602373	TITLE *602373 CALPONIN 2; CNN2
;;CALPONIN, NEUTRAL, NON-SMOOTH MUSCLE;;
CALPONIN H2, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Masuda et al. (1996) cloned a cDNA encoding calponin-2 (CNN2) by
screening a human heart cDNA library with a CNN1 (600806) cDNA. The CNN2
protein is 94.8% identical to mouse calponin h2 (see 600806), indicating
that these proteins are homologs. The predicted CNN2 protein has 309
amino acids and a pI of 7.1. It contains motifs that are present in CNN1
and CNN3 (602374): 3 tandem repeats of 29 amino acids, an actin-binding
domain, a VAV (164875)-homologous region, and 2 consensus
phosphorylation sites for tyrosine kinase at the C terminus. The 3-prime
untranslated region of the CNN2 mRNA contains an Alu repetitive sequence
in the antisense direction. RT-PCR detected CNN2 transcripts in both
cultured smooth muscle and nonmuscle cells and showed that mouse
calponin h2 is expressed in embryonic and adult heart. CNN2 protein
localizes to the cell-to-cell junctions of cardiomyocytes and
codistributes with vinculin (193065). Masuda et al. (1996) suggested
that CNN2 may be involved in the structural organization and/or
anchorage of actin filaments and may function in the cell adhesion
mechanism.

MAPPING

Cheng et al. (1994) mapped the CNN2 gene to chromosome 21q11.1 by
hybridization to chromosome 21q-specific YACs. However, Gross (2011)
mapped the CNN2 gene to chromosome 19p13.3 based on an alignment of the
CNN2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC141833) with the genomic sequence
(GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Cheng, J.-F.; Boyartchuk, V.; Zhu, Y.: Isolation and mapping of
human chromosome 21 cDNA: progress in constructing a chromosome 21
expression map. Genomics 23: 75-84, 1994.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/16/2011.

3. Masuda, H.; Tanaka, K.; Takagi, M.; Ohgami, K.; Sakamaki, T.; Shibata,
N.; Takahashi, K.: Molecular cloning and characterization of human
non-smooth muscle calponin. J. Biochem. 120: 415-424, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 02/16/2011

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 2/20/1998

EDITED mgross: 02/16/2011
alopez: 8/25/2009
alopez: 2/26/1998
dholmes: 2/24/1998
dholmes: 2/20/1998

130160	TITLE *130160 ELASTIN; ELN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Elastic fibers are comprised of 2 distinct components, a more abundant
amorphous component (elastin) and the microfibrillar component. Elastin
is composed largely of glycine, proline, and other hydrophobic residues
and contains multiple lysine-derived crosslinks, such as desmosines,
which link the individual polypeptide chains into a rubberlike network.
The hydrophobic regions of the chains between the crosslinks are highly
mobile. The hydrophobic and crosslinking domains are coded by separate,
small (27 to 114 bp) exons that are separated by large introns. The
initial translation product is a 72-kD polypeptide, designated
tropoelastin (Rosenbloom, 1984).

Indik et al. (1987) cloned human elastin cDNA and found that it encodes
a deduced 786-amino acid protein. They described alternative splicing of
elastin mRNA.

Uitto et al. (1991) reviewed the molecular biology of human elastin.
Elastin is initially synthesized as a soluble polypeptide of
approximately 72 kD. The individual elastin molecules are aligned on a
scaffolding of microfibrils composed of fibrillin (134797). This
alignment is stabilized by the formation of intermolecular crosslinks
known as desmosines, which contribute to the insolubility of elastin.
Formation of desmosines is initiated by oxidative deamination of certain
lysyl residues by lysyl oxidase, a copper-dependent enzyme. The elastin
polypeptides are encoded by an mRNA of approximately 3.5 kb which
comprises a 2.2-kb coding segment and a relatively large 1.3-kb, 3-prime
untranslated region.

MAPPING

Emanuel et al. (1985) provisionally assigned the elastin gene to
2q31-qter. Fazio et al. (1991) used human elastin cDNAs in both in situ
hybridization and Southern analysis of human-rodent cell hybrids to map
the elastin gene to 7q11.2. PCR analysis with elastin-specific primers
of DNA from a hybrid cell line containing only human chromosome 7
yielded a product of the expected size, while DNA containing human
chromosome 2, but not chromosome 7, did not result in a product. Foster
et al. (1993) described a dinucleotide repeat polymorphism in the ELN
gene and used it to confirm assignment to chromosome 7 as well as to
exclude the gene from chromosome 2 by linkage studies.

Wydner et al. (1994) used PCR primers complementary to regions of the
mouse tropoelastin mRNA to define a novel intron length polymorphism
(ILP) within intron 8 of the mouse elastin gene. Using this polymorphism
in an interspecific backcross, they mapped the mouse Eln gene to the
distal half of chromosome 5 in a region of homology of synteny of human
chromosome 7.

GENE STRUCTURE

Indik et al. (1987) found a dearth of coding sequences and a remarkable
abundance of Alu repetitive sequences in the 3-prime region of the human
elastin gene. This suggested to them that, mediated by recombination
between Alu sequences, considerable polymorphism may exist in the human
population and between species. Tromp et al. (1991) identified a RFLP in
the ELN gene.

The human ELN gene has 34 exons and spans a total of approximately 45 kb
of genomic DNA. The exon/intron ratio is unusually low, approximately
1:19 (Uitto et al., 1991).

GENE FUNCTION

Li et al. (1998) defined the role of elastin in arterial development and
disease by generating mice lacking elastin. These mice died of an
obstructive arterial disease that resulted from subendothelial cell
proliferation and reorganization of smooth muscle. These cellular
changes were similar to those seen in atherosclerosis; however, lack of
elastin was not associated with endothelial damage, thrombosis, or
inflammation, which occur in models of atherosclerosis. Hemodynamic
stress was not associated with arterial obstruction in these mice
either, as the disease still occurred in arteries that were isolated in
organ culture and therefore not subject to hemodynamic stress.
Disruption of elastin was enough to induce subendothelial proliferation
of smooth muscle and may contribute to obstructive arterial disease.

To investigate why a loss-of-function mutation in 1 elastin allele
causes an inherited obstructive arterial disease, supravalvular aortic
stenosis, Li et al. (1998) generated mice hemizygous for the elastin
gene (Eln +/-). Although ELN mRNA and protein were reduced by 50% in Eln
+/- mice, arterial compliance at physiologic pressures was nearly
normal. This discrepancy was explained by a paradoxical increase of 35%
in the number of elastic lamellae and smooth muscle in Eln +/- arteries.
Examination of humans with ELN hemizygosity revealed a 2.5-fold increase
in elastic lamellae and smooth muscle. Thus, ELN hemizygosity in mice
and humans induces a compensatory increase in the number of rings of
elastic lamellae and smooth muscle during arterial development. Humans
are exquisitely sensitive to reduced ELN expression, developing profound
arterial thickening and markedly increased risk of obstructive vascular
disease.

Lee et al. (2007) studied the immune responses of age-matched smokers
with and without emphysema (see COPD; 606963) and found that
differential responsiveness of T cells to elastin peptides, but not to
collagen (see COL6A1; 120220) or albumin (ALB; 103600), correlated with
emphysema severity. Compared with controls, COPD patients secreted
increased levels of IFNG (147570) and IL10 (124092) in response to
elastin peptides in an MHC II-dependent manner. Antibody to elastin, but
not to collagen, was also increased in emphysema patients, as were lung
B cells secreting antibody to the protein. Although regulatory T cell
(Treg) responses did not differ between subject and control peripheral
blood cells, emphysema patients showed a significant reduction of lung
Tregs compared with controls. Lee et al. (2007) concluded that
antielastin autoimmunity, possibly resulting from secretion of
proteolytic enzymes induced by cigarette smoke exposure, is associated
with an inflammatory response leading to emphysema and to
tobacco-related pathology in other organs.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Role in Williams-Beuren Syndrome

Curran et al. (1993) showed that the ELN gene was disrupted in a
translocation with a breakpoint at 7q11.23. Exon 28 of the gene was the
site of the breakpoint. Furthermore, Ewart et al. (1993) showed close
linkage of ELN and supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS; 185500) in 2
families. Ewart et al. (1993) found that deletion involving 7q11.23 and
resulting in hemizygosity of the elastin gene is responsible for the
Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS; 194050). Deletions limited to the elastin
gene appear to result in SVAS, whereas deletions spanning at least 114
kb lead to the Williams syndrome. Thus, the latter is a contiguous gene
syndrome with neurobehavioral features and mental retardation not easily
accounted for by the disruption of the elastin gene alone.

Perez Jurado et al. (1996) reported that 61 of 65 clinically defined
patients with Williams-Beuren syndrome had a deletion of the ELN locus.
They noted that no variability in the size of the deletion could be
detected between WBS patients by genotyping of polymorphic markers,
suggesting that the chromosomal breakpoints in these patients fell into
narrowly defined physical regions. Perez Jurado et al. (1996) also
compared clinical differences between maternally and paternally
inherited ELN deletions and postulated that an imprinted locus, silent
on the paternal chromosome and contributing to statural growth, may be
affected by the deletion.

Duba et al. (2002) investigated a family with a cytogenetically balanced
translocation t(7;16)(q11.23;q13) in which the 5 translocation carriers
manifested a wide variation in phenotype, ranging from a hoarse voice as
the only feature, partial WBS with or without SVAS, to the full WBS
phenotype. DNA sequence analysis showed that the breakpoint on
chromosome 7 was within intron 5 of the ELN gene and on chromosome 16
within intron 1 of the GPR56 gene (604110). In the course of the
rearrangement, no basepair was lost from either the chromosome 7 or
chromosome 16 sequences. Duba et al. (2002) speculated that the expected
phenotype in the reported family would be SVAS, not WBS, and proposed a
long-range position effect caused by the translocation event as the most
likely explanation.

- Supravalvular Aortic Stenosis

In a family with SVAS (185500), Ewart et al. (1994) found, by pulsed
field, PCR, and Southern analysis, a 100-kb deletion of the 3-prime end
of the elastin gene cosegregating with the disease (130160.0001). DNA
sequence analysis localized the breakpoint of the deletion between
elastin exons 27 and 28, the same region disrupted by the
SVAS-associated translocation. The family included an affected mother
and daughter. The daughter had right ventricular hypertrophy,
supravalvular pulmonic stenosis, bilateral narrowing of the pulmonary
arteries (left more severe than right), and a diffusely narrowed
ascending aorta with a discrete supravalvular narrowing diagnosed by
cardiac catheterization at 6 weeks of age. The patient also had
intermittent acrocyanosis and hypertension. At 16 months of age, the
supravalvular pulmonic stenosis had improved. The proband also had some
features common to Williams syndrome, including dolichocephaly,
bitemporal narrowness, outer canthal distance less than 2 SD below the
mean, periorbital fullness, broad mouth, full cheeks, hoarse voice, and
hypersensitivity to loud noises. The diagnosis of Williams syndrome was
not made because she had normal serum calcium levels, a normal urine
calcium/creatinine ratio, normal psychomotor development, and normal
growth parameters. The child was treated with phenobarbital for
seizures. The mother had had seizures in adolescence. Since childhood,
she had had a grade III (out of VI) early systolic murmur heard best at
the suprasternal notch and radiating to the left carotid. At least 2
other family members were affected by SVAS. The mother's brother had
narrowing of the entire pulmonary arterial tree documented by cardiac
catheterization and was treated for seizures. A maternal first cousin
had severe bilateral peripheral pulmonic stenosis, right ventricular
hypertrophy, and mild SVAS demonstrated by echocardiogram.

Gross rearrangements of the ELN gene have not been identified in most
cases of autosomal dominant SVAS. To define the spectrum of ELN
mutations responsible for SVAS, Li et al. (1997) refined the genomic
structure of the gene and used this information in mutation analyses.
ELN point mutations were found to cosegregate with the disease in 4
familial cases (e.g., 130160.0005) and to be associated with SVAS in 3
sporadic cases (130160.0004). Two of the mutations were nonsense, 1 was
a single bp deletion, and 4 were splice site mutations. In 1 sporadic
case, the mutation had arisen de novo.

Tassabehji et al. (1997) described the complete exon-intron structure of
the ELN gene. All exons are in-frame, allowing exon skipping without
disrupting the reading frame. Microsatellites were located in introns 17
and 18. They found that isolated SVAS was associated with point
mutations that predicted premature chain termination. They stated that
in their experience all patients with a classic Williams syndrome
phenotype had been found to be hemizygous at the elastin locus;
nevertheless, only 5% had severe clinical SVAS. In their 2 SVAS families
with point mutations, each mutation manifested as severe SVAS in the
proband, but as mild cardiac features or nonpenetrance in the mothers.
Tassabehji et al. (1997) considered such variability typical of
phenotypes produced by haploinsufficiency, where genetic background is
expected to have a major modifying effect. An alternative hypothesis is
that a dominant-negative elastin mutation results if truncated proteins
have some but not all domains critical for intermolecular interactions
and thus may disrupt posttranslational processing and development of
elastic fibers.

Koch et al. (2003) similarly found the complete spectrum of arterial
stenoses in 5 members of an extended pedigree with a confirmed nonsense
mutation haplotype.

Urban et al. (2000) used single-strand conformation and heteroduplex
analyses of genomic amplimers to identify point mutations within the ELN
gene in patients with nonsyndromic SVAS from a total of 8 unrelated
families. They identified 6 novel point mutations. Nonpenetrance was
demonstrated in some of the families. Together with the new mutations
they found, 14 point mutations had been reported in SVAS patients, and
10 of these resulted in premature stop codons (PTCs). They analyzed the
expression of ELN alleles in skin fibroblasts from 1 SVAS patient and
showed that PTC mutations resulted in selective elimination of mutant
transcripts. Inhibition of the nonsense-mediated decay mechanism by
cycloheximide resulted in the stabilization of mutant elastin mRNA.
Allelic inactivation by the ELN mutation in this patient led to an
overall decrease of the steady state levels of elastin mRNA. In the skin
fibroblasts from the same SVAS patient, they demonstrated reduced
synthesis and secretion of tropoelastin. Given the predominance of PTC
mutations in SVAS, Urban et al. (2000) suggested that functional
haploinsufficiency may be the pathomechanism underlying most cases of
nonsyndromic SVAS.

Metcalfe et al. (2000) used SSCP and heteroduplex analysis to screen 100
unrelated patients with SVAS and normal karyotypes without major
deletions of the ELN gene as determined by FISH. All 34 exons of the ELN
gene were screened and mutations were identified in 35 of the patients.
The mutations were 23 nonsense or frameshift mutations predicted to
cause premature termination, 6 splice site mutations, 4 missense
mutations, and 2 small deletions in exon 1 encompassing the ATG
initiation codon. The 35 patients represented 24 familial cases, 10
sporadic cases, and 1 of unknown status. Recurrent mutations were the
nonsense mutations Y150X in exon 9 (130160.0013), Q442X in exon 21
(130160.0003), and K176X in exon 10 (130160.0014), which appeared to be
mutation hotspots. A marked phenotypic intrafamilial variability was
illustrated by 2 large families with multiple affected members with
disease severity ranging from asymptomatic carriers to mild or severe
SVAS requiring surgery, or sudden infant death. No obvious
genotype-phenotype correlation was detected; cases with missense or
splicing mutations were as likely to have severe SVAS as cases with
truncating mutations.

Urban et al. (2002) compared both elastogenesis and proliferation rate
of cultured aortic smooth-muscle cells (SMCs) and skin fibroblasts from
5 healthy control subjects, 4 patients with isolated SVAS, and 5
patients with WBS. Three mutations found in patients with SVAS were
found to result in null alleles. RNA blood hybridization,
immunostaining, and metabolic labeling experiments demonstrated that
SVAS cells and WBS cells have reduced elastin mRNA levels and that they
consequently deposit low amounts of insoluble elastin. Abnormally low
levels of elastin deposition in SVAS cells and in WBS cells were found
to coincide with an increase in proliferation rate, which could be
reversed by addition of exogenous insoluble elastin. This led to the
conclusion that insoluble elastin is an important regulator of cellular
proliferation. The reduced net deposition of insoluble elastin in
arterial walls of patients with either SVAS or WBS leads to the
increased proliferation of arterial SMCs, which results in the formation
of multilayer thickening of the tunica media of large arteries and,
consequently, in the development of hyperplastic intimal lesions leading
to segmental arterial occlusion.

Micale et al. (2010) analyzed the ELN gene in 31 familial and sporadic
cases of SVAS and identified 7 novel mutations, including 5 frameshift
mutations and 2 splice site mutations (see, e.g., 130160.0020). In vitro
analysis of 3 of the frameshift mutations using minigene constructs and
transfection assays confirmed that functional haploinsufficiency of the
ELN gene is the main pathomechanism underlying SVAS. In addition,
molecular analysis of patient fibroblasts showed that the 2044+5G-C
(130160.0020) mutant allele encodes an aberrant shorter form of the
elastin polypeptide that may hamper the normal assembly of elastin
fibers in a dominant-negative manner.

- Cutis Laxa

In the cell line from a patient with cutis laxa (123700), Zhang et al.
(1997) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion in exon 30 of the
ELN gene (130160.0008). In a 30-year-old woman and her 2-year-old son,
both of whom had classic cutis laxa, Zhang et al. (1999) identified
heterozygosity for a different 1-bp deletion in the ELN gene
(130160.0010), also in exon 30.

In a 37-year-old Caucasian woman with cutis laxa, Tassabehji et al.
(1998) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion in the ELN gene
(130160.0009).

In a mother and daughter with cutis laxa and severe pulmonary disease,
originally described by Beighton (1972) and Corbett et al. (1994), Urban
et al. (2005) identified no mutations in the elastin gene by direct
sequencing, but detected an abnormal protein in cultured dermal
fibroblasts using metabolic labeling and immunoprecipitation. Mutation
and gene expression analyses established the presence of a complex
tandem duplication in the elastin gene (130160.0016).

In affected members of a 3-generation family of Japanese and German
ancestry and an unrelated Singaporean girl of Chinese descent with cutis
laxa and aortic aneurysmal disease, Szabo et al. (2006) identified
heterozygosity for a 25-bp deletion (130160.0017) and a 1-bp deletion
(130160.0018) in exon 30 of the ELN gene, respectively.

- Role in Other Disorders

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the ELN
gene and susceptibility to intracranial berry aneurysm, see ANIB1
(105800).

ANIMAL MODEL

Faury et al. (2003) reported that Eln +/- mice were stably hypertensive
from birth, with a mean arterial pressure 25 to 30 mm Hg higher than
their wildtype counterparts. The animals had only moderate cardiac
hypertrophy and lived a normal life span with no overt signs of
degenerative vascular disease. Examination of arterial mechanical
properties showed that the inner diameters of Eln +/- arteries were
generally smaller than wildtype arteries at any given intravascular
pressure. Because the Eln +/- mice were hypertensive, however, the
effective arterial working diameter was comparable to that of the
normotensive wildtype animal. Physiologic studies indicated a role for
the renin (179820)-angiotensin (see 106150) system in maintaining the
hypertensive state. Faury et al. (2003) concluded that the association
of hypertension with elastin haploinsufficiency in humans and mice
strongly suggested that elastin and other proteins of the elastic fiber
should be considered as causal genes for essential hypertension.

Hirano et al. (2008) stated that the Eln gene in most mammalian species
contains 36 exons. The rat and mouse Eln genes have 37 exons, whereas
the human ELN gene has only 34 exons due to the sequential loss of 2
exons during primate evolution. In addition, although still contained
within the human gene, exon 22 is rarely included in the elastin
transcript. The mouse and human ELN proteins share only 64.1% amino acid
identity. Because of the structural differences between mouse and human
ELN, Hirano et al. (2008) developed a humanized elastin mouse in which
elastin production was controlled by a human ELN transgene. Expression
of the human transgene reversed the hypertension and cardiovascular
changes associated with Eln haploinsufficiency and rescued the perinatal
lethality of the Eln-null phenotype.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 100-KB DEL

In a family with SVAS (185500), Ewart et al. (1994) found a heterozygous
100-kb deletion in the 3-prime end of the elastin gene with a breakpoint
between elastin exons 27 and 28. The same region was disrupted in the
familial reciprocal translocation reported by Morris et al. (1993).
Ewart et al. (1994) pointed out that the protein product of the mutant
gene would lack a microfibril-associated glycoprotein (MAGP; 156790)
binding site that normally exists in the C terminus of elastin.

.0002
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 30-KB DEL

Olson et al. (1995) used Southern blot analysis to screen for mutations
in the ELN gene in 6 familial and 3 sporadic cases of SVAS (185500)
without features of Williams-Beuren syndrome (194050). The familial
cases included members of a previously reported large pedigree with
linkage to the elastin gene region (Olson et al., 1993). A 30-kb
deletion extending from breakpoints in intron 1 and intron 27 was found
in 2 members of a Middle Eastern family. The proband developed severe
SVAS and peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis and underwent aortic
operation in early childhood. He had no evidence of Williams syndrome or
clinically apparent abnormalities of other elastin-containing tissue.
The deletion was also demonstrated in his mother, an obligate carrier
with subtle disease (a heart murmur and a nondiagnostic echocardiogram).
Blood for DNA analysis was not available from a maternal uncle with SVAS
and a sister with isolated peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis.

.0003
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, GLN442TER

Li et al. (1997) found a heterozygous nonsense mutation in a sporadic
case of SVAS (185500): a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1324, resulting
in conversion of a glutamine to a premature stop codon (Q442X) in exon
21. DNA samples could not be obtained from the parents of the proband.

Tassabehji et al. (1997) found the same mutation in a patient with SVAS.
The patient had presented at the age of 8 weeks with a heart murmur and
episodes of cyanosis. Echocardiography at 4 months of age showed SVAS
and pulmonary arterial stenosis. These changes were progressive.
Corrective open heart surgery was performed at the age of 21 months, at
which time it was noted that the aorta and pulmonary arteries were very
thick and abnormal. His mother had had cardiac follow-up for a heart
murmur until the age of 6 years, but echocardiogram showed no evidence
of SVAS and no pulmonary artery stenosis.

Metcalfe et al. (2000) found the Q442X mutation in 3 unrelated patients
with SVAS among 100 patients screened. Haplotype analysis using ELN
flanking and intragenic markers showed no evidence of a founder effect;
therefore this appeared to be a mutation hotspot.

.0004
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, ARG570TER

In a sporadic case of SVAS (185500), Li et al. (1997) found a nonsense
mutation: a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1708, resulting in
conversion of arginine-570 to a premature stop codon in exon 25 (R570X).
DNA samples could not be obtained from the parents of the proband.

Metcalfe et al. (2000) detected the R570X mutation in a sporadic case of
SVAS with peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis and bilateral inguinal
hernias.

.0005
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 1821C

Using primers amplifying exon 26 of the ELN gene, Li et al. (1997)
identified an anomalous band that cosegregated with SVAS (185500) in 1
family. The aberrant conformer showed a single-nucleotide deletion at
position 1821 in exon 26 (1821delC). This deletion caused a frameshift
resulting in a premature stop codon in exon 28.

.0006
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, IVS15AS, A-G, -2

In 2 unrelated kindreds, Li et al. (1997) found that SVAS (185500)
segregated with an A-to-G transition at position -2 in the splice
acceptor site of intron 15 preceding exon 16.

.0007
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 1-BP INS, FS615TER

In a patient with SVAS (185500), Tassabehji et al. (1997) identified
insertion of a T in codon 606 of exon 26 of the ELN gene, producing a
frameshift predicted to cause premature termination 10 codons
downstream. The patient presented at birth with a heart murmur. At the
age of 3 years, echocardiography suggested SVAS on the basis of
'waisting' of the ascending aorta and poststenotic dilatation. A brother
had died suddenly in the first year of life and at autopsy was noted to
have spontaneously repaired SVAS, repaired central pulmonary artery
stenosis, and marked ventricular hypertrophy. The aortic valve and
proximal aorta were markedly dysplastic with extreme thickening beyond
the valve. The proband's mother had presented to cardiologists in
childhood with a murmur and a clinical diagnosis of aortic stenosis had
been made.

.0008
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 2012G

In a patient with cutis laxa (123700), Zhang et al. (1995) demonstrated
decreased elastin mRNA levels in skin fibroblasts due to transcript
instability. Zhang et al. (1997) cloned and sequenced both ELN cDNA
alleles in the cell line from this patient and identified a frameshift
mutation, deletion of 2012G, in the C-terminal coding region of 1
allele. The patient was heterozygous for the single base deletion, which
was not found in genomic DNA from either parent or from 65 unrelated
control samples. The mutant transcript was overrepresented compared to
the normal transcript.

.0009
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 748A

In a 37-year-old Caucasian patient with autosomal dominant cutis laxa
(123700), Tassabehji et al. (1998) identified heterozygosity for a
frameshift mutation in exon 32 of the elastin gene which was predicted
to replace 37 amino acids at the C terminus of elastin by a novel
sequence of 62 amino acids. Immunoprecipitation studies and mRNA showed
that the mutant allele was expressed. Electron microscopy of the skin
sections showed abnormal branching and fragmentation in the amorphous
elastin component, and immunocytochemistry showed reduced elastin
deposition in the elastic fibers and fewer microfibrils in the dermis.
These findings suggested that the mutant tropoelastin protein was
synthesized, secreted, and incorporated into the elastic matrix, where
it altered the architecture of elastic fibers. Interference with
crosslinking would reduce elastic recoil in affected tissues and explain
the cutis laxa phenotype.

.0010
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 2039C

In a 30-year-old woman and her 2-year-old son, both of whom had classic
cutis laxa (123700), Zhang et al. (1999) identified heterozygosity for a
deletion of 2039C from exon 30 of the ELN gene. The same exon was the
site of the mutation in the 2012delG deletion (130160.0008).

.0011
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, IVS15AS, C-G, -3

In 2 large, independently collected midwestern US pedigrees with
supravalvular aortic stenosis (185500), Urban et al. (1999) found a
C-to-G transversion in the acceptor splice site of intron 15 of the
elastin gene. The mutation segregated in both families with high
penetrance of SVAS, and all affected individuals carried the mutation.
Haplotype analysis indicated that the mutations in the 2 apparently
nonoverlapping kindreds were identical by descent. RT-PCR of elastin
from skin fibroblasts of an affected individual showed 2 abnormal
elastin species present as 0.9% and 0.3% of the total elastin message.
One transcript arose from activation of a cryptic splice site in intron
15 that added 44 bp of intronic sequence to the sequence encoded by exon
16 and led to a premature termination codon in exon 17 because of
frameshift; the other transcript arose from skipping of exon 16. The
miniscule amount of transcript associated with this mutation supported
haploinsufficiency of elastin as the etiology of SVAS.

.0012
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 1040C

In a large German family with SVAS (185500), Boeckel et al. (1999)
identified a 1-bp deletion (1040delC) in codon 347 of exon 18 of the ELN
gene, resulting in a stop codon in exon 22. The mutation was present in
heterozygous state. The family studied had affected individuals in 4
generations and by implication in a fifth earlier generation. The
severity of the phenotype appeared to increase in successive
generations, i.e., the phenomenon of anticipation. Tassabehji et al.
(1997) noted that the mothers of their severely affected SVAS patients
with ELN point mutations had only mild cardiac features or
nonpenetrance. Boeckel et al. (1999) observed nonpenetrance in at least
2 individuals, brothers, both of whom transmitted the disorder to
children.

.0013
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, TYR150TER

Metcalfe et al. (2000) identified a tyr150-to-ter (Y150X) mutation in
exon 9 of the ELN gene in 4 unrelated patients with SVAS (185500) among
100 patients screened. Haplotype analysis using ELN flanking and
intragenic markers showed no evidence of a founder effect; therefore
this appeared to be a mutation hotspot.

.0014
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, LYS176TER

Metcalfe et al. (2000) detected a lys176-to-ter (K176X; 526A-T) mutation
in exon 10 of the ELN gene in 2 apparently unrelated familial cases of
SVAS (185500) among 100 patients screened.

.0015
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, ARG610GLN AND 24-BP DUP, NT1034

In 2 related families with supravalvular aortic stenosis (185500), Urban
et al. (2001) identified 2 ELN mutations located on the same allele: an
in-frame duplication of nucleotides 1034-1057 in exon 18, and an 1829G-A
change in exon 26 predicted to result in an arg610-to-gln (R610Q)
substitution. In 1 family, an individual was identified with a
recombination between exons 18 and 26 of the ELN gene. This individual
was unaffected and carried the exon 18 insertion mutation but not
1829G-A. Skin fibroblasts were established from this recombinant normal
individual and from an affected individual carrying both of the
mutations. RT-PCR analysis indicated that the expression of the mutant
allele was reduced to 12 to 27% of that of the normal allele in the
affected but not in the unaffected individual. Further studies showed
reduced steady state elastin mRNA levels and tropoelastin synthesis in
the affected individual. RT-PCR analysis of the mRNA rescued by
cycloheximide treatment indicated that the 1829G-A mutation created a
cryptic donor splice site within exon 26, resulting in the deletion of 4
nucleotides at the 3-prime end of exon 26 and a frameshift in the mRNA.
This frameshift mutation generated a premature termination codon in the
domain encoded by exon 28, clearly resulting in nonsense-mediated decay
of this frameshift RNA product. Despite considerable variability in the
molecular nature of mutations responsible for SVAS, the unifying
mechanism appears to be the generation of null alleles by
nonsense-mediated decay leading to elastin haploinsufficiency.

.0016
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, EX9-33DUP

In a mother and daughter with cutis laxa (123700) and severe pulmonary
disease, originally described by Beighton (1972) and Corbett et al.
(1994), Urban et al. (2005) identified no mutations in the elastin gene
by direct sequencing, but detected an abnormal protein in cultured
dermal fibroblasts using metabolic labeling and immunoprecipitation.
Mutation and gene expression analyses established the presence of a
heterozygous complex rearrangement involving the duplication of exons 9
to 33, with a third copy of exons 9 and 10 and intron 10 added to the
end of the mRNA; nucleotides 3-65 of intron 10 encode a 21-amino acid
missense peptide sequence before ending in a stop codon.
Immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that the mutant tropoelastin is
partially secreted and partially retained intracellularly; a polyclonal
antibody raised against a unique peptide in the mutant molecule showed
both intracellular and matrix staining.

.0017
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 25-BP DEL, NT2114

In affected members of a 3-generation family of Japanese and German
ancestry with cutis laxa (123700) and aortic aneurysmal disease, Szabo
et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a 25-bp deletion beginning
at nucleotide 2114 in exon 30 of the ELN gene. There was variable
expression of cutis laxa, hernias, and aortic lesions in affected family
members. The mutation was not found in 121 controls.

.0018
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 2159C

In a Singaporean girl of Chinese descent with cutis laxa (123700) and
aortic aneurysmal disease, Szabo et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity
for a de novo 1-bp deletion (2159delC) in exon 30 of the ELN gene. The
mutation was not found in either of her parents or in 121 controls.

.0019
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1621C-T

In a boy with severe cutis laxa (123700), severe congenital pulmonary
disease (previously not reported in ADCL), and supravalvular pulmonary
artery stenosis, Graul-Neumann et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous
1621C-T transition in the ELN gene, resulting in an in-frame deletion of
exon 25 and predicting a protein lacking amino acids 527-540. The same
mutation was present in the clinically healthy father, but not in the
mother, the paternal grandparents, or 96 healthy controls. Analysis of
ELN expression in fibroblasts revealed the same amount of complete ELN
mRNA in the proband as in normal age-matched controls, whereas the
father had a more than 50% reduction of ELN mRNA expression as compared
to corresponding age-matched controls. In contrast, addition of the
translation inhibitor puromcin caused an increase in total ELN mRNA
expression in the father. Graul-Neumann et al. (2008) concluded that the
variable processing of an identically mutated gene (dominant negative in
the child and haploinsufficiency in the father) caused the highly
variable clinical appearance of ADCL in this family.

.0020
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, IVS28, G-C, +5

In a 3-generation family with supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS;
185500), Micale et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 2044+5G-C
transversion in intron 28 of the ELN gene. The mutation was present in
all 3 family members who had been diagnosed with SVAS as well as in 1
asymptomatic family member; it was not found in 2 more unaffected family
members or in 100 unrelated control samples. RT-PCR analysis of elastin
mRNA from transfected HEK293 cells as well as patient fibroblasts
demonstrated 2 distinct transcripts, a 200-bp band corresponding to
wildtype mRNA product and a 300-bp mutant; sequencing confirmed that the
longer transcript resulted from splicing failure and inclusion of intron
28 in the mRNA, predicting a shorter elastin protein with a premature
termination codon within the same intron. Assessment of ELN mRNA
expression level after incubation of patient fibroblasts with an
inhibitor of nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) showed no significant
increase in ELN mRNA aberrant transcript, indicating that this mutation
is conceivably not a substrate of NMD.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Reidy  (1963); Sephel et al. (1989)
REFERENCE 1. Beighton, P. H.: The dominant and recessive forms of cutis laxa. J.
Med. Genet. 9: 216-221, 1972.

2. Boeckel, T.; Dierks, A.; Vergopoulos, A.; Bahring, S.; Knoblauch,
H.; Muller-Myhsok, B.; Baron, H.; Aydin, A.; Bein, G.; Luft, F. C.;
Schuster, H.: A new mutation in the elastin gene causing supravalvular
aortic stenosis. Am. J. Cardiol. 83: 1141-1143, 1999.

3. Corbett, E.; Glaisyer, H.; Chan, C.; Madden, B.; Khaghani, A.;
Yacoub, M.: Congenital cutis laxa with a dominant inheritance and
early onset emphysema. Thorax 49: 836-837, 1994.

4. Curran, M. E.; Atkinson, D. L.; Ewart, A. K.; Morris, C. A.; Leppert,
M. F.; Keating, M. T.: The elastin gene is disrupted by a translocation
associated with supravalvular aortic stenosis. Cell 73: 159-168,
1993.

5. Duba, H.-C.; Doll, A.; Neyer, M.; Erdel, M.; Mann, C.; Hammerer,
I.; Utermann, G.; Grzeschik, K.-H.: The elastin gene is disrupted
in a family with a balanced translocation t(7;16)(q11.23;q13) associated
with a variable expression of the Williams-Beuren syndrome. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 10: 351-361, 2002.

6. Emanuel, B. S.; Cannizzaro, L.; Ornstein-Goldstein, N.; Indik,
Z. K.; Yoon, K.; May, M.; Oliver, L.; Boyd, C.; Rosenbloom, J.: Chromosomal
localization of the human elastin gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 37: 873-882,
1985.

7. Ewart, A. K.; Jin, W.; Atkinson, D.; Morris, C. A.; Keating, M.
T.: Supravalvular aortic stenosis associated with a deletion disrupting
the elastin gene. J. Clin. Invest. 93: 1071-1077, 1994.

8. Ewart, A. K.; Morris, C. A.; Atkinson, D.; Jin, W.; Sternes, K.;
Spallone, P.; Stock, A. D.; Leppert, M.; Keating, M. T.: Hemizygosity
at the elastin locus in a developmental disorder, Williams syndrome. Nature
Genet. 5: 11-16, 1993.

9. Ewart, A. K.; Morris, C. A.; Ensing, G. J.; Loker, J.; Moore, C.;
Leppert, M.; Keating, M.: A human vascular disorder, supravalvular
aortic stenosis, maps to chromosome 7. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90:
3226-3230, 1993.

10. Faury, G.; Pezet, M.; Knutsen, R. H.; Boyle, W. A.; Heximer, S.
P.; McLean, S. E.; Minkes, R. K.; Blumer, K. J.; Kovacs, A.; Kelly,
D. P.; Li, D. Y.; Starcher, B.; Mecham, R. P.: Developmental adaptation
of the mouse cardiovascular system to elastin haploinsufficiency. J.
Clin. Invest. 112: 1419-1428, 2003.

11. Fazio, M. J.; Mattei, M.-G.; Passage, E.; Chu, M.-L.; Black, D.;
Solomon, E.; Davidson, J. M.; Uitto, J.: Human elastin gene: new
evidence for localization to the long arm of chromosome 7. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 48: 696-703, 1991.

12. Foster, K.; Ferrell, R.; King-Underwood, L.; Povey, S.; Attwood,
J.; Rennick, R.; Humphries, S. E.; Henney, A. M.: Description of
a dinucleotide repeat polymorphism in the human elastin gene and its
use to confirm assignment of the gene to chromosome 7. Ann. Hum.
Genet. 57: 87-96, 1993.

13. Graul-Neumann, L. M.; Hausser, I.; Essayie, M.; Rauch, A.; Kraus,
C.: Highly variable cutis laxa resulting from a dominant splicing
mutation of the elastin gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A: 977-983,
2008.

14. Hirano, E.; Knutsen, R. H.; Sugitani, H.; Ciliberto, C. H.; Mecham,
R. P.: Functional rescue of elastin insufficiency in mice by the
human elastin gene. Circ. Res. 101: 523-531, 2008.

15. Indik, Z.; Yeh, H.; Ornstein-Goldstein, N.; Sheppard, P.; Anderson,
N.; Rosenbloom, J. C.; Peltonen, L.; Rosenbloom, J.: Alternative
splicing of human elastin mRNA indicated by sequence analysis of cloned
genomic and complementary DNA. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 5680-5684,
1987.

16. Indik, Z.; Yoon, K.; Morrow, S. D.; Cicila, G.; Rosenbloom, J.;
Rosenbloom, J.; Ornstein-Goldstein, N.: Structure of the 3-prime
region of the human elastin gene: great abundance of Alu repetitive
sequences and few coding sequences. Connect. Tissue Res. 16: 197-211,
1987.

17. Koch, A.; Buheitel, G.; Hofbeck, M.; Rauch, A.; Kraus, C.; Tassabehji,
M.; Singer, H.: Spectrum of arterial obstructions caused by one elastin
gene point mutation. Europ. J. Pediat. 162: 53-54, 2003.

18. Lee, S.-H.; Goswami, S.; Grudo, A.; Song, L.; Bandi, V.; Goodnight-White,
S.; Green, L.; Hacken-Bitar, J.; Huh, J.; Bakaeen, F.; Coxson, H.
O.; Cogswell, S.; Storness-Bliss, C.; Corry, D. B.; Kheradmand, F.
: Antielastin autoimmunity in tobacco smoking-induced emphysema. Nature
Med. 13: 567-569, 2007.

19. Li, D. Y.; Brooke, B.; Davis, E. C.; Mecham, R. P.; Sorensen,
L. K.; Boak, B. B.; Eichwald, E.; Keating, M. T.: Elastin is an essential
determinant of arterial morphogenesis. Nature 393: 276-280, 1998.

20. Li, D. Y.; Faury, G.; Taylor, D. G.; Davis, E. C.; Boyle, W. A.;
Mecham, R. P.; Stenzel, P.; Boak, B.; Keating, M. T.: Novel arterial
pathology in mice and humans hemizygous for elastin. J. Clin. Invest. 102:
1783-1787, 1998.

21. Li, D. Y.; Toland, A. E.; Boak, B. B.; Atkinson, D. L.; Ensing,
G. J.; Morris, C. A.; Keating, M. T.: Elastin point mutations cause
an obstructive vascular disease, supravalvular aortic stenosis. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 6: 1021-1028, 1997.

22. Metcalfe, K.; Rucka, A. K.; Smoot, L.; Hofstadler, G.; Tuzler,
G.; McKeown, P.; Siu, V.; Rauch, A.; Dean, J.; Dennis, N.; Ellis,
I.; Reardon, W.; Cytrynbaum, C.; Osborne, L.; Yates, J. R.; Read,
A. P.; Donnai, D.; Tassabehji, M.: Elastin: mutational spectrum in
supravalvular aortic stenosis. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 8: 955-963,
2000.

23. Micale, L.; Turturo, M. G.; Fusco, C.; Augello, B.; Jurado, L.
A. P.; Izzi, C.; Digilio, M. C.; Milani, D.; Lapi, E.; Zelante, L.;
Merla, G.: Identification and characterization of seven novel mutations
of elastin gene in a cohort of patients affected by supravalvular
aortic stenosis. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 18: 317-323, 2010.

24. Morris, C. A.; Loker, J.; Ensing, G.; Stock, A. D.: Supravalvular
aortic stenosis cosegregates with a familial 6;7 translocation which
disrupts the elastin gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 46: 737-744, 1993.

25. Olson, T. M.; Michels, V. V.; Lindor, N. M.; Pastores, G. M.;
Weber, J. L.; Schaid, D. J.; Driscoll, D. J.; Feldt, R. H.; Thibodeau,
S. N.: Autosomal dominant supravalvular aortic stenosis: localization
to chromosome 7. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 869-873, 1993.

26. Olson, T. M.; Michels, V. V.; Urban, Z.; Csiszar, K.; Christiano,
A. M.; Driscoll, D. J.; Feldt, R. H.; Boyd, C. D.; Thibodeau, S. N.
: A 30 kb deletion within the elastin gene results in familial supravalvular
aortic stenosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1677-1679, 1995.

27. Perez Jurado, L. A.; Peoples, R.; Kaplan, P.; Hamel, B. C. J.;
Francke, U.: Molecular definition of the chromosome 7 deletion in
Williams syndrome and parent-of-origin effects on growth. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 59: 781-792, 1996.

28. Reidy, J. P.: Cutis hyperelastica (Ehlers-Danlos) and cutis laxa. Brit.
J. Plast. Surg. 16: 84-94, 1963.

29. Rosenbloom, J.: Elastin: relation of protein and gene structure
to disease. Lab. Invest. 51: 605-623, 1984.

30. Sephel, G. C.; Byers, P. H.; Holbrook, K. A.; Davidson, J. M.
: Heterogeneity of elastin expression in cutis laxa fibroblast strains. J.
Invest. Derm. 93: 147-153, 1989.

31. Szabo, Z.; Crepeau, M. W.; Mitchell, A. L.; Stephan, M. J.; Puntel,
R. A.; Loke, K. Y.; Kirk, R. C.; Urban, Z.: Aortic aneurysmal disease
and cutis laxa caused by defects in the elastin gene. (Letter) J.
Med. Genet. 43: 255-258, 2006.

32. Tassabehji, M.; Metcalfe, K.; Donnai, D.; Hurst, J.; Reardon,
W.; Burch, M.; Read, A. P.: Elastin: genomic structure and point
mutations in patients with supravalvular aortic stenosis. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 6: 1029-1036, 1997.

33. Tassabehji, M.; Metcalfe, K.; Hurst, J.; Ashcroft, G. S.; Kielty,
C.; Wilmot, C.; Donnai, D.; Read, A. P.; Jones, C. J. P.: An elastin
gene mutation producing abnormal tropoelastin and abnormal elastic
fibres in a patient with autosomal dominant cutis laxa. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 7: 1021-1028, 1998.

34. Tromp, G.; Christiano, A.; Goldstein, N.; Indik, Z.; Boyd, C.;
Rosenbloom, J.; Deak, S.; Prockop, D.; Kuivaniemi, H.: A to G polymorphism
in ELN gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 19: 4314 only, 1991.

35. Uitto, J.; Christiano, A. M.; Kahari, V.-M.; Bashir, M. M.; Rosenbloom,
J.: Molecular biology and pathology of human elastin. Biochem. Soc.
Trans. 19: 824-829, 1991.

36. Urban, Z.; Gao, J.; Pope, F. M.; Davis, E. C.: Autosomal dominant
cutis laxa with severe lung disease: synthesis and matrix deposition
of mutant tropoelastin. J. Invest. Derm. 124: 1193-1199, 2005.

37. Urban, Z.; Michels, V. V.; Thibodeau, S. N.; Davis, E. C.; Bonnefont,
J.-P.; Munnich, A.; Eyskens, B.; Gewillig, M.; Devriendt, K.; Boyd,
C. D.: Isolated supravalvular aortic stenosis: functional haploinsufficiency
of the elastin gene as a result of nonsense-mediated decay. Hum.
Genet. 106: 577-588, 2000.

38. Urban, Z.; Michels, V. V.; Thibodeau, S. N.; Donis-Keller, H.;
Csiszar, K.; Boyd, C. D.: Supravalvular aortic stenosis: a splice
site mutation within the elastin gene results in reduced expression
of two aberrantly spliced transcripts. Hum. Genet. 104: 135-142,
1999.

39. Urban, Z.; Riazi, S.; Seidl, T. L.; Katahira, J.; Smoot, L. B.;
Chitayat, D.; Boyd, C. D.; Hinek, A.: Connection between elastin
haploinsufficiency and increased cell proliferation in patients with
supravalvular aortic stenosis and Williams-Beuren syndrome. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 71: 30-44, 2002.

40. Urban, Z.; Zhang, J.; Davis, E. C.; Maeda, G. K.; Kumar, A.; Stalker,
H.; Belmont, J. W.; Boyd, C. D.; Wallace, M. R.: Supravalvular aortic
stenosis: genetic and molecular dissection of a complex mutation in
the elastin gene. Hum. Genet. 109: 512-520, 2001.

41. Wydner, K. S.; Sechler, J. L.; Boyd, C. D.; Passmore, H. C.:
Use of an intron length polymorphism to localize the tropoelastin
gene to mouse chromosome 5 in a region of linkage conservation with
human chromosome 7. Genomics 23: 125-131, 1994.

42. Zhang, M.-C.; Giro, M.; Quaglino, D., Jr.; Davidson, J. M.: Transforming
growth factor-beta reverses a posttranscriptional defect in elastin
synthesis in a cutis laxa skin fibroblast strain. J. Clin. Invest. 95:
986-994, 1995.

43. Zhang, M.-C.; He, L.; Giro, M.; Yong, S. L.; Tiller, G. E.; Davidson,
J. M.: Cutis laxa arising from frameshift mutations in exon 30 of
the elastin gene (ELN). J. Biol. Chem. 274: 981-986, 1999.

44. Zhang, M. C.; He, L.; Yong, S. L.; Tiller, G. E.; Davidson, J.
M.: Cutis laxa arising from a frame shift mutation in the elastin
gene (ELN). (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61 (suppl.): A353 only,
1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/14/2012
Kelly A. Przylepa - updated: 11/20/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/1/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/11/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/19/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/10/2004
Natalie E. Krasikov - updated: 2/19/2004
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 2/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/17/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/6/2001
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 4/17/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/16/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/14/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/18/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/5/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/1/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/15/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/24/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/15/1997
Moyra Smith - updated: 10/21/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 03/15/2012
terry: 3/14/2012
alopez: 1/26/2012
alopez: 1/24/2012
carol: 9/1/2010
wwang: 8/25/2010
ckniffin: 8/16/2010
carol: 8/9/2010
alopez: 1/6/2010
carol: 11/26/2008
terry: 11/20/2008
wwang: 10/14/2008
terry: 9/25/2008
mgross: 5/1/2008
mgross: 6/11/2007
carol: 4/20/2006
carol: 4/19/2006
terry: 4/19/2006
tkritzer: 5/26/2004
terry: 5/10/2004
carol: 2/19/2004
terry: 2/19/2004
cwells: 2/11/2003
tkritzer: 7/29/2002
tkritzer: 7/26/2002
terry: 7/17/2002
carol: 1/2/2002
mcapotos: 12/13/2001
terry: 12/6/2001
carol: 5/18/2001
mcapotos: 5/10/2001
mcapotos: 4/17/2001
carol: 8/29/2000
terry: 8/16/2000
carol: 3/15/2000
mgross: 5/25/1999
mgross: 5/18/1999
terry: 5/14/1999
alopez: 3/19/1999
alopez: 3/18/1999
mgross: 3/17/1999
carol: 1/6/1999
terry: 1/5/1999
carol: 12/2/1998
terry: 12/1/1998
terry: 8/11/1998
carol: 6/22/1998
terry: 6/19/1998
alopez: 6/18/1998
terry: 6/15/1998
terry: 5/29/1998
terry: 10/28/1997
alopez: 10/27/1997
terry: 10/24/1997
mark: 10/6/1997
mark: 9/9/1997
mark: 8/19/1997
jenny: 8/19/1997
terry: 8/15/1997
mark: 1/29/1997
mark: 10/21/1996
mark: 11/6/1995
terry: 11/7/1994
mimadm: 9/24/1994
jason: 6/8/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994
pfoster: 4/1/1994

611335	TITLE *611335 SMALL NUCLEOLAR RNA, H/ACA BOX, 5C; SNORA5C
;;snoRNA, HBI-80
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs involved in RNA
processing. Box H/ACA snoRNAs, such as SNORA5C, direct the conversion of
uridine to pseudouridine at specific residues of ribosomal RNAs or small
nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) (Gu et al., 2005).

CLONING

By RT-PCR of human blood total RNA, Gu et al. (2005) identified several
box H/ACA snoRNAs, including SNORA5C, which they called HBI-80. HBI-80
contains 102 nucleotides.

GENE FUNCTION

Based on sequence complementarity, Gu et al. (2005) predicted that
HBI-80 pseudouridylates U1625 of 18S ribosomal RNA (see 180450).

MAPPING

Gu et al. (2005) mapped the SNORA5C gene to chromosome 7, within intron
3 of the TBRG4 gene (611325).

REFERENCE 1. Gu, A.-D.; Zhou, H.; Yu, C.-H.; Qu, L.-H.: A novel experimental
approach for systematic identification of box H/ACA snoRNAs from eukaryotes. Nucleic
Acids Res. 33: e194, 2005. Note: Electronic Article.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/16/2007

EDITED wwang: 05/20/2010
mgross: 8/17/2007
mgross: 8/16/2007

605129	TITLE *605129 PROTEASOME ACTIVATOR SUBUNIT 3; PSME3
;;PROTEASOME ACTIVATOR 28-GAMMA; PA28G;;
PA28-GAMMA;;
REG-GAMMA;;
KI ANTIGEN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PSME3 belongs to the proteasome activator subunit (PSME) gene family.
For background information on the PSME gene family, see PSME1 (600654).

CLONING

Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; 152700) produce
autoantibodies against a number of nuclear antigens, including SNRP70
(180740), PCNA (176740), CDR1 (302650), and Ki. By screening a human
placenta cDNA library with a probe obtained by screening a bovine retina
cDNA library with anti-Ki sera from an SLE patient, Nikaido et al.
(1990) isolated a cDNA encoding PSME3, which they called Ki. Sequence
analysis predicted that the 254-amino acid, hydrophilic PSME3 protein
contains a nuclear localization signal and has a molecular mass of
approximately 30 kD, close to the 32 kD observed by Western blot
analysis. PSME3 shares over 99% amino acid identity with the bovine
sequence. RNA blot analysis of human placenta, bovine brain, and mouse
embryos detected 3.0- and 1.5-kb PSME3 transcripts.

GENE FUNCTION

Steroid receptor coactivator-3 (SRC3, or NCOA3; 601937) is an oncogene
frequently amplified and overexpressed in breast cancer. Using
immunoprecipitation analysis, Li et al. (2006) found that endogenous
SRC3 and REG-gamma interacted in HeLa cell nuclear extracts and MCF-7
breast cancer cells. Protein pull-down assays showed the REG-gamma
interacted specifically with the HAT domain of SRC3. Knockdown of
REG-gamma via RNA interference (RNAi) in breast cancer and human
embryonic kidney cell lines resulted in a 2- to 3-fold increase in SRC3
protein levels. Conversely, REG-gamma overexpression in HeLa cells
reduced SRC3 protein levels. In vitro proteasome assays using purified
proteins showed that REG-gamma promoted degradation of SRC3 by the 20S
proteasome in a ubiquitin- and ATP-independent manner. Knockdown of
REG-gamma via RNAi increased estrogen receptor (ER; see 133430) target
gene expression and enhanced estradiol-mediated cell growth in MCF-7
cells, and these effects were secondary to the effect of REG-gamma on
SRC3.

MAPPING

By analysis of overlapping YAC contigs and by FISH, Albertsen et al.
(1994) mapped the PSME3 gene to 17q12-q21. Kandil et al. (1997) mapped
the mouse Psme3 gene to chromosome 14 using interspecific backcross
analysis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Barton et al. (2004) found that mice lacking Psme3 had normal levels of
surface class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules,
slightly reduced Cd8 (see 186910)-positive T cells, and normal responses
to infection with influenza or SV40 virus. However, the ability of Psme3
-/- mice to clear the pulmonary fungal pathogen Histoplasma capsulatum
was slower than wildtype mice. Barton et al. (2004) proposed that PSME3
functions in the MHC class I antigen-processing pathway and that it
exerts an influence on proteasome cleavage specificity.

REFERENCE 1. Albertsen, H. M.; Smith, S. A.; Mazoyer, S.; Fujimoto, E.; Stevens,
J.; Williams, B.; Rodriguez, P.; Cropp, C. S.; Slijepcevic, P.; Carlson,
M.; Robertson, M.; Bradley, P.; Lawrence, E.; Harrington, T.; Mei
Sheng, Z.; Hoopes, R.; Sternberg, N.; Brothman, A.; Callahan, R.;
Ponder, B. A. J.; White, R.: A physical map and candidate genes in
the BRCA1 region on chromosome 17q12-21. Nature Genet. 7: 472-479,
1994.

2. Barton, L. F.; Runnels, H. A.; Schell, T. D.; Cho, Y.; Gibbons,
R.; Tevethia, S. S.; Deepe, G. S., Jr.; Monaco, J. J.: Immune defects
in 28-kDa proteasome activator gamma-deficient mice. J. Immun. 172:
3948-3954, 2004.

3. Kandil, E.; Kohda, K.; Ishibashi, T.; Tanaka, K.; Kasahara, M.
: PA28 subunits of the mouse proteasome: primary structures and chromosomal
localization of the genes. Immunogenetics 46: 337-344, 1997.

4. Li, X.; Lonard, D. M.; Jung, S. Y.; Malovannaya, A.; Feng, Q.;
Qin, J.; Tsai, S. Y.; Tsai, M.-J.; O'Malley, B. W.: The SRC-3/AIB1
coactivator is degraded in a ubiquitin- and ATP-independent manner
by the REG-gamma proteasome. Cell 124: 381-392, 2006.

5. Nikaido, T.; Shimada, K.; Shibata, M.; Hata, M.; Sakamoto, M.;
Takasaki, Y.; Sato, C.; Takahashi, T.; Nishida, Y.: Cloning and nucleotide
sequence of cDNA for Ki antigen, a highly conserved nuclear protein
detected with sera from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Clin.
Exp. Immun. 79: 209-214, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/20/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/11/2005

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/11/2000

EDITED carol: 07/12/2010
alopez: 9/30/2009
wwang: 5/28/2009
mgross: 5/20/2009
mgross: 11/14/2005
terry: 11/11/2005
joanna: 1/31/2001
mgross: 7/11/2000

611333	TITLE *611333 SMALL NUCLEOLAR RNA, H/ACA BOX, 45; SNORA45
;;snoRNA, ACA3-2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) are small noncoding RNAs involved in RNA
processing. Box H/ACA snoRNAs, such as SNORA45, direct the conversion of
uridine to pseudouridine at specific residues of ribosomal RNAs or small
nuclear RNAs (snRNAs) (Gu et al., 2005).

CLONING

By RT-PCR of human blood total RNA, Gu et al. (2005) identified several
box H/ACA snoRNAs, including SNORA45, which they called ACA3-2. ACA3-2
contains 131 nucleotides and has 2 isoforms.

GENE FUNCTION

Based on sequence complementarity, Gu et al. (2005) predicted that
ACA3-2 directs pseudouridylation of U3889 of 28S ribosomal RNA (see
180450).

MAPPING

Gu et al. (2005) mapped the SNORA45 gene to chromosome 11, within intron
4 of the RPL27A gene (603637).

REFERENCE 1. Gu, A.-D.; Zhou, H.; Yu, C.-H.; Qu, L.-H.: A novel experimental
approach for systematic identification of box H/ACA snoRNAs from eukaryotes. Nucleic
Acids Res. 33: e194, 2005. Note: Electronic Article.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/16/2007

EDITED wwang: 05/20/2010
mgross: 8/16/2007

605088	TITLE *605088 MAJOR VAULT PROTEIN, RAT, HOMOLOG OF; MVP
;;LUNG RESISTANCE-RELATED PROTEIN; LRP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Vaults are hollow intracellular organelles with dimensions of about 57
by 32 nm and a nuclear mass of about 13 MD, 3 times the size of a
ribosome. They are composed of a small RNA (VTRNA1-1; 612695), the
100-kD major vault protein (MVP), and minor vault proteins of 193 kD
(PARP4; 607519) and 240 kD (TEP1; 601686). MVP accounts for over 70% of
the particle mass (Izquierdo et al., 1996; Kickhoefer et al., 1999).

CLONING

Multidrug-resistant (MDR) cancer cells frequently overexpress the 110-kD
lung resistance-related protein (LRP). Overexpression of LRP often
predicts a poor response to chemotherapy. By screening a
multidrug-resistant non-P-glycoprotein (see ABCB1; 171050) fibrosarcoma
cell line with an LRP-specific monoclonal antibody, Scheffer et al.
(1995) isolated a cDNA encoding LRP. The deduced 896-amino acid LRP
protein shares 88% amino acid identity with the rat major vault protein
(Mvp). RNase protection assays showed that LRP expression was enhanced
4- to 8-fold in non-P-glycoprotein MDR cell lines.

Using immunohistochemical analysis, Izquierdo et al. (1996) found that
LRP was widely expressed in normal and tumor tissues and showed a
characteristic cytoplasmic granular pattern. High LRP expression was
detected in the epithelial lining of bronchioles and upper and lower
digestive tract, renal proximal tubules, epidermal keratinocytes and
melanocytes, macrophages, and adrenal cortex. Lower and variable
expression of LRP was detected in other tissues. LRP was expressed in
all tumor types tested, and its level of expression fairly reflected the
chemosensitivity of the tumors, with lower expression in highly
chemosensitive tumors. Immunoprecipitated LRP had an apparent molecular
mass of 110 kD by SDS-PAGE.

By EST database analysis, Holzmann et al. (2001) identified a long MVP
splice variant, L-MVP, that contains a 41-bp stretch in the 5-prime
region that is intronic in the shorter S-MVP splice variant. This 41-bp
stretch introduces an upstream ORF encoding a deduced 18-amino acid
peptide. RT-PCR detected ubiquitous expression of both variants, and
S-MVP was always the major variant.

Van Zon et al. (2002) identified a central calcium-binding EF-hand motif
and a C-terminal coiled-coil domain in MVP.

Using confocal immunocytochemistry with anti-MVP antibody, Slesina et
al. (2005) found a dense distribution of vault particles in the
cytoplasm of human U373 astroglioma cell line. A punctate staining
pattern was also detected in the nucleus. Cryoimmunoelectron microscopy
revealed clusters of immunogold particles at nuclear pores and in the
nucleoplasm, suggesting that nuclear MVP was also associated with
vaults. Quantification of fluorescent MVP in the cytosol and nucleus of
U373 cells revealed about 5% of MVP in the nucleus.

GENE FUNCTION

Kickhoefer et al. (1998) found that expression of MVP and VTRNA1-1 and
assembly of vaults increased up to 15-fold in several drug-resistant
cell lines compared with the parental cell lines. They hypothesized that
the absolute vault level in cell lines may dictate the extent of drug
resistance.

Abbondanza et al. (1998) found that MVP coprecipitated with estrogen
receptor (ER, or ESR1; 133430) from nuclear extracts of MCF-7 human
breast cancer cells and that ER associated with intact vaults. Mutation
analysis showed that a central region of ER containing nuclear
localization signals was involved in the interaction. A limited amount
of ER molecules in the nuclear extract appeared to be associated with
MVP. Physiologic concentrations of estradiol increased the amount of MVP
present in MCF-7 nuclear extracts and coimmunoprecipitated with ER. The
hormone-dependent interaction of vaults with ER was reproduced in vitro.
Antibodies to progesterone receptor (PGR; 607311) and glucocorticoid
receptor (GCCR; 138040) also coimmunoprecipitated MVP, but more weakly.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis and by in vitro binding assays with
recombinant proteins, Kickhoefer et al. (1999) confirmed direct
interaction between MVP and PARP4, which they called VPARP. The
C-terminal domain was the smallest sequence of PARP4 that could bind
MVP. The PARP-like catalytic domain, when expressed as a recombinant
protein in E. coli, showed ADP-ribosylase activity. Vault particles
purified from rat liver and incubated with radiolabeled NAD showed
prominent ADP-ribosylation of Mvp and some automodification of Parp4.

Holzmann et al. (2001) showed that in vitro translation of L-MVP was low
relative to translation of S-MVP. Mutation of the start codon of the
upstream ORF in the L-MVP transcript reversed the suppression of MVP
translation, suggesting that translation of the upstream ORF controls
expression of the larger protein.

Using yeast 2- and 3-hybrid analysis and mutation analysis, van Zon et
al. (2002) found that MVP molecules interacted with each other via their
coiled-coil domains. MVP also bound calcium, likely via its EF-hand
motif. The N-terminal half of MVP bound a C-terminal domain of VPARP,
but TEP1 did not appear to interact with either MVP or VPARP.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Yu et al. (2002) showed that MPV
interacted with PTEN (601728), a protein phosphatase that can function
as a tumor suppressor. Endogenous PTEN associated with vault particles
isolated from HeLa cells. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis confirmed the
interaction between PTEN and MVP. Deletion analysis mapped the
interacting regions to the C2 domain of PTEN and the EF-hand motifs of
MVP. The interaction was independent of tyrosine phosphorylation, but
required calcium, consistent with a calcium-induced conformational
change in the MVP EF-hand motifs.

Using human airway epithelial cells, Kowalski et al. (2007) showed that
MVP accumulated rapidly into lipid rafts during Pseudomonas aeruginosa
infection, and this accumulation was markedly reduced in cells from
cystic fibrosis (219700) patients expressing the delF508 mutation
(602421.0001) in CFTR (602421). Immunofluorescence microscopy and
coimmunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated colocalization of
bacteria, CFTR, and MVP, without direct physical association. The outer
core oligosaccharide of P. aeruginosa bound CFTR and was required for
recruitment of MVP to lipid rafts. Small interfering RNA-mediated
knockdown of MVP decreased recruitment of MVP to lipid rafts following
P. aeruginosa infection without affecting NFKB (see 164011) activation,
IL8 (146930) secretion, or apoptosis induction, suggesting a key role
for MVP in bacterial uptake.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lange et al. (2000) determined that the MVP gene contains 15 exons. They
found that the promoter region has an inverted CCAAT box but no TATA
box. They identified several putative promoter binding sites including
an SP1 (189901)-binding site located close to a p53 (191170)-binding
motif. An alternative 3-prime splice site of intron 1 results in a
splicing variant within the 5-prime untranslated region of MVP mRNA.

MAPPING

By FISH, Scheffer et al. (1995) mapped the LRP gene to chromosome
16p13.1-p11.2, in the same chromosomal region as the MDR-associated
genes MRP (ABCC1; 158343) and PRKCB1 (176970). The authors noted that
acute myeloid leukemia patients with a deletion of an MRP gene,
resulting from a chromosome 16 inversion, often have a favorable
outcome.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kowalski et al. (2007) found that Mvp -/- mice infected with P.
aeruginosa internalized fewer bacteria in lung epithelial cells than
wildtype mice, resulting in increased bacterial burden in the lung. Mvp
-/- mice also had increased mortality after P. aeruginosa infection.
Kowalski et al. (2007) concluded that MVP contributes to resistance
against P. aeruginosa lung infection.

REFERENCE 1. Abbondanza, C.; Rossi, V.; Roscigno, A.; Gallo, L.; Belsito, A.;
Piluso, G.; Medici, N.; Nigro, V.; Molinari, A. M.; Moncharmont, B.;
Puca, G. A.: Interaction of vault particles with estrogen receptor
in the MCF-7 breast cancer cell. J. Cell Biol. 141: 1301-1310, 1998.

2. Holzmann, K.; Ambrosch, I.; Elbling, L.; Micksche, M.; Berger,
W.: A small upstream open reading frame causes inhibition of human
major vault protein expression from a ubiquitous mRNA splice variant. FEBS
Lett. 494: 99-104, 2001.

3. Izquierdo, M. A.; Scheffer, G. L.; Flens, M. J.; Giaccone, G.;
Broxterman, H. J.; Meijer, C. J. L. M.; van der Valk, P.; Scheper,
R. J.: Broad distribution of the multidrug resistance-related vault
lung resistance protein in normal human tissues and tumors. Am. J.
Path. 148: 877-887, 1996.

4. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Rajavel, K. S.; Scheffer, G. L.; Dalton, W.
S.; Scheper, R. J.; Rome, L. H.: Vaults are up-regulated in multidrug-resistant
cancer cell lines. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 8971-8974, 1998.

5. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Siva, A. C.; Kedersha, N. L.; Inman, E. M.;
Ruland, C.; Streuli, M.; Rome, L. H.: The 193-kD vault protein, VPARP,
is a novel poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. J. Cell Biol. 146: 917-928,
1999.

6. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Stephen, A. G.; Harrington, L.; Robinson, M.
O.; Rome, L. H.: Vaults and telomerase share a common subunit, TEP1. J.
Biol. Chem. 274: 32712-32717, 1999.

7. Kowalski, M. P.; Dubouix-Bourandy, A.; Bajmoczi, M.; Golan, D.
E.; Zaidi, T.; Coutinho-Sledge, Y. S.; Gygi, M. P.; Gygi, S. P.; Wiemer,
E. A. C.; Pier, G. B.: Host resistance to lung infection mediated
by major vault protein in epithelial cells. Science 317: 130-132,
2007.

8. Lange, C.; Walther, W.; Schwabe, H.; Stein, U.: Cloning and initial
analysis of the human multidrug resistance-related MVP/LRP gene promoter. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 278: 125-133, 2000.

9. Scheffer, G. L.; Wijngaard, P. L. J.; Flens, M. J.; Izquierdo,
M. A.; Slovak, M. L.; Pinedo, H. M.; Meijer, C. J. L. M.; Clevers,
H. C.; Scheper, R. J.: The drug resistance-related protein LRP is
the human major vault protein. Nature Med. 1: 578-582, 1995.

10. Slesina, M.; Inman, E. M.; Rome, L. H.; Volknandt, W.: Nuclear
localization of the major vault protein in U373 cells. Cell Tissue
Res. 321: 97-104, 2005.

11. van Zon, A.; Mossink, M. H.; Schoester, M.; Scheffer, G. L.; Scheper,
R. J.; Sonneveld, P.; Wiemer, E. A. C.: Structural domains of vault
proteins: a role for the coiled coil domain in vault assembly. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 291: 535-541, 2002.

12. Yu, Z.; Fotouhi-Ardakani, N.; Wu, L.; Maoui, M.; Wang, S.; Banville,
D.; Shen, S.-H.: PTEN associates with the vault particles in HeLa
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 40247-40252, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/6/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/17/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/30/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/28/2000

EDITED mgross: 03/26/2009
terry: 3/6/2009
mgross: 7/18/2007
terry: 7/17/2007
carol: 7/30/2002
mgross: 8/11/2000
mgross: 6/29/2000
mgross: 6/28/2000

300722	TITLE *300722 MICRO RNA 19B2; MIR19B2
;;miRNA19B2;;
MIRN19B2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), such as miRNA19B2, are 20- to 23-nucleotide RNAs
that regulate gene expression posttranscriptionally by mediating
sequence-specific repression of mRNA translation (Lagos-Quintana et al.,
2001).

CLONING

Using a directional cloning procedure to identify miRNAs from HeLa cell
total RNA, Lagos-Quintana et al. (2001) cloned miRNA19B2.

GENE FUNCTION

Mourelatos et al. (2002) identified miRNA19B2 as 1 of at least 40 miRNAs
present in a large 15S ribonucleoprotein complex containing EIF2C2
(606229), GEMIN3 (606168), and GEMIN4 (606969).

Using RT-PCR, Mavrakis et al. (2011) analyzed the expression of 430
miRNAs in 50 clinical T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL; see
613065) specimens representing 7 cytogenetic groups and in 18 T-ALL cell
lines. They identified 10 miRNAs that accounted for most detectable
miRNAs in T-ALL cells, 5 of which, MIR19B, MIR20A (609420), MIR26A (see
612151), MIR92 (see 609422), and MIR223 (300694), were predicted to
target tumor suppressor genes. All 5 of these miRNAs accelerated
leukemia development in a mouse model. These 5 miRNAs also produced
overlapping and cooperative effects on tumor suppressors implicated in
T-ALL pathogenesis, including IKAROS (IKZF1; 603023), PTEN (601728), BIM
(BCL2L11; 603827), PHF6 (300414), NF1 (162200), and FBXW7 (606278).

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lagos-Quintana et al. (2001) mapped the
MIRN19B2 gene to the X chromosome. Mourelatos et al. (2002) determined
that the MIRN19B2 gene is clustered with the MIRN92A2 gene within a
250-nucleotide region of the X chromosome.

Gross (2008) mapped the MIRN19B2 gene to chromosome Xq26.2 based on an
alignment of the MIRN19B2 stem-loop sequence
(ACAUUGCUACUUACAAUUAGUUUUGCAGGUUUGCAUUUCAGCGUAUAUAUGUAUAUGUGGCUGUGCAAAUCCAUGCAAAACUGAUUGUGAUAAUGU)
with the genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/30/2008.

2. Lagos-Quintana, M.; Rauhut, R.; Lendeckel, W.; Tuschl, T.: Identification
of novel genes coding for small expressed RNAs. Science 294: 853-858,
2001.

3. Mavrakis, K. J.; Van Der Meulen, J.; Wolfe, A. L.; Liu, X.; Mets,
E.; Taghon, T.; Khan, A. A.; Setty, M.; Rondou, P.; Vandenberghe,
P.; Delabesse, E.; Benoit, Y.; Socci, N. B.; Leslie, C. S.; Van Vlierberghe,
P.; Speleman, F.; Wendel, H.-G.: A cooperative microRNA-tumor suppressor
gene network in acute T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Nature
Genet. 43: 673-678, 2011. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 43: 815 only,
2011.

4. Mourelatos, Z.; Dostie, J.; Paushkin, S.; Sharma, A.; Charroux,
B.; Abel, L.; Rappsilber, J.; Mann, M.; Dreyfuss, G.: miRNPs: a novel
class of ribonucleoproteins containing numerous microRNAs. Genes
Dev. 16: 720-728, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/11/2011

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 6/30/2008

EDITED carol: 04/11/2013
mgross: 8/11/2011
wwang: 7/1/2008
mgross: 6/30/2008

603422	TITLE *603422 PDZ AND LIM DOMAIN PROTEIN 4; PDLIM4
;;LIM DOMAIN PROTEIN RIL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kiess et al. (1995) identified the rat ril gene based on its
downregulation in Hras-transformed cells. The gene contains a LIM/double
zinc finger domain but lacks a homeodomain. Northern blot analysis
revealed expression in a wide variety of mouse tissues.

Searching for novel genes in the human 5q31.1 region by cDNA selection,
Bashirova et al. (1998) isolated a human RIL cDNA. The human RIL gene
encodes a 328-amino acid polypeptide. PCR of human fetal brain
identified an alternatively spliced mRNA that lacks the sixth exon,
leading to the loss of the LIM domain.

Using RT-PCR, Boumber et al. (2007) found that RIL was expressed in all
15 normal human tissues tested.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bashirova et al. (1998) determined that the human RIL gene contains 7
exons distributed over 14.5 kb of genomic DNA. Exons 6 and 7 encode the
LIM domain.

MAPPING

Bashirova et al. (1998) characterized the 5q31.1 genomic region. They
ordered the genes in this region
cen--IL4(147780)--IL13(147683)--RAD50(604040)--IL5(147850)--IRF1(147575)--RIL--CSF2
(138960)--IL3(147740)--tel.

GENE FUNCTION

Boumber et al. (2007) found that the RIL gene was methylated in a high
proportion of cancers, with highest methylation in acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML; 601626) and colon cancer (114500). Methylation was
associated with loss of RIL expression, and RIL could be reactivated by
the hypomethylating agent 5-aza-2-prime-deoxycytidine. Restoration of
RIL expression in colon cancer cells by stable transfection resulted in
reduced cell growth and clonogenicity and an approximately 2-fold
increase in apoptosis following ultraviolet exposure.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The expression of RIL mRNA in human bone marrow stromal cells suggests a
possible involvement in osteoblast development/function. Omasu et al.
(2003) carried out a correlation study between genetic variations in RIL
and bone mineral density (BMD). A significant association was identified
between a -3333T-C polymorphism in the 5-prime flanking region of the
RIL gene with radial BMD in adult Japanese women. The radial BMD
represented the quality of both cortical bone thickness and cancellous
bone volume when the distal part of the radial bone near the wrist joint
was measured. Omasu et al. (2003) concluded that the RIL locus may be an
important determinant of osteoporosis. Homozygous T-allele carriers had
the lowest adjusted BMD, heterozygous individuals have an intermediate
adjusted BMD, and homozygous C-allele carriers had the highest adjusted
BMD, implying an allelic dosage effect of this variation on BMD. In the
370 individuals studied, the frequency of the C allele was 0.81 and that
of the T allele was 0.19.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OSTEOPOROSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RIL, -3333T-C

In adult Japanese women, Omasu et al. (2003) found an association
between the T allele in the -3333T-C polymorphism in the 5-prime
flanking region of the RIL gene to low bone mineral density (BMD) in an
allele-dosage-related manner. They hypothesized that the variation may
be an important determinant of osteoporosis (166710).

REFERENCE 1. Bashirova, A. A.; Markelov, M. L.; Shlykova, T. V.; Levshenkova,
E. V.; Alibaeva, R. A.; Frolova, E. I.: The human RIL gene: mapping
to human chromosome 5q31.1, genomic organization and alternative transcripts. Gene 210:
239-245, 1998.

2. Boumber, Y. A.; Kondo, Y.; Chen, X.; Shen, L.; Gharibyan, V.; Konishi,
K.; Estey, E.; Kantarjian, H.; Garcia-Manero, G.; Issa, J.-P. J.:
RIL, a LIM gene on 5q31, is silenced by methylation in cancer and
sensitizes cancer cells to apoptosis. Cancer Res. 67: 1997-2005,
2007.

3. Kiess, M.; Scharm, B.; Aguzzi, A.; Hajnal, A.; Klemenz, R.; Schwarte-Waldhoff,
I.; Schafer, R.: Expression of ril, a novel LIM domain gene, is down-regulated
in Hras-transformed cells and restored in phenotypic revertants. Oncogene 10:
61-68, 1995.

4. Omasu, F.; Ezura, Y.; Kajita, M.; Ishida, R.; Kodaira, M.; Yoshida,
H.; Suzuki, T.; Hosoi, T.; Inoue, S.; Shiraki, M.; Orimo, H.; Emi,
M.: Association of genetic variation of the RIL gene, encoding a
PDZ-LIM domain protein and localized in 5q31.1, with low bone mineral
density in adult Japanese women. J. Hum. Genet. 48: 342-345, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/31/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/27/2003

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 1/12/1999

EDITED carol: 02/26/2013
mgross: 1/5/2009
terry: 12/31/2008
carol: 3/18/2004
cwells: 8/29/2003
terry: 8/27/2003
mgross: 7/22/1999
alopez: 1/12/1999

601900	TITLE *601900 INTERFERON REGULATORY FACTOR 4; IRF4
;;LYMPHOCYTE-SPECIFIC IRF; LSIRF;;
MULTIPLE MYELOMA ONCOGENE 1; MUM1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IRF4 is a transcription factor essential for the development of T
helper-2 (Th2) cells, IL17 (see 603149)-producing Th17 cells, and IL9
(146931)-producing Th9 cells (Staudt et al., 2010).

CLONING

Grossman et al. (1996) cloned a novel human interferon regulatory factor
(IRF) that they named LSIRF for 'lymphocyte-specific IRF.' They reported
that the gene encodes a 450-amino acid polypeptide with a predicted mass
of 51.6 kD. The gene is expressed as a single 5-kb transcript in spleen,
lymphocytes, and melanocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

Grossman et al. (1996) found that expression of LSIRF was induced in T
cells after crosslinking of the T-cell receptor (see 186880).

By fluorescence and confocal microscopy, Negishi et al. (2005)
demonstrated that IRF4 interacted with MYD88 (602170) in the cytoplasm
of human embryonic kidney cells. Mutation and coimmunoprecipitation
analysis showed that IRF4 interacted with the TIR/IL1 region of MYD88.
IRF4 inhibited interaction of MYD88 with IRF5 (607218), which interacts
with the same central region of MYD88 as IRF4, but it did not block
interaction of MYD88 with IRF7 (605047), which binds to the N terminus.
IRF5-dependent gene induction was inhibited by IRF4, and IRF4-deficient
macrophages were hyperresponsive to Toll-like receptor (TLR; see 603030)
stimuli. Negishi et al. (2005) concluded that IRF4 negatively regulates
TLR signaling by selectively competing with IRF5.

Shaffer et al. (2008) used a loss-of-function, RNA interference-based
genetic screen to demonstrate that IRF4 inhibition is toxic to myeloma
cell lines, regardless of transforming oncogenic mechanism. Gene
expression profiling and genomewide chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis uncovered an extensive network of IRF4 target genes and
identified MYC (190080) as a direct target of IRF4 in activated B cells
and myeloma. Unexpectedly, IRF4 was itself a direct target of MYC
transactivation, generating an autoregulatory circuit in myeloma cells.
Shaffer et al. (2008) suggested that although IRF4 is not genetically
altered in most myelomas, they are nonetheless addicted to an aberrant
IRF4 regulatory network that fuses the gene expression programs of
normal plasma cells and activated B cells.

Zheng et al. (2009) showed that in mouse T regulatory cells, high
amounts of IRF4, a transcription factor essential for TH2 effector cell
differentiation, is dependent on Foxp3 (300292) expression. They
proposed that IRF4 expression endows T regulatory cells with the ability
to suppress TH2 responses. Indeed, ablation of a conditional Irf4 allele
in T regulatory cells resulted in selective dysregulation of TH2
responses, IL4-dependent immunoglobulin isotype production, and tissue
lesions with pronounced plasma cell infiltration, in contrast to the
mononuclear cell-dominated pathology typical of mice lacking T
regulatory cells. Zheng et al. (2009) concluded that T regulatory cells
use components of the transcriptional machinery, promoting a particular
type of effector CD4+ T cell differentiation, to efficiently restrain
the corresponding type of the immune response.

Staudt et al. (2010) found that Cd4 (186940)-positive T cells from Irf4
-/- mice failed to differentiate into Il9-producing Th9 cells in the
presence of Tgfb (190180) and Il4 (147780). Treatment of Cd4-positive T
cells with Irf4 small interfering RNA strongly reduced Il9 production
and enhanced Ifng (147570) expression, but had no effect on Il2 (147680)
production. Reporter gene analysis demonstrated that Irf4 bound directly
to the Il9 promoter. Naive human CD4-positive T cells stimulated with
IL4 and TGFB also differentiated into Th9 cells, and this was
accompanied by strong expression of IRF4. Staudt et al. (2010) concluded
that IRF4 is essential for development of Th9 cells.

By flow cytometric analysis, Cretney et al. (2011) demonstrated that
Blimp1 (PRDM1; 603423) was expressed in a subset of mouse regulatory T
cells (Tregs) that localized mainly to mucosal sites and expressed Il10
(124092) in a Blimp1-dependent manner. Blimp1 was also required for
tissue homeostasis. Irf4, but not Tbet (TBX21; 604895), was essential
for Blimp1 expression and for differentiation of all effector Tregs.
Cretney et al. (2011) concluded that the differentiation pathway that
leads to the acquisition of Treg effector functions requires both IRF4
and BLIMP1.

Li et al. (2012) showed that in mouse CD4+ T cells and B cells IRF4
unexpectedly can cooperate with activator protein-1 (AP1; see 165160)
complexes to bind to AP1-IRF4 composite (5-prime-TGAnTCA/GAAA-3-prime)
motifs that they denoted as AP1-IRF composite elements (AICEs).
Moreover, BATF-JUN family protein complexes cooperate with IRF4 in
binding to AICEs in preactivated CD4+ T cells stimulated with IL21
(605384) and in TH17 differentiated cells. Importantly, BATF (612476)
binding was diminished in Irf4-null T cells and IRF4 binding was
diminished in Batf-null T cells, consistent with functional cooperation
between these factors. Moreover, Li et al. (2012) showed that AP1 and
IRF complexes cooperatively promote transcription of the Il10 gene,
which is expressed in TH17 cells and potently regulated by IL21. Li et
al. (2012) concluded that their findings revealed that IRF4 can signal
via complexes containing ETS or AP1 motifs depending on the cellular
context.

Using chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing in T-helper-17 (TH17)
cells, Glasmacher et al. (2012) found that IRF4 targets sequences
enriched for activated protein-1 (AP1; 165160)-IRF composite elements
(AICEs) that are cobound by BATF (612476), an AP1 factor required for
TH17, B, and dendritic cell differentiation. IRF4 and BATF bind
cooperatively to structurally divergent AICEs to promote gene activation
and TH17 differentiation. The AICE motif directs assembly of IRF4 or
IRF8 (601565) with BATF heterodimers and is also used in TH2, B, and
dendritic cells. Glasmacher et al. (2012) concluded that this genomic
regulatory element and cognate factors appear to have evolved to
integrate diverse immunomodulatory signals.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Grossman et al. (1996) mapped
the LSIRF gene to chromosome 6p25-p23.

- Association with Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia

In a genomewide association study to identify common variants
influencing the risk of developing chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL;
see 151400), Di Bernardo et al. (2008) found the strongest association
with 2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that mapped to a 97-kb
block of linkage disequilibrium on chromosome 6p25.3 (CLLS4; 612558)
that contains the IRF4 gene. The SNP dbSNP rs872071 maps within the
3-prime untranslated region of IRF4. The overall estimate of effect
associated with dbSNP rs872071 was an odds ratio trend of 1.54 with a
95% confidence interval of 1.41 to 1.69 and a P value of 1.91 x 10(-20).
The genotype at SNP dbSNP rs872071 was sufficient to capture all of the
locus variation. Di Bernardo et al. (2008) considered IRF4 a strong
candidate gene for a CLL susceptibility a priori, being a key regulator
of lymphocyte development and proliferation. In studies using
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed lymphocytes, expression of IRF4
mRNA was significantly associated with genotype in a dose-dependent
fashion (P = 0.042), with lower expression associated with risk alleles.
Di Bernardo et al. (2008) argued that this observation is consistent
with a model in which the causal variant influences risk by arresting
transition of memory B cells through decreased IRF4 expression.

Using a set of SNP markers, Crowther-Swanepoel et al. (2010) generated a
fine-scale map of 6p25.3 and narrowed the signal for association with
CLL to an 18-kb DNA segment within the 3-prime untranslated region (UTR)
of IRF4. Resequencing this segment in European subjects identified 55
common polymorphisms, including 13 highly correlated candidate causal
variants. In a large case-control study, it was shown that all but 4
variants could be excluded with 95% confidence. These 4 SNPs mapped to a
3-kb region of the 3-prime UTR of IRF4, consistent with the causal basis
of the association being differential IRF4 expression.

CYTOGENETICS

In multiple myeloma (254500), chromosomal translocations affecting 14q32
and unidentified partner chromosomes are common, suggesting that they
may cause the activation of novel oncogenes. In multiple myeloma cell
lines, Iida et al. (1997) identified a t(6;14)(p25;q32) translocation in
2 of 11 cell lines. The translocation juxtaposes the immunoglobulin
heavy-chain (IGHG1; 147100) locus to the MUM1 (for 'multiple myeloma
oncogene 1') gene, which is also referred to as interferon regulatory
factor-4 (IRF4), a member of a gene family known to be active in the
control of B-cell proliferation and differentiation. See IRF1 (147575)
on chromosome 5 and IRF2 (147576) on chromosome 4. As a result of the
translocation, the MUM1/IRF4 gene is overexpressed, an event that may
contribute to tumorigenesis, as Iida et al. (1997) showed that MUM1/IRF4
has oncogenic activity in vitro.

ANIMAL MODEL

By knocking out exons 2 and 3 of the Irf4 gene, Mittrucker et al. (1997)
generated mice deficient in Irf4 protein. Flow cytometric analysis
indicated normal expression of bone marrow and immature B-lymphocyte
markers. After 4 to 5 weeks of age, the mutant mice began to develop
generalized lymphadenopathy with expansion of both T and B lymphocytes,
failed to develop germinal centers in B-cell follicles or plasma cells
after immunization, had poor T- and B-lymphocyte proliferative responses
after stimulation with most mitogens, lacked production of all serum Ig
subclasses after immunization with T cell-dependent or -independent
antigens, and were unable to reject mastocytoma cells. Mittrucker et al.
(1997) concluded that IRF4 is essential for mature T- and B-lymphocyte
function.

Negishi et al. (2005) found that mice lacking Irf4 displayed a more
potent and lethal inflammatory response to CpG oligonucleotides,
underscoring the role of IRF4 as a critical negative regulator of TLR
signaling.

Honma et al. (2005) showed that Irf4 -/- mice were sensitive to TLR
stimulation, such as lipopolysaccharide-induced shock. Irf4 -/-
macrophages produced high levels of Tnf (191160) and Il6 (147620) in
response to TLR ligands. Small interfering RNA against Irf4 in normal
macrophages inhibited the inflammatory response. Honma et al. (2005)
concluded that IRF4 negatively regulates TLR signaling and inhibits
proinflammatory cytokine production.

Staudt et al. (2010) found that transfer of either Th2 or Th9 cells to
Rag2 (179616)-deficient mice resulted in severe asthma symptoms. In mice
that had received Th9 cells, but not Th2 cells, these symptoms could be
relieved with anti-Il9. Mice lacking Irf4, which is essential for Th9
cell development, were resistant to development of asthma, while Irf4
+/- heterozygotes had an intermediate phenotype. Staudt et al. (2010)
concluded that Th9 cell-derived IL9 is an important inducer of asthmatic
symptoms, equivalent to that caused by Th2 cells and IL4.

REFERENCE 1. Cretney, E.; Xin, A.; Shi, W.; Minnich, M.; Masson, F.; Miasari,
M.; Belz, G. T.; Smyth, G. K.; Busslinger, M.; Nutt, S. L.; Kallies,
A.: The transcription factors Blimp-1 and IRF4 jointly control the
differentiation and function of effector regulatory T cells. Nature
Immun. 12: 304-311, 2011.

2. Crowther-Swanepoel, D.; Broderick, P.; Ma, Y.; Robertson, L.; Pittman,
A. M.; Price, A.; Twiss, P.; Vijayakrishnan, J.; Quereshi, M.; Dyer,
M. J. S.; Matutes, E.; Dearden, C.; Catovsky, D.; Houlston, R. S.
: Fine-scale mapping of the 6p25.3 chronic lymphocytic leukaemia susceptibility
locus. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 1840-1845, 2010.

3. Di Bernardo, M. C.; Crowther-Swanepoel, D.; Broderick, P.; Webb,
E.; Sellick, G.; Wild, R.; Sullivan, K.; Vijayakrishnan, J.; Wang,
Y.; Pittman, A. M.; Sunter, N. J.; Hall, A. G.; and 17 others:
A genome-wide association study identifies six susceptibility loci
for chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Nature Genet. 40: 1204-1210, 2008.

4. Glasmacher, E.; Agrawal, S.; Chang, A. B.; Murphy, T. L.; Zeng,
W.; Vander Lugt, B.; Khan, A. A.; Ciofani, M.; Spooner, C. J.; Rutz,
S.; Hackney, J.; Nurieva, R.; Escalante, C. R.; Ouyang, W.; Littman,
D. R.; Murphy, K. M.; Singh, H.: A genomic regulatory element that
directs assembly and function of immune-specific AP-1-IRF complexes. Science 338:
975-980, 2012.

5. Grossman, A.; Mittrucker, H.-W.; Nicholl, J.; Suzuki, A.; Chung,
S.; Antonio, L.; Suggs, S.; Sutherland, G. R.; Siderovski, D. P.;
Mak, T. W.: Cloning of human lymphocyte-specific interferon regulatory
factor (hLSIRF/hIRF4) and mapping of the gene to 6p23-p25. Genomics 37:
229-233, 1996.

6. Honma, K.; Udono, H.; Kohno, T.; Yamamoto, K.; Ogawa, A.; Takemori,
T.; Kumatori, A.; Suzuki, S.; Matsuyama, T.; Yui, K.: Interferon
regulatory factor 4 negatively regulates the production of proinflammatory
cytokines by macrophages in response to LPS. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102:
16001-16006, 2005.

7. Iida, S.; Rao, P. H.; Butler, M.; Corradini, P.; Boccadoro, M.;
Klein, B.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Dalla-Favera, R.: Deregulation of
MUM1/IRF4 by chromosomal translocation in multiple myeloma. Nature
Genet. 17: 226-230, 1997.

8. Li, P.; Spolski, R.; Liao, W.; Wang, L.; Murphy, T. L.; Murphy,
K. M.; Leonard, W. J.: BATF-JUN is critical for IRF4-mediated transcription
in T cells. Nature 490: 543-546, 2012.

9. Mittrucker, H.-W.; Matsuyama, T.; Grossman, A.; Kundig, T. M.;
Potter, J.; Shahinian, A.; Wakeham, A.; Patterson, B.; Ohashi, P.
S.; Mak, T. W.: Requirement for the transcription factor LSIRF/IRF4
for mature B and T lymphocyte function. Science 275: 540-543, 1997.

10. Negishi, H.; Ohba, Y.; Yanai, H.; Takaoka, A.; Honma, K.; Yui,
K.; Matsuyama, T.; Taniguchi, T.; Honda, K.: Negative regulation
of Toll-like-receptor signaling by IRF-4. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102:
15989-15994, 2005.

11. Shaffer, A. L.; Emre, N. C. T.; Lamy, L.; Ngo, V. N.; Wright,
G.; Xiao, W.; Powell, J.; Dave, S.; Yu, X.; Zhao, H.; Zeng, Y.; Chen,
B.; Epstein, J.; Staudt, L. M.: IRF4 addiction in multiple myeloma. Nature 454:
226-231, 2008.

12. Staudt, V.; Bothur, E.; Klein, M.; Lingnau, K.; Reuter, S.; Grebe,
N.; Gerlitzki, B.; Hoffmann, M.; Ulges, A.; Taube, C.; Dehzad, N.;
Becker, M.; Stassen, M.; Steinborn, A.; Lohoff, M.; Schild, H.; Schmitt,
E.; Bopp, T.: Interferon-regulatory factor 4 is essential for the
developmental program of T helper 9 cells. Immunity 33: 192-202,
2010.

13. Zheng, Y.; Chaudhry, A.; Kas, A.; deRoos, P.; Kim, J. M.; Chu,
T.-T.; Corcoran, L.; Treuting, P.; Klein, U.; Rudensky, A. Y.: Regulatory
T-cell suppressor program co-opts transcription factor IRF4 to control
TH2 responses. Nature 458: 351-356, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/7/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/4/2012
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/1/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/11/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/24/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/16/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/8/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/6/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/23/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/6/1998

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 7/10/1997

EDITED alopez: 01/07/2013
alopez: 1/7/2013
terry: 1/7/2013
alopez: 12/6/2012
terry: 12/4/2012
alopez: 12/5/2011
terry: 12/1/2011
mgross: 11/18/2011
terry: 11/11/2011
mgross: 2/3/2011
terry: 1/24/2011
mgross: 4/30/2009
terry: 4/23/2009
alopez: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/2/2009
alopez: 1/29/2009
terry: 1/16/2009
alopez: 8/27/2008
terry: 8/8/2008
mgross: 7/11/2007
terry: 7/6/2007
mgross: 8/23/2001
psherman: 4/15/1999
alopez: 5/6/1998
alopez: 3/6/1998
alopez: 9/11/1997
alopez: 9/8/1997
terry: 7/28/1997

611731	TITLE *611731 APC GENE; APC
;;DELETED IN POLYPOSIS 2.5; DP2.5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The APC gene encodes a multidomain protein that plays a major role in
tumor suppression by antagonizing the WNT (see WNT1; 164820) signaling
pathway. Inappropriate activation of this pathway through loss of APC
function contributes to cancer progression, as in familial adenomatous
polyposis (FAP; 175100). APC also has a role in cell migration,
adhesion, chromosome segregation, spindle assembly, apoptosis, and
neuronal differentiation (Hanson and Miller, 2005).

The APC protein is an integral part of the beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806)
signaling pathway.

CLONING

The APC gene was identified and cloned simultaneously and independently
by 2 groups: the group of Bert Vogelstein in Baltimore, in collaboration
with the group of Yusuke Nakamura in Tokyo (Kinzler et al., 1991;
Nishisho et al., 1991), and the group of Ray White in Salt Lake City
(Groden et al., 1991; Joslyn et al., 1991). The deduced 2,843-residue
protein has a molecular mass of 311.8 kD. The protein sequence does not
contain transmembrane regions or nuclear targeting signals, suggesting
cytoplasmic localization.

Kinzler et al. (1991) identified several genes within a 5.5-Mb region of
DNA linked to FAP. All were expressed in normal colonic mucosa: FER
(176942), MCC (159350), SRP19 (182175), and TB2 (REEP5; 125265), in
addition to the APC gene itself. The APC gene product was predicted to
contain coiled-coil regions and was expressed in a wide variety of
tissues.

Joslyn et al. (1991) identified 3 genes within small deleted regions on
chromosome 5q12 found in 2 unrelated patients with FAP. One of these,
termed DP2.5, was found by Groden et al. (1991) to be the APC gene. The
other 2 genes identified by Joslyn et al. (1991) were SRP19 and DP1
(REEP5). Northern blot analysis by Groden et al. (1991) identified a
10-kb APC mRNA.

Hampton et al. (1992) isolated 2 overlapping YACs containing the MCC
gene; one of the YACs also included the complete APC gene.

Lambertz and Ballhausen (1993) isolated cDNA clones representing
transcripts expressed in human fetal brain and coding for the 5-prime
end of the APC gene. Sequence analyses revealed an alternative 5-prime
untranslated region comprising at least 103 bp. This finding suggested
that 2 APC-specific promoter elements exist, giving rise to 2 different
untranslated regions. Within the alternative UTR, Lambertz and
Ballhausen (1993) identified 3 additional AUG codons, located 5-prime to
the intrinsic APC initiation site. The authors suggested that these
codons may be relevant for the translational regulation of APC gene
expression.

Horii et al. (1993) noted that transcriptional initiation of APC occurs
at 3 sites in 2 distinct nontranslated exons at the 5-prime end of the
gene. Studies of transcripts from human colorectal tumor cell lines
suggested the presence of mutations in the transcriptional control
region. Horii et al. (1993) also detected at least 5 different forms of
5-prime noncoding sequences which were generated by alternative
splicing. They stated that the splicing mechanism appeared to be
regulated in a tissue-specific fashion, and 1 transcript, expressed
exclusively in brain, contained an extra exon.

GENE STRUCTURE

Groden et al. (1991) determined that the APC gene contains 15 exons.

Sulekova and Ballhausen (1995) identified a novel coding exon of the APC
gene. To that point, the 54-bp exon (exon 10A) was the smallest coding
exon in the gene, and was located 1.6-kb downstream from exon 10. It is
alternatively spliced and inserted in-frame into mature transcripts; it
gives an APC protein with an additional 18 amino acids. APC exon 10A
flanking sequences were presented so that this exon could be included in
mutation screening procedures.

Xia et al. (1995) described an alternatively spliced APC transcript
which had not been reported previously. Within this transcript, they
found an evolutionarily conserved but previously unidentified exon
between the known exons 10 and 11. The exon contains a heptad repeat
motif.

Karagianni et al. (2005) identified an alternatively spliced Apc
transcript in mouse embryonic stem cells and colon tissue. The
transcript contains an untranslated exon, which the authors designated
exon N. Transcripts bearing exon N spliced to either exon 1 or exon 2
were detected in all mouse tissues examined. A promoter region within
exon N has features of a housekeeping gene, including high average GC
content and lack of CAAT and TATA boxes. Karagianni et al. (2005) mapped
the promoter about 40 kb upstream of the initiating methionine, and
transient transfection experiments showed strong promoter activity.

GENE FUNCTION

Hoshino et al. (1991) found that fragments of chromosome 5, including
the region containing the APC gene, suppressed tumor activity when
transferred into NIH-3T3 cells that had been transformed with Kirsten
sarcoma virus.

Rubinfeld et al. (1993) and Su et al. (1993) found that APC associated
with both beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806) and alpha-catenin (CTNNA1;
116805). Since both proteins bind to the cell adhesion molecule
E-cadherin (192090), the results suggested that APC is involved in cell
adhesion.

Peifer (1993) reviewed the role of the catenins in Drosophila and
extrapolated the likely significance of the beta-catenin-APC
interaction. One possibility is that the APC complex regulates
transmission of the contact inhibition signal into the cell. This
hypothesis would be consistent with the observation that APC mutations
are associated with the development of hyperplasia, an early event in
tumorigenesis. A second possibility is that the APC-catenin complex
regulates adhesion. Although this idea is supported by evidence that
loss of cadherin-mediated adhesion can contribute to metastasis, it
would be less consistent with the evidence that APC acts early in
tumorigenesis.

Smith et al. (1993) produced monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies to APC
for characterizing the protein in normal and tumor cells. They found
that 81% of colon tumor cell lines were totally devoid of the normal,
full-length protein, whereas 40 cell lines derived from sporadic tumors
of other organs had only full-length APC. Immunohistochemical analysis
of APC in normal colonic mucosa demonstrated cytoplasmic staining with
more intense staining in the basolateral margins of the epithelial
cells. The staining was markedly increased in the upper portions of the
crypts, suggesting an increased level of expression with maturation.

Miyashiro et al. (1995) discussed findings that suggested an important
link between the role of APC in tumor initiation and the process of
cellular adhesion. Immunohistochemical studies in normal mouse intestine
suggested that a portion of the APC protein is localized in the lateral
cytoplasm of intestinal epithelial cells and functions in cooperation
with catenins, whereas the APC protein in microvilli and in the apical
cytoplasm has other functions independent of catenins.

Matsumine et al. (1996) showed that the APC-beta-catenin complex binds
to DLG (see 601014), the human homolog of the Drosophila discs large
tumor suppressor protein. This interaction required the
carboxyl-terminal region of APC and the homology repeat region of DLG.
APC colocalized with DLG at the lateral cytoplasm in rat colon
epithelial cells and at the synapse in cultured hippocampal neurons.
Matsumine et al. (1996) suggested that the APC-DLG complex may
participate in regulation of both cell cycle progression and neuronal
function.

Rubinfeld et al. (1996) showed that when beta-catenin is present in
excess, APC binds to a human homolog of 'Armadillo,' glycogen synthase
kinase 3-beta (GSK3B; 605004), a component of the Wingless signaling
pathway in Drosophila development.

Midgley et al. (1997) developed antisera to APC N- and C-terminal
epitopes. They found that the APC protein was expressed in epithelial
and mesenchymal cells in many tissues. In epithelium of bladder, small
and large intestine, esophagus, stomach, and epidermis, APC expression
was restricted to regions where cell replication has ceased and terminal
differentiation is established. APC staining was often diffusely
cytoplasmic; however, in surface cells there was accentuated expression
in the subapical regions and along the lateral margins. Midgley et al.
(1997) concluded that this distribution is compatible with APC function
related to signaling at the adherens junction and indicates that APC
plays a role in cells committed to terminal differentiation.

In mouse epithelial cells, Roose et al. (1999) found that TCF7 (189908)
was one of the targets of the beta-catenin/TCF4 interaction. Roose et
al. (1999) suggested that TCF7 may act as a feedback repressor of
beta-catenin/TCF4 target genes, and thus may cooperate with APC to
suppress malignant transformation of epithelial cells.

Using immunofluorescence microscopy, Neufeld and White (1997) found that
full-length APC protein was present in both the nucleus and the
cytoplasm of human mammary epithelial cells. The nuclear APC protein was
concentrated in discrete subnuclear regions, including the nucleoli,
whereas the cytoplasmic APC protein concentrated at the leading edge of
migrating cells. Colocalization of APC protein with rRNA confirmed a
nucleolar localization. Cell fractionation studies demonstrated
full-length APC protein in both the membrane/cytoskeletal and the
nuclear fractions. Neufeld et al. (2000) demonstrated that nuclear
export of APC is mediated by 2 intrinsic, leucine-rich, nuclear export
signals (NESs) located near the amino terminus. Each NES was able to
induce the nuclear export of a fused carrier protein. Mutation of both
APC NESs resulted in the nuclear accumulation of the full-length APC
protein of approximately 320 kD, further establishing that the 2
intrinsic APC NESs are necessary for APC protein nuclear export.
Moreover, endogenous APC accumulated in the nucleus of cells treated
with the Crm1-specific nuclear export inhibitor leptomycin B. Together,
these data indicated that APC is a nucleocytoplasmic shuttle protein
whose predominantly cytoplasmic localization requires NES function, and
suggested that APC may be important for signaling between the nuclear
and cytoplasmic compartments of epithelial cells.

Kawasaki et al. (2000) cloned a gene, ASEF (605216), whose protein
product was shown to directly interact with APC. ASEF immunoprecipitated
with beta-catenin; however, ASEF and beta-catenin did not interact
directly, suggesting that ASEF, APC, and beta-catenin are found in the
same complex in vivo. Kawasaki et al. (2000) suggested that the APC-ASEF
complex may regulate the actin cytoskeletal network, cell morphology and
migration, and neuronal function.

Kaplan et al. (2001) showed that, during mitosis, wildtype APC localized
to the ends of microtubules embedded in kinetochores and formed a
complex with the checkpoint proteins Bub1 (602452) and Bub3 (603719). In
vitro, APC was a high-affinity substrate for Bub kinases. Cells carrying
a truncated APC gene were defective in chromosome segregation. Kaplan et
al. (2001) concluded that there is a role for APC in
kinetochore-microtubule attachment, and suggested that truncations in
APC that eliminate microtubule binding may contribute to chromosomal
instability in cancer cells.

By immunoprecipitation and pull-down assays using cells from FAP
patients, cells from nonfamilial colorectal carcinoma patients, and
normal human fetal lung fibroblasts, Homma et al. (2002) found that APC
associated with the alpha (CSNK2A1; 115440) and beta (CSNK2B; 115441)
subunits of casein kinase-2 (CK2). APC preferentially interacted with
the tetrameric CK2 holoenzyme. In synchronized cells, association of APC
with CK2 was cell cycle dependent. Full-length APC inhibited CK2
activity in vitro, and mutation analysis localized the inhibitory region
to the C terminus of APC, between residues 2086 and 2394.

In a cell migration assay using primary rat astrocytes,
Etienne-Manneville and Hall (2003) demonstrated that PAR6-PKC-zeta
(176982) interacted with and regulated GSK3-beta to promote polarization
of the centrosome and to control the direction of cell protrusion. CDC42
(116952)-dependent phosphorylation of GSK3-beta occurred specifically at
the leading edge of migrating cells, and induced the interaction of APC
protein with the plus ends of microtubules. The association of APC with
microtubules was essential for cell polarization.

Yamashita et al. (2003) found that dividing Drosophila male germline
stem cells used intracellular mechanisms involving centrosome function
and cortically localized APC protein to orient mitotic spindles
perpendicular to the niche, ensuring a reliably asymmetric outcome in
which 1 daughter cell remains in the niche and self-renews stem cell
identity, whereas the other, displaced away, initiates differentiation.

In cultured murine myocytes, Wang et al. (2003) found that agrin
(103320)-induced acetylcholine receptor (AChR) postsynaptic aggregation
required APC, which was found to colocalize and bind specifically to the
AChR beta subunit (100710). The interaction occurred downstream of MuSK
(601296) activation. Wang et al. (2003) suggested that a direct
interaction between APC and the AChR beta subunit may link AChR to the
cytoskeleton, helping to localize the receptors to the neuromuscular
junction.

Using microarray and RT-PCR analyses, Jette et al. (2004) found that
expression of 2 retinoid biosynthesis genes, RDH5 (601617) and RDHL
(DHRS9; 612131), was reduced in colon adenomas and carcinomas compared
with normal controls. Reintroduction of wildtype APC into an
APC-deficient colon carcinoma cell line increased expression of RDHL
without affecting RDH5. Induction of RDHL by APC appeared to depend on
the presence of CDX2 (600297).

Choi et al. (2004) found that APC was downregulated by the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway in human 293T cells and that Wnt signaling
inhibited this process. APC was ubiquitinated directly, and axin (AXIN1;
603816), which is present in the same protein complex as APC,
facilitated APC downregulation. Furthermore, Choi et al. (2004) found
that treatment of human 293T cells with WNT3A (606359) led to
accumulation of APC and beta-catenin in nuclear lysates, providing
support for the hypothesis that APC has a role in shuttling beta-catenin
in and out of the nucleus.

Watanabe et al. (2004) found that monkey Iqgap1 (603379) and Apc
interacted directly via the armadillo repeats of Apc and the C terminus
of Iqgap1. Clip170 (179838) also immunoprecipitated with Apc and Iqgap1.
Apc and Iqgap1 localized interdependently to the leading edge in
migrating Vero cells, and transfection of cells with constitutively
active human IQGAP1 provided accumulation sites with APC in a manner
dependent on actin filaments. Watanabe et al. (2004) concluded that RAC1
(602048) and CDC42 recruit the IQGAP1/APC complex and that IQGAP1 links
APC to actin filaments for cell polarization and directional migration.

By fractionating human and canine cell lysates over glycerol gradients,
Penman et al. (2005) identified 2 distinct soluble protein pools
containing APC. One of these pools represented fully assembled
beta-catenin-targeting complexes. The second pool contained at least 2
different forms of APC: APC that was bound to partially assembled
beta-catenin-targeting complexes and APC that could bind microtubules.
Formation of fully assembled beta-catenin-targeting complexes was
reduced by inhibitors of GSK3B. Highly elevated levels of beta-catenin
in tumor cells correlated with decreased ability of endogenous APC to
bind microtubules. Furthermore, APC lacking the direct
microtubule-binding site was more effective at downregulating
beta-catenin. Penman et al. (2005) concluded that interaction of APC
with microtubules and with the beta-catenin-targeting complex are
mutually exclusive.

By examining degradation of beta-catenin in human colon cancer cell
lines with different APC truncations, Yang et al. (2006) determined that
APC regulates beta-catenin phosphorylation and ubiquitination by
distinct domains and by separate molecular mechanisms.

Migrating fibroblasts polarize to form a leading edge and a tail in a
process that involves asymmetric distribution of RNAs. Mili et al.
(2008) used a fractionation scheme combined with microarrays to analyze
protruding pseudopodia of mouse fibroblasts in response to migratory
stimuli. Mili et al. (2008) found that a diverse group of RNAs
accumulates in such pseudopodial protrusions. Through their 3-prime
untranslated regions these transcripts are anchored in granules
concentrated at the plus ends of detyrosinated microtubules. RNAs in the
granules associate with the APC tumor suppressor and FMRP (309550). APC
is required for the accumulation of transcripts in protrusions. Mili et
al. (2008) concluded that their results suggested a new type of RNA
anchoring mechanism as well as an unanticipated function for APC in
localizing RNAs.

- APC Gene Function in Disease

Unlike some other tumor suppressor genes, loss or mutation in the
wildtype gene is not essential to the development of intestinal polyps
(Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990). In a review, Kinzler and Vogelstein
(1996) noted that the APC gene serves as a gatekeeper in colonic
epithelial cells. The wildtype APC allele is lost in a great majority of
colorectal tumors of both sporadic and FAP patients, consistent with the
Knudson 2-hit model.

Powell et al. (1992) presented evidence that APC mutations occur early
during colorectal tumorigenesis. Sequence analysis of 41 colorectal
tumors revealed that most carcinomas (60%) and adenomas (63%) contained
a mutated APC gene. Mutations of the APC gene were found in the earliest
tumors that could be analyzed, including adenomas as small as 0.5 cm in
diameter, and the frequency of such mutations remained constant as
tumors progressed from benign to malignant stages. This finding provided
support for the multistage process of colorectal carcinogenesis with the
APC gene at or near the initial step (Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990).

Fearon (1997) reviewed more than 20 different hereditary cancer
syndromes that had been defined and attributed to specific germline
mutations in various inherited cancer genes. A useful diagram
illustrated how APC protein regulates beta-catenin levels in normal
cells, and how mutations in APC or CTNNB1 in cancer cell genes
deregulate cell growth via TCF4.

He et al. (1998) identified the c-myc (190080) oncogene as a target gene
in the beta-catenin signaling pathway. Expression of MYC was shown to be
repressed by wildtype APC and activated by beta-catenin, and these
effects were mediated through TCF4 binding sites in the MYC promoter.

FAP is associated with an increased risk of developing papillary thyroid
carcinomas (188550). A significant fraction of sporadic human papillary
thyroid carcinomas have RET protooncogene rearrangements that generate
chimeric transforming oncogenes designated RET/PTC (see RET; 164761).
Cetta et al. (1998) found RET/PTC1 oncogene activation in 2 of 3
papillary carcinomas from an FAP kindred, and in the papillary carcinoma
of a second FAP kindred. These findings showed that loss of function of
APC coexists with gain of function of RET in some papillary thyroid
carcinomas, suggesting that RET/PTC1 oncogene activation could be a
progression step in the development of FAP-associated thyroid tumors.

Soravia et al. (1999) described 2 FAP kindreds with thyroid cancer and
different germline APC mutations (611731.0038 and 611731.0039,
respectively). In 3 FAP patients, RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3 were expressed
in thyroid cancers; no positivity was observed for RET/PTC2. The
findings suggested that loss of APC function and gain of RET/PTC
function is an early event in FAP-associated thyroid tumorigenesis.

Lamlum et al. (1999) assembled evidence that APC mutations may not
result in simple loss of protein function. They found that FAP patients
with germline APC mutations within a small region (codons 1194 to 1392
at most) showed mainly allelic loss in their colorectal adenomas, in
contrast to other FAP patients, whose 'second hits' tended to occur by
truncating mutations in the mutation cluster region. These results
indicated that different APC mutations provide cells with different
selective advantages, with mutations close to codon 1300 providing the
greatest advantage. Allelic loss was selected strongly in cells with 1
mutation near codon 1300. A different germline-somatic APC mutation
association existed in FAP desmoids. Lamlum et al. (1999) concluded that
APC is not, therefore, a classic tumor suppressor. Their findings
indicated a new mechanism for disease severity: if a broader spectrum of
mutations is selected in tumors, the somatic mutation rate is
effectively higher, and more tumors grow.

Dihlmann et al. (1999) provided experimental evidence for a
dominant-negative effect of APC gene products associated with severe
polyposis. Wildtype APC activity in beta-catenin/TCF-mediated
transcription was strongly inhibited by a mutant APC that is truncated
at codon 1309 (611731.0023). In contrast, mutant APC gene products that
are associated with attenuated polyposis, such as those involving codon
386 or 1465 (611731.0019), interfered only weakly with wildtype APC
activity. These results suggested a molecular explanation for the
genotype-phenotype correlation in FAP patients and supported the idea
that colorectal tumor growth might be, in part, driven by selection for
a mutation in the 'mutation cluster region' (MCR).

Lamlum et al. (1999) noted that APC seems to act as a tumor-suppressor
gene in a 'nonclassical' fashion: the site of the germline mutation
determines the type of 'second hit' in FAP tumors, and simple protein
inactivation is selected weakly, if at all. In a screening of 210
colorectal adenomas from 35 FAP patients, Lamlum et al. (1999) found
that patients with germline APC mutations around codon 1300 tended to
acquire their second hit by allelic loss and had more severe disease.
Other FAP patients tended to acquire their second hit by a truncating
mutation in the MCR region of the APC gene.

Of 40 colorectal cancer cell lines, Rowan et al. (2000) found that 32
(83%) showed evidence of APC mutation and/or allelic loss. The authors
identified several APC mutations and found a hotspot for somatic
mutation in sporadic colorectal tumors at codon 1554. The results
suggested that APC mutations occur in most colorectal cancers. When
combined with previously published data, their results showed that there
is interdependence of the 2 hits at APC in sporadic colorectal tumors as
well as in FAP. APC mutations in the MCR, especially those close to
codon 1300, were associated with allelic loss, whereas tumors with
mutations outside this region tended to harbor truncating mutations. The
causes of this phenomenon were thought to be selection for retained
N-terminal and lost C-terminal APC functions, effects on beta-catenin
levels, and APC protein stability.

Rosin-Arbesfeld et al. (2000) showed that APC contains highly conserved
nuclear export signals 3-prime adjacent to the mutation cluster region
that enable it to exit from the nucleus. Mutant APC in cancer cells lost
this ability, ultimately resulting in the nuclear accumulation of
beta-catenin. The findings suggested that the ability of APC to exit
from the nucleus is critical for its tumor suppressor function.

In 2 families from Singapore with FAP, Cao et al. (2000) identified 2
deletions in the APC gene at exons 11 and 14, respectively. By mapping
the precise breakpoints, Cao et al. (2001) confirmed that these
deletions encompassed about 2 kb and 6 kb of the genomic regions
encompassing exons 11 and 14, respectively. Detailed sequence analysis
suggested that the 2-kb exon 11 deletion was most likely generated by a
topoisomerase-I (TOP1; 126420)-mediated nonhomologous recombination and
the 6-kb exon 14 deletion by an Alu-Alu homologous recombination. In the
case of the first deletion, both 5-prime and 3-prime breakpoints had 2
topoisomerase I recognition sites and runs of pyrimidines within the
10-bp sequences in their vicinity. This was thought to be the first
report of a topoisomerase-I-mediated germline mutation in a tumor
suppressor gene. Both deletions resulted in truncated APC proteins
missing the beta-catenin and axin-binding domains, resulting in severe
polyposis and cancer.

Fearnhead et al. (2001) reviewed understanding of how mutations in the
APC gene translate into changes at the protein level, which in turn
contribute to the role of APC in tumorigenesis.

Yan et al. (2002) found that slightly lower levels of APC expression
were associated with a pronounced predisposition to hereditary
colorectal tumors. No APC mutations were identified in a family with FAP
associated with partial reduction in APC protein expression, but
neoplastic tissue showed loss of the normal allele. Yan et al. (2002)
identified a second case with no structural changes in the APC gene, but
a reduced level of expression of APC. The mutations responsible for the
reduced expression presumably resided deep within an intron or far
upstream of the gene in the affected allele. The data were consistent
with a threshold for APC product being required to suppress intestinal
tumorigenesis, and suggested that the threshold is finely balanced.

Albuquerque et al. (2002) analyzed somatic APC point mutations and LOH
in 133 colorectal adenomas from 6 FAP patients. They observed that when
germline mutations resulted in truncated proteins without any of the 7
beta-catenin downregulating 20-amino acid repeats distributed in the
central domain of APC, the majority of the corresponding somatic point
mutations retained 1 or, less frequently, of the same 20-amino acid
repeats. Conversely, when the germline mutation resulted in a truncated
protein retaining one 20-amino acid repeat, most second hits removed all
20-amino acid repeats. The latter was frequently accomplished by allelic
loss. Notably, and in contrast to previous observations, in a patient
where the germline APC mutation retained 2 such repeats, the majority of
the somatic hits were point mutations (and not LOH) located upstream,
which removed all of the 20-amino acid repeats. These results indicated
selection for APC genotypes that are likely to retain some activity in
downregulating beta-catenin (116806) signaling. The authors proposed
that this selection process is aimed at a specific degree of
beta-catenin signaling optimal for tumor formation, rather than at its
constitutive activation by deletion of all of the beta-catenin
downregulating motifs in APC.

Goss et al. (2002) demonstrated that APC alleles with 5-prime mutations
produce APC protein that downregulates beta-catenin, inhibits
beta-catenin/T-cell factor-mediated transactivation, and induces
cell-cycle arrest. Transfection studies demonstrated that
cap-independent translation is initiated internally at an AUG at codon
184 of APC. Furthermore, APC coding sequence between AAPC mutations and
AUG-184 permits internal ribosome entry in a bicistronic vector. These
data suggested that AAPC alleles in vivo may produce functional APC by
internal initiation and established a functional correlation between
5-prime APC mutations and their associated clinical phenotype.

A genetic model for colorectal cancer (Fearon and Vogelstein, 1990)
suggests that the sequential accumulation of mutations in specific
genes, i.e., APC, KRAS (KRAS2; 190070), and p53, drives the transition
from healthy colonic epithelia through increasingly dysplastic adenoma
to colorectal cancer. However, Smith et al. (2002) found that only 6.6%
of 100 colorectal cancer tumors had mutations in all 3 genes, with 38.7%
of tumors containing mutations in only 1 of the 3 genes. The most common
combination of mutations was p53 and APC (27.1%), whereas mutations in
both p53 and KRAS were extremely rare. Statistical analysis confirmed
that mutations in KRAS and p53 cooccurred less frequently than expected
by chance. The findings suggested that these mutations lie in alternate
pathways, and that there are multiple genetic pathways to colorectal
cancer.

Green and Kaplan (2003) found that conditional expression of a truncated
form of APC in HEK293 cells, which express wildtype APC, dominantly
interfered with microtubule plus-end attachments, recapitulating the
phenotype observed in APC mutant tumor cells. The authors proposed that
APC functions to modulate microtubule plus-end attachments during
mitosis, and that a mutant APC allele predisposes cells to increased
mitotic abnormalities, which may contribute to tumor progression.

Kawasaki et al. (2003) showed that overexpression of ASEF (605216)
decreased E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion and promoted the
migration of epithelial canine kidney cells. Both of these activities
were stimulated by truncated APC proteins expressed in human colorectal
tumor cells. Experiments based on RNA interference and dominant-negative
mutants showed that both ASEF and mutated APC were required for the
migration of colorectal tumor cells expressing truncated APC. Kawasaki
et al. (2003) concluded that the APC-ASEF complex functions in cell
migration as well as in E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion, and that
truncated APC present in colorectal tumor cells contributes to their
aberrant migratory properties.

Takacs et al. (2008) demonstrated that Drosophila APC homologs have an
activating role in both physiologic and ectopic Wnt/Wingless (see
164820) signaling. The Apc amino terminus is important for its
activating function, whereas the beta-catenin binding sites are
dispensable. Takacs et al. (2008) suggested that APC likely promotes
Wingless transduction through downregulation of Axin (603816), a
negative regulator of Wingless signaling. Takacs et al. (2008) suggested
that, given the evolutionary conservation of APC in Wnt signal
transduction, an activating role may also be present in vertebrates with
relevance to development and cancer.

In FAP, beta-catenin is stabilized constitutively, providing a permanent
mitogenic signal to normally resting cells. This occurs when the second
allele of APC is inactivated somatically. Kohler et al. (2009) described
an APC domain, the beta-catenin inhibitory domain (CID), that is located
between the second and third 20-amino acid beta-catenin-binding repeats
and therefore was present in many truncated APC products found in human
tumours. In truncated APC, the CID was absolutely necessary to
downregulate the transcriptional activity and the level of beta-catenin,
even when an axin/conductin binding site was present. The activity of
the CID was dramatically reduced in several colon cancer cell lines and
could be inhibited by shorter truncated APC lacking the CID. The authors
concluded that CID is a direct target of the selective pressure acting
on APC during tumorigenesis, and it explains the interdependence of both
APC mutations in colorectal, duodenal, and desmoid tumours.

Zhang et al. (2010) showed that deficiency in the APC gene and
subsequent activation of beta-catenin lead to the repression of cellular
caspase-8 inhibitor c-FLIP (603599) expression through activation of
c-Myc (190080), and that all-trans-retinyl acetate (RAc) independently
upregulates tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL; 603598) death receptors and suppresses decoy receptors. Thus,
the combination of TRAIL and RAc induces apoptosis in APC-deficient
premalignant cells without affecting normal cells in vitro. In addition,
Zhang et al. (2010) showed that short-term and noncontinuous TRAIL and
RAc treatment induced apoptosis specifically in intestinal polyps,
strongly inhibited tumor growth, and prolonged survival in 'multiple
intestinal neoplasms' (Min) mice. With their approach, Zhang et al.
(2010) further demonstrated that TRAIL and RAc induced significant cell
death in human colon polyps, providing a potentially selective approach
for colorectal cancer chemoprevention by targeting APC-deficient cells
for apoptosis.

Lane et al. (2010) found evidence of reduced APC expression in patients
with 5q- syndrome (153550) compared with healthy controls and patients
with low-risk myelodysplastic syndrome.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Germline and Somatic Mutations in the APC Gene

In 4 unrelated patients with familial adenomatous polyposis-1 (FAP1;
175100), Groden et al. (1991) identified 4 different heterozygous
inactivating mutations in the APC gene (611731.0001-611731.0004).

In the germline of 5 patients with FAP1 or Gardner syndrome, Nishisho et
al. (1991) identified 4 point mutations in the APC gene
(611731.0005-611731.00008) using both the ribonuclease (RNase)
protection assay on PCR-amplified DNA and direct sequencing of cloned
PCR products. One mutation (611731.0006) was found in 2 unrelated
patients: 1 with isolated FAP and the other with Gardner syndrome.
Nishisho et al. (1991) also identified somatic mutations in the APC gene
(see, e.g., 611731.0009) in 4 of 158 colorectal cancers isolated from
patients with sporadic disease.

Miyoshi et al. (1992) identified germline mutations in the APC gene in
53 (67%) of 79 unrelated FAP patients. Twenty-eight mutations were small
deletions and 2 were insertions of 1 or 2 bp; 19 were point mutations
resulting in stop codons, and 4 were missense point mutations. Thus, 92%
of the mutations were predicted to result in truncation of the APC
protein. More than two-thirds (68%) of the mutations were clustered in
the 5-prime half of the last exon, and nearly two-fifths of the total
mutations occurred at 1 of 5 positions. The findings suggested that the
C terminal of the protein is required for proper function.

Using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), Fodde et al.
(1992) identified 8 different germline mutations in the APC gene (see,
e.g., 611731.0012-611731.0018) in Dutch patients with FAP. All the
mutations resulted in truncated proteins.

Seki et al. (1992) identified LOH at the APC locus in an adrenocortical
carcinoma from an FAP patient. Miyoshi et al. (1992) described loss of
heterozygosity at the APC locus in 30 (48%) of 63 colorectal adenomas or
carcinomas tumors, as well as somatic APC mutations in 43. Forty-one
(95%) of the mutations resulted in truncation of the APC protein. Over
60% of the somatic mutations were clustered within a small region of
exon 15 designated as the 'mutation cluster region' (MCR), which
accounted for less than 10% of the coding region. Mutations in the MCR
result in expression of COOH-terminally truncated proteins. Combining
all the data, more than 80% of tumors had at least one mutation in the
APC gene, of which more than 60% had 2 mutations. The results strongly
suggested that somatic mutations of the APC gene are associated with the
development of the great majority of colorectal tumors.

Using SSCP analysis, Cottrell et al. (1992) identified APC mutations in
patients with FAP and in colon cancer tissue from patients with sporadic
disease. All mutations resulted in truncated proteins. Their results
suggested that highly localized short sequences, such as runs that code
for adenine and thymine, may account for up to 20% of all observed APC
mutations. One 5-bp deletion was found in a sporadic colon tumor and in
4 unrelated APC patients. Cottrell et al. (1992) suggested that since
most mutations predict truncation of the APC protein, diagnosis might be
more conveniently detected through analysis of the APC protein.

Sen-Gupta et al. (1993) reported a somatic deletion mutation of the APC
gene in desmoid tissue in a patient reported by Hodgson et al. (1993) as
having FAP caused by a constitutional chromosome 5q22 deletion.

Nagase and Nakamura (1993) summarized the germline APC mutations in 174
FAP patients and in somatic APC mutations in 103 colorectal tumors, as
well as mutations in tumors arising in organs other than the colon and
rectum. They concluded that inactivation of both alleles at the APC
locus is required for development of most tumors in the colon and
rectum. The great majority of the known mutations would result in
truncation of the APC product. Almost all known mutations had been
located within the 5-prime half of the coding region, although somatic
mutations in colorectal tumors tended to cluster in the MCR, which
represents only 8% of the coding sequence (codons 1286-1513). It was
suggested that the location of germline mutations is correlated with the
number of colorectal polyps in FAP patients.

De Vries et al. (1996) described an on-line database of mutations in the
APC gene. Beroud and Soussi (1996) described a database of germline and
somatic mutations in the APC gene in human tumors and cell lines. The
database held 737 mutations, including 332 germline and 402 somatic.
Almost all led to truncation of the APC protein either by a nonsense
mutation (30%) or by a frameshift mutation (68%). Most of the mutations
occurred in the first half of the coding region. Germline mutations were
scattered throughout the 5-prime half of the gene, whereas somatic
mutations (60%) were concentrated in the MCR region. In germline
mutations, 2 hotspot codons were identified, one at position 1061 and
the second at position 1309. In somatic mutations, 2 hotspots occurred
at positions 1309 and 1450. The authors noted that the concentration of
mutations in the 5-prime part of the gene was believed to be involved in
a dominant effect of the N-terminus of the APC protein. This APC region
contains a dimerization domain and it has been demonstrated that
wildtype and mutant APC are associated in vivo.

Van der Luijt et al. (1997) identified 67 germline mutations, including
27 novel mutations, in the APC gene in 105 Dutch families with FAP.
Sixty-five mutations were detected using denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis (DGGE) for exons 1-14, and the protein truncation test
for the large exon 15. Most of the mutations were either frameshifts
(39/65) or single base substitutions (18/65), resulting in premature
stop codons. Splicing defects were identified in 7 cases and a
nonconservative amino acid change in 1 case. Southern blot analysis
detected APC structural rearrangements in 2 pedigrees by Southern blot
analysis.

Analyzing 2 sets of data, Marshall et al. (1997) commented on the
finding that 1- to 2-bp deletions and 1-bp insertions were much more
commonly found among somatic mutations of the APC gene than among
germline mutations of the APC gene. On the other hand, deletions of more
than 2 bp were much more frequent among the germline mutations than
among somatic mutations. Insertions of more than 1 bp were more frequent
in somatic mutations than in germline mutations. Possible explanations
for these differences were discussed.

Wallis et al. (1999) carried out mutation analysis of the APC gene in
205 families, comprised of 190 unrelated FAP and 15 non-FAP colorectal
cancer patients, using DGGE, PTT, and direct sequencing. Mutations
causing chain termination were identified only in patients in the FAP
group (105 patients). Amino acid substitutions were identified in 4
individuals, 3 of whom were in the non-FAP group.

Won et al. (1999) identified germline mutations of the APC gene in 38 of
62 (61%) unrelated Korean patients with FAP. The mutation was presumed
to be novel in 19. They found the protein truncation test to be superior
to SSCP analysis in the detection of germline mutations.

Approximately 80% of FAP patients can be shown to have truncating
mutations of the APC gene. To determine the cause of FAP in the other
20% of the patients, Laken et al. (1999) used MAMA (monoallelic mutation
analysis) to examine independently the status of each of the 2 APC
alleles. Of 9 patients analyzed, 7 were found to have significantly
reduced expression from 1 of their 2 alleles, whereas 2 patients were
found to have full-length expression from both alleles. Laken et al.
(1999) concluded that more than 95% of patients with FAP have
inactivating mutations in APC and that a combination of MAMA and
standard genetic tests will identify APC abnormalities in the vast
majority of such patients. That no APC expression from the mutant allele
is found in some FAP patients argues strongly against the requirement
for dominant-negative effects of APC mutations. The results also
suggested that there may be at least 1 additional gene besides APC that
can give rise to FAP. Laken et al. (1999) pointed out that APCL, a
homolog of APC located on 19p13.3, had been described by Nakagawa et al.
(1998) and van Es et al. (1999). This homolog, as well as the
functionally related family of axin genes (see 603816), are good
candidates for FAP causation in these kindreds.

In 4 FAP families, Su et al. (2000) identified pathogenic APC genomic
rearrangements resulting from homologous and nonhomologous
recombinations mediated by Alu elements. Two of these 4 rearrangements
were complex, involving deletion and insertion of nucleotides. These
rearrangements were initially revealed by analyzing cDNAs and could not
have been identified by using mutation detection methods that screened
each exon individually. The identification of 4 genomic rearrangements
among a total of 26 APC mutations in the study suggested that genomic
rearrangements are relatively frequent.

Lamlum et al. (2000) screened 164 unrelated patients with 'multiple'
(3-100) colorectal adenomas for germline variants throughout the APC
gene, including promoter mutations. In addition to 3 Ashkenazi patients
with I1307K (611731.0029), they found 7 patients with the E1317Q variant
(611731.0036) and 4 patients with truncating APC variants in exon 9 or
in the 3-prime part of the gene. Germline APC variants accounted for
approximately 10% of patients with multiple adenomas. The authors
recommended screening multiple adenoma patients for a restricted number
of germline APC variants, namely the missense changes E1317Q and I1307K
(if of Ashkenazi descent), and, if there is a family history of
colorectal tumors, for truncating mutations 5-prime to exon 5, in exon
9, and 3-prime to codon 1580.

In 34 of 917 unrelated FAP patients, Aretz et al. (2004) identified 26
different heterozygous mutations in the APC gene at or close to splice
sites; 6 of these occurred within exon sequences. Detailed analysis
showed that 1 variant in exon 4 and 3 variants in exon 14 resulted in
exon skipping due to aberrant splicing, likely related to disruption of
exonic splicing enhancers. Aretz et al. (2004) emphasized that the
consequences of some missense and silent mutations are manifest at the
DNA level and not the protein level. Aretz et al. (2004) found that a
common 5-bp deletion at codon 1309 (611731.0023) was overrepresented in
their group of patients with proven or suspected de novo mutations
compared with familial cases (34 of 96 vs 26 of 505, p less than 0.001),
supporting the view that the sequence around codon 1309 is a hotspot for
mutation. Using haplotype analysis, Aretz et al. (2004) traced the
parental origin of de novo mutations in 16 unrelated patients and found
that 4 were of maternal and 12 of paternal origin, suggesting a moderate
sex bias towards paternal origin. They noted that large deletions and
single-base substitutions were exclusively of paternal origin, whereas
small deletions were equally distributed.

Among tissue specimens from 174 FAP patients with known APC germline
mutations, Blaker et al. (2004) identified 8 tumors of types
infrequently seen in FAP. Second somatic APC mutations were found in 4
of the 8 tumors: a uterine adenocarcinoma, a hepatocellular adenoma, an
adrenocortical adenoma, and an epidermal cyst. These tumors showed an
elevated concentration of beta-catenin, but no mutations in the CTNNB1
gene. Blaker et al. (2004) stated that theirs was the first study
reporting second somatic APC mutations in FAP-associated uterine
adenocarcinoma and epidermal cysts, and concluded that their data
strengthened a role for impaired APC function in the pathogenesis of
adrenal and hepatic neoplasms in FAP patients.

Aretz et al. (2005) used the multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) method to screen 174 unrelated FAP patients in whom
no point mutation in the APC gene had been uncovered by PTT or
denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC). They
identified 14 different deletions in 26 patients, ranging from single
exons to the whole gene including the promoter region. Almost all of the
deletions (22 of 26) were detected in the 46 patients with typical FAP,
whereas none were found in 93 patients with attenuated FAP. Aretz et al.
(2005) noted that a large deletion occurred in about half of the
apparently mutation-negative families with typical FAP, pointing to an
overall frequency of around 12% for large deletions in their series of
patients with typical FAP, compared to 75% for point mutations.

Charames et al. (2008) identified a large heterozygous deletion in the
APC promoter region, including promoter 1A and 5-prime untranslated
regions, in affected members of a large Canadian Mennonite kindred with
adenomatous polyposis coli and colon cancer. The authors were unable to
determined the precise limits of the large promoter deletion. The
mutation was shown to result in transcriptional silencing of the APC
allele. The findings were consistent with a founder effect in this
genetically isolated population.

- Other Cancers Caused by Somatic Mutation in the APC Gene

Oda et al. (1996) observed loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at the APC
and/or MCC loci in 4 (57%) of 7 informative hepatoblastoma (see 114550)
tissues derived from patients without FAP. Somatic mutations were
detected in 8 (61.5%) of the 13 total cases, with 9 cases (69%) showing
genetic alterations in the APC gene as LOH or somatic mutations (see,
e.g., 611731.0024). Double mutations were demonstrated in 2 cases. The
nature of the somatic mutations observed in this study was unusual
because 9 of the 10 mutations were missense, with only 1 case featuring
a frameshift mutation due to an insertion. By contrast, more than 90% of
mutations in the APC gene in colorectal tumors result in a truncated APC
protein due to either frameshift or nonsense mutations.

Among 46 medulloblastomas (see 155255) derived from patients with
sporadic disease and no FAP, Huang et al. (2000) identified 2 with
somatic mutations in the APC gene and 4 with somatic mutations in the
beta-catenin gene. This study provided the first evidence that APC
mutations are operative in a subset of sporadic medulloblastomas.

- Epigenetics

In a study of patients with stage I nonsmall cell lung cancer (see
211980) who underwent curative resection but had a recurrence compared
to matched patients who did not have a recurrence, Brock et al. (2008)
found that promoter methylation of the CDKN2A (600160), CDH13 (601364),
RASSF1A (605082), and APC genes in tumors and in histologically
tumor-negative lymph nodes was independently associated with tumor
recurrence.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

In 22 unrelated APC patients, Nagase et al. (1992) found that germline
mutations between codons 1250 and 1464 were associated with profuse
polyps (10 or more), whereas mutations in other regions of the APC gene
were associated with sparse polyps (fewer than 10).

In an analysis of 150 unrelated patients with familial adenomatous
polyposis, Nagase et al. (1992) found no indication that extracolonic
manifestations, such as osteomas and desmoid tumors, correlated with the
type or intragenic location of a particular germline mutation.

Olschwang et al. (1993) found that the extent of congenital hypertrophy
of the retinal pigment epithelium (CHRPE) correlated with the position
of the protein-truncating mutation in APC. CHRPE lesions were almost
always absent if the mutation occurred before exon 9, but were
consistently present if it occurred after this exon. The same finding
was recorded by Bunyan et al. (1995), who also noted that a more distal
mutation site was associated with an earlier age of onset of symptoms
and a larger number of colonic polyps.

Caspari et al. (1994) and Gayther et al. (1994) found that patients with
the 5-bp deletion at codon 1309 (611731.0023) had gastrointestinal
symptoms and death from colorectal cancer that occurred about 10 years
earlier than in patients with other mutations.

Spirio et al. (1993) and Olschwang et al. (1993) found that the patients
with mutations in codons 136 to 302 of the APC gene did not develop
CHRPE, whereas those with mutations in a region beyond exon 9 and up to
codon 1387 of the gene presented with ophthalmic lesions. Only some
patients with mutations within exon 9 had CHRPE. Among 26 FAP patients,
including 18 with CHRPE, Wallis et al. (1994) reported a clear
association between CHRPE and APC mutations located at or after codon
457 in exon 9. Patients without CHRPE all had mutations proximal to exon
9. All 26 APC mutations resulted in truncated proteins, but the
mutations associated with CHRPE predicted truncated proteins larger than
50 kD. Wallis et al. (1994) suggested that larger mutant APC proteins
may exert a dominant-negative effect, resulting in decreased APC
function and expression of CHRPE.

Among 36 patients from 20 FAP families, Caspari et al. (1995) found that
patients with a mutation between codons 1445 and 1578 did not express
CHRPE, but developed severe desmoid tumors. With the exception of 3
prepubertal children, all patients with mutations in this region
developed desmoid tumors.

Davies et al. (1995) found that families with mutations 3-prime of codon
1444 had significantly more lesions on dental panoramic radiographs (p
less than 0.001) and appeared to have a higher incidence of desmoid
tumors than did families with mutations at the 5-prime end. All 7
families except one with mutations 5-prime of exon 9 did not express
CHRPE. All of 38 individuals from 16 families with mutations between
exon 9 and codon 1444 expressed CHRPE. The 11 individuals from 4
families with mutations 3-prime of codon 1444 did not express CHRPE.
These results suggested that the severity of some of the features of
Gardner syndrome may correlate with genotype in FAP.

Giardiello et al. (1997) studied 51 families in the Johns Hopkins
Polyposis Registry and detected germline APC mutations in 42. APC
mutation was associated with the extraintestinal phenotype. Mutations in
codons 542-1309 were associated with pigmented retinal lesions, while
mutations in codons 1465, 1546, and 2621 were associated with multiple
extraintestinal manifestations. Patients without extraintestinal
manifestations had either nontruncating APC mutations or had no
detectable APC mutations.

Brensinger et al. (1998) examined the colorectal and extracolonic
phenotypes in 2 FAP families from the Johns Hopkins Polyposis Registry;
1 family from the Indiana University Medical Center, Indianapolis,
Indiana; and 1 from the University of Colorado Cancer Center, Denver,
Colorado with mutations in the 3-prime end of the APC gene. The authors
found considerable intra- and interfamilial variability in colorectal
phenotype. Extracolonic manifestations also showed intra- and
interfamilial variation and did not correlate with colorectal phenotypic
expression: many of the individuals with an attenuated colorectal
phenotype had numerous skin lesions. No clear genotype-phenotype
correlation emerged from this study.

Wallis et al. (1999) studied genotype/phenotype correlations for 9
extracolonic manifestations associated with FAP. A significantly greater
proportion of individuals with mutations between codons 1395 and 1493
(group C3) exhibited osteomas, desmoids, and epidermoid cysts as
compared to those with mutations between codons 177 and 452 (group C1).
In addition, a significantly greater proportion of group C3 patients
presented with symptomatic desmoid tumors and osteomas as compared to
those with mutations between codons 457 and 1309 (group C2). Patients in
group C3 also exhibited the highest frequency of periampullary cancer
and gastric and duodenal adenomas. Although the incidence of
hepatoblastoma was too low to allow statistical analysis, Wallis et al.
(1999) noted that hepatoblastoma-associated APC mutations clustered
within the group C2 mutation region. Wallis et al. (1999) suggested that
liver imaging may be indicated in families with mutations in this
region.

Among 105 FAP patients with known pathogenic APC mutations, Bisgaard and
Bulow (2006) found that 17 reported palpable osteomas. Osteomas were
only identified in patients with mutations between codons 767 and 1513,
a gene area also associated with CHRPE and hepatoblastoma. Sebaceous
cysts were reported in 51% of 173 FAP patients, and those patients had
APC mutations evenly distributed in the gene with no particular
hotspots. Osteomas appeared most frequently in patients with sebaceous
cysts (odds ratio of 6.6).

- Attenuated APC

Spirio et al. (1993) determined the APC mutations in 7 families with
so-called 'attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli' (AAPC), i.e., FAP with
relatively few colonic polyps but still a significant risk of colon
cancer. Four distinct mutations in the APC gene were identified in 7
AAPC families (see, e.g., Y157X, 611731.0021). These mutations predicted
truncation products, similar to those identified in classic APC.
However, 4 mutated sites in AAPC were located very close to one another
and closer to the 5-prime end of the APC gene than mutations previously
discovered in patients with classic APC.

Friedl et al. (1996) reported a large family with attenuated FAP with a
frameshift mutation at codon 1597, which is beyond the beta-cadherin
binding site. The findings suggested a 5-prime border for the occurrence
of a second region of attenuated FAP that is located in the 3-prime part
of the APC gene. The authors proposed that a sufficient amount of
functional APC protein was available due to the absence of a
dominant-negative effect.

In a large Dutch family with attenuated FAP, van der Luijt et al. (1996)
identified a truncating mutation in the 3-prime region of the APC gene
(exon 15) (611731.0028). No truncated polypeptides were detected in
patient cells. Van der Luijt et al. (1996) speculated that 3-prime
mutations may be null alleles and that the attenuated phenotype is the
result of a haploinsufficiency of the normal APC protein and absence of
a truncated protein that could lead to a dominant-negative effect.

Spirio et al. (1998) suggested that specific APC alleles may be able to
modulate somatic APC chromosomal stability, including LOH. In 64
adenomas and 2 carcinomas from 8 patients with attenuated APC, there was
a decreased LOH of the APC allele compared to tumors of patients with
classic APC. In fact, no loss of the inherited normal APC allele was
observed, although sequencing showed that the inherited normal APC
allele had frequently undergone somatic point mutations and small
deletions in the tumors. These findings supported the suggestion that
attenuated APC alleles have residual gene activity and that this
activity modulates the spectrum and frequency of downstream mutations
that lead to adenoma formation.

In affected individuals from 7 of 11 AAPC kindreds, Soravia et al.
(1998) identified 5 novel germline APC mutations. The mutations were
located in 3 different regions of the APC gene: (1) at the 5-prime end
spanning exons 4 and 5, (2) within exon 9, and (3) at the 3-prime distal
end of the gene. Patients with mutations at the 5-prime end of the gene
tended to have more severe upper-gastrointestinal manifestations and a
higher number of polyps compared to the other groups. All AAPC kindreds
showed a predominance of right-sided colorectal adenomas and rectal
polyp sparing. No desmoid tumors were found in these kindreds.

Su et al. (2000) investigated the mechanism for attenuated APC in
patients carrying a mutant APC allele with a mutation in the
alternatively spliced region of exon 9, designated APC-AS9. The APC-AS9
allele was found to downregulate beta-catenin-regulated transcription,
the major tumor-suppressor function of APC, as did the wildtype APC.
Mutation analysis showed that both APC-AS9 and the wildtype APC alleles
were somatically mutated in most colorectal tumors from these patients.
Functional analysis showed that a common somatic mutation in APC-AS9 in
these tumors did not inactivate the wildtype APC. The results indicated
that carriers of APC-AS9 develop fewer colorectal tumors than do typical
patients with FAP because somatic inactivation of both APC alleles is
necessary for colorectal tumorigenesis. However, these patients do
develop colorectal tumors more frequently than does the general
population because APC-AS9 is inactivated by mutations that do not
inactivate the wildtype APC.

A further group of individuals, so-called 'multiple' adenoma patients,
have a phenotype like AAPC, with 3 to 99 polyps throughout the
colorectum, but most have no demonstrable germline APC mutations.
Routine mutation detection techniques failed to detect a pathogenic APC
germline mutation in approximately 30% of patients with classic
polyposis and 90% of those with AAPC/multiple adenomas. Sieber et al.
(2002) developed a real-time quantitative multiplex PCR assay to detect
APC exon 14 deletions. When this technique was applied to a set of 60
classic polyposis and 143 AAPC/multiple adenoma patients with no
apparent APC germline mutation, deletions were found exclusively in
individuals with classic polyposis (7 of 60, 12%). Fine mapping of the
region suggested that most (6 of 7) of these deletions encompassed the
entire APC locus, confirming that haploinsufficiency can result in a
classic polyposis phenotype.

The 3-prime 6.5 kb of the APC open reading frame is encoded by a single
exon, exon 15. Su et al. (2002) characterized 2 germline APC alterations
that deleted the entire APC exon 15 as a result of 56-kb (611731.0049)
and 73-kb (611731.0050) deletions at the APC locus. A surprising finding
was that the latter mutation resulted in a typical FAP phenotype,
whereas the former resulted in a phenotype consistent with attenuated
FAP.

Goss et al. (2002) demonstrated that attenuated APC alleles with 5-prime
mutations produce APC protein that downregulates beta-catenin, inhibits
beta-catenin/T-cell factor-mediated transactivation, and induces
cell-cycle arrest. Transfection studies demonstrated that translation
was initiated internally at an AUG at codon 184. Furthermore, APC coding
sequence between AAPC mutations and AUG-184 permitted internal ribosome
entry in a bicistronic vector. These data suggested that AAPC alleles in
vivo may produce functional APC by internal initiation. In addition, the
amino terminus of APC, which includes a homodimerization domain and
nuclear export signal, may not be critical for APC tumor-suppressor
function.

During APC mutation screening in 1,248 unrelated FAP patients, Aretz et
al. (2007) identified 75 cases with an assumed or confirmed de novo
mutation, and in 8 (11%) of the de novo cases, they confirmed the
presence of somatic mosaicism. In leukocyte DNA, the percentage of
mosaicism varied between 5.5% and 77%, whereas the proportion of the
mutation in tumor DNA from the respective patients was consistently
higher. Six of the 8 patients had an attenuated or atypical polyposis
phenotype that differed from the expected phenotype given the site of
the mutation. Aretz et al. (2007) concluded that some of the deviations
from the expected phenotype in FAP could be explained by the presence of
somatic mosaicism.

ANIMAL MODEL

- Animal Models of Disease

Lander (1991) used his microsatellite map to locate the mouse 'multiple
intestinal neoplasia' (Min) gene to mouse chromosome 18, which shows
homology of synteny to human chromosome 5. The findings suggested that
Min corresponds to APC in the human. Su et al. (1992) showed
specifically that the murine homolog of the APC gene (Apc) is tightly
linked to the phenotypically defined Min locus. In the Min mouse, the
authors identified a nonsense mutation in the Apc gene: a 2549T-A
transversion, resulting in a leu850-to-ter (L850X) substitution. Luongo
et al. (1993) showed that Min maps to proximal mouse chromosome 18.
Thus, Apc and Mcc are syntenic in both mouse and human, although the
gene order in the interval between the 2 genes is different between the
2 species.

Fodde et al. (1994) found that mice heterozygous for a truncating Apc
gene mutation progressively developed intestinal tumors in a manner
similar to that observed in patients with FAP and in mice carrying the
Min mutation. Moser et al. (1993) showed that female mice carrying the
Min mutation were also prone to develop mammary tumors. Min/+ mammary
glands were more sensitive to chemical carcinogenesis than are +/+
mammary glands. Transplantation of mammary cells from Min/+ or +/+
donors into +/+ hosts demonstrated that the propensity to develop
mammary tumors was intrinsic to the Min/+ mammary cells.

Dietrich et al. (1993) reported the genetic mapping of a locus that
strongly modified tumor number in Min/+ animals. This gene, Mom1
('modifier of Min1'; 172411), mapped to distal chromosome 4 and
controlled about 50% of genetic variation in tumor number in 2
intraspecific backcrosses. It was found to lie in the region of synteny
conservation with human chromosome 1p36-p35, a region of frequent
somatic loss of heterozygosity in a variety of human tumors, including
colon tumors.

Using homologous recombination of Apc in embryonic stem cells to
generate mice with a truncated Apc protein, Oshima et al. (1995) found
that most homozygous mice died in utero before day 8 of gestation.
Heterozygous mice developed multiple polyps throughout the intestinal
tract, mostly in the small intestine. The earliest polyps arose
multifocally during the third week after birth, and new polyps continued
to appear thereafter. Surprisingly, every nascent polyp consisted of a
microadenoma covered with a layer of normal villous epithelium. These
microadenomas originated from single crypts by forming abnormal
outpockets into the inner lacteal side of the neighboring villi.
Genotyping showed that all microadenomas had lost the wildtype Apc
allele, whereas the mutant allele remained unchanged. These results
indicated that loss of heterozygosity followed by formation of
intravillous microadenomas was responsible for polyposis in the
intestinal mucosa. A dominant-negative mechanism was considered
unlikely.

In the Min mouse, Wasan et al. (1997) observed a small but general
increase in tumor counts in both the large and the small bowel with
higher dietary fat. Increasing dietary fat also increased polyp size in
the small bowel. These changes appeared independent of total calorific
intake as assessed by body weights. Halving the crude fiber intake
together with an increase in dietary fat from 3% to 10% did not have as
marked an effect on tumor counts as did an increase of fat alone to 15%,
which also decreased survival.

Takaku et al. (1998) inactivated the mouse Dpc4 gene (SMAD4; 600993).
The homozygous mutants were embryonic lethal, whereas the heterozygotes
showed no abnormality. These investigators then introduced the Dpc4
mutation into the knockout mice for the mouse Apc-delta716 gene. Because
both Apc and Dpc4 are located on mouse chromosome 18, they constructed
compound heterozygotes carrying both mutations on the same chromosome by
meiotic recombination. In such mice, intestinal polyps developed into
more malignant tumors than those in the simple Apc-delta716
heterozygotes, showing an extensive stromal cell proliferation,
submucosal invasion, cell type heterogeneity, and in vivo
transplantability. Takaku et al. (1998) suggested that mutations in DPC4
(SMAD4) play a significant role in the malignant progression of
colorectal tumors.

Fodde et al. (2001) found that mouse embryonic stem cells with a mutant
Apc gene showed extensive chromosome and spindle aberrations, suggesting
a role for APC in chromosome segregation. Consistent with this role,
wildtype APC accumulated at the kinetochore during mitosis. Mutant Apc
cells formed mitotic spindles with an abundance of microtubules that
inefficiently connected with kinetochores. This phenotype could be
recapitulated by the induced expression of a 253-amino acid
carboxy-terminal fragment of APC in microsatellite-unstable human
colorectal cancer cells. Fodde et al. (2001) concluded that loss of APC
sequences that lie C-terminal to the beta-catenin regulatory domain
contributes to chromosomal instability in colorectal cancer.

Kielman et al. (2002) investigated the effect of different mutations in
Apc on the differentiation potential of mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells.
They provided genetic and molecular evidence that the ability and
sensitivity of ES cells to differentiate into the 3 germ layers was
inhibited by increased doses of beta-catenin (116806) by specific Apc
mutations. These ranged from a severe differentiation blockade in Apc
alleles completely deficient in beta-catenin regulation to more specific
neuroectodermal, dorsal mesodermal, and endodermal defects in more
hypomorphic alleles. Accordingly, a targeted oncogenic mutation in
Ctnnb1 (Catnb) also affected the differential potential of ES cells.
Expression profiling of wildtype and Apc-mutated teratomas supported the
differentiation defects at the molecular level and pinpointed a large
number of downstream structural and regulating genes. Chimeric
experiments showed that the effect was cell-autonomous. The results
implied that constitutive activation of the Apc/beta-catenin signaling
pathway results in differentiation defects in tissue homeostasis, and
possibly underlies tumorigenesis in the colon and other self-renewing
tissues.

The mammalian homeobox transcription factor CDX2 (600297) has key roles
in intestinal development and differentiation. Heterozygous Cdx2 mice
develop 1 or 2 benign hamartomas in the proximal colon, whereas
heterozygous Apc(del716) mice develop numerous adenomatous polyps,
mostly in the small intestine. Aoki et al. (2003) showed that the
colonic polyp number is about 6 times higher in compound mutant mice
carrying both mutations in heterozygous state. Levels of both Apc and
Cdx2 were significantly lower in the distal colon, which caused high
anaphase bridge index (ABI) associated with a higher frequency of loss
of heterozygosity at Apc. In cultured rat intestinal epithelial and
human colon cancer cell lines, suppression of Cdx2 by antisense RNA
caused marked increases in ABI and chromosomal aberrations. This was
mediated by stimulation of the mTOR (601231) pathway, causing
translational deregulation and G1-S acceleration. Similar results were
obtained in the mice with compound heterozygosity for the Apc deletion
and the Cdx knockout. Forced activation of mTOR through the upstream
regulator Akt1 (164730) also increased ABI in colon cancer cells. High
ABI in all cell lines was suppressed by mTOR inhibitors. These results
suggested that reduced expression of CDX2 is important in colon
tumorigenesis through mTOR-mediated chromosomal instability.

Functional loss of APC has been shown or proposed to have several
different mechanisms: mutation in APC, nondisjunction, homologous
somatic recombination, and epigenetic silencing. In the C57BL/6 (B6)
Apc(Min/+) mouse model of inherited intestinal cancer, loss of Apc
function can occur by loss of heterozygosity through somatic
recombination between homologs. Haigis and Dove (2003) reported that the
Robertsonian translocation referred to as Rb9 suppressed the
multiplicity of intestinal adenomas in this mouse model. As the copy
number of Rb9 increased, the association with the interphase nucleolus
of the rDNA repeats centromeric to the Apc locus on mouse chromosome 18
was increasingly disrupted. Their analysis showed that homologous
somatic recombination is the principal pathway for LOH in adenomas in B6
Apc(Min/+) mice. These studies provided additional evidence that
neoplastic growth can initiate in the complete absence of canonic
genomic instability. Rb9 was originally identified in a wild mouse
caught in the Orobian Alps near Bergamo in northern Italy. It consists
of a centric fusion between mouse chromosomes 7 and 18. In addition to
reduced fertility owing to meiotic nondisjunction, the chromosomes
involved in a Robertsonian translocation show suppressed meiotic
recombination when heterozygous. The suppression of recombination is
thought to result from mispairing of trivalents during pachytene.

Tischfield and Shao (2003) pointed to the work of Haigis and Dove (2003)
as indicating that somatic recombination rather than chromosome loss
associated with genetic instability is the primary cause of adenoma
formation in the mouse model. The authors showed that a Robertsonian
translocation, which seemingly interferes with the colocalization of
chromosome homologs in interphase nucleus, suppresses recombination and
subsequent adenoma formation in the mutant mice. Karyotypically normal
B6 mice heterozygous for the Min mutation of the Apc gene have intact
nucleolar organizing regions (NORs) near the centromeres of chromosome
18 homologs, facilitating nucleolar colocalization and the homologous
recombination that produces loss of a normal Apc allele and a high
incidence of intestinal adenomas. Apc(Min+) mice lack an NOR on the 7.18
translocation chromosome, resulting in a failure of nucleolar
colocalization of homologs, suppression of homologous recombination, and
far fewer intestinal adenomas.

Hurlstone et al. (2003) found that Apc mutant zebrafish completed
gastrulation, but their hearts failed to loop and formed excessive
endocardial cushions. Conversely, overexpression of Apc or Dickkopf-1
(DKK1; 605189), a secreted Wnt inhibitor, blocked cushion formation. In
wildtype hearts, nuclear beta-catenin accumulated only in valve-forming
cells, where it could activate a Tcf reporter. In mutant hearts, all
cells displayed nuclear beta-catenin and Tcf reporter activities, while
valve markers were markedly upregulated. Concomitantly, proliferation
and epithelial-mesenchymal transition, normally restricted to
endocardial cushions, occurred throughout the endocardium. Hurlstone et
al. (2003) concluded that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling may play a role in
determining endocardial cell fate. Apc mutant zebrafish carried a
premature termination codon corresponding to amino acid 1318 of human
APC, an allele designated apc(mcr). Heterozygous mutant zebrafish
developed normally. Homozygous mutant zebrafish embryos died between 72
and 96 hours postfertilization and displayed multiple defects including
cardiac malformations, enlarged otic vesicles, smaller eyes, and body
curvature. Further, jaw, pharynx, and inner-ear structures failed to
develop and fin buds arrested. Primordia for internal organs such as
gut, liver, and pancreas formed but developed abnormally. Hurlstone et
al. (2003) suggested that mutant embryos probably develop beyond
gastrulation owing to the presence of maternal Apc.

Rao et al. (2005) found that mice haploinsufficient for both Bub1b
(602860) and Apc developed 10 times more colonic tumors than mice
deficient in Apc alone, and the tumors were of higher grades. Compound
mutant mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) contained more beta-catenin
and proliferated at a faster rate than wildtype or Bub1b +/- MEFs.
Compound mutant MEFs also slipped through mitosis in the presence of
nocodazole and exhibited a higher rate of genomic instability than
wildtype, Bub1b +/-, or Apc +/- mice. Rao et al. (2005) concluded that
BUB1B and APC functionally interact in regulating metaphase-anaphase
transition, deregulation of which increases genomic instability and the
development and progression of colorectal cancer.

Nadauld et al. (2006) found that Apc mutant zebrafish had ocular
abnormalities similar to those in mice and humans with APC mutations.
Furthermore, they showed that Apc had a dual role in ocular
morphogenesis. APC regulation of canonical WNT/beta-catenin signaling
appeared active in the developing lens. In contrast, Apc controlled
retinoic acid production via Rdh5 in the retina and was required for
retinal differentiation.

Amos-Landgraf et al. (2007) established a nonsense mutation of the Apc
gene in an inbred rat strain and observed that Apc-mutant heterozygotes
developed multiple neoplasms with a distribution between the colon and
small intestine that closely simulated that found in human FAP patients.
Owing to the metacentric nature of the rat karyotype, the authors were
able to demonstrate that loss of the wildtype APC allele in tumors did
not involve chromosome loss. Amos-Landgraf et al. (2007) designated this
rat strain Pirc (polyposis in rat colon) and suggested that it could
address many of the gaps in modeling human colon cancer.

To elucidate the role of MYC (190080) in the intestine after APC loss,
Sansom et al. (2007) simultaneously deleted both Apc and Myc in the
adult murine small intestine. They showed that loss of Myc rescued the
phenotypes of perturbed differentiation, migration, proliferation, and
apoptosis, which occur on deletion of Apc. Remarkably, this rescue
occurred in the presence of high levels of nuclear beta-catenin. Array
analysis revealed that Myc is required for the majority of Wnt (see
164820) target gene activation following Apc loss. Sansom et al. (2007)
concluded that these data established MYC as the critical mediator of
the early stages of neoplasia following APC loss.

Shibata et al. (2007) generated several FAP mouse lines heterozygous for
a ser580-to-asp (S580D) truncation mutation in the Apc gene and found
that 1 line (line 19) showed reduced incidence of intestinal adenomas
(less than 5% compared with other lines). They identified a deletion in
the Ctnna1 gene (116805) as the cause of tumor suppression in line-19
Apc S580D/+ mice and found that suppression only occurred when the
Ctnna1 deletion was in cis configuration with the Apc S580D mutation. In
all adenomas generated in line-19 Apc S580D/+ mice, somatic
recombination between Apc and Ctnna1 retained the wildtype Ctnna1
allele. Shibata et al. (2007) concluded that simultaneous inactivation
of Ctnna1 and Apc during tumor initiation suppressed adenoma formation
in line-19 Apc S580D/+ mice, suggesting that CTNNA1 plays an essential
role in initiation of intestinal adenomas.

Lane et al. (2010) showed that young Apc(min) mice had normal
steady-state hematopoiesis. However, Apc(min) mice developed
myelodysplastic syndrome between 136 and 210 days of age, with increased
potential for spleen cells to form myeloid, granulocyte, and erythroid
colonies. Transplantation experiments revealed that Apc(min) bone marrow
had enhanced repopulation potential, suggesting intrinsic enhancement of
short- and long-term hematopoietic stem cell function. However, serial
transplantation experiments revealed impaired repopulation potential in
secondary recipients due to loss of the quiescent stem cell population
in Apc(min) bone marrow.

- Therapeutic Strategies

Westbrook et al. (1994) explored the potential for gene therapy by
studying the transient expression of the APC gene in normal rat colonic
epithelium, using liposomal gene delivery by rectal catheter infusion.
Expression of a beta-galactosidase reporter gene and of the human APC
gene under a constitutive promoter was demonstrated. Close to 100% of
epithelial cells expressed the introduced gene. Expression was transient
and did not persist beyond 4 days, consistent with the normal turnover
time of gut epithelium, but it could be maintained by repeated
treatments. Human APC was expressed for 3 weeks under these conditions
at approximately one-tenth the level of the endogenous APC gene, and no
toxicity was observed beyond that attributed to repeated rectal enemas.

Tsujii and DuBois (1995) showed that overexpression of cyclooxygenase-2
(COX2; 600262) in rat intestinal epithelial cells resulted in increased
adhesion to extracellular matrix and resistance to butyrate-induced
apoptosis. These phenotypic changes that might enhance tumorigenic
potential were reversed by sulindac sulfide, a COX inhibitor.

Mahmoud et al. (1997) found that heterozygous Min -/+ mice with an Apc
mutation resulting in a truncated Apc protein had changes in the growth
characteristics of preneoplastic tissue, including decreased apoptosis
and proliferation and decreased enterocyte migration. These findings
suggested a dominant-negative effect. The mutation was also associated
with changes in beta-catenin expression. These effects were reversed
with the chemopreventive drug sulindac sulfide. However, Mahmoud et al.
(1999) found no difference in enterocyte migration, proliferation,
apoptosis, or beta-catenin levels in another group of mutant Apc mice
with no Apc protein expression compared to wildtype littermates bearing
2 normal Apc alleles. Furthermore, administration of sulindac sulfide to
Apc1638N mice did not alter enterocyte migration. These observations
suggested that the dominant-negative effect altering cell migration was
exerted by the truncated Apc protein present in the first group of Min/+
mice.

Boolbol et al. (1996) found that histologically normal-appearing small
bowel from the Min mouse showed increased amounts of Cox2 and
prostaglandin E2 compared to +/+ littermates. Using 2 different in situ
techniques, terminal transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling and a
direct immunoperoxidase method, Min animals also demonstrated a 27%-47%
decrease in enterocyte apoptosis compared to +/+ animals. Treatment with
sulindac not only inhibited tumor formation but decreased small bowel
Cox2 and prostaglandin E2 to baseline and restored normal levels of
apoptosis.

Oshima et al. (1996) bred mice carrying an APC mutation with a mouse
with a disrupted Cox2 gene. All of the animals were heterozygous at the
Apc locus; if homozygous for wildtype COX2, they developed an average of
652 polyps at 10 weeks, while heterozygotes had 224 polyps and
homozygously deficient mice had only 93 polyps. The findings showed that
induction of Cox2 is an early, rate-limiting step for adenoma formation.
As supporting evidence, a drug that inhibited COX2 but not COX1 (176805)
also markedly reduced the number of polyps. Oshima et al. (1996) added
the Cox2 gene to the list of genes involved in colon neoplasia. The
findings suggested to Prescott and White (1996) that drugs that inhibit
COX2 should be broadly effective in chemoprevention of colon cancer.
Prescott and White (1996) reviewed the intimate connections between APC
and COX2.

Halberg et al. (2000) found that the multiplicity and invasiveness of
intestinal adenomas in Min mice was enhanced by deficiency of p53. In
addition, the occurrence of desmoid fibromas was strongly enhanced by
p53 deficiency. The genetic modifier Mom1 and the pharmacologic agents
piroxicam and difluoromethylornithine each reduced intestinal adenoma
multiplicity in the absence of p53 function. Mom1 showed no influence on
the development of desmoid fibromas, whereas the combination of
piroxicam and difluoromethylornithine exerted a moderate effect.

Lal et al. (2001) studied the effects of COX inhibitors on intestinal
adenomas and colonic aberrant crypt foci in the accelerated polyposis
mismatch-repair-deficient Min mouse model (Apc+/-Msh2-/-) as well as in
the standard Min mouse model. The mice with knockout of the Msh2 gene
(609309) have genetic features of both familial adenomatous polyposis
and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer, and rapidly develop
numerous small- and large-bowel adenomas, as well as colonic aberrant
crypt foci. Lal et al. (2001) found that a specific COX2 inhibitor was
effective in preventing small-bowel polyps in mismatch-repair-deficient
Min mice and both small- and large-bowel polyps in standard Min mice.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 2-BP DEL, EX7

In a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis coli-1 (FAP1; 175100),
Groden et al. (1991) identified a heterozygous 2-bp deletion at exon 7
of the APC gene at positions 730 and 731 in the cDNA sequence reported
by Joslyn et al. (1991). This changed the normal sequence at the splice
junction from CAGAGGTCA, of which the first CAG is an intronic sequence,
to CAGGTCA. Groden et al. (1991) noted that although this deletion is
within the 5-prime splice site, known consensus sequences suggest that
the splice site may still be maintained. The deletion would therefore
result in a frameshift and premature stop codon. Studies of both parents
showed that the mutation in the proband was de novo; however, it had
been transmitted to 2 of his 3 children.

.0002
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, ARG-TER, 904C-T

In a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis-1 (175100), Groden et
al. (1991) identified a heterozygous 904C-T transition in exon 8 of the
APC gene, resulting in an arg-to-ter substitution.

.0003
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 1-BP DEL, EX10

In a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis-1 (175100), Groden et
al. (1991) identified a heterozygous 1-bp deletion in exon 10 of the APC
gene, resulting in a frameshift and truncation of the protein within 30
bases.

.0004
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, TYR-TER, 1500T-G

In a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis-1 (175100), Groden et
al. (1991) identified a heterozygous 1500T-G substitution in exon 11 of
the APC gene, resulting in a tyr-to-ter substitution.

.0005
GARDNER SYNDROME
APC, ARG414CYS

In a 24-year-old patient with Gardner syndrome (see 175100), Nishisho et
al. (1991) identified a C-to-T transition in the APC gene, resulting in
an arg414-to-cys (R414C) substitution. The patient had adenomatous
polyposis and a mandibular osteoma.

.0006
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
GARDNER SYNDROME, INCLUDED
APC, ARG302TER

In 2 unrelated patients, a 46-year-old with FAP1 (175100) and a
27-year-old with Gardner syndrome manifest as polyposis with a desmoid
tumor, Nishisho et al. (1991) identified a C-to-T transition in the APC
gene, resulting in an arg302-to-ter (R302X) substitution. There was
cosegregation of the mutation with the disease phenotype in multiple
members of the FAP kindred. The findings suggested that the specific
mutation does not completely specify the extracolonic manifestations of
FAP, and that the phenotype is likely to be the result of other genetic
or environmental influences.

Chung et al. (2006) identified a de novo R302X mutation in a 19-year-old
woman with Gardner syndrome (see 175100) manifest as the
cribriform-morular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma, which had
been discovered 8 months before the discovery of polyposis of the colon.

.0007
GARDNER SYNDROME
APC, SER280TER

In a 39-year-old patient with Gardner syndrome (see 175100), Nishisho et
al. (1991) found a C-to-G transversion in the APC gene, resulting in a
ser280-to-ter (S280X) substitution. The patient had polyposis and a
mandibular osteoma.

.0008
GARDNER SYNDROME
APC, SER713TER

In a patient with Gardner syndrome (see 175100), Nishisho et al. (1991)
identified a heterozygous C-to-G transversion in the APC gene, resulting
in a ser713-to-ter (S713X) substitution. The patient had polyposis and a
mandibular osteoma.

.0009
COLORECTAL CANCER, SOMATIC
APC, GLN1338TER

In a colorectal cancer (see 114500) cell line, Nishisho et al. (1991)
identified a somatic C-to-T transition in the APC gene, resulting in a
gln1338-to-ter (Q1338X) substitution. Study of tissues from the patient
from whose tumor the cell line was established 28 years earlier showed
that the mutation was in the primary tumor and in metastases but not in
normal tissues.

.0010
GASTRIC CANCER, SOMATIC
APC, GLY1120GLU

In gastric cancer tumor tissue (see 613659), Horii et al. (1992)
identified a somatic G-to-A transition in the APC gene, resulting in a
gly1120-to-glu (G1120E) substitution.

.0011
GASTRIC CANCER, SOMATIC
APC, GLN1067TER

In gastric cancer tumor tissue (see 613659), Horii et al. (1992)
identified a somatic C-to-T transition in the APC gene, resulting in a
gln1067-to-ter (Q1067X) substitution.

.0012
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 4-BP DEL, CODON 169

In 2 apparently unrelated Dutch patients with FAP1 (175100), Fodde et
al. (1992) identified a 4-bp deletion (ATAG) in codons 169-171 of the
APC gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. The
wildtype sequence suggested the presence of a head-to-tail duplication
of a tetranucleotide which offered a suitable substrate for unequal but
homologous crossover events leading to either triplication or deletion
of the 4-bp unit. Haplotype analysis performed with intragenic and
flanking polymorphic markers indicated that the 2 identical 4-bp
deletions were located on different chromosomes, suggesting that they
had arisen independently.

.0013
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 1-BP INS, ILE357

In affected members of a Dutch family with FAP1 (175100), Fodde et al.
(1992) identified a 1-bp insertion (A) at codon 357 of the APC gene,
resulting in a premature termination codon 22 bp downstream.

.0014
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
BRAIN TUMOR-POLYPOSIS SYNDROME 2, INCLUDED
APC, GLN541TER

In affected members of a Dutch family with FAP1 (175100), Fodde et al.
(1992) identified a C-to-T transition in the APC gene, resulting in a
gln541-to-ter (Q541X) substitution.

Hamilton et al. (1995) found the same mutation in an FAP family in which
1 patient also had a calcified ependymoma, indicating brain
tumor-polyposis syndrome-2.

.0015
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, ARG554TER

In a Dutch family with FAP1 (175100), Fodde et al. (1992) identified a
C-to-T transition in the APC gene, resulting in an arg554-to-ter (R554X)
substitution.

.0016
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, ARG564TER

In a Dutch family with FAP1 (175100), Fodde et al. (1992) identified a
C-to-T transition in the APC gene, resulting in an arg564-to-ter (R564X)
substitution.

.0017
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 1-BP INS, CODON 629

In a Dutch family with FAP1 (175100), Fodde et al. (1992) identified a
1-bp insertion (A) in codon 629 of the APC gene, resulting in a
premature stop codon 13 bp downstream.

.0018
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, TYR935TER

In a Dutch family with FAP1 (175100), Fodde et al. (1992) identified a
C-to-A transversion in the APC gene, resulting in a tyr935-to-ter
(Y935X) substitution.

.0019
GARDNER SYNDROME
ADENOMA, PERIAMPULLARY, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
APC, 2-BP DEL, CODON 1465

In tumor tissue from a periampullary adenoma from a patient with FAP
(175100), Bapat et al. (1993) identified a somatic 2-bp deletion (AG) at
codon 1465 of the APC gene. The patient had a germline APC mutation
(611731.0023).

Martin-Denavit et al. (2001) described the 1465delAG mutation in 2
unrelated families with Gardner syndrome who showed interfamilial
phenotypic heterogeneity. The mutation was identified by a simple
nonradioactive method using a heteroduplex analysis and specifically
characterized by sequence analysis. In both families, fibromatosis was
noted before polyposis, leading to the diagnosis of Gardner syndrome. In
the first family, progression of fibromas and osteomas was much greater,
and colonic polyposis was sparser, compared to the second family.
Prognosis was mainly based on the dramatic evolution of the desmoid
tumors before the age of 30. In contrast, desmoid manifestations
remained discrete in family 2, and the prognosis was dependent on the
development of colon cancer. The wide inter- and intrafamilial
variability of the phenotype suggested the operation of one or more
modifier genes. Since a 'second hit' is thought to be necessary for the
development of desmoid tumors, this may account for a difference between
and even within families; a modifier locus may have favored a 'second
hit' in mesenchymal cells in family 1, and in colonic epithelial cells
in family 2.

.0020
ADENOMA, PERIAMPULLARY, SOMATIC
APC, 4-BP DEL, CODON 1464

In tumor tissue of a periampullary adenoma from a patient with FAP
(175100), Bapat et al. (1993) identified a somatic 4-bp deletion (AGAG)
at codon 1464 of the APC gene. The patient had a germline APC mutation
(611731.0023).

.0021
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, TRP157TER

In 1 of 7 families with what Spirio et al. (1993) referred to as an
'attenuated' form of familial polyposis (see 175100), the authors
identified a 470G-A transition in exon 4 of the APC gene, resulting in a
trp157-to-ter (W157X) substitution, predicted to generate a truncated
product of 156 amino acids. This mutation was present in all affected
family members, as well as in 3 asymptomatic individuals. Notably, one
of the latter had reached the age of 41 without developing any
clinically detectable adenomatous polyps. This mutation and 3 others
detected in other atypical families were located very close to one
another and nearer the 5-prime end of the APC gene than any base
substitution or small deletion previously discovered in patients with
classic APC.

.0022
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
BRAIN TUMOR-POLYPOSIS SYNDROME 2, INCLUDED
APC, GLN215TER

In affected members of a family with FAP1 (175100), Hamilton et al.
(1995) identified a C-to-T transition in the APC gene, resulting in a
gln215-to-ter (Q215X) substitution. One patient developed an anaplastic
astrocytoma at age 37, indicating brain tumor-polyposis syndrome-2 (see
175100).

.0023
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
GARDNER SYNDROME, INCLUDED;;
ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS COLI WITH CONGENITAL CHOLESTEATOMA, INCLUDED
APC, 5-BP DEL, CODON 1309

In 9 patients with severe FAP1 (175100), Gayther et al. (1994)
identified a 5-bp deletion at codon 1309 of the APC gene. The 5-bp
deletion extends from the last base of codon 1309 to the first base of
codon 1311; some refer to it as the 'codon 1309' APC mutation. This
mutation may account for 9% of FAP due to mutations in the APC gene. The
mutation tends to be associated with more severe and earlier onset
disease and the presence of congenital hypertrophy of the retinal
pigmented epithelium (CHRPE).

Bapat et al. (1993) identified a 5-bp deletion at codon 1309 in an FAP
patient with periampullary adenomas. Two different somatic mutations in
the APC gene (611731.0019; 611731.0020) were identified in 2 distinct
adenomas from this patient.

Distante et al. (1996) described a 5-year-old girl with the mutation who
presented with rectal bleeding from extensive polyposis of the colon;
her father had had a colectomy for FAP at the age 23.

Shaoul et al. (1999) described a 6-year-old boy with FAP and congenital
cholesteatoma (see 604183). They suggested that cholesteatoma represents
a tumor-like lesion with biologic characteristics resembling other
alimentary lesions of FAP. The patient first came to medical attention
at the age of 4 years because of intermittent painless hematochezia.
Colonoscopy at the age of 6 years showed multiple polyps of the colon.
Eye examination showed hyperpigmented retinal lesions in the temporal
retina of each eye, but radiographic studies of the mandible and maxilla
showed no changes. The cholesteatoma was detected at the age of 4 years
because of unilateral conductive hearing loss. Polyps had been detected
in the patient's mother at the age of 25 years and a subtotal colectomy
was performed. In both the mother and the child, DNA analysis identified
a 5-bp deletion (GAAAG) at codons 1309-1311 in exon 15 of the APC gene.
Shaoul et al. (1999) commented that mutations at codon 1309 have been
associated with early development of adenomatous polyps and a greater
risk of malignancies at an early age. Furthermore, the same mutations
are strongly associated with the presence of congenital hypertrophy of
the retinal pigment epithelium.

.0024
HEPATOBLASTOMA, SOMATIC
APC, SER1395CYS

In tumor tissue isolated from hepatoblastoma (see 114550) of 3 unrelated
affected Japanese boys, Oda et al. (1996) identified an A-to-T
transition in the APC gene, resulting in a ser1395-to-cys (S1395C)
substitution. Oda et al. (1996) noted that hepatoblastoma is an
extracolonic feature of FAP (175100).

.0025
DESMOID DISEASE, HEREDITARY
APC, 2-BP INS, CODON 1924

In affected members of a family with hereditary desmoid disease
(135290), Eccles et al. (1996) identified a 2-bp insertion (AA) in codon
1924 of the APC gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature protein
termination. The mutation occurred in the 3-prime end of exon 15.

.0026
DESMOID DISEASE, HEREDITARY
APC, 4-BP DEL, NT5844

Scott et al. (1996) identified a germline APC mutation in the original
kindred with hereditary desmoid disease (135290) described by Maher et
al. (1992). Direct sequencing of genomic DNA revealed a 4-bp deletion at
nucleotides 5844-5847 (codon 1962) of the APC sequence. The same
mutation occurred in 2 other apparently unrelated families with desmoid
tumors. Haplotype analysis suggested a common origin for the APC
mutation in the 3 families.

.0027
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 1-BP DEL, EX15

In affected members of a large family with FAP1 (175100), Scott et al.
(1995) identified a 1-bp deletion (5960delA) in codon 1987 of the APC
gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination 61 codons
downstream. The mutation was in the 3-prime end of exon 15 in the
3-prime region of the APC gene. Affected family members showed a highly
variable phenotype, with both severe disease with extracolonic
manifestations and mild disease.

Van der Luijt et al. (1996) did not detect a truncated APC protein in
cells from the family reported by Scott et al. (1995).

.0028
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, 4-BP DEL, EX15

In a large Dutch family with attenuated FAP1 (see 175100), van der Luijt
et al. (1996) identified a 4-bp (TTCT) deletion at codons 1860 to 1862
of the APC gene, resulting in a frameshift and an immediate stop codon.
The deletion occurred in the 3-prime part of exon 15 and did not result
in a stable truncated protein; only the wildtype APC protein was
detected in an affected individual. The phenotype in this family showed
marked variability in number of polyps (ranging from 0 to more than 100)
and relatively late age at cancer onset (mean 56 years). None of the
patients had desmoid tumors. Van der Luijt et al. (1996) hypothesized
that the milder phenotype in this family was due to haploinsufficiency
of a normal APC protein and absence of a truncated APC protein with a
possible dominant-negative effect.

.0029
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
BREAST CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
APC, ILE1307LYS

In a 39-year-old Ashkenazi Jewish man with colorectal adenomas and a
family history of colon cancer (175100), Laken et al. (1997) identified
a 3920T-A transversion in the APC gene, resulting in an ile1307-to-lys
(I1307K) substitution. An in vitro synthesized protein assay from this
allele showed a truncated APC protein. The T-to-A change converted an
AAATAAAA sequence to (A)8 and was postulated to result in failure of the
cellular transcriptional or translational machinery, resulting in a
truncated protein. The (A)8 tract not only was unstable in vivo, leading
to somatic mutation, but also appeared to be unstable in vitro during
the enzymatic manipulations employed in the IVSP assay. The same
mutation was identified in 28% of Ashkenazi Jews with a family history
of CRC and in the carrier state of 6% unaffected Ashkenazim from the
general population. Analysis of tumor tissue occurring in CRC patients
with the I1307K mutation revealed that nearly half contained somatic
truncating mutations closely surrounding the germline mutation; all the
somatic mutations occurred exclusively in the I1307K allele. Laken et
al. (1997) concluded that presence of the I1307K mutation results in a
2-fold increased risk for colorectal cancer, although the change in
itself does not likely contribute to the disease.

Petersen et al. (1998) addressed the increasingly important problem of
interpreting the significance of missense mutations found in
disease-causing genes, citing the APC I1307K mutation as a case in
point. Using a Bayesian approach that incorporated genetic information
on affected relatives, relationship of the relatives to the proband, the
population frequency of the mutation, and the phenocopy rate of the
disease, the authors concluded that the I1307K mutation was likely to be
disease causing. Petersen et al. (1998) also developed a simple
approximation for rare alleles and considered the case of unknown
penetrance and allele frequency.

By genotyping 5,081 Ashkenazi volunteers in a community survey, Woodage
et al. (1998) concluded that APC I1307K carriers have a modestly
elevated risk of developing cancer (less than 2-fold). Woodage et al.
(1998) emphasized that the large majority of I1307K carriers would not
develop cancer of the colon or breast, and that only a small proportion
of Jewish individuals who develop these cancers will be carriers.
Redston et al. (1998) identified a heterozygous I1307K polymorphism in
66 (10.4%) of 632 unrelated Ashkenazi Jewish women with primary invasive
breast cancer (113705). This proportion was significantly greater than
the 7.03% carrier frequency observed in the study by Woodage et al.
(1998). However, prevalence data suggested that the effect of the I1307K
allele on breast cancer risk was largely or entirely limited to those
with BRCA (see, e.g., BRCA1, 113705) founder mutations. Redston et al.
(1998) concluded that the I1307K polymorphism emerges as a candidate
low-penetrance breast cancer susceptibility allele or a genetic modifier
of risk in BRCA heterozygotes.

Frayling et al. (1998) identified the I1307K allele in 3 patients of
Ashkenazi Jewish descent with multiple colorectal adenomas and/or
carcinoma.

Yuan et al. (1998) described a French-Canadian kindred in which HNPCC
was related to a novel truncating mutation in the MLH1 gene
(120436.0009). In the same family, they found the I1307K APC
polymorphism, which had previously been identified only in individuals
of self-reported Ashkenazi Jewish origin. However, there appeared to be
no relationship between the I1307K polymorphism and the presence or
absence of cancer in the French-Canadian family.

Gryfe et al. (1999) identified the APC I1307K allele in 48 (10.1%) of
476 Ashkenazi Jewish subjects with adenomatous polyps and/or colorectal
cancer. Compared with the frequency of 2 separate population control
groups, the APC I1307K allele was associated with an estimated relative
risk of 1.5 to 1.7 for colorectal neoplasia (P equal to 0.01). Compared
with noncarriers, APC I1307K carriers had increased numbers of adenomas
and colorectal cancers per patient, as well as a younger age at
diagnosis. Gryfe et al. (1999) estimated that the APC I1307K
polymorphism directly contributes to 3 to 4% of all Ashkenazi Jewish
colorectal cancer.

In persons at average risk for colorectal cancer, Rozen et al. (1999)
identified the APC I1307K variant in 5.0% of 120 European and 1.6% of
188 non-European Jews (P = 0.08). It occurred in 15.4% of 52 Ashkenazi
Israelis with familial cancer (P = 0.02), and was not detected in 51
non-European Jews at increased cancer risk. Colorectal neoplasia
occurred individually or in the families of 13 of 20 Ashkenazi I1307K
carriers, 8 of whom also had a personal or family history of noncolonic
neoplasia.

Prior et al. (1999) did not identify the I1307K mutation among 345
non-Ashkenazim individuals with colorectal cancer, suggesting that it is
restricted to that population. Somatic mutations occurred at a lower
frequency and were more randomly distributed when the I1307K allele was
not present.

In an editorial, Gruber et al. (1999) compared the group of Prior et al.
(1999) to investigators at the scene of an accident. Prior et al. (1999)
carefully characterized the somatic mutations associated with the I1307K
polymorphism as if they were crash sites near this hypermutability oil
slick. Tumors with the wildtype allele at codon 1307 had a variety of
somatic mutations that were distributed randomly in the APC gene and
were not tightly clustered around the 1307 codon. These results
contrasted sharply with previous crash site investigations of the mutant
allele which showed characteristic mutations piling up like cars around
the oil slick. This earlier work by the Vogelstein group (Laken et al.,
1997), confirmed by Gryfe et al. (1998), showed that mutations arising
in association with the mutant allele appeared to be localized to a
29-bp region around the gene and were almost always insertions.
Furthermore, these unusual somatic mutations were restricted to the
mutant allele, never occurring in the wildtype allele in the same
patients. The reference to 'crash sites' and 'oil slick' provided useful
imagery comparable to the 'gatekeeper' and 'caretaker' roles of other
cancer-related genes--again products of the Vogelstein laboratory, as is
the designation 'landscaper,' envisioned as the basis of colorectal
cancer in juvenile polyposis.

Patael et al. (1999) found the I1307K polymorphism in 2 non-Ashkenazi
Jewish women in Israel and hypothesized that among Jewish persons it may
not be restricted to Ashkenazim, but may actually reflect a common
ancestral polymorphism. The haplotype pattern in these 2 women and in 9
Ashkenazi carrier controls was identical in all individuals regardless
of ethnic origin.

Lamlum et al. (2000) screened 164 unrelated patients with multiple
(3-100) colorectal adenomas for germline variants throughout the APC
gene, and found 3 Ashkenazi patients harboring the I1307K mutation.
Germline APC variants accounted for approximately 10% of all patients
with multiple adenomas. The authors recommended screening multiple
adenoma patients of Ashkenazi descent for the I1307K variant.

Silverberg et al. (2001) found no increased frequency of I1307K in
Ashkenazi Jewish patients with inflammatory bowel disease and concluded
that this mutation cannot account for the increased susceptibility to
colorectal cancer associated with inflammatory bowel disease.

Rozen et al. (2002) reported studies in Israel indicating that I1307K is
a low-penetrance variant with a 1.7 relative risk for neoplasia in
carriers who have familial carcinoma, clinically equivalent to obtaining
a family history of sporadic colorectal neoplasia and promoting early
screening. They concluded that I1307K is a founder variant in Jews of
different ethnic origin, mainly Ashkenazim, and it explains only
partially their higher incidence of colorectal carcinoma.

Lynch and de la Chapelle (2003) schematized the somatic mutations that
occur in carriers of the I1307K polymorphism, which results in a stretch
of 8 adenosines that is believed to increase the risk of somatic
mutations as a result of slippage during replication. Lynch and de la
Chapelle (2003) illustrated the types of somatic changes in colonic
tumors, e.g., an addition of 1 adenosine seen in the affected allele of
many carriers. The addition or loss of a nucleotide causes a frameshift
and loss of function of APC, constituting an important somatic event in
tumor initiation.

In individuals of Ashkenazi, Sephardi, and Arab descent, Niell et al.
(2003) found a common progenitor haplotype spanning across APC I1037K
from the centromeric marker D5S135 to the telomeric marker D5S346. The
ancestor of modern I1307K alleles existed 87.9 to 118 generations ago
(approximately 2,200 to 2,950 years ago). This estimate indicated that
I1307K existed at about the time of the beginning of the Jewish
diaspora, explaining its presence in non-Ashkenazi populations. The data
did not indicate that selection operated at I1307K, providing compelling
evidence that the high frequency of disease-susceptibility alleles in
the Ashkenazim is due to genetic drift, not selection.

.0030
GARDNER SYNDROME
APC, 2-BP DEL, 1538AG

In 2 previously reported patients with severe Gardner phenotype (see
175100) (Davies et al., 1995), Armstrong et al. (1997) identified a 2-bp
deletion (1538delAG) in the APC gene, resulting in a frameshift and
premature termination. The patients were of different ethnic backgrounds
and had different haplotypes, suggesting that the same mutation had
arisen in 2 separate populations.

.0031
GARDNER SYNDROME
APC, ARG499TER

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with Gardner syndrome (see
175100), Eccles et al. (1997) identified a C-to-T transition in exon 11
of the APC gene, resulting in an arg499-to-ter (R499X) substitution. The
proband was diagnosed with FAP at age 7 years and colon cancer at age 9
years. Multiple family members had FAP, colon cancer, and extracolonic
features, including CHRPE, osteomas, and sebaceous cysts.

.0032
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, TYR486TER

In affected members of a family with FAP1 (175100), Eccles et al. (1997)
identified a C-to-T transition in exon 11 of the APC gene, resulting in
a tyr486-to-ter (Y486X) substitution. The proband was diagnosed with FAP
at age 15 years and had a colectomy the same year. Three other affected
family members had colectomies at ages 9 and 15 years.

.0033
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 3-BP DEL

In affected members of a family with FAP1 (175100), Cama et al. (1994)
identified a 3-bp deletion in the APC gene: 2 adenine residues of codon
437 and the adjacent guanine residue at the consensus donor splicing
sequence of exon 9. The sequence of the 3-prime end of exon 9 was
converted from CCA A/gtat to CC/tat. The APC gene mutation abolished the
donor site of exon 9a, used in both alternatively spliced isoforms of
the exon. The phenotype was characterized by hundreds of colorectal
adenomas (320 to more than 500); a child in this family already had 460
adenomas at the age of 8 years. Analysis of the relative levels of
mutant and wildtype transcripts in unaffected colonic mucosa
demonstrated that the mutant allele was not expressed. In contrast, a
second kindred with a neighboring mutation (611731.0034) in exon 9 in
the portion of the exon that is alternatively spliced showed an
attenuated form of FAP characterized by a low number of colorectal
adenomas. The model suggested by these 2 kindreds suggested that the
type of mutation and transcript dosage effects contribute to the
heterogeneity of disease phenotypes in FAP.

.0034
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, 2-BP DEL

In a family with an attenuated form of FAP1 (see 175100) characterized
by a low number of colorectal adenomas (up to 22), Curia et al. (1998)
identified a 2-bp deletion within codon 367 of exon 9 of the APC gene.
This frameshift mutation was located in the portion of exon 9 that
undergoes alternative splicing and was predicted to introduce a
premature termination signal at codon 376 in the fraction of mature
transcripts containing the alternatively spliced form of exon 9. Thus,
splicing-out of the mutation site into a fraction of mRNA molecules was
predicted, with the residual production of wildtype transcripts from the
mutant APC alleles. Curia et al. (1998) contrasted this finding with
that in a neighboring exon 9 mutation (611731.0033) that led to deletion
of exon 9 and was associated with a severe FAP phenotype characterized
by hundreds of colorectal adenomas. They suggested that, in addition to
the mutation site, the type of mutation and transcript dosage effects
contribute to the heterogeneity of disease phenotypes in FAP.

.0035
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, 2-BP DEL

In a family with attenuated FAP of variable phenotype (see 175100),
Young et al. (1998) identified a 2-bp deletion in the alternatively
spliced region of exon 9 at codon 398, resulting in a frameshift and
stop signal 4 codons downstream. The clinical features ranged from
sparse right-sided polyposis and cancer in the proximal colon at the age
of 34 to pancolonic polyposis and cancer at the age of 68. Rectal
sparing was common to all affected members. Alternatively spliced
transcripts that deleted the mutation were readily amplified from normal
colonic mucosa, providing an explanation for the attenuated phenotype
seen in this family.

.0036
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, GLU1317GLN

In 4 patients with multiple colorectal adenomas and/or carcinomas (see
175100), Frayling et al. (1998) identified a 3949G-C transversion in
exon 15 of the APC gene, resulting in a glu1317-to-gln (E1317Q)
substitution. One of these individuals had an unusually large number of
metaplastic polyps of the colorectum. Although 2 patients had a remote
family history of colorectal cancer and 1 had a family history of
gastric cancer, none had a family history of colonic adenomas or classic
FAP.

Lamlum et al. (2000) identified the E1317Q variant in 7 of 164 unrelated
patients with multiple (3-100) colorectal adenomas. Among the entire
group, germline APC variants accounted for approximately 10% of patients
with multiple adenomas. The authors recommended screening multiple
adenoma patients for a restricted number of germline APC variants,
including E1317Q.

.0037
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 1-BP DEL, 5960A

In a 57-year-old man with FAP1 (175100), Kartheuser et al. (1999)
identified a 1-bp deletion (5960delA) in the 3-prime end of exon 15 of
the APC gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. The
patient had an unusual and complex phenotype with colorectal, gastric,
and periampullary adenomatous polyposis, as well as 3 bilateral
adrenocortical adenomas. His mother died of colon cancer at age 66.
Three of the patient's 4 asymptomatic children were also found to have
the mutation.

.0038
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, 2-BP DEL, 937GA

In a family with an attenuated form of adenomatous polyposis coli (see
175100) and thyroid cancer, Soravia et al. (1999) identified a germline
2-bp deletion (937delGA) in exon 9 of the APC gene, resulting in a
frameshift and a premature stop codon. The thyroid tumors showed a range
of morphologic features: some exhibited typical papillary architecture
and were associated with multifocal carcinoma; in others, there were
unusual areas of cribriform morphology, and spindle-cell components with
whorled architecture. RET/PTC1 and RET/PTC3 (see 164761) were expressed
in thyroid cancers.

.0039
GARDNER SYNDROME
APC, LEU698TER

In affected members of a family with Gardner syndrome (see 175100) and
thyroid cancer, Soravia et al. (1999) identified a heterozygous 2092T-G
transversion in exon 698 of the APC gene, resulting in a leu698-to-ter
(L698X) substitution. The thyroid tumors showed a range of morphologic
features: some exhibited typical papillary architecture and were
associated with multifocal carcinoma; in others, there were unusual
areas of cribriform morphology, and spindle-cell components with whorled
architecture. Affected members showed classic FAP associated, in
addition to thyroid carcinoma, with desmoid tumor, duodenal polyposis,
osteoma, dental abnormalities, and epidermoid cysts. RET/PTC1 and
RET/PTC3 (see 164761) were expressed in thyroid cancers.

.0040
DESMOID DISEASE, HEREDITARY
APC, 337-BP INS

In affected members of an Amish family with autosomal dominant
inheritance of desmoid tumors (135290), Halling et al. (1999) identified
a 337-bp insertion in an AluI sequence at codon 1526 of the APC gene,
resulting in protein truncation. The presence of a poly(A) tail at the
3-prime end of the insertion suggested that the AluI sequence was
inserted by a retrotranspositional event.

.0041
MOVED TO 611731.0023
.0042
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, DEL

Pilarski et al. (1999) reported a 39-year-old man with attenuated FAP1
(see 175100) and a cytogenetically visible interstitial 5q deletion.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis with 2 cosmid probes
specific for the 5-prime and 3-prime ends of the APC gene indicated that
the entire locus was deleted. The number of polyps (50-60) seen in this
patient was consistent with attenuated FAP. Pilarski et al. (1999)
stated that this was the first reported case of attenuated FAP
associated with a germline deletion of the entire APC gene.

.0043
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, IVS3AS, G-A, -1

In 5 separately ascertained families from Newfoundland with attenuated
FAP1 (see 175100), Spirio et al. (1999) identified a G-to-A transition
in the splice acceptor site of intron 3 of the APC gene, which created a
mutant RNA without exon 4 of APC. The observation of the same APC
mutation in 5 families from the same geographic area suggested a founder
effect. The identification of this germline mutation strengthened the
correlation between the 5-prime location of an APC disease-causing
mutation and the attenuated polyposis phenotype.

.0044
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 11-BP INS, NT1060

Rozen et al. (1999) reported a large kindred in which a novel 11-bp
insertion (AAGGATGATAT) at nucleotide position 1060 (codon 353) in exon
9 of the APC gene segregated with classic FAP with or without colorectal
cancer (175100). In at least 5 mutation carriers, however, there were no
clinical, endoscopic, or histologic features of FAP at the time of the
study. The authors commented that this family highlighted the possible
contribution of low penetrance germline APC mutations to 'sporadic'
colorectal neoplasia.

.0045
DESMOID DISEASE, HEREDITARY
APC, 4-BP DEL, 7929TCTA

In affected members of a large French-Canadian kindred with hereditary
desmoid disease (135290), Couture et al. (2000) identified a
heterozygous 4-bp deletion (7929delTCTA) at codons 2643-2644 of the APC
gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. The mutant
APC allele did not express a stable truncated protein in vivo. The
phenotype was characterized by the early onset of multiple tumors,
arising near the axial skeleton and in proximal extremities. Although
penetrance of desmoid tumors was nearly 100%, expression of the disease
was variable. Many gene carriers had cutaneous cysts. Polyposis of the
colon was rarely observed in the affected individuals and no upper
gastrointestinal polyps were documented. In a desmoid tumor from the
proband, Couture et al. (2000) identified a somatic 1-bp deletion
(3720delT; 611731.0046) in codon 1240 of the APC gene.

.0046
DESMOID TUMOR, SOMATIC
APC, 1-BP DEL, 3720T

Couture et al. (2000) identified a somatic 1-bp deletion (3720delT) in
codon 1240 of the APC gene in desmoid tumor tissue from a patient with
hereditary desmoid disease (135290) and a germline mutation in the APC
gene (611731.0045). Immunohistochemistry on the tumor tissue
demonstrated elevated levels of beta-catenin (116806).

.0047
GARDNER SYNDROME
APC, GLN208TER

In a man with Gardner syndrome (see 175100) reported by Dhaliwal et al.
(1990), Su et al. (2001) identified a gln208-to-ter (Q208X) mutation in
the APC gene. The patient's 28-year-old son was diagnosed with FAP at
age 15 and underwent proctocolectomy at the age of 23. The son also
developed multiple intraperitoneal desmoid tumors and a hepatocellular
carcinoma. In the liver tumor of the son, Su et al. (2001) showed that
the wildtype allele of the APC gene carried a somatic 1-bp deletion at
codon 568 (611731.0048). The somatic APC mutation was not found in the
surrounding normal tissue.

.0048
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
APC, 1-BP DEL

In a hepatocellular tumor (114550) of a patient with Gardner syndrome
(see 175100 and 611731.0047), Su et al. (2001) identified a somatic 1-bp
deletion at codon 568 of the APC gene. The somatic APC mutation was not
found in the surrounding normal tissue.

.0049
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1, ATTENUATED
APC, 56-KB DEL, EX15DEL

In a proband who had a phenotype consistent with attenuated FAP1 (see
175100), Su et al. (2002) found a genomic rearrangement resulting in a
56-kb deletion and consequent removal of the entire exon 15 of the APC
gene. This rearrangement also resulted in a hybrid gene between APC and
U2AF1RS1 (601079).

.0050
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 73-KB DEL, EX15DEL

In a family with features of classic FAP1 (175100), Su et al. (2002)
detected a genomic rearrangement resulting in a 73-kb deletion and
consequent removal of the entire exon 15 of the APC gene.

.0051
FAMILIAL ADENOMATOUS POLYPOSIS 1
APC, 5-BP DEL, NT3221

In the Spanish Balearic Islands, Gonzalez et al. (2005) found that a
5-bp deletion (3221_3225delACAAA) at codon 1061 of the APC gene was the
most common basis for FAP1 (175100). Haplotype analysis of 5 families
was consistent with a founder effect.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Barber et al. (1994); Hodgson et al. (1994); Lynch  (1996); Polakis
(1995); Powell et al. (1993); Solomon et al. (1987)
REFERENCE 1. Albuquerque, C.; Breukel, C.; van der Luijt, R.; Fidalgo, P.; Lage,
P.; Slors, F. J. M.; Leitao, C. N.; Fodde, R.; Smits, R.: The 'just-right'
signaling model: APC somatic mutations are selected based on a specific
level of activation of the beta-catenin signaling cascade. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 11: 1549-1560, 2002.

2. Amos-Landgraf, J. M.; Kwong, L. N.; Kendziorski, C. M.; Reichelderfer,
M.; Torrealba, J.; Weichert, J.; Haag, J. D.; Chen, K.-S.; Waller,
J. L.; Gould, M. N.; Dove, W. F.: A target-selected Apc-mutant rat
kindred enhances the modeling of familial human colon cancer. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 4036-4041, 2007.

3. Aoki, K.; Tamai, Y.; Horiike, S.; Oshima, M.; Taketo, M. M.: Colonic
polyposis caused by mTOR-mediated chromosomal instability in Apc(+/delta716)
Cdx2(+/-) compound mutant mice. Nature Genet. 35: 323-330, 2003.

4. Aretz, S.; Stienen, D; Uhlhaas, S.; Pagenstecher, C.; Mangold,
E.; Caspari, R.; Propping, P.; Friedl, W.: Large submicroscopic genomic
APC deletions are a common cause of typical familial adenomatous polyposis.
(Letter) J. Med. Genet. 42: 185-192, 2005.

5. Aretz, S.; Stienen, D.; Friedrichs, N.; Stemmler, S.; Uhlhaas,
S.; Rahner, N.; Propping, P.; Friedl, W.: Somatic APC mosaicism:
a frequent cause of familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Hum. Mutat. 28:
985-992, 2007.

6. Aretz, S.; Uhlhaas, S.; Caspari, R.; Mangold, E.; Pagenstecher,
C.; Propping, P.; Friedl, W.: Frequency and parental origin of de
novo APC mutations in familial adenomatous polyposis. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 12: 52-58, 2004.

7. Aretz, S.; Uhlhaas, S.; Sun, Y.; Pagenstecher, C.; Mangold, E.;
Caspari, R.; Moslein, G.; Schulmann, K.; Propping, P.; Friedl, W.
: Familial adenomatous polyposis: aberrant splicing due to missense
or silent mutations in the APC gene. Hum. Mutat. 24: 370-380, 2004.

8. Armstrong, J. G.; Davies, D. R.; Guy, S. P.; Frayling, I. M.; Evans,
D. G. R.: APC mutations in familial adenomatous polyposis families
in the northwest of England. Hum. Mutat. 10: 376-380, 1997.

9. Bapat, B.; Odze, R.; Mitri, A.; Berk, T.; Ward, M.; Gallinger,
S.: Identification of somatic APC gene mutations in periampullary
adenomas in a patient with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). Hum.
Molec. Genet. 2: 1957-1959, 1993.

10. Barber, J. C. K.; Ellis, K. H.; Bowles, L. V.; Delhanty, J. D.
A.; Ede, R. F.; Male, B. M.; Eccles, D. M.: Adenomatous polyposis
coli and a cytogenetic deletion of chromosome 5 resulting from a maternal
intrachromosomal insertion. J. Med. Genet. 31: 312-316, 1994.

11. Beroud, C.; Soussi, T.: APC gene: database of germline and somatic
mutations in human tumors and cell lines. Nucleic Acids Res. 24:
121-124, 1996.

12. Bisgaard, M. L.; Bulow, S.: Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP):
genotype correlation to FAP phenotype with osteomas and sebaceous
cysts. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A: 200-204, 2006.

13. Blaker, H.; Sutter, C.; Kadmon, M.; Otto, H. F.; von Knebel-Doeberitz,
M.; Gebert, J.; Helmke, B. M.: Analysis of somatic APC mutations
in rare extracolonic tumors of patients with familial adenomatous
polyposis coli. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 41: 93-98, 2004.

14. Boolbol, S. K.; Dannenberg, A. J.; Chadburn, A.; Martucci, C.;
Guo, X.-J.; Ramonetti, J. T.; Abreu-Goris, M.; Newmark, H. L.; Lipkin,
M. L.; DeCosse, J. J.; Bertagnolli, M. M.: Cyclooxygenase-2 overexpression
and tumor formation are blocked by sulindac in a murine model of familial
adenomatous polyposis. Cancer Res. 56: 2556-2560, 1996.

15. Brensinger, J. D.; Laken, S. J.; Luce, M. C.; Powell, S. M.; Vance,
G. H.; Ahnen, D. J.; Petersen, G. M.; Hamilton, S. R.; Giardiello,
F. M.: Variable phenotype of familial adenomatous polyposis in pedigrees
with 3-prime mutation in the APC gene. Gut 43: 548-552, 1998.

16. Brock, M. V.; Hooker, C. M.; Ota-Machida, E.; Han, Y.; Guo, M.;
Ames, S.; Glockner, S.; Piantadosi, S.; Gabrielson, E.; Pridham, G.;
Pelosky, K.; Belinsky, S. A.; Yang, S. C.; Baylin, S. B.; Herman,
J. G.: DNA methylation markers and early recurrence in stage I lung
cancer. New Eng. J. Med. 358: 1118-1128, 2008.

17. Bunyan, D. J.; Shea-Simonds, J.; Reck, A. C.; Finnis, D.; Eccles,
D. M.: Genotype-phenotype correlations of new causative APC gene
mutations in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis. J. Med.
Genet. 32: 728-731, 1995.

18. Cama, A.; Esposito, D. L.; Palmirotta, R.; Curia, M. C.; Ranieri,
A.; Ficari, F.; Valanzano, R.; Modesti, A.; Battista, P.; Tonelli,
F.; Mariani-Costantini, R.: A novel mutation at the splice junction
of exon 9 of the APC gene in familial adenomatous polyposis. Hum.
Mutat. 3: 305-308, 1994.

19. Cao, X.; Eu, K. W.; Seow-Choen, F.; Zao, Y.; Cheah, P. Y.: APC
mutation and phenotypic spectrum of Singapore familial adenomatous
polyposis patients. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 8: 42-48, 2000.

20. Cao, X.; Eu, K. W.; Seow-Choen, F.; Zhao, Y.; Cheah, P. Y.: Topoisomerase-I-
and Alu-mediated genomic deletions of the APC gene in familial adenomatous
polyposis. Hum. Genet. 108: 436-442, 2001.

21. Caspari, R.; Friedl, W.; Mandl, M.; Moslein, G.; Kadmon, M.; Knapp,
M.; Jacobasch, K.-H.; Ecker, K.-W.; Kreissler-Haag, D.; Timmermanns,
G.; Propping, P.: Familial adenomatous polyposis: mutation at codon
1309 and early onset of colon cancer. Lancet 343: 629-632, 1994.
Note: Erratum: Lancet 343: 863 only, 1994.

22. Caspari, R.; Olschwang, S.; Friedl, W.; Mandl, M.; Boisson, C.;
Boker, T.; Augustin, A.; Kadmon, M.; Moslein, G.; Thomas, G.; Propping,
P.: Familial adenomatous polyposis: desmoid tumours and lack of ophthalmic
lesions (CHRPE) associated with APC mutations beyond codon 1444. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 4: 337-340, 1995.

23. Cetta, F.; Chiappetta, G.; Melillo, R. M.; Petracci, M.; Montalto,
G.; Santoro, M.; Fusco, A.: The ret/ptc1 oncogene is activated in
familial adenomatous polyposis-associated thyroid papillary carcinomas. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 1003-1006, 1998.

24. Charames, G. S.; Ramyar, L.; Mitri, A.; Berk, T.; Cheng, H.; Jung,
J.; Bocangel, P.; Chodirker, B.; Greenberg, C.; Spriggs, E.; Bapat,
B.: A large novel deletion in the APC promoter region causes gene
silencing and leads to classical familial adenomatous polyposis in
a Manitoba Mennonite kindred. Hum. Genet. 124: 535-541, 2008.

25. Choi, J.; Park, S. Y.; Costantini, F.; Jho, E.; Joo, C.-K.: Adenomatous
polyposis coli is down-regulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway
in a process facilitated by Axin. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 49188-49198,
2004.

26. Chung, D. C.; Maher, M. M.; Faquin, W. C.: Case 37-2006: a 19-year-old
woman with thyroid cancer and lower gastrointestinal bleeding. New
Eng. J. Med. 355: 2349-2357, 2006.

27. Cottrell, S.; Bicknell, D.; Kaklamanis, L.; Bodmer, W. F.: Molecular
analysis of APC mutations in familial adenomatous polyposis and sporadic
colon carcinomas. Lancet 340: 626-630, 1992.

28. Couture, J.; Mitri, A.; Lagace, R.; Smits, R.; Berk, T.; Bouchard,
H.-L.; Fodde, R.; Alman, B.; Bapat, B.: A germline mutation at the
extreme 3-prime end of the APC gene results in a severe desmoid phenotype
and is associated with overexpression of beta-catenin in the desmoid
tumor. Clin. Genet. 57: 205-212, 2000.

29. Curia, M. C.; Esposito, D. L.; Aceto, G.; Palmirotta, R.; Crognale,
S.; Valanzano, R.; Ficari, F.; Tonelli, F.; Battista, P.; Mariani-Costantini,
R.; Cama, A.: Transcript dosage effect in familial adenomatous polyposis:
model offered by two kindreds with exon 9 APC gene mutations. Hum.
Mutat. 11: 197-201, 1998.

30. Davies, D. R.; Armstrong, J. G.; Thakker, N.; Horner, K.; Guy,
S. P.; Clancy, T.; Sloan, P.; Blair, V.; Dodd, C.; Warnes, T. W.;
Harris, R.; Evans, D. G. R.: Severe Gardner syndrome in families
with mutations restricted to a specific region of the APC gene. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 57: 1151-1158, 1995.

31. De Vries, E. M. G.; Ricke, D. O.; De Vries, T. N.; Hartmann, A.;
Blaszyk, H.; Liao, D.; Soussi, T.; Kovach, J. S.; Sommer, S. S.:
Database of mutations in the p53 and APC tumor suppressor genes designed
to facilitate molecular epidemiological analyses. Hum. Mutat. 7:
202-213, 1996.

32. Dhaliwal, M. K.; Hughes, J. I.; Jackson, G. L.; Pathak, S.: Multiple
polyposis coli associated with Gardner's syndrome and chromosomal
mosaicism: a family analysis. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 85: 880-883,
1990.

33. Dietrich, W. F.; Lander, E. S.; Smith, J. S.; Moser, A. R.; Gould,
K. A.; Luongo, C.; Borenstein, N.; Dove, W.: Genetic identification
of Mom-1, a major modifier locus affecting Min-induced intestinal
neoplasia in the mouse. Cell 75: 631-639, 1993.

34. Dihlmann, S.; Gebert, J.; Siermann, A.; Herfarth, C.; von Knebel
Doeberitz, M.: Dominant negative effect of the APC(1309) mutation:
a possible explanation for genotype-phenotype correlations in familial
adenomatous polyposis. Cancer Res. 59: 1857-1860, 1999.

35. Distante, S.; Nasioulas, S.; Somers, G. R.; Cameron, D. J. S.;
Young, M. A.; Forrest, S. M.; Gardner, R. J. M.: Familial adenomatous
polyposis in a 5 year old child: a clinical, pathological, and molecular
genetic study. J. Med. Genet. 33: 157-160, 1996.

36. Eccles, D. M.; Lunt, P. W.; Wallis, Y.; Griffiths, M.; Sandhu,
B.; McKay, S.; Morton, D.; Shea-Simonds, J.; Macdonald, F.: An unusually
severe phenotype for familial adenomatous polyposis. Arch. Dis. Child. 77:
431-435, 1997.

37. Eccles, D. M.; van der Luijt, R.; Breukel, C.; Bullman, H.; Bunyan,
D.; Fisher, A.; Barber, J.; du Boulay, C.; Primrose, J.; Burn, J.;
Fodde, R.: Hereditary desmoid disease due to a frameshift mutation
at codon 1924 of the APC gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59: 1193-1201,
1996.

38. Etienne-Manneville, S.; Hall, A.: Cdc42 regulates GSK-3-beta
and adenomatous polyposis coli to control cell polarity. Nature 421:
753-756, 2003.

39. Fearnhead, N. S.; Britton, M. P.; Bodmer, W. F.: The ABC of APC. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 721-733, 2001.

40. Fearon, E. R.: Human cancer syndromes: clues to the origin and
nature of cancer. Science 278: 1043-1050, 1997.

41. Fearon, E. R.; Vogelstein, B.: A genetic model for colorectal
tumorigenesis. Cell 61: 759-767, 1990.

42. Fodde, R.; Edelmann, W.; Yang, K.; van Leeuwen, C.; Carlson, C.;
Renault, B.; Breukel, C.; Alt, E.; Lipkin, M.; Meera Khan, P.; Kucherlapati,
R.: A targeted chain-termination mutation in the mouse Apc gene results
in multiple intestinal tumors. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 8969-8973,
1994.

43. Fodde, R.; Kuipers, J.; Rosenberg, C.; Smits, R.; Kielman, M.;
Gaspar, C.; van Es, J. H.; Breukel, C.; Wiegant, J.; Giles, R. H.;
Clevers, H.: Mutations in the APC tumour suppressor gene cause chromosomal
instability. Nature Cell Biol. 3: 433-438, 2001.

44. Fodde, R.; van der Luijt, R.; Wijnen, J.; Tops, C.; van der Klift,
H.; van Leeuwen-Cornelisse, I.; Griffioen, G.; Vasen, H.; Meera Khan,
P.: Eight novel inactivating germ line mutations at the APC gene
identified by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Genomics 13:
1162-1168, 1992.

45. Frayling, I. M.; Beck, N. E.; Ilyas, M.; Dove-Edwin, I.; Goodman,
P.; Pack, K.; Bell, J. A.; Williams, C. B.; Hodgson, S. V.; Thomas,
H. J. W.; Talbot, I. C.; Bodmer, W. F.; Tomlinson, I. P. M.: The
APC variants I1307K and E1317Q are associated with colorectal tumors,
but not always with a family history. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95:
10722-10727, 1998.

46. Friedl, W.; Meuschel, S.; Caspari, R.; Lamberti, C.; Krieger,
S.; Sengteller, M.; Propping, P.: Attenuated familial adenomatous
polyposis due to a mutation in the 3-prime part of the APC gene: a
clue for understanding the function of the APC protein. Hum. Genet. 97:
579-584, 1996.

47. Gayther, S. A.; Wells, D.; SenGupta, S. B.; Chapman, P.; Neale,
K.; Tsioupra, K.; Delhanty, J. D. A.: Regionally clustered APC mutations
are associated with a severe phenotype and occur at a high frequency
in new mutation cases of adenomatous polyposis coli. Hum. Mol. Genet. 3:
53-56, 1994.

48. Giardiello, F. M.; Petersen, G. M.; Piantadosi, S.; Gruber, S.
B.; Traboulsi, E. I.; Offerhaus, G. J. A.; Muro, K.; Krush, A. J.;
Booker, S. V.; Luce, M. C.; Laken, S. J.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein,
B.; Hamilton, S. R.: APC gene mutations and extraintestinal phenotype
of familial adenomatous polyposis. Gut 40: 521-525, 1997.

49. Gonzalez, S.; Blanco, I.; Campos, O.; Julia, M.; Reyes, J.; Llompart,
A.; Cabeza, E.; Germa, J. R.; Obrador, A.; Capella, G.: Founder mutation
in familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) in the Balearic Islands. Cancer
Genet. Cytogenet. 158: 70-74, 2005.

50. Goss, K. H.; Trzepacz, C.; Tuohy, T. M. F.; Groden, J.: Attenuated
APC alleles produce functional protein from internal translation initiation. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 8161-8166, 2002.

51. Green, R. A.; Kaplan, K. B.: Chromosome instability in colorectal
tumor cells is associated with defects in microtubule plus-end attachments
caused by a dominant mutation in APC. J. Cell Biol. 163: 949-961,
2003.

52. Groden, J.; Thliveris, A.; Samowitz, W.; Carlson, M.; Gelbert,
L.; Albertsen, H.; Joslyn, G.; Stevens, J.; Spirio, L.; Robertson,
M.; Sargeant, L.; Krapcho, K.; Wolff, E.; Burt, R.; Hughes, J. P.;
Warrington, J.; McPherson, J.; Wasmuth, J.; Le Paslier, D.; Abderrahim,
H.; Cohen, D.; Leppert, M.; White, R.: Identification and characterization
of the familial adenomatous polyposis coli gene. Cell 66: 589-600,
1991.

53. Gruber, S. B.; Petersen, G. M.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.
: Cancer, crash sites, and the new genetics of neoplasia. (Editorial) Gastroenterology 116:
210-212, 1999.

54. Gryfe, R.; Di Nicola, N.; Gallinger, S.; Redston, M.: Somatic
instability of the APC I1307K allele in colorectal neoplasia. Cancer
Res. 58: 4040-4043, 1998.

55. Gryfe, R.; Di Nicola, N.; Lal, G.; Gallinger, S.; Redston, M.
: Inherited colorectal polyposis and cancer risk of the APC I1307K
polymorphism. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 378-384, 1999.

56. Haigis, K. M.; Dove, W. F.: A Robertsonian translocation suppresses
a somatic recombination pathway to loss of heterozygosity. Nature
Genet. 33: 33-39, 2003.

57. Halberg, R. B.; Katzung, D. S.; Hoff, P. D.; Moser, A. R.; Cole,
C. E.; Lubet, R. A.; Donehower, L. A.; Jacoby, R. F.; Dove, W. F.
: Tumorigenesis in the multiple intestinal neoplasia mouse: redundancy
of negative regulators and specificity of modifiers. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 97: 3461-3466, 2000.

58. Halling, K. C.; Lazzaro, C. R.; Honchel, R.; Bufill, J. A.; Powell,
S. M.; Arndt, C. A. S.; Lindor, N. M.: Hereditary desmoid disease
in a family with a germline AluI repeat mutation of the APC gene. Hum.
Hered. 49: 97-102, 1999.

59. Hamilton, S. R.; Liu, B.; Parsons, R. E.; Papadopoulos, N.; Jen,
J.; Powell, S. M.; Krush, A. J.; Berk, T.; Cohen, Z.; Tetu, B.; Burger,
P. C.; Wood, P. A.; Taqi, F.; Booker, S. V.; Petersen, G. M.; Offerhaus,
G. J. A.; Tersmette, A. C.; Giardiello, F. M.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler,
K. W.: The molecular basis of Turcot's syndrome. New Eng. J. Med. 332:
839-847, 1995.

60. Hampton, G. M.; Ward, J. R. T. J.; Cottrell, S.; Howe, K.; Thomas,
H. J. W.; Ballhausen, W. G.; Jones, T.; Sheer, D.; Solomon, E.; Frischauf,
A.-M.; Bodmer, W. F.: Yeast artificial chromosomes for the molecular
analysis of the familial polyposis APC gene region. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 89: 8249-8253, 1992.

61. Hanson, C. A.; Miller, J. R.: Non-traditional roles for the adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor protein. Gene 361: 1-12, 2005.

62. He, T.-C.; Sparks, A. B.; Rago, C.; Hermeking, H.; Zawel, L.;
da Costa, L. T.; Morin, P. J.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler, K. W.: Identification
of c-MYC as a target of the APC pathway. Science 281: 1509-1512,
1998.

63. Hodgson, S. V.; Coonar, A. S.; Hanson, P. J. V.; Cottrell, S.;
Scriven, P. N.; Jones, T.; Hawley, P. R.; Wilkinson, M. L.: Two cases
of 5q deletions in patients with familial adenomatous polyposis: possible
link with Caroli's disease. J. Med. Genet. 30: 369-375, 1993.

64. Hodgson, S. V.; Fagg, N. L. K.; Talbot, I. C.; Wilkinson, M.:
Deletions of the entire APC gene are associated with sessile colonic
adenomas. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 31: 426 only, 1994.

65. Homma, M. K.; Li, D.; Krebs, E. G.; Yuasa, Y.; Homma, Y.: Association
and regulation of casein kinase 2 activity by adenomatous polyposis
coli protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 5959-5964, 2002.

66. Horii, A.; Nakatsuru, S.; Ichii, S.; Nagase, H.; Nakamura, Y.
: Multiple forms of the APC gene transcripts and their tissue-specific
expression. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 283-287, 1993.

67. Horii, A.; Nakatsuru, S.; Miyoshi, Y.; Ichii, S.; Nagase, H.;
Kato, Y.; Yanagisawa, A.; Nakamura, Y.: The APC gene, responsible
for familial adenomatous polyposis, is mutated in human gastric cancer. Cancer
Res. 52: 3231-3233, 1992.

68. Hoshino, Y.; Horikawa, I.; Oshimura, M.; Yuasa, Y.: Normal human
chromosome 5, on which a familial adenomatous polyposis gene is located,
has tumor suppressive activity. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 174:
298-304, 1991.

69. Huang, H.; Mahler-Araujo, B. M.; Sankila, A.; Chimelli, L.; Yonekawa,
Y.; Kleihues, P.; Ohgaki, H.: APC mutations in sporadic medulloblastomas. Am.
J. Path. 156: 433-437, 2000.

70. Hurlstone, A. F. L.; Haramis, A.-P. G.; Wienholds, E.; Begthel,
H.; Korving, J.; van Eeden, F.; Cuppen, E.; Zivkovic, D.; Plasterk,
R. H. A.; Clevers, H.: The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway regulates cardiac
valve formation. Nature 425: 633-637, 2003.

71. Jette, C.; Peterson, P. W.; Sandoval, I. T.; Manos, E. J.; Hadley,
E.; Ireland, C. M.; Jones, D. A.: The tumor suppressor adenomatous
polyposis coli and caudal related homeodomain protein regulate expression
of retinol dehydrogenase L. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 34397-34405, 2004.

72. Joslyn, G.; Carlson, M.; Thliveris, A.; Albertsen, H.; Gelbert,
L.; Samowitz, W.; Groden, J.; Stevens, J.; Spirio, L.; Robertson,
M.; Sargeant, L.; Krapcho, K.; Wolff, E.; Burt, R.; Hughes, J. P.;
Warrington, J.; McPherson, J.; Wasmuth, J.; Le Paslier, D.; Abderrahim,
H.; Cohen, D.; Leppert, M.; White, R.: Identification of deletion
mutations and three new genes at the familial polyposis locus. Cell 66:
601-613, 1991.

73. Kaplan, K. B.; Burds, A. A.; Swedlow, J. R.; Bekir, S. S.; Sorger,
P. K.; Nathke, I. S.: A role for the adenomatous polyposis coli protein
in chromosome segregation. Nature Cell Biol. 3: 429-432, 2001.

74. Karagianni, N.; Ly, M.-C.; Psarras, S.; Chlichlia, K.; Schirrmacher,
V.; Gounari, F.; Khazaie, K.: Novel adenomatous polyposis coli gene
promoter is located 40 kb upstream of the initiating methionine. Genomics 85:
231-237, 2005.

75. Kartheuser, A.; Walon, C.; West, S.; Breukel, C.; Detry, R.; Gribomont,
A.-C.; Hamzehloei, T.; Hoang, P.; Maiter, D.; Pringot, J.; Rahier,
J.; Khan, P. M.; Curtis, A.; Burn, J.; Fodde, R.; Verellen-Dumoulin,
C.: Familial adenomatous polyposis associated with multiple adrenal
adenomas in a patient with a rare 3-prime APC mutation. J. Med. Genet. 36:
65-67, 1999.

76. Kawasaki, Y.; Sato, R.; Akiyama, T.: Mutated APC and Asef are
involved in the migration of colorectal tumour cells. Nature Cell
Biol. 5: 211-215, 2003.

77. Kawasaki, Y.; Senda, T.; Ishidata, T.; Koyama, R.; Morishita,
T.; Iwayama, Y.; Higuchi, O.; Akiyama, T.: Asef, a link between the
tumor suppressor APC and G-protein signaling. Science 289: 1194-1197,
2000.

78. Kielman, M. F.; Ridanpaa, M.; Gaspar, C.; van Poppel, N.; Breukel,
C.; van Leeuwen, S.; Taketo, M. M.; Roberts, S.; Smits, R.; Fodde,
R.: Apc modulates embryonic stem-cell differentiation by controlling
the dosage of beta-catenin signaling. Nature Genet. 32: 594-605,
2002. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 33: 107 only, 2003.

79. Kinzler, K. W.; Nilbert, M. C.; Su, L.-K.; Vogelstein, B.; Bryan,
T. M.; Levy, D. B.; Smith, K. J.; Preisinger, A. C.; Hedge, P.; McKechnie,
D.; Finniear, R.; Markham, A.; Groffen, J.; Boguski, M. S.; Altschul,
S. F.; Horii, A.; Ando, H.; Miyoshi, Y.; Miki, Y.; Nishisho, I.; Nakamura,
Y.: Identification of FAP locus genes from chromosome 5q21. Science 253:
661-665, 1991.

80. Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.: Lessons from hereditary colorectal
cancer. Cell 87: 159-170, 1996.

81. Kohler, E. M.; Chandra, S. H. V.; Behrens, J.; Schneikert, J.
: Beta-catenin degradation mediated by the CID domain of APC provides
a model for the selection of APC mutations in colorectal, desmoid
and duodenal tumours. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 213-226, 2009.

82. Laken, S. J.; Papadopoulos, N.; Petersen, G. M.; Gruber, S. B.;
Hamilton, S. R.; Giardiello, F. M.; Brensinger, J. D.; Vogelstein,
B.; Kinzler, K. W.: Analysis of masked mutations in familial adenomatous
polyposis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 2322-2326, 1999.

83. Laken, S. J.; Petersen, G. M.; Gruber, S. B.; Oddoux, C.; Ostrer,
H.; Giardiello, F. M.; Hamilton, S. R.; Hampel, H.; Markowitz, A.;
Klimstra, D.; Jhanwar, S.; Winawer, S.; Offit, K.; Luce, M. C.; Kinzler,
K. W.; Vogelstein, B.: Familial colorectal cancer in Ashkenazim due
to a hypermutable tract in APC. Nature Genet. 17: 79-83, 1997.

84. Lal, G.; Ash, C.; Hay, K.; Redston, M.; Kwong, E.; Hancock, B.;
Mak, T.; Kargman, S.; Evans, J. F.; Gallinger, S.: Suppression of
intestinal polyps in Msh2-deficient and non-Msh2-deficient multiple
intestinal neoplasia mice by a specific cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor
and by a dual cyclooxygenase-1/2 inhibitor. Cancer Res. 61: 6131-6136,
2001.

85. Lambertz, S.; Ballhausen, W. G.: Identification of an alternative
5-prime untranslated region of the adenomatous polyposis coli gene. Hum.
Genet. 90: 650-652, 1993.

86. Lamlum, H.; Al Tassan, N.; Jaeger, E.; Frayling, I.; Sieber, O.;
Bin Reza, F.; Eckert, M.; Rowan, A.; Barclay, E.; Atkin, W.; Williams,
C.; Gilbert, J.; Cheadle, J.; Bell, J.; Houlston, R.; Bodmer, W.;
Sampson, J.; Tomlinson, I.: Germline APC variants in patients with
multiple colorectal adenomas, with evidence for the particular importance
of E1317Q. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 2215-2221, 2000.

87. Lamlum, H.; Ilyas, M.; Rowan, A.; Clark, S.; Johnson, V.; Bell,
J.; Frayling, I.; Efstathiou, J.; Pack, K.; Payne, S.; Roylance, R.;
Gorman, P.; Sheer, D.; Neale, K.; Phillips, R.; Talbot, I.; Bodmer,
W.; Tomlinson, I.: The type of somatic mutation at APC in familial
adenomatous polyposis is determined by the site of the germline mutation:
a new facet of Knudson's 'two-hit' hypothesis. Nature Med. 5: 1071-1075,
1999.

88. Lander, E.: Personal Communication. Cambridge, Mass.  10/1991.

89. Lane, S. W.; Sykes, S. M.; Al-Shahrour, F.; Shterental, S.; Paktinat,
M.; Celso, C. L.; Jesneck, J. L.; Ebert, B. L.; Williams, D. A.; Gilliland,
D. G.: The Apc(min) mouse has altered hematopoietic stem cell function
and provides a model for MPD/MDS. Blood 115: 3489-3497, 2010.

90. Luongo, C.; Gould, K. A.; Su, L.-K.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein,
B.; Dietrich, W.; Lander, E. S.; Moser, A. R.: Mapping of multiple
intestinal neoplasia (Min) to proximal chromosome 18 of the mouse. Genomics 15:
3-8, 1993.

91. Lynch, H. T.: Desmoid tumors: genotype-phenotype differences
in familial adenomatous polyposis: a nosological dilemma. (Editorial) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 59: 1184-1185, 1996.

92. Lynch, H. T.; de la Chapelle, A.: Hereditary colorectal cancer. New
Eng. J. Med. 348: 919-932, 2003.

93. Maher, E. R.; Morson, B.; Beach, R.; Hodgson, S. V.: Phenotypic
variation in hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer syndrome: association
with infiltrative fibromatosis (desmoid tumor). Cancer 69: 2049-2051,
1992.

94. Mahmoud, N. N.; Bilinski, R. T.; Churchill, M. R.; Edelmann, W.;
Kucherlapati, R.; Bertagnolli, M. M.: Genotype-phenotype correlation
in murine Apc mutation: differences in enterocyte migration and response
to sulindac. Cancer Res. 59: 353-359, 1999.

95. Mahmoud, N. N.; Boolbol, S. K.; Bilinski, R. T.; Martucci, C.
M.; Chadburn, A.; Bertagnolli, M. M.: Apc gene mutation is associated
with a dominant-negative effect upon intestinal cell migration. Cancer
Res. 57: 5045-5050, 1997.

96. Marshall, B.; Isidro, G.; Carvalhas, R.; Boavida, M. G.: Germline
versus somatic mutations of the APC gene: evidence for mechanistic
differences. (Letter) Hum. Mutat. 9: 286-288, 1997.

97. Martin-Denavit, T.; Duthel, S.; Giraud, S.; Olschwang, S.; Saurin,
J. C.; Plauchu, H.: Phenotype variability of two FAP families with
an identical APC germline mutation at codon 1465: a potential modifier
effect? Clin. Genet. 60: 125-131, 2001.

98. Matsumine, A.; Ogai, A.; Senda, T.; Okumura, N.; Satoh, K.; Baeg,
G.-H.; Kawahara, T.; Kobayashi, S.; Okada, M.; Toyoshima, K.; Akiyama,
T.: Binding of APC to the human homolog of the Drosophila discs large
tumor suppressor protein. Science 272: 1020-1023, 1996.

99. Midgley, C. A.; White, S.; Howitt, R.; Save, V.; Dunlop, M. G.;
Hall, P. A.; Lane, D. P.; Wyllie, A. H.; Bubb, V. J.: APC expression
in normal human tissues. J. Path. 181: 426-433, 1997.

100. Mili, S.; Moissoglu, K.; Macara, I. G.: Genome-wide screen reveals
APC-associated RNAs enriched in cell protrusions. Nature 453: 115-119,
2008.

101. Miyashiro, I.; Senda, T.; Matsumine, A.; Baeg, G.-H.; Kuroda,
T.; Shimano, T.; Miura, S.; Noda, T.; Kobayashi, S.; Monden, M.; Toyoshima,
K.; Akiyama, T.: Subcellular localization of the APC protein: immunoelectron
microscopic study of the association of the APC protein with catenin. Oncogene 11:
89-96, 1995.

102. Miyoshi, Y.; Ando, H.; Nagase, H.; Nishisho, I.; Horii, A.; Miki,
Y.; Mori, T.; Utsunomiya, J.; Baba, S.; Petersen, G.; Hamilton, S.
R.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.; Nakamura, Y.: Germ-line mutations
of the APC gene in 53 familial adenomatous polyposis patients. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4452-4456, 1992.

103. Miyoshi, Y.; Nagase, H.; Ando, H.; Horii, A.; Ichii, S.; Nakatsuru,
S.; Aoki, T.; Miki, Y.; Mori, T.; Nakamura, Y.: Somatic mutations
of the APC gene in colorectal tumors: mutation cluster region in the
APC gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1: 229-233, 1992.

104. Moser, A. R.; Mattes, E. M.; Dove, W. F.; Lindstrom, M. J.; Haag,
J. D.; Gould, M. N.: Apc(Min), a mutation in the murine Apc gene,
predisposes to mammary carcinomas and focal alveolar hyperplasias. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 8977-8981, 1993.

105. Nadauld, L. D.; Chidester, S.; Shelton, D. N.; Rai, K.; Broadbent,
T.; Sandoval, I. T.; Peterson, P. W.; Manos, E. J.; Ireland, C. M.;
Yost, H. J.; Jones, D. A.: Dual roles for adenomatous polyposis coli
in regulating retinoic acid biosynthesis and Wnt during ocular development. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 13409-13414, 2006.

106. Nagase, H.; Miyoshi, Y.; Horii, A.; Aoki, T.; Ogawa, M.; Utsunomiya,
J.; Baba, S.; Sasazuki, T.; Nakamura, Y.: Correlation between the
location of germ-line mutations in the APC gene and the number of
colorectal polyps in familial adenomatous polyposis patients. Cancer
Res. 52: 4055-4057, 1992.

107. Nagase, H.; Miyoshi, Y.; Horii, A.; Aoki, T.; Petersen, G. M.;
Vogelstein, B.; Maher, E.; Ogawa, M.; Maruyama, M.; Utsunomiya, J.;
Baba, S.; Nakamura, Y.: Screening for germ-line mutations in familial
adenomatous polyposis patients: 61 new patients and a summary of 150
unrelated patients. Hum. Mutat. 1: 467-473, 1992.

108. Nagase, H.; Nakamura, Y.: Mutations of the APC (adenomatous
polyposis coli) gene. Hum. Mutat. 2: 425-434, 1993.

109. Nakagawa, H.; Murata, Y.; Koyama, K.; Fujiyama, A.; Miyoshi,
Y.; Monden, M.; Akiyama, T.; Nakamura, Y.: Identification of a brain-specific
APC homologue, APCL, and its interaction with beta-catenin. Cancer
Res. 58: 5176-5181, 1998.

110. Neufeld, K. L.; Nix, D. A.; Bogerd, H.; Kang, Y.; Beckerle, M.
C.; Cullen, B. R.; White, R. L.: Adenomatous polyposis coli protein
contains two nuclear export signals and shuttles between the nucleus
and cytoplasm. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 12085-12090, 2000.

111. Neufeld, K. L.; White, R. L.: Nuclear and cytoplasmic localizations
of the adenomatous polyposis coli protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94:
3034-3039, 1997.

112. Niell, B. L.; Long, J. C.; Rennert, G.; Gruber, S. B.: Genetic
anthropology of the colorectal cancer-susceptibility allele APC I1307K:
evidence of genetic drift within the Ashkenazim. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73:
1250-1260, 2003.

113. Nishisho, I.; Nakamura, Y.; Miyoshi, Y.; Miki, Y.; Ando, H.;
Horii, A.; Koyama, K.; Utsunomiya, J.; Baba, S.; Hedge, P.; Markham,
A.; Krush, A. J.; Petersen, G.; Hamilton, S. R.; Nilbert, M. C.; Levy,
D. B.; Bryan, T. M.; Preisinger, A. C.; Smith, K. J.; Su, L.-K.; Kinzler,
K. W.; Vogelstein, B.: Mutations of chromosome 5q21 genes in FAP
and colorectal cancer patients. Science 253: 665-669, 1991.

114. Oda, H.; Imai, Y.; Nakatsuru, Y.; Hata, J.; Ishikawa, T.: Somatic
mutations of the APC gene in sporadic hepatoblastomas. Cancer Res. 56:
3320-3323, 1996.

115. Olschwang, S.; Tiret, A.; Laurent-Puig, P.; Muleris, M.; Parc,
R.; Thomas, G.: Restriction of ocular fundus lesions to a specific
subgroup of APC mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli patients. Cell 75:
959-968, 1993.

116. Oshima, M.; Dinchuk, J. E.; Kargman, S. L.; Oshima, H.; Hancock,
B.; Kwong, E.; Trzaskos, J. M.; Evans, J. F.; Taketo, M. M.: Suppression
of intestinal polyposis in Apc(delta-716) knockout mice by inhibition
of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2). Cell 87: 803-809, 1996.

117. Oshima, M.; Oshima, H.; Kitagawa, K.; Kobayashi, M.; Itakura,
C.; Taketo, M.: Loss of Apc heterozygosity and abnormal tissue building
in nascent intestinal polyps in mice carrying a truncated Apc gene. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 4482-4486, 1995.

118. Patael, Y.; Figer, A.; Gershoni-Baruch, R.; Papa, M. Z.; Risel,
S.; Shtoyerman-Chen, R.; Karasik, A.; Theodor, L.; Friedman, E.:
Common origin of the I1307K APC polymorphism in Ashkenazi and non-Ashkenazi
Jews. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 7: 555-559, 1999.

119. Peifer, M.: Cancer, catenins, and cuticle pattern: a complex
connection. Science 262: 1667-1668, 1993.

120. Penman, G. A.; Leung, L.; Nathke, I. S.: The adenomatous polyposis
coli protein (APC) exists in two distinct soluble complexes with different
functions. J. Cell Sci. 118: 4741-4750, 2005.

121. Petersen, G. M.; Parmigiani, G.; Thomas, D.: Missense mutations
in disease genes: a Bayesian approach to evaluate causality. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 62: 1516-1524, 1998.

122. Pilarski, R. T.; Brothman, A. R.; Benn, P.; Rosengren, S. S.
: Attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis in a man with an interstitial
deletion of chromosome arm 5q. Am. J. Med. Genet. 86: 321-324, 1999.

123. Polakis, P.: Mutations in the APC gene and their implications
for protein structure and function. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 5: 66-71,
1995.

124. Powell, S. M.; Petersen, G. M.; Krush, A. J.; Booker, S.; Jen,
J.; Giardiello, F. M.; Hamilton, S. R.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler, K.
W.: Molecular diagnosis of familial adenomatous polyposis. New Eng.
J. Med. 329: 1982-1987, 1993.

125. Powell, S. M.; Zilz, N.; Beazer-Barclay, Y.; Bryan, T. M.; Hamilton,
S. R.; Thibodeau, S. N.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler, K. W.: APC mutations
occur early during colorectal tumorigenesis. Nature 359: 235-237,
1992.

126. Prescott, S. M.; White, R. L.: Self-promotion? Intimate connections
between APC and prostaglandin H synthase-2. Cell 87: 783-786, 1996.

127. Prior, T. W.; Chadwick, R. B.; Papp, A. C.; Arcot, A. N.; Isa,
A. M.; Pearl, D. K.; Stemmermann, G.; Percesepe, A.; Loukola, A.;
Aaltonen, L. A.; de la Chapelle, A.: The I1307K polymorphism of the
APC gene in colorectal cancer. Gastroenterology 116: 58-63, 1999.

128. Rao, C. V.; Yang, Y.-M.; Swamy, M. V.; Liu, T.; Fang, Y.; Mahmood,
R.; Jhanwar-Uniyal, M.; Dai, W.: Colonic tumorigenesis in BubR1 +/-
Apc Min/+ compound mutant mice is linked to premature separation of
sister chromatids and enhanced genomic instability. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 102: 4365-4370, 2005.

129. Redston, M.; Nathanson, K. L.; Yuan, Z. Q.; Neuhausen, S. L.;
Satagopan, J.; Wong, N.; Yang, D.; Nafa, D.; Abrahamson, J.; Ozcelik,
H.; Antin-Ozerkis, D.; Andrulis, I.; and 13 others: The APC I1307K
allele and breast cancer risk. Nature Genet. 20: 13-14, 1998.

130. Roose, J.; Huls, G.; van Beest, M.; Moerer, P.; van der Horn,
K.; Goldschmeding, R.; Logtenberg, T.; Clevers, H.: Synergy between
tumor suppressor APC and the beta-catenin-Tcf4 target Tcf1. Science 285:
1923-1926, 1999.

131. Rosin-Arbesfeld, R.; Townsley, F.; Bienz, M.: The APC tumour
suppressor has a nuclear export function. Nature 406: 1009-1012,
2000.

132. Rowan, A. J.; Lamlum, H.; Ilyas, M.; Wheeler, J.; Straub, J.;
Papadopoulou, A.; Bicknell, D.; Bodmer, W. F.; Tomlinson, I. P. M.
: APC mutations in sporadic colorectal tumors: a mutational 'hotspot'
and interdependence of the 'two hits.' Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97:
3352-3357, 2000.

133. Rozen, P.; Naiman, T.; Strul, H.; Taussky, P.; Karminsky, N.;
Shomrat, R.; Samuel, Z.; Yaron, Y.; Orr-Urtreger, A.: Clinical and
screening implications of the I1307K adenomatous polyposis coli gene
variant in Israeli Ashkenazi Jews with familial colorectal neoplasia:
evidence for a founder effect. Cancer 94: 2561-2568, 2002.

134. Rozen, P.; Samuel, Z.; Shomrat, R.; Legum, C.: Notable intrafamilial
phenotypic variability in a kindred with familial adenomatous polyposis
and an APC mutation in exon 9. Gut 45: 829-833, 1999.

135. Rozen, P.; Shomrat, R.; Strul, H.; Naiman, T.; Karminsky, N.;
Legum, C.; Orr-Urtreger, A.: Prevalence of the I1307K APC gene variant
in Israeli Jews of differing ethnic origin and risk for colorectal
cancer. Gastroenterology 116: 54-57, 1999.

136. Rubinfeld, B.; Albert, I.; Porfiri, E.; Fiol, C.; Munemitsu,
S.; Polakis, P.: Binding of GSK3-beta to the APC-beta-catenin complex
and regulation of complex assembly. Science 272: 1023-1026, 1996.

137. Rubinfeld, B.; Souza, B.; Albert, I.; Muller, O.; Chamberlain,
S. H.; Masiarz, F. R.; Munemitsu, S.; Polakis, P.: Association of
the APC gene product with beta-catenin. Science 262: 1731-1734,
1993.

138. Sansom, O. J.; Meniel, V. S.; Muncan, V.; Phesse, T. J.; Wilkins,
J. A.; Reed, K. R.; Vass, J. K.; Athineos, D.; Clevers, H.; Clarke,
A. R.: Myc deletion rescues Apc deficiency in the small intestine. Nature 446:
676-679, 2007.

139. Scott, R. J.; Froggart, N. J.; Trembath, R. C.; Evans, D. G.
R.; Hodgson, S. V.; Maher, E. R.: Familial infiltrative fibromatosis
(desmoid tumours) (MIM135290) caused by a recurrent 3-prime APC gene
mutation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 1921-1924, 1996.

140. Scott, R. J.; van der Luijt, R.; Spycher, M.; Mary, J.-L.; Muller,
A.; Hoppeler, T.; Haner, M.; Muller, H.; Martinoli, S.; Brazzola,
P.-L.; Meera Khan, P.: Novel germline APC gene mutation in a large
familial adenomatous polyposis kindred displaying variable phenotypes. Gut 36:
731-736, 1995. Note: Erratum: Gut 38: 794 only, 1996.

141. Seki, M.; Tanaka, K.; Kikuchi-Yanoshita, R.; Konishi, M.; Fukunari,
H.; Iwama, T.; Miyaki, M.: Loss of normal allele of the APC gene
in an adrenocortical carcinoma from a patient with familial adenomatous
polyposis. Hum. Genet. 89: 298-300, 1992.

142. Sen-Gupta, S.; Van der Luijt, R. B.; Bowles, L. V.; Meera Khan,
P.; Delhanty, J. D. A.: Somatic mutation of APC gene in desmoid tumour
in familial adenomatous polyposis. (Letter) Lancet 342: 552-553,
1993.

143. Shaoul, R.; Papsin, B.; Cutz, E.; Durie, P.: Congenital cholesteatoma
in a child carrying a gene mutation for adenomatous polyposis coli. J.
Pediat. Gastroent. Nutr. 28: 100-103, 1999.

144. Shibata, H.; Takano, H.; Ito, M.; Shioya, H.; Hirota, M.; Matsumoto,
H.; Kakudo, Y.; Ishioka, C.; Akiyama, T.; Kanegae, Y.; Saito, I.;
Noda, T.: Alpha-catenin is essential in intestinal adenoma formation. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 18199-18204, 2007.

145. Sieber, O. M.; Lamlum, H.; Crabtree, M. D.; Rowan, A. J.; Barclay,
E.; Lipton, L.; Hodgson, S.; Thomas, H. J. W.; Neale, K.; Phillips,
R. K. S.; Farrington, S. M.; Dunlop, M. G.; and 9 others: Whole-gene
APC deletions cause classical familial adenomatous polyposis, but
not attenuated polyposis or 'multiple' colorectal adenomas. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 2954-2958, 2002.

146. Silverberg, M. S.; Clelland, C.; Murphy, J. E.; Steinhart, A.
H.; McLeod, R. S.; Greenberg, G. R.; Cohen, Z.; Siminovitch, K. A.
: Carrier rate of APC I1307K is not increased in inflammatory bowel
disease patients of Ashkenazi Jewish origin. Hum. Genet. 108: 205-210,
2001.

147. Smith, G.; Carey, F. A.; Beattie, J.; Wilkie, M. J. V.; Lightfoot,
T. J.; Coxhead, J.; Garner, R. C.; Steele, R. J. C.; Wolf, C. R.:
Mutations in APC, Kirsten-ras, and p53--alternative genetic pathways
to colorectal cancer. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 9433-9438, 2002.

148. Smith, K. J.; Johnson, K. A.; Bryan, T. M.; Hill, D. E.; Markowitz,
S.; Willson, J. K. V.; Paraskeva, C.; Petersen, G. M.; Hamilton, S.
R.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler, K. W.: The APC gene product in normal
and tumor cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 2846-2850, 1993.

149. Solomon, E.; Voss, R.; Hall, V.; Bodmer, W. F.; Jass, J. R.;
Jeffreys, A. J.; Lucibello, F. C.; Patel, I.; Rider, S. H.: Chromosome
5 allele loss in human colorectal carcinomas. Nature 328: 616-619,
1987.

150. Soravia, C.; Berk, T.; Madlensky, L.; Mitri, A.; Cheng, H.; Gallinger,
S.; Cohen, Z.; Bapat, B.: Genotype-phenotype correlations in attenuated
adenomatous polyposis coli. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 1290-1301, 1998.

151. Soravia, C.; Sugg, S. L.; Berk, T.; Mitri, A.; Cheng, H.; Gallinger,
S.; Cohen, Z.; Asa, S. L.; Bapat, B. V.: Familial adenomatous polyposis-associated
thyroid cancer: a clinical, pathological, and molecular genetics study. Am.
J. Path. 154: 127-135, 1999.

152. Spirio, L.; Green, J.; Robertson, J.; Robertson, M.; Otterud,
B.; Sheldon, J.; Howse, E.; Green, R.; Groden, J.; White, R.; Leppert,
M.: The identical 5-prime splice-site acceptor mutation in five attenuated
APC families from Newfoundland demonstrates a founder effect. Hum.
Genet. 105: 388-398, 1999. Note: Erratum: Hum. Genet. 107: 294 only,
2000.

153. Spirio, L.; Olschwang, S.; Groden, J.; Robertson, M.; Samowitz,
W.; Joslyn, G.; Gelbert, L.; Thliveris, A.; Carlson, M.; Otterud,
B.; Lynch, H.; Watson, P.; Lynch, P.; Laurent-Puig, P.; Burt, R.;
Hughes, J. P.; Thomas, G.; Leppert, M.; White, R.: Alleles of the
APC gene: an attenuated form of familial polyposis. Cell 75: 951-957,
1993.

154. Spirio, L. N.; Samowitz, W.; Robertson, J.; Robertson, M.; Burt,
R. W.; Leppert, M.; White, R.: Alleles of APC modulate the frequency
and classes of mutations that lead to colon polyps. Nature Genet. 20:
385-388, 1998.

155. Su, L.-K.; Abdalla, E. K.; Law, C. H. L.; Kohlmann, W.; Rashid,
A.; Vauthey, J.-N.: Biallelic inactivation of the APC gene is associated
with hepatocellular carcinoma in familial adenomatous polyposis coli. Cancer 92:
332-339, 2001.

156. Su, L.-K.; Barnes, C. J.; Yao, W.; Qi, Y.; Lynch, P. M.; Steinbach,
G.: Inactivation of germline mutant APC alleles by attenuated somatic
mutations: a molecular genetic mosaicism for attenuated familial adenomatous
polyposis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 582-590, 2000. Note: Erratum:
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 1045 only, 2000.

157. Su, L.-K.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.; Preisinger, A. C.;
Moser, A. R.; Luongo, C.; Gould, K. A.; Dove, W. F.: Multiple intestinal
neoplasia caused by a mutation in the murine homolog of the APC gene. Science 256:
668-670, 1992. Note: Erratum: Science 256: 1114 only, 1992.

158. Su, L.-K.; Kohlmann, W.; Ward, P. A.; Lynch, P. M.: Different
familial adenomatous polyposis phenotypes resulting from deletions
of the entire APC exon 15. Hum. Genet. 111: 88-95, 2002.

159. Su, L.-K.; Steinbach, G.; Sawyer, J. C.; Hindi, M.; Ward, P.
A.; Lynch, P. M.: Genomic rearrangements of the APC tumor-suppressor
gene in familial adenomatous polyposis. Hum. Genet. 106: 101-107,
2000.

160. Su, L.-K.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler, K. W.: Association of the
APC tumor suppressor protein with catenins. Science 262: 1734-1737,
1993.

161. Sulekova, Z.; Ballhausen, W. G.: A novel coding exon of the
human adenomatous polyposis coli gene. Hum. Genet. 96: 469-471,
1995.

162. Takacs, C. M.; Baird, J. R.; Hughes, E. G.; Kent, S. S.; Benchabane,
H.; Paik, R.; Ahmed, Y.: Dual positive and negative regulation of
Wingless signaling by adenomatous polyposis coli. Science 319: 333-336,
2008.

163. Takaku, K.; Oshima, M.; Miyoshi, H.; Matsui, M.; Seldin, M. F.;
Taketo, M. M.: Intestinal tumorigenesis in compound mutant mice of
both Dpc4 (Smad4) and Apc genes. Cell 92: 645-656, 1998.

164. Tischfield, J. A.; Shao, C.: Somatic recombination redux. Nature
Genet. 33: 5-6, 2003.

165. Tsujii, M.; DuBois, R. N.: Alterations in cellular adhesion
and apoptosis in epithelial cells overexpressing prostaglandin endoperoxide
synthase 2. Cell 83: 493-501, 1995.

166. van der Luijt, R. B.; Khan, P. M.; Vasen, H. F. A.; Breukel,
C.; Tops, C. M. J.; Scott, R. J.; Fodde, R.: Germline mutations in
the 3-prime part of APC exon 15 do not result in truncated proteins
and are associated with attenuated adenomatous polyposis coli. Hum.
Genet. 98: 727-734, 1996.

167. van der Luijt, R. B.; Khan, P. M.; Vasen, H. F. A.; Tops, C.
M. J.; van Leeuwen-Cornelisse, I. S. J.; Wijnen, J. T.; van der Klift,
H. M.; Plug, R. J.; Griffioen, G.; Fodde, R.: Molecular analysis
of the APC gene in 105 Dutch kindreds with familial adenomatous polyposis:
67 germline mutations identified by DGGE, PTT, and Southern analysis. Hum.
Mutat. 9: 7-16, 1997.

168. van Es, J.; Kirkpatrick, C.; van de Wetering, M.; Molenaar, M.;
Miles, A.; Kuipers, J.; Destree, O.; Peifer, M.; Clevers, H.: Identification
of APC2, a homologue of the adenomatous polyposis coli tumour suppressor. Curr.
Biol. 9: 105-108, 1999.

169. Wallis, Y. L.; Macdonald, F.; Hulten, M.; Morton, J. E. V.; McKeown,
C. M.; Neoptolemos, J. P.; Keighley, M.; Morton, D. G.: Genotype-phenotype
correlation between position of constitutional APC gene mutation and
CHRPE expression in familial adenomatous polyposis. Hum. Genet. 94:
543-548, 1994.

170. Wallis, Y. L.; Morton, D. G.; McKeown, C. M.; Macdonald, F.:
Molecular analysis of the APC gene in 205 families: extended genotype-phenotype
correlations in FAP and evidence for the role of APC amino acid changes
in colorectal cancer predisposition. J. Med. Genet. 36: 14-20, 1999.

171. Wang, J.; Jing, Z.; Zhang, L.; Zhou, G.; Braun, J.; Yao, Y.;
Wang, Z.-Z.: Regulation of acetylcholine receptor clustering by the
tumor suppressor APC. Nature Neurosci. 6: 1017-1018, 2003.

172. Wasan, H. S.; Novelli, M.; Bee, J.; Bodmer, W. F.: Dietary fat
influences on polyp phenotype in multiple intestinal neoplasia mice. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 3308-3313, 1997.

173. Watanabe, T.; Wang, S.; Noritake, J.; Sato, K.; Fukata, M.; Takefuji,
M.; Nakagawa, M.; Izumi, N.; Akiyama, T.; Kaibuchi, K.: Interaction
with IQGAP1 links APC to Rac1, Cdc42, and actin filaments during cell
polarization and migration. Dev. Cell 7: 871-883, 2004.

174. Westbrook, C. A.; Chmura, S. J.; Arenas, R. B.; Kim, S. Y.; Otto,
G.: Human APC gene expression in rodent colonic epithelium in vivo
using liposomal gene delivery. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 2005-2010,
1994.

175. Won, Y.-J.; Park, K. J.; Kwon, H.-J.; Lee, J.-H.; Kim, J.-H.;
Kim, Y. J.; Chun, S. H.; Han, H.-J.; Park, J.-G.: Germline mutations
of the APC gene in Korean familial adenomatous polyposis patients. J.
Hum. Genet. 44: 103-108, 1999.

176. Woodage, T.; King, S. M.; Wacholder, S.; Hartge, P.; Struewing,
J. P.; McAdams, M.; Laken, S. J.; Tucker, M. A.; Brody, L. C.: The
APC I1307K allele and cancer risk in a community-based study of Ashkenazi
Jews. Nature Genet. 20: 62-65, 1998.

177. Xia, L.; St. Denis, K. A.; Bapat, B.: Evidence for a novel exon
in the coding region of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene. Genomics 28:
589-591, 1995.

178. Yamashita, Y. M.; Jones, D. L.; Fuller, M. T.: Orientation of
asymmetric stem cell division by the APC tumor suppressor and centrosome. Science 301:
1547-1550, 2003.

179. Yan, H.; Dobbie, Z.; Gruber, S. B.; Markowitz, S.; Romans, K.;
Giardiello, F. M.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.: Small changes
in expression affect predisposition to tumorigenesis. Nature Genet. 30:
25-26, 2002.

180. Yang, J.; Zhang, W.; Evans, P. M.; Chen, X.; He, X.; Liu, C.
: Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) differentially regulates beta-catenin
phosphorylation and ubiquitination in colon cancer cells. J. Biol.
Chem. 281: 17751-17757, 2006.

181. Young, J.; Simms, L. A.; Tarish, J.; Buttenshaw, R.; Knight,
N.; Anderson, G. J.; Bell, A.; Leggett, B.: A family with attenuated
familial adenomatous polyposis due to a mutation in the alternatively
spliced region of APC exon 9. Hum. Mutat. 11: 450-455, 1998.

182. Yuan, Z. Q.; Kasprzak, L.; Gordon, P. H.; Pinsky, L.; Foulkes,
W. D.: I1307K APC and hMLH1 mutations in a non-Jewish family with
hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. Clin. Genet. 54: 368-370,
1998.

183. Zhang, L.; Ren, X.; Alt, E.; Bai, X.; Huang, S.; Xu, Z.; Lynch,
P. M.; Moyer, M. P.; Wen, X.-F.; Wu, X.: Chemoprevention of colorectal
cancer by targeting APC-deficient cells for apoptosis. Nature 464:
1058-1061, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/10/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/10/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/22/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/30/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/11/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/4/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/24/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/28/2008

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 1/17/2008

EDITED carol: 09/12/2013
terry: 4/4/2013
terry: 3/14/2013
carol: 3/8/2013
terry: 12/20/2012
terry: 8/31/2012
terry: 8/8/2012
terry: 1/17/2012
carol: 10/13/2011
terry: 10/11/2011
ckniffin: 10/5/2011
mgross: 5/18/2011
terry: 5/10/2011
alopez: 5/10/2010
mgross: 3/24/2010
terry: 1/21/2010
alopez: 4/22/2009
wwang: 1/15/2009
ckniffin: 12/30/2008
mgross: 6/25/2008
alopez: 6/18/2008
terry: 6/12/2008
mgross: 4/11/2008
alopez: 4/8/2008
terry: 4/4/2008
wwang: 3/25/2008
terry: 3/24/2008
carol: 2/5/2008
ckniffin: 2/4/2008
ckniffin: 1/28/2008

605604	TITLE *605604 POLYADENYLATE-BINDING PROTEIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2; PAIP2
;;POLY(A)-BINDING PROTEIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2;;
PABP-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2;;
PAIP2A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By Far Western interaction cloning using human PABP (604679) as the
probe and a placenta cDNA expression library, Khaleghpour et al. (2001)
isolated a 1.4-kb cDNA encoding PAIP2. The highly acidic (predicted pI
of 3.9), 127-amino acid protein has a predicted molecular mass of 14.5
kD and acts as a repressor of translation both in vitro and in vivo.

GENE FUNCTION

Khaleghpour et al. (2001) found that PAIP2 preferentially inhibited
translation of a poly(A)-containing mRNA but had no effect on the
translation of hepatitis C virus mRNA, which is cap and eIF4G (see
600495) independent. The authors showed that PAIP2 decreases the
affinity of PABP for poly(A) RNA and disrupts the repeating structure of
poly(A) ribonucleoprotein. Furthermore, PAIP2 was found to compete with
PAIP1 (605184) for PABP binding. Thus, Khaleghpour et al. (2001)
concluded that PAIP2 inhibits translation by interdicting PABP function.

Using the 3-prime UTR of rat Vegf to probe a human colon carcinoma cell
line cDNA expression library, Onesto et al. (2004) identified PAIP2 as a
putative regulator of VEGF (192240) expression. They demonstrated that
PAIP2 stabilized VEGF mRNA, leading to increased VEGF expression. By in
vitro protein-protein interactions and coimmunoprecipitation
experiments, Onesto et al. (2004) showed that PAIP2 interacted with
another VEGF mRNA-binding protein, HuR (ELAVL1; 603466), suggesting that
PAIP2 and ELAVL1 cooperate to stabilize VEGF mRNA.

MAPPING

Scott (2001) mapped the PAIP2 gene to chromosome 5 based on sequence
similarity between the PAIP2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF317675) and a
chromosome 5 clone (GenBank GENBANK AL136640).

REFERENCE 1. Khaleghpour, K.; Svitkin, Y. V.; Craig, A. W.; DeMaria, C. T.;
Deo, R. C.; Burley, S. K.; Sonenberg, N.: Translational repression
by a novel partner of human poly(A) binding protein, Paip2. Molec.
Cell 7: 205-216, 2001.

2. Onesto, C.; Berra, E.; Grepin, R.; Pages, G.: Poly(A)-binding
protein-interacting protein 2, a strong regulator of vascular endothelial
growth factor mRNA. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 34217-34226, 2004.

3. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/13/2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/4/2005

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 1/30/2001

EDITED mgross: 05/10/2007
mgross: 5/10/2007
mgross: 2/4/2005
mgross: 3/13/2001
mgross: 1/30/2001

611114	TITLE *611114 MICRO RNA 150; MIR150
;;miRNA150;;
MIRN150
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), such as MIRN150, are 20- to 24-nucleotide noncoding
RNAs found in animals and plants. These small RNAs regulate gene
expression at the translational level through interactions with their
target mRNAs. MIRN150 is a hematopoietic cell-specific miRNA (Zhou et
al., 2007).

CLONING

Lagos-Quintana et al. (2002) cloned mouse miRNA150. Using miRNA arrays
and quantitative RT-PCR analysis, Zhou et al. (2007) detected abundant
expression of mouse miR150 in lymph nodes. Expression was also high in
spleen, with lower levels in thymus, heart, and brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhou et al. (2007) found that expression of mouse miR150 increased
during B- and T-cell development. Overexpression of miR150 in
hematopoietic stem cells, followed by bone marrow transplantation,
impaired formation of mature B cells, but not other lymphoid and myeloid
cell populations. Premature expression of miR150 blocked transition from
pro-B to pre-B lymphocytes. Zhou et al. (2007) proposed that miR150
likely downregulates mRNAs important for pre- and pro-B cell formation
and function.

Using loss- and gain-of-function gene targeting approaches for Mir150
with conditional and partial ablation of Myb (189990) in mice, Xiao et
al. (2007) showed that Mir150 controlled Myb expression in vivo in a
dose-dependent manner over a narrow range of miRNA and Myb
concentrations, dramatically affecting lymphocyte development and the
humoral immune response. They concluded that MYB is a critical target of
MIR150.

Using microarray and Northern blot analysis, Chang et al. (2008) showed
that MIRN150 was among several miRNAs downregulated by MYC (190080) in
mouse and human B-cell lymphoma cell lines. The expression of MIRN150
strongly inhibited tumor formation by lymphoma cells following injection
into immunodeficient mice.

MAPPING

Hartz (2008) mapped the MIRN150 gene to chromosome 19q13.33 based on an
alignment of the mature MIRN150 sequence (UCUCCCAACCCUUGUACCAGUG) with
the genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Chang, T.-C.; Yu, D.; Lee, Y.-S.; Wentzel, E. A.; Arking, D. E.;
West, K. M.; Dang, C. V.; Thomas-Tikhonenko, A.; Mendell, J. T.:
Widespread microRNA repression by Myc contributes to tumorigenesis. Nature
Genet. 40: 43-50, 2008.

2. Hartz, P. H.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/22/2008.

3. Lagos-Quintana, M.; Rauhut, R.; Yalcin, A.; Meyer, J.; Lendeckel,
W.; Tuschi, T.: Identification of tissue-specific microRNAs from
mouse. Curr. Biol. 12: 735-739, 2002.

4. Xiao, C.; Calado, D. P.; Galler, G.; Thai, T.-H.; Patterson, H.
C.; Wang, J.; Rajewsky, N.; Bender, T. P.; Rajewsky, K.: MiR-150
controls B cell differentiation by targeting the transcription factor
c-Myb. Cell 131: 146-159, 2007.

5. Zhou, B.; Wang, S.; Mayr, C.; Bartel, D. P.; Lodish, H. F.: miR-150,
a microRNA expressed in mature B and T cells, blocks early B cell
development when expressed prematurely. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104:
7080-7085, 2007. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 18070
only, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/15/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/22/2008

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/13/2007

EDITED terry: 12/20/2012
mgross: 5/18/2009
terry: 5/15/2009
carol: 5/23/2008
terry: 5/22/2008
mgross: 6/13/2007

603685	TITLE *603685 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S28; RPS28
DESCRIPTION The mammalian ribosome is composed of 4 RNA species (see 180450) and
approximately 80 different proteins.

Chan et al. (1991) cloned and characterized a rat ribosomal protein S28
(Rps28) cDNA. They deposited the sequence of a human RPS28 cDNA in
GenBank (GENBANK L05091).

By somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid mapping analyses, Kenmochi
et al. (1998) mapped the human RPS28 gene to 19p13.2 (GenBank GENBANK
AB007164).

REFERENCE 1. Chan, Y.-L.; Olvera, J.; Wool, I. G.: The primary structure of
rat ribosomal protein S28. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 179: 314-318,
1991.

2. Kenmochi, N.; Kawaguchi, T.; Rozen, S.; Davis, E.; Goodman, N.;
Hudson, T. J.; Tanaka, T.; Page, D. C.: A map of 75 human ribosomal
protein genes. Genome Res. 8: 509-523, 1998.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/30/1999

EDITED alopez: 06/18/1999
carol: 4/7/1999

607733	TITLE *607733 SCRIBBLE, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; SCRIB
;;SCRIBBLE 1; SCRB1;;
CIRCLETAIL, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF;;
KIAA0147
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SCRIB is a cytoplasmic multimodular scaffold protein targeted to
epithelial adherens junctions and neuronal presynaptic compartments.
SCRIB and its orthologs in vertebrates and invertebrates participate in
cell polarization (summary by Nola et al., 2008).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated myeloid leukemia
cell line cDNA library, Nagase et al. (1995) cloned SCRIB, which they
designated KIAA0147. The nucleotide sequence contains a central GAG
repeat that occurs 19 times within a 36-triplet stretch, creating a
glutamine-rich region in the deduced 1,551-amino acid protein. KIAA0147
shares 32% amino acid identity with yeast adenylyl cyclase over a
302-amino acid region. Northern blot analysis revealed expression in all
tissues examined, with highest expression in skeletal muscle.

Nakagawa and Huibregtse (2000) identified a 220-kD protein within the
lysate of a cervical carcinoma cell line that interacts with human
papillomavirus E6 protein. By mass spectrometry of tryptic fragments,
followed by searching an EST database, they determined that the
E6-interacting protein is KIAA0147, the human homolog of Drosophila
Scrib, with which it shares 35% amino acid identity. SCRIB contains a
series of N-terminal leucine-rich repeats and 4 central PDZ domains.
Comparison with the Drosophila protein suggested that the KIAA0147 cDNA
lacks 5-prime sequences specifying approximately 67 amino acids.

Using a positional cloning approach, Murdoch et al. (2003) identified
Scrb1 as the mouse gene mutated in the 'circletail' (crc) phenotype,
which is characterized by craniorachischisis, a severe neural tube
defect. RT-PCR detected several Scrb1 alternative transcripts resulting
from inclusion or exclusion of exons 16, 29, or 36. During mouse
development, expression of Scrb1 showed a dynamic pattern of expression
in a wide variety of organ systems, as well as in neuroepithelium during
initiation of neural tube closure. Expression of Scrb1 overlapped with
expression of Vangl2 (600533), the gene mutated in 'loop-tail,' a
similar defect of neural tube closure. Coexpression was found in
neuroepithelium, ventricular myocardium, eyelid, lung epithelium,
whisker follicles, and the epithelial lining of the stomach.

GENE FUNCTION

Nakagawa and Huibregtse (2000) determined that SCRIB binds directly to
the human papillomavirus E6 protein. They showed that the binding is
mediated by the PDZ domain of SCRIB and a C-terminal epitope of E6.
Fluorescence-labeled SCRIB localized to the periphery of canine kidney
cells, where it colocalized with ZO1 (TJP1; 601009) in tight junctions.
Nakagawa and Huibregtse (2000) determined that SCRIB is targeted for
ubiquitination by a complex of E6 and UBE3A (601623) in vitro and that
expression of E6 induces degradation of SCRIB and DLG (601014) in vivo.
E6 coexpression resulted in loss of integrity of tight junctions, as
measured by ZO1 localization, and this effect was dependent on the
PDZ-binding epitope of E6.

Montcouquiol et al. (2003) showed that a mutation in the Vangl2 gene
results in significant disruptions in the polarization of stereociliary
bundles in mouse cochlea as a result of defects in the direction of
movement and/or anchoring of the kinocilium within each hair cell.
Similar but less severe defects are observed in animals containing a
mutation in the LAP protein family gene Scrb1. Polarization defects in
animals heterozygous for Vangl2 and Scrb1 are comparable with Vangl2
homozygotes, demonstrating genetic interactions between these genes in
the regulation of planar cell polarity in mammals.

Zhan et al. (2008) showed that depletion of Scribble in mammary
epithelia disrupted cell polarity, blocked 3-dimensional morphogenesis,
inhibited apoptosis, and induced dysplasia in vivo that progressed to
tumors after long latency. Like depletion, mislocalization of Scribble
from cell-cell junctions was sufficient to promote cell transformation.
Spontaneous mammary tumors in mice and humans showed both downregulated
and mislocalized Scribble. Zhan et al. (2008) concluded that Scribble
has a role as a tumor suppressor.

Using immunoprecipitation analysis, Nola et al. (2008) showed that SCRIB
interacted with PAK1 (602590) and PAK2 (605022), serine/threonine
kinases crucial for cell migration. Immunohistochemical analysis showed
that SCRIB and PAK colocalized at the leading edge of migrating human
epithelial cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts in response to
chemoattractants. Knockdown studies with human breast epithelial cells
showed that SCRIB was required for localization of PAK and beta-PIX
(ARHGEF7; 605477) at the leading edge of migrating cells, PAK
activation, formation of membrane protrusions at the leading edge, and
cell motility. Circletail mouse fibroblasts also showed reduced motility
in response to serum stimulation compared with wildtype fibroblasts. The
cell migration defect of SCRIB-deficient cells appeared to be due to
loss of PAK activation, since constitutively active PAK rescued
chemotaxis in SCRIB-deficient cells. Depletion of beta-PIX or SCRIB
caused comparable defects in cell migration and PAK activation. Nola et
al. (2008) concluded that SCRIB participates in lamellipodia formation
through activation of PAK at the leading edge of migratory cells.

Dow et al. (2008) found that knockdown of SCRIB via small hairpin RNA
cooperated with oncogenic RAS (HRAS; 190020) or RAF (RAF1; 164760)
mutants to promote an invasive phenotype in MCF10A breast epithelia
cells. The invasive phenotype was predominantly due to loss of
SCRIB-dependent suppression of MAP kinase signaling.

GENE STRUCTURE

Murdoch et al. (2003) determined that the mouse Scrb1 gene contains 38
exons and spans about 23 kb.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SCRIB
gene to chromosome 8 (TMAP RH25368).

ANIMAL MODEL

Circletail (crc) is a mouse phenotype characterized by
craniorachischisis, a severe neural tube defect. Murdoch et al. (2003)
determined that the circletail mutation is a 1-bp insertion in the Scrb1
gene, resulting in a frameshift that leads to premature termination of
the protein.

Phillips et al. (2007) found that crc mouse mutants developed heart
malformation and cardiomyopathy attributable to abnormalities in
cardiomyocyte organization within the early heart tube. N-cadherin
(CDH2; 114020) was lost from the cardiomyocyte cell membrane and
cell-cell adhesion was disrupted. This resulted in abnormalities in
heart looping and in formation of both the trabeculae and compact
myocardium, which ultimately resulted in cardiac misalignment defects
and ventricular noncompaction. Mislocalization of Vangl2 (600533) in
crc/crc cardiomyocytes suggested that wildtype Scrib acts in the planar
cell polarity pathway in the heart. Moreover, heterozygosity for
mutations in both Scrib and Vangl2 caused cardiac defects similar to
those found in homozygous mutants for each gene but without other major
defects.

REFERENCE 1. Dow, L. E.; Elsum, I. A.; King, C. L.; Kinross, K. M.; Richardson,
H. E.; Humbert, P. O.: Loss of human Scribble cooperates with H-Ras
to promote cell invasion through deregulation of MAPK signalling. Oncogene 27:
5988-6001, 2008.

2. Montcouquiol, M.; Rachel, R. A.; Lanford, P. J.; Copeland, N. G.;
Jenkins, N. A.; Kelley, M. W.: Identification of Vangl2 and Scrb1
as planar polarity genes in mammals. Nature 423: 173-177, 2003.

3. Murdoch, J. N.; Henderson, D. J.; Doudney, K.; Gaston-Massuet,
C.; Phillips, H. M.; Paternotte, C.; Arkell, R.; Stanier, P.; Copp,
A. J.: Disruption of scribble (Scrb1) causes severe neural tube defects
in the circletail mouse. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 87-98, 2003.

4. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Tanaka, A.; Ishikawa, K.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. IV. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0121-KIAA0160) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 2: 167-174, 1995.

5. Nakagawa, S.; Huibregtse, J. M.: Human Scribble (Vartul) is targeted
for ubiquitin-mediated degradation by the high-risk papillomavirus
E6 proteins and the E6AP ubiquitin-protein ligase. Molec. Cell. Biol. 20:
8244-8253, 2000.

6. Nola, S.; Sebbagh, M.; Marchetto, S.; Osmani, N.; Nourry, C.; Audebert,
S.; Navarro, C.; Rachel, R.; Montcouquiol, M.; Sans, N.; Etienne-Manneville,
S.; Borg, J.-P.; Santoni, M.-J.: Scrib regulates PAK activity during
the cell migration process. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 3552-3565, 2008.

7. Phillips, H. M.; Rhee, H. J.; Murdoch, J. N.; Hildreth, V.; Peat,
J. D.; Anderson, R. H.; Copp, A. J.; Chaudhry, B.; Henderson, D. J.
: Disruption of planar cell polarity signaling results in congenital
heart defects and cardiomyopathy attributable to early cardiomyocyte
disorganization. Circ. Res. 101: 137-145, 2007.

8. Zhan, L.; Rosenberg, A.; Bergami, K. C.; Yu, M.; Xuan, Z.; Jaffe,
A. B.; Allred, C.; Muthuswamy, S. K.: Deregulation of Scribble promotes
mammary tumorigenesis and reveals a role for cell polarity in carcinoma. Cell 135:
865-878, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 05/20/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/3/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/19/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/27/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2003

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/29/2003

EDITED mgross: 05/20/2013
mgross: 11/10/2009
terry: 11/3/2009
mgross: 3/20/2009
terry: 3/19/2009
alopez: 7/2/2008
terry: 5/27/2008
alopez: 5/16/2003
alopez: 5/2/2003
terry: 5/1/2003
mgross: 4/30/2003

154950	TITLE *154950 MAX PROTEIN; MAX
;;MYC-ASSOCIATED FACTOR X
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The MAX protein is the most conserved dimerization component of the MYC
(190080)-MAX-MXD1 (600021) network of basic helix-loop-helix leucine
zipper (bHLHZ) transcription factors that regulate cell proliferation,
differentiation, and apoptosis. While heterodimerization of MAX with MYC
activates and mediates its transcription and transforming activity,
heterodimerization of MAX with MXD1 family members antagonize
MYC-dependent cell transformation by transcriptional repression of the
same E-box target DNA sequences. The conservation of the MAX sequence is
particularly high in the bHLHZ domain, which is involved in
protein-protein interactions and DNA binding (Nair and Burley, 2003;
Comino-Mendez et al., 2011).

CLONING

Wagner et al. (1992) demonstrated that 2 species of RNA hybridized
specifically to a MAX cDNA probe in all human and murine cell lines
tested. Unlike MYC, the steady state level of MAX RNA was not
significantly modulated with respect to proliferation or
differentiation. Unlike MYC RNA, MAX RNA was relatively stable with a
half-life of more than 3 hours, and therefore it did not exhibit the
characteristic short half-life of RNAs encoded by most immediate early
genes. The predicted tertiary structure of MAX closely resembles that of
MYC, and it was on the basis of the
basic/helix-loop-helix/leucine-zipper (bHLHZ) homology that Prendergast
et al. (1991) cloned the cDNA encoding MAX.

Comino-Mendez et al. (2011) stated that the 160-amino acid MAX protein
contains an N-terminal bHLHZ domain and 6 casein kinase II
phosphorylation sites.

GENE STRUCTURE

The complete structure of the MAX gene was reported by Blackwood and
Eisenman (1991).

Comino-Mendez et al. (2011) noted that the MAX gene contains 5 exons.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ chromosomal hybridization, Wagner et al. (1992)
demonstrated that the MAX gene is located on chromosome 14q23. This
region of chromosome 14 is involved in deletions in B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia and malignant lymphomas and in the 12;14
translocation in uterine leiomyomas. Gilladoga et al. (1992) similarly
mapped the MAX gene to chromosome 14q22-q24 by isotopic in situ
hybridization and to mouse chromosome 12 in region D.

GENE FUNCTION

Zervos et al. (1995) described MXI2 (600289), a protein that interacts
with the MAX protein.

Grandori et al. (1996) identified DDX18 (606355) as a direct in vivo
target of Myc and Max and hypothesized that Myc may exert its effects on
cell behavior through proteins that affect RNA structure and metabolism.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Nair and Burley (2003) determined the x-ray structures of the bHLHZ
domains of MYC-MAX and MAD (600021)-MAX heterodimers bound to their
common DNA target, the enhancer box (E box) hexanucleotide
(5-prime-CACGTG-3-prime), at 1.9- and 2.0-angstrom resolution,
respectively. E-box recognition by these 2 structurally similar
transcription factor pairs determines whether a cell will divide and
proliferate (MYC-MAX) or differentiate and become quiescent (MAD-MAX).
Deregulation of MYC has been implicated in the development of many human
cancers, including Burkitt lymphoma, neuroblastomas, and small cell lung
cancers. Both quasisymmetric heterodimers resemble the symmetric MAX
homodimer, albeit with marked structural differences in the coiled-coil
leucine zipper regions that explain preferential homo- and heteromeric
dimerization of these 3 evolutionarily related DNA-binding proteins. The
MYC-MAX heterodimer, but not its MAD-MAX counterpart, dimerizes to form
a bivalent heterotetramer, explaining how MYC can upregulate expression
of genes with promoters bearing widely separated E boxes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using exome sequencing in 3 unrelated families with bilateral
pheochromocytoma (171300), Comino-Mendez et al. (2011) identified 3
different heterozygous germline mutations in the MAX gene
(154950.0001-154950.0003) that segregated with the disease. A follow-up
study of 59 patients with pheochromocytoma identified 5 additional
mutations (see, e.g., 154950.0004-154950.0005). Studies of tumor tissue
showed a lack of full-length MAX protein and loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) of the MAX allele, which resulted from paternal uniparental disomy
(UPD) and loss of the maternal allele. This LOH constituted the somatic
second-hit of the Knudson hypothesis. The paternal origin of the mutated
allele detected in 6 families suggested preferential paternal
transmission of the disease (p = 0.031). In addition, 2 children who
inherited the mutation from their mother and 2 obligate carriers from
another family did not develop tumors, further supporting this theory.
Eight of 12 cases had bilateral tumors, and 3 of 8 probands had
metastases at diagnosis. Overall, the findings indicated that MAX acts
as a classic tumor suppressor gene. Normal lymphocytes from patients
showed absence of methylation of the MAX promoter and biallelic
expression of MAX, which ruled out an imprinting-mediated effect on MAX
expression. Comino-Mendez et al. (2011) pointed to the study of Hopewell
and Ziff (1995), who showed loss of Max repression ability in rat
pheochromocytoma cells, suggesting that MAX mutations can lead to
deregulation of oncogenic MYC.

NOMENCLATURE

The designation MAX came from MYC associated factor X (Eisenman, 1994).
The murine homolog of MAX is referred to as Myn (Prendergast et al.,
1991).

ANIMAL MODEL

Hopewell and Ziff (1995) showed that a functional Max protein is not
expressed in the rat adrenal pheochromocytoma cell line PC12 due to a
mutant form of Max lacking the C terminus. The mutant protein was
incapable of repressing transcription from an E-box element.
Reintroduction of Max into PC12 cells resulted in repression of
E-box-dependent transcription and a reduction in growth rate. The
ability of these cells to divide, differentiate, and apoptose in the
absence of Max demonstrated for the first time that these processes can
occur via Max- and possibly Myc-independent mechanisms.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
MAX, MET1VAL

In a 46-year-old woman with bilateral malignant pheochromocytoma
(171300), Comino-Mendez et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous 1A-G
transition in exon 1 of the MAX gene, resulting in a met1-to-val (M1V)
substitution in the initiation codon. Heterozygosity for the mutation
was also found in her 29-year-old brother, who had a unilateral
nonmalignant pheochromocytoma, as well as in 2 of her unaffected
children. The mutation was not found in 750 control chromosomes. Studies
of tumor tissue showed a lack of full-length MAX protein and loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) of the MAX allele, which resulted from paternal UPD
and loss of the maternal allele. The findings indicated that MAX acts as
a classic tumor suppressor gene.

.0002
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
MAX, ARG75TER

In 4 affected members of a large family with autosomal dominant
inheritance of bilateral nonmalignant pheochromocytoma (171300) with
onset between 28 and 35 years of age, Comino-Mendez et al. (2011)
identified a heterozygous 223C-T transition in exon 4 of the MAX gene,
resulting in an arg75-to-ter (R75X) substitution. One unaffected family
member also carried the mutation, which was not found in 750 control
chromosomes. Studies of tumor tissue showed a lack of full-length MAX
protein and LOH of the MAX allele, which resulted from paternal UPD and
loss of the maternal allele.

.0003
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
MAX, IVS4DS, G-A, +1

In a 32-year-old man with bilateral malignant pheochromocytoma (171300),
Comino-Mendez et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition
in intron 4 of the MAX gene (295+1G-A), resulting in a splice site
mutation and skipping of exon 4. Family history revealed a deceased
brother and niece with unilateral pheochromocytoma. The mutation was not
found in 750 control chromosomes. Studies of the tumor tissue showed a
lack of full-length MAX protein and LOH of the MAX allele, which
resulted from paternal UPD and loss of the maternal allele.

.0004
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
MAX, ARG33TER

In a young man with bilateral nonmalignant pheochromocytoma (171300),
Comino-Mendez et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous 97C-T transition
in exon 3 of the MAX gene, resulting in an arg33-to-ter (R33X)
substitution. Tumor tissue showed LOH of maternal chromosome 14q.

.0005
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
MAX, 1-BP DEL, 185A

In a 47-year-old woman with bilateral nonmalignant pheochromocytoma
(171300), Comino-Mendez et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous 1-bp
deletion (185delA) in exon 4 of the MAX gene, resulting in a frameshift
and premature termination. Tumor tissue showed LOH of maternal
chromosome 14q.

REFERENCE 1. Blackwood, E.; Eisenman, R. N.: Max: a helix-loop-helix zipper
protein that forms a sequence-specific DNA-binding complex with Myc. Science 251:
1211-1217, 1991.

2. Comino-Mendez, I.; Gracia-Aznarez, F. J.; Schiavi, F.; Landa, I.;
Leandro-Garcia, L. J.; Leton, R.; Honrado, E.; Ramos-Medina, R.; Caronia,
D.; Pita, G.; Gomez-Grana, A.; de Cubas, A. A.; and 17 others:
Exome sequencing identifies MAX mutations as a cause of hereditary
pheochromocytoma. Nature Genet. 43: 663-667, 2011.

3. Eisenman, R. N.: Personal Communication. Seattle, Wash.  7/27/1994.

4. Gilladoga, A. D.; Edelhoff, S.; Blackwood, E. M.; Eisenman, R.
N.; Disteche, C. M.: Mapping of MAX to human chromosome 14 and mouse
chromosome 12 by in situ hybridization. Oncogene 7: 1249-1251, 1992.

5. Grandori, C.; Mac, J.; Siebelt, F.; Ayer, D. E.; Eisenman, R. N.
: Myc-Max heterodimers activate a DEAD box gene and interact with
multiple E box-related sites in vivo. EMBO J. 15: 4344-4357, 1996.

6. Hopewell, R.; Ziff, E. B.: The nerve growth factor-responsive
PC12 cell line does not express the Myc dimerization partner Max. Molec.
Cell Biol. 15: 3470-3478, 1995.

7. Nair, S. K.; Burley, S. K.: X-ray structures of Myc-Max and Mad-Max
recognizing DNA: molecular bases of regulation by proto-oncogenic
transcription factors. Cell 112: 193-205, 2003.

8. Prendergast, G. C.; Lawe, D.; Ziff, E. B.: Association of Myn,
the murine homolog of Max, with c-Myc stimulates methylation-sensitive
DNA binding and Ras cotransformation. Cell 65: 395-408, 1991.

9. Wagner, A. J.; Le Beau, M. M.; Diaz, M. O.; Hay, N.: Expression,
regulation, and chromosomal localization of the Max gene. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 89: 3111-3115, 1992.

10. Zervos, A. S.; Faccio, L.; Gatto, J. P.; Kyriakis, J. M.; Brent,
R.: Mxi2, a mitogen-activated protein kinase that recognizes and
phosphorylates Max protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 10531-10534,
1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/8/2011
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 2/4/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 10/4/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/22/1992

EDITED carol: 09/17/2013
wwang: 8/15/2011
ckniffin: 8/8/2011
carol: 9/27/2007
mgross: 2/4/2003
carol: 10/4/2001
alopez: 9/3/1998
mark: 12/18/1995
carol: 10/7/1994
carol: 4/7/1993
carol: 7/6/1992
carol: 7/2/1992
carol: 6/3/1992
carol: 5/22/1992

607883	TITLE *607883 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 52 (RIBOFLAVIN TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 1; SLC52A1
;;G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 172B; GPR172B;;
G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 42; GPCR42;;
PORCINE ENDOGENOUS RETROVIRUS, SUBGROUP A, RECEPTOR 2; PAR2;;
PERV-A RECEPTOR 2;;
RIBOFLAVIN TRANSPORTER 1; RFT1;;
FLJ10060
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GPCR41 (607882) and GPCR42 act as receptors for porcine endogenous
retrovirus subgroup A (PERV-A).

The water-soluble vitamin riboflavin is converted to the coenzymes
flavin mononucleotide (FMN) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), and
is essential for normal cellular functions. SLC52A1, or RFT1, is a
transmembrane protein that mediates cellular uptake of riboflavin
(summary by Yao et al., 2010).

CLONING

By database screening for homologs of GPCR41, Ericsson et al. (2003)
identified GPCR42, which they designated PAR2. They cloned full-length
PAR2 from a 293-cell cDNA library. The deduced 448-amino acid protein is
a putative G protein-coupled receptor and contains 10 or 11 putative
transmembrane regions similar to other gammaretrovirus receptors. PAR2
shares significant homology with PAR1 and with PAR proteins from baboon,
pig, and mouse. Northern blot analysis using a probe that did not
differentiate between PAR1 and PAR2 detected expression in all tissues
examined, with the possible exception of bladder. Highest expression was
in testis. RT-PCR detected PAR1 and PAR2 expression in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells of 11 healthy volunteers. Confocal microscopy detected
expression of fluorescence-tagged PAR2 at the plasma membrane and in the
perinuclear region of transfected rabbit corneal fibroblasts.

Using real-time PCR, Yao et al. (2010) detected highly specific RFT1
expression in placenta. Much lower expression was detected in small
intestine, thymus, and trachea, with little to none in other tissues
examined. Fluorescence-tagged RFT1 was expressed in the plasma membrane
of transfected HEK293 cells.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Ericsson et al. (2003) mapped the GPR172B
gene to chromosome 17.

Hartz (2012) mapped the SLC52A1 gene to chromosome 17p13.2 based on an
alignment of the SLC52A1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK000922) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Ericsson et al. (2003) determined that expression of PAR1 or PAR2 in
transfected rabbit corneal fibroblasts and mouse NIH 3T3 fibroblasts
mediated both the entry and the productive replication of PERV-A.
Expression of PAR1 and PAR2 did not alter the sensitivity of the rabbit
cells to PERV-B or -C. The results suggested that PAR2 may mediate a
higher level of PERV infection than PAR1. Ericsson et al. (2003) noted
that the presence of these PERV-A receptors highlights a risk faced by
xenotransplant recipients.

Using transfected HEK293 cells, Yao et al. (2010) showed that RFT1, RFT2
(SLC52A3; 613350), and RFT3 (SLC52A2; 607882) mediated uptake of
radiolabeled riboflavin in a time- and concentration-dependent manner.
All 3 transporters also mediated riboflavin uptake independent of
extracellular Na+ and Cl-. RFT2, but not RFT1 or RFT3, showed reduced
riboflavin uptake when extracellular pH was increased from 5.4 to 8.4.
For all 3, radiolabeled riboflavin transport was completely inhibited by
excess unlabeled riboflavin and lumiflavine, and modestly inhibited by
FMN. FAD slightly but significantly inhibited RFT3-mediated riboflavin
uptake. Little to no effect was observed with other riboflavin analogs,
D-ribose, organic ions, or other vitamins.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a woman with riboflavin deficiency (RBFVD; 615026) who had an infant
with transient neonatal riboflavin deficiency (Chiong et al., 2007), Ho
et al. (2011) identified a de novo heterozygous 1.9-kb deletion within
the SLC52A1 gene (607883.0001), predicted to result in
haploinsufficiency. The infant did not carry the deletion. These
findings confirmed that the transient clinical and metabolic
abnormalities in the infant were the result of maternal riboflavin
deficiency.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RIBOFLAVIN DEFICIENCY
SLC52A1, 1.9-KB DEL

In a woman with riboflavin deficiency (RBFVD; 615026), Ho et al. (2011)
identified a de novo heterozygous 1.9-kb deletion in the SLC52A1 gene,
resulting in the deletion of exons 2 and 3 and predicted to cause
haploinsufficiency. The woman was clinically asymptomatic, but showed
biochemical evidence of riboflavin deficiency, manifest as increased
serum acylcarnitines. She was originally ascertained (Chiong et al.,
2007) after her newborn daughter presented soon after birth with poor
suck, hypoglycemia, and metabolic acidosis. The child had dicarboxylic
aciduria and elevated plasma acylcarnitine levels, initially thought to
be consistent with multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD;
231680). Treatment with oral riboflavin resulted in complete resolution
of the clinical and biochemical findings. The findings were consistent
with transient neonatal riboflavin deficiency secondary to maternal
riboflavin deficiency that was exacerbated during pregnancy. The infant
did not carry the deletion.

REFERENCE 1. Chiong, M. A.; Sim, K. G.; Carpenter, K.; Rhead, W.; Ho, G.; Olsen,
R. K.; Christodoulou, J.: Transient multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenation
deficiency in a newborn female caused by maternal riboflavin deficiency. Molec.
Genet. Metab. 92: 109-114, 2007.

2. Ericsson, T. A.; Takeuchi, Y.; Templin, C.; Quinn, G.; Farhadian,
S. F.; Wood, J. C.; Oldmixon, B. A.; Suling, K. M.; Ishii, J. K.;
Kitagawa, Y.; Miyazawa, T.; Salomon, D. R.; Weiss, R. A.; Patience,
C.: Identification of receptors for pig endogenous retrovirus. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 6759-6764, 2003.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/11/2012.

4. Ho, G.; Yonezawa, A.; Masuda, S.; Inui, K.; Sim, K. G.; Carpenter,
K.; Olsen, R. K. J.; Mitchell, J. J.; Rhead, W. J.; Peters, G.; Christodoulou,
J.: Maternal riboflavin deficiency, resulting in transient neonatal-onset
glutaric aciduria type 2, is caused by a microdeletion in the riboflavin
transporter gene GPR172B. Hum. Mutat. 32: E1976-E1984, 2011. Note:
Electronic Article.

5. Yao, Y.; Yonezawa, A.; Yoshimatsu, H.; Masuda, S.; Katsura, T.;
Inui, K.: Identification and comparative functional characterization
of a new human riboflavin transporter hRFT3 expressed in the brain. J.
Nutr. 140: 1220-1226, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/22/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/11/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/13/2003

EDITED carol: 03/15/2013
carol: 1/30/2013
ckniffin: 1/22/2013
alopez: 8/21/2012
terry: 7/11/2012
carol: 7/3/2012
alopez: 6/18/2007
terry: 6/28/2005
mgross: 6/13/2003

605515	TITLE *605515 FORKHEAD BOX P1; FOXP1
;;GLUTAMINE-RICH FACTOR 1; QRF1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

FOXP1 is a transcriptional repressor that plays a critical role in
monocyte differentiation and macrophage function (Shi et al., 2008).

CLONING

Li and Tucker (1993) cloned a glutamine-rich factor, which they
designated QRF1, that was expressed preferentially at the terminal
differentiation stage of B cells and in skeletal muscle. The deduced
707-amino acid QRF1 protein contains an 84-amino acid segment that shows
significant sequence homology with the DNA-binding domains of the
hepatocyte nuclear factor-3/forkhead (see FOXA1; 602294) family of
proteins.

By expression cloning using blood and testis cDNA libraries to identify
the target of a monoclonal antibody (JC12), Banham et al. (2001)
obtained a full-length cDNA encoding FOXP1. The predicted 677-amino acid
protein contains coiled-coil, glutamine-rich, and serine/threonine-rich
domains in its N-terminal half; a central zinc finger domain; and
coiled-coil, serine/threonine/proline-rich, winged helix, and acidic
domains in its C-terminal half. FOXP1 also has numerous putative
phosphorylation sites, 2 nuclear localization signals (NLSs) in its
C-terminal half, and 2 PEST motif in its C-terminal acidic region.
Multiple-tissue array analysis showed ubiquitous expression of FOXP1 in
normal adult and fetal tissues, with highest expression in lymphoid and
gastrointestinal tissues. Immunohistochemistry showed that FOXP1 protein
was widely expressed, with a predominantly nuclear localization, in
normal tissues.

Wang et al. (2003) stated that there are 4 splice variants of mouse
Foxp1, designated Foxp1a through Foxp1d. They identified and cloned
Foxp1d, which encodes a Foxp1 isoform lacking the N-terminal
polyglutamine domain found in Foxp1a and Foxp1b. Northern blot analysis
and RNase protection assays showed tissue-specific expression of all 4
variants in mouse. Northern blot analysis of human tissues detected
tissue-specific expression of FOXP1 variants, with highest levels in
peripheral blood lymphocytes and in caudate nucleus of brain. Western
blot analysis detected variable expression of Foxp1a, Foxp1c, and Foxp1d
in mouse tissues, with high expression of all 3 isoforms in lung.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2003) found that mouse Foxp1a, Foxp1c, Foxp1d, and the
related Foxp2 (605317) protein bound a 7-nucleotide core sequence,
TATTT(G/A)T. These Foxp proteins repressed gene transcription via
binding to this consensus site, which was identified within the SV40 and
IL2 (147680) promoters. In some cases, the strength of Foxp1 repression
was mediated by the polyglutamine domain. Mouse Foxp1 proteins also
formed homodimers or heterodimers with subfamily members, and the
conserved C2H2 zinc finger and leucine zipper motifs mediated
dimerization.

Using genetic manipulations, Rousso et al. (2008) demonstrated that
Foxp1 established the pattern of LIM-homeodomain protein (see 601999)
expression in embryonic mice and, accordingly, organized motor axon
projections, their connectivity with peripheral targets, and the
establishment of motor pools. Hox proteins (see 142950) dictated the
pattern of Foxp1 expression in spinal cord, and both Foxp1 and Hox were
required for segment-appropriate generation of motor columns and pools
in mouse.

Shi et al. (2008) generated transgenic mice overexpressing human FOXP1
in monocyte/macrophage lineage cells. Circulating blood monocytes from
these mice had reduced expression of macrophage colony-stimulating
factor receptor (CSF1R; 164770), impaired migratory capacity, and
diminished accumulation as splenic macrophages. Macrophage functions
were globally impaired, and osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption were
attenuated. Forced overexpression of Csf1r reversed many of the
deficits, suggesting that repression of Csf1r is likely the dominant
mechanism responsible for FOXP1 effects on monocyte differentiation and
macrophage function.

- Association of FOXP1 With Cancer

By analysis of a tumor/normal tissue expression array, Banham et al.
(2001) found that expression of FOXP1 was lower in colon tumors and
higher in stomach and prostate tumors compared with matched normal
tissues. Immunohistochemical analysis showed frequent loss of
expression, increased expression, and cytoplasmic mislocalization of the
predominantly nuclear FOXP1 protein in solid tumors.

By immunohistochemical analysis of a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (BCL)
tissue microarray, Banham et al. (2005) found that untreated patients
with a high percentage of FOXP1-positive nuclei had significantly
reduced survival and earlier progression compared with FOXP1-negative
patients.

Of 275 BCLs, Haralambieva et al. (2005) found that only 5 (3
gastrointestinal, 1 thyroid, and 1 cervical lymph node) carried a
chromosomal breakpoint in the FOXP1 gene and strong nuclear FOXP1
expression. All were diffuse large BCLs rather than marginal zone BCLs.
Haralambieva et al. (2005) concluded that genetic alterations at 3p13
are associated with strong FOXP1 expression.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Banham et al. (2001) mapped the FOXP1 gene
to chromosome 3p14.1.

CYTOGENETICS

Streubel et al. (2005) noted that 3 chromosomal translocations,
t(11;18)(q21;q21), t(14;18)(q32;q21), and t(1;14)(p22;q32), are
associated with mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphomas. They
identified a t(3;14)(p14;q32) in a case of MALT lymphoma of the thyroid.
FISH studies showed that the IGH locus (147100) was rearranged, and
long-distance inverse PCR identified FOXP1 as the partner gene on
chromosome 3. Using FISH assays to screen 91 MALT lymphomas negative for
3 common translocations, Streubel et al. (2005) identified
t(3;14)(p14;q32) in 9 cases (3 thyroid, 4 ocular adnexa, and 2 skin).
Most t(3;14)(p14;q32)-positive MALT lymphomas also harbored additional
genetic abnormalities, such as trisomy 3. All 4 of the MALT-associated
translocations were mutually exclusive. Real-time RT-PCR analysis showed
upregulated expression of FOXP1 in MALT cases with t(3;14)(p14;q32) or
trisomy 3. Streubel et al. (2005) concluded that FOXP1 is a
translocation partner of IGH in a site-dependent subset of MALT
lymphomas.

Carr et al. (2010) reported a boy with severe speech delay and delayed
motor development (see 613670) who carried a de novo heterozygous 1.0-Mb
interstitial deletion of chromosome 3p14.1 that involved only the FOXP1
gene. The phenotype was confounded by a Chiari I malformation, which was
surgically corrected at age 30 months. The patient had delayed gross
motor skills and walked at 16 months. After surgery for the Chiari
malformation, he had some improvement in motor skills. The most
significant feature was speech delay with limited verbal output and
difficulty in articulating entire words and multisyllabic speech,
although he did not have a deficit in oromotor coordination. At age 4
years, he developed staring spells with motor arrest associated with
epileptiform discharges. He had mild dysmorphic facial features,
including broad forehead, hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral
fissures, ptosis, short nose, broad nasal tip, and smooth philtrum. Carr
et al. (2010) concluded that FOXP1 may play a role in the development of
verbal and motor skills.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Hamdan et al. (2010) identified 2 different de novo heterozygous
mutations in the FOXP1 gene (605515.0001 and 605515.0002, respectively)
in 2 unrelated children of French Canadian origin with moderate mental
retardation, expressive language deficits, and autistic features
(613670). The first mutation (605515.0001) was a small deletion found
using array-based comparative genomic hybridization of a cohort of 80
patients with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and 30 with intellectual
disability. The second mutation (R525X; 605515.0002) was found by direct
sequencing of the FOXP1 gene in a cohort of 110 patients with
intellectual disability, 84 with ASD, and 51 with both. Hamdan et al.
(2010) chose to examine the FOXP1 gene specifically because of the role
of the FOXP2 gene (605317) in a speech and language disorder (SPCH1;
602081); patients with intellectual disability and ASD often show
language impairment. The results indicated that disruption of FOXP1 has
a global impact on brain development.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hu et al. (2006) found that mice lacking Foxp1 died at embryonic day
14.5 due to heart valve and outflow tract abnormalities. Reconstitution
of Rag2 (179616)-deficient mice with Foxp1 -/- or Foxp1 +/- fetal liver
cells resulted in decreased mature B cells, but normal thymocytes, in
the recipients. Foxp1 -/- pro-B cells had reduced IgM, Rag1 (179615),
and Rag2 expression, and V(D)J rearrangement was also impaired in Foxp1
-/- B cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and EMSA analyses showed that
Foxp1 bound to Foxp site-2 (Fkh2) in the Erag enhancer, which is
upstream of Rag2, in a B-lineage specific way. Hu et al. (2006)
concluded that FOXP1 influences B-cell development at an early stage,
and that FOXP1 deficiency results in a phenotype that resembles double
haploinsufficiency of E2A (TCF3; 147141) and EBF (164343).

Feng et al. (2010) generated mice with a conditional deletion of Foxp1
in double-positive thymocytes and found that peripheral Cd4 (see 186940)
and Cd8 (see 186910) cells also lacked Foxp1 and that single-positive
thymocytes acquired an activated phenotype in thymus. Peripheral cells
also exhibited an activated phenotype and increased apoptosis and
readily produced cytokines upon T-cell receptor engagement. Feng et al.
(2010) concluded that FOXP1 is an essential transcriptional regulator
for thymocyte development and the generation of quiescent naive T cells.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION WITH LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT AND AUTISTIC FEATURES
FOXP1, 390-KB DEL

In a French Canadian girl who had mental retardation with language
impairment and autistic features (613670), Hamdan et al. (2010)
identified a de novo heterozygous 390-kb intragenic deletion in the
FOXP1 gene. The deletion encompassed exons 4 to 14 of the longest FOXP1
isoform, including the translation initiation site and leucine zipper
and zinc finger domains important for transcriptional activity.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION WITH LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT AND AUTISTIC FEATURES
FOXP1, ARG525TER

In a French Canadian boy who had mental retardation with language
impairment and autistic features (613670), Hamdan et al. (2010)
identified a de novo heterozygous 1573C-T transition in the FOXP1 gene,
resulting in an arg525-to-ter (R525X) substitution. The mutation was
predicted to abolish the last 152 residues of the protein, including
part of the forkhead DNA-binding (FHD) domain and a conserved nuclear
localization signal. The mutation was not found in 570 controls. In
vitro functional expression studies in HEK293 cells showed that the
R525X mutant impaired the transcriptional repression ability of FOXP1,
consistent with a loss of function.

REFERENCE 1. Banham, A. H.; Beasley, N.; Campo, E.; Fernandez, P. L.; Fidler,
C.; Gatter, K.; Jones, M.; Mason, D. Y.; Prime, J. E.; Trougouboff,
P.; Wood, K.; Cordell, J. L.: The FOXP1 winged helix transcription
factor is a novel candidate tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 3p. Cancer
Res. 61: 8820-8829, 2001.

2. Banham, A. H.; Connors, J. M.; Brown, P. J.; Cordell, J. L.; Ott,
G.; Sreenivasan, G.; Farinha, P.; Horsman, D. E.; Gascoyne, R. D.
: Expression of the FOXP1 transcription factor is strongly associated
with inferior survival in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Clin.
Cancer Res. 11: 1065-1072, 2005.

3. Carr, C. W.; Moreno-De-Luca, D.; Parker, C.; Zimmerman, H. H.;
Ledbetter, N.; Martin, C. L.; Dobyns, W. B.; Abdul-Rahman, O. A.:
Chiari I malformation, delayed gross motor skills, severe speech delay,
and epileptiform discharges in a child with FOXP1 haploinsufficiency. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 18: 1216-1220, 2010.

4. Feng, X.; Ippolito, G. C.; Tian, L.; Wiehagen, K.; Oh, S.; Sambandam,
A.; Willen, J.; Bunte, R. M.; Maika, S. D.; Harriss, J. V.; Caton,
A. J.; Bhandoola, A.; Tucker, P. W.; Hu, H.: Foxp1 is an essential
transcriptional regulator for the generation of quiescent naive T
cells during thymocyte development. Blood 115: 510-518, 2010.

5. Hamdan, F. F.; Daoud, H.; Rochefort, D.; Piton, A.; Gauthier, J.;
Langlois, M.; Foomani, G.; Dobrzeniecka, S.; Krebs, M.-O.; Joober,
R.; Lafreniere, R. G.; Lacaille, J.-C.; Mottron, L.; Drapeau, P.;
Beauchamp, M. H.; Phillips, M. S.; Fombonne, E.; Rouleau, G. A.; Michaud,
J. L.: De novo mutations in FOXP1 in cases with intellectual disability,
autism, and language impairment. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 87: 671-678,
2010.

6. Haralambieva, E.; Adam, P.; Ventura, R.; Katzenberger, T.; Kalla,
J.; Holler, S.; Hartmann, M.; Rosenwald, A.; Greiner, A.; Muller-Hermelink,
H. K.; Banham, A. H.; Ott, G.: Genetic rearrangement of FOXP1 is
predominantly detected in a subset of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas
with extranodal presentation. (Letter) Leukemia 20: 1300-1303, 2005.

7. Hu, H.; Wang, B.; Borde, M.; Nardone, J.; Maika, S.; Allred, L.;
Tucker, P. W.; Rao, A.: Foxp1 is an essential transcriptional regulator
of B cell development. Nature Immun. 7: 819-826, 2006.

8. Li, C.; Tucker, P. W.: DNA-binding properties and secondary structural
model of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork head domain. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 11583-11587, 1993.

9. Rousso, D. L.; Gaber, Z. B.; Wellik, D.; Morrisey, E. E.; Novitch,
B. G.: Coordinated actions of the forkhead protein Foxp1 and Hox
proteins in the columnar organization of spinal motor neurons. Neuron 59:
226-240, 2008.

10. Shi, C.; Sakuma, M.; Mooroka, T.; Liscoe, A.; Gao, H.; Croce,
K. J.; Sharma, A.; Kaplan, D.; Greaves, D. R.; Wang, Y.; Simon, D.
I.: Down-regulation of the forkhead transcription factor Foxp1 is
required for monocyte differentiation and macrophage function. Blood 112:
4699-4711, 2008.

11. Streubel, B.; Vinatzer, U.; Lamprecht, A.; Raderer, M.; Chott,
A.: T(3;14)(p14.1;q32) involving IGH and FOXP1 is a novel recurrent
chromosomal aberration in MALT lymphoma. Leukemia 19: 652-658, 2005.

12. Wang, B.; Lin, D.; Li, C.; Tucker, P.: Multiple domains define
the expression and regulatory properties of Foxp1 forkhead transcriptional
repressors. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 24259-24268, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/23/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/16/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/20/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/19/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/30/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/12/2006

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/2/2001

EDITED mgross: 01/19/2012
terry: 11/23/2011
alopez: 8/18/2011
ckniffin: 8/16/2011
wwang: 12/21/2010
ckniffin: 12/20/2010
mgross: 2/24/2010
terry: 2/19/2010
mgross: 1/30/2009
mgross: 12/21/2006
terry: 12/12/2006
carol: 1/2/2001

609178	TITLE *609178 MIS12, S. POMBE, HOMOLOG OF; MIS12
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to yeast Mis12, followed by PCR of a
HeLa cell cDNA library, Goshima et al. (2003) cloned MIS12. The deduced
205-amino acid protein contains 2 conserved blocks in its N-terminal 100
amino acids, followed by a coiled-coil region of about 50 amino acids.
Endogenous HeLa cell MIS12 had an apparent molecular mass of about 25
kD. Immunolocalization showed MIS12 colocalized at kinetochores with
CENPA (117139) and CENPC (117141), and its position during the cell
cycle was that of a typical kinetochore protein. The level of MIS12 did
not fluctuate during the cell cycle.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RNA interference (RNAi) in HeLa cells, Goshima et al. (2003)
demonstrated that reduced MIS12 resulted in misaligned metaphase
chromosomes, abnormally extended metaphase spindle length, lagging
anaphase chromosomes, and interphase micronuclei without mitotic delay.
Spindle checkpoint protein MAD2 (601467) temporally localized at
kinetochores at early mitotic stages after MIS12 RNAi. Kinetochore
localization of MIS12 was unaffected by CENPA RNAi.

Following MIS12 overexpression in HeLa cells, Obuse et al. (2004)
immunoprecipitated MIS12 in a kinetochore-associated complex that
contained PMF1 (609176), DC8 (609174), C20ORF172 (609175), and HP1-alpha
(CBX5; 604478). ZWINT (609177) also associated with the complex at
kinetochores during mitosis. Immunoprecipitation of transfected cells
indicated that MIS12 could form stable complexes with C20ORF172 and DC8.
Much weaker interaction was detected between MIS12 and ZWINT. Exclusion
chromatography revealed 3 peaks containing MIS12 and C20ORF172, but only
the middle peak, which had a mass of 669 kD, contained HP1-alpha. MIS12
knockdown by RNAi abolished the kinetochore association of ZWINT, DC8,
and C20ORF172.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MIS12
gene to chromosome 17 (TMAP SHGC-36031).

REFERENCE 1. Goshima, G.; Kiyomitsu, T.; Yoda, K.; Yanagida, M.: Human centromere
chromatin protein hMis12, essential for equal segregation, is independent
of CENP-A loading pathway. J. Cell Biol. 160: 25-39, 2003.

2. Obuse, C.; Iwasaki, O.; Kiyomitsu, T.; Goshima, G.; Toyoda, Y.;
Yanagida, M.: A conserved Mis12 centromere complex is linked to heterochromatic
HP1 and outer kinetochore protein Zwint-1. Nature Cell Biol. 6:
1135-1141, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/27/2005

EDITED mgross: 01/28/2005
mgross: 1/27/2005

604472	TITLE *604472 TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR LIGAND SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 13; TNFSF13
;;APRIL;;
TNF- AND APOL-RELATED LEUKOCYTE EXPRESSED LIGAND 2; TALL2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Members of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) family of ligands play
important roles in various physiologic and pathologic processes,
including cell proliferation, differentiation, and death, and modulation
of immune responses. By screening EST databases, Hahne et al. (1998)
cloned a novel TNF cDNA, TNFSF13, which they called APRIL, for 'a
proliferation-inducing ligand.' The full-length cDNA TNFSF13 clone
encodes a 250-amino acid protein with a predicted 28-amino acid
cytoplasmic domain, a hydrophobic transmembrane region, and an
extracellular domain of 201 amino acids with no signal peptide. There is
only 1 N-linked glycosylation site. The sequence of the extracellular
domain shows 21% homology with TNFSF6 (134638) and 20% homology with
TNFA (191160). Northern blot analysis revealed weak expression
restricted to a few tissues: transcripts of 2.1 and 2.4 kb in prostate
and a transcript of 1.8 kb in peripheral blood leukocytes. All tumor
cell lines, however, strongly expressed the TNFSF13 2.1-kb transcript,
and expression of extracellular or full-length TNFSF13 led to increased
proliferation of various cell lines.

Shu et al. (1999) identified the same gene, which they designated TALL2.
TALL2 shares about 35% sequence identity with TALL1 (BLYS, or TNFSF13B;
603969) in the C terminus.

By RACE, RT-PCR, and screening of a T-cell cDNA library, Pradet-Balade
et al. (2002) isolated a hybrid transcript formed by intergenic splicing
of exons 1 through 6 of TWEAK (TNFSF12; 602695) to exons 2 through 6 of
APRIL. See 602695 for further information on the protein encoded by the
TWEAK/APRIL transcript, which Pradet-Balade et al. (2002) called
TWEPRIL.

Using Northern blot analysis, Pradet-Balade et al. (2002) found that
relative expression of the 1.9-kb APRIL transcript was about 6-fold
higher than that of the 2.5-kb TWEPRIL transcript in resting T cells.
However, in activated T cells, both transcripts were expressed at
similar levels. A similar expression pattern for APRIL and TWEPRIL was
detected in CD4 (186940)-positive and CD8 (see 186910)-positive T-cell
subpopulations. TWEAK expression was similar between resting and
activated T cells. TWEAK was found predominantly in ribosome-free
fractions in both resting and activated T cells, whereas APRIL and
TWEPRIL increased their association with polyribosomes following T-cell
activation, suggesting that translational efficiency of APRIL and
TWEPRIL increases upon T-cell activation.

GENE FUNCTION

Seyler et al. (2005) analyzed synovial tissue specimens from 72 patients
with rheumatoid arthritis (180300) for TNFSF13 and TNFSF13B production
and TNFSF13/TNFSF13B receptor expression. Synovitis with ectopic
germinal centers present had the highest levels of TNFSF13, produced
exclusively by CD83 (604534)-positive dendritic cells; TNFSF13B was
present in similar levels in all types of synovitis (with or without
germinal centers or T cell-B cell aggregates) and was produced
exclusively from CD68 (153634)-positive macrophages. In synovitis with
germinal centers, inhibiting TNFSF13 and TNFSF13B with a TACI
(TNFRSF13B; 604907):Fc fusion protein resulted in destruction of the
germinal centers and marked inhibition of IFN-gamma (147570) and Ig
transcription, whereas similar inhibition in the aggregate and diffuse
types of synovitis enhanced IFN-gamma production and did not affect Ig
levels. These differential immunomodulatory effects correlated with the
presence of TACI-positive T cells in aggregate and diffuse synovitis and
their absence in synovitis with germinal centers. Seyler et al. (2005)
proposed that TNFSF13 and TNFSF13B regulate B-cell as well as T-cell
function and have both pro- and antiinflammatory effects in rheumatoid
arthritis.

Both BLYS and APRIL have been described as homotrimeric molecules, a
feature common to many members of the TNF superfamily. Using ELISA
analysis, Roschke et al. (2002) found that patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus (152700), rheumatoid arthritis, Reiter syndrome, psoriatic
arthritis (see 607507), polymyositis (see 160750), and ankylosing
spondylitis (106300) had significantly higher levels of BLYS/APRIL
heterotrimers than did controls. Roschke et al. (2002) proposed that
BLYS/APRIL heterotrimers may play a role in rheumatic and other
autoimmune diseases, and that other members of the TNF ligand
superfamily may also form active soluble heterotrimers.

Using cell-based, biochemical, and structural studies, Hymowitz et al.
(2005) characterized interactions between APRIL and TACI. They found
that the short isoform of human TACI, which lacks cysteine-rich domain-1
(CRD1), was still functional for signaling and that CRD2 of TACI was
sufficient for high-affinity binding to either murine April or human
BAFF (TNFSF13B). The solution structure of CRD2 of TACI revealed a
compact domain and additional ligand-binding determinants. Cocrystal
structures of murine April bound to CRD2 of human TACI or to human BCMA
(TNFRSF17; 109545) showed large interfaces and revealed key differences
that likely influence ligand-binding affinity and specificity.

Ingold et al. (2005) showed that the TNF homology domain of mouse and
human APRIL bound BCMA and TACI, whereas a basic sequence (QKQKKQ) close
to the N terminus of the mature protein bound negatively charged
sulfated glycosaminoglycan side chains of proteoglycans. Although T-cell
lines bound little APRIL, ectopic expression of glycosaminoglycan-rich
syndecans (see SDC1; 186355) or glypicans (see GPC1; 600395) conferred
on these cells a high binding capacity that was completely dependent on
the N-terminal basic sequence of APRIL. Moreover, SDC1-positive plasma
cells and proteoglycan-rich nonhematopoietic cells displayed high
specific, heparin-sensitive binding to APRIL. Inhibition of BAFF and
APRIL, but not BAFF alone, prevented survival and/or migration of newly
formed plasma cells to bone marrow. In addition, costimulation of B-cell
proliferation by APRIL was only effective upon APRIL oligomerization.
Ingold et al. (2005) proposed that APRIL binding to the extracellular
matrix or to proteoglycan-positive cells induces APRIL oligomerization,
which is the prerequisite for triggering TACI- and/or BCMA-mediated
activation, migration, and survival signals.

Using flow cytometry, fluorescence microscopy, and immunohistochemical
analysis, Huard et al. (2008) found that APRIL was expressed on
recruited neutrophils and accumulated on subepithelial heparan sulfate
proteoglycans in upper (e.g., tonsils) and lower (e.g., lamina propria)
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) and contributed to survival of
plasma cells. Mice lacking April had less-persistent mucosal humoral
immunity. Huard et al. (2008) proposed that inflammation-recruited
neutrophils may create plasma cell niches in MALT to sustain local
antibody production.

GENE STRUCTURE

Pradet-Balade et al. (2002) determined that the TNFSF13 gene contains 6
exons.

MAPPING

Pradet-Balade et al. (2002) determined that the transcriptional start
site of the TNFSF13 gene lies 878 bp downstream of the TNFSF12 gene on
chromosome 17p13.1.

ANIMAL MODEL

By treating mice with TACI-Ig, Gross et al. (2001) determined that BLYS
and APRIL are required for the development of both transitional (T2) and
mature B lymphocytes. TACI-Ig-treated mice also had less circulating
immunoglobulin and produced less collagen-specific antibody. TACI-Ig
treatment inhibited the development of collagen-induced rheumatoid
arthritis. Gross et al. (2001) proposed that TACI-Ig may have a role in
both the prevention and treatment of autoimmune disease mediated by
pathogenic autoantibodies.

Stein et al. (2002) created mice expressing human APRIL as a transgene
in T cells. These mice appeared normal. Transgenic T cells showed
enhanced survival in vitro and enhanced survival of staphylococcal
enterotoxin B-reactive Cd4-positive T cells in vivo, and both of these
responses correlated with elevated Bcl2 levels. Analysis of humoral
responses to T cell-dependent antigens in the transgenic mice indicated
that APRIL affected IgM responses, but not IgG responses. In contrast, T
cell-independent type-2 (TI-2) humoral responses were enhanced in APRIL
transgenic mice. As TACI had been reported to be indispensable for TI-2
antibody formation, Stein et al. (2002) concluded that APRIL-TACI
interactions have a role in generating the TI-2 response and that APRIL
is involved in the induction and/or maintenance of T- and B-cell
responses.

To investigate the role of APRIL in immunity, Castigli et al. (2004)
generated April-deficient mice. April -/- mice had normal T and B
lymphocyte development, normal T and B cell proliferation in vitro, but
increased numbers of CD4+ effector/memory T cells and increased IgG
responses to T-dependent antigens. Serum IgA levels were significantly
decreased, and serum IgA antibody responses to mucosal immunization with
T-dependent antigens and to type 1 T-independent antigens were impaired
in April -/- mice. The results suggested that APRIL downregulates T
cell-dependent antibody responses and promotes IgA class switching.

REFERENCE 1. Castigli, E.; Scott, S.; Dedeoglu, F.; Bryce, P.; Jabara, H.; Bhan,
A. K.; Mizoguchi, E.; Geha, R. S.: Impaired IgA class switching in
APRIL-deficient mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 3903-3908, 2004.

2. Gross, J. A.; Dillon, S. R.; Mudri, S.; Johnston, J.; Littau, A.;
Roque, R.; Rixon, M.; Schou, O.; Foley, K. P.; Haugen, H.; McMillen,
S.; Waggie, K.; Schreckhise, R. W.; Shoemaker, K.; Vu, T.; Moore,
M.; Grossman, A.; Clegg, C. H.: TACI-Ig neutralizes molecules critical
for B cell development and autoimmune disease: impaired B cell maturation
in mice lacking BLyS. Immunity 15: 289-302, 2001.

3. Hahne, M.; Kataoka, T.; Schroter, M.; Hofmann, K.; Irmler, M.;
Bodmer, J.-L.; Schneider, P.; Bornand, T.; Holler, N.; French, L.
E.; Sordat, B.; Rimoldi, D.; Tschopp, J.: APRIL, a new ligand of
the tumor necrosis factor family, stimulates tumor cell growth. J.
Exp. Med. 188: 1185-1190, 1998.

4. Huard, B.; McKee, T.; Bosshard, C.; Durual, S.; Matthes, T.; Myit,
S.; Donze, O.; Frossard, C.; Chizzolini, C.; Favre, C.; Zubler, R.;
Guyot, J. P.; Schneider, P.; Roosnek, E.: APRIL secreted by neutrophils
binds to heparan sulfate proteoglycans to create plasma cell niches
in human mucosa. J. Clin. Invest. 118: 2887-2895, 2008. Note: Erratum:
J. Clin. Invest. 120: 1362 only, 2010.

5. Hymowitz, S. G.; Patel, D. R.; Wallweber, H. J. A.; Runyon, S.;
Yan, M.; Yin, J.; Shriver, S. K.; Gordon, N. C.; Pan, B.; Skelton,
N. J.; Kelley, R. F.; Starovasnik, M. A.: Structures of APRIL-receptor
complexes: like BCMA, TACI employs only a single cysteine-rich domain
for high affinity ligand binding. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 7218-7227,
2005.

6. Ingold, K.; Zumsteg, A.; Tardivel, A.; Huard, B.; Steiner, Q.-G.;
Cachero, T. G.; Qiang, F.; Gorelik, L.; Kalled, S. L.; Acha-Orbea,
H.; Rennert, P. D.; Tschopp, J.; Schneider, P.: Identification of
proteoglycans as the APRIL-specific binding partners. J. Exp. Med. 201:
1375-1383, 2005.

7. Pradet-Balade, B.; Medema, J. P.; Lopez-Fraga, M.; Lozano, J. C.;
Kolfschoten, G. M.; Picard, A.; Martinez-A., C.; Garcia-Sanz, J. A.;
Hahne, M.: An endogenous hybrid mRNA encodes TWE-PRIL, a functional
cell surface TWEAK-APRIL fusion protein. EMBO J. 21: 5711-5720,
2002.

8. Roschke, V.; Sosnovtseva, S.; Ward, C. D.; Hong, J. S.; Smith,
R.; Albert, V.; Stohl, W.; Baker, K. P.; Ullrich, S.; Nardelli, B.;
Hilbert, D. M.; Migone, T.-S.: BLyS and APRIL form biologically active
heterotrimers that are expressed in patients with systemic immune-based
rheumatic diseases. J. Immun. 169: 4314-4321, 2002.

9. Seyler, T. M.; Park, Y. W.; Takemura, S.; Bram, R. J.; Kurtin,
P. J.; Goronzy, J. J.; Weyand, C. M.: BLyS and APRIL in rheumatoid
arthritis. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 3083-3092, 2005.

10. Shu, H.-B.; Hu, W. H.; Johnson, H.: TALL-1 is a novel member
of the TNF family that is down-regulated by mitogens. J. Leukoc.
Biol. 65: 680-683, 1999.

11. Stein, J. V.; Lopez-Fraga, M.; Elustondo, F. A.; Carvalho-Pinto,
C. E.; Rodriguez, D.; Gomez-Caro, R.; de Jong, J.; Martinez-A, C.;
Medema, J. P.; Hahne, M.: APRIL modulates B and T cell immunity. J.
Clin. Invest. 109: 1587-1598, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/20/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/3/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/3/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/15/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/9/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/7/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/28/2000

EDITED terry: 09/14/2012
mgross: 3/24/2009
terry: 3/20/2009
mgross: 10/17/2006
terry: 10/3/2006
mgross: 1/3/2006
wwang: 12/15/2005
tkritzer: 4/14/2004
terry: 4/9/2004
mgross: 9/7/2001
carol: 1/28/2000

602822	TITLE *602822 HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H4 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER A; HIST1H4A
;;HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H4A;;
HIST1 CLUSTER, H4A;;
H4 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER A; H4FA;;
H4/A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The nucleosome is the basic repeat unit of eukaryotic chromatin. The
nucleosome core particle consists of an octamer formed by 2 each of the
core histones H2A (see 613499), H2B (see 609904), H3 (see 602810), and
H4, around which DNA is wrapped. A fifth histone, histone H1 (see
142709), is bound to the linker DNA between nucleosomes and is important
for the higher order structure of chromatin. HIST1H4A is a core histone
H4 (summary by Marzluff et al. (2002) and Foster and Downs (2005)).

GENE FAMILY

All core histones, including H4 histones, contain a histone fold domain,
which is central to the nucleosome core structure, and a flexible
N-terminal domain that protrudes from the nucleosome core particle. Like
other histones, H4 histones can be subgrouped according to their
temporal expression. Replication-dependent histones, such as HIST1H4A
through HIST1H4L (602831) and HIST2H4A (142750) are mainly expressed
during S phase. In contrast, replication-independent histones, or
replacement variant histones, can be expressed throughout the cell
cycle. Most replication-dependent H4 histone genes, as well as other
core histone genes, are located within histone gene cluster-1 (HIST1) on
chromosome 6p22-p21. Two other histone gene clusters, HIST2 and HIST3,
are located on chromosomes 1q21 and 1q42, respectively. HIST2 contains 1
replication-dependent H4 gene, HIST2H4A, and there are no H4 genes in
HIST3. An additional H4 gene, HIST4H4 (615069), is located on chromosome
12p13.1. In mouse, the Hist1, Hist2, and Hist3 gene clusters are located
on chromosomes 13A2-A3, 3F1-F2, and 11B2, respectively. All
replication-dependent histone genes are intronless, and they encode
mRNAs that lack a poly(A) tail, ending instead in a conserved stem-loop
sequence. Unlike replication-dependent histone genes,
replication-independent histone genes are solitary genes that are
located on chromosomes apart from any other H1 or core histone genes.
Some replication-independent histone genes contain introns and encode
mRNAs with poly(A) tails. All human and mouse H4 histone genes encode
the same protein (summary by Marzluff et al. (2002) and Foster and Downs
(2005)).

CLONING

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) identified the
mouse and human HIST1H4A genes. All mouse and human H4 genes, including
HIST1H4A, encode the same protein.

MAPPING

By analysis of a YAC contig from chromosome 6p21.3, Albig et al. (1997)
characterized a cluster of 35 histone genes, including H4/a.

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) determined that the
HIST1 cluster on chromosome 6p22-p21 contains 55 histone genes,
including 12 H4 genes. The HIST1H4A gene is the most telomeric H4 gene
within the HIST1 cluster. The HIST1 cluster spans over 2 Mb and includes
2 large gaps (over 250 kb each) where there are no histone genes, but
many other genes. The organization of histone genes in the mouse Hist1
cluster on chromosome 13A2-A3 is essentially identical to that in human
HIST1. The HIST2 cluster on chromosome 1q21 contains 6 histone genes,
including 1 H4 gene (HIST2H4A; 142750), and the HIST3 cluster on
chromosome 1q42 contains 3 histone genes, but no H4 genes. Hist2 and
Hist3 are located on mouse chromosomes 3F1-F2 and 11B2, respectively. An
additional H4 gene, HIST4H4 (615069), is located on human chromosome
12p13.1 and mouse chromosome 6G1.

GENE FUNCTION

- H4 Histone Family

As reviewed by Felsenfeld (1992), detailed biochemical definition of the
protein complexes that regulate gene transcription led to reemergence of
questions concerning the role of histones. He reviewed evidence
suggesting that transcriptional activation requires that transcription
factors successfully compete with histones for binding to promoters.

CpG island hypermethylation and global genomic hypomethylation are
common epigenetic features of cancer cells. Fraga et al. (2005)
characterized posttranslational modifications to histone H4 in a
comprehensive panel of normal tissues, cancer cell lines, and primary
tumors. They found that cancer cells had a loss of monoacetylated and
trimethylated forms of histone H4. These changes appeared early and
accumulated during the tumorigenic process, as they showed in a mouse
model of multistage skin carcinogenesis. The losses occurred
predominantly at the acetylated lys16 and trimethylated lys20 residues
of histone H4 and were associated with the hypomethylation of DNA
repetitive sequences, a well-known characteristic of cancer cells. Fraga
et al. (2005) suggested that the global loss of monoacetylation and
trimethylation of histone H4 is a common hallmark of human tumor cells.

Wang et al. (2001) reported the purification, molecular identification,
and functional characterization of a histone H4-specific
methyltransferase, PRMT1 (602950), a protein arginine methyltransferase.
PRMT1 specifically methylates arginine-3 of histone H4 in vitro and in
vivo. Methylation of arg3 by PRMT1 facilitates subsequent acetylation of
H4 tails by p300 (602700). However, acetylation of H4 inhibits its
methylation by PRMT1. Most important, a mutation in the
S-adenosyl-L-methionine-binding site of PRMT1 substantially crippled its
nuclear receptor coactivator activity. Wang et al. (2001) concluded that
their findings reveal arg3 of H4 as a novel methylation site by PRMT1
and indicate that arg3 methylation plays an important role in
transcriptional regulation.

Agalioti et al. (2002) found that only a small subset of lysines in
histones H3 (see 602810) and H4 are acetylated in vivo by the GCN5
acetyltransferase (see 602301) during activation of the interferon-beta
gene (IFNB; 147640). Reconstitution of recombinant nucleosomes bearing
mutations in these lysine residues revealed the cascade of gene
activation via a point-by-point interpretation of the histone code
through the ordered recruitment of bromodomain-containing transcription
complexes. Acetylation of histone H4 lys8 mediates recruitment of the
SWI/SNF complex (see 603111), whereas acetylation of lys9 and lys14 in
histone H3 is critical for the recruitment of TFIID (see 313650). Thus,
the information contained in the DNA address of the enhancer is
transferred to the histone N termini by generating novel adhesive
surfaces required for the recruitment of transcription complexes.

Using deuterium exchange/mass spectrometry coupled with hydrodynamic
measures, Black et al. (2004) demonstrated that CENPA (117139) and
histone H4 form subnucleosomal tetramers that are more compact and
conformationally more rigid than the corresponding tetramers of histones
H3 and H4. Substitution into histone H3 of the domain of CENPA
responsible for compaction was sufficient to direct it to centromeres.
Thus, Black et al. (2004) concluded that the centromere-targeting domain
of CENPA confers a unique structural rigidity to the nucleosomes into
which it assembles, and is likely to have a role in maintaining
centromere identity.

Acetylation of histone H4 on lysine-16 (H4-K16Ac) is a prevalent and
reversible posttranslational chromatin modification in eukaryotes. To
characterize the structural and functional role of this mark,
Shogren-Knaak et al. (2006) used a native chemical ligation strategy to
generate histone H4 that was homogeneously acetylated at K16. The
incorporation of this modified histone into nucleosomal arrays inhibited
the formation of compact 30-nanometer-like fibers and impeded the
ability of chromatin to form cross-fiber interactions. H4-K16Ac also
inhibited the ability of the adenosine triphosphate-utilizing chromatin
assembly and remodeling enzyme ACF to mobilize a mononucleosome,
indicating that this single histone modification modulates both higher
order chromatin structure and functional interactions between a
nonhistone protein and the chromatin fiber.

In a screen for endogenous tumor-associated T-cell responses in a
primary mouse model of prostatic adenocarcinoma, Savage et al. (2008)
identified a naturally arising CD8+ T cell response that is reactive to
a peptide derived from histone H4. Despite the ubiquitous nature of
histones, T cell recognition of histone H4 peptide was specifically
associated with the presence of prostate cancer in these mice. Thus,
Savage et al. (2008) concluded that the repertoire of antigens
recognized by tumor-infiltrating T cells is broader than previously
thought and includes peptides derived from ubiquitous self antigens that
are normally sequestered from immune detection.

Dang et al. (2009) reported an age-associated decrease in yeast Sir2
(see SIRT1, 604479) protein abundance accompanied by an increase in
histone H4 lysine-16 acetylation and loss of histones at specific
subtelomeric regions in replicatively old yeast cells, which results in
compromised transcriptional silencing at these loci. Antagonizing
activities of Sir2 and Sas2, a histone acetyltransferase, regulate the
replicative life span through histone H4 lys16 at subtelomeric regions.
Dang et al. (2009) concluded that this pathway, distinct from existing
aging models for yeast, may represent an evolutionarily conserved
function of sirtuins in regulation of replicative aging by maintenance
of intact telomeric chromatin.

Xu et al. (2010) reported that significant amounts of histone H3.3 (see
601128)-H4 tetramers split in vivo, whereas most H3.1 (see 602810)-H4
tetramers remain intact during mitotic division. Inhibiting DNA
replication-dependent deposition greatly reduced the level of splitting
events, which suggested that (i) the replication-independent H3.3
deposition pathway proceeds largely by cooperatively incorporating 2 new
H3.3-H4 dimers, and (ii) the majority of splitting events occurred
during replication-dependent deposition. Xu et al. (2010) concluded that
'silent' histone modifications within large heterochromatic regions are
maintained by copying modifications from neighboring preexisting
histones without the need for H3-H4 splitting events.

Qi et al. (2010) provided multiple lines of evidence establishing PHF8
(300560) as the first monomethyl histone H4 lysine-20 (H4K20me1)
demethylase, with additional activities towards histone H3K9me1 and me2.
PHF8 is located around the transcriptional start sites of approximately
7,000 RefSeq genes and in gene bodies and intergenic regions. PHF8
depletion resulted in upregulation of H4K20me1 and H3K9me1 at the
transcriptional start site and H3K9me2 in the nontranscriptional start
sites, respectively, demonstrating differential substrate specificities
at different target locations. PHF8 positively regulates gene
expression, which is dependent on its H3K4me3-binding PHD and catalytic
domains. Importantly, patient mutations significantly compromised PHF8
catalytic function. PHF8 regulates cell survival in the zebrafish brain
and jaw development, thus providing a potentially relevant biologic
context for understanding the clinical symptoms associated with PHF8
patients. Lastly, genetic and molecular evidence supported a model
whereby PHF8 regulates zebrafish neuronal cell survival and jaw
development in part by directly regulating the expression of the
homeodomain transcription factor MSX1/MSXB (605558), which functions
downstream of multiple signaling and developmental pathways.

Liu et al. (2010) reported that PHF8, while using multiple substrates,
including H3K9me1/2 and H3K27me2, also functions as an H4K20me1
demethylase. PHF8 is recruited to promoters by its PHD domain based on
interaction with H3K4me2/3 and controls G1-S transition in conjunction
with E2F1, HCF1 (300019), and SET1A (611052), at least in part, by
removing the repressive H4K20me1 mark from a subset of E2F1-regulated
gene promoters. Phosphorylation-dependent PHF8 dismissal from chromatin
in prophase is apparently required for the accumulation of H4K20me1
during early mitosis, which might represent a component of the condensin
II loading process. Accordingly, the HEAT repeat clusters in 2
non-structural maintenance of chromosomes (SMC) condensin II subunits,
NCAPD3 (609276) and NCAPG2 (608532), are capable of recognizing
H4K20me1, and ChIP-Seq analysis demonstrated a significant overlap of
condensin II and H4K20me1 sites in mitotic HeLa cells. Thus, Liu et al.
(2010) concluded that the identification and characterization of an
H4K20me1 demethylase, PHF8, has revealed an intimate link between this
enzyme and 2 distinct events in cell cycle progression.

Fullgrabe et al. (2013) reported that induction of autophagy is coupled
to reduction of histone H4 lysine-16 acetylation (H4K16ac) through
downregulation of the histone acetyltransferase MOF (MYST1; 609912), and
demonstrated that this histone modification regulates the outcome of
autophagy. At a genomewide level, Fullgrabe et al. (2013) found that
H4K16 deactylation is associated predominantly with the downregulation
of autophagy-related genes. Antagonizing H4K16ac downregulation upon
autophagy induction results in the promotion of cell death. Fullgrabe et
al. (2013) concluded that their findings established that alteration in
a specific histone posttranslational modification during autophagy
affects the transcriptional regulation of autophagy-related genes and
initiates a regulatory feedback loop, which serves as a key determinant
of survival versus death responses upon autophagy induction.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Sekulic et al. (2010) reported the crystal structure of a subnucleosomal
heterotetramer, (CENP-A-H4)2 (CENP-A, 117139, in complex with histone
H4), that reveals 3 distinguishing properties encoded by the residues
that comprise the CENP-A targeting domain (CATD): (1) a CENP-A-CENP-A
interface that is substantially rotated relative to the H3-H3 interface;
(2) a protruding loop L1 of the opposite charge as that on H3; and (3)
strong hydrophobic contacts that rigidify the CENP-A-H4 interface.
Residues involved in the CENP-A-CENP-A rotation are required for
efficient incorporation into centromeric chromatin, indicating
specificity for an unconventional nucleosome shape. DNA topologic
analysis indicated that CENP-A-containing nucleosomes are octameric with
conventional left-handed DNA wrapping. Sekulic et al. (2010) concluded
that CENP-A marks centromere location by restructuring the nucleosome
from within its folded histone core.

Elsasser et al. (2012) reported the crystal structures of the DAXX
(603186) histone-binding domain with a histone H3.3-H4 dimer, including
mutants within DAXX and H3.3, together with in vitro and in vivo
functional studies that elucidated the principles underlying H3.3
recognition specificity. Occupying 40% of the histone surface-accessible
area, DAXX wraps around the H3.3-H4 dimer, with complex formation
accompanied by structural transitions in the H3.3-H4 histone fold. DAXX
uses an extended alpha-helical conformation to compete with major
interhistone, DNA, and ASF1 interaction sites. Elsasser et al. (2012)
concluded that their structural studies identified recognition elements
that read out H3.3-specific residues, and functional studies addressed
the contribution of gly90 in H3.3 and glu225 in DAXX to
chaperone-mediated H3.3 variant recognition specificity.

EVOLUTION

Histone IV genes are highly conserved across evolution. Delange and
Smith (1971) noted that, in their 110 amino acids, histone IV genes of
cattle and garden peas differ by only 2 residues.

Heintz et al. (1981) concluded that the human histone genes are
clustered in the genome but are not arranged into recognizable repeating
units. The lack of organization of the human histone genes (as
contrasted with those of invertebrates or of Xenopus laevis) may reflect
the diminished requirement for rapid synthesis of large quantities of
histone proteins during early mammalian development.

Kedes and Maxson (1981) found that the histone genes in man, mouse,
chicken, and toad show a dispersed topology; they are scattered and
separated by long stretches of nonhistone DNA. In an article subtitled
'Paradigm Lost,' the authors referred to 'this newly discovered
diaspora.'

NOMENCLATURE

Marzluff et al. (2002) provided a nomenclature for replication-dependent
histone genes located within the HIST1, HIST2, and HIST3 clusters. The
symbols for these genes all begin with HIST1, HIST2, or HIST3 according
to which cluster they are located in. The H2A, H2B, H3, and H4 genes
were named systematically according to their location within the HIST1,
HIST2, and HIST3 clusters. For example, HIST1H4A is the most telomeric
H4 gene within HIST1, and HIST1H4L (602831) is the most centromeric. In
contrast, the H1 genes, all of which are located within HIST1, were
named according to their mouse homologs. Thus, HIST1H1A (142709) is
homologous to mouse H1a, HIST1H1B (142711) is homologous to mouse H1b,
and so on.

HISTORY

Szabo et al. (1978) presented nucleic acid hybridization data indicating
that chromosome 7 carries gene(s) coding for histone H4 protein.
Steffensen (1979) presented evidence that all 5 histone genes in man are
clustered at 7q2. Yunis and Chandler (1979) located the histone genes to
bands 7q32-36 and the homologous chromosome segments in chimpanzee,
gorilla, and orangutan.

A clone containing a human histone gene cluster in the order
H3-H4-H1-H2A-H2B was isolated by Clark et al. (1981), as cited by
Hentschel and Birnstiel (1981). Sierra et al. (1982) likewise found an
arrangement of the histone genes different from that in the sea urchin
and Drosophila.

Carozzi et al. (1984) isolated an H1 histone gene from a 15-kb human DNA
genomic sequence. The presence of H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 genes in this same
15-kb fragment demonstrated that these genes are clustered.

By study of mouse-human cell hybrids and by in situ hybridization, Green
et al. (1984) showed that H3 and H4 histone genes are on 1q, probably
1q21. From in situ hybridization, Tripputi et al. (1986) concluded that
histone genes map to at least 3 different chromosomes: 1, 6, and 12.
Some may be nonexpressed pseudogenes. They commented that the number of
histone genes is between 100 and 200. The histones have the distinction
of being the only proteins coded by repetitive DNA. Tanguay et al.
(1987) reported in situ hybridization data corroborating those of
Tripputi et al. (1986), using a heterologous probe containing the 5
histone genes of Drosophila. They found that the main concentrations of
grains were at 6p12-q21, 12q11-q22, and 1cen-q25. Allen et al. (1989)
reported the conflicting assignment of histones 3 and 4 to human
chromosome 6.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Chandler et al. (1979); Lichtler et al. (1982); Shogren-Knaak et al.
(2006)
REFERENCE 1. Agalioti, T.; Chen, G.; Thanos, D.: Deciphering the transcriptional
histone acetylation code for a human gene. Cell 111: 381-392, 2002.

2. Albig, W.; Kioschis, P.; Poustka, A.; Meergans, K.; Doenecke, D.
: Human histone gene organization: nonregular arrangement within a
large cluster. Genomics 40: 314-322, 1997.

3. Allen, B.; Ostrer, H.; Stein, J.; Stein, G.: Histone gene clusters
map to chromosomes 1 and 6. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51:
950 only, 1989.

4. Black, B. E.; Foltz, D. R.; Chakravarthy, S.; Luger, K.; Woods,
V. L., Jr.; Cleveland, D. W.: Structural determinants for generating
centromeric chromatin. Nature 430: 578-582, 2004.

5. Carozzi, N.; Marashi, F.; Plumb, M.; Zimmerman, S.; Zimmerman,
A.; Coles, L. S.; Wells, J. R. E.; Stein, G.; Stein, J.: Clustering
of human H1 and core histone genes. Science 224: 1115-1117, 1984.

6. Chandler, M. E.; Kedes, L. H.; Cohn, R. H.; Yunis, J. J.: Genes
coding for histone proteins in man are located on the distal end of
chromosome 7. Science 205: 908-910, 1979.

7. Clark, S. J.; Krieg, P. A.; Wells, J. R. E.: Isolation of a clone
containing human histone genes. Nucleic Acids Res. 9: 1583-1597,
1981.

8. Dang, W.; Steffen, K. K.; Perry, R.; Dorsey, J. A.; Johnson, F.
B.; Shilatifard, A.; Kaeberlein, M.; Kennedy, B. K.; Berger, S. L.
: Histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation regulates cellular lifespan. Nature 459:
802-807, 2009.

9. Delange, R. J.; Smith, E. L.: Histones: structure and function. Ann.
Rev. Biochem. 40: 279-314, 1971.

10. Elsasser, S. J.; Huang, H.; Lewis, P. W.; Chin, J. W.; Allis,
C. D.; Patel, D. J.: DAXX envelops a histone H3.3-H4 dimer for H3.3-specific
recognition. Nature 491: 560-565, 2012.

11. Felsenfeld, G.: Chromatin as an essential part of the transcriptional
mechanism. Nature 355: 219-224, 1992.

12. Foster, E. R.; Downs, J. A.: Histone H2A phosphorylation in DNA
double-strand break repair. FEBS J. 272: 3231-3240, 2005.

13. Fraga, M. F.; Ballestar, E.; Villar-Garea, A.; Boix-Chornet, M.;
Espada, J.; Schotta, G.; Bonaldi, T.; Haydon, C.; Ropero, S.; Petrie,
K.; Iyer, N. G.; Perez-Rosado, A.; and 11 others: Loss of acetylation
at lys16 and trimethylation at lys20 of histone H4 is a common hallmark
of human cancer. Nature Genet. 37: 391-400, 2005.

14. Fullgrabe, J.; Lynch-Day, M. A.; Heldring, N.; Li, W.; Struijk,
R. B.; Ma, Q.; Hermanson, O.; Rosenfeld, M. G.; Klionsky, D. J.; Joseph,
B.: The histone H4 lysine 16 acetyltransferase hMOF regulates the
outcome of autophagy. Nature 500: 468-471, 2013.

15. Green, L.; Van Antwerpen, R.; Stein, J.; Stein, G.; Tripputi,
P.; Emanuel, B.; Selden, J.; Croce, C.: A major human histone gene
cluster on the long arm of chromosome 1. Science 226: 838-840, 1984.

16. Heintz, N.; Zernik, M.; Roeder, R. G.: The structure of the human
histone genes: clustered but not tandemly repeated. Cell 24: 661-668,
1981.

17. Hentschel, C. C.; Birnstiel, M. L.: The organization and expression
of histone gene families. Cell 25: 301-313, 1981.

18. Kedes, L.; Maxson, R.: Histone gene organization: paradigm lost. Nature 2
94: 11-12, 1981.

19. Lichtler, A. C.; Sierra, F.; Clark, S.; Wells, J. R. E.; Stein,
J. L.; Stein, G. S.: Multiple H4 histone mRNAs of HeLa cells are
encoded in different genes. Nature 298: 195-198, 1982.

20. Liu, W.; Tanasa, B.; Tyurina, O. V.; Zhou, T. Y.; Gassmann, R.;
Liu, W. T.; Ohgi, K. A.; Benner, C.; Garcia-Bassets, I.; Aggarwal,
A. K.; Desai, A.; Dorrestein, P. C.; Glass, C. K.; Rosenfeld, M. G.
: PHF8 mediates histone H4 lysine 20 demethylation events involved
in cell cycle progression. Nature 466: 508-512, 2010.

21. Marzluff, W. F.; Gongidi, P.; Woods, K. R.; Jin, J.; Maltais,
L. J.: The human and mouse replication-dependent histone genes. Genomics 80:
487-498, 2002.

22. Qi, H. H.; Sarkissian, M.; Hu, G.-Q.; Wang, Z.; Bhattacharjee,
A.; Gordon, D. B.; Gonzales, M.; Lan, F.; Ongusaha, P. P.; Huarte,
M.; Yaghi, N. K.; Lim, H.; Garcia, B. A.; Brizuela, L.; Zhao, K.;
Roberts, T. M.; Shi, Y.: Histone H4K20/H3K9 demethylase PHF8 regulates
zebrafish brain and craniofacial development. Nature 466: 503-507,
2010.

23. Savage, P. A.; Vosseller, K.; Kang, C.; Larimore, K.; Riedel,
E.; Wojnoonski, K.; Jungbluth, A. A.; Allison, J. P.: Recognition
of a ubiquitous self antigen by prostate cancer-infiltrating CD8+
T lymphocytes. Science 319: 215-220, 2008.

24. Sekulic, N.; Bassett, E. A.; Rogers, D. J.; Black, B. E.: The
structure of (CENP-A-H4)2 reveals physical features that mark centromeres. Nature 467:
347-351, 2010.

25. Shogren-Knaak, M.; Ishii, H.; Sun, J.-M.; Pazin, M. J.; Davie,
J. R.; Peterson, C. L.: Histone H4-K16 acetylation controls chromatin
structure and protein interactions. Science 311: 844-847, 2006.

26. Shogren-Knaak, M.; Ishii, H.; Sun, J.-M.; Pazin, M. J.; Davie,
J. R.; Peterson, C. L.: Histone H4-K16 acetylation controls chromatin
structure and protein interactions. Science 311: 844-847, 2006.

27. Sierra, F.; Lichtler, A.; Marashi, F.; Rickles, R.; Van Dyke,
T.; Clark, S.; Wells, J.; Stein, G.; Stein, J.: Organization of human
histone genes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 79: 1795-1799, 1982.

28. Steffensen, D. M.: Human histone genes mapped to chromosome 7.
(Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 25: 211 only, 1979.

29. Szabo, P.; Yu, L. C.; Borun, T.; Varicchio, F.; Siniscalco, M.;
Prensky, W.: Localization of the histone genes in man. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 22: 359-363, 1978.

30. Tanguay, R. M.; Berube, D.; Gagne, R.: Localization of histone
genes to chromosomes 6, 12, and 1 by in situ hybridization. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 46: 702 only, 1987.

31. Tripputi, P.; Emanuel, B. S.; Croce, C. M.; Green, L. G.; Stein,
G. S.; Stein, J. L.: Human histone genes map to multiple chromosomes. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 3185-3188, 1986.

32. Wang, H.; Huang, Z.-Q.; Xia, L.; Feng, Q.; Erdjument-Bromage,
H.; Strahl, B. D.; Briggs, S. D.; Allis, C. D.; Wong, J.; Tempst,
P.; Zhang, Y.: Methylation of histone H4 at arginine 3 facilitating
transcriptional activation by nuclear hormone receptor. Science 293:
853-857, 2001.

33. Xu, M.; Long, C.; Chen, X.; Huang, C.; Chen, S.; Zhu, B.: Partitioning
of histone H3-H4 tetramers during DNA replication-dependent chromatin
assembly. Science 328: 94-98, 2010.

34. Yunis, J. J.; Chandler, M. E.: Localization of histone genes
to bands 7q32-36 in man and the homologous chromosome segments in
chimpanzee, gorilla, and orangutan. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 25:
220 only, 1979.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/14/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 2/7/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/21/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/6/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/14/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/14/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/25/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/18/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/27/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/10/1998

EDITED alopez: 10/14/2013
alopez: 6/24/2013
mgross: 2/7/2013
mgross: 2/4/2013
alopez: 12/21/2012
alopez: 10/6/2010
mgross: 7/22/2010
alopez: 4/14/2010
wwang: 9/1/2009
alopez: 8/17/2009
terry: 8/14/2009
alopez: 3/25/2008
alopez: 4/24/2006
terry: 4/18/2006
tkritzer: 3/31/2003
alopez: 8/31/2001
terry: 8/27/2001
alopez: 8/26/1998
alopez: 7/14/1998
alopez: 7/10/1998

610276	TITLE *610276 PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL GLYCAN, CLASS X; PIGX
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) is a complex glycolipid that anchors
many proteins to the cell surface. PIGX is a subunit of a GPI
mannosyltransferase complex involved in the synthesis of the core GPI
structure in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Ashida et al., 2005).

CLONING

Ashida et al. (2005) cloned rat Pigx cDNA, which contained an unusual
CTG (leu) initiation codon. The deduced 252-amino acid protein has a
22-amino acid signal peptide, a C-terminal transmembrane region, and 2
N-glycosylation sites. Human and rat Pigx proteins share 77% sequence
identity. Pigx colocalized with an ER marker in transfected CHO cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using coprecipitation experiments, Ashida et al. (2005) determined that
rat Pigx bound Pigm (610273). The expression of Pigm in CHO cells was
very low in the absence of coexpressed Pigx, suggesting that Pigx
stabilizes Pigm.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ashida et al. (2005) determined that the PIGX gene contains 6 exons and
spans 25 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Ashida et al. (2005) mapped the PIGX gene
to chromosome 3q29.

REFERENCE 1. Ashida, H.; Hong, Y.; Murakami, Y.; Shishioh, N.; Sugimoto, N.;
Kim, Y. U.; Maeda, Y.; Kinoshita, T.: Mammalian PIG-X and yeast Pbn1p
are the essential components of glycosylphosphatidylinositol-mannosyltransferase
I. Molec. Biol. Cell 16: 1439-1448, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/23/2006

EDITED carol: 07/23/2006
carol: 7/23/2006

604665	TITLE *604665 COP9, SUBUNIT 3; COPS3
;;SGN3
DESCRIPTION To identify new components of the 26S proteasome, Seeger et al. (1998)
obtained peptide sequences from a 45-kD protein. By micropeptide
sequence analysis and probing of cDNA libraries, Seeger et al. (1998)
isolated a cDNA encoding COPS3, which they termed SGN3, for subunit 3 of
a novel 450-kD signalosome complex that also includes TRIP15 (604508),
COPS5 (604850), GPS1 (601934), and 4 other subunits. Sequence analysis
predicted that COPS3 is a 403-amino acid protein which contains regions
with homology to the 26S proteasome S3 regulatory subunit.
Autoradiographic analysis showed that the complex phosphorylates JUN
(165160), IKBA (164008), and the C-terminal part of the p105 precursor
of NFKB (164011). The 26S proteasome is not a phosphorylation target,
although immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated that the 450-kD
complex has a cytosolic localization, concentrated around the nucleus.

Elsea et al. (1999) reported the localization and partial
characterization of SGN3. They mapped the SGN3 gene to 17p11.2 by
somatic cell hybrid analysis. By analysis of genomic clones, they
further localized the SGN3 gene to the distal end of the Smith-Magenis
syndrome (SMS) critical region (182290), near marker D17S71. Although
SMS patients were haploinsufficient for SGN3, analyses showed that the
SGN3 protein was present at equivalent levels in patient and parental
control cells, and that the COP9 signalosome complex was assembled and
in normal quantities in transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines from
patients. Elsea et al. (1999) concluded that SGN3 probably does not play
a significant role with respect to SMS, although its involvement could
not be ruled out since the importance of the COP9 signalosome in
embryogenesis or differentiation was not well understood.

REFERENCE 1. Elsea, S. H.; Mykytyn, K.; Ferrell, K.; Coulter, K. L.; Das, P.;
Dubiel, W.; Patel, P. I.; Metherall, J. E.: Hemizygosity for the
COP9 signalosome subunit gene, SGN3, in the Smith-Magenis syndrome. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 87: 342-348, 1999.

2. Seeger, M.; Kraft, R.; Ferrell, K.; Bech-Otschir, D.; Dumdey, R.;
Schade, R.; Gordon, C.; Naumann, M.; Dubiel, W.: A novel protein
complex involved in signal transduction possessing similarities to
26S proteasome subunits. FASEB J. 12: 469-478, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/12/2000

CREATED Sonja A. Rasmussen: 3/8/2000

EDITED carol: 10/26/2000
mcapotos: 10/19/2000
terry: 10/12/2000
mgross: 3/8/2000

609787	TITLE *609787 UBIQUITIN-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; UBAP1
;;UBAP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening the expression patterns of ESTs located in a region at
9p22-p21 undergoing loss of heterozygosity in nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(NPC), Yang et al. (1999) identified an EST that is downregulated in
NPC. Using the clone for this EST and 5-prime RACE, Qian et al. (2001)
identified the full-length cDNA sequence, which they designated UBAP1.
The deduced 502-amino acid protein has a predicted molecular mass of 55
kD and contains 2 putative tandem UBA domains at the C terminus, a
coiled-coil domain, 2 possible N-glycosylation sites, 5 PKC
phosphorylation sites, 7 casein kinase II phosphorylation sites, and 3
N-myristoylation sites. Qian et al. (2001) also identified mouse Ubap1.
The human and mouse proteins share 90% sequence identity. Northern blot
analysis of human tissues detected ubiquitous expression of a 2.7-kb
transcript, with highest expression in heart, skeletal muscle, and
liver. RT-PCR of mouse tissues also revealed ubiquitous expression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using RT-PCR and direct sequencing, Qian et al. (2001) screened the NPC
cell line HNE1 and 10 primary NPCs for mutations in the UBAP1 gene. They
found no sequence alterations.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Qian et al. (2001) mapped the UBAP1 gene to
chromosome 9p22-p21.

REFERENCE 1. Qian, J.; Yang, J.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, B.; Wang, J.; Zhou, M.; Tang,
K.; Li, W.; Zeng, Z.; Zhao, X.; Shen, S.; Li, G.: Isolation and characterization
of a novel cDNA, UBAP1, derived from the tumor suppressor locus in
human chromosome 9p21-22. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 127: 613-618,
2001.

2. Yang, J. B.; Tang, X. N.; Deng, L. W.: Detailed deletion mapping
of chromosome 9p21-22 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Chin. J. Oncol. 21:
419-421, 1999. Note: Article in Chinese.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 12/13/2005

EDITED terry: 04/12/2012
carol: 12/13/2005

601685	TITLE *601685 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S6 KINASE, 90-KD, 2; RPS6KA2
;;RIBOSOMAL S6 KINASE 3; RSK3;;
MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE 1C; MAPKAPK1C;;
MAPKAP KINASE 1C
DESCRIPTION Serine/threonine protein kinases in the ribosomal S6 kinase (RSK) family
have been implicated as signaling intermediates in the cellular response
to several growth factors. Moller et al. (1994) described the cloning
and characterization of 3 genes encoding 3 isoforms of ribosomal protein
S6 kinase, which they called HU1 (RPS6KA1; 601684), HU2 (RPS6KA2), and
HU3 (RPS6KA3; 300075). The partial HU2 cDNA (GenBank GENBANK L07598)
encodes a predicted protein containing 2 distinct consensus ATP-binding
site sequences. Northern blot and RNase protection analyses detected
major 7.5-kb and minor 3.5-kb HU2 transcripts in fibroblasts, skeletal
muscle, lymphocytes, and placenta.

Zhao et al. (1995) cloned a full-length cDNA encoding the RPS6KA2
isoform of ribosomal protein S6 kinase, which they designated RSK3. The
deduced 733-amino acid RSK3 protein has 84% and 75% sequence identity
with RSK2 (RPS6KA3) and RSK1 (RPS6KA1), respectively. RSK3 has a unique
N-terminal sequence which contains a putative bipartite nuclear
localization signal. Immunoblot analysis of human cell lysates detected
an 83-kD RSK protein. The authors demonstrated serum-stimulated nuclear
translocation of endogenous RSK3 in HeLa cells. RSK3 exhibited
growth-stimulated autophosphorylation and kinase activity; however, its
relative activity toward several known RSK substrates differed from the
activities of other RSKs. Unlike RSK1, RSK3 was not activated by ERK2
(PRKM1; 176948) in vitro. Northern blot analysis detected a single
6.5-kb RSK3 transcript in all tissues examined, with the highest
expression in lung and skeletal muscle.

Goustin (1998) reported that the RSK3 gene (GenBank GENBANK Z98049,
GENBANK AL022069) contains 217,693 bp from the transcriptional start
site to the polyadenylation signal. The gene has 21 exons, with an
88.1-kb intron between exons 1 and 2.

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Moller et al. (1994) mapped the
RPS6KA2 gene to chromosome 6. Zhao et al. (1995) refined the mapping to
6q27 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Zeniou et al. (2002) determined the expression of the RSK1, RSK2, and
RSK3 genes in various human tissues, during mouse embryogenesis, and in
mouse brain. The 3 RSK mRNAs were expressed in all human tissues and
brain regions tested, supporting functional redundancy. However,
tissue-specific variations in levels suggested that the proteins may
also serve specific roles. The mouse Rsk3 gene was prominently expressed
in the developing neural and sensory tissues, whereas Rsk1 gene
expression was the strongest in various other tissues with high
proliferative activity, suggesting distinct roles during development. In
adult mouse brain, the highest levels of Rsk2 expression were observed
in regions with high synaptic activity, including the neocortex, the
hippocampus, and Purkinje cells. The authors suggested that in these
areas, which are essential to cognitive function and learning, the RSK1
and RSK3 genes may not be able to fully compensate for a lack of RSK2
function.

REFERENCE 1. Goustin, A. S.: Personal Communication. Detroit, Mich.  8/17/1998.

2. Moller, D. E.; Xia, C. H.; Tang, W.; Zhu, A. X.; Jakubowski, M.
: Human rsk isoforms: cloning and characterization of tissue-specific
expression. Am. J. Physiol. 266: C351-C359, 1994.

3. Zeniou, M.; Ding, T.; Trivier, E.; Hanauer, A.: Expression analysis
of RSK gene family members: the RSK2 gene, mutated in Coffin-Lowry
syndrome, is prominently expressed in brain structures essential for
cognitive function and learning. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2929-2940,
2002.

4. Zhao, Y.; Bjorbaek, C.; Weremowicz, S.; Morton, C. C.; Moller,
D. E.: RSK3 encodes a novel pp90rsk isoform with a unique N-terminal
sequence: growth factor-stimulated kinase function and nuclear translocation. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 15: 4353-4363, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 3/31/2004
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 11/17/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/14/1997

EDITED mgross: 03/13/2007
tkritzer: 3/31/2004
carol: 12/8/1998
psherman: 11/17/1998
terry: 7/30/1998
mark: 2/14/1997

610104	TITLE *610104 MICRO RNA 125B1; MIR125B1
;;miRNA125B1;;
MIRN125B1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MicroRNAs, such as MIR125B, are small noncoding RNAs that regulate
target gene expression posttranscriptionally through basepairing with
their target mRNAs. MIR125B1 and MIR125B2 (610105) both encode
precursors of the same mature MIR125B sequence, but the precursors
differ in the sequences flanking the mature MIR125B sequence (Lee et
al., 2005).

CLONING

Using synthetic siRNAs designed against the loop region of both MIR125B1
and MIR125B2, Lee et al. (2005) determined that MIR125B2 was the source
of most of the miR125b they detected in human cell lines.

Using quantitative real-time PCR, Sonkoly et al. (2007) found ubiquitous
but variable expression of miR125B in human tissues. Highest expression
was in prostate, heart, cervix, brain, and bladder.

GENE FUNCTION

Using microarray analysis, Ciafre et al. (2005) found that expression of
MIR125B1 was significantly upregulated in primary glioblastomas compared
with normal peripheral brain tissue.

Using microarray analysis, van Rooij et al. (2006) identified miR125B
among a group of miRNAs upregulated in 2 independent mouse models of
cardiac hypertrophy. Northern blot analysis showed increased expression
of miR125B in idiopathic end-stage failing human hearts.

Laneve et al. (2007) found that MIRN9 (see 611186), MIRN125A (611191),
and MIRN125B were upregulated in a human neuroblastoma cell line by
retinoic acid. They identified the mRNA encoding t-NTRK3, a truncated
isoform of NTRK3 (191316), as a target of the 3 miRNAs. The 3-prime UTR
of the t-NTRK3 transcript has a binding site for MIRN9 and another for
both MIRN125A and MIRN125B, which share the same seed sequence. These
miRNAs repressed t-NTRK3 expression in an additive manner, and
downregulation of t-NTRK3 was critical for regulating neuroblastoma cell
growth. Consistent with their function, MIRN9, MIRN125A, and MIRN125B
were downmodulated in primary neuroblastoma tumors.

Using microarray analysis and quantitative real-time PCR, Sonkoly et al.
(2007) found that expression of miR125B was decreased in psoriasis (see
177900) and atopic eczema (see 603165) compared with normal human skin.

To investigate the functional consequences of heterozygous mutations in
ATM (607585), homozygous mutations in which cause ataxia-telangiectasia
(AT; 208900), Smirnov and Cheung (2008) compared the gene and microRNA
expression phenotypes of noncarriers, AT carriers, and AT patients. The
authors found that some expression phenotypes are more similar between
noncarriers and AT carriers compared to AT patients, as expected for a
recessive disorder. However, for some expression phenotypes, AT carriers
are more similar to the patients than to the noncarriers. Analysis of
one of these expression phenotypes, TNFSF4 (603594) level, allowed
Smirnov and Cheung (2008) to uncover a regulatory pathway in which ATM
regulates TNFSF4 expression through MIRN125B. In AT carriers and AT
patients, this pathway is disrupted. As a result, the level of MIRN125B
is lower and the level of its target gene, TNFSF4, is higher than in
noncarriers. A decreased level of MIRN125B is associated with breast
cancer, and an elevated level of TNFSF4 is associated with
atherosclerosis. Thus, Smirnov and Cheung (2008) concluded that their
findings provided a mechanistic suggestion for the increased risk of
breast cancer and heart disease in AT carriers.

Le et al. (2009) identified highly conserved miRNA response elements in
the 3-prime UTRs of zebrafish and human p53 (TP53; 191170) transcripts
and showed that MIR125B bound directly to these elements. MIR125B
repressed translation of endogenous p53, reduced expression of p53
target genes, and countered drug-induced apoptosis in human cells.
Knockdown of mir125b in zebrafish embryos resulted in severe
developmental defects, particularly accumulation of dead cells in the
brain, and loss of mir125b increased p53 protein and p53-dependent
apoptosis. Treatment of zebrafish embryos with DNA-damaging agents
resulted in downregulation of mir125b and a rapid increase in p53
protein. Le et al. (2009) concluded that MIR125B is an important
negative regulator of p53 and p53-induced apoptosis during development
and during the stress response.

MAPPING

Lee et al. (2005) stated that the MIRN125B1 gene maps to chromosome 11
and is located in the exon of an uncharacterized gene.

Ciafre et al. (2005) stated that the MIR125B1 gene maps to chromosome
11q24.1, where it lies in a cluster with the LET7A2 (612142) and MIR100
(613186) genes.

ANIMAL MODEL

Bousquet et al. (2010) found that inoculation of mice with
Mir125b-overexpressing hematopoietic mouse fetal liver cells resulted in
an elevated number of neutrophils, monocytes, and lymphocytes and
macrocytic anemia. Within 12 to 29 weeks posttansplantation, half of the
inoculated mice succumbed to a hematologic malignancy, including
myeloproliferative neoplasm, B-cell acute lymphoid leukemia (B-ALL), and
T-cell acute lymphoid leukemia (T-ALL). The type of leukemia appeared to
be related to the level of Mir125b expression, with lower expression in
T-ALL and higher expression in myeloid neoplasm. Overexpression of
Mir125b also accelerated the development of BCR (151410)/ABL
(189980)-induced leukemia in mice.

REFERENCE 1. Bousquet, M.; Harris, M. H.; Zhou, B.; Lodish, H. F.: MicroRNA
miR-125b causes leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 107: 21558-21563,
2010.

2. Ciafre, S. A.; Galardi, S.; Mangiola, A.; Ferracin, M.; Liu, C.-G.;
Sabatino, G.; Negrini, M.; Maira, G.; Croce, C. M.; Farace, M. G.
: Extensive modulation of a set of microRNAs in primary glioblastoma. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 334: 1351-1358, 2005.

3. Laneve, P.; Di Marcotullio, L.; Gioia, U.; Fiori, M. E.; Ferretti,
E.; Gulino, A.; Bozzoni, I.; Caffarelli, E.: The interplay between
microRNAs and the neurotrophin receptor tropomyosin-related kinase
C controls proliferation of human neuroblastoma cells. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 104: 7957-7962, 2007.

4. Le, M. T. N.; Teh, C.; Shyh-Chang, N.; Xie, H.; Zhou, B.; Korzh,
V.; Lodish, H. F.; Lim, B.: MicroRNA-125b is a novel negative regulator
of p53. Genes Dev. 23: 862-876, 2009.

5. Lee, Y. S.; Kim, H. K.; Chung, S.; Kim, K.-S.; Dutta, A.: Depletion
of human micro-RNA miR-125b reveals that it is critical for the proliferation
of differentiated cells but not for the downregulation of putative
targets during differentiation. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 16635-16641,
2005.

6. Smirnov, D. A.; Cheung, V. G.: ATM gene mutations result in both
recessive and dominant expression phenotypes of genes and microRNAs. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 83: 243-253, 2008. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet.
83: 657 only, 2008.

7. Sonkoly, E.; Wei, T.; Janson, P. C. J.; Saaf, A.; Lundeberg, L.;
Tengvall-Linder, M.; Norstedt, G.; Alenius, H.; Homey, B.; Scheynius,
A.; Stahle, M.; Pivarcsi, A.: MicroRNAs: novel regulators involved
in the pathogenesis of psoriasis? PLoS One 7: e610, 2007. Note:
Electronic Article.

8. van Rooij, E.; Sutherland, L. B.; Liu, N.; Williams, A. H.; McAnally,
J.; Gerard, R. D.; Richardson, J. A.; Olson, E. N.: A signature pattern
of stress-responsive microRNAs that can evoke cardiac hypertrophy
and heart failure. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 18255-18260, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 06/03/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/28/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/16/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/8/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/30/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/6/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/24/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/10/2006

EDITED mgross: 06/03/2013
terry: 11/30/2010
mgross: 12/17/2009
mgross: 9/16/2009
terry: 8/28/2009
mgross: 4/21/2009
terry: 4/16/2009
carol: 12/4/2008
alopez: 9/17/2008
terry: 9/8/2008
mgross: 4/30/2008
terry: 4/30/2008
mgross: 7/11/2007
mgross: 7/10/2007
terry: 7/6/2007
mgross: 2/7/2007
mgross: 1/24/2007
wwang: 5/16/2006
wwang: 5/10/2006

601155	TITLE *601155 MINOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY ANTIGEN HA-1; HMHA1
;;HISTOCOMPATIBILITY (MINOR) HA-1;;
HLA-HA1;;
KIAA0223
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cytotoxic T lymphocytes directed against minor histocompatibility
antigens of the host were demonstrated in blood from recipients of bone
marrow from donors who were genotypically HLA identical. Clones of such
cytotoxic T cells were isolated from lymphocyte populations in the blood
of patients with severe graft-versus-host disease (GVHD; see 614395).
These clones were used as reagents to identify 5 nonsex-linked minor
histocompatibility antigens, designated HA-1, -2 (600642) , -3, -4, and
-5 by van Els et al. (1992). Most of the cytotoxic-T-cell clones
isolated from various patients reacted against HA-1 (van Els et al.,
1992). Goulmy et al. (1996) stated that for immune recognition, the
HA-1, -2, -4, and -5 antigens must be presented to cytotoxic T cells by
the major histocompatibility antigen HLA-A2. In this way, they behave
like antigens recognized in an HLA-restricted fashion. The HA-1 antigen
is present in 69% of normal people who express HLA-A2, whereas the
frequencies of the 3 others in this set of HLA-A2-restricted minor
histocompatibility antigens are either high (95% for HA-2); or low (16%
of HA-4 and 7% for HA-5). The HLA-1-restricted minor histocompatibility
antigen HA-3 occurs in 88% of persons positive for HLA-A1. HA-1, -2, -4,
and -5 are inherited independently of the HLA genes; each of them is
encoded by a single gene, and none has a locus within the HLA region
(Schreuder et al., 1993).

GENE FUNCTION

To investigate whether mismatching of minor histocompatibility antigens
contributes to acute GVHD in recipients of genotypically HLA-identical
bone marrow, Goulmy et al. (1996) studied 148 bone marrow recipients and
their sib donors. Fifty pairs were positive for HLA-A1, 117 were
positive for HLA-A2, and 19 were positive for both. The pairs were typed
with cytotoxic-T-cell clones specific for HA-1, -2, -3, -4, and -5. A
mismatch of only HA-1 was significantly correlated with GVHD of grade II
or higher in adults.

Den Haan et al. (1998) identified HA-1 as a nonapeptide derived from a
partial cDNA sequence, designated KIAA0223, derived from the acute
myelogenous leukemia KG-1. HA-1 has the amino acid sequence VLHDDLLEA,
termed HA-1(H). A single amino acid substitution of arginine for
histidine leads to HA-1-negative status, termed HA-1(R). Den Haan et al.
(1998) found that HA-1(H) is presented by its recognizing antigen,
HLA-A*0201, while HA-1(R) is not. The binding affinity of the HA-1(R)
peptide for HLA-A*0201 is 1/12 that of HA-1(H). The authors concluded
that HA-1(R) is a null allele and that only bone marrow transplantation
from an HA-1(R/R) donor to an HA-1(H/H) or HA-1(H/R) recipient, and not
the reverse, would be significantly associated with GVHD. Den Haan et
al. (1998) suggested that HA-1 typing before bone marrow transplantation
of HLA-matched donor-recipient combinations would improve bone marrow
donor selection and prediction of HA-1-induced GVHD.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kaminski et al. (2000) determined that the HA-1 gene contains 23 exons
and spans 16 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1996) mapped the KIAA0223
gene to chromosome 19. Kaminski et al. (2000) mapped the HA-1 gene to
chromosome 19p13.3 based on sequence identity shared with a BAC clone
mapped to 19p13.3.

REFERENCE 1. den Haan, J. M. M.; Meadows, L. M.; Wang, W.; Pool, J.; Blokland,
E.; Bishop, T. L.; Reinhardus, C.; Shabanowitz, J.; Offringa, R.;
Hunt, D. F.; Engelhard, V. H.; Goulmy, E.: The minor histocompatibility
antigen HA-1: a diallelic gene with a single amino acid polymorphism. Science 279:
1054-1057, 1998.

2. Goulmy, E.; Schipper, R.; Pool, J.; Blokland, E.; Falkenburg, J.
H. F.; Vossen, J.; Gratwohl, A.; Vogelsang, G. B.; van Houwelingen,
H. C.; van Rood, J. J.: Mismatches of minor histocompatibility antigens
between HLA-identical donors and recipients and the development of
graft-versus-host disease after bone marrow transplantation. New
Eng. J. Med. 334: 281-285, 1996.

3. Kaminski, W. E.; Piehler, A.; Schmitz, G.: Genomic organization
of the human cholesterol-responsive ABC transporter ABCA7: tandem
linkage with the minor histocompatibility antigen HA-1 gene. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 278: 782-789, 2000.

4. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Ohira, M.; Kawarabayasi, Y.;
Ohara, O.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Miyajima, N.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VI. The coding
sequences of 80 new genes (KIAA0201-KIAA0280) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from cell line KG-1 and brain. DNA Res. 3: 321-329,
1996.

5. Schreuder, G. M. T.; Pool, J.; Blokland, E.; van Els, C.; Bakker,
A.; van Rood, J. J.; Goulmy, E.: A genetic analysis of human minor
histocompatibility antigens demonstrates Mendelian segregation independent
of HLA. Immunogenetics 38: 98-105, 1993.

6. van Els, C. A.; D'Amaro, J.; Pool, J.; Blokland, E.; Bakker, A.;
van Elsen, P. J.; van Rood, J. J.; Goulmy, E.: Immunogenetics of
human minor histocompatibility antigens: their polymorphism and immunodominance. Immunogenetics 35:
161-165, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/3/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/12/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/25/1996

EDITED mgross: 12/16/2011
carol: 3/20/2009
carol: 7/3/2002
carol: 10/26/1999
carol: 8/26/1999
alopez: 2/12/1998
terry: 5/24/1996
terry: 4/5/1996
mark: 3/25/1996

300344	TITLE *300344 MELANOMA ANTIGEN, FAMILY A, 11; MAGEA11
;;MAGE11
DESCRIPTION The MAGEA family consists of 12 genes (MAGEA1 to MAGEA12), of which 6,
MAGEA1 (300016), MAGEA2 (300173), MAGEA3 (300174), MAGEA4 (300175),
MAGEA6 (300176), and MAGEA12 (300177), are expressed in melanomas and
other cancers. For further background information on the MAGEA family,
see 300016.

CLONING

De Plaen et al. (1994) identified the 12 MAGEA genes. MAGEA11 appeared
to be a weakly expressed member of the family.

MAPPING

By analysis of cell hybrids, ordered YACs, and cosmids, Rogner et al.
(1995) localized the MAGEA cluster to Xq28. They showed that the 12
genes are arranged in 3 clusters within 3.5 Mb.

See 300016 for a discussion of the high frequency of genes on the X
chromosome encoding proteins with the MAGE domain as well as other
cancer-testis antigen genes (Ross et al., 2005).

REFERENCE 1. De Plaen, E.; Arden, K.; Traversari, C.; Gaforio, J. J.; Szikora,
J.-P.; De Smet, C.; Brasseur, F.; van der Bruggen, P.; Lethe, B.;
Lurquin, C.; Brasseur, R.; Chomez, P.; De Backer, O.; Cavenee, W.;
Boon, T.: Structure, chromosomal localization, and expression of
12 genes of the MAGE family. Immunogenetics 40: 360-369, 1994.

2. Rogner, U. C.; Wilke, K.; Steck, E.; Korn, B.; Poustka, A.: The
melanoma antigen gene (MAGE) family is clustered in the chromosomal
band Xq28. Genomics 29: 725-731, 1995.

3. Ross, M. T.; Grafham, D. V.; Coffey, A. J.; Scherer, S.; McLay,
K.; Muzny, D.; Platzer, M.; Howell, G. R.; Burrows, C.; Bird, C. P.;
Frankish, A.; Lovell, F. L.; and 270 others: The DNA sequence of
the human X chromosome. Nature 434: 325-337, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/21/2005

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/7/2001

EDITED alopez: 03/24/2005
terry: 3/21/2005
mgross: 6/7/2001

610328	TITLE *610328 RUN AND FYVE DOMAINS-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; RUFY2
;;KIAA1537
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned RUFY2, which they designated
KIAA1537. RT-PCR ELISA detected variable expression in all adult and
fetal tissues examined. Highest expression was in ovary, whole adult
brain, and testis, and lowest expression was in pancreas, spleen, fetal
liver, and fetal whole brain. RUFY2 was expressed in all specific adult
brain regions examined, with highest expression in amygdala.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to RUFY1 (610327),
followed by screening prostate cancer and neuroblastoma cDNA libraries,
Yang et al. (2002) cloned RUFY2. The deduced 606-amino acid protein has
an N-terminal RUN domain, 2 central coiled-coil domains, and a
C-terminal FYVE domain containing 2 zinc-binding sites and an SH3 domain
recognition motif (PxxPxP). Northern blot analysis detected RUFY2
expression in brain, lung, and testis only.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitation analysis, Yang et al. (2002) demonstrated that
RUFY2 directly interacted with ETK (EPHA3; 179611) following their
coexpression in a mouse myoblast cell line.

Majercak et al. (2006) showed that expression of RUFY2 reduced secretion
of beta-amyloid from human embryonic kidney cells stably expressing APP
(104760). The RUFY2 gene maps to a region of chromosome 10q that has
been linked to both late-onset Alzheimer disease (AD6; 605526) and
elevated plasma levels of pathogenic beta-amyloid.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the RUFY2
gene to chromosome 10 (TMAP WI-11265). By genomic sequence analysis,
Majercak et al. (2006) mapped the RUFY2 gene to chromosome 10q21.

REFERENCE 1. Majercak, J.; Ray, W. J.; Espeseth, A.; Simon, A.; Shi, X.-P.;
Wolffe, C.; Getty, K.; Marine, S.; Stec, E.; Ferrer, M.; Strulovici,
B.; Bartz, S.; and 17 others: LRRTM3 promotes processing of amyloid-precursor
protein by BACE1 and is a positional candidate gene for late-onset
Alzheimer's disease. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 17967-17972, 2006.

2. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 143-150, 2000.

3. Yang, J.; Kim, O.; Wu, J.; Qiu, Y.: Interaction between tyrosine
kinase Etk and a RUN domain- and FYVE domain-containing protein RUFY1:
a possible role of ETK in regulation of vesicle trafficking. J. Biol.
Chem. 277: 30219-30226, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/15/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/16/2006

EDITED wwang: 03/21/2007
terry: 3/15/2007
mgross: 8/16/2006

182100	TITLE +182100 FUCOSYLTRANSFERASE 2; FUT2
;;SECRETOR FACTOR; Se
NORWALK VIRUS INFECTION, RESISTANCE TO, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The classic human secretor locus (Se) FUT2 encodes
alpha-(1,2)fucosyltransferase, which regulates expression of the Lewis
ABO(H) histo-blood group antigens on the surface of epithelial cells and
in body fluids and determines the secretion status of the ABO antigens
(see 110300). Secretor status of this polymorphic protein was used by
Mohr (1951) to provide the first autosomal linkage in humans between
secretor factor and the Lutheran blood group (see 111200) (summary by
Hazra et al., 2008).

The secretor factor (Se) might be considered either a physiologic trait
or an honorary blood group (VAM). The individual who is a so-called
secretor has demonstrable ABH blood group antigen in the saliva and
other body fluids; the nonsecretor does not. Secretor is dominant.

CLONING

Rouquier et al. (1995) used the FUT1 cDNA to screen chromosome 19 cosmid
libraries in search of the FUT2 gene. One cosmid was isolated that
contained 2 distinct segments that cross-hybridized with FUT1.

Kelly et al. (1995) found that SEC2 encodes a predicted 332-amino acid
polypeptide and a longer isoform that shares 68% sequence identity with
the COOH-terminal 292 residues of human FUT1.

GENE FUNCTION

The secretor locus is linked to the Lutheran blood group locus (111200)
and the myotonic dystrophy locus (DMPK; 605377). Coupled with the
ability to determine the secretor status of the fetus from amniotic
fluid (Harper et al., 1971), this linkage potentially allows prenatal
diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy (DM; 160900). Oriol et al. (1981)
suggested that the Se locus and the Hh (FUT1) locus (211100) may be
closely linked. This is a condition of their model. Classically, the Se
gene is considered to be a regulatory gene controlling expression of the
structural gene H in external secretions. Under this hypothesis, Bombay
(h-h) persons should not be able to express the Se gene. Oriol et al.
(1981) analyzed statistically the 44 published Bombay pedigrees and
concluded that in fact there is no suppression of Se in Bombay persons.
Furthermore, they found a lod score of 12.9 at 1% recombination for
linkage of Bombay and secretor. They suggested that Hh and Se are both
structural genes, each coding for a 2-alpha-L-fucosyltransferase.

Le Pendu et al. (1982) presented evidence that the fucosyltransferase of
epithelial origin, coded by the Se gene, is able to transform both type
1 and type 2 natural substrate, whereas the enzyme of mesodermal origin,
coded by the H gene (mutant in the Bombay phenotype), works
preferentially on type 2 natural substrate. The close linkage of the 2
genes is of interest. The possible existence of 2 alpha (1-to-2)
fucosyltransferases was first suggested on the basis of stereochemical
differences between the 2 precursor chains, types 1 and 2. Gedde-Dahl et
al. (1984) found linkage of Se and APOE (107741)--peak lod score 3.3 at
recombination fraction 0.08 in males and 1.36 at 0.22 in females, and
linkage of APOE and Lu with lod score 4.52 at zero recombination in
sexes combined. C3-APOE linkage gave lod score 4.0 at theta 0.18 in
males but 0.04 at theta 0.45 in females. A summarizing map was given
(Gedde-Dahl et al., 1984; see their Figure 3).

Kudo et al. (1996) reviewed briefly the biosynthetic pathways involved
in synthesis of Lewis blood group antigens and secretion of ABH into
saliva.

MAPPING

The Lutheran secretor linkage was the first autosomal linkage identified
in man. It was first discovered by Mohr (1951) as a linkage of the
Lutheran blood group and the 'recessive' Lewis blood group. This was
recognized as the Lutheran-secretor linkage (Mohr, 1954) after the
ingenious interpretation by Grubb (1953) of the interactions between the
Lewis (FUT3) locus (111100) determining the presence/absence of Lewis
substance in the saliva and on red cells and the Se locus determining
secretion of ABH blood group substances in the saliva and Le(a) or Le(b)
expression in red cells. Discovery of the secretor-C3 linkage in Mohr's
department (Eiberg et al. (1983)) and the assignment of the C3 locus
(120700) to chromosome 19 indicated that this historic linkage group is
on that chromosome.

Rouquier et al. (1995) observed that a 100-kb cosmid contig, localized
to 19q13.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization, contained FUT1 and 2
FUT1-related sequences, termed SEC1 and SEC2 for secretor candidate 1
and 2. SEC1 and SEC2 were separated by 12 kb and were 65.5 kb and 35 kb
apart, respectively, from the FUT1 gene. They concluded that SEC1 was a
pseudogene with translational frameshifts and termination codons
interrupting potential open reading frames that would otherwise share
primary sequence similarity with FUT1.

Reguigne-Arnould et al. (1995) pointed out that 5 of the 7
fucosyltransferase genes cloned to that time had been mapped to 2
clusters, 1 with FUT1 and FUT2 on 19q and the other with FUT6 (136836),
FUT3, and FUT5 (136835) on 19p. Linkage studies using microsatellite
markers and comparison of genetic and physical maps suggested that FUT1
and FUT2 loci are located on 19q13.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Data on gene frequencies of allelic variants were tabulated by
Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

Kelly et al. (1995) found that approximately 20% of randomly selected
individuals were apparently homozygous for an enzyme-inactivating W143X
nonsense mutation (182100.0001) at the FUT2 locus, in correspondence
with the frequency of the nonsecretor phenotype in most human
populations. Furthermore, each of 6 unrelated nonsecretor individuals
were apparently homozygous for this null allele.

Kudo et al. (1996) discussed the possibility of a selective advantage
accounting for the development of different inactivating mutations of
the SEC2 gene in different ethnic groups (see 182100.0002). The absence
or presence of Lewis antigens, proven to be the product of Le and Se
genes, and antigen expression in digestive organs, may be biologically
much more important than expression in erythrocytes.

Koda et al. (1996) reviewed the molecular basis for the
secretor-negative phenotype in Japanese. The nonsense mutation of the
FUT2 gene, 428G-A (182100.0001), found in Caucasians and symbolized se1,
was not found. They found, however, a missense mutation, 385A-T
(182100.0002), designated se2, and 2 nonsense mutations (571C-T, se3,
and 628C-T, se4) in the Japanese Se enzyme-deficient allele. In
addition, Koda et al. (1996) found a fusion gene, which consisted of the
5-prime region of the pseudogene (FUT2P) and the 3-prime region of the
functional FUT2 gene, as an Se enzyme-deficient allele (se5). The DNA
sequence analysis of the fusion gene indicated that the crossover region
corresponded to regions between bases 253 and 313 of the pseudogene and
between bases 211 and 271 of the FUT2 gene. The findings suggested that
the fusion gene was generated by homologous but unequal crossover. A
population study on 141 randomly selected Japanese individuals indicated
to Koda et al. (1996) that se2 is a common Se enzyme-deficient allele in
the Japanese population and that secretor-deficient alleles are race
specific. Liu et al. (1999) investigated 5 populations from 3 ethnic
groups in East Asia for the fusion gene. The fusion gene was found at a
high frequency in 2 Japanese populations (0.0551 in Okinawa and 0.0792
in Akita), and at a very low frequency in a Korean population (0.0063 in
Seoul). No individuals with the fusion gene were identified among 292
patients from 2 Chinese populations. The authors suggested that the
fusion gene likely emerged from within the Japanese population, given
its high frequency in the Japanese but rare occurrence in neighboring
populations.

The common nonsecretor allele found in Caucasians (182100.0001) is
virtually absent in Taiwanese and mainland Chinese. In several groups
indigenous to Taiwan, the Le(a+b-) nonsecretor phenotype has been found,
as reviewed by Yu et al. (1999).

Koda et al. (1997) found that a 725T-G transversion in FUT1
(211100.0004), which results in an amino acid change, leu242 to arg, and
complete deletion of FUT2 (182100.0003) are responsible for the classic
Bombay phenotype.

Lindesmith et al. (2003) found that individuals who are homozygous for
the FUT2 G428A allele (182100.0001) in the ABH histo-blood group family
do not express the H type-1 oligosaccharide ligand required for Norwalk
virus binding. The FUT2 susceptibility allele is fully penetrant against
Norwalk virus infection as none of these individuals developed an
infection after challenge, regardless of dose. Of the susceptible
population that encoded a functional FUT2 gene, a portion was resistant
to infection, suggesting that a memory immune response or some other
unidentified factor also affords protection from Norwalk virus
infection.

Hazra et al. (2008) found a strong association between dbSNP rs492602 in
FUT2 and positive plasma vitamin B12 levels in a genomewide scan and an
independent replication sample from the Nurses' Health Study. Women
homozygous for the dbSNP rs492602 G allele had higher B12 levels. This
allele is in strong linkage disequilibrium with the FUT2 nonsecretor
variant encoding W143X (182100.0001), suggesting a plausible mechanism
for altered B12 absorption and plasma levels. This association was found
in a cohort of healthy women of European descent.

Tanaka et al. (2009) performed a genomewide association analysis to
identify genetic factors affecting circulating vitamin B12 levels and
identified dbSNP rs602662 in the FUT2 gene (p = 2.83 x 10(-20)) in
Italians in the InCHIANTI (1,175 participants), SardiNIA (1,115
participants), and BLSA (640 participants) studies. The top locus was
replicated in an independent sample from the 687 participants in the
Progetto Nutrizione study.

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the FUT2
gene and susceptibility to Crohn disease, see 266600.

ANIMAL MODEL

Falk et al. (1995) created transgenic mice with the human Le gene and
showed that Helicobacter pylori, a causative agent of gastric disorders,
attached to gastric epithelial cells in the transgenic mice but not in
their normal littermates. This implies that Le/Le individuals may have
an advantage in avoiding H. pylori infection (600263).

Using gene targeting in embryonic stem cells, Domino et al. (2001)
generated strains of mice that were deficient in Fut2. Fut2-null mice
developed normally and exhibited no gross phenotypic abnormalities.
Using immunohistochemistry, the authors observed that Fut2-null mice no
longer exhibited the wildtype expression pattern of
alpha(1,2)-fucosylated glycans in the uterine epithelium. However,
normal fertility was observed. Domino et al. (2001) concluded that
alpha(1,2)-fucosylated glycans play nonessential roles in blastocyst
implantation or sperm function in mice.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SECRETOR/NONSECRETOR POLYMORPHISM
NORWALK VIRUS INFECTION, RESISTANCE TO, INCLUDED;;
VITAMIN B12 PLASMA LEVEL QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 1, INCLUDED
FUT2, TRP143TER

Kelly et al. (1995) found that a nonsense mutation involving codon 143
(numbered from the putative initiator methionine of the short FUT2
protein) is responsible for the nonsecretor phenotype. See also Rouquier
et al. (1995). The nonsense mutation was due to a G-to-A transition at
nucleotide 428. However, the trp143-to-ter mutation found in ethnic
groups other than Japanese was not found in any of 45 Japanese
nonsecretors. Instead, 2 novel mutations, a C-to-T transition at
nucleotide 357 and an A-to-T transversion at nucleotide 385 were found
in Japanese nonsecretors. The 357C-T mutation was silent insofar as
amino acid substitution was concerned; the 385A-T missense mutation
(182100.0002) resulted in inactivation of the
alpha(1,2)fucosyltransferase.

Lindesmith et al. (2003) showed that the nonsecretor status in
homozygosity prevents expression of the H type-1 oligosaccharide ligand
and is fully protective from Norwalk virus infection.

Hazra et al. (2008) found that 3 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the
FUT2 gene, including dbSNP rs601338, which encodes the W143X variant,
are in strong linkage disequilibrium and are strongly associated with
plasma levels of vitamin B12 as a quantitative trait (B12QTL1; 612542).
Hazra et al. (2008) considered the W143X polymorphism to be a plausible
causal variant for this association.

In 1,174 Crohn disease (CD; 266600) cases and 357 controls, McGovern et
al. (2010) found association of the FUT2 W143X polymorphism and CD (p =
2.6 x 10(-5)).

.0002
SECRETOR/NONSECRETOR POLYMORPHISM, JAPANESE TYPE
FUT2, ILE129PHE

In the SE gene, designated SEC2 by Rouquier et al. (1995), Kudo et al.
(1996) found homozygosity for an A-to-T transversion at nucleotide 385,
resulting in a missense substitution ile129-to-phe in all Japanese
nonsecretor individuals. They referred to the mutant allele in Japanese
nonsecretors as sej; sej/sej homozygosity accounted for more than 15% of
the Japanese population. The inactivated sej allele had a frequency of
39% in the Japanese. Kudo et al. (1996) discussed the possibility of a
selective advantage accounting for the development of different
inactivating mutations of the SEC2 gene in different ethnic groups.

.0003
BOMBAY PHENOTYPE, CLASSIC
FUT2, DEL

In 3 unrelated individuals with the Bombay phenotype, Koda et al. (1997)
found that a 725T-G transversion in FUT1 (211100.0004), which results in
an amino acid change, leu242 to arg, and complete deletion of FUT2 were
responsible for the classic Bombay phenotype. The individuals lacked the
H antigen not only on blood cells but also in saliva, which prompted
Koda et al. (1997) to investigate the FUT2 gene in these persons. The
mutations in both genes were homozygous. The results of analyses of FUT1
and FUT2 by Koda et al. (1997) suggested that the homozygosity for these
2 unusual and linked genetic mutations is common in individuals with the
classic Bombay phenotype.

Koda et al. (2000) isolated the junction region of the deletion of FUT2
and found evidence that the deletion was generated by Alu-Alu
recombination.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Gibson and Ferguson-Smith (1980); Lewis et al. (1977); Race and Sanger
(1968)
REFERENCE 1. Domino, S. E.; Zhang, L.; Gillespie, P. J.; Saunders, T. L.; Lowe,
J. B.: Deficiency of reproductive tract alpha(1,2)fucosylated glycans
and normal fertility in mice with targeted deletions of the FUT1 or
FUT2 alpha(1,2)fucosyltransferase locus. Molec. Cell. Biol. 21:
8336-8345, 2001.

2. Eiberg, H.; Mohr, J.; Staub Nielsen, L.; Simonsen, N.: Genetics
and linkage relationships of the C3 polymorphism: discovery of C3-Se
linkage and assignment of LES-C3-DM-Se-PEPD-Lu synteny to chromosome
19. Clin. Genet. 24: 159-170, 1983.

3. Falk, P. G.; Bry, L.; Holgersson, J.; Gordon, J. I.: Expression
of a human alpha-1,3/4-fucosyltransferase in the pit cell lineage
of FVB/N mouse stomach results in production of Leb-containing glycoconjugates:
a potential transgenic mouse model for studying helicobacter pylori
infection. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 1515-1519, 1995.

4. Gedde-Dahl, T., Jr.; Olaisen, B.; Teisberg, P.; Wilhelmy, M. C.;
Mevag, B.; Helland, R.: The locus for apolipoprotein E (apoE) is
close to the Lutheran (Lu) blood group locus on chromosome 19. Hum.
Genet. 67: 178-182, 1984.

5. Gibson, S. L. M.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.: The secretor status of
the foetus. Clin. Genet. 18: 97-102, 1980.

6. Grubb, R.: Zur Genetik des Lewis-Systems. Naturwissenschaften 21:
560-561, 1953.

7. Harper, P. S.; Bias, W. B.; Hutchinson, J. R.; McKusick, V. A.
: ABH secretor status of the fetus: a genetic marker identifiable
by amniocentesis. J. Med. Genet. 8: 438-440, 1971.

8. Hazra, A.; Kraft, P.; Selhub, J.; Giovannucci, E. L.; Thomas, G.;
Hoover, R. N.; Chanock, S. J.; Hunter, D. J.: Common variants of
FUT2 are associated with plasma vitamin B12 levels. Nature Genet. 40:
1160-1162, 2008.

9. Kelly, R. J.; Rouquier, S.; Giorgi, D.; Lennon, G. G.; Lowe, J.
B.: Sequence and expression of a candidate for the human secretor
blood group alpha (1,2)fucosyltransferase gene (FUT2): Homozygosity
for an enzyme-inactivating nonsense mutation commonly correlates with
the non-secretor phenotype. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 4640-4649, 1995.

10. Koda, Y.; Soejima, M.; Johnson, P. H.; Smart, E.; Kimura, H.:
Missense mutation of FUT1 and deletion of FUT2 are responsible for
Indian Bombay phenotype of ABO blood group system. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 238: 21-25, 1997.

11. Koda, Y.; Soejima, M.; Johnson, P. H.; Smart, E.; Kimura, H.:
An Alu-mediated large deletion of the FUT2 gene in individuals with
the ABO-Bombay phenotype. Hum. Genet. 106: 80-85, 2000.

12. Koda, Y.; Soejima, M.; Liu, Y.; Kimura, H.: Molecular basis for
secretor type alpha(1,2)-fucosyltransferase gene deficiency in a Japanese
population: a fusion gene generated by unequal crossover responsible
for the enzyme deficiency. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59: 343-350, 1996.

13. Kudo, T.; Iwasaki, H.; Nishihara, S.; Shinya, N.; Ando, T.; Narimatsu,
I.; Narimatsu, H.: Molecular genetic analysis of the human Lewis
histo-blood group system. II. Secretor gene inactivation by a novel
single missense mutation A385T in Japanese nonsecretor individuals. J.
Biol. Chem. 271: 9830-9837, 1996.

14. Le Pendu, J.; Lemieux, R. U.; Lambert, F.; Dalix, A.-M.; Oriol,
R.: Distribution of H type 1 and H type 2 antigenic determinants
in human sera and saliva. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 34: 402-415, 1982.

15. Lewis, M.; Kaita, H.; Chown, B.; Giblett, E. R.; Anderson, J.;
Cote, G. B.: The Lutheran and secretor loci genetic linkage analysis. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 29: 101-106, 1977.

16. Lindesmith, L.; Moe, C.; Marionneau, S.; Ruvoen, N.; Jiang, X.;
Lindblad, L.; Stewart, P.; LePendu, J.; Baric, R.: Human susceptibility
and resistance to Norwalk virus infection. Nature Med. 9: 548-553,
2003.

17. Liu, Y.-H.; Koda, Y.; Soejima, M.; Pang, H.; Wang, B.-J.; Kim,
D.-S.; Oh, H.-B.; Kimura, H.: The fusion gene at the ABO-secretor
locus (FUT2): absence in Chinese populations. J. Hum. Genet. 44:
181-184, 1999.

18. McGovern, D. P. B.; Jones, M. R.; Taylor, K. D.; Marciante, K.;
Yan, X.; Dubinsky, M.; Ippoliti, A.; Vasiliauskas, E.; Berel, D.;
Derkowski, C.; Dutridge, D.; International IBD Genetics Consortium;
and 10 others: Fucosyltransferase 2 (FUT2) non-secretor status
is associated with Crohn's disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 3468-3476,
2010.

19. Mohr, J.: A Study of Linkage in Man.  Copenhagen: Munksgaard
(pub.)  1954.

20. Mohr, J.: Estimation of linkage between the Lutheran and the
Lewis blood groups. Acta Path. Microbiol. Scand. 29: 339-344, 1951.

21. Oriol, R.; Danilovs, J.; Hawkins, B. R.: A new genetic model
proposing that the Se gene is a structural gene closely linked to
the H gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 33: 421-431, 1981.

22. Race, R. R.; Sanger, R.: Blood Groups in Man.  Philadelphia:
F. A. Davis Co. (pub.)  (5th ed.): 1968.

23. Reguigne-Arnould, I.; Couillin, P.; Mollicone, R.; Faure, S.;
Fletcher, A.; Kelly, R. J.; Lowe, J. B.; Oriol, R.: Relative positions
of two clusters of human alpha-L-fucosyltransferases in 19q (FUT1-FUT2)
and 19p (FUT6-FUT3-FUT5) within the microsatellite genetic map of
chromosome 19. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 71: 158-162, 1995.

24. Rouquier, S.; Lowe, J. B.; Kelly, R. J.; Fertitta, A. L.; Lennon,
G. G.; Giorgi, D.: Molecular cloning of a human genomic region containing
the H blood group alpha-(1,2)fucosyltransferase gene and two H locus-related
DNA restriction fragments: isolation of a candidate for the human
secretor blood group locus. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 4632-4639, 1995.

25. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World
Distribution.  New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

26. Tanaka, T.; Scheet, P.; Giusti, B.; Bandinelli, S.; Piras, M.
G.; Usala, G.; Lai, S.; Mulas, A.; Corsi, A. M.; Vestrini, A.; Sofi,
F.; Gori, A. M.; Abbate, R.; Guralnik, J.; Singleton, A.; Abecasis,
G. R.; Schlessinger, D.; Uda, M.; Ferrucci, L.: Genome-wide association
study of vitamin B6, vitamin B12, folate, and homocysteine blood concentrations. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 84: 477-482, 2009. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet.
84: 712 only, 2009.

27. Yu, L.-C.; Lee, H.-L.; Chu, C.-C.; Broadberry, R. E.; Lin, M.
: A newly identified nonsecretor allele of the human histo-blood group
alpha(1,2)fucosyltransferase gene (FUT2). Vox Sang. 76: 115-119,
1999.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 09/19/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/3/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/16/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/15/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 4/16/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/17/2000
Sonja A. Rasmussen - updated: 7/27/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/18/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED alopez: 09/19/2013
carol: 5/10/2012
alopez: 3/7/2012
alopez: 3/5/2012
alopez: 3/24/2010
carol: 8/12/2009
terry: 8/3/2009
alopez: 1/21/2009
terry: 1/16/2009
carol: 6/1/2005
mgross: 4/20/2005
terry: 3/16/2005
tkritzer: 11/6/2003
alopez: 10/7/2003
tkritzer: 9/22/2003
alopez: 5/16/2003
alopez: 4/17/2003
terry: 4/15/2003
mgross: 4/16/2002
carol: 10/31/2000
mcapotos: 8/1/2000
alopez: 2/29/2000
terry: 2/17/2000
carol: 7/27/1999
kayiaros: 7/27/1999
jlewis: 6/30/1999
terry: 6/18/1999
terry: 11/30/1998
alopez: 5/4/1998
terry: 7/7/1997
mark: 9/11/1996
terry: 9/3/1996
mark: 7/11/1996
terry: 6/21/1996
terry: 6/17/1996
mark: 1/9/1996
mark: 11/13/1995
mimadm: 3/25/1995
davew: 7/26/1994
warfield: 3/7/1994
carol: 11/18/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992

603234	TITLE *603234 ATP-BINDING CASSETTE, SUBFAMILY C, MEMBER 6; ABCC6
;;ANTHRACYCLINE RESISTANCE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; ARA;;
MULTIDRUG RESISTANCE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 6; MRP6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ABCC6 belongs to the multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP)
subfamily of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transmembrane transporters. MRPs
are involved in drug resistance, particularly in association with cancer
chemotherapy. Mutations in the ABCC6 gene cause pseudoxanthoma elasticum
(PXE; see 264800), a heritable connective tissue disorder characterized
by calcification of elastic fibers in skin, arteries, and retina (Bergen
et al., 2000; Le Saux et al., 2000; Ringpfeil et al., 2000).

CLONING

Multidrug resistance in cancer cells has been attributed to the
overexpression of certain membrane proteins, several of which are
members of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) superfamily. Examples include
MRP (158343) and MDR1 (171050). Longhurst et al. (1996) screened an
E1000 leukemia cell cDNA library using an MRP probe. They cloned a novel
cDNA encoding a 453-amino acid polypeptide that was similar to the
C-terminal half of MRP. Whereas MRP contains 2 ABC domains and 12
transmembrane domains, the ARA protein contains 1 ABC domain and 5
transmembrane domains. Northern blot analysis showed that ARA was
expressed as a 2.2-kb mRNA in an E1000 leukemia cell line, but not in
the untransformed parental CEM cell line. Southern blot analysis
revealed that, like MRP, the ARA gene was amplified in the genomic DNA
of the E1000 cell line. The ABCC6 protein consists of 1,503 amino acids
with a molecular mass of 165 kD, is located in the plasma membrane, and
probably has 17 membrane-spanning helices grouped into 3 transmembrane
domains (Le Saux et al., 2000). The 4.5-kb ABCC6 mRNA is expressed in
several secretory tissues, but primarily in kidney and liver. By RT-PCR
analysis using RNA isolated from tissues frequently affected by PXE,
Bergen et al. (2000) detected expression of ABCC6 in retina, skin, and
vascular tissue, although the highest level of expression was in the
liver.

By Western blot analysis of transfected Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)
cells, Belinsky et al. (2002) found that MRP6 migrated at the predicted
molecular mass of about 152 kD and at 182 kD, which likely represents a
glycosylated form.

Sinko et al. (2003) found that human ABCC6, when expressed by retroviral
transduction in polarized mammalian cells (MDCKII), is exclusively
localized to the basolateral membrane. In contrast to the in vitro
translated protein, ABCC6 was glycosylated in MDCK cells. Limited
proteolysis of the fully glycosylated and underglycosylated forms,
followed by immunodetection with region-specific antibodies, indicated
that asn15, located in the extracellular N-terminal region of ABCC6, is
the only N-glycosylated site in the protein.

By in situ hybridization and immunohistochemical analysis, Beck et al.
(2005) detected ABCC6 mRNA and protein in a wide range of epithelial
cells of exocrine and endocrine tissues such as acinar cells in the
pancreas, mucosal cells of the intestine, and follicular epithelial
cells of the thyroid. Enteroendocrine G cells of the stomach showed
strong immunostaining. In addition, ABCC6 mRNA and protein were present
in most neurons of the brain, in alveolar macrophages in the lung, in
lymph node lymphocytes, in hepatocytes, and in keratinocytes and
epithelial cells of the ducts of sweat glands.

Using PCR, Matsuzaki et al. (2005) found that Abcc6 expression was
highest in mouse liver and lower in kidney and small intestine.
Second-round nested PCR revealed much weaker expression in brain,
tongue, stomach, and eye. Subcloning and sequencing of distinct PCR
products indicated that the 3-prime end is subject to aberrant splicing,
resulting in each case in a premature termination codon. PCR analysis of
cultured human cells revealed similar splice variations in the 3-prime
end resulting in the skipping of exons 24 and 30 in epidermal
keratinocytes, and exons 24, 26, and 28 in dermal fibroblasts. In
fibroblasts, a minor PCR product represented alternative splicing of
exon 7.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kool et al. (1999) determined that the human ABCC6 gene comprises 31
exons.

Ratajewski et al. (2008) found that the 5-prime upstream region of the
ABCC6 gene contains a major Alu element of over 4.5 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Belinsky and Kruh (1999) and Klein et al. (1999) suggested that ABCC6
function may be related to cellular detoxification rather than drug
resistance. Bergen et al. (2000) commented that the molecules presumably
transported by ABCC6 may be essential for extracellular matrix
deposition or turnover of connective tissue at specific sites in the
body. Given the high expression of ABCC6 in liver and kidney, ABCC6
substrates may be transported into the blood. A deficiency of specific
ABCC6 substrates may affect a range of connective tissue sites
throughout the body and specifically elastic fiber assembly.

By assaying membrane vesicles obtained from ABCC6-expressing insect
cells, Ilias et al. (2002) found ABCC6 specifically bound MgATP and
actively transported glutathione conjugates, including leukotriene-C4
and N-ethylmaleimide S-glutathione (NEM-GS), in an MgATP-dependent
manner. 17-Beta-estradiol-17-beta-D-glucuronide was a weak transport
substrate. The organic anions probenecid, benzbromarone, and
indomethacin specifically inhibited ABCC6-mediated NEM-GS transport, and
orthovanadate, a phosphotyrosine phosphatase inhibitor, completely
inhibited NEM-GS transport.

Using similar substrates, Belinsky et al. (2002) found that MRP6
expressed in CHO cell membranes could transport glutathione conjugates
but not glucuronate conjugates. Transfected cells also showed enhanced
resistance to several anticancer agents. The highest levels of
resistance were observed for the inhibitors of topoisomerase II (126430)
etoposide and teniposide, followed by the anthracyclines doxorubicin and
daunorubicin. MRP6-expressing CHO cells accumulated less etoposide
compared with control transfected cells, indicating that MRP6 functions
as a drug efflux pump.

Using a luciferase reporter gene construct, Jiang et al. (2006) examined
the 2.6-kb human ABCC6 promoter. An NF-kappa-B (see NFKB1, 164011)-like
sequence conferred strong expression in HepG2 hepatoma cells, but much
weaker expression in cell lines of other tissue origin. Injection of the
construct into mouse tail vein confirmed liver-specific expression.
Testing of selected cytokines revealed that TGF-beta (190180)
upregulated, while TNF-alpha (191160) and interferon-gamma (IFNG;
147570) downregulated, the promoter activity in HepG2 cells. The
responsiveness to TGF-beta resided primarily within an SP1 (189906)/SP3
(601804) binding site. The expression of the ABCC6 promoter was markedly
enhanced by SP1. Jiang et al. (2006) concluded that the expression of
ABCC6 can be modulated by proinflammatory cytokines.

Using the ABCC6 promoter region in reporter gene assays in the HepG2
hepatoma cell line, Ratajewski et al. (2006) showed that all-trans
retinoic acid caused significant induction of ABCC6 activity. They found
9-cis retinoic acid (9cRA), a specific RXR (see RXRA, 180245) receptor
agonist, induced the ABCC6 promoter in a concentration-dependent manner.
9cRA also induced the expression of endogenous ABCC6 in HepG2 cells. The
binding of RXR to the endogenous ABCC6 promoter was confirmed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments. Occupancy of the ABCC6
promoter by RXR was relatively high in unstimulated cells and increased
further in 9cRA-treated cells.

Using the ABCC6 reporter construct described by Ratajewski et al. (2006)
in a screen for ABCC6-regulating factors, Ratajewski et al. (2008) found
that GATA3 (131320) repressed ABCC6 activity, and that SP1, PLAG1
(603026), and PLAGL1 (603044) induced ABCC6 activity. They identified 2
putative PLAG-binding sites on the reverse strand of the ABCC6 proximal
promoter. Reporter gene assays, electrophoretic mobility shift assays,
and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that the more proximal
site was bound and activated by PLAG1 and PLAGL1. Furthermore,
overexpression of PLAG1 resulted in enhanced ABCC6 transcription in
transfected human embryonic kidney cells.

MAPPING

Kuss et al. (1998) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to map the
ARA gene to human chromosome 16p13.1. The gene order in this region is
telomere--MYH11(160745)--MRP--ARA--centromere. The MRP and ARA genes are
located within 9 kb of each other and are transcribed in opposite
directions. Both MRP and ARA are deleted in a subgroup of inv(16)
leukemias, and both are expressed in normal hematopoietic precursor
cells.

- Pseudogenes

Pulkkinen et al. (2001) identified 2 pseudogenes containing sequences
highly homologous to the 5-prime end of the ABCC6 gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum

Simultaneously and independently, Bergen et al. (2000), Le Saux et al.
(2000), and Ringpfeil et al. (2000) identified missense, nonsense, and
splice site mutations as well as deletions and insertions in the ABCC6
gene accounting for pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800). Mutations
appeared to represent autosomal recessive (Le Saux et al., 2000) and
autosomal dominant (177850) (Bergen et al., 2000) modes of inheritance,
and sporadic cases. By SSCP and heteroduplex analysis using genetic DNA
from a cohort of 17 unrelated PXE patients, Le Saux et al. (2000)
screened 109 exons within 5 PXE candidate genes in the chromosome
16p13.1 region for mutations. By screening the 31 exons of ABCC6 by
SSCP, Le Saux et al. (2000) identified 6 mutations that were responsible
for PXE in 10 of 17 patients. They identified a C-to-T substitution
within exon 24 at nucleotide 3421, resulting in an arg-to-stop
substitution at codon 1141 (R1141X; 603234.0001) in 6 unrelated families
with autosomal recessive PXE. Bergen et al. (2000) identified mutations
in ABCC6 causing autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and sporadic
PXE. Bergen et al. (2000) found the R114X mutation in 2 families with
autosomal dominant PXE. One patient had a large de novo deletion of
chromosome 16 (603234.0010). Ringpfeil et al. (2000) reported a total of
8 pathogenetic mutations in the ABCC6 gene in 8 kindreds with PXE. They
referred to the gene as MRP6 (multidrug resistance-associated
protein-6). Examination of clinically unaffected family members in 4
multiplex families identified heterozygous carriers, consistent with an
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.

Le Saux et al. (2001) performed a mutation analysis of the ABCC6 gene in
122 unrelated patients with PXE, the largest cohort of patients studied
to that time. They characterized 36 mutations, 28 of which were novel.
Twenty-one were missense variants, 6 were small insertions or deletions,
5 were nonsense, 2 were alleles likely to result in aberrant mRNA
splicing, and 2 were large deletions involving ABCC6. Although most
mutations appeared to be unique variants, 2 disease-causing alleles
occurred frequently in apparently unrelated individuals. Arg1141 to ter
(R1141X; 603234.0001) was found in this patient cohort at a frequency of
18.8% and was preponderant in European patients. Deletion of nucleotides
23-29 (603234.0016) occurred at a frequency of 12.9% and was prevalent
in patients from the United States. Putative disease-causing mutations
were identified in approximately 64% of the 244 chromosomes studied, and
85.2% of the 122 patients were found to have at least 1 disease-causing
allele. The results suggested that a fraction of the undetected mutant
alleles could be either genomic rearrangements or mutations occurring in
noncoding regions of the ABCC6 gene. A cluster of disease-causing
variants was observed within exons encoding a large C-terminal
cytoplasmic loop and in the C-terminal nucleotide-binding domain.

While implementing a strategy to screen for PXE by complete mutation
analysis of the ABCC6 gene, Germain (2001) found evidence for the
existence of at least 1 pseudogene highly homologous to the 5-prime end
of ABCC6. Sequence variants in this ABCC6-like pseudogene could be
mistaken for mutations in the ABCC6 gene and consequently lead to
erroneous genotyping results in pedigrees affected with PXE.

Germain et al. (2001) identified a heterozygous missense mutation in
exon 7 of the ABCC6 gene in a female PXE patient whose parents were
second cousins. Despite complete scanning of the gene, no further
mutation was evident. A heterozygous profile was also found in the
proband's unaffected children. However, haplotype homozygosity was
confirmed at chromosome 16p13.1, using both extragenic microsatellites
and intragenic polymorphisms located 3-prime from the mutation, in
agreement with the known consanguinity in the family. Taken together,
the data indicated that PCR products of exon 7 of the ABCC6 gene were
amplified from more than 2 genomic copies. This supported the existence
of one or more ABCC6 pseudogenes highly homologous to the 5-prime end
(exons 1-9) of the ABCC6 gene.

Pulkkinen et al. (2001) identified 2 pseudogenes containing sequences
highly homologous to the 5-prime end of the ABCC6 gene. Nucleotide
differences in flanking introns between these 2 pseudogenes and ABCC6
allowed them to design allele-specific primers that eliminated the
amplification of both pseudogene sequences by PCR and provided reliable
amplification of ABCC6-specific sequences only. The use of
allele-specific PCR revealed 2 novel 5-prime-end PXE mutations.

In 59 unrelated Dutch patients with PXE, Hu et al. (2003) identified 17
different mutations, including 11 novel mutations, in the ABCC6 gene in
65 alleles. The R1141X mutation was by far the most common mutation,
identified in 19 (32.2%) patients; the second most common mutation,
which results in the deletion of exons 23-29 (603234.0014), was
identified in 11 (18.6%) patients. In 20 patients, only 1 mutation in 1
allele was detected. Combined with previous mutation data, Hu et al.
(2003) concluded that approximately 80% of the PXE mutations occur in
the cytoplasmic domains of the predicted ABCC6 protein, especially the 2
nucleotide-binding fold (NBF) domains (NBF1 and NBF2) and the eighth
cytoplasmic loop between the fifteenth and sixteenth transmembrane
regions.

Hu et al. (2004) described an efficient molecular diagnostic strategy
for ABCC6 in PXE. The 2 most frequent mutations, R1141X (603234.0001)
and deletion of exons 23 through 29 (603234.0016), as well as a core set
of mutations, were identified by restriction enzyme digestion and size
separation on agarose gels. In the remaining patient group in which only
1 or no mutant allele was found, the complete coding sequence was
analyzed using DHPLC. All variations found were confirmed by direct DNA
sequencing. Finally, Southern blot was used to investigate the potential
presence of small or large deletions. Twenty different mutations,
including 2 novel mutations in the ABCC6 gene, were identified in 80.3%
of the 76 patients, and 58.6% of the 152 ABCC6 alleles analyzed.

Chassaing et al. (2005) commented that mutations had been identified in
PXE in most of the 31 ABCC6 exons and that no correlation between the
nature or the location of the mutations and phenotype severity had been
established.

Trip et al. (2002), Van Soest et al. (1997), and Bacchelli et al. (1999)
emphasized the carriage of a sole ABCC6 mutation as a cardiovascular
risk factor. Sherer et al. (2001) described limited phenotypic
expression of PXE in parents of affected offspring.

Miksch et al. (2005) performed a mutation screen in ABCC6 using
haplotype analysis in conjunction with direct sequencing to achieve a
mutation detection rate of 97%. Their mutational analysis confirmed an
earlier haplotype-based analysis and conclusions regarding a
recessive-only mode of inheritance in PXE (Cai et al., 2000) through the
identification of 2 mutated alleles in all individuals with PXE who
appear in either consecutive or alternating generations of the same
family. Their study demonstrated that the full phenotypic expression of
the disorder requires 2 defective allelic copies of ABCC6 and that
pseudodominance is the mode of transmission in presumed autosomal
dominant families (i.e., the second parental disease allele 'marries
into' the family). The apparent frequency of this mechanism was
approximately 7.5% in their family cohort. Miksch et al. (2005) stated
that in their families no heterozygote for a large deletion showed any
apparent clinical sign of PXE according to category I diagnostic
criteria.

Chassaing et al. (2005) provided a comprehensive catalog of ABCC6
mutations identified in PXE.

Pfendner et al. (2007) collected mutation data on an international case
series of 270 patients with PXE (239 probands, 31 affected family
members). In 134 patients with a known phenotype and both mutations
identified, genotype-phenotype correlations were assessed. In total, 316
mutant alleles in ABCC6, including 39 novel mutations, were identified
in 239 probands. Mutations clustered in exons 24 and 28, corresponding
to the second nucleotide-binding fold and the last intracellular domain
of the protein. Together with the recurrent R1141X (603234.0001) and
del23-29 (603234.0016) mutations, these mutations accounted for 71.5% of
the total individual mutations identified. Genotype-phenotype analysis
failed to reveal a significant correlation between the type of mutations
identified or their predicted effect on the expression of the protein
and the age of onset and severity of the disease.

Using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) to analyze
35 PXE patients with incomplete ABCC6 genotypes after exonic sequencing,
Costrop et al. (2010) identified 6 multiexon deletions and 4 single-exon
deletions and were thus able to characterized 25% of the unidentified
disease alleles. The findings illustrated the instability of the ABCC6
genomic region and stressed the importance of screening for deletions in
the molecular diagnosis of PXE.

- Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy 2

In a 28-year-old French man with PXE, who had a younger brother who died
of generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI1; 614473) at age
15 months, Le Boulanger et al. (2010) identified compound heterozygosity
for missense mutations in the ABCC6 gene (603234.0025 and 603234.0026),
which were also found in heterozygosity in each of his unaffected
parents, respectively. No disease-causing mutations were found in the
known GACI1 (208000)-related gene, ENPP1 (173335). Although no DNA
material was available from the deceased younger brother, his disease
was presumed to be related to the familial ABCC6 mutations. Le Boulanger
et al. (2010) concluded that GACI may represent an atypical and severe
end of the vascular phenotypic spectrum of PXE.

Nitschke et al. (2012) analyzed the ABCC6 gene in 28 GACI patients from
25 unrelated families who were negative for mutation in the ENNP1 gene,
as well as 2 unrelated GACI patients in whom only 1 ENNP1 mutation had
been detected. They identified homozygosity or compound heterozygosity
for mutations in ABCC6 in 8 unrelated GACI patients (see, e.g.,
603234.0001, 603234.0006, and 603234.0027-603234.0029). In 6 patients
from 5 unrelated families, only 1 mutation was detected in ABCC6; the
authors noted that there was no phenotypic difference between these
patients and those with biallelic mutations in ABCC6, and stated that
mutations in regulatory untranslated regions of ABCC6 might not have
been detected by their approach. No mutation in the ABCC6 gene was found
in 16 patients from 14 unrelated families, including the 2 patients who
were known to carry monoallelic mutations in ENNP1. Overall, 13
different ABCC6 mutations were identified in GACI patients, all but 2 of
which had been previously identified in typical PXE patients who had a
much milder phenotype than the GACI patients. Based on the considerable
overlap of phenotype and genotype of GACI and pseudoxanthoma elasticum,
Nitschke et al. (2012) suggested that GACI and PXE represent 2 ends of a
clinical spectrum of ectopic calcification and other organ pathologies
rather than 2 distinct disorders.

POPULATION GENETICS

The Afrikaner population of South Africa is of Dutch, German, and French
Huguenot descent and has its origin in the first European immigrant
settlements at the Cape of Good Hope during the 17th century. Torrington
and Viljoen (1991) proposed that the basis for the high prevalence of
PXE in the Afrikaner population is a founder effect. An initial
genealogic study traced the ancestry of 20 Afrikaner families with PXE
back to potentially only 4 individuals, suggesting that this disorder is
most likely derived from these original founders in South Africa. To
further study this possibility, Le Saux et al. (2002) performed
haplotype and mutation analyses in 17 of the 20 originally analyzed
Afrikaner families, and identified 3 common haplotypes and 6 different
disease-causing variants. Three of these mutant alleles were missense
variants, 2 were nonsense mutations, and 1 was a single-basepair
insertion. The most common variant, arg1339 to cys (R1339C;
603234.0017), accounted for 53% of the PXE alleles, whereas other mutant
alleles appeared at lower frequencies ranging from 3 to 12%. Haplotype
analysis of the Afrikaner families showed that the 3 most frequent
mutations were identical by descent, indicating a founder origin of PXE
in this population.

Chassaing et al. (2005) suggested that the proposed prevalence of PXE of
1 in 25,000 may be an underestimation. Consequently, the prevalence of
heterozygous carriers, and the prevalence of different organ involvement
in carriers of 1 or 2 ABCC6 mutations, are not precisely known.

PATHOGENESIS

Since the ABCC6 gene is expressed primarily, if not exclusively, in the
liver and kidneys, Ringpfeil et al. (2001) suggested that PXE is a
primary metabolic disorder with secondary involvement of elastic fibers,
a situation comparable to the secondary involvement of connective tissue
elements in homocystinuria (236200) and alkaptonuria (203500).

ABCC6 is a member of the large ATP-dependent transmembrane transporter
family. Chassaing et al. (2005) commented that the association of PXE to
ABCC6 efflux transport alterations raised a number of pathophysiology
hypotheses, among them, the idea that PXE is a systemic metabolic
disease resulting from lack or accumulation over time in the bloodstream
of molecules interacting with the synthesis, turnover, and/or
maintenance of extracellular matrix (ECM).

Since ABCC6 is expressed primarily in the liver, Jiang and Uitto (2006)
likewise supported the notion that PXE is a metabolic disease.

In an investigation of the functional relationship between ABCC6
deficiency and elastic fiber calcification, Le Saux et al. (2006)
speculated that ABCC6 deficiency in PXE patients induces a persistent
imbalance in circulating metabolite(s) which impairs the synthetic
abilities of normal elastoblasts or specifically alters elastic fiber
assembly. They found that PXE fibroblasts cultured with normal human
serum expressed and deposited increased amounts of proteins, but
structurally normal elastic fibers. Normal and PXE fibroblasts as well
as normal smooth muscle cells deposited abnormal aggregates of elastic
fibers when maintained in the presence of serum from PXE patients. The
expression of tropoelastin (see 130160) and other elastic
fiber-associated genes was not significantly modulated by the presence
of PXE serum. These results indicated that certain metabolites present
in PXE sera interfered with the normal assembly of elastic fibers in
vitro and suggested that PXE is a primary metabolic disorder with
secondary connective tissue manifestations.

ANIMAL MODEL

To elucidate the pathogenesis of PXE, Klement et al. (2005) generated a
transgenic mouse by targeted ablation of the mouse Abcc6 gene.
Abcc6-null mice were negative for expression of Mrp6 in the liver, and
necropsies revealed profound mineralization of several tissues including
skin, arterial blood vessels, and retina, while heterozygous animals
were indistinguishable from the wildtype mice. Particularly striking was
the mineralization of vibrissae, as confirmed by von Kossa and alizarin
red stains. Electron microscopy revealed mineralization affecting both
elastic structures and collagen fibers. Mineralization of vibrissae was
noted as early as 5 weeks of age and was progressive with age in Abcc6
-/- mice but was not observed in heterozygous or wildtype mice up to 2
years of age. Total body computerized tomography scan of Abcc6 -/- mice
showed mineralization in skin and subcutaneous tissue as well as in
kidneys. These data demonstrated aberrant mineralization of soft tissues
in PXE-affected organs, and consequently, these mice recapitulated
features of this complex disease.

Gorgels et al. (2005) generated Abcc6 -/- mice and showed by light and
electron microscopy that Abcc6 -/- mice spontaneously developed
calcification of elastic fibers in blood vessel walls and in Bruch
membrane in the eye. No clear abnormalities were seen in the dermal
extracellular matrix. Calcification of blood vessels was most prominent
in small arteries in the cortex of the kidney, but in old mice, it
occurred also in other organs and in the aorta and vena cava. Monoclonal
antibodies against mouse Abcc6 localized the protein to the basolateral
membranes of hepatocytes and the basal membrane in renal proximal
tubules, but failed to show the protein at the pathogenic sites. Abcc6
-/- mice developed a 25% reduction in plasma HDL cholesterol and an
increase in plasma creatinine levels, which may be due to impaired
kidney function. No changes in serum mineral balance were found. Gorgels
et al. (2005) concluded that the phenotype of the Abcc6 -/- mouse shares
calcification of elastic fibers with human PXE pathology, and supports
the hypothesis that PXE is a systemic disease.

To characterize the mineralization process in PXE, Jiang et al. (2007)
examined a PXE animal model, the Abcc6 -/- mouse, with respect to
specific proteins serving as inhibitors of mineralization. The levels of
calcium and phosphate in serum of these mice were normal, but the Abcc6
-/- serum had less ability to prevent the mineral deposition induced by
inorganic phosphate in a cell culture system. Addition of fetuin-A
(138680) to the culture system prevented the mineralization. The
calcium-phosphate product was markedly elevated in the mineralized
vibrissae of Abcc6 -/- mice, an early biomarker of the mineralization
process, consistent with histopathologic findings. Levels of fetuin-A
were slightly decreased in Abcc6 -/- serum, and positive immunostaining
for matrix-Gla-protein (MGP; 154870), fetuin-A, and ankylosis protein
(ANK; 605145) as well as alkaline phosphatase activity were strongly
associated with the mineralization process. In situ hybridization
demonstrated that the genes for MGP and Ank were expressed locally in
vibrissae, whereas fetuin-A was expressed highly in the liver. These
data suggested that the deposition of the bone-associated proteins
spatially coincides with mineralization and actively regulates this
process locally and systemically.

In the Dyscalc1 mouse model of dystrophic cardiac calcification (DCC),
Meng et al. (2007) studied 2 intercrosses and identified Abcc6 as the
causative gene, which was confirmed by transgenic complementation. The
authors noted that myocardial calcification has not been reported as a
phenotype associated with human PXE or mouse Abcc6-knockout models.

In all mouse strains positive for DCC, Aherrahrou et al. (2008)
identified a missense mutation at the 3-prime border of exon 14 of the
Abcc6 gene that created an additional donor splice site. The alternative
transcript lacked the last 5 nucleotides of exon 14, resulting in
premature termination at codon 684, and leading to Abcc6 protein
deficiency in DCC-susceptible mice.

Jiang et al. (2009) found that grafting of wildtype mouse muzzle skin
onto the back of Abcc6-knockout mice resulted in abnormal mineralization
of vibrissae consistent with PXE, whereas grafting of Abcc6-knockout
mouse muzzle skin onto wildtype mice did not. The data implied that PXE
does not result from localized defect based on resident cellular
abnormalities but from a change of metabolite(s) in serum. These
findings implicate circulatory factors as a critical component of the
mineralization process and supported the notion that PXE is a secondary
mineralization of connective tissues. In addition, the findings
suggested that the abnormal mineralization process could possibly be
countered or even reversed by changes in the homeostatic milieu.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2, INCLUDED
ABCC6, ARG1141TER

---Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum

In a large consanguineous Italian family segregating autosomal recessive
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800), Le Saux et al. (2000) identified a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide 3421 in exon 24 of the ABCC6 gene,
resulting in an arg-to-ter substitution at codon 1141 (R1141X). All
unaffected individuals but 1 were heterozygous carriers; affected
individuals were homozygous for this mutation. This variant was not
found in the control panel of 200 normal alleles and cosegregated in
homozygous or compound heterozygous state with the PXE phenotype in
families. This mutation was also identified in 5 unrelated pedigrees.
R1141X was found in homozygous state in unrelated patients with
autosomal recessive PXE from the United Kingdom and Belgium. Haplotype
analysis of the PXE locus in families with the R1141X mutation revealed
that this mutation was segregating with different haplotypes, suggesting
that R1141X may be a recurrent mutation in ABCC6. Testing of cultured
skin fibroblasts showed no ABCC6 mRNA in patients carrying the R1141X
mutation from the large Italian pedigree.

Bergen et al. (2000) identified this mutation in 2 families segregating
autosomal dominant PXE (177850).

In a family in which 2 brothers and a sister had PXE, Ringpfeil et al.
(2000) demonstrated that the affected individuals were compound
heterozygotes for the R1141X mutation and an R1268Q mutation
(603234.0011).

In a cohort of 101 unrelated patients with PXE, Le Saux et al. (2001)
found that the R1141X mutant allele was present in 28.4% of European
alleles and only 4.1% of U.S. alleles. Also, this nonsense mutation was
unequally distributed among European countries. The frequency of
homozygotes was in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the European
population.

Hu et al. (2003) demonstrated a founder effect for the R1141X mutation
in the Netherlands. They identified the mutation in 19 alleles in 16
Dutch patients with PXE, in heterozygous, homozygous, or compound
heterozygous form. Expression of the normal allele in heterozygotes was
predominant; no or very low expression was found in homozygotes. The
mutation induced instability of the aberrant mRNA. Hu et al. (2003)
suggested that the PXE phenotype of the R1141X mutation most likely
results from complete loss of function or functional haploinsufficiency
of ABCC6.

In the study of Trip et al. (2002), the presence of a single R1141X
mutation in ABCC6 appeared to be an independent risk factor for coronary
heart disease in young people.

---Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy 2

In 2 patients with generalized arterial calcification of infancy-2
(GACI2; 614473), Nitschke et al. (2012) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ABCC6 gene. A French female infant
with GACI who died at 6 weeks of age, who had calcification of the
coronary arteries and other arteries, severe hypertension, and heart
failure, was compound heterozygous for R1141X and R1314W (603234.0006).
A 3-year-old Spanish boy with GACI who had calcification of the splenic
and pancreatic arteries, nephrocalcinosis, severe hypertension,
cardiomegaly, psychomotor retardation, and abdominal distention, was
compound heterozygous for R1141X and R518X (603234.0027).

---Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum, Forme Fruste, Digenic, ABCC6/GGCX

In a woman and her sister with biopsy-confirmed PXE, Li et al. (2009)
identified compound heterozygosity for the R1141X mutation and a
mutation in the GGCX gene (V255M; 137167.0012). Neither had evidence of
a coagulopathy and the skin phenotype was mild (see 177850), but skin
biopsies showed undercarboxylated matrix gla proteins (MGP; 154870) in
the areas of abnormal mineralization. Since R1141X in the heterozygous
state is usually not associated with clinical features, the findings
suggested that the women had digenic inheritance of PXE. In contrast, 2
other family members who were compound heterozygous for R1141X and
another mutation in the GGCX gene (S300F; 137167.0013) had no signs of
either disorder on clinical exam but refused further clinical testing.
Plasma levels of undercarboxylated total MGP of the 2 clinically
unaffected individuals were at the lower end of normal. Although the
reasons for the lack of clinical findings in the 2 unaffected family
members remained unclear, Li et al. (2009) concluded that
undercarboxylation of MGP plays a critical role in aberrant
mineralization of tissues in PXE.

.0002
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, IVS21, G-T, +1

In patients with autosomal recessive pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800)
from 2 families, Le Saux et al. (2000) found that affected individuals
carried a G-to-T transversion at the +1 position of intron 21 of the
ABCC6 gene, affecting the donor splice site. One of the families was
from the U.K., and the other was from the United States. The family from
the U.K. carried the R1141X mutation (603234.0001) on the other allele;
in the American family, the other mutation was R1138Q (603234.0003).

.0003
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ARG1138GLN

In a family with autosomal recessive pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800),
Le Saux et al. (2000) identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 3413
of the ABCC6 gene, resulting in an arginine-to-glutamine substitution at
codon 1138 (R1138Q). This mutation was found in compound heterozygosity
with the IVS21+1G-T mutation (603234.0002).

In a so-called sporadic case of PXE, Ringpfeil et al. (2000) identified
an R1138Q mutation in the ABCC6 gene in compound heterozygosity with the
R1268 mutation (603234.0011). Arginine-1138 is the same codon as that
affected in the R1138W mutation (603234.0012); in the latter mutation,
the nucleotide change is 3412C-T.

.0004
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ARG1114PRO

In a family with autosomal recessive pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800),
Le Saux et al. (2000) found affected individuals to be homozygous for a
G-to-C transversion at nucleotide 3341 of the ABCC6 gene, resulting in
an arg-to-pro substitution at codon 1114 (R1114P) in exon 24. This
mutation was found in homozygosity.

.0005
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, 1-BP DEL, 3775T

In a patient thought to represent an isolated case of autosomal dominant
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (177850), Le Saux et al. (2000) found a
deletion of a T at nucleotide 3775 of the ABCC6 gene. This was a de novo
mutation in the patient, and no mutations were found in the other allele
of ABCC6 by screening using SSCP.

Plomp et al. (2009) examined a group of 15 adults homozygous for the
3775delT mutation and 44 individuals heterozygous for this mutation from
a genetically isolated population in the Netherlands. All participants
filled out a questionnaire and underwent standardized dermatologic and
ophthalmologic examinations with photography of skin and fundus
abnormalities. Skin biopsies from affected skin or a predilection site
and/or a scar were examined and compared with biopsies from controls.
Plomp et al. (2009) found that skin abnormalities, ophthalmologic signs,
and cardiovascular problems varied greatly among the 15 homozygous
participants. There was no correlation among severity of skin, eyes, or
cardiovascular abnormalities. None of the 44 heterozygous participants
had any sign of pseudoxanthoma elasticum on dermatologic,
histopathologic, and/or ophthalmologic examination, but 32% had
cardiovascular disease.

.0006
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2, INCLUDED
ABCC6, ARG1314TRP

Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum

In a patient with autosomal recessive pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800),
Le Saux et al. (2000) identified a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 3940
of the ABCC6 gene, resulting in an arg-to-trp substitution at codon 1314
(R1314W). This mutation was found in homozygosity in one family.

Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy 2

In a 5-year-old boy with generalized arterial calcification of infancy
(GACI2; 614473), Nitschke et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for the
R1314W mutation. The boy was born as the first of dizygotic twins, and
his twin brother was unaffected. The patient had calcification of the
aorta and pulmonary, coronary, and renal arteries as well as other
arteries, and stippled calcifications of proximal epiphyses of humeri,
femora, pelvic cartilage, larynx, and mandible. He had severely
decreased biventricular systolic function, marked cardiomegaly, and
severe mitral insufficiency, as well as hypertension and respiratory
insufficiency. Cerebral MRI revealed diffuse white matter disease, with
cystic encephalomalacia, and laboratory analysis showed
hyperbilirubinemia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Nitschke et al. (2012)
also identified the R1314W mutation in compound heterozygosity in 2
unrelated GACI patients, a French female infant who died at 6 weeks of
age and also carried an R1141X mutation (603234.0001), and an
Afro-Caribbean male infant who died at 8 weeks of age with generalized
arterial stenosis, myocardial infarction, and hypertension and also
carried a 1-bp insertion (450insC; 603234.0028) in exon 4 of the ABCC6
gene, predicted to result in a premature stop codon and a truncated
protein. In addition, in a 3-year-old South African girl with GACI,
Nitschke et al. (2012) identified only a heterozygous R1314W mutation,
but noted that mutations in regulatory untranslated regions of ABCC6
might not have been detected by their technique. In the South African
child, onset of symptoms occurred at 2.5 years of age, and included
calcification of the aorta, spleen, and pancreas, nephrocalcinosis,
failure to thrive, hypertension, and heart failure.

.0007
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, 1-BP DEL, 3798T

In a large autosomal recessive pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800) family,
Bergen et al. (2000) identified the deletion of a T at nucleotide 3798
of the ABCC gene in homozygosity. This mutation results in a frameshift
and premature chain termination.

.0008
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, 4-BP INS, 4243AGAA

In 2 families segregating what was thought to be autosomal dominant
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (177850), Bergen et al. (2000) identified a
4-bp insertion, AGAA, at nucleotide 4243 in exon 30. This insertion
causes a frameshift resulting in the disruption of the Walker B motif
and a protein longer by 24 amino acids.

.0009
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, 22-BP DEL

In a patient with pseudoxanthoma elasticum (177850), Bergen et al.
(2000) identified a 22-basepair deletion from nucleotides 1967 through
1989 of the ABCC6 gene in heterozygosity. The other allele appeared to
be wildtype.

.0010
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, DEL

In a patient with pseudoxanthoma elasticum (177850), Bergen et al.
(2000) detected a large deletion encompassing the ABCC6 gene as well as
the MYH11 (160745) and ABCC1 (158343) genes. The other allele appeared
to be wildtype.

.0011
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ARG1268GLN

Ringpfeil et al. (2000) found an arg1268-to-gln (R1268Q) mutation in
compound heterozygous state in 3 presumably unrelated families with PXE
(264800). In 2 families, the mutation was combined with R1141X
(603234.0001); in 1 family, it was combined with R1138Q (603234.0003).

In one of the families with PXE in which the R1141X mutation had been
identified by Ringpfeil et al. (2000), Germain et al. (2000) identified
a 3803G-A transition in exon 27 of the ABCC6 cDNA, resulting in an
R1268Q mutation. To their surprise, the R1268Q variant was found in
homozygous state in the proband's unaffected husband. They investigated
the R1268Q mutation and found the Q1268 allele at a relatively high
frequency (0.19) in a control population of 62 Caucasians. Genotype
frequencies were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, and 3 healthy volunteers
were homozygous for the Q1268 allele. R1268Q is thus a harmless
polymorphism when present in homozygous state.

.0012
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ARG1138TRP

In a familial case of PXE (264800), Ringpfeil et al. (2000) found
homozygosity for an arg1138-to-trp (R1138W) mutation in the ABCC6 gene
due to a 3412C-T transition. The mutation was found in homozygous state
in the proband's mother and in heterozygous state in her father,
creating a pedigree pattern of pseudodominance. The same codon is
involved in the R1138Q mutation due to a 3413G-A transition
(603234.0003).

Ringpfeil et al. (2001) discussed the same pedigree, derived from a
consanguineous French-Canadian PXE family.

.0013
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ARG1164TER

Ringpfeil et al. (2001) studied the ABCC6 mutation in 4 multiplex
families with PXE (264800) inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
In each family, the proband was a compound heterozygote for a single-bp
substitution mutation (3490C-T; arg1164 to ter) and a novel deletion of
approximately 16.5 kb spanning the site of the single-bp substitution in
trans (i.e., on the homologous chromosome 16) (603234.0014). In 2 of the
families the single-nucleotide substitution was R1164X; in 1 it was
R1141X (603234.0001); and in another it was a splice site mutation,
3736-1G-A (603234.0015). In all 4 families the patients were thought
first to be homozygous for the nondeletion mutation. The deletion
mutation was shown to extend from intron 22 to intron 29, resulting in
out-of-frame deletion of 1,213 nucleotides from the corresponding mRNA
and causing elimination of 505 amino acids from the MRP6 polypeptide.
The deletion breakpoints were precisely the same in all 4 families,
which were of different ethnic backgrounds, and haplotype analysis by 13
microsatellite markers suggested that the deletion had occurred
independently. Deletion breakpoints within introns 22 and 29 were
embedded within AluSx repeat sequences, specifically in a 16-bp segment
of DNA, suggesting Alu-mediated homologous recombination as a mechanism.

.0014
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, 1,213-NT DEL

See 603234.0013 and Ringpfeil et al. (2001).

.0015
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2, INCLUDED
ABCC6, IVS26, G-A, -1

See 603234.0013 and Ringpfeil et al. (2001).

See 603234.0029 and Nitschke et al. (2012).

.0016
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, EX23-29DEL

In a cohort of 101 unrelated patients with PXE (264800), Le Saux et al.
(2001) identified a 16.4-kb deletion of the ABCC6 gene (deletion of
exons 23-29) in 12.9% of mutant alleles. The frequency was very
different in Europe and the United States, being 4.3% and 28.4%,
respectively. The frequency of individuals homozygous for this mutation
was observed to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the United States.

.0017
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ARG1339CYS

In 17 Afrikaner families in South Africa with autosomal recessive
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800), Le Saux et al. (2002) found that 53%
of the PXE-associated alleles of the ABCC6 gene had a 4015C-T
transition, which caused an arg1339-to-cys (R1339C) mutation. Haplotype
analysis showed that the mutation was identical by descent in these
families.

.0018
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ARG1459CYS

In a family in which PXE classified as 'definite' occurred in 2
generations, Plomp et al. (2004) detected an arg1459-to-cys substitution
(R1459C) in the ABCC protein on 1 allele only. The authors considered
the diagnosis of PXE definite if 2 of the following 3 criteria were
present: yellowish papules and/or plaques on the lateral side of the
neck and/or flexural areas of the body; typical histopathological
changes in a skin biopsy after von Kossa staining; and the presence of
peau d'orange, angioid streaks, or comet-like streaks in the retina. The
mother of this family and one of her sons fulfilled all 3 criteria.
Plomp et al. (2004) stated that the R1459C mutation might be one that
could cause PXE in the heterozygous state (177850). In their review of
families with putative autosomal dominant PXE, including this family and
2 others examined by them, the authors noted that they did not find a
single family with definite PXE in 3 or more generations.

Bergen (2006) stated that the family with the apparently heterozygous
R1459C mutation studied by Plomp et al. (2004) remained 'an interesting
puzzle and is perhaps the always existing 'exception to the rule'.'

.0019
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, VAL1298PHE

In a cohort of 122 unrelated patients with PXE (264800) from several
countries, Le Saux et al. (2001) found a 3892G-T transversion in exon 28
of the ABCC6 gene that resulted in a val1298-to-phe (V1298F)
substitution. The mutation was present in heterozygosity in 2 alleles
from patients from the United States, for an allele frequency among 74
United States alleles of 2.7%. The mutation was not found in the
European population.

Ilias et al. (2002) showed that the V1298F mutation, localized to the
C-terminal cytoplasmic domain of ABCC6, did not affect the expression of
the ABCC6 protein in infected insect cells, but that the protein was
essentially inactive in the MgATP-dependent transport of
N-ethylmaleimide S-glutathione (NEM-GS) or leukotriene-C4.

.0020
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, GLY1302ARG

In a cohort of 122 unrelated patients with PXE (264800) from several
countries, Le Saux et al. (2001) found a 3904G-A transition in exon 28
of the ABCC6 gene that resulted in a gly1302-to-arg (G1302R) amino acid
substitution in the second intracellular nucleotide-binding domain. The
mutation, present in homozygosity, occurred in a total of 4 alleles from
patients from the United States, giving an allele frequency of 5.4% in a
total of 74 United States alleles. It was not found in the European
population.

Ilias et al. (2002) showed that the G1302R mutation did not affect the
expression of the ABCC6 protein in infected insect cells, but that the
protein was essentially inactive in the MgATP-dependent transport of
N-ethylmaleimide S-glutathione (NEM-GS) or leukotriene-C4.

.0021
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, GLY1321SER

In a cohort of 122 unrelated patients with PXE (264800) from several
countries, Le Saux et al. (2001) found a 3961G-A transition in exon 28
of the ABCC6 gene that resulted in a gly1321-to-ser (G1321S)
substitution in the second intracellular nucleotide-binding domain. They
found the mutation in heterozygosity in 1 of 74 United States alleles,
for an allele frequency of 1.4%. It was not found in the European
population.

Ilias et al. (2002) showed that the G1321S mutation did not affect the
expression of the ABCC6 protein in infected insect cells, but that the
protein was essentially inactive in the MgATP-dependent transport of
N-ethylmaleimide S-glutathione (NEM-GS) or leukotriene-C4.

.0022
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ASP1238HIS

Chassaing et al. (2004) described a pedigree of PXE (264800) with
pseudodominant inheritance. Two affected sibs carried 3 distinct
mutations of the ABCC6 gene. The brother carried a 3712G-C transversion
in exon 26 that resulted in an asp1238-to-his substitution (D1238H), and
a 3389C-T transition in exon 24 that resulted in a thr1130-to-met
substitution (T1130M; 603234.0024). His sister carried the T1130M
mutation and a 33-bp deletion (603234.0023). The mother, who had PXE
also, was deduced to a compound heterozygote for the deletion and
T1130M, whereas the father was assumed to be heterozygous for the D1238H
mutation which was shared by the sibs; however, DNA was not available
for study on either parent.

.0023
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, 33-BP DEL

In the Algerian pedigree studied by Chassaing et al. (2004), a female
patient with PXE (264800) carried a 33-bp deletion in exon 9 of the
ABCC6 gene (1088-1120del) in compound heterozygosity with a missense
mutation (603234.0024). The mutation led to the deletion of 11 amino
acids in the transmembrane and intracellular domains (Q363_R373del).

.0024
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, THR1130MET

See 603234.0022 and Chassaing et al. (2004). The T1130M substitution
arose from a 3389C-T transition in exon 24.

.0025
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2, INCLUDED
ABCC6, ARG765GLN

In a 28-year-old French man with pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE; 264800),
who had a younger brother who died of generalized arterial calcification
of infancy (GACI2; 614473) at age 15 months, Le Boulanger et al. (2010)
identified compound heterozygosity for missense mutations in the ABCC6
gene, an arg765-to-gln (R765Q) substitution and a gln1406-to-lys
(Q1406K; 603234.0026) substitution. The mutations were found in
heterozygosity in each of his unaffected parents, respectively. Although
no DNA material was available from the deceased younger brother, his
disease was presumed to be related to the familial ABCC6 mutations. Le
Boulanger et al. (2010) concluded that GACI may represent an atypical
and severe end of the vascular phenotype spectrum of PXE. (The mutations
identified by Le Boulanger et al. (2010) were listed as R765Q and Q1406K
in their text, but as E765Q and E1406K in their Figure 3.)

The R765Q mutation in exon 18 of the ABCC6 gene has also been identified
in heterozygosity and in compound heterozygosity with another ABCC6
mutation in patients with PXE (see Le Saux et al., 2001 and Miksch et
al., 2005, respectively).

.0026
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2, INCLUDED
ABCC6, GLN1406LYS

See 603234.0025 and Le Boulanger et al. (2010).

.0027
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM, INCLUDED
ABCC6, ARG518TER

In a 3-year-old Spanish boy with generalized arterial calcification of
infancy (GACI2; 614473), who had calcification of the splenic and
pancreatic arteries, nephrocalcinosis, severe hypertension,
cardiomegaly, psychomotor retardation, and abdominal distention,
Nitschke et al. (2012) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the ABCC6 gene: an R1141X substitution (603234.0001) and a
1552C-T transition in exon 12, resulting in an arg518-to-ter (R518X)
substitution.

The R518X mutation has also been identified in compound heterozygosity
with another ABCC6 mutation in patients with pseudoxanthoma elasticum
(PXE; 264800) (see, e.g., Meloni et al., 2001 and Miksch et al., 2005).

.0028
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2
ABCC6, 1-BP INS, 450C

See 603234.0006 and Nitschke et al. (2012).

.0029
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM, INCLUDED
ABCC6, IVS21, G-T, +1

In a Canadian female infant with generalized arterial calcification of
infancy (GACI2; 614473), originally reported by Glatz et al. (2006), who
died at 6.5 weeks of age of myocardial infarction with calcification of
the aorta and coronary, pulmonary, and renal arteries and occlusion of
the right coronary artery, Nitschke et al. (2012) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 splice site mutations in the ABCC6 gene, a G-T
transversion in intron 21 (IVS21+1G-T) and a IVS26-1G-A (603234.0015),
both predicted to cause a frameshift resulting in a premature
termination codon. The latter mutation had previously been identified in
compound heterozygosity in a patient with pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE;
264800).

The IVS21+1G-T splice-site mutation has also been identified in compound
heterozygosity with another ABCC6 mutation in PXE patients (see, e.g.,
Le Saux et al., 2001 and Miksch et al., 2005).

REFERENCE 1. Aherrahrou, Z.; Doehring, D. C.; Ehlers, E.-M.; Liptau, H.; Depping,
R.; Linsel-Nitschke, P.; Kaczmarek, P. M.; Erdmann, J.; Schunkert,
H.: An alternative splice variant in Abcc6, the gene causing dystrophic
calcification, leads to protein deficiency in C3H/He mice. J. Biol.
Chem. 283: 7608-7615, 2008.

2. Bacchelli, B.; Quaglino, D.; Gheduzzi, D.; Taparelli, F.; Boraldi,
F.; Trolli, B.; Le Saux, O.; Boyd, C. D.; Ronchetti, I. P.: Identification
of heterozygote carriers in families with a recessive form of pseudoxanthoma
elasticum (PXE). Mod. Pathol. 12: 1112-1123, 1999.

3. Beck, K.; Hayashi, K.; Dang, K.; Hayashi, M.; Boyd, C. D.: Analysis
of ABCC6 (MRP6) in normal human tissues. Histochem. Cell Biol. 123:
517-528, 2005.

4. Belinsky, M. G.; Chen, Z.-S.; Shchaveleva, I.; Zeng, H.; Kruh,
G. D.: Characterization of the drug resistance and transport properties
of multidrug resistance protein 6 (MRP6, ABCC6). Cancer Res. 62:
6172-6177, 2002.

5. Belinsky, M. G.; Kruh, G. D.: MOAT-E (ARA) is a full-length MRP/cMOAT
subfamily transporter expressed in kidney and liver. Brit. J. Cancer 80:
1342-1349, 1999.

6. Bergen, A. A. B.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum: the end of the autosomal
dominant segregation myth. (Commentary) J. Invest. Derm. 126: 704-705,
2006.

7. Bergen, A. A. B.; Plomp, A. S.; Schuurman, E. J.; Terry, S.; Breuning,
M.; Dauwerse, H.; Swart, J.; Kool, M.; van Soest, S.; Baas, F.; ten
Brink, J. B.; de Jong, P. T. V. M.: Mutations in ABCC6 cause pseudoxanthoma
elasticum. Nature Genet. 25: 228-231, 2000.

8. Cai, L.; Struk, B.; Adams, M. D.; Ji, W.; Haaf, T.; Kang, H.-L.;
Dho, S. H.; Xu, X.; Ringpfeil, F.; Nancarrow, J.; Zach, S.; Schaen,
L.; and 19 others: A 500-kb region on chromosome 16p13.1 contains
the pseudoxanthoma elasticum locus: high resolution mapping and genomic
structure. J. Molec. Med. 78: 36-46, 2000.

9. Chassaing, N.; Martin, L.; Calvas, P.; Le Bert, M.; Hovnanian,
A.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum: a clinical, pathophysiological and
genetic update including 11 novel ABCC6 mutations. J. Med. Genet. 42:
881-892, 2005.

10. Chassaing, N.; Martin, L.; Mazereeuw, J.; Barrie, L.; Nizard,
S.; Bonafe, J.-L.; Calvas, P.; Hovnanian, A.: Novel ABCC6 mutations
in pseudoxanthomas elasticum. J. Invest. Derm. 122: 608-613, 2004.

11. Costrop, L. M. F.; Vanakker, O. O. M.; Van Laer, L.; Le Saux,
O.; Martin, L.; Chassaing, N.; Guerra, D.; Pasquali-Ronchetti, I.;
Coucke, P. J.; De Paepe, A.: Novel deletions causing pseudoxanthoma
elasticum underscore the genomic instability of the ABCC6 region. J.
Hum. Genet. 55: 112-117, 2010.

12. Germain, D. P.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum: evidence for the existence
of a pseudogene highly homologous to the ABCC6 gene. (Letter) J.
Med. Genet. 38: 457-460, 2001.

13. Germain, D. P.; Nau, V.; Esnault, C.; Jeunemaitre, X.; Bruneval,
P.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum: molecular investigations in a consanguineous
family further supports the existence of pseudogenes (psi-ABCC6) homologous
to the ABCC6 gene. Gene Funct. Dis. 2: 208-213, 2001.

14. Germain, D. P.; Perdu, J.; Remones, V.; Jeunemaitre, X.: Homozygosity
for the R1268Q mutation in MRP6, the pseudoxanthoma elasticum gene,
is not disease-causing. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 274: 297-301,
2000.

15. Glatz, A. C.; Pawel, B. R.; Hsu, D. T.; Weinberg, P.; Chrisant,
M. R. K.: Idiopathic infantile arterial calcification: two case reports,
a review of the literature and a role for cardiac transplantation. Pediat.
Transplant. 10: 225-233, 2006.

16. Gorgels, T. G. M. F.; Hu, X.; Scheffer, G. L.; van der Wal, A.
C.; Toonstra, J.; de Jong, P. T. V. M.; van Kuppevelt, T. H.; Levelt,
C. N.; de Wolf, A.; Loves, W. J. P.; Scheper, R. J.; Peek, R.; Bergen,
A. A. B.: Disruption of Abcc6 in the mouse: novel insight in the
pathogenesis of pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14:
1763-1773, 2005.

17. Hu, X.; Peek, R.; Plomp, A.; ten Brink, J.; Scheffer, G.; van
Soest, S.; Leys, A.; de Jong, P. T. V. M.; Bergen, A. A. B.: Analysis
of the frequent R1141X mutation in the ABCC6 gene in pseudoxanthoma
elasticum. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 44: 1824-1829, 2003.

18. Hu, X.; Plomp, A.; Gorgels, T.; Ten Brink, J.; Loves, W.; Mannens,
M.; De Jong, P. T. V. M.; Bergen, A. A. B.: Efficient molecular diagnostic
strategy for ABCC6 in pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Genet. Test. 8:
292-300, 2004.

19. Hu, X.; Plomp, A.; Wijnholds, J.; ten Brink, J.; van Soest, S.;
van den Born, L. I.; Leys, A.; Peek, R.; de Jong, P. T. V. M.; Bergen,
A. A. B.: ABCC6/MRP6 mutations: further insight into the molecular
pathology of pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 11:
215-224, 2003.

20. Ilias, A.; Urban, Z.; Seidl, T. L.; Le Saux, O.; Sinko, E.; Boyd,
C. D.; Sarkadi, B.; Varadi, A.: Loss of ATP-dependent transport activity
in pseudoxanthoma elasticum-associated mutants of human ABCC6 (MRP6). J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 16860-16867, 2002. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem.
277: 24842 only, 2002.

21. Jiang, Q.; Endo, M.; Dibra, F.; Wang, K.; Uitto, J.: Pseudoxanthoma
elasticum is a metabolic disease. J. Invest. Derm. 129: 348-354,
2009.

22. Jiang, Q.; Li, Q.; Uitto, J.: Aberrant mineralization of connective
tissues in a mouse model of pseudoxanthoma elasticum: systemic and
local regulatory factors. J. Invest. Derm. 127: 1392-1402, 2007.

23. Jiang, Q.; Matsuzaki, Y.; Li, K.; Uitto, J.: Transcriptional
regulation and characterization of the promoter region of the human
ABCC6 gene. J. Invest. Derm. 126: 325-355, 2006.

24. Jiang, Q.; Uitto, J.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum: a metabolic disease?
(Commentary) J. Invest. Derm. 126: 1440-1441, 2006.

25. Klein, I.; Sarkadi, B.; Varadi, A.: An inventory of the human
ABC proteins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1461: 237-262, 1999.

26. Klement, J. F.; Matsuzaki, Y.; Jiang, Q.-J.; Terlizzi, J.; Choi,
H. Y.; Fujimoto, N.; Li, K.; Pulkkinen, L.; Birk, D. E.; Sundberg,
J. P.; Uitto, J.: Targeted ablation of the Abcc6 gene results in
ectopic mineralization of connective tissues. Molec. Cell. Biol. 25:
8299-8310, 2005.

27. Kool, M.; van der Linden, M.; de Haas, M.; Baas, F.; Borst, P.
: Expression of human MRP6, a homologue of the multidrug resistance
protein gene MRP1, in tissues and cancer cells. Cancer Res. 59:
175-182, 1999.

28. Kuss, B. J.; O'Neill, G. M.; Eyre, H.; Doggett, N. A.; Callen,
D. F.; Davey, R. A.: ARA, a novel ABC transporter, is located at
16p13.1, is deleted in inv(16) leukemias, and is shown to be expressed
in primitive hematopoietic precursors. Genomics 51: 455-458, 1998.

29. Le Boulanger, G.; Labreze, C.; Croue, A.; Schurgers, L. J.; Chassaing,
N.; Wittkampf, T.; Rutsch, F.; Martin, L.: An unusual severe vascular
case of pseudoxanthoma elasticum presenting as generalized arterial
calcification of infancy. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 118-123, 2010.

30. Le Saux, O.; Beck, K.; Sachsinger, C.; Silvestri, C.; Treiber,
C.; Goring, H. H. H.; Johnson, E. W.; De Paepe, A.; Pope, F. M.; Pasquali-Ronchetti,
I.; Bercovitch, L.; Marais, A.-S.; Viljoen, D. L.; Terry, S. F.; Boyd,
C. D.: A spectrum of ABCC6 mutations is responsible for pseudoxanthoma
elasticum. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 749-764, 2001. Note: Erratum:
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 1413 only, 2001; Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet.
71: 448 only, 2002.

31. Le Saux, O.; Beck, K.; Sachsinger, C.; Treiber, C.; Goring, H.
H. H.; Curry, K.; Johnson, E. W.; Bercovitch, L.; Marais, A.-S.; Terry,
S. F.; Viljoen, D. L.; Boyd, C. D.: Evidence for a founder effect
for pseudoxanthoma elasticum in the Afrikaner population of South
Africa. Hum. Genet. 111: 331-338, 2002.

32. Le Saux, O.; Bunda, S.; VanWart, C. M.; Douet, V.; Got, L.; Martin,
L.; Hinek, A.: Serum factors from pseudoxanthoma elasticum patients
alter elastic fiber formation in vitro. J. Invest. Derm. 126: 1497-1505,
2006.

33. Le Saux, O.; Urban, Z.; Tschuch, C.; Csiszar, K.; Bacchelli, B.;
Quaglino, D.; Pasquali-Ronchetti, I.; Pope, F. M.; Richards, A.; Terry,
S.; Bercovitch, L.; de Paepe, A.; Boyd, C. D.: Mutations in a gene
encoding an ABC transporter cause pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Nature
Genet. 25: 223-227, 2000.

34. Li, Q.; Grange, D. K.; Armstrong, N. L.; Whelan, A. J.; Hurley,
M. Y.; Rishavy, M. A.; Hallgren, K. W.; Berkner, K. L.; Schurgers,
L. J.; Jiang, Q.; Uitto, J.: Mutations in the GGCX and ABCC6 genes
in a family with pseudoxanthoma elasticum-like phenotypes. J. Invest.
Derm. 129: 553-563, 2009.

35. Longhurst, T. J.; O'Neill, G. M.; Harvie, R. M.; Davey, R. A.
: The anthracycline resistance-associated (ara) gene, a novel gene
associated with multidrug resistance in a human leukaemia cell line. Brit.
J. Cancer 74: 1331-1335, 1996.

36. Matsuzaki, Y.; Nakano, A.; Jiang, Q.-J.; Pulkkinen, L.; Uitto,
J.: Tissue-specific expression of the ABCC6 gene. J. Invest. Derm. 125:
900-905, 2005.

37. Meloni, I.; Rubegni, P.; De Aloe, G.; Bruttini, M.; Pianigiani,
E.; Cusano, R.; Seri, M.; Mondillo, S.; Federico, A.; Bardelli, A.
M.; Andreassi, L.; Fimiani, M.; Renieri, A.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum:
point mutations in the ABCC6 gene and a large deletion including also
ABCC1 and MYH11. (Abstract) Hum. Mutat. 18: 85 only, 2001. Note:
Full article online.

38. Meng, H.; Vera, I.; Che, N.; Wang, X.; Wang, S. S.; Ingram-Drake,
L.; Schadt, E. E.; Drake, T. A.; Lusis, A. J.: Identification of
Abcc6 as the major causal gene for dystrophic cardiac calcification
in mice through integrative genomics. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104:
4530-4535, 2007.

39. Miksch, S.; Lumsden, A.; Guenther, U. P.; Foernzler, D.; Christen-Zach,
S.; Daugherty, C.; Ramesar, R. S.; Lebwohl, M.; Hohl, D.; Neldner,
K. H.; Lindpaintner, K.; Richards, R. I.; Struk, B.: Molecular genetics
of pseudoxanthoma elasticum: type and frequency of mutations in ABCC6. Hum.
Mutat. 26: 235-248, 2005.

40. Nitschke, Y.; Baujat, G.; Botschen, U.; Wittkampf, T.; du Moulin,
M.; Stella, J.; Le Merrer, M.; Guest, G.; Lambot, K.; Tazarourte-Pinturier,
M.-F.; Chassaing, N.; Roche, O.; and 19 others: Generalized arterial
calcification of infancy and pseudoxanthoma elasticum can be caused
by mutations in either ENPP1 or ABCC6. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90: 25-39,
2012.

41. Pfendner, E. G.; Vanakker, O. M.; Terry, S. F.; Vourthis, S.;
McAndrew, P. E.; McClain, M. R.; Fratta, S.; Marais, A.-S.; Hariri,
S.; Coucke, P. J.; Ramsay, M.; Viljoen, D.; Terry, P. F.; De Paepe,
A.; Uitto, J.; Bercovitch, L. G.: Mutation detection in the ABCC6
gene and genotype-phenotype analysis in a large international case
series affected by pseudoxanthoma elasticum. J. Med. Genet. 44:
621-628, 2007.

42. Plomp, A. S.; Bergen, A. A. B.; Florijn, R. J.; Terry, S. F.;
Toonstra, J.; van Dijk, M. R.; de Jong, P. T. V. M.: Pseudoxanthoma
elasticum: wide phenotypic variation in homozygotes and no signs in
heterozygotes for the c.3775delT mutation in ABCC6. Genet. Med. 11:
852-858, 2009.

43. Plomp, A. S.; Hu, X.; de Jong, P. T. V. M.; Bergen, A. A. B.:
Does autosomal dominant pseudoxanthoma elasticum exist? Am. J. Med.
Genet. 126A: 403-412, 2004.

44. Pulkkinen, L.; Nakano, A.; Ringpfeil, F.; Uitto, J.: Identification
of ABCC6 pseudogenes on human chromosome 16p: implications for mutation
detection in pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Hum. Genet. 109: 356-365,
2001.

45. Ratajewski, M.; Bartosz, G.; Pulaski, L.: Expression of the human
ABCC6 gene is induced by retinoids through the retinoid X receptor. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 350: 1082-1087, 2006.

46. Ratajewski, M.; Van de Ven, W. J. M.; Bartosz, G.; Pulaski, L.
: The human pseudoxanthoma elasticum gene ABCC6 is transcriptionally
regulated by PLAG family transcription factors. Hum. Genet. 124:
451-463, 2008.

47. Ringpfeil, F.; Lebwohl, M.G.; Christiano, A. M.; Uitto, J.: Pseudoxanthoma
elasticum: mutations in the MRP6 gene encoding a transmembrane ATP-binding
cassette (ABC) transporter. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 6001-6006,
2000.

48. Ringpfeil, F.; Nakano, A.; Uitto, J.; Pulkkinen, L.: Compound
heterozygosity for a recurrent 16.5-kb Alu-mediated deletion mutation
and single-base-pair substitutions in the ABCC6 gene results in pseudoxanthoma
elasticum. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68: 642-652, 2001.

49. Ringpfeil, F.; Pulkkinen, L.; Uitto, J.: Molecular genetics of
pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Exp. Derm. 10: 221-228, 2001.

50. Sherer, D. W.; Bercovitch, L.; Lebwohl, M.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum:
significance of limited phenotypic expression in parents of affected
offspring. J. Am. Acad. Derm. 44: 534-537, 2001.

51. Sinko, E.; Ilias, A.; Ujhelly, O.; Homolya, L.; Scheffer, G. L.;
Bergen, A. A. B.; Sarkadi, B.; Varadi, A.: Subcellular localization
and N-glycosylation of human ABCC6, expressed in MDCKII cells. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 308: 263-269, 2003.

52. Torrington, M.; Viljoen, D. L.: Founder effect in 20 Afrikaner
kindreds with pseudoxanthoma elasticum. S. Afr. Med. J. 79: 7-11,
1991.

53. Trip, M. D.; Smulders, Y. M.; Wegman, J. J.; Hu, X.; Boer, J.
M.; ten Brink, J. B.; Zwinderman, A. H.; Kastelein, J. J.; Feskens,
E. J.; Bergen, A. A.: Frequent mutation in the ABCC6 gene (R1141X)
is associated with a strong increase in the prevalence of coronary
artery disease. Circulation 106: 773-775, 2002.

54. van Soest, S.; Swart, J.; Tijmes, N.; Sandkuijl, L. A.; Rommers,
J.; Bergen, A. A. B.: A locus for autosomal recessive pseudoxanthoma
elasticum, with penetrance of vascular symptoms in carriers, maps
to chromosome 16p13.1. Genome Res. 7: 830-834, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/8/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/18/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/25/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/14/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/6/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/28/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/5/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/28/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/30/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/6/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/28/2007
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 11/29/2006
Victor A. McKusick - edited: 9/21/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/1/2004
Jane Kelly - updated: 8/22/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/10/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/13/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/17/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/19/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/30/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/22/2000
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 12/2/1998

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/29/1998

EDITED carol: 10/01/2013
alopez: 7/18/2012
carol: 2/8/2012
terry: 2/8/2012
carol: 2/8/2012
alopez: 6/29/2010
terry: 6/18/2010
wwang: 6/18/2010
ckniffin: 3/25/2010
ckniffin: 11/3/2009
wwang: 10/30/2009
ckniffin: 10/14/2009
alopez: 5/13/2009
mgross: 1/8/2009
terry: 1/6/2009
wwang: 10/28/2008
wwang: 8/5/2008
alopez: 1/24/2008
terry: 12/28/2007
wwang: 10/3/2007
wwang: 4/30/2007
alopez: 3/13/2007
alopez: 3/9/2007
terry: 3/6/2007
alopez: 2/28/2007
mgross: 11/29/2006
joanna: 12/20/2005
alopez: 10/12/2005
alopez: 9/21/2005
carol: 4/9/2004
ckniffin: 4/1/2004
ckniffin: 10/17/2003
carol: 8/22/2003
carol: 3/18/2003
tkritzer: 3/13/2003
terry: 3/10/2003
tkritzer: 11/22/2002
tkritzer: 11/15/2002
terry: 11/13/2002
carol: 8/9/2002
carol: 7/31/2002
carol: 1/3/2002
carol: 11/21/2001
mcapotos: 10/30/2001
mcapotos: 10/25/2001
terry: 10/17/2001
cwells: 3/29/2001
terry: 3/19/2001
mcapotos: 9/5/2000
carol: 6/14/2000
carol: 6/1/2000
carol: 5/30/2000
alopez: 5/22/2000
carol: 11/9/1999
alopez: 12/2/1998
alopez: 10/29/1998

603647	TITLE *603647 BCS1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG-LIKE; BCS1L
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The human BCS1L gene encodes a homolog of S. cerevisiae bcs1 protein
involved in the assembly of complex III of the mitochondrial respiratory
chain.

CLONING

The S. cerevisiae bcs1 protein is a constituent of the inner
mitochondrial membrane and is required for the expression of functional
ubiquinol-cytochrome-c reductase (bc1) complex (see 191328). The bcs1
protein shares sequence similarity with members of the AAA (ATPases
associated with various cellular activities) superfamily (see 601681).
By searching an EST database for sequences related to bcs1, Petruzzella
et al. (1998) identified a cDNA encoding human BCS1L (BCS1-like). The
predicted 420-amino acid human protein is 50% identical to yeast bcs1
and, like bcs1, contains 2 conserved nucleotide-binding motifs. Although
BCS1L does not contain an N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequence,
in vitro mitochondrial import and trypsin-protection assays demonstrated
that it is imported into mitochondria. Northern blot analysis revealed
that BCS1L is expressed ubiquitously as a 1.4-kb mRNA. The authors also
detected a 4.5-kb transcript that they considered to be either an
alternative BCS1L mRNA or an mRNA derived from a related gene.

GENE FUNCTION

Found within the inner mitochondrial membrane, BCS1L is presumed to
facilitate insertion of Rieske Fe/S protein into precursors to complex
III during assembly of the respiratory chain (Cruciat et al., 1999).
Complex III then becomes assembled with complexes IV and I into a
respirasome supercomplex that facilitates the electron transfer required
for the synthesis of ATP.

MAPPING

Based on sequence similarity to ESTs, Petruzzella et al. (1998)
tentatively mapped the BCS1L gene to 2q33.

GENE STRUCTURE

De Lonlay et al. (2001) showed that the BCS1L gene consists of 7 exons.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Mitochondrial Complex III Deficiency, Nuclear Type 1

De Lonlay et al. (2001) found 4 biallelic mutations in the BCS1L gene in
6 patients from 4 families with mitochondrial complex III deficiency
nuclear type 1 (MC3DN1; 124000) characterized by neonatal proximal
tubulopathy, hepatic involvement, and encephalopathy. Complementation
studies in yeast confirmed the deleterious effect of these missense
mutations. De Lonlay et al. (2001) suggested that mutation of BCS1L is a
frequent cause of complex III deficiency, as one-third of their Turkish
patients had mutations in the BSC1L gene. De Lonlay et al. (2001)
reported that they had not been able to detect BCS1L mutations in
complex III-deficient patients with clinical presentations other than
neonatal tubulopathy with hepatic involvement and encephalopathy.

- GRACILE Syndrome

The GRACILE (growth retardation, amino aciduria, cholestasis, iron
overload, lactic acidosis, and early death) syndrome (603358) belongs to
the disease heritage of Finland. All affected families carry the same
ancestral haplotype on 2q33-q37, indicating 1 founder mutation (Visapaa
et al., 1998). Visapaa et al. (2002) identified a homozygous
ser78-to-gly mutation (S78G; 603358.0005) in the BCS1L gene in all
Finnish patients with GRACILE syndrome studied. In addition, they
identified 5 different mutations in the BCS1L gene in 3 British infants,
previously reported by Morris et al. (1995), whose symptoms resembled
those in GRACILE syndrome but who also had complex III deficiency and
neurologic symptoms. The phenotype of the Turkish patients in whom de
Lonlay et al. (2001) demonstrated mutations in the BCS1L gene was
distinctly different from that of the Finnish patients. Whereas the
Turkish patients had complex III deficiency, the Finnish patients had
complex III activity within the normal range. The Finnish patients had
no neurologic problems, but had marked hepatic iron overload, associated
with abnormal levels of proteins involved in iron transfer and storage,
and free plasma iron. These findings implied that BCS1L has another
cellular function that is uncharacterized but essential, and that it is
putatively involved in iron metabolism.

- Bjornstad Syndrome

Bjornstad syndrome (262000) is an autosomal recessive condition
characterized by sensorineural hearing loss and pili torti. Lubianca
Neto et al. (1998) mapped the Bjornstad syndrome locus to 2q34-q36.
Hinson et al. (2007) refined the map location of the disorder to 2q35
and demonstrated mutations in the BCS1L gene (e.g., 603647.0001).

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

To understand how BCS2L mutations cause such widely different clinical
phenotypes, Hinson et al. (2007) considered the locations of defects on
the BCS1L protein structure and compared the function of mutant BCS1L in
yeast and in human lymphocytes. Their studies showed that all BCS1L
mutations disrupted the assembly of mitochondrial respirasomes (the
basic unit of respiration in human mitochondria), but the clinical
severity of the mutations was correlated with the production of reactive
oxygen species. The data indicated that in addition to mitochondrial
heteroplasmy and variable energy requirements of tissues,
tissue-specific sensitivities to reactive oxygen species contribute to
the variability of the manifestations of mitochondrial defects.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1
BCS1L, SER277ASN

In 2 affected sibs and 1 fetus in a consanguineous family with
mitochondrial complex III deficiency nuclear type 1 (MC3DN1; 124000)
characterized by neonatal tubulopathy, encephalopathy, and liver
failure, de Lonlay et al. (2001) identified a homozygous 830G-A
transition in the BCS1L gene, resulting in a ser277-to-asp (S277N)
substitution.

.0002
LEIGH SYNDROME DUE TO MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY
BCS1L, PRO99LEU

In 2 patients with complex III deficiency (124000), a boy and a girl,
born to unrelated consanguineous families, de Lonlay et al. (2001)
identified the same homozygous C-to-T transition at nucleotide 296 in
exon 1 of the BCS1L gene, causing the substitution of a leucine for a
highly conserved proline at codon 99 (P99L). The patients had metabolic
acidosis, hepatic involvement, neurologic deterioration, and brainstem
and basal ganglia lesions consistent with a diagnosis of Leigh syndrome
(256000). One patient had abnormal ventilation patterns and proximal
renal tubulopathy.

.0003
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1
BCS1L, ARG155PRO

In a boy of Turkish origin with complex III deficiency (124000) born to
nonconsanguineous parents, de Lonlay et al. (2001) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the BCS1L gene: a 464C-G transversion
in exon 3 of the BCS1L gene, resulting in an arg155-to-pro (R155P)
substitution, and a 1057G-A transition in exon 7, resulting in a
val353-to-met (V353M; 603647.0004) substitution.

.0004
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1
BCS1L, VAL353MET

See 603647.0003 and de Lonlay et al. (2001).

.0005
GRACILE SYNDROME
BCS1L, SER78GLY

Visapaa et al. (2002) reported that all GRACILE syndrome (603358)
patients in Finland were homozygous for a 232A-G mutation in exon 2 of
the BCS1L gene, resulting in a ser78-to-gly (S78G) substitution. Unlike
the Turkish patients reported by de Lonlay et al. (2001), the Finnish
patients had normal complex III activity and no neurologic problems, but
did have marked iron overload.

.0006
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1
BCS1L, ARG45CYS

In 2 Spanish sibs with fatal infantile complex III deficiency (124000),
De Meirleir et al. (2003) identified compound heterozygosity for
mutation in the BCS1L gene: a 246C-T transition in exon 1, resulting in
an arg45-to-cys (R45C) substitution, and a 279C-T transition in exon 1,
resulting in an arg56-to-ter (R56X; 603647.0007) substitution. The R45C
substitution occurs in a crucial targeting signal of the gene and is
predicted to interfere with proper protein functioning. Each parent was
heterozygous for 1 of the mutations. Both patients had severe metabolic
acidosis noted shortly after birth, as well as severe liver dysfunction
and a renal tubulopathy. One died at age 3 weeks of lactic acidosis. The
second infant also had obvious neurologic involvement, with delayed
myelination, axial hypotonia, and developmental delay. He died at age 3
months. Postmortem liver examination of both infants showed liver
fibrosis, severe cholestasis, and hepatosiderosis with accumulation of
iron in aggregates of macrophages and in Kupffer cells. Mitochondria
appeared enlarged with few or no cristae and a fluffy matrix. De
Meirleir et al. (2003) suggested that the iron accumulation could be
explained by the lack of incorporation of iron in the iron-sulfur
cluster of complex III.

Ramos-Arroyo et al. (2009) reported another Spanish infant with the R45C
and R56X mutations. She presented with neonatal severe hypotonia, food
intolerance, and vomiting. She soon developed a proximal renal
tubulopathy with glucosuria, phosphaturia, and aminoaciduria, metabolic
lactic acidosis, and hepatic involvement. Bilateral cataracts were also
noted. At age 4 months, she showed nystagmus, hypertonia, microcephaly,
developmental delay, and failure to thrive. Her neurologic condition and
metabolic acidosis worsened rapidly, and she died at 6 months of age.
Biochemical studies of muscle tissue showed impaired activity of
mitochondrial complex III. Ramos-Arroyo et al. (2009) noted that this
child did not have evidence of altered iron metabolism, as had been
observed in the patients reported by De Meirleir et al. (2003), and as
has been observed in patients with the allelic disorder GRACILE syndrome
(603358). Ramos-Arroyo et al. (2009) postulated that phenotypic
variability even in individuals with the same BCS1L genotype may reflect
tissue-specific expression of the mutant gene.

.0007
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1
BCS1L, ARG56TER

See 603647.0006 and De Meirleir et al. (2003).

.0008
BJORNSTAD SYNDROME
BCS1L, ARG183HIS

In affected members of the family with Bjornstad syndrome (262000) in
which Lubianca Neto et al. (1998) demonstrated linkage to 2q, Hinson et
al. (2007) identified homozygosity for a C-to-T transition in the BCS1L
gene, resulting in an arg183-to-his (R183H) substitution. Eight
individuals in 2 sibships related as first cousins once removed were
affected; the parents in each case were consanguineous.

.0009
BJORNSTAD SYNDROME WITH MILD MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1, INCLUDED
BCS1L, ARG184CYS

In a sporadic case of Bjornstad syndrome (262000) with mild
mitochondrial complex III deficiency (124000), Hinson et al. (2007)
found compound heterozygosity for 2 missense mutations in the BCS1L
gene: arg184 to cys (R184C) and gly35 to arg (G35R; 603647.0010).

In a Moroccan girl with mitochondrial complex III deficiency (124000),
Fernandez-Vizarra et al. (2007) identified compound heterozygosity for
the R184C mutation and a 547C-T transition in exon 3 of the BCS1L gene,
resulting in an arg183-to-cys (R183C; 603647.0012) substitution. She
presented at age 9 months with acute psychomotor regression, hypotonia,
and failure to thrive, which progressed to spastic quadriparesis and
mental retardation associated with abnormal signal intensities in the
thalami, basal ganglia, and periventricular white matter, consistent
with an encephalopathy. Heart, liver, and kidneys were apparently
unaffected, but she was also noted to have brittle hair. Studies in
yeast showed that both mutations significantly reduced mitochondrial
cytochrome content and respiratory activity, as well as caused a
decreased incorporation of the Rieske iron-sulfur protein (UQCRFS1;
191327) into complex III. Further studies showed decreased levels of
fully assembled complex III. The findings suggested that BCS1L is
necessary for proper complex III assembly.

.0010
BJORNSTAD SYNDROME WITH MILD MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY
BCS1L, GLY35ARG

See 603647.0009 and Hinson et al. (2007).

.0011
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1
BCS1L, THR50ALA

In a 4-year-old Spanish boy with isolated mitochondrial complex III
deficiency (124000), Blazquez et al. (2009) identified a homozygous
148A-G transition in exon 1 of the BCS1L gene, resulting in a
thr50-to-ala (T50A) substitution in the mitochondrial sorting sequence.
He presented at 6 months of age with psychomotor retardation, failure to
thrive, hypotonia, lactic acidosis, and hepatic dysfunction. Physical
examination showed unstable head support, poor eye fixation, coarse
facies, and epicanthus. There was hypertrichosis of the frontal head
zone and limbs, and excessive fat distribution in the upper back, neck,
hands and feet, with almost no fat on the limbs. Respiratory chain
activity in muscle and fibroblasts showed an isolated complex III defect
(58% of normal in muscle, 93% in fibroblasts). At age 4 years, he still
showed psychomotor retardation, had developed mild sensorineural hearing
loss, and persistent lactic acidemia, but renal function, hair, and iron
metabolism were normal. Brain MRI was normal. The mutation was not found
in 400 control alleles, and each unaffected parent was heterozygous for
the mutation.

.0012
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX III DEFICIENCY, NUCLEAR TYPE 1
BCS1L, ARG183CYS

See 603647.0009 and Fernandez-Vizarra et al. (2007).

REFERENCE 1. Blazquez, A.; Gil-Borlado, M. C.; Moran, M.; Verdu, A.; Cazorla-Calleja,
M. R.; Martin, M. A.; Arenas, J.; Ugalde, C.: Infantile mitochondrial
encephalomyopathy with unusual phenotype caused by a novel BCS1L mutation
in an isolated complex III-deficient patient. Neuromusc. Disord. 19:
143-146, 2009.

2. Cruciat, C. M.; Hell, K.; Folsch, H.; Neupert, W.; Stuart, R. A.
: Bsc1p, an AAA-family member, is a chaperone for the assembly of
the cytochrome bc(1) complex. EMBO J. 18: 5226-5233, 1999.

3. de Lonlay, P.; Valnot, I.; Barrientos, A.; Gorbatyuk, M.; Tzagoloff,
A.; Taanman, J.-W.; Benayoun, E.; Chretien, D.; Kadhom, N.; Lombes,
A.; Ogier de Baulny, H.; Niaudet, P.; Munnich, A.; Rustin, P.; Rotig,
A.: A mutant mitochondrial respiratory chain assembly protein causes
complex III deficiency in patients with tubulopathy, encephalopathy
and liver failure. Nature Genet. 29: 57-60, 2001.

4. De Meirleir, L.; Seneca, S.; Damis, E.; Sepulchre, B.; Hoorens,
A.; Gerlo, E.; Garcia Silva, M. T.; Hernandez, E. M.; Lissens, W.;
Van Coster, R.: Clinical and diagnostic characteristics of complex
III deficiency due to mutations in the BCS1L gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 121A:
126-131, 2003.

5. Fernandez-Vizarra, E.; Bugiani, M.; Goffrini, P.; Carrara, F.;
Farina, L.; Procopio, E.; Donati, A.; Uziel, G.; Ferrero, I.; Zeviani,
M.: Impaired complex III assembly associated with BCS1L gene mutations
in isolated mitochondrial encephalopathy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 16:
1241-1252, 2007.

6. Hinson, J. T.; Fantin, V. R.; Schonberger, J.; Breivik, N.; Siem,
G.; McDonough, B.; Sharma, P.; Keogh, I.; Godinho, R.; Santos, F.;
Esparza, A.; Nicolau, Y.; Selvaag, E.; Cohen, B. H.; Hoppel, C. L.;
Tranebjaerg, L.; Eavey, R. D.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.: Missense
mutations in the BCS1L gene as a cause of the Bjornstad syndrome. New
Eng. J. Med. 356: 809-819, 2007.

7. Lubianca Neto, J. F.; Lu, L.; Eavey, R. D.; Macias Flores, M. A.;
Martinez Caldera, R.; Sangwatanaroj, S.; Schott, J. J.; McDonough,
B.; Santos, J. I.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.: The Bjornstad
syndrome (sensorineural hearing loss and pili torti) disease gene
maps to chromosome 2q34-36. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 1107-1112, 1998.

8. Morris, A. A. M.; Taylor, R. W.; Birch-Machin, M. A.; Jackson,
M. J.; Coulthard, M. G.; Bindoff, L. A.; Welch, J. R.; Howell, N.;
Turnbull, D. M.: Neonatal Fanconi syndrome due to deficiency of complex
III of the respiratory chain. Pediat. Nephrol. 9: 407-411, 1995.

9. Petruzzella, V.; Tiranti, V.; Fernandez, P.; Ianna, P.; Carrozzo,
R.; Zeviani, M.: Identification and characterization of human cDNAs
specific to BCS1, PET112, SCO1, COX15, and COX11, five genes involved
in the formation and function of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Genomics 54:
494-504, 1998.

10. Ramos-Arroyo, M. A.; Hualde, J.; Ayechu, A.; De Meirleir, L.;
Seneca, S.; Nadal, N.; Briones, P.: Clinical and biochemical spectrum
of mitochondrial complex III deficiency caused by mutations in the
BCS1L gene. (Letter) Clin. Genet. 75: 585-587, 2009.

11. Visapaa, I.; Fellman, V.; Varilo, T.; Palotie, A.; Raivio, K.
O.; Peltonen, L.: Assignment of the locus for a new lethal neonatal
metabolic syndrome to 2q33-37. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63: 1396-1403,
1998.

12. Visapaa, I.; Fellman, V.; Vesa, J.; Dasvarma, A.; Hutton, J. L.;
Kumar, V.; Payne, G. S.; Makarow, M.; Van Coster, R.; Taylor, R. W.;
Turnbull, D. M.; Suomalainen, A.; Peltonen, L.: GRACILE syndrome,
a lethal metabolic disorder with iron overload, is caused by a point
mutation in BCS1L. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71: 863-876, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/1/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/9/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/4/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/21/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/27/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/5/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/29/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/22/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 3/15/1999

EDITED carol: 04/08/2013
ckniffin: 4/8/2013
wwang: 6/4/2010
ckniffin: 6/1/2010
wwang: 3/24/2010
ckniffin: 3/9/2010
wwang: 11/20/2009
wwang: 11/18/2009
ckniffin: 11/4/2009
carol: 3/21/2007
terry: 2/27/2007
wwang: 10/12/2005
ckniffin: 10/5/2005
carol: 9/21/2005
ckniffin: 8/29/2005
terry: 4/21/2005
terry: 3/3/2005
carol: 7/10/2003
ckniffin: 7/9/2003
carol: 11/1/2002
tkritzer: 10/30/2002
terry: 10/29/2002
alopez: 9/4/2001
terry: 8/22/2001
alopez: 3/15/1999

606839	TITLE *606839 CADHERIN-RELATED FAMILY, MEMBER 5; CDHR5
;;MUCIN AND CADHERIN-LIKE; MUCDHL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Paris and Williams (2000) identified several genes, including CDHR5,
which they called MUCDHL, by constructing a physical map of chromosome
11p15.5. They found that MUCDHL contains nonpolymorphic tandem repeats
similar to mucin proteins and a consensus calcium-binding motif found in
all cadherins.

MAPPING

Paris and Williams (2000) constructed a physical map of chromosome
11p15.5 and located the CDHR5 gene less than 250 kb telomeric to a mucin
gene cluster.

REFERENCE 1. Paris, M. J.; Williams, B. R. G.: Characterization of a 500-kb
contig spanning the region between c-Ha-Ras and MUC2 on chromosome
11p15.5. Genomics 69: 196-202, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/10/2002

EDITED wwang: 12/03/2010
carol: 4/10/2002

605722	TITLE *605722 POTASSIUM CHANNEL, INWARDLY RECTIFYING, SUBFAMILY J, MEMBER 16; KCNJ16
;;KIR5.1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Inwardly rectifying potassium (Kir) channels are important for
regulation of the resting membrane potential and control of cellular
electrical activity. KCNJ16, or Kir5.1, belongs to the Kir family, but
it does not produce functional potassium channels when expressed by
itself. Instead, Kir5.1 appears to coassemble selectively with either
Kir4.1 (KCNJ10; 602208) or Kir4.2 (KCNJ15; 602106) to form novel
heteromeric channels (summary by D'Adamo et al., 2011).

CLONING

By EST database searching for sequences showing homology to mouse
Kir5.1, Liu et al. (2000) identified a human EST with 98% sequence
identity to a segment on chromosome 17. Using the full-length Kir5.1
mouse clone, they derived the human ortholog, designated KCNJ16, from
genomic sequence. The KCNJ16 gene encodes a deduced 418-amino acid
protein with a calculated molecular mass of 48 kD. The protein shares
over 95% sequence identity with both mouse and rat Kir5.1. RT-PCR
analysis detected ubiquitous expression of KCNJ16, whereas Northern blot
analysis detected significant expression of a 4.0-kb transcript in
kidney, pancreas, and thyroid gland. In situ hybridization demonstrated
expression of KCNJ16 in convoluted tubule cells of the kidney and in
acinar and ductal cells of the pancreas. Liu et al. (2000) noted that
Kir1.1 (KCNJ1; 600359), Kir4.1, and Kir4.2 are all expressed in kidney.
They suggested that heteromultimers of these potassium channel proteins
in kidney and pancreas may play a role in ion transport, fluid
regulation, and pH balance.

By database searching with sequences from rat Kir5.1, Derst et al.
(2001) independently assembled a human KCNJ16 cDNA, which they called
Kir5.1. They predicted that Kir5.1 encodes a protein of 418 amino acids
that shares 91% amino acid identity with rat and mouse Kir5.1. They
noted that Kir5.1 shares 40 to 43% amino acid identity with members of
the Kir2 gene family, including Kir2.1 (KCNJ2; 600681), Kir2.2 (KCNJ12;
602323), Kir2.3, and Kir2.4 (KCNJ14; 603953).

Using in situ hybridization, Derst et al. (2001) detected Kir5.1
expression restricted to the hindbrain, midbrain, and diencephalon in
rat brain. Using RT-PCR, they detected KCNJ16 expression in human kidney
in the proximal tubule, the thick ascending limb, and the cortical
collecting duct. They noted that KCNJ16 expression overlaps with Kir2.1
expression in some regions of the brain and kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

Derst et al. (2001) found that when Kir5.1 was expressed in Xenopus
oocytes, it was targeted to the cell surface and formed electrically
silent channels together with Kir2.1, thus negatively controlling Kir2.1
channel activity in native cells.

By electrophysiologic recording of HEK293T cells transfected with rat
cDNAs, Tanemoto et al. (2000) showed that Kir4.1, but not Kir5.1, formed
functional homomeric K+ channels sensitive to intracellular, but not
extracellular, pH. Heteromeric Kir4.1/Kir5 channels were functional and
showed channel properties different than those of homomeric Kir4.1
channels. For both Kir4.1 and Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels, response to pH
disappeared at pH 5.5 and increased in a pH-dependent manner between pH
6.5 and pH 8.0. Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels had larger conductance, altered
kinetics, and greater sensitivity to pH than Kir4.1 channels.
Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels opened in bursts, and the closed period between
bursts was influenced by intracellular pH.

In cotransfection experiments, Tanemoto et al. (2002) showed that Kir5.1
assembles to form a functional homomeric potassium channel by
interacting with PSD95 (602887). Kir5.1 expressed alone was distributed
mostly in the cytoplasm, but Kir5.1 coexpressed with PSD95 was located
on the plasma membrane in a clustered manner. Using GST pull-down
studies, Tanemoto et al. (2002) identified domains responsible for
Kir5.1/PSD95 interaction. They found that protein kinase A
(PKA)-mediated phosphorylation of Kir5.1 disrupted the binding of Kir5.1
with PSD95. Tanemoto et al. (2002) hypothesized that Kir5.1/PSD95 forms
a functional brain potassium channel that may be a physiologic target of
PKA-mediated signaling.

GENE STRUCTURE

Derst et al. (2001) determined that the KCNJ16 gene is encoded by 5
exons spanning approximately 60 kb. They noted that KCNJ16 and KCNJ2 are
separated by only 34 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Liu et al. (2000) mapped the KCNJ16 gene
to chromosome 17q25. By the same method, Derst et al. (2001) assigned
KCNJ16 to chromosome 17q23.1-q24.2, near KCNJ2.

ANIMAL MODEL

D'Adamo et al. (2011) found that, despite widespread Kir5.1 expression,
Kir5.1 -/- mice were born at the expected mendelian ratio, were viable
and fertile, and showed no behavioral or physical abnormalities.
However, whole-cell patch clamp experiments showed that neurons cultured
from the locus ceruleus (LC) of Kir5.1 -/- mice exhibited reduced
response to intracellular pH compared with wildtype LC neurons. Both the
kinetics and amplitude of firing of Kir5.1 -/- LC neurons were altered
in response to NH4Cl application or elevated soluble CO2. D'Adamo et al.
(2011) concluded that Kir5.1/Kir4.1 channels of the LC respond to
hypercapnic acidosis.

REFERENCE 1. D'Adamo, M. C.; Shang, L.; Imbrici, P.; Brown, S. D. M.; Pessia,
M.; Tucker, S. J.: Genetic inactivation of Kcnj16 identifies Kir5.1
as an important determinant of neuronal PCO2/pH sensitivity. J. Biol.
Chem. 286: 192-198, 2011.

2. Derst, C.; Karschin, C.; Wischmeyer, E.; Hirsch, J. R.; Preisig-Muller,
R.; Rajan, S.; Engel, H.; Grzeschik, K.-H.; Daut, J.; Karschin, A.
: Genetic and functional linkage of Kir5.1 and Kir2.1 channel subunits. FEBS
Lett. 491: 305-311, 2001.

3. Liu, Y.; McKenna, E.; Figueroa, D. J.; Blevins, R.; Austin, C.
P.; Bennett, P. B.; Swanson, R.: The human inward rectifier K+ channel
subunit Kir5.1 (KCNJ16) maps to chromosome 17q25 and is expressed
in kidney and pancreas. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 90: 60-63, 2000.

4. Tanemoto, M.; Fujita, A.; Higashi, K.; Kurachi, Y.: PSD-95 mediates
formation of a functional homomeric Kir5.1 channel in the brain. Neuron 34:
387-397, 2002.

5. Tanemoto, M.; Kittaka, N.; Inanobe, A.; Kurachi, Y.: In vivo formation
of a proton-sensitive K+ channel by heteromeric subunit assembly of
Kir5.1 with Kir4.1. J. Physiol. 525: 587-592, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/9/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/1/2011
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 12/18/2002

CREATED Yen-Pei C. Chang: 3/8/2001

EDITED terry: 11/29/2012
mgross: 6/9/2011
terry: 6/1/2011
carol: 2/4/2003
tkritzer: 12/18/2002
carol: 3/8/2001

615143	TITLE *615143 UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 20; USP20
;;VHL-INTERACTING DEUBIQUITINATING ENZYME 2; VDU2;;
KIAA1003
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Deubiquitinating enzymes (EC 3.4.19.12), such as USP20, remove ubiquitin
peptides from ubiquitin-containing substrates. These enzymes have a
major role in rescuing ubiquitinated proteins from proteasome-mediated
degradation (Curcio-Morelli et al., 2003).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned USP20, which they designated
KIAA1003. The deduced 913-amino acid protein shares significant
similarity with chicken Ubp41 (USP2; 604725). RT-PCR ELISA detected
relatively low USP20 expression in all adult and fetal tissues examined,
except spleen, which showed no USP20 expression. Highest levels were in
adult brain and ovary.

By searching databases for sequences similar to human VDU1 (USP33;
615146), followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE and PCR, Li et al. (2002)
cloned full-length human USP20, which they called VDU2. The deduced
protein contains 913 amino acids and has a calculated molecular mass of
102 kD. Human and mouse VDU2 share 92% amino acid identity, and human
VDU2 shares 59% amino acid identity with the human VDU1 type II isoform,
with strongest homology at the N- and C-terminal ends. VDU2 has 2 UCH
domains, which are crucial for deubiquitinating activity. Northern blot
analysis detected a 4.5-kb VDU2 transcript in all human tissues
examined, including brain, heart, placenta, lung, liver, muscle, kidney,
and pancreas.

By subcellular fractionation and immunofluorescence analysis,
Curcio-Morelli et al. (2003) found that both epitope-tagged VDU1 and
VDU2 localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in transfected HEK
cells.

By database analysis, Thorne et al. (2011) identified 3 USP20 variants
that encode the same protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in vivo and in vitro deubiquitination assays, Li et al. (2002)
showed that human VDU2 exhibited ubiquitin cleavage activity. They found
that human VDU1 and VDU2 competitively interacted with the E3 ubiquitin
ligase VHL (608537), resulting in ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated
degradation of both proteins.

Type II iodothyronine deiodinase (D2, or DIO2; 601413) converts
thyroxine into biologically active triiodothyronine (T3). T3 production
is terminated via ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated degradation of
D2. By coimmunoprecipitation analysis in transfected HEK293 cells,
Curcio-Morelli et al. (2003) found that both VDU1 and VDU2 bound D2.
Both VDU enzymes colocalized with D2 in the ER and reduced
ubiquitination and degradation of D2. Expression of Vdu1, but not Vdu2,
increased in mouse brown adipocytes following exposure to cold or
norepinephrine. Curcio-Morelli et al. (2003) concluded that VDU enzymes
recycle inactive ubiquitinated D2 to its active deubiquitinated form and
thereby regulate the supply of active thyroid hormone.

Thorne et al. (2011) found that knockdown of USP20 in HeLa cells
resulted in compensatory upregulation of USP33 expression.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the USP20 gene
to chromosome 9.

Hartz (2013) mapped the USP20 gene to chromosome 9q34.11 based on an
alignment of the USP20 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB023220) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Curcio-Morelli, C.; Zavacki, A. M.; Christofollete, M.; Gereben,
B.; de Freitas, B. C. G.; Harney, J. W.; Li, Z.; Wu, G.; Bianco, A.
C.: Deubiquitination of type 2 iodothyronine deiodinase by von Hippel-Lindau
protein-interacting deubiquitinating enzymes regulates thyroid hormone
activation. J. Clin. Invest. 112: 189-196, 2003.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/26/2013.

3. Li, Z.; Wang, D.; Na, X.; Schoen, S. R.; Messing, E. M.; Wu, G.
: Identification of a deubiquitinating enzyme subfamily as substrates
of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 294 -700-709, 2002.

4. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

5. Thorne, C.; Eccles, R. L.; Coulson, J. M.; Urbe, S.; Clague, M.
J.: Isoform-specific localization of the deubiquitinase USP33 to
the Golgi apparatus. Traffic 12: 1563-1574, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 04/17/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/17/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/27/2013

EDITED mgross: 04/17/2013
mgross: 4/17/2013
mgross: 3/27/2013

600944	TITLE *600944 DEOXYHYPUSINE SYNTHASE; DHPS
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Joe et al. (1995) stated that the unusual amino acid hypusine is formed
posttranslationally and is only found in a single cellular protein,
eukaryotic translation initiation factor-5A (EIF5A; see 600187).
Hypusine biosynthesis involves 2 enzymatic steps. In the first step,
deoxyhypusine synthase (EC 2.5.1.46) catalyzes the NAD-dependent
transfer of the butylamine moiety of spermidine to the epsilon-amino
group of a specific lysine residue of the EIF5A precursor protein to
form the intermediate deoxyhypusine residue. In the second step,
mediated by deoxyhypusine hydroxylase (611262), the conversion of the
deoxyhypusine residue to the hypusine residue completes EIF5A
maturation. Hypusine is found in all eukaryotes and in some
archaebacteria, but not in eubacteria. The amino acid sequence of EIF5A
is highly conserved, especially in the region surrounding the hypusine
residue, suggesting an important fundamental function for this protein
throughout eukaryotic evolution. Hypusine and EIF5A appear to be vital
for cell proliferation in eukaryotes.

CLONING

Joe et al. (1995) isolated cDNA clones encoding deoxyhypusine synthase
from a human HeLa cell library. Full-length cDNA clones encoding a
369-amino acid protein (calculated molecular mass of 40,970 Da) and a
shorter cDNA clone (that would potentially encode a protein with an
internal deletion of 56 amino acids) were isolated. The deduced amino
acid sequence of the human enzyme showed a high degree of identity to
that of the yeast enzyme.

From a human peripheral blood mononuclear cell cDNA library, Bevec et
al. (1996) isolated 2 independent sequences encoding biologically active
deoxyhypusine synthase. DNA sequence analysis predicted a 369-amino acid
protein with a molecular mass of 41,055 Da.

GENE FUNCTION

Bevec et al. (1996) demonstrated that recombinant DHPS showed
significant catalytic activity in synthesis of deoxyhypusine after in
vitro transcription and translation as well as on expression in
Escherichia coli.

Hauber et al. (2005) demonstrated that inhibition of DHPS by the
experimental drug CNI-1493 or RNA interference efficiently suppressed
retroviral replication in cell culture and primary cells with no
measurable drug-induced adverse effects on cell cycle transition,
apoptosis, or general cytotoxicity. They showed that the antiviral
effect of CNI-1493 was due to inhibition of the HIV-1 Rev regulatory
protein, for which the hypusine-requiring EIF5A is a cofactor.

MAPPING

Using a panel of somatic rodent/human cell hybrids, Bevec et al. (1996)
localized the DHPS gene to human chromosome 19. Jones et al. (1996)
localized the DHPS gene to 19p13.12-p13.11, using fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis in a combination with somatic human/rodent
translocation hybrid analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Bevec, D.; Kappel, B.; Jaksche, H.; Csonga, R.; Hauber, J.; Klier,
H.; Steinkasserer, A.: Molecular characterization of a cDNA encoding
functional human deoxyhypusine synthase and chromosomal mapping of
the corresponding gene locus. FEBS Lett. 378: 195-198, 1996.

2. Hauber, I.; Bevec, D.; Heukeshoven, J.; Kratzer, F.; Horn, F.;
Choidas, A.; Harrer, T.; Hauber, J.: Identification of cellular deoxyhypusine
synthase as a novel target for antiretroviral therapy. J. Clin. Invest. 115:
76-85, 2005.

3. Joe, Y. A.; Wolff, E. C.; Park, M. H.: Cloning and expression
of human deoxyhypusine synthase cDNA: structure-function studies with
the recombinant enzyme and mutant proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 270:
22386-22392, 1995.

4. Jones, T.; Sheer, D.; Kapetanopoulos, A.; Hauber, J.; Bevec, D.;
Steinkasserer, A.: The gene coding for human deoxyhypusine synthase
(DHPS) maps to chromosome 19p13.11-p13.12. Genomics 35: 635-636,
1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/2/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/13/1995

EDITED carol: 07/27/2007
terry: 2/2/2005
terry: 9/10/1996
terry: 8/23/1996
mark: 3/18/1996
terry: 3/6/1996
mark: 12/11/1995
mark: 11/13/1995

611297	TITLE *611297 ODD-SKIPPED-RELATED 2; OSR2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

OSR2 is a mammalian homolog of the Drosophila odd-skipped family of
transcription factors (Lan et al., 2004).

CLONING

By database searching with mouse Osr1 (608891) as query Lan et al (2001)
identified human OSR2. They subsequently cloned mouse Osr2, which
encodes a 276-amino acid protein. Northern blot analysis detected Osr2
in mouse embryonic RNA. In situ hybridization detected Osr2 expression
in a dynamic pattern during craniofacial, limb, and kidney development
with expression first detected at embryonic day (E) 9.5 in the
mesonephric vesicles, followed by expression in the mesenchyme adjacent
to the maxillary processes. In developing limb buds, Osr2 expression
follows a distinct dorsal to ventral developmental time sequence. Mouse
Osr2 was expressed at sites of epithelial-mesenchyme interaction during
tooth and kidney development. Osr2 shares 65% amino acid identity with
Osr1 and 98% identity over the zinc finger domains.

Kawai et al. (2005) cloned mouse splice variants Osr2a and Osr2b
containing 312 and 276 amino acids, respectively, and differing by an
additional C-terminal sequence in Osr2a. Osr2a contains 5 predicted zinc
finger domains, while Osr2b contains 3 zinc finger domains. Database
analysis confirmed the presence of 2 splice variants in rat and human.
PCR analysis of Osr2 splice variant expression in mouse tissues detected
both transcripts in kidney, muscle, testis, and mouse embryos with weak
expression in the lung. The ratio of Osr2a to Osr2b varied in the
tissues tested, with Osr2b predominantly transcribed.
Immunocytochemistry studies in COS-7 cells expressing Osr2a and Osr2b
localized both isoforms to the nucleus.

GENE FUNCTION

Using transcriptional activity studies with Gal4 fusions and luciferase
assay systems, Kawai et al. (2005) showed that both Osr2 variants affect
transcriptional activity, with the 2 variants expressing opposite
transcriptional activities. Osr2a repressed transcriptional activity,
and Osr2b activated transcription. In the luciferase assay, the opposite
results were obtained with Osr2a activating and Osr2b repressing
transcription.

MAPPING

Lan et al. (2004) stated that the OSR2 gene mapped to chromosome 8q23,
which Prescott et al. (2000) reported as a region associated with
nonsyndromic orofacial clefting.

Kawai et al. (2005) mapped the mouse Osr2 gene to mouse chromosome 15.

ANIMAL MODEL

Lan et al. (2004) generated mice with target disruption of Osr2.
Homozygous mutant mice displayed complete embryogenesis but died within
24 hours of birth. All homozygous mutant mice exhibited open eyelids,
bilateral cleft of the secondary palate, and thickened tympanic rings.
No abnormalities of kidney or limb development were detected. Histologic
analysis of mutant mice showed early normal palatal growth and initial
downward palatal outgrowth. However, between embryonic days 13.5 and
14.5, homozygous mutant mice displayed retarded palatal shelves that
remained vertically oriented rather than the normal rapid growth and
reorientation to a horizontal position detected in wildtype and
heterozygous mutant embryos. During continued normal development,
palatal shelves initiate fusion at the midline by embryonic day 15.5;
however, homozygous mutant mice showed no fusion of palatal shelves,
resulting in bilateral cleft of the secondary palate at birth.
Homozygous mutant mice exhibited a 26% reduction in palatal cell
proliferation at embryonic day 13.5. In situ hybridization showed that
the palatal mesenchyme proliferation defect in the homozygous mutant
mice was correlated with the spatiotemporal downregulation of Osr1
expression. Homozygous mutant mice displayed altered mRNA expression and
spatial distribution of Osr1, Tgfb3 (190230), and Pax9 (167416) during
palate development. Lan et al. (2004) concluded that Osr2 acts as a
regulator of palatal growth and patterning.

Zhang et al. (2009) observed that Osr2 -/- embryos exhibited
supernumerary tooth development lingual to their molar teeth. Because
Osr2 -/- mice die shortly after birth, Zhang et al. (2009) transplanted
embryonic day-13.5 mandibular molar tooth germs under renal capsules of
adult mice to allow complete tooth morphogenesis. After 21 days,
wildtype and Osr2 +/- molar tooth germs gave rise to 2 or 3 mineralized
molar teeth, whereas Osr2 -/- mutant molar tooth germs gave rise to 4 or
5 mineralized teeth. In the developing tooth mesenchyme of wildtype
embryos, Osr2 was expressed in a lingual-to-buccal gradient that was
complementary to the expression pattern of Bmp4 (112262), an essential
odontogenic signal. In Osr2 -/- embryos, expression of several ontogenic
factors, including Pitx2 (601542), Shh (600725), Msx1 (142983), and Lef1
(153245), was spatially expanded or upregulated compared with expression
in wildtype embryos. Msx1 -/- Osr2 -/- double-mutant embryos showed
largely normalized tooth development, suggesting that expansion of the
odontogenic field in Osr2 -/- embryos required Msx1, a feedback
activator of Bmp4. Zhang et al. (2009) concluded that MSX1 and OSR2 act
antagonistically to pattern the tooth morphogenic field by controlling
the expression and spatial distribution of mesenchymal odontogenic
signals along the buccolingual axis.

REFERENCE 1. Kawai, S.; Kato, T.; Inaba, H.; Okahashi, N.; Amano, A.: Odd-skipped
related 2 splicing variants show opposite transcriptional activity. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 328: 306-311, 2005.

2. Lan, Y.; Kingsley, P. D.; Cho, E.-S.; Jiang, R.: Osr2, a new mouse
gene related to Drosophila odd-skipped, exhibits dynamic expression
patterns during craniofacial, limb, and kidney development. Mech.
Dev. 107: 175-179, 2001.

3. Lan, Y.; Ovitt, C. E.; Cho, E.-S.; Maltby, K. M.; Wang, W.; Jiang,
R.: Odd-skipped related 2 (Osr2) encodes a key intrinsic regulator
of secondary palate growth and morphogenesis. Development 131: 3207-3216,
2004.

4. Prescott, N. J.; Lees, M. M.; Winter, R. M.; Malcolm, S.: Identification
of susceptibility loci for nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without
cleft palate in a two stage genome scan of affected sib-pairs. Hum.
Genet. 106: 345-350, 2000.

5. Zhang, Z.; Lan, Y.; Chai, Y.; Jiang, R.: Antagonistic actions
of Msx1 and Osr2 pattern mammalian teeth into a single row. Science 323:
1232-1234, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/9/2009

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 8/3/2007

EDITED mgross: 09/10/2009
mgross: 9/10/2009
terry: 9/9/2009
wwang: 8/9/2007
wwang: 8/3/2007

611417	TITLE *611417 SMALL G PROTEIN SIGNALING MODULATOR 1; SGSM1
;;KIAA1941
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching a region of chromosome 22 for protein-coding sequences,
followed by RT-PCR and RACE of an adult brain cDNA library, Yang et al.
(2007) cloned SGSM1, which had previously been cloned and named KIAA1941
by Nagase et al. (2001). Nagase et al. (2001) reported a deduced
1,233-amino acid protein with 2 RUN domains and a TBC domain, whereas
Yang et al. (2007) reported a deduced 1,093-amino acid protein with an
N-terminal RUN domain and a C-terminal TBC domain. By Northern blot
analysis, Yang et al. (2007) detected expression of a 7.0-kb SGSM1
transcript predominantly in adult heart, brain, kidney, pancreas, and
testis; in fetal brain, skeletal muscle, and heart; and in nearly all
specific adult brain regions examined. In mouse, Sgsm1 was detected only
in adult brain and there was evidence of splice variants. In situ
hybridization and immunohistochemical analysis of adult mouse brain
showed that Sgsm1 was predominantly expressed in the layer of Ammon's
horn (CA1, CA2, CA3), in dentate gyrus, hippocampus, granular and
Purkinje cell layer of cerebellum, and in neurons of the cerebral
cortex. Immunofluorescence analysis detected endogenous Sgsm1 associated
with the Golgi apparatus in a mouse neuroblastoma cell line.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunoprecipitations and Western blot analysis with a mouse
neuroblastoma cell line, Yang et al. (2007) showed that SGSM1 interacted
with endogenous Rap1 (see RAP1A, 179520) and Rap2 (see RAP2A, 179540).
Further work with transfected cells and epitope-tagged proteins showed
SGSM1, as well as 2 other SGSM proteins, SGSM2 (611418), and SGSM3
(610440), coimmunoprecipitated with all RAP proteins examined, including
RAP1A, RAP1B (179530), RAP2A, and RAP2B (179541). Using deletion
mutants, Yang et al. (2007) identified a RAP-interacting domain (RAPID)
(amino acids 301-350), containing 5 conserved blocks of sequence
following the RUN motif, shared by all the SGSM proteins. Yang et al.
(2007) also found that endogenous Rab4 (179511) and Rab11 (see RAB11A,
605570) interacted with all of the SGSM proteins in the mouse
neuroblastoma cell line; however, Rab3 (see RAB3A, 179490), Rab5 (see
RAB5A, 179512), and Rab8 (see RAB8A, 165040) interacted only with SGSM1
and SGSM3.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yang et al. (2007) determined that the SGSM1 gene contains 25 exons.

MAPPING

By sequencing the euchromatic region of chromosome 22 as part of the
Human Genome Project, Yang et al. (2007) identified the SGSM1 gene on
chromosome 22q11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. XXII. The complete sequences of 50 new
cDNA clones which code for large proteins. DNA Res. 8: 319-327,
2001.

2. Yang, H.; Sasaki, T.; Minoshima, S.; Shimizu, N.: Identification
of three novel proteins (SGSM1, 2, 3) which modulate small G protein
(RAP and RAB)-mediated signaling pathway. Genomics 90: 249-260,
2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/10/2007

EDITED carol: 09/13/2007
carol: 9/10/2007

603816	TITLE *603816 AXIS INHIBITOR 1; AXIN1
;;AXIN;;
FUSED, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

During embryonic development and tissue homeostasis in adults, the Wnt
(see 164820)-beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806) signaling pathway modulates
cellular differentiation, proliferation, movement, and polarity. AXIN1
has both positive and negative regulatory roles in Wnt-beta-catenin
signaling. AXIN1 is a core component of a 'destruction complex' that
promotes phosphorylation and polyubiquitination of cytoplasmic
beta-catenin, resulting in beta-catenin proteasomal degradation in the
absence of Wnt signaling. Nuclear accumulation of AXIN1 can positively
influence beta-catenin-mediated transcription during Wnt signaling (Lui
et al., 2011).

CLONING

In the vertebrate embryo, the formation of the dorsal-ventral axis
depends on the activity of the Wnt signaling pathway (see 164820).
Mutations in the mouse gene 'fused' (fu) cause axis duplication in
homozygous mouse embryos. Zeng et al. (1997) renamed the fu gene 'axin'
to distinguish it from the unrelated Drosophila 'fused' gene, and cloned
mouse and human axin cDNAs. The human AXIN gene encodes a 900-amino acid
polypeptide with 87% identity to the mouse protein. Although the
sequence contains a bipartite nuclear localization signal, Zeng et al.
(1997) did not find that the protein was localized to the nucleus. The
sequence also contains a regulator of G protein signaling domain (RGS;
see 602189) and a C-terminal region with homology to a conserved
sequence near the N terminus of Drosophila and vertebrate 'dishevelled'
proteins (see 601365).

GENE FUNCTION

Zeng et al. (1997) found that injection of axin mRNA into frog embryos
inhibited dorsal axis formation, apparently by interfering with
signaling through the Wnt pathway.

The WNT signaling pathway is essential for development and
organogenesis. WNT signaling stabilizes beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806),
which accumulates in the cytoplasm, binds to T-cell factor, also known
as lymphoid enhancer-binding factor-1 (LEF1; 153245), and then
upregulates downstream genes. Mutations in CTNNB1 or APC (611731) occur
in human neoplasms including colon cancers and hepatocellular carcinomas
(HCC; 114550). Because hepatocellular carcinomas tend to show
accumulation of beta-catenin more often than mutations in CTNNB1, Satoh
et al. (2000) looked for mutations in AXIN1, which encodes a key factor
for WNT signaling, in 6 HCC cell lines and 100 primary HCCs. Among the 4
cell lines and 87 HCCs in which they did not detect CTNNB1 mutations,
they identified AXIN1 mutations in 3 cell lines and 6 mutations in 5 of
the primary HCCs. In cell lines containing mutations in either gene,
they observed increased DNA binding of T-cell factor associated with
beta-catenin in nuclei. Adenovirus-mediated gene transfer of wildtype
AXIN1 induced apoptosis in hepatocellular and colorectal cancer cells
that had accumulated beta-catenin as a consequence of either APC,
CTNNB1, or AXIN1 mutation, suggested that axin may be an effective
therapeutic molecule for suppressing growth of hepatocellular and
colorectal cancers.

To investigate whether the '2-hit' mutation of AXIN1 occurred in 5
primary HCCs in which AXIN1 mutations were found, Satoh et al. (2000)
examined loss of heterozygosity (LOH) using 2 polymorphic markers and
found LOH in 3 tumors, indicating that AXIN1 is likely to function as a
tumor suppressor. All of the AXIN1 mutations detected in hepatoma cell
lines and primary HCCs predicted truncated proteins lacking the binding
site for beta-catenin; hence, these products would lack the ability to
form complexes with beta-catenin, which would thus not be degraded
properly.

To understand how the WNT coreceptor LRP5 (603506) is involved in
transducing the canonical WNT signals, Mao et al. (2001) identified axin
as a protein that interacts with the intracellular domain of LRP5. LRP5,
when expressed in fibroblast cells, showed no effect on the canonical
WNT signaling pathway by itself, but acted synergistically with WNT. In
contrast, LRP5 mutants lacking the extracellular domain functioned as
constitutively active forms that bound axin and that induced LEF1
activation by destabilizing axin and stabilizing beta-catenin. Addition
of WNT caused the translocation of axin to the membrane and enhanced the
interaction between axin and LRP5. In addition, the LRP5 sequences
involved in interactions with axin were found to be required for LEF1
activation. The authors concluded that the binding of axin to LRP5 is an
important part of the WNT signal transduction pathway. In Rat1 and P19
cells, Chen et al. (2006) found that Macf1 (608271) interacted directly
with Axin and translocated with the Axin complex to the cell membrane
upon Wnt stimulation.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) have the ability to renew themselves and
to give rise to all lineages of the blood. Reya et al. (2003) showed
that the WNT signaling pathway has an important role in this process.
Overexpression of activated beta-catenin expands the pool of HSCs in
long-term cultures by both phenotype and function. Furthermore, HSCs in
their normal microenvironment activate a LEF1/TCF reporter, which
indicates that HSCs respond to WNT signaling in vivo. To demonstrate the
physiologic significance of this pathway for HSC proliferation, Reya et
al. (2003) showed that the ectopic expression of axin or a frizzled
(603408) ligand-binding domain, inhibitors of the WNT signaling pathway,
led to inhibition of HSC growth in vitro and reduced reconstitution in
vivo. Furthermore, activation of WNT signaling in HSCs induced increased
expression of HOXB4 (142965) and NOTCH1 (190198), genes previously
implicated in self-renewal of HSCs. Reya et al. (2003) concluded that
the WNT signaling pathway is critical for normal HSC homeostasis in
vitro and in vivo, and provide insight into a potential molecular
hierarchy of regulation of HSC development.

Huang et al. (2009) used a chemical genetic screen to identify a small
molecule, XAV939, which selectively inhibits beta-catenin-mediated
transcription. XAV939 stimulates beta-catenin degradation by stabilizing
axin, the concentration-limiting component of the destruction complex.
Using a quantitative chemical proteomic approach, Huang et al. (2009)
found that XAV939 stabilizes axin by inhibiting the
poly-ADP-ribosylating enzymes tankyrase-1 (603303) and tankyrase-2
(607128). Both tankyrase isoforms interact with a highly conserved
domain of axin and stimulate its degradation through the
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway.

Kim et al. (2013) reported that WNT signaling is governed by
phosphorylation regulation of the axin scaffolding function.
Phosphorylation by GSK3 (see 605004) kept axin activated (open) for
beta-catenin (116806) interaction and poised for engagement of LRP6
(603507). Formation of the WNT-induced LRP6-axin signaling complex
promoted axin dephosphorylation by protein phosphatase-1 (see 176875)
and inactivated (closed) axin through an intramolecular interaction.
Inactivation of axin diminished its association with beta-catenin and
LRP6, thereby inhibiting beta-catenin phosphorylation and enabling
activated LRP6 to selectively recruit active axin for inactivation
reiteratively.

Lui et al. (2011) found that the deubiquitinating protease USP34
(615295) stabilized nuclear AXIN1 in human cell lines and promoted
expression of beta-catenin target genes. USP34 immunoprecipitated with
ubiquitinated AXIN1. Lui et al. (2011) noted that tankyrase-dependent
poly-ADP-ribosylation of AXIN1 is a prerequisite for AXIN1
ubiquitination. Knockdown of USP34 or both AXIN1 and AXIN2 together in
human cell lines reduced Wnt reporter activity, suggesting that rescue
of AXIN1 from proteasomal degradation contributes to the positive effect
of AXIN1 on Wnt signaling. Lui et al. (2011) concluded that nuclear
AXIN1 has a positive regulatory role in Wnt-beta-catenin signaling that
is controlled by USP34 opposing tankyrase-dependent ubiquitination of
AXIN1.

MAPPING

By inclusion within mapped cosmids, Zeng et al. (1997) mapped the human
AXIN1 gene to 16p13.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The high rate of discordance in monozygotic twin pairs for most complex
diseases is a puzzle. The possibility has been considered that
stochastically or environmentally triggered differences in the
epigenetic status of key genes may be responsible for some MZ
discordance and, indeed, for much of the burden of complex disease. For
most complex traits, there are very few identified genes whose
methylation status can be investigated or pertinent tissue is accessible
for methylation studies on living subjects. Until such genes for common
diseases become known, therefore, it is worth investigating cases of MZ
discordance for rare diseases in which the causal gene(s) are known or
strongly suspected. Caudal duplication anomaly (607864) resembles the
spinal duplication seen in Axin(Fu) mice, which carry a mutation in the
Axin locus (Zeng et al., 1997). Highly penetrant mice displayed
bifurcating tails as a result of caudal duplication in the distal
region.

Oates et al. (2006) studied a pair of monozygotic (MZ) twins discordant
for a caudal duplication anomaly (607864), in whom Kroes et al. (2002)
had found no mutation in the AXIN1 gene. Using bisulfite sequencing,
they examined methylation at the promoter region of the AXIN1 gene in
these twins and in age-related singleton controls. Methylation of the
promoter region (608271.0002) in peripheral blood mononuclear cells was
variable among individuals, including MZ pairs. In the MZ pair
discordant for the caudal duplication, this region of the affected twin
was significantly more methylated than that of the unaffected twin (P
less than 0.0001), which was significantly more methylated than those of
the controls (P = 0.02). Oates et al. (2006) confirmed that this CpG
island functions as a promoter in vitro and that its activity is
inversely proportional to the extent of methylation. This finding raised
the possibility that hypermethylation of the AXIN1 promoter is
associated with the malformation. The authors suggested that this case
may be paradigmatic for some cases of MZ discordance.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
AXIN1, 33-BP DEL

In a primary hepatocellular carcinoma (114550), Satoh et al. (2000)
found a 33-bp deletion in exon 3 of the AXIN1 gene, involving 2 glycogen
synthase kinase-3-beta (GSK3B; 605004) phosphorylation sites. In
addition to this deletion they found 12 missense mutations, of which 9
occurred in codons encoding serine or threonine residues. They confirmed
that all 13 mutations found in primary HCCs occurred as somatic events.

.0002
CAUDAL DUPLICATION ANOMALY
AXIN1, PROMOTER HYPERMETHYLATION

Oates et al. (2006) examined methylation at the promoter region of the
AXIN1 gene in monozygotic twins discordant for a caudal duplication
anomaly (607864). Methylation of the promoter region in the peripheral
blood mononucleated cells was variable among individuals. The promoter
region of the AXIN1 gene was significantly more methylated in the twin
with the caudal duplication than in the unaffected twin, which was
significantly more methylated than those in controls.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, H.-J.; Lin, C.-M.; Lin, C.-S.; Perez-Olle, R.; Leung, C.
L.; Liem, R. K. H.: The role of microtubule actin cross-linking factor
1 (MACF1) in the Wnt signaling pathway. Genes Dev. 20: 1933-1945,
2006.

2. Huang, S.-M. A.; Mishina, Y. M.; Liu, S.; Cheung, A.; Stegmeier,
F.; Michaud, G. A.; Charlat, O.; Wiellette, E.; Zhang, Y.; Wiessner,
S.; Hild, M.; Shi, X.; and 24 others: Tankyrase inhibition stabilizes
axin and antagonizes Wnt signalling. Nature 461: 614-620, 2009.

3. Kim, S.-E.; Huang, H.; Zhao, M.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, A.; Semonov,
M. V.; MacDonald, B. T.; Zhang, X.; Abreu, J. G.; Peng, L.; He, X.
: Wnt stabilization of beta-catenin reveals principles for morphogen
receptor-scaffold assemblies. Science 340: 867-870, 2013.

4. Kroes, H. Y.; Takahashi, M.; Zijlstra, R. J.; Baert, J. A. L. L.;
Kooi, K. A.; Hofstra, R. M. W.: Two cases of the caudal duplication
anomaly including a discordant monozygotic twin. Am. J. Med. Genet. 112:
390-393, 2002.

5. Lui, T. T. H.; Lacroix, C.; Ahmed, S. M.; Goldenberg, S. J.; Leach,
C. A.; Daulat, A. M.; Angers, S.: The ubiquitin-specific protease
USP34 regulates axin stability and Wnt/beta-catenin signaling. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 31: 2053-2065, 2011.

6. Mao, J.; Wang, J.; Liu, B.; Pan, W.; Farr, G. H., III; Flynn, C.;
Yuan, H.; Takada, S.; Kimelman, D.; Li, L.; Wu, D.: Low-density lipoprotein
receptor-related protein-5 binds to axin and regulates the canonical
Wnt signaling pathway. Molec. Cell 7: 801-809, 2001.

7. Oates, N. A.; van Vliet, J.; Duffy, D. L.; Kroes, H. Y.; Martin,
N. G.; Boomsma, D. I.; Campbell, M.; Coulthard, M. G.; Whitelaw, E.;
Chong, S.: Increased DNA methylation at the AXIN1 gene in a monozygotic
twin from a pair discordant for a caudal duplication anomaly. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 79: 155-162, 2006.

8. Reya, T.; Duncan, A. W.; Ailles, L.; Domen, J.; Scherer, D. C.;
Willert, K.; Hintz, L.; Nusse, R.; Weissman, I. L.: A role for Wnt
signalling in self-renewal of haematopoietic stem cells. Nature 423:
409-414, 2003.

9. Satoh, S.; Daigo, Y.; Furukawa, Y.; Kato, T.; Miwa, N.; Nishiwaki,
T.; Kawasoe, T.; Ishiguro, H.; Fujita, M.; Tokino, T.; Sasaki, Y.;
Imaoka, S.; Murata, M.; Shimano, T.; Yamaoka, Y.; Nakamura, Y.: AXIN1
mutations in hepatocellular carcinomas, and growth suppression in
cancer cells by virus-mediated transfer of AXIN1. Nature Genet. 24:
245-250, 2000.

10. Zeng, L.; Fagotto, F.; Zhang, T.; Hsu, W.; Vasicek, T. J.; Perry,
W. L., III; Lee, J. J.; Tilghman, S. M.; Gumbiner, B. M.; Costantini,
F.: The mouse fused locus encodes axin, an inhibitor of the Wnt signaling
pathway that regulates embryonic axis formation. Cell 90: 181-192,
1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 06/27/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/25/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/13/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/18/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/16/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/6/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/6/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/1/2000

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 5/18/1999

EDITED mgross: 06/27/2013
alopez: 6/25/2013
alopez: 11/18/2009
terry: 11/13/2009
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
wwang: 9/18/2006
alopez: 6/23/2006
terry: 6/16/2006
alopez: 5/28/2003
alopez: 5/6/2003
terry: 5/6/2003
carol: 11/14/2001
mgross: 8/6/2001
carol: 5/25/2000
alopez: 3/1/2000
terry: 3/1/2000
alopez: 9/13/1999
alopez: 5/18/1999

606605	TITLE *606605 ATR-INTERACTING PROTEIN; ATRIP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cortez et al. (2001) searched for substrates of ATM (see 607585) and ATR
(601215) and identified a protein of 86 kD, which they called ATRIP for
'ATR-interacting protein.' The full-length cDNA encodes a deduced
791-amino acid protein with a coiled-coil domain near its N terminus.
RNA blotting indicated that ATRIP is expressed in all tissues tested.
Cortez et al. (2001) also identified an alternatively spliced exon
encoding amino acids 658 to 684 near the C-terminus. RT-PCR from 2 cell
lines indicated that both forms were expressed.

GENE FUNCTION

ATRIP is phosphorylated by ATR, regulates ATR expression, and is an
essential component of the DNA damage checkpoint pathway. Cortez et al.
(2001) demonstrated that ATR and ATRIP both localize to intranuclear
foci after DNA damage or inhibition of replication. Deletion of ATR
mediated by the Cre recombinase caused the loss of ATR and ATRIP
expression, loss of DNA damage checkpoint responses, and cell death.
Therefore, ATR is essential for the viability of human somatic cells.
Small interfering RNA directed against ATRIP caused the loss of both
ATRIP and ATR expression and the loss of checkpoint responses to DNA
damage. Cortez et al. (2001) concluded that ATRIP and ATR are mutually
dependent partners in cell cycle checkpoint signaling pathways.

The function of the ATR-ATRIP protein kinase complex is crucial for the
cellular response to replication stress and DNA damage. Zou and Elledge
(2003) demonstrated that replication protein A (RPA) complex, which
associates with single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), is required for recruitment
of ATR to sites of DNA damage and for ATR-mediated CHK1 (603078)
activation in human cells. In vitro, RPA stimulates the binding of ATRIP
to single-stranded DNA. The binding of ATRIP to RPA-coated
single-stranded DNA enables the ATR-ATRIP complex to associate with DNA
and stimulates phosphorylation of the RAD17 (603139) protein that is
bound to DNA. Furthermore, Ddc2, the budding yeast homolog of ATRIP, is
specifically recruited to double-stranded DNA breaks in an RPA-dependent
manner. A checkpoint-deficient mutant of RPA, rfa1-t11, is defective for
recruiting Ddc2 to single-stranded DNA both in vivo and in vitro. Zou
and Elledge (2003) concluded that RPA-coated single-stranded DNA is the
critical structure at sites of DNA damage that recruits the ATR-ATRIP
complex and facilitates its recognition of substrates for
phosphorylation and the initiation of checkpoint signaling.

By mutation analysis, Namiki and Zou (2006) identified 2 major
RPA-ssDNA-interacting domains of ATRIP in regions flanking the conserved
coiled-coil domain. They also identified an internal region of ATRIP
that exhibited affinity to single-stranded DNA. Namiki and Zou (2006)
concluded that there are multiple interactions between ATRIP and
RPA-ssDNA and that ATRIP may interact directly with ssDNA in the
ATRIP-RPA-ssDNA complex.

REFERENCE 1. Cortez, D.; Guntuku, S.; Qin, J.; Elledge, S. J.: ATR and ATRIP:
partners in checkpoint signaling. Science 294: 1713-1716, 2001.

2. Namiki, Y.; Zou, L.: ATRIP associates with replication protein
A-coated ssDNA through multiple interactions. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
580-585, 2006.

3. Zou, L.; Elledge, S. J.: Sensing DNA damage through ATRIP recognition
of RPA-ssDNA complexes. Science 300: 1542-1548, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/27/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/22/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/18/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/15/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/10/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/17/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/28/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 1/10/2002

EDITED alopez: 01/14/2010
carol: 6/1/2007
alopez: 4/2/2007
terry: 3/27/2007
mgross: 8/22/2006
carol: 8/18/2006
ckniffin: 8/17/2006
terry: 8/15/2006
wwang: 3/24/2006
terry: 3/10/2006
alopez: 6/19/2003
terry: 6/17/2003
ckniffin: 3/11/2003
alopez: 1/28/2002
alopez: 1/10/2002

607927	TITLE *607927 ANKYRIN REPEATS- AND FYVE DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; ANKFY1
;;ANKYRIN REPEATS HOOKED TO A ZINC FINGER MOTIF; ANKHZN;;
KIAA1255
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ANKFY1 contains several protein-interacting domains and shares
significant identity with a number of S. cerevisiae proteins involved in
vesicular trafficking (Kuriyama et al., 2000).

CLONING

Ito et al. (1999) cloned mouse Ankfy1, which they designated Ankhzn. The
deduced 1,184-amino acid protein has an apparent molecular mass of 130
kD. Ankhzn contains an N-terminal coiled-coil domain, a BTB/POZ domain,
17 ankyrin repeats, and a C-terminal zinc finger motif. The ankyrin
repeats are separated into a group of 4 repeats in the N-terminal half
and a group of 13 repeats in the C-terminal half. Ito et al. (1999)
determined that there is a soluble form of Ankhzn and a form that
associates with endosomes.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned ANKFY1, which they designated
KIAA1255. The deduced protein shares 88% identity with mouse Ankhzn.
RT-PCR ELISA detected high expression in whole adult brain and
intermediate expression in all other tissues and specific brain regions
examined, including fetal brain.

By searching databases for sequences sharing homology with mouse Ankhzn,
followed by PCR, Kuriyama et al. (2000) cloned ANKHZN from a fetal brain
cDNA library. The deduced 1,166 amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of about 128 kD. ANKHZN shares 85% identity with mouse
Ankhzn, and the 2 proteins have the same domain structure. Kuriyama et
al. (2000) noted that the C-terminal zinc finger (FYVE) domain, which
contains 8 potential Zn(2+)-coordinating cysteine residues that bind 2
Zn(2+) ions, is well conserved among proteins related to intracellular
trafficking. Northern blot analysis detected a 7-kb transcript in both
human and mouse brain. RT-PCR detected expression in all tissues
examined. Subcellular fractionation of human kidney recovered ANKHZN in
both the soluble and membrane fractions.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kuriyama et al. (2000) determined that the ANKFY1 gene contains 25
exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the ANKFY1
gene to chromosome 17. By radiation hybrid analysis and FISH, Kuriyama
et al. (2000) mapped the ANKFY1 gene to chromosome 17p13. Southern blot
analysis indicated that ANKFY1 is a single-copy gene.

REFERENCE 1. Ito, K.; Ishii, N.; Miyashita, A.; Tominaga, K.; Kuriyama, H.;
Maruyama, H.; Shirai, M.; Naito, M.; Arakawa, M.; Kuwano, R.: Molecular
cloning of a novel 130-kDa cytoplasmic protein, Ankhzn, containing
ankyrin repeats hooked to a zinc finger motif. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 257: 206-213, 1999.

2. Kuriyama, H.; Asakawa, S.; Minoshima, S.; Maruyama, H.; Ishii,
N.; Ito, K.; Gejyo, F.; Arakawa, M.; Shimizu, N.; Kuwano, R.: Characterization
and chromosomal mapping of a novel human gene, ANKHZN. Gene 253:
151-160, 2000.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.; Nomura, N.;
Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human
genes. XV. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain
which code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 337-345, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/27/2003

EDITED mgross: 06/27/2003

139259	TITLE *139259 G1- TO S-PHASE TRANSITION 1; GSPT1
;;GST1, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; GST1;;
PEPTIDE CHAIN RELEASE FACTOR 3A; ERF3A;;
ETF3A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kikuchi et al. (1988) isolated a gene from a yeast genomic library that
could complement a temperature-sensitive mutant of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. The gene, termed GST1, seemed to be essential for the G1- to
S-phase transition in the yeast cell cycle. The gene product appeared to
be a GTP-binding protein of molecular mass 76,565 Da with 38% identity
in amino acid sequence with the alpha subunit of elongation factor-1
(130590). Hoshino et al. (1989) cloned the human equivalent from a cDNA
library.

Hoshino et al. (1998) cloned mouse Gspt1. The deduced 635-amino acid
protein has a unique N terminus and a conserved C-terminal eukaryotic
elongation factor-1-alpha-like domain. The mouse and human Gspt1
proteins share 94% sequence identity. RT-PCR analysis indicated
expression of Gspt1 in all mouse tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Eukaryotic RF1 (ETF1; 600285) and RF3 are involved in translation
termination. In vitro, RF1 catalyzes the release of the polypeptide
chain without any stop codon specificity; the GTP-binding protein RF3
confers GTP dependence to the termination process and stimulates RF1
activity. Le Goff et al. (1997) used tRNA-mediated nonsense suppression
of different stop codons in a CAT reporter gene to analyze the
polypeptide chain release factor activities of recombinant human RF1 and
RF3 proteins overexpressed in human cells. Using a CAT assay, they
measured the competition between the suppressor tRNA and the release
factors when a stop codon was present in the ribosomal A site.
Regardless of which of the 3 stop codons was present in the CAT open
reading frame, the overexpression of RF1 alone markedly decreased
translational read-through by suppressor tRNA. Thus, Le Goff et al.
(1997) concluded that RF1 has intrinsic antisuppressor activity. The
levels of antisuppression when both RF1 and RF3 were overexpressed were
almost the same as those when RF1 was overexpressed alone, suggesting
that RF1-RF3 complex-mediated termination may be controlled by the
expression level of RF1. Overexpression of RF3 alone had an inhibitory
effect on CAT gene expression. CAT mRNA stability studies suggested that
RF3 inhibits gene expression at the transcriptional level. Le Goff et
al. (1997) suggested that RF3 may perform other functions, including the
stimulation of RF1 activity, in vivo.

Hoshino et al. (1998) found that expression of Gspt1 by Swiss 3T3 cells
increased with serum or phorbol ester stimulation. By
coimmunoprecipitation and yeast 2-hybrid analyses, they found
interaction between mouse Gspt1 and human eRF1. Hoshino et al. (1998)
hypothesized that Gspt1, in a binary complex with eRF1, functions as a
polypeptide chain release factor.

Alkalaeva et al. (2006) reconstituted eukaryotic translation initiation,
elongation, and termination processes in vitro on a model mRNA encoding
a tetrapeptide followed by a UAA stop codon using individual 40S and 60S
ribosomal subunits and the complete set of individual initiation,
elongation, and release factors. They found that binding of human ERF1
and ERF3A and GTP to the ribosomal pretermination complex induced a
structural rearrangement characterized by a 2-nucleotide forward shift
of the toeprint attributed to the pretermination complex. Subsequent GTP
hydrolysis was required for rapid hydrolysis of peptidyl tRNA in the
pretermination complex. Cooperativity between ERF1 and ERF3A in ensuring
fast peptidyl-tRNA hydrolysis required the ERF3A-binding C-terminal
domain of ERF1.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen and in vitro and in vivo binding assays,
including reciprocal immunoprecipitation assays, Tompkins et al. (2006)
showed that GSPT1 bound the p19(ARF) isoform of CDKN2A (600160), but not
the p16(INK4A) isoform.

MAPPING

By nonradioactive in situ hybridization, Ozawa et al. (1992) mapped the
GSPT1 gene, the human homolog of the yeast gene GST1, to human
chromosome 16p13.1. Southern blot hybridization with a panel of
human-rodent somatic cells confirmed the localization of the GSPT1 gene
on chromosome 16 and also showed the existence of a homologous gene on
the X chromosome (GSPT2; 300418). They pointed out that a breakpoint for
nonrandom chromosome rearrangements has been found in the region of
GSPT1 in patients with acute nonlymphocytic leukemia.

REFERENCE 1. Alkalaeva, E. Z.; Pisarev, A. V.; Frolova, L. Y.; Kisselev, L.
L.; Pestova, T. V.: In vitro reconstitution of eukaryotic translation
reveals cooperativity between release factors eRF1 and eRF3. Cell 125:
1125-1136, 2006.

2. Hoshino, S.; Imai, M.; Mizutani, M.; Kikuchi, Y.; Hanaoka, F.;
Ui, M.; Katada, T.: Molecular cloning of a novel member of the eukaryotic
polypeptide chain-releasing factors (eRF): its identification as eRF3
interacting with eRF1. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 22254-22259, 1998.

3. Hoshino, S.; Miyazawa, H.; Enomoto, T.; Hanaoka, F.; Kikuchi, Y.;
Kikuchi, A.; Ui, M.: A human homologue of the yeast GST1 gene codes
for a GTP-binding protein and is expressed in a proliferation-dependent
manner in mammalian cells. EMBO J. 8: 3807-3814, 1989.

4. Kikuchi, Y.; Shimatake, H.; Kikucki, A.: A yeast gene required
for the G1-to-S transition encodes a protein containing an A-kinase
target site and GTPase domain. EMBO J. 7: 1175-1182, 1988.

5. Le Goff, X.; Philippe, M.; Jean-Jean, O.: Overexpression of human
release factor 1 alone has an antisuppressor effect in human cells. Molec.
Cell Biol. 17: 3164-3172, 1997.

6. Ozawa, K.; Murakami, Y.; Eki, T.; Yokoyama, K.; Soeda, E.; Hoshino,
S.; Ui, M.; Hanaoka, F.: Mapping of the human GSPT1 gene, a human
homolog of the yeast GST1 gene, to chromosomal band 16p13.1. Somat.
Cell Molec. Genet. 18: 189-194, 1992.

7. Tompkins, V.; Hagen, J.; Zediak, V. P.; Quelle, D. E.: Identification
of novel ARF binding proteins by two-hybrid screening. Cell Cycle 5:
641-646, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/28/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/29/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/13/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/18/1990

EDITED wwang: 05/05/2010
mgross: 4/28/2010
mgross: 11/29/2006
mgross: 12/13/2002
carol: 8/16/1999
terry: 8/11/1998
carol: 8/13/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/29/1992
carol: 2/11/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
supermim: 1/18/1990

114070	TITLE *114070 ANNEXIN A6; ANXA6
;;ANNEXIN VI; ANX6;;
CALCIUM-BINDING PROTEIN p68;;
CALELECTRIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ANXA6 is a member of a family of proteins that bind membrane or
cytoskeleton in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner. These proteins are
characterized by homologous amino acid sequences that are present in
multiple copies in each protein. The family is variously known as
calelectrins, annexins, calpactins, endonexins, and lipocortins.

CLONING

Three members of the calelectrin family with apparent molecular masses
of 67 kD, 35 kD, and 32.5 kD had been purified to homogeneity. Sudhof et
al. (1988) reported the cDNA cloning and primary structure of human
67-kD calelectrin. The deduced sequence contains 8 similar repeats, each
consisting of about 68 amino acids. Comparison of the 67-kD calelectrin
sequence with the protein sequences of lipocortins I and II (151690,
151740) demonstrated a close relationship (42 to 45% identity).

Thomas et al. (2002) found that Anxa6 showed a punctate supranuclear and
apical distribution in rat pancreatic acinary cells. Anxa6 colocalized
with Crhsp28, a component of a protein complex associated with vesicular
structures.

MAPPING

Davies et al. (1989) assigned the ANXA6 gene to 5q32-q34 by use of a
cDNA clone to probe genomic DNA from rodent-human somatic cell hybrids
and for in situ hybridization. The corresponding gene in the mouse was
assigned to chromosome 11 by probing DNA from rodent-rodent somatic cell
hybrids. Warrington and Bengtsson (1994) used 3 physical mapping methods
(radiation hybrid mapping, pulsed field gel electrophoresis, and
fluorescence in situ hybridization of interphase nuclei) to determine
the order and relative distances between 12 loci in the 5q31-q33 region.
ANXA6 was one of those loci.

GENE STRUCTURE

Smith et al. (1994) demonstrated that the ANX6 gene is approximately 60
kb long and contains 26 exons. The genomic sequence at the 3-prime end
does not contain a canonical polyadenylylation signal. The genomic
sequence upstream of the transcription start site contains TATAA and
CAAT motifs. The spatial organization of the exons revealed no obvious
similarities between the 2 halves of the ANX6 gene. Comparison of the
intron/exon boundary positions of ANX6 with those of ANX1 (151690) and
ANX2 (151740) revealed that within the repeated domains the breakpoints
are perfectly conserved except for exon 8, which is 1 codon smaller in
ANX2. The corresponding point in the second half of ANX6 is represented
by 2 exons, exons 20 and 21. The latter exon is alternatively spliced,
giving rise to annexin VI isoforms that differ with respect to a 6-amino
acid insertion at the start of repeat 7.

GENE FUNCTION

Thomas et al. (2002) found that stimulation of rat pancreatic acinary
cells with the secretagogue cholecystokinin (118440) enhanced the
colocalization of Anxa6 and Crhsp28 within regions of acini immediately
below the apical plasma membrane. Thomas et al. (2002) concluded that
Ca(2+)-dependent binding between CRHSP28 and ANXA6 is required for
acinar cell membrane trafficking events and digestive enzyme secretion.

REFERENCE 1. Davies, A. A.; Moss, S. E.; Crompton, M. R.; Jones, T. A.; Spurr,
N. K.; Sheer, D.; Kozak, C.; Crumpton, M. J.: The gene coding for
the p68 calcium-binding protein is localized to bands q32-q34 of human
chromosome 5, and to mouse chromosome 11. Hum. Genet. 82: 234-238,
1989.

2. Smith, P. D.; Davies, A.; Crumpton, M. J.; Moss, S. E.: Structure
of the human annexin VI gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 2713-2717,
1994.

3. Sudhof, T. C.; Slaughter, C. A.; Leznicki, I.; Barjon, P.; Reynolds,
G. A.: Human 67-kDa calelectrin contains a duplication of four repeats
found in 35-kDa lipocortins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 664-668,
1988.

4. Thomas, D. D. H.; Kaspar, K. M.; Taft, W. B.; Weng, N.; Rodenkirch,
L. A.; Groblewski, G. E.: Identification of annexin VI as a Ca(2+)-sensitive
CRHSP-28-binding protein in pancreatic acinar cells. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
35496-35502, 2002.

5. Warrington, J. A.; Bengtsson, U.: High-resolution physical mapping
of human 5q31-q33 using three methods: radiation hybrid mapping, interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization, and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Genomics 24:
395-398, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/7/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/7/1989

EDITED terry: 05/20/2010
wwang: 6/22/2005
wwang: 6/17/2005
terry: 6/7/2005
alopez: 6/5/2002
mgross: 9/17/1999
psherman: 3/31/1998
terry: 1/9/1995
jason: 7/15/1994
carol: 11/3/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
supermim: 2/9/1990

614570	TITLE *614570 KINESIN FAMILY MEMBER 18B; KIF18B
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

KIF18B belongs to the kinesin superfamily of ATPases that move cargo
molecules or organelles along microtubules from the center of the cell
toward the cell periphery. Kinesins contain 4 major domains: a globular
motor domain with binding sites for microtubules and ATP; a short linker
region; a long coiled-coil stalk for dimerization; and a cargo-binding
C-terminal tail domain (summary by Lee et al., 2010).

CLONING

By RT-PCR of HeLa cell mRNA, Lee et al. (2010) cloned KIF18B. The
deduced 842-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 92 kD.
The motor and stalk domains of KIF18B share 60% identity with the
corresponding region of KIF18A (611271). RT-PCR of several human cell
lines revealed a KIF18B splice variant encoding a deduced 873-amino acid
protein, which the authors called isoform-2. Compared with isoform-1,
isoform-2 contains a unique C-terminal end that includes 3 overlapping
PxxP motifs. Northern blot analysis of HeLa cell RNA revealed a 3.0-kb
transcript. RNA dot-blot analysis of several tissues revealed high
KIF18B expression only in amygdala, with weak expression in a limited
number of other adult tissues, fetal tissues, and human cell lines.
RT-PCR analysis revealed variable KIF18B expression in all human cell
lines examined. Western blot analysis of synchronized HeLa cells showed
that KIF18B expression was elevated at late G2 through metaphase and
that KIF18B had an apparent molecular mass of 120 kD.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that KIF18B was present
predominantly in the nucleus and to a lesser extent in the cytoplasm of
interphase cells. During mitosis, most KIF18B was closely associated
with the plus end of astral microtubules emanating from the spindle pole
during prometaphase and metaphase. KIF18B was not detected at anaphase
and telophase. Database analysis revealed orthologs of KIF18B in several
vertebrate species.

Tanenbaum et al. (2011) found that KIF18B localized to microtubule plus
ends during early prometaphase in human U2OS osteosarcoma cells. KIF18B
was not expressed in G1 and was sequestered in the nucleus in G2. KIF18B
was completely degraded at the metaphase-anaphase transition.

GENE FUNCTION

By mutation analysis, Lee et al. (2010) found that only 1 of 3 putative
nuclear localization signals in KIF18B directed nuclear localization.

Using U2OS human osteosarcoma cells, Tanenbaum et al. (2011) identified
KIF18B as an essential component of a microtubule-depolymerizing complex
containing MCAK (KIF2C; 604538) and EB1 (MAPRE1; 603108). KIF18B
interacted independently with MCAK and a subset of EB1 at microtubule
plus ends. All 3 proteins, in addition to KIF18B motor activity, were
required for efficient plus-end microtubule depolymerization. Knockdown
of either KIF18B or MCAK reduced the localization of the other protein
at microtubule plus ends and reduced microtubule depolymerization.
Disruption of the MCAK-KIF18B interaction by mutation of the interacting
domains, or phosphorylation of MCAK by the microtubule-polymerizing
agents Aurora A (AURKA; 603072) or Aurora B (AURKB; 604970), similarly
blocked microtubule depolymerization. Use of a KIF5B (602809)/KIF18B
chimera revealed that the major role of KIF18B motor domain in this
process was to provide plus end-directed movement along microtubules.
Tanenbaum et al. (2011) hypothesized that KIF18B, released into the
cytoplasm upon mitotic nuclear envelope breakdown, is recruited to
microtubule plus ends through interaction with EB1 and MCAK. The motor
activity of KIF18B directs the complex to the tip of microtubules, and
the depolymerizing activity of the complex is modulated by Aurora A and
Aurora B.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lee et al. (2010) determined that the KIF18B gene contains 15 exons, the
last of which is alternatively spliced.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the KIF18B gene to chromosome 17q21.31 based on an
alignment of the KIF18B sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC044933) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/28/2012.

2. Lee, Y. M.; Kim, E.; Park, M.; Moon, E.; Ahn, S.-M.; Kim, W.; Hwang,
K. B.; Kim, Y. K.; Choi, W.; Kim, W.: Cell cycle-regulated expression
and subcellular localization of a kinesin-8 member human KIF18B. Gene 466:
16-25, 2010.

3. Tanenbaum, M. E.; Macurek, L.; van der Vaart, B.; Galli, M.; Akhmanova,
A.; Medema, R. H.: A complex of Kif18b and MCAK promotes microtubule
depolymerization and is negatively regulated by Aurora kinases. Curr.
Biol. 21: 1356-1365, 2011.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/13/2012

EDITED terry: 05/08/2012
mgross: 4/13/2012

300810	TITLE *300810 MICRO RNA 98; MIR98
;;miRNA98;;
MIRN98
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), such as MIR98, are endogenous noncoding RNAs of
about 22 nucleotides that bind complementary sequences within the
3-prime UTRs of target mRNAs, leading to translational repression and/or
mRNA cleavage (Hu et al., 2009).

CLONING

Mourelatos et al. (2002) identified MIR98 as 1 of at least 40 miRNAs
present in a large 15S RNP complex containing EIF2C2 (606229), GEMIN3
(606168), and GEMIN4 (606969). The MIR98 sequence is
UGAGGUAGUAAGUUGUAUUGUU.

GENE FUNCTION

Hu et al. (2009) noted that miRNAs have been implicated in the fine
tuning of the Toll-like receptor (TLR; see 603030)-mediated inflammatory
response. Using Northern and Western blot analyses and PCR with human
cholangiocytes, which express multiple TLRs, Hu et al. (2009) showed
that MIR98 and LET7 (see MIRNLET7A1; 605386) regulated CIS (CISH;
602441) protein expression via translational suppression. CIS expression
was upregulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or Cryptosporidium parvum
exposure, and this upregulation involved downregulation of MIR98 and
LET7, which relieved MIR98- and LET7-mediated translational repression
of CIS. Gain- and loss-of-function studies showed that CIS accelerated
degradation of IKBA (NFKBIA; 164008) and enhanced NFKB (see 164011)
activation in cholangiocytes in response to LPS stimulation or C. parvum
exposure.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Mourelatos et al. (2002) mapped the MIR98
gene to chromosome X.

REFERENCE 1. Hu, G.; Zhou, R.; Liu, J.; Gong, A.-Y.; Eischeid, A. N.; Dittman,
J. W.; Chen, X.-M.: MicroRNA-98 and let-7 confer cholangiocyte expression
of cytokine-inducible Src homology 2-containing protein in response
to microbial challenge. J. Immun. 183: 1617-1624, 2009.

2. Mourelatos, Z.; Dostie, J.; Paushkin, S.; Sharma, A.; Charroux,
B.; Abel, L.; Rappsilber, J.; Mann, M.; Dreyfuss, G.: miRNPs: a novel
class of ribonucleoproteins containing numerous microRNAs. Genes
Dev. 16: 720-728, 2002.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/11/2009

EDITED mgross: 12/11/2009

602352	TITLE *602352 GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE 2; GNRH2
DESCRIPTION Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 1 (GNRH1; 152760) is a decapeptide widely
known for its role in regulating reproduction by serving as a signal
from the hypothalamus to pituitary gonadotropes. This function for GNRH1
has been highly conserved during 500 million years of vertebrate
evolution despite the fact that its amino acid sequence varies by 50%.
In addition to the hypothalamic GNRH1 of variable sequence, many
vertebrate species express a second, invariant GNRH form, GNRH-II (or
GNRH2), with the primary structure
gln-his-trp-ser-his-gly-trp-tyr-pro-gly. Antibody staining demonstrates
GNRH2 in the midbrain of all species where its location has been
described (Kasten et al., 1996). Furthermore, nucleic acid probes have
been used to identify GNRH2 expression in the midbrain of several fish
species and one mammal. White et al. (1998) showed that a gene encoding
GNRH2 is expressed in humans and is located on chromosome 20p13,
distinct from the GNRH1 gene on 8p21-p11.2. The genomic and mRNA
structures of GNRH2 parallel those of GNRH1. However, in contrast to
GNRH1, GNRH2 is expressed at significantly higher levels outside the
brain (up to 30-fold), particularly in the kidney, bone marrow, and
prostate. The widespread expression of GNRH2 suggests it may have
multiple functions. Molecular phylogenetic analysis shows that GNRH2 is
likely the result of a duplication before the appearance of vertebrates,
and predicts the existence of a third GNRH form in humans and other
vertebrates. White et al. (1998) used fluorescence in situ hybridization
to map GNRH2 to 20p13.

Chen et al. (2002) found that human normal and leukemic T cells produce
GNRH2 and GNRH1. Exposure of normal or cancerous human or mouse T cells
to GNRH2 or GNRH1 triggered de novo gene transcription and cell-surface
expression of the laminin receptor (150370), which is involved in
cellular adhesion and migration and in tumor invasion and metastasis.
GNRH2 or GNRH1 also induced adhesion to laminin and chemotaxis toward
SDF1A (600835), and augmented entry in vivo of metastatic T-lymphoma
into the spleen and bone marrow. Homing of normal T cells into specific
organs was reduced in mice lacking GNRH1. A specific GNRH1 receptor
antagonist blocked GNRH1 but not GNRH2-induced effects, which was
suggestive of signaling through distinct receptors. Chen et al. (2002)
suggested that GNRH2 and GNRH1, secreted from nerves or autocrine or
paracrine sources, interact directly with T cells and trigger gene
transcription, adhesion, chemotaxis, and homing to specific organs.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, A.; Ganor, Y.; Rahimipour, S.; Ben-Aroya, N.; Koch, Y.; Levite,
M.: The neuropeptides GnRH-II and GnRH-I are produced by human T
cells and trigger laminin receptor gene expression, adhesion, chemotaxis
and homing to specific organs. Nature Med. 8: 1421-1426, 2002.

2. Kasten, T. L.; White, S. A.; Norton, T. T.; Bond, C. T.; Adelman,
J. P.; Fernald, R. D.: Characterization of two new preproGnRH mRNAs
in the tree shrew: first direct evidence for mesencephalia GnRH gene
expression in a placental mammal. Gen. Comp. Endocr. 104: 7-19,
1996.

3. White, R. B.; Eisen, J. A.; Kasten, T. L.; Fernald, R. D.: Second
gene for gonadotropin-releasing hormone in humans. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 95: 305-309, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/13/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/1998

EDITED alopez: 02/19/2003
terry: 2/13/2003
dholmes: 3/10/1998
mark: 2/13/1998

604065	TITLE *604065 CALCIUM CHANNEL, VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT, T TYPE, ALPHA-1G SUBUNIT; CACNA1G
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Voltage-activated calcium channels can be distinguished based on their
voltage-dependence, deactivation, and single-channel conductance. See
601011. Low-voltage-activated calcium channels are referred to as 'T'
type because their currents are both transient, owing to fast
inactivation, and tiny, owing to small conductance. T-type channels are
thought to be involved in pacemaker activity, low-threshold calcium
spikes, neuronal oscillations and resonance, and rebound burst firing.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences related to calcium channels,
Perez-Reyes et al. (1998) identified a partial human cDNA encoding a
novel channel that they designated alpha-1G or Ca(V)T.1. The authors
used the partial cDNA to isolate additional human, rat, and mouse
alpha-1G cDNAs. Northern blot analysis of human and rat tissues
indicated that the alpha-1G gene was expressed as an 8.5-kb mRNA
predominantly in brain. An additional 9.7-kb transcript was also
detected. When expressed in Xenopus oocytes, the rat alpha-1G channel
exhibited the properties of a low-voltage-activated T-type calcium
channel.

Jagannathan et al. (2002) found that multiple isoforms of CACNA1G and at
least 2 isoforms of CACNA1H (607904) are generated by alternative
splicing and are expressed in testis. In situ hybridization localized
transcripts both in germ cells and in other testis cell types. Within
cardiac tissue, both CACNA1G and CACNA1H were expressed in vascular
tissue and not in myocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

By whole-cell patch clamp, Jagannathan et al. (2002) detected T-type
voltage-operated Ca(2+) channel currents in isolated round spermatids.
Currents were consistent with those generated by CACNA1H or CACNA1G
channels.

By action potential clamp studies, Chemin et al. (2002) found
significant differences in the biochemical properties of CACNA1G,
CACNA1H, and CACNA1I (608230) following transient transfection in human
embryonic kidney cells. Using firing activities recorded in dissociated
rat cerebellar Purkinje neurons and thalamocortical relay neurons as
voltage-clamp waveforms, they showed that CACNA1I currents contributed
to sustained electrical activities, while CACNA1G and CACNA1H currents
generated short burst firing. Chemin et al. (2002) hypothesized that
each of the T-channel pore-forming subunits displays specific gating
properties that uniquely contribute to neuronal firing and that CACNA1I
channels provide pacemaker activity.

MAPPING

By FISH and radiation hybrid analysis, Perez-Reyes et al. (1998) mapped
the CACNA1G gene to 17q22. Using interspecific backcross analysis, they
mapped the mouse Cacna1g gene to the distal portion of chromosome 11, in
a region showing homology of synteny with 17q22.

ANIMAL MODEL

To investigate whether T-type Ca(2+) channels in thalamocortical relay
(TC) neurons are involved in the generation of spike-and-wave discharges
(SWDs), Kim et al. (2001) used gene targeting to generate a null
mutation of CACNA1G that encodes the pore-forming subunit of T-type
Ca(2+) channels. The knockout mice grew normally and were fertile.
General development of the brain and major organs appeared normal. Using
pharmacologic models, Kim et al. (2001) analyzed the ability of mutant
mice to generate SWDs. The thalamocortical relay neurons of the knockout
mice lacked the burst mode firing of action potentials, whereas they
showed the normal pattern of tonic mode firing. The knockout thalamus
was specifically resistant to the generation of SWDs in response to
GABA-B receptor (see 603540) activation. Kim et al. (2001) concluded
that the modulation of the intrinsic firing pattern mediated by CACNA1G
T-type Ca(2+) channels plays a critical role in the generation of GABA-B
receptor-mediated SWDs in the thalamocortical pathway, the hallmark of
absence seizures.

Sensations from viscera, like fullness, easily become painful if the
stimulus persists. Kim et al. (2003) demonstrated that mice lacking
alpha 1G T-type calcium channels show hyperalgesia to visceral pain.
Thalamic infusion of a T-type blocker induced similar hyperalgesia in
wildtype mice. In response to visceral pain, the ventroposterolateral
thalamic neurons evoked a surge of single spikes, which then slowly
decayed as T type-dependent burst spikes gradually increased. In
alpha-1G-deficient neurons, the single-spike response persisted without
burst spikes. Kim et al. (2003) concluded that T-type calcium channels
underlie an antinociceptive mechanism operating in the thalamus and that
their findings support the idea that burst firing plays a critical role
in sensory gating in the thalamus.

REFERENCE 1. Chemin, J.; Monteil, A.; Perez-Reyes, E.; Bourinet, E.; Nargeot,
J.; Lory, P.: Specific contribution of human T-type calcium channel
isotypes (alpha-1G, alpha-1H, and alpha-1I) to neuronal excitability. J.
Physiol. 540: 3-14, 2002.

2. Jagannathan, S.; Punt, E. L.; Gu, Y.; Arnoult, C.; Sakkas, D.;
Barratt, C. L. R.; Publicover, S. J.: Identification and localization
of T-type voltage-operated calcium channel subunits in human male
germ cells: expression of multiple isoforms. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
8449-8456, 2002.

3. Kim, D.; Park, D.; Choi, S.; Lee, S.; Sun, M.; Kim, C.; Shin, H.-S.
: Thalamic control of visceral nociception mediated by T-type Ca(2+)
channels. Science 302: 117-119, 2003.

4. Kim, D.; Song, I.; Keum, S.; Lee, T.; Jeong, M.-J.; Kim, S.-S.;
McEnery, M. W.; Shin, H.-S.: Lack of the burst firing of thalamocortical
relay neurons and resistance to absence seizures in mice lacking alpha-1G
T-type Ca(2+) channels. Neuron 31: 35-45, 2001.

5. Perez-Reyes, E.; Cribbs, L. L.; Daud, A.; Lacerda, A. E.; Barclay,
J.; Williamson, M. P.; Fox, M.; Rees, M.; Lee, J.-H.: Molecular characterization
of a neuronal low-voltage-activated T-type calcium channel. Nature 391:
896-900, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/06/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/29/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/20/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 2/1/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/26/1999

EDITED mgross: 11/06/2003
alopez: 10/29/2003
mgross: 6/20/2003
carol: 2/12/2002
terry: 2/1/2002
mgross: 7/26/1999

612745	TITLE *612745 MICRO RNA 181B2; MIR181B2
;;miRNA181B2;;
MIRN181B2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), such as MIR181B, are short noncoding RNAs that
repress translation or induce cleavage of target mRNAs with which they
interact (Ciafre et al., 2005). Two distinct genes, MIR181B1 (612744)
and MIR181B2, encode the same mature MIR181B miRNA.

GENE FUNCTION

Using microarray and Northern blot analyses, Ciafre et al. (2005) found
that expression of MIR181B was significantly downregulated in primary
glioblastomas and human glioblastoma cell lines compared with normal
brain tissue.

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the MIR181B2 gene to chromosome 9q33.3 based on an
alignment of the MIR181B2 stem-loop sequence
(CUGAUGGCUGCACUCAACAUUCAUUGCUGUCGGUGGGUUUGAGUCUGAAUCAACUCACUGAUCAAUGAAUG
CAAACUGCGGACCAAACA) with the genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Ciafre, S. A.; Galardi, S.; Mangiola, A.; Ferracin, M.; Liu, C.-G.;
Sabatino, G.; Negrini, M.; Maira, G.; Croce, C. M.; Farace, M. G.
: Extensive modulation of a set of microRNAs in primary glioblastoma. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 334: 1351-1358, 2005.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/21/2009.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/21/2009

EDITED mgross: 04/21/2009

604450	TITLE *604450 PROTEASOME 26S SUBUNIT, NON-ATPase, 12; PSMD12
;;p55
DESCRIPTION The 26S proteasome is responsible for the ATP-dependent degradation of a
variety of cellular proteins. Selective breakdown of these proteins is
mediated by the ubiquitin pathway. The 26S proteasome is a 2,000-kD
protein complex composed of the 20S proteasome, which is the catalytic
subcomplex, and PA700, which is the regulatory subcomplex. The
approximately 700-kD PA700 complex consists of approximately 20
heterogeneous proteins ranging from 25 to 112 kD. These subunits can be
divided into 2 classes, those that are members of the AAA (ATPases
associated with various cellular activities) family and those that are
not.

Saito et al. (1997) sequenced peptides from the p55 subunit of the
bovine PA700 complex. They identified a human EST encoding a homologous
protein and used this EST to isolate hepatoblastoma HepG2 cell cDNAs
encoding human p55, also called PSMD12. The deduced 456-amino acid
PSMD12 protein has a calculated molecular mass of 52,903 Da. The authors
identified a putative S. cerevisiae homolog, which they named NAS5, that
shares 41.1% amino acid sequence identity with PSMD12. Disruption of the
NAS5 gene resulted in lethality.

REFERENCE 1. Saito, A.; Watanabe, T. K.; Shimada, Y.; Fujiwara, T.; Slaughter,
C. A.; DeMartino, G. N.; Tanahashi, N.; Tanaka, K.: cDNA cloning
and functional analysis of p44.5 and p55, two regulatory subunits
of the 26S proteasome. Gene 203: 241-250, 1997.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 1/20/2000

EDITED mgross: 01/21/2000
psherman: 1/20/2000

608513	TITLE *608513 RIBONUCLEASE P, RNA COMPONENT H1; RPPH1
;;H1 RNA; H1RNA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

H1RNA is the RNA component of the RNase P ribonucleoprotein, an
endoribonuclease that cleaves tRNA precursor molecules to form the
mature 5-prime termini of their tRNA sequences (Baer et al., 1989).

CLONING

Bartkiewicz et al. (1989) purified RNase P from HeLa cell extracts and,
using this as template, synthesized and cloned H1RNA cDNA. The deduced
340-nucleotide transcript does not contain a 5-prime cap structure. The
5-prime and 3-prime termini are complementary, and the authors predicted
that they are hydrogen bonded.

Baer et al. (1989) cloned an H1RNA cDNA, including its flanking regions,
from human spleen DNA. In vitro transcription of H1RNA cDNA using S100
and whole HeLa cell extracts confirmed synthesis of a transcript
containing about 340 nucleotides. The mature form of H1RNA did not
appear to be derived from a larger precursor molecule. Inhibitor studies
indicated that H1RNA is transcribed by RNA polymerase (Pol) III (see
606007).

GENE FUNCTION

Following depletion of RNase P from HeLa cell extracts, Reiner et al.
(2006) found a severe deficiency in Pol III-mediated transcription of
tRNA and other small noncoding RNA genes. Targeted cleavage of the H1RNA
moiety of RNase P altered enzyme specificity and diminished Pol III
transcription. Similarly, inactivation of RNase P protein subunits, such
as RPP38 (606116), by small interfering RNA inhibited Pol III function
and Pol III-directed promoter activity in the cell. RNase P exerted its
role in transcription through association with Pol III and chromatin of
active tRNA and 5S rRNA (180420) genes. Reiner et al. (2006) concluded
that RNase P has a role in Pol III transcription and that transcription
and early tRNA processing may be coordinated.

GENE STRUCTURE

Baer et al. (1989) determined that the flanking regions of the H1RNA
gene contain transcriptional control elements characteristic of both RNA
polymerase II and RNA polymerase III.

Myslinski et al. (2001) analyzed the H1RNA promoter region using various
transcription assays on mutant templates and DNA binding assays with
recombinant proteins. They found that the DNA elements required for
H1RNA transcription are typical of vertebrate small nuclear RNA promoter
elements. However, the promoter is unusually compact and is contained
within 100 bp of 5-prime flanking sequences.

MAPPING

By Southern blot analyses, Bartkiewicz et al. (1989) determined that
there are no more than 3 H1RNA genes, and Baer et al. (1989) predicted
that there is only a single gene. Baer et al. (1989) mapped the H1RNA
gene to chromosome 14q just below the centromere by analyzing a panel of
mouse-human hybrid chromosomes and by in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Baer, M.; Nilsen, T. W.; Costigan, C.; Altman, S.: Structure and
transcription of a human gene for H1 RNA, the RNA component of human
RNase P. Nucleic Acids Res. 18: 97-103, 1989.

2. Bartkiewicz, M.; Gold, H.; Altman, S.: Identification and characterization
of an RNA molecule that copurifies with RNase P activity from HeLa
cells. Genes Dev. 3: 488-499, 1989.

3. Myslinski, E.; Ame, J.-C.; Krol, A.; Carbon, P.: An unusually
compact external promoter for RNA polymerase III transcription of
the human H1RNA gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 29: 2502-2509, 2001.

4. Reiner, R.; Ben-Asouli, Y.; Krilovetzky, I.; Jarrous, N.: A role
for the catalytic ribonucleoprotein RNase P in RNA polymerase III
transcription. Genes Dev. 20: 1621-1635, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/17/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/8/2004

EDITED mgross: 07/19/2006
terry: 7/17/2006
mgross: 3/8/2004

611325	TITLE *611325 TRANSFORMING GROWTH FACTOR-BETA REGULATOR 4; TBRG4
;;KIAA0948;;
CELL CYCLE PROGRESSION RESTORATION 2; CPR2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening a hepatoma cDNA expression library for clones that could
block mating pheromone-induced G1 arrest in yeast, Edwards et al. (1997)
cloned TBRG4, which they called CPR2. The deduced protein contains
multiple putative leucine zipper domains characteristic of transcription
factors.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned TBRG4, which they designated
KIAA0948. The transcript contains several repetitive elements in the
3-prime untranslated region. The deduced 521-amino acid protein shares
significant similarity with rat Cpr2. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate
expression in ovary, and little to no expression in all other tissues
and specific brain regions examined.

MAPPING

By FISH, Edwards et al. (1997) mapped the TBRG4 gene to chromosome
7p14-p13.

REFERENCE 1. Edwards, M. C.; Liegeois, N.; Horecka, J.; DePinho, R. A.; Sprague,
G. F., Jr.; Tyers, M.; Elledge, S. J.: Human CPR (cell cycle progression
restoration) genes impart a Far- phenotype on yeast cells. Genetics 147:
1063-1076, 1997.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/15/2007

EDITED carol: 08/16/2007
carol: 8/15/2007

601271	TITLE *601271 GUANYLATE CYCLASE ACTIVATOR 2B; GUCA2B
;;UROGUANYLIN; UGN;;
GUANYLATE CYCLASE C ACTIVATING PEPTIDE II;;
GCAP II
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Uroguanylin and guanylin (GUCA2A; 139392), peptide homologs of the
bacterial heat-stable enterotoxins (e.g., the E. coli ST toxin; STa),
are endogenous activators of the guanylate cyclase-2C receptor (GUCY2C;
601330), which synthesizes cyclic GMP (cGMP), a key component of several
intracellular signal transduction pathways.

CLONING

- Peptide Isolation

Kita et al. (1994) searched for members of the guanylin-like family and
purified a 16-amino acid peptide, which they termed uroguanylin, from
human urine. The uroguanylin peptide shares amino acid sequence homology
with guanylin. By systematic isolation of circulating regulatory
peptides that generate cGMP as second messengers, Hess et al. (1995)
identified a 24-amino acid peptide with a molecular mass of 2.6 kD,
which they termed guanylate cyclase C activating peptide II (GCAP II),
and identified as the 'circulating form of uroguanylin.' The 16
C-terminal amino acids are identical to uroguanylin, and 8 of 13
C-terminal residues are conserved between GCAP II, uroguanylin, and E.
coli STa. By immunohistochemistry, Hess et al. (1995) showed that GCAP
II localized to enteroendocrine cells of colonic mucosa.

- Gene Isolation

Using human uroguanylin cDNA as a probe to screen a human genomic
library, Miyazato et al. (1997) isolated the gene for uroguanylin and
determined the full-length sequence, which encodes a deduced 112-amino
acid protein. The entire nucleotide sequence that corresponds to the 16
amino acid residues of mature uroguanylin is included in the third exon.
The GUCA2B gene also has multiple binding sites for the
promoter-specific transcription factors AP1 (165160) and AP2 (107580),
and a cAMP-regulated enhancer element. RNA blot analysis showed that the
human uroguanylin mRNA is expressed in the gastric fundus and pylorus,
as well as in the intestine.

Whitaker et al. (1997) cloned the mouse Guca2b gene (which the authors
referred to as Guca1b). In the mouse, uroguanylin mRNA is most prominent
in the proximal small intestine, whereas guanylin mRNA is predominantly
expressed in distal small intestine and colon. The upstream promoter
sequence of the mouse uroguanylin gene contains consensus binding sites
for several known transcription factors, including HNF1 (142410) and Sp1
(189906).

GENE STRUCTURE

Miyazato et al. (1997) determined that the human GUCA2B gene contains 3
exons.

Whitaker et al. (1997) found that the mouse uroguanylin and guanylin
genes are structurally similar, both being composed of 3 short exons.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Miyazato et al. (1997) mapped the
human GUCA2B gene to chromosome 1p34-p33.

Whitaker et al. (1997) demonstrated that the mouse Guca2b gene is
tightly linked to the guanylin gene on mouse chromosome 4.

GENE FUNCTION

Kita et al. (1994) found that synthetic uroguanylin increased cGMP
levels in T84 cells, competed for receptors with (125)I-labeled ST, and
stimulated chloride secretion. Kita et al. (1994) discussed the
bioactivity of human uroguanylin in light of their previous
investigation of uroguanylin from opossum urine (Hamra et al., 1993).

Whitaker et al. (1997) noted that uroguanylin is an endogenous ligand of
the intestinal receptor guanylate cyclase-C and stimulates an increase
in cGMP, inducing chloride secretion via the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR; 602421). Although their
structural homologies and similar bioactivities suggest that guanylin
and uroguanylin are members of the same peptide family, their tissue
gene expression patterns differ, indicating that they may have different
roles in the regulation of epithelial functions.

Kinoshita et al. (1997) found significantly higher urinary excretion of
uroguanylin in persons on a high-salt rather than a low-salt diet. In
addition, their concentration of plasma uroguanylin increased with
increasing serum creatinine, and the 10-kD precursor of uroguanylin
increased as the severity of renal impairment increased. The findings
suggested that uroguanylin is involved in the regulation of electrolyte
homeostasis by the kidney.

In a review of the functions of uroguanylin, Forte et al. (1996) noted
that uroguanylin receptors are present on the luminal surface of
epithelial cells lining the intestinal tract and renal proximal tubules,
leading to salt and water secretion into the intestinal lumen as well as
the renal tubules. Uroguanylin mRNA is also expressed in both atria and
ventricles of the heart. Since uroguanylin circulates in the plasma of
normal individuals, it may function as an intestinal natriuretic hormone
and its secretion may be influenced by dietary levels of salt.

EVOLUTION

Whitaker et al. (1997) speculated that uroguanylin and guanylin may
represent gene duplications that have evolved to allow overlapping and
complementary patterns of expression in the intestine.

ANIMAL MODEL

Lorenz et al. (2003) found that transgenic uroguanylin knockout mice had
in an impaired ability to excrete an enteral load of NaCl, primarily due
to an inappropriate increase in renal Na+ absorption. They also had an
increase in mean arterial blood pressure that was independent of the
level of dietary salt intake. The authors concluded that uroguanylin
plays a role in an enteric-renal communication axis in the maintenance
of salt homeostasis in vivo.

REFERENCE 1. Forte, L. R.; Fan, X.; Hamra, F. K.: Salt and water homeostasis:
uroguanylin is a circulating peptide hormone with natriuretic activity. Am.
J. Kidney Dis. 28: 296-304, 1996.

2. Hamra, F. K.; Forte, L. R.; Eber, S. L.; Pidhorodeckyj, N. V.;
Krause, W. J.; Freeman, R. H.; Chin, D. T.; Tompkins, J. A.; Fok,
K. F.; Smith, C. E.; Duffin, K. L.; Siegel, N. R.; Currie, M. G.:
Uroguanylin: structure and activity of a second endogenous peptide
that stimulates intestinal guanylate cyclase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90:
10464-10468, 1993.

3. Hess, R.; Kuhn, M.; Schulz-Knappe, P.; Raida, M.; Fuchs, M.; Klodt,
J.; Adermann, K.; Kaever, V.; Cetin, Y.; Forssmann, W.-G.: GCAP-II:
isolation and characterization of the circulating form of human uroguanylin. FEBS
Lett. 374: 34-38, 1995.

4. Kinoshita, H.; Fujimoto, S.; Nakazato, M.; Yokota, N.; Date, Y.;
Yamaguchi, H.; Hisanaga, S; Eto, T.: Urine and plasma levels of uroguanylin
and its molecular forms in renal diseases. Kidney Int. 52: 1028-1034,
1997.

5. Kita, T.; Smith, C. E.; Fok, K. F.; Duffin, K. L.; Moore, W. M.;
Karabatsos, P. J.; Kachur, J. F.; Hamra, F. K.; Pidhorodeckyj, N.
V.; Forte, L. R.; Currie, M. G.: Characterization of human uroguanylin:
a member of the guanylin peptide family. Am. J. Physiol. 266: F342-F348,
1994.

6. Lorenz, J. N.; Nieman, M.; Sabo, J.; Sanford, L. P.; Hawkins, J.
A.; Elitsur, N.; Gawenis, L. R.; Clarke, L. L.; Cohen, M. B.: Uroguanylin
knockout mice have increased blood pressure and impaired natriuretic
response to enteral NaCl load. J. Clin. Invest. 112: 1244-1254,
2003.

7. Miyazato, M.; Nakazato, M.; Matsukura, S.; Kangawa, K.; Matsuo,
H.: Genomic structure and chromosomal localization of human uroguanylin. Genomics 43:
359-365, 1997.

8. Whitaker, T. L.; Steinbrecher, K. A.; Copeland, N. G.; Gilbert,
D. J.; Jenkins, N. A.; Cohen, M. B.: The uroguanylin gene (Guca1b)
is linked to guanylin (Guca2) on mouse chromosome 4. Genomics 45:
348-354, 1997. Note: Erratum: Genomics 66: 122 only, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 11/13/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/10/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/8/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/8/1997

CREATED Mark H. Paalman: 5/21/1996

EDITED terry: 06/06/2012
carol: 11/13/2003
ckniffin: 11/10/2003
mark: 12/11/1997
terry: 12/8/1997
mark: 10/15/1997
terry: 10/8/1997
mark: 5/21/1996
terry: 5/21/1996

180646	TITLE *180646 SMALL NUCLEOLAR RNA, H/ACA BOX, 62; SNORA62
;;RNA, U108 SMALL NUCLEOLAR; RNU108;;
RNA, E2 SMALL NUCLEOLAR; RNE2;;
snoRNA, E2
DESCRIPTION See 180645. Several of the known small nucleolar RNA (snoRNA) species
have been shown to be required for processing of ribosomal RNA (rRNA)
precursors. The genes of most of the known vertebrate snoRNA species are
located in introns of mRNA precursors (Maxwell and Fournier, 1995). E2
RNA is a nucleolar species that is 154-nucleotides long in the human.
Selvamurugan and Eliceiri (1995) stated that it belongs to a new family
of snoRNAs because it does not have the sequences named 'box C,'
'C-prime,' or 'D' that are present in most vertebrate snoRNA species,
and it does not bind fibrillarin (134795), the nucleolar protein
associated with most snoRNAs. E2 snoRNA is found in all tissues tested
in all vertebrates analyzed. Two observations are compatible with the
possibility that the human E2 RNA gene may be intronic. First, the human
gene lacks the intragenic flanking sequences that are functional in
other genes. Second, the 5-prime end of E2 RNA is monophosphorylated,
suggesting that it is formed by RNA processing. Intron-encoded snoRNAs
have monophosphorylated 5-prime termini. Selvamurugan and Eliceiri
(1995) demonstrated that the E2 gene resides in an intron of a
laminin-binding protein, the 67-kD laminin receptor (LAMR1; 150370).
Multiple copies (up to 16) of the LAMR1 gene per haploid genome are
present in the human.

REFERENCE 1. Maxwell, E. W.; Fournier, M. J.: The small nucleolar RNAs. Annu.
Rev. Biochem. 64: 897-934, 1995.

2. Selvamurugan, N.; Eliceiri, G. L.: The gene for human E2 small
nucleolar RNA resides in an intron of a laminin-binding protein gene. Genomics 30:
400-401, 1995.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/1/1993

EDITED mgross: 08/16/2007
mgross: 1/20/2006
psherman: 12/15/1999
psherman: 12/14/1999
psherman: 3/11/1999
alopez: 2/21/1999
terry: 7/7/1997
terry: 3/26/1996
mark: 1/14/1996
carol: 11/1/1993

603884	TITLE *603884 BCL2-ASSOCIATED ATHANOGENE 4; BAG4
;;SILENCER OF DEATH DOMAINS; SODD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Tumor necrosis factor receptor-1 (TNFR1; 191190) and several other
members of the TNF receptor superfamily, such as DR3 (603366), contain
intracellular death domains and are capable of triggering apoptosis when
activated by their respective ligands. However, TNFR1 self-associates
and signals independently of ligand when overexpressed. Jiang et al.
(1999) suggested the existence of a cellular mechanism to protect
against ligand-independent signaling by TNFR1 and other death domain
receptors. Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay with DR3 as bait, these authors
identified a cDNA encoding a protein that they designated 'silencer of
death domains' (SODD). The predicted 457-amino acid SODD protein
migrates as a doublet of 60 kD on Western blots of mammalian cell
extracts. Coimmunoprecipitation studies revealed that SODD is associated
with TNFR1 in vivo. TNF treatment of cells released SODD from TNFR1,
permitting the recruitment of proteins such as TRADD (603500) and TRAF2
(601895) to the active TNFR1 signaling complex. Jiang et al. (1999)
proposed that SODD is a negative regulatory protein that is normally
associated with the death domain of TNFR1, inhibiting the intrinsic
self-aggregation properties of the death domain and maintaining TNFR1 in
an inactive, monomeric state. This inhibition is relieved by
TNF-mediated receptor crosslinking, which triggers the rapid release of
SODD, allowing the death domains of TNFR1 to self-associate and bind
other proteins to form an active TNFR1 signaling complex. These authors
found that SODD also interacted with DR3 in yeast 2-hybrid assays,
suggesting that SODD association may be representative of a general
mechanism for preventing spontaneous signaling by death
domain-containing receptors.

BAG1 (601497) binds the ATPase domains of Hsp70 (see 140550) and Hsc70
(600816), modulating their chaperone activity. See BAG2 (603882).
Takayama et al. (1999) identified cDNAs corresponding to BAG4 and 3
other BAG1-like proteins. These authors suggested that interactions with
various BAG family proteins allow opportunities for specification and
diversification of Hsp70/Hsc70 chaperone functions.

GENE FUNCTION

Pancreatic cancer cells are resistant to TNFA-mediated apoptosis. By
Northern blot analysis, Ozawa et al. (2000) detected a 5-fold increased
expression of 3.5-kb SODD transcripts in pancreatic cancer cells and
pancreatic cancer cell lines compared with normal pancreatic cells.
Other gastrointestinal cancers (liver, esophagus, stomach, and colon)
showed no increased SODD expression. In situ hybridization analysis
revealed expression of SODD in the cytoplasm of cancer cells.

By array CGH, Yang et al. (2006) analyzed the copy number and expression
level of genes in the 8p12-p11 amplicon in 22 human breast cancer
(114480) specimens and 7 breast cancer cell lines. Of the 21 potential
genes identified, PCR analysis and functional analysis indicated that 3
genes, LSM1 (607281), BAG4, and C8ORF4 (607702), are breast cancer
oncogenes that can work in combination to influence a transformed
phenotype in human mammary epithelial cells.

MAPPING

The BAG4 gene resides on chromosome 8p11 (Yang et al., 2006).

REFERENCE 1. Jiang, Y.; Woronicz, J. D.; Liu, W.; Goeddel, D. V.: Prevention
of constitutive TNF receptor 1 signaling by silencer of death domains. Science 283:
543-546, 1999. Note: Erratum: Science 283: 1852 only, 1999.

2. Ozawa, F.; Friess, H.; Zimmermann, A.; Kleeff, J.; Buchler, M.
W.: Enhanced expression of silencer of death domains (SODD/BAG-4)
in pancreatic cancer. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 271: 409-413,
2000.

3. Takayama, S.; Xie, Z.; Reed, J. C.: An evolutionarily conserved
family of Hsp70/Hsc70 molecular chaperone regulators. J. Biol. Chem. 274:
781-786, 1999.

4. Yang, Z. Q.; Streicher, K. L.; Ray, M. E.; Abrams, J.; Ethier,
S. P.: Multiple interacting oncogenes on the 8p11-p12 amplicon in
human breast cancer. Cancer Res. 66: 11632-11643, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/4/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/7/2000

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/7/1999

EDITED alopez: 11/19/2012
wwang: 5/10/2007
ckniffin: 5/4/2007
mgross: 12/8/2000
terry: 12/7/2000
alopez: 6/7/1999

600126	TITLE *600126 PHOSPHODIESTERASE 4A, cAMP-SPECIFIC; PDE4A
;;DUNCE-LIKE PHOSPHODIESTERASE E2, FORMERLY; DPDE2, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cyclic nucleotides are important second messengers that regulate and
mediate a number of cellular responses to extracellular signals, such as
hormones, light, and neurotransmitters. Cyclic nucleotide
phosphodiesterases (PDEs) regulate the cellular concentrations of cyclic
nucleotides and thereby play a role in signal transduction. PDE4A is a
class IV cAMP-specific PDE (summary by Milatovich et al., 1994).

CLONING

Livi et al. (1990) isolated a cDNA for a cAMP phosphodiesterase from
human monocytes. The deduced protein contains 686 amino acids. Northern
blot analysis detected a predominant transcript of about 4.8 kb in
primary human monocytes and placenta. Obernolte et al. (1993) identified
the monocyte clone as the homolog of rat Pde4a.

Using degenerate primers based on Drosophila dnc and rat Dpd to amplify
human Dpd orthologs, followed by low-stringency hybridization of a brain
cDNA library, Bolger et al. (1993) cloned full-length DPDE2, which they
called PDE46, and a possible splice variant. The major transcript
encodes a deduced 779-amino acid protein with 2 N-terminal domains that
share a high degree of conservation with other DPDE proteins, and a
C-terminal catalytic domain. Northern blot analysis detected a 4.5-kb
DPDE2 transcript in normal human temporal cortex. RNase protection
assays showed that DPDE2 was expressed in 6 of 7 cell lines examined.

The difference in sequence within the 5-prime region of the open reading
frame reported by Bolger et al. (1993) and Livi et al. (1990) was
examined by Sullivan et al. (1994), who confirmed the sequence reported
by Bolger et al. (1993).

Sullivan et al. (1998) characterized the first 'short' PDE4A isoenzyme.
Huston et al. (1996) had characterized the full-length human 'long'
PDE4A isoenzyme.

GENE FUNCTION

Bolger et al. (1993) confirmed that DPDE2 showed cAMP PDE activity,
which was inhibited by several cyclin nucleotide PDE inhibitors.

Wilson et al. (1994) characterized the PDE4A enzyme.

Growth hormone (GH; 139250) is an essential priming factor for the
differentiation of 3T3-F442A mouse preadipocytes into mature adipocytes.
MacKenzie et al. (1998) found that GH-mediated differentiation of
3T3-F442A cells was accompanied by increased cAMP phosphodiesterase
activity by a specific Pde4a isoform that they called Pde4a5. They
showed that activation of Pde4a5 countered GH-mediated differentiation
of 3T3-F442A cells. Activation of Pde4a5 was mediated by a
phosphorylation pathway involving Jak2 (147796), PI3 kinase (see
601232), and p70S6 (see 608938).

Vecsey et al. (2009) demonstrated that sleep deprivation selectively
impaired 3-prime, 5-prime-cAMP- and protein kinase A (PKA; see
176911)-dependent forms of synaptic plasticity in the mouse hippocampus,
reduced cAMP signaling, and increased activity and protein levels of
PDE4, an enzyme that degrades cAMP. Treatment of mice with
phosphodiesterase inhibitors rescued the sleep deprivation-induced
deficits in cAMP signaling, synaptic plasticity, and
hippocampus-dependent memory. Vecsey et al. (2009) concluded that their
findings demonstrated that brief sleep deprivation disrupts hippocampal
function by interfering with cAMP signaling through increased PDE4
activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sullivan et al. (1998) determined that the PDE4A gene spans 50 kb and
contains at least 17 exons.

MAPPING

Milatovich et al. (1994) assigned the PDE4A gene to human chromosome 19
by Southern analysis of somatic cell hybrid lines and to mouse
chromosome 9 by Southern analysis of recombinant inbred (RI) mouse
strains. Horton et al. (1995) confirmed the localization of PDE4A to
chromosome 19 by analysis of a human/hamster somatic cell hybrid panel.
Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, they regionalized the gene to
chromosome 19p13.2-q12.

Sullivan et al. (1998) determined that the PDE4A gene is 350 kb proximal
to TYK2 (176941) and 850 kb distal to LDLR (606945) on chromosome
19p13.2.

REFERENCE 1. Bolger, G.; Michaeli, T.; Martins, T.; St. John, T.; Steiner, B.;
Rodgers, L.; Riggs, M.; Wigler, M.; Ferguson, K.: A family of human
phosphodiesterases homologous to the dunce learning and memory gene
product of Drosophila melanogaster are potential targets for antidepressant
drugs. Molec. Cell. Biol. 13: 6558-6571, 1993.

2. Horton, Y. M.; Sullivan, M.; Houslay, M. D.: Molecular cloning
of a novel splice variant of human type IVA (PDE-IVA) cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase
and localization of the gene to the p13.2-q12 region of human chromosome
19. Biochem. J. 308: 683-691, 1995. Note: Erratum: Biochem. J. 312:
991 only, 1995.

3. Huston, E.; Pooley, L.; Julien, P.; Scotland, G.; McPhee, I.; Sullivan,
M.; Bolger, G.; Houslay, M. D.: The human cyclic AMP-specific phosphodiesterase
PDE-46 (HSPDE4A4B) expressed in transfected COS7 cells occurs as both
particulate and cytosolic species that exhibit distinct kinetics of
inhibition by the antidepressant rolipram. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 31334-31344,
1996.

4. Livi, G. P.; Kmetz, P.; McHale, M. M.; Cieslinski, L. B.; Sathe,
G. M.; Taylor, D. P.; Davis, R. L.; Torphy, T. J.; Balcarek, J. M.
: Cloning and expression of cDNA for a human low-K(m), rolipram-sensitive
cyclic AMP phosphodiesterase. Molec. Cell. Biol. 10: 2678-2686,
1990.

5. MacKenzie, S. J.; Yarwood, S. J.; Peden, A. H.; Bolger, G. B.;
Vernon, R. G.; Houslay, M. D.: Stimulation of p70S6 kinase via a
growth hormone-controlled phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase pathway leads
to the activation of a PDE4A cyclic AMP-specific phosphodiesterase
in 3T3-F442A preadipocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 3549-3554,
1998.

6. Milatovich, A.; Bolger, G.; Michaeli, T.; Francke, U.: Chromosome
localizations of genes for five cAMP-specific phosphodiesterases in
man and mouse. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 20: 75-86, 1994.

7. Obernolte, R.; Bhakta, S.; Alvarez, R.; Bach, C.; Zuppan, P.; Mulkins,
M.; Jarnagin, K.; Shelton, E. R.: The cDNA of a human lymphocyte
cyclic-AMP phosphodiesterase (PDE IV) reveals a multigene family. Gene 129:
239-247, 1993.

8. Sullivan, M.; Egerton, M.; Shakur, Y.; Marquardsen, A.; Houslay,
M. D.: Molecular cloning and expression, in both COS-1 cells and
S. cerevisiae, of a human cytosolic type-IVA, cyclic AMP specific
phosphodiesterase (hPDE-IVA-h6.1). Cell. Signal. 6: 793-812, 1994.

9. Sullivan, M.; Rena, G.; Begg, F.; Gordon, L.; Olsen, A. S.; Houslay,
M. D.: Identification and characterization of the human homologue
of the short PDE4A cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase RD1 (PDE4A1) by
analysis of the human HSPDE4A gene locus located at chromosome 19p13.2. Biochem.
J. 333: 693-703, 1998.

10. Vecsey, C. G.; Baillie, G. S.; Jaganath, D.; Havekes, R.; Daniels,
A.; Wimmer, M.; Huang, T.; Brown, K. M.; Li, X.-Y.; Descalzi, G.;
Kim, S. S.; Chen, T.; Shang, Y.-Z.; Zhuo, M.; Houslay, M. D.; Abel,
T.: Sleep deprivation impairs cAMP signalling in the hippocampus. Nature 461:
1122-1125, 2009.

11. Wilson, M.; Sullivan, M.; Brown, N.; Houslay, M. D.: Purification,
characterization and analysis of rolipram inhibition of a human-type
IVA cyclic AMP-specific phosphodiesterase expressed in yeast. Biochem.
J. 304: 407-415, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/30/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/3/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/22/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/17/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/23/1994

EDITED carol: 03/20/2013
mgross: 11/30/2010
terry: 11/30/2010
mgross: 2/16/2010
terry: 2/3/2010
alopez: 1/7/2010
terry: 12/22/2009
mgross: 12/4/2009
ckniffin: 6/5/2002
carol: 12/9/1999
dkim: 12/8/1998
alopez: 8/20/1998
terry: 8/17/1998
jamie: 6/3/1997
mark: 11/14/1995
pfoster: 11/3/1995
carol: 1/19/1995
carol: 9/23/1994

615036	TITLE *615036 MICRO RNA 410; MIR410
;;miRNA410
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Micro RNAs (miRNAs), such as MIR410, are small noncoding RNAs that
downregulate gene expression by promoting mRNA degradation or preventing
mRNA translation via sequence-specific interactions with target RNAs
(Gattolliat et al., 2011).

GENE FUNCTION

A combination of age at diagnosis, stage of disease, and amplification
of the MYCN gene (164840) define high- and low-risk neuroblastomas (see
256700). Using microarray expression profiling and quantitative RT-PCR,
Gattolliat et al. (2011) found that 15 of 17 miRNAs significantly
downregulated in high-risk neuroblastomas originated from a large miRNA
cluster on chromosome 14q. Of these, MIR410 and MIR487B (615037)
exhibited the highest fold change and discriminated high-risk from
low-risk neuroblastomas. Compared with high-risk neuroblastomas,
low-risk neuroblastomas showed expression of both MIR410 and MIR487B,
and MIR410 and MIR487B expression favored overall and disease-free
survival. No loss of copy number at this locus was found in high-risk
neuroblastomas, suggesting that downregulation of these miRNAs was
likely the result of transcriptional or processing regulation.

Richardson et al. (2013) found that MIR410 is a regulator of lipoprotein
lipase (LPL; 609708) and that the minor allele C of the SNP dbSNP
rs13702 in LPL (609708.0043) abolishes the response of a functional
MIR410 recognition element in the LPL 3-prime untranslated region.

MAPPING

Gattolliat et al. (2011) stated that the MIR410 gene maps to a large
miRNA cluster on chromosome 14q32.31.

REFERENCE 1. Gattolliat, C.-H.; Thomas, L.; Ciafre, S. A.; Meurice, G.; Le Teuff,
G.; Job, B.; Richon, C.; Combaret, V.; Dessen, P.; Valteau-Couanet,
D.; May, E.; Busson, P.; Douc-Rasy, S.; Benard, J.: Expression of
miR-487b and miR-410 encoded by 14q32.31 locus is a prognostic marker
in neuroblastoma. Brit. J. Cancer 105: 1352-1361, 2011.

2. Richardson, K.; Nettleton, J. A.; Rotllan, N.; Tanaka, T.; Smith,
C. E.; Lai, C.-Q.; Parnell, L. D.; Lee, Y.-C.; Lahti, J.; Lemaitre,
R. N.; Manichaikul, A.; Keller, M.; and 34 others: Gain-of-function
lipoprotein lipase variant dbSNP rs13702 modulates lipid traits
through disruption of a microRNA-410 seed site. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92:
5-14, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/25/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/24/2013

EDITED alopez: 02/26/2013
terry: 2/25/2013
mgross: 1/24/2013

613753	TITLE *613753 MICRO RNA 211; MIR211
;;miRNA211;;
MIRN211
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), such as MIR211, are small noncoding RNAs that
commonly basepair with sequences in the 3-prime UTRs of target mRNAs and
either inhibit mRNA translation or cause mRNA destabilization (Krol et
al., 2010).

CLONING

Krol et al. (2010) found that Mir211, Mir204 (610942), and the Mir183
(611608)/Mir96 (611606)/Mir182 (611607) cluster were highly expressed in
mouse retina. Quantitative RT-PCR showed that expression of Mir204 and
Mir211 was enriched in the microdissected inner nuclear layer, whereas
the Mir183/Mir9/Mir182 cluster was most abundant in photoreceptors.

GENE FUNCTION

Using expression arrays and quantitative RT-PCR, Krol et al. (2010)
showed that expression of Mir211, Mir204, and the Mir183/Mir96/Mir182
cluster was reversibly up- and downregulated in mouse retina during
light and dark adaptation, respectively. Increased accumulation of these
miRNAs upon light adaptation occurred independently of circadian rhythm.
The half-lives of these and other miRNAs appeared to be much shorter in
retinal neurons than in rod bipolar cells or Muller glia cells. Similar
rapid miRNA decay was observed in cultured rodent neurons and mouse
embryonic stem cell-derived neurons. Inhibitor studies revealed that
miRNA turnover was stimulated by neuronal activity.

Chen et al. (2010) found that miR211 regulates the vascular endothelial
growth factor angiopoietin-1 (ANGPT1; 601667).

MAPPING

Hartz (2011) mapped the MIR211 gene to chromosome 15q13.3 based on an
alignment of the mature MIR211 sequence (UUCCCUUUGUCAUCCUUCGCCU) with
the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Krol et al. (2010) noted that the mouse Mir211 gene is located within an
intron of the Trpm1 gene (603576).

REFERENCE 1. Chen, J.; Yang, T.; Yu, H.; Sun, K.; Shi, Y.; Song, W.; Bai, Y.;
Wang, X.; Lou, K.; Song, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Hui, R.: A functional variant
in the 3-prime-UTR of angiopoietin-1 might reduce stroke risk by interfering
with the binding efficiency of microRNA 211. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19:
2524-2533, 2010.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/5/2011.

3. Krol, J.; Busskamp, V.; Markiewicz, I.; Stadler, M. B.; Ribi, S.;
Richter, J.; Duebel, J.; Bicker, S.; Fehling, H. J.; Schubeler, D.;
Oertner, T. G.; Schratt, G.; Bibel, M.; Roska, B.; Filipowicz, W.
: Characterizing light-regulated retinal microRNAs reveals rapid turnover
as a common property of neuronal microRNAs. Cell 141: 618-631, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 08/08/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/21/2011

EDITED alopez: 08/08/2013
mgross: 2/21/2011

604026	TITLE *604026 GOLGI SNAP RECEPTOR COMPLEX MEMBER 1; GOSR1
;;GOS28;;
GOLGI SNARE, 28-KD; GS28
DESCRIPTION The specificity of vesicular transport is thought to be determined by
correct pairing of vesicle-associated SNAREs (v-SNAREs) with those on
the target membrane (t-SNAREs). This complex then recruits soluble NSF
attachment proteins (SNAPs) and N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF;
601633) to form a 20S fusion (or SNARE) complex. See SNAPA (603215).
Nagahama et al. (1996) identified GOS28, a putative Golgi v-SNARE of 28
kD that localized primarily to transport vesicles at the terminal rims
of Golgi stacks. They demonstrated that GOS28 plays a role in
intra-Golgi transport. Subramaniam et al. (1996) isolated cDNAs encoding
rat GOS28, which they called p28 or GS28 (Golgi SNARE of 28 kD).
Sequence analysis revealed that the predicted protein contained a
central coiled-coil domain and a C-terminal membrane anchor. The authors
found that GS28 is a core component of the Golgi 20S SNARE complex that
participates in the docking or fusion stage of endoplasmic
reticulum-Golgi transport. Lowe et al. (1997) reported that GS28 plays a
role in transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cis- (inside
face) and medial-Golgi, while the GS27 (604027) Golgi SNARE participates
in protein movement from the medial-Golgi towards the trans- Golgi
(plasma-membrane face) and the trans-Golgi network.

By searching EST databases using the rat GS28 protein sequence, Bui et
al. (1999) identified human GS28 cDNAs. The deduced 250-amino acid human
protein is 97% identical to rat GS28. Independently, Mao et al. (1998)
identified a human GOS28 cDNA among a collection of cDNAs expressed in
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells.

By analysis of radiation hybrids and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Bui et al. (1999) mapped the GS28 gene to 17q11.

REFERENCE 1. Bui, T. D.; Levy, E. R.; Subramaniam, V. N.; Lowe, S. L.; Hong,
W.: cDNA characterization and chromosomal mapping of human Golgi
SNARE GS27 and GS28 to chromosome 17. Genomics 57: 285-288, 1999.

2. Lowe, S. L.; Peter, F.; Subramaniam, V. N.; Wong, S. H.; Hong,
W.: A SNARE involved in protein transport through the Golgi apparatus. Nature 389:
881-884, 1997.

3. Mao, M.; Fu, G.; Wu, J.-S.; Zhang, Q.-H.; Zhou, J.; Kan, L.-X.;
Huang, Q.-H.; He, K.-L.; Gu, B.-W.; Han, Z.-G.; Shen, Y.; Gu, J.;
Yu, Y.-P.; Xu, S.-H.; Wang, Y.-X.; Chen, S.-J.; Chen, Z.: Identification
of genes expressed in human CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
by expressed sequence tags and efficient full-length cDNA cloning. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8175-8180, 1998.

4. Nagahama, M.; Orci, L.; Ravazzola, M.; Amherdt, M.; Lacomis, L.;
Tempst, P.; Rothman, J. E.; Sollner, T. H.: A v-SNARE implicated
in intra-Golgi transport. J. Cell Biol. 133: 507-516, 1996.

5. Subramaniam, V. N.; Peter, F.; Philp, R.; Wong, S. H.; Hong, W.
: GS28, a 28-kilodalton Golgi SNARE that participates in ER-Golgi
transport. Science 272: 1161-1163, 1996.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/19/1999

EDITED alopez: 07/19/1999

171640	TITLE *171640 PHOSPHATASE, ACID, TYPE 5, TARTRATE-RESISTANT; ACP5
;;TARTRATE-RESISTANT ACID PHOSPHATASE; TRAP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ketcham et al. (1988) cloned a full-length cDNA for type 5
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase from human placenta and found that
it contained an open reading frame of 969 basepairs (corresponding to a
protein of 323 amino acids), a putative signal sequence of 19 amino
acids, and 2 potential glycosylation sites. The deduced amino acid
sequence of the human isozyme is 85% identical to the amino acid
sequence of porcine uteroferrin and 82% identical to the corresponding
regions of a partial amino acid sequence of the bovine spleen enzyme.
The type 5 isozyme of acid phosphatase is the most basic of the acid
phosphatases and is the only form insensitive to inhibition by
L(+)-tartrate. Normally, it is detected as a minor intracellular
component of spleen, lung, liver, and bone. High levels of acid
phosphatase-5 are found within the spleen and monocytes of patients with
Gaucher disease (230800). The type 5 isozyme is an iron-containing
glycoprotein with a molecular mass of approximately 34 kD.

Lord et al. (1990) also isolated a clone for ACP5, which is found
principally in resident tissue macrophages. They found that an ACP5 cDNA
clone contained an open reading frame of 975 bp, encoded a protein of
325 amino acids, including a single peptide of 19 residues and 2
potential sites for N-glycosylation.

MAPPING

Allen et al. (1989) assigned the ACP5 gene to 15q22-q26 by in situ
hybridization both to normal metaphase chromosomes and to the
chromosomes of an individual carrying an unbalanced translocation
involving chromosome 15. However, Grimes et al. (1993) showed that the
Acp5 gene maps to mouse chromosome 9 in a group of genes that are
homologous to a group of genes on 19p13.3-p13.1. By Southern blot
analysis of somatic cell hybrids and use of a PCR method, Leach et al.
(1994) confirmed the assignment of ACP5 to chromosome 19. By isotopic in
situ hybridization, Lord et al. (1990) mapped the APC5 gene to
19p13.3-p13.2 with a peak at 19p13.2.

GENE FUNCTION

Lord et al. (1990) found that the expression of ACP5 mRNA was restricted
to mononuclear phagocytes and that the enzyme was induced more than
20-fold on transformation of normal human monocytes to macrophages by
culture in serum-supplemented medium.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 10 patients with spondyloenchondrodysplasia with immune dysregulation
(SPENCDI; 607944) from 8 families, Briggs et al. (2011) identified
homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for mutations in the ACP5 gene
(see, e.g., 171640.0001-171640.0004). In vivo testing confirmed a loss
of expressed protein, and all 8 cases assayed showed elevated serum
interferon alpha (see IFNA1, 147660) activity, with gene expression
profiling in whole blood defining a type I interferon signature.

Simultaneously and independently, Lausch et al. (2011) mapped SPENCDI to
chromosome 19p13 and identified homozygous or compound heterozygous
mutations in the ACP5 gene in 14 affected individuals from 11 families
(see, e.g., 171640.0004-171640.0007). Lausch et al. (2011) demonstrated
that the mutations abolished TRAP enzyme function in serum and cells of
affected individuals, and that phosphorylated osteopontin accumulated in
serum, urine, and cells cultured from TRAP-deficient individuals.
Case-derived dendritic cells exhibited an altered cytokine profile and
were more potent than matched controls in stimulating allogeneic T-cell
proliferation in mixed lymphocyte reactions.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hayman et al. (1996) observed that mice with a targeted disruption of
the Acp5 gene, or Trap, suffered from developmental deformities of the
limb and axial skeleton and had osteoclasts defective in bone
resorption, resulting in mild osteopetrosis.

Bune et al. (2001) determined that macrophages of Acp5-deficient mice
had compensatory acid phosphatase activity attributable to the Acp2 gene
(171650) and enhanced proinflammatory responses in vitro. However, mice
lacking Acp5 showed delayed clearance of Staphylococcus aureus in vivo,
which was associated with reduced numbers of peritoneal macrophages, in
spite of normal macrophage and neutrophil phagocytosis and killing in
vitro.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPONDYLOENCHONDRODYSPLASIA WITH IMMUNE DYSREGULATION
ACP5, THR89ILE

In a Turkish brother and sister with spondyloenchondrodysplasia and
immune dysregulation (607944), born of first-cousin parents, Briggs et
al. (2011) identified homozygosity for a 266C-T transition in exon 4 of
the ACP5 gene, resulting in a thr89-to-ile (T89I) substitution at a
highly conserved residue. The brother, who was previously reported by
Navarro et al. (2008), presented at age 22 months with spasticity and a
vasculitic skin rash. Upon evaluation at 11 years of age, plasma levels
of total TRAP protein were negligible and TRAP 5a protein was
undetectable, and he had spasticity and intracranial calcifications,
elevated antinuclear antibody and anti-double-stranded DNA antibody
titers, and hypocomplementemia. His older sister, who was evaluated at
14 years of age for short stature, had a history of Raynaud phenomenon
but did not have elevated ANA or anti-dsDNA titers; she was, however,
found to have a high level of interferon-alpha (147660) in serum.

.0002
SPONDYLOENCHONDRODYSPLASIA WITH IMMUNE DYSREGULATION
ACP5, GLN223TER

In an 11-year-old Pakistani boy with spondyloenchondrodysplasia and
immune dysregulation (607944), born of first-cousin parents and
previously reported by Renella et al. (2006) as 'patient 10' (Crow,
2011), Briggs et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for a 667C-T
transition in the ACP5 gene, resulting in a gln223-to-ter (Q223X)
substitution. Plasma levels of total TRAP protein were negligible and
TRAP 5a protein was undetectable in this patient, indicating an almost
complete lack of TRAP synthesis or secretion. In addition to skeletal
manifestations, the patient had elevated antinuclear antibody and
anti-double-stranded DNA antibody titers and autoimmune hemolytic
anemia.

.0003
SPONDYLOENCHONDRODYSPLASIA WITH IMMUNE DYSREGULATION
ACP5, MET264LYS

In a female patient with spondyloenchondrodysplasia and immune
dysregulation (607944), who was born of first-cousin parents of
Portuguese descent and was originally reported by Roifman and Melamed
(2003), Briggs et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for a 791T-A
transversion in exon 7 of the ACP5 gene, resulting in a met264-to-lys
(M264K) substitution. Computational analysis indicated that this change
was likely to destabilize the structure of the protein. In addition to
skeletal changes, the patient had a history of recurrent infections,
elevated antinuclear antibody and anti-double-stranded DNA antibody
titers, thrombocytopenia requiring splenectomy, nonerosive arthropathy,
systemic lupus erythematosus, and hypothyroidism.

.0004
SPONDYLOENCHONDRODYSPLASIA WITH IMMUNE DYSREGULATION
ACP5, GLY215ARG

In a female patient from Mali with spondyloenchondrodysplasia and immune
dysregulation (607944), Briggs et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for
a 643G-A transition in exon 6 of the ACP5 gene, resulting in a
gly215-to-arg (G215R) substitution. This patient, who presented at 6
years of age with nephropathy, also had severe short stature with
metaphyseal dysplasia, elevated antinuclear antibody and
anti-double-stranded DNA antibody titers, and systemic lupus
erythematosus with class V lupus nephritis on renal biopsy.

In 2 unrelated girls with spondyloenchondrodysplasia, 14 years and 10
years of age, respectively, Lausch et al. (2011) identified homozygosity
for the G215R mutation in the ACP5 gene. In addition to skeletal
changes, the older girl had chronic thrombocytopenia, ataxia,
leukodystrophy, and basal ganglia calcifications, whereas the younger
girl had only calcifications of the left globus pallidus without
immunologic or neurologic symptoms. The mutation was not found in 228
control alleles.

.0005
SPONDYLOENCHONDRODYSPLASIA WITH IMMUNE DYSREGULATION
ACP5, GLY109ARG

In 2 sibs with spondyloenchondrodysplasia and immune dysregulation
(607944), Lausch et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for a 325G-A
transition in exon 7 of the ACP5 gene, resulting in a gly109-to-arg
(G109R) substitution. In addition to skeletal changes, both sibs had
systemic lupus erythematosus, the older sib also had arthralgia and
vitiligo, and the younger sib had arthritis; the older sib also had mild
developmental delay and diffuse intracranial calcifications as well as
of the basal ganglia, and the younger sib had basal ganglia and right
frontal lobe calcifications, but neither sib displayed neurologic signs.
In 2 additional affected individuals from unrelated families, 1 of whom
was the patient originally reported by Scharer (1958), Lausch et al.
(2011) identified compound heterozygosity for the G109R mutation and
another mutation in the ACP5 gene (see 171640.0006 and 171640.0007).
None of the mutations was found in 228 control alleles.

.0006
SPONDYLOENCHONDRODYSPLASIA WITH IMMUNE DYSREGULATION
ACP5, 3-BP DEL, 831CTA

In a 64-year-old Ashkenazi Jewish man with spondyloenchondrodysplasia
and immune dysregulation (607944), who was originally reported by
Scharer (1958) and later studied by Renella et al. (2006), Lausch et al.
(2011) identified compound heterozygosity for mutations in the ACP5
gene: a 3-bp deletion (813delCTA) in exon 7 and a G109R substitution
(171640.0005). The patient was diagnosed with systemic lupus
erythematosus at 9.5 years of age but was subsequently lost to
follow-up; the diagnosis of spondyloenchondrodysplasia was made 40 years
later upon reevaluation of his radiographs. In adulthood he had
continued to have recurrent fevers and arthralgias and developed
antiphospholipid syndrome, steroid-dependent neutropenia, and
thrombocytopenia.

.0007
SPONDYLOENCHONDRODYSPLASIA WITH IMMUNE DYSREGULATION
ACP5, LEU201PRO

In a 12-year-old patient with spondyloenchondrodysplasia and immune
dysregulation (607944), Lausch et al. (2011) identified compound
heterozygosity for mutations in the ACP5 gene: a 602T-C transition in
exon 6, resulting in a leu201-to-pro (L201P) substitution, and a G109R
substitution (171640.0005). In addition to skeletal manifestations, the
patient had thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, hepatosplenomegaly, elevated
antinuclear antibody titers, childhood-onset spastic diplegia, and
calcification of the basal ganglia and frontal subcortical area.

REFERENCE 1. Allen, B. S.; Ketcham, C. M.; Roberts, R. M.; Nick, H. S.; Ostrer,
H.: Localization of the human type 5, tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase
gene by in situ hybridization. Genomics 4: 597-600, 1989.

2. Briggs, T. A.; Rice, G. I.; Daly, S.; Urquhart, J.; Gornall, H.;
Bader-Meunier, B.; Baskar, K.; Baskar, S.; Baudouin, V.; Beresford,
M. W.; Black, G. C. M.; Dearman, R. J.; and 28 others: Tartrate-resistant
acid phosphatase deficiency causes a bone dysplasia with autoimmunity
and a type I interferon expression signature. Nature Genet. 43:
127-131, 2011.

3. Bune, A. J.; Hayman, A. R.; Evans, M. J.; Cox, T. M.: Mice lacking
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (Acp 5) have disordered macrophage
inflammatory responses and reduced clearance of the pathogen, Staphylococcus
aureus. Immunology 102: 103-113, 2001.

4. Crow, Y.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/8/2011.

5. Grimes, R.; Reddy, S. V.; Leach, R. J.; Scarcez, T.; Roodman, G.
D.; Sakaguchi, A. Y.; Lalley, P. A.; Windle, J. J.: Assignment of
the mouse tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase gene (Acp5) to chromosome
9. Genomics 15: 421-422, 1993.

6. Hayman, A. R.; Jones, S. J.; Boyde, A.; Foster, D.; Colledge, W.
H.; Carlton, M. B.; Evans, M. J.; Cox, T. M.: Mice lacking tartrate-resistant
acid phosphatase (Acp 5) have disrupted endochondral ossification
and mild osteopetrosis. Development 122: 3151-3162, 1996.

7. Ketcham, C. M.; Roberts, R. M.; Simmen, R. C.; Nick, H. S.: Molecular
cloning of the type 5, iron-containing, tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase
from human placenta. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 557-563, 1988.

8. Lausch, E.; Janecke, A.; Bros, M.; Trojandt, S.; Alanay, Y.; De
Laet, C.; Hubner, C. A.; Meinecke, P.; Nishimura, G.; Matsuo, M.;
Hirano, Y.; Tenoutasse, S.; and 9 others: Genetic deficiency of
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase associated with skeletal dysplasia,
cerebral calcifications and autoimmunity. Nature Genet. 43: 132-137,
2011.

9. Leach, R. J.; Reus, B. E.; Hundley, J. E.; Johnson-Pais, T. L.;
Windle, J. J.: Confirmation of the assignment of the human tartrate-resistant
acid phosphatase gene (ACP5) to chromosome 19. Genomics 19: 180-181,
1994.

10. Lord, D. K.; Cross, N. C. P.; Bevilacqua, M. A.; Rider, S. H.;
Gorman, P. A.; Groves, A. V.; Moss, D. W.; Sheer, D.; Cox, T. M.:
Type 5 acid phosphatase: sequence, expression and chromosomal localization
of a differentiation-associated protein of the human macrophage. Europ.
J. Biochem. 189: 287-293, 1990. Note: Erratum: Europ. J. Biochem.
191: 775 only, 1990.

11. Navarro, V.; Scott, C.; Briggs, T. A.; Barete, S.; Frances, C.;
Lebon, P.; Maisonobe, T.; Rice, G. I.; Wouters, C. H.; Crow, Y. J.
: Two further cases of spondyloenchondrodysplasia (SPENCD) with immune
dysregulation. Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A: 2810-2815, 2008.

12. Renella, R.; Schaefer, E.; LeMerrer, M.; Alanay, Y.; Kandemir,
N.; Eich, G.; Costa, T.; Ballhausen, D.; Boltshauser, E.; Bonafe,
L.; Giedion, A.; Unger, S.; Superti-Furga, A.: Spondyloenchondrodysplasia
with spasticity, cerebral calcifications, and immune dysregulation:
clinical and radiologic delineation of a pleiotropic disorder. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 140A: 541-550, 2006.

13. Roifman, C. M.; Melamed, I.: A novel syndrome of combined immunodeficiency,
autoimmunity and spondylometaphyseal dysplasia. Clin. Genet. 63:
522-529, 2003.

14. Scharer, K.: A case of infantile generalized lupus erythematosus
with unusual bone changes. Helv. Paediat. Acta 13: 40-68, 1958.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/3/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/30/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/4/1989

EDITED terry: 03/14/2013
carol: 5/3/2011
mgross: 4/30/2001
dkim: 12/11/1998
jason: 6/27/1994
carol: 2/9/1994
carol: 10/5/1993
carol: 9/27/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990

