607287	TITLE *607287 LSM7 PROTEIN; LSM7
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Sm-like proteins were identified in a variety of organisms based on
sequence homology with the Sm protein family (see SNRPD2; 601061).
Sm-like proteins contain the Sm sequence motif, which consists of 2
regions separated by a linker of variable length that folds as a loop.
The Sm-like proteins are thought to form a stable heteromer present in
tri-snRNP particles, which are important for pre-mRNA splicing.

CLONING

In a search for human Sm-like proteins, Achsel et al. (1999)
fractionated proteins present in purified (U4/U6.U5) tri-snRNPs and
isolated 7 Sm-like proteins, which they named LSm2-LSm8. Using partial
peptide sequence for database searches, they identified and sequenced
EST clones. Using additional sequence obtained by PCR amplification of a
HeLa cDNA library, they assembled full-length cDNA sequences for
LSM2-LSM8.

Salgado-Garrido et al. (1999) searched database sequence for Sm proteins
and identified 16 potential Sm-related genes in yeast as well as some
Sm-related genes in human and archaebacteria. Using a multiple sequence
alignment of Sm domains, they built a phylogenetic tree of yeast, human,
and archaeal Sm and Sm-like proteins.

GENE FUNCTION

Using electron-microscopy, Achsel et al. (1999) observed that purified
LSm proteins form a heteromer that is stable even in the absence of RNA
and exhibits a doughnut-shaped structure similar to the Sm core RNP
structure. They demonstrated that the purified LSm heteromer binds
specifically to the U6 snRNA at its 3-prime-terminal U-tract. They also
showed that the LSm proteins facilitate the formation of U4/U6 RNA
duplexes in vitro and concluded that the LSm proteins may play a role in
U4/U6 snRNP formation.

Using immunoprecipitation experiments, Salgado-Garrido et al. (1999)
concluded that there is a complex of 7 Sm-like proteins bound to RNA in
yeast. Lsm2-Lsm8 coprecipitate the U4, U5 and U6 snRNAs and directly
associate with the U6 snRNA present in the free U6 snRNP. Additionally,
the yeast Lsm2-Lsm7 proteins were found to be associated with the
pre-RNase P RNA but not the mature RNase RNA. Using immunoprecipitation
experiments from human cell extracts, Salgado-Garrido et al. (1999)
showed that the LSM3 and LSM4 proteins are specifically associated with
snRNP complexes containing the U6 snRNA. Salgado-Garrido et al. (1999)
concluded that Sm and Sm-like proteins assemble in at least 2
functionally conserved complexes of deep evolutionary origin.

By disrupting the Sm and Sm-like genes in yeast, Salgado-Garrido et al.
(1999) concluded that disruption of genes encoding Sm-like proteins
directly associated with the U6 snRNA (Lsm2-8) generated variable
phenotypes. Lsm2, Lsm3, Lsm4, and Lsm8 are essential for vegetative
growth. Lsm5, Lsm6, and Lsm7 are not essential for growth; however,
their disruptions lead to slow growth especially at elevated
temperature. The levels of the U6 snRNA were strongly reduced in the
strains harboring the Lsm5, Lsm6, and Lsm7 disruptions. Lsm1 and Lsm9
are dispensable for vegetative growth, but Lsm1 is required for optimal
vegetative growth at 30 degrees and is temperature sensitive.

Ingelfinger et al. (2002) determined that human LSM1 to LSM7, but not
LSM8, were expressed in HeLa cells within cytoplasmic foci. The foci
also contained a decapping enzyme (DCP1/2) and the exonuclease XRN1
(607994). Coexpression of wildtype and mutant LSM proteins, as well as
fluorescence resonance energy transfer, indicated that the LSM proteins
form a complex similar to one found in yeast. Ingelfinger et al. (2002)
concluded that the foci contain a partially or fully assembled machinery
for the degradation of mRNA.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the LSM7
gene to chromosome 19 (TMAP stSG29317).

REFERENCE 1. Achsel, T.; Brahms, H.; Kastner, B.; Bachi, A.; Wilm, M.; Luhrmann,
R.: A doughnut-shaped heteromer of human Sm-like proteins binds to
the 3-prime end of U6 snRNA, thereby facilitating U4/U6 duplex formation
in vitro. EMBO J. 18: 5789-5802, 1999.

2. Ingelfinger, D.; Arndt-Jovin, D. J.; Luhrmann, R.; Achsel, T.:
The human LSm1-7 proteins colocalize with the mRNA-degrading enzymes
Dcp1/2 and Xrn1 in distinct cytoplasmic foci. RNA 8: 1489-1501,
2002.

3. Salgado-Garrido, J.; Bragado-Nilsson, E.; Kandels-Lewis, S.; Seraphin,
B.: Sm and Sm-like proteins assemble in two related complexes of
deep evolutionary origin. EMBO J. 18: 3451-3462, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/29/2003

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 10/9/2002

EDITED alopez: 03/08/2005
mgross: 7/29/2003
carol: 10/15/2002

300822	TITLE *300822 OPSIN 1, LONG-WAVE-SENSITIVE; OPN1LW
;;RED CONE PIGMENT; RCP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The long-wave-sensitive opsin-1 gene (OPN1LW) encodes red cone pigment,
1 of 3 light-sensitive pigments that mediate human color vision. The
red-sensitive and green-sensitive (OPN1MW; 300821) opsins comprise a
family of repeated genes on the X chromosome. Whereas there is a single
red pigment gene, green pigment genes vary in number among persons with
normal color vision. The red pigment gene and the multiple green pigment
genes are arranged in a head-to-tail tandem array. The maximal
sensitivity of red cones is 560 nm (Nathans et al., 1986, 1986).

A master switch for the genes of this locus, called the locus control
region (LCR; 300824), is located between 3.1 kb and 3.7 kb 5-prime of
the gene array and has been shown to be essential for expression of both
the red and green pigment genes as well as cone-specific expression of
the genes and their segregated expression in separate cones (summary by
Deeb, 2005).

CLONING

Nathans et al. (1986) isolated and sequenced genomic and cDNA clones
that encode each of the 3 visual pigments. The deduced amino acid
sequences show 41% identity with rhodopsin (180380). The red and green
pigments show 96% mutual identity, but only 43% identity with the blue
pigment (613522). In determining which of the 3 opsin genes corresponded
to each of the 3 cone pigments, Nathans et al. (1986) used the fact that
2 are X-linked and 1 is autosomal. The autosomal one was clearly the
blue cone pigment which is defective in tritan colorblindness (190900);
which of the other genes was for the red pigment and which for the green
was resolved by study of males with red (protan) or green (deutan)
colorblindness.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nathans et al. (1986) determined that the OPN1LW gene contains 6 exons.

MAPPING

Nathans et al. (1986) mapped the OPN1LW and OPN1MW genes to the distal
part of Xq, tightly linked to each other and to the G6PD gene (305900).

GENE FUNCTION

Visual pigments consist of an apoprotein, opsin, covalently linked to a
small, conjugated chromophore, 11-cis retinal, or in some cases 11-cis
dehydroretinal. Photon absorption by the visual pigments initiates
visual excitation by causing an 11-cis to all-trans isomerization of the
chromophore. Variation in absorption spectra of different visual
pigments is thought to arise from differences in the primary structure
of the apoprotein. Specifically, the visual pigments of the 3 types of
cones that mediate color vision are thought to differ in their
absorption spectra as a result of attachment of 11-cis retinal to 3
structurally distinct cone opsins. A corollary of the hypothesis is that
colorblindness arises from alterations in the genes encoding the cone
opsins. Most humans can match any color by mixing 3 primary colors: red,
green, and blue. Thomas Young (1802) hypothesized that this phenomenon
(trichromacy) is the consequence of humans having 3 independent
light-sensitive mechanisms. It is now known that Young's 3 mechanisms
are embodied in 3 classes of cone photoreceptor cells in the retina.
Each class contains a different visual pigment, which determines the
spectral sensitivity of all the cones of that class. The maximal
sensitivity of red, green, and blue cones is 560 nm, 530 nm, and 420 nm,
respectively (Nathans et al., 1986, 1986; Deeb, 2005).

Light exposure can induce suppression and/or circadian phase shift of
plasma melatonin levels in subjects with normal color vision. To
determine if normal cone photoreceptor systems are necessary for
light-induced melatonin suppression, Ruberg et al. (1996) tested whether
color vision-deficient humans also have light-induced melatonin
suppression. In 1 study, 14 red-green color vision-deficient subjects
and 7 normal controls were exposed to a 90-min, 200-lux, white light
stimulus from 0200-0330 h. Melatonin suppression was observed in
controls (t = -7.04; P less than 0.001), all color vision-deficient
subjects (t = -4.76; P less than 0.001), protanopic observers (t =
-6.23; P less than 0.005), and deuteranopic observers (t = -3.48; P less
than 0.05), with no significant difference in the magnitude of
suppression between groups. These findings suggested that a normal
trichromatic visual system is not necessary for light-mediated
neuroendocrine regulation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Nathans et al. (1986) determined that whereas there is a single red
pigment gene, green pigment genes vary in number among persons with
normal color vision. The red pigment gene and the multiple green pigment
genes are arranged in a head-to-tail tandem array, with the red pigment
gene at the 5-prime end. Nathans et al. (1986) suggested that
nonhomologous pairing and unequal crossing-over can explain the
development of protan (red; 303800) and deutan (green; 303900)
colorblindness. Gene conversion may also be involved.

Although there are 15 amino acid differences between the MW (green) and
LW (red) opsins, the greater part of the spectral shift in sensitivity
is the result of substitutions at sites 180, 277, and 285, with 5 other
sites having smaller effects. Site 180 (see 300822.0002) is polymorphic
in both MW and LW opsin genes. The middlewave opsin is missing or
defective in deuteranopia and the longwave opsin in protanopia. Using
refined methods, Neitz and Neitz (1995) reexamined the numbers and
ratios of genes in the Xq28 cluster in men with normal color vision.
Results indicated that many men have more pigment genes on the X
chromosome than had previously been suggested and that many have more
than 1 longwave pigment gene.

In a study of 33 unrelated subjects with blue cone monochromacy
(303700), Nathans et al. (1993) found one subject with a single red
pigment gene carrying an arg247-to-ter mutation (300822.0001). In
another subject, they identified a cys203-to-arg mutation in both the
red pigment (300822.0003) and the green pigment (300821.0002) genes. In
addition, in 14 unrelated BCM probands, Nathans et al. (1993) identified
a single 5-prime red, 3-prime green hybrid gene carrying the C203R
mutation.

In a Danish family with BCM, Ladekjaer-Mikkelsen et al. (1996)
identified an isolated red pigment gene with deletion of exon 4
(300822.0005). The authors stated that this was the first intragenic
deletion reported among the red and green pigment genes and that it
represented a new mechanism underlying the development of BCM.

Ueyama et al. (2002) analyzed DNA in 217 Japanese males with congenital
red/green color vision deficiencies. The normal genotype of a single red
gene, followed by a green gene, was found in 23 subjects. Four of the 23
were from the 69 protan subject groups and 19 of the 23 were from the
148 deutan subject group. Three of the 23 subjects had missense
mutations: asn94-to-lys (300821.0003) in the single green gene of a
deutan subject; arg330-to-gln (300821.0004) in both green genes of
another deutan subject; and gly338-to-glu (300822.0004) in the single
red gene of a protan subject. Both normal and mutant opsins were
expressed in cultured COS-7 cells and visual pigments were regenerated
with 11-cis-retinal. The mutations resulted in no absorbance or a low
absorbance spectrum. Therefore, these 3 mutant opsins probably affected
the folding process, resulting in a loss of function as a visual
pigment.

In a British family segregating X-linked recessive BCM, Michaelides et
al. (2005) identified a single hybrid 5-prime-L/M-3-prime gene
containing the C203R substitution in exon 4 (see 300822.0003).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BLUE CONE MONOCHROMACY
OPN1LW, ARG247TER

In the male proband from a 4-generation BCM family with 3 affected
individuals, who had been previously studied by Reitner et al. (1991)
(patient 'MP'), Nathans et al. (1993) identified a single red pigment
gene carrying a C-T transition in exon 4, resulting in an arg247-to-ter
(R247X) substitution.

.0002
RED CONE POLYMORPHISM
OPN1LW, SER180ALA

Genetic variation of human senses within the normal range probably
exists but usually cannot be investigated in detail for lack of
appropriate methods. Subtle perceptual differences in red-green vision
can be studied, however, since both photo-pigment genotypes and
psychophysical phenotypes can be assessed by sophisticated techniques.
Color matches of males with normal color vision fall into 2 main groups
that appear to be transmitted by X-linked inheritance. This difference
in color matching is likely to reflect small variations in the
absorption maxima of visual pigments, suggesting the presence of 2
common variants of the red and/or green visual pigments that differ in
spectral positioning. Winderickx et al. (1992) reported a common single
amino acid polymorphism (62% ser, 38% ala) at residue 180 of the RCP
gene, explaining the finding of 2 major groups in the distribution of
color matching among males with normal color vision.

.0003
BLUE CONE MONOCHROMACY
OPN1LW AND OPN1MW, CYS203ARG

In the male proband from a 3-generation family with 8 individuals with
blue cone monochromacy (303700), Nathans et al. (1993) identified a
cys203-to-arg (C203R) mutation in both the RCP and the GCP (300821.0002)
genes. In addition, in 14 unrelated BCM probands, Nathans et al. (1993)
identified a single 5-prime red, 3-prime green hybrid gene carrying the
C203R mutation.

Reyniers et al. (1995) described a family with BCM due to the presence
of a C203R mutation in both RCP and GCP. The flanking sequences of the
C203R mutation in exon 4 of RCP were characteristic for GCP, indicating
that this mutation was transferred from GCP into RCP by gene conversion.

In a British family segregating X-linked recessive BCM, Michaelides et
al. (2005) identified a single hybrid 5-prime-L/M-3-prime gene, which
was the result of recombination within intron 4, with a C203R
substitution in exon 4.

.0004
COLORBLINDNESS, PROTAN
RCP, GLY338GLU

In a person with protan colorblindness (303900), Ueyama et al. (2002)
found a gly338-to-glu (GGG to GAG; G338E) mutation in the single red
pigment gene. The mutant opsin showed no absorbance.

.0005
BLUE CONE MONOCHROMACY
OPN1LW, EX2DEL

In the proband of a Danish family with blue cone monochromacy (303700),
Ladekjaer-Mikkelsen et al. (1996) identified a single red pigment gene
in which exon 4 had been deleted. The same deletion was found in a
maternal half-brother with BCM and their unaffected carrier mother,
whereas the deletion was not found in a brother with normal color
vision. The deletion was predicted to generate a premature stop codon,
resulting in a protein that lacks the final 3 of 7 transmembrane
alpha-helices, including the lysine at codon 312 where 11-cis retinal
covalently attaches to normal pigment.

REFERENCE 1. Deeb, S. S.: The molecular basis of variation in human color vision. Clin.
Genet. 67: 369-377, 2005.

2. Ladekjaer-Mikkelsen, A.-S.; Rosenberg, T.; Jorgensen, A. L.: A
new mechanism in blue cone monochromatism. Hum. Genet. 98: 403-408,
1996.

3. Michaelides, M.; Johnson, S.; Simunovic, M. P.; Bradshaw, K.; Holder,
G.; Mollon, J. D.; Moore, A. T.; Hunt, D. M.: Blue cone monochromatism:
a phenotype and genotype assessment with evidence of progressive loss
of cone function in older individuals. Eye 19: 2-10, 2005.

4. Nathans, J.; Maumenee, I. H.; Zrenner, E.; Sadowski, B.; Sharpe,
L. T.; Lewis, R. A.; Hansen, E.; Rosenberg, T.; Schwartz, M.; Heckenlively,
J. R.; Traboulsi, E.; Klingaman, R.; Bech-Hansen, N. T.; LaRoche,
G. R.; Pagon, R. A.; Murphey, W. H.; Weleber, R. G.: Genetic heterogeneity
among blue-cone monochromats. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 53: 987-1000, 1993.

5. Nathans, J.; Piantanida, T. P.; Eddy, R. L.; Shows, T. B.; Hogness,
D. S.: Molecular genetics of inherited variation in human color vision. Science 232:
203-210, 1986.

6. Nathans, J.; Thomas, D.; Hogness, D. S.: Molecular genetics of
human color vision: the genes encoding blue, green, and red pigments. Science 232:
193-202, 1986.

7. Neitz, M.; Neitz, J.: Numbers and ratios of visual pigment genes
for normal red-green color vision. Science 267: 1013-1016, 1995.

8. Reitner, A.; Sharpe, L. T.; Zrenner, E.: Is colour vision possible
with only rods and blue-sensitive cones? Nature 352: 798-800, 1991.

9. Reyniers, E.; Van Thienen, M.-N.; Meire, F.; De Boulle, K.; Devries,
K.; Kestelijn, P.; Willems, P. J.: Gene conversion between red and
defective green opsin gene in blue cone monochromacy. Genomics 29:
323-328, 1995.

10. Ruberg, F. L.; Skene, D. J.; Hanifin, J. P.; Rollag, M. D.; English,
J.; Arendt, J.; Brainard, G. C.: Melatonin regulation in humans with
color vision deficiencies. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 81: 2980-2985,
1996.

11. Ueyama, H.; Kuwayama, S.; Imai, H.; Tanabe, S.; Oda, S.; Nishida,
Y.; Wada, A.; Shichida, Y.; Yamade, S.: Novel missense mutations
in red/green opsin genes in congenital color-vision deficiencies. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 294: 205-209, 2002.

12. Winderickx, J.; Lindsey, D. T.; Sanocki, E.; Teller, D. Y.; Motulsky,
A. G.; Deeb, S. S.: Polymorphism in red photopigment underlies variation
in colour matching. Nature 356: 431-433, 1992.

13. Young, T.: The Bakerian lecture: on the theory of light and colours. Phil.
Trans. Roy. Soc. London 92: 12-48, 1802.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/13/2010

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 8/30/2010

EDITED terry: 12/10/2010
carol: 9/20/2010
carol: 9/14/2010
carol: 9/13/2010
carol: 8/31/2010

612696	TITLE *612696 VAULT RNA 1-2; VTRNA1-2
;;HVG2;;
VAULT RNA COMPONENT 2; VAULTRC2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Vaults are large cytoplasmic ribonucleoproteins composed largely of MVP
(605088) and a nontranslated vault RNA component. By PCR of a human
genomic DNA library, Kickhoefer et al. (1998) cloned 3 vault RNA genes,
HVG1 (VTRNA1-1; 612695), HVG2 (VTRNA1-2), and HVG3 (VTRNA1-3; 612697).
Both HVG2 and HVG3 contain 86 bases and have an internal RNA polymerase
III (see 606007)-type promoter element and a typical polymerase III
termination signal. They both have an internal 10-base deletion compared
with HVG1.

Kickhoefer et al. (1999) found that only HVG1 was expressed in all human
cell lines examined. When expressed, HVG2 and HVG3 were often associated
with the supernatant fraction rather than microsomal pellets containing
vaults.

Nandy et al. (2009) described the structure of VTRNA1-2. The
88-nucleotide RNA forms an extended stem-loop structure with asymmetric
internal bulges. It contains characteristic internal polymerase III
A-box and B-box promoter elements and a downstream B2-box motif. Size
exclusion chromatography of fractionated HeLa cells, followed by
Northern and Western blot analyses, detected about 5% of the VTRNA1-1
and VTRNA1-2 content eluting with MVP, while 95% remained in the
supernatant.

GENE FUNCTION

Kickhoefer et al. (1998) found that HVG1, but not HVG2 or HVG3,
associated with vaults in human cell lines.

Nandy et al. (2009) found that expression of VTRNA1-1, VTRNA1-2,
VTRNA1-3, and CBL3 (VTRNA2-1; 614938) was upregulated in cord blood
lymphocytes infected with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Upregulation was
highest for VTRNA1-1 (about 1,100-fold) and lowest for CBL3 (about
3-fold). Expression of VTRNA1-1, VTRNA1-2, and CBL3 was also upregulated
by the EBV-related Kaposi sarcoma virus, but not by members of other
virus families.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kickhoefer et al. (2003) determined that the upstream region of the
VTRNA1-2 gene contains a TATA-like element, a consensus proximal
sequence, and a cAMP response element.

MAPPING

Kickhoefer et al. (2003) stated that the VTRNA1-1, VTRNA1-2, and
VTRNA1-3 genes map to a 16-kb region of chromosome 5.

Nandy et al. (2009) stated that the VTRNA1-2 gene is located near the
PCDHA gene cluster (604966), which Wu and Maniatis (1999) mapped to
chromosome 5q31.

REFERENCE 1. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Emre, N.; Stephen, A. G.; Poderycki, M. J.;
Rome, L. H.: Identification of conserved vault RNA expression elements
and a non-expressed mouse vault RNA gene. Gene 309: 65-70, 2003.

2. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Rajavel, K. S.; Scheffer, G. L.; Dalton, W.
S.; Scheper, R. J.; Rome, L. H.: Vaults are up-regulated in multidrug-resistant
cancer cell lines. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 8971-8974, 1998.

3. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Stephen, A. G.; Harrington, L.; Robinson, M.
O.; Rome, L. H.: Vaults and telomerase share a common subunit, TEP1. J.
Biol. Chem. 274: 32712-32717, 1999.

4. Nandy, C.; Mrazek, J.; Stoiber, H.; Grasser, F. A.; Huttenhofer,
A.; Polacek, N.: Epstein-Barr virus-induced expression of a novel
human vault RNA. J. Molec. Biol. 388: 776-784, 2009.

5. Wu, Q.; Maniatis, T.: A striking organization of a large family
of human neural cadherin like cell adhesion genes. Cell 97: 779-790,
1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/19/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/25/2009

EDITED mgross: 11/15/2012
terry: 10/19/2012
mgross: 3/26/2009

606195	TITLE *606195 IROQUOIS HOMEOBOX PROTEIN 5; IRX5
;;IRXB2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IRX5 is a member of the Iroquois homeobox gene family. Members of this
family appear to play multiple roles during pattern formation of
vertebrate embryos.

CLONING

Members of the Iroquois complex in Drosophila, including the highly
homologous homeobox genes caupolican, araucan, and mirror, act as
prepattern molecules in neurogenesis. Bosse et al. (1997) identified 3
members of the Iroquois homeobox gene family in mouse and showed that
they are involved in several embryonic developmental processes including
anterior/posterior and dorsal/ventral patterning of specific regions of
the central nervous system, and regionalization of the otic vesicle,
branchial epithelium, and limbs.

By EST database searching, Lewis et al. (1999) identified a human
breast-derived partial cDNA clone containing a novel homeobox. Using
oligonucleotide primers designed to this clone for RACE/PCR, they
obtained the full-length cDNA, which they designated IRX2 but which was
later designated IRX5, as well as fragments of transcripts derived from
4 additional IRX genes. The human IRX homeodomains are about 90%
identical to the homeodomains of the Drosophila Iroquois complex
proteins and about 93% identical to each other. Each of the IRX proteins
contains a hexapeptide-like motif. Lewis et al. (1999) found that the
deduced 417-amino acid IRX5 protein also contains acidic and polyproline
regions and an IRO box. Northern blot analysis detected 2 main
transcripts of 2.6 and 3.9 kb, but the larger transcript did not appear
to contain a closely related homeobox. IRX5 expression is not
breast-specific, as it was found to be weakly expressed in adult human
lung, uterus, salivary gland, and kidney. In situ hybridization
demonstrated that IRX5 is differentially expressed in major mammary
epithelial cell lineages and that its expression is further regulated
during both the proliferative and cyclical phases of human breast
development. IRX5 expression is maintained in human mammary neoplasias.

GENE FUNCTION

Through in vivo modeling in Xenopus laevis embryos, Bonnard et al.
(2012) demonstrated that Irx5 modulates the migration of progenitor cell
populations in branchial arches and gonads by repressing Sdf1 (CXCL12;
600835). They also found that transcriptional control by Irx5 is
modulated by direct protein-protein interaction with GATA3 (131320) and
TRPS1 (604386). Bonnard et al. (2012) suggested that IRX proteins
integrate combinatorial transcriptional inputs to regulate key signaling
molecules involved in the ontogeny of multiple organs during
embryogenesis and homeostasis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 5 affected individuals from 2 consanguineous families with an
autosomal recessive craniofacial syndrome mapping to chromosome
16q12.2-q21 (611174), Bonnard et al. (2012) screened 73 candidate genes
and identified 2 homozygous missense mutations in the IRX5 gene
(606195.0001 and 606195.0002) that segregated with disease in each
family. Irx5 knockdown by morpholino injection in X. laevis embryos
recapitulated the blood, heart, germ cell, and craniofacial anomalies
seen in patients with IRX5 mutations. In addition, Bonnard et al. (2012)
found that IRX5 has direct protein-protein interactions with GATA3 and
TRPS1, and noted that disruption of the latter proteins causes syndromes
with overlapping features (see hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural
deafness, and renal disease, 131320, and trichorhinophalangeal syndrome,
190350, respectively).

MAPPING

By screening of a human genomic library with chicken IRX2 cDNA and EST
database searching, Ogura et al. (2001) cloned 4 human IRX genes. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization, they mapped the IRX5 and IRX7
(606196) genes to chromosome 16q11.2-q13 and the IRX1 (606197) and IRX2
(606198) genes to chromosome 5p15.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Costantini et al. (2005) found that homozygous Ire5-knockout mice were
viable and fertile but had a defect in the differentiation of retinal
cone bipolar cells and were slightly smaller than wildtype.
Electrocardiograms revealed a significantly decreased signal amplitude
during ventricular repolarization. Lack of the cardiac repolarization
gradient was due to increased Kv4.2 (KCND2; 605410) in endocardial
myocardium, resulting in a selective increase of the transient outward
current, which is the major cardiac repolarization current, and in an
increased susceptibility to arrhythmias. Myocardial Irx5 was expressed
in a gradient opposite that of Kcnd2, and Irx5 repressed Kcnd2
expression by recruiting Bop (SMYD1; 606846), a cardiac transcriptional
repressor. Costantini et al. (2005) concluded that an IRX5 repressor
gradient negatively regulates potassium channel gene expression in the
heart and ensures coordinated cardiac repolarization.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HAMAMY SYNDROME
IRX5, ASN166LYS

In 3 sibs from a consanguineous Jordanian family, originally described
by Hamamy et al. (2007), with severe hypertelorism, midface prominence,
myopia, mental retardation, and bone fragility (611174), Bonnard et al.
(2012) identified homozygosity for a 498C-A transversion in the IRX5
gene, resulting in an asn166-to-lys (N166K) substitution at a
phylogenetically invariant residue in the third helix of the
homeodomain. Functional analysis demonstrated altered protein stability
and DNA binding activity, suggesting that the N166K mutation may act as
a hypomorphic rather than null allele.

.0002
HAMAMY SYNDROME
IRX5, ALA150PRO

In 2 brothers from a consanguineous Turkish family with severe
hypertelorism, midface prominence, myopia, mental retardation, and bone
fragility (611174), Bonnard et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for a
448G-C transition in the IRX5 gene, resulting in an ala150-to-pro
(A150P) substitution at a phylogenetically invariant residue in the
second helix of the homeodomain. The mutation segregated with disease in
the family. X. laevis embryos with Irx5 knockdown showed defective
cranial neural crest cell migration that could be rescued with wildtype
mouse Irx5 DNA but not A150P Irx5 DNA. The A150P variant was also
unstable in X. laevis embryos compared to wildtype or N166K
(606195.0001); Bonnard et al. (2012) suggested that the A150P mutation
may act as a hypomorphic rather than null allele.

REFERENCE 1. Bonnard, C.; Strobl, A. C.; Shboul, M.; Lee, H.; Merriman, B.;
Nelson, S. F.; Ababneh, O. H.; Uz, E.; Guran, T.; Kayserili, H.; Hamamy,
H.; Reversade, B.: Mutations in IRX5 impair craniofacial development
and germ cell migration via SDF1. Nature Genet. 44: 709-713, 2012.

2. Bosse, A.; Zulch, A.; Becker, M.-B.; Torres, M.; Gomez-Skarmeta,
J. L.; Modolell, J.; Gruss, P.: Identification of the vertebrate
Iroquois homeobox gene family with overlapping expression during early
development of the nervous system. Mech. Dev. 69: 169-181, 1997.

3. Costantini, D. L.; Arruda, E. P.; Agarwal, P.; Kim, K.-H.; Zhu,
Y.; Zhu, W.; Lebel, M.; Cheng, C. W.; Park, C. Y.; Pierce, S. A.;
Guerchicoff, A.; Pollevick, G. D.; and 10 others: The homeodomain
transcription factor Irx5 establishes the mouse cardiac ventricular
repolarization gradient. Cell 123: 347-358, 2005.

4. Hamamy, H. A.; Teebi, A. S.; Oudjhane, K.; Shegem, N. N.; Ajlouni,
K. M.: Severe hypertelorism, midface prominence, prominent/simple
ears, severe myopia, borderline intelligence, and bone fragility in
two brothers: new syndrome? Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A: 229-234, 2007.

5. Lewis, M. T.; Ross, S.; Strickland, P. A.; Snyder, C. J.; Daniel,
C. W.: Regulated expression patterns of IRX-2, an Iroquois-class
homeobox gene, in the human breast. Cell Tissue Res. 296: 549-554,
1999.

6. Ogura, K.; Matsumoto, K.; Kuroiwa, A.; Isobe, T.; Otoguro, T.;
Jurecic, V.; Baldini, A.; Matsuda, Y.; Ogura, T.: Cloning and chromosome
mapping of human and chicken Iroquois (IRX) genes. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 92: 320-325, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/14/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/10/2007

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 8/14/2001

EDITED alopez: 06/15/2012
terry: 6/14/2012
wwang: 8/17/2007
terry: 8/10/2007
mgross: 10/25/2006
terry: 3/18/2004
mcapotos: 8/15/2001
mcapotos: 8/14/2001
carol: 8/14/2001

