180664	TITLE *180664 POLYMERASE II, RNA, SUBUNIT E; POLR2E
;;RPB5, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
RNA POLYMERASE II, 25-KD SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION The eukaryotic DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II (or B) is composed of 10
to 14 polypeptides ranging from 220 to 10 kD. For general information on
the structure and function of RNA polymerase II, see 180660.

CLONING

Acker et al. (1994) isolated cDNAs of 5 subunits of RNA polymerase II.

MAPPING

Using in situ hybridization, Acker et al. (1994) showed that the POLR2E
gene, encoding the 25-kD subunit, maps to 19p13.3. A second site of
hybridization to 11q23.1 was thought to represent a pseudogene, most
likely a retroposon, since no remnants of introns could be identified in
the study of genomic DNA.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Cramer et al. (2000) derived a backbone model of a 10-subunit yeast RNA
polymerase II using x-ray diffraction data extending to 3-angstrom
resolution. All 10 subunits exhibited a high degree of identity with the
corresponding human proteins, and 9 of the 10 subunits are conserved
among the 3 eukaryotic RNA polymerases I, II, and III. Notable features
of the model include a pair of jaws, formed by subunits Rpb1 (180660),
Rpb5 (homologous to human POLR2E), and Rpb9 (180662), that appear to
grip DNA downstream of the active center. A clamp on the DNA nearer the
active center, formed by Rpb1, Rpb2 (180661), and Rpb6 (604414), may be
locked in the closed position by RNA, accounting for the great stability
of transcribing complexes. A pore in the protein complex beneath the
active center may allow entry of substrates for polymerization and exit
of the transcript during proofreading and passage through pause sites in
the DNA.

REFERENCE 1. Acker, J.; Mattei, M.-G.; Wintzerith, M.; Roeckel, N.; Depetris,
D.; Vigneron, M.; Kedinger, C.: Chromosomal localization of human
RNA polymerase II subunit genes. Genomics 20: 496-499, 1994.

2. Cramer, P.; Bushnell, D. A.; Fu, J.; Gnatt, A. L.; Maier-Davis,
B.; Thompson, N. E.; Burgess, R. R.; Edwards, A. M.; David, P. R.;
Kornberg, R. D.: Architecture of RNA polymerase II and implications
for the transcription mechanism. Science 288: 640-648, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/2/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/18/1994

EDITED alopez: 06/21/2001
alopez: 6/19/2001
carol: 6/15/2001
alopez: 5/2/2000
psherman: 9/2/1999
alopez: 2/5/1999
terry: 8/24/1998
joanna: 4/4/1996
carol: 4/18/1994

601555	TITLE *601555 RHO FAMILY GTPase 2; RND2
;;RAS HOMOLOG GENE FAMILY, MEMBER N; RHON;;
ARHN;;
GTP-BINDING PROTEIN RHO7; RHO7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the course of a complete genomic sequence analysis of 117 kb from
chromosome 17 containing the BRCA1 gene (113705) located on 17q21, Smith
et al. (1996) identified just centromeric to the BRCA1 gene a novel gene
they designated RHO7. RHO7 was identified initially as a homolog to the
RHO family (see 165370) of GTP-binding proteins (Chardin, 1991) by a
database search using deduced amino acid sequences from predicted exons.
The gene was found to be highly similar to the mouse EST homolog, with
more than 90% identity between the 2 nucleotide sequences.

By screening a human fetal brain cDNA library using bovine Rnd1 (609038)
as probe, Nobes et al. (1998) cloned RND2. The deduced protein contains
227 amino acids and has a calculated molecular mass of 25.3 kD. It has 3
guanine-binding motifs, 2 loops and a threonine involved in phosphate
binding, and 3 major residues that coordinate magnesium in the GTP-bound
state. However, RND2 lacks the residues important for the intrinsic
GTPase activity of RAS (see 190020). RND2 ends with a CAAX box motif and
a terminal methionine residue, suggesting that RND2 is farnesylated.
Northern blot analysis detected high expression of a 1.5-kb RND2
transcript only in testis, with little to no expression in all other
adult and fetal tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Heng et al. (2008) demonstrated that the proneural protein neurogenin-2
(Neurog2; 606624), which controls neurogenesis in the embryonic cortex,
directly induces the expression of the small GTP-binding protein Rnd2 in
newly generated mouse cortical neurons before they initiate migration.
Rnd2 silencing leads to a defect in radial migration of cortical neurons
similar to that observed when the Neurog2 gene is deleted. Remarkably,
restoring Rnd2 expression in Neurog2-mutant neurons is sufficient to
rescue their ability to migrate. Heng et al. (2008) concluded that their
results identified Rnd2 as a novel essential regulator of neuronal
migration in the cerebral cortex and demonstrated that Rnd2 is a major
effector of Neurog2 function in the promotion of migration. Thus, a
proneural protein controls the complex cellular behavior of cell
migration through a remarkably direct pathway involving the
transcriptional activation of a small GTP-binding protein.

MAPPING

By FISH, Nobes et al. (1998) mapped the RND2 gene to chromosome 17q21.

REFERENCE 1. Chardin, P.: Small GTP-binding proteins of the ras family: a conserved
functional mechanism? Cancer Cells 3: 117-126, 1991.

2. Heng, J. I.-T.; Nguyen, L.; Castro, D. S.; Zimmer, C.; Wildner,
H.; Armant, O.; Skowronska-Krawczyk, D.; Bedogni, F.; Matter, J.-M.;
Hevner, R.; Guillemot, F.: Neurogenin 2 controls cortical neuron
migration through regulation of Rnd2. Nature 455: 114-118, 2008.

3. Nobes, C. D.; Lauritzen, I.; Mattei, M.-G.; Paris, S.; Hall, A.;
Chardin, P.: A new member of the Rho family, Rnd1, promotes disassembly
of actin filament structures and loss of cell adhesion. J. Cell Biol. 141:
187-197, 1998.

4. Smith, T. M.; Lee, M. K.; Szabo, C. I.; Jerome, N.; McEuen, M.;
Taylor, M.; Hood, L.; King, M.-C.: Complete genomic sequence and
analysis of 117 kb of human DNA containing the gene BRCA1. Genomic
Res. 6: 1029-1049, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/24/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/29/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/4/1996

EDITED alopez: 09/25/2008
terry: 9/24/2008
alopez: 4/4/2007
mgross: 11/29/2004
mgross: 11/23/2004
carol: 9/13/2002
mark: 1/6/1997

602304	TITLE *602304 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR SUBFAMILY 1, GROUP D, MEMBER 2; NR1D2
;;REV-ERBA-ALPHA-RELATED RECEPTOR; RVR;;
REV-ERBA-BETA;;
REV-ERB-BETA;;
BD73
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Dumas et al. (1994) used PCR with primers from conserved regions of
nuclear hormone receptor superfamily genes to identify a new member of
this superfamily, which they called BD73. The amino acid sequence of
BD73 is 96% identical to Rev-ErbA-alpha in the DNA-binding domain and
72% identical in the ligand-binding domain. Northern blot analysis
showed a 4.5-kb transcript present in variable amounts in a variety of
tissues and cell lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Dumas et al. (1994) showed that, in vitro, the BD73 protein has
DNA-binding activity to a specific A/T-rich sequence.

Toward a system-level understanding of the transcriptional circuitry
regulating circadian clocks, Ueda et al. (2005) identified
clock-controlled elements on 16 clock and clock-controlled genes in a
comprehensive surveillance of evolutionarily conserved cis elements and
measurement of the transcriptional dynamics. Ueda et al. (2005) found
that E boxes (CACGTG) and E-prime boxes (CACGTT) controlled the
expression of Per1 (602260), Nr1d2, Per2 (603426), Nr1d1 (602408), Dbp
(124097), Bhlhb2 (604256), and Bhlhb3 (606200) transcription following a
repressor-precedes-activator pattern, resulting in delayed
transcriptional activity. RevErbA/ROR (600825)-binding elements
regulated the transcriptional activity of Arntl (602550), Npas2
(603347), Nfil3 (605327), Clock (601851), Cry1 (601933), and Rorc
(602943) through a repressor-precedes-activator pattern as well.
DBP/E4BP4-binding elements controlled the expression of Per1, Per2, Per3
(603427), Nr1d1, Nr1d2, Rora, and Rorb (601972) through a
repressor-antiphasic-to-activator mechanism, which generates
high-amplitude transcriptional activity. Ueda et al. (2005) suggested
that regulation of E/E-prime boxes is a topologic vulnerability in
mammalian circadian clocks, a concept that had been functionally
verified using in vitro phenotype assay systems.

Solt et al. (2012) identified potent synthetic REV-ERB agonists with in
vivo activity. Administration of synthetic REV-ERB ligands alters
circadian behavior and the circadian pattern of core clock gene
expression in the hypothalami of mice. The circadian pattern of
expression of an array of metabolic genes in the liver, skeletal muscle,
and adipose tissue was also altered, resulting in increased energy
expenditure. Treatment of diet-induced obese mice with a REV-ERB agonist
decreased obesity by reducing fat mass and markedly improving
dyslipidemia and hyperglycemia.

Cho et al. (2012) determined the genomewide cis-acting targets of both
REV-ERB isoforms in murine liver, which revealed shared recognition at
over 50% of their total DNA binding sites and extensive overlap with the
master circadian regulator BMAL1. Although REV-ERB-alpha has been shown
to regulate BMAL1 expression directly, cistromic analysis revealed a
more profound connection between BMAL1 and the REV-ERB-alpha and
REV-ERB-beta genomic regulatory circuits than was previously suspected.
Genes within the intersection of the BMAL1, REV-ERB-alpha, and
REV-ERB-beta cistromes are highly enriched for both clock and metabolic
functions. As predicted by the cistromic analysis, dual depletion of
REV-ERB-alpha and REV-ERB-beta function by creating double-knockout mice
profoundly disrupted circadian expression of core circadian clock and
lipid homeostatic gene networks. As a result, double-knockout mice
showed markedly altered circadian wheel-running behavior and deregulated
lipid metabolism. Cho et al. (2012) concluded that their data united
REV-ERB-alpha and REV-ERB-beta with PER, CRY, and other components of
the principal feedback loop that drives circadian expression and
indicated a more integral mechanism for the coordination of circadian
rhythm and metabolism.

Lam et al. (2013) presented evidence that in mouse macrophages Rev-Erbs
regulate target gene expression by inhibiting the functions of distal
enhancers that are selected by macrophage lineage-determining factors,
thereby establishing a macrophage-specific program of repression. The
repressive functions of Rev-Erbs are associated with their ability to
inhibit the transcription of enhancer-derived RNAs (eRNAs). Furthermore,
targeted degradation of eRNAs at 2 enhancers subject to negative
regulation by Rev-Erbs resulted in reduced expression of nearby mRNAs,
suggesting a direct role of these eRNAs in enhancer function. By
precisely defining eRNA start sites using a modified form of global
run-on sequencing that quantifies nascent 5-prime ends, Lam et al.
(2013) showed that transfer of full enhancer activity to a target
promoter requires both the sequences mediating transcription factor
binding and the specific sequences encoding the eRNA transcript. Lam et
al. (2013) concluded that their studies provided evidence for a direct
role of eRNAs in contributing to enhancer function and suggested that
Rev-Erbs act to suppress gene expression at a distance by repressing
eRNA transcription.

MAPPING

Using YAC mapping and FISH, Koh and Moore (1999) mapped the NR1D2 gene
to chromosome 3p24.3-p24.2.

EVOLUTION

Koh and Moore (1999) noted that the THRA (190120), NR1D1 (602408), and
RARA (180240) genes are linked on chromosome 17q, and that the NR1D1
gene overlaps an exon of the THRA gene on the opposite strand. They
found that THRB (190160), NR1D2, and RARB (180220) are similarly linked
and oriented on chromosome 3p. The ancestral genes were duplicated
before the divergence of vertebrates, since at least the TRs and RARs
are also duplicated in birds and amphibians.

REFERENCE 1. Cho, H.; Zhao, X.; Hatori, M.; Yu, R. T.; Barish, G. D.; Lam, M.
T.; Chong, L.-W.; DiTacchio, L.; Atkins, A. R.; Glass, C. K.; Liddle,
C.; Auwerx, J.; Downes, M.; Panda, S.; Evans, R. M.: Regulation of
circadian behaviour and metabolism by REV-ERB-alpha and REV-ERB-beta. Nature 485:
123-127, 2012.

2. Dumas, B.; Harding, H. P.; Choi, H.-S.; Lehmann, K. A.; Chung,
M.; Lazar, M. A.; Moore, D. D.: A new orphan member of the nuclear
hormone receptor superfamily closely related to Rev-Erb. Molec. Endocr. 8:
996-1005, 1994.

3. Koh, Y.-S.; Moore, D. D.: Linkage of the nuclear hormone receptor
genes NR1D2, THRB, and RARB: evidence for an ancient, large-scale
duplication. Genomics 57: 289-292, 1999.

4. Lam, M. T. Y.; Cho, H.; Lesch, H. P.; Gosselin, D.; Heinz, S.;
Tanaka-Oishi, Y.; Benner, C.; Kaikkonen, M. U.; Kim, A. S.; Kosaka,
M.; Lee, C. Y.; Watt, A.; Grossman, T. R.; Rosenfeld, M. G.; Evans,
R. M.; Glass, C. K.: Rev-Erbs repress macrophage gene expression
by inhibiting enhancer-directed transcription. Nature 498: 511-515,
2013.

5. Solt, L. A.; Wang, Y.; Banerjee, S.; Hughes, T.; Kojetin, D. J.;
Lundasen, T.; Shin, Y.; Liu, J.; Cameron, M. D.; Noel, R.; Yoo, S.-H.;
Takahashi, J. S.; Butler, A. A.; Kamenecka, T. M.; Burris, T. P.:
Regulation of circadian behaviour and metabolism by synthetic REV-ERB
agonists. Nature 485: 62-68, 2012.

6. Ueda, H. R.; Hayashi, S.; Chen, W.; Sano, M.; Machida, M.; Shigeyoshi,
Y.; Iino, M.; Hashimoto, S.: System-level identification of transcriptional
circuits underlying mammalian circadian clocks. Nature Genet. 37:
187-192, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 09/03/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/20/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/9/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/29/2005

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/30/1998

EDITED alopez: 09/03/2013
joanna: 10/2/2012
alopez: 9/25/2012
terry: 9/20/2012
mgross: 3/29/2012
terry: 3/9/2012
carol: 2/28/2012
terry: 7/29/2005
alopez: 6/18/1999
alopez: 1/30/1998

173410	TITLE *173410 PLATELET-DERIVED GROWTH FACTOR RECEPTOR, BETA; PDGFRB
;;PDGFR;;
PDGFR1
PDGFRB/ETV6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
PDGFRB/D10S170 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
PDGFRB/RABPT5 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
PDGFRB/HIP1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
PDGFRB/MYO18A FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The PDGFRB gene encodes platelet-derived growth factor receptor-beta, a
cell surface tyrosine kinase receptor for members of the
platelet-derived growth factor family (see, e.g., PDFGB, 190040).
Activation of the receptor leads to activation of downstream signaling
pathways, inducing cellular proliferation, differentiation, survival,
and migration (summary by Nicolas et al., 2013).

See also PDGFRA (173490).

CLONING

Stimulation of cell proliferation of the receptor for PDGF (190040) has
been implicated in atherogenesis and in cell transformation by the SIS
oncogene. Escobedo et al. (1986) sequenced the receptor and cloned its
gene.

Gronwald et al. (1988) cloned a cDNA coding for human PDGFR and studied
its expression. The cDNA contained an open reading frame that coded for
a protein of 1,106 amino acids. In transfectants, Gronwald et al. (1988)
found that the PDGFR clone expressed a high affinity receptor specific
for the BB isoform of PDGF, i.e., PDGF dimers composed of 2 B chains.
There may be a separate class of PDGF receptor that binds both the
homodimers and the heterodimer.

Claesson-Welsh et al. (1988) determined the structure of the human PDGF
receptor as deduced from a full-length cDNA clone. The receptor
expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells was found to bind specifically
to B-chain-containing PDGF molecules (190040). With the description of a
second PDGF receptor (173490), it is necessary to use the symbol PDGFR1.
Matsui et al. (1989) designated the second type of PDGFR as type alpha
because PDGF binding was blocked by AA as well as BB isoforms of the
ligand; the product of the earlier cloned PDGF receptor was termed type
beta.

The PDFGRB gene is expressed in pericytes in the developing vascular
walls of mouse brain (Lindahl et al., 1997). It is expressed
particularly in the basal ganglia and dentate nucleus of the cerebellum
(summary by Nicolas et al., 2013).

GENE FUNCTION

Di Pasquale et al. (2003) characterized 43 cell lines as permissive or
nonpermissive for adeno-associated virus type 5 (AAV-5) transduction and
compared the gene expression profiles derived from cDNA microarray
analyses of those cell lines. A statistically significant correlation
was observed between expression of PDGFR-alpha (173490) and AAV-5
transduction. Subsequent experiments confirmed the role of PDGFR-alpha
and PDGFR-beta as receptors for AAV-5.

Gilbertson and Clifford (2003) presented data confirming that PDGFRB is
preferentially expressed in metastatic medulloblastoma (155255) and
suggested that it may prove useful as a prognostic marker and as a
therapeutic target for the disease.

Svegliati Baroni et al. (2006) presented evidence showing that
stimulatory autoantibodies to PDGFR are a specific hallmark of
scleroderma (181750). These antibodies appeared to trigger an
intracellular loop that involves Ras (190020), ERK1 (601795)/ERK2
(176948), and reactive oxygen species (ROS) and that leads to increased
type I collagen (120150) expression. The authors suggested that the
biologic activity of PDGFR antibodies on fibroblasts has a causal role
in the pathogenesis of the disease. Tan (2006) suggested that the
profibrotic phenotype of fibroblasts in patients with scleroderma is
maintained by at least 3 mechanisms involving TGFB1 (190180), PDGFR, and
the Ras-ERK1/ERK2-ROS cascade.

Greenberg et al. (2008) defined a role for VEGF (192240) as an inhibitor
of neovascularization on the basis of its capacity to disrupt vascular
smooth muscle cell function. Specifically, under conditions of
PDGF-mediated angiogenesis, VEGF ablates pericyte coverage of nascent
vascular sprouts, leading to vessel destabilization. At the molecular
level, VEGF-mediated activation of VEGFR2 (191306) suppresses PDGFRB
signaling in vascular smooth muscle cells through the assembly of a
receptor complex consisting of PDGFRB and VEGFR2. Inhibition of VEGFR2
not only prevents assembly of this receptor complex but also restores
angiogenesis in tissues exposed to both VEGF and PDGF. Finally, genetic
deletion of tumor cell VEGF disrupts PDGFRB/VEGFR2 complex formation and
increases tumor vessel maturation. Greenberg et al. (2008) concluded
that their findings underscored the importance of vascular smooth muscle
cells/pericytes in neovascularization and revealed a dichotomous role
for VEGF and VEGFR2 signaling as both a promoter of endothelial cell
function and a negative regulator of vascular smooth muscle cells and
vessel maturation.

Nazarian et al. (2010) showed that acquired resistance of BRAF(V600E)
(164757.0001)-positive melanomas to PLX4032, a novel class I
RAF-selective inhibitor, develops by mutually exclusive PDGFRB
upregulation or NRAS (164790) mutations but not through secondary
mutations in BRAF(V600E). Nazarian et al. (2010) used PLX4032-resistant
sublines artificially derived from BRAF(V600E)-positive melanoma cell
lines and validated key findings in PLX4032-resistant tumors and
tumor-matched, short-term cultures from clinical trial patients.
Induction of PDGFRB RNA, protein, and tyrosine phosphorylation emerged
as a dominant feature of acquired PLX4032 resistance in a subset of
melanoma sublines, patient-derived biopsies, and short-term cultures.
PDGFRB-upregulated tumor cells had low activated RAS levels and, when
treated with PLX4032, did not reactivate the MAPK (see 176872) pathway
significantly. In another subset, high levels of activated NRAS
resulting from mutations led to significant MAPK pathway reactivation
upon PLX4032 treatment. Knockdown of PDGFRB or NRAS reduced growth of
the respective PLX4032-resistant subsets. Overexpression of PDGFRB or
mutated NRAS conferred PLX4032 resistance to PLX4032-sensitive parental
cell lines. Importantly, Nazarian et al. (2010) showed that MAPK
reactivation predicts MEK inhibitor sensitivity. Thus, Nazarian et al.
(2010) concluded that melanomas escape BRAF(V600E) targeting not through
secondary BRAF(V600E) mutations but via receptor tyrosine kinase
(RTK)-mediated activation of alternative survival pathway(s) or
activated RAS-mediated reactivation of the MAPK pathway, suggesting
additional therapeutic strategies.

MAPPING

By Southern blotting of DNA from somatic cell hybrids and by in situ
hybridization, Francke et al. (1986) mapped the gene for PDGFR to
5q31-q32. The gene is flanked proximally by GMCSF (138960) and distally
by FMS (164770). All 3 loci may be implicated in the 5q- syndrome
(153550). See also Yarden et al. (1986). Buchberg et al. (1989) cited
unpublished observations indicating that Pdgfr is located on mouse
chromosome 18.

The Treacher Collins Syndrome Collaborative Group (1996) determined that
the PDGFRB gene is located within approximately 900 kb proximal of the
TCOF1 gene (606847).

The PDGFRB gene and the CSF1R gene (164770) encode proteins that belong
to the same subfamily of receptor tyrosine kinases (Yarden and Ullrich,
1988). Both genes are located on 5q and are linked physically in a
head-to-tail array with less than 500 bp between the polyadenylation
signal of the PDGFRB gene and the transcription start point of the CSF1R
gene (Roberts et al., 1988). (This finding is inconsistent with the
conclusion that the PDGFRB gene is located at 5q31-q32 and the presumed
assignment of CSF1R to 5q33.2-q33.3. One of the assignments must be in
error.) Close linkage of the 2 genes has been demonstrated also in the
mouse and How et al. (1996) demonstrated that in the pufferfish (Fugu
rubripes) the 2 genes are linked tandemly in a head-to-tail array with
2.2 kb of intragenic sequence.

Gross (2013) mapped the PDGFRB gene to chromosome 5q32 based on an
alignment of the PDGFRB sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC032224) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

CYTOGENETICS

- PDGFRB Fusion Genes

Abe et al. (1997) reported that in a patient with acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML; 601626), the TRIP11 gene (604505), which they called
CEV14, was fused to the PDGFRB gene as a result of a t(5;14)(q33;q32)
translocation. On initial diagnosis, this patient had exhibited a sole
t(7;11) translocation, but the t(5;14)(q33;q32) translocation appeared
during the relapse phase. The CEV14-PDGFRB chimeric gene consisted of
the 5-prime region of CEV14 fused to the 3-prime region of PDGFRB.

Apperley et al. (2002) noted that a small proportion of patients with
chronic myeloproliferative disorders have constitutive activation of the
PDGFRB gene, resulting in many cases from a chromosome translocation
such as t(5;12), which creates a fusion gene with ETV6 (600618). Fusions
between PDGFRB and H4/D10S170 (601985), rabaptin-5 (RABPT5; 603616), and
huntingtin-interacting protein-1 (HIP1; 601767) have also been reported
in cases of chronic myeloproliferative disorders. The protein tyrosine
kinase activity of PDGFRB, like that of ABL1 (189980) and KIT (164920),
is inhibited by imatinib mesylate. The compound has been shown to be
effective in the treatment of chronic myeloid leukemia (151410) and
gastrointestinal stromal tumors (606764), which are caused by
abnormalities in the ABL1 and KIT genes, respectively. Apperley et al.
(2002) demonstrated that imatinib mesylate was also effective in the
treatment of chronic myeloproliferative disorders with rearrangements of
the PDGFRB gene. Three of 4 patients presented with leukocytosis and
eosinophilia (see 131440), and their leukemia cells carried the
ETV6-PDGFRB fusion gene.

Steer and Cross (2002) reviewed the acquired reciprocal chromosomal
translocations that involve 5q31-q33 and are associated with a
significant minority of patients with BCR-ABL-negative chronic myeloid
leukemias. The most common of these fuses the ETV6 gene to the PDGFRB
gene, but at the time of the review 4 additional partner genes were
known: H4 (D10S170), HIP1, CEV14 (TRIP11), and rabaptin-5. Clinically,
most patients present with a myeloproliferative disorder with
eosinophilia, eosinophilic leukemia, or chronic myelomonocytic leukemia
and thus fall into the broad category of myeloproliferative
disorders/myelodysplastic syndromes (MPD/MDS). With the advent of
targeted signal transduction therapy, patients with rearrangement of
PDGFRB might be better classified as a distinct subgroup of MPD/MDS.

In 9 patients with BCR-ABL-negative chronic myeloproliferative disorders
or MPD/MDS, Baxter et al. (2003) described translocations involving
chromosome bands 5q31 or 5q33, resulting in fusion of the PDGFRB gene
with other genes. They commented that several PDGFRB partner genes
remained to be characterized.

Pierce et al. (2008) showed that expression of TEL/PDGFRB in murine
myeloid FDCP-Mix cells prevented cell differentiation, increased cell
survival, increased the level of phosphatidylinositol
3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdInsP3), and increased the expression and
phosphorylation of Thoc5 (612733). Elevated Thoc5 expression also led to
increased cell survival and PtdInsP3 levels, suggesting that the effects
associated with TEL/PDGFRB expression were due, at least in part, to
Thoc5 upregulation.

Walz et al. (2009) reported a 51-year-old male with imatinib-responsive
eosinophilia associated with atypical myeloproliferative neoplasm who
presented with a t(5;17)(q33-34;q11.2). The translocation resulted in
the fusion of MYO18A (610067) intron 40 to PDGFRB intron 9, and RT-PCR
confirmed in-frame fusion between MYO18A exon 40 and PDGFRB exon 10. The
predicted 2,661-amino acid chimeric protein contains almost all of the
MYO18A sequence fused to the PDGFRB transmembrane, WW-like, and kinase
domains. RT-PCR also detected the reciprocal PDGFRB-MYO18A transcript,
with PDGFRB exon 9 fused to MYO18A exon 41.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Idiopathic Basal Ganglia Calcification 4

In affected members of a large 3-generation family with idiopathic basal
ganglia calcification-4 (IBGC4; 615007), Nicolas et al. (2013)
identified a heterozygous mutation in the PDGFRB gene (L658P;
173410.0001). The mutation, which was identified by exome sequencing of
2 affected individuals and confirmed by Sanger sequencing, segregated
with the disorder in this family and was not found in several large
exome databases. Many mutation carriers were asymptomatic, but 1 had
late-onset parkinsonism and dementia, and several had depression or
migraine. Nicolas et al. (2013) noted that animal models have shown a
key role for Pdgfrb in the development of pericytes in vessels within
the brain, and that pericytes have a key role in maintaining the
integrity of the blood-brain barrier, which is hypothesized to be
impaired in IBGC. In addition, the PDGFB-PDGFRB pathway appears to be
involved in phosphate-induced calcifications in vascular smooth muscle
cells by modulating expression of the phosphate transporter SLC20A1
(137570) (Villa-Bellosta et al., 2009); IGBC3 (614540) is caused by
mutation in a related phosphate transporter SLC20A2 (158378). These
findings suggest that cerebral phosphate homeostasis may play a role in
vascular calcifications.

- Infantile Myofibromatosis 1

In affected members of 4 unrelated families with infantile
myofibromatosis-1 (IMF1; 228550), Cheung et al. (2013) identified the
same heterozygous missense mutation in the PDGFRB gene (R561C;
173410.0003). The families were of Chinese, European, French Canadian,
and French origin, respectively. The mutation, which was identified by
exome sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing in the first 2
families, segregated with the phenotype in all families and was not
found in several large control databases. In addition, tumor tissue from
1 of the patients who carried a germline R561C mutation harbored an
additional somatic PDGFRB mutation (N666K) that was predicted to be
damaging. Structural modeling indicated that the R561C mutation occurs
in the cytoplasmic juxtamembrane (JM) region between the helical
transmembrane segment and the kinase domain, and was predicted to
compromise the autoinhibitory role of the JM domain, leading to
increased kinase firing and promoting the formation of myofibromas in
tissues with high PDGFRB signaling activity. Modeling also predicted
that the N666K mutation would favor an active kinase formation. In vitro
functional studies were not performed. Sequencing the PDGFRB gene in 5
individuals with nonfamilial IMF did not identify any causative
mutations.

Martignetti et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous R561C mutation in
the PDGFRB gene in affected members from 7 unrelated families with
autosomal dominant infantile myofibromatosis. The mutation, which was
identified by exome sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing,
segregated with the disorder and was not found in several large control
databases. Another family with the disorder carried a different
heterozygous mutation in the PDGFRB gene (P660T; 173410.0004).

ANIMAL MODEL

Klinghoffer et al. (2001) created 2 complementary lines of knockin mice
in which the intracellular signaling domains of one PDGFR had been
removed and replaced by those of the other PDGFR. While both lines
demonstrated substantial rescue of normal development, substitution of
the Pdgfrb signaling domains with those of Pdgfra resulted in varying
degrees of vascular disease.

Armulik et al. (2010) demonstrated a direct role of pericytes at the
blood-brain barrier in vivo. Using a set of adult viable
pericyte-deficient mouse mutants, they showed that pericyte deficiency
increases the permeability of the blood-brain barrier to water and a
range of low molecular mass and high molecular mass tracers. The
increased permeability occurs by endothelial transcytosis, a process
that is rapidly arrested by the drug imatinib. Furthermore, Armulik et
al. (2010) showed that pericytes function at the blood-brain barrier in
at least 2 ways: by regulating blood-brain barrier-specific gene
expression patterns in endothelial cells, and by inducing polarization
of astrocyte end-feet surrounding central nervous system (CNS) blood
vessels. Armulik et al. (2010) concluded that their results indicated a
novel and critical role for pericytes in the integration of endothelial
and astrocyte functions at the neurovascular unit, and in the regulation
of the blood-brain barrier.

Daneman et al. (2010) independently showed that the blood-brain barrier
is formed during embryogenesis as endothelial cells invade the CNS and
pericytes are recruited to the nascent vessels, over a week before
astrocyte generation. Analyzing mice with null and hypomorphic alleles
of Pdgfrb, which have defects in pericyte generation, they demonstrated
that pericytes are necessary for the formation of the blood-brain
barrier, and that absolute pericyte coverage determines relative
vascular permeability. Daneman et al. (2010) demonstrated that pericytes
regulate functional aspects of the blood-brain barrier, including the
formation of tight junctions and vesicle trafficking in CNS endothelial
cells. Pericytes do not induce blood-brain barrier-specific gene
expression in CNS endothelial cells, but inhibit the expression of
molecules that increase vascular permeability and CNS immune cell
infiltration. Daneman et al. (2010) concluded that pericyte-endothelial
cell interactions are critical to regulate the blood-brain barrier
during development, and that disruption of these interactions may lead
to blood-brain barrier dysfunction and neuroinflammation during CNS
injury and disease.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BASAL GANGLIA CALCIFICATION, IDIOPATHIC, 4
PDGFRB, LEU658PRO

In affected members of a large 3-generation family with idiopathic basal
ganglia calcification-4 (IBGC4; 615007), Nicolas et al. (2013)
identified a heterozygous 1973T-C transition in the PDGFRB gene,
resulting in a leu658-to-pro (L658P) substitution at a highly conserved
residue within the tyrosine kinase domain. The mutation, which was
identified by exome sequencing of 2 affected individuals and confirmed
by Sanger sequencing, segregated with the disorder in this family and
was not found in several large exome databases. No functional studies
were performed. Many mutation carriers were asymptomatic, but 1 had
late-onset parkinsonism and dementia, and several had depression or
migraine.

.0002
BASAL GANGLIA CALCIFICATION, IDIOPATHIC, 4
PDGFRB, ARG987TRP

In a 66-year-old woman with sporadic occurrence of IBGC4 (615007),
Nicolas et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous 2959C-T transition in
the PDGFRB gene, resulting in an arg987-to-trp (R987W) substitution at a
highly conserved residue. The mutation was not found in multiple exome
databases. No functional studies were performed. The patient presented
with a mild cognitive dysexecutive syndrome and bradykinesia and
pyramidal signs.

.0003
MYOFIBROMATOSIS, INFANTILE, 1
PDGFRB, ARG561CYS

In affected members of 4 unrelated families with infantile
myofibromatosis-1 (IMF1; 228550), Cheung et al. (2013) identified a
heterozygous c.1681C-T transition in the PDGFRB gene, resulting in an
arg561-to-cys (R561C) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
families were of Chinese, European, French Canadian, and French origin,
respectively. The mutation, which was identified by exome sequencing and
confirmed by Sanger sequencing in the first 2 families, segregated with
the phenotype in all families and was not found in several large control
databases. Structural modeling indicated that the R561C mutation occurs
in the cytoplasmic juxtamembrane (JM) region between the helical
transmembrane segment and the kinase domain, and was predicted to
compromise the autoinhibitory role of the JM domain, leading to
increased kinase firing and promoting the formation of myofibromas in
tissues with high PDGFRB signaling activity. In vitro functional studies
were not performed.

Martignetti et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous R561C mutation in
the PDGFRB gene in affected members from 7 unrelated families with
autosomal dominant infantile myofibromatosis. The mutation, which was
identified by exome sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing,
segregated with the disorder and was not found in several large control
databases.

.0004
MYOFIBROMATOSIS, INFANTILE, 1
PDGFRB, PRO660THR (dbSNP rs144050370)

In affected members of a family with autosomal dominant infantile
myofibromatosis-1 (228550) originally reported by Zand et al. (2004),
Martignetti et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous c.1978C-A
transversion in exon 14 of the PDGFRB gene, resulting in a pro660-to-thr
(P660T) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the tyrosine
kinase domain. The mutation, which was identified by exome sequencing
and confirmed by Sanger sequencing, segregated with the disorder and was
found at very low frequency (0.000077) in control databases (dbSNP
rs144050370). In vitro functional studies were not performed.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Golub et al. (1994); Kulkarni et al. (2000); Leal et al. (1985); Magnusson
et al. (2001); Ross et al. (1998)
REFERENCE 1. Abe, A.; Emi, N.; Tanimoto, M.; Terasaki, H.; Marunouchi, T.; Saito,
H.: Fusion of the platelet-derived growth factor receptor beta to
a novel gene CEV14 in acute myelogenous leukemia after clonal evolution. Blood 90:
4271-4277, 1997.

2. Apperley, J. F.; Gardembas, M.; Melo, J. V.; Russell-Jones, R.;
Bain, B. J.; Baxter, E. J.; Chase, A.; Chessells, J. M.; Colombat,
M.; Dearden, C. E.; Dimitrijevic, S.; Mahon, F.-X.; Marin, D.; Nikolova,
Z.; Olavarria, E.; Silberman, S.; Schultheis, B.; Cross, N. C. P.;
Goldman, J. M.: Response to imatinib mesylate in patients with chronic
myeloproliferative diseases with rearrangements of the platelet-derived
growth factor receptor beta. New Eng. J. Med. 347: 481-487, 2002.

3. Armulik, A.; Genove, G.; Mae, M.; Nisancioglu, M. H.; Wallgard,
E.; Niaudet, C.; He, L.; Norlin, J.; Lindblom, P.; Strittmatter, K.;
Johansson, B. R.; Betsholtz, C.: Pericytes regulate the blood-brain
barrier. Nature 468: 557-561, 2010.

4. Baxter, E. J.; Kulkarni, S.; Vizmanos, J.-L.; Jaju, R.; Martinelli,
G.; Testoni, N.; Hughes, G.; Salamanchuk, Z.; Calasanz, M. J.; Lahortiga,
I.; Pocock, C. F.; Dang, R.; Fidler, C.; Wainscoat, J. S.; Boultwood,
J.; Cross, N. C. P.: Novel translocations that disrupt the platelet-derived
growth factor receptor beta (PDGFRB) gene in BCR-ABL-negative chronic
myeloproliferative disorders. Brit. J. Haemat. 120: 251-256, 2003.

5. Buchberg, A. M.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.: Localization
of the murine macrophage colony-stimulating factor gene to chromosome
3 using interspecific backcross analysis. Genomics 5: 363-367, 1989.

6. Cheung, Y. H.; Gayden, T.; Campeau, P. M.; LeDuc, C. A.; Russo,
D.; Nguyen, V.-H.; Guo, J.; Qi, M.; Guan, Y.; Albrecht, S.; Moroz,
B.; Eldin, K. W.; and 13 others: A recurrent PDGFRB mutation causes
familial infantile myofibromatosis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92: 996-1000,
2013.

7. Claesson-Welsh, L.; Eriksson, A.; Moren, A.; Severinsson, L.; Ek,
B.; Ostman, A.; Betsholtz, C.; Heldin, C.-H.: cDNA cloning and expression
of a human platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) receptor specific
for B-chain-containing PDGF molecules. Molec. Cell. Biol. 8: 3476-3486,
1988.

8. Daneman, R.; Zhou, L.; Kebede, A. A.; Barres, B. A.: Pericytes
are required for blood-brain barrier integrity during embryogenesis. Nature 468:
562-566, 2010.

9. Di Pasquale, G.; Davidson, B. L.; Stein, C. S.; Martins, I.; Scudiero,
D.; Monks, A.; Chiorini, J. A.: Identification of PDGFR as a receptor
for AAV-5 transduction. Nature Med. 9: 1306-1312, 2003.

10. Escobedo, J. A.; Fried, V. A.; Daniel, T. O.; Williams, L. T.
: Primary structure of the platelet-derived growth factor. (Abstract) Clin.
Res. 34: 544A, 1986.

11. Francke, U.; Yang-Feng, T. L.; Brissenden, J. E.; Ullrich, A.
: Chromosomal mapping of genes involved in growth control. Cold Spring
Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 51: 855-866, 1986.

12. Gilbertson, R. J.; Clifford, S. C.: PDGFRB is overexpressed in
metastatic medulloblastoma. (Letter) Nature Genet. 35: 197-198,
2003.

13. Golub, T. R.; Barker, G. F.; Lovett, M.; Gilliland, D. G.: Fusion
of PDGF receptor beta to a novel ets-like gene, tel, in chronic myelomonocytic
leukemia with t(5;12) chromosomal translocation. Cell 77: 307-316,
1994.

14. Greenberg, J. I.; Shields, D. J.; Barillas, S. G.; Acevedo, L.
M.; Murphy, E.; Huang, J.; Scheppke, L.; Stockmann, C.; Johnson, R.
S.; Angle, N.; Cheresh, D. A.: A role for VEGF as a negative regulator
of pericyte function and vessel maturation. Nature 456: 809-813,
2008. Note: Erratum: Nature 457: 1168 only, 2009.

15. Gronwald, R. G. K.; Grant, F. J.; Haldeman, B. A.; Hart, C. E.;
O'Hara, P. J.; Hagen, F. S.; Ross, R.; Bowen-Pope, D. F.; Murray,
M. J.: Cloning and expression of a cDNA coding for the human platelet-derived
growth factor receptor: evidence for more than one receptor class. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 3435-3439, 1988.

16. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/8/2013.

17. How, G.-F.; Venkatesh, B.; Brenner, S.: Conserved linkage between
the puffer fish (Fugu rubripes) and human genes for platelet-derived
growth factor receptor and macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor. Genome
Res. 6: 1185-1191, 1996.

18. Klinghoffer, R. A.; Mueting-Nelsen, P. F.; Faerman, A.; Shani,
M.; Soriano, P.: The two PDGF receptors maintain conserved signaling
in vivo despite divergent embryological functions. Molec. Cell 7:
343-354, 2001.

19. Kulkarni, S.; Heath, C.; Parker, S.; Chase, A.; Iqbal, S.; Pocock,
C. F.; Kaeda, J.; Cwynarski, K.; Goldman, J. M.; Cross, N. C. P.:
Fusion of H4/D10S170 to the platelet-derived growth factor receptor
beta in BCR-ABL-negative myeloproliferative disorders with a t(5;10)(q33;q21). Cancer
Res. 60: 3592-3598, 2000.

20. Leal, F.; Williams, L. T.; Robbins, K. C.; Aaronson, S. A.: Evidence
that the v-sis gene product transforms by interaction with the receptor
for platelet-derived growth factor. Science 230: 327-330, 1985.

21. Lindahl, P.; Johansson, B. R.; Leveen, P.; Betsholtz, C.: Pericyte
loss and microaneurysm formation in PDGF-B-deficient mice. Science 277:
242-245, 1997.

22. Magnusson, M. K.; Meade, K. E.; Brown, K. E.; Arthur, D. C.; Krueger,
L. A.; Barrett, A. J.; Dunbar, C. E.: Rabaptin-5 is a novel fusion
partner to platelet-derived growth factor beta receptor in chronic
myelomonocytic leukemia. Blood 98: 2518-2525, 2001.

23. Martignetti, J. A.; Tian, L.; Li, D.; Ramirez, M. C. M.; Camacho-Vanegas,
O.; Camacho, S. C.; Guo, Y.; Zand, D. J.; Bernstein, A. M.; Masur,
S. K.; Kim, C. E.; Otieno, F. G.; and 16 others  Mutations in
PDGFRB cause autosomal-dominant infantile myofibromatosis. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 92: 1001-1007, 2013.

24. Matsui, T.; Heidaran, M.; Miki, T.; Popescu, N.; La Rochelle,
W.; Kraus, M.; Pierce, J.; Aaronson, S.: Isolation of a novel receptor
cDNA establishes the existence of two PDGF receptor genes. Science 243:
800-804, 1989.

25. Nazarian, R.; Shi, H.; Wang, Q.; Kong, X.; Koya, R. C.; Lee, H.;
Chen, Z.; Lee, M.-K.; Attar, N.; Sazegar, H.; Chodon, T.; Nelson,
S. F.; McArthur, G.; Sosman, J. A.; Ribas, A.; Lo, R. S.: Melanomas
acquire resistance to B-RAF(V600E) inhibition by RTK or N-RAS upregulation. Nature 468:
973-977, 2010.

26. Nicolas, G.; Pottier, C.; Maltete, D.; Coutant, S.; Rovelet-Lecrux,
A.; Legallic, S.; Rousseau, S.; Vaschalde, Y.; Guyant-Marechal, L.;
Augustin, J.; Martinaud, O.; Defebvre, L.; and 10 others: Mutation
of the PDGFRB gene as a cause of idiopathic basal ganglia calcification. Neurology 80:
181-187, 2013.

27. Pierce, A.; Carney, L.; Hamza, H. G.; Griffiths, J. R.; Zhang,
L.; Whetton, B. A.; Gonzalez Sanchez, M. B.; Tamura, T.; Sternberg,
D.; Whetton, A. D.: THOC5 spliceosome protein: a target for leukaemogenic
tyrosine kinases that affects inositol lipid turnover. Brit. J. Haemat. 141:
641-650, 2008.

28. Roberts, W. M.; Look, A. T.; Roussel, M. F.; Sherr, C. J.: Tandem
linkage of human CSF-1 receptor (c-fms) and PDGF receptor genes. Cell 55:
655-661, 1988.

29. Ross, T. S.; Bernard, O. A.; Berger, R.; Gilliland, D. G.: Fusion
of Huntingtin interacting protein 1 to platelet-derived growth factor-beta
receptor (PDGF-beta-R) in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia with t(5;7)(q33;q11.2). Blood 91:
4419-4426, 1998.

30. Steer, E. J.; Cross, N. C. P.: Myeloproliferative disorders with
translocations of chromosome 5q31-35: role of the platelet-derived
growth factor receptor beta. Acta Haemat. 107: 113-122, 2002.

31. Svegliati Baroni, S.; Santillo, M.; Bevilacqua, F.; Luchetti,
M.; Spadoni, T.; Mancini, M.; Fraticelli, P.; Sambo, P.; Funaro, A.;
Kazlauskas, A.; Avvedimento, E. V.; Gabrielli, A.: Stimulatory autoantibodies
to the PDGF receptor in systemic sclerosis. New Eng. J. Med. 354:
2667-2676, 2006.

32. Tan, F. K.: Autoantibodies against PDGF receptor in scleroderma.
(Editorial) New Eng. J. Med. 354: 2709-2711, 2006.

33. Treacher Collins Syndrome Collaborative Group: Positional cloning
of a gene involved in the pathogenesis of Treacher Collins syndrome. Nature
Genet. 12: 130-136, 1996.

34. Villa-Bellosta, R.; Levi, M.; Sorribas, V.: Vascular smooth muscle
cell calcification and SLC20 inorganic phosphate transporters: effects
of PDGF, TNF-alpha, and Pi. Pflugers Arch. 458: 1151-1161, 2009.

35. Walz, C.; Haferlach, C.; Hanel, A.; Metzgeroth, G.; Erben, P.;
Gosenca, D.; Hochhaus, A.; Cross, N. C. P.; Reiter, A.: Identification
of a MYO18A-PDGFRB fusion gene in an eosinophilia-associated atypical
myeloproliferative neoplasm with a t(5;17)(q33-34;q11.2). Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 48: 179-183, 2009.

36. Yarden, Y.; Escobedo, J. A.; Kuang, W.-J.; Yang-Feng, T. L.; Daniel,
T. O.; Tremble, P. M.; Chen, E. Y.; Ando, M. E.; Harkins, R. N.; Francke,
U.; Fried, V. A.; Ullrich, A.; Williams, L. T.: Structure of the
receptor for platelet-derived growth factor helps define a family
of closely related growth factor receptors. Nature 323: 226-232,
1986.

37. Yarden, Y.; Ullrich, A.: Growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases. Ann.
Rev. Biochem. 57: 443-478, 1988.

38. Zand, D. J.; Huff, D.; Everman, D.; Russell, K.; Saitta, S.; McDonald-M
cGinn, D.; Zackai, E. H.: Autosomal dominant inheritance of infantile
myofibromatosis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 126A: 261-266, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/27/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 1/8/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/8/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/3/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/21/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/12/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/10/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/16/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/29/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/26/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/19/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/23/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/16/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/16/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/12/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/4/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/25/1986

EDITED tpirozzi: 07/08/2013
tpirozzi: 7/5/2013
tpirozzi: 7/3/2013
ckniffin: 6/27/2013
carol: 4/25/2013
mgross: 1/8/2013
carol: 1/8/2013
ckniffin: 1/8/2013
alopez: 2/7/2011
terry: 2/3/2011
alopez: 1/24/2011
terry: 1/21/2011
mgross: 3/15/2010
terry: 3/12/2010
wwang: 6/15/2009
wwang: 6/12/2009
terry: 6/10/2009
mgross: 4/16/2009
alopez: 3/11/2009
alopez: 2/6/2009
terry: 1/29/2009
wwang: 6/27/2006
terry: 6/26/2006
tkritzer: 11/19/2003
cwells: 11/18/2003
alopez: 10/16/2003
alopez: 9/23/2003
tkritzer: 5/29/2003
terry: 5/16/2003
carol: 9/27/2002
alopez: 9/27/2002
tkritzer: 9/25/2002
tkritzer: 9/16/2002
carol: 7/1/2002
carol: 4/19/2002
mgross: 3/12/2001
mark: 7/16/1997
jenny: 7/9/1997
jamie: 3/4/1997
jenny: 3/4/1997
terry: 2/24/1997
mark: 1/29/1996
terry: 1/29/1996
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 3/2/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 8/3/1989
root: 4/5/1989

603483	TITLE *603483 EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION INITIATION FACTOR 4E-BINDING PROTEIN 3; EIF4EBP3
;;4EBP3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Eukaryotic initiation factor 4F (EIF4F), which recognizes the cap
structure mediating translation initiation, consists of 3 polypeptides,
including EIF4E (133440), the cap-binding protein subunit. EIF4E
activity is regulated in part by 2 translational repressors, EIF4EBP1
(602223) and EIF4EBP2 (602224), which bind to it and prevent its
assembly into EIF4F. Poulin et al. (1998) isolated a prostate carcinoma
cell line cDNA encoding EIF4EBP3, which they designated 4EBP3, a new
member of the EIF4EBP family. The deduced 100-amino acid protein shares
57% and 59% identity with EIF4EBP1 and EIF4EBP2, respectively. Northern
blot analysis detected a major 800-bp transcript in almost every tissue
examined, although at varying levels. The authors demonstrated that the
14.6-kD EIF4EBP3 phosphoprotein is heat stable and binds to EIF4E in
vitro as well as in vivo. EIF4EBP3 overexpression specifically reduced
EIF4E-dependent translation.

By real-time quantitative RT-PCR of several mouse tissues, Poulin et al.
(2003) found 4Ebp3 highly expressed in liver, at a level 10-fold higher
than that in kidney. Other tissues expressed variable and significantly
lower levels of 4Ebp3 mRNA.

- MASK-BP3 Intergenic Splice Variant

Poulin et al. (2003) identified an mRNA of about 8.5 kb that hybridized
with a 4EBP3 probe in Northern blots and included exons 1 through 33 of
the MASK gene (ANKHD1; 610500) spliced to an intermediate exon 0,
followed by 4EBP3 exons B and C. The transcript lacked MASK exon 34 and
4EBP3 exon A.

GENE FUNCTION

By Western blot analysis, Kleijn et al. (2002) found 4EBP3 in the
cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions of normal human primary T cells and of
HEK293 and HeLa cells. 4EBP3 was associated with EIF4E in both cell
compartments. The association of cytoplasmic 4EBP3 and EIF4E in HEK293
and HeLa cells was reduced by serum or interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680)
starvation. In primary T cells, the interaction was reduced by cell
activation.

Dowling et al. (2010) inhibited the mTORC1 (601231) pathway in cells
lacking EIF4EBP1, EIF4EBP2, and EIF4EBP3 and analyzed the effects on
cell size, cell proliferation, and cell cycle progression. Although the
EIF4EBPs had no effect on cell size, they inhibited cell proliferation
by selectively inhibiting the translation of mRNAs that encode
proliferation-promoting proteins and proteins involved in cell cycle
progression. Thus, Dowling et al. (2010) concluded that control of cell
size and cell cycle progression appear to be independent in mammalian
cells, whereas in lower eukaryotes, EIF4E binding proteins influence
both cell growth and proliferation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Poulin et al. (2003) determined that the EIF4EBP3 gene contains 3 exons
and spans 1.9 kb. The last exon is noncoding.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Poulin et al. (2003) mapped the EIF4EBP3
gene to chromosome 5q31.3, where it lies downstream of the ANKHD1 gene.
Southern blot analysis demonstrated that EIF4EBP3 is present in single
copy. Poulin et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Eif4ebp3 gene to a region of
chromosome 18 that shares homology of synteny with human chromosome
5q31.

REFERENCE 1. Dowling, R. J. O.; Topisirovic, I.; Alain, T.; Bidinosti, M.; Fonseca,
B. D.; Petroulakis, E.; Wang, X.; Larsson, O.; Selvaraj, A.; Liu,
Y.; Kozma, S. C.; Thomas, G.; Sonenberg, N.: mTORC1-mediated cell
proliferation, but not cell growth, controlled by the 4E-BPs. Science 328:
1172-1176, 2010.

2. Kleijn, M.; Scheper, G. C.; Wilson, M. L.; Tee, A. R.; Proud, C.
G.: Localisation and regulation of the eIF4E-binding protein 4E-BP3. FEBS
Lett. 532: 319-323, 2002.

3. Poulin, F.; Brueschke, A.; Sonenberg, N.: Gene fusion and overlapping
reading frames in the mammalian genes for 4E-BP3 and MASK. J. Biol.
Chem. 278: 52290-52297, 2003.

4. Poulin, F.; Gingras, A.-C.; Olsen, H.; Chevalier, S.; Sonenberg,
N.: 4E-BP3, a new member of the eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-binding
protein family. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 14002-14007, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/14/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/25/2006

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 2/3/1999

EDITED alopez: 09/24/2012
terry: 9/20/2012
alopez: 6/18/2010
terry: 6/14/2010
alopez: 10/17/2006
terry: 8/25/2006
psherman: 2/3/1999

604744	TITLE *604744 DIMETHYLARGININE DIMETHYLAMINOHYDROLASE 2; DDAH2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase (DDAH; EC 3.5.3.18) regulates
cellular methylarginine concentrations, which in turn inhibit nitric
oxide synthase (see 163731) activity.

CLONING

Leiper et al. (1999) isolated a cDNA encoding DDAHI (604743) and, by
screening a database of translated open reading frames with the deduced
DDAHI peptide sequence, identified DDAHII. Both DDAHI and DDAHII cDNAs
encode 285-amino acid proteins. The DDAHII amino acid sequence shares
98% identity with that of its mouse homolog and 62% identity with the
sequence of DDAHI. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.0-kb DDAHII
transcript expressed at highest levels in heart, kidney, and placenta.

By RNA dot blot analysis, Tran et al. (2000) determined that DDAH2
expression predominates in more highly vascularized tissues and in
immune tissues, while DDAH1 expression predominates in tissues that also
express the neuronal isoform of NOS (163731).

GENE FUNCTION

Leiper et al. (1999) expressed a histidine-tagged DDAHII clone in E.
coli and assayed the cell lysate for DDAH activity. Recombinant DDAHII
metabolized ADMA and L-NMMA, but not SDMA or L-arginine, demonstrating
that DDAHII is a functional homolog of DDAHI.

By overexpression in human and murine endothelial cells, Smith et al.
(2003) determined that DDAH2 reduced the secretion of ADMA, increased
VEGF mRNA expression, and enhanced tube formation by cells grown in a
3-dimensional medium. A DDAH inhibitor reduced tube formation in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Genomic sequence analysis by Tran et al. (2000) indicated that DDAH2
contains 8 exons with 3 transcription start sites that generate
alternatively spliced transcripts.

MAPPING

Tran et al. (2000) mapped the DDAH2 gene to 6p21.3 by radiation hybrid
and FISH analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Leiper, J. M,; Santa Maria, J.; Chubb, A.; MacAllister, R. J.;
Charles, I. G.; Whitley, G. S.; Vallance, P.: Identification of two
human dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolases with distinct tissue
distributions and homology with microbial arginine deiminases. Biochem.
J. 343: 209-214, 1999.

2. Smith, C. L.; Birdsey, G. M.; Anthony, S.; Arrigoni, F. I.; Leiper,
J. M.; Vallance, P.: Dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase activity
modulates ADMA levels, VEGF expression, and cell phenotype. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 308: 984-989, 2003.

3. Tran, C. T. L.; Fox, M. F.; Vallance, P.; Leiper, J. M.: Chromosomal
localization, gene structure, and expression pattern of DDAH1: comparison
with DDAH2 and implications for evolutionary origins. Genomics 68:
101-105, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/4/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/31/2000

CREATED Stefanie A. Nelson: 3/27/2000

EDITED alopez: 06/11/2008
mgross: 2/4/2005
mgross: 10/31/2000
alopez: 3/27/2000

601209	TITLE *601209 POLY(rC)-BINDING PROTEIN 1; PCBP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Leffers et al. (1995) described the cloning and characterization of 2
cDNAs for poly(rC)-binding proteins, called PCBP1 and PCBP2 (601210) by
them. The authors analyzed an EST database for sequences that were
predicted to encode a protein with K-homologous (KH) domains. The 60- to
70-amino acid KH motifs are found in several putative nucleic acid
binding proteins such as FMR1 (309550) and HNRNPK (600712) and are
thought to be involved in RNA binding. Using primers from 1 EST the
authors produced a probe that was used to screen a cDNA library of
transformed human amnion cells. The cDNA they isolated for PCBP1 encodes
a putative 356-amino acid protein that contains 3 KH domains. It is 83%
identical to PCBP2 at the DNA level and 90% homologous at the amino acid
level. The PCBP1 protein is about 85% similar to the mouse hnRNP-X/mCTBP
protein (Hahm et al., 1993).

Chkheidze and Liebhaber (2003) determined that endogenous HeLa cell
PCBP1 colocalized to nuclear speckles with SC35 (600813). They
identified a nuclear localization signal within a 9-amino acid segment
between KH2 and KH3. Deletion of this segment blocked nuclear
accumulation of PCBP1.

GENE FUNCTION

When expressed with a vaccinia virus system in transformed amnion cells,
Leffers et al. (1995) found that both PCBP1 and PCBP2 bound poly(rC)
when not phosphorylated; phosphorylated protein bound with much lower
affinity.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a human brain cDNA library, Kosturko et
al. (2006) found that mouse Hnrnpa2 (600124) interacted with human
HNRNPE1. They confirmed the interaction with in vivo and in vitro
protein interaction assays. Hnrnpe1 colocalized with Hnrnpa2 and A2RE
mRNA in granules in dendrites of rat oligodendrocytes. Overexpression of
HNRNPE1 or microinjection of exogenous HNRNPE1 in rat neural cells
inhibited translation of A2RE mRNA, but not translation of mutated A2RE
mRNA. Excess HNRNPE1 added to an in vitro translation system reduced
translation efficiency of A2RE mRNA in an Hnrnpa2-dependent manner.
Kosturko et al. (2006) hypothesized that binding of HNRNPE1 to HNRNPA2
inhibits A2RE mRNA translation during granule transport.

Shi et al. (2008) identified PCBP1 in a genetic screen to identify human
genes that, when expressed in yeast, could increase the amount of iron
loaded into ferritin (see 134790). PCBP1 bound to ferritin in vivo, and
bound iron and facilitated iron loading into ferritin in vitro.
Depletion of PCBP1 in human cells inhibited ferritin iron loading and
increased cytosolic iron pools. Thus, Shi et al. (2008) concluded that
PCBP1 can function as a cytosolic iron chaperone in the delivery of iron
to ferritin.

MAPPING

Transcripts of both PCBPs were detected in all the human tissues
analyzed. Tommerup and Leffers (1996) mapped PCBP1 to 2p13-p12 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Chkheidze, A. N.; Liebhaber, S. A.: A novel set of nuclear localization
signals determine distributions of the alpha-CP RNA-binding proteins. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 23: 8405-8415, 2003.

2. Hahm, K.; Kim, G.; Turck, C. W.; Smale, S. T.: Isolation of a
murine gene encoding a nucleic acid-binding protein with homology
to hnRNP K. Nucleic Acids Res. 21: 3894 only, 1993.

3. Kosturko, L. D.; Maggipinto, M. J.; Korza, G.; Lee, J. W.; Carson,
J. H.; Barbarese, E.: Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP)
E1 binds to hnRNP A2 and inhibits translation of A2 response element
mRNAs. Molec. Biol. Cell 17: 3521-3533, 2006.

4. Leffers, H.; Dejgaard, K.; Celis, J. E.: Characterisation of two
major cellular poly(rC)-binding human proteins, each containing three
K-homologous (KH) domains. Europ. J. Biochem. 230: 447-453, 1995.

5. Shi, H.; Bencze, K. Z.; Stemmler, T. L.; Philpott, C. C.: A cytosolic
iron chaperone that delivers iron to ferritin. Science 320: 1207-1210,
2008.

6. Tommerup, N.; Leffers, H.: Assignment of human KH-box-containing
genes by in situ hybridization: HNRNPK maps to 9q21.32-q21.33, PCBP1
to 2p12-p13, and PCBP2 to 12q13.12-q13.13, distal to FRA12A. Genomics 32:
297-298, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/10/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/10/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/11/2004

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 4/17/1996

EDITED mgross: 09/17/2009
terry: 9/10/2009
alopez: 6/12/2008
terry: 6/10/2008
cwells: 3/2/2004
terry: 2/11/2004
mark: 9/4/1996
mark: 6/7/1996
terry: 5/2/1996
mark: 4/17/1996
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 4/17/1996

609787	TITLE *609787 UBIQUITIN-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; UBAP1
;;UBAP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening the expression patterns of ESTs located in a region at
9p22-p21 undergoing loss of heterozygosity in nasopharyngeal carcinoma
(NPC), Yang et al. (1999) identified an EST that is downregulated in
NPC. Using the clone for this EST and 5-prime RACE, Qian et al. (2001)
identified the full-length cDNA sequence, which they designated UBAP1.
The deduced 502-amino acid protein has a predicted molecular mass of 55
kD and contains 2 putative tandem UBA domains at the C terminus, a
coiled-coil domain, 2 possible N-glycosylation sites, 5 PKC
phosphorylation sites, 7 casein kinase II phosphorylation sites, and 3
N-myristoylation sites. Qian et al. (2001) also identified mouse Ubap1.
The human and mouse proteins share 90% sequence identity. Northern blot
analysis of human tissues detected ubiquitous expression of a 2.7-kb
transcript, with highest expression in heart, skeletal muscle, and
liver. RT-PCR of mouse tissues also revealed ubiquitous expression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using RT-PCR and direct sequencing, Qian et al. (2001) screened the NPC
cell line HNE1 and 10 primary NPCs for mutations in the UBAP1 gene. They
found no sequence alterations.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Qian et al. (2001) mapped the UBAP1 gene to
chromosome 9p22-p21.

REFERENCE 1. Qian, J.; Yang, J.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, B.; Wang, J.; Zhou, M.; Tang,
K.; Li, W.; Zeng, Z.; Zhao, X.; Shen, S.; Li, G.: Isolation and characterization
of a novel cDNA, UBAP1, derived from the tumor suppressor locus in
human chromosome 9p21-22. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 127: 613-618,
2001.

2. Yang, J. B.; Tang, X. N.; Deng, L. W.: Detailed deletion mapping
of chromosome 9p21-22 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Chin. J. Oncol. 21:
419-421, 1999. Note: Article in Chinese.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 12/13/2005

EDITED terry: 04/12/2012
carol: 12/13/2005

120290	TITLE *120290 COLLAGEN, TYPE XI, ALPHA-2; COL11A2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Type XI collagen, a fibril-forming collagen found mainly in the
cartilage extracellular matrix, is important for the integrity and
development of the skeleton (summary by Lui et al., 1996).

CLONING

Kimura et al. (1989) cloned human COL11A2, which encodes a deduced
protein with high sequence similarity to COL11A1 (120280). By Northern
blot analysis, Kimura et al. (1989) showed that COL11A2 is expressed in
cartilage but not in adult liver, skin, and tendon.

MAPPING

Law et al. (1989, 1990) used a cosmid clone containing the COL11A2 gene
as a probe in the Southern blot analysis of DNA from a panel of
human/hamster somatic cell hybrids containing different numbers and
combinations of human chromosomes. They concluded that the gene is
located on chromosome 6, and study of a cell hybrid containing only 6q
indicated that the COL11A2 gene is on 6p.

By a combination of somatic cell hybrid mapping and in situ
hybridization, Hanson et al. (1989, 1989) localized the COL11A2 gene to
6p21.3. By physical mapping of the class II HLA region using pulsed
field gel electrophoresis, Hanson et al. (1991) demonstrated that the
COL11A2 gene is about 45 kb centromeric to HLA-DPA1 (142880) and is
transcribed in the opposite (i.e., telomeric) direction.

Kimura et al. (1989) assigned the COL11A2 gene to 6p21.2 by in situ
hybridization. The nucleotide sequence showed that although type XI
collagen belongs to the fibril-forming class of collagens, there are
substantial differences in exon sizes at the 3-prime end of the gene
when comparing the COL11A2 gene with the genes for types I, II, and III
collagens. It is thought that the alpha-3 chain of type XI collagen is a
posttranslational variant of the type II, or cartilage, collagen
subunit, i.e., is encoded by the COL2A1 gene (120140).

Stubbs et al. (1993) showed that the homologous gene in the mouse is
also 'embedded' within the major histocompatibility complex on
chromosome 17.

GENE STRUCTURE

Vuoristo et al. (1995) analyzed the COL11A2 gene from 2 overlapping
cosmid clones that had previously been isolated in the course of
searching the human major histocompatibility region. Nucleotide sequence
defined over 28,000 bp of the gene. It was shown to contain 66 exons. As
with most genes for fibrillar collagens, the first intron was among the
largest, and the introns at the 5-prime end of the gene were in general
larger than the introns at the 3-prime end. Analysis of the exons coding
for the major triple helical domain indicated that the gene structure
had not evolved with the genes for the major fibrillar collagen and that
there were marked differences in the number of exons, the exon sizes,
and codon usage. The gene was located close to the gene for the retinoid
X receptor beta (180246) in a head-to-tail arrangement similar to that
previously seen with the 2 mouse genes. Also, there was marked
interspecies homology in the intergenic sequences.

Lui et al. (1996) showed that COL11A2 contains at least 62 exons
spanning 30.5 kb. The gene differs from other collagens in that the
amino propeptide is encoded by 14 exons rather than the usual 5 to 8.
The promoter is GC-rich and lacks a TATA box. The authors believed that
the gene is likely to undergo alternative splicing. The gene lies within
the MHC region and is only 1.1-kb from the retinoid X receptor-beta
(180246) and about 40 kb from DPB2 (142880).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Melkoniemi et al. (2000) stated that in spite of partial overlap between
the Stickler (see 108300), Marshall (154780), Weissenbacher-Zweymuller
(277610), and otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED; 215150)
phenotypes caused by mutations in the COL2A1 (120140), COL11A1 (120280),
and COL11A2 genes, absence of eye involvement in patients carrying
COL11A2 mutations is noteworthy. This was best explained by the finding
that the COL11A2 gene is not expressed in the vitreous body and that the
COL5A2 (120190) chain replaces the COL11A2 chain in the ocular vitreous
(Mayne et al., 1993).

- Stickler Syndrome, Type III

Type II collagen is closely associated with both type IX collagen
(120210) and type XI collagen in thin collagen fibrils of hyaline
cartilage. This prompted Brunner et al. (1994) to study linkage of a
Stickler syndrome phenotype (STL3; 184840) to polymorphic markers within
or near genes encoding these cartilage collagens. In a large Dutch
kindred, Stickler syndrome was found to be linked to the 6p22-p21.3
region where COL11A2 maps. Unlike the usual cases of Stickler syndrome
which show high myopia, vitreoretinal degeneration, and retinal
detachment, ocular features were lacking in all affected individuals in
the Dutch family. This may be explained by absence of the alpha-2 chain
of type XI collagen in the vitreous. The skeletal and otologic
manifestations of the Stickler syndrome were present in the family,
however. Vikkula et al. (1995) established that the affected members of
the Dutch kindred with Stickler syndrome reported by Brunner et al.
(1994) had a mutation in the COL11A2 gene (120290.0001).

Sirko-Osadsa et al. (1998) described a family with Stickler syndrome in
which there was no eye involvement and demonstrated that the phenotype
was due to heterozygosity for a 27-bp deletion in the COL11A2 gene
(120290.0003). The affected members of the family had sensorineural
hearing loss, cleft palate/uvula, micrognathia, malar flattening, joint
pains, and multiple hereditary exostoses.

- Weissenbacher-Zweymuller Syndrome

Pihlajamaa et al. (1998) demonstrated that the original patient
described by Weissenbacher and Zweymuller (1964) as a 'combination of a
Pierre Robin syndrome with a fetal chondrodysplasia' (WZS; 277610) had a
heterozygous mutation in the COL11A2 gene (120290.0004).

- Otospondylomegaepiphyseal Dysplasia

Vikkula et al. (1995) studied a Dutch kindred in which 3 sibs of a
consanguineous mating had a severe degenerative joint disease resembling
osteoarthritis that presented in early adulthood and affected
predominantly the hips, knees, elbows, and shoulders (OSMED; 215150).
Vikkula et al. (1995) found that the mutation in these sibs was a
gly175-to-arg mutation of the COL11A2 gene (120290.0002). van Steensel
et al. (1997) described the clinical and radiographic features of
otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia in these sibs.

Melkoniemi et al. (2000) reported 7 families with OSMED. All affected
individuals had a remarkably similar phenotype: profound sensorineural
hearing loss, skeletal dysplasia with limb shortening and large
epiphyses, cleft palate, very flat face, hypoplasia of the mandible, a
short nose with anteverted nares, and a flat nasal bridge. A different
mutation of the COL11A2 gene was identified in each family. In 4
families, including 3 with consanguineous parents, the mutations were
homozygous. Individuals in 3 other families, in which parents were
nonconsanguineous, were compound heterozygous. Of the 10 identified
mutations, 9 were predicted to cause premature termination of
translation, and 1 was predicted to cause an in-frame deletion.

In an Egyptian brother and sister with OSMED, Temtamy et al. (2006)
identified homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion in the COL11A2 gene
(120290.0011). The first-cousin parents were heterozygous for the
deletion; a younger brother was unaffected.

- Deafness, Autosomal Dominant 13

In 2 families, 1 American and 1 Dutch, with autosomal dominant,
nonsyndromic hearing loss (DFNA13; 601868) previously been mapped to 6p,
McGuirt et al. (1999) identified heterozygous mutations in the COL11A2
gene (120290.0005-120290.0006) that were predicted to affect the
triple-helix domain of the collagen protein. McGuirt et al. (1999) found
that mice with a targeted disruption of Col11a2 also showed hearing
loss. Electron microscopy of the tectorial membrane of these mice
revealed loss of organization of the collagen fibrils. The findings
revealed a unique ultrastructural malformation of the inner ear
architecture associated with nonsyndromic hearing loss, and suggested
that tectorial membrane abnormalities may be one etiology of
sensorineural hearing loss primarily affecting the mid-frequencies.

- Deafness, Autosomal Recessive 53

In 5 affected members of 2 sibships of a consanguineous Iranian family
with nonsyndromic hearing loss (DFNB53; 609706), Chen et al. (2005)
identified homozygosity for a missense mutation in the COL11A2 gene
(P621T; 120290.0008). The 4 parents and 1 sib were heterozygous for the
mutation.

- Fibrochondrogenesis 2

In a deceased infant with fibrochondrogenesis (FBCG2; 614524), born of
consanguineous parents, Tompson et al. (2012) identified homozygosity
for a splice site mutation in the COL11A2 gene (120290.0012). In another
deceased infant with fibrochondrogenesis, who was born of healthy
nonconsanguineous parents, they identified heterozygosity for a 9-bp
deletion (120290.0013).

- Associations Pending Confirmation

Among Japanese, ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament of
the spine (OPLL; 602475) is a leading cause of myelopathy, showing
ectopic bone formation in the paravertebral ligament. Maeda et al.
(2001) provided genetic evidence that the COL11A2 locus constitutes
susceptibility for OPLL. Five distinct SNPs identified in COL11A2 were
combined to construct haplotypes. A male-specific association with a
COL11A2 haplotype was found with OPLL. In a case-control study of 711
Japanese individuals with OPLL and 896 controls, Horikoshi et al. (2006)
found no association between 2 SNPs in the COL11A2 gene and OPLL.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE III
COL11A2, IVS, G-A, +1

In a large Dutch kindred with Stickler syndrome (184840), which was
found by Brunner et al. (1994) to map to the same region of 6p as the
COL11A2 gene, Vikkula et al. (1995) found heterozygosity for a 1-bp
change at the exon-intron boundary such that the intronic donor-site
sequence, GTGAG, was replaced by ATGAG. This change created a novel
NlaIII restriction site in the genomic sequence. The G-to-A transition
resulted in a 54-bp in-frame deletion, which represented deletion of the
exon 5-prime of the mutation. This exon sequence was located 108
nucleotides upstream of the junction between sequences encoding the
triple-helical and C-propeptide domains of the alpha-2(XI) chain.

.0002
OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
COL11A2, GLY175ARG

Vikkula et al. (1995) studied a Dutch kindred in which 3 sibs had a
severe degenerative joint disease resembling osteoarthritis that
presented in early adulthood and affected predominantly the hips, knees,
elbows, and shoulders (215150). The spine was less severely affected,
and adult height was only slightly below that of the unaffected sibs.
There was increased lumbar lordosis and prominent interphalangeal
joints. Short fifth metacarpals were found in all 3 sibs. The patients
had distinctive facial features with midface hypoplasia with a short
upturned nose, prominent eyes, depressed nasal bridge, and prominent
supraorbital ridges. Sensorineural hearing loss was present from birth
and required the use of hearing aids in all 3 affected sibs. None of the
3 had myopia or vitreoretinal degeneration. The parents were fourth
cousins. The affected sibs were found to be homozygous for an extended
haplotype of 7 CA dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms from 6p21 near the
COL11A2 locus. Using conservative estimates of 0.002 for the frequency
of the abnormal allele and 0.005 for the frequency of the marker
haplotype, Vikkula et al. (1995) obtained a lod score of 3.09 at theta =
0.0 for linkage of the disease phenotype to 6p21. To find the mutation
causing the autosomal recessive disorder, they used RT-PCR with total
RNA extracted from EBV-transformed lymphoblasts, and the complete coding
sequence of the COL11A2 gene was determined for 1 individual. This
identified a G-to-A transition, converting a glycyl to an arginyl codon,
within the triple-helical domain of the alpha-2(XI) chain. The change in
sequence eliminated an MspI restriction site. Affected children were
homozygous for the arginyl codon, while unaffected children were
homozygous for the glycyl codon; both parents were heterozygous for the
sequence change. The mutation occurred in a Gly-X-Y triplet. The
clinical findings in the 3 sibs with the gly175-to-arg missense mutation
were described by van Steensel et al. (1997).

.0003
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE III
COL11A2, 27-BP DEL

In a family with type III Stickler syndrome (184840), Sirko-Osadsa et
al. (1998) identified a 27-bp deletion within exon 39 of the COL11A2
gene.

.0004
WEISSENBACHER-ZWEYMULLER SYNDROME
OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, HETEROZYGOUS, INCLUDED
COL11A2, GLY955GLU

Weissenbacher and Zweymuller (1964) described a newborn boy of normal
size who presented with a 'combination of a Pierre Robin syndrome with a
fetal chondrodysplasia' (277610). The child had a markedly snub nose,
cleft palate, micrognathia, glossoptosis, rhizomelic shortness of the
limbs with dumbbell-shaped femora, and coronal vertebral clefts. A
follow-up report when the original WZS patient was 18 years old (Giedion
et al., 1982) indicated that he had developed sensorineural deafness at
about 5 years of age, and a spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with enlarged
epiphyses of the long bones, radiologically most pronounced at the age
of 13.5 years. At age 18, he was normal in height (164 cm) and in
appearance except for slightly shorter limbs and lower segment. Also, he
had no ocular signs or symptoms. His parents were healthy and
nonconsanguineous. A brother was unaffected. Giedion et al. (1982)
reported 3 additional patients with the same condition and suggested
that they should be classified as otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia
(OSMED; 215150); common findings in patients of the OSMED group were
midface hypoplasia, cleft palate, micrognathia, sensorineural deafness,
normal eyes, and spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with large epiphyses.
Pihlajamaa et al. (1998) analyzed the original WZS patient for mutations
in 2 collagen genes expressed in cartilage, COL2A1 and COL11A2. No
mutations were found in the COL2A1 gene but the COL11A2 gene contained a
G-to-A transition that converted codon 955 from an obligate glycine
(GGG) in the major triple helix of the protein to a codon for glutamate
(GAG). The mutation was present in heterozygous state.

.0005
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 13
COL11A2, ARG549CYS

In affected members of an American family with autosomal dominant
nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss (DFNA13; 601868), McGuirt et al.
(1999) identified a heterozygous C-to-T missense mutation in exon 42
that predicted an arg549-to-cys amino acid substitution.

.0006
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 13
COL11A2, GLY323GLU

In affected members of a Dutch family with autosomal dominant
nonsyndromic sensorineural deafness (DFNA13; 601868), McGuirt et al.
(1999) found a heterozygous G-to-A transition in exon 31 that predicted
a gly323-to-glu amino acid substitution.

.0007
OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
COL11A2, SER345TER

In a family from Morocco with consanguineous parents, Melkoniemi et al.
(2000) found that 3 children with OSMED (215150) were homozygous for a
C-to-A transversion at nucleotide 2492 in exon 33 of the COL11A2 gene,
resulting in a ser345-to-ter substitution. One of the children was
described as having normal body length at birth, but short limbs with
enlarged joints and stiff interphalangeal joints were noted. The
radiologic features included vertebral coronal clefts, square iliac
wings and a thick ischium, large metaphyses of the long bones, and
enlarged epiphyses of the elbows and knees. At age 7 years, she was of
nearly normal height, but disproportionate, and her palate was extremely
narrow, with a double row of teeth. Eye examination revealed slight
myopia.

.0008
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE III
COL11A2, ARG893TER

In affected members of a 3-generation family with type III Stickler
syndrome (184840), Vuoristo et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous
C-to-T transition in exon 57 of the COL11A2 gene, resulting in an
arg893-to-ter (R893X) substitution. The mutation induced skipping of
exon 57 in 1 allele, resulting in an in-frame deletion of 18 amino
acids. Sensorineural hearing loss was present in all 3 generations. The
propositus was a 4-year-old boy who had Robin sequence at birth. Both
the propositus and his father had a flat malar area and nasal bridge,
and the nose was upturned. The father had symptoms and radiologic
findings of osteoarthritis from the age of 29 years. At age 73 years,
the affected grandmother showed extensive osteoarthritic changes in the
spine. Her father had undergone hip replacement in midadulthood.

.0009
WEISSENBACHER-ZWEYMULLER SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL11A2, ARG845TER

In 5 individuals from a consanguineous Israeli Bedouin family with
autosomal recessive Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome (277610), Harel et
al. (2005) identified homozygosity for a 3991C-T transition in exon 56
of the COL11A2 gene, resulting in an arg845-to-ter (R845X) substitution.
The R845X mutation was initially reported by Melkoniemi et al. (2000) in
compound heterozygous state in the offspring of nonconsanguineous
parents of northern European descent. The major differentiation between
WZS and otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED; 215150) had been
proposed to be the 'catch-up growth' associated with the former, with a
definite diagnosis established also after follow-up. Given that
homozygous COL11A2 mutations causing OSMED have been identified
throughout the COL11A2 gene (Melkoniemi et al., 2000), it seems
improbable that one could define a specific region in the gene that,
when mutated, might cause WZS rather than OSMED. The R845X premature
translation termination mutation is in accordance with the mutations of
COL11A2 that are associated with OSMED, which are almost exclusively
frameshift or nonsense mutations that lead to the production of
truncated alpha-2 (XI) chains, unlikely to be incorporated into type XI
collagen molecules. Alternatively, these mutations may trigger
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, and thus would be expected to be
functional nulls. Harel et al. (2005) concluded that autosomal recessive
WZS and OSMED are a single entity.

.0010
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 53
COL11A2, PRO621THR

In 5 affected members of 2 sibships of a consanguineous Iranian family
with nonsyndromic hearing loss (DFNB53; 609706), Chen et al. (2005)
identified homozygosity for an 1861C-A transversion in exon 21 of the
COL11A2 gene, resulting in a pro621-to-thr (P621T) substitution near the
N terminus of the triple helical region. The 4 parents and 1 sib were
heterozygous for the mutation.

.0011
OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
COL11A2, 1-BP DEL, 3962G

In an Egyptian brother and sister with OSMED (215150), Temtamy et al.
(2006) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion (3962delG) in exon 55
of the COL11A2 gene, resulting in a termination codon in exon 56. The
first-cousin parents were heterozygous for the deletion; a younger
brother was unaffected.

.0012
FIBROCHONDROGENESIS 2
COL11A2, IVS18, 1-BP INS, +3

In a deceased infant with fibrochondrogenesis-2 (FBCG2; 614524), born of
consanguineous parents, Tompson et al. (2012) identified homozygosity
for a 1-bp insertion in intron 18 (+3insG) of the COL11A2 gene,
predicted to result in aberrant mRNA processing. The unaffected parents
were heterozygous for the mutation, as was an unaffected sib. An exon
trapping splicing assay in COS-7 cells demonstrated skipping of exon 18
in RNA from the mutant construct but not from the control.

.0013
FIBROCHONDROGENESIS 2
COL11A2, 9-BP DEL, NT2899

In a deceased infant with fibrochondrogenesis-2 (FBCG2; 614524), born of
healthy nonconsanguineous parents, Tompson et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for a de novo 9-bp deletion (2899_2907del9), predicted to
delete 3 amino acids within the triple helical domain. The mutation was
not present in the unaffected parents.

REFERENCE 1. Brunner, H. G.; van Beersum, S. E. C.; Warman, M. L.; Olsen, B.
R.; Ropers, H.-H.; Mariman, E. C. M.: A Stickler syndrome gene is
linked to chromosome 6 near the COL11A2 gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3:
1561-1564, 1994.

2. Chen, W.; Kahrizi, K.; Meyer, N. C.; Riazalhosseini, Y.; Van Camp,
G.; Najmabadi, H.; Smith, R. J. H.: Mutation of COL11A2 causes autosomal
recessive non-syndromic hearing loss at the DFNB53 locus. J. Med.
Genet. 42: e61, 2005. Note: Electronic Article.

3. Giedion, A.; Brandner, M.; Lecannellier, J.; Muhar, U.; Prader,
A.; Sulzer, J.; Zweymuller, E.: Oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal dysplasia
(OSMED). Helv. Pediat. Acta 37: 361-380, 1982.

4. Hanson, I. M.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Gorman, P. A.; Solomon, E.; Trowsdale,
J.: The pro-alpha2(XI) collagen gene, COL11A2, maps to the centromeric
border of the major histocompatibility complex. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 51: 1010-1011, 1989.

5. Hanson, I. M.; Gorman, P.; Lui, V. C. H.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Solomon,
E.; Trowsdale, J.: The human alpha-2(XI) collagen gene (COL11A2)
maps to the centromeric border of the major histocompatibility complex
on chromosome 6. Genomics 5: 925-931, 1989.

6. Hanson, I. M.; Poustka, A.; Trowsdale, J.: New genes in the class
II region of the human major histocompatibility complex. Genomics 10:
417-424, 1991.

7. Harel, T.; Rabinowitz, R.; Hendler, N.; Galil, A.; Flusser, H.;
Chemke, J.; Gradstein, L.; Lifshitz, T.; Ofir, R.; Elbedour, K.; Birk,
O. S.: COL11A2 mutation associated with autosomal recessive Weissenbacher-Zweymuller
syndrome: molecular and clinical overlap with otospondylomegaepiphyseal
dysplasia (OSMED). Am. J. Med. Genet. 132A: 33-35, 2005.

8. Horikoshi, T.; Maeda, K.; Kawaguchi, Y.; Chiba, K.; Mori, K.; Koshizuka,
Y.; Hirabayashi, S.; Sugimori, K.; Matsumoto, M.; Kawaguchi, H.; Takahashi,
M.; Inoue, H.; Kimura, T.; Matsusue, Y.; Inoue, I.; Baba, H.; Nakamura,
K.; Ikegawa, S.: A large-scale genetic association study of ossification
of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. Hum. Genet. 119:
611-616, 2006.

9. Kimura, T.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Chan, S. D. H.; Lui, V. C. H.; Mattei,
M.-G.; van der Rest, M.; Ono, K.; Solomon, E.; Ninomiya, Y.; Olsen,
B. R.: The human alpha-2(XI) collagen (COL11A2) chain: molecular
cloning of cDNA and genomic DNA reveals characteristics of a fibrillar
collagen with differences in genomic organization. J. Biol. Chem. 264:
13910-13916, 1989.

10. Law, M. L.; Chan, S. D. H.; Berger, R.; Jones, C.; Kao, F. T.;
Solomon, E.; Cheah, K. S. E.: The gene for the alpha-2 chain of the
human fibrillar collagen type XI (COL11A2) assigned to the short arm
of chromosome 6. Ann. Hum. Genet. 54: 23-29, 1990.

11. Law, M. L.; Chan, S. D. H.; Berger, R.; Jones, C. A.; Kao, F.
T.; Solomon, E.; Cheah, K. S. E.: The gene for the alpha2 chain of
the human fibrillar collagen, type XI (COL11A2) is on the short arm
of chromosome 6. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51: 1029-1030,
1989.

12. Lui, V. C. H.; Ng, L. J.; Sat, E. W. Y.; Cheah, K. S. E.: The
human alpha-2(XI) collagen gene (COL11A2): completion of coding information,
identification of the promoter sequence, and precise localization
within the major histocompatibility complex reveal overlap with the
KE5 gene. Genomics 32: 401-412, 1996.

13. Maeda, S.; Koga, H.; Matsunaga, S.; Numasawa, T.; Ikari, K.; Furushima,
K.; Harata, S.; Takeda, J.; Sakou, T.; Komiya, S.; Inoue, I.: Gender-specific
haplotype association of collagen alpha-2 (XI) gene in ossification
of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. J. Hum. Genet. 46:
1-4, 2001.

14. Mayne, R.; Brewton, R. G.; Mayne, P. M.; Baker, J. R.: Isolation
and characterization of the chains of type V/type XI collagen present
in bovine vitreous. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 9381-9386, 1993.

15. McGuirt, W. T.; Prasad, S. D.; Griffith, A. J.; Kunst, H. P. M.;
Green, G. E.; Shpargel, K. B.; Runge, C.; Huybrechts, C.; Mueller,
R. F.; Lynch, E.; King, M.-C.; Brunner, H. G.; Cremers, C. W. R. J.;
Takanosu, M.; Li, S.-W.; Arita, M.; Mayne, R.; Prockop, D. J.; Van
Camp, G.; Smith, R. J. H.: Mutations in COL11A2 cause non-syndromic
hearing loss (DFNA13). Nature Genet. 23: 413-419, 1999.

16. Melkoniemi, M.; Brunner, H. G.; Manouvrier, S.; Hennekam, R.;
Superti-Furga, A.; Kaariainen, H.; Pauli, R. M.; van Essen, T.; Warman,
M. L.; Bonaventure, J.; Miny, P.; Ala-Kokko, L.: Autosomal recessive
disorder otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia is associated with loss-of-function
mutations in the COL11A2 gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66: 368-377, 2000.

17. Pihlajamaa, T.; Prockop, D. J.; Faber, J.; Winterpacht, A.; Zabel,
B.; Giedion, A.; Wiesbauer, P.; Spranger, J.; Ala-Kokko, L.: Heterozygous
glycine substitution in the COL11A2 gene in the original patient with
the Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome demonstrates its identity with
heterozygous OSMED (nonocular Stickler syndrome). Am. J. Med. Genet. 80:
115-120, 1998.

18. Sirko-Osadsa, D. A.; Murray, M. A.; Scott, J. A.; Lavery, M. A.;
Warman, M. L.; Robin, N. H.: Stickler syndrome without eye involvement
is caused by mutations in COL11A2, the gene encoding the alpha-2(XI)
chain of type XI collagen. J. Pediat. 132: 368-371, 1998.

19. Stubbs, L.; Lui, V. C. H.; Ng, L. J.; Cheah, K. S. E.: The alpha-2(XI)
collagen gene lies within 8 kb of Pb in the proximal portion of the
murine major histocompatibility complex. Mammalian Genome 4: 95-103,
1993.

20. Temtamy, S. A.; Mannikko, M.; Abdel-Salam, G. M. H.; Hassan, N.
A.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Afifi, H. H.: Oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal dysplasia
(OSMED): clinical and radiological findings in sibs homozygous for
premature stop codon mutation in the COL11A2 gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A:
1189-1195, 2006.

21. Tompson, S. W.; Faqeih, E. A.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Hecht, J. T.; Miki,
R.; Funari, T.; Funari, V. A.; Nevarez, L.; Krakow, D.; Cohn, D. H.
: Dominant and recessive forms of fibrochondrogenesis resulting from
mutations at a second locus, COL11A2. Am. J. Med. Genet. 158A: 309-314,
2012.

22. van Steensel, M. A. M.; Buma, P.; de Waal Malefijt, M. C.; van
den Hoogen, F. H. J.; Brunner, H. G.: Oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal
dysplasia (OSMED): clinical description of three patients homozygous
for a missense mutation in the COL11A2 gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 70:
315-323, 1997.

23. Vikkula, M.; Mariman, E. C. M.; Lui, V. C. H.; Zhidkova, N. I.;
Tiller, G. E.; Goldring, M. B.; van Beersum, S. E. C.; de Waal Malefijt,
M. C.; van den Hoogen, F. H. J.; Ropers, H.-H.; Mayne, R.; Cheah,
K. S. E.; Olsen, B. R.; Warman, M. L.; Brunner, H. G.: Autosomal
dominant and recessive osteochondrodysplasias associated with the
COL11A2 locus. Cell 80: 431-437, 1995.

24. Vuoristo, M. M.; Pappas, J. G.; Jansen, V.; Ala-Kokko, L.: A
stop codon mutation in COL11A2 induces exon skipping and leads to
non-ocular Stickler syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 130A: 160-164,
2004.

25. Vuoristo, M. M.; Pihlajamaa, T.; Vandenberg, P.; Prockop, D. J.;
Ala-Kokko, L.: The human COL11A2 gene structure indicates that the
gene has not evolved with the genes for the major fibrillar collagens. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 22873-22881, 1995.

26. Weissenbacher, G.; Zweymuller, E.: Gleichzeitiges Vorkommen eines
Syndroms von Pierre Robin und einer fetalen Chondrodysplasie. Mschr.
Kinderheilk. 112: 315-317, 1964.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/8/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/11/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/28/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/10/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/17/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/23/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/29/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/31/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/30/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/15/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/3/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/1/1998
Alan F. Scott - updated: 4/12/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/29/1987

EDITED carol: 03/09/2012
terry: 3/8/2012
carol: 8/4/2011
terry: 12/2/2008
wwang: 12/1/2006
wwang: 10/12/2006
terry: 10/11/2006
wwang: 9/5/2006
ckniffin: 8/28/2006
wwang: 11/10/2005
wwang: 8/24/2005
terry: 8/17/2005
tkritzer: 11/30/2004
terry: 11/23/2004
mcapotos: 2/6/2001
terry: 1/29/2001
carol: 12/21/2000
carol: 6/16/2000
mgross: 4/11/2000
terry: 3/31/2000
alopez: 11/30/1999
terry: 11/30/1999
carol: 2/16/1999
terry: 2/15/1999
carol: 12/10/1998
terry: 12/7/1998
terry: 12/3/1998
terry: 6/1/1998
carol: 5/9/1998
terry: 5/1/1998
mark: 10/18/1996
mark: 4/12/1996
terry: 4/11/1996
mark: 4/10/1996
joanna: 4/4/1996
mark: 2/19/1996
terry: 2/16/1996
carol: 2/24/1995
terry: 11/16/1994
carol: 2/25/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 6/11/1991
carol: 5/22/1991

608086	TITLE *608086 GTPase, IMAP FAMILY, MEMBER 5; GIMAP5
;;IMMUNITY-ASSOCIATED NUCLEOTIDE 4-LIKE 1; IAN4L1;;
IAN4-LIKE 1;;
IMMUNITY-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 3; IMAP3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Daheron et al. (2001) cloned mouse Ian4 from a myeloid precursor cell
line. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.1-kb transcript in myeloid
cells. Cell fractionation and immunocytochemical analysis revealed
mitochondrial localization. A truncation mutant lacking the C-terminal
20 amino acids localized diffusely throughout the cytoplasm.

By searching a sequence database using IMAP1 (608084) as probe, Stamm et
al. (2002) identified IAN4L1, which they called IMAP3. The deduced
307-amino acid protein contains 5 motifs conserved in GTP-binding
proteins and a putative C-terminal transmembrane region. IAN4L1 shares
46% identity with IMAP1. Phylogenetic analysis showed that IAN4L1 is
homologous to mouse Ian4.

By Western blot and confocal microscopy analyses, Keita et al. (2007)
found that rat Gimap5 was expressed as a 35-kD protein in T lymphocytes,
but not other mononuclear cells, in a sedimentable subcellular
compartment distinct from mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum. Gimap5
did not colocalize with Bcl2 (151430).

GENE STRUCTURE

Stamm et al. (2002) determined that the IAN4L1 gene contains 3 exons.
Exon 1 is untranslated, and exon 3 contains more than 94% of the coding
sequence.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Stamm et al. (2002) mapped the IAN4L1 gene
to a 100-kb IMAP gene cluster on chromosome 7q32-q36. Within this
cluster, IMAP1 is located on the negative strand, while IMAP2 (608085),
IMAP3, and IMAP4 (608087) are on the opposite positive strand.

By interspecific backcross mapping, Daheron et al. (2001) mapped the
mouse Ian4 gene to the central region of chromosome 6.

ANIMAL MODEL

Biobreeding diabetes-prone (BBDP) rats homozygous for a frameshift
mutation in the Gimap5 gene, termed the lyp mutation, exhibit
spontaneous apoptosis of T lymphocytes, resulting in marked lymphopenia
and development of autoimmune type I diabetes (see 222100). Using flow
cytometry, Keita et al. (2007) found that T cells from lyp/lyp rats
showed loss of mitochondrial membrane potential. They proposed that
GIMAP5 regulates T-lymphocyte survival by mechanisms operating upstream
of mitochondria.

Barnes et al. (2010) identified a chemically induced recessive mutation,
which they called sphinx, in the mouse Gimap5 gene. Homozygous sphinx
mice, like Gimap5 -/- mice, were lymphopenic, showed granulocyte
accumulation, exhibited liver abnormalities, and died by age 14 weeks.
Further analysis of sphinx mice suggested that Gimap5 has cell-intrinsic
roles in lymphocyte survival, quiescence, and antigen receptor-induced
proliferation. Early morbidity of sphinx mice appeared to be due to
antibiotic-suppressible, microflora-dependent intestinal inflammation
and wasting disease. Barnes et al. (2010) proposed that GIMAP5 is a key
regulator of hematopoietic integrity and lymphocyte homeostasis.

REFERENCE 1. Barnes, M. J.; Aksoylar, H.; Krebs, P.; Bourdeau, T.; Arnold, C.
N.; Xia, Y.; Khovananth, K.; Engel, I.; Sovath, S.; Lampe, K.; Laws,
E.; Saunders, A.; Butcher, G. W.; Kronenberg, M.; Steinbrecher, K.;
Hildeman, D.; Grimes, H. L.; Beutler, B.; Hoebe, K.: Loss of T cell
and B cell quiescence precedes the onset of microbial flora-dependent
wasting disease and intestinal inflammation in Gimap5-deficient mice. J.
Immun. 184: 3743-3754, 2010.

2. Daheron, L.; Zenz, T.; Siracusa, L. D.; Brenner, C.; Calabretta,
B.: Molecular cloning of Ian4: a BCR/ABL-induced gene that encodes
an outer membrane mitochondrial protein with GTP-binding activity. Nucleic
Acids Res. 29: 1308-1316, 2001.

3. Keita, M.; Leblanc, C.; Andrews, D.; Ramanathan, S.: GIMAP5 regulates
mitochondrial integrity from a distinct subcellular compartment. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 361: 481-486, 2007.

4. Stamm, O.; Krucken, J.; Schmitt-Wrede, H.-P.; Benten, W. P. M.;
Wunderlich, F.: Human ortholog to mouse imap38 encoding an ER-localizable
G-protein belongs to a gene family clustered on chromosome 7q32-q36. Gene 282:
159-167, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/3/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/9/2003

EDITED mgross: 11/04/2010
mgross: 11/4/2010
terry: 11/3/2010
mgross: 9/9/2003

609516	TITLE *609516 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 382; ZNF382
;;KRAB/ZINC FINGER SUPPRESSOR PROTEIN 1, RAT, HOMOLOG OF; KS1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the C2H2 zinc finger transcription factor family, such as
ZNF382, play key roles in the regulation of cell proliferation,
differentiation, and apoptosis in response to a variety of stimuli
(Gebelein et al., 1998).

CLONING

Gebelein et al. (1998) cloned rat Znf382, which they called Ks1.
Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of Ks1, with
highest levels in lung, kidney, and testis. Immunofluorescence
localization detected epitope-tagged Ks1 in the nucleus following
transfection of a human pancreatic cell line.

By screening a fetal heart cDNA library using PCR primers designed to
amplify KRAB domain-encoding sequences, followed by EST database
analysis and RACE of fetal heart RNA, Luo et al. (2002) cloned ZNF382.
The deduced 548-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of
about 64 kD. ZNF382 contains N-terminal KRAB A and KRAB B domains,
followed by a vestigial zinc finger, a nuclear localization signal, and
9 tandemly repeated Kruppel-type C2H2-zinc finger domains at its C
terminus. ZNF382 shares 91% and 83% amino acid identity with rat Ks1 in
the KRAB and zinc finger domains, respectively. Northern blot analysis
detected a 2.9-kb transcript abundantly expressed in heart. Weaker
expression was detected in skeletal muscle, but no expression was
detected in 6 other tissues examined. Expression of ZNF382 was more
widespread in human fetal tissues. Whole 34- and 40-day embryos showed
high ZNF382 expression. At later developmental stages, ZNF382 was
detected predominantly in cerebellum, kidney, and cerebrum, and to a
lesser extent in lung, heart, skeletal muscle, tongue, and adrenal
gland.

GENE FUNCTION

By biochemical analysis, Gebelein et al. (1998) determined that rat Ks1
contains 2 transcriptional repressor domains, R1 and R2. R1 corresponds
to the KRAB A motif, and R2 is located immediately after the KRAB B
motif. Expression of rat Ks1 in a mouse fibroblast line suppressed
neoplastic transformation mediated by Hras (190020) and other potent
oncogenes. Deletion analysis indicated that R2 was required to suppress
transformation.

Using a random oligonucleotide-binding assay, Gebelein and Urrutia
(2001) identified a 27-bp rat Ks1-binding element (KBE). Deletion and
site-directed mutagenesis revealed that the 9 C-terminal zinc fingers
and the KRAB domain of Ks1 were required for transcriptional repression
through the KBE site. The KRAB domain of Ks1 interacted with the KAP1
(TRIM28; 601742) corepressor, and mutations that abolished this
interaction alleviated Ks1-mediated transcriptional repression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Luo et al. (2002) determined that the ZNF382 gene contains 5 exons and
spans about 23 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Luo et al. (2002) mapped the ZNF382 gene
to chromosome 19q13.13.

REFERENCE 1. Gebelein, B.; Fernandez-Zapico, M.; Imoto, M.; Urrutia, R.: KRAB-independent
suppression of neoplastic cell growth by the novel zinc finger transcription
factor KS1. J. Clin. Invest. 102: 1911-1919, 1998.

2. Gebelein, B.; Urrutia, R.: Sequence-specific transcriptional repression
by KS1, a multiple-zinc-finger-Kruppel-associated box protein. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 21: 928-939, 2001.

3. Luo, K.; Yuan, W.; Zhu, C.; Li, Y.; Wang, Y.; Zeng, W.; Jiao, W.;
Liu, M.; Wu, X.: Expression of a novel Krupple-like zinc-finger gene,
ZNF382, in human heart. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 299: 606-612,
2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/4/2005

EDITED mgross: 08/04/2005

611056	TITLE *611056 SELENOCYSTEINE LYASE; SCLY
;;SCL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Selenocysteine lyase (SCLY; EC 4.4.1.16) catalyzes the pyridoxal 5-prime
phosphate-dependent conversion of L-selenocysteine to L-alanine and
elemental selenium (Mihara et al., 2000).

CLONING

By database analysis using porcine Scly as probe, followed by screening
a mouse liver cDNA library and human EST libraries, Mihara et al. (2000)
cloned a full-length mouse Scly cDNA and identified a partial human SCLY
cDNA sequence. The deduced mouse protein has 432 amino acids. RT-PCR
detected Scly expression in mouse brain, heart, lung, stomach, liver,
kidney, spleen, and testis. Western blot analysis detected expression in
all mouse tissues examined, with the highest expression in liver,
kidney, and testis. Mouse Scly localized to the cytosolic fraction in
mouse liver and formed homodimers.

GENE FUNCTION

Mihara et al. (2000) showed that mouse Scly catalyzed the conversion of
L-selenocysteine to L-alanine. Scly activity required pyridoxal 5-prime
phosphate, was specific to L-selenocysteine, and showed maximum
reactivity at pH 9.0.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the human
SCLY gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP SHGC-81267).

REFERENCE 1. Mihara, H.; Kurihara, T.; Watanabe, T.; Yoshimura, T.; Esaki, N.
: cDNA cloning, purification, and characterization of mouse liver
selenocysteine lyase: candidate for selenium delivery protein in selenoprotein
synthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 6195-6200, 2000.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 5/23/2007

EDITED wwang: 05/23/2007
wwang: 5/23/2007

608537	TITLE *608537 VHL GENE; VHL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The evolutionarily conserved VHL gene encodes 2 protein products, a
30-kD full-length form (p30) and a 19-kD form (p19). The protein
products of the VHL gene play a role in the oxygen-sensing pathway, in
microtubule stability and orientation, tumor suppression, cilia
formation, regulation of senescence, cytokine signaling, collagen IV
(see 120130) regulation, and assembly of a normal extracellular
fibronectin matrix (summary by Nordstrom-O'Brien et al., 2010).

CLONING

By positional cloning, Latif et al. (1993) identified the VHL tumor
suppressor gene. The gene encodes a 213-amino acid protein with a
predicted acidic repeat domain found in the procyclic surface membrane
glycoprotein of Trypanosoma brucei. The authors identified 2 widely
expressed mRNA transcripts of approximately 6 and 6.5 kb.

Iliopoulos et al. (1995) demonstrated that the product of the VHL gene
is an approximately 30-kD protein.

By screening a rat liver cDNA library, Duan et al. (1995) isolated the
rat VHL gene, which is predicted to encode a 185-amino acid protein. The
rat protein is 88% identical to the aligned 213-amino acid human VHL
gene product. The human and rat proteins had molecular masses of 28 and
21 kD, respectively.

Richards et al. (1996) used in situ hybridization to investigate the
principal sites of VHL expression during embryogenesis. They also
analyzed a variety of fetal tissues for levels of the 2 VHL isoforms,
isoform I, which contains all 3 exons, and isoform II, which contains
only exons 1 and 3. Although VHL expression was found to be ubiquitous,
particularly high levels of expression were detected in the urogenital
system, brain, spinal cord, sensory ganglia, eyes, and bronchial
epithelium. Richards et al. (1996) noted that this expression pattern
correlated to some extent with the pattern of organ involvement in VHL
syndrome but that there were significant differences. Both isoforms of
VHL were detected in all tissues, and the ratio of isoforms was similar
between tissues.

Schoenfeld et al. (1998) identified a second native VHL gene product.
They showed that this 18-kD protein is initiated from the second
translation start site at codon 54, which contains a more conserved
Kozak consensus sequence and thus may serve as a second, internal,
translation initiation site. The significance of a second translation
start site is underscored by the lack of mutations found between the
first and second methionine codons of the VHL gene in both sporadic and
VHL-associated renal carcinomas. This observation suggested that
mutation in this region may not lead to VHL inactivation if translation
could be initiated at the second methionine codon, producing a
functional VHL protein. Furthermore, both the rat and mouse contain only
19 of the 53 amino acids present in this region in the human VHL ORF.
Schoenfeld et al. (1998) concluded that the 18-kD protein contains the
biologic activity of the VHL gene.

Iliopoulos et al. (1998) also demonstrated that in addition to the
213-amino acid VHL protein with an apparent molecular mass of 30 kD
(VHL30), a second VHL protein (VHL19) resulted from internal translation
from the second methionine within the VHL ORF. VHL30 resides primarily
in the cytosol, with lower amounts found in the nucleus or associated
with cell membranes. In contrast, VHL19 is equally distributed between
the nucleus and cytosol and is not found in association with membranes.
VHL19, like VHL30, can bind to elongin B (600787), elongin C (600788),
and Hs-Cul2 in coimmunoprecipitation assays and can inhibit the
production of hypoxia-inducing proteins such as VEGF (192240) and GLUT1
(138140) when reintroduced into renal carcinoma cells that lack a
wildtype VHL allele. Thus, cells contain 2 biologically active VHL gene
products.

GENE STRUCTURE

Latif et al. (1993) determined that the VHL gene contains at least 3
exons.

Zatyka et al. (2002) analyzed the promoter region of the VHL gene and
found 4 regions of conservation between human, primate, and rodent
sequences. In silico analysis identified binding sites for numerous
transcription factors within the conserved regions, and deletion
analysis of the promoter in a reporter assay in 293 and HeLa cells
identified 1 negative and 2 positive regulatory elements. The promoter
contains a functional SP1 (189906) site and overlapping SP1/AP2 (107580)
sites.

GENE FUNCTION

- Role in Tumor Suppression

Maher et al. (1990) compared age incidence curves for sporadic
cerebellar hemangioblastoma and sporadic renal cell carcinoma to those
for familial forms of these tumors that occur as part of von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300). The curves for tumors in VHL syndrome
were compatible with a single mutation model, whereas the age incidence
curves for sporadic tumors suggested a 2-stage mutation process. On the
whole, the findings suggested that the VHL gene functions as a recessive
tumor suppressor gene.

Crossey et al. (1994) presented convincing evidence that the VHL
syndrome gene functions as a recessive tumor suppressor gene and that
inactivation of both alleles of the VHL gene is a critical event in the
pathogenesis of VHL neoplasms. Studies of loss of heterozygosity (LOH)
showed that in 7 tumors from 7 familial cases in which the parental
origin of the 3p26-p25 allele loss could be determined, the allele had
been lost from the chromosome inherited from the unaffected parent. In 4
VHL tumors, LOH on other chromosomes (5q21, 13q, 17q) was found,
indicating that homozygous VHL gene mutations may be required but not
sufficient for tumorigenesis in von Hippel-Lindau syndrome.

When expressed in COS-7 cells, Duan et al. (1995) found that both the
human and the rat VHL proteins showed predominant nuclear, nuclear and
cytosolic, or predominant cytosolic VHL staining by immunofluorescence.
A complicated pattern of cellular proteins was seen that could be
specifically coimmunoprecipitated with the introduced VHL protein. A
complex containing VHL and proteins with apparent molecular masses of 16
and 9 kD was the most consistently observed. Certain naturally occurring
VHL missense mutations demonstrated either complete or partial loss of
the p16-p9 complex. Duan et al. (1995) concluded that the VHL tumor
suppressor gene product is a nuclear protein, perhaps capable of
specifically translocating between the nucleus and the cytosol. They
suggested that VHL may execute its function via formation of specific
multiprotein complexes.

Vogelstein (1995) referred to the VHL gene as a gatekeeper gene for
cancers such as those of the kidney. Rubenstein and Yaari (1994)
suggested that the VHL gene may serve that role in relation to
astrocytoma. They presented the pedigree of a Puerto Rican family in
which at least 9 members had von Hippel-Lindau syndrome and 2 of these
had astrocytoma.

To elucidate the biochemical mechanisms underlying tumor suppression by
the VHL protein, Duan et al. (1995) and Kibel et al. (1995) searched for
cellular proteins that bind to wildtype VHL protein but not to
tumor-derived VHL protein mutants. They found that 2 transcriptional
elongation factors, elongin B (600787) and elongin C (600788), bind in
vitro and in vivo to a short, colinear region of the VHL protein that is
frequently mutated in human tumors. Kibel et al. (1995) showed that a
peptide replica of this region inhibited binding of VHL protein to
elongin B and elongin C, whereas a point-mutant derivative,
corresponding to a naturally occurring VHL missense mutation, had no
effect. Duan et al. (1995) showed that recombinant VHL competes with
elongin A (600786) for elongin B and C binding in vitro. The results
were interpreted as indicating that the normal tumor suppression
function of VHL protein involves the inhibition of transcription
elongation by its binding to elongin B and elongin C.

In a review article, Tyers and Willems (1999) stated that the VHL
protein is part of a complex that includes elongin B, elongin C, and
cullin-2 (CUL2; 603135), proteins that are associated with
transcriptional elongation and ubiquitination. Components of the VCB
(VHL/elongin C/elongin B) complex share sequence similarities with the
E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes SCF (SKP1, (601434); CUL1, (603134); F-box
protein) and APC (anaphase promoting complex; see 603462). Thus, elongin
B is ubiquitin-like, and elongin C and CUL2 are similar to the SKP1 and
CUL1 components of SCF, respectively. Substrate recognition by E3
enzymes such as SCF and APC is crucial because protein degradation must
be highly selective. Both SCF and APC interact with a set of adaptor
proteins that recruit different binding partners through specific
protein-protein interaction domains. SOCS-box-containing proteins (see
603597) may act as adaptors for the VCB complex.

Feldman et al. (1999) demonstrated that the folding and assembly of VHL
into a complex with its partner proteins, elongin B and elongin C, is
directly mediated by the chaperonin TRiC, also called CCT (see 600114).
Association of VHL with TRiC is required for formation of the
VHL-elongin B-elongin C complex. A 55-amino acid domain of VHL (amino
acids 100 to 155) is both necessary and sufficient for binding to TRiC.
Mutation or deletion of this domain is associated with VHL syndrome, and
2 mutations that disrupt the normal interaction with TRiC and impair VHL
folding were identified. These results defined a novel role for TRiC in
mediating oligomerization and suggested that inactivating mutations can
impair polypeptide function by interfering with chaperone-mediated
folding.

Lee et al. (1996) demonstrated that there is a tightly regulated,
cell-density-dependent transport of the VHL protein into and/or out of
the nucleus. In densely grown cells, it is predominantly in the
cytoplasm, whereas in sparse cultures, most of the protein can be
detected in the nucleus. They identified a putative nuclear localization
signal in the first 60 and first 28 amino acids of the human and rat VHL
protein, respectively. Sequences in the C-terminal region of VHL protein
may also be required for localization to the cytosol. The findings
indicated a novel cell-density-dependent pathway responsible for the
regulation of VHL cellular localization.

Iliopoulos et al. (1995) showed that the renal cell carcinoma cell line
786-O, which is known to harbor a VHL mutation, fails to produce a
wildtype VHL protein. Reintroduction of wildtype, but not mutant, VHL
into these cells had no demonstrable effect on their growth in vitro but
inhibited their ability to form tumors in nude mice. Like many cancer
cells, the 786-0 RCC fails to exit the cell cycle upon serum withdrawal.
Pause et al. (1998) showed that reintroduction of the wildtype VHL gene
restores the ability of VHL-negative RCC cells to exit the cell cycle
and enter G0/quiescence in low serum. The cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p27 (CDKN1B; 600778) accumulates upon serum withdrawal, only
in the presence of VHL, as a result of an increase in protein stability.
Pause et al. (1998) proposed that loss of the wildtype VHL gene results
in a specific cellular defect in serum-dependent growth control, which
may initiate tumor formation. Thus, VHL appears to be the first tumor
suppressor involved in the regulation of cell cycle exit, which is
consistent with its gatekeeper function in the kidney.

To discover genes involved in VHL-mediated carcinogenesis, Ivanov et al.
(1998) used renal cell carcinoma cell lines stably transfected with
wildtype VHL-expressing transgenes. Large-scale RNA differential display
technology applied to these cell lines identified several differentially
expressed genes, including an alpha carbonic anhydrase gene, termed CA12
(603263). The deduced protein sequence was classified as a one-pass
transmembrane carbonic anhydrase possessing an apparently intact
catalytic domain in the extracellular CA module. Reintroduced wildtype
VHL strongly inhibited the overexpression of the CA12 gene in the
parental renal cell carcinoma cell lines. Similar results were obtained
with CA9 (603179) which encodes another transmembrane carbonic anhydrase
with an intact catalytic domain. Although both domains of the VHL
protein contributed to regulation of CA12 expression, the elongin
binding domain alone could effectively regulate CA9 expression. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization, Ivanov et al. (1998) mapped CA12 and
CA9 to chromosome bands 15q22 and 17q21.2, respectively, regions prone
to amplification in some human cancers. Ivanov et al. (1998) stated that
additional experiments were necessary to define the role of CA IX and CA
XII enzymes in the regulation of pH in the extracellular
microenvironment and its potential impact on cancer cell growth.

Roe et al. (2006) found that VHL directly associated with and stabilized
p53 (TP53; 191170) by suppressing MDM2 (164785)-mediated ubiquitination
and nuclear export of p53. Moreover, upon genotoxic stress, VHL invoked
an interaction between p53 and p300 (EP300; 602700) and the acetylation
of p53, which led to an increase in p53 transcriptional activity and
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Roe et al. (2006) concluded that VHL
has a function in upregulating p53.

Yang et al. (2007) noted that VHL-defective renal carcinoma cells
exhibit increased NF-kappa-B (see 164011) activity, which can promote
resistance to chemotherapy or cytokines. They showed that VHL
downregulates NF-kappa-B activity by acting as an adaptor to promote
casein kinase-2 (see 115440)-mediated inhibitory phosphorylation of
CARD9 (607212), an NF-kappa-B agonist.

- Role in Oxygen-Related Gene Expression

The highly vascular tumors associated with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome
overproduce angiogenic peptides such as vascular endothelial growth
factor/vascular permeability factor (VEGF/VPF; 192240). Iliopoulos et
al. (1996) found that renal carcinoma cells lacking wildtype VHL protein
produce mRNAs encoding VEGF/VPF, the glucose transporter GLUT1 (SLC2A1;
138140), and the platelet-derived growth factor B chain (190040) under
both normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Reintroduction of wildtype, but
not mutant, VHL protein into these cells specifically inhibited
production of these mRNAs under normoxic conditions, thus restoring
their previously described hypoxia-inducible profile. Iliopoulos et al.
(1996) concluded that the VHL protein appears to play a critical role in
the transduction of signals generated by changes in ambient oxygen
tension.

VEGF mRNA is upregulated in von Hippel-Lindau syndrome-associated
tumors. Mukhopadhyay et al. (1997) assessed the effect of the VHL gene
product on VEGF expression. Using a VEGF promoter-luciferase construct
for cotransfection with a wildtype VHL vector in embryonic kidney and
renal cell carcinoma cell lines, they showed that wildtype VHL protein
inhibited VEGF promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner up to 5- to
10-fold. Deletion analysis defined a 144-bp region of the VEGF promoter
necessary for VHL repression. This VHL-responsive element is GC rich and
specifically bound the transcription factor Sp1 (189906) in crude
nuclear extracts. They further demonstrated that VHL and Sp1 directly
interact with an inhibitory effect on Sp1, suggesting that loss of Sp1
inhibition may be important in the pathogenesis of von Hippel-Lindau
syndrome and renal cell carcinoma.

Maxwell et al. (1999) studied the involvement of VHL in oxygen-regulated
gene expression using ribonuclease protection analysis of 2
VHL-deficient renal carcinoma cell lines, RCC4 and 786-O. Eleven genes
encoding products involved in glucose transport, glycolysis, high energy
phosphate metabolism, and angiogenesis were examined; 9 were induced by
hypoxia in other mammalian cells and 2 were repressed by hypoxia. None
of these responses were seen in the VHL-defective cell lines. Responses
to hypoxia were restored by stable transfection of a wildtype VHL gene,
with effects ranging from a modest action of hypoxia to substantial
regulation. These results indicated that the previously described
upregulation of hypoxia-inducible mRNAs in VHL-defective cells extend to
a broad range of oxygen-regulated genes and involves a constitutive
'hypoxia pattern' for both positively and negatively regulated genes.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF1; 603348) has a key role in cellular
response to hypoxia, including the regulation of genes involved in
energy metabolism, angiogenesis, and apoptosis. The alpha subunits of
HIF are rapidly degraded by the proteasome under normal conditions but
are stabilized by hypoxia. Cobaltous ions or iron chelators mimic
hypoxia, indicating that the stimuli may interact through effects on a
ferroprotein oxygen sensor. Maxwell et al. (1999) demonstrated a
critical role for the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene product
VHL in HIF1 regulation. In VHL-defective cells, HIF-alpha subunits were
constitutively stabilized and HIF1 was activated. Reexpression of VHL
restored oxygen-dependent instability. VHL and HIF-alpha subunits
coimmunoprecipitated, and VHL was present in the hypoxic HIF1
DNA-binding complex. In cells exposed to iron chelation or cobaltous
ions, HIF1 is dissociated from VHL. These findings indicated that the
interaction between HIF1 and VHL is iron dependent and that it is
necessary for the oxygen-dependent degradation of HIF-alpha subunits.
Maxwell et al. (1999) suggested that constitutive HIF1 activation may
underlie the angiogenic phenotype of VHL-associated tumors.

In the presence of oxygen, HIF is targeted for destruction by an E3
ubiquitin ligase containing the VHL tumor suppressor protein. Ivan et
al. (2001) found that human VHL protein binds to a short HIF-derived
peptide when a conserved proline residue at the core of this peptide is
hydroxylated. Because proline hydroxylation requires molecular oxygen
and iron, this protein modification may play a key role in mammalian
oxygen sensing. Jaakkola et al. (2001) also demonstrated that the
interaction between VHL protein and a specific domain of the HIF1-alpha
subunit is regulated through hydroxylation of a proline residue
(HIF1-alpha P564) by an enzyme which they termed HIF-alpha
prolyl-hydroxylase (HIF-PH). An absolute requirement for dioxygen as a
cosubstrate and iron as a cofactor suggests that HIF-PH functions
directly as a cellular oxygen sensor.

Mahon et al. (2001) showed that the N-terminal 155 residues of VHL
interact with HIF1AN (606615). They found that VHL functions as a
transcriptional corepressor inhibiting HIF1A transactivation by
recruiting HDAC1 (601241), HDAC2 (605164), and HDAC3 (605166). Epstein
et al. (2001) defined a conserved HIF-VHL-prolyl hydroxylase pathway in
C. elegans and identified Egl9 as a dioxygenase that regulates HIF by
prolyl hydroxylation. In mammalian cells, they showed that the
HIF-prolyl hydroxylases are represented by 3 proteins, PHD1 (606424),
PHD2 (606425), and PHD3 (606426), with a conserved
2-histidine-1-carboxylate iron coordination motif at the catalytic site.
Direct modulation of recombinant enzyme activity by graded hypoxia, iron
chelation, and cobaltous ions mirrored the characteristics of HIF
induction in vivo, fulfilling requirements for these enzymes being
oxygen sensors that regulate HIF.

Hoffman et al. (2001) reported that the products of 4 different type 2C
VHL alleles retain the ability to downregulate HIF but are defective for
promotion of fibronectin (135600) matrix assembly. Furthermore, leu188
to val (L188V; 608537.0014), a well-studied type 2C mutation, retained
the ability to suppress renal carcinoma growth in vivo.

Clifford et al. (2001) investigated in detail the effect of 13 naturally
occurring VHL mutations (11 missense), representing each phenotypic
subclass, on HIF-alpha subunit regulation. Mutations associated with the
PHE-only phenotype (type 2C) promoted HIF-alpha ubiquitylation in vitro
and demonstrated wildtype binding patterns with VHL interacting
proteins, suggesting that loss of other VHL functions are necessary for
PHE susceptibility. Mutations causing HAB susceptibility (types 1, 2A,
and 2B) demonstrated variable effects on HIF-alpha subunit and elongin
binding, but all resulted in defective HIF-alpha regulation and loss of
fibronectin binding. All RCC-associated mutations caused complete
HIF-alpha dysregulation and loss of fibronectin binding. These studies
strengthened the notion that HIF deregulation plays a causal role in
hemangioblastoma and renal carcinoma, and raised the possibility that
abnormal fibronectin matrix assembly contributes to pheochromocytoma
pathogenesis in the setting of VHL syndrome.

Hemangioblastomas of the central nervous system and retina in VHL
patients overexpress vascular endothelial growth factor, which
represents a potential target for anti-angiogenic drugs. In 3 VHL
patients with CNS or retinal hemangioblastomas treated by the anti-VEGF
receptor SU5416, Richard et al. (2002) observed, after 3 to 4 months of
treatment, a secondary paradoxical polycythemia. Hematocrit was normal
before the beginning of the trial, and no progression of
hemangioblastomas was observed. Polycythemia had never been reported in
SU5416 trials for advanced malignancies. In the studies of Richard et
al. (2002), the polycythemia may have represented a specific action on
red blood cell precursors occurring only in the absence of a functional
VHL gene.

Staller et al. (2003) demonstrated that the VHL tumor suppressor protein
negatively regulates CXCR4 (162643) expression owing to its capacity to
target HIF1A (603348) for degradation under normoxic conditions. This
process is suppressed under hypoxic conditions, resulting in
HIF-dependent CXCR4 activation. An analysis of clear cell renal
carcinoma that manifests mutations in the VHL gene in most cases
revealed an association of strong CXCR4 expression with poor
tumor-specific survival. Staller et al. (2003) concluded that their
results suggest a mechanism for CXCR4 activation during tumor cell
evolution and imply that VHL inactivation acquired by incipient tumor
cells early in tumorigenesis confers not only a selective survival
advantage but also the tendency to home to selected organs.

Corn et al. (2003) established that the VHL protein binds to Tat-binding
protein-1 (TBP1; 186852). TBP1 associates with the beta-domain of VHL
and complexes with VHL and HIF1A in vivo. Overexpression of TBP1
promotes degradation of HIF1A in a VHL-dependent manner that requires
the ATPase domain of TBP1. Several distinct mutations in exon 2 of the
VHL gene disrupt binding of VHL to TBP1. A VHL protein mutant containing
an exon 2 missense substitution coimmunoprecipitated with HIF1A, but not
TBP1, and did not promote degradation of HIF1A. Thus, the ability of the
VHL protein to degrade HIF1A depends in part on its interaction with
TBP1 and suggests a new mechanism for HIF1A stabilization in some
VHL-deficient tumors.

To identify novel target genes of the VHL protein, Zatyka et al. (2002)
investigated the effect of wildtype VHL protein on the expression of 588
cancer-related genes in 2 VHL-defective renal cell carcinoma cell lines.
Expression array analysis identified 9 genes that demonstrated a greater
than 2-fold decrease in expression in both RCC cell lines after
restoration of wildtype VHL protein. Three of the 9 genes, VEGF, PAI1
(173360), and LRP1 (107770), had previously been reported as targets of
the VHL protein and are hypoxia-inducible. In addition, 6 novel targets
were detected, including cyclin D1 (CCND1; 168461). No evidence was
found that CCND1 expression was influenced by hypoxia, suggesting that
VHL protein downregulates these targets by an HIF-independent mechanism.

Homozygous disruption of the Vhl gene in mice results in embryonic
lethality from lack of placental vasculogenesis (Gnarra et al., 1997).
To investigate Vhl function in the adult, Haase et al. (2001) generated
a conditional Vhl-null allele (2-lox allele) and a null allele (1-lox
allele) by Cre-mediated recombination in embryonic stem cells. They
showed that mice heterozygous for the 1-lox allele developed cavernous
hemangiomas of the liver, a rare manifestation in the human disease.
Histologically, these tumors were associated with hepatocellular
steatosis and focal proliferations of small vessels. To study the
cellular origin of these lesions, Haase et al. (2001) inactivated VHL
tissue specifically in hepatocytes. Deletion of VHL in the liver
resulted in severe steatosis, many blood-filled vascular cavities, and
foci of increased vascularization within the hepatic parenchyma. These
histopathologic changes were similar to those seen in livers from mice
heterozygous for the 1-lox allele. Hypoxia-inducible mRNAs encoding
vascular endothelial growth factor, glucose transporter-1, and
erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) were upregulated. Thus, targeted
inactivation of mouse Vhl replicated clinical features of the human
disease and underscored the importance of the VHL gene product in the
regulation of hypoxia-responsive genes in vivo.

Wang et al. (2007) showed that mice overexpressing Hif1a in osteoblasts
through selective deletion of Vhl expressed high levels of Vegf (192240)
and developed extremely dense, heavily vascularized long bones. In
contrast, mice lacking Hif1a in osteoblasts had long bones that were
significantly thinner and less vascularized than those of controls. Loss
of Vhl in osteoblasts increased endothelial sprouting from the embryonic
metatarsals in vitro but had little effect on osteoblast function in the
absence of blood vessels. Wang et al. (2007) concluded that activation
of the HIF1A pathway in osteoblasts during bone development couples
angiogenesis to osteogenesis.

Endocytosis plays a major role in the deactivation of receptors
localized to the plasma membrane, and early endocytic events require the
small GTPase RAB5 (179512) and its effector rabaptin-5 (RABEP1; 603616).
Wang et al. (2009) found that hypoxia, via the VHL-HIF2A (603349)
signaling pathway, downregulated rabaptin-5 expression, leading to
decelerated endocytosis and prolonged activation of ligand-bound EGFR
(131550). Primary kidney and breast tumors with strong hypoxic
signatures showed significantly lower expression of rabaptin-5 RNA and
protein. Wang et al. (2009) identified a conserved hypoxia-responsive
element (HRE) in the rabaptin-5 promoter that bound in vitro-translated
HIF1A and HIF2A, leading to displacement of RNA polymerase II and
attenuating rabaptin-5 transcription.

Mehta et al. (2009) reported that in C. elegans the loss of VHL1
significantly increased life span and enhanced resistance to
polyglutamine and beta-amyloid toxicity. Deletion of HIF1 (603348) was
epistatic to VHL1, indicating that HIF1 acts downstream of VHL1 to
modulate aging and proteotoxicity. VHL1 and HIF1 control longevity by a
mechanism distinct from both dietary restriction and insulin-like
signaling. Mehta et al. (2009) concluded that their findings define VHL1
and the hypoxic response as an alternative longevity and protein
homeostasis pathway.

Russell et al. (2011) demonstrated that VHL binds to SOCS1 (603597) and
promotes degradation of phosphorylated JAK2 (147796) via
ubiquitin-mediated destruction.

- Role in Protein Assembly

Ohh et al. (1998) showed that fibronectin coimmunoprecipitated with
normal VHL protein but not tumor-derived VHL mutants. Immunofluorescence
and biochemical fractionation experiments showed that fibronectin
colocalized with a fraction of VHL associated with the endoplasmic
reticulum, and cold competition experiments suggested that complexes
between fibronectin and VHL protein exist in intact cells. Assembly of
an extracellular fibronectin matrix by VHL -/- renal carcinoma cells, as
determined by immunofluorescence and ELISA assays, was grossly defective
compared with VHL +/+ renal carcinoma cells. Reintroduction of wildtype,
but not mutant, VHL protein into VHL -/- renal carcinoma cells partially
corrected this defect. Extracellular fibronectin matrix assembly by VHL
-/- mouse embryos and mouse embryo fibroblasts, unlike their VHL +/+
counterparts, was grossly impaired. Ohh et al. (1998) concluded that VHL
protein is important in fibronectin matrix assembly.

Hergovich et al. (2003) found that VHL is a microtubule-associated
protein that can protect microtubules from depolymerization in several
cell lines. Both the microtubule binding and stabilization functions
depended on amino acids 95-123, a hotspot for mutations in VHL syndrome.
They found that the syndrome-associated mutations Y98H (608537.0009) and
Y112H (608537.0012) disrupted the microtubule-stabilizing function of
the protein.

- Role in Ciliary Maintenance

Using immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy, Lolkema et al. (2008)
showed that Vhl localized to cilia extending from basal bodies stained
with gamma-tubulin (TUBG1; 191135) in primary mouse kidney cells. Cilia
were absent in renal cell carcinoma cells derived from a VHL patient,
but reintroduction of VHL into these cells resulted in rapid cilia
assembly. The cilia function of VHL required residues 1 to 53, which
constitute an acidic domain, and residues 95 to 123, which were
previously implicated in microtubule binding and tumor suppression.

- Role in Central Nervous System Development

Kanno et al. (2000) investigated the role of the VHL gene in CNS
development using rodent CNS progenitor cells. They showed that
expression of the VHL protein is correlated with neuronal
differentiation but not with glial differentiation in CNS progenitor
cells, and also that VHL gene transduction induces neuronal
differentiation. Furthermore, a VHL mRNA antisense oligonucleotide
inhibited differentiation of CNS progenitor cells and upregulated their
cell cycle.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

The ubiquitination of HIF by VHL plays a central role in the cellular
response to changes in oxygen availability. VHL protein binds to HIF
only when a conserved proline in HIF is hydroxylated, a modification
that is oxygen-dependent. Min et al. (2002) determined the 1.85-angstrom
structure of a 20-residue HIF1A-VHL protein-elongin B-elongin C complex
that shows that HIF1A binds to VHL protein in an extended beta
strand-like conformation. The hydroxyproline inserts into a gap in the
VHL hydrophobic core, at a site that is a hotspot for tumorigenic
mutations, with its 4-hydroxyl group recognized by buried serine and
histidine residues. Although the beta sheet-like interactions contribute
to the stability of the complex, the hydroxyproline contacts are central
to the strict specificity characteristic of signaling.

Hon et al. (2002) determined the crystal structure of a hydroxylated
HIF1A peptide bound to the VHL protein, elongin C, and elongin B and
performed solution binding assays, which revealed a single, conserved
hydroxyproline-binding pocket in the VHL protein. They found that
optimized hydrogen bonding to the buried hydroxyprolyl group confers
precise discrimination between hydroxylated and unmodified prolyl
residues. Hon et al. (2002) concluded that this mechanism provides a new
focus for development of therapeutic agents to modulate cellular
responses to hypoxia.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Nordstrom-O'Brien et al. (2010) provided a review of the molecular
genetics of the VHL gene, including the mutational spectrum and
associated phenotypes.

- Von Hippel-Lindau Syndrome

Using restriction fragment analysis, Latif et al. (1993) identified
rearrangements of the VHL gene in 28 of 221 kindreds with von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300). Eighteen of these rearrangements were
due to deletion in the candidate gene. Using pulsed field gel
electrophoresis and cosmid mapping, Latif et al. (1993) established a
physical map of the VHL gene region and identified 3 large
nonoverlapping constitutional deletions in 3 unrelated VHL patients; 1
of these was an in-frame 3-nucleotide deletion at nucleotide 434,
predicted to remove ile146 in the gene product (608537.0001).

Using single-strand conformation polymorphism and heteroduplex analysis
to investigate 94 VHL patients without large deletions, Crossey et al.
(1994) identified 40 different mutations in the VHL gene in 55 unrelated
kindreds: 19 missense mutations, 6 nonsense mutations, 12 frameshift
deletions or insertions, 2 in-frame deletions, and 1 splice donor site
mutation. The 2 most frequent mutations were arg238-to-gln (608537.0005)
and arg238-to-trp (608537.0003), which were detected in 5 and 4
unrelated kindreds, respectively.

Olschwang et al. (1998) screened 92 unrelated patients with VHL syndrome
for point mutations and found 61 DNA variants. In addition, a search for
EcoRI rearrangements revealed germline anomalies in 5 patients. The 61
variants could be subdivided into 20 mutations predicted to alter the
open reading frame and 43 DNA sequence variants that on a priori grounds
were of unknown biologic consequence. The 3-prime end of the coding
sequence of the VHL gene, which encodes the elongin (see 600787)-binding
domain, was the site of 5 of 20 truncating mutations (25%) and 18 of 41
DNA variants (44%) of uncertain functional significance. A similar
screening in 18 patients with sporadic hemangioblastoma revealed 2
missense DNA variants.

Wait et al. (2004) performed genetic analysis of 5 CNS hemangioblastomas
excised from 3 related VHL patients with the same germline VHL gene
deletion. All of the tumors showed distinct 'second-hit' point mutations
on the wildtype allele, even those tumors originating in the same
patient. Moreover, the same types of tumors from the same locations also
showed different point mutations. Wait et al. (2004) concluded that the
somatic mutations were random, and that there is a unique mechanism
underlying tumorigenesis in patients with germline deletion mutations.

Using markers specific for chromosome 3, Glasker et al. (2006) mapped
the deletion size of the 'second-hit' in 16 tumor tissue specimens from
a single patient with VHL syndrome who had a germline heterozygous
partial deletion in the VHL gene. The tumors consisted of 3 central
nervous system hemangioblastomas, 7 renal cell carcinomas, 3 cystic
renal structures, 2 pancreatic tumors, and 1 pancreatic cyst. Deletion
size was highly variable, ranging from short deletions around the VHL
gene to complete deletion of chromosome 3. However, there was no
correlation between deletion size and site of the germline mutation,
affected organ, or type or biological behavior of the tumor. Glasker et
al. (2006) concluded that loss of VHL gene function alone is not
immediately causative for neoplastic growth and suggested that further
molecular events may be required for tumor formation.

(For genotype/phenotype correlations in VHL syndrome, see 193300.)

- Cancer

The Knudson model predicts that sporadic cancers should be associated
with mutations in the same locus affected in the corresponding
hereditary cancer. Using SSCP and RT-PCR techniques, Latif et al. (1993)
identified aberrant patterns in the VHL gene in 5 renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) lines. In 4 of them, the pattern was due to small, 1- to
10-nucleotide deletions that created frameshift mutations and,
presumably, truncated proteins. In the fifth RCC line, the change was a
nonsense mutation, resulting from a 761C-A transversion.

Eng et al. (1995) identified mutations in the VHL gene in 4 of 48
sporadic pheochromocytomas (171300). Two mutations were somatic and 2
were germline. In a mother and 2 sons with pheochromocytoma, Crossey et
al. (1995) identified a VHL mutation (R238W; 6085327.0003) mutation.
None of them had evidence of VHL syndrome.

In 30 (11%) of 271 unrelated patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma,
Neumann et al. (2002) identified 22 different germline mutations in the
VHL gene (see, e.g., 608537.0014 and 608537.0026).

Zhuang et al. (1996) analyzed VHL gene alterations in sporadic human
colon carcinomas and adenomas using techniques that allowed for
procurement and analysis of selected subpopulations of cells from
paraffin embedded and frozen human tumor specimens. Allelic loss of the
VHL gene was detected in 7 of 11 (64%) of informative patients with
sporadic colon carcinoma. No allelic loss was shown in colon adenomas
from 8 informative patients. The authors suggested that VHL gene loss
may represent a relatively late event in colonic neoplasia progression.

Oberstrass et al. (1996) found abnormalities of the VHL gene in 10 of 20
capillary hemangioblastomas of the CNS. Seven tumors had a frameshift
mutation due either to deletion of 1 or more basepairs (6 cases) or to
insertion of 1 basepair (1 case). The remaining 3 tumors had either
point mutations with intron splice site sequences (2 cases) or a point
mutation resulting in an amino acid substitution (1 case). Evidence for
germline alterations of the VHL gene was found in 2 patients who showed
identical mutations in both tumors and corresponding leukocyte DNA.
Oberstrass et al. (1996) noted that it is significant that one of the 2
tumors with a germline mutation was in an 18-year-old male, and the
other in a 40-year-old female. The non-germline mutations included
tumors from individuals 70, 62, 60, 55, and 52 years old.

Kenck et al. (1996) investigated 91 different parenchymal tumors of the
kidney for mutation in the VHL gene by SSCP and/or heteroduplex
techniques. Evidence of mutation of the VHL gene was associated
exclusively with nonpapillary renal cell carcinoma.

Fearon (1997) reviewed more than 20 different hereditary cancer
syndromes that had been defined and attributed to specific germline
mutations in various inherited cancer genes. In a useful diagram, he
illustrated the roles of allelic variation ('1 gene - different
syndromes') and genetic heterogeneity ('different genes - 1 syndrome')
in inherited cancer syndromes. VHL mutations were used as an example of
the former: inactivating mutations, such as nonsense mutations or
deletions, predisposed to clear-cell renal carcinoma, retinal angioma,
and cerebellar and spinal hemangioblastoma; missense mutations, e.g., in
codon 167, predisposed to these tumors and pheochromocytoma in addition.

Van der Harst et al. (1998) screened the VHL gene for germline mutations
in 68 patients who were operated on for pheochromocytoma. This was
undertaken to follow up on the work of Neumann et al. (1993), who
reported that, according to clinical criteria, approximately 23% of the
apparently sporadic pheochromocytomas may in fact be related to a
familial disorder; these disorders are, in addition to von Hippel-Lindau
syndrome, neurofibromatosis-1 (NF1; 162200) and multiple endocrine
neoplasia types IIA (MEN2A; 171400) and IIB (MEN2B; 162300). They found
mutations in the VHL gene in 8 patients; 2 patients were an uncle and
nephew who had the same missense mutation, R64P (608537.0015). In 4
other patients, missense mutations, P25L, L63P (608537.0016), G144Q, and
I147T, were identified. Three of these mutations (P25L, L63P, and R64P)
were located closer to the N terminus of the VHL protein than any
previously reported VHL mutation. In 2 other cases, the mutations were
located not in the coding region but in the intronic sequence (but not
within splice sites), adjacent to the exon, so that they were probably
not related to the syndrome. The results suggested that 8.8% of patients
(6 of 68) with apparently sporadic pheochromocytomas may carry germline
mutations in the VHL gene. This is a relatively high proportion,
although not as high as the 23% reported earlier.

Gallou et al. (1999) investigated the nature of somatic VHL mutations in
173 primary sporadic human renal cell carcinomas using PCR and SSCP
analysis. They detected an abnormal SSCP pattern in 73 samples. After
sequencing, they identified microdeletions in 58% of cases,
microinsertions in 17%, nonsense mutations in 8%, and missense mutations
in 17%. VHL mutations were found only in the nonpapillary renal cell
carcinoma subtype, as previously reported. To compare somatic and
germline mutations, they used the VHL database, which included 507
mutations. The study of mutational events revealed a significant
difference between somatic and germline mutations. Mutations leading to
truncated proteins were observed in 78% of somatic mutations but in only
37% of germline mutations (P less than 0.001). The authors postulated
that a specific pattern of VHL mutations is associated with sporadic
RCC. This pattern corresponds to mutations leading to truncated
proteins, with few specific missense mutations.

Bender et al. (2000) studied 36 VHL-related pheochromocytomas for
somatic VHL and RET gene alterations and LOH of markers on chromosome
arms 1p, 3p, and 22q. For comparison, they performed the same analyses
in 17 sporadic pheochromocytomas. They found significantly different LOH
frequencies at 3 loci between sporadic and VHL tumors; the more than 91%
LOH of markers on 3p and the relatively low frequencies of LOH at 1p and
22q (15% and 21%, respectively) in VHL pheochromocytomas argue for the
importance of VHL gene dysregulation and dysfunction in the pathogenesis
of almost all VHL pheochromocytomas. In contrast, the relatively low
frequency of 3p LOH (24%) and the lack of intragenic VHL alterations
compared with the high frequency of 1p LOH (71%) and the moderate
frequency of 22q LOH (53%) in sporadic pheochromocytomas argue for genes
other than VHL, especially on 1p, that are significant for sporadic
tumorigenesis and suggest that the genetic pathways involved in sporadic
versus VHL pheochromocytoma genesis are distinct.

Renal cell carcinomas occur frequently in patients treated with
long-term dialysis, especially in cases of end-stage renal disease
(ESRD)/acquired cystic disease of the kidney (ACDK). In patients
receiving dialysis, Yoshida et al. (2002) examined 14 RCCs (7 clear-cell
and 7 papillary carcinomas) for somatic mutations of the VHL gene as
well as of the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET oncogene (164860) to
address the molecular pathogenesis of ESRD/ACDK-associated RCCs. They
found that 3 tumors had VHL frameshifts; 1 showed additional LOH at the
VHL gene locus. All 3 tumors were clear-cell RCCs occurring in ESRD with
55, 106, and 156 months of dialysis, respectively. No mutations were
found in the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET oncogene, where mutations
had previously been found in cases of papillary RCCs.

Maranchie et al. (2004) observed a paradoxically lower prevalence of RCC
in patients with complete germline deletion of VHL. They retrospectively
evaluated 123 patients from 55 families with large germline VHL
deletions, including 42 intragenic partial deletions and 13 complete VHL
deletions. An age-adjusted comparison demonstrated a higher prevalence
of RCC in patients with partial germline VHL deletions relative to
complete deletions (48.9% vs 22.6%, p = 0.007). This striking phenotypic
dichotomy was not seen for cystic renal lesions or for CNS (p = 0.22),
pancreas (p = 0.72), or pheochromocytoma (p = 0.34). Deletion mapping
demonstrated that development of RCC had an even greater correlation
with retention of HSPC300 (C3ORF10; 611183), located within the 30-kb
region of 3p, immediately telomeric to VHL (52.3% vs 18.9%, p less than
0.001), suggesting the presence of a neighboring gene or genes critical
to the development and maintenance of RCC.

Gallou et al. (2004) studied the renal phenotype in 274 individuals from
126 unrelated VHL families in whom 92 different VHL mutations were
identified. The incidence of renal involvement was increased in families
with mutations leading to protein truncation or large rearrangement, as
compared to families with missense mutations (81% vs 63%, respectively;
p = 0.03). In the group with missense mutations, Gallou et al. (2004)
identified 2 mutation cluster regions (MCRs) associated with a high risk
of harboring renal lesions: MCR-1 (codons 74-90) and MCR-2 (codons
130-136). In addition, the incidence of RCCs was higher in families with
mutations leading to protein truncation than in families with missense
mutations (75% vs 57%, respectively; p = 0.04). Furthermore, missense
mutations within MCR-1, but not MCR-2, conferred genetic susceptibility
to RCC.

- Autosomal Recessive Familial Erythrocytosis 2

Inheritance of germline mutations in both VHL alleles was found by Ang
et al. (2002) and by others (Pastore et al., 2003; Percy et al., 2002)
as the cause of autosomal recessive familial erythrocytosis (ECYT2,
263400; see 608537.0019). The VHL protein plays an important role in
hypoxia sensing. It binds to hydroxylated HIF1-alpha and serves as a
recognition component of an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. In hypoxia or
secondary to a mutated VHL gene, the nondegraded HIF1-alpha forms a
heterodimer with HIF1-beta and leads to increased transcription of
hypoxia-inducible genes, including EPO. Pastore et al. (2003) reported 7
erythrocytosis patients with VHL mutations in both alleles
(608537.0021-608537.0024). Two Danish sibs and an American boy were
homozygous for the R200W mutation (608537.0019). Three unrelated white
Americans were compound heterozygous for R200W and another VHL mutation:
L188V (608537.0014) in 2 and P192A (608537.0023) in the third.
Additionally, a Croatian boy was homozygous for an H191D mutation
(608537.0024). Pastore et al. (2003) stated that they had not observed
VHL syndrome-associated tumors in subjects with erythrocytosis or their
heterozygous relatives. They found that up to half of the consecutive
patients with apparent congenital erythrocytosis and increased serum EPO
(133170) whom they had examined had mutations of both VHL alleles. They
concluded that VHL mutations are the most frequent cause of recessive
congenital erythrocytosis and define a class of disorders due to
augmented hypoxia sensing.

ANIMAL MODEL

Gemmill et al. (2002) isolated the Drosophila homolog of TRC8 (603046)
and studied its function by genetic manipulations and a yeast 2-hybrid
screen. Human and Drosophila TRC8 proteins localize to the endoplasmic
reticulum. Loss of either Drosophila Trc8 or Vhl resulted in an
identical ventral midline defect. Direct interaction between Trc8 and
Vhl in Drosophila was confirmed by GST-pull-down and
coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Gemmill et al. (2002) found that in
Drosophila, overexpression of Trc8 inhibited growth consistent with its
presumed role as a tumor suppressor gene. Human JAB1 (604850)
localization was dependent on VHL mutant status. Thus, the VHL, TRC8,
and JAB1 proteins appear to be linked both physically and functionally,
and all 3 may participate in the development of kidney cancer.

Ding et al. (2006) used the Cre-loxP system to delete the Vhl gene from
podocytes in the glomerular basement membrane of mice. At about 4 weeks
of age, the mice developed rapidly progressive renal disease with
hematuria, proteinuria, and renal failure with crescentic
glomerulonephritis with prominent segmental fibrin deposition and
fibrinoid necrosis. No immune deposits were present; the phenotype was
similar to human 'pauci-immune' rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
(RPGN). Gene expression profiling showed increased expression of the HIF
target gene Cxcr4 (162643) in glomeruli from both mice and humans with
RPGN. Treatment of the mice with a Cxcr4 antibody resulted in clinical
improvement, and isolated overexpression of Cxcr4 was sufficient to
cause glomerular disease. Ding et al. (2006) hypothesized that
upregulation of Cxcr4 allowed terminally differentiated podocytes to
reenter the cell cycle, proliferate, and form cellular crescents.

Hickey et al. (2007) found that mice homozygous for the Chuvash
polycythemia-associated VHL mutation (R200W; 608537.0019) developed
polycythemia similar to the human disease. Although bone marrow
cellularity and morphology was similar to controls, spleens from the
mutant mice showed increased numbers of erythroid progenitors and
megakaryocytes, as well as erythroid differentiation of splenic cells in
vitro. Further analysis showed upregulation of HIF2A (603349) and of key
target genes, including EPO, VEGF (192240), GLUT1 (138140), and PAI1
(173360), that contribute to polycythemia.

Using immunofluorescence microscopy, Zehetner et al. (2008) found that
Vhl was expressed in mouse insulin-producing pancreatic beta cells.
Conditional inactivation of Vhl in beta cells promoted a diversion of
glucose away from mitochondria into lactate production, causing cells to
produce high levels of glycolytically derived ATP and to secrete
elevated levels of insulin at low glucose concentrations. Vhl-deficient
mice exhibited diminished glucose-stimulated changes in cytoplasmic
Ca(2+) concentration, electrical activity, and insulin secretion, which
culminated in impaired systemic glucose tolerance. Vhl deletion was
associated with upregulation of Hif1a and the glucose transporter Glut1,
an Hif1a target gene. Combined deletion of Vhl and Hif1a rescued the
defects due to Vhl deletion alone, implying that they resulted from
Hif1a activation.

Lee et al. (2009) generated transgenic mouse embryonic stem cells with
the homozygous VHL type 2B mutation R167Q (608537.0005). Mutant cells
had preserved regulation of both HIF-alpha factors with slightly greater
normotoxic dysregulation of HIF2-alpha. R167Q-derived teratomas had a
growth advantage and showed hemangioma formation. Homozygous mice were
embryonic lethal due to placental failure, and heterozygous mice
developed renal cysts and were predisposed to the carcinogen-promoted
renal carcinoma.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, 3-BP DEL, ILE75DEL

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ILE146DEL mutation has been renumbered as ILE75DEL.

In a patient with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300), Latif et al.
(1993) identified an in-frame 3-nucleotide deletion at nucleotide 434 of
the VHL gene, predicted to remove isoleucine-146 in the gene product.

.0002
RENAL CELL CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
VHL, SER183TER

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the SER254TER mutation has been renumbered as SER183TER (S183X).

In a cell line from a sporadic case of renal cell carcinoma (144700),
Latif et al. (1993) identified a 761C-A transversion in the VHL gene,
predicted to result in a ser254-to-ter (S254X) substitution.

.0003
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA, INCLUDED
VHL, ARG167TRP

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG238TRP mutation has been renumbered as ARG167TRP (R167W).

In a study of 94 VHL (193300) patients without large deletions, Crossey
et al. (1994) found that the 2 most frequent mutations were missense
mutations at codon 238: 4 kindreds had a 712C-T transition, resulting in
an arg238-to-trp (R238W) change, and 5 kindreds had a 713G-A transition,
leading to an arg238-to-gln (R238Q; 608537.0005) substitution. Another
mutation 712C-G transversion, resulting in an arg238-to-gly (R238G)
substitution (608537.0004). All 3 mutations at codon 238 occurred at a
CpG dinucleotide. The authors noted that although pheochromocytoma
occurs in only about 7% of patients with VHL, a codon 238 mutation
carried a high risk (62%) of pheochromocytoma.

The R238W mutation was found by Garcia et al. (1997) in a Spanish family
in which VHL was manifested predominantly as familial pheochromocytoma
in 2 generations, consistent with VHL syndrome type 2C.

In a mother and 2 sons with pheochromocytoma (171300), consistent with
VHL syndrome type 2C, Crossey et al. (1995) identified the R238W
mutation.

Zbar et al. (1996) confirmed previous observations that germline codon
167 mutations of the VHL gene (R167W and R167Q; 608537.0005) convey a
high risk for the development of pheochromocytoma and renal cell
carcinoma. In 21 of 33 families with mutations at codon 167,
pheochromocytoma occurred, compared to 15 of 223 families without a
mutation at codon 167. The association between codon 167 mutations and
pheochromocytoma was detected in all nationalities tested. Two of 4
Japanese VHL pheochromocytoma families had mutations at codon 167; and 3
of 10 French VHL pheochromocytoma families had mutations at codon 167.

Neumann et al. (2002) identified the R167Q substitution in the germline
of a patient with sporadic pheochromocytoma (171300).

In the germlines of 6 unrelated patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma
(171300), Neumann et al. (2002) identified the R167W substitution. The
mutation was not identified in 600 control chromosomes.

.0004
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, ARG167GLY

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG238GLY mutation has been renumbered as ARG167GLY (R167G).

See 608537.0003 and Crossey et al. (1994).

.0005
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, ARG167GLN

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG238GLN mutation has been renumbered as ARG167GLN (R167Q).

See 608537.0003 and Crossey et al. (1994).

.0006
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, ARG161TER

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG232TER mutation has been renumbered as ARG161TER (R161X).

In a patient with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300), Loeb et al.
(1994) identified a 694C-T transition in exon 3 of the VHL gene,
resulting in an amber stop codon arg232-to-ter (R232X).

Gilcrease et al. (1995) found the identical 694C-T transition as a
somatic mutation in a clear cell papillary cystadenoma of the epididymis
in a patient who showed no evidence of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome and in
whom somatic cells did not contain this mutation.

.0007
HEMANGIOBLASTOMA, SPORADIC CEREBELLAR
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME, INCLUDED
VHL, TRP88SER

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the TRP159SER mutation has been renumbered as TRP88SER (W88S).

In 13 sporadic cases of cerebellar hemangioblastoma, Kanno et al. (1994)
sought somatic mutations in the VHL gene with single-strand conformation
polymorphism analyses of the tumor DNAs. An abnormal SSCP pattern was
detected in 7, and in 3 of these the mutation was successfully
characterized by direct sequencing. The somatic mutations were 2
missense mutations and 1 deletion of a single base. One of the missense
mutations was a 476G-C transversion, resulting in a trp-to-ser change.
The codon number was not noted.

In a Japanese patient with VHL (193300), the Clinical Research Group for
VHL in Japan (1995) identified the 476G-C transversion, which resulted
in a trp159-to-ser (W159S) substitution.

.0008
HEMANGIOBLASTOMA, SPORADIC CEREBELLAR
VHL, LEU135PHE

In a sporadic case of cerebellar hemangioblastoma, Kanno et al. (1994)
identified a missense mutation in exon 2 of the VHL gene: a 618A-C
transversion, resulting in a leu135-to-phe substitution.

.0009
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, TYR98HIS

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the TYR169HIS mutation has been renumbered as TYR98HIS (Y98H), resulting
from a 292T-C transition.

In 14 apparently unrelated von Hippel-Lindau syndrome type 2A (193300)
families from the Black Forest region of Germany, Brauch et al. (1995)
found a 505T-C transition in the VHL gene, resulting in a tyr169-to-his
(Y169H) substitution. Brauch et al. (1995) suggested that more than 75
VHL germline mutations had been identified in VHL patients to that date.
The same mutation, associated with pheochromocytoma, had been identified
by Chen et al. (1995) in 2 VHL 2A families in Pennsylvania. All affected
individuals in the 16 families shared the same VHL haplotype, indicating
a founder effect. In at least one of the Pennsylvania families, the
Y169H mutation probably derived from their Pfalz ancestors, who were
among Germans who migrated to Pennsylvania.

In a patient with the Y169H mutation as the cause of VHL, Schimke et al.
(1998) found a functioning carotid paraganglioma.

Allen et al. (2001) performed a longitudinal clinical study and DNA
analysis of 24 family members, 16 of whom exhibited a 505T-C change in
exon 1 of the VHL gene. Two of the 16 were asymptomatic carriers of the
505T-C mutation. Twelve of 16 (75%) of the gene carriers had 1 or more
ocular angiomas. The mean number of ocular angiomas per gene carrier was
3.3. Six eyes had optic disc angiomas. Five gene carriers (31%) lost
vision because of ocular angiomatosis. Four patients (25%) had
cerebellar hemangioblastomas and 11 patients (69%) had
pheochromocytomas. No patient had renal cell carcinoma, consistent with
the clinical diagnosis of VHL syndrome type 2A. The authors stated that
recognition of the VHL syndrome 2A phenotype suggested the presence of a
specific mutation (505T-C) in the VHL gene. They suggested that
confirmation of this genotype would increase a clinician's ability to
provide favorable prognostic information to affected family members.

Bender et al. (2001) studied 125 individuals in southern Germany
carrying the 505T-C mutation. Forty-seven percent had pheochromocytoma;
36% had retinal angioma; 36%, hemangioblastoma of the spine; and 16% had
hemangioblastoma of the brain. Forty-seven percent of patients were
symptomatic; 30% were asymptomatic despite the presence of at least 1
VHL-related tumor; and 23% of the carriers had no detectable VHL lesion.
Of the 19 patients who died, 10 died of symptomatic VHL lesions. Overall
penetrance by cumulative incidence was estimated at 48% by 35 years and
88% by 70 years. Bender et al. (2001) suggested that the mortality rate
for those carrying this mutation was much lower than in unselected VHL
mutations and was comparable to that of the general population of
Germany.

.0010
MOVED TO 608537.0003
.0011
MOVED TO 608537.0003
.0012
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, TYR112HIS

In a large VHL (193300) family with pheochromocytoma without renal
carcinoma (VHL type 2A) studied by Tisherman et al. (1962, 1993), Zbar
et al. (1996) identified a tyr112-to-his (Y112H) mutation in the VHL
gene. Of 22 affected family members, 19 were affected with
pheochromocytoma; no affected family member had renal cell carcinoma. In
the original report (Tisherman et al., 1962), at least 7 persons had
pheochromocytoma. One or more cafe-au-lait spots (in 22 persons),
extensive hemangiomas (in 2 persons), and angiomatosis retinae (in 2
persons) were discovered in the family.

.0013
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, VAL166PHE

In a family with VHL (193300), Gross et al. (1996) identified a
val166-to-phe (V166F) mutation in the VHL gene. Seven members had
pheochromocytoma, all without renal carcinoma.

.0014
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2, INCLUDED;;
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA, INCLUDED
VHL, LEU188VAL

In a family with VHL (193300), Neumann et al. (1995) identified a
leu188-to-val (L188V) mutation in the VHL gene. Nine patients had
pheochromocytoma without renal carcinoma (Zbar et al., 1996).

In 6 members of the same German family identified by Neumann et al.
(1995) with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome type 2C, Weirich et al. (2002)
found a P81S mutation in the VHL gene (608537.0020) which cosegregated
with the L188V mutation. Weirich et al. (2002) discussed the possible
impact of these mutations on protein function and phenotype.

In 2 unrelated white American children, a 15-year-old male and a
13-year-old female, who presented at 5 years of age with familial
erythrocytosis (ECYT2; 263400), Pastore et al. (2003) identified a
562C-G transversion in the VHL gene, resulting in the L188V mutation. In
both patients the mutation was in compound heterozygous state with the
common R200W mutation (608537.0019).

Neumann et al. (2002) identified the L188V mutation in the germline of a
patient with sporadic pheochromocytoma (171300). The mutation was not
identified in 600 control chromosomes.

.0015
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
VHL, ARG64PRO

In an uncle and his nephew with apparently isolated pheochromocytoma
(171300), van der Harst et al. (1998) found an arg64-to-pro (R64P)
mutation in the VHL gene. This mutation was 1 of 3 missense mutations
identified by van der Harst et al. (1998) that were located closer to
the N terminus of the VHL protein than any previously reported VHL
mutation (see also 608537.0016).

.0016
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
VHL, LEU63PRO

In a patient with apparently sporadic pheochromocytoma (171300), van der
Harst et al. (1998) found a leu63-to-pro (L63P) mutation in the VHL
gene. This mutation was 1 of 3 missense mutations identified by van der
Harst et al. (1998) that were located closer to the N terminus of the
VHL protein than any previously reported VHL mutation (see also
608537.0015).

.0017
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, TYR112ASN

In a family with VHL (193300), Bradley et al. (1999) identified a 547T-A
transversion in exon 1 of the VHL gene, resulting in a tyr112-to-asn
(Y112N) substitution. Of 13 affected individuals, 7 had renal cell
carcinoma and 1 had pheochromocytoma. The authors contrasted this family
to 2 families reported by Chen et al. (1996) that had a mutation at the
same position but causing a different amino acid change (tyr112 to his;
608537.0012). In these families, 19 of 22 affected individuals had
pheochromocytoma and none had renal cell carcinoma. Bradley et al.
(1999) concluded that different amino acid changes at the same position
can cause very distinct clinical phenotypes.

.0018
RENAL CELL CARCINOMA WITH PARANEOPLASTIC ERYTHROCYTOSIS
VHL, LEU163PRO

Wiesener et al. (2002) described a 50-year-old man, admitted to hospital
for acute myocardial infarction, who was found to have marked
erythrocytosis. Serum erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) was increased, and
ultrasonography demonstrated a mass at the upper pole of the left
kidney. Following nephrectomy, which confirmed the diagnosis of renal
cell carcinoma (144700), EPO serum concentration decreased within 7 days
and hemoglobin levels returned to normal. The patient was well 9 months
later with normal EPO serum concentration. In this patient, Wiesener et
al. (2002) reported that EPO mRNA was not detectable in normal kidney
tissue but markedly upregulated in the tumor. Hypoxia-inducible genes,
including VEGF (192240), GLUT1 (138140), carbonic anhydrase-9 (603179),
lactate dehydrogenase-A (150000), and aldolase A (103850), were also
strongly induced in the tumor. Immunoblots showed significant
overexpression of the HIF1A (603348) and HIF2A (603349) subunits in the
tumor, and immunohistochemistry performed for HIF1A showed nuclear
accumulation of the transcription factor in virtually every tumor cell.
A mutation analysis of the VHL gene in tumor cells revealed a
leu163-to-pro (L163P) missense mutation due to a 701T-C transition in
exon 3. This mutation had previously been identified in another RCC. The
mutation was not present in other tissues of the patient. In this case,
there was a clear indication that the pronounced erythrocytosis was a
precipitating factor in the coronary thrombosis.

.0019
POLYCYTHEMIA, CHUVASH TYPE
VHL, ARG200TRP

Chuvash polycythemia, familial erythrocytosis-2 (263400) caused by this
specific mutation, is an autosomal recessive disorder of erythrocytosis
that is endemic to the mid-Volga River region. Ang et al. (2002) studied
5 multiplex Chuvash families and confirmed that polycythemia was
associated with significant elevations of serum erythropoietin (EPO;
133170) levels and ruled out a location of the gene on chromosome 11 as
had been reported previously by Vasserman et al. (1999). They also ruled
out mutation in the HIF1A gene (603348), which is located in 14q. Using
a genomewide screen, they identified a region on 3p with a lod score
greater than 2 and identified a 598C-T transition in the VHL gene,
resulting in an arg200-to-trp (R200W) mutation in all cases. Ang et al.
(2002) concluded that the R200W substitution impairs the interaction of
VHL with HIF1-alpha, reducing the rate of degradation of HIF1-alpha and
resulting in increased expression of downstream target genes including
EPO, SLC2A1 (138140), transferrin (TF; 190000), transferrin receptor
(TFRC; 190010), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF; 192240).
Mutations in VHL had been associated with pheochromocytoma,
hemangioblastoma, and renal cell carcinoma, none of which were observed
in individuals with Chuvash polycythemia or obligate carriers of the
R200W mutation. Ang et al. (2002) stated that more than 700 mutations
had been reported in VHL (Beroud et al., 1998), but that no individual
had been found to be homozygous or compound heterozygous for germline
mutations.

Pastore et al. (2003) evaluated the role of the VHL gene in 8 children
with a history of polycythemia and an elevated serum EPO level and
identified 3 different germline VHL mutations in 4 of them. One child
was homozygous for the R200W mutation, and another was compound
heterozygous for the R200W mutation and a val130-to-leu mutation (V130L;
608537.0021). Of 2 sibs who were heterozygous for an asp126-to-tyr
mutation (D126Y; 608537.0022), 1 fulfilled some criteria of VHL syndrome
(193300); a pulmonary angioma was discovered at 10 years of age and
treated by coil embolization without effect on the polycythemia, and at
15 years of age nephrectomy was performed for a subcapsular hemangioma.

Percy et al. (2002) observed homozygosity for the R200W mutation in 3
Bangladeshi families with Chuvash-type congenital polycythemia living in
the United Kingdom.

By haplotype analysis of 101 ethnically diverse individuals with the
common R200W mutation, including 72 Chuvash individuals, Liu et al.
(2004) determined that the R200W mutation is due to a founder effect
that originated from 14,000 to 62,000 years ago.

In a matched cohort study, Gordeuk et al. (2004) found that homozygosity
for the 598C-T transition in the VHL gene was associated with vertebral
hemangiomas, varicose veins, lower blood pressures, and elevated serum
VEGF concentrations (p less than 0.0005), as well as premature mortality
related to cerebral vascular events and peripheral thrombosis.
Spinocerebellar hemangioblastomas, renal carcinomas, and
pheochromocytomas typical of classic VHL syndrome were not found,
suggesting that overexpression of HIF1-alpha and VEGF is not sufficient
for tumorigenesis. Although hemoglobin-adjusted serum erythropoietin
concentrations were approximately 10-fold higher in 598C-T homozygotes
than in controls, erythropoietin response to hypoxia was identical.
Gordeuk et al. (2004) concluded that Chuvash polycythemia is a distinct
VHL syndrome manifested by thrombosis, vascular abnormalities, and
intact hypoxic regulation despite increased basal expression of
hypoxia-regulated genes.

Cario et al. (2005) reported a Turkish patient who was homozygous for
the R200W mutation. Haplotype analysis showed a different haplotype than
that associated with the Chuvash population, indicating that the
mutation arose independently and is not geographically restricted.

Perrotta et al. (2006) found that the R200W missense mutation (598C-T)
causing Chuvash polycythemia is more frequent on the island of Ischia in
the Bay of Naples (0.070) than it is in Chuvashia (0.057). The haplotype
of all patients in Ischia matched that identified in the Chuvash
cluster, thus supporting the single founder hypothesis. Perrotta et al.
(2006) also found that unaffected heterozygotes had increased HIF1-alpha
activity, which might confer a biochemical advantage for mutation
maintenance. They suggested that this form of familial polycythemia may
be endemic in other regions of the world, a hypothesis supported by the
reports of Percy et al. (2002, 2003).

Russell et al. (2011) presented evidence suggesting 2 main molecular
mechanisms by which the R200W and H191D (608537.0024) VHL mutations
result in polycythemia. In vitro studies showed that the R200W mutation
attenuated formation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase and attenuated binding
of HIF1 (603348). In patients, this would lead to overproduction of the
HIF-target erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) and thus secondary polycythemia.
In addition, VHL mutations result in conformational changes causing
increased binding to SOCS1 (603597), which inhibits binding and
degradation of phosphorylated JAK2 (147796). The resulting pJAK2
stabilization promotes hyperactivation of the JAK2-STAT5 (601511)
pathway in erythroid progenitors, causing hypersensitivity to
erythropoietin and thereby to primary polycythemia. Treatment of
R200W/R200W transgenic mice with a JAK2 inhibitor resulted in decreased
hematocrit, smaller spleen, and decreased sensitivity to EPO compared to
untreated transgenic mice.

.0020
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, PRO81SER

In 6 members of a German family in which the L188V mutation in the VHL
gene (608537.0014) had previously been identified in association with
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome type 2C (193300), Weirich et al. (2002)
identified a 454C-T transition in exon 1 of the VHL gene, resulting in a
pro81-to-ser (P81S) mutation. The concurrent P81S mutation was
identified by novel screening approaches, including denaturing
high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and sequencing. The 2
mutations cosegregated with the syndrome. Weirich et al. (2002)
discussed the possible impact of the mutations on protein function and
phenotype.

.0021
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, VAL130LEU

See 608537.0019 and Pastore et al. (2003).

.0022
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, ASP126TYR

See 608537.0019 and Pastore et al. (2003).

.0023
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, PRO192SER

In a 10-year-old white American boy who presented at age 9 years with
familial erythrocytosis (263400), Pastore et al. (2003) identified
compound heterozygosity for a 574C-T transition in the VHL gene,
resulting in a pro192-to-ser (P192S) change, and the common R200W
mutation (608537.0019).

.0024
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, HIS191ASP

In a 17-year-old Croatian boy who presented at age 1 year with familial
erythrocytosis (263400), Pastore et al. (2003) identified homozygosity
for a 571C-G transversion in the VHL gene, resulting in a his191-to-asp
(H191D) change.

Russell et al. (2011) presented evidence suggesting 2 main molecular
mechanisms by which the H191D and R200W (608537.0019) VHL mutations
result in polycythemia. In vitro studies showed that the H191D mutation
attenuated formation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase and attenuated binding
of HIF1 (603348). In patients, this would lead to overproduction of the
HIF-target erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) and thus secondary polycythemia.
In addition, VHL mutations result in conformational changes causing
increased binding to SOCS1 (603597), which inhibits binding and
degradation of phosphorylated JAK2 (147796). The resulting pJAK2
stabilization promotes hyperactivation of the JAK2-STAT5 (601511)
pathway in erythroid progenitors, causing hypersensitivity to
erythropoietin and thereby to primary polycythemia. Treatment of
R200W/R200W transgenic mice with a JAK2 inhibitor resulted in decreased
hematocrit, smaller spleen, and decreased sensitivity to EPO compared to
untreated transgenic mice.

.0025
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, VAL84LEU

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the VAL155LEU (V155L) mutation has been renumbered as V84L.

In 2 sibs from Wales with bilateral pheochromocytoma without other
features of VHL syndrome, consistent with VHL type 2C (193300), Crossey
et al. (1995) identified a heterozygous 463G-T transversion in exon 1 of
the VHL gene, resulting in a val155-to-leu (V155L) substitution.

Abbott et al. (2006) identified the V84L substitution in affected
individuals from 3 unrelated families with early-onset isolated
pheochromocytoma consistent with VHL syndrome type 2C. Although no other
signs of VHL syndrome were present in 7 patients, 1 patient was
suspected to have a spinal hemangioblastoma based on imaging studies.

.0026
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
VHL, GLY93SER

In the germlines of 2 unrelated patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma
(171300), Neumann et al. (2002) identified a 490G-A transition in exon 1
of the VHL gene, resulting in a gly93-to-ser (G93S) substitution. The
mutation was not identified in 600 control chromosomes.

.0027
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, GLN164ARG

In a 2.5-year-old girl who presented with a pheochromocytoma but no
other manifestations of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300), Sovinz et
al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 491A-G transition in exon 3 of the
VHL gene, resulting in an gln164-to-arg (Q164R) substitution in a
protein surface residue. Genotyping of the family indicated that she
inherited the mutation from her father, in whom it occurred de novo.
Although he was in good health and asymptomatic, detailed physical
examination found a retinal angioma, an adrenal adenoma, and bilateral
pheochromocytoma, consistent with VHL syndrome. Sovinz et al. (2010)
noted that Ong et al. (2007) had identified the Q164R mutation in a
family in which a patient developed pheochromocytoma at age 10 years and
retinal angioma at age 23 years, suggesting that this mutation may be
associated with early onset of symptoms.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Herman et al. (1994); Neumann and Wiestler (1991)
REFERENCE 1. Abbott, M.-A.; Nathanson, K. L.; Nightingale, S.; Maher, E. R.;
Greenstein, R. M.: The von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) germline mutation
V84L manifests as early-onset bilateral pheochromocytoma. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 140A: 685-690, 2006.

2. Allen, R. C.; Webster, A. R.; Sui, R.; Brown, J.; Taylor, C. M.;
Stone, E. M.: Molecular characterization and ophthalmic investigation
of a large family with type 2A von Hippel-Lindau disease. Arch. Ophthal. 119:
1659-1665, 2001.

3. Ang, S. O.; Chen, H.; Gordeuk, V. R.; Sergueeva, A. I.; Polyakova,
L. A.; Miasnikova, G. Y.; Kralovics, R.; Stockton, D. W.; Prchal,
J. T.: Endemic polycythemia in Russia: mutation in the VHL gene. Blood
Cell Molec. Dis. 28: 57-62, 2002.

4. Ang, S. O.; Chen, H.; Hirota, K.; Gordeuk, V. R.; Jelinek, J.;
Guan, Y.; Liu, E.; Sergueeva, A. I.; Miasnikova, G. Y.; Mole, D.;
Maxwell, P. H.; Stockton, D. W.; Semenza, G. L.; Prchal, J. T.: Disruption
of oxygen homeostasis underlies congenital Chuvash polycythemia. Nature
Genet. 32: 614-621, 2002.

5. Bender, B. U.; Eng, C.; Olschewski, M.; Berger, D. P.; Laubenberger,
J.; Altehofer, C.; Kirste, G.; Orszagh, M.; van Velthoven, V.; Miosczka,
H.; Schmidt, D.; Neumann, H. P. H.: VHL c.505 T-C mutation confers
a high age related penetrance but no increased overall mortality. J.
Med. Genet. 38: 508-514, 2001.

6. Bender, B. U.; Gutsche, M.; Glasker, S.; Muller, B.; Kirste, G.;
Eng, C.; Neumann, H. P. H.: Differential genetic alterations in von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome-associated and sporadic pheochromocytomas. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 4568-4574, 2000.

7. Beroud, C.; Joly, D.; Gallou, C.; Staroz, F.; Orfanelli, M. T.;
Junien, C.: Software and database for the analysis of mutations in
the VHL gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 26: 256-258, 1998.

8. Bradley, J. F.; Collins, D. L.; Schimke, R. N.; Parrott, H. N.;
Rothberg, P. G.: Two distinct phenotypes caused by two different
missense mutations in the same codon of the VHL gene. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 87: 163-167, 1999.

9. Brauch, H.; Kishida, T.; Glavac, D.; Chen, F.; Pausch, F.; Hofler,
H.; Latif, F.; Lerman, M. I.; Zbar, B.; Neumann, H. P. H.: Von Hippel-Lindau
(VHL) disease with pheochromocytoma in the Black Forest region of
Germany: evidence for a founder effect. Hum. Genet. 95: 551-556,
1995.

10. Cario, H.; Schwarz, K.; Jorch, N.; Kyank, U.; Petrides, P. E.;
Schneider, D. T.; Uhle, R.; Debatin, K.-M.; Kohne, E.: Mutations
in the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene and VHL-haplotype
analysis in patients with presumable congenital erythrocytosis. Haematologica 90:
19-24, 2005.

11. Chen, F.; Kishida, T.; Yao, M.; Hustad, T.; Glavac, D.; Dean,
M.; Gnarra, J. R.; Orcutt, M. L.; Duh, F. M.; Glenn, G.; Green, J.;
Hsia, Y. E.; Lamiell, J.; Li, H.; Wei, M. H.; Schmidt, L.; Tory, K.;
Kuzman, I.; Stackhouse, T.; Latif, F.; Linehan, W. M.; Lerman, M.;
Zbar, B.: Germline mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor
suppressor gene: correlations with phenotype. Hum. Mutat. 5: 66-75,
1995.

12. Chen, F.; Slife, L.; Kishida, T.; Mulvihill, J.; Tisherman, S.
E.; Zbar, B.: Genotype-phenotype correlation in von Hippel-Lindau
disease: identification of a mutation associated with VHL type 2A. J.
Med. Genet. 33: 716-717, 1996.

13. Clifford, S. C.; Cockman, M. E.; Smallwood, A. C.; Mole, D. R.;
Woodward, E. R.; Maxwell, P. H.; Ratcliffe, P. J.; Maher, E. R.:
Contrasting effects on HIF-1-alpha regulation by disease-causing pVHL
mutations correlate with patterns of tumourigenesis in von Hippel-Lindau
disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1029-1038, 2001.

14. Clinical Research Group for VHL in Japan: Germline mutations
in the von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) gene in Japanese VHL. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 4: 2233-2237, 1995.

15. Corn, P. G.; McDonald, E. R., III; Herman, J. G.; El-Deiry, W.
S.: Tat-binding protein-1, a component of the 26S proteasome, contributes
to the E3 ubiquitin ligase function of the von Hippel-Lindau protein. Nature
Genet. 35: 229-237, 2003.

16. Crossey, P. A.; Eng, C.; Ginalska-Malinowska, M.; Lennard, T.
W. J.; Wheeler, D. C.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Maher, E. R.: Molecular
genetic diagnosis of von Hippel-Lindau disease in familial phaeochromocytoma. J.
Med. Genet. 32: 885-886, 1995.

17. Crossey, P. A.; Foster, K.; Richards, F. M.; Phipps, M. E.; Latif,
F.; Tory, K.; Jones, M. H.; Bentley, E.; Kumar, R.; Lerman, M. I.;
Zbar, B.; Affara, N. A.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.; Maher, E. R.: Molecular
genetic investigations of the mechanism of tumourigenesis in von Hippel-Lindau
disease: analysis of allele loss in VHL tumours. Hum. Genet. 93:
53-58, 1994.

18. Crossey, P. A.; Richards, F. M.; Foster, K.; Green, J. S.; Prowse,
A.; Latif, F.; Lerman, M. I.; Zbar, B.; Affara, N. A.; Ferguson-Smith,
M. A.; Maher, E. R.: Identification of intragenic mutations in the
von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour suppressor gene and correlation with
disease phenotype. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 1303-1308, 1994.

19. Ding, M.; Cui, S.; Li, C.; Jothy, S.; Haase, V.; Steer, B. M.;
Marsden, P. A.; Pippin, J.; Shankland, S.; Rastaldi, M. P.; Cohen,
C. D.; Kretzler, M.; Quaggin, S. E.: Loss of the tumor suppressor
Vhlh leads to upregulation of Cxcr4 and rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
in mice. Nature Med. 12: 1081-1087, 2006.

20. Duan, D. R.; Humphrey, J. S.; Chen, D. Y. T.; Weng, Y.; Sukegawa,
J.; Lee, S.; Gnarra, J. R.; Linehan, W. M.; Klausner, R. D.: Characterization
of the VHL tumor suppressor gene product: localization, complex formation,
and the effect of natural inactivating mutations. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 92: 6459-6463, 1995.

21. Duan, D. R.; Pause, A.; Burgess, W. H.; Aso, T.; Chen, D. Y. T.;
Garrett, K. P.; Conaway, R. C.; Conaway, J. W.; Linehan, W. M.; Klausner,
R. D.: Inhibition of transcription elongation by the VHL tumor suppressor
protein. Science 269: 1402-1406, 1995.

22. Eng, C.; Crossey, P. A.; Mulligan, L. M.; Healey, C. S.; Houghton,
C.; Prowse, A.; Chew, S. L.; Dahia, P. L. M.; O'Riordan, J. L. H.;
Toledo, S. P. A.; Smith, D. P.; Maher, E. R.; Ponder, B. A. J.: Mutations
in the RET proto-oncogene and the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour
suppressor gene in sporadic and syndromic phaeochromocytomas. J.
Clin. Genet. 32: 934-937, 1995.

23. Epstein, A. C. R.; Gleadle, J. M.; McNeill, L. A.; Hewitson, K.
S.; O'Rourke, J.; Mole, D. R.; Mukherji, M.; Metzen, E.; Wilson, M.
I.; Dhanda, A.; Tian, Y.-M.; Masson, N.; Hamilton, D. L.; Jaakkola,
P.; Barstead, R.; Hodgkin, J.; Maxwell, P. H.; Pugh, C. W.; Schofield,
C. J.; Ratcliffe, P. J.: C. elegans EGL-9 and mammalian homologs
define a family of dioxygenases that regulate HIF by prolyl hydroxylation. Cell
107: 43-54, 2001.

24. Fearon, E. R.: Human cancer syndromes: clues to the origin and
nature of cancer. Science 278: 1043-1050, 1997.

25. Feldman, D. E.; Thulasiraman, V.; Ferreyra, R. G.; Frydman, J.
: Formation of the VHL-elongin BC tumor suppressor complex is mediated
by the chaperonin TRiC. Molec. Cell 1051-1061, 1999.

26. Gallou, C.; Chauveau, D.; Richard, S.; Joly, D.; Giraud, S.; Olschwang,
S.; Martin, N.; Saquet, C.; Chretien, Y.; Mejean, A.; Correas, J.-M.;
Benoit, G.; Colombeau, P.; Grunfeld, J.-P.; Junien, C.; Beroud, C.
: Genotype-phenotype correlation in von Hippel-Lindau families with
renal lesions. Hum. Mutat. 24: 215-224, 2004. Note: Erratum: Hum.
Mutat. 24: 435-436, 2004.

27. Gallou, C.; Joly, D.; Mejean, A.; Staroz, F.; Martin, N.; Tarlet,
G.; Orfanelli, M. T.; Bouvier, R.; Droz, D.; Chretien, Y.; Marechal,
J. M.; Richard, S.; Junien, C.; Beroud, C.: Mutations of the VHL
gene in sporadic renal cell carcinoma: definition of a risk factor
for VHL patients to develop an RCC. Hum. Mutat. 13: 464-475, 1999.

28. Garcia, A.; Matias-Guiu, X.; Cabezas, R.; Chico, A.; Prat, J.;
Baiget, M.; De Leiva, A.: Molecular diagnosis of von Hippel-Lindau
disease in a kindred with a predominance of familial phaeochromocytoma. Clin.
Endocr. 46: 359-363, 1997.

29. Gemmill, R. M.; Bemis, L. T.; Lee, J. P.; Sozen, M. A.; Baron,
A.; Zeng, C.; Erickson, P. F.; Hooper, J. E.; Drabkin, H. A.: The
TRC8 hereditary kidney cancer gene suppresses growth and functions
with VHL in a common pathway. Oncogene 21: 3507-3516, 2002.

30. Gilcrease, M. Z.; Schmidt, L.; Zbar, B.; Truong, L.; Rutledge,
M.; Wheeler, T. M.: Somatic von Hippel-Lindau mutation in clear cell
papillary cystadenoma of the epididymis. Hum. Path. 26: 1341-1346,
1995.

31. Glasker, S.; Sohn, T.-S.; Okamoto, H.; Li, J.; Lonser, R. R.;
Oldfield, E. H.; Vortmeyer, A. O.; Zhuang, Z.: Second hit deletion
size in von Hippel-Lindau disease. Ann. Neurol. 59: 105-110, 2006.

32. Gnarra, J. R.; Ward, J. M.; Porter, F. D.; Wagner, J. R.; Devor,
D. E.; Grinberg, A.; Emmert-Buck, M. R.; Westphal, H.; Klausner, R.
D.; Marston Linehan, W.: Defective placental vasculogenesis causes
embryonic lethality in VHL-deficient mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94:
9102-9107, 1997.

33. Gordeuk, V. R.; Sergueeva, A. I.; Miasnikova, G. Y.; Okhotin,
D.; Voloshin, Y.; Choyke, P. L.; Butman, J. A.; Jedlickova, K.; Prchal,
J. T.; Polyakova, L. A.: Congenital disorder of oxygen sensing: association
of the homozygous Chuvash polycythemia VHL mutation with thrombosis
and vascular abnormalities but not tumors. Blood 103: 3924-3932,
2004.

34. Gross, D. J.; Avishai, N.; Meiner, V.; Filon, D.; Zbar, B.; Abeliovich,
D.: Familial pheochromocytoma associated with a novel mutation in
the von Hippel-Lindau gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 81: 147-149,
1996.

35. Haase, V. H.; Glickman, J. N.; Socolovsky, M.; Jaenisch, R.:
Vascular tumors in livers with targeted inactivation of the von Hippel-Lindau
tumor suppressor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 1583-1588, 2001.

36. Hergovich, A.; Lisztwan, J.; Barry, R.; Ballschmieter, P.; Krek,
W.: Regulation of microtubule stability by the von Hippel-Lindau
tumour suppressor protein pVHL. Nature Cell Biol. 5: 64-70, 2003.

37. Herman, J. G.; Latif, F.; Weng, Y.; Lerman, M. I.; Zbar, B.; Liu,
S.; Samid, D.; Duan, D.-S. R.; Guarra, J. R.; Linehan, W. M.; Baylin,
S. B.: Silencing of the VHL tumor-suppressor gene by DNA methylation
in renal carcinomas. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 9700-9704, 1994.

38. Hickey, M. M.; Lam, J. C.; Bezman, N. A.; Rathmell, W. K.; Simon,
M. C.: von Hippel-Lindau mutation in mice recapitulates Chuvash polycythemia
via hypoxia-inducible factor-2-alpha signaling and splenic erythropoiesis. J.
Clin. Invest. 117: 3879-3889, 2007.

39. Hoffman, M. A.; Ohh, M.; Yang, H.; Kico, J. M.; Ivan, M.; Kaelin,
W. G., Jr.: von Hippel-Lindau, protein mutants linked to type 2C
VHL disease preserve the ability to downregulated HIF. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 10: 1019-1027, 2001.

40. Hon, W.-C.; Wilson, M. I.; Harlos, K.; Claridge, T. D. W.; Schofield,
C. J.; Pugh, C. W.; Maxwell, P. H.; Ratcliffe, P. J.; Stuart, D. I.;
Jones, E. Y.: Structural basis for the recognition of hydroxyproline
in HIF-1-alpha by pVHL. Nature 417: 975-978, 2002.

41. Iliopoulos, O.; Kibel, A.; Gray, S.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: Tumour
suppression by the human von Hippel-Lindau gene product. Nature Med. 1:
822-826, 1995.

42. Iliopoulos, O.; Levy, A. P.; Jiang, C.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.; Goldberg,
M. A.: Negative regulation of hypoxia-inducible genes by the von
Hippel-Lindau protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 10595-10599, 1996.

43. Iliopoulos, O.; Ohh, M.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: pVHL(19) is a biologically
active product of the von Hippel-Lindau gene arising from internal
translation initiation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 11661-11666, 1998.

44. Ivan, M.; Kondo, K.; Yang, H.; Kim, W.; Valiando, J.; Ohh, M.;
Salic, A.; Asara, J. M.; Lane, W. S.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: HIF-alpha
targeted for VHL-mediated destruction by proline hydroxylation: implications
for O(2) sensing. Science 292: 464-468, 2001.

45. Ivanov, S. V.; Kuzmin, I.; Wei, M.-H.; Pack, S.; Geil, L.; Johnson,
B. E.; Stanbridge, E. J.; Lerman, M. I.: Down-regulation of transmembrane
carbonic anhydrases in renal cell carcinoma cell lines by wild-type
von Hippel-Lindau transgenes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 12596-12601,
1998.

46. Jaakkola, P.; Mole, D. R.; Tian, Y.-M.; Wilson, M. I.; Gielbert,
J.; Gaskell, S. J.; von Kriegsheim, A.; Hebestreit, H. F.; Mukherji,
M.; Schofield, C. J.; Maxwell, P. H.; Pugh, C. W.; Ratcliffe, P. J.
: Targeting of HIF-alpha to the von Hippel-Lindau ubiquitylation complex
by O(2)-regulated prolyl hydroxylation. Science 292: 468-472, 2001.

47. Kanno, H.; Kondo, K.; Ito, S.; Yamamoto, I.; Fujii, S.; Torigoe,
S.; Sakai, N.; Hosaka, M.; Shuin, T.; Yao, M.: Somatic mutations
of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene in sporadic central
nervous system hemangioblastomas. Cancer Res. 54: 4845-4847, 1994.

48. Kanno, H.; Saljooque, F.; Yamamoto, I.; Hattori, S.; Yao, M.;
Shuin, T.; U, H.-S.: Role of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor
protein during neuronal differentiation. Cancer Res. 60: 2820-2824,
2000.

49. Kenck, C.; Wilhelm, M.; Bugert, P.; Staehler, G.; Kovacs, G.:
Mutation of the VHL gene is associated exclusively with the development
of non-papillary renal cell carcinomas. J. Path. 179: 157-161, 1996.

50. Kibel, A.; Iliopoulos, O.; DeCaprio, J. A.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.
: Binding of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein to elongin
B and C. Science 269: 1444-1446, 1995.

51. Kuzmin, I.; Duh, F.-M.; Latif, F.; Geil, L.; Zbar, B.; Lerman,
M. I.: Identification of the promoter of the human von Hippel-Landau
disease tumor suppressor gene. Oncogene 10: 2185-2194, 1995.

52. Latif, F.; Tory, K.; Gnarra, J.; Yao, M.; Duh, F.-M.; Orcutt,
M. L.; Stackhouse, T.; Kuzmin, I.; Modi, W.; Geil, L.; Schmidt, L.;
Zhou, F.; Li, H.; Wei, M. H.; Chen, F.; Glenn, G.; Choyke, P.; Walther,
M. M.; Weng, Y.; Duan, D.-S. R.; Dean, M.; Glavac, D.; Richards, F.
M.; Crossey, P. A.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.; Le Paslier, D.; Chumakov,
I.; Cohen, D.; Chinault, A. C.; Maher, E. R.; Linehan, W. M.; Zbar,
B.; Lerman, M. I.: Identification of the von Hippel-Lindau disease
tumor suppressor gene. Science 260: 1317-1320, 1993.

53. Lee, C. M.; Hickey, M. M.; Sanford, C. A.; McGuire, C. G.; Cowey,
C. L.; Simon, M. C.; Rathmell, W. K.: VHL type 2B gene mutation moderates
HIF dosage in vitro and in vivo. Oncogene 28: 1694-1705, 2009.

54. Lee, S.; Chen, D. Y. T.; Humphrey, J. S.; Gnarra, J. R.; Linehan,
W. M.; Klausner, R. D.: Nuclear/cytoplasmic localization of the von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene product is determined by cell
density. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 1770-1775, 1996.

55. Liu, E.; Percy, M. J.; Amos, C. I.; Guan, Y.; Shete, S.; Stockton,
D. W.; McMullin, M. F.; Polyakova, L. A.; Ang, S. O.; Pastore, Y.
D.; Jedlickova, K.; Lappin, T. R. J.; Gordeuk, V.; Prchal, J. T.:
The worldwide distribution of the VHL 598C-T mutation indicates a
single founder effect. Blood 103: 1937-1940, 2004.

56. Loeb, D. B.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.; Stajich, J. M.; Vance, J. M.
: A novel mutation in the von Hippel-Lindau gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3:
1423-1424, 1994.

57. Lolkema, M. P.; Mans, D. A.; Ulfman, L. H.; Volpi, S.; Voest,
E. E.; Giles, R. H.: Allele-specific regulation of primary cilia
function by the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 16: 73-78, 2008.

58. Maher, E. R.; Yates, J. R. W.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.: Statistical
analysis of the two stage mutation model in von Hippel-Lindau disease,
and in sporadic cerebellar haemangioblastoma and renal cell carcinoma. J.
Med. Genet. 27: 311-314, 1990.

59. Mahon, P. C.; Hirota, K.; Semenza, G. L.: FIH-1: a novel protein
that interacts with HIF-1-alpha and VHL to mediate repression of HIF-1
transcriptional activity. Genes Dev. 15: 2675-2686, 2001.

60. Maranchie, J. K.; Afonso, A.; Albert, P. S.; Kalyandrug, S.; Phillips,
J. L.; Zhou, S.; Peterson, J.; Ghadimi, B. M.; Hurley, K.; Riss, J.;
Vasselli, J. R.; Ried, T.; Zbar, B.; Choyke, P.; Walther, M. M.; Klausner,
R. D.; Linehan, W. M.: Solid renal tumor severity in von Hippel Lindau
disease is related to germline deletion length and location. Hum.
Mutat. 23: 40-46, 2004.

61. Maxwell, P. H.; Wiesener, M. S.; Chang, G.-W.; Clifford, S. C.;
Vaux, E. C.; Cockman, M. E.; Wykoff, C. C.; Pugh, C. W.; Maher, E.
R.; Ratcliffe, P. J.: The tumour suppressor protein VHL targets hypoxia-inducible
factors for oxygen-dependent proteolysis. Nature 399: 271-275, 1999.

62. Mehta, R.; Steinkraus, K. A.; Sutphin, G. L.; Ramos, F. J.; Shamieh,
L. S.; Huh, A.; Davis, C.; Chandler-Brown, D.; Kaeberlein, M.: Proteasomal
regulation of the hypoxic response modulates aging in C. elegans. Science 324:
1196-1198, 2009.

63. Min, J.-H.; Yang, H.; Ivan, M.; Gertler, F.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.;
Pavletich, N. P.: Structure of an HIF-1-alpha-pVHL complex: hydroxyproline
recognition in signaling. Science 296: 1886-1889, 2002.

64. Mukhopadhyay, D.; Knebelmann, B.; Cohen, H. T.; Ananth, S.; Sukhatme,
V. P.: The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene product interacts
with Sp1 to repress vascular endothelial growth factor promoter activity. Molec
. Cell. Biol. 17: 5629-5639, 1997.

65. Neumann, H. P. H.; Bausch, B.; McWhinney, S. R.; Bender, B. U.;
Gimm, O.; Franke, G.; Schipper, J.; Klisch, J.; Altehoefer, C.; Zerres,
K.; Januszewicz, A.; Eng, C.: Germ-line mutations in nonsyndromic
pheochromocytoma. New Eng. J. Med. 346: 1459-1466, 2002.

66. Neumann, H. P. H.; Berger, D. P.; Sigmund, G.; Blum, U.; Schmidt,
D.; Parmer, R. J.; Volk, B.; Kirste, G.: Pheochromocytomas, multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 2, and von Hippel-Lindau disease. New Eng.
J. Med. 329: 1531-1538, 1993. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 331:
1535 only, 1994.

67. Neumann, H. P. H.; Eng, C.; Mulligan, L. M.; Glavac, D.; Zauner,
I.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Crossey, P. A.; Maher, E. R.; Brauch, H.: Consequences
of direct genetic testing for germline mutations in the clinical management
of families with multiple endocrine neoplasia, type II. JAMA 274:
1149-1151, 1995.

68. Neumann, H. P. H.; Wiestler, O. D.: Clustering of features of
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome: evidence for a complex genetic locus. Lancet 337:
1052-1054, 1991.

69. Nordstrom-O'Brien, M.; van der Luijt, R. B.; van Rooijen, E.;
van den Ouweland, A. M.; Majoor-Krakauer, D. F.; Lolkema, M. P.; van
Brussel, A.; Voest, E. E.; Giles, R. H.: Genetic analysis of von
Hippel-Lindau disease. Hum. Mutat. 31: 521-537, 2010.

70. Oberstrass, J.; Reifenberger, G.; Reifenberger, J.; Wechsler,
W.; Collins, V. P.: Mutation of the von Hippel-Lindau tumour suppressor
gene in capillary haemangioblastomas of the central nervous system. J.
Path. 179: 151-156, 1996.

71. Ohh, M.; Yauch, R. L.; Lonergan, K. M.; Whaley, J. M.; Stemmer-Rachamimov,
A. O.; Louis, D. N.; Gavin, B. J.; Kley, N.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.; Iliopoulos,
O.: The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein is required for
proper assembly of an extracellular fibronectin matrix. Molec. Cell 1:
959-968, 1998.

72. Olschwang, S.; Richard, S.; Boisson, C.; Giraud, S.; Laurent-Puig,
P.; Resche, F.; Thomas, G.: Germline mutation profile of the VHL
gene in von Hippel-Lindau disease and in sporadic hemangioblastoma. Hum.
Mutat. 12: 424-430, 1998.

73. Ong, K. R.; Woodward, E. R.; Killick, P.; Lim, C.; Macdonald,
F.; Maher, E. R.: Genotype-phenotype correlations in von Hippel-Lindau
disease. Hum. Mutat. 28: 143-149, 2007.

74. Pastore, Y.; Jedlickova, K.; Guan, Y.; Liu, E.; Fahner, J.; Hasle,
H.; Prchal, J. F.; Prchal, J. T.: Mutations of von Hippel-Lindau
tumor-suppressor gene and congenital polycythemia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73:
412-419, 2003. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74: 598 only, 2004.

75. Pastore, Y. D.; Jelinek, J.; Ang, S.; Guan, Y.; Liu, E.; Jedlickova,
K.; Krishnamurti, L.; Prchal, J. T.: Mutations in the VHL gene in
sporadic apparently congenital polycythemia. Blood 101: 1591-1595,
2003.

76. Pause, A.; Lee, S.; Lonergan, K. M.; Klausner, R. D.: The von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene is required for cell cycle exit
upon serum withdrawal. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 993-998, 1998.

77. Percy, M. J.; McMullin, M. F.; Jowitt, S. N.; Potter, M.; Treacy,
M.; Watson, W. H.; Lappin, T. R. J.: Chuvash-type congenital polycythemia
in 4 families of Asian and Western European ancestry. Blood 102:
1097-1099, 2003.

78. Percy, M. J.; McMullin, M. F.; Treacy, M.; Potter, M.; Watson,
W. H.; Jowitt, S. N.; Lappin, T. R. J.: Identification of the Chuvash-type
congenital polycythemia in patients of Asian and Western European
ancestry. Blood 100: 660 only, 2002.

79. Perrotta, S.; Nobili, B.; Ferraro, M.; Migliaccio, C.; Borriello,
A.; Cucciolla, V.; Martinelli, V.; Rossi, F.; Punzo, F.; Cirillo,
P.; Parisi, G.; Zappia, V.; Rotoli, B.; Ragione, F. D.: Von Hippel-Lindau-dependent
polycythemia is endemic on the island of Ischia: identification of
a novel cluster. Blood 107: 514-519, 2006.

80. Richard, S.; Croisille, L.; Yvart, J.; Casadeval, N.; Eschwege,
P.; Aghakhani, N.; David, P.; Gaudric, A.; Scigalla, P.; Hermine,
O.: Paradoxical secondary polycythemia in von Hippel-Lindau patients
treated with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor receptor therapy. Blood 99:
3851-3853, 2002.

81. Richards, F. M.; Schofield, P. N.; Fleming, S.; Maher, E. R.:
Expression of the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour suppressor gene
during human embryogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 639-644, 1996.

82. Roe, J.-S.; Kim, H.; Lee, S.-M.; Kim, S.-T.; Cho, E.-J.; Youn,
H.-D.: p53 stabilization and transactivation by a von Hippel-Lindau
protein. Molec. Cell 22: 395-405, 2006.

83. Rubenstein, J. L.; Yaari, H.: von Hippel-Lindau and the genetics
of astrocytoma. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 86: 142-143, 1994.

84. Russell, R. C.; Sufan, R. I.; Zhou, B.; Heir, P.; Bunda, S.; Sybingco,
S. S.; Greer, S. N.; Roche, O.; Heathcote, S. A.; Chow, V. W. K.;
Boba, L. M.; Richmond, T. D.; Hickey, M. M.; Barber, D. L.; Cheresh,
D. A.; Simon, M. C.; Irwin, M. S.; Kim, W. Y.; Ohh, M.: Loss of JAK2
regulation via a heterodimeric VHL-SOCS1 E3 ubiquitin ligase underlies
Chuvash polycythemia. Nature Med. 17: 845-853, 2011.

85. Schimke, R. N.; Collins, D. L.; Rothberg, P. G.: Functioning
carotid paraganglioma in the von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. (Letter) Am.
J. Med. Genet. 80: 533-534, 1998.

86. Schoenfeld, A.; Davidowitz, E. J.; Burk, R. D.: A second major
native von Hippel-Lindau gene product, initiated from an internal
translation start site, functions as a tumor suppressor. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 95: 8817-8822, 1998.

87. Sovinz, P.; Urban, C.; Uhrig, S.; Stepan, V.; Lackner, H.; Schwinger,
W.; Benesch, M.; Moser, A.; Spuller, E.; Speicher, M. R.: Pheochromocytoma
in a 2.75-year-old-girl with a germline von Hippel-Lindau mutation
Q164R. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 1752-1755, 2010.

88. Staller, P.; Sulitkova, J.; Lisztwan, J.; Moch, H.; Oakeley, E.
J.; Krek, W.: Chemokine receptor CXCR4 downregulated by von Hippel-Lindau
tumor suppressor pVHL. Nature 425: 307-311, 2003.

89. Tisherman, S. E.; Gregg, F. J.; Danowski, T. S.: Familial pheochromocytoma. JAMA 182:
152-156, 1962.

90. Tisherman, S. E.; Tisherman, B. G.; Tisherman, S. A.; Dunmire,
S.; Levey, G. S.; Mulvihill, J. J.: Three-decade investigation of
familial pheochromocytoma: an allele of von Hippel-Lindau disease? Arch.
Int. Med. 153: 2550-2556, 1993.

91. Tyers, M.; Willems, A. R.: One ring to rule a superfamily of
E3 ubiquitin ligases. Science 284: 602-604, 1999.

92. van der Harst, E.; de Krijger, R. R.; Dinjens, W. N. M.; Weeks,
L. E.; Bonjer, H. J.; Bruining, H. A.; Lamberts, S. W. J.; Koper,
J. W.: Germline mutations in the vhl gene in patients presenting
with phaeochromocytomas. Int. J. Cancer. 77: 337-340, 1998.

93. Vasserman, N. N.; Karzakova, L. M.; Tverskaya, S. M.; Saperov,
V. N.; Muchukova, O. M.; Pavlova, G. P.; Efimova, N. K.; Vankina,
N. N.; Evgrafov, O. V.: Localization of the gene responsible for
familial benign polycythemia to chromosome 11q23. Hum. Hered. 49:
129-132, 1999.

94. Vogelstein, B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/6/1995.

95. Wait, S. D.; Vortmeyer, A. O.; Lonser, R. R.; Chang, D. T.; Finn,
M. A.; Bhowmick, D. A.; Pack, S. D.; Oldfield, E. H.; Zhuang, Z.:
Somatic mutations in VHL germline deletion kindred correlate with
mild phenotype. Ann. Neurol. 55: 236-240, 2004.

96. Wang, Y.; Roche, O.; Yan, M. S.; Finak, G.; Evans, A. J.; Metcalf,
J. L.; Hast, B. E.; Hanna, S. C.; Wondergem, B.; Furge, K. A.; Irwin,
M. S.; Kim, W. Y.; Teh, B. T.; Grinstein, S.; Park, M.; Marsden, P.
A.; Ohh, M.: Regulation of endocytosis via the oxygen-sensing pathway. Nature
Med. 15: 319-324, 2009.

97. Wang, Y.; Wan, C.; Deng, L.; Liu, X.; Cao, X.; Gilbert, S. R.;
Bouxsein, M. L.; Faugere, M.-C.; Guldberg, R. E.; Gerstenfeld, L.
C.; Haase, V. H.; Johnson, R. S.; Schipani, E.; Clemens, T. L.: The
hypoxia-inducible factor alpha pathway couples angiogenesis to osteogenesis
during skeletal development. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 1616-1626, 2007.

98. Weirich, G.; Klein, B.; Wohl, T.; Engelhardt, D.; Brauch, H.:
VHL2C phenotype in a German von Hippel-Lindau family with concurrent
VHL germline mutations P81S and L188V. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87:
5241-5246, 2002.

99. Wiesener, M. S.; Seyfarth, M.; Warnecke, C.; Jurgensen, J. S.;
Rosenberger, C.; Morgan, N. V.; Maher, E. R.; Frei, U.; Eckardt, K.-U.
: Paraneoplastic erythrocytosis associated with an inactivating point
mutation of the von Hippel-Lindau gene in a renal cell carcinoma. Blood 99:
3562-3565, 2002.

100. Yang, H.; Minamishima, Y. A.; Yan, Q.; Schlisio, S.; Ebert, B.
L.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, L.; Kim, W. Y.; Olumi, A. F.; Kaelin, W. G.,
Jr.: pVHL acts as an adaptor to promote the inhibitory phosphorylation
of the NF-kappa-B agonist Card9 by CK2. Molec. Cell 28: 15-27, 2007.

101. Yoshida, M.; Yao, M.; Ishikawa, I.; Kishida, T.; Nagashima, Y.;
Kondo, K.; Nakaigawa, N.; Hosaka, M.: Somatic von Hippel-Lindau disease
gene mutation in clear-cell renal carcinomas associated with end-stage
renal disease/acquired cystic disease of the kidney. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 35: 359-364, 2002.

102. Zatyka, M.; da Silva, N. F.; Clifford, S. C.; Morris, M. R.;
Wiesener, M. S.; Eckardt, K.-U.; Houlston, R. S.; Richards, F. M.;
Latif, F.; Maher, E. R.: Identification of cyclin D1 and other novel
targets for the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene by expression
array analysis and investigation of cyclin D1 genotype as a modifier
in von Hippel-Lindau disease. Cancer Res. 62: 3803-3811, 2002.

103. Zatyka, M.; Morrissey, C.; Kuzmin, I.; Lerman, M. I.; Latif,
F.; Richards, F. M.; Maher, E. R.: Genetic and functional analysis
of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumour suppressor gene promoter. J.
Med. Genet. 39: 463-472, 2002.

104. Zbar, B.; Kishida, T.; Chen, F.; Schmidt, L.; Maher, E. R.; Richards,
F. M.; Crossey, P. A.; Webster, A. R.; Affara, N. A.; Ferguson-Smith,
M. A.; Brauch, H.; Glavac, D.; and 14 others: Germline mutations
in the Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) gene in families from North
America, Europe, and Japan. Hum. Mutat. 8: 348-357, 1996.

105. Zehetner, J.; Danzer, C.; Collins, S.; Eckhardt, K.; Gerber,
P. A.; Ballschmieter, P.; Galvanovskis, J.; Shimomura, K.; Ashcroft,
F. M.; Thorens, B.; Rorsman, P.; Krek, W.: pVHL is a regulator of
glucose metabolism and insulin secretion in pancreatic beta cells. Genes
Dev. 22: 3135-3146, 2008.

106. Zhuang, Z.; Emmert-Buck, M. R.; Roth, M. J.; Gnarra, J.; Linehan,
W. M.; Liotta, L. A.; Lubensky, I. A.: Von Hippel-Lindau disease
gene deletion detected in microdissected sporadic human colon carcinoma
specimens. Hum. Path. 27: 152-156, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/3/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/28/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/30/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/8/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/1/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/28/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/13/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/14/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/1/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/1/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/14/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/13/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/23/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/17/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/28/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/6/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/30/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/24/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/2/2004

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 3/17/2004

EDITED carol: 04/22/2013
terry: 4/4/2013
carol: 8/5/2011
wwang: 8/5/2011
ckniffin: 8/3/2011
alopez: 1/10/2011
wwang: 11/10/2010
ckniffin: 10/28/2010
wwang: 9/3/2010
ckniffin: 8/30/2010
alopez: 4/14/2010
carol: 12/23/2009
ckniffin: 12/15/2009
wwang: 9/29/2009
alopez: 6/22/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
wwang: 6/11/2009
terry: 6/8/2009
terry: 6/3/2009
mgross: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/1/2009
carol: 9/23/2008
terry: 9/10/2008
terry: 6/6/2008
mgross: 5/29/2008
terry: 5/28/2008
wwang: 5/16/2008
ckniffin: 3/13/2008
mgross: 2/28/2008
terry: 1/14/2008
wwang: 8/13/2007
terry: 8/9/2007
terry: 8/1/2007
wwang: 7/12/2007
wwang: 11/13/2006
terry: 11/3/2006
ckniffin: 11/1/2006
wwang: 8/21/2006
wwang: 8/18/2006
ckniffin: 8/14/2006
mgross: 6/14/2006
terry: 6/13/2006
carol: 5/24/2006
ckniffin: 5/23/2006
wwang: 4/24/2006
ckniffin: 4/17/2006
alopez: 3/29/2006
terry: 3/28/2006
terry: 2/3/2006
carol: 1/12/2006
ckniffin: 1/6/2006
tkritzer: 10/6/2004
terry: 9/30/2004
tkritzer: 9/2/2004
terry: 8/24/2004
tkritzer: 6/3/2004
ckniffin: 6/2/2004
carol: 3/23/2004
ckniffin: 3/23/2004
ckniffin: 3/19/2004

