186745	TITLE *186745 TALIN 1; TLN1
;;TALIN; TLN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Talin serves a function of linking vinculin (193065) to the integrins,
and, thus, the cytoskeleton to extracellular matrix (ECM) receptors. It
has a mass of 270 kD and shares 23% N-terminal identity with ezrin
(123900), which has similar functions.

GENE FUNCTION

DiPaolo et al. (2002) and Ling et al. (2002) presented evidence that
talin, through its FERM domain, interacts with the C-terminal tail of
the 90-kD PIP5K1C (606102) isoform. The authors showed that this
interaction induces clustering of PIP5D1C and talin at focal adhesions
and increases the local production of
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate.

Mechanical forces on matrix-integrin-cytoskeleton linkages are crucial
for cell viability, morphology, and organ function. The production of
force depends on the molecular connections from ECM-integrin complexes
to the cytoskeleton. The minimal matrix complex causing
integrin-cytoskeleton connections is a trimer of fibronectin's (135600)
integrin-binding domain FNIII7-10. Jiang et al. (2003) reported a
specific molecular slip bond that was repeatedly broken by a force of 2
pN at the cellular loading rate of 60 nm/second; this occurred with
single trimer beads but not with the monomer. Talin-1, which binds to
integrins and actin filaments in vitro, is required for the 2-pN slip
bond and rapid cytoskeleton binding. Furthermore, Jiang et al. (2003)
showed that inhibition of fibronectin binding to alpha-v-beta-3 integrin
(193210 and 173470) and deletion of beta-3 markedly decreased the 2-pN
force peak. They suggested that talin-1 initially forms a molecular slip
bond between closely packed fibronectin-integrin complexes and the actin
cytoskeleton, which can apply a low level of force to fibronectin until
many bonds form or a signal is received to activate a force response.

Tadokoro et al. (2003) reported that specific binding of the
cytoskeletal protein talin to integrin beta subunit (135630) cytoplasmic
tails leads to the conformational rearrangements of integrin
extracellular domains that increase their affinity. They found that
regulated binding of talin to integrin beta tails is a final common
element of cellular signaling cascades that control integrin activation.

Hu et al. (2007) developed correlational fluorescent speckle microscopy
to measure the coupling of focal adhesion proteins to actin filaments
(see 102610). Different classes of focal adhesion structural and
regulatory molecules exhibited varying degrees of correlated motions
with actin filaments, indicating hierarchical transmission of actin
motion through focal adhesions. Interactions between vinculin (193065),
talin, and actin filaments appear to constitute a slippage interface
between the cytoskeleton and integrins, generating a molecular clutch
that is regulated during the morphodynamic transitions of cell
migration.

Kanchanawong et al. (2010) used 3-dimensional super-resolution
fluorescence microscopy to map nanoscale protein organization in focal
adhesions. Their results revealed that integrins and actin are
vertically separated by an approximately 40-nm focal adhesion core
region consisting of multiple protein-specific strata: a
membrane-apposed integrin signaling layer containing integrin
cytoplasmic tails (see 193210), focal adhesion kinase (600758), and
paxillin (602505); an intermediate force-transduction layer containing
talin and vinculin; and an uppermost actin-regulatory layer containing
zyxin (602002), vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (601703), and
alpha-actinin (102575). By localizing amino- and carboxy-terminally
tagged talins, Kanchanawong et al. (2010) revealed talin's polarized
orientation, indicative of a role in organizing the focal adhesion
strata. Kanchanawong et al. (2010) concluded that their composite
multilaminar protein architecture provided a molecular blueprint for
understanding focal adhesion functions.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Using magnetic tweezers, total internal reflection fluorescence, and
atomic force microscopy, del Rio et al. (2009) investigated the effect
of force on the interaction between talin, a protein that links liganded
membrane integrins to the cytoskeleton, and vinculin, a focal adhesion
protein that is activated by talin binding, leading to reorganization of
the cytoskeleton. Application of physiologically relevant forces caused
stretching of single talin rods that exposed cryptic binding sites for
vinculin. Thus in the talin-vinculin system, molecular
mechanotransduction can occur by protein binding after exposure of
buried binding sites in the talin-vinculin system.

MAPPING

Using PCR amplification and DNA from a panel of human/rodent somatic
cell hybrids, Gilmore et al. (1995) assigned the TLN gene to 9p.
Deletions in 9p have been implicated in a variety of cancers. That a
cytoskeletal protein associated with the cell adhesion apparatus, such
as talin, might behave as a tumor suppressor gene has been proposed. For
example, the APC tumor suppressor gene (APC; 611731) encodes a protein
that associates with beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806), a component of a
complex of proteins linked to the cytoplasmic face of the cadherin
family of cell-cell adhesion molecules. Similarly, talin is a component
of a complex of proteins linked to the cytoplasmic face of integrins in
cell-ECM junctions (Luna and Hitt, 1992).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Rees et al. (1990)
REFERENCE 1. del Rio, A.; Perez-Jimenez, R.; Liu, R.; Roca-Cusachs, P.; Fernandez,
J. M.; Sheetz, M. P.: Stretching single talin rod molecules activates
vinculin binding. Science 323: 638-641, 2009.

2. Di Paolo, G.; Pellegrini, L.; Letinic, K.; Cestra, G.; Zoncu, R.;
Voronov, S.; Chang, S.; Guo, J.; Wenk, M. R.; De Camill, P.: Recruitment
and regulation of phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase type I-gamma
by the FERM domain of talin. Nature 420: 85-89, 2002.

3. Gilmore, A. P.; Ohanian, V.; Spurr, N. K.; Critchley, D. R.: Localisation
of the human gene encoding the cytoskeletal protein talin to chromosome
9p. Hum. Genet. 96: 221-224, 1995.

4. Hu, K.; Ji, L.; Applegate, K. T.; Danuser, G.; Waterman-Storer,
C. M.: Differential transmission of actin motion within focal adhesions. Science 315:
111-115, 2007.

5. Jiang, G.; Giannone, G.; Critchley, D. R.; Fukumoto, E.; Sheetz,
M. P.: Two-piconewton slip bond between fibronectin and the cytoskeleton
depends on talin. Nature 424: 334-337, 2003.

6. Kanchanawong, P.; Shtengel, G.; Pasapera, A. M.; Ramko, E. B.;
Davidson, M. W.; Hess, H. F.; Waterman, C. M.: Nanoscale architecture
of integrin-based cell adhesions. Nature 468: 580-584, 2010.

7. Ling, K.; Doughman, R. L.; Firestone, A. J.; Bunce, M. W.; Anderson,
R. A.: Type I-gamma phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase targets
and regulates focal adhesions. Nature 420: 89-93, 2002.

8. Luna, E. J.; Hitt, A. L.: Cytoskeleton-plasma membrane interactions. Science 258:
955-964, 1992.

9. Rees, D. J. G.; Ades, S. E.; Singer, S. J.; Hynes, R. O.: Sequence
and domain structure of talin. Nature 347: 685-689, 1990.

10. Tadokoro, S.; Shattil, S. J.; Eto, K.; Tai, V.; Liddington, R.
C.; de Pereda, J. M.; Ginsberg, M. H.; Calderwood, D. A.: Talin binding
to integrin beta tails: a final common step in integrin activation. Science 302:
103-106, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/2/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/10/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/20/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/29/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/7/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/10/1992

EDITED alopez: 02/07/2011
terry: 2/2/2011
alopez: 3/12/2009
terry: 3/10/2009
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
alopez: 2/21/2007
terry: 2/20/2007
alopez: 10/29/2003
terry: 10/29/2003
tkritzer: 7/25/2003
terry: 7/24/2003
mgross: 11/14/2002
mgross: 11/7/2002
mark: 8/22/1995
carol: 4/27/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/10/1992

600798	TITLE *600798 POLIOVIRUS RECEPTOR-LIKE 2; PVRL2
;;HERPESVIRUS ENTRY MEDIATOR B; HVEB;;
POLIOVIRUS RECEPTOR-RELATED 2; PVRR2; PRR2;;
CD112 ANTIGEN; CD112;;
NECTIN 2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Entry of the poliovirus into permissive cells is dependent on the
expression of a specific receptor, the poliovirus receptor (PVR;
173850), which is an integral membrane glycoprotein. Its extracellular
region exhibits 3 immunoglobulin-like domains. Two integral forms,
PVR-alpha and PVR-delta, and 2 soluble forms, PVR-beta and PVR-gamma,
are lacking a transmembrane region generated by alternative splicing of
mRNA. The normal cellular function of PVR is unknown. The identification
of human PVR prompted study of its counterpart in other species. In the
monkey, 2 genes located at 2 separate genetic loci, AGM1 and AGM2, have
been cloned. AGM1 encodes 2 membrane-bound splice variant forms
homologous to PVR-alpha and PVR-delta. AGM2 encodes a membrane-bound
form, PVR-alpha-2. Morrison and Racaniello (1992) described a murine
gene, Mph, as a structural homolog of human PVR. Two Mph molecules,
Mph-alpha and Mph-beta, are thought to be generated by alternative
splicing from a primary transcript.

Following the discovery of the human PVR-related gene (PVRR1; 600644),
other PVR-related molecules were sought. Using degenerate
oligonucleotides in a PCR-based methodology, Eberle et al. (1995)
identified a second PVR-related cDNA, which they called PRR2.
Furthermore, they presented evidence that PRR2, and not PVR, is the
homolog of Mph, and questioned the existence of a true murine homolog of
PVR. The PRR2 gene encodes 2 glycoproteins, PRR2-alpha (short form) and
PRR2-delta (long form), which have 69% and 73% identity within Mph-alpha
and Mph-beta, respectively. In contrast, the human PVR protein exhibits
only 51% identity which is, moreover, restricted to the 3 immunoglobulin
domains of the murine protein. Northern blot analysis showed that 2 mRNA
isoforms of 3.0 kb (PRR2-alpha) and 4.4 kb (PRR2-delta) are ubiquitously
found in various normal human tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Bottino et al. (2003) immunized mice with natural killer
(NK)-susceptible human target cells and obtained antibodies to PVR and
PVRL2. Binding analysis and flow cytometry demonstrated that both
molecules bound strongly with DNAM1 (CD226; 605397), but not with other
activating NK receptors, including NKp46 (NCR1; 604530) and NKp30 (NCR3;
611550). Expression of PVR or PVRL2 rendered cells susceptible to
enhanced lysis in a DNAM1-dependent manner that was nearly abrogated in
the presence of antibody to PVR, PVRL2, or DNAM1.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Liu et al. (2012) generated the crystal structure of the nectin-2
Ig-like V-set domain at 1.85-angstrom resolution. The structure bound to
both the soluble ectodomain of DNAM1 and cell surface-expressed
full-length DNAM1. Mutational analysis revealed that disruption of the
homodimeric interface of nectin-2 led to failure of homodimer formation
and loss of binding to DNAM1.

MAPPING

By isotopic hybridization, Eberle et al. (1995) mapped the PRR2 gene to
19q13.2-q13.4 in the same chromosomal region as PVR. By genomic sequence
analysis, Freitas et al. (1998) mapped the PRR2 gene to chromosome
19q13.2, where it lies centromeric to the TOMM40 gene (608061) and the
APOE (107741)-APOC2 (608083) gene cluster.

REFERENCE 1. Bottino, C.; Castriconi, R.; Pende, D.; Rivera, P.; Nanni, M.;
Carnemolla, B.; Cantoni, C.; Grassi, J.; Marcenaro, S.; Reymond, N.;
Vitale, M.; Moretta, L.; Lopez, M.; Moretta, A.: Identification of
PVR (CD155) and nectin-2 (CD112) as cell surface ligands for the human
DNAM-1 (CD226) activating molecule. J. Exp. Med. 198: 557-567, 2003.

2. Eberle, F.; Dubreuil, P.; Mattei, M.-G.; Devilard, E.; Lopez, M.
: The human PRR2 gene, related to the human poliovirus receptor gene
(PVR), is the true homolog of the murine Mph gene. Gene 159: 267-272,
1995.

3. Freitas, E. M.; Zhang, W. J.; Lalonde, J.-P.; Tay, G. K.; Gaudieri,
S.; Ashworth, L. K.; van Bockxmeer, F. M.; Dawkins, R. L.: Sequencing
of 42kb of the APO E-C2 gene cluster reveals a new gene: PEREC1. DNA
Seq. 9: 89-101, 1998.

4. Liu, J.; Qian, X.; Chen, Z.; Xu, X.; Gao, F.; Zhang, S.; Zhang,
R.; Qi, J.; Gao, G. F.; Yan, J.: Crystal structure of cell adhesion
molecule nectin-2/CD112 and its binding to immune receptor DNAM-1/CD226. J
Immun. 188: 5511-5520, 2012.

5. Morrison, M. E.; Racaniello, V. R.: Molecular cloning and expression
of a murine homolog of the human poliovirus receptor gene. J. Virol. 66:
2807-2813, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 05/03/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/14/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/27/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/27/1995

EDITED mgross: 05/03/2013
carol: 4/6/2011
mgross: 10/24/2007
mgross: 4/5/2006
terry: 4/3/2006
mgross: 11/14/2005
terry: 11/14/2005
wwang: 9/28/2005
ckniffin: 9/24/2003
mgross: 8/27/2003
carol: 11/10/1999
carol: 8/12/1998
alopez: 6/8/1998
mark: 9/27/1995

605207	TITLE *605207 CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY XXVIB, POLYPEPTIDE 1; CYP26B1
;;CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY XXVIA, POLYPEPTIDE 2; CYP26A2;;
P450, RETINOIC ACID-INACTIVATING, 2; P450RAI2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Retinoids, particularly all-trans-retinoic acid (RA), are important
regulators of cell differentiation, cell proliferation, and apoptosis.
All-trans-RA plays a role during development and in the maintenance of
adult tissues. The level of all-trans-RA in cells and tissues is
regulated by the balance between its biosynthesis and its catabolism to
inactive metabolites. The cytochrome P450 enzyme P450RAI (CYP26A1;
602239), referred to by White et al. (2000) as P450RAI1, is partially
responsible for the inactivation of all-trans-RA. White et al. (2000)
identified an EST clone from a human retina cDNA library that showed
significant sequence homology to P450RAI1. Using PCR primers, they
amplified a partial cDNA, designated P450RAI2 (CYP26A2), encoding a
512-amino acid protein that is also involved in the specific
inactivation of all-trans-RA. Northern blot analysis detected a 5-kb
P450RAI2 transcript in most tissues tested, with highest expression in
human adult brain, particularly in the cerebellum and pons but also in
the cerebral cortex, medulla, occipital pole, frontal lobe, and temporal
lobe. P450RAI1, on the other hand, did not show appreciable expression
in any of the human brain tissues tested.

GENE FUNCTION

White et al. (2000) found that transiently transfected P450RAI2 was
capable of converting all-trans-RA to more polar metabolites.
Competition experiments with other retinoids suggested that all-trans-RA
is the preferred substrate.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 sibs and an unrelated Turkish patient with radiohumeral fusions and
other skeletal and craniofacial anomalies (614416), Laue et al. (2011)
identified homozygous missense mutations in the CYP26B1 gene (R363L,
605207.0001, and S146P, 605207.0002, respectively).

ANIMAL MODEL

Yashiro et al. (2004) found that mice express Cyp26b1 in the distal
region of the developing limb bud. Mice that lacked Cyp26b1 exhibited
severe limb malformations. The lack of Cyp26b1 resulted in spreading of
the RA signal toward the distal end of the developing limb and induced
proximodistal patterning defects characterized by expansion of proximal
identity and restriction of distal identity. Cyp26b1 deficiency also
induced pronounced apoptosis in the developing limb and delayed
chondrocyte maturation. Wildtype embryos exposed to excess RA
phenocopied the limb defects of Cyp26b1-deficient mice. Yashiro et al.
(2004) concluded that RA acts as a morphogen to determine proximodistal
identity and that CYP26B1 prevents apoptosis and promotes chondrocyte
maturation in the developing limb.

Bowles et al. (2006) found that retinoic acid, produced by mesonephroi
of both sexes, caused germ cells in the ovary to enter meiosis and
initiate oogenesis. Meiosis is retarded in the fetal testis by the
action of the retinoid-degrading enzyme CYP26B1, ultimately leading to
spermatogenesis. In testes of Cyp26b1-knockout mouse embryos, germ cells
entered meiosis precociously, as if in a normal ovary. Thus, Bowles et
al. (2006) concluded that precise regulation of retinoid levels during
fetal gonad development provides the molecular control mechanism that
specifies germ cell fate.

Laue et al. (2011) analyzed murine embryos exposed to a chemical
inhibitor of Cyp26 enzymes and zebrafish lines with mutations in cyp26b1
and suggested that the endochondral bone fusions are due to unrestricted
chondrogenesis at the presumptive sites of joint formation within
cartilaginous templates, whereas craniosynostosis is induced by a defect
in osteoblastic differentiation. Ultrastructural analysis, in situ
expression studies, and in vitro quantitative RT-PCR experiments of
cellular markers of osseous differentiation indicated that the most
likely cause for these phenomena is aberrant osteoblast-osteocyte
transitioning.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RADIOHUMERAL FUSIONS WITH OTHER SKELETAL AND CRANIOFACIAL ANOMALIES
CYP26B1, ARG363LEU

In 3 sibs, born to first-cousin parents, who exhibited combinations of
severe craniofacial malformation, occipital encephalocele, radiohumeral
fusions, oligodactyly, advanced osseous maturation, and calvarial
mineralization defects (614416), Laue et al. (2011) identified
homozygosity for a 1088G-T transversion in the CYP26B1 gene, predicting
an arg363-to-leu (R363L) substitution. Both parents were heterozygous
for the mutation, which was not found in 190 unrelated control
individuals. The mutation occurs within an EXXR motif that is highly
conserved across species and all human CYP450 proteins. Substitutions of
residues within this motif are known to ablate the catalytic properties
of these enzymes. Cellular cotransfection of CYP26B1-expression
constructs encoding the R363L substitution alongside an RA-responsive
luciferase reporter gene demonstrated a significantly attenuated ability
to metabolize exogenously applied RA in HEK293 cells (86% reduction).
The reduction of enzymatic activity noted for the mutant protein was
comparable to that conferred by a truncating mutation underlying a
zebrafish cyp26b1 null allele, indicating that the human mutation
constitutes a null allele.

.0002
RADIOHUMERAL FUSIONS WITH OTHER SKELETAL AND CRANIOFACIAL ANOMALIES
CYP26B1, SER146PRO

In a Turkish patient, born to consanguineous parents, with coronal and
lambdoid craniosynostosis, a large sagittal skull defect, limited elbow
extension, and arachnodactyly (614416), Laue et al. (2011) identified a
homozygous 436T-C transition in the CYP26B1 gene, predicting a
ser146-to-pro (S146P) substitution. Th3 mutation is predicted to disrupt
helix C, a broadly represented structural element in CYP450 enzymes.
Cellular cotransfection of CYP26B1-expression constructs encoding the
S146P substitution alongside an RA-responsive luciferase reporter gene
demonstrated a significantly attenuated ability to metabolize
exogenously applied RA in HEK293 cells (31% reduction). The retention of
activity by the S146P substitution was consistent with it constituting a
hypomorphic mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Bowles, J.; Knight, D.; Smith, C.; Wilhelm, D.; Richman, J.; Mamiya,
S.; Yashiro, K.; Chawengsaksophak, K.; Wilson, M. J.; Rossant, J.;
Hamada, H.; Koopman, P.: Retinoid signaling determines germ cell
fate in mice. Science 312: 596-600, 2006.

2. Laue, K.; Pogoda, H.-M.; Daniel, P. B.; van Haeringen, A.; Alanay,
Y.; von Ameln, S.; Rachwalski, M.; Morgan, T.; Gray, M. J.; Breuning,
M. H.; Sawyer, G. M.; Sutherland-Smith, A. J.; Nikkels, P. G.; Kubisch,
C.; Bloch, W.; Wollnik, B.; Hammerschmidt, M.; Robertson, S. P.:
Craniosynostosis and multiple skeletal anomalies in humans and zebrafish
result from a defect in the localized degradation of retinoic acid. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 89: 595-606, 2011.

3. White, J. A.; Ramshaw, H.; Taimi, M.; Stangle, W.; Zhang, A.; Everingham,
S.; Creighton, S.; Tam, S.-P.; Jones, G.; Petkovich, M.: Identification
of the human cytochrome P450, P450RAI-2, which is predominantly expressed
in the adult cerebellum and is responsible for all-trans-retinoic
acid metabolism. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 6403-6408, 2000.

4. Yashiro, K.; Zhao, X.; Uehara, M.; Yamashita, K.; Nishijima, M.;
Nishino, J.; Saijoh, Y.; Sakai, Y.; Hamada, H.: Regulation of retinoic
acid distribution is required for proximodistal patterning and outgrowth
of the developing mouse limb. Dev. Cell 6: 411-422, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Nara Sobreira - updated: 1/5/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/31/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/20/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/10/2000

EDITED carol: 04/17/2012
carol: 1/6/2012
alopez: 8/2/2006
terry: 7/31/2006
mgross: 4/20/2004
mgross: 1/27/2004
carol: 8/10/2000

605566	TITLE *605566 RETICULON 4 RECEPTOR; RTN4R
;;NOGO RECEPTOR; NGR
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

NOGO (604475) has been identified as a component of the central nervous
system myelin that prevents axonal regeneration in the adult vertebrate
central nervous system. Analysis of NogoA (amino-Nogo) has shown that an
axon-inhibiting domain of 66 amino acids is expressed at the
extracellular surface and at the endoplasmic reticulum lumen of
transfected cells and oligodendrocytes. The acidic amino terminus of
NogoA is detected at the cytosolic face of cellular membranes and may
contribute to inhibition of axon regeneration at sites of
oligodendrocyte injury. Fournier et al. (2001) showed that the
extracellular domain of Nogo (Nogo-66) inhibits axonal extension but
does not alter nonneuronal cell morphology. In contrast, a multivalent
form of the N terminus of NogoA affects the morphology of both neurons
and other cell types. Fournier et al. (2001) identified a
brain-specific, leucine-rich-repeat protein with high affinity for
soluble Nogo-66. Cleavage of the Nogo-66 receptor and other
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-linked proteins from axonal surfaces
renders neurons insensitive to Nogo-66. Nogo-66 receptor expression is
sufficient to impart Nogo-66 axonal inhibition to unresponsive neurons.
Disruption of the interaction between Nogo-66 and its receptor provides
the potential for enhanced recovery after human central nervous system
(CNS) injury. The Nogo-66 receptor gene encodes a protein of 473 amino
acids. The predicted protein contains a signal sequence followed by 8
leucine-rich-repeat (LRR) domains, a flanking LRR C-terminal domain that
is cysteine rich, a unique region, and a GPI anchorage site.
Subsequently, both Barton et al. (2003) and Pignot et al. (2003) showed
that there is an N-terminal LRR domain preceding the 8 LRR domains. By
Northern blot analysis Fournier et al. (2001) showed that expression of
the Nogo-66 receptor is widespread in the brain; the areas richest in
gray matter express the highest levels. Nogo-66 receptor mRNA is not
detectable in white matter, where NogoA is expressed by
oligodendrocytes. Northern blot analysis in mouse showed a single band
of 2.3 kb in the adult brain, indicating that the isolated NgR clone is
full length. Low levels of this mRNA are observed in heart and kidney
but not in other peripheral tissues.

Fournier et al. (2001) used oligonucleotide primers based on the
predicted NOGO receptor cDNA from the genomic sequence to amplify the
human receptor from an adult brain cDNA library. The deduced protein
shares 89% sequence identity with the mouse protein. The exons of the
human NOGO receptor gene are separated by nearly 30 kb.

By Northern blot analysis, Pignot et al. (2003) found a 2.4-kb NGR
transcript highly expressed in brain, moderately expressed in spleen and
liver, and weakly expressed in skeletal muscle, lung, kidney, and
placenta. A brain multitissue array revealed highest NGR expression in
cerebellum, followed by several cortical areas, amygdala, hippocampus,
and accumbens nucleus. Much weaker expression was detected in other
brain regions examined. By digestion of NGR with phospholipase C, Pignot
et al. (2003) confirmed that NGR has a GPI anchor, and sucrose density
fractionation of transfected Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells
demonstrated the association of human NGR with lipid rafts.

GENE FUNCTION

GrandPre et al. (2002) identified competitive antagonists of the NOGO
receptor derived from amino-terminal peptide fragments of NOGO-66. The
NOGO-66(1-40) antagonist peptide blocks NOGO-66 or CNS myelin inhibition
of axonal outgrowth in vitro, demonstrating that the NOGO receptor
mediates a significant portion of axonal outgrowth inhibition by myelin.
Intrathecal administration of the amino-terminal antagonist peptide to
rats with midthoracic spinal cord hemisection resulted in significant
axon outgrowth of the corticospinal tract, and improved functional
recovery. Thus, GrandPre et al. (2002) concluded that NOGO-66 and the
NOGO receptor have central roles in limiting axonal regeneration after
CNS injury.

Wang et al. (2002) demonstrated that a GPI-anchored central nervous
system myelin protein, oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein (OMG;
164345), is a potent inhibitor of neurite outgrowth in cultured neurons.
Like NOGOA (604475), OMGP contributes significantly to the inhibitory
activity associated with CNS myelin. To further elucidate the mechanisms
that mediate this inhibitory activity, Wang et al. (2002) screened an
expression library and identified the NOGO receptor as a high affinity
OMGP-binding protein. Cleavage of NOGO receptor and other GPI-linked
proteins from the cell surface renders axons of dorsal root ganglia
insensitive to OMGP. Introduction of exogenous NOGO receptor confers
OMGP responsiveness to otherwise insensitive neurons. Thus, OMGP is an
important inhibitor of neurite outgrowth that acts through the NOGO
receptor and its associated receptor complex. Wang et al. (2002)
suggested that interfering with the OMGP/NOGO receptor pathway may allow
lesioned axons to regenerate after injury in vivo.

Axonal regeneration in the adult CNS is limited by 2 proteins in myelin,
Nogo and myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG; 159640). The NOGO receptor
(NgR) had been identified as an axonal GPI-anchored protein, whereas the
MAG receptor had remained elusive. Liu et al. (2002) demonstrated that
MAG binds directly, with high affinity, to NgR. Cleavage of GPI-linked
proteins from axons protects growth cones from MAG-induced collapse, and
dominant-negative NgR eliminates MAG inhibition of neurite outgrowth.
MAG-resistant embryonic neurons were rendered MAG-sensitive by
expression of NgR. MAG and Nogo-66 activate NgR independently and serve
as redundant NgR ligands that may limit axonal regeneration after CNS
injury.

Domeniconi et al. (2002) showed that MAG inhibits axonal regeneration
through interaction with NgR. They demonstrated that MAG binds
specifically to an NgR-expressing cell line in a GPI-dependent and
sialic acid-independent manner. Consistent with a direct interaction of
MAG and NgR, Domeniconi et al. (2002) observed that MAG precipitates NgR
from NgR-expressing cells, dorsal root ganglia, and cerebellar neurons.
Experiments blocking NgR from interacting with MAG prevented inhibition
of neurite outgrowth by MAG. Using NgR-expressing cell cultures, the
authors found that MAG and NOGO-66 compete directly for binding to NgR.

In inhibiting neurite outgrowth, several myelin components, including
the extracellular domain of NOGOA, OMGP, and MAG, exert their effects
through the same NOGO receptor. The GPI-anchored nature of the NOGO
receptor indicates the requirement for an additional transmembrane
protein to transduce the inhibitory signals into the interior of
responding neurons. Wang et al. (2002) demonstrated that p75 (NGFR;
162010), a transmembrane protein known to be a receptor for the
neurotrophin family of growth factors, specifically interacts with the
NOGO receptor. p75 is required for NOGO receptor-mediated signaling, as
neurons from p75 knockout mice were no longer responsive to myelin or to
any of the known NOGO receptor ligands. Blocking the p75-NOGO receptor
interaction also reduced the activities of these inhibitors. Moreover, a
truncated p75 protein lacking the intracellular domain, when
overexpressed in primary neurons, attenuated the same set of inhibitory
activities, suggesting that p75 is a signal transducer of the Nogo
receptor-p75 receptor complex. Wang et al. (2002) suggested that
interfering with p75 and its downstream signaling pathways may allow
lesioned axons to overcome most of the inhibitory activities associated
with central nervous system myelin.

Wong et al. (2002) reported that p75(NTR) is a coreceptor for the NOGO
receptor for MAG (159460) signaling. In cultured human embryonic kidney
(HEK) cells expressing the NOGO receptor, p75(NTR) was required for
MAG-induced intracellular calcium elevation. Coimmunoprecipitation
showed an association of the NOGO receptor with p75(NTR) that could be
disrupted by an antibody against p75(NTR), and extensive coexpression
was observed in the developing rat nervous system. Furthermore, a
p75(NTR) antibody abolished MAG-induced repulsive turning of Xenopus
axonal growth cones and calcium elevation, both in neurons and in the
NOGO receptor/p75(NTR)-expressing HEK cells.

Yu et al. (2004) observed that Ngr and p75 were colocalized in
low-density membrane raft fractions of rat forebrain and cerebellum and
in cultured cerebellar granule cells. Disruption of lipid rafts by a
cholesterol-binding reagent reduced Nogo-66 signaling in the cultured
cells. Yu et al. (2004) concluded that lipid rafts facilitate the
interaction between Nogo receptor components.

By deletion analysis, Barton et al. (2003) showed that the binding of
soluble fragments of NOGO, MAG, and NGR itself to cell-surface NGR
required the entire LRR region (the N-terminal LRR, the 8 central LRRs,
and the C-terminal LRR) of NGR, but not other portions of the protein.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

He et al. (2003) reported the 1.5-angstrom crystal structure of NGR.
They found that NGR adopts a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) module whose
concave exterior surface contains a broad region of evolutionarily
conserved patches of aromatic residues. A deep cleft at the C-terminal
base of the LRR may play a role in the association of NGR with the p75
coreceptor.

Barton et al. (2003) reported the NGR structure to 2.3-angstrom
resolution. They found that NGR has an elongated banana-like shape with
approximate dimensions of 80 by 35 by 35 angstroms. It has low secondary
structure content, consisting mostly of short beta strands that generate
a long parallel beta sheet spanning the concave surface of the molecule.

MAPPING

Fournier et al. (2001) identified human sequence corresponding to the
mouse NogoA receptor within a genomic cosmid sequence (GenBank GENBANK
AC007663) on chromosome 22q11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Schizophrenia (181500) or schizoaffective disorders are rather common
features in patients with DiGeorge/velocardiofacial syndrome (DGS
188400/VCFS 192430) as a result of 22q11.2 haploinsufficiency. Sinibaldi
et al. (2004) evaluated the RTN4R gene, which maps within the DGS/VCFS
critical region, as a potential candidate for schizophrenia
susceptibility. They screened 120 unrelated Italian patients with
schizophrenia for mutations in RTN4R using denaturing high performance
liquid chromatography. Three mutant alleles were detected, including 2
missense changes (R119W, 605566.0001; R196H, 605566.0002) and 1
synonymous codon variant. The 2 schizophrenia patients with missense
changes were strongly resistant to neuroleptic treatment at any dosage.
Both missense changes were absent in 300 control subjects. Molecular
modeling revealed that both changes lead to putative structural
alterations of the native protein.

ANIMAL MODEL

McGee et al. (2005) found that mutations in NgR affect cessation of
ocular dominance plasticity. In NgR -/- mice, plasticity during the
critical period was normal, but it continued abnormally such that ocular
dominance at 45 or 120 days postnatal was subject to the same plasticity
as at juvenile ages. Thus, physiologic Ngr signaling from myelin-derived
Nogo, Mag, and Omgp (164345) consolidated the neural circuitry
established during experience-dependent plasticity. McGee et al. (2005)
concluded that after pathologic trauma, similar NgR signaling limits
functional recovery and axonal regeneration.

In vitro, Zheng et al. (2005) found that neurite outgrowth from NgR-null
mouse dorsal root ganglion or cerebellar granule neurons were inhibited
by myelin or by a Nogo-66 substrate, similar to wildtype. Ngfr-deficient
dorsal root ganglion neurons, but not cerebellar neurons, demonstrated
somewhat less inhibition to myelin, suggesting that Ngfr works through a
mechanism separate from NgR. In vivo, NgR-null and Ngfr-deficient mice
did not show enhanced regeneration of corticospinal tract axons after
spinal hemisection compared to wildtype. Zheng et al. (2005) concluded
that NgR is not essential for mediating inhibitory signals from CNS
myelin and does not play a central role in inhibition of axonal growth.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SCHIZOPHRENIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RTN4R, ARG119TRP

In an Italian patient with schizophrenia (181500), Sinibaldi et al.
(2004) identified a 355C-T transition in the RTN4R gene that resulted in
an arg119-to-trp (R119W) amino acid substitution. This patient was
strongly resistant to neuroleptic treatment at any dosage. Molecular
modeling revealed that this change led to putative structural
alterations of the native protein.

.0002
SCHIZOPHRENIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RTN4R, ARG196HIS

In an Italian patient with schizophrenia (181500), Sinibaldi et al.
(2004) identified a 587G-A transition in the RTN4R gene that resulted in
an arg196-to-his (R196H) amino acid substitution. This patient was
strongly resistant to neuroleptic treatment at any dosage. Molecular
modeling revealed that this change led to putative structural
alterations of the native protein.

REFERENCE 1. Barton, W. A.; Liu, B. P.; Tzvetkova, D.; Jeffrey, P. D.; Fournier,
A. E.; Sah, D.; Cate, R.; Strittmatter, S. M.; Nikolov, D. B.: Structure
and axon outgrowth inhibitor binding of the Nogo-66 receptor and related
proteins. EMBO J. 22: 3291-3302, 2003.

2. Domeniconi, M.; Cao, Z.; Spencer, T.; Sivasankaran, R.; Wang, K.
C.; Nikulina, E.; Kimura, N.; Cai, H.; Deng, K.; Gao, Y.; He, Z.;
Filbin, M. T.: Myelin-associated glycoprotein interacts with the
Nogo66 receptor to inhibit neurite outgrowth. Neuron 35: 283-290,
2002.

3. Fournier, A. E.; GrandPre, T.; Strittmatter, S. M.: Identification
of a receptor mediating Nogo-66 inhibition of axonal regeneration. Nature 409:
341-346, 2001.

4. GrandPre, T.; Li, S.; Strittmatter, S. M.: Nogo-66 receptor antagonist
peptide promotes axonal regeneration. Nature 417: 547-551, 2002.

5. He, X. L.; Bazan, J. F.; McDermott, G.; Park, J. B.; Wang, K.;
Tessier-Lavigne, M.; He, Z.; Garcia, K. C.: Structure of the Nogo
receptor ectodomain: a recognition module implicated in myelin inhibition. Neuron 38:
177-185, 2003.

6. Liu, B. P.; Fournier, A.; GrandPre, T.; Strittmatter, S. M.: Myelin-associated
glycoprotein as a functional ligand for the Nogo-66 receptor. Science 297:
1190-1193, 2002.

7. McGee, A. W.; Yang, Y.; Fischer, Q. S.; Daw, N. W.; Strittmatter,
S. M.: Experience-driven plasticity of visual cortex limited by myelin
and Nogo receptor. Science 309: 2222-2226, 2005.

8. Pignot, V.; Hein, A. E.; Barske, C.; Wiessner, C.; Walmsley, A.
R.; Kaupmann, K.; Mayeur, H.; Sommer, B.; Mir, A. K.; Frentzel, S.
: Characterization of two novel proteins, NgRH1 and NgRH2, structurally
and biochemically homologous to the Nogo-66 receptor. J. Neurochem. 85:
717-728, 2003.

9. Sinibaldi, L.; De Luca, A.; Bellacchio, E.; Conti, E.; Pasini,
A.; Paloscia, C.; Spalletta, G.; Caltagirone, C.; Pizzuti, A.; Dallapiccola,
B.: Mutations of the Nogo-66 receptor (RTN4R) gene in schizophrenia.
(Abstract) Hum. Mutat. 24: 534-535, 2004. Note: Full article online.

10. Wang, K. C.; Kim, J. A.; Sivasankaran, R.; Segal, R.; He, Z.:
p75 interacts with the Nogo receptor as a co-receptor for Nogo, MAG
and OMgp. Nature 420: 74-78, 2002.

11. Wang, K. C.; Koprivica, V.; Kim, J. A.; Sivasankaran, R.; Guo,
Y.; Neve, R. L.; He, Z.: Oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein in a
Nogo receptor ligand that inhibits neurite outgrowth. Nature 417:
941-944, 2002.

12. Wong, S. T.; Henley, J. R.; Kanning, K. C.; Huang, K.; Bothwell,
M.; Poo, M.: A p75(NTR) and Nogo receptor complex mediates repulsive
signaling by myelin-associated glycoprotein. Nature Neurosci. 5:
1302-1308, 2002.

13. Yu, W.; Guo, W.; Feng, L.: Segregation of Nogo66 receptors into
lipid rafts in rat brain and inhibition of Nogo66 signaling by cholesterol
depletion. FEBS Lett. 577: 87-92, 2004.

14. Zheng, B.; Atwal, J.; Ho, C.; Case, L.; He, X.; Garcia, K. C.;
Steward, O.; Tessier-Lavigne, M.: Genetic deletion of the Nogo receptor
does not reduce neurite inhibition in vitro or promote corticospinal
tract regeneration in vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 1205-1210,
2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/29/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/24/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/10/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/26/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/10/2005
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 11/27/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/14/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/18/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/12/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/28/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 1/19/2001

EDITED wwang: 10/06/2006
wwang: 10/5/2006
terry: 9/29/2006
wwang: 5/10/2006
ckniffin: 4/24/2006
alopez: 10/11/2005
terry: 10/10/2005
carol: 8/8/2005
carol: 7/21/2005
wwang: 6/7/2005
terry: 5/26/2005
alopez: 2/15/2005
wwang: 1/25/2005
terry: 1/10/2005
alopez: 12/19/2002
carol: 12/6/2002
tkritzer: 11/27/2002
alopez: 11/20/2002
terry: 11/18/2002
alopez: 11/14/2002
terry: 11/12/2002
alopez: 9/20/2002
tkritzer: 9/18/2002
alopez: 7/16/2002
terry: 7/12/2002
alopez: 5/29/2002
terry: 5/28/2002
carol: 1/19/2001

601833	TITLE *601833 ALLOGRAFT INFLAMMATORY FACTOR 1; AIF1
;;INTERFERON RESPONSE TRANSCRIPT 1; IRT1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Autieri (1996) cloned a full-length cDNA of AIF1 (for allograft
inflammatory factor-1) from a human peripheral blood lymphocyte cDNA
library. The corresponding rat gene had been shown by differential
display PCR to undergo increased expression in response to vascular
injury incurred during balloon angioplasty. Sequence analysis revealed
that AIF1 encodes a 143-amino acid polypeptide 4 amino acids shorter
than that of rat Aif1; differences in this respect reside primarily at
the C terminus. Amino acid motif analysis of AIF1 revealed a consensus
EF-hand helix loop domain that is a conserved feature of calcium-binding
proteins. Autieri (1996) showed that Aif1 expression is elevated 8- to
9-fold in the 3 days following balloon angioplasty. The author also
demonstrated that the constitutive level of AIF1 mRNA in peripheral
blood lymphocytes can be augmented by the mitogen phytohemagglutinin A
(PHA). The author concluded that AIF1 represents a cytokine-inducible,
tissue-specific, and highly conserved transcript transiently expressed
in response to vascular trauma. Northern blot analysis revealed that
AIF1 is expressed in a variety of human tissues, with highest expression
in tissues of lymphoid origin, in particular, spleen, blood lymphocytes,
and thymus.

GENE FUNCTION

Autieri and Agrawal (1998) identified IRT1 by stimulating vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) with various cytokines. Northern blot
analysis revealed wide but variable constitutive expression of a 1.3-kb
IRT1 transcript in human tissues and in VSMCs stimulated with
gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570) but not with other cytokines or growth
factors. IRT1 expression was downregulated in proliferating T cells.
Expression of IRT1 was stimulated by balloon angioplasty in rat carotid
arteries, possibly due to the presence of Ifng-producing T lymphocytes
at the injury site. The predicted protein contains a leucine zipper
motif, a hydrophobic region, a nuclear localization sequence, and 2
potential phosphorylation sites. Overexpression of IRT1 in VMSCs
resulted in altered morphology and inhibition of cell growth.

Using in vitro binding and coimmunoprecipitation assays, Autieri et al.
(2003) determined that AIF1 interacts with actin. In unstimulated VSMCs,
AIF1 colocalized with F-actin, but translocated to lamellipodia upon
PDGF (see 190040) stimulation. VSMCs stably transduced with AIF1
retrovirus migrated 2.6-fold more rapidly in response to PDGF than
control cells. AIF1 colocalized with RAC1 (602048), and AIF1-transduced
VSMCs showed a constitutive and enhanced activation of RAC1. Autieri et
al. (2003) concluded that AIF1 binds and polymerizes F-actin and
regulates RAC1 activity and VSMC migration.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the AIF1
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP SHGC-132025).

The AIF1 gene resides in the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) cluster of
genes located in the region represented by the human major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) on 6p21.3 (Allcock et al., 2004).

REFERENCE 1. Allcock, R. J. N.; Windsor, L.; Gut, I. G.; Kucharzak, R.; Sobre,
L.; Lechner, D.; Garnier, J.-G.; Baltic, S.; Christiansen, F. T.;
Price, P.: High-density SNP genotyping defines 17 distinct haplotypes
of the TNF block in the Caucasian population: implications for haplotype
tagging. Hum. Mutat. 24: 517-525, 2004.

2. Autieri, M. V.: cDNA cloning of human allograft inflammatory factor-1:
tissue distribution, cytokine induction, and mRNA expression in injured
rat carotid arteries. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 228: 29-37,
1996.

3. Autieri, M. V.; Agrawal, N.: IRT-1, a novel interferon-gamma-responsive
transcript encoding a growth-suppressing basic leucine zipper protein. J.
Biol. Chem. 273: 14731-14737, 1998.

4. Autieri, M. V.; Kelemen, S. E.; Wendt, K. W.: AIF-1 is an actin-polymerizing
and Rac1-activating protein that promotes vascular smooth muscle cell
migration. Circ. Res. 92: 1107-1114, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/10/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/18/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/6/2002

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 5/28/1997

EDITED alopez: 02/15/2005
wwang: 1/25/2005
terry: 1/10/2005
cwells: 2/26/2004
terry: 2/18/2004
mgross: 5/6/2002
alopez: 6/27/1997
alopez: 6/5/1997
alopez: 5/28/1997

605701	TITLE *605701 TRIPARTITE MOTIF-CONTAINING PROTEIN 10; TRIM10
;;RFB30;;
HEMATOPOIETIC RING FINGER 1; HERF1;;
RING FINGER PROTEIN 9, FORMERLY; RNF9, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening a human chromosome 6-specific library with a B30.2
domain-encoding exon that had been mapped to 6p21.3 as the probe, Henry
et al. (1997) obtained a cDNA encoding RFB30. Sequence analysis
predicted that the 481-amino acid protein contains a RING finger-B box
domain encoded by exon 1, a coiled-coil domain encoded by exons 2
through 6, and a B30.2 domain encoded by exon 7.

Harada et al. (1999) isolated a cDNA encoding mouse Herf1. Northern blot
analysis of mouse tissue detected a 2.3-kb transcript only in spleen and
bone marrow erythroid cells. In embryonic mice, expression was detected
on day 11.5 at the beginning of erythropoiesis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Henry et al. (1997) determined that the TRIM10 gene contains at least 7
exons.

MAPPING

Henry et al. (1997) mapped the TRIM10 gene to chromosome 6p21.3.

REFERENCE 1. Harada, H.; Harada, Y.; O'Brien, D. P.; Rice, D. S.; Naeve, C.
W.; Downing, J. R.: HERF1, a novel hematopoiesis-specific RING finger
protein, is required for terminal differentiation of erythroid cells. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 19: 3808-3815, 1999.

2. Henry, J.; Ribouchon, M.-T.; Depetris, D.; Mattei, M.-G.; Offer,
C.; Tazi-Ahnini, R.; Pontarotti, P.: Cloning, structural analysis,
and mapping of the B30 and B7 multigenic families to the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) and other chromosomal regions. Immunogenetics 46:
383-395, 1997.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/27/2001

EDITED mgross: 04/19/2005
mgross: 2/27/2001

120353	TITLE *120353 MATRIX METALLOPROTEINASE 1; MMP1
;;COLLAGENASE, FIBROBLAST; CLG; CLGN;;
COLLAGENASE, INTERSTITIAL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Matrix metalloproteinases are zinc-dependent proteases that degrade
extracellular matrix proteins. MMP1 is also known as collagenase (EC
3.4.23.7) (Nagase et al., 1992).

CLONING

Brinckerhoff et al. (1987) identified a cDNA clone of human collagenase.
The clone identified a single collagenase gene of about 17 kb from blots
of human genomic DNA. Restriction enzyme analysis and DNA sequence data
indicated that the cDNA clone was full length and that it was identical
to that described for human skin fibroblast collagenase. Collagenase is
the only enzyme able to initiate breakdown of the interstitial
collagens, types I, II, and III. The fact that the collagens are the
most abundant proteins in the body means that collagenase plays a key
role in the remodeling that occurs constantly in both normal and
diseased conditions. The identity of human skin and synovial cell
collagenase and the ubiquity of this enzyme and of its substrates,
collagens I, II, and III, imply that the common mechanism controlling
collagenolysis throughout the body may be operative in both normal and
disease states.

MAPPING

Gerhard et al. (1987) confirmed the assignment of the collagenase gene
to chromosome 11 by the use of a DNA probe for Southern analysis of
somatic cell hybrids. Analysis of cell lines with rearrangements
involving chromosome 11 indicated that the gene is in the region
11q11-q23. Church et al. (1983) had used somatic cell hybrids between
mouse cells and human normal skin and corneal fibroblasts and recessive
dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB; 226600) skin fibroblasts to
assign the human structural gene for collagenase to chromosome 11.
Production of collagenase was measured by a specific radioimmunoassay.
It appeared that both the normal and the RDEB collagenase gene mapped to
chromosome 11. This was earlier taken to indicate that the abnormal
collagenase produced by RDEB cells represented a mutation of the
structural gene. Later work indicated that both the autosomal dominant
(131750) and autosomal recessive forms of dystrophic epidermolysis
bullosa are due to mutations in the type VII collagen gene (COL7A1;
120120). The excessive formation of collagenase must represent a
secondary phenomenon, not the primary defect. It should be noted that
fibroblasts from patients with the Werner syndrome (277700) also express
high constitutive levels of collagenase in vitro (Bauer et al., 1986).

Pendas et al. (1996) isolated a 1.5-Mb YAC clone mapping to 11q22.
Detailed analysis of this nonchimeric YAC clone ordered 7 MMP genes as
follows: cen--MMP8 (120355)--MMP10 (185260)--MMP1--MMP3 (185250)--MMP12
(601046)--MMP7 (178990)--MMP13 (600108)--tel.

GENE FUNCTION

Maymon et al. (2000) measured levels of MMP1 in amniotic fluid from 353
women, including those with intact membranes, in term or preterm labor
or not in labor, and those with term and premature rupture of the
membranes (610504), with or without microbial invasion of the amniotic
cavity. MMP1 was detectable in 81.3% (287 of 353) amniotic fluid
samples, and the concentration increased with increasing gestational
age. Analysis of the matrix metalloproteinase profile of amniotic fluid
in term and preterm rupture of membranes showed that patterns were
similar for every enzyme except MMP1 and MMP8 (120355), suggesting
different molecular pathophysiologic mechanisms for extracellular matrix
degradation of rupture of membranes in term and preterm gestations.
Maymon et al. (2000) concluded that MMP1 is implicated in the mechanisms
of membrane rupture.

Lahmann et al. (2001) found significantly more MMP1 mRNA in the buttock
skin of smokers than nonsmokers and suggested that smoking-induced MMP1
might be important in the skin-aging effects of tobacco smoking.

Saffarian et al. (2004) showed that activated collagenase (MMP1) moves
processively on the collagen fibril. The mechanism of movement is a
biased diffusion with the bias component dependent on the proteolysis of
its substrate, not ATP hydrolysis. Inactivation of the enzyme by a
single amino acid residue substitution in the active center eliminated
the bias without noticeable effect on rate of diffusion. Monte Carlo
simulations using a model similar to a 'burnt bridge' Brownian ratchet
accurately described the experimental result and previous observations
on kinetics of collagen digestion. Saffarian et al. (2004) concluded
that the biologic implications of MMP1 acting as a molecular ratchet
tethered to the cell surface suggested novel mechanisms for its role in
tissue remodeling and cell-matrix interaction.

Boire et al. (2005) found that expression of PAR1 (F2R; 187930) was both
required and sufficient to promote growth and invasion of breast
carcinoma cells in a xenograft mouse model. MMP1 acted as a protease
agonist of PAR1, cleaving the receptor at the proper site to generate
PAR1-dependent Ca(2+) signals and migration. MMP1 activity was derived
from fibroblasts and was absent from the breast cancer cells. These
results demonstrated that MMP1 in the stromal-tumor microenvironment can
alter the behavior of cancer cells through PAR1 to promote cell
migration and invasion.

By in vivo selection, transcriptomic analysis, functional verification,
and clinical validation, Minn et al. (2005) identified a set of genes
that marks and mediates breast cancer metastasis to the lungs. Some of
these genes serve dual functions, providing growth advantages both in
the primary tumor and in the lung microenvironment. Others contribute to
aggressive growth selectivity in the lung. Among the lung metastasis
signature genes identified, several, including MMP1 (p less than
0.000001), were functionally validated. Two that were not functionally
validated but that achieved the highest statistical significance (p less
than 0.000001) were FSCN1 (602689) and angiopoietin-like 4 (ANGPTL4;
605910). Those subjects expressing the lung metastasis signature had a
significantly poorer lung metastasis-free survival, but not bone
metastasis-free survival, compared to subjects without the signature.

Metastasis entails numerous biologic functions that collectively enable
cancerous cells from a primary site to disseminate and overtake distant
organs. Using genetic and pharmacologic approaches, Gupta et al. (2007)
showed that the epidermal growth factor receptor ligand epiregulin
(602061), the cyclooxygenase COX2 (600262), and the matrix
metalloproteinases MMP1 and MMP2 (120360), when expressed in human
breast cancer cells, collectively facilitate the assembly of new tumor
blood vessels, the release of tumor cells into the circulation, and the
breaching of lung capillaries by circulating tumor cells to seed
pulmonary metastasis. Gupta et al. (2007) concluded that their findings
revealed how aggressive primary tumorigenic functions can be
mechanistically coupled to greater lung metastatic potential, and how
such biologic activities can be therapeutically targeted with specific
drug combinations.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Joos et al. (2002) found an association between a 1-bp insertion in the
MMP1 gene (G-1607GG; dbSNP rs1799750; 120353.0001) and the rate of
decline of lung function in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD;
606963).

Fujimoto et al. (2002) analyzed the G-1607GG promoter polymorphism in
the MMP1 gene in 75 African American infants who were born after preterm
premature rupture of the membranes (PPROM; 610504) and 235 controls, and
found a significant association between fetal carriage of a 2G allele
and PPROM (OR = 2.29; p = 0.028).

In studies in amnion fibroblasts, Wang et al. (2008) found that
inhibition of DNA methylation resulted in significantly increased MMP1
gene transcription and an associated significant increase in MMP1
production. These effects were correlated with reduced DNA methylation
at a specific site, -1538C, in the MMP1 promoter, and DNA methylation at
that site was reduced in a larger percentage of fetal membranes that
ruptured prematurely. The authors identified another SNP, 3447T-C
(numbering based on AF007878.1; dbSNP rs2075847), and observed that the
minor C allele was always methylated in vivo and that methylation
resulted in increased affinity for a nuclear protein in amnion
fibroblasts. Plasmid transfection studies and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated reduced promoter activity of the
minor C allele. In a case-control study involving 284 African American
neonates from pregnancies complicated by PPROM and 361 African American
neonates from normal term pregnancies, Wang et al. (2008) found the
minor C allele to be protective against PPROM (OR = 0.7451; p = 0.0326),
consistent with its reduced promoter function. Neonates homozygous for
the major T allele had 3.51-higher risk for PPROM compared to CC
homozygotes (p = 0.007). Wang et al. (2008) concluded that, in addition
to genetic variation, DNA methylation plays a role in controlling MMP1
expression and risk of PPROM.

Titeux et al. (2008) demonstrated that the G-1607GG polymorphism in MMP1
results in transcriptional upregulation. They found a significant
association between this SNP and disease severity among patients with
autosomal recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa (RDEB; 226600).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PULMONARY DISEASE, CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE, RATE OF DECLINE OF LUNG FUNCTION
IN
PRETERM PREMATURE RUPTURE OF THE MEMBRANES, INCLUDED;;
EPIDERMOLYSIS BULLOSA DYSTROPHICA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, MODIFIER OF,
INCLUDED
MMP1, 1-BP INS, -1607G (dbSNP rs1799750)

Rutter et al. (1998) identified a SNP (dbSNP rs1799750) in the promoter
region of the MMP1 gene (position -1607) where an additional guanine
nucleotide creates a binding site for members of the Ets family of
transcription factors. The 2G SNP displayed significantly higher
transcription in normal fibroblasts and in melanoma cells compared to
the 1G SNP. The occurrence of 2G homozygotes was 30% in 100 CEPH
controls; in tumor cell lines it was 62.5%. Rutter et al. (1998)
suggested that increased MMP1 expression contributes to stromal
degradation involved in tumor invasion.

Rate of Decline of Lung Function in Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease

Joos et al. (2002) investigated the role of MMP polymorphisms (including
G-1607GG in MMP1 and N357S in MMP12) in the development of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (see 606963). The authors determined the
prevalence of these polymorphisms in 590 continuing smokers chosen from
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Lung Health Study for
having the fastest (284 individuals) and slowest (306 individuals)
5-year rate of decline of lung function. Of 5 polymorphisms among 3 MMP
loci, only G-1607GG was associated with a rate of decline in lung
function. This allele was associated with a fast rate of decline (p =
0.02). However, haplotypes consisting of alleles from the G-1607GG and
N357S polymorphisms were associated with rate of decline of lung
function (p = 0.0007). Joos et al. (2002) concluded that polymorphisms
in the MMP1 and MMP12 genes, but not MMP9, are either causative factors
in smoking-related lung injury or are in linkage disequilibrium with
causative polymorphisms.

Preterm Premature Rupture of the Membranes

Fujimoto et al. (2002) studied the G-1607GG promoter polymorphism in
amnion-derived cells and found that the 2G promoter had more than 2-fold
greater activity than the 1G allele. Induction of MMP1 mRNA by phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) was significantly greater in cells with a
1G/2G or 2G/2G genotype compared to cells homozygous for the 1G allele.
Analysis in 75 African American infants who were born after preterm
premature rupture of the membranes (PPROM; 610504) and 235 controls
demonstrated a significant association between fetal carriage of a 2G
allele and PPROM (OR = 2.29; p = 0.028). The authors concluded that the
2G allele has stronger promoter activity in amnion cells, that it
confers increased responsiveness of amnion cells to stimuli that induce
MMP1, and that this polymorphism contributes to the risk of PPROM.

Modifier of Epidermolysis Bullosa Dystrophica

Titeux et al. (2008) demonstrated that the G-1607GG polymorphism (dbSNP
rs1799750) in MMP1 results in transcriptional upregulation. The authors
found a significant association between this SNP and disease severity
among patients with autosomal recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa
(RDEB; 226600). In 3 affected sibs and a follow-up cohort of 31
unrelated French patients, the functional SNP resulting in increased
collagenase activity was associated with a more severe phenotype (p =
6.27 x 10(-5)). Titeux et al. (2008) concluded that increased MMP1 leads
to increased collagen degradation and worsening disease severity,
suggesting that MMP1 is a modifier gene in RDEB.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Goldberg et al. (1986)
REFERENCE 1. Bauer, E. A.; Silverman, N.; Busiek, D. F.; Kronberger, A.; Deuel,
T. F.: Diminished response of Werner's syndrome fibroblasts to growth
factors PDGF and FGF. Science 234: 1240-1243, 1986.

2. Boire, A.; Covic, L.; Agarwal, A.; Jacques, S.; Sherifi, S.; Kuliopulos,
A.: PAR1 is a matrix metalloprotease-1 receptor that promotes invasion
and tumorigenesis of breast cancer cells. Cell 120: 303-131, 2005.

3. Brinckerhoff, C. E.; Ruby, P. L.; Austin, S. D.; Fini, M. E.; White,
H. D.: Molecular cloning of human synovial cell collagenase and selection
of a single gene from genomic DNA. J. Clin. Invest. 79: 542-546,
1987.

4. Church, R. L.; Bauer, E. A.; Eisen, A. Z.: Human skin collagenase:
assignment of the structural gene to chromosome 11 in both normal
and recessive dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa cells using human-mouse
somatic cell hybrids. Collagen Rel. Res. 3: 115-124, 1983.

5. Fujimoto, T.; Parry, S.; Urbanek, M.; Sammel, M.; Macones, G.;
Kuivaniemi, H.; Romero, R.; Strauss, J. F., III: A single nucleotide
polymorphism in the matrix metalloproteinase-1 (MMP-1) promoter influences
amnion cell MMP-1 expression and risk for preterm premature rupture
of the fetal membranes. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 6296-6302, 2002.

6. Gerhard, D. S.; Jones, C.; Bauer, E. A.; Eisen, A. Z.; Goldberg,
G. I.: Human collagenase gene is localized to 11q. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 46: 619 only, 1987.

7. Goldberg, G. I.; Wilhelm, S. M.; Kronberger, A.; Bauer, E. A.;
Grant, G. A.; Eisen, A. Z.: Human fibroblast collagenase: complete
primary structure and homology to an oncogene transformation-induced
rat protein. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 6600-6605, 1986.

8. Gupta, G. P.; Nguyen, D. X.; Chiang, A. C.; Bos, P. D.; Kim, J.
Y.; Nadal, C.; Gomis, R. R.; Manova-Todorova, K.; Massague, J.: Mediators
of vascular remodelling co-opted for sequential steps in lung metastasis. Nature 446:
765-770, 2007.

9. Joos, L.; He, J.-Q.; Shepherdson, M. B.; Connett, J. E.; Anthonisen,
N. R.; Pare, P. D.; Sandford, A. J.: The role of matrix metalloproteinase
polymorphisms in the rate of decline in lung function. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 11: 569-576, 2002. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 803-804,
2003.

10. Lahmann, C.; Bergemann, J.; Harrison, G.; Young, A. R.: Matrix
metalloproteinase-1 and skin ageing in smokers. (Letter) Lancet 357:
935-936, 2001.

11. Maymon, E.; Romero, R.; Pacora, P.; Gervasi, M.-T.; Bianco, K.;
Ghezzi, F.; Yoon, B. H.: Evidence for the participation of interstitial
collagenase (matrix metalloproteinase 1) in preterm premature rupture
of membranes. Am. J. Obstet. Gynec. 183: 914-920, 2000.

12. Minn, A. J.; Gupta, G. P.; Siegel, P. M.; Bos, P. D.; Shu, W.;
Giri, D. D.; Viale, A.; Olshen, A. B.; Gerald, W. L.; Massague, J.
: Genes that mediate breast cancer metastasis to lung. Nature 436:
518-524, 2005.

13. Nagase, H.; Barrett, A. J.; Woessner, J. F., Jr.: Nomenclature
and glossary of the matrix metalloproteinases. Matrix Suppl. 1:
421-424, 1992.

14. Pendas, A. M.; Santamaria, I.; Alvarez, M. V.; Pritchard, M.;
Lopez-Otin, C.: Fine physical mapping of the human matrix metalloproteinase
genes clustered on chromosome 11q22.3. Genomics 37: 266-269, 1996.

15. Rutter, J. L.; Mitchell, T. I.; Buttice, G.; Meyers, J.; Gusella,
J. F.; Ozelius, L. J.; Brinckerhoff, C. E.: A single nucleotide polymorphism
in the matrix metalloproteinase-1 promoter creates an Ets binding
site and augments transcription. Cancer Res. 58: 5321-5325, 1998.

16. Saffarian, S.; Collier, I. E.; Marmer, B. L.; Elson, E. L.; Goldberg,
G.: Interstitial collagenase is a Brownian ratchet driven by proteolysis
of collagen. Science 306: 108-111, 2004.

17. Titeux, M.; Pendaries, V.; Tonasso, L.; Decha, A.; Bodemer, C.;
Hovnanian, A.: A frequent functional SNP in the MMP1 promoter is
associated with higher disease severity in recessive dystrophic epidermolysis
bullosa. Hum. Mutat. 29: 267-276, 2008.

18. Wang, H.; Ogawa, M.; Wood, J. R.; Bartolomei, M. S.; Sammel, M.
D.; Kusanovic, J. P.; Walsh, S. W.; Romero, R.; Strauss, J. F., III
: Genetic and epigenetic mechanisms combine to control MMP1 expression
and its association with preterm premature rupture of membranes. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 17: 1087-1096, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/12/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/20/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/4/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/15/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 2/23/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/2/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/28/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/9/2002
Ethylin Wang Jabs - updated: 8/21/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/28/1992

EDITED carol: 06/18/2013
carol: 8/8/2012
carol: 1/20/2011
wwang: 3/1/2010
wwang: 12/3/2009
terry: 11/12/2009
wwang: 5/23/2008
ckniffin: 5/20/2008
carol: 5/20/2008
ckniffin: 5/20/2008
alopez: 6/19/2007
terry: 6/4/2007
alopez: 8/18/2005
terry: 8/15/2005
carol: 5/26/2005
mgross: 2/23/2005
alopez: 2/22/2005
terry: 2/2/2005
carol: 1/28/2005
terry: 1/28/2005
cwells: 4/11/2003
cwells: 10/9/2002
psherman: 4/15/1998
mark: 9/4/1997
mark: 9/2/1997
carol: 4/7/1994
carol: 9/21/1992
carol: 9/18/1992
carol: 5/28/1992

600912	TITLE *600912 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 19; TCF19
;;SC1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ku et al. (1991) cloned a growth-regulated cDNA by differential
screening of a mouse 3T3 cell line library to identify transcripts
induced by serum stimulation. Transcripts of the gene, designated SC1,
were detectable beginning at about 8 hours after stimulation. The mouse
cDNA was used to clone the human SC1 cDNA. The 2.6-kb cDNA encoded a
deduced 359-amino acid polypeptide with features characteristic of
transactivating factors. The gene was mapped by in situ hybridization to
chromosome 6p21-p22. The bacterially expressed protein had the predicted
size of 39 kD.

MAPPING

Krishnan et al. (1995) mapped TCF19 with POU5F1 (164177) to a 0.2-Mb
region between HLA-C (142840) and the so-called S gene (602593) at
6p21.3. POU5F1 and TCF19 are about 130 kb telomeric of HLAC and about
600 bp from each other.

REFERENCE 1. Krishnan, B. R.; Jamry, I.; Chaplin, D. D.: Feature mapping of
the HLA class I region: localization of the POU5F1 and TCF19 genes. Genomics 30:
53-58, 1995.

2. Ku, D.-H.; Chang, C..; Koniecki, J.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Boghosian-Sell,
L.; Alder, H.; Baserga, R.: A new growth-regulated complementary
DNA with the sequence of a putative trans-activating factor. Cell
Growth Differ. 2: 179-186, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Alan F. Scott - updated: 11/13/1995

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 11/2/1995

EDITED alopez: 06/05/2003
dkim: 10/28/1998
carol: 6/18/1998
psherman: 5/5/1998
mark: 4/7/1996
mark: 11/2/1995

246530	TITLE *246530 LEUKOTRIENE C4 SYNTHASE; LTC4S
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Leukotriene C4 synthetase (LTC4S) catalyzes the synthesis of leukotriene
C4 (LTC4) through conjugation of LTA4 with reduced glutathione (GSH),
which is synthesized by glutathione synthetase (GSS; 601002).
Leukotriene C4 and its receptor-binding metabolites LTD4 and LTE4 are
cysteinyl leukotrienes that are potent lipid mediators of tissue
inflammation. In general, leukotrienes are potent proinflammatory
mediators synthesized from membrane-derived arachidonic acid after
activation of certain granulocytes (Kanaoka et al., 2001).

The cysteinyl leukotrienes have been implicated in bronchial asthma.
CYSLTR1 (300201) and CYSLTR2 (605666) are receptors for LTC4 and its
metabolites. CYSLTR-selective pharmacologic antagonists are important in
the treatment of asthma (Martinez Molina et al., 2007).

CLONING

Penrose et al. (1992) purified LTC4 synthase and characterized it as an
18-kD protein. Lam et al. (1994) cloned the LTC4S gene and showed that
its open reading frame encodes a 150-residue protein with a molecular
mass of 16.5-kD and a pI of 11.05. The deduced sequence contains 2
consensus protein kinase C phosphorylation sites and a potential
N-linked glycosylation site as well as 3 putative membrane-spanning
regions. The deduced amino acid sequence of LTC4S showed no significant
homology to GSH S-transferases but shared 31% overall sequence identity
with 5-lipoxygenase activating protein (FLAP; 603700). Peptide
structural analysis of the deduced LTC4 synthase predicted the presence
of 3 transmembrane domains nearly superimposable on those of FLAP. LTC4
synthase was inhibitable by a FLAP inhibitor, MK-886.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic cloning from a P1 library, Penrose et al. (1996) found that
the LTC4S gene is 2.52 kb long and contains 5 exons. The investigators
noted that although the intron-exon junctions of LTC4S and the human
FLAP gene are identical, the size of FLAP reported by Kennedy et al.
(1991) is over 31 kb. Penrose et al. (1996) found multiple transcription
initiation sites in the 5-prime flanking region of the LTC4S gene.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Penrose et al. (1996) mapped
the LTC4S gene to chromosome 5q35.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Ago et al. (2007) showed the atomic structure of human LTC4S in complex
with glutathione at 3.3 angstrom resolution by x-ray crystallography and
provided insights into the high substrate specificity for a glutathione
and LTA4 that distinguishes LTC4S from other microsomal glutathione
S-transferases. The LTC4S monomer has 4 transmembrane alpha-helices and
forms a 3-fold symmetric trimer as a unit with functional domains across
each interface. Glutathione resides in a U-shaped conformation within an
interface between adjacent monomers, and this binding is stabilized by a
loop structure at the top of the interface. LTA4 would fit into the
interface so that arg104 of one monomer activates glutathione to provide
the thiolate anion that attacks C6 of LTA4 to form a thioether bond, and
arg31 in the neighboring monomer donates a proton to form a hydroxyl
group at C5, resulting in
5(S)-hydroxy-6(R)-S-glutathionyl-7,9-trans-11,14-cis-eicosatetranoic
acid (LTC4).

Martinez Molina et al. (2007) independently presented the crystal
structure of human LTC4S in its apo and glutathione-complexed forms to
2.0 and 2.15 angstrom resolution, respectively. The structure revealed a
homotrimer, where each monomer is comprised of 4 transmembrane segments.
The structure of the enzyme in complex with substrate revealed that the
active site enforces a horseshoe-shaped conformation on glutathione and
effectively positions the thiol group for activation by a nearby
arginine at the membrane-enzyme interface. In addition, the structure
provides a model for how the omega end of the lipophilic cosubstrate is
pinned at one end of a hydrophobic cleft, providing a molecular 'ruler'
to align the reactive epoxide at the thiol of glutathione.

GENE FUNCTION

Pace-Asciak et al. (1986) demonstrated that the leukotriene precursor,
LTA4, is transformed by human platelets into LTC4 by a
glutathione-dependent pathway.

Pace-Asciak et al. (1986) found that LTC4 synthesis was severely
impaired in 2 sibs with glutathione synthetase deficiency (266130).
Platelets from the patients had approximately 30% of normal glutathione
levels, reflecting a decrease of glutathione synthetase activity. The
findings in these patients suggested that cellular glutathione levels
may regulate the production of LTC4 synthetase.

The formation of leukotriene C4 from membrane-derived arachidonic acid
is catalyzed by 3 successive enzymatic steps after transmembrane
activation of eosinophils, basophils, mast cells, and
monocytes/macrophages. Arachidonic acid is released from cell membranes
by the action of phospholipase A2 (see 600522). 5-Lipoxygenase is
activated independently via a 5-lipoxygenase-associated protein and
Ca(2+) and catalyzes 2 sequential enzymatic reactions to form LTA4.
Leukotriene C4 synthase catalyzes the conjugation of LTA4 with reduced
glutathione to form LTC4 (Penrose et al., 1992).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Asthma and Aspirin-Intolerant Asthma

Aspirin-intolerant asthma (AIA; 208550) is a distinct clinical syndrome
characterized by adverse respiratory reactions to aspirin and other
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Aspirin causes
bronchoconstriction in AIA patients by triggering cysteinyl-leukotriene
production, probably by removing PGE(2)-dependent inhibition. Sampson et
al. (1997) and Cowburn et al. (1998) found increased LTC4S expression in
bronchial biopsies from patients with AIA. The study by Cowburn et al.
(1998) reported that LTC4S expression in AIA patients was increased
5-fold and 18-fold compared to aspirin-tolerant asthmatics and
nonasthmatic controls, respectively. The authors postulated that AIA
patients may have a polymorphism involved in the regulation of LTC4S
expression that results in overproduction of cysteinyl-leukotrienes
leading to bronchoconstriction.

Sanak et al. (1997) identified a promoter polymorphism in the LTC4S
gene, -444A-C, that was overrepresented among patients with
aspirin-intolerant asthma. Six of 11 AIA patients were homozygous for
the -444C allele, compared to only 1 individual in the aspirin-tolerant
asthmatic and control groups. The frequency of the -444C allele was
nearly doubled in AIA (0.436) compared to aspirin-tolerant asthmatics
(0.227) and nonasthmatic controls (0.226), yielding a relative risk of
3.89 for the -444C allele.

Sanak et al. (2000) found that peripheral blood eosinophils from
patients with AIA had increased LTC4S mRNA. An inhaled aspirin
provocation test led to increased urinary output of LTC4, which reached
significance only in carriers of the -444C allele. Nuclear-protein
interaction studies on HeLa cells showed that the -444C allele created
an additional binding site for the transcriptional signal of histone H4
transcription factor-2 (H4FN; 142750), and in vitro studies demonstrated
that the -444C allele resulted in increased reporter gene expression.
Sanak et al. (2000) concluded that overexpression of LTC4S may
predispose to AIA.

Using in vitro transfection of promoter-reporter constructs, Sayers et
al. (2003) showed that dexamethasone increased transcription of LTC4S by
more than 50% for the -1072G/-444A, A-C, and G-C haplotype constructs (p
less than 0.02), but had no effect on the A-A haplotype (p = 0.27).
Sayers et al. (2003) concluded that the 9% of the Caucasian asthmatic
population with the A-A haplotype may have genetically predetermined
lower cysteinyl-leukotriene levels in the presence of corticosteroids
compared to other patients, which has potential implications in the
evaluation of combined corticosteroid and antileukotriene therapy in
asthma.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kanaoka et al. (2001) found that Ltc4s-null mice developed normally and
were fertile. Bone marrow-derived cells from these mice provided no Ltc4
in response to IgE-dependent activation. In addition, zymosan-induced
peritoneal vascular permeability and IgE-mediated passive cutaneous
anaphylaxis were significantly diminished in these mice. The findings
indicated that Ltc4s is the major Ltc4-producing enzyme in tissues, and
that Ltc4 plays a role in vascular permeability in innate and adaptive
immune host inflammatory responses.

REFERENCE 1. Ago, H.; Kanaoka, Y.; Irikura, D.; Lam, B. K.; Shimamura, T.; Austen,
K. F.; Miyano, M.: Crystal structure of a human membrane protein
involved in cysteinyl leukotriene biosynthesis. Nature 448: 609-612,
2007.

2. Cowburn, A. S.; Sladek, K.; Soja, J.; Adamek, L.; Nizankowska,
E.; Szczeklik, A.; Lam, B. K.; Penrose, J. F.; Austen, K. F.; Holgate,
S. T.; Sampson, A. P.: Overexpression of leukotriene C(4) synthase
in bronchial biopsies from patients with aspirin-intolerant asthma. J.
Clin. Invest. 101: 834-846, 1998.

3. Kanaoka, Y.; Maekawa, A.; Penrose, J. F.; Austen, K. F.; Lam, B.
K.: Attenuated zymosan-induced peritoneal vascular permeability and
IgE-dependent passive cutaneous anaphylaxis in mice lacking leukotriene
C4 synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 22608-22613, 2001.

4. Kennedy, B. P.; Diehl, R. E.; Boie, Y.; Adam, M.; Dixon, R. A.
: Gene characterization and promoter analysis of the human 5-lipoxygenase-activating
protein (FLAP). J. Biol. Chem. 266: 8511-8516, 1991.

5. Lam, B. K.; Penrose, J. F.; Freeman, G. J.; Austen, K. F.: Expression
cloning of a cDNA for human leukotriene C4 synthase, an integral membrane
protein conjugating reduced glutathione to leukotriene A4. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 7663-7667, 1994.

6. Martinez Molina, D.; Wetterholm, A.; Kohl, A.; McCarthy, A. A.;
Niegowski, D.; Ohlson, E.; Hammarberg, T.; Eshaghi, S.; Haeggstrom,
J. Z.; Nordlund, P.: Structural basis for synthesis of inflammatory
mediators by human leukotriene C4 synthase. Nature 448: 613-616,
2007.

7. Pace-Asciak, C. R.; Klein, J.; Spielberg, S. P.: Human genetic
defect in leukotriene C(4) synthesis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 140:
857-860, 1986.

8. Pace-Asciak, C. R.; Klein, J.; Spielberg, S. P.: Metabolism of
leukotriene A4 into C4 by human platelets. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 877:
68-74, 1986.

9. Penrose, J. F.; Gagnon, L.; Goppelt-Struebe, M.; Myers, P.; Lam,
B. K.; Jack, R. M.; Austen, K. F.; Soberman, R. J.: Purification
of human leukotriene C(4) synthase: organization, nucleotide sequence,
and chromosomal localization to 5q35. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89:
11603-11606, 1992.

10. Penrose, J. F.; Spector, J.; Baldasaro, M.; Xu, K.; Boyce, J.;
Arm, J. P.; Austen, K. F.; Lam, B. K.: Molecular cloning of the gene
for human leukotriene C(4) synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 11356-11361,
1996.

11. Sampson, A. P.; Cowburn, A. S.; Sladek, K.; Adamek, L.; Nizankowska,
E.; Szczeklik, A.; Lam, B. K.; Penrose, J. F.; Austen, K. F.; Holgate,
S. T.: Profound overexpression of leukotriene C4 synthase in bronchial
biopsies from aspirin-intolerant asthmatic patients. Int. Arch. Allergy
Immun. 113: 355-357, 1997.

12. Sanak, M.; Pierzchalska, M.; Bazan-Socha, S.; Szczeklik, A.:
Enhanced expression of the leukotriene C4 synthase due to overactive
transcription of an allelic variant associated with aspirin-intolerant
asthma. Am. J. Resp. Cell Molec. Biol. 23: 290-296, 2000.

13. Sanak, M.; Simon, H.-U.; Szczeklik, A.: Leukotriene C4 synthase
promoter polymorphism and risk of aspirin-induced asthma. Lancet 350:
1599-1600, 1997.

14. Sayers, I.; Sampson, A. P.; Ye, S.; Holgate, S. T.: Promoter
polymorphism influences the effect of dexamethasone on transcriptional
activation of the LTC4 synthase gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 11:
619-622, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 10/4/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/3/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/13/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/12/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/17/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/26/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/6/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/26/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/25/1998
Perseveranda M. Cagas - updated: 9/23/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/7/1987

EDITED carol: 06/09/2011
wwang: 6/9/2009
terry: 11/15/2007
carol: 10/4/2007
ckniffin: 10/3/2007
carol: 8/15/2007
terry: 8/13/2007
carol: 5/12/2004
terry: 5/12/2004
alopez: 3/17/2004
alopez: 7/20/2000
terry: 7/17/2000
carol: 7/26/1999
terry: 7/6/1999
alopez: 4/6/1999
carol: 1/26/1999
alopez: 3/25/1998
terry: 3/20/1998
joanna: 6/20/1997
mark: 9/24/1996
mark: 9/23/1996
terry: 5/22/1996
carol: 1/13/1995
mimadm: 2/19/1994
carol: 1/28/1993
carol: 1/8/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/29/1992

608073	TITLE *608073 NUCLEOPHOSMIN/NUCLEOPLASMIN FAMILY, MEMBER 2; NPM2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Burns et al. (2003) cloned mouse Npm2 and identified human NPM2. The
deduced human protein contains 214 amino acids and shares 61% identity
with mouse Npm2. NPM2 has a conserved bipartite nuclear localization
signal followed by a stretch of negatively charged glutamic acid and
aspartic acid residues implicated in protamine and histone binding. It
also has several putative serine and threonine phosphorylation sites.
Northern blot analysis of several mouse tissues detected a 1.0-kb
transcript only in ovary, and in situ hybridization revealed expression
limited to growing oocytes. Immunofluorescent localization detected Npm2
within the oocyte nucleus before nuclear membrane breakdown, after which
Npm2 redistributed to the cytoplasm. Following fertilization, Npm2
localized to pronuclei and nuclei of early cleavage embryos through the
8-cell stage. Npm2 was barely detectable in blastocysts.

GENE STRUCTURE

Burns et al. (2003) determined that the mouse Npm2 gene contains 9 exons
and spans about 5.8 kb.

MAPPING

Burns et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Npm2 gene to chromosome 14.

ANIMAL MODEL

Burns et al. (2003) found that female Npm2-null mice showed defects in
preimplantation embryo development, with abnormalities in oocyte and
early embryonic nuclei. Defects included the absence of coalesced
nucleolar structures and the loss of heterochromatin and deacetylated
histone H3 (see 602810), which normally circumscribe nucleoli in oocytes
and early embryos, respectively. In male mice, sperm DNA decondensation
proceeded in the absence of Npm2.

REFERENCE 1. Burns, K. H.; Viveiros, M. M.; Ren, Y.; Wang, P.; DeMayo, F. J.;
Frail, D. E.; Eppig, J. J.; Matzuk, M. M.: Roles of NPM2 in chromatin
and nucleolar organization in oocytes and embryos. Science 300:
633-636, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/3/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
terry: 4/6/2005
mgross: 9/3/2003

177046	TITLE *177046 PROTEASOME SUBUNIT, BETA-TYPE, 8; PSMB8
;;LARGE MULTIFUNCTIONAL PROTEASE 7; LMP7;;
PROTEASOME-RELATED GENE 7;;
RING10;;
PROTEASOME SUBUNIT BETA-5I
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The immunoproteasome, a distinct class of proteasome found predominantly
in monocytes and lymphocytes, shapes the antigenic repertoire presented
on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules. PSMB8
encodes the chymotrypsin-like catalytic subunit of the immunoproteasome
(Muchamuel et al., 2009).

GENE STRUCTURE

Agarwal et al. (2010) noted that the PSMB8 gene contains 6 exons with
alternative splicing of exons 1A and 1B.

MAPPING

Antigen processing involves the generation of peptides from cytosolic
proteins and their transport into the endoplasmic reticulum, where they
associate with MHC class I molecules. Two genes have been identified in
the MHC class II region, TAP1 (170260) and TAP2 (170261), that are
thought to encode the peptide transport proteins. Glynne et al. (1991)
reported a proteasome-related sequence, RING10, mapping between the
transporter genes on chromosome 6p21.3.

GENE FUNCTION

Muchamuel et al. (2009) showed that PR-957, a selective inhibitor of
LMP7, blocked presentation of MHC class I-restricted antigens in vitro
and in vivo. PR-957 also blocked production of IL23 (see 605580) by
activated monocytes and IL2 (147680) and IFNG (147570) by T cells. In
mouse models, PR-957 reversed signs of rheumatoid arthritis (RA; 180300)
and cellular infiltration, cytokine production, and autoantibody levels.
Muchamuel et al. (2009) concluded that LMP7 has a role in controlling
pathogenic immune responses and may be a target in autoimmune disorders.

Incorporation of the proteasome beta subunits into the maturing
proteasome frequently requires proteolytic removal of a prosequence by
proteolytically active subunits. By following the incorporation of
mutant human LMP7 into the 20S proteasome, Witt et al. (2000) showed
that the LMP7 prosequence was not essential for incorporation of LMP7
into the maturing proteasome, but it increased the efficiency of LMP7
incorporation and proteasome maturation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Deng et al. (1995) found evidence suggesting that LMP genes have effects
on susceptibility to insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM; 222100),
independent of HLA-DR and HLA-DQ. A genomic polymorphism of LMP7 was
found to be strongly associated with IDDM, and the arg/his-60
polymorphism in LMP2 (309060) was found to be associated with IDDM in
subjects containing an HLA-DR4-DQB1*0302 haplotype.

By genomewide homozygosity mapping followed by candidate gene sequencing
of the 3 patients with autoinflammatory, lipodystrophy, and dermatosis
syndrome (ALDD; 256040) reported by Garg et al. (2010), Agarwal et al.
(2010) identified the same homozygous mutation in the PSMB8 gene (T75M;
177046.0001).

Kitamura et al. (2011) identified a homozygous PSMB8 mutation (G197V;
177046.0002) in 3 Japanese patients from 2 consanguineous families with
the Nakajo-Nishimura autoinflammatory syndrome. One of the families had
previously been reported by Tanaka et al. (1993). The mutation increased
assembly intermediates of immunoproteasomes, resulting in decreased
proteasome function and ubiquitin-coupled protein accumulation in
patient tissues. In addition, IL6 (147620) was highly expressed and
there was reduced expression of PSMB8. In vitro studies showed that
downregulation of PSMB8 inhibited the differentiation of murine and
human adipocytes in vitro, and injection of siRNA against Psmb8 in mouse
skin reduced adipocyte tissue volume. The findings identified PSMB8 as
an essential component and regulator of inflammation and of adipocyte
differentiation, suggesting that immunoproteasomes have pleiotropic
functions in maintaining the homeostasis of a variety of cell types.

In 5 patients with an autoinflammatory disorder previously designated
CANDLE syndrome for 'chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with
lipodystrophy and elevated temperature' (Torrelo et al., 2010), Liu et
al. (2012) identified homozygous mutations in the PSMB8 gene
(177046.0001 and 177046.0004). Two additional patients were heterozygous
for a PSMB8 mutation, but a second pathogenic mutation could not be
found. The patients had high levels of gamma-interferon-induced
protein-10 (CXCL10; 147310), as well as other inflammatory markers.
Microarray profiling suggested dysregulation of the interferon signaling
pathway, particularly gamma-interferon.

ANIMAL MODEL

Fehling et al. (1994) found that mice with a targeted deletion of the
Lmp7 gene had reduced levels of MHC class I cell-surface expression and
presented an endogenous antigen inefficiently.

NOMENCLATURE

The original designation for this gene, RING10, is an acronym for
'really interesting new gene.' The 'D number' of this expressed sequence
was D6S216E.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
AUTOINFLAMMATION, LIPODYSTROPHY, AND DERMATOSIS SYNDROME
PSMB8, THR75MET

In 3 affected members from 2 unrelated families with an autoinflammatory
disorder termed 'joint contractures, muscle atrophy, microcytic anemia,
and panniculitis-induced lipodystrophy' (256040), Agarwal et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous 224C-T transition in exon 2 of the PSMB8 gene,
resulting in a thr75-to-met (T75M) substitution in a highly conserved
residue. The mutation was not found in 275 controls but was present in
heterozygosity in available parents and unaffected sibs. The patients
had previously been reported by Garg et al. (2010) and were of
Portuguese and Mexican origin, respectively. The parents of the
Portuguese patients were consanguineous, whereas consanguinity was
suspected in the parents of the Mexican patients. Haplotype analysis
indicated identity by descent, but the mutation appeared to be ancient.
Molecular dynamics simulation indicated that the mutation relaxed the
protein structure by 1.2 angstrom, and may affect the proteolytic
processing of peptides. Studies of patient lymphocytes showed that the
mutant protein had markedly decreased chymotrypsin-like activity
compared to wildtype, consistent with a decrease in proteasomal activity
and loss of function. Laboratory studies of the 2 Mexican sibs performed
by Agarwal et al. (2010) showed that both had significantly increased
levels of serum IL6 (147620) and gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570), and 1
had increased IL8 (146930). Other cytokines were not elevated,
suggesting a particular biomarker signature. The disorder is
characterized by childhood onset of joint stiffness and severe
contractures of the hands and feet, erythematous skin lesions with
subsequent development of severe lipodystrophy, and laboratory evidence
of immune dysregulation. Accompanying features include muscle weakness
and atrophy, hepatosplenomegaly, and microcytic anemia. The findings
indicated that dysfunction of the immunoproteasome can result in an
autoinflammatory disease.

Liu et al. (2012) identified a homozygous T75M mutation in 4 unrelated
patients with an autoinflammatory disorder previously designated CANDLE
syndrome for 'chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with
lipodystrophy and elevated temperature' (Torrelo et al., 2010). The
clinical features were similar to those reported by Garg et al. (2010).
Two patients reported by Liu et al. (2012) were of Hispanic origin and 2
were of Spanish origin. However, only 2 patients shared the same
haplotype, suggesting that this is a mutational hotspot. Two additional
patients reported by Liu et al. (2012) were heterozygous for the T75M
mutation, but a second mutation was not detected.

.0002
AUTOINFLAMMATION, LIPODYSTROPHY, AND DERMATOSIS SYNDROME
PSMB8, GLY197VAL

In 3 Japanese patients from 2 consanguineous families with an
autoinflammatory disorder termed 'Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome' (256040),
Kitamura et al. (2011) identified a homozygous G-to-T transversion in
the PSMB8 gene, resulting in a gly197-to-val (G197V) substitution in a
conserved surface-exposed position in a beta-hairpin turn; the affected
residue is G201V in the other isoform of the protein. The mutation was
not found in 624 control alleles. Patient B cells showed decreased
levels of the mature protein and increased proportion of
immunoproteasome intermediates, as well as decreased proteasome
activity, and patient skin cells showed accumulated ubiquitinated
proteins. IL6 (147620) expression was increased in patient tissues. One
of the families had previously been reported by Tanaka et al. (1993).

.0003
AUTOINFLAMMATION, LIPODYSTROPHY, AND DERMATOSIS SYNDROME
PSMB8, GLY201VAL

In 5 unrelated Japanese patients with an autoinflammatory disorder
termed 'Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome' (256040), Arima et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous 602G-T transversion in exon 5 of the PSMB8 gene,
resulting in a gly201-to-val (G201V) substitution in a highly conserved
residue. Haplotype analysis indicated a founder effect. The mutation is
located at the edge of the S8 beta-sheet of the protein, close to the
catalytic residue thr73, and was predicted to cause conformational
changes of catalytic residues thr73 and lys105 as well as affecting the
interface of the protein with other proteasome subunits. Patient-derived
lymphoblastoid cell lines showed markedly decreased chymotrypsin-like
activity compared to controls. Trypsin-like and caspase-like activity
were also decreased. Western blot analysis showed reduced levels of the
20S proteasome, consistent with an assembly defect. Patient cells showed
decreased proteolytic activity with an accumulation of ubiquitinated and
oxidized proteins, and patient skin biopsies showed activation of an
inflammatory response. Patient sera showed increased IL6 (147620) and
IL10 (124092) associated with increased intracellular phosphorylated p38
(MAPK14; 600289), which may be related to increased inflammation. The
findings suggested that decreased proteasome activity can affect signal
transduction and promote inflammation.

.0004
AUTOINFLAMMATION, LIPODYSTROPHY, AND DERMATOSIS SYNDROME
PSMB8, CYS135TER

In a 12.5-year-old Ashkenazi Jewish boy with an autoinflammatory
disorder characterized by chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with
lipodystrophy and elevated temperature (256040), Liu et al. (2012)
identified a homozygous 405C-A transversion in exon 3 of the PSMB8 gene,
resulting in a cys135-to-ter (C135X) substitution, leading to a large
deletion of the terminal 141 residues. The mutant protein was predicted
to interfere with proper assembly of the proteasome. The patient
presented at 1 month of age with fever and skin lesions. He later
developed annular plaques, recurrent fevers, lipodystrophy,
hepatomegaly, arthritis/arthralgia, violaceous eyelids, microcytic
anemia, and elevated liver enzymes.

REFERENCE 1. Agarwal, A. K.; Xing, C.; DeMartino, G. N.; Mizrachi, D.; Hernandez,
M. D.; Sousa, A. B.; Martinez de Villarreal, L.; dos Santos, H. G.;
Garg, A.: PSMB8 encoding the beta-5i proteasome subunit is mutated
in joint contractures, muscle atrophy, microcytic anemia, and panniculitis-induced
lipodystrophy syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 87: 866-872, 2010.

2. Arima, K.; Kinoshita, A.; Mishima, H.; Kanazawa, N.; Kaneko, T.;
Mizushima, T.; Ichinose, K.; Nakamura, H.; Tsujino, A.; Kawakami,
A.; Matsunaka, M.; Kasagi, S.; and 18 others: Proteasome assembly
defect due to a proteasome subunit beta type 8 (PSMB8) mutation causes
the autoinflammatory disorder, Nakajo-Nishimura syndrome. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 108: 14914-14919, 2011.

3. Deng, G. Y.; Muir, A.; Maclaren, N. K.; She, J.-X.: Association
of LMP2 and LMP7 genes within the major histocompatibility complex
with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus: population and family studies. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 56: 528-534, 1995.

4. Fehling, H. J.; Swat, W.; Laplace, C.; Kuhn, R.; Rajewsky, K.;
Muller, U.; von Boehmer, H.: MHC class I expression in mice lacking
the proteasome subunit LMP-7. Science 265: 1234-1237, 1994.

5. Garg, A.; Hernandez, M. D.; Sousa, A. B.; Subramanyam, L.; Martinez
de Villarreal, L.; dos Santos, H. G.; Barboza, O.: An autosomal recessive
syndrome of joint contractures, muscular atrophy, microcytic anemia,
and panniculitis-associated lipodystrophy. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 95:
E58-63, 2010. Note: Electronic Article.

6. Glynne, R.; Powis, S. H.; Beck, S.; Kelly, A.; Kerr, L. A.; Trowsdale,
J.: A proteasome-related gene between the two ABC transporter loci
in the class II region of the human MHC. Nature 353: 357-360, 1991.

7. Kitamura, A.; Maekawa, Y.; Uehara, H.; Izumi, K.; Kawachi, I.;
Nishizawa, M.; Toyoshima, Y.; Takahashi, H.; Standley, D. M.; Tanaka,
K.; Hamazaki, J.; Murata, S.; Obara, K.; Toyoshima, I.; Yasutomo,
K.: A mutation in the immunoproteasome subunit PSMB8 causes autoinflammation
and lipodystrophy in humans. J. Clin. Invest. 121: 4150-4160, 2011.

8. Liu, Y.; Ramot, Y.; Torrelo, A.; Paller, A. S.; Si, N.; Babay,
S.; Kim, P. W.; Sheikh, A.; Lee, C.-C. R.; Chen, Y.; Vera, A.; Zhang,
X.; Goldbach-Mansky, R.; Zlotogorski, A.: Mutations in proteasome
subunit beta type 8 cause chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis
with lipodystrophy and elevated temperature with evidence of genetic
and phenotypic heterogeneity. Arthritis Rheum. 64: 895-907, 2012.

9. Muchamuel, T.; Basler, M.; Aujay, M. A.; Suzuki, E.; Kalim, K.
W.; Lauer, C.; Sylvain, C.; Ring, E. R.; Shields, J.; Jiang, J.; Shwonek,
P.; Parlati, F.; Demo, S. D.; Bennett, M. K.; Kirk, C. J.; Groettrup,
M.: A selective inhibitor of the immunoproteasome subunit LMP7 blocks
cytokine production and attenuates progression of experimental arthritis. Nature
Med. 15: 781-787, 2009. Note: Erratum: Nature Med. 15: 1333 only,
2009.

10. Tanaka, M.; Miyatani, N.; Yamada, S.; Miyashita, K.; Toyoshima,
I.; Sakuma, K.; Tanaka, K.; Yuasa, T.; Miyatake, T.; Tsubaki, T.:
Hereditary lipo-muscular atrophy with joint contracture, skin eruptions
and hyper-gamma-globulinemia: a new syndrome. Intern. Med. 32: 42-45,
1993.

11. Torrelo, A.; Patel, S.; Colmenero, I.; Gurbindo, D.; Lendinez,
F.; Hernandez, A.; Lopez-Robledillo, J. C.; Dadban, A.; Requena, L.;
Paller, A. S.: Chronic atypical neutrophilic dermatosis with lipodystrophy
and elevated temperature (CANDLE) syndrome. J. Am. Acad. Derm. 62:
489-495, 2010.

12. Witt, E.; Zantopf, D.; Schmidt, M.; Kraft, R.; Kloetzel, P.-M.;
Kruger, E.: Characterisation of the newly identified human Ump1 homologue
POMP and analysis of LMP7(beta-5i) incorporation into 20 S proteasomes. J.
Molec. Biol 301: 1-9, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/11/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/26/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/30/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/9/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/20/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/1/1993

EDITED carol: 10/10/2012
carol: 4/13/2012
terry: 4/13/2012
ckniffin: 4/11/2012
alopez: 10/24/2011
carol: 9/30/2011
ckniffin: 9/26/2011
wwang: 2/9/2011
ckniffin: 2/7/2011
mgross: 4/30/2010
terry: 4/30/2010
wwang: 12/7/2009
mgross: 9/9/2009
terry: 8/20/2009
mgross: 6/25/2007
carol: 8/16/2001
dkim: 7/23/1998
mark: 6/9/1996
carol: 2/27/1995
carol: 10/18/1993
carol: 2/1/1993

607290	TITLE *607290 SHISA, XENOPUS, HOMOLOG OF, 5; SHISA5
;;SCOTIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Zhang et al. (2000) cloned a cDNA encoding Scotin, which they called
HSPC217, from CD34 (142230)-positive hematopoietic stem/progenitor
cells. The deduced 170-amino acid protein contains an MYB (189990)
DNA-binding domain repeat signature. Microarray analysis of 5
hematopoietic cell lines detected low-level expression of Scotin in NB4
and Jurkat cells, but no expression was detected in HL60, K562, and U937
cells.

Bourdon et al. (2002) identified mouse Scotin by differential display of
spleen and thymus of normal and p53 (191170) null mice after gamma
irradiation of whole animals. The induced 1.85-kb transcript encodes a
deduced 235-amino acid protein. By searching an EST database using the
mouse sequence as probe, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, Bourdon
et al. (2002) cloned a full-length cDNA encoding Scotin from a placenta
cDNA library. The deduced 240-amino acid human protein shares 70%
identity with mouse Scotin. Both the human and the mouse proteins
contain an N-terminal signal sequence, a central transmembrane domain
composed of 18 hydrophobic amino acids, and a proline/tyrosine domain,
and both show an apparent molecular mass of 25 kD by Western blot
analysis. Immunolocalization of exogenously expressed Scotin revealed
colocalization with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) markers. By mutation
analysis, Bourdon et al. (2002) determined that the proline-rich domain
is required for ER localization.

GENE FUNCTION

Bourdon et al. (2002) noted that mouse thymus and spleen cells underwent
massive p53-dependent apoptosis following ultraviolet irradiation or
exposure to actinomycin D. They found that Scotin mRNA was induced
coincident with apoptosis and was expressed only in spleen and thymus of
irradiated wildtype mice and not in the spleen or thymus of irradiated
p53 null mice. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, they
confirmed direct binding between p53 and Scotin, and using a luciferase
reporter plasmid driven by the mouse Scotin promoter, they confirmed
dose-dependent p53 transactiviation. Furthermore, Bourdon et al. (2002)
showed that the apoptosis induced by the p53/Scotin pathway is caspase
dependent.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Bourdon et al. (2002) determined that the
human Scotin gene contains 6 exons. They identified a p53-responsive
element of 9 decamers within the mouse Scotin promoter.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Zhang et al. (2000) mapped the human
Scotin gene to chromosome 3. By genomic sequence analysis, Bourdon et
al. (2002) mapped the Scotin gene to chromosome 3p21.3. They also
identified a Scotin pseudogene on chromosome Xq13.1-q13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Bourdon, J.-C.; Renzing, J.; Robertson, P. L.; Fernandes, K. N.;
Lane, D. P.: Scotin, a novel p53-inducible proapoptotic protein located
in the ER and the nuclear membrane. J. Cell Biol. 158: 235-246,
2002.

2. Zhang, Q.-H.; Ye, M.; Wu, X.-Y.; Ren, S.-X.; Zhao, M.; Zhao, C.-J.;
Fu, G.; Shen, Y.; Fan, H.-Y.; Lu, G.; Zhong, M.; Xu, X.-R.; and 9
others: Cloning and functional analysis of cDNAs with open reading
frames for 300 previously undefined genes expressed in CD34+ hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells. Genome Res. 10: 1546-1560, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/10/2002

EDITED mgross: 04/07/2010
mgross: 10/10/2002

606195	TITLE *606195 IROQUOIS HOMEOBOX PROTEIN 5; IRX5
;;IRXB2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IRX5 is a member of the Iroquois homeobox gene family. Members of this
family appear to play multiple roles during pattern formation of
vertebrate embryos.

CLONING

Members of the Iroquois complex in Drosophila, including the highly
homologous homeobox genes caupolican, araucan, and mirror, act as
prepattern molecules in neurogenesis. Bosse et al. (1997) identified 3
members of the Iroquois homeobox gene family in mouse and showed that
they are involved in several embryonic developmental processes including
anterior/posterior and dorsal/ventral patterning of specific regions of
the central nervous system, and regionalization of the otic vesicle,
branchial epithelium, and limbs.

By EST database searching, Lewis et al. (1999) identified a human
breast-derived partial cDNA clone containing a novel homeobox. Using
oligonucleotide primers designed to this clone for RACE/PCR, they
obtained the full-length cDNA, which they designated IRX2 but which was
later designated IRX5, as well as fragments of transcripts derived from
4 additional IRX genes. The human IRX homeodomains are about 90%
identical to the homeodomains of the Drosophila Iroquois complex
proteins and about 93% identical to each other. Each of the IRX proteins
contains a hexapeptide-like motif. Lewis et al. (1999) found that the
deduced 417-amino acid IRX5 protein also contains acidic and polyproline
regions and an IRO box. Northern blot analysis detected 2 main
transcripts of 2.6 and 3.9 kb, but the larger transcript did not appear
to contain a closely related homeobox. IRX5 expression is not
breast-specific, as it was found to be weakly expressed in adult human
lung, uterus, salivary gland, and kidney. In situ hybridization
demonstrated that IRX5 is differentially expressed in major mammary
epithelial cell lineages and that its expression is further regulated
during both the proliferative and cyclical phases of human breast
development. IRX5 expression is maintained in human mammary neoplasias.

GENE FUNCTION

Through in vivo modeling in Xenopus laevis embryos, Bonnard et al.
(2012) demonstrated that Irx5 modulates the migration of progenitor cell
populations in branchial arches and gonads by repressing Sdf1 (CXCL12;
600835). They also found that transcriptional control by Irx5 is
modulated by direct protein-protein interaction with GATA3 (131320) and
TRPS1 (604386). Bonnard et al. (2012) suggested that IRX proteins
integrate combinatorial transcriptional inputs to regulate key signaling
molecules involved in the ontogeny of multiple organs during
embryogenesis and homeostasis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 5 affected individuals from 2 consanguineous families with an
autosomal recessive craniofacial syndrome mapping to chromosome
16q12.2-q21 (611174), Bonnard et al. (2012) screened 73 candidate genes
and identified 2 homozygous missense mutations in the IRX5 gene
(606195.0001 and 606195.0002) that segregated with disease in each
family. Irx5 knockdown by morpholino injection in X. laevis embryos
recapitulated the blood, heart, germ cell, and craniofacial anomalies
seen in patients with IRX5 mutations. In addition, Bonnard et al. (2012)
found that IRX5 has direct protein-protein interactions with GATA3 and
TRPS1, and noted that disruption of the latter proteins causes syndromes
with overlapping features (see hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural
deafness, and renal disease, 131320, and trichorhinophalangeal syndrome,
190350, respectively).

MAPPING

By screening of a human genomic library with chicken IRX2 cDNA and EST
database searching, Ogura et al. (2001) cloned 4 human IRX genes. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization, they mapped the IRX5 and IRX7
(606196) genes to chromosome 16q11.2-q13 and the IRX1 (606197) and IRX2
(606198) genes to chromosome 5p15.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Costantini et al. (2005) found that homozygous Ire5-knockout mice were
viable and fertile but had a defect in the differentiation of retinal
cone bipolar cells and were slightly smaller than wildtype.
Electrocardiograms revealed a significantly decreased signal amplitude
during ventricular repolarization. Lack of the cardiac repolarization
gradient was due to increased Kv4.2 (KCND2; 605410) in endocardial
myocardium, resulting in a selective increase of the transient outward
current, which is the major cardiac repolarization current, and in an
increased susceptibility to arrhythmias. Myocardial Irx5 was expressed
in a gradient opposite that of Kcnd2, and Irx5 repressed Kcnd2
expression by recruiting Bop (SMYD1; 606846), a cardiac transcriptional
repressor. Costantini et al. (2005) concluded that an IRX5 repressor
gradient negatively regulates potassium channel gene expression in the
heart and ensures coordinated cardiac repolarization.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HAMAMY SYNDROME
IRX5, ASN166LYS

In 3 sibs from a consanguineous Jordanian family, originally described
by Hamamy et al. (2007), with severe hypertelorism, midface prominence,
myopia, mental retardation, and bone fragility (611174), Bonnard et al.
(2012) identified homozygosity for a 498C-A transversion in the IRX5
gene, resulting in an asn166-to-lys (N166K) substitution at a
phylogenetically invariant residue in the third helix of the
homeodomain. Functional analysis demonstrated altered protein stability
and DNA binding activity, suggesting that the N166K mutation may act as
a hypomorphic rather than null allele.

.0002
HAMAMY SYNDROME
IRX5, ALA150PRO

In 2 brothers from a consanguineous Turkish family with severe
hypertelorism, midface prominence, myopia, mental retardation, and bone
fragility (611174), Bonnard et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for a
448G-C transition in the IRX5 gene, resulting in an ala150-to-pro
(A150P) substitution at a phylogenetically invariant residue in the
second helix of the homeodomain. The mutation segregated with disease in
the family. X. laevis embryos with Irx5 knockdown showed defective
cranial neural crest cell migration that could be rescued with wildtype
mouse Irx5 DNA but not A150P Irx5 DNA. The A150P variant was also
unstable in X. laevis embryos compared to wildtype or N166K
(606195.0001); Bonnard et al. (2012) suggested that the A150P mutation
may act as a hypomorphic rather than null allele.

REFERENCE 1. Bonnard, C.; Strobl, A. C.; Shboul, M.; Lee, H.; Merriman, B.;
Nelson, S. F.; Ababneh, O. H.; Uz, E.; Guran, T.; Kayserili, H.; Hamamy,
H.; Reversade, B.: Mutations in IRX5 impair craniofacial development
and germ cell migration via SDF1. Nature Genet. 44: 709-713, 2012.

2. Bosse, A.; Zulch, A.; Becker, M.-B.; Torres, M.; Gomez-Skarmeta,
J. L.; Modolell, J.; Gruss, P.: Identification of the vertebrate
Iroquois homeobox gene family with overlapping expression during early
development of the nervous system. Mech. Dev. 69: 169-181, 1997.

3. Costantini, D. L.; Arruda, E. P.; Agarwal, P.; Kim, K.-H.; Zhu,
Y.; Zhu, W.; Lebel, M.; Cheng, C. W.; Park, C. Y.; Pierce, S. A.;
Guerchicoff, A.; Pollevick, G. D.; and 10 others: The homeodomain
transcription factor Irx5 establishes the mouse cardiac ventricular
repolarization gradient. Cell 123: 347-358, 2005.

4. Hamamy, H. A.; Teebi, A. S.; Oudjhane, K.; Shegem, N. N.; Ajlouni,
K. M.: Severe hypertelorism, midface prominence, prominent/simple
ears, severe myopia, borderline intelligence, and bone fragility in
two brothers: new syndrome? Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A: 229-234, 2007.

5. Lewis, M. T.; Ross, S.; Strickland, P. A.; Snyder, C. J.; Daniel,
C. W.: Regulated expression patterns of IRX-2, an Iroquois-class
homeobox gene, in the human breast. Cell Tissue Res. 296: 549-554,
1999.

6. Ogura, K.; Matsumoto, K.; Kuroiwa, A.; Isobe, T.; Otoguro, T.;
Jurecic, V.; Baldini, A.; Matsuda, Y.; Ogura, T.: Cloning and chromosome
mapping of human and chicken Iroquois (IRX) genes. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 92: 320-325, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/14/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/10/2007

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 8/14/2001

EDITED alopez: 06/15/2012
terry: 6/14/2012
wwang: 8/17/2007
terry: 8/10/2007
mgross: 10/25/2006
terry: 3/18/2004
mcapotos: 8/15/2001
mcapotos: 8/14/2001
carol: 8/14/2001

610270	TITLE *610270 MONOACYLGLYCEROL O-ACYLTRANSFERASE 2; MOGAT2
;;ACYL-CoA:MONOACYLGLYCEROL ACYLTRANSFERASE 2;;
MGAT2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Dietary fat absorption from the small intestine is facilitated by
acyl-CoA:monoacylglycerol transferase (MOGAT; EC 2.3.1.22) and
acyl-CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DGAT; see 604900) activities.
MOGAT catalyzes the joining of monoacylglycerol and fatty acyl-CoAs to
form diacylglycerol (Yen and Farese, 2003).

CLONING

By database analysis with the sequence of mouse Mogat1 (610268) as
query, Cao et al. (2003) identified and cloned mouse Mogat2 by PCR
amplification. Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues showed strong
expression in small intestine, kidney, and adipose tissue, moderate
expression in stomach, and weak expression in liver, skeletal muscle,
and spleen.

Yen and Farese (2003) identified and cloned mouse and human MOGAT2 based
on their homology with DGAT2 (606983). MOGAT2 encodes a 334-amino acid
protein with a predicted molecular mass of 38.2 kD. Yen and Farese
(2003) also identified a 284-amino acid splice variant, in which an
unspliced intron introduces 67 different C-terminal residues and a
premature stop codon. MOGAT2 contains a phosphate acyltransferase-like
domain and 2 predicted N-linked glycosylation sites. Northern blot
analysis revealed expression of 7.2-, 3.0-, and 1.3-kb transcripts in
liver, stomach, and small intestine, with lower expression in colon and
kidney. A probe specific to the truncated splice variant hybridized
mainly to the 1.3-kb transcript in stomach. Immunofluorescence analysis
of transiently transfected COS-7 cells showed that MGAT2 displayed a
pattern consistent with localization in the endoplasmic reticulum.

GENE FUNCTION

Using transient transfection of mouse Mogat2 in AV-12, COS-7, and Caco-2
cells, Cao et al. (2003) showed that Mogat activity was significantly
higher than in untransfected/mock-transfected cells. These assays also
showed that Mogat2 possesses weak Dgat activity. Kinetics analysis of
Mogat2-transfected COS-7 cells demonstrated that Mogat2 activity is
time-, Mogat2 protein concentration-, and substrate
concentration-dependent.

Using transfections of insect and mammalian cells with MOGAT2, Yen and
Farese (2003) showed that MOGAT activity is increased in cell membranes.
This MOGAT activity is proportional to the level of MOGAT2 protein
expressed and dependent on substrate concentration. Transfection assays
also showed that MOGAT2 exhibits minor DGAT activity. Substrate
specificity assays of MOGAT2 demonstrated that MOGAT2 can catalyze the
acylation of rac-1- and sn-2-monooleoylglycerols. MOGAT2 uses a broad
range of fatty acyl-CoAs but prefers monoacylglycerols containing
unsaturated fatty acids.

Cao et al. (2003) performed a variety of in vitro analyses on mouse
Mogat2 expressed in mammalian and bacterial cells, which showed that
Mogat2 activity is stimulated by phosphatidylcholine,
phosphatidylserine, and phosphatidic acid. Mogat2 activity is inhibited
by nonionic and zwitterionic detergents, in contrast to DGAT1, which is
activated by these detergents. Assays on bacterially expressed Mogat2
confirmed the DGAT activity of Mogat2.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yen and Farese (2003) stated that the MOGAT2 gene contains 6 exons.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MOGAT2
gene to chromosome 11 (TMAP SHGC-32865). Yen and Farese (2003) stated
that the MOGAT2 gene maps to chromosome 11q13.5 and the mouse homolog to
chromosome 7.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yen et al. (2009) found that Mgat2 -/- mice were born at the expected
mendelian frequency and were indistinguishable from wildtype animals
when fed a low-fat diet. However, they had 50% reduced intestinal MGAT
activity compared with wildtype mice, and when fed a high-fat diet, they
were protected against development of obesity, glucose intolerance,
hypercholesterolemia, and fatty liver. Caloric intake was normal in
Mgat2 -/- mice, and dietary fat was absorbed fully, but the entry of
dietary fat into the circulation occurred at a reduced rate. This
altered kinetics of fat absorption appeared to result in elevated
partitioning of dietary fat toward energy dissipation rather than toward
storage in white adipose tissue. Yen et al. (2009) concluded that MGAT2
has a crucial role in the assimilation of dietary fat and accretion of
body fat.

REFERENCE 1. Cao, J.; Burn, P.; Shi, Y.: Properties of the mouse intestinal
acyl-CoA:monoacylglycerol acyltransferase, MGAT2. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
25657-25663, 2003.

2. Cao, J.; Lockwood, J.; Burn, P.; Shi, Y.: Cloning and functional
characterization of a mouse intestinal acyl-CoA:monoacylglycerol acyltransferase,
MGAT2. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 13860-13866, 2003.

3. Yen, C.-L. E.; Cheong, M.-L.; Grueter, C.; Zhou, P.; Moriwaki,
J.; Wong, J. S.; Hubbard, B.; Marmor, S.; Farese, R. V., Jr.: Deficiency
of the intestinal enzyme acyl CoA:monoacylglycerol acyltransferase-2
protects mice from metabolic disorders induced by high-fat feeding. Nature
Med. 15: 442-446, 2009.

4. Yen, C.-L. E.; Farese, R. V., Jr.: MGAT2, a monoacylglycerol acyltransferase
expressed in the small intestine. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 18532-18537,
2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/24/2009

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 7/22/2006

EDITED mgross: 04/29/2009
terry: 4/24/2009
carol: 7/22/2006

123840	TITLE *123840 PEPTIDYL-PROLYL ISOMERASE A; PPIA
;;CYCLOPHILIN A; CYPA;;
CYPH
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cyclophilin is a specific high-affinity binding protein for the
immunosuppressant agent cyclosporin A. Because of its dramatic effects
on decreasing morbidity and increasing survival rates in human
transplants, the molecular mechanism of immunosuppression by cyclosporin
A has been a matter of much interest. Liu et al. (1990) cloned human
cDNA for T-cell CYPH and constructed an expression vector under control
of the tac promoter for efficient expression in E. coli.

GENE FUNCTION

Cyclophilin A (also designated peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase A or
PPIA) is a member of the immunophilin class of proteins that all possess
peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase activity and, therefore, are
believed to be involved in protein folding and/or intracellular protein
transport. Luban et al. (1993) showed that cyclophilin A binds to the
Gag protein of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). This
interaction can be inhibited by the immunosuppressant cyclosporin A and
also by nonimmunosuppressive, cyclophilin A-binding cyclosporin A
derivatives, which were also shown to exhibit potent anti-HIV-1
activity. Thus, cyclophilin A may have an essential function in HIV-1
replication.

Pushkarsky et al. (2001) identified CD147 (BSG; 109480) as a receptor
for extracellular CYPA. They found that CD147 enhanced HIV-1 infection
through interaction with CYPA incorporated into virions.
Virus-associated CYPA coimmunoprecipitated with CD147 from infected
cells, and antibody to CD147 inhibited HIV-1 entry. Viruses whose
replication did not require CYPA were resistant to the inhibitory effect
of anti-CD147 antibody. Pushkarsky et al. (2001) concluded that HIV-1
entry depends on an interaction between virus-associated CYPA and CD147
on a target cell.

Towers et al. (2003) demonstrated that HIV-1 sensitivity to restriction
factors is modulated by CYPA. In certain nonhuman primate cells, the
HIV-1 capsid protein (CA)-CYPA interaction is essential for restriction:
HIV-1 infectivity is increased greater than 100-fold by cyclosporin A, a
competitive inhibitor of the interaction, or by an HIV-1 CA mutation
that disrupts CYPA binding. Conversely, disruption of CA-CYPA
interaction in human cells reveals that CYPA protects HIV-1 from the
Ref-1 restriction factor. Towers et al. (2003) concluded that their
findings suggest that HIV-1 has coopted a host cell protein to
counteract restriction factors expressed by human cells and this
adaptation can confer sensitivity to restriction in unnatural hosts.

Manel et al. (2010) showed that, when dendritic cell resistance to
infection is circumvented, HIV-1 induces dendritic cell maturation, an
antiviral type I interferon response, and activation of T cells. This
innate response is dependent on the interaction of newly synthesized
HIV-1 capsid with cellular cyclophilin A (CYPA) and the subsequent
activation of the transcription factor IRF3 (603734). Because the
peptidylprolyl isomerase CYPA also interacts with HIV-1 capsid to
promote infectivity, the results of Manel et al. (2010) indicated that
capsid conformation has evolved under opposing selective pressures for
infectivity versus furtiveness. Thus, a cell-intrinsic sensor for HIV-1
exists in dendritic cells and mediates an antiviral immune response, but
it is not typically engaged owing to the absence of dendritic cell
infection.

Using different Apoe (107741) transgenic mice, including mice with
ablation and/or inhibition of CypA, Bell et al. (2012) showed that
expression of Apoe4 and lack of murine Apoe, but not Apoe2 and Apoe3,
leads to blood brain barrier breakdown by activating a proinflammatory
CypA-Nfkb (164011)-Mmp9 (120361) pathway in pericytes. This, in turn,
leads to neuronal uptake of multiple blood-derived neurotoxic proteins,
and microvascular and cerebral blood flow reductions. Bell et al. (2012)
showed that the vascular defects in Apoe-deficient and Apoe4-expressing
mice precede neuronal dysfunction and can initiate neurodegenerative
changes. Astrocyte-secreted Apoe3, but not Apoe4, suppressed the
CypA-Nfkb-Mmp9 pathway in pericytes through a lipoprotein receptor. Bell
et al. (2012) concluded that CypA is a key target for treating
APOE4-mediated neurovascular injury and the resulting neuronal
dysfunction and degeneration.

MAPPING

Using a panel of somatic rodent/human cell hybrids and PCR technology,
Willenbrink et al. (1995) mapped the cyclophilin gene (designated PPIA)
on chromosome 7 and 4 pseudogenes (PPIP2, PPIP3, PPIP4, and PPIP6) to
chromosomes 14, 10, 18, and 3, respectively. Using chromosome 7 and
chromosome 10 deletion hybrid panels, they further localized the PPIA
coding gene to 7p13-p11.2, as confirmed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) analysis, and a pseudogene (PPIP3) to the region
10q11.2-q23.

Braaten et al. (1996) mapped the PPIA gene to 7p13 by FISH.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Fraser et al. (2009) introduced dual strategies of ambient temperature
x-ray crystallographic data collection and automated electron density
sampling to structurally unravel interconverting substrates of the human
proline isomerase cyclophilin A. A conservative mutation outside the
active site was designed to stabilize features of the previously hidden
minor conformation. This mutation not only inverted the equilibrium
between the substrates, but also caused large, parallel reductions in
the conformational interconversion rates and the catalytic rate. Fraser
et al. (2009) concluded that their studies introduced crystallographic
approaches to define functional minor protein conformations and, in
combination with NMR analysis of the enzyme dynamics in solution, show
how collective motions directly contribute to the catalytic power of an
enzyme.

ANIMAL MODEL

Sayah et al. (2004) showed that knockdown of owl monkey CYPA by RNA
interference (RNAi) correlated with suppression of anti-HIV-1 activity.
However, reintroduction of CYPA to RNAi-treated cells did not restore
antiviral activity. A search for additional RNAi targets identified
TRIMCYP, an RNAi-responsive mRNA encoding a TRIM5 (608487)/CYPA fusion
protein. TRIMCYP accounts for post-entry restriction of HIV-1 in owl
monkeys and blocks HIV-1 infection when transferred to otherwise
infectable human or rat cells. Sayah et al. (2004) suggested that
TRIMCYP arose after the divergence of New and Old World primates when a
LINE-1 retrotransposon catalyzed the insertion of a CYPA cDNA into the
TRIM5 locus. They concluded that this was the first vertebrate example
of a chimeric gene generated by this mechanism of exon shuffling.

Colgan et al. (2005) found that mice deficient in Cypa were resistant to
immunosuppression by cyclosporine both in vitro and in vivo, as assessed
by proliferation, IL2 (147680) secretion, signal transduction, and tumor
rejection. Cypa-deficient mice remained sensitive to FK506. Colgan et
al. (2005) concluded that CYPA is the primary mediator of
immunosuppression by cyclosporine.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Takahashi et al. (1989)
REFERENCE 1. Bell, R. D.; Winkler, E. A.; Singh, I.; Sagare, A. P.; Deane, R.;
Wu, Z.; Holtzman, D. M.; Betsholtz, C.; Armulik, A.; Sallstrom, J.;
Berk, B. C.; Zlokovic, B. V.: Apolipoprotein E controls cerebrovascular
integrity via cyclophilin A. Nature 485: 512-516, 2012.

2. Braaten, D.; Wellington, S.; Warburton, D.; Luban, J.: Assignment
of cyclophilin A (PPIA) to human chromosome band 7p13 by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 74: 262 only, 1996.

3. Colgan, J.; Asmal, M.; Yu, B.; Luban, J.: Cyclophilin A-deficient
mice are resistant to immunosuppression by cyclosporine. J. Immun. 174:
6030-6038, 2005.

4. Fraser, J. S.; Clarkson, M. W.; Degnan, S. C.; Erion, R.; Kern,
D.; Alber, T.: Hidden alternative structures of proline isomerase
essential for catalysis. Nature 462: 669-673, 2009.

5. Liu, J.; Albers, M. W.; Chen, C.-M.; Schreiber, S. L.; Walsh, C.
T.: Cloning, expression, and purification of human cyclophilin in
Escherichia coli and assessment of the catalytic role of cysteines
by site-directed mutagenesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 2304-2308,
1990.

6. Luban, J.; Bossolt, K. L.; Franke, E. K.; Kalpana, G. V.; Goff,
S. P.: Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 gag protein binds to cyclophilins
A and B. Cell 73: 1067-1078, 1993.

7. Manel, N.; Hogstad, B.; Wang, Y.; Levy, D. E.; Unutmaz, D.; Littman,
D. R.: A cryptic sensor for HIV-1 activates antiviral innate immunity
in dendritic cells. Nature 467: 214-217, 2010. Note: Erratum: Nature
470: 424 only, 2011.

8. Pushkarsky, T.; Zybarth, G.; Dubrovsky, L.; Yurchenko, V.; Tang,
H.; Guo, H.; Toole, B.; Sherry, B.; Bukrinsky, M.: CD147 facilitates
HIV-1 infection by interacting with virus-associated cyclophilin A. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 6360-6365, 2001.

9. Sayah, D. M.; Sokolskaja, E.; Berthoux, L.; Luban, J.: Cyclophilin
A retrotransposition into TRIM5 explains owl monkey resistance to
HIV-1. Nature 430: 569-573, 2004.

10. Takahashi, N.; Hayano, T.; Suzuki, M.: Peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans
isomerase is the cyclosporin A-binding protein cyclophilin. Nature 337:
473-475, 1989.

11. Towers, G. J.; Hatziioannou, T.; Cowan, S.; Goff, S. P.; Luban,
J.; Bieniasz, P. D.: Cyclophilin A modulates the sensitivity of HIV-1
to host restriction factors. Nature Med. 9: 1138-1143, 2003.

12. Willenbrink, W.; Halaschek, J.; Schuffenhauer, S.; Kunz, J.; Steinkasserer,
A.: Cyclophilin A, the major intracellular receptor for the immunosuppressant
cyclosporin A, maps to chromosome 7p11.2-p13: four pseudogenes map
to chromosomes 3, 10, 14, and 18. Genomics 28: 101-104, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/5/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/6/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/6/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/4/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/14/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/26/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/26/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/12/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/11/1990

EDITED alopez: 06/07/2012
terry: 6/5/2012
alopez: 7/6/2011
alopez: 10/7/2010
terry: 10/6/2010
alopez: 1/15/2010
terry: 1/6/2010
mgross: 8/29/2006
terry: 8/4/2006
mgross: 7/14/2005
tkritzer: 8/27/2004
terry: 8/26/2004
alopez: 9/2/2003
alopez: 8/26/2003
terry: 8/26/2003
carol: 7/10/2001
terry: 3/12/1997
terry: 3/3/1997
terry: 6/11/1996
terry: 5/24/1996
mark: 10/2/1995
terry: 9/11/1995
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/20/1991
carol: 12/12/1991
carol: 3/15/1991

606157	TITLE *606157 PANTOTHENATE KINASE 2; PANK2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Pantothenate kinase (EC 2.7.2.33) is an essential regulatory enzyme in
CoA biosynthesis, catalyzing the cytosolic phosphorylation of
pantothenate (vitamin B5), N-pantothenoylcysteine, and pantetheine. CoA
is the major acyl carrier, playing a central role in intermediary and
fatty acid metabolism. In both yeast and fly, each with only 1
pantothenate kinase gene, the null mutant is inviable (summary by Zhou
et al., 2001).

CLONING

Using linkage analysis of an extended Amish pedigree, Taylor et al.
(1996) defined an interval on 20p13 that contains the gene mutant in
Hallervorden-Spatz disease, now known as neurodegeneration with brain
iron accumulation-1 (NBIA1; 234200). Zhou et al. (2001) narrowed the
critical region for the disorder by genotyping polymorphic
microsatellite markers in affected families. Analysis of candidate genes
in this 1.4-Mb region led to the identification in the index family of a
7-bp deletion in the coding sequence of a gene with homology to murine
pantothenate kinase-1. PANK2 is a member of a family of eukaryotic genes
consisting of a group of 6 exons that encode homologous core proteins,
preceded by a series of alternate initiating exons, some of which encode
unique N-terminal peptides. By 5-prime RACE and EST analysis, Zhou et
al. (2001) found evidence for at least 5 initiating exons for PANK2, but
only 1 of these, exon 1C, has an open reading frame with potential
initiation codons that splices in-frame to exon 2. Zhou et al. (2001)
found a sequence similar to that of human PANK2 in mouse, with homology
in the derived amino acid sequence extending to the leucine codon at
nucleotide 31 but diverging 5-prime of it. There is precedence for the
use of a leucine initiating codon in humans, which is probably read by a
methionine tRNA. The leucine codon is flanked by a reasonable initiation
consensus sequence. Zhou et al. (2001) also noted the presence of a
stem-loop structure 14 nucleotides downstream from this leucine, the
location of which has been shown to enhance translation initiation at
nonconserved AUG and non-AUG initiation codons. The mouse stem-loop
sequence is nearly identical, with only 3 nucleotide changes, 2 in the
postulated loop of the stem loop and 1 that changes a GC to a GU
basepair, which implies structural conservation. Because of this strong
conservation, Zhou et al. (2001) proposed that the CUG may serve as an
alternative initiation codon for translation in addition to one of the
methionine codons downstream. There is also a 22-bp palindrome at the
junction of spliced exons 1C and 2. This sequence may form a hairpin
structure and thus explain why most PANK2 ESTs terminate just 3-prime of
the palindrome. Zhou et al. (2001) speculated that this sequence may
serve a regulatory function. PANK2 is ubiquitously expressed, including
in retina and infant basal ganglia. Zhou et al. (2001) provided evidence
for pantothenic kinase activity in PANK2 by showing that the human gene
PANK2 can rescue the temperature-sensitive E. coli pantothenate kinase
mutant.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hortnagel et al. (2003) determined the exon-intron structure of the
human PANK2 gene and identified 2 alternatively used first exons. The
resulting transcripts encode distinct isoforms of PANK2, one of which
carries an N-terminal extension with a predicted mitochondrial targeting
signal. An in vitro import assay and in vivo immunolocalization
experiments demonstrated a mitochondrial localization of this isoform.
The authors concluded that the symptoms observed in pantothenate
kinase-associated neurodegeneration (234200) may be caused by a
deficiency of the mitochondrial isoform; they further postulated the
existence of a complete intramitochondrial pathway for de novo synthesis
of coenzyme A.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Zhou et al. (2001) identified 3 nonsense mutations in exon 1C of the
PANK2 gene in affected individuals with classic Hallervorden-Spatz
disease (234200), also known as neurodegeneration with brain iron
accumulation-1 (NBIA1) or pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (PKAN), but not in controls.

In the original patient with HARP syndrome (607236) reported by Higgins
et al. (1992), Ching et al. (2002) identified homozygosity for a
mutation in the PANK2 gene (606157.0011). HARP syndrome shares many
clinical and radiographic features with PKAN, but is distinguished by a
specific lipoprotein abnormality. The mutation identified by Ching et
al. (2002) confirmed that HARP syndrome is part of the PKAN disease
spectrum.

Hayflick et al. (2003) performed clinical assessment and mutation screen
of the PANK2 gene on 123 patients from 98 families with a diagnosis of
Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome, classified on the basis of clinical
assessment as having classic disease (characterized by early onset with
rapid progression) or atypical disease (later onset with slow
progression). PANK2 mutations were found in 66 of the 98 families. Of 49
families whose members had classic disease, all had mutations in PANK2.
Of 49 families whose members had atypical disease, mutations were found
in 17 (35%). Whereas almost all mutations in patients with atypical
disease led to amino acid changes, those in patients with classic
disease more often resulted in predicted protein truncation. Patients
with atypical disease who had PANK2 mutations were more likely to have
prominent speech-related and psychiatric symptoms than patients with
classic disease or mutation-negative patients with atypical disease. In
all patients with pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration,
whether classic or atypical, T2-weighted MRI of the brain showed a
specific pattern of hyperintensity within the hypointense medial globus
pallidus. This pattern was not seen in any patients without mutations.
Predicted levels of pantothenate kinase-2 protein correlated with the
severity of the disease.

In the 66 families with mutations in the PANK2 gene studied by Hayflick
et al. (2003), 2 PANK2 mutations, both of them missense mutations,
accounted for one-third of the disease alleles, G411R (606157.0002) and
T418M (606157.0010). G411R constituted 31 disease-related alleles in 27
families. Eighty-one percent of the 27 families with the G411R mutation
were of European descent. In 6 families (4 with classic disease and 2
with atypical disease), the G411R mutation was found on one chromosome
and no mutation was identified on the other. Families with only 1
identified mutation were not distinguishable from those with 2. Some of
these mutations were undetectable with the screening method used, e.g.,
promoter mutations. Six of the 9 families with a single mutant allele
had only the allele with the G411R mutation. This observation is
striking because mutations in both alleles were detected in nearly all
families, and it suggests that G411R may be semidominant, with 1 allele
sufficient to cause disease given certain genetic backgrounds. Against
this hypothesis was the fact that no disease phenotype was observed in
G411R-heterozygous carrier parents of affected persons.

In 16 patients with PKAN, Pellecchia et al. (2005) identified 12
mutations in the PANK2 gene, including 5 novel mutations. They found no
genotype/phenotype correlations.

Hartig et al. (2006) identified homozygous or compound heterozygous
PANK2 mutations in 48 of 72 patients with PKAN. Deletions accounted for
4% of mutated alleles. There was a correlation between predicted
loss-of-function alleles and earlier age at disease onset.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kuo et al. (2005) generated a mouse knockout of the murine Pank2 gene.
Homozygous null mice gradually developed retinal degeneration with
progressive photoreceptor decline, significantly lower scotopic a- and
b-wave amplitudes, decreased cell number and disruption of the outer
segment, and reduced pupillary constriction response. Homozygous male
mutants were infertile due to azoospermia, a condition that was not
appreciated in affected humans with pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200). In contrast to the human, homozygous null
mice exhibited no basal ganglia changes or dystonia. By
immunohistochemistry, Pank2 was localized to mitochondria in both retina
and spermatozoa.

Drosophila has only 1 PANK gene, fumble (fbl), which encodes several
isoforms of pantothenate kinase, including a long isoform fblL that
localizes to mitochondria and shorter isoforms fblS1 and fblS2 that
localize to the cytosol. Wu et al. (2009) introduced various isoforms of
Drosophila fbl and human PANK2 into flies to study their in vivo
functions. Only mitochondria-targeted FblL or human PANK2 was able to
rescue a hypomorphic fbl(1) mutation, with the rescuing ability
dependent on the expression level of the transgene. Transgenic lines
with low expression of normal fbl or PANK2 displayed similar phenotypes
as PANK2-mutant transgenic flies. These PANK2 mutants all showed reduced
enzyme activity, and phenotype severity correlated with in vitro enzyme
activity. Cytosolic PANK3 (606161) and PANK4 (606162) could partially
rescue all fbl defects except male sterility. The authors concluded that
fbl is the ortholog of human PANK2, and PANK2 is functionally more
potent than PANK3 and PANK4 in vivo. Wu et al. (2009) suggested that
mitochondria-located pantothenate kinase is required to achieve the
maximal enzymatic activity to fulfill the most challenging biologic
tasks such as maintaining male fertility and optimal neuronal function,
and PKAN features are mainly due to the reduction of the total cellular
pantothenate kinase activity in the most susceptible regions.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, 7-BP DEL, NT627

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a homozygous
7-bp deletion in exon 2 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in a frameshift.

.0002
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL, INCLUDED
PANK2, GLY411ARG

In 10 individuals with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a homozygous
1261G-A transition in exon 6 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in a
glycine-to-arginine substitution at codon 411 (G411R). The mutation was
also seen in 7 individuals with atypical PKAN.

.0003
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, TYR80TER

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a C-to-G
transversion at nucleotide 270 in exon 1C of the PANK2 gene, resulting
in a tyrosine-to-termination substitution at codon 80 (Y80X). This
mutation was found in compound heterozygosity with arg154 to tyr
(606157.0004). In another affected individual, the mutation was found in
homozygosity.

.0004
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, ARG154TRP

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) found a C-to-T transition
at nucleotide 490 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in an arg-to-trp
substitution at codon 154 (R154W). This patient was compound
heterozygous for the Y80X mutation (606157.0003).

.0005
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, ARG176CYS

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 556 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in an
arg-to-cys substitution at codon 176 (R176C). This individual was a
compound heterozygote for the G411R mutation (606157.0002).

.0006
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, SER361ASN

In an individual with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200) who was compound heterozygous for an R145W
mutation (606157.0004) in the PANK2 gene, Zhou et al. (2001) identified
a G-to-A transition on the other allele, resulting in a ser361-to-asn
(S361N) amino acid substitution.

.0007
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL
PANK2, SER240PRO

In an individual with atypical pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a homozygous
mutation, a T-to-C transition at nucleotide 751 of the PANK2 gene,
resulting in a serine-to-proline substitution at codon 240 (S240P).

.0008
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL
PANK2, THR124ALA

In an individual with atypical pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified an A-to-G
transition at nucleotide 400 of the PANK2 gene, resulting in a
threonine-to-alanine substitution at codon 124 (T124A).

.0009
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL
PANK2, ARG168CYS

In an individual with atypical pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001) identified a C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 532of the PANK2 gene, resulting in an
arg-to-cys substitution at codon 168 (R168C). This patient was compound
heterozygous for the G411R mutation (606157.0002).

.0010
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, ATYPICAL, INCLUDED
PANK2, THR418MET

In individuals with both typical and atypical pantothenate
kinase-associated neurodegeneration (234200), Zhou et al. (2001)
identified a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1283 of the PANK2 gene,
resulting in a threonine-to-methionine substitution at codon 418
(T418M). This mutation was found in homozygosity in 2 patients with
classical PKAN, and in compound heterozygosity with the G411R mutation
(606157.0002) in an individual with atypical PKAN.

Hayflick et al. (2003) found the T418M mutation on 10 alleles in 6 of 66
families with PANK2 mutations causing Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome.

.0011
HARP SYNDROME
PANK2, ARG371TER

In the patient originally reported by Higgins et al. (1992) with HARP
syndrome (607236), Ching et al. (2002) demonstrated homozygosity for a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1111 in exon 5 of the PANK2 gene. The
mutation changed an arginine codon to a stop codon at amino acid 371 and
shortened PANK2 by 89 amino acids. Ching et al. (2002) suspected that
the patient was the offspring of consanguineous parents because they
came from a village of 500 inhabitants. The patient demonstrated severe
spasticity and dystonia from early childhood. At age 10, she was shown
to have pigmentary retinopathy on funduscopic examination and the 'eye
of the tiger' sign on brain MRI. Peripheral blood smear and electron
microscopy demonstrated marked acanthocytosis that was not due to an
intrinsic erythrocyte protein defect. On high-resolution lipoprotein
electrophoresis, she demonstrated absence of the pre-beta fraction and
normal blood levels of cholesterol, triglycerides, high and low density
lipoprotein cholesterol, and apolipoproteins A, B, and E.

.0012
HARP SYNDROME
PANK2, MET327THR

In a patient with HARP syndrome (607236) initially reported by Orrell et
al. (1995), Houlden et al. (2003) identified compound heterozygosity for
mutations in the PANK2 gene: a 980T-C change in exon 4, resulting in a
met327-to-thr (M327T) substitution, and a splice site mutation
(606157.0013). Her unaffected father and 2 of his unaffected brothers
were heterozygous for the M327T mutation.

.0013
HARP SYNDROME
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1, INCLUDED
PANK2, IVS4, G-T, -1

In a patient with HARP syndrome (607236) initially reported by Orrell et
al. (1995), Houlden et al. (2003) identified compound heterozygosity for
mutations in the PANK2 gene: a G-to-T transversion at the splice site of
exon 5 (IVS4-1G-T), and M327T (606157.0012). The patient's mother and
sister, both of whom had acanthocytosis and hypoprebetalipoproteinemia
without neurologic abnormalities, were heterozygous for the splice site
mutation. Houlden et al. (2003) noted that the IVS4 mutation had been
reported in 2 patients with classic pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration (234200) (Hayflick et al., 2003), thus confirming that
the 2 disorders are allelic.

.0014
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, 3-BP DEL, 1142GAG

In affected members from 4 Dutch families with pantothenate
kinase-associated neurodegeneration (234200), Rump et al. (2005)
identified a 3-bp deletion (1142delGAG) in the PANK2 gene. The in-frame
deletion is predicted to result in substitution of arg371 and glu372
with a glutamine in the catalytic domain of the protein. Five patients
from 3 families were homozygous for the mutation. The patient from the
fourth family was compound heterozygous for the deletion and a second
mutation (S68X; 606157.0015). Haplotype analysis suggested a founder
effect that arose in Friesland, a northern province of the Netherlands,
at the beginning of the ninth century, approximately 38 generations ago.

.0015
NEURODEGENERATION WITH BRAIN IRON ACCUMULATION 1
PANK2, SER68TER

In a Dutch patient with pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration
(234200), Rump et al. (2005) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the PANK2 gene: a 3-bp deletion (606157.0014) and a 233C-A
transversion, resulting in a ser68-to-ter (S68X) substitution. The
patient had a severe form of the disorder and died at age 12 years.

REFERENCE 1. Ching, K. H. L.; Westaway, S. K.; Gitschier, J.; Higgins, J. J.;
Hayflick, S. J.: HARP syndrome is allelic with pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration. Neurology 58: 1673-1674, 2002.

2. Hartig, M. B.; Hortnagel, K.; Garavaglia, B.; Zorzi, G.; Kmiec,
T.; Klopstock, T.; Rostasy, K.; Svetel, M.; Kostic, V. S.; Schuelke,
M.; Botz, E.; Weindl, A.; Novakovic, I.; Nardocci, N.; Prokisch, H.;
Meitinger, T.: Genotypic and phenotypic spectrum of PANK2 mutations
in patients with neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation. Ann.
Neurol. 59: 248-256, 2006.

3. Hayflick, S. J.; Westaway, S. K.; Levinson, B.; Zhou, B.; Johnson,
M. A.; Ching, K. H. L.; Gitschier, J.: Genetic, clinical, and radiographic
delineation of Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome. New Eng. J. Med. 348:
33-40, 2003.

4. Higgins, J. J.; Patterson, M. C.; Papadopoulos, N. M.; Brady, R.
O.; Pentchev, P. G.; Barton, N. W.: Hypoprebetalipoproteinemia, acanthocytosis,
retinitis pigmentosa, and pallidal degeneration (HARP syndrome). Neurology 42:
194-198, 1992.

5. Hortnagel, K.; Prokisch, H.; Meitinger, T.: An isoform of hPANK2,
deficient in pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration, localizes
to mitochondria. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 321-327, 2003.

6. Houlden, H.; Lincoln, S.; Farrer, M.; Cleland, P. G.; Hardy, J.;
Orrell, R. W.: Compound heterozygous PANK2 mutations confirm HARP
and Hallervorden-Spatz syndromes are allelic. Neurology 61: 1423-1426,
2003.

7. Kuo, Y.-M.; Duncan, J. L.; Westaway, S. K.; Yang, H.; Nune, G.;
Xu, E. Y.; Hayflick, S. J.; Gitschier, J.: Deficiency of pantothenate
kinase 2 (Pank2) in mice leads to retinal degeneration and azoospermia. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 49-57, 2005.

8. Orrell, R. W.; Amrolia, P. J.; Heald, A.; Cleland, P. G.; Owen,
J. S.; Morgan-Hughes, J. A.; Harding, A. E.; Marsden, C. D.: Acanthocytosis,
retinitis pigmentosa, and pallidal degeneration: a report of three
patients, including the second reported case with hypoprebetalipoproteinemia
(HARP syndrome). Neurology 45: 487-492, 1995.

9. Pellecchia, M. T.; Valente, E. M.; Cif, L.; Salvi, S.; Albanese,
A.; Scarano, V.; Bonuccelli, U.; Bentivoglio, A. R.; D'Amico, A.;
Marelli, C.; Di Giorgio, A.; Coubes, P.; Barone, P.; Dallapiccola,
B.: The diverse phenotype and genotype of pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration. Neurology 64: 1810-1812, 2005.

10. Rump, P.; Lemmink, H. H.; Verschuuren-Bemelmans, C. C.; Grootscholten,
P. M.; Fock, J. M.; Hayflick, S. J.; Westaway, S. K.; Vos, Y. J.;
van Essen, A. J.: A novel 3-bp deletion in the PANK2 gene of Dutch
patients with pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration: evidence
for a founder effect. Neurogenetics 6: 201-207, 2005.

11. Taylor, T. D.; Litt, M.; Kramer, P.; Pandolfo, M.; Angelini, L.;
Nardocci, N.; Davis, S.; Pineda, M.; Hattori, H.; Flett, P. J.; Cilio,
M. R.; Bertini, E.; Hayflick, S. J.: Homozygosity mapping of Hallervorden-Spatz
syndrome to chromosome 20p12.3-p13. Nature Genet. 14: 479-481, 1996.
Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 16: 109 only, 1997.

12. Wu, Z.; Li, C.; Lv, S.; Zhou, B.: Pantothenate kinase-associated
neurodegeneration: insights from a Drosophila model. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 18: 3659-3672, 2009.

13. Zhou, B.; Westaway, S. K.; Levinson, B.; Johnson, M. A.; Gitschier,
J.; Hayflick, S. J.: A novel pantothenate kinase gene (PANK2) is
defective in Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome. Nature Genet. 28: 345-349,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 7/8/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/31/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/11/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/2/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/16/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/3/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/3/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/24/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/3/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 7/30/2001

EDITED carol: 04/16/2013
terry: 5/25/2012
wwang: 7/22/2010
terry: 7/8/2010
carol: 3/8/2010
carol: 3/1/2010
carol: 2/25/2010
alopez: 11/2/2007
terry: 10/31/2007
wwang: 4/19/2006
ckniffin: 4/11/2006
wwang: 3/14/2006
ckniffin: 3/2/2006
wwang: 8/23/2005
ckniffin: 8/16/2005
alopez: 1/3/2005
tkritzer: 2/6/2004
ckniffin: 2/3/2004
cwells: 11/18/2003
terry: 1/24/2003
alopez: 11/1/2002
carol: 9/18/2002
tkritzer: 9/17/2002
terry: 9/3/2002
alopez: 7/30/2001

