608359	TITLE *608359 SULFOTRANSFERASE FAMILY 4A, MEMBER 1; SULT4A1
;;BRAIN SULFOTRANSFERASE-LIKE PROTEIN 1; BRSTL1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SULT4A1 belongs to the sulfotransferase family, which is involved in the
metabolism of endogenous chemicals, such as thyroid hormones, steroids,
and monoamine neurotransmitters, as well as drugs and xenobiotics.
Conjugation with a charged sulfonate moiety usually decreases the
biologic activity of the compound and increases its aqueous solubility
and excretion (summary by Falany et al., 2000).

CLONING

By differential display to identify transcripts enriched in islet cells
relative to pancreatic exocrine tissue, Ferrer et al. (1997) obtained a
partial SULT4A1 sequence. Using this sequence to probe an insulinoma
cDNA library, Falany et al. (2000) isolated partial SULT4A1 cDNAs
containing intronic sequences. By screening a brain cDNA library, they
cloned full-length SULT4A1, which they called BRSTL1. The deduced
284-amino acid SULT4A1 protein has a calculated molecular mass of about
33.1 kD. It contains an N-terminal 3-prime-phosphoadenosine
5-prime-phosphosulfate (PAPS)-binding site, a putative active-site
histidine (his111), and a central motif involved in PAPS binding.
SULT4A1 shares 30% to 36% amino acid identity with several other
sulfotransferases. Northern blot analysis detected expression of SULT4A1
in brain, but not in heart, placenta, lung, liver, skeletal muscle,
kidney, or pancreas. RT-PCR of liver RNA generated a SULT4A1 product
identical to the cDNA isolated from brain except for the inclusion of a
126-bp insert. The insert, which is located at a position corresponding
to intron 7 of several human SULT genes, contains several stop codons.
This transcript was also detected in several pancreatic cell lines.

Sakakibara et al. (2002) cloned mouse Sult4a1. By searching databases
using the mouse sequence and RT-PCR of a brain cDNA library, they cloned
human SULT4A1. The mouse and human proteins share 97.9% amino acid
identity. Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues showed expression of
Sult4a1 only in brain, cerebellum, and hypothalamus. By mRNA dot blot
analysis of human tissues, expression was detected in spinal cord and in
all brain regions examined. Recombinant mouse and human SULT4A1
expressed in E. coli both had an apparent molecular mass of about 33 kD
by SDS-PAGE.

GENE FUNCTION

Sakakibara et al. (2002) assayed the sulfotransferase activity of
recombinant mouse and human SULT4A1 using radiolabeled PAPS as the
sulfate donor. Both enzymes utilized a variety of endogenous and
xenobiotic compounds, including L-triiodothyronine, thyroxine, estrone,
p-nitrophenol, 2-naphthylamine, and 2-naphthol. Using mouse brain
homogenate as substrate in the sulfotransferase assay, they found 4
distinct brain compounds sulfated by both mouse and human SULT4A1.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SULT4A1
gene to chromosome 22 (TMAP A001X01).

REFERENCE 1. Falany, C. N.; Xie, X.; Wang, J.; Ferrer, J.; Falany, J. L.: Molecular
cloning and expression of novel sulphotransferase-like cDNAs from
human and rat brain. Biochem. J. 346: 857-864, 2000.

2. Ferrer, J.; Wasson, J.; Schoor, K. D.; Mueckler, M.; Donis-Keller,
H.; Permutt, M. A.: Mapping novel pancreatic islet genes to human
chromosomes. Diabetes 46: 386-392, 1997.

3. Sakakibara, Y.; Suiko, M.; Pai, T. G.; Nakayama, T.; Takami, Y.;
Katafuchi, J.; Liu, M.-C.: Highly conserved mouse and human brain
sulfotransferases: molecular cloning, expression, and functional characterization. Gene 285:
39-47, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/22/2003

EDITED carol: 02/16/2011
mgross: 12/22/2003

192090	TITLE *192090 CADHERIN 1; CDH1
;;CADHERIN, EPITHELIAL;;
E-CADHERIN; CDHE; ECAD;;
UVOMORULIN; UVO;;
CALCIUM-DEPENDENT ADHESION PROTEIN, EPITHELIAL;;
LIVER CELL ADHESION MOLECULE; LCAM
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Uvomorulin is a specific calcium ion-dependent cell adhesion molecule.
In mice it expresses its adhesive function during the preimplantation
stage of development and in epithelial cells, where it is concentrated
in the intermediate junctions.

CLONING

Mansouri et al. (1987) examined the amino acid sequence of uvomorulin
and concluded that the gene is highly conserved. Sequence comparison
showed extensive similarity to chicken LCAM. Using the mouse cDNA clone,
Mansouri et al. (1987) screened a human liver cDNA library and isolated
a 2-kb cDNA clone containing coding sequences for human uvomorulin.
Sequence comparison showed over 80% identity to the mouse in both
nucleotide and amino acid sequences.

GENE STRUCTURE

Berx et al. (1995) cloned the human E-cadherin gene and showed that it
has 16 exons spanning approximately 100 kb of genomic DNA. The gene
structure is similar to that of other cadherins.

MAPPING

By Southern analysis of DNA from a panel of mouse-human somatic cell
hybrids, Mansouri et al. (1987, 1988) assigned the UVO gene to 16q
(16p11-qter). In the mouse the Um locus is on chromosome 8 (Mansouri et
al., 1987; Eistetter et al., 1988), together with a number of other loci
that are located on human 16q (Scherer et al., 1989). Using a cDNA probe
for the human UVO gene, Natt et al. (1989) performed Southern blot
analysis of 2 overlapping interstitial deletions on human chromosome 16q
and thereby assigned the UVO locus to 16q22.1, distal to LCAT (606967)
and proximal to HP (140100) and TAT (613018). Chen et al. (1991)
confirmed the assignment to chromosome 16 and concluded that UVO is
located near LCAT in band 16q22.1. Starting with a human-hamster cell
hybrid carrying a single copy of chromosome 16 as the only human genetic
material, Ceccherini et al. (1992) generated radiation hybrids retaining
unselected fragments of this human chromosome. The most likely order and
location of 38 DNA sequences including the UVO gene and the TAT gene
were established by multiple pairwise analysis and scaled to estimate
the physical distance in megabases. The experiments illustrated the
usefulness of radiation hybrids for mapping. Berx et al. (1995)
confirmed the map position of CDH1 to 16q22.1 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Overduin et al. (1995) determined the 3-dimensional structure of the
amino-terminal repeat of mouse epithelial cadherin. Unexpected
structural similarities with the immunoglobulin fold suggested an
evolutionary relation between the calcium-dependent cadherin cell
adhesion molecules and the calcium-independent immunoglobulin cell
adhesion molecules.

Boggon et al. (2002) presented the 3.1-angstrom resolution crystal
structure of the whole, functional extracellular domain from C-cadherin,
a representative classical cadherin from Xenopus. The structure
suggested a molecular mechanism for adhesion between cells by classical
cadherins, and it provided a new framework for understanding both
same-cell (cis) and juxtaposed-cell (trans) cadherin interactions.

Al-Amoudi et al. (2007) applied cryoelectron tomography of vitreous
sections from human epidermis to visualize the 3-dimensional molecular
architecture of desmosomal cadherins at close-to-native conditions. The
3-dimensional reconstructions showed a regular array of densities at
approximately 70-angstrom intervals along the midline, with a curved
shape resembling the x-ray structure of C-cadherin, a representative
classical cadherin. Model-independent 3-dimensional image processing of
extracted subtomograms revealed the cadherin organization. After fitting
the C-cadherin atomic structure into the averaged subtomograms,
Al-Amoudi et al. (2007) saw a periodic arrangement of a trans W-like and
a cis V-like interaction corresponding to molecules from opposing
membranes and the same cell membrane, respectively.

GENE FUNCTION

Cano et al. (2000) found that transcription of mouse E-cadherin is under
the control of Snail (SNAI1; 604238), a strong repressor that
specifically interacts with the mouse E-cadherin promoter. By in situ
hybridization of early mouse embryos undergoing epithelial-mesenchymal
transitions, they found expression of E-cadherin to be inversely
correlated with expression of Snai1. Cano et al. (2000) found strong
evidence that abnormal expression of SNAI1 could also underlie the
tumorigenic conversion of epithelia associated with the loss of
E-cadherin expression. In a screen of several mouse cell lines, they
detected high expression of Snai1 mRNA, and low expression of E-cadherin
mRNA, in cell types that are highly invasive and metastatic, whereas the
opposite pattern was found in noninvasive epithelial cell lines. They
found the same inverse correlation between SNAI1 and E-cadherin
expression in human carcinoma cell lines of various etiologies, as well
as in primary human tumors undergoing malignant progression. Only a
human bladder transitional cell carcinoma cell line, which downregulates
E-cadherin through hypermethylation of the E-cadherin promoter, did not
show high SNAI1 expression. By transfection experiments with several
epithelial cell lines, Cano et al. (2000) found that Snai1
overexpression leads to a dramatic conversion to a fibroblastic
phenotype at the same time that E-cadherin expression is lost and
tumorigenic and invasive properties are acquired.

Batlle et al. (2000) found the identical inverse pattern of Snai1 and
E-cadherin expression by Northern blot analysis of a panel of epithelial
tumor cell lines. Likewise, they also found that exogenous expression of
SNAI1 downregulates E-cadherin mRNA. In addition, Batlle et al. (2000)
found that reduction in SNAI1 levels by transfection of antisense SNAI1
promotes a significant restoration of E-cadherin mRNA and protein.
Through mutation analysis and gel retardation assays, Batlle et al.
(2000) found that the 3 E-boxes contained in the promoter region of
E-cadherin cooperate in SNAI1-mediated E-cadherin repression.

Using retroviral transduction, Palmer et al. (2004) generated human
SW480-ADH colon cancer cells that ectopically express mouse
hemagglutinin-tagged protein (SNAIL-HA). Overexpression of Snai1 in
these cells resulted in lower vitamin D receptor (VDR; 601769) mRNA and
protein expression and inhibited induction of E-cadherin and VDR by
1,25(OH)2D3. A 1,25(OH)2D3 analog inhibited tumor growth in
immunodeficient mice injected with mock cells, but not in those injected
with SNAIL-HA cells. In 32 paired samples of normal colon and tumor
tissue from patients undergoing colorectal surgery, Palmer et al. (2004)
found that high SNAI1 expression in tumor tissue correlated with
downregulation of VDR and E-cadherin (p = 0.007 and 0.0073,
respectively). Palmer et al. (2004) concluded that the balance between
VDR and SNAI1 expression is critical for E-cadherin expression, which
influences cell fate during colon cancer progression.

Jamal and Schneider (2002) found downregulation of E-cadherin and
associated catenin proteins in human melanocytes and melanoma cells
following ultraviolet induction of endothelin-1 (EDN1; 131240) through
the type B endothelin receptor (EDNRB; 131244). Downregulation of
E-cadherin through this pathway involved the downstream activation of
caspase-8 (601763), but not the distal executioner caspases, and it did
not lead to apoptosis. EDN1 also induced a transient association between
caspase-8 and E-cadherin/beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806) complexes. Jamal
and Schneider (2002) concluded that inhibition of E-cadherin through
this pathway would tend to promote melanoma invasion.

Listeria monocytogenes is the etiologic agent of listeriosis, a severe
human food-borne infection characterized by bacterial dissemination to
the central nervous system and the fetoplacental unit, due to its
capacity to cross the intestinal barrier, the blood-brain barrier, and
the fetoplacental barrier (Lorber, 1997). An important feature of this
bacterium is its ability to induce its own internalization into cells
that normally are nonphagocytic, such as epithelial cells. Internalin A
(InlA) and InlB, 2 leucine-rich repeat invasion proteins that have been
characterized in detail, mediate entry into different cell types. Human
E-cadherin promotes entry of Listeria monocytogenes into mammalian cells
by interacting with the bacterial surface protein InlA. Lecuit et al.
(1999) showed that mouse E-cadherin, although very similar to human
E-cadherin (85% identical), is not a receptor for internalin. By a
series of domain-swapping and mutagenesis experiments, they identified
pro16 of E-cadherin as a residue critical for specificity: a pro-to-glu
substitution in human E-cadherin totally abrogated interaction, whereas
a glu-to-pro substitution in mouse E-cadherin resulted in a complete
gain of function. A correlation between cell permissivity and the nature
of residue 16 in E-cadherins from several species was established. The
location of this key specificity residue in a region of E-cadherin not
involved in cell-cell adhesion and the stringency of the interaction
demonstrated by Lecuit et al. (1999) have important consequences not
only for the understanding of internalin function but also for the
choice of the animal model to be used to study human listeriosis: mouse,
albeit previously widely used, and rat appear as inappropriate animal
models to study all aspects of human listeriosis, as opposed to guinea
pig, which stands as a small animal of choice for future in vivo
studies.

E-cadherin also has a role in food-borne infection with Listeria
monocytogenes. This pathogen expresses a surface protein, internalin,
that interacts with the host receptor, E-cadherin, to promote entry into
human epithelial cells. Murine E-cadherin, in contrast to guinea pig
E-cadherin, does not interact with internalin, excluding the mouse as a
model for addressing internalin function in vivo. Lecuit et al. (2001)
demonstrated that in guinea pigs and transgenic mice expressing human
E-cadherin, internalin mediates invasion of enterocytes and crossing of
the intestinal barrier.

Kawasaki et al. (2003) showed that overexpression of ASEF (605216)
decreases E-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion and promotes the
migration of epithelial canine kidney cells. Both of these activities
were stimulated by truncated APC (611731) proteins expressed in
colorectal tumor cells. Experiments based on RNA interference and
dominant-negative mutants showed that both ASEF and mutated APC are
required for the migration of colorectal tumor cells expressing
truncated APC. Kawasaki et al. (2003) concluded that the APC-ASEF
complex functions in cell migration as well as in E-cadherin-mediated
cell-cell adhesion, and that truncated APC present in colorectal tumor
cells contributes to their aberrant migratory properties.

The morphogenesis of organs as diverse as lungs, teeth, and hair
follicles is initiated by a downgrowth from a layer of epithelial stem
cells. During follicular morphogenesis, stem cells form this bud
structure by changing their polarity and cell-cell contact. Jamora et
al. (2003) showed that this process is achieved through simultaneous
receipt of 2 external signals: a WNT protein (WNT3A; 606359) to
stabilize beta-catenin, and a bone morphogenetic protein inhibitor
(Noggin; 602991) to produce Lef1 (153245). Beta-catenin binds to and
activates Lef1 transcription complexes that appear to act
uncharacteristically by downregulating the gene encoding E-cadherin, an
important component of polarity and intercellular adhesion. When either
signal is missing, functional Lef1 complexes are not made, and
E-cadherin downregulation and follicle morphogenesis are impaired. In
Drosophila, E-cadherin can influence the plane of cell division and
cytoskeletal dynamics. Consistent with this notion, Jamora et al. (2003)
showed that forced elevation of E-cadherin levels block invagination and
follicle production. Jamora et al. (2003) concluded that their findings
reveal an intricate molecular program that links 2 extracellular
signaling pathways to the formation of a nuclear transcription factor
that acts on target genes to remodel cellular junctions and permit
follicle formation.

Kawasaki and Taira (2004) presented evidence that short interfering RNAs
(siRNAs) targeted to CpG islands of an E-cadherin promoter induced DNA
and histone methylation and repressed transcription of the E-cadherin
gene. A retraction was published.

Hayashi and Carthew (2004) investigated the physical basis of biologic
patterning of the Drosophila retina in vivo. They demonstrated that
E-cadherin and N-cadherin (CDH2; 114020) mediate apical adhesion between
retina and epithelia cells. Differential expression of N-cadherin within
a subgroup of retinal cells (cone cells) caused them to form an overall
shape that minimized their surface contact with surrounding cells. The
cells within this group, in both normal and experimentally manipulated
conditions, packed together in the same way as soap bubbles do. The
shaping of cone cell group and packing of its components precisely
imitated the physical tendency for surfaces to be minimized. Hayashi and
Carthew (2004) concluded that simple patterned expression of N-cadherin
resulted in a complex spatial pattern of cells owing to cellular surface
mechanics.

Ino et al. (2002) demonstrated that dysadherin (606669)
posttranslationally downregulates E-cadherin, the prime mediator of
cell-cell adhesion in epithelial cells. Sato et al. (2003) demonstrated
that dysadherin expression was significantly negatively correlated with
E-cadherin expression in thyroid carcinomas.

Full-length membrane-bound E-cadherin is cleaved in the extracellular
domain by a metalloprotease, generating a 38-kD C-terminal fragment,
which can be further processed by a gamma-secretase-like activity into a
soluble 33-kD C-terminal fragment. Using a panel of mouse embryonic
fibroblasts deficient in various metalloproteases, Maretzky et al.
(2005) found that those cells deficient in Adam10 (602192) showed
reduced generation of the E-cadherin 38-kD C-terminal fragment. They
further found that Adam10 was responsible for both constitutive and
regulated E-cadherin shedding in mouse fibroblasts and keratinocytes.
Adam10-mediated E-cadherin shedding affected epithelial cell-cell
adhesion as well as cell migration, and it modulated beta-catenin
subcellular localization and downstream signaling.

Pena et al. (2005) studied the expression and functional correlation of
the SNAI1, CDH1, vitamin D receptor (VDR; 601769), and ZEB1 (189909)
genes and examined their possible involvement in colon cancer. Their
expression was measured by real-time PCR in 114 patients with colorectal
cancer, and tumor characteristics were analyzed in each patient. SNAI1
expression was associated with downregulation of CDH1 (P = less than
0.001) and VDR (P = less than 0.001) gene products. There was a positive
correlation between CDH1 and VDR expressions, but the association
between SNAI1 and CDH1 was not found in patients with high expression of
ZEB1. There was a correlation between downregulation of: (a) ZEB1 and
presence of polyps in surgical resections; (b) VDR and poor
differentiation; and (c) CDH1 and poor differentiation, vascular
invasion, presence of lymph node metastases and advanced stages; as well
as a trend toward a correlation between SNAI1 expression in tumors and
vascular invasion. Pena et al. (2005) suggested analyzing these genes in
colon cancer patients for prognostic purposes and for predicting
response to possible therapies with vitamin D or its analogs.

Frebourg et al. (2006) found that in human embryos CDH1 is highly
expressed at 4 and 5 weeks in the frontonasal prominence and at 6 weeks
in the lateral and medial nasal prominences, and is therefore expressed
during critical stages of lip and palate development. These results were
in agreement with those obtained by Montenegro et al. (2000) in mouse
embryos by immunohistochemistry. Frebourg et al. (2006) also found that
at most time points examined CDH1 expression varied with that of PVRL1
(600644), mutations in which cause autosomal recessive clefting
syndromes with ectodermal dysplasia (see 225060).

By in silico analysis, Place et al. (2008) identified putative miR373
(MIRN373; 611954) target sites in the promoter regions of the E-cadherin
and cold shock domain-containing C2 (CSDC2) genes. Transfection of
miR373 and its precursor hairpin into PC-3 human prostate carcinoma
cells induced expression of E-cadherin and CSDC2. Knockdown experiments
confirmed that induction of E-cadherin by pre-miR373 required the
miRNA-processing enzyme Dicer (606241). Enrichment of RNA polymerase II
(see 180660) was detected at both E-cadherin and CSDC3 promoters after
miR373 transfection. Induction of E-cadherin and CSDC2 by miR373 was not
observed in several other human cell lines of different tissue origins,
indicating that miR373 differentially activates target genes in
different cell lines.

Cavey et al. (2008) focused on Drosophila homophilic E-cadherin
complexes rather than total E-cadherin, including diffusing 'free'
E-cadherin, because these complexes are a better proxy for adhesion.
They found that E-cadherin complexes partition in very stable
microdomains (i.e., bona fide adhesive foci, which are more stable than
remodeling contacts). Stability and mobility of these microdomains was
dependent on 2 actin populations: small stable actin patches
concentrated at homophilic E-cadherin clusters and a dynamic contractile
actin network that constrains homophilic E-cadherin clusters lateral
movement by a tethering mechanism. Alpha-catenin controls epithelial
architecture mainly through regulation of the mobility of homophilic
E-cadherin clusters and was largely dispensable for their stability.
Uncoupling stability and mobility of E-cadherin complexes suggested that
stable epithelia may remodel through the regulated mobility of very
stable adhesive foci.

Among 48 primary ovarian cancer (167000) tumors and corresponding
metastases, Blechschmidt et al. (2008) found a significant association
(p = 0.008) between reduced E-cadherin expression in the primary cancer
tissue and shorter overall survival. Patients with decreased E-cadherin
expression and increased SNAIL expression in the primary tumor showed a
higher risk of death (p = 0.002). There was no significant difference in
expression of E-cadherin or SNAIL between primary tumors and metastases.
The findings were consistent with a role for E-cadherin and SNAIL in the
behavior of metastatic cancer.

Pinho et al. (2009) demonstrated that wildtype E-cadherin regulated
MGAT3 (604621) gene transcription, resulting in increased
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase III (GnT-III) expression. GnT-III and
N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase V (GnT-V, or MGAT5, 601774)
competitively modified E-cadherin N-glycans. RNAi-knockdown of GnT-III
in MCF-7/AZ cells revealed membrane delocalization of E-cadherin leading
to its cytoplasmic accumulation. Further, GnT-III knockdown in cells
also caused modifications of E-cadherin N-glycans catalyzed by GnT-III
and GnT-V. Pinho et al. (2009) proposed a bidirectional crosstalk
between E-cadherin and GnT-III/GnT-V, which may influence tumor
progression and metastasis.

Banh et al. (2009) showed that the first 2 extracellular domains of
N-cadherin interacted with the inhibitory receptor KLRG1 (604874),
blocked interaction of KLRG1 with E-cadherin, and could regulate KLRG1
signaling. Binding of KLRG1 to E-cadherin inhibited E-cadherin-dependent
cell adhesion and led to tyrosine phosphorylation of E-cadherin. The
KLRG1/E-cadherin interaction led to the generation of a bidirectional
signal in which both KLRG1 and E-cadherin activated downstream signaling
cascades simultaneously, regulating cells expressing one or the other
molecule.

Maitre et al. (2012) showed that cell adhesion and cortex tension have
different mechanical functions in controlling progenitor cell-cell
contact formation and sorting during zebrafish gastrulation. Cortex
tension controls cell-cell contact expansion by modulating interfacial
tension at the contact. By contrast, adhesion has little direct function
in contact expansion, but instead is needed to mechanically couple the
cortices of adhering cells at their contacts, allowing cortex tension to
control contact expansion. The coupling function of adhesion is mediated
by E-cadherin and limited by the mechanical anchoring of E-cadherin to
the cortex. Thus, Maitre et al. (2012) concluded that cell adhesion
provides the mechanical scaffold for cell cortex tension to drive cell
sorting during gastrulation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Somatic Mutations

Reduced expression of E-cadherin is regarded as one of the main
molecular events involved in dysfunction of the cell-cell adhesion
system, triggering cancer invasion and metastasis. Becker et al. (1994)
suggested that E-cadherin mutations contribute to the histopathologic
appearance of stomach cancer because 13 of 26 diffuse gastric carcinomas
(137215), which have reduced homophilic cell-to-cell interactions, had
abnormal gene transcripts that were not seen in noncancerous tissue from
the same patients, indicating a somatic origin.

Oda et al. (1994) analyzed 10 human cancer cell lines that showed growth
characterized morphologically by loose cell-cell adhesion for possible
structural abnormalities in the expressed E-cadherin. Strong mRNA and
protein expression with no nucleotide sequence abnormalities was found
in 4 cell lines, and mRNA was absent in 4 other cell lines. In the
remaining 2 gastric carcinoma cell lines, the mRNA sequence was
abnormal. One showed a 12-bp in-frame deletion with strong expression of
mRNA and protein. In the other, there were 4 mRNA species with
insertions of different sizes, among which the major transcripts (with a
7-bp insertion) caused a frameshift, and expression of both mRNA and
protein were markedly reduced. In these 2 cell lines, DNA mutations were
detected around exon-intron junctions, revealing that aberrant RNA
splicing was the cause of the mRNA abnormalities. In addition, the
wildtype allele of the E-cadherin locus was lost, suggesting that the
E-cadherin gene had been inactivated by 2 hits (mutation and allele
loss), similar to the mechanism for inactivation of tumor suppressor
genes.

Risinger et al. (1994) identified somatic mutations in the CDH1 gene
(see, e.g., 192090.0001-192090.0003) in carcinomas of the endometrium
(608089) and ovary (167000). Two tumors had retention of the wildtype
alleles, and 2 had somatic loss of heterozygosity in the tumor tissue.
The findings were consistent with CDH1 acting as a tumor suppressor
gene.

To investigate the molecular basis of altered CDH1 expression in cancer,
Berx et al. (1995) performed a PCR/SSCP mutation screen of the CDH1 gene
in 49 breast cancer patients. No relevant DNA changes were encountered
in any of 42 infiltrative ductal or medullary breast carcinoma samples.
In contrast, 4 of 7 infiltrative lobular breast carcinomas (see 137215)
harbored protein truncation mutations (3 nonsense and 1 frameshift) in
the extracellular part of the E-cadherin protein (e.g., 192090.0004).
Each of the 4 lobular carcinomas with E-cadherin mutations showed
tumor-specific loss of heterozygosity of chromosomal region 16q22.1
containing the E-cadherin locus, thus supporting the Knudson 2-hit
hypothesis. Berx et al. (1995) detected no E-cadherin expression in
these 4 tumors by immunohistochemistry.

Ilyas et al. (1997) concluded that mutations in CDH1 do not account for
decreased E-cadherin protein expression in colorectal tumors. They found
no association between either CDH1 allele loss or exon 16 replication
errors and low levels of CDH1 protein expression in 54 sporadic
colorectal cancers (114500) and 14 ulcerative colitis-associated
colorectal cancers. The authors had postulated that CDH1 gene mutation
or allele loss would affect E-cadherin's function as a suppressor of
tumor invasion.

Berx et al. (1998) found reports of 69 somatic mutations of the CDH1
gene. These comprised, in addition to a few missense mutations, mainly
splice site mutations and truncation mutations caused by insertions,
deletions, and nonsense mutations. There was a major difference in
mutation type between diffuse gastric and infiltrative lobular breast
cancers. In diffuse gastric tumors, the predominant defects were exon
skippings, which caused in-frame deletions. By contrast, most mutations
found in infiltrating lobular breast cancers were out-of-frame
mutations, which were predicted to yield secreted truncated E-cadherin
fragments. In most cases these mutations occurred in combination with
loss of heterozygosity.

Wheeler et al. (2002) examined the possible contribution of E-cadherin
to sporadic small intestinal adenocarcinoma. E-cadherin protein
expression was assessed immunohistochemically in a total of 21
nonfamilial, nonampullary small intestinal adenocarcinomas. Eight tumors
(38%) had decreased protein expression at the cell membrane, a finding
in common with colorectal carcinomas (Ilyas et al., 1997). This led the
authors to suggest that mutation or promoter hypermethylation in the
E-cadherin gene may play an important role in the pathogenesis of
sporadic small intestinal adenocarcinoma.

Deplazes et al. (2009) demonstrated that E-cadherin harboring an
in-frame deletion of exon 8 had reduced ability to activate Rac1
(602048) and to inhibit Rho (165390). The lack of Rac1 activation
influenced the downstream signaling of Rac1, as shown by a decrease in
the binding of the Rac1 effector protein IQGAP1 (603379) to Rac1-GTP.
Reduced membranous localization of p120-catenin (CTNND1; 601045) in
mutant E-cadherin expressing cells was associated with the lack of
negative regulation of Rho by mutant E-cadherin. The enhanced motility
and invasion associated with mutant E-cadherin was sensitive to the
inhibition of Rac1 and Rho. Deplazes et al. (2009) concluded that the
mutation of E-cadherin had a reciprocal influence on Rac1 and Rho
activation, and that Rac1 and Rho are involved in the establishment of
the migratory and invasive phenotype of tumor cells harboring an
E-cadherin mutation.

- Germline Mutations in Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer
and Lobular Breast Cancer

Striking examples of dominantly inherited predisposition to gastric
cancer (including Napoleon Bonaparte's family) have been reported
(Sokoloff, 1938). In addition, a number of dominantly inherited familial
cancer syndromes are characterized by gastric cancer susceptibility.
Guilford et al. (1998) reported heterozygous germline mutations in the
CDH1 gene (192090.0005-192090.0007) in 3 kindreds of Maori origin from
New Zealand with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC; 137215).

Richards et al. (1999) analyzed 8 UK kindreds with hereditary diffuse
gastric cancer and identified novel germline CDH1 mutations (192090.0008
and 192090.0009) in 2 families. Both mutations were predicted to
truncate the E-cadherin protein in the signal peptide domain. In 1
family, there was evidence of nonpenetrance and susceptibility to both
gastric and colorectal cancer; thus, in addition to 6 cases of gastric
cancer, a CDH1 mutation carrier developed colorectal cancer at age 30
years. Gayther et al. (1998) also described germline CDH1 mutations in
familial gastric cancer. Yoon et al. (1999) screened 5 Korean patients
with familial gastric cancer for germline mutations in the CDH1 gene and
identified 2 with missense mutations.

To extend earlier observations of germline CDH1 mutations in kindreds
with an inherited susceptibility to diffuse gastric cancer, Guilford et
al. (1999) sought germline mutations in the CDH1 gene in 5 further
families affected predominantly by diffuse gastric cancer and in 1
family with a history of diffuse gastric cancer and early-onset breast
cancer. Heterozygous inactivating mutations were found in the CDH1 gene
in each of these 6 families. No mutation hotspots were identified.

Aberrant promoter methylation and the associated loss of gene expression
is a common finding in human cancers. Nevertheless, it had been
difficult to demonstrate that methylation of a specific gene was causal
in any given tumor and not a consequence of the malignant
transformation. Grady et al. (2000) noted that patients with
heterozygous germline mutations in the CDH1 gene develop gastric cancer,
but their cancers consistently demonstrate no loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) at the CDH1 locus. They hypothesized that methylation of the CDH1
promoter might represent the 'second genetic hit' in the genesis of
these tumors. The CDH1 promoter was found to be consistently
unmethylated in normal stomach mucosa, whereas 3 of 6 HDGC tumors with
negative CDH1 staining had aberrant CDH1 promoter methylation. Two
tumors that had retained unmethylated CDH1 promoters harbored somatic
CDH1 mutations. No somatic mutations were found in 2 HDGC tumors showing
CDH1 promoter methylation, but sequence polymorphisms confirmed that
they retained a second wildtype allele. These findings indicated that
the formation of HDGC tumors requires biallelic CDH1 inactivation, which
in one-half of cases is accomplished by promoter methylation of a
retained wildtype allele. Grady et al. (2000) pointed to examples of
promoter methylation identified in sporadic cancers in which promoter
methylation of the CDKN2A (600160) and RB1 (614041) genes had been
noted, as well as in some renal tumors in patients with von
Hippel-Lindau disease (193300).

Oliveira et al. (2002) performed germline CDH1 mutation screening in 39
kindreds with familial aggregation of gastric cancer, a subset of which
fulfilled the criteria defined by the International Gastric Cancer
Linkage Consortium (IGCLC) for hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. CDH1
germline mutations were detected in 4 of 11 (36.4%) HDGC families. No
mutations were identified in 63.6% of HDGC families or in kindreds with
familial aggregation of gastric cancer not fulfilling criteria for HDGC.
These results added support to the evidence that only HDGC families
harbor germline mutations in CDH1 and that genes other than CDH1
remained to be identified.

Humar et al. (2002) performed a germline mutation search in 10 gastric
cancer families, 7 of which met the clinical criteria for HDGC. They
identified germline mutations in 4 of the 7 families and in 1 family
that was borderline for the clinical criteria. Of the mutations
identified in the 5 families, 4 were previously unreported.

Suriano et al. (2003) screened a series of 66 young (diagnosed before
age 50) gastric cancer probands for germline CDH1 mutations and
identified 2 missense alterations: A617T (192090.0002) and A634V
(192090.0015). Stably transfected cadherin-negative CHO cell lines were
characterized in terms of aggregation, invasion, and motility. Cells
expressing either the A634V or thr340-to-ala (T340A; 192090.0016)
mutation failed to aggregate, showed invasive behavior, and migrated
abnormally compared to wildtype cells in vitro. Cells expressing the
A617T mutation displayed an intermediate ability to aggregate.

Suriano et al. (2003) characterized the effect of CDH1 germline missense
mutations on the morphology, motility, and proliferation of transfected
Chinese hamster ovary cells. Wildtype E-cadherin and A617T-expressing
cells had an epithelial-like morphology, with polarized cells migrating
unidirectionally. T340A- and A634V-expressing cells had a high-motility
fibroblast-like phenotype, which was dependent on an increased level of
active RhoA (165390). Val832-to-met (V832M; 192090.0017)-expressing
cells grew in a piled-up structure of round cells, resulting from
disturbance of binding between alpha-catenin (CTNNA1; 116805) and
beta-catenin, and destabilization of the adhesion complex was shown to
hamper the motile capabilities of these cells. CDH1 mutations showed no
effect on cell proliferation. Suriano et al. (2003) concluded that the
ability of cells expressing CDH1 mutations to invade is independent of
their motile capabilities, providing evidence that motility is neither
necessary nor sufficient for cells to invade.

Brooks-Wilson et al. (2004) ascertained 43 apparent cases of hereditary
gastric cancer and screened them for germline CDH1 mutations. The
authors identified heterozygosity in 10 different families for 10
loss-of-function mutations, including 2 insertions, 5 deletions, 2
splice-site substitutions, and 1 complex deletion/insertion involving a
splice site. They also found 3 heterozygous missense mutations which
were predicted to affect conserved residues and to have deleterious
effects on protein function. Brooks-Wilson et al. (2004) noted that
there were multiple cases of breast cancers, including pathologically
confirmed lobular breast cancer (see 137215), in both mutation-positive
and -negative families.

Masciari et al. (2007) identified a germline mutation in the CDH1 gene
(192090.0021) in a woman who developed lobular breast cancer at age 42
years. The breast cancer was negative for E-cadherin by immunostaining,
and further analysis detected loss of heterozygosity of part of the
gene. The patient's mother reportedly developed lobular breast cancer at
age 28. No other breast or gastric cancers were reported in the family.

Simoes-Correia et al. (2008) analyzed Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells
stably expressing the germline E-cadherin R749W and E757K mutations,
which are associated with hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (137215),
and observed an abnormal pattern of E-cadherin expression, with protein
accumulating mainly in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The authors
demonstrated that E-cadherin missense mutants are subject to ER quality
control (ERQC) and undergo ER-associated degradation; treatment of these
mutant cells with specific chemical chaperones restored E-cadherin to
the cell membrane and rescued its function. Simoes-Correia et al. (2008)
concluded that ERQC plays a major role in E-cadherin regulation.

Oliveira et al. (2009) reported 6 (6.5%) of 93 previously described
mutation-negative hereditary diffuse gastric cancer probands who carried
genomic deletions (see, e.g., 192090.0022 and 192090.0023) in the CDH1
gene. The statistically significant overrepresentation of Alu repeats
around the breakpoints indicated nonallelic homologous recombination of
Alu repeats as a likely mechanism for these deletions. When all
mutations and deletions were considered, the overall frequency of CDH1
alterations in HDGC was approximately 46% (73 of 160), and large CDH1
deletions occurred in 3.8% of HDGC families.

- Other Disease Associations

Jonsson et al. (2004) demonstrated an association between the -160C/A
promoter polymorphism of CDH1 (192090.0018) and risk of hereditary
prostate cancer.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Frebourg et al. (2006) reported the association of CDH1 mutations with
cleft lip with or without cleft palate (119530) in 2 families with
hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. In each family, the CDH1 mutation was
a splicing mutation generating aberrant transcripts with an in-frame
deletion, removing the extracellular cadherin repeat domains involved in
cell-cell adhesion. Such transcripts might encode mutant proteins with
trans-dominant-negative effects. Expression of CDH1 in human embryos
during critical stages of lip and palate development suggested that
alteration of the E-cadherin pathway may contribute to human clefting.
The development of diffuse gastric cancer in CDH1 mutation carriers
requires the somatic inactivation of the wildtype allele (Grady et al.,
2000; Oliveira et al., 2004), as predicted by the Knudson 2-hit model.

ANIMAL MODEL

Riethmacher et al. (1995) introduced a targeted mutation into the
E-cadherin gene by homologous recombination in mouse embryonic stem
cells. The mutation removed E-cadherin sequences essential for Ca(2+)
binding and for adhesive function. These embryonic stem cells were used
to generate mice carrying the mutation. Heterozygous mutant animals
appeared normal and were fertile. However, the homozygous mutation was
not compatible with life; the homozygous embryos showed severe
abnormalities before implantation. Particularly, the adhesive cells of
the morula dissociated shortly after compaction had occurred, and their
morphologic polarization was then destroyed.

Development of malignant tumors is in part characterized by the ability
of a tumor cell to overcome cell-cell adhesion and to invade surrounding
tissue. E-cadherin, the main adhesion molecule of epithelia, has been
implicated in carcinogenesis because it is frequently lost in human
epithelial cancers. Reestablishing the functional cadherin complex in
tumor cell lines results in reversion from an invasive to a benign
epithelial phenotype. Perl et al. (1998) found that loss of E-cadherin
expression coincides with the transition from well-differentiated
adenoma to invasive carcinoma in a transgenic mouse model of pancreatic
beta-cell carcinogenesis. Intercrossing model mice with transgenic mice
that maintained E-cadherin expression in beta-tumor cells resulted in
arrest of tumor development at the adenoma stage, whereas expression of
a dominant-negative form of E-cadherin induced early invasion and
metastasis. The results demonstrated that loss of E-cadherin-mediated
cell adhesion is a rate-limiting step in the progression from adenoma to
carcinoma and is a cause of that progression, not a consequence.

HISTORY

The liver cell adhesion molecule is a primary cell adhesion molecule
that appears in a distinct pattern at a variety of inductive embryonic
sites as well as in adult tissues. It was initially isolated on the
basis of its ability to mediate calcium-dependent adhesion between cells
of the chicken liver epithelium. Gallin et al. (1987) isolated and
determined the nucleic acid sequence of a cDNA clone encoding chicken
LCAM. The predicted sequence of the protein supported an earlier
conclusion that LCAM is an intrinsic membrane protein. Its sequence was
not homologous to other known protein sequences, including those of the
neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM; 116930) and other members of the
immunoglobulin superfamily. It was not certain that the liver cell
adhesion molecule of the chicken is different from calcium-dependent
adhesion molecules, including uvomorulin and E-cadherin, which have been
isolated from different epithelial tissues or cell lines in mammals;
these molecules have biochemical properties and tissue distributions so
similar to those of LCAM that it is likely that all of them are its
mammalian homologs.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ENDOMETRIAL CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
CDH1, LEU711VAL

In an endometrial carcinoma (608089), Risinger et al. (1994) identified
a somatic C-to-G transversion in the CDH1 gene, resulting in a
leu711-to-val (L711V) substitution. The wildtype allele was not lost.

.0002
ENDOMETRIAL CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE, INCLUDED
CDH1, ALA617THR

In an endometrial carcinoma (608089), Risinger et al. (1994) identified
a somatic G-to-A transition in the CDH1 gene, resulting in an
ala617-to-thr (A617T) substitution. Somatic loss of heterozygosity was
identified in the tumor tissue.

Suriano et al. (2003) detected a heterozygous germline A617T mutation in
2 African American female patients with diffuse gastric cancer (137215).
The authors observed that CHO cells expressing the A617T mutation
displayed decreased cell-to-cell aggregation.

.0003
OVARIAN CANCER, SOMATIC
CDH1, SER838GLY

In ovarian carcinoma tissue (167000), Risinger et al. (1994) identified
a somatic A-to-G transition in codon 838 of the CDH1 gene, resulting in
a ser838-to-gly (S838G) substitution. The tumor tissue showed somatic
loss of heterozygosity.

.0004
BREAST CANCER, LOBULAR, SOMATIC
CDH1, GLU261TER

In an infiltrative lobular breast carcinoma (see 137215), Berx et al.
(1995) found a somatic GAA (glu)-to-TAA (stop) nonsense mutation (E261X)
in the CDH1 gene. Tumor-specific loss of heterozygosity of chromosomal
region 16q22.1 was demonstrated in this case.

.0005
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE
CDH1, 1008G-T

In affected members of a Maori family from New Zealand with early-onset
hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (137215) originally reported by Jones
(1964), Guilford et al. (1998) identified a heterozygous 1008G-T
transversion in the CDH1 gene. The G-to-T transversion was in the last
nucleotide (position 1008) of exon 7, which is part of the donor splice
consensus sequence. RT-PCR studies showed that the mutation resulted in
a 7-bp insertion derived from the intronic sequence between the normal
splice donor site and an adjacent cryptic splice site, and was predicted
to generate a premature stop codon in exon 8 of the CDH1 gene. The
cryptic splicing of the 1008T transcript occurred with high efficiency;
only 1 of 20 clones derived from the normal 180-bp PCR product contained
the 1008T mutation. Alternatively, the G-to-A transversion could have
resulted in a glu336-to-asp (E336D) substitution, which could have had
important effects on the correct functioning of the protein. In this
family, the age of death from gastric cancer ranged upward from 14
years, with the majority of cases occurring in people under the age of
40. The pedigree pattern was consistent with dominant inheritance of a
susceptibility gene with incomplete penetrance. The presence of a
somatic mutation at position 1008 of the CDH1 gene had been reported in
a sporadic case of histologically diffuse gastric carcinoma (Oda et al.,
1994).

.0006
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE
CDH1, 1-BP INS, 2382C

Guilford et al. (1998) described a family in which multiple members with
diffuse gastric cancer (137215) were heterozygous for the insertion of
an additional C residue in a run of 5 cytosines at positions 2382 to
2386. The resulting frameshift led to an E-cadherin molecule lacking
about half of its cytoplasmic domain. The gastric cancer was of the
early-onset, histologically diffuse type.

.0007
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE
CDH1, GLN699TER

In a family with early-onset, histologically diffuse gastric cancer
(137215), Guilford et al. (1998) found that the 30-year-old proband was
heterozygous for a 2095C-T transition in the CDH1 gene, resulting in a
gln699-to-ter (Q699X) substitution. The mutation was predicted to result
in an E-cadherin peptide lacking both the transmembrane and cytoplasmic
domains.

.0008
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE
CDH1, IVS1AS, A-G, -2

In a family from the U.K. in which 6 members had gastric cancer
(137215), Richards et al. (1999) identified a splice acceptor site
mutation, an A-to-G transition at position -2 from nucleotide 49 at the
start of exon 2 of the CDH1 gene. In addition to the 6 members with
gastric cancer, 1 member of the family developed adenocarcinoma of the
rectum at the age of 30 years.

.0009
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE
CDH1, TRP20TER

In a family from the U.K. with 3 cases of gastric cancer (137215) in
successive generations, diagnosed at ages 27, 50, and 38 years, Richards
et al. (1999) identified a germline G-to-A transition at nucleotide 59
in exon 2 of the CDH1 gene, resulting in a trp20-to-ter (W20X)
substitution. The mutation was predicted to truncate the E-cadherin gene
product in the signal peptide domain, which is cleaved from the N
terminus of the mature protein.

.0010
REMOVED FROM DATABASE
.0011
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE
CDH1, GLU24TER

In a family in which multiple members had diffuse gastric cancer
(137215), Guilford et al. (1999) identified a heterozygous G-to-T
transversion at nucleotide 70 in exon 2 of the CDH1 gene, resulting in a
glu24-to-ter (Q24X) substitution in the signal peptide of the E-cadherin
precursor protein. Lynch et al. (2000) described E-cadherin
mutation-based genetic counseling in this kindred. Of 24 family members
tested for the 70G-T mutation, 9 were found to be positive and 15
negative. None of the 19 patients counseled wanted results sent to their
physicians once they recognized the potential for insurance
discrimination. None had undergone endoscopic ultrasound. Three who were
positive for the mutation expressed strong interest in prophylactic
gastrectomy. Three of the 9 who tested positive were affected and had
died by the time of report.

.0012
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE
CDH1, ARG598TER

In a family segregating diffuse gastric cancer (137215), Gayther et al.
(1998) found a 2095C-T transition in the CDH1 gene, resulting in an
arg598-to-ter (R598X) substitution. The family was subsequently studied
from the point of view of genetic screening, surgical management, and
pathologic findings by Huntsman et al. (2001).

.0013
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE
CDH1, 1-BP INS, 1711G

Gayther et al. (1998) found a 1-bp insertion in the CDH1 gene in the
proband of a family with familial diffuse gastric cancer (137215).
Insertion of a G after nucleotide 1711 created a frameshift predicted to
truncate the protein at codon 587. The family was subsequently studied
from the point of view of genetic screening, surgical management, and
pathologic findings by Huntsman et al. (2001).

.0014
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE
CDH1, 1-BP INS, 1588C

In a family segregating diffuse gastric cancer (137215), Guilford et al.
(1999) identified a 1-bp insertion (1588insC) in exon 11 of the CDH1
gene. Chun et al. (2001) reported total gastrectomy as a prophylactic
intervention in all 5 affected members of a family with diffuse gastric
cancer and the 1588insC mutation.

.0015
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE
CDH1, ALA634VAL

In a Portuguese adult male with diffuse hereditary signet ring gastric
carcinoma (137215), Suriano et al. (2003) identified a 1901C-T
transition in exon 12 of the CDH1 gene, which was predicted to result in
an ala634-to-val (A634V) substitution. Cells transfected with this
mutant cDNA exhibited decreased aggregation, increased invasiveness, and
nonuniform migration in vitro compared to cells transfected with
wildtype cDNA.

.0016
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE
CDH1, THR340ALA

In a kindred of European origin with gastric cancer (137215), Oliveira
et al. (2002) identified a heterozygous 1018A-G transition in exon 8 of
the CDH1 gene, resulting in a thr340-to-ala (T340A) substitution.

Suriano et al. (2003) observed that CHO cells expressing the T340A
mutation failed to aggregate, showed invasive behavior, and migrated
abnormally compared to wildtype cells in vitro.

.0017
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE
CDH1, VAL832MET

In a Japanese family with diffuse gastric cancer (137215), Yabuta et al.
(2002) identified heterozygosity for a 2494G-A transition in exon 16 of
the CDH1 gene, resulting in a val832-to-met (V832M) substitution.

.0018
PROSTATE CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
CDH1, -160C-A (dbSNP rs16260)

Jonsson et al. (2004) genotyped 1,036 patients with sporadic, familial
(2 close relatives), or hereditary (3 or more close relatives) prostate
cancer (176807) and 669 controls for the -160C/A promoter polymorphism
(dbSNP rs16260). The risk of hereditary prostate cancer was increased
among CA carriers (odds ratio = 1.7) and AA carriers (odds ratio = 2.6)
compared to controls; genotype frequencies did not differ between
sporadic or familial cases and controls. Jonsson et al. (2004) concluded
that CDH1 is a low-penetrant prostate cancer susceptibility gene that
might explain a proportion of familial and particularly hereditary
prostate cancer.

In an independent replication study population consisting of 612
patients with sporadic prostate cancer and 211 patients with at least 2
relatives with prostate cancer in a nuclear family (so-called 'FH+'
cases) and 540 controls, Lindstrom et al. (2005) found strong evidence
of an association between the -160C-A promoter polymorphism and risk of
prostate cancer (p = 0.003) when comparing FH+ cases and controls. In
the total study population, CA and AA carriers had an increased risk
compared to CC carriers (odds ratio = 1.5 and 2.6, respectively). No
significant difference in genotype frequency was observed between
sporadic cases and controls.

.0019
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE, AND CLEFT LIP WITH OR WITHOUT
CLEFT PALATE
CDH1, IVS4DS, T-A, +2

Frebourg et al. (2006) described a Caucasian family in which 4 members
had diffuse gastric cancer and cleft lip/palate (see 137215) and 2 other
individuals had gastric cancer without clefting. Affected members of the
family were shown to have a mutation of the intron 4 splicing donor site
(531+2T-A). RT-PCR analysis of CDH1 from peripheral blood lymphocytes
and sequence analysis of the amplified cDNA demonstrated that this
mutation induced complex aberrant splicing including activation of an
exonic cryptic donor splicing site.

.0020
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE, AND CLEFT LIP WITH OR WITHOUT
CLEFT PALATE
CDH1, 1137G-A

Frebourg et al. (2006) found a splicing mutation affecting the last
nucleotide of exon 8 of the CDH1 gene (1137G-A) in a man with hereditary
diffuse gastric cancer (137215), his 2 daughters with gastric cancer, a
daughter with cleft lip but no gastric cancer at age 25, and in a
16-year-old son who had congenital aplasia cutis of the scalp and
partial acrania (107600) but no known gastric cancer.

.0021
BREAST CANCER, LOBULAR
CDH1, 1-BP INS, 517A

In the germline of a woman who developed lobular breast cancer (see
137215) at age 42 years, Masciari et al. (2007) identified a
heterozygous 1-bp insertion (517insA) in the CDH1 gene, resulting in
truncation of the extracellular portion of the protein. The breast
cancer was negative for E-cadherin by immunostaining, and further
analysis detected loss of heterozygosity of part of the gene. The
patient's mother reportedly developed lobular breast cancer at age 28.
No other breast or gastric cancers were reported in the family.

.0022
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE
CDH1, 193.6-KB DEL, EX1-2

In 2 probands, one northern European and the other Canadian, with
diffuse gastric cancer (137215), who were both negative for germline
CDH1 point mutations, Oliveira et al. (2009) identified the same
193.6-kb germline deletion involving the entire CDH3 gene (114021) and
exons 1 and 2 of the CDH1 gene. The northern European proband, who also
had lobular breast cancer, had 2 children and a grandchild diagnosed
with diffuse gastric cancer at the age of 40, 37, and 28, respectively.
Affected family members were not tested for the deletion. The Canadian
proband developed diffuse gastric cancer at age 38 and again at age 43,
and had 2 sisters who also developed diffuse gastric cancer at age 30
and 35, respectively, but they were not tested for the deletion.
Haplotype analysis of microsatellite markers surround the CDH1 gene
indicated that the 2 probands shared a 9-marker haplotype, demonstrating
the existence of a common ancestor carrying the deletion.

.0023
GASTRIC CANCER, HEREDITARY DIFFUSE
CDH1, 828-BP DEL/3-BP INS, EX16

In a European proband with diffuse gastric cancer (137215) who was
negative for germline CDH1 point mutations, Oliveira et al. (2009)
identified an 828-bp deletion/3-bp insertion in the CDH1 gene. The
deletion affected exon 16. The proband's mother had died of gastric
cancer of unconfirmed histology as had 2 relatives, and 2 other
relatives had died of diffuse gastric cancer and lobular breast cancer.
The proband's 2 sisters were diagnosed with diffuse gastric cancer, and
1 was tested for the deletion and proved to be a carrier as had her 2
asymptomatic children.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Lauren  (1965); La Vecchia et al. (1992); Zanghieri et al. (1990)
REFERENCE 1. Al-Amoudi, A.; Diez, D. C.; Betts, M. J.; Frangakis, A. S.: The
molecular architecture of cadherins in native epidermal desmosomes. Nature 450:
832-837, 2007.

2. Banh, C.; Fugere, C.; Brossay, L.: Immunoregulatory functions
of KLRG1 cadherin interactions are dependent on forward and reverse
signaling. Blood 114: 5299-5306, 2009.

3. Batlle, E.; Sancho, E.; Franci, C.; Dominguez, D.; Monfar, M.;
Baulida, J.; Garcia de Herreros, A.: The transition factor Snail
is a repressor of E-cadherin gene expression in epithelial tumour
cells. Nature Cell Biol. 2: 84-89, 2000.

4. Becker, K.-F.; Atkinson, M. J.; Reich, U.; Becker, I.; Nekarda,
H.; Siewert, J. R.; Hoefler, H.: E-Cadherin gene mutations provide
clues to diffuse type gastric carcinomas. Cancer Res. 54: 3845-3852,
1994.

5. Berx, G.; Becker, K.-F.; Hofler, H.; van Roy, F.: Mutations of
the human E-cadherin (CDH1) gene. Hum. Mutat. 12: 226-237, 1998.

6. Berx, G.; Cleton-Jansen, A.-M.; Nollet, F.; de Leeuw, W. J. F.;
van de Vijver, M. J.; Cornelisse, C.; van Roy, F.: E-cadherin is
a tumour/invasion suppressor gene mutated in human lobular breast
cancers. EMBO J. 14: 6107-6115, 1995.

7. Berx, G.; Staes, K.; van Hengel, J.; Molemans, F.; Bussemakers,
M. J. G.; van Bokhoven, A.; van Roy, F.: Cloning and characterization
of the human invasion suppressor gene E-cadherin (CDH1). Genomics 26:
281-289, 1995.

8. Blechschmidt, K.; Sassen, S.; Schmalfeldt, B.; Schuster, T.; Hofler,
H.; Becker, K.-F.: The E-cadherin repressor snail is associated with
lower overall survival of ovarian cancer patients. Brit. J. Cancer 98:
489-495, 2008.

9. Boggon, T. J.; Murray, J.; Chappuis-Flament, S.; Wong, E.; Gumbiner,
B. M.; Shapiro, L.: C-cadherin ectodomain structure and implications
for cell adhesion mechanisms. Science 296: 1308-1313, 2002.

10. Brooks-Wilson, A. R.; Kaurah, P.; Suriano, G.; Leach, S.; Senz,
J.; Grehan, N.; Butterfield, Y. S. N.; Jeyes, J.; Schinas, J.; Bacani,
J.; Kelsey, M.; Ferreira, P.; and 19 others: Germline E-cadherin
mutations in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer: assessment of 42 new
families and review of genetic screening criteria. J. Med. Genet. 41:
508-517, 2004.

11. Cano, A.; Perez-Moreno, M. A.; Rodrigo, I.; Locascio, A.; Blanco,
M. J.; del Barrio, M. G.; Portillo, F.; Nieto, M. A.: The transcription
factor Snail controls epithelial-mesenchymal transitions by repressing
E-cadherin expression. Nature Cell Biol. 2: 76-83, 2000.

12. Cavey, M.; Rauzi, M.; Lenne, P.-F.; Lecuit, T.: A two-tiered
mechanism for stabilization and immobilization of E-cadherin. Nature 453:
751-756, 2008.

13. Ceccherini, I.; Romeo, G.; Lawrence, S.; Breuning, M. H.; Harris,
P. C.; Himmelbauer, H.; Frischauf, A. M.; Sutherland, G. R.; Germino,
G. G.; Reeders, S. T.; Morton, N. E.: Construction of a map of chromosome
16 by using radiation hybrids. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 104-108,
1992.

14. Chen, L. Z.; Harris, P. C.; Apostolou, S.; Baker, E.; Holman,
K.; Lane, S. A.; Nancarrow, J. K.; Whitmore, S. A.; Stallings, R.
L.; Hildebrand, C. E.; Richards, R. I.; Sutherland, G. R.; Callen,
D. F.: A refined physical map of the long arm of human chromosome
16. Genomics 10: 308-312, 1991.

15. Chun, Y. S.; Lindor, N. M.; Smyrk, T. C.; Petersen, B. T.; Burgart,
L. J.; Guilford, P. J.; Donohue, J. H.: Germline E-cadherin gene
mutations: is prophylactic total gastrectomy indicated? Cancer 92:
181-187, 2001.

16. Deplazes, J.; Fuchs, M.; Rauser, S.; Genth, H.; Lengyel, E.; Busch,
R.; Luber, B.: Rac1 and Rho contribute to the migratory and invasive
phenotype associated with somatic E-cadherin mutation. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 18: 3632-3644, 2009.

17. Eistetter, H. R.; Adolph, S.; Ringwald, M.; Simon-Chazottes, D.;
Schuh, R.; Guenet, J. L.; Kemler, R.: Chromosomal mapping of the
structural gene coding for the mouse cell adhesion molecule uvomorulin. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 3489-3493, 1988.

18. Frebourg, T.; Oliveira, C.; Hochain, P.; Karam, R.; Manouvrier,
S.; Graziadio, C.; Vekemans, M.; Hartmann, A.; Baert-Desurmont, S.;
Alexandre, C.; Lejeune Dumoulin, S.; Marroni, C.; and 16 others
: Cleft lip/palate and CDH1/E-cadherin mutation in families with hereditary
diffuse gastric cancer. J. Med. Genet. 43: 138-142, 2006.

19. Gallin, W. J.; Sorkin, B. C.; Edelman, G. M.; Cunningham, B. A.
: Sequence analysis of a cDNA clone encoding the liver cell adhesion
molecule, L-CAM. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 2808-2812, 1987.

20. Gayther, S. A.; Gorringe, K. L.; Ramus, S. J.; Huntsman, D.; Roviello,
F.; Grehan, N.; Machado, J. C.; Pinto, E.; Seruca, R.; Halling, K.;
MacLeod, P.; Powell, S. M.; Jackson, C. E.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Caldas,
C.: Identification of germ-line E-cadherin mutations in gastric cancer
families of European origin. Cancer Res. 58: 4086-4089, 1998.

21. Grady, W. M.; Willis, J.; Guilford, P. J.; Dunbier, A. K.; Toro,
T. T.; Lynch, H.; Wiesner, G.; Ferguson, K.; Eng, C.; Park, J.-G.;
Kim, S.-J.; Markowitz, S.: Methylation of the CDH1 promoter as the
second genetic hit in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer. Nature Genet. 26:
16-17, 2000.

22. Guilford, P.; Hopkins, J.; Harraway, J.; McLeod, M.; McLeod, N.;
Harawira, P.; Taite, H.; Scoular, R.; Miller, A.; Reeve, A. E.: E-cadherin
germline mutations in familial gastric cancer. Nature 392: 402-405,
1998.

23. Guilford, P. J.; Hopkins, J. B. W.; Grady, W. M.; Markowitz, S.
D.; Willis, J.; Lynch, H.; Rajput, A.; Wiesner, G. L.; Lindor, N.
M.; Burgart, L. J.; Toro, T. T.; Lee, D.; Limacher, J.-M.; Shaw, D.
W.; Findlay, M. P. N.; Reeve, A. E.: E-cadherin germline mutations
define an inherited cancer syndrome dominated by diffuse gastric cancer. Hum.
Mutat. 14: 249-255, 1999.

24. Hayashi, T.; Carthew, R. W.: Surface mechanics mediate pattern
formation in the developing retina. Nature 431: 647-652, 2004.

25. Humar, B.; Toro, T.; Graziano, F.; Muller, H.; Dobbie, Z.; Kwang-Yang,
H.; Eng, C.; Hampel, H.; Gilbert, D.; Winship, I.; Parry, S.; Ward,
R.; Findlay, M.; Christian, A.; Tucker, M.; Tucker, K.; Merriman,
T.; Guilford, P.: Novel germline CDH1 mutations in hereditary diffuse
gastric cancer families. Hum. Mutat. 19: 518-525, 2002.

26. Huntsman, D. G.; Carneiro, F.; Lewis, F. R.; MacLeod, P. M.; Hayashi,
A.; Monaghan, K. G.; Maung, R.; Seruca, R.; Jackson, C. E.; Caldas,
C.: Early gastric cancer in young, asymptomatic carriers of germ-line
E-cadherin mutations. New Eng. J. Med. 344: 1904-1909, 2001.

27. Ilyas, M.; Tomlinson, I. P. M.; Hanby, A.; Talbot, I. C.; Bodmer,
W. F.: Allele loss, replication errors and loss of expression of
E-cadherin in colorectal cancers. Gut 40: 654-659, 1997.

28. Ino, Y.; Gotoh, M.; Sakamoto, M.; Tsukagoshi, K.; Hirohashi, S.
: Dysadherin, a cancer-associated cell membrane glycoprotein, down-regulates
E-cadherin and promotes metastasis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 365-370,
2002.

29. Jamal, S.; Schneider, R. J.: UV-induction of keratinocyte endothelin-1
downregulates E-cadherin in melanocytes and melanoma cells. J. Clin.
Invest. 110: 443-452, 2002.

30. Jamora, C.; DasGupta, R.; Kocieniewski, P.; Fuchs, E.: Links
between signal transduction, transcription and adhesion in epithelial
bud development. Nature 422: 317-322, 2003. Note: Erratum: Nature
424: 974 only, 2003.

31. Jones, E. G.: Familial gastric cancer. New Zealand Med. J. 63:
287-296, 1964.

32. Jonsson, B.-A.; Adami, H.-O.; Hagglund, M.; Bergh, A.; Goransson,
I.; Stattin, P.; Wiklund, F.; Gronberg, H.: -160C/A polymorphism
in the E-cadherin gene promoter and risk of hereditary, familial and
sporadic prostate cancer. Int. J. Cancer 109: 348-352, 2004.

33. Kawasaki, H.; Taira, K.: Induction of DNA methylation and gene
silencing by short interfering RNAs in human cells. Nature 431:
211-217, 2004. Note: Erratum: Nature 431: 878 only, 2004. Note: Retraction:
Nature 441: 1176 only, 2006.

34. Kawasaki, Y.; Sato, R.; Akiyama, T.: Mutated APC and Asef are
involved in the migration of colorectal tumour cells. Nature Cell
Biol. 5: 211-215, 2003.

35. Lauren, P.: The two histological main types of gastric carcinoma:
diffuse and so-called intestinal-type carcinoma. An attempt at a histo-clinical
classification. Acta Path. Microbiol. Scand. 64: 31-49, 1965.

36. La Vecchia, C.; Negri, E.; Franceschi, S.; Gentile, A.: Family
history and the risk of stomach and colorectal cancer. Cancer 70:
50-55, 1992.

37. Lecuit, M.; Dramsi, S.; Gottardi, C.; Fedor-Chaiken, M.; Gumbiner,
B.; Cossart, P.: A single amino acid in E-cadherin responsible for
host specificity towards the human pathogen Listeria monocytogenes. EMBO
J. 18: 3956-3963, 1999.

38. Lecuit, M.; Vandormael-Pournin, S.; Lefort, J.; Huerre, M.; Gounon,
P.; Dupuy, C.; Babinet, C.; Cossart, P.: A transgenic model for listeriosis:
role of internalin in crossing the intestinal barrier. Science 292:
1722-1725, 2001.

39. Lindstrom, S.; Wiklund, F.; Jonsson, B.-A.; Adami, H.-O.; Balter,
K.; Brookes, A. J.; Xu, J.; Zheng, S. L.; Isaacs, W. B.; Adolfsson,
J.; Gronberg, H.: Comprehensive genetic evaluation of common E-cadherin
sequence variants and prostate cancer risk: strong confirmation of
functional promoter SNP. Hum. Genet. 118: 339-347, 2005.

40. Lorber, B.: Listeriosis. Clin. Infect. Dis. 24: 1-11, 1997.

41. Lynch, H. T.; Grady, W.; Lynch, J. F.; Tsuchiya, K. D.; Wiesner,
G.; Markowitz, S. D.: E-cadherin mutation-based genetic counseling
and hereditary diffuse gastric carcinoma. Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 122:
1-6, 2000.

42. Maitre, J.-L.; Berthoumieux, H.; Krens, S. F. G.; Salbreux, G.;
Julicher, F.; Paluch, E.; Heisenberg, C.-P.: Adhesion functions in
cell sorting by mechanically coupling the cortices of adhering cells. Science 338:
253-256, 2012.

43. Mansouri, A.; Goodfellow, P. N.; Kemler, R.: Molecular cloning
and chromosomal localization of the human cell adhesion molecule uvomorulin
(UVO). (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46: 655, 1987.

44. Mansouri, A.; Spurr, N.; Goodfellow, P. N.; Kemler, R.: Characterization
and chromosomal localization of the gene encoding the human cell adhesion
molecule uvomorulin. Differentiation 38: 67-71, 1988.

45. Maretzky, T.; Reiss, K.; Ludwig, A.; Buchholz, J.; Scholz, F.;
Proksch, E.; de Strooper, B.; Hartmann, D.; Saftig, P.: ADAM10 mediates
E-cadherin shedding and regulates epithelial cell-cell adhesion, migration,
and beta-catenin translocation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 9182-9187,
2005.

46. Masciari, S.; Larsson, N.; Senz, J.; Boyd, N.; Kaurah, P.; Kandel,
M. J.; Harris, L. N.; Pinheiro, H. C.; Troussard, A.; Miron, P.; Tung,
N.; Oliveira, C.; Collins, L.; Schnitt, S.; Garber, J. E.; Huntsman,
D.: Germline E-cadherin mutations in familial lobular breast cancer.
(Letter) J. Med. Genet. 44: 726-731, 2007.

47. Montenegro, M. A.; Rojas, M.; Dominguez, S.; Vergara, A.: Cytokeratin,
vimentin and E-cadherin immunodetection in the embryonic palate in
two strains of mice with different susceptibility to glucocorticoid-induced
clefting. J. Craniofac. Genet. Dev. Biol. 20: 137-143, 2000.

48. Natt, E.; Magenis, R. E.; Zimmer, J.; Mansouri, A.; Scherer, G.
: Regional assignment of the human loci for uvomorulin (UVO) and chymotrypsinogen
B (CTRB) with the help of two overlapping deletions on the long arm
of chromosome 16. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 50: 145-148, 1989.

49. Oda, T.; Kanai, Y.; Oyama, T.; Yoshiura, K.; Shimoyama, Y.; Birchmeier,
W.; Sugimura, T.; Hirohashi, S.: E-cadherin gene mutations in human
gastric carcinoma cell lines. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 1858-1862,
1994.

50. Oliveira, C.; Bordin, M. C.; Grehan, N.; Huntsman, D.; Suriano,
G.; Machado, J. C.; Kiviluoto, T.; Aaltonen, L.; Jackson, C. E.; Seruca,
R.; Caldas, C.: Screening E-cadherin in gastric cancer families reveals
germline mutations only in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer kindred. Hum.
Mutat. 19: 510-517, 2002.

51. Oliveira, C.; de Bruin, J.; Nabais, S.; Ligtenberg, M.; Moutinho,
C.; Nagengast, F. M.; Seruca, R.; van Krieken, H.; Carneiro, F.:
Intragenic deletion of CDH1 as the inactivating mechanism of the wild-type
allele in an HDGC tumour. Oncogene 23: 2236-2240, 2004.

52. Oliveira, C.; Senz, J.; Kaurah, P.; Pinheiro, H.; Sanges, R.;
Haegert, A.; Corso, G.; Schouten, J.; Fitzgerald, R.; Vogelsang, H.;
Keller, G.; Dwerryhouse, S.; and 9 others: Germline CDH1 deletions
in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer families. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18:
1545-1555, 2009.

53. Overduin, M.; Harvey, T. S.; Bagby, S.; Tong, K. I.; Yau, P.;
Takeichi, M.; Ikura, M.: Solution structure of the epithelial cadherin
domain responsible for selective cell adhesion. Science 267: 386-389,
1995.

54. Palmer, H. G.; Larriba, M. J.; Garcia, J. M.; Ordonez-Moran, P.;
Pena, C.; Peiro, S.; Puig, I.; Rodriguez, R.; de la Fuente, R.; Bernad,
A.; Pollan, M.; Bonilla, F.; Gamallo, C.; Garcia de Herreros, A.;
Munoz, A.: The transcription factor SNAIL represses vitamin D receptor
expression and responsiveness in human colon cancer. Nature Med. 10:
917-919, 2004.

55. Pena, C.; Garcia, J. M.; Silva, J.; Garcia, V.; Rodriguez, R.;
Alonso, I.; Millan, I.; Salas, C.; Garcia de Herreros, A.; Munoz,
A.; Bonilla, F.: E-cadherin and vitamin D receptor regulation by
SNAIL and ZEB1 in colon cancer: clinicopathological correlations. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 3361-3370, 2005.

56. Perl, A.-K.; Wilgenbus, P.; Dahl, U.; Semb, H.; Christofori, G.
: A causal role for E-cadherin in the transition from adenoma to carcinoma. Nature 392:
190-193, 1998.

57. Pinho, S. S.; Reis, C. A.; Paredes, J.; Magalhaes, A. M.; Ferreira,
A. C.; Figueiredo, J.; Xiaogang, W.; Carneiro, F.; Gartner, F.; Seruca,
R.: The role of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase III and V in the
post-transcriptional modifications of E-cadherin. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18:
2599-2608, 2009.

58. Place, R. F.; Li, L.-C.; Pookot, D.; Noonan, E. J.; Dahiya, R.
: MicroRNA-373 induces expression of genes with complementary promoter
sequences. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 1608-1613, 2008.

59. Richards, F. M.; McKee, S. A.; Rajpar, M. H.; Cole, T. R. P.;
Evans, D. G. R.; Jankowski, J. A.; McKeown, C.; Sanders, D. S. A.;
Maher, E. R.: Germline E-cadherin gene (CDH1) mutations predispose
to familial gastric cancer and colorectal cancer. Hum. Molec. Genet. 8:
607-610, 1999.

60. Riethmacher, D.; Brinkmann, V.; Birchmeier, C.: A targeted mutation
in the mouse E-cadherin gene results in defective preimplantation
development. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 855-859, 1995.

61. Risinger, J. I.; Berchuck, A.; Kohler, M. F.; Boyd, J.: Mutations
of the E-cadherin gene in human gynecologic cancers. Nature Genet. 7:
98-102, 1994.

62. Sato, H.; Ino, Y.; Miura, A.; Abe, Y.; Sakai, H.; Ito, K.; Hirohashi,
S.: Dysadherin: expression and clinical significance in thyroid carcinoma. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 4407-4412, 2003.

63. Scherer, G.; Bausch, E.; Gaa, A.; von Deimling, O.: Gene mapping
on mouse chromosome 8 by interspecific crosses: new data on a linkage
group conserved on human chromosome 16q. Genomics 5: 275-282, 1989.

64. Simoes-Correia, J.; Figueiredo, J.; Oliveira, C.; van Hengel,
J.; Seruca, R.; van Roy, F.; Suriano, G.: Endoplasmic reticulum quality
control: a new mechanism of E-cadherin regulation and its implication
in cancer. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 3566-3576, 2008.

65. Sokoloff, B.: Predisposition to cancer in the Bonaparte family. Am.
J. Surg. 40: 673-678, 1938.

66. Suriano, G.; Oliveira, C.; Ferreira, P.; Machado, J. C.; Bordin,
M. C.; De Wever, O.; Bruyneel, E. A.; Moguilevsky, N.; Grehan, N.;
Porter, T. R.; Richards, F. M.; Hruban, R. H.; Roviello, F.; Huntsman,
D.; Mareel, M.; Carneiro, F.; Caldas, C.; Seruca, R.: Identification
of CDH1 germline missense mutations associated with functional inactivation
of the E-cadherin protein in young gastric cancer probands. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 575-582, 2003.

67. Suriano, G.; Oliveira, M. J.; Huntsman, D.; Mateus, A. R.; Ferreira,
P.; Casares, F.; Oliveira, C.; Carneiro, F.; Machado, J. C.; Mareel,
M.; Seruca, R.: E-cadherin germline missense mutations and cell phenotype:
evidence for the independence of cell invasion on the motile capabilities
of the cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 3007-3016, 2003.

68. Wheeler, J. M. D.; Warren, B. F.; Mortensen, N. J. M.; Kim, H.
C.; Biddolph, S. C.; Elia, G.; Beck, N. E.; Williams, G. T.; Shepherd,
N. A.; Bateman, A. C.; Bodmer, W. F.: An insight into the genetic
pathway of adenocarcinoma of the small intestine. Gut 50: 218-223,
2002.

69. Yabuta, T.; Shinmura, K.; Tani, M.; Yamaguchi, S.; Yoshimura,
K.; Katai, H.; Nakajima, T.; Mochiki, E.; Tsujinaka, T.; Takami, M.;
Hirose, K.; Yamaguchi, A.; Takenoshita, S.; Yokota, J.: E-cadherin
gene variants in gastric cancer families whose probands are diagnosed
with diffuse gastric cancer. Int. J. Cancer 101: 434-441, 2002.

70. Yoon, K.-A.; Ku, J.-L.; Yang, H.-K.; Kim, W. H.; Park, S. Y.;
Park, J.-G.: Germline mutations of E-cadherin gene in Korean familial
gastric cancer patients. J. Hum. Genet. 44: 177-180, 1999.

71. Zanghieri, G.; Di Gregorio, C.; Sacchetti, C.; Fante, R.; Sassatelli,
R.; Cannizzo, G.; Carriero, A.; Ponz de Leon, M.: Familial occurrence
of gastric cancer in the 2-year experience of a population-based registry. Cancer 66:
2047-2051, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/2/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/23/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/3/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/8/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/31/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/3/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/15/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/3/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/30/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/24/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/15/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/28/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/9/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/15/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/11/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/25/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/13/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/3/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/27/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/1/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/27/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/1/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/27/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/16/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/28/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/15/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/29/2002
Paul Brennan - updated: 3/6/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/9/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/26/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/28/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/26/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/24/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/29/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/5/1999
Sonja A. Rasmussen - updated: 7/27/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/13/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/18/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/18/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/11/1998
Paul Brennan - updated: 11/14/1997
Alan F. Scott - updated: 10/11/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/31/1987

EDITED carol: 07/24/2013
ckniffin: 7/23/2013
terry: 11/6/2012
alopez: 11/6/2012
terry: 11/2/2012
mgross: 11/30/2011
terry: 11/23/2011
carol: 6/17/2011
carol: 12/22/2010
ckniffin: 12/3/2010
wwang: 7/22/2010
terry: 7/8/2010
wwang: 4/14/2010
terry: 3/31/2010
wwang: 11/6/2009
terry: 11/3/2009
wwang: 10/15/2009
terry: 10/15/2009
carol: 9/17/2009
wwang: 9/16/2009
terry: 9/3/2009
carol: 2/6/2009
terry: 2/2/2009
ckniffin: 1/30/2009
wwang: 7/15/2008
terry: 7/9/2008
alopez: 5/7/2008
terry: 4/24/2008
mgross: 4/15/2008
carol: 2/8/2008
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
wwang: 1/16/2008
ckniffin: 12/28/2007
alopez: 7/18/2006
carol: 7/6/2006
alopez: 5/10/2006
alopez: 3/15/2006
terry: 3/9/2006
wwang: 2/21/2006
terry: 2/15/2006
wwang: 1/23/2006
terry: 1/11/2006
wwang: 7/28/2005
terry: 7/25/2005
alopez: 7/13/2005
alopez: 3/9/2005
terry: 3/3/2005
wwang: 2/7/2005
wwang: 1/31/2005
terry: 1/27/2005
alopez: 10/20/2004
alopez: 10/15/2004
tkritzer: 10/5/2004
carol: 10/1/2004
terry: 9/29/2004
carol: 8/27/2004
terry: 8/27/2004
carol: 6/18/2003
alopez: 4/1/2003
terry: 4/1/2003
alopez: 3/25/2003
alopez: 3/3/2003
terry: 2/27/2003
mgross: 12/17/2002
terry: 12/16/2002
alopez: 10/15/2002
ckniffin: 5/29/2002
terry: 5/28/2002
alopez: 5/17/2002
terry: 5/15/2002
carol: 5/1/2002
terry: 4/29/2002
alopez: 3/6/2002
carol: 11/13/2001
mcapotos: 10/23/2001
terry: 10/9/2001
mcapotos: 7/3/2001
mcapotos: 6/28/2001
terry: 6/26/2001
alopez: 6/13/2001
terry: 6/12/2001
carol: 3/19/2001
alopez: 3/2/2001
terry: 2/28/2001
carol: 2/27/2001
terry: 2/26/2001
alopez: 8/28/2000
terry: 8/24/2000
mgross: 11/18/1999
alopez: 11/16/1999
terry: 10/29/1999
carol: 10/5/1999
carol: 7/27/1999
kayiaros: 7/27/1999
terry: 6/9/1999
mgross: 5/27/1999
mgross: 5/19/1999
terry: 5/13/1999
dkim: 9/23/1998
terry: 9/18/1998
psherman: 8/27/1998
terry: 8/20/1998
carol: 6/19/1998
terry: 6/18/1998
terry: 6/3/1998
alopez: 3/11/1998
terry: 3/11/1998
alopez: 11/26/1997
alopez: 11/17/1997
alopez: 11/14/1997
mark: 7/8/1997
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 3/4/1996
terry: 2/23/1996
mimadm: 6/7/1995
pfoster: 3/23/1995
carol: 2/17/1995
carol: 6/17/1993
carol: 10/7/1992

611354	TITLE *611354 CLEAVAGE AND POLYADENYLATION-SPECIFIC FACTOR 3-LIKE; CPSF3L
;;INTEGRATOR COMPLEX SUBUNIT 11; INTS11;;
RELATED TO CPSF SUBUNITS, 68-KD PROTEIN; RC68
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The Integrator complex contains at least 12 subunits and associates with
the C-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II large subunit (POLR2A;
180660) and mediates the 3-prime end processing of small nuclear RNAs U1
(RNU1; 180680) and U2 (RNU2; 180690). INTS11, or CPSF3L, is the
catalytic subunit of the Integrator complex (Baillat et al., 2005).

CLONING

By searching for members of the beta-lactamase superfamily (see LACTB,
608440), Dominski et al. (2005) identified CPSF3L, which they called
RC68. The deduced 600-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal
histidine motif involved in zinc binding and catalysis, suggesting that
RC68 functions as an RNA-specific endonuclease. Fluorescence- and
epitope-tagged RC68 was expressed in both the nucleus and cytoplasm of
transfected HeLa cells, with higher concentrations in the nucleus. The
expression of RC68 did not change during the cell cycle.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of HeLa cells, Dominski et al. (2005) showed
that full-length RC74 (INTS9; 611352) interacted with C-terminal
fragments of RC68 and full-length importin-alpha (KNPA2; 600685). Using
reciprocal immunoprecipitations, they confirmed the interaction between
RC74 and the C-terminal region of RC68 in HeLa cells and mouse myeloma
cells. Depletion of RC68 in HeLa cells by small interfering RNA led to
cell cycle arrest at G1. Arrested cells were the size of G2 cells,
indicating that depletion of RC68 blocked entry into S phase but did not
prevent cell growth.

Using immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis to identify proteins
that interact with DSS1 (601285), Baillat et al. (2005) identified
several Integrator complex proteins, including INTS11.
Immunoprecipitation analysis of HEK293 cells expressing epitope-tagged
INTS11 revealed the presence of RNA polymerase II (see POLR2A; 180660)
and other Integrator subunits. Expression of a mutant INTS11 protein
(E203Q) in HEK293 cells resulted in an Integrator complex that could
associate with both the promoter and the 3-prime end of U1 and U2 small
nuclear RNA, but could not process U1 and U2 primary transcripts.

MAPPING

Hartz (2007) mapped the CPSF3L gene to chromosome 1p36.33 based on an
alignment of the CPSF3L sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK000549) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Baillat, D.; Hakimi, M.-A.; Naar, A. M.; Shilatifard, A.; Cooch,
N.; Shiekhattar, R.: Integrator, a multiprotein mediator of small
nuclear RNA processing, associates with the C-terminal repeat of RNA
polymerase II. Cell 123: 265-276, 2005.

2. Dominski, Z.; Yang, X.; Purdy, M.; Wagner, E. J.; Marzluff, W.
F.: A CPSF-73 homologue is required for cell cycle progression but
not cell growth and interacts with a protein having features of CPSF-100. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 25: 1489-1500, 2005.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/17/2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/17/2007

EDITED wwang: 08/17/2007

189902	TITLE *189902 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR DP1; TFDP1
;;E2F DIMERIZATION PARTNER 1; DP1;;
TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR, SEQUENCE-SPECIFIC, DRTF1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The E2F transcription factor family (see 189971) regulates the
expression of various cellular promoters, particularly those involved in
the cell cycle. E2F factors bind to DNA as homodimers or heterodimers in
association with dimerization partner DP1. TFDP1 may be the first
example of a family of related transcription factors; see TFDP2
(602160).

CLONING

The cDNA for transcription factor DP1 (TFDP1) was cloned by Girling et
al. (1993) from a library of F9 embryonal carcinoma cells by using PCR
primers predicted from partial peptide sequences of a 46-kD protein. The
protein was isolated by virtue of its binding to a DNA sequence taken
from the adenovirus E2A promoter. TFDP1 is a component of the DRTF1/E2F
transcription factor complex, which coordinates events in the cell cycle
by interacting with RB1 (614041), the retinoblastoma gene product, and
RB-related proteins (Bandara and La Thangue, 1991). DRTF1 activity is
downregulated in differentiating embryonal carcinoma cells, and E2F
activity is induced in adenovirus-infected HeLa cells. Bandara and La
Thangue (1991) showed that the adenovirus E1a protein causes the
dissociation of the RB protein from this complex. TFDP1 has a predicted
sequence of 410 amino acids (Girling et al., 1993) with a region of
similarity to E2F1 (189971), accounting for the ability of both to bind
the same DNA sequence.

GENE FUNCTION

SMAD3 (603109) is a direct mediator of transcriptional activation by the
TGF-beta (190180) receptor (see 190181). Its target genes in epithelial
cells include cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK; see 116953) inhibitors that
generate a cytostatic response. Chen et al. (2002) defined how, in the
same context, SMAD3 can mediate transcriptional repression of the
growth-promoting gene MYC (190080). A complex containing SMAD3, the
transcription factors E2F4 (600659), E2F5 (600967), and DP1, and the
corepressor p107 (116957) preexists in the cytoplasm. In response to
TGF-beta, this complex moves into the nucleus and associates with SMAD4
(600993), recognizing a composite SMAD-E2F site on MYC for repression.
Previously known as the ultimate recipients of CDK regulatory signals,
E2F4/E2F5 and p107 act here as transducers of TGF-beta receptor signals
upstream of CDK. SMAD proteins therefore mediate transcriptional
activation or repression depending on their associated partners.

Gain-of-function mutations in LRRK2 (609007) cause Parkinson disease
(PARK8; 607060) characterized by age-dependent degeneration of
dopaminergic neurons. Gehrke et al. (2010) found that LRRK2 interacted
with the microRNA (miRNA) pathway to regulate protein synthesis. They
showed that mRNAs for Drosophila E2f1 and Dp, which had previously been
implicated in cell cycle and survival control (Girling et al., 1993),
were translationally repressed by the miRNAs Let7 (MIRLET7A1; 605386)
and miR184* (613146), respectively. Pathogenic human LRRK2 antagonized
Let7 and miR184*, leading to overproduction of E2f1 and Dp, which was
critical for LRRK2 pathogenesis. In Drosophila, genetic deletion of
Let7, antagomir-mediated blockage of Let7 and miR184* action, transgenic
expression of Dp target protector, or replacement of endogenous Dp with
a Dp transgene nonresponsive to Let7 each had toxic effects similar to
those of pathogenic LRRK2. Conversely, increasing the level of Let7 or
miR184* attenuated pathogenic LRRK2 effects. Human LRRK2 associated with
Drosophila Argonaute-1 (EIF2C1, or AGO1; 606228) or human Argonaute-2
(EIF2C2, or AGO2; 606229) of the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC).
In aged fly brain, Ago1 protein level was negatively regulated by human
LRRK2. Furthermore, pathogenic LRRK2 promoted the association of
phosphorylated 4EBP1 (EIF4EPB1; 602223) with human AGO2. Gehrke et al.
(2010) concluded that deregulated synthesis of E2F1 and DP caused by
miRNA pathway impairment is a key event in LRRK2 pathogenesis,
suggesting that novel miRNA-based therapeutic strategies may be useful
for Parkinson disease.

MAPPING

In a study mapping the human SOX1 gene (602148) to 13q34 by fluorescence
in situ hybridization, Malas et al. (1997) demonstrated that the TFDP1
gene maps distal to SOX1 on 13q34. Zhang et al. (1997) used fluorescence
in situ hybridization to map the TFDP1 gene to human chromosome 13q34.
They noted the presence of a pseudogene, termed TFDP1P, at 1q32.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Abba et al. (2007) observed genomic amplification affecting the murine
chromosome 8 region in mouse mammary tumors. The homologous syntenic
cluster mapping to human chromosome 13q34 was also amplified in a subset
of human breast cancers. Specifically, the TFDP1 gene showed the highest
frequency of amplification affecting 23 (31.1%) of 74 primary breast
cancer samples. Other genes within the same cluster region on 13q34 were
also amplified, including CUL4A (603137), LAMP1 (153330), and GAS6
(600441). Metaanalysis of publicly available gene expression data showed
a strong association between high expression of TFDP1 and decreased
overall survival in patients with breast cancer.

REFERENCE 1. Abba, M. C.; Fabris, V. T.; Hu, Y.; Kittrell, F. S.; Cai, W.-W.;
Donehower, L. A.; Sahin, A.; Medina, D.; Aldaz, C. M.: Identification
of novel amplification gene targets in mouse and human breast cancer
at a syntenic cluster mapping to mouse ch8A1 and human ch13q34. Cancer
Res. 67: 4104-4112, 2007.

2. Bandara, L. R.; La Thangue, N. B.: Adenovirus E1a prevents the
retinoblastoma gene product from complexing with a cellular transcription
factor. Nature 351: 494-497, 1991.

3. Chen, C.-R.; Kang, Y.; Siegel, P. M.; Massague, J.: E2F4/5 and
p107 as Smad cofactors linking the TGF-beta receptor to c-myc repression. Cell 110:
19-32, 2002.

4. Gehrke, S.; Imai, Y.; Sokol, N.; Lu, B.: Pathogenic LRRK2 negatively
regulates microRNA-mediated translational repression. Nature 466:
637-641, 2010.

5. Girling, R.; Partridge, J. F.; Bandara, L. R.; Burden, N.; Totty,
N. F.; Hsuan, J. J.; La Thangue, N. B.: A new component of the transcription
factor DRTF1/E2F. Nature 362: 83-87, 1993. Note: Erratum: Nature
365: 468 only, 1993.

6. Malas, S.; Duthie, S. M.; Mohri, F.; Lovell-Badge, R.; Episkopou,
V.: Cloning and mapping of the human SOX1: a highly conserved gene
expressed in the developing brain. Mammalian Genome 8: 866-868,
1997.

7. Zhang, Y.; Venkatraj, V. S.; Fischer, S. G.; Warburton, D.; Chellappan,
S. P.: Genomic cloning and chromosomal assignment of the E2F dimerization
partner TFDP gene family. Genomics 39: 95-98, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/7/2008
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/26/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/19/1991

EDITED terry: 05/24/2012
carol: 6/17/2011
mgross: 8/25/2010
wwang: 2/11/2008
ckniffin: 2/7/2008
mgross: 7/26/2002
carol: 10/11/1999
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/19/1991

120290	TITLE *120290 COLLAGEN, TYPE XI, ALPHA-2; COL11A2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Type XI collagen, a fibril-forming collagen found mainly in the
cartilage extracellular matrix, is important for the integrity and
development of the skeleton (summary by Lui et al., 1996).

CLONING

Kimura et al. (1989) cloned human COL11A2, which encodes a deduced
protein with high sequence similarity to COL11A1 (120280). By Northern
blot analysis, Kimura et al. (1989) showed that COL11A2 is expressed in
cartilage but not in adult liver, skin, and tendon.

MAPPING

Law et al. (1989, 1990) used a cosmid clone containing the COL11A2 gene
as a probe in the Southern blot analysis of DNA from a panel of
human/hamster somatic cell hybrids containing different numbers and
combinations of human chromosomes. They concluded that the gene is
located on chromosome 6, and study of a cell hybrid containing only 6q
indicated that the COL11A2 gene is on 6p.

By a combination of somatic cell hybrid mapping and in situ
hybridization, Hanson et al. (1989, 1989) localized the COL11A2 gene to
6p21.3. By physical mapping of the class II HLA region using pulsed
field gel electrophoresis, Hanson et al. (1991) demonstrated that the
COL11A2 gene is about 45 kb centromeric to HLA-DPA1 (142880) and is
transcribed in the opposite (i.e., telomeric) direction.

Kimura et al. (1989) assigned the COL11A2 gene to 6p21.2 by in situ
hybridization. The nucleotide sequence showed that although type XI
collagen belongs to the fibril-forming class of collagens, there are
substantial differences in exon sizes at the 3-prime end of the gene
when comparing the COL11A2 gene with the genes for types I, II, and III
collagens. It is thought that the alpha-3 chain of type XI collagen is a
posttranslational variant of the type II, or cartilage, collagen
subunit, i.e., is encoded by the COL2A1 gene (120140).

Stubbs et al. (1993) showed that the homologous gene in the mouse is
also 'embedded' within the major histocompatibility complex on
chromosome 17.

GENE STRUCTURE

Vuoristo et al. (1995) analyzed the COL11A2 gene from 2 overlapping
cosmid clones that had previously been isolated in the course of
searching the human major histocompatibility region. Nucleotide sequence
defined over 28,000 bp of the gene. It was shown to contain 66 exons. As
with most genes for fibrillar collagens, the first intron was among the
largest, and the introns at the 5-prime end of the gene were in general
larger than the introns at the 3-prime end. Analysis of the exons coding
for the major triple helical domain indicated that the gene structure
had not evolved with the genes for the major fibrillar collagen and that
there were marked differences in the number of exons, the exon sizes,
and codon usage. The gene was located close to the gene for the retinoid
X receptor beta (180246) in a head-to-tail arrangement similar to that
previously seen with the 2 mouse genes. Also, there was marked
interspecies homology in the intergenic sequences.

Lui et al. (1996) showed that COL11A2 contains at least 62 exons
spanning 30.5 kb. The gene differs from other collagens in that the
amino propeptide is encoded by 14 exons rather than the usual 5 to 8.
The promoter is GC-rich and lacks a TATA box. The authors believed that
the gene is likely to undergo alternative splicing. The gene lies within
the MHC region and is only 1.1-kb from the retinoid X receptor-beta
(180246) and about 40 kb from DPB2 (142880).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Melkoniemi et al. (2000) stated that in spite of partial overlap between
the Stickler (see 108300), Marshall (154780), Weissenbacher-Zweymuller
(277610), and otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED; 215150)
phenotypes caused by mutations in the COL2A1 (120140), COL11A1 (120280),
and COL11A2 genes, absence of eye involvement in patients carrying
COL11A2 mutations is noteworthy. This was best explained by the finding
that the COL11A2 gene is not expressed in the vitreous body and that the
COL5A2 (120190) chain replaces the COL11A2 chain in the ocular vitreous
(Mayne et al., 1993).

- Stickler Syndrome, Type III

Type II collagen is closely associated with both type IX collagen
(120210) and type XI collagen in thin collagen fibrils of hyaline
cartilage. This prompted Brunner et al. (1994) to study linkage of a
Stickler syndrome phenotype (STL3; 184840) to polymorphic markers within
or near genes encoding these cartilage collagens. In a large Dutch
kindred, Stickler syndrome was found to be linked to the 6p22-p21.3
region where COL11A2 maps. Unlike the usual cases of Stickler syndrome
which show high myopia, vitreoretinal degeneration, and retinal
detachment, ocular features were lacking in all affected individuals in
the Dutch family. This may be explained by absence of the alpha-2 chain
of type XI collagen in the vitreous. The skeletal and otologic
manifestations of the Stickler syndrome were present in the family,
however. Vikkula et al. (1995) established that the affected members of
the Dutch kindred with Stickler syndrome reported by Brunner et al.
(1994) had a mutation in the COL11A2 gene (120290.0001).

Sirko-Osadsa et al. (1998) described a family with Stickler syndrome in
which there was no eye involvement and demonstrated that the phenotype
was due to heterozygosity for a 27-bp deletion in the COL11A2 gene
(120290.0003). The affected members of the family had sensorineural
hearing loss, cleft palate/uvula, micrognathia, malar flattening, joint
pains, and multiple hereditary exostoses.

- Weissenbacher-Zweymuller Syndrome

Pihlajamaa et al. (1998) demonstrated that the original patient
described by Weissenbacher and Zweymuller (1964) as a 'combination of a
Pierre Robin syndrome with a fetal chondrodysplasia' (WZS; 277610) had a
heterozygous mutation in the COL11A2 gene (120290.0004).

- Otospondylomegaepiphyseal Dysplasia

Vikkula et al. (1995) studied a Dutch kindred in which 3 sibs of a
consanguineous mating had a severe degenerative joint disease resembling
osteoarthritis that presented in early adulthood and affected
predominantly the hips, knees, elbows, and shoulders (OSMED; 215150).
Vikkula et al. (1995) found that the mutation in these sibs was a
gly175-to-arg mutation of the COL11A2 gene (120290.0002). van Steensel
et al. (1997) described the clinical and radiographic features of
otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia in these sibs.

Melkoniemi et al. (2000) reported 7 families with OSMED. All affected
individuals had a remarkably similar phenotype: profound sensorineural
hearing loss, skeletal dysplasia with limb shortening and large
epiphyses, cleft palate, very flat face, hypoplasia of the mandible, a
short nose with anteverted nares, and a flat nasal bridge. A different
mutation of the COL11A2 gene was identified in each family. In 4
families, including 3 with consanguineous parents, the mutations were
homozygous. Individuals in 3 other families, in which parents were
nonconsanguineous, were compound heterozygous. Of the 10 identified
mutations, 9 were predicted to cause premature termination of
translation, and 1 was predicted to cause an in-frame deletion.

In an Egyptian brother and sister with OSMED, Temtamy et al. (2006)
identified homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion in the COL11A2 gene
(120290.0011). The first-cousin parents were heterozygous for the
deletion; a younger brother was unaffected.

- Deafness, Autosomal Dominant 13

In 2 families, 1 American and 1 Dutch, with autosomal dominant,
nonsyndromic hearing loss (DFNA13; 601868) previously been mapped to 6p,
McGuirt et al. (1999) identified heterozygous mutations in the COL11A2
gene (120290.0005-120290.0006) that were predicted to affect the
triple-helix domain of the collagen protein. McGuirt et al. (1999) found
that mice with a targeted disruption of Col11a2 also showed hearing
loss. Electron microscopy of the tectorial membrane of these mice
revealed loss of organization of the collagen fibrils. The findings
revealed a unique ultrastructural malformation of the inner ear
architecture associated with nonsyndromic hearing loss, and suggested
that tectorial membrane abnormalities may be one etiology of
sensorineural hearing loss primarily affecting the mid-frequencies.

- Deafness, Autosomal Recessive 53

In 5 affected members of 2 sibships of a consanguineous Iranian family
with nonsyndromic hearing loss (DFNB53; 609706), Chen et al. (2005)
identified homozygosity for a missense mutation in the COL11A2 gene
(P621T; 120290.0008). The 4 parents and 1 sib were heterozygous for the
mutation.

- Fibrochondrogenesis 2

In a deceased infant with fibrochondrogenesis (FBCG2; 614524), born of
consanguineous parents, Tompson et al. (2012) identified homozygosity
for a splice site mutation in the COL11A2 gene (120290.0012). In another
deceased infant with fibrochondrogenesis, who was born of healthy
nonconsanguineous parents, they identified heterozygosity for a 9-bp
deletion (120290.0013).

- Associations Pending Confirmation

Among Japanese, ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament of
the spine (OPLL; 602475) is a leading cause of myelopathy, showing
ectopic bone formation in the paravertebral ligament. Maeda et al.
(2001) provided genetic evidence that the COL11A2 locus constitutes
susceptibility for OPLL. Five distinct SNPs identified in COL11A2 were
combined to construct haplotypes. A male-specific association with a
COL11A2 haplotype was found with OPLL. In a case-control study of 711
Japanese individuals with OPLL and 896 controls, Horikoshi et al. (2006)
found no association between 2 SNPs in the COL11A2 gene and OPLL.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE III
COL11A2, IVS, G-A, +1

In a large Dutch kindred with Stickler syndrome (184840), which was
found by Brunner et al. (1994) to map to the same region of 6p as the
COL11A2 gene, Vikkula et al. (1995) found heterozygosity for a 1-bp
change at the exon-intron boundary such that the intronic donor-site
sequence, GTGAG, was replaced by ATGAG. This change created a novel
NlaIII restriction site in the genomic sequence. The G-to-A transition
resulted in a 54-bp in-frame deletion, which represented deletion of the
exon 5-prime of the mutation. This exon sequence was located 108
nucleotides upstream of the junction between sequences encoding the
triple-helical and C-propeptide domains of the alpha-2(XI) chain.

.0002
OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
COL11A2, GLY175ARG

Vikkula et al. (1995) studied a Dutch kindred in which 3 sibs had a
severe degenerative joint disease resembling osteoarthritis that
presented in early adulthood and affected predominantly the hips, knees,
elbows, and shoulders (215150). The spine was less severely affected,
and adult height was only slightly below that of the unaffected sibs.
There was increased lumbar lordosis and prominent interphalangeal
joints. Short fifth metacarpals were found in all 3 sibs. The patients
had distinctive facial features with midface hypoplasia with a short
upturned nose, prominent eyes, depressed nasal bridge, and prominent
supraorbital ridges. Sensorineural hearing loss was present from birth
and required the use of hearing aids in all 3 affected sibs. None of the
3 had myopia or vitreoretinal degeneration. The parents were fourth
cousins. The affected sibs were found to be homozygous for an extended
haplotype of 7 CA dinucleotide repeat polymorphisms from 6p21 near the
COL11A2 locus. Using conservative estimates of 0.002 for the frequency
of the abnormal allele and 0.005 for the frequency of the marker
haplotype, Vikkula et al. (1995) obtained a lod score of 3.09 at theta =
0.0 for linkage of the disease phenotype to 6p21. To find the mutation
causing the autosomal recessive disorder, they used RT-PCR with total
RNA extracted from EBV-transformed lymphoblasts, and the complete coding
sequence of the COL11A2 gene was determined for 1 individual. This
identified a G-to-A transition, converting a glycyl to an arginyl codon,
within the triple-helical domain of the alpha-2(XI) chain. The change in
sequence eliminated an MspI restriction site. Affected children were
homozygous for the arginyl codon, while unaffected children were
homozygous for the glycyl codon; both parents were heterozygous for the
sequence change. The mutation occurred in a Gly-X-Y triplet. The
clinical findings in the 3 sibs with the gly175-to-arg missense mutation
were described by van Steensel et al. (1997).

.0003
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE III
COL11A2, 27-BP DEL

In a family with type III Stickler syndrome (184840), Sirko-Osadsa et
al. (1998) identified a 27-bp deletion within exon 39 of the COL11A2
gene.

.0004
WEISSENBACHER-ZWEYMULLER SYNDROME
OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, HETEROZYGOUS, INCLUDED
COL11A2, GLY955GLU

Weissenbacher and Zweymuller (1964) described a newborn boy of normal
size who presented with a 'combination of a Pierre Robin syndrome with a
fetal chondrodysplasia' (277610). The child had a markedly snub nose,
cleft palate, micrognathia, glossoptosis, rhizomelic shortness of the
limbs with dumbbell-shaped femora, and coronal vertebral clefts. A
follow-up report when the original WZS patient was 18 years old (Giedion
et al., 1982) indicated that he had developed sensorineural deafness at
about 5 years of age, and a spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with enlarged
epiphyses of the long bones, radiologically most pronounced at the age
of 13.5 years. At age 18, he was normal in height (164 cm) and in
appearance except for slightly shorter limbs and lower segment. Also, he
had no ocular signs or symptoms. His parents were healthy and
nonconsanguineous. A brother was unaffected. Giedion et al. (1982)
reported 3 additional patients with the same condition and suggested
that they should be classified as otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia
(OSMED; 215150); common findings in patients of the OSMED group were
midface hypoplasia, cleft palate, micrognathia, sensorineural deafness,
normal eyes, and spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with large epiphyses.
Pihlajamaa et al. (1998) analyzed the original WZS patient for mutations
in 2 collagen genes expressed in cartilage, COL2A1 and COL11A2. No
mutations were found in the COL2A1 gene but the COL11A2 gene contained a
G-to-A transition that converted codon 955 from an obligate glycine
(GGG) in the major triple helix of the protein to a codon for glutamate
(GAG). The mutation was present in heterozygous state.

.0005
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 13
COL11A2, ARG549CYS

In affected members of an American family with autosomal dominant
nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss (DFNA13; 601868), McGuirt et al.
(1999) identified a heterozygous C-to-T missense mutation in exon 42
that predicted an arg549-to-cys amino acid substitution.

.0006
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 13
COL11A2, GLY323GLU

In affected members of a Dutch family with autosomal dominant
nonsyndromic sensorineural deafness (DFNA13; 601868), McGuirt et al.
(1999) found a heterozygous G-to-A transition in exon 31 that predicted
a gly323-to-glu amino acid substitution.

.0007
OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
COL11A2, SER345TER

In a family from Morocco with consanguineous parents, Melkoniemi et al.
(2000) found that 3 children with OSMED (215150) were homozygous for a
C-to-A transversion at nucleotide 2492 in exon 33 of the COL11A2 gene,
resulting in a ser345-to-ter substitution. One of the children was
described as having normal body length at birth, but short limbs with
enlarged joints and stiff interphalangeal joints were noted. The
radiologic features included vertebral coronal clefts, square iliac
wings and a thick ischium, large metaphyses of the long bones, and
enlarged epiphyses of the elbows and knees. At age 7 years, she was of
nearly normal height, but disproportionate, and her palate was extremely
narrow, with a double row of teeth. Eye examination revealed slight
myopia.

.0008
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE III
COL11A2, ARG893TER

In affected members of a 3-generation family with type III Stickler
syndrome (184840), Vuoristo et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous
C-to-T transition in exon 57 of the COL11A2 gene, resulting in an
arg893-to-ter (R893X) substitution. The mutation induced skipping of
exon 57 in 1 allele, resulting in an in-frame deletion of 18 amino
acids. Sensorineural hearing loss was present in all 3 generations. The
propositus was a 4-year-old boy who had Robin sequence at birth. Both
the propositus and his father had a flat malar area and nasal bridge,
and the nose was upturned. The father had symptoms and radiologic
findings of osteoarthritis from the age of 29 years. At age 73 years,
the affected grandmother showed extensive osteoarthritic changes in the
spine. Her father had undergone hip replacement in midadulthood.

.0009
WEISSENBACHER-ZWEYMULLER SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL11A2, ARG845TER

In 5 individuals from a consanguineous Israeli Bedouin family with
autosomal recessive Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome (277610), Harel et
al. (2005) identified homozygosity for a 3991C-T transition in exon 56
of the COL11A2 gene, resulting in an arg845-to-ter (R845X) substitution.
The R845X mutation was initially reported by Melkoniemi et al. (2000) in
compound heterozygous state in the offspring of nonconsanguineous
parents of northern European descent. The major differentiation between
WZS and otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED; 215150) had been
proposed to be the 'catch-up growth' associated with the former, with a
definite diagnosis established also after follow-up. Given that
homozygous COL11A2 mutations causing OSMED have been identified
throughout the COL11A2 gene (Melkoniemi et al., 2000), it seems
improbable that one could define a specific region in the gene that,
when mutated, might cause WZS rather than OSMED. The R845X premature
translation termination mutation is in accordance with the mutations of
COL11A2 that are associated with OSMED, which are almost exclusively
frameshift or nonsense mutations that lead to the production of
truncated alpha-2 (XI) chains, unlikely to be incorporated into type XI
collagen molecules. Alternatively, these mutations may trigger
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, and thus would be expected to be
functional nulls. Harel et al. (2005) concluded that autosomal recessive
WZS and OSMED are a single entity.

.0010
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 53
COL11A2, PRO621THR

In 5 affected members of 2 sibships of a consanguineous Iranian family
with nonsyndromic hearing loss (DFNB53; 609706), Chen et al. (2005)
identified homozygosity for an 1861C-A transversion in exon 21 of the
COL11A2 gene, resulting in a pro621-to-thr (P621T) substitution near the
N terminus of the triple helical region. The 4 parents and 1 sib were
heterozygous for the mutation.

.0011
OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
COL11A2, 1-BP DEL, 3962G

In an Egyptian brother and sister with OSMED (215150), Temtamy et al.
(2006) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion (3962delG) in exon 55
of the COL11A2 gene, resulting in a termination codon in exon 56. The
first-cousin parents were heterozygous for the deletion; a younger
brother was unaffected.

.0012
FIBROCHONDROGENESIS 2
COL11A2, IVS18, 1-BP INS, +3

In a deceased infant with fibrochondrogenesis-2 (FBCG2; 614524), born of
consanguineous parents, Tompson et al. (2012) identified homozygosity
for a 1-bp insertion in intron 18 (+3insG) of the COL11A2 gene,
predicted to result in aberrant mRNA processing. The unaffected parents
were heterozygous for the mutation, as was an unaffected sib. An exon
trapping splicing assay in COS-7 cells demonstrated skipping of exon 18
in RNA from the mutant construct but not from the control.

.0013
FIBROCHONDROGENESIS 2
COL11A2, 9-BP DEL, NT2899

In a deceased infant with fibrochondrogenesis-2 (FBCG2; 614524), born of
healthy nonconsanguineous parents, Tompson et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for a de novo 9-bp deletion (2899_2907del9), predicted to
delete 3 amino acids within the triple helical domain. The mutation was
not present in the unaffected parents.

REFERENCE 1. Brunner, H. G.; van Beersum, S. E. C.; Warman, M. L.; Olsen, B.
R.; Ropers, H.-H.; Mariman, E. C. M.: A Stickler syndrome gene is
linked to chromosome 6 near the COL11A2 gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3:
1561-1564, 1994.

2. Chen, W.; Kahrizi, K.; Meyer, N. C.; Riazalhosseini, Y.; Van Camp,
G.; Najmabadi, H.; Smith, R. J. H.: Mutation of COL11A2 causes autosomal
recessive non-syndromic hearing loss at the DFNB53 locus. J. Med.
Genet. 42: e61, 2005. Note: Electronic Article.

3. Giedion, A.; Brandner, M.; Lecannellier, J.; Muhar, U.; Prader,
A.; Sulzer, J.; Zweymuller, E.: Oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal dysplasia
(OSMED). Helv. Pediat. Acta 37: 361-380, 1982.

4. Hanson, I. M.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Gorman, P. A.; Solomon, E.; Trowsdale,
J.: The pro-alpha2(XI) collagen gene, COL11A2, maps to the centromeric
border of the major histocompatibility complex. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 51: 1010-1011, 1989.

5. Hanson, I. M.; Gorman, P.; Lui, V. C. H.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Solomon,
E.; Trowsdale, J.: The human alpha-2(XI) collagen gene (COL11A2)
maps to the centromeric border of the major histocompatibility complex
on chromosome 6. Genomics 5: 925-931, 1989.

6. Hanson, I. M.; Poustka, A.; Trowsdale, J.: New genes in the class
II region of the human major histocompatibility complex. Genomics 10:
417-424, 1991.

7. Harel, T.; Rabinowitz, R.; Hendler, N.; Galil, A.; Flusser, H.;
Chemke, J.; Gradstein, L.; Lifshitz, T.; Ofir, R.; Elbedour, K.; Birk,
O. S.: COL11A2 mutation associated with autosomal recessive Weissenbacher-Zweymuller
syndrome: molecular and clinical overlap with otospondylomegaepiphyseal
dysplasia (OSMED). Am. J. Med. Genet. 132A: 33-35, 2005.

8. Horikoshi, T.; Maeda, K.; Kawaguchi, Y.; Chiba, K.; Mori, K.; Koshizuka,
Y.; Hirabayashi, S.; Sugimori, K.; Matsumoto, M.; Kawaguchi, H.; Takahashi,
M.; Inoue, H.; Kimura, T.; Matsusue, Y.; Inoue, I.; Baba, H.; Nakamura,
K.; Ikegawa, S.: A large-scale genetic association study of ossification
of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. Hum. Genet. 119:
611-616, 2006.

9. Kimura, T.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Chan, S. D. H.; Lui, V. C. H.; Mattei,
M.-G.; van der Rest, M.; Ono, K.; Solomon, E.; Ninomiya, Y.; Olsen,
B. R.: The human alpha-2(XI) collagen (COL11A2) chain: molecular
cloning of cDNA and genomic DNA reveals characteristics of a fibrillar
collagen with differences in genomic organization. J. Biol. Chem. 264:
13910-13916, 1989.

10. Law, M. L.; Chan, S. D. H.; Berger, R.; Jones, C.; Kao, F. T.;
Solomon, E.; Cheah, K. S. E.: The gene for the alpha-2 chain of the
human fibrillar collagen type XI (COL11A2) assigned to the short arm
of chromosome 6. Ann. Hum. Genet. 54: 23-29, 1990.

11. Law, M. L.; Chan, S. D. H.; Berger, R.; Jones, C. A.; Kao, F.
T.; Solomon, E.; Cheah, K. S. E.: The gene for the alpha2 chain of
the human fibrillar collagen, type XI (COL11A2) is on the short arm
of chromosome 6. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51: 1029-1030,
1989.

12. Lui, V. C. H.; Ng, L. J.; Sat, E. W. Y.; Cheah, K. S. E.: The
human alpha-2(XI) collagen gene (COL11A2): completion of coding information,
identification of the promoter sequence, and precise localization
within the major histocompatibility complex reveal overlap with the
KE5 gene. Genomics 32: 401-412, 1996.

13. Maeda, S.; Koga, H.; Matsunaga, S.; Numasawa, T.; Ikari, K.; Furushima,
K.; Harata, S.; Takeda, J.; Sakou, T.; Komiya, S.; Inoue, I.: Gender-specific
haplotype association of collagen alpha-2 (XI) gene in ossification
of the posterior longitudinal ligament of the spine. J. Hum. Genet. 46:
1-4, 2001.

14. Mayne, R.; Brewton, R. G.; Mayne, P. M.; Baker, J. R.: Isolation
and characterization of the chains of type V/type XI collagen present
in bovine vitreous. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 9381-9386, 1993.

15. McGuirt, W. T.; Prasad, S. D.; Griffith, A. J.; Kunst, H. P. M.;
Green, G. E.; Shpargel, K. B.; Runge, C.; Huybrechts, C.; Mueller,
R. F.; Lynch, E.; King, M.-C.; Brunner, H. G.; Cremers, C. W. R. J.;
Takanosu, M.; Li, S.-W.; Arita, M.; Mayne, R.; Prockop, D. J.; Van
Camp, G.; Smith, R. J. H.: Mutations in COL11A2 cause non-syndromic
hearing loss (DFNA13). Nature Genet. 23: 413-419, 1999.

16. Melkoniemi, M.; Brunner, H. G.; Manouvrier, S.; Hennekam, R.;
Superti-Furga, A.; Kaariainen, H.; Pauli, R. M.; van Essen, T.; Warman,
M. L.; Bonaventure, J.; Miny, P.; Ala-Kokko, L.: Autosomal recessive
disorder otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia is associated with loss-of-function
mutations in the COL11A2 gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66: 368-377, 2000.

17. Pihlajamaa, T.; Prockop, D. J.; Faber, J.; Winterpacht, A.; Zabel,
B.; Giedion, A.; Wiesbauer, P.; Spranger, J.; Ala-Kokko, L.: Heterozygous
glycine substitution in the COL11A2 gene in the original patient with
the Weissenbacher-Zweymuller syndrome demonstrates its identity with
heterozygous OSMED (nonocular Stickler syndrome). Am. J. Med. Genet. 80:
115-120, 1998.

18. Sirko-Osadsa, D. A.; Murray, M. A.; Scott, J. A.; Lavery, M. A.;
Warman, M. L.; Robin, N. H.: Stickler syndrome without eye involvement
is caused by mutations in COL11A2, the gene encoding the alpha-2(XI)
chain of type XI collagen. J. Pediat. 132: 368-371, 1998.

19. Stubbs, L.; Lui, V. C. H.; Ng, L. J.; Cheah, K. S. E.: The alpha-2(XI)
collagen gene lies within 8 kb of Pb in the proximal portion of the
murine major histocompatibility complex. Mammalian Genome 4: 95-103,
1993.

20. Temtamy, S. A.; Mannikko, M.; Abdel-Salam, G. M. H.; Hassan, N.
A.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Afifi, H. H.: Oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal dysplasia
(OSMED): clinical and radiological findings in sibs homozygous for
premature stop codon mutation in the COL11A2 gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A:
1189-1195, 2006.

21. Tompson, S. W.; Faqeih, E. A.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Hecht, J. T.; Miki,
R.; Funari, T.; Funari, V. A.; Nevarez, L.; Krakow, D.; Cohn, D. H.
: Dominant and recessive forms of fibrochondrogenesis resulting from
mutations at a second locus, COL11A2. Am. J. Med. Genet. 158A: 309-314,
2012.

22. van Steensel, M. A. M.; Buma, P.; de Waal Malefijt, M. C.; van
den Hoogen, F. H. J.; Brunner, H. G.: Oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal
dysplasia (OSMED): clinical description of three patients homozygous
for a missense mutation in the COL11A2 gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 70:
315-323, 1997.

23. Vikkula, M.; Mariman, E. C. M.; Lui, V. C. H.; Zhidkova, N. I.;
Tiller, G. E.; Goldring, M. B.; van Beersum, S. E. C.; de Waal Malefijt,
M. C.; van den Hoogen, F. H. J.; Ropers, H.-H.; Mayne, R.; Cheah,
K. S. E.; Olsen, B. R.; Warman, M. L.; Brunner, H. G.: Autosomal
dominant and recessive osteochondrodysplasias associated with the
COL11A2 locus. Cell 80: 431-437, 1995.

24. Vuoristo, M. M.; Pappas, J. G.; Jansen, V.; Ala-Kokko, L.: A
stop codon mutation in COL11A2 induces exon skipping and leads to
non-ocular Stickler syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 130A: 160-164,
2004.

25. Vuoristo, M. M.; Pihlajamaa, T.; Vandenberg, P.; Prockop, D. J.;
Ala-Kokko, L.: The human COL11A2 gene structure indicates that the
gene has not evolved with the genes for the major fibrillar collagens. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 22873-22881, 1995.

26. Weissenbacher, G.; Zweymuller, E.: Gleichzeitiges Vorkommen eines
Syndroms von Pierre Robin und einer fetalen Chondrodysplasie. Mschr.
Kinderheilk. 112: 315-317, 1964.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/8/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/11/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/28/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/10/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/17/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/23/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/29/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/31/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/30/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/15/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/3/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/1/1998
Alan F. Scott - updated: 4/12/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/29/1987

EDITED carol: 03/09/2012
terry: 3/8/2012
carol: 8/4/2011
terry: 12/2/2008
wwang: 12/1/2006
wwang: 10/12/2006
terry: 10/11/2006
wwang: 9/5/2006
ckniffin: 8/28/2006
wwang: 11/10/2005
wwang: 8/24/2005
terry: 8/17/2005
tkritzer: 11/30/2004
terry: 11/23/2004
mcapotos: 2/6/2001
terry: 1/29/2001
carol: 12/21/2000
carol: 6/16/2000
mgross: 4/11/2000
terry: 3/31/2000
alopez: 11/30/1999
terry: 11/30/1999
carol: 2/16/1999
terry: 2/15/1999
carol: 12/10/1998
terry: 12/7/1998
terry: 12/3/1998
terry: 6/1/1998
carol: 5/9/1998
terry: 5/1/1998
mark: 10/18/1996
mark: 4/12/1996
terry: 4/11/1996
mark: 4/10/1996
joanna: 4/4/1996
mark: 2/19/1996
terry: 2/16/1996
carol: 2/24/1995
terry: 11/16/1994
carol: 2/25/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 6/11/1991
carol: 5/22/1991

606626	TITLE *606626 DISHEVELLED-ASSOCIATED ACTIVATOR OF MORPHOGENESIS 1; DAAM1
;;KIAA0666
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening size-fractionated brain cDNA libraries for cDNAs with the
potential to encode proteins larger than 50 kD, Ishikawa et al. (1998)
identified a cDNA which they designated KIAA0666. KIAA0666 encodes a
1,085-amino acid protein predicted to function in cell division. It is
68% identical to the KIAA0381 protein (DAAM2; 606627). RT-PCR analysis
detected expression of KIAA0666 in all tissues tested.

Habas et al. (2001) identified a novel formin (see FMN1; 136535)
homology (FH) protein that they named DAAM1. DAAM1 is a widely expressed
protein that contains 1,078 amino acids and is identical to the KIAA0666
protein. Like other FH proteins, DAAM1 contains a central proline-rich
FH1 domain and a more C-terminal FH2 domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Wnt (see 164975) signaling via the frizzled receptor (Fz; see 600667)
controls cell polarity and movement during development. Habas et al.
(2001) reported that in human cells and during Xenopus embryogenesis,
Wnt/Fz signaling activated the small GTPase Rho (165390), a key
regulator of cytoskeleton architecture. Wnt/Fz activation of Rho
required the cytoplasmic protein dishevelled (DVL; see 601365) and
DAAM1. DAAM1 bound to both DVL and Rho and mediated Wnt-induced DVL-Rho
complex formation. Inhibition or depletion of DAAM1 prevented Wnt/Fz
activation of Rho and of Xenopus gastrulation, but did not prevent
activation of beta-catenin (116806) signaling.

Liu et al. (2008) showed that human DAAM1 was autoinhibited by an
intramolecular interaction between its N-terminal GTPase domain, which
includes an autoinhibitory domain, and its C-terminal autoregulatory
domain. Interaction of DAAM1 with DVL disrupted this autoinhibitory
interaction, resulting in DAAM1 activation. Mutations within or removal
of the autoregulatory domain converted DAAM1 into an active protein that
could induce Rho activation. Liu et al. (2008) also demonstrated that
Dvl synergized with Daam1 to regulate gastrulation during Xenopus
embryogenesis.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Ishikawa et al. (1998) mapped the DAAM1
gene to chromosome 14.

REFERENCE 1. Habas, R.; Kato, Y.; He, X.: Wnt/Frizzled activation of Rho regulates
vertebrate gastrulation and requires a novel Formin homology protein
Daam1. Cell 107: 843-854, 2001.

2. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Suyama, M.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.;
Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. X. The complete sequences of 100 new
cDNA clones from brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA
Res. 5: 169-176, 1998.

3. Liu, W.; Sato, A.; Khadka, D.; Bharti, R.; Diaz, H.; Runnels, L.
W.; Habas, R.: Mechanism of activation of the Formin protein Daam1. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 210-215, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/18/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 1/23/2002

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 1/23/2002

EDITED wwang: 04/02/2010
alopez: 10/2/2008
mgross: 4/18/2008
terry: 4/18/2008
mgross: 1/23/2002
carol: 1/23/2002
mgross: 1/23/2002

180660	TITLE *180660 POLYMERASE II, RNA, SUBUNIT A; POLR2A
;;RPB1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
RNA POLYMERASE II, 220-KD SUBUNIT;;
RNA POLYMERASE II, LARGE SUBUNIT; RPO2; RPOL2; POLR2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II (EC 2.7.7.6), a complex multisubunit
enzyme, is responsible for the transcription of protein-coding genes. It
is composed of 10 to 14 subunits ranging in size from 220 to 10 kD.
POLR2A encodes the 220-kD subunit. RNA polymerase II interacts with the
promoter regions of genes as well as with a variety of elements and
transcription factors to determine essentially all of the parameters
that govern transcription, e.g., tissue and development specificity,
stress response, etc.

Dynamic phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of 3 serines within a
heptapeptide sequence repeated 52 times in the POLR2A C-terminal domain
(CTD) and other CTD modifications specify recruitment of proteins that
regulate various transcription-related events (Ni et al., 2011).

CLONING

Cho et al. (1985) isolated genomic sequences for the large subunit of
human RNA polymerase II (pol II). Sequences homologous to Drosophila pol
II large subunit sequences were present in single copy.

Wintzerith et al. (1992) cloned and sequenced the complete human gene
for POLR2A and symbolized it RPBh1. The deduced 1,970-amino acid protein
contains 10 conserved domains, designated A through J, a putative
C2H2-type zinc-binding element, and a C-terminal domain (CTD) containing
52 copies of a heptapeptide repeat.

Mita et al. (1995) also cloned and sequenced the human POLR2A gene and
referred to it as RpIILS. The deduced amino acid sequence was identical
to that reported by Wintzerith et al. (1992). The sequence of the
5-prime flanking region is approximately 84% identical to the mouse gene
(vs 90% for the coding regions).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Cramer et al. (2000) derived a backbone model of a 10-subunit yeast RNA
polymerase II using x-ray diffraction data extending to 3-angstrom
resolution. All 10 subunits exhibited a high degree of identity with the
corresponding human proteins, and 9 of the 10 subunits are conserved
among the 3 eukaryotic RNA polymerases I, II, and III. Notable features
of the model include a pair of jaws, formed by subunits Rpb1, Rpb5
(180664), and Rpb9 (180662), that appear to grip DNA downstream of the
active center. A clamp on the DNA nearer the active center, formed by
Rpb1, Rpb2 (180661), and Rpb6 (604414), may be locked in the closed
position by RNA, accounting for the great stability of transcribing
complexes. A pore in the protein complex beneath the active center may
allow entry of substrates for polymerization and exit of the transcript
during proofreading and passage through pause sites in the DNA.

Cramer et al. (2001) determined the structure of a 10-subunit yeast RNA
polymerase II (lacking 2 small subunits dispensable for transcription)
derived from 2 crystal forms at 2.8- and 3.1-angstrom resolution.
Comparison of the structures reveals a division of the polymerase into 4
mobile modules, including a clamp, shown previously to swing over the
active center. In the 2.8-angstrom structure, the clamp is in an open
state, allowing entry of straight promoter DNA for the initiation of
transcription. Gnatt et al. (2001) determined the crystal structure of
RNA polymerase II in the act of transcription at 3.3-angstrom
resolution. They observed duplex DNA entering the main cleft of the
enzyme and unwinding before the active site. Nine basepairs of DNA-RNA
hybrid extend from the active center at nearly right angles to the
entering DNA, with the 3-prime end of the RNA in the nucleotide addition
site. Protein-nucleic acid contacts help explain DNA and RNA strand
separation, the specificity of RNA synthesis, 'abortive cycling' during
transcription initiation, and RNA and DNA translocation during
transcription elongation.

Bushnell et al. (2004) reported the crystal structure of RNA polymerase
II with general transcription factor IIB (TFIIB; 189963) at 4.5-angstrom
resolution. The structure reveals 3 features crucial for transcription
initiation: an N-terminal zinc ribbon domain of TFIIB that contacts the
dock domain of the polymerase, near the path of RNA exit from a
transcribing enzyme; a 'finger' domain of TFIIB that is inserted into
the polymerase active center; and a C-terminal domain, whose interaction
with both the polymerase and with a TATA box-binding protein-promoter
DNA complex orients the DNA for unwinding and transcription. TFIIB
stabilizes an early initiation complex, containing an incomplete RNA-DNA
hybrid region. It may interact with the template strand, which sets the
location of the transcription start site, and may interfere with RNA
exit, which leads to abortive initiation or promoter escape. Westover et
al. (2004) determined the structure of an RNA polymerase II-transcribing
complex in the posttranslocation state, with a vacancy at the growing
end of the RNA-DNA hybrid helix. At the opposite end of the hybrid
helix, the RNA separates from the template DNA. This separation of
nucleic acid strands is brought about by interaction with a set of
protein loops in a strand/loop network. Westover et al. (2004) concluded
that formation of the network must occur in the transition from abortive
initiation to promoter escape.

Meinhart and Cramer (2004) described the structure of a
ser2-phosphorylated C-terminal domain peptide of RNA polymerase II bound
to the C-terminal domain-interacting domain of PCF11 (608876). The
C-terminal domain motif of ser2-pro3-thr4-ser5 forms a beta turn that
binds to a conserved groove in the C-terminal domain-interacting domain
of PCF11. The ser2 phosphate group does not make direct contact with
PCF11, but may be recognized indirectly because it stabilizes the beta
turn with an additional hydrogen bond. Iteration of the peptide
structure results in a compact beta spiral model of the C-terminal
domain. Meinhart and Cramer (2004) suggested that during the mRNA
transcription processing cycle, compact spiral regions in the C-terminal
domain are unraveled and regenerated in a phosphorylation-dependent
manner.

Wang et al. (2009) reported the crystal structure of RNA polymerase II
in the third state, the reverse translocated or 'backtracked' state. The
defining feature of the backtracked structure is a binding site for the
first backtracked nucleotide. This binding site is occupied in case of
nucleotide misincorporation in the RNA or damage to the DNA, and is
termed the 'P' site because it supports proofreading. The predominant
mechanism of proofreading is the excision of a dinucleotide in the
presence of the elongation factor SII (TFIIS; see 604784). Structure
determination of a cocrystal with TFIIS revealed a rearrangement whereby
cleavage of the RNA may take place.

Kostrewa et al. (2009) presented the crystal structure of the complete
Pol II-B complex at 4.3-angstrom resolution, and complementary
functional data. The results indicated the mechanism of transcription
initiation, including the transition to RNA elongation. Promoter DNA is
positioned over the Pol II active center cleft with the 'B-core' domain
that binds the wall at the end of the cleft. DNA is then opened with the
help of the B-linker that binds the Pol II rudder and clamp coiled-coil
at the edge of the cleft. The DNA template strand slips into the cleft
and is scanned for the transcription start site with the help of the
B-reader that approaches the active site. Synthesis of the RNA chain and
rewinding of upstream DNA displace the B-reader and the B-linker,
respectively, to trigger B release and elongation complex formation.

Liu et al. (2010) developed a crystal structure of the RNA polymerase
II-TFIIB complex at 3.8-angstrom resolution obtained under different
solution conditions from the structure obtained by Bushnell et al.
(2004) and complementary with it. The crystal structure revealed the
carboxy-terminal region of TFIIB, located above the polymerase active
center cleft, but showing none of the B finger. In the new structure,
the linker between the amino- and carboxyl-terminal regions can also be
seen, snaking down from above the cleft toward the active center.

- Quantitative Mass Spectrometry

One of the primary goals of proteomics is the description of the
composition, dynamics, and connections of the multiprotein modules that
catalyze a wide range of biologic functions in cells (Hartwell et al.,
1999). The yeast 2-hybrid (Y2H) method is designed to detect binary
interactions between proteins in the nucleus of a yeast cell. A
limitation of this technique is that it does not detect protein-protein
interactions in the context of their physiologic environment. Another
approach for the analysis of protein complexes involves the use of
affinity chromatography for isolation or enrichment of complexes,
followed by mass spectrometric identification of the constituent
proteins. Ranish et al. (2003) described a generic strategy for
determining the specific composition, changes in composition, and
changes in abundance of protein complexes. It was based on the use of
isotope-coded affinity tag (ICAT) reagents and mass spectrometry to
compare the relative abundances of tryptic peptides derived from
suitable pairs of purified or partially purified protein complexes. In a
first application, the genuine protein components of a large RNA
polymerase II (Pol II) preinitiation complex (PIC) were distinguished
from a background of copurifying proteins by comparing the relative
abundances of peptides derived from a control sample and the specific
complex that was purified from nuclear extracts by a single-step
promoter DNA affinity procedure. This was the first time that a fully
assembled RNA Pol II PIC had been comprehensively analyzed. The
quantitative mass spectrometry technique provided for the first time a
detailed description of the partially purified core Pol II complex and
led to the detection of potential new components of this extensively
studied complex.

Lehmann et al. (2007) showed the intrinsic RNA-dependent RNA polymerase
(RdRP) activity of Pol II with only pure polymerase, an RNA
template-product scaffold, and nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs).
Crystallography revealed the template-product duplex in the site
occupied by the DNA-RNA hybrid during transcription. RdRP activity
resided at the active site used during transcription, but it was slower
and less processive than DNA-dependent activity. RdRP activity was also
obtained with part of the hepatitis delta virus (HDV) antigenome. The
complex of transcription factor IIS (604784) with Pol II could cleave
one HDV strand, create a reactive stem loop in the hybrid site, and
extend the new RNA 3-prime end. Short RNA stem loops with a 5-prime
extension sufficed for activity, but their growth to a critical length
appeared to impair processivity. Lehmann et al. (2007) concluded that
the RdRP activity of Pol II provides a missing link in molecular
evolution, because it suggests that Pol II evolved from an ancient
replicase that duplicated RNA genomes.

GENE FUNCTION

Kornberg and Lorch (1991) discussed the mechanism by which genes become
accessible for transcription, particularly the final stages of the
process in which activator proteins and the transcription machinery
confront the nucleosome and also specifically in relation to
transcription by RNA pol II.

Buratowski (1994) reviewed 'the basics of basal transcription by RNA
polymerase II.' For this enzyme to transcribe a gene, the authors
commented that an array of over 20 proteins must be assembled at its
promoter. Buratowski (1994) reviewed progress in identifying and
purifying these transcription factors, as well as cloning the genes that
encode them.

Damage to actively transcribed DNA is preferentially repaired by the
transcription-coupled repair (TCR) system. TCR requires RNA pol II, but
the mechanism by which repair enzymes preferentially recognize and
repair DNA lesions on PolB II-transcribed genes is incompletely
understood. Bregman et al. (1996) demonstrated that a fraction of the
large subunit of Pol II (PolIILS) is ubiquitinated after exposing cells
to UV radiation or cisplatin, but not to several other DNA-damaging
agents. This novel covalent modification of PolIILS occurs within 15
minutes of exposing cells to UV-radiation and persists for about 8 to 12
hours. Ubiquitinated PolIILS is also phosphorylated on the C-terminal
domain. UV-induced ubiquitination of PolIILS is deficient in fibroblasts
from persons with either Cockayne syndrome type A (CS-A; 216400) or type
B (CS-B; see 133540). In both of these disorders transcription-coupled
repair is disrupted. UV-induced ubiquitination of PolIILS can be
restored by introducing cDNA constructs encoding the CSA or CSB genes,
respectively, into CS-A or CS-B fibroblasts. These results suggested
that ubiquitination of PolIILS plays a role in the recognition and/or
repair of damage to actively transcribed genes. Alternatively, these
findings may reflect a role played by the CSA and CSB gene products in
transcription, a possibility that had been suggested on other grounds.

The monoclonal antibody CC-3 recognizes a phosphodependent epitope on a
255-kD nuclear matrix protein (p255) shown to associate with spliceosome
complexes. Vincent et al. (1996) showed that p255 represents a highly
phosphorylated form of Pol II large subunit (IIo) that physically
associates with spliceosomes. They suggested that IIo is involved in
coupling transcription with RNA processing.

High levels of gene transcription by RNA polymerase II depend on high
rates of transcription initiation and reinitiation. Initiation requires
recruitment of the complete transcription machinery to a promoter, a
process facilitated by activators and chromatin remodeling factors.
Reinitiation is thought to occur through a different pathway. After
initiation, a subset of the transcription machinery remains at the
promoter, forming a platform for assembly of a second transcription
complex. Yudkovsky et al. (2000) described the isolation of a
reinitiation intermediate in yeast that includes transcription factors
TFIID (see 313650), TFIIA (see 600520), TFIIH (see 189972), TFIIE (see
189962), and Mediator (see 602984). This intermediate can act as a
scaffold for formation of a functional reinitiation complex. Formation
of this scaffold is dependent on ATP and TFIIH. In yeast, the scaffold
is stabilized in the presence of the activator Gal4-VP16, but not
Gal4-AH, suggesting a new role for some activators and Mediator in
promoting high levels of transcription.

In a yeast 2-hybrid screen to identify proteins that interact with the
phosphorylated C-terminal domain (CTD) of POLR2A, Bourquin et al. (1997)
identified PPIG (606093). Using GST fusion proteins, they demonstrated
direct interaction between PPIG and the CTD of POLR2A.

Dye and Proudfoot (2001) performed in vivo analysis of transcriptional
termination for the human beta-globin gene (141900) and demonstrated
cotranscriptional cleavage (CoTC). This primary cleavage event within
beta-globin pre-mRNA, downstream of the poly(A) site, is critical for
efficient transcriptional termination by RNA pol II. Teixeira et al.
(2004) showed that the CoTC process in the human beta-globin gene
involves an RNA self-cleaving activity. They characterized the
autocatalytic core of the CoTC ribozyme and showed its functional role
in efficient termination in vivo. The identified core CoTC is highly
conserved in the 3-prime flanking regions of other primate beta-globin
genes. Functionally, it resembles the 3-prime processive, self-cleaving
ribozymes described for the protein-encoding genes from the myxomycetes
Didymium iridis and Physarum polycephalum, indicating evolutionary
conservation of this molecular process. Teixeira et al. (2004) predicted
that regulated autocatalytic cleavage elements within pre-mRNAs may be a
general phenomenon and that functionally it may provide an entry point
for exonucleases involved in mRNA maturation, turnover, and, in
particular, transcriptional termination.

Using a variety of RNA-binding assays, Kaneko and Manley (2005) showed
that the CTD of mammalian POLR2A interacted with RNA in a
sequence-specific manner in vitro and in vivo. The CTD-binding consensus
sequence downstream of a polyadenylation signal suppressed mRNA 3-prime
end formation and transcription termination. In vitro assays indicated
that the inhibition of processing is CTD dependent.

In yeast, the Paf1 complex interacts with DNA polymerase II and is
involved in multiple aspects of histone methylation. By
immunoprecipitation, Rozenblatt-Rosen et al. (2005) determined the
components of the human PAF1 complex (see 610506). The immunoprecipitate
also contained POLR2A that was unphosphorylated, phosphorylated on ser5,
or phosphorylated on ser2, suggesting that the PAF1 complex may be
involved in both initiation and elongation.

Cells use transcription-coupled repair to efficiently eliminate DNA
lesions such as ultraviolet light-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers
(CPDs). Brueckner et al. (2007) presented the structure-based mechanism
for the first step in eukaryotic transcription-coupled repair,
CPD-induced stalling of RNA polymerase (Pol) II. A CPD in the
transcribed strand slowly passes a translocation barrier and enters the
polymerase active site. The CPD 5-prime thymine then directs uridine
misincorporation into mRNA, which blocks translocation. Artificial
replacement of the uridine by adenosine enables CPD bypass; thus, Pol II
stalling requires CPD-directed misincorporation. In the stalled complex,
the lesion is inaccessible, and the polymerase conformation is
unchanged. Brueckner et al. (2007) concluded that this is consistent
with nonallosteric recruitment of repair factors and excision of a
lesion-containing DNA fragment in the presence of Pol II.

The carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of the large subunit of mammalian
polymerase II consists of 52 repeats of a consensus heptapeptide
tyr-ser-pro-thr-ser-pro-ser. Differential phosphorylation of ser2 and
ser5 at the 5-prime and 3-prime regions of genes appears to coordinate
the localization of transcription and RNA processing factors to the
elongating polymerase complex (Chapman et al., 2007). Egloff et al.
(2007) showed that mutation of ser7 to ala causes a specific defect in
snRNA gene expression. They also presented evidence that phosphorylation
of ser7 facilitates interaction with the snRNA gene-specific integrator
complex. Egloff et al. (2007) concluded that their findings assigned a
biologic function to this amino acid and highlighted a gene
type-specific requirement for a residue within the CTD heptapeptide,
supporting the existence of a CTD code.

Using monoclonal antibodies, Chapman et al. (2007) revealed ser7
phosphorylation of RNA polymerase-2 on transcribed genes. This position
did not appear to be phosphorylated in CTDs of less than 20 consensus
repeats. The position of repeats where ser7 was substituted influenced
the appearance of distinct phosphorylated forms, suggesting functional
differences between CTDs. Chapman et al. (2007) concluded that
restriction of ser7 epitopes to the linker-proximal regions limits CTD
phosphorylation patterns and is a requirement for optimal gene
expression.

To study nutritional control of C. elegans in larval development, Baugh
et al. (2009) analyzed growth and gene expression profiles during L1
arrest and recovery. Larvae that were fed responded relatively slowly to
starvation compared with the rapid response of arrested larvae to
feeding. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of RNA polymerase II followed by
deep sequencing showed that during L1 arrest, Pol II continued
transcribing starvation-response genes, but the enzyme accumulated on
the promoters of growth and development genes. In response to feeding,
promoter accumulation decreased, and elongation and mRNA levels
increased. Therefore, Baugh et al. (2009) concluded that accumulation of
Pol II at promoters anticipates nutritionally-controlled gene expression
during C. elegans development.

Natalizio et al. (2009) noted that the CTD of POLR2A is not present in
homologous subunits of RNA polymerases I and III. They found that fusing
the CTD of POLR2A to POLR3A (614258) did not enhance the
cotranscriptional pre-mRNA splicing or capping activity of POLR3A in
transfected cells. Furthermore, fusing the CTD of POLR2A to the
bacteriophage T7 RNA did not enhance pre-mRNA splicing or capping in
vitro or in vivo. Natalizio et al. (2009) proposed that efficient
coupling of transcription to pre-mRNA processing requires not only the
phosphorylated CTD of POLR2A but also other RNA polymerase II-specific
subunits or associated factors.

Kasowski et al. (2010) examined genomewide differences in transcription
factor binding in several humans and a single chimpanzee by using
chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing. They mapped the
binding sites of RNA polymerase II and NF-kappa-B (see 164011) in 10
lymphoblastoid cell lines and found that 25% and 7.5% of the respective
binding regions differed between individuals. Binding differences were
frequently associated with SNPs and genomic structural variants, and
these differences were often correlated with differences in gene
expression, suggesting functional consequences of binding variation.
Furthermore, the results of comparing PolII binding between humans and
chimpanzee suggested extensive divergence in transcription factor
binding.

The carboxy-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II in mammals undergoes
extensive posttranslational modification, which is essential for
transcriptional initiation and elongation. Sims et al. (2011) showed
that the carboxy-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II is methylated at a
single arginine (R1810) by the coactivator-associated arginine
methyltransferase-1 (CARM1; 603934). Although methylation at R1810 is
present on the hyperphosphorylated form of RNA polymerase II in vivo,
ser2 or ser5 phosphorylation inhibits CARM1 activity toward this site in
vitro, suggesting that methylation occurs before transcription
initiation. Mutation of R1810 results in the misexpression of a variety
of small nuclear RNAs and small nucleolar RNAs, an effect that is also
observed in Carm1 -/- mouse embryo fibroblasts. Sims et al. (2011)
concluded that carboxy-terminal domain methylation facilitates the
expression of select RNAs, perhaps serving to discriminate the RNA
polymerase II-associated machinery recruited to distinct gene types.

The RNA polymerase II largest subunit contains a CTD with up to 52
Tyr(1)-Ser(2)-Pro(3)-Thr(4)-Ser(5)-Pro(6)-Ser(7) consensus repeats.
Serines 2, 5, and 7 are known to be phosphorylated, and these
modifications help to orchestrate the interplay between transcription
and processing of mRNA precursors. Hsin et al. (2011) provided evidence
that phosphorylation of CTD Thr(4) residues is required specifically for
histone mRNA 3-prime end processing, functioning to facilitate
recruitment of 3-prime processing factors to histone genes. Like Ser(2),
Thr(4) phosphorylation requires the CTD kinase CDK9 (603251) and is
evolutionarily conserved from yeast to human. Hsin et al. (2011)
concluded that their data illustrate how a CTD modification can play a
highly specific role in facilitating efficient gene expression.

Using affinity chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry with HEK293
cells to isolate RNA polymerase II-interacting proteins, Ni et al.
(2011) identified RPRD1A (610347), RPRD1B (614694), and RPRD2 (614695),
in addition to RECQL5 (603781), GRINL1A (606485), and the putative RNA
polymerase II phosphatase RPAP2 (611476). RPRD1A and RPRD1B accompanied
RNA polymerase II from promoter regions to 3-prime UTRs during
transcription in vivo. RPRD1A and RPRD1B coprecipitated with the
C-terminal domain of POLR2A when it was serine phosphorylated, but not
when it was unphosphorylated. Overexpression of RPRD1A or RPRD1B reduced
the amount of serine-phosphorylated POLR2A associated with a target
gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mita et al. (1995) determined that the POLR2A gene contains 29 exons and
spans about 32 kb of DNA. Intron size varies considerably between
species, largely as a consequence of Alu and B1 insertions in the human
and mouse genes, respectively. The 5-prime flanking region of POL2RA
contains several binding sites for the transcription factor Sp1
(189906), a CCAAT sequence, and a sequence homologous to a heat-shock
element.

MAPPING

Cannizzaro et al. (1986) assigned the human gene to the distal portion
of the short arm of chromosome 17 (17pter-p12) by in situ hybridization
and Southern analysis of DNA from somatic cell hybrids.

Pravtcheva et al. (1986) mapped the gene encoding the largest subunit of
RNA pol II to mouse chromosome 11 by Southern blot analysis of
mouse-Chinese hamster somatic cell hybrids and by in situ hybridization.
This is another example of the homology of mouse chromosome 11 and human
chromosome 17. Somatic cell hybrid studies by vanTuinen and Ledbetter
(1987) narrowed the assignment to 17p13.105-p12. Using in situ
hybridization, Acker et al. (1994) likewise mapped the POLR2A gene to
17p13.

HISTORY

From a strain of fetal human lung diploid fibroblasts, Buchwald and
Ingles (1976) isolated clones resistant to the cytotoxic action of
alpha-amanitin. The resistant clones were recovered at a frequency of 5
x 10(-8) following mutagenesis with ethyl methanane sulfonate. The
clones retained the resistant phenotype after propagation in drug-free
medium. The amanitin sensitivity of RNA pol II purified from the mutant
cells suggested the presence of 2 forms of the enzyme, one similar to
that in wildtype cells and the second with increased resistance to
alpha-amanitin inhibition. Thus, alpha-amanitin resistance behaves as a
dominant. It is dominant in Chinese hamster and rat cells, also.
Amanitin is a bicyclic octapeptide produced by the mushroom Amanita
phaloides. In Drosophila, alpha-amanitin resistance mutations are
located in the genes for the large subunit of RNA pol II. The same is
presumably true for amanitin-resistance in human cells. Transfection
experiments referred to by Cannizzaro et al. (1986) supported this idea.
A relationship to homeotic genes (142960) and other genes on 17p was
raised, as well as a possible etiologic role of mutation in RPOL2 in the
Miller-Dieker syndrome (247200). Drosophila mutants of RNA pol II show
developmental abnormalities.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Shander et al. (1982); vanTuinen et al. (1988)
REFERENCE 1. Acker, J.; Mattei, M.-G.; Wintzerith, M.; Roeckel, N.; Depetris,
D.; Vigneron, M.; Kedinger, C.: Chromosomal localization of human
RNA polymerase II subunit genes. Genomics 20: 496-499, 1994.

2. Baugh, L. R.; DeModena, J.; Sternberg, P. W.: RNA Pol II accumulates
at promoters of growth genes during developmental arrest. Science 324:
92-95, 2009.

3. Bourquin, J.-P.; Stagljar, I.; Meier, P.; Moosmann, P.; Silke,
J.; Baechi, T.; Georgiev, O.; Schaffner, W.: A serine/arginine-rich
nuclear matrix cyclophilin interacts with the C-terminal domain of
RNA polymerase II. Nucleic Acids Res. 25: 2055-2061, 1997.

4. Bregman, D. B.; Halaban, R.; van Gool, A. J.; Henning, K. A.; Friedberg,
E. C.; Warren, S. L.: UV-induced ubiquitination of RNA polymerase
II: a novel modification deficient in Cockayne syndrome cells. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 11586-11590, 1996.

5. Brueckner, F.; Hennecke, U.; Carell, T.; Cramer, P.: CPD damage
recognition by transcribing RNA polymerase II. Science 315: 859-862,
2007.

6. Buchwald, M.; Ingles, C. J.: Human diploid fibroblast mutants
with altered RNA polymerase II. Somat. Cell Genet. 2: 225-233, 1976.

7. Buratowski, S.: The basics of basal transcription by RNA polymerase
II. Cell 77: 1-3, 1994.

8. Bushnell, D. A.; Westover, K. D.; Davis, R. E.; Kornberg, R. D.
: Structural basis of transcription: an RNA polymerase II-TFIIB cocrystal
at 4.5 angstroms. Science 303: 983-988, 2004.

9. Cannizzaro, L. A.; Emanuel, B. S.; Cho, K. W. Y.; Weinmann, R.
: The gene encoding the large subunit of human RNA polymerase II is
located on the short arm of chromosome 17. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 38:
812-818, 1986.

10. Chapman, R. D.; Heidemann, M.; Albert, T. K.; Mailhammer, R.;
Flatley, A.; Meisterernst, M.; Kremmer, E.; Eick, D.: Transcribing
RNA polymerase II is phosphorylated at CTD residue serine-7. Science 318:
1780-1782, 2007.

11. Cho, K. W. Y.; Khalili, K.; Zandomeni, R.; Weinmann, R.: The
gene encoding the large subunit of human RNA polymerase II. J. Biol.
Chem. 260: 15204-15210, 1985.

12. Cramer, P.; Bushnell, D. A.; Fu, J.; Gnatt, A. L.; Maier-Davis,
B.; Thompson, N. E.; Burgess, R. R.; Edwards, A. M.; David, P. R.;
Kornberg, R. D.: Architecture of RNA polymerase II and implications
for the transcription mechanism. Science 288: 640-648, 2000.

13. Cramer, P.; Bushnell, D. A.; Kornberg, R. D.: Structural basis
of transcription: RNA polymerase II at 2.8 angstrom resolution. Science 292:
1863-1876, 2001.

14. Dye, M. J.; Proudfoot, N. J.: Multiple transcript cleavage precedes
polymerase release in termination by RNA polymerase II. Cell 105:
669-681, 2001.

15. Egloff, S.; O'Reilly, D.; Chapman, R. D.; Taylor, A.; Tanzhaus,
K.; Pitts, L.; Eick, D.; Murphy, S.: Serine-7 of the RNA polymerase
II CTD is specifically required for snRNA gene expression. Science 318:
1777-1779, 2007.

16. Gnatt, A. L.; Cramer, P.; Fu, J.; Bushnell, D. A.; Kornberg, R.
D.: Structural basis of transcription: an RNA polymerase II elongation
complex at 3.3 angstrom resolution. Science 292: 1876-1882, 2001.

17. Hartwell, L. H.; Hopfield, J. J.; Leibler, S.; Murray, A. W.:
From molecular to modular cell biology. Nature 402: C47-C52, 1999.

18. Hsin, J.-P.; Sheth, A.; Manley, J. L.: RNAP II CTD phosphorylated
on threonine-4 is required for histone mRNA 3-prime end processing. Science 334:
683-686, 2011.

19. Kaneko, S.; Manley, J. L.: The mammalian RNA polymerase II C-terminal
domain interacts with RNA to suppress transcription-coupled 3-prime
end formation. Molec. Cell 20: 91-103, 2005.

20. Kasowski, M.; Grubert, F.; Heffelfinger, C.; Hariharan, M.; Asabere,
A.; Waszak, S. M.; Habegger, L.; Rozowsky, J.; Shi, M.; Urban, A.
E.; Hong, M.-Y.; Karczewski, K. J.; Huber, W.; Weissman, S. M.; Gerstein,
M. B.; Korbel, J. O.; Snyder, M.: Variation in transcription factor
binding among humans. Science 328: 232-235, 2010.

21. Kornberg, R. D.; Lorch, Y.: Irresistible force meets immovable
object: transcription and the nucleosome. Cell 67: 833-836, 1991.

22. Kostrewa, D.; Zeller, M. E.; Armache, K.-J.; Seizl, M.; Leike,
K.; Thomm, M.; Cramer, P.: RNA polymerase II-TFIIB structure and
mechanism of transcription initiation. Nature 462: 323-330, 2009.

23. Lehmann, E.; Brueckner, F.; Cramer, P.: Molecular basis of RNA-dependent
RNA polymerase II activity. Nature 450: 445-449, 2007.

24. Liu, X.; Bushnell, D. A.; Wang, D.; Calero, G.; Kornberg, R. D.
: Structure of an RNA polymerase II-TFIIB complex and the transcription
initiation mechanism. Science 327: 206-209, 2010.

25. Meinhart, A.; Cramer, P.: Recognition of RNA polymerase II carboxy-terminal
domain by 3-prime-RNA-processing factors. Nature 430: 223-226, 2004.

26. Mita, K.; Tsuji, H.; Morimyo, M.; Takahashi, E.; Nenoi, M.; Ichimura,
S.; Yamauchi, M.; Hongo, E.; Hayashi, A.: The human gene encoding
the largest subunit of RNA polymerase II. Gene 159: 285-286, 1995.

27. Natalizio, B. J.; Robson-Dixon, N. D.; Garcia-Blanco, M. A.:
The carboxyl-terminal domain of RNA polymerase II is not sufficient
to enhance the efficiency of pre-mRNA capping or splicing in the context
of a different polymerase. J. Biol. Chem. 284: 8692-8702, 2009.

28. Ni, Z.; Olsen, J. B.; Guo, X.; Zhong, G.; Ruan, E. D.; Marcon,
E.; Young, P.; Guo, H.; Li, J.; Moffat, J.; Emili, A.; Greenblatt,
J. F.: Control of the RNA polymerase II phosphorylation state in
promoter regions by CTD interaction domain-containing proteins RPRD1A
and RPRD1B. Transcription 2: 237-242, 2011.

29. Pravtcheva, D.; Rabin, M.; Bartolomei, M.; Corden, J.; Ruddle,
F. H.: Chromosomal assignment of gene encoding the largest subunit
of RNA polymerase II in the mouse. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 12:
523-528, 1986.

30. Ranish, J. A.; Yi, E. C.; Leslie, D. M.; Purvine, S. O.; Goodlett,
D. R.; Eng, J.; Aebersold, R.: The study of macromolecular complexes
by quantitative proteomics. Nature Genet. 33: 349-356, 2003.

31. Rozenblatt-Rosen, O.; Hughes, C. M.; Nannepaga, S. J.; Shanmugam,
K. S.; Copeland, T. D.; Guszczynski, T.; Resau, J. H.; Meyerson, M.
: The parafibromin tumor suppressor protein is part of a human Paf1
complex. Molec. Cell. Biol. 25: 612-620, 2005.

32. Shander, M. T. M.; Croce, C.; Weinmann, R.: Human mutant cell
lines with altered RNA polymerase II. J. Cell. Physiol. 113: 324-328,
1982.

33. Sims, R. J., III; Rojas, L. A.; Beck, D.; Bonasio, R.; Schuller,
R.; Drury, W. J., III; Eick, D.; Reinberg, D.: The C-terminal domain
of RNA polymerase II is modified by site-specific methylation. Science 332:
99-103, 2011.

34. Teixeira, A.; Tahiri-Alaoui, A.; West, S.; Thomas, B.; Ramadass,
A.; Martianov, I.; Dye, M.; James, W.; Proudfoot, N. J.; Akoulitchev,
A.: Autocatalytic RNA cleavage in the human beta-globin pre-mRNA
promotes transcription termination. Nature 432: 526-530, 2004.

35. vanTuinen, P.; Dobyns, W. B.; Rich, D. C.; Summers, K. M.; Robinson,
T. J.; Nakamura, Y.; Ledbetter, D. H.: Molecular detection of microscopic
and submicroscopic deletions associated with Miller-Dieker syndrome. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 43: 587-596, 1988.

36. vanTuinen, P.; Ledbetter, D. H.: Construction and utilization
of a detailed somatic cell hybrid mapping panel for human chromosome
17: localization of an anonymous clone to the critical region of Miller-Dieker
syndrome, deletion 17p13. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46:
708-709, 1987.

37. Vincent, M.; Lauriault, P.; Dubois, M.-F.; Lavoie, S.; Bensaude,
O.; Chabot, B.: The nuclear matrix protein p255 is a highly phosphorylated
form of RNA polymerase II largest subunit which associates with spliceosomes. Nucleic
Acids Res. 24: 4649-4652, 1996.

38. Wang, D.; Bushnell, D. A.; Huang, X.; Westover, K. D.; Levitt,
M.; Kornberg, R. D.: Structural basis of transcription: backtracked
RNA polymerase II at 3.4 angstrom resolution. Science 324: 1203-1206,
2009.

39. Westover, K. D.; Bushnell, D. A.; Kornberg, R. D.: Structural
basis of transcription: separation of RNA from DNA by RNA polymerase
II. Science 303: 1014-1016, 2004.

40. Wintzerith, M.; Acker, J.; Vicaire, S.; Vigneron, M.; Kedinger,
C.: Complete sequence of the human RNA polymerase II largest subunit. Nucleic
Acids Res. 20: 910, 1992.

41. Yudkovsky, N.; Ranish, J. A.; Hahn, S.: A transcription reinitiation
intermediate that is stabilized by activator. Nature 408: 225-229,
2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/21/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/30/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/29/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/3/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/25/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/26/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/22/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/5/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/17/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/19/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/12/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/28/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/26/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/10/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/20/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 7/10/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/19/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/8/2000
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 2/20/1997
Alan F. Scott - updated: 10/5/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED mgross: 06/27/2012
terry: 6/21/2012
alopez: 11/30/2011
mgross: 9/29/2011
alopez: 5/6/2011
terry: 5/3/2011
alopez: 5/26/2010
terry: 5/25/2010
alopez: 2/1/2010
terry: 1/26/2010
alopez: 1/7/2010
terry: 12/22/2009
alopez: 6/22/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
alopez: 1/12/2009
terry: 1/9/2009
alopez: 5/9/2008
terry: 4/22/2008
alopez: 2/5/2008
alopez: 4/19/2007
terry: 4/17/2007
mgross: 10/24/2006
alopez: 10/19/2006
wwang: 12/20/2005
wwang: 12/12/2005
terry: 2/7/2005
tkritzer: 1/4/2005
terry: 12/28/2004
tkritzer: 8/30/2004
terry: 8/26/2004
mgross: 3/17/2004
alopez: 3/11/2004
terry: 3/10/2004
alopez: 2/28/2003
alopez: 2/21/2003
terry: 2/20/2003
carol: 7/10/2001
alopez: 6/21/2001
alopez: 6/20/2001
alopez: 6/19/2001
carol: 6/15/2001
alopez: 11/8/2000
carol: 5/25/2000
psherman: 9/2/1999
terry: 8/24/1998
terry: 11/7/1997
mark: 2/20/1997
jamie: 12/18/1996
jamie: 12/17/1996
jamie: 12/6/1996
joanna: 4/4/1996
mark: 10/5/1995
mark: 9/27/1995
jason: 7/13/1994
carol: 4/18/1994
carol: 4/28/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992

600869	TITLE *600869 G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR KINASE 6; GRK6
;;GPRK6
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By PCR on neutrophil cDNA using primers based on sequences of known
receptor kinases, Haribabu and Snyderman (1993) identified GPRK5
(600870) and GPRK6 sequences. Using a fragment of the GPRK6 PCR clone to
screen a cDNA library, they isolated a cDNA encoding GPRK6. Sequence
analysis predicted that the 544-amino acid GPRK6 protein contains the
conserved DLG (asp-leu-gly) and ENIL (glu-asn-ile-leu) motifs. Northern
blot analysis detected 2.1- and 2.9-kb GPRK6 transcripts in all tissues
tested, with strongest expression in placenta and skeletal muscle.

By screening a heart cDNA with the catalytic domains of BARK (ADRBK1;
109635), Benovic and Gomez (1993) isolated a cDNA encoding GRK6. The
576-amino acid GRK6 protein is 70% identical to GRK5. PAGE analysis
showed expression of a 66-kD protein from an insect cell line.

GENE FUNCTION

Benovic and Gomez (1993) found that GRK6 could phosphorylate rhodopsin
(RHO; 180380) in a light-dependent manner and ADRB2 (109690) in an
agonist-dependent manner. However, GRK6 was significantly less active
than BARK or GRK5 on these substrates.

Gaudreau et al. (2002) identified the leukotriene B4 receptor, BLT1
(LTB4R; 601531), as a substrate for GRK6. Thr308 in the BLT1 cytoplasmic
tail was critical for inositol phosphate production and GRK6-mediated
phosphorylation and desensitization of BLT1 signaling.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis, Haribabu and Snyderman (1993) mapped
the GPRK6 gene and a closely related gene to chromosomes 5 and 13,
respectively. Bullrich et al. (1995) mapped GPRK6 to 5q35 by analysis of
a rodent human hybrid panel. The GPRK6-related locus was found to map to
13pter-q21.

ANIMAL MODEL

Gainetdinov et al. (2003) noted that some GRKs have been shown to
phosphorylate G protein-coupled dopamine receptors, thereby regulating
their activity and mediating desensitization of the receptors. Using
immunohistochemistry, Gainetdinov et al. (2003) found that GRK6 is
expressed in striatal neurons receiving dopaminergic input, and that
postsynaptic D2/D3 dopamine receptors are physiologic targets of this
kinase. GRK6 knockout mice showed supersensitivity to the
locomotor-stimulating effects of psychostimulants, including cocaine and
amphetamine. In addition, these mice demonstrated an enhanced coupling
of striatal D2-like dopamine receptors to G proteins and augmented
response to direct dopamine agonists. Gainetdinov et al. (2003) noted
that supersensitivity of dopamine signaling has been postulated to be
involved in several brain disorders, including addiction.

Kavelaars et al. (2003) found that application of arachidonic acid to
the ears of Grk6 -/- mice induced significantly increased inflammatory
responses compared with wildtype mice. Neutrophils from Grk6 -/- mice
responded to leukotriene B4 with a prolonged increase in intracellular
calcium and actin polymerization. Kavelaars et al. (2003) concluded that
GRK6 deficiency leads to prolonged BLT1 signaling and increased
neutrophil migration.

REFERENCE 1. Benovic, J. L.; Gomez, J.: Molecular cloning and expression of
GRK6: a new member of the G protein-coupled receptor kinase family. J.
Biol. Chem. 268: 19521-19527, 1993.

2. Bullrich, F.; Druck, T.; Kunapuli, P.; Gomez, J.; Gripp, K. W.;
Schlegelberger, B.; Lasota, J.; Aronson, M.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Huebner,
K.; Benovic, J. L.: Chromosomal mapping of the genes GPRK5 and GPRK6
encoding G protein-coupled receptor kinases GRK5 and GRK6. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 70: 250-254, 1995.

3. Gainetdinov, R. R.; Bohn, L. M.; Sotnikova, T. D.; Cyr, M.; Laakso,
A.; Macrae, A. D.; Torres, G. E.; Kim, K.-M.; Lefkowitz, R. J.; Caron,
M. G.; Premont, R. T.: Dopaminergic supersensitivity in G protein-coupled
receptor kinase 6-deficient mice. Neuron 38: 291-303, 2003.

4. Gaudreau, R.; Le Gouill, C.; Venne, M. H.; Stankova, J.; Rola-Pleszczynski,
M.: Threonine 308 within a putative casein kinase 2 site of the cytoplasmic
tail of leukotriene B(4) receptor (BLT1) is crucial for ligand-induced,
G-protein-coupled receptor-specific kinase 6-mediated desensitization. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 31567-31576, 2002.

5. Haribabu, B.; Snyderman, R.: Identification of additional members
of human G-protein-coupled receptor kinase multigene family. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 9398-9402, 1993.

6. Kavelaars, A.; Vroon, A.; Raatgever, R. P.; Fong, A. M.; Premont,
R. T.; Patel, D. D.; Lefkowitz, R. J.; Heijnen, C. J.: Increased
acute inflammation, leukotriene B4-induced chemotaxis, and signaling
in mice deficient for G protein-coupled receptor kinase 6. J. Immun. 171:
6128-6134, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/31/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/10/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/22/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/16/1995

EDITED mgross: 05/18/2012
mgross: 4/3/2006
terry: 3/31/2006
carol: 10/13/2003
ckniffin: 10/10/2003
carol: 7/1/2002
carol: 5/24/2002
mgross: 6/22/2000
mark: 10/16/1995

182350	TITLE *182350 ATPase, Na+/K+ TRANSPORTING, ALPHA-3 POLYPEPTIDE; ATP1A3
;;SODIUM-POTASSIUM-ATPase, ALPHA-3 POLYPEPTIDE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The alpha subunit of the Na,K-ATPase is the catalytic subunit. Three
isoforms are expressed in the nervous system: ATP1A1 (182310), ATP1A2
(182340), and ATP1A3 (de Carvalho Aguiar et al., 2004).

GENE FUNCTION

Agrin (AGRN; 103320) mediates accumulation of acetylcholine receptors at
the developing neuromuscular junction through its interaction with MUSK
(601296), and it has also been implicated in brain development. Through
biochemical studies, Hilgenberg et al. (2006) found that agrin bound
Atp1a3 in mouse cortical neurons. Immunohistochemical analysis showed
that Atp1a3 colocalized with agrin-binding sites at synapses. Agrin
inhibited Atp1a3 activity, resulting in membrane depolarization and
increased action potential frequency in mouse cortical neurons in
culture and acute slice. An agrin fragment that acted as a competitive
antagonist depressed action potential frequency, indicating that
endogenous agrin regulates native Atp1a3 function. Hilgenberg et al.
(2006) concluded that agrin regulates activity-dependent processes in
neurons through its interaction with ATP1A3.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ovchinnikov et al. (1988) determined that the ATP1A3 gene has about
25,000 basepairs and that its protein-coding region includes 23 exons.

MAPPING

By Southern analysis of DNA from panels of rodent/human somatic cell
hybrid lines, Yang-Feng et al. (1988) mapped the ATP1A3 gene to
chromosome 19q12-q13.2. Harley et al. (1988) concluded that the order is
qter--DM--APOC2--ATP1A3--cen.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Dystonia 12

In 7 unrelated families with rapid-onset dystonia parkinsonism, or
dystonia-12 (DYT12; 128235), de Carvalho Aguiar et al. (2004) identified
6 different heterozygous mutations in the ATP1A3 gene
(182350.0001-182350.0006). Functional expression studies and structural
analysis suggested that the mutations impaired enzyme activity or
stability.

Anselm et al. (2009) and Blanco-Arias et al. (2009) reported de novo
heterozygous ATP1A3 mutations (182350.0007 and 182350.0008,
respectively) in patients with DYT12.

- Alternating Hemiplegia of Childhood 2

In 82 of 105 patients with alternating hemiplegia of childhood-2 (AHC2;
615820), Heinzen et al. (2012) identified 19 different heterozygous
mutations in the ATP1A3 gene (see, e.g., 182350.0009-182350.0012). The
first mutations were identified through exome sequencing of affected
individuals. Thirteen of the 18 mutations observed in sporadic cases
were confirmed to occur de novo. Since it was possible that some
variants represented polymorphisms, Heinzen et al. (2012) estimated that
mutations in the ATP1A3 gene may be responsible for up to 74% of
patients with sporadic, typical AHC. Several mutations were recurrent,
and some occurred within hypermutable sequences. All patients had
infantile onset of hemiplegia attacks, usually associated with episodes
of quadriparesis, abnormal eye movements, autonomic signs, seizures,
dystonia, ataxia, chorea, and developmental delay. Transfection of
several of the mutations in HeLa cells showed protein levels similar to
wildtype, but ATP1A3 activity was significantly decreased. In contrast,
transfection of DYT12-associated mutations resulted in decreased protein
levels as well as decreased activity. The report expanded the spectrum
of phenotypes associated with mutations in the ATP1A3 gene.

ANIMAL MODEL

Ashmore et al. (2009) identified 6 different EMS-induced missense
mutations in the Atp1a2 and Atp1a3 genes in Drosophila. All mutations
resulted in reduced respiration activity consistent with a loss of
ATPase function and a hypomorphic effect. Different mutant strains
exhibited some abnormalities, including progressive
temperature-dependent paralysis, progressive stress-sensitive paralysis,
and decreased locomotor activity in response to startle, suggesting a
decrease in maximal locomotion capacity. Neuromuscular studies showed
allele-specific pathology, including brain vacuoles and myopathology,
and biochemical studies showed decreased metabolic rates. An unexpected
finding was the some mutant strains had increased longevity, which was
not related to caloric restriction. Low doses of ouabain showed a
similar effect on longevity in control groups. Ashmore et al. (2009)
suggested that these findings may be relevant for studying the
pathogenesis of FHM2 and DYT12 (128235).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DYSTONIA 12
ATP1A3, THR613MET

In a sporadic patient (Linazasoro et al., 2002) and affected members of
a second family (Zaremba et al., 2004) with dystonia-12 (DYT12; 128235),
de Carvalho Aguiar et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous 1838C-T
transition in the ATP1A3 gene, resulting in a thr613-to-met (T613M)
substitution in a highly conserved residue near the phosphorylation
domain on the cytoplasmic face of the protein. The mutation was not
identified in 500 northern European control chromosomes.

Brashear et al. (2007) identified the T613M mutation in a family with
DYT12 reported by Pittock et al. (2000).

.0002
DYSTONIA 12
ATP1A3, ILE274THR

In a patient with dystonia-12 (128235), de Carvalho Aguiar et al. (2004)
identified a heterozygous 821T-C transition in the ATP1A3 gene,
resulting in an ile274-to-thr (I274T) substitution in a highly conserved
residue in the transmembrane domain of the protein. The mutation was not
identified in 500 northern European control chromosomes. The patient had
disease onset at age 37 years.

.0003
DYSTONIA 12
ATP1A3, GLU277LYS

In a patient with dystonia-12 (128235), de Carvalho Aguiar et al. (2004)
identified a heterozygous 829G-A transition in exon 8 of the ATP1A3
gene, resulting in a glu277-to-lys (E277K) substitution in a highly
conserved residue in the transmembrane domain of the protein. The
mutation was not identified in 500 northern European control
chromosomes. The patient had disease onset at age 20 years.

Tarsy et al. (2010) identified the E277K mutation in a 29-year-old woman
of African Caribbean descent with DYT12. She had onset at age 26 years
of weakness and flexion of the left hand and ankle, which progressed
rapidly over the next few years to become frank dystonia of the left arm
and bulbar symptoms, including dysphagia, laryngeal dysfunction with
task-specific dysphonia, and oropharyngeal dysmotility. She also had
mild parkinsonism, with hypomimia and wide-based gait. Treatment with
oral trihexyphenidyl and botulinum injection into selected laryngeal
muscles resulted in clinical improvement.

.0004
DYSTONIA 12
ATP1A3, ILE758SER

In 12 affected members of a family with dystonia-12 (128235) reported by
Dobyns et al. (1993), de Carvalho Aguiar et al. (2004) identified a
heterozygous 2273T-G transversion in the ATP1A3 gene, resulting in an
ile758-to-ser (I758S) substitution in a highly conserved residue in the
transmembrane domain of the protein. The mutation was not identified in
500 northern European control chromosomes.

.0005
DYSTONIA 12
ATP1A3, PHE780LEU

In 2 affected members of a family with dystonia-12 (128235), de Carvalho
Aguiar et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous 2338T-C transition in the
ATP1A3 gene, resulting in a phe780-to-leu (F780L) substitution in a
highly conserved residue in the transmembrane region of the protein
close to the extracellular surface. The mutation was not identified in
500 northern European control chromosomes.

.0006
DYSTONIA 12
ATP1A3, ASP801TYR

In 4 affected members of a family with dystonia-12 (128235) reported by
Brashear et al. (1997), de Carvalho Aguiar et al. (2004) identified a
heterozygous 2401G-T transversion in the ATP1A3 gene, resulting in an
asp801-to-tyr (D801Y) substitution in a highly conserved residue in the
transmembrane region of the protein. The mutation was not identified in
500 northern European control chromosomes.

.0007
DYSTONIA 12
ATP1A3, ASP923ASN

In a boy with early-onset DYT12 (128235) at age 4 years, Anselm et al.
(2009) identified a heterozygous de novo 2767G-A transition in exon 20
of the ATP1A3 gene, resulting in an asp923-to-asn (D923N) substitution.
The mutation was not found in 338 Caucasian control chromosomes. The
substitution was predicted to occur in a residue buried in the membrane
close to the ion-binding residue gln920, suggesting that it may affect
enzyme activity. He was born of an unaffected Caucasian father and
Chinese mother. The onset of dystonia was abrupt, occurring after mild
trauma to the forehead. He developed mutism, eye convergence, and
inability to walk, which later evolved into severe dystonia, severe
dysarthria, and drooling. The condition stabilized over several months,
and he showed mild improvement over the next 8 years. About a year after
onset, he developed unusual episodes of flaccidity lasting for hours,
later replaced by shorter episodes of stiffness. Treatment with L-dopa
was not effective. At the time of the report, he had bulbar symptoms,
striking oromotor dystonia with inability to speak or swallow well, and
apraxia.

.0008
DYSTONIA 12
ATP1A3, 3-BP DUP, 3191TAC

In a 16-year-old female with DYT12 (128235), Blanco-Arias et al. (2009)
reported a de novo heterozygous 3-bp duplication (3191dupTAC) in exon 23
of the ATP1A3 gene, resulting in duplication of tyr1013, the C-terminal
amino acid of the protein before the stop codon. The mutation was not
found in either parent, her brother, or in 218 control individuals. HeLa
cells expressing the mutant protein showed decreased survival in
response to ouabain challenge, but no defect was detected in protein
expression or plasma membrane targeting. Functional analysis
demonstrated a drastic 40- to 50-fold reduction in Na(+) affinity in the
mutant. Blanco-Arias et al. (2009) suggested a crucial role for the C
terminus of the alpha-subunit in the function of the Na+/K+-ATPase and
emphasized a key impact of Na(+) affinity in the pathophysiology of
DYT12.

.0009
ALTERNATING HEMIPLEGIA OF CHILDHOOD 2
ATP1A3, ASP801ASN

In 36 of 95 unrelated patients with alternating hemiplegia of childhood
(614820), Heinzen et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 2401G-A
transition in the ATP1A3 gene, resulting in an asp801-to-asn (D801N)
substitution in the sixth transmembrane domain. The mutation was
demonstrated to occur de novo in cases where parental material was
available. All patients had infantile onset of hemiplegia attacks,
usually associated with episodes of quadriparesis, abnormal eye
movements, autonomic signs, seizures, dystonia, ataxia, chorea, and
developmental delay. Transfection of the mutation in HeLa cells showed
protein levels similar to wildtype, but ATP1A3 activity was
significantly decreased. Evaluation of the crystal structure of the
protein predicted that the D801N substitution would prevent the binding
of potassium ions to the pump.

.0010
ALTERNATING HEMIPLEGIA OF CHILDHOOD 2
ATP1A3, GLU815LYS

In 19 patients with alternating hemiplegia of childhood-2 (614820),
Heinzen et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 2443G-A transition in
the ATP1A3 gene, resulting in a glu815-to-lys (E815K) substitution in
the sixth transmembrane domain. The mutation was shown to occur de novo
in all patients whose parents were available for study. Transfection of
the mutation in HeLa cells showed protein levels similar to wildtype,
but ATP1A3 activity was significantly decreased.

.0011
ALTERNATING HEMIPLEGIA OF CHILDHOOD 2
ATP1A3, SER811PRO

In 4 unrelated patients with AHC2 (614820), Heinzen et al. (2012)
identified a de novo heterozygous 2431T-C transition in the ATP1A3 gene,
resulting in a ser811-to-pro (S811P) substitution in the sixth
transmembrane domain. Transfection of the mutation in HeLa cells showed
protein levels similar to wildtype, but ATP1A3 activity was
significantly decreased.

.0012
ALTERNATING HEMIPLEGIA OF CHILDHOOD 2
ATP1A3, GLY947ARG

In 5 patients with AHC2 (614820), Heinzen et al. (2012) identified a
heterozygous 2839G-A transition in the ATP1A3 gene, resulting in a
gly947-to-arg (G947R) substitution in the ninth transmembrane domain.
The mutation was shown to occur de novo in all patients whose parents
were available for study.

REFERENCE 1. Anselm, I. A.; Sweadner, K. J.; Gollamudi, S.; Ozelius, L. J.;
Darras, B. T.: Rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism in a child with
a novel ATP1A3 gene mutation. Neurology 73: 400-401, 2009.

2. Ashmore, L. J.; Hrizo, S. L.; Paul, S. M.; Van Voorhies, W. A.;
Beitel, G. J.; Palladino, M. J.: Novel mutations affecting the Na,
K ATPase alpha model complex neurological diseases and implicate the
sodium pump in increased longevity. Hum. Genet. 126: 431-447, 2009.

3. Blanco-Arias, P.; Einholm, A. P.; Mamsa, H.; Concheiro, C.; Gutierrez-de-Teran,
H.; Romero, J.; Toustrup-Jensen, M. S.; Carracedo, A.; Jen, J. C.;
Vilsen, B.; Sobrido, M.-J.: A C-terminal mutation of ATP1A3 underscores
the crucial role of sodium affinity in the pathophysiology of rapid-onset
dystonia-parkinsonism. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 2370-2377, 2009.

4. Brashear, A.; DeLeon, D.; Bressman, S. B.; Thyagarajan, D.; Farlow,
M. R.; Dobyns, W. B.: Rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism in a second
family. Neurology 48: 1066-1069, 1997.

5. Brashear, A.; Dobyns, W. B.; de Carvalho Aguiar, P.; Borg, M.;
Frijns, C. J. M.; Gollamudi, S.; Green, A.; Guimaraes, J.; Haake,
B. C.; Klein, C.; Linazasoro, G.; Munchau, A.; Raymond, D.; Riley,
D.; Saunders-Pullman, R.; Tijssen, M. A. J.; Webb, D.; Zaremba, J.;
Bressman, S. B.; Ozelius, L. J.: The phenotypic spectrum of rapid-onset
dystonia-parkinsonism (RDP) and mutations in the ATP1A3 gene. Brain 130:
828-835, 2007.

6. de Carvalho Aguiar, P.; Sweadner, K. J.; Penniston, J. T.; Zaremba,
J.; Liu, L.; Caton, M.; Linazasoro, G.; Borg, M.; Tijssen, M. A. J.;
Bressman, S. B.; Dobyns, W. B.; Brashear, A.; Ozelius, L. J.: Mutations
in the Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase alpha-3 gene ATP1A3 are associated with rapid-onset
dystonia parkinsonism. Neuron 43: 169-175, 2004.

7. Dobyns, W. B.; Ozelius, L. J.; Kramer, P. L.; Brashear, A.; Farlow,
M. R.; Perry, T. R.; Walsh, L. E.; Kasarskis, E. J.; Butler, I. J.;
Breakefield, X. O.: Rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism. Neurology 43:
2596-2602, 1993.

8. Harley, H. G.; Brook, J. D.; Jackson, C. L.; Glaser, T.; Walsh,
K. V.; Sarfarazi, M.; Kent, R.; Lager, M.; Koch, M.; Harper, P. S.;
Levenson, R.; Housman, D. E.; Shaw, D. J.: Localization of a human
Na+,K+-ATPase alpha subunit gene to chromosome 19q12-q13.2 and linkage
to the myotonic dystrophy locus. Genomics 3: 380-384, 1988.

9. Heinzen, E. L.; Swoboda, K. J.; Hitomi, Y.; Gurrieri, F.; Nicole,
S.; de Vries, B.; Tiziano, F. D.; Fontaine, B.; Walley, N. M.; Heavin,
S.; Panagiotakaki, E; European Alternating Hemiplegia of Childhood
(AHC) Genetics Consortium; and 33 others: De novo mutations in
ATP1A3 cause alternating hemiplegia of childhood. Nature Genet. 44:
1030-1034, 2012.

10. Hilgenberg, L. G. W.; Su, H.; Gu, H.; O'Dowd, D. K.; Smith, M.
A.: Alpha-3-Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase is a neuronal receptor for agrin. Cell 125:
359-369, 2006.

11. Linazasoro, G.; Indakoetxea, B.; Ruiz, J.; Van Blercom, N.; Lasa,
A.: Possible sporadic rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism. Mov. Disord. 17:
608-609, 2002.

12. Ovchinnikov, Y. A.; Monastyrskaya, G. S.; Broude, N. E.; Ushkaryov,
Y. A.; Melkov, A. M.; Smirnov, Y. V.; Malyshev, I. V.; Allikmets,
R. L.; Kostina, M. B.; Dulubova, I. E.; Kiyatkin, N. I.; Grishin,
A. V.; Modyanov, N. N.; Sverdlov, E. D.: Family of human Na+,K+-ATPase
genes: structure of the gene for the catalytic subunit (alpha-III-form)
and its relationship with structural features of the protein. FEBS
Lett. 233: 87-94, 1988.

13. Pittock, S. J.; Joyce, C.; O'Keane, V.; Hugle, B.; Hardiman, O.;
Brett, F.; Green, A. J.; Barton, D. E.; King, M. D.; Webb, D. W.:
Rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism: a clinical and genetic analysis
of a new kindred. Neurology 55: 991-995, 2000.

14. Tarsy, D.; Sweadner, K. J.; Song, P. C.: Case 17-2010: a 29-year-old
woman with flexion of the left hand and foot and difficulty speaking. New
Eng. J. Med. 362: 2213-2219, 2010.

15. Yang-Feng, T. L.; Schneider, J. W.; Lindgren, V.; Shull, M. M.;
Benz, E. J., Jr.; Lingrel, J. B.; Francke, U.: Chromosomal localization
of human Na+,K+-ATPase alpha- and beta-subunit genes. Genomics 2:
128-138, 1988.

16. Zaremba, J.; Mierzewska, H.; Lysiak, Z.; Kramer, P.; Ozelius,
L. J.; Brashear, A.: Rapid-onset dystonia-parkinsonism: a fourth
family consistent with linkage to chromosome 19q13. Mov. Disord. 19:
1506-1510, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/13/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/10/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/24/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/30/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 3/8/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/17/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/10/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/1/1987

EDITED carol: 09/14/2012
carol: 9/14/2012
terry: 9/13/2012
ckniffin: 9/13/2012
wwang: 6/11/2010
ckniffin: 6/10/2010
wwang: 5/25/2010
ckniffin: 5/24/2010
wwang: 3/31/2010
terry: 3/30/2010
wwang: 3/11/2010
mgross: 3/8/2010
wwang: 1/8/2010
ckniffin: 12/17/2009
wwang: 3/16/2005
wwang: 3/10/2005
ckniffin: 3/10/2005
carol: 10/31/2000
mgross: 7/21/1999
terry: 6/18/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 8/14/1989
root: 1/9/1989
root: 12/20/1988

605925	TITLE *605925 PERICENTRIN; PCNT
;;KENDRIN; KEN;;
PERICENTRIN B;;
PERICENTRIN 2, FORMERLY; PCNT2, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Eukaryotic chromosome segregation depends on mitotic spindle apparatus,
a bipolar array of microtubules nucleated from centrosomes. Centrosomal
microtubule nucleation requires attachment of gamma-tubulin (TUBG1;
191135) ring complexes to a salt-insoluble centrosomal core. In budding
yeast, this attachment is provided by the coiled-coil protein Spc110p,
which links the yeast gamma-tubulin complex to the core of the yeast
centrosome.

Flory et al. (2000) showed that kendrin is a human homolog of yeast
Spc110p. They identified kendrin by homology of its C-terminal
calmodulin-binding site with that of Spc110p. The N-terminal regions of
kendrin share significant sequence homology with pericentrin, a
centrosome component known to interact with gamma-tubulin. (It was later
determined that kendrin and pericentrin are identical.) Kendrin
localizes specifically to centrosomes throughout the cell cycle. In
mitotic human breast cancer cells containing abundant centrosome-like
structures, Flory et al. (2000) found kendrin only at centrosomes
associated with spindle microtubules.

By screening a human fetal liver cDNA expression library with
anti-centrosome serum, followed by 5-prime RACE and rescreening a cDNA
library with the RACE product, Li et al. (2001) isolated a cDNA encoding
kendrin, which they called pericentrin-B because of its high sequence
identity with pericentrin, then thought to be a separate protein.
Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated that kendrin is expressed in
centrosomes and is an essential component of the pericentriolar material
(PCM). Immunoblot analysis showed that kendrin is expressed as a greater
than 350-kD protein. Sequence analysis predicted that the 3,321-amino
acid protein contains a large N-terminal coiled-coil domain of
approximately 1,500 residues and a smaller C-terminal coiled-coil domain
of approximately 500 amino acids. Both coiled-coil domains are flanked
by non-coiled ends. Immunoprecipitation and immunoblot analysis
indicated that kendrin complexes with PCM1 (600299) but not with
gamma-tubulin. Functional analysis suggested that kendrin and PCM1
activities are not essential for the microtubule nucleation process.

Kantaputra et al. (2011) performed in situ hybridization analysis of
lower molar tooth expression in wildtype mice, and observed that the
first Pcnt signals were derived from tooth-presumptive epithelium at
embryonic day 9.5. Pcnt was expressed in the thickened tooth epithelium
and mesenchyme at E12.5, in the bud epithelium at embryonic day 13.5,
and in the cap epithelium and dental papillae at embryonic day 14.5,
with weak expression in both ameloblasts and odontoblasts at embryonic
day 18.5.

MAPPING

By PCR amplification, Southern blot analysis, and fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Chen et al. (1996) mapped the kendrin (PCNT) gene to 21q
between PFKL (171860) at 21q22.3 and 21qter.

GENE FUNCTION

Rauch et al. (2008) demonstrated that absence of PCNT results in
disorganized mitotic spindles and missegregation of chromosomes.

Using small interfering RNA, Graser et al. (2007) found that depletion
of pericentrin, CEP290 (610142), or CEP164 (614848) in human retinal
pigment epithelial cells prevented serum starvation-induced formation of
a primary cilium.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Individuals with microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type
II (MOPD2; 210720) have an average birth weight of less that 1500 g at
term, an average adult height of 100 cm, a brain size comparable to that
of a 3-month old but usually with near-normal intelligence, and a
variety of associated bone abnormalities. Rauch et al. (2008) identified
29 different homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the PCNT
gene in 25 patients with MOPD2. There were 12 stop mutations and 17
frameshift mutations (4 splice site mutations, 2 small insertions, 2
small deletions, and 1 exon deletion). Two mutations occurred twice in
unrelated patients, namely, R1923X (605925.0004) and 841insG
(605925.0005). In contrast, they identified no PCNT mutations in 27
patients with a clinical diagnosis of MOPD1 (210710), MOPD3 (210730),
Seckel syndrome (see 210600), or unclassified growth retardation
syndromes. Absence of the PCNT protein was confirmed by Western blot
analysis of lymphoblastoid cell lines from 2 patients, and both
investigated heterozygous parents of 1 of these patients showed reduced
protein levels in lymphoblasts. Rauch et al. (2008) suggested that this
may explain their finding of significant reduction of the mean height of
heterozygous MOPD II parents.

Griffith et al. (2008) performed a SNP-microarray genomewide
homozygosity scan on 2 consanguineous families from the Middle East that
included individuals clinically diagnosed with Seckel syndrome and
showing cellular evidence of defective ATR signaling (601215). They
mapped the disorder in these families to chromosome 21q22.3 in the
region of the PCNT gene. By sequencing the 47 coding exons of the PCNT
gene in affected individuals from the 2 Middle Eastern families, they
identified homozygous truncating mutations in both: E220X (605925.0001)
in one and S629fs (605925.0002) in the other. From screening of
additional cases, they identified another truncating mutation in the
PCNT gene (605925.0003) in a consanguineous Moroccan family.

Willems et al. (2008) noted that mutations in the PCNT gene had been
identified in 28 patients, including the 25 with MOPD II reported by
Rauch et al. (2008) and the 3 diagnosed with Seckel syndrome reported by
Griffith et al. (2008). They performed direct sequencing of PCNT in 21
patients and identified 9 distinct mutations in 4 of the 16 patients
diagnosed with Seckel syndrome and in all 5 patients diagnosed with MOPD
II. Clinical analysis of the 4 Seckel syndrome patients with PCNT
mutations showed that all presented minor skeletal changes and a severe
growth retardation more suggestive of MOPD II. Willems et al. (2008)
concluded that, despite variable clinical severity, MOPD II is a
genetically homogeneous condition due to loss of function of
pericentrin. Thus, the patients reported by Griffith et al. (2008) with
mutations in the PCNT gene can be considered to have MOPD II. In their
full report, in which additional patients were studied, Willems et al.
(2010) identified a total of 13 distinct mutations in the PCNT gene,
including one in another patient diagnosed with Seckel syndrome
(605925.0009); this patient also had minor skeletal changes and clinical
features compatible with a diagnosis of MOPD II.

In a 3-year-old Italian boy who was diagnosed at birth with Seckel
syndrome but in whom the diagnosis was later revised to MOPD II, Piane
et al. (2009) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion in the PCNT
gene (605295.0012). Noting the phenotypic overlap between Seckel
syndrome and MOPD II, the authors emphasized the need for reevaluation
in patients since certain clinical features may not be evident at birth;
they considered PCNT mutations to be the hallmark for a correct
diagnosis of MOPD II.

In 4 patients from 2 unrelated Thai pedigrees with features of MOPD II
as well as extreme microdontia and alveolar bone hypoplasia, Kantaputra
et al. (2011) identified homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for
mutations in the PCNT gene (605925.0004; 605925.0010-605925.0011).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MICROCEPHALIC OSTEODYSPLASTIC PRIMORDIAL DWARFISM, TYPE II
PCNT, GLU220TER

In affected male and female members of a consanguineous Saudi Arabian
family who had been diagnosed with Seckel syndrome (210600), Griffith et
al. (2008) identified homozygosity for a glu220-to-ter (E220X) mutation
in the PCNT gene. Both patients were born at 33 weeks' gestation and
were small at birth. One of them had diabetes mellitus. The parents in
each case were heterozygous for the mutation, which was not found in
over 200 control alleles. Willems et al. (2008) later reported that
patients with mutations in the PCNT gene have type II microcephalic
osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism (210720), a clinically variable but
genetically homogeneous condition.

.0002
MICROCEPHALIC OSTEODYSPLASTIC PRIMORDIAL DWARFISM, TYPE II
PCNT, SER629FS

In a female diagnosed with Seckel syndrome (210600), born of
first-cousin parents in Kuwait, Griffith et al. (2008) identified
homozygosity for a single-basepair deletion in exon 12 of the PCNT gene
that led to a frameshift which was predicted to result in premature
protein termination after an additional 65 amino acids (S629fs). The
parents were heterozygous for the mutation, which was not found in over
200 control alleles. Willems et al. (2008) later reported that patients
with mutations in the PCNT gene have type II microcephalic
osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism (210720), a clinically variable but
genetically homogeneous condition.

.0003
MICROCEPHALIC OSTEODYSPLASTIC PRIMORDIAL DWARFISM, TYPE II
PCNT, CYS1190FS

In a male diagnosed with Seckel syndrome (210600), born of first-cousin
parents in Morocco, Griffith et al. (2008) identified homozygosity for a
1-bp insertion in exon 18 of the PCNT gene, resulting in a frameshift at
codon 1190 (C1190fs). The parents were heterozygous for the mutation,
which was not found in over 200 control alleles. Willems et al. (2008)
later reported that patients with mutations in the PCNT gene have type
II microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism (210720), a
clinically variable but genetically homogeneous condition.

.0004
MICROCEPHALIC OSTEODYSPLASTIC PRIMORDIAL DWARFISM, TYPE II
PCNT, ARG1923TER

In 2 patients with microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism
type II (MOPD2; 210720) from consanguineous but unrelated families, one
of Omani descent and the other of Pakistani descent, Rauch et al. (2008)
identified homozygosity for a 5767C-T transition in the PCNT gene,
resulting in an arg1923-to-ter (R1923X) substitution. The patients, aged
5.5 and 1.5 years, were born prematurely, one at 34 and the other at 32
weeks' gestation, with severe intrauterine growth retardation. Both had
severe short stature, extreme microcephaly, and mild developmental
delay.

In a Thai brother and sister with features of MOPD II as well as extreme
microdontia and alveolar bone hypoplasia, originally reported by
Kantaputra (2002), Kantaputra et al. (2011) identified compound
heterozygosity for the R1923X mutation in the PCNT gene and a 3-bp
deletion (9460delAAG; 605925.0010) in exon 43, predicted to result in
deletion of lys315.

.0005
MICROCEPHALIC OSTEODYSPLASTIC PRIMORDIAL DWARFISM, TYPE II
PCNT, 1-BP INS, 841G

In 2 presumably unrelated Turkish patients with microcephalic
osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II (MOPD2; 210720), one from a
consanguineous and the other from an apparently nonconsanguineous union,
Rauch et al. (2008) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion,
841_842insG, resulting in a frameshift at arg281 and a termination codon
at position 327 (R281fsX327). The patient from the nonconsanguineous
union was born at 35 weeks' gestation weighing 1300 g, and the other
patient was born at 40 weeks' gestation weighing 1320 g. The patients,
aged 12 and 5.5 years, had severe short stature and extreme microcephaly
with mild developmental delay. Both also had multiple brain aneurysms
and moyamoya disease (see 252350). Further analyses suggested that this
mutation was transmitted through an unknown common ancestor because both
patients were identical for all polymorphic sites identified within the
PCNT region.

.0006
MICROCEPHALIC OSTEODYSPLASTIC PRIMORDIAL DWARFISM, TYPE II
PCNT, GLU1037TER

In a 12-year-old Turkish girl with microcephalic osteodysplastic
primordial dwarfism type II (210720), whose parents were consanguineous,
Rauch et al. (2008) identified homozygosity for a 3109G-T transversion
in the PCNT gene, resulting in a glu1037-to-ter (E1037X) substitution.
The child was born at 34 weeks' gestation weighing only 880 g. She had
severe short stature, extreme microcephaly, multiple brain aneurysms,
moyamoya disease, and mild developmental delay.

In a male patient from Turkey with the diagnosis of MOPD II, Willems et
al. (2010) identified homozygosity for the E1037X mutation.

.0007
MICROCEPHALIC OSTEODYSPLASTIC PRIMORDIAL DWARFISM, TYPE II
PCNT, 486-BP DEL, NT84

In a 12.5-year-old girl of consanguineous Kurdish descent with
microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II (210720),
Rauch et al. (2008) identified homozygosity for a large deletion
extending from IVS30 at nucleotide 84 to IVS34 at nucleotide 569, which
resulted in a frameshift leading to a premature termination codon at
amino acid 2317 (IVS30-84_IVS31-569del). The child was born at term
weighing 1200 g. She was -9 SD in height and -8.7 SD for head
circumference. She had moyamoya disease and no developmental delay.

.0008
MICROCEPHALIC OSTEODYSPLASTIC PRIMORDIAL DWARFISM, TYPE II
PCNT, ARG2918TER

In 2 children with microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism
type II (210720), aged 6.5 and 5 years, in a consanguineous Dutch
family, Rauch et al. (2008) identified homozygosity for an 8752C-T
transition in the PCNT gene, resulting in an arg2918-to-ter (R2918X)
substitution. The children showed severe intrauterine growth retardation
at birth with extreme short stature and microcephaly. Both had enlarged
ventricles and both showed severe developmental delay.

.0009
MICROCEPHALIC OSTEODYSPLASTIC PRIMORDIAL DWARFISM, TYPE II
PCNT, GLN1280HIS

In a patient with the diagnosis of Seckel syndrome, Willems et al.
(2010) identified homozygosity for a 3840G-C transversion affecting the
last base of exon 19 of the PCNT gene, resulting in an apparent missense
mutation, gln1280-to-his (Q2280H). The mutation was predicted to alter
splicing. This was confirmed by sequence analysis of RT-PCR products
which demonstrated exon 19 skipping, predictive of a premature
termination of translation (Pro1204GlyfsX11). The clinical analysis of
this patient showed that she presented minor skeletal changes and
clinical features compatible with the diagnosis of MOPD II.

.0010
MICROCEPHALIC OSTEODYSPLASTIC PRIMORDIAL DWARFISM, TYPE II
PCNT, 3-BP DEL, 9460AAG

See 605925.0004 and Kantaputra et al. (2011).

.0011
MICROCEPHALIC OSTEODYSPLASTIC PRIMORDIAL DWARFISM, TYPE II
PCNT, GLU1154TER

In male and female third cousins with features of MOPD II (210720) as
well as extreme microdontia and alveolar bone hypoplasia, originally
reported by Kantaputra et al. (2004), Kantaputra et al. (2011)
identified homozygosity for a 3460G-T transversion in exon 17 of the
PCNT gene, resulting in a glu1154-to-ter (E1154X) substitution predicted
to cause premature termination of the protein. The unaffected parents
were each heterozygous for the mutation.

.0012
MICROCEPHALIC OSTEODYSPLASTIC PRIMORDIAL DWARFISM, TYPE II
PCNT, 1-BP INS, 1527A

In a 3-year-old Italian boy with microcephalic osteodysplastic
primordial dwarfism type II (210720), Piane et al. (2009) identified
homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion (1527_1528insA) in exon 10 of the PCNT
gene, causing a frameshift predicted to result in a premature
termination codon (Thr510fs). (The protein change was incorrectly
published as Treo510fs.) His unaffected parents were heterozygous for
the mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, H.; Gos, A.; Morris, M. A.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Localization
of a human homolog of the mouse pericentrin gene (PCNT) to chromosome
21qter. Genomics 35: 620-624, 1996.

2. Flory, M. R.; Moser, M. J.; Monnat, R. J., Jr.; Davis, T. N.:
Identification of a human centrosomal calmodulin-binding protein that
shares homology with pericentrin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 5919-5923,
2000.

3. Graser, S.; Stierhof, Y.-D.; Lavoie, S. B.; Gassner, O. S.; Lamla,
S.; Le Clech, M.; Nigg, E. A.: Cep164, a novel centriole appendage
protein required for primary cilium formation. J. Cell Biol. 179:
321-330, 2007.

4. Griffith, E.; Walker, S.; Martin, C.-A.; Vagnarelli, P.; Stiff,
T.; Vernay, B.; Al Sanna, N.; Saggar, A.; Hamel, B.; Earnshaw, W.
C.; Jeggo, P. A.; Jackson, A. P.; O'Driscoll, M.: Mutations in pericentrin
cause Seckel syndrome with defective ATR-dependent DNA damage signaling. Nature
Genet. 40: 232-236, 2008.

5. Kantaputra, P.; Tanpaiboon, P.; Porntaveetus, T.; Ohazama, A.;
Sharpe, P.; Rauch, A.; Hussadaloy, A.; Thiel, C. T.: The smallest
teeth in the world are caused my mutations in the PCNT gene. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 155A: 1398-1403, 2011.

6. Kantaputra, P. N.: Apparently new osteodysplastic and primordial
short stature with severe microdontia, opalescent teeth, and rootless
molars in two siblings. Am. J. Med. Genet. 111: 420-428, 2002.

7. Kantaputra, P. N.; Tanpaiboon, P.; Unachak, K.; Praphanphoj, V.
: Microcephalic osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism with severe microdontia
and skin anomalies: confirmation of a new syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 130A:
181-190, 2004.

8. Li, Q.; Hansen, D.; Killilea, A.; Joshi, H. C.; Palazzo, R. E.;
Balczon, R.: Kendrin/pericentrin-B, a centrosome protein with homology
to pericentrin that complexes with PCM-1. J. Cell. Sci. 114: 797-809,
2001.

9. Piane, M.; Della Monica, M.; Piatelli, G.; Lulli, P.; Lonardo,
F.; Chessa, L.; Scarano, G.: Majewski osteodysplastic primordial
dwarfism type II (MOPD II) syndrome previously diagnosed as Seckel
syndrome: report of a novel mutation of the PCNT gene. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 149A: 2452-2456, 2009.

10. Rauch, A.; Thiel, C. T.; Schindler, D.; Wick, U.; Crow, Y. J.;
Ekici, A. B.; van Essen, A. J.; Goecke, T. O.; Al-Gazali, L.; Chrzanowska,
K. H.; Zweier, C.; Brunner, H. G.; and 18 others: Mutations in
the pericentrin (PCNT) gene cause primordial dwarfism. Science 319:
816-819, 2008.

11. Willems, M.; Genevieve, D.; Borck, G.; Baujat, G.; Gerard, M.;
Heron, D.; Leheup, B.; Le Merrer, M.; Verloes, A.; Colleaux, L.; Munnich,
A.; Cormier-Daire, V.: Pericentrin molecular analysis in 22 Seckel/MOPDII
patients. (Abstract) 58th Annual Meeting, American Society of Human
Genetics, Philadelphia, Pa. , 2008. Note: P. 91.

12. Willems, M.; Genevieve, D.; Borck, G.; Baumann, C.; Baujat, G.;
Bieth, E.; Edery, P.; Farra, C.; Gerard, M.; Heron, D.; Leheup, B.;
Le Merrer, M.; Lyonnet, S.; Martin-Coignard, D.; Mathieu, M.; Thauvin-Robinet,
C.; Verloes, A.; Colleaux, L.; Munnich, A.; Cormier-Daire, V.: Molecular
analysis of pericentrin gene (PCNT) in a series of 24 Seckel/microcephalic
osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism type II (MOPD II) families. J.
Med. Genet. 47: 797-802, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/21/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/3/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/20/2011
Nara Sobreira - updated: 2/17/2011
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 11/17/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/27/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/25/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/11/2001

EDITED carol: 09/16/2013
carol: 8/13/2013
tpirozzi: 7/12/2013
carol: 2/26/2013
carol: 2/21/2013
mgross: 10/4/2012
terry: 10/3/2012
carol: 10/20/2011
carol: 2/17/2011
terry: 2/17/2011
carol: 11/11/2010
carol: 12/9/2008
carol: 11/17/2008
carol: 2/27/2008
carol: 2/26/2008
carol: 7/17/2001
carol: 5/25/2001
carol: 5/11/2001

604713	TITLE *604713 C-TYPE LECTIN DOMAIN FAMILY 11, MEMBER A; CLEC11A
;;STEM CELL GROWTH FACTOR; SCGF;;
LYMPHOCYTIC SECRETED LONG FORM OF C-TYPE LECTIN; LSLCL;;
LECTIN, C-TYPE, LYMPHOCYTE-SECRETED LONG FORM
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Multiple growth factors synergistically stimulate proliferation of
hematopoietic progenitor cells. Using an expression cloning method,
Hiraoka et al. (1997) obtained a cDNA encoding a predicted 245-amino
acid protein, which they called SCGF. The authors found that SCGF
possesses burst-promoting activity, granulocyte/macrophage
(GM)-promoting activity, and colony-forming unit/GM-sustaining effects.
Northern blot analysis detected low-level expression of a 1.6-kb SCGF
transcript in all tissues tested, and a 2.6-kb SCGF transcript was also
detected in heart.

Using RT-PCR analysis on single-stranded cDNA from human bone marrow
poly(A) RNA, Mio et al. (1998) obtained a full-length SCGF cDNA encoding
a deduced 323-amino acid protein, which they named SCGF-alpha; they
designated the shorter clone isolated by Hiraoka et al. (1997)
SCGF-beta. Northern blot analysis detected an SCGF transcript of
approximately 1.4 to 1.6 kb in many human tissues, including spleen,
thymus, appendix, bone marrow, and fetal liver, with low expression in
peripheral blood leukocytes. An additional transcript of 2.2 to 2.4 kb
was detected in thymus and bone marrow.

Using degenerate PCR primers based on the sequence of a purified 47-kD
protein, p47, secreted by HIV-1-infected T cells fused with embryonic
fibroblasts, Bannwarth et al. (1998) cloned a cDNA encoding SCGF, which
they called LSLCL (lymphocytic secreted long form of C-type lectin).
Sequence analysis revealed a 21-amino acid signal peptide; a
glutamate-rich N-terminal domain, which includes an arg-gly-asp triplet;
a leucine zipper; and a C-terminal C-type lectin domain, which is known
to be a carbohydrate recognition domain. The authors found O-glycan
attachment sites but no N-glycosylation sites. Northern blot analysis
detected a 1.4-kb transcript that was strongly expressed in T and B
lymphoblastoid, weakly expressed in monocytoid cell lines, and not
expressed in fibroblasts. Strong expression was detected in bone marrow,
with weak expression detected in all other tissues tested. Bannwarth et
al. (1998) argued that the structure of SCGF is reminiscent of
collectins (see 178635) rather than of growth factors.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bannwarth et al. (1999) reported that the SCGF gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Mio et al. (1998) mapped the SCGF gene to chromosome
19q13.3. By genomic Southern blot analysis, Bannwarth et al. (1999)
mapped the gene to the same locus.

Mio et al. (1998) mapped the mouse Scgf gene to chromosome 7B3-B5 using
FISH.

REFERENCE 1. Bannwarth, S.; Giordanengo, V.; Grosgeorge, J.; Turc-Carel, C.;
Lefebvre, J.-C.: Cloning, mapping, and genomic organization of the
LSLCL gene, encoding a new lymphocytic secreted mucin-like protein
with a C-type lectin domain: a new model of exon shuffling. Genomics 57:
316-317, 1999.

2. Bannwarth, S.; Giordanengo, V.; Lesimple, J.; Lefebvre, J. C.:
Molecular cloning of a new secreted sulfated mucin-like protein with
a C-type lectin domain that is expressed in lymphoblastic cells. J.
Biol. Chem. 273: 1911-1916, 1998.

3. Hiraoka, A.; Sugimura, A.; Seki, T.; Nagasawa, T.; Ohta, N.; Shimonishi,
M.; Hagiya, M.; Shimizu, S.: Cloning, expression, and characterization
of a cDNA encoding a novel human growth factor for primitive hematopoietic
progenitor cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 7577-7582, 1997.

4. Mio, H.; Kagami, N.; Yokokawa, S.; Kawai, H.; Nakagawa, S.; Takeuchi,
K.; Sekine, S.; Hiraoka, A.: Isolation and characterization of a
cDNA for human, mouse, and rat full-length stem cell growth factor,
a new member of C-type lectin superfamily. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 249: 124-130, 1998.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/22/2000

EDITED carol: 06/07/2012
ckniffin: 6/6/2012
carol: 5/22/2012
mgross: 3/23/2000
mgross: 3/22/2000

602764	TITLE *602764 KERATIN 35; KRT35
;;KERATIN, HAIR, ACIDIC, 5; KRTHA5;;
KERATIN, HARD, TYPE I, 5; HA5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

See KRTHA1 (601077) for general information on hair keratins.

CLONING

Rogers et al. (1996) identified the KRTHA5 gene, which they called HA5,
while studying the HA2 (KRTHA2; 602760) genomic sequence. Using the
partial HA5 genomic fragment to screen a human scalp cDNA library, the
authors isolated an HA5 cDNA. A comparison of the genomic and cDNA
sequences revealed the presence of an intron in the 3-prime noncoding
region. Together with the 6 conserved introns expected in the region
encoding the alpha-helical domain, the HA5 gene has 7 introns. The
predicted 425-amino acid HA5 protein contains a C-terminal domain with 8
cysteine and 10 proline residues. Its N-terminal domain lacks sequence
homology with the N-terminal domains of HA1 (KRTHA1), HA3A (KRTHA3A;
602761), HA3B (KRTHA3B; 602762), and HA4 (KRTHA4; 602763), all of which
are closely conserved in length and sequence. Northern blot analysis
detected a 1.8-kb HA5 transcript in human scalp but not in hairless
epidermis. In situ hybridization detected HA5 transcripts mainly in
supramatricial cells and lowermost cortical cells of the hair bulb,
indicating that HA5 is expressed early in hair morphogenesis;
transcripts were not detected in the cuticle. See Langbein et al. (1999)
for additional information on the expression pattern of the KRTHA5 gene
in the hair follicle.

Rogers et al. (1998) reported that the deduced KRTHA5 protein has 426
amino acids.

MAPPING

Rogers et al. (1996) located the HA5 gene 8 kb upstream of the HA2 gene
on 17q12-q21 and found that the 2 genes are oriented in the same
transcriptional direction.

Rogers et al. (1998) isolated and characterized 2 overlapping human PAC
clones that cover 190 kb on 17q12-q21 and contain 9 type I hair keratin
genes, 1 transcribed hair keratin pseudogene, and 1 orphan exon. The
order of the genes is 5-prime--KRTHA6 (604540)--KRTHA5--KRTHA2--orphan
exon--KRTHA8 (604542)--KRTHA7
(604541)--pseudogene--KRTHA1--KRTHA4--KRTHA3B--KRTHA3A--3-prime. The
hair keratin genes range in size from 4.2 to 7.5 kb, and the genes are
separated from each other by 5.5 to 18.4 kb; all are located within
about 140 kb. Except for KRTHA5, which has 8 exons, all of the genes
contain 7 exons. Each gene is transcribed from the 5-prime to 3-prime
direction. Based on sequence homologies, the genes can be grouped into 3
subclusters of tandemly arranged genes. One subcluster, group A,
consists of KRTHA1, KRTHA3A, KRTHA3B, and KRTHA4, which share 89%
overall amino acid identity. A second subcluster, group B, contains
KRTHA7 and KRTHA8, as well as the hair keratin pseudogene, which the
authors called HAA. The functional hair keratins and hypothetical HAA
hair keratin share approximately 81% overall amino acid identity. The
third subcluster, group C, consists of the structurally less related
hair keratins KRTHA2, KRTHA5, and KRTHA6, which share about 70% amino
acid identity.

REFERENCE 1. Langbein, L.; Rogers, M. A.; Winter, H.; Silke, P.; Beckhaus, U.;
Rackwitz, H.-R.; Schweizer, J.: The catalog of human hair keratins.
I. Expression of the nine type I members in the hair follicle. J.
Biol. Chem. 274: 19874-19884, 1999.

2. Rogers, M. A.; Winter, H.; Langbein, L.; Krieg, T.; Schweizer,
J.: Genomic characterization of the human type I cuticular hair keratin
hHa2 and identification of an adjacent novel type I hair keratin gene
hHa5. J. Invest. Derm. 107: 633-638, 1996.

3. Rogers, M. A.; Winter, H.; Wolf, C.; Heck, M.; Schweizer, J.:
Characterization of a 190-kilobase pair domain of human type I hair
keratin genes. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 26683-26691, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patti M. Sherman - updated: 2/17/2000

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 6/30/1998

EDITED carol: 04/23/2008
carol: 3/26/2008
mgross: 2/21/2000
psherman: 2/17/2000
carol: 7/20/1998
carol: 7/8/1998

188070	TITLE *188070 THROMBOXANE A2 RECEPTOR, PLATELET; TBXA2R
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The TBXA2R gene encodes the thromboxane A2 receptor, which is a member
of the family of G protein-coupled receptors. It plays an essential role
in hemostasis by interacting with thromboxane A2 (TXA2) to induce
platelet aggregation (summary by Hirata et al., 1994). Thromboxane A2 is
an arachidonate metabolite that is a potent stimulator of platelet
aggregation and a constrictor of vascular and respiratory smooth
muscles. TXA2 has been implicated as a mediator in diseases such as
myocardial infarction, stroke, and bronchial asthma (summary by Ushikubi
et al., 1989).

CLONING

Ushikubi et al. (1989) purified the cell surface receptor for TXA2,
using a stable analog of TXA2. Using an oligonucleotide probe
corresponding to its partial amino acid sequence, Hirata et al. (1991)
obtained a cDNA encoding the receptor from human placenta and a partial
cDNA clone from cultured human megakaryocytic leukemia cells. The
placenta cDNA encoded a protein of 343 amino acids with 7 putative
transmembrane domains. The protein expressed in COS-7 cells bound drugs
with affinities identical to those of the platelet receptor, and that
expressed in Xenopus oocytes opened calcium-ion-activated chloride
channels on agonist stimulation. Northern blot analysis and nucleotide
sequences of the 2 clones suggested that an identical form of
thromboxane A2 receptor is present in platelets and vascular tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Two isoforms of the human TXA2 receptor have been cloned: one from
placenta and the other from endothelium, referred to as TXR-alpha and
TXR-beta, respectively. These isoforms differ only in their C-terminal
tails. Hirata et al. (1996) found that both isoforms are present in
human platelets. The 2 isoforms expressed in cultured cells show similar
ligand-binding characteristics and phospholipase C activation but
oppositely regulated adenylyl cyclase activity: TXR-alpha activates
adenylyl cyclase, while TXR-beta inhibits it.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nusing et al. (1993) reported that the TBXA2R gene is present in the
genome in single copy, spans over 15 kb, and contains 3 exons divided by
2 introns. Intron 1 exists in the 5-prime noncoding region, 83 bp
upstream from the ATG start site, and is 6.3 kb long. Intron 2, with a
length of 4.3 kb, is located at the end of the sixth transmembrane
region, thereby separating it from the downstream coding sequences,
including the seventh transmembrane region and the 3-prime untranslated
region. By rapid amplification of 5-prime cDNA ends, Nusing et al.
(1993) determined transcription initiation sites starting in 2 different
putative promoter regions.

MAPPING

Using transcribed 3-prime untranslated DNA sequence polymorphisms,
Schwengel et al. (1993) localized the TBXA2R gene to chromosome 19 by
PCR amplification in a series of monochromosomal human/rodent somatic
cell hybrids. Linkage mapping placed TBXA2R closest to D19S120, with a
maximum lod = 19.55 at theta = 0.05 in the CEPH panel of DNAs.
Multipoint linkage analysis placed TBXA2R between the markers D19S120
and PMS207 on the telomeric end of 19p13.3.

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization of cloned genomic DNA to
metaphase chromosomes, Nusing et al. (1993) demonstrated that the TBXA2R
gene is located on 19p13.3. The map position was confirmed by Duncan et
al. (1995), who also noted minor in situ hybridization signals at
12q24.3-q24.4 and 15q25-q26.

Taketo et al. (1994) used the mouse homolog of the human TXA2 receptor
as a cDNA probe to map the gene in the mouse (Tbxa2r) to chromosome 10,
using a panel of DNA samples from an interspecific cross. The best gene
order suggested that TBXA2R is located distal to Myb and proximal to
Pah.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with an autosomal dominant
platelet-type bleeding disorder (BDPLT13; 614009) characterized by
defective platelet response to TBXA2, Hirata et al. (1994) identified a
heterozygous mutation in the TBXA2R gene (R60L; 188070.0001).

Mumford et al. (2010) concluded that heterozygosity for mutations in the
TBXA2R gene is sufficient to cause abnormal platelet functional
responses in vitro, but is insufficient to cause clinically significant
dysfunction in vivo.

Unoki et al. (2000) surveyed 29 possible candidate genes for bronchial
asthma for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genomic DNA from
Japanese patients. They identified 33 SNPs, only 4 of which had
previously been reported, among 14 of these genes. They also performed
association studies using 585 bronchial asthma patients and 343 normal
controls for these SNPs. Only 1 of the 33 SNPs showed a positive
association with bronchial asthma: a 924T-C polymorphism in the TBXA2R
gene, seen most often in adult patients.

ANIMAL MODEL

The actions of TXA2 are mediated by G protein-coupled
thromboxane-prostanoid (TP) receptors. TP receptors have been implicated
in the pathogenesis of cardiovascular diseases. To investigate the
physiologic functions of TP receptors, Thomas et al. (1998) generated TP
receptor-deficient mice by gene targeting. Tp -/- animals reproduced and
survived in expected numbers, and their major organ systems were normal.
Thromboxane agonist binding could not be detected in tissues from Tp -/-
mice. Bleeding times were prolonged in these mice and their platelets
did not aggregate after exposure to TXA2 agonists. Aggregation responses
after collagen stimulation were also delayed, although ADP-stimulated
aggregation was normal. In summary, Tp -/- mice had a mild bleeding
disorder and altered vascular responses to TXA2 and arachidonic acid.
Their studies suggested that most of the recognized functions of TXA2
are mediated by the single known Tp gene locus.

Cheng et al. (2002) demonstrated that injury-induced vascular
proliferation and platelet activation are enhanced in mice that are
genetically deficient in the PGI2 receptor (600022) but are depressed in
mice genetically deficient in the TXA2 receptor or treated with a TXA2
receptor antagonist. The augmented response to vascular injury was
abolished in mice deficient in both receptors. Thus, PGI2 modulates
platelet-vascular interactions in vivo and specifically limits the
response to TXA2. This interplay may help explain the adverse
cardiovascular effects associated with selective COX2 inhibitors, which,
unlike aspirin and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs, inhibit PGI2 but
not TXA2.

Kabashima et al. (2003) used mice deficient in Tbxa2r to investigate the
role of TBXA2R in the immune system. They showed that Tbxa2r, which is
highly expressed in mouse spleen and thymus, is expressed on naive but
not memory T cells. Tbxa2r -/- mice were apparently normal, but they
developed marked cervical lymphadenopathy with disruption of the zonal
structure of lymph nodes with age. Contact hypersensitivity was also
enhanced in these mice. Treating cells with a TBXA2R agonist increased
random chemokinesis of naive T cells and inhibited adhesion of dendritic
cells (DCs) to T cells and DC-dependent T-cell proliferation. Kabashima
et al. (2003) concluded that TBXA2-TBXA2R signaling negatively regulates
DC-T cell interactions.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BLEEDING DISORDER, PLATELET-TYPE, 13, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
TBXA2R, ARG60LEU

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with autosomal dominant
platelet-type bleeding disorder-13 (BDPLT13; 614009) characterized by
defective platelet response to TBXA2, Hirata et al. (1994) identified a
heterozygous 179G-T transversion in the TBXA2R gene, resulting in an
arg60-to-leu (R60L) substitution in the first cytoplasmic loop. The
proband in 1 family was homozygous for the mutation and had a slightly
more severe phenotype. The families had been reported by Ushikubi et al.
(1987) and Fuse et al. (1993), respectively, who demonstrated impaired
platelet aggregation responses to TBXA2 and its analogs, despite a
normal response to thrombin. Expression of the mutant receptor in
Chinese hamster ovary cells by Hirata et al. (1994) showed decreased
agonist-induced second messenger formation despite normal ligand binding
affinities. Dominant inheritance of the disorder suggested that the
mutation produces a dominant-negative effect.

Hirata et al. (1996) showed that the R60L mutant of the TXR-alpha
isoform of the human TXA2 receptor, which had been shown to impair
phospholipase C activation, also impaired adenylyl cyclase stimulation,
whereas TXR-beta with the same mutation retained its activity to inhibit
adenylyl cyclase.

.0002
BLEEDING DISORDER, PLATELET-TYPE, 13, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
TBXA2R, ASP304ASN

In a 14-year-old white boy with mild mucocutaneous platelet-type
bleeding disorder-13 (BDPLT13; 614009) characterized by defective
platelet response to TBXA2, Mumford et al. (2010) identified a
heterozygous 910G-A transversion in the TBXA2R gene, resulting in an
asp304-to-asn (D304N) substitution in transmembrane domain 7. The
patient's father, who also carried the mutation, had no bleeding
symptoms. In vitro studies of platelets from both the boy and his father
showed impaired aggregation and ATP secretion responses to arachidonic
acid and a TBXA2R agonist. In vitro functional expression studies in CHO
cells showed normal surface membrane expression of the mutant protein,
but there was significantly decreased binding and a significant
reduction (more than 85%) in intracellular calcium levels in response to
a TBXA2R agonist compared to wildtype, consistent with a loss of
function. Noting the phenotypic differences between the boy and his
father, Mumford et al. (2010) speculated that the clinical bleeding
phenotype demonstrated by the boy represented the effect of the
heterozygous D304N mutation combined with an additional unidentified
hemostatic defect. Mumford et al. (2010) concluded that heterozygosity
for mutations in the TBXA2R gene is sufficient to cause abnormal
platelet functional responses in vitro, but is insufficient to cause
clinically significant dysfunction in vivo.

.0003
BLEEDING DISORDER, PLATELET-TYPE, 13, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
TBXA2R, VAL241GLY

In an individual whose platelets showed defective response to TBXA2 in
vitro, consistent with susceptibility to platelet-type bleeding
disorder-13 (BDPLT13; 614009), Flamm et al. (2012) identified a
heterozygous T-to-G transversion in exon 2 of the TBXA2R gene, resulting
in a val241-to-gly (V241G) substitution at a highly conserved residue in
the third intracellular loop of the receptor near the inner membrane. In
vitro functional expression studies showed normal expression of the
mutant receptor, but impaired calcium mobilization and aggregation in
response to a TBXA2 agonist. Because G protein signaling through ADP was
normal, Flamm et al. (2012) concluded that the mutation caused abnormal
coupling of TBXA2R to Gq, resulting in impaired calcium mobilization.
The individual's platelets also showed impaired response to the
anticoagulants aspirin and indomethacin, which inhibit the production of
thromboxane A2. The individual had no self-reported bleeding tendencies.

REFERENCE 1. Cheng, Y.; Austin, S. C.; Rocca, B.; Koller, B. H.; Coffman, T.
M.; Grosser, T.; Lawson, J. A.; FitzGerald, G. A.: Role of prostacyclin
in the cardiovascular response to thromboxane A2. Science 296: 539-541,
2002.

2. Duncan, A. M. V.; Anderson, L. L.; Funk, C. D.; Abramovitz, M.;
Adam, M.: Chromosomal localization of the human prostanoid receptor
gene family. Genomics 25: 740-742, 1995.

3. Flamm, M. H.; Colace, T. V.; Chatterjee, M. S.; Jing, H.; Zhou,
S.; Jaeger, D.; Brass, L. F.; Sinno, T.; Diamond, S. L.: Multiscale
prediction of patient-specific platelet function under flow. Blood 120:
190-198, 2012.

4. Fuse, I.; Mito, M.; Hattori, A.; Higuchi, W.; Shibata, A.; Ushikubi,
F.; Okuma, M.; Yahata, K.: Defective signal transduction induced
by thromboxane A2 in a patient with a mild bleeding disorder: impaired
phospholipase C activation despite normal phospholipase A2 activation. Blood 81:
994-1000, 1993.

5. Hirata, M.; Hayashi, Y.; Ushikubi, F.; Yokota, Y.; Kageyama, R.;
Nakanishi, S.; Narumiya, S.: Cloning and expression of cDNA for a
human thromboxane A2 receptor. Nature 349: 617-620, 1991.

6. Hirata, T.; Kakizuka, A.; Ushikubi, F.; Fuse, I.; Okuma, M.; Narumiya,
S.: Arg60-to-leu mutation of the human thromboxane A2 receptor in
a dominantly inherited bleeding disorder. J. Clin. Invest. 94: 1662-1667,
1994.

7. Hirata, T.; Ushikubi, F.; Kakizuka, A.; Okuma, M.; Narumiya, S.
: Two thromboxane A(2) receptor isoforms in human platelets: opposite
coupling to adenylyl cyclase with different sensitivity to arg60-to-leu
mutation. J. Clin. Invest. 97: 949-956, 1996.

8. Kabashima, K.; Murata, T.; Tanaka, H.; Matsuoka, T.; Sakata, D.;
Yoshida, N.; Katagiri, K.; Kinashi, T.; Tanaka, T.; Miyasaka, M.;
Nagai, H.; Ushikubi, F.; Narumiya, S.: Thromboxane A2 modulates interaction
of dendritic cells and T cells and regulates acquired immunity. Nature
Immun. 4: 694-701, 2003.

9. Mumford, A. D.; Dawood, B. B.; Daly, M. E.; Murden, S. L.; Williams,
M. D.; Protty, M. B.; Spalton, J. C.; Wheatley, M.; Mundell, S. J.;
Watson, S. P.: A novel thromboxane A2 receptor D304N variant that
abrogates ligand binding in a patient with a bleeding diathesis. Blood 115:
363-369, 2010. Note: Erratum: Blood 119: 4092 only, 2012.

10. Nusing, R. M.; Hirata, M.; Kakizuka, A.; Eki, T.; Ozawa, K.; Narumiya,
S.: Characterization and chromosomal mapping of the human thromboxane
A2 receptor gene. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 25253-25259, 1993.

11. Schwengel, D. A.; Nouri, N.; Meyers, D. A.; Levitt, R. C.: Linkage
mapping of the human thromboxane A2 receptor (TBXA2R) to chromosome
19p13.3 using transcribed 3-prime untranslated DNA sequence polymorphisms. Genomics 18:
212-215, 1993.

12. Taketo, M.; Rochelle, J. M.; Sugimoto, Y.; Namba, T.; Honda, A.;
Negishi, M.; Ichikawa, A.; Narumiya, S.; Seldin, M. F.: Mapping of
the genes encoding mouse thromboxane A2 receptor and prostaglandin
E receptor subtypes EP2 and EP3. Genomics 19: 585-588, 1994.

13. Thomas, D. W.; Mannon, R. B.; Mannon, P. J.; Latour, A.; Oliver,
J. A.; Hoffman, M.; Smithies, O.; Koller, B. H.; Coffman, T. M.:
Coagulation defects and altered hemodynamic responses in mice lacking
receptors for thromboxane A(2). J. Clin. Invest. 102: 1994-2001,
1998.

14. Unoki, M.; Furuta, S.; Onouchi, Y.; Watanabe, O.; Doi, S.; Fujiwara,
H.; Miyatake, A.; Fujita, K.; Tamari, M.; Nakamura, Y.: Association
studies of 33 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 29 candidate
genes for bronchial asthma: positive association a T924C polymorphism
in the thromboxane A2 receptor gene. Hum. Genet. 106: 440-446, 2000.

15. Ushikubi, F.; Nakajima, M.; Hirata, M.; Okuma, M.; Fujiwara, M.;
Narumiya, S.: Purification of the thromboxane A2/prostaglandin H2
receptor from human blood platelets.. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 16496-16501,
1989.

16. Ushikubi, F.; Okuma, M.; Kanaji, K.; Sugiyama, T.; Ogorochi, T.;
Narumiya, S.; Uchino, H.: Hemorrhagic thrombocytopathy with platelet
thromboxane A2 abnormality: defective signal transduction with normal
binding activity. Thromb. Haemost. 57: 158-164, 1987.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/2/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/8/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/5/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/12/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/6/1991

EDITED carol: 01/08/2013
ckniffin: 1/2/2013
carol: 9/19/2012
carol: 9/14/2011
ckniffin: 9/8/2011
mgross: 3/17/2004
alopez: 7/28/2003
mgross: 6/5/2003
alopez: 5/8/2002
terry: 5/8/2002
carol: 5/18/2000
terry: 5/12/2000
carol: 12/28/1998
terry: 12/23/1998
terry: 12/18/1998
dkim: 9/11/1998
mark: 3/26/1996
terry: 3/20/1996
mark: 4/21/1995
carol: 11/10/1994
terry: 11/9/1994
carol: 11/30/1993
carol: 3/17/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992

