300116	TITLE *300116 MATURE T-CELL PROLIFERATION 1; MTCP1
;;C6.1B;;
p13
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Stern et al. (1993) noted that T-cell lymphoproliferative diseases often
result from chromosomal translocations involving the T-cell receptor
genes and genes that are thought to favor proliferation by virtue of
their abnormal expression following rearrangement. Several genes have
been identified at or near translocation breaks in immature T-cell
leukemias. Stern et al. (1993) identified a novel gene on Xq28
associated with mature T-cell proliferation. They studied 2 patients,
one with benign clonal proliferation and another with a T-cell
prolymphocytic leukemia, who both had the rare but recurrent t(X;14)
translocation and a common Xq28 breakpoint. The gene, which the authors
symbolized MTCP1, was abnormally transcribed in T cells from both
patients. MTCP1 uses alternate splicing and appears to have 2 short open
reading frames.

Soulier et al. (1994) cloned a splice variant of mouse Mtcp1 that
encodes a deduced 68-amino acid protein, which they called p8. They also
identified possible splice variants that shorten the 5-prime UTR without
modifying the 68-codon ORF. Mouse p8 shares 88% identity with human p8,
which is also 68 amino acids long. Western blot analysis detected
variable p8 expression in several T-cell lines, non-T leukemia and
lymphoblastoid cell lines, and COS-7 cells. A t(X;14)-associated
leukemia showed overexpression of p8 compared with normal peripheral
blood lymphocytes (PBLs). Mouse p8 was expressed in a cytoplasmic
granular pattern in transfected COS-7 cells.

Madani et al. (1996) stated that p8 MTCP1 is a mitochondrial protein. By
PCR, they cloned a splice variant of MTCP1 that encodes a deduced
107-amino acid protein, which they called p13 MTCP1. Human p13 MTCP1
shares no similarity with p8 MTCP1, but it shares 95% amino acid
identity with mouse p13 Mtcp1 and 39% identity with human TCL1 (TCL1A;
186960). Western blot analysis detected p13 MTCP1 at an apparent
molecular mass of 13 kD in transfected COS-7 cells. The p13 MTCP1
protein was weakly expressed in leukemia cells bearing the t(X;14)
translocation, but not in other leukemia cells, normal PBLs, or
activated lymphocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Soulier et al. (1994) determined that the MTCP1 gene contains at least 7
exons. The 5-prime UTR contains a long GC-rich sequence.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Stern et al. (1993) confirmed the localization
of the MTCP1 gene to Xq28.

GENE FUNCTION

Gritti et al. (1998) showed that overexpression of human p13 MTCP1 in
lymphoid tissue of mice resulted in late-onset (after 15 months) T-cell
prolymphocytic leukemia. Western blot analysis suggested that the level
of transgene expression correlated with tumor incidence.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 3 unrelated families with an X-linked recessive
syndromic form of moyamoya disease (MYMY4; 300845), Miskinyte et al.
(2011) identified 3 different deletions on chromosome Xq28. The critical
region of overlap was a 3.4-kb region including exon 1 of the MTCP1 gene
and the first 3 exons of BRCC3 (300617), resulting in loss of BRCC3 and
MTCP1NB expression in patient lymphoblastoid cell lines. Morpholino
knockdown of Brcc3 in zebrafish resulted in defective angiogenesis that
could be rescued by endothelial expression of Brcc3, suggesting that
loss of BRCC3 function was responsible for the human disorder. The
phenotype is a multisystem disorder characterized by moyamoya disease,
short stature, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, and facial dysmorphism.
Other variable features include dilated cardiomyopathy and premature
graying of the hair. Miskinyte et al. (2011) noted that some of the
features of the disorder were reminiscent of chromosome breakage
syndromes.

REFERENCE 1. Gritti, C.; Dastot, H.; Soulier, J.; Janin, A.; Daniel, M.-T.;
Madani, A.; Grimber, G.; Briand, P.; Sigaux, F.; Stern, M.-H.: Transgenic
mice for MTCP1 develop T-cell prolymphocytic leukemia. Blood 92:
368-373, 1998.

2. Madani, A.; Choukroun, V.; Soulier, J.; Cacheux, V.; Claisse, J.-F.;
Valensi, F.; Daliphard, S.; Cazin, B.; Levy, V.; Leblond, V.; Daniel,
M.-T.; Sigaux, F.; Stern, M.-H.: Expression of p13(MTCP1) is restricted
to mature T-cell proliferations with t(X;14) translocations. Blood 87:
1923-1927, 1996.

3. Miskinyte, S.; Butler, M. G.; Herve, D.; Sarret, C.; Nicolino,
M.; Petralia, J. D.; Bergametti, F.; Arnould, M.; Pham, V. N.; Gore,
A. V.; Spengos, K.; Gazal, S.; Woimant, F.; Steinberg, G. K.; Weinstein,
B. M.; Tournier-Lasserve, E.: Loss of BRCC3 deubiquitinating enzyme
leads to abnormal angiogenesis and is associated with syndromic moyamoya. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 88: 718-728, 2011.

4. Soulier, J.; Madani, A.; Cacheux, V.; Rosenzwajg, M.; Sigaux, F.;
Stern, M.-H.: The MTCP-1/c6.1B gene encodes for a cytoplasmic 8 kD
protein overexpressed in T cell leukemia bearing a t(X;14) translocation. Oncogene 9:
3565-3570, 1994.

5. Stern, M.-H.; Soulier, J.; Rosenzwajg, M.; Nakahara, K.; Canki-Klain,
N.; Aurias, A.; Sigaux, F.; Kirsch, I. R.: MTCP-1: a novel gene on
the human chromosome Xq28 translocated to the T cell receptor alpha/delta
locus in mature T cell proliferations. Oncogene 8: 2475-2483, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/16/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/6/2011

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/20/1998

EDITED mgross: 08/30/2011
carol: 8/11/2011
terry: 6/16/2011
carol: 6/14/2011
carol: 6/7/2011
ckniffin: 6/6/2011
carol: 6/30/2010
wwang: 10/16/2006
mark: 1/20/1998

607003	TITLE *607003 THYMIC STROMAL LYMPHOPOIETIN; TSLP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Several cytokines, including interleukin-7 (IL7; 146660), play a key
role in the development of B lymphocytes. TSLP is a member of this
family of B cell-stimulating factors.

CLONING

By EST and genomic database screening for sequences similar to IL7,
followed by screening a lung fibroblast sarcoma cDNA library, Reche et
al. (2001) obtained a cDNA encoding TSLP. The deduced 159-amino acid
protein, which is only 43% identical to mouse Tslp, contains a
28-residue signal sequence, 6 cysteines, and 2 N-glycosylation sites.
SDS-PAGE analysis showed expression of a 23-kD protein, larger than the
predicted 15 kD, suggesting that TSLP is glycosylated. PCR analysis of a
panel of cDNA libraries and cultured cell lines indicated that
expression of a 1.3-kb TSLP transcript may be restricted to a few lung
libraries. Reche et al. (2001) also identified TSLP receptor, which is
composed of TSLPR (CRLF2; 300357) and IL7R (146661) subunits. Dendritic
cells (DCs) and monocytes coexpress IL7R and TSLPR.

Quentmeier et al. (2001) also cloned and characterized TSLP. They noted
the presence of 7 basic C-terminal amino acids (KKRRKRK) in the protein
and that 6 of the 7 cysteines in the mouse protein (those involved in
disulfide bond formation) are conserved in human, whereas the sites for
N-glycosylation are distinct. Northern blot analysis revealed wide
expression of an approximately 1.1-kb transcript, with highest levels in
heart, liver, testis, and prostate.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Quentmeier et al. (2001) mapped the
TSLP gene to chromosome 5 in a region showing homology of synteny to
mouse chromosome 18, where the mouse Tslp gene is localized.

GENE FUNCTION

Reche et al. (2001) showed that incubation of DCs or monocytes with TSLP
enhanced the expression of CCL17 (601520), CCL18 (603757), CCL22
(602957), and CCL19 (602227). IL7, on the other hand, induced expression
of CCL17, CCL22, and CCL19, but also CXCL8 (146930), CXCL7 (121010),
CXCL5 (600324), CXCL1 (155730), CXCL2 (139110), and CXCL3 (139111).
Functional analysis indicated that TSLP enhances the DC maturation
process, as evidenced by upregulation of DC markers and costimulatory
molecules and stronger T-cell proliferation.

By screening myeloid cell lines, Quentmeier et al. (2001) established
that an acute myeloid leukemia line, MUTZ-3, responds by proliferating
in response to TSLP. TSLP also inhibited apoptosis in these cells.
Proliferation in response to TSLP could not be attributed to the
production of other growth factors tested and could be inhibited by
relatively high concentrations of anti-IL7R. TSLP, like IL7, stimulated
phosphorylation of STAT5 (601511), but unlike IL7, it did not activate
JAK3 (600173). TSLP did not phosphorylate mitogen-activated protein
kinases (e.g., ERK1; 601795).

By flow cytometric analysis, Soumelis et al. (2002) showed that
TSLP-activated DCs (TSLP-DCs) express higher levels of HLA-DR and DCLAMP
(605883) than do nonactivated or IL7-activated DCs, and that TSLP-DCs
induce marked proliferation and expansion of allogeneic naive CD4
(186940)-positive T cells. Quantitative mRNA screening and ELISA
analysis showed that TSLP-DCs do not produce detectable proinflammatory
cytokines, but do produce high levels of TARC (CCL17) and MDC (CCL22)
chemokines, which preferentially attract CCR4 (604836)-expressing Th2
lymphocytes. TSLP-DCs induced CD4 cells to produce high amounts of IL13
(147683), IL5 (147850), and the proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis
factor (TNF; 191160), but only low amounts of IL10 (124092) and
gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570). RT-PCR analysis did not detect TSLP in
most hemopoietic cells, the exception being mast cells. Keratinocytes,
epithelial cells, smooth muscle cells, and lung fibroblasts also
expressed high levels of TSLP. Within tonsils, highest levels were in
crypt epithelial cells. Soumelis et al. (2002) suggested that TSLP may
contribute to constitutive inflammation in this tissue and sporadic
inflammation in squamous epithelium. Immunohistochemical analysis of
allergic inflammatory tissue showed high expression of TSLP in
keratinocytes of acute and chronic atopic dermatitis lesions, but no
expression in normal skin. Strong TSLP expression in atopic dermatitis
was associated with the disappearance of langerin (604862)-positive
Langerhans cells within the epidermis and the concurrent appearance of
many DCLAMP-activated DCs within the dermis, many of which expressed
langerin. Soumelis et al. (2002) proposed that TSLP expression by
keratinocytes in atopic dermatitis lesions may contribute directly to
the activation of Langerhans cells, which may migrate into the dermis
and then the draining lymph nodes where they can prime allergen-specific
Th2 responses.

Watanabe et al. (2005) reported that human Hassall corpuscles express
TSLP. Human TSLP activates thymic CD11c+ (151510) dendritic cells to
express high levels of CD80 (112203) and CD86 (601020). These
TSLP-conditioned cells are then able to induce the proliferation and
differentiation of CD4+/CD8-(186910)/CD25-(147730) thymic T cells into
CD4+/CD25+/FOXP3+ (300292) regulatory T cells. This induction depends on
peptide-MHC class II interactions and the presence of CD80 and CD86 as
well as IL2 (147680). Immunohistochemistry studies revealed that
CD25+/CTLA4+(123890) regulatory T cells associate in the thymic medulla
with activated or mature dendritic cells and TSLP-expressing Hassall
corpuscles. Watanabe et al. (2005) concluded that Hassall corpuscles
have a critical role in dendritic cell-mediated secondary positive
selection of medium to high affinity self-reactive T cells, leading to
the generation of CD4+/CD25+ regulatory T cells within the thymus.

Siracusa et al. (2011) demonstrated that TSLP promotes systemic
basophilia, that disruption of TSLP-TSLPR interactions results in
defective basophil responses, and that TSLPR-sufficient basophils can
restore TH2-cell-dependent immunity in vivo. TSLP acted directly on bone
marrow-resident progenitors to promote basophil responses selectively.
Critically, TSLP could elicit basophil responses in both IL3
(147740)-IL3R (see 308385)-sufficient and -deficient environments, and
genomewide transcriptional profiling and functional analyses identified
heterogeneity between TSLP-elicited versus IL3-elicited basophils.
Furthermore, activated human basophils expressed TSLPR, and basophils
isolated from eosinophilic esophagitis (see 610247) patients were
distinct from classical basophils. Siracusa et al. (2011) concluded that
collectively, their studies identified previously unrecognized
heterogeneity within the basophil cell lineage and indicated that
expression of TSLP may influence susceptibility to multiple allergic
diseases by regulating basophil hematopoiesis and eliciting a population
of functionally distinct basophils that promote TH2 cytokine-mediated
inflammation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the TSLP
gene and eosinophilic esophagitis, see EOE2 (613412).

ANIMAL MODEL

Using mice deficient in Il7r and/or the common cytokine receptor gamma
chain, Il2rg (308380), Vobhenrich et al. (2003) determined the cytokines
responsible for fetal and perinatal lymphopoiesis in the absence of Il7.
Fetal and perinatal B-cell lymphopoiesis occurred in the bone marrow of
Il2rg -/- mice until 12 weeks of age, but it was absent in Il7r -/- mice
by 4 weeks of age. Lymphopoiesis in Il7r -/- mice was restricted to
fetal liver and was dependent on the presence of Tslp. The residual
lymphopoiesis that occurred in Il7r -/- mice was dependent on Flk2
(136351). Vobhenrich et al. (2003) concluded that TSLP is the main
factor driving IL7-independent fetal and perinatal lymphopoiesis,
although FLK2 is involved.

Using a mouse model of allergic skin inflammation elicited by repeated
epicutaneous (EC) sensitization with ovalbumin (OVA) to tape-stripped
skin, which mimics the scratching-inflicted injury associated with
atopic dermatitis (see 603165), He et al. (2008) found that Tslpr -/-
mice had reduced inflammation, with fewer eosinophils and local Th2
cytokine expression, but unchanged splenocyte secretion of these
cytokines. Addition of Tslp significantly enhanced Th2 cytokine
secretion in vitro by targeting Tlspr on antigen-specific T cells.
Intradermal injection of anti-Tlsp blocked the development of allergic
skin inflammation after EC antigen challenge of OVA-immunized wildtype
mice. He et al. (2008) proposed that TLSP is essential for
antigen-driven Th2 cytokine secretion by skin-infiltrating effector T
cells.

REFERENCE 1. He, R.; Oyoshi, M. K.; Garibyan, L.; Kumar, L.; Ziegler, S. F.;
Geha, R. S.: TSLP acts on infiltrating effector T cells to drive
allergic skin inflammation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 11875-11880,
2008.

2. Quentmeier, H.; Drexler, H. G.; Fleckenstein, D.; Zaborski, M.;
Armstrong, A.; Sims, J. E.; Lyman, S. D.: Cloning of human thymic
stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP) and signaling mechanisms leading to proliferation. Leukemia 15:
1286-1292, 2001.

3. Reche, P. A.; Soumelis, V.; Gorman, D. M.; Clifford, T.; Liu, M.;
Travis, M.; Zurawski, S. M.; Johnston, J.; Liu, Y.-J.; Spits, H.;
de Waal Malefyt, R.; Kastelein, R. A.; Bazan, J. F.: Human thymic
stromal lymphopoietin preferentially stimulates myeloid cells. J.
Immun. 167: 336-343, 2001.

4. Siracusa, M. C.; Saenz, S. A.; Hill, D. A.; Kim, B. S.; Headley,
M. B.; Doering, T. A.; Wherry, E. J.; Jessup, H. K.; Siegel, L. A.;
Kambayashi, T.; Dudek, E. C.; Kubo, M.; Cianferoni, A.; Spergel, J.
M.; Ziegler, S. F.; Comeau, M. R.; Artis, D.: TSLP promotes interleukin-3-independent
basophil haematopoiesis and type 2 inflammation. Nature 477: 229-233,
2011.

5. Soumelis, V.; Reche, P. A.; Kanzler, H.; Yuan, W.; Edward, G.;
Homey, B.; Gilliet, M.; Ho, S.; Antonenko, S.; Lauerma, A.; Smith,
K.; Gorman, D.; Zurawski, S.; Abrams, J.; Menon, S.; McClanahan, T.;
de Waal-Malefyt, R.; Bazan, F.; Kastelein, R. A.; Liu, Y.-J.: Human
epithelial cells trigger dendritic cell-mediated allergic inflammation
by producing TSLP. Nature Immun. 3: 673-680, 2002.

6. Vobhenrich, C. A. J.; Cumano, A.; Muller, W.; Di Santo, J. P.;
Vieira, P.: Thymic stromal-derived lymphopoietin distinguishes fetal
from adult B cell development. Nature Immun. 4: 773-779, 2003.

7. Watanabe, N.; Wang, Y.-H.; Lee, H. K.; Ito, T.; Wang, Y.-H.; Cao,
W.; Liu, Y.-J.: Hassall's corpuscles instruct dendritic cells to
induce CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells in human thymus. Nature 436:
1181-1185, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/21/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/14/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/16/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/10/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/10/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/11/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/31/2002

EDITED alopez: 09/22/2011
alopez: 9/22/2011
terry: 9/21/2011
wwang: 5/18/2010
terry: 5/14/2010
mgross: 4/17/2009
terry: 4/16/2009
carol: 9/9/2008
alopez: 10/12/2005
terry: 10/10/2005
mgross: 9/10/2003
alopez: 7/26/2002
mgross: 6/11/2002
mgross: 5/31/2002

603864	TITLE *603864 COPPER CHAPERONE FOR SUPEROXIDE DISMUTASE; CCS
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Copper (Cu) is required for aerobic life and yet, paradoxically, is
highly toxic. This apparent contradiction has been rationalized by
assuming that Cu, like other redox-active metals, is sequestered in
nonreactive forms as it is transported into cells and moves through
cellular compartments. Culotta et al. (1997) determined that one such Cu
chaperone protein, Lys7, specifically delivers Cu to copper/zinc
superoxide dismutase (Sod1; 147450) in S. cerevisiae. By searching EST
databases, they identified cDNAs encoding the human Lys7 homolog, which
they named CCS (copper chaperone for SOD1). The predicted 274-amino acid
human protein is 28% identical to Lys7. CCS complemented a yeast Lys7
mutation, demonstrating that CCS is a functional homolog of Lys7.
Northern blot analysis revealed that CCS was expressed as a 1.2-kb mRNA
in all tissues and cell lines tested.

MAPPING

Bartnikas et al. (2000) mapped the CCS gene to chromosome 11q13 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. They mapped the mouse Ccs gene to
the proximal or centromeric end of chromosome 9 by haplotype analysis of
a backcross panel.

GENE FUNCTION

Casareno et al. (1998) found that the region of CCS encompassing amino
acids 86-234 shares 47% identity with human SOD1. The residues of SOD1
identical to those of CCS include all of the known Cu and zinc ligands,
the dimerization interface, and most of the amino acid residues mutated
in familial ALS (105400). Binding assays and coimmunoprecipitation
studies indicated that SOD1 and CCS directly interact in vitro and in
vivo via the homologous domains in each protein. Immunofluorescence
analysis experiments showed that CCS and SOD1 were distributed in an
identical pattern throughout the cytoplasm and nucleus of mammalian
cells. The authors proposed that Cu delivery to SOD1 is mediated via a
direct interaction with CCS.

Rae et al. (1999) demonstrated that the yeast Lys7 gene product, yCCS,
activates Sod1 through direct insertion of the Cu cofactor. They found
that the concentration of intracellular free Cu is limited to less than
one free Cu ion per cell, suggesting that a pool of free Cu ions is not
used in physiologic activation of metalloenzymes. Instead, Cu-dependent
enzymes require accessory factors, such as the metallochaperone CCS, to
compete with chelators and processes that sequester essentially all
intracellular free Cu.

Casareno et al. (1998) demonstrated that CCS interacts not only with
wildtype SOD1 but also with SOD1 containing the common missense mutation
resulting in familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS), A4V
(147450.0012), which is responsible for almost 50% of SOD1 mutations in
FALS cases. The findings revealed a common mechanism whereby different
SOD1 FALS mutants may result in neuronal injury and suggested a novel
therapeutic approach in patients affected by this fatal disease. The
delivery of copper by CCS to a target protein either unable or less able
to incorporate this metal would inevitably lead to copper-mediated
toxicity. Such a model is consistent with the failure to observe FALS in
transgenic mice lacking SOD1, because under such circumstances no
CCS-SOD1 interaction, and thus no copper transfer, will occur.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Huppke et al. (2012) identified mutations in the SLC33A1 gene (603690)
in patients with an autosomal recessive disorder of congenital
cataracts, hearing loss, and neurodegeneration (CCHLND; 614482). One of
the patients, who had a nonsense mutation (603690.0004), was a Turkish
boy who had additional features not found in the other patients,
including neonatal hypotonia, hypoglycemia, and a pericardial effusion.
In this patient, Huppke et al. (2012) later identified a homozygous
missense mutation in the CCS gene (603864.0001) and suggested that a
defect in copper homeostasis or SOD1 deficiency may have contributed to
the phenotype.

ANIMAL MODEL

Wong et al. (2000) generated mice deficient in Ccs by targeted
disruption. Although the Ccs -/- mice were viable and possessed normal
levels of Sod1 protein, they revealed marked reductions in Sod1 activity
when compared with control littermates. Metabolic labeling with
copper-64 demonstrated that the reduction of Sod1 activity in Ccs -/-
mice was the direct result of impaired copper incorporation into Sod1
and that this effect was specific because no abnormalities were observed
in copper uptake, distribution, or incorporation into other copper
enzymes. Consistent with this loss of Sod1 activity, Ccs -/- mice showed
increased sensitivity to paraquat and reduced female fertility,
phenotypes that are characteristic of Sod1-deficient mice. Wong et al.
(2000) concluded that their results demonstrate the essential role of
any mammalian copper chaperone.

Subramaniam et al. (2002) bred Ccs heterozygotes to Sod1 heterozygotes
generate double-knockout mice. Motor neurons in Ccs -/- mice showed
increased rate of death after facial nerve axotomy, a response
documented for Sod1 -/- mice. Thus, CCS is necessary for the efficient
incorporation of copper into SOD1 in motor neurons. Although the absence
of Ccs led to a significant reduction in the amount of copper-loaded
mutant Sod1, it did not modify the onset and progression of motor neuron
disease in Sod1-mutant mice. Subramaniam et al. (2002) concluded that
CCS-dependent copper loading of mutant SOD1 plays no role in the
pathogenesis of motor neuron disease in these mouse models.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
CCS, ARG163TRP

This variant is classified as a variant of unknown significance because
its contribution to an early-onset neurodegenerative disorder has not
been confirmed.

In a Turkish boy, born of consanguineous parents, with an early-onset
neurodegenerative disorder resulting in death at age 3.5 years, Huppke
et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 487C-T transition in exon 5 of the
CCS gene, resulting in an arg163-to-trp (R163W) substitution at a highly
conserved residue in domain II. The patient had previously been reported
by Huppke et al. (2012) as having congenital cataracts, hearing loss,
and neurodegeneration (CCHLND; 614482) due to a homozygous truncating
mutation in the SLC33A1 gene (Y366X; 603690.0004). Complementation
studies in yeast lacking Ccs indicated that the mutant CCS protein
showed about 50% complementation compared to wildtype, and studies in
HeLa cells showed that the mutant CCS protein had decreased binding with
SOD1 (147450). Studies in patient fibroblasts showed that CCS protein
levels were about 40% of controls and that SOD1 (147450) enzyme activity
was significantly decreased. Patient fibroblasts also showed evidence of
the unfolded protein response, which may reflect cellular oxidative
stress. The patient with the CCS variant had additional symptoms not
present in the other patients with SLC33A1 mutations, including neonatal
hypotonia, hypoglycemia, and a pericardial effusion. At age 18 months,
he had rapid developmental regression and epilepsy with persistent
bilateral thalamic lesions on brain MRI. Huppke et al. (2012) suggested
that a defect in copper homeostasis or SOD1 deficiency may have
contributed to the phenotype in this patient. Direct DNA sequencing
excluded mutations in the CCS gene in 35 patients with developmental
delay and low serum copper and ceruloplasmin who did not have mutations
in the ATP7A (300011) or ATP7B (606882) genes.

REFERENCE 1. Bartnikas, T. B.; Waggoner, D. J.; Casareno, R. L. B.; Gaedigk,
R.; White, R. A.; Gitlin, J. D.: Chromosomal localization of CCS,
the copper chaperone for Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase. Mammalian Genome 11:
409-411, 2000.

2. Casareno, R. L. B.; Waggoner, D.; Gitlin, J. D.: The copper chaperone
CCS directly interacts with copper/zinc superoxide dismutase. J.
Biol. Chem. 273: 23625-23628, 1998.

3. Culotta, V. C.; Klomp, L. W. J.; Strain, J.; Casareno, R. L. B.;
Krems, B.; Gitlin, J. D.: The copper chaperone for superoxide dismutase. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 23469-23472, 1997.

4. Huppke, P.; Brendel, C.; Kalscheuer, V.; Korenke, G. C.; Marquardt,
I.; Freisinger, P.; Christodoulou, J.; Hillebrand, M.; Pitelet, G.;
Wilson, C.; Gruber-Sedlmayr, U.; Ullmann, R.; Haas, S.; Elpeleg, O.;
Nurnberg, G.; Nurnberg, P.; Dad, S.; Moller, L. B.; Kaler, S. G.;
Gartner, J.: Mutations in SLC33A1 cause a lethal autosomal-recessive
disorder with congenital cataracts, hearing loss, and low serum copper
and ceruloplasmin. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90: 61-68, 2012. Note: Erratum:
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90: 378 only, 2012.

5. Huppke, P.; Brendel, C.; Korenke, G. C.; Marquardt, I.; Donsante,
A.; Yi, L.; Hicks, J. D.; Steinbach, P. J.; Wilson, C.; Elpeleg, O.;
Moller, L. B.; Christodoulou, J.; Kaler, S. G.; Gartner, J.: Molecular
and biochemical characterization of a unique mutation in CCS, the
human copper chaperone to superoxide dismutase. Hum. Mutat. 33:
1207-1215, 2012.

6. Rae, T. D.; Schmidt, P. J.; Pufahl, R. A.; Culotta, V. C.; O'Halloran,
T. V.: Undetectable intracellular free copper: the requirement of
a copper chaperone for superoxide dismutase. Science 284: 805-808,
1999.

7. Subramaniam, J. R.; Lyons, W. E.; Liu, J.; Bartnikas, T. B.; Rothstein,
J.; Price, D. L.; Cleveland, D. W.; Gitlin, J. D.; Wong, P. C.: Mutant
SOD1 causes motor neuron disease independent of copper chaperone-mediated
copper loading. Nature Neurosci. 5: 301-307, 2002.

8. Wong, P. C.; Waggoner, D.; Subramaniam, J. R.; Tessarollo, L.;
Bartnikas, T. B.; Culotta, V. C.; Price, D. L.; Rothstein, J.; Gitlin,
J. D.: Copper chaperone for superoxide dismutase is essential to
activate mammalian Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97:
2886-2891, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/4/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/28/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/20/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/2/1999

EDITED carol: 07/26/2013
carol: 9/5/2012
ckniffin: 9/4/2012
carol: 12/13/2011
alopez: 4/12/2002
mgross: 3/29/2002
terry: 3/28/2002
carol: 5/25/2000
terry: 5/18/2000
jlewis: 9/29/1999
terry: 9/20/1999
carol: 7/26/1999
alopez: 6/2/1999

603023	TITLE *603023 IKAROS FAMILY ZINC FINGER 1; IKZF1
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN, SUBFAMILY 1A, MEMBER 1; ZNFN1A1;;
IKAROS; IK1;;
LYF1
IKAROS/BCL6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ikaros proteins are lymphoid-restricted zinc finger transcription
factors that are considered master regulators of lymphocyte
differentiation. Klug et al. (1998) noted that there are at least 8
alternatively spliced transcripts of the Ikaros gene that encode
isoforms with common N-terminal and C-terminal domains. By screening a
Jurkat T-cell cDNA library with a mouse Ikaros cDNA, Molnar et al.
(1996) isolated human Ikaros cDNAs. The deduced human and mouse Ikaros
proteins are 95% identical. RT-PCR of human thymus and peripheral blood
leukocyte mRNAs detected 6 Ikaros splicing variants which were expressed
at similar levels and ratios as the corresponding mouse leukocyte Ikaros
transcripts. The authors found that Ikaros proteins are conserved in
sequence composition and relative expression between human T cells and
mouse thymocytes. Northern blot analysis demonstrated the expression of
7.5- and 4.5-kb Ikaros transcripts in human thymus, spleen, and
peripheral blood leukocytes.

By PCR using primers based on a conserved nucleotide sequence of various
zinc finger proteins, Nietfeld and Meyerhans (1996) cloned human bone
marrow cDNAs encoding Ikaros, which they designated IK1. The deduced
519-amino acid protein is 93% identical to the mouse Ikaros isoform
1/LyF1 isoform VI and contains 4 N-terminal and 2 C-terminal zinc finger
domains. The authors detected 3 human mRNA species by Northern blot
analysis: a 4.4-kb transcript, which was prominent in peripheral blood
leukocytes; a 6.0-kb transcript, which was strongly expressed in spleen,
thymus, lymph node, and bone marrow; and a 7.0-kb transcript. They
stated that the human and mouse Ikaros genes have similar overall
transcription patterns.

Dijon et al. (2008) stated that the N-terminal Kruppel-like zinc finger
domain of Ikaros proteins is involved in DNA binding, while the
C-terminal zinc finger domain mediates homo- or heterodimerization with
other Ikaros proteins. Alternative splicing of exons 3 to 6 produces
Ikaros isoforms with 0 to 4 N-terminal zinc fingers, and those with at
least 3 efficiently bind DNA. The DNA-binding Ikaros isoforms include
IK1, IK2, IK3, and IKX, and IK4 can bind DNA on palindromic sequences.
IK5, IK6, IK7, and IK8 are considered dominant-negative isoforms due to
their capacity to bind other isoforms and their inefficiency in binding
DNA.

GENE FUNCTION

Harker et al. (2002) showed that Ikaros may play an important role in
CD4 (186940) versus CD8 (see CD8A; 186910) lineage commitment decisions
by demonstrating: (1) that it binds to regulatory elements in the
endogenous CD8A locus in vivo using thymocyte chromatin
immunoprecipitations; (2) that Ikaros suppresses position effect
variegation of transgenes driven by CD8 regulatory elements; and (3)
that mice with reduced levels of Ikaros and Aiolos (606221) show an
apparent increase in CD4 populations with immature phenotype, i.e.,
cells that fail to activate the CD8A gene. The authors proposed that
Ikaros family members function as activators of the CD8A gene and that
their associated activities are critical for appropriate chromatin
remodeling transitions during thymocyte differentiation and lineage
commitment.

Ezzat et al. (2005) demonstrated that Ikaros is expressed in the
hormone-producing pituitary corticomelanotroph cells of mice, where it
binds the proopiomelanocortin promoter and regulates endogenous gene
expression. Ikaros-null mice had contraction of the pituitary
corticomelanotroph population, reduced circulating adrenocorticotrophic
hormone levels, and adrenal glucocorticoid insufficiency. Hematopoietic
reconstitution failed to correct this hormonal deficit, but the
phenotype of reduced body weight and diminished survival was rescued by
systemic glucocorticoid-hormone administration. Ezzat et al. (2005)
concluded that Ikaros plays a role in orchestrating immune-endocrine
development and function.

Yap et al. (2005) identified Ikaros-binding elements in the 5-prime
flanking regions of pufferfish, mouse, and human STAT4 (600558).
Transactivation, electrophoretic mobility shift, and RNA interference
analyses showed that Ikaros bound to the STAT4 promoter and was involved
in regulation of STAT4 in human T cells.

Dijon et al. (2008) found that purified CD34 (142230)-positive human
cord blood cells and adult peripheral blood cells that were cultured
under erythroid conditions expressed the DNA-binding Ikaros isoforms IK1
through IK4, but not the dominant-negative isoform IK6.
Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that expression of IK6 in these
cells resulted in complex formation between IK6 and IK1, and IK6
decreased cell number and increased cell death. IK6 overexpression
disturbed erythroid differentiation and expression of erythroid-specific
genes, although it had no effect on Ikaros expression, and favored
myelopoiesis by promoting expression of myeloid-specific genes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dijon et al. (2008) stated that the IKZF1 gene contains 7 translated
exons.

MAPPING

Using somatic cell hybrid DNAs, Molnar et al. (1996) mapped the human
Ikaros gene to 7p13-p11.1, near the EGFR gene (131550). They mapped the
mouse Ikaros gene to chromosome 11 by interspecific backcross analysis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Ikaros is required for normal lymphocyte development. Germline mutant
mice that express only non-DNA-binding dominant-negative 'leukemogenic'
Ikaros isoforms lacking critical N-terminal zinc fingers develop an
aggressive form of lymphoblastic leukemia 3 to 6 months after birth (see
'Animal Model' below). These facts prompted Sun et al. (1999) to seek
molecular abnormalities involving the Ikaros gene in acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL2; 613067) in infants. In leukemic cells from 12 ALL
infants less than 1 year of age, Sun et al. (1999) found high-level
expression of dominant-negative isoforms of Ikaros with abnormal
subcellular compartmentalization patterns. PCR cloning and nucleotide
sequencing were used to identify the specific Ikaros isoforms and detect
Ikaros gene mutations in these cells. Leukemic cells from 7 of 7 infants
with ALL, including 5 of 5 MLL-AF4-positive (159557) infants, expressed
dominant-negative Ikaros isoforms IK4, IK7, and IK8 that lack critical
N-terminal zinc fingers. In 6 of 7 patients, Sun et al. (1999) detected
an in-frame deletion of 10 amino acids (KSSMPQKFLG) upstream of the
transcription-activation domain adjacent to the C-terminal zinc fingers
of IK2, IK4, IK7, and IK8. In contrast, only wildtype IK1 and IK2
isoforms with normal nuclear localization were found in normal infant
bone marrow cells and infant thymocytes. These results implicated the
expression of dominant-negative Ikaros isoforms and the disruption of
normal Ikaros function in the leukemogenesis of ALL in infants.

Nakase et al. (2000) found overexpression of the dominant-negative IK6
isoform in 14 of 41 B-cell patients with adult B-cell ALL. None of the
other dominant-negative isoforms of the Ikaros gene were detected by
RT-PCR analysis. Southern blot analysis with PstI digestion revealed
that those patients with the dominant-negative IK6 isoform might have
small mutations in the Ikaros locus. The results suggested that Ikaros
plays a key role in human B-cell malignancies through the
dominant-negative isoform IK6.

Using RT-PCR to detect Ikaros isoforms with the 30-base deletion in exon
6, Payne et al. (2001) showed that transcripts for IK1 and IK1 with the
deletion were present in normal cord blood and bone marrow, as well as
in 3 ALL cell lines. In addition, they identified an isoform, IKX, that
was identical to IK3 except that it included exon 6; IKX was generated
from a novel exon combination with and without the 30-base deletion.
Payne et al. (2001) detected multiple DNA-binding and nonbinding
isoforms with a 60-base insertion linked to leukemia expressed at the
RNA level in normal hemopoietic cells. Immunoblot analysis indicated
that the predominant isoform in normal cells is IKX, while the
predominant form in leukemic cells is IK1.

In a genomewide analysis of leukemic cells from 242 pediatric ALL
patients using high resolution, single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
arrays and genomic DNA sequencing, Mullighan et al. (2007) identified
mutations in genes encoding principal regulators of B-lymphocyte
development and differentiation in 40% of B-progenitor ALL cases.
Deletions were detected in IKZF1, IKZF3 (606221),TCF3 (147141), EBF1
(164343), and LEF1 (153245). The PAX5 (167414) gene was the most
frequent target of somatic mutation, being altered in 31.7% of cases.

The Philadelphia chromosome, a chromosomal abnormality that encodes
BCR-ABL1 (see 151410, 189980), is the defining lesion of chronic
myelogenous leukemia (CML) and a subset of acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL). To define oncogenic lesions that cooperate with BCR-ABL1 to
induce ALL, Mullighan et al. (2008) performed a genomewide analysis of
diagnostic leukemia samples from 304 individuals with ALL, including 43
BCR-ABL1 B-progenitor ALLs and 23 CML cases. IKZF1, encoding the
transcription factor Ikaros, was deleted in 83.7% of BCR-ABL1 ALL, but
not in chronic phase CML. Deletion of IKZF1 was also identified as an
acquired lesion at the time of transformation of CML to ALL (lymphoid
blast crisis). The IKZF1 deletions resulted in haploinsufficiency,
expression of a dominant-negative Ikaros isoform, or the complete loss
of Ikaros expression. Sequencing of IKZF1 deletion breakpoints suggested
that aberrant RAG-mediated recombination (see 179615) is responsible for
the deletions. Mullighan et al. (2008) concluded that genetic lesions
resulting in the loss of Ikaros function are an important event in the
development of BCR-ABL1 ALL.

Mullighan et al. (2009) identified deletions involving the IKZF1 gene in
leukemic cells of 63 (28.6%) of 221 children with B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Cells from 20 patients had a deletion of coding
exons 3 through 6, resulting in the expression of a dominant-negative
form of IKZF1. IKZF1 deletions were associated with an increased risk of
relapse and adverse effects in the original cohort and in an independent
cohort of 258 patients (p values ranging from less than 0.001 to 0.004).

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the
IKZF1 gene and acute lymphoblastic leukemia, see ALL2 (613067).

CYTOGENETICS

The BCL6 gene (109565), isolated from the breakpoints of 3q27-associated
chromosomal translocations, is implicated in diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas (DLBL). Hosokawa et al. (2000) described the molecular
characterization of novel t(3;7)(q27;p12) translocations in 2 patients
with DLBL. Molecular genetic analysis of the breakpoint area involving
BCL6 revealed the presence of the Ikaros gene. As a molecular
consequence of the translocation, the 5-prime regulatory region of BCL6
was replaced by the putative 5-prime regulatory region of the Ikaros
gene, probably leading to deregulated expression of the BCL6 gene
throughout B-cell differentiation. RT-PCR and FISH analyses of a patient
sample established that the translocation resulted in fusion of the
Ikaros and BCL6 genes. The clinical features of the 2 patients with DLBL
and t(3;7)(q27;p12) translocations were reported by Ichinohasama et al.
(1998).

ANIMAL MODEL

Mice homozygous for a germline mutation in the Ikaros DNA-binding domain
lack not only T and B lymphocytes and natural killer cells, but also
their earliest defined progenitors (Georgopoulos et al., 1994). In
contrast, the erythroid and myeloid lineages are intact in these mutant
mice. Klug et al. (1998) showed that the DNA-binding isoforms of mouse
Ikaros are localized in the nucleus of the most primitive hematopoietic
stem cell subset. They found that Ikaros localizes to heterochromatin in
Abelson-transformed pre-B lymphocytes. Changes in the RNA splicing
pattern of Ikaros occurred at 2 stages of lymphoid differentiation.

O'Neill et al. (1999, 2000) described the structure of a chromatin
remodeling complex associated with Ikaros that is present only in adult
hematopoietic cells. This complex binds to Ikaros-like DNA-binding
sites, including a long polypyrimidine-rich sequence upstream of the
human delta-globin gene (142000), and was thus called PYR complex.
Deletion of this sequence in a human beta locus-containing cosmid
(carrying sequences from the human gamma-A gene, 142200, through the
adult beta-globin gene, 141900) in transgenic mice resulted in delayed
switching from gamma-globin to beta-globin. Lopez et al. (2002) showed
that homozygous Ikaros-null mice lacked the PYR complex, demonstrating a
requirement for Ikaros in the formation of the complex on DNA.
Heterozygous Ikaros-null mice had about half as much PYR complex,
indicating a dosage effect for both Ikaros and PYR complex. They also
showed that Ikaros-null mice had multiple hematopoietic cell defects,
including anemia and megakaryocytic abnormalities, in addition to
lymphoid and stem cell defects. The null mice also had a delay in murine
embryonic-to-adult beta-globin switching and a delay in human
gamma-to-beta switching, consistent with the suggested role for PYR
complex in this process. Lastly, cDNA array analyses indicated that
several hematopoietic cell-specific genes in all blood lineages were
either up- or downregulated in 14-day embryos from Ikaros-null mice
compared with wildtype mice. These results indicated that Ikaros and PYR
complex function together in vivo at many adult hematopoietic
cell-specific genes and at intergenic sites, affecting their expression
and leading to pleiotropic hematopoietic defects.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells are specialized dendritic cells that
produce high levels of type I interferon (see IFNA1; 147660) upon viral
infection. Allman et al. (2006) showed that mice expressing low levels
of Ikaros lacked peripheral plasmacytoid dendritic cells but not other
dendritic cell subsets. Loss of plasmacytoid dendritic cells was
associated with inability to produce type I interferon after challenge
with Tlr7 (300365) or Tlr9 (605474) ligands or murine cytomegalovirus.
Conventional dendritic cells were present in normal numbers and
exhibited normal responses to in vivo challenge with murine
cytomegalovirus or inactivated toxoplasma antigen.

REFERENCE 1. Allman, D.; Dalod, M.; Asselin-Paturel, C.; Delale, T.; Robbins,
S. H.; Trinchieri, G.; Biron, C. A.; Kastner, P.; Chan, S.: Ikaros
is required for plasmacytoid dendritic cell differentiation. Blood 108:
4025-4034, 2006.

2. Dijon, M.; Bardin, F.; Murati, A.; Batoz, M.; Chabannon, C.; Tonnelle,
C.: The role of Ikaros in human erythroid differentiation. Blood 111:
1138-1146, 2008.

3. Ezzat, S.; Mader, R.; Yu, S.; Ning, T.; Poussier, P.; Asa, S. L.
: Ikaros integrates endocrine and immune system development. J. Clin.
Invest. 115: 1021-1029, 2005.

4. Georgopoulos, K.; Bigby, M.; Wang, J. H.; Molnar, A.; Wu, P.; Winandy,
S.; Sharpe, A.: The Ikaros gene is required for the development of
all lymphoid lineages. Cell 79: 143-156, 1994.

5. Harker, N.; Naito, T.; Cortes, M.; Hostert, A.; Hirschberg, S.;
Tolaini, M.; Roderick, K.; Georgopoulos, K.; Kioussis, D.: The CD8-alpha
gene locus is regulated by the Ikaros family of proteins. Molec.
Cell 10: 1403-1415, 2002.

6. Hosokawa, Y.; Maeda, Y.; Ichinohasama, R.; Miura, I.; Taniwaki,
M.; Seto, M.: The Ikaros gene, a central regulator of lymphoid differentiation,
fuses to the BCL6 gene as a result of t(3;7)(q27;p12) translocation
in a patient with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Blood 95: 2719-2721,
2000.

7. Ichinohasama, R.; Miura, I.; Funato, T.; Sato, I.; Suzuki, C.;
Saito, Y.; Decoteau, J. F.; Myers, J. B.; Kadin, M. E.; Sawai, T.;
Ooya, K.: A recurrent nonrandom translocation (3;7)(q27;p12) associated
with BCL-6 gene rearrangement in B-cell diffuse large cell lymphoma. Cancer
Genet. Cytogenet. 104: 19-27, 1998.

8. Klug, C. A.; Morrison, S. J.; Masek, M.; Hahm, K.; Smale, S. T.;
Weissman, I. L.: Hematopoietic stem cells and lymphoid progenitors
express different Ikaros isoforms, and Ikaros is localized to heterochromatin
in immature lymphocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 657-662, 1998.

9. Lopez, R. A.; Schoetz, S.; DeAngelis, K.; O'Neill, D.; Bank, A.
: Multiple hematopoietic defects and delayed globin switching in Ikaros
null mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 602-607, 2002.

10. Molnar, A.; Wu, P.; Largespada, D. A.; Vortkamp, A.; Scherer,
S.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Bruns, G.; Georgopoulos, K.:
The Ikaros gene encodes a family of lymphocyte-restricted zinc finger
DNA binding proteins, highly conserved in human and mouse. J. Immun. 156:
585-592, 1996.

11. Mullighan, C. G.; Goorha, S.; Radtke, I.; Miller, C. B.; Coustan-Smith,
E.; Dalton, J. D.; Girtman, K.; Mathew, S.; Ma, J.; Pounds, S. B.;
Su, X.; Pui, C.-H.; Relling, M. V.; Evans, W. E.; Shurtleff, S. A.;
Downing, J. R.: Genome-wide analysis of genetic alterations in acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia. Nature 446: 758-764, 2007.

12. Mullighan, C. G.; Miller, C. B.; Radtke, I.; Phillips, L. A.;
Dalton, J.; Ma, J.; White, D.; Hughes, T. P.; Le Beau, M. M.; Pui,
C.-H.; Relling, M. V.; Shurtleff, S. A.; Downing, J. R.: BCR-ABL1
lymphoblastic leukaemia is characterized by the deletion of Ikaros. Nature 453:
110-114, 2008.

13. Mullighan, C. G.; Su, X.; Zhang, J.; Radtke, I.; Phillips, L.
A. A.; Miller, C. B.; Ma, J.; Liu, W.; Cheng, C.; Schulman, B. A.;
Harvey, R. C.; Chen, I.-M.; and 17 others: Deletion of IKZF1 and
prognosis in acute lymphoblastic leukemia. New Eng. J. Med. 360:
470-480, 2009.

14. Nakase, K.; Ishimaru, F.; Avitahl, N.; Dansako, H.; Matsuo, K.;
Fujii, K.; Sezaki, N.; Nakayama, H.; Yano, T.; Fukuda, S.; Imajoh,
K.; Takeuchi, M.; and 13 others: Dominant negative isoform of the
Ikaros gene in patients with adult B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Cancer
Res. 60: 4062-4065, 2000.

15. Nietfeld, W.; Meyerhans, A.: Cloning and sequencing of hIK-1,
a cDNA encoding a human homologue of mouse Ikaros/LyF-1. Immun. Lett. 49:
139-141, 1996.

16. O'Neill, D.; Yang, J.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Bornschlegel, K.;
Tempst, P.; Bank, A.: Tissue-specific and developmental stage-specific
DNA binding by a mammalian SWI/SNF complex associated with human fetal-to-adult
globin gene switching. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 349-354, 1999.

17. O'Neill, D. W.; Schoetz, S. S.; Lopez, R. A.; Castle, M.; Rabinowitz,
L.; Shor, E.; Krawchuk, D.; Goll, M. G.; Renz, M.; Sellig, H.-P.;
Han, S.; Seong, R. H.; Park, S. D.; Agalioti, T.; Munshi, N.; Thanos,
D.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Tempst, P.; Bank, A.: An Ikaros-containing
chromatin-remodeling complex in adult-type erythroid cells. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 20: 7572-7582, 2000.

18. Payne, K. J.; Nicolas, J.-H.; Zhu, J. Y.; Barsky, L. W.; Crooks,
G. M.: Cutting edge: predominant expression of a novel Ikaros isoform
in normal human hemopoiesis. J. Immun. 167: 1867-1870, 2001.

19. Sun, L.; Heerema, N.; Crotty, L.; Wu, X.; Navara, C.; Vassilev,
A.; Sensel, M.; Reaman, G. H.; Uckun, F. M.: Expression of dominant-negative
and mutant isoforms of the antileukemic transcription factor Ikaros
in infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96:
680-685, 1999.

20. Yap, W.-H.; Yeoh, E.; Tay, A.; Brenner, S.; Venkatesh, B.: STAT4
is a target of the hematopoietic zinc-finger transcription factor
Ikaros in T cells. FEBS Lett. 579: 4470-4478, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/4/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/3/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/29/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/4/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/25/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/8/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/28/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/6/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/28/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/29/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/19/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/18/1999

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 9/9/1998

EDITED mgross: 10/08/2010
terry: 10/6/2010
wwang: 10/13/2009
ckniffin: 10/5/2009
wwang: 2/9/2009
ckniffin: 2/4/2009
mgross: 10/7/2008
terry: 10/3/2008
alopez: 6/18/2008
terry: 6/12/2008
mgross: 10/29/2007
alopez: 6/18/2007
terry: 6/4/2007
wwang: 4/25/2007
terry: 7/8/2005
terry: 4/5/2005
mgross: 4/16/2004
mgross: 4/28/2003
terry: 3/8/2002
mgross: 2/11/2002
terry: 2/6/2002
mgross: 12/3/2001
terry: 11/28/2001
mgross: 8/23/2001
mcapotos: 10/9/2000
mcapotos: 10/6/2000
terry: 9/29/2000
mcapotos: 9/1/2000
mcapotos: 6/2/2000
mcapotos: 5/25/2000
terry: 5/19/2000
carol: 9/23/1999
mgross: 3/5/1999
mgross: 2/25/1999
terry: 2/18/1999
terry: 11/19/1998
psherman: 9/17/1998
psherman: 9/16/1998

601387	TITLE *601387 TUMOR SUSCEPTIBILITY GENE 101; TSG101
;;VACUOLAR PROTEIN SORTING 23, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; VPS23
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a strategy that enabled the isolation of previously unknown genes
encoding selectable recessive phenotypes, Li and Cohen (1996) identified
in the mouse a gene whose homozygous functional disruption by
insertional mutagenesis and antisense RNA synthesis produced cell
transformation. In their strategy, expression of a selectable marker in
mouse 3T3 cells was dependent upon insertion of a gene search vector
downstream of the promoter of randomly targeted chromosomal genes.
Transactivation of a promoter on the noncoding strand of the search
vector resulted in expression of antisense RNA that was complementary to
the coding strand of the targeted allele, resulting in functional
inactivation of the other allele. They subsequently selected for clonal
colonies that gained the ability to grow in 0.5% agar and formed
metastatic tumors in nude mice. Li and Cohen (1996) isolated such a
clonal colony and designated the inactivated gene Tsg101. Removal of the
transactivator required for antisense RNA expression restored normal
growth, presumably because of subsequent loss of expression of the
antisense transcripts complementary to Tsg101. The protein encoded by
the Tsg101 cDNA contains a coiled-coil domain that interacts with
stathmin (151442), a cytosolic phosphoprotein implicated in
tumorigenesis. Li and Cohen (1996) observed that overexpression of
Tsg101 antisense transcripts in NIH 3T3 cells resulted in cell
transformation and increased stathmin-specific mRNA.

Li et al. (1997) determined that the human TSG101 gene encodes a
381-amino acid polypeptide of 42.8 kD which is 94% identical to the
mouse protein.

By database searching and comparison of the TSG101 proteins of yeast and
other organisms, Koonin and Abagyan (1997) concluded that TSG101 may
belong to a group of apparently inactive homologs of
ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes.

Wagner et al. (2003) stated that many of the TSG101 transcripts
associated with human malignancies are actually alternatively spliced
forms generated by exon skipping.

GENE FUNCTION

Like other enveloped viruses, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 uses
cellular machinery to bud from infected cells. Garrus et al. (2001)
showed that TSG101, which functions in vacuolar protein sorting (VPS),
is required for HIV-1 budding. The ubiquitin enzyme-2 variant (UEV)
domain of TSG101 binds to an essential tetrapeptide (PTAP) motif within
the p6 domain of the structural Gag protein of HIV-1 and also to
ubiquitin. Depletion of cellular TSG101 by small interfering RNA
arrested HIV-1 budding at a late stage, and budding was rescued by
reintroduction of TSG101. Dominant-negative mutant VPS4 proteins that
inhibit vacuolar protein sorting also arrested HIV-1 and MLV (murine
leukemia virus) budding. These observations suggested that retroviruses
bud by appropriating cellular machinery normally used in the VPS pathway
to form multivesicular bodies.

Amit et al. (2004) showed that LRSAM1 (610933) binds the TSG101 SB
(steadiness box) and UEV regions. LRSAM1 ubiquitylates TSG101 both in
HEK293T cells and in vitro, and multiple monomeric ubiquitylation of
TSG101 results in inactivation of TSG101 sorting function. Studies of
receptor endocytosis and virus budding suggested that LRSAM1 enables
recycling of TSG101-containing sorting complexes and cargo reloading.

In Drosophila cells, Moberg et al. (2005) showed that Tsg101 mutations
activated Notch (see NOTCH1; 190198) signaling and caused overproduction
of a secreted Drosophila mitogen. The authors concluded that alterations
in trafficking through the endocytic pathway can trigger the secretion
of growth factors and cause overproliferation of neighboring cells.

Carlton and Martin-Serrano (2007) found that 2 proteins involved in
HIV-1 budding--TSG101, a subunit of the endosomal sorting complex
required for transport-1 (ESCRT-1), and ALIX (608074), an
ESCRT-associated protein--were recruited to the midbody during
cytokinesis by interaction with centrosome protein 55 (CEP55; 610000), a
centrosome and midbody protein essential for abscission. TSG101, ALIX,
and possibly other components of ESCRT-1 were required for the
completion of cytokinesis. Carlton and Martin-Serrano (2007) concluded
that thus, HIV-1 budding and cytokinesis use a similar subset of
cellular components to carry out topologically similar membrane fission
events.

Using coimmunoprecipitation and crosslinking analysis, Bishop and
Woodman (2001) found that human VPS28 (601387) interacted with the
coiled-coil C-terminal portion of TSG101. Expression of ATPase-defective
VPS4 (609983) shifted a portion of TSG101 and VPS28 from the cytosol to
endosomal vacuoles. Bishop and Woodman (2001) concluded that TSG101 and
VPS28 are directly involved in endosomal sorting.

Philips et al. (2008) showed that the avirulent Mycobacterium smegmatis
species could multiply in Drosophila S2 cells or murine macrophages in
which small interfering RNA had disrupted ESCRT components, including
Tsg101 and Vps28, by modulating the phagosome induced by mycobacteria.
Immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy showed that Tsg101- or
Vps28-depleted cells harbored mycobacteria in a heavily ubiquitinated
vacuolar location. Philips et al. (2008) concluded that ESCRT machinery
is critical for containment of mycobacterial proliferation.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Lee et al. (2008) solved the crystal structure of the ESCRT- and ALIX
(608074)-binding region (EABR) of CEP55 (610000) bound to an ALIX
peptide at a resolution of 2.0 angstroms. The structure showed that EABR
forms an aberrant dimeric parallel coiled coil. Bulky and charged
residues at the interface of the 2 central heptad repeats create
asymmetry and a single binding site for an ALIX or TSG101 peptide. Both
ALIX and ESCRT-1 are required for cytokinesis, which suggested that
multiple CEP55 dimers are required for function.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization and by analysis of a radiation
hybrid mapping panel, Li et al. (1997) demonstrated that the human
TSG101 gene maps to 11p15.2-p15.1. This region of chromosome 11 has been
found to show loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in a variety of human
malignancies, primarily breast cancers.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Li et al. (1997) analyzed transcripts from 15 uncultured primary human
breast carcinomas and matched normal breast tissue from the same
patients by RT-PCR, Southern blot analysis, and direct DNA sequencing.
They found that 7 breast cancers had intragenic TSG101 deletions that
physically or functionally disrupted sequences encoding the coiled-coil
domain of the protein. Analysis of genomic DNA, which was available from
6 of the 7 patients showing mutations in TSG101 transcripts, confirmed
the presence of abnormalities at the TSG101 genomic locus in all 6
cancers. Mutations in 2 TSG101 alleles were identified by both genomic
DNA analysis and cDNA analysis in 3 breast cancers and by cDNA analysis
in a fourth tumor (see 601387.0001). No TSG101 abnormalities were
observed in transcripts or genomic DNA of matched normal breast tissue
from these breast cancer patients. The findings of Li et al. (1997)
suggested that TSG101 is mutated at high frequency in human breast
cancer and further suggested that defects in TSG101 occur during breast
cancer tumorigenesis and/or progression. The wildtype gene has the
characteristics of a typical tumor suppressor gene.

The report by Li et al. (1997) of TSG101 intragenic deletions in 7 of 15
primary human breast carcinomas attracted particular interest because
BRCA1 (113705) and BRCA2 (600185), which are involved in familial breast
cancer, had not been found to be associated with a significant number of
sporadic mammary carcinomas, in contrast to the behavior of most
tumor-suppressor genes. Steiner et al. (1997) failed, however, to find
deletions in the TSG101 gene in breast cancer cases and called into
question the assignment of TSG101 to the class of tumor-suppressor
genes. Haber and Harlow (1997) pointed out the increasing vagueness in
the use of the term tumor suppressor gene. They suggested that the
simplest, most inclusive, and cleanest genetic definition should be
used, namely, 'genes that sustain loss-of-function mutations in the
development of cancer.' At the simplest level, mutations associated with
cancer can be informatively split into gain-of-function and
loss-of-function mutations. The definition complements the
well-established and universally recognized gain-of-function mutations
that are used to define the protooncogene-to-oncogene conversion.

ANIMAL MODEL

Wagner et al. (2003) produced mice with a conditional deletion of the
Tsg101 gene. They determined that Tsg101 is essential for cell growth,
cell survival, and normal function of embryonic and adult tissues.
Tsg101-deficient mammary epithelial cells exhibited a defect in cell
cycle regulation and underwent increased cell death. Tsg101 knockout did
not result in accelerated cell growth or cause neoplastic
transformation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BREAST CANCER
TSG101, VAL-ALA, 1162T-C

In a breast cancer, Li et al. (1997) identified a T-to-C transition at
nucleotide 1162 in the nondeleted allele of the TSG101 gene. Deletion of
the other allele had been identified by LOH. The mutation eliminates a
BbsI restriction site and generates a val-to-ala substitution at one of
the putative protein kinase C (176960) phosphorylation sites of the
TSG101 protein.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bishop and Woodman (2001); Philips et al. (2008)
REFERENCE 1. Amit, I.; Yakir, L.; Katz, M.; Zwang, Y.; Marmor, M. D.; Citri,
A.; Shtiegman, K.; Alroy, I.; Tuvia, S.; Reiss, Y.; Roubini, E.; Cohen,
M.; Wides, R.; Bacharach, E.; Schubert, U.; Yarden, Y.: Tal, a Tsg101-specific
E3 ubiquitin ligase, regulates receptor endocytosis and retrovirus
budding. Genes Dev. 18: 1737-1752, 2004.

2. Bishop, N.; Woodman, P.: TSG101/mammalian VPS23 and mammalian
VPS28 interact directly and are recruited to VPS4-induced endosomes. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 11735-11742, 2001.

3. Bishop, N.; Woodman, P.: TSG101/mammalian VPS23 and mammalian
VPS28 interact directly and are recruited to VPS4-induced endosomes. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 11735-11742, 2001.

4. Carlton, J. G.; Martin-Serrano, J.: Parallels between cytokinesis
and retroviral budding: a role for the ESCRT machinery. Science 316:
1908-1912, 2007.

5. Garrus, J. E.; von Schwedler, U. K.; Pornillos, O. W.; Morham,
S. G.; Zavitz, K. H.; Wang, H. E.; Wettstein, D. A.; Stray, K. M.;
Cote, M.; Rich, R. L.; Myszka, D. G.; Sundquist, W. I.: Tsg101 and
vacuolar protein sorting pathway are essential for HIV-1 budding. Cell 107:
55-65, 2001.

6. Haber, D.; Harlow, E.: Tumour-suppressor genes: evolving definitions
in the genomic age. Nature Genet. 16: 320-322, 1997.

7. Koonin, E. V.; Abagyan, R. A.: TSG101 may be the prototype of
a class of dominant negative ubiquitin regulators. (Letter) Nature
Genet. 16: 330-331, 1997.

8. Lee, H. H.; Elia, N.; Ghirlando, R.; Lippincott-Schwartz, J.; Hurley,
J. H.: Midbody targeting of the ESCRT machinery by a noncanonical
coiled coil in CEP55. Science 322: 576-580, 2008.

9. Li, L.; Cohen, S. N.: tsg101: a novel tumor susceptibility gene
isolated by controlled homozygous functional knockout of allelic loci
in mammalian cells. Cell 85: 319-329, 1996.

10. Li, L.; Li, X.; Francke, U.; Cohen, S. N.: The TSG101 tumor susceptibility
gene is located in chromosome 11 band p15 and is mutated in human
breast cancer. Cell 88: 143-154, 1997.

11. Moberg, K. H.; Schelble, S.; Burdick, S. K.; Hariharan, I. K.
: Mutations in erupted, the Drosophila ortholog of mammalian tumor
susceptibility gene 101, elicit non-cell-autonomous overgrowth. Dev.
Cell 9: 699-710, 2005.

12. Philips, J. A.; Porto, M. C.; Wang, H.; Rubin, E. J.; Perrimon,
N.: ESCRT factors restrict mycobacterial growth. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 105: 3070-3075, 2008.

13. Philips, J. A.; Porto, M. C.; Wang, H.; Rubin, E. J.; Perrimon,
N.: ESCRT factors restrict mycobacterial growth. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 105: 3070-3075, 2008.

14. Steiner, P.; Barnes, D. M.; Harris, W. H.; Weinberg, R. A.: Absence
of rearrangements in the tumour susceptibility gene TSG101 in human
breast cancer. (Letter) Nature Genet. 16: 332-333, 1997.

15. Wagner, K.-U.; Krempler, A.; Qi, Y.; Park, K.; Henry, M. D.; Triplett,
A. A.; Riedlinger, G.; Rucker, E. B., III; Hennighausen, L.: Tsg101
is essential for cell growth, proliferation, and cell survival of
embryonic and adult tissues. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23: 150-162, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/12/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/9/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/20/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/10/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/30/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/31/1997
Harry C. Dietz - edited: 4/4/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/7/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/19/1996

EDITED alopez: 11/18/2008
terry: 11/12/2008
mgross: 4/14/2008
terry: 4/9/2008
alopez: 7/25/2007
terry: 7/24/2007
wwang: 4/16/2007
mgross: 4/10/2006
wwang: 12/20/2005
mgross: 3/13/2003
terry: 3/10/2003
mgross: 10/30/2001
carol: 7/20/2001
carol: 6/27/2001
terry: 8/4/1997
terry: 7/31/1997
terry: 4/14/1997
mark: 4/4/1997
mark: 4/1/1997
mark: 2/7/1997
terry: 2/4/1997
mark: 8/20/1996
terry: 8/19/1996
mark: 8/19/1996

190195	TITLE *190195 TRANSGLUTAMINASE 1; TGM1
;;TRANSGLUTAMINASE, KERATINOCYTE; TGK;;
TRANSGLUTAMINASE, EPIDERMAL TYPE I
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The TGM1 gene encodes transglutaminase-1, a catalytic membrane-bound
enzyme that functions in the formation of the epidermal cornified cell
envelope, which acts as a mechanical barrier to protect against water
loss and infectious agents (Farasat et al., 2009).

CLONING

Phillips et al. (1990) determined the nucleotide and deduced amino acid
sequences of the coding regions of the human and rat keratinocyte
transglutaminase (protein-glutamine:amine gamma-glutamyltransferase; EC
2.3.2.13). The human and rat proteins have a molecular mass of about 90
kD and show 92% identity. Substantial similarities were demonstrated in
the human clotting factor XIII catalytic subunit (134570), guinea pig
liver tissue transglutaminase, and the human erythrocyte band-4.2
protein (177070). The keratinocyte enzyme is most similar to factor
XIII, whereas the band-4.2 protein is most similar to tissue
transglutaminase. A salient feature of the keratinocyte transglutaminase
is its 105-residue extension beyond the N terminus of the tissue
transglutaminase. This extension and the unrelated activation peptide of
factor XIII (a 37-residue extension) appeared to have been added for
specialized functions after divergence of the tissue transglutaminase
from their common lineage. Kim et al. (1991) identified mRNAs for all 3
types of transglutaminase (C, K, and E) and sequenced completely the
cDNA clones encoding the transglutaminase K enzyme. The deduced
813-amino acid sequence of the TGK protein shares 49 to 53% homology
with other transglutaminase proteins of known sequence.

Kim et al. (1992) demonstrated 2 variant forms of the TGM1 gene, the
rarer of which contains a 2-nucleotide deletion near the 5-prime end,
uses an alternate initiation codon, and differs from the common larger
variant only in the first 15 amino acids. Furthermore, they showed that
the DNA sequences of intron 14 possess several tracts of dinucleotide
repeats that show wide size polymorphism in the human population.

GENE STRUCTURE

Polakowska et al. (1992) and Kim et al. (1992) both demonstrated that
the TGM1 gene has 15 exons.

Yamanishi et al. (1992) placed the size at 14.3 kb. The translation
start was located in the second exon. The sizes of exons from 3 to 14
were markedly conserved between genes for human TGM1 and factor XIIIA,
another member of the transglutaminase family.

EVOLUTION

Polakowska et al. (1992) presented a likely phylogenetic tree for 7
known members of the transglutaminase family based on amino acid
sequence similarity. They also presented arguments suggesting that the
active enzyme evolved first, and the structural human erythrocyte
membrane protein 4.2 (band 4.2) evolved from the type II
transglutaminases.

Kim et al. (1992) demonstrated that the positions of the 14 TGM1 introns
have been conserved in comparison with the genes encoding 2 other
transglutaminase-like activities, although the TGM1 gene has relatively
smaller introns. On the other hand, the TGM1 enzyme is the largest known
transglutaminase, about 90 kD. It can be demonstrated that the
transglutaminase family of genes arose by duplications and subsequent
divergent evolution from a common ancestor and became scattered in the
human genome.

MAPPING

By the study of somatic cell hybrids, Polakowska et al. (1991)
determined that the TGM1 gene is located on human chromosome 14. Kim et
al. (1992) confirmed the assignment to chromosome 14 by study of somatic
cell hybrids and regionalized the assignment to 14q11.2-q13 by in situ
hybridization. By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Yamanishi et al.
(1992) mapped the TGM1 gene to 14q11.2.

Van Bokhoven et al. (1996) found that the 3-prime end of the RAB
geranylgeranyl transferase alpha subunit gene (RABGGTA; 601905) overlaps
the promoter region of the TGM1 gene. Further analysis revealed that the
RABGGTA and TGM1 genes are located only 2 kb apart in head-to-tail
tandem arrangement. These 2 genes are functionally unrelated.

GENE FUNCTION

During terminal differentiation, mammalian epidermal cells acquire a
deposit of protein 10 to 20 nm thick on the intracellular surface of the
plasma membrane, which is termed the cornified or cross-linked cell
envelope (CE). The CE is the most insoluble component of the epidermis
due to crosslinking by disulfide bonds as well as by
gamma-glutamyl-lysine isodipeptide bonds that are formed by the action
of transglutaminases. Three different glutaminase activities have been
identified in mammalian epidermis and other stratified squamous
epithelial tissues. These include a ubiquitous tissue type II enzyme
called transglutaminase C (190196); a keratinocyte type I activity
called transglutaminase K, which is present in cultured epidermal
keratinocytes; and a so-called epidermal activity, transglutaminase E
(600238), which is present in hair follicles and advanced differentiated
epidermal cells. Transglutaminase K is membrane-associated, whereas the
C and E forms are soluble (Nemes et al., 1999). Transglutaminases are
defined as enzymes capable of forming isopeptide bonds by transfer of an
amine onto glutaminyl residues of a protein. Nemes et al. (1999) showed
that the membrane-bound form of the transglutaminase-1 enzyme can also
form ester bonds between specific glutaminyl residues of human
involucrin (IVL; 147360) and a synthetic analog of epidermal-specific
omega-hydroxyceramides. The formation of a lipid envelope approximately
5-nm thick on the surface of epidermal keratinocytes is an important
component of normal barrier function. The lipid envelope consists of
omega-hydroxyceramides covalently linked by ester bonds to cornified
envelope proteins, most abundantly to involucrin. In general the
findings indicated a dual role for transglutaminase-1 in epidermal
barrier formation and provided insight into the pathophysiology of
lamellar ichthyosis (LI; see 242300) resulting from defects in this
enzyme.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mutations in the TGM1 gene were found as the cause of autosomal
recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI1; 242300) of the lamellar form by
Huber et al. (1995) and by Russell et al. (1995). Huber et al. (1995)
were prompted to study TGM1 because of the finding that affected
individuals in 3 families exhibited drastically reduced transglutaminase
activity; in 2 of the families, expression of TGM1 transcripts was
diminished or abnormal and no TGM1 protein was detected. Homozygous or
compound heterozygous mutations of the TGM1 gene were identified in all
3 families (see 190195.0001-190195.0005). The results suggested that
intact cross-linkage of cornified cell envelopes is required for
epidermal tissue homeostasis. Russell et al. (1995) were prompted to
seek mutations in the TGM1 gene because of the finding that autosomal
recessive lamellar ichthyosis maps to 14q11 and shows complete linkage
with TGM1. In affected individuals from 2 unrelated families with the
lamellar form of ARCI1, they identified homozygosity for point mutations
in 2 adjacent arginine residues, R141H (190195.0006 and R142H
190195.0007). Within the transglutaminase family, these arginines are
invariant within a conserved region, distant from the catalytic site of
the enzyme.

Laiho et al. (1997) studied ARCI in the Finnish population, in which
they expected to find single mutations enriched by founder effect.
Surprisingly, 5 different mutations of TGM1 (arg141 to his, 190195.0006;
arg142 to cys, 190195.0004; gly217 to ser, 190195.0023; val378 to leu,
190195.0008; and arg395 to leu, 190195.0009) were found in Finnish ARCI
patients. TGM1 mutations were identified not only in patients with
lamellar ichthyosis but also in patients with nonbullous congenital
ichthyosis erythroderma. Moreover, haplotype analysis of the chromosomes
carrying the most common mutation, a C-to-T transition resulting in the
substitution arg142 to cys, revealed that the same mutation had been
introduced twice in the Finnish population. In addition to arg142 to
cys, 3 other mutations, in arg141 and arg142, had been described
elsewhere in other populations. These findings suggested to Laiho et al.
(1997) that this region of TGM1 is more susceptible to mutation.
Although the corresponding amino acid sequence is conserved in other
transglutaminases, mutations do not always cluster in this region;
mutations in coagulation factor XIII, for example, do not. A protein
model of the arg142-to-cys mutation suggested disruption or
destabilization of the protein. In transfection studies, the closely
related transglutaminase F13 protein with the corresponding mutation was
shown to be susceptible to degradation in COS cells, also suggestive of
the destabilizing effect of the arg142-to-cys mutation in TGM1.

Using microsatellite markers linked to the TGM1 gene, Pigg et al. (1998)
studied 43 Norwegian families with autosomal recessive congenital
ichthyosis, 36 with the lamellar form and 7 with nonbullous congenital
ichthyosiform erythroderma, and found a common haplotype for 2 markers
on 74% of disease-associated chromosomes. In 3 individuals homozygous
for the common haplotype, 2 with lamellar ichthyosis and 1 with
congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma, homozygosity for a splice site
mutation in the TGM1 gene was identified (IVS5-2A-G; 190195.0002).
Screening of probands from the remaining 40 families revealed the splice
site mutation on 61 of 72 alleles associated with lamellar ichthyosis
and on 9 of 15 alleles associated with congenital ichthyosiform
erythroderma. These findings suggested a single founder mutation for
most patients with ARCI in Norway.

In African American twin girls with lamellar ichthyosis that spared the
face and flexural surfaces, Tok et al. (1999) identified homozygosity
for a missense mutation in the TGM1 gene (R315L; 109195.0033). In a male
infant of Italian extraction who had lamellar ichthyosis over his entire
integument, they identified compound heterozygosity for mutations in
TGM1.

In a Japanese boy with ARCI who displayed nonbullous congenital
ichthyosiform erythroderma consisting of fine gray or light brown scales
on an erythematous skin, Akiyama et al. (2001) identified compound
heterozygosity for a missense mutation and a 1-bp deletion in the TGM1
gene (190195.0011 and 190195.0012, respectively).

Cserhalmi-Friedman et al. (2001) analyzed the TGM1 gene in 10 ARCI
patients with the lamellar form of ichthyosis and identified compound
heterozygosity for 14 different mutations in 7 patients (see, e.g.,
190195.0014-190195.0020 and 190195.0024-190195.0026).

In a Japanese girl and a Korean boy with similar clinical histories and
ichthyosis in a distribution affecting primarily the trunk, Yang et al.
(2001) identified compound heterozygosity for mutations in TGM1
(190195.0021, 190195.0022, and 190195.0027).

Raghunath et al. (2003) described 2 sibs with ARCI who presented the
self-healing collodion baby phenotype; they had markedly diminished TGM1
epidermal activity and were found to be compound heterozygous for
missense mutations in the TGM1 gene (190195.0013 and 190195.0014).
Molecular modeling and biochemical assays of mutant proteins under
elevated hydrostatic pressure suggested significantly reduced activity
in G278R and a chelation of water molecules in D490G that locked the
mutated enzyme in an inactive trans conformation in utero. After birth,
these water molecules were removed and the enzyme was predicted to
isomerize back to a partially active cis form, explaining the dramatic
improvement of this skin condition.

Oji et al. (2006) sequenced the TGM1 gene in 10 ARCI probands from
Germany, France, Turkey, the Netherlands, or Morocco, who were were
primarily affected in a 'bathing suit' distribution, and identified
homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for TGM1 mutations in all
patients (see, e.g., 190195.0002, 190195.0007, and
190195.0029-190195.0032). Oji et al. (2006) observed that most bathing
suit ichthyosis (BSI) mutations are located in exons 5 and 6, leading to
an amino acid change in the first part of the catalytic core domain.
Digital thermography in healthy individuals showed a striking
correlation between warmer body sites and the 'bathing suit'
distribution of scaling, and in situ TGase testing in the skin of BSI
patients demonstrated a marked decrease of enzyme activity when the
temperature was increased from 25 to 37 degrees Celsius. Oji et al.
(2006) concluded that the bathing suit form of ichthyosis is caused by
TGM1 deficiency and that it is a temperature-sensitive phenotype.

In 8 South African black patients with autosomal recessive congenital
ichthyosis in a bathing suit distribution mapping to chromosome 14q11,
Arita et al. (2007) sequenced the candidate gene TGM1 and identified
homozygosity for a missense mutation (R315L; 190195.0033). Arita et al.
(2007) noted that the R315L mutation had been previously identified by
Tok et al. (1999) in African-American twins who had a more classic
presentation of lamellar ichthyosis in which skin scaling was very
extensive, sparing only the face and the flexures.

Aufenvenne et al. (2009) studied 8 of the TGM1 mutations that were
identified by Oji et al. (2006) in patients who had ichthyosis in a
bathing suit distribution (see, e.g., 190195.0029-190195.0032) as well
as 3 mutations associated with classic LI (see, e.g., 100195.0007).
Using fluorescence spectrometry, Aufenvenne et al. (2009) demonstrated
that both the BSI- and LI-associated mutations had decreased enzyme
activity compared to wildtype, but the BSI mutations exhibited a marked
shift in temperature optimum from 37 degrees Celsius to 31 degrees
Celsius, with residual activity ranging between 13% and 16.5% at the
lower temperature, whereas activity at 37 degrees Celsius was less than
10%. The mutations known to cause classic LI showed only activities
below 7.5%. Deficient activity of the BSI mutations could be
reconstituted by decreasing the temperature to below 33 degrees Celsius.
Aufenvenne et al. (2009) concluded that the striking distribution of
scaling in BSI is due to mutations that render TGase-1 sensitive to
temperatures above 33 degrees Celsius.

Farasat et al. (2009) identified TGM1 mutations in 57 (55%) of 104
patients with autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis. Twenty-two
novel mutations were identified. The presence of a TGM1 mutation was
significantly associated with the presence collodion membrane at birth,
ectropion, plate-like scales, and alopecia. Patients with at least 1
truncating mutation were more likely to have severe hypohidrosis and
overheating at onset of symptoms compared to those with missense
mutations. There was a high frequency of mutated arginine codons, most
likely due to the deamination of CpG dinucleotides. The most common
mutation was an A-to-G transition in intron 5 (190195.0002), which
accounted for 28% of the mutated alleles.

In a French family in which 1 sister had a lamellar ichthyosis phenotype
and another sister presented a self-healing collodion baby phenotype
limited to an acral distribution, Mazereeuw-Hautier et al. (2009)
identified compound heterozygosity for 3 different mutations in the TGM1
gene (190195.0034-190195.0036, respectively).

Hackett et al. (2010) reported TGM1 mutations in 5 patients with ARCI
who were born with collodion membrane, 3 of whom went on to develop the
characteristic bathing suit distribution of ichthyosis (see, e.g.,
190195.0033), and 2 of whom developed a self-healing collodion baby
(SHCB) phenotype. The authors also reviewed the phenotypes associated
with the more than 40 reported mutations in TGM1 and noted that BSI and
SHCB mutations appeared to cluster in exons 5, 6, and 7 of the TGM1
gene.

In 16 Spanish ARCI families from Galicia, Rodriguez-Pazos et al. (2011)
analyzed 5 ARCI-associated genes and identified TGM1 mutations in 11
probands, all of whom exhibited the lamellar form of ichthyosis. Three
mutations accounted for 41%, 23%, and 14% of the TGM1 mutant alleles,
respectively (see, e.g., 190195.0038 and 190195.0039). Rodriguez-Pazos
et al. (2011) concluded that the high percentage of patients with the
same TGM1 mutation, together with the high number of homozygous probands
(64%), indicated the existence of a strong founder effect in this
population.

ANIMAL MODEL

Matsuki et al. (1998) generated mice lacking the Tgm1 gene and found
that they have erythrodermic skin with abnormal keratinization. In their
stratum corneum, degradation of nuclei and keratohyalin F-granules was
incomplete and cell envelope assembly was defective. The skin barrier
function of Tgm1-null mice was markedly impaired, and these mice died
within 4 to 5 hours after birth. These results clearly demonstrate that
the Tgm1 gene is essential to the development and maturation of the
stratum corneum and to adaptation to the environment after birth. Thus,
these knockout mice may be a useful model for severe cases of LI.

Using lamellar ichthyosis as a prototype for therapeutic cutaneous gene
delivery, Choate et al. (1996) used the human skin/immunodeficient mouse
xenograft model to correct the molecular, histologic, and functional
abnormalities of LI patient skin in vivo. They used
transglutaminase-1-deficient primary keratinocytes from LI patients
combined with high-efficiency transfer of functional transglutaminase
enzyme to regenerate engineered human LI epidermis on immunodeficient
mice. Engineered LI epidermis displayed normal transglutaminase
expression in vivo, unlike unengineered LI epidermis in which
transglutaminase activity was absent. Epidermal architecture was also
normalized, as was expression of the epidermal differentiation marker
filaggrin (135940). Engineered LI skin demonstrated restoration of
cutaneous barrier function measures to levels seen in epidermis
regenerated by keratinocytes from patients with normal skin, indicating
functional correction in vivo of the proposed primary pathophysiologic
defect in LI. The results confirmed a major role for transglutaminase in
epidermal differentiation and demonstrated a potential future approach
to therapeutic gene delivery in human skin.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, 1-BP DEL, 4640T

In a sporadic case of autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI1;
242300) of the lamellar form, Huber et al. (1995) used SSCP and sequence
analysis of PCR products to demonstrate a homozygous deletion of a T at
position 4640 in exon 8 of the TGM1 gene. This change led to a
frameshift and a truncated protein of 442 amino acids that still
contained the active site but not the putative Ca(2+)-binding region.
Mutation strongly reduced the level of normal transcripts (detectable
only by RT-PCR) as reported for nonsense and frameshift mutations in
other genes. (The deletion occurred at the first nucleotide of codon
433, TGG, leading to a premature stop codon downstream.)

.0002
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1, WITH OR WITHOUT BATHING
SUIT DISTRIBUTION
TGM1, IVS5, A-G, -2

In a sibship in which 2 sisters had autosomal recessive lamellar
ichthyosis (ARCI1; 242300), Huber et al. (1995) demonstrated
homozygosity for an A-to-G transition at nucleotide 3366 that converted
the canonical splice acceptor sequence from AG to GG. The cDNA products
showed the same A-to-G change found in genomic DNA and contained the
complete intron 5 sequence inserted into the normal transcript. This
inclusion of intron 5 led to a frameshift and created a premature stop
codon upstream of the sequences coding for the active site of the TGM1
enzyme.

Pigg et al. (1998) studied 36 Norwegian families with lamellar
ichthyosis and 7 with nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma
(ARCI1), using microsatellite markers linked to the TGM1 gene. One
common haplotype for 2 markers was found on 74% of disease-associated
chromosomes. Three individuals homozygous for the common haplotype, 2
affected by lamellar ichthyosis and 1 affected by congenital
ichthyosiform erythroderma, were analyzed for mutations in the TGM1
gene. All 3 patients were found to be homozygous for an A-to-G
transition located in the canonical splice acceptor site of intron 5.
Probands from the remaining 40 families were screened for this mutation;
the A-to-G transition was found on 61 of 72 alleles associated with
lamellar ichthyosis and on 9 of 15 alleles associated with congenital
ichthyosiform erythroderma. These findings suggested a single founder
mutation for most patients with these 2 phenotypes in Norway. The
mutation, which Pigg et al. (1998) designated 2562A-G, resulted in the
insertion of a guanosine at position 877 (876insG) in the mature cDNA
and the frameshift created a premature termination at codon 293. The
mutation was previously observed in 1 family (Huber et al., 1995) with a
resulting cDNA that included the entire intron 5, whereas in the
Norwegian patients, intron 5 was spliced but with only 1 intronic
nucleotide retained, suggesting that the mutation can result in variant
transcripts in different individuals.

Shevchenko et al. (2000) presented results from 5 families with the
intron 5/exon 6 splice acceptor site mutation. Affected members of 2
families were homozygous for the mutation, and those of the other
families were compound heterozygotes. Despite the diverse background of
these American patients, haplotype construction identified a common
founder chromosome spanning approximately 1.5 cM on 14q11. This
haplotype shared many of the alleles of the Norwegian haplotype, though
none of the patients claimed Norwegian ancestry. Genealogic information
from this ethnically and racially diverse group of patients provided
evidence that the founder chromosome may have arisen in the Westphalia
region of Germany. No association with congenital ichthyosiform
erythroderma was found in their study. Those patients who were
homozygous for the acceptor site mutation were less severely affected
than many of the compound heterozygotes. Shevchenko et al. (2000)
estimated that the IVS5-2A-G mutation originated in Germany and was
introduced in the Norwegian population around 1000 to 1100 A.D. They
also hypothesized that German families from Westphalia immigrating to
the United States introduced this mutation to the North American
population.

This mutation in the Norwegian families was reported by Pigg et al.
(1998) to result in an insertion of a G in the resultant mRNA (876insG).
In the Swiss family reported by Huber et al. (1995), the same A-to-G
substitution resulted in an mRNA product that retained the complete
intron 5 sequence in the normal transcript. In contrast, Shevchenko et
al. (2000) found that mRNA from their patients consisted of 2
transcripts: one with intron 5 inserted at the exon 5 splice represented
approximately 90% of the transcripts, whereas the other mRNA fragment
with the inserted G represented the remaining 10%. Failure of the
spliceosome to excise intron 5 was consistent with the loss of the
canonical AG sequence caused by the splice acceptor mutation. Shevchenko
et al. (2000) proposed a mechanism for the formation of the extra-G
transcript.

Farasat et al. (2009) identified the IVS5-2A-G mutation in 28% of
mutated TGM1 alleles from 57 American patients with LI, making it the
most common mutation in their study.

In a 16-year-old German boy with ARCI and his similarly affected
brother, who both showed a bathing suit distribution in infancy but
later displayed mild generalized ichthyosis, Oji et al. (2006)
identified compound heterozygosity for what they designated an 877-2A-G
splice site mutation in the TGM1 gene, and a 943C-T transition in exon
6, resulting in an arg315-to-cys (R315C; 190195.0031) substitution in
the first part of the catalytic core domain. Their unaffected parents
were each heterozygous for one of the mutations, neither of which was
found in 100 control chromosomes. Analysis of TGase-1 activity in
cryosections of patient skin was reduced in healthy skin areas and
abnormal in affected skin areas, showing only cytoplasmic and clearly
reduced TGase activity. The splice site mutation was also found in
compound heterozygosity with 2 distinct TGM1 missense mutations in a
2-year-old German boy with bathing suit ichthyosis and an unrelated
1-year-old German boy who had mild scaling, primarily in the axillae and
on the neck.

.0003
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, SER42TYR

In 2 sisters with autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis-1 (242300)
of the lamellar form, Huber et al. (1995) identified 3 mutations in the
TGM1 gene, 2 of which were inherited from their father, including a
950C-A transversion in exon 3, resulting in a ser42-to-tyr (S42Y)
substitution at a putative phosphorylation site located 5 amino acids
upstream of the cys cluster thought to be the membrane anchor region of
transglutaminase, and a 1399C-T transition in exon 3, resulting in an
arg142-to-cys (R142C; 190195.0004) substitution at a highly conserved
residue. The third mutation, inherited from their mother, was a 3549G-A
transition in exon 6 of the TGM1 gene, resulting in an arg323-to-gln
(R323Q; 190195.0005) substitution at a highly conserved residue. None of
the mutations were found in 50 controls. Because mutation analysis had
shown that regions adjacent to the cys cluster are important for
membrane attachment of the enzyme protein, Huber et al. (1995) suggested
that the S42Y mutation might explain the increased ratio of cytosolic to
membrane transglutaminase activity and protein observed in the 2
sisters.

.0004
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, ARG142CYS

See 190195.0003 and Huber et al. (1995).

Laiho et al. (1997) analyzed the TGM1 gene in Finnish patients with
lamellar ichthyosis (242300) and identified homozygosity for R142C in
affected members of 2 families. Compound heterozygosity for R142C and
another mutation in TGM1 was found in another 9 patients from 6
families, some presenting with lamellar ichthyosis and others exhibiting
nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma (see, e.g., 190195.0006
and 190195.0008).

.0005
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, ARG323GLN

See 190195.0003 and Huber et al. (1995).

.0006
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, ARG141HIS

In 2 affected sibs from a US Caucasian family with severe autosomal
recessive congenital ichthyosis (242300) of the lamellar form, Russell
et al. (1995) identified homozygosity for a 1489G-A transition in exon 3
of the TGM1 gene, resulting in an arg141-to-his (R141H) substitution at
a highly conserved residue. The mutation was present in heterozygosity
in the unaffected parents, who were not known to be related; however,
close questioning revealed a common ancestor 6 generations back. The
mutation was not found in 104 US Caucasian control alleles.

In a 1-year-old Finnish boy with nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform
erythroderma, Laiho et al. (1997) identified compound heterozygosity for
R141H and R142C (190195.0004). The authors also identified the R141H
mutation in compound heterozygosity with V378L (190195.0008) in an
11-year-old Finnish boy with lamellar ichthyosis.

.0007
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1, WITH OR WITHOUT BATHING
SUIT DISTRIBUTION
TGM1, ARG142HIS

In 2 affected cousins from a consanguineous Egyptian family with severe
autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI1; 242300) of the
lamellar form, Russell et al. (1995) identified homozygosity for a
1492G-A transition in exon 3 of the TGM1 gene, resulting in an
arg142-to-his (R142H) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
mutation was present in heterozygosity in the unaffected parents, but
was not found in 102 Egyptian control alleles.

In a 35-year-old Dutch woman with ARCI in a bathing suit distribution,
Oji et al. (2006) identified compound heterozygosity for the R142H
mutation and a 376C-T transition in exon 3 of the TGM1 gene, resulting
in an arg126-to-cys (R126C; 190195.0030) substitution at a residue at
the beginning of the beta-sandwich domain. Her unaffected parents were
each heterozygous for one of the mutations, neither of which was found
in 100 control chromosomes. In situ TGase testing of an unaffected area
of the patient's skin demonstrated a marked decrease in enzyme activity
when the temperature was increased from 25 to 37 degrees Celsius. Oji et
al. (2006) concluded that the bathing suit distribution of ichthyosis
represents a temperature-sensitive phenotype.

.0008
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, VAL378LEU

In a 25-year-old Finnish woman with autosomal recessive congenital
ichthyosis (ARCI1; 242300) manifesting as nonbullous congenital
ichthyosiform erythroderma, Laiho et al. (1997) identified compound
heterozygosity for a val378-to-leu (V378L) mutation in the TGM1 gene and
an unknown allele. The ichthyosis was accentuated in the palms and soles
and flexures and was associated with alopecia and ectropion. In a
10-year-old Finnish boy and an unrelated 11-year-old Finnish boy with
the lamellar form of ichthyosis, Laiho et al. (1997) identified compound
heterozygosity for the V378L mutation and an R395L mutation
(190195.0009) or an R141H mutation (190195.0006), respectively.

.0009
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, ARG395LEU

In 2 Finnish brothers with autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis
(242300) manifesting as nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform
erythroderma, Laiho et al. (1997) identified an arg395-to-leu (R395L)
mutation in the TGM1 gene in compound heterozygous state with a second
unknown allele. In a 17-year-old Finnish female and a 10-year-old
Finnish boy, both with the lamellar form of ichthyosis, they identified
the same R395L mutation in compound heterozygosity with G217S
(190195.0023) or V378L (190195.0008), respectively.

.0010
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1, WITH BATHING SUIT DISTRIBUTION
TGM1, VAL382MET

In a 4-year-old girl with autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis in a
'bathing suit' distribution (242300), Petit et al. (1997) identified
homozygosity for a 1144G-A transition in exon 7 of the TGM1 gene,
resulting in a val382-to-met (V382M) substitution at an evolutionarily
conserved residue in the core domain. The mutation was present in
heterozygosity in the unaffected parents and an unaffected brother, but
was not found in 50 unrelated controls. The patient had large brown
scales on the trunk, neck, and scalp, with sparing of the face and
limbs. Functional analysis of cultured keratinocytes demonstrated a
profound reduction of membrane-bound as well as cytosolic
transglutaminase (TG) activity in both affected and unaffected skin from
the patient compared to controls. Immunoblot analysis of cytoplasmic and
membrane keratinocyte extracts revealed no detectable TGK protein in
affected or unaffected skin from the patient, although Northern blot
analysis showed TGM1 mRNA of normal size and comparable amounts with an
age-matched control. Petit et al. (1997) proposed that other mechanisms
may compensate for TGK deficiency in unaffected skin, and suggested that
the regulation of the formation of the cornified envelope might differ
between these different areas of skin.

.0011
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, ARG388HIS

Akiyama et al. (2001) reported novel mutations in the TGM1 gene in a
Japanese boy with autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (242300).
The patient displayed nonbullous congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma,
with fine gray or light brown scales on an erythematous skin. An in situ
transglutaminase activity assay detected markedly reduced
transglutaminase activity in the patient's epidermis. Electron
microscopy revealed incomplete thickening of the cornified cell envelope
during keratinization in the epidermis. Sequencing of the entire exons
and exon-intron borders of TGM1 revealed that the proband was a compound
heterozygote for 2 novel mutations, 9008delA (190195.0012) and arg388 to
his (R388H). The missense mutation R388H, resulting from a G-to-A
transition in exon 8 of the TGM1 gene, altered a conserved residue in
the center of the core domain of the protein. The frameshift mutation
9008delA, resulting in a premature termination codon at the tail of the
TGM1 peptide, was in the beta-barrel 2 domain (C-terminal end domain) of
the peptide, far from the active sites of the TGM1 molecule.

.0012
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, 1-BP DEL, 9008A

See 190195.0011 and Akiyama et al. (2001).

.0013
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, ASP490GLY

In 2 sibs with autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (242300) who
presented the self-healing collodion baby phenotype and had markedly
diminished TGM1 epidermal activity, Raghunath et al. (2003) identified
compound heterozygosity for missense mutations in the TGM1 gene: G278R
(190195.0014) and D490G. The amino acid substitutions arose from a
G-to-A transition at nucleotide 3400 and an A-to-G transition at
nucleotide 7367, respectively. Molecular modeling and biochemical assays
of mutant proteins under elevated hydrostatic pressure suggested
significantly reduced activity in G278R and a chelation of water
molecules in D490G that locked the mutated enzyme in an inactive trans
conformation in utero. After birth, these water molecules were removed
and the enzyme was predicted to isomerize back to a partially active cis
form, explaining the dramatic improvement of this skin condition.

.0014
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, GLY278ARG

See 190195.0013 and Raghunath et al. (2003).

In a male patient with autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis
(242300), Cserhalmi-Friedman et al. (2001) identified compound
heterozygosity for a gly278-to-arg (G278R) and an arg286-to-gln (R286Q;
190195.0017) substitution in the TGM1 gene. The unaffected parents were
each heterozygous for one of the mutations, neither of which was found
in 50 unrelated controls. On his trunk, the patient had large scales and
mild erythema; immunofluorescence microscropy showed interrupted stratum
granulosum and stratum corneum staining, which the authors suggested
might be due to instability of mutant protein leading to higher
sensitivity to degradation.

.0015
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, GLY392ASP

In a female patient with autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis
(242300), Cserhalmi-Friedman et al. (2001) identified compound
heterozygosity for a gly392-to-asp (G392D) substitution and a 5-bp
deletion (1303del5; 190195.0024) in the TGM1 gene. The unaffected
parents were each heterozygous for one of the mutations, neither of
which was found in 50 unrelated controls. On her trunk, the patient had
large scales and moderate erythema; immunofluorescence microscopy showed
no detectable staining, confirming the marked reduction in protein
level.

.0016
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, ARG142PR0

In a female patient with autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis
(242300), Cserhalmi-Friedman et al. (2001) identified compound
heterozygosity for an arg142-to-pro (R142P) and a gln582-to-ter (Q582X;
190195.0025) substitution in the TGM1 gene. The unaffected parents were
each heterozygous for one of the mutations, neither of which was found
in 50 unrelated controls. On her trunk, the patient had large scales and
moderate erythema; immunofluorescence microscopy showed no detectable
staining, confirming the marked reduction in protein level.

.0017
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, ARG286GLN

See 190195.0014 and Cserhalmi-Friedman et al. (2001).

.0018
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, VAL518MET

In a female patient with autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis
(242300), Cserhalmi-Friedman et al. (2001) identified compound
heterozygosity for a val518-to-met (V518M) and a ser160-to-cys (S160C;
190195.0019) substitution in the TGM1 gene. The unaffected parents were
each heterozygous for one of the mutations, neither of which was found
in 50 unrelated controls. On her trunk, the patient had large scales and
moderate erythema; immunofluorescence microscopy showed positive
staining in the stratum granulosum and stratum coreum that corresponded
to a normal level of protein, but in vitro enzyme activity assay
revealed that mutant enzyme function was reduced to 30% of wildtype
activity.

.0019
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, SER160CYS

See 190195.0018 and Cserhalmi-Friedman et al. (2001).

.0020
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, GLY94ASP

In a female patient with autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis
(242300), Cserhalmi-Friedman et al. (2001) identified compound
heterozygosity for a gly94-to-asp (G94D) substitution and a -86C-T
transition (190195.0026) in the TGM1 gene. The unaffected parents were
each heterozygous for one of the mutations, neither of which was found
in 50 unrelated controls. On her trunk, the patient had large scales and
mild erythema.

.0021
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1, WITH BATHING SUIT DISTRIBUTION
TGM1, ASN288THR

In a Japanese girl and a Korean boy with similar clinical histories and
ichthyosis in a distribution affecting primarily the trunk (242300),
Yang et al. (2001) identified compound heterozygosity for an A-C
transversion in exon 5 of the TGM1 gene, resulting in an asn288-to-thr
(N288T) substitution, and another missense mutation in TGM1. In the
Japanese girl, the second mutation was a C-T transition in exon 6,
resulting in an arg306-to-trp (R306W; 190195.0022) substitution, whereas
in the Korean boy, the second mutation was an A-T transversion in exon 2
of TGM1, resulting in an asp101-to-val (D101V; 190195.0027)
substitution. The unaffected parents were each heterozygous for one of
the mutations, none of which was found in 50 or more controls.
Three-dimensional structural prediction analyses revealed that these
missense mutations cause misfolding in the central catalytic core domain
of the transglutaminase-1 enzyme that would probably result in reduced
enzyme activity. Analysis of TGM1 activity in skin samples from the
Korean family showed that both cytosolic and membrane-bound forms of the
mutant enzymes had reduced activity, which was approximately 50% of
wildtype activity in the parents heterozygous for N288T and D101V,
respectively, with mutant TGM1 activity ranging from 5% in the membrane
to 15% in the cytosol in the compound heterozygous patient.

.0022
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1, WITH BATHING SUIT DISTRIBUTION
TGM1, ARG306TRP

See 190195.0021 and Yang et al. (2001).

In a 56-year-old Japanese woman with a mild form of lamellar ichthyosis
limited to the neck, abdomen, center of the back, and bilateral axillae
(242300), Akiyama et al. (2001) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
missense mutations in the TGM1 gene, a 3404C-T transition in exon 6,
resulting in an arg306-to-trp (R306W) substitution and a 2582T-A
transversion in exon 4, resulting in a leu204-to-gln (L204Q;
190195.0028) substitution. The patient's mother was heterozygous for the
R306W mutation; DNA was unavailable from her deceased father. Neither
mutation was found in 25 unrelated Japanese controls. Immunofluorescence
demonstrated reduced expression of TGM1 in the granular layer of the
patient's epidermis, with normal expression of TGM3. Considering the
distribution pattern of the skin lesions and the clinical history that
the affected areas enlarged in the summer and became smaller in the
winter, Akiyama et al. (2001) suggested that increased water content and
elevated pH in the stratum corneum might play an important role in
formation of lamellar scales in this patient.

.0023
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, GLY217SER

See 190195.0009 and Laiho et al. (1997).

.0024
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, 5-BP DEL, NT1303

See 190195.0015 and Cserhalmi-Friedman et al. (2001).

.0025
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, GLN582TER

See 190195.0016 and Cserhalmi-Friedman et al. (2001).

.0026
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, -86C-T

See 190195.0020 and Cserhalmi-Friedman et al. (2001).

.0027
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, ASP101VAL

See 190195.0021 and Yang et al. (2001).

.0028
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, LEU204GLN

See 190195.0022 and Akiyama et al. (2001).

.0029
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1, WITH BATHING SUIT DISTRIBUTION
TGM1, TYR276ASN

In a 14-year-old Turkish boy with autosomal recessive congenital
ichthyosis in a bathing suit distribution (242300), Oji et al. (2006)
identified homozygosity for an 826T-A transversion in exon 5 of the TGM1
gene, resulting in a tyr276-to-asn (Y276N) substitution in the first
part of the catalytic core domain. His unaffected first-cousin parents
were heterozygous for the mutation, which was not found in 100 control
chromosomes. The patient had thick dark scales on the trunk, with
sparing of the limbs and face; the scaling was most pronounced in the
axillae. Ultrastructural analysis of affected skin revealed groups of
single polygonal clefts, the so-called 'cholesterol clefts,'
representing remnants of cholesterol crystals within the thickened
massive horny layer, whereas healthy skin from his right arm showed a
normal diameter of the stratum corneum and completely normal
ultrastructure. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that in the
patient's healthy skin, enzyme localization and activity were almost
normal, whereas in affected skin, activity was only present in the
cytoplasm and was clearly reduced. In situ TGase testing of the
patient's healthy skin demonstrated a marked decrease in enzyme activity
when the temperature was increased from 25 to 37 degrees Celsius.

Using fluorescence spectrometry, Aufenvenne et al. (2009) demonstrated
that the Y276N mutation not only has decreased enzyme activity compared
to wildtype but also exhibits a marked shift in temperature optimum from
37 degrees Celsius to 31 degrees Celsius: residual activity was 14.55%
at the lower temperature, whereas activity at 37 degrees Celsius was
less than 5%, and the deficient activity could be reconstituted by
decreasing the temperature to below 33 degrees Celsius. Aufenvenne et
al. (2009) concluded that the striking distribution of scaling in
bathing suit ichthyosis is due to mutations that render TGase-1
sensitive to temperatures above 33 degrees Celsius.

.0030
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1, WITH BATHING SUIT DISTRIBUTION
TGM1, ARG126CYS

See 190195.0007 and Oji et al. (2006).

Using fluorescence spectrometry, Aufenvenne et al. (2009) demonstrated
that the R126C mutation not only has decreased enzyme activity compared
to wildtype but also exhibits a marked shift in temperature optimum from
37 degrees Celsius to 31 degrees Celsius: residual activity was 13% at
the lower temperature, whereas activity at 37 degrees Celsius was less
than 7.5%, and the deficient activity could be reconstituted by
decreasing the temperature to below 33 degrees Celsius. In contrast, the
R142H mutation (190195.0007) consistently showed activity below 5.5% at
either temperature. Aufenvenne et al. (2009) concluded that the striking
distribution of scaling in BSI is due to mutations that render TGase-1
sensitive to temperatures above 33 degrees Celsius.

.0031
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1, WITH BATHING SUIT DISTRIBUTION
TGM1, ARG315CYS

See 190195.0002 and Oji et al. (2006).

Using fluorescence spectrometry, Aufenvenne et al. (2009) demonstrated
that the R315C mutation not only has decreased enzyme activity compared
to wildtype but also exhibits a marked shift in temperature optimum from
37 degrees Celsius to 31 degrees Celsius: residual activity was about
14% at the lower temperature, whereas activity at 37 degrees Celsius was
less than 6%, and the deficient activity could be reconstituted by
decreasing the temperature to below 33 degrees Celsius. Aufenvenne et
al. (2009) concluded that the striking distribution of scaling in BSI is
due to mutations that render TGase-1 sensitive to temperatures above 33
degrees Celsius.

.0032
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1, WITH BATHING SUIT DISTRIBUTION
TGM1, ARG315HIS

In 2 brothers from a consanguineous family of Moroccan origin with
autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (242300) in a bathing suit
distribution, Oji et al. (2006) identified homozygosity for a 944G-A
transition in exon 6 of the TGM1 gene, resulting in an arg315-to-his
(R315H) substitution at a residue in the first part of the catalytic
core domain. Their unaffected parents were heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 100 control chromosomes. The
16-year-old proband had moderate scaling on the trunk as well as on
particular areas of the limbs, whereas his brother had less severe
scaling with a similar distribution pattern.

Using fluorescence spectrometry, Aufenvenne et al. (2009) demonstrated
that the R315H mutation not only has decreased enzyme activity compared
to wildtype but also exhibits a marked shift in temperature optimum from
37 degrees Celsius to 31 degrees Celsius: residual activity was about
13.5% at the lower temperature, whereas activity at 37 degrees Celsius
was 6.25%, and the deficient activity could be reconstituted by
decreasing the temperature to below 33 degrees Celsius. Aufenvenne et
al. (2009) concluded that the striking distribution of scaling in
bathing suit ichthyosis is due to mutations that render TGase-1
sensitive to temperatures above 33 degrees Celsius.

.0033
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1, WITH OR WITHOUT BATHING
SUIT DISTRIBUTION
TGM1, ARG315LEU

In monozygotic African American twin girls with autosomal recessive
congenital ichthyosis (242300) involving nearly the entire integument
but sparing the face and flexural surfaces, Tok et al. (1999) identified
homozygosity for a 1030G-T transversion in exon 6 of the TGM1 gene,
resulting in an arg315-to-leu (R315L) substitution at a highly conserved
residue within the catalytic core domain.

In 8 South African black patients with ARCI in a bathing suit
distribution, 5 of whom had previously been reported by Jacyk (2005),
Arita et al. (2007) identified homozygosity for the R315L mutation in
the TGM1 gene. Noting that the mutation was detected in all 8 DNA
samples and that several of the affected individuals belonged to the
Nguni ethnic groups (Zulu, Swazi, and Xhosa), Arita et al. (2007)
concluded that it likely represented a founder effect in this
population. The mutation was not found in 50 ethnically matched control
samples.

In a boy with ARCI in a bathing suit distribution, who was born of a
black South African mother and white Irish father, Hackett et al. (2010)
identified compound heterozygosity for the R315L mutation and a 1-bp
insertion (1331dupA) in exon 9 of the TGM1 gene (190195.0037), causing a
frameshift predicted to result in a premature termination codon. The
patient had collodion membrane with eclabium and ectropion noted at
birth, and in the first months of life developed lamellar scaling
involving large dark scales on his trunk with complete sparing of all 4
limbs and the face. Neither mutation was found in 100 control
chromosomes.

.0034
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, VAL359MET

In a 7-year-old French girl with autosomal recessive congenital
ichthyosis (242300), who was born with a mild and transient acral
self-healing collodion baby phenotype, Mazereeuw-Hautier et al. (2009)
identified compound heterozygosity for a 1075G-A transition in exon 7 of
the TGM1 gene, resulting in a val359-to-met (V359M) substitution, and a
1187G-A transition in exon 8, resulting in an arg396-to-his (R396H;
190195.0035) substitution. Fluorescence spectroscopy demonstrated that
the V359M mutation had 12.8% of the activity of wildtype TGM1, whereas
activity of R396H was nearly abolished, at 3.3% of wildtype. The
proband's 9-year-old sister, who had ARCI of the classic lamellar type,
was compound heterozygous for the R396H mutation and a 7-bp deletion in
the TGM1 gene (1922delGGCCTGT; 190195.0036), involving the last 5
nucleotides of exon 12 and the consensus GT donor splice site of intron
12, predicted to cause abnormal splicing and causing a frameshift
resulting in a premature termination codon 34 amino acids downstream of
the deletion. Their unaffected mother was heterozygous for the R396H
mutation, and their apparently unaffected father was a compound
heterozygote for V359M and the 7-bp deletion; none of the mutations was
found in 100 unrelated Caucasian controls. Mazereeuw-Hautier et al.
(2009) noted that a transient and mild anomaly of the skin at birth
could not be ruled out in the father.

.0035
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, ARG396HIS

See 190195.0034 and Mazereeuw-Hautier et al. (2009).

.0036
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, 7-BP DEL, NT1922

See 190195.0034 and Mazereeuw-Hautier et al. (2009).

.0037
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, 1-BP INS, 1331A

See 190195.0033 and Hackett et al. (2010).

.0038
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1, WITH OR WITHOUT BATHING
SUIT DISTRIBUTION
TGM1, ARG670TER

In 3 Spanish probands from Galicia with autosomal recessive congenital
ichthyosis (242300) of the lamellar type, Rodriguez-Pazos et al. (2011)
identified homozygosity for a 2278C-T transition in exon 15 of the TGM1
gene, resulting in an arg670-to-ter (R670X) substitution in the
beta-barrel-2 domain. Another 3 Galician ARCI patients were compound
heterozygous for R670X and a 5-bp deletion (1223_1227delACACA;
190195.0039) in exon 8 of the TGM1 gene, and 1 additional patient was
homozygous for the 5-bp deletion. The R670X mutation accounted for 41%
and the 5-bp deletion for 23% of TGM1 mutant alleles in the Galician
population under study. These findings were consistent with a strong
founder effect in this population.

.0039
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 1
TGM1, 5-BP DEL, NT1223

See 190195.0038 and Rodriguez-Pazos et al. (2011).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Laiho et al. (1999)
REFERENCE 1. Akiyama, M.; Takizawa, Y.; Kokaji, T.; Shimizu, H.: Novel mutations
of TGM1 in a child with congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma. Brit.
J. Derm. 144: 401-407, 2001.

2. Akiyama, M.; Takizawa, Y.; Suzuki, Y.; Ishiko, A.; Matsuo, I.;
Shimizu, H.: Compound heterozygous TGM1 mutations including a novel
missense mutation L204Q in a mild form of lamellar ichthyosis. (Letter) J.
Invest. Derm. 116: 992-995, 2001.

3. Arita, K.; Jacyk, W. K.; Wessagowit, V.; van Rensburg, E. J.; Chaplin,
T.; Mein, C. A.; Akiyama, M.; Shimizu, H.; Happle, R.; McGrath, J.
A.: The South African 'bathing suit ichthyosis' is a form of lamellar
ichthyosis caused by a homozygous missense mutation, p.R315L, in transglutaminase
1. (Letter) J. Invest. Derm. 127: 490-493, 2007.

4. Aufenvenne, K.; Oji, V.; Walker, T.; Becker-Pauly, C.; Hennies,
H. C.; Stocker, W.; Traupe, H.: Transglutaminase-1 and bathing suit
ichthyosis: molecular analysis of gene/environment interactions. (Letter) J.
Invest. Derm. 129: 2068-2071, 2009.

5. Choate, K. A.; Medalie, D. A.; Morgan, J. R.; Khavari, P. A.:
Corrective gene transfer in the human skin disorder lamellar ichthyosis. Nature
Med. 2: 1263-1267, 1996.

6. Cserhalmi-Friedman, P. B.; Milstone, L. M.; Christiano, A. M.:
Diagnosis of autosomal recessive lamellar ichthyosis with mutations
in the TGM1 gene. Brit. J. Derm. 144: 726-730, 2001.

7. Farasat, S.; Wei, M.-H.; Herman, M.; Liewehr, D. J.; Steinberg,
S. M.; Bale, S. J.; Fleckman, P.; Toro, J. R.: Novel transglutaminase-1
mutations and genotype-phenotype investigations of 104 patients with
autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis in the USA. J. Med. Genet. 46:
103-111, 2009.

8. Hackett, B. C.; Fitzgerald, D.; Watson, R. M.; Hol, F. A.; Irvine,
A. D.: Genotype-phenotype correlations with TGM1: clustering of mutations
in the bathing suit ichthyosis and self-healing collodion baby variants
of lamellar ichthyosis. Brit. J. Derm. 162: 448-451, 2010.

9. Huber, M.; Rettler, I.; Bernasconi, K.; Frenk, E.; Lavrijsen, S.
P. M.; Ponec, M.; Bon, A.; Lautenschlager, S.; Schorderet, D. F.;
Hohl, D.: Mutations of keratinocyte transglutaminase in lamellar
ichthyosis. Science 267: 525-528, 1995.

10. Jacyk, W. K.: Bathing-suit ichthyosis: a peculiar phenotype of
lamellar ichthyosis in South African blacks. Europ. J. Derm. 15:
433-436, 2005.

11. Kim, H. C.; Idler, W. W.; Kim, I. G.; Han, J. H.; Chung, S. I.;
Steinert, P. M.: The complete amino acid sequence of the human transglutaminase
K enzyme deduced from the nucleic acid sequences of cDNA clones. J.
Biol. Chem. 266: 536-539, 1991.

12. Kim, I.-G.; McBride, O. W.; Wang, M.; Kim, S.-Y.; Idler, W. W.;
Steinert, P. M.: Structure and organization of the human transglutaminase
1 gene. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 7710-7717, 1992.

13. Laiho, E.; Ignatius, J.; Mikkola, H.; Yee, V. C.; Teller, D. C.;
Niemi, K.-M.; Saarialho-Kere, U.; Kere, J.; Palotie, A.: Transglutaminase
1 mutations in autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis: private
and recurrent mutations in an isolated population. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61:
529-538, 1997.

14. Laiho, E.; Niemi, K.-M.; Ignatius, J.; Kere, J.; Palotie, A.;
Saarialho-Kere, U.: Clinical and morphological correlations for transglutaminase
1 gene mutations in autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 7: 625-632, 1999.

15. Matsuki, M.; Yamashita, F.; Ishida-Yamamoto, A.; Yamada, K.; Kinoshita,
C.; Fushiki, S.; Ueda, E.; Morishima, Y.; Tabata, K.; Yasuno, H.;
Hashida, M.; Iizuka, H.; Ikawa, M.; Okabe, M.; Kondoh, G.; Kinoshita,
T.; Takeda, J.; Yamanishi, K.: Defective stratum corneum and early
neonatal death in mice lacking the gene for transglutaminase 1 (keratinocyte
transglutaminase). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 1044-1049, 1998.

16. Mazereeuw-Hautier, J.; Aufenvenne, K.; Deraison, C.; Ahvazi, B.;
Oji, V.; Traupe, H.; Hovnanian, A.: Acral self-healing collodion
baby: report of a new clinical phenotype caused by a novel TGM1 mutation. Brit.
J. Derm. 161: 456-463, 2009.

17. Nemes, Z.; Marekov, L. N.; Fesus, L.; Steinert, P. M.: A novel
function for transglutaminase 1: attachment of long-chain omega-hydroxyceramides
to involucrin by ester bond formation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96:
8402-8407, 1999.

18. Oji, V.; Hautier, J. M.; Ahvazi, B.; Hausser, I.; Aufenvenne,
K.; Walker, T.; Seller, N.; Steijlen, P. M.; Kuster, W.; Hovnanian,
A.; Hennies, H. C.; Traupe, H.: Bathing suit ichthyosis is caused
by transglutaminase-1 deficiency: evidence for a temperature-sensitive
phenotype. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15: 3083-3097, 2006.

19. Petit, E.; Huber, M.; Rochat, A.; Bodemer, C.; Teillac-Hamel,
D.; Muh, J.-P.; Revuz, J.; Barrandon, Y.; Lathrop, M.; de Prost, Y.;
Hohl, D.; Hovnanian, A.: Three novel point mutations in the keratinocyte
transglutaminase (TGK) gene in lamellar ichthyosis: significance for
mutant transcript level, TGK immunodetection and activity. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 5: 218-228, 1997.

20. Phillips, M. A.; Stewart, B. E.; Qin, Q.; Chakravarty, R.; Floyd,
E. E.; Jetten, A. M.; Rice, R. H.: Primary structure of keratinocyte
transglutaminase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 9333-9337, 1990.

21. Pigg, M.; Gedde-Dahl, T., Jr.; Cox, D.; Hausser, I.; Anton-Lamprecht,
I.; Dahl, N.: Strong founder effect for a transglutaminase 1 gene
mutation in lamellar ichthyosis and congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma
from Norway. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 6: 589-596, 1998.

22. Polakowska, R. R.; Eddy, R. L.; Shows, T. B.; Goldsmith, L. A.
: Epidermal type I transglutaminase (TGM1) is assigned to human chromosome
14. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 56: 105-107, 1991.

23. Polakowska, R. R.; Eickbush, T.; Falciano, V.; Razvi, F.; Goldsmith,
L. A.: Organization and evolution of the human epidermal keratinocyte
transglutaminase I gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4476-4480, 1992.

24. Raghunath, M.; Hennies, H.-C.; Ahvazi, B.; Vogel, M.; Reis, A.;
Steinert, P. M.; Traupe, H: Self-healing collodion baby: a dynamic
phenotype explained by a particular transglutaminase-1 mutation. J.
Invest. Derm. 120: 224-228, 2003.

25. Rodriguez-Pazos, L.; Ginarte, M.; Fachal, L.; Toribio, J.; Carracedo,
A.; Vega, A.: Analysis of TGM1, ALOX12B, ALOXE3, NIPAL4 and CYP4F22
in autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis from Galicia (NW Spain):
evidence of founder effects. Brit. J. Derm. 165: 906-911, 2011.

26. Russell, L. J.; DiGiovanna, J. J.; Rogers, G. R.; Steinert, P.
M.; Hashem, N.; Compton, J. G.; Bale, S. J.: Mutations in the gene
for transglutaminase 1 in autosomal recessive lamellar ichthyosis. Nature
Genet. 9: 279-283, 1995.

27. Shevchenko, Y. O.; Compton, J. G.; Toro, J. R.; DiGiovanna, J.
J.; Bale, S. J.: Splice-site mutation in TGM1 in congenital recessive
ichthyosis in American families: molecular, genetic, genealogic, and
clinical studies. Hum. Genet. 106: 492-499, 2000.

28. Tok, J.; Garzon, M. C.; Cserhalmi-Friedman, P.; Lam, H. M.; Spitz,
J. L.; Christiano, A. M.: Identification of mutations in the transglutaminase
1 gene in lamellar ichthyosis. Exp. Derm. 8: 128-133, 1999.

29. van Bokhoven, H.; Rawson, R. B.; Merkx, G. F. M.; Cremers, F.
P. M.; Seabra, M. C.: cDNA cloning and chromosomal localization of
the genes encoding the alpha- and beta-subunits of human Rab geranylgeranyl
transferase: the 3-prime end of the alpha-subunit gene overlaps with
the transglutaminase 1 gene promoter. Genomics 38: 133-140, 1996.

30. Yamanishi, K.; Inazawa, J.; Liew, F.-M.; Nonomura, K.; Ariyama,
T.; Yasuno, H.; Abe, T.; Doi, H.; Hirano, J.; Fukushima, S.: Structure
of the gene for human transglutaminase 1. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 17858-17863,
1992.

31. Yang, J.-M.; Ahn, K.-S.; Cho, M.-O.; Yoneda, K.; Lee, C.-H.; Lee,
J.-H.; Lee, E.-S.; Candi, E.; Melino, G.; Ahvazi, B.; Steinert, P.
M.: Novel mutations of the transglutaminase 1 gene in lamellar ichthyosis. J.
Invest. Derm. 117: 214-218, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/17/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/26/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/5/2007
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/29/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/28/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 2/11/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 3/28/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/13/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/8/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/13/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/17/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/13/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/30/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/6/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/3/1991

EDITED terry: 01/18/2013
carol: 1/17/2013
wwang: 4/1/2009
ckniffin: 3/26/2009
carol: 12/6/2007
carol: 12/5/2007
wwang: 10/3/2007
tkritzer: 11/21/2003
alopez: 4/29/2003
alopez: 4/28/2003
alopez: 2/11/2003
alopez: 3/28/2001
carol: 2/16/2001
cwells: 1/23/2001
terry: 1/19/2001
mcapotos: 7/20/2000
mcapotos: 6/28/2000
terry: 6/13/2000
alopez: 11/12/1999
terry: 11/8/1999
carol: 8/18/1999
terry: 8/13/1999
alopez: 5/13/1999
carol: 3/26/1999
terry: 3/17/1999
psherman: 3/13/1998
terry: 3/6/1998
terry: 11/4/1997
terry: 10/30/1997
mark: 10/9/1997
terry: 10/6/1997
alopez: 7/16/1997
terry: 1/17/1997
terry: 11/1/1996
terry: 10/30/1996
mark: 1/27/1996
terry: 1/23/1996
terry: 3/13/1995
carol: 4/4/1994
carol: 4/7/1993
carol: 10/22/1992
carol: 6/17/1992
carol: 6/15/1992

603542	TITLE *603542 SMALL NUCLEAR RIBONUCLEOPROTEIN POLYPEPTIDE G; SNRPG
DESCRIPTION The 4 major small nuclear ribonucleoprotein particles (snRNPs) share 8
proteins which form the snRNP structural core. See SNRPF (603541). One
common protein, G (SNRPG), migrates as a doublet of approximately 9 kD
by high-TEMED SDS-PAGE. By performing RACE on a HeLa cell cDNA library
using primers based on the partial protein sequence of SNRPG, Hermann et
al. (1995) cloned SNRPG cDNAs. The predicted 76-amino acid protein
contains 34% hydrophobic residues, most of which are located in the
C-terminal half. The authors found that G protein translated in vitro
from a single SNRPG mRNA also migrated as a doublet by high-TEMED
SDS-PAGE. They suggested that the 2 bands represent conformational
isomers of the same protein. Northern blot analysis revealed that the
SNRPG gene is expressed as an approximately 0.5-kb mRNA in HeLa cells.

REFERENCE 1. Hermann, H.; Fabrizio, P.; Raker, V. A.; Foulaki, K.; Hornig, H.;
Brahms, H.; Luhrmann, R.: snRNP Sm proteins share two evolutionarily
conserved sequence motifs which are involved in Sm protein-protein
interactions. EMBO J. 14: 2076-2088, 1995.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/16/1999

EDITED psherman: 02/16/1999

612972	TITLE *612972 TIGGER TRANSPOSABLE ELEMENT-DERIVED GENE 1; TIGD1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DNA transposons are repetitive elements that move in the genome by
excision and reintegration without an RNA intermediate. Tiggers are
ancestral transposons that appear to be the source of several medium
reiterated frequency repeats (MERs) in the human genome. TIGD1 belongs
to a family of genes derived from Tiggers (Smit and Riggs, 1996; Dou et
al., 2004).

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the TIGD1 gene to chromosome 2q37.1 based on an
alignment of the TIGD1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK056329) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

EVOLUTION

- Tigger Transposons

DNA transposons are characterized by terminal inverted repeats (TIRs) of
10 to 500 bp, and they encode a transposase that binds to the TIRs and
catalyzes the cutting and pasting of the element. By searching the human
genome for repetitive elements containing TIRs, followed by database
analysis, Smit and Riggs (1996) identified 2 related elements with
coding capacity that they designated Tigger1 and Tigger2. The deduced
Tigger1 and Tigger2 products share 48% amino acid identity, and both are
related to the Drosophila pogo transposase. Smit and Riggs (1996)
identified several MERs within the genome that appeared to arise by
Tigger duplication. Tigger1 was represented primarily by full-length
elements, whereas most elements related to Tigger2 were partial copies
or included an internal deletion.

REFERENCE 1. Dou, T.; Gu, S.; Zhou, Z.; Ji, C.; Zeng, L.; Ye, X.; Xu, J.; Ying,
K.; Xie, Y.; Mao, Y.: Isolation and characterization of a Jerky and
JRK/JH8 like gene, Tigger transposable element derived 7, TIGD7. Biochem.
Genet. 42: 279-285, 2004.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/20/2009.

3. Smit, A. F. A.; Riggs, A. D.: Tiggers and other DNA transposon
fossils in the human genome. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 1443-1448,
1996.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/20/2009

EDITED mgross: 08/20/2009

604881	TITLE *604881 RABPHILIN 3A-LIKE; RPH3AL
;;NOC2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a DNA fragment encoding the Rab3A (179490)-binding domain of a
mouse rabphilin-3A (RPH3A; 612159) cDNA, Kotake et al. (1997) probed a
rat islet cDNA library under low stringency and identified rat Rph3al,
which they designated Noc2. A full-length Noc2 clone was isolated from a
rat insulin-secreting cell line cDNA library. The Noc2 cDNA encodes a
302-amino acid protein that shows 40.7% amino acid identity and 77.9%
similarity to the N-terminal region of rat rabphilin-3A. However, it
lacks the C2 domains, and hence the Noc2 (no C2 domain) designation.
Noc2 contains 1 potential protein kinase A and 3 potential protein
kinase C phosphorylation sites. RNA blot analysis revealed that a single
2.2- or 2.6-kb transcript of Noc2 is expressed at very high levels in
pancreatic islets, and at low to moderate or high levels in other
endocrine tissues and hormone-secreting cell lines, but at very low
levels in brain. Screening a mouse embryonic cDNA library with the yeast
2-hybrid system, Kotake et al. (1997) showed that Noc2 interacts with
the LIM domain-containing protein zyxin (602002), a component of the
cytoskeleton. The authors suggested that Noc2 is probably involved in
regulated exocytosis in endocrine cells by interacting with the
cytoskeleton.

Using cDNA selection, Smith et al. (1999) identified a human transcript
spanning a common deletion on 17p13.3 found in approximately 40% of
medulloblastomas. The full-length coding sequence predicted a 315-amino
acid protein displaying 77% amino acid identity with the rat Noc2
(Rph3al) protein. Northern blot analysis detected moderate to high
expression of a 2.6-kb RPH3AL transcript in thyroid, ovary, stomach,
heart, pancreas, skeletal muscle, kidney, and liver.

GENE STRUCTURE

Smith et al. (1999) determined that the RPH3AL gene contains 9 exons.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Smith et al. (1999) determined that at least 1 exon of the RPH3AL gene
maps within the common 9-kb deletion on chromosome 17p13.3 found in
medulloblastomas. However, they found no mutations in this gene in 33
tumor samples with allelic loss of 17p13, including 10 medulloblastomas,
14 follicular thyroid cancers, and 9 ovarian cancers.

REFERENCE 1. Kotake, K.; Ozaki, N.; Mizuta, M.; Sekiya, S.; Inagaki, N.; Seino,
S.: Noc2, a putative zinc finger protein involved in exocytosis in
endocrine cells. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 29407-29410, 1997.

2. Smith, J. S.; Tachibana, I.; Allen, C.; Chiappa, S. A.; Lee, H.
K.; McIver, B.; Jenkins, R. B.; Raffel, C.: Cloning of a human ortholog
(RPH3AL) of (RNO)Rph3al from a candidate 17p13.3 medulloblastoma tumor
suppressor locus. Genomics 59: 97-101, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 7/10/2000

CREATED Wilson H. Y. Lo: 4/26/2000

EDITED wwang: 11/23/2010
wwang: 7/2/2008
carol: 7/10/2000
carol: 4/27/2000

603658	TITLE *603658 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S7; RPS7
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The eukaryotic ribosome consists of more than 80 different ribosomal
proteins, including RPS7, and 4 RNA species (see 180450).

CLONING

Annilo et al. (1995) isolated cDNAs encoding RPS7 by screening a human
cDNA expression library with antibodies against rat Rps7. The deduced
194-amino acid human RPS7 protein is identical to rat Rps7. Northern
blot analysis detected an approximately 0.7-kb RPS7 transcript in HeLa
cells. The authors identified several RPS7 pseudogenes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Annilo et al. (1995) determined that the RPS7 gene contains 7 exons and
spans over 6 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH, Annilo et al. (1995) mapped the RPS7 gene to chromosome 2p25.
Kenmochi et al. (1998) confirmed the mapping assignment reported by
Annilo et al. (1995).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Gazda et al. (2008) screened 196 probands with Diamond-Blackfan anemia
(see DBA8, 612563) for mutations in 25 genes encoding ribosomal proteins
and identified a splice site mutation in the RPS7 gene in 1 proband
(603658.0001). The mutation was not found in his unaffected sister or at
least 150 controls, and functional studies strongly suggested that
mutation in RPS7 is associated with defects in the maturation of
ribosomal RNAs.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DIAMOND-BLACKFAN ANEMIA 8
RPS7, IVS3DS, G-A, +1

In a male patient with Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA8; 612563) who had no
associated malformations, Gazda et al. (2008) identified heterozygosity
for a G-A transition at the donor splice site in intron 3 (IVS3DS+1G-A)
of the RPS7 gene. The mutation was not found in his unaffected sister or
in at least 150 controls. Lymphoblastoid cells established from the
patient's cells displayed higher levels of 45S and 30S pre-rRNAs
compared to cells derived from an unaffected sibling; siRNA knockdown of
RPS7 synthesis in HeLa cells resulted in a strong defect in 5-prime ETS
processing, with accumulation of 45S and 30S pre-rRNAs and a marked
decrease in the 41S, 21S, and 18S-E intermediates, whereas levels of
precursors to the large ribosomal subunit RNAs were unchanged.

REFERENCE 1. Annilo, T.; Laan, M.; Stahl, J.; Metspalu, A.: The human ribosomal
protein S7-encoding gene: isolation, structure and localization in
2p25. Gene 165: 297-302, 1995.

2. Gazda, H. T.; Sheen, M. R.; Vlachos, A.; Choesmel, V.; O'Donohue,
M.-F.; Schneider, H.; Darras, N.; Hasman, C.; Sieff, C. A.; Newburger,
P. E.; Ball, S. E.; Niewiadomska, E.; and 9 others: Ribosomal protein
L5 and L11 mutations are associated with cleft palate and abnormal
thumbs in Diamond-Blackfan anemia patients. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 83:
769-780, 2008.

3. Kenmochi, N.; Kawaguchi, T.; Rozen, S.; Davis, E.; Goodman, N.;
Hudson, T. J.; Tanaka, T.; Page, D. C.: A map of 75 human ribosomal
protein genes. Genome Res. 8: 509-523, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/26/2009

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/18/1999

EDITED wwang: 01/29/2009
terry: 1/26/2009
carol: 3/19/1999

607033	TITLE *607033 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR B1, MITOCHONDRIAL; TFB1M
;;MITOCHONDRIAL 12S rRNA DIMETHYLASE 1;;
DIMETHYLADENOSINE TRANSFERASE 1, MITOCHONDRIAL;;
CGI75;;
mtTFB1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The transcription of genes from mitochondrial DNA requires a
mitochondrial RNA polymerase (see POLRMT, 601778) and a DNA-binding
transcription factor (see TFAM, 600438). Transcription factor B1 (TFB1M)
is a part of this transcription complex.

CLONING

By database searching for sequences showing homology to S. cerevisiae
and S. pombe TFB proteins, McCulloch et al. (2002) identified human
TFB1M, which they designated CGI-75, and assembled the complete sequence
from available ESTs. The deduced 346-amino acid protein shares 16%
identity with the S. pombe homolog. Upon transfection into HeLa cells,
fluorescence-labeled TFB1M colocalized with mitochondrial markers in a
punctate cytoplasmic staining pattern.

GENE FUNCTION

By gel mobility shift assay, McCulloch et al. (2002) found that
recombinant TFB1M binds to the mitochondrial light strand promoter
(LSP). With addition of a nonspecific competitor to the reaction, they
determined that the binding is largely independent of the DNA sequence.
They further found that TFB1M significantly enhanced transcription from
LSP by TFAM in an in vitro mitochondrial transcription reaction, but was
itself transcriptionally inactive. McCulloch et al. (2002) noted
sequence similarity between TFB1M and several rRNA adenine
dimethyltransferase enzymes and verified by solid-phase in vitro binding
assays that recombinant TFB1M could bind S-adenosylmethionine.

Seidel-Rogol et al. (2003) showed that TFB1M appears to be a
dual-function protein, acting both as a transcription factor and as an
rRNA modification enzyme. The data showed that the protein methylates a
conserved stem-loop in bacterial 16S rRNA and that the homologous
sequence in the human mitochondrial 12S molecule is similarly modified.

Cotney et al. (2009) demonstrated that TFB1M and TFB2M (607055) are key
downstream effectors of mitochondrial biogenesis that perform unique,
yet cooperative functions. The primary function of TFB2M is mtDNA
transcription and maintenance, which is independent of its rRNA
methyltransferase activity, while that of TFB1M is mitochondrial 12S
rRNA (561000) methylation needed for normal mitochondrial translation,
metabolism, and cell growth. Overexpression of TFB1M caused 12S rRNA
hypermethylation, aberrant mitochondrial biogenesis, and increased
sorbitol-induced cell death. These phenotypes were recapitulated in
cells harboring the pathogenic 1555A-G mtDNA mutation (561000.0001),
implicating a deleterious rRNA methylation-dependent retrograde signal
in maternally inherited deafness (221745) pathology.

GENE STRUCTURE

By sequence analysis of the genomic DNA directly upstream from TFB1M,
McCulloch et al. (2002) identified putative binding sites for several
nuclear transcription factors, including 2 sites for nuclear respiratory
factor-2 (600609), which activates the transcription of several
nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TFB1M
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP stSG3392).

REFERENCE 1. Cotney, J.; McKay, S. E.; Shadel, G. S.: Elucidation of separate,
but collaborative functions of the rRNA methyltransferase-related
human mitochondrial transcription factors B1 and B2 in mitochondrial
biogenesis reveals new insight into maternally inherited deafness. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 18: 2670-2682, 2009.

2. McCulloch, V.; Seidel-Rogol, B. L.; Shadel, G. S.: A human mitochondrial
transcription factor is related to RNA adenine methyltransferases
and binds S-adenosylmethionine. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 1116-1125,
2002.

3. Seidel-Rogol, B. L.; McCulloch, V.; Shadel, G. S.: Human mitochondrial
transcription factor B1 methylates ribosomal RNA at a conserved stem-loop. Nature
Genet. 33: 23-24, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 4/1/2010
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/20/2002

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/12/2002

EDITED wwang: 04/15/2010
terry: 4/1/2010
alopez: 12/23/2002
terry: 12/20/2002
carol: 6/13/2002
carol: 6/12/2002

180370	TITLE *180370 THIOSULFATE SULFURTRANSFERASE; TST
;;RHODANESE; RDS
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Thiosulfate sulfurtransferase (EC 2.8.1.1), also known as rhodanese, is
a ubiquitous enzyme present in all living organisms from bacteria to
man. The enzyme catalyzes the cyanide-dependent cleavage of thiosulfate
to form thiocyanate and sulfite (summary by Aminlari et al., 2007).

CLONING

By screening a human fetal liver cDNA expression library with a
monoclonal antibody against bovine liver rhodanese, Aita et al. (1997)
cloned a RDS cDNA. Northern blot analysis showed that the RDS gene is
expressed as a 1.3-kb mRNA. It encodes a predicted 297-amino acid
protein that is approximately 90% identical to rodent and bovine Rds.
Aita et al. (1997) stated that RDS and MPST (602496) share 60% amino
acid sequence identity. Transient expression of the RDS cDNA in E. coli
and in mammalian cells resulted in significantly increased rhodanese
activity.

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the TST gene to chromosome 22q12.3 based on an
alignment of the TST sequence (GenBank GENBANK B1820468) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37). The MPST gene also maps to 22q12.3.

GENE FUNCTION

Delivery of 5S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) (see 180420) to the nucleus involves
a complex intracellular trafficking pattern that includes nuclear export
and reimport in association with ribosomal protein L5 (RPL5; 603634). A
portion of 5S rRNA can also be diverted to mitochondria, where it
participates in mitochondrial protein synthesis. Smirnov et al. (2010)
found that human 5S rRNA required 2 protein factors for mitochondrial
import, and they identified 1 of these as mitochondrial rhodanese.
Rhodanese bound to 5S rRNA cotranslationally to form a tight complex. In
this complex, 5S rRNA functioned as a chaperone for misfolded rhodanese
and maintained rhodanese in its enzymatically inactive form. Interaction
with rhodanese was required for mitochondrial import of 5S rRNA.
Knockdown of rhodanese in human HepG2 cells via small interfering RNA
reduced mitochondrial translational activity and reduced cell growth on
galactose-containing medium, indicating insufficient mitochondrial
respiration activity.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Rhodanese is monomorphic in most populations, but by starch gel
electrophoresis Scott and Wright (1980) found polymorphism in 2
linguistic groups of Athabaskan Indians. The enzyme is monomeric since
no bands of intermediate mobility were found in heterozygotes. The
frequency of the RDS-1 and RDS-2 alleles were estimated to be about 0.82
and 0.18, and about 0.87 and 0.13, respectively, in the 2 Indian groups.

Whitehouse et al. (1988) found no genetic variants of rhodanese in a
study of material from European populations.

Data on gene frequencies of allelic variants were tabulated by
Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

HISTORY

Cagianut et al. (1981) found much reduced activity of rhodanese in the
livers of 2 males with Leber optic atrophy (535000) from a well-studied
Swiss family with 5 symptomatic persons in 4 generations. Nikoskelainen
(1984) could not confirm the reported low activity of rhodanese in Leber
optic atrophy patients. Whitehouse et al. (1989) studied rhodanese
isozymes in liver biopsies from 3 subjects with Leber optic neuropathy.
No qualitative abnormality and no deficiency could be found, thus
excluding the hypothesis of rhodanese deficiency.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Weng et al. (1978)
REFERENCE 1. Aita, N.; Ishii, K.; Akamatsu, Y.; Ogasawara, Y.; Tanabe, S.:
Cloning and expression of human liver rhodanese cDNA. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 231: 56-60, 1997.

2. Aminlari, M.; Malekhusseini, A.; Akrami, F.; Ebrahimnejad, H.:
Cyanide-metabolizing enzyme rhodanese in human tissues: comparison
with domestic animals. Comp. Clin. Path. 16: 47-51, 2007.

3. Cagianut, B.; Rhyner, K.; Furrer, W.; Schnebli, H. P.: Thiosulphate-sulphur
transferase (rhodanese) deficiency in Leber's hereditary optic atrophy.
(Letter) Lancet 318: 981-982, 1981. Note: Originally Volume II.

4. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  12/8/2009.

5. Nikoskelainen, E.: New aspects of the genetic, etiologic, and
clinical puzzle of Leber's disease. Neurology 34: 1482-1484, 1984.

6. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World Distribution.
New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

7. Scott, E. M.; Wright, R. C.: Genetic polymorphism of rhodanese
from human erythrocytes. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 32: 112-114, 1980.

8. Smirnov, A.; Comte, C.; Mager-Heckel, A.-M.; Addis, V.; Krasheninnikov,
I. A.; Martin, R. P.; Entelis, N.; Tarassov, I.: Mitochondrial enzyme
rhodanese is essential for 5S ribosomal RNA import into human mitochondria. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 30792-30803, 2010.

9. Weng, L.; Heinrikson, R. L.; Westley, J.: Active site cysteinyl
and arginyl residues of rhodanese. J. Biol. Chem. 253: 8109-8119,
1978.

10. Whitehouse, D. B.; Pilz, A. J.; Porta, G.; Hopkinson, D. A.:
Rhodanese isozymes in human tissues. Ann. Hum. Genet. 52: 1-10,
1988.

11. Whitehouse, D. B.; Poole, C. J. M.; Kind, P. R. N.; Hopkinson,
D. A.: Rhodanese isozymes in three subjects with Leber's optic neuropathy. J.
Med. Genet. 26: 113-115, 1989.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/3/2011
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 4/6/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED mgross: 10/13/2011
terry: 8/3/2011
carol: 12/8/2009
terry: 2/9/2009
psherman: 4/6/1998
mimadm: 3/25/1995
terry: 5/11/1994
warfield: 3/7/1994
carol: 11/18/1993
carol: 10/19/1992
carol: 8/28/1992

606095	TITLE *606095 PEPTIDYL-PROLYL ISOMERASE H; PPIH
;;CYCLOPHILIN H
DESCRIPTION Cyclophilins catalyze the cis-trans isomerization of peptidyl-prolyl
bonds, a rate-limiting step in protein folding. Members of the
cyclophilin family bind the immunosuppressive drug cyclosporin A (CsA)
and share a conserved core domain of approximately 110 amino acids,
called the cyclophilin domain.

CLONING

During purification of a 55-kD protein associated with U4/U6 and
U4/U6.U5 snRNPs, Horowitz et al. (1997) copurified an 18-kD protein. By
database searching, they identified the protein as a novel human
cyclophilin, PPIH, which they named USA-CyP (U-snRNP-associated
cyclophilin). Independently, Teigelkamp et al. (1998) purified PPIH,
which they called SnuCyp-20, as a 20-kD component of the spliceosomal
25S [U4/U6.U5] tri-snRNP complex from HeLa cells. PPIH encodes a deduced
177-amino acid protein that shares 68% and 55% sequence identity with C.
elegans CyP-11 and human cyclophilin A (PPIA; 123840), respectively.
Teigelkamp et al. (1998) demonstrated that purified tri-snRNPs exhibit
peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans isomerase activity in vitro, which is
CsA-sensitive, suggesting that PPIH is an active isomerase.

Reidt et al. (2000) determined the crystal structure of PPIH, which
resembles that of PPIA. The active centers of PPIH and PPIA, as well as
most residues involved in PPIA/CsA binding, superimpose almost
perfectly.

Using immunofluorescence microscopy, Teigelkamp et al. (1998)
demonstrated that PPIH colocalizes with snRNP-containing structures
known as nuclear speckles.

Horowitz et al. (1997) demonstrated that PPIH forms a stable complex
with PRP3 (607301) and PRP4 (607795) in the absence of RNA. Using
fractionation of RNA-free protein complexes dissociated from isolated
tri-snRNPs, Teigelkamp et al. (1998) determined that PPIH is part of a
stable heteromer containing the U4/U6-specific 60-kD (PRP4) and 90-kD
(PRP3) proteins. Using coimmunoprecipitation experiments, they
demonstrated that PPIH specifically interacts with the [U4/U6.U5]
tri-snRNP complex 60-kD component. Teigelkamp et al. (1998) concluded
that PPIH may play a role in the assembly of the tri-snRNP complex
and/or the spliceosome.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PPIH
gene to chromosome 11 (TMAP sts-AA025365).

REFERENCE 1. Horowitz, D. S.; Kobayashi, R.; Krainer, A. R.: A new cyclophilin
and the human homologues of yeast Prp3 and Prp4 form a complex associated
with U4/U6 snRNPs. RNA 3: 1374-1387, 1997.

2. Reidt, U.; Reuter, K.; Achsel, T.; Ingelfinger, D.; Luhrmann, R.;
Ficner, R.: Crystal structure of the human U4/U6 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein
particle-specific SnuCyp-20, a nuclear cyclophilin. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
7439-7442, 2000.

3. Teigelkamp, S.; Achsel, T.; Mundt, C.; Gothel, S.-F.; Cronshagen,
U.; Lane, W. S.; Marahiel, M.; Luhrmann, R.: The 20kD protein of
human [U4/U6.U5] tri-snRNPs is a novel cyclophilin that forms a complex
with the U4/U6-specific 60kD and 90kD proteins. RNA 4: 127-141,
1998.

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 7/10/2001

EDITED mgross: 05/16/2003
carol: 7/10/2001

609997	TITLE *609997 HISTIDINE TRIAD NUCLEOTIDE-BINDING PROTEIN 2; HINT2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Histidine triad proteins, such as HINT2, are nucleotide hydrolases and
transferases that act on the alpha-phosphate of ribonucleotides
(Brenner, 2002).

CLONING

Brenner (2002) stated that HINT2 encodes a deduced 163-amino acid
protein that contains 35 additional N-terminal amino acids compared with
HINT1 (601314).

MAPPING

Brenner (2002) stated that the HINT2 gene maps to chromosome 9p11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Brenner, C.: Hint, Fhit, and GalT: function, structure, evolution,
and mechanism of three branches of the histidine triad superfamily
of nucleotide hydrolases and transferases. Biochemistry 41: 9003-9014,
2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/22/2006

EDITED mgross: 03/22/2006

612027	TITLE *612027 GRP1-ASSOCIATED SCAFFOLD PROTEIN; GRASP
;;TAMALIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nevrivy et al. (2000) cloned mouse Grasp. The deduced 392-amino acid
protein has an alanine/proline-rich N-terminal region containing an Src
(190090) homology-3 domain-binding site (PxxP), followed by a PDZ domain
and a leucine-rich domain. It shares substantial similarity with
proteins of the MAGUK family (see 606959) and with RGS12 (602512).
RT-PCR detected high expression in mouse brain, moderate expression in
lung and heart, and low expression in kidney, ovary, and embryo.
Epitope-tagged Grasp localized to the plasma membrane of transfected
human embryonic kidney cells.

By searching databases, Kitano et al. (2003) identified orthologs of rat
Grasp, which they called tamalin, in several species, including human.
Human tamalin contains 395 amino acids.

GENE FUNCTION

Using subtractive hybridization, Nevrivy et al. (2000) found that
all-trans retinoic acid upregulated expression of Grasp in a mouse
embryo cell line. Yeast 2-hybrid screening and in vitro pull-down assays
showed that the leucine-rich region of Grasp interacted with the
N-terminal coiled-coil domain of Grp1 (PSCD3; 605081). Grasp also
interacted with the N-terminal coiled-coil domain of cytohesin-2 (PSCD2;
602488) in pull-down assays. In transfected HEK293 cells, Grasp enhanced
Grp1 association with the plasma membrane and also colocalized with
endogenous ADP-ribosylation factors (see ARF1, 103180) at the plasma
membrane. Mutation analysis showed the alanine/proline-rich region
and/or the PDZ domain of Grasp directed membrane localization.

Kitano et al. (2003) showed that rat tamalin interacted with multiple
neuronal proteins through its protein-binding domains. The PDZ domain of
tamalin bound to the PDZ-binding motifs of Sap90/Psd95-associated
protein (DLGAP3; 611413) and tamalin itself, whereas the PDZ-binding
motif of tamalin interacted with the PDZ domain of Sscam (MAGI2;
606382). Tamalin formed a complex with Psd95 (DLG4; 602887) and Mint2
(APBA2; 602712) by mechanisms other than PDZ-mediated interactions.
Tamalin assembled with these proteins in vivo, and the tamalin protein
complex was verified by coimmunoprecipitation of rat brain lysates.
Kitano et al. (2003) concluded that tamalin forms a protein complex with
multiple postsynaptic and protein-trafficking scaffold proteins.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the GRASP
gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP STS-AA024848).

ANIMAL MODEL

Ogawa et al. (2007) obtained tamalin-knockout mice in the expected
mendelian ratio, and these mice were viable and fertile with normal
physical, behavioral, and emotional characteristics. However, tamalin
deficiency reduced both acute and adaptive responses to morphine and
cocaine.

REFERENCE 1. Kitano, J.; Yamazaki, Y.; Kimura, K.; Masukado, T.; Nakajima, Y.;
Nakanishi, S.: Tamalin is a scaffold protein that interacts with
multiple neuronal proteins in distinct modes of protein-protein association. J.
Biol. Chem. 278: 14762-14768, 2003.

2. Nevrivy, D. J.; Peterson, V. J.; Avram, D.; Ishmael, J. E.; Hansen,
S. G.; Dowell, P.; Hruby, D. E.; Dawson, M. I.; Leid, M.: Interaction
of GRASP, a protein encoded by a novel retinoic acid-induced gene,
with members of the cytohesin family of guanine nucleotide exchange
factors. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 16827-16836, 2000.

3. Ogawa, M.; Miyakawa, T.; Nakamura, K.; Kitano, J.; Furushima, K.;
Kiyonari, H.; Nakayama, R.; Nakao, K.; Moriyoshi, K.; Nakanishi, S.
: Altered sensitivities to morphine and cocaine in scaffold protein
tamalin knockout mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 14789-14794, 2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/6/2008

EDITED mgross: 05/06/2008

607991	TITLE *607991 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 8 (SODIUM-CALCIUM EXCHANGER), MEMBER 3; SLC8A3
;;SODIUM-CALCIUM EXCHANGER 3; NCX3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Plasma membrane sodium-calcium exchangers, such as SLC8A3, are
reversible transporters controlling Ca(2+) homeostasis. The forward
sodium-calcium exchange extrudes 1 Ca(2+) for 3 extracellular Na(+)
ions, using the Na(+) gradient and the electrical potential across the
plasma membrane as an energy source.

CLONING

Nicoll et al. (1996) cloned rat Slc8a3, which they designated Ncx3. The
deduced 927-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal signal peptide, 11
transmembrane segments, a long cytoplasmic loop between transmembrane
segments 5 and 6, and alpha and beta repeat sequences characteristic of
exchange proteins. The authors predicted that the N terminus is
extracellular and the C terminus is intracellular. Slc8a3 contains 5
N-glycosylation sites and 4 phosphorylation sites. Northern blot
analysis of rat tissues detected a 6.0-kb transcript only in brain and
skeletal muscle.

By searching databases for sequences similar to rat Slc8a3, followed by
RT-PCR of neuroblastoma cell line total RNA, Gabellini et al. (2002)
cloned SLC8A3, which they designated NCX3. The deduced 921-amino acid
protein contains an N-terminal cluster of 5 transmembrane domains and a
C-terminal cluster of 5 transmembrane domains. The clusters are
separated by a large hydrophilic intracellular loop. Gabellini et al.
(2002) identified complex alternative splicing in the exons encoding the
intracellular loop. The form expressed in brain and the neuroblastoma
cell line has 7 of 9 exons, lacking exons 3 and 5. In addition to this
isoform, 2 other isoforms were expressed in skeletal muscle: one lacking
only exon 3, and the other lacking exons 3, 4, and 5, resulting in a
terminating frameshift. The predicted proteins range in size from 68 to
100 kD. The coding region of SLC8A3 shares 68% and 71% amino acid
identity with SLC8A1 (182305) and SLC8A2 (601901), respectively, and 97%
identity with rat Slc8a3.

GENE FUNCTION

Nicoll et al. (1996) determined that transfection of rat Slc8a3 into
baby hamster kidney cells mediated a 12-fold increase in Na(+)
gradient-dependent Ca(2+) uptake relative to control cells.

Using promoter-reporter constructs, Gabellini et al. (2002) found that
expression of the SLC8A3 promoter in neuroblastoma cells was promoted by
retinoic acid, brain-derived neurotrophic factor (113505), and rising
cAMP levels. Ca(2+) was inhibitory, and inhibition was mediated by CAMK2
(see 114078)-directed phosphorylation of CREB (see 123810).

GENE STRUCTURE

Gabellini et al. (2002) determined that the SLC8A3 gene contains 9 exons
and spans about 150 kb. Exon 1 is untranslated.

Gabellini et al. (2002) determined that the promoter region of SLC8A3
contains a TATA box and several GC boxes, indicating constitutive
transcription. It also includes binding sites for brain-specific AP2
(107580) transcription factor and for muscle-specific MyoD (159970),
GATA2 (137295), and GATA3 (131320).

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Gabellini et al. (2002) mapped the SLC8A3
gene to chromosome 14q24.2. Nicoll et al. (1996) mapped the mouse Slc8a3
gene to chromosome 12.

ANIMAL MODEL

Sokolow et al. (2004) produced mice deficient in Ncx3. Ncx3-deficient
mice presented a skeletal muscle fiber necrosis and a defective
neuromuscular transmission, reflecting the absence of Ncx3 in the
sarcolemma of the muscle fibers and at the neuromuscular junction. The
defective neuromuscular transmission was characterized by the presence
of electromyographic abnormalities. The findings indicated that NCX3
plays an important role in vivo in the control of Ca(2+) concentrations
in skeletal muscle fibers and at the neuromuscular junction.

Molinaro et al. (2008) demonstrated that homozygous ablation of the Ncx3
gene in mice increased the extent of ischemic brain lesions after middle
cerebral artery occlusion, particularly in the temporoparietal cortex,
compared to controls. Cultured hippocampal cells from Ncx3-deficient
mice showed significantly increased cell death in response to oxygen
glucose deprivation compared to wildtype cells. Hypoxic conditions
increased the reverse mode of the transporter in wildtype cells, but
this reverse current was significantly decreased in Ncx3-deficient
cells. The findings indicated impaired Ca(2+) and Na(+) homeostasis
resulting from absence of Ncx3. Molinaro et al. (2008) noted that NCX3
activity is ATP-independent and can thus function normally even during
ischemic conditions, and suggested that wildtype Ncx3 may have
beneficial effects during hypoxic conditions by decreasing cellular
Na(+) content in the initial stages.

REFERENCE 1. Gabellini, N.; Bortoluzzi, S.; Danieli, G. A.; Carafoli, E.: The
gene promoter of human Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger isoform 3 (SLC8A3) is
controlled by cAMP and calcium. Ann. New York Acad. Sci. 976: 282-284,
2002.

2. Gabellini, N.; Bortoluzzi, S.; Danieli, G. A.; Carafoli, E.: The
human SLC8A3 gene and the tissue-specific Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger 3
isoforms. Gene 298: 1-7, 2002.

3. Molinaro, P.; Cuomo, O.; Pignataro, G.; Boscia, F.; Sirabella,
R.; Pannaccione, A.; Secondo, A.; Scorziello, A.; Adornetto, A.; Gala,
R.; Viggiano, D.; Sokolow, S.; Herchuelz, A.; Schurmans, S.; Di Renzo,
G.; Annunziato, L.: Targeted disruption of Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger
3 (NCX3) gene leads to a worsening of ischemic brain damage. J. Neurosci. 28:
1179-1184, 2008.

4. Nicoll, D. A.; Quednau, B. D.; Qui, Z.; Xia, Y.-R.; Lusis, A. J.;
Philipson, K. D.: Cloning of a third mammalian Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger,
NCX3. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 24914-24921, 1996.

5. Sokolow, S.; Manto, M.; Gailly, P.; Molgo, J.; Vandebrouck, C.;
Vanderwinden, J.-M.; Herchuelz, A.; Schurmans, S.: Impaired neuromuscular
transmission and skeletal muscle fiber necrosis in mice lacking Na/Ca
exchanger 3. J. Clin. Invest. 113: 265-273, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/30/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/10/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/28/2003

EDITED wwang: 08/01/2008
ckniffin: 7/30/2008
carol: 7/22/2008
tkritzer: 2/16/2004
terry: 2/10/2004
cwells: 11/5/2003
mgross: 7/28/2003

604941	TITLE *604941 PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 2, REGULATORY SUBUNIT B, ALPHA; PPP2R2A
;;PR55-ALPHA;;
B55-ALPHA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Protein phosphorylation on serine and threonine residues by protein
kinases is responsible for the communication of many intracellular
signals. Equally important is the dephosphorylation of proteins by
serine/threonine phosphatases. Protein phosphatase-2A (PP2A; see
176915), a heterotrimeric serine/threonine phosphatase, has a
particularly complex set of regulatory subunits controlling its function
and localization. By screening lung fibroblast and fetal brain cDNA
libraries using 2 overlapping oligonucleotides corresponding to a
tryptic peptide derived from the 55-kD subunit of rabbit PP2A (PR55),
Mayer et al. (1991) isolated human cDNAs encoding PPP2R2A and PPP2R2B
(604325), which they termed PR55-alpha and PR55-beta, respectively. The
deduced 447-amino acid PPP2R2A protein has a calculated molecular mass
of approximately 52 kD. SDS-PAGE analysis, however, showed that PPP2R2A
was expressed as a 55-kD protein. The nucleotide sequence of PPP2R2A is
75% identical to PPP2R2B in the coding region. Northern blot analysis
detected PPP2R2A transcripts of 2.3 and 2.5 kb, as well as a less
abundant one of 4.4 kb, in all cell lines examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Hyperphosphorylation of Tau (MAPT; 157140) contributes to Alzheimer
disease (104300), and PP2A dephosphorylates Tau, reducing its
deleterious effect. Using an in vitro assay with recombinant human
proteins, Xu et al. (2008) showed that the B-alpha subunit specifically
and markedly facilitated dephosphorylation of phosphorylated Tau by
heterotrimeric PP2A.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PPP2R2A
gene to chromosome 8 (TMAP WI-18898).

REFERENCE 1. Mayer, R. E.; Hendrix, P.; Cron, P.; Matthies, R.; Stone, S. R.;
Goris, J.; Merlevede, W.; Hofsteenge, J.; Hemmings, B. A.: Structure
of the 55-kDa regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 2A: evidence
for a neuronal-specific isoform. Biochemistry 30: 3589-3597, 1991.

2. Xu, Y.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, P.; Jeffrey, P. D.; Shi, Y.: Structure
of a protein phosphatase 2A holoenzyme: insights into B55-mediated
Tau dephosphorylation. Molec. Cell 31: 873-885, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/29/2009

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/9/2000

EDITED mgross: 06/02/2009
terry: 5/29/2009
mgross: 12/1/2006
mgross: 5/10/2000
mgross: 5/9/2000

246530	TITLE *246530 LEUKOTRIENE C4 SYNTHASE; LTC4S
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Leukotriene C4 synthetase (LTC4S) catalyzes the synthesis of leukotriene
C4 (LTC4) through conjugation of LTA4 with reduced glutathione (GSH),
which is synthesized by glutathione synthetase (GSS; 601002).
Leukotriene C4 and its receptor-binding metabolites LTD4 and LTE4 are
cysteinyl leukotrienes that are potent lipid mediators of tissue
inflammation. In general, leukotrienes are potent proinflammatory
mediators synthesized from membrane-derived arachidonic acid after
activation of certain granulocytes (Kanaoka et al., 2001).

The cysteinyl leukotrienes have been implicated in bronchial asthma.
CYSLTR1 (300201) and CYSLTR2 (605666) are receptors for LTC4 and its
metabolites. CYSLTR-selective pharmacologic antagonists are important in
the treatment of asthma (Martinez Molina et al., 2007).

CLONING

Penrose et al. (1992) purified LTC4 synthase and characterized it as an
18-kD protein. Lam et al. (1994) cloned the LTC4S gene and showed that
its open reading frame encodes a 150-residue protein with a molecular
mass of 16.5-kD and a pI of 11.05. The deduced sequence contains 2
consensus protein kinase C phosphorylation sites and a potential
N-linked glycosylation site as well as 3 putative membrane-spanning
regions. The deduced amino acid sequence of LTC4S showed no significant
homology to GSH S-transferases but shared 31% overall sequence identity
with 5-lipoxygenase activating protein (FLAP; 603700). Peptide
structural analysis of the deduced LTC4 synthase predicted the presence
of 3 transmembrane domains nearly superimposable on those of FLAP. LTC4
synthase was inhibitable by a FLAP inhibitor, MK-886.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic cloning from a P1 library, Penrose et al. (1996) found that
the LTC4S gene is 2.52 kb long and contains 5 exons. The investigators
noted that although the intron-exon junctions of LTC4S and the human
FLAP gene are identical, the size of FLAP reported by Kennedy et al.
(1991) is over 31 kb. Penrose et al. (1996) found multiple transcription
initiation sites in the 5-prime flanking region of the LTC4S gene.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Penrose et al. (1996) mapped
the LTC4S gene to chromosome 5q35.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Ago et al. (2007) showed the atomic structure of human LTC4S in complex
with glutathione at 3.3 angstrom resolution by x-ray crystallography and
provided insights into the high substrate specificity for a glutathione
and LTA4 that distinguishes LTC4S from other microsomal glutathione
S-transferases. The LTC4S monomer has 4 transmembrane alpha-helices and
forms a 3-fold symmetric trimer as a unit with functional domains across
each interface. Glutathione resides in a U-shaped conformation within an
interface between adjacent monomers, and this binding is stabilized by a
loop structure at the top of the interface. LTA4 would fit into the
interface so that arg104 of one monomer activates glutathione to provide
the thiolate anion that attacks C6 of LTA4 to form a thioether bond, and
arg31 in the neighboring monomer donates a proton to form a hydroxyl
group at C5, resulting in
5(S)-hydroxy-6(R)-S-glutathionyl-7,9-trans-11,14-cis-eicosatetranoic
acid (LTC4).

Martinez Molina et al. (2007) independently presented the crystal
structure of human LTC4S in its apo and glutathione-complexed forms to
2.0 and 2.15 angstrom resolution, respectively. The structure revealed a
homotrimer, where each monomer is comprised of 4 transmembrane segments.
The structure of the enzyme in complex with substrate revealed that the
active site enforces a horseshoe-shaped conformation on glutathione and
effectively positions the thiol group for activation by a nearby
arginine at the membrane-enzyme interface. In addition, the structure
provides a model for how the omega end of the lipophilic cosubstrate is
pinned at one end of a hydrophobic cleft, providing a molecular 'ruler'
to align the reactive epoxide at the thiol of glutathione.

GENE FUNCTION

Pace-Asciak et al. (1986) demonstrated that the leukotriene precursor,
LTA4, is transformed by human platelets into LTC4 by a
glutathione-dependent pathway.

Pace-Asciak et al. (1986) found that LTC4 synthesis was severely
impaired in 2 sibs with glutathione synthetase deficiency (266130).
Platelets from the patients had approximately 30% of normal glutathione
levels, reflecting a decrease of glutathione synthetase activity. The
findings in these patients suggested that cellular glutathione levels
may regulate the production of LTC4 synthetase.

The formation of leukotriene C4 from membrane-derived arachidonic acid
is catalyzed by 3 successive enzymatic steps after transmembrane
activation of eosinophils, basophils, mast cells, and
monocytes/macrophages. Arachidonic acid is released from cell membranes
by the action of phospholipase A2 (see 600522). 5-Lipoxygenase is
activated independently via a 5-lipoxygenase-associated protein and
Ca(2+) and catalyzes 2 sequential enzymatic reactions to form LTA4.
Leukotriene C4 synthase catalyzes the conjugation of LTA4 with reduced
glutathione to form LTC4 (Penrose et al., 1992).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Asthma and Aspirin-Intolerant Asthma

Aspirin-intolerant asthma (AIA; 208550) is a distinct clinical syndrome
characterized by adverse respiratory reactions to aspirin and other
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). Aspirin causes
bronchoconstriction in AIA patients by triggering cysteinyl-leukotriene
production, probably by removing PGE(2)-dependent inhibition. Sampson et
al. (1997) and Cowburn et al. (1998) found increased LTC4S expression in
bronchial biopsies from patients with AIA. The study by Cowburn et al.
(1998) reported that LTC4S expression in AIA patients was increased
5-fold and 18-fold compared to aspirin-tolerant asthmatics and
nonasthmatic controls, respectively. The authors postulated that AIA
patients may have a polymorphism involved in the regulation of LTC4S
expression that results in overproduction of cysteinyl-leukotrienes
leading to bronchoconstriction.

Sanak et al. (1997) identified a promoter polymorphism in the LTC4S
gene, -444A-C, that was overrepresented among patients with
aspirin-intolerant asthma. Six of 11 AIA patients were homozygous for
the -444C allele, compared to only 1 individual in the aspirin-tolerant
asthmatic and control groups. The frequency of the -444C allele was
nearly doubled in AIA (0.436) compared to aspirin-tolerant asthmatics
(0.227) and nonasthmatic controls (0.226), yielding a relative risk of
3.89 for the -444C allele.

Sanak et al. (2000) found that peripheral blood eosinophils from
patients with AIA had increased LTC4S mRNA. An inhaled aspirin
provocation test led to increased urinary output of LTC4, which reached
significance only in carriers of the -444C allele. Nuclear-protein
interaction studies on HeLa cells showed that the -444C allele created
an additional binding site for the transcriptional signal of histone H4
transcription factor-2 (H4FN; 142750), and in vitro studies demonstrated
that the -444C allele resulted in increased reporter gene expression.
Sanak et al. (2000) concluded that overexpression of LTC4S may
predispose to AIA.

Using in vitro transfection of promoter-reporter constructs, Sayers et
al. (2003) showed that dexamethasone increased transcription of LTC4S by
more than 50% for the -1072G/-444A, A-C, and G-C haplotype constructs (p
less than 0.02), but had no effect on the A-A haplotype (p = 0.27).
Sayers et al. (2003) concluded that the 9% of the Caucasian asthmatic
population with the A-A haplotype may have genetically predetermined
lower cysteinyl-leukotriene levels in the presence of corticosteroids
compared to other patients, which has potential implications in the
evaluation of combined corticosteroid and antileukotriene therapy in
asthma.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kanaoka et al. (2001) found that Ltc4s-null mice developed normally and
were fertile. Bone marrow-derived cells from these mice provided no Ltc4
in response to IgE-dependent activation. In addition, zymosan-induced
peritoneal vascular permeability and IgE-mediated passive cutaneous
anaphylaxis were significantly diminished in these mice. The findings
indicated that Ltc4s is the major Ltc4-producing enzyme in tissues, and
that Ltc4 plays a role in vascular permeability in innate and adaptive
immune host inflammatory responses.

REFERENCE 1. Ago, H.; Kanaoka, Y.; Irikura, D.; Lam, B. K.; Shimamura, T.; Austen,
K. F.; Miyano, M.: Crystal structure of a human membrane protein
involved in cysteinyl leukotriene biosynthesis. Nature 448: 609-612,
2007.

2. Cowburn, A. S.; Sladek, K.; Soja, J.; Adamek, L.; Nizankowska,
E.; Szczeklik, A.; Lam, B. K.; Penrose, J. F.; Austen, K. F.; Holgate,
S. T.; Sampson, A. P.: Overexpression of leukotriene C(4) synthase
in bronchial biopsies from patients with aspirin-intolerant asthma. J.
Clin. Invest. 101: 834-846, 1998.

3. Kanaoka, Y.; Maekawa, A.; Penrose, J. F.; Austen, K. F.; Lam, B.
K.: Attenuated zymosan-induced peritoneal vascular permeability and
IgE-dependent passive cutaneous anaphylaxis in mice lacking leukotriene
C4 synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 22608-22613, 2001.

4. Kennedy, B. P.; Diehl, R. E.; Boie, Y.; Adam, M.; Dixon, R. A.
: Gene characterization and promoter analysis of the human 5-lipoxygenase-activating
protein (FLAP). J. Biol. Chem. 266: 8511-8516, 1991.

5. Lam, B. K.; Penrose, J. F.; Freeman, G. J.; Austen, K. F.: Expression
cloning of a cDNA for human leukotriene C4 synthase, an integral membrane
protein conjugating reduced glutathione to leukotriene A4. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 7663-7667, 1994.

6. Martinez Molina, D.; Wetterholm, A.; Kohl, A.; McCarthy, A. A.;
Niegowski, D.; Ohlson, E.; Hammarberg, T.; Eshaghi, S.; Haeggstrom,
J. Z.; Nordlund, P.: Structural basis for synthesis of inflammatory
mediators by human leukotriene C4 synthase. Nature 448: 613-616,
2007.

7. Pace-Asciak, C. R.; Klein, J.; Spielberg, S. P.: Human genetic
defect in leukotriene C(4) synthesis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 140:
857-860, 1986.

8. Pace-Asciak, C. R.; Klein, J.; Spielberg, S. P.: Metabolism of
leukotriene A4 into C4 by human platelets. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 877:
68-74, 1986.

9. Penrose, J. F.; Gagnon, L.; Goppelt-Struebe, M.; Myers, P.; Lam,
B. K.; Jack, R. M.; Austen, K. F.; Soberman, R. J.: Purification
of human leukotriene C(4) synthase: organization, nucleotide sequence,
and chromosomal localization to 5q35. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89:
11603-11606, 1992.

10. Penrose, J. F.; Spector, J.; Baldasaro, M.; Xu, K.; Boyce, J.;
Arm, J. P.; Austen, K. F.; Lam, B. K.: Molecular cloning of the gene
for human leukotriene C(4) synthase. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 11356-11361,
1996.

11. Sampson, A. P.; Cowburn, A. S.; Sladek, K.; Adamek, L.; Nizankowska,
E.; Szczeklik, A.; Lam, B. K.; Penrose, J. F.; Austen, K. F.; Holgate,
S. T.: Profound overexpression of leukotriene C4 synthase in bronchial
biopsies from aspirin-intolerant asthmatic patients. Int. Arch. Allergy
Immun. 113: 355-357, 1997.

12. Sanak, M.; Pierzchalska, M.; Bazan-Socha, S.; Szczeklik, A.:
Enhanced expression of the leukotriene C4 synthase due to overactive
transcription of an allelic variant associated with aspirin-intolerant
asthma. Am. J. Resp. Cell Molec. Biol. 23: 290-296, 2000.

13. Sanak, M.; Simon, H.-U.; Szczeklik, A.: Leukotriene C4 synthase
promoter polymorphism and risk of aspirin-induced asthma. Lancet 350:
1599-1600, 1997.

14. Sayers, I.; Sampson, A. P.; Ye, S.; Holgate, S. T.: Promoter
polymorphism influences the effect of dexamethasone on transcriptional
activation of the LTC4 synthase gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 11:
619-622, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 10/4/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/3/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/13/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/12/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/17/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/26/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/6/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/26/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/25/1998
Perseveranda M. Cagas - updated: 9/23/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/7/1987

EDITED carol: 06/09/2011
wwang: 6/9/2009
terry: 11/15/2007
carol: 10/4/2007
ckniffin: 10/3/2007
carol: 8/15/2007
terry: 8/13/2007
carol: 5/12/2004
terry: 5/12/2004
alopez: 3/17/2004
alopez: 7/20/2000
terry: 7/17/2000
carol: 7/26/1999
terry: 7/6/1999
alopez: 4/6/1999
carol: 1/26/1999
alopez: 3/25/1998
terry: 3/20/1998
joanna: 6/20/1997
mark: 9/24/1996
mark: 9/23/1996
terry: 5/22/1996
carol: 1/13/1995
mimadm: 2/19/1994
carol: 1/28/1993
carol: 1/8/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/29/1992

609884	TITLE *609884 TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN 67; TMEM67
;;MKS3 GENE;;
MECKELIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Smith et al. (2006) refined mapping of a Meckel syndrome locus (MKS3;
607361) to a 12.67-Mb interval on chromosome 8q21.13-q22.1, which is
syntenic to the Wpk locus in rat. Positional cloning of the Wpk gene
suggested an MKS3 candidate gene, TMEM67 (transmembrane protein-67). The
human TMEM67 gene encodes a deduced 995-amino acid protein, which the
authors called meckelin, with a calculated unglycosylated mass of 108
kD. Human and rat meckelin share 84% identity. Meckelin was predicted to
contain a signal peptide, at least 2 cysteine-rich repeats, and a
490-residue extracellular region with 4 N-linked glycosylated sites,
followed by 7 transmembrane domains and a 30-residue cytoplasmic tail.
RNA blotting identified a primary transcript of 4.0 kb and a weaker
product of 4.5 kb expressed in all adult and fetal human tissues tested.
Real-time quantitative PCR analysis of human embryonic tissues detected
highest expression in spinal cord and moderate levels in adrenal tissue,
brain, and kidney.

Using in situ hybridization with human embryos, Dawe et al. (2007) found
that meckelin was expressed in kidney, liver, retina, hindbrain,
developing sphenoid bone, and the brain midline. Intense expression was
also detected in cartilage of developing limbs, particularly in the
digits. Immunohistochemical analysis of 18- to 20-week-old human fetal
kidneys detected moderate to high expression of meckelin and MKS1
(609883) at the proximal renal tubule epithelia, but not at glomeruli.
In liver, these proteins were also expressed at the biliary epithelium
of larger bile ducts, but not in hepatocytes. In HEK293 cells, meckelin
was expressed at the cell border and colocalized with alpha-tubulin (see
602529) at primary cilia. Western blot analysis detected meckelin at an
apparent molecular mass of 120 kD.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Smith et al. (2006) mapped the TMEM67 gene to
chromosome 8q21.13-q22.1.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RNA interference, Dawe et al. (2007) found that knockdown of
either Mks1 or Mks3 in mouse inner medullary IMCD-3 cells blocked
centriole migration to the apical membrane and formation of the primary
cilium. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that wildtype Mks1 and
Mks3 interacted, and knockdown of either Mks1 or Mks3 in IMCD-3 cells
decreased the formation of highly branched structures and tubules in
3-dimensional cultures. Dawe et al. (2007) concluded that MKS1 and MKS3
have roles in ciliogenesis and renal tubulogenesis.

Tammachote et al. (2009) showed that kidney tissue and cells from MKS1
(249000) and MKS3 patients showed defects in centrosome and cilia
number, including multiciliated respiratory-like epithelia, and longer
cilia. Stable shRNA knockdown of Mks1 and Mks3 in IMCD-3 cells induced
multiciliated and multicentrosomal phenotypes. MKS1 and MKS3 functions
are required for ciliary structure and function, including a role in
regulating length and appropriate number through modulating centrosome
duplication. Tammachote et al. (2009) concluded that MKS1 and MKS3 are
ciliopathies, with new cilia-related eye and sperm phenotypes defined.

Williams et al. (2011) showed that the conserved proteins Mks1, Mksr1
(B9D1; 614144), Mksr2 (B9D2; 611951), Tmem67, Rpgrip1l (610937), Cc2d2a
(612013), Nphp1 (607100), and Nphp4 (607215) functioned at an early
stage of ciliogenesis in C. elegans. These 8 proteins localized to the
ciliary transition zone and established attachments between the basal
body and transition zone membrane. They also provided a docking site
that restricted vesicle fusion to vesicles containing ciliary proteins.

By yeast 2-hybrid and immunoprecipitation analyses, Adams et al. (2012)
found that the C-terminal cytoplasmic tail of meckelin interacted with
filamin A (FLNA; 300017). Loss of filamin A or meckelin in immortalized
fibroblasts from patients with null mutations in the genes or by small
interfering RNA in mouse IMCD3 cells resulted in similar cellular
phenotypes, including abnormal basal body positioning and ciliogenesis,
aberrant remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton, deregulation of RHOA
(165390) activity, and hyperactivation of canonical Wnt (see 606359)
signaling. Adams et al. (2012) concluded that the meckelin-filamin A
signaling axis is a key regulator of ciliogenesis and normal Wnt
signaling.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Meckel Syndrome 3

In 5 consanguineous families with Meckel syndrome linked to chromosome
8q21.13-q22.1 (MKS3; 607361), Smith et al. (2006) detected 5 different
homozygous mutations in the TMEM67 gene (609884.0001-609884.0005). The
mutations consisted of 2 frameshift deletions, 2 splicing mutations, and
a nonconservative missense change. The mutations were not found in over
120 ethnically matched normal control chromosomes.

Consugar et al. (2007) identified 7 novel pathogenic mutations in the
TMEM67 gene (see, e.g., 609884.0011) in 5 of 17 families with a clinical
diagnosis of Meckel syndrome.

- Joubert Syndrome 6

Joubert syndrome (JBTS; see 213300) is an autosomal recessive disorder
characterized by cerebellar vermis hypoplasia associated with hypotonia,
developmental delay, abnormal respiratory patterns, and abnormal eye
movements. The association of retinal dystrophy and renal anomalies
defines a subtype of JBTS. Occipital encephalocele and polydactyly have
occasionally been reported in patients with JBTS. These features are
also found in Meckel-Gruber syndrome. The phenotypic overlap between
JBTS and Meckel-Gruber syndrome is supported by the central nervous
system malformations seen in the Wpk rat model of Meckel-Gruber
syndrome, which includes agenesis of the corpus callosum and
hydrocephalus but not exencephaly. The missense mutation, P394L, seen in
the rat Mks3 gene is presumably a hypomorphic allele because of the mild
phenotype and viability of the Wpk rat (Smith et al., 2006). While
sequencing MKS1 (609883) and MKS3 genes in 31 unrelated fetuses
presenting a cerebrorenodigital syndrome, which was designated
'Meckel-like' because of the absence of at least 1 of the MKS diagnostic
criteria, Baala et al. (2007) identified MKS3 mutations in a family with
2 sibs. The pregnancies were terminated at 30 weeks' and 28 weeks'
gestation, respectively, because of abnormal posterior fossae and
hyperechogenic, enlarged kidneys detected by ultrasound. Kidney
pathology in both fetuses showed liver bile duct proliferation and
microcysts mainly in the medulla. Abnormalities in the brainstem
resembling those of JS were described. The 2 sibs were found to be
compound heterozygous for 2 mutations in the MKS3 gene: a missense
mutation, Y513C, inherited from the father (609884.0006) and an
insertion/deletion mutation inherited from the mother (609884.0007).
Despite the absence of neurologic symptoms required for postnatal
diagnosis in these sibs, Baala et al. (2007) questioned what MKS gene
mutations could be found in patients with typical JBTS and sequenced 22
patients who had no deletion of the NPHP1 gene (607100). Sequence
analysis revealed mutations in 3 patients. Studies identified the MKS3
gene as mutant in a sixth form of Joubert syndrome (JBTS6; 610688).

Otto et al. (2009) identified TMEM67 mutations (609884.0011;
609884.0013; 609884.0019; 609884.0021-609884.0023) in 4 (3.3%) of 120
unrelated probands with Joubert syndrome. All patients had ataxia,
hypotonia or psychomotor retardation or showed cerebellar vermis hypo-
or aplasia. All developed end-stage renal disease between 8 and 15
years, and 4 had hepatic fibrosis. Four also had ocular involvement,
including blindness, retinal degeneration, or retinal coloboma.

- Bardet-Biedl Syndrome

The identification of mutations in the MKS1 gene (609883) in patients
with clinical diagnoses of Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS; 209900) led
Leitch et al. (2008) to investigate other Meckel syndrome genes as
contributors to the BBS phenotype. While they did not find families with
2 pathogenic alleles in the MKS3 gene, they did find 2 families
harboring potentially pathogenic heterozygous alleles. In one of these
families a splice-site mutation in MKS3 was found with homozygosity for
a BBS9 mutation (607968). An individual from the second family carried a
complex allele encoding a protein with 2 in cis changes. One of the
changes was predicted to be benign; the second, S320C (609884.0012), was
predicted to be pathogenic. This patient also carried a homozygous
truncating mutation in CEP290 (610142.0013).

- COACH Syndrome

COACH syndrome (216360) is an autosomal recessive disorder originally
described as including cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, oligophrenia
(mental retardation), ataxia, ocular coloboma, and congenital hepatic
fibrosis (Verloes and Lambotte, 1989). The clinical features overlap
with those observed in Joubert and Meckel syndrome. In 8 (57%) of 14
families diagnosed with COACH syndrome, defined as Joubert syndrome with
congenital liver fibrosis, Brancati et al. (2008) identified compound
heterozygous mutations in the TMEM67 gene (see, e.g.,
609884.0013-609885.0016). One of the families included the original
family reported by Verloes and Lambotte (1989) (609884.0013 and
609884.0014). The phenotype in all patients was consistent with Joubert
syndrome with congenital hepatic fibrosis, indicating that COACH
syndrome can be considered a subtype of Joubert syndrome. The clinical
variability of the disorder, relating to the extent and severity of
liver and neurologic dysfunction as well as to the presence or absence
of ocular and renal findings, was hypothesized to be due to genetic
modifiers, similar to other ciliopathies, including Bardet-Biedl
syndrome (BBS; 209900).

Doherty et al. (2010) identified mutations in the TMEM67 gene in 19
(83%) of 23 families with COACH syndrome, defined as Joubert syndrome
with liver disease. In contrast, TMEM67 mutations were only found in 2
(1%) of 209 families with Joubert syndrome without liver involvement.
The findings further supported the concept that COACH syndrome is a form
of Joubert syndrome with hepatic fibrosis. The proposed ciliary function
for TMEM67 supported a unifying underlying pathophysiology for liver
disease in these disorders.

- Nephronophthisis 11

In patients with nephronophthisis and hepatic fibrosis (NPHP11; 613550),
Otto et al. (2009) identified homozygous or compound heterozygous
missense mutations in the TMEM67 gene (see, e.g.,
609884.0018-609884.0021). Mutations in the TMEM67 gene were not found in
105 NPHP patients without liver fibrosis, suggesting that liver fibrosis
is a specific feature of TMEM67 mutations. Otto et al. (2009) concluded
that mutations in TMEM67 can cause NPHP in patients with additional
liver fibrosis but without neurologic involvement and with normal brain
imaging, and that NPHP11, MKS3, and JBTS6 represent a spectrum of
allelic disorders.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Otto et al. (2009) found homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for
missense mutations in the TMEM67 gene (609884.0018-609884.0021) in
patients with NPHP11 and hepatic fibrosis. All patients with NPHP and
hepatic fibrosis and no brain anomaly carried a missense mutation
affecting either amino acid C615 or G821. Thus, Otto et al. (2009)
suggested that some hypomorphic mutations of TMEM67 do not lead to any
neurologic impairment. Four additional patients with a more severe
phenotype of Joubert syndrome-6 also had homozygous or compound
heterozygous mutations (see, e.g., 609884.0011; 609884.0013;
609884.0019; 609884.0021-609884.0023). None of the patients with JBTS6
had truncating mutations on both alleles; all had at least 1 missense
allele. Finally, the liver seems to be affected in most of the patients
with TMEM67 mutations independently of the neurologic involvement,
suggesting that liver disease is a specific feature resulting from
TMEM67 mutations.

ANIMAL MODEL

In the Wistar polycystic kidneys (Wpk) rat, which is a model with
polycystic kidney disease, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and
hydrocephalus, Smith et al. (2006) refined the mapping of the Wpk locus
and identified a missense mutation in the rat Tmem67 gene that was not
present in the parental Wistar strain.

In the Wpk rat model of MKS3, Tammachote et al. (2009) reported
functional defects of the connecting cilium in the eye that resulted in
lack of formation of the outer segment, whereas infertile Wpk males
developed spermatids with very short flagella that did not extend beyond
the cell body. In Wpk renal collecting duct cysts, cilia were generally
longer than normal, with additional evidence of cells with multiple
primary cilia and centrosome overduplication.

Garcia-Gonzalo et al. (2011) found that Tmem67-null mice survived to
birth without overt morphologic abnormalities, but died soon after. By
embryonic day 18.5, Tmem67-null embryonic kidneys had developed cysts,
and kidney tubules had fewer cilia than controls. Tmem67-null embryonic
fibroblasts did not have ciliary defects, suggesting that Tmem67 has
tissue-specific roles in ciliogenesis. Garcia-Gonzalo et al. (2011) also
demonstrated that Tmem67 interacts with Tctn1 (609863) and Tctn2
(613846) and other proteins in a large complex localized to the
transition zone between the ciliary axoneme and the basal body.

Adams et al. (2012) found that knockdown of Mks3 or the Flna ortholog in
zebrafish resulted in similar phenotypes, including brain and body axis
defects, cardiac edema, and otic placode and eye defects. Combined low
doses of both Mks3 and Flna morpholinos increased both the incidence and
severity of developmental defects. An Flna-null mouse strain showed
similar defects. At embryonic day 13.5, male Flna hemizygous embryos
were highly dysmorphic, with extensive disruption of ventricular zone of
the neocortex and severe periventricular heterotopia. Basal body
position was disrupted and neuroepithelial layer showed impaired
ciliogenesis.

Abdelhamed et al. (2013) found that knockdown of Tmem67 in mice
recapitulated the phenotypic variability of neurologic features seen in
human ciliopathies. Two main phenotypic groups were recognized.
Incipient congenic mice (F6 to F10) showed MKS-like features with
variable neurologic abnormalities, including exencephaly and
frontal/occipital encephalocele associated with the loss of primary
cilia, diminished Shh signaling, and dorsalization of the caudal neural
tube. These mutant mice also showed highly deregulated canonical
Wnt/beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806) signaling associated with hyperactive
DVL1 (601365) localized to the basal body: DVL1 is the downstream
signaling modulator of Wnt pathways. Conversely, fully congenic mice (F
greater than 10) had less variable neurodevelopmental features that were
characteristic of JBTS, including cerebellar hypoplasia consistent with
the molar tooth sign on imaging, and retention of abnormal bulbous cilia
associated with neural tube ventralization. These mutant mice had low
levels of deregulated canonical Wnt signaling associated with the loss
of DVL1 localization to the basal body. Abdelhamed et al. (2013)
suggested that modifier alleles likely determine the variation between
MKS and JBTS caused by TMEM67 mutations.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 3
TMEM67, 2-BP DEL, 383AC

In an individual with MKS3 (607361) from Oman, Smith et al. (2006) found
a homozygous 2-bp deletion in exon 3 of the MKS3 gene, 383-384delAC,
causing a frameshift beginning at his128 with premature stop at residue
140 (H128fsX140). Each of the first-cousin parents was heterozygous for
the mutation. The affected individual had occipital encephalocele,
Dandy-Walker cysts, renal cystic dysplasia, hepatic developmental
defects, and left-hand postaxial polydactyly.

.0002
MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 3
TMEM67, 1-BP DEL, 647A

In a Pakistani family with MKS3 (607361), Smith et al. (2006) found that
2 affected sibs carried a homozygous 1-bp deletion (647delA) in exon 6
of the MKS3 gene. The deletion caused a frameshift beginning at glu216
of the protein, with premature termination at residue 221. The sibs had
occipital encephalocele, renal cystic dysplasia, hepatic developmental
defects, and midline cleft palate.

By immunohistochemical analysis, Dawe et al. (2007) found complete lack
of meckelin expression in kidney from a patient with the 647delA
mutation.

.0003
MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 3
TMEM67, IVS8, A-G, -2

In a Pakistani family with MKS3 (607361), Smith et al. (2006) found that
a child with Meckel syndrome carried a homozygous splice site mutation,
IVS8-2A-G, in the MKS3 gene. The child had occipital encephalocele,
renal cystic dysplasia, and hepatic developmental defects.

.0004
MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 3
TMEM67, GLN376PRO

In a Pakistani patient with Meckel syndrome type 3 (607361), Smith et
al. (2006) found a homozygous 1127A-C transversion in exon 11 of the
MKS3 gene causing a missense protein change, Q376P. The patient had
occipital encephalocele, renal cystic dysplasia, hepatic developmental
defects, midline cleft palate, and epididymal cysts.

By immunohistochemical analysis, Dawe et al. (2007) found that the Q376P
substitution in the N-terminal extracellular domain of meckelin resulted
in lack of meckelin at the cell surface due to accumulation of the
mutant protein in the endoplasmic reticulum.

.0005
MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 3
TMEM67, IVS15, G-A, +1

In 2 Pakistani cases of Meckel syndrome type 3 (607361) in individuals
related as double first cousins, Smith et al. (2006) found that the
disorder was related to a homozygous splice site mutation in intron 15
of the MKS3 gene: IVS15+1G-A. One patient had occipital encephalocele,
renal cystic dysplasia, and hepatic developmental defects; the other had
the same 3 features as well as bilateral postaxial polydactyly.

.0006
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
COACH SYNDROME, INCLUDED
TMEM67, TYR513CYS

In 2 sibs derived from pregnancies terminated at 30 weeks' and 28 weeks'
gestation, respectively, because of abnormal posterior fossae and
hyperechogenic, enlarged kidneys detected by ultrasound, Baala et al.
(2007) found compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the MKS3 gene. A
missense mutation in exon 15, tyr513 to cys (Y513C), was inherited from
the father; a complex in/del mutation (13-bp deletion encompassing the
exon 22/intron 22 boundary replaced by 2 bp) was inherited from the
mother. This 2315_2323+4del13insGG mutation (609884.0007) removed the
donor splice site. Strong suspicion of Joubert syndrome (JS) in this
family prompted a search for MKS3 mutations in patients with a typical
form of the disorder and led to the establishment of a sixth locus for
Joubert syndrome (JBTS6; 610688).

Doherty et al. (2010) identified the Y513C mutation in compound
heterozygosity with another pathogenic TMEM67 mutation (see, e.g.,
I833T; 609884.0013) in 2 families with COACH syndrome (216360), defined
as Joubert syndrome with hepatic involvement.

.0007
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
TMEM67, 13-BP DEL, 2-BP INS

See 609884.0006 and Baala et al. (2007).

.0008
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
TMEM67, IVS23+5G-C

In a 14-year-old Algerian girl, the child of consanguineous parents,
with the molar tooth sign and superior vermian dysplasia (JBTS6;
610688), Baala et al. (2007) found homozygous MKS3 mutation near the
donor splice site of intron 23 (IVS23+5G-C). Both parents and a healthy
sister were heterozygous for the mutation. Sequencing of RNA transcript
confirmed exon skipping from exons 22 to 24. This in-frame deletion
predicted a protein lacking amino acids 775 to 813, which compose most
of the putative coiled-coil domain of the protein. This patient had been
reported by Romano et al. (2006).

.0009
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
TMEM67, IVS6+2T-G

Baala et al. (2007) demonstrated compound heterozygosity for mutations
in the MKS3 gene in a 7-year-old girl with a mild form of Joubert
syndrome (JBTS6; 610688). The patient had been reported by Romano et al.
(2006). Three MKS3 variations were found: on the maternal allele, a
donor splice site mutation in intron 6 (IVS6+2T-G), and on the paternal
allele, a missense mutation located in exon 16 (G545E) and a mutation
located at the last base of exon 21 (2341G-A). Either of the mutations
from the father could be deleterious.

.0010
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
TMEM67, GLY545GLU, 2341G-A

See 609884.0009 and Baala et al. (2007).

.0011
MECKEL SYNDROME, TYPE 3
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6, INCLUDED
TMEM67, ARG208TER

In affected fetuses from 3 unrelated families with Meckel syndrome type
3 (607361), Consugar et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 622A-T
transversion in exon 6 of the TMEM67 gene, resulting in an arg208-to-ter
(R208X) substitution. All fetuses were compound heterozygous for R208X
and another pathogenic mutation in the TMEM67 gene.

In a German patient with Joubert syndrome-6 (610688), Otto et al. (2009)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the TMEM67 gene:
R208X and I833T (609884.0013). The patient had end-stage renal failure
at age 15, hepatic fibrosis, mental retardation, and cerebellar vermis
atrophy. No ocular involvement was observed.

.0012
BARDET-BIEDL SYNDROME 14, MODIFIER OF
TMEM67, SER320CYS

In an 11-year-old female patient with Bardet-Biedl syndrome (209900)
Leitch et al. (2008) found heterozygosity for a complex mutation in the
TMEM67 gene coding for a protein with 2 in cis changes, and homozygosity
for a truncating mutation of the CEP290 gene (610142.0013). One of the
substitutions in the TMEM67 gene was predicted computationally to be
benign, while the other, ser320 to cys (S320C), occurred at a highly
conserved residue and was predicted to be pathogenic. The S320C mutation
resulted in severe gastrulation movement defects in zebrafish embryos.

.0013
COACH SYNDROME
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6, INCLUDED
TMEM67, ILE833THR

In 2 sibs originally reported by Verloes and Lambotte (1989) as having
COACH syndrome (216360), Brancati et al. (2008) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the TMEM67 gene: a 2498T-C transition
in exon 24, resulting in an ile833-to-thr (I833T) substitution, and a
splice site mutation in intron 24 (2556+1G-T; 609884.0014). An unrelated
patient from Croatia was compound heterozygous for I833T and another
splice site mutation in intron 2 (312+5G-A; 609884.0015). The phenotype
in all patients was consistent with Joubert syndrome (610688) with
congenital hepatic fibrosis, indicating that COACH syndrome is a subtype
of Joubert syndrome.

In a patient with Joubert syndrome-6 (610688)/COACH syndrome, Otto et
al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the
TMEM67 gene: I833T and R208X (609884.0011). The patient had end-stage
renal failure at age 16, liver fibrosis, mental retardation, and
cerebellar vermis aplasia. Ocular involvement was not observed.

Doherty et al. (2010) identified the I833T mutation in compound
heterozygosity with another pathogenic TMEM67 mutation (see, e.g.,
Y513C; 609884.0006) in 4 unrelated patients with COACH syndrome, which
the authors defined as Joubert syndrome with liver involvement.

In a German girl with Joubert syndrome, Dafinger et al. (2011)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the TMEM67 gene:
I833T and pro358 to leu (P358L; 609884.0024). She also had a
heterozygous 12-bp deletion in the KIF7 gene (3986del12; 611254.0008).
The patient had mental retardation, molar tooth sign on brain MRI,
ataxia, hypertelorism, low-set ears, coloboma, and elevated liver
enzymes.

.0014
COACH SYNDROME
TMEM67, IVS24DS, G-T, +1

See 609884.0013 and Brancati et al. (2008).

.0015
COACH SYNDROME
TMEM67, IVS2DS, G-A, +5

See 609884.0013 and Brancati et al. (2008).

.0016
COACH SYNDROME
TMEM67, PHE590SER

In 2 Italian brothers with COACH syndrome (216360) reported by Gentile
et al. (1996), Brancati et al. (2008) identified compound heterozygosity
for 2 mutations in the TMEM67 gene: a 1769T-C transition in exon 17,
resulting in a phe590-to-ser (F590S) substitution, and a splice site
mutation in intron 19 (1961-2A-C; 609884.0017).

.0017
COACH SYNDROME
TMEM67, IVS19AS, A-C, -2

See 609884.0016 and Brancati et al. (2008).

.0018
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 11
TMEM67, GLY821SER

In 3 sibs, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, with nephronophthisis
and hepatic fibrosis (NPHP11; 613550), Otto et al. (2009) identified a
homozygous 2461G-A transition in exon 24 of the TMEM67 gene, resulting
in a gly821-to-ser (G821S) substitution in a highly conserved residue.
The mutation was not found in 188 controls or in 147 ethnically matched
controls. The patients developed end-stage renal disease between ages 9
and 14 years and had no neurologic abnormalities.

.0019
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 11
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6, INCLUDED
TMEM67, CYS615ARG

In a Turkish patient, born of consanguineous parents, with NPHP11 and
hepatic fibrosis (613550), Otto et al. (2009) identified a homozygous
1843T-C transition in exon 18 of the TMEM67 gene, resulting in a
cys615-to-arg (C615R) substitution in a highly conserved residue. A
German patient was also found to be homozygous for the mutation, and
haplotype analysis indicated a common founder. The Turkish patient had
end-stage renal failure at age 6, liver fibrosis, retinal degeneration,
and mild cortical atrophy. The German patient had end-stage renal
failure at age 6, liver fibrosis, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, and no ocular
or neurologic involvement. Another German patient with NPHP, liver
fibrosis, strabismus, nystagmus, and mild 'statomotoric' retardation was
found to be compound heterozygous for C615R and an 869G-T transversion
in exon 8, resulting in a trp290-to-leu (W290L; 609884.0020)
substitution.

Otto et al. (2009) reported a patient with Joubert syndrome-6 (610688)
who was compound heterozygous for C615R and a 755T-C transition in exon
8 of the TMEM67 gene, resulting in a met252-to-thr (M252T; 609884.0023)
substitution. The patient had end-stage renal failure at age 14, hepatic
fibrosis, nystagmus, oculomotor apraxia, chorioretinal coloboma, ataxia,
and psychomotor retardation.

.0020
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 11
TMEM67, TRP290LEU

See 609884.0019 and Otto et al. (2009).

.0021
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 11
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6, INCLUDED
TMEM67, GLY821ARG

In a German patient with NPHP11 and hepatic fibrosis (613550), Otto et
al. (2009) identified a homozygous 2461G-C transversion in exon 24 of
the TMEM67 gene, resulting in a gly821-to-arg (G821R) substitution. The
patient developed end-stage renal failure at age 10 years, and also had
anisocoria and psychomotor retardation, but normal brain MRI findings.
An unrelated German patient with a more severe phenotype, consistent
with Joubert syndrome-6 (610688), was compound heterozygous for G821R
and a 130C-T transition in exon 1, resulting in a gln44-to-ter (Q44X;
609884.0022) substitution. The patient with Joubert syndrome had
end-stage renal failure at age 12, retinal degeneration, chorioretinal
coloboma, ataxia, and cerebellar vermis aplasia. Liver involvement was
not reported. Haplotype analysis of both patients indicated a common
origin for the G821R mutation.

.0022
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
TMEM67, GLN44TER

See 609884.0021 and Otto et al. (2009).

.0023
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
TMEM67, MET252THR

See 609884.0019 and Otto et al. (2009).

.0024
JOUBERT SYNDROME 6
TMEM67, PRO358LEU

See 609884.0013 and Dafinger et al. (2011).

.0025
MECKEL SYNDROME 3
TMEM67, 3-BP DEL, 2754CTT

In a patient from a consanguineous family who presented with MKS3
(607361) and cerebellar heterotopia, Adams et al. (2012) identified a
homozygous 3-bp deletion, c.2754_2756delCTT, resulting in an in-frame
deletion of phe919 (919delF) in the C-terminal cytoplasmic region of
meckelin. The deletion abrogated the interaction of meckelin with
filamin A (FLNA; 300017), resulting in aberrant hyperactivation of
canonical Wnt signaling in patient fibroblasts compared with controls.

REFERENCE 1. Abdelhamed, Z. A.; Wheway, G.; Szymanska, K.; Natarajan, S.; Toomes,
C.; Inglehearn, C.; Johnson, C. A.: Variable expressivity of ciliopathy
neurological phenotypes that encompass Meckel-Gruber syndrome and
Joubert syndrome is caused by complex de-regulated ciliogenesis, Shh
and Wnt signalling defects. Hum. Molec. Genet. 22: 1358-1372, 2013.

2. Adams, M.; Simms, R. J.; Abdelhamed, Z.; Dawe, H. R.; Szymanska,
K.; Logan, C. V.; Wheway, G.; Pitt, E.; Gull, K.; Knowles, M. A.;
Blair, E.; Cross, S. H.; Sayer, J. A.; Johnson, C. A.: A meckelin-filamin
A interaction mediates ciliogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 21: 1272-1286,
2012.

3. Baala, L.; Romano, S.; Khaddour, R.; Saunier, S.; Smith, U. M.;
Audollent, S.; Ozilou, C.; Faivre, L.; Laurent, N.; Foliguet, B.;
Munnich, A.; Lyonnet, S.; and 9 others: The Meckel-Gruber syndrome
gene, MKS3, is mutated in Joubert syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 80:
186-194, 2007.

4. Brancati, F.; Iannicelli, M.; Travaglini, L.; Mazzotta, A.; Bertini,
E.; Boltshauser, E.; D'Arrigo, S.; Emma, F.; Fazzi, E.; Gallizzi,
R.; Gentile, M.; Loncarevic, D.; and 12 others: MKS3/TMEM67 mutations
are a major cause of COACH Syndrome, a Joubert Syndrome related disorder
with liver involvement. Hum. Mutat. 30: E432-E442, 2008. Note: Electronic
Article.

5. Consugar, M. B.; Kubly, V. J.; Lager, D. J.; Hommerding, C. J.;
Wong, W. C.; Bakker, E.; Gattone, V. H., II; Torres, V. E.; Breuning,
M. H.; Harris, P. C.: Molecular diagnostics of Meckel-Gruber syndrome
highlights phenotypic differences between MKS1 and MKS3. Hum. Genet. 121:
591-599, 2007.

6. Dafinger, C.; Liebau, M. C.; Elsayed, S. M.; Hellenbroich, Y.;
Boltshauser, E.; Korenke, G. C.; Fabretti, F.; Janecke, A. R.; Ebermann,
I.; Nurnberg, G.; Nurnberg, P.; Zentgraf, H.; Koerber, F.; Addicks,
K.; Elsobky, E.; Benzing, T.; Schermer, B.; Bolz, H. J.: Mutations
in KIF7 link Joubert syndrome with Sonic Hedgehog signaling and microtubule
dynamics. J. Clin. Invest. 121: 2662-2667, 2011.

7. Dawe, H. R.; Smith, U. M.; Cullinane, A. R.; Gerrelli, D.; Cox,
P.; Badano, J. L.; Blair-Reid, S.; Sriram, N.; Katsanis, N.; Attie-Bitach,
T.; Afford, S. C.; Copp, A. J.; Kelly, D. A.; Gull, K.; Johnson, C.
A.: The Meckel-Gruber syndrome proteins MKS1 and meckelin interact
and are required for primary cilium formation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 16:
173-186, 2007.

8. Doherty, D.; Parisi, M. A.; Finn, L. S.; Gunay-Aygun, M.; Al-Mateen,
M.; Bates, D.; Clericuzio, C.; Demir, H.; Dorschner, M.; van Essen,
A. J.; Gahl, W. A.; Gentile, M.; and 11 others: Mutations in 3
genes (MKS3, CC2D2A and RPGRIP1L) cause COACH syndrome (Joubert syndrome
with congenital hepatic fibrosis). J. Med. Genet. 47: 8-21, 2010.

9. Garcia-Gonzalo, F. R.; Corbit, K. C.; Sirerol-Piquer, M. S.; Ramaswami,
G.; Otto, E. A.; Noriega, T. R.; Seol, A. D.; Robinson, J. F.; Bennett,
C. L.; Josifova, D. J.; Garcia-Verdugo, J. M.; Katsanis, N.; Hildebrandt,
F.; Reiter, J. F.: A transition zone complex regulates mammalian
ciliogenesis and ciliary membrane composition. Nature Genet. 43:
776-784, 2011.

10. Gentile, M.; Di Carlo, A.; Susca, F.; Gambotto, A.; Caruso, M.
L.; Panella, C.; Vajro, P.; Guanti, G.: COACH syndrome: report of
two brothers with congenital hepatic fibrosis, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia,
oligophrenia, ataxia, and mental retardation. Am. J. Med. Genet. 64:
514-520, 1996.

11. Leitch, C. C.; Zaghloul, N. A.; Davis, E. E.; Stoetzel, C.; Diaz-Font,
A.; Rix, S.; Al-Fadhel, M.; Lewis, R. A.; Eyaid, W.; Banin, E.; Dollfus,
H.; Beales, P. L.; Badano, J. L.; Katsanis, N.: Hypomorphic mutations
in syndromic encephalocele genes are associated with Bardet-Biedl
syndrome. Nature Genet. 40: 443-448, 2008. Note: Erratum: Nature
Genet. 40: 927 only, 2008.

12. Otto, E. A.; Tory, K.; Attanasio, M.; Zhou, W.; Chaki, M.; Paruchuri,
Y.; Wise, E. L.; Wolf, M. T. F.; Utsch, B.; Becker, C.; Nurnberg,
G.; Nurnberg, P.; Nayir, A.; Saunier, S.; Antignac, C.; Hildebrandt,
F.: Hypomorphic mutations in meckelin (MKS3/TMEM67) cause nephronophthisis
with liver fibrosis (NPHP11). J. Med. Genet. 46: 663-670, 2009.

13. Romano, S.; Boddaert, N.; Desguerre, I.; Hubert, L.; Salomon,
R.; Seidenwurm, D.; Bahi-Buisson, N.; Nabbout, R.; Sonigo, P.; Lyonnet,
S.; Brunelle, F.; Munnich, A.; de Lonlay, P.: Molar tooth sign and
superior vermian dysplasia: a radiological, clinical, and genetic
study. Neuropediatrics 37: 42-45, 2006.

14. Smith, U. R.; Consugar, M.; Tee, L. J.; McKee, B. M.; Maina, E.
N.; Whelan, S.; Morgan, N. V.; Goranson, E.; Gissen, P.; Lilliquist,
S.; Aligianis, I. A.; Ward, C. J.; and 19 others: The transmembrane
protein meckelin (MKS3) is mutated in Meckel-Gruber syndrome and wpk
rat. Nature Genet. 38: 191-196, 2006.

15. Tammachote, R.; Hommerding, C. J.; Sinders, R. M.; Miller, C.
A.; Czarnecki, P. G.; Leightner, A. C.; Salisbury, J. L.; Ward, C.
J.; Torres, V. E.; Gattone, V. H., II; Harris, P. C.: Ciliary and
centrosomal defects associated with mutation and depletion of the
Meckel syndrome genes MKS1 and MKS3. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 3311-3323,
2009.

16. Verloes, A.; Lambotte, C.: Further delineation of a syndrome
of cerebellar vermis hypo/aplasia, oligophrenia, congenital ataxia,
coloboma, and hepatic fibrosis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 32: 227-232,
1989.

17. Williams, C. L.; Li, C.; Kida, K.; Inglis, P. N.; Mohan, S.; Semenec,
L.; Bialas, N. J.; Stupay, R. M.; Chen, N.; Blacque, O. E.; Yoder,
B. K.; Leroux, M. R.: MKS and NPHP modules cooperate to establish
basal body/transition zone membrane associations and ciliary gate
function during ciliogenesis. J. Cell. Biol. 192: 1023-1041, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/8/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/19/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/16/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/18/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/29/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/3/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/7/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/25/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/7/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/6/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/3/2007

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/9/2006

EDITED carol: 10/09/2013
carol: 8/14/2013
ckniffin: 8/8/2013
joanna: 8/5/2013
carol: 7/19/2013
mgross: 7/16/2013
carol: 2/7/2012
alopez: 8/23/2011
ckniffin: 8/18/2011
joanna: 6/6/2011
mgross: 5/19/2011
terry: 4/29/2011
carol: 9/7/2010
ckniffin: 9/3/2010
wwang: 7/21/2010
terry: 7/7/2010
mgross: 6/30/2010
terry: 6/25/2010
wwang: 6/24/2010
ckniffin: 6/16/2010
joanna: 4/1/2009
alopez: 7/14/2008
alopez: 5/23/2008
terry: 5/7/2008
wwang: 6/14/2007
ckniffin: 6/6/2007
alopez: 1/8/2007
terry: 1/3/2007
alopez: 2/9/2006

606084	TITLE *606084 CDC42 EFFECTOR PROTEIN 1; CDC42EP1
;;CEP1;;
BONE MARROW STROMAL/ENDOTHELIAL CELL PROTEIN, 55-KD; MSE55
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hemonectin is an extracellular matrix cytoadhesive protein that promotes
the attachment of developing bone marrow granulocytic cells to bone
marrow stroma. By immunoscreening an endothelial cell cDNA library with
a polyclonal anti-rabbit hemonectin antibody and probing an
oligo(dT)-primed library, Bahou et al. (1992) obtained a cDNA encoding
MSE55. Sequence analysis predicted that the 391-amino acid serum protein
lacks a signal peptide but contains a series of 8 proline/alanine
repeats as well as EF-hand motifs. Southern blot analysis suggested that
the MSE55 gene is conserved in primates, dogs, and ducks. Northern blot
analysis detected a 2.5-kb MSE55 transcript in endothelial and K562
cells; expression was not detected in monocytic, myeloid,
erythroleukemic, or lymphocytic cell lines. Immunoblot analysis showed
expression of a 55-kD protein in endothelial cell lines and serum.
Because antibody raised against MSE55 did not recognize hemonectin and
anti-hemonectin antibody did not react with the recombinant protein,
Bahou et al. (1992) concluded that hemonectin and MSE55 are distinct.

GENE FUNCTION

Burbelo et al. (1995) identified a 16-amino acid CDC42 (116952)/RAC
(602048) interactive-binding (CRIB) region in a number of kinase and
nonkinase proteins, including MSE55. MSE55, a nonkinase, bound more
strongly to the GTP form of CDC42 than to RAC. Burbelo et al. (1999)
showed that MSE55 increases membrane actin polymerization and induces
the formation of long, actin-based protrusions in fibroblasts. They
concluded that MSE55 is a CDC42 effector protein that mediates actin
cytoskeleton reorganization at the plasma membrane.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the MSE55
gene to chromosome 22 (TMAP sts-R52295).

REFERENCE 1. Bahou, W. F.; Campbell, A. D.; Wicha, M. S.: cDNA cloning and
molecular characterization of MSE55, a novel human serum constituent
protein that displays bone marrow stromal/endothelial cell-specific
expression. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 13986-13992, 1992.

2. Burbelo, P. D.; Drechsel, D.; Hall, A.: A conserved binding motif
defines numerous candidate target proteins for both Cdc42 and Rac
GTPases. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 29071-29074, 1995.

3. Burbelo, P. D.; Snow, D. M.; Bahou, W.; Spiegel, S.: MSE55, a
Cdc42 effector protein, induces long cellular extensions in fibroblasts. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 9083-9088, 1999.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/6/2001

EDITED mgross: 08/30/2002
mgross: 7/6/2001

612730	TITLE *612730 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 9 (SODIUM/HYDROGEN EXCHANGER), MEMBER 8; SLC9A8
;;SODIUM/HYDROGEN EXCHANGER 8; NHE8;;
KIAA0939
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Sodium-hydrogen exchangers (NHEs), such as SLC9A8, are integral
transmembrane proteins that exchange extracellular Na+ for intracellular
H+. NHEs have multiple functions, including intracellular pH
homeostasis, cell volume regulation, and electroneutral NaCl absorption
in epithelia (Xu et al., 2008).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) obtained a partial SLC9A8 clone, which
they designated KIAA0939. RT-PCR ELISA detected low expression in most
adult tissues and specific brain regions examined. Little to no
expression was detected in adult lung and spleen and in fetal liver and
brain.

By searching databases using rabbit Nhe3 (SLC9A3; 182307) as query,
Goyal et al. (2003) identified human SLC9A8, which they called NHE8. The
full-length protein contains 581 amino acids and shares 96% identity
with mouse Nhe8. NHE8 has an N-terminal hydrophobic domain with 10 to 12
transmembrane segments and a short C-terminal hydrophilic tail. It also
has 4 potential N-glycosylation sites, a PKC-epsilon (PRKCE; 176975)
phosphorylation site, and putative SH2-, SH3-, ERK (see MAPK3; 601795)-,
and type III PDZ-binding domains. Northern blot analysis of mouse
tissues revealed ubiquitous expression, with highest levels in kidney,
testis, skeletal muscle, and liver. Western blot analysis detected Nhe8
in apical membranes purified from rat renal cortex. In situ
hybridization of rat kidney revealed high expression of Nhe8 in proximal
tubules in the outer stripe of the outer medulla, with lower expression
in cortical proximal tubules. No message was detected in glomeruli.

Using Northern blot analysis, Xu et al. (2008) detected 7- and 4-kb NHE8
transcripts in all sections of the human gastrointestinal tract, with
highest expression in stomach, duodenum, and ascending colon. Adult
mouse gastrointestinal tract showed a slightly different distribution of
Nhe8, and Nhe8 expression was much higher in stomach and jejunum of
young mice compared with adult mice.

By immunofluorescence analysis and immunogold electron microscopy of
HeLa cells, Lawrence et al. (2010) found that the majority of NHE8
localized to the trans-Golgi network, with a smaller proportion
localized with multivesicular bodies.

GENE FUNCTION

Xu et al. (2008) found that rat Nhe8 was a functional NHE with kinetics
and an inhibitor profile that differed from other apically expressed
NHEs.

Lawrence et al. (2010) found that knockdown of NHE8 in HeLa cells, but
not knockdown of any other NHE tested, resulted in endosomal clustering,
increased proportion of dense multivesicular bodies, and elevated EGF
(131530) degradation. Overexpression of an inactive NHE8 mutant resulted
in a similar endosomal phenotype. Depletion of NHE8 had no effect on
perinuclear localization of the trans-Golgi network, rate of protein
secretion, or endosomal pH.

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the SLC9A8 gene to chromosome 20q13.13 based on an
alignment of the SLC9A8 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB023156) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Goyal, S.; Vanden Heuvel, G.; Aronson, P. S.: Renal expression
of novel Na+/H+ exchanger isoform NHE8. Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol. 284:
F467-F473, 2003.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/14/2009.

3. Lawrence, S. P.; Bright, N. A.; Luzio, J. P.; Bowers, K.: The
sodium/proton exchanger NHE8 regulates late endosomal morphology and
function. Molec. Biol. Cell 21: 3540-3551, 2010.

4. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

5. Xu, H.; Chen, H.; Dong, J.; Lynch, R.; Ghishan, F. K.: Gastrointestinal
distribution and kinetic characterization of the sodium-hydrogen exchanger
isoform 8 (NHE8). Cell Physiol. Biochem. 21: 109-116, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/19/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/14/2009

EDITED mgross: 12/19/2011
terry: 12/19/2011
mgross: 4/14/2009

606945	TITLE *606945 LOW DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN RECEPTOR; LDLR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The low density lipoprotein receptor is a cell surface receptor that
plays an important role in cholesterol homeostasis.

CLONING

The low density lipoprotein receptor is synthesized as a 120-kD
glycoprotein precursor that undergoes change to a 160-kD mature
glycoprotein through the covalent addition of a 40-kD protein
(Tolleshaug et al., 1982).

Yamamoto et al. (1984) reported that the human LDL receptor is an
839-amino acid protein rich in cysteine, with multiple copies of the Alu
family of repetitive DNAs. Russell et al. (1984) demonstrated DNA
sequence homology of the LDL receptor with the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGF; 131530).

Sudhof et al. (1985) found that 13 of the 18 exons of the gene encode
protein sequences that are homologous to sequences in other proteins: 5
encode a sequence similar to one in C9 component of complement (120940);
3 encode a sequence similar to a repeat sequence in the precursor for
EGF and in 3 proteins of the blood clotting system--factor IX (300746),
factor X (613872), and protein C (612283), and 5 other exons encode
nonrepeated sequences that are shared only with the EGF precursor. Since
the LDL receptor is a mosaic protein built up of exons shared with
different proteins, it is a member of several supergene families.
Gilbert (1985) commented on the relevance of these findings to
understanding the significance of 'split genes' and 'exon shuffling'
during evolution.

MAPPING

Francke et al. (1984) assigned the LDL receptor to chromosome 19 on the
basis of expression studies in hamster-human somatic cell hybrids. The
LDLR gene was regionalized to 19p13.1-p13.3 by in situ hybridization
(Lindgren et al., 1985).

Frank et al. (1989) identified RFLPs of the mouse LDL receptor gene and
used them to map the gene, designated Ldlr, to the proximal region of
chromosome 9. Using interspecific backcrosses, they established the
order and interval distances for this and several other loci on mouse
chromosome 9, namely, Apoa4 (107690), which is on chromosome 11 in man,
and mannosephosphate isomerase (154550), which is on chromosome 15 in
man.

GENE FUNCTION

Brown and Goldstein (1974) described LDL binding to cultured fibroblasts
in a manner consistent with a receptor, and found that this binding
resulted in suppression of cholesterol synthesis by the cell via
repression of HMG CoA reductase. In a review article, Brown and
Goldstein (1979) described the mechanism of receptor-mediated
endocytosis using the LDL receptor as the prototypic example, thus
further describing its role in cholesterol metabolism. Normally, LDL is
bound at the cell membrane and taken into the cell ending up in
lysosomes where the protein is degraded and the cholesterol is made
available for repression of microsomal enzyme 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl
coenzyme A (HMG CoA) reductase, the rate-limiting step in cholesterol
synthesis.

Lo et al. (2007) observed that inhibition of lymphotoxin (see 153440)
and LIGHT (TNFSF14; 604520) signaling with a soluble lymphotoxin B
receptor (LTBR; 600979) decoy protein attenuated the dyslipidemia in LDL
receptor-deficient mice, which lack the ability to control lipid levels
in the blood. The authors concluded that the immune system directly
influences lipid metabolism and that lymphotoxin modulating agents may
represent a novel therapeutic route for the treatment of dyslipidemia.

- LDL Receptor as a Viral Receptor

Hepatitis C virus (HCV), the principal viral cause of chronic hepatitis,
is not readily replicated in cell culture systems, making it difficult
to ascertain information on cell receptors for the virus. However,
several observations from studies on the role of HCV in mixed
cryoglobulinemia provided some insight into HCV entry into cells.
Evidence indicated that HCV and other viruses enter cells through the
mediation of LDL receptors: by the demonstration that endocytosis of
these viruses correlates with LDL receptor activity, by complete
inhibition of detectable endocytosis by anti-LDL receptor antibody, by
inhibition with anti-apolipoprotein E and anti-apolipoprotein B
antibodies, by chemical methods abrogating lipoprotein/LDL receptor
interactions, and by inhibition with the endocytosis inhibitor
phenylarsine oxide. Agnello et al. (1999) provided confirmatory evidence
by the lack of detectable LDL receptor on cells known to be resistant to
infection by one of these viruses, bovine viral diarrheal virus (BVDV).
Endocytosis via the LDL receptor was shown to be mediated by complexing
of the virus to very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) or LDL, but not high
density lipoprotein (HDL). Studies using LDL receptor-deficient cells or
a cytolytic BVDV system indicated that the LDL receptor may be the main
but not exclusive means of cell entry of these viruses.

Atherogenic lipoprotein phenotype (108725) shows close linkage to the
LDLR locus; indeed, the mutation(s) responsible for this phenotype may
reside in the LDLR gene rather than in a separate, closely situated
gene.

Zelcer et al. (2009) demonstrated that the sterol-responsive nuclear
liver X receptor (LXR) (see 600380) helps maintain cholesterol
homeostasis, not only through promotion of cholesterol efflux but also
through suppression of LDL uptake. LXR inhibits the LDLR pathway through
the transcriptional induction of IDOL (MYLIP; 610082), an E3 ubiquitin
ligase that triggers ubiquitination of the LDLR on its cytoplasmic
domain, thereby targeting it for degradation. LXR ligand reduced,
whereas LXR knockout increased, LDLR protein levels in vivo in a
tissue-selective manner. IDOL knockdown in hepatocytes increased LDLR
protein levels and promoted LDL uptake. Conversely, Zelcer et al. (2009)
found that adenovirus-mediated expression of IDOL in mouse liver
promoted LDLR degradation and elevated plasma LDL levels. Zelcer et al.
(2009) concluded that the LXR-IDOL-LDLR axis defines a complementary
pathway to sterol response element-binding proteins for sterol
regulation of cholesterol uptake.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Rudenko et al. (2002) described the crystal structure of the LDL
receptor extracellular domain at endosomal pH. The ligand-binding domain
(modules R2 to R7) folds back as an arc over the epidermal growth factor
precursor homology domain (the modules A, B, beta propeller, and C). The
modules R4 and R5, which are critical for lipoprotein binding, associate
with the beta propeller via their calcium-binding loop. Rudenko et al.
(2002) proposed a mechanism for lipoprotein release in the endosome
whereby the beta propeller functions as an alternate substrate for the
ligand-binding domain, binding in a calcium-dependent way and promoting
lipoprotein release.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Davis et al. (1986) found that substitution of cysteine for tyrosine in
the cytoplasmic domain of LDL receptors impedes their internalization.
Lehrman et al. (1985) found that genes with nonsense and frameshift
mutations that truncated the cytoplasmic domain resulted in
internalization-defective LDL receptors.

In a patient with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (FH; 143890),
Hobbs et al. (1986) described an LDL receptor mutant in which 1 of the 7
repeating units constituting the ligand binding domain had been deleted.
The deletion arose by homologous recombination by repetitive Alu
sequences in intron 4 and intron 5 of the gene. The deletion removed
exon 5, which normally encodes the sixth repeat of the ligand binding
domain. In the resultant mRNA, exon 4 was found to be spliced to exon 6,
preserving the reading frame. The resulting shortened protein reaches
the cell surface and reacts with antireceptor antibodies but does not
bind LDL. It does, however, bind VLDL, a lipoprotein that contains
apoprotein E as well as apoprotein B-100. The findings in this
instructive case support the hypothesis that the 7 repeated sequences in
the receptor constitute the LDL binding domain, that the sixth repeat is
required for binding of LDL but not of VLDL, and that deletion of a
single repeat can alter the binding specificity of the LDL receptor.

Horsthemke et al. (1987) analyzed DNA from 70 patients in the UK with
heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. In most, the restriction
fragment pattern of the LDLR gene was indistinguishable from the normal;
however, 3 patients were found to have a deletion of about 1 kb in the
central portion of the gene. In 2 patients, the deletion included all or
part of exon 5 (606945.0027); in the third, the deletion included exon 7
(606945.0033). Including a previously described patient with a deletion
in the 3-prime part of the gene, these results indicated that 4 out of
70 patients, or 6%, have deletions.

Langlois et al. (1988) screened 234 unrelated heterozygotes for FH to
detect major rearrangements in the LDLR gene. Total genomic DNA was
analyzed by Southern blot hybridization to probes encompassing exons 1
to 18 of the LDLR gene. Six different mutations were detected and
characterized by use of exon-specific probes and detailed restriction
mapping. The frequency of deletions in the Langlois et al. (1988) study
was 2.5% (6 out of 234 patients). An illustration of previously mapped
deletions and the deletions identified in this study (a total of 16)
suggested that particular areas in the LDLR gene are susceptible to
deletion.

In a Japanese subject with homozygous hypercholesterolemia, Lehrman et
al. (1987) found a 7.8-kb deletion in LDLR (606945.0029). The deletion
joined intron 15 to the middle of exon 18, which encodes the 3-prime
untranslated region, thereby removing all 3-prime splice acceptor sites
distal to intron 15. The mRNA should produce a truncated receptor that
lacks the normal membrane-COOH terminus. The truncated protein was such
that more than 90% of the receptor was secreted from the cell, and the
receptors remaining on the surface showed defective internalization. The
deletion resulted from recombination between 2 repetitive sequences of
the Alu family, one in intron 15 and the other in exon 18. Lehrman et
al. (1987) stated that Alu sequences had been found at the deletion
joints of all 4 gross deletions that had been characterized in LDLR.
Because of these and similar findings in connection with deletions in
the gamma-delta-beta-globin cluster, recombination between Alu sequences
appears to be a frequent cause of deletions in the human genome (see
EVOLUTION).

Horsthemke et al. (1987) suggested that unequal crossing-over between 2
Alu-repetitive DNA sequences was responsible for an intragenic deletion
of the LDLR gene leading to familial hypercholesterolemia. A 4-kb
deletion had occurred between an Alu-repetitive sequence in intron 12
and a sequence in intron 14. The deletion eliminated exons 13 and 14 and
changed the reading frame of the resulting spliced mRNA such that a stop
codon was created in the following exon (606945.0032). The truncated
receptor protein appeared to be rapidly degraded. The deletion was
presumably caused by an unequal crossover event between 2 homologous
chromosomes at meiosis.

Hobbs et al. (1988) found that 16 of 132 cell strains (12%) from persons
with the clinical syndrome of homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
synthesized no immunodetectable LDL receptor protein, indicating the
presence of 2 mutant genes that failed to produce crossreacting material
(CRM-negative mutants). DNA and mRNA from all but one of these
CRM-negative patients were available for study. Haplotype analysis based
on 10 RFLPs suggested that the 30 CRM-negative genes represented by
these 15 individuals had included 13 different mutant alleles. Four of
the alleles produced no mRNA; 3 of these 4 had large deletions ranging
from 6 to 20 kb that eliminated the promoter region of the gene. The
reason for the lack of mRNA in the fourth allele was not apparent. Three
alleles encoded mRNAs of abnormal size. One of the abnormal mRNAs was
produced by a gene harboring a deletion, and another was produced by a
gene with a complex rearrangement. The third abnormal-sized mRNA (3.1 kb
larger than normal) was produced by an allele that had no detectable
alteration as judged by Southern blotting. The other 6 mRNA-positive
alleles appeared normal by Southern blotting and produced normal-sized
mRNA but no receptor protein.

Among 20 mutant LDL receptor genes, Yamakawa et al. (1989) found 4
different deletion mutations (20%). None of these had been reported
previously in Caucasians. Three of them were novel and one was similar
to a previously described Japanese mutation. In 3 of the 4 deletions,
the rearrangements were related to intron 15 in which there are many Alu
sequences.

Rudiger et al. (1991) reviewed previously described deletions in the
LDLR gene in cases of familial hypercholesterolemia and reported the
finding of a deletion in 3 of 25 unrelated patients with FH. Two of
these were equivalent to previously described LDLR alterations, thus
supporting a notion of recombination hotspots which involve Alu
sequences. In at least 4 cases (FH626, PO, JA, and FH-DK3), a deletion
of exon 5 of the LDLR gene has been found as the defect responsible for
FH. The FH626 mutation was characterized by Hobbs et al. (1986) and
found to involve Alu repeat sequences in introns 4 and 5. Rudiger et al.
(1991) characterized FH-DK3 and likewise found involvement of 2 Alu
repeated sequences present in introns 4 and 5. The crossover breakpoints
involve sequences similar to those reported for FH626 but not at
identical positions in the 5-prime end. By use of denaturing gradient
gel electrophoresis (DGGE) in combination with PCR, Top et al. (1992)
found no evidence of a promoter mutation in the LDLR gene in 350
heterozygotes for FH. Hobbs et al. (1992) reviewed 71 mutations in the
LDL receptor gene that had been characterized at the molecular level and
added 79 additional mutations. Furthermore, they reviewed the insight
that all 150 mutations provided into the structure/function relationship
of the receptor protein and the clinical manifestations of FH.

Feussner et al. (1996) described a 20-year-old man with a combination of
heterozygous FH caused by splice mutation (606945.0054) and type III
hyperlipoproteinemia (107741).

Lee et al. (1998) studied 80 unrelated individuals with FH from the West
of Scotland. Microsatellite analysis using D19S394 was informative in 20
of 23 families studied. In these families, there was no inconsistency
with segregation of the FH phenotype with the LDLR locus. Using SSCP,
Lee et al. (1998) also detected mutations in exon 4 of the LDLR gene in
15 of 80 of these individuals; 7 of 15 had the same cys163-to-tyr
mutation (606945.0058). Lee et al. (1998) concluded that microsatellite
analysis using D19S394 is useful in tracking the LDLR gene in families
and could be used in conjunction with LDL cholesterol levels to diagnose
FH, especially in children and young adults, in whom phenotypic
diagnosis can be difficult.

Jensen et al. (1999) studied 17 families with mutations in the LDLR gene
as a model in which to test formally for linkage directly between an
atherogenic genotype and ischemic heart disease or aortocoronary
calcified atherosclerosis. The aortocoronary calcification was
significantly associated with age and plasma cholesterol. Sex,
hypertension, body mass index, and smoking were not associated with the
aortocoronary calcification. Nonparametric analysis indicated
significant linkage of the LDLR locus to aortic (p less than 0.00005)
and to aortocoronary calcified atherosclerosis (p less than 0.00001).
Assuming a dominant mode of inheritance, significant linkage was
detected for aortic (lod = 3.89) and aortocoronary calcified
atherosclerosis (lod = 4.10). Jensen et al. (1999) suggested that the
atherogenicity of variations in other genes could be assessed by a
similar approach.

Yamakawa et al. (1988) described a TaqI polymorphism in the LDLR gene
which should be useful in the study of FH. Leitersdorf et al. (1989)
used 10 different RFLPs to construct 123 differing haplotypes from 20
pedigrees. The 5 most common haplotypes accounted for 67.5% of the
sample. Heterozygosity and polymorphism information content (PIC) for
each site were determined.

Varret et al. (1997) described a database of LDLR genes and provided a
listing of the 210 mutations it contained as of the fall of 1996. Wilson
et al. (1998) described an online database of LDLR mutations.

Kathiresan et al. (2008) studied SNPs in 9 genes in 5,414 subjects from
the cardiovascular cohort of the Malmo Diet and Cancer Study. All 9 SNPs
had been associated with elevated LDL or lowered HDL. One of the SNPs,
dbSNP rs1529729 in the SMARCA4 gene, was highly correlated with variants
in LDLR. Kathiresan et al. (2008) replicated the associations with the 9
SNPs and created a genotype score on the basis of the number of
unfavorable alleles. With increasing genotype scores, the level of LDL
cholesterol increased, whereas the level of HDL cholesterol decreased.
At 10-year follow-up, the genotype score was found to be an independent
risk factor for incident cardiovascular disease (myocardial infarction,
ischemic stroke, or death from coronary heart disease); the score did
not improve risk discrimination but modestly improved clinical risk
reclassification for individual subjects beyond standard clinical
factors.

Aulchenko et al. (2009) reported a genomewide association (GWA) study of
loci affecting total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, and
triglycerides sampled randomly from 16 population-based cohorts and
genotyped using mainly the Illumina HumanHap300-Duo platform. This study
included a total of 17,797 to 22,562 individuals aged 18 to 104 years
from geographic regions spanning from the Nordic countries to Southern
Europe. Aulchenko et al. (2009) established 22 loci associated with
serum lipid levels at a genomewide significance level (P less than 5 x
10(-8)), including 16 loci that were identified by previous GWA studies.
Association of the LDLR gene region identified by dbSNP rs2228671 was
found with total cholesterol levels (P = 9.3 x 10(-24)).

In a patient diagnosed with probable heterozygous FH, Bourbon et al.
(2007) analyzed the LDLR gene and identified a novel variant initially
assumed to be a silent polymorphism (R385R; 606945.0065); however,
analysis of mRNA from the patient's cells showed that the mutation
introduces a new 5-prime acceptor splice site that causes a 31-bp
deletion predicted to result in premature termination. The variant was
subsequently also found in a Chinese homozygous FH patient.

Defesche et al. (2008) analyzed the LDLR gene in 1,350 patients
clinically diagnosed with familial hypercholesterolemia who were
negative for functional DNA variation in the LDLR, APOB (107730), and
PCSK9 (607786) genes. The authors examined the effects of 128 seemingly
neutral exonic and intronic DNA variants and identified the R385R
variant in 2 Chinese families and a G186G (606945.0066) variant that
clearly affected a donor splice site and segregated with
hypercholesterolemia in 35 unrelated Dutch families.

In a metaanalysis of plasma lipid concentrations in greater than 100,000
individuals of European descent, Teslovich et al. (2010) identified SNP
dbSNP rs6511720 near the LDLR gene as having an effect on LDL
cholesterol concentrations with an effect size of -6.99 mg per deciliter
and a P value of 4 x 10(-117). This variant was also found to affect
coronary artery disease risk.

Kulseth et al. (2010) performed RNA analysis in 30 unrelated patients
with clinically defined hypercholesterolemia but without any LDLR
mutations detected by standard DNA analysis; sequencing of RT-PCR
products from an index patient revealed that the major product contained
an insertion of 81 bp from the 5-prime end of intron 14 of LDLR. DNA
sequencing of exons 13 and 14 detected an intronic mutation
(606945.0067) that segregated in heterozygosity with elevated
cholesterol in the proband's family. Kulseth et al. (2010) analyzed an
additional 550 index patients and identified the same splice site
mutation in 3 more probands.

Noting that large-scale genetic cascade screening for familial
hypercholesterolemia showed that 15% of LDLR or APOB mutation carriers
had LDLC levels below the 75th percentile, Huijgen et al. (2010)
proposed 3 criteria for determining pathogenicity of such mutations:
mean LDLC greater than the 75th percentile, higher mean LDLC level in
untreated than in treated carriers, and higher percentage of medication
users in carriers than in noncarriers at screening. Applying these
criteria to 46 mutations found in more than 50 untreated adults, 3 of
the mutations were determined to be nonpathogenic: 1 in LDLR and 2 in
APOB. Nonpathogenicity of the 3 variants was confirmed by segregation
analysis. Huijgen et al. (2010) emphasized that novel sequence changes
in LDLR and APOB should be interpreted with caution before being
incorporated into a cascade screening program.

- Modifiers

Vergopoulos et al. (1997) presented findings suggesting the existence of
a xanthomatosis susceptibility gene in a consanguineous Syrian kindred
containing 6 individuals with homozygous FH (see 602247). Half of the
homozygotes had giant xanthomas, while half did not, even though their
LDL cholesterol concentrations were elevated to similar degrees (more
than 14 mmol/l). Heterozygous FH individuals in this family were also
clearly distinguishable with respect to xanthoma size. By DNA analysis
they identified a hitherto undescribed mutation in the LDLR gene in this
family: a T-to-C transition at nucleotide 1999 in codon 646 of exon 14,
resulting in an arginine for cysteine substitution. Segregation analysis
suggested that a separate susceptibility gene may explain the formation
of giant xanthomas.

In a 13-year-old girl with severe hypercholesterolemia, Ekstrom et al.
(1999) demonstrated compound heterozygosity for a cys240-to-phe mutation
(606945.0059) and a tyr167-to-ter mutation (606945.0045) in the LDLR
gene. Her 2 heterozygous sibs also carried the C240F mutation, but only
one of them was hypercholesterolemic. The authors concluded that there
may be cholesterol-lowering mechanisms that are activated by mutations
in other genes (see 143890).

Knoblauch et al. (2000) studied an Arab family that carried the
tyr807-to-cys substitution (606945.0019). In this family, some
heterozygous persons had normal LDL levels, while some homozygous
individuals had LDL levels similar to those persons with heterozygous
FH. The authors presented evidence for the existence of a
cholesterol-lowering gene on 13q (604595).

Based on the finding from bioinformatic analysis that Alu repeats
represent 85% of LDLR intronic sequences outside exon-intron junctions,
Amsellem et al. (2002) designed a strategy to improve the exploration of
genomic regions in the vicinity of exons in 110 FH subjects from an
admixed population. In the first group of 42 patients found negative for
mutations by former screening strategies, approximately half (22) were
carriers of at least 1 heterozygous mutation. Among a second group of 68
patients recruited to correct for ascertainment bias toward exonic
mutations, 37 (27%) mutation carriers had a splicing regulatory
mutation. Of the 54 mutations identified, 13 were intronic and 18 were
novel, nearly half of which were intronic. Amsellem et al. (2002) stated
that their strategy of detecting the most likely disease-causing LDLR
mutations outside of Alu-rich genomic regions revealed that intronic
mutations may have a greater impact on the molecular basis of FH than
previously reported.

POPULATION GENETICS

Seftel et al. (1980) pointed to a high frequency of hypercholesterolemic
homozygotes in South Africa. In a 7-year period, 34 homozygotes were
seen in one clinic in Johannesburg. All were Afrikaners and most lived
in Transvaal Province. The authors calculated the frequency of
heterozygotes and homozygotes to be 1 in 100 and 1 in 30,000,
respectively. The oldest of their patients was a 46-year-old woman. Of
the 34, six were age 30 or older. The authors concluded that the high
frequency of the gene is attributable to founder effect, as in the case
of porphyria variegata (176200), lipoid proteinosis (247100), and
sclerosteosis (269500). Torrington and Botha (1981) found that 20 of 26
families with FHC (77%) belonged to the Gereformeerde Kerk, whereas
according to the 1970 census only 5% of the Afrikaans-speaking white
population of South Africa belonged to this religious group. Again, the
data were consistent with a founder effect. Using the LDLR activity of
lymphocytes, Steyn et al. (1989) calculated the prevalence of
heterozygous FHC in the permanent residents of a predominantly
Afrikaans-speaking community in South Africa to be 1 in 71--the highest
prevalence reported to date.

Hobbs et al. (1987) found a large deletion (more than 10 kb) in the LDLR
gene in 63% of French Canadians with heterozygous FH. The deletion also
occurred in homozygous form in 4 of 7 French-Canadian homozygotes. The
deletion removed the promoter and first exon of the gene and abolished
the production of mRNA for LDL receptor. The high frequency of the
mutation was interpreted as representing founder effect; 8,000 ancestors
account for present-day French Canadians and there has been relatively
little outbreeding. The deletion has not been observed in any other
ethnic group. It can be detected by analysis of genomic DNA from blood
leukocytes, thus allowing direct diagnosis of FH in most affected French
Canadians. Ma et al. (1989) identified a second 'French Canadian' LDLR
gene deletion which was found in 4 of 80 heterozygotes (5%). The
mutation consisted of a 5-kb deletion removing exons 2 and 3 of the LDLR
gene, which corresponded to the first 2 repeats of the LDLR-binding
domain (606945.0026).

Leitersdorf et al. (1990) analyzed the LDL receptor genes of 11 French
Canadian FH homozygotes. Only 3 different LDLR haplotypes were
identified, and the coding region of the allele associated with each was
sequenced. Three different missense mutations were found. Assays
developed to detect each of these directly were applied to 130 FH
heterozygotes from the greater Montreal area. The common deletion
(606945.0025) responsible for about 60% of cases (Hobbs et al., 1987)
and the smaller deletion (606945.0026) identified by Ma et al. (1989)
and found in about 5% of French Canadians were also sought. They were
able to detect LDL receptor mutations in 76% of the subjects and 14% had
1 of the 3 missense mutations. In the Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean region of
Quebec province, De Braekeleer (1991) estimated the prevalence of
familial hypercholesterolemia as 1/122, compared to the usually
estimated frequency of 1/500 for European populations.

Like the French Canadians, the South Afrikaners appear to have a unique
form of mutation in the LDLR gene consistent with founder effect (Brink
et al., 1987). Because of the presumed role of founder effect on the
high frequency of familial hypercholesterolemia in South Africa, it is
not surprising that Kotze et al. (1987) found a predominance of 2
haplotypes in 27 informative families with FH. In a study of homozygotes
from the Afrikaner population in South Africa, Leitersdorf et al. (1989)
found that 2 mutations account for more than 95% of the mutant LDL
receptor genes. Both mutations were basepair substitutions that resulted
in a single amino acid change and both could be detected readily with
PCR and restriction analysis. The findings were considered consistent
with the high frequency of FH being due to founder effect. Graadt van
Roggen et al. (1991) studied the prevalence and distribution of the 3
common mutations in South Africa in 27 unrelated homozygous and 79
unrelated heterozygous FH Afrikaner patients from 2 regions of South
Africa, the Transvaal and Cape Provinces. The 3 mutations were FH
Afrikaner-1 (606945.0006), FH Afrikaner-2 (606945.0009), and FH
Afrikaner-3 (606945.0044). The relative distribution of each of the 3
mutations was similar in the 2 regions, with frequencies of 66, 27, and
7%, respectively. Defects other than the 3 common mutations were more
frequent in the Cape than in the Transvaal; thus, the 3 known mutations
accounted for 98% of FH alleles in the Transvaal and only 74% in the
Cape Province. None of the patients carried the familial apolipoprotein
B-100 mutation.

Schuster et al. (1995) identified yet another homozygote for the
val408-to-met mutation (606945.0009), a 12-year-old Greek boy living in
Germany. The mutation was present in both his parents, his brother,
grandmother, uncle, and cousin. The haplotype, using 6 RFLPs of the LDL
receptor gene, was different from the one reported earlier in Afrikaner
and Dutch FH patients. Schuster et al. (1995) concluded that the
mutation in the Greek boy probably occurred independently. Furthermore,
they speculated that, because the parents were from different areas in
Greece, the mutation may be common in Greeks.

Deletion of gly197 (606945.0005) is the most prevalent LDL receptor
mutation causing familial hypercholesterolemia in Ashkenazi Jewish
individuals. Studying index cases from Israel, South Africa, Russia, the
Netherlands, and the United States, Durst et al. (2001) found that all
traced their ancestry to Lithuania. A highly conserved haplotype was
identified in chromosomes carrying this deletion, suggesting a common
founder. When 2 methods were used for analysis of linkage disequilibrium
between flanking polymorphic markers and the disease locus and for the
study of the decay of LD over time, the estimated age of the deletion
was found to be 20 +/- 7 generations, so that the most recent common
ancestor of the mutation-bearing chromosomes would date to the 14th
century. This corresponds with the founding of the Jewish community of
Lithuania (1338 A.D.), as well as with the great demographic expansion
of Ashkenazi Jewish individuals in eastern Europe, which followed this
settlement. Durst et al. (2001) could find no evidence supporting a
selective evolutionary metabolic advantage. Therefore, the founder
effect in a rapidly expanding population from a limited number of
families remains a simple, parsimonious hypothesis explaining the spread
of this mutation in Ashkenazi Jewish individuals.

Defesche and Kastelein (1998) stated that more than 350 different
mutations had been found in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia.
They tabulated the preferential geographic distribution that has been
demonstrated for some of the LDL receptor mutations. For example, in the
West of Scotland about half of the index cases of FH were found to have
the cys163-to-tyr mutation (606945.0058). Defesche and Kastelein (1998)
commented on the geographic associations of LDL receptor mutations
within the Netherlands.

EVOLUTION

Alu sequences are widely scattered in the genome, being present in
300,000 to 500,000 copies. They have been described, for example, in the
genes for alpha-globin (see 141800), gastrin (137250), gamma crystallin
(123660), insulin-like growth factor II (147470), and soluble thymidine
kinase. Each is about 300 bp long; thus Alu sequences represent about 3%
of the total DNA. On the basis of structural similarity, the origin of
Alu elements can be traced to the gene for 7SL RNA (Ullu and Tschudi,
1984). The abundant cytoplasmic 7SL RNA functions in protein secretion
as a component of the signal-recognition particle. This particle,
consisting of 6 different polypeptides and 1 molecule of 7SL RNA,
mediates the translocation of secretory proteins across the cytoplasmic
reticulum. Although the 7SL RNA has a well-defined biologic function,
that of the related Alu repeat remains unknown. Thus, the 7SL RNA gene
may be a progenitor of a processed pseudogene, the Alu element, that has
'recently' spread to different locations in the human genome. The
average Alu family member probably integrated into its present genomic
location about 15-30 Myr ago. The Alu family is specific to primates,
suggesting that these repeats were not present as little as 65 Myr ago.

According to the Alu family copy number, one would, on the average,
expect to find 1 such repeat every 3 to 5 kb in the human genome if they
are randomly distributed. However, studies of the
albumin/alpha-fetoprotein family by Ruffner et al. (1987) and of the
thymidine kinase (188300) and beta-tubulin (191130) genes by Slagel et
al. (1987) indicate clustering of Alu repeats in some parts of the
genome. For example, the beta-tubulin gene has 10 of these repeats in
less than 5 kb of a single intron and the thymidine kinase has 13
members within its introns in a region of about 10 kb.

HISTORY

Some early studies of somatic hybrid cells suggested that the gene(s)
for low density lipoprotein receptor may be on chromosome 5 or 21 or
both (Maartmann-Moe et al., 1982).

Li et al. (1988) worked out a PCR method for analyzing DNA sequences in
individual diploid cells and human sperm. They showed that 2 genetic
loci could be coamplified from a single sperm, and proposed its use for
genetic linkage studies. They analyzed the genotype of single sperm
derived from an individual heterozygous at the LDLR locus and the
HLA-DQ(alpha) locus and could show independent assortment. Individual
sperm were drawn into a fine plastic needle under microscopic
observation and delivered to a tube for lysis and amplification. Eighty
individual sperm were analyzed for the study of independent assortment
of LDLR and DQA. The method has great promise for fine mapping. Boehnke
et al. (1989) described the experimental design and issues of sample
size to be considered in the application of the method to the generation
of fine-structure human genetic maps.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using Ldlr -/- mice expressing the lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
(LCMV) glycoprotein (GP) transgene under control of the insulin
promoter, which functions as a mouse model in which type 1 diabetes
(125853) can be induced at will, Johansson et al. (2008) administered a
high-fat diet for 16 weeks to induce the development of advanced
atherosclerotic lesions before inducing diabetes. After the onset of
diabetes, there was increased intraplaque hemorrhage and plaque
disruption, regardless of lesion size, in mice fed low- or high-fat
diets for an additional 14 weeks. Furthermore, diabetes resulted in
increased accumulation of monocytic cells positive for S100A9 (123886),
a proinflammatory biomarker for cardiovascular events, and for a
macrophage marker protein, without increasing lesion macrophage content,
and S100A9 immunoreactivity correlated with intraplaque hemorrhage.
Hyperglycemia was not sufficient to induce plaque disruption: aggressive
lipid lowering, primarily of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, prevented
both plaque disruption and the increased S100A9 in diabetic
atherosclerotic lesions. Conversely, oleate promoted macrophage
differentiation into an S100A9-positive population in vitro, thereby
mimicking the effects of diabetes. Johansson et al. (2008) concluded
that diabetes increases plaque disruption independently of effects on
plaque initiation, through a mechanism that requires triglyceride-rich
lipoproteins and is associated with an increased accumulation of
S100A9-positive monocytic cells, and that this represents an important
link between diabetes, plaque disruption, and the innate immune system.

Lewis et al. (2009) generated mice lacking C1qa (120550) and/or serum
IgM (147020) as well as Ldlr and studied them on both low- and high-fat
semisynthetic diets. On both diets, serum IgM/Ldlr -/- mice developed
substantially larger and more complex en face and aortic root
atherosclerotic lesions, with accelerated cholesterol crystal formation
and increased smooth muscle content in aortic root lesions. TUNEL
analysis revealed increased apoptosis in both C1qa/Ldlr -/- and serum
IgM/Ldlr -/- mice. Overall lesions were larger in mice lacking IgM
rather than C1q, suggesting that IgM protective mechanisms are partially
independent of classic complement pathway activation and apoptotic cell
clearance. Lewis et al. (2009) concluded that IgM antibodies play a
central role in protection against atherosclerosis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
FH TURKEY
LDLR, GLN12TER

In a homozygote with familial hypercholesterolemia (FH; 143890) of
Turkish ancestry, Leitersdorf and Hobbs (1990) identified a CAG-to-TAG
change in codon 12 converting glutamine to a stop codon.

.0002
FH CAPE TOWN 1
LDLR, ASP26/GLY27DEL

In a South African black with FH (143890), Leitersdorf et al. (1988)
demonstrated deletion of aspartic acid-26 and glycine-27 due to deletion
of the 6 nucleotides of codons 26 and 27: GCGATG.

Thiart et al. (2000) found this mutation in 28% of mutant alleles in 56
South African black patients.

.0003
FH FRENCH CANADIAN 4
LDLR, TRP66GLY

This change in exon 3 is a class 3 binding-defective mutation
(Leitersdorf et al., 1990). In the French-Canadian population of a
province in Quebec, Moorjani et al. (1993) compared the clinical
features of homozygous FH (143890) because of the relatively high
frequency of a small number of mutations. In a comparison of 10 subjects
who had the trp66-to-gly (W66G) mutation in exon 3 with 11 subjects who
were homozygous for the 'greater than 10 kb' deletion of the promoter
region in exon 1 (606945.0025), they found the following: mean plasma
cholesterol concentration was higher in the subjects with the deletion
and there was no overlap in values in the 2 groups. Although the
frequency of coronary heart disease was similar in the 2 groups, age of
onset was earlier in subjects with the deletion; in addition, coronary
deaths were more frequent and occurred at an earlier age in the deletion
subjects.

Grossman et al. (1994) reported a 29-year-old woman with FH and a
homozygous W66G mutation who underwent hepatocyte-directed ex vivo gene
therapy with LDLR-expressing retroviruses. She tolerated the procedures
well, liver biopsy after 4 months showed engraftment of the transgene,
and there was no clinical or pathologic evidence for autoimmune
hepatitis. The patient showed an improvement in serum lipids up to 18
months after the treatment.

.0004
FH PUERTO RICO
LDLR, SER156LEU

Hobbs et al. (1989) found this missense mutation in a Puerto Rican
kindred that appeared to have an independently segregating mutation that
suppressed the hypercholesterolemia phenotype in some heterozygotes (see
144020). The same mutation was identified in a German family by Schuster
et al. (1993).

.0005
FH PISCATAWAY
FH LITHUANIA
LDLR, GLY197DEL

Meiner et al. (1991) found that the mutation was responsible for 35% of
71 Ashkenazi-Jewish FH (143890) families in Israel. Of the 25 Ashkenazi
patients who carried the mutant allele, 16 were of Lithuanian origin.
The mutation was not found in 47 non-Ashkenazi FH families. The mutation
was found in 8 of 10 FH cases in the Jewish community in South Africa,
which originated mainly from Lithuania. PCR amplification of a DNA
fragment that includes the mutation in heterozygous individuals results
in the formation of a heteroduplex that can be demonstrated by PAGE and
used for molecular diagnosis.

Mandelshtam et al. (1998) found this mutation in one-third (7 of 23) of
familial hypercholesterolemia cases in St. Petersburg (Russia) Jews and
in no patients of Russian descent.

.0006
FH AFRIKANER 1
FH MAINE
LDLR, ASP206GLU

Kotze et al. (1990) demonstrated a cytosine-to-guanine base substitution
at nucleotide 681 resulting in an amino acid change from aspartic acid
to glutamic acid at residue 206 (D206E) in the cysteine-rich
ligand-binding domain of the LDL receptor. The mutation gives rise to an
additional DdeI restriction site; segregation of the mutation with the
disease was confirmed in 5 large Afrikaner FH (143890) families. Kotze
et al. (1990) predicted that 65% of affected South African Afrikaners
carry this particular base substitution which can be diagnosed by PCR
amplification of genomic DNA followed by restriction enzyme analysis.
Indeed, from analysis of 138 chromosomes of Afrikaner FH (143890)
patients, Kotze et al. (1991) found this mutation in 91 (68.4%). Komuro
et al. (1987) described a homozygote for defective internalization of
the LDL receptor who survived to age 57. Leitersdorf and Hobbs (1990)
found the same mutation in an English-American living in Maine.

Vergotine et al. (2001) demonstrated the feasibility of prenatal
diagnosis of homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia in an Afrikaner
family with the D206E mutation.

.0007
FH MEXICO
FH FRENCH CANADIAN 3
LDLR, GLU207LYS

Codon 207 (GAG) is changed to AAG (Leitersdorf and Hobbs, 1990). The
same mutation was found in French Canadians with FH (143890)
(Leitersdorf et al., 1990).

.0008
FH DENVER 2
LDLR, ASP283ASN

In an African American patient with FH (143890), Leitersdorf and Hobbs
(1990) found a change of aspartic acid-283 (GAC) to asparagine (AAC).

.0009
FH AFRIKANER 2
LDLR, VAL408MET

This and the asp206-to-glu mutation (see 606945.0006) are frequent among
Afrikaners with FH (143890). A GTG-to-ATG mutation is responsible
(Leitersdorf et al., 1989). In a study of 138 chromosomes of Afrikaner
FH patients, Kotze et al. (1991) found that 31 (23.3%) had this
mutation. Schuster et al. (1993) found the same mutation in a German
family and showed that it existed on the same 7-RFLP haplotype as did
the mutation described in South Africa and in the Netherlands,
suggesting a common European origin. Similarly, Defesche et al. (1993)
found the val408-to-met mutation in 19 (1.5%) of 1,268 FH patients of
Dutch descent. In 9 of the patients carrying this mutation on one
allele, the LDLR DNA haplotype was that observed in a South African FH
patient homozygous for the same mutation. The remaining 10 Dutch FH
patients all shared a common haplotype, partly identical to the
Afrikaner haplotype, which could have arisen from a single
recombinational event. With the exception of the family reported by
Schuster et al. (1993), this mutation has been described only in persons
of Dutch ancestry.

.0010
FH ALGERIA
LDLR, ALA410THR

A GCT-to-ACT change is responsible for this variant (Zuliani and Hobbs,
1990).

.0011
FH KUWAIT
LDLR, VAL502MET

A GTG-to-ATG mutation is responsible for this variant (Zuliani and
Hobbs, 1990).

.0012
FH SAINT OMER
LDLR, GLY525ASP

A GGC-to-GAC mutation is responsible for this variant (Leitersdorf and
Hobbs, 1990).

.0013
FH GENOA
LDLR, GLY528ASP

A GGT-to-GAT mutation is responsible for this variant (Leitersdorf and
Hobbs, 1990).

.0014
FH NAPLES
LDLR, GLY544VAL

Esser and Russell (1988) found a GGC-to-GTC mutation as the basis of
this variant.

.0015
FH FRENCH CANADIAN 2
LDLR, CYS646TYR

Leitersdorf et al. (1990) found a TGT-to-TAT mutation in exon 14 as the
basis of this variant. See 606945.0003, 606945.0007, 606945.0025, and
606945.0026 for other French Canadian mutations.

.0016
FH LEBANESE
LDLR, CYS660TER

Lehrman et al. (1987) analyzed the nature of the LDLR mutation present
in high frequency in Lebanon; the frequency of homozygotes is more than
10 times higher than in other parts of the world. It was on the basis of
studies in Lebanon that Khachadurian (1964) first established the
existence of homozygous FHC (143890). Lehrman et al. (1987) demonstrated
that the mutation involves a shortened receptor protein containing 3
domains: the region of clustered O-linked carbohydrates, the
membrane-spanning region, and the cytoplasmic tail. The defect was
attributable to a single nucleotide substitution that creates a
premature termination codon at amino acid 660, eliminating 180 residues
from the mature protein. The termination codon occurred in the middle of
a cysteine-rich sequence that is part of the domain homologous to
epidermal growth factor precursor. The truncated protein retains only 2
domains: a complete ligand-binding region (residues 1-292) and a partial
epidermal growth factor precursor homology region (residues 293-659).
The mutant gene lacks the portions that code for the membrane-spanning
region and the cytoplasmic tail. After synthesis, most of the mutant
receptor remains within the cell. The mutation creates a new restriction
site for the enzyme HinfI, thus permitting diagnosis by Southern
blotting of genomic DNA. Lehrman et al. (1987) studied 4 unrelated Arab
patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, 3 from Lebanon
and 1 from Syria. They referred to this mutation as the Lebanese allele.
In 5 Christian-Arab kindreds in Israel, Oppenheim et al. (1991) found
the 'Lebanese' allele in correlation with hypercholesterolemia. In
addition, their results suggested the possible existence of an
independent factor contributing to elevated LDL cholesterol levels.

.0017
FH ZAMBIA
LDLR, PRO664LEU

In an Asiatic Indian with FH (143890), Knight et al. (1989) and Soutar
et al. (1989) found a CCG-to-CTG mutation changing proline-664 to
leucine. Knight et al. (1989) found that the precursor form of the
mutant receptor is converted more slowly than normal, and the mature
form on the cell surface binds LDL less well than normal. Soutar et al.
(1991) identified this mutation in a large Asian-Indian kindred
containing 22 heterozygotes and 3 homozygotes. All the heterozygotes had
a raised level of plasma total cholesterol and low density lipoprotein
cholesterol, but were remarkably free from premature coronary disease.
No correlation could be found between the apo(a) phenotype (152200) and
the presence or absence of the LDLR mutation. There was, however,
evidence for an inherited trait that markedly increased Lp(a)
concentration, which did not segregate with either apo(a) or the
defective LDLR allele. FH Zambia was found in a patient with familial
hypercholesterolemia who was of Indian origin residing in Zambia.
Rubinsztein et al. (1992) found the same mutation in 4 South African
families of Muslim religion who traced their origin to the vicinity of
Surat in the Gujerat province of India. Functional studies suggested
that the FH in these subjects was due to low steady-state levels of
receptor molecules that are functionally normal but exhibit accelerated
turnover.

Among 915 consecutive patients with FH and of Dutch descent, Defesche et
al. (1992) found 7 persons with the C-to-T transition at nucleotide 2054
in exon 14. All the patients shared the same haplotype. Contrary to
previous reports, no difference was found in plasma levels of Lp(a)
between family members with the mutation in exon 14 and unaffected
persons.

.0018
FH BAHRAIN
LDLR, TRP792TER

In a Bahraini patient with FH (143890), Lehrman et al. (1985) found a
change in the tryptophan-792 codon to a stop codon as the basis of this
variant. Truncation of the cytoplasmic domain of the LDLR protein
results in defective internalization. Recurrence of this mutation was
observed by Loux et al. (1991) in the course of a survey of 139
unrelated French FH subjects.

.0019
FH BARI
FH SYRIA
LDLR, TYR807CYS

In an Italian patient with FH (143890), Davis et al. (1986) found a
TAT-to-TGT mutation in this internalization-defective allele.

.0020
FH NASHVILLE
LDLR, 4-BP INS, EX8

In an American patient with FH (143890), Leitersdorf and Hobbs (1990)
found insertion of 4 nucleotides in exon 8 causing frameshift and
premature termination as the basis of this null allele.

.0021
FH PARIS 3
LDLR, 4-BP INS, EX17

In a French patient with FH (143890), Lehrman et al. (1985) found
insertion of 4 nucleotides in exon 17 causing frameshift and premature
termination as the basis of this internalization-defective allele.
Benlian et al. (1990) found the same duplication of 4 bases in exon 17
as the basis of familial hypercholesterolemia in a homozygous offspring
of consanguineous French parents and in heterozygous relatives. The same
mutation was not found in any normal individuals or in 158 other
individuals with hypercholesterolemia type IIa. The duplication involved
the third nucleotide of codon 796 and the 3 nucleotides of codon 797,
resulting in a frameshift and a stop codon 20 basepairs downstream.

.0022
FH PORTUGAL
LDLR, ASP203ASN

In Portuguese patients with FH (143890), Hobbs et al. (1992) identified
a G-A transition in exon 4 of the LDLR gene, resulting in an
asp203-to-asn (D203N) substitution. The mutation was not found in over
200 non-FH alleles.

.0023
FH ST. LOUIS
LDLR, EX2-8DUP

In an American child homozygous for FH (143890), Lehrman et al. (1987)
found that the LDL receptor precursor was unusually long due to a
duplication of 7 exons. Unequal crossing-over between homologous
repetitive elements (Alu sequences) in intron 1 and intron 8 was the
basis of the duplication.

.0024
FH PARIS 2
LDLR, EX2-5DUP

In a French patient with FH (143890), Leitersdorf and Hobbs (1990) found
this mutation.

.0025
FH FRENCH CANADIAN 1
FH DENVER
LDLR, PROMOTER/EX1 DEL

Deletion of the promoter and exon 1 of the LDLR gene resulting in a null
allele is the mutation found in about 60% of French Canadian cases of FH
(143890) in Quebec (Hobbs et al., 1987; Leitersdorf et al., 1990).
Leitersdorf et al. (1990) quoted work indicating that all persons with
the 'French-Canadian deletion' trace their ancestry to a small town
northeast of Montreal called Kamouraska, thus illustrating founder
effect. Founder effect was suggested as well by the fact that the
mutation was also found in France where it was, however, rare (Fumeron
et al., 1992). The same mutation was found in a non-French Canadian
Caucasian in Denver, Colorado (Hobbs et al., 1988). Betard et al. (1992)
found that the 10-kb deletion had the same haplotype, called the B
haplotype. They identified 15 different haplotypes for the normal allele
in heterozygotes. Thus, founder effect is again supported.

(It is more accurate to state that Kamouraska is northeast of Quebec
City on the south side of the St. Lawrence River. See 609313 for a
unique form of erythrokeratodermia variabilis, designated the Kamouraska
type and symbolized EKV3, that has been identified in families living in
the same region of Quebec.)

Simard et al. (2004) identified the breakpoint of the more than 15-kb
deletion involving the promoter and exon 1 of the LDLR gene, as well as
the breakpoint of the 5-kb deletion of exons 2 and 3 (606945.0026),
which accounts for 5% of French-Canadian FH cases. Both deletions
appeared to be the result of homologous recombination by unequal
crossing over between the left arms of Alu repeats. Simard et al. (2004)
determined that 55% of the LDLR gene is composed of Alu elements; thus,
it is not surprising that most LDLR rearrangements involve at least 1
Alu. They developed a rapid PCR-based assay for these 2
'French-Canadian' deletions. Screening of a representative population
sample of 943 French-Canadian youths whose LDL cholesterol levels were
above the 50th percentile allowed Simard et al. (2004) to estimate the
prevalence of the more than 15-kb allele as 0.11% (95% confidence
interval, 0.03 to 0.38).

.0026
FH FRENCH CANADIAN 5
FH TONAMI 2;;
FH TSUKUBA 1
LDLR, EX2-3DEL

Ma et al. (1989) found deletion of exons 2 and 3 in a French Canadian
patient with FH (143890). The same mutation was found in 2 Japanese
patients with homozygous FH and called FH Tonami-2 (Kajinami et al.,
1989) and FH Tsukuba-1 (Yamakawa et al., 1989).

.0027
FH PARIS 1
LDLR, EX5DEL

In a French patient with FH (143890), Hobbs et al. (1986) found deletion
of exon 5 of the LDLR gene. Horsthemke et al. (1987) found the same
mutation in 2 English patients.

.0028
FH CAPE TOWN 2
FH LEUVEN
LDLR, EX7-8DEL

In South African patients with FH (143890), Henderson et al. (1988)
detected a hitherto undescribed 2.5-kb deletion in the central region of
the LDLR gene, most likely including all of exons 7 and 8. The same
mutation was present in a Dutch patient in Leuven (Russell et al.,
1986).

.0029
FH ROCHESTER
FH OSAKA 1;;
FH HELSINKI
LDLR, EX16-18DEL

In an American patient with FH (143890), Lehrman et al. (1985) found
deletion of exons 16, 17, and part of 18, due apparently to Alu-Alu
recombination. The same mutation was found in Japanese by Lehrman et al.
(1987) and in many Finns by Aalto-Setala et al. (1989). A 9.5-kb
deletion extended from intron 15 to exon 18. Because of loss of the
domains encoded by exons 16, 17, and 18, the carboxy-terminal portion of
the normal receptor, comprising amino acids 750-839, has been replaced
by an unrelated stretch of 55 amino acids. This particular mutation was
found in 23 of 46 unrelated Finnish FH patients with an established
functional defect of LDLR. In cultured fibroblasts, both
receptor-mediated binding and internalization of LDL were reduced on the
average by 25 and 50%, respectively. Aalto-Setala et al. (1989) referred
to the mutation as FH-Helsinki. Rodningen et al. (1992) found the same
mutation in 3 out of 181 (1.7%) unrelated Norwegian FH subjects. All 3
showed the same haplotype. Aalto-Setala et al. (1992) found that the
FH-Helsinki mutation was present in 75 (38%) of 199 unrelated Finnish
patients with hypercholesterolemia. The prevalence ranged from 26 to 58%
in different areas of Finland, with the striking exception of the North
Karelia region where only 1 of 26 (4%) FH patients carried the
FH-Helsinki allele.

.0030
FH VANCOUVER 4
FH VANCOUVER 5
LDLR, EX2-6DEL

Langlois et al. (1988) found 2 instances of deletion of exons 2-6.

.0031
FH VANCOUVER 3
LDLR, EX3-8DEL

Langlois et al. (1988) found an instance of deletion of exons 3-8.

.0032
FH LONDON 1
FH ITALY 1;;
FH VANCOUVER 1
LDLR, EX13-14DEL

In an English patient with FH (143890), Horsthemke et al. (1987) found
deletion of exons 13 and 14. Hobbs et al. (1988) found the same mutation
in an Italian patient and Langlois et al. (1988) found it in Vancouver.

.0033
FH LONDON 2
LDLR, EX7DEL

In an English patient with FH (143890), Horsthemke et al. (1987) found
deletion of exon 7.

.0034
FH OSAKA 2
LDLR, EX7-14DEL

In a Japanese patient with FH (143890), Miyake et al. (1989) found
deletion of exons 7 to 14.

.0035
FH VANCOUVER 2
LDLR, EX17DEL

Langlois (1989) found deletion of exon 17 in a patient in Vancouver,
B.C.

.0036
FH VANCOUVER 6
LDLR, EX4-6DEL

Langlois et al. (1988) found deletion of exons 4 to 6.

.0037
FH REYKJAVIK
LDLR, EX9-10DEL

In the Icelandic population, Taylor et al. (1989) found this deletion.
However, in 17 unrelated families from Iceland, Taylor et al. (1989)
identified at least 4 different haplotypes, indicating that FH (143890)
is a heterogeneous disease even in this small, geographically isolated
population.

.0038
FH TONAMI 1
LDLR, EX15DEL

Kajinami et al. (1988) found deletion of exon 15 in a Japanese patient.

.0039
FH TSUKUBA 2
LDLR, EX16-17DEL

Yamakawa et al. (1989) found deletion of exons 16 and 17 in a Japanese
patient with FH (143890).

.0040
FH BALTIMORE-1
LDLR, EX17-18DEL

In an American Caucasian with FH (143890), Hobbs et al. (1990) found a
deletion from intron 16 to the 3-prime flanking region of the LDLR gene,
resulting in the deletion of exons 17 and 18.

.0041
FH LEIDEN 3
LDLR, EX16DEL

In Dutch patients with FH (143890), Top et al. (1990) found that
deletion of the 5-prime part of exon 16 was a frequent mutation.

.0042
FH POTENZA
LDLR, EX13-15DEL

In an Italian patient with FH (143890), Lehrman et al. (1986) found
deletion of exons 14 and 15 and part of 13.

.0043
FH BOLOGNA 2
LDLR, EX13-15DUP

In a survey of Italian patients with FH (143890), Lelli et al. (1991)
identified a heterozygous patient with an insertion in the LDLR gene
that represented a duplication of exons 13, 14, and 15.

.0044
FH AFRIKANER 3
LDLR, ASP154ASN

Graadt van Roggen et al. (1991) found a G-to-A transition in codon 154
resulting in substitution of asparagine for aspartic acid.

.0045
FH DRUZE
LDLR, TYR167TER

In FH (143890) families from 2 distinct Druze villages from the Golan
Heights in northern Israel, Landsberger et al. (1992) found a TAC-to-TAG
substitution in codon 167, changing the sense from tyrosine to stop. The
mutation was in exon 4, which encodes the fourth repeat of the binding
domain of the mature receptor. Landsberger et al. (1992) presented
demographic data concerning the Druze.

.0046
FH PAVIA
LDLR, EX2-12DEL

Bertolini et al. (1992) found a large rearrangement of the LDLR gene in
3 apparently unrelated families segregating for FH (143890) living in
northern Italy. Southern blot analysis demonstrated heterozygosity for a
25-kb deletion eliminating exons 2-12. The affected subjects possessed 2
LDL receptor mRNA species: one of normal size (5.3 kb) and one of
smaller size (3.5 kb). In the latter mRNA, the coding sequence of exon 1
was joined to the coding sequence of exon 13, causing a change in the
reading frame and thereby giving rise to a premature stop codon. The
predicted receptor protein, a short polypeptide of 29 amino acids, would
be expected to be devoid of any function. Bertolini et al. (1992) found
a common ancestor for the 3 families who had lived in the 17th century
in a region called Lomellina in southwest Lombardy, near Pavia.

.0047
FH NORTH KARELIA
LDLR, 7-BP DEL, EX6

Koivisto et al. (1992) identified a mutation found in many Finnish
patients with heterozygous FH (143890). The mutation, designated FH
North Karelia (FH-NK) , deleted 7 nucleotides from exon 6 of the LDLR
gene, caused a translational frameshift, and was predicted to result in
a truncated receptor protein. The mutation was found in 69 (34%) of 201
unrelated Finnish FH patients and was especially frequent (prevalence
79%) in patients from eastern Finland. FH Helsinki (606945.0029) and FH
North Karelia together account for about two-thirds of FH mutations in
Finland.

In Finnish North Karelia, with a population of about 180,000, Vuorio et
al. (1997) found that the FH-NK mutation accounts for 84% (340 of 407)
of FH cases, while the FH-Helsinki allele was found in 4% (18 cases).
The minimum prevalence of FH in North Karelia was estimated to be 1 in
441 inhabitants; in 1 commune, a frequency of 1 in 143 was found. By use
of parish and tax records, they identified a common ancestor for most of
the North Karelian FH-NK persons in the village of Puso, located within
an area where the FH prevalence is the highest. DNA analysis indicated
that 2% of subjects aged 1 to 25 years would have been diagnosed as
false-negative and 7% as false-positive FH patients on the basis of LDL
cholesterol determinations alone. Coronary heart disease (CHD) was
present in 65 (30%) of the 179 FH gene carriers aged 25 years or more,
and 19 individuals had a previous history of acute myocardial
infarction. The average age at onset of CHD was 42 years for males and
48 years for females.

.0048
FH LONDON 3
LDLR, CYS210TER

In an Irish subject with familial hypercholesterolemia (143890), 1 of
200 patients attending lipid clinics in the London area, Gudnason et al.
(1993) found a GCG-to-GAG transversion changing cys210 to a stop codon.

.0049
FH LONDON 4
LDLR, 2-BP DEL, 694AC

In 5 patients of British extraction with familial hypercholesterolemia
(143890), Gudnason et al. (1993) found deletion of the last 2 bases (694
and 695) of codon 206 (GAC).

.0050
FH OSAKA 3
LDLR, ASP412HIS

In a Japanese patient with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
(143890), Miyake et al. (1992) identified a G-to-C transversion in exon
9 which was predicted to change asp412 to his. The amino acid change
occurred in the epidermal growth-factor-precursor homology domain of the
LDL receptor. Both in the fibroblasts of the patient and in transfected
COS-1 cells, the mutant protein showed impaired processing and rapid
degradation. Members of the family carrying the mutant gene in
heterozygous state showed higher serum cholesterol levels than the
others; however, cholesterol levels were also influenced by the
apolipoprotein E phenotype. The mutant LDLR reported by Miyake et al.
(1992) is designated here FH Osaka-3.

.0051
FH AFRIKANER 4
LDLR, 18-BP DUP

Kotze et al. (1995) identified a de novo duplication in the LDLR gene in
the course of screening hypercholesterolemics who did not have 1 of the
3 known mutations responsible for the high frequency of FH (143890)
(more than 1/100) in South African Afrikaners. The de novo duplication
of 18 basepairs in exon 4 occurred after nucleotide 678 (or 681) of
their sequence. The authors suggested that the resultant change is
severe, because the corresponding duplicated amino acids 200-205 (or
201-206) are highly conserved in E/apo B binding repeat 5 of LDLC. One
of the daughters of the index patient inherited the defective LDLR gene,
which was absent in both grandparents. Kotze et al. (1995) suggested
that this was the first report of a molecularly characterized de novo
mutation associated with FH.

.0052
FH TURKU
LDLR, GLY823ASP

Two deletions, designated FH-Helsinki (143890.0029) and FH-North Karelia
(143890.0047), account for the mutations present in approximately 60 to
70% of all heterozygous FH (143890) probands in Finland. Koivisto et al.
(1995) screened the DNA samples from a cohort representing the remaining
30% of heterozygous patients by amplifying all 18 exons of the LDLR gene
by PCR and searching for DNA variations with the SSCP technique. Ten
novel mutations were identified, comprising 2 nonsense and 7 missense
mutations, as well as 1 frameshift mutation caused by a 13-bp deletion.
Koivisto et al. (1995) found a single nucleotide change, substituting
adenine for guanine at position 2533 of their sequence and resulting in
a gly823-to-asp amino acid change, in DNA samples from 14 unrelated FH
probands. The mutation, designated FH-Turku, affected the sequence
encoding the putative basolateral sorting signal of the LDL receptor
protein. The FH-Turku gene and another point mutation, FH-Pori (leu380
to his; 606945.0053), accounted for approximately 8% of the FH-causing
gene alterations in Finland and were found to be particularly common
among FH patients from the southwestern part of the country. The
FH-Turku missense mutation was the one closest to the C terminus of LDLR
identified to date.

Koivisto et al. (2001) showed that the FH-Turku mutant receptor is
mistargeted to the apical surface in both Madin-Darby canine kidney
(MDCK) cells and hepatic epithelial cells, resulting in reduced
endocytosis of LDL from the basolateral/sinusoidal surface.
Consequently, virally encoded mutant receptor fails to mediate
cholesterol clearance in LDL receptor-deficient mice, suggesting that a
defect in polarized LDL receptor expression in hepatocytes underlies the
hypercholesterolemia in patients harboring this allele. This evidence
directly links the pathogenesis of a human disease to defects in
basolateral targeting signals, providing a genetic confirmation of these
signals in maintaining epithelial cell polarity.

.0053
FH PORI
LDLR, LEU380HIS

See 606945.0052 and Koivisto et al. (1995).

.0054
FH ELVERUM
LDLR, IVS3, G-A, +1

In Norway, Leren et al. (1994) identified a splice mutation, a G-to-A
change of the first base of intron 3 destroying the conserved GT splice
donor site of intron 3 of the LDLR gene. The same mutation was reported
in patients with FH (143890) in England (Sun et al., 1995) and Germany
(Feussner et al., 1996).

.0055
FH AARHUS
LDLR, ASN543HIS AND 9-BP DEL

During a survey of mutations of the LDL receptor gene in Danish patients
with familial hypercholesterolemia (143890), using SSCP analysis, Jensen
et al. (1997) observed different patterns in exons 11 and 17 from 2
apparently unrelated FH index cases indicating the presence of 2
different mutations. No other mutations were identified by analysis of
the remaining 16 exons and the promoter region. The mutation in exon 11
was found to be a 1690A-C transversion, causing an N543H amino acid
substitution. In exon 17, they identified a 9-bp deletion of nucleotides
2393-2405 (2393del9). This sequence contains a 4-bp repeat of the
nucleotides TCCT at the end. It was therefore likely that the 9-bp
deletion had occurred due to 'slipped mispairing mutagenesis,' involving
mispairing of the 4-bp repeat during replication. The deletion did not
cause a frameshift, and the mutant allele coded, therefore, for an LDL
receptor protein lacking 3 amino acids in the membrane-spanning domain:
leu778, val779, and phe780. The 2 mutations were in the same allele of
the LDLR gene. Each of these mutations alone had little or no effect on
receptor function in transfected COS cells, but when both mutations were
present simultaneously, receptor function, as assessed by flow
cytometric measurement of fluorescent LDL uptake in cells, was reduced
by 75%. Immunostainable receptors on the cell surface were decreased by
80% as measured by flow cytometry. The 2 mutations therefore acted in
synergy to affect receptor function, possibly during intracellular
receptor transport, since Northern blot analysis suggested that mRNA
levels were unaffected. Jensen et al. (1997) noted that double mutations
had been reported in several clinically relevant genes, such as the HEXA
gene (606869.0036) and the CFTR gene (602421) (Savov et al., 1995). In
most of these disorders, one mutation was found to be causative, and the
other modified the onset or severity of the disease. The common
methionine-valine polymorphism in the PRNP gene (176640.0005) modifies
both qualitatively and quantitatively the phenotypic expression of the
pathogenic D178N mutation (176640.0010) resulting in 2 different
disorders: fatal familial insomnia and familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease (Goldfarb et al., 1992). Jensen et al. (1997) stated that in the
case of the LDLR double mutant, there appeared to be a true synergistic
action.

.0056
FH ICELAND
LDLR, IVS4, T-C, +2

Gudnason et al. (1997) stated that haplotype analysis in 18 apparently
unrelated families with FH (143890) in Iceland has identified at least 5
different chromosomes cosegregating with hypercholesterolemia. The most
common haplotype was identified in 11 of the 18 families, indicating a
founder mutation. By using SSCP analysis and direct sequencing of
amplified DNA, Gudnason et al. (1997) identified a T-to-C transition in
the second nucleotide in the 5-prime part of intron 4 of the LDLR gene.
This mutation was present in 10 of the 18 families. In half of the
cases, these families could be traced to a common ancestor by going back
no further than the 18th century. The mutation was predicted to affect
correct splicing of exon 4, and analysis at the cellular level
demonstrated an abnormal mRNA containing intron 4 sequence in
lymphoblastoid cells from a patient carrying the mutation. Translation
of the mRNA would lead to a premature stop codon and a truncated
nonfunctional protein of 285 amino acids.

.0058
FH GLASCO
LDLR, CYS163TYR

Lee et al. (1998) reported that in the West of Scotland, in the Glasco
area, about half of the index cases of familial hypercholesterolemia
(143890) were found to have the cys163-to-tyr mutation of the LDLR gene.

.0059
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, CYS240PHE

In a 13-year-old girl with severe hypercholesterolemia (143890), Ekstrom
et al. (1999) demonstrated compound heterozygosity for a cys240-to-phe
mutation and a tyr167-to-ter mutation (606945.0045) in the LDLR gene.
Fibroblasts from the patient showed very low cholesterol esterification
rate, LDL uptake, and degradation as compared to normal fibroblasts. Her
2 heterozygous sibs also carried the C240F mutation, but only one of
them was hypercholesterolemic. Ekstrom et al. (1999) expressed the C240F
mutant in LDLR-deficient CHOldlA7 cells. The transfected cells produced
a detectable protein but were unable to mediate uptake or degradation of
LDL. The authors concluded that there may be cholesterol-lowering
mechanisms that can be activated, perhaps by mutations in known or
hitherto unknown genes.

.0060
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, TRP23TER

In patients with familial hypercholesterolemia (143890), Hobbs et al.
(1992) identified a trp23-to-ter mutation in the LDLR gene.

.0061
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, CYS25SER

In a Japanese patient with familial hypercholesterolemia (143890),
Takahashi et al. (2001) identified a G-to-C transversion at nucleotide
137 of the LDLR gene, resulting in a cys25-to-ser (C25S) amino acid
substitution in the ligand-binding site (mutation class 2B: slow
transport and processing). The patient first noticed xanthomas on both
elbows at the age of 5 years. These continued to increase in number and
size. At age 40 years, xanthomas were present on elbows, palms, knees,
and feet. Clinical manifestations of myocardial ischemia developed at
age 41. Selective LDL filtration was initiated after plasma apheresis
through a macromolecular exclusion filter. With bimonthly treatments,
her LDL cholesterol decreased by approximately 50% and the xanthomas
regressed markedly, almost disappearing with 5 years of treatment.

.0062
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, CYS88SER

Pisciotta et al. (2002) identified a de novo LDLR mutation in a
47-year-old white male who at the age of 43 had suffered a myocardial
infarction. He was heterozygous for a G-to-C transversion in exon 4,
which resulted in a serine for cysteine substitution at position 88
(C88S) of the receptor protein. The mutation was not found in his
parents (nonpaternity was excluded), but it was present in his
9-year-old son, who had familial hypercholesterolemia (143890).
Haplotype analysis indicated that this de novo mutation occurred in the
paternal germline.

.0063
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, IVS14, G-A, +1

Takada et al. (2002) described a novel splice site mutation in the LDLR
gene, IVS14+1G-A, which genealogic research confirmed was shared by 14
of 1,135 members of an American Caucasian pedigree descended from a
common ancestor and affected with familial hypercholesterolemia
(143890). The mutation resulted in an abruptly truncated LDLR protein,
reducing functional LDLR activity by half in heterozygous carriers of
the mutant allele. Takada et al. (2002) stated this was the largest
familial hypercholesterolemia kindred described, and of 208 members
screened for this LDLR mutation, 94 carriers and 114 noncarriers were
identified. Strikingly lower total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol
values were observed among most of the LDLR mutation carriers who were
simultaneously homozygous for the -265C allele of the -265C-T
polymorphism of the APOA2 gene (107670.0002). In vitro transfection
assays showed that transcriptional activity of the APOA2 promoter was
reduced by 30% in the -265C allele as compared with the -265T allele.
The variant of the APOA2 gene was associated with reduced plasma LDL
cholesterol only in familial hypercholesterolemia patients.

In the same large family reported by Takada et al. (2002), Takada et al.
(2003) found that a SNP in the growth hormone receptor gene (GHR),
resulting in a L526I (600946.0028) substitution, influenced plasma
levels of high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol in affected family
members with the LDLR mutation. The lowest levels of plasma HDL were
observed among leu/leu homozygotes, highest levels among ile/ile
homozygotes, and intermediate levels among leu/ile heterozygotes. No
such effect was observed among noncarriers of the LDLR mutation.

In the pedigree reported by Takada et al. (2002), Sato et al. (2004)
demonstrated a significant modification of the phenotype of familial
hypercholesterolemia resulting from the IVS14+1G-A mutation by the
arg287 variation in the EPHX2 gene (132811.0001).

.0064
FH PYRGOS
LDLR, -45T DEL

In a patient with familial hypercholesterolemia (143890), Dedoussis et
al. (2003) identified a novel mutation in repeat 3 of the LDLR gene
promoter, -45delT. Analysis of a neutral polymorphism in LDLR mRNA from
the patient's white blood cells showed that the expression of 1 allele
was significantly reduced, and cells had only 24% of LDLR activity by
binding and uptake of iodine-labeled LDL. Transient transfection studies
using a luciferase gene reporter revealed that the -45delT mutation
considerably reduced the transcriptional activity of the LDLR promoter
and strongly suggested that the mutation was the cause of the familial
hypercholesterolemia phenotype. The proband was a female in her late
thirties; her father was reported to have elevated cholesterol levels
and had undergone bypass surgery at the age of 70.

.0065
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, ARG385ARG

In a patient diagnosed with probable heterozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia (143890), who had tendinous xanthomas and angina
since the age of 29 years, Bourbon et al. (2007) identified
heterozygosity for a 1216C-A transversion in exon 9 of the LDLR gene,
resulting in a synonymous arg385-to-arg (R385R) change. However,
analysis of mRNA from the patient's cells showed that the mutation
introduces a new 5-prime acceptor splice site that is used to the
exclusion of the natural splice site and causes a 31-bp deletion
predicted to result in premature termination 4 codons beyond the change.
Review of previous LDLR gene sequencing data revealed that the same base
substitution was present in a Chinese homozygous FH patient in whom no
other mutation in LDLR had been found. The authors stated that the
difference in origins of the 2 patients suggested that the mutation was
very unlikely to have been inherited from a common ancestor and that it
might be present in other populations as well.

Defesche et al. (2008) analyzed the LDLR gene in 1,350 patients
clinically diagnosed with familial hypercholesterolemia who were
negative for functional DNA variation in known hypercholesterolemia
genes and identified the R385R variant in 2 probands, both of Chinese
origin, and their family members. In view of the faint band representing
the aberrantly spliced mRNA on gel electrophoresis, the authors
suggested that this DNA variant likely leads to nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay.

.0066
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, GLY186GLY

In 35 unrelated Dutch patients clinically diagnosed with familial
hypercholesterolemia who were negative for functional DNA variation in
known hypercholesterolemia genes, Defesche et al. (2008) identified a
621C-T transition in exon 4 of the LDLR gene, resulting in a synonymous
gly186-to-gly (G186G) change, that introduces a 3-prime splice donor
site with a higher 'probability score' than the naturally occurring
3-prime splice site 75 bp downstream. Analysis of cDNA synthesized from
total RNA revealed that the aberrant splicing results in a 75-bp
in-frame deletion and a stable mRNA, predicted to produce an LDLR
protein lacking a 25-amino acid fragment (gly186 to cys210). The variant
was found in homozygosity in 2 of the probands, who had LDL cholesterol
levels of 14.8 and 10.5 mmol/L, respectively, and who both suffered
myocardial infarctions before the age of 20 years. The variant was also
identified in 62 first-degree relatives of the index cases.

.0067
HYPERCHOLESTEROLEMIA, FAMILIAL
LDLR, IVS14, C-G, +86

In a proband with clinically defined hypercholesterolemia (143890),
Kulseth et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for a splice site
mutation (2140+86C-G) in intron 14 of the LDLR gene, activating a
cryptic splice site that results in aberrantly spliced mRNA containing
an 81-bp insertion. Twelve of 23 family members tested were heterozygous
for the mutation, and carriers had significantly increased total
cholesterol levels compared to noncarriers. The 2140+86C-G mutation was
found in 3 additional probands with hypercholesterolemia, and in 1
proband's family the mutation was found in 6 of 7 tested family members,
who all had LDL cholesterol levels above the 97th percentile. RT-PCR
analysis in 1 affected individual from that family showed that the
mutant allele mainly gave rise to aberrantly spliced mRNA, but
contributed 21% normal transcripts. Transfection studies in CHO cells
demonstrated retention of mutant LDLR in the endoplasmic reticulum,
presumably due to protein misfolding.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Allen et al. (1980); Brown and Goldstein (1976); Elston et al. (1976);
Goldstein et al. (1977); Goldstein et al. (1975); Hobbs et al. (1985);
Horsthemke et al. (1987); Horsthemke et al. (1985); Kingsley and Krieger
(1984); Lehrman et al. (1987); Lehrman et al. (1985); Sudhof et al.
(1985)
REFERENCE 1. Aalto-Setala, K.; Helve, E.; Kovanen, P. T.; Kontula, K.: Finnish
type of low density lipoprotein receptor gene mutation (FH-Helsinki)
deletes exons encoding the carboxy-terminal part of the receptor and
creates an internalization-defective phenotype. J. Clin. Invest. 84:
499-505, 1989.

2. Aalto-Setala, K.; Koivisto, U.-M.; Miettinen, T. A.; Gylling, H.;
Kesaniemi, Y. A.; Savolainen, M.; Pyorala, K.; Ebeling, T.; Mononen,
I.; Turtola, H.; Viikari, J.; Kontula, K.: Prevalence and geographical
distribution of major LDL receptor gene rearrangements in Finland. J.
Intern. Med. 231: 227-234, 1992.

3. Agnello, V.; Abel, G.; Elfahal, M.; Knight, G. B.; Zhang, Q.-X.
: Hepatitis C virus and other flaviviridae viruses enter cells via
low density lipoprotein receptor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 12766-12771,
1999.

4. Allen, J. M.; Thompson, G. R.; Myant, N. B.; Steiner, R.; Oakley,
C. M.: Cardiovascular complications of homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia. Brit.
Heart J. 44: 361-368, 1980.

5. Amsellem, S.; Briffaut, D.; Carrie, A.; Rabes, J. P.; Girardet,
J. P.; Fredenrich, A.; Moulin, P.; Krempf, M.; Reznik, Y.; Vialettes,
B.; de Gennes, J. L.; Brukert, E.; Benlian, P.: Intronic mutations
outside of Alu-repeat-rich domains of the LDL receptor gene are a
cause of familial hypercholesterolemia. Hum. Genet. 111: 501-510,
2002.

6. Aulchenko, Y. S.; Ripatti, S.; Lindqvist, I.; Boomsma, D.; Heid,
I. M.; Pramstaller, P. P.; Penninx, B. W. J. H.; Janssens, A. C. J.
W.; Wilson, W. F.; Spector, T.; Martin, N. G.; Pedersen, N. L.: and
45 others: Loci influencing lipid levels and coronary heart disease
risk in 16 European population cohorts. Nature Genet. 41: 47-55,
2009.

7. Benlian, P.; Amselem, S.; Loux, N.; Pastier, D.; Giraud, G.; de
Gennes, J. L.; Turpin, G.; Monnier, L.; Rieu, D.; Douste-Blazy, P.;
Dastugue, B.; Goossens, M.; Junien, C.: A LDL receptor gene homozygous
mutation: PCR amplification, direct genomic sequencing, associated
haplotype, rapid screening for frequency. Ann. Genet. 33: 65-69,
1990.

8. Bertolini, S.; Lelli, N.; Coviello, D. A.; Ghisellini, M.; Masturzo,
P.; Tiozzo, R.; Elicio, N.; Gaddi, A.; Calandra, S.: A large deletion
in the LDL receptor gene--the cause of familial hypercholesterolemia
in three Italian families: a study that dates back to the 17th century
(FH-Pavia). Am. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 123-134, 1992.

9. Betard, C.; Kessling, A. M.; Roy, M.; Chamberland, A.; Lussier-Cacan,
S.; Davignon, J.: Molecular genetic evidence for a founder effect
in familial hypercholesterolemia among French Canadians. Hum. Genet. 88:
529-536, 1992.

10. Boehnke, M.; Arnheim, N.; Li, H.; Collins, F. S.: Fine-structure
genetic mapping of human chromosomes using the polymerase chain reaction
on single sperm: experimental design considerations. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 45: 21-32, 1989.

11. Bourbon, M.; Sun, X.-M.; Soutar, A. K.: A rare polymorphism in
the low density lipoprotein (LDL) gene that affects mRNA splicing. Atherosclerosis 195:
e17, 2007. Note: Electronic Article.

12. Brink, P. A.; Steyn, L. T.; Coetzee, G. A.; van der Westhuyzen,
D. R.: Familial hypercholesterolemia in South African Afrikaners:
PvuII and StuI DNA polymorphisms in the LDL-receptor gene consistent
with a predominating founder gene effect. Hum. Genet. 77: 32-35,
1987.

13. Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: Familial hypercholesterolemia:
defective binding of lipoproteins to cultured fibroblasts associated
with impaired regulation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme at
reductase activity. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 71: 788-792, 1974.

14. Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: Receptor-mediated endocytosis:
insights from the lipoprotein receptor system. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 76:
3330-3337, 1979.

15. Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: Analysis of a mutant strain of
human fibroblasts with a defect in the internalization of receptor-bound
low density lipoproteins. Cell 9: 663-674, 1976.

16. Davis, C. G.; Lehrman, M. A.; Russell, D. W.; Anderson, R. G.
W.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: The J.D. mutation in familial
hypercholesterolemia: amino acid substitution in cytoplasmic domain
impedes internalization of LDL receptors. Cell 45: 15-24, 1986.

17. De Braekeleer, M.: Hereditary disorders in Saguenay-Lac-St-Jean
(Quebec, Canada). Hum. Hered. 41: 141-146, 1991.

18. Dedoussis, G. V. Z.; Pitsavos, C.; Kelberman, D.; Skoumas, J.;
Prassa, M. E.; Choumerianou, D. M.; Stefanadis, C.; Humphries, S.
E.; Toutouzas, P.: FH-Pyrgos: a novel mutation in the promoter (-45delT)
of the low-density lipoprotein receptor gene associated with familial
hypercholesterolemia. Clin. Genet. 64: 414-419, 2003.

19. Defesche, J. C.; Kastelein, J. J. P.: Molecular epidemiology
of familial hypercholesterolaemia. (Letter) Lancet 352: 1643-1644,
1998.

20. Defesche, J. C.; Schuurman, E. J. M.; Klaaijsen, L. N.; Khoo,
K. L.; Wiegman, A.; Stalenhoef, A. F. H.: Silent exonic mutations
in the low-density lipoprotein receptor gene that cause familial hypercholesterolemia
by affecting mRNA splicing. Clin. Genet. 73: 573-578, 2008.

21. Defesche, J. C.; van de Ree, M. A.; Kastelein, J. J. P.; van Diermen,
D. E.; Janssens, N. W. E.; van Doormaal, J. J.; Hayden, M. R.: Detection
of the pro664-to-leu mutation in the low-density lipoprotein receptor
and its relation to lipoprotein(a) levels in patients with familial
hypercholesterolemia of Dutch ancestry from The Netherlands and Canada. Clin.
Genet. 42: 273-280, 1992.

22. Defesche, J. C.; van Diermen, D. E.; Lansberg, P. J.; Lamping,
R. J.; Reymer, P. W. A.; Hayden, M. R.; Kastelein, J. J. P.: South
African founder mutations in the low-density lipoprotein receptor
gene causing familial hypercholesterolemia in the Dutch population. Hum.
Genet. 92: 567-570, 1993.

23. Durst, R.; Colombo, R.; Shpitzen, S.; Ben Avi, L.; Friedlander,
Y.; Wexler, R.; Raal, F. J.; Marais, D. A.; Defesche, J. C.; Mandelshtam,
M. Y.; Kotze, M. J.; Leitersdorf, E.; Meiner, V.: Recent origin and
spread of a common Lithuanian mutation, G197del LDLR, causing familial
hypercholesterolemia: positive selection is not always necessary to
account for disease incidence among Ashkenazi Jews. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68:
1172-1188, 2001.

24. Ekstrom, U.; Abrahamson, M.; Floren, C.-H.; Tollig, H.; Wettrell,
G.; Nilsson, G.; Sun, X.-M.; Soutar, A. K.; Nilsson-Ehle, P.: An
individual with a healthy phenotype in spite of a pathogenic LDL receptor
mutation (C240F). Clin. Genet. 55: 332-339, 1999.

25. Elston, R. C.; Namboodiri, K. K.; Go, R. C. P.; Siervogel, R.
M.; Glueck, C. J.: Probable linkage between essential familial hypercholesterolemia
and third complement component (C3). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 16:
294-297, 1976.

26. Esser, V.; Russell, D. W.: Transport-deficient mutations in the
low density lipoprotein receptor: alterations in the cysteine-rich
and cysteine-poor regions of the protein block intracellular transport. J.
Biol. Chem. 263: 13276-13281, 1988.

27. Feussner, G.; Dobmeyer, J.; Nissen, H.; Hansen, T. S.: Unusual
Xanthomas in a young patient with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia
and type III hyperlipoproteinemia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 65: 149-154,
1996.

28. Francke, U.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: Assignment of the
human gene for the low density lipoprotein receptor to chromosome
19: synteny of a receptor, a ligand, and a genetic disease. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 2826-2830, 1984.

29. Frank, S. L.; Taylor, B. A.; Lusis, A. J.: Linkage of the mouse
LDL receptor gene on chromosome 9. Genomics 5: 646-648, 1989.

30. Fumeron, F.; Grandchamp, B.; Fricker, J.; Krempf, M.; Wolf, L.-M.;
Khayat, M.-C.; Boiffard, O.; Apfelbaum, M.: Presence of the French
Canadian deletion in a French patient with familial hypercholesterolemia.
(Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 326: 69 only, 1992.

31. Gilbert, W.: Genes-in-pieces revisited. Science 228: 823-824,
1985.

32. Goldfarb, L. G.; Petersen, R. B.; Tabaton, M.; Brown, P.; LeBlanc,
A. C.; Montagna, P.; Cortelli, P.; Julien, J.; Vital, C.; Pendelbury,
W. W.; Haltia, M.; Wills, P. R.; and 9 others: Fatal familial insomnia
and familial Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: disease phenotype determined
by a DNA polymorphism. Science 258: 806-808, 1992.

33. Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.; Stone, N. J.: Genetics of the
LDL receptor: evidence that the mutations affecting binding and internalization
are allelic. Cell 12: 629-641, 1977.

34. Goldstein, J. L.; Dana, S. E.; Brunschede, G. Y.; Brown, M. S.
: Genetic heterogeneity in familial hypercholesterolemia: evidence
for two different mutations affecting functions of low-density lipoprotein
receptor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 72: 1092-1096, 1975.

35. Graadt van Roggen, F.; van der Westhuyzen, D. R.; Marais, A. D.;
Gevers, W.; Coetzee, G. A.: Low density lipoprotein receptor founder
mutations in Afrikaner familial hypercholesterolaemic patients: a
comparison of two geographical areas. Hum. Genet. 88: 204-208, 1991.

36. Grossman, M.; Raper, S. E.; Kozarsky, K.; Stein, E. A.; Engelhardt,
J. F.; Muller, D.; Lupien, P. J.; Wilson, J. M.: Successful ex vivo
gene therapy directed to liver in a patient with familial hypercholesterolaemia. Nature
Genet. 6: 335-341, 1994.

37. Gudnason, V.; King-Underwood, L.; Seed, M.; Sun, X.-M.; Soutar,
A. K.; Humphries, S. E.: Identification of recurrent and novel mutations
in exon 4 of the LDL receptor gene in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia
in the United Kingdom. Arteriosclerosis Thromb. 13: 56-63, 1993.

38. Gudnason, V.; Sigurdsson, G.; Nissen, H.; Humphries, S. E.: Common
founder mutation in the LDL receptor gene causing familial hypercholesterolemia
in the Icelandic population. Hum. Mutat. 10: 36-44, 1997.

39. Henderson, H. E.; Berger, G. M. B.; Marais, A. D.: A new LDL
receptor gene deletion mutation in the South African population. Hum.
Genet. 80: 371-374, 1988.

40. Hobbs, H. H.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: Molecular genetics
of the LDL receptor gene in familial hypercholesterolemia. Hum. Mutat. 1:
445-466, 1992.

41. Hobbs, H. H.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.; Russell, D. W.:
Deletion of exon encoding cysteine-rich repeat of low density lipoprotein
receptor alters its binding specificity in a subject with familial
hypercholesterolemia. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 13114-13120, 1986.

42. Hobbs, H. H.; Brown, M. S.; Russell, D. W.; Davignon, J.; Goldstein,
J. L.: Deletion in the gene for the low-density-lipoprotein receptor
in a majority of French Canadians with familial hypercholesterolemia. New
Eng. J. Med. 317: 734-737, 1987.

43. Hobbs, H. H.; Lehrman, M. A.; Yamamoto, T.; Russell, D. W.: Polymorphism
and evolution of Alu sequences in the human low density lipoprotein
receptor gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 7651-7655, 1985. Note:
Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 1964 only, 1986.

44. Hobbs, H. H.; Leitersdorf, E.; Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.;
Russell, D. W.: Multiple CRM- mutations in familial hypercholesterolemia:
evidence for 13 alleles, including four deletions. J. Clin. Invest. 81:
909-917, 1988.

45. Hobbs, H. H.; Leitersdorf, E.; Leffert, C. C.; Cryer, D. R.; Brown,
M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: Evidence for a dominant gene that suppresses
hypercholesterolemia in a family with defective low density lipoprotein
receptors. J. Clin. Invest. 84: 656-664, 1989.

46. Hobbs, H. H.; Russell, D. W.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.:
The LDL receptor locus in familial hypercholesterolemia: mutational
analysis of a membrane protein. Annu. Rev. Genet. 24: 133-170, 1990.

47. Horsthemke, B.; Beisiegel, U.; Dunning, A.; Havinga, J. R.; Williamson,
R.; Humphries, S.: Unequal crossing-over between two Alu-repetitive
DNA sequences in the low-density-lipoprotein-receptor gene: a possible
mechanism for the defect in a patient with familial hypercholesterolaemia. Europ.
J. Biochem. 164: 77-81, 1987.

48. Horsthemke, B.; Dunning, A.; Humphries, S.: Identification of
deletions in the human low density lipoprotein receptor gene. J.
Med. Genet. 24: 144-147, 1987.

49. Horsthemke, B.; Kessling, A. M.; Seed, M.; Wynn, V.; Williamson,
R.; Humphries, S. E.: Identification of a deletion in the low density
lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene in a patient with familial hypercholesterolaemia. Hum.
Genet. 71: 75-78, 1985.

50. Huijgen, R.; Kindt, I.; Fouchier, S. W.; Defesche, J. C.; Hutten,
B. A.; Kastelein, J. J. P.; Vissers, M. N.: Functionality of sequence
variants in the genes coding for the low-density lipoprotein receptor
and apolipoprotein B in individuals with inherited hypercholesterolemia. Hum.
Mutat. 31: 752-760, 2010.

51. Jensen, H. K.; Jensen, T. G.; Faergeman, O.; Jensen, L. G.; Andresen,
B. S.; Corydon, M. J.; Andreasen, P. H.; Hansen, P. S.; Heath, F.;
Bolund, L.; Gregersen, N.: Two mutations in the same low-density
lipoprotein receptor allele act in synergy to reduce receptor function
in heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. Hum. Mutat. 9: 437-444,
1997.

52. Jensen, J. M.; Kruse, T. A.; Brorholt-Petersen, J. U.; Christiansen,
T. M.; Jensen, H. K.; Kolvraa, S.; Faergeman, O.: Linking genotype
to aorto-coronary atherosclerosis: a model using familial hypercholesterolemia
and aorto-coronary calcification. Ann. Hum. Genet. 63: 511-520,
1999.

53. Johansson, F.; Kramer, F.; Barnhart, S.; Kanter, J. E.; Vaisar,
T.; Merrill, R. D.; Geng, L.; Oka, K.; Chan, L.; Chait, A.; Heinecke,
J. W.; Bornfeldt, K. E.: Type 1 diabetes promotes disruption of advanced
atherosclerotic lesions in LDL receptor-deficient mice. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 105: 2082-2087, 2008.

54. Kajinami, K.; Fujita, H.; Koizumi, J.; Mabuchi, H.; Takeda, R.;
Ohta, M.: Genetically determined mild type of familial hypercholesterolemia
including normocholesterolemic patients: FH-Tonami-2. Circulation 80
(suppl. 2): 278 only, 1989.

55. Kajinami, K.; Mabuchi, H.; Itoh, H.; Michishita, I.; Takeda, M.;
Wakasugi, T.; Koizumi, J.; Takeda, R.: New variant of low density
lipoprotein receptor gene FH-Tonami. Arteriosclerosis 8: 187-192,
1988.

56. Kathiresan, S.; Melander, O.; Anevski, D.; Guiducci, C.; Burtt,
N. P.; Roos, C.; Hirschhorn, J. N.; Berglund, G.; Hedblad, B.; Groop,
L.; Altshuler, D. M.; Newton-Cheh, C.; Orho-Melander, M.: Polymorphisms
associated with cholesterol and risk of cardiovascular events. New
Eng. J. Med. 358: 1240-1249, 2008.

57. Khachadurian, A. K.: The inheritance of essential familial hypercholesterolemia. Am.
J. Med. 37: 402-407, 1964.

58. Kingsley, D. M.; Krieger, M.: Receptor-mediated endocytosis of
low density lipoprotein: somatic cell mutants define multiple genes
required for expression of surface-receptor activity. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 81: 5454-5458, 1984.

59. Knight, B. L.; Gavigan, S. J. P.; Soutar, A. K.; Patel, D. D.
: Defective processing and binding of low-density lipoprotein receptors
in fibroblasts from a familial hypercholesterolaemic subject. Europ.
J. Biochem. 179: 693-698, 1989.

60. Knoblauch, H.; Muller-Myhsok, B.; Busjahn, A.; Ben Avi, L.; Bahring,
S.; Baron, H.; Heath, S. C.; Uhlmann, R.; Faulhaber, H.-D.; Shpitzen,
S.; Aydin, A.; Reshef, A.; and 11 others: A cholesterol-lowering
gene maps to chromosome 13q. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66: 157-166, 2000.

61. Koivisto, U.-M.; Hubbard, A. L.; Mellman, I.: A novel cellular
phenotype for familial hypercholesterolemia due to a defect in polarized
targeting of LDL receptor. Cell 105: 575-585, 2001.

62. Koivisto, U.-M.; Turtola, H.; Aalto-Setala, K.; Top, B.; Frants,
R. R.; Kovanen, P. T.; Syvanen, A.-C.; Kontula, K.: The familial
hypercholesterolemia (FH)-North Karelia mutation of the low density
lipoprotein receptor gene deletes seven nucleotides of exon 6 and
is a common cause of FH in Finland. J. Clin. Invest. 90: 219-228,
1992.

63. Koivisto, U.-M.; Viikari, J. S.; Kontula, K.: Molecular characterization
of minor gene rearrangements in Finnish patients with heterozygous
familial hypercholesterolemia: identification of two common missense
mutations (Gly823-to-Asp and Leu380-to-His) and eight rare mutations
of the LDL receptor gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 789-797, 1995.

64. Komuro, I.; Kato, H.; Nakagawa, T.; Takahashi, K.; Mimori, A.;
Takeuchi, F.; Nishida, Y.; Miyamoto, T.: Case report: the longest-lived
patient with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia secondary to
a defect in internalization of the LDL receptor. Am. J. Med. Sci. 294:
341-345, 1987.

65. Kotze, M. J.; Langenhoven, E.; Retief, A. E.; Steyn, K.; Marais,
M. P.; Grobbelaar, J. J.; Oosthuizen, C. J. J.; Weich, H. F. H.; Benade,
A. J. S.: Haplotype associations of three DNA polymorphisms at the
human low density lipoprotein receptor gene locus in familial hypercholesterolemia. J.
Med. Genet. 24: 750-755, 1987.

66. Kotze, M. J.; Langenhoven, E.; Warnich, L.; du Plessis, L.; Retief,
A. E.: The molecular basis and diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolaemia
in South African Afrikaners. Ann. Hum. Genet. 55: 115-121, 1991.

67. Kotze, M. J.; Theart, L.; Peeters, A.; Langenhoven, E.: A de
novo duplication in the low density lipoprotein receptor gene. Hum.
Mutat. 6: 181-183, 1995.

68. Kotze, M. J.; Warnich, L.; Langenhoven, E.; du Plessis, L.; Retief,
A. E.: An exon 4 mutation identified in the majority of South African
familial hypercholesterolaemics. J. Med. Genet. 27: 298-302, 1990.

69. Kulseth, M. A.; Berge, K. E.; Bogsrud, M. P.; Leren, T. P.: Analysis
of LDLR mRNA in patients with familial hypercholesterolemia revealed
a normal mutation in intron 14, which activates a cryptic splice site. J.
Hum. Genet. 55: 676-680, 2010.

70. Landsberger, D.; Meiner, V.; Reshef, A.; Levy, Y.; van der Westhuyzen,
D. R.; Coetzee, G. A.; Leitersdorf, E.: A nonsense mutation in the
LDL receptor gene leads to familial hypercholesterolemia in the Druze
sect. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 50: 427-433, 1992.

71. Langlois, S.: Personal Communication. Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada  1989.

72. Langlois, S.; Kastelein, J. J. P.; Hayden, M. R.: Characterization
of six partial deletions in the low-density-lipoprotein (LDL) receptor
gene causing familial hypercholesterolemia (FH). Am. J. Hum. Genet. 43:
60-68, 1988.

73. Lee, W. K.; Haddad, L.; Macleod, M. J.; Dorrance, A. M.; Wilson,
D. J.; Gaffney, D.; Dominiczak, M. H.; Packard, C. J.; Day, I. N.;
Humphries, S. E.; Dominiczak, A. F.: Identification of a common low
density lipoprotein receptor mutation (C163Y) in the West of Scotland. J.
Med. Genet. 35: 573-578, 1998.

74. Lehrman, M. A.; Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.; Russell, D. W.;
Schneider, W. J.: Internalization-defective LDL receptors produced
by genes with nonsense and frameshift mutations that truncate the
cytoplasmic domain. Cell 41: 735-743, 1985.

75. Lehrman, M. A.; Goldstein, J. L.; Russell, D. W.; Brown, M. S.
: Duplication of seven exons in LDL receptor gene caused by Alu-Alu
recombination in a subject with familial hypercholesterolemia. Cell 48:
827-835, 1987.

76. Lehrman, M. A.; Russell, D. W.; Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.
: Alu-Alu recombination deletes splice acceptor sites and produces
secreted low density lipoprotein receptor in a subject with familial
hypercholesterolemia. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 3354-3361, 1987.

77. Lehrman, M. A.; Russell, D. W.; Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.
: Exon-Alu recombination deletes 5 kilobases from the low density
lipoprotein receptor gene, producing a null phenotype in familial
hypercholesterolemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 3679-3683, 1986.

78. Lehrman, M. A.; Schneider, W. J.; Sudhof, T. C.; Brown, M. S.;
Goldstein, J. L.; Russell, D. W.: Mutation in LDL receptor: Alu-Alu
recombination deletes exons encoding transmembrane and cytoplasmic
domains. Science 227: 140-146, 1985.

79. Leitersdorf, E.; Hobbs, H. H.: Personal Communication. Dallas,
Tex.  12/1990.

80. Leitersdorf, E.; Hobbs, H. H.; Fourie, A. M.; Jacobs, M.; van
der Westhuyzen, D. R.; Coetzee, G. A.: Deletion in the first cysteine-rich
repeat of low-density lipoprotein receptor impairs its transport but
not lipoprotein binding in fibroblasts from a subject with familial
hypercholesterolemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 7912-7916, 1988.

81. Leitersdorf, E.; Tobin, E. J.; Davignon, J.; Hobbs, H. H.: Common
low-density lipoprotein receptor mutations in the French Canadian
population. J. Clin. Invest. 85: 1014-1023, 1990.

82. Leitersdorf, E.; van der Westhuyzen, D. R.; Coetzee, G. A.; Hobbs,
H. H.: Two common low density lipoprotein receptor gene mutations
cause familial hypercholesterolemia in Afrikaners. J. Clin. Invest. 84:
954-961, 1989.

83. Lelli, N.; Ghisellini, M.; Calandra, S.; Gaddi, A.; Ciarrocchi,
A.; Coviello, D. A.; Bertolini, S.: Duplication of exons 13, 14 and
15 of the LDL-receptor gene in a patient with heterozygous familial
hypercholesterolemia. Hum. Genet. 86: 359-362, 1991.

84. Leren, T. P.; Solberg, K.; Rodningen, O. K.; Tonstad, S.; Ose,
L.: Two founder mutations in the LDL receptor gene in Norwegian familial
hypercholesterolemia subjects. Atherosclerosis 111: 175-182, 1994.

85. Lewis, M. J.; Malik, T. H.; Ehrenstein, M. R.; Boyle, J. J.; Botto,
M.; Haskard, D. O.: Immunoglobulin M is required for protection against
atherosclerosis in low-density lipoprotein receptor-deficient mice. Circulation 120:
417-426, 2009.

86. Li, H.; Gyllensten, U. B.; Cui, X.; Saiki, R. K.; Erlich, H. A.;
Arnheim, N.: Amplification and analysis of DNA sequences in single
human sperm and diploid cells. Nature 335: 414-417, 1988.

87. Lindgren, V.; Luskey, K. L.; Russell, D. W.; Francke, U.: Human
genes involved in cholesterol metabolism: chromosomal mapping of the
loci for the low density lipoprotein receptor and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme
A reductase with cDNA probes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 8567-8571,
1985.

88. Lo, J. C.; Wang, Y.; Tumanov, A. V.; Bamji, M.; Yao, Z.; Reardon,
C. A.; Getz, G. S.; Fu, Y.-X.: Lymphotoxin beta receptor-dependent
control of lipid homeostasis. Science 316: 285-288, 2007.

89. Loux, N.; Benlian, P.; Pastier, D.; Boileau, C.; Cambou, J. P.;
Monnier, L.; Percheron, C.; Junien, C.: Recurrent mutation at aa
792 in the LDL receptor gene in a French patient. Hum. Genet. 87:
373-375, 1991.

90. Ma, Y. H.; Betard, C.; Roy, M.; Davignon, J.; Kessling, A. M.
: Identification of a second 'French Canadian' LDL receptor gene deletion
and development of a rapid method to detect both deletions. Clin.
Genet. 36: 219-228, 1989.

91. Maartmann-Moe, K.; Wang, H. S.; Donald, L. J.; Hamerton, J. L.;
Berg, K.: Data from hybrid cell lines raise the possibility that
factors controlling the low density lipoprotein receptor activity
may reside on human chromosome 21, 5 or both. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 32: 295-296, 1982.

92. Mandelshtam, M.; Chakir, K.; Shevtsov, S.; Golubkov, V.; Skobeleva,
N.; Lipovetsky, B.; Konstantinov, V.; Denisenko, A.; Gaitskhoki, V.;
Schwartz, E.: Prevalence of Lithuanian mutation among St. Petersburg
Jews with familial hypercholesterolemia. Hum. Mutat. 12: 255-258,
1998.

93. Meiner, V.; Landsberger, D.; Berkman, N.; Reshef, A.; Segal, P.;
Seftel, H. C.; van der Westhuyzen, D. R.; Jeenah, M. S.; Coetzee,
G. A.; Leitersdorf, E.: A common Lithuanian mutation causing familial
hypercholesterolemia in Ashkenazi Jews. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 49: 443-449,
1991.

94. Miyake, Y.; Tajima, S.; Funahashi, T.; Yamamoto, A.: Analysis
of a recycling-impaired mutant of low density lipoprotein receptor
in familial hypercholesterolemia. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 16584-16590,
1989.

95. Miyake, Y.; Tajima, S.; Funahashi, T.; Yamamura, T.; Yamamoto,
A.: A point mutation of low-density-lipoprotein receptor causing
rapid degradation of the receptor. Europ. J. Biochem. 210: 1-7,
1992.

96. Moorjani, S.; Roy, M.; Torres, A.; Betard, C.; Gagne, C.; Lambert,
M.; Brun, D.; Davignon, J.; Lupien, P.: Mutations of low-density-lipoprotein-receptor
gene, variation in plasma cholesterol, and expression of coronary
heart disease in homozygous familial hypercholesterolaemia. Lancet 341:
1303-1306, 1993.

97. Oppenheim, A.; Friedlander, Y.; Dann, E. J.; Berkman, N.; Schwartz,
S. P.; Leitersdorf, E.: Hypercholesterolemia in five Israeli Christian-Arab
kindreds is caused by the 'Lebanese' allele at the low density lipoprotein
receptor gene locus and by an additional independent major factor. Hum.
Genet. 88: 75-84, 1991.

98. Pisciotta, L.; Cantafora, A.; De Stefano, F.; Langheim, S.; Calandra,
S.; Bertolini, S.: A 'de novo' mutation of the LDL-receptor gene
as the cause of familial hypercholesterolemia. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1587: 7-11, 2002.

99. Rodningen, O. K.; Rosby, O.; Tonstad, S.; Ose, L.; Berg, K.; Leren,
T. P.: A 9.6 kilobase deletion in the low density lipoprotein receptor
gene in Norwegian familial hypercholesterolemia subjects. Clin. Genet. 42:
288-295, 1992.

100. Rubinsztein, D. C.; Coetzee, G. A.; Marais, A. D.; Leitersdorf,
E.; Seftel, H. C.; van der Westhuyzen, D. R.: Identification and
properties of the proline-644-to-leucine mutant LDL receptor in South
Africans of Indian origin. J. Lipid Res. 33: 1647-1655, 1992.

101. Rudenko, G.; Henry, L.; Henderson, K.; Ichtchenko, K.; Brown,
M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.; Deisenhofer, J.: Structure of the LDL receptor
extracellular domain at endosomal pH. Science 298: 2353-2358, 2002.

102. Rudiger, N. S.; Heinsvig, E. M.; Hansen, F. A.; Faergeman, O.;
Bolund, L.; Gregersen, N.: DNA deletions in the low density lipoprotein
(LDL) receptor gene in Danish families with familial hypercholesterolemia. Clin.
Genet. 39: 451-462, 1991.

103. Ruffner, D. E.; Sprung, C. N.; Minghetti, P. P.; Gibbs, P. E.
M.; Dugaiczyk, A.: Invasion of the human albumin-alpha-fetoprotein
gene family by Alu, Kpn, and two novel repetitive DNA elements. Molec.
Biol. Evol. 4: 1-9, 1987.

104. Russell, D. W.; Lehrman, M. A.; Sudhof, T. C.; Yamamoto, T.;
Davis, C. G.; Hobbs, H. H.; Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: The LDL
receptor in familial hypercholesterolemia: use of human mutations
to dissect a membrane protein. Cold Spring Harbor Symp. Quant. Biol. 51:
811-819, 1986.

105. Russell, D. W.; Schneider, W. J.; Yamamoto, T.; Luskey, K. L.;
Brown, M. S.; Goldstein, J. L.: Domain map of the LDL receptor: sequence
homology with the epidermal growth factor precursor. Cell 37: 577-585,
1984.

106. Sato, K.; Emi, M.; Ezura, Y.; Fujita, Y.; Takada, D.; Ishigami,
T.; Umemura, S.; Xin, Y.; Wu, L. L.; Larrinaga-Shum, S.; Stephenson,
S. H.; Hunt, S. C.; Hopkins, P. N.: Soluble epoxide hydrolase variant
(glu287arg) modifies plasma total cholesterol and triglyceride phenotype
in familial hypercholesterolemia: intrafamilial association study
in an eight-generation hyperlipidemic kindred. J. Hum. Genet. 49:
29-34, 2004.

107. Savov, A.; Angelicheva, D.; Balassopoulou, A.; Jordanova, A.;
Noussia-Arvanitakis, S.; Kalaydjieva, L.: Double mutant alleles:
are they rare? Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1169-1171, 1995.

108. Schuster, H.; Manke, C.; Fischer, J.; Keller, C.; Wolfram, G.;
Zollner, N.: Identification of the valine 408 to methionine mutation
in the LDL receptor in a Greek patient with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. Clin.
Genet. 48: 90-92, 1995.

109. Schuster, H.; Ostwald, P.; Keller, P.; Wolfram, G.; Keller, C.
: Identification of the serine-156 to leucine mutation in the low-density
lipoprotein receptor in a German family with familial hypercholesterolemia. Clin.
Investig. 71: 172-175, 1993.

110. Seftel, H. C.; Baker, S. G.; Sandler, M. P.; Forman, M. B.; Joffe,
B. I.; Mendelsohn, D.; Jenkins, T.; Mieny, C. J.: A host of hypercholesterolaemic
homozygotes in South Africa. Brit. Med. J. 281: 633-636, 1980.

111. Simard, L. R.; Viel, J.; Lambert, M.; Paradis, G.; Levy, E.;
Delvin, E. E.; Mitchell, G. A.: The delta > 15 kb deletion French
Canadian founder mutation in familial hypercholesterolemia: rapid
polymerase chain reaction-based diagnostic assay and prevalence in
Quebec. Clin. Genet. 65: 202-208, 2004.

112. Slagel, V.; Flemington, E.; Traina-Dorge, V.; Bradshaw, H.; Deininger,
P.: Clustering and subfamily relationships of the Alu family in the
human genome. Molec. Biol. Evol. 4: 19-29, 1987.

113. Soutar, A. K.; Knight, B. L.; Patel, D. D.: Identification of
a point mutation in growth repeat C of the low density lipoprotein-receptor
gene in a patient with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia that
affects ligand binding and intracellular movement of receptors. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 4166-4170, 1989.

114. Soutar, A. K.; McCarthy, S. N.; Seed, M.; Knight, B. L.: Relationship
between apolipoprotein(a) phenotype, lipoprotein(a) concentration
in plasma, and low density lipoprotein receptor function in a large
kindred with familial hypercholesterolemia due to the pro664-to-leu
mutation in the LDL receptor gene. J. Clin. Invest. 88: 483-492,
1991.

115. Steyn, K.; Weight, M. J.; Dando, B. R.; Christopher, K. J.; Rossouw,
J. E.: The use of low density lipoprotein receptor activity of lymphocytes
to determine the prevalence of familial hypercholesterolaemia in a
rural South African community. J. Med. Genet. 26: 32-36, 1989.

116. Sudhof, T. C.; Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.; Russell, D. W.
: The LDL receptor gene: a mosaic of exons shared with different proteins. Science 228:
815-822, 1985.

117. Sudhof, T. C.; Russell, D. W.; Goldstein, J. L.; Brown, M. S.;
Sanchez-Pescador, R.; Bell, G. I.: Cassette of eight exons shared
by genes for LDL receptor and EGF precursor. Science 228: 893-895,
1985.

118. Sun, X.-M.; Patel, D. D.; Bhatnager, D.; Knight, B. L.; Soutar,
A. K.: Characterization of a splice-site mutation in the gene for
the LDL receptor associated with an unpredictably severe clinical
phenotype in English patients with heterozygous FH. Arteroscler.
Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 15: 219-227, 1995.

119. Takada, D.; Emi, M.; Ezura, Y.; Nobe, Y.; Kawamura, K.; Iino,
Y.; Katayama, Y.; Xin, Y.; Wu, L. L.; Larringa-Shum, S.; Stephenson,
S. H.; Hunt, S. C.; Hopkins, P. N.: Interaction between the LDL-receptor
gene bearing a novel mutation and a variant in the apolipoprotein
A-II promoter: molecular study in a 1135-member familial hypercholesterolemia
kindred. J. Hum. Genet. 47: 656-664, 2002.

120. Takada, D.; Ezura, Y.; Ono, S.; Iino, Y.; Katayama, Y.; Xin,
Y.; Wu, L. L.; Larringa-Shum, S.; Stephenson, S. H.; Hunt, S. C.;
Hopkins, P. M.; Emi, M.: Growth hormone receptor variant (L526I)
modifies plasma HDL cholesterol phenotype in familial hypercholesterolemia:
intra-familial association study in an eight-generation hyperlipidemic
kindred. Am. J. Med. Genet. 121A: 136-140, 2003.

121. Takahashi, M.; Ikeda, U.; Takahashi, S.; Hattori, H.; Iwasaki,
T.; Ishihara, M.; Egashira, T.; Honma, S.; Asano, Y.; Shimada, K.
: A novel mutation in exon 2 of the low-density lipoprotein-receptor
gene in a patient with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. (Letter) Clin.
Genet. 59: 290-292, 2001.

122. Taylor, R.; Bryant, J.; Gudnason, V.; Sigurdsson, G.; Humphries,
S.: A study of familial hypercholesterolaemia in Iceland using RFLPs. J.
Med. Genet. 26: 494-498, 1989.

123. Teslovich, T. M.; Musunuru, K.; Smith, A. V.; Edmondson, A. C.;
Stylianou, I. M.; Koseki, M.; Pirruccello, J. P.; Ripatti, S.; Chasman,
D. I.; Willer, C. J.; Johansen, C. T.; Fouchier, S. W.; and 197 others
: Biological, clinical and population relevance of 95 loci for blood
lipids. Nature 466: 707-713, 2010.

124. Thiart, R.; Scholtz, C. L.; Vergotine, J.; Hoogendijk, C. F.;
de Villiers, J. N. P.; Nissen, H.; Brusgaard, K.; Gaffney, D.; Hoffs,
M. S.; Vermaak, W. J. H.; Kotze, M. J.: Predominance of a 6 bp deletion
in exon 2 of the LDL receptor gene in Africans with familial hypercholesterolaemia. J.
Med. Genet. 37: 514-519, 2000.

125. Tolleshaug, H.; Goldstein, J. L.; Schneider, W. J.; Brown, M.
S.: Posttranslational processing of the LDL receptor and its genetic
disruption in familial hypercholesterolemia. Cell 30: 715-724, 1982.

126. Top, B.; Koeleman, B. P. C.; Gevers Leuven, J. A.; Havekes, L.
M.; Frants, R. R.: Rearrangements in the LDL receptor gene in Dutch
familial hypercholesterolemic patients and the presence of a common
4 kb deletion. Atherosclerosis 83: 127-136, 1990.

127. Top, B.; Uitterlinden, A. G.; van der Zee, A.; Kastelein, J.
J. P.; Gevers Leuven, J. A.; Havekes, L. M.; Frants, R. R.: Absence
of mutations in the promoter region of the low density lipoprotein
receptor gene in a large number of familial hypercholesterolaemia
patients as revealed by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Hum.
Genet. 89: 561-565, 1992.

128. Torrington, M.; Botha, J. L.: Familial hypercholesterolaemia
and church affiliation. (Letter) Lancet 318: 1120 only, 1981. Note:
Originally Volume II.

129. Ullu, E.; Tschudi, C.: Alu sequences are processed 7SL RNA genes. Nature 312:
171-172, 1984.

130. Varret, M.; Rabes, J.-P.; Collod-Beroud, G.; Junien, C.; Boileau,
C.; Beroud, C.: Software and database for the analysis of mutations
in the human LDL receptor gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 25: 172-180,
1997.

131. Vergopoulos, A.; Bajari, T.; Jouma, M.; Knoblauch, H.; Aydin,
A.; Bahring, S.; Mueller-Myhsok, B.; Dresel, A.; Joubran, R.; Luft,
F. C.; Schuster, H.: A xanthomatosis-susceptibility gene may exist
in a Syrian family with familial hypercholesterolemia. Europ. J.
Hum. Genet. 5: 315-323, 1997.

132. Vergotine, J.; Thiart, R.; Langenhoven, E.; Hillermann, R.; De
Jong, G.; Kotze, M. J.: Prenatal diagnosis of familial hypercholesterolemia:
importance of DNA analysis in the high-risk South African population. Genet.
Counsel. 12: 121-127, 2001.

133. Vuorio, A. F.; Turtola, H.; Piilahti, K.-M.; Repo, P.; Kanninen,
T.; Kontula, K.: Familial hypercholesterolemia in the Finnish North
Karelia: a molecular, clinical, and genealogical study. Arterioscler.
Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 17: 3127-3138, 1997.

134. Wilson, D. J.; Gahan, M.; Haddad, L.; Heath, K.; Whittall, R.
A.; Williams, R. R.; Humphries, S. E.; Day, I. N. M.: A World Wide
Web site for low-density lipoprotein receptor gene mutations in familial
hypercholesterolemia: sequence-based, tabular, and direct submission
data handling. Am. J. Cardiol. 81: 1509-1511, 1998.

135. Yamakawa, K.; Okafuji, T.; Iwamura, Y.; Yuzawa, K.; Satoh, J.;
Hattori, N.; Yamanouchi, Y.; Yanagi, H.; Kawai, K.; Tsuchiya, S.;
Russell, D. W.; Hamaguchi, H.: TaqI polymorphism in the LDL receptor
gene and a TaqI 1.5-kb band associated with familial hypercholesterolemia. Hum.
Genet. 80: 1-5, 1988.

136. Yamakawa, K.; Takada, K.; Yanagi, H.; Tsuchiya, S.; Kawai, K.;
Nakagawa, S.; Kajiyama, G.; Hamaguchi, H.: Three novel partial deletions
of the low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor gene in familial hypercholesterolemia. Hum.
Genet. 82: 317-321, 1989.

137. Yamamoto, T.; Davis, C. G.; Brown, M. S.; Schneider, W. J.; Casey,
M. L.; Goldstein, J. L.; Russell, D. W.: The human LDL receptor:
a cysteine-rich protein with multiple Alu sequences in its mRNA. Cell 39:
27-38, 1984.

138. Zelcer, N.; Hong, C.; Boyadjian, R.; Tontonoz, P.: LXR regulates
cholesterol uptake through Idol-dependent ubiquitination of the LDL
receptor. Science 325: 100-104, 2009.

139. Zuliani, G.; Hobbs, H. H.: Personal Communication. Dallas,
Tex.  1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/14/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/9/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/12/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/5/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/21/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/9/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/14/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/7/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/1/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/18/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/5/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/15/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/1/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/25/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/4/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/3/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/10/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/27/2002

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 5/15/2002

EDITED carol: 10/14/2013
carol: 6/7/2013
joanna: 5/4/2012
carol: 2/15/2012
carol: 2/13/2012
terry: 2/9/2012
terry: 10/26/2011
carol: 5/23/2011
carol: 4/8/2011
alopez: 10/12/2010
wwang: 9/27/2010
alopez: 8/6/2010
terry: 8/5/2010
joanna: 4/27/2010
carol: 4/5/2010
alopez: 1/21/2010
wwang: 12/11/2009
terry: 12/9/2009
alopez: 8/17/2009
terry: 8/14/2009
wwang: 7/20/2009
wwang: 5/18/2009
terry: 5/7/2009
terry: 4/3/2009
carol: 10/21/2008
carol: 10/9/2008
wwang: 4/23/2008
carol: 4/16/2008
carol: 4/2/2008
carol: 4/1/2008
alopez: 6/18/2007
wwang: 10/18/2005
wwang: 10/12/2005
ckniffin: 10/5/2005
tkritzer: 4/15/2005
terry: 4/15/2005
tkritzer: 3/9/2005
ckniffin: 3/1/2005
tkritzer: 3/1/2004
terry: 2/25/2004
alopez: 12/10/2003
terry: 12/4/2003
alopez: 4/3/2003
terry: 4/3/2003
carol: 2/19/2003
tkritzer: 2/14/2003
terry: 2/10/2003
tkritzer: 12/10/2002
tkritzer: 12/3/2002
terry: 11/27/2002
carol: 11/13/2002
tkritzer: 8/30/2002
terry: 8/27/2002
carol: 6/5/2002
ckniffin: 6/5/2002
ckniffin: 6/3/2002
ckniffin: 5/17/2002

114760	TITLE *114760 CARBONIC ANHYDRASE IV; CA4
;;CA IV
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Carbonic anhydrases (CAs) are a family of zinc metalloenzymes. For
background information on the CA family, see 114800.

CA IV is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored membrane isozyme
expressed on the luminal surfaces of pulmonary (and certain other)
capillaries and on the luminal surface of proximal renal tubules. CA IV
has ancient evolutionary status among CA isozymes. It is functionally
important in CO2 and bicarbonate transport and has a possible role in
inherited renal abnormalities of bicarbonate transport (review by
Okuyama et al., 1993). CA IV is responsible for the taste of
carbonation.

CLONING

CA IV was originally purified from bovine lung as a 52-kD protein by
Whitney and Briggle (1982). The human enzyme is smaller (35 kD) and
contains no detectable N-linked or O-linked glycosylation (Zhu and Sly,
1990).

Okuyama et al. (1992) isolated a full-length cDNA for human CA IV from a
kidney cDNA library. The deduced CA IV protein contains an 18-amino acid
signal sequence, a 260-amino acid region that shows 30 to 36% similarity
with the 29-kD cytoplasmic CAs (e.g., CA1, 114800), and an additional
27-amino acid C-terminal sequence that ends in a 21-amino acid
hydrophobic domain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Okuyama et al. (1993) isolated a full-length CA IV genomic clone. They
found that the 9.5-kb gene contains 8 exons and 7 introns. The first
exon (exon 1a) encodes the signal sequence. Exon 7 encodes the C
terminus of the enzyme precursor, the C terminus of the mature protein,
and the 120-bp sequence corresponding to the 3-prime untranslated region
of the cDNA.

GENE FUNCTION

CA IV is expressed on the apical surfaces of some segments of the
nephron (Brown et al., 1990), the apical plasma membrane of the colon,
and the plasma membrane of specialized capillary beds, including the
cortical capillaries in brain (Ghandour et al., 1992), the
choriocapillaris of the eye (Hageman et al., 1991), the pulmonary
microvasculature (Fleming et al., 1993), and microcapillaries of
skeletal and cardiac muscle (Sender et al., 1994).

Fleming et al. (1995) presented Northern blot data that characterized
the regional distribution of CA IV in rat gastrointestinal tract in
comparison with other CA isozymes known to be expressed in the gut. They
demonstrated that CA IV is an abundant brush border enzyme in the lower
gastrointestinal tract of both rat and human. They stated that the
findings are consistent with participation of CA IV in the extensive
iron and fluid transport in the distal small and large intestine.

In mammals, carbonation elicits both somatosensory and chemosensory
responses, including activation of taste neurons. Chandrashekar et al.
(2009) identified the cellular and molecular substrates for the taste of
carbonation. By targeted genetic ablation and the silencing of synapses
in defined populations of taste receptor cells, they demonstrated that
the sour-sensing cells (expressing PKD2L1, 604532) act as the taste
sensors for carbonation, and showed that carbonic anhydrase-4, a
glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored enzyme, functions as the principal
CO(2) taste sensor. Chandrashekar et al. (2009) concluded that, taken
together, their studies revealed the basis of the taste of carbonation
as well as the contribution of taste cells in the orosensory response to
CO(2).

MAPPING

By the use of PCR on DNA from human/rodent somatic cell hybrids, Okuyama
et al. (1993) assigned the CA4 gene to chromosome 17. They confirmed and
regionalized the assignment to 17q23 by in situ hybridization. (A
different gene called CA4 that was earlier assigned to chromosome 16 was
in fact CA7 (114770).)

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 2 unrelated South African families with retinitis
pigmentosa-17 (RP17; 600852), Rebello et al. (2004) identified a
mutation in the CA4 gene (R14W; 114760.0001).

Yang et al. (2005) identified another family with RP17 that segregated
with the R14W mutation. Genealogic records indicated that this family
was an offshoot of the South African family reported by Bardien et al.
(1995). In 1 of 178 families with autosomal dominant RP, the authors
identified a heterozygous R219S mutation (114760.0002).

ANIMAL MODEL

Shah et al. (2005) produced Ca4-, Ca14 (604832)-, and Ca4/Ca14-null
mice. Although Ca4 or Ca14 knockout resulted in viable mice, Ca4-null
mice, particularly females, were produced in smaller numbers than
predicted. Ca4/Ca14-null mice were also produced in smaller numbers than
predicted, were smaller in size than wildtype mice, and many females
died before 10 months of age. Electrophysiologic studies on hippocampal
slices of the knockout mice showed that either CA could mediate
buffering after synaptic transmission in hippocampal slices in the
absence of the other, but eliminating both significantly reduced
hippocampal pH regulation. Shah et al. (2005) concluded that both CA4
and CA14 contribute to extracellular buffering in the CNS, although CA4
appeared to be more important in the hippocampus.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 17
CA4, ARG14TRP

In 24 affected members of 2 large unrelated South African families with
retinitis pigmentosa-17 (600852) previously reported by Bardien et al.
(1995) and Bardien et al. (1997), Rebello et al. (2004) identified a
40C-T transition in exon 1a of the CA4 gene, resulting in an
arg14-to-trp (R14W) substitution. The mutation occurs in the signal
sequence of the gene at position -5 relative to the signal sequence
cleavage site. The mutation was found to cosegregate with the disease
phenotype and was not found in 36 unaffected family members or 100
controls. Expression of the R14W mutant cDNA in COS-7 cells showed that
the mutation (1) reduced the steady-state level of carbonic anhydrase IV
activity by 28% due to a combination of decreased synthesis and
accelerated turnover; (2) led to upregulation of immunoglobulin heavy
chain-binding protein (BiP; 138120), double-stranded RNA-regulated
protein kinase-like ER kinase (PERK; 604032), and CCAAT-enhancer-binding
protein homologous protein (CHOP; 126337), markers of the unfolded
protein response and endoplasmic reticulum stress; and (3) induced
apoptosis, as evidenced by annexin V (131230) binding and terminal
deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling staining, in
most cells expressing the mutant, but not the wildtype, protein. Rebello
et al. (2004) suggested that a high level of expression of the mutant
allele in the endothelial cells of the choriocapillaris leads to
apoptosis, leading in turn to ischemia in the overlying retina and
producing autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa.

In 13 affected members of a large Caucasian family with RP17, Yang et
al. (2005) identified heterozygosity for the R14W mutation. Genealogic
records indicated that this family was an offshoot of the South African
family reported by Bardien et al. (1995). In affected individuals,
reduction in night and peripheral vision manifested at around age 15,
followed by rod photoreceptor atrophy, bone spicule pigmentation, and
concomitant cone photoreceptor dysfunction manifested by photophobia,
color vision changes, and decreased central vision. ERG demonstrated
reduction of both rod and cone responses.

The mechanism of efficient removal of acid load from retina and retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE) by the choriocapillaris is obscure. Yang et al.
(2005) showed that a functional complex of CA4 and NBC1 (SLC4A4; 603345)
was specifically expressed in the choriocapillaris and that the R14W and
R219S (114760.0002) mutations disrupted NBC1-mediated HCO3- transport.
The authors noted that the importance of functional CA4 for survival of
photoreceptors implies that CA inhibitors, which are widely used as
medications, particularly in the treatment of glaucoma, may have
long-term adverse effects on vision.

.0002
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 17
CA4, ARG219SER

In a European family with RP17 (600852), Yang et al. (2005) identified
heterozygosity for a C-A transversion in exon 7 of the CA4 gene,
resulting in an arg219-to-ser (R219S) substitution in a conserved
residue. The mutation was not found in 1,000 control chromosomes.
Biochemical analysis showed that the mutant protein was enzymatically
inactive.

.0003
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 17
CA4, ARG69HIS

In a Chinese patient with retinitis pigmentosa-17 (600842), Alvarez et
al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a 206G-A transition in exon 3
of the CA4 gene, resulting in an arg69-to-his (R69H) substitution. The
mutation impaired NBC1 (603345)-mediated pH recovery after acid load.
The mutation was not found in 432 normal chromosomes.

REFERENCE 1. Alvarez, B. V.; Vithana, E. N.; Yang, Z.; Koh, A. H.; Yeung, K.;
Yong, V.; Shandro, H. J.; Chen, Y.; Kolatkar, P.; Palasingam, P.;
Zhang, K.; Aung, T.; Casey, J. R.: Identification and characterization
of a novel mutation in the carbonic anhydrase IV gene that causes
retinitis pigmentosa. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 48: 3459-3468,
2007.

2. Bardien, S.; Ebenezer, N.; Greenberg, J.; Inglehearn, C. F.; Bartmann,
L.; Goliath, R.; Beighton, P.; Ramesar, R.; Bhattacharya, S. S.:
An eighth locus for autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa is linked
to chromosome 17q. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1459-1462, 1995.

3. Bardien, S.; Ramesar, R.; Bhattacharya, S.; Greenberg, J.: Retinitis
pigmentosa locus on 17q (RP17): fine localization to 17q22 and exclusion
of the PDEG and TIMP2 genes. Hum. Genet. 101: 13-17, 1997.

4. Brown, D.; Zhu, X. L.; Sly, W. S.: Localization of membrane-associated
carbonic anhydrase type IV in kidney epithelial cells. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 87: 7457-7461, 1990.

5. Chandrashekar, J.; Yarmolinsky, D.; von Buchholtz, L.; Oka, Y.;
Sly, W.; Ryba, N. J. P.; Zuker, C. S.: The taste of carbonation. Science 326:
443-445, 2009.

6. Fleming, R. E.; Crouch, E. C.; Ruzicka, C. A.; Sly, W. S.: Pulmonary
carbonic anhydrase IV: developmental regulation and cell-specific
expression in the capillary endothelium. Am. J. Physiol. 265: L627-L635,
1993.

7. Fleming, R. E.; Parkkila, S.; Parkkila, A.-K.; Rajaniemi, H.; Waheed,
A.; Sly, W. S.: Carbonic anhydrase IV expression in rat and human
gastrointestinal tract regional, cellular, and subcellular localization. J.
Clin. Invest. 96: 2907-2913, 1995.

8. Ghandour, M. S.; Langley, O. K.; Zhu, X. L.; Waheed, A.; Sly, W.
S.: Carbonic anhydrase IV on brain capillary endothelial cells: a
marker associated with the blood-brain barrier. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 89: 6823-6827, 1992.

9. Hageman, G. S.; Zhu, X. L.; Waheed, A.; Sly, W. S.: Localization
of carbonic anhydrase IV in a specific capillary bed of the human
eye. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 2716-2720, 1991.

10. Okuyama, T.; Batanian, J. R.; Sly, W. S.: Genomic organization
and localization of gene for human carbonic anhydrase IV to chromosome
17q. Genomics 16: 678-684, 1993.

11. Okuyama, T.; Sato, S.; Zhu, X. L.; Waheed, A.; Sly, W. S.: Human
carbonic anhydrase IV: cDNA cloning, sequence comparison, and expression
in COS cell membranes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 1315-1319, 1992.

12. Rebello, G.; Ramesar, R.; Vorster, A.; Roberts, L.; Ehrenreich,
L.; Oppon, E.; Gama, D.; Bardien, S.; Greenberg, J.; Bonapace, G.;
Waheed, A.; Shah, G. N.; Sly, W. S.: Apoptosis-inducing signal sequence
mutation in carbonic anhydrase IV identified in patients with the
RP17 form of retinitis pigmentosa. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 6617-6622,
2004.

13. Sender, S.; Gros, G.; Wahleed, A.; Hageman, G. S.; Sly, W. S.
: Immunohistochemical localization of carbonic anhydrase IV in capillaries
of rat and human skeletal muscle. J. Histochem. Cytochem. 42: 1229-1236,
1994.

14. Shah, G. N.; Ulmasov, B.; Waheed, A.; Becker, T.; Makani, S.;
Svichar, N.; Chesler, M.; Sly, W. S.: Carbonic anhydrase IV and XIV
knockout mice: Roles of the respective carbonic anhydrases in buffering
the extracellular space in brain. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 16771-16776,
2005.

15. Whitney, P. L.; Briggle, T. V.: Membrane-associated carbonic
anhydrase purified from bovine lung. J. Biol. Chem. 257: 12056-12059,
1982.

16. Yang, Z.; Alvarez, B. V.; Chakarova, C.; Jiang, L.; Karan, G.;
Frederick, J. M.; Zhao, Y.; Sauve, Y.; Li, X.; Zrenner, E.; Wissinger,
B.; Den Hollander, A. I.; Katz, B.; Baehr, W.; Cremers, F. P.; Casey,
J. R.; Bhattacharya, S. S.; Zhang, K.: Mutant carbonic anhydrase
4 impairs pH regulation and causes retinal photoreceptor degeneration. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 255-265, 2005.

17. Zhu, X. L.; Sly, W. S.: Carbonic anhydrase IV from human lung:
purification, characterization, and comparison with membrane carbonic
anhydrase from human kidney. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 8795-8801, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/10/2009
Jane Kelly - updated: 4/16/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/8/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/21/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/8/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/23/1987

EDITED alopez: 11/11/2009
terry: 11/10/2009
wwang: 5/27/2009
carol: 1/29/2009
carol: 4/16/2008
wwang: 11/30/2007
terry: 11/8/2007
wwang: 1/24/2006
wwang: 12/21/2005
tkritzer: 7/20/2004
tkritzer: 7/12/2004
terry: 7/8/2004
carol: 3/1/2000
carol: 9/28/1998
mark: 1/27/1996
terry: 1/19/1996
mark: 11/16/1995
carol: 6/18/1993
carol: 4/29/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 3/6/1990

606130	TITLE *606130 RING FINGER PROTEIN 26; RNF26
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RING finger motif is a distinct zinc-chelating domain involved in
mediating protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions. RING finger
proteins are involved in a variety of functions such as oncogenesis,
signal transduction, peroxisome biogenesis, viral infection,
development, transcriptional repression, and ubiquitination. RNF26 is a
member of the C3HC5 RING finger subfamily.

CLONING

By use of a genomic fragment from a chromosome 11q23 contig and EST
database searching, Katoh (2001) cloned an RNF26 cDNA encoding a deduced
433-amino acid protein with an N-terminal leucine zipper domain and a
C-terminal RING finger domain. Its RING finger domain is 49% homologous
to that of CGR19 (606138), another C3HC5 RING finger protein. Northern
blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of a 3.2-kb transcript in
adult and fetal human tissues. Expression of RNF26 was upregulated in
various human cancer cell lines, including promyelocytic leukemia,
cervical uterine cancer, colorectal cancer, and gastric cancer cell
lines, and in 3 of 6 primary gastric cancers.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Katoh (2001) mapped the RNF26 gene to chromosome
11q23.

REFERENCE 1. Katoh, M.: Molecular cloning and characterization of RNF26 on
human chromosome 11q23 region, encoding a novel RING finger protein
with leucine zipper. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 282: 1038-1044,
2001.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 7/20/2001

EDITED terry: 02/02/2005
mcapotos: 7/24/2001
mcapotos: 7/20/2001

157145	TITLE *157145 MICROSEMINOPROTEIN, BETA; MSMB
;;MSPB
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

An abundant constituent of the human seminal plasma is a 14-kD protein
of prostate origin known as beta-microseminoprotein, prostatic secretory
protein (PRPS), or PSP94. It is a product of a single gene transcribed
in the prostate but not in the testis. The primary structure is known
from sequence determinations on the purified seminal plasma protein as
well as from the cDNA (Mbikay et al., 1987). The 94-amino acid seminal
protein is derived from a pre-polypeptide of 114 amino acids. There is a
possible N-glycosylation site on the amino-terminal leader peptide of
the pre-polypeptide molecule. From a comparison of the PSP(94) protein
in human and rhesus monkey, Nolet et al. (1991) found that the sequence
had evolved with few constraints and at a relatively rapid rate. Rapid
evolution of the gene might explain the apparent absence in nonprimates
of homologous sequences detectable by hybridization. The protein was
considered to be beta-inhibin because of reports of its ability to
suppress FSH secretion by the pituitary gland. Later the inhibin
activity of this seminal plasma protein was questioned when highly
purified preparations were found to be devoid of this activity.
Furthermore, it has no structural similarity to the ovarian inhibins.
Since the biologic functions of beta-microseminoprotein were unclear,
Ulvsback et al. (1989) studied expression of the gene. Transcripts of
identical size were found in prostate, respiratory (tracheal, bronchial,
and lung) tissues, and the mucosa of the gastric antrum. Thus, the
protein may have functions other than those related to male
reproduction.

MAPPING

Ulvsback et al. (1991) concluded that the gene is present in single copy
in the haploid human genome. By Southern analysis of DNA from somatic
cell hybrids, they assigned the gene to chromosome 10. The coding
nucleotides of the human MSMB gene are separated into 4 exons by
relatively large introns (Green et al., 1990). DNA hybridization under
conditions of low stringency suggested to Ulvsback et al. (1991) the
presence of a related gene in other mammals, birds, and amphibians.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization using a phage clone with an MSMB
insert, Sasaki et al. (1996) mapped the MSMB gene to 10q11.2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In large genomewide association studies to find common variants
influencing prostate cancer susceptibility, Thomas et al. (2008) and
Eeles et al. (2008) identified a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in
the proximal promoter of the MSMB gene (157145.0001) that was
significantly associated with prostate cancer risk.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PROSTATE CANCER, HEREDITARY, 13
MSMB, -2C-T (dbSNP rs10993994)

In a large 2-stage genomewide association study of prostate cancer,
Thomas et al. (2008) a single-nucleotide polymorphism, dbSNP rs10993994,
in the proximal promoter of the MSMB gene that was significantly
associated with prostate cancer risk (HPC13; 611928) (7.31 x 10(-13)).

Eeles et al. (2008) conducted a genomewide association study using blood
DNA samples from 1,854 individuals with clinically detected prostate
cancer diagnosed at or before the age of 60 years or with a family
history of disease, and 1,894 population-screened controls with a low
prostate-specific antigen (PSA; see 176820) concentration (less than 0.5
ng/ml). They analyzed these samples for 541,129 SNPs. Eeles et al.
(2008) identified a SNP in the MSMB gene, dbSNP rs10993994, that was
significantly associated with prostate cancer (8.7 x 10(-29)). The SNP
dbSNP rs10993994 is 2 basepairs upstream of the transcription start site
of MSMB. The risk allele, T, affects multiple predicted binding sites
for transcription and splicing factors.

Chang et al. (2009) genotyped 16 tagging SNPs and imputed 29 additional
SNPs in a 65-kb genomic region at chromosome 10q11 in a Swedish
population-based case-control study including 2,899 cases and 1,722
controls. They found evidence for 2 independent loci, separated by a
recombination hotspot, associated with prostate cancer risk. Among
multiple significant SNPs at locus 1, the initial SNP, dbSNP rs10993994,
was the most significant. The risk allele of this SNP, T, had only 13%
of the promoter activity of the wildtype allele in a prostate cancer
model, LNCaP cells. Chang et al. (2009) concluded that the T allele of
dbSNP rs10993994 may be a potential causal variant at chromosome 10q11
that confers increased risk of prostate cancer.

By fine-mapping analysis of a 65-kb region on chromosome 10q including
dbSNP rs10993994 in 6,118 prostate cancer cases and 6,105 controls of
European origin, Lou et al. (2009) found that dbSNP rs10993994 remained
the SNP most strongly associated with prostate cancer risk (p = 8.8 x
10(-18); heterozygous odds ratio (OR) of 1.20, homozygous OR of 1.64).
Lou et al. (2009) stated that the SNP was located at position -57. In
vitro functional analysis showed that the T allele was associated with
decreased transcriptional activity and that the C allele preferentially
bound to the CREB transcription factor (123810). Analysis of tumor cell
lines with a CC or CT genotype revealed a higher level of MSMB gene
expression compared to cell lines with a TT genotype. Lou et al. (2009)
suggested that regulation of MSMB expression is a plausible mechanism
accounting for the association with prostate cancer identified at this
locus.

Yeager et al. (2009) sequenced a 97-kb region of chromosome 10q11.2
including the area surrounding the MSMB gene and the NCOA4 gene (601984)
in 70 unrelated individuals, including 36 with prostate cancer. They
identified a 51-kb block of linkage disequilibrium (LD) containing dbSNP
rs10993994 and the proximal promoter of the MSMB gene. No additional
variants in LD with dbSNP rs10993994 were identified, suggesting that
this is the probable variant that accounts for the association with
prostate cancer. In total, 241 novel polymorphisms were identified in
the 97-kb region, but none were in the exons of the MSMB gene. No
polymorphic sites were found in the first 6 exons of the NCOA4 gene, but
several were observed in exons 7 through 10.

REFERENCE 1. Chang, B.-L.; Cramer, S. D.; Wiklund, F.; Isaacs, S. D.; Stevens,
V. L.; Sun, J.; Smith, S.; Pruett, K.; Romero, L. M.; Wiley, K. E.;
Kim, S.-T.; and 14 others: Fine mapping association study and functional
analysis implicate a SNP in MSMB at 10q11 as a causal variant for
prostate cancer risk. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 1368-1375, 2009.

2. Eeles, R. A.; Kote-Jarai, Z.; Giles, G. G.; Al Olama, A. A.; Guy,
M.; Jugurnauth, S. K.; Mulholland, S.; Leongamornlert, D. A.; Edwards,
S. M.; Morrison, J.; Field, H. I.; Southey, M. C.; and 37 others
: Multiple newly identified loci associated with prostate cancer susceptibility. Nature
Genet. 40: 316-321, 2008.

3. Green, C. B.; Liu, W. Y.; Kwok, S. C.: Cloning and nucleotide
sequence analysis of the human beta-microseminoprotein gene. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 167: 1184-1190, 1990.

4. Lou, H.; Yeager, M.; Li, H.; Bosquet, J. G.; Hayes, R. B.; Orr,
N.; Yu, K.; Hutchinson, A.; Jacobs, K. B.; Kraft, P.; Wacholder, S.;
Chatterjee, N.; and 24 others: Fine mapping and functional analysis
of a common variant in MSMB on chromosome 10q11.2 associated with
prostate cancer susceptibility. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 7933-7938,
2009.

5. Mbikay, M.; Nolet, S.; Fournier, S.; Benjannet, S.; Chapdelaine,
P.; Paradis, G.; Dube, J. Y.; Tremblay, R.; Lazure, C.; Seidah, N.
G.; Chretien, M.: Molecular cloning and sequence of the cDNA for
a 94-amino-acid seminal plasma protein secreted by the human prostate. DNA 6:
23-29, 1987.

6. Nolet, S.; St-Louis, D.; Mbikay, M.; Chretien, M.: Rapid evolution
of prostatic protein PSP(94) suggested by sequence divergence between
rhesus monkey and human cDNAs. Genomics 9: 775-777, 1991.

7. Sasaki, T.; Matsumoto, N.; Jinno, Y.; Niikawa, N.; Sakai, H.; Kanetake,
H.; Saito, Y.: Assignment of the human beta-microseminoprotein gene
(MSMB) to chromosome 10q11.2. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 72: 177-178,
1996.

8. Thomas, G.; Jacobs, K. B.; Yeager, M.; Kraft, P.; Wacholder, S.;
Orr, N.; Yu, K.; Chatterjee, N.; Welch, R.; Hutchinson, A.; Crenshaw,
A.; Cancel-Tassin, G.; and 27 others: Multiple loci identified
in a genome-wide association study of prostate cancer. Nature Genet. 40:
310-315, 2008.

9. Ulvsback, M.; Lindstrom, C.; Weiber, H.; Abrahamsson, P.-A.; Lilja,
H.; Lundwall, A.: Molecular cloning of a small prostate protein,
known as beta-microsemenoprotein, PSP-94 or beta-inhibin, and demonstration
of transcripts in non-genital tissues. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 164:
1310-1315, 1989.

10. Ulvsback, M.; Spurr, N. K.; Lundwall, A.: Assignment of the human
gene for beta-microseminoprotein (MSMB) to chromosome 10 and demonstration
of related genes in other vertebrates. Genomics 11: 920-924, 1991.

11. Yeager, M.; Deng, Z.; Boland, J.; Matthews, C.; Bacior, J.; Lonsberry,
V.; Hutchinson, A.; Burdett, L. A.; Qi, L.; Jacobs, K. B.; Gonzalez-Bosquet,
J.; Berndt, S. I.; Hayes, R. B.; Hoover, R. N.; Thomas, G.; Hunter,
D. J.; Dean, M.; Chanock, S. J.: Comprehensive resequence analysis
of a 97 kb region of chromosome 10q11.2 containing the MSMB gene associated
with prostate cancer. Hum. Genet. 126: 743-750, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/3/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/22/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/14/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/12/1990

EDITED joanna: 09/13/2012
wwang: 8/3/2010
joanna: 6/10/2010
wwang: 1/11/2010
ckniffin: 12/22/2009
mgross: 10/20/2009
terry: 10/14/2009
alopez: 4/17/2008
carol: 2/19/2001
terry: 6/13/1996
terry: 6/7/1996
carol: 11/9/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 12/17/1991
carol: 12/5/1991
carol: 5/6/1991
carol: 8/14/1990

603148	TITLE *603148 ACTIVATING TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 3; ATF3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

An activating transcription factor (ATF)-binding site is a promoter
element present in a wide variety of viral and cellular genes, including
E1A-inducible adenoviral genes and cAMP-inducible cellular genes. By
screening expression cDNA libraries with a DNA probe containing 3 tandem
ATF-binding sites, Hai et al. (1989) isolated human cDNAs derived from 8
separate genes encoding ATF consensus-binding proteins, including ATF3.
Members of this family share significant sequence similarity within a
leucine zipper DNA-binding motif and an adjacent basic region; the
proteins show little similarity outside of these regions.

By screening a HeLa cell cDNA library with a partial ATF3 cDNA (Hai et
al., 1989), Chen et al. (1994) isolated a full-length ATF3 cDNA. The
deduced protein has 181 amino acids and a calculated molecular mass of
22 kD. Chen et al. (1994) also isolated a naturally occurring,
alternatively spliced form of ATF3 cDNA that encodes a truncated ATF3
protein lacking the leucine zipper dimerization domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Using cotransfection studies, Chen et al. (1994) demonstrated that ATF3,
which is a member of the mammalian activation transcription factor/cAMP
responsive element-binding (CREB) protein family of transcription
factors, actually represses transcription from promoters with ATF sites.
The truncated ATF3 variant, which does not bind DNA, stimulates
transcription and antagonizes the action of ATF3. Chen et al. (1994)
presented evidence for a 'cofactor model' of ATF3 repression in which
ATF3 stabilizes the binding of inhibitory cofactors at the promoter.

Using cluster analysis of transcriptome data derived from Tlr4
(603030)-activated mouse macrophages, Gilchrist et al. (2006) identified
a group of genes regulated by Atf3. Network analysis predicted that Atf3
belongs to a transcriptional complex that includes members of the Nfkb
(see 164011) transcription factor family. Promoter analysis, followed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and microarray analyses, indicated
an overrepresentation of closely apposed Atf3- and Nfkb-binding sites
within the putative Atf3-regulated genes, which included Il6 (147620)
and Il12b (161561). After activation of mouse macrophages, Atf3 and the
Nfkb component Rel (164910) bound to the regulatory regions of Il6 and
Il12b, with Rel functioning as a transcriptional activator and Atf3
functioning as a negative regulator. Injection of Atf3 -/- mice with
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) increased circulating levels of Il6, Il12b, and
Tnf (191160) more than 10-fold compared with wildtype mice. ChIP
analysis of LPS-treated wildtype mouse macrophages showed that decreased
histone acetylation coincided with decreased binding of Rel and
increased binding of Atf3 to the Il6 promoter. Histone deacetylation did
not occur in Atf3-deficient mouse macrophages, suggesting that ATF3
inhibits IL6 and IL12B transcription by altering chromatin structure and
restricting access to transcription factors. Gilchrist et al. (2006)
concluded that ATF3 regulates TLR-stimulated inflammatory responses as
part of a negative feedback loop.

Wu et al. (2010) reported that the genetic and pharmacologic suppression
of calcineurin (601302)/nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT; see
600489) function promotes tumor formation in mouse skin and in
xenografts, in immune-compromised mice, of H-ras(V12)
(190020.0001)-expressing primary human keratinocytes, or
keratinocyte-derived squamous cell carcinoma cells. Calcineurin/NFAT
inhibition counteracts p53 (191170)-dependent cancer cell senescence,
thereby increasing tumorigenic potential. ATF3, a member of the
'enlarged' AP1 family, is selectively induced by calcineurin/NFAT
inhibition, both under experimental conditions and in clinically
occurring tumors, and increased ATF3 expression accounts for suppression
of p53-dependent senescence and enhanced tumorigenic potential. Thus, Wu
et al. (2010) concluded that intact calcineurin/NFAT signaling is
critically required for p53 and senescence-associated mechanisms that
protect against skin squamous cancer development.

By analysis of whole blood and peripheral blood mononuclear cells,
Hoetzenecker et al. (2012) found that individuals with sepsis had
declining levels of the reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger,
glutathione (see 601002), that correlated with increased ATF3 levels and
decreased IL6 levels during sepsis-associated immunosuppression (SAIS).
Stimulation of monocytes with endotoxin superinduced NRF2 (NFE2L2;
600492)-dependent ATF3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Rosenberger et al. (2008) found that Atf3-deficient mice had enhanced
protection against murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) infection, with reduced
liver viral load and hepatic histopathology, compared with wildtype
mice. ChIP analysis showed that Atf3 interacted with a cis regulatory
element of the Ifng gene (147570). Atf3-deficient natural killer (NK)
cells had increased transcription and secretion of Ifng, a factor
involved in protection against MCMV. Reconstitution of NK-deficient mice
with Atf3-deficient NK cells was more effective against MCMV than
replacement with wildtype NK cells. Rosenberger et al. (2008) concluded
that ATF3 acts within NK cells to regulate antiviral responses.

Hoetzenecker et al. (2012) found that mice lacking Atf3 were susceptible
to endotoxic shock, even under conditions of ROS stress. However,
superinduction of Atf3 caused high susceptibility to bacterial and
fungal infections, whereas Atf3 -/- mice were resistant to these
infections. Mice lacking both Atf3 and Il6 were highly susceptible to
bacterial and fungal infections. In a model of SAIS, secondary
infections caused less mortality in Atf3 -/- mice than in wildtype mice.
Hoetzenecker et al. (2012) concluded that ROS-induced ATF3 is crucial in
determining susceptibility to secondary infections during SAIS.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, B. P. C.; Liang, G.; Whelan, J.; Hai, T.: ATF3 and ATF3-delta-Zip:
transcriptional repression versus activation by alternatively spliced
isoforms. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 15819-15826, 1994.

2. Gilchrist, M.; Thorsson, V.; Li, B.; Rust, A. G.; Korb, M.; Roach,
J. C.; Kennedy, K.; Hai, T.; Bolouri, H.; Aderem, A.: Systems biology
approaches identify ATF3 as a negative regulator of Toll-like receptor
4. Nature 441: 173-178, 2006. Note: Erratum: Nature 451: 1022 only,
2008.

3. Hai, T.; Liu, F.; Coukos, W. J.; Green, M. R.: Transcription factor
ATF cDNA clones: an extensive family of leucine zipper proteins able
to selectively form DNA-binding heterodimers. Genes Dev. 3: 2083-2090,
1989. Note: Erratum: Genes Dev. 4: 682 only, 1990.

4. Hoetzenecker, W.; Echtenacher, B.; Guenova, E.; Hoetzenecker, K.;
Woelbing, F.; Bruck, J.; Teske, A.; Valtcheva, N.; Fuchs, K.; Kneilling,
M.; Park, J.-H.; Kim, K.-H.; Kim, K.-W.; Hoffmann, P.; Krenn, C.;
Hai, T.; Ghoreschi, K.; Biedermann, T.; Rocken, M.: ROS-induced ATF3
causes susceptibility to secondary infections during sepsis-associated
immunosuppression. Nature Med. 18: 128-134, 2012.

5. Rosenberger, C. M.; Clark, A. E.; Treuting, P. M.; Johnson, C.
D.; Aderem, A.: ATF3 regulates MCMV infection in mice by modulating
IFN-gamma expression in natural killer cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105:
2544-2549, 2008.

6. Wu, X.; Nguyen, B.-C.; Dziunycz, P.; Chang, S.; Brooks, Y.; Lefort,
K.; Hofbauer, G. F. L.; Dotto, G. P.: Opposing roles for calcineurin
and ATF3 in squamous skin cancer. Nature 465: 368-372, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/23/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/2/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/1/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/18/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/5/2006

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 10/15/1998

EDITED carol: 03/19/2013
terry: 11/28/2012
terry: 9/14/2012
mgross: 3/5/2012
terry: 2/23/2012
alopez: 6/7/2010
terry: 6/2/2010
mgross: 4/1/2008
terry: 4/1/2008
alopez: 3/26/2008
terry: 3/18/2008
mgross: 7/6/2006
terry: 7/5/2006
psherman: 10/15/1998

606108	TITLE *606108 PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE, MAGNESIUM-DEPENDENT, 1A; PPM1A
;;PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE, MAGNESIUM-DEPENDENT, 1, ALPHA ISOFORM;;
PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 2C, ALPHA ISOFORM; PP2CA;;
PP2C-ALPHA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PPM1A is a serine/threonine protein phosphatase that is essential for
regulating cellular stress responses in eukaryotes. For further
background information on serine/threonine protein phosphatases, see
605119.

CLONING

By screening a human teratocarcinoma cDNA library with rat Pp2c-alpha as
the probe, Mann et al. (1992) cloned the human counterpart, PPM1A, which
they called PP2C-alpha. The PPM1A cDNA encodes a predicted 382-amino
acid peptide that shares 99.7% amino acid identity with rabbit
Pp2c-alpha.

In a genetic screen to identify protein phosphatases that negatively
regulate the p38 (600289) and JNK (see 601158) stress-activated MAPK
cascades, Takekawa et al. (1998) obtained a PP2C-alpha cDNA, which they
initially called MC4, that encodes a 324-amino acid peptide. The authors
hypothesized that MC4 is an alternative splicing product of PP2C-alpha.
The 2 proteins, which they termed PP2C-alpha-1 (382 amino acids) and
PP2C-alpha-2 (324 amino acids), differ at the C terminus. Northern blot
analysis detected 2.8- and 4.4-kb transcripts, which correspond to
PP2C-alpha-1 and PP2C-alpha-2, respectively. Both transcripts were
expressed at high levels in heart, placenta, skeletal muscle, and
pancreas, and the 4.4-kb transcript (PP2C-alpha-2) was detected in
brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunohistochemical analysis, Das et al. (1996) detected PPM1A in
both the cytoplasm and nucleus of mammalian cells, consistent with a
role in dephosphorylating components of stress-activated pathways.

By expressing PPM1A in mammalian cells, Takekawa et al. (1998)
demonstrated that PPM1A inhibits the activation of the stress-responsive
p38 and JNK MAPK cascades. Their in vivo and in vitro observations
indicated that PPM1A dephosphorylates and inactivates MAPKKs (MKK6
(601254) and SEK1 (601335)) and a MAPK (p38) in the stress-responsive
MAPK cascades. Using coimmunoprecipitation assays, the authors
demonstrated that PPM1A directly interacts with p38.

A key step in TGF-beta (TGFB1; 190180) signaling is ligand-induced
phosphorylation of receptor-activated SMADs (see SMAD2; 601366). Using a
functional genomic approach, Lin et al. (2006) identified human PPM1A as
a SMAD phosphatase. PPM1A dephosphorylated and promoted nuclear export
of TGF-beta-activated SMAD2 and SMAD3 (603109) in human cells. Ectopic
expression of PPM1A abolished TGF-beta-induced antiproliferative and
transcriptional responses, whereas depletion of PPM1A enhanced TGF-beta
signaling in human and other mammalian cells. In zebrafish,
Smad-antagonizing activity of Ppm1a was observed during Nodal
(601265)-dependent early embryogenesis. Lin et al. (2006) concluded that
PPM1A plays a critical role in TGF-beta signaling through
dephosphorylation of SMAD2 and SMAD3.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Das et al. (1996) determined the crystal structure of PPM1A, which they
called PP2C. The structure revealed a novel protein fold with a
catalytic domain composed of a central beta sandwich that binds 2
manganese ions, which is surrounded by alpha helices. The authors stated
that the protein architecture and deduced catalytic mechanism are
similar to the PP1, PP2A, and PP2B family of protein ser/thr
phosphatases.

REFERENCE 1. Das, A. K.; Helps, N. R.; Cohen, P. T. W.; Barford, D.: Crystal
structure of the protein serine/threonine phosphatase 2C at 2.0 angstrom
resolution. EMBO J. 15: 6798-6809, 1996.

2. Lin, X.; Duan, X.; Liang, Y.-Y.; Su, Y.; Wrighton, K. H.; Long,
J.; Hu, M.; Davis, C. M.; Wang, J.; Brunicardi, F. C.; Shi, Y.; Chen,
Y.-G.; Meng, A.; Feng, X.-H.: PPM1A functions as a Smad phosphatase
to terminate TGF-beta signaling. Cell 125: 915-928, 2006.

3. Mann, D. J.; Campbell, D. G.; McGowan, C. H.; Cohen, P. T. W.:
Mammalian protein serine/threonine phosphatase 2C: cDNA cloning and
comparative analysis of amino acid sequences. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1130:
100-104, 1992.

4. Takekawa, M.; Maeda, T.; Saito, H.: Protein phosphatase 2C-alpha
inhibits the human stress-responsive p38 and JNK MAPK pathways. EMBO
J. 17: 4744-4752, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/12/2010

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 7/13/2001

EDITED wwang: 04/16/2010
mgross: 4/12/2010
mgross: 3/15/2006
mgross: 7/13/2001

612040	TITLE *612040 LYSOPHOSPHATIDYLCHOLINE ACYLTRANSFERASE 2; LPCAT2
;;ACYLTRANSFERASE-LIKE 1; AYTL1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis and PCR, Shindou et al. (2007) cloned mouse and
human LPCAT2. The mouse and human LPCAT2 proteins contain 544 amino
acids and share 88.4% identity. Both have 3 putative transmembrane
domains, several motifs conserved in members of the lysophospholipid
acyltransferase family, and a C-terminal endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
targeting motif (KKxx). PCR analysis of mouse tissues found highest
Lpcat2 expression in resident macrophages and activated neutrophils,
followed by skin, colon, spleen, and activated macrophages.
Epitope-tagged Lpcat2 was expressed mainly in the ER and Golgi of
transfected Chinese hamster ovary cells.

Soupene et al. (2008) identified 3 splice variants of mouse Lpcat2,
which they called Aytl1. The deduced full-length protein contains an
N-terminal catalytic domain and 2 cation-binding EF-hand motifs in its
C-terminal region.

GENE FUNCTION

Shindou et al. (2007) found that lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induced
expression of Lpcat2 in mouse macrophages, and that this induction was
blocked by dexamethasone. In vitro assays of Lpcat2-expressing
microsomes showed that Lpcat2 catalyzed the biosynthesis of
platelet-activating factor (PAF; see 173393) from lyso-PAF. Lpcat2 also
used arachidonoyl-CoA to produce glycerophospholipid PAF precursors from
lysophosphatidylcholine. Under resting conditions, Lpcat2 preferred
arachidonoyl-CoA and contributed to membrane biogenesis. Upon acute
inflammatory stimulation with LPS, the activated enzyme used acetyl-CoA
more efficiently and produced PAF. Shindou et al. (2007) concluded that
LPCAT2 catalyzes membrane biogenesis in inflammatory cells and produces
a prophlogistic mediator in response to external stimuli.

Soupene et al. (2008) expressed mouse Aytl1 in E. coli membranes and
found that it acylated lysophosphatidylcholine, but not other
lysophospholipids tested, in the presence of various acyl-CoA donors.
Calcium and magnesium inhibited Aytl1 activity.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the LPCAT2
gene to chromosome 16 (TMAP RH94125).

REFERENCE 1. Shindou, H.; Hishikawa, D.; Nakanishi, H.; Harayama, T.; Ishii,
S.; Taguchi, R.; Shimizu, T.: A single enzyme catalyzes both platelet-activating
factor production and membrane biogenesis of inflammatory cells: cloning
and characterization of acetyl-CoA:lyso-PAF acetyltransferase. J.
Biol. Chem. 282: 6532-6539, 2007.

2. Soupene, E.; Fyrst, H.; Kuypers, F. A.: Mammalian acyl-CoA:lysophosphatidylcholine
acyltransferase enzymes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 88-93, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/9/2008

EDITED mgross: 05/09/2008

605169	TITLE *605169 E74-LIKE FACTOR 5; ELF5
;;EPITHELIUM-SPECIFIC ETS FACTOR 2; ESE2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the ETS family of transcription factors (see 164720) have
been implicated in control of cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. See
Sharrocks et al. (1997) for further discussion of the ETS family.

CLONING

Oettgen et al. (1999) isolated a novel epithelium-specific ETS gene,
ESE2, by screening a human cDNA database for sequences showing homology
to ETS family members. Two isoforms of ESE2 were identified, differing
at the amino terminus. ESE2a encodes a predicted protein of 265 amino
acids with molecular weight 31.3 kD. ESE2b encodes a protein of 255
amino acids with molecular weight 30.1 kD. ESE2a has a 10-amino acid
extension at its amino terminus as compared to ESE2b. ESE2 has several
tyrosine kinase, casein kinase II (see 115440), and protein kinase C
(see 176960) consensus phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis of
poly(A+) RNA identified an ESE2 transcript between 2.4 and 2.6 kb in
length. Expression was highest in kidney and prostate, both of which
have high epithelial cell content. Further analysis by dot blot
confirmed expression in epithelial cell-rich tissues, including salivary
gland, mammary gland, fetal kidney, and trachea. RT-PCR using
isoform-specific PCR primers showed differential expression of ESE2a and
2b. Kidney expressed only ESE2a, while prostate expressed both isoforms,
with levels of ESE2b being higher. ESE2 expression was upregulated
during keratinocyte differentiation, similar to that of ESE1, but
occurred at a later stage. In electrophoretic mobility shift assays,
ESE2a did not demonstrate specific binding to a Drosophila E74 ETS
binding site. A truncated version of ESE2a lacking the first 42 amino
acids did bind this site specifically. The truncated ESE2a also bound to
the regulatory regions of several glandular epithelium-specific genes.

Zhou et al. (1998) isolated a human ELF5 cDNA from a human lung cDNA
library. By screening several cancer cell lines for expression, the
authors observed ELF5/ESE2 mRNA in a progesterone-sensitive ductal
breast carcinoma cell line only. Southern blot analysis showed evidence
of loss of heterozygosity in the lung carcinoma cell lines NCI-H358 and
NCI-H441, and rearrangement of the gene in 2 other lung carcinoma cell
lines, SK-LU-1 and NCI-H661.

GENE FUNCTION

Hemberger et al. (2010) showed that ELF5 is expressed in the human
placenta in villous cytotrophoblast cells but not in post-mitotic
syncytiotrophoblast and invasive extravillous cytotrophoblast cells.
ELF5 establishes a circuit of mutually interacting transcription factors
with CDX2 (600297) and EOMES (604615), and the highly proliferative
ELF5+/CDX2+ double-positive subset of cytotrophoblast cells demarcates a
putative trophoblast stem cell compartment in the early human placenta.
In contrast to placental trophoblast, however, ELF5 is hypermethylated
and largely repressed in human embryonic stem cells and derived
trophoblast cell lines, as well as in induced pluripotent stem cells and
murine epiblast stem cells. The authors concluded that these cells
exhibit an embryonic lineage-specific epigenetic signature and do not
undergo an epigenetic reprogramming to reflect the trophoblast lineage
at key loci such as ELF5.

MAPPING

By PCR using gene-specific primers and the Genebridge 4 radiation hybrid
DNA panel, Zhou et al. (1998) mapped the ELF5/ESE2 gene to chromosome
11p15-p13, a region of the genome that frequently undergoes loss of
heterozygosity in several types of cancer.

ANIMAL MODEL

Oakes et al. (2008) stated that Elf5 knockout in mice is embryonic
lethal due to failure of placenta development and that Elf5
heterozygotes show defective mammary gland development and reduced milk
secretion during pregnancy. They showed that Elf5 is essential for
normal alveolar development and lactation due to regulation of Cd61
(ITGB3; 173470)-positive progenitor cells. Oakes et al. (2008) also
stated that Elf5 can transactivate the whey acidic protein (WFDC5;
605161) promoter, a component of milk. They concluded that Elf5
specifies the differentiation of Cd61-positive progenitors to establish
the secretory alveolar lineage during pregnancy.

REFERENCE 1. Hemberger, M.; Udayashankar, R.; Tesar, P.; Moore, H.; Burton,
G. J.: ELF5-enforced transcriptional networks define an epigenetically
regulated trophoblast stem cell compartment in the human placenta. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 2456-2467, 2010.

2. Oakes, S. R.; Naylor, M. J.; Asselin-Labat, M.-L.; Blazek, K. D.;
Gardiner-Garden, M.; Hilton, H. N.; Kazlauskas, M.; Pritchard, M.
A.; Chodosh, L. A.; Pfeffer, P. L.; Lindeman, G. J.; Visvader, J.
E.; Ormandy, C. J.: The Ets transcription factor Elf5 specifies mammary
alveolar cell fate. Genes Dev. 22: 581-586, 2008.

3. Oettgen, P.; Kas, K.; Dube, A.; Gu, X.; Grall, F.; Thamrongsak,
U.; Akbarali, Y.; Finger, E.; Boltax, J.; Endress, G.; Munger, K.;
Kunsch, C.; Libermann, T. A.: Characterization of ESE-2, a novel
ESE-1-related ETS transcription factor that is restricted to glandular
epithelium and differentiated keratinocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 274:
29439-29452, 1999.

4. Sharrocks, A. D.; Brown, A. L.; Ling, Y.; Yates, P. R.: The ETS-domain
transcription factor family. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 29: 1371-1387,
1997.

5. Zhou, J.; Ng, A. Y. N.; Tymms, M. J.; Jermiin, L. S.; Seth, A.
K.; Thomas, R. S.; Kola, I.: A novel transcription factor, ELF5,
belongs to the ELF subfamily of ETS genes and maps to human chromosome
11p13-15, a region subject to LOH and rearrangement in human carcinoma
cell lines. Oncogene 17: 2719-2732, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/27/2008

CREATED Stefanie A. Nelson: 7/25/2000

EDITED alopez: 08/05/2013
carol: 12/11/2009
wwang: 5/28/2008
terry: 5/27/2008
mgross: 11/30/2000
alopez: 7/25/2000

607587	TITLE *607587 INTERLEUKIN 17D; IL17D
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IL17D is a member of the unique IL17 family, which share a conserved
cysteine motif. IL17D regulates cytokine production in endothelial cells
and inhibits hemopoiesis in vitro (Starnes et al., 2002).

CLONING

Using nested RACE PCR, Starnes et al. (2002) obtained a cDNA encoding
IL17D. The predicted 202-amino acid protein, the longest in the IL17
family, contains a signal peptide, conserved cysteines that allow
homodimer formation, and a unique extended C-terminal domain. RT-PCR
analysis showed high expression in skeletal muscle, brain, adipose,
heart, lung, and pancreas, with lower expression in bone marrow, fetal
liver, kidney, leukocytes, liver, lymph node, placenta, spleen, thymus,
tonsil, resting CD4 (186940)-positive T cells, and resting CD19
(107265)-positive B cells. Western blot analysis indicated expression of
monomeric and dimeric proteins of 26 and 53 kD, respectively.

GENE FUNCTION

Starnes et al. (2002) showed that purified recombinant IL17D inhibited
myeloid progenitor cell colony formation. IL17D enhanced endothelial
cell production of IL6 (147620), IL8 (146930), and GMCSF (CSF2; 138960),
but not other cytokines. The increased expression of IL8 was found to be
NFKB (see 164011)-dependent. IL17D did not stimulate proliferation of
peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Starnes et al. (2002) mapped the IL17D
gene to chromosome 13p11, a region linked to translocations in Hodgkin
lymphoma (236000).

REFERENCE 1. Starnes, T.; Broxmeyer, H. E.; Robertson, M. J.; Hromas, R.: Cutting
edge: IL-17D, a novel member of the IL-17 family, stimulates cytokine
production and inhibits hemopoiesis. J. Immun. 169: 642-646, 2002.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/27/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/27/2003

611542	TITLE *611542 ARYLSULFATASE B; ARSB
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ARSB gene encodes arylsulfatase B (N-acetylgalactosamine
4-sulfatase; EC 3.1.6.12), a lysosomal enzyme that removes the C4
sulfate ester group from the N-acetylgalactosamine sugar residue at the
nonreducing terminus of the glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) dermatan sulfate
and chondroitin sulfate during lysosomal degradation (Karageorgos et
al., 2007).

CLONING

Schuchman et al. (1990) cloned a full-length ARSB cDNA from a human
testes cDNA library. The deduced 533-residue protein has 6 potential
N-glycosylation sites. Comparison of the predicted amino acid sequences
of arylsulfatases A (ARSA; 607574), B, and C (ARSC; 300747) demonstrated
regions of identity, particularly in their N termini.

Kunieda et al. (1995) isolated the rat Arsb gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

The ARSB gene contains 8 exons and spans about 206 kb (Karageorgos et
al., 2007).

MAPPING

Hellkuhl and Grzeschik (1978) assigned a gene for arylsulfatase B to
chromosome 5 by human-mouse somatic cell hybrids. By somatic cell
hybridization methods, DeLuca et al. (1979) assigned arylsulfatases A
and B to chromosomes 22 and 5, respectively. By study of an interstitial
deletion of 5q12, Dudin et al. (1984) excluded ARSB and HEXB from this
segment.

Fidzianska et al. (1984) assigned the ARSB locus to 5p11-qter by
analysis of somatic cell hybrids isolated from 2 separate fusions of
human fibroblasts carrying a translocation involving chromosome 5 with a
Chinese hamster cell line. By study of rearranged chromosomes in
human/hamster hybrids, using a tritium-labeled human genomic DNA
fragment for in situ hybridization, Fidzianska et al. (1986) narrowed
the assignment of ARSB to 5q11-q13.

Litjens et al. (1989) localized the ARSB gene to 5q13-q14.

By rat/mouse somatic cell hybridization, Kunieda et al. (1995) localized
the rat Arsb gene to chromosome 2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a patient with mucopolysaccharidosis type VI (253200), Wicker et al.
(1991) identified a homozygous mutation in the ARSB gene (611542.0001).

In patients with MPS VI, Jin et al. (1992) identified homozygous or
compound heterozygous mutations in the ARSB gene
(611532.0002-611542.0004).

In 9 patients with MPS VI, Litjens et al. (1996) identified several
mutations in the ARSB gene (see, e.g., 611542.0008-611542.0010). All
patients were compound heterozygotes and showed variable phenotypes
ranging from mild to severe. For each patient, the combined biochemical
phenotypes of the 2 mutant sulfatase alleles demonstrated a good
correspondence with the observed clinical phenotype.

Litjens and Hopwood (2001) stated that a total of 45 clinically relevant
mutations had been identified in the ARSB gene in patients with
mucopolysaccharidosis type VI. Missense mutations represented the
largest group, with 31 identified. No common mutations had been
described, making screening of the general population difficult.

Karageorgos et al. (2007) identified 83 different ARSB mutations among
105 patients with MPS VI. The most frequent mutation was Y210C
(611542.0009), which was identified in 18% of patients and associated
with an attenuated phenotype.

Among 12 Spanish and 4 Argentinian patients with MPS VI, Garrido et al.
(2007) identified 19 different mutations, including 9 novel mutations,
in the ARSB gene. The most common mutant alleles were splice site
mutations, 611542.0011 and 611542.0012, which accounted for 21.9% and
12.5% of mutant alleles, respectively.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yoshida et al. (1993) reported the clinical, morphologic, and
biochemical features of a rat model of MPS VI. Affected rats had facial
dysmorphia, dysostosis multiplex, and increased urinary excretion of
glucosaminoglycans. Ultrastructural studies revealed storage of GAGs
throughout the reticuloendothelial cells, cartilage, and other
connective tissues, but no deposition was observed in the nervous
system. Biochemical analyses demonstrated that the excreted GAG was
dermatan sulfate and the activity of hepatic arylsulfatase B was less
than 5% of the normal mean value. Pedigree analysis showed that the
phenotype was inherited as an autosomal recessive single trait. Yoshida
et al. (1994) demonstrated that the responsible gene lies on rat
chromosome 2. It had been known that some loci on rat chromosome 2
correspond to those on human chromosome 5 and mouse chromosome 13.
Kunieda et al. (1995) demonstrated furthermore MPS VI in rats was due to
a homozygous 1-bp insertion (507insC) in the Arsb gene, resulting in a
frameshift and premature termination at codon 258.

Evers et al. (1996) produced a targeted disruption of the Arsb gene in
mice and found that homozygous mutant animals exhibited arylsulfatase B
enzyme deficiency and elevated urinary secretion of dermatan sulfate.
They developed progressive symptoms resembling those of MPS VI in
humans. Around 4 weeks of age, facial dysmorphism became overt, long
bones were shortened, and pelvic and costal abnormalities were observed.
Major alterations in bone formation with perturbed cartilaginous tissues
in newborns and widened, perturbed, and persisting growth plates in
adult animals were seen. All major parenchymal organs showed storage of
glycosaminoglycans preferentially in interstitial cells and macrophages.
Affected mice were fertile and mortality was not elevated up to 15
months of age.

McGovern et al. (1985) studied the mutant arylsulfatase B enzymes in
homozygotes for separately ascertained cat lines with MPS VI. They
showed that the enzymes were distinguishable in physicokinetic and
immunologic properties as well as in ability to dimerize with normal
enzyme in heterozygotes.

Yogalingam et al. (1996) studied the Arsb (feline f4S) gene in MPS VI
Siamese cats. They cloned the gene from a normal feline heart cDNA
library, sequenced it, and identified a missense mutation (leu476pro;
L476P) in the gene in MPS VI cats. Expression of the normal f4S gene,
accompanied by mannose-6-phosphate (M6P), corrected the lysosomal
storage of undegraded sulfated glycosaminoglycans in these cells. The
observation suggested that expression of the normal f4S gene in MPS VI
myoblasts is predominantly mediated by an M6P receptor (154540).

Crawley et al. (1996) used a feline model of MPS VI to investigate
enzyme replacement therapy. They evaluated tissue distribution and
clinical efficacy of 3 forms of recombinant human
N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase. Intravenously administered enzyme was
rapidly cleared from the circulation. The majority of the enzyme was
distributed to the liver but was also detected in most other tissues.
Tissue half-life was approximately 2-4 days. In 3 MPS VI cats, regular
intravenous infusions of recombinant enzyme for up to 20 months showed
variable reduction of storage vacuoles in Kupffer cells and connective
tissues; however, cartilage chondrocytes remained vacuolated. Vertebral
bone mineral volume was improved in 2 MPS VI cats in which therapy was
initiated before skeletal maturity, and increased bone volume appeared
to correlate with earlier age of onset of therapy. One cat showed
greater mobility in response to therapy. Crawley et al. (1996) suggested
that, given their results, significant reduction in disease progression
and tissue pathology might be expected in patients with this disorder.

Crawley et al. (1997) reported a dose-related response effect of enzyme
replacement therapy in MPS VI cats treated from birth. The evidence came
from clinical, biochemical, and histopathologic observations.

Crawley et al. (1998) stated that the family of cats with MPS VI used
for testing the efficacy of enzyme replacement therapy were homozygous
for the L476P substitution in the Arsb gene. An additional mutation,
asp520asn (D520N), inherited independently from L476P and identified in
the same family of cats, resulted in 3 clinical phenotypes: L476P
homozygotes exhibited dwarfism and facial dysmorphia due to epiphyseal
dysplasia, abnormal low leukocyte 4S/beta-hexosaminidase ratios,
dermatan sulfaturia, lysosomal inclusions in most tissues (including
chondrocytes), corneal clouding, degenerative joint disease, and
abnormal leukocyte inclusions. Similarly, D520N/D520N and L476P/D520N
cats had abnormally low leukocyte 4S/beta-hexosaminidase ratios, mild
dermatan sulfaturia, lysosomal inclusions in some chondrocytes, and
abnormal leukocyte inclusions; however, both had normal growth and
appearance. In addition, L476P/D520N cats had a high incidence of
degenerative joint disease. Crawley et al. (1998) concluded that
L476P/D520N cats have a very mild MPS VI phenotype not previously
described in MPS VI humans. Yogalingam et al. (1998), from the same
group, also reported biochemical and clinical assessment of L476P
homozygous, D520N/L476P compound heterozygous, and D520N homozygous
cats. They showed that the entire range of clinical phenotypes, from
severe MPS VI, to mild MPS VI, to normal were clustered within a narrow
range of residual 4S activity from 0.5 to 4.6% of normal levels. The
results suggested that the D520N mutation causes a rapid degradation of
4S protein. The effect of this is partially ameliorated as a result of a
significant elevation in the specific activity of mutant D520N 4S
reaching the lysosomes.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VI, INTERMEDIATE
ARSB, GLY137VAL

In a patient with mucopolysaccharidosis type VI (253200), born of
consanguineous parents, Wicker et al. (1991) identified a homozygous
410G-T transversion in the ARSB gene, resulting in a gly137-to-val
(G137V) substitution. The mutation did not affect protein synthesis, but
severely reduced protein stability. The phenotype was of intermediate
severity.

.0002
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VI, SEVERE
ARSB, CYS117ARG

In a patient with severe MPS VI (253200), Jin et al. (1992) identified a
homozygous 349T-C transition in the ARSB gene, resulting in a
cys117-to-arg (C117R) substitution. The patient's cultured fibroblasts
showed about 2% of normal arylsulfatase B activity compared to a value
of about 7% in cultured fibroblasts from a patient with mild MPS VI
(L236P; 611542.0003).

.0003
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VI, MILD
ARSB, LEU236PRO

In a patient with mild MPS VI (253200), Jin et al. (1992) identified
compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ARSB gene: a 707T-C
transition resulting in a leu236-to-pro (L236P) substitution, and a
1214G-A transition resulting in a cys405-to-tyr (C405Y; 611542.0004)
substitution. The patient's cultured fibroblasts showed about 7% of
normal arylsulfatase B activity compared to a value of about 2% in
cultured fibroblasts from a patient with severe MPS VI (C117R;
611542.0002).

.0004
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VI, SEVERE
ARSB, CYS405TYR

See 611542.0003 and Jin et al. (1992).

.0005
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VI, SEVERE
ARSB, 1-BP DEL, 238G

In an 11-year-old boy with severe MPS VI (253200), Litjens et al. (1992)
identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion (238delG), resulting in a
frameshift and premature termination at codon 113. As an infant, he had
coarse dysmorphic features, advanced bone age, dysostosis multiplex, and
corneal clouding. Hydrocephalus required shunting at 4 years, and
cervical cord compression resulting from upper cervical instability
required surgical stabilization at 6 years of age.

.0006
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VI, SEVERE
ARSB, 1-BP DEL, 743C

In a child with a severe form of Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome (253200),
Isbrandt et al. (1996) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
deletions in the ARSB gene. One allele carried a 1-bp deletion (743delC)
in exon 4 resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. The
protein was predicted to be 221 amino acids, which is less than 42% of
the 533 amino acid wildtype enzyme. The second allele carried an 11-bp
deletion in exon 1 and a leu72-to-gln substitution (611542.0007). The
patient presented at 2.5 years with facial dysmorphism, scoliosis and
dysostosis multiplex, corneal clouding, hepatomegaly, and umbilical
hernia. At age 7 years, he had short stature, severe kyphoscoliosis,
restriction of joint movement, and pyramidal symptoms.

.0007
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VI, SEVERE
ARSB, 11-BP DEL AND LEU72GLN

In a child with severe Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome (253200), Isbrandt et al.
(1996) found a 1-bp deletion in the ARSB gene (611542.0006) and an 11-bp
deletion which resulted in premature termination and a shortened protein
predicted to be less than 23% of the length of the wildtype enzyme. In
addition to the 11-bp deletion, they observed a 215T-A transversion
resulting in a leu72-to-gln (L72Q) substitution on the same allele.

.0008
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VI
ARSB, ARG95GLN

In a patient with a severe form of MPS VI (253200), Litjens et al.
(1996) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ARSB
gene: a 284G-A transition resulting in an arg95-to-gln (R95Q)
substitution, and H393P (611542.0010). She presented at age 13 months
with mild developmental delay, thoracolumbar kyphosis,
hepatosplenomegaly, and skeletal changes characteristic of the disorder.
In another family, 2 sibs with a mild form of MPS VI were compound
heterozygous for R95Q and Y210C (611542.0009). Functional expression
studies in CHO cells showed that the R95Q mutant retained about 0.02%
residual activity.

.0009
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VI
ARSB, TYR210CYS

In 2 sibs with a mild form of MPS VI (253200), Litjens et al. (1996)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ARSB gene: a
629A-G transition resulting in a tyr210-to-cys (Y210C) substitution, and
R95Q (611542.0008). An additional unrelated patient with an intermediate
phenotype was compound heterozygous for Y210C and H393P (611542.0010).
Functional expression studies in CHO cells showed that the Y210C mutant
retained about 2% residual activity.

.0010
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VI
ARSB, HIS393PRO

In a patient with a severe form of MPS VI (253200), Litjens et al.
(1996) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ARSB
gene: a 1178A-C transversion resulting in a his393-to-pro (H393P)
substitution, and R95Q (611542.0008) Functional expression studies in
CHO cells showed that the H393P mutant expressed no ARSB protein and
thus had no residual activity.

.0011
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VI
ARSB, IVS5AS, G-C,-1

Garrido et al. (2007) identified a G-to-C transversion in intron 5 of
the ARSB gene (1143-1G-C) in 21.9% of mutant alleles from 16 Spanish and
Argeninian patients with MPS VI (253200). RT-PCR analysis showed that
the mutation resulted in the skipping of exon 6 and premature
termination. Haplotype analysis indicated a founder effect.

.0012
MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSIS TYPE VI
ARSB, IVS5AS, T-G, -8

Garrido et al. (2007) identified a T-to-G transversion in intron 5 of
the ARSB gene (1143-8T-G) in 12.5% of mutant alleles from 16 Spanish and
Argeninian patients with MPS VI (253200). RT-PCR analysis showed that
the mutation resulted in the skipping of exon 6 and premature
termination. Haplotype analysis indicated a founder effect.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Fox et al. (1984); Haskins et al. (1979); Jezyk et al. (1977); Villani
et al. (1999); Vine et al. (1981); Weller and Austen (1983)
REFERENCE 1. Crawley, A. C.; Brooks, D. A.; Muller, V. J.; Petersen, B. A.;
Isaac, E. L.; Bielicki, J.; King, B. M.; Boulter, C. D.; Moore, A.
J.; Fazzalari, N. L.; Anson, D. S.; Byers, S.; Hopwood, J. J.: Enzyme
replacement therapy in a feline model of Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome. J.
Clin. Invest. 97: 1864-1873, 1996.

2. Crawley, A. C.; Niedzielski, K. H.; Isaac, E. L.; Davey, R. C.
A.; Byers, S.; Hopwood, J. J.: Enzyme replacement therapy from birth
in a feline model of mucopolysaccharidosis type VI. J. Clin. Invest. 99:
651-662, 1997.

3. Crawley, A. C.; Yogalingam, G.; Muller, V. J.; Hopwood, J. J.:
Two mutations within a feline mucopolysaccharidosis type VI colony
cause three different clinical phenotypes. J. Clin. Invest. 101:
109-119, 1998.

4. DeLuca, C.; Brown, J. A.; Shows, T. B.: Lysosomal arylsulfatase
deficiencies in humans: chromosome assignment for arylsulfatase A
and B. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 76: 1957-1961, 1979.

5. Dudin, G.; Alexander, D.; Talj, F.; Deeb, M.; Musallam, S.; Der
Kaloustian, V. M.: Interstitial deletion of band q12 of chromosome
5. Clin. Genet. 25: 455-458, 1984.

6. Evers, M.; Saftig, P.; Schmidt, P.; Hafner, A.; McLoghlin, D. B.;
Schmahl, W.; Hess, B.; von Figura, K.; Peters, C.: Targeted disruption
of the arylsulfatase B gene results in mice resembling the phenotype
of mucopolysaccharidosis VI. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 8214-8219,
1996.

7. Fidzianska, E.; Abramowicz, T.; Czartoryska, B.; Glogowska, I.;
Gorska, D.; Mazurozak, T.; Rodo, M.; Wehr, H.; Witkowska, J.: Localization
of the human arylsulfatase B gene locus to chromosome 5 by use of
hamster-man somatic cell hybrids.(Abstract) 7th Int. Cong. Hum. Genet.,
Berlin 611-612, 1986.

8. Fidzianska, E.; Abramowicz, T.; Czartoryska, B.; Glogowska, I.;
Gorska, D.; Rodo, M.: Assignment of the gene for human arylsulfatase
B, ARSB, to chromosome region 5p11-5qter. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 38:
150-151, 1984.

9. Fox, M. F.; DuToit, D. L.; Warnich, L.; Retief, A. E.: Regional
localization of alpha-galactosidase (GLA) to Xpter-q22, hexosaminidase
B (HEXB) to 5q13-qter, and arylsulfatase B (ARSB) to 5pter-q13. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 38: 45-49, 1984.

10. Garrido, E.; Chabas, A.; Coll, M. J.; Blanco, M.; Dominguez, C.;
Grinberg, D.; Vilageliu, L.; Cormand, B.: Identification of the molecular
defects in Spanish and Argentinian mucopolysaccharidosis VI (Maroteaux-Lamy
syndrome) patients, including 9 novel mutations. Molec. Genet. Metab. 92:
122-130, 2007.

11. Haskins, M. E.; Jezyk, P. F.; Patterson, D. F.: Mucopolysaccharide
storage disease in three families of cats with arylsulfatase B deficiency:
leukocyte studies and carrier identification. Pediat. Res. 13: 1203-1210,
1979.

12. Hellkuhl, B.; Grzeschik, K.-H.: Assignment of a gene for arylsulfatase
B to human chromosome 5 (EC 3.1.6.1) using human-mouse somatic cell
hybrids. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 22: 203-206, 1978.

13. Isbrandt, D.; Hopwood, J. J.; von Figura, K.; Peters, C.: Two
novel frameshift mutations causing premature stop codons in a patient
with the severe form of Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome. Hum. Mutat. 7:
361-363, 1996.

14. Jezyk, P. F.; Haskins, M. E.; Patterson, D. F.; Mellman, W. J.;
Greenstein, M.: Mucopolysaccharidosis in a cat with arylsulfatase
B deficiency: a model of Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome. Science 198: 834-836,
1977.

15. Jin, W.-D.; Jackson, C. E.; Desnick, R. J.; Schuchman, E. H.:
Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI: identification of three mutations in
the arylsulfatase B gene of patients with the severe and mild phenotypes
provides molecular evidence for genetic heterogeneity. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 50: 795-800, 1992.

16. Karageorgos, L.; Brooks, D. A.; Pollard, A.; Melville, E. L.;
Hein, L. K.; Clements, P. R.; Ketteridge, D.; Swiedler, S. J.; Beck,
M.; Giugliani, R.; Harmatz, P.; Wraith, J. E.; Guffon, N.; Teles,
E. L.; Sa Miranda, M. C.; Hopwood, J. J.: Mutational analysis of
105 mucopolysaccharidosis type VI patients. Hum. Mutat. 28: 897-903,
2007.

17. Kunieda, T.; Simonaro, C. M.; Yoshida, M.; Ikadai, H.; Levan,
G.; Desnick, R. J.; Schuchman, E. H.: Mucopolysaccharidosis type
VI in rats: isolation of cDNAs encoding arylsulfatase B, chromosomal
localization of the gene, and identification of the mutation. Genomics 29:
582-587, 1995.

18. Litjens, T.; Baker, E. G.; Beckmann, K. R.; Morris, C. P.; Hopwood,
J. J.; Callen, D. F.: Chromosomal localization of ARSB, the gene
for human N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulphatase. Hum. Genet. 82: 67-68,
1989.

19. Litjens, T.; Brooks, D. A.; Peters, C.; Gibson, G. J.; Hopwood,
J. J.: Identification, expression, and biochemical characterization
of N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase mutations and relationship with
clinical phenotype in MPS-VI patients. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 58: 1127-1134,
1996.

20. Litjens, T.; Hopwood, J. J.: Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI: structural
and clinical implications of mutations in N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase. Hum.
Mutat. 18: 282-295, 2001.

21. Litjens, T.; Morris, C. P.; Robertson, E. F.; Peters, C.; von
Figura, K.; Hopwood, J. J.: An N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase
mutation (delta-G-238) results in a severe Maroteaux-Lamy phenotype. Hum.
Mutat. 1: 397-402, 1992.

22. McGovern, M. M.; Mandell, N.; Haskins, M.; Desnick, R. J.: Animal
model studies of allelism: characterization of arylsulfatase B mutations
in homoallelic and heteroallelic (genetic compound) homozygotes with
feline mucopolysaccharidosis VI. Genetics 110: 733-749, 1985.

23. Schuchman, E. H.; Jackson, C. E.; Desnick, R. J.: Human arylsulfatase
B: MOPAC cloning, nucleotide sequence of a full-length cDNA, and regions
of amino acid identity with arylsulfatases A and C. Genomics 6:
149-158, 1990.

24. Villani, G. R. D.; Balzano, N.; Vitale, D.; Saviano, M.; Pavone,
V.; Di Natale, P.: Maroteaux-Lamy syndrome: five novel mutations
and their structural localization. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1453:
185-192, 1999.

25. Vine, D. T.; McGovern, M. M.; Haskins, M. E.; Desnick, R. J.:
Feline mucopolysaccharidosis. VI. Purification and characterization
of the residual arylsulfatase B activity. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 33:
916-927, 1981.

26. Weller, P. F.; Austen, K. F.: Human eosinophil arylsulfatase
B: structure and activity of the purified tetrameric lysosomal hydrolase. J.
Clin. Invest. 71: 114-123, 1983.

27. Wicker, G.; Prill, V.; Brooks, D.; Gibson, G.; Hopwood, J.; von
Figura, K.; Peters, C.: Mucopolysaccharidosis VI (Maroteaux-Lamy
syndrome): an intermediate clinical phenotype caused by substitution
of valine for glycine at position 137 of arylsulfatase B. J. Biol.
Chem. 266: 21386-21391, 1991.

28. Yogalingam, G.; Hopwood, J. J.; Crawley, A.; Anson, D. S.: Mild
feline mucopolysaccharidosis type VI: identification of an N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase
mutation causing instability and increased specific activity. J.
Biol. Chem. 273: 13421-13429, 1998.

29. Yogalingam, G.; Litjens, T.; Bielicki, J.; Crawley, A. C.; Muller,
V.; Anson, D. S.; Hopwood, J. J.: Feline mucopolysaccharidosis type
VI. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 27259-27265, 1996.

30. Yoshida, M.; Noguchi, J.; Ikadai, H.; Takahashi, M.; Nagase, S.
: Arylsulfatase B-deficient mucopolysaccharidosis in rats. J. Clin.
Invest. 91: 1099-1104, 1993.

31. Yoshida, M.; Tachibana, M.; Kobayashi, E.; Ikadai, H.; Kunieda,
T.: The locus responsible for mucopolysaccharidosis VI (Maroteaux-Lamy
syndrome) is located on rat chromosome 2. Genomics 20: 145-146,
1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/22/2009

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 10/18/2007

EDITED carol: 09/12/2013
wwang: 1/21/2011
wwang: 10/6/2009
ckniffin: 9/22/2009
carol: 10/31/2008
carol: 10/23/2007
ckniffin: 10/22/2007

611525	TITLE *611525 POLYMERASE (DNA-DIRECTED), DELTA 4; POLD4
;;CDM1, S. POMBE, HOMOLOG OF;;
DNA POLYMERASE, DELTA 4, SMALLEST SUBUNIT; POLDS;;
P12
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The DNA polymerase delta complex is involved in DNA replication and
repair, and it consists of the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA;
176740), the multisubunit replication factor C (see 102579), and the 4
subunit polymerase complex: POLD1 (174761), POLD2 (600815), POLD3
(611415), and POLD4 (Liu and Warbrick, 2006).

CLONING

By EST database analysis using calf Pold4 and S. pombe Cdm1 sequences,
Liu et al. (2000) identified POLD4, which they called p12. The deduced
107-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 12.4 kD and
shares 25% amino acid identity with S. pombe Cdm1, the fourth subunit of
S. pombe polymerase delta.

GENE FUNCTION

Liu and Warbrick (2006) showed that both the p12 and p66 (POLD3; 611415)
subunits can be modified by ubiquitin in predominantly monoubiquitinated
forms. Using lysine to arginine substitution mutants, they showed that
ubiquitination took place on some combination of lysine residues and not
at the free N terminus. They suggested that p12 ubiquitination may play
a role in regulating protein-protein interactions.

Zhang et al. (2007) showed that rapid degradation of p12 occurred in
response to UV or genotoxic treatment of HeLa and HEK293T cells. The
half-life of p12 was reduced approximately 30-fold after UV treatment,
from 11 hours to 24 minutes, and p12 depletion was due to an accelerated
rate of proteolysis that required proteasome activity and an active
ubiquitin pathway. UV treatment converted the DNA polymerase delta
complex in vivo to a 3-subunit enzyme lacking p12 that retained activity
on poly(dA)/oligo(dT) templates but was impaired in its ability to
extend singly primed M13 templates, suggesting that the loss of the p12
subunit compromised POLD activity. Zhang et al. (2007) found that p12
degradation was blocked in ATR (601215) -/- cells but not in ATM
(607585) -/- cells and concluded that p12 degradation is regulated by
ATR, the apical kinase that regulates the damage response in S-phase.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the POLD4
gene to chromosome 11 (TMAP WI-18546).

REFERENCE 1. Liu, G.; Warbrick, E.: The p66 and p12 subunits of DNA polymerase
delta are modified by ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like proteins. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 349: 360-366, 2006.

2. Liu, L.; Mo, J.; Rodriguez-Belmonte, E. M.; Lee, M. Y. W. T.:
Identification of a fourth subunit of mammalian DNA polymerase delta. J.
Biol. Chem. 275: 18739-18744, 2000.

3. Zhang, S.; Zhou, Y.; Trusa, S.; Meng, X.; Lee, E. Y. C.; Lee, M.
Y. W. T.: A novel DNA damage response: rapid degradation of the p12
subunit of DNA polymerase delta. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 15330-15340,
2007.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 10/11/2007

EDITED wwang: 10/12/2007

607796	TITLE *607796 PHD FINGER PROTEIN 11; PHF11
;;NY-REN-34
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using autologous antibody, Scanlan et al. (1999) cloned PHF11, which
they designated NY-REN-34, from a clear-cell renal carcinoma cDNA
library. The deduced 191-amino acid protein contains a zinc finger
motif. RT-PCR detected expression in all normal tissues tested,
including lung, testis, small intestine, breast, liver, and placenta.

Using a positional cloning approach, Zhang et al. (2003) cloned PHF11
from a quantitative trait locus on chromosome 13q14 that influences
immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels and asthma (147050). PCR analysis detected
several splice variants, 1 of which was expressed in all tissues
examined. A variant utilizing an alternative exon 1 was expressed in
immune-related tissues and cells. Variants utilizing 2 alternative exons
following exon 5, both of which contain premature stop codons, were
detected only in lung and unactivated peripheral blood leukocytes, but
not in activated cells.

- PHF11/SETDB2 Fusion Transcripts

Using primers designed from exons utilized by SETDB2 (607865) and PHF11,
Zhang et al. (2003) amplified PCR products that spanned both and
represented 3 alternatively spliced fusion transcripts. Expression of
each transcript was tissue specific and was detected in nearly all
tissues examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang et al. (2003) determined that the PHF11 gene contains 10 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Scanlan et al. (1999) mapped the PHF11
gene to chromosome 13. Zhang et al. (2003) mapped the PHF11 gene to
chromosome 13q14. The SETDB2 gene is 4 kb proximal to the PHF11 gene and
is transcribed in the same direction.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Atopic or IgE-mediated diseases include the common disorders of asthma
(600807), atopic dermatitis (603165), and allergic rhinitis (607154).
Chromosome 13q14 shows consistent linkage to atopy and total serum IgE
concentration. Anderson et al. (2002) identified association between
total serum IgE levels and a novel 13q14 microsatellite (USAT24G1).
Zhang et al. (2003) localized the underlying quantitative trait locus
(QTL) in a comprehensive single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) map. They
found replicated association to IgE levels that was attributed to
several alleles in PHF11. They also found association with these
variants to severe clinical asthma.

REFERENCE 1. Anderson, G. G.; Leaves, N. I.; Bhattacharyya, S.; Zhang, Y.; Walshe,
V.; Broxholme, J.; Abecasis, G.; Levy, E.; Zimmer, M.; Cox, R.; Cookson,
W. O. C. M.: Positive association to IgE levels and a physical map
of the 13q14 atopy locus. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 10: 266-270, 2002.

2. Scanlan, M. J.; Gordan, J. D.; Williamson, B.; Stockert, E.; Bander,
N. H.; Jongeneel, V.; Gure, A. O.; Jager, D.; Jager, E.; Knuth, A.;
Chen, Y.-T.; Old, L. J.: Antigens recognized by autologous antibody
in patients with renal-cell carcinoma. Int. J. Cancer 83: 456-464,
1999.

3. Zhang, Y.; Leaves, N. I.; Anderson, G. G.; Ponting, C. P.; Broxholme,
J.; Holt, R.; Edser, P.; Bhattacharyya, S.; Dunham, A.; Adcock, I.
M.; Pulleyn, L.; Barnes, P. J.; and 11 others: Positional cloning
of a quantitative trait locus on chromosome 13q14 that influences
immunoglobulin E levels and asthma. Nature Genet. 34: 181-186, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/9/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/19/2003

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/16/2003

EDITED carol: 06/26/2003
mgross: 6/9/2003
alopez: 6/3/2003
alopez: 5/19/2003
tkritzer: 5/19/2003
mgross: 5/16/2003

607788	TITLE *607788 MULTIPLE COAGULATION FACTOR DEFICIENCY PROTEIN 2; MCFD2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Deka et al. (1988) cloned a gene they designated T+ due to the presence
of a transposon-like human repeat element (THE1) in the unusually long
3-prime untranslated region. The deduced protein contains 79 amino acids
and shares significant similarity with troponin-c (see 191040) and
calmodulin (see 114180) within a conserved 12-amino acid motif. Deka et
al. (1988) also identified a transcribed pseudogene, which they called
T-, that contains an interspersed Alu repeat instead of the THE1
element. Northern blot analysis of tissues and cell lines detected major
transcripts of 4.0, 3.0, 1.9, and 0.85 kb. A 2.5-kb transcript was also
detected in a neuroblastoma sample. The 4.0- and 1.9-kb transcripts were
present in HeLa cell polysome fractions, leading the authors to conclude
that they are likely translated.

Using a positional cloning strategy, Zhang et al. (2003) searched for
the gene responsible for the form of combined deficiency of factor V and
factor VIII that mapped to the region 2p21-p16.3 (F5F8D2; 613625). The
candidate genetic interval of approximately 2.4 Mb in the draft human
genome sequence contained about 20 known and predicted genes and a
number of partial ESTs, none of which had sequence homology to known
components of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or Golgi. Direct DNA
sequencing of individual candidate genes identified mutations in the
predicted exons and intron-exon junctions of a partial cDNA, HUMTRANSC,
previously reported based on its unusually long 3-prime untranslated
region containing a THE1. This gene, renamed MCFD2 (multiple coagulation
factor deficiency protein-2) by Zhang et al. (2003), contains a
145-amino acid open reading frame and is identical to the T+ gene
reported by Deka et al. (1988). Notable features include a predicted
signal peptide at the N terminus and 2 calmodulin-like EF-hands for
putative calcium binding at the C terminus. Northern blot analysis
showed that MCFD2 is expressed in multiple tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhang et al. (2003) showed that MCFD2 and the LMAN1 gene, which is
mutant in the most common form of F5F8D (F5F8D1; 227300), colocalize in
the endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC) and
that MCFD2 is localized to the ERGIC through a direct, calcium-dependent
interaction with LMAN1.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang et al. (2003) determined that the MCFD2 gene contains 4 exons
encompassing approximately 19 kb of genomic DNA. Deka et al. (1988)
determined that the promoter region of the MCFD2 gene contains a CAAT
element and a TATA element. The THE1 element is oriented in the reverse
direction of the gene.

MAPPING

Zhang et al. (2003) identified the MCFD2 gene within a critical region
on chromosome 2p21-p16.3 associated with F5F8D.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Zhang et al. (2003) identified 7 distinct mutations in the MCFD2 gene
accounting for F5F8D in 9 of 12 families. The affected individual in 1
of these families was 1 of the original F5F8D probands reported by Oeri
et al. (1954). Most of the mutations resulted in a null allele with
complete lack of protein expression (607788.0001-607788.0005). The other
2 mutations were missense (607788.0006-607788.0007). In vitro functional
expression studies in HeLa cells showed that LMAN1 did not
coimmunoprecipitate with missense mutant MCFD2. The results suggested an
essential role for the second EF-hand of MCFD2 in the calcium-dependent
interaction with LMAN1 and the subsequent function of the MCFD2-LMAN1
complex in the transport of factor V and factor VIII.

Zhang et al. (2008) identified 4 different MCFD2 mutations (see, e.g.,
607788.0008) in affected members of 4 families with combined factor V
and factor VIII deficiency. The families were of Greek, Afro-Caribbean,
Saudi Arabian, and Italian descent.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
FACTOR V AND FACTOR VIII, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 2
MCFD2, 149G-A, +5

In 2 families with combined deficiency of factors V and VIII (613625),
Zhang et al. (2003) found a donor splice site mutation, 149+5G-A, in the
MCFD2 gene. One of these families was the first to be described with
combined deficiency of factor V and factor VIII (Oeri et al., 1954).

.0002
FACTOR V AND FACTOR VIII, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 2
MCFD2, 309G-A, +1

In 2 families with combined deficiency of factors V and VIII (613625),
Zhang et al. (2003) found a donor splice site mutation, 309+1G-A, in the
MCFD2 gene.

.0003
FACTOR V AND FACTOR VIII, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 2
MCFD2, 1-BP DEL, 103C

In a family with combined deficiency of factors V and VIII (613625),
Zhang et al. (2003) found a 1-bp deletion, 103delC, resulting in
frameshift at residue 35 of the MCFD2 protein.

.0004
FACTOR V AND FACTOR VIII, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 2
MCFD2, 1-BP DEL, 249T

In a family with combined deficiency of factors V and VIII (613625),
Zhang et al. (2003) found a 1-bp deletion, 249delT, resulting in
frameshift at residue 83 of the MCFD2 protein.

.0005
FACTOR V AND FACTOR VIII, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 2
MCFD2, 8-BP DEL, NT263

In a family with combined deficiency of factors V and VIII (613625),
Zhang et al. (2003) found deletion of nucleotides 263-270
(263-270delTTGATGGC) of the MCFD2 gene, resulting in a frameshift at
residue 88.

.0006
FACTOR V AND FACTOR VIII, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 2
MCFD2, ASP129GLU

In a family with combined deficiency of factors V and VIII (613625),
Zhang et al. (2003) found a 387C-G transversion in the MCFD2 gene,
resulting in an asp129-to-glu (D129E) change in a highly conserved
residues within the second EF-hand domain of MCFD2. In vitro functional
expression studies in HeLa cells showed that LMAN1 did not
coimmunoprecipitate with D129E-mutant protein, although the mutant
protein was synthesized at high levels.

.0007
FACTOR V AND FACTOR VIII, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 2
MCFD2, ILE136THR

In a family with combined deficiency of factors V and VIII (613625),
Zhang et al. (2003) found a 407T-C transition in the MCFD2 gene,
resulting in an ile136-to-thr (I136T) change in a highly conserved
residue within the second EF-hand domain of MCFD2. In vitro functional
expression studies in HeLa cells showed that LMAN1 did not
coimmunoprecipitate with I136T-mutant protein, although the mutant
protein was synthesized at high levels.

.0008
FACTOR V AND FACTOR VIII, COMBINED DEFICIENCY OF, 2
MCFD2, ASP81TYR

In affected members of a family with combined deficiency of factors V
and VIII (613625), Zhang et al. (2008) identified a homozygous 241G-T
transversion in the MCFD2 gene, resulting in an asp81-to-tyr (D81Y)
substitution in a highly conserved residue within 1 of the EF-hand
domains. In vitro functional expression studies in COS-1 cells showed
that D81Y-mutant protein failed to coimmunoprecipitate with LMAN1.

REFERENCE 1. Deka, N.; Wong, E.; Matera, A. G.; Kraft, R.; Leinwand, L. A.;
Schmid, C. W.: Repetitive nucleotide sequence insertions into a novel
calmodulin-related gene and its processed pseudogene. Gene 71: 123-134,
1988.

2. Oeri, J.; Matter, M.; Isenschmid, H.; Hauser, F.; Koller, F.:
Angeborener Mangel an Faktor V (Parahaemophilie) verbunden mit echter
Haemophilie A bei zwei Brudern. Mod. Probl. Paediatr. 1: 575-588,
1954.

3. Zhang, B.; Cunningham, M. A.; Nichols, W. C.; Bernat, J. A.; Seligsohn,
U.; Pipe, S. W.; McVey, J. H.; Schulte-Overberg, U.; de Bosch, N.
B.; Ruiz-Saez, A.; White, G. C.; Tuddenham, E. G. D.; Kaufman, R.
J.; Ginsburg, D.: Bleeding due to disruption of a cargo-specific
ER-to-Golgi transport complex. Nature Genet. 34: 220-225, 2003.

4. Zhang, B.; Spreafico, M.; Zheng, C.; Yang, A.; Platzer, P.; Callaghan,
M. U.; Avci, Z.; Ozbek, N.; Mahlangu, J.; Haw, T.; Kaufman, R. J.;
Marchant, K.; Tuddenham, E. G. D.; Seligsohn, U.; Peyvandi, F.; Ginsburg,
D.: Genotype-phenotype correlation in combined deficiency of factor
V and factor VIII. Blood 111: 5592-5600, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/10/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/12/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/14/2003

EDITED carol: 11/04/2010
carol: 11/3/2010
alopez: 3/20/2009
wwang: 3/19/2009
ckniffin: 3/10/2009
terry: 5/10/2006
mgross: 6/12/2003
alopez: 6/3/2003
alopez: 5/16/2003
alopez: 5/14/2003

139320	TITLE *139320 GNAS COMPLEX LOCUS; GNAS
;;GNAS1 GENE, FORMERLY; GNAS1, FORMERLY
GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE-BINDING PROTEIN, ALPHA-STIMULATING ACTIVITY POLYPEPTIDE
1, INCLUDED; GNAS1, INCLUDED;;
Gs, ALPHA SUBUNIT, INCLUDED;;
STIMULATORY G PROTEIN, INCLUDED;;
ADENYLATE CYCLASE STIMULATORY PROTEIN, ALPHA SUBUNIT, INCLUDED;;
SECRETOGRANIN VI, INCLUDED;;
NEUROENDOCRINE SECRETORY PROTEIN 55, INCLUDED; NESP55, INCLUDED;;
XL-ALPHA-S, INCLUDED; XLAS, INCLUDED;;
A/B TRANSCRIPT, INCLUDED;;
ALTERNATIVE GENE PRODUCT ENCODED BY THE XL EXON, INCLUDED; ALEX, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GNAS is a complex imprinted locus that produces multiple transcripts
through the use of alternative promoters and alternative splicing. The
most well-characterized transcript derived from GNAS, Gs-alpha, encodes
the alpha subunit of the stimulatory guanine nucleotide-binding protein
(G protein). Gs-alpha is expressed biallelically in nearly all tissues
and plays essential roles in a multitude of physiologic processes. Other
transcripts produced by GNAS are expressed exclusively from either the
paternal or the maternal GNAS allele (Bastepe and Juppner, 2005).

CLONING

- Overview of Transcripts Produced by GNAS

The GNAS locus is imprinted and encodes 4 main transcripts, Gs-alpha,
XLAS, NESP55, and the A/B transcript, as well as an antisense GNAS
transcript (GNASAS; 610540). The 4 main transcripts are produced through
the use of alternative promoters and splicing of 4 unique first exons
onto the shared exons 2 through 13. Gs-alpha is ubiquitously expressed
and encodes a protein that stimulates adenylyl cyclase when activated by
an agonist-occupied G protein-coupled receptor, thereby generating the
second messenger cAMP. Gs-alpha is biallelically expressed except in a
small number of tissues, including renal proximal tubules, thyroid,
gonads, and pituitary, where it is predominantly expressed from the
maternal GNAS allele. XLAS is a large variant of Gs-alpha that is
expressed exclusively from the paternal GNAS allele, primarily in
neuroendocrine tissues and the nervous system. The XLAS and Gs-alpha
proteins are identical over their C-terminal portions, but they have
distinct N termini. NESP55 is exclusively expressed from the maternal
GNAS allele and encodes a chromogranin (see 118910)-like neuroendocrine
secretory protein that, due to a stop codon in its unique first exon,
shares no amino acid sequence with Gs-alpha. The A/B transcript, which
uses the alternative first exon A/B (also referred to as exon 1A or
1-prime), and the antisense GNAS transcript, which consists of exons
that do not overlap with any other GNAS exons, are ubiquitously
expressed noncoding transcripts that are derived exclusively from the
paternal GNAS allele. Consistent with their parent-specific expression,
the promoters of the XLAS, NESP55, A/B, and antisense transcripts are
within differentially methylated regions (DMRs), and in each case the
nonmethylated promoter drives expression. In contrast, the promoter for
Gs-alpha lacks methylation and is biallelically active in most tissues
(Bastepe and Juppner, 2005).

- Gs-Alpha Transcript

Using oligonucleotide probes for recombinants that code for alpha
subunits of G signal transduction proteins, Bray et al. (1986) screened
human brain cDNA libraries and identified 11 clones corresponding to 4
species of Gs-alpha cDNA. One of the clones was predicted to encode a
384-amino acid protein with homology to the bovine and rat Gs-alpha
proteins. The 4 clones differed in nucleotide sequence in the region
that codes for amino acid residues 71 to 88. Two forms corresponded to
proteins with molecular masses of 52 and 45 kD. The authors suggested
alternative splicing of a single precursor mRNA.

- A/B Transcript

Ishikawa et al. (1990) reported a Gs-alpha mRNA that uses a different
promoter and exon, which they termed exon 1-prime (later termed exon 1A
or A/B) that is located 2.5 kb upstream of GNAS exon 1. Exon 1-prime
does not contribute an in-frame ATG, and thus its mRNA may encode a
truncated form of Gs-alpha.

- XLAS Transcript

By restriction landmark genomic scanning, Hayward et al. (1998)
identified a differentially methylated locus containing a previously
undescribed GNAS1 exon. This exon was included within transcripts
homologous to an mRNA encoding the large G protein XL-alpha (s) in the
rat (Kehlenbach et al., 1994). Two restriction sites flanking this exon
were methylated on a maternal allele and unmethylated on a paternal
allele. RT-PCR of human fetal tissues showed that in contrast to
Gs-encoding transcripts, which were biallelic, mRNAs encoding XLAS were
derived exclusively from the paternal allele. The paternally active
alternative promoter was located 35 kb upstream of exon 1.

In rat, the paternally expressed XLAS gene is a splice variant of GNAS,
consisting of exon 1 of XL and exons 2 to 13 of GNAS. A second open
reading frame in XL exon 1, which completely overlaps the XL domain ORF,
encodes ALEX (alternative gene product encoded by the XL exon), which is
translated from the XLAS mRNA and binds the XL domain of XLAS (Klemke et
al., 2001).

- NESP55 Transcript

Hayward et al. (1998) identified a second promoter upstream of the
Gs-alpha site in addition to that for XLAS. Both upstream promoters were
associated with a large coding exon and showed opposite patterns of
allele-specific methylation and monoallelic transcription. The more
5-prime of these exons encoded the neuroendocrine secretory protein-55
(NESP55), which was expressed exclusively from the maternal allele. The
NESP55 exon is 11 kb 5-prime to the paternally expressed XLAS exon. The
transcripts from these 2 promoters both splice onto GNAS1 exon 2, yet
share no coding sequences. Despite their structural unrelatedness, the
encoded proteins, of opposite allelic origin, have both been implicated
in regulated secretion in neuroendocrine tissues. Hayward et al. (1998)
concluded that maternally (NESP55), paternally (XLAS), and biallelically
(Gs-alpha)-derived proteins are produced by different patterns of
promoter use and alternative splicing of GNAS1, a gene showing
simultaneous imprinting in both the paternal and maternal directions.

By sequencing clones obtained from human pheochromocytoma and rat
pituitary cDNA libraries, Weiss et al. (2000) identified 2 main splice
variants that included NESP55 sequences. In the 2,400-bp variant, NESP55
exons were spliced onto GNAS exons 2 to 13, and in the shorter 1800-bp
variant, NESP55 exons were spliced onto GNAS exons 2, 3, and N1. Several
cDNA clones contained inverted repeats on either the 5-prime or 3-prime
terminus, and heterogeneity in the GNAS region, such as deletion of exon
3 or insertion of a CAG trinucleotide after exon 3, was also found. The
2,400-bp variant contains an open reading frame (ORF) encoding the
NESP55 protein and an ORF encoding a truncated form of GNAS lacking exon
1. The sequence TAATG encodes the stop codon (TAA) of the NESP55 ORF as
well as the initiating methionine (ATG) of the truncated GNAS. The human
NESP55 ORF encodes a protein of about 28 kD, which has high homology
with rat Nesp55, particularly in the first 70 amino acids. Northern blot
analysis and RT-PCR detected the longer transcript in rat adrenal
medulla, pituitary, and locus ceruleus, and the shorter transcript only
in pituitary. Biochemical analysis indicated that rat Nesp55 is a
keratan sulfate proteoglycan, and like other chromogranins, Nesp55 was
proteolytically processed into smaller peptides in several rat tissues,
including a predominant GPIPIRRH peptide that is also found in human
NESP55.

- GNAS Antisense Transcript

Hayward and Bonthron (2000) described a spliced polyadenylated antisense
transcript (GNASAS; 610540) arising from the maternally methylated
region upstream of the XL-alpha-s exon, which spans the upstream NESP55
region. The antisense transcript is imprinted, and expressed only from
the paternal allele, suggesting to the authors that it may have a
specific role in suppressing in cis the activity of the paternal NESP55
allele. For further information on the GNAS antisense transcript, see
610540,

GENE STRUCTURE

Rickard and Wilson (2003) provided a schematic representation of the
GNAS locus. Exons 1 through 13 of GNAS produce the Gs-alpha transcript.
Imprinted first exons specifically used for the NESP55, XLAS, and exon
1A transcripts are located approximately 35, 14, and 2.5 kb upstream of
GNAS exon 1, respectively. These exons are spliced to GNAS exons 2
through 13. The GNAS antisense transcript originates upstream of the
XLAS exon. An alternative 3-prime exon, located within GNAS intron 3,
includes an alternative stop codon and polyadenylation site.

Bastepe and Juppner (2005) noted that the promoter regions associated
with the imprinted NESP55, XLAS, exon A/B, and antisense transcripts are
located within differentially methylated regions. In each case, the
nonmethylated promoter drives expression of the transcript. In contrast,
the Gs-alpha promoter lacks methylation and is biallelically active in
most tissues.

MAPPING

Using a cDNA probe in connection with a mouse/human somatic cell hybrid
panel, Sparkes et al. (1987) mapped the gene encoding the
alpha-stimulating polypeptide of G protein to chromosome 20. (See also
Blatt et al. (1988).) Ashley et al. (1987) mapped the corresponding gene
in the mouse to chromosome 2 which, by the argument of homology of
synteny, supports the assignment of the human stimulatory G protein gene
to chromosome 20.

Gejman et al. (1991) mapped the GNAS1 gene to the distal long arm of
chromosome 20 by linkage studies using a polymorphism detected by
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). A maximum lod score of
9.31 was obtained at a theta of 0.042 with the locus D20S15, previously
reported to be on the long arm of chromosome 20 (Donis-Keller et al.,
1987).

By in situ hybridization, Gopal Rao et al. (1991) assigned the GNAS1
gene to chromosome 20q12-q13.2. Using the same method, Levine et al.
(1991) mapped the GNAS1 gene to chromosome 20q13.2-q13.3.

GENE FAMILY

- G Protein Family

G proteins transduce extracellular signals received by transmembrane
receptors to effector proteins. The activity of hormone-sensitive
adenylate cyclase is regulated by at least 2 G proteins, 1 stimulatory
(Gs) and 1 inhibitory (Gi; see 139310). A third G protein, Go (139311),
is abundant in brain. Each G protein is a heterotrimer composed of an
alpha, beta, and gamma subunit. The GNAS locus encodes Gs-alpha, the
alpha subunit of the G stimulatory protein. Each of the 3 G protein
subunits is encoded by a member of 1 of 3 corresponding gene families.
Hurowitz et al. (2000) counted 16 different members of the alpha subunit
family, 5 different members of the beta subunit family, and 11 different
members of the gamma subunit family, as described in mammals. Using
BACs, they determined the gene structure and chromosome location of each
gene. The G protein family includes transducin (189970).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Rasmussen et al. (2011) presented the crystal structure of the active
state ternary complex composed of agonist-occupied monomeric
beta-2-adrenergic receptor (AR) (ADRB2; 109690) and nucleotide-free Gs
heterotrimer. The principal interactions between the beta-2-AR and Gs
involve the amino- and carboxy-terminal alpha-helices of Gs, with
conformational changes propagating to the nucleotide-binding pocket. The
largest conformational changes in the beta-2-AR include a 14-angstrom
outward movement at the cytoplasmic end of transmembrane segment 6 and
an alpha-helical extension of the cytoplasmic end of transmembrane
segment 5. The most surprising observation is a major displacement of
the alpha-helical domain of G-alpha-s relative to the Ras-like GTPase
domain.

Chung et al. (2011) applied peptide amide hydrogen-deuterium exchange
mass spectrometry to probe changes in the structure of the
heterotrimeric bovine G protein, Gs, on formation of a complex with
agonist-bound human beta-2-AR, and reported structural links between the
receptor-binding surface and the nucleotide-binding pocket of Gs that
undergo higher levels of hydrogen-deuterium exchange than would be
predicted from the crystal structure of the beta-2-AR-Gs complex.
Together with x-ray crystallographic and electron microscopic data of
the beta-2-AR-Gs complex, Chung et al. (2011) provided a rationale for a
mechanism of nucleotide exchange, whereby the receptor perturbs the
structure of the amino-terminal region of the alpha-subunit of Gs and
consequently alters the 'P-loop' that binds the beta-phosphate in GDP.

GENE FUNCTION

- Function of Gs-Alpha Protein

Mehlmann et al. (2002) demonstrated that meiotic arrest of the oocyte
can be released in mice by microinjecting the oocyte within the follicle
with an antibody that inhibits Gs. This indicates that Gs activity in
the oocyte is required to maintain meiotic arrest within the ovarian
follicle and suggests that the follicle may keep the cell cycle arrested
by activating Gs.

Harrison et al. (2003) demonstrated that signaling via the erythrocyte
ADRB2 and heterotrimeric G-alpha-s regulated the entry of the human
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Agonists that stimulate cAMP
production led to an increase in malarial infection that could be
blocked by specific receptor antagonists. Moreover, peptides designed to
inhibit G-alpha-s protein function reduced parasitemia in P. falciparum
cultures in vitro, and beta-antagonists reduced parasitemia of P.
berghei infections in an in vivo mouse model. Harrison et al. (2003)
suggested that signaling via erythrocyte ADRB2 and G-alpha-s may
regulate malarial infection across parasite species.

Adams et al. (2009) demonstrated that hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cell (HSPC) engraftment of bone marrow in fetal development is dependent
on G-alpha-S. The authors observed that HSPCs from adult mice deficient
in G-alpha-S differentiated and underwent chemotaxis, but did not home
to or engraft in the bone marrow in adult mice, and demonstrated a
marked inability to engage the marrow microvasculature. Deletion of
G-alpha-S after engraftment did not lead to lack of retention in the
marrow; rather, cytokine-induced mobilization into the blood was
impaired. In tests of the effect of G-alpha-S activation on HSPCs,
pharmacologic activators enhanced homing and engraftment in vivo. Adams
et al. (2009) concluded that G-alpha-S governs specific aspects of HSPC
localization under physiologic conditions in vivo and may be
pharmacologically targeted to improve transplantation efficiency.

- Imprinting of GNAS

Hall (1990) noted that the region of chromosome 20 occupied by the
Gs-alpha gene is homologous to an area of mouse chromosome 2 involved in
both maternal and paternal imprinting.

Campbell et al. (1994) presented evidence suggesting that GNAS1 is
biallelically expressed in a wide range of human fetal tissues. Of 75
fetuses genotyped, 13 heterozygous for a FokI polymorphism in GNAS1 were
identified whose mothers were homozygous for one or another allele.
Analysis of GNAS1 RNA from each fetus showed expression from both
parental alleles. No tissue-specific pattern of expression was
discerned. Campbell et al. (1994) concluded that if genomic imprinting
regulates the expression of the GNAS1 gene, the effect must either be
subtle and quantitative or be confined to a small subset of specialized
hormone-responsive cells within the target tissues.

Hayward et al. (2001) investigated GNAS1 imprinting in the normal adult
pituitary and found that Gs-alpha was monoallelically expressed from the
maternal allele in this tissue. They found that this monoallelic
expression of Gs-alpha was frequently relaxed in somatotroph tumors
regardless of GNAS1 mutation status. These findings implied a possible
role for loss of Gs-alpha imprinting during pituitary somatotroph
tumorigenesis and also suggested that Gs-alpha imprinting is regulated
separately from that of the other GNAS1 products, NESP55 and XL-alpha-s,
which retain maternal and paternal imprinting, respectively, in these
tumors.

To establish if the GNAS1 gene is imprinted in human endocrine tissues,
Mantovani et al. (2002) selected 14 thyroid, 10 granulosa cell, 13
pituitary (3 normal glands, 7 GH-secreting adenomas, and 3
nonfunctioning adenomas), 3 adrenal, and 11 lymphocyte samples shown to
be heterozygous for a known polymorphism in exon 5. RNA from these
tissues was analyzed by RT-PCR, and expression from both parental
alleles was evaluated by enzymatic digestion and subsequent
quantification of the resulting fragments. Most thyroid, ovarian, and
pituitary samples showed an almost exclusive or significantly
predominant expression of the maternal allele over the paternal one,
whereas in lymphocyte and adrenal samples both alleles were equally
expressed. The authors concluded that their results provided evidence
for a predominant maternal origin of GNAS1 transcripts in different
human adult endocrine tissues, particularly thyroid, ovary, and
pituitary.

Using hot-stop PCR analysis on total RNA from 6 normal human thyroid
specimens, Liu et al. (2003) showed that the majority of the Gs-alpha
mRNA (72 +/- 3%) was derived from the maternal allele. This was
considered consistent with the presence of TSH (see 188540) resistance
in patients with maternal Gs-alpha-null mutations (PHP 1a; 103580) and
the absence of TSH resistance in patients with paternal Gs-alpha
mutations (pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism). Patients with PTH (168450)
resistance in the absence of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (PHP1B;
603233) have an imprinting defect of the Gs-alpha gene resulting in both
alleles having a paternal epigenotype, which would lead to a more
moderate level of thyroid-specific Gs-alpha deficiency. The authors
found evidence of borderline TSH resistance in 10 of 22 PHP Ib patients.
The authors concluded that their study provided further evidence for
tissue-specific imprinting of Gs-alpha in humans and provided a
potential mechanism for mild to moderate TSH resistance in PHP Ia and
borderline resistance in some patients with PHP Ib.

Liu et al. (2000) showed that the human GNAS exon 1A promoter region
(2.5 kb upstream from exon 1) is imprinted in a manner similar to that
in the mouse: the region is normally methylated on the maternal allele
and unmethylated on the paternal allele. In 13 patients with
pseudohypoparathyroidism Ib, the exon 1A region was unmethylated on both
alleles, and was thus biallelically expressed. Liu et al. (2000)
proposed that the exon 1A differentially methylated region (DMR) is
important for establishing or maintaining tissue-specific GNAS
imprinting and that loss of exon 1A imprinting is the cause of PHP Ib.
(See also Bastepe et al. (2001, 2001).)

Freson et al. (2002) described a PHP Ib patient with lack of methylation
of the exon XL and 1A promoters, and biallelic methylation of the NESP55
promoter. Platelets of this patient showed a functional Gs defect,
decreased cAMP formation upon Gs-receptor stimulation, and normal
Gs-alpha sequence, but reduced Gs-alpha protein levels. The authors
hypothesized that transcriptional deregulation between the biallelically
active promoters of both exon 1A and exon 1 of Gs-alpha could explain
the decreased Gs-alpha expression in platelets and presumably in the
proximal renal tubules. Platelets demonstrated decreased NESP55 and
increased XL-alpha-s protein levels, in agreement with the methylation
status of their corresponding first exons. In a megakaryocytic cell line
MEG-01, exon 1A is methylated on both alleles, in contrast to the
normally maternally methylated exon 1A in leukocytes. Experimental
demethylation of exon 1A in MEG-01 cells led to reduced Gs-alpha
expression, in agreement with the observations in the patient. The
authors proposed that platelet studies may allow more facile evaluation
of disturbances of the GNAS1 cluster in PHP Ib patients.

Genomic imprinting, by which maternal and paternal alleles of some genes
have different levels of activity, has profound effects on growth and
development of the mammalian fetus. Plagge et al. (2004) disrupted a
paternally expressed transcript at the Gnas locus, Gnasxl, which encodes
the unusual Gs-alpha isoform XL-alpha-s. Mice with mutations in Gnasxl
had poor postnatal growth and survival and a spectrum of phenotypic
effects indicating that XL-alpha-s controls a number of key postnatal
physiologic adaptations, including suckling, blood glucose, and energy
homeostasis. Increased cAMP levels in brown adipose tissue of Gnasxl
mutants and phenotypic comparison with Gnas mutants suggested that
XL-alpha-s can antagonize Gs-alpha-dependent signaling pathways. The
opposing effects of maternally and paternally expressed products of the
Gnas locus provided tangible molecular support for the parental conflict
hypothesis of imprinting.

Two candidate imprinting control regions (ICRs) have been identified at
the compact imprinted Gnas cluster on distal mouse chromosome 2: one at
exon 1A upstream of Gnas itself and one covering the promoters of Gnasxl
and the antisense Gnas transcript, also called Nespas (Coombes et al.,
2003). Gnas itself is mainly biallelically expressed but is weakly
paternally repressed in specific tissues. Williamson et al. (2004)
showed that a paternally-derived targeted deletion of the germline
differentially methylated region at exon 1A abolished tissue-specific
imprinting of Gnas, which rescued the abnormal phenotype of mice with a
maternally-derived Gnas mutation. Imprinting of alternative transcripts,
Nesp, Gnasxl, and Nespas in the cluster was unaffected. The results
established that the differentially methylated region in exon 1A
contains an imprinting control element that specifically regulates Gnas
and comprises a characterized ICR for a gene that is only weakly
imprinted in a minority of tissues. Williamson et al. (2004) concluded
that there must be a second ICR regulating the alternative transcripts.

Williamson et al. (2006) identified a second ICR at the mouse Gnas
cluster. They showed that a paternally-derived targeted deletion of the
germline DMR associated with the antisense Nespas transcript
unexpectedly affected both the expression of all transcripts in the
cluster and methylation of 2 DMRs. The results established that the
Nespas DMR is the principal ICR at the Gnas cluster and functions
bidirectionally as a switch for modulating expression of the
antagonistically acting genes Gnasxl and Gnas. Uniquely, the Nespas DMR
acts on the downstream ICR at exon 1A to regulate tissue-specific
imprinting of the Gnas gene.

Mantovani et al. (2004) investigated the presence of a parent
specificity of Gs-alpha mutations in 10 patients affected with
McCune-Albright syndrome (MAS; 174800) and 12 isolated tumors (10
GH-secreting adenomas, 1 toxic thyroid adenoma, and 1 hyperfunctioning
adrenal adenoma). The parental origin of Gs-alpha mutations was assessed
by evaluating NESP55 and exon 1A transcripts, which are monoallelically
expressed from the maternal and paternal alleles, respectively. By this
approach, Mantovani et al. (2004) demonstrated that in isolated
GH-secreting adenomas, as well as in MAS patients with acromegaly,
Gs-alpha mutations were on the maternal allele. By contrast, the
involvement of other endocrine organs in MAS patients was not associated
with a particular parent specificity, as precocious puberty and
hyperthyroidism were present in patients with mutations on either the
maternal or the paternal allele. Moreover, isolated hyperfunctioning
thyroid and adrenal adenomas displayed the mutation on the maternal and
paternal alleles, respectively. Mantovani et al. (2004) concluded that
their data confirmed the importance of Gs-alpha imprinting in the
pituitary gland and demonstrated the high degree of tissue specificity
of this phenomenon.

To establish whether Gs-alpha is imprinted also in tissues that are site
of alteration both in PHP Ia and PPHP, Mantovani et al. (2004) selected
20 bone and 10 adipose tissue samples that were heterozygous for a known
polymorphism in exon 5. Expression from both parental alleles was
evaluated by RT-PCR and enzymatic digestion of the resulting fragments.
By this approach, the great majority of the samples analyzed showed an
equal expression of the 2 alleles. The authors concluded that their
results provided evidence for the absence of Gs-alpha imprinting in
human bone and fat and suggested that the clinical finding of
osteodystrophy and obesity in PHP Ia and PPHP patients despite the
presence of a normal Gs-alpha allele is likely due to Gs-alpha
haploinsufficiency in these tissues.

By analyzing 30 polymorphic sites across the Gnas1 gene region in
C57BL/6J x Mus spretus F1 mice, Li et al. (2004) identified 2 allelic
switch regions (ASRs) that marked boundaries of epigenetic information.
Activating signals consisting of histone acetylation and methylation of
H3 lys4 (see 602810) and silencing signals consisting of histone
methylation of H3 lys9 and DNA methylation segregated independently
across the ASRs. The authors suggested that these ASRs may allow the
transcriptional elongation to proceed through the silenced domain of
nearby imprinted promoters.

Sakamoto et al. (2004) examined the chromatin state of each parental
allele within the exon 1A-Gs-alpha promoter region by chromatin
immunoprecipitation of samples derived from mice with heterozygous
deletions within the region using antibodies to covalently modified
histones. The exon 1A DMR had allele-specific differences in histone
acetylation and methylation, with histone acetylation and H3 lysine-4
(H3K4) methylation of the paternal allele, and H3 lysine-9 (H3K9)
methylation of the maternal allele. Both parental alleles had similar
levels of histone acetylation and H3K4 methylation within the Gs-alpha
promoter and first exon, with no H3K9 methylation. In liver, where
Gs-alpha is biallelically expressed, both parental alleles had similar
levels of tri- and dimethylated H3K4 within the Gs-alpha first exon. In
contrast, in renal proximal tubules there was a greater ratio of tri- to
dimethylated H3K4 of Gs-alpha exon 1 in the more transcriptionally
active maternal as compared with the paternal allele. The authors
concluded that allele-specific differences in Gs-alpha expression
correlate in a tissue-specific manner with allele-specific differences
in the extent of H3K4 methylation, and chronic transcriptional
activation in mammals is correlated with trimethylation of H3K4.

Morison et al. (2005) reported a census of known imprinted genes in
humans and mice. They listed 83 transcriptional units, of which 29 are
imprinted in both species. They noted that there is a high level of
discordance of imprinting status between the mouse and human and that a
high proportion of imprinted genes are noncoding RNAs or genes derived
by retrotransposition.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Inactivating Mutations in the GNAS Gene

Inactivating loss-of-function mutations in the GNAS1 gene result in
pseudohypoparathyroidism Ia (PHP1A; 103580),
pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP; 612463), and progressive osseous
heteroplasia (POH; 166350) (Aldred and Trembath, 2000).

In a patient with PHP Ia and his affected mother, Patten et al. (1989,
1990) identified a heterozygous mutation in the GNAS gene (139320.0001).

Ahmed et al. (1998) performed mutation analysis in 13 unrelated
families, 8 with PHP Ia and PPHP patients, and 5 with PPHP patients
only. GNAS1 mutations were detected in 4 of the 8 families with PHP Ia:
2 novel de novo missense mutations and an identical frameshift deletion
in 2 unrelated families (139320.0011). GNAS1 mutations were not detected
in any of the families with PPHP only.

Aldred and Trembath (2000) found that a recurring 4-bp deletion in exon
7 of the GNAS1 gene (139320.0011) was common among patients with PHP1A.
The authors noted that inactivating mutations are scattered throughout
the GNAS gene with some evidence of clustering.

In 4 unrelated Italian families with PHP Ia, Mantovani et al. (2000)
identified heterozygous mutations in GNAS: 2 families had 2 previously
reported deletions in exons 5 and 7, whereas the other 2 families had 2
novel frameshift deletions (139320.0025 and 139320.0026). No mutations
were detected in the families in which PPHP was the only clinical
manifestation.

Ahrens et al. (2001) investigated 29 unrelated patients with Albright
hereditary osteodystrophy and PHP Ia or pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism
and their affected family members. All patients showed a reduced GNAS1
protein activity (mean 59% compared with healthy controls). In 21 of 29
patients (72%), 15 different mutations in GNAS1, including 11 novel
mutations, were detected. There were 8 instances in which a mother had
PPHP and her offspring had PHP Ia with AHO due to the same mutation
(see, e.g., 139320.0028). They also reported 5 unrelated patients with a
previously described 4-bp deletion in exon 7 (139320.0011), confirming
the presence of a hotspot for loss-of-function mutations in GNAS1. In 8
patients, no molecular abnormality was found in the GNAS1 gene despite a
functional defect of Gs-alpha.

Shore et al. (2002) identified heterozygous inactivating GNAS1 mutations
in 13 of 18 probands with progressive osseous heteroplasia. The
defective allele in POH was inherited exclusively from fathers, a result
consistent with a model of imprinting for GNAS1. Direct evidence that
the same mutation can cause either POH or PPHP was observed in a single
family; in this family 5 sisters had POH due to a frameshift deletion of
4 nucleotides (139320.0011) inherited from the father in whom the
mutation was nonpenetrant. Three offspring of these sisters had PPHP,
including traces of subcutaneous ossification. Shore et al. (2002)
described a second family in which the unaffected father was
heterozygous for the same GNAS1 mutation associated with POH in his 3
affected daughters. Shore et al. (2002) noted that hormone resistance,
such as that in PHP Ia, is strongly correlated with GNAS1 mutations in
the maternally derived allele, indicating that the maternal allele is
critical in some tissues for cellular functions required for signal
transduction. In contrast, severe, progressive heterotopic ossification,
such as that found in POH, correlates with paternal inheritance of the
GNAS1 mutation, suggesting that the paternal allele specifically
influences progressive osteoblastic differentiation, proliferation of
cells in soft connective tissues, or both.

Linglart et al. (2002) conducted clinical and biologic studies including
screening for mutations in the GNAS1 gene in 30 patients from 21
families with PHP: 19 with PHP associated with decreased erythrocyte Gs
activity (PHP Ia); 10 with AHO associated with decreased erythrocyte Gs
activity (isolated AHO); and 1 with PHP, hormonal resistance, and AHO
but normal erythrocyte Gs activity (PHP Ic). A heterozygous GNAS1 gene
lesion was found in 14 of 17 (82%) of the PHP Ia index cases, including
11 new mutations and a mutation hotspot involving codons 189-190 (21%).
These lesions led to a truncated protein in all but 3 cases with
missense mutations. In the patient diagnosed with PHP Ic, Gs-alpha
protein was shortened by just 4 amino acids, a finding consistent with
the conservation of Gs activity in erythrocytes and the loss of receptor
contact. No GNAS1 lesions were found in the 5 individuals with isolated
AHO who were not related to the PHP Ia patients. Intrafamilial
segregation analyses of the mutated GNAS1 allele in 9 PHP Ia patients
established that the mutation had occurred de novo on the maternal
allele in 4 and had been transmitted by a mother with a mild phenotype
in the other 5. They concluded that imprinting of GNAS1 plays a role in
the clinical phenotype of loss-of-function mutations and that a
functional maternal GNAS1 allele has a predominant role in preventing
the hormonal resistance of PHP Ia.

Aldred et al. (2002) reported 2 patients with Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy and deletions of chromosome 20q, including complete
deletion of the GNAS1 gene. One boy had a paternally inherited deletion
of chromosome 20q13.13-q13.32 and a normal biochemical evaluation
consistent with pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism. The other patient had a
maternally derived deletion of chromosome 20q13.31-q13.33 and
pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia. Neither patient showed evidence of
soft tissue ossification.

In patients with AHO, Rickard and Wilson (2003) searched the 3
overlapping upstream exons, NESP55, XL-alpha-s, and exon 1A. Analysis of
the NESP55 transcripts revealed the creation of a novel splice site in 1
patient and an unusual intronic mutation that caused retention of the
intron in another patient, neither of which could be detected by
analysis of the cDNA of GNAS1.

In a brother and sister with a PHP-Ia phenotype, who also had neonatal
diarrhea and pancreatic insufficiency, Aldred et al. (2000) identified
heterozygosity for a 12-bp in-frame insertion in the GNAS1 gene
(139320.0035). The mutation was inherited from the unaffected mother,
who was found to have germline mosaicism. Makita et al. (2007) performed
biochemical and intact cell studies of the 12-bp insertion (AVDT) and
suggested that the PHP-Ia phenotype results from the instability of the
Gs-alpha-AVDT mutant and that the accompanying neonatal diarrhea may
result from its enhanced constitutive activity in the intestine.

Adegbite et al. (2008) reviewed the charts of 111 individuals with
cutaneous and subcutaneous ossification. While most individuals with
superficial or progressive ossification had inactivating mutations in
GNAS, there were no specific genotype-phenotype correlations that
distinguished the more progressive forms such as POH from the
nonprogressive forms such as PPHP and PHP Ia/c.

- Pseudohypoparathyroidism Type Ib

In 3 brothers with a clinical diagnosis of PHP Ib (603233), Wu et al.
(2001) identified heterozygosity for a 3-bp deletion in the GNAS gene
(139320.0033). The boys had decreased cAMP response to PTH infusion, but
normal erythrocyte Gs activity. When expressed in vitro, the mutant
Gs-alpha was unable to interact with PTHR1 (168468) but showed normal
coupling to other coexpressed heptahelical receptors. Wu et al. (2001)
noted that the absence of PTH resistance in the mother and maternal
grandfather who carried the same mutation was consistent with models of
paternal imprinting of the GNAS gene.

In affected members and obligate carriers of 12 unrelated families with
PHP Ib, Bastepe et al. (2003) identified a 3-kb heterozygous
microdeletion located approximately 220 kb centromeric of exon 1A, which
they called exon A/B, of the GNAS gene. Four of 16 apparently sporadic
PHP Ib patients also had the deletion. Affected individuals with the
microdeletion showed loss of exon 1A methylation, but no other
epigenetic abnormalities. In all examined cases, the deletion was
inherited from the mother, consistent with the observation of PHP Ib
developing only in offspring of female obligate carriers. The deletion
also removed 3 of 8 exons encoding syntaxin-16 (STX16; 603666.0001), but
Bastepe et al. (2003) considered the involvement of STX16 in the
molecular pathogenesis of PHP Ib unlikely. They postulated that the
microdeletion disrupts a putative cis-acting element required for
methylation at exon 1A and that this epigenetic defect underlies the
pathogenesis of PHP Ib.

In all affected individuals and obligate carriers in a large kindred
with PHP Ib, Linglart et al. (2005) identified a 4.4-kb microdeletion
overlapping with a region of the 3-kb deletion identified by Bastepe et
al. (2003). Affected individuals exhibited loss of methylation only at
GNAS exon A/B. Linglart et al. (2005) concluded that PHP Ib comprises at
least 2 distinct conditions sharing the same clinical phenotype: one
associated with the loss of exon A/B methylation alone and, in most
cases, with a heterozygous microdeletion in the STX16 region, and the
other associated with methylation abnormalities at all GNAS DMRs,
including the DMR at exon A/B.

In affected members of 2 unrelated kindreds with PHP Ib, Bastepe et al.
(2005) identified a 4.7-kb deletion (139320.0031) removing the entire
NESP55 DMR and exons 3 and 4 of the antisense transcript of the GNAS
gene (GNASAS; 610540.0001) . Maternal inheritance of the deletion caused
loss of imprinting in cis at the entire GNAS locus.

Liu et al. (2005) found that all of 20 PHP Ib probands studied had loss
of GNAS exon 1A imprinting (a paternal epigenotype on both alleles). All
5 probands with familial disease had a deletion mutation within the
closely linked STX16 gene and a GNAS imprinting defect involving only
the exon 1A region. In contrast, the STX16 mutation was absent in all
sporadic cases. The majority of these patients had abnormal imprinting
of the more upstream regions in addition to the exon 1A imprinting
defect, with 8 of 15 having a paternal epigenotype on both alleles
throughout the GNAS locus. In virtually all cases, the imprinting status
of the paternally methylated NESP55 and maternally methylated
NESPAS/XL-alpha-s promoters was concordant, suggesting that their
imprinting may be coregulated, whereas the imprinting of the
NESPAS/XL-alpha-s promoter region and XL-alpha-s first exon was not
always concordant, even though they are closely linked and lie within
the same DMR. The authors concluded that familial and sporadic forms of
PHP Ib have distinct GNAS imprinting patterns that occur through
different defects in the imprinting mechanism.

- Activating Mutations in the GNAS Gene

Activating gain-of-function mutations in the GNAS1 gene result in the
McCune-Albright syndrome (MAS; 174800), polyostotic fibrous dysplasia
(POFD; see 174800), and various endocrine tumors. These activating
mutations are present in the mosaic state, resulting from a postzygotic
somatic mutation appearing early in the course of development which
yields a monoclonal population of mutated cells within variously
affected tissues. The nonmosaic state for activating mutations is
presumably lethal to the embryo (Aldred and Trembath, 2000; Lumbroso et
al., 2004).

Weinstein et al. (1991) analyzed DNA from tissues of 4 patients with the
McCune-Albright syndrome for the presence of activating mutations in the
GNAS1 gene and identified 1 of 2 activating mutations, R201C
(139320.0008) and R201H (139320.0009) in tissues from all 4 patients.

Among 113 patients with McCune-Albright syndrome, including 98 girls and
15 boys, Lumbroso et al. (2004) found that 43% had a GNAS1 mutation
involving arg201, with a net preponderance of the R201H (n = 34)
compared to R201C (n = 15). No difference in severity or manifestations
of the disease was noted between the two mutations. In patients who had
several tissue samples analyzed, the same mutation was always found,
supporting the hypothesis of an early postzygotic somatic mutation.

Bianco et al. (2000) analyzed a series of 8 consecutive cases of
polyostotic fibrous dysplasia without other features of McCune-Albright
syndrome and identified arg201 mutations (see, e.g., 139320.0013) in the
GNAS1 gene in all of them.

In a review, Aldred and Trembath (2000) noted that mutations leading to
constitutive activation of the GNAS1 gene occur in 2 specific codons,
201 and 227.

Fragoso et al. (2003) identified somatic heterozygous mutations in the
GNAS1 gene (139320.0009; 139320.0013) in adrenal tissue from 3 unrelated
patients with ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (AIMAH;
219080). The mutations resulted in constitutive activation of the G
protein. The mutations were not present in peripheral blood, and none of
the patients had signs of McCune-Albright syndrome. Fragoso et al.
(2003) discussed whether the patients could be considered part of the
spectrum of McCune-Albright syndrome or whether they represent isolated
cases of AIMAH associated with somatic mutations.

- Somatic Mutations in Pituitary Adenomas

Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH; 139190) uses cAMP as a second
messenger to stimulate growth hormone (GH; 139250) secretion and
proliferation of normal pituitary somatotrophs (Billestrup et al.,
1986). Vallar et al. (1987) identified constitutive activation of Gs in
tissue from a subset of GH-secreting pituitary tumors (102200).

In a series of 32 corticotroph adenomas of the pituitary (219090),
Williamson et al. (1995) found 2 with somatic mutations in the GNAS1
gene at codon 227 (139320.0010; 139320.0012).

Hayward et al. (2001) noted that approximately 40% of growth
hormone-secreting pituitary adenomas contain somatic mutations in the
GNAS1 gene. These mutations, which occur at arg201 or glu227 (see, e.g.,
139320.0008 and 139320.0010, respectively), constitutively activate the
alpha subunit of GNAS1. Although transcripts encoding Gs-alpha are
biallelically derived in most human tissues, Hayward et al. (2001)
showed that the mutation had occurred on the maternal allele in 21 of 22
GNAS1-positive somatotroph adenomas. They also showed that Gs-alpha is
monoallelically expressed from the maternal allele in normal adult
pituitary tissue. This monoallelic expression of Gs-alpha was frequently
relaxed in somatotroph tumors regardless of GNAS1 mutation status. These
findings implied a possible role for loss of Gs-alpha imprinting during
pituitary somatotroph tumorigenesis.

- Other Disease Associations

Jia et al. (1999) identified a common silent polymorphism in the GNAS1
gene involving a change of codon 131 from ATT (ile) to ATC (ile). The
authors found a significant difference in the frequency of the alleles
between 268 white patients with essential hypertension (145500) (51% +)
and a matched group of 231 control subjects (58% +) (P = 0.02).

Genevieve et al. (2005) reported 2 unrelated girls who presented with
severe pre- and postnatal growth retardation and had de novo
interstitial deletions of chromosome 20q13.2-q13.3. Molecular studies
showed that the deletions were of paternal origin in both girls and were
approximately 4.5 Mb in size, encompassing the GNAS imprinted locus,
including paternally imprinted Gnasxl, and the TFAP2C gene (601602).
Both patients had intractable feeding difficulties, microcephaly, facial
dysmorphism with high forehead, broad nasal bridge, small chin and
malformed ears, mild psychomotor retardation, and hypotonia. Genevieve
et al. (2005) noted that a mouse model with disruption of the Gnasxl
gene had poor postnatal growth and survival (Plagge et al., 2004), and
that a patient reported by Aldred et al. (2002) with a paternal deletion
of the GNAS complex also showed pre- and postnatal growth retardation
and feeding difficulties. Moreover, disruption of the Tfap2c gene in
mice had been shown to affect embryonic development (Werling and
Schorle, 2002).

Using metaanalysis combining data from case control and family studies
in Gambia, Kenya, and Malawi and a case control study from Ghana, Auburn
et al. (2008) detected associations between intronic or conservative
SNPs of GNAS and severe malaria. SNPs with significant associations
clustered in the 5-prime end of GNAS. Auburn et al. (2008) proposed that
the impact of GNAS on malaria parasite invasion efficacy may alter
susceptibility to disease.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yu et al. (1998) generated mice with a mutation in exon 2 of the Gnas
gene, resulting in a null allele. Homozygous Gs deficiency was
embryonically lethal. Heterozygotes with maternal (m-/+) and paternal
(+/p-) inheritance of the Gnas null allele had distinct phenotypes,
suggesting that Gnas is an imprinted gene. Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
resistance is present in m-/+ but not +/p- mice. Expression of the alpha
subunit in the renal cortex (the site of PTH action) was markedly
reduced in m-/+ but not in +/p- mice, demonstrating that the Gnas
paternal allele is imprinted in this tissue. Gnas was also imprinted in
brown and white adipose tissue. The maximal physiologic response to
vasopressin (urinary concentrating ability) was normal in both m-/+ and
+/p- mice and Gnas was not imprinted in the renal inner medulla, the
site of vasopressin action. Tissue-specific imprinting of Gnas was
likely the mechanism for variable and tissue-specific hormone resistance
in the knockout mice and a similar mechanism might explain the variable
phenotype in AHO.

Exon 2 m-/+ mice are obese and hypometabolic, whereas exon 2 +/p- mice
are lean and hypermetabolic. To study the effect of Gs-alpha deficiency
without disrupting other Gnas gene products, Chen et al. (2005)
disrupted exon 1 of the Gnas gene in mice. They found that exon 1 +/p-
mice lacked the exon 2 +/p- phenotype and developed obesity and insulin
resistance. Exon 2 and exon 1 m-/+ mice both had subcutaneous edema at
birth, presumably due to loss of maternal Gs-alpha expression; however,
they differed in other respects, raising the possibility for the
presence of other maternal-specific gene products. Exon 1 m-/+ mice had
more severe obesity and insulin resistance and a lower metabolic rate
relative to exon 1 +/p- mice. Chen et al. (2005) concluded that the
lean, hypermetabolic, and insulin-sensitive exon 2 +/p- phenotype
appeared to result from XL-alpha-s deficiency, whereas loss of
paternal-specific Gs-alpha expression in exon 1 +/p- mice led to an
opposite metabolic phenotype. Thus, alternative GNAS gene products have
opposing effects on glucose and lipid metabolism. The differences
between exon 1 m-/+ and +/p- mice presumably resulted from differential
effects on Gs-alpha expression in tissues where Gs-alpha is normally
imprinted.

A suspicion of the existence of one or more imprinted genes on distal
mouse chromosome 2 had been raised by Cattanach and Kirk (1985) and
Peters et al. (1994): paternal uniparental disomy (UPD)/maternal
deletion and maternal UPD/paternal deletion of a region between
breakpoints T2Wa and T28H on distal mouse chromosome 2 resulted in
distinct phenotypes and early lethality. Neuronatin (NNAT; 603106) is an
imprinted gene on distal mouse chromosome 2 that maps outside the
T2Wa-T28H imprinted region (Kikyo et al., 1997). Given the large
distance and the presence of multiple nonimprinted genes between Gnas
and Nnat, it is likely that they lie within distinct imprinting domains.
The tissue-specific imprinting of Gnas observed by Yu et al. (1998) had
been demonstrated for other imprinted genes; e.g., DeChiara et al.
(1991) had demonstrated tissue-specific parental imprinting in the case
of the insulin-like growth factor II gene (147280) by study of targeted
disruption of the gene in mice.

Bastepe et al. (2004) studied chimeric mice containing wildtype
chondrocytes and chondrocytes with either homozygous or heterozygous
disruption of Gnas exon 2. Haploinsufficiency of Gnas signaling resulted
in chondrocytes that differentiated prematurely. The phenotype was
similar to that observed in Pthr1 (168468)-deficient mice. Bastepe et
al. (2004) determined that expression of Gnas in chondrocytes occurs
from both parental alleles. They concluded that GNAS is the primary
mediator of PTHR1 in chondrocytes and that haploinsufficiency of GNAS
signaling contributes to the skeletal phenotypes of AHO.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, MET1VAL

In a mother and son with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580),
Patten et al. (1989, 1990) identified a heterozygous A-to-G transition
in exon 1 of the GNAS1 gene, resulting in a met1-to-val (M1V)
substitution at the initiator codon. Initiation at the next AUG was
in-frame and predicted to result in deletion of 59 N-terminal amino
acids. Laboratory studies showed that the GNAS protein was reactive with
a C-terminal Gs-alpha antiserum, but not with 2 Gs-alpha peptide
antisera to amino acid residues 28-42 or 47-61. This was the first
molecular delineation of a mutation in a human G protein and a
conclusive demonstration that mutation at the GNAS1 locus results in
AHO.

.0002
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, IVS10DS, G-C, +1

In 4 sisters with PHP Ia (103580), Weinstein et al. (1990) identified a
heterozygous G-to-C transversion in intron 10 of the GNAS1 gene,
resulting in a splice site mutation. The authors used PCR to amplify
genomic fragments with an attached high-melting G+C-rich region ('GC
clamp') and DGGE to analyze the fragments. All 4 daughters had decreased
Gs-alpha mRNA and functional Gs-alpha deficiency. The mother, who had
PPHP (612463), also carried the heterozygous mutation. She had minor
stigmata of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, such as unilateral
brachyphalangy I, x-ray evidence of subcutaneous calcifications, and
short stature relative to other members of her family, but no hormonal
abnormalities. The kindred had previously been reported by Kinard et al.
(1979)l.

.0003
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED;;
OSSEOUS HETEROPLASIA, PROGRESSIVE, INCLUDED
GNAS, 1-BP DEL, 725C

In a mother with PPHP (612463) and her daughter with PHP1A (103580),
Weinstein et al. (1990) identified a heterozygous 1-bp deletion (G) in
exon 10 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a frameshift.

Adegbite et al. (2008) identified the same deletion (725delC) in an
unaffected carrier father and in 3 of his 5 children with progressive
osseous heteroplasia (POH; 166350). The 3 children exhibited varying
degrees of severity based on the extent of the heterotropic ossification
lesions and resultant functional impairment.

.0004
REMOVED FROM DATABASE
.0005
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, IVS3AS, A-G, -12

Levine and Deily (1990) identified a family in which members affected
with PHP1A (103580) had an A-to-G transition 12 bases from the 3-prime
terminus of intron 3 of the GNAS gene. The mutation was predicted to
result in a frameshift and a premature stop codon.

.0006
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, LEU99PRO

In affected members of a family with PHP Ia (103580), Levine and Deily
(1990) identified a heterozygous T-to-C transition in the GNAS gene,
resulting in a leu99-to-pro (L99P) substitution.

.0007
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, CYS165ARG

In affected members of a family with PHP1A (103580), Levine and Vechio
(1990) identified a heterozygous C-to-T transition in exon 6 of the GNAS
gene, resulting in a cys165-to-arg (C165R) substitution.

.0008
MCCUNE-ALBRIGHT SYNDROME, SOMATIC, MOSAIC
PITUITARY TUMOR, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
SEX CORD STROMAL TUMOR, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
GNAS, ARG201CYS

In various tissues from 4 patients with McCune-Albright syndrome
(174800), Weinstein et al. (1991) found 1 of 2 activating mutations
within codon 201 in exon 8 of the GNAS gene. Two patients carried an
arg201-to-cys substitution (R201C); the other 2 carried an R201H
substitution (139320.0009). Tissues analyzed included affected endocrine
organs, such as gonads, adrenal glands, thyroid, and pituitary, as well
as tissues not classically involved in the McCune-Albright syndrome. In
each patient the proportion of cells affected varied from tissue to
tissue. In 2 endocrine organs, the highest proportion of mutant alleles
was found in regions of abnormal cell proliferation. Weinstein et al.
(1991) concluded that somatic mutation of the GNAS gene early in
embryogenesis resulted in the mosaic population of normal and
mutant-bearing tissues that underlie the clinical manifestations of
McCune-Albright syndrome.

Candeliere et al. (1995) found the R201C mutation in a 14-year-old boy
who had previously been reported as a case of panostotic fibrous
dysplasia (see 174800).

Landis et al. (1989) identified somatic gain-of-function mutations in
the GNAS1 gene in 4 of 8 growth hormone (GH; 139250)-secreting pituitary
tumors (102200) surgically removed from patients with acromegaly. Two
tumors contained a C-to-T transition resulting in an R201C substitution.
The other 2 tumors had an R201H substitution (139320.0009) and a Q227R
substitution (139320.0010), respectively. All the mutations resulted in
constitutive activation of Gs by inhibiting its GTPase activity and
behaved like dominantly acting oncogenes.

Yang et al. (1996) identified somatic mutations at GNAS codon 201 in 9
of 21 pituitary adenomas derived from Korean patients with acromegaly.
Eight tumors had the R201C mutation and 1 had an R201S substitution
(139320.0013). Clinically, patients with the GNAS mutations were older
and responded better to octreotide-induced growth hormone suppression
than those without mutations.

Collins et al. (2003) identified an R201C mutation in thyroid carcinoma
derived from a patient with McCune-Albright syndrome.

Fragoso et al. (1998) identified a somatic R201C mutation in 4 (66.6%)
of 14 human sex cord stromal tumors, including ovarian and testicular
Leydig cell tumors. In contrast, no GIP2 (139360) mutations were found
in any of the sex cord stromal tumors studied.

Kalfa et al. (2006) detected the R201C mutation in 8 of 30 cases of
juvenile ovarian granulosa cell tumor, the most common sex cord stromal
tumor. Laser microdissection confirmed that the mutation was exclusively
localized in the tumoral granulosa cells and was absent in the ovarian
stroma. Patients with a hyperactivated G-alpha-s exhibited a
significantly more advanced tumor (p less than 0.05) because 7 of them
(77.7%) were staged as Ic or had had a recurrence.

.0009
MCCUNE-ALBRIGHT SYNDROME, SOMATIC, MOSAIC
PITUITARY TUMOR, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
ACTH-INDEPENDENT MACRONODULAR ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
SEX CORD STROMAL TUMOR, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
GNAS, ARG201HIS

In 2 patients with McCune-Albright syndrome (174800), Weinstein et al.
(1991) identified an arg201-to-his (R201H) mutation in exon 8 of the
GNAS gene in endocrine organs affected in this disorder, such as gonads,
adrenal glands, thyroid, and pituitary, as well as tissues not
classically involved. In 2 endocrine organs, ovary and adrenal, the
highest proportion of mutant alleles was found in regions of abnormal
cell proliferation. Weinstein et al. (1991) concluded that somatic
mutation of the GNAS gene early in embryogenesis resulted in the mosaic
population of normal and mutant-bearing tissues that underlie the
clinical manifestations of McCune-Albright syndrome. It remained an open
question whether GNAS1 mutations were causally related to the
nonendocrine abnormalities in 3 of the patients: chronic liver disease
in 1, thymic hyperplasia in 2, gastrointestinal adenomatous polyps in 1,
cardiopulmonary disease in 1, and sudden death in 2.

Schwindinger et al. (1992) found a G-to-A transition resulting in the
R201H substitution in a patient with McCune-Albright syndrome who had
severe bony involvement, characteristic skin lesions, and a history of
hyperthyroidism. The mutation was found in a higher proportion of skin
cells from affected areas than from unaffected areas. The findings
confirmed the Happle (1986) hypothesis that this disorder is due to
mosaicism for a postzygotic GNAS1 mutation. The authors noted that
arg201 is also the site of ADP-ribosylation by the cholera toxin.

Collins et al. (2003) identified the R201H mutation in thyroid carcinoma
from a patient with McCune-Albright syndrome.

In 2 growth hormone (GH; 139250)-secreting pituitary tumors (102200)
surgically removed from patients with acromegaly, Landis et al. (1989)
identified a somatic mutation in the GNAS1 gene, resulting in an R201H
substitution. The mutation resulted in constitutive activation of Gs by
inhibiting its GTPase activity and behaved like a dominantly acting
oncogene.

Fragoso et al. (2003) identified a heterozygous R201H mutation in
adrenal tissue from 2 unrelated patients with ACTH-independent
macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (219080).

In 1 of 30 cases of juvenile ovarian granulosa cell tumor, the most
common sex cord stromal tumor, Kalfa et al. (2006) detected the R201H
mutation of the GNAS gene. Laser microdissection confirmed that the
mutation was exclusively localized in the tumoral granulosa cells and
was absent in the ovarian stroma.

.0010
PITUITARY TUMOR, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING, SOMATIC
PITUITARY ADENOMA, ACTH-SECRETING, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
GNAS, GLN227ARG

In a growth hormone (GH; 139250)-secreting pituitary tumor (102200)
surgically removed from a patient with acromegaly, Landis et al. (1989)
identified a somatic mutation in the GNAS1 gene, resulting in a
gln227-to-arg (Q227R) substitution. The mutation resulted in
constitutive activation of Gs by inhibiting its GTPase activity and
behaved like a dominantly acting oncogene.

In a series of 32 corticotroph adenomas of the pituitary (219090),
Williamson et al. (1995) found 2 with somatic mutations in the GNAS1
gene at codon 227. One had the Q227R mutation and the second had a Q227H
mutation (139320.0012).

.0011
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
OSSEOUS HETEROPLASIA, PROGRESSIVE, INCLUDED;;
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, 4-BP DEL, 565CTGA

In a patient with PHP1A (103580), Weinstein et al. (1992) identified a
heterozygous 4-bp deletion (565delCTGA) in exon 7 of the GNAS1 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature stop codon. Analysis of
lymphocyte RNA by reverse transcription-PCR and direct sequencing showed
that the GNAS1 allele bearing the mutation was not expressed as mRNA.
Consistent with this, Northern blot analysis revealed an approximately
50% deficiency in steady state levels of GNAS1 mRNA.

Ahmed et al. (1998) identified this deletion mutation in 2 unrelated
families with PHP Ia.

Shore et al. (2002) provided direct evidence that the 4-bp deletion can
cause either progressive osseous heteroplasia (POH; 166350) or Albright
hereditary osteodystrophy without hormone resistance (PPHP; 612463) in
the same family. Five sisters with POH had inherited this mutation from
the father in whom the mutation was nonpenetrant. Three offspring of
these sisters had AHO, including traces of subcutaneous ossification.
Shore et al. (2002) suggested that POH requires paternal inheritance of
a GNAS1 mutation, whereas hormone resistance is more likely to occur
when the genetic defect is maternally inherited.

Ahmed et al. (2002) cautioned against a premature conclusion that POH
may require paternal inheritance. In a family reported by Ahmed et al.
(1998), the 4-bp deletion was found in a brother and sister and in their
mother but not in their father. Aside from brachymetacarpia and short
stature, the mother did not have features of AHO. The daughter had
typical features of AHO and hormone resistant PHP1A; in contrast, her
brother presented in the first year of life with ossification of
subcutaneous tissue that was followed by progressive, generalized
heterotopic ossification of skeletal muscle, without any clear evidence
of hormone resistance. These cases exemplified the wide phenotypic
heterogeneity in persons with mutations in GNAS1, even within 1 family.

Bastepe and Juppner (2002) suggested that, like some patients who have
either PHP type Ia or PHP type Ib, the son described by Ahmed et al.
(1998) may have developed resistance to parathyroid hormone later in
life or not at all. Given that the patient's sister and mother had PHP
type Ia and PPHP, respectively, POH resulting from maternally inherited
GNAS1 mutations may actually represent an incomplete form of PHP type
Ia. Bastepe and Juppner (2002) suggested that the underlying mechanism
for this form of POH may be distinct from that described by Shore et al.
(2002), which appears to result only from paternally inherited GNAS1
mutations.

Adegbite et al. (2008) identified heterozygosity for the 565delCTGA
mutation in the GNAS gene in 13 POH cases (10 familial cases among 3
different families, and 3 individual spontaneous cases). The mutation
resulted in variable severity and pleiotropy, both in family members and
in unrelated sporadic cases.

.0012
PITUITARY ADENOMA, ACTH-SECRETING, SOMATIC
GNAS, GLN227HIS

In a series of 32 corticotroph adenomas of the pituitary (219090),
Williamson et al. (1995) found 2 with somatic mutations in the GNAS1
gene at codon 227. One had a Q227R (139320.0010) substitution, and the
other had a mutation resulting in a gln227-to-his (Q227H) substitution.
The latter patient was a 35-year-old male who presented with severe
Cushing syndrome complicated by psychosis.

.0013
PITUITARY TUMOR, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING, SOMATIC
POLYOSTOTIC FIBROUS DYSPLASIA, SOMATIC, MOSAIC, INCLUDED;;
ACTH-INDEPENDENT MACRONODULAR ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
GNAS, ARG201SER

In a series of growth hormone-secreting pituitary tumors (102200)
derived from 21 Korean acromegalic patients, Yang et al. (1996) found
that 1 tumor had a somatic C-to-A transversion in the GNAS1 gene,
resulting in an arg201-to-ser (R201S) substitution.

Candeliere et al. (1997) reported a patient with polyostotic fibrous
dysplasia (see 174800) in whom the R201S mutation was identified in the
somatic mosaic state.

Fragoso et al. (2003) identified a heterozygous somatic R201S mutation
in adrenal tissue from a patient with ACTH-independent macronodular
adrenal hyperplasia (219080).

.0014
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, SER250ARG

In a patient with PHP Ia (103580), Warner et al. (1997) identified a
ser250-to-arg (S250R) mutation in the GNAS1 gene. Both GNAS1 activity
and expression were decreased by approximately 50% in erythrocyte
membranes from the affected patient. In vitro functional expression
studies suggested that substitution or deletion of residue 250 may alter
guanine nucleotide binding, which could lead to thermolability and
impaired function.

.0015
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA, INCLUDED
GNAS, 38-BP DEL, EX1/IVS1 BOUNDARY

In affected members of a large kindred in which 2 mothers had
pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP; 612463) and their 6 offspring had
PHP Ia (103580), Fischer et al. (1998) identified a 38-bp deletion at
the exon 1/intron 1 boundary of the GNAS gene. The deletion was
predicted to eliminate the splice donor site of exon 1. Some of the
patients had increased basal serum levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH; see 188540) and/or excessive TSH responses to
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH; 613879). The pseudo-PHP patients had
decreased Gs activity, but normal urinary cAMP responses to PTH, normal
TSH levels and responses to TRH, and normal serum levels of calcium and
PTH.

.0016
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
GNAS, ARG258TRP

In a 24-year-old man with PPHP (612463), Warner et al. (1998) identified
a de novo arg258-to-trp (R258W) mutation in the GNAS1 gene. Arg258 is a
nonconserved residue adjacent to a highly conserved glutamic acid
residue, glu259, that is important for contact between switch 2 and 3 in
the activated state. Warner et al. (1998) presented evidence that
substitution of arg258 led to defective GDP binding, resulting in
increased thermolability and decreased activation. Developmental delay,
brachycephaly, and decreased muscle tone were noted by age 10 months.
Throughout childhood he was small for his age and stocky in appearance.
By 6 years, he developed learning disabilities as well as impulsive and
aggressive behavior. Brachydactyly involved the distal phalanx of the
thumb and the fourth metacarpals bilaterally. He also had intracranial
calcifications in the globus pallidus. There was no evidence of
resistance to parathyroid hormone or thyrotropin.

.0017
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
GNAS, ARG258ALA

Warner et al. (1998) identified a heterozygous arg258-to-ala (R258A)
substitution in the GNAS gene as a cause of PPHP (612463). The
substitution led to increased GDP release and impaired receptor-mediated
activation. Based on the crystal structure of GNAS1, arg258 interacts
with residue gln170 within the helical domain. Loss of this interaction
was predicted to open the cleft between the GTPase and helical domain,
resulting in more rapid GDP release, as observed in the arg258 variants.
Warner et al. (1998) suggested that interactions between arg258 and the
helical domain are important for receptor-mediated activation. This same
codon was affected in another patient with AHO (R258W; 139320.0016).

Warner and Weinstein (1999) showed that a gln170-to-ala substitution
(Q170A; 139320.0018) also leads to increased GDP release but does not
affect receptor-mediated activation. Therefore, interactions between
arg258 and gln170 are important for maintaining guanine nucleotide
binding but are not important for activation by receptor. Warner and
Weinstein (1999) also showed that the R258A mutation, but not Q170A, was
associated with a markedly elevated intrinsic GTPase rate, resulting in
more rapid inactivation. Arg258, through mutual interactions with glu50,
may constrain arg201, a residue critical for catalyzing GTP hydrolysis.
Disruption of the interaction between arg258 and glu50 may relieve this
constraint and allow arg201 to interact more efficiently with the
gamma-phosphate of GTP in the transition state. This is an example of a
mutation in a heterotrimeric G protein that increases the intrinsic
GTPase activity and provides another mechanism by which receptor
signaling can be impaired by G protein mutations.

.0018
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
GNAS, GLN170ALA

See 139320.0017 and Warner and Weinstein (1999).

.0019
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA, WITH TESTOTOXICOSIS
GNAS, ALA366SER

Iiri et al. (1994) studied 2 unrelated boys who had a paradoxical
combination of PHP Ia (103580) and testotoxicosis (176410). Both boys
were found to have an ala366-to-ser (A366S) mutation in the GNAS1 gene.
PHP Ia is marked by resistance to hormones acting through cyclic AMP
(parathyroid hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone) as well as a 50%
decrease in erythrocyte Gs activity in this heterozygous disorder. In
contrast, testotoxicosis is a form of precocious puberty in which the
Leydig cells secrete testosterone in the absence of luteinizing hormone,
often due to constitutive activation of the luteinizing hormone receptor
and (indirectly) of Gs. Iiri et al. (1994) demonstrated that this A366S
mutation constitutively activated adenylyl cyclase in vitro, causing
hormone-independent cAMP accumulation when expressed in cultured cells,
and accounting for the testotoxicosis phenotype. Although the mutant
form was quite stable at testis temperature, it was rapidly degraded at
37 degrees centigrade, explaining the PHP Ia phenotype caused by loss of
Gs activity. In vitro experiments indicated that accelerated release of
GDP caused both the constitutive activity and the thermolability of the
A366S mutant form.

.0020
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, ARG231HIS

In patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580), Farfel et
al. (1996) identified an arg231-to-his (R231H) mutation in the GNAS1
gene which impaired the ability of the mutant protein to mediate
hormonal stimulation of cAMP accumulation in transiently transfected
cells.

Iiri et al. (1997) reported biochemical analyses showing that an
activation defect caused by the R231H mutation was paradoxically
intensified by hormonal and other stimuli. By substituting histidine for
a conserved arginine residue, the mutation removed an internal salt
bridge (to a conserved glutamate) that normally acts as an
intramolecular hasp to maintain tight binding of the gamma-phosphate of
GTP. The activation defect became prominent only under conditions that
destabilized binding of guanine nucleotide (receptor stimulation) or
impaired the ability of alpha-s to bind the gamma-phosphate of GTP
(e.g., cholera toxin). Although GDP release is usually the rate-limiting
step in nucleotide exchange, the biochemical phenotype of this mutant
GNAS indicated that efficient G protein activation by receptors and
other stimuli depends on the ability of the protein to clasp tightly the
GTP molecule that enters the binding site. The 3 affected patients in
the family carrying the R231H mutation of the GNAS1 gene showed classic
clinical features of PHP Ia, including Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy, but Gs activities in their erythrocytes were nearly
normal (ranging between 60% and 90% of normal). Erythrocyte membranes of
most PHP I patients contain only 50% of the normal complement of Gs
activity and these patients are classified as PHP Ia, indicating that
the affected patients carry inactivating mutations in the GNAS1 gene. In
contrast, the PHP Ib phenotype is found in a smaller number of PHP I
patients whose erythrocytes contain normal (or nearly normal) Gs
activity. The R231H patients showed that results of the erythrocyte Gs
assay can lead to an incorrect inference with respect to the genetic
basis of the disease. PHP I patients with apparently normal or nearly
normal erythrocyte Gs activities merit careful investigation, especially
when they display the classic clinical phenotype, including Albright
hereditary osteodystrophy. Although such patients may inherit mutations
in genes other than GNAS1, their GNAS1 gene may encode mutant proteins
with instructive qualitative defects, including impairment of
conformational change, subcellular localization, or interaction with
other proteins, including receptors, effectors, and regulators of G
protein signaling proteins.

Ishikawa et al. (2001) found the R231H mutation in exon 9 of the GNAS1
gene in a Japanese patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia.

.0021
MCCUNE-ALBRIGHT SYNDROME, SOMATIC, MOSAIC
GNAS, ARG201GLY

Riminucci et al. (1999) studied a patient who had been diagnosed with
McCune-Albright syndrome (174800) at the age of 8 years. In an affected
parietal bone sample, the authors identified a heterozygous C-to-G
transversion in the GNAS1 gene, resulting in an arg201-to-gly (R201G)
amino acid substitution. The boy presented with precocious puberty,
facial deformities, and typical cafe-au-lait spots with a 'coast of
Maine' profile. Extensive involvement of the cranial vault was apparent
on x-ray. At the age of 13, acromegalic bone changes and growth hormone
oversecretion were detected. With the exception of a single case of
polyostotic fibrous dysplasia in which an R201S mutation was found
(139320.0013), R201C (139320.0008) and R201H (139320.0009) had been the
mutations consistently found in McCune-Albright syndrome patients and in
non-MAS cases of fibrous dysplasia of bone. Thus, of the predicted
missense mutations of codon 201, only R201P and R201L remained
undetected (although R201L had been observed by Gorelov et al. (1995) in
isolated, non-MAS endocrine tumors).

.0022
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, 2-BP DEL, GA, EXON 8

In affected members of a kindred with either PHP1A (103580) or PPHP
(612463), Yu et al. (1999) identified a 2-bp deletion in exon 8 of the
GNAS gene, resulting in premature termination of the protein. Serial
measurements of thyroid function in members of kindred 1 indicated that
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH; see 188540) resistance progressed with
age and became more evident after the first year of life in those with
PHP1A.

.0023
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, 2-BP DEL, CT, EXON 4

In affected members of a kindred with either PHP1A (103580) or PPHP
(612463), Yu et al. (1999) identified a heterozygous 2-bp deletion (CT)
in exon 4 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination codon.

.0024
OSSEOUS HETEROPLASIA, PROGRESSIVE
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA, INCLUDED
GNAS, 1-BP DEL, 348C

In 2 patients with progressive osseous heteroplasia (166350) from
different families, Shore et al. (2002) identified a 1-bp deletion
(348delC) in exon 5 of the GNAS1 gene.

Shapira et al. (1995) had described the same mutation in a patient with
pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580).

.0025
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, 1-BP DEL, C, EXON 1

In an Italian patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580),
Mantovani et al. (2000) detected a heterozygous 1-bp deletion (C) within
codon 38 in exon 1 of the GNAS1 gene, resulting in a premature stop
codon at position 57. This mutation was also found in the patient's
mother, who had pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (612463).

.0026
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, 2-BP DEL, TG, EXON 11

In an Italian patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580),
Mantovani et al. (2000) detected a heterozygous 2-bp deletion (TG)
within codon 287 in exon 11 of the GNAS1 gene, resulting in a premature
stop codon at position 298. The mutation was also found in the patient's
mother, who presented the same clinical and biologic features.

.0027
OSSEOUS HETEROPLASIA, PROGRESSIVE
GNAS, 2-BP DEL, 860TG

In an unusual case of progressive osseous heteroplasia (166350)
involving the face in an 8-year-old Albanian girl, Faust et al. (2003)
identified a heterozygous 2-bp deletion in the GNAS1 gene, 860-861delTG,
resulting in a frameshift of 11 amino acids followed by a premature stop
codon.

.0029
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA, INCLUDED
GNAS1, PRO115LEU

In a woman with PPHP (612463), Ahrens et al. (2001) identified a C-to-T
transition in exon 5 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a pro115-to-leu
(P115L) substitution. Her son, who had the same mutation, had PHP Ia
(103580).

.0030
REMOVED FROM DATABASE
.0031
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IB
GNAS, 4.7-KB DEL

In 2 unrelated kindreds with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ib (603233),
Bastepe et al. (2005) identified a 4.7-kb deletion in the GNAS locus
that removed the differentially methylated region (DMR) of the GNAS gene
encompassing the NESP55 region and exons 3 and 4 of the GNAS antisense
transcript (GNASAS; 610540.0001). When inherited from a female, the
deletion abolished all maternal GNAS imprints and derepressed maternally
silenced transcripts, suggesting that the deleted region contains a
cis-acting element that controls imprinting of the maternal GNAS allele.

.0032
RECLASSIFIED - VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
GNAS, 36-BP DUP, ALA138ASP, PRO161ARG

This variant, formerly titled PROLONGED BLEEDING TIME, BRACHYDACTYLY,
AND MENTAL RETARDATION, has been reclassified because delineation of the
phenotype and the contribution of the variant to the phenotype are
unclear.

In 3 patients from 2 families with markedly prolonged bleeding time
accompanied by neurologic problems, brachydactyly, and a variable degree
of mental retardation, Freson et al. (2001) identified a paternally
inherited functional polymorphism in XL exon 1, consisting of a 36-bp
duplication and 2 nucleotide substitutions, resulting in changes of
codon 138 from alanine to aspartic acid (A138D) and of codon 161 from
proline to arginine (P161R), that was associated with Gs hyperfunction
in platelets, leading to an increased trauma-related bleeding tendency.

Freson et al. (2003) described 8 additional patients who inherited the
same XLAS polymorphism paternally and who showed Gs hyperfunction in
their platelets and fibroblasts. The clinical features were variable: 3
patients resembled those reported by Freson et al. (2001) and had
psychomotor retardation, disturbed behavior, facial dysmorphism, feeding
or gastrointestinal motility problems, and abnormal bleeding following
trauma, whereas 5 patients had growth deficiency and no clinical
bleeding abnormalities. All carriers also had an elongated ALEX protein
as a consequence of the paternally inherited insertion. The paternally
inherited double XLAS/ALEX functional polymorphism was also associated
with elevated platelet membrane Gs-alpha protein levels. The in vitro
interaction between the 2 elongated XLAS and ALEX proteins was markedly
reduced. Freson et al. (2003) suggested that in contrast to the strong
interaction between the 2 wildtype proteins, the defective association
may result in unimpeded receptor-stimulated activation of XLAS.

.0033
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IB
GNAS, 3-BP DEL, CAT, EXON 13

In 3 brothers with a clinical diagnosis of pseudohypoparathyroidism type
Ib (603233) and their clinically unaffected mother and maternal
grandfather, Wu et al. (2001) identified heterozygosity for a 3-bp
deletion (CAT) in exon 13 of the GNAS gene, resulting in the deletion of
ile382. Biochemical studies showed normal erythrocyte Gs activity, but
decreased cAMP response to PTH infusion. When expressed in vitro, mutant
Gs-alpha was unable to interact with PTHR1 (168468) but showed normal
coupling to other coexpressed heptahelical receptors. The mutation was
not found in the unaffected father and sister or in 30 unrelated
controls. Wu et al. (2001) noted that the absence of PTH resistance in
the mother and maternal grandfather who carried the same mutation was
consistent with models of paternal imprinting of the GNAS gene.

.0034
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, 1-BP INS, A, EXON 3

In a 10-year-old girl with brachymetacarpia, mental retardation,
normocalcemic pseudohypoparathyroidism, and hypothyroidism (103580),
Thiele et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous insertion of an adenosine
in exon 3 of the GNAS gene, altering codon 85 and leading to a
frameshift and a stop at codon 87 in exon 4. Molecular studies of cDNA
from blood RNA demonstrated normal, biallelic expression of Gs-alpha-S
transcripts, whereas expression of Gs-alpha-L transcripts from the
maternal allele was reduced. Both the reduced activity and the mutation
were also found in the mother and the affected younger brother. Thiele
et al. (2007) noted that this was the first reported pathogenic mutation
in exon 3 of the GNAS gene. The mutation is associated with
pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia due to selective deficiency of
Gs-alpha-L and a partial reduction of Gs-alpha activity.

.0035
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, 12-BP INS, NT1107

In a brother and sister with a PHP Ia phenotype (103580), who also had
neonatal diarrhea and pancreatic insufficiency, Aldred et al. (2000)
identified heterozygosity for a 12-bp insertion in exon 13 of the GNAS1
gene, resulting in an in-frame ala-val-asp-thr (AVDT) repeat at codon
366 within the beta-6/alpha-5 loop. The mutation was not found in 2
unaffected sibs and was also not detected in the lymphocyte DNA of
either of the clinically unaffected parents. Haplotype analysis
confirmed germline mosaicism and indicated that the mutation was
maternal in origin.

By biochemical and intact cell analysis of the mutant Gs-alpha
containing the AVDT repeat within its GDP/GTP binding site, Makita et
al. (2007) demonstrated that the mutant protein was unstable but
constitutively active as a result of rapid GDP release and reduced GTP
hydrolysis, suggesting that instability and paradoxical inactivation by
receptor stimulation results in a loss of function. Gs-alpha-AVDT was
located primarily in the cytosol except in rat and mouse small intestine
epithelial cells, where it was found predominantly in the membrane, with
adenylyl cyclase present and constitutive increases in cAMP accumulation
occurring in parallel. Makita et al. (2007) suggested that the PHP Ia
phenotype results from the instability of the Gs-alpha-AVDT mutant and
that the accompanying neonatal diarrhea may result from its enhanced
constitutive activity in the intestine.

.0036
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IC
GNAS, TYR391TER

In a girl with PHP type Ic (612462), Linglart et al. (2002) identified a
heterozygous mutation in exon 13 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a
tyr319-to-ter (Y391X) substitution only 4 amino acids before the
wildtype stop codon. She had hormone resistance with features of
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy and decreased cAMP response to PTH
infusion, but normal erythrocyte Gs activity. The findings suggested
that the mutation interfered somehow with receptor-mediated activation.
Linglart et al. (2002) noted that the C terminus is required for
receptor coupling, and postulated that the Y391X mutation in this
patient interrupted receptor coupling, leading to hormone resistance.
The findings showed the limits of the erythrocyte Gs bioassay used in
the study.

.0037
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IB
GNAS, METHYLATION CHANGES, PATERNAL EPIGENOTYPE

Mariot et al. (2008) studied a girl with obvious Albright osteodystrophy
features, PTH resistance, and normal G-alpha-s bioactivity in red blood
cells (PHP Ib, 603233), yet no loss-of-function mutation in the GNAS
coding sequence. Methylation analysis of the 4 GNAS differentially
methylated regions, i.e., NESP, AS, XL, and A/B, revealed broad
methylation changes at all of these regions, leading to a paternal
epigenotype on both alleles. There was a dramatic decrease of
methylation at exon A/B, XL, and AS promoter regions and therefore
likely biallelic expression of A/B, XL, and AS transcripts. The NESP
region appeared fully methylated in the patient, which was predicted to
result in a dramatic decrease in NESP-specific transcripts. The cause of
the imprinting defect was unknown. Mariot et al. (2008) concluded that:
(1) the decreased expression of G-alpha-s due to GNAS epimutations is
not restricted to the renal tubule but may affect nonimprinted tissues
like bone; and (2) PHP-1b is a heterogeneous disorder that should lead
to the study of GNAS epigenotype in patients with PHP and no mutation in
GNAS exons 1 through 13, regardless of their physical features. They
suggested that Albright osteodystrophy, or at least brachymetacarpia and
obesity, are not specific symptoms of PHP-1a (103580).

.0038
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IC
GNAS, LEU388ARG

In a 12-year-old boy with PHP IC (612462), Thiele et al. (2011)
identified a heterozygous 1163T-G transversion in exon 13 of the GNAS
gene, resulting in a leu388-to-arg (L388R) substitution in a conserved
residue in the alpha-5-helix in the C-terminal part of the protein
directly involved in the contact of Gs-alpha to the G protein-coupled
receptor. The patient had characteristic features of AHO, including
round face, brachymetacarpia, short stature, obesity, and mental
retardation. Serum PTH and TSH were increased and calcium was low. His
mother, who also carried the mutation, had short stature and
brachymetacarpia, but no evidence of hormone resistance. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that the L388R mutant protein
caused complete absence of receptor-mediated cAMP production, with
normal receptor-independent cAMP production. The findings indicated
normal Gs-alpha activity, but a selective defect in Gs-alpha-receptor
coupling functions.

.0039
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IC
GNAS, GLU392TER

In 13-year-old dizygotic twins and an unrelated 5-year-old girl with PHP
IC (612462), Thiele et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous 1174G-T
transversion in exon 13 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a glu392-to-ter
(E392X) substitution in the alpha-5-helix in the C terminus. The
patients had characteristic features of AHO, including round face,
brachymetacarpia, short stature, and obesity. Serum PTH and TSH were
increased and calcium was low. Both mothers, who also carried the
mutation, had short stature, round face, and/or brachymetacarpia, but no
evidence of hormone resistance. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that the mutant protein caused complete absence of
receptor-mediated cAMP production, with normal receptor-independent cAMP
production. The findings indicated normal Gs-alpha activity, but a
selective defect in Gs-alpha-receptor coupling functions.

.0040
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IC
GNAS, GLU392LYS

In an 11-month-old girl with PHP IC (612462), Thiele et al. (2011)
identified a heterozygous 1174G-A transition in exon 13 of the GNAS
gene, resulting in a glu392-to-lys (E392K) substitution in the
alpha-5-helix in the C terminus. The patient had characteristic features
of AHO, including round face, brachymetacarpia, and short stature. Serum
PTH and TSH were increased, but calcium was normal. Her mother, who also
carried the mutation, had short stature and brachymetacarpia, but no
evidence of hormone resistance. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that the mutant protein caused a decrease in receptor-mediated
cAMP production, with normal receptor-independent cAMP production. The
findings indicated normal Gs-alpha activity, but a selective defect in
Gs-alpha-receptor coupling functions.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Carter et al. (1987); Harris et al. (1985); Kozasa et al. (1988);
Lin et al. (1992); Mattera et al. (1989); Shenker et al. (1995); Shenker
et al. (1993)
REFERENCE 1. Adams, G. B.; Alley, I. R.; Chung, U.; Chabner, K. T.; Jeanson,
N. T.; Lo Celso, C.; Marsters, E. S.; Chen, M.; Weinstein, L. S.;
Lin, C. P.; Kronenberg, H. M.; Scadden, D. T.: Haematopoietic stem
cells depend on G-alphaS-mediated signalling to engraft bone marrow. Nature 459:
103-107, 2009.

2. Adegbite, N. S.; Xu, M.; Kaplan, F. S.; Shore, E. M.; Pignolo,
R. J.: Diagnostic and mutational spectrum of progressive osseous
heteroplasia (POH) and other forms of GNAS-based heterotopic ossification. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 146A: 1788-1796, 2008.

3. Ahmed, S. F.; Barr, D. G. D.; Bonthron, D. T.: GNAS1 mutations
and progressive osseous heteroplasia. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 346:
1669-1670, 2002.

4. Ahmed, S. F.; Dixon, P. H.; Bonthron, D. T.; Stirling, H. F.; Barr,
D. G. D.; Kelnar, C. J. H.; Thakker, R. V.: GNAS1 mutational analysis
in pseudohypoparathyroidism. Clin. Endocr. 49: 525-531, 1998.

5. Ahrens, W.; Hiort, O.; Staedt, P.; Kirschner, T.; Marschke, C.;
Kruse, K.: Analysis of the GNAS1 gene in Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 4630-4634, 2001.

6. Aldred, M. A.; Aftimos, S.; Hall, C.; Waters, K. S.; Thakker, R.
V.; Trembath, R. C.; Brueton, L.: Constitutional deletion of chromosome
20q in two patients affected with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 113: 167-172, 2002.

7. Aldred, M. A.; Bagshaw, R. J.; MacDermot, K.; Casson, D.; Murch,
S. H.; Walker-Smith, J. A.; Trembath, R. C.: Germline mosaicism for
a GNAS1 mutation and Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. (Letter) J.
Med. Genet. 37: e35, 2000. Note: Electronic Letter.

8. Aldred, M. A.; Trembath, R. C.: Activating and inactivating mutations
in the human GNAS1 gene. Hum. Mutat. 16: 183-189, 2000.

9. Ashley, P. L.; Ellison, J.; Sullivan, K. A.; Bourne, H. R.; Cox,
D. R.: Chromosomal assignment of the murine Gi and Gs genes. (Abstract) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 41: A155 only, 1987.

10. Auburn, S.; Diakite, M.; Fry, A. E.; Ghansah, A.; Campino, S.;
Richardson, A.; Jallow, M.; Sisay-Joof, F.; Pinder, M.; Griffiths,
M. J.; Peshu, N.; Williams, T. N.; and 9 others: Association of
the GNAS locus with severe malaria. Hum. Genet. 124: 499-506, 2008.

11. Bastepe, M; Pincus, J. E.; Sugimoto, T.; Tojo, K. Kanatani, M.;
Azuma, Y.; Kruse, K.; Rosenbloom, A. L.; Koshiyama, H.; Juppner, H.
: Positional dissociation between the genetic mutation responsible
for pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ib and the associated methylation
defect at exon A/B: evidence for a long-range regulatory element within
the imprinted GNAS1 locus. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1231-1241, 2001.

12. Bastepe, M.; Frohlich, L. F.; Hendy, G. N.; Indridason, O. S.;
Josse, R. G.; Koshiyama, H.; Korkko, J.; Nakamoto, J. M.; Rosenbloom,
A. L.; Slyper, A. H.; Sugimoto, T.; Tsatsoulis, A.; Crawford, J. D.;
Juppner, H.: Autosomal dominant pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ib
is associated with a heterozygous microdeletion that likely disrupts
a putative imprinting control element of GNAS. J. Clin. Invest. 112:
1255-1263, 2003.

13. Bastepe, M.; Frohlich, L. F.; Linglart, A.; Abu-Zahra, H. S.;
Tojo, K.; Ward, L. M.; Juppner, H.: Deletion of the NESP55 differentially
methylated region causes loss of maternal GNAS imprints and pseudohypoparathyroidism
type Ib. Nature Genet. 37: 25-27, 2005.

14. Bastepe, M.; Juppner, H.: GNAS locus and pseudohypoparathyroidism. Hormone
Res. 63: 65-74, 2005.

15. Bastepe, M.; Juppner, H.: GNAS1 mutations and progressive osseous
heteroplasia. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 346: 1671 only, 2002.

16. Bastepe, M.; Lane, A. H.; Juppner, H.: Parental uniparental isodisomy
of chromosome 20q--and the resulting changes in GNAS1 methylation--as
a plausible cause of pseudohypoparathyroidism. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68:
1283-1289, 2001.

17. Bastepe, M.; Weinstein, L. S.; Ogata, N.; Kawaguchi, H.; Juppner,
H.; Kronenberg, H. M.; Chung, U.: Stimulatory G protein directly
regulates hypertrophic differentiation of growth plate cartilage in
vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 14794-14799, 2004.

18. Bianco, P.; Riminucci, M.; Majolagbe, A.; Kuznetsov, S. A.; Collins,
M. T.; Mankani, M. H.; Corsi, A.; Bone, H. G.; Wientroub, S.; Spiegel,
A. M.; Fisher, L. W.; Robey, P. G.: Mutations of the GNAS1 gene,
stromal cell dysfunction, and osteomalacic changes in non-McCune-Albright
fibrous dysplasia of bone. J. Bone Miner. Res. 15: 120-128, 2000.

19. Billestrup, N.; Swanson, L. W.; Vale, W.: Growth hormone-releasing
factor stimulates proliferation of somatotrophs in vitro. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 83: 6854-6857, 1986.

20. Blatt, C.; Eversole-Cire, P.; Cohn, V. H.; Zollman, S.; Fournier,
R. E. K.; Mohandas, L. T.; Nesbitt, M.; Lugo, T.; Jones, D. T.; Reed,
R. R.; Weiner, L. P.; Sparkes, R. S.; Simon, M. I.: Chromosomal localization
of genes encoding guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunits in mouse
and human. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 7642-7646, 1988.

21. Bray, P.; Carter, A.; Simons, C.; Guo, V.; Puckett, C.; Kamholz,
J.; Spiegel, A.; Nirenberg, M.: Human cDNA clones for four species
of G-alpha-s signal transduction protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83:
8893-8897, 1986.

22. Campbell, R.; Gosden, C. M.; Bonthron, D. T.: Parental origin
of transcription from the human GNAS1 gene. J. Med. Genet. 31: 607-614,
1994.

23. Candeliere, G. A.; Glorieux, F. H.; Prud'Homme, J.; St.-Arnaud,
R.: Increased expression of the c-fos proto-oncogene in bone from
patients with fibrous dysplasia. New Eng. J. Med. 332: 1546-1551,
1995.

24. Candeliere, G. A.; Roughley, P. J.; Glorieux, F. H.: Polymerase
chain reaction-based technique for the selective enrichment and analysis
of mosaic arg201 mutations in G alpha s from patients with fibrous
dysplasia of bone. Bone 21: 201-206, 1997.

25. Carter, A.; Bardin, C.; Collins, R.; Simons, C.; Bray, P.; Spiegel,
A.: Reduced expression of multiple forms of the alpha subunit of
the stimulatory GTP-binding protein in pseudohypoparathyroidism type
Ia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 7266-7269, 1987.

26. Cattanach, B. M.; Kirk, M.: Differential activity of maternally
and paternally derived chromosome regions in mice. Nature 315: 496-498,
1985.

27. Chen, M.; Gavrilova, O.; Liu, J.; Xie, T.; Deng, C.; Nguyen, A.
T.; Nackers, L. M.; Lorenzo, J.; Shen, L.; Weinstein, L. S.: Alternative
Gnas gene products have opposite effects on glucose and lipid metabolism. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 7386-7391, 2005.

28. Chung, K. Y.; Rasmussen, S. G. F.; Liu, T.; Li, S.; DeVree, B.
T.; Chae, P. S.; Calinski, D.; Kobilka, B. K.; Woods, V. L., Jr.;
Sunahara, R. K.: Conformational changes in the G protein Gs induced
by the beta-2 adrenergic receptor. Nature 477: 611-615, 2011.

29. Collins, M. T.; Sarlis, N. J.; Merino, M. J.; Monroe, J.; Crawford,
S. E.; Krakoff, J. A.; Guthrie, L. C.; Bonat, S.; Robey, P. G.; Shenker,
A.: Thyroid carcinoma in the McCune-Albright syndrome: contributory
role of activating G(s)-alpha mutations. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
4413-4417, 2003.

30. Coombes, C.; Arnaud, P.; Gordon, E.; Dean, W.; Coar, E. A.; Williamson,
C. M.; Feil, R.; Peters, J.; Kelsey, G.: Epigenetic properties and
identification of an imprint mark in the Nesp-Gnasxl domain of the
mouse Gnas imprinted locus. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23: 5475-5488, 2003.

31. DeChiara, T.; Robertson, E. J.; Efstratiadis, A.: Parental imprinting
of the mouse insulin-like growth factor II gene. Cell 64: 849-859,
1991.

32. Donis-Keller, H.; Green, P.; Helms, C.; Cartinhour, S.; Weiffenbach,
B.; Stephens, K.; Keith, T. P.; Bowden, D. W.; Smith, D. R.; Lander,
E. S.; Botstein, D.; Akots, G.; and 21 others: A genetic linkage
map of the human genome. Cell 51: 319-337, 1987.

33. Farfel, Z.; Iiri, T.; Shapira, H.; Roitman, A.; Mouallem, M.;
Bourne, H. R.: Pseudohypoparathyroidism, a novel mutation in the
beta/gamma- contact region of Gs-alpha impairs receptor stimulation. J.
Biol. Chem. 271: 19653-19655, 1996.

34. Faust, R. A.; Shore, E. M.; Stevens, C. E.; Xu, M.; Shah, S.;
Phillips, C. D.; Kaplan, F. S.: Progressive osseous heteroplasia
in the face of a child. Am. J. Med. Genet. 118A: 71-75, 2003.

35. Fischer, J. A.; Egert, F.; Werder, E.; Born, W.: An inherited
mutation associated with functional deficiency of the alpha-subunit
of the guanine nucleotide-binding protein Gs in pseudo- and pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 935-938, 1998.

36. Fragoso, M. C. B. V.; Domenice, S.; Latronico, A. C.; Martin,
R. M.; Pereira, M. A. A.; Zerbini, M. C. N.; Lucon, A. M.; Mendonca,
B. B.: Cushing's syndrome secondary to adrenocorticotropin-independent
macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia due to activating mutations
of GNAS1 gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 2147-2151, 2003.

37. Fragoso, M. C. B. V.; Latronico, A. C.; Carvalho, F. M.; Zerbini,
M. C. N.; Marcondes, J. A. M.; Araujo, L. M. B.; Lando, V. S.; Frazzatto,
E. T.; Mendonca, B. B.; Villares, S. M. F.: Activating mutation of
the stimulatory G protein (gsp) as a putative cause of ovarian and
testicular human stromal Leydig cell tumors. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83:
2074-2078, 1998.

38. Freson, K.; Hoylaerts, M. F.; Jaeken, J.; Eyssen, M.; Arnout,
J.; Vermylen, J.; Van Geet, C.: Genetic variation of the extra-large
stimulatory G protein alpha-subunit leads to Gs hyperfunction in platelets
and is a risk factor for bleeding. Thromb. Haemost. 86: 733-738,
2001.

39. Freson, K.; Jaeken, J.; Van Helvoirt, M.; de Zegher, F.; Wittevrongel,
C.; Thys, C.; Hoylaerts, M. F.; Vermylen, J.; Van Geet, C.: Functional
polymorphisms in the paternally expressed XL-alpha-s and its cofactor
ALEX decrease their mutual interaction and enhance receptor-mediated
cAMP formation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 1121-1130, 2003.

40. Freson, K.; Thys, C.; Wittevrongel, C.; Proesmans, W.; Hoylaerts,
M. F.; Vermylen, J.; Van Geet, C.: Pseudohypoparathyroidism type
Ib with disturbed imprinting in the GNAS1 cluster and Gs-alpha deficiency
in platelets. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2741-2750, 2002.

41. Gejman, P. V.; Weinstein, L. S.; Martinez, M.; Spiegel, A. M.;
Cao, Q.; Hsieh, W.-T.; Hoehe, M. R.; Gershon, E. S.: Genetic mapping
of the Gs-alpha subunit gene (GNAS1) to the distal long arm of chromosome
20 using a polymorphism detected by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Genomics 9:
782-783, 1991.

42. Genevieve, D.; Sanlaville, D.; Faivre, L.; Kottler, M.-L.; Jambou,
M.; Gosset, P.; Boustani-Samara, D.; Pinto, G.; Ozilou, C.; Abeguile,
G.; Munnich, A.; Romana, S.; Raoul, O.; Cormier-Daire, V.; Vekemans,
M.: Paternal deletion of the GNAS imprinted locus (including Gnasxl)
in two girls presenting with severe pre- and post-natal growth retardation
and intractable feeding difficulties. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 13:
1033-1039, 2005.

43. Gopal Rao, V. V. N.; Schnittger, S.; Hansmann, I.: G protein
Gs-alpha (GNAS1), the probable candidate gene for Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy, is assigned to human chromosome 20q12-q13.2. Genomics 10:
257-261, 1991.

44. Gorelov, V. N.; Dumon, K.; Barteneva, N. S.; Palm, D.; Roher,
H.-D.; Goretzki, P. E.: Overexpression of Gs-alpha subunit in thyroid
tumors bearing a mutated Gs-alpha gene. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 121:
219-224, 1995.

45. Hall, J. G.: Genomic imprinting: review and relevance to human
diseases. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 46: 857-873, 1990.

46. Happle, R.: The McCune-Albright syndrome: a lethal gene surviving
by mosaicism. Clin. Genet. 29: 321-324, 1986.

47. Harris, B. A.; Robishaw, J. D.; Mumby, S. M.; Gilman, A. G.:
Molecular cloning of complementary DNA for the alpha subunit of the
G protein that stimulates adenylate cyclase. Science 229: 1274-1277,
1985.

48. Harrison, T.; Samuel, B. U.; Akompong, T.; Hamm, H.; Mohandas,
N.; Lomasney, J. W.; Haldar, K.: Erythrocyte G protein-coupled receptor
signaling in malarial infection. Science 301: 1734-1736, 2003.

49. Hayward, B. E.; Barlier, A.; Korbonits, M.; Grossman, A. B.; Jacquet,
P.; Enjalbert, A.; Bonthron, D. T.: Imprinting of the G(s)-alpha
gene GNAS1 in the pathogenesis of acromegaly. J. Clin. Invest. 107:
R31-R36, 2001.

50. Hayward, B. E.; Bonthron, D. T.: An imprinted antisense transcript
at the human GNAS1 locus. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 835-841, 2000.

51. Hayward, B. E.; Kamiya, M.; Strain, L.; Moran, V.; Campbell, R.;
Hayashizaki, Y.; Bonthron, D. T.: The human GNAS1 gene is imprinted
and encodes distinct paternally and biallelically expressed G proteins. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 10038-10043, 1998.

52. Hayward, B. E.; Moran, V.; Strain, L.; Bonthron, D. T.: Bidirectional
imprinting of a single gene: GNAS1 encodes maternally, paternally,
and biallelically derived proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 15475-15480,
1998.

53. Hurowitz, E. H.; Melnyk, J. M.; Chen, Y.-J.; Kouros-Mehr, H.;
Simon, M. I.; Shizuya, H.: Genomic characterization of the human
heterotrimeric G protein alpha, beta, and gamma subunit genes. DNA
Res. 7: 111-120, 2000.

54. Iiri, T.; Farfel, Z.; Bourne, H. R.: Conditional activation defect
of a human Gs-alpha mutant. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 5656-5661,
1997.

55. Iiri, T.; Herzmark, P.; Nakamoto, J. M.; Van Dop, C.; Bourne,
H. R.: Rapid GDP release from Gs-alpha in patients with gain and
loss of endocrine function. Nature 371: 164-168, 1994.

56. Ishikawa, Y.; Bianchi, C.; Nadal-Ginard, B.; Homcy, C. J.: Alternative
promoter and 5-prime exon generate a novel Gs-alpha mRNA. J. Biol.
Chem. 265: 8458-8462, 1990.

57. Ishikawa, Y.; Tajima, T.; Nakae, J.; Nagashima, T.; Satoh, K.;
Okuhara, K.; Fujieda, K.: Two mutations of the Gs-alpha gene in two
Japanese patients with sporadic pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia. J.
Hum. Genet. 46: 426-430, 2001.

58. Jia, H.; Hingorani, A. D.; Sharma, P.; Hopper, R.; Dickerson,
C.; Trutwein, D.; Lloyd, D. D.; Brown, M. J.: Association of the
G(s)-alpha gene with essential hypertension and response to beta-blockade. Hypertension 34:
8-14, 1999.

59. Kalfa, N.; Ecochard, A.; Patte, C.; Duvillard, P.; Audran, F.;
Pienkowski, C.; Thibaud, E.; Brauner, R.; Lecointre, C.; Plantaz,
D.; Guedj, A.-M.; Paris, F.; Baldet, P.; Lumbroso, S.; Sultan, C.
: Activating mutations of the stimulatory G protein in juvenile ovarian
granulosa cell tumors: a new prognostic factor? J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 91: 1842-1847, 2006.

60. Kehlenbach, R. H.; Matthey, J.; Huttner, W. B.: XL alpha S is
a new type of G protein. Nature 372: 804-809, 1994. Note: Erratum:
Nature 375: 253 only, 1995.

61. Kikyo, N.; Williamson, C. M.; John, R. M.; Barton, S. C.; Beechey,
C. V.; Ball, S. T.; Cattanach, B. M.; Surani, M. A.; Peters, J.:
Genetic and functional analysis of neuronatin in mice with maternal
or paternal duplication of distal chr. 2. Dev. Biol. 190: 66-77,
1997.

62. Kinard, R. E.; Walton, J. E.; Buckwalter, J. A.: Pseudohypoparathyroidism. Arch.
Intern. Med. 139: 204-207, 1979.

63. Klemke, M.; Kehlenbach, R. H.; Huttner, W. B.: Two overlapping
reading frames in a single exon encode interacting proteins--a novel
way of gene usage. EMBO J. 20: 3849-3860, 2001.

64. Kozasa, T.; Itoh, H.; Tsukamoto, T.; Kaziro, Y.: Isolation and
characterization of the human Gs-alpha gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85:
2081-2085, 1988.

65. Landis, C. A.; Masters, S. B.; Spada, A.; Pace, A. M.; Bourne,
H. R.; Vallar, L.: GTPase inhibiting mutations activate the alpha
chain of Gs and stimulate adenylyl cyclase in human pituitary tumours. Nature 340:
692-696, 1989.

66. Levine, M. A.; Deily, J. R.: Identification of multiple mutations
in the gene encoding the alpha subunit of Gs in patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism
type IA. (Abstract) J. Bone Miner. Res. 5: S142 only, 1990.

67. Levine, M. A.; Modi, W. S.; O'Brien, S. J.: Mapping of the gene
encoding the alpha subunit of the stimulatory G protein of adenylyl
cyclase (GNAS1) to 20q13.2-q13.3 in human by in situ hybridization. Genomics 11:
478-479, 1991.

68. Levine, M. A.; Vechio, J. D.: Personal Communication. Baltimore,
Md.  8/1/1990.

69. Li, T.; Vu, T. H.; Ulaner, G. A.; Yang, Y.; Hu, J.-F.; Hoffman,
A. R.: Activating and silencing histone modifications form independent
allelic switch regions in the imprinted Gnas gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
741-750, 2004.

70. Lin, C. K.; Hakakha, M. J.; Nakamoto, J. M.; Englund, A. T.; Brickman,
A. S.; Scott, M. L.; Van Dop, C.: Prevalence of three mutations in
the Gs-alpha gene among 24 families with pseudohypoparathyroidism
type Ia. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 189: 343-349, 1992.

71. Linglart, A.; Carel, J. C.; Garabedian, M.; Le, T.; Mallet, E.;
Kottler, M. L.: GNAS1 lesions in pseudohypoparathyroidism Ia and
Ic: genotype phenotype relationship and evidence of the maternal transmission
of the hormonal resistance. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 189-197,
2002.

72. Linglart, A.; Gensure, R. C.; Olney, R. C.; Juppner, H.; Bastepe,
M.: A novel STX16 deletion in autosomal dominant pseudohypoparathyroidism
type Ib redefines the boundaries of a cis-acting imprinting control
element of GNAS. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 76: 804-814, 2005. Note: Erratum:
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81: 196 only, 2007.

73. Liu, J.; Erlichman, B.; Weinstein, L. S.: The stimulatory G protein
alpha-subunit Gs-alpha is imprinted in human thyroid glands: implications
for thyroid function in pseudohypoparathyroidism types 1A and 1B. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 4336-4341, 2003.

74. Liu, J.; Litman, D.; Rosenberg, M. J.; Yu, S.; Biesecker, L. G.;
Weinstein, L. S.: A GNAS1 imprinting defect in pseudohypoparathyroidism
type IB. J. Clin. Invest. 106: 1167-1174, 2000.

75. Liu, J.; Nealon, J. G.; Weinstein, L. S.: Distinct patterns of
abnormal GNAS imprinting in familial and sporadic pseudohypoparathyroidism
type IB. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 95-102, 2005.

76. Lumbroso, S.; Paris, F.; Sultan, C.: Activating Gs-alpha mutations:
analysis of 113 patients with signs of McCune-Albright syndrome--a
European collaborative study. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 2107-2113,
2004.

77. Makita, N.; Sato, J.; Rondard, P.; Fukamachi, H.; Yuasa, Y.; Aldred,
M. A.; Hashimoto, M.; Fujita, T.; Iiri, T.: Human G(S-alpha) mutant
causes pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia/neonatal diarrhea, a potential
cell-specific role of the palmitoylation cycle. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 104: 17424-17429, 2007.

78. Mantovani, G.; Ballare, E.; Giammona, E.; Beck-Peccoz, P.; Spada,
A.: The Gs-alpha gene: predominant maternal origin of transcription
in human thyroid gland and gonads. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 4736-4740,
2002.

79. Mantovani, G.; Bondioni, S.; Lania, A. G.; Corbetta, S.; de Sanctis,
L.; Cappa, M.; Di Battista, E.; Chanson, P.; Beck-Peccoz, P.; Spada,
A.: Parental origin of Gs-alpha mutations in the McCune-Albright
syndrome and in isolated endocrine tumors. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89:
3007-3009, 2004.

80. Mantovani, G.; Bondioni, S.; Locatelli, M.; Pedroni, C.; Lania,
A. G.; Ferrante, E.; Filopanti, M.; Beck-Peccoz, P.; Spada, A.: Biallelic
expression of the Gs-alpha gene in human bone and adipose tissue. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 6316-6319, 2004.

81. Mantovani, G.; Romoli, R.; Weber, G.; Brunelli, V.; De Menis,
E.; Beccio, S.; Beck-Peccoz, P.; Spada, A.: Mutational analysis of
GNAS1 in patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism: identification of
two novel mutations. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 4243-4248, 2000.

82. Mariot, V.; Maupetit-Mehouas, S.; Sinding, C.; Kottler, M.-L.;
Linglart, A.: A maternal epimutation of GNAS leads to Albright osteodystrophy
and parathyroid hormone resistance. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 93:
661-665, 2008.

83. Mattera, R.; Graziano, M. P.; Yatani, A.; Zhou, Z.; Graf, R.;
Codina, J.; Birnbaumer, L.; Gilman, A. G.; Brown, A. M.: Splice variants
of the alpha subunit of the G protein G(8) activate both adenylyl
cyclase and calcium channels. Science 243: 804-807, 1989.

84. Mehlmann, L. M.; Jones, T. L. Z.; Jaffe, L. A.: Meiotic arrest
in the mouse follicle maintained by a GS protein in the oocyte. Science 297:
1343-1345, 2002.

85. Morison, I. M.; Ramsay, J. P.; Spencer, H. G.: A census of mammalian
imprinting. Trends Genet. 21: 457-465, 2005.

86. Patten, J. L.; Johns, D. R.; Valle, D.; Eil, C.; Gruppuso, P.
A.; Steele, G.; Smallwood, P. M.; Levine, M. A.: Mutation in the
gene encoding the stimulatory G protein of adenylate cyclase in Albright's
hereditary osteodystrophy. New Eng. J. Med. 322: 1412-1419, 1990.

87. Patten, J. L.; Smallwood, P. M.; Eil, C.; Johns, D. R.; Valle,
D.; Steel, G.; Levine, M. A.: An initiator codon mutation in the
gene encoding the alpha subunit of Gs in pseudohypoparathyroidism
type IA (PHP IA). (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 45 (suppl.): A212
only, 1989.

88. Peters, J.; Beechey, C. V.; Ball, S. T.; Evans, E. P.: Mapping
studies of the distal imprinting region of mouse chromosome 2. Genet.
Res. 63: 169-174, 1994.

89. Plagge, A.; Gordon, E.; Dean, W.; Boiani, R.; Cinti, S.; Peters,
J.; Kelsey, G.: The imprinted signaling protein XL-alpha-s is required
for postnatal adaptation to feeding. Nature Genet. 36: 818-826,
2004.

90. Rasmussen, S. G. F.; DeVree, B. T.; Zou, Y.; Kruse, A. C.; Chung,
K. Y.; Kobilka, T. S.; Thian, F. S.; Chae, P. S.; Pardon, E.; Calinski,
D.; Mathiesen, J. M.; Shah, S. T. A.; Lyons, J. A.; Caffrey, M.; Gellman,
S. H.; Steyaert, J.; Skiniotis, G.; Weis, W. I.; Sunahara, R. K.;
Kobilka, B. K.: Crystal structure of the beta-2 adrenergic receptor-Gs
protein complex. Nature 477: 549-555, 2011.

91. Rickard, S. J.; Wilson, L. C.: Analysis of GNAS1 and overlapping
transcripts identifies the parental origin of mutations in patients
with sporadic Albright hereditary osteodystrophy and reveals a model
system in which to observe the effects of splicing mutations on translated
and untranslated messenger RNA. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72: 961-974,
2003.

92. Riminucci, M.; Fisher, L. W.; Majolagbe, A.; Corsi, A.; Lala,
R.; de Sanctis, C.; Robey, P. G.; Bianco, P.: A novel GNAS1 mutation,
R201G, in McCune-Albright syndrome. J. Bone Miner. Res. 14: 1987-1989,
1999.

93. Sakamoto, A.; Liu, J.; Greene, A.; Chen, M.; Weinstein, L. S.
: Tissue-specific imprinting of the G protein Gs is associated with
tissue-specific differences in histone methylation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
819-828, 2004.

94. Schwindinger, W. F.; Francomano, C. A.; Levine, M. A.: Identification
of a mutation in the gene encoding the alpha subunit of the stimulatory
G-protein of adenylyl cyclase in McCune-Albright syndrome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 5152-5156, 1992.

95. Shapira, H.; Mouallem, M.; Shapiro, M. S.; Weisman, Y.; Farfel,
Z.: Pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia: two new heterozygous frameshift
mutations in exons 5 and 10 of the Gs alpha gene. Human Genet. 97:
73-75, 1995.

96. Shenker, A.; Chanson, P.; Weinstein, L. S.; Chi, P.; Spiegel,
A. M.; Lomri, A.; Marie, P. J.: Osteoblastic cells derived from isolated
lesions of fibrous dysplasia contain activating somatic mutations
of the G(s)-alpha gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1675-1676, 1995.

97. Shenker, A.; Weinstein, L. S.; Moran, A.; Pescovitz, O. H.; Charest,
N. J.; Boney, C. M.; Van Wyk, J. J.; Merino, M. J.; Feuillan, P. P.;
Spiegel, A. M.: Severe endocrine and nonendocrine manifestations
of the McCune-Albright syndrome associated with activating mutations
of stimulatory G protein Gs. J. Pediat. 123: 509-518, 1993.

98. Shore, E. M.; Ahn, J.; Jan de Beur, S.; Li, M.; Xu, M.; Gardiner,
R. J. M.; Zasloff, M. A.; Whyte, M. P.; Levine, M. A.; Kaplan, F.
S.: Paternally inherited inactivating mutations of the GNAS1 gene
in progressive osseous heteroplasia. New Eng. J. Med. 346: 99-106,
2002. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 346: 1678 only, 2002.

99. Shore, E. M.; Kaplan, F. S.; Levine, M. A.: GNAS1 mutations and
progressive osseous heteroplasia. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 346:
1670-1671, 2002.

100. Sparkes, R. S.; Cohn, V. H.; Mohandas, T.; Zollman, S.; Cire-Eversole,
P.; Amatruda, T. T.; Reed, R. R.; Lochrie, M. A.; Simon, M. I.: Mapping
of genes encoding the subunits of guanine nucleotide-binding protein
(G-proteins) in humans. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46: 696
only, 1987.

101. Thiele, S.; de Sanctis, L.; Werner, R.; Grotzinger, J.; Aydin,
C.; Juppner, H.; Bastepe, M.; Hiort, O.: Functional characterization
of GNAS mutations found in patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism
type Ic defines a new subgroup of pseudohypoparathyroidism affecting
selectively Gs-alpha-receptor interaction. Hum. Mutat. 32: 653-660,
2011.

102. Thiele, S.; Werner, R.; Ahrens, W.; Hoppe, U.; Marschke, C.;
Staedt, P.; Hiort, O.: A disruptive mutation in exon 3 of the GNAS
gene with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, normocalcemic pseudohypoparathyroidism,
and selective long transcript variant Gs-alpha-L deficiency. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 92: 1764-1768, 2007.

103. Vallar, L.; Spada, A.; Giannattasio, G.: Altered Gs and adenylate
cyclase activity in human GH-secreting pituitary adenomas. Nature 330:
566-568, 1987.

104. Warner, D. R.; Gejman, P. V.; Collins, R. M.; Weinstein, L. S.
: A novel mutation adjacent to the switch III domain of Gs-alpha in
a patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism. Molec. Endocr. 11: 1718-1727,
1997.

105. Warner, D. R.; Weinstein, L. S.: A mutation in the heterotrimeric
stimulatory guanine nucleotide binding protein alpha-subunit with
impaired receptor-mediated activation because of elevated GTPase activity. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 4268-4272, 1999.

106. Warner, D. R.; Weng, G.; Yu, S.; Matalon, R.; Weinstein, L. S.
: A novel mutation in the switch 3 region of Gs-alpha in a patient
with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy impairs GDP binding and receptor
activation. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 23976-23983, 1998.

107. Weinstein, L. S.; Gejman, P. V.; de Mazancourt, P.; American,
N.; Spiegel, A. M.: A heterozygous 4-bp deletion mutation in the
Gs-alpha gene (GNAS1) in a patient with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. Genomics 13:
1319-1321, 1992.

108. Weinstein, L. S.; Gejman, P. V.; Friedman, E.; Kadowaki, T.;
Collins, R. M.; Gershon, E. S.; Spiegel, A. M.: Mutations of the
Gs alpha-subunit gene in Albright hereditary osteodystrophy detected
by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87:
8287-8290, 1990.

109. Weinstein, L. S.; Shenker, A.; Gejman, P. V.; Merino, M. J.;
Friedman, E.; Spiegel, A. M.: Activating mutations of the stimulatory
G protein in the McCune-Albright syndrome. New Eng. J. Med. 325:
1688-1695, 1991.

110. Weiss, U.; Ischia, R.; Eder, S.; Lovisetti-Scamihorn, P.; Bauer,
R.; Fischer-Colbrie, R.: Neuroendocrine secretory protein 55 (NESP55):
alternative splicing onto transcripts of the GNAS gene and posttranslational
processing of a maternally expressed protein. Neuroendocrinology 71:
177-186, 2000.

111. Werling, U.; Schorle, H.: Transcription factor gene AP-2-gamma
essential for early murine development. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 3149-3156,
2002.

112. Williamson, C. M.; Ball, S. T.; Nottingham, W. T.; Skinner, J.
A.; Plagge, A.; Turner, M. D.; Powles, N.; Hough, T.; Papworth, D.;
Fraser, W. D.; Maconochie, M.; Peters, J.: A cis-acting control region
is required exclusively for the tissue-specific imprinting of Gnas. Nature
Genet. 36: 894-899, 2004.

113. Williamson, C. M.; Turner, M. D.; Ball, S. T.; Nottingham, W.
T.; Glenister, P.; Fray, M.; Tymowska-Lalanne, Z.; Plagge, A.; Powles-Glover,
N.; Kelsey, G.; Maconochie, M.; Peters, J.: Identification of an
imprinting control region affecting the expression of all transcripts
in the Gnas cluster. Nature Genet. 38: 350-355, 2006.

114. Williamson, E. A.; Ince, P. G.; Harrison, D.; Kendall-Taylor,
P.; Harris, P. E.: G-protein mutations in human pituitary adrenocorticotrophic
hormone-secreting adenomas. Europ. J. Clin. Invest. 25: 128-131,
1995.

115. Wu, W.-I.; Schwindinger, W. F.; Aparicio, L. F.; Levine, M. A.
: Selective resistance to parathyroid hormone caused by a novel uncoupling
mutation in the carboxyl terminus of G-alpha(s). J. Biol. Chem. 276:
165-171, 2001.

116. Yang, I.; Park, S.; Ryu, M.; Woo, J.; Kim, S.; Kim, J.; Kim,
Y.; Choi, Y.: Characteristics of gsp-positive growth hormone-secreting
pituitary tumors in Korean acromegalic patients. Europ. J. Endocr. 134:
720-726, 1996.

117. Yu, D.; Yu, S.; Schuster, V.; Kruse, K.; Clericuzio, C. L.; Weinstein,
L. S.: Identification of two novel deletion mutations within the
Gs-alpha gene (GNAS1) in Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 84: 3254-3259, 1999.

118. Yu, S.; Yu, D.; Lee, E.; Eckhaus, M.; Lee, R.; Corria, Z.; Accili,
D.; Westphal, H.; Weinstein, L. S.: Variable and tissue-specific
hormone resistance in heterotrimeric Gs protein alpha-subunit (Gs-alpha)
knockout mice is due to tissue-specific imprinting of the Gs-alpha
gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8715-8720, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/25/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/7/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/30/2011
Nara Sobreira - updated: 6/17/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/19/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/24/2009
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 1/13/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/6/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/8/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/6/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/26/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/19/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/31/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/17/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/4/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/8/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/17/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/6/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/5/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/21/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/6/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/27/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/20/2005
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 8/16/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/2/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/14/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/8/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/16/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/23/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/22/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/20/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/13/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/10/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/26/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 8/27/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/9/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/16/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/10/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/8/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/18/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/10/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/12/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/26/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/20/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/15/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/19/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/10/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/20/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/15/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/8/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/22/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/9/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/7/2000
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/16/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/20/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/15/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/29/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/16/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/4/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/26/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/1/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/3/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/19/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/13/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/1/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/30/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/8/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/11/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/17/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/13/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 6/24/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/8/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 09/30/2013
ckniffin: 9/25/2013
carol: 9/5/2013
terry: 3/14/2013
mgross: 2/5/2013
terry: 11/29/2012
alopez: 3/9/2012
terry: 3/7/2012
carol: 12/1/2011
ckniffin: 11/30/2011
carol: 4/20/2011
joanna: 10/12/2009
carol: 6/18/2009
terry: 6/17/2009
alopez: 6/4/2009
terry: 5/19/2009
alopez: 4/24/2009
wwang: 3/24/2009
mgross: 1/13/2009
mgross: 1/8/2009
terry: 1/6/2009
carol: 12/19/2008
ckniffin: 12/15/2008
wwang: 10/15/2008
terry: 10/8/2008
carol: 5/6/2008
carol: 3/26/2008
carol: 2/28/2008
ckniffin: 2/28/2008
ckniffin: 2/19/2008
alopez: 11/5/2007
terry: 10/31/2007
alopez: 7/17/2007
carol: 6/29/2007
wwang: 12/4/2006
wwang: 11/8/2006
mgross: 11/1/2006
carol: 10/18/2006
ckniffin: 10/17/2006
alopez: 10/6/2006
alopez: 10/5/2006
alopez: 8/21/2006
alopez: 3/9/2006
terry: 3/6/2006
alopez: 10/27/2005
carol: 10/5/2005
wwang: 10/3/2005
terry: 9/27/2005
ckniffin: 9/20/2005
wwang: 9/2/2005
carol: 8/16/2005
joanna: 8/16/2005
wwang: 8/11/2005
wwang: 8/2/2005
alopez: 7/14/2005
alopez: 7/8/2005
carol: 6/24/2005
joanna: 5/10/2005
tkritzer: 3/22/2005
tkritzer: 3/18/2005
carol: 3/18/2005
carol: 3/16/2005
tkritzer: 3/8/2005
terry: 2/23/2005
mgross: 11/23/2004
mgross: 11/22/2004
tkritzer: 8/23/2004
terry: 8/20/2004
terry: 2/20/2004
cwells: 2/13/2004
carol: 11/24/2003
carol: 11/17/2003
tkritzer: 11/14/2003
terry: 11/11/2003
ckniffin: 11/10/2003
alopez: 9/29/2003
terry: 9/26/2003
carol: 8/27/2003
ckniffin: 8/25/2003
tkritzer: 8/15/2003
terry: 8/11/2003
carol: 7/11/2003
tkritzer: 7/9/2003
carol: 7/9/2003
terry: 6/11/2003
tkritzer: 5/13/2003
terry: 5/9/2003
tkritzer: 5/5/2003
tkritzer: 4/25/2003
terry: 4/16/2003
carol: 4/16/2003
tkritzer: 4/15/2003
terry: 4/10/2003
terry: 4/8/2003
alopez: 10/23/2002
terry: 10/18/2002
alopez: 10/10/2002
cwells: 8/9/2002
cwells: 6/25/2002
terry: 6/12/2002
terry: 4/4/2002
alopez: 3/26/2002
alopez: 3/20/2002
terry: 3/6/2002
carol: 1/31/2002
mcapotos: 1/18/2002
terry: 1/15/2002
carol: 12/19/2001
cwells: 11/20/2001
cwells: 11/19/2001
joanna: 10/3/2001
mcapotos: 8/10/2001
cwells: 8/10/2001
cwells: 7/20/2001
cwells: 6/27/2001
terry: 6/15/2001
alopez: 3/22/2001
terry: 11/8/2000
terry: 10/6/2000
mcapotos: 10/3/2000
mcapotos: 9/22/2000
mgross: 8/9/2000
carol: 7/19/2000
mcapotos: 6/28/2000
mcapotos: 6/23/2000
terry: 6/7/2000
alopez: 5/16/2000
mcapotos: 5/11/2000
mcapotos: 5/4/2000
terry: 4/20/2000
carol: 4/7/2000
mcapotos: 4/6/2000
mcapotos: 4/5/2000
terry: 3/15/2000
carol: 2/8/2000
carol: 2/2/2000
mcapotos: 2/2/2000
carol: 2/1/2000
mcapotos: 1/31/2000
terry: 1/14/2000
alopez: 11/30/1999
alopez: 11/29/1999
alopez: 11/23/1999
mgross: 10/11/1999
carol: 9/30/1999
jlewis: 9/28/1999
terry: 9/15/1999
terry: 8/16/1999
mgross: 5/11/1999
mgross: 5/7/1999
terry: 5/4/1999
alopez: 3/26/1999
carol: 3/22/1999
terry: 3/1/1999
carol: 2/12/1999
terry: 2/3/1999
carol: 10/29/1998
terry: 10/19/1998
carol: 10/18/1998
terry: 10/13/1998
dkim: 10/12/1998
carol: 10/9/1998
carol: 10/1/1998
terry: 9/30/1998
carol: 9/14/1998
terry: 9/8/1998
terry: 8/21/1998
carol: 8/14/1998
terry: 8/11/1998
terry: 7/20/1998
terry: 7/17/1998
terry: 7/14/1998
terry: 7/13/1998
carol: 7/2/1998
dholmes: 6/29/1998
dholmes: 6/24/1998
alopez: 12/22/1997
alopez: 12/10/1997
alopez: 12/3/1997
mark: 9/3/1997
mark: 7/8/1997
mark: 6/14/1997
terry: 5/30/1997
mark: 12/17/1996
jenny: 12/13/1996
terry: 11/19/1996
mark: 9/22/1995
pfoster: 9/7/1994
davew: 6/28/1994
carol: 6/2/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994
carol: 12/13/1993

608237	TITLE *608237 GALACTOSE-3-O-SULFOTRANSFERASE 2; GAL3ST2
;;GLYCOPROTEIN BETA-GALACTOSE 3-PRIME-SULFOTRANSFERASE; GP3ST
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Sulfated glycoconjugates are found in glycoproteins, proteoglycans,
glycolipids, and polysaccharides. GAL3ST2 transfers a sulfate group to
the hydroxyl at C3 of nonreducing beta-galactosyl residues (Honke et
al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to CST (602300),
followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE of a colon cDNA library, Honke et
al. (2001) cloned GAL3ST2, which they called GP3ST. The deduced
398-amino acid type II membrane protein has a calculated molecular mass
of about 46 kD. GP3ST contains an N-terminal transmembrane domain, two
5-prime-phosphoadenosine 3-prime phosphosulfate (PAPS)-binding motifs,
which are characteristic of sulfotransferases, and 6 potential
N-glycosylation sites. Northern blot and RT-PCR analyses detected
ubiquitous expression of GP3ST; highest expression was in heart,
stomach, colon, liver, and spleen. In situ hybridization detected
expression of GP3ST in epithelial cells lining the lower to middle layer
of the crypts in colonic mucosa, hepatocytes surrounding the central
vein of the liver, extravillous cytotrophoblasts in the basal plate and
septum of the placenta, renal tubules of the kidney, and neuronal cells
of the cerebral cortex.

GENE FUNCTION

Using radiolabeled PAPS as the sulfate donor, Honke et al. (2001)
determined that recombinant GP3ST in lysates of overexpressing COS-1
cells showed sulfotransferase activity toward oligosaccharides
containing nonreducing beta-galactosides, such as N-acetyllactosamine,
lactose, lacto-N-tetraose, lacto-N-neotetraose, and O-glycoside core-1
oligosaccharide. Nuclear magnetic resonance analysis of purified
products indicated that the hydroxyl group at C3 was esterified by a
sulfate. The optimal pH was between 6.0 and 6.5, and Cu(2+) and Zn(2+)
strongly inhibited the sulfotransferase activity.

Carbohydrates, predominantly sulfated N-linked glycans, account for
approximately 30% of the mass of Tamm-Horsfall glycoprotein (THP, or
UMOD; 191845), a major protein of human urine. Greimel et al. (2006)
showed that both membrane-bound and soluble recombinant human GP3ST
incorporated radiolabeled SO4 into purified human urine THP in a
concentration-dependent manner.

GENE STRUCTURE

Honke et al. (2001) determined that the GP3ST gene contains 2 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Honke et al. (2001) mapped the GP3ST gene
to chromosome 2q37.3.

REFERENCE 1. Greimel, P.; Jabs, S.; Storch, S.; Cherif, S.; Honke, K.; Braulke,
T.; Thiem, J.: In vitro sulfation of N-acetyllactosaminide by soluble
recombinant human beta-Gal-3-prime-sulfotransferase. Carbohydrate
Res. 341: 918-924, 2006.

2. Honke, K.; Tsuda, M.; Koyota, S.; Wada, Y.; Iida-Tanaka, N.; Ishizuka,
I.; Nakayama, J.; Taniguchi, N.: Molecular cloning and characterization
of a human beta-Gal-3-prime-sulfotransferase that acts on both type
1 and type 2 (Gal-beta-1-3/1-4-GlcNAc-R) oligosaccharides. J. Biol.
Chem. 276: 267-274, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/8/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/10/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/11/2013
terry: 2/8/2013
alopez: 2/21/2007
terry: 2/20/2007
mgross: 2/1/2007
mgross: 11/10/2003

602963	TITLE *602963 UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME E2D 3; UBE2D3
;;UBC4/5, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME UBCH5C; UBCH5C
DESCRIPTION See UBE2D1 (602961) for general information about ubiquitination and the
UBC4/5 subfamily of E2 enzymes.

CLONING

By PCR using oligonucleotides based on UBCH5B (UBE2D2; 602962), Jensen
et al. (1995) identified a human peripheral blood lymphocyte cDNA
encoding UBCH5C, or UBE2D3. The predicted 147-amino acid UBCH5C and
UBCH5B proteins differ by only 4 amino acids, with 3 of the differences
conservative changes; the nucleotide sequences of their cDNAs are 87%
identical within the coding region and 23% conserved within the 3-prime
untranslated region. The UBCH5C protein has 94% sequence identity with
the Drosophila UbcD1 protein, 92% identity with C. elegans ubc2, 88%
identity with human UBCH5A (UBE2D1), and 79% identity with S. cerevisiae
UBC4 and UBC5, and Arabidopsis thaliana UBC8 and UBC9. Recombinant
UBCH5C expressed in E. coli had a molecular mass of 16 kD by SDS-PAGE.
Quantitative PCR showed that UBCH5C was expressed in all human tissues
examined and at higher levels than UBCH5A and UBCH5B.

GENE FUNCTION

Jensen et al. (1995) demonstrated that UBCH5C could conjugate ubiquitin
to target proteins in an E6AP (UBE3A; 601623)-dependent manner.

All-trans retinoic acid (RA) is used in differentiation therapy to
achieve remission of acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) because it
causes APL cell cycle arrest and differentiation. Using a short hairpin
RNA screen, Hattori et al. (2007) identified UBE2D3 among 26 proteins
that were essential for RA-induced differentiation and growth arrest in
NB4 human promyelocytic cells. UBE2D3 was upregulated following RA
treatment of NB4 cells. UBE2D3 physically associated with cyclin D1
(CCND1; 168461) and mediated RA-induced cyclin D1 degradation. Knockdown
of UBE2D3 by RNA interference blocked RA-induced cyclin D1 degradation
and cell cycle arrest. Hattori et al. (2007) concluded that
ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis is involved in RA-induced cell cycle
arrest.

Shembade et al. (2010) showed that A20 (191163) inhibits the E3 ligase
activities of TRAF6 (602355), TRAF2 (601895), and cIAP1 (601712) by
antagonizing interactions with E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes UBC13
(603679) and UBCH5C. A20, together with the regulatory molecule TAX1BP1
(605326), interacted with UBC13 and UBCH5C and triggered their
ubiquitination and proteasome-dependent degradation. These findings
suggested a mechanism of A20 action in the inhibition of inflammatory
signaling pathways.

Okiyoneda et al. (2010) identified the components of the peripheral
protein quality control network that removes unfolded CFTR containing
the F508del mutation (602421.0001) from the plasma membrane. Based on
their results and proteostatic mechanisms at different subcellular
locations, Okiyoneda et al. (2010) proposed a model in which the
recognition of unfolded cytoplasmic regions of CFTR is mediated by HSC70
(600816) in concert with DNAJA1 (602837) and possibly by the HSP90
machinery (140571). Prolonged interaction with the chaperone-cochaperone
complex recruits CHIP (607207)-UBCH5C and leads to ubiquitination of
conformationally damaged CFTR. This ubiquitination is probably
influenced by other E3 ligases and deubiquitinating enzyme activities,
culminating in accelerated endocytosis and lysosomal delivery mediated
by Ub-binding clathrin adaptors and the endosomal sorting complex
required for transport (ESCRT) machinery, respectively. In an
accompanying perspective, Hutt and Balch (2010) commented that the
'yin-yang' balance maintained by the proteostasis network is critical
for normal cellular, tissue, and organismal physiology.

REFERENCE 1. Hattori, H.; Zhang, X.; Jia, Y.; Subramanian, K. K.; Jo, H.; Loison,
F.; Newburger, P. E.; Luo, H. R.: RNAi screen identifies UBE2D3 as
a mediator of all-trans retinoic acid-induced cell growth arrest in
human acute promyelocytic NB4 cells. Blood 110: 640-650, 2007.

2. Hutt, D.; Balch, W. E.: The proteome in balance. Science 329:
766-767, 2010.

3. Jensen, J. P.; Bates, P. W.; Yang, M.; Vierstra, R. A.; Weissman,
A. M.: Identification of a family of closely related human ubiquitin
conjugating enzymes. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 30408-30414, 1995.

4. Okiyoneda, T.; Barriere, H.; Bagdany, M.; Rabeh, W. M.; Du, K.;
Hohfeld, J.; Young, J. C.; Lukacs, G. L.: Peripheral protein quality
control removes unfolded CFTR from the plasma membrane. Science 329:
805-810, 2010.

5. Shembade, N.; Ma, A.; Harhaj, E. W.: Inhibition of NF-kappa-B
signaling by A20 through disruption of ubiquitin enzyme complexes. Science 327:
1135-1139, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/31/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/11/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/27/2008

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 8/12/1998

EDITED alopez: 09/03/2010
terry: 8/31/2010
alopez: 3/11/2010
mgross: 6/24/2008
terry: 5/27/2008
psherman: 9/4/1998
alopez: 9/3/1998
psherman: 8/13/1998

614720	TITLE *614720 CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE 19; CDK19
;;KIAA1028
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Kikuno et al. (1999) cloned CDK19, which they designated
KIAA1028. The transcript contains repetitive elements in its 3-prime
end, and the deduced 375-amino acid protein shares significant
similarity with CDK8 (603184). RT-PCR ELISA detected variable CDK19
expression in all adult and fetal tissues and specific adult brain
regions examined. Highest expression was in corpus callosum, followed by
kidney and ovary.

Mukhopadhyay et al. (2010) observed CDK19 expression in a wide variety
of human tissues, with high expression in fetal brain and retina.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Kikuno et al. (1999) mapped the CDK19 gene
to chromosome 6.

Hartz (2012) mapped the CDK19 gene to chromosome 6q21 based on an
alignment of the CDK19 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB028951) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

CYTOGENETICS

In a 41-year-old woman with microcephaly, mental retardation, retinal
folds, and lymphedema (see 152950), Mukhopadhyay et al. (2010)
identified a pericentric inversion in chromosome 6 involving 6p11.1 and
6q21 that disrupted the CDK19 gene, resulting in haploinsufficiency
(patient transcript level 54% compared to control). No other large copy
number abnormalities were identified on comparative genomic
hybridization. The patient had microcephaly at birth, and head
circumference remained far below the P10 curve on subsequent
examinations. She had cafe-au-lait-like pigmentations scattered over her
body, but no other features consistent with neurofibromatosis (see
162200). Moderate psychomotor retardation and hearing loss were
diagnosed in infancy. Ophthalmologic evaluation at 2 years of age
revealed horizontal nystagmus; funduscopy revealed bilateral falciform
retinal folds running from the optic nerve head to the temporal
periphery. Both folds were attached by white fibrous tissue to the pars
plana and temporal equator of the lens. At age 14 years, visual acuity
bilaterally was limited to finger counting. Eye examination of the
parents showed no significant abnormalities. The patient was also found
to have night blindness and lymphedema; at 41 years of age she developed
type 2 diabetes (125853), which was treated with diet and oral
medication. Mukhopadhyay et al. (2010) concluded that the syndrome of
microcephaly, congenital retinal fold, and mild mental retardation in
their patient was likely caused by CDK19 haploinsufficiency. Analysis of
the CDK19 gene in 9 additional patients with similar features revealed
no mutations.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/13/2012.

2. Kikuno, R.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIV. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 6: 197-205, 1999.

3. Mukhopadhyay, A.; Kramer, J. M.; Merkx, G.; Lugtenberg, D.; Smeets,
D. F.; Oortveld, M. A. W.; Blokland, E. A. W.; Agrawal, J.; Schenck,
A.; van Bokhoven, H.; Huys, E.; Schoenmakers, E. F.; Geurts van Kessel,
A.; van Nouhuys, C. E.; Cremers, F. P. M.: CDK19 is disrupted in
a female patient with bilateral congenital retinal folds, microcephaly
and mild mental retardation. Hum. Genet. 128: 281-291, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 09/18/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/13/2012

EDITED carol: 09/18/2012
mgross: 7/13/2012

600315	TITLE *600315 TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR RECEPTOR SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 4; TNFRSF4
;;TAX-TRANSCRIPTIONALLY ACTIVATED GLYCOPROTEIN 1 RECEPTOR; TXGP1L;;
OX40 ANTIGEN;;
LYMPHOID ACTIVATION ANTIGEN ACT35; ACT35;;
CD134
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ACT35 antigen is a cell surface glycoprotein that was discovered
through the production of a monoclonal antibody raised against the
HUT-102 cell line. Its expression can be induced on lymphocytes by
mitogen stimulation or viral stimulation. Because the cell and tissue
distribution resembles the pattern of the IL2 receptor, CD25 (147730),
it was speculated that a relationship between the ACT35 antigen and the
CD25 antigen exists.

CLONING

Latza et al. (1994) cloned a cDNA for the ACT35 antigen and showed its
strong homology with the previously described rat OX40 antigen. It is
therefore another member of the tumor necrosis factor/nerve growth
factor receptor family. Birkeland et al. (1995) cloned cDNA and genomic
DNA for the mouse homolog.

GENE FUNCTION

Song et al. (2004) showed that OX40 engagement sustains activation of
protein kinase B (PKB; 164730) and intermediates of PKB signaling
pathways, including PI3K (see 601232), GSK3 (see 606784), and FKHR
(FOXO1A; 136533). T cells from mice lacking Ox40 were unable to maintain
PKB activity over time, and this loss of activity coincided with cell
death. Expression of active PKB in responding Ox40 -/- cells reversed
the survival defect. Song et al. (2004) concluded that the duration of
signaling needed for long-term survival is much longer than that needed
for proliferation.

Munks et al. (2004) found that stimulation of 4-1BB (TNFRSF9; 602250) in
mice at the time of a DNA prime, poxvirus vaccine, increased the number
of functional memory CD8 (see 186910) T cells that responded, while
stimulation of OX40 increased the number of antigen-specific CD4
(186940) T cells that responded. Stimulating both of these TNFRs
enhanced the CD8 response more than stimulating 4-1BB alone. Munks et
al. (2004) suggested that stimulating these receptors can improve the
response to a powerful virus vector and may be useful in vaccine
development.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Using a single dose of agonistic antibody against OX40, Bansal-Pakala et
al. (2001) were able to prevent tolerance induction and to break
existing tolerance or augment the reactivity of hyporesponsive T cells.
Bansal-Pakala et al. (2001) proposed that targeting OX40 and possibly
other members of the TNFR family might have benefits as adjuvants.

GENE STRUCTURE

Birkeland et al. (1995) determined the gene structure of mouse OX40,
which showed that there are several intron/exon bodies shared between
OX40 and CD27 (186711), CD40 (109535), TNFR1 (191190), and CD95
(134637).

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Latza et al. (1994) mapped the
ACT35 gene to 1p36, where the genes for TNFR2 (191191) and the lymphoid
activation antigen CD30 (153243) are located.

Birkeland et al. (1995) mapped the gene encoding murine OX40 to
chromosome 4 in an area that contains the gene for TNFR2 and shows
homology of synteny with the region of human chromosome 1 that contains
the genes for TNFR2, OX40, and CD30.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using Ox40 -/- mice and a mouse model of asthma, Jember et al. (2001)
found that wildtype mice had significantly higher eosinophilic
infiltrate in the bronchial fluid than did Ox40 -/- mice. The
Ox40-deficient mice also had significantly reduced levels of the Th2
cytokines IL4 (147780) and IL5 (147850), but no elevation in IFNG
(147570), in bronchial fluid, and antigen-specific and total IgE was
reduced in serum. Functional analysis indicated that wildtype mice had
pronounced airway hyperreactivity compared with Ox40 -/- mice.
Histologic analysis revealed marked cellular infiltrate around the
bronchioles of wildtype mice and a near absence of mucus production by
Ox40 -/- mice. Jember et al. (2001) concluded that OX40/OX40L
interactions are integral to the development of the asthmatic phenotype.
They proposed that strategies targeting both OX40 and CD28 (186760) may
be most effective in preventing the development of allergen-specific T
cells.

OX40 is not expressed on naive T cells, but it is upregulated within 2
days of antigen activation. Humphreys et al. (2003) showed that
influenza virus-induced weight loss and T-cell inflammation in mice
could be reduced by an Ox40-Ig fusion protein. Flow cytometric and
intracellular cytokine analysis demonstrated that the number and
proportion of Cd8-positive T cells producing Tnf were reduced in treated
mice. Delayed treatment also inhibited weight loss in mice with
established illness without affecting viral clearance or antigen recall
responses. Reduced proliferation and enhanced apoptosis of lung cells
accompanied the improved clinical phenotype. Humphreys et al. (2003)
concluded that interference with the late costimulatory pathway has
potential for the treatment of dysregulated immune responses in lung.

Shimojima et al. (2004) found that CD134 is the primary receptor for
feline immunodeficiency virus. CD134 expression promotes viral binding
and renders cells permissive for viral entry, productive infection, and
syncytium formation. Infection is CXCR4 (162643)-dependent, analogous to
infection with X4 strains of HIV.

REFERENCE 1. Bansal-Pakala, P.; Jember, A. G.-H.; Croft, M.: Signaling through
OX40 (CD134) breaks peripheral T-cell tolerance. Nature Med. 7:
907-912, 2001.

2. Birkeland, M. L.; Copeland, N. G.; Gilbert, D. J.; Jenkins, N.
A.; Barclay, A. N.: Gene structure and chromosomal localization of
the mouse homologue of rat OX40 protein. Europ. J. Immun. 25: 926-930,
1995.

3. Humphreys, I. R.; Walzl, G.; Edwards, L.; Rae, A.; Hill, S.; Hussell,
T.: A critical role for OX40 in T cell-mediated immunopathology during
lung viral infection. J. Exp. Med. 198: 1237-1242, 2003.

4. Jember, A. G.-H.; Zuberi, R.; Liu, F.-T.; Croft, M.: Development
of allergic inflammation in a murine model of asthma is dependent
on the costimulatory receptor OX40. J. Exp. Med. 193: 387-392, 2001.

5. Latza, U.; Durkop, H.; Schnittger, S.; Ringeling, J.; Eitelbach,
F.; Hummel, M.; Fonatsch, C.; Stein, H.: The human OX40 homolog:
cDNA structure, expression and chromosomal assignment of the ACT35
antigen. Europ. J. Immun. 24: 677-683, 1994.

6. Munks, M. W.; Mourich, D. V.; Mittler, R. S.; Weinberg, A. D.;
Hill, A. B.: 4-1BB and OX40 stimulation enhance CD8 and CD4 T-cell
responses to a DNA prime, poxvirus boost vaccine. Immunology 112:
559-566, 2004.

7. Shimojima, M.; Miyazawa, T.; Ikeda, Y.; McMonagle, E. L.; Haining,
H.; Akashi, H.; Takeuchi, Y.; Hosie, M. J.; Willett, B. J.: Use of
CD134 as a primary receptor by the feline immunodeficiency virus. Science 303:
1192-1195, 2004.

8. Song, J.; Salek-Ardakani, S.; Rogers, P. R.; Cheng, M.; Van Parijs,
L.; Croft, M.: The costimulation-regulated duration of PKB activation
controls T cell longevity. Nature Immun. 5: 150-158, 2004. Note:
Erratum: Nature Immun. 5: 1190 only, 2004. Erratum: Nature Immun.
6: 219 only, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/27/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/13/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/28/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/11/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/13/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/6/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/18/1995

EDITED carol: 10/01/2013
alopez: 5/24/2013
carol: 5/27/2008
terry: 5/27/2008
mgross: 3/13/2006
mgross: 1/28/2005
alopez: 6/15/2004
terry: 6/11/2004
mgross: 5/13/2004
mgross: 2/6/2002
terry: 11/29/2001
psherman: 3/1/1999
alopez: 12/22/1998
alopez: 12/21/1998
jamie: 1/29/1997
mark: 7/11/1995
carol: 1/19/1995
carol: 1/18/1995

609089	TITLE *609089 F-BOX ONLY PROTEIN 3; FBXO3
;;FBX3;;
FBA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the F-box protein family, such as FBXO3, are characterized by
an approximately 40-amino acid F-box motif. SCF complexes, formed by
SKP1 (601434), cullin (see CUL1; 603134), and F-box proteins, act as
protein-ubiquitin ligases. F-box proteins interact with SKP1 through the
F box, and they interact with ubiquitination targets through other
protein interaction domains (Jin et al., 2004).

CLONING

Using SKP1 as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen, and by searching an EST
database, Winston et al. (1999) identified a partial FBXO3 cDNA, which
they designated FBX3.

By searching for genes in a region of chromosome 11 associated with WAGR
syndrome (194072), Gawin et al. (1999) identified and cloned FBXO3,
which they designated clone 29944. Northern blot analysis detected
variable expression of a 2.5-kb transcript in all human tissues
examined, with highest expression in heart. Fbxo3 was also detected in
all adult mouse tissues examined. In developing mouse, expression was
low at embryonic day 10 and rose thereafter.

Ilyin et al. (2000) cloned mouse Fbxo3, which they designated Fba. The
deduced 415-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal F box and a
C-terminal domain that shares similarity with bacterial ApaG proteins.

GENE FUNCTION

Winston et al. (1999) showed that in vitro translated FBXO3 interacted
with SKP1 in an in vitro binding assay and in transfected human
embryonic kidney cells.

MAPPING

By analyzing a PAC contig covering chromosome 11p14.1-p13, Gawin et al.
(1999) mapped the FBXO3 gene to chromosome 11p13, centromeric to the
C11ORF41 gene (612297) and telomeric to the LMO2 gene (180385).

Jin et al. (2004) stated that the FBXO3 gene maps to chromosome 11p13
and the mouse Fbxo3 gene maps to chromosome 2E2.0.

REFERENCE 1. Gawin, B.; Niederfuhr, A.; Schumacher, N.; Hummerich, H.; Little,
P. F. R.; Gessler, M.: A 7.5 Mb sequence-ready PAC contig and gene
expression map of human chromosome 11p13-p14.1. Genome Res. 9: 1074-1086,
1999.

2. Ilyin, G. P.; Rialland, M.; Pigeon, C.; Guguen-Guillouzo, C.:
cDNA cloning and expression analysis of new members of the mammalian
F-box protein family. Genomics 67: 40-47, 2000.

3. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

4. Winston, J. T.; Koepp, D. M.; Zhu, C.; Elledge, S. J.; Harper,
J. W.: A family of mammalian F-box proteins. Curr. Biol. 9: 1180-1182,
1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/16/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/14/2004

EDITED mgross: 09/18/2008
terry: 9/16/2008
mgross: 12/15/2004

602647	TITLE *602647 NUCLEAR RNA EXPORT FACTOR 1; NXF1
;;TIP-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; TAP;;
MEX67, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; MEX67
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Segref et al. (1997) identified a yeast gene, MEX67, that encodes a
factor essential for nuclear mRNA export. The Mex67 protein is found at
the nuclear pores, can be UV-crosslinked to polyadenylated RNA, and
interacts with a putative RNA-binding protein in a yeast 2-hybrid
screen. Thus, Segref et al. (1997) suggested that the Mex67 protein
participates directly in the export of mRNA from the nucleus to the
cytoplasm. They reported that the Mex67 protein is homologous to the
human 'tip-associated protein' (TAP).

The 'tyrosine kinase-interacting protein' (Tip) of herpesvirus saimiri
blocks LCK (153390)-mediated signal transduction and is essential for
primary T cell immortalization and for lymphoma induction in vivo. Using
the yeast 2-hybrid system to identify factors that associate with Tip,
Yoon et al. (1997) cloned a cDNA encoding 'tip-associated protein'
(TAP). The predicted 560-amino acid TAP protein migrates as a 65-kD
protein by SDS-PAGE. Northern blot analysis indicated that TAP was
expressed as 2.5- and 4.4-kb mRNAs in all tissues tested. Expression of
Tip and TAP in Jurkat-T cells induced cell aggregation, which was likely
caused by the upregulated surface expression of lymphocyte adhesion
molecules, and NF-kappa-B (164011, 164012) activity. Therefore, Yoon et
al. (1997) suggested that TAP is an important cellular mediator of Tip
function in T-cell transformation by herpesvirus saimiri.

GENE FUNCTION

Gruter et al. (1998) reported the identification of TAP as the cellular
factor that specifically binds to the CTE (constitutive transport
element) of the type D retroviruses. Microinjection experiments
performed in Xenopus oocytes demonstrated that TAP directly stimulates
CTE-dependent export. Furthermore, TAP overcomes the mRNA export block
caused by the presence of saturating amounts of CTE RNA. Thus, TAP, like
its yeast homolog Mex67, is an mRNA nuclear export mediator. TAP is
therefore a cellular RNA binding protein that is directly involved in
the export of its target RNA.

Using binding analysis, Herold et al. (2000) showed that NXF1, NXF2
(300315), and NXF3 (300316) interact with E1BAP5 (605800), as well as
with NXT1 (605811) and NXT2 (300320). The RBDs of NXF1 and NXF2, but not
that of NXF3, were found to bind RNA. Only NXF1, however, could promote
RNA export mediated by the constitutive transport element of simian type
D retrovirus. Both NXF1 and NXF2, but not NXF3, through their C-terminal
NWD loop, could bind to the nucleoporins CAN (NUP214; 114350), NUP153
(603948), and NUP62 (605815). Only NXF1 could bind to NUP98 (601021).
CAT reporter and Western blot assays showed that coexpression of NXF1 or
NXF2, but not NXF3, with NXT1 or NXT2 activated CAT expression,
suggesting that under these conditions NXF1 can also stimulate RNA
export. The LRRs and NTF2 (605813)-like domains are required for export
activity.

Shamsher et al. (2002) found that transportin-2 (603002) forms complexes
with TAP that strictly depend on the presence of RanGTP. The data
supported the conclusion that transportin-2 participates directly in the
export of a large proportion of cellular mRNAs, and that TAP connects
transportin-2 to mRNAs to be exported.

Li et al. (2006) showed that the TAP gene contains a functional
constitutive transport element (CTE) in its alternatively spliced intron
10. TAP mRNA containing this intron is exported to the cytoplasm and is
present in polyribosomes. A small TAP protein is encoded by this mRNA
and can be detected in human and monkey cells. Li et al. (2006)
concluded that TAP regulates expression of its own intron-containing RNA
through a CTE-mediated mechanism, and that CTEs are likely to be
important elements that facilitate efficient expression of mammalian
mRNAs with retained introns.

FMRP (FMR1; 309550) is a nucleocytoplasmic shuttling RNA-binding protein
that participates in mRNA transport and translational control. Using
immunoprecipitation analysis and quantitative real-time RT-PCR, Zhang et
al. (2007) showed that Fmrp and Nxf2 were present in Nxf1
mRNA-containing ribonucleoprotein particles in cultured mouse neuronal
cells. Expression of Nxf2 led to destabilization of Nxf1 mRNA, and this
effect was abolished when Fmrp expression was reduced by small
interfering RNA. Zhang et al. (2007) concluded that FMRP and NXF2
collaborate to destabilize NXF1 mRNA.

MAPPING

Using genomic sequence analysis, Herold et al. (2000) mapped the NXF1
gene to chromosome 11 and determined that it contains at least 21 exons.
Hamilton et al. (1997) mapped the Mvb1 locus to proximal mouse
chromosome 19.

Windpassinger et al. (2003) observed that Human Genome Project sequence
data indicated that the NXF1 gene is located on 11q12-q14, the region to
which the locus for Silver spastic paraplegia syndrome (270685) had been
mapped. They excluded NXF1 as the mutant gene, as no mutations were
found on sequence analysis of at least 2 affected individuals from each
of 4 different families and 1 healthy control.

ANIMAL MODEL

In mice, the modifier-of-vibrator-1 locus (Mvb1) controls levels of
correctly processed mRNA from genes mutated by endogenous retrovirus
insertions into introns, including the Pitpn(vb) (600174) tremor
mutation and the Eya1(BOR) (601653) model of human branchiootorenal
syndrome. By positional complementation cloning, Floyd et al. (2003)
identified Mvb1 as the nuclear export factor Nxf1, providing an
unexpected link between the mRNA export receptor and pre-mRNA
processing. Population structure of the suppressive allele in wild Mus
musculus castaneus suggested selective advantage.

REFERENCE 1. Floyd, J. A.; Gold, D. A.; Concepcion, D.; Poon, T. H.; Wang, X.;
Keithley, E.; Chen, D.; Ward, E. J.; Chinn, S. B.; Friedman, R. A.;
Yu, H.-T.; Moriwaki, K.; Shiroishi, T.; Hamilton, B. A.: A natural
allele of Nxf1 suppresses retrovirus insertional mutations. Nature
Genet. 35: 221-228, 2003.

2. Gruter, P.; Tabernero, C.; von Kobbe, C.; Schmitt, C.; Saavedra,
C.; Bachi, A.; Wilm, M.; Felber, B. K.; Izaurralde, E.: TAP, the
human homolog of Mex67p, mediates CTE-dependent RNA export from the
nucleus. Molec. Cell 1: 649-659, 1998.

3. Hamilton, B. A.; Smith, D. J.; Mueller, K. L.; Kerrebrock, A. W.;
Bronson, R. T.; van Berkel, V.; Daly, M. J.; Kruglyak, L.; Reeve,
M. P.; Nemhauser, J. L.; Hawkins, T. L.; Rubin, E. M.; Lander, E.
S.: The vibrator mutation causes neurodegeneration via reduced expression
of PITP-alpha: positional complementation cloning and extragenic suppression. N
euron 18: 711-722, 1997.

4. Herold, A.; Suyama, M.; Rodrigues, J. P.; Braun, I. C.; Kutay,
U.; Carmo-Fonseca, M.; Bork, P.; Izaurralde, E.: TAP (NXF1) belongs
to a multigene family of putative RNA export factors with a conserved
modular architecture. Molec. Cell. Biol. 20: 8996-9008, 2000.

5. Li, Y.; Bor, Y.; Misawa, Y.; Xue, Y.; Rekosh, D.; Hammarskjold,
M.-L.: An intron with a constitutive transport element is retained
in a Tap messenger RNA. Nature 443: 234-237, 2006.

6. Segref, A.; Sharma, K.; Doye, V.; Hellwig, A.; Huber, J.; Luhrmann,
R.; Hurt, E.: Mex67p, a novel factor for nuclear mRNA export, binds
to both poly(A)+ RNA and nuclear pores. EMBO J. 16: 3256-3271, 1997.

7. Shamsher, M. K.; Ploski, J.; Radu, A.: Karyopherin beta-2B participates
in mRNA export from the nucleus. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 14195-14199,
2002.

8. Windpassinger, C.; Wagner, K.; Petek, E.; Fischer, R.; Auer-Grumbach,
M.: Refinement of the 'Silver syndrome locus' on chromosome 11q12-q14
in four families and exclusion of eight candidate genes. Hum. Genet. 114:
99-109, 2003.

9. Yoon, D.-W.; Lee, H.; Seol, W.; DeMaria, M.; Rosenzweig, M.; Jung,
J. U.: Tap: a novel cellular protein that interacts with Tip of herpesvirus
saimiri and induces lymphocyte aggregation. Immunity 6: 571-582,
1997.

10. Zhang, M.; Wang, Q.; Huang, Y.: Fragile X mental retardation
protein FMRP and the RNA export factor NXF2 associate with and destabilize
Nxf1 mRNA in neuronal cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 10057-10062,
2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 08/29/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/6/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/9/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/1/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/29/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/21/1998

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/21/1998

EDITED mgross: 08/29/2007
alopez: 11/7/2006
terry: 11/6/2006
tkritzer: 12/16/2003
terry: 12/9/2003
alopez: 10/31/2003
alopez: 10/1/2003
terry: 10/1/2003
tkritzer: 12/18/2002
mgross: 4/4/2001
mgross: 4/3/2001
mgross: 4/2/2001
mgross: 3/29/2001
psherman: 7/6/2000
carol: 9/21/1998
alopez: 6/23/1998
psherman: 5/22/1998
psherman: 5/21/1998

608054	TITLE *608054 CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY IIA, POLYPEPTIDE 7; CYP2A7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Fernandez-Salguero et al. (1995) cloned 3 complete CYP2A genes, CYP2A6
(122720), CYP2A7, and CYP2A13 (608055), in addition to 2 pseudogenes
truncated after exon 5, all of which are located in a 350-kb region on
chromosome 19q13.2. The deduced CYP2A7 protein contains 494 amino acids.

GENE STRUCTURE

Fernandez-Salguero et al. (1995) determined that the CYP2A7 gene
contains 9 exons.

MAPPING

Fernandez-Salguero et al. (1995) determined the structural organization
of the CYP2 gene cluster, which spans 350 kb on chromosome 19q13.2. They
also determined the directions of transcription.

REFERENCE 1. Fernandez-Salguero, P.; Hoffman, S. M. G.; Cholerton, S.; Mohrenweiser,
H.; Raunio, H.; Rautio, A.; Pelkonen, O.; Huang, J.; Evans, W. E.;
Idle, J. R.; Gonzalez, F. J.: A genetic polymorphism in coumarin
7-hydroxylation: sequence of the human CYP2A genes and identification
of variant CYP2A6 alleles. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 651-660, 1995.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/20/2003

EDITED mgross: 08/20/2003

603302	TITLE *603302 ADENYLATE CYCLASE 9; ADCY9
;;ADENYLYL CYCLASE 9
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The adenylyl cyclases (EC 4.6.1.1) are membrane-associated enzymes that
are expressed in most human tissues. These enzymes catalyze the
formation of cAMP and are regulated by a family of G protein-coupled
receptors, protein kinases, and calcium.

CLONING

Adenylate cyclase-9 (ADCY9) is a widely distributed adenylyl cyclase
that was originally cloned from mouse (Paterson et al., 1995; Premont et
al., 1996). Hacker et al. (1998) cloned human cardiac ADCY9 cDNAs and
found that the deduced 1,294-amino acid protein is 90% identical to
mouse Adcy9. Like mouse Adcy9, the predicted human ADCY9 protein
contains 12 transmembrane domains, Asn-linked glycosylation sites, and
cAMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylation sites; however, these
proteins differ in the C2b domain due to a frameshift in the human ADCY9
coding sequence relative to the coding sequence of mouse Adcy9. Northern
blot analysis detected 8.5- and 6.3-kb ADCY9 transcripts in all human
tissues examined.

By semiquantitative RT-PCR, Ludwig and Seuwen (2002) found that human
ADCY9 was highly expressed in colon, moderately expressed in lung,
kidney, spleen, testis, and ovary, and weakly expressed in most other
tissues examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ludwig and Seuwen (2002) determined that the ADCY9 gene contains 11
exons and spans 153 kb.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Hacker et al. (1998) mapped the
human and mouse ADCY9 genes to 16p13.3 and chromosome 16 band B1,
respectively.

GENE FUNCTION

Hacker et al. (1998) found that ADCY9 is stimulated by beta-adrenergic
receptor (see ABRB2; 109690) activation but is insensitive to forskolin,
calcium, and somatostatin (182450). In contrast to mouse Adcy9, the
activity of human ADCY9 is unaffected by inhibitors of calcineurin (see
114107).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Toyota et al. (2002) studied polymorphisms of the ADCY9 gene in relation
to mood disorders and found no significant association in Japanese.

In asthma (see 600807), the response to beta-agonists acting at
beta-2-adrenergic receptors displays extensive interindividual
variation. Tantisira et al. (2005) identified a 2316A-G transition
resulting in ile772-to-met (I772M; dbSNP rs2230739) substitution in the
C1b region of the catalytic domain. In stably transfected A431 squamous
carcinoma cells, met772 resulted in decreased catalytic activity
compared to wildtype ile772. However, cells expressing met772 cultured
in the presence of glucocorticoid had a significantly increased
albuterol-stimulated adenylyl cyclase response when compared with those
expressing ile772 (80% vs 20%; p = 0.02). An equivalent increase in
ADRB2 expression was observed in both lines due to glucocorticoid, but
ADCY9 expression was unaffected. Among 436 asthmatic children, met772
carriers on budesonide, an inhaled corticosteroid, showed a significant
improvement in forced expiratory volume compared to control treatment.
Moreover, a highly significant interaction was found for budesonide
treatment and the ADCY9 polymorphism. Tantisira et al. (2005) concluded
that this ADCY9 polymorphism alters albuterol responsiveness in the
context of concomitant inhaled corticosteroid administration, which may
provide a predictor for pharmacologic responsiveness.

REFERENCE 1. Hacker, B. M.; Tomlinson, J. E.; Wayman, G. A.; Sultana, R.; Chan,
G.; Villacres, E.; Disteche, C.; Storm, D. R.: Cloning, chromosomal
mapping, and regulatory properties of the human type 9 adenylyl cyclase
(ADCY9). Genomics 50: 97-104, 1998.

2. Ludwig, M.-G.; Seuwen, K.: Characterization of the human adenylyl
cyclase gene family: cDNA, gene structure, and tissue distribution
of the nine isoforms. J. Recept. Signal Transduct. Res. 22: 79-110,
2002.

3. Paterson, J. M.; Smith, S. M.; Harmar, A. J.; Antoni, F. A.: Control
of a novel adenylyl cyclase by calcineurin. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 214: 1000-1008, 1995.

4. Premont, R. T.; Matsuoka, I.; Mattei, M. G.; Pouille, Y.; Defer,
N.; Hanoune, J.: Identification and characterization of a widely
expressed form of adenylyl cyclase. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 13900-13907,
1996.

5. Tantisira, K. G.; Small, K. M.; Litonjua, A. A.; Weiss, S. T.;
Liggett, S. B.: Molecular properties and pharmacogenetics of a polymorphism
of adenylyl cyclase type 9 in asthma: interaction between beta-agonist
and corticosteroid pathways. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 1671-1677, 2005.

6. Toyota, T.; Hattori, E.; Meerabux, J.; Yamada, K.; Saito, K.; Shibuya,
H.; Nankai, M.; Yoshikawa, T.: Molecular analysis, mutation screening,
and association study of adenylate cyclase type 9 gene (ADCY9) in
mood disorders. Am. J. Med. Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 114B:
84-92, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 6/16/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/11/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/4/2002

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 11/19/1998

EDITED terry: 10/02/2012
wwang: 6/20/2008
terry: 6/16/2008
carol: 10/12/2006
terry: 10/11/2006
carol: 2/11/2002
terry: 2/4/2002
psherman: 11/19/1998

606343	TITLE *606343 POLYMERASE, DNA, LAMBDA; POLL
DESCRIPTION DNA polymerases can participate in both replication of the genome and
DNA repair processes. The human genome contains multiple DNA polymerase
genes.

CLONING

By searching sequence databases to identify new members of the polX
family, Aoufouchi et al. (2000) identified EST clones representing 2 DNA
polymerases, POLM (606344) and POLL, which they called pol mu and pol
lambda, respectively. By screening bone marrow and lymph node cDNA
libraries, they isolated a full-length POLL cDNA. POLL encodes a deduced
575-amino acid protein predicted to contain a polX domain, a BRCA-1
C-terminal (BRCT) domain, and 2 helix-hairpin-helix (HHH) DNA-binding
motifs. POLL structurally resembles terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase
(TDT; 187410). It shares 34% amino acid identity with DNA polymerase
beta (POLB; 174760) and 82% identity with mouse Poll. Aoufouchi et al.
(2000) found that POLL has template-dependent DNA polymerase activity in
vitro. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.7-kb POLL transcript with
highest expression in testis and fetal liver and very weak expression in
many other tissues. They identified POLL splice variants which they
considered to be nonfunctional. Using semiquantitative RT-PCR
amplification, Aoufouchi et al. (2000) concluded that POLL mRNA
expression is downregulated in a dose- and time-dependent manner upon
cell exposure to DNA damaging agents.

Aoufouchi et al. (2000) provided a phylogenetic comparison of yeast and
human proteins of the polX family.

GENE STRUCTURE

Aoufouchi et al. (2000) determined that POLL is encoded by 8 exons and
spans approximately 9 kb of genomic DNA.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the POLL
gene to human chromosome 10 (TMAP sts-W69567).

REFERENCE 1. Aoufouchi, S.; Flatter, E.; Dahan, A.; Faili, A.; Bertocci, B.;
Storck, S.; Delbos, F.; Cocea, L.; Gupta, N.; Weill, J.-C.; Reynaud,
C.-A.: Two novel human and mouse DNA polymerases of the polX family. Nucleic
Acids Res. 28: 3684-3693, 2000.

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 10/1/2001

EDITED carol: 10/02/2001

600849	TITLE *600849 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR COREPRESSOR 1; NCOR1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Thyroid hormone receptor (THR1; 190160) and retinoic acid receptor
(RARA, 180240; RARB, 180220; RARG, 180190) exert their regulatory
functions by acting as both activators and repressors of gene
expression. Horlein et al. (1995) identified a mouse cDNA for a nuclear
receptor corepressor (Ncor) of relative molecular mass 270,000 that
mediates ligand-independent inhibition of gene transcription by Thr1 and
Rars. Their finding suggested that the molecular mechanisms of
repression by thyroid hormone and retinoic acid receptors are analogous
to the corepressor-dependent transcriptional inhibitory mechanisms of
yeast and Drosophila. They suggested that the corepressor is a member of
a new gene family, which they termed TRAC (thyroid hormone- and retinoic
acid receptor-associated corepressor).

GENE FUNCTION

Grignani et al. (1998) demonstrated that both PML-RAR-alpha (see 102578)
and PLZF-RAR-alpha (see 176797) fusion proteins recruit the NCOR-histone
deacetylase (see 601241) complex through the RAR-alpha CoR box.
PLZF-RAR-alpha contains a second, retinoic acid-resistant binding site
in the PLZF amino-terminal region. High doses of retinoic acid release
histone deacetylase activity from PML-RAR-alpha, but not from
PLZF-RAR-alpha. Mutation of the NCOR binding site abolishes the ability
of PML-RAR-alpha to block differentiation, whereas inhibition of histone
deacetylase activity switches the transcriptional and biologic effects
of PLZF-RAR-alpha from being an inhibitor to an activator of the
retinoic acid signaling pathway. Therefore, Grignani et al. (1998)
concluded that recruitment of histone deacetylase is crucial to the
transforming potential of APL fusion proteins, and the different effects
of retinoic acid on the stability of the PML-RAR-alpha and
PLZF-RAR-alpha corepressor complexes determines the differential
response of APLs to retinoic acid.

Binding of ligand to nuclear hormone receptors induces a conformation
that attracts coactivator proteins containing a Leu-x-x-Leu-Leu motif,
the so-called NR box. Hu and Lazar (1999) showed that NCOR1 and SMRT
(600848) contain sequences that are similar to the NR box and are
repeated in each of 2 nuclear hormone receptor interaction domains. Hu
and Lazar (1999) called this box (L/I-x-x-I/V-I) the 'corner box,' or
CoRNR box (for 'corepressor/nuclear receptor box'). The CoRNR box is
required for nuclear hormone receptor interaction, and the CoRNR box
peptides specifically block corepressor interaction in vitro and
repression in vivo. Sequences flanking the CoRNR box determine nuclear
hormone receptor specificity. Thus, Hu and Lazar (1999) concluded that
the key feature of hormone action, differential recognition of
unliganded and liganded nuclear hormone receptors by coactivators and
corepressors, is due to very subtle differences between CoRNR and NR
boxes.

Baek et al. (2002) demonstrated that interleukin-1-beta (IL1B; 147720)
causes nuclear export of a specific NCOR corepressor complex, resulting
in derepression of a specific subset of nuclear factor-kappa-B (NFKB;
see 164011)-regulated genes. These genes are exemplified by the
tetraspanin KAI1 (600623), which regulates membrane receptor function.
Nuclear export of the NCOR/TAB2 (605101)/HDAC3 (605166) complex by IL1B
is temporally linked to selective recruitment of a TIP60 (601409)
coactivator complex. KAI1 is also directly activated by a ternary
complex, dependent on the acetyltransferase activity of TIP60, that
consists of the presenilin-dependent C-terminal cleavage product of the
beta amyloid precursor protein (APP; 104760), FE65 (602709), and TIP60,
identifying a specific in vivo gene target of an APP-dependent
transcription complex in the brain.

Zhang et al. (2002) reported that GPS2 (601935), a protein involved in
intracellular signaling, is an integral subunit of the NCOR1 NCOR1-HDAC3
complex. They determined structural motifs that direct the formation of
a highly stable and active deacetylase complex. GPS2 and TBL1 (300196),
another component of the NCOR1-HDAC3 complex, interact cooperatively
with repression domain-1 of NCOR1 to form a heterotrimeric structure and
are indirectly linked to HDAC3 via an extended NCOR1 SANT domain that
also activates latent HDAC3 activity. Zhang et al. (2002) also showed
that the NCOR1-HDAC3 complex inhibits JNK (601158) activation through
the associated GPS2 subunit and thus could potentially provide an
alternative mechanism for hormone-mediated antagonism of AP1 (165160)
function.

Yoon et al. (2003) purified NCOR complexes, which contained 10 to 12
proteins, from HeLa cell nuclear extracts and characterized the
interactions of TBL1 and TBLR1 (608628) with NCOR. TBL1 and TBLR1
interacted with NCOR through 2 independent interactions. Their
N-terminal regions interacted with the RD1 region of NCOR, and their
C-terminal WD40 repeats interacted with the RD4 region of NCOR. In
vitro, TBL1 and TBLR1 also bound histones H2B (see 609904) and H4 (see
602822), and transcriptional repression by TBL1 and TBLR1 correlated
with their interactions with histones. Using small interfering RNAs,
Yoon et al. (2003) demonstrated that HDAC3 was essential for repression
by unliganded thyroid hormone receptor. TBL1 and TBLR1 were also
essential, but they were functionally redundant.

Virtually all neural stem cells maintain an undifferentiated state and
the capacity to self-renew in response to fibroblast growth factor-2
(FGF2; 134920). Hermanson et al. (2002) reported that NCOR, a repressor
or transcription, is a principal regulator in neural stem cells, since
FGF2-treated embryonic cortical progenitors from NCOR gene-disrupted
mice displayed impaired self-renewal and spontaneous differentiation
into astroglia-like cells. Stimulation of wildtype neural stem cells
with ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF; 118945), a
differentiation-inducing cytokine, resulted in a
phosphatidyl-inositol-3-OH kinase/Akt1 kinase-dependent (see 164730)
phosphorylation of NCOR, and caused a temporally correlated
redistribution of NCOR to the cytoplasm. Hermanson et al. (2002)
observed that this is a critical strategy for cytokine-induced astroglia
differentiation and lineage-characteristic gene expression. Recruitment
of protein phosphatase-1 (see 176875) to a specific binding site on NCOR
exerted a reciprocal effect on the cellular localization of NCOR.
Hermanson et al. (2002) proposed that repression by NCOR, modulated by
opposing enzymatic activities, is a critical mechanism in neural stem
cells that underlies the inhibition of glial differentiation.

Using transfected mouse and human cells, Sardi et al. (2006) found that,
upon NRG1 (142445)-induced activation and presenilin (PSEN1;
104311)-dependent cleavage of ERBB4 (600543), the ERBB4 intracellular
domain formed a complex with TAB2 and NCOR. This complex translocated to
the nucleus of undifferentiated rat neural precursors and inhibited
their differentiation into astrocytes by repressing transcription of
glial genes. Consistent with this observation, cortical astrogenesis
occurred precociously in Erbb4-knockout mice, and this phenotype could
be rescued by reexpression of a cleavable isoform of human ERBB4, but
not by reexpression of an uncleavable ERBB4 isoform.

MAPPING

Using a mapped bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) containing 158 kb
of genomic NCOR1, Ordentlich et al. (1999) mapped the human NCOR1 gene
to chromosome 11p11.2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Jepsen et al. (2000) generated mice with targeted disruption of the
Ncor1 gene. Altered patterns of transcription in tissues and cells
derived from Ncor1-deficient mice and the resulting block at specific
points in central nervous system, erythrocyte, and thymocyte development
indicated that NCOR1 is a required component of short-term active
repression by nuclear receptors and MAD (600021) and of a subset of
long-term repression events mediated by REST (600571). Unexpectedly,
NCOR1 and HDAC3 were also required for transcriptional activation of 1
class of retinoic acid response element. Together, these findings
suggested that specific combinations of corepressors and histone
deacetylases mediate the gene-specific actions of DNA-bound repressors
in development of multiple organ systems.

Alenghat et al. (2008) created a knockin mouse model in which a missense
mutation, Y478A, was introduced into the Ncor1 deacetylase activation
domain (DAD). This created a mutant protein that was stable but unable
to associate with or activate Hdac3. The DADm mice were viable, born at
normal mendelian frequencies, and morphologically indistinguishable from
wildtype littermates at birth. Thus, Ncor1 binding to Hdac3 is not
required for normal development, and the embryonic defects of mice
lacking Ncor1 are due to factors other than, or in addition to, Hdac3
recruitment by Ncor1. However, the DADm mice had aberrant regulation of
clock genes and had abnormal circadian behavior. These mice were leaner
and more insulin-sensitive owing to increased energy expenditure.
Unexpectedly, loss of a functional Ncor1-Hdac3 complex in vivo did not
lead to sustained increases in known catabolic genes, but instead
significantly altered the oscillatory patterns of several metabolic
genes, demonstrating that circadian regulation of metabolism is critical
for normal energy balance. Alenghat et al. (2008) concluded that
activation of Hdac3 by Ncor1 is a nodal point in the epigenetic
regulation of circadian and metabolic physiology.

REFERENCE 1. Alenghat, T.; Meyers, K.; Mullican, S. E.; Leitner, K.; Adeniji-Adele,
A.; Avila, J.; Bucan, M.; Ahima, R. S.; Kaestner, K. H.; Lazar, M.
A.: Nuclear receptor corepressor and histone deacetylase 3 govern
circadian metabolic physiology. Nature 456: 997-1000, 2008.

2. Baek, S. H.; Ohgi, K. A.; Rose, D. W.; Koo, E. H.; Glass, C. K.;
Rosenfeld, M. G.: Exchange of N-CoR corepressor and Tip60 coactivator
complexes links gene expression by NF-kappa-B and beta-amyloid precursor
protein. Cell 110: 55-67, 2002.

3. Grignani, F.; De Matteis, S.; Nervi, C.; Tomassoni, L.; Gelmetti,
V.; Cioce, M.; Fanelli, M.; Ruthardt, M.; Ferrara, F. F.; Zamir, I.;
Seiser, C.; Grignani, F.; Lazar, M. A.; Minucci, S.; Pelicci, P. G.
: Fusion proteins of the retinoic acid receptor-alpha recruit histone
deacetylase in promyelocytic leukaemia. Nature 391: 815-818, 1998.

4. Hermanson, O.; Jepsen, K.; Rosenfeld, M. G.: N-CoR controls differentiation
of neural stem cells into astrocytes. Nature 419: 934-939, 2002.

5. Horlein, A. J.; Naar, A. M.; Heinzel, T.; Torchia, J.; Gloss, B.;
Kurokawa, R.; Ryan, A.; Kamel, Y.; Soderstrom, M.; Glass, C. K.; Rosenfeld,
M. G.: Ligand-independent repression by the thyroid hormone receptor
mediated by a nuclear receptor co-repressor. Nature 377: 397-403,
1995.

6. Hu, X.; Lazar, M. A.: The CoRNR motif controls the recruitment
of corepressors by nuclear hormone receptors. Nature 402: 93-96,
1999.

7. Jepsen, K.; Hermanson, O.; Onami, T. M.; Gleiberman, A. S.; Lunyak,
V.; McEvilly, R. J.; Kurokawa, R.; Kumar, V.; Liu, F.; Seto, E.; Hedrick,
S. M.; Mandel, G.; Glass, C. K.; Rose, D. W.; Rosenfeld, M. G.: Combinatorial
roles of the nuclear receptor corepressor in transcription and development. Cell 102:
753-763, 2000.

8. Ordentlich, P.; Downes, M.; Xie, W.; Genin, A.; Spinner, N. B.;
Evans, R. M.: Unique forms of human and mouse nuclear receptor corepressor
SMRT. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 2639-2644, 1999.

9. Sardi, S. P.; Murtie, J.; Koirala, S.; Patten, B. A.; Corfas, G.
: Presenilin-dependent ErbB4 nuclear signaling regulates the timing
of astrogenesis in the developing brain. Cell 127: 185-197, 2006.

10. Yoon, H.-G.; Chan, D. W.; Huang, Z.-Q.; Li, J.; Fondell, J. D.;
Qin, J.; Wong, J.: Purification and functional characterization of
the human N-CoR complex: the roles of HDAC3, TBL1 and TBLR1. EMBO
J. 22: 1336-1346, 2003.

11. Zhang, J.; Kalkum, M.; Chait, B. T.; Roeder, R. G.: The N-CoR-HDAC3
nuclear receptor corepressor complex inhibits the JNK pathway through
the integral subunit GPS2. Molec. Cell 9: 611-623, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/8/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/18/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/1/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/12/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/10/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/29/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/20/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/10/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/21/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/6/1995

EDITED mgross: 02/08/2013
mgross: 1/29/2013
terry: 11/3/2010
wwang: 5/12/2009
mgross: 5/8/2009
alopez: 2/23/2009
terry: 2/18/2009
mgross: 6/1/2004
alopez: 11/13/2002
terry: 11/12/2002
mgross: 10/10/2002
mgross: 7/29/2002
alopez: 5/1/2001
mgross: 11/20/2000
alopez: 2/10/2000
mgross: 12/20/1999
psherman: 12/17/1999
carol: 4/26/1999
mgross: 4/21/1999
psherman: 2/15/1999
mark: 10/6/1995

609051	TITLE *609051 CASPASE RECRUITMENT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 8; CARD8
;;TUMOR-UPREGULATED CARD-CONTAINING ANTAGONIST OF CASP9; TUCAN;;
CARD INHIBITOR OF NFKB-ACTIVATING LIGANDS; CARDINAL;;
NDPP1;;
KIAA0955
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Caspase recruitment domain (CARD)-containing proteins, such as CARD8,
are involved in pathways leading to activation of caspases or nuclear
factor kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011) in the context of apoptosis or
inflammation, respectively (Bouchier-Hayes et al., 2001).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned CARD8, which they designated
KIAA0955. The transcript contains several repetitive elements in the
3-prime UTR, and the deduced protein contains 431 amino acids. RT-PCR
ELISA detected highest expression of CARD8 in kidney and corpus callosum
and lowest expression in pancreas. All other tissues and specific brain
regions examined showed intermediate expression.

By searching databases for sequences similar to the CARD domain of APAF1
(602233), followed by PCR, Pathan et al. (2001) cloned CARD8, which they
designated TUCAN. CARD8 contains an N-terminal segment that shares 50%
amino acid identity with a region of the proapoptotic protein DEFCAP
(NALP1; 606636), as well as a C-terminal CARD domain.

By Western blot analysis of several tissues, Bouchier-Hayes et al.
(2001) found CARD8 expressed at an apparent molecular mass of 50 kD,
close to the predicted molecular mass of 49 kD. Highest expression was
in lung, ovary, testis, and placenta, with low or absent expression in
brain, skeletal muscle, and spleen.

By RT-PCR, Razmara et al. (2002) found highest CARD8 expression in
placenta, spleen, lymph node, and bone marrow.

By EST analysis, Zhang and Fu (2002) identified 5 splice variants of
CARD8, which they called NDPP1. The variants all have different
translation start sites.

Yamamoto et al. (2005) cloned a splice variant of CARD8 that they named
TUCAN54 after the calculated molecular mass of the encoded protein. The
deduced 487-amino acid TUCAN54 protein has a unique 80-amino acid N
terminus compared with the 48-kD isoform, TUCAN48, but both proteins
contain a NALP homology domain, a candidate caspase cleavage site
(DEED), a C-terminal CARD domain, and several putative phosphorylation
sites. The N terminus of TUCAN54 provides phosphorylation sites not
found in TUCAN48. RT-PCR detected high TUCAN54 expression in leukocytes
and spleen. Expression was lower in heart, lung, thymus, liver,
pancreas, and testis, and little to no expression was detected in other
tissues examined. TUCAN54 was widely expressed in a variety of tumor
cell lines.

By EST database and RT-PCR analyses, Bagnall et al. (2008) characterized
5 isoforms of CARD8 that differ in their N termini and have predicted
molecular masses of 47.5, 48, 51, 54, and 60 kD. The major 48-kD isoform
has 432 amino acids and starts in exon 5, and the 54-kD isoform has 487
amino acids and starts in exon 4. The 47.5-kD isoform differs in the
first 20 amino acids from the 48-kD isoform and results from a putative
initiation codon 20 bp upstream of exon 6. Western blot analysis of
lymphoblastoid cell lines from 6 Crohn disease (see IBD1; 266600)
patients showed a 48- or 47.5-kD band in all cell lines and an
additional band of 54 kD in only 1 cell line.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang and Fu (2002) determined that the CARD8 gene contains 14 exons and
spans more than 50 kb. The first 3 exons are noncoding.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Zhang and Fu (2002) mapped the CARD8 gene
to chromosome 19q13.3.

GENE FUNCTION

By overexpression in Jurkat human T cells, Pathan et al. (2001) found
that CARD8 inhibited apoptosis and caspase activation induced by APAF1-
and CASP9 (602234)-dependent stimuli but not APAF1- and
CASP9-independent stimuli. Immunohistochemical analysis detected
elevated CARD8 immunostaining in 42 of 66 (64%) colon cancer specimens
compared with the adjacent normal tissues. Higher endogenous CARD8
immunostaining correlated with shorter patient survival.

Bouchier-Hayes et al. (2001) found that CARD8 suppressed NFKB activation
associated with overexpression of NFKB activators or with ligand-induced
stimulation of IL1 receptor (see 147810) or TNF receptor (see 191190).
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments revealed that CARD8 interacted with
the regulatory subunit of the I-kappa-B kinase complex, IKK-gamma
(IKBKG; 300248). Bouchier-Hayes et al. (2001) concluded that CARD8 is a
regulator of NFKB activation in the context of proinflammatory signals.

Razmara et al. (2002) found that CARD8 mediated apoptosis.
Overexpression of CARD8 induced apoptosis in transfected breast cancer
and green monkey kidney cells. In contrast to the findings of Pathan et
al. (2001), inhibitor studies by Razmara et al. (2002) indicated that
apoptosis was induced by CARD8 via the APAF1/CASP9 apoptotic complex.
CARD8 also suppressed NFKB activation by diverse stimuli, and stable
CARD8 expression sensitized monocytes to differentiation-induced
apoptosis. Razmara et al. (2002) found that CARD8 bound CASP1 (147678)
and negatively regulated CASP1-dependent IL1B secretion in monocytes. In
addition, CARD8 bound the CASP1 inhibitors ICEBERG (605354) and
pseudo-ICE. Razmara et al. (2002) concluded that CARD8 may be an adaptor
molecule that regulates CASP1 activation, NFKB activation, and
apoptosis.

Zhang and Fu (2002) found that expression of CARD8 blocked BAX
(600040)-induced apoptosis in several human cell lines and in rat
embryonic fibroblasts. TNF-alpha-induced NFKB activation was suppressed
in a CARD8-transfected hepatoma cell line.

Agostini et al. (2004) noted that NALP1, unlike other short NALP
proteins, contains a C-terminal CARD domain that interacts with and
activates CASP5 (602665). CASP1 and CASP5 are activated when they
assemble with NALP1 and ASC (PYCARD; 606838) to form the inflammasome,
which is responsible for processing the inactive IL1B (147720) precursor
(proIL1B) to release active IL1B cytokine. Using immunoprecipitation
analysis, Agostini et al. (2004) found that CARD8, which contains
C-terminal FIIND (function to find) and CARD domains, associated with
constructs of NALP2 (609364) and NALP3 (CIAS1; 606416) lacking the
N-terminal pyrin domain and/or the C-terminal leucine-rich repeat
domain. They determined that the interaction was mediated by the FIIND
domain of CARD8 and the centrally located NACHT domain of NALP2 and
NALP3. The pyrin domain of NALP2 and NALP3, like that of NALP1,
interacted with the pyrin domain of ASC, which recruits CASP1.
Transfection experiments showed that an inflammasome could be assembled
containing ASC, CARD8, CASP1, and a short NALP, resulting in activation
of CASP1, but not CASP5, and strong processing of proIL1B.

Yamamoto et al. (2005) found that overexpression of TUCAN54 in human
cell lines inhibited pro-CASP9 activation and suppressed apoptosis
induced by staurosporin, a protein kinase inhibitor, and by etoposide, a
chemotherapeutic reagent. In contrast, suppression of TUCAN54 expression
via small interfering RNA increased etoposide-induced cell death.
TUCAN54 also inhibited CASP8 (601763) activation, thereby suppressing
FAS (TNFRSF6; 134637)-induced cell death. TUCAN48 inhibited CASP9
activation and, more weakly, CASP8 activation, but only TUCAN54
physically associated with FADD (602457). FADD constitutively associated
with pro-CASP8 in transfected cells, suggesting that TUCAN54 inhibits
pro-CASP8 activation by forming a molecular complex with FADD and
pro-CASP8.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using RNA from lymphoblastoid cell lines of Crohn disease patients,
Bagnall et al. (2008) showed that an A-to-T transversion in exon 5 of
the CARD8 gene (dbSNP rs2043211), predicted to result in a cys10-to-ter
(C10X) substitution in the 48-kD isoform of CARD8, did not affect the
47.5-kD isoform. Patients who were TT homozygous showed somewhat reduced
expression of CARD8 mRNA, but expressed a 47.5-kD protein. The authors
showed that the dbSNP rs2043211 variant had multiple outcomes including
unaffected, cys10 to ter, cys34 to ter, phe52 to ile, and phe102 to ile.
Bagnall et al. (2008) noted that the multiple isoforms and differing
consequences for a predicted stop codon polymorphism underline the
importance of detailed analysis of the effects of proposed functional
variants on gene expression.

Using a genomewide screen of Salmonella typhimurium-infected HapMap
lymphoblastoid cells from individuals of northern and western European
or Nigerian ancestry, Ko et al. (2009) identified a loss-of-function
allele of CARD8 (cys10 to ter; dbSNP rs2043211) that was associated with
increased cell death in vitro. Overexpression of alternative alleles and
RNA interference analysis supported the association. Genotyping of
individuals with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) showed a
modestly increased risk with the variant. Ko et al. (2009) proposed that
loss of CARD8 function and an increased inflammatory response may
protect against Salmonella but lead to increased inflammatory disease.

REFERENCE 1. Agostini, L.; Martinon, F.; Burns, K.; McDermott, M. F.; Hawkins,
P. N.; Tschopp, J.: NALP3 forms an IL-1-beta-processing inflammasome
with increased activity in Muckle-Wells autoinflammatory disorder. Immunity 20:
319-325, 2004.

2. Bagnall, R. D.; Roberts, R. G.; Mirza, M. M.; Torigoe, T.; Prescott,
N. J.; Mathew, C. G.: Novel isoforms of the CARD8 (TUCAN) gene evade
a nonsense mutation. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 16: 619-625, 2008.

3. Bouchier-Hayes, L.; Conroy, H.; Egan, H.; Adrain, C.; Creagh, E.
M.; MacFarlane, M.; Martin, S. J.: CARDINAL, a novel caspase recruitment
domain protein, is an inhibitor of multiple NF-kappa-B activation
pathways. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 44069-44077, 2001.

4. Ko, D. C.; Shukla, K. P.; Fong, C.; Wasnick, M.; Brittnacher, M.
J.; Wurfel, M. M.; Holden, T. D.; O'Keefe, G. E.; Van Yserloo, B.;
Akey, J. M.; Miller, S. I.: A genome-wide in vitro bacterial-infection
screen reveals human variation in the host response associated with
inflammatory disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 85: 214-227, 2009.

5. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

6. Pathan, N.; Marusawa, H.; Krajewska, M.; Matsuzawa, S.; Kim, H.;
Okada, K.; Torii, S.; Kitada, S.; Krajewski, S.; Welsh, K.; Pio, F.;
Godzik, A.; Reed, J. C.: TUCAN, an antiapoptotic caspase-associated
recruitment domain family protein overexpressed in cancer. J. Biol.
Chem. 276: 32220-32229, 2001.

7. Razmara, M.; Srinivasula, S. M.; Wang, L.; Poyet, J.-L.; Geddes,
B. J.; DiStefano, P. S.; Bertin, J.; Alnemri, E. S.: CARD-8 protein,
a new CARD family member that regulates caspase-1 activation and apoptosis. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 13952-13958, 2002.

8. Yamamoto, M.; Torigoe, T.; Kamiguchi, K.; Hirohashi, Y.; Nakanishi,
K.; Nabeta, C.; Asanuma, H.; Tsuruma, T.; Sato, T.; Hata, F.; Ohmura,
T.; Yamaguchi, K.; Kurotaki, T.; Hirata, K.; Sato, N.: A novel isoform
of TUCAN is overexpressed in human cancer tissues and suppresses both
caspase-8- and caspase-9-mediated apoptosis. Cancer Res. 65: 8706-8714,
2005.

9. Zhang, H.; Fu, W.: NDPP1 is a novel CARD domain containing protein
which can inhibit apoptosis and suppress NF-kappa-B activation. Int.
J. Oncol. 20: 1035-1040, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/27/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/4/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/18/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/1/2005

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/29/2004

EDITED mgross: 10/27/2009
terry: 10/27/2009
mgross: 6/5/2009
terry: 6/4/2009
wwang: 12/30/2008
terry: 12/18/2008
mgross: 5/13/2005
mgross: 3/1/2005
mgross: 11/29/2004

602130	TITLE *602130 MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE 3; MAPKAPK3
;;MAPKAP3;;
MAPKAP KINASE 3;;
3PK
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Sithanandam et al. (1996) identified a mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK)-activated protein kinase with a single potential SH3-binding site
in the proline-rich N terminus, a putative ATP-binding site, 2 MAP
kinase phosphorylation site motifs, and a putative nuclear localization
signal. They called the protein 3pK. The gene was cloned from NotI
linking clones and codes for a 2.5-kd mRNA that was expressed in all
human tissues examined, being especially high in the heart and skeletal
muscle. Sequence analysis revealed a 382-amino acid protein of 42 kD. It
shares 72% nucleotide and 75% amino acid identity with MAPKAP kinase-2
(602006). In HL60 cells and transiently transfected HEK293 cells,
activation of 3pK in vivo by the growth inducers serum and tetradecanoyl
phorbol acetate was Raf dependent and was mediated by the Raf/MEK/ERK
kinase cascade.

GENE FUNCTION

Ludwig et al. (1996) showed that 3pK is the first kinase to be activated
through all 3 MAPK cascades: extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK;
see 176948), MAPKAP kinase-2, and Jun-N-terminal
kinases/stress-activated protein kinases. They showed also that 3pK has
a novel substrate specificity from other MAPKAPs. Thus, Ludwig et al.
(1996) concluded that 3pK functions as an integrative element of
signaling in both mitogen and stress responses.

Maizels et al. (2001) investigated the activation in vivo and regulation
of the expression of components of the p38 MAPK (600289) pathway during
gonadotropin-induced formation and development of the rat corpus luteum.
They postulated that the p38 MAPK pathway could serve to promote
phosphorylation of key substrates during luteal maturation, since
maturing luteal cells, thought to be cAMP-nonresponsive, nevertheless
maintain critical phosphoproteins. The p38 MAPK downstream protein
kinase target MAPKAPK3 was newly induced at both mRNA and protein levels
during luteal formation and maturation, while mRNA and protein
expression of the closely related MAPKAPK2 diminished. MAPKAPK3-specific
immune complex kinase assays provided direct evidence that MAPKAPK3 was
in an activated state during luteal maturation in vivo. Transient
transfection studies provided direct evidence that MAPKAPK3 was capable
of signaling to activate CREB (123810) transcriptional activity, as
assessed by means of GAL4-CREB fusion protein construct coexpressed with
GAL4-luciferase reporter construct. Introduction of wildtype, but not
kinase-dead mutant, MAPKAPK3 cDNA, into a mouse ovarian cell line
stimulated GAL4-CREB-dependent transcriptional activity approximately
3-fold. Maizels et al. (2001) concluded that MAPKAPK3 is uniquely poised
to support luteal maturation through the phosphorylation and activation
of the nuclear transcription factor CREB.

GENE STRUCTURE

Maizels et al. (2001) determined that the MAPKAPK3 gene contains 10
exons.

MAPPING

Maizels et al. (2001) mapped the MAPKAPK3 gene to chromosome 3p21.3.

REFERENCE 1. Ludwig, S.; Engel, K.; Hoffmeyer, A.; Sithanandam, G.; Neufeld,
B.; Palm, D.; Gaestel, M.; Rapp, U.: 3pK, a novel mitogen-activated
protein (MAP) kinase-activated protein kinase, is targeted by three
MAP kinase pathways. Molec. Cell. Biol. 16: 6687-6697, 1996.

2. Maizels, E. T.; Mukherjee, A.; Sithanandam, G.; Peters, C. A.;
Cottom, J.; Mayo, K. E.; Hunzicker-Dunn, M.: Developmental regulation
of mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated kinases-2 and -3 (MAPKAPK-2/-3)
in vivo during corpus luteum formation in the rat. Molec. Endocr. 15:
716-733, 2001.

3. Sithanandam, G.; Latif, F.; Duh, F.-M.; Bernal, R.; Smola, U.;
Li, H.; Kuzmin, I.; Wixler, V.; Geil, L.; Shrestha, S.; Lloyd, P.;
Bader, S.; Sekido, Y.; Tartof, K. D.; Kashuba, V. I.; Zabarovsky,
E. R.; Dean, M.; Klein, G.; Lerman, M. I.; Minna, J. D.; Rapp, U.
R.; Allikmets, R.: 3pK, a new mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated
protein kinase located in the small cell lung cancer tumor suppressor
gene region. Molec. Cell. Biol. 16: 868-876, 1996. Note: Erratum:
Molec. Cell. Biol. 16: 1880 only, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/11/2002

CREATED Ethylin Wang Jabs: 11/19/1997

EDITED carol: 04/12/2013
carol: 9/8/2003
alopez: 7/11/2002
psherman: 3/26/1999
psherman: 4/21/1998
mark: 12/19/1997

607083	TITLE *607083 WOLF-HIRSCHHORN SYNDROME CANDIDATE 1-LIKE 1; WHSC1L1
;;NUCLEAR SET DOMAIN-CONTAINING 3; NSD3
NSD3/NUP98 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By EST database searching with mouse Nsd1 (606681) and human NSD2
(WHSC1; 602952) as probe and screening of an amnion cell cDNA library,
Angrand et al. (2001) cloned a partial sequence for WHSC1L1, which they
called NSD3. They obtained the full-length cDNA by 5-prime RACE. The
deduced 1,437-amino acid protein contains 2 PWWP domains involved in
protein-protein interaction, 5 PHD-type zinc finger motifs found in
chromatin-associated proteins, a SAC (SET-associated cys-rich) domain, a
SET domain, and a C-terminal C5HCH domain. They also identified a
variant, arising from alternative polyadenylation and exon splicing,
that encodes a deduced 645-amino acid peptide. The short isoform
contains a single PWWP domain. By PCR analysis, Angrand et al. (2001)
found the 2 variants, as well as a third, 1,388-amino acid peptide, in
HeLa cells. WHSC1L1 shares 68% and 55% identity with mouse Nsd1 (606681)
and human WHSC1 (602952), respectively, over a 700-amino acid block
containing the SAC, SET, and C5HCH domains. Northern blot analysis
detected an 8.5-kb transcript in all tissues examined, with highest
expression in brain, heart, and skeletal muscle, and lower expression in
liver and lung.

GENE STRUCTURE

Angrand et al. (2001) determined that the WHSC1L1 gene contains 24 exons
and spans over 90 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH, Angrand et al. (2001) mapped the WHSC1L1 gene to chromosome
8p12. Stec et al. (2001) identified a pseudogene (WHSC1L2P) on
chromosome 17q21.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Rosati et al. (2002) described fusion between the NUP98 gene (601021)
and the NSD3 gene in a patient with acute myeloid leukemia associated
with t(8;11)(p11.2;p15). FISH analysis revealed a split of a specific
BAC which showed the fusion partner at 8p11.2 to be NSD3.

REFERENCE 1. Angrand, P.-O.; Apiou, F.; Stewart, A. F.; Dutrillaux, B.; Losson,
R.; Chambon, P.: NSD3, a new SET domain-containing gene, maps to
8p12 and is amplified in human breast cancer cell lines. Genomics 74:
79-88, 2001.

2. Rosati, R.; La Starza, R.; Veronese, A.; Aventin, A.; Schwienbacher,
C.; Vallespi, T.; Negrini, M.; Martelli, M. F.; Mecucci, C.: NUP98
is fused to the NSD3 gene in acute myeloid leukemia associated with
t(8;11)(p11.2;p15). Blood 99: 3857-3860, 2002. Note: Erratum: Blood
100: 1132 only, 2002.

3. Stec, I.; van Ommen, G.-J. B.; den Dunnen, J. T.: WHSC1L1, on
human chromosome 8p11.2, closely resembles WHSC1 and maps to a duplicated
region shared with 4p16.3. Genomics 76: 5-8, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/2/2002

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/28/2002

EDITED terry: 03/14/2013
cwells: 7/31/2002
terry: 7/2/2002
carol: 6/28/2002

600662	TITLE *600662 MADS BOX TRANSCRIPTION ENHANCER FACTOR 2, POLYPEPTIDE C; MEF2C
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MEF2C belongs to the myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) family of
transcription factors. MEF2C plays a pivotal role in myogenesis,
development of the anterior heart field, neural crest and craniofacial
development, and neurogenesis, among others (summary by Zweier et al.,
2010).

See also MEF2A (600660).

CLONING

McDermott et al. (1993) cloned a member of the MEF2 family of proteins
from a human skeletal muscle cDNA library using a fragment of the MEF2A
cDNA as a probe. Transcripts of MEF2C were found in the skeletal muscle
and brain. Alternative splice variants were found, 1 of which was unique
to the brain.

Leifer et al. (1993) found that the brain form was expressed by neurons
in particular layers of the cerebral cortex and that expression declined
during postnatal development. The skeletal isoform of the cDNA encodes a
465-amino acid protein with conserved MADS and MEF2 domains. Like the
other MEF2 gene products, MEF2C has both DNA binding and
trans-activating activities indistinguishable from other members of the
family. MEF2C, however, is induced late during myogenic differentiation
and has a strict tissue-specific pattern of expression not seen in MEF2A
or MEF2B.

Zweier et al. (2010) found high expression of isoform 1 of the MEF2C
gene in fetal and adult human brain, whereas isoform 2 was widely
expressed with highest levels in skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Breitbart et al. (1993) suggested that, while MEF2A may be involved in
induction of muscle differentiation, MEF2C may be involved with
maintenance of the differentiated state.

CREB-binding protein (CBP; 600140)/p300 (602700) and p300/CBP-associated
factor (PCAF; 602203) are coactivators for MEF2C during differentiation.
Chen et al. (2000) showed that NCOA2 mediates the coactivation of
MEF2C-dependent transcription through interaction with the MADS box
domain of MEF2C. They proposed a model of cooperative interaction
between NCOA2, myogenin (MYOG; 159980), and MEF2C in the regulation of
muscle-specific gene expression.

During mammalian development, electrical activity promotes the
calcium-dependent survival of neurons that have made appropriate
synaptic connections. Mao et al. (1999) showed that calcium influx into
cerebellar neurons triggers the activation of the MKK6 (601254)-p38 MAP
kinase (600289) cascade and that the p38 MAP kinase then phosphorylates
and activates MEF2s. Once activated by this calcium-dependent p38 MAP
kinase signaling pathway, MEF2 can regulate the expression of genes that
are critical for survival of newly differentiated neurons. These
findings demonstrated that MEF2 is a calcium-regulated transcription
factor and defined a function for MEF2 during nervous system development
that is distinct from previously well-characterized functions of MEF2
during muscle differentiation.

Chen et al. (2002) demonstrated that Carm1 (603934) and Ncoa2
cooperatively stimulated the activity of Mef2c in mouse mesenchymal stem
cells and found that there was direct interaction among Mef2c, Grip1,
and Carm1.

By targeting human MEF2A or mouse Mef2c expression to mouse
cardiomyocytes, Xu et al. (2006) demonstrated that overexpressing these
transcription factors caused cardiomyopathy or predisposed transgenic
mice to more fulminant disease following pressure overload. In cultured
cardiomyocytes, MEF2A or Mef2c overexpression induced sarcomeric
disorganization and focal elongation. Both MEF2A and Mef2c programmed
similar profiles of gene expression in the heart that included genes
involved in extracellular matrix remodeling, ion handling, and
metabolism.

Potthoff et al. (2007) showed that class II histone deacetylases (e.g.,
HDAC5; 605315) were selectively degraded by the proteasome in mouse
slow, oxidative myofibers, enabling Mef2 to activate the slow myofiber
gene program. Forced expression of Hdac5 in skeletal muscle or genetic
deletion of Mef2c or Mef2d (600663) blocked activity-dependent fast to
slow fiber transformation, whereas expression of hyperactive Mef2c
promoted the slow fiber phenotype, enhancing endurance and enabling mice
to run almost twice the distance of wildtype littermates.

Using a loss-of-function allele in mice, Johnnidis et al. (2008)
reported that the myeloid-specific microRNA-223 (miR223; 300694)
negatively regulates progenitor proliferation and granulocyte
differentiation and activation. miR223 mutant mice had an expanded
granulocytic compartment resulting from a cell-autonomous increase in
the number of granulocyte progenitors. Johnnidis et al. (2008) showed
that Mef2c, a transcription factor that promotes myeloid progenitor
proliferation, is a target of miR223, and that genetic ablation of Mef2c
suppresses progenitor expansion and corrects the neutrophilic phenotype
in miR223-null mice. In addition, granulocytes lacking miR223 were
hypermature, hypersensitive to activating stimuli, and displayed
increased fungicidal activity. As a consequence of this neutrophil
hyperactivity, miR223 mutant mice spontaneously developed inflammatory
lung pathology and exhibited exaggerated tissue destruction after
endotoxin challenge. Johnnidis et al. (2008) concluded that their data
supported a model in which miR223 acts as a fine tuner of granulocyte
production and the inflammatory response.

Zweier et al. (2010) demonstrated that MEF2C increases promoter
activation of the MECP2 (300005) and CDKL5 (300203) genes.

MAPPING

Martin et al. (1994) mapped Mef2 to mouse chromosome 13. By fluorescence
in situ hybridization, Krainc et al. (1995) mapped human MEF2C to
chromosome 5q14, a region with homology of synteny to the mouse
location.

CYTOGENETICS

In 5 unrelated children with severe mental retardation, stereotypic
movements, epilepsy, and/or cerebral malformations (613443), Le Meur et
al. (2010) identified 5 different interstitial de novo deletions of
chromosome 5q14 ranging in size from 216 kb to 8.8 Mb. The minimal
common deleted region contained only the MEF2C gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a girl with severe mental retardation, stereotypic movements,
epilepsy, and cerebral malformation (MRD20; 613443), Le Meur et al.
(2010) identified a de novo heterozygous nonsense mutation in the MEF2C
gene (S228X; 600662.0001). Le Meur et al. (2010) noted that the role of
MEF2C in synaptic plasticity is consistent with a role in learning and
memory, and the authors referred to the mouse models of Li et al. (2008)
and Barbosa et al. (2008).

Zweier et al. (2010) identified 4 different de novo heterozygous
mutations in the MEF2C gene (see. e.g., 600662.0002-600662.0004) in 4 of
362 probands with mental retardation who were screened for mutations in
this gene. Two of the mutations were missense and 2 were truncating. Two
additional patients with a similar disorder had heterozygous deletions
involving the MEF2C gene. Analysis of blood-derived RNA showed
significantly decreased levels of MEF2C isoform 2 mRNA in all patients
with deletions in or including the MEF2C gene region, including the
patients reported by Engels et al. (2009), Cardoso et al. (2009), and Le
Meur et al. (2010), suggesting haploinsufficiency. Two patients with
missense mutations did not show decreased MEF2C mRNA levels. All
deletions and mutations caused significantly decreased MEF2C
transcriptional activity, which could be rescued by wildtype MEF2C.
Finally, all patients, including the 2 with missense mutations, showed
decreased levels of MECP2 mRNA, and all except 2 patients had decreased
levels of CDKL5 mRNA. These 2 genes are involved in Rett or Rett
syndrome-like phenotypes (312750 and 300672, respectively), which shares
some features with MRD20. Zweier et al. (2010) concluded that the
phenotype results from involvement of a common pathway involving these 3
genes.

ANIMAL MODEL

Members of the MEF2 family of MADs-box transcription factors bind to an
A-T-rich DNA sequence associated with muscle-specific genes. The murine
Mef2c gene is expressed in heart precursor cells before formation of the
linear heart tube. In mice homozygous for a known mutation of Mef2c, Lin
et al. (1997) found that the heart tube did not undergo looping
morphogenesis, the future right ventricle did not form, and a subset of
cardiac muscle genes was not expressed. The absence of the right
ventricular region of the mutant correlated with downregulation of the
dHAND gene, which encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
required for cardiac morphogenesis. The authors concluded that MEF2C is
an essential regulator of cardiac morphogenesis and right ventricular
development.

Von Both et al. (2004) characterized the molecular basis for defective
heart formation in Foxh1 (603621)-null mice and determined that Mef2c is
a direct target of Foxh1. They identified a composite Foxh1-Nkx2.5
(600584)-binding site within the Mef2c gene that was regulated by
Tgf-beta (see 190180) signaling in a Smad-dependent manner. Von Both et
al. (2004) concluded that a TGF-beta-like SMAD signaling pathway
specifies the anterior heart field through a FOXH1-NKX2.5 complex that
regulates MEF2C expression.

Verzi et al. (2007) found that conditional inactivation of Mef2c in
mouse neural crest resulted in neonatal lethality due to severe
craniofacial defects. Mef2c was required for expression of Dlx5
(600028), Dlx6 (600030), and Hand2 (602407) transcription factors in the
branchial arches, and Verzi et al. (2007) identified a branchial
arch-specific enhancer in the Dlx5/Dlx6 locus that was activated
synergistically by Mef2c and Dlx5. Mef2c and Dlx5/Dlx6 also interacted
genetically, since mice heterozygous for either Dlx5/Dlx6 or Mef2c were
normal at birth and survived to weaning, whereas heterozygosity for both
Dlx5/Dlx6 and Mef2c resulted in defective palate development and
neonatal lethality.

Barbosa et al. (2008) found that mice with brain-specific deletion of
the Mef2c gene were viable to adulthood, were slightly smaller than
wildtype littermates, and showed impaired balance beam walking and an
abnormal hind/forelimb clasping reflex at a young age. In addition,
Mef2c-knockout mice showed impaired hippocampal-dependent learning and
memory. These behavioral changes were accompanied by a marked increase
in the number of excitatory synapses and potentiation of basal and
evoked synaptic transmission resulting from altered presynaptic
function. Conversely, neuronal expression of a superactivating form of
Mef2c in postsynaptic cells resulted in a reduction of excitatory
postsynaptic sites without affecting learning and memory performance. No
changes in synapse structure were observed. The findings suggested that
MEF2C activity per se does not directly determine learning, but somehow
facilitates learning-related plasticity by controlling excessive
synaptic input. Barbosa et al. (2008) concluded that refinement of
synaptic connectivity facilitates hippocampal-dependent learning and
memory.

Li et al. (2008) found that conditional knockout of Mef2c in nestin
(NES; 600915)-expressing neural stem/progenitor cells impaired neuronal
differentiation in mice, resulting in aberrant aggregation and
compaction of neurons migrating into the lower layers of the neocortex
during development. Neural stem cell proliferation and survival were not
affected. Conditional Mef2c-null mice surviving to adulthood manifested
smaller, less mature neurons and smaller brain size with more immature
electrophysiologic network properties. They also showed severe
behavioral deficits reminiscent of Rett syndrome (RTT; 312750), such as
anxiety, decreased cognitive function, and marked paw-clasping. Li et
al. (2008) concluded that MEF2C has a crucial role in programming early
neuronal differentiation and proper distribution within the layers of
the neocortex during development.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 20
MEF2C, SER228TER

In a girl with autosomal dominant mental retardation-20 (MRD20; 613443),
Le Meur et al. (2010) identified a de novo heterozygous 683C-G
transversion in exon 7 of the MEF2C gene, resulting in a ser228-to-ter
(S228X) substitution.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 20
MEF2C, LEU38GLN

In a 3-year-old girl with MRD20 (613443), Zweier et al. (2010)
identified a de novo heterozygous 113T-A transversion in exon 3 of the
MEF2C gene, resulting in a leu38-to-gln (L38Q) substitution in the MADS
domain. Homology modeling predicted that the mutation may alter
DNA-binding affinity. The patient had severe mental retardation with
absent speech and inability to walk, hypotonia, seizure onset at age 10
months, delayed myelination, and mildly dysmorphic facial features.

.0003
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 20
MEF2C, 1-BP DUP, 99T

In a 14-year-old boy with MRD20 (613443), Zweier et al. (2010)
identified a de novo heterozygous 1-bp duplication (99dupT) in exon 3 of
the MEF2C gene, resulting in a glu34-to-ter (E34X) substitution. The
patient had severe mental retardation with absent speech, hypertonia,
seizures onset at age 10 months, mildly enlarged ventricles, and mildly
dysmorphic facial features.

.0004
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 20
MEF2C, GLY27ALA

In a 10-year-old girl with MRD20 (613443), Zweier et al. (2010)
identified a de novo heterozygous 80G-C transversion in exon 3 of the
MEF2C gene, resulting in a gly27-to-ala (G27A) substitution in the MADS
domain. Homology modeling predicted that the mutation may alter
DNA-binding affinity. The patient had severe mental retardation with
absent speech and difficulty walking, hypotonia, seizure onset at 6
months, delayed myelination, and mildly dysmorphic facial features.

.0005
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 20
MEF2C, 1-BP DEL, 457A

In an 8-year-old girl with severe MRD20 (613443), Bienvenu et al. (2013)
identified a de novo heterozygous 1-bp deletion (457delA) in exon 5 of
the MEF2C gene, predicted to result in premature termination
(N153TfsX33) and loss of the functional transactivation domain. In
infancy, the patient had poor feeding due to marked hypotonia and poor
eye contact due to strabismus. Motor milestones were delayed, and she
walked at age 4 years. At age 18 months, she had a single episode of
myoclonic febrile seizures that were easily controlled. At age 7 years,
she had poor growth, microcephaly (-2.5 SD), lack of speech,
stereotypical movements, unstable wide-based gait, and happy demeanor.
There were mild dysmorphic features, including large eyebrows, open
mouth with thick everted lower lip, and anteverted nares. Brain MRI was
normal.

REFERENCE 1. Barbosa, A. C.; Kim. M.-S.; Ertunc, M.; Adachi, M.; Nelson, E.
D.; McAnally, J.; Richardson, J. A.; Kavalali, E. T.; Monteggia, L.
M.; Bassel-Duby, R.; Olson, E. N.: MEF2C, a transcription factor
that facilitates learning and memory by negative regulation of synapse
numbers and function. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 9391-9396, 2008.

2. Bienvenu, T.; Diebold, B.; Chelly, J.; Isidor, B.: Refining the
phenotype associated with MEF2C point mutations. Neurogenetics 14:
71-75, 2013.

3. Breitbart, R. E.; Liang, C.; Smoot, L. B.; Laheru, D. A.; Mahdavi,
V.; Nadal-Ginard, B.: A fourth human MEF2 transcription factor, hMEF2D,
is an early marker of the myogenic lineage. Development 118: 1095-1106,
1993.

4. Cardoso, C.; Boys, A.; Parrini, E.; Mignon-Ravix, C.; McMahon,
J. M.; Khantane, S.; Bertini, E.; Pallesi, E.; Missirian, C.; Zuffardi,
O.; Novara, F.; Villard, L.; Giglio, S.; Chabrol, B.; Slater, H. R.;
Moncla, A.; Scheffer, I. E.; Guerrini, R.: Periventricular heterotopia,
mental retardation, and epilepsy associated with 5q14.3-q15 deletion. Neurology 72:
784-792, 2009.

5. Chen, S. L.; Dowhan, D. H.; Hosking, B. M.; Muscat, G. E. O.:
The steroid receptor coactivator, GRIP-1, is necessary for MEF-2C-dependent
gene expression and skeletal muscle differentiation. Genes Dev. 14:
1209-1228, 2000.

6. Chen, S. L.; Loffler, K. A.; Chen, D.; Stallcup, M. R.; Muscat,
G. E. O.: The coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase is
necessary for muscle differentiation: CARM1 coactivates myocyte enhancer
factor-2. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 4324-4333, 2002.

7. Engels, H.; Wohlleber, E.; Zink, A., Hoyer, J.; Ludwig, K. U.;
Brockschmidt, F. F.; Wieczorek, D.; Moog, U.; Hellmann-Mersch, B.;
Weber, R. G.; Willatt, L.; Kreiss-Nachtsheim, M.; Firth, H. V.; Rauch,
A.: A novel microdeletion syndrome involving 5q14.3-q15: clinical
and molecular cytogenetic characterization of three patients. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 17: 1592-1599, 2009.

8. Johnnidis, J. B.; Harris, M. H.; Wheeler, R. T.; Stehling-Sun,
S.; Lam, M. H.; Kirak, O.; Brummelkamp, T. R.; Fleming, M. D.; Camargo,
F. D.: Regulation of progenitor cell proliferation and granulocyte
function by microRNA-223. Nature 451: 1125-1129, 2008.

9. Krainc, D.; Haas, M.; Ward, D. C.; Lipton, S. A.; Bruns, G.; Leifer,
D.: Assignment of human myocyte-specific enhancer binding factor
2C (hMEF2C) to human chromosome 5q14 and evidence that MEF2C is evolutionarily
conserved. Genomics 29: 809-811, 1995.

10. Leifer, D.; Krainc, D.; Yu, Y.-T.; McDermott, J.; Breitbart, R.
E.; Heng, J.; Neve, R. L.; Kosofsky, B.; Nadal-Ginard, B.; Lipton,
S. A.: MEF2C, a MADS/MEF2-family transcription factor expressed in
a laminar distribution in cerebral cortex. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90:
1546-1550, 1993.

11. Le Meur, N.; Holder-Espinasse, M.; Jaillard, S.; Goldenberg, A.;
Joriot, S.; Amati-Bonneau, P.; Guichet, A.; Barth, M.; Charollais,
A.; Journel, H.; Auvin, S.; Boucher, C.; Kerckaert, J.-P.; David,
V.; Manouvrier-Hanu, S.; Saugier-Veber, P.; Frebourg, T.; Dubourg,
C.; Andrieux, J.; Bonneau, D.: MEF2C haploinsufficiency caused by
either microdeletion of the 5q14.3 region or mutation is responsible
for severe mental retardation with stereotypic movements, epilepsy
and/or cerebral malformations. J. Med. Genet. 47: 22-29, 2010.

12. Li, H.; Radford, J. C.; Ragusa, M. J.; Shea, K. L.; McKercher,
S. R.; Zaremba, J. D.; Soussou, W.; Nie, Z.; Kang, Y.-J.; Nakanishi,
N.; Okamoto, S.; Roberts, A. J.; Schwarz, J. J.; Lipton, S. A.: Transcription
factor MEF2C influences neural stem/progenitor cell differentiation
and maturation in vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 9397-9402, 2008.

13. Lin, Q.; Schwarz, J.; Bucana, C.; Olson, E. N.: Control of mouse
cardiac morphogenesis and myogenesis by transcription factor MEF2C. Science 276:
1404-1407, 1997.

14. Mao, Z.; Bonni, A.; Xia, F.; Nadal-Vicans, M.; Greenberg, M. E.
: Neuronal activity-dependent cell survival mediated by transcription
factor MEF2. Science 286: 785-790, 1999.

15. Martin, J. F.; Miano, J. M.; Hustad, C. M.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins,
N. A.; Olson, E. N.: A Mef2 gene that generates a muscle-specific
isoform via alternative mRNA splicing. Molec. Cell. Biol. 14: 1647-1656,
1994.

16. McDermott, J. C.; Cardoso, M. C.; Yu, Y.-T.; Andres, V.; Leifer,
D.; Krainc, D.; Lipton, S. A.; Nadal-Ginard, B.: hMEF2C gene encodes
skeletal muscle- and brain-specific transcription factors. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 13: 2564-2577, 1993.

17. Potthoff, M. J.; Wu, H.; Arnold, M. A.; Shelton, J. M.; Backs,
J.; McAnally, J.; Richardson, J. A.; Bassel-Duby, R.; Olson, E. N.
: Histone deacetylase degradation and MEF2 activation promote the
formation of slow-twitch myofibers. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 2459-2467,
2007.

18. Verzi, M. P.; Agarwal, P.; Brown, C.; McCulley, D. J.; Schwarz,
J. J.; Black, B. L.: The transcription factor MEF2C is required for
craniofacial development. Dev. Cell 12: 645-652, 2007.

19. von Both, I.; Silvestri, C.; Erdemir, T.; Lickert, H.; Walls,
J. R.; Henkelman, R. M.; Rossant, J.; Harvey, R. P.; Attisano, L.;
Wrana, J. L.: Foxh1 is essential for development of the anterior
heart field. Dev. Cell 7: 331-345, 2004.

20. Xu, J.; Gong, N. L.; Bodi, I.; Aronow, B. J.; Backx, P. H.; Molkentin,
J. D.: Myocyte enhancer factors 2A and 2C induce dilated cardiomyopathy
in transgenic mice. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 9152-9162, 2006.

21. Zweier, M.; Gregor, A.; Zweier, C.; Engels, H.; Sticht, H.; Wohlleber,
E.; Bijlsma, E. K.; Holder, S. E.; Zenker, M.; Rossier, E.; Grasshoff,
U.; Johnson, D. S.; Robertson, L.; Firth, H. V.; Kraus, C.; Ekici,
A. B.; Reis, A.; Rauch, A.: Mutations in MEF2C from the 5q14.3q15
microdeletion syndrome region are a frequent cause of severe mental
retardation and diminish MECP2 and CDKL5 expression. Hum. Mutat. 31:
722-733, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/5/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/15/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/29/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/18/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/6/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/4/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/14/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/7/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/11/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/22/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/20/1997
Alan F. Scott - updated: 11/8/1995

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 8/18/1995

EDITED carol: 09/16/2013
carol: 3/8/2013
ckniffin: 3/5/2013
wwang: 6/22/2010
ckniffin: 6/15/2010
wwang: 8/11/2009
ckniffin: 7/29/2009
wwang: 6/5/2008
terry: 5/30/2008
alopez: 3/26/2008
terry: 3/18/2008
mgross: 11/6/2007
terry: 11/6/2007
mgross: 5/23/2007
terry: 5/4/2007
wwang: 8/14/2006
wwang: 8/11/2006
terry: 8/9/2006
terry: 4/4/2005
mgross: 10/7/2004
mgross: 8/11/2000
alopez: 10/22/1999
alopez: 7/10/1997
terry: 6/23/1997
alopez: 6/20/1997
mark: 4/7/1996
mark: 8/18/1995

612786	TITLE *612786 CYCLIN Y; CCNY
;;CYCLIN-FOLD PROTEIN 1; CFP1;;
CYCLIN X; CCNX;;
CHROMOSOME 10 OPEN READING FRAME 9; C10ORF9
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cyclins, such as CCNY, control cell division cycles and regulate
cyclin-dependent kinases (e.g., CDC2; 116940) (Li et al., 2009).

CLONING

Using mass spectrometry to identify proteins upregulated in metastatic
versus nonmetastatic human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell lines,
followed by database analysis, Zhang et al. (2005) identified an isoform
of CCNY that they called CFP1 variant A. The deduced protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 36.9 kD.

By database analysis and PCR of a testis cDNA library, Li et al. (2009)
cloned CCNY, which they designated CCNX. The deduced 287-amino acid
protein has a central cyclin box and shares highest similarity with
cyclin B3 (CCNB3; 300456). RT-PCR detected highest expression in testis
and lower expression in all other tissues examined except brain and
kidney. Fluorescence-tagged CCNX was expressed predominantly in the
nucleus in a human nonsmall lung cancer cell line.

GENE STRUCTURE

Li et al. (2009) determined that the CCNY gene contains 12 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Deloukas et al. (2004) mapped the CCNY
gene to chromosome 10p11.2, where it lies between the CREM (123812) and
FZD8 (606146) genes.

GENE FUNCTION

Using the promoter regions of several cell cycle regulators and
transcription factors, Li et al. (2009) showed that CCNX specifically
activated transcription from the MYC (190080) promoter.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the CCNY
gene and inflammatory bowel disease, see IBD1 (266600).

REFERENCE 1. Deloukas, P.; Earthrowl, M. E.; Grafham, D. V.; Rubenfield, M.;
French, L.; Steward, C. A.; Sims, S. K.; Jones, M. C.; Searle, S.;
Scott, C.; Howe, K.; Hunt, S. E.; and 124 others: The DNA sequence
and comparative analysis of human chromosome 10. Nature 429: 151-157,
2004.

2. Li, X.; Wang, X.; Liu, G.; Li, R.; Yu, L.: Identification and
characterization of cyclin X which activates transcriptional activities
of c-Myc. Molec. Biol. Rep. 36: 97-103, 2009.

3. Zhang, Y.-T.; Geng, Y.-P.; Si, L.-S.; Wang, Y.-L.: Proteomic analysis
of differentially expressed proteins between metastatic and non-metastatic
human colorectal carcinoma cell lines. Europ. J. Gastroent. Hepatol. 17:
725-732, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/10/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/15/2009

EDITED terry: 12/10/2009
mgross: 5/15/2009

611310	TITLE *611310 PHOSPHOSERYL-tRNA KINASE; PSTK
;;CHROMOSOME 10 OPEN READING FRAME; C10ORF89
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In eukaryotes, decoding of the UGA codon as selenocysteine (Sec)
requires a Sec insertion sequence (SECIS) in the 3-prime untranslated
region of the mRNA. A specific elongation factor, EFSEC (607695),
specifically recognizes selenocysteyl-tRNA(Ser)Sec and the SECIS and
directs insertion of Sec into protein. Carlson et al. (2004) performed a
computational search of archaeal and eukaryotic genomes to find
kinase-like genes that occurred in organisms with the Sec insertion
machinery but not in organisms lacking this machinery. They found 27
ORFs that were further screened for homology to known kinase domains and
proteins in the National Center for Biotechnology Information
nonredundant database. They identified a novel protein, designated PSTK,
that had homologs in eurkaryotes with a functional Sec insertion system,
but not in those lacking this sytem. The PSTK cDNA was isolated and
cloned into a His-tag expression vector. The deduced human PSTK protein
contains 359 amino acids with a predicted ATP-binding domain. It shares
80% sequence identity with the mouse homolog.

GENE FUNCTION

Carlson et al. (2004) demonstrated that PSTK specifically catalyzed the
formation of phosphoseryl-tRNA(Ser)Sec from seryl-tRNA(Ser)Sec and ATP
in the presence of Mg2+. In binding assays, both tRNA(Ser)Sec and
seryl-tRNA(Ser)Sec bound to PSTK, but ATP enhanced the binding of
tRNA(Ser)Sec and decreased the binding of seryl-tRNA(Ser)Sec. Carlson et
al. (2004) suggested that PSTK plays an important role in selenoprotein
biosynthesis and/or regulation.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PSTK
gene to chromosome 10 (TMAP RH94240).

REFERENCE 1. Carlson, B. A.; Xu, X.-M.; Kryukov, G. V.; Rao, M.; Berry, M. J.;
Gladyshev, V. N.; Hatfield, D. L.: Identification and characterization
of phosphoseryl-tRNA(Ser)Sec kinase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101:
12848-12853, 2004.

CREATED Stefanie A. Nelson: 8/8/2007

EDITED carol: 08/08/2007
carol: 8/8/2007

601046	TITLE *601046 MATRIX METALLOPROTEINASE 12; MMP12
;;MACROPHAGE METALLOELASTASE; MME
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) are a family of related
matrix-degrading enzymes that are important in tissue remodeling and
repair during development and inflammation. Abnormal expression is
associated with various diseases such as tumor invasiveness, arthritis,
and atherosclerosis. MMP activity may also be related to
cigarette-induced pulmonary emphysema. Shapiro et al. (1993) cloned a
cDNA for a metalloproteinase produced by human alveolar macrophages,
which are known to have the capacity to degrade elastin (130160), by
screening an alveolar macrophage cDNA library and a genomic library with
the previously cloned mouse gene (Shapiro et al., 1992). The human gene,
which they designated HME (human macrophage metalloelastase), produces a
1.8-kb transcript encoding a 470-amino acid protein that is 64%
identical to the mouse protein. Both the mRNA and protein were detected
in alveolar macrophages. As in the mouse, the predicted human 54-kD
protein is processed by loss of both N- and C-terminal residues to a
22-kD mature form. The authors showed that recombinantly expressed HME
was able to degrade insoluble elastin.

GENE STRUCTURE

Belaaouaj et al. (1995) described the genomic organization of the HME
gene (also symbolized MMP12). The 13-kb gene is composed of 10 exons and
shares the highly conserved intron-exon borders of other MMPs. The
authors also demonstrated tissue-specific expression in macrophages and
stromal cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Curci et al. (1998) reported that the total MMP12 recoverable from
abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA; 100070) tissue was 7-fold greater than
that from normal aorta. They demonstrated its distinct localization to
residual elastic fiber fragments, indicating that the enzyme
participates in aortic elastin degradation. They suggested that MMP12
has a more central role in aneurysm disease than do other elastolytic
MMPs.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Hunninghake et al. (2009) tested for an association between SNPs in
MMP12 and a measure of lung function, prebronchodilator forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1), in more than 8,300 subjects in 7
cohorts that included children and adults. They also examined the
association between these SNPs and development of COPD in the adult
cohorts. Hunninghake et al. (2009) found that the minor allele (G) of a
functional variant in the promoter region of MMP12 (dbSNP rs2276109,
-82A-G) was positively associated with FEV1 in a combined analysis of
children with asthma and adult former and current smokers in all cohorts
(P = 2 x 10(-6)). This allele was also associated with a reduced risk of
onset of COPD (see 606963) in the Normative Aging Study cohort (hazard
ratio, 0.65; 95% CI, 0.46-0.92; P = 0.02) and with a reduced risk of
COPD in a cohort of smokers (OR = 0.63; 95% CI, 0.45-0.88; P = 0.005)
and among participants in a family-based study of early-onset COPD (P =
0.006). Hunninghake et al. (2009) concluded that the minor allele of
dbSNP rs2276109 is associated with a positive effect on lung function in
children with asthma and in adults who smoke. This allele is also
associated with a reduced risk of COPD in adult smokers. Hunninghake et
al. (2009) noted that this minor allele has been associated with
decreased promoter activity through less efficient binding of AP1
(165160) in both murine and human monocytic cell lines (Jormsjo et al.,
2000), and that deletion of the AP1 binding site abolishes both basal
and stimulated expression of MMP12 (Wu et al., 2003).

MAPPING

Belaaouaj et al. (1995) localized the gene to 11q22.2-q22.3 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Pendas et al. (1996) isolated a
1.5-Mb YAC clone mapping to 11q22.3. Detailed analysis of this
nonchimeric YAC clone ordered 7 MMP genes as follows: cen--MMP8
(120355)--MMP10 (185260)--MMP1 (120353)--MMP3 (185250)--MMP12--MMP7
(178990)--MMP13 (600108)--tel.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hautamaki et al. (1997) demonstrated that macrophage elastase must be
present for chronic cigarette smoke exposure to induce emphysema in
mice. Mice homozygous for a knockout of the macrophage elastase gene
(Mme -/-) (Shipley et al., 1996), in contrast to wildtype mice, did not
show increased numbers of macrophages in their lungs and did not develop
emphysema in response to long-term exposure to cigarette smoke.
Smoke-exposed Mme -/- mice that received monthly intratracheal
instillations of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (158105) showed
accumulation of alveolar macrophages but did not develop air space
enlargement. Thus, Hautamaki et al. (1997) concluded that macrophage
elastase is probably sufficient for the development of emphysema that
results from chronic inhalation of cigarette smoke.

Through a global analysis of pulmonary gene expression in the lungs of
mice lacking integrin beta-6 (147558), Kaminski et al. (2000) identified
a marked induction of macrophage metalloelastase, a metalloproteinase
that preferentially degrades elastin and has been implicated in the
chronic lung disease emphysema. Morris et al. (2003) demonstrated that
Itgb6-null mice develop age-related emphysema that is completely
abrogated either by transgenic expression of versions of the beta-6
integrin subunit that support TGFB activation, or by the loss of MMP12.
Furthermore, Morris et al. (2003) showed that the effects of ITGB6
deletion are overcome by simultaneous transgenic expression of active
TGFB1. Morris et al. (2003) concluded that they had uncovered a pathway
in which the loss of integrin-mediated activation of latent TGFB causes
age-dependent pulmonary emphysema through alterations of macrophage
MMP12 expression. Furthermore, they showed that a functional alteration
in the TGFB activation pathway affects susceptibility to this disease.

By examining the effects of an Il13 (147683) transgene on wildtype mice
and mice lacking Mmp9 (120361) or Mmp12, Lanone et al. (2002) determined
that the IL13-mediated eosinophilic and lymphocytic inflammation and
alveolar remodeling in the lung that occurs in asthma (600807), COPD
(606963), and interstitial lung disease is dependent on both MMP9 and
MMP12 mechanisms. The results indicated that MMP9 inhibits neutrophil
accumulation, but, unlike MMP12, has no effect on eosinophil,
macrophage, or lymphocyte accumulation. Furthermore, IL13-induced
production of MMP2 (120360), MMP9, MMP13, and MMP14 (600754) was found
to be dependent on MMP12.

Houghton et al. (2009) showed that Mmp12-null mice exhibited impaired
bacterial clearance and increased mortality when challenged with both
gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria at macrophage-rich portals of
entry, such as the peritoneum and lung. Intracellular stores of MMP12
are mobilized to macrophage phagolysosomes after the ingestion of
bacterial pathogens. Once inside phagolysosomes, MMP12 adheres to
bacterial cell walls where it disrupts cellular membranes resulting in
bacterial death. The antimicrobial properties of MMP12 do not reside
within its catalytic domain, but rather within the carboxyl-terminal
domain. This domain contains a unique 4-amino acid sequence on an
exposed beta-loop of the protein that is required for the observed
antimicrobial activity. Houghton et al. (2009) concluded that their
study represented the first report of direct antimicrobial activity by a
matrix metallopeptidase, and described a new antimicrobial peptide that
is sequentially and structurally unique in nature.

GENETIC VARIABILITY

Joos et al. (2002) investigated the role of MMP polymorphisms (including
G-1607GG in MMP1 and asn357ser in MMP12) in the development of chronic
obstructive lung disease. The authors determined the prevalence of these
polymorphisms in 590 continuing smokers chosen from the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute Lung Health Study for having the fastest (n =
284) and slowest (n = 306) 5 year rate of decline of lung function. Of 5
polymorphisms among 3 MMP loci, only G-1607GG was associated with a rate
of decline in lung function. This allele was associated with a fast rate
of decline (p = 0.02). However, haplotypes consisting of alleles from
the G-1607GG and asn357ser polymorphisms were associated with rate of
decline of lung function (p = 0.0007). The authors concluded that
polymorphisms in the MMP1 and MMP12 genes, but not MMP9, are either
causative factors in smoking-related lung injury or are in linkage
disequilibrium with causative polymorphisms.

HISTORY

The elastase secreted by leukocytes (ELA2; 130130) is a serine protease
inhibitable by alpha-1-protease inhibitor (107400), whereas the elastase
secreted by macrophages is a metalloprotease not inhibitable by
alpha-1-protease inhibitor (Rosenbloom, 1984).

REFERENCE 1. Belaaouaj, A.; Shipley, J. M.; Kobayashi, D. K.; Zimonjic, D. B.;
Popescu, N.; Silverman, G. A.; Shapiro, S. D.: Human macrophage metalloelastase:
genomic organization, chromosomal location, gene linkage, and tissue-specific
expression. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 14568-14575, 1995.

2. Curci, J. A.; Liao, S.; Huffman, M. D.; Shapiro, S. D.; Thompson,
R. W.: Expression and localization of macrophage elastase (matrix
metalloproteinase-12) in abdominal aortic aneurysms. J. Clin. Invest. 102:
1900-1910, 1998.

3. Hautamaki, R. D.; Kobayashi, D. K.; Senior, R. M.; Shapiro, S.
D.: Requirement for macrophage elastase for cigarette smoke-induced
emphysema in mice. Science 277: 2002-2004, 1997.

4. Houghton, A. M.; Hartzell, W. O.; Robbins, C. S.; Gomis-Ruth, F.
X.; Shapiro, S. D.: Macrophage elastase kills bacteria within murine
macrophages. Nature 460: 637-641, 2009.

5. Hunninghake, G. M.; Cho, M. H.; Tesfaigzi, Y.; Soto-Quiros, M.
E.; Avila, L.; Lasky-Su, J.; Stidley, C.; Melen, E.; Soderhall, C.;
Hallberg, J.; Kull, I.; Kere, J.; and 14 others: MMP12, lung function,
and COPD in high-risk populations. New Eng. J. Med. 361: 2599-2608,
2009.

6. Joos, L.; He, J.-Q.; Shepherdson, M. B.; Connett, J. E.; Anthonisen,
N.  R.; Pare, P. D.; Sandford, A. J.: The role of matrix metalloproteinase
polymorphisms in the rate of decline in lung function. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 11: 569-576, 2002. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 803-804,
2003.

7. Jormsjo, S.; Ye, S.; Moritz, J.; Walter, D. H.; Dimmeler, S.; Zeiher,
A. M.; Henney, A.; Hamsten, A.; Eriksson, P.: Allele-specific regulation
of matrix metalloproteinase-12 gene activity is associated with coronary
artery luminal dimensions in diabetic patients with manifest coronary
artery disease. Circ. Res. 86: 998-1003, 2000.

8. Kaminski, N.; Allard, J. D.; Pittet, J. F.; Zuo, F.; Griffiths,
M. J.; Morris, D.; Huang, X.; Sheppard, D.; Heller, R. A.: Global
analysis of gene expression in pulmonary fibrosis reveals distinct
programs regulating lung inflammation and fibrosis. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 97: 1778-1783, 2000.

9. Lanone, S.; Zheng, T.; Zhu, Z.; Liu, W.; Lee, C. G.; Ma, B.; Chen,
Q.; Homer, R. J.; Wang, J.; Rabach, L. A.; Rabach, M. E.; Shipley,
J. M.; Shapiro, S. D.; Senior, R. M.; Elias, J. A.: Overlapping and
enzyme-specific contributions of matrix metalloproteinases-9 and -12
in IL-13-induced inflammation and remodeling. J. Clin. Invest. 110:
463-474, 2002.

10. Morris, D. G.; Huang, X.; Kaminski, N.; Wang, Y.; Shapiro, S.
D.; Dolganov, G.; Glick, A.; Sheppard, D.: Loss of integrin alpha-v-beta-6-mediated
TGF-beta activation causes Mmp12-dependent emphysema. Nature 422:
169-173, 2003.

11. Pendas, A. M.; Santamaria, I.; Alvarez, M. V.; Pritchard, M.;
Lopez-Otin, C.: Fine physical mapping of the human matrix metalloproteinase
genes clustered on chromosome 11q22.3. Genomics 37: 266-269, 1996.

12. Rosenbloom, J.: Elastin: relation of protein and gene structure
to disease. Lab. Invest. 51: 605-623, 1984.

13. Shapiro, S. D.; Griffin, G. L.; Gilbert, D. J.; Jenkins, N. A.;
Copeland, N. G.; Welgus, H. G.; Senior, R. M.; Ley, T. J.: Molecular
cloning, chromosomal localization, and bacterial expression of a murine
macrophage metalloelastase. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 4664-4671, 1992.

14. Shapiro, S. D.; Kobayashi, D. K.; Ley, T. J.: Cloning and characterization
of a unique elastolytic metalloproteinase produced by human alveolar
macrophages. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 23824-23829, 1993.

15. Shipley, J. M.; Wesselschmidt, R. L.; Kobayashi, D. K.; Ley, T.
J.; Shapiro, S. D.: Metalloelastase is required for macrophage-mediated
proteolysis and matrix invasion in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93:
3942-3946, 1996.

16. Wu, L.; Tanimoto, A.; Murata, Y.; Sasaguri, T.; Fan, J.; Sasaguri,
Y.; Watanabe, T.: Matrix metalloproteinase-12 gene expression in
human vascular smooth muscle cells. Genes Cells 8: 225-234, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/26/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/27/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/13/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/24/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/21/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/25/1997
Ethylin Wang Jabs - updated: 8/21/1997
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 4/21/1997

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 2/7/1996

EDITED alopez: 08/09/2012
carol: 8/8/2012
terry: 4/8/2010
alopez: 2/2/2010
terry: 1/26/2010
alopez: 9/4/2009
terry: 8/27/2009
mgross: 2/13/2006
alopez: 3/24/2003
terry: 3/24/2003
cwells: 10/9/2002
carol: 12/28/1998
terry: 12/23/1998
terry: 12/21/1998
dkim: 7/24/1998
psherman: 5/15/1998
alopez: 9/26/1997
alopez: 9/25/1997
terry: 9/25/1997
mark: 9/4/1997
mark: 5/1/1997
jenny: 5/1/1997
jenny: 4/21/1997
mark: 2/7/1996

607147	TITLE *607147 POLIOVIRUS RECEPTOR-LIKE 3; PVRL3
;;POLIOVIRUS RECEPTOR-RELATED 3; PVRR3; PRR3;;
NECTIN 3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Nectins (e.g., PVRL1, 600644) are immunoglobulin-like adhesion molecules
that interact with afadin (AF6; 159559). Afadin is an actin
filament-binding protein that connects nectins to the actin
cytoskeleton. The nectin-afadin system organizes adherens junctions
cooperatively with the cadherin (see 192090)-catenin (see 116805) system
in epithelial cells.

CLONING

By searching an EST database using PRR1, PRR2 (PVRL2; 600798), and PVR
(173850) as queries, followed by RT-PCR of placenta mRNA, Reymond et al.
(2000) cloned a full-length cDNA encoding PRR3. The deduced 550-amino
acid PRR3 protein has a calculated molecular mass of 55.4 kD and
contains an N-terminal hydrophobic leader sequence; an ectodomain
containing a V-type Ig domain and 2 C-type Ig domains bracketed by 6
cysteine residues; a hydrophobic transmembrane region; and a long
cytoplasmic sequence. PRR3 also has 6 potential N-glycosylation sites.
Northern blot analysis revealed PRR3 expression predominantly in
placenta and testis, with faint or no expression in other tissues. A
major transcript of 2.8 kb and minor transcripts of 9.5, 6.0, and 4.7 kb
were detected in placenta. PRR3 was also expressed in mammalian
epithelial cell lines. Flow cytometry showed expression of PRR3 at the
surface of transfected COS-1 cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using coimmunoprecipitation experiments, Reymond et al. (2000) found
that PRR3 interacts with both the L- and S-afadin isoforms in a similar
ratio.

Using immunolocalization of adult mouse hippocampal sections Mizoguchi
et al. (2002) found that the nectin-afadin system colocalizes with the
cadherin-catenin system at synapses between mossy fiber terminals and
dendrites of pyramidal cells in the CA3 area. Nectins-1 and -3
asymmetrically localize at the pre- and postsynaptic sides of puncta
adherentia junctions, respectively. During development, nectins-1 and -3
asymmetrically localize not only at puncta adherentia junctions but also
at synaptic junctions. Using rat hippocampal neurons in culture,
Mizoguchi et al. (2002) observed that inhibition of the nectin-based
adhesion results in a decrease in synapse size and a concomitant
increase in synapse number.

Togashi et al. (2011) found that mouse hair cells and supporting cells
express the immunoglobulin-like adhesion molecules nectin-1 (600644) and
-3, respectively, and that their interaction mediates the heterotypic
adhesion between these 2 cell types. Genetic removal of nectin-1 or -3
disrupted the checkerboard-like pattern, inducing aberrant attachment
between hair cells. When cells expressing either nectin-1 or -3 were
cocultured, they arranged themselves into a mosaic pattern. Thus,
Togashi et al. (2011) concluded that nectin-1 and nectin-3 promote the
formation of the checkerboard-like pattern of the auditory epithelia.

ANIMAL MODEL

Inagaki et al. (2006) found that male, but not female, nectin-3 -/- mice
were infertile. Phase contrast microscopy revealed that spermatozoa of
mutant mice showed severe malformation of the head and midpiece.
Nectin-3 knockout resulted in defects in the later steps of sperm
morphogenesis, including distorted nuclei and abnormal distribution of
mitochondria, as well as loss of nectin-2 (PVRL2; 600798) at
Sertoli-spermatid junctions. The localization of nectin-2 at
Sertoli-Sertoli junctions was unaffected.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PVRL3
gene to chromosome 3 (TMAP stSG2552).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible role of variation in the PVRL3 gene in
Tourette syndrome/chronic tic disorder, see 137580.

REFERENCE 1. Inagaki, M.; Irie, K.; Ishizaki, H.; Tanaka-Okamoto, M.; Miyoshi,
J.; Takai, Y.: Role of cell adhesion molecule nectin-3 in spermatid
development. Genes Cells 11: 1125-1132, 2006.

2. Mizoguchi, A.; Nakanishi, H.; Kimura, K.; Matsubara, K.; Ozaki-Kuroda,
K.; Katata, T.; Honda, T.; Kiyohara, Y.; Heo, K.; Higashi, M.; Tsutsumi,
T.; Sonoda, S.; Ide, C.; Takai, Y.: Nectin: an adhesion molecule
involved in formation of synapses. J. Cell Biol. 156: 555-565, 2002.

3. Reymond, N.; Borg, J.-P.; Lecocq, E.; Adelaide, J.; Campadelli-Fiume,
G.; Dubreuil, P.; Lopez, M.: Human nectin3/PRR3: a novel member of
the PVR/PRR/nectin family that interacts with afadin. Gene 255:
347-355, 2000.

4. Togashi, H.; Kominami, K.; Waseda, M.; Komura, H.; Miyoshi, J.;
Takeichi, M.; Takai, Y.: Nectins establish a checkerboard-like cellular
pattern in the auditory epithelium. Science 333: 1144-1147, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/27/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/21/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/11/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/14/2002

EDITED carol: 03/27/2012
ckniffin: 3/8/2012
alopez: 9/23/2011
terry: 9/21/2011
wwang: 12/12/2006
terry: 12/11/2006
terry: 7/20/2004
mgross: 8/14/2002

606285	TITLE *606285 SORCS RECEPTOR 3; SORCS3
;;KIAA1059
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The VPS10 domain-containing receptors, including sortilin (SORT1;
602458) and sortilin-related receptor (SORL1; 602005), derive their name
from the yeast vacuolar protein sorting protein-10, which is involved in
sorting of carboxy-peptidase Y from the Golgi apparatus to the vacuole.
By EST database searching with mouse sequence of 2 VPS10 proteins,
SorCS1 (606283) and SorCS2 (606284) (Hermey et al., 1999; Rezgaoui et
al., 2001), Hampe et al. (2001) identified 3 novel human VPS10
domain-containing receptors. Two were orthologs of mouse SORCS1 and
SORCS2; the third was designated SORCS3. Hampe et al. (2001) noted that
all mammalian VPS10 domains carry an N-terminal signal peptide for
translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum. The greatest similarity
between the receptors is found in the C-terminal parts of the VPS10
domains, which harbor 12 cysteine residues with a characteristic spacing
conserved in all VPS10 proteins from yeast to man. SORCS1 and SORCS3
share the greatest homology. SORCS2 shares the same domain composition,
but is less similar. SORT1 and SORTL1 lack the leucine-rich domain of
the SORCS proteins, and their VPS10 domains are less related.

Kikuno et al. (1999) cloned a human SORCS3 cDNA, which they designated
KIAA1059, from a brain cDNA library and found that it encodes a deduced
1,297-amino acid protein.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Kikuno et al. (1999) mapped the SORCS3
gene to chromosome 10. By electronic PCR, Hampe et al. (2001) mapped the
gene within a BAC clone on chromosome 10q23.3.

REFERENCE 1. Hampe, W.; Rezgaoui, M.; Hermans-Borgmeyer, I.; Schaller, H. C.
: The genes for the human VPS10 domain-containing receptors are large
and contain many small exons. Hum. Genet. 108: 529-536, 2001.

2. Hermey, G.; Riedel, I. B.; Hampe, W.; Schaller, H. C.; Hermans-Borgmeyer,
I.: Identification and characterization of SorCS, a third member
of a novel receptor family. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 266:
347-351, 1999.

3. Kikuno, R.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIV. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 6: 197-205, 1999.

4. Rezgaoui, M.; Hermey, G.; Riedel, I. B.; Hampe, W.; Schaller, H.
C.; Hermans-Borgmeyer, I.: Identification of SorCS2, a novel member
of the VPS10 domain containing receptor family, prominently expressed
in the developing mouse brain. Mech. Dev. 100: 335-338, 2001.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/25/2001

EDITED carol: 09/28/2001
carol: 9/28/2001

605880	TITLE *605880 LYSINE ACETYLTRANSFERASE 6B; KAT6B
;;HISTONE ACETYLTRANSFERASE MYST4; MYST4;;
MONOCYTIC LEUKEMIA ZINC FINGER PROTEIN-RELATED FACTOR; MORF
MORF/CBF FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Champagne et al. (1999) identified and characterized monocytic leukemia
zinc finger protein-related factor (MORF), a novel human histone
acetyltransferase. MORF is a 1,781-residue protein that is ubiquitously
expressed in adult human tissues. MORF also contains a strong
transcriptional repression domain at its N terminus and a highly potent
activation domain at its C terminus, and may be involved in both
positive and negative regulation of transcription.

Using immunohistochemistry on mice of various developmental ages,
Campeau et al. (2012) demonstrated expression of Myst4 in the
telencephalic vesicles, trigeminal ganglion, spinal cord, dorsal root
ganglia, digestive tract, pancreas, liver, and ribs of developing
embryo; after birth, it is strongly expressed in the diaphysis of the
long bones, the kidney, and the patella, among other organs.

- MORF/CBP Fusion Gene

Panagopoulos et al. (2001) reported a novel t(10;16)(q22;p13)
chromosomal translocation in a childhood acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML-M5a) leading to a MORF-CBP (600140) chimera. RT-PCR experiments
yielded in-frame MORF-CBP and CBP-MORF fusion transcripts. Genomic
analyses revealed that the breaks were close to Alu elements in intron
16 of MORF and intron 2 of CBP and that duplications had occurred near
the breakpoints. The authors constructed an exon/intron map of the MORF
gene. The MORF-CBP protein retained the zinc fingers, 2 nuclear
localization signals, the histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain, a
portion of the acidic domain of MORF, and the CBP protein downstream of
codon 29. The part of CBP encoding the RARA-binding domain, the
CREB-binding domain, the 3 cys/his-rich regions, the bromodomain, the
HAT domain and the glu-rich domains was present. In the reciprocal
CBP-MORF, part of the acidic domain, and the C-terminal ser- and
met-rich regions of MORF may be driven by the CBP promoter.

MAPPING

Champagne et al. (1999) mapped the MORF gene to chromosome 10q22 by
FISH.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) studied a cohort of 19 individuals with a
presumed diagnosis of the Ohdo syndrome SBBYS variant (SBBYSS; 603736).
Twelve individuals were considered to have typical features of the
syndrome, 2 had suggestive but milder features, and 5 were classified as
atypical. By whole-exome sequencing in 4 individuals with typical
features, Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified heterozygous mutations
in the KAT6B gene: a nonsense mutation (E1357X; 605880.0004) in
individual 4, a 1-bp insertion (605880.0001) in individual 1, and a 2-bp
deletion (605880.0002) in individual 2. Subsequently, all 19 individuals
with an SBBYSS or an SBBYSS-like phenotype were sequenced for the entire
KAT6B coding region by classic Sanger sequencing. Truncating mutations
in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene were confirmed in 12 individuals, and
individual 3 was found to have a heterozygous frameshift mutation in
exon 15 (605880.0003), which had not been detected on whole-exome
sequencing. When parental samples were available, the mutations were
shown to have occurred de novo. Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) suggested
that mutations of protein-protein interaction domains in exon 18 result
in a more complex phenotype than the phenotype due to simple
haploinsufficiency of KAT6B and raised the possibility that exon 18
mutations are activating or have a dominant-negative effect.

In 6 patients with genitopatellar syndrome (GTPTS; 606170), Campeau et
al. (2012) identified 5 different heterozygous de novo truncating
mutations in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene (605880.0005-605880.0009), all of
which were predicted to result in loss of the highly conserved
transcription activation domain. Campeau et al. (2012) noted that
SBBYSS, also caused by mutation in KAT6B, is a disorder with features
overlapping those of genitopatellar syndrome, but with clinical
differences.

Simpson et al. (2012) identified mutations in the KAT6B gene in 5
unrelated patients with genitopatellar syndrome (see, e.g., 605880.0006
and 605880.0010); they stated that the form of Ohdo syndrome (SBBYSS) in
which mutations in KAT6B had been found is phenotypically distinct from
genitopatellar syndrome.

In 2 children with clinical features of SBBYSS, including a 4-year-old
girl previously reported by Szakszon et al. (2011), Szakszon et al.
(2013) identified different de novo truncating mutations in the distal
region of exon 18 of the KAT6B gene (605880.0011-605880.0012).

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Szakszon et al. (2013) noted that truncating mutations of KAT6B exon 18
between positions c.3018 and c.3892 had been shown to cause GTPTS,
whereas truncating mutations distal to position c.4069 in the same exon
cause SBBYSS (with one exception, a c.4360_4368delins mutation in a
patient with GTPTS; see 605880.0005). They stated that their finding of
truncating mutations of KAT6B exon 18 at positions c.5064_5071
(605880.0011) and c.5389 (605880.0012) in patients with SBBYSS confirmed
this genotype-phenotype correlation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) examined mice carrying a gene trap insertion
in the mouse ortholog Kat6b (Qkf/Myst4/Morf) that produces approximately
5% of the normal amount of Kat6b mRNA. The Qkf gt/gt hypomorphic mutant
displayed a number of defects that mirror SBBYSS syndrome, although the
phenotype in the mice is milder. Mice are of normal size at birth but
fail to thrive and have brain developmental defects as well as
craniofacial defects. Observed abnormalities include short and narrow
palpebral fissures, low set ears, and malocclusion. Qkf mRNA is strongly
expressed in the eyelids and teeth primordia during development. Similar
to individuals with SBBYSS, the Qkf gt/gt mice have long, slender feet
and disproportionately long first digits.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 1-BP INS, NT4405

By whole-exome sequencing in a patient (individual 1) with typical
features of SBBYSS (603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a
1-bp insertion at nucleotide 4405 in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, which
resulted in a frameshift.

.0002
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 2-BP DEL, NT5370

By whole-exome sequencing in a patient (individual 2) with typical
features of SBBYSS (603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a
2-bp deletion at nucleotide 5370 in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, which
resulted in a frameshift.

.0003
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 1-BP DEL, NT3018

By Sanger sequencing in a patient (individual 3) with typical SBBYSS
(603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a 1-bp deletion at
nucleotide 3018 in exon 15 of the KAT6B gene, which resulted in a
frameshift. The mutation was not initially detected on whole-exome
sequencing. The parents did not have the mutation. The patient also had
a 1q21 duplication, which the authors considered to be incidental.

.0004
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, GLU1357TER

By whole-exome sequencing in a patient (individual 4) with typical
features of SBBYSS (603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a
heterozygous 4069G-T transversion in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene,
resulting in a glu1357-to-ter (E1357X) substitution. The parents did not
have the mutation.

.0005
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, DEL/INS, NT4360

In a male patient with genitopatellar syndrome (GTPTS; 606170),
originally reported by Abdul-Rahman et al. (2006) ('patient 2'), Campeau
et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo deletion/insertion
(4360_4368delinsAAAAACCAAAA) in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, predicted to
result in premature termination and loss of the highly conserved
transcription activation domain. The mutation was not found in the
patient's unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant Server.

.0006
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, 4-BP DEL, 3769TCTA

In 2 unrelated male patients with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), 1 of
whom was originally reported by Lifchez et al. (2003), Campeau et al.
(2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo 4-bp deletion
(3769delTCTA) in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, predicted to result in
premature termination and loss of the highly conserved transcription
activation domain. The mutation was not found in the patients'
unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant Server.

In an unrelated 7-month-old girl and 3-month-old boy with genitopatellar
syndrome (606170), Simpson et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for
the 3769delTCTA mutation in the KAT6B gene, which was not present in
their unaffected parents, in the 1000 Genomes Project, or in 600 control
exome profiles. Quantitative assessment of global H3/H4 acetylation of
extracted histones in primary skin fibroblasts from the infant girl
demonstrated a significant reduction in H3 and H4 acetylation compared
to control fibroblasts.

.0007
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, 2-BP DEL, 3788AA

In a female patient with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), Campeau et
al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo 2-bp deletion
(3788delAA) in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, predicted to result in
premature termination and loss of the highly conserved transcription
activation domain. The mutation was not found in the patients'
unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant Server.

.0008
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, GLY1298TER

In an African American girl with genitopatellar syndrome (606170),
originally reported by Abdul-Rahman et al. (2006), Campeau et al. (2012)
identified heterozygosity for a 3892G-T transversion in exon 18 of the
KAT6B gene, predicted to result in premature termination and loss of the
highly conserved transcription activation domain. DNA from the patient's
parents was unavailable; however, the mutation was not found in the
Exome Variant Server.

.0009
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, GLY1268TER

In a female patient with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), originally
reported by Lammer and Abrams (2002), Campeau et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for a de novo 3802G-T transversion in exon 18 of the
KAT6B gene, predicted to result in premature termination and loss of the
highly conserved transcription activation domain. The mutation was not
found in the patient's unaffected parents or in the Exome Variant
Server.

.0010
GENITOPATELLAR SYNDROME
KAT6B, 4-BP DEL, NT1227

In a female patient with genitopatellar syndrome (606170), originally
reported by Reardon (2002), Simpson et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for a de novo 4-bp deletion (3680_3695del) in exon 18 of
the KAT6B gene. The mutation was not found in her unaffected parents, in
the 1000 Genomes Project, or in 600 control exome profiles.

.0011
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, 8-BP DEL/4-BP INS, NT5064

In a child of Sicilian ancestry with SBBYSS (603736), Szakszon et al.
(2013) identified a heterozygous, de novo, complex insertion/deletion
mutation, c.5064_5071delTACTATGGinsCACA, in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene,
leading to a net loss of 4 bp, a frameshift, and a premature stop codon
(met1690glufs*24).

.0012
SAY-BARBER-BIESECKER-YOUNG-SIMPSON SYNDROME
KAT6B, ARG1797TER

By Sanger sequencing in a patient (individual 13) with typical SBBYSS
(603736), Clayton-Smith et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous de novo
c.5389C-T transition in exon 18 of the KAT6B gene, resulting in an
arg1797-to-ter (R1797X) substitution. The parents did not have the
mutation.

In a child of Hungarian ancestry with typical SBBYSS, previously
reported by Szakszon et al. (2011), Szakszon et al. (2013) identified de
novo heterozygosity for the same R2797X mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Abdul-Rahman, O. A.; La, T. H.; Kwan, A.; Schlaubitz, S.; Barsh,
G. S.; Enns, G. M.; Hudgins, L.: Genitopatellar syndrome: expanding
the phenotype and excluding mutations in LMX1B and TBX4. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 140A: 1567-1572, 2006.

2. Campeau, P. M.; Kim, J. C.; Lu, J. T.; Schwartzentruber, J. A.;
Abdul-Rahman, O. A.; Schlaubitz, S.; Murdock, D. M.; Jiang, M.-M.;
Lammer, E. J.; Enns, G. M.; Rhead, W. J.; Rowland, J.; and 9 others
: Mutations in KAT6B, encoding a histone acetyltransferase, cause
genitopatellar syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90: 282-289, 2012.

3. Champagne, N.; Bertos, N. R.; Pelletier, N.; Wang, A. H.; Vezmar,
M.; Yang,Y.; Heng, H. H.; Yang, X. J.: Identification of a human
histone acetyltransferase related to monocytic leukemia zinc finger
protein. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 28528-28536, 1999.

4. Clayton-Smith, J.; O'Sullivan, J.; Daly, S.; Bhaskar, S.; Day,
R.; Anderson, B.; Voss, A. K.; Thomas, T.; Biesecker, L. G.; Smith,
P.; Fryer, A.; Chandler, K. E.; and 13 others: Whole-exome-sequencing
identifies mutations in histone acetyltransferase gene KAT6B in individuals
with the Say-Barber-Biesecker variant of Ohdo syndrome. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 89: 675-681, 2011.

5. Lammer, E. J.; Abrams, L.: Genitopatellar syndrome: delineating
the anomalies of female genitalia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 111: 316-318,
2002.

6. Lifchez, C. A.; Rhead, W. J.; Leuthner, S. R.; Lubinsky, M. S.
: Genitopatellar syndrome: expanding the phenotype. Am. J. Med. Genet. 122A:
80-83, 2003.

7. Panagopoulos, I.; Fioretos, T.; Isaksson, M.; Samuelsson, U.; Billstrom,
R.; Strombeck, B.; Mitelman, F.; Johansson, B.: Fusion of the MORF
and CBP genes in acute myeloid leukemia with the t(10;16)(q22;p13). Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 395-404, 2001.

8. Reardon, W.: Genitopatellar syndrome: a recognizable phenotype. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 111: 313-315, 2002.

9. Simpson, M. A.; Deshpande, C.; Dafou, D.; Vissers, L. E. L. M.;
Woollard, W. J.; Holder, S. E.; Gillessen-Kaesbach, G.; Derks, R.;
White, S. M.; Cohen-Snuijf, R.; Kant, S. G.; Hoefsloot, L. H.; Reardon,
W.; Brunner, H. G.; Bongers, E. M. H. F.; Trembath, R. C.: De novo
mutations of the gene encoding the histone acetyltransferase KAT6B
cause genitopatellar syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90: 290-294, 2012.

10. Szakszon, K.; Berenyi, E.; Jakab, A.; Bessenyei, B.; Balogh, E.;
Kobling, T.; Szilvassy, J.; Knegt, A. C.; Olah, E.: Blepharophimosis
mental retardation syndrome Say-Barber/Biesecker/Young-Simpson type:
new findings with neuroimaging. Am. J. Med. Genet. 155A: 634-637,
2011.

11. Szakszon, K.; Salpietro, C.; Kakar, N.; Knegt, A. C.; Olah, E.;
Dallapiccola, B.; Borck, G.: De novo mutations of the gene encoding
the histone acetyltransferase KAT6B in two patients with Say-Barber/Biesecker/Young-Simpson
syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 161A: 884-888, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Nara Sobreira - updated: 5/14/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/10/2012
Nara Sobreira - updated: 12/13/2011

CREATED George E. Tiller: 4/26/2001

EDITED carol: 08/29/2013
carol: 5/14/2013
carol: 4/24/2012
carol: 4/10/2012
terry: 4/10/2012
carol: 12/13/2011
carol: 12/12/2011
mgross: 2/21/2006
cwells: 5/2/2001
cwells: 4/26/2001

606556	TITLE *606556 TRIPARTITE MOTIF-CONTAINING PROTEIN 14; TRIM14
;;KIAA0129
DESCRIPTION TRIM proteins are composed of 3 zinc-binding domains, a RING, a B-box
type 1, and a B-box type 2, followed by a coiled-coil region. They are
involved in development and cell growth.

CLONING

By sequencing cDNAs randomly selected from a cDNA library derived from
the human immature myeloid cell line KG-1, Nagase et al. (1995)
identified a partial cDNA encoding TRIM14, which they called KIAA0129.
The deduced 406-amino acid protein is 25% identical to RFP (602165).
Northern blot analysis revealed wide expression of KIAA0129 that was
highest in liver but undetectable in skeletal muscle.

By EST database searching for B-box-containing proteins, Reymond et al.
(2001) identified 37 TRIM members, including 2 isoforms of TRIM14.
Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous expression of a 5.0-kb TRIM14
transcript. Fluorescence microscopy demonstrated expression in
cytoplasmic speckles. Confocal microscopy failed to identify a
subcellular localization. Interaction mating analysis indicated that
TRIM14 does not form a homodimer.

MAPPING

By analysis of a human/rodent hybrid cell panel, Nagase et al. (1995)
mapped the TRIM14 gene to chromosome 9. Reymond et al. (2001) refined
the localization to 9q22-q31 using radiation hybrid analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Tanaka, A.; Ishikawa, K.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. IV. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0121-KIAA0160) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 2: 167-174, 1995.

2. Reymond, A.; Meroni, G.; Fantozzi, A.; Merla, G.; Cairo, S.; Luzi,
L.; Riganelli, D.; Zanaria, E.; Messali, S.; Cainarca, S.; Guffanti,
A.; Minucci, S.; Pelicci, P. G.; Ballabio, A.: The tripartite motif
family identifies cell compartments. EMBO J. 20: 2140-2151, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/13/2001

EDITED mgross: 12/13/2001

606439	TITLE *606439 ATLASTIN GTPase 1; ATL1
;;ATLASTIN;;
SPG3A GENE; SPG3A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ATL1 gene encodes atlastin-1, a dynamin-related GTPase, which plays
a role in formation of the tubular endoplasmic reticulum (ER) network
and in axon elongation in neurons (Zhu et al., 2006; Orso et al., 2009).

CLONING

By positional cloning, Zhao et al. (2001) demonstrated that a form of
autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia with early onset
(SPG3A; 182600), before the age of 10 years and usually before the age
of 5, is caused by mutation in a GTPase gene. The gene was found to have
no homology to genes that cause other forms of hereditary spastic
paraplegia. It does show significant homology to guanylate binding
protein-1 (GBP1; 600411), a member of the dynamin family of large
GTPases. Northern blot analysis of ATL1 expression detected a 2.2-kb
transcript primarily in adult and fetal brain. RT-PCR experiments
indicated measurable expression in all tissues examined, although
expression in adult brain was at least 50-fold higher than in other
tissues. Translation of the 2.2-kb cDNA sequence of ATL1 yielded a
peptide of 558 amino acids.

By PCR of a cerebral cortex cDNA library, Zhu et al. (2003) cloned ATL1,
which they called atlastin-1. The deduced 558-amino acid protein
contains GTP-binding motifs in its N-terminal half and 2 transmembrane
domains in its C-terminal half. It also has 3 potential N-glycosylation
sites. Western blot analysis of transfected COS-7 cells detected
atlastin-1 at an apparent molecular mass of about 64 kD. Western blot
analysis detected high atlastin-1 expression in human and rat brain
homogenates, with much lower expression in several other human tissues,
including smooth muscle, adrenal gland, kidney, testis, and lung.
Immunohistochemical analysis of rat brain sections detected high
expression of atlastin-1 in cortical neurons of lamina V, pyramidal
neurons in CA1 and CA3 of the hippocampus, and in amygdala and several
thalamic nuclei. Staining was most prominent in the cell soma, with
weaker staining of axons and dendrites. Immunogold labeling detected rat
atlastin-1 predominantly in the cis-Golgi cisternae. Protease protection
assays indicated that the N and C termini of human atlastin-1 were
exposed to the cytoplasmic face of the membrane in transfected cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay, Zhu et al. (2003) determined that
atlastin-1 self-associates. Chemical cross-linking experiments indicated
that atlastin-1 most likely forms a homotetramer of about 230 kD. Zhu et
al. (2003) demonstrated that atlastin-1 has GTPase activity.

Independently, Evans et al. (2006) and Sanderson et al. (2006)
demonstrated that the N-terminal domain of spastin (SPAST; 604277) bound
directly to the C-terminal cytoplasmic domain of atlastin, suggesting
that the 2 gene products interact in a common biologic pathway. Evans et
al. (2006) used yeast 2-hybrid analysis and coimmunoprecipitation
studies in HeLa cells, and Sanderson et al. (2006) used yeast 2-hybrid
analysis of a human fetal brain cDNA library and protein pull-down,
coimmunoprecipitation, and colocalization studies in HeLa cells, HEK293T
cells, and mouse NSC34 neuronal cells.

In the developing rat brain, Zhu et al. (2006) found that atlastin-1 was
expressed not only in the Golgi apparatus and endoplasmic reticulum, but
was also enriched in axonal growth cones and growth cone-like
varicosities along the axons. Atlastin-1 labeling was prominent on
vesicular structures within the growth cones, but not at the plasma
membrane and not at synapses. Knockdown of atlastin-1 using shRNA in
cultured cortical cells inhibited axonal growth. Overall, the findings
suggested that atlastin-1 has diverse functions in neurons, likely
acting both in intracellular membrane trafficking as well as in
expansion at the axonal growth cone. These functional studies suggested
that the early-onset axonopathy observed in SPG3A may result from
abnormal development of axons.

Orso et al. (2009) demonstrated that Drosophila atlastin localizes on
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membranes and that its loss causes ER
fragmentation. Drosophila atlastin embedded in distinct membranes has
the ability to form trans-oligomeric complexes, and its overexpression
induces enlargement of ER profiles, consistent with excessive fusion of
ER membranes. In vitro experiments confirmed that atlastin autonomously
drives membrane fusion in a GTP-dependent fashion. In contrast,
GTPase-deficient atlastin is inactive, unable to form trans-oligomeric
complexes owing to failure to self-associate, and incapable of promoting
fusion in vitro. The results of Orso et al. (2009) demonstrated that
atlastin mediates membrane tethering and fusion and strongly suggested
that it is the GTPase activity required for ER homotypic fusion.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhao et al. (2001) found that the ATL1 gene contains 14 exons and spans
approximately 69 kb.

MAPPING

Zhao et al. (2001) determined that the ATL1 gene maps to chromosome
14q11-q21. Zhu et al. (2003) stated that the ATL1 gene maps to
chromosome 14q22.1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Spastic Paraplegia 3A

Zhao et al. (2001) identified mutations in the ATL1 gene (see, e.g.,
606439.0001) in families with spastic paraplegia-3A (SPG3A; 182600) in
which linkage to 14q11-q21 had been demonstrated as well as in other
phenotypically similar families without linkage evidence.

Durr et al. (2004) identified mutations in the ATL1 gene in 12 (39%) of
31 families with early-onset autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia. One
family showed incomplete penetrance.

Namekawa et al. (2006) stated that 19 mutations in the ATL1 gene had
been identified in 40 different families. More than 90% of the mutations
were located in exons 4 (12.5%), 7 (27.5%), 8 (17.5%), and 12 (35%).

In COS-7 cells, Zhu et al. (2006) showed that disease-associated
missense mutations in the ATL1 gene were expressed and interacted
strongly with wildtype ATL1, causing a decrease in GTPase activity in a
dominant-negative manner. The GTPase impairment was strongest with the
R217Q mutation (606439.0004), which is located within the GTPase binding
site, but was also observed with other missense mutations (R239C;
606439.0001 and H258R; 606439.0003), suggesting that these regions may
modulate activity.

Beetz et al. (2007) reported a family in which spastic paraplegia
segregated with a deletion of exon 1 of the SPAST gene (604277) in the
proband, her brother, and her 2 sons. Although the proband and her
brother also had a deletion of the ATL1 gene, the ATL1 deletion did not
segregate with the disorder in her sons and had no apparent effect on
the severity of the disorder. The findings suggested that
haploinsufficiency is the pathogenic mechanism for SPG4 (182601),
whereas a dominant-negative effect is the pathogenic mechanism for
SPG3A.

- Hereditary Sensory Neuropathy Type 1D

By genomewide linkage analysis followed by array-based exonic sequencing
of candidate genes, Guelly et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous
mutation in the ATL1 gene (N355K; 606439.0010) as a cause of autosomal
dominant hereditary neuropathy type 1D (HSN1D; 613708) in an affected
family. Screening of this gene in 115 additional probands with a similar
disorder identified 2 additional heterozygous mutations in the ATL1 gene
in 2 unrelated probands (606439.0011 and 606439.0012, respectively). The
phenotype was characterized by adult onset of a distal axonal sensory
neuropathy affecting all modalities, often associated with distal
ulceration and amputation as well as hyporeflexia, although some
patients showed features suggesting upper neuron involvement. In vitro
functional expression studies in COS7 cells did not reveal a common
pathogenetic mechanism, and there was no clear functional distinction
between mutations causing SPG3A and HSN1D, but Guelly et al. (2011)
postulated that a defect in the tubular endoplasmic reticulum may
underlie both disorders.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 3, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ATL1, ARG239CYS

In affected members of 3 apparently unrelated kindreds with spastic
paraplegia-3 (182600), Zhao et al. (2001) identified a heterozygous
884C-T transition in exon 7 of the ATL1 gene, resulting in an
arg239-to-cys (R239C) substitution.

Abel et al. (2004) identified the R239C mutation in all 22 affected
members of a French family with SPG3 reported by Hazan et al. (1993).
Abel et al. (2004) stated that this was the seventh SPG3 family of
western European descent found to have the R239C mutation. Abel et al.
(2004) reported the nucleotide change as 715C-T, based on numbering from
the translation initiation codon, and noted that position 715 is within
a CpG doublet, suggesting that it is a possible mutation hotspot.

By haplotype analysis of 3 French families with the R239C mutation,
Namekawa et al. (2006) concluded that the mutations arose independently
and were not due to a founder effect. Further analysis confirmed that
the mutation occurred in a hotspot defined by a methylated CpG
dinucleotide.

.0002
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 3, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ATL1, SER259TYR

In a kindred designated ADHSP-P with early-onset autosomal dominant
spastic paraplegia (182600), Zhao et al. (2001) identified
heterozygosity (both C and A) at nucleotide 945 of the full-length ATL1
cDNA, corresponding to exon 8 of the gene. Unaffected members of the
family had only C at this position. This mutation, TCC (ser) to TAC
(tyr), was predicted to alter amino acid 259. Thus, this mutation,
S259Y, is adjacent to the H258R mutation (606439.0003).

.0003
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 3, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ATL1, HIS258ARG

Zhao et al. (2001) found that affected members in a kindred with
autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia of early onset (182600)
were heterozygous (A and G) at nucleotide position 942 of the
full-length cDNA corresponding to the ATL1 gene. Affected members in
this kindred had only C at this position. The mutation was predicted to
result in a his258-to-arg (H258R) amino acid substitution, at a site
adjacent to S259Y (606439.0002).

.0004
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 3, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ATL1, ARG217GLN

In a large Italian family with early-onset, autosomal dominant
uncomplicated spastic paraplegia (182600), Muglia et al. (2002)
identified an 818G-A mutation in the ATL1 gene, resulting in an
arg217-to-gln substitution in a highly conserved GTPase motif.

.0005
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 3, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ATL1, 1-BP INS, 1688A

In an Italian family with autosomal dominant hereditary spastic
paraplegia (182600), Tessa et al. (2002) identified a heterozygous 1-bp
insertion, 1688A, in exon 12 of the ATL1 gene, producing a frameshift
and premature stop codon. The resulting protein lacked the last 37 amino
acids, including all of exon 14. Seven clearly affected individuals and
2 asymptomatic individuals with hyperreflexia carried the mutation. The
authors commented on the apparent age-dependent penetrance of the
disorder in this family.

.0006
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 3, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ATL1, MET408VAL

In a family with 6 members affected with a very early onset severe form
of spastic paraplegia (182600), Dalpozzo et al. (2003) identified a
heterozygous 1222A-G transition in exon 12 of the ATL1 gene, resulting
in a met408-to-val (M408V) substitution. All affected members had onset
in infancy with delayed motor milestones, gait impairment, spastic
paraparesis, distal atrophy, and lower limb weakness. Because of the
very early onset, the first patients were misdiagnosed with cerebral
palsy, and the index patient (mother of 5 affected members) was unaware
that she had a genetically transmissible disease. Two patients had the
unusual sign of mild hand atrophy.

.0007
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 3, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ATL1, ARG415TRP

In all 3 affected members tested from an Italian family with SPG3A
(182600), D'Amico et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous mutation in
exon 12 of the atlastin gene, resulting in an arg415-to-trp (R415W)
substitution. The mutation was not identified in 400 control
chromosomes. The 3 patients had onset before 5 years of age, and 2
additional family members were reportedly affected by infantile-onset
spastic paraparesis. However, 9 asymptomatic relatives ranging in age
from 13 to 70 years also had the mutation. D'Amico et al. (2004)
concluded that the reduced penetrance of this mutation indicated that
modulator genes or epigenetic factors are involved in the development of
the disease, and they noted the implications for genetic counseling.

Varga et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous c.1243C-T transition in
the ATL1 gene resulting in an R415W substitution in affected members of
a family with SPG3A originally reported by Raggio et al. (1973) as
having a pure spastic paraplegia transmitted in an X-linked pattern of
inheritance. Whole-exome sequencing of 1 of the affected males
identified the heterozygous R415W substitution. This mutation was then
identified in 3 affected family members and in 3 unaffected family
members, consistent with incomplete penetrance. Two of the unaffected
carriers were women, and family history indicated that most unaffected
women were obligate carriers. These findings were consistent with
sex-associated reduced penetrance of this mutation. Varga et al. (2013)
identified the same mutation in 1 of 83 Spanish patients with apparent
sporadic HSP and in 2 of 28 Russian patients with dominant HSP. Evidence
again suggested incomplete penetrance in these families. Varga et al.
(2013) also identified a heterozygous c.1244A-G transition, resulting in
an arg415-to-gln (R415Q; 606439.0014) substitution, in a Moroccan family
with SPG3A and incomplete penetrance. Varga et al. (2013) noted that
both the c.1243C-T and c.1244A-G transitions occur at a CpG nucleotide
(on the plus and minus strands, respectively) and thus may represent a
mutation hotspot due to spontaneous deamination of methylated cytosines.
R415 affects a highly conserved residue that does not localize to a
known protein domain.

.0008
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 3, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ATL1, LEU157TRP

In a mother and son with SPG3A (182600), Rainier et al. (2006)
identified a heterozygous 638T-C transition in exon 4 of the ATL1 gene,
resulting in a leu157-to-trp (L157W) substitution. The mutation is
predicted to disrupt a putative phosphorylation site of the protein.
Genetic analysis of family members indicated that the mutation occurred
de novo in the mother. The mother was a 34-year-old woman with
uncomplicated nonprogressive spastic paraplegia since infancy who was
originally diagnosed with spastic diplegic cerebral palsy. She was
correctly diagnosed with SPG after her son developed similar clinical
symptoms at age 10 months.

.0009
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 3, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ATL1, 3-BP DEL

In affected members of a large French Canadian family with SPG3A
(182600), Meijer et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 3-bp in-frame
deletion in the ATL1 gene, resulting in a deletion of asn436 (436delN).
Functional expression studies showed decreased ATL1 protein levels in
patients' lymphoblasts but normal levels of mRNA, normal GTPase
activity, and normal protein interactions. Meijer et al. (2007)
postulated decreased protein stability and a dominant-negative
loss-of-function mechanism.

.0010
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY, TYPE ID
ATL1, ASN355LYS

In affected members of a large 4-generation family with autosomal
dominant hereditary sensory neuropathy type ID (HSN1D; 613708), Guelly
et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous 1065C-A transversion in exon 11
of the ATL1 gene, resulting in an asn355-to-lys (N355K) substitution.
The mutation was not found in 370 controls. The phenotype was
characterized by early adult onset of a severe distal st sensory axonal
neuropathy with frequent ulcerations and amputation digits. In vitro
functional expression studies in COS7 cells showed that the mutant
protein had decreased GTPase activity compared to wildtype, and caused
disruption of endoplasmic reticulum 3-way junctions.

.0011
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY, TYPE ID
ATL1, GLU66GLN

In a 61-year-old man with hereditary sensory neuropathy-1D (HSN1D;
613708), Guelly et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous 196G-C
transversion in exon 2 of the ATL1 gene, resulting in a glu66-to-gln
(E66Q) substitution. He presented with progressive, ascending, severe
sensory loss affecting all modalities in the lower legs, but no foot
ulcerations or paresis. He had hyporeflexia, and sural nerve biopsy
revealed a severe, chronic, axonal neuropathy with a moderate
demyelinating component. The patient's deceased mother reportedly had a
similar severe sensory neuropathy. The mutation was not found in 150
control individuals, but in vitro functional expression studies showed
no change in GTPase activity and no changes in endoplasmic reticulum
morphology.

.0012
NEUROPATHY, HEREDITARY SENSORY, TYPE ID
ATL1, 1-BP DEL, 976G

In a man with hereditary sensory neuropathy-1D (HSN1D; 613708), Guelly
et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous 1-bp deletion (976delG) in exon
9 of the ATL1 gene, resulting in premature termination in the C
terminus. The patient had adult-onset sensory neuropathy with
ulcerations, lack of pain perception, paresthesias in the fingers, and
occasional lancinating pains in his ankles. Patellar tendon reflexes
were brisk, and Achilles tendon reflexes were absent. His father and
brother were similarly affected. The mutation was not found in 334
control individuals. In vitro functional expression studies showed
decreased expression of the truncated protein and diffuse localization
throughout the cytoplasm instead of proper localization to the
endoplasmic reticulum.

.0013
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 3, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ATL1, ARG416CYS

In affected members of a 3-generation South African Zulu family with
autosomal dominant SPG3A (182600), Orlacchio et al. (2011) identified a
heterozygous 1246C-T transition in exon 12 of the ATL1 gene, resulting
in an arg416-to-cys (R416C) substitution. The mutation was not found in
400 controls. The phenotype in this family was unusual in that affected
individuals had late onset (range 38 to 56 years), mild mental
retardation (IQ 32 to 67), and thin corpus callosum without cerebellar
involvement or white matter abnormalities. Spasticity was restricted to
the lower limbs; 3 patients had sphincter disturbances.

.0014
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 3, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ATL1, ARG415GLN

In 4 Moroccan sibs with SPG3A (182600), Varga et al. (2013) identified a
c.1244A-G transition in the ATL1 gene, resulting in an arg415-to-gln
(R415Q) substitution. Three sibs were homozygous and 1 was heterozygous
for the mutation. Heterozygosity for the mutation was then found in 3
unaffected family members and in 2 family members who had very subtle
signs of the disorder (hyperreflexia). These findings suggested complete
penetrance for the mutation in homozygous state and incomplete
penetrance for the mutation in heterozygous state. Varga et al. (2013)
also identified a heterozygous c.1243C-T transition, resulting in an
R415W (606439.0007) substitution in another family with SPG3A and
incomplete penetrance. Varga et al. (2013) noted that both the c.1243C-T
and c.1244A-G transitions occur at a CpG nucleotide (on the plus and
minus strands, respectively) and thus may represent a mutation hotspot
due to spontaneous deamination of methylated cytosines. R415 is a highly
conserved residue that does not localize to a known protein domain.

REFERENCE 1. Abel, A.; Fonknechten, N.; Hofer, A.; Durr, A.; Cruaud, C.; Voit,
T.; Weissenbach, J.; Brice, A.; Klimpe, S.; Auburger, G.; Hazan, J.
: Early onset autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia caused by novel
mutations in SPG3A. Neurogenetics 5: 239-243, 2004.

2. Beetz, C.; Nygren, A. O. H.; Deufel, T.; Reid, E.: An SPG3A whole
gene deletion neither co-segregates with disease nor modifies phenotype
in a hereditary spastic paraplegia family with a pathogenic SPG4 mutation.
(Letter) Neurogenetics 8: 317-318, 2007.

3. D'Amico, A.; Tessa, A.; Sabino, A.; Bertini, E.; Santorelli, F.
M.; Servidei, S.: Incomplete penetrance in an SPG3A-linked family
with a new mutation in the atlastin gene. Neurology 62: 2138-2139,
2004.

4. Dalpozzo, F.; Rossetto, M. G.; Boaretto, F.; Sartori, E.; Mostacciuolo,
M. L.; Daga, A.; Bassi, M. T.; Martinuzzi, A.: Infancy onset hereditary
spastic paraplegia associated with a novel atlastin mutation. Neurology 61:
580-581, 2003. Note: Erratum: Neurology 62: 348 only, 2004.

5. Durr, A.; Camuzat, A.; Colin, E.; Tallaksen, C.; Hannequin, D.;
Coutinho, P.; Fontaine, B.; Rossi, A.; Gil, R.; Rousselle, C.; Ruberg,
M.; Stevanin, G.; Brice, A.: Atlastin1 mutations are frequent in
young-onset autosomal dominant spastic paraplegia. Arch. Neurol. 61:
1867-1872, 2004.

6. Evans, K.; Keller, C.; Pavur, K.; Glasgow, K.; Conn, B.; Lauring,
B.: Interaction of two hereditary spastic paraplegia gene products,
spastin and atlastin, suggests a common pathway for axonal maintenance. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 10666-10671, 2006.

7. Guelly, C.; Zhu, P.-P.; Leonardis, L.; Papic, L.; Zidar, J.; Schabhuttl,
M.; Strohmaier, H.; Weis, J.; Strom, T. M.; Baets, J.; Willems, J.;
De Jonghe, P.; Reilly, M. M.; Frohlich, E.; Hatz, M.; Trajanoski,
S.; Pieber, T. R.; Janecke, A. R.; Blackstone, C.; Auer-Grumbach,
M.: Targeted high-throughput sequencing identifies mutations in atlastin-1
as a cause of hereditary sensory neuropathy type I. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 88:
99-105, 2011.

8. Hazan, J.; Lamy, C.; Melki, J.; Munnich, A.; de Recondo, J.; Weissenbach,
J.: Autosomal dominant familial spastic paraplegia is genetically
heterogeneous and one locus maps to chromosome 14q. Nature Genet. 5:
163-167, 1993.

9. Meijer, I. A.; Dion, P.; Laurent, S.; Dupre, N.; Brais, B.; Levert,
A.; Puymirat, J.; Rioux, M. F.; Sylvain, M.; Zhu, P.-P.; Soderblom,
C.; Stadler, J.; Blackstone, C.; Rouleau, G. A.: Characterization
of a novel SPG3A deletion in a French-Canadian family. Ann. Neurol. 61:
599-603, 2007.

10. Muglia, M.; Magariello, A.; Nicoletti, G.; Patitucci, A.; Gabriele,
A. L.; Conforti, F. L.; Mazzei, R.; Caracciolo, M.; Ardito, B.; Lastilla,
M.; Tedeschi, G.; Quattrone, A.: Further evidence that SPG3A gene
mutations cause autosomal dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia. Ann.
Neurol. 51: 794-795, 2002.

11. Namekawa, M.; Nelson, I.; Ribai, P.; Durr, A.; Denis, E.; Stevanin,
G.; Ruberg, M.; Brice, A.: A founder effect and mutational hot spots
may contribute to the most frequent mutations in the SPG3A gene. (Letter) Neurogenetics 7:
131-132, 2006.

12. Namekawa, M.; Ribai, P.; Nelson, I.; Forlani, S.; Fellmann, F.;
Goizet, C.; Depienne, C.; Stevanin, G.; Ruberg, M.; Durr, A.; Brice,
A.: SPG3A is the most frequent cause of hereditary spastic paraplegia
with onset before age 10 years. Neurology 66: 112-114, 2006.

13. Orlacchio, A.; Montieri, P.; Babalini, C.; Gaudiello, F.; Bernardi,
G.; Kawarai, T.: Late-onset hereditary spastic paraplegia with thin
corpus callosum caused by a new SPG3A mutation. (Letter) J. Neurol. 258:
1361-1363, 2011.

14. Orso, G.; Pendin, D.; Liu, S.; Tosetto, J.; Moss, T. J.; Faust,
J. E.; Micaroni, M.; Egorova, A.; Martinuzzi, A.; McNew, J. A.; Daga,
A.: Homotypic fusion of ER membranes requires the dynamin-like GTPase
Atlastin. Nature 460: 978-983, 2009. Note: Erratum: Nature 464:
942 only, 2010.

15. Raggio, J. F.; Thurmon, T. F.; Anderson, E. E.: X-linked hereditary
spastic paraplegia. J. La. State Med. Soc. 125: 4-6, 1973.

16. Rainier, S.; Sher, C.; Reish, O.; Thomas, D.; Fink, J. K.: De
novo occurrence of novel SPG3A/atlastin mutation presenting as cerebral
palsy. Arch. Neurol. 63: 445-447, 2006.

17. Sanderson, C. M.; Connell, J. W.; Edwards, T. L.; Bright, N. A.;
Duley, S.; Thompson, A.; Luzio, J. P.; Reid, E.: Spastin and atlastin,
two proteins mutated in autosomal-dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia,
are binding partners. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15: 307-318, 2006.

18. Tessa, A.; Casali, C.; Damiano, M.; Bruno, C.; Fortini, D.; Patrono,
C.; Cricchi, F.; Valoppi, M.; Nappi, G.; Amabile, G. A.; Bertini,
E.; Santorelli, F. M.: SPG3A: an additional family carrying a new
atlastin mutation. Neurology 59: 2002-2005, 2002.

19. Varga, R.-E.; Schule, R.; Fadel, H.; Valenzuela, I.; Speziani,
F.; Gonzalez, M.; Rudenskaia, G.; Nurnberg, G.; Thiele, H.; Altmuller,
J.; Alvarez, V.; Gamez, J.; Garbern, J. Y.; Nurnberg, P.; Zuchner,
S.; Beetz, C.: Do not trust the pedigree: reduced and sex-dependent
penetrance at a novel mutation hotspot in ATL1 blurs autosomal dominant
inheritance of spastic paraplegia. Hum. Mutat. 34: 860-863, 2013.

20. Zhao, X.; Alvarado, D.; Rainier, S.; Lemons, R.; Hedera, P.; Weber,
C. H.; Tukel, T.; Apak, M.; Heiman-Patterson, T.; Ming, L.; Bui, M.;
Fink, J. K.: Mutations in a newly identified GTPase gene cause autosomal
dominant hereditary spastic paraplegia. Nature Genet. 29: 326-331,
2001.

21. Zhu, P.-P.; Patterson, A.; Lavoie, B.; Stadler, J.; Shoeb, M.;
Patel, R.; Blackstone, C.: Cellular localization, oligomerization,
and membrane association of the hereditary spastic paraplegia 3A (SPG3A)
protein atlastin. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 49063-49071, 2003.

22. Zhu, P.-P.; Soderblom, C.; Tao-Cheng, J.-H.; Stadler, J.; Blackstone,
C.: SPG3A protein atlastin-1 is enriched in growth cones and promotes
axon elongation during neuronal development. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15:
1343-1353, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/25/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/11/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/28/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/15/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/11/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/15/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/27/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/27/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/6/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/1/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/23/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/6/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin -updated: 9/26/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/12/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/11/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/1/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/19/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/19/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/2/2001

EDITED carol: 09/16/2013
carol: 7/26/2013
ckniffin: 7/25/2013
carol: 10/13/2011
terry: 10/12/2011
ckniffin: 10/11/2011
wwang: 3/2/2011
wwang: 2/23/2011
ckniffin: 1/28/2011
wwang: 10/27/2010
ckniffin: 10/15/2010
alopez: 6/1/2010
mgross: 11/13/2009
terry: 11/11/2009
alopez: 9/15/2009
terry: 9/15/2009
wwang: 1/15/2008
ckniffin: 12/27/2007
wwang: 12/4/2007
ckniffin: 11/27/2007
wwang: 2/8/2007
ckniffin: 2/6/2007
wwang: 9/21/2006
wwang: 9/7/2006
ckniffin: 9/1/2006
wwang: 8/29/2006
ckniffin: 8/23/2006
wwang: 4/12/2006
ckniffin: 4/6/2006
wwang: 11/14/2005
wwang: 10/6/2005
ckniffin: 9/26/2005
mgross: 5/16/2005
terry: 5/12/2005
ckniffin: 4/11/2005
wwang: 3/8/2005
ckniffin: 3/1/2005
terry: 8/17/2004
tkritzer: 1/27/2004
ckniffin: 1/21/2004
carol: 2/25/2003
ckniffin: 2/19/2003
carol: 8/22/2002
ckniffin: 8/19/2002
alopez: 11/2/2001

610101	TITLE *610101 CUTC COPPER TRANSPORTER, E. COLI, HOMOLOG OF; CUTC
;;COPPER TRANSPORTER PROTEIN CUTC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the CUT family of copper transporters are associated with
copper homeostasis and are involved in the uptake, storage, delivery,
and efflux of copper (Gupta et al., 1995; Li et al., 2005).

CLONING

Using a PCR-based method, Li et al. (2005) cloned a member of the CUT
gene family, CUTC, from a human fetal brain cDNA library. CUTC encodes a
deduced 273-amino acid protein with a molecular mass of about 29.3 kD.
The CUTC protein shares 89% and 44% sequence identity with the mouse and
E. coli CutC proteins, respectively. RT-PCR analysis revealed expression
of CUTC in all human tissues examined, with lowest expression in
skeletal muscle, pancreas, prostate, and small intestine. Expression of
a CUTC-pEGF fusion plasmid in COS-7 and AD293 cells demonstrated the
presence of CUTC in the cytoplasm of both cell types and in the nucleus
of AD293 cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Based on the subcellular localization of the CUTC protein, Li et al.
(2005) suggested that CUTC may act as a shuttle protein in copper
homeostasis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Li et al. (2005) determined that the CUTC gene contains 9 exons and
spans over 23.6 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Li et al. (2005) mapped the CUTC gene to
chromosome 10q24.

REFERENCE 1. Gupta, S. D.; Lee, B. T.; Camakaris, J.; Wu, H. C.: Identification
of cutC and cutF (nlpE) genes involved in copper tolerance in Escherichia
coli. J. Bacteriol. 177: 4207-4215, 1995.

2. Li, J.; Ji, C.; Chen, J.; Yang, Z.; Wang, Y.; Fei, X.; Zheng, M.;
Gu, X.; Wen, G.; Xie, Y.; Mao, Y.: Identification and charactreization
of a novel Cut family cDNA that encodes human copper transporter protein
CutC. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 337: 179-183, 2005.

CREATED Iain McIntosh: 5/9/2006

EDITED carol: 05/10/2006

610665	TITLE *610665 Fc FRAGMENT OF IgG, LOW AFFINITY IIIb, RECEPTOR FOR; FCGR3B
;;IMMUNOGLOBULIN G Fc RECEPTOR III-1;;
FCRIII-1;;
CD16B
NEUTROPHIL ANTIGEN NA, INCLUDED;;
NEUTROPHIL-SPECIFIC ANTIGEN NA1, INCLUDED;;
NEUTROPHIL-SPECIFIC ANTIGEN NA2, INCLUDED;;
NEUTROPHIL-SPECIFIC ANTIGEN NC1, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The Fc receptor with low affinity for IgG (FCGR3, or CD16) is encoded by
2 nearly identical genes, FCGR3A (146740) and FCGR3B, resulting in
tissue-specific expression of alternative membrane-anchored isoforms.
FCGR3A encodes a transmembrane protein expressed on activated
monocytes/macrophages, natural killer (NK) cells, and a subset of T
cells. In contrast, FCGR3B encodes a glycosylphosphatidylinositol
(GPI)-anchored protein that is expressed constitutively by neutrophils
and after gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570) stimulation by eosinophils
(summary by Gessner et al., 1995).

CLONING

Ory et al. (1989) reported the cDNA sequences encoding the NA1 and NA2
forms of FCGR3 on neutrophils, which are encoded by the FCGR3B gene.

By Western blot and flow cytometric analyses, Ravetch and Perussia
(1989) demonstrated differential expression of FCGR3 on
polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs) and NK cells. The glycoprotein on
NK cells (FCGR3A) had a molecular mass 6 to 10 kD larger than that on
neutrophils (FCGR3B) and was resistant to phosphatidylinositol-specific
phospholipase C. Transcripts derived from FCGR3A and FCGR3B in NK cells
and PMNs, respectively, have multiple single nucleotide differences,
including 1 that converts a termination codon to a codon encoding arg,
thereby extending the cytoplasmic domain by 21 amino acids and
introducing a transmembrane anchor for FCGR3A in NK cells. The deduced
FCGR3A protein contains 254 amino acids, whereas the deduced FCGR3B
protein contains 233 amino acids. Ravetch and Perussia (1989) concluded
that cell type-specific expression of 2 genes encoding alternative FCGR3
proteins has a significant effect on the biologic functions of the
molecules.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gessner et al. (1995) isolated and sequenced genomic clones of FCGR3A
and FCGR3B, located their transcription initiation sites, identified the
different organizations of their 5-prime regions, and demonstrated 4
distinct classes of FCGR3A transcripts compared with a single class of
FCGR3B transcripts. The gene promoters displayed different
tissue-specific transcriptional activities reflecting expression of
FCGR3A in NK cells and FCGR3B in neutrophils.

MAPPING

By spot blot analysis, Grundy et al. (1989) mapped the FCGR2A (146790)
and FCGR2B genes, which are separated by about 200 kb, to chromosome 1q.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Sondermann et al. (2000) described the crystal structures of a soluble
FCGR3 (CD16B), an Fc fragment from human IgG1 (Fc1), and their complex.
In the 1:1 complex, the receptor binds to the 2 halves of the Fc
fragment in contact with residues of the C-gamma-2 domains and the hinge
region. Upon complex formation, the angle between the 2 soluble CD16B
domains increases significantly and the Fc fragment opens
asymmetrically. The high degree of amino acid conservation between
soluble CD16B and other Fc receptors, and similarly between Fc1 and
related immunoglobulins, suggested similar structures and modes of
association.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Genetic polymorphism of Fc receptor III on neutrophils is detectable by
several means, including reaction with antibodies against the biallelic
neutrophil-specific antigen system NA; differences in electrophoretic
mobility on SDS-PAGE; and differences in mRNAs encoding the allelic
forms of Fc receptor III. Ory et al. (1989) described the relationship
between structural and antigenic polymorphisms of FCGR3B and showed that
these reflect differences at the level of primary protein structure.

In a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; 152700), Clark et
al. (1990) found that neutrophils were not recognized by either
monoclonal or polyclonal antibodies to Fc receptor III, but reacted
normally with antibodies to Fc receptor II (FCGR2A), as well as with
antibodies to complement receptor-1, complement receptor-3 (120980), and
decay-accelerating factor (DAF; 125240). Analysis of genomic DNA showed
that failure of the patient's neutrophils to express Fc receptor III was
most likely due to an abnormality of the gene encoding the receptor.

Huizinga et al. (1990) described a case of neonatal isoimmune
neutropenia in which the mother was completely lacking FcRIII (CD16) on
neutrophils, but normal expression of FcRIII on natural killer cells.
The mother had isoantibodies in her blood against CD16 antigen,
apparently produced during pregnancy and responsible for the neutropenia
in her child. Fc receptor III is encoded by 2 separate genes: FcRIII-1,
which encodes the neutrophil receptor, and FcRIII-2, which encodes the
transmembrane receptor on natural killer cells and macrophages. The
neutrophil FcRIII deficiency appeared to be due to deletion of the
FcRIII-1 gene, while the FcRIII-2 gene was normally present. Her parents
were found to be heterozygous for the defect.

Neutrophil-specific antigens have been identified in the course of study
of isoimmune neonatal neutropenia due to fetomaternal incompatibility.
(Since it occurs in multiple sibs, neonatal neutropenia might simulate a
recessive disorder.) Two loci, termed NA and NB (162860), were
identified (Lalezari and Radel, 1974), with 2 alleles known at the NA
locus. These are NA1 and NA2 and have a frequency of 0.377 and 0.633,
respectively, in Caucasians and 0.651 in 0.302, respectively, in
Japanese (Ohto and Matsuo, 1989). The 'NA-null' status of the mother
reported by Huizinga et al. (1990) indicated that CD16 and NA are the
same molecule. Fromont et al. (1992) described a healthy woman who after
multiple pregnancies developed an antibody directed against CD16 which
caused transient neonatal alloimmune neutropenia (NAIN). The woman's
polymorphonuclear leukocytes did not react with monoclonal NA1 and NA2
antibodies, indicating the NA-null phenotype. Fromont et al. (1992)
determined that in a healthy, white population of 3,377 random blood
donors there were only 4 other instances of the NA-null phenotype. Their
proposita was the only one with an allo-CD16 antibody. The gene
frequency was calculated to be 0.0274 +/- 0.0059.

The neutrophil-specific antigen NC1 was defined by an antibody (Vaz) in
the serum of a multiparous mother who gave birth to a child with
alloimmune neonatal neutropenia (Lalezari et al., 1970). This antigen
has a gene frequency of about 0.80 (Lalezari et al., 1970). NC1 was
found to be associated with the neutrophil-specific antigen NA2,
although the precise relationship of NC1 and NA2 was unclear. Using the
antigen capture assay MAIGA and the granulocyte (GIFT) and lymphocyte
(LIFT) immunofluorescence tests, Bux et al. (1995) obtained results
indicating that NC1 and NA2 antigens are identical.

Aitman et al. (2006) showed that copy number variation (CNV) of the
orthologous rat and human Fcgr3 (FCGR3A; 146740) genes is a determinant
of susceptibility to immunologically mediated glomerulonephritis.
Positional cloning identified loss of the rat-specific Fcgr3 paralog
'Fcgr3-related sequence' (Fcgr3rs) as a determinant of macrophage
overactivity and glomerulonephritis in Wistar Kyoto rats. In humans, low
copy number of FCGR3B, an ortholog of rat Fcgr3, was associated with
glomerulonephritis in the autoimmune disorder SLE. Aitman et al. (2006)
concluded that their finding that gene CNV predisposes to
immunologically mediated renal disease in 2 mammalian species provides
direct evidence for the importance of genome plasticity in the evolution
of genetically complex phenotypes, including susceptibility to common
human disease.

Following up on the study of Aitman et al. (2006) in a larger sample,
Fanciulli et al. (2007) confirmed and strengthened their previous
finding of an association between low FCGR3B copy number and
susceptibility to glomerulonephritis in SLE patients. Low copy number
was also associated with risk of systemic SLE with no known renal
involvement as well as with microscopic polyangiitis and Wegener
granulomatosis (608710), but not with organ- specific Graves disease
(275000) or Addison disease (240200), in British and French cohorts.
Fanciulli et al. (2007) concluded that low FCGR3B copy number or
complete FCGR3B deficiency has a key role in the development of specific
autoimmunity.

Willcocks et al. (2008) confirmed that low copy number of FCGR3B was
associated with SLE (152700) in a Caucasian U.K. population, but they
were unable to find an association in a Chinese population.
Investigations of the functional effects of FCGR3B CNV revealed that
FCGR3B CNV correlated with cell surface expression, soluble FCGR3B
production, and neutrophil adherence to and uptake of immune complexes
both in a patient family and in the general population. Willcocks et al.
(2008) found that individuals from 3 U.K. cohorts with antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody-associated systemic vasculitis (AASV) were more
likely to have high FCGR3B CNV. They proposed that FCGR3B CNV is
involved in immune complex clearance, possibly explaining the
association of low CNV with SLE and high CNV with AASV.

Among 1,115 patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA; 180300) and 654
controls, Robinson et al. (2012) found a significant association between
FCGR3B deletions and disease (OR = 1.50, p = 0.028). The association was
more apparent in rheumatoid factor (RF)-positive disease (OR = 1.61, p =
0.011). Robinson et al. (2012) noted that the general association (p =
0.028) would not remain significant if corrected for multiple testing,
but the evidence was strengthened by the stronger association in the
RF-positive group of patients. The level of FCGR3B expression on
neutrophils was shown to correlate with gene copy number. The results
implicated an important role for neutrophils in the pathogenesis of RA,
potentially through reduced FCGR3B-mediated immune complex clearance.
The authors used a novel quantitative sequence variant assay in the
study.

In a metaanalysis of 8 published studies examining the association of
FCGR3B CNVs in autoimmune diseases, McKinney and Merriman (2012) found
that low (less than 2) gene copy number was associated with SLE (OR of
1.59, p = 9.1 x 10(-7)), but not with rheumatoid arthritis (OR of 1.36,
p = 0.15). A combined autoimmune phenotype analysis, including
vasculitis, ulcerative colitis (see 266600), Kawasaki disease (611775),
and other disorders, supported FCGR3B deletions as a risk factor for
non-organ-specific autoimmunity (OR = 1.44, p = 2.9 x 10(-9)). The
findings implicated defects in the clearance of immune complexes in the
etiology of non-organ-specific autoimmune disease.

Mueller et al. (2013) found that the increased risk of SLE associated
with reduced copy number of FCGR3B can be explained by the presence of a
chimeric gene, FCGR2B-prime, that occurs as a consequence of FCGR3B
deletion on FCGR3B zero-copy haplotypes. The FCGR2B-prime gene consists
of upstream elements and a 5-prime coding region that derive from FCGR2C
(612169), and a 3-prime coding region that derives from FCGR2B (604590).
The coding sequence of FCGR2B-prime is identical to that of FCGR2B, but
FCGR2B-prime would be expected to be under the control of 5-prime
flanking sequences derived from FCGR2C. Mueller et al. (2013) found by
flow cytometry, immunoblotting, and cDNA sequencing that presence of the
chimeric FCGR2B-prime gene results in the ectopic presence of
Fc-gamma-RIIb on natural killer cells, providing an explanation for SLE
risk associated with reduced FCGR3B copy number. To pursue the
underlying mechanism of SLE disease association with FCGR3B copy number
variation, Mueller et al. (2013) aligned the reference sequence (GRCh37)
of the proximal block of the FCGR locus (chr1:161,480,906-161,564,008)
to that of the distal block (chr1:161,562,570-161,645,839).
Identification of informative paralogous sequence variants (PSVs)
enabled Mueller et al. (2013) to narrow the potential breakpoint region
to a 24.5-kb region of paralogy between then 2 ancestral duplicated
blocks. The complete absence of nonpolymorphic PSVs in the 24.5-kb
region prevented more precise localization of the breakpoints in
FCGR3B-deleted or FCGR3B-duplicated haplotypes.

EVOLUTION

By determining the nature and rate of copy number variation (CNV)
mutation and investigating the global variation of disease-associated
variation at the FCGR locus, Machado et al. (2012) determined that CNV
of the FCGR3 genes is mediated by recurrent nonallelic homologous
recombination between the 2 segmental duplications that carry FCGR3A and
FCGR3B. They showed that pathogen richness, particularly helminth
pathogens, is likely to have influenced the patterns of variation in
FCGRs in humans. Machado et al. (2012) proposed that alterations to IgG
binding in the context of helminth infection have driven positive
selection in FCGR among different mammalian species, linking
evolutionary pressure of helminth infection with autoimmune disease via
adaptation at the genetic level. This model supports the 'hygiene
hypothesis,' which states that in the absence of chronic helminth
infection in modern populations, previously selected alleles respond to
immune system challenges differently and therefore may alter
susceptibility to autoimmune disease.

ANIMAL MODEL

Pinheiro da Silva et al. (2007) found that Fcrg (FCER1G; 147139) -/-
mice showed reduced mortality in an acute peritonitis model caused by
cecal ligation and puncture (CLP) compared with wildtype mice. The
reduced mortality in Fcrg -/- mice was associated with lower serum and
peritoneal Tnf (191160) and significantly increased capacity of
neutrophils and macrophages to phagocytose E. coli. Mice lacking Fcgr3
(the only Fcgr3 gene in mice) also had reduced sepsis after CLP. Fcgr3
bound E. coli, inducing Fcrg phosphorylation, recruitment of tyrosine
phosphatase Shp1 (PTPN6; 176883), and dephosphorylation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K; see 171834). Decreased Pi3k
activity inhibited E. coli phagocytosis and increased Tnf production
through Tlr4 (603030). Confocal microscopy demonstrated negative
regulation of Marco (604870) by Fcrg. Interaction of E. coli with Fcgr3
induced recruitment of Shp1 to Marco and inhibited E. coli phagocytosis.
Pinheiro da Silva et al. (2007) concluded that binding of E. coli to
FCGR3 triggers an inhibitory FCRG pathway that impairs MARCO-mediated
bacterial clearance and activates TNF secretion.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NEUTROPHIL-SPECIFIC ANTIGENS NA1/NA2
FCGR3B, ARG36SER, ASN65SER, ASP82ASN, AND VAL106ILE

Ory et al. (1989) found nucleotide changes in the FCGR3B gene predicting
4 amino acid differences between the NA1 and NA2 alloantigens of
neutrophils involved in alloimmune neonatal neutropenia. As a result,
NA1 FCGR3 has only 4 potential N-linked glycosylation sites compared
with 6 in NA2 FCGR3. In addition, Ory et al. (1989) found a silent
nucleotide change at codon 38: CTC (leu38) in NA1; CTT (leu38) in NA2.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Salmon et al. (1992)
REFERENCE 1. Aitman, T. J.; Dong, R.; Vyse, T. J.; Norsworthy, P. J.; Johnson,
M. D.; Smith, J.; Mangion, J.; Roberton-Lowe, C.; Marshall, A. J.;
Petretto, E.; Hodges, M. D.; Bhangal, G.; and 10 others: Copy number
polymorphism in Fcgr3 predisposes to glomerulonephritis in rats and
humans. Nature 439: 851-855, 2006.

2. Bux, J.; Behrens, G.; Leist, M.; Mueller-Eckhardt, C.: Evidence
that the granulocyte-specific antigen NC1 is identical with NA2. Vox
Sang. 68: 46-49, 1995.

3. Clark, M. R.; Liu, L.; Clarkson, S. B.; Ory, P. A.; Goldstein,
I. M.: An abnormality of the gene that encodes neutrophil Fc receptor
III in a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus. J. Clin. Invest. 86:
341-346, 1990.

4. Fanciulli, M.; Norsworthy, P. J.; Petretto, E.; Dong, R.; Harper,
L.; Kamesh, L.; Heward, J. M.; Gough, S. C. L.; de Smith, A.; Blakemore,
A. I. F.; Froguel, P.; Owen, C. J.; Pearce, S. H. S.; Teixeira, L.;
Guillevin, L.; Graham, D. S. C.; Pusey, C. D.; Cook, H. T.; Vyse,
T. J.; Aitman, T. J.: FCGR3B copy number variation is associated
with susceptibility to systemic, but not organ-specific, autoimmunity. Nature
Genet. 39: 721-723, 2007.

5. Fromont, P.; Bettaieb, A.; Skouri, H.; Floch, C.; Poulet, E.; Duedari,
N.; Bierling, P.: Frequency of the polymorphonuclear neutrophil Fc-gamma
receptor III deficiency in the French population and its involvement
in the development of neonatal alloimmune neutropenia. Blood 79:
2131-2134, 1992.

6. Gessner, J. E.; Grussenmeyer, T.; Kolanus, W.; Schmidt, R. E.:
The human low affinity immunoglobulin G Fc receptor III-A and III-B
genes: molecular characterization of the promoter regions. J. Biol.
Chem. 270: 1350-1361, 1995.

7. Grundy, H. O.; Peltz, G.; Moore, K. W.; Golbus, M. S.; Jackson,
L. G.; Lebo, R. V.: The polymorphic Fc-gamma receptor II gene maps
to human chromosome 1q. Immunogenetics 29: 331-339, 1989.

8. Huizinga, T. W. J.; Kuijpers, R. W. A. M.; Kleijer, M.; Schulpen,
T. W. J.; Cuypers, H. T. M.; Roos, D.; von dem Borne, A. E. G. K.
: Maternal genomic neutrophil FcRIII deficiency leading to neonatal
isoimmune neutropenia. Blood 76: 1927-1932, 1990.

9. Lalezari, P.; Radel, E.: Neutrophil-specific antigens: immunology
and clinical significance. Seminars Hemat. 11: 281-290, 1974.

10. Lalezari, P.; Thalenfeld, B.; Weinstein, W. J.: The third neutrophil
antigen.In: Terasaki, P. I.: Histocompatibility Testing 1970.  Copenhagen:
Munksgaard (pub.)  1970. Pp. 319-322.

11. Machado, L. R.; Hardwick, R. J.; Bowdrey, J.; Bogle, H.; Knowles,
T. J.; Sironi, M.; Hollox, E. J.: Evolutionary history of copy-number-variable
locus for the low-affinity Fc-gamma receptor: mutation rate, autoimmune
disease, and the legacy of helminth infection. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90:
973-985, 2012.

12. McKinney, C.; Merriman, T. R.: Meta-analysis confirms a role
for deletion in FCGR3B in autoimmune phenotypes. Hum. Molec. Genet. 21:
2370-2376, 2012.

13. Mueller, M.; Barros, P.; Witherden, A. S.; Roberts, A. L.; Zhang,
Z.; Schaschl, H.; Yu, C.-Y.; Hurles, M. E.; Schaffner, C.; Floto,
R. A.; Game, L.; Steinberg, K. M.; Wilson, R. K.; Graves, T. A.; Eichler,
E. E.; Cook, H. T.; Vyse, T. J.; Aitman, T. J.: Genomic pathology
of SLE-associated copy-number variation at the FCGR2C/FCGR3B/FCGR2B
locus. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92: 28-40, 2013.

14. Ohto, H.; Matsuo, Y.: Neutrophil-specific antigens and gene frequencies
in Japanese. Transfusion 29: 654 only, 1989.

15. Ory, P.; Clark, M. R.; Kwoh, E. E.; Clarkson, S. B.; Goldstein,
I. M.: Sequences of complementary DNAs that encode the NA1 and NA2
forms of Fc-gamma receptor III on neutrophils. J. Clin. Invest. 84:
1688-1691, 1989.

16. Ory, P. A.; Goldstein, I. M.; Kwoh, E. E.; Clarkson, S. B.: Characterization
of polymorphic forms of Fc receptor III on human neutrophils. J.
Clin. Invest. 83: 1676-1681, 1989.

17. Pinheiro da Silva, F.; Aloulou, M.; Skurnik, D.; Benhamou, M.;
Andremont, A.; Velasco, I. T.; Chiamolera, M.; Verbeek, J. S.; Launay,
P.; Monteiro, R. C.: CD16 promotes Escherichia coli sepsis through
an FcR-gamma inhibitory pathway that prevents phagocytosis and facilitates
inflammation. Nature Med. 13: 1368-1374, 2007.

18. Ravetch, J. V.; Perussia, B.: Alternative membrane forms of Fc-gamma-RIII(CD16)
on human natural killer cells and neutrophils: cell type-specific
expression of two genes that differ in single nucleotide substitutions. J.
Exp. Med. 170: 481-497, 1989.

19. Robinson, J. I.; Carr, I. M.; Cooper, D. L.; Rashid, L. H.; Martin,
S. G.; Emery, P.; Isaacs, J. D.; Barton, A.; BRAGGSS; Wilson, A.
G.; Barrett, J. H.; Morgan, A. W.: Confirmation of association of
FCGR3B but not FCGR3A copy number with susceptibility to autoantibody
positive rheumatoid arthritis. Hum. Mutat. 33: 741-749, 2012.

20. Salmon, J. E.; Edberg, J. C.; Brogle, N. L.; Kimberly, R. P.:
Allelic polymorphisms of human Fc-gamma receptor IIA and Fc-gamma
receptor IIIB: independent mechanisms for differences in human phagocyte
function. J. Clin. Invest. 89: 1274-1281, 1992.

21. Sondermann, P.; Huber, R.; Oosthuizen, V.; Jacob, U.: The 3.2-angstrom
crystal structure of the human IgG1 Fc fragment--Fc-gamma-RIII complex. Nature 406:
267-273, 2000.

22. Willcocks, L. C.; Lyons, P. A.; Clatworthy, M. R.; Robinson, J.
I.; Yang, W.; Newland, S. A.; Plagnol, V.; McGovern, N. N.; Condliffe,
A. M.; Chilvers, E. R.; Adu, D.; Jolly, E. C.; Watts, R.; Lau, Y.
L.; Morgan, A. W.; Nash, G.; Smith, K. G. C.: Copy number of FCGR3B,
which is associated with systemic lupus erythematosus, correlates
with protein expression and immune complex uptake. J. Exp. Med. 205:
1573-1582, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/5/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/27/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/24/2012
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/4/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/9/2012
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 8/2/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/26/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/16/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/6/2007

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 12/20/2006

EDITED alopez: 06/07/2013
ckniffin: 6/5/2013
carol: 3/8/2013
alopez: 2/27/2013
mgross: 9/25/2012
terry: 9/24/2012
mgross: 9/4/2012
terry: 8/9/2012
mgross: 8/3/2012
mgross: 8/2/2012
mgross: 7/30/2012
terry: 7/26/2012
alopez: 4/23/2012
terry: 4/17/2012
ckniffin: 4/16/2012
alopez: 8/6/2007
alopez: 12/20/2006

610704	TITLE *610704 PROHIBITIN 2; PHB2
;;REPRESSOR OF ESTROGEN RECEPTOR ACTIVITY; REA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using the C-terminal EF domains of a dominant-negative estrogen receptor
(ER)-alpha (ESR1; 133430) mutant as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a
breast cancer cell line cDNA library, followed by EST database analysis,
Montano et al. (1999) cloned PHB2, which the called REA. The deduced
299-amino acid protein contains 4 potential phosphorylation sites, a
nuclear receptor interaction box, and a nuclear localization motif.

GENE FUNCTION

Montano et al. (1999) showed that REA enhanced the potency of a
dominant-negative ER-alpha mutant and antiestrogens as suppressors of
ER-alpha activity in Chinese hamster ovary cells. When coexpressed with
wildtype ER-alpha or ER-beta (ESR2; 601663), REA suppressed activation
of a reporter gene in a dose-dependent manner. REA had no effect on
reporter activity in the absence of liganded ER, and it had no effect on
the transcriptional activities of other hormone receptors. Mutation
analysis showed that an N-terminal domain and a central domain of REA
were required for its repressor activity. REA interacted directly with
ER-alpha in an in vitro pull-down assay. REA did not interfere with the
ability of ER-alpha to bind to estrogen response element DNA, but it
competed with the coactivator SRC1 (NCOA1; 602691) for modulation of
ER-alpha transcriptional activity.

By gel filtration, mass spectrometry, coimmunoprecipitation, and Western
blot analysis of HeLa cells, Da Cruz et al. (2008) showed that
prohibitin-1 (PHB; 176705) and prohibitin-2 interacted in a 250-kD
complex with SLP2 (STOML2; 608292). Knockdown of SLP2 in HeLa cells or
mouse embryonic fibroblasts via RNA interference led to increased
proteolysis of the prohibitins and other mitochondrial proteins.

Using coimmunoprecipitation analysis, Christie et al. (2011) confirmed
that SLP2 interacted with PHB1 and PHB2. Elevated SLP2 content increased
the association of PHB1 with mitochondrial membranes.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the PHB2 gene to chromosome 12p13.31 based on an
alignment of the PHB2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF150962) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

ANIMAL MODEL

Mussi et al. (2006) reported that Rea deletion in mice was embryonic
lethal. They found that, compared with wildtype mice, virgin Rea +/-
mice exhibited faster mammary ductal elongation, and Rea +/- mice showed
increased lobuloalveolar development during pregnancy and delayed
mammary gland involution after weaning. These phenotypes of Rea +/- mice
were associated with significantly increased cell proliferation and ER
transcriptional activities. Rea repressed ER transcriptional activity in
mouse mammary gland under natural conditions, as well as following
ovariectomy and after estrogen replacement.

Using conditional gene targeting, Merkwirth et al. (2008) restricted
expression of mouse Phb2 to mitochondria and identified processing of
the dynamin (see 602377)-like GTPase Opa1 (605290), an essential
component of the mitochondrial fusion machinery, as the central cellular
process controlled by prohibitins. Deletion of Phb2 led to selective
loss of long isoforms of Opa1, resulting in aberrant cristae
morphogenesis, impaired cellular proliferation, and resistance to
apoptosis. Expression of a long Opa1 isoform in Phb2-deficient cells
suppressed these defects, identifying impaired Opa1 processing as the
primary cellular defect in the absence of prohibitins. Merkwirth et al.
(2008) concluded that prohibitins are essential for formation of
mitochondrial cristae and suggested that cell proliferation is coupled
with mitochondrial morphogenesis.

REFERENCE 1. Christie, D. A.; Lemke, C. D.; Elias, I. M.; Chau, L. A.; Kirchhof,
M. G.; Li, B.; Ball, E. H.; Dunn, S. D.; Hatch, G. M.; Madrenas, J.
: Stomatin-like protein 2 binds cardiolipin and regulates mitochondrial
biogenesis and function. Molec. Cell. Biol. 31: 3845-3856, 2011.

2. Da Cruz, S.; Parone, P. A.; Gonzalo, P.; Bienvenut, W. V.; Tondera,
D.; Jourdain, A.; Quadroni, M.; Martinou, J.-C.: SLP-2 interacts
with prohibitins in the mitochondrial inner membrane and contributes
to their stability. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1783: 904-911, 2008.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/20/2013.

4. Merkwirth, C.; Dargazanli, S.; Tatsuta, T.; Geimer, S.; Lower,
B.; Wunderlich, F. T.; von Kleist-Retzow, J.-C.; Waisman, A.; Westermann,
B.; Langer, T.: Prohibitins control cell proliferation and apoptosis
by regulating OPA1-dependent cristae morphogenesis in mitochondria. Genes
Dev. 22: 476-488, 2008.

5. Montano, M. M.; Ekena, K.; Delage-Mourroux, R.; Chang, W.; Martini,
P.; Katzenellenbogen, B. S.: An estrogen receptor-selective coregulator
that potentiates the effectiveness of antiestrogens and represses
the activity of estrogens. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 6947-6952,
1999.

6. Mussi, P.; Liao, L.; Park, S.-E.; Ciana, P.; Maggi, A.; Katzenellenbogen,
B. S.; Xu, J.; O'Malley, B. W.: Haploinsufficiency of the corepressor
of estrogen receptor activity (REA) enhances estrogen receptor function
in the mammary gland. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 16716-16721, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 02/20/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/21/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/16/2007

EDITED mgross: 02/20/2013
mgross: 3/24/2008
terry: 3/21/2008
mgross: 1/16/2007

603286	TITLE *603286 KISS1 METASTASIS SUPPRESSOR; KISS1
;;METASTIN;;
KISSPEPTIN
DESCRIPTION KISS1 is a human metastasis suppressor gene that suppresses metastases
of melanomas and breast carcinomas without affecting tumorigenicity.

CLONING

Welch et al. (1994) found that microcell-mediated transfer of human
chromosome 6 into human metastatic melanoma cells (C8161 or MelJuSo)
suppressed their ability to metastasize in athymic nude mice by at least
95% without affecting the tumorigenicity of the cells. Using a modified
subtractive hybridization approach, Lee et al. (1996) isolated a cDNA
expressed in hybrid chromosome 6-C8161 cells but not in parental C8161
cells. They designated the cDNA KISS1, combining laboratory nomenclature
for putative suppressor sequences with acknowledgment of the gene's
discovery in Hershey, Pennsylvania. Lee et al. (1996) reported the
sequence of the predicted KISS1 protein and a corrected sequence in a
published erratum. The KISS1 protein consists of 145 amino acids.
Northern blot analysis revealed that KISS1 was expressed as a 1-kb mRNA
in chromosome 6-C8161 hybrid cell lines as well as in normal placenta
tissue. Low levels of smaller transcripts were observed in pancreas and
kidney. Lee et al. (1996) did not detect KISS1 expression in any cell
line capable of metastasizing in athymic nude mice.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), Lee et al. (1996) mapped
the KISS1 gene to 1q32-q41. They suggested that a metastasis-suppressing
gene or genes on chromosome 6 regulate KISS1. By radiation hybrid
mapping and FISH, West et al. (1998) localized the KISS1 gene to 1q32.

GENE FUNCTION

Lee et al. (1996) observed that expression of KISS1 in C8161 melanoma
cells suppressed metastasis, suggesting that KISS1 plays a role in the
regulation of cancer metastasis in human malignant melanoma. Lee and
Welch (1997) demonstrated that expression of KISS1 in human breast
carcinoma cells reduced metastatic potential by 95% compared to control
cells but did not suppress tumorigenicity. The authors concluded that
KISS1 also functions as a metastasis suppressor gene in at least some
human breast cancers.

Ohtaki et al. (2001) demonstrated that KISS1 encodes a
carboxy-terminally amidated peptide with 54 amino acid residues, which
they isolated from human placenta as the endogenous ligand of an orphan
G protein-coupled receptor (GPR54; 604161). They named the truncated
form of KISS1 'metastin.' Metastin inhibits chemotaxis and invasion of
GPR54-transfected CHO cells in vitro and attenuates pulmonary metastasis
of GPR54-transfected B16-BL6 melanomas in vivo.

Using real-time PCR, Shahab et al. (2005) found that expression of Kiss1
mRNA increased with puberty in both male and female rhesus monkeys.
Kisspeptin-10 (112-121), a decapeptide derived from KISS1, was
administered to agonadal juvenile monkeys and induced a GnRH (152760)
response as measured by a surge in plasma luteinizing hormone (LH; see
152780). In intact females, but not in agonadal males, the level of
Gpr54 mRNA in the hypothalamus increased about 3-fold from the juvenile
to midpubertal stage. In situ hybridization detected robust Kiss1 and
Gpr54 expression in the arcuate nucleus. Shahab et al. (2005) concluded
that KISS1 signaling through GPR54 in the primate hypothalamus at the
end of the juvenile phase of development may contribute to the pubertal
resurgence of pulsatile GnRH release.

Kinoshita et al. (2005) examined whether metastin, the product of
metastasis suppressor gene KISS1, is a central neuropeptide regulating
GnRH/LH surge and then estrous cyclicity in the female rat. Injection of
metastin into the third ventricle or preoptic area increased plasma LH
concentrations in estrogen-primed ovariectomized rats, demonstrating
that metastin profoundly stimulates LH secretion by acting on the
preoptic area, where most GnRH neurons projecting to the median eminence
are located. Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated metastin neurons
in the arcuate nucleus colocalized with estrogen receptors, with some
fibers in the preoptic area in close apposition with GnRH neuronal cell
bodies or fibers. Quantitative RT-PCR revealed KISS1 and GPR54 (606161)
mRNAs expressed in the arcuate nucleus and preoptic area, respectively.
The blockade of local metastin action in the preoptic area with a
specific monoclonal antibody to rat metastin completely abolished
proestrous LH surge and inhibited estrous cyclicity. In the arcuate
nucleus, numbers of metastin-immunoreactive cell bodies and c-Fos
(164810) expression were significantly higher in the early proestrus
afternoon compared with the day of diestrus. Thus, Kinoshita et al.
(2005) concluded that metastin released in the preoptic area is involved
in inducing the preovulatory LH surge and regulating estrous cyclicity.

Navarro et al. (2005) studied the effect of KISS1 peptide on LH
secretion using in vitro and in vivo settings under different
experimental conditions. Central intracerebroventricular administration
of KISS1 peptide potently elicited LH secretion in vivo over a range of
doses from 10 pmol to 1 nmol. The effect of centrally injected KISS1
appeared to be mediated via the hypothalamic LHRH. However, no effect of
central administration of KISS1 was detected on relative LHRH mRNA
levels. Likewise, systemic (either intraperitoneal or intravascular)
injection of KISS1 markedly stimulated LH secretion. Navarro et al.
(2005) found that LH-releasing activity of KISS1 was persistently
observed after blockade of endogenous excitatory amino acid and nitric
oxide pathways, i.e., relevant neurotransmitters in the neuroendocrine
control of LH secretion. Navarro et al. (2005) concluded that their
results provided solid evidence for a potent stimulatory effect of KISS1
on LH release, acting at central levels (likely the hypothalamus) and
eventually at the pituitary, and further documented a novel role of the
KISS1/GPR54 system as a relevant downstream element in the
neuroendocrine network governing LH secretion.

Smith et al. (2005) found that KISS1 neurons in the arcuate nucleus,
which are inhibited by estradiol, may play a role in the negative
feedback regulation of GnRH secretion, whereas KISS1 neurons in the
anteroventral periventricular nucleus, which are stimulated by
estradiol, may participate in the positive feedback regulation of GnRH
secretion.

Navarro et al. (2005) studied the effects of KISS1 peptide on FSH (see
136530) secretion in vivo and in vitro. Intracerebroventricular
administration of KISS1 peptide significantly stimulated FSH secretion
in prepubertal and adult rats. Yet, dose-response analyses in vivo
demonstrated an ED50 value for the FSH-releasing effects of KISS1 of 400
pmol, i.e., approximately 100-fold higher than that of LH. In addition,
systemic injection of KISS1 significantly stimulated FSH secretion in
vivo. However, KISS1 failed to elicit basal FSH release directly at the
pituitary level, although it moderately enhanced GnRH-stimulated FSH
secretion in vitro. Finally, Navarro et al. (2005) reported that
mechanistic studies revealed that the ability of KISS1 to elicit FSH
secretion was abolished by the blockade of endogenous GnRH actions, but
it was persistently observed in different models of leptin (164160)
insufficiency and after blockade of endogenous excitatory amino acid and
nitric oxide pathways, relevant signals in the neuroendocrine control of
gonadotropin secretion. In summary, Navarro et al. (2005) concluded that
their results extended previous observations on the role of KISS1 in the
control of LH secretion and provided solid evidence for a stimulatory
effect of KISS1 on FSH release, acting at a central level.

In a study of 6 healthy male volunteers, Dhillo et al. (2005) found that
elevation of plasma concentrations of kisspeptin significantly increased
circulating LH, FSH, and testosterone levels. Dhillo et al. (2005)
suggested that kisspeptin infusion may provide a novel mechanism for
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis manipulation in disorders of the
reproductive system.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a consanguineous Kurdish family in which 4 sisters had normosmic
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH13; 614842), Topaloglu et al. (2012)
identified homozygosity for a missense mutation in the KISS1 gene
(603286.0001) that segregated with the disease and was not found in 100
ethnically matched controls. Subsequent analysis of KISS1 in 12
additional families with normosmic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and in
90 sporadic cases revealed no mutations.

ANIMAL MODEL

D'Anglemont de Tassigny et al. (2007) generated Kiss1-null mice that
were viable and healthy with no apparent abnormalities but failed to
undergo sexual maturation. Mutant female mice did not progress through
the estrous cycle, had thread-like uteri and small ovaries, and did not
produce mature Graffian follicles. Mutant males had small testes, and
spermatogenesis arrested mainly at the early haploid spermatid stage.
Both sexes had low circulating gonadotropin (LH and FSH) and sex steroid
(beta-estradiol or testosterone) hormone levels. Migration of GnRH
neurons into the hypothalamus appeared normal with appropriate axonal
connections to the median eminence and total GnRH content. The
hypothalamic-pituitary axis was functional, as shown by robust LH
secretion after peripheral administration of kisspeptin. D'Anglemont de
Tassigny et al. (2007) stated that the phenotypes of Gpr54- and
Kiss1-null mice are virtually identical, providing direct proof that
kisspeptins are the true physiologic ligand for the GPR54 receptor in
vivo. The authors also noted that apart from activation of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis, KISS1 does not seem to play a vital
role in any other physiologic processes, and loss of KISS1 cannot be
overcome by compensatory mechanisms.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 13 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
KISS1, ASN115LYS

In 4 affected sisters from a consanguineous Kurdish family with
normosmic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH13; 614842), Topaloglu et al.
(2012) identified homozygosity for a 345C-G transversion in the KISS1
gene, resulting in an asn115-to-lys (N115K) substitution at a highly
conserved residue. The unaffected parents were heterozygous for the
mutation, and unaffected sibs were heterozygous or homozygous for
wildtype. The mutation was not found in 100 ethnically matched controls.
Functional studies showed that human KISS1R (604161) had significantly
reduced sensitivity to mutant kisspeptin-10, and mutant kisspeptin-10
was unable to stimulate a maximal inositol phosphate response at any
concentration tested, indicating significantly reduced efficacy as well
as potency.

REFERENCE 1. d'Anglemont de Tassigny, X.; Fagg, L. A.; Dixon, J. P. C.; Day,
K.; Leitch, H. G.; Hendrick, A. G.; Zahn, D.; Franceschini, I.; Caraty,
A.; Carlton, M. B. L.; Aparicio, S. A. J. R.; Colledge, W. H.: Hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism in mice lacking a functional Kiss1 gene. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 104: 10714-10719, 2007.

2. Dhillo, W. S.; Chaudhri, O. B.; Patterson, M.; Thompson, E. L.;
Murphy, K. G.; Badman, M. K.; McGowan, B. M.; Amber, V.; Patel, S.;
Ghatei, M. A.; Bloom, S. R.: Kisspeptin-54 stimulates the hypothalamic-pituitary
gonadal axis in human males. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 6609-6615,
2005.

3. Kinoshita, M.; Tsukamura, H.; Adachi, S.; Matsui, H.; Uenoyama,
Y.; Iwata, K.; Yamada, S.; Inoue, K.; Ohtaki, T.; Matsumoto, H.; Maeda,
K.-I.: Involvement of central metastin in the regulation of preovulatory
luteinizing hormone surge and estrous cyclicity in female rats. Endocrinology 146:
4431-4436, 2005.

4. Lee, J.-H.; Miele, M. E.; Hicks, D. J.; Phillips, K. K.; Trent,
J. M.; Weissman, B. E.; Welch, D. R.: KiSS-1, a novel human malignant
melanoma metastasis-suppressor gene. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 88: 1731-1737,
1996. Note: Erratum: J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 89: 1549 only, 1997.

5. Lee, J.-H.; Welch, D. R.: Suppression of metastasis in human breast
carcinoma MDA-MB-435 cells after transfection with the metastasis
suppressor gene, KiSS-1. Cancer Res. 57: 2384-2387, 1997.

6. Navarro, V. M.; Castellano, J. M.; Fernandez-Fernandez, R.; Tovar,
S.; Roa, J.; Mayen, A.; Nogueiras, R.; Vazquez, M. J.; Barreiro, M.
L.; Magni, P.; Aguilar, E.; Dieguez, C.; Pinilla, L.; Tena-Sempere,
M.: Characterization of the potent luteinizing hormone-releasing
activity of KiSS-1 peptide, the natural ligand of GPR54. Endocrinology 146:
156-163, 2005.

7. Navarro, V. M.; Castellano, J. M.; Fernandez-Fernandez, R.; Tovar,
S.; Road, J.; Mayen, A.; Barreiro, M. L.; Casanueva, F. F.; Aguilar,
E.; Dieguez, C.; Pinilla, L.; Tena-Sempere, M.: Effects of KiSS-1
peptide, the natural ligand of GPR54, on follicle-stimulating hormone
secretion in the rat. Endocrinology 146: 1689-1697, 2005.

8. Ohtaki, T.; Shintani, Y.; Honda, S.; Matsumoto, H.; Hori, A.; Kanehashi,
K.; Terao, Y.; Kumano, S.; Takatsu, Y.; Masuda, Y.; Ishibashi, Y.;
Watanabe, T.; and 9 others: Metastasis suppressor gene KiSS-1 encodes
peptide ligand of a G-protein-coupled receptor. Nature 411: 613-617,
2001.

9. Shahab, M.; Mastronardi, C.; Seminara, S. B.; Crowley, W. F.; Ojeda,
S. R.; Plant, T. M.: Increased hypothalamic GPR54 signaling: a potential
mechanism for initiation of puberty in primates. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 102: 2129-2134, 2005.

10. Smith, J. T.; Cunningham, M. J.; Rissman, E. F.; Clifton, D. K.;
Steiner, R. A.: Regulation of Kiss1 gene expression in the brain
of the female mouse. Endocrinology 146: 3686-3692, 2005.

11. Topaloglu, A. K.; Tello, J. A.; Kotan, L. D.; Ozbek, M. N.; Yilmaz,
M. B.; Erdogan, S.; Gurbuz, F.; Temiz, F.; Millar, R. P.; Yuksel,
B.: Inactivating KISS1 mutation and hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. New
Eng. J. Med. 366: 629-635, 2012.

12. Welch, D. R.; Chen, P.; Miele, M. E.; McGary, C. T.; Bower, J.
M.; Stanbridge, E. J.; Weissman, B. E.: Microcell-mediated transfer
of chromosome 6 into metastatic human C8161 melanoma cells suppresses
metastasis but does not inhibit tumorigenicity. Oncogene 9: 255-262,
1994.

13. West, A.; Vojta, P. J.; Welch, D. R.; Weissman, B. E.: Chromosome
localization and genomic structure of the KiSS-1 metastasis suppressor
gene (KISS1). Genomics 54: 145-148, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/23/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/10/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/19/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/28/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/8/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/14/2001
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 12/11/1998

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 11/13/1998

EDITED carol: 10/03/2012
carol: 9/27/2012
carol: 2/23/2012
terry: 2/23/2012
wwang: 8/15/2007
terry: 7/10/2007
carol: 3/19/2007
alopez: 12/7/2006
terry: 11/28/2006
wwang: 6/17/2005
wwang: 6/9/2005
terry: 6/8/2005
alopez: 6/15/2001
terry: 6/14/2001
dkim: 12/11/1998
carol: 12/11/1998
terry: 11/18/1998
alopez: 11/13/1998

601070	TITLE *601070 INTERLEUKIN 15 RECEPTOR, ALPHA; IL15RA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680) and interleukin-15 (IL15; 600554) are
cytokines with overlapping but distinct biologic effects. Their
receptors share 2 subunits, the IL2R beta (146710) and gamma (308380)
chains, which are essential for signal transduction. The IL2 receptor
requires an additional IL2-specific alpha subunit (IL2RA; 147730) for
high-affinity IL2 binding. Giri et al. (1995) identified and cloned a
murine IL15-specific alpha subunit and showed that it is structurally
related to IL2R-alpha.

Anderson et al. (1995) isolated 3 differentially spliced human
IL15R-alpha variants.

Using RT-PCR, Dubois et al. (1999) cloned 8 IL15RA isoforms, including
the 3 reported by Anderson et al. (1995). The first 4 isoforms include
the full-length form containing exons 1 through 7 and forms lacking exon
2, exon 3, or both exons 2 and 3. The remaining 4 isoforms are identical
to the first 4 except that they contain an alternative C-terminal exon,
exon 7-prime, that is 100 bp shorter than exon 7. These 8 isoforms were
detected in most cell lines and tissues examined. Western blot analysis
using cDNAs encoding the full-length isoform and the isoform lacking
exon 2 (exon 7 forms of both) showed that both proteins were extensively
N- and O-glycosylated. Confocal microscopy demonstrated that full-length
IL15RA was associated primarily with the nuclear membrane, with part of
the receptor having an intranuclear localization. Isoforms lacking exon
2, which encodes a protein-binding sushi domain with a putative nuclear
localization signal, showed extranuclear localization in the endoplasmic
reticulum, Golgi, and cytoplasmic vesicles. Loss of exon 3 had no effect
on IL15RA localization. Immunoprecipitation analysis indicated that
smaller amounts of IL15RA and IL15RA lacking exon 2 were expressed as
glycosylated proteins on the cell surface.

GENE FUNCTION

Giri et al. (1995) found that the murine IL15R-alpha subunit alone bound
IL15 with a 1,000-fold higher affinity than that seen with IL2R-alpha
and IL2.

Anderson et al. (1995) found that all 3 human IL15R-alpha variants they
identified were capable of high-affinity binding of IL15. The
cytoplasmic domain of IL15R-alpha, like that of IL2R-alpha, was
dispensable for mitogenic signaling, suggesting that the primary role of
the alpha chains is to confer high-affinity binding. At high
concentrations, IL15, like IL2, was able to signal through a complex of
IL2R-beta and -gamma in the absence of the alpha subunit.

Dubois et al. (1999) found that, in contrast to full-length IL15RA,
IL15RA isoforms lacking exon 2 were unable to bind IL15.

Using radioimmunoassays, Mortier et al. (2004) identified a 42-kD
soluble form of IL15RA released by a proteolytic shedding mechanism from
the plasma membrane. The soluble receptor displayed high affinity for
IL15 and inhibited both binding of IL15 to the membrane receptor and
IL15-induced cell proliferation.

Mortier et al. (2006) found that, in contrast to the behavior of the
natural soluble form of IL15RA, a recombinant, soluble sushi domain of
IL15RA behaved as a potent IL15 agonist by enhancing binding of IL15 to
the IL2RB/IL2RG complex and increasing IL15 bioactivity. A fusion
protein of IL15 and the IL15RA sushi domain was an even stronger agonist
of the IL2RB/IL2RG complex.

Rubinstein et al. (2006) found that stimulation of mouse
memory-phenotype Cd8-positive T cells, which express high levels of Cd44
(107269) and Il2rb, with a complex of either human or mouse soluble
IL15/IL15RA resulted in a strong lymphoproliferative response that was
greater than the response to IL15 alone. The lymphoproliferative
response was mediated solely through the Il2rb/Il2rg receptor.
Administration of mouse soluble Il15/Il15ra in vivo caused nearly all
transferred memory-phenotype Cd8-positive cells to divide multiple
times, whereas only about half did so in response to Il15 alone. In
contrast to the ability of soluble IL15RA to potentiate the function of
IL15, soluble IL2RA blocked the function of IL2. Rubinstein et al.
(2006) concluded that the IL15/IL15RA complex has enhanced effects on
T-cell survival compared with IL15 alone.

To examine whether tolerant T cells could be rescued and functionally
restored for use in therapy of established tumors, Teague et al. (2006)
studied a transgenic T-cell receptor mouse model in which Cd8-positive T
cells specific for a candidate tumor antigen also expressed in liver
were tolerant. FACS analysis showed that these tolerant T cells
expressed Il15ra, and treatment of the cells with Il15 induced
proliferation and Il2 secretion. Such proliferation abrogated tolerance,
and the rescued cells could effectively treat leukemia. Teague et al.
(2006) concluded that high-affinity CD8-positive T cells are not
necessarily deleted by encounter with self-antigen in the periphery and
can be rescued and expanded for use in tumor immunotherapy.

By flow cytometric and confocal microscopy analyses, Brilot et al.
(2007) found that cell-to-cell contact between mature dendritic cells
(DCs) and natural killer (NK) cells occurred rapidly and induced
intracellular calcium release and upregulation of CD69 (107273).
Formation of a synapse between the 2 cell types required the adhesion
molecules LFA1 (see 153370) and LFA3 (153420), induced expression of
IL15RA, and was necessary for NK cell survival. Il15ra-deficient NK
cells obtained from donors with a history of infectious mononucleosis or
IL15RA-positive NK cells treated with anti-IL15RA showed reduced NK
survival after coculture with mature DCs. Brilot et al. (2007) concluded
that mature DCs interact with and activate resting NK cells via
formation of a regulatory synapse. They proposed that IL15RA expression
on NK cells is required for optimal NK/DC interaction and that IL15RA
mediates cell contact-dependent NK cell survival.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Chirifu et al. (2007) noted that IL2 and IL15 are recognized by the
alpha units of their receptors (IL2RA and IL15RA, respectively), but
that signaling is mediated by the common gamma chain, IL2RG. The
receptors for the 2 cytokines also share the beta unit, IL2RB. Chirifu
et al. (2007) determined the 1.85-angstrom crystal structure of the
IL15-IL15RA complex. The findings highlighted the importance of water in
generating the high-affinity complex and revealed that the topologies of
the IL15-IL15RA and IL2-IL2RA complexes are similar.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dubois et al. (1999) determined that the IL15RA gene contains 8 exons,
including an alternative C-terminal exon that they designated exon
7-prime.

MAPPING

Anderson et al. (1995) stated that the IL15RA and IL2RA genes have a
similar intron/exon organization and are closely linked in both human
and murine genomes. The IL2RA gene had been previously mapped to
chromosome 10p15-p14 and its mouse homolog to chromosome 2. Anderson et
al. (1995) mapped the human IL15RA gene to chromosome 10p15-p14 by FISH
and the mouse Il15ra gene to chromosome 2 by interspecific backcross
mapping.

REFERENCE 1. Anderson, D. M.; Kumaki, S.; Ahdieh, M.; Bertles, J.; Tometsko,
M.; Loomis, A.; Giri, J.; Copeland, N. G.; Gilbert, D. J.; Jenkins,
N. A.; Valentine, V.; Shapiro, D. N.; Morris, S. W.; Park, L. S.;
Cosman, D.: Functional characterization of the human interleukin-15
receptor alpha chain and close linkage of IL15RA and IL2RA genes. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 29862-29869, 1995.

2. Brilot, F.; Strowig, T.; Roberts, S. M.; Arrey, F.; Munz, C.:
NK cell survival mediated through the regulatory synapse with human
DCs requires IL-15R-alpha. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 3316-3329, 2007.

3. Chirifu, M.; Hayashi, C.; Nakamura, T.; Toma, S.; Shuto, T.; Kai,
H.; Yamagata, Y.; Davis, S. J.; Ikemizu, S.: Crystal structure of
the IL-15-IL-15R-alpha complex, a cytokine-receptor unit presented
in trans. Nature Immun. 8: 1001-1007, 2007.

4. Dubois, S.; Magrangeas, F.; Lehours, P.; Raher, S.; Bernard, J.;
Boisteau, O.; Leroy, S.; Minvielle, S.; Godard, A.; Jacques, Y.:
Natural splicing of exon 2 of human interleukin-15 receptor alpha-chain
mRNA results in a shortened form with a distinct pattern of expression. J.
Biol. Chem. 274: 26978-26984, 1999.

5. Giri, J. G.; Kumaki, S.; Ahdieh, M.; Friend, D. J.; Loomis, A.;
Shanebeck, K.; DuBose, R.; Cosman, D.; Park, L. S.; Anderson, D. M.
: Identification and cloning of a novel IL-15 binding protein that
is structurally related to the alpha of the IL-2 receptor. EMBO J. 14:
3654-3663, 1995.

6. Mortier, E.; Bernard, J.; Plet, A.; Jacques, Y.: Natural, proteolytic
release of a soluble form of human IL-15 receptor alpha-chain that
behaves as a specific, high affinity IL-15 antagonist. J. Immun. 173:
1681-1688, 2004.

7. Mortier, E.; Quemener, A.; Vusio, P.; Lorenzen, I.; Boublik, Y.;
Grotzinger, J.; Plet, A.; Jacques, Y.: Soluble interleukin-15 receptor
alpha (IL-15R-alpha)-sushi as a selective and potent agonist of IL-15
action through IL-15R-beta/gamma: hyperagonist IL-15-IL-15R-alpha
fusion proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 1612-1619, 2006.

8. Rubinstein, M. P.; Kovar, M.; Purton, J. F.; Cho, J.-H.; Boyman,
O.; Surh, C. D.; Sprent, J.: Converting IL-15 to a superagonist by
binding to soluble IL-15R-alpha. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 9166-9171,
2006.

9. Teague, R. M.; Sather, B. D.; Sacks, J. A.; Huang, M. Z.; Dossett,
M. L.; Morimoto, J.; Tan, X.; Sutton, S. E.; Cooke, M. P.; Ohlen,
C.; Greenberg, P. D.: Interleukin-15 rescues tolerant CD8+ T cells
for use in adoptive immunotherapy of established tumors. Nature Med. 12:
335-341, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/13/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/17/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/3/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/25/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/14/2006

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/1996

EDITED mgross: 03/15/2013
terry: 3/13/2013
mgross: 2/5/2008
terry: 1/17/2008
mgross: 1/3/2007
mgross: 9/25/2006
mgross: 2/16/2006
terry: 2/14/2006
dkim: 7/2/1998
terry: 3/29/1996
mark: 2/13/1996

147851	TITLE *147851 INTERLEUKIN 5 RECEPTOR, ALPHA; IL5RA
;;IL5R
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Tavernier et al. (1991) isolated cDNA clones encoding 2 receptor
proteins involved in the binding of human interleukin-5 (IL5; 147850).
The major transcript of this receptor gene, as analyzed in both
eosinophilic sublines of human promyelocytic cells and in eosinophilic
myelocytes grown from cord blood, encodes a secreted form of this
receptor. A second component of the receptor was found to be identical
to the beta chain of the human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating
factor high affinity receptor (CSF2RB; 138981). The finding that IL5 and
CSF2 share a receptor subunit provides a molecular basis for the
observation that these cytokines can partially interfere with each
other's binding and have highly overlapping biologic activities on
eosinophils. The common use of the same receptor component is
reminiscent of the structural relatedness of IL3 (147740), IL5, and
GM-CSF (CSF2; 138960). The homology at the C terminus may indicate a
related binding domain. The common origin of all 3 cytokines is also
suggested by their clustered chromosomal localization and by the
structure of their genes.

The 60-kD alpha chain binds IL5; the 130-kD beta chain increases the
binding affinity but cannot bind IL5 by itself. In addition, the beta
chain is required for signal transduction, most likely by association
with other receptor components. Tavernier et al. (1992) demonstrated
that soluble isoforms of the alpha subunit result from a 'normal'
splicing event or from the absence of splicing, whereas synthesis of
membrane-anchored forms of the alpha subunit requires alternative
splicing.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a granulocyte cDNA library with the
cytoplasmic domain of IL5RA as bait, Geijsen et al. (2001) identified an
interaction of IL5RA with syntenin (SDCBP; 602217). GST pull-down,
BIAcore, coimmunoprecipitation, and deletion mutant analyses confirmed
an association of syntenin with the last 15 C-terminal residues of
IL5RA; syntenin did not interact with CFS2RB. Within this 15-residue
stretch of IL5RA, the C-terminal phenylalanine is critical. Deletion of
either of the 2 tandem PDZ domains of syntenin, which are known to
interact with C-terminal peptide sequences, abrogated the IL5RA-syntenin
interaction. A second 2-hybrid screen identified the mouse
transcriptional factor Sox4 (184430) as a binding partner for syntenin
but not for IL5RA. The syntenin-Sox4 interaction occurs outside of the
PDZ domains of syntenin. Luciferase reporter analysis and fluorescence
microscopy showed that IL5, but not IL3, induces cytoplasmic and nuclear
expression of syntenin and, in a syntenin- and cytoplasmic
IL5RA-dependent manner, of Sox4. Geijsen et al. (2001) concluded that
syntenin acts as an adaptor molecule in the IL5RA-mediated activation of
SOX4. They also noted that mice lacking either Il5ra or Sox4 have
defects in B-cell development.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sun et al. (1995) identified a promoter (P1) located 5-prime upstream of
exon 1 of the IL5RA gene. Zhang et al. (1997) showed that an additional
promoter (P2) was present in the 5-prime upstream region of exon 2 of
the IL5RA gene.

MAPPING

By use of recombinant inbred strains of mice, Gough and Rakar (1992)
localized the murine equivalent of the IL5R gene to the distal half of
chromosome 6. The position lay between 2 regions of conserved synteny,
one on human chromosome 2 and the second on human chromosome 3. The
human IL5R gene presumably maps to one of these 2 chromosomes. Isobe et
al. (1992) mapped the IL5RA gene to 3p26-p24 by Southern blot analysis
of DNA from a panel of mouse-human hybrid somatic cell lines
complemented by in situ hybridization. Jacob et al. (1993) assigned the
IL5R gene to 3p26-p25 by study of human-rodent somatic cell hybrids
containing various portions of human chromosome 3 and using a
human-specific IL5R tandem repeat marker. Using the mouse-specific
tandem repeat marker in recombinant inbred strains of mice, they
assigned the Il5r gene to the distal part of mouse chromosome 6, close
to the Raf1 locus.

REFERENCE 1. Geijsen, N.; Uings, I. J.; Pals, C.; Armstrong, J.; McKinnon, M.;
Raaijmakers, J. A. M.; Lammers, J.-W. J.; Koenderman, L.; Coffer,
P. J.: Cytokine-specific transcriptional regulation through an IL-5R-alpha
interacting protein. Science 293: 1136-1138, 2001.

2. Gough, N. M.; Rakar, S.: Localization of the IL-5 receptor gene
to the distal half of murine chromosome 6 using recombinant inbred
strains of mice. Genomics 12: 855-856, 1992.

3. Isobe, M.; Kumura, Y.; Murata, Y.; Takaki, S.; Tominaga, A.; Takatsu,
K.; Ogita, Z.: Localization of the gene encoding the alpha subunit
of human interleukin-5 receptor (IL5RA) to chromosome region 3p24-3p26. Genomics 14:
755-758, 1992.

4. Jacob, C. O.; Mykytyn, K.; Varcony, T.; Drabkin, H. A.: Mapping
of the interleukin 5 receptor gene to human chromosome 3p25-p26 and
to mouse chromosome 6 close to the Raf-1 locus with polymorphic tandem
repeat sequences. Mammalian Genome 4: 435-439, 1993.

5. Sun, Z.; Yergeau, D. A.; Tuypens, T.; Tavernier, J.; Paul, C. C.;
Baumann, M. A.: Tenen, D. G.; Ackerman, S. J.: Identification and
characterization of a functional promoter region in the human eosinophil
IL-5 receptor alpha subunit gene. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 1462-1471,
1995.

6. Tavernier, J.; Devos, R.; Cornelis, S.; Tuypens, T.; Van der Heyden,
J.; Fiers, W.; Plaetinck, G.: A human high affinity interleukin-5
receptor (IL5R) is composed of an IL5-specific alpha chain and a beta
chain shared with the receptor for GM-CSF. Cell 66: 1175-1184, 1991.

7. Tavernier, J.; Tuypens, T.; Plaetinck, G.; Verhee, A.; Fiers, W.;
Devos, R.: Molecular basis of the membrane-anchored and two soluble
isoforms of the human interleukin 5 receptor alpha subunit. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 7041-7045, 1992.

8. Zhang, J.; Kuvelkar, R.; Cheewatrakoolpong, B.; Williams, S.; Egan,
R. W.; Billah, M. M.: Evidence for multiple promoters of the human
IL-5 receptor alpha subunit gene: a novel 6-base pair element determines
cell-specific promoter function. J. Immun. 15: 5412-5421, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 08/16/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/10/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/4/1991

EDITED mgross: 08/16/2001
mgross: 3/10/1999
mgross: 2/16/1999
mgross: 2/15/1999
terry: 2/10/1999
carol: 1/29/1999
dkim: 7/2/1998
terry: 5/13/1994
carol: 8/31/1993
carol: 12/21/1992
carol: 11/5/1992
carol: 8/31/1992
carol: 4/1/1992

153634	TITLE *153634 MACROPHAGE ANTIGEN CD68; CD68
;;MACROSIALIN
DESCRIPTION CD68 is a 110-kD transmembrane glycoprotein that is highly expressed by
human monocytes and tissue macrophages. Holness and Simmons (1993)
isolated cDNA clones encoding CD68 by transient expression in COS cells
and immunoselection using anti-CD68 monoclonal antibodies. Two types of
cDNA clones were isolated, differing by the insertion of 2 short
segments in the N-terminal portion of the extracellular domain. The cDNA
sequence predicted a type I integral membrane protein of 354 residues
with a heavily glycosylated extracellular domain of 298 residues
containing 9 potential N-linked glycosylation sites and numerous
potential O-linked glycosylation sites. The extracellular domain
consists of 2 distinct regions separated by an extended proline hinge: a
distal mucin-like domain and a proximal domain with significant sequence
homology to a family of lysosomal/plasma membrane shuttling proteins
(e.g., LAMP1; 153300). CD68 is a member of a family of hematopoietic
mucin-like molecules that includes leukosialin/CD43 (182160) and stem
cell antigen CD34 (142230).

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Jones et al. (1998) assigned the
linked CD68 and EIF4A1 (602641) genes to 17p13. By interspecific
backcross analysis, they mapped the mouse Cd68 and Eif4a1 genes to
chromosome 8.

REFERENCE 1. Holness, C. L.; Simmons, D. L.: Molecular cloning of CD68, a human
macrophage marker related to lysosomal glycoproteins. Blood 81:
1607-1613, 1993.

2. Jones, E.; Quinn, C. M.; See, C. G.; Montgomery, D. S.; Ford, M.
J.; Kolble, K.; Gordon, S.; Greaves, D. R.: The linked human elongation
initiation factor 4A1 (EIF4A1) and CD68 genes map to chromosome 17p13. Genomics 53:
248-250, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 12/15/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/14/1993

EDITED carol: 04/23/1999
carol: 12/15/1998
dkim: 12/3/1998
mark: 3/4/1998
carol: 10/26/1993
carol: 5/14/1993

613966	TITLE *613966 TASTE RECEPTOR, TYPE 2, MEMBER 42; TAS2R42
;;T2R42;;
T2R55
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TAS2R42 belongs to a family of intronless genes that encode highly
related bitter taste receptors (TAS2Rs). TAS2Rs are G protein-coupled
receptors, which are characterized by 7 transmembrane domains (summary
by Fischer et al., 2005). For further information on the TAS2R gene
family, see 604791.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Fischer et al. (2005) mapped the TAS2R42
gene, which they called T2R55, to a TAS2R gene cluster on chromosome
12p13.

REFERENCE 1. Fischer, A.; Gilad, Y.; Man, O.; Paabo, S.: Evolution of bitter
taste receptors in humans and apes. Molec. Biol. Evol. 22: 432-436,
2005. Note: Erratum: Molec. Biol. Evol. 22: 1157 only, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/11/2011

EDITED terry: 06/08/2012
mgross: 5/12/2011

603936	TITLE *603936 GROWTH/DIFFERENTIATION FACTOR 11; GDF11
;;BONE MORPHOGENETIC PROTEIN 11; BMP11
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GDF9, or BMP11, is a member of the transforming growth factor-beta (see
TGFB1, 191080) superfamily of regulatory molecules.

CLONING

The bones that comprise the axial skeleton have distinct morphologic
features characteristic of their positions along the anterior/posterior
axis. McPherron et al. (1997) described a novel mouse TGF-beta family
member, myostatin, encoded by the Mstn gene (601788), that has an
essential role in regulating skeletal muscle mass. By low-stringency
screening, McPherron et al. (1997) also identified a gene related to
Mstn. The cloning of this gene, designated Gdf11, was also reported by
Gamer et al. (1999) and Nakashima et al. (1999).

GENE FUNCTION

McPherron et al. (1999) showed that Gdf11 has an important role in
establishing the patterning of the axial skeleton. They found that
during early mouse embryogenesis Gdf11 is expressed in the primitive
streak and tail bud regions, which are sites where new mesodermal cells
are generated. Homozygous mutant mice carrying a targeted deletion of
Gdf11 exhibited anteriorly directed homeotic transformations throughout
the axial skeleton and posterior displacement of the hindlimbs. The
effect of the mutation was dose dependent, as Gdf11 +/- mice had a
milder phenotype than Gdf11 -/- mice. Mutant embryos showed alterations
in patterns of Hox (see 142950) gene expression, suggesting that Gdf11
acts upstream of the Hox genes. McPherron et al. (1999) interpreted
their findings to indicate that Gdf11 is a secreted signal that acts
globally to specify positional identity along the anterior/posterior
axis. To their knowledge, Gdf11 was the first secreted protein to be
discovered that functions globally to regulate anterior/posterior axial
patterning. The homeotic transformations observed in Gdf11 mutant mice
were more extensive than those seen either by genetic manipulation of
presumed patterning genes or by administration of retinoic acid. The
question was raised of whether Gdf11 and retinoic acid interact to
regulate Hox gene expression and anterior/posterior patterning and
whether Gdf11 regulates the patterning of tissues other than those
studied by McPherron et al. (1999).

Kim et al. (2005) demonstrated that mouse Gdf11 controls the number of
retinal ganglion cells, as well as amacrine and photoreceptor cells,
that form during development. Gdf11 does not affect proliferation of
progenitors, a major role of Gdf11 action in other tissues, but instead
controls duration of expression of Math5 (ATOH7; 609876), a gene that
confers competence for retinal ganglion cell genesis, in progenitor
cells. Thus, Gdf11 governs the temporal windows during which multipotent
progenitors retain competence to produce distinct neural progeny.

ANIMAL MODEL

Wu et al. (2003) presented evidence that mouse Gdf11 is involved in an
inhibitory feedback mechanism that limits the generation of new neurons
by neuronal progenitors in the olfactory epithelium. In vitro, Gdf11
inhibits neurogenesis in olfactory epithelium progenitors by inducing
Kip1 (600778) and reversible cell cycle arrest. Mice lacking functional
Gdf11 had more olfactory epithelium progenitors and neurons, whereas
mice lacking follistatin (136470), a Gdf11 antagonist, had decreased
progenitors and neurons.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the GDF11
gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP stSG47458).

REFERENCE 1. Gamer, L. W.; Wolfman, N. M.; Celeste, A. J.; Hattersley, G.; Hewick,
R.; Rosen, V.: A novel BMP expressed in developing mouse limb, spinal
cord, and tail bud is a potent mesoderm inducer in Xenopus embryos. Dev.
Biol. 208: 222-232, 1999.

2. Kim, J.; Wu, H.-H.; Lander, A. D.; Lyons, K. M.; Matzuk, M. M.;
Calof, A. L.: GDF11 controls the timing of progenitor cell competence
in developing retina. Science 308: 1927-1930, 2005.

3. McPherron, A. C.; Lawler, A. M.; Lee, S.-J.: Regulation of skeletal
muscle mass in mice by a new TGF-beta superfamily member. Nature 387:
83-90, 1997.

4. McPherron, A. C.; Lawler, A. M.; Lee, S.-J.: Regulation of anterior/posterior
patterning of the axial skeleton by growth/differentiation factor
11. Nature Genet. 22: 260-264, 1999.

5. Nakashima, M.; Toyono, T.; Akamine, A.; Joyner, A.: Expression
of growth/differentiation factor 11, a new member of the BMP/TGF-beta
superfamily during mouse embryogenesis. Mech. Dev. 80: 185-189,
1999.

6. Wu, H.-H.; Ivkovic, S.; Murray, R. C.; Jaramillo, S.; Lyons, K.
M.; Johnson, J. E.; Calof, A. L.: Autoregulation of neurogenesis
by GDF11. Neuron 37: 197-207, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/27/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/17/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/28/1999

EDITED carol: 10/28/2009
wwang: 7/20/2007
carol: 2/2/2006
alopez: 7/27/2005
terry: 7/27/2005
joanna: 3/8/2004
cwells: 8/6/2003
terry: 7/17/2003
alopez: 12/8/1999
carol: 12/7/1999
alopez: 6/28/1999

601691	TITLE *601691 ATP-BINDING CASSETTE, SUBFAMILY A, MEMBER 4; ABCA4
;;ATP-BINDING CASSETTE TRANSPORTER, RETINA-SPECIFIC; ABCR;;
ABC TRANSPORTER, RETINA-SPECIFIC;;
PHOTORECEPTOR RIM PROTEIN; RMP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ABCA4 gene produces an ATP-binding cassette (ABC) superfamily
transmembrane protein expressed exclusively in retinal photoreceptors
that is involved in clearance from photoreceptor cells of
all-trans-retinal aldehyde (atRAL), a byproduct of the retinoid cycle of
vision (Sun et al., 1999; Cideciyan et al., 2009).

CLONING

Allikmets et al. (1997) identified the ABCR gene among expressed
sequence tags obtained from human retina. ABCR was found to be closely
related to the mouse and human ABC1 (600046) and ABC2 (600047) genes.
The ABCR gene was not expressed detectably in any of 50 nonretinal fetal
and adult tissues examined. Other studies indicated that the gene is
uniquely retina-specific. The transcript size was estimated to be 8 kb.
Allikmets et al. (1997) reported the complete sequence of the 6,705-bp
ABCR coding region and the predicted 2,235-amino acid polypeptide
encoded by it.

Allikmets et al. (1998) revised the estimate of the size of the ABCR
gene to 6,819 bp encoding a 2,273-amino acid protein.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Gerber et al. (1998) and Allikmets et al.
(1998) determined that the ABCA4 gene contains at least 50 exons and
spans an estimated 150 kb. Exon sizes range from 33 bp to 266 bp.

GENE FAMILY

The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) superfamily includes genes whose products
are transmembrane proteins involved in energy-dependent transport of a
wide spectrum of substrates across membranes. Allikmets et al. (1997)
noted that many disease-causing members of this superfamily result in
defects in the transport of specific substrates, e.g., CFTR (602421),
ALD (300100), SUR (600509), PMP70 (170995), and TAP2 (170261). In
eukaryotes, ABC genes typically encode 4 domains that include 2
conserved ATP-binding domains and 2 domains with multiple transmembrane
segments. The ATP-binding domains of the ABC genes contain motifs of
characteristic conserved residues (Walker A and B motifs) spaced by 90
to 120 amino acids. Both this conserved spacing and the 'signature' or
'C' motif just upstream of the Walker B site distinguish members of the
ABC superfamily from other ATP-binding proteins. These features allowed
the isolation of new ABC genes by hybridization, degenerate PCR, and
inspection of DNA sequence databases. Allikmets et al. (1996)
characterized 21 members of the ABC superfamily by determining their map
locations and patterns of expression.

MAPPING

Using a whole genome radiation hybrid panel, Allikmets et al. (1997)
mapped the ABCR gene to 1p21-p13, close to microsatellite markers D1S236
and D1S188. They further refined the localization by screening YACs from
the described contig between these anonymous markers. These YACs
delineated a region containing the Stargardt disease gene.

Azarian and Travis (1997) mapped the human photoreceptor rim protein
gene (RMP) to chromosome 1 by radiation hybrid analysis. By homology,
they mapped the mouse Rmp gene to chromosome 3 between the Ly37 and Tshb
loci. Nasonkin et al. (1998) refined the map position of the human ABCR
gene to 1p22.1-p21 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. By contig
mapping, Allikmets et al. (1998) localized the ABCR gene to chromosome
1p22.3-p22.2 between markers D1S3361 and D1S236.

GENE FUNCTION

Allikmets et al. (1997) localized ABCR transcripts exclusively within
photoreceptor cells, indicating that ABCR mediates the transport of an
essential molecule (or ion) either into or out of photoreceptor cells.

The ABCR gene is expressed exclusively in the retina, and in situ
hybridization localized ABCR transcripts to rod photoreceptor cells. Sun
and Nathans (1997) further localized ABCR to the disc membrane of
retinal rod outer segments. The observations narrowed the range of
plausible functions for ABCR and the corresponding range of pathogenic
mechanisms underlying Stargardt disease (STGD; 248200). The authors
commented that the accumulation of lipofuscin in the retinal pigment
epithelium in Stargardt disease might reflect a defective ABCR-mediated
transport of retinoids within the rod outer segment.

Allikmets et al. (1997) commented that the accumulation in the retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE) of a lipofuscin-like substance in STGD suggests
that the site of ABCR-mediated transport may be on the apical face of
the photoreceptor cell and that this transport may affect exchange
between the RPE and the photoreceptors.

To search for natural and artificial substrates and/or allosteric
regulators of ABCR, Sun et al. (1999) solubilized and functionally
reconstituted the purified protein into lipid membranes and surveyed a
group of structurally diverse compounds for their ability to stimulate
or inhibit ABCR ATPase activity. They observed that all-trans-retinal
stimulated the ATPase activity of ABCR 3- to 4-fold. 11-cis- and
13-cis-retinal showed similar activity. All-trans-retinal stimulated the
ATPase activity of ABCR with Michaelis-Menten behavior indicative of
simple noncooperative binding associated with a rate-limiting
enzyme-substrate intermediate in the pathway of ATP hydrolysis. Sun et
al. (1999) concluded that these and other findings supported the
hypothesis that various geometric isomers of retinal and/or other
retinoids are transported by ABCR in a reaction that is coupled to ATP
hydrolysis. The kinetic behavior implied that all-trans-retinal binds to
an intermediate in the ATPase reaction pathway and that this binding
accelerates a rate-limiting step in ATP hydrolysis and/or release of the
hydrolysis products.

Korschen et al. (1999) identified glutamic acid-rich proteins (GARPs;
see 600724) as multivalent proteins that interact with the key players
of cGMP signaling, phosphodiesterase (see 602676) and guanylate cyclase
(see 600179), and with ABCR, through 4 short repetitive sequences. In
electron micrographs, GARPs are restricted to the rim region and
incisures of discs in close proximity to the guanylate cyclase and ABCR,
whereas the phosphodiesterase is randomly distributed. Korschen et al.
(1999) concluded that the GARPs organize a dynamic protein complex near
the disc rim that may control cGMP turnover and possibly other
light-dependent processes.

Molday et al. (2000) showed by immunofluorescence microscopy and Western
blot analysis that ABCR is present in foveal and peripheral cone, as
well as rod, photoreceptors. The results suggested that the loss in
central vision experienced by patients with Stargardt macular dystrophy
arises directly from ABCR-mediated foveal cone degeneration.

The aldehyde group of all-trans-retinal reacts with the primary amine of
phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) to form an equilibrium mixture of
N-retinylidene-PE and all-trans-retinal. Beharry et al. (2004) isolated
Abca4 from bovine rod outer segment disc membranes, and using HPLC and
radiolabeled substrates, they found that Abca4 bound N-retinylidene-PE
and all-trans-retinal. ATP and GTP released these retinoids from Abca4,
but ADP, GDP, and nonhydrolyzable derivatives did not. N-retinyl-PE, the
reduced form of N-retinylidene-PE, also bound Abca4, and
all-trans-retinal bound Abca4 in the absence of PE. All-trans-retinol
did not bind Abca4. Beharry et al. (2004) concluded that ABCA4 functions
as a flippase to translocate N-retinylidene-PE from the lumen to the
cytoplasmic side of retinal disc membranes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Summaries of Mutations

Allikmets (2000) gave a tally of all ABCR alleles as 350 to 400, making
the heterogeneity of ABCR comparable to that of another member of the
ABC superfamily, the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator
(CFTR). Allelic variations in ABCR are the most prominent cause of
retinal dystrophies with mendelian inheritance patterns.

Sun et al. (2000) listed 37 reported naturally occurring ABCA4
mutations. By studying expression of ABCR variants in transiently
transfected 293 cells, they observed a wide spectrum of biochemical
defects in these variants and provided insight into the transport
mechanism of ABCR.

- Stargardt Macular Dystrophy

Allikmets et al. (1997) performed mutation analysis of the ABCR gene in
48 families with Stargardt macular dystrophy (STGD1; 248200) previously
ascertained by strict definitional criteria and shown to be linked to
1p. Using a total of 21 exons, they identified 19 different mutations
(see, e.g., 601691.0001-601691.0005), the majority representing missense
mutations in conserved amino acid positions. However, they also found
several 1- to 2-bp insertions and deletions representing frameshifts.
Two missense alterations (D847H; R943Q, 601691.0035) were found in at
least 1 control individual, suggesting that they are neutral
polymorphisms. The remaining mutations were found only in STGD patients
and not in at least 40 unrelated normal controls (80 chromosomes). The
mutations were scattered throughout the coding sequence of the ABCR
gene. Most of the patients were found to be compound heterozygotes but 2
consanguineous families (1 Saudi Arabian (601691.0002) and 1 North
American) were homozygous. In an erratum, Allikmets et al. (1997)
provided a correction of the numbering system for mutations in the ABCR
gene in Stargardt macular dystrophy. Sequencing of ABCR cDNA clones
revealed an additional 114-bp exon after position 4352. This exon adds
38 in-frame amino acids to the polypeptide and represents the major
transcript. See 601691.0004 and 601691.0005.

Nasonkin et al. (1998) reported 4 mutations in the ABCR gene in patients
with Stargardt disease: 3106G-A (601691.0011), 3211insGT (601691.0012),
2565G-A (601691.0013), and 6079C-T (601691.0004).

Lewis et al. (1999) reported results of mutation scanning and direct DNA
sequencing of all 50 exons of ABCR in 150 families segregating autosomal
recessive Stargardt disease (STGD1). ABCR variations were identified in
173 (57%) disease chromosomes, most of which represented missense amino
acid substitutions. These ABCR variants were not found in 220 unaffected
control individuals (440 chromosomes) but did cosegregate with the
disease in these families with STGD1, and many occurred in conserved
functional domains. Missense amino acid substitutions located in the
amino terminal one-third of the protein appeared to be associated with
earlier onset of the disease and may represent misfolding alleles. The 2
most common mutant alleles, gly1961 to glu (601691.0007) and ala1038 to
val (601691.0016), each identified in 16 of 173 disease chromosomes,
represented 18.5% of mutations identified. G1961E in heterozygous state
had previously been associated, at a statistically significant level,
with age-related macular degeneration (ARMD). Clinical evaluation of
these 150 families with STGD1 revealed a high frequency of ARMD in
first- and second-degree relatives. These findings supported the
hypothesis that compound heterozygous ABCR mutations are responsible for
STGD1 and that some ABCR mutations in heterozygous state may enhance
susceptibility to ARMD.

Rivera et al. (2000) studied 144 patients with Stargardt disease and 220
unaffected individuals ascertained from the German population, to
complete a comprehensive, population-specific survey of the sequence
variation in the ABCA4 gene. In addition, they studied 200 individuals
with ARMD to assess the possible role of ABCA4 in that disorder. Using a
screening strategy based primarily on denaturing gradient gel
electrophoresis, they identified a total of 127 unique alterations, of
which 90 had not previously been reported, and classified 72 as probable
pathogenic mutations. Of the 288 Stargardt disease chromosomes studied,
mutations were identified in 166, representing a detection rate of
approximately 58%. Eight different alleles accounted for 61% of the
identified disease alleles, and at least 1 of these, the L541P/A1038V
complex allele (601691.0023), appeared to be a founder mutation in the
German population. When the group with ARMD and the control group were
analyzed with the same methodology, 18 patients with ARMD and 12
controls were found to harbor possible disease-associated alterations.
This represented no significant difference between the 2 groups;
however, for detection of modest effects of rare alleles in complex
diseases, the analysis of larger cohorts of patients may be required.

Yatsenko et al. (2001) tested the hypothesis that patients with
late-onset Stargardt disease, i.e., onset at 35 years or later, retained
partial ABCR activity attributable to mild missense alleles. They
approached this study by in vivo functional analysis of various
combinations of mutant alleles. They directly sequenced the entire
coding region of ABCR and detected mutations in 33 of 50 (66%) disease
chromosomes, but surprisingly, 11 of 33 (33%) were truncating alleles.
Importantly, all 22 missense mutations were located outside the known
functional domains of ABCR (ATP-binding or transmembrane), whereas in
the general cohort of STGD1 subjects studied by Lewis et al. (1999),
alterations occurred with equal frequency across the entire protein.
Yatsenko et al. (2001) suggested that these missense mutations in
regions of unknown function are milder alleles and are more susceptible
to modifier effects. Thus, they corroborated a prediction from the model
of ABCR pathogenicity that (1) one mutant ABCR allele is always missense
in late-onset STGD1 patients, and (2) the age of onset is correlated
with the amount of ABCR activity of this allele. In addition, they
reported 3 new pseudodominant families, bringing the total to 8 of 178
outbred STGD1 families, and suggested a carrier frequency of
STGD1-associated ABCR mutations of about 4.5% (approximately 1 in 22).

Using double gradient-denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DG-DGGE),
Fumagalli et al. (2001) performed a mutation screen in 44 Italian
autosomal recessive Stargardt disease patients corresponding to 36
independent genomes. In 34 of the 36 patients (94.4%), 37 sequence
changes were identified, including 26 missense, 6 frameshift, 3
splicing, and 2 nonsense variations. Twenty of the 37 mutations had not
previously been described. There appeared to exist a subset of molecular
defects specific to the Italian population. The identification of at
least 2 disease-associated mutations in 4 healthy control individuals
indicated a higher than expected carrier frequency of variant ABCR
alleles in the general population. Genotype-phenotype analysis showed a
possible correlation between the nature and location of some mutations
and specific ophthalmoscopic features of STGD disease.

Fingert et al. (2006) reported a case of Stargardt disease in a patient
homozygous for a mutation in the ABCA4 gene (601691.0026) as a result of
uniparental isodisomy of chromosome 1. The patient's father was
heterozygous for the mutation.

Pal Singh et al. (2006) identified homozygous null mutations in the
ABCA4 gene (601691.0028-601691.0029) in affected members of 2 Indian
families with early-onset severe retinal dystrophy.

- Age-Related Macular Degeneration

Age-related macular degeneration (ARMD; see 153800) is the leading cause
of severe central visual impairment among the elderly and is associated
both with environmental factors such as smoking and with genetic
factors. Allikmets et al. (1997) screened 167 unrelated ARMD patients
for alterations in the ABCR gene. Thirteen different ARMD-associated
alterations, both deletions and amino acid substitutions (e.g.,
601691.0006), were found in 1 allele of ABCR in 26 patients (16%). The
authors suggested that identification of ABCR alterations will permit
presymptomatic testing for high-risk individuals and may lead to earlier
diagnosis of ARMD and to new strategies for prevention and therapy.

De La Paz et al. (1999) screened their patients with ARMD (159 familial
cases from 112 multiple families and 53 sporadic cases) and 56 racially
matched individuals with no known history of ARMD for evidence of
mutation in the ABCR gene. The authors identified only 2 of the
previously reported variants in their study population. Both variants
occurred in sporadic cases, and none was found in familial cases or in
the randomly selected population. In addition, the authors identified
several previously undescribed polymorphisms and variants in both the
ARMD and control populations. The authors concluded that mutation in the
ABCR gene is not a major genetic risk factor for ARMD in their study
population.

Shroyer et al. (1999) analyzed the ABCA4 gene in a 3-generation family
manifesting both Stargardt disease and ARMD, and identified
heterozygosity for a missense mutation (P1380L; 601691.0026) in the
paternal grandmother with ARMD, whereas the proband and his 2 paternal
cousins with Stargardt disease were compound heterozygous for the P1380L
mutation and another missense mutation (601691.0036 and 601691.0037,
respectively) in the ABCA4 gene. Shroyer et al. (1999) suggested that
carrier relatives of STGD patients may have an increased risk of
developing ARMD.

Allikmets and the International ABCR Screening Consortium (2000) tested
the original hypothesis that ABCR is a dominant susceptibility locus for
ARMD by screening 1,218 unrelated ARMD patients of North American and
western European origin and 1,258 comparison individuals from 15 centers
in North America and Europe for the 2 most frequent ARMD-associated
variants found in ABCR: G1961E (601691.0007) and D2177N (601691.0006).
One or the other of these sequence changes was found in 1 allele of ABCR
in 40 patients (3.4%) and in 13 control subjects (0.95%). These
differences were considered statistically significant. The risk of ARMD
was elevated approximately 3-fold in D2177N carriers and approximately
5-fold in G1961E carriers.

By mutation analysis in a cohort of families that manifested both STGD
and ARMD, Shroyer et al. (2001) found that ARMD-affected relatives of
STGD patients are more likely to be carriers of pathogenic STGD alleles
than predicted based on chance alone. Shroyer et al. (2001) used an in
vitro biochemical assay to test for protein expression and ATP-binding
defects, and found that mutations associated with ARMD have a range of
assayable defects ranging from no detectable defect to apparent null
alleles. Of the 21 missense ABCR mutations reported in patients with
ARMD, 16 (76%) showed abnormalities in protein expression, ATP binding,
or ATPase activity. They inferred that carrier relatives of STGD
patients are predisposed to develop ARMD.

Guymer et al. (2001) investigated the role of the G1961E (601691.0007)
and D2177N (601691.0006) alleles of the ABCA4 gene in the pathogenesis
of ARMD. They concluded that although the ABCA4 gene is definitively
involved in the pathogenesis of Stargardt disease and some cases of
photoreceptor degeneration, the alleles did not appear to be involved in
a statistically significant fraction of ARMD cases.

Single-copy variants of the ABCR gene have been shown to confer enhanced
susceptibility to ARMD. Bernstein et al. (2002) examined 19 of 33 sibs
from 15 Stargardt families who carried their respective proband's
variant ABCR allele. Some families exhibited concordance of ABCR alleles
with the macular degeneration phenotype, but others did not. Exudative
ARMD was uncommon among both probands and sibs.

- Retinitis Pigmentosa 19

Martinez-Mir et al. (1998) demonstrated that the causative mutation in a
family with retinitis pigmentosa-19 (601718) was a frameshift
(601691.0008) in the ABCR gene, which was present in homozygous state.
The authors observed that the heterozygous parents, aged 72 and 82, in
their family showed no signs of age-related macular dystrophy (ARMD).
They thought, however, that this finding did not argue against
haploinsufficiency of ABCR as the cause of ARMD; because this is a
multifactorial disorder, ABCR haploinsufficiency may be only a
predisposing factor, and not all parents of patients have ARMD. ABCR
expression is confined to rods, and the fact that these photoreceptors
are the cell type primarily affected in RP support ABCR as the gene
responsible for RP19. They pointed out that the highest concentration of
rods is 5 mm out from the fovea, within the zone that is affected in
macular degeneration. If the rods in Stargardt disease and age-related
macular degeneration produce an aberrant product, it would be expected
to reach its highest concentration in this region. Persons with 1
wildtype and 1 mutant ABCR allele would be predisposed to a late-onset
accumulation of cellular debris (drusen) and the development of ARMD.

- Cone-Rod Dystrophy 3

To evaluate the importance of the ABCA4 gene as a cause of autosomal
recessive cone-rod dystrophy (CORD3; 604116), Maugeri et al. (2000)
studied 5 patients with autosomal recessive CORD and 15 patients with
isolated CORD, all from Germany and the Netherlands. They found 19 ABCA4
mutations in 13 (65%) of 20 patients. In 6 patients, mutations were
identified in both ABCA4 alleles; in 7 patients, mutations were detected
in 1 allele. The complex ABCA4 allele L541P/A1038V (601691.0023) was
found exclusively in German patients with CORD; 1 patient carried this
complex allele in homozygous state, and 5 others were compound
heterozygous.

Following the studies of Maugeri et al. (2000), Ducroq et al. (2002)
evaluated the prevalence of ABCA4 mutations in a cohort of 55 patients
with autosomal recessive or sporadic cone-rod dystrophy. They screened
the 50 exons of the ABCA4 gene as well as the flanking intronic
sequences using DHPLC and identified 16 different mutant alleles in 13
(23.6%) of 55 patients. Among these 13 patients, 2 were homozygotes
(from 2 consanguineous families; see, e.g., 601691.0024), 4 were
compound heterozygotes, and 7 were simple heterozygotes. There was no
significant difference in the frequency of ABCA4 mutations between
autosomal recessive and sporadic cases of CORD (6 of 29 versus 7 of 26
cases, respectively). Ducroq et al. (2002) estimated that this screen
detected approximately 80% of mutations present in these families, with
unidentified mutations potentially located in promoter or intron
sequences or in undiscovered exons, and stated that the corrected
mutation frequency would then be 29.5% of all CORD cases. For a sporadic
case of cone-rod dystrophy with no ABCA4 mutation, they estimated that
the risk of the disease being inherited as an autosomal recessive
condition can be estimated to be 15.6% using the Bayesian calculation.

Fishman et al. (2003) examined 30 patients with autosomal recessive
CORD, 16 of whom harbored plausible disease-causing variations in the
ABCA4 gene. Among the mutation-positive patients, 2 distinctly different
fundus phenotypes were observed: 12 showed diffuse pigmentary
degenerative changes (type 1), whereas 4 showed either no pigmentary
changes or only a mild degree of peripheral pigment degeneration (type
2). All 16 patients showed either a central scotoma (6 patients) or both
a central scotoma and some degree of peripheral field loss (10
patients). Both cone and rod a- and b-wave electroretinogram (ERG)
amplitudes were reduced in all patients, which is diagnostic for CORD.
Of the 12 patients classified as type 1, 4 harbored an A1038V change
(601691.0016): in 2 this was the only sequence variation identified; in
1 case, it was observed in compound heterozygosity with a nonsense
mutation; and in 1 case it was found as a complex allele with an L541P
mutation (see 601691.0023). In the additional 8 patients classified as
type 1, 2 showed 2 different heterozygous missense mutations, 3 had a
single heterozygous missense mutation, and 3 had a heterozygous splice
site mutation within intron 40 (601691.0010). In the 4 patients with
considerably less funduscopically apparent pigmentary change (type 2), a
heterozygous missense mutation was observed: in 2 instances L1201R
(601691.0025), and in another 2 L2027F (601691.0004).

Ducroq et al. (2006) analyzed a large multiplex Christian Arab family
with presumed autosomal recessive CORD and 6 consanguineous loops and
found segregation of 3 distinct haplotypes at the CORD3 locus.
Sequencing of the ABCA4 gene revealed 3 different mutations segregating
with the disease in this family: 4 patients were homozygous for a
splice-site mutation; 4 were compound heterozygous for the splice-site
mutation and 1 of 2 missense mutations, respectively; and 1 patient was
compound heterozygous for the 2 missense mutations. Ducroq et al. (2006)
emphasized the pitfalls of homozygosity mapping in highly inbred
families when the heterozygote carrier frequency is high in the general
population.

Kitiratschky et al. (2008) screened the ABCA4 gene in 64 patients with
cone or cone-rod dystrophy and a family history consistent with
autosomal recessive inheritance. They identified mutations in 20 (31%)
of 64 patients, including 16 with CORD and 3 with cone dystrophy (see,
e.g., 601690.0007, 601690.0010, and 601691.0030-601691.0033).

- Susceptibility to Cleft Lip/Palate

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the
ABCA4 gene and susceptibility to nonsyndromic cleft lip/palate, see
119530.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Stargardt disease and late-onset fundus flavimaculatus (FFM) are
autosomal recessive disorders leading to macular degeneration in
childhood and adulthood, respectively. Rozet et al. (1998) screened the
entire coding sequence of the ABCR gene in 40 unrelated STGD and 15 FFM
families and showed that mutations truncating the ABCR protein
consistently led to STGD. On the other hand, all mutations identified in
FFM were missense mutations affecting uncharged amino acids. They stated
that this was the first genotype/phenotype correlation in ABCR gene
mutations.

Shroyer et al. (1999) reviewed ABCR mutations and the associated retinal
diseases and proposed a model in which ABCR activity inversely
correlates with severity of disease. In this model, truncating and
severely misfolding mutations are associated with early-onset disease
characterized by a primary photoreceptor loss and secondary retinal
pigment epithelium (RPE) defects (retinitis pigmentosa and cone-rod
dystrophy). In patients with milder mutations, photoreceptors are spared
initially, but byproducts of faulty ABCR transport lead to accumulated
material in the RPE and sequential photoreceptor loss (Stargardt disease
and fundus flavimaculatus). Similarly, ABCR-associated ARMD might be due
to the gradual accumulation of these same byproducts with eventual
photoreceptor loss.

Klevering et al. (2004) described 3 Dutch families in which different
combinations of retinal disorders occurred: ARMD, RP, and STGD in the
first family, RP and STGD in the second family, and ARMD, CORD, and STGD
in the third family. Three different mutations in the ABCA4 gene were
identified in these families. In view of the relatively high carrier
frequency of ABCA4 mutations (approximately 5%) in the general
population, Klevering et al. (2004) concluded that the occurrence of
various combinations of relatively rare retinal disorders in one family
might not be as uncommon as once believed.

Wiszniewski et al. (2005) analyzed missense mutations (see, e.g.,
601691.0023) in the photoreceptors of transgenic Xenopus laevis tadpoles
and found mislocalization of ABCA4 protein. These mutations caused
retention of ABCA4 in the photoreceptor inner segment, likely by
impairing correct folding, resulting in the total absence of physiologic
protein function. Patients with different retinal dystrophies harboring
2 misfolding alleles exhibit early age of onset (5 to 12 years) of
retinal disease. Wiszniewski et al. (2005) suggested that a class of
ABCA4 mutants may be an important determinant of the age of onset of
retinal disease.

Valverde et al. (2007) screened for mutations in the ABCA4 gene in 60
patients in 50 Spanish families with different retinal dystrophies: 16
with autosomal recessive CORD, 27 with autosomal recessive retinitis
pigmentosa, and 7 with autosomal dominant macular degeneration. Sixteen
distinct variants were identified in 25 of the families. Thirteen of the
CORD families had mutations in the ABCA4 gene; the most prevalent
mutation in these families was a 2888delG mutation (601691.0027),
accounting for 30% of the alleles detected. Putative disease-associated
alleles were identified in 9 of the RP families and in 3 of the macular
degeneration families.

In 66 individuals with known disease-causing ABCA4 alleles, Cideciyan et
al. (2009) defined retina-wide disease expression by measuring rod and
cone photoreceptor-mediated vision. Serial measurements over a mean
period of 8.7 years were consistent with a model wherein a normal
plateau phase of variable length was followed by initiation of
retina-wide disease that progressed exponentially. Estimates of the age
of disease initiation were used as a severity metric and contributions
made by each ABCA4 allele were predicted. One-third of the nontruncating
alleles were found to cause more severe disease than premature
terminations, supporting the existence of a pathogenic component beyond
simple loss of function.

ANIMAL MODEL

By SDS-PAGE and immunoblot analysis of purified bovine and frog rod
outer segments, Azarian and Travis (1997) identified 210- and 240-kD
proteins, respectively, as RMP. By peptide microsequence analysis and
degenerate primers for nested PCR on bovine and mouse retinal libraries,
Azarian and Travis (1997) isolated a mouse Rmp cDNA encoding a putative
2,310-amino acid protein. Sequence analysis predicted 86% identity and
92% similarity of mouse RMP to human ABCR protein, 3 potential
N-glycosylation sites, 12 membrane-spanning segments, 2 ABC transporter
signature motifs with potential phosphorylation sites, and 2 consensus
ATP/GTP nucleotide-binding sites. Northern blot analysis revealed
expression exclusively in retina. Immunoblot analysis showed that RMP is
expressed predominantly in the outer segments of retinal photoreceptors.

Weng et al. (1999) characterized the ocular phenotype in Abcr knockout
mice. Mice lacking the Abcr gene showed delayed dark adaptation,
increased all-trans-retinaldehyde (all-trans-RAL) following light
exposure, elevated phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) in outer segments,
accumulation of the protonated Schiff base complex of all-trans-RAL and
PE (N-retinylidene-PE), and striking deposition of a major lipofuscin
fluorophore (A2E) in retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). These data
suggested that ABCR functions as an outwardly directed flippase for
N-retinylidene-PE. Delayed dark adaptation is likely due to accumulation
in discs of the noncovalent complex between opsin and all-trans-RAL.
ABCR-mediated retinal degeneration in patients may result from
'poisoning' of the RPE due to A2E accumulation, with secondary
photoreceptor degeneration due to loss of the ABCR support role.

The primary pathologic defect in Stargardt disease is accumulation of
toxic lipofuscin pigments, such A2E, in cells of the RPE. This
accumulation was thought to be responsible for the photoreceptor death
and severe visual loss in patients with Stargardt disease. Sieving et
al. (2001) found that treatment of rodents with isotretinoin (Accutane),
an agent used in the treatment of acne, delayed rhodopsin regeneration
and slowed recovery of rod sensitivity after light exposure.
Importantly, isotretinoin did not cause photoreceptor degeneration and
actually protected photoreceptors from light-induced damage. Light
activation of rhodopsin results in its release of
all-trans-retinaldehyde, which constitutes the first reactant in A2E
biosynthesis. A side effect of treatment with isotretinoin is reduced
night vision because of its inhibitory effect on 11-cis-retinol
dehydrogenase (601617) in RPE cells. Radu et al. (2003) tested the
effects of isotretinoin on lipofuscin accumulation in Abcr knockout
mice, a model of recessive Stargardt disease. They observed by electron
microscopy that isotretinoin blocked the formation of A2E biochemically
and the accumulation of lipofuscin pigments. No significant visual loss
was observed in Abcr-null mice by electroretinography. Isotretinoin also
blocked the slower, age-dependent accumulation of lipofuscin in wildtype
mice. The results suggested that treatment with isotretinoin may inhibit
lipofuscin accumulation and delay the onset of visual loss in patients
with Stargardt disease and may be an effective treatment for other forms
of retinal or macular degeneration associated with lipofuscin
accumulation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 3, INCLUDED
ABCA4, GLY863ALA

In affected members of 3 families with Stargardt macular dystrophy
(248200), Allikmets et al. (1997) found a 2588G-C transversion of the
ABCA4 gene, predicting a gly863-to-ala (G863A) amino acid substitution.

In 40 western European patients with STGD, Maugeri et al. (1999) found
19 novel mutations in the ABCR gene. The 2588G-C transversion,
identified in 15 (37.5%) patients, showed linkage disequilibrium with a
rare 2828G-A polymorphism (R943Q; 601091.0035) in exon 19, suggesting a
founder effect. The guanine at position 2588 is part of the 3-prime
splice site of exon 17. Analysis of the lymphoblastoid cell mRNA of 2
STGD patients with the 2588G-C mutation showed that the resulting mutant
ABCR proteins either lack gly863 or contain the missense mutation gly863
to ala. Maugeri et al. (1999) hypothesized that the 2588G-C alteration
is a mild mutation that causes STGD only in combination with a severe
ABCR mutation. This was supported by the fact that the accompanying ABCR
mutation in at least 5 of the 8 STGD patients was null (severe) and that
a combination of 2 mild mutations had not been observed among 68 STGD
patients. The 2588G-C mutation is present in 1 of every 35 western
Europeans, a rate higher than that of the most frequent severe autosomal
recessive mutation, delta-F508, in the CFTR gene in cystic fibrosis
(602421.0001). Given an STGD incidence of 1 in 10,000, homozygosity for
the 2588G-C mutation or compound heterozygosity for this and other mild
ABCR mutations probably does not result in an STGD phenotype.

Maugeri et al. (2002) studied 2,343 unrelated random control individuals
from 11 European countries and 241 control individuals from the U.S. and
found a carrier frequency of the 2588G-C mutation of 1 out of 54 and 1
out of 121, respectively. In Europe, an increasing gradient was observed
from southwest (carrier frequency in Portugal: 0 out of 199) to
northeast (carrier frequency in Sweden: 1 out of 18). Haplotype analysis
in 16 families with STGD (12 Dutch, 3 German, and 1 of Swedish origin)
segregating the 2588G-C mutation showed 4 intragenic SNPs invariably
present in all disease chromosomes and sharing of the same allele for
several microsatellite markers flanking the ABCA4 locus in most of the
disease chromosomes. These results indicated a single origin of the
2588G-C mutation, which was estimated to have occurred between 2,400 and
3,000 years ago. This study confirmed the 2588G-C mutation as one of the
most frequent autosomal recessive disease mutations in the European
population, with an origin somewhere in the north-northeastern parts of
Europe. Maugeri et al. (2002) raised the possibility of a carrier
advantage due to some unknown function of ABCA4 in nonocular tissues.
The high carrier frequency of the 2588C allele in Sweden of 1 out of 18
was in striking contrast with the incidence of STGD, which apparently is
not higher in that country than in the rest of Europe, and therefore
supported the hypothesis that this mutation represents a mild allele
which is not disease causing in homozygous state.

By enzyme-kinetic studies of mutations in the nucleotide-binding
domain-1 (NBD1) of the ABCA4 gene, Suarez et al. (2002) showed that the
G863Q mutation had a significant attenuation of the rate of nucleotide
hydrolysis and nucleotide binding affinity compared to wildtype protein
and the mild R943Q mutation.

Aberrant or modified splicing patterns of genes are causative for many
human diseases. Hiller et al. (2004) described widespread occurrence of
alternative splicing at NAGNAG acceptors. Hiller et al. (2006) reported
a genomewide screen for single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that
affect such tandem acceptors. From 121 SNPs identified, they extracted
64 SNPs that most likely affect alternative NAGNAG splicing. They
demonstrated that the NAGNAG motif is necessary and sufficient for this
type of alternative splicing. Since 28% of the NAGNAG SNPs occurred in
known disease genes, they represented preferred candidates for
functional analysis. As an example of the disease relevance of a NAGNAG
SNP, they cited the ABCA4 gene and the mutation described by Maugeri et
al. (1999): a NAGNAG mutation (2588G/C, changing the acceptor site
TAGGAG to TAGCAG) that has a high frequency in patients with STGD1. By
experimental analysis of the splice patterns of 2 patients with STGD who
carried the mutation and 1 control individual, they found that only the
alleles with the TAGCAG produce 2 splice forms. The study of Hiller et
al. (2006) would predict exactly this outcome of the mutation.

In an 18.5-year-old female with cone dystrophy (CORD3; 604116), in whom
information on rod function was unavailable, Kitiratschky et al. (2008)
identified compound heterozygosity for the G863A mutation and a splice
site mutation (601690.0030). The patient, who had onset of disease at 18
years of age, had increased glare sensitivity and normal night vision,
atrophy of RPE at the macula, central scotoma, and decreased cone
response on electroretinography (ERG); information was unavailable on
her color vision or on ERG rod function. Family members were not
available for study.

.0002
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, VAL931MET

In a patient with Stargardt macular dystrophy (248200) and
consanguineous parents, Allikmets et al. (1997) identified a G-to-A
transition at nucleotide 2791 in the ABCR gene, predicting a
val931-to-met (V931M) amino acid change.

.0003
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, ALA1028VAL

In 5 families, Allikmets et al. (1997) found that individuals with
Stargardt macular dystrophy (248200) had a C-to-T transition at
nucleotide 3083 of the ABCR gene, predicting an ala1028-to-val (A1028V)
amino acid substitution.

.0004
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 3, INCLUDED
ABCA4, LEU2027PHE

In 3 families, Allikmets et al. (1997) found that individuals with
Stargardt macular dystrophy (248200) had a C-to-T transition at
nucleotide 5965 of the ABCR gene, predicting a leu1989-to-phe (L1989F)
amino acid substitution. In a correction of the numbering system for
mutations, necessitated by the finding of an additional 114-bp exon
after nucleotide position 4352, Allikmets et al. (1997) indicated that
the mutation originally designated LEU1989PHE should be L2027F. In 2
sibs with Stargardt disease, Nasonkin et al. (1998) identified a 6079C-T
transition, resulting in a leucine-to-phenylalanine change at codon 2027
(L2027F).

Fishman et al. (2003) observed this mutation in 2 patients with cone-rod
dystrophy (604116) who had comparatively mild funduscopically apparent
pigmentary changes.

.0005
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, VAL2050LEU

In 2 families with Stargardt disease (248200), Allikmets et al. (1997)
found a G-to-C transversion at nucleotide 6034 of the ABCR gene,
predicted to result in a val2012-to-leu (V2012L) amino acid substitution
in the protein product. In a correction to the numbering system,
Allikmets et al. (1997) indicated that this mutation, originally
designated V2012L, should be designated V2050L.

.0006
MACULAR DEGENERATION, AGE-RELATED, 2, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
ABCA4, ASP2177ASN

Allikmets et al. (1997) found an asp2177-to-asn (D2177N) mutation in 7
of 167 patients with age-related macular dystrophy (153800) and in only
1 of 220 controls. The associated retinal pathology ranged from fine
macular cuticular drusen (age 62 years) to normal maculas but extensive
extramacular and peripheral drusen (ages 72 and 74 years, respectively),
to geographic atrophy involving the central third of the macula in each
eye (ages 61 to 86 years, respectively).

.0007
MACULAR DEGENERATION, AGE-RELATED, 2, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
STARGARDT DISEASE 1, INCLUDED;;
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 3, INCLUDED
ABCA4, GLY1961GLU

In 6 of 167 patients with age-related macular dystrophy (ARMD2; 153800),
Allikmets et al. (1997) found a gly1961-to-glu (G1961E) alteration in
the ABCR protein. The associated pathology ranged from a few tiny
juxtafoveal drusen in 1 eye of a patient (age 74 years), to confluent
drusen and drusenoid retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) detachments (age
78 years), to various forms of soft to calcified macular drusen and
extensive geographic atrophy (more than 1 disc diameter) (ages 81 and 82
years, respectively).

In a study of 150 families with recessive Stargardt disease (248200),
Lewis et al. (1999) found that the G1961E mutation was present in 16 of
173 chromosomes in which mutation was identified. G1961E in heterozygous
state had previously been associated with age-related macular
degeneration. In 150 families with STGD1, a high frequency of ARMD in
first- and second-degree relatives was found, suggesting that
heterozygosity enhances susceptibility to ARMD.

In a 14-year-old female with cone dystrophy (CORD3; 604116),
Kitiratschky et al. (2008) identified compound heterozygosity for a
5882G-A transition in exon 42 of the ABCA4 gene, resulting in the G1961E
substitution, and a splice site mutation (601691.0030). The patient, who
had onset of disease at 6 years of age, had a red-green defect of color
vision, normal glare sensitivity and night vision, RPE atrophy of the
macula and peripheral retina, central scotoma, and a reduced cone but
normal rod electroretinogram (ERG). Both mutations were also identified
in her affected brother, and their unaffected parents were each
heterozygous for 1 of the mutations, respectively.

.0008
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 19
ABCA4, 1-BP DEL, 1847A

Martinez-Mir et al. (1997) demonstrated that one form of autosomal
recessive retinitis pigmentosa (601718) maps to 1p21-p13, the same
region as that to which Stargardt disease and its somewhat milder
variant, fundus flavimaculatus, map. In a family with RP19, Martinez-Mir
et al. (1998) demonstrated a homozygous mutation in the ABCR gene, a
1-bp deletion at cDNA position 1847 (1847delA). The mutation generated a
frameshift early in the coding region (codon 616 in exon 13) that added
32 new residues and a premature stop codon.

.0009
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 19
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 3, INCLUDED
ABCA4, IVS30, G-T, +1

Ophthalmologic and molecular genetic studies were performed by Cremers
et al. (1998) in a consanguineous family with individuals showing either
retinitis pigmentosa (601718) or cone-rod dystrophy (CORD3; 604116).
Assuming pseudodominant (recessive) inheritance of allelic defects,
linkage analysis positioned the causal gene at 1p21-p13 (lod score =
4.22), a genomic segment that harbors the ABCA4 gene involved in
Stargardt disease and age-related macular degeneration. In 4 RP patients
in this family they found homozygosity for a 5-prime splice site
mutation, IVS30+1G-T. The 5 patients with CORD in this family were
compound heterozygotes for the IVS30+1G-T mutation and a 5-prime splice
site mutation in intron 40: IVS40+5G-A (601691.0010). Both splice site
mutations were found heterozygously in 2 unrelated STGD patients (in
whom the second mutation was either a missense mutation or unknown), but
not in 100 control individuals. Since no Stargardt patient had been
reported to carry 2 ABCR null alleles and the RP phenotype was more
severe than the STGD phenotype, Cremers et al. (1998) hypothesized that
the intron 30 splice site mutation represented a true null allele. Since
the intron 30 mutation was found heterozygously in the CORD patients,
the intron 40 mutation probably rendered the exon 40 5-prime splice site
partially functional. These results showed that mutations in the ABCR
gene result not only in STGD and ARMD, but also in autosomal recessive
RP and CORD.

.0010
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 3
ABCA4, IVS40, G-A, +5

Cremers et al. (1998) presented evidence that a 5-prime splice site
mutation in intron 40 (IVS40+5G-A) in compound heterozygous state with
the IVS30+1G-T mutation (601691.0009) in the ABCR gene can result in
cone-rod dystrophy (CORD3; 604116).

In 3 patients with autosomal recessive CORD and diffuse pigmentary
degenerative changes, Fishman et al. (2003) identified the IVS40+5G-A
mutation.

In a 30-year-old man with cone dystrophy, Kitiratschky et al. (2008)
identified compound heterozygosity for the IVS40 5714+5G-A splice site
mutation and an L1940P substitution (601690.0033) in the ABCA4 gene. The
patient, who had onset of disease at 7 years of age, had normal color
vision, normal glare sensitivity and night vision, atrophy of the RPE
and choroid as well as RPE clumping in the area of the macula, central
scotoma, and a reduced cone but normal rod electroretinogram. Both
mutations were also identified in his affected sister, and their
unaffected mother was heterozygous for the L1940P mutation; information
was unavailable on their father.

.0011
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, TRP855TER

In a patient with Stargardt disease (248200), Nasonkin et al. (1998)
identified a G-to-T transition at nucleotide 2565 resulting in a stop at
codon 855 (W855X).

.0012
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, GLU1036LYS

In 2 sibs with Stargardt disease (248200), Nasonkin et al. (1998)
identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 3106 replacing the
negatively charged glutamic acid with a positively charged lysine
residue at codon 1036 (G1036K).

.0013
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, 2-BP INS, 3211GT

In 2 sibs with Stargardt disease (248200), Nasonkin et al. (1998)
identified an insertion of 2 bases, GT, at nucleotide 3211 (3211insGT),
causing a frameshift at codon 1071 and leading to a protein termination
11 amino acids downstream.

.0014
FUNDUS FLAVIMACULATUS
ABCA4, LEU1970PHE

In a family with fundus flavimaculatus (248200), Rozet et al. (1998)
demonstrated that affected members were compound heterozygotes for 2
missense mutations, leu1970 to phe (L1970F), due to a 5908C-T
transition, and leu1971 to arg (L1971R; 601691.0015), due to a 5912T-G
transversion.

.0015
FUNDUS FLAVIMACULATUS
ABCA4, LEU1971ARG

See 601691.0014 and Rozet et al. (1998).

.0016
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
MACULAR DEGENERATION, AGE-RELATED, 2, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 3, INCLUDED
ABCA4, ALA1038VAL

In a study of 150 families segregating recessive Stargardt disease
(248200), Lewis et al. (1999) found that the 2 most common mutant
alleles, ala1038-to-val and gly1961-to-glu (601691.0007), each
identified in 16 of 173 disease chromosomes, constituted 18.5% of the
mutations identified.

Fishman et al. (2003) identified this mutation in 4 patients with
cone-rod dystrophy (604116): in 2 this was the only sequence variation
found; in 1 case, it was observed in compound heterozygosity with a
nonsense mutation; and in 1 case it was found as a complex allele with
an L541P mutation (see 601691.0023). Diffuse pigmentary degenerative
changes were seen funduscopically in all 4 patients.

.0017
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 19, INCLUDED
ABCA4, IVS13, G-A, -1

In a family segregating RP19 (601718) and STGD1 (248200) in 2 first
cousins, Rozet et al. (1999) found that compound heterozygosity for a
splice acceptor site mutation of the ABCR gene, IVS13-1G-A, and an
unknown mutation resulted in STGD1, whereas hemizygosity for the splice
site mutation resulted in RP19. In the patient with RP19, a partial
deletion of the maternal ABCR gene was presumed to be the source of a
null allele, although this was not conclusively proven.

.0018
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, TYR340ASP

Shroyer et al. (2000) described a family showing pseudodominant
inheritance of the autosomal recessive disorder Stargardt disease
(248200). The mother had onset of symptoms at the age of 30 years and
was compound heterozygous for a 1018T-G transversion, resulting in a
tyr340-to-asp (Y340D) mutation, and a 5338C-G transversion, resulting in
a pro1780-to-ala (P1780A) mutation (601691.0034). Her 3 children with
Stargardt disease were compound heterozygous for the Y340D mutation, and
a complex mutation consisting of G863A (601691.0001)/R572Q
(601691.0022)/R943Q (601691.0035) inherited from the father.

.0019
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, IVS5AS, A-G, -2

In a patient with Stargardt disease (248200), Gerber et al. (1998)
identified a homozygous acceptor splice site mutation in the ABCA4 gene,
an A-to-G change in intron 5 at position -2.

.0020
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, ARG212CYS

In a patient with Stargardt disease (248200), Gerber et al. (1998)
identified a heterozygous C-to-T transition at nucleotide 634 in the
ABCA4 gene, resulting in an arg212-to-cys substitution. The second
mutation was not identified.

Paloma et al. (2001) noted out that the R212C mutation had been found in
French, Italian, Dutch, German, and Spanish patients but not in British
patients.

.0021
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, ARG18TRP

In 2 patients with Stargardt disease (248200), Gerber et al. (1998)
identified a homozygous C-to-T transition at nucleotide 52 in the ABCA4
gene, resulting in an arg18-to-trp substitution.

.0022
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, ARG572GLN

In a 2-generation pedigree demonstrating pseudodominant inheritance of
Stargardt disease (248200), Shroyer et al. (2000) described a complex
allele consisting of a 1715G-A transition, resulting in an arg572-to-gln
(R572Q) substitution, the G863A mutation (601691.0001), and the R943Q
mutation (601691.0035). The 3 children of this family were compound
heterozygous for the Y340D (601691.0018) mutation and the complex
mutation; the Y340D mutation was inherited from the mother, and the
complex allele was inherited from the father.

.0023
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 3, INCLUDED
ABCA4, LEU541PRO AND ALA1038VAL

In a study of 144 patients with Stargardt disease (248200) in Germany,
Rivera et al. (2000) found that 8 different mutations accounted for 61%
of the identified disease alleles, and concluded that at least 1 of
these, the leu541-to-pro/ala1038-to-val allele, was a founder mutation
in this population. The mutation occurred on a single haplotype. The
amino acid substitution leu541 to pro was caused by a T-to-C transition
at nucleotide 1622 in exon 12.

Maugeri et al. (2000) found homozygosity for this complex allele in a
German patient diagnosed as having cone-rod dystrophy (CORD3; 604116).
They found it in compound heterozygous state in 5 other German patients
with cone-rod dystrophy.

Fishman et al. (2003) identified this allele in a patient of German and
Polish ancestry with cone-rod dystrophy. Diffuse pigmentary degenerative
changes were apparent funduscopically.

Wiszniewski et al. (2005) analyzed a cohort of 29 arRP families for
ABCA4 mutations and identified homozygosity for the complex L541P/A1038V
allele in 2 affected individuals of 1 family.

.0024
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 3
ABCA4, 2-BP DEL, 2617CT

In a patient with cone-rod dystrophy (604116) from a consanguineous
Portuguese family, Ducroq et al. (2002) found homozygosity for a
frameshift mutation (2617delC-T) in the ABCA4 gene.

.0025
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 3
ABCA4, LEU1201ARG

In 2 patients with cone-rod dystrophy (CORD3; 604116) with comparatively
mild funduscopically apparent pigmentary changes, Fishman et al. (2003)
identified a heterozygous leu1201-to-arg mutation (L1201R) in the ABCA4
gene.

.0026
STARGARDT DISEASE
MACULAR DEGENERATION, AGE-RELATED, 2, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
ABCA4, PRO1380LEU

In a 3-generation family manifesting both Stargardt disease (SGTD1;
248200) and age-related macular degeneration (ARMD2; 153800), Shroyer et
al. (1999) identified heterozygosity for a 4139C-T transition in the
ABCA4 gene, resulting in a pro1380-to-leu (P1380L) substitution, in the
paternal grandmother with ARMD. The proband and his 2 paternal cousins,
who all had Stargardt disease, were compound heterozygous for the P1380L
mutation and a 2461T-A transversion in the ABCA4 gene, resulting in a
trp821-to-arg (W821R; 601691.0036) substitution, and a 3365G-A
transition in the ABCA4 gene, resulting in a glu1122-to-lys (E1122K;
601691.0037) substitution, respectively. Shroyer et al. (1999) suggested
that carrier relatives of STGD patients may have an increased risk of
developing ARMD.

In a female patient with Stargardt disease, Fingert et al. (2006)
identified homozygosity for a pro1380-to-leu mutation in the ABCA4 gene
caused by uniparental isodisomy of chromosome 1. Her father was
heterozygous for the mutation and the mother was not a carrier.

.0027
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 3
ABCA4, 1-BP DEL, 2888G

Valverde et al. (2007) identified a 1-bp deletion (2888delG) in the
ABCA4 gene in compound heterozygous or homozygous state in 4 of 13
Spanish patients with cone-rod dystrophy-3 (604116). The mutation leads
to a frameshift that produces a stop codon.

.0028
RETINAL DYSTROPHY, EARLY-ONSET SEVERE
ABCA4, 1-BP DEL, 1225A

In a brother and sister, born of consanguineous Indian parents, with
early-onset severe retinal dystrophy (see 248200), Pal Singh et al.
(2006) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion at nucleotide 1225
(1225delA) in exon 9 of the ABCA4 gene, resulting in a frameshift at
arg409. The parents and an unaffected sib were heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 100 normal controls.

.0029
RETINAL DYSTROPHY, EARLY-ONSET SEVERE
ABCA4, ARG2030TER

In 3 brothers, born of consanguineous Indian parents, with early-onset
severe retinal dystrophy (see 248200), Pal Singh et al. (2006)
identified homozygosity for a 6088C-T transition in exon 44 of the ABCA4
gene, resulting in an arg2030-to-ter substitution. The parents and an
unaffected sib were heterozygous for the mutation, which was not found
in 100 normal controls.

.0030
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 3
ABCA4, IVS39, T-C, -10

In 6 patients with cone-rod dystrophy (CORD3; 604116), 1 with cone
dystrophy, and 1 with cone dystrophy but no information on rod function,
all of whom had a family history consistent with autosomal recessive
inheritance, Kitiratschky et al. (2008) identified compound
heterozygosity for a splice site mutation (5461-10T-C) in intron 39 and
another mutation in the ABCA4 gene (see, e.g., 601690.0001 and
601690.0007). In 2 of the CORD3 patients, a mutation on the second
allele was not detected; the authors noted that with the methods used,
genomic rearrangement mutations could not be excluded.

.0031
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 3
STARGARDT DISEASE 1, INCLUDED
ABCA4, ALA1762ASP

In a 20-year-old woman with cone dystrophy (CORD3; 604116), Kitiratschky
et al. (2008) identified compound heterozygosity for a 5285C-A
transversion in exon 37 of the ABCA4 gene, resulting in an
ala1762-to-asp (A1762D) substitution, and a 15-bp deletion (3539del15;
601690.0032) in exon 24 of the ABCA4 gene. The patient, who had onset of
disease at 10 years of age, had a red-green defect of color vision,
normal glare sensitivity and night vision, RPE atrophy of the macula and
peripheral retina, central scotoma, and a reduced cone but normal rod
electroretinogram (ERG). Both mutations were also identified in her
affected sister, and their unaffected parents were each heterozygous for
1 of the mutations, respectively. The A1762D mutation had previously
been found (Stenirri et al., 2004) in compound heterozygosity with
another ABCA4 missense mutation in a patient with Stargardt disease
(248200).

.0032
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 3
ABCA4, 15-BP DEL, NT3539

See 601691.0031 and Kitiratschky et al. (2008).

.0033
FUNDUS FLAVIMACULATUS
STARGARDT DISEASE 1, INCLUDED;;
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 3, INCLUDED
ABCA4, LEU1940PRO

In 2 unrelated Spanish patients, 1 with fundus flavimaculatus (see
248200) and 1 with early-onset Stargardt disease (248200), Paloma et al.
(2001) identified heterozygosity for a mutation in exon 41 of the ABCA4
gene, resulting in a leu1940-to-pro (L1940P) substitution. The second
disease allele remained unidentified for both patients.

In a 30-year-old man with cone dystrophy (CORD3; 604116), Kitiratschky
et al. (2008) identified compound heterozygosity for a splice site
mutation in intron 40 of the ABCA4 gene (601690.0010) and a 5819T-C
transition in exon 41, resulting in the L1940P substitution.

.0034
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, PRO1780ALA

See 601691.0018 and Shroyer et al. (2000).

.0035
MACULAR DEGENERATION, AGE-RELATED, 2, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, ARG943GLN

Allikmets et al. (1997) reported the 2828G-A transition in exon 19 of
the ABCA4 gene, resulting in an arg943-to-gln (R943Q) substitution as a
neutral polymorphism in STGD patients and controls. alterations in the
ABCR gene. Subsequently, the R943Q variant was associated with mild
forms of ARMD ( Allikmets et al., 1997). Maugeri et al. (1999) found
that the R943Q variant was in linkage disequilibrium with the G863A
mutation (601091.0001), suggesting a founder effect.

By enzyme-kinetic studies of mutations in the nucleotide-binding
domain-1 (NBD1) of the ABCA4 gene, Suarez et al. (2002) showed that the
R943Q mutation had a small but detectable reduction in nucleotidase
activity and nucleotide binding affinity compared to wildtype protein.

.0036
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, TRP821ARG

See 601691.0026 and Shroyer et al. (1999).

.0037
STARGARDT DISEASE 1
ABCA4, GLU1122LYS

See 601691.0026 and Shroyer et al. (1999).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Birnbach et al. (1994)
REFERENCE 1. Allikmets, R.: Simple and complex ABCR: genetic predisposition
to retinal disease. (Editorial) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 793-799,
2000.

2. Allikmets, R.; Gerrard, B.; Hutchinson, A.; Dean, M.: Characterization
of the human ABC superfamily: isolation and mapping of 21 new genes
using the expressed sequence tags database. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5:
1649-1655, 1996.

3. Allikmets, R.; Shroyer, N. F.; Singh, N.; Seddon, J. M.; Lewis,
R. A.; Bernstein, P. S.; Peiffer, A.; Zabriskie, N. A.; Hutchinson,
A.; Dean, M.; Lupski, J. R.; Leppert, M.: Mutation of the Stargardt
disease gene (ABCR) in age-related macular degeneration. Science 277:
1805-1807, 1997.

4. Allikmets, R.; Singh, N.; Sun, H.; Shroyer, N. F.; Hutchinson,
A.; Chidambaram, A.; Gerrard, B.; Baird, L.; Stauffer, D.; Peiffer,
A.; Rattner, A.; Smallwood, P.; Li, Y.; Anderson, K. L.; Lewis, R.
A.; Nathans, J.; Leppert, M.; Dean, M.; Lupski, J. R.: A photoreceptor
cell-specific ATP-binding transporter gene (ABCR) is mutated in recessive
Stargardt macular dystrophy. Nature Genet. 15: 236-246, 1997. Note:
Erratum: Nature Genet. 17:122 only, 1997.

5. Allikmets, R.; the International ABCR Screening Consortium:
Further evidence for an association of ABCR alleles with age-related
macular degeneration. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 487-491, 2000.

6. Allikmets, R.; Wasserman, W. W.; Hutchinson, A.; Smallwood, P.;
Nathans, J.; Rogan, P. K.; Schneider, T. D.; Dean, M.: Organization
of the ABCR gene: analysis of promoter and splice junction sequences. Gene 215:
111-122, 1998.

7. Azarian, S. M.; Travis, G. H.: The photoreceptor rim protein is
an ABC transporter encoded by the gene for recessive Stargardt's disease
(ABCR). FEBS Lett. 409: 247-252, 1997.

8. Beharry, S.; Zhong, M.; Molday, R. S.: N-retinylidene-phosphatidylethanolamine
is the preferred retinoid substrate for the photoreceptor-specific
ABC transporter ABCA4 (ABCR). J. Biol. Chem. 279: 53972-53979, 2004.

9. Bernstein, P. S.; Leppert, M.; Singh, N.; Dean, M.; Lewis, R. A.;
Lupski, J. R.; Allikmets, R.; Seddon, J. M.: Genotype-phenotype analysis
of ABCR variants in macular degeneration probands and siblings. Invest.
Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 43: 466-473, 2002.

10. Birnbach, C. D.; Jarvelainen, M.; Possin, D. E.; Milam, A. H.
: Histopathology and immunocytochemistry of the neurosensory retina
in fundus flavimaculatus. Ophthalmology 101: 1211-1219, 1994.

11. Cideciyan, A. V.; Swider, M.; Aleman, T. S.; Tsybovsky, Y.; Schwartz,
S. B.; Windsor, E. A. M.; Roman, A. J.; Sumaroka, A.; Steinberg, J.
D.; Jacobson, S. G.; Stone, E. M.; Palczewski, K.: ABCA4 disease
progression and a proposed strategy for gene therapy. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 18: 931-941, 2009.

12. Cremers, F. P. M.; van de Pol, D. J. R.; van Driel, M.; den Hollander,
A. I.; van Haren, F. J. J.; Knoers, N. V. A. M.; Tijmes, N.; Bergen,
A. A. B.; Rohrschneider, K.; Blankenagel, A.; Pinckers, A. J. L. G.;
Deutman, A. F.; Hoyng, C. B.: Autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa
and cone-rod dystrophy caused by splice site mutations in the Stargardt's
disease gene ABCR. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 355-362, 1998.

13. De La Paz, M. A.; Guy, V. K.; Abou-Donia, S.; Heinis, R.; Bracken,
B.; Vance, J. M.; Gilbert, J. R.; Gass, J. D. M.; Haines, J. L.; Pericak-Vance,
M. A.: Analysis of the Stargardt disease gene (ABCR) in age-related
macular degeneration. Ophthalmology 106: 1531-1536, 1999.

14. Ducroq, D.; Rozet, J.-M.; Gerber, S.; Perrault, I.; Barbet, F.;
Hanein, S.; Hakiki, S.; Dufier, J.-L.; Munnich, A.; Hamel, C.; Kaplan,
J.: The ABCA4 gene in autosomal recessive cone-rod dystrophies. (Letter) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 71: 1480-1482, 2002.

15. Ducroq, D.; Shalev, S.; Habib, A.; Munnich, A.; Kaplan, J.; Rozet,
J.-M.: Three different ABCA4 mutations in the same large family with
several consanguineous loops affected with autosomal recessive cone-rod
dystrophy. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 14: 1269-1273, 2006.

16. Fingert, J. H.; Eliason, D. A.; Phillips, N. C.; Lotery, A. J.;
Sheffield, V. C.; Stone, E. M.: Case of Stargardt disease caused
by uniparental isodisomy. Arch. Ophthal. 124: 744-745, 2006.

17. Fishman, G. A.; Stone, E. M.; Eliason, D. A.; Taylor, C. M.; Lindeman,
M.; Derlacki, D. J.: ABCA4 gene sequence variations in patients with
autosomal recessive cone-rod dystrophy. Arch. Ophthal. 121: 851-855,
2003.

18. Fumagalli, A.; Ferrari, M.; Soriani, N.; Gessi, A.; Foglieni,
B.; Martina, E.; Manitto, M. P.; Brancato, R.; Dean, M.; Allikmets,
R.; Cremonesi, L.: Mutational scanning of the ABCR gene with double-gradient
denaturing-gradient gel electrophoresis (DG-DGGE) in Italian Stargardt
disease patients. Hum. Genet. 109: 326-338, 2001.

19. Gerber, S.; Rozet, J. M.; van de Pol, T. J. R.; Hoyng, C. B.;
Munnich, A.; Blankenagel, A.; Kaplan, J.; Cremers, F. P. M.: Complete
exon-intron structure of the retina-specific ATP binding transporter
gene (ABCR) allows the identification of novel mutations underlying
Stargardt disease. Genomics 48: 139-142, 1998.

20. Guymer, R. H.; Heon, E.; Lotery, A. J.; Munier, F. L.; Schorderet,
D. F.; Baird, P. N.; McNeil, R. J.; Haines, H.; Sheffield, V. C.;
Stone, E. M.: Variation of codons 1961 and 2177 of the Stargardt
disease gene is not associated with age-related macular degeneration. Arch.
Ophthal. 119: 745-751, 2001.

21. Hiller, M.; Huse, K.; Szafranski, K.; Jahn, N.; Hampe, J.; Schreiber,
S.; Backofen, R.; Platzer, M.: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms in
NAGNAG acceptors are highly predictive for variations of alternative
splicing. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 78: 291-302, 2006.

22. Hiller, M.; Huse, K.; Szafranski, K.; Jahn, N.; Hampe, J.; Schreiber,
S.; Backofen, R.; Platzer, M.: Widespread occurrence of alternative
splicing at NAGNAG acceptors contributes to proteome plasticity. Nature
Genet. 36: 1255-1257, 2004. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 37: 106
only, 2005.

23. Kitiratschky, V. B. D.; Grau, T.; Bernd, A.; Zrenner, E.; Jagle,
H.; Renner, A. B.; Kellner, U.; Rudolph, G.; Jacobson, S. G.; Cideciyan,
A. V.; Schaich, S.; Kohl, S.; Wissinger, B.: ABCA4 gene analysis
in patients with autosomal recessive cone and cone rod dystrophies. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 16: 812-819, 2008.

24. Klevering, B. J.; Maugeri, A.; Wagner, A.; Go, S. L.; Vink, C.;
Cremers, F. P. M.; Hoyng, C. B.: Three families displaying the combination
of Stargardt's disease with cone-rod dystrophy or retinitis pigmentosa. Ophthalmology 111:
546-553, 2004.

25. Korschen, H. G.; Beyermann, M.; Muller, F.; Heck, M.; Vantler,
M.; Koch, K.-W.; Kellner, R.; Wolfrum, U.; Bode, C.; Hofmann, K. P.;
Kaupp, U. B.: Interaction of glutamic-acid-rich proteins with the
cGMP signalling pathway in rod photoreceptors. Nature 400: 761-766,
1999.

26. Lewis, R. A.; Shroyer, N. F.; Singh, N.; Allikmets, R.; Hutchinson,
A.; Li, Y.; Lupski, J. R.; Leppert, M.; Dean, M.: Genotype/phenotype
analysis of a photoreceptor-specific ATP-binding cassette transporter
gene, ABCR, in Stargardt disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 422-434,
1999.

27. Martinez-Mir, A.; Bayes, M.; Vilageliu, L.; Grinberg, D.; Ayuso,
C.; del Rio, T.; Garcia-Sandoval, B.; Bussaglia, E.; Baiget, M.; Gonzalez-Duarte,
R.; Balcells, S.: A new locus for autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa
(RP19) maps to 1p13-1p21. Genomics 40: 142-146, 1997.

28. Martinez-Mir, A.; Paloma, E.; Allikmets, R.; Ayuso, C.; del Rio,
T.; Dean, M.; Vilageliu, L.; Gonzalez-Duarte, R.; Balcells, S.: Retinitis
pigmentosa caused by a homozygous mutation in the Stargardt disease
gene ABCR. (Letter) Nature Genet. 18: 11-12, 1998.

29. Maugeri, A.; Flothmann, K.; Hemmrich, N.; Ingvast, S.; Jorge,
P.; Paloma, E.; Patel, R.; Rozet, J.-M.; Tammur, J.; Testa, F.; Balcells,
S.; Bird, A. C.; and 16 others: The ABCA4 2588G-C Stargardt mutation:
single origin and increasing frequency from South-West to North-East
Europe. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 10: 197-203, 2002.

30. Maugeri, A.; Klevering, B. J.; Rohrschneider, K.; Blankenagel,
A.; Brunner, H. G.; Deutman, A. F.; Hoyng, C. B.; Cremers, F. P. M.
: Mutations in the ABCA4 (ABCR) gene are the major cause of autosomal
recessive cone-rod dystrophy. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 960-966, 2000.

31. Maugeri, A.; van Driel, M. A.; van de Pol, D. J. R.; Klevering,
B. J.; van Haren, F. J. J.; Tijmes, N.; Bergen, A. A. B.; Rohrschneider,
K.; Blankenagel, A.; Pinckers, A. J. L. G.; Dahl, N.; Brunner, H.
G.; Deutman, A. F.; Hoyng, C. B.; Cremers, F. P. M.: The 2588G-C
mutation in the ABCR gene is a mild frequent founder mutation in the
western European population and allows the classification of ABCR
mutations in patients with Stargardt disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64:
1024-1035, 1999.

32. Molday, L. L.; Rabin, A. R.; Molday, R. S.: ABCR expression in
foveal cone photoreceptors and its role in Stargardt macular dystrophy. Nature
Genet. 25: 257-258, 2000.

33. Nasonkin, I.; Illing, M.; Koehler, M. R.; Schmid, M.; Molday,
R. S.; Weber, B. H. F.: Mapping of the rod photoreceptor ABC transporter
(ABCR) to 1p21-p22.1 and identification of novel mutations in Stargardt's
disease. Hum. Genet. 102: 21-26, 1998.

34. Paloma, E.; Martinez-Mir, A.; Vilageliu, L.; Gonzalez-Duarte,
R.; Balcells, S.: Spectrum of ABCA4 (ABCR) gene mutations in Spanish
patients with autosomal recessive macular dystrophies. Hum. Mutat. 17:
504-510, 2001.

35. Pal Singh, H.; Jalali, S.; Hejtmancik, J. F.; Kannabiran, C.:
Homozygous null mutations in the ABCA4 gene in two families with autosomal
recessive retinal dystrophy. Am. J. Ophthal. 141: 906-913, 2006.

36. Radu, R. A.; Mata, N. L.; Nusinowitz, S.; Liu, X.; Sieving, P.
A.; Travis, G. H.: Treatment with isotretinoin inhibits lipofuscin
accumulation in a mouse model of recessive Stargardt's macular degeneration. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 4742-4747, 2003.

37. Rivera, A.; White, K.; Stohr, H.; Steiner, K.; Hemmrich, N.; Grimm,
T.; Jurklies, B.; Lorenz, B.; Scholl, H. P. N.; Apfelstedt-Sylla,
E.; Weber, B. H. F.: A comprehensive survey of sequence variation
in the ABCA4 (ABCR) gene in Stargardt disease and age-related macular
degeneration. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 800-813, 2000.

38. Rozet, J.-M.; Gerber, S.; Ghazi, I. Perrault, I.; Ducroq, D.;
Souied, E.; Cabot, A.; Dufier, J.-L.; Munnich, A.; Kaplan, J.: Mutations
of the retinal specific ATP binding transporter gene (ABCR) in a single
family segregating both autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa RP19
and Stargardt disease: evidence of clinical heterogeneity at this
locus. J. Med. Genet. 36: 447-451, 1999.

39. Rozet, J.-M.; Gerber, S.; Souied, E.; Perrault, I.; Chatelin,
S.; Ghazi, I.; Leowski, C.; Dufier, J.-L.; Munnich, A.; Kaplan, J.
: Spectrum of ABCR gene mutations in autosomal recessive macular dystrophies. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 6: 291-295, 1998. Note: Erratum: Europ. J. Hum. Genet.
7: 102 only, 1999.

40. Shroyer, N. F.; Lewis, R. A.; Allikmets, R.; Singh, N.; Dean,
M.; Leppert, M.; Lupski, J. R.: The rod photoreceptor ATP-binding
cassette transporter gene, ABCR, and retinal disease: from monogenic
to multifactorial. Vision Res. 39: 2537-2544, 1999.

41. Shroyer, N. F.; Lewis, R. A.; Lupski, J. R.: Complex inheritance
of ABCR mutations in Stargardt disease: linkage disequilibrium, complex
alleles, and pseudodominance. Hum. Genet. 106: 244-248, 2000.

42. Shroyer, N. F.; Lewis, R. A.; Yatsenko, A. N.; Wensel, T. G.;
Lupski, J. R.: Cosegregation and functional analysis of mutant ABCR
(ABCA4) alleles in families that manifest both Stargardt disease and
age-related macular degeneration. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 2671-2678,
2001.

43. Sieving, P. A.; Chaudhry, P.; Kondo, M.; Provenzano, M.; Wu, D.;
Carlson, T. J.; Bush, R. A.; Thompson, D. A.: Inhibition of the visual
cycle in vivo by 13-cis retinoic acid protects from light damage and
provides a mechanism for night blindness in isotretinoin therapy. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 1835-1840, 2001.

44. Stenirri, S.; Fermo, I.; Battistella, S.; Galbiati, S.; Soriani,
N.; Paroni, R.; Manitto, M. P.; Martina, E.; Brancato, R.; Allikmets,
R.; Ferrari, M.; Cremonesi, L.: Denaturing HPLC profiling of the
ABCA4 gene for reliable detection of allelic variations. Clin. Chem. 50:
1336-1343, 2004.

45. Suarez, T.; Biswas, S. B.; Biswas, E. E.: Biochemical defects
in retina-specific human ATP binding cassette transporter nucleotide
binding domain 1 mutants associated with macular degeneration. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 21759-21767, 2002.

46. Sun, H.; Molday, R. S.; Nathans, J.: Retinal stimulates ATP hydrolysis
by purified and reconstituted ABCR, the photoreceptor-specific ATP-binding
cassette transporter responsible for Stargardt disease. J. Biol.
Chem. 274: 8269-8281, 1999.

47. Sun, H.; Nathans, J.: Stargardt's ABCR is localized to the disc
membrane of retinal rod outer segments. (Letter) Nature Genet. 17:
15-16, 1997.

48. Sun, H.; Smallwood, P. M.; Nathans, J.: Biochemical defects in
ABCR protein variants associated with human retinopathies. Nature
Genet. 26: 242-246, 2000.

49. Valverde, D.; Riveiro-Alvarez, R.; Aguirre-Lamban, J.; Baiget,
M.; Carballo, M.; Antinolo, G.; Millan, J. M.; Sandoval, B. G.; Ayuso,
C.: Spectrum of the ABCA4 gene mutations implicated in severe retinopathies
in Spanish patients. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 48: 985-990, 2007.

50. Weng, J.; Mata, N. L.; Azarian, S. M.; Tzekov, R. T.; Birch, D.
G.; Travis, G. H.: Insights into the function of Rim protein in photoreceptors
and etiology of Stargardt's disease from the phenotype in abcr knockout
mice. Cell 98: 13-23, 1999.

51. Wiszniewski, W.; Zaremba, C. M.; Yatsenko, A. N.; Jamrich, M.;
Wensel, T. G.; Lewis, R. A.; Lupski, J. R.: ABCA4 mutations causing
mislocalization are found frequently in patients with severe retinal
dystrophies. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 2769-2778, 2005.

52. Yatsenko, A. N.; Shroyer, N. F.; Lewis, R. A.; Lupski, J. R.:
Late-onset Stargardt disease is associated with missense mutations
that map outside known functional regions of ABCR (ABCA4). Hum. Genet. 108:
346-355, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/7/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/1/2010
Anne M. Stumpf - reorganized: 8/26/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/12/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/22/2009
Jane Kelly - updated: 12/6/2007
Jane Kelly - updated: 11/20/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/9/2007
Jane Kelly - updated: 12/15/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/4/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/25/2006
Jane Kelly - updated: 8/9/2004
Jane Kelly - updated: 1/16/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/6/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/8/2003
Jane Kelly - updated: 11/5/2002
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 11/1/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/17/2001
Jane Kelly - updated: 7/17/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/22/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/7/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/20/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/22/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/23/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/8/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/8/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/9/2000
Jane Kelly - updated: 8/27/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/21/1999
Michael J. Wright - updated: 6/18/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/5/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/18/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/2/1998
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/30/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/23/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/29/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/18/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/28/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/2/1997

EDITED carol: 09/16/2013
terry: 8/8/2012
alopez: 12/13/2011
carol: 8/23/2011
terry: 8/16/2011
wwang: 1/10/2011
terry: 1/7/2011
terry: 10/12/2010
alopez: 7/13/2010
mgross: 3/1/2010
terry: 3/1/2010
alopez: 8/26/2009
wwang: 8/25/2009
terry: 8/12/2009
wwang: 6/2/2009
wwang: 5/7/2009
terry: 4/22/2009
wwang: 1/30/2009
carol: 12/7/2007
carol: 12/6/2007
carol: 11/20/2007
alopez: 10/4/2007
wwang: 3/20/2007
wwang: 3/9/2007
carol: 12/15/2006
wwang: 12/6/2006
terry: 12/4/2006
alopez: 2/7/2006
terry: 1/25/2006
carol: 1/23/2006
tkritzer: 8/9/2004
alopez: 1/16/2004
carol: 10/22/2003
terry: 7/30/2003
carol: 6/19/2003
tkritzer: 6/17/2003
terry: 6/6/2003
terry: 5/15/2003
cwells: 1/13/2003
terry: 1/8/2003
cwells: 11/5/2002
cwells: 11/1/2002
joanna: 10/30/2002
tkritzer: 8/16/2002
tkritzer: 8/14/2002
terry: 8/9/2002
mcapotos: 10/17/2001
mcapotos: 7/20/2001
mcapotos: 7/17/2001
carol: 6/22/2001
terry: 6/22/2001
mcapotos: 5/17/2001
terry: 5/7/2001
carol: 1/8/2001
mcapotos: 11/6/2000
carol: 11/3/2000
mcapotos: 10/30/2000
terry: 10/20/2000
carol: 9/27/2000
alopez: 9/26/2000
terry: 9/22/2000
mcapotos: 8/7/2000
alopez: 6/23/2000
carol: 6/23/2000
carol: 6/8/2000
mcapotos: 4/7/2000
mcapotos: 4/6/2000
mcapotos: 4/4/2000
carol: 3/29/2000
terry: 3/8/2000
alopez: 2/9/2000
carol: 11/11/1999
carol: 8/27/1999
carol: 8/11/1999
mgross: 7/21/1999
mgross: 7/6/1999
terry: 6/18/1999
terry: 5/5/1999
carol: 2/22/1999
terry: 2/18/1999
carol: 10/7/1998
terry: 10/2/1998
carol: 10/1/1998
carol: 9/30/1998
terry: 9/29/1998
psherman: 6/24/1998
terry: 6/4/1998
carol: 5/12/1998
alopez: 5/11/1998
dholmes: 5/11/1998
carol: 4/23/1998
terry: 4/14/1998
carol: 3/28/1998
carol: 3/21/1998
mark: 1/21/1998
terry: 1/7/1998
terry: 12/30/1997
terry: 12/29/1997
mark: 11/7/1997
mark: 9/18/1997
terry: 9/16/1997
jenny: 9/1/1997
terry: 8/29/1997
terry: 8/28/1997
jamie: 6/3/1997
jamie: 3/4/1997
mark: 3/2/1997

601738	TITLE *601738 EXOSTOSIN-LIKE GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 1; EXTL1
;;EXOSTOSIN-LIKE 1;;
MULTIPLE EXOSTOSES-LIKE 1;;
EXTL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The tumor suppressor genes EXT1 (608177) and EXT2 (608210) are
associated with hereditary multiple exostoses and encode bifunctional
glycosyltransferases essential for chain polymerization of heparan
sulfate and its analog, heparin. Wise et al. (1997) identified another
gene, which they called EXTL, that showed striking sequence similarity
to both EXT1 and EXT2 at the nucleotide and amino acid sequence levels.
Although the mRNA transcribed from this gene is similar in size to that
of EXT1 and EXT2, its pattern of expression was quite different.

GENE FUNCTION

Of the 3 highly homologous EXT-like genes, EXTL1, EXTL2 (602411), and
EXTL3 (605744), EXTL2 is an alpha-1,4-GlcNAc transferase I, the key
enzyme that initiates the heparan sulfate/heparin synthesis. Kim et al.
(2001) transiently expressed truncated forms of EXTL1 and EXTL3, lacking
the putative NH2-terminal transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains, in
COS-1 cells and found that the cells harbored alpha-GlcNAc transferase
activity. Various results suggested that EXTL3 is most likely involved
in both chain initiation and elongation, whereas EXTL1 is possibly
involved only in the chain elongation of heparan sulfate, and perhaps of
heparin as well. Thus, the acceptor specificities of the 5 family
members are overlapping but distinct, except for EXT1 and EXT2, which
have the same specificity. Thus, all of the 5 cloned human EXT gene
family proteins harbor glycosyltransferase activities, which probably
contribute to the synthesis of heparan sulfate and heparin.

Hall et al. (2002) proposed the EXTL genes as candidates for second
mutations leading to the development of exostoses.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Exclusion Studies

Xu et al. (1999) examined the EXTL1 and EXTL2 genes for the presence of
germline mutations in hereditary multiple exostosis patients and found
none.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization,
Wise et al. (1997) mapped EXTL to 1p36.1 between D1S458 and D1S511, a
region that frequently shows loss of heterozygosity in a variety of
tumor types.

REFERENCE 1. Hall, C. R.; Cole, W. G.; Haynes, R.; Hecht, J. T.: Reevaluation
of a genetic model for the development of exostosis in hereditary
multiple exostosis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 112: 1-5, 2002.

2. Kim, B.-T.; Kitagawa, H.; Tamura, J.; Saito, T.; Kusche-Gullberg,
M.; Lindahl, U.; Sugahara, K.: Human tumor suppressor EXT gene family
members EXTL1 and EXTL3 encode alpha-1,4-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferases
that likely are involved in heparan sulfate/heparin biosynthesis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 7176-7181, 2001.

3. Wise, C. A.; Clines, G. A.; Massa, H.; Trask, B. J.; Lovett, M.
: Identification and localization of the gene for EXTL, a third member
of the multiple exostoses gene family. Genome Res. 7: 10-16, 1997.

4. Xu, L.; Xia, J.; Jiang, H.; Zhou, J.; Li, H.; Wang, D.; Pan, Q.;
Long, Z.; Fan, C.; Deng, H.-X.: Mutation analysis of hereditary multiple
exostoses in the Chinese. Hum. Genet. 105: 45-50, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/7/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/1/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/7/1997

EDITED carol: 10/11/2013
ckniffin: 10/30/2003
carol: 10/8/2002
terry: 10/7/2002
mcapotos: 8/17/2001
mcapotos: 8/16/2001
mcapotos: 8/2/2001
terry: 8/1/2001
carol: 3/20/2001
mark: 6/11/1997
mark: 4/7/1997

603584	TITLE *603584 MAP KINASE-ACTIVATING DEATH DOMAIN; MADD
;;DIFFERENTIALLY EXPRESSED IN NORMAL AND NEOPLASTIC CELLS; DENN;;
INSULINOMA-GLUCAGONOMA PROTEIN 20; IG20;;
RAB3 GDP/GTP EXCHANGE PROTEIN; RAB3GEP;;
KIAA0358
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chow and Lee (1996) reported the cDNA sequence of DENN, a novel human
gene that is differentially expressed in normal and neoplastic cells
(hence, the symbol DENN). Northern blot analysis revealed differential
levels of expression of a 6.5-kb DENN transcript in malignant cell lines
compared to normal human tissues, where expression was highest in fetal
brain and kidney and in adult testis, ovary, brain, and heart. In fetal
liver and in several human cancer cell lines, the authors identified
cDNAs representing alternative transcripts of DENN that harbor a
deletion of 129 bp encoding 43 amino acids. Present within the serine-
and leucine-rich DENN gene product is an arginyl-glycyl-aspartic acid
(RGD) cellular adhesion motif and a leucine zipper-like motif.

Using the yeast interaction trap system to identify proteins that
interact with the death domain of the type-1 tumor necrosis factor
receptor (TNFR1; 191190), Schievella et al. (1997) isolated cDNAs
encoding 'MAP kinase-activating death domain' (MADD) protein.
Immunoblotting of immunoprecipitated proteins from various human cell
lines detected an approximately 200-kD MADD protein. The deduced
1,588-amino acid MADD protein contains a C-terminal death domain.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1997) cloned KIAA0358. The deduced protein
contains 1,581 amino acids and is nearly identical to DENN.

Chow et al. (1998) stated that the DENN and MADD cDNAs and proteins are
virtually identical. From genomic studies, they traced the alternative
splicing of a 129-bp fragment to an alternative 5-prime donor site
involving exon 7. The deduced longer DENN isoform has 1,587 amino acids.
Western blot analysis of human MOLT-4 T-lymphoblastic leukemic cell
proteins detected a doublet consisting of 138- and 142-kD polypeptides.
The authors found the DENN protein concentrated predominantly in the
cytosolic compartment of MOLT-4 cells but was restricted to the nuclear
compartment of PLC/PRF/5 hepatoma cells.

Efimova et al. (2004) identified 7 putative splice variants of MADD:
IG20 full-length (IG20FL), IG20, KIAA0358, MADD (also referred to as
DENN), IG20 short variant-2 (IG20SV2), DENNSV (also referred to as
IG20SV3), and IG20SV4. These variants arise from alternative splicing of
exons 13L, 16, 21, 26, and 34. IG20FL, the longest variant, is encoded
by all 36 exons of the MADD gene. RT-PCR detected variable expression of
IG20, MADD, IG20SV, and DENNSV in all human tissues examined. Expression
of KIAA0358, IG20FL, and IG20SV4 was not observed.

GENE FUNCTION

Schievella et al. (1997) found that the MADD protein associated with
TNFR1 through a death domain-death domain interaction. Overexpression of
MADD activated the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase ERK2 (176948),
and expression of the MADD death domain stimulated both the ERK2 and
JNK1 (601158) MAP kinases and induced the phosphorylation of cytosolic
phospholipase A2 (600522). The authors suggested that MADD links TNFR1
with MAP kinase activation and arachidonic acid release.

Al-Zoubi et al. (2001) showed that HeLa cells permanently transfected
with IG20 or DENNSV were more susceptible or resistant to TNF-alpha
(TNFA; 191160)-induced apoptosis, respectively. All MADD variants tested
could interact with TNFR1 and activate ERK and NF-kappa-B (see 164011).
However, relative to control cells, only those expressing IG20 showed
enhanced TNF-alpha-induced activation of caspase-8 (CASP8; 601763) and
CASP3 (600636). Cowpox virus CrmA, an inhibitor of caspase-induced
apoptosis, inhibited apoptosis when transfected in IG20-expressing HeLa
cells.

Using specific small hairpin RNAs targeted to splice variants of the
MADD gene, Mulherkar et al. (2006) found that knockdown of the MADD
variant resulted in spontaneous apoptosis in HeLa cells and in a human
ovarian carcinoma cell line, and they demonstrated that the MADD variant
alone was necessary and sufficient for cancer cell survival. Mulherkar
et al. (2006) hypothesized that since the MADD variant can bind to death
receptors, it may prevent apoptotic signaling by interfering with death
receptor oligomerization.

Efimova et al. (2004) found that overexpression of DENNSV enhanced cell
replication and resistance to treatment with proapoptotic stimuli. In
contrast, IG20 expression suppressed cell replication and increased
susceptibility to proapoptotic stimuli. Moreover, cells that were
resistant or susceptible to TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis exclusively
expressed endogenous DENNSV and IG20, respectively. Transfection of IG20
in a DENNSV-expressing cell line overrode endogenous DENNSV function and
increased susceptibility to apoptotic stimuli. Dominant-negative
I-kappa-B (see NFKBIA; 164008) reversed the effects of DENNSV, but not
IG20, indicating that DENNSV functions through NF-kappa-B activation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chow et al. (1998) determined that the MADD gene spans at least 28 kb
and contains 15 exons, ranging in size from 73 to 1,230 bp.

Efimova et al. (2004) determined that the MADD gene contains 36 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1997) mapped the MADD gene
to chromosome 11. Using FISH, Chow et al. (1998) mapped the MADD gene to
chromosome 11p11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Al-Zoubi, A. M.; Efimova, E. V.; Kaithamana, S.; Martinez, O.;
El-Azami El-Idrissi, M.; Dogan, R. E.; Prabhakar, B. S.: Contrasting
effects of IG20 and its splice isoforms, MADD and DENN-SV, on tumor-necrosis
factor alpha-induced apoptosis and activation of caspase-8 and -3. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 47202-47211, 2001.

2. Chow, V. T. K.; Lee, S. S.: DENN, a novel human gene differentially
expressed in normal and neoplastic cells. DNA Seq. 6: 263-273, 1996.

3. Chow, V. T. K.; Lim, K. M.; Lim, D.: The human DENN gene: genomic
organization, alternative splicing, and localization to chromosome
11p11.21-p11.22. Genome 41: 543-552, 1998.

4. Efimova, E. V.; Al-Zoubi, A. M.; Martinez, O.; Kaithamana, S.;
Lu, S.; Arima, T.; Prabhakar, B. S.: IG20, in contrast to DENN-SV,
(MADD splice variants) suppresses tumor cell survival, and enhances
their susceptibility to apoptosis and cancer drugs. Oncogene 23:
1076-1087, 2004.

5. Mulherkar, N.; Ramaswamy, M.; Mordi, D. C.; Prabhakar, B. S.:
MADD/DENN splice variant of the IG20 gene is necessary and sufficient
for cancer cell survival. Oncogene 25: 6252-6261, 2006.

6. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

7. Schievella, A. R.; Chen, J. H.; Graham, J. R.; Lin, L.-L.: MADD,
a novel death domain protein that interacts with the type 1 tumor
necrosis factor receptor and activates mitogen-activated protein kinase. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 12069-12075, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/5/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/3/2007
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 2/26/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/25/1999

EDITED mgross: 07/21/2008
mgross: 7/26/2007
terry: 6/5/2007
wwang: 4/6/2007
terry: 4/3/2007
carol: 2/14/2001
psherman: 12/17/1999
terry: 5/3/1999
carol: 3/2/1999
psherman: 2/26/1999
psherman: 2/25/1999

602207	TITLE *602207 RAS-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN RAB18; RAB18
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Rab proteins are members of a family of Ras-related small GTPases that
regulate membrane trafficking in organelles and transport vesicles.

CLONING

By stimulating umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) with histamine
and differential display gene expression analysis, Schafer et al. (2000)
isolated a cDNA encoding RAB18. The deduced 206-amino acid protein
shares 98%, 92%, and 85% identity with the mouse, snail, and worm
sequences, respectively. RAB18 contains totally conserved
phosphate/Mg(2+)-binding motifs and guanine-binding motifs as well as
somewhat variable organelle-targeting regions. Northern blot analysis
detected 2.5- and 1.0-kb transcripts in endothelial cells but not in
smooth muscle cells or leukocytes. RT-PCR analysis suggested ubiquitous
expression, which HPLC analysis determined to be strongest in heart,
kidney, pancreas, lung, and liver, with weak expression in brain,
placenta, and skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Schafer et al. (2000) reported that stimulation of polarized HUVEC or
nonpolarized mononuclear cells with histamine showed a significant time-
and dose-dependent increase of RAB18 transcript in both cell types,
suggesting a possible role for Rab proteins in inflammation.

MAPPING

McMurtrie et al. (1997) mapped the mouse Rab18 gene to chromosome 18.

Hartz (2009) mapped the RAB18 gene to chromosome 10p12.1 based on an
alignment of the RAB18 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AA216667) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 5 large consanguineous families, 4 Pakistani and
1 Turkish, segregating Warburg Micro syndrome (WARBM3; 614222), Bem et
al. (2011) identified homozygous loss-of-function mutations in the RAB18
gene (602207.0001 and 602207.0002, respectively). Direct sequencing for
RAB18 mutations in 58 additional families segregating Warburg Micro
syndrome detected compound heterozygous mutations
(602207.0003-602207.0004) in affected sibs of 1 family. Bem et al.
(2011) performed nucleotide-binding assays and showed that although
RAB18 bound GDP and GTP comparably to other RABs (RAB5A, 179512; RAB35,
604199), the RAB18 L24Q (602207.0001) and R93del (602207.0003) mutant
proteins did not bind detectable levels of either GDP or GTP and are
therefore functionally null. Bem et al. (2011) noted that the
pathogenicity of these mutations could be explained by their lack of
guanosine nucleotide binding because, as for other RAB proteins, this is
a prerequisite for correct subcellular localization and function.

ANIMAL MODEL

Bem et al. (2011) investigated the effect of knockdown of rab18 in
zebrafish to establish whether rab18 has a conserved role in brain and
eye development. The most common abnormalities observed at 3 days
post-fertilization in both the rab18a and rab18b morphants were
microphthalmia, microcephaly, pericardial edema, delayed jaw formation,
a reduced overall body size, and a general developmental delay. Further
characterization of the rab18b eye phenotype revealed that the rab18b
morphants had delayed retinal development and abnormal retinal
lamination, residual nucleated lens fiber cells, widely open choroid
fissure, and microphthalmia at day 3. To assess the specificity of the
rab18b phenotype, Bem et al. (2011) conducted a rescue experiment by
synthesizing rab18b mRNA. Partial rescue of the eye defects, pericardial
edema, and overall developmental delay was observed at 3 days.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
WARBURG MICRO SYNDROME 3
RAB18, LEU24GLN

In affected members of 4 large consanguineous Pakistani families
segregating Warburg Micro syndrome-3 (614222), Bem et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous founder mutation in the RAB18 gene: a 71T-A
transition resulting in a leu24-to-gln (L24Q) substitution.

.0002
WARBURG MICRO SYNDROME 3
RAB18, EX2DEL

In 2 affected sibs in a consanguineous Turkish family segregating
Warburg Micro syndrome-3 (614222), Bem et al. (2011) identified a
homozygous exon 2 deletion predicted to result in a frameshift. The
parents were heterozygous for the deletion.

.0003
WARBURG MICRO SYNDROME 3
RAB18, 3-BP DEL, NT277

In affected members of a family segregating Warburg Micro syndrome-3
(614222), Bem et al. (2011) identified compound heterozygous mutations
in the RAB18 gene: a 3-bp deletion (277_279del) resulting in deletion of
arginine-93 (R93del), and an antitermination mutation, a 619T-C
transition resulting in a ter207-to-gln (X207Q; 602207.0004)
substitution, predicted to extend RAB18 by 20 amino acids (X207QextX20)
and thus abolish C-terminal prenylation and membrane targeting.

.0004
WARBURG MICRO SYNDROME 3
RAB18, TER207GLN

See 602207.0003 and Bem et al. (2011).

REFERENCE 1. Bem, D.; Yoshimura, S.-I.; Nunes-Bastos, R.; Bond, F. C.; Kurian,
M. A.; Rahman, F.; Handley, M. T. W.; Hadzhiev, Y.; Masood, I.; Straatman-Iwanowska,
A. A.; Cullinane, A. R.; McNeill, A.; and 15 others: Loss-of-function
mutations in RAB18 cause Warburg Micro syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 88:
499-507, 2011. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 88: 678 only, 2011.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/28/2009.

3. McMurtrie, E. B.; Barbosa, M. D. F. S.; Zerial, M.; Kingsmore,
S. F.: Rab17 and Rab18, small GTPases with specificity for polarized
epithelial cells: genetic mapping in the mouse. Genomics 45: 623-625,
1997.

4. Schafer, U.; Seibold, S.; Schneider, A.; Neugebauer, E.: Isolation
and characterisation of the human rab18 gene after stimulation of
endothelial cells with histamine. FEBS Lett. 466: 148-154, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Nara Sobreira - updated: 9/12/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/16/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/18/1997

EDITED carol: 09/29/2011
terry: 9/14/2011
carol: 9/14/2011
terry: 9/12/2011
carol: 10/28/2009
carol: 10/27/2009
mgross: 1/23/2001
terry: 1/16/2001
carol: 12/14/2000
mark: 12/18/1997

103020	TITLE *103020 ADENYLATE KINASE 2; AK2
;;ADENYLATE KINASE, MITOCHONDRIAL MYOKINASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Nucleoside monophosphate kinases, including adenylate kinases, catalyze
the reversible phosphorylation between nucleoside triphosphates and
monophosphates.

CLONING

Bruns and Regina (1977) analyzed the subcellular compartmentalization of
adenylate kinase-2 (EC 2.7.4.3) in HeLa cells, mouse RAG cells, and
RAG-human hybrids expressing human AK2. The results indicated that AK2
is a mitochondrial enzyme.

Noma et al. (1998) isolated cDNAs encoding human adenylate kinase-2 from
a HeLa cell cDNA library, using bovine AK2 cDNA as probe. Two
transcripts were identified: one, designated AK2A, encodes a deduced
239-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 26.5 kD, and
the other, designated AK2B, encodes a deduced 232-amino acid protein
with a predicted molecular mass of 25.6 kD. Northern blot analysis
demonstrated 3 strong hybridizing signals of 0.9 (AK2A), 1.7 (AK2B), and
3.5 kb, with high expression in liver, heart, skeletal muscle, and
pancreas, moderate expression in kidney, placenta, and brain, and weak
expression in lung. However, Western blot analysis showed high levels of
AK2 protein in liver, heart, and kidney, low levels in lung, and
undetectable levels in brain and skeletal muscle.

MAPPING

The existence of a second adenylate kinase locus linked to PGM1 and
peptidase C, i.e., on chromosome 1, was suggested by cell hybridization
studies by Van Cong et al. (1972). The Goss-Harris method of mapping
combines features of recombinational study in families and synteny tests
in hybrid cells. As applied to chromosome 1, the method shows that AK2
and UMPK are distal to PGM1 and that the order of the loci is PGM1:
UMPK: (AK2, alpha-FUC): ENO1 (Goss and Harris, 1977). Carritt et al.
(1982) presented evidence that AK2 is in 1p34.

GENE FUNCTION

Lee et al. (2007) showed that intrinsic apoptosis in human cells that
was induced by the chemotherapeutic agent etoposide or the antibiotic
staurosporine, but not by FAS ligand (TNFSF6; 134638) or TRAIL (TNFSF10;
603598), caused translocation of AK2 from mitochondria to the cytoplasm,
followed by formation of a complex between AK2, FADD (602457), and
CASP10 (601762). Yeast 2-hybrid analysis, protein pull-down assays, and
immunoprecipitation analysis showed that the N- and C-terminal domains
of AK2, which include nucleoside- and substrate-binding domains,
respectively, bound the C-terminal death domain of FADD. AK2 binding
promoted association of CASP10 with FADD, and addition of purified AK2
protein to cell extracts induced activation of CASP10 via FADD, leading
to subsequent activation of CASP9 (602234) and CASP3 (600636). Apoptosis
through the AK2 complex did not correlate with the adenylate kinase
activity of AK2, did not require CASP8 (601763)-mediated apoptotic
responses, and did not involve mitochondrial cytochrome c release.
Immunodepletion or knockdown of AK2, FADD, or CASP10 abrogated
etoposide-induced apoptosis, and AK2 complexes were not observed in
several etoposide-resistant human tumor cell lines that were deficient
in expression of FADD, CASP10, or CASP3. In contrast to the findings in
human cells, etoposide-induced apoptosis was observed in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts that lacked Fadd expression. Since mice also lack Casp10,
Lee et al. (2007) concluded that mice lack an apoptotic pathway
comparable to the AK2-FADD-CASP10 pathway in humans.

Pannicke et al. (2009) showed that knockdown of zebrafish ak2 also leads
to aberrant leukocyte development, demonstrating the evolutionarily
conserved role of AK2. They concluded that their results provide in vivo
evidence for AK2 selectivity in leukocyte differentiation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 6 affected individuals from 5 families segregating reticular
dysgenesis (267500), Pannicke et al. (2009) identified 6 causative
mutations in homozygous or compound heterozygous state
(103020.0001-103020.0006).

Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009) identified biallelic mutations in AK2
(103020.0007-103020.0013) in 7 individuals with reticular dysgenesis.
These mutations resulted in absent or strongly decreased protein
expression. The authors then demonstrated that restoration of AK2
expression in the bone marrow cells of individuals with reticular
dysgenesis overcomes the neutrophil differentiation arrest, underlining
its specific requirement in the development of a restricted set of
hematopoietic lineages. Finally, Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009)
established that AK2 is specifically expressed in the stria vascularis
region of the inner ear, which provides an explanation for the
sensorineural deafness in these individuals. Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) concluded that their results identified a previously unknown
mechanism involved in regulation of hematopoietic cell differentiation
in one of the most severe human immunodeficiency syndromes.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 5,038-BP DEL

In a German male with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Pannicke et al.
(2009) identified a homozygous 5,038-bp deletion encompassing parts of
exon 6, all of intron 6 and parts of exon 7 reaching into the 3-prime
UTR of the AK2 gene. The mutation led to a complete loss of detectable
AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone marrow mononuclear cells. The
parents were heterozygous for the mutation, which was not found in 112
German or 50 Turkish healthy subjects.

.0002
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 1-BP DEL, 118T

In a German male with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Pannicke et al.
(2009) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the AK2
gene: a 1-bp deletion (118delT) leading to a frameshift and early
truncation of the protein, and a 1A-G transition leading to a
met1-to-val (M1V) substitution (103020.0003). The mutation led to a
complete loss of detectable AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone
marrow mononuclear cells. Each parent was heterozygous for one of the
mutations. The mutations were not found in 112 German or 50 Turkish
healthy subjects.

.0003
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, MET1VAL

See 103020.0002 and Pannicke et al. (2009).

.0004
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 331, G-A, -1

In a German male with reticular dysgenesis (267500), the offspring of
consanguineous parents, Pannicke et al. (2009) identified homozygosity
for a splicing mutation, 331-1G-A, in the AK2 gene. The mutation led to
a complete loss of detectable AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone
marrow mononuclear cells. The parents were heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 112 German or 50 Turkish healthy
subjects.

.0005
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 1-BP DEL, 453C

In male and female Turkish sibs with reticular dysgenesis (267500), the
offspring of consanguineous parents, Pannicke et al. (2009) identified
homozygosity for a 1-bp deletion (453delC) in the AK2 gene, leading to a
frameshift and early truncation of the protein. The mutation led to a
complete loss of detectable AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone
marrow mononuclear cells. The parents were heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 112 German or 50 Turkish healthy
subjects.

.0006
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, 498, G-A, +1

In a Turkish female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), the offspring of
consanguineous parents, Pannicke et al. (2009) identified homozygosity
for a splicing mutation, 498+1G-A, in the AK2 gene. The mutation led to
a complete loss of detectable AK2 protein in fibroblasts and in bone
marrow mononuclear cells. The parents were heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 112 German or 50 Turkish healthy
subjects.

.0007
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, ASP165GLY

In 2 separate pedigrees with reticular dysgenesis (267500), each of whom
was consanguineous, Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009) identified
homozygosity for an A-to-G transition at nucleotide 546 in exon 5 of the
AK2 gene, resulting in an asp-to-gly substitution in codon 165 (D165G)
within the LID domain. This mutation changed a highly conserved amino
acid. The parents were found to be carriers, and unaffected sibs were
heterozygous or homozygous for the wildtype allele.

.0008
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, LEU183TER

In a female from a consanguineous family affected with reticular
dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009) identified a 1-bp
deletion of C at nucleotide 523 in exon 6 of the AK2 gene (523delC),
resulting in a substitution of a termination codon for a leucine at
codon 183 (L183X). This mutation was not detected in her sister and each
parent was found to be a carrier.

.0009
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, ARG186CYS

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) found compound heterozygosity for mutations in the AK2 gene: a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide 556 in exon 6, resulting in an
arg-to-cys substitution at codon 186 (R186C), and an exon 2 deletion
(see 103020.0010).

.0010
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, EX2 DEL

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500) from a nonconsanguineous
family, Lagresle-Peyrou et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity
for deletion of exon 2 of the AK2 gene and an arg186-to-cys substitution
(103020.0009). Each parent was a carrier of one of the mutations.

.0011
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, ARG103TRP

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) identified a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 307 in exon 3 of the
AK2 gene, resulting in an arg-to-trp substitution at codon 103 (R103W).
Each of her parents was a carrier for this mutation, which occurs in a
highly conserved amino acid residue.

.0012
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, LYS233TER

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) identified a 5-kb deletion following nucleotide 633 (633del5kb),
resulting in a lys-to-ter substitution at codon 233 (K233X). The patient
was homozygous for this mutation. Two of her 3 unaffected sibs, and each
of her unaffected parents, were carriers.

.0013
RETICULAR DYSGENESIS
AK2, GLU9TER

In a female with reticular dysgenesis (267500), Lagresle-Peyrou et al.
(2009) identified homozygosity for a G-to-T transversion at nucleotide
25 in exon 1 of the AK2 gene, resulting in a glu-to-ter codon
substitution at amino acid 9 (E9X). The child was homozygous for this
mutation. Each of her parents was a carrier.

REFERENCE 1. Bruns, G. A. P.; Regina, V. M.: Adenylate kinase-2, a mitochondrial
enzyme. Biochem. Genet. 15: 477-486, 1977.

2. Carritt, B.; King, J.; Welch, H. M.: Gene order and localization
of enzyme loci on the short arm of chromosome 1. Ann. Hum. Genet. 46:
329-335, 1982.

3. Goss, S. J.; Harris, H.: Gene transfer by means of cell fusion.
II. The mapping of 8 loci on human chromosome 1 by statistical analysis
of gene assortment in somatic cell hybrids. J. Cell Sci. 25: 39-57,
1977.

4. Lagresle-Peyrou, C.; Six, E. M.; Picard, C.; Rieux-Laucat, F.;
Michel, V.; Ditadi, A.; Chappedelaine, C. D.; Morillon, E.; Valensi,
F.; Simon-Stoos, K. L.; Mullikin, J. C.; Noroski, L. M.; and 10 others
: Human adenylate kinase 2 deficiency causes a profound hematopoietic
defect associated with sensorineural deafness. Nature Genet. 41:
106-111, 2009.

5. Lee, H.-J.; Pyo, J.-O.; Oh, Y.; Kim, H.-J.; Hong, S.; Jeon, Y.-J.;
Kim, H.; Cho, D.-H.; Woo, H.-N.; Song, S.; Nam, J.-H.; Kim, H. J.;
Kim, K.-S.; Jung, Y.-K.: AK2 activates a novel apoptotic pathway
through formation of a complex with FADD and caspase-10. Nature Cell
Biol. 9: 1303-1310, 2007.

6. Noma, T.; Song, S.; Yoon, Y.-S.; Tanaka, S.; Nakazawa, A.: cDNA
cloning and tissue-specific expression of the gene encoding human
adenylate kinase isozyme 2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1395: 34-39,
1998.

7. Pannicke, U.; Honig, M.; Hess, I.; Friesen, C.; Holzmann, K.; Rump,
E.-M.; Barth, T. F.; Rojewski, M. T.; Schulz, A.; Boehm, T.; Friedrich,
W.; Schwarz, K.: Reticular dysgenesis (aleukocytosis) is caused by
mutations in the gene encoding mitochondrial adenylate kinase 2. Nature
Genet. 41: 101-105, 2009.

8. Van Cong, N.; Billardon, C.; Rebourcet, R.; Kaouel, C. L.-B.; Picard,
J. Y.; Weil, D.; Frezal, J.: The existence of a second adenylate
kinase locus linked to PGM-1 and peptidase-C. Ann. Genet. 15: 213-218,
1972.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/15/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/4/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/28/2008
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 8/6/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED terry: 06/11/2012
alopez: 1/26/2010
terry: 1/15/2010
terry: 8/13/2009
carol: 8/12/2009
terry: 8/4/2009
mgross: 10/28/2008
ckniffin: 6/1/2004
tkritzer: 8/8/2003
carol: 8/6/2003
psherman: 4/15/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989
marie: 3/25/1988
reenie: 2/9/1987
marie: 1/7/1987

603162	TITLE *603162 ECTONUCLEOSIDE TRIPHOSPHATE DIPHOSPHOHYDROLASE 5; ENTPD5
;;CD39-LIKE 4; CD39L4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nucleoside triphosphatases (NTPases) are divalent cation-dependent
transmembrane glycoproteins that hydrolyze extracellular nucleoside tri-
and/or diphosphates. NTPases are characterized by the presence of 4
motifs known as apyrase-conserved regions (ACRs). Chadwick et al. (1998)
identified cDNAs encoding a mouse NTPase, which they symbolized MNTPase.
By searching an EST database for sequences similar to that of MNTPase,
Chadwick and Frischauf (1998) identified cDNAs corresponding to 2 human
genes, CD39L2 (603160) and CD39L4. The coding regions of the mouse and
human CD39L4 genes share 88% nucleotide sequence identity. The predicted
428-amino acid CD39L4 protein contains all 4 ACRs, a single N-terminal
transmembrane segment, and a large extracellular C-terminal domain.
Northern blot analysis revealed that CD39L4 was expressed as a 4.8-kb
mRNA in all tissues tested. Several smaller bands were also observed in
tissues with the strongest CD39L4 expression.

Fang et al. (2010) showed that fluorescence-tagged Entpd5 localized with
an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) marker in mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs).

GENE FUNCTION

By PCR analysis of cDNA libraries, Mulero et al. (1999) detected CD39L4
only in macrophages. Functional and Western blot analysis determined
that the ADPase and nucleotide disphosphatase activity of the secreted
51-kD protein is enhanced by the presence of divalent cations.
Glycosidase or tunicamycin treatment (Mulero et al., 2000) reduced the
size of the protein to the predicted 46 kD and reduced the amount
secreted as well; unlike CD39L3 (603161), however, it did not impair
enzymatic activity.

Fang et al. (2010) showed that in vitro-translated ENTPD5 hydrolyzed UDP
and GDP, but not other nucleotides. Deletion of Pten (601728) in MEFs
results in activation of the PI3 kinase (see 601232)/Akt (see 164730)
pathway, which promotes cell growth and survival, with a concomitant
increase in protein translation. Fang et al. (2010) showed that Entpd5
expression and ATP hydrolysis were significantly elevated in Pten -/-
MEFs. Mass spectrometric analysis identified ENTPD5, UMP/CMP kinase-1
(CMPK1; 191710), and adenylate kinase-1 (AK1; 103000) as components of
an ATP hydrolysis cycle in HeLa cells. Within this cycle, ENTPD5
provided the critical UMP or GMP cofactors for hydrolysis of ATP to AMP,
and lack of any of the 3 enzymes compromised ATP hydrolysis. Knockdown
of Entpd5 in Pten -/- MEFs increased expression of markers of ER stress,
reduced protein N-glycosylation, and reduced lactate production. Western
blot, immunohistochemical, and microarray analyses showed that
upregulation of ENTPD5 correlated with AKT activation in human prostate
cancer cell lines and primary prostate tumor samples. Knockdown of
ENTPD5 in LNCaP prostate cancer cells reduced tumor growth in nude mice.
Fang et al. (2010) concluded that ENTPD5 has a critical role in
N-glycosylation and contributes to the Warburg effect, i.e., elevated
lactate production under aerobic conditions, in tumor cells.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization and linkage analysis, Chadwick et
al. (1998) mapped the MNTPase gene to mouse chromosome 12 in a region
showing homology of synteny with human chromosome 14q. By analysis of
radiation hybrid and somatic cell hybrid panels, Chadwick and Frischauf
(1998) confirmed that CD39L4 is located on human chromosome 14q24.
Chadwick and Frischauf (1998) concluded that CD39L4 is the human homolog
of MNTPase.

REFERENCE 1. Chadwick, B. P.; Frischauf, A.-M.: The CD39-like gene family:
identification of three new human members (CD39L2, CD39L3, and CD39L4),
their murine homologues, and a member of the gene family from Drosophila
melanogaster. Genomics 50: 357-367, 1998.

2. Chadwick, B. P.; Williamson, J.; Sheer, D.; Frischauf, A.-M.:
cDNA cloning and chromosomal mapping of a mouse gene with homology
to NTPases. Mammalian Genome 9: 162-164, 1998.

3. Fang, M.; Shen, Z.; Huang, S.; Zhao, L.; Chen, S.; Mak, T. W.;
Wang, X.: The ER UDPase ENTPD5 promotes protein N-glycosylation,
the Warburg effect, and proliferation in the PTEN pathway. Cell 143:
711-724, 2010.

4. Mulero, J. J.; Yeung, G.; Nelken, S. T.; Bright, J. M.; McGowan,
D. W.; Ford, J. E.: Biochemical characterization of CD39L4. Biochemistry 39:
12924-12928, 2000.

5. Mulero, J. J.; Yeung, G.; Nelken, S. T.; Ford, J. E.: CD39-L4
is a secreted human apyrase, specific for the hydrolysis of nucleoside
diphosphates. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 20064-20067, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/10/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/28/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 10/19/1998

EDITED mgross: 02/15/2011
terry: 2/10/2011
alopez: 10/20/2010
joanna: 3/1/2001
cwells: 2/28/2001
cwells: 2/27/2001
alopez: 10/20/1998
alopez: 10/19/1998

609360	TITLE *609360 RENALASE; RNLS
;;CHROMOSOME 10 OPEN READING FRAME 59; C10ORF59
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Renalase is a flavin adenine dinucleotide-dependent amine oxidase that
is secreted into the blood from the kidney (Xu et al., 2005).

CLONING

By searching databases for transcripts likely to encode proteins
secreted from the kidney, Xu et al. (2005) identified a cDNA clone
encoding renalase. The deduced 342-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 37.8 kD. Renalase contains an N-terminal signal
sequence and an amino oxidase domain. Northern blot analysis of several
tissues detected robust expression of a 1.5-kb transcript in kidney, and
lower expression in heart, skeletal muscle, and liver. A minor
transcript of about 2.4 kb was detected in skeletal muscle, and a minor
transcript of 1.2 kb was detected in kidney and liver. In situ
hybridization detected renalase in renal glomeruli and proximal tubules,
and in cardiomyocytes. Western blot analysis detected renalase at an
apparent molecular mass of about 35 kD in human urine. There was also a
signal at 67 to 75 kD, suggesting that the protein may form a doublet.
Renalase was also detected in the plasma of healthy individuals, but not
in the plasma of patients with end-stage renal disease on hemodialysis.

GENE FUNCTION

Xu et al. (2005) demonstrated that epitope-tagged renalase was secreted
from transfected human embryonic kidney cells. Purified and recombinant
renalase metabolized catecholamines, with dopamine as the preferred
substrate, followed by epinephrine and norepinephrine. Within 30 seconds
of a single bolus injection of recombinant renalase into rats, systolic,
diastolic, and mean arterial pressure were decreased in a dose-dependent
manner. Renalase also decreased cardiac contractility and heart rate,
but peripheral vascular resistance was unchanged.

GENE STRUCTURE

Xu et al. (2005) determined that the renalase gene contains 9 exons and
spans about 311 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Xu et al. (2005) mapped the RNLS gene to
chromosome 10q23.33.

REFERENCE 1. Xu, J.; Li, G.; Wang, P.; Velazquez, H.; Yao, X.; Li, Y.; Wu, Y.;
Peixoto, A.; Crowley, S.; Desir, G. V.: Renalase is a novel, soluble
monoamine oxidase that regulates cardiac function and blood pressure. J.
Clin. Invest. 115: 1275-1280, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/24/2005

EDITED alopez: 09/09/2009
wwang: 5/26/2005
wwang: 5/24/2005

601984	TITLE *601984 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR COACTIVATOR 4; NCOA4
;;RET-ACTIVATING GENE ELE1; ELE1;;
ANDROGEN RECEPTOR COACTIVATOR, 70-KD; ARA70
PTC3 CHIMERIC ONCOGENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Androgen receptor (AR; 313700) is a transcriptional factor that belongs
to the steroid receptor superfamily. Using the C terminus of AR as bait
in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human brain cDNA library, Yeh and Chang
(1996) cloned NCOA4, which they designated ARA70. The interaction
between the AR bait and NCOA4 occurred only in the presence of
dihydrotestosterone. The deduced 614-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 70 kD. It shares 99% homology with the protein encoded
by the RET-fused gene (RFG) cDNA isolated from human thyroid by Santoro
et al. (1994). Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues detected highest
expression of Ara70 in thymus, prostate, testis, and adrenal gland.
Intermediate expression was found in several other mouse tissues, and no
expression was detected in brain cortex, liver, spleen, and seminal
vesicle.

GENE FUNCTION

Yeh and Chang (1996) showed that ARA70 is a ligand-dependent
AR-associated protein that functions in human prostate cancer cells as
an activator to enhance AR transcriptional activity 10-fold in the
presence of dihydrotestosterone or testosterone, but not
hydroxyflutamide. ARA70 induced only slightly the transcriptional
activity of other steroid receptors such as estrogen receptor (133430)
in human prostate cancer cells.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, Minoletti et al. (1994) mapped
the ELE1 gene to chromosome 10q11.2. The ELE1 gene maps more than 500 kb
from the RET protooncogene (164761), which also maps to chromosome
10q11.2.

CYTOGENETICS

The PTC3 oncogene (RET/PTC3) is an activated form of the RET
protooncogene, which is frequently rearranged in papillary thyroid
carcinoma (PTC; 188550). RET/PTC3 results from a structural
rearrangement between the ELE1 and RET genes on chromosome 10
(Bongarzone et al., 1994) and has been observed in both sporadic and
radiation-associated post-Chernobyl PTC. Minoletti et al. (1994) found
that the karyotype of 2 PTC3-positive PTCs did not show evidence of
chromosome 10 abnormalities, indicating that a cytogenetically
undetectable paracentric inversion within chromosome 10q11.2 generates
PTC3. To understand the molecular basis that predisposes RET and ELE1
genes to be recurrent targets of 'illegitimate' recombination,
Bongarzone et al. (1997) examined the genomic regions containing the
ELE1/RET breakpoints in 6 Italian sporadic, RET/PTC3-positive tumors and
3 radiation-associated tumors from children living in areas contaminated
by the Chernobyl accident; the latter tumors also expressed RET/PTC3
oncogene. They found that the breakpoints in both genes clustered in
regions that they designated ELE1-bcr (1.8 kb) and RET-bcr (1.9 kb). In
all sporadic tumors and in 1 post-Chernobyl tumor, the ELE1/RET
recombination corresponded with short sequences of homology (3 to 7 bp)
between the 2 rearranging genes. In addition, Bongarzone et al. (1997)
observed an interesting distribution of the post-Chernobyl breakpoints
in ELE1-bcr located within an Alu element, or between 2 close Alu
elements, and always in AT-rich regions. In the case of the ELE1/RET
fusion gene, the 5-prime end of ELE1 is fused to the tyrosine kinase
portion of the RET gene. See 601985 for discussion of the PTC1 chimeric
oncogene.

Klugbauer et al. (2001) identified 22 reciprocal and 4 nonreciprocal
ELE1 and RET rearrangements in 26 post-Chernobyl PTC tumor samples.
Breakpoints were distributed in the affected introns of both genes
without significant clustering, and there was no accumulation of
breakpoints at the 2 Alu elements in the ELE1 sequence. However, at
least 1 topoisomerase I (126420) site was found at or near all
breakpoints, indicating a potential role for this enzyme in the
formation of DNA strand breaks and/or ELE1 and RET inversions. Due to
the presence of short regions of sequence homology and short direct and
inverted repeats at the majority of breakpoints, Klugbauer et al. (2001)
concluded that chimeric ELE1/RET and RET/ELE1 genes are formed by a
nonhomologous DNA end-joining mechanism.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Undermasculinization of the male genitalia is a common congenital
disorder, but in only a small proportion of cases is there an
identifiable abnormality of androgen production or of the androgen
receptor. Lim et al. (2001) studied 27 subjects in whom no abnormality
of the androgen receptor could be established as the cause of
undermasculinized genitalia. They found likewise no abnormality in the
NCOA4 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Bongarzone, I.; Butti, M. G.; Coronelli, S.; Borrello, M. G.; Santoro,
M.; Mondellini, P.; Pilotti, S.; Fusco, A.; Della Porta, G.; Pierotti,
M. A.: Frequent activation of ret protooncogene by fusion with a
new activating gene in papillary thyroid carcinomas. Cancer Res. 54:
2979-2985, 1994.

2. Bongarzone, I.; Butti, M. G.; Fugazzola, L.; Pacini, F.; Pinchera,
A.; Vorontsova, T. V.; Demidchik, E. P.; Pierotti, M. A.: Comparison
of the breakpoint regions of ELE1 and RET genes involved in the generation
of RET/PTC3 oncogene in sporadic and in radiation-associated papillary
thyroid carcinomas. Genomics 42: 252-259, 1997.

3. Klugbauer, S.; Pfeiffer, P.; Gassenhuber, H.; Beimfohr, C.; Rabes,
H. M.: RET rearrangements in radiation-induced papillary thyroid
carcinomas: high prevalence of topoisomerase I sites at breakpoints
and microhomology-mediated end joining in ELE1 and RET chimeric genes. Genomics 73:
149-160, 2001.

4. Lim, H. N.; Hawkins, J. R.; Hughes, I. A.: Genetic evidence to
exclude the androgen receptor co-factor, ARA70 (NCOA4) as a candidate
gene for the causation of undermasculinised genitalia. (Letter) Clin.
Genet. 59: 284-286, 2001.

5. Minoletti, F.; Butti, M. G.; Coronelli, S.; Miozzo, M.; Sozzi,
G.; Pilotti, S.; Tunnacliffe, A.; Pierotti, M. A.; Bongarzone, I.
: The two genes generating RET/PTC3 are localized in chromosomal band
10q11.2. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 11: 51-57, 1994.

6. Santoro, M.; Dathan, N. A.; Berlingieri, M. T.; Bongarzone, I.;
Paulin, C.; Grieco, M.; Pierotti, M. A.; Vecchio, G.; Fusco, A.:
Molecular characterization of RET/PTC3: a novel rearranged version
of the RET proto-oncogene in a human thyroid papillary carcinoma. Oncogene 9:
509-516, 1994.

7. Yeh, S.; Chang, C.: Cloning and characterization of a specific
coactivator, ARA-70, for the androgen receptor in human prostate cells. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 5517-5521, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/18/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/4/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/10/1997

EDITED mgross: 10/18/2004
mgross: 10/4/2004
mgross: 10/18/2002
carol: 8/22/2001
mcapotos: 8/15/2001
carol: 7/2/2001
terry: 2/28/2000
carol: 12/22/1999
carol: 6/29/1999
mark: 9/11/1997
terry: 9/11/1997
mark: 9/10/1997

606974	TITLE *606974 COMPONENT OF OLIGOMERIC GOLGI COMPLEX 2; COG2
;;LOW DENSITY LIPOPROTEIN RECEPTOR DEFECT C-COMPLEMENTING PROTEIN; LDLC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Multiprotein complexes are key determinants of Golgi apparatus structure
and its capacity for intracellular transport and glycoprotein
modification. Several complexes have been identified, including the
Golgi transport complex (GTC), the LDLC complex, which is involved in
glycosylation reactions, and the SEC34 complex, which is involved in
vesicular transport. These 3 complexes are identical and have been
termed the conserved oligomeric Golgi (COG) complex, which includes COG2
(Ungar et al., 2002).

CLONING

Podos et al. (1994) isolated a cDNA encoding LDLC by expressing human
genomic DNA in ldlC Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, which have
defective LDLR (606945) expression due to glycosylation defects,
detecting corrected expression, probing a size-selected genomic DNA
library, Northern blot analysis of HeLa cells, and screening of a HeLa
cell cDNA library. Expression of LDLC alone in ldlC CHO cells, but not
in ldlB (606973) CHO cells, corrected LDLR expression. Northern blot
analysis revealed expression of a 3.4-kb LDLC transcript in HeLa cells,
with lower expression in wildtype, but not mutant, CHO cells. LDLC is a
deduced 738-amino acid cytoplasmic protein. Immunofluorescence
microscopy indicated that LDLC is associated with the Golgi in CHO cells
and mouse fibroblasts.

By SDS-PAGE analysis of bovine brain cytosol, Ungar et al. (2002)
identified the 8 subunits of the COG complex. Immunofluorescence
microscopy demonstrated that COG1 (LDLB) colocalizes with COG7 (606978),
as well as with COG3 (606975) and COG5 (606821), with a Golgi marker in
a perinuclear distribution. Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that all
COG subunits interact with COG2. Ungar et al. (2002) concluded that the
COG complex is critical for the structure and function of the Golgi
apparatus and can influence intracellular membrane trafficking.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the COG2
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP stSG15532).

REFERENCE 1. Podos, S. D.; Reddy, P.; Ashkenas, J.; Krieger, M.: LDLC encodes
a brefeldin A-sensitive, peripheral Golgi protein required for normal
Golgi function. J. Cell Biol. 127: 679-691, 1994.

2. Ungar, D.; Oka, T.; Brittle, E. E.; Vasile, E.; Lupashin, V. V.;
Chatterton, J. E.; Heuser, J. E.; Krieger, M.; Waters, M. G.: Characterization
of a mammalian Golgi-localized protein complex, COG, that is required
for normal Golgi morphology and function. J. Cell Biol. 157: 405-415,
2002.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/23/2002

EDITED ckniffin: 06/05/2002
mgross: 5/28/2002
mgross: 5/23/2002

604708	TITLE *604708 NUCLEAR FACTOR OF ACTIVATED T CELLS 5; NFAT5
;;TONICITY-RESPONSIVE ENHANCER-BINDING PROTEIN; TONEBP;;
NFAT-LIKE PROTEIN 1; NFATL1;;
KIAA0827
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Tonicity-responsive enhancers (TonEs) in kidney medulla cells play a key
role in hypertonicity-induced transcriptional stimulation of
sodium/myoinositol cotransporter (SLC5A3; 600444),
sodium/chloride/betaine cotransporter (SLC6A12; 603080), and aldose
reductase (AKR1B1; 103880). Using a yeast 1-hybrid strategy followed by
screening of a HeLa cDNA library, Miyakawa et al. (1999) obtained a cDNA
encoding NFAT5, which they called TONEBP (TonE-binding protein). By
searching an EST database for sequences related to NFATC family members
(e.g., NFATC1; 600489), Lopez-Rodriguez et al. (1999) also isolated a
cDNA encoding NFAT5. The 1,455-amino acid NFAT5 protein contains a
region near the N terminus that has high homology to the Rel-like
DNA-binding domain of the NFATC family. However, NFAT5 lacks the
N-terminal sequence that functions as an interface for calcineurin (see
114105) and regulatory kinases. Northern blot analysis detected an
approximately 13-kb NFAT5 transcript that was ubiquitously expressed. By
electrophoretic mobility shift analyses, Miyakawa et al. (1999) showed
that the NFAT5 Rel region binds to TonE DNA, and Lopez-Rodriguez et al.
(1999) showed that it binds to sequences similar to those preferred by
NFATC1, but not to FOS (164810) or JUN (165160). Western blot analysis
detected expression of a 200-kD NFAT5 protein in a kidney cell line
(Lopez-Rodriguez et al., 1999). By immunostaining, Miyakawa et al.
(1999) showed that NFAT5 is present in both cytoplasm and nucleus of
isotonic kidney cells, but is found predominantly in the nucleus of
cells cultured in hypertonic medium; Lopez-Rodriguez et al. (1999)
detected staining only in the nucleus of resting and stimulated T
lymphocytes, HeLa cells, and myoblast cells.

By Western blot analysis of mouse tissue, Trama et al. (2000) detected
abundant expression of NFAT5, which they termed NFATL1, in thymus, with
much lower amounts in testis, lung, and brain, and no expression in
other tissues, including lymph nodes. Stimulated mouse splenocytes
expressed NFAT5, whereas quiescent mouse splenocytes and T cells exposed
to cyclosporin A or FK506 did not. Reporter gene analysis showed that
T-cell receptor cross-linking resulted in the induction of NFAT5 in
human Jurkat cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Jauliac et al. (2002) found that both NFATC2 (600490) and NFAT5 were
expressed in invasive human ductal breast carcinomas. Using cell lines
derived from breast and colon carcinomas, they found that these NFATs
promoted carcinoma invasion and that their activity correlated with
expression of alpha-6 (147556)/beta-4 (147557) integrin. The
transcriptional activity of NFAT5 was induced by alpha-6/beta-4
clustering in the presence of chemoattractants, resulting in enhanced
cell migration. Jauliac et al. (2002) determined that the activity of
NFAT5 required an intact beta-4 cytoplasmic tail.

In studies in rats, Machnik et al. (2009) demonstrated that TONEBP-VEGFC
(601528) signaling in mononuclear phagocytes is a major determinant of
extracellular volume and blood pressure homeostasis, and is intimately
involved in salt-induced hypertension (see 145500).

Kleinewietfeld et al. (2013) demonstrated that increased salt
concentrations found locally under physiologic conditions in vivo
markedly boost the induction of murine and human T(H)17 cells. High-salt
conditions activated the p38/MAPK (600289) pathway involving NFAT5 and
serum/glucocorticoid-regulated kinase-1 (SGK1; 602958) during
cytokine-induced T(H)17 polarization. Gene silencing or chemical
inhibition of p38/MAPK, NFAT5, or SGK1 abrogated the high-salt-induced
T(H)17 cell development. The T(H)17 cells generated under high-salt
conditions displayed a highly pathogenic and stable phenotype
characterized by the upregulation of the proinflammatory cytokines GMCSF
(138960), TNF-alpha (191160), and IL2 (147680). Moreover, mice fed with
a high-salt diet developed a more severe form of autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE), in line with augmented central nervous system
infiltrating and peripherally induced antigen-specific T(H)17 cells.
Thus, Kleinewietfeld et al. (2013) suggested that increased dietary salt
intake might represent an environmental risk factor for the development
of autoimmune diseases through the induction of pathogenic T(H)17 cells.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the NFAT5
gene, which they called KIAA0827, to chromosome 16. Hebinck et al.
(2000) mapped the NFAT5 gene to chromosome 16q22.1 by FISH and radiation
hybrid analysis. Using the latter method, they mapped the mouse homolog
to chromosome 8D.

ANIMAL MODEL

Lopez-Rodriguez et al. (2004) found that homozygous Nfat5-deficient mice
were genetically underrepresented after embryonic day 14.5. Surviving
mice manifested a progressive and profound atrophy of the kidney medulla
with impaired activation of several osmoprotective genes, including
Akr1b1, Slc6a12, and Slc5a3. The Akr1b1 gene is controlled by a
tonicity-responsive enhancer, which was refractory to hypertonic stress
in fibroblasts lacking Nfat5, establishing this enhancer as a direct
transcriptional target of NFAT5. Lopez-Rodriguez et al. (2004) concluded
that NFAT5 is a tonicity-responsive transcription factor with a central
role in kidney homeostasis and function.

REFERENCE 1. Hebinck, A.; Dalski, A.; Engel, H.; Mattei, M.-G.; Hawken, R.;
Schwinger, E.; Zuhlke, C.: Assignment of transcription factor NFAT5
to human chromosome 16q22.1, murine chromosome 8D and porcine chromosome
6p1.4 and comparison of the polyglutamine domains. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 90: 68-70, 2000.

2. Jauliac, S.; Lopez-Rodriguez, C.; Shaw, L. M.; Brown, L. F.; Rao,
A.; Toker, A.: The role of NFAT transcription factors in integrin-mediated
carcinoma invasion. Nature Cell Biol. 4: 540-544, 2002.

3. Kleinewietfeld, M.; Manzel, A.; Titze, J.; Kvakan, H.; Yosef, N.;
Linker, R. A.; Muller, D. N.; Hafler, D. A.: Sodium chloride drives
autoimmune disease by the induction of pathogenic T(H)17 cells. Nature 496:
518-522, 2013.

4. Lopez-Rodriguez, C.; Antos, C. L.; Shelton, J. M.; Richardson,
J. A.; Lin, F.; Novobrantseva, T. I.; Bronson, R. T.; Igarashi, P.;
Rao, A.; Olson, E. N.: Loss of NFAT5 results in renal atrophy and
lack of tonicity-responsive gene expression. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101:
2392-2397, 2004.

5. Lopez-Rodriguez, C.; Aramburu, J.; Rakeman, A. S.; Rao, A.: NFAT5,
a constitutively nuclear NFAT protein that does not cooperate with
Fos and Jun. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 7214-7219, 1999.

6. Machnik, A.; Neuhofer, W.; Jantsch, J.; Dahlmann, A.; Tammela,
T.; Machura, K.; Park, J.-K.; Beck, F.-X.; Muller, D. N.; Derer, W.;
Goss, J.; Ziomber, A.; and 10 others: Macrophages regulate salt-dependent
volume and blood pressure by a vascular endothelial growth factor-C-dependent
buffering mechanism. Nature Med. 15: 545-552, 2009.

7. Miyakawa, H.; Woo, S. K.; Dahl, S. C.; Handler, J. S.; Kwon, H.
M.: Tonicity-responsive enhancer binding protein, a Rel-like protein
that stimulates transcription in response to hypertonicity. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 2538-2542, 1999.

8. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 355-364, 1998.

9. Trama, J.; Lu, Q.; Hawley, R. G.; Ho, S. N.: The NFAT-related
protein NFATL1 (TonEBP/NFAT5) is induced upon T cell activation in
a calcineurin-dependent manner. J. Immun. 165: 4884-4894, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 05/07/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/6/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/16/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/25/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/1/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/21/2000

EDITED alopez: 05/07/2013
carol: 7/7/2009
terry: 7/6/2009
mgross: 3/23/2004
terry: 3/16/2004
mgross: 10/22/2003
mgross: 10/25/2002
carol: 2/12/2001
mgross: 2/7/2001
mcapotos: 2/1/2001
mgross: 3/22/2000
mgross: 3/21/2000

142230	TITLE *142230 HEMATOPOIETIC PROGENITOR CELL ANTIGEN CD34; CD34
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CD34 is a monomeric cell surface antigen with a molecular mass of
approximately 110 kD that is selectively expressed on human
hematopoietic progenitor cells.

CLONING

In the hands of Sutherland et al. (1988), partial amino acid analysis of
highly purified CD34 antigen revealed no significant sequence similarity
with any previously described structures. Sequential immunoprecipitation
and Western blot analysis indicated that this antigen is not a member of
the leukosialin/sialophorin family, despite the fact that these
molecules share several structural similarities.

Simmons et al. (1992) isolated a cDNA clone for CD34. They stated that
the gene is expressed by small vessel endothelial cells in addition to
hematopoietic progenitor cells and is a sialomucin of as-yet-unknown
function.

Study of the CD34 cDNA permitted He et al. (1992) to demonstrate that it
encodes a type I transmembrane protein with no obvious homology to other
known proteins.

OTHER FEATURES

Sutherland et al. (1993) provided a review, including potential clinical
applications in selecting for hematopoietic stem cell progenitors from
tumor-contaminated marrow in preparation for transplantation and for
genetic manipulation in gene therapy.

GENE STRUCTURE

Satterthwaite et al. (1992) reported that the CD34 gene spans 26 kb and
has 8 exons. Using RNase protection, they demonstrated that the start
site of CD34 transcription is 258 bp upstream of the translational start
site. He et al. (1992) showed that the upstream regulatory sequences of
CD34 contain no TATA or CAAT box sequences, but MYB, MYC, and ETS-like
binding motifs were identified.

GENE FUNCTION

Continuous turnover of epithelia is ensured by the extensive
self-renewal capacity of tissue-specific stem cells. Similarly,
epithelial tumor maintenance relies on cancer stem cells, which co-opt
stem cell properties. In murine skin, follicular morphogenesis is driven
by bulge stem cells that specifically express CD34. Malanchi et al.
(2008) identified a population of cells in early epidermal tumors
characterized by phenotype and functional similarities to normal bulge
skin stem cells. This population contains cancer stem cells, which are
the only cells with tumor initiation properties. Transplants derived
from these cancer stem cells preserve the hierarchical organization of
the primary tumor. Malanchi et al. (2008) described beta-catenin
(116806) signaling as being essential in sustaining the cancer stem cell
phenotype. Ablation of the beta-catenin gene results in the loss of
cancer stem cells and complete tumor regression. In addition, Malanchi
et al. (2008) provided evidence for the involvement of increased
beta-catenin signaling in malignant human squamous cell carcinomas.
Malanchi et al. (2008) concluded that because Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
is not essential for normal epidermal homeostasis, such a mechanistic
difference may thus be targeted to eliminate cancer stem cells and
consequently eradicate squamous cell carcinomas.

MAPPING

By Southern blot analysis of DNA from a panel of human/mouse somatic
cell hybrids using a CD34 cDNA probe, Tenen et al. (1990) demonstrated
that the gene for CD34 is located on 1q12-qter. By means of in situ
hybridization, Howell et al. (1991) narrowed the assignment to 1q32. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization, Satterthwaite et al. (1992) mapped
the gene to 1q32.

ANIMAL MODEL

To analyze the involvement of CD34 in hematopoiesis, Cheng et al. (1996)
produced both embryonic stem (ES) cells in mice null for the expression
of this mucin. Analysis of yolk sac-like hematopoietic development in
embryoid bodies derived from CD34-null ES cells showed a significant
delay in both erythroid and myeloid differentiation that could be
reversed by transfection of the mutant ES cells with CD34 constructs
expressing either a complete or truncated cytoplasmic domain. In spite
of these diminished embryonic hematopoietic progenitor numbers, the
CD34-null mice developed normally, and the hematopoietic profile of
adult blood appeared typical. However, the colony-forming activity of
hematopoietic progenitors derived from both bone marrow and spleen was
significantly reduced in adult CD34-deficient animals.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) give rise to all blood cells. CD34 is a
sialomucin-like adhesion molecule that is expressed on a few percent of
primitive bone marrow cells. In human bone marrow, virtually all
colony-forming unit activity resides in the population expressing human
CD34. In primates, CD34-positive cells, but not CD34-negative cells,
repopulate lethally irradiated baboons. On the other hand, in murine
hematopoiesis, HSCs are found almost exclusively in the CD34-negative to
-low fraction. Okuno et al. (2002) made transgenic mouse strains with
human genomic P1 artificial chromosome clones spanning the entire CD34
genomic locus. In all transgenic mouse strains, a vast majority of
phenotypic and functional HSC populations including mouse CD34-negative
or -low cells expressed the human CD34 transgene. These data strongly
supported the notion that CD34-positive human bone marrow cells contain
long-term HSCs that can maintain hematopoiesis throughout life.

Using fluorescence intravital microscopy (IVM) with homing assays,
Hidalgo et al. (2002) examined the repopulation of bone marrow of
sublethally irradiated nonobese diabetic (NOD)/severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID) mice, which have multiple defects in innate and
adaptive immunologic functions, with human CD34-positive hematopoietic
progenitor cells obtained either from cord blood or from adult bone
marrow or peripheral blood. Human hematopoietic progenitor cells rolled
and arrested in NOD/SCID bone marrow microvessels, and the rolling
capacity of neonatal cord blood cells was much lower than that of adult
cells. Rolling and retention were nearly abolished in NOD/SCID Selp
(173610) -/- Sele (131210) -/- mice and in NOD/SCID Sele -/- mice. Flow
cytometric and IVM analyses suggested that the neonatal defect resulted
from expression of a nonfunctional form of SELPLG (600738) on cord blood
CD34-positive cells that were unable to bind Selp. This subset of cells
was enriched in CD34-positive/CD38 (107270)-low/negative progenitors.
Hidalgo et al. (2002) proposed that manipulation of expression of
selectins and their ligands may improve homing of cord blood
CD34-positive cells to bone marrow.

REFERENCE 1. Cheng, J.; Baumhueter, S.; Cacalano, G.; Carver-Moore, K.; Thibodeaux,
H.; Thomas, R.; Broxmeyer, H. E.; Cooper, S.; Hague, N.; Moore, M.;
Lasky, L. A.: Hematopoietic defects in mice lacking the sialomucin
CD34. Blood 87: 479-490, 1996.

2. He, X.-Y.; Antao, V. P.; Basila, D.; Marx, J. C.; Davis, B. R.
: Isolation and molecular characterization of the human CD34 gene. Blood 79:
2296-2302, 1992.

3. Hidalgo, A.; Weiss, L. A.; Frenette, P. S.: Functional selectin
ligands mediating human CD34+ cell interactions with bone marrow endothelium
are enhanced postnatally. J. Clin. Invest. 110: 559-569, 2002.

4. Howell, S. M.; Molgaard, H. V.; Greaves, M. F.; Spurr, N. K.:
Localisation of the gene coding for the haemopoietic stem cell antigen
CD34 to chromosome 1q32. Hum. Genet. 87: 625-627, 1991.

5. Malanchi, I.; Peinado, H.; Kassen, D.; Hussenet, T.; Metzger, D.;
Chambon, P.; Huber, M.; Hohl, D.; Cano, A.; Birchmeier, W.; Huelsken,
J.: Cutaneous cancer stem cell maintenance is dependent on beta-catenin
signalling. Nature 452: 650-653, 2008.

6. Okuno, Y.; Iwasaki, H.; Huettner, C. S.; Radomska, H. S.; Gonzalez,
D. A.; Tenen, D. G.; Akashi, K.: Differential regulation of the human
and murine CD34 genes in hematopoietic stem cells. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 99: 6246-6251, 2002.

7. Satterthwaite, A. B.; Burn, T. C.; Le Beau, M. M.; Tenen, D. G.
: Structure of the gene encoding CD34, a human hematopoietic stem
cell antigen. Genomics 12: 788-794, 1992.

8. Simmons, D. L.; Satterthwaite, A. B.; Tenen, D. G.; Seed, B.:
Molecular cloning of a cDNA encoding CD34, a sialomucin of human hematopoietic
stem cells. J. Immun. 148: 267-271, 1992.

9. Sutherland, D. R.; Stewart, A. K.; Keating, A.: CD34 antigen:
molecular features and potential clinical applications. Stem Cells 11
(suppl. 3): 50-57, 1993.

10. Sutherland, D. R.; Watt, S. M.; Dowden, G.; Karhi, K.; Baker,
M. A.; Greaves, M. F.; Smart, J. E.: Structural and partial amino
acid sequence analysis of the human hemopoietic progenitor cell antigen
CD34. Leukemia 2: 793-803, 1988.

11. Tenen, D. G.; Satterthwaite, A. B.; Borson, R.; Simmons, D.; Eddy,
R. L.; Shows, T. B.: Chromosome 1 localization of the gene for CD34,
a surface antigen of human stem cells. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 53:
55-57, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/12/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/6/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/27/1989

EDITED alopez: 09/08/2011
alopez: 5/13/2008
terry: 4/16/2008
carol: 8/15/2006
mgross: 1/12/2006
mgross: 6/11/2002
terry: 6/6/2002
carol: 12/13/1998
mark: 3/21/1996
terry: 3/8/1996
carol: 12/15/1993
carol: 4/7/1993
carol: 7/23/1992
carol: 6/9/1992
carol: 6/2/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

610130	TITLE *610130 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 26 (SULFATE TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 1; SLC26A1
;;SULFATE ANION TRANSPORTER 1; SAT1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SLC26A1 belongs to a family of transporters that mediate electroneutral
exchange of Cl- for HCO3- across the plasma membrane (Lohi et al.,
2000).

CLONING

By RT-PCR of human kidney mRNA using primers derived from the mouse
Slc26a1 cDNA, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, Regeer et al. (2003)
cloned SLC26A1. They also identified a SLC26A1 variant lacking exon 2 in
the 5-prime UTR. The deduced 701-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of about 75 kD. It has 12 putative transmembrane domains
and intracellular N and C termini. SLC26A1 contains a sulfate
transporter signature, a phosphopantetheine attachment site, a STAS
domain, a sulfate transporter family sequence, 2 putative extracellular
N-glycosylation sites, and multiple putative intracellular
phosphorylation sites. PCR analysis showed highest expression in kidney
and liver, with lower expression in brain, colon, thymus, spleen, small
intestine, leukocytes, pancreas, testis, and prostate.

GENE FUNCTION

Regeer et al. (2003) found that Xenopus oocytes injected with SLC26A1
cRNA showed 40-fold induction of sulfate uptake, 5-fold induction of
chloride uptake, and 6-fold induction of oxalate uptake compared with
water-injected controls. Formate was not a transport substrate.

GENE STRUCTURE

Regeer et al. (2003) determined that the SLC26A1 gene spans 5.8 kb and
contains 4 exons, with translation initiation beginning in exon 3. The
5-prime flanking region is 60% GC rich, lacks canonical TATA and CAAT
boxes, and has a large number of potential cis-acting elements
recognized by transcription factors. Regeer et al. (2003) identified a
minimal promoter containing an AP1 (165160) site that was essential for
transcription.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Lohi et al. (2000) mapped the SLC26A1 gene
to chromosome 4p16.3.

REFERENCE 1. Lohi, H.; Kujala, M.; Kerkela, E.; Saarialho-Kere, U.; Kestila,
M.; Kere, J.: Mapping of five new putative anion transporter genes
in human and characterization of SLC26A6, a candidate gene for pancreatic
anion exchanger. Genomics 70: 102-112, 2000.

2. Regeer, R. R.; Lee, A.; Markovich, D.: Characterization of the
human sulfate anion transporter (hsat-1) protein and gene (SAT1; SLC26A1). DNA
Cell Biol. 22: 107-117, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/17/2006

EDITED mgross: 05/17/2006
mgross: 5/17/2006

611137	TITLE *611137 PROTEASOME SUBUNIT, BETA-TYPE, 11; PSMB11
;;PROTEASOME SUBUNIT, BETA-5 FAMILY, THYMUS-SPECIFIC;;
PROTEASOME SUBUNIT BETA-5T
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Proteasomes generate peptides that are presented by major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) I molecules to other cells of the
immune system. Proteolysis is conducted by 20S proteasomes, complexes of
28 subunits arranged as a cylinder in 4 heteroheptameric rings: alpha-1
to -7, beta-1 to -7, beta-1 to -7, and alpha-1 to -7. The catalytic
subunits are beta-1 (PSMB6; 600307), beta-2 (PSMB7; 604030), and beta-5
(PSMB5; 600306). Three additional subunits, beta-1i (PSMB9; 177045),
beta-2i (PSMB10; 176847), and beta-5i (PSMB8; 177046), are induced by
gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570) and are preferentially incorporated into
proteasomes to make immunoproteasomes. PSMB11, or beta-5t, is a
catalytic subunit expressed exclusively in cortical thymic epithelial
cells (Murata et al., 2007).

CLONING

By searching databases for proteasome-related genes, followed by PCR of
HeLa cell genomic DNA, Murata et al. (2007) cloned human PSMB11, which
they called beta-5t. The beta-5t protein was most homologous to beta-5
and beta-5i. Northern and Western blot analyses of mouse tissues showed
that beta-5t was expressed exclusively in thymus. Immunohistochemical
analysis detected beta-5t expression in mouse cortical thymic epithelial
cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunoprecipitation analysis, Murata et al. (2007) found that
about 20% of 20S proteasomes in mouse thymus contained beta-5t instead
of beta-5 or beta-5i. Moreover, these beta-5t-containing proteasomes, or
thymoproteasomes, preferentially incorporated beta-1i and beta-2i in
place of beta-1 and beta-2, respectively.

GENE STRUCTURE

Murata et al. (2007) determined that the PSMB11 gene contains 1 exon in
both mice and humans.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Murata et al. (2007) mapped the PSMB11
gene to chromosome 14, adjacent to the PSMB5 gene on the opposite
strand.

ANIMAL MODEL

Murata et al. (2007) found that mice deficient in beta-5t had fewer Cd8
(see 186910) single-positive (SP) thymocytes, but normal numbers of Cd4
(186940) SP cells, compared with wildtype mice. They concluded that
PSMB11 plays a pivotal role in development of CD8-positive T cells.

REFERENCE 1. Murata, S.; Sasaki, K.; Kishimoto, T.; Niwa, S.; Hayashi, H.; Takahama,
Y.; Tanaka, K.: Regulation of CD8+ T cell development by thymus-specific
proteasomes. Science 316: 1349-1353, 2007.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/25/2007

EDITED alopez: 04/03/2009
mgross: 6/25/2007

611941	TITLE *611941 ATPase FAMILY, AAA DOMAIN-CONTAINING, MEMBER 2; ATAD2
;;AAA NUCLEAR COREGULATOR, CANCER-ASSOCIATED; ANCCA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ATAD2 is an ATPase involved in the control of chromatin structure and
gene transcription (Caron et al., 2010).

CLONING

By microarray analysis, Zou et al. (2007) identified ATAD2, which they
called ANCCA, as a gene upregulated in breast cancer cells
overexpressing ACTR (NCOA3; 601937) or treated with estrogen. They
obtained the full-length cDNA by database analysis and PCR of a
leukocyte cDNA library. The deduced 1,390-amino acid protein contains an
N-terminal acidic region, followed by 2 AAA ATPase domains (see 601681)
and a bromodomain. Northern blot analysis detected ANCCA transcripts of
5 and 4.7 kb in estrogen-stimulated breast cancer cells. Western blot
analysis revealed a 170-kD ANCCA protein. Immunofluorescence analysis
showed ANCCA localized primarily in the nucleus. By database analysis,
Zou et al. (2007) identified ANCCA orthologs in all eukaryotes except
Drosophila.

Caron et al. (2010) cloned long (L) and short (S) variants of mouse
Atad2. Atad2-L and Atad2-S encode proteins of 1,364 and 1,040 amino
acids, respectively. RT-PCR of mouse tissues detected Atad2-L in embryos
at various stages and in several adult tissues, including lung, spleen,
testis, and uterus. Atad2-S was detected in testis only. Caron et al.
(2010) also identified human ATAD2, which corresponds to mouse Atad2-L.
No human ortholog of Atad2-S was detected. Quantitative RT-PCR of human
tissues showed robust expression in testis, lower expression in heart,
prostate, and thymus, and much lower expression in all other tissues
examined. Western blot analysis detected ATAD2 and Atad2-L associated
with the chromatin fractions of human H1299 cells and mouse testis,
respectively. Atad2-S was found in both the soluble and insoluble
fractions of mouse testis.

GENE FUNCTION

By microarray, Northern blot, and Wester blot analyses, Zou et al.
(2007) found that overexpression of ACTR or estrogen treatment
upregulated ANCCA mRNA and protein in breast cancer cells. ANCCA
associated directly with estrogen-bound estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha
(ESR1; 133430) and ACTR. Upon estrogen stimulation, ANCCA was
selectively recruited to a subset of ER-alpha target genes, including
cyclin D1 (CCND1; 168461), MYC (190080), and E2F1 (189971), and was
required for their estrogen-induced gene expression and breast cancer
cell proliferation. ANCCA bound and hydrolyzed ATP and was critical for
recruitment of coregulator CBP (CREBBP; 600140) and histone
hyperacetylation at the ER target chromatin. Mutation of lys473 and
glu532 within the Walker A and Walker B motifs, respectively, of AAA
domain-1 of ANCCA rendered ANCCA defective as a coactivator in mediating
estrogen induction of gene expression.

Caron et al. (2010) found that mouse Atad2-S oligomerized via its ATPase
domain and associated with acetylated histone H4 (see 602822) via its
bromodomain. Overexpression of ATAD2 was found in a wide range of human
cancers and was associated with poor prognosis in lung and breast
cancers. Knockdown of ATAD2 in human cell lines revealed that ATAD2
functioned as a global regulator of chromatin structure and function,
with variable impact on gene expression that was dependent on cell type.
In cancer cell lines, knockdown of ATAD2 enhanced apoptosis.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the ATAD2 gene to chromosome 8q24.13 based on an
alignment of the ATAD2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF118088) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Caron, C.; Lestrat, C.; Marsal, S.; Escoffier, E.; Curtet, S.;
Virolle, V.; Barbry, P.; Debernardi, A.; Brambilla, C.; Brambilla,
E.; Rousseaux, S.; Khochbin, S.: Functional characterization of ATAD2
as a new cancer/testis factor and a predictor of poor prognosis in
breast and lung cancers. Oncogene 29: 5171-5181, 2010.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  11/4/2013.

3. Zou, J. X.; Revenko, A. S.; Li, L. B.; Gemo, A. T.; Chen, H.-W.
: ANCCA, an estrogen-regulated AAA+ ATPase coactivator for ER-alpha,
is required for coregulator occupancy and chromatin modification. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 18067-18072, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/4/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/9/2008

EDITED mgross: 11/05/2013
mcolton: 11/4/2013
mgross: 4/9/2008

613648	TITLE *613648 MATERNALLY EXPRESSED GENE 8; MEG8
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for human orthologs of imprinted ovine genes, Charlier et
al. (2001) identified MEG8. They noted that MEG8 contains a high degree
of interspersed repeats and, while represented by several ESTs, appears
to lack a protein-coding sequence. RT-PCR of ovine tissues revealed
highest expression in skeletal muscle and kidney. Meg8 was maternally
expressed in sheep.

By searching for human orthologs of an imprinted small nucleolar RNA
(snoRNA) gene from rat chromosome 6 in a syntenic region of human
chromosome 14, Cavaille et al. (2002) identified SNORD112 (613649),
which they called 14q(0), within an intron of the MEG8 gene. Downstream
of MEG8, they identified 9 tandem copies of SNORD113 (see 613650)
followed by 31 tandem copies of SNORD114 (see 613651), which they called
the 14q(I) and 14q(II) clusters, respectively. Each of the 70- to
75-nucleotide snoRNAs contains the characteristic C/D-prime/C-prime/D
motifs and a terminal 5-prime-to-3-prime stem structure with a conserved
sequence. RT-PCR of several overlapping clones suggested that most of
the snoRNA genes originate from introns of a large RNA that includes
exons of the upstream MEG8 gene in addition to exons that overlap the
SNORD113 and SNORD114 gene clusters. This large transcript appears to be
devoid of significant protein-coding potential. Northern blot analysis
revealed highest SNORD112 expression in brain and uterus, with lower
expression in heart and weak expression in other tissues examined. This
expression pattern was identical to that of SNORD113 and SNORD114.

GENE STRUCTURE

Charlier et al. (2001) determined that the MEG8 gene contains at least 8
exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Cavaille et al. (2002) mapped the MEG8
gene to chromosome 14q32.

REFERENCE 1. Cavaille, J.; Seitz, H.; Paulsen, M.; Ferguson-Smith, A. C.; Bachellerie,
J.-P.: Identification of tandemly-repeated C/D snoRNA genes at the
imprinted human 14q32 domain reminiscent of those at the Prader-Willi/Angelman
syndrome region. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 1527-1538, 2002.

2. Charlier, C.; Segers, K.; Wagenaar, D.; Karim, L.; Berghmans, S.;
Jaillon, O.; Shay, T.; Weissenbach, J.; Cockett, N.; Gyapay, G.; Georges,
M.: Human-ovine comparative sequencing of a 250-kb imprinted domain
encompassing the callipyge (clpg) locus and identification of six
imprinted transcripts: DLK1, DAT, GTL2, PEG11, antiPEG11, and MEG8. Genome
Res. 11: 850-862, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/19/2010

EDITED mgross: 11/19/2010

607431	TITLE *607431 DAZ-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; DAZAP2
;;KIAA0058
DESCRIPTION Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human testis cDNA library with the
coding region of DAZ (400003) as bait, Tsui et al. (2000) cloned 2 novel
cDNAs, which they designated DAZAP1 (607430) and DAZAP2, encoding
proteins of 407 and 167 amino acids, respectively. Northern blot
analysis detected ubiquitous, low-level expression of a 2.2-kb DAZAP2
transcript.

GENE FUNCTION

Using GST-fusion binding analysis, Tsui et al. (2000) determined that
both DAZAP1 and DAZAP2 interact with DAZ and DAZL (601486). Deletion
constructs indicated that DAZ and DAZL bind to DAZAP1/DAZAP2 mainly
through the DAZ repeat region.

MAPPING

By FISH, Tsui et al. (2000) mapped the DAZAP2 gene to chromosome
2q33-q34.

REFERENCE 1. Tsui, S.; Dai, T.; Roettger, S.; Schempp, W.; Salido, E. C.; Yen,
P. H.: Identification of two novel proteins that interact with germ-cell-specific
RNA-binding proteins DAZ and DAZL1. Genomics 65: 266-273, 2000.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 12/18/2002

EDITED cwells: 12/20/2002
carol: 12/18/2002

606244	TITLE *606244 SIGNAL-TRANSDUCING ADAPTOR MOLECULE 2; STAM2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cytokine signaling involves the recruitment of cytoplasmic kinases in a
cascade that leads to the activation of downstream target genes. The
signal-transducing adaptor molecules (STAMs) are associated with JAK3
(600173) and JAK2 (147796) and are involved in signaling for DNA
synthesis in response to interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680) and
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GMCSF; 138960).

CLONING

By screening an EST database for sequences homologous to STAM (601899),
followed by probing an activated peripheral blood leukocyte cDNA
library, Endo et al. (2000) isolated a cDNA encoding STAM2. Sequence
analysis predicted that the 525-amino acid protein is 50% identical to
STAM. STAM2 contains an SH3 domain, which is 89% identical to that of
STAM, and a C-terminal tyrosine cluster region that includes an
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif, or ITAM. Northern blot
and immunoblot analyses revealed ubiquitous expression of 1.3-, 3.9-,
and 6.8-kb transcripts and of a 68-kD protein. Immunoprecipitation and
immunoblot analyses detected tyrosine phosphorylation of STAM2 after
cytokine stimulation and an association of STAM2 with JAK2 and JAK3.
Like STAM, STAM2 was found to induce expression of MYC (190080) in
response to IL2 stimulation. Endo et al. (2000) suggested that STAM and
STAM2 may have compensatory functions upon stimulation with IL2 and
GMSCF.

By antiphosphotyrosine affinity purification of HeLa cell lysates
stimulated with epidermal growth factor (EGF; 131530), followed by
micropeptide sequence analysis and EST database searching, Pandey et al.
(2000) identified STAM2. Mutation analysis indicated that the SH3 and
ITAM regions of STAM2 are required for tyrosine phosphorylation.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the STAM2
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP WI-20935).

REFERENCE 1. Endo, K.; Takeshita, T.; Kasai, H.; Sasaki, Y.; Tanaka, N.; Asao,
H.; Kikuchi, K.; Yamada, M.; Chen, M.; O'Shea, J. J.; Sugamura, K.
: STAM2, a new member of the STAM family, binding to the Janus kinases. FEBS
Lett. 477: 55-61, 2000.

2. Pandey, A.; Fernandez, M. M.; Steen, H.; Blagoev, B.; Nielsen,
M. M.; Roche, S.; Mann, M.; Lodish, H. F.: Identification of a novel
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activation motif-containing molecule,
STAM2, by mass spectrometry and its involvement in growth factor and
cytokine receptor signaling pathways. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 38633-38639,
2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 8/31/2001

EDITED mgross: 08/31/2001

614109	TITLE *614109 BPI FOLD-CONTAINING PROTEIN, FAMILY C; BPIFC
;;BACTERICIDAL PERMEABILITY-INCREASING PROTEIN-LIKE 2; BPIL2;;
BPI-LIKE 2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BPIL2 shares significant similarity with members of the lipid transfer
(LT)/lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-binding protein (LBP; 151990) family. All
LT/LBP proteins are capable of binding phospholipids and LPS. Some are
involved in lipid transfer and metabolism (e.g., CETP; 118470), and
others are involved in host response to gram-negative bacterial
infection (e.g., BPI; 109195) (summary by Mulero et al., 2002).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to BPI, followed by
screening and RACE of a fetal skin cDNA library, Mulero et al. (2002)
cloned BPIL2. The deduced 507-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal
signal sequence and shares 28% identity with BPI. Structural modeling
predicted that, like BPI, BPIL2 assumes a boomerang-like conformation
composed of 2 domains, each of which includes a hydrophobic pocket on
its concave surface. BPIL2 also has 10 potential N-glycosylation sites
and 2 conserved cysteines predicted to form a disulfide bridge to anchor
the N-terminal domain. Mulero et al. (2002) also identified several
splice variants of BPIL2. In situ hybridization detected BPIL2 in the
basal layer of the epidermis from inflammatory skin of patients with
psoriasis (see 177900), but not in normal fetal or adult skin.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mulero et al. (2002) determined that the BPIL2 gene contains 15 exons.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid, radiation hybrid, and database analyses, Mulero
et al. (2002) mapped the BPIL2 gene (BPIFC) to chromosome 22q13.

REFERENCE 1. Mulero, J. J.; Boyle, B. J.; Bradley, S.; Bright, J. M.; Nelken,
S. T.; Ho, T. T.; Mize, N. K.; Childs, J. D.; Ballinger, D. G.; Ford,
J. E.; Rupp, F.: Three new human members of the lipid transfer/lipopolysaccharide
binding protein family (LT/LBP). Immunogenetics 54: 293-300, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/22/2011

EDITED alopez: 05/11/2012
mgross: 7/22/2011

300629	TITLE *300629 ADAPTOR-RELATED PROTEIN COMPLEX 1, SIGMA-2 SUBUNIT; AP1S2
;;CLATHRIN-ASSOCIATED/ASSEMBLY/ADAPTOR PROTEIN, SMALL 1-LIKE;;
CLATHRIN ADAPTOR COMPLEX AP1, SIGMA-1B SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Clathrin and its associated heterotetrameric protein complexes (APs) are
the main protein components of the coat surrounding the cytoplasmic face
of coated vesicles. AP1, which is localized at the trans-Golgi network,
is composed of 2 large chains, beta-prime-adaptin (600157) and
gamma-adaptin (603533); a medium (mu) chain, AP47 (603535); and a small
(sigma) chain, AP19 (603531). Takatsu et al. (1998) identified a human
cDNA encoding sigma-1B, a protein related to mouse AP19. The predicted
157-amino acid protein shares 87% identity with human AP19. In yeast
2-hybrid assays, sigma-1B interacted with both gamma-adaptin and
gamma-2-adaptin (603534). Northern blot analysis revealed that SIGMA1B
was expressed ubiquitously in human tissues.

GENE STRUCTURE

Tarpey et al. (2006) stated that the AP1S2 gene is composed of 5 exons.

MAPPING

Tarpey et al. (2006) identified the AP1S2 gene on chromosome Xp22 by
sequence analysis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a systematic sequencing screen of the coding exons of the X
chromosome in 250 families with X-linked mental retardation (XLMR),
Tarpey et al. (2006) identified 2 nonsense mutations and 1 consensus
splice site mutation in the AP1S2 gene on Xp22 in 3 families. Affected
individuals in these families, designated MRX59 (300630), showed mild to
profound mental retardation. Other features included hypotonia early in
life and delay in walking. Tarpey et al. (2006) suggested that aberrant
endocytic processing through disruption of adaptor protein complexes was
likely to result from the AP1S2 mutations identified in the 3
XLMR-affected families. Such defects may plausibly cause abnormal
synaptic development and function. AP1S2 was the first reported XLMR
gene that encodes a protein directly involved in the assembly of
endocytic vesicles.

Saillour et al. (2007) identified 2 pathogenic mutations in the AP1S2
gene (300529.0004 and 300529.0005, respectively) in affected members of
2 unrelated families with X-linked mental retardation.

Tarpey et al. (2009) sequenced the coding exons of the X chromosome in
208 families with X-linked mental retardation. They identified 3
mutations in the AP1S2 gene in 3 families.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED 59
AP1S2, GLN36TER

In a family described by Turner et al. (2003) with an X-linked recessive
form of mental retardation (MRX59; 300630) in 10 males in 4 generations,
Tarpey et al. (2006) demonstrated a nonsense mutation, gln36 to ter
(Q36X), that arose from a 106C-T transition in exon 2 of the AP1S2 gene.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED 59
AP1S2, ARG52TER

In the family with X-linked mental retardation (MRX59; 300630) studied
by Carpenter et al. (1999), Tarpey et al. (2006) found that affected
members had an arg52-to-ter (R52X) mutation in the AP1S2 gene, resulting
from a 154C-T transition in exon 2.

.0003
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED 59
AP1S2, 4-BP DEL, NT180

In a family with 4 males with X-linked mental retardation (MRX59;
300630) in 2 generations, Tarpey et al. (2006) found in affected members
a 4-bp deletion in the AP1S2 gene, preceding the splice acceptor site of
exon 3 that resulted in the replacement of the invariant A at position
-2 with a T (180-5del4). The mutation was expected to cause skipping of
exon 3, which would then introduce a translational frameshift, resulting
in the inclusion of 3 novel amino acids, with termination at codon 64.

.0004
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED 59
AP1S2, IVS3DS, G-A, +5

In affected members of a French family with MRX59 (300630), Saillour et
al. (2007) identified a G-to-A transition in intron 3 of the AP1S2 gene
(IVS3AS+5G-A), resulting in the skipping of exon 3 and premature
truncation of the protein.

.0005
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED 59
AP1S2, GLN66TER

In affected members of a family with X-linked mental retardation
(300630) originally reported by Fried (1972), Saillour et al. (2007)
identified a 226G-T transversion in exon 3 of the AP1S2 gene, resulting
in a gln66-to-ter (Q66X) substitution. The mutation was not identified
in more than 160 normal X chromosomes.

REFERENCE 1. Carpenter, N. J.; Brown, W. T.; Qu, Y.; Keenan, K. L.: Regional
localization of a nonspecific X-linked mental retardation gene (MRX59)
to Xp21.2-p22.2. Am. J. Med. Genet. 85: 266-270, 1999.

2. Fried, K.: X-linked mental retardation and/or hydrocephalus. Clin.
Genet. 3: 258-263, 1972.

3. Saillour, Y.; Zanni, G.; Des Portes, V.; Heron, D.; Guibaud, L.;
Iba-Zizen, M. T.; Pedespan, J. L.; Poirier, K.; Castelnau, L.; Julien,
C.; Franconnet, C.; Bonthron, D.; Porteous, M. E.; Chelly, J.; Bienvenu,
T.: Mutations in the AP1S2 gene encoding the sigma 2 subunit of the
adaptor protein 1 complex are associated with syndromic X-linked mental
retardation with hydrocephalus and calcifications in basal ganglia.
(Letter) J. Med. Genet. 44: 739-744, 2007.

4. Takatsu, H.; Sakurai, M.; Shin, H.-W.; Murakami, K.; Nakayama,
K.: Identification and characterization of novel clathrin adaptor-related
proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 24693-24700, 1998.

5. Tarpey, P. S.; Smith, R.; Pleasance, E.; Whibley, A.; Edkins, S.;
Hardy, C.; O'Meara, S.; Latimer, C.; Dicks, E.; Menzies, A.; Stephens,
P.; Blow, M.; and 67 others: A systematic, large-scale resequencing
screen of X-chromosome coding exons in mental retardation. Nature
Genet. 41: 535-543, 2009.

6. Tarpey, P. S.; Stevens, C.; Teague, J.; Edkins, S.; O'Meara, S.;
Avis, T.; Barthorpe, S.; Buck, G.; Butler, A.; Cole, J.; Dicks, E.;
Gray, K.; and 37 others: Mutations in the gene encoding the sigma
2 subunit of the adaptor protein 1 complex, AP1S2, cause X-linked
mental retardation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 79: 1119-1124, 2006.

7. Turner, G.; Gedeon, A.; Kerr, B.; Bennett, R.; Mulley, J.; Partington,
M.: Syndromic form of X-linked mental retardation with marked hypotonia
in early life, severe mental handicap, and difficult adult behavior
maps to Xp22. Am. J. Med. Genet. 117A: 245-250, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/01/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/28/2007

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/7/2006

EDITED terry: 10/01/2009
wwang: 1/17/2008
ckniffin: 12/28/2007
alopez: 12/8/2006

605690	TITLE *605690 GLIOMA TUMOR SUPPRESSOR CANDIDATE REGION GENE 1; GLTSCR1
DESCRIPTION Smith et al. (2000) generated a complete transcript map of a 150-kb
interval of chromosome 19q13.3 in which allelic loss is a frequent event
in human diffuse gliomas. Using cDNA selection with whole brain and
placenta poly(A+) RNAs, exon trapping, and genomic sequencing, they
identified 2 novel transcripts, designated GLTSCR1 and GLTSCR2 (605691).
The full-length coding region of GLTSCR1 was defined by skeletal muscle
cDNA library screening and RT-PCR confirmation of exons predicted from
genomic sequence. Northern blot analysis detected expression of a 6.5-kb
GLTSCR1 transcript at moderate levels in heart, brain, placenta,
skeletal muscle, and pancreas, and at lower levels in lung, liver, and
kidney. Mutation analysis of the transcripts in this region in diffuse
gliomas with 19q deletions revealed no tumor-specific mutations.

REFERENCE 1. Smith, J. S.; Tachibana, I.; Pohl, U.; Lee, H. K.; Thanarajasingam,
U.; Portier, B. P.; Ueki, K.; Ramaswamy, S.; Billings, S. J.; Mohrenweiser,
H. W.; Louis, D. N.; Jenkins, R. B.: A transcript map of the chromosome
19q-arm glioma tumor suppressor region. Genomics 64: 44-50, 2000.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 2/26/2001

EDITED mcapotos: 02/28/2001
mcapotos: 2/28/2001
carol: 2/26/2001

614062	TITLE *614062 CDC42-BINDING PROTEIN KINASE, BETA; CDC42BPB
;;CDC42BP-BETA;;
MYOTONIC DYSTROPHY KINASE-RELATED CDC42-BINDING KINASE, BETA; MRCKB;;
MRCK-BETA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using CDC42 (116952) as bait in an expression screen of a human brain
cDNA library, Leung et al. (1998) obtained a partial cDNA for CDC42BPB,
which they designated MRCK-beta. They obtained full-length cDNAs
encoding Mrck-beta and a related protein, Mrck-alpha (CDC42BPA; 603412),
from a rat cDNA library. The deduced rat Mrck-alpha and Mrck-beta
proteins contain 1,732 and 1,702 amino acids, respectively. Both have an
N-terminal kinase domain, followed by a central coiled-coil region, a
cysteine-rich region, a pleckstrin (PLEK; 173570) homology (PH) domain,
and a C-terminal p21 GTPase (see HRAS; 190020)-binding domain. Northern
blot analysis detected Mrck-beta expression in all rat tissues examined,
with highest expression in kidney and lung. Expression of MRCK-alpha and
MRCK-beta was also detected in HeLa cells.

By RT-PCR walking, Moncrieff et al. (1999) cloned full-length human
CDC42BPB from human fetal brain mRNA. The deduced protein contains 1,711
amino acids. It shares 90% amino acid identity and conservation of
domain structure with rat Cdc42bpb. Northern blot analysis detected a
major 7-kb transcript in all human tissues examined, with highest
expression in heart, brain, and placenta.

GENE FUNCTION

Ng et al. (2004) showed that the isolated kinase inhibitory motif of
MRCK-gamma (CDC42BPG; 613991) bound the kinase domains of MRCK-alpha and
MRCK-beta and inhibited their catalytic activities.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Huo et al. (2011) found that MRCK-beta
bound to the C-terminal ZU5 domain of ZO1 (TJP1; 601009). The
interaction likely caused a conformational change in the ZU5 domain.
Cotransfection of MRCK-beta and ZO1 led to prominent colocalization of
the 2 proteins at the leading edge of COS-7 cells. Mutation analysis
showed that the ZU5 domain of ZO1 was required for targeting of
MRCK-beta to the leading edge. Formation of the ZO1-MRCK-beta complex
required priming of MRCK-beta by CDC42. Disruption of the ZO1/MRCK-beta
complex inhibited MRCK-beta-mediated cell migration.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis and FISH, Moncrieff et al. (1999) mapped
the CDC42BPB gene to chromosome 14q32.3.

REFERENCE 1. Huo, L.; Wen, W.; Wang, R.; Kam, C.; Xia, J.; Feng, W.; Zhang,
M.: Cdc42-dependent formation of the ZO-1/MRCK-beta complex at the
leading edge controls cell migration. EMBO J. 30: 665-678, 2011.

2. Leung, T.; Chen, X.-Q.; Tan, I.; Manser, E.; Lim, L.: Myotonic
dystrophy kinase-related Cdc42-binding kinase acts as a Cdc42 effector
in promoting cytoskeletal reorganization. Molec. Cell. Biol. 18:
130-140, 1998.

3. Moncrieff, C. L.; Bailey, M. E. S.; Morrison, N.; Johnson, K. J.
: Cloning and chromosomal localization of human Cdc42-binding protein
kinase-beta. Genomics 57: 297-300, 1999.

4. Ng, Y.; Tan, I.; Lim, L.; Leung, T.: Expression of the human myotonic
dystrophy kinase-related Cdc42-binding kinase gamma is regulated by
promoter DNA methylation and Sp1 binding. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 34156-34164,
2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/24/2011

EDITED mgross: 06/24/2011
mgross: 6/24/2011

601166	TITLE *601166 G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 15; GPR15
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using primers based on conserved regions of the opioid-related receptors
(e.g., 165196), Heiber et al. (1996) isolated a PCR product that they
then used to locate the full-length coding region of a novel human
receptor gene, GPR15. GPR15 shares sequence identity with the
angiotensin II receptors type 1 (106165) and type 2 (300034), the
interleukin 8 b receptor (146928), and the orphan receptors GPR1
(600239) and angiotensin receptor-like 1 (600052).

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Heiber et al. (1996) mapped GPR15
to 3q11.2-q13.1.

GENE FUNCTION

Kim et al. (2013) showed that GPR15, an orphan heterotrimeric guanine
nucleotide-binding protein (G protein)-coupled receptor, controlled the
specific homing of T cells, particularly FOXP3 (300292)-positive
regulatory cells (T-regs), to the large intestine lamina propria. GRP15
expression was modulated by gut microbiota and transforming growth
factor beta-1 (TGFB1; 190180), but not by retinoic acid. GPR15-deficient
mice were prone to develop more severe large intestine inflammation,
which was rescued by the transfer of GPR15-sufficient T-regs. Kim et al.
(2013) concluded that their findings described a T-cell homing receptor
for the large intestine lamina propria and indicated that GPR15 plays a
role in mucosal immune tolerance largely by regulating the influx of
T-regs.

REFERENCE 1. Heiber, M.; Marchese, A.; Nguyen, T.; Heng, H. H. Q.; George, S.
R.; O'Dowd, B. F.: A novel human gene encoding a G-protein-coupled
receptor (GPR15) is located on chromosome 3. Genomics 32: 462-465,
1996.

2. Kim, S. V.; Xiang, W. V.; Kwak, C.; Yang, Y.; Lin, X. W.; Ota,
M.; Sarpel, U.; Rifkin, D. B.; Xu, R.; Littman, D. R.: GPR15-mediated
homing controls immune homeostasis in the large intestine mucosa. Science 340:
1456-1459, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/29/2013

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/28/1996

EDITED alopez: 10/29/2013
mark: 8/30/1996
mark: 3/28/1996

608273	TITLE *608273 INTERLEUKIN 27; IL27
;;INTERLEUKIN 27, 28-KD SUBUNIT;;
IL27p28;;
INTERLEUKIN 30; IL30
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IL30, a member of the long-chain 4-helix bundle cytokine family, and
EBI3 (605816), form the IL27 heterodimer, which is expressed by
antigen-presenting cells. IL27 triggers expansion of antigen-specific
naive CD4 (186940)-positive T cells and promotes polarization towards a
Th1 phenotype with expression of gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570). IL27
acts in synergy with IL12 (see IL12B; 161561) and binds to WSX1 (IL27RA;
605350) (Pflanz et al., 2002).

CLONING

By searching sequence databases for IL6 (147620)-related proteins,
Pflanz et al. (2002) identified IL30, which they termed p28 because of
its apparent molecular mass as determined by SDS-PAGE. The predicted
243-amino acid protein, which is 73% identical to the mouse protein,
contains an N-terminal signal peptide, several O-glycosylation sites,
and a stretch of 13 glutamate residues between helices C and D.

GENE FUNCTION

Pflanz et al. (2002) showed that coexpression of IL30 with EBI3, but not
with other IL6 family members, permitted the release of IL30 from an
intracellular location and its secretion. Real-time quantitative PCR and
ELISA analysis detected coexpression of EBI3 and IL30 in
lipopolysaccharide-activated monocytes and dendritic cells; only EBI3
was detected in placenta. Naive, but not memory, T cells proliferated in
response to the heterodimer formed by IL30 and EBI3, which Pflanz et al.
(2002) termed IL27, and did so synergistically in response to IL27 and
IL12. Secretion of IFNG by T cells and natural killer cells required the
presence of both IL27 and IL12; IL27 did not promote the production of
Th2 cytokines. Screening of cells expressing members of the IL6/IL12
family of signaling receptors and coimmunoprecipitation experiments
demonstrated that only WSX1 bound IL27. Kinetic analysis showed that
IL30 was transiently expressed prior to IL12A (161560) and IL12B. EBI3
expression was also rapidly upregulated, but it persisted somewhat
longer than that of IL30. Pflanz et al. (2002) proposed that IL27, IL12,
and IL23 (605580) act sequentially, with some overlap, on naive and
memory Th1 cells in response to pathogen challenge.

Takeda et al. (2003) showed that STAT1 (600555) interacted with a
conserved cytoplasmic domain tyrosine residue of WSX1 after the residue
was phosphorylated. IL27 stimulation induced phosphorylation of STAT1
and expression of TBET (TBX21; 604895) and IL12RB2 (601642) in wildtype,
but not WSX1-deficient, naive CD4-positive T cells. Together with IL12,
IL27 augmented IFNG secretion in wildtype, but not WSX1-deficient, naive
CD4-positive T cells. Takeda et al. (2003) concluded that the IL27-WSX1
signaling system acts before the IL12R system in STAT1-mediated TBET
induction during the initiation of Th1 differentiation.

Pflanz et al. (2004) found that transfection of WSX1 into a cell line
expressing gp130 (600694) but only low levels of WSX1 resulted in
IL27-dependent phosphorylation of STAT1 and STAT3 (102582). In addition,
they showed that anti-gp130 blocked IL27-mediated cellular effects.
Quantitative PCR analysis indicated that, in addition to naive
CD4-positive T cells, numerous cell types expressed both gp130 and WSX1,
including mast cells. IL27 stimulation of mast cells resulted in
upregulation of proinflammatory cytokine expression. Pflanz et al.
(2004) concluded that IL27 not only contributes to the development of an
adaptive immune response through its action on CD4-positive T cells, but
also directly acts on cells of the innate immune system.

Batten et al. (2006) found that Il27ra -/- mice were hypersusceptible to
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), with significantly
increased demyelination and inflammation, and had more inflammatory Il17
(IL17A; 603149)-producing T (Th17) cells in draining lymph nodes
compared with wildtype mice. Flow cytometric analysis showed that
increased Il17 production also occurred in the central nervous system of
mutant mice. In vitro, Il27 was more efficient than Ifng in suppressing
Th17 cell differentiation, and it could overcome the Th17-promoting
effects of Il6. The suppressive activity of Il27 was dependent on Stat1
activation. EAE was ameliorated in Il27ra -/- mice treated with
anti-Il17, but it was more severe in mice lacking both Il27ra and Ifngr
(107470). Batten et al. (2006) concluded that IL27 inhibits Th17
differentiation in a STAT1-dependent, IFNG-independent manner, and that
IL27 functions by antagonizing IL6, which is required for Th17 cell
differentiation and EAE pathogenesis.

Using RT-PCR, Stumhofer et al. (2006) found that mice with toxoplasmic
encephalitis showed a dramatic increase in expression of Il27 and a much
smaller increase in expression of Ebi3. T. gondii-infected mice lacking
Il27ra were protected from acute lethality by Ctla4 (123890)-Ig
treatment, but they succumbed during the chronic phase of infection due
to inflammation and necrosis associated with pathogenic Cd4-positive,
Il17-expressing T cells infiltrating the brain. Treatment of T cells
with anti-Il6 or Il27 inhibited Il17 production. Il27-mediated
inhibition of Il17 production was dependent on Stat1 and independent of
inhibition of Il6 signaling mediated by Socs3 (604176). Stumhofer et al.
(2006) proposed that IL27 may be a useful target in treating
inflammatory diseases mediated by Th17 cells.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Pflanz et al. (2002) mapped the IL30 gene
to chromosome 16p11.

REFERENCE 1. Batten, M.; Li, J.; Yi, S.; Kljavin, N. M.; Danilenko, D. M.; Lucas,
S.; Lee, J.; de Sauvage, F. J.; Ghilardi, N.: Interleukin 27 limits
autoimmune encephalomyelitis by suppressing the development of interleukin
17-producing T cells. Nature Immun. 7: 929-936, 2006.

2. Pflanz, S.; Hibbert, L.; Mattson, J.; Rosales, R.; Vaisberg, E.;
Bazan, J. F.; Phillips, J. H.; McClanahan, T. K.; de Waal Malefyt,
R.; Kastelein, R. A.: WSX-1 and glycoprotein 130 constitute a signal-transducing
receptor for IL-27. J. Immun. 172: 2225-2231, 2004.

3. Pflanz, S.; Timans, J. C.; Cheung, J.; Rosales, R.; Kanzler, H.;
Gilbert, J.; Hibbert, L.; Churakova, T.; Travis, M.; Vaisberg, E.;
Blumenschein, W. M.; Mattson, J. D.; and 9 others: IL-27, a heterodimeric
cytokine composed of EBI3 and p28 protein, induces proliferation of
naive CD4+ T cells. Immunity 16: 779-790, 2002.

4. Stumhofer, J. S.; Laurence, A.; Wilson, E. H.; Huang, E.; Tato,
C. M.; Johnson, L. M.; Villarino, A. V.; Huang, Q.; Yoshimura, A.;
Sehy, D.; Saris, C. J. M.; O'Shea, J. J.; Hennighausen, L.; Ernst,
M.; Hunter, C. A.: Interleukin 27 negatively regulates the development
of interleukin 17-producing T helper cells during chronic inflammation
of the central nervous system. Nature Immun. 7: 937-945, 2006.

5. Takeda, A.; Hamano, S.; Yamanaka, A.; Hanada, T.; Ishibashi, T.;
Mak, T. W.; Yoshimura, A.; Yoshida, H.: Cutting edge: role of IL-27/WSX-1
signaling for induction of T-bet through activation of STAT1 during
initial Th1 commitment. J. Immun. 170: 4886-4890, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/20/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/6/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/11/2004

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/20/2003

EDITED mgross: 12/20/2006
mgross: 12/6/2006
mgross: 8/11/2004
mgross: 11/20/2003

602441	TITLE *602441 CYTOKINE-INDUCIBLE SH2-CONTAINING PROTEIN; CISH
;;CIS
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CIS belongs to the suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) family (see
SOCS1; 603597) and is an important negative regulator for inflammatory
signaling (Hu et al., 2009).

CLONING

As part of the search for immediate-early cytokine-responsive genes,
Yoshimura et al. (1995) cloned murine Cish, which was shown to have a
growth inhibitory function. Cis, the protein product of Cish, has an Src
homology 2 (SH2) domain in the middle of its sole structural motif.

Uchida et al. (1997) isolated a human CISH cDNA. The CISH protein
consists of 258 amino acids. Northern blot analysis showed expression of
CISH as a 2-kb transcript in various epithelial tissues, including lung
and kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

Hu et al. (2009) noted that microRNAs (miRNAs) have been implicated in
the fine tuning of the Toll-like receptor (TLR; see 603030)-mediated
inflammatory response. Using Northern and Western blot analyses and PCR
with human cholangiocytes, which express multiple TLRs, Hu et al. (2009)
showed that the miRNAs MIR98 (300810) and LET7 (see MIRNLET7A1; 605386)
regulated CIS protein expression via translational suppression. CIS
expression was upregulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or
Cryptosporidium parvum exposure, and this upregulation involved
downregulation of MIR98 and LET7, which relieved MIR98- and
LET7-mediated translational repression of CIS. Gain- and
loss-of-function studies showed that CIS accelerated degradation of IKBA
(NFKBIA; 164008) and enhanced NFKB (see 164011) activation in
cholangiocytes in response to LPS stimulation or C. parvum exposure. Hu
et al. (2009) proposed that LET7 and MIR98 allow expression of CIS in
response to microbial challenge.

GENE STRUCTURE

Uchida et al. (1997) determined that the CISH gene contains 2 introns,
about 3 kb and 0.4 kb in size, and has 3 repeats of the pentameric mRNA
destabilization signal, ATTTA, in its 3-prime UTR.

MAPPING

Uchida et al. (1997) mapped the human CISH gene to chromosome 3p21.3 by
FISH. The mouse gene is tightly linked to the Gnai2 gene (139360) on
chromosome 9, a region syntenic to human chromosome 3p21.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Khor et al. (2010) used a case-control design to test for an association
between CISH polymorphisms and susceptibility to major infectious
diseases, including bacteremia, tuberculosis (607948), and severe
malaria (611162), in blood samples from 8,402 persons from Gambia, Hong
Kong, Kenya, Malawi, and Vietnam. The others had previously tested 20
other immune-related genes in 1 or more of these sample collections.
Khor et al. (2010) observed associations between variant alleles of
multiple CISH polymorphisms and increased susceptibility to each
infectious disease in each of the study populations. When all 5 SNPs, at
positions -639, -292 (dbSNP rs414171; 602441.0001), -163 (dbSNP
rs6768330), +1320 (dbSNP rs2239751), and +3415 (dbSNP rs622502), within
the CISH-associated locus were considered together in a multiple-SNP
score, Khor et al. (2010) found an association between CISH genetic
variants and susceptibility to bacteremia, malaria, and tuberculosis (P
= 3.8 x 10(-11) for all comparisons), and with -292 accounting for most
of the association signal (P = 4.58 x 10(-7)). Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) obtained from adult subjects carrying the -292
variant, as compared with wildtype cells, showed a muted response to the
stimulation of interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680) production, i.e., 25 to 40%
less CISH expression. Khor et al. (2010) found that the overall risk of
one of these infectious diseases was increased by at least 18% among
persons carrying the variant CISH alleles.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
TUBERCULOSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
MALARIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
BACTEREMIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2, INCLUDED
CISH, -292, A-T (dbSNP rs414171)

In a case-control study testing for association between CISH
polymorphisms and susceptibility to major infectious diseases involving
8,402 individuals from Gambia, Hong Kong, Keyna, Malawi, and Vietnam,
Khor et al. (2010) found that dbSNP rs414171 at the -292 position
relative to the CISH gene results in increased susceptibility to
tuberculosis (607948), malaria (611162), and invasive bacterial disease
(BACTS2; 614383) (p = 4.58 x -10(-7)). In addition, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells obtained from adult subjects carrying the -292
variant, as compared with wildtype cells, showed a muted response to the
stimulation of interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680), i.e., 25 to 40% less CISH
expression.

REFERENCE 1. Hu, G.; Zhou, R.; Liu, J.; Gong, A.-Y.; Eischeid, A. N.; Dittman,
J. W.; Chen, X.-M.: MicroRNA-98 and let-7 confer cholangiocyte expression
of cytokine-inducible Src homology 2-containing protein in response
to microbial challenge. J. Immun. 183: 1617-1624, 2009.

2. Khor, C. C.; Vannberg, F. O.; Chapman, S. J.; Guo, H.; Wong, S.
H.; Walley, A. J.; Vukcevic, D.; Rautanen, A.; Mills, T. C.; Chang,
K.-C.; Kam, K.-M.; Crampin, A. C.; and 23 others: CISH and susceptibility
to infectious diseases. New Eng. J. Med. 362: 2092-2101, 2010.

3. Uchida, K.; Yoshimura, A.; Inazawa, J.; Yanagisawa, K.; Osada,
H.; Masuda, A.; Saito, T.; Takahashi, T.; Miyajima, A.; Takahashi,
T.: Molecular cloning of CISH, chromosome assignment to 3p21.3, and
analysis of expression in fetal and adult tissues. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 78: 209-212, 1997.

4. Yoshimura, A.; Ohkubo, T.; Kiguchi, T.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert,
D. J.; Copeland, N. G.; Hara, T.; Miyajima, A.: A novel cytokine-inducible
gene CIS, encodes an SH2-containing protein that binds to tyrosine-phosphorylated
interleukin 3 and erythropoietin receptors. EMBO J. 14: 2816-2826,
1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/10/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 12/11/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/10/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/13/1998

EDITED mgross: 12/08/2011
alopez: 9/8/2010
alopez: 6/10/2010
terry: 6/10/2010
mgross: 12/11/2009
terry: 12/10/2009
mcapotos: 12/9/1999
psherman: 3/17/1998
psherman: 3/13/1998

601832	TITLE *601832 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L29; RPL29
;;HP/HS-INTERACTING PROTEIN; HIP;;
HEPARIN/HEPARAN SULFATE-BINDING PROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Liu et al. (1996) used RT-PCR to identify transcripts encoding cell
surface heparin/heparan sulfate- (HP/HS-) binding peptides. One clone
isolated in this manner had a predicted peptide sequence with features
of an HP/HS-binding motif; the authors termed this transcript HIP, for
'HP/HS interacting protein.' Liu et al. (1996) cloned the corresponding
cDNA from a HeLa cell cDNA library and found that it encodes a 159-amino
acid polypeptide 80% similar to the rodent ribosomal protein L29.
Transfection of HIP cDNA demonstrated cell surface expression, and the
sequence encodes neither a membrane-spanning region nor a glycosylation
site. Northern blot analysis revealed that HIP is expressed as a 1.3-kb
message in a variety of human cell lines and tissues.

Mammalian ribosome proteins are members of multigene families that are
composed predominantly of multiple processed pseudogenes and 1
functional-containing gene, although some, such as human ribosomal
protein L37a, are present as single-copy genes. During a large-scale
partial sequencing of human heart cDNA clones, Law et al. (1996) found a
novel clone that was very similar to the rat ribosomal protein L29 in
both DNA and amino acid sequences. The cDNA encodes a protein that shows
80.4% homology to protein L29 from the large ribosomal subunit of rat.
The putative protein has a large excess of basic residues over acidic
residues, with a unique lysine-rich tandem repeat structure that
suggested a binding function. Liu et al. (1996) showed that RPL29 had
the same nucleotide sequence as does cell surface heparin/heparan
sulfate-binding protein, also designated HB/HS interacting protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Rohde et al. (1996) demonstrated direct binding between heparin and HIP.
They showed that HIP is expressed on the surfaces of intact RL95 uterine
epithelial cells and that RL95 cell suspensions form aggregates when
incubated with antibodies directed against HIP. Using
immunofluorescence, Rohde et al. (1996) demonstrated that HIP is
expressed in both luminal and glandular epithelium of normal human
endometrium.

MAPPING

Garcia-Barcelo et al. (1997) used a PCR-based strategy to distinguish
the functional intron-containing gene RPL29 from multiple pseudogenes.
By somatic cell hybrid analysis, radiation hybrid mapping, and
fluorescence in situ hybridization, they localized RPL29 to the
telomeric region of 3q, where it was the most distal marker identified
to that time. The gene is close to RPL35A (180468), which maps to
3q29-qter.

Kirn-Safran et al. (2000) mapped the single-copy mouse Rpl29 gene to
distal chromosome 9. Promoter analysis indicated the presence of binding
motifs for ubiquitously expressed transcription factors and for nuclear
factor kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011), as well as the lack of a TATA box.

REFERENCE 1. Garcia-Barcelo, M.; Law, P. T. W.; Tsui, S. K. W.; Fung, K. P.;
Lee, C. Y.; Waye, M. M. Y.: Mapping of the human ribosomal large
subunit protein gene RPL29 to human chromosome 3q29-qter. Genomics 46:
148-151, 1997.

2. Kirn-Safran, C. B.; Dayal, S.; Martin-DeLeon, P. A.; Carson, D.
D.: Cloning, expression, and chromosome mapping of the murine Hip/Rpl29
gene. Genomics 68: 210-219, 2000.

3. Law, P. T. W.; Tsui, S. K. W.; Lam, W. Y.; Luk, S. C. W.; Hwaang,
D. M.; Liew, C. C.; Lee, C. Y.; Fung, K. P.; Waye, M. M. Y.: A novel
cDNA encoding a human homologue of ribosomal protein L29. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1305: 105-108, 1996.

4. Liu, S.; Smith, S. E.; Julian, J.; Rohde, L. H.; Karin, N. J.;
Carson, D. D.: cDNA cloning and expression of HIP, a novel cell surface
heparan sulfate/heparin-binding protein of human uterine epithelial
cells and cell lines. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 11817-11823, 1996.

5. Rohde, L. H.; Julian, J.; Babaknia, A.; Carson, D. D.: Cell surface
expression of HIP, a novel heparin/heparan sulfate-binding protein,
of human uterine epithelial cells and cell lines. J. Biol. Chem. 271:
11824-11830, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/31/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/19/1997

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 3/26/1997

EDITED terry: 07/26/2006
alopez: 11/21/2001
mgross: 10/31/2000
carol: 2/11/2000
alopez: 10/23/1998
dholmes: 12/31/1997
mark: 12/22/1997
terry: 12/19/1997
alopez: 10/2/1997
jenny: 9/5/1997
alopez: 6/27/1997
alopez: 6/9/1997

608125	TITLE *608125 XYLOSYLTRANSFERASE 2; XYLT2
;;XT2;;
UDP-D-XYLOSE:PROTEOGLYCAN CORE PROTEIN BETA-D-XYLOSYLTRANSFERASE 2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

For background information on xylosyltransferases, see XYLT1 (608124).

CLONING

Using degenerate primers based on the sequences of XT1 tryptic peptides,
Gotting et al. (2000) cloned XT2 by PCR and RACE of a placenta cDNA
library. The deduced 865-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular
mass of about 97 kD. XT2 has a potential type II transmembrane region, a
proline-rich sequence, and 3 potential N-glycosylation sites. XT2 shares
about 55% amino acid identity with XT1, including stretches that share
more than 80% identity. Alignment of the XT1 and XT2 proteins with Xt1
and Xt2 from rat liver revealed highly conserved sequences in the
central and C-terminal regions of the proteins. RT-PCR detected XT2
expression in all tissues examined, with greatest abundance in kidney
and pancreas.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gotting et al. (2000) determined that the XYLT2 gene contains 11 exons
and spans 15 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Gotting et al. (2000) mapped the XYLT2
gene to chromosome 17q21.3-q22.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

On the basis of the altered proteoglycan metabolism in pseudoxanthoma
elasticum (PXE; 264800), which suggested that enzymes from this pathway
function as a genetic cofactor in the severity of the disorder, Schon et
al. (2006) proposed the XYLT genes XYLT1 (608124) and XYLT2 as candidate
genes for this cofactor role. They screened all exons of these 2 genes
in 65 German PXE patients using denaturing high performance liquid
chromatography and analyzed the influence of variations on clinical
characteristics. They identified 22 variations in the XYLT genes. The
missense mutation ala115 to ser in XYLT1 (608124.0001) was associated
with higher serum XT activity (p = 0.005). The amino acid substitution
thr801 to arg in the XYLT2 gene (608125.0001) occurred with
significantly higher frequency in patients under 30 years of age at
diagnosis; all PXE patients with this variation suffered from skin
lesions compared to only 75% of the wildtype patients. The other
variants in the XYLT2 gene were found to be more frequent in patients
with higher organ involvement.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM, MODIFIER OF SEVERITY OF
XYLT2, THR801ARG

Schon et al. (2006) found that the amino acid substitution thr801 to arg
(T801R) in XYLT2 occurred with significantly higher frequency in
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE; 264800) patients under 30 years of age at
diagnosis (43% vs 26%; p = 0.04); all PXE patients with this variation
suffered from skin lesions compared to only 75% of the wildtype patients
(p = 0.002). This variant was also more frequent in patients with organ
involvement (p = 0.02). The amino acid substitution arose from a 2402C-G
transversion in XYLT2 exon 11.

REFERENCE 1. Gotting, C.; Kuhn, J.; Zahn, R.; Brinkmann, T.; Kleesiek, K.:
Molecular cloning and expression of human UDP-D-xylose:proteoglycan
core protein beta-D-xylosyltransferase and its first isoform XT-II. J.
Molec. Biol. 304: 517-528, 2000.

2. Schon, S.; Schulz, V.; Prante, C.; Hendig, D.; Szliska, C.; Kuhn,
J.; Kleesiek, K.; Gotting, C.: Polymorphisms in the xylosyltransferase
genes cause higher serum XT-1 activity in patients with pseudoxanthoma
elasticum (PXE) and are involved in a severe disease course. J. Med.
Genet. 43: 745-749, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/9/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/26/2003

EDITED carol: 02/29/2012
joanna: 7/27/2010
alopez: 1/10/2007
terry: 1/9/2007
mgross: 9/26/2003

602178	TITLE *602178 CHONDROADHERIN; CHAD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chondroadherin (CHAD) was initially described by Larsson et al. (1991)
as a 36-kD matrix protein isolated from bovine cartilage. It was shown
to mediate chondrocyte-matrix interactions. Analysis of cDNA generated
from a bovine chondrocyte mRNA demonstrated that chondroadherin belongs
to the family of leucine-rich repeat (LRR) proteins. Of the LRR
proteins, chondroadherin is most closely related to the proteoglycans
decorin (125255), biglycan (301870), fibromodulin (600245), and lumican
(600616), and the matrix protein PRELP (601914). Each of these molecules
is present in the extracellular matrix of cartilage, each possesses 10
adjacent LRR regions flanked by disulfide-bonded domains, and each
possesses consensus motifs within the LRR regions for N-linked
glycosylation.

Grover et al. (1997) cloned a cDNA of the human CHAD gene using
PCR-based techniques. The gene encodes a protein of 359 amino acids, of
which the first 21 amino acids represent a putative signal peptide
sequence. It possesses 11 leucine-rich repeats flanked by cysteine-rich
regions. The cDNA has a 5-prime untranslated region of 149 bp, a coding
region of 1,080 bp including the stop codon, and a 3-prime untranslated
region of 561 bp terminating in a poly(A) tail. The cDNA hybridized with
a single messenger RNA of 1.9 kb, which is present in chondrocytes at
all ages.

GENE STRUCTURE

Grover et al. (1997) determined that the CHAD gene contains 3 exons.

MAPPING

Using a cosmid clone spanning the CHAD gene, Grover et al. (1997)
assigned the gene to 17q21.33 by PCR analysis of human/hamster somatic
cell hybrids and by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Grover, J.; Chen, X.-N.; Korenberg, J. R.; Roughley, P. J.: The
structure and chromosome location of the human chondroadherin gene
(CHAD). Genomics 45: 379-385, 1997.

2. Larsson, T.; Sommarin, Y.; Paulsson, M.; Antonsson, P.; Hedbom,
E.; Wendel, M.; Heinegard, D.: Cartilage matrix proteins: a basic
36-kDa protein with a restricted distribution to cartilage and bone. J.
Biol. Chem. 266: 20428-20433, 1991.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/12/1997

EDITED alopez: 05/01/2007
mark: 12/14/1997
mark: 12/12/1997

600284	TITLE *600284 ELONGATION FACTOR RNA POLYMERASE II; ELL
;;ELEVEN NINETEEN LYSINE-RICH LEUKEMIA GENE
DESCRIPTION Thirman et al. (1994) cloned the gene that fuses to MLL (159555) in
patients with acute myeloid leukemia associated with the translocation
t(11;19)(q23;p13.1). This translocation is distinct from another type of
11;19 translocation with a 19p13.3 breakpoint that results in the fusion
of MLL to the ENL gene (159556). By PCR screening of a cDNA library
prepared from a patient's leukemia cells with this translocation,
Thirman et al. (1994) obtained a fusion transcript containing exon 7 of
MLL and sequence of an unknown gene. The sequence of this gene was
amplified and used as a probe to screen a fetal brain cDNA library. On
Northern blot analysis, this cDNA detected a 4.4-kb transcript that was
abundant in peripheral blood leukocytes, skeletal muscle, placenta, and
testis and expressed at lower levels in spleen, thymus, heart, brain,
lung, kidney, liver, and ovary. In addition, a 2.8-kb transcript was
present in peripheral blood, testis, and placenta. On zoo blots, this
gene was shown to be evolutionarily conserved in 10 mammalian species,
as well as in chicken, frog, and fish. They named the gene ELL (for
'eleven-nineteen lysine-rich leukemia' gene). A highly basic,
lysine-rich motif of the predicted ELL protein was homologous to similar
regions of several proteins, including the DNA-binding domain of
poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (173870).

ELL was shown by Shilatifard et al. (1996) to encode an elongation
factor that can increase the catalytic rate of RNA polymerase II
transcription by suppressing transient pausing by the polymerase at
multiple sites along the DNA. The authors noted that ELL is the second
elongation factor to be implicated in oncogenesis (elongin (see 600786),
which is a transcription factor regulated by the product of the von
Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene (608537), was the first), and
they stated that these findings provide further support for a close
connection between the regulation of transcription and cell growth.

In studies of the transforming properties of the MLL-ELL fusion gene,
Lavau et al. (2000) retrovirally transduced primary murine hematopoietic
progenitors and assessed their growth properties both in vitro and in
vivo. MLL-ELL increased the proliferation of myeloid colony-forming
cells in methylcellulose cultures upon serial replating, whereas
overexpression of ELL alone had no effect. Reconstitution of lethally
irradiated congenic mice with bone marrow progenitors transduced with
MLL-ELL resulted in the development of monoclonal or pauciclonal acute
myeloid leukemias within 100 to 200 days. The leukemic cells were
readily transplantable to secondary recipients and could be established
as immortalized cell lines in liquid cultures.

REFERENCE 1. Lavau, C.; Luo, R. T.; Du, C.; Thirman, M. J.: Retrovirus-mediated
gene transfer of MLL-ELL transforms primary myeloid progenitors and
causes acute myeloid leukemias in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97:
10984-10989, 2000.

2. Shilatifard, A.; Lane, W. S.; Jackson, K. W.; Conaway, R. C.; Conaway,
J. W.: An RNA polymerase II elongation factor encoded by the human
ELL gene. Science 271: 1873-1876, 1996.

3. Thirman, M. J.; Levitan, D. A.; Kobayashi, H.; Simon, M. C.; Rowley,
J. D.: Cloning of ELL, a gene that fuses to MLL in a t(11;19)(q23;p13.1)
in acute myeloid leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 12110-12114,
1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/26/2000
Moyra Smith - updated: 3/29/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/5/1995

EDITED ckniffin: 03/23/2004
carol: 12/2/2003
mcapotos: 11/8/2000
mcapotos: 11/1/2000
terry: 10/26/2000
joanna: 6/20/1997
mark: 4/21/1997
mark: 4/11/1996
terry: 4/9/1996
mark: 3/29/1996
mimadm: 9/23/1995
carol: 1/5/1995

600187	TITLE *600187 EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION INITIATION FACTOR 5A; EIF5A
;;EIF5A1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The eukaryotic initiation factor 5A is an 18-kD protein composed of 154
amino acids. It contains a unique amino acid residue, hypusine, that is
formed posttranslationally via the transfer and hydroxylation of the
butylamino-group from the polyamine spermidine to a lys50 within the
EIF5A protein. Koettnitz et al. (1994) isolated and characterized the
human EIF5A pseudogene. Subsequently, Koettnitz et al. (1995) identified
a genomic clone encoding a functional EIF5A. The authors showed that
this sequence could successfully complement yeast carrying the HYP2
mutation (the homolog of EIF5A), whereas the pseudogenes could not.

GENE STRUCTURE

Koettnitz et al. (1995) found that the human EIF5A gene contains at
least 4 exons and spans at least 4.8 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Saini et al. (2009) used molecular genetic and biochemical studies to
show that EIF5A promotes translation elongation. Depletion or
inactivation of EIF5A in the yeast S. cerevisiae resulted in the
accumulation of polysomes and an increase in ribosomal transit times.
Addition of recombinant EIF5A from yeast, but not a derivative lacking
hypusine, enhanced the rate of tripeptide synthesis in vitro. Moreover,
inactivation of EIF5A mimicked the effects of the EEF2 (130610)
inhibitor sordarin, indicating that EIF5A might function together with
EEF2 to promote ribosomal translocation. Because EIF5A is a structural
homolog of the bacterial protein EF-P, Saini et al. (2009) proposed that
EIF5A/EF-P is a universally conserved translation elongation factor.

To identify tumor suppressor genes in lymphoma (605027), Scuoppo et al.
(2012) screened a short hairpin RNA library targeting genes deleted in
human lymphomas and functionally confirmed those in a mouse lymphoma
model. Of the 9 tumor suppressors identified, 8 corresponded to genes
occurring in 3 physically linked 'clusters,' suggesting that the common
occurrence of large chromosomal deletions in human tumors reflects
selective pressure to attenuate multiple genes. Among the newly
identified tumor suppressors were adenosylmethionine decarboxylase-1
(AMD1; 180980) and eukaryotic translation initiation factor 5A (eIF5A),
2 genes associated with hypusine, a unique amino acid produced as a
product of polyamine metabolism through a highly conserved pathway.
Through a secondary screen surveying the impact of all polyamine enzymes
on tumorigenesis, Scuoppo et al. (2012) established the
polyamine-hypusine axis as a new tumor suppressor network regulating
apoptosis. Unexpectedly, heterozygous deletions encompassing AMD1 and
eIF5A often occur together in human lymphomas, and cosuppression of both
genes promotes lymphomagenesis in mice. Thus, Scuoppo et al. (2012)
concluded that some tumor suppressor functions can be disabled through a
2-step process targeting different genes acting in the same pathway.

Translation elongation factor P (EF-P) is critical for virulence in
bacteria. EF-P is present in all bacteria and orthologous to archaeal
and eukaryotic initiation factor 5A (a/eIF5A). Ude et al. (2013)
demonstrated that EF-P is an elongation factor that enhances translation
of polyproline-containing proteins: in the absence of EF-P, ribosomes
stall at polyproline stretches, whereas the presence of EF-P alleviates
the translational stalling. Moreover, Ude et al. (2013) demonstrated the
physiologic relevance of EF-P to fine-tune the expression of the
polyproline-containing pH receptor CadC to levels necessary for an
appropriate stress response. Bacterial, archaeal, and eukaryotic cells
have hundreds to thousands of polyproline-containing proteins of diverse
function, suggesting that EF-P and a/elF5A are critical for copy number
adjustment of multiple pathways across all kingdoms of life.

Doerfel et al. (2013) showed that EF-P prevents the ribosome from
stalling during synthesis of proteins containing consecutive prolines,
such as PPG, PPP, or longer proline strings, in natural and engineered
model proteins. EF-P promotes peptide-bond formation and stabilizes the
peptidyl-transfer RNA in the catalytic center of the ribosome. EF-P is
posttranslationally modified by a hydroxylated beta-lysine attached to a
lysine residue. The modification enhances the catalytic proficiency of
the factor mainly by increasing its affinity to the ribosome. Doerfel et
al. (2013) proposed that EF-P and its eukaryotic homolog, elF5A, are
essential for the synthesis of a subset of proteins containing proline
stretches in all cells.

MAPPING

Steinkasserer et al. (1995) mapped the EIF5A gene to 17p13-p12 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Three pseudogenes were mapped to
10q23.3, 17q25, and 19q13.2.

REFERENCE 1. Doerfel, L. K.; Wohlgemuth, I.; Kothe, C.; Peske, F.; Urlaub, H.;
Rodnina, M. V.: EF-P is essential for rapid synthesis of proteins
containing consecutive proline residues. Science 339: 85-88, 2013.

2. Koettnitz, K.; Kappel, B.; Baumruker, T.; Hauber, J.; Bevec, D.
: The genomic structure encoding human initiation factor eIF-5A. Gene 144:
249-252, 1994.

3. Koettnitz, K.; Wohl, T.; Kappel, B.; Lottspeich, F.; Hauber, J.;
Bevec, D.: Identification of a new member of the human eIF-5A gene
family. Gene 159: 283-284, 1995.

4. Saini, P.; Eyler, D. E.; Green, R.; Dever, T. E.: Hypusine-containing
protein eIF5A promotes translation elongation. Nature 459: 118-121,
2009.

5. Scuoppo, C.; Miething, C.; Lindqvist, L.; Reyes, J.; Ruse, C.;
Appelmann, I.; Yoon, S.; Krasnitz, A.; Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Pappin,
D.; Pelletier, J.; Lowe, S. W.: A tumour suppressor network relying
on the polyamine-hypusine axis. Nature 487: 244-248, 2012.

6. Steinkasserer, A.; Jones, T.; Sheer, D.; Koettnitz, K.; Hauber,
J.; Bevec, D.: The eukaryotic cofactor for the human immunodeficiency
virus type 1 (HIV-1) rev protein, eIF-5A, maps to chromosome 17p12-p13:
three eIF-5A pseudogenes map to 10q23.3, 17q25, and 19q13.2. Genomics 25:
749-752, 1995.

7. Ude, S.; Lassak, J.; Starosta, A. L.; Kraxenberger, T.; Wilson,
D. N.; Jung, K.: Translation elongation factor EF-P alleviates ribosome
stalling at polyproline stretches. Science 339: 82-85, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/29/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/19/2009
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/17/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/11/1994

EDITED alopez: 01/29/2013
terry: 1/29/2013
alopez: 9/4/2012
terry: 8/29/2012
alopez: 6/4/2009
terry: 5/19/2009
mgross: 3/27/2001
joanna: 5/8/1998
terry: 3/20/1997
jamie: 1/17/1997
mark: 9/17/1995
mark: 4/19/1995
terry: 11/11/1994

604310	TITLE *604310 BIOGENESIS OF LYSOSOME-RELATED ORGANELLES COMPLEX 1, SUBUNIT 6; BLOC1S6
;;BLOC1, SUBUNIT 6; BLOS6;;
PALLIDIN; PLDN;;
PA;;
PALLID, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The 'pallid' mouse mutant represents a platelet storage pool deficiency
(SPD) manifesting with prolonged bleeding time, pigment dilution, and
other features. Huang et al. (1999) described the physical mapping,
positional cloning, and mutational and functional analysis of the gene
that is defective in pallid mice. The gene encodes a ubiquitously
expressed, highly charged 172-amino acid protein, which they called
pallidin, with no homology to known proteins. Huang et al. (1999)
isolated the orthologous gene encoding human pallidin and found that the
predicted protein has 86% amino acid identity with the mouse protein.
The first 60 amino acids give rise to an unstructured protein, followed
by 2 highly alpha-helical coiled-coil regions, essential for palladin
self-binding and binding to syntaxin-13 (see STX12, 606892).

Cullinane et al. (2011) noted that PLDN transcript-1, which they called
PLDN1, contains 172 amino acids and is encoded by exons 1 to 5.
Transcript-2, which they called PLDN2, contains 101 amino acids and is
encoded by exon A, exon 2, and exon B. PCR analysis of adult and fetal
human tissues showed ubiquitous expression of transcript-1 except for
absence in adult and fetal brain. Transcript-2 showed limited expression
in adult brain, testis, and leukocytes, and in fetal lung, brain, and
thymus.

GENE STRUCTURE

Cullinane et al. (2011) determined that the PLDN gene contains 7 exons
with alternative splicing of exons A and B.

MAPPING

Huang (2000) stated that ESTs of the human PLDN gene had been mapped to
chromosome 15q15 by radiation hybrid mapping.

By ancestral chromosome mapping, Huang et al. (1999) localized the mouse
pallidin gene to chromosome 2E. The pallidin gene is closely linked to
mouse Epb42 (171070) and B2m (109700), 68 cM from the centromere.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Huang et al. (1999) discovered that
pallidin interacts with syntaxin-13 (see STX12, 606892), a t-SNARE
protein that mediates vesicle docking and fusion. Huang et al. (1999)
confirmed this interaction by coimmunoprecipitation assay.
Immunofluorescence studies corroborated that the cellular distribution
of pallidin overlaps that of syntaxin-13.

By coimmunoprecipitation and immunodepletion experiments of mouse skin
fibroblasts, Falcon-Perez et al. (2002) identified pallidin as a
component of BLOC1 (biogenesis of lysosome-related organelles complex-1;
see 601444), which also contains 'muted' (607289). A yeast 2-hybrid
screen found no direct interaction between muted and pallidin, but
pallidin was found to interact with itself. Residues that include 2
putative coiled-coil domains of human pallidin were necessary and
sufficient for self-assembly. Falcon-Perez et al. (2002) also determined
that pallidin/BLOC1 could interact with actin filaments in vitro and in
transfected cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Cullinane et al. (2011) analyzed the exonic regions of all 8 BLOC1
subunit-encoding genes in 38 patients with Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome
(HPS)-like symptoms, who were negative for mutations in genes associated
with HPS1 through HPS6 (see 203300), and identified homozygosity for a
nonsense mutation in exon 3 of the PLDN gene in 1 patient (Q78X;
604310.0001). Noting that exon 3 is present only in the PLDN1
transcript, Cullinane et al. (2011) demonstrated that expression of the
PLDN2 transcript was not upregulated as a compensatory mechanism in the
patient's cells, suggesting that PLDN1 and PLDN2 have different
promoters and different functions within cells.

In a 17-year-old Italian girl with an HPS-like primary immunodeficiency
syndrome, Badolato et al. (2012) performed whole-exome sequencing and
identified homozygosity for the Q78X mutation in the PLDN gene; no
mutations were found in other immunodeficiency-associated genes.

ANIMAL MODEL

'Pallid' is 1 of 13 platelet SPD mouse mutants. Pallid (pa) animals
suffer from prolonged bleeding time, pigment dilution, kidney lysosomal
enzyme elevation, serum alpha-1-antitrypsin activity deficiency
(613490), and abnormal otolith formation. As with other mouse mutants of
this class, characterization of pallid mice suggested a defect in
organelle biosynthesis. Huang et al. (1999) detected a nonsense mutation
at codon 69 of this gene in the pallid mutant. Whereas the 'mocha'
(607246) and 'pearl' (603401) SPD mutants have defects in Ap3, the
findings of Huang et al. (1999) suggested that pallid SPD mutants are
defective in a more downstream event of vesicle trafficking, namely
vesicle docking and fusion. Huang et al. (1999) stated that pallid was
the fifth SPD mutant to be described at the molecular level. These
mutants are characterized by abnormalities in platelet-dense granules,
melanosomes, and lysosomes, and in each case, the predicted protein is
involved in organelle biogenesis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HERMANSKY-PUDLAK SYNDROME 9
BLOC1S6, GLN78TER

In a 9-month-old boy of Indian ancestry with Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome-9
(HPS9; 614171), Cullinane et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for a
232C-T transition in exon 3 of the PLDN gene, resulting in a
gln78-to-ter (Q78X) substitution, which would abolish a SC35 binding
site and is predicted to result in loss of exon 3 and a frameshift.
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis of PLDN transcript-1 showed normal mRNA
expression in patient fibroblasts and melanocytes; however, immunoblot
analysis showed that full-length palladin protein was absent from
patient cells. PCR analysis of patient fibroblast and melanocyte cDNA
did detect a faint lower band of PLDN, consistent with an alternative
transcript skipping exon 3. Cullinane et al. (2011) demonstrated that
even if the mutant transcript is translated into protein, although it
correctly localizes to early endosomes, it does not interact with
syntaxin-13 (see 606892). In patient melanocytes, the melanogenic
protein TYRP1 (115501) showed aberrant localization, an increase in
plasma-membrane trafficking, and a failure to reach melanosomes, thus
explaining the boy's severe albinism and establishing the diagnosis of
HPS9.

In a 17-year-old Italian girl with an HPS-like primary immunodeficiency
syndrome, Badolato et al. (2012) performed whole-exome sequencing and
identified homozygosity for the Q78X mutation in the PLDN gene. Sanger
sequencing confirmed the mutation, which was present in heterozygosity
in her unaffected parents but was not found in approximately 250 control
exomes or in the NHLBI exome collection. An increased proportion of both
resting and IL2 (147680)-activated NK cells from the patient expressed
CD107A (LAMP1; 153330) on the surface compared to controls, and patient
NK cells also showed moderately increased cell surface expression of
CD63 (155740). In addition, IL2-activated NK cells from the patient had
decreased granulation, and both resting and activated NK cells showed
reduced cytolytic activity compared to controls.

REFERENCE 1. Badolato, R.; Prandini, A.; Caracciolo, S.; Colombo, F.; Tabellini,
G.; Giacomelli, M.; Cantarini, M. E.; Pession, A.; Bell, C. J.; Dinwiddie,
D. L.; Miller, N. A.; Hateley, S. L.; Saunders, C. J.; Zhang, L.;
Schroth, G. P.; Plebani, A.; Parolini, S.; Kingsmore, S. F.: Exome
sequencing reveals a pallidin mutation in a Hermansky-Pudlak-like
primary immunodeficiency syndrome. (Letter) Blood 119: 3185-3187,
2012.

2. Cullinane, A. R.; Curry, J. A.; Carmona-Rivera, C.; Summers, C.
G.; Ciccone, C.; Cardillo, N. D.; Dorward, H.; Hess, R. A.; White,
J. G.; Adams, D.; Huizing, M.; Gahl, W. A.: A BLOC-1 mutation screen
reveals that PLDN is mutated in Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome type 9. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 88: 778-787, 2011.

3. Falcon-Perez, J. M.; Starcevic, M.; Gautam, R.; Dell'Angelica,
E. C.: BLOC-1, a novel complex containing the pallidin and muted
proteins involved in the biogenesis of melanosomes and platelet-dense
granules. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 28191-28199, 2002.

4. Huang, L.: Personal Communication. San Francisco, Calif.  2/3/2000.

5. Huang, L.; Kuo, Y.-M.; Gitschier, J.: The pallid gene encodes
a novel, syntaxin 13-interacting protein involved in platelet storage
pool deficiency. Nature Genet. 23: 329-332, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/22/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/12/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/25/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/2/2000

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 11/23/1999

EDITED mgross: 04/15/2013
carol: 10/22/2012
terry: 10/22/2012
wwang: 8/17/2011
terry: 8/12/2011
alopez: 12/3/2010
carol: 8/13/2010
mgross: 9/10/2003
mgross: 10/9/2002
mgross: 9/20/2002
joanna: 12/11/2001
mgross: 3/15/2000
terry: 2/25/2000
terry: 2/2/2000
joanna: 1/24/2000
alopez: 11/23/1999

601555	TITLE *601555 RHO FAMILY GTPase 2; RND2
;;RAS HOMOLOG GENE FAMILY, MEMBER N; RHON;;
ARHN;;
GTP-BINDING PROTEIN RHO7; RHO7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the course of a complete genomic sequence analysis of 117 kb from
chromosome 17 containing the BRCA1 gene (113705) located on 17q21, Smith
et al. (1996) identified just centromeric to the BRCA1 gene a novel gene
they designated RHO7. RHO7 was identified initially as a homolog to the
RHO family (see 165370) of GTP-binding proteins (Chardin, 1991) by a
database search using deduced amino acid sequences from predicted exons.
The gene was found to be highly similar to the mouse EST homolog, with
more than 90% identity between the 2 nucleotide sequences.

By screening a human fetal brain cDNA library using bovine Rnd1 (609038)
as probe, Nobes et al. (1998) cloned RND2. The deduced protein contains
227 amino acids and has a calculated molecular mass of 25.3 kD. It has 3
guanine-binding motifs, 2 loops and a threonine involved in phosphate
binding, and 3 major residues that coordinate magnesium in the GTP-bound
state. However, RND2 lacks the residues important for the intrinsic
GTPase activity of RAS (see 190020). RND2 ends with a CAAX box motif and
a terminal methionine residue, suggesting that RND2 is farnesylated.
Northern blot analysis detected high expression of a 1.5-kb RND2
transcript only in testis, with little to no expression in all other
adult and fetal tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Heng et al. (2008) demonstrated that the proneural protein neurogenin-2
(Neurog2; 606624), which controls neurogenesis in the embryonic cortex,
directly induces the expression of the small GTP-binding protein Rnd2 in
newly generated mouse cortical neurons before they initiate migration.
Rnd2 silencing leads to a defect in radial migration of cortical neurons
similar to that observed when the Neurog2 gene is deleted. Remarkably,
restoring Rnd2 expression in Neurog2-mutant neurons is sufficient to
rescue their ability to migrate. Heng et al. (2008) concluded that their
results identified Rnd2 as a novel essential regulator of neuronal
migration in the cerebral cortex and demonstrated that Rnd2 is a major
effector of Neurog2 function in the promotion of migration. Thus, a
proneural protein controls the complex cellular behavior of cell
migration through a remarkably direct pathway involving the
transcriptional activation of a small GTP-binding protein.

MAPPING

By FISH, Nobes et al. (1998) mapped the RND2 gene to chromosome 17q21.

REFERENCE 1. Chardin, P.: Small GTP-binding proteins of the ras family: a conserved
functional mechanism? Cancer Cells 3: 117-126, 1991.

2. Heng, J. I.-T.; Nguyen, L.; Castro, D. S.; Zimmer, C.; Wildner,
H.; Armant, O.; Skowronska-Krawczyk, D.; Bedogni, F.; Matter, J.-M.;
Hevner, R.; Guillemot, F.: Neurogenin 2 controls cortical neuron
migration through regulation of Rnd2. Nature 455: 114-118, 2008.

3. Nobes, C. D.; Lauritzen, I.; Mattei, M.-G.; Paris, S.; Hall, A.;
Chardin, P.: A new member of the Rho family, Rnd1, promotes disassembly
of actin filament structures and loss of cell adhesion. J. Cell Biol. 141:
187-197, 1998.

4. Smith, T. M.; Lee, M. K.; Szabo, C. I.; Jerome, N.; McEuen, M.;
Taylor, M.; Hood, L.; King, M.-C.: Complete genomic sequence and
analysis of 117 kb of human DNA containing the gene BRCA1. Genomic
Res. 6: 1029-1049, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/24/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/29/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/4/1996

EDITED alopez: 09/25/2008
terry: 9/24/2008
alopez: 4/4/2007
mgross: 11/29/2004
mgross: 11/23/2004
carol: 9/13/2002
mark: 1/6/1997

300730	TITLE *300730 G ANTIGEN 12F; GAGE12F
DESCRIPTION See GAGE1 (300594) for more information about the GAGE gene cluster.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gjerstorff and Ditzel (2008) stated that the GAGE12F gene is contained
within a 9.5-kb GAGE repeat. The GAGE12F gene contains 5 exons spanning
about 6.3 kb and has a LINE insertion.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Gjerstorff and Ditzel (2008) mapped the
GAGE12F gene to a GAGE gene cluster on chromosome Xp11.23.

REFERENCE 1. Gjerstorff, M. F.; Ditzel, H. J.: An overview of the GAGE cancer/testis
antigen family with the inclusion of newly identified members. Tissue
Antigens 71: 187-192, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/5/2008

EDITED wwang: 08/18/2008
wwang: 8/6/2008

606298	TITLE *606298 PROTOCADHERIN-GAMMA, SUBFAMILY A, MEMBER 11; PCDHGA11
;;PCDH-GAMMA-A11
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cadherins are calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion molecules, and
protocadherins constitute a subfamily of nonclassic cadherins. PCDHGA11
is 1 of 22 tandemly arranged genes within the PCDHG gene cluster
(604968) on chromosome 5q31. The 22 PCDHG genes function as 'variable'
exons that are individually spliced to a downstream constant region to
form distinct PCDHG transcripts. The variable PCDHG exons encode the
extracellular and transmembrane domains of the protocadherin protein,
and the common region encodes the intracellular domain (Wu et al.,
2001). For further information on the PCDHG genes, see 604968.

CLONING

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Wu and Maniatis (1999) cloned
full-length PCDHGA11.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wu et al. (2001) mapped the PCDHGA11 gene
to chromosome 5q31, between the PCDHGB7 gene (606304) and a pseudogene
adjacent to the PCDHGA12 gene (603059). They localized the mouse PCDHG
genes to chromosome 18c.

REFERENCE 1. Wu, Q.; Maniatis, T.: A striking organization of a large family
of human neural cadherin-like cell adhesion genes. Cell 97: 779-790,
1999.

2. Wu, Q.; Zhang, T.; Cheng, J.-F.; Kim, Y.; Grimwood, J.; Schmutz,
J.; Dickson, M.; Noonan, J. P.; Zhang, M. Q.; Myers, R. M.; Maniatis,
T.: Comparative DNA sequence analysis of mouse and human protocadherin
gene clusters. Genome Res. 11: 389-404, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/15/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/27/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/05/2012
alopez: 4/5/2012
mgross: 10/15/2007
mgross: 9/27/2001

605125	TITLE *605125 GABA-A RECEPTOR-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; GABARAP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Type-A receptors for the neurotransmitter GABA (gamma-aminobutyric acid)
(see 137160) are ligand-gated chloride channels that mediate inhibitory
neurotransmission. By performing a yeast 2-hybrid screen on a fetal
brain cDNA library using the intracellular loop of the GABA-A receptor
gamma-2S subunit (GABRG2; 137164) as bait, followed by screening an
adult brain cDNA library, Wang et al. (1999) identified a cDNA encoding
GABARAP. Sequence analysis predicted that the 117-amino acid, 13.9-kD
GABARAP protein contains a basic N terminus and an acidic C terminus,
with an overall pI of 9.6. Northern blot analysis detected a 0.9-kb
GABARAP transcript in all tissues tested, namely heart, brain, placenta,
lung, liver, skeletal muscle, kidney, and pancreas. Western blot
analysis also detected GABARAP expression in all tissues tested,
suggesting that GABARAP is also involved in biologic events other than
interaction with GABA-A receptors.

MAPPING

Komoike et al. (2010) noted that the GABARAP gene maps to chromosome
17p13.1.

GENE FUNCTION

Binding analysis by Wang et al. (1999) showed that the N-terminal 21
amino acids of GABARAP formed an alpha helix that interacted with
tubulin (see TUBA1; 191110). Immunoprecipitation and immunohistochemical
analysis in rat brain tissues demonstrated association and
colocalization of GABARAP and GABA-A receptors.

Apg8 is a ubiquitin-like protein involved in autophagy in yeast. A
cysteine protease, Apg4, cleaves Apg8 to create a C-terminal glycine
required for ubiquitin-like modification reactions. There are at least 4
mammalian Apg8 homologs: GATE16 (GABARAPL2; 607452), GABARAP, MAP1LC3
(see 601242), and APG8L (GABARAPL1; 607420). Hemelaar et al. (2003)
found that mouse Atg4b (611338) acted on the C termini of these 4 Atg8
homologs, and that the reaction required the active-site cysteine of
Atg4b. Although the amino acid sequences of these Apg8 homologs differ
from one another by as much as 71%, their affinities for Atg4b were
roughly comparable in competition experiments.

Using coimmunoprecipitation and mass spectrometric analyses, Lee et al.
(2005) identified DDX47 (615428) as a binding partner of GABARAP in
human 2774 and SKOV-3 ovarian tumor cell lysates. Yeast 2-hybrid
analysis confirmed the interaction. Overexpression of either DDX47 or
GABARAP alone had no effect on proliferation of SKOV-3 cells; however,
their coexpression inhibited cell proliferation and induced apoptosis.

Behrends et al. (2010) reported a proteomic analysis of the autophagy
interaction network (AIN) in human cells under conditions of ongoing
(basal) autophagy, revealing a network of 751 interactions among 409
candidate interacting proteins with extensive connectivity among
subnetworks. Many new AIN components have roles in vesicle trafficking,
protein or lipid phosphorylation, and protein ubiquitination, and affect
autophagosome number or flux when depleted by RNA interference. The 6
human orthologs of yeast autophagy-8 (ATG8), MAP1LC3A, MAP1LC3B
(609604), MAP1LC3C (609605), GABARAP, GABARAPL1, and GABARAPL2, interact
with a cohort of 67 proteins, with extensive binding partner overlap
between family members, and frequent involvement of a conserved surface
on ATG8 proteins known to interact with LC3-interacting regions in
partner proteins. Behrends et al. (2010) concluded that their studies
provided a global view of the mammalian autophagy interaction landscape
and a resource for mechanistic analysis of this critical protein
homeostasis pathway.

ANIMAL MODEL

Komoike et al. (2010) found that Gabarap was expressed in the
telencephalon, hindbrain, and rhombomere of zebrafish during development
and later expressed in other brain regions. Knockdown of Gabarap
resulted in dwarfism of the entire zebrafish body, as well as a severely
hypoplastic head and mandible. The findings suggested that the Gabarap
gene plays a role in brain development in zebrafish.

REFERENCE 1. Behrends, C.; Sowa, M. E.; Gygi, S. P.; Harper, J. W.: Network
organization of the human autophagy system. Nature 466: 68-76, 2010.

2. Hemelaar, J.; Lelyveld, V. S.; Kessler, B. M.; Ploegh, H. L.:
A single protease, Apg4B, is specific for the autophagy-related ubiquitin-like
proteins GATE-16, MAP1-LC3, GABARAP, and Apg8L. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
51841-51850, 2003.

3. Komoike, Y.; Shimojima, K.; Liang, J.-S.; Fujii, H.; Maegaki, Y.;
Osawa, M.; Fujii, S.; Higashinakagawa, T.; Yamamoto, T.: A functional
analysis of GABARAP on 17p13.1 by knockdown zebrafish. J. Hum. Genet. 55:
155-162, 2010.

4. Lee, J. H.; Rho, S. B.; Chun, T.: GABA-A receptor-associated protein
(GABARAP) induces apoptosis by interacting with DEAD (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp/His)
box polypeptide 47 (DDX 47). Biotech. Lett. 27: 623-628, 2005.

5. Wang, H.; Bedford, F. K.; Brandon, N. J.; Moss, S. J.; Olsen, R.
W.: GABA(A)-receptor-associated protein links GABA(A) receptors and
the cytoskeleton. Nature 397: 69-72, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 09/24/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/28/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/20/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/6/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/11/2000

EDITED mgross: 09/24/2013
alopez: 9/28/2010
wwang: 4/29/2010
ckniffin: 4/20/2010
carol: 12/11/2009
mgross: 8/16/2007
terry: 8/6/2007
mgross: 7/11/2000

609509	TITLE *609509 INTERLEUKIN 31; IL31
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IL31, which is made principally by activated Th2-type T cells, interacts
with a heterodimeric receptor consisting of IL31RA (609510) and OSMR
(601743) that is constitutively expressed on epithelial cells and
keratinocytes. IL31 may be involved in the promotion of allergic skin
disorders and in regulating other allergic diseases, such as asthma
(Dillon et al., 2004).

CLONING

Dillon et al. (2004) isolated IL31 from an activated T-cell cDNA library
based on its ability to stimulate proliferation of cells bearing IL31RA
and OSMR when translated. The predicted 164-amino acid IL31 precursor
protein produces a 141-amino acid mature protein that shares 31%
identity with the mature mouse protein. Quantitative real-time PCR
detected low expression of IL31 in testis, bone marrow, skeletal muscle,
kidney, colon, thymus, small intestine, and trachea. Among lymphoid and
myeloid cell subsets, IL31 was expressed in activated CD4
(186940)-positive T lymphocytes and at lower levels in CD8 (see
186910)-positive T cells, but not in natural killer cells, monocytes, or
resting B cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using flow cytometric analysis, Dillon et al. (2004) found that IL31
activated STAT1 (600555), STAT3 (102582), and STAT5 (601511), but not
STAT6 (601512).

Ip et al. (2007) found that stimulation of a bronchial epithelial cell
line with IL31 resulted in dose- and time-dependent upregulation of EGF
(131530), VEGF (192240), and CCL2 (158105). Combination of IL31 with
either IL4 (147780) or IL13 (147683) further enhanced CCL2 production.
IL31 also activated p38 MAPK (MAPK14; 600289), ERK (e.g., MAPK1;
176948), and JNK (MAPK8; 601158), and inhibition of these signal
transduction molecules differentially inhibited production of EGF, VEGF,
and CCL2. Ip et al. (2007) concluded that MAP kinase activation can be
crucial for IL31-mediated activation of bronchial epithelial cells and
suggested that IL31 may have a role in bronchial inflammation.

MAPPING

Dillon et al. (2004) stated that the IL31 gene maps to chromosome
12q24.31 and the mouse gene maps to a syntenic region on chromosome 5.

ANIMAL MODEL

Dillon et al. (2004) observed alopecia, severe pruritus, skin
thickening, and conjunctivitis, but no internal organ changes, in
transgenic mice overexpressing mouse Il31. Microscopic analysis of
lesional skin revealed several hallmarks of human atopic dermatitis.
However, the alopecia and pruritus developed in an IgE-independent
manner, suggestive of nonatopic dermatitis. Treatment of Rag1 (179615)
-/- mice with exogenous Il31 demonstrated that the alopecia, but not the
pruritus, was lymphocyte dependent. Dillon et al. (2004) proposed that
IL31 is involved in promoting dermatitis in allergic and nonallergic
diseases.

REFERENCE 1. Dillon, S. R.; Sprecher, C.; Hammond, A.; Bilsborough, J.; Rosenfeld-Franklin,
M.; Presnell, S. R.; Haugen, H. S.; Maurer, M.; Harder, B.; Johnston,
J.; Bort, S.; Mudri, S.; and 18 others: Interleukin 31, a cytokine
produced by activated T cells, induces dermatitis in mice. Nature
Immun. 5: 752-760, 2004. Note: Erratum: Nature Immun. 6: 114 only,
2005.

2. Ip, W. K.; Wong, C. K.; Li, M. L. Y.; Li, P. W.; Cheung, P. F.
Y.; Lam, C. W. K.: Interleukin-31 induces cytokine and chemokine
production from human bronchial epithelial cells through activation
of mitogen-activated protein kinase signalling pathways: implications
for the allergic response. Immunology 122: 532-541, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/11/2008

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/29/2005

EDITED mgross: 01/26/2011
mgross: 1/26/2011
terry: 1/24/2011
carol: 12/2/2008
mgross: 9/12/2008
terry: 9/11/2008
mgross: 8/1/2005
mgross: 7/29/2005

608504	TITLE *608504 RHO GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 15; ARHGEF15
;;EPHEXIN 5; E5;;
KIAA0915
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Rho GTPase functions as a molecular switch by cycling between an active
GTP-bound form and an inactive GDP-bound form. Guanine nucleotide
exchange factors (GEFs) initiate the exchange of GDP with GTP and
promote the association of Rho with its effector molecules. ARHGEF15
functions as a specific GEF for RHOA (165390) (summary by Ogita et al.,
2003).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1998) cloned ARHGEF15, which they designated
KIAA0915. The transcript contains a repetitive element in the 3-prime
untranslated region, and the deduced 777-amino acid protein shares 35.9%
identity over 499 amino acids with ARHGEF5 (600888). In descending
order, RT-PCR ELISA detected intermediate to low expression of ARHGEF15
in lung, ovary, heart, liver, kidney, testis, skeletal muscle, and
brain. Little to no expression was detected in pancreas and spleen.

By Western blot analysis, Ogita et al. (2003) determined that rat
Arhgef15 is expressed in the vascular smooth muscle cells of all organs
examined. Immunohistochemical analysis indicated weak staining in rat
cardiomyocytes, but none in other parenchymal cells or blood cells.
ARHGEF15 expression was also detected in human coronary artery smooth
muscle cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Ogita et al. (2003) found that endogenous rat Arhgef15 was
coimmunoprecipitated by anti-Epha4 (602188) antibody in a rat aortic
smooth muscle cell line, and mouse Epha4 immunoprecipitated with human
ARHGEF15 when coexpressed in a human embryonic kidney cell line.
Mutation analysis indicated that the Dbl homology domain and the
pleckstrin homology (PH) domain of ARHGEF15, but not the PH domain
alone, mediated the interaction with Epha4. The authors presented
evidence that ARHGEF15 has a role in RHOA activation and the regulation
of vascular smooth muscle contractility.

Margolis et al. (2010) showed that E5 functioned as a GEF for Rhoa, but
not Rac1 (602048) or Cdc42 (116952), and that it regulated synapse
formation in developing mouse neurons. E5 specifically
coimmunoprecipitated with ephrin receptor Ephb2 (600997). Knockdown and
overexpression studies revealed that binding of E5 to Ephb2 inhibited
formation of excitatory synapses. The E5-Ephb2 interaction was
terminated by the binding of ephrin B (see EFNB1; 300035) to Ephb2.
Activation of Ephb2 by ephrin B resulted in tyrosine phosphorylation,
release, and destabilization of E5, permitting the formation of
excitatory synapses. Degradation of E5 required its binding to the E3
ubiquitin ligase Ube3a (601623), and E5 degradation was inhibited by an
inactive Ube3a mutant or proteasome inhibition. Margolis et al. (2010)
observed that E5 localized to newly formed filopodia prior to synapse
development and appeared to restrict filopodia motility and growth.
Thus,they suggested that E5 might function as an initial barrier to
synapse formation until its degradation following ephrin B-mediated
activation of Ephb2. Margolis et al. (2010) noted that mutations in
UBE3A can cause Angelman syndrome (105830), and they showed that E5
expression was elevated in a mouse model of Angelman syndrome. They
concluded that elevated E5 expression during development may contribute
to abnormal cognitive function in Angelman syndrome.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the ARHGEF15
gene to chromosome 17. Gross (2011) mapped the ARHGEF15 gene to
chromosome 17p13.1 based on an alignment of the ARHGEF15 sequence
(GenBank GENBANK BC036749) and the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/6/2011.

2. Margolis, S. S.; Salogiannis, J.; Lipton, D. M.; Mandel-Brehm,
C.; Wills, Z. P.; Mardinly, A. R.; Hu, L.; Greer, P. L.; Bikoff, J.
B.; Ho, H.-Y. H.; Soskis, M. J.; Sahin, M.; Greenberg, M. E.: EphB-mediated
degradation of the RhoA GEF ephexin5 relieves a developmental brake
on excitatory synapse formation. Cell 143: 442-455, 2010.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Oharo, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 355-364, 1998.

4. Ogita, H.; Kunimoto, S.; Kamioka, Y.; Sawa, H.; Masuda, M.; Mochizuki,
N.: EphA4-mediated Rho activation via Vsm-RhoGEF expressed specifically
in vascular smooth muscle cells. Circ. Res. 93: 23-31, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/6/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/25/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/2/2004

EDITED mgross: 04/06/2011
mgross: 4/6/2011
terry: 2/25/2011
alopez: 3/2/2004

607837	TITLE *607837 CLN8 GENE; CLN8
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ranta et al. (1999) reported the positional cloning of a novel gene,
CLN8, in the critical region of chromosome 8p for progressive epilepsy
with mental retardation (EPMR; 610003), or Northern epilepsy. The CLN8
gene encodes a deduced 286-amino acid transmembrane protein with a
molecular mass of 80 kD. Ranta et al. (1999) also cloned mouse Cln8.

To determine the intracellular localization of CLN8, Lonka et al. (2000)
transiently transfected BHK cell lines with CLN8 cDNA. Using CLN8- and
cell organelle-specific antibodies with confocal immunofluorescence
microscopy, they showed that the CLN8 protein localizes primarily in the
ER, with partial localization in the ER-Golgi intermediate compartment
(ERGIC). The ER-ERGIC localization was not altered in the CLN8 protein
containing a human CLN8 mutation (600143.0001). However, the truncated
murine mnd mutant protein was found only in the ER. Mutations in the ER
retrieval signal KKRP resulted in localization of CLN8 to the Golgi
apparatus. The authors concluded that CLN8 is an ER resident protein
that recycles between ER and ERGIC.

MAPPING

Ranta et al. (1999) identified the CLN8 gene within the critical region
of chromosome 8p for neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis-8 (CLN8; 600143).
Ranta (1999) stated that the Cln8 gene is located in the centromeric
region of mouse chromosome 8p, between markers D8Mit124 and D8Mit61.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Ranta et al. (1999) found that 22 Finnish patients with the Northern
epilepsy variant of CLN8, were homozygous for an arg24-to-gly mutation
in the CLN8 gene (607837.0001). The findings indicated a founder effect.

In 9 of 18 families with the so-called Turkish variant of late infantile
CLN, Ranta et al. (2004) identified 4 mutations in the CLN8 gene (see
607837.0002-607837.0004), indicating that these patients in fact had
CLN8.

In 3 unrelated Italian patients with CLN8, Cannelli et al. (2006)
identified homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the CLN8
gene (see, e.g., 607837.0005 and 607837.0006, respectively).

ANIMAL MODEL

Ranta et al. (1999) found conservation of the codon harboring the human
CLN8 mutation with the localization of a mutation in the 'motor neuron
degeneration' (mnd) mouse, a naturally occurring mouse NCL (Bronson et
al., 1993). In mnd/mnd mice, they identified a homozygous 1-bp insertion
(267-268insC at codon 90) predicting a frameshift and a truncated
protein. This was the first description of the molecular basis of a
naturally occurring animal model for NCL.

Katz et al. (2005) identified a leu164-to-pro (L164P) mutation in the
Cln8 gene in English setter dogs with autosomal recessive NCL.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 8, NORTHERN EPILEPSY VARIANT
CLN8, ARG24GLY

In 22 Finnish patients with the Northern epilepsy variant of CLN8
(610003), Ranta et al. (1999) found homozygosity for an arg24-to-gly
(R24G) missense mutation which resulted from a C-to-G transversion at
nucleotide 70. The carrier frequency was 1 in 135, consistent with a
founder mutation.

.0002
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 8
CLN8, TRP263CYS

In affected members of 3 families with the so-called Turkish variant of
late infantile CLN, originally reported by Topcu et al. (2004), Ranta et
al. (2004) identified homozygosity for a 789G-C transversion in exon 3
of the CLN8 gene, resulting in a trp263-to-cys (W263C) mutation. The
findings indicated that these patients in fact had CLN8 (600143). In
affected members of another Turkish family reported by Topcu et al.
(2004), Ranta et al. (2004) found compound heterozygosity for W263C and
R204C (607837.0003).

.0003
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 8
CLN8, ARG204CYS

In affected members of 5 families with the so-called Turkish variant of
late infantile CLN, originally reported by Mitchell et al. (2001) and
Topcu et al. (2004), Ranta et al. (2004) identified a homozygous 610C-T
transition in exon 3 of the CLN8 gene, resulting in an arg204-to-cys
(R204C) mutation. The findings indicated that these patients in fact had
CLN8 (600143). In affected members of another Turkish family reported by
Topcu et al. (2004), Ranta et al. (2004) found compound heterozygosity
for R204C and W263C (607837.0002).

.0004
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 8
CLN8, 1-BP DEL, 88G

In affected members of a family with the so-called Turkish variant of
late-infantile CLN, originally reported by Mitchell et al. (2001), Ranta
et al. (2004) identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion (88delG) in the CLN8
gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination of the
protein.

.0005
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 8
CLN8, ALA30PRO

In an Italian child with CLN8 (600143), born of consanguineous parents,
Cannelli et al. (2006) identified a homozygous 88G-C transversion in
exon 2 of the CLN8 gene, resulting in an ala30-to-pro (A30P)
substitution.

.0006
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 8
CLN8, 1-BP DEL, 66G

In 2 unrelated Italian children with CLN8 (600143), Cannelli et al.
(2006) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the CLN8
gene: a shared 1-bp deletion (66delG) and a different pathogenic
missense mutation in each child. Haplotype analysis of the 66delG
mutation suggested a common ancestor.

.0007
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 8
CLN8, 3-BP DEL, 180GAA

In an Italian boy with CLN8 (600143), Vantaggiato et al. (2009)
identified a homozygous 3-bp deletion (180delGAA) in exon 2 of the CLN8
gene, resulting in the deletion of residue lys61. Further studies showed
that the patient had complete isodisomy of maternal chromosome 8. In
vitro studies in human neuroblastoma cells and mouse neuronal cells
showed that the mutation did not affect protein localization neuronal
differentiation, or cellular migration, but did result in increased
cellular proliferation that was specific to neuronal cells. Cells with
the 180delGAA mutation also showed an increased apoptotic response to
NMDA. The findings suggested an indirect role for CLN8 in cell survival.

REFERENCE 1. Bronson, R. T.; Lake, B. D.; Cook, S.; Taylor, S.; Davisson, M.
T.: Motor neuron degeneration of mice is a model of neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis (Batten's disease). Ann. Neurol. 33: 381-385, 1993.

2. Cannelli, N.; Cassandrini, D.; Bertini, E.; Striano, P.; Fusco,
L.; Gaggero, R.; Specchio, N.; Biancheri, R.; Vigevano, F.; Bruno,
C.; Simonati, A.; Zara, F.; Santorelli, F. M.: Novel mutations in
CLN8 in Italian variant late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis:
another genetic hit in the Mediterranean. Neurogenetics 7: 111-117,
2006.

3. Katz, M. L.; Khan, S.; Awano, T.; Shahid, S. A.; Siakotos, A. N.;
Johnson, G. S.: A mutation in the CLN8 gene in English setter dogs
with neuronal ceroid-lipofuscinosis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 327:
541-547, 2005.

4. Lonka, L.; Kyttala, A.; Ranta, S.; Jalanko, A.; Lehesjoki, A.-E.
: The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis CLN8 membrane protein is a resident
of the endoplasmic reticulum. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1691-1697, 2000.

5. Mitchell, W. A.; Wheeler, R. B.; Sharp, J. D.; Bate, S. L.; Gardiner,
R. M.; Ranta, U. S.; Lonka, L.; Williams, R. E.; Lehesjoki, A.-E.;
Mole, S. E.: Turkish variant late infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
(CLN7) may be allelic to CLN8. Europ. J. Paediat. Neurol. 5 (suppl.
A): 21-27, 2001.

6. Ranta, S.: Personal Communication. Helsinki, Finland  10/1/1999.

7. Ranta, S.; Topcu, M.; Tegelberg, S.; Tan, H.; Ustubutun, A.; Saatci,
I.; Dufke, A.; Enders, H.; Pohl, K.; Alembik, Y.; Mitchell, W. A.;
Mole, S. E.; Lehesjoki, A.-E.: Variant late infantile neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis in a subset of Turkish patients is allelic to Northern
epilepsy. Hum. Mutat. 23: 300-305, 2004.

8. Ranta, S.; Zhang, Y.; Ross, B.; Lonka, L.; Takkunen, E.; Messer,
A.; Sharp, J.; Wheeler, R.; Kusumi, K.; Mole, S.; Liu, W.; Soares,
M. B.; de Fatima Bonaldo, M.; Hirvasniemi, A.; de la Chapelle, A.;
Gilliam, T. C.; Lehesjoki, A.-E.: The neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses
in human EPMR and mnd mutant mice are associated with mutations in
CLN8. Nature Genet. 23: 233-236, 1999.

9. Topcu, M.; Tan, H.; Yalnizoglu, D.; Usubutun, A.; Saatci, I.; Aynaci,
M.; Anlar, B.; Topaloglu, H.; Turanli, G.; Kose, G.; Aysun, S.: Evaluation
of 36 patients from Turkey with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis: clinical,
neurophysiological, neuroradiological and histopathologic studies. Turk.
J. Pediat. 46: 1-10, 2004.

10. Vantaggiato, C.; Redaelli, F.; Falcone, S.; Perrotta, C; Tonelli,
A.; Bondioni, S.; Morbin, M.; Riva, D.; Saletti, V.; Bonaglia, M.
C.; Giorda, R.; Bresolin, N.; Clementi, E.; Bassi, M. T.: A novel
CLN8 mutation in late-infantile-onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
(LINCL) reveals aspects of CLN8 neurobiological function. Hum. Mutat. 30:
1104-1116, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/10/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/24/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/5/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/29/2003

EDITED wwang: 12/03/2009
ckniffin: 11/10/2009
wwang: 7/21/2009
wwang: 9/7/2006
ckniffin: 8/24/2006
carol: 3/24/2006
ckniffin: 3/24/2006
ckniffin: 3/21/2006
ckniffin: 3/16/2006
tkritzer: 5/27/2004
terry: 5/5/2004
carol: 5/29/2003

609554	TITLE *609554 INTEGRAL MEMBRANE PROTEIN 2C; ITM2C
;;BRI3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The integral membrane protein family (ITMs, e.g., ITM2B, 603904)
consists of integral type II membrane glycoproteins with an
extracellular C terminus. Using sequence analysis and 5-prime and
3-prime RACE, Vidal et al. (2001) isolated a cDNA corresponding to
integral membrane protein 2C (ITM2C, which the authors referred to as
BRI3), and showed that it encodes a 267-amino acid protein with a
calculated molecular mass of 30.2 kD. ITM2C shares several conserved
features with other human and murine ITM family members, including 1
N-glycosylation and 2 phosphorylation sites and a single transmembrane
domain. Mouse Itm2c shares 92.9% amino acid identity with human ITM2C.
ITM2C shares 43.7% amino acid identity with ITM2B, with greatest
identity in the C-terminal portion. EST homology searches identified
clones encoding a 219-amino acid ITM2C splice variant. The promoter
region of ITM2C is GC-rich and contains 3 SP1 and 5 AP-1 binding sites.
Northern blot analysis showed strong expression of a 2.1-kb ITM2C
transcript in brain and very weak expression in several other tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a human brain library with the
C-terminus of the beta-amyloid protein-converting enzyme BACE (604252)
as bait, Wickham et al. (2005) identified ITM2C as an interacting
protein. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the interaction of
ITM2C and BACE. By in situ hybridization, Wickham et al. (2005) showed
that ITM2C is widely expressed in mouse brain, especially in the
hippocampus, cortex, cerebellum, olfactory lobe, and striatum. In situ
hybridization analysis showed that ITM2C and BACE were expressed in
overlapping patterns in the brains of an Alzheimer disease patient,
normal mouse, and a mouse model of Alzheimer disease. A series of
pulse-chase experiments showed that ITM2C is cleaved to an approximately
4-kD C-terminal secreted product, and that the convertases furin
(136950), PC7 (604872), and to a lesser extent PC5A (600488) are
responsible for this cleavage.

GENE STRUCTURE

Using genomic sequence alignment, Vidal et al. (2001) showed that the
ITM2C gene contains 6 exons and spans more than 20 kb.

MAPPING

Vidal et al. (2001) identified the ITM2C gene within a genomic clone
mapping to chromosome 2.

REFERENCE 1. Vidal, R.; Calero, M.; Revesz, T.; Plant, G.; Ghiso, J.; Frangione,
B.: Sequence, genomic structure and tissue expression of human BRI(3),
a member of the BRI gene family. Gene 266: 95-102, 2001.

2. Wickham, L.; Benjannet, S.; Marcinkiewicz, E.; Chretien, M.; Seidah,
N. G.: Beta-amyloid protein converting enzyme 1 and brain-specific
type II membrane protein BRI(3): binding partners processed by furin. J.
Neurochem. 92: 93-102, 2005.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 8/25/2005

EDITED alopez: 08/25/2005
alopez: 8/25/2005

608086	TITLE *608086 GTPase, IMAP FAMILY, MEMBER 5; GIMAP5
;;IMMUNITY-ASSOCIATED NUCLEOTIDE 4-LIKE 1; IAN4L1;;
IAN4-LIKE 1;;
IMMUNITY-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 3; IMAP3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Daheron et al. (2001) cloned mouse Ian4 from a myeloid precursor cell
line. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.1-kb transcript in myeloid
cells. Cell fractionation and immunocytochemical analysis revealed
mitochondrial localization. A truncation mutant lacking the C-terminal
20 amino acids localized diffusely throughout the cytoplasm.

By searching a sequence database using IMAP1 (608084) as probe, Stamm et
al. (2002) identified IAN4L1, which they called IMAP3. The deduced
307-amino acid protein contains 5 motifs conserved in GTP-binding
proteins and a putative C-terminal transmembrane region. IAN4L1 shares
46% identity with IMAP1. Phylogenetic analysis showed that IAN4L1 is
homologous to mouse Ian4.

By Western blot and confocal microscopy analyses, Keita et al. (2007)
found that rat Gimap5 was expressed as a 35-kD protein in T lymphocytes,
but not other mononuclear cells, in a sedimentable subcellular
compartment distinct from mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum. Gimap5
did not colocalize with Bcl2 (151430).

GENE STRUCTURE

Stamm et al. (2002) determined that the IAN4L1 gene contains 3 exons.
Exon 1 is untranslated, and exon 3 contains more than 94% of the coding
sequence.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Stamm et al. (2002) mapped the IAN4L1 gene
to a 100-kb IMAP gene cluster on chromosome 7q32-q36. Within this
cluster, IMAP1 is located on the negative strand, while IMAP2 (608085),
IMAP3, and IMAP4 (608087) are on the opposite positive strand.

By interspecific backcross mapping, Daheron et al. (2001) mapped the
mouse Ian4 gene to the central region of chromosome 6.

ANIMAL MODEL

Biobreeding diabetes-prone (BBDP) rats homozygous for a frameshift
mutation in the Gimap5 gene, termed the lyp mutation, exhibit
spontaneous apoptosis of T lymphocytes, resulting in marked lymphopenia
and development of autoimmune type I diabetes (see 222100). Using flow
cytometry, Keita et al. (2007) found that T cells from lyp/lyp rats
showed loss of mitochondrial membrane potential. They proposed that
GIMAP5 regulates T-lymphocyte survival by mechanisms operating upstream
of mitochondria.

Barnes et al. (2010) identified a chemically induced recessive mutation,
which they called sphinx, in the mouse Gimap5 gene. Homozygous sphinx
mice, like Gimap5 -/- mice, were lymphopenic, showed granulocyte
accumulation, exhibited liver abnormalities, and died by age 14 weeks.
Further analysis of sphinx mice suggested that Gimap5 has cell-intrinsic
roles in lymphocyte survival, quiescence, and antigen receptor-induced
proliferation. Early morbidity of sphinx mice appeared to be due to
antibiotic-suppressible, microflora-dependent intestinal inflammation
and wasting disease. Barnes et al. (2010) proposed that GIMAP5 is a key
regulator of hematopoietic integrity and lymphocyte homeostasis.

REFERENCE 1. Barnes, M. J.; Aksoylar, H.; Krebs, P.; Bourdeau, T.; Arnold, C.
N.; Xia, Y.; Khovananth, K.; Engel, I.; Sovath, S.; Lampe, K.; Laws,
E.; Saunders, A.; Butcher, G. W.; Kronenberg, M.; Steinbrecher, K.;
Hildeman, D.; Grimes, H. L.; Beutler, B.; Hoebe, K.: Loss of T cell
and B cell quiescence precedes the onset of microbial flora-dependent
wasting disease and intestinal inflammation in Gimap5-deficient mice. J.
Immun. 184: 3743-3754, 2010.

2. Daheron, L.; Zenz, T.; Siracusa, L. D.; Brenner, C.; Calabretta,
B.: Molecular cloning of Ian4: a BCR/ABL-induced gene that encodes
an outer membrane mitochondrial protein with GTP-binding activity. Nucleic
Acids Res. 29: 1308-1316, 2001.

3. Keita, M.; Leblanc, C.; Andrews, D.; Ramanathan, S.: GIMAP5 regulates
mitochondrial integrity from a distinct subcellular compartment. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 361: 481-486, 2007.

4. Stamm, O.; Krucken, J.; Schmitt-Wrede, H.-P.; Benten, W. P. M.;
Wunderlich, F.: Human ortholog to mouse imap38 encoding an ER-localizable
G-protein belongs to a gene family clustered on chromosome 7q32-q36. Gene 282:
159-167, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/3/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/9/2003

EDITED mgross: 11/04/2010
mgross: 11/4/2010
terry: 11/3/2010
mgross: 9/9/2003

604744	TITLE *604744 DIMETHYLARGININE DIMETHYLAMINOHYDROLASE 2; DDAH2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase (DDAH; EC 3.5.3.18) regulates
cellular methylarginine concentrations, which in turn inhibit nitric
oxide synthase (see 163731) activity.

CLONING

Leiper et al. (1999) isolated a cDNA encoding DDAHI (604743) and, by
screening a database of translated open reading frames with the deduced
DDAHI peptide sequence, identified DDAHII. Both DDAHI and DDAHII cDNAs
encode 285-amino acid proteins. The DDAHII amino acid sequence shares
98% identity with that of its mouse homolog and 62% identity with the
sequence of DDAHI. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.0-kb DDAHII
transcript expressed at highest levels in heart, kidney, and placenta.

By RNA dot blot analysis, Tran et al. (2000) determined that DDAH2
expression predominates in more highly vascularized tissues and in
immune tissues, while DDAH1 expression predominates in tissues that also
express the neuronal isoform of NOS (163731).

GENE FUNCTION

Leiper et al. (1999) expressed a histidine-tagged DDAHII clone in E.
coli and assayed the cell lysate for DDAH activity. Recombinant DDAHII
metabolized ADMA and L-NMMA, but not SDMA or L-arginine, demonstrating
that DDAHII is a functional homolog of DDAHI.

By overexpression in human and murine endothelial cells, Smith et al.
(2003) determined that DDAH2 reduced the secretion of ADMA, increased
VEGF mRNA expression, and enhanced tube formation by cells grown in a
3-dimensional medium. A DDAH inhibitor reduced tube formation in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Genomic sequence analysis by Tran et al. (2000) indicated that DDAH2
contains 8 exons with 3 transcription start sites that generate
alternatively spliced transcripts.

MAPPING

Tran et al. (2000) mapped the DDAH2 gene to 6p21.3 by radiation hybrid
and FISH analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Leiper, J. M,; Santa Maria, J.; Chubb, A.; MacAllister, R. J.;
Charles, I. G.; Whitley, G. S.; Vallance, P.: Identification of two
human dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolases with distinct tissue
distributions and homology with microbial arginine deiminases. Biochem.
J. 343: 209-214, 1999.

2. Smith, C. L.; Birdsey, G. M.; Anthony, S.; Arrigoni, F. I.; Leiper,
J. M.; Vallance, P.: Dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase activity
modulates ADMA levels, VEGF expression, and cell phenotype. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 308: 984-989, 2003.

3. Tran, C. T. L.; Fox, M. F.; Vallance, P.; Leiper, J. M.: Chromosomal
localization, gene structure, and expression pattern of DDAH1: comparison
with DDAH2 and implications for evolutionary origins. Genomics 68:
101-105, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/4/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/31/2000

CREATED Stefanie A. Nelson: 3/27/2000

EDITED alopez: 06/11/2008
mgross: 2/4/2005
mgross: 10/31/2000
alopez: 3/27/2000

611056	TITLE *611056 SELENOCYSTEINE LYASE; SCLY
;;SCL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Selenocysteine lyase (SCLY; EC 4.4.1.16) catalyzes the pyridoxal 5-prime
phosphate-dependent conversion of L-selenocysteine to L-alanine and
elemental selenium (Mihara et al., 2000).

CLONING

By database analysis using porcine Scly as probe, followed by screening
a mouse liver cDNA library and human EST libraries, Mihara et al. (2000)
cloned a full-length mouse Scly cDNA and identified a partial human SCLY
cDNA sequence. The deduced mouse protein has 432 amino acids. RT-PCR
detected Scly expression in mouse brain, heart, lung, stomach, liver,
kidney, spleen, and testis. Western blot analysis detected expression in
all mouse tissues examined, with the highest expression in liver,
kidney, and testis. Mouse Scly localized to the cytosolic fraction in
mouse liver and formed homodimers.

GENE FUNCTION

Mihara et al. (2000) showed that mouse Scly catalyzed the conversion of
L-selenocysteine to L-alanine. Scly activity required pyridoxal 5-prime
phosphate, was specific to L-selenocysteine, and showed maximum
reactivity at pH 9.0.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the human
SCLY gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP SHGC-81267).

REFERENCE 1. Mihara, H.; Kurihara, T.; Watanabe, T.; Yoshimura, T.; Esaki, N.
: cDNA cloning, purification, and characterization of mouse liver
selenocysteine lyase: candidate for selenium delivery protein in selenoprotein
synthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 6195-6200, 2000.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 5/23/2007

EDITED wwang: 05/23/2007
wwang: 5/23/2007

300272	TITLE *300272 HISTONE DEACETYLASE 6; HDAC6
;;KIAA0901
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Histone acetylation (see HAT1; 603053) and deacetylation (see HDAC1;
601241) alternately exposes and occludes DNA to transcription factors.
There are at least 2 classes of HDACs, class I consisting of proteins
homologous to yeast Rpd3 (e.g., HDAC1, HDAC2 (605164), and HDAC3
(605166)) and class II consisting of proteins homologous to yeast Hda1
(e.g., HDAC4; 605314). HDAC6 belongs to class II.

CLONING

Nagase et al. (1998) isolated a cDNA encoding HDAC6, which they called
KIAA0901, from a brain cDNA library. RT-PCR analysis detected HDAC6
expression in all tissues tested, with highest expression in brain and
lowest expression in heart, spleen, and pancreas.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to yeast Hda1,
followed by screening a cDNA library and PCR, Grozinger et al. (1999)
identified cDNAs encoding the class II HDACs HDAC4, HDAC5 (605315), and
HDAC6. Sequence analysis predicted that the 1,216-amino acid HDAC6
protein consists of an apparent internal dimer containing 2 highly
homologous catalytic domains, the first beginning at residue 215 and the
second at residue 610. Northern blot analysis detected expression of a
5.0-kb HDAC6 transcript that was highest in heart, liver, kidney, and
pancreas. Functional analysis confirmed that HDAC6 possesses
deacetylation activity against all 4 core histones and that the 2
catalytic domains function independently. Western blot analysis showed
that HDAC6 is expressed as a 131-kD protein that does not
coimmunoprecipitate with other HDACs or transcription factors. Grozinger
et al. (1999) speculated that HDAC6 may not interact with histones in
vivo but may deacetylate other substrates.

Bertos et al. (2004) determined that the human HDAC6 protein contains 8
consecutive serine- and glutamic acid-containing tetradecapeptide (SE14)
repeats between the second deacetylase domain and the C-terminal
ubiquitin-binding zinc finger. The SE14 domain is not present in
orthologs from C. elegans, Drosophila, and mouse. HDAC6 also contains 2
nuclear export signals and a nuclear localization signal.

GENE FUNCTION

Hubbert et al. (2002) demonstrated that HDAC6 functions as a tubulin
deacetylase. HDAC6 is localized exclusively in the cytoplasm, where it
associates with microtubules and localizes with the microtubule motor
complex (see 601143). In vivo the overexpression of HDAC6 led to a
global deacetylation of alpha-tubulin (see 602529), whereas a decrease
in HDAC6 increased alpha-tubulin acetylation. In vitro, purified HDAC6
potently deacetylated alpha-tubulin in assembled microtubules.
Furthermore, overexpression of HDAC6 promoted chemotactic cell movement,
supporting the idea that HDAC6-mediated deacetylation regulates
microtubule-dependent cell motility. Hubbert et al. (2002) concluded
that HDAC6 is the tubulin deacetylase, and provided evidence that
reversible acetylation regulates important biologic processes beyond
histone metabolism and gene transcription.

Aggregates of misfolded proteins are transported and removed from the
cytoplasm by dynein motors via the microtubule network to an organelle
termed the aggresome, where they are processed. Kawaguchi et al. (2003)
identified HDAC6 as a component of the aggresome in human cells. HDAC6
could bind both polyubiquitinated misfolded proteins and dynein motors,
thereby recruiting misfolded protein cargo to dynein motors for
transport to aggresomes. Cells deficient in HDAC6 failed to clear
misfolded protein aggregates from the cytoplasm, could not form
aggresomes properly, and were hypersensitive to accumulation of
misfolded proteins.

Bertos et al. (2004) determined that the SE14 domain of HDAC6 was
dispensable for the deacetylase and ubiquitin-binding activities of
HDAC6, but it conferred acetyl-microtubule targeting. They further found
that HDAC6 maintained a cytoplasmic distribution in the presence of
leptomycin B, an inhibitor of nuclear export signals, and that the SE14
domain conferred leptomycin B resistance. The SE14 domain formed a
unique structure that caused monomeric HDAC6 to migrate at a molecular
mass of about 500 kD by gel filtration, rather than the predicted mass
of about 150 kD. Bertos et al. (2004) concluded that the cytoplasmic
distribution of HDAC6 is differentially regulated in mice and humans,
and that the SE14 domain serves to stably retain human HDAC6 in the
cytoplasm.

Kovacs et al. (2005) found that inactivation of HDAC6 in human embryonic
kidney cells led to HSP90 (see 140571) hyperacetylation, dissociation of
HSP90 from an essential cochaperone, p23 (607061), and loss of chaperone
activity. In HDAC6-deficient cells, HSP90-dependent maturation of the
glucocorticoid receptor (GCCR; 138040) was compromised, resulting in a
receptor defective in ligand binding, nuclear translocation, and
transcriptional activation. Kovacs et al. (2005) concluded that HSP90 is
a target of HDAC6 and that reversible acetylation is a mechanism that
regulates HSP90 chaperone complex activity.

Pandey et al. (2007) demonstrated in Drosophila that autophagy acts as a
compensatory degradation system when the ubiquitin proteasome system
(UPS) is impaired, and that HDAC6, a microtubule-associated deacetylase
that interacts with polyubiquitinated proteins, is an essential
mechanistic link in this compensatory interaction. The authors found
that compensatory autophagy was induced in response to mutations
affecting the proteasome and in response to UPS impairment in a fly
model of the neurodegenerative disease spinobulbar muscular atrophy.
Autophagy compensated for impaired UPS function in an HDAC6-dependent
manner. Furthermore, expression of HDAC6 was sufficient to rescue
degeneration associated with UPS dysfunction in vivo in an
autophagy-dependent manner. Pandey et al. (2007) concluded that
impairment of autophagy (i.e., associated with aging or genetic
variation) might predispose to neurodegeneration. Moreover, their
findings suggested that it may be possible to intervene in
neurodegeneration by augmenting HDAC6 to enhance autophagy.

Pugacheva et al. (2007) found that AURKA (603072) and its activator HEF1
(NEDD9; 602265) localized to the basal body and the second centriole in
quiescent ciliated human retinal pigment epithelial cells. Association
of AURKA with HEF1 in response to extracellular cues was required for
ciliary disassembly. Activation of AURKA was independently sufficient to
induce rapid ciliary resorption, and AURKA acted in this process through
phosphorylation of HDAC6, leading to HDAC6-dependent tubulin
deacetylation and destabilization of the ciliary axoneme. Small molecule
inhibitors of AURKA and HDAC6 reduced regulated disassembly of cilia.

An immediate response to cell stress is reversible blockade of mRNA
translation. Stalled mRNAs are sequestered into cytoplasmic stress
granules (SGs), which are complex assemblies of initiation factors and
proteins involved in translational control and RNA remodeling or
degradation, as well as 40S ribosome subunits and polyadenylated mRNAs
whose translation has been arrested. Kwon et al. (2007) showed that the
SG protein G3BP (608431) interacted with HDAC6 in vivo and in vitro and
that HDAC6 was recruited to SGs. Inhibition of HDAC led to impaired SG
assembly, and Hdac6-deficient mouse embryo fibroblasts failed to form
SGs, although they exhibited normal phosphorylation of Eif2a (609234) in
response to stress. Inactivating mutations in the catalytic domains or
the C-terminal zinc finger domain of HDAC6 impaired SG assembly. Kwon et
al. (2007) also found that HDAC6 was required for cells to recover from
oxidative stress. They proposed that HDAC6 is a central component of the
stress response that regulates SG formation and potentially contributes
to control of RNA metabolism and translation.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Mahlknecht et al. (2001) mapped the HDAC6 gene
to chromosome Xp11.23.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Chassaing et al. (2005) reported a 4-generation family segregating an
apparent X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia (300863) with features
including intrauterine growth retardation, hydrocephaly, rhizomelic
shortening, facial dysmorphism, and microphthalmia. Using X-linked
polymorphic microsatellite markers, Simon et al. (2010) performed
linkage analysis in the family described by Chassaing et al. (2005) and
mapped the disease locus to a 24-Mb interval on chromosome Xp11.3-q13.1
(lod = 3.30). By exon sequencing, Simon et al. (2010) identified a
variant in exon 29 of HDAC6, 281 bp after the translation termination
codon (c.*281A>T; 300272.0001) that completely segregated with the
disorder. The variant was located in the sequence corresponding to the
seed sequence of miR433 (611711). Transduction experiments with an HDAC6
3-prime UTR-bearing transgene showed that the mutation abrogated the
posttranscriptional regulation normally exerted by this microRNA.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CHONDRODYSPLASIA WITH PLATYSPONDYLY, DISTINCTIVE BRACHYDACTYLY, HYDROCEPHALY,
AND MICROPHTHALMIA (1 family)
HDAC6, 4023A-T

In the 4-generation family with X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia
described by Chassaing et al. (2005), Simon et al. (2010) detected an
A-to-T transversion in exon 29 of the HDAC6 gene, in the 3-prime
untranslated region 281 basepairs after the TAA translation termination
codon (c.*281A-T). The mutation completely cosegregated with the
disorder and was not found in SNP databases or in 100 control
individuals. The variant was located in the sequence corresponding to
the seed sequence of miR433 (611711). In MG63 osteosarcoma cells, miR433
downregulated both the expression of endogenous HDAC6 and that of an
enhanced green fluorescent protein-reporter mRNA bearing the wildtype
3-prime UTR of HDAC6. This effect was totally abrogated when the
reporter mRNA bore the mutated HDAC6 3-prime UTR. The HDAC6 protein was
overexpressed in thymus from an affected male fetus. Concomitantly, the
level of total alpha-tubulin (see 602529), a target of HDAC6, was
increased in the affected fetal thymus, whereas the level of acetylated
alpha-tubulin was profoundly decreased. Skin biopsies from a female
patient with striking body asymmetry expressed a mutated HDAC6 allele in
31% of affected arm-derived fibroblasts, whereas it was not expressed in
the contralateral arm. Overexpression of HDAC6 was also observed in
affected arm-derived fibroblasts. The authors concluded that the HDAC6
3-prime UTR variant suppressed miR433-mediated posttranscriptional
regulation, causing overexpression of HDAC6 and resulting in this form
of X-linked chondrodysplasia.

REFERENCE 1. Bertos, N. R.; Gilquin, B.; Chan, G. K. T.; Yen, T. J.; Khochbin,
S.; Yang, X.-J.: Role of the tetradecapeptide repeat domain of human
histone deacetylase 6 in cytoplasmic retention. J. Biol. Chem. 279:
48246-48254, 2004.

2. Chassaing, N.; Siani, V.; Carles, D.; Delezoide, A. L.; Alberti,
E. M.; Battin, J.; Chateil, J. F.; Gilbert-Dussardier, B.; Coupry,
I.; Arveiler, B.; Saura, R.; Lacombe, D.: X-linked dominant chondrodysplasia
with platyspondyly, distinctive brachydactyly, hydrocephaly, and microphthalmia
. Am. J. Med. Genet. 136A: 307-312, 2005.

3. Grozinger, C. M.; Hassig, C. A.; Schreiber, S. L.: Three proteins
define a class of human histone deacetylases related to yeast Hda1p. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 4868-4873, 1999.

4. Hubbert, C.; Guardiola, A.; Shao, R.; Kawaguchi, Y.; Ito, A.; Nixon,
A.; Yoshida, M.; Wang, X.-F.; Yao, T.-P.: HDAC6 is a microtubule-associated
deacetylase. Nature 417: 455-458, 2002.

5. Kawaguchi, Y.; Kovacs, J. J.; McLaurin, A.; Vance, J. M.; Ito,
A.; Yao, T.-P.: The deacetylase HDAC6 regulates aggresome formation
and cell viability in response to misfolded protein stress. Cell 115:
727-738, 2003.

6. Kovacs, J. J.; Murphy, P. J. M.; Gaillard, S.; Zhao, X.; Wu, J.-T.;
Nicchitta, C. V.; Yoshida, M.; Toft, D. O.; Pratt, W. B.; Yao, T.-P.
: HDAC6 regulates Hsp90 acetylation and chaperone-dependent activation
of glucocorticoid receptor. Molec. Cell 18: 601-607, 2005.

7. Kwon, S.; Zhang, Y.; Matthias, P.: The deacetylase HDAC6 is a
novel critical component of stress granules involved in the stress
response. Genes Dev. 21: 3381-3394, 2007.

8. Mahlknecht, U.; Schnittger, S.; Landgraf, F.; Schoch, C.; Ottmann,
O. G.; Hiddemann, W.; Hoelzer, D.: Assignment of the human histone
deacetylase 6 gene (HDAC6) to X chromosome p11.23 by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 93: 135-136, 2001.

9. Nagase, T.; Isikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 355-364, 1998.

10. Pandey, U. B.; Nie, Z.; Batlevi, Y.; McCray, B. A.; Ritson, G.
P.; Nedelsky, N. B.; Schwartz, S. L.; DiProspero, N. A.; Knight, M.
A.; Schuldiner, O.; Padmanabhan, R.; Hild, M.; Berry, D. L.; Garza,
D.; Hubbert, C. C.; Yao, T.-P.; Baehrecke, E. H.; Taylor, J. P.:
HDAC6 rescues neurodegeneration and provides an essential link between
autophagy and the UPS. Nature 447: 859-863, 2007.

11. Pugacheva, E. N.; Jablonski, S. A.; Hartman, T. R.; Henske, E.
P.; Golemis, E. A.: HEF1-dependent Aurora A activation induces disassembly
of the primary cilium. Cell 129: 1351-1363, 2007.

12. Simon, D.; Laloo, B.; Barillot, M.; Barnetche, T.; Blanchard,
C.; Rooryck, C.; Marche, M.; Burgelin, I.; Coupry, I.; Chassaing,
N.; Gilbert-Dussardier, B.; Lacombe, D.; Grosset, C.; Arveiler, B.
: A mutation in the 3-prime-UTR of the HDAC6 gene abolishing the post-transcriptional
regulation mediated by hsa-miR-433 is linked to a new form of dominant
X-linked chondrodysplasia. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 2015-2027, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 09/16/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/14/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/23/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/29/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/2/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/13/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/28/2002
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 8/28/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/4/2000

EDITED alopez: 09/16/2013
mgross: 1/15/2008
terry: 1/14/2008
mgross: 8/30/2007
terry: 8/23/2007
alopez: 7/3/2007
terry: 6/29/2007
mgross: 6/8/2006
terry: 6/2/2006
wwang: 7/7/2005
wwang: 6/28/2005
terry: 6/13/2005
alopez: 5/31/2002
terry: 5/28/2002
mcapotos: 8/28/2001
mgross: 11/29/2000
mgross: 10/4/2000

603940	TITLE *603940 POTASSIUM CHANNEL, SUBFAMILY K, MEMBER 7; KCNK7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Members of the tandem pore domain potassium (K2P) channel family, such
as TWIK1 (601745) and TREK (603219), contain 4 transmembrane domains and
2 pore-forming (P) domains. See KCNK6 (603939). By searching an EST
database for sequences related to mouse Kcnk6, Salinas et al. (1999)
isolated a human cDNA encoding a novel potassium channel, which they
designated KCNK7. RT-PCR revealed that exon skipping gives rise to 5
mRNA species encoding 3 protein forms, KCNK7-A, -B, and -C. The
predicted 307-amino acid KCNK7A form is the longest; KCNK7B and KCNK7C
have truncated cytoplasmic C termini. Sequence analysis revealed that
the KCNK7 protein contains 4 potential transmembrane segments and 2 P
domains. The P2 domain contains a very unconventional GLE motif instead
of the GLG found in TWIK1 and KCNK6 or the GFG found in other K2P
channels. The core region spanning the 4 transmembrane domains of KCNK7A
shares 80% and 42% protein sequence identity with those of Kcnk6 and
TWIK1, respectively. As with Kcnk6, none of the KCNK7 protein forms were
able to generate channel activity when expressed in mammalian cells.

MAPPING

By analysis of radiation hybrids, Salinas et al. (1999) mapped the KCNK7
gene to 11q13.

REFERENCE 1. Salinas, M.; Reyes, R.; Lesage, F.; Fosset, M.; Heurteaux, C.;
Romey, G.; Lazdunski, M.: Cloning of a new mouse two-P domain channel
subunit and a human homologue with a unique pore structure. J. Biol.
Chem. 274: 11751-11760, 1999.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/29/1999

EDITED alopez: 12/02/2010
joanna: 6/6/2000
mgross: 6/30/1999
mgross: 6/29/1999

123930	TITLE *123930 CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY IIB, POLYPEPTIDE 6; CYP2B6
;;CYTOCHROME P450, PHENOBARBITAL-INDUCIBLE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Miles et al. (1988) reported the isolation of cDNA clones that seemed,
on the basis of their sequence homology to the rat P450IIB1 cDNA, to be
encoded by part of the human P450IIB subfamily. Evidence of alternative
splicing at the CYP2B locus was presented. Yamano et al. (1989)
demonstrated 2 anomalous cDNAs derived from the CYP2B locus on
chromosome 19.

GENE FUNCTION

Santisteban et al. (1988) were unable to demonstrate directly that
either P450IIA (CYP2A; see 122720) or IIB is inducible by phenobarbital
in man. However, they showed that members of both gene subfamilies are
inducible by phenobarbital in the marmoset monkey.

Thum and Borlak (2000) investigated the gene expression of major human
cytochrome P450 genes in various regions of explanted hearts from 6
patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and 1 with transposition of the
arterial trunk and 2 samples of normal heart. mRNA for cytochrome 2B6
was predominantly expressed in the right ventricle. A strong correlation
between tissue-specific gene expression and enzyme activity was found.
Thum and Borlak (2000) concluded that their findings showed that
expression of genes for cytochrome P450 monooxgenases and verapamil
metabolism are found predominantly in the right side of the heart, and
suggested that this observation may explain the lack of efficacy of
certain cardioselective drugs.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mizukami et al. (1983) determined the structure of a rat
phenobarbital-inducible P-450 gene. The gene spans about 14 kb and has 8
introns. The putative transcription start site is located 30 bp upstream
of the ATG initiation codon and a TATA-like sequence is present 27 bp
farther 5-prime-ward. The 3-prime end contains a putative
polyadenylation signal 25 to 26 bp upstream of the poly(A) attachment
site. Mizukami et al. (1983) concluded that the gene they sequenced is
P-450e (Cyp2b2) or a similar gene. Presumably, all P-450 genes have a
similar structure.

MAPPING

Using a cloned cDNA that codes for a human ortholog of the
phenobarbital-inducible cytochrome P450IIB subfamily in rodents,
Santisteban et al. (1988) localized the CYP2B gene(s) to 19cen-q13.3 by
Southern blot hybridization to DNA extracted from a panel of
human-rodent somatic cell hybrids. The CYP2A locus is also located on
chromosome 19. Other members of the P450II family are located on
chromosome 10 (2C) and chromosome 22 (2D).

By Southern blot analysis of human-rodent somatic cell hybrids, Miles et
al. (1988) established the chromosomal localization of the CYP2B gene
subfamily to be 19q12-19q13.2, close to the location of CYP2A. Rat
chromosome 1 shows homology to mouse chromosome 7 and human chromosome
19 and contains the rat P450IIB genes. Southern blot analysis indicated
the distinctness of the CYP2A and CYP2B clusters. Miles et al. (1988)
used RFLPs of these loci to establish the linkage relationships.

CYP2B is in the same NotI fragment as CYP2A (Spurr, 1988). Although
CYP2A and CYP2B map to the same 350-kb pulsed field gel electrophoresis
fragment, recombination between them was observed by Walsh et al.
(1989), suggesting that they are separated by a recombination hotspot.
Yamano et al. (1989) confirmed the assignment to chromosome 19 using the
somatic cell hybrid method. By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Trask
et al. (1993) assigned the CYP2B gene to 19q13.2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Efavirenz, an effective antiretroviral agent used in the treatment of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV; see 609423) infection, is associated
with central nervous system side (CNS) effects (see 614546). Population
differences in pharmacokinetics and treatment response to the drug are
known. Haas et al. (2004) examined associations between CNS side effects
and efavirenz plasma concentration-time profiles and polymorphisms in
several genes, including CYP2B6, in 157 American HIV-infected patients.
They found that homozygosity for a nonsynonymous CYP2B6 SNP, 516G-T
(dbSNP rs3745274; 123930.0001), was present in 20% of African Americans
compared with only 3% of European Americans and was associated with
higher efavirenz exposure in plasma (P less than 0.0001). The median
24-hour area under the curve of efavirenz was about 3-fold higher in
516T homozygotes than in 516G homozygotes, and was intermediate in 516GT
heterozygotes, regardless of ethnicity, suggesting a gene dosage effect.
Among all patients, CNS side effects at week 1 were associated with 516T
(P = 0.036). There were no significant immunologic or virologic
differences for polymorphisms in any of the genes studied. Haas et al.
(2004) concluded that interindividual differences in drug metabolism
may, in part, explain susceptibility to efavirenz CNS side effects.

Blievernicht et al. (2007) used multiplex PCR and MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometry to genotype 15 SNPs of CYP2B6.

Watanabe et al. (2010) expressed wildtype CYP2B6 and 26 CYP2B6 variants
in COS-7 cells and assessed kinetic parameters against 2 substrates,
selegiline and 7-ethoxy-4-trifluoromethylcoumarin (7-EFC). They found
that 2 variants, CYP2B6.10 and CYP2B6.14, had significantly lower
Vmax/Km values for selegiline N-demethylation compared with wildtype
CYP2B6. The kinetic parameters for 9 other variants could not be
determined because they were inactive in the deethylation of 7-EFC and
the N-demethylation/N-depropaglyation of selegiline.

POPULATION GENETICS

By genotyping 100 healthy Mongolians, Davaalkham et al. (2009) found
that 7% of Mongolians were homozygous for the T allele of 516G-T,
whereas 64% were homozygous for the G allele. They noted that the
overall CYP2B6 allele distribution was comparable to that in Japanese,
Korean, and Han Chinese populations.

ANIMAL MODEL

Paolini et al. (1999) found significant increases in the
carcinogen-metabolizing enzymes CYP1A1 (108330), CYP1A2 (124060), CYP3A
(124010), CYP2B, and CYP2A in the lungs of rats supplemented with high
doses of beta-carotene. The authors suggested that correspondingly high
levels of CYPs in humans would predispose an individual to cancer risk
from the widely bioactivated tobacco-smoke procarcinogens, thus
explaining the cocarcinogenic effect of beta-carotene in smokers.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
EFAVIRENZ, POOR METABOLISM OF
EFAVIRENZ CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM TOXICITY, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
CYP2B6, GLN172HIS (dbSNP rs3745274)

Haas et al. (2004) studied 157 American HIV-infected patients and found
that homozygosity for a nonsynonymous SNP in CYP2B6, 516G-T (dbSNP
rs3745274), which results in a gln172-to-his (Q172H) substitution, was
present in 20% of African Americans compared with only 3% of European
Americans and was associated with higher efavirenz exposure in plasma (P
less than 0.0001). The median 24-hour area under the curve of efavirenz
was about 3-fold higher in 516T homozygotes than in 516G homozygotes,
and was intermediate in 516GT heterozygotes, regardless of ethnicity,
suggesting a gene dosage effect. Among all patients, CNS side effects at
week 1 were associated with 516T (P = 0.036). Higher efavirenz
concentrations had no effect on HIV viral load.

Carr et al. (2010) determined plasma efavirenz concentrations in 219
HIV-positive Chilean patients and identified 11 CYP2B6 SNPs that were
significantly associated with drug concentrations. Of these, only 516G-T
(P = 5.6 x 10(-20)) was exonic. However, a composite model in which
516G-T was combined 2 other SNPs was more strongly associated with
efavirenz plasma concentrations than 516G-T alone.

Elens et al. (2010) studied 50 HIV-infected patients from Belgium and
confirmed that minimum trough plasma level concentrations of efavirenz
were associated with CYP2B6 allelic status. They also found that
cell-associated concentrations of efavirenz were associated with CYP2B6
516G-T. Elens et al. (2010) concluded that knowledge of CYP2B6 genetic
status should be taken into account for efavirenz treatment.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Cressey and Lallemant (2007)
REFERENCE 1. Blievernicht, J. K.; Schaeffeler, E.; Klein, K.; Eichelbaum, M.;
Schwab, M.; Zanger, U. M.: MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry for multiplex
genotyping of CYP2B6 single-nucleotide polymorphisms. Clin. Chem. 53:
24-33, 2007.

2. Carr, D. F.; la Porte, C. J. L.; Pirmohamed, M.; Owen, A.; Cortes,
C. P.: Haplotype structure of CYP2B6 and association with plasma
efavirenz concentrations in a Chilean HIV cohort. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 65: 1889-1893, 2010.

3. Cressey, T. R.; Lallemant, M.: Pharmacogenetics of antiretroviral
drugs for the treatment of HIV-infected patients: an update. Infect.
Genet. Evol. 7: 333-342, 2007.

4. Davaalkham, J.; Hayashida, T.; Tsuchiya, K.; Gatanaga, H.; Nyamkhuu,
D.; Oka, S.: Allele and genotype frequencies of cytochrome P450 2B6
gene in a Mongolian population. Drug Metab. Dispos. 37: 1991-1993,
2009.

5. Elens, L.; Vandercam, B.; Yombi, J.-C.; Lison, D.; Wallemacq, P.;
Haufroid, V.: Influence of host genetic factors on efavirenz plasma
and intracellular pharmacokinetics in HIV-1-infected patients. Pharmacogenomics 11:
1223-1234, 2010.

6. Haas, D. W.; Ribaudo, H. J.; Kim, R. B.; Tierney, C.; Wilkinson,
G. R.; Gulick, R. M.; Clifford, D. B.; Hulgan, T.; Marzolini, C.;
Acosta, E. P.: Pharmacogenetics of efavirenz and central nervous
system side effects: an Adult AIDS Clinical Trials Group study. AIDS 18:
2391-2400, 2004.

7. Miles, J. S.; Spurr, N. K.; Gough, A. C.; Jowett, T.; McLaren,
A. W.; Brook, J. D.; Wolf, C. R.: A novel human cytochrome P450 gene
(P450IIB): chromosomal localization and evidence for alternative splicing. Nucleic
Acids Res. 16: 5783-5795, 1988.

8. Mizukami, Y.; Sogawa, K.; Suwa, Y.; Muramatsu, M.; Fujii-Kuriyama,
Y.: Gene structure of a phenobarbital-inducible cytochrome P-450
in rat liver. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 3958-3962, 1983.

9. Paolini, M.; Cantelli-Forti, G.; Perocco, P.; Pedulli, G. F.; Abdel-Rahman,
S. Z.; Legator, M. S.: Co-carcinogenic effect of beta-carotene. (Letter) Nature 398:
760-761, 1999.

10. Santisteban, I.; Povey, S.; Shephard, E. A.; Phillips, I. R.:
The major phenobarbital-inducible cytochrome P-450 gene subfamily
(P450IIB) mapped to the long arm of human chromosome 19. Ann. Hum.
Genet. 52: 129-135, 1988.

11. Spurr, N.: Personal Communication. London, England  10/25/1988.

12. Thum, T.; Borlak, J.: Gene expression in distinct regions of
the heart. Lancet 355: 979-983, 2000.

13. Trask, B.; Fertitta, A.; Christensen, M.; Youngblom, J.; Bergmann,
A.; Copeland, A.; de Jong, P.; Mohrenweiser, H.; Olsen, A.; Carrano,
A.; Tynan, K.: Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping of human
chromosome 19: cytogenetic band location of 540 cosmids and 70 genes
or DNA markers. Genomics 15: 133-145, 1993.

14. Walsh, K. V.; Harley, H. G.; Rundle, S. A.; Brook, J. D.; Miles,
J. S.; Wolf, C. R.; Shaw, D. J.; Harper, P. S.: The linkage relationship
of the loci CYP2A and CYP2B. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51:
1102, 1989.

15. Watanabe, T.; Sakuyama, K.; Sasaki, T.; Ishii, Y.; Ishikawa, M.;
Hirasawa, N.; Hiratsuka, M.: Functional characterization of 26 CYP2B6
allelic variants (CYP2B6.2-CYP2B6.28, except CYP2B6.22). Pharmacogenet.
Genomics 20: 459-462, 2010.

16. Yamano, S.; Nhamburo, P. T.; Aoyama, T.; Meyer, U. A.; Inaba,
T.; Kalow, W.; Gelboin, H. V.; McBride, O. W.; Gonzalez, F. J.: cDNA
cloning and sequence and cDNA-directed expression of human P450 IIB1:
identification of a normal and two variant cDNAs derived from the
CYP2B locus on chromosome 19 and differential expression of the IIB
mRNAs in human liver. Biochemistry 28: 7340-7348, 1989.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/14/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/13/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/6/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/15/1988

EDITED carol: 02/26/2013
mgross: 6/19/2012
terry: 6/14/2012
mgross: 3/23/2012
mgross: 3/22/2012
terry: 5/13/2011
mgross: 8/21/2003
mgross: 8/20/2003
alopez: 6/15/2000
alopez: 5/6/1999
terry: 5/24/1996
warfield: 4/8/1994
carol: 2/11/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/31/1991
carol: 7/6/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990

607209	TITLE *607209 CASPASE RECRUITMENT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 10; CARD10
;;CARD-MAGUK PROTEIN 3; CARMA3;;
BCL10-INTERACTING MAGUK PROTEIN 1; BIMP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The caspase recruitment domain (CARD) is a protein module that consists
of 6 or 7 antiparallel alpha helices. It participates in apoptosis
signaling through highly specific protein-protein homophilic
interactions. Like several other CARD proteins, CARD10 belongs to the
membrane-associated guanylate kinase (MAGUK) family and activates
NF-kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011) through BCL10 (603517) (Wang et al.,
2001).

CLONING

By database searching for CARD proteins with high similarity to, and
therefore a greater likelihood of interacting with, BCL10, Gaide et al.
(2001) identified CARD11 (607210), CARD14 (607211), and CARD10, which
they termed CARMA1, CARMA2, and CARMA3, respectively.

Using a mammalian 2-hybrid screen to identify proteins that interact
with BCL10 and induce luciferase activity, Wang et al. (2001) identified
CARD10, which interacted selectively with BCL10 and not other CARD
proteins. The deduced 1,032-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal
CARD domain that shares 58% identity with that of CARD11, a central
coiled-coil domain, and a C-terminal tripartite structure comprised of a
PDZ domain, an SH3 domain, and a GUK domain. Northern blot analysis
revealed expression of a 4.4-kb transcript in a variety of adult
tissues, including heart, kidney, and liver. CARD10 was also expressed
in fetal lung, liver, and kidney, and in multiple cancer cell lines.

McAllister-Lucas et al. (2001) cloned mouse and human CARD10, which they
termed BIMP1, by EST database searching for clones homologous to the
CARD of CARD9 (607212). The mouse Card10 protein is 90% identical to the
human protein.

GENE FUNCTION

By mutation and immunoprecipitation analyses, Wang et al. (2001)
confirmed that the CARD domain of CARD10 is required for its interaction
with BCL10. Luciferase reporter analysis showed induction of NFKB
activity through IKKG (IKBKG; 300248) or IKKB (IKBKB; 603258), and this
induction required the N terminus of CARD10, as well as its SH3 and PDZ
domains, but not its GUK domain.

By coprecipitation analysis, McAllister-Lucas et al. (2001) showed that
BIMP1, in the presence of BCL10, interacts with MALT1 (604860) and
cooperates in a signaling pathway through a CARD-mediated mechanism.
Analysis of stimulated T cells suggested that BIMP1, through its
interaction with BCL10, functions to couple cell surface receptor
stimulation and protein kinase C (see 176982) activation to the
induction of NFKB.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the CARD10
gene to chromosome 22 (TMAP stSG53029).

ANIMAL MODEL

Grabiner et al. (2007) found that Carma3 +/- mice had no developmental
defects, but about 50% of Carma3 -/- mice developed anencephaly, leading
to perinatal mortality. Anencephaly is also present in about 50% of
Bcl10 -/- mice, supporting the hypothesis that CARMA3 and BCL10 function
in the same signal transduction pathway. Using Carma3 -/- mouse
embryonic fibroblasts, Grabiner et al. (2007) showed that Carma3 was
required for G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR; see 600239)-induced
NF-kappa-B activation. The defect was specific, because other stimuli,
such as Tnf-alpha (TNF; 191160), lipopolysaccharide, and extracellular
matrix proteins, activated NF-kappa-B in Carma3 -/- cells. Grabiner et
al. (2007) concluded that CARMA3 is involved in a GPCR-induced signaling
pathway leading to NF-kappa-B activation.

REFERENCE 1. Gaide, O.; Martinon, F.; Micheau, O.; Bonnet, D.; Thome, M.; Tschopp,
J.: Carma1, a CARD-containing binding partner of Bcl10, induces Bcl10
phosphorylation and NF-kappa-B activation. FEBS Lett. 496: 121-127,
2001.

2. Grabiner, B. C.; Blonska, M.; Lin, P.-C.; You, Y.; Wang, D.; Sun,
J.; Darnay, B. G.; Dong, C.; Lin, X.: CARMA3 deficiency abrogates
G protein-coupled receptor-induced NF-kappa-B activation. Genes Dev. 21:
984-996, 2007.

3. McAllister-Lucas, L. M.; Inohara, N.; Lucas, P. C.; Ruland, J.;
Benito, A.; Li, Q.; Chen, S.; Chen, F. F.; Yamaoka, S.; Verma, I.
M.; Mak, T. W.; Nunez, G.: Bimp1, a MAGUK family member linking protein
kinase C activation to Bcl10-mediated NF-kappa-B induction. J. Biol.
Chem. 276: 30589-30597, 2001.

4. Wang, L.; Guo, Y.; Huang, W.-J.; Ke, X.; Poyet, J.-L.; Manji, G.
A.; Merriam, S.; Glucksmann, M. A.; DiStefano, P. S.; Alnemri, E.
S.; Bertin, J.: CARD10 is a novel caspase recruitment domain/membrane-associated
guanylate kinase family member that interacts with BCL10 and activates
NF-kappa-B. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 21405-21409, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/16/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/12/2002

EDITED mgross: 05/30/2007
terry: 5/16/2007
joanna: 9/25/2002
mgross: 9/12/2002

613400	TITLE *613400 ACIREDUCTONE DIOXYGENASE 1; ADI1
;;SUBMERGENCE-INDUCED PROTEIN-LIKE; SIPL;;
MT1-MMP CYTOPLASMIC TAIL-BINDING PROTEIN 1; MTCBP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching a cDNA expression library for clones that permitted
hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in HEK293 cells expressing
Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen-1 (293EBNA cells), followed by
5-prime RACE of a normal liver cDNA library, Yeh et al. (2001) cloned
ADI1, which they called SIPL. The transcript contains a short upstream
ORF in addition to the major ORF. The deduced protein shares significant
similarity with rice Sip, which is induced by submergence in water.
Database analysis revealed a putative splice variant encoding a protein
with 63 additional N-terminal amino acids, which Yeh et al. (2001)
called 'extended SIPL' (ESIPL). Northern blot analysis failed to detect
SIPL in any tissue; however, RT-PCR followed by Southern blot analysis
detected SIPL in all normal and tumor tissues examined. ESIPL
transcripts were detected only in skeletal muscle and in hepatocellular
carcinoma, ovarian cancer, and placenta choriocarcinoma. Epitope-tagged
SIPL was expressed in both the nucleus and cytoplasm of transfected 293
cells, with perinuclear or nuclear clustering in some cells. Database
analysis revealed SIPL orthologs in all organisms examined, including
prokaryotes.

GENE FUNCTION

Yeh et al. (2001) showed that 293EBNA cells expressing SIPL were
permissive for HCV infection, while untransfected cells were not.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Uekita et al. (2004) found that the
isolated C-terminal tail of MMP14 (600754) interacted with MTCBP1.
MTCBP1 colocalized with MMP14 at the cell membrane, but it was also
detected in the cytoplasm and nucleus. MTCBP1 inhibited the activity of
MMP14 to promote cell migration and invasion.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the ADI1 gene to chromosome 2p25.3 based on an
alignment of the ADI1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK001775) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/10/2010.

2. Uekita, T.; Gotoh, I.; Kinoshita, T.; Itoh, Y.; Sato, H.; Shiomi,
T.; Okada, Y.; Seiki, M.: Membrane-type 1 matrix metalloproteinase
cytoplasmic tail-binding protein-1 is a new member of the Cupin superfamily:
a possible multifunctional protein acting as an invasion suppressor
down-regulated in tumors. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 12734-12743, 2004.

3. Yeh, C.-T.; Lai, H.-Y.; Chen, T.-C.; Chu, C.-M.; Liaw, Y.-F.:
Identification of a hepatic factor capable of supporting hepatitis
C virus replication in a nonpermissive cell line. J. Virol. 75:
11017-11024, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/2/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/10/2010

EDITED mgross: 08/09/2010
terry: 8/2/2010
mgross: 5/10/2010

607021	TITLE *607021 SEIZURE-RELATED 6-LIKE; SEZ6L
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Allelic losses on 22q are frequently found in small cell lung carcinomas
(SCLCs) and advanced non-small cell lung carcinomas, indicating the
presence of tumor suppressor gene(s) on that chromosome arm. In an SCLC
cell line, Nishioka et al. (2000) detected a homozygous deletion at
22q12.1. Cloning of the breakpoints revealed that the deletion was
interstitial and was 428,131 bp in size. The deleted region contained
the SEZ6L (seizure 6-like) gene, whose structure had been partially
determined by the chromosome 22 sequencing project (Dunham et al.,
1999). The SEZ6L cDNA contains a 3,072-bp open reading frame encoding a
1,024-amino acid transmembrane protein with multiple domains involved in
protein-protein interaction and signal transduction. SEZ6L expression
was detected in a variety of human tissues, including lung, while its
expression was detected in 14 (30%) of 46 lung cancer cell lines
examined. Missense mutations were detected in 3 (7%) of 46 cell lines,
and a 1-bp deletion in the polypyrimidine tract preceding exon 4 was
detected in 1 (2%) of 46 primary lung cancers. Therefore, Nishioka et
al. (2000) considered it possible that genetic and/or epigenetic SEZ6L
alterations are involved in the development and/or progression in a
subset of lung cancer, although functional analysis of the SEZ6L gene as
well as molecular analysis of other genes in the homozygously deleted
region would be necessary in order to understand the pathogenetic
significance of 22q deletions in human lung carcinogenesis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nishioka et al. (2000) concluded that the SEZ6L gene consists of 17
exons within a 210-kb region.

MAPPING

Nishioka et al. (2000) identified the SEZ6L gene within a deletion at
chromosome 22q12.1.

GENE FUNCTION

SEZ6L was one of the genes studied by Suzuki et al. (2002) in a
microarray genome screen for genes upregulated by demethylation and
histone deacetylase inhibition in human colorectal cancer.

REFERENCE 1. Dunham, I.; Shimizu, N.; Roe, B. A.; Chissoe, S.; Hunt, A. R.;
Collins, J. E.; Bruskiewich, R.; Beare, D. M.; Clamp, M.; Smink, L.
J.; Ainscough, R.; Almeida, J. P.; and 213 others: The DNA sequence
of human chromosome 22. Nature 402: 489-495, 1999. Note: Erratum:
Nature 404: 904 only, 2000.

2. Nishioka, M.; Kohno, T.; Takahashi, M.; Niki, T.; Yamada, T.; Sone,
S.; Yokota, J.: Identification of a 428-kb homozygously deleted region
disrupting the SEZ6L gene at 22q12.1 in a lung cancer cell line. Oncogene 19:
6251-6260, 2000.

3. Suzuki, H.; Gabrielson, E.; Chen, W.; Anbazhagan, R.; van Engeland,
M.; Weijenberg, M. P.; Herman, J. G.; Baylin, S. B.: A genomic screen
for genes upregulated by demethylation and histone deacetylase inhibition
in human colorectal cancer. Nature Genet. 31: 141-149, 2002.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/6/2002

EDITED terry: 09/07/2012
alopez: 6/6/2002

600285	TITLE *600285 EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION TERMINATION FACTOR 1; ETF1
;;RELEASE FACTOR 1; RF1;;
ERF1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Termination of protein biosynthesis and release of the nascent
polypeptide chain are signaled by the presence of an in-frame stop codon
at the aminoacyl site of the ribosome. The process of translation
termination is universal and is mediated by protein release factors
(RFs) and GTP. A class 1 RF recognizes the stop codon and promotes the
hydrolysis of the ester bond linking the polypeptide chain with the
peptidyl site tRNA, a reaction catalyzed at the peptidyl transferase
center of the ribosome. Class 2 RFs, which are not codon specific and do
not recognize codons, stimulate class 1 RF activity and confer GTP
dependency upon the process. In prokaryotes, both class 1 RFs, RF1 and
RF2, recognize UAA; however, UAG and UGA are decoded specifically by RF1
and RF2, respectively. In eukaryotes, eRF1, or ETF1, the functional
counterpart of RF1 and RF2, functions as an omnipotent RF, decoding all
3 stop codons (Frolova et al., 1994).

CLONING

Frolova et al. (1994) characterized a family of tightly related proteins
from lower and higher eukaryotes that are structurally and functionally
similar to rabbit RF. Two of these proteins, one from human and the
other from Xenopus laevis, were expressed in yeast and Escherichia coli,
respectively, purified, and shown to be active in the in vitro RF assay.
Another protein of this family, sup45 (sup1) of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae, is involved in omnipotent suppression during translation.
The amino acid sequence of the RF1 family is highly conserved. Frolova
et al. (1994) concluded that the RF1 proteins are directly implicated in
the termination of translation in eukaryotes.

GENE FUNCTION

Eukaryotic RF1 and RF3 (see GSPT1; 139259) are involved in translation
termination. In vitro, RF1 catalyzes the release of the polypeptide
chain without any stop codon specificity; the GTP-binding protein RF3
confers GTP dependence to the termination process and stimulates RF1
activity. Le Goff et al. (1997) used tRNA-mediated nonsense suppression
of different stop codons in a CAT reporter gene to analyze the
polypeptide chain release factor activities of recombinant human RF1 and
RF3 proteins overexpressed in human cells. Using a CAT assay, they
measured the competition between the suppressor tRNA and the release
factors when a stop codon was present in the ribosomal A site.
Regardless of which of the 3 stop codons was present in the CAT open
reading frame, the overexpression of RF1 alone markedly decreased
translational read-through by suppressor tRNA. Thus, Le Goff et al.
(1997) concluded that RF1 has intrinsic antisuppressor activity. The
levels of antisuppression when both RF1 and RF3 were overexpressed were
almost the same as those when RF1 was overexpressed alone, suggesting
that RF1-RF3 complex-mediated termination may be controlled by the
expression level of RF1. Overexpression of RF3 alone had an inhibitory
effect on CAT gene expression. CAT mRNA stability studies suggested that
RF3 inhibits gene expression at the transcriptional level. Le Goff et
al. (1997) suggested that RF3 may perform other functions, including the
stimulation of RF1 activity, in vivo.

Alkalaeva et al. (2006) reconstituted eukaryotic translation initiation,
elongation, and termination processes in vitro on a model mRNA encoding
a tetrapeptide followed by a UAA stop codon using individual 40S and 60S
ribosomal subunits and the complete set of individual initiation,
elongation, and release factors. They found that binding of human ERF1
and ERF3A (GSPT1) and GTP to the ribosomal pretermination complex
induced a structural rearrangement characterized by a 2-nucleotide
forward shift of the toeprint attributed to the pretermination complex.
Subsequent GTP hydrolysis was required for rapid hydrolysis of peptidyl
tRNA in the pretermination complex. Cooperativity between ERF1 and ERF3A
in ensuring fast peptidyl-tRNA hydrolysis required the ERF3A-binding
C-terminal domain of ERF1.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Song et al. (2000) determined the crystal structure of ETF1 to
2.8-angstrom resolution, which, when combined with mutagenesis analyses
of the universal GGQ motif, revealed the molecular mechanism of RF
activity. The overall shape and dimensions of ETF1 resemble a tRNA
molecule, with domains 1, 2, and 3 of ETF1 corresponding to the
anticodon loop, aminoacyl acceptor stem, and T stem of a tRNA molecule,
respectively. The position of the essential GGQ motif at an exposed tip
of domain 2 suggested to the authors that the gln residue coordinates a
water molecule to mediate the hydrolytic activity at the peptidyl
transferase center. Song et al. (2000) proposed that a conserved groove
on domain 1, 80 angstroms from the GGQ motif, forms the codon
recognition site.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lai et al. (2001) determined that the ETF1 gene contains 10 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Hansen et al. (1999) mapped the ETF1 gene
to chromosome 5q31.1. Guenet et al. (2000) confirmed the mapping of the
ETF1 gene to 5q31 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Alkalaeva, E. Z.; Pisarev, A. V.; Frolova, L. Y.; Kisselev, L.
L.; Pestova, T. V.: In vitro reconstitution of eukaryotic translation
reveals cooperativity between release factors eRF1 and eRF3. Cell 125:
1125-1136, 2006.

2. Frolova, L.; Le Goff, X.; Rasmussen, H. H.; Cheperegin, S.; Drugeon,
G.; Kress, M.; Arman, I.; Haenni, A.-L.; Celis, J. E.; Philippe, M.;
Justesen, J.; Kisselev, L.: A highly conserved eukaryotic protein
family possessing properties of polypeptide chain release factor. Nature 372:
701-703, 1994.

3. Guenet, L.; Henry, C.; Toutain, B.; Dubourg, C.; Le Gall, J. Y.;
David, V.; Le Treut, A.: Eukaryotic translation termination factor
gene (ETF1/eRF1) maps at D5S500 in a commonly deleted region of chromosome
5q31 in malignant myeloid diseases. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 88: 82-86,
2000.

4. Hansen, L. L.; Jakobsen, C. G.; Justesen, J.: Assignment of the
human translation termination factor 1 (ETF1) to 5q31.1 and of the
proximal marker D5S1995 by radiation hybrid mapping. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 87: 256-257, 1999.

5. Lai, F.; Godley, L. A.; Joslin, J.; Fernald, A. A.; Liu, J.; Espinosa,
R., III; Zhao, N.; Pamintuan, L.; Till, B. G.; Larson, R. A.; Qian,
Z.; Le Beau, M. M.: Transcript map and comparative analysis of the
1.5-Mb commonly deleted segment of human 5q31 in malignant myeloid
diseases with a del(5q). Genomics 71: 235-245, 2001.

6. Le Goff, X.; Philippe, M.; Jean-Jean, O.: Overexpression of human
release factor 1 alone has an antisuppressor effect in human cells. Molec.
Cell Biol. 17: 3164-3172, 1997.

7. Song, H.; Mugnier, P.; Das, A. K.; Webb, H. M.; Evans, D. R.; Tuite,
M. F.; Hemmings, B. A.; Barford, D.: The crystal structure of human
eukaryotic release factor eRF1--mechanism of stop codon recognition
and peptidyl-tRNA hydrolysis. Cell 100: 311-321, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/28/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/12/2005
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 1/7/2001
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 10/13/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 6/14/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/5/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/6/1995

EDITED wwang: 05/05/2010
mgross: 4/28/2010
wwang: 5/4/2009
mgross: 5/17/2005
terry: 5/12/2005
terry: 1/8/2001
carol: 1/7/2001
terry: 10/16/2000
carol: 10/13/2000
mcapotos: 6/23/2000
mcapotos: 6/22/2000
psherman: 6/14/2000
mgross: 4/5/2000
alopez: 8/12/1999
alopez: 2/18/1999
dkim: 7/7/1998
carol: 1/6/1995

300162	TITLE *300162 ACETYLSEROTONIN METHYLTRANSFERASE-LIKE; ASMTL
;;ACETYLSEROTONIN METHYLTRANSFERASE-LIKE, X-LINKED; ASMTLX
DESCRIPTION The human Y chromosome is an extreme case with respect to recombination
frequencies. Over most of its entire length, the Y chromosome is
virtually a nonrecombining chromosome. At its distal ends, however,
within the 2 X-Y homologous pseudoautosomal regions (PAR1 and PAR2),
recombination frequencies are extremely high. Indeed, PAR1 on Xp/Yp
exhibits one of the highest recombination rates in male meiosis in the
human genome. This is due to the fact that males have an obligatory
crossover within the 2.6-Mb region of PAR1 (Rappold, 1993). The
preponderance of gene families expressed specifically in the testes has
been described on the nonrecombining portion of the human Y chromosome
(Lahn and Page, 1997). This has raised questions about the evolutionary
forces that led to their creation as well as to the molecular mechanisms
involved. In contrast, the evolution of genes and gene families in the
recombining portion of Y is likely to follow very different principles.
For example, the high frequency of recombination may have rendered this
region more prone to unequal crossing over, leading to gene duplications
in the ancestral PAR1 region. Ried et al. (1998) stated that to that
time 9 genes and 1 pseudogene had been characterized within PAR1. Only 2
of them, ASMT (300015) and XE7 (312095), had been characterized as
'single' genes, whereas all the others had close relatives in the genome
or were duplicated within PAR1. In this connection, Ried et al. (1998)
isolated a novel pseudoautosomal gene, ASMTL (N-acetylserotonin
O-methyltransferase-like), showing significant homology to the ASMT
gene. ASMT is an enzyme catalyzing the last step in the synthesis of
melatonin, a hormone that depresses body temperature and facilitates
sleep onset by inducing the circadian rhythm. It is exclusively
expressed in brain, retina, and pineal gland. Besides the homology of
ASMTL to ASMT in its 3-prime part, the N-terminal part of ASMTL is
similar to the entire length of the multicopy associated filamentation
(maf) protein of Bacillus subtilis and to orfE of Escherichia coli, gene
products involved in the regulation of cell division and growth. The
bipartite structure suggested that ASMTL is the product of a gene fusion
event, during which 2 different full-length genes are joined to form a
single gene. Ried et al. (1998) also detected the identity of 1 exon
(1A) of ASMT to exon 3 in yet another pseudoautosomal gene, XE7. The
data suggested that exon duplication and exon shuffling as well gene
fusion may represent common characteristics of the evolution of the
pseudoautosomal region.

Ried et al. (1998) found that ASMTL resides proximal to and in the close
vicinity of ANT3 (300151). The cosmid used in the initial cDNA selection
approach contained not only the 3-prime end of ASMTL but also the entire
ANT3 gene. ANT3 had previously been shown to be associated with a CpG
island located approximately 1,300 kb from the telomere. Sequencing
indicated that the 5-prime end of ASMTL is located approximately 1,350
kb from Xptel. Thus, the homologous genes ASMTL and ASMT (previously
mapped 1,700-1,800 kb from Xptel) reside within 500 kb in the middle
portion of PAR1.

REFERENCE 1. Lahn, B. T.; Page, D. C.: Functional coherence of the human Y
chromosome. Science 278: 675-680, 1997.

2. Rappold, G. A.: The pseudoautosomal regions of the human sex chromosomes. Hum.
Genet. 92: 315-324, 1993.

3. Ried, K.; Rao, E.; Schiebel, K.; Rappold, G. A.: Gene duplications
as a recurrent theme in the evolution of the human pseudoautosomal
region 1: isolation of the gene ASMTL. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 1771-1778,
1998.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/30/1998

EDITED alopez: 06/21/1999
carol: 12/2/1998

604540	TITLE *604540 KERATIN 36; KRT36
;;KERATIN, HAIR, ACIDIC, 6; KRTHA6;;
KERATIN, HARD, TYPE I, 6; HA6
DESCRIPTION See KRTHA1 (601077) for general information on hair keratins.

Rogers et al. (1998) and Langbein et al. (1999) reported the
identification of the KRTHA6 gene, which they called HA6. Rogers et al.
(1998) found that the deduced KRTHA6 protein has 468 amino acids. They
stated that KRTHA6 is probably identical to the minor type I hair
keratin HAX (Heid et al., 1988). The KRTHA6 gene contains 7 exons. By
RT-PCR, Rogers et al. (1998) showed that KRTHA6 is expressed in the
human hair follicle. See Langbein et al. (1999) for further details on
the expression pattern of the KRTHA6 gene in the hair follicle.

Rogers et al. (1998) isolated and characterized 2 overlapping human PAC
clones that cover 190 kb on 17q12-q21 and contain 9 type I hair keratin
genes, 1 transcribed hair keratin pseudogene, and 1 orphan exon. The
order of the genes is 5-prime--KRTHA6--KRTHA5 (602764)--KRTHA2
(602760)--orphan exon--KRTHA8 (604542)--KRTHA7
(604541)--pseudogene--KRTHA1--KRTHA4 (602763)--KRTHA3B (602762)--KRTHA3A
(602761)--3-prime. The hair keratin genes range in size from 4.2 to 7.5
kb, and the genes are separated from each other by 5.5 to 18.4 kb; all
are located within about 140 kb. Each gene is transcribed from the
5-prime to 3-prime direction. Based on sequence homologies, the genes
can be grouped into 3 subclusters of tandemly arranged genes. One
subcluster, group A, consists of KRTHA1, KRTHA3A, KRTHA3B, and KRTHA4,
which share 89% overall amino acid identity. A second subcluster, group
B, contains KRTHA7 and KRTHA8, as well as the hair keratin pseudogene,
which the authors called HAA. The functional hair keratins and
hypothetical HAA hair keratin share approximately 81% overall amino acid
identity. The third subcluster, group C, consists of the structurally
less related hair keratins KRTHA2, KRTHA5, and KRTHA6, which share about
70% amino acid identity.

REFERENCE 1. Heid, H. W.; Moll, I.; Franke, W. W.: Patterns of expression of
trichocytic and epithelial cytokeratins in mammalian tissues. II.
Concomitant and mutually exclusive synthesis of trichocytic and epithelial
cytokeratins in diverse human and bovine tissues (hair follicle, nail
bed and matrix, lingual papilla, thymic reticulum). Differentiation 37:
215-230, 1988.

2. Langbein, L.; Rogers, M. A.; Winter, H.; Silke, P.; Beckhaus, U.;
Rackwitz, H.-R.; Schweizer, J.: The catalog of human hair keratins.
I. Expression of the nine type I members in the hair follicle. J.
Biol. Chem. 274: 19874-19884, 1999.

3. Rogers, M. A.; Winter, H.; Wolf, C.; Heck, M.; Schweizer, J.:
Characterization of a 190-kilobase pair domain of human type I hair
keratin genes. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 26683-26691, 1998.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 2/11/2000

EDITED carol: 03/26/2008
mgross: 2/21/2000
psherman: 2/16/2000

613534	TITLE *613534 FANCD2/FANCI-ASSOCIATED NUCLEASE 1; FAN1
;;MYOTUBULARIN-RELATED PROTEIN 15; MTMR15;;
KIAA1018
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

FAN1 is a DNA endo- and exonuclease involved in the repair of DNA damage
caused by crosslinking agents. FAN1 is recruited to sites of interstrand
cross linkage damage by interacting with the FANCI (611360)-FANCD2
(227646) complex (MacKay et al., 2010; Kratz et al., 2010; Smogorzewska
et al., 2010).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned FAN1, which they designated
KIAA1018. The deduced protein contains 1,017 amino acids. RT-PCR
analysis detected relatively uniform FAN1 expression in all adult and
fetal tissues and specific adult brain regions examined.

Kratz et al. (2010) stated that the FAN1 protein contains a predicted
N-terminal RAD18 (605256)-like ubiquitin (191339)-binding zinc finger
domain and a C-terminal nuclease domain.

Zhou et al. (2012) found expression of the FAN1 gene in multiple
parenchymatous human tissues, including the kidney, liver, neuronal
tissue, and female reproductive organs. The expression pattern differed
from that of FANCD2, which was found primarily in lymphatic and bone
marrow-derived sources, as well as in skin and testes.

GENE FUNCTION

Using tandem affinity purification and large-scale immunoprecipitation
analysis, followed by mass spectroscopy, Cannavo et al. (2007)
identified FAN1 as a protein that interacted with the mismatch repair
proteins MLH1 (120436), PMS1 (600258), and PMS2 (600259).

Independently, MacKay et al. (2010) and Kratz et al. (2010) found that
recombinant human FAN1 exhibited DNA endonuclease activity toward
5-prime flaps and had 5-prime exonuclease activity mediated by its
C-terminal nuclease domain. Only DNA damage caused by interstrand
crosslinking agents resulted in recruitment of FAN1 to sites of DNA
damage, and this recruitment required interaction of FAN1 with
monoubiquitinated FANCD2. Depletion of FAN1 sensitized human cell lines
to interstrand crosslinking agents and caused chromosomal instability.
Smogorzewska et al. (2010) reported similar findings and showed that
FAN1 required both FANCI and FANCD2 for localization at sites of DNA
damage.

A central event in the Fanconi pathway is monoubiquitylation of the
FANCI-FANCD2 protein complex. Liu et al. (2010) characterized FAN1,
which promotes interstrand crosslink repair in a manner strictly
dependent on its ability to accumulate at or near sites of DNA damage
and that relies on monoubiquitylation of the FANCI-FANCD2 complex. Liu
et al. (2010) concluded that the monoubiquitylated complex recruits the
downstream repair protein FAN1 and facilitates repair of DNA interstrand
crosslinks.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the FAN1
gene to chromosome 15.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 9 unrelated families with karyomegalic
interstitial nephritis (KMIN; 614817), Zhou et al. (2012) identified 12
different homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in the FAN1 gene
(see, e.g., 613534.0001-613534.0008). Eight of the 12 mutations resulted
in a truncated protein. The first mutation was identified by
homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing in 1 affected family. Upon
exposure to mitomycin C, FAN1 mutant cells showed genomic instability,
as manifest by increased chromatid breaks and radial chromosomes on
metaphase spreads. Although the results of the test for Fanconi anemia
(see, e.g., 227650), diepoxybutane-induced breakage, were negative in
FAN1-mutant cells lines, these cells still showed decreased survival in
response to either inducer of interstrand crosslink repair (ICL)
compared to controls. Thus, there were subtle differences in cell
reaction between FANCA (607139)-mutant and FAN1-mutant cells, suggesting
that these proteins act in somewhat distinct manners. None of the FAN1
mutant proteins was able to correct mitomycin C-induced decreased
survival in cells lacking FAN1 nuclease activity. Morpholino knockdown
of Fan1 in zebrafish embryos resulted in a nephronophthisis (NPHP;
256100)-like phenotype, with shortened and curved body axis, as well as
a Fanconi anemia-like phenotype, with microcephaly, microphthalmia, and
massive apoptosis. There was evidence of activation of the DNA damage
repair pathway, as demonstrated by increased signaling for gamma-H2AX
(H2AFX; 601772). Knockdown of born Fan1 and p53 (191170) in zebrafish
caused renal cysts, reminiscent of a ciliopathy. In the fawn-hooded
hypertensive rat, an animal model of chronic kidney disease, as well as
in kidney samples from humans with genetically heterogeneous forms of
chronic kidney disease, Zhou et al. (2012) found increased nuclear
staining for gamma-H2AX, indicating activation of the DNA damage
response pathway. These findings supported the hypothesis that DNA
lesions and DNA damage response pathways may partially drive renal
damage in NPHP-related ciliopathies and in chronic kidney disease.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS, KARYOMEGALIC
FAN1, TRP707TER

In 2 brothers of Maori descent with karyomegalic interstitial nephritis
(KMIN; 614817) (Palmer et al., 2007), Zhou et al. (2012) identified a
homozygous 2120G-A transition in exon 8 of the FAN1 gene, resulting in a
trp707-to-ter (W707X) substitution. The mutation was found by
homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing of the candidate region. The
mutation was not found in 96 controls.

.0002
INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS, KARYOMEGALIC
FAN1, IVS2DS, T-A, +2

In affected members of 2 French families with karyomegalic interstitial
nephritis (614817), Zhou et al. (2012) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the FAN1 gene. Both families carried a
T-to-A transition in intron 2 (1234+2T-A), resulting in a splice site
mutation on 1 allele. One family (Godin et al., 1996) carried a 2-bp
deletion in exon 7 (2036_7delGA; 613534.0003) on the second allele, and
the other family carried a 2245C-T transition in exon 9, resulting in an
arg749-to-ter (R749X; 613534.0004) substitution on the second allele.
None of the mutations were found in 96 controls, and haplotype analysis
suggested a founder effect for the splice site mutation.

.0003
INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS, KARYOMEGALIC
FAN1, 2-BP DEL, 2036GA

See 613534.0002 and Zhou et al. (2012).

.0004
INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS, KARYOMEGALIC
FAN1, ARG749TER

See 613534.0002 and Zhou et al. (2012).

.0005
INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS, KARYOMEGALIC
FAN1, 1-BP DEL, 2616A

In a woman of Spanish descent with karyomegalic interstitial nephritis
(614817) originally reported by Spoendlin et al. (1995), Zhou et al.
(2012) identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion (2616delA) in exon 12 of
the FAN1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination
(Asp873ThrfsTer17). An unrelated woman of French descent (Verine et al.,
2010) was compound heterozygous for 2616delA and a G-to-A transition in
intron 3 (1375+1G-A), resulting in a splice site mutation (613534.0006).
Neither mutation was found in 96 controls.

.0006
INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS, KARYOMEGALIC
FAN1, IVS3DS, G-A, +1

See 613534.0005 and Zhou et al. (2012).

.0007
INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS, KARYOMEGALIC
FAN1, 2-BP DEL, 2774TT

In a patient with KMIN (614817) originally reported by Baba et al.
(2006), Zhou et al. (2012) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the FAN1 gene: a 2-bp deletion (2774_5delTT) in exon 12,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination (Leu925ProfsTer25),
and a 2810G-A transition in exon 13, resulting in a gly937-to-asp
(G937D; 613534.0008) substitution at a highly conserved residue. Neither
mutation was found in 96 controls.

.0008
INTERSTITIAL NEPHRITIS, KARYOMEGALIC
FAN1, GLY937ARG

See 613534.0007 and Zhou et al. (2012).

REFERENCE 1. Baba, F.; Nanovic, L.; Jaffery, J. B.; Friedl, A.: Karyomegalic
tubulointerstitial nephritis--a case report. Path. Res. Pract. 202:
555-559, 2006.

2. Cannavo, E.; Gerrits, B.; Marra, G.; Schlapbach, R.; Jiricny, J.
: Characterization of the interactome of the human MutL homologues
MLH1, PMS1, and PMS2. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 2976-2986, 2007.

3. Godin, M.; Francois, A.; Le Roy, F.; Morin, J.-P.; Creppy, E.;
Hemet, J.; Fillastre, J.-P.: Karyomegalic interstitial nephritis.
(Letter) Am. J. Kid. Dis. 27: 166 only, 1996.

4. Kratz, K.; Schopf, B.; Kaden, S.; Sendoel, A.; Eberhard, R.; Lademann,
C.; Cannavo, E.; Sartori, A. A.; Hengartner, M. O.; Jiricny, J.:
Deficiency of FANCD2-associated nuclease KIAA1018/FAN1 sensitizes
cells to interstrand crosslinking agents. Cell 142: 77-88, 2010.

5. Liu, T.; Ghosal, G.; Yuan, J.; Chen, J.; Huang, J.: FAN1 acts
with FANCI-FANCD2 to promote DNA interstrand cross-link repair. Science 329:
693-696, 2010.

6. MacKay, C.; Declais, A.-C.; Lundin, C.; Agostinho, A.; Deans, A.
J.; MacArtney, T. J.; Hofmann, K.; Gartner, A.; West, S. C.; Helleday,
T.; Lilley, D. M. J.; Rouse, J.: Identification of KIAA1018/FAN1,
a DNA repair nuclease recruited to DNA damage by monoubiquitinated
FANCD2. Cell 142: 65-76, 2010.

7. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

8. Palmer, D.; Lallu, S.; Matheson, P.; Bethwaite, P.; Tompson, K.
: Karyomegalic interstitial nephritis: a pitfall in urine cytology. Diagn.
Cytopathol. 35: 179-182, 2007.

9. Smogorzewska, A.; Desetty, R.; Saito, T. T.; Schlabach, M.; Lach,
F. P.; Sowa, M. E.; Clark, A. B.; Kunkel, T. A.; Harper, J. W.; Colaiacovo,
M. P.; Elledge, S. J.: A genetic screen identifies FAN1, a Fanconi-anemia-associated
nuclease necessary for DNA interstrand crosslink repair. Molec. Cell 39:
36-47, 2010.

10. Spoendlin, M.; Moch, H.; Brunner, F.; Brunner, W.; Burger, H.-R.;
Kiss, D.; Wegmann, W.; Dalquen, P.; Oberholzer, M.; Thiel, G.; Mihatsch,
M. J.: Karyomegalic interstitial nephritis: further support for a
distinct entity and evidence for a genetic defect. Am. J. Kid. Dis. 25:
242-252, 1995.

11. Verine, J.; Reade, R.; Janin, A.; Droz, D.: Nephrite interstitielle
caryomegalique: un nouveau cas francais. Ann. Path. 30: 240-242,
2010.

12. Zhou, W.; Otto, E. A.; Cluckey, A.; Airik, R.; Hurd, T. W.; Chaki,
M.; Diaz, K.; Lach, F. P.; Bennett, G. R.; Gee, H. Y.; Ghosh, A. K.;
Natarajan, S.; and 32 others: FAN1 mutations cause karyomegalic
interstitial nephritis, linking chronic kidney failure to defective
DNA damage repair. Nature Genet. 44: 910-915, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/20/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/13/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/1/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/20/2010

EDITED carol: 08/29/2013
ckniffin: 5/20/2013
carol: 9/13/2012
ckniffin: 9/13/2012
alopez: 9/2/2010
terry: 9/1/2010
mgross: 8/20/2010

610606	TITLE *610606 CYTOPLASMIC POLYADENYLATION ELEMENT-BINDING PROTEIN 3; CPEB3
;;KIAA0940
CPEB3 RIBOZYME, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned CPEB3, which they designated
KIAA0940. RT-PCR ELISA detected high expression in brain, intermediate
expression in kidney, heart, lung, liver, skeletal muscle, testis,
ovary, pancreas, and fetal liver, and low expression in spleen and fetal
brain. CPEB3 was expressed in all specific adult brain regions examined,
with highest levels in amygdala and substantia nigra.

Salehi-Ashtiani et al. (2006) stated that CPEB3 transcripts use 2
alternate untranslated first exons, one expressed in liver and testis,
and the other expressed in brain. The 698-amino acid CPEB3 protein has
an N-terminal glutamine-rich domain, followed by 2 RNA recognition
motifs and a C-terminal zinc finger domain. The glutamine-rich domain is
not present in other CPEBs.

- CPEB3 Ribozyme

Using an in vitro self-selection technique, Salehi-Ashtiani et al.
(2006) identified self-cleaving ribozymes associated with olfactory
receptor OR4K15, insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF1R; 147370),
a LINE-1 retrotransposon (see LRE1; 151626), and CPEB3. The CPEB3
ribozyme is located within intron 3 and is structurally related to
ribozymes from human hepatitis delta virus (HDV), a single-stranded RNA
satellite virus for hepatitis B infection (see 610424). EST database
analysis and RT-PCR of human and mouse total RNA extracts indicated that
the CPEB3 ribozyme is expressed and self-cleaves in vivo.
Salehi-Ashtiani et al. (2006) identified the CPEB3 ribozyme only in
mammalian vertebrates. They proposed that HDV ribozymes and the CPEB3
ribozyme are evolutionarily related, and that HDV arose from the human
transcriptome.

GENE FUNCTION

- CPEB3 Ribozyme

Salehi-Ashtiani et al. (2006) narrowed the active sequence of the CPEB3
ribozyme to 81 nucleotides. This 81-nucleotide construct cleaved to
produce a 9-nucleotide upstream fragment containing a 2-prime-to-3-prime
cyclic phosphate, and a 72-nucleotide downstream fragment containing a
5-prime terminal hydroxyl that could be phosphorylated with
polynucleotide kinase (PNKP; 605610). The ribozyme had a low Mg(2+)
requirement, and was also active in the presence of Mn(2+) and Ca(2+).
Ribozyme activity was almost constant between pH 5.5 and 8.5, suggesting
the presence of 2 functional groups.

GENE STRUCTURE

Salehi-Ashtiani et al. (2006) reported that the CPEB3 gene spans 242 kb
and contains 11 exons, including 2 alternatively spliced, untranslated
first exons. Intron 3 spans 46 kb and contains a ribozyme.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the CPEB3 gene
to chromosome 10.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

2. Salehi-Ashtiani, K.; Luptak, A.; Litovchick, A.; Szostak, J. W.
: A genomewide search for ribozymes reveals an HDV-like sequence in
the human CPEB3 gene. Science 313: 1788-1792, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/29/2006

EDITED mgross: 11/29/2006

608071	TITLE *608071 F-BOX AND WD40 DOMAIN PROTEIN 4; FBXW4
;;FBW4; FBWD4;;
DACTYLIN;;
DACTYLAPLASIA, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF;;
DAC, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF;;
SHFM3 GENE, FORMERLY; SHFM3, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Sidow et al. (1999) reported the positional cloning of the gene
disrupted in the mouse mutant dactylaplasia (Dac). The Dac gene belongs
to the F-box/WD40 gene family, which encodes adaptors that target
specific proteins for destruction by presenting them to the
ubiquitination machinery. In connection with biochemical studies, this
report demonstrated the importance of this gene family in vertebrate
embryonic development. Sidow et al. (1999) designated the Dac protein
product dactylin. Two different alleles of Dac were found to be due to
insertions, a common mechanism of mutation in the mouse (see ANIMAL
MODEL).

By positional cloning in the critical region for the split-hand/foot
malformation-3 locus (SHFM3; 246560) on chromosome 10q24, EST database
searching, and RT-PCR, Ianakiev et al. (1999) generated a cDNA encoding
human dactylin. Sequence analysis predicted that the 412-amino acid
putative cytoplasmic protein contains an N-terminal F box and 4
C-terminal WD40 domains. Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous
expression of a 2.8-kb transcript that is strongest in fetal brain,
followed by kidney, lung, and liver. In situ hybridization of a
5.5-week-old mouse embryo confirmed the expression of dactylin in the
central nervous system and liver as well as at low levels in the
mesoderm and ectoderm of the developing limb. The data suggested to
Ianakiev et al. (1999) that dactylin is likely to be involved in
signaling pathways crucial for normal limb development and that it is a
candidate gene for SHFM3.

Ilyin et al. (2000) independently cloned human dactylin, which they
termed FBWD4.

By sequence and computational analyses, Salzman et al. (2012) identified
hundreds of transcripts that showed noncanonical ordering of exons in
pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia samples and normal human
leukocytes. The most abundant transcripts with scrambled exons
originated from the FBXW4, CAMSAP1 (613774), and ZKSCAN1 (601260) genes.
RT-PCR of human cells confirmed the findings. Transcripts with scrambled
exons appeared to be circular, as they showed lack of polyadenylation
and resistance to 5-prime exoribonuclease activity. Endogenous circular
and linear FBXW4 and CAMSAP1 transcripts were detected in both the
cytoplasm and nucleus of fractionated HeLa cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ianakiev et al. (1999) determined that the DAC gene contains 9 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Ianakiev et al. (1999) identified the
human DAC gene in the critical region for the SHFM3 locus on chromosome
10q24. Using FISH, Ianakiev et al. (1999) mapped the DAC gene to
chromosome 10q24.3. They identified a pseudogene at the breakpoint
cluster region on chromosome 22q11.2 that shares greater than 93%
nucleotide identity with the DAC gene.

Jin et al. (2004) reported that the mouse Fbxw4 gene maps to chromosome
19C3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

De Mollerat et al. (2003) conducted mutation analysis of the dactylin
gene in 7 patients with split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM) and found no
point mutations. However, Southern blot, pulsed field gel
electrophoresis, and dosage analyses demonstrated a complex
rearrangement associated with a 0.5-Mb tandem duplication in all the
patients. The distal and proximal breakpoints were within 80- and 130-kb
regions, respectively; the smallest duplicated region common to all
patients was 444 kb and contained a disrupted extra copy of the dactylin
gene from exon 9 to exon 6, as well as the entire LBX1 (604255), BTRC
(603482), and POLL (606343) genes.

Because structural alterations of the gene encoding dactylin lead to
reduced levels of transcript in the mouse mutant Dac, which resembles
human SHFM, Basel et al. (2003) studied several individuals with SHFM
and reported a significant decrease of dactylin transcript. This
observation supported a central role for dactylin in the pathogenesis of
SHFM3.

Kano et al. (2005) screened 28 Japanese families with nonsyndromic SHFM
for tandem genomic duplication of chromosome 10q24 by Southern blot and
sequence analysis of the dactylin gene. No mutations were found in
coding regions and flanking intronic sequences of the dactylin gene, but
2 families had genomic rearrangements. One was a 511.6-kb tandem
duplication, and the other was a 447.3-kb duplication containing the
LBX1, BTRC, POLL, and DPCD genes and a disrupted extra copy of the
dactylin gene. Kano et al. (2005) noted that the smaller duplicated
region was almost identical to that described by de Mollerat et al.
(2003).

ANIMAL MODEL

Dactylaplasia, a mouse model of SHFM3, is an inherited limb malformation
that depends on 2 loci. The first locus, Dac, is an insertional mutation
around the dactylin gene that is inherited as a semidominant trait. Two
independent, spontaneous Dac alleles, Dac(1J) and Dac(2J), have been
identified. The second locus, Mdac, is a modifier on chromosome 13 that
is polymorphic in inbred strains. The dominant Mdac allele suppresses
the dactylaplasia phenotype in Dac mice, whereas the recessive Mdac
allele does not. Thus, dactylaplasia is observed only in mice homozygous
for the recessive Mdac allele. Kano et al. (2007) showed that the Dac
insertion is an LTR retrotransposon caused by the type D mouse
endogenous provirus element (MusD), which contains intact ORFs for the
viral gag, pro, and pol genes. In Dac(2J), MusD is inserted in intron 5
of the dactylin gene and no dactylin transcripts are expressed. In
Dac(1J), MusD is inserted in the upstream region of dactylin and neither
the size nor the amount of dactylin transcripts are affected. Kano et
al. (2007) refined the Mdac locus to a 9.4-Mb region on chromosome 13.
Dac mutants homozygous for the recessive Mdac allele had unmethylated
CpGs and active chromatin at the LTR of the MusD insertion, as well
ectopic expression of MusD elements. In contrast, Dac mutants carrying
the dominant Mdac allele had heavily methylated CpGs and inactive
chromatin at the LTR of the insertion, correlating with inhibition of
the dactylaplasia phenotype. Ectopic expression of MusD was not observed
in mice carrying the dominant Mdac allele. Kano et al. (2007) concluded
that ectopic expression of the MusD insertion, rather than lack of
dactylin expression, correlates with the dactylaplasia phenotype. They
proposed the Mdac acts a defensive factor to protect the host genome
from pathogenic MusD insertions.

REFERENCE 1. Basel, D.; DePaepe, A.; Kilpatrick, M. W.; Tsipouras, P.: Split
hand foot malformation is associated with a reduced level of dactylin
gene expression. Clin. Genet. 64: 350-354, 2003.

2. de Mollerat, X. J.; Gurrieri, F.; Morgan, C. T.; Sangiorgi, E.;
Everman, D. B.; Gaspari, P.; Amiel, J.; Bamshad, M. J.; Lyle, R.;
Blouin, J.-L.; Allanson, J. E.; Le Marec, B.; and 11 others: A
genomic rearrangement resulting in a tandem duplication is associated
with split hand-split foot malformation 3 (SHFM3) at 10q24. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 1959-1971, 2003.

3. Ianakiev, P.; Kilpatrick, M. W.; Dealy, C.; Kosher, R.; Korenberg,
J. R.; Chen, X.-N.; Tsipouras, P.: A novel human gene encoding an
F-box/WD40 containing protein maps in the SHFM3 critical region on
10q24. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 261: 64-70, 1999.

4. Ilyin, G. P.; Rialland, M.; Pigeon, C.; Guguen-Guillouzo, C.:
cDNA cloning and expression analysis of new members of the mammalian
F-box protein family. Genomics 67: 40-47, 2000.

5. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

6. Kano, H.; Kurahashi, H.; Toda, T.: Genetically regulated epigenetic
transcriptional activation of retrotransposon insertion confers mouse
dactylaplasia phenotype. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 19034-19039,
2007.

7. Kano, H.; Kurosawa, K.; Horii, E.; Ikegawa, S.; Yoshikawa, H.;
Kurahashi, H.; Toda, T.: Genomic rearrangement at 10q24 in non-syndromic
split-hand/split-foot malformation. Hum. Genet. 118: 477-483, 2005.

8. Salzman, J.; Gawad, C.; Wang, P. L.; Lacayo, N.; Brown, P. O.:
Circular RNAs are the predominant transcript isoform from hundreds
of human genes in diverse cell types. PLoS One 7: e30733, 2012.
Note: Electronic Article.

9. Sidow, A.; Bulotsky, M. S.; Kerrebrock, A. W.; Birren, B. W.; Altshuler,
D; Jaenisch, R.; Johnson, K. R.; Lander, E. S.: A novel member of
the F-box/WD40 gene family, encoding dactylin, is disrupted in the
mouse dactylaplasia mutant. Nature Genet. 23: 104-107, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 05/16/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/5/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/3/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/13/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/23/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/10/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/4/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/25/2003

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 9/2/2003

EDITED mgross: 05/16/2013
wwang: 8/30/2010
carol: 10/15/2008
mgross: 6/5/2008
terry: 6/3/2008
wwang: 4/20/2007
terry: 4/13/2007
carol: 4/4/2007
wwang: 2/23/2006
mgross: 12/10/2004
tkritzer: 11/6/2003
terry: 11/4/2003
cwells: 9/25/2003
carol: 9/11/2003
ckniffin: 9/2/2003

614715	TITLE *614715 TRANSMEMBRANE AND IMMUNOGLOBULIN DOMAINS-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; TMIGD2
;;IMMUNOGLOBULIN AND PROLINE-RICH RECEPTOR 1; IGPR1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TMIGD2 is widely expressed on the plasma membrane of endothelial and
epithelial cells and contributes to cell adhesion and migration (Rahimi
et al., 2012).

CLONING

By searching databases for genes encoding proteins with an
immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domain, Rahimi et al. (2012) identified TMIGD2,
which they called IGPR1. The deduced 282-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 31 kD. It contains an N-terminal signal
sequence, followed by an extracellular Ig-like domain, a transmembrane
domain, and a cytoplasmic proline-rich C-terminal domain. The N-terminal
extracellular region contains 2 putative glycosylation sites. The Ig
domain was predicted to assume an Ig V (variable) fold structure.
Orthologs of IGPR1 were detected in several mammalian species, but not
in rat or mouse. Quantitative PCR revealed high IGPR1 expression in
artery, vein, and brain, with low to moderate expression in other
tissues. Western blot analysis detected an IGPR1 protein with an
apparent molecular mass of 55 kD in thymus, placenta, heart, small
intestine, skin, and kidney. An IGPR1 protein with an apparent molecular
mass of 35 kD was expressed in skeletal muscle, brain, colon, lung, and
ovary. Immunohistochemical analysis showed IGPR1 expression mainly in
epithelial and endothelial cells, and IGPR1 was expressed on the plasma
membrane of transfected porcine aorta endothelial cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Rahimi et al. (2012) found that overexpression of IGPR1 in porcine or
human endothelial cells increased tube formation in 3-dimensional
cultures. IGPR1 overexpression also increased angiogenesis in mouse
melanoma cells following injection into mice. In contrast, knockdown of
IGPR1 in human umbilical vein endothelial cells reduced capillary tube
formation. IGPR1 overexpression also altered adhesion, migration, and
morphology of actin stress fibers in transfected cells. Protein
interaction assays revealed that the isolated proline-rich cytoplasmic
region of IGPR1 interacted with SH3 domains in several proteins, notably
SPIN90 (NCKIPSD; 606671). In porcine or human endothelial cells,
overexpression or knockdown of SPIN90 increased and decreased,
respectively, tube formation in 3-dimensional culture. Rahimi et al.
(2012) hypothesized that interaction between IGPR1 and SPIN90 regulates
angiogenesis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rahimi et al. (2012) reported that the TMIGD2 gene contains at least 4
exons.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the TMIGD2 gene to chromosome 19p13.3 based on an
alignment of the TMIGD2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC015655) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/29/2012.

2. Rahimi, N.; Rezazadeh, K.; Mahoney, J. E.; Hartsough, E.; Meyer,
R. D.: Identification of IGPR-1 as a novel adhesion molecule involved
in angiogenesis. Molec. Biol. Cell 23: 1646-1656, 2012.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/12/2012

EDITED terry: 07/13/2012
mgross: 7/12/2012

602981	TITLE *602981 AE-BINDING PROTEIN 1; AEBP1
;;AORTIC CARBOXYPEPTIDASE-LIKE PROTEIN; ACLP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Vascular smooth muscle cells originate from diverse cell types during
embryonic development and acquire different phenotypes in disease
states. The interactions of these cells with the extracellular matrix
(ECM) are important in governing these processes. By screening a human
aortic smooth muscle cell expression library for proteins that interact
with the E47 product of E2A (TCF3; 147141), Layne et al. (1998) isolated
a full-length cDNA encoding ACLP. The deduced 1,158-amino acid ACLP
protein contains a putative signal peptide; an 11-residue lys/pro-rich
motif repeated 4 times in the N terminus; a domain with 30% identity to
the slime mold adhesion protein discoidin I; and a C-terminal 500-amino
acid domain with 39% identity to carboxypeptidase E (CPE; 114855).
Northern blot analysis detected a 4.0-kb ACLP transcript. Immunoblot
analysis showed expression of a 175-kD ACLP protein. Western blot
analysis and in situ hybridization established that expression of ACLP
is largely restricted to aorta, particularly to smooth muscle cells.
Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated perinuclear staining in mouse
aortic smooth muscle cells.

GENE FUNCTION

By purification of aortic smooth muscle cells from day-18.5 mouse
embryos, followed by immunoblot analysis, Layne et al. (2001) showed
that Aclp is a secreted protein that associates with the ECM, as
predicted from its primary structure. Immunohistochemistry of day-15.5
mouse embryos revealed wide expression of Aclp in vascular smooth muscle
cells, in bony and cartilaginous skeleton (skull, vertebrae, and ribs),
in the basement membrane of lung airways, and in the dermis.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Layne et al. (2001) determined that the
mouse Aclp gene contains 21 exons.

ANIMAL MODEL

By homologous recombination, Layne et al. (2001) generated Aclp -/-
mice. Although heterozygotes were phenotypically normal, most Aclp -/-
mice succumbed around the time of birth with gastroschisis, an extrusion
of the abdominal viscera through the ventral body wall. Gastoschisis
appeared as early as day 13.5. Many dead neonates were pale and had
missing abdominal organs, such as liver and intestine. Aclp -/- mice
that survived to adulthood had large, nonhealing skin lesions, deficient
wound repair, and poor fibroblast proliferation. Layne et al. (2001)
concluded that ACLP has important roles in both embryonic development
and adult tissue repair.

HISTORY

Layne et al. (1998) found that the C terminus of ACLP is highly
homologous to AEBP1, which was originally identified in mouse by He et
al. (1995) as a factor that specifically binds AE1 and acts as a
repressor of aP2 gene (600434) expression. Aebp1 contains a region that
is 40% identical to the regulatory carboxypeptidases CPH/E, CPN
(212070), and CPM (114860). He et al. (1995) found that CP activity was
important for the transcriptional repression activity of Aebp1 and
suggested that Aebp1 regulates transcription by cleavage of factors
involved in transcription. Ohno et al. (1996) identified human AEBP1 as
a gene whose cDNAs were found exclusively in osteoblast and adipose
tissue libraries. The predicted 845-amino acid human AEBP1 protein is
95% identical to mouse Aebp1 except for an additional 105 amino acids in
the N terminus of the human protein. This N-terminal extension contains
a nuclear targeting signal. Northern blot analysis of various human
tissues detected a 3-kb AEBP1 mRNA only in osteoblasts and adipose
tissues.

Song and Fricker (1997), however, reported that AEBP1 has no
carboxypeptidase activity; in contrast, CPZ (603105), CPE, and CPD
(603102) were found to have modest or abundant activity. Layne et al.
(1998) determined that the Aebp1 sequence described by He et al. (1995)
lacks a G residue 11 bases 5-prime of the proposed start codon and is
likely an incomplete clone of mouse Aclp. Northern blot analysis, even
with Aepb1-derived probes, detected a single 4.0-kb transcript, which is
consistent with the size of the human and mouse ACLP cDNAs. Furthermore,
Layne (2001) stated that they have never detected nuclear localization
of ACLP, nor have they detected any ACLP splice variants that might
account for the discrepant data, suggesting that the human sequence
reported by Ohno et al. (1996) is also a truncated clone.

REFERENCE 1. He, G.-P.; Muise, A.; Li, A. W.; Ro, H.-S.: A eukaryotic transcriptional
repressor with carboxypeptidase activity. Nature 378: 92-96, 1995.

2. Layne, M.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/6/2001.

3. Layne, M. D.; Endege, W. O.; Jain, M. K.; Yet, S.-F.; Hsieh, C.-M.;
Chin, M. T.; Perrella, M. A.; Blanar, M. A.; Haber, E.; Lee, M.-E.
: Aortic carboxypeptidase-like protein, a novel protein with discoidin
and carboxypeptidase-like domains, is up-regulated during vascular
smooth muscle cell differentiation. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 15654-15660,
1998.

4. Layne, M. D.; Yet, S.-F.; Maemura, K.; Hsieh, C.-M.; Bernfield,
M.; Perrella, M. A.; Lee, M.-E.: Impaired abdominal wall development
and deficient wound healing in mice lacking aortic carboxypeptidase-like
protein. Molec. Cell. Biol. 21: 5256-5261, 2001.

5. Ohno, I.; Hashimoto, J.; Shimizu, K.; Takaoka, K.; Ochi, T.; Matsubara,
K.; Okubo, K.: A cDNA cloning of human AEBP1 from primary cultured
osteoblasts and its expression in a differentiating osteoblastic cell
line. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 228: 411-414, 1996.

6. Song, L.; Fricker, L. D.: Cloning and expression of human carboxypeptidase
Z, a novel metallocarboxypeptidase. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 10543-10550,
1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/26/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/18/1998

EDITED mgross: 07/26/2001
mgross: 7/26/2001
alopez: 8/18/1998

606343	TITLE *606343 POLYMERASE, DNA, LAMBDA; POLL
DESCRIPTION DNA polymerases can participate in both replication of the genome and
DNA repair processes. The human genome contains multiple DNA polymerase
genes.

CLONING

By searching sequence databases to identify new members of the polX
family, Aoufouchi et al. (2000) identified EST clones representing 2 DNA
polymerases, POLM (606344) and POLL, which they called pol mu and pol
lambda, respectively. By screening bone marrow and lymph node cDNA
libraries, they isolated a full-length POLL cDNA. POLL encodes a deduced
575-amino acid protein predicted to contain a polX domain, a BRCA-1
C-terminal (BRCT) domain, and 2 helix-hairpin-helix (HHH) DNA-binding
motifs. POLL structurally resembles terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase
(TDT; 187410). It shares 34% amino acid identity with DNA polymerase
beta (POLB; 174760) and 82% identity with mouse Poll. Aoufouchi et al.
(2000) found that POLL has template-dependent DNA polymerase activity in
vitro. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.7-kb POLL transcript with
highest expression in testis and fetal liver and very weak expression in
many other tissues. They identified POLL splice variants which they
considered to be nonfunctional. Using semiquantitative RT-PCR
amplification, Aoufouchi et al. (2000) concluded that POLL mRNA
expression is downregulated in a dose- and time-dependent manner upon
cell exposure to DNA damaging agents.

Aoufouchi et al. (2000) provided a phylogenetic comparison of yeast and
human proteins of the polX family.

GENE STRUCTURE

Aoufouchi et al. (2000) determined that POLL is encoded by 8 exons and
spans approximately 9 kb of genomic DNA.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the POLL
gene to human chromosome 10 (TMAP sts-W69567).

REFERENCE 1. Aoufouchi, S.; Flatter, E.; Dahan, A.; Faili, A.; Bertocci, B.;
Storck, S.; Delbos, F.; Cocea, L.; Gupta, N.; Weill, J.-C.; Reynaud,
C.-A.: Two novel human and mouse DNA polymerases of the polX family. Nucleic
Acids Res. 28: 3684-3693, 2000.

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 10/1/2001

EDITED carol: 10/02/2001

614413	TITLE *614413 AMINOACYLASE 3; ACY3
;;ASPARTOACYLASE 3;;
HEPATITIS C VIRUS CORE-BINDING PROTEIN 1; HCBP1;;
HCV CORE-BINDING PROTEIN 1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Aminoacylase-3 is a hydrolase that removes the acyl group from several
acylated aromatic amino acids and from S-benzyl-N-acetylcysteine
(Pushkin et al., 2004).

CLONING

Pushkin et al. (2004) cloned mouse Acy3, which encodes a deduced
318-amino acid protein with a calculated molecular mass of about 35.2
kD. Acy3 has no membrane domain, but it contains consensus sites for
N-glycosylation, tyrosine sulfation, tyrosine and threonine
phosphorylation, and myristoylation. Northern blot analysis detected
high expression of an approximately 1.4-kb Acy3 transcript in kidney,
followed by liver. Weaker expression was detected in heart, small
intestine, brain, lung, testis, and stomach. Testis expressed an
additional transcript of about 2.2 kb. Immunocytochemical analysis of
mouse kidney revealed Acy3 localization to the apical membrane of S1
convoluted proximal tubule cells and in the cytoplasm of S2 and S3
proximal straight tubule cells. Gel-filtration and transmission electron
microscopy showed that Acy3 formed tetramers.

GENE FUNCTION

By assaying mouse Acy3 expressed in HEK293 cells, Pushkin et al. (2004)
found that it used all acetylated substrates examined, which included
N-acetyl-L-histidine, N-acetyl-L-tyrosine, N-acetyl-L-phenylalanine, and
S-benzyl-N-acetyl-L-cysteine. It showed highest affinity for
S-benzyl-N-acetyl-L-cysteine and had a pH optimum of 7.5 to 7.7.

MAPPING

Hartz (2011) mapped the ACY3 gene to chromosome 11q13.2 based on an
alignment of the ACY3 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF359506) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Pushkin et al. (2004) stated that mouse Acy3 maps to chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  12/21/2011.

2. Pushkin, A.; Carpenito, G.; Abuladze, N.; Newman, D.; Tsuprun,
V.; Ryazantsev, S.; Motemoturu, S.; Sassani, P.; Solovieva, N.; Dukkipati,
R.; Kurtz, I.: Structural characterization, tissue distribution,
and functional expression of murine aminoacylase III. Am. J. Physiol.
Cell Physiol. 286: C848-C856, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/4/2012

EDITED mgross: 01/04/2012
mgross: 1/4/2012

606696	TITLE *606696 KATANIN, p60 SUBUNIT, A1; KATNA1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Microtubules are dynamic polymers of alpha-tubulin (e.g., TUBA3; 602529)
and beta-tubulin (TUBB; 191130) that are used to organize membranous
organelles during interphase and to segregate chromosomes during
mitosis. Microtubule-severing proteins generate internal breaks within
microtubules during metaphase but not during interphase. Katanin is an
ATP-dependent microtubule-severing protein composed of p60 and p80
subunits. Katanin p80 (KATNB1; 602703) is concentrated at centrosomes
during interphase.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for homologs of sea urchin p60 katanin,
followed by 3-prime RACE with fibroblast cDNA, McNally and Thomas (1998)
isolated a cDNA encoding KATNA1. Sequence analysis predicted that the
491-amino acid KATNA1 protein contains a central consensus cyclin B
(CCNB1; 123836)/CDC2 (116940) phosphorylation site (TPLK). The
N-terminal 80 residues of KATNA1 and sea urchin p60 katanin are 50%
identical, and the C-terminal 318-residue AAA (for 'ATPase associated
with a variety of cellular activities') ATPase domain of KATNA1 and sea
urchin p60 katanin are 75% identical. Immunoblot analysis revealed wide
expression of a 55- to 60-kD protein that was coexpressed with p80
katanin in frog eggs. Anti-KATNA1 antibody inhibited
microtubule-severing activity in Xenopus eggs. Immunofluorescence
microscopy demonstrated diffuse expression and focal colocalization with
gamma-tubulin (TUBG; 191135) in interphase fibroblast microtubule
asters, as is also seen with KATNB1. McNally and Thomas (1998) observed
that the area occupied by KATNA1 is twice that occupied by TUBG during
metaphase. McNally and Thomas (1998) proposed that CCNB1/CDC2 activates
KATNA1 microtubule-severing activity near centrosomes during mitosis.

Using in situ hybridization and immunohistochemical analysis, Karabay et
al. (2004) showed that Katna1 localizes along the length of axons at
early stages of neuronal development in the rat and mouse, with
expression generally higher in and near growth cones of extending axons
and in distal regions. Katna1 expression declined upon neuronal
maturation.

GENE FUNCTION

Toyo-Oka et al. (2005) identified KATNA1 as a molecular target of NDEL1
(607538). Phosphorylation of Ndel1 by Cdk5 (123831) facilitated
interaction between NDEL1 and KATNA1, suggesting that phosphorylated
NDEL1 may regulate the distribution of KATNA1. Abnormal accumulation of
Katna1 in the nucleus of Ndel1-null mouse embryonic fibroblasts
supported an essential role for NDEL1 in KATNA1 regulation. Complete
loss of Ndel1 or expression of dominant-negative Katna1 mutants in
migrating neurons resulted in defective migration and elongation of
nuclear-centrosomal distance. Toyo-Oka et al. (2005) suggested that
NDEL1 may be essential for mitotic cell division and neuronal migration,
not only via regulation of cytoplasmic dynein function, but also by
modulation of KATNA1 localization and function.

Postmitotic neurons require microtubules for dynamic scaffolding within
axons, dendrites, and growth cones. Microtubules are nucleated
exclusively at centrosomes and must be severed from the centrosome for
transport into the axon; shorter microtubules are transported along
axons more quickly than long microtubules. Using overexpression and
knockdown studies with cultured rodent neurons, Karabay et al. (2004)
showed that Katna1 is an active microtubule-severing enzyme with a
critical role in neuronal microtubule dynamics. Katna1 expression
dropped when axons were presented with target cells that caused them to
stop growing.

Iwaya et al. (2010) showed that the N-terminal microtubule interacting
and trafficking (MIT) domains of mouse and human KATNA1 bound
unpolymerized, but not polymerized, tubulin. The isolated MIT domain of
KATNA1 formed an antiparallel 3-stranded helix, with a hydrophobic core
of partly conserved alanine residues. Mutagenesis experiments revealed
that positively charged arg49 and lys67 of helix 3 are required for
tubulin binding. A coiled-coil region that follows the MIT domain
mediates dimer formation and when included in the protein fragment
interfered with binding of the MIT domain to tubulin.

Using cDNA constructs based on mouse p60 and p80 (602703), Iwaya et al.
(2012) showed that the N-terminal MIT domain of p60 interacted with the
C-terminal domain (CTD) of p80. Binding of either microtubules or the
p80-CTD to the p60 MIT domain stimulated the ATPase and
microtubule-severing activity of p60. Ca(2+) bound to a separate region
of the MIT domain of p60 and negatively regulated microtubule- or
p80-enhanced p60 activity. Ca(2+) did not inhibit the basal ATPase
activity of p60 or the binding of p60 to microtubules.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the KATNA1
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP EST392905).

Hartz (2012) mapped the KATNA1 gene to chromosome 6q25.1 based on the
alignment of the KATNA1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF056022) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/3/2012.

2. Iwaya, N.; Akiyama, K.; Goda, N.; Tenno, T.; Fujiwara, Y.; Hamada,
D.; Ikura, T.; Shirakawa, M.; Hiroaki, H.: Effect of Ca(2+) on the
microtubule-severing enzyme p60-katanin: insight into the substrate-dependent
activation mechanism. FEBS J. 279: 1339-1352, 2012.

3. Iwaya, N.; Kuwahara, Y.; Fujiwara, Y.; Goda, N.; Tenno, T.; Akiyama,
K.; Mase, S.; Tochio, H.; Ikegami, T.; Shirakawa, M.; Hiroaki, H.
: A common substrate recognition mode conserved between katanin p60
and VPS4 governs microtubule severing and membrane skeleton reorganization. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 16822-16829, 2010.

4. Karabay, A.; Yu, W.; Solowska, J. M.; Baird, D. H.; Baas, P. W.
: Axonal growth is sensitive to the levels of katanin, a protein that
severs microtubules. J. Neurosci. 24: 5778-5788, 2004.

5. McNally, F. J.; Thomas, S.: Katanin is responsible for the M-phase
microtubule-severing activity in Xenopus eggs. Molec. Biol. Cell 9:
1847-1861, 1998.

6. Toyo-Oka, K.; Sasaki, S.; Yano, Y.; Mori, D.; Kobayashi, T.; Toyoshima,
Y. Y.; Tokuoka, S. M.; Ishii, S.; Shimizu, T.; Muramatsu, M.; Hiraiwa,
N.; Yoshiki, A.; Wynshaw-Boris, A.; Hirotsune, S.: Recruitment of
katanin p60 by phosphorylated NDEL1, an LIS1 interacting protein,
is essential for mitotic cell division and neuronal migration. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 3113-3128, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/3/2012
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/21/2009

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/18/2002

EDITED alopez: 08/21/2012
terry: 8/3/2012
wwang: 8/6/2009
terry: 7/21/2009
mgross: 2/18/2002

610497	TITLE *610497 BRAIN AND REPRODUCTIVE ORGAN-EXPRESSED PROTEIN; BRE
;;BRCC4;;
BRCC45
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Li et al. (1995) cloned BRE from a placenta cDNA library. The deduced
protein contains 383 amino acids. Northern blot analysis of normal human
fibroblasts detected a single BRE mRNA at 1.7 to 1.9 kb. Northern blot
analysis of several rat tissues detected highest expression in testis
and intermediate expression in brain and ovary. Using the juxtamembrane
domain of the p55 TNF receptor (TNFRSF1A; 191190) as bait in a yeast
2-hybrid screen, Gu et al. (1998) cloned Bre from a mouse cerebellum
cDNA library.

GENE FUNCTION

Li et al. (1995) found that the expression of BRE decreased following
DNA damage in normal human fibroblasts caused by UV irradiation or
4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide (4NQO) exposure. Similar decreased BRE
expression was observed in retinoic acid-treated human brain glioma
cells and promyelocytic cells. BRE expression was unchanged in cells
following growth inhibition.

Using protein-binding assays and immunoprecipitation analysis in HEK293
cells, Gu et al. (1998) confirmed the interaction between mouse Bre and
Tnfrsf1a. Bre specifically interacted with Tnfrsf1a but not with other
TNF family members. Overexpression of Bre inhibited TNF-induced
NF-kappa-B activation.

Dong et al. (2003) demonstrated that in human cell lines BRE and BRCC3
(300617) are components of a holoenzyme complex containing BRCA1
(113705), BRCA2 (600185), BARD1 (601593), and RAD51 (179617), which they
called the BRCA1- and BRCA2-containing complex (BRCC). The complex
showed UBC5 (see UBE2D1; 602961)-dependent ubiquitin E3 ligase activity.
Inclusion of BRE and BRCC3 enhanced ubiquitination by the complex, and
cancer-associated truncations in BRCA1 reduced the association of BRE
and BRCC3 with the complex. RNA interference of BRE and BRCC3 in HeLa
cells increased cell sensitivity to ionizing radiation and resulted in a
defect in G2/M checkpoint arrest. Dong et al. (2003) concluded that the
BRCC is a ubiquitin E3 ligase that enhances cellular survival following
DNA damage.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the BRE
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP RH66226).

REFERENCE 1. Dong, Y.; Hakimi, M.-A.; Chen, X.; Kumaraswamy, E.; Cooch, N. S.;
Godwin, A. K.; Shiekhattar, R.: Regulation of BRCC, a holoenzyme
complex containing BRCA1 and BRCA2, by a signalosome-like subunit
and its role in DNA repair. Molec. Cell 12: 1087-1099, 2003.

2. Gu, C.; Castellino, A.; Chan, J. Y.-H.; Chao, M. V.: BRE: a modulator
of TNF-alpha action. FASEB J. 12: 1101-1108, 1998.

3. Li, L.; Yoo, H.; Becker, F. F.; Ali-Osman, F.; Chan, J. Y. H.:
Identification of a brain- and reproductive-organs-specific gene responsive
to DNA damage and retinoic acid. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 206:
764-774, 1995.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/16/2006

EDITED wwang: 10/16/2006

601791	TITLE *601791 PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS FACTOR 14; PEX14
;;PEROXIN 14;;
NFE2-ASSOCIATED POLYPEPTIDE 2; NAPP2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Working with Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Albertini et al. (1997) described
peroxin-14 (PEX14), the first membrane-bound peroxisomal protein that
binds to the peroxisomal type-2 targeting signal (PTS2) receptor, PEX7
(601757). Thus, the PEX14 protein may represent the functional docking
site for PTS2-dependent protein import to the peroxisome. In addition to
the interaction with the PTS2 receptor, PEX14 protein was found to
interact with PEX5 protein (600414), the PTS1 receptor. This observation
suggested the overlapping of 2 import pathways, with PEX14 being the
point of convergence. Moreover, PEX14 also interacted with 2 other
membrane-bound peroxins, including the SH3 domain protein PEX13
(601789), the putative docking protein for PTS1-dependent protein
import. Albertini et al. (1997) proposed that these 3 peroxins are
components of a common translocation machinery.

Using yeast Pex14 sequences to probe EST databases, Fransen et al.
(1998) identified a cDNA encoding PEX14. The deduced 377-amino acid
protein contains a nonmembrane-spanning hydrophobic region, a
coiled-coil region, and a charged, acidic C terminus; it has no class II
SH3-binding motif. Western blot analysis showed expression of a 57-kD
protein.

By searching an EST database using S. cerevisiae Pex14 as query, Will et
al. (1999) identified a cDNA encoding PEX14 in a breast cell library.
The deduced protein contains 2 conserved coiled-coil region and has a
calculated molecular mass of about 41 kD. The human and yeast proteins
share 26% identity. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a
2.1-kb transcript in all tissues examined. Western blot analysis of
human fibroblast and in vitro translated protein revealed an apparent
molecular mass of about 55 kD, which may reflect its high content of
acidic amino acids. Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed
colocalization with peroxisomal catalase. PEX14 was found in the
particulate fraction of fractionated cells and resisted salt or alkali
extraction, suggesting that it is an integral membrane protein. Protease
protection assays indicated that the C terminus is cytosolic and that
the N terminus likely protrudes into the peroxisomal lumen.

Gavva et al. (2002) identified PEX14, which they called NAPP2, as a
protein in an erythroleukemia expression library that interacted with
nuclear factor erythroid-2 (NFE2; 601490). Northern blot analysis
revealed a transcript of about 2 kb expressed in all cell lines tested.

GENE FUNCTION

Ligand blot analysis by Fransen et al. (1998) determined that PEX14
binds to both the PTS1 receptor (PEX5) and weakly with the SH3 domain of
PEX13. Biochemical analysis indicated that PEX14 is required for the
import of PTS1-containing proteins into peroxisomes.

Will et al. (1999) found that Pex14 deficiency in S. cerevisiae could
not be rescued by expression of human PEX14, indicating that the
proteins are not functionally interchangeable. Overexpression of PEX14
in normal skin fibroblasts led to the decoration of tubular structures
and mislocalization of peroxisomal catalase to the cytosol. Unlike the
findings in yeast, PEX14 did not form homooligomers or interact with
PTS2 receptor or PEX13.

By in vitro binding assays of truncated recombinant proteins, Gavva et
al. (2002) found that interaction between PEX14 and NFE2 occurs through
the N-terminal 203 amino acids of PEX14 and the N-terminal 114 amino
acids of NFE2. Expression of PEX14 inhibited NFE2-directed
transcriptional activation. PEX14 also functioned as a corepressor and
interacted specifically with HDAC1 (601241), but not with HDAC2 (605164)
or HDAC3 (605166).

MAPPING

By FISH, Gavva et al. (2002) mapped the PEX14 gene to chromosome 1p36.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a patient with Zellweger syndrome (PBD13A; 614887), Shimozawa et al.
(2004) identified a gln185-to-ter mutation in the PEX14 gene (Q185X;
601791.0001). Although PEX14 mutants had been identified in yeast and in
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells, this was said to be the first
reported case of human PEX14 deficiency. Shimozawa et al. (2004) stated
that PEX14 is a member of the complementation group of peroxisome
biogenesis disorders, and designated it complementation group K. PEX14
rescued the import of a PTS1-dependent as well as a PTS2-dependent
protein into the peroxisomes in fibroblasts from the patient. The
patient's fibroblasts lacked PEX14, as determined by immunocytochemical
analysis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS DISORDER 13A (ZELLWEGER)
PEX14, GLN185TER

In an infant with Zellweger syndrome (PBD13A; 614887), Shimozawa et al.
(2004) identified a homozygous 553C-T transition in the PEX14 gene,
resulting in a gln185-to-ter (Q185X) substitution in a putative
coiled-coil region of the protein. At birth the patient showed typical
craniofacial dysmorphia of Zellweger syndrome, including large open
fontanels, high forehead, flat occiput, low/broad nasal bridge, and
micrognathia, as well as neurologic abnormalities including hypotonia.
Plasma analysis showed elevated very long chain fatty acids (VLCFA) and
di- and trihydroxycholestanoic acid, and a normal phytanic acid level.
Erythrocyte plasmalogens were undetectable. The patient died at 10 days
of age.

.0002
PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS DISORDER 13A (ZELLWEGER)
PEX14, 41-KB DEL

In a Pakistani patient with Zellweger syndrome (PBD13A; 614887), born of
related parents, Huybrechts et al. (2008) identified a homozygous 41-kb
deletion in the PEX14 gene, resulting in the deletion of exon 3,
frameshift, and premature protein truncation. Cultured skin fibroblasts
from the patient showed absence of PEX14 protein and absence of normal
peroxisomes. The patient had severe cholestasis and hepatomegaly,
neuronal migration defect, and progressive hypotonia.

REFERENCE 1. Albertini, M.; Rehling, P.; Erdmann, R.; Girzalsky, W.; Kiel, J.
A. K.. W.; Veenhuis, M.; Kunau, W.-H.: Pex14p, a peroxisomal membrane
protein binding both receptors of the two PTS-dependent import pathways. Cell 89:
83-92, 1997.

2. Fransen, M.; Terlecky, S. R.; Subramani, S.: Identification of
a human PTS1 receptor docking protein directly required for peroxisomal
protein import. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8087-8092, 1998.

3. Gavva, N. R.; Wen, S.-C.; Daftari, P.; Moniwa, M.; Yang, W.-M.;
Yang-Feng, L.-P. T.; Seto, E.; Davie, J. R.; Shen, C.-K. J.: NAPP2,
a peroxisomal membrane protein, is also a transcriptional corepressor. Genomics 79:
423-431, 2002.

4. Huybrechts, S. J.; Van Veldhoven, P. P.; Hoffman, I.; Zeevaert,
R.; de Vos, R.; Demaerel, P.; Brams, M.; Jaeken, J.; Fransen, M.;
Cassiman, D.: Identification of a novel PEX14 mutation in Zellweger
syndrome. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 45: 376-383, 2008.

5. Shimozawa, N.; Tsukamoto, T.; Nagase, T.; Takemoto, Y.; Koyama,
N.; Suzuki, Y.; Komori, M.; Osumi, T.; Jeannette, G.; Wanders, R.
J. A.; Kondo, N.: Identification of a new complementation group of
the peroxisome biogenesis disorders and PEX14 as the mutated gene. Hum.
Mutat. 23: 552-558, 2004.

6. Will, G. K.; Soukupova, M.; Hong, X.; Erdmann, K. S.; Kiel, J.
A. K. W.; Dodt, G.; Kunau, W.-H.; Erdmann, R.: Identification and
characterization of the human orthologue of yeast Pex14p. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 19: 2265-2277, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/2/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/15/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/16/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/11/2002
David Valle - edited: 6/23/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/5/1997

EDITED alopez: 10/25/2012
alopez: 10/24/2012
wwang: 10/8/2008
ckniffin: 10/2/2008
carol: 7/16/2008
tkritzer: 1/20/2005
tkritzer: 7/28/2004
terry: 6/15/2004
mgross: 1/3/2003
terry: 12/16/2002
carol: 10/25/2002
mgross: 4/11/2002
psherman: 10/21/1998
psherman: 10/20/1998
dkim: 7/2/1998
mark: 6/23/1997
joanna: 6/23/1997
mark: 5/5/1997

603886	TITLE *603886 ARTEMIN; ARTN
;;NEUBLASTIN;;
ENOVIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Neurotrophic factors, such as GDNF (600837), NTN (602018), and PSPN
(602921), orchestrate multiple aspects of the development and
maintenance of the central and peripheral nervous systems. These GDNF
family ligands signal though a multicomponent receptor system composed
of a high affinity binding component, (GFRA1-GFRA4; see 601496) and a
common signaling component, the RET (164761) receptor tyrosine kinase.
By searching databases for sequences related to NTN, Baloh et al. (1998)
identified human and mouse genomic clones and cDNAs encoding a novel
member of the GDNF family, which they named Artemin. Northern blot
analysis revealed that Artemin is expressed at low levels in many
peripheral adult tissues. Using in situ hybridization analysis of rat
embryos at E14, the authors found that Artemin is expressed in regions
that are likely to influence the development of peripheral neurons, such
as the nerve roots, but not the developing neurons, of the dorsal root
ganglia. The predicted human Artemin protein contains a signal peptide
and a large proregion. The mature protein contains 113 amino acids.

GENE FUNCTION

Baloh et al. (1998) demonstrated that Artemin, like GDNF and NTN,
supports the survival of neurons from all peripheral ganglia examined,
including sympathetic, neural crest, and placodally derived sensory
neurons. In addition, Artemin can support the survival of at least 1
population of central nervous system neurons, the dopaminergic midbrain
neurons. Artemin is a ligand for the GFR-alpha-3 (GRFA3; 605710)
coreceptor, which together with RET, represents the preferred
multicomponent receptor for Artemin signaling.

In a mouse model of neuropathic pain, Gardell et al. (2003) found that
systemic, intermittent administration of artemin produced dose- and
time-related reversal of nerve injury-induced pain behavior as well as
partial to complete normalization of multiple morphologic and
neurochemical features of the injury state. After spinal injury, there
was an increase in dorsal root ganglion cells that were GFR-alpha-3
reactive, the primary site of artemin action.

GENE STRUCTURE

Baloh et al. (1998) determined that the Artemin gene contains 3 introns.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Baloh et al. (1998) mapped the Artemin
gene to chromosome 1p33-p32.

ANIMAL MODEL

Honma et al. (2002) found that Artn- and Gfra3-deficient mice shared
abnormalities in the migration and axonal projection pattern of the
entire sympathetic nervous system, resulting in abnormal innervation of
target tissues and cell death due to lack of neurotrophic support. They
visualized Artn expression in transgenic mice expressing
fluorescence-tagged Artn in order to characterize these defects.
Fluorescence was detected along blood vessels and in cells nearby to
sympathetic axonal projections. Honma et al. (2002) confirmed the
chemoattractive properties of Artn by demonstrating that sympathetic
neuroblasts migrated and projected axons toward Artn-soaked beads
implanted into mouse embryos.

REFERENCE 1. Baloh, R. H.; Tansey, M. G.; Lampe, P. A.; Fahrner, T. J.; Enomoto,
H.; Simburger, K. S.; Leitner, M. L.; Araki, T.; Johnson, E. M., Jr.;
Milbrandt, J.: Artemin, a novel member of the GDNF ligand family,
supports peripheral and central neurons and signals through the GFR-alpha-3-RET
receptor complex. Neuron 21: 1291-1302, 1998.

2. Gardell, L. R.; Wang, R.; Ehrenfels, C.; Ossipov, M. H.; Rossomando,
A. J.; Miller, S.; Buckley, C.; Cai, A. K.; Tse, A.; Foley, S. F.;
Gong, B.; Walus, L.; and 10 others: Multiple actions of systemic
artemin in experimental neuropathy. Nature Med. 9: 1383-1389, 2003.

3. Honma, Y.; Araki, T.; Gianino, S.; Bruce, A.; Heuckeroth, R. O.;
Johnson, E. M., Jr.; Milbrandt, J.: Artemin is a vascular-derived
neurotrophic factor for developing sympathetic neurons. Neuron 35:
267-282, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/6/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/9/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/7/1999

EDITED alopez: 11/07/2003
carol: 10/6/2003
ckniffin: 10/6/2003
mgross: 10/9/2002
alopez: 6/7/1999

609458	TITLE *609458 MANNOSIDASE, ALPHA, CLASS 2B, MEMBER 1; MAN2B1
;;MANNOSIDASE, ALPHA B, LYSOSOMAL; MANB;;
LAMAN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Alpha-mannosidase (EC 3.2.1.24) is a lysosomal hydrolase that cleaves
alpha-linked mannose residues from the nonreducing end of N-linked
glycoproteins (Gotoda et al., 1998).

See also beta-mannosidase (MANBA; 609489).

CLONING

Nebes and Schmidt (1994) isolated and sequenced a cDNA for
alpha-mannosidase. Liao et al. (1996) used RT-PCR to clone 2 cDNAs
encoding human lysosomal alpha-mannosidase. The shorter of the 2 cDNAs
encodes a 3-kb open reading frame which, when expressed, produces a
functional alpha-mannosidase enzyme; the longer cDNA, encoding a 3.6-kb
open reading frame, produced no alpha-mannosidase activity when
expressed. Northern blot analysis identified a major 3-kb mRNA
transcript in all human tissues tested and a minor 3.6-kb mRNA
transcript in several adult tissues.

Nilssen et al. (1997) reported purification and characterization of
lysosomal alpha-mannosidase, which they symbolized LAMAN, from human
placenta. They found that the enzyme was synthesized as a single-chain
precursor which is processed into 3 glycopeptides of 70, 42, and 15 kD.
The 70-kD peptide is further partially proteolyzed into 3 more peptides
that are joined by disulfide bridges. The deduced amino acid sequence
contains a putative signal peptide of 48 amino acids followed by a
polypeptide sequence of 962 amino acids. Northern blot analysis revealed
a single transcript of approximately 3.5 kb present in all tissues
examined, but at varying levels.

Berg et al. (1997) reported the purification of feline liver lysosomal
alpha-mannosidase and determination of its cDNA sequence. The active
enzyme consists of 3 polypeptides, with molecular masses of 72, 41, and
12 kD, joined by noncovalent forces. They demonstrated that the enzyme
is synthesized as a single-chain precursor with a putative signal
peptide of 50 amino acids followed by a polypeptide chain of 957 amino
acids, which is cleaved into the 3 polypeptides of the mature enzyme.
The deduced amino acid sequence was 81.1% and 83.2% identical with the
human and bovine sequences, respectively. Tollersrud et al. (1997)
purified the bovine kidney enzyme to homogeneity and cloned the gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Riise et al. (1997) determined that the MANB gene spans 21.5 kb and
contains 24 exons. By primer extension analysis, the major transcription
initiation sites were mapped to positions -309, -196, and -191 relative
to the first in-frame ATG. No CAAT or TATA sequences were identified
within the 134 bp upstream of the transcription initiation site, but the
5-prime flanking region contains several GC-rich regions with putative
binding sites for the transcription factors Sp1 (189906), AP-2 (107580),
and ETF.

MAPPING

By analysis of human-mouse hybrid cells, Kaneda et al. (1987) assigned
the MANB gene to chromosome 19p13.2-q12. By PCR analysis of DNA from 2
human/rodent somatic cell hybrid mapping panels, Nebes and Schmidt
(1994) mapped the MANB gene to the proximal portion of chromosome 19. In
combination with earlier findings, the gene could be mapped to
19cen-q12.

Beccari et al. (1996) mapped the mouse Man2b1 gene to chromosome 8 using
the Jackson Laboratory interspecific panel DNA.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 Palestinian sibs with alpha-mannosidosis (MANSA; 248500) originally
reported by Bach et al. (1978), Nilssen et al. (1997) identified a
homozygous mutation in the MAN2B1 gene (609458.0001).

In unrelated patients with alpha-mannosidosis, Gotoda et al. (1998)
identified 5 mutations in the MAN2B1 gene (609458.0001-609458.0005). All
mutations were either in the homozygous or compound heterozygous states.

In a screening of 43 patients with mannosidosis from 39 families, mainly
of European origin, Berg et al. (1999) identified 21 novel
disease-causing mutations in the MAN2B1 gene, and 4 polymorphic amino
acid variations. Disease-causing mutations were identified in 72% of the
patients' alleles and included 8 splicing, 6 missense, and 3 nonsense
mutations, as well as 2 small insertions and 2 small deletions. In
addition, Southern blot analysis indicated rearrangements in some
alleles. Most mutations were private or occurred in 2 or 3 families,
except for the R750W substitution (609458.0004), which was found in 13
patients from different European countries and accounted for 21% of the
disease alleles. No correlation between the types of mutations and the
clinical manifestations was evident.

Riise Stensland et al. (2012) identified 96 different pathogenic
mutations in the MAN2B1 gene, including 83 novel mutations, in 130
unrelated patients with alpha-mannosidosis from 30 countries. Most of
the mutations were private, but R750W was found in 50 patients from 16
countries and accounted for 27.3% of disease alleles. Haplotype analysis
indicated at least 4 independent events causing R750W, with 1 haplotype
accounting for 95% of the alleles. Population-based analysis suggested
that the mutant allele arose in eastern Europe. Other recurrent
mutations included a splice site mutation in intron 14 (609458.0006),
found in 13 disease alleles, and L809P (609458.0007), found in 8 disease
alleles. Twenty-nine novel missense mutations were identified. Most did
not show any residual enzyme activity when expressed in COS7 cells, but
10 showed some activity, including 5 with 30% or more residual activity.
There were no apparent genotype/phenotype correlations.

ANIMAL MODEL

Roces et al. (2004) reported correction of storage of neutral
oligosaccharides in a mouse model of alpha-mannosidosis after
intravenous administration of Man2b1 from bovine kidney and human and
mouse recombinant MAN2B1. The bovine and human enzymes were barely
phosphorylated, whereas the bulk of the mouse Man2b1 contained mannose
6-phosphate recognition markers. Clearance and apparent half-life of the
internalized enzyme was dependent on the enzyme source as well as tissue
type. The corrective effect was time-, tissue- and dose-dependent, and
the effects were observed to be transient. After a single dose injection
of MAN2B1, the maximum corrective effect was observed between 2 and 6
days. Injection of 250 microU of human MAN2B1 per gram of body weight
followed by a subsequent injection 3.5 days later was sufficient to
clear liver, kidney, and heart of neutral oligosaccharides. A decrease
in mannose-containing oligosaccharides was also observed in the brain,
with storage levels in treated mice less than 30% of levels found in
control mice.

Blanz et al. (2008) demonstrated that the neuropathology of a mouse
model for alpha-mannosidosis could be efficiently treated using
recombinant human alpha-mannosidase (rhLAMAN). After intravenous
administration of various doses (25-500 U/kg), rhLAMAN was widely
distributed among tissues, and immunohistochemistry revealed lysosomal
delivery of the injected enzyme. Whereas low doses (25 U/kg) led to a
greater than 70% clearance of stored substrates in visceral tissues and
doses of 250 U/kg were sufficient for clearance in peripheral neurons of
the trigeminal ganglion, repeated high-dose injections (500 U/kg) were
required to achieve a greater than 50% reduction of brain storage.
Successful transfer across the blood-brain barrier was evident as the
injected enzyme was found in hippocampal neurons, leading to nearly
complete disappearance of storage vacuoles. In addition, the decrease in
neuronal storage in the brain correlated with an improvement of the
neuromotor disabilities found in untreated alpha-mannosidosis mice.
Uptake of rhLAMAN seemed to be independent of mannose-6-phosphate
receptors, consistent with the low phosphorylation profile of the
enzyme.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ALPHA-MANNOSIDOSIS
MAN2B1, HIS71LEU

In 2 sibs with alpha-mannosidosis (MANSA; 248500), born of
consanguineous parents, Nilssen et al. (1997) identified a homozygous
212A-T transversion in exon 2 of the MANB gene, resulting in a
his71-to-leu (H71L) substitution. Residue his71 is conserved among
lysosomal alpha-mannosidases from several species. The sibs were thought
to be mildly affected and residual acidic alpha-mannosidase activity of
20% of normal was detected in the patient's fibroblasts, according to
the report of this family by Bach et al. (1978). Nevertheless, the
patients showed vacuolated leukocytes and fibroblasts consistent with
the disease phenotype. The authors suggested that mutant mannosidase
enzymes, even though containing residual activity upon testing at the
appropriate pH, may be mislocalized to nonlysosomal compartments and
therefore functionally inactive.

Gotoda et al. (1998) identified the same mutation, which they designated
HIS72LEU in keeping with the codon numbering system of Wakamatsu et al.
(1997). The patient, represented by cell line GM2051, was one of the
patients reported by Nilssen et al. (1997).

.0002
ALPHA-MANNOSIDOSIS
MAN2B1, ARG760TER

In a 47-year-old Japanese woman with mannosidosis (248500), born to
first-cousin parents, Gotoda et al. (1998) identified a homozygous
C-to-T transition in exon 19 of the MAN2B1 gene, resulting in an
arg760-to-ter (R760X) substitution. The lysosomal alpha-mannosidase
activity of the peripheral leukocytes was decreased to less than 1% of
control values.

.0003
ALPHA-MANNOSIDOSIS
MAN2B1, GLN639TER

In fibroblast cell lines from a 7-year-old Finnish boy with
alpha-mannosidosis (248500), who was originally described by Autio et
al. (1973), Gotoda et al. (1998) identified compound heterozygosity for
2 mutations in the MAN2B1 gene: a C-to-T transition in exon 15,
resulting in a gln639-to-ter (Q639X) substitution, and a C-to-T
transition in exon 18, resulting in an arg750-to-trp substitution
(R750W; 609458.0004). Alpha-mannosidase activity was reduced to
approximately 2% of normal.

.0004
ALPHA-MANNOSIDOSIS
MAN2B1, ARG750TRP

See 609458.0003 and Gotoda et al. (1998).

Berg et al. (1999) identified the arg750-to-trp (R750W) mutation in 13
patients with alpha-mannosidosis (248500) from different European
countries. R750W accounted for 21% of disease alleles.

Riise Stensland et al. (2012) identified the R750W mutation in 50 of 130
unrelated patients with alpha-mannosidosis from 30 countries. It was the
most common mutation, accounting for 27.3% of disease alleles. Haplotype
analysis indicated at least 4 independent events causing R750W, with 1
haplotype accounting for 95% of the alleles. Population-based analysis
suggested that the mutant allele arose in eastern Europe. The mutation
was found in patients with mild, moderate, and severe disease.

.0005
ALPHA-MANNOSIDOSIS
MAN2B1, PRO356ARG

In a fibroblast cell line from a 2-year-old girl with severe
alpha-mannosidosis (248500), Gotoda et al. (1998) identified a
homozygous C-to-T transversion in exon 8 of the MAN2B1 gene, resulting
in a pro356-to-arg (P356R) substitution. The patient showed severe
growth failure with hypotonia, psychomotor retardation, and
hepatosplenomegaly.

.0006
ALPHA-MANNOSIDOSIS
MAN2B1, IVS14DS, G-C, +1

In a study of 130 unrelated patients with alpha-mannosidosis (248500)
from 30 countries, Riise Stensland et al. (2012) found that a G-to-C
transversion in intron 14 (IVS14+1G-C) of the MAN2B1 gene (Berg et al.,
1999) was present on 13 disease alleles, making it the second most
common mutation after R750W (609458.0004).

.0007
ALPHA-MANNOSIDOSIS
MAN2B1, LEU809PRO

In a study of 130 unrelated patients with alpha-mannosidosis (248500)
from 30 countries, Riise Stensland et al. (2012) found that a 2426T-C
transition in exon 20 of the MAN2B1 gene (Berg et al., 1999) was present
on 8 disease alleles, making it the third most common mutation after
R750W (609458.0004) and a splice site mutation in intron 14
(609458.0006).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Champion et al. (1978); Champion and Shows (1977); Hultberg  (1970);
Ingram et al. (1977); Jolly et al. (1980); Michelakakis et al. (1992);
Walkley et al. (1994)
REFERENCE 1. Autio, S.; Norden, N. E.; Ockerman, P. A.; Riekkinen, P.; Rapola,
J.; Louhimo, T.: Mannosidosis: clinical, fine-structural and biochemical
findings in three cases. Acta Paediat. Scand. 62: 555-565, 1973.

2. Bach, G.; Kohn, G.; Lasch, E. E.; Massri, M. E.; Ornoy, A.; Sekeles,
E.; Legum, C.; Cohen, M. M.: A new variant of mannosidosis with increased
residual enzymatic activity and mild clinical manifestation. Pediat.
Res. 12: 1010-1015, 1978.

3. Beccari, T.; Appollini, M. G.; Stirling, J. L.; Orlacchio, A.:
Assignment of lysosomal alpha-D-mannosidase to mouse chromosome 8. Mammalian
Genome 7: 707-708, 1996.

4. Berg, T.; Riise, H. M. F.; Hansen, G. M.; Malm, D.; Tranebjaerg,
L.; Tollersrud, O. K.; Nilssen, O.: Spectrum of mutations in alpha-mannosidosis. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 64: 77-88, 1999.

5. Berg, T.; Tollersrud, O. K.; Walkley, S. U.; Siegel, D.; Nilssen,
O.: Purification of feline lysosomal alpha-mannosidase, determination
of its cDNA sequence and identification of a mutation causing alpha-mannosidosis
in Persian cats. Biochem. J. 328: 863-870, 1997.

6. Blanz, J.; Stroobants, S.; Lullmann-Rauch, R.; Morelle, W.; Ludemann,
M.; D'Hooge, R.; Reuterwall, H.; Michalski, J. C.; Fogh, J.; Andersson,
C.; Saftig, P.: Reversal of peripheral and central neural storage
and ataxia after recombinant enzyme replacement therapy in alpha-mannosidosis
mice. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 3437-3445, 2008.

7. Champion, M. J.; Brown, J. A.; Shows, T. B.: Studies on the alpha-mannosidase
(MAN-B), peptidase D (PEP D) and glucose on chromosome 19 in man. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 22: 186-189, 1978.

8. Champion, M. J.; Shows, T. B.: Mannosidosis: assignment of the
lysosomal alpha-mannosidase B gene to chromosome 19 in man. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 74: 2968-2972, 1977.

9. Gotoda, Y.; Wakamatsu, N.; Kawai, H.; Nishida, Y.; Matsumoto, T.
: Missense and nonsense mutations in the lysosomal alpha-mannosidase
gene (MANB) in severe and mild forms of alpha-mannosidosis. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 63: 1015-1024, 1998.

10. Hultberg, B.: Properties of alpha-mannosidase in mannosidosis. Scand.
J. Clin. Lab. Invest. 26: 155-160, 1970.

11. Ingram, P. H.; Bruns, G. A. P.; Regina, V. M.; Eisenman, R. E.;
Gerald, P. S.: Expression of alpha-D-mannosidase in man-hamster somatic
cell hybrids. Biochem. Genet. 15: 455-476, 1977.

12. Jolly, R. D.; Slack, P. M.; Winter, P. J.; Murphy, C. E.: Mannosidosis:
patterns of storage and urinary excretion of oligosaccharides in the
bovine model. Aust. J. Exp. Biol. Med. Sci. 58: 421-428, 1980.

13. Kaneda, Y.; Hayes, H.; Uchida, T.; Yoshida, M. C.; Okada, Y.:
Regional assignment of five genes on human chromosome 19. Chromosoma 95:
8-12, 1987.

14. Liao, Y.-F.; Lal, A.; Moremen, K. W.: Cloning, expression, purification,
and characterization of the human broad specificity lysosomal acid
alpha-mannosidase. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 28348-28358, 1996.

15. Michelakakis, H.; Dimitriou, E.; Mylona-Karayanni, C.; Bartsocas,
C. S.: Phenotypic variability of mannosidosis type II: report of
two Greek siblings. Genetic Counseling 3: 195-199, 1992.

16. Nebes, V. L.; Schmidt, M. C.: Human lysosomal alpha-mannosidase:
isolation and nucleotide sequence of the full-length cDNA. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 200: 239-245, 1994. Note: Erratum: Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 232: 583 only, 1997.

17. Nilssen, O.; Berg, T.; Riise, H. M. F.; Ramachandran, U.; Evjen,
G.; Hansen, G. M.; Malm, D.; Tranebjaerg, L.; Tollersrud, O. K.:
Alpha-mannosidosis: functional cloning of the lysosomal alpha-mannosidase
cDNA and identification of a mutation in two affected siblings. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 6: 717-726, 1997.

18. Riise, H. M. F.; Berg, T.; Nilssen, O.; Romeo, G.; Tollersrud,
O. K.; Ceccherini, I.: Genomic structure of the human lysosomal alpha-mannosidase
gene (MANB). Genomics 42: 200-207, 1997.

19. Riise Stensland, H. M. F.; Klenow, H. B.; Van Nguyen, L.; Hansen,
G. M.; Malm, D.; Nilssen, O.: Identification of 83 novel alpha-mannosidosis-associated
sequence variants: functional analysis of MAN2B1 missense mutations. Hum.
Mutat. 33: 511-520, 2012.

20. Roces, D. P.; Lullmann-Rauch, R.; Peng, J.; Balducci, C.; Andersson,
C.; Tollersrud, O.; Fogh, J.; Orlacchio, A.; Beccari, T.; Saftig,
P.; von Figura, K.: Efficacy of enzyme replacement therapy in alpha-mannosidosis
mice: a preclinical animal study. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 1979-1988,
2004.

21. Tollersrud, O. K.; Berg, T.; Healy, P.; Evjen, G.; Ramachandran,
U.; Nilssen, O.: Purification of bovine lysosomal alpha-mannosidase,
characterization of its gene and determination of two mutations that
cause alpha-mannosidosis. Europ. J. Biochem. 246: 410-419, 1997.

22. Wakamatsu, N.; Gotoda, Y.; Saito, S.; Kawai, H.: Characterization
of the human MANB gene encoding lysosomal alpha-D-mannosidase. Gene 198:
351-357, 1997.

23. Walkley, S. U.; Thrall, M. A.; Dobrenis, K.; Huang, M.; March,
P. A.; Siegel, D. A.; Wurzelmann, S.: Bone marrow transplantation
corrects the enzyme defect in neurons of the central nervous system
in a lysosomal storage disease. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 2970-2974,
1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/31/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/3/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/22/2007

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 7/1/2005

EDITED carol: 04/04/2013
carol: 7/18/2012
ckniffin: 7/17/2012
carol: 6/5/2012
ckniffin: 5/31/2012
wwang: 11/9/2009
terry: 11/3/2009
wwang: 3/22/2007
carol: 7/27/2005
ckniffin: 7/22/2005

609867	TITLE *609867 UBIQUITIN-LIKE DOMAIN-CONTAINING CTD PHOSPHATASE 1; UBLCP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

During large-scale cDNA sequencing, Zheng et al. (2005) cloned a novel
phosphatase, which they named ubiquitin-like domain-containing CTD
phosphatase-1 (UBLCP1), from a human fetal brain cDNA library. UBLCP1
encodes a 318-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 36.8
kD. It has a CTD phosphatase catalytic domain containing several
residues essential for catalytic activity that are conserved with those
in the CTD phosphatases CTDSP1 (605323) and CTDP1 (604927). UBLCP1 also
contains an N-terminal ubiquitin-like domain that harbors a
proteasome-interacting motif. RT-PCR detected relatively high expression
of UBLCP1 in placenta, lung, testis, and ovary, with weaker expression
in heart, liver, kidney, spleen, thymus, colon, and peripheral blood
leukocytes. UBLCP1 expression was particularly high in breast, lung,
colon, prostate, ovarian, and pancreas tumor tissues. Immunofluorescence
analysis localized UBLCP1 to the nucleus.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in vitro phosphatase assays, Zheng et al. (2005) demonstrated that
UBLCP1 shows magnesium-dependent phosphatase activity towards the
substrate p-nitrophenyl phosphate that is optimal at pH 5. In vitro
assays also showed that UBLCP1 dephosphorylates the C-terminal domain of
RNA polymerase II (180660), with highest activity at serine-5.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zheng et al. (2005) determined that the UBLCP1 gene contains 11 exons
spanning over 22.7 kb.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Zheng et al. (2005) mapped the UBLCP1 gene to
chromosome 5q33.3.

REFERENCE 1. Zheng, H.; Ji, C.; Gu, S.; Shi, B.; Wang, J.; Xie, Y.; Mao, Y.
: Cloning and characterization of a novel RNA polymerase II C-terminal
domain phosphatase. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 331: 1401-1407,
2005.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 1/31/2006

EDITED carol: 12/26/2007
carol: 1/31/2006

600442	TITLE *600442 AQUAPORIN 5; AQP5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Aquaporin water channels, such as AQP5, play a fundamental role in
transmembrane water movement in plant and animal tissues (see AQP1;
107776).

CLONING

Since the molecular pathway by which water is secreted by salivary
glands was unknown, Raina et al. (1995) isolated cDNA from rat
submandibular gland by homology cloning. In vitro translation yielded a
27-kD polypeptide, and expression of the cRNA in Xenopus oocytes
conferred a 20-fold increase in osmotic water permeability, which was
reversibly inhibited by HgCl(2). Northern blot analysis demonstrated a
1.6-kb mRNA in submandibular, parotid, and sublingual salivary glands,
lacrimal gland, eye, trachea, and lung. In situ hybridization
demonstrated strong hybridization over the corneal epithelium of the eye
and over the secretory lobules in salivary glands. This member of the
mammalian aquaporin water channel family, designated AQP5, was
implicated in the generation of saliva, tears, and pulmonary secretions.

Lee et al. (1996) isolated and characterized the human AQP5 cDNA and
gene. The AQP5 cDNA from a human submaxillary gland library contained a
795-bp open reading frame encoding a 265-amino acid polypeptide. The
deduced amino acid sequences of human and rat AQP5 are 91% identical,
with 6 substitutions in the 22-amino acid COOH-terminal domain. Lee et
al. (1996) identified a transcription initiation site 518 bp upstream of
the initiating methionine.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Lee et al. (1996) mapped the AQP5
gene to chromosome 12q13. The AQP5 gene resides within a 7.4-kb
SalI-EcoRI restriction fragment. The homologous mouse gene was localized
to distal chromosome 15.

GENE FUNCTION

Lee et al. (1996) showed that microinjection of human AQP5 in Xenopus
oocytes conferred mercurial-sensitive osmotic water permeability
equivalent to other aquaporins.

Tsubota et al. (2001) examined the distribution of AQP5 in lacrimal
gland biopsy specimens. Healthy controls and patients with either
Mikulicz disease or non-Sjogren syndrome dry eye had the expected apical
distribution of AQP5 in lacrimal acinar cells. Patients with Sjogren
syndrome, however, had diffuse cytoplasmic staining for AQP5, with
almost no labeling at the apical membrane. Sodium channel and
sodium-potassium ATPase distribution were normal in all groups. Tsubota
et al. (2001) concluded that there is a selective defect in lacrimal
gland AQP5 trafficking in Sjogren syndrome that might contribute to
decreased lacrimation and dry eye in these patients.

Sidhaye et al. (2006) observed a dose-responsive decrease in Aqp5
abundance in mouse lung epithelial cells exposed to hypotonic medium.
Hypotonic reduction of Aqp5 was augmented and reduced, respectively, by
conditions that activated or inhibited Trpv4 (605427). Hypotonic
reduction of Aqp5 required extracellular calcium and was associated with
increased intracellular calcium. The response to hypotonicity was
recapitulated by coexpression of TRPV4 and AQP5 in human embryonic
kidney cells. Sidhaye et al. (2006) concluded that AQP5 abundance is
tightly controlled along a spectrum of extracellular osmolalities and
that its abundance in hypotonic conditions can be regulated by TRPV4
activation.

By immunohistochemistry, Blaydon et al. (2013) observed strong
localization of AQP5 to the plasma membrane in keratinocytes of the
stratum granulosum. Levels of AQP5 in the palmar epidermis were much
lower than those seen in cells of the sweat glands.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using linkage data in combination with exome sequencing followed by
Sanger sequencing in families segregating autosomal dominant diffuse
nonepidermolytic PPK (PPKB; 600231), Blaydon et al. (2013) identified
heterozygosity for 5 different missense mutations in the AQP5 gene
(600442.0001-600442.0005) in affected members of 7 Swedish families, 3
British families, and a Scottish family. The mutations all segregated
with disease in the respective families and were not found in the dbSNP
or 1000 Genomes Project databases. Immunohistochemical analyses revealed
that the mutant AQP5 variants retained the ability to traffic to the
plasma membrane; the analyses also showed an increase in levels of
acetylated alpha-tubulin (see 602529) in a patient palm biopsy compared
to a control palm, suggesting increased levels of microtubule
stabilization in diffuse NEPPK palmar epidermis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Ma et al. (2000) presented results from studies of Aqp5-null knockout
mice indicating that AQP5 is responsible for the majority of water
transport across the apical membrane of type I alveolar epithelial
cells. The unimpaired alveolar fluid clearance in Aqp5-null mice
indicated that high alveolar water permeability is not required for
active, near-isosmolar fluid transport. King et al. (2000) stated that 5
aquaporin-null phenotypes had been reported: AQP0, AQP1, AQP2, AQP4, and
AQP5.

Nejsum et al. (2002) studied the localization of AQPs 1 through 5 in rat
and mouse skin and sweat glands and investigated the potential roles of
AQPs in sweat secretion. The studies demonstrated that AQP5 resides in
plasma membranes of sweat secretory cells and is essential for sweat
secretion. Aqp5-null mice showed no apparent differences in the number
or morphologic appearance of sweat glands. However, these mice showed a
marked reduction in pilocarpine-induced sweat response. Nejsum et al.
(2002) raised the possibility that dysregulation of AQP5 in sweat glands
may contribute to the pathogenesis of hypohidrosis observed in patients
with Sjogren syndrome (270150) who show markedly decreased sweating in
response to methacholine stimulation. In contrast, hyperhidrosis
(144110) is a chronic idiopathic disorder of excessive sweating which
may affect the palms, axillae, soles, and face. They suggested that AQP5
inhibition may be a therapeutic option in these patients.

Two AQP water channels are expressed in mammalian cornea, AQP1 in
endothelial cells and AQP5 in epithelial cells. Thiagarajah and Verkman
(2002) examined the effect of Aqp1 or Aqp5 knockout in mice. Corneal
thickness in fixed sections was reduced in Aqp1 null mice and increased
in Aqp5 null mice. After exposure of the external corneal surface to
hypotonic saline, the rate of corneal swelling was reduced by Aqp5
deletion. After exposure of the endothelial surface to hypotonic saline
by anterior chamber perfusion, the rate of corneal swelling was reduced
by Aqp1 deletion. The recovery of corneal transparency and thickness
after hypotonic swelling was delayed in Aqp1 null mice. Thiagarajah and
Verkman (2002) concluded that AQP1 and AQP5 provide the principal routes
for corneal water transport across the endothelial and epithelial
barriers, respectively.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PALMOPLANTAR KERATODERMA, BOTHNIAN TYPE
AQP5, ALA38GLU

In affected individuals of 7 Swedish families with Bothnian-type diffuse
nonepidermolytic PPK (PPKB; 600231), including a family previously
studied by Lind et al. (1994), Blaydon et al. (2013) identified
heterozygosity for a c.113C-A transversion in exon 1 of the AQP5 gene,
resulting in an ala38-to-glu (A38E) substitution at a residue located on
the extracellular surface of the protein. The mutation segregated with
disease in each family and was not found in the dbSNP or 1000 Genomes
Project databases. Affected individuals carrying the A38E mutation all
shared the same haplotype, indicating that A38E represents a founder
mutation. In 1 of the Swedish families, however, most affected
individuals carried a different missense mutation in AQP5 (R188C;
600442.0002); the A38E founder mutation was present in only 1 branch of
the family and was inherited from an affected individual who married
into the family.

.0002
PALMOPLANTAR KERATODERMA, BOTHNIAN TYPE
AQP5, ARG188CYS

In affected individuals of a Swedish family with Bothnian-type diffuse
nonepidermolytic PPK (600231), Blaydon et al. (2013) identified
heterozygosity for a c.562C-T transition in exon 3 of the AQP5 gene,
resulting in an arg188-to-cys (R188C) substitution at a highly conserved
residue lining the extracellular end of the water channel. The mutation,
which was not found in the dbSNP or 1000 Genomes Project databases,
segregated with disease in most of the family. In 1 branch of the
family, however, affected individuals carried the A38E founder mutation
(600442.0001), which was inherited from an affected individual who
married into the family.

.0003
PALMOPLANTAR KERATODERMA, BOTHNIAN TYPE
AQP5, ILE45SER

In affected individuals of 2 families of British descent with
Bothnian-type diffuse nonepidermolytic PPK (600231), Blaydon et al.
(2013) identified heterozygosity for a c.134T-G transversion in exon 1
of the AQP5 gene, resulting in an ile45-to-ser (I45S) substitution at a
residue lining the extracellular end of the water channel. The mutation
segregated with disease in both families and was not found in the dbSNP
or 1000 Genomes Project databases.

.0004
PALMOPLANTAR KERATODERMA, BOTHNIAN TYPE
AQP5, ILE177PHE

In affected members of a large British family with Bothnian-type diffuse
nonepidermolytic PPK (600231), Blaydon et al. (2013) identified
heterozygosity for a c.529A-T transversion in exon 3 of the AQP5 gene,
resulting in an ile177-to-phe (I177F) substitution at a residue lining
the extracellular end of the water channel. The mutation segregated with
disease in the family and was not found in the dbSNP or 1000 Genomes
Project databases.

.0005
PALMOPLANTAR KERATODERMA, BOTHNIAN TYPE
AQP5, ASN123ASP

In affected members of a family from Scotland with Bothnian-type diffuse
nonepidermolytic PPK (600231), Blaydon et al. (2013) identified
heterozygosity for a c.367A-G transition in exon 2 of the AQP5 gene,
resulting in an asn123-to-asp (N123D) substitution at a residue located
on the extracellular surface of the protein. The mutation segregated
with disease in the family and was not found in the dbSNP or 1000
Genomes Project databases.

REFERENCE 1. Blaydon, D. C.; Lind, L. K.; Plagnol, V.; Linton, K. J.; Smith,
F. J. D.; Wilson, N. J.; McLean, W. H. I.; Munro, C. S.; South, A.
P.; Leigh, I. M.; O'Toole, E. A.; Lundstrom, A.; Kelsell, D. P.:
Mutations in AQP5, encoding a water-channel protein, cause autosomal-dominant
diffuse nonepidermolytic palmoplantar keratoderma. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93:
330-335, 2013.

2. King, L. S.; Nielsen, S.; Agre, P.: Aquaporins and the respiratory
system: advice for a lung investigator. J. Clin. Invest. 105: 15-16,
2000.

3. Lee, M. D.; Bhakta, K. Y.; Raina, S.; Yonescu, R.; Griffin, C.
A.; Copeland, N. G.; Gilbert, D. J.; Jenkins, N. A.; Preston, G. M.;
Agre, P.: The human aquaporin-5 gene: molecular characterization
and chromosomal localization. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 8599-8604, 1996.

4. Lind, L.; Lundstrom, A.; Hofer, P.-A.; Holmgren, G.: The gene
for diffuse palmoplantar keratoderma of the type found in northern
Sweden is localized to chromosome 12q11-q13. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3:
1789-1793, 1994.

5. Ma, T.; Fukuda, N.; Song, Y.; Matthay, M. A.; Verkman, A. S.:
Lung fluid transport in aquaporin-5 knockout mice. J. Clin. Invest. 105:
93-100, 2000.

6. Nejsum, L. N.; Kwon, T.-H.; Jensen, U. B.; Fumagalli, O.; Frokiaer,
J.; Krane, C. M.; Menon, A. G.; King, L. S.; Agre, P. C.; Nielsen,
S.: Functional requirement of aquaporin-5 in plasma membranes of
sweat glands. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 511-516, 2002.

7. Raina, S.; Preston, G. M.; Guggino, W. B.; Agre, P.: Molecular
cloning and characterization of an aquaporin cDNA from salivary, lacrimal,
and respiratory tissues. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 1908-1912, 1995.

8. Sidhaye, V. K.; Guler, A. D.; Schweitzer, K. S.; D'Alessio, F.;
Caterina, M. J.; King, L. S.: Transient receptor potential vanilloid
4 regulates aquaporin-5 abundance under hypotonic conditions. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 4747-4752, 2006.

9. Thiagarajah, J. R.; Verkman, A. S.: Aquaporin deletion in mice
reduces corneal water permeability and delays restoration of transparency
after swelling. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 19139-19144, 2002.

10. Tsubota, K.; Hirai, S.; King, L. S.; Agre, P.; Ishida, N.: Defective
cellular trafficking of lacrimal gland aquaporin-5 in Sjogren's syndrome. Lancet 357:
688-689, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 09/27/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/5/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/10/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/4/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/31/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/24/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/7/1995

EDITED carol: 09/27/2013
mgross: 6/6/2006
terry: 6/5/2006
wwang: 2/14/2005
terry: 2/10/2005
mgross: 5/4/2004
carol: 2/18/2002
mcapotos: 2/7/2002
terry: 1/31/2002
mcapotos: 1/28/2000
mcapotos: 1/24/2000
terry: 1/24/2000
dkim: 12/15/1998
dkim: 6/30/1998
mark: 7/11/1996
terry: 6/17/1996
carol: 3/8/1995
carol: 3/7/1995

611275	TITLE *611275 BCL2/ADENOVIRUS E1B 19-KD PROTEIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2-LIKE; BNIPL
;;BNIP2-SIMILAR; BNIPS;;
BNIPL1;;
BNIPL2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis using full-length BNIP2 (603292) or its BNIP2 and
CDC42GAP (ARHGAP1; 602732) homology (BCH) domain as probe, followed by
5-prime RACE of human kidney epithelial cells, Zhou et al. (2002) cloned
BNIPL, which they called BNIPS. They identified 2 alternative splicing
isoforms, a deduced 275-amino acid BNIPS-alpha isoform and a deduced
204-amino acid BNIPS-beta isoform. The BNIPS-alpha isoform shared 46%
identity with BNIP2 with higher similarity over the BCH domain, which is
predicted to comprise several alpha helices. PCR analysis detected
differing levels of expression of the BNIPS-alpha and BNIPS-beta
isoforms in a number of human cancer cell lines including breast cancer
MCF-7, HeLa cells, 293T embryonic transformed kidney epithelial cells,
and stomach and colon cancer cell lines. PCR analysis of mouse tissues
detected expression of BNIPS-alpha in all tissues examined.
Immunofluorescence studies localized the BNIPS-alpha isoform to the
cytosol and BNIPS-beta primarily to the nucleus.

Using a high-throughput transfection screen for suppressors of cell
growth from a human placental cDNA library, followed by 5-prime RACE,
Qin et al. (2003) independently cloned BNIPL. They identified 2
alternatively spliced isoforms that used different start codons: a
deduced 275-amino acid isoform, BNIPL1, isoform identical to the
BNIPS-alpha isoform isolated by Zhou et al. (2002) and a longer
357-amino acid isoform, BNIPL2, containing 82 additional N-terminal
amino acids, followed by the 275-amino acid sequence identical to
BNIPL1. By Northern blot analysis of human tissues, Shen et al. (2003)
detected a 2.4-kb BNIPL transcript in placenta and lung.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhou et al. (2002) showed that overexpression of the BNIPS-alpha isoform
in human breast cancer cells caused cell rounding, which was accompanied
by annexin V (ANXA5; 131230) binding, cell shrinkage, and detachment.
BNIPS-beta showed no change in cell morphology. The BCH domain was
required for proapoptotic activity. Zhou et al. (2002) concluded that
BNIPS-alpha induces apoptosis.

Using yeast 2-hybrid and pull-down affinity studies, Qin et al. (2003)
showed that the BCH domain of the BNIPL2 isoform interacted with Bcl2
(151430), Cdc42GAP, and with itself. They demonstrated that the BCH
domain was responsible for the ability of BNIPL2 to suppress GAP
activity of Cdc42GAP toward CDC42 (116952) and for the proapoptotic
function of BNIPL2. Shen et al. (2003) showed that overexpression of
BNIPL inhibited cell growth in human hepatocarcinoma cells. Using in
vivo and in vitro assays, they found that BNIPL interacted with MIF
(153620) and GFER (600924).

GENE STRUCTURE

Qin et al. (2003) determined that the BNIPL gene contains 10 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Qin et al. (2003) mapped the BNIPL gene to
chromosome 1q21.1.

REFERENCE 1. Qin, W.; Hu, J.; Guo, M.; Xu, J.; Li, J.; Yao, G.; Zhou, X.; Jiang,
H.; Zhang, P.; Shen, L.; Wan, D.; Gu, J.: BNIPL-2, a novel homologue
of BNIP-2, interacts with Bcl-2 and Cdc42GAP in apoptosis. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 308: 379-385, 2003.

2. Shen, L.; Hu, J.; Lu, H.; Wu, M.; Qin, W.; Wan, D.; Li, Y.-Y.;
Gu, J.: The apoptosis-associated protein BNIPL interacts with two
cell proliferation-related proteins, MIF and GFER. FEBS Lett. 540:
86-90, 2003.

3. Zhou, Y. T.; Soh, U. J. K.; Shang, X.; Guy, G. R.; Low, B. C.:
The BNIP-2 and Cdc42GAP homology/Sec14p-like domain of BNIP-S-alpha
is a novel apoptosis-inducing sequence. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 7483-7492,
2002.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 8/1/2007

EDITED wwang: 08/01/2007
wwang: 8/1/2007

191311	TITLE *191311 DISCOIDIN DOMAIN RECEPTOR FAMILY, MEMBER 2; DDR2
;;NEUROTROPHIC TYROSINE KINASE RECEPTOR-RELATED 3; NTRKR3;;
TYROSINE KINASE RECEPTOR RELATED TO NEUROTROPHIC TRK; TKT
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a PCR-mediated approach, Karn et al. (1993) characterized cDNAs
from human and mouse representing a novel type of receptor protein
tyrosine kinase (RTK). The deduced 855-amino acid sequence of the
longest ORF has a unique extracellular region encompassing a factor
VIII-like domain, not previously described for RTKs. The most closely
related RTKs are members of the neurotrophin receptors (TRKs; see TRKA,
191315), which show 47 to 49% homology with the kinase domain of the
novel RTK. Therefore, Karn et al. (1993) called the novel gene TKT
(pronounced 'ticket') for 'tyrosine-kinase related to TRK.' TKT
orthologs from man and mouse are 98% similar. Northern blot analysis
detected a 10-kb transcript that was highly expressed in heart and lung,
with lower expression in brain, placenta, liver, skeletal muscle, and
kidney. In mouse, highest expression was also detected in heart and
lung, with lower expression in brain and testis.

Using in situ hybridization with 1-week-old mice, Labrador et al. (2001)
found that Ddr2 was expressed along chondrocyte columns in the
proliferative region of the growth plate. Ddr2 mRNA was also present,
although dispersed, at areas of calcified cartilage in the
cartilage-bone junction, as well as in the trabecular bone surface. Ddr2
protein was detected in most mouse tissues examined. Highest levels of
phosphorylated Ddr2 were detected in lung, ovary, and skin, which did
not correlate with Ddr2 protein levels.

MAPPING

By analysis of human/mouse somatic cell hybrids using PCR with primers
that amplified human but not mouse genomic DNA, Karn et al. (1993)
demonstrated that the TKT gene segregates with human chromosome 1 and is
located in the region 1q12-qter.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Bargal et al. (2009) mapped the short limb-hand type of
spondyloepiphyseal-metaphyseal dysplasia (SMED-SL; 271665) to a region
on chromosome 1 that included that DDR2 gene. They considered DDR2 to be
a strong candidate for the disorder because of the similarity between
the phenotype of the Ddr2 knockout mouse and that of SMED-SL patients.
In 8 patients from 7 different consanguineous families with SMED-SL,
they identified homozygous missense mutations in exon 17 of the DDR2
gene: an R752C substitution (191311.0001) in 6 Arab Muslims living in
the Jerusalem area, an I726R (191311.0002) substitution in 1 Algerian,
and a T713I (191311.0003) substitution in 1 Pakistani. Bargal et al.
(2009) also identified a splice site mutation (191311.0004) in the DDR2
gene, which resulted in the skipping of exon 17, in one of the Jewish
families with SMED-SL originally reported by Borochowitz et al. (1993).
All of the mutations occurred in the active site of the DDR2 tyrosine
kinase domain.

Ali et al. (2010) reported homozygous DDR2 missense mutations in 2
consanguineous families with SMED-SL in the United Arab Emirates. One
was a novel mutation (E113K; 191311.0005) in 2 sibs from a family of
Pakistani origin, and the other the R752C mutation (191311.0001) in 2
Egyptian sibs. The authors expressed DDR2 constructs with the identified
point mutations in human cell lines and evaluated their localization and
functional properties. All SMED-SL missense mutants were defective in
collagen-induced receptor activation, and the 3 missense mutations
reported by Bargal et al. (2009) were retained in the endoplasmic
reticulum. In contrast, the novel mutation trafficked normally but
failed to bind collagen.

ANIMAL MODEL

Labrador et al. (2001) obtained Ddr2 -/- mice at the expected mendelian
ratio. Ddr2 -/- mice appeared normal at birth, but they failed to
thrive, resulting in proportionate smaller body size and reduced body
mass. They developed a progressive skeletal phenotype characterized by
shortening of long bones, irregular growth of flat bones, and shorter
snout. Reduced bone growth in Ddr2 -/- mice appeared to be due to
reduced chondrocyte proliferation rather than apoptosis or a defect in
chondrocyte differentiation. Ddr2 -/- embryonic fibroblasts and Ddr2 -/-
adult skin fibroblasts proliferated more slowly and showed a diminished
wounding response compared with wildtype fibroblasts.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPONDYLOMETAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, SHORT LIMB-HAND TYPE
DDR2, ARG752CYS

In 6 patients with the short limb-hand type of spondylometaepiphyseal
dysplasia (271665) from 5 Arab Muslim families living in the Jerusalem
area, Bargal et al. (2009) identified homozygosity for a 2254C-T
transition in exon 17 of the DDR2 gene, resulting in an arg752-to-cys
(R752C) substitution. All of the parents were heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 200 chromosomes of matched healthy
unrelated individuals. Haplotype analysis indicated that this is a
founder mutation.

Ali et al. (2010) found that the 2 affected sibs from the consanguineous
Egyptian family originally reported by Al-Gazali et al. (1996) carried
the R752C mutation in homozygosity. Both sibs died, one of respiratory
failure at age 13 years and the other of cord compression at age 8
years. In severity the phenotype was similar to the patients described
by Bargal et al. (2009).

Ali et al. (2010) expressed R752C mutant protein in human cells and
found that it was retained in endoplasmic reticulum and was defective in
collagen-induced receptor activation.

.0002
SPONDYLOMETAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, SHORT LIMB-HAND TYPE
DDR2, ILE726ARG

In an Algerian patient with spondylometaepiphyseal dysplasia, short
limb-hand type (271665), Bargal et al. (2009) identified homozygosity
for a 2177T-G transversion in exon 17 of the DDR2 gene, resulting in an
ile726-to-arg (I726R) substitution. The parents were heterozygous for
the mutation, which was not found in 200 chromosomes of matched healthy
unrelated individuals.

Ali et al. (2010) expressed I726R mutant protein in human cells and
found that it was retained in endoplasmic reticulum and was defective in
collagen-induced receptor activation.

.0003
SPONDYLOMETAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, SHORT LIMB-HAND TYPE
DDR2, THR713ILE

In a Pakistani patient with spondylometaepiphyseal dysplasia, short
limb-hand type (271665), Bargal et al. (2009) identified homozygosity
for a 2138C-T transition in exon 17 of the DDR2 gene, resulting in a
thr713-to-ile (T713I) substitution. The parents were heterozygous for
the mutation, which was not found in 200 chromosomes of matched healthy
unrelated individuals.

Ali et al. (2010) expressed T713I mutant protein in human cells and
found that it was retained in endoplasmic reticulum and was defective in
collagen-induced receptor activation.

.0004
SPONDYLOMETAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, SHORT LIMB-HAND TYPE
DDR2, IVS17, G-A, +1

In the parents of the affected members of one of the original
consanguineous Jewish families with spondylometaepiphyseal dysplasia,
short limb-hand type (271665), described by Borochowitz et al. (1993),
Bargal et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for an IVS17+1G-A
mutation in the DDR2 gene, which resulted in the skipping of exon 17.

.0005
SPONDYLOMETAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, SHORT LIMB-HAND TYPE
DDR2, GLU113LYS

In 2 brothers from a consanguineous Pakistani family with
spondylometaepiphyseal dysplasia, short limb-hand type (271665), Ali et
al. (2010) detected homozygosity for a c.337G-A transition in DDR2
resulting in a glu-to-lys substitution at codon 113 (E113K). The E113K
mutation is located in the extracellular discoidin domain and affects a
surface-exposed residue important in the DDR2 collagen-binding site. The
brothers had bowing of lower limbs in addition to short limbs and hands.
Both had repeated respiratory infections. Neurologic development was
normal in both.

Ali et al. (2010) expressed E113K mutant protein in human cells and
found that, while it trafficked normally, it was defective in
collagen-induced receptor activation and failed to bind collagen.

REFERENCE 1. Al-Gazali, L. I.; Bakalinova, D.; Sztriha, L.: Spondylo-meta-epiphyseal
dysplasia, short limb, abnormal calcification type. Clin. Dysmorph. 5:
197-206, 1996.

2. Ali, B. R.; Xu, H.; Akawi, N. A.; John, A.; Karuvantevida, N. S.;
Langer, R.; Al-Gazali, L.; Leitinger, B.: Trafficking defects and
loss of ligand binding are the underlying causes of all reported DDR2
missense mutations found in SMED-SL patients. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19:
2239-2250, 2010.

3. Bargal, R.; Cormier-Daire, V.; Ben-Neriah, Z.; Le Merrer, M.; Sosna,
J.; Melki, J.; Zangen, D. H.; Smithson, S. F.; Borochowitz, Z.; Belostotsky,
R.; Raas-Rothschild, A.: Mutations in DDR2 gene cause SMED with short
limbs and abnormal calcifications. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 84: 80-84,
2009.

4. Borochowitz, Z.; Langer, L. O., Jr.; Gruber, H. E.; Lachman, R.;
Katznelson, M. B.-M.; Rimoin, D. L.: Spondylo-meta-epiphyseal dysplasia
(SMED), short limb-hand type: a congenital familial skeletal dysplasia
with distinctive features and histopathology. Am. J. Med. Genet. 45:
320-326, 1993.

5. Karn, T.; Holtrich, U.; Brauninger, A.; Bohme, B.; Wolf, G.; Rubsamen-Waigmann,
H.; Strebhardt, K.: Structure, expression and chromosomal mapping
of TKT from man and mouse: a new subclass of receptor tyrosine kinases
with a factor VIII-like domain. Oncogene 8: 3433-3440, 1993.

6. Labrador, J. P.; Azcoitia, V.; Tuckermann, J.; Lin, C.; Olaso,
E.; Manes, S.; Bruckner, K.; Goergen, J.-L.; Lemke, G.; Yancopoulos,
G.; Angel, P.; Martinez-A, C.; Klein, R.: The collagen receptor DDR2
regulates proliferation and its elimination leads to dwarfism. EMBO
J. 2: 446-452, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 08/22/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/7/2010
Nara Sobreira - updated: 7/6/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/14/1994

EDITED alopez: 08/22/2013
mgross: 4/7/2010
terry: 4/7/2010
terry: 7/6/2009
carol: 7/6/2009
carol: 8/20/2008
psherman: 7/19/1999
mark: 9/11/1997
carol: 1/14/1994

606397	TITLE *606397 CLARIN 1; CLRN1
;;USH3A GENE; USH3A;;
USH3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By EST database searching and sequencing of the Usher syndrome type IIIA
(276902) critical region on chromosome 3q21-q25, Joensuu et al. (2001)
identified several genes, including CLRN1, which they called USH3A gene.
The USH3A protein has a cytosolic N terminus, 2 helical transmembrane
domains, and an endoplasmic reticulum membrane retention signal, TKGH,
in the C terminus. Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression
of 3 USH3A transcripts of 4.5 kb, 1.4 kb, and 2.0 kb in adult human
tissues. RT-PCR analysis detected expression in retina. No expression of
USH3A was detected in human lymphoblasts by either method.

Fields et al. (2002) found that the USH3A gene encodes a deduced
232-amino acid protein. The mature form of the protein is predicted to
contain 3 transmembrane domains and 204 residues.

Adato et al. (2002) assembled a 500-kb genomic interval spanning the
USH3A gene and determined the full-length coding sequence of the USH3A
gene, expected to encode a 232-amino acid protein with 4 transmembrane
domains, which they named clarin-1. Adato et al. (2002) detected
expression of USH3A in retina, skeletal muscle, testis, and olfactory
epithelium. In mouse inner ear, expression was specific to the inner and
outer hair cells of the organ of Corti and to the spiral ganglion cells.

By sequencing CLRN1 clones obtained from a human retina cDNA library,
Vastinsalo et al. (2011) identified 10 alternative splice variants in
addition to the main variant, which contains exons 0, 2, and 3 and
encodes a 232-amino acid protein. Other transcripts containing ORFs were
predicted to encode proteins of 30 to 245 amino acids, and all but the
30-amino acid peptide have 1 to 4 transmembrane segments. Some splice
variants include premature stop codons and may be untranslated. EST
database analysis suggested that exon 2 may also be spliced onto
additional downstream exons. PCR analysis detected weak expression of
the main CLRN1 variant in most tissues examined. The variant encoding
the 245-amino acid protein was detected in retina, cochlea, heart,
brain, placenta, lung, skeletal muscle, pancreas, and ovary.

GENE STRUCTURE

Joensuu et al. (2001) determined that the CLRN1 gene contains 4 exons
spanning approximately 18 kb of genomic DNA. They also identified a
splice variant, designated isoform b, comprising an additional 87-bp
exon (exon 1b).

Fields et al. (2002) provided a revised structure of the CLRN1 gene,
including a new translation start site, 5-prime untranslated region, and
a transcript encoding a 232-amino acid protein. They stated that no
portion of exon 1, exon 1b, or exon 4 was present in their revised CLRN1
cDNA.

Adato et al. (2002) determined the genomic structure and alternative
transcripts of the CLRN1 gene. A longer transcript than those reported
by Joensuu et al. (2001) began with a newly identified exon 0, continued
with exon 2, had exons 3 and 4 transcribed together with their
intervening intron, but did not include the previously identified exons
1 and 1b.

Vastinsalo et al. (2011) determined that the CLRN1 gene contains at
least 8 exons, which they termed exons 0, 0b, 1, 1b, 2, 2b, 3a, and 3b.
Exons 3a and 3b are joined, along with the intervening intron, to form
exon 3 in the main splice variant. The region upstream of exon 1, which
is not transcribed in the main variant, contains a CpG island. Regions
upstream of exons 0, 1, 2, and 3 contain putative transcription
factor-binding sites. Functional analysis revealed that highest promoter
activity was associated with the region upstream of exon 0. A
pseudogene, CLRN1OS, is located on the opposite strand and has a 5-prime
UTR running in the opposite direction and overlapping the 5-prime UTR of
the CLRN1 gene.

GENE FAMILY

Adato et al. (2002) performed sequence database searches and identified
2 additional clarin-1 human paralogs: clarin-2 and clarin-3. No
orthologs were identified in the genomes of prokaryotes, yeast, plants,
nematodes, and insects, suggesting that this gene family is limited to
vertebrates. Four transmembrane domains, conserved sequence motifs, and
a single glycosylation consensus site between TM1 and TM2 characterized
the clarin family members, with a total of 14 identified clarins in
different species. In a wider context the clarins appeared to belong to
a large superfamily of small integral membrane glycoproteins with 4
transmembrane domains, including connexins and claudins, previously
shown to be involved in forms of deafness. The only protein showing
significant sequence similarity to the 3 clarins was stargazin, a
cellular synapse protein encoded by the CACNG2 gene (602911). Because of
the sequence homology to stargazin, Adato et al. (2002) suggested a role
for clarin-1 in hair cell and photoreceptor cell synapses.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Joensuu et al. (2001) mapped the CLRN1 gene to
chromosome 3q21-q25. Fields et al. (2002) stated 3q25 as the cytogenetic
location of the CLRN1 gene.

Fields et al. (2002) showed that the orthologous gene in the mouse is on
chromosome 3 and in rat on chromosome 2. They identified 2 human
paralogs on chromosomes 4 and 10.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Usher Syndrome Type IIIA

In 2 Finnish families reported by Sankila et al. (1995) and Joensuu et
al. (1996) and an Italian family reported by Gasparini et al. (1998)
with Usher syndrome type IIIA (276902), Joensuu et al. (2001) identified
mutations in the USH3A gene (606397.0001-606397.0003).

Fields et al. (2002) described 4 novel disease-causing mutations in the
USH3A gene, including one that appeared to be relatively common in the
Ashkenazi Jewish population (N48K; 606937.0004).

Adato et al. (2002) detected 3 USH3A mutations among 11 affected
individuals from 6 families with Usher syndrome type IIIA. They were a
missense mutation (606397.0004), a nonsense mutation (606397.0006), and
a 23-bp deletion (606397.0007), likely rendering clarin-1 functionally
inactive.

Aller et al. (2004) screened for mutations in the USH3A gene in Spanish
patients with Usher syndrome and found mutations in only 2 families.
They identified 1 patient with Usher syndrome type IIIA who was
homozygous for a C40G mutation (606397.0008). They noted that only 1
other mutation had been reported in the USH3A gene in Spanish families
with Usher syndrome (606397.0006). These 2 families accounted for only
1.7% of Spanish families with Usher syndrome.

- Retinitis Pigmentosa 61

In affected members of 2 consanguineous Pakistani families segregating
nonsyndromic autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (RP61; 614180),
Khan et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for missense mutations in the
CLRN1 gene (606397.0009-606397.0010), both of which occurred in a
transmembrane domain. Khan et al. (2011) concluded that these
RP-associated mutations might represent hypomorphic mutations, because
the substituted amino acids located in the transmembrane domains
remained polar, whereas more severe changes had been detected in
patients with USH3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Geng et al. (2009) developed a Clrn1 -/- mouse model for Usher syndrome
type IIIA. Clrn1 was expressed as early as embryonic day 16.5 in the
auditory and vestibular hair cells and associated ganglionic neurons,
with its expression being higher in outer hair cells than inner hair
cells. Clrn1 -/- mice showed early-onset hearing loss that rapidly
progressed to severe levels. Two to 3 weeks after birth (postnatal day
14 to 21), Clrn1-null mice showed elevated auditory-evoked brainstem
response (ABR) thresholds and prolonged peak and interpeak latencies. By
postnatal day 21, approximately 70% of Clrn1-null mice had no detectable
ABR, and by postnatal day 30, these mice were deaf. Distortion product
otoacoustic emissions were not recordable from Clrn1-null mice.
Vestibular function in Clrn1-null mice mirrored the cochlear phenotype,
although it deteriorated more gradually than cochlear function.
Disorganization of outer hair cell stereocilia was seen as early as
postnatal day 2 and by postnatal day 21 outer hair cell loss was
observed. Geng et al. (2009) concluded that CLRN1 is necessary for hair
cell function and associated neural activation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IIIA
CLRN1, TYR176TER

Fields et al. (2002) demonstrated that the Fin(major) USH3A mutation in
exon 3 of the USH3A gene, which had been identified by Joensuu et al.
(2001) as 300C-T (TYR100TER), should be referred to as 528T-G, resulting
in a tyr176-to-ter substitution. Joensuu et al. (2001) had identified
homozygosity for this mutation in a Finnish family segregating Usher
syndrome type IIIA (276902) and found it in a further 52 Finnish
patients. Fields et al. (2002) found this mutation in 11 of 28 mutated
alleles from affected individuals of Finnish and other northern European
ancestry.

.0002
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IIIA
CLRN1, MET120LYS

In 4 Finnish patients from 2 families segregating Usher syndrome type
IIIA (276902), Joensuu et al. (2001) identified heterozygosity for the
Fin(major) mutation (606397.0001) and a T-to-A transversion resulting in
a met-to-lys substitution. Whereas Joensuu et al. (2001) referred to
this mutation, designated Fin(minor), as 131T-A (MET44LYS), Fields et
al. (2002) showed that this mutation should be referred to as 359T-A
(met120 to lys; M120K). The mutation occurred in exon 1 of the USH3A
gene.

.0003
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IIIA
CLRN1, 3-BP DEL, 459ATT

In a consanguineous Italian family segregating Usher syndrome type IIIA
(276902), Joensuu et al. (2001) identified a 3-bp deletion in exon 3 of
the USH3A gene, resulting in the substitution of one methionine for
isoleucine and leucine. Fields et al. (2002) showed that this mutation,
referred to as 231-233delATT by Joensuu et al. (2001), should be
referred to as 459-461delATT.

.0004
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IIIA
CLRN1, ASN48LYS

Of a total of 28 mutated alleles of the USH3A gene detected by Fields et
al. (2002) in patients with Usher syndrome type IIIA (276902), 11 had a
missense mutation, asn48 to lys (N48K), due to a 144T-G transversion in
exon 1. The mutation occurred only in Ashkenazi Jewish subjects and was
present in homozygous state in all except 1, in whom it was found in
compound heterozygous state with a leu150-to-pro mutation (L150P;
606397.0005).

Adato et al. (2002) detected the N48K missense mutation in 6 affected
individuals from 4 unrelated families of Eastern European Jewish origin.
Five patients were homozygous, while 1 patient carried the substitution
only on 1 allele and the second USH3A mutation was not detected. Shared
microsatellite and SNP haplotypes on carrier chromosomes suggested the
existence of a founder effect for this mutation.

In a cohort of 40 Ashkenazi Jewish patients with Usher syndrome, Ness et
al. (2003) found that the 16 (40%) who were clinically classified as
having Usher syndrome type III were homozygous for the N48K mutation.
The carrier frequency of N48K was 0.7% (95% CI = 0.0-1.6%) among
Ashkenazi Jews in the New York area, with a predicted Usher syndrome
type III prevalence of 1.2 per 100,000. Despite the genetic homogeneity
of Usher syndrome type III in this group, there was a wide range of
phenotypic severity displayed by the N48K homozygotes. Age at onset of
the auditory phenotype varied from infancy to more than 35 years. A
56-year-old woman had onset of the ocular phenotype in early childhood
ending with no useful vision, whereas hearing loss began after age 35
years, progressing to moderate to severe.

.0005
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IIIA
CLRN1, LEU150PRO

In an Ashkenazi Jewish subject with type IIIA Usher syndrome (276902)
who was living in the United States, Fields et al. (2002) found that the
common Jewish mutation asn48 to lys (606397.0004) was combined, in
compound heterozygous state, with a 449T-C transition in exon 3,
resulting in a leu150-to-pro (L150P) mutation.

.0006
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IIIA
CLRN1, TYR63TER

Adato et al. (2002) detected a 189C-A substitution, which was expected
to cause a tyr63-to-ter (Y63X) nonsense mutation in homozygous state in
3 sibs with Usher syndrome type IIIA (276902) from a nonconsanguineous
Spanish family.

Aller et al. (2004) stated that the family with the Y63X mutation
reported by Adato et al. (2002) could be diagnosed clinically as Usher
syndrome type I because hearing impairment was profound and stable.
Aller et al. (2004) considered that progressive hearing loss is not the
definitive parameter in distinguishing Usher syndrome type III from
Usher syndrome types I and II.

.0007
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IIIA
CLRN1, 23-BP DEL, NT187

In 2 sibs with Usher syndrome type IIIA (276902) from a
nonconsanguineous family of Yemenite Jewish origin, Adato et al. (2002)
detected a 23-bp deletion in homozygous state. The deletion spanned
nucleotides 187-209 downstream from the first methionine codon, and was
predicted to cause a frameshift at amino acid 63 and stop codon after 25
amino acids.

.0008
USHER SYNDROME, TYPE IIIA
CLRN1, CYS40GLY

In a patient with type IIIA Usher syndrome, Aller et al. (2004)
identified homozygosity for a 118T-G transversion, resulting in a
cys40-to-gly (C40G) mutation in the USH3A gene. Both parents and an
unaffected sister were heterozygous for the mutation.

.0009
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 61
CLRN1, LEU154TRP

In affected members of a consanguineous Pakistani family with
nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa (RP61; 614180), Khan et al. (2011)
identified homozygosity for a 461T-G transversion in exon 3 of the CLRN1
gene, resulting in a leu154-to-trp (L154W) substitution in a
transmembrane domain. Subcellular localization studies demonstrated
retention of the mutant protein in the endoplasmic reticulum, whereas
the wildtype protein was mainly present at the cell membrane. The
mutation was not found in 81 unrelated Pakistani RP patients or in 90
ethnically matched control individuals.

.0010
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 61
CLRN1, PRO31LEU

In affected members of a consanguineous Pakistani family with
nonsyndromic retinitis pigmentosa (RP61; 614180), Khan et al. (2011)
identified homozygosity for a 92C-T transition in exon 1 of the CLRN1
gene, resulting in a pro31-to-leu (P31L) substitution in a transmembrane
domain. Subcellular localization studies demonstrated retention of the
mutant protein in the endoplasmic reticulum, whereas the wildtype
protein was mainly present at the cell membrane. The mutation was not
found in 81 unrelated Pakistani RP patients or in 90 ethnically matched
control individuals.

REFERENCE 1. Adato, A.; Vreugde, S.; Joensuu, T.; Avidan, N.; Hamalainen, R.;
Belenkiy, O.; Olender, T.; Bonne-Tamir, B.; Ben-Asher, E.; Espinos,
C.; Millan, J. M.; Lehesjoki, A.-E.; Flannery, J. G.; Avraham, K.
B.; Pietrovski, S.; Sankila, E.-M.; Beckmann, J. S.; Lancet, D.:
USH3A transcripts encode clarin-1, a four-transmembrane-domain protein
with a possible role in sensory synapses. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 10:
339-350, 2002.

2. Aller, E.; Jaijo, T.; Oltra, S.; Alio, J.; Galan, F.; Najera, C.;
Beneyto, M.; Millan, J. M.: Mutation screening of USH3 gene (clarin-1)
in Spanish patients with Usher syndrome: low prevalence and phenotypic
variability. Clin. Genet. 66: 525-529, 2004.

3. Fields, R. R.; Zhou, G.; Huang, D.; Davis, J. R.; Moller, C.; Jacobson,
S. G.; Kimberling, W. J.; Sumegi, J.: Usher syndrome type III: revised
genomic structure of the USH3 gene and identification of novel mutations. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 71: 607-617, 2002.

4. Gasparini, P.; De Fazio, A.; Croce, A. I.; Stanziale, P.; Zelante,
L.: Usher syndrome type III (USH3) linked to chromosome 3q in an
Italian family. J. Med. Genet. 35: 666-667, 1998.

5. Geng, R.; Geller, S. F.; Hayashi, T.; Ray, C. A.; Reh, T. A.; Bermingham-McDonogh,
O.; Jones, S. M.; Wright, C. G.; Melki, S.; Imanishi, Y.; Palczewski,
K.; Alagramam, K. N.; Flannery, J. G.: Usher syndrome IIIA gene clarin-1
is essential for hair cell function and associated neural activation. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 18: 2748-2760, 2009.

6. Joensuu, T.; Blanco, G.; Pakarinen, L.; Sistonen, P.; Kaariainen,
H.; Brown, S.; de la Chapelle, A.; Sankila, E.-M.: Refined mapping
of the Usher syndrome type III locus on chromosome 3, exclusion of
candidate genes, and identification of the putative mouse homologous
region. Genomics 38: 255-263, 1996.

7. Joensuu, T.; Hamalainen, R.; Yuan, B.; Johnson, C.; Tegelberg,
S.; Gasparini, P.; Zelante, L.; Pirvola, U.; Parakinen, L.; Lehesjoki,
A.-E.; de la Chapelle, A.; Sankila, E.-M.: Mutations in a novel gene
with transmembrane domains underlie Usher syndrome type 3. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 69: 673-684, 2001. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet.
69: 1160 only, 2001.

8. Khan, M. I.; Kersten, F. F. J.; Azam, M.; Collin, R. W. J.; Hussain,
A.; Shah, S. T-A.; Keunen, J. E. E.; Kremer, H.; Cremers, F. P. M.;
Qamar, R.; den Hollander, A. I.: CLRN1 mutations cause nonsyndromic
retinitis pigmentosa. Ophthalmology 118: 1444-1448, 2011.

9. Ness, S. L.; Ben-Yosef, T.; Bar-Lev, A.; Madeo, A. C.; Brewer,
C. C.; Avraham, K. B.; Kornreich, R.; Desnick, R. J.; Willner, J.
P.; Friedman, T. B.; Griffith, A. J.: Genetic homogeneity and phenotypic
variability among Ashkenazi Jews with Usher syndrome type III. J.
Med. Genet. 40: 767-772, 2003.

10. Sankila, E.-M.; Pakarinen, L.; Kaariainen, H.; Aittomaki, K.;
Karjalainen, S.; Sistonen, P.; de la Chapelle, A.: Assignment of
an Usher syndrome type III (USH3) gene to chromosome 3q. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 4: 93-98, 1995.

11. Vastinsalo, H.; Jalkanen, R.; Dinculescu, A.; Isosomppi, J.; Geller,
S.; Flannery, J. G.; Hauswirth, W. W.; Sankila, E.-M.: Alternative
splice variants of the USH3A gene clarin 1 (CLRN1). Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 19: 30-35, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 02/28/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/19/2012
Jane Kelly - updated: 8/16/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/23/2010
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/31/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/13/2004
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 2/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/17/2002

CREATED Deborah L. Stone: 10/18/2001

EDITED carol: 02/28/2012
mgross: 1/23/2012
terry: 1/19/2012
carol: 8/19/2011
terry: 8/16/2011
carol: 5/5/2011
terry: 5/3/2011
wwang: 6/30/2010
terry: 6/23/2010
carol: 4/4/2005
wwang: 3/31/2005
terry: 3/31/2005
carol: 2/6/2004
tkritzer: 1/30/2004
terry: 1/13/2004
cwells: 11/10/2003
carol: 11/5/2003
cwells: 2/11/2003
alopez: 9/18/2002
carol: 9/17/2002
mcapotos: 12/21/2001
carol: 10/25/2001
carol: 10/18/2001

185880	TITLE *185880 VESICLE-ASSOCIATED MEMBRANE PROTEIN 1; VAMP1
;;SYNAPTOBREVIN 1; SYB1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Synaptobrevins 1 and 2 (185881) are small integral membrane proteins
specific for synaptic vesicles in neurons.

CLONING

Archer et al. (1990) isolated and characterized cosmid clones containing
the human genes encoding synaptobrevins 1 and 2. Their coding regions
are highly homologous, being interrupted at identical positions by
introns of different size and sequence.

GENE STRUCTURE

The genes encoding synaptobrevins 1 and 2 have 5 exons whose boundaries
correspond to those of the protein domains (Archer et al., 1990). Exon 1
contains part of the initiator methionine codon, whereas exon 2 encodes
the variable and immunogenic amino-terminal domain. The third exon
comprises the highly conserved central domain, exon 4 encodes most of
the transmembrane region, and exon 5 contains the last residues of the
transmembrane region and the small intravesicular carboxyl terminus.

GENE FUNCTION

Neuronal exocytosis is triggered by calcium and requires 3 SNARE
proteins: synaptobrevin on the synaptic vesicle, and syntaxin (e.g.,
186590) and SNAP25 (600322) on the plasma membrane. Neuronal SNARE
proteins form a parallel 4-helix bundle that is thought to drive the
fusion of opposing membranes. Hu et al. (2002) demonstrated that whereas
syntaxin and SNAP25 in target membranes are freely available for SNARE
complex formation, availability of synaptobrevin on synaptic vesicles is
very limited. Calcium at micromolar concentrations triggers SNARE
complex formation and fusion between synaptic vesicles and reconstituted
target membranes. Although calcium does promote interaction of SNARE
proteins between opposing membranes, it does not act by releasing
synaptobrevin from synaptic vesicle restriction. Hu et al. (2002)
concluded that their data suggests a mechanism in which
calcium-triggered membrane apposition enables syntaxin and SNAP25 to
engage synaptobrevin, leading to membrane fusion.

Tucker et al. (2004) investigated the effect of synaptotagmin 1 (SYT1;
185605) on membrane fusion mediated by neuronal SNARE proteins SNAP25,
syntaxin, and synaptobrevin, which were reconstituted into vesicles. In
the presence of calcium, the cytoplasmic domain of SYT1 strongly
stimulated membrane fusion when synaptobrevin densities were similar to
those found in native synaptic vesicles. The calcium dependence of
SYT1-stimulated fusion was modulated by changes in lipid composition of
the vesicles and by a truncation that mimics cleavage of SNAP25 by
botulinum neurotoxin A. Stimulation of fusion was abolished by
disrupting the calcium-binding activity, or by severing the tandem C2
domains, of SYT1. Thus, SYT1 and SNAREs are likely to represent the
minimal protein complement for calcium-triggered exocytosis.

By use of the large calyx of Held presynaptic terminal from rats, Sakaba
et al. (2005) demonstrated that cleavage of different SNARE proteins by
clostridial neurotoxins caused distinct kinetic changes in
neurotransmitter release. When elevating calcium ion concentration
directly at the presynaptic terminal with the use of caged calcium,
cleavage of SNAP25 by botulinum toxin A produced a strong reduction in
the calcium sensitivity for release, whereas cleavage of syntaxin using
botulinum toxin C1 and synaptobrevin using tetanus toxin produced an all
or nothing block without changing the kinetics of remaining vesicles.
When stimulating release by calcium influx through channels, a
difference between botulinum toxin C1 and tetanus toxin emerged, which
suggests that cleavage of synaptobrevin modifies the coupling between
channels and release-competent vesicles.

MAPPING

By Southern analysis of rodent-human somatic cell hybrids, Archer et al.
(1990) assigned the SYB1 gene to 12p; by analysis of DNA from Chinese
hamster-mouse somatic cell hybrids, they mapped the Syb1 gene to mouse
chromosome 6.

ANIMAL MODEL

The 'lethal-wasting' (lew) mouse is a spontaneous autosomal recessive
mutant that manifests as a neurologic phenotype characterized by
generalized lack of movement, wasting and prewean death by age 15 days.
By positional cloning, Nystuen et al. (2007) determined that the lew
phenotype results from a 190G-T transversion in the coding region of the
Vamp1 gene, predicted to result in truncation of nearly half of the
protein. Western blot analysis showed no detectable Vamp1 protein in
mutant mice. The authors noted that the phenotype was milder than that
of Vamp2 (185881)-null mice, which die at birth. By immunostudies of
normal mice, Nystuen et al. (2007) showed that Vamp1 is expressed
primarily in certain neuronal tissues, including the retina and areas of
the diencephalon and midbrain such as the zona incerta (subthalamus) and
rostral periolivary region. The findings suggested that Vamp1 has a
vital role in a subset of central nervous system tissues.

REFERENCE 1. Archer, B. T., III; Ozcelik, T.; Jahn, R.; Francke, U.; Sudhof,
T. C.: Structures and chromosomal localizations of two human genes
encoding synaptobrevins 1 and 2. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 17267-17273,
1990.

2. Hu, K.; Carroll, J.; Fedorovich, S.; Rickman, C.; Sukhodub, A.;
Davietov, B.: Vesicular restriction of synaptobrevin suggests a role
for calcium in membrane fusion. Nature 415: 646-650, 2002.

3. Nystuen, A. M.; Schwendinger, J. K.; Sachs, A. J.; Yang, A. W.;
Haider, N. B.: A null mutation in VAMP1/synaptobrevin is associated
with neurological defects and prewean mortality in the lethal-wasting
mouse mutant. Neurogenetics 8: 1-10, 2007.

4. Sakaba, T.; Stein, A.; Jahn, R.; Neher, E.: Distinct kinetic changes
in neurotransmitter release after SNARE protein cleavage. Science 309:
491-494, 2005.

5. Tucker, W. C.; Weber, T.; Chapman, E. R.: Reconstitution of Ca(2+)-regulated
membrane fusion by synaptotagmin and SNAREs. Science 304: 435-438,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/27/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/15/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/29/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/4/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/7/1990

EDITED wwang: 03/02/2007
ckniffin: 2/27/2007
carol: 8/16/2005
terry: 8/15/2005
alopez: 5/4/2004
terry: 4/29/2004
alopez: 2/7/2002
terry: 2/4/2002
alopez: 11/15/2001
psherman: 11/30/1998
psherman: 10/22/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 11/30/1990
carol: 11/7/1990

611088	TITLE *611088 COILED-COIL DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 65; CCDC65
;;NYD-SP28
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CCDC65 is a sperm tail protein that is posttranslationally modified
during sperm capacitation (Zheng et al., 2006).

CLONING

By differential display of genes upregulated in human adult versus fetal
testis, Zheng et al. (2006) cloned CCDC65, which they called NYD-SP28.
The deduced 484-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 57
kD and contains 2 potential sites for N-glycosylation, 2 for
N-myristoylation, and many potential phosphorylation sites. Western blot
analysis detected high CCDC65 expression in adult human testis, but no
detectable expression in fetal testis. Immunohistochemical studies of
CCDC65 expression in spermatozoa detected protein primarily in the
spermatocyte and spermatid, with weak expression in spermatogonia and no
signal in Leydig cells. Immunofluorescence analysis detected CCDC65
throughout the entire sperm tail in human noncapacitated, capacitated,
and acrosome-reacted spermatozoa. Using 2-dimensional SDS-PAGE analysis
of proteins from human noncapacitated and capacitated sperm extracts,
Zheng et al. (2006) concluded that CCDC65 is posttranslationally
modified during capacitation. Transfection experiments in 7721 cells
localized CCDC65 to the cytoplasm.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zheng et al. (2006) determined that the CCDC65 gene contains 8 exons
spanning more than 17 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Zheng et al. (2006) mapped the CCDC65 gene
to chromosome 12q13.12.

GENE FUNCTION

Austin-Tse et al. (2013) noted that the Chlamydomonas CCDC65 ortholog
Fap250 is a subunit of the nexin-dynein regulatory complex (N-DRC). The
Chlamydomonas ida6 motility mutant with inner arm dynein defects was
rescued by transformation with Fap250, and a causative mutation was
identified in the Fab250/Ccdc65 gene. Analysis of isolated ida6 axonemes
showed defects in the assembly of both the inner dynein arms and the
N-DRC. These data, together with the predicted size of the FAP250
polypeptide, strongly suggested that FAP250 corresponds to the DRC2
subunit of N-DRC and that DRC2/FAP250/CCDC65 plays a critical role in
the assembly of the N-DRC.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 Ashkenazi Jewish patients, including 2 brothers, with primary
ciliary dyskinesia-27 (CILD27; 615504), Austin-Tse et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the CCDC65 gene
(611088.0001). The patients were ascertained from a larger cohort of 295
individuals with CILD. The patients had recurrent bronchitis, sinusitis,
and/or otitis media, but no situs inversus. Fertility status could not
be ascertained. Cilia ultrastructure showed normal outer dynein arms,
radial spokes, and central pairs, but there was a reduction in inner
dynein arms and nexin links. Microtubule disorganization was also
observed in 5 to 15% of cilia cross sections, suggesting that the
reduction in nexin links may lead to overall structural instability in a
subset of cilia. Live imaging of patient nasal epithelial cilia showed a
stiff, dyskinetic cilia waveform.

ANIMAL MODEL

Austin-Tse et al. (2013) found that morpholino knockdown of the CCDC65
gene in zebrafish resulted in a strong ciliopathy phenotype, including
pronephric cysts, axis curvature, left-right asymmetry defects, and
hydrocephalus. Immunostaining for certain ciliary proteins did not
detect structural abnormalities, and ultrastructure analysis showed that
the outer dynein arms were not missing. High-speed video microscopy
showed stiff, dyskinetic cilia, consistent with a motility defect.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 27, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
CCDC65, 2-BP DEL, 877AT

In 2 brothers of Ashkenazi Jewish descent with primary ciliary
dyskinesia-27 without situs inversus (CILD27; 615504), Austin-Tse et al.
(2013) identified a homozygous 2-bp deletion (877delAT) in exon 6 of the
CCDC65 gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination
(Ile293ProfsTer2). An unrelated girl of Ashkenazi Jewish descent was
also found to be homozygous for the mutation; her unaffected parents
were heterozygous for the mutation. The patients had recurrent
bronchitis, sinusitis, and/or otitis media. Fertility status could not
be ascertained. Cilia ultrastructure showed normal outer dynein arms,
radial spokes, and central pairs, but there was a reduction in inner
dynein arms and nexin links. Microtubule disorganization was also
observed in 5 to 15% of cilia cross sections, suggesting that the
reduction in nexin links may lead to overall structural instability in a
subset of cilia. Live imaging of patient nasal epithelial cilia showed a
stiff, dyskinetic cilia waveform.

REFERENCE 1. Austin-Tse, C.; Halbritter, J.; Zariwala, M. A.; Gilberti, R. M.;
Gee, H. Y.; Hellman, N.; Pathak, N.; Liu, Y.; Panizzi, J. R.; Patel-King,
R. S.; Tritschler, D.; Bower, R.; and 31 others: Zebrafish ciliopathy
screen plus human mutational analysis identifies C21orf59 and CCDC65
defects as causing primary ciliary dyskinesia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93:
672-686, 2013.

2. Zheng, Y.; Zhang, J.; Wang, L.; Zhou, Z.; Xu, M.; Li, J.; Sha,
J.-H.: Cloning and characterization of a novel sperm tail protein,
NYD-SP28. Int. J. Molec. Med. 18: 1119-1125, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/31/2013

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 6/6/2007

EDITED carol: 11/06/2013
carol: 11/5/2013
ckniffin: 10/31/2013
carol: 6/6/2007

609511	TITLE *609511 ZINC FINGER FYVE DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 20; ZFYVE20
;;RABENOSYN 5
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a gel overlay assay, Nielsen et al. (2000) identified ZFYVE20,
which they called rabenosyn-5, as a protein that directly interacts with
RAB5 (179512). By peptide analysis, EST database analysis, and PCR of a
HeLa cell cDNA library, they cloned rabenosyn-5 cDNA. The deduced
784-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal C2H2-type zinc finger
domain, a central FYVE finger domain, and 5 copies of the amino acid
motif NPF at its C terminus. SDS-PAGE showed rabenosyn-5 with an
apparent molecular mass of 110 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Nielsen et al. (2000) determined that rabenosyn-5 colocalized with EEA1
(605070) on RAB5-positive endosomes in HeLa cells. Recruitment of
rabenosyn-5 and EEA1 was dependent upon phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(see 601232). Mutation analysis indicated that the FYVE domain of
rabenosyn-5 was required for endosome targeting. Rabenosyn-5 was
complexed with the Sec1-like protein VPS45 (VPS45A; 610035), and
rabenosyn-5 appeared to serve as a molecular link between VPS45 and
RAB5. Both EEA1 and rabenosyn-5 were required for early endosomal
fusion, but only rabenosyn-5 overexpression inhibited processing of
procathepsin D (116840) to its 47-kD intermediate, suggesting that the 2
proteins play distinct roles in endosomal trafficking.

By immunofluorescence microscopy of HeLa cells, Naslavsky et al. (2004)
detected rabenosyn-5 partly colocalized with EHD1 (605888) in vesicular
and tubular structures. Depletion of either EHD1 or rabenosyn-5 in HeLa
cells by RNA interference (RNAi) delayed recycling of transferrin
(190000) and its receptor (TFRC; 190010), as well as major
histocompatibility complex class I (see HLA-A; 142800), to the plasma
membrane. Depletion of EHD1 caused accumulation of internalized cargo in
a compact juxtanuclear compartment, but depletion of rabenosyn-5 caused
retention of cargo within a dispersed peripheral compartment.
Simultaneous depletion of both rabenosyn-5 and EHD1 resulted in a
phenotype similar to that observed with rabenosyn-5 RNAi alone,
suggesting that rabenosyn-5 acts before EHD1 in the regulation of
endocytic recycling. Naslavsky et al. (2004) concluded that rabenosyn-5
and EHD1 act sequentially in the transport of proteins from early
endosomes to the endosomal recycling compartment and back to the plasma
membrane.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Using a structural proteomic approach, Eathiraj et al. (2005) determined
the specificity and structural basis underlying the interaction of the
multivalent effector rabenosyn-5 with the Rab family. The results
demonstrated that even the structurally similar effector domains in
rabenosyn-5 can achieve highly selective recognition of distinct subsets
of Rab GTPases exclusively through interactions with the switch and
interswitch regions. The observed specificity is determined at a
family-wide level by structural diversity in the active conformation,
which governs the spatial disposition of critical conserved recognition
determinants, and by a small number of both positive and negative
sequence determinants that allow further discrimination between Rab
GTPases with similar switch conformations.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the ZFYVE20
gene to chromosome 3 (TMAP STS-N59228).

REFERENCE 1. Eathiraj, S.; Pan, X.; Ritacco, C.; Lambright, D. G.: Structural
basis of family-wide Rab GTPase recognition by rabenosyn-5. (Letter) Nature 436:
415-419, 2005.

2. Naslavsky, N.; Boehm, M.; Backlund, P. S., Jr.; Caplan, S.: Rabenosyn-5
and EHD1 interact and sequentially regulate protein recycling to the
plasma membrane. Molec. Biol. Cell 15: 2410-2422, 2004.

3. Nielsen, E.; Christoforidis, S.; Uttenweiler-Joseph, S.; Miaczynska,
M.; Dewitte, F.; Wilm, M.; Hoflack, B.; Zerial, M.: Rabenosyn-5,
a novel Rab5 effector, is complexed with hVPS45 and recruited to endosomes
through a FYVE finger domain. J. Cell Biol. 151: 601-612, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/16/2005

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/2/2005

EDITED mgross: 04/10/2006
terry: 8/16/2005
mgross: 8/3/2005
mgross: 8/2/2005

612212	TITLE *612212 PLASMINOGEN-LIKE A; PLGLA
;;PLASMINOGEN-RELATED GENE A; PRGA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using primers based on PRGB (PLGLB1; 173340) for PCR amplification of
placental genomic DNA, Lewis et al. (1999) cloned PLGLA, which they
called PRGA. The deduced 96-amino peptide has a signal sequence followed
by a 77-amino acid stretch that is identical to the N terminus of
plasminogen (PLG; 173350) and differs from the homologous PRGB sequence
at only 4 positions. Northern blot analysis using a probe that did not
differentiate between PRGA and PRGB detected PRG only in liver and in a
lymphoblastic leukemia cell line.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lewis et al. (1999) determined that the PLGLA gene contains 4 coding
exons.

Kida et al. (1997) characterized the 5-prime flanking region of the
human PLGLA gene and found 3 TATA boxes 550 to 600 bp upstream of the
transcription initiation site, a TATA-like sequence (TGTAA) at position
-16, and putative binding sites for several transcription factors. The
1.1-kb 5-prime flanking sequence directed basal liver-specific
expression in HepG2 cells, and deletion analysis identified 2 negative
elements in the PLGLA promoter.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PLGLA
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP D2S2643)

REFERENCE 1. Kida, M.; Wakabayashi, S.; Ichinose, A.: Characterization of the
5-prime-flanking regions of plasminogen-related genes A and B. FEBS
Lett. 404: 95-99, 1997.

2. Lewis, V. O.; Gehrmann, M.; Weissbach, L.; Hyman, J. E.; Rielly,
A.; Jones, D. G.; Llinas, M.; Schaller, J.: Homologous plasminogen
N-terminal and plasminogen-related gene A and B peptides: characterization
of cDNAs and recombinant fusion proteins. Europ. J. Biochem. 259:
618-625, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/31/2008

EDITED carol: 07/01/2010
wwang: 7/31/2008

600641	TITLE *600641 SULFOTRANSFERASE FAMILY 1A, PHENOL-PREFERRING, MEMBER 3; SULT1A3
;;SULFOTRANSFERASE, MONOAMINE-PREFERRING; STM
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Sulfate conjugation is a key metabolic process controlled by a number of
genes. These include STD (125263), the dehydroepiandrosterone
(DHEA)-preferring sulfotransferase; STE (600043), the
estrogen-preferring form; STP1 (171150) and STP2 (601292), the
phenol-preferring forms; and STM, the monoamine-preferring form. STM,
the thermolabile or monoamine-metabolizing form of phenol
sulfotransferase, is responsible for the sulfate conjugation of
monoamine neurotransmitters such as dopamine, over 95% of which is
sulfate conjugated (Aksoy and Weinshilboum, 1995).

CLONING

Zhu et al. (1993) and Wood et al. (1994) cloned the STM cDNA from brain
and liver libraries, respectively. The same cDNA was later isolated by
Jones et al. (1995). The 3 sequences were in agreement and predicted a
295-amino acid protein.

Aksoy et al. (1994) expressed the STM cDNA in COS-1 cells as a 35.5-kD
protein. Northern blots showed a 1.4-kb mRNA in liver, kidney, lung,
small intestine, spleen and leukocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Aksoy and Weinshilboum (1995) determined that the STM gene has a total
length of approximately 8.4 kb and includes 10 exons, the first 3 of
which are untranslated. Many of the exon-intron borders are at the same
positions as in the human DHEA sulfotransferase gene. The first 2 exons
are present in the 5-prime UTR of a longer mRNA expressed in brain and
liver, while exon 3 is present in the 5-prime UTR of a shorter mRNA also
present in these tissues.

Dooley and Huang (1996) determined the genomic organization of the human
STP1, STP2, and STM genes. These 3 genes each have 8 exons with the
initiator methionine on exon 2. All 3 colocalize on a single cosmid from
chromosome 16p12.1-p11.2 and have a high degree of sequence homology,
suggesting that these 3 genes arose by gene duplication. Dooley and
Huang (1996) stated that the previously identified PST gene sequences
HAST3 and M-PST are isolates of the STM gene.

GENE FUNCTION

Weinshilboum et al. (1997) reviewed the molecular biology of the
sulfotransferases. These enzymes catalyze sulfate conjugation of many
hormones, neurotransmitters, drugs, and xenobiotic compounds. They
stated that at that time the 5 known human cytosolic sulfotransferases
were STE (symbolized EST by them), a hydroxysteroid sulfotransferase
STD, and 3 phenol-preferring sulfotransferases (STP1, STP2, and STM).
The genes for these human enzymes, as well as those of other mammalian
cytosolic sulfotransferases that had been cloned, showed a high degree
of structural homology, with conservation of location of most
intron-exon splice junctions. Genetic polymorphisms of several of these
that have been demonstrated through family studies are suspected on the
basis of large differences among individuals in the expression.

MAPPING

Aksoy et al. (1994) used PCR screening of DNAs from human-rodent somatic
cell hybrid mapping panels to assign the STM gene to chromosome 16.
Regional localization to 16p11.2 was achieved by PCR analysis of a
high-resolution mouse-human somatic cell hybrid panel containing defined
portions of human chromosome 16.

Bernier et al. (1994) assigned the placental estrogen sulfotransferase
to chromosome 16 using DNA from panels of human/rodent somatic cell
hybrids and PCR amplification. Weinshilboum (1995) pointed out that the
'placental estrogen sulfotransferase' gene that Bernier et al. (1994)
mapped to chromosome 16 is, in fact, the STM gene. Bernier et al. (1994)
reported, on the basis of expression data, that the mRNA encoded by
their gene can catalyze the sulfate conjugation of estrogens, although
with a much lower affinity than the mRNA encoded by the human STE gene
that is localized on 4q13.1 (600043).

The STM gene, a thermolabile phenol sulfotransferase, maps very near the
location of the thermostable phenol sulfotransferase, STP1. Her et al.
(1996) showed that a second thermolabile phenol sulfotransferase, STP2
(601292), also maps to chromosome 16.

REFERENCE 1. Aksoy, I. A.; Callen, D. F.; Apostolou, S.; Her, C.; Weinshilboum,
R. M.: Thermolabile phenol sulfotransferase gene (STM) localization
to human chromosome 16p11.2. Genomics 23: 275-277, 1994.

2. Aksoy, I. A.; Weinshilboum, R. M.: Human thermolabile phenol sulfotransferase
gene (STM): molecular cloning and structural characterization. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 208: 786-795, 1995.

3. Aksoy, I. A.; Wood, T. C.; Weinshilboum, R.: Human liver estrogen
sulfotransferase: identification by cDNA cloning and expression. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 200: 1621-1629, 1994.

4. Bernier, F.; Leblanc, G.; Labrie, F.; Luu-The, V.: Structure of
human estrogen and aryl sulfotransferase gene: two mRNA species issued
from a single gene. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 28200-28205, 1994.

5. Dooley, T. P.; Huang, Z.: Genomic organization and DNA sequences
of two human phenol sulfotransferase genes (STP1 and STP2) on the
short arm of chromosome 16. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 228:
134-140, 1996.

6. Her, C.; Raftogianis, R.; Weinshilboum, R. M.: Human phenol sulfotransferase
STP2 gene: molecular cloning, structural characterization, and chromosomal
localization. Genomics 33: 409-420, 1996.

7. Jones, A. L.; Hagen, M.; Coughtrie, M. W. H.; Roberts, R. C.; Glatt,
H.: Human platelet phenolsulfotransferases: cDNA cloning, stable
expression in V79 cells and identification of a novel allelic variant
of the phenol-sulfating form. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 208:
855-862, 1995.

8. Weinshilboum, R.: Personal Communication. Rochester, Minn.
10/9/1995.

9. Weinshilboum, R. M.; Otterness, D. M.; Aksoy, I. A.; Wood, T. C.;
Her, C.; Raftogianis, R. B.: Sulfotransferase molecular biology:
cDNAs and genes. FASEB J. 11: 3-14, 1997.

10. Wood, T. C.; Aksoy, I. A.; Aksoy, S.; Weinshilboum, R. M.: Human
liver thermolabile phenol sulfotransferase: cDNA cloning, expression
and characterization. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 198: 1119-1127,
1994.

11. Zhu, X.; Veronese, M. E.; Bernard, C. C. A.; Sansom, L. N.; McManus,
M. E.: Identification of two human brain aryl sulfotransferase cDNAs. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 195: 120-127, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 5/20/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/16/1997

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 7/9/1995

EDITED alopez: 04/09/2009
alopez: 6/14/1999
alopez: 7/24/1997
mark: 6/9/1997
alopez: 5/27/1997
alopez: 5/19/1997
terry: 5/16/1997
jamie: 5/8/1997
terry: 6/6/1996
terry: 5/30/1996
joanna: 12/8/1995
terry: 10/27/1995
carol: 7/20/1995

607292	TITLE *607292 SEMAPHORIN 4A; SEMA4A
;;SEMAPHORIN B; SEMAB; SEMB
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SEMA4A is a member of the semaphorin family of soluble and transmembrane
proteins. Semaphorins are involved in guidance of axonal migration
during neuronal development and in immune responses.

CLONING

Using degenerate PCR primers based on motifs conserved in members of the
semaphorin family, Kumanogoh et al. (2002) identified mouse Sema4a,
which was originally identified as SemB (Puschel et al., 1995). RT-PCR
analysis detected prominent expression in adult mouse brain, spleen,
lung, kidney, and testis. Flow cytometric analysis showed expression in
B cells and dendritic cells (DCs) but not in resting T cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Kumanogoh et al. (2002) showed that activation upregulated expression of
mouse Sema4a in both B and T cells, and proliferation and interleukin-2
(IL2; 147680) production by T cells were enhanced in the presence of
Sema4a. However, Sema4a, unlike CD100 (SEMA4D; 601866), did not enhance
the activation of B cells or DCs. Mice treated with Sema4a had enhanced
priming of antigen-specific T cells secreting both IL4 (147780) and
gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570). Treatment of mice with anti-Sema4a
early after immunization with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein
suppressed the development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.
In these mice, infiltration of mononuclear inflammatory cells was
ablated by inhibition of the generation of antigen-specific T cells by
anti-Sema4a. Expression cloning determined that the high-affinity
receptor for Sema4a is Tim2. Sema4a stimulation of cells expressing Tim2
induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Tim2 but not of Tim3 (606652).
Kumanogoh et al. (2002) concluded that Sema4a and CD100 have crucial
roles in the reciprocal stimulation between T cell and
antigen-presenting cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Abid et al. (2006) screened 135 Pakistani patients with retinitis
pigmentosa (RP35; 610282), 25 with cone-rod dystrophy (CORD10; 610283),
and 30 with congenital blindness for mutations in the SEMA4A gene. They
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 substitutions
(607292.0001-607292.0002) in 2 RP and 2 CORD patients and heterozygosity
for another substitution (607292.0003) in 3 patients with RP and 1
patient with congenital blindness. No mutations in SEMA4A were found in
affected members of a Pakistani family with cone-rod dystrophy (CORD8;
605549) previously mapped to chromosome 1q12-q24 (Ismail et al., 2006).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 35
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 10, INCLUDED
SEMA4A, ASP345HIS

In 2 Pakistani patients with retinitis pigmentosa-35 (610282) and 2 with
cone-rod dystrophy-10 (610282), Abid et al. (2006) identified compound
heterozygosity for a G-to-C transversion in codon 345 and a T-to-G
transversion in codon 350 in exon 10 of the SEMA4A gene, resulting in an
asp345-to-his (D345H) and a phe350-to-cys (F350C; 607292.0002)
substitution in the conserved semaphorin domain, respectively. Sequence
analysis of the unaffected parents of 1 of the CORD patients revealed
that his father was heterozygous for the D345H mutation and his mother
was heterozygous for the F350C mutation. Neither mutation was found in
100 ethnically matched controls.

.0002
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 35
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 10, INCLUDED
SEMA4A, PHE350CYS

See 607292.0001 and Abid et al. (2006).

.0003
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 35
SEMA4A, ARG713GLN

In 3 Pakistani patients with retinitis pigmentosa-35 (610282) and 1 with
congenital blindness of uncertain phenotype, Abid et al. (2006)
identified heterozygosity for a G-to-A transition in codon 713 of exon
15 of the SEMA4A gene, resulting in an arg713-to-gln (R713Q)
substitution in the cytoplasmic tail. Sequence analysis of family
members of 1 of the RP patients confirmed that the R713Q mutation
segregated with the disease phenotype in an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance, and the mutation was not found in 100 ethnically matched
controls.

REFERENCE 1. Abid, A.; Ismail, M.; Mehdi, S. Q.; Khaliq, S.: Identification
of novel mutations in the SEMA4A gene associated with retinal degenerative
diseases. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 43: 378-381, 2006.

2. Ismail, M.; Abid, A.; Anwar, K.; Mehdi, S. Q.; Khaliq, S.: Refinement
of the locus for autosomal recessive cone-rod dystrophy (CORD8) linked
to chromosome 1q23-q24 in a Pakistani family and exclusion of candidate
genes. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 827-831, 2006.

3. Kumanogoh, A.; Marukawa, S.; Suzuki, K.; Takegahara, N.; Watanabe,
C.; Ch'ng, E.; Ishida, I.; Fujimura, H.; Sakoda, S.; Yoshida, K.;
Kikutani, H.: Class IV semaphorin Sema4A enhances T-cell activation
and interacts with Tim-2. Nature 419: 629-633, 2002.

4. Puschel, A. W.; Adams, R. H.; Betz, H.: Murine semaphorin D/collapsin
is a member of a diverse gene family and creates domains inhibitory
for axonal extension. Neuron 14: 941-948, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/18/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/27/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/10/2002

EDITED carol: 07/26/2007
wwang: 12/18/2006
carol: 7/28/2006
carol: 7/27/2006
terry: 7/27/2006
mgross: 10/10/2002

606238	TITLE *606238 IKAROS FAMILY ZINC FINGER 5; IKZF5
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN, SUBFAMILY 1A, MEMBER 5; ZNFN1A5;;
PEGASUS
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the Ikaros (ZNFN1A1; 603023) family of transcription factors,
which includes Pegasus, are expressed in lymphocytes and are implicated
in the control of lymphoid development.

CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen on an erythroleukemia cDNA library with
the C-terminal dimerization domain of Aiolos (606221) as bait, followed
by RT-PCR, Perdomo et al. (2000) isolated cDNAs encoding Eos (606239)
and Pegasus. Sequence analysis predicted that the Pegasus protein
contains 419 amino acids. Like the other Ikaros family members, Pegasus
has a conserved C-terminal zinc finger cluster. However, Pegasus has
little homology in its other regions to Ikaros family proteins, and it
has 3 divergent N-terminal zinc fingers rather than the 4 N-terminal
fingers conserved in the other members. GST pull-down experiments showed
that the C-terminal zinc fingers of Pegasus interact with other Ikaros
proteins and with Pegasus itself, establishing the presence of
functional dimerization domains. DNA binding analysis indicated that
Eos, but not Pegasus, interacts with high affinity with sequences
similar to those bound by Ikaros and other family members. Pegasus was
found to preferentially recognize GnnTGTnG rather than the tGGGAatacc
site recognized by other Ikaros family members. Reporter analysis
demonstrated that Pegasus acts as a transcriptional repressor at its
sites but not at Eos sites. Northern blot analysis revealed broad
expression of 3 Pegasus transcripts in hemopoietic cell lines and in
tissues, a pattern that contrasts with the immune tissue-restricted
expression of other Ikaros family members.

REFERENCE 1. Perdomo, J.; Holmes, M.; Chong, B.; Crossley, M.: Eos and Pegasus,
two members of the Ikaros family of proteins with distinct DNA binding
activities. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 38347-38254, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 8/30/2001

EDITED alopez: 06/18/2007
mgross: 8/31/2001
mgross: 8/30/2001

614479	TITLE *614479 MALONYL CoA:ACP ACYLTRANSFERASE, MITOCHONDRIAL; MCAT
;;MITOCHONDRIAL MALONYLTRANSFERASE;;
MT, MITOCHONDRIAL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MCAT (EC 2.3.1.39) is the catalytic subunit of the type II
malonyl-CoA-dependent system for biosynthesis of fatty acids in
mitochondria (Zhang et al., 2003).

CLONING

Zhang et al. (2003) cloned human MCAT, which they called mitochondrial
MT. The deduced 390-amino acid protein has an N-terminal cleavable
mitochondrial targeting signal, a GxSxG serine esterase active-site
motif, and conserved arg and his residues required for activity.
Fluorescence-tagged MCAT colocalized with a mitochondrial marker
following expression in HeLa cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhang et al. (2003) found that human mitochondrial MT expressed in
insect cells had a narrower substrate specificity than cytosolic MT
(FASN; 600212) and transferred a malonyl moiety to the mitochondrial
malonyl acceptor ACP (NDUFAB1; 603836) only.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang et al. (2003) determined that the MCAT gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Zhang et al. (2003) mapped the MCAT gene
to chromosome 22q13.31.

REFERENCE 1. Zhang, L.; Joshi, A. K.; Smith, S.: Cloning, expression, characterization,
and interaction of two components of a human mitochondrial fatty acid
synthase: malonyltransferase and acyl carrier protein. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
40067-40074, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/13/2012

EDITED joanna: 08/30/2012
mgross: 2/13/2012

611966	TITLE *611966 TRAFFICKING PROTEIN PARTICLE COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 9; TRAPPC9
;;NIK- AND IKBKB-BINDING PROTEIN; NIBP;;
KIAA1882
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NIBP binds NIK (604655) and IKK-beta (IKBKB; 603258) and plays a role in
the neuronal NF-kappa-B (see 164011) signaling pathway (Hu et al.,
2005).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from an adult amygdala cDNA library,
Nagase et al. (2001) cloned a partial cDNA encoding NIBP, which they
designated KIAA1882. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate expression in all
tissues and specific brain regions examined.

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a human brain cDNA library using
N-terminal NIK (MAP3K14; 604655) as bait, followed by database analysis,
Hu et al. (2005) cloned NIBP. The deduced 1,246-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 139.4 kD and shares 80 to 90% homology with
the corresponding rodent sequences. Northern blot analysis of human
tissues detected a 4.5-kb transcript with high expression in muscle and
kidney, and lower levels in brain, heart, and placenta; 2 smaller
transcripts of 2.1 and 1.5 kb were also detected. Immunohistochemical
studies detected NIBP protein in neuronal cells in mouse brain with
staining localized to cell bodies and neuronal processes in the
pyramidal layer of mouse cortex, spinal cord motor neurons, and white
matter neurons.

Mochida et al. (2009) noted that there are 2 transcript variants of
TRAPPC9 in humans. Variant 1 is the longer form and encodes a
1,246-amino acid protein. Variant 2 uses an alternate 5-prime exon
initiating translation at a downstream start codon and encodes a
1,148-amino acid protein. In situ hybridization showed low levels of
expression in mouse embryonic brain with strong expression in adult
brain. Trappc9 was found in neurons of the cerebral cortex, hippocampus,
and deep gray matter. Trappc9 immunoreactivity was widespread in the
cytoplasm, without specific localization to any particular organelle,
and was not found in the nucleus. In 11.5-week human embryonic brain,
there was higher expression in the developing cortical plate compared to
the ventricular zone, indicating higher expression in postmitotic
neurons than in progenitor cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hu et al. (2005) determined that the TRAPPC9 gene contains 23 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hu et al. (2005) mapped the TRAPPC9 gene
to chromosome 8q24.3.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitation and GST pull-down assays, Hu et al. (2005)
showed that NIBP interacted with NIK and IKK-beta but showed no
interaction with IKK-alpha (CHUK; 600664) or IKK-gamma (IKBKG; 300248).
NIBP overexpression in HEK293T cells potentiated TNFA (191160)-induced
NF-kappa-B activation through increased phosphorylation of the IKK
complex and its downstream substrates IKBA (NFKBIA; 164008) and p65
(NFKB3; 164014). Mobility shift assays demonstrated increased NF-kappa-B
DNA binding. Knockdown of NIBP by siRNA reduced TNFA-induced NF-kappa-B
activation, prevented NGF (see 162030)-induced neuronal differentiation,
and decreased BCLXL (see BCL2L1; 600039) gene expression in PC12 cells.
Hu et al. (2005) suggested that NIBP may act as an adaptor to recruit
NIK or other kinases to the IKK complex, and that NIBP acts as a
downstream component of NGF in neuronal cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By genomewide linkage analysis, followed by candidate gene sequencing,
of an Israeli Arab family with nonsyndromic mental retardation (MRT13;
613192), Mochida et al. (2009) identified a homozygous truncating
mutation in the TRAPPC9 gene (R475X; 611966.0001).

Mir et al. (2009) identified the R475X mutation in affected members of a
Pakistani family with MRT13 and identified a 4-bp deletion (611966.0003)
in affected members of an Iranian family with MRT13, previously reported
by Najmabadi et al. (2007).

Philippe et al. (2009) identified a nonsense mutation in the TRAPPC9
gene (611966.0002) in 3 Tunisian brothers with autosomal recessive
mental retardation.

In 2 sisters, born of unrelated parents from southern Italy, with MRT13,
Marangi et al. (2013) identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the
TRAPPC9 gene (611966.0004).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, ARG475TER

In affected members of an Israeli Arab family with nonsyndromic
autosomal recessive mental retardation and postnatal microcephaly
(MRT13; 613192), Mochida et al. (2009) identified a homozygous 1423C-T
transition in exon 7 of the TRAPPC9 gene, resulting in an arg475-to-ter
(R475X) substitution in TRAPPC9 variant 1. The same change represents
1129C-T, resulting in an arg377-to-ter (R377X) substitution, in TRAPPC9
variant 2. Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for the mutation, and
it was not identified in 306 control chromosomes. The protein was not
detected in patient lymphoblast cell lines.

Mir et al. (2009) identified a homozygous 1422C-T transition in the
TRAPPC9 gene, resulting in an R475X mutation, in affected members of a
large consanguineous Pakistani family with mental retardation. The
mutant protein was not expressed, consistent with nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay. Affected individuals had borderline microcephaly, delayed
walking, and white matter abnormalities on brain MRI.

Abou Jamra et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for the R475X mutation
in affected members of a large consanguineous Syrian family with
autosomal recessive mental retardation. The patients had neonatal
hypotonia, severe motor delay with walking between ages 5 and 7 years,
single words or no speech, growth retardation, stereotypic movements,
and hand flapping. They also shared some dysmorphic features, including
low frontal hairline, synophrys, and microcephaly.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, ARG570TER

In 3 brothers, born of consanguineous Tunisian parents, with autosomal
recessive mental retardation (MRT13; 613192), Philippe et al. (2009)
identified a homozygous 1708C-T transition in exon 9 of the TRAPPC9
gene, resulting in an arg570-to-ter (R570X) substitution. The mutation
was not found in 1,120 control chromosomes. The protein was not detected
in patient fibroblasts, and the authors postulated nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay. In cultured patient fibroblasts, stimulation with TNF-alpha
(191160) showed a defect in IKBA (NFKBIA; 164008) degradation,
suggesting impaired function of the NF-kappa-B (see 164011) signaling
pathway.

.0003
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, 4-BP DEL, 2311TGTT

In affected members of an Iranian family (M001) with mental retardation
(613192), previously reported by Najmabadi et al. (2007) as showing
linkage to chromosome 8q24, Mir et al. (2009) identified a 4-bp deletion
(2311delTGTT) in the TRAPPC9 gene, resulting in a frameshift and
premature termination. Affected members had severe nonsyndromic mental
retardation, were ambulatory but nonverbal, and had microcephaly. There
were no seizures or dysmorphic features.

.0004
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, IVS17AS, A-C, -2

In 2 sisters, born of unrelated parents from southern Italy, with MRT13
(613192), Marangi et al. (2013) identified a homozygous A-to-C
transversion in intron 17 of the TRAPPC9 gene (2851-2A-C), resulting in
the skipping of exon 18, a frameshift, and premature termination
(Thr951TyrfsTer17). Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for the
mutation, which was identified by exome sequencing. PCR analysis of
patient cells did not show reduction of the TRAPPC9 transcript in the 2
sisters.

REFERENCE 1. Abou Jamra, R. A.; Wohlfart, S.; Zweier, M.; Uebe, S.; Priebe,
L.; Ekici, A.; Giesebrecht, S.; Abboud, A.; Al Khateeb, M. A.; Fakher,
M.; Hamdan, S.; Ismael, A.; Muhammad, S.; Nothen, M. M.; Schumacher,
J.; Reis, A.: Homozygosity mapping in 64 Syrian consanguineous families
with non-specific intellectual disability reveals 11 novel loci and
high heterogeneity. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 19: 1161-1166, 2011.

2. Hu, W.-H.; Pendergast, J. S.; Mo, X.-M.; Brambilla, R.; Bracchi-Ricard,
V.; Li, F.; Walters, W. M.; Blits, B.; He, L.; Schaal, S. M.; Bethea,
J. R.: NIBP, a novel NIK and IKK-beta-binding protein that enhances
NF-kappa-B activation. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 29233-29241, 2005.

3. Marangi, G.; Leuzzi, V.; Manti, F.; Lattante, S.; Orteschi, D.;
Pecile, V.; Neri, G.; Zollino, M.: TRAPPC9-related autosomal recessive
intellectual disability: report of a new mutation and clinical phenotype. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 21: 229-232, 2013.

4. Mir, A.; Kaufman, L.; Noor, A.; Motazacker, M. M.; Jamil, T.; Azam,
M.; Kahrizi, K.; Rafiq, M. A.; Weksberg, R.; Nasr, T.; Naeem, F.;
Tzschach, A.; Kuss, A. W.; Ishak, G. E.; Doherty, D.; Ropers, H. H.;
Barkovich, A. J.; Najmabadi, H.; Ayub, M.; Vincent, J. B.: Identification
of mutations in TRAPPC9, which encodes the NIK- and IKK-beta-binding
protein, in nonsyndromic autosomal-recessive mental retardation. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 85: 909-915, 2009.

5. Mochida, G. H.; Mahajnah, M.; Hill, A. D.; Basel-Vanagaite, L.;
Gleason, D.; Hill, R. S.; Bodell, A.; Crosier, M.; Straussberg, R.;
Walsh, C. A.: A truncating mutation of TRAPPC9 is associated with
autosomal-recessive intellectual disability and postnatal microcephaly. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 85: 897-902, 2009.

6. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. XXI. The complete sequences of 60 new
cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins. DNA Res. 8:
179-187, 2001.

7. Najmabadi, H.; Motazacker, M. M.; Garshasbi, M.; Kahrizi, K.; Tzschach,
A.; Chen, W.; Behjati, F.; Hadavi, V.; Nieh, S. E.; Abedini, S. S.;
Vazifehmand, R.; Firouzabadi, S. G.; and 9 others: Homozygosity
mapping in consanguineous families reveals extreme heterogeneity of
non-syndromic autosomal recessive mental retardation and identifies
8 novel gene loci. Hum. Genet. 121: 43-48, 2007.

8. Philippe, O.; Rio, M.; Carioux, A.; Plaza, J.-M.; Guigue, P.; Molinari,
F.; Boddaert, N.; Bole-Feysot, C.; Nitschke, P.; Smahi, A.; Munnich,
A.; Colleaux, L.: Combination of linkage mapping and microarray-expression
analysis identifies NF-kappa-B signaling defect as a cause of autosomal-recessive
mental retardation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 85: 903-908, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/20/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/17/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/21/2009

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 4/18/2008

EDITED carol: 09/13/2013
carol: 5/8/2013
carol: 3/27/2013
ckniffin: 3/20/2013
carol: 1/3/2012
carol: 11/17/2011
ckniffin: 11/17/2011
wwang: 12/30/2009
ckniffin: 12/21/2009
mgross: 12/17/2009
carol: 4/18/2008
wwang: 4/18/2008

611596	TITLE *611596 SHORT-CHAIN DEHYDROGENASE/REDUCTASE FAMILY, MEMBER 4; DHRS4
;;SDR FAMILY, MEMBER 4;;
NADPH-DEPENDENT RETINOL DEHYDROGENASE/REDUCTASE; NRDR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase enzymes, like DHRS4, are
NAD/NADP-dependent oxidoreductases that function in the breakdown of
steroids, retinoids, prostaglandins, and xenobiotics. DHRS2 also has a
noncatalytic role in the regulation of the cell cycle and apoptosis
(summary by Gabrielli and Tofanelli, 2012).

CLONING

By searching databases for homologs of rat Dhrs4, Fransen et al. (1999)
identified 3 variants of human DHRS4, which they called SDR-SRL because
the protein belongs to the short-chain dehydrogenase/reductase (SDR)
family and has a C-terminal SRL peroxisome-targeting sequence.
Fluorescence-tagged rat Dhrs4 localized to peroxisomes in transfected
Chinese hamster ovary cells.

By RT-PCR and RACE of a human liver cDNA library, Du et al. (2004)
cloned full-length DHRS4, which they called NRDR, and a shorter variant
lacking exons 4, 5, and 6. Both deduced proteins contain a classical
alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH)-short domain, a short-chain ADH (SCAD)
motif, phosphorylation and fatty acylation sites, and a peroxisomal
targeting signal. RT-PCR detected variable expression of both
transcripts in most tissues examined.

By RT-PCR and RACE of a HeLa cell cDNA library, Song et al. (2007)
cloned full-length NRDR and a variant lacking exon 3, which they called
NRDRB1. The deduced NRDR and NRDRB1 proteins have calculated molecular
masses of 29 and 27 kD, respectively. Song et al. (2007) detected NRDRB1
mRNA expression in 14 (53.9%) of 26 cervical cancer tissues, but
expression was not detected in 12 normal cervical tissues.
Immunohistochemical analysis detected NRDRB1 protein only in tumor
tissues. The full-length NRDR mRNA was observed in both normal and
neoplastic cervical tissues, but NRDR protein was only expressed in
normal cervical epithelium, where it localized in peroxisomes.

Gabrielli and Tofanelli (2012) reported that the full-length DHRS4
protein contains 278 amino acids.

GENE FUNCTION

Gabrielli and Tofanelli (2012) noted that differences in the
substrate-binding sites of DHRS2 (615194) and DHRS4 are associated with
different substrate specificities. In general, DHRS4 accepts a broader
range of substrates than DHRS2.

GENE STRUCTURE

Du et al. (2004) determined that the DHRS4 gene contains 8 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Du et al. (2004) mapped the DHRS4 gene to
chromosome 14q11.2.

EVOLUTION

Gabrielli and Tofanelli (2012) found that DHRS2 and DHRS4, which are
located within 315 kb of each other on chromosome 14, originated from a
duplication of the DHRS4 gene that took place before the formation of
the mammalian clade. DHRS2 evolved more rapidly and underwent positive
selection on more sites than the DHRS4 gene. DHRS2 sites under positive
selection were mainly located in the enzyme active site. Two other
duplicated DHRS4 genes, DHRS4L2 (615196) and DHRS4L1 (615195), are
located 20 and 47 kb downstream of DHRS4, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Du, J.; Huang, D.-Y.; Liu, G.-F.; Wang, G.-L.; Xu, X.-L.; Wang,
B.; Zhu, L.: cDNA cloning of a short isoform of human liver NADP(H)-dependent
retinol dehydrogenase/reductase and analysis of its characteristics. Acta
Genet. Sin. 31: 661-667, 2004.

2. Fransen, M.; Van Veldhoven, P. P.; Subramani, S.: Identification
of peroxisomal proteins by using M13 phage protein VI phage display:
molecular evidence that mammalian peroxisomes contain a 2,4-dienoyl-CoA
reductase. Biochem. J. 340: 561-568, 1999.

3. Gabrielli, F.; Tofanelli, S.: Molecular and functional evolution
of human DHRS2 and DHRS4 duplicated genes. Gene 511: 461-469, 2012.

4. Song, X.-H.; Liang, B.; Liu, G.-F.; Li, R.; Xie, J.-P.; Du, K.;
Huang, D.-Y.: Expression of a novel alternatively spliced variant
of NADP(H)-dependent retinol dehydrogenase/reductase with deletion
of exon 3 in cervical squamous carcinoma. Int. J. Cancer 120: 1618-1626,
2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 04/24/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/13/2007

EDITED mgross: 04/24/2013
terry: 11/21/2008
mgross: 11/13/2007

602120	TITLE *602120 CHROMODOMAIN HELICASE DNA-BINDING PROTEIN 3; CHD3
;;Mi2-ALPHA
DESCRIPTION See CHD1 (602118) for a description of this gene family.

CLONING

Anti-Mi2 autoantibody is strongly associated with dermatomyositis and is
found in sera of 20% of dermatomyositis patients. Mi2 antigen consists
of at least 8 components. By immunoscreening human thymocyte and HeLa
cell cDNA expression libraries with anti-Mi2 patient sera, Ge et al.
(1995) isolated a partial cDNA encoding Mi2-alpha, or CHD3. The deduced
partial protein contains 4 potential zinc finger domains. Antibodies
against recombinant Mi2-alpha reacted with a 240-kD HeLa cell protein.
Northern blot analysis detected a single 7.5- to 8.0-kb Mi2-alpha
transcript in HeLa cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Seelig et al. (1996) noted that the Mi2-alpha and Mi2-beta (CHD4;
603277) proteins react with most or all dermatomyositis patient anti-Mi2
sera. While these proteins are distinct, they have stretches of
identical sequence that could result in shared epitopes.

Woodage et al. (1997) characterized the CHD3 gene. The predicted
1,944-amino acid protein shares 22.9% identity and 34.5% similarity
overall with the mouse Chd1 gene product.

MAPPING

Woodage et al. (1997) mapped the CHD3 gene to 17p13 by PCR screening of
the Genebridge 4 radiation hybrid mapping panel.

REFERENCE 1. Ge, Q.; Nilasena, D. S.; O'Brien, C. A.; Frank, M. B.; Targoff,
I. N.: Molecular analysis of a major antigenic region of the 240-kD
protein of Mi-2 autoantigen. J. Clin. Invest. 96: 1730-1737, 1995.

2. Seelig, H. P.; Renz, M.; Targoff, I. N.; Ge, Q.; Frank, M. B.:
Two forms of the major antigenic protein of the dermatomyositis-specific
Mi-2 autoantigen. (Letter) Arthritis Rheum. 39: 1769-1771, 1996.

3. Woodage, T.; Basrai, M. A.; Baxevanis, A. D.; Hieter, P.; Collins,
F. S.: Characterization of the CHD family of proteins. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 94: 11472-11477, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Patti M. Sherman - updated: 11/25/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/13/1997

EDITED alopez: 03/15/2010
carol: 11/25/1998
psherman: 11/25/1998
psherman: 11/6/1998
mark: 11/13/1997

611430	TITLE *611430 TETRATRICOPEPTIDE REPEAT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 21A; TTC21A
;;STRESS-INDUCIBLE PROTEIN 2; STI2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis to identify putative coding sequences in a region
of chromosome 3 associated with carcinomas, Protopopov et al. (2003)
identified TTC21A, which they called ST12. The deduced 1,320-amino acid
protein contains 10 N-terminal tetratricopeptide repeats of about 34
amino acids each. Northern blot analysis detected strong expression of a
6.5-kb transcript only in testis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Protopopov et al. (2003) determined that the TTC21A gene contains 27
exons and spans about 27 kb.

MAPPING

Using FISH and a deletion cell hybrid panel, Protopopov et al. (2003)
mapped the TTC21A gene to chromosome 3p21.3.

REFERENCE 1. Protopopov, A.; Kashuba, V.; Zabarovska, V. I.; Muravenko, O. V.;
Lerman, M. I.; Klein, G.; Zabarovsky, E. R.: An integrated physical
and gene map of the 3.5-Mb chromosome 3p21.3 (AP20) region implicated
in major human epithelial malignancies. Cancer Res. 63: 404-412,
2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/13/2007

EDITED mgross: 02/26/2013
alopez: 9/13/2007

607074	TITLE *607074 PROTEIN KINASE D2; PRKD2
;;PKD2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By EST database searching with the conserved C-terminal sequence of
serine kinases and screening of a human ductal pancreatic cDNA library,
Sturany et al. (2001) cloned a novel serine/threonine protein kinase,
which they called PKD2. The deduced 878-amino acid protein, which has a
predicted molecular mass of 97 kD, contains an N-terminal hydrophobic
area predicted to be a transmembrane region, 2 cysteine-rich motifs that
form zinc finger-like repeats, a pleckstrin homology domain, and a
putative kinase domain containing the ATP-binding consensus sequence. An
invariant aspartate essential for kinase activity is located within a
motif conserved in serine/threonine kinases. The first zinc finger-like
domain shares 88% identity to the corresponding domains in PKD/PKC-mu
(PRKCM; 605435) and PKC-nu (PRKCN; 607077). Northern blot analysis
detected constitutive low expression of a 4-kb transcript; higher levels
were observed in pancreas, heart, lung, smooth muscle, and brain, and
lower levels kidney and liver. SDS-PAGE revealed a protein with a
molecular mass of 105 kD, as did Western blot analysis of endogenous
PRKD2 or protein expressed following transfection.

GENE FUNCTION

Sturany et al. (2001) demonstrated phorbol ester binding to the duplex
zinc finger-like motif of PRKD2 as well as autophosphorylation following
phorbol ester stimulation. The addition of phosphatidyl-L-serine caused
synergistic stimulation. Phorbol ester-activated PRKD2 migrated more
slowly than inactive PRKD2 by SDS-PAGE, suggesting hyperphosphorylation
upon activation.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PRKD2
gene to chromosome 19 (TMAP R67403).

REFERENCE 1. Sturany, S.; Van Lint, J.; Muller, F.; Wilda, M.; Hameister, H.;
Hocker, M.; Brey, A.; Gern, U.; Vandenheede, J.; Gress, T.; Adler,
G.; Seufferlein, T.: Molecular cloning and characterization of the
human protein kinase D2: a novel member of the protein kinase D family
of serine threonine kinases. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 3310-3318, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/26/2002

EDITED alopez: 04/20/2011
carol: 6/27/2002

603916	TITLE *603916 EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION INITIATION FACTOR 3, SUBUNIT C; EIF3C
;;EIF3-p110;;
EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION INITIATION FACTOR 3, SUBUNIT 8, FORMERLY; EIF3S8,
FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Eukaryotic initiation factor-3 (eIF3) is the largest of the eIFs and
consists of at least 10 nonidentical subunits, including EIF2C (Asano et
al., 1997).

CLONING

Asano et al. (1997) demonstrated that the 115-kD component of HeLa cell
eIF3 is actually composed of 2 proteins, p116 (PRT1; 603917) and p110.
By screening a HeLa cell expression library with antibodies against the
115-kD band, these authors identified cDNAs encoding p110. The predicted
913-amino acid p110 protein has a pI of 5.8 and is unrelated to p116.
p110 shares 31% identity to the S. cerevisiae Nip1 protein, which is
thought to be involved in nuclear import and the initiation phase of
protein synthesis. Asano et al. (1997) found that the p116, p110, and
p36 (603911) subunits localize on 40S ribosomes in cells active in
translation and coimmunoprecipitate with p170 (602039), indicating that
these proteins are integral components of eIF3. Northern blot analysis
revealed that p110 is expressed as a 3-kb mRNA.

GENE FUNCTION

By reciprocal yeast 2-hybrid and coimmunoprecipitation analyses of the
human STS26T malignant schwannoma cell line, Scoles et al. (2006) showed
that isoforms 1 and 2 of schwannomin (NF2; 607379) interacted with
EIF3C. Mutation analysis revealed that the FERM domain of schwannomin
interacted with the C-terminal half of EIF3C. Immunofluorescence
microscopy of STS26T cells showed that the 2 proteins partly colocalized
at punctate perinuclear structures and at some membranous structures.
Overexpression of EIF3C in STS26T cells elevated cell proliferation, and
schwannomin countered this effect. Western blot analysis revealed an
inverse abundance of schwannomin and EIF3C in human meningiomas.

MAPPING

Gross (2011) mapped the EIF3C gene to chromosome 16p11.2 based on an
alignment of the EIF3C sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC000533) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37). A nearly identical copy of EIF3C, designated
EIF3CL, also maps to chromosome 16p11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Asano, K.; Kinzy, T. G.; Merrick, W. C.; Hershey, J. W. B.: Conservation
and diversity of eukaryotic translation initiation factor eIF3. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 1101-1109, 1997.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/20/2011.

3. Scoles, D. R.; Yong, W. H.; Qin, Y.; Wawrowsky, K.; Pulst, S. M.
: Schwannomin inhibits tumorigenesis through direct interaction with
the eukaryotic initiation factor subunit c (elF3c). Hum. Molec. Genet. 15:
1059-1070, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 05/20/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/28/2011

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/16/1999

EDITED mgross: 05/20/2011
mgross: 5/19/2011
terry: 4/28/2011
mgross: 10/2/2007
cwells: 9/17/2003
alopez: 6/17/1999

608487	TITLE *608487 TRIPARTITE MOTIF-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5; TRIM5
;;RNF88
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TRIM5 belongs to the large tripartite motif protein family, members of
which typically are composed of 3 zinc-binding domains, a RING, unique
B-box type 1 and B-box type 2 domains, followed by a coiled-coil (CC)
region. TRIM proteins use homomultimerization to identify specific cell
compartments.

CLONING

Using a consensus B-box domain to screen dbEST databases, Reymond et al.
(2001) identified 37 TRIM members in mammals, 21 of which were novel, as
well as 34 splice variants. TRIM5 has 6 variants termed alpha, beta,
gamma, delta, epsilon, and zeta, all of which lack a B-box type 1
domain. Additional domains C-terminal to the CC region are variably
present. TRIM5-zeta lacks RING, B-box, and CC domains, but possesses 3
RFP-like domains. Northern blot analysis of adult human tissues detected
ubiquitous expression of TRIM5. Using interaction mating and mutation
analysis, Reymond et al. (2001) confirmed that TRIM5, like most TRIMs,
homointeracts through the CC region. Interaction was also detected with
TRIM6 (607564). Green fluorescent protein microscopy demonstrated
expression as cytoplasmic speckles, possibly in novel subcellular
compartments.

Stremlau et al. (2004) determined that human TRIM5-alpha contains 493
amino acids and includes a C-terminal b30.2 (SPRY) domain missing in
other TRIM5 isoforms.

GENE FUNCTION

By fluorescence microscopy and mutation analysis, Xu et al. (2003)
showed that TRIM5-delta interacts with BTBD1 (608530) and BTBD2
(608531), apparently serving as a scaffold for the assembly of
endogenous BTBD1/2 proteins, dependent on the presence of the CC region
and a wildtype RING domain. TRIM5-delta exhibits ubiquitylation in the
presence of UBCH5B (UBE2D2; 602962), dependent on the presence of
zinc-coordinating cysteines in the RING domain.

Kaiser et al. (2007) reported the reconstruction of the core protein of
a 4-million-year-old endogenous virus from the chimpanzee genome
(PtERV1) and showed that the human variant of the intrinsic immune
protein TRIM5-alpha can actively prevent infection by this virus.
However, Kaiser et al. (2007) suggested that the selective changes that
have occurred in the human lineage during the acquisition of resistance
to this virus, and perhaps similar viruses, may have left our species
more susceptible to infection by HIV-1.

Pertel et al. (2011) demonstrated that TRIM5 promotes innate immune
signaling and that this activity is amplified by retroviral infection
and interaction with the capsid lattice. Acting with the heterodimeric
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBC13-UEV1A, TRIM5 catalyzes the synthesis
of unattached K63-linked ubiquitin chains that activate the TAK1
(602614) kinase complex and stimulate AP1 (see 165160) and NF-kappa-B
(see 164011) signaling. Interaction with the HIV-1 capsid lattice
greatly enhanced the UBC13-UEV1A-dependent E3 activity of TRIM5, and
challenge with retroviruses induced the transcription of AP1- and
NF-kappa-B-dependent factors with a magnitude that tracked with TRIM5
avidity for the invading capsid. Finally, TAK1 and UBC13-UEV1A
contributed to capsid-specific restriction by TRIM5. Pertel et al.
(2011) concluded that the retroviral restriction factor TRIM5 has 2
additional activities that are linked to restriction: it constitutively
promotes innate immune signaling, and it acts as a pattern recognition
receptor specific for the retrovirus capsid lattice.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Reymond et al. (2001) mapped the TRIM5
gene to chromosome 11p15, in a cluster with TRIM6, TRIM21 (109092),
TRIM22 (606559), TRIM34 (605684), and a TRIM pseudogene. The authors
noted that, apart from another cluster in the HLA region (chromosome
6p21-23), TRIM genes are dispersed throughout the genome.

ANIMAL MODEL

Stremlau et al. (2004) noted that HIV-1, the cause of acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in humans, efficiently enters the cells
of Old World monkeys but encounters a block before reverse
transcription. The block acts on the HIV-1 capsid and is mediated by a
dominant repressive factor. By screening HeLa cell lines transduced with
a cDNA library from rhesus fibroblasts, Stremlau et al. (2004)
identified HeLa cells expressing rhesus TRIM5-alpha. These cells were
resistant to HIV-1 but not simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV)
infection. PCR analysis indicated a disruption of viral cDNA synthesis
in rhesus TRIM5-alpha-expressing cells. Mutation analysis suggested that
both the N-terminal RING and C-terminal SPRY domains of rhesus
TRIM5-alpha contribute to its HIV-1 inhibitory activity. Short
interfering (si) RNA experiments reducing rhesus TRIM5-alpha expression
resulted in increased efficiency of HIV-1 infection. Stremlau et al.
(2004) concluded that monkey TRIM5-alpha is the repressive factor
inhibiting HIV-1 reverse transcription and proposed that rhesus
TRIM5-alpha may directly bind and ubiquitinate the HIV-1 viral capsid.

Sayah et al. (2004) showed that knockdown of owl monkey CYPA (123840) by
RNA interference (RNAi) correlated with suppression of anti-HIV-1
activity. However, reintroduction of CYPA to RNAi-treated cells did not
restore antiviral activity. A search for additional RNAi targets
identified TRIMCYP, an RNAi-responsive mRNA encoding a TRIM5/CYPA fusion
protein. TRIMCYP accounts for post-entry restriction of HIV-1 in owl
monkeys and blocks HIV-1 infection when transferred to otherwise
infectable human or rat cells. Sayah et al. (2004) suggested that
TRIMCYP arose after the divergence of New and Old World primates when a
LINE-1 retrotransposon catalyzed the insertion of a CYPA cDNA into the
TRIM5 locus. They concluded that this was the first vertebrate example
of a chimeric gene generated by this mechanism of exon shuffling.

Sakuma et al. (2007) showed that rhesus Trim5-alpha, but not human
TRIM5-alpha, blocked late-phase HIV-1 production through rapid
degradation of HIV-1 Gag polyproteins. In agreement with Sakuma et al.
(2007), Zhang et al. (2008) found that rhesus Trim5-alpha could block
late-stage HIV-1, but not macaque SIV, production. However, the amount
of Trim5-alpha required for this effect was much higher than that
endogenously expressed, and they questioned the biologic significance of
the finding. In a reply, Sakuma et al. (2008) suggested that technical
differences, such as cell lines and capsid sequences, may explain the
need for high Trim5-alpha expression in the experiments of Zhang et al.
(2008).

REFERENCE 1. Kaiser, S. M.; Malik, H. S.; Emerman, M.: Restriction of an extinct
retrovirus by the human TRIM5-alpha antiviral protein. Science 316:
1756-1758, 2007. Note: Erratum: Science 317: 1036 only, 2007.

2. Pertel, T.; Hausmann, S.; Morger, D.; Zuger, S.; Guerra, J.; Lascano,
J.; Reinhard, C.; Santoni, F. A.; Uchil, P. D.; Chatel, L.; Bisiaux,
A.; Albert, M. L.; Strambio-De-Castillia, C.; Mothes, W.; Pizzato,
M.; Grutter, M. G.; Luban, J.: TRIM5 is an innate immune sensor for
the retrovirus capsid lattice. Nature 472: 361-365, 2011.

3. Reymond, A.; Meroni, G.; Fantozzi, A.; Merla, G.; Cairo, S.; Luzi,
L.; Riganelli, D.; Zanaria, E.; Messali, S.; Cainarca, S.; Guffanti,
A.; Minucci, S.; Pelicci, P. G.; Ballabio, A.: The tripartite motif
family identifies cell compartments. EMBO J. 20: 2140-2151, 2001.

4. Sakuma, R.; Noser, J. A.; Ohmine, S.; Ikeda, Y.: Rhesus monkey
TRIM5-alpha restricts HIV-1 production through rapid degradation of
viral Gag polyproteins. Nature Med. 13: 631-635, 2007.

5. Sakuma, R.; Ohmine, S.; Mael, A. A.; Noser, J. A.; Ikeda, Y.:
Reply to Zhang et al. (Letter) Nature Genet. 236-238, 2008.

6. Sayah, D. M.; Sokolskaja, E.; Berthoux, L.; Luban, J.: Cyclophilin
A retrotransposition into TRIM5 explains owl monkey resistance to
HIV-1. Nature 430: 569-573, 2004.

7. Stremlau, M.; Owens, C. W.; Perron, M. J.; Kiessling, M.; Autissier,
P.; Sodroski, J.: The cytoplasmic body component TRIM5-alpha restricts
HIV-1 infection in Old World monkeys. Nature 427: 848-853, 2004.

8. Xu, L.; Yang, L.; Moitra, P. K.; Hashimoto, K.; Rallabhandi, P.;
Kaul, S.; Meroni, G.; Jensen, J. P.; Weissman, A. M.; D'Arpa, P.:
BTBD1 and BTBD2 colocalize to cytoplasmic bodies with the RBCC/tripartite
motif protein, TRIM5-delta. Exp. Cell Res. 288: 84-93, 2003.

9. Zhang, F.; Perez-Caballero, D.; Hatziioannou,T.; Bieniasz, P. D.
: No effect of endogenous TRIM5-alpha on HIV-1 production. (Letter) Nature
Med. 14: 235-236, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/29/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/26/2004

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/26/2004

EDITED alopez: 11/13/2012
alopez: 7/12/2011
terry: 7/8/2011
mgross: 6/2/2008
terry: 5/29/2008
alopez: 7/25/2007
terry: 7/24/2007
tkritzer: 8/27/2004
terry: 8/26/2004
mgross: 3/16/2004
alopez: 2/26/2004

159557	TITLE *159557 AF4/FMR2 FAMILY, MEMBER 1; AFF1
;;MYELOID/LYMPHOID OR MIXED LINEAGE LEUKEMIA, TRANSLOCATED TO, 2; MLLT2;;
MIXED LINEAGE LEUKEMIA, TRANSLOCATED TO, 2;;
ALL1-FUSED GENE FROM CHROMOSOME 4; AF4
DESCRIPTION The ALL1 gene (MLL; 159555), located at 11q23, is rearranged in acute
leukemias with reciprocal translocations between this region and
chromosomes 1, 4, 6 (159559), 9 (159558), 10, or 19 (159556). Gu et al.
(1992) studied the t(4;11) translocation which results in 2 reciprocal
fusion products coding for chimeric proteins derived from ALL1 and from
a gene on chromosome 4. They referred to the latter as AF4 for
'ALL1-fused gene from chromosome 4.' Fused RNAs were found in the three
t(4;11) cells lines studied; therefore, Gu et al. (1992) could not
establish which of the 2 products is oncogenic.

Nakamura et al. (1993) found that the gene on chromosome 4q21 that is
fused with the ALL1 gene in patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia
and translocation t(4;11)(q21;q23) and the gene on chromosome 9 that is
fused with the ALL1 gene on chromosome 11 in patients with leukemia and
the t(9;11)(p22;q23) show high sequence homology with the ENL gene on
chromosome 19, which is fused to the ALL1 gene in patients with leukemia
and the translocation t(11;19)(q23;p13). They found further that the
protein products of the AF4, AF9 (MLLT3), and ENL (MLLT1) genes
contained nuclear targeting sequences as well as serine-rich and
proline-rich regions. Stretches abundant in basic amino acids were also
present in the 3 proteins. These results indicated that the different
proteins fused to ALL1 polypeptides in leukemia provide similar
functional domains.

Domer et al. (1993) independently demonstrated that the derivative
chromosome 11, carrying a translocated segment of chromosome 4, encodes
a fusion RNA which predicts a chimeric protein with features of the MLL
gene on 11q23 and the AF4 gene on 4q21. The sequence of the complete
open reading frame for this fusion transcript revealed that the MLL
protein is homologous with DNA methyltransferase, the Drosophila
trithorax gene product, and the 'AT-hook' motif of high mobility group
proteins. An alternative splice that deletes the AT-hook region of MLL
was identified. AF4 is a serine- and proline-rich putative transcription
factor with a glutamine-rich carboxyl terminus. The composition of the
complete MLL-AF4 fusion product argues that it may act through either a
gain-of-function or a dominant-negative mechanism in leukemogenesis.
This gene is also symbolized MLLT2.

Uckun et al. (1998) analyzed bone marrow leukemic cells of 17 infants
and 127 children with newly diagnosed acute lymphatic leukemia (ALL), as
well as fetal liver and bone marrow and normal infant bone marrow
samples for the presence of a t(4;11) translocation, using standard
cytogenetic techniques and expression of an MLL-AF4 fusion transcript by
standard RT-PCR assays as well as nested RT-PCR that is 100-fold more
sensitive than the standard RT-PCR. Overall, 9 of the 17 infants and 17
of 127 noninfant pediatric ALL patients were positive for expression of
MLL-AF4 fusion transcripts. None of the MLL-AF4(+) cases were positive
for E2A-PBX1 (147141; 176310) or BCR-ABL (151410; 189980) fusion
transcript expression. Although 8 of 9 MLL-AF4(+) infants had
cytogenetically detectable t(4;11) translocation, 15 of the 17
MLL-AF4(+) noninfants were t(4;11) negative. Infants with MLL-AF4(+) ALL
had poor outcomes, whereas noninfant fusion-gene-positive,
translocation-negative patients has favorable outcomes similar to
MLL-AF4(-) patients. Notably, MLL-AF4 transcripts also were detected by
nested RT-PCR in 4 of 16 fetal bone marrows, 5 of 13 fetal livers, and 1
of 6 normal infant bone marrows, but not in any of the 44 remission bone
marrow specimens from pediatric ALL patients. These results represented
unprecedented evidence that MLL-AF4 fusion transcripts can be present in
normal hematopoietic cells, indicating that their expression is
insufficient for leukemic transformation of normal lymphocyte
precursors.

Isnard et al. (1998) isolated cDNA clones of the mouse Af4 gene. By
Northern analysis, they detected a single transcript of approximately 10
kb in all adult tissues examined, with highest expression in thymus,
lymph nodes, and kidney. They also studied expression in fetal thymus
and liver. By fluorescence in situ hybridization, they showed that the
Af4 gene maps to the E region of mouse chromosome 5, which is syntenic
with human 4q21.

To gain insight into the translocation mechanism and the relevant drug
exposure in treatment-related leukemia, Lovett et al. (2001) analyzed
the der(11) and der(4) genomic breakpoint junctions of a t(4;11)
translocation in the leukemia of a patient previously administered
etoposide and dactinomycin for the chemotherapy of primary alveolar
rhabdomyosarcoma (268220). The genomic breakpoint junctions involved
intron 6 of the MLL gene and intron 3 of the AF4 gene. Recombination was
precise at the sequence level except for the overall gain of a single
templated nucleotide. The translocation breakpoints in MLL and AF4 were
DNA topoisomerase II cleavage sites. Etoposide and its metabolites, but
not dactinomycin, enhanced cleavage at these sites on in vitro
incubation. The findings were inconsistent with a translocation
mechanism involving interchromosomal recombination by simple exchange of
DNA topoisomerase II subunits and DNA-strand transfer. Etoposide and/or
its metabolites were considered the relevant exposures in this patient.

REFERENCE 1. Domer, P. H.; Fakharzadeh, S. S.; Chen, C.-S.; Jockel, J.; Johansen,
L.; Silverman, G. A.; Kersey, J. H.; Korsmeyer, S. J.: Acute mixed-lineage
leukemia t(4;11)(q21;q23) generates an MLL-AF4 fusion product. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 7884-7888, 1993.

2. Gu, Y.; Nakamura, T.; Alder, H.; Prasad, R.; Canaani, O.; Cimino,
G.; Croce, C. M.; Canaani, E.: The t(4;11) chromosome translocation
of human acute leukemias fuses the ALL-1 gene, related to Drosophila
trithorax, to the AF-4 gene. Cell 71: 701-708, 1992.

3. Isnard, P.; Depetris, D.; Mattei, M.-G.; Ferrier, P.; Djabali,
M.: cDNA cloning, expression and chromosomal localization of the
murine AF-4 gene involved in human leukemia. Mammalian Genome 9:
1065-1068, 1998.

4. Lovett, B. D.; Lo Nigro, L.; Rappaport, E. F.; Blair, I. A.; Osheroff,
N.; Zheng, N.; Megonigal, M. D.; Williams, W. R.; Nowell, P. C.; Felix,
C. A.: Near-precise interchromosomal recombination and functional
DNA topoisomerase II cleavage sites at MLL and AF-4 genomic breakpoints
in treatment-related acute lymphoblastic leukemia with t(4;11) translocation. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 9802-9807, 2001.

5. Nakamura, T.; Alder, H.; Gu, Y.; Prasad, R.; Canaani, O.; Kamada,
N.; Gale, R. P.; Lange, B.; Crist, W. M.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C.
M.; Canaani, E.: Genes on chromosomes 4, 9, and 19 involved in 11q23
abnormalities in acute leukemia share sequence homology and/or common
motifs. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 4631-4635, 1993.

6. Uckun, F. M.; Herman-Hatten, K.; Crotty, M.-L.; Sensel, M. G.;
Sather, H. N.; Tuel-Ahlgren, L.; Sarquis, M. B.; Bostrom, B.; Nachman,
J. B.; Steinherz, P. G.; Gaynon, P. S.; Heerema, N.: Clinical significance
of MLL-AF4 fusion transcript expression in the absence of a cytogenetically
detectable t(4;11)(q21;q23) chromosomal translocation. Blood 92:
810-821, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/15/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/26/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/4/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/1/1993

EDITED carol: 06/25/2009
carol: 6/25/2009
mcapotos: 10/15/2001
mcapotos: 10/8/2001
carol: 5/27/1999
carol: 2/27/1999
terry: 2/26/1999
carol: 11/12/1998
terry: 11/4/1998
dkim: 9/11/1998
carol: 7/30/1998
mark: 3/11/1997
mark: 10/18/1996
mimadm: 12/2/1994
carol: 3/24/1994
carol: 9/20/1993
carol: 6/17/1993
carol: 2/2/1993
carol: 2/1/1993

604511	TITLE *604511 CHROMOBOX HOMOLOG 1; CBX1
;;CBX;;
HP1, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, BETA;;
HP1-BETA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Heterochromatin protein-1 (HP1) is localized at heterochromatin sites,
where it mediates gene silencing.

CLONING

Some autoimmune sera recognize antigens located near the centromere
(CENPA, 117139; CENPB, 117140; CENPC1, 117141) as well as
heterochromatin protein-1 (HP1). Using human autoimmune serum to screen
a HepG2 library, Furuta et al. (1997) isolated a cDNA encoding CBX1, a
human homolog of Drosophila HP1, which the authors called HP1-beta. CBX1
encodes a 185-amino acid protein that has 66% sequence identity and 80%
similarity to CBX5 (604478). CBX1 is 100% identical to mouse M31 and to
human HSM1, which was identified by Singh et al. (1991). CBX1 has a
conserved 37-amino acid region called the chromodomain, or chromobox, in
the N-terminal region. Immunofluorescence studies demonstrated that only
antibodies directed against the C terminus of CBX1 showed nucleoplasmic
and heterochromatin staining. N-terminal-specific antibodies were
nonreactive. The C-terminal domain antibodies were also reactive with
the centromeric region during metaphase and anaphase and with whole
chromosomes during telophase.

GENE FUNCTION

Lachner et al. (2001) showed that mammalian methyltransferases that
selectively methylate histone H3 (see 602810) on lysine-9 (Suv39h
HMTases; see SUV39H1, 300254) generate a binding site for HP1 proteins,
a family of heterochromatic adaptor molecules implicated in both gene
silencing and supranucleosomal chromatin structure. High-affinity in
vitro recognition of a methylated histone H3 peptide by HP1 requires a
functional chromodomain; thus, the HP1 chromodomain is a specific
interaction motif for the methyl epitope on lysine-9 of histone H3. In
vivo, heterochromatin association of HP1 proteins is lost in Suv39h
double-null primary mouse fibroblasts but is restored after
reintroduction of a catalytically active SUV39H1 HMTase. Lachner et al.
(2001) concluded that their data define a molecular mechanism through
which the SUV39H-HP1 methylation system can contribute to the
propagation of heterochromatic subdomains in native chromatin.

Bannister et al. (2001) demonstrated that HP1 can bind with high
affinity to histone H3 methylated at lysine-9 but not at lysine-4. They
identified the chromodomain of HP1 as its methyl-lysine-binding domain.
A point mutation in the chromodomain, which destroys the gene silencing
activity of HP1 in Drosophila, abolished methyl-lysine-binding activity.
Genetic and biochemical analysis in S. pombe showed that the methylase
activity of Clr4 (the SUV39H1 homolog) is necessary for the correct
localization of Swi6 (the HP1 equivalent) at centromeric heterochromatin
and for gene silencing. Bannister et al. (2001) concluded that these
results provide a stepwise model for the formation of a
transcriptionally silent heterochromatin: SUV39H1 places a methyl marker
on histone H3, which is then recognized by HP1 through its chromodomain.
This model may also explain the stable inheritance of the
heterochromatic state.

Eukaryotic genomes are organized into discrete structural and functional
chromatin domains. Noma et al. (2001) demonstrated that distinct
site-specific histone H3 methylation patterns define euchromatic and
heterochromatic chromosomal domains within an 47-kb region of the mating
type locus in fission yeast. H3 methylated at lysine-9, and its
interacting Swi6 protein, are strictly localized to a 20-kb silent
heterochromatic interval. In contrast, H3 methylated at lysine-4 is
specific to the surrounding euchromatic regions. Two inverted repeats
flanking the silent interval serve as boundary elements to mark the
borders between heterochromatin and euchromatin. Deletions of these
boundary elements leads to spreading of H3 lys9 methylation and Swi6
into neighboring sequences. Furthermore, the H3 lys6 methylation and
corresponding heterochromatin-associated complexes prevent H3 lys4
methylation in the silent domain.

Festenstein et al. (2003) used fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching to demonstrate that a GFP-HP1-beta fusion protein is
highly mobile within both the euchromatin and heterochromatin of ex vivo
resting murine T cells. Moreover, T cell activation greatly increased
this mobility, indicating that such a process may facilitate
(hetero)chromatin remodeling and permit access of epigenetic modifiers
and transcription factors to the many genes that are consequently
derepressed.

Cheutin et al. (2003) demonstrated that maintenance of stable
heterochromatin domains in living cells involves the transient binding
and dynamic exchange of HP1 from chromatin. HP1 exchange kinetics
correlated with the condensation level of chromatin and were dependent
on the histone methyltransferase Suv39h (300254). The chromodomain and
the chromoshadow domain of HP1 are both required for binding to native
chromatin in vivo, but they contribute differentially to binding in
euchromatin and heterochromatin. Cheutin et al. (2003) suggested that
their data argue against HP1 repression of transcription by formation of
static, higher order oligomeric networks but support a dynamic
competition model, and demonstrate that heterochromatin is accessible to
regulatory factors.

Fischle et al. (2005) demonstrated that HP1-alpha (604478), HP1-beta,
and HP1-gamma (604477) are released from chromatin during the M phase of
the cell cycle even though trimethylation levels of histone H3 lys9
remain unchanged. However, the additional transient modification of
histone H3 by phosphorylation of ser10 next to the more stable
methyl-lys9 mark is sufficient to eject HP1 proteins from their binding
sites. Inhibition or depletion of the mitotic kinase Aurora B (604970),
which phosphorylates histone H3 on ser10, causes retention of HP1
proteins on mitotic chromosomes, suggesting that H3 ser10
phosphorylation is necessary for the dissociation of HP1 from chromatin
in M phase. Fischle et al. (2005) concluded that their findings
establish a regulatory mechanism of protein-protein interactions,
through a combinatorial readout of 2 adjacent posttranslational
modifications: a stable methylation and a dynamic phosphorylation mark.

Smallwood et al. (2007) demonstrated that DNMT1 (126375) could interact
with HP1-alpha, HP1-beta, and HP1-gamma in a human colon carcinoma cell
line, resulting in stimulation of DNMT1 methyltransferase activity. The
HP1 proteins were sufficient to target DNMT1 activity in vivo, and
HP1-dependent repression required DNMT1. Smallwood et al. (2007)
demonstrated that HP1-alpha and HP1-beta were recruited to the survivin
(BIRC5; 603352) promoter in a DNMT1-dependent manner. They concluded
that direct interactions between HP1 proteins and DNMT1 mediate
silencing of euchromatic genes.

Ayoub et al. (2008) identified a dynamic change in chromatin that
promotes H2AX (601772) phosphorylation in mammalian cells. DNA breaks
swiftly mobilized HP1-beta, a chromatin factor bound to histone H3
methylated on lysine-9 (H3K9me; see 601128). Local changes in histone
tail modifications were not apparent. Instead, phosphorylation of
HP1-beta on amino acid thr51 accompanied mobilization, releasing
HP1-beta from chromatin by disrupting hydrogen bonds that fold its
chromodomain around H3K9me. Inhibition of casein kinase-2 (CK2; see
115442), an enzyme implicated in DNA damage sensing and repair,
suppressed thr51 phosphorylation and HP1-beta mobilization in living
cells. CK2 inhibition, or a constitutively chromatin-bound HP1-beta
mutant, diminished H2AX phosphorylation. Ayoub et al. (2008) concluded
that their findings revealed a signaling cascade that helps to initiate
the DNA damage response, altering chromatin by modifying a histone code
mediator protein, HP1, but not the code itself.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Nielsen et al. (2002) showed that HP1 uses an induced-fit mechanism to
recognize the methylation of lys9, as revealed by the structure of its
chromodomain bound to a histone H3 peptide dimethylated at N-zeta of
lys9. The binding pocket for the N-methyl groups is provided by 3
aromatic side chains, tyr21, trp42, and phe45, which reside in 2 regions
that become ordered on binding of the peptide. The side chain of lys9 is
almost fully extended and surrounded by residues that are conserved in
many other chromodomains. The QTAR peptide sequence preceding lys9
performs most of the additional interactions with the chromodomain, with
HP1 residues val23, leu40, trp42, leu58, and cys60 appearing to be a
major determinant of specificity by binding the key buried ala7. Nielsen
et al. (2002) concluded that their findings predict which other
chromodomains will bind methylated proteins and suggest a motif that
they might recognize.

REFERENCE 1. Ayoub, N.; Jeyasekharan, A. D.; Bernal, J. A.; Venkitaraman, A.
R.: HP1-beta mobilization promotes chromatin changes that initiate
the DNA damage response. Nature 453: 682-686, 2008.

2. Bannister, A. J.; Zegerman, P.; Partridge, J. F.; Miska, E. A.;
Thomas, J. O.; Allshire, R. C.; Kouzarides, T.: Selective recognition
of methylated lysine 9 on histone H3 by the HP1 chromo domain. Nature 410:
120-124, 2001.

3. Cheutin, T.; McNairn, A. J.; Jenuwein, T.; Gilbert, D. M.; Singh,
P. B.; Misteli, T.: Maintenance of stable heterochromatin domains
by dynamic HP1 binding. Science 299: 721-725, 2003.

4. Festenstein, R.; Pagakis, S. N.; Hiragami, K.; Lyon, D.; Verreault,
A.; Sekkali, B.; Kioussis, D.: Modulation of heterochromatin protein
1 dynamics in primary mammalian cells. Science 299: 719-721, 2003.

5. Fischle, W.; Tseng, B. S.; Dormann, H. L.; Ueberheide, B. M.; Garcia,
B. A.; Shabanowitz, J.; Hunt, D. F.; Funabiki, H.; Allis, C. D.:
Regulation of HP1-chromatin binding by histone H3 methylation and
phosphorylation. Nature 438: 1116-1122, 2005.

6. Furuta, K.; Chan, E. K. L.; Kiyosawa, K.; Reimer, G.; Luderschmidt,
C.; Tan, E. M.: Heterochromatin protein HP1-Hsbeta (p25beta) and
its localization with centromeres in mitosis. Chromosoma 106: 11-19,
1997.

7. Lachner, M.; O'Carroll, D.; Rea, S.; Mechtler, K.; Jenuwein, T.
: Methylation of histone H3 lysine 9 creates a binding site for HP1
proteins. Nature 410: 116-120, 2001.

8. Nielsen, P. R.; Nietilspach, D.; Mott, H. R.; Callaghan, J.; Bannister,
A.; Kouzarides, T.; Murzin, A. G.; Murzina, N. V.; Laue, E. D.: Structure
of the Hp1 chromodomain bound to histone H3 methylated at lysine 9. Nature 416:
103-107, 2002.

9. Noma, K.; Allis, C. D.; Grewal, S. I. S.: Transitions in distinct
histone H3 methylation patterns at the heterochromatin domain boundaries. Science 293:
1150-1155, 2001.

10. Singh, P. B.; Miller, J. R.; Pearce, J.; Kothary, R.; Burton,
R. D.; Paro, R.; James, T. C.; Gaunt, S. J.: A sequence motif found
in a Drosophila heterochromatin protein is conserved in animals and
plants. Nucleic Acids Res. 19: 789-794, 1991.

11. Smallwood, A.; Esteve, P.-O.; Pradhan, S.; Carey, M.: Functional
cooperation between HP1 and DNMT1 mediates gene silencing. Genes
Dev. 21: 1169-1178, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/11/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/10/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/12/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/13/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/26/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/14/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/1/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/4/2000

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
alopez: 7/15/2008
terry: 7/11/2008
mgross: 7/10/2007
alopez: 1/13/2006
terry: 1/12/2006
alopez: 2/19/2003
terry: 2/13/2003
alopez: 3/12/2002
alopez: 3/1/2002
terry: 2/26/2002
alopez: 8/20/2001
terry: 8/14/2001
alopez: 3/1/2001
terry: 10/4/2000
alopez: 8/9/2000
carol: 2/22/2000
carol: 2/4/2000

179490	TITLE *179490 RAS-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN RAB3A; RAB3A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The RAS gene superfamily is divided into 3 main branches according to
protein homology. In mammals the first branch includes the classic RAS
genes as well as RAL (179550) and RRAS (165090). The RHO genes (165370,
165380, 165390) belong to the second branch and the RAB genes to the
third. The RAB genes were so named because they were first isolated from
a rat brain library. Zahraoui et al. (1989) isolated cDNAs encoding
RAB3A and several other human RAB proteins. See RAB5A (179512). The
predicted 220-amino acid human RAB3A protein shares 99% and 78% identity
with rat Rab3A and human RAB3B (179510), respectively.

GENE FUNCTION

Giovedi et al. (2004) found that interaction between mammalian synapsin
I (SYN1; 313440) and Rab3a regulated the activities of both proteins.
Synapsin I stimulated the Rab3a cycle by increasing GTP binding, GTPase
activity, and Rab3a recruitment to the synaptic vesicle membrane.
Conversely, Rab3a inhibited synapsin I binding to actin and synapsin
I-induced synaptic vesicle clustering.

Corticoamygdala long-term potentiation (LTP) and late-phase LTP at
hippocampal synapses are 2 forms of LTP that require both postsynaptic
NMDA receptor (see, e.g., 138249) activation and presynaptic protein
kinase A (PKA; see 176911) activation. By in vitro analysis of
transverse slices from the hippocampus and lateral amygdala of
Rab3a-null mice, Huang et al. (2005) found that Rab3a was necessary for
both forms of synaptic plasticity. Rim1-alpha (606629), a
Rab3a-interacting molecule, was also required for hippocampal late-phase
LTP. The findings indicated that presynaptic proteins also play a role
in plasticity that is dependent on postsynaptic activity, thus adding a
layer of complexity to synaptic interactions.

Ruediger et al. (2011) investigated how mossy fiber terminal complexes
at the entry of hippocampal and cerebellar circuits rearrange upon
learning in mice, and the functional role of the rearrangements.
Ruediger et al. (2011) showed that one-trial and incremental learning
lead to robust, circuit-specific, long-lasting, and reversible increases
in the numbers of filopodial synapses onto fast-spiking interneurons
that trigger feedforward inhibition. The increase in feedforward
inhibition connectivity involved a majority of the presynaptic
terminals, restricted the number of c-Fos (164810)-expressing
postsynaptic neurons at memory retrieval, and correlated temporally with
the quality of the memory. Ruediger et al. (2011) then showed that for
contextual fear conditioning and Morris water maze learning, increased
feedforward inhibition connectivity by hippocampal mossy fibers has a
critical role for the precision of the memory and the learned behavior.
In the absence of mossy fiber long-term potentiation in Rab3a-null mice,
c-Fos ensemble reorganization and feedforward inhibition growth were
both absent in CA3 upon learning, and the memory was imprecise. By
contrast, in the absence of adducin-2 (ADD2; 102681), c-Fos
reorganization was normal, but feedforward inhibition growth was
abolished. In parallel, c-Fos ensembles in CA3 were greatly enlarged,
and the memory was imprecise. Feedforward inhibition growth and memory
precision were both rescued by re-expression of Add2 specifically in
hippocampal mossy fibers. Ruediger et al. (2011) concluded that their
results established a causal relationship between learning-related
increases in the numbers of defined synapses and the precision of
learning and memory in the adult. The results further related plasticity
and feedforward inhibition growth at hippocampal mossy fibers to the
precision of hippocampus-dependent memories.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sullivan et al. (1999) found that the RAB3A gene consists of 5 exons
spanning 7.9 kb, and is located 3.7 kb from PDE4C (600128).

MAPPING

Rousseau-Merck et al. (1989, 1989) used the cloned human RAB3A cDNA as a
probe to map the corresponding gene by hybridization to flow sorted
chromosomes and by in situ hybridization. They concluded that RAB3A is
located on 19p13.2. The RAB genes may serve a regulatory function in the
developing nervous system. No oncogenic activity has been demonstrated
as yet for any of the RAB branch family genes. It is noteworthy,
however, that the 19p13.2 site is involved in malignant processes such
as acute leukemias. By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Trask et al.
(1993) assigned the RAB3A gene to 19p13.1-p12.

ANIMAL MODEL

In brain, RAB3A is found specifically in synaptic vesicles. Geppert et
al. (1997) generated Rab3a-deficient mice. They found that the size of
the readily releasable pool of vesicles was normal, but that
calcium-triggered fusion was altered in the absence of Rab3a such that a
greater number of exocytic events occurred within a brief time after
arrival of the nerve impulse. They concluded that RAB3A regulates a late
step in synaptic vesicle fusion.

Kapfhamer et al. (2002) identified a semidominant mouse mutation called
'earlybird' (Ebd) that shortens the circadian period of locomotor
activity. Sequence analysis of Rab3a identified a point mutation in the
conserved amino acid (asp77 to gly) within the GTP-binding domain of the
Rab3a protein in earlybird mutants, resulting in significantly reduced
levels of Rab3a protein. Phenotypic assessment of earlybird mice and a
null allele of Rab3a revealed anomalies in circadian period and sleep
homeostasis, providing evidence that Rab3a-mediated synaptic
transmission is involved in these behaviors.

REFERENCE 1. Geppert, M.; Goda, Y.; Stevens, C. F.; Sudhof, T. C.: The small
GTP-binding protein Rab3A regulates a late step in synaptic vesicle
fusion. Nature 387: 810-814, 1997.

2. Giovedi, S.; Darchen, F.; Valtorta, F.; Greengard, P.; Benfenati,
F.: Synapsin is a novel Rab3 effector protein on small synaptic vesicles.
II. Functional effects of the Rab3A-synapsin I interaction. J. Biol.
Chem. 279: 43769-43779, 2004.

3. Huang, Y.-Y.; Zakharenko, S. S.; Schoch, S.; Kaeser, P. S.; Janz,
R.; Sudhof, T. C.; Siegelbaum, S. A.; Kandel, E. R.: Genetic evidence
for a protein-kinase-A-mediated presynaptic component in NMDA-receptor-dependent
forms of long-term synaptic potentiation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102:
9365-9370, 2005.

4. Kapfhamer, D.; Valladares, O.; Sun, Y.; Nolan, P. M.; Rux, J. J.;
Arnold, S. E.; Veasey, S. C.; Bucan, M.: Mutations in Rab3a alter
circadian period and homeostatic response to sleep loss in the mouse. Nature
Genet. 32: 290-295, 2002.

5. Rousseau-Merck, M. F.; Zahraoui, A.; Bernheim, A.; Touchot, N.;
Miglierina, R.; Tavitian, A.; Berger, R.: Chromosome mapping of the
human RAS-related RAB3A gene to 19p13.2. Genomics 5: 694-698, 1989.

6. Rousseau-Merck, M. F.; Zahraoui, A.; Bernheim, A.; Touchot, N.;
Miglierina, R.; Tavitian, A.; Berger, R.: Chromosome mapping of the
human RAS related RAB3A and RAB3B genes to chromosomes 19p13.2 and
1p31-p32, respectively. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51: 1070
only, 1989.

7. Ruediger, S.; Vittori, C.; Bednarek, E.; Genoud, C.; Strata, P.;
Sacchetti, B.; Caroni, P.: Learning-related feedforward inhibitory
connectivity growth required for memory precision. Nature 473: 514-518,
2011.

8. Sullivan, M.; Olsen, A. S.; Houslay, M. D.: Genomic organisation
of the human cyclic AMP-specific phosphodiesterase PDE4C gene and
its chromosomal localisation to 19p13.1, between RAB3A and JUND. Cell.
Signal. 11: 735-742, 1999.

9. Trask, B.; Fertitta, A.; Christensen, M.; Youngblom, J.; Bergmann,
A.; Copeland, A.; de Jong, P.; Mohrenweiser, H.; Olsen, A.; Carrano,
A.; Tynan, K.: Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping of human
chromosome 19: cytogenetic band location of 540 cosmids and 70 genes
or DNA markers. Genomics 15: 133-145, 1993.

10. Zahraoui, A.; Touchot, N.; Chardin, P.; Tavitian, A.: The human
rab genes encode a family of GTP-binding proteins related to yeast
YPT1 and SEC4 products involved in secretion. J. Biol. Chem. 264:
12394-12401, 1989.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/22/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/12/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/25/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/16/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/7/1999
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 3/9/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/6/1989

EDITED alopez: 06/24/2011
alopez: 6/24/2011
terry: 6/22/2011
wwang: 7/28/2005
ckniffin: 7/12/2005
mgross: 1/25/2005
alopez: 10/18/2002
alopez: 9/16/2002
carol: 9/16/2002
carol: 12/10/1999
mcapotos: 12/10/1999
terry: 12/7/1999
mgross: 3/9/1999
carol: 2/11/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 12/14/1989
carol: 12/12/1989
ddp: 10/27/1989

610626	TITLE *610626 PPAP2 DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1B; PPAPDC1B
;;HTPAP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Previous studies of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) suggested that
deletion of a region of human chromosome 8p contributes to HCC
metastasis. Using cDNA microarray analysis of chromosome 8 ESTs from HCC
cell lines to identify genes with downregulated expression in high
metastatic potential versus low metastatic potential cell lines,
followed by database analysis and RT-PCR, Wu et al. (2006) cloned
PPAPDC1B, which they called HTPAP. The 175-amino acid protein contains
an N-terminal transmembrane domain, an acid phosphatase homology region,
2 PKC phosphorylation sites, and a tyrosine kinase phosphorylation site.
RT-PCR analysis of 16 metastatic HCC tissues paired with 16 primary HCC
tissues showed downregulation of PPAPDC1B expression in 11 of 16
metastatic lesions compared to primary HCC tissues, with 9 of 16
metastatic lesions showing significant downregulation of PPAPDC1B (P
less than 0.05).

GENE FUNCTION

Using in vitro matrigel assays, Wu et al. (2006) showed that
PPAPDC1B-transfected metastatic HCC cells showed significantly lower
invasion activity. Transfection and expression of PPAPDC1B in nude mice
bearing human HCC significantly decreased the incidence and degree of
pulmonary metastasis of HCC.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wu et al. (2006) mapped the PPAPDC1B gene
to chromosome 8p12.

REFERENCE 1. Wu, X.; Jia, H.-L.; Wang, Y.-F.; Ren, N.; Ye, Q.-H.; Sun, H.-C.;
Wang, L.; Liu, Y.-K.; Tang, Z.-Y.; Qin, L.-X.: HTPAP gene on chromosome
8p is a candidate metastasis suppressor for human hepatocellular carcinoma. Oncogene 25:
1832-1840, 2006.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 12/1/2006

EDITED wwang: 12/01/2006

609590	TITLE *609590 QUAKING, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; QKI
;;QK1;;
QK
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

QKI belongs to a family of RNA-binding proteins that have an HNRNPK
(600712) homology (KH) domain embedded in a 200-amino acid region called
the GSG domain. Other members of this family include SAM68 (KHDRBS1;
602489) and SF1 (601516) (Chen and Richard, 1998). QKI proteins regulate
RNA splicing, export of target RNAs from the nucleus, translation of
proteins, and RNA stability (Lauriat et al., 2008).

CLONING

Ebersole et al. (1996) identified several splice variants of mouse Qki
that could be grouped into 2 classes based on size. The longer mRNAs (7,
6, and 5 kb) were abundant in mouse brain, whereas the shorter mRNAs
(1.5 to 1.9 kb) were less abundant. The longer variants encode deduced
proteins containing an N-terminal proline-rich domain, followed by 2 RG
boxes, a second proline-rich region, a central GSG/STAR domain, a third
proline-rich domain, and 5 tyrosines preceding alternative C-terminal
ends. The GSG domain consists of a KH domain flanked by evolutionarily
conserved quaking (QUA) domains 1 and 2. Qki also has 7 SH3-binding
sites dispersed throughout its sequence. Qki expression peaked in
16-day-old myelinating mouse brain. A splice variant was also detected
in newborn testis. In situ hybridization of normal mouse brain showed
Qki transcripts in myelinating tracts in the cerebellum. Ebersole et al.
(1996) identified multiple QKI transcripts in human, rodent, chicken,
and frog.

By Northern blot analysis, Hardy et al. (1996) found that the 5-, 6-,
and 7-kb Qki mRNAs, which they designated Qki-5, Qki-6, and Qki-7,
respectively, were variably expressed in developing and adult mouse
brain. Levels of Qki-5 declined dramatically after the second postnatal
week, whereas levels of Qki-6 and Qki-7 declined modestly thereafter.
Immunohistochemical analysis detected all 3 proteins in myelinating
cells of the central and peripheral nervous system and in astrocytes.
The isoforms showed distinct intracellular distributions, however, with
Qki-6 and Qki-7 localized to perikaryal cytoplasm and Qki-5 restricted
to nucleus.

Noveroske et al. (2002) found that Qki was expressed in the yolk sac
endoderm in mice, adjacent to developing blood islands.

Using quantitative RT-PCR, Lauriat et al. (2008) found that QKI-5 showed
no significant differences in expression across various age groups in
human prefrontal cortex (PFC) and hippocampus. However, QKI-5 was the
only QKI variant expressed at high levels in fetal PFC. QKI-6 expression
increased in PFC in a linear fashion with age, with a substantial
increase between 1 to 2 months and 1 to 2 years of age. In human
hippocampus, QKI-6 expression increased at 1 to 2 years of age, remained
high during childhood, and decreased in adulthood. QKI-7a generally
showed a linear trend toward increased expression in PFC with age, but
there was a peak at 1 to 2 years of age. QKI-7b expression in PFC did
not vary significantly with age due to greater variability between
individuals, but there was a trend toward an increase with age. In
hippocampus, QKI-7a and QKI-7b showed a trend toward decreased
expression in adulthood, similar to QKI-6, but there was greater
variability between individuals. Lauriat et al. (2008) noted that
expression of QKI-6 and QKI-7 in PFC increased during the period of
active myelination.

By sequencing mRNAs expressed in primary cultures of human astrocytes,
Radomska et al. (2013) identified QKI5, QKI6, QKI7, QKI7b, and a novel
variant that they called QKI6b. QKI6b differs from other QKI variants in
the 3-prime UTR and encodes a protein identical to that encoded by QKI6.
QKI6 and QKI6b were the most abundant QKI transcripts detected in human
astrocytes, and QKI5 was the least abundant. Immunohistochemical
analysis with isoform-specific antibodies revealed that QKI6 and QKI7
were uniformly distributed throughout the nucleus, cell body, and
processes, whereas QKI5 localized to nuclei and was excluded from
nucleoli. Western blot analysis detected QKI6 at an apparent molecular
mass of 38 kD. Both QKI5 and QKI7 had apparent molecular masses of about
40 kD.

GENE STRUCTURE

Backx et al. (2010) noted that the QKI gene contains 8 exons.

MAPPING

Backx et al. (2010) stated that the QKI gene maps to chromosome 6q26.

The mouse Qki gene maps to chromosome 17 (Ebersole et al., 1996).

GENE FUNCTION

Chen and Richard (1998) showed that the mouse Qk1 proteins homodimerized
in vivo, and they determined that the GSG domain mediated dimerization
and RNA binding. Self-association was mediated by a region of QUA1
predicted to form coiled coils.

Larocque et al. (2002) found that mouse Qk1 proteins bound a short
element in the 3-prime UTR of Mbp (159430). The balance between the
nuclear and cytoplasmic isoforms of Qk1 controlled the nuclear export of
Mbp mRNAs and the cellular localization of the 17- and 21.5-kD Mbp
isoforms. Overexpression of Qki-5 in cultured rodent oligodendrocytes
recreated the Mbp defects observed in qk(v) mice, with retention of Mbp
in the nucleus. Larocque et al. (2002) concluded that the QKI proteins
have a role in myelination.

In an mRNA analysis of 55 control human brains, Aberg et al. (2006)
found that QKI mRNA levels accounted for 47% of the coordinated
variation of mRNA levels of 6 oligodendrocyte-related genes, PLP1
(300401), MAG (159460), MBP, TF (190000), SOX10 (602229), and CDKN1B
(600778). In silico analysis identified potential QKI-binding sites in
all of the genes except TF. Variation in the relative expression of
splice variant QKI-7 explained a large fraction of additional mRNA
variation in 3 highly coexpressed genes, MAG, PLP1, and TF. Analysis of
55 brains from patients with schizophrenia (see 181500) showed
significantly decreased expression of MAG, PLP1, and TF compared to
control brains that was associated with decreased levels of QKI-7. Aberg
et al. (2006) concluded that QKI is a regulator of oligodendrocyte
differentiation and maturation in the human brain, and suggested that
splice variants of QKI may play a role in myelin and oligodendrocyte
dysfunction in schizophrenia.

Using yeast 2-hybrid screens, coaffinity purification analysis of
transfected HEK293 cells, and bioinformatic analysis, Lim et al. (2006)
developed an interaction network for 54 human proteins involved in 23
inherited ataxias. By database analysis, they expanded the core network
to include more distantly related interacting proteins that could
function as genetic modifiers. RBPMS (601558) was a main hub in the
network and interacted with many proteins, including the cerebellar
ataxia-associated proteins ATN1 (607462) and QK1.

Using a rat cell line and primary mixed glial cultures from neonatal rat
brain, Chen et al. (2007) showed that Qk1 was necessary and sufficient
for oligodendroglia progenitor cell differentiation. Qk1 isoforms 5, 6,
and 7 differed in their ability to promote oligodendroglia
differentiation, which was dependent on the RNA-binding ability of Qk1.
RNA interference-mediated Qk1 knockdown abrogated differentiation
without affecting proliferation capacity or cell cycle progression.

Using qualitative RT-PCR, Lauriat et al. (2008) examined expression of
putative QKI target mRNAs, including MAGI1 (602625), BCAS1 (602968),
CDKN1B, PLP1, and MAG, in human prefrontal cortex and hippocampus from
fetus to adulthood (up to 46 years of age). Most of the putative QKI
target mRNAs showed increased expression with increasing age in
prefrontal cortex. However, there was little evidence of developmental
regulation of these mRNAs in hippocampus.

Using small interfering RNA, Radomska et al. (2013) found that knockdown
of QKI7 in cultured human astrocytes reduced expression of an astrocyte
differentiation marker, GFAP (137780), but did not reduce cell
viability. The dominant GFAP variant expressed in the astrocytes,
GFAP-alpha, was the most highly downregulated. Radomska et al. (2013)
identified a core QKI regulatory element (QRE) in the 3-prime UTR of the
GFAP-alpha transcript and a potential upstream half-site. The QRE, but
not the half-site, was conserved in mouse Gfap. Exposure of astrocytes
to the antipsychotic drug haloperidol specifically increased expression
of QKI7 and GFAP transcripts.

CYTOGENETICS

Backx et al. (2010) reported a woman with borderline mental retardation
and dysmorphic features who had a de novo reciprocal balanced
translocation t(5;6)(q23.1;q26) disrupting the QKI gene. The 5q
breakpoint occurred in a gene desert. RNA studies showed a 50% reduction
in QKI expression, consistent with haploinsufficiency. She presented at
birth with hypotonia, short neck, genital hypoplasia with underdeveloped
labia majora, and facial dysmorphism including epicanthal folds, narrow
palpebral fissures, broad nasal bridge with small nose and bulbous tip,
small mouth with downturned corners, a long philtrum, and small
protruding cupped ears. She attended special education schools.
Evaluation at age 23 years showed relative microcephaly,
microretrognathia, small mouth with high-arched palate, myopia, and
nasal speech. She also had inverted nipples and irregular menses.
Seizures and brain anomalies were not present.

Backx et al. (2010) provided a literature review of 18 patients reported
with chromosome 6qter deletions and 2 patients reported with
interstitial 6q deletion. All deletions included the QKI gene. They
noted that while the deletion sizes varied a common recognizable
phenotype of intellectual disabilities, hypotonia, seizures, brain
anomalies, and specific dysmorphic facial features could be distilled
for the chromosome 6qter deletion syndrome.

ANIMAL MODEL

Recessive mutations in the mouse quaking gene affect myelination and
embryogenesis and can be embryonic lethal. A spontaneous, recessive
quaking mutation, qk(v), results in viable mice with a severe deficit in
myelin, leading to rapid tremor by postnatal day 10. By Northern blot
analysis, Ebersole et al. (1996) detected a truncated Qki message in
brains of qk(v) mice.

Hardy et al. (1996) found that Qki-6 and Qki-7 were absent from
myelin-forming cells in qk(v) mice. Qki-5 was absent only from
oligodendrocytes of tracts from severely affected qk(v) brain regions.

Wu et al. (2002) found misregulated alternative splicing of several
myelin genes in qk(v) mice.

Lu et al. (2003) presented evidence that the qk(v) mutation affects an
enhancer required for expression of Qki in myelinating cells but not in
other tissues.

Chen and Richard (1998) determined that a point mutation within the QUA1
region of Qk1 caused embryonic lethality in mice. The mutation abolished
Qk1 self-association but had no effect on RNA-binding activity.
Expression of wildtype Qk1 or a lethal mutant Qk1 deficient in
self-association but not RNA binding induced cell death by apoptosis in
a mouse fibroblast cell line. The lethal Qk1 mutant was more potent at
inducing apoptosis.

Noveroske et al. (2002) found that embryonic mice with a lethal point
mutation in Qki had defective yolk sac vascular remodeling and abnormal
vessels in the embryo proper at midgestation, coinciding with embryonic
death.

Noveroske et al. (2005) isolated qk(e5), an N-ethyl-N-nitrosurea-induced
viable allele of mouse Qki. Unlike qk(v)/qk(v) mice, qk(e5)/qk(e5) mice
had early-onset seizures, severe ataxia, and a dramatically reduced life
span. Ultrastructural analysis of qk(e5)/qk(e5) brains revealed severe
dysmyelination when compared with both wildtype and qk(v)/qk(v) brains.
Young adult qk(e5)/qk(e5) mice exhibited Purkinje cell axonal swellings
indicative of neurodegeneration, which is not seen in young adult
qk(v)/qk(v) mice. The molecular defect in the qk(e5) allele was not
evident, but protein expression studies showed that qk(e5)/qk(e5)
postnatal oligodendrocytes lacked Qki-6 and Qki-7 and had reduced Qki-5
levels. Several oligodendrocyte developmental markers were present in
qk(e5)/qk(e5) postnatal brain, but Cnp (123830) and Mbp levels were
considerably reduced. Noveroske et al. (2005) noted that qk(v) is a
large deletion that affects expression of Pacrg (608427) and Parkin
(PARK2; 602544) in addition to Qki, complicating interpretation of its
neuropathology. Thus, they suggested that qk(e5) may be useful in
studying QKI regulation in the developing central nervous system and its
role in myelination.

Wilson et al. (2010) noted that the qk(v) phenotype, which includes
dysmyelination of the central nervous system and male sterility, is due
to reduced expression of Qk and a complete lack of Pacrg expression,
respectively. Since Pacrg is required for correct development of the
spermatozoan flagella (a specialized type of motile cilia), Wilson et
al. (2010) analyzed qk(v) mutant mice for evidence of cilial
dysfunction. Histologic and magnetic resonance imaging analyses
demonstrated that qk(v) mutant mice were affected by acquired,
communicating hydrocephalus (HC). Structure of axonemal microtubules and
density of ciliated cells were normal, and cilia length was similar to
wildtype littermates. There was a reduction in ependymal cilial beat
frequency and cilial-mediated flow in qk(v) mutant mice compared with
wildtype littermate controls. Transgenic expression of Pacrg was
necessary and sufficient to correct this deficit and rescue the HC
phenotype in the qk(v) mutant. Wilson et al. (2010) concluded that Pacrg
is required for motile cilia function and may be involved in the
pathogenesis of human ciliopathies, such as HC, asthenospermia, and
primary ciliary dyskinesia.

REFERENCE 1. Aberg, K.; Saetre, P.; Jareborg, N.; Jazin, E.: Human QKI, a potential
regulator of mRNA expression of human oligodendrocyte-related genes
involved in schizophrenia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 7482-7487,
2006.

2. Backx, L.; Fryns, J. P.; Marcelis, C.; Devriendt, K.; Vermeesch,
J.; Van Esch, H.: Haploinsufficiency of the gene Quaking (QKI) is
associated with the 6q terminal deletion syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A:
319-326, 2010.

3. Chen, T.; Richard, S.: Structure-function analysis of Qk1: a lethal
point mutation in mouse quaking prevents homodimerization. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 18: 4863-4871, 1998.

4. Chen, Y.; Tian, D.; Ku, L.; Osterhout, D. J.; Feng, Y.: The selective
RNA-binding protein quaking I (QKI) is necessary and sufficient for
promoting oligodendroglia differentiation. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 23553-23560,
2007.

5. Ebersole, T. A.; Chen, Q.; Justice, M. J.; Artzt, K.: The quaking
gene product necessary in embryogenesis and myelination combines features
of RNA binding and signal transduction proteins. Nature Genet. 12:
260-265, 1996.

6. Hardy, R. J.; Loushin, C. L.; Friedrich, V. L., Jr.; Chen, Q.;
Ebersole, T. A.; Lazzarini, R. A.; Artzt, K.: Neural cell type-specific
expression of QKI proteins is altered in quakingviable mutant mice. J.
Neurosci. 16: 7941-7949, 1996.

7. Larocque, D.; Pilotte, J.; Chen, T.; Cloutier, F.; Massie, B.;
Pedraza, L.; Couture, R.; Lasko, P.; Almazan, G.; Richard, S.: Nuclear
retention of MBP mRNAs in the quaking viable mice. Neuron 36: 815-829,
2002.

8. Lauriat, T. L.; Shiue, L.; Haroutunian, V.; Verbitsky, M.; Ares,
M., Jr.; Ospina, L.; McInnes, L. A.: Developmental expression profile
of quaking, a candidate gene for schizophrenia, and its target genes
in human prefrontal cortex and hippocampus shows regional specificity. J.
Neurosci. Res. 86: 785-796, 2008.

9. Lim, J.; Hao, T.; Shaw, C.; Patel, A. J.; Szabo, G.; Rual, J.-F.;
Fisk, C. J.; Li, N.; Smolyar, A.; Hill, D. E.; Barabasi, A.-L.; Vidal,
M.; Zoghbi, H. Y.: A protein-protein interaction network for human
inherited ataxias and disorders of Purkinje cell degeneration. Cell 125:
801-814, 2006.

10. Lu, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Ku, L.; Wang, H.; Ahmadian, A.; Feng, Y.:
The quakingviable mutation affects qkI mRNA expression specifically
in myelin-producing cells of the nervous system. Nucleic Acids Res. 31:
4646-4624, 2003.

11. Noveroske, J. K.; Hardy, R.; Dapper, J. D.; Vogel, H.; Justice,
M. J.: A new ENU-induced allele of mouse quaking causes severe CNS
dysmyelination. Mammalian Genome 16: 672-682, 2005.

12. Noveroske, J. K.; Lai, L.; Gaussin, V.; Northrop, J. L.; Nakamura,
H.; Hirschi, K. K.; Justice, M. J.: Quaking is essential for blood
vessel development. Genesis 32: 218-230, 2002.

13. Radomska, K. J.; Halvardson, J.; Reinius, B.; Carlstrom, E. L.;
Emilsson, L.; Feuk, L.; Jazin, E.: RNA-binding protein QKI regulates
Glial fibrillary acidic protein expression in human astrocytes. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 22: 1373-1382, 2013.

14. Wilson, G. R.; Wang, H. X.; Egan, G. F.; Robinson, P. J.; Delatycki,
M. B.; O'Bryan, M. K.; Lockhart, P. J.: Deletion of the Parkin co-regulated
gene causes defects in ependymal ciliary motility and hydrocephalus
in the quaking(viable) mutant mouse. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 1593-1602,
2010.

15. Wu, J. I.; Reed, R. B.; Grabowski, P. J.; Artzt, K.: Function
of quaking in myelination: regulation of alternative splicing. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 4233-4238, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/5/2013
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/21/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/28/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 2/24/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/24/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/15/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/1/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/19/2005

EDITED mgross: 09/05/2013
mgross: 9/5/2013
carol: 11/21/2011
terry: 11/21/2011
wwang: 7/14/2011
ckniffin: 6/28/2011
mgross: 2/24/2009
terry: 2/24/2009
mgross: 1/15/2009
wwang: 6/26/2006
ckniffin: 6/1/2006
mgross: 9/19/2005

