300654	TITLE *300654 FATTY ACID AMIDE HYDROLASE 2; FAAH2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Fatty acid amide hydrolases, such as FAAH1 (FAAH; 602935) and FAAH2,
hydrolyze primary fatty acid amide substrates (e.g., oleamide) and may
play a role in fatty acid catabolism (summary by Wei et al., 2006).

CLONING

By activity-based protein profiling in breast cancer and ovarian cancer
cell lines, Wei et al. (2006) cloned FAAH2. The deduced 532-amino acid
FAAH2 protein contains a predicted N-terminal transmembrane domain, an
amidase signature sequence containing the ser-ser-lys catalytic triad,
and shares approximately 20% amino acid identity with FAAH1. FAAH2 was
detected in the membrane fraction of transfected cancer cells, and
protein protection assays showed that FAAH2 is luminally oriented in the
membrane, unlike the cytoplasmic orientation of FAAH1. RT-PCR analysis
detected FAAH2 expression in human heart, kidney, liver, lung, and
prostate. Homologs of FAAH2 were identified in primates, marsupial, and
frog, but not in mouse or rat.

GENE FUNCTION

Wei et al. (2006) showed that mammalian cells expressing FAAH2 displayed
high oleamide hydrolase activity. FAAH2 displayed activity over a wide
range of endogenous fatty acid amide substrates and highest activity
with N-oleoyl ethanolamine (C18:1 N-acylethanolamine). Known inhibitors
of FAAH1 also inhibited FAAH2 activity.

MAPPING

Wei et al., 2006 noted that the FAAH2 gene maps to chromosome Xp11.

REFERENCE 1. Wei, B. Q.; Mikkelsen, T. S.; McKinney, M. K.; Lander, E. S.; Cravatt,
B. F.: A second fatty acid amide hydrolase with variable distribution
among placental mammals. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 36569-36578, 2006.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 7/11/2007

EDITED alopez: 01/13/2011
terry: 1/4/2011
wwang: 7/11/2007

610123	TITLE *610123 5-@HYDROXYTRYPTAMINE RECEPTOR 3, SUBUNIT E; HTR3E
;;SEROTONIN 5-HT-3E RECEPTOR
DESCRIPTION For background information on the serotonin (5-HT) receptor gene family,
see 182131.

CLONING

The serotonin receptor 5-HT3 is an oligomeric complex composed of 5
subunits. Using BLAST analysis with a consensus sequence derived from
HTR3A (182139) and HTR3B (604654), Niesler et al. (2003) identified and
subsequently cloned 2 novel homologous genes, HTR3D and HTR3E. The HTR3E
gene encodes a predicted protein of 471 amino acids including a 16-amino
acid signal sequence, 4 transmembrane domains, and several potential
glycosylation and phosphorylation sites. Sequence comparisons showed
that HTR3C, HTR3D, and HTR3E share amino acid sequence identities of
64.8 to 74.3%; multiple sequence alignments suggested that HTR3C
(610121), HTR3D (610122), and HTR3E share a common evolutionary history,
whereas HTR3A and HTR3B are evolutionarily more distant. RT-PCR analysis
showed HTR3E expression only in adult colon and intestine.

Karnovsky et al. (2003) identified HTR3E and showed using RT-PCR that 2
alternative first exons are used, encoding predicted proteins of either
456 or 471 amino acids. HTR3E contains 6 proline residues necessary for
normal 5-HT3 receptor function. RT-PCR showed very strong expression in
small intestine and weak expression in spinal cord and retina. HTR3E is
also expressed in the human colorectal adenocarcinoma cell lines SW480
and differentiated Caco-2. Southern blot analyses of zooblots showed
HTR3E hybridization to human, dog, cow, pig, rabbit, and chicken genomic
DNA, but not to mouse or rat genomic DNA.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in situ hybridization, Kapeller et al. (2008) observed
colocalization of HTR3E with microRNA-510 (MIR510; 610123) in
enterocytes of colonic mucosa and in myenteric plexus. They identified
an MIR510-binding site in the 3-prime UTR of the HTR3E gene. Following
transfection of Colo320 cells, MIR510 downregulated expression of a
reporter gene that included the HTR3E 3-prime UTR in a dose-dependent
manner. Quantitative real-time PCR showed that MIR510 binding did not
affect the stability of HTR3E mRNA, suggesting that MIR510 repressed
HTR3E expression at the translational level.

GENE STRUCTURE

Karnovsky et al. (2003) reported that the HTR3E gene contains 9 exons
spanning at least 7.7 kb. They also found an additional alternative
first exon that includes exon 2 and 112 nucleotides between exons 1 and
2.

MAPPING

Niesler et al. (2003) mapped the HTR3E gene to chromosome 3q27 by FISH.
PCR and hybridization analysis showed that HTR3E, HTR3C, and HTR3D form
a cluster and map within a 100-kb region.

REFERENCE 1. Kapeller, J.; Houghton, L. A.; Monnikes, H.; Walstab, J.; Moller,
D.; Bonisch, H.; Burwinkel, B.; Autschbach, F.; Funke, B.; Lasitschka,
F.; Gassler, N.; Fischer, C.; and 10 others: First evidence for
an association of a functional variant in the microRNA-510 target
site of the serotonin receptor-type 3E gene with diarrhea predominant
irritable bowel syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 2967-2977, 2008.

2. Karnovsky, A. M.; Gotow, L. F.; McKinley, D. D.; Piechan, J. L.;
Ruble, C. L.; Mills, C. J.; Schellin, K. A. B.; Slightom, J. L.; Fitzgerald,
L. R.; Benjamin, C. W.; Roberds, S. L.: A cluster of novel serotonin
receptor 3-like genes on human chromosome 3. Gene 319: 137-148,
2003.

3. Niesler, B.; Frank, B.; Kapeller, J.; Rappold, G. A.: Cloning,
physical mapping and expression analysis of the human 5-HT(3) serotonin
receptor-like genes HTR3C, HTR3D and HTR3E. Gene 310: 101-111, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/23/2011

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 5/16/2006

EDITED mgross: 12/09/2011
terry: 11/23/2011
alopez: 5/16/2006

602516	TITLE *602516 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 4; RGS4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) proteins have been shown to
accelerate the GTPase activities of G protein alpha-subunits, thus
driving G proteins into their inactive GDP-bound forms. See 602189 for
further background information.

CLONING

By searching for homologs of the yeast SST2 gene product, which
regulates G protein signaling, Druey et al. (1996) cloned RGS4 cDNAs
from rat and human brain cDNA libraries. The human RGS4 cDNA encodes a
predicted 205-amino acid protein that is 97% identical to rat Rgs4.
Northern blot analysis detected a single human RGS4 transcript that was
expressed exclusively in brain. RGS4 partially complemented a yeast SST2
mutation, but it required the G protein alpha-subunit to function. Druey
et al. (1996) suggested that RGS4, and presumably other RGSs, negatively
regulate signaling upstream or at the level of the heterotrimeric G
protein.

Koelle and Horvitz (1996) cloned a human RGS4 cDNA by searching for
homologs of the C. elegans egl-10 gene (see 602517).

Using RT-PCR, Ruiz de Azua et al. (2010) found that Rgs4 was highly
expressed in the MIN6 murine insulinoma cell line and in mouse
pancreatic islets.

GENE FUNCTION

Ruiz de Azua et al. (2010) showed that knockdown of Rgs4 in MIN6 cells
caused a concentration-dependent increase in intracellular calcium,
increased basal insulin release, and enhanced glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion. Rgs4 coimmunoprecipitated with M3 muscarinic receptor (M3R,
or CHRM3; 118494) from transfected COS-7 cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sierra et al. (2002) determined that RGS4 contains 5 exons and spans 5.5
kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Sierra et al. (2002) mapped the RGS4 gene
to chromosome 1q23.3. They mapped the mouse Rgs4 gene to chromosome 1 by
interspecific backcross mapping.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the RGS4
gene and schizophrenia, see 181500.

ANIMAL MODEL

Ruiz de Azua et al. (2010) found that Rgs4 deficiency in mice enhanced
M3r-mediated insulin secretion. Pancreatic beta cell-specific Rgs4
knockout did not alter basal glucose levels, but it increased plasma
insulin levels and increased insulin release after administration of a
muscarinic agonist. Ruiz de Azua et al. (2010) concluded that RGS4 acts
as a negative regulator of M3R signaling in pancreatic beta cells.

REFERENCE 1. Druey, K. M.; Blumer, K. J.; Kang, V. H.; Kehrl, J. H.: Inhibition
of G-protein-mediated MAP kinase activation by a new mammalian gene
family. Nature 379: 742-746, 1996.

2. Koelle, M. R.; Horvitz, H. R.: EGL-10 regulates G protein signaling
in the C. elegans nervous system and shares a conserved domain with
many mammalian proteins. Cell 84: 115-125, 1996.

3. Ruiz de Azua, I.; Scarselli, M.; Rosemond, E.; Gautam, D.; Jou,
W.; Gavrilova, O.; Ebert, P. J.; Levitt, P.; Wess, J.: RGS4 is a
negative regulator of insulin release from pancreatic beta-cells in
vitro and in vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 107: 7999-8004, 2010.

4. Sierra, D. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Householder, D.; Grishin, N. V.;
Yu, K.; Ukidwe, P.; Barker, S. A.; He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Otero, G.;
Brown, G.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Wilkie, T. M.: Evolution
of the regulators of G-protein signaling multigene family in mouse
and human. Genomics 79: 177-185, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/12/2011
John Logan Black, III - updated: 5/15/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 4/6/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 8/9/2005
John Logan Black, III - updated: 4/4/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/12/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 4/14/1998

EDITED mgross: 05/17/2011
mgross: 5/17/2011
terry: 5/12/2011
carol: 2/1/2010
carol: 5/15/2006
carol: 5/12/2006
terry: 4/6/2006
carol: 8/16/2005
terry: 8/9/2005
terry: 7/11/2005
mgross: 4/4/2005
mgross: 9/12/2002
psherman: 4/15/1998
psherman: 4/14/1998

182269	TITLE 182269 SMALL PROLINE-RICH PROTEIN 2C; SPRR2C
DESCRIPTION See 182267. SPRR2C appears to be a pseudogene due to a C-to-T transition
in the sixth codon resulting in a TAG stop codon (Gibbs et al., 1993).

REFERENCE 1. Gibbs, S.; Fijneman, R.; Wiegant, J.; Geurts van Kessel, A.; van
de Putte, P.; Backendorf, C.: Molecular characterization and evolution
of the SPRR family of keratinocyte differentiation markers encoding
small proline-rich proteins. Genomics 16: 630-637, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/18/1993

EDITED terry: 7/11/1994
carol: 6/18/1993

608524	TITLE *608524 INHIBITOR OF GROWTH 4; ING4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to ING1 (601566) and ING2 (604215),
followed by PCR and RACE of a placenta cDNA library, Shiseki et al.
(2003) cloned ING4, which they called p29ING4. The deduced 249-amino
acid protein contains a C-terminal plant homeodomain finger motif and 2
nuclear localization signals.

GENE FUNCTION

Shiseki et al. (2003) showed that overexpression of ING4 or ING5
(608525) in cancer cell lines diminished colony-forming efficiency,
decreased cell population in S phase, and induced p53 (191170)-dependent
apoptosis. Both ING4 and ING5 activated the WAF1 (116899) promoter and
induced WAF1 expression. ING4 and ING5 physically interacted with p300
(602700), a member of histone acetyltransferase complexes, and with p53
in vivo, and they enhanced acetylation of p53 at lys382.

Garkavtsev et al. (2004) reported that ING4 is involved in regulating
brain tumor growth and angiogenesis. Expression of ING4 was
significantly reduced in gliomas as compared with normal human brain
tissue, and the extent of reduction correlated with the progression from
lower to higher grades of tumors. In mice, xenografts of human
glioblastoma U87MG, which has decreased expression of ING4, grew
significantly faster and had higher vascular volume fractions than
control tumors. Garkavtsev et al. (2004) showed that ING4 physically
interacts with the p65 (RelA; 164014) subunit of NFKB (see 164011), and
that ING4 regulates brain tumor angiogenesis through transcriptional
repression of NFKB-responsive genes, including IL8 (146930), IL6
(147620), COX2 (600262), and colony-stimulating factor 3 (138970). The
authors concluded that ING4 has an important role in brain tumor
pathogenesis.

A key component of the hypoxic response pathway is hypoxia-inducible
factor (HIF; see 603348). Ozer et al. (2005) found that ING4 suppressed
expression of HIF target genes under hypoxic conditions. ING4 directly
interacted with HPH2 (EGLN1; 606425), a mediator of HIF stability,
providing a mechanism for ING4 recruitment to HIF. ING4 association with
HPH2 did not affect hydroxylase activity or HIF stability , but it
suppressed HIF activity in a chromatin-dependent manner. Ozer et al.
(2005) hypothesized that ING4, recruited to HIF by HPH2 under hypoxic
conditions, acts as an adaptor protein to recruit transcriptional
repressors to mediate HIF activity.

By immunopurifying HeLa cell proteins that associated with ING4, Doyon
et al. (2006) found that ING4 was a component of a histone
acetyltransferase complex containing HBO1 (MYST2; 609880). Using an in
vitro acetyltransferase assay, they showed that the complex could
acetylate lysines of the histone H4 (see 602822) N-terminal domain.

Zhang et al. (2010) presented evidence that microRNA-650 (MIR650;
615379) plays a role in human gastric cancer tumorigenicity. Using
bioinformatic analysis, they identified a potential binding site for
MIR650 in the 3-prime UTR of ING4. Transfection of MIR650 precursor into
HEK293 cells reduced protein content of ING4, whereas inhibition of
MIR650 increased expression of a reporter gene containing the ING4
3-prime UTR.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the ING4
gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP WI-19753).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kim et al. (2004) devised a screen for genes that suppress the loss of
contact inhibition elicited by overexpression of the protooncogene MYCN
(164840). The initial application of this screen detected 9 distinctive
suppressors within a representative human cDNA library. One of these
genes was ING4, a potential tumor suppressor gene. Ectopic expression of
ING4 suppressed the loss of contact inhibition elicited by either MYCN
or MYC (190080) but had no direct effect on cellular proliferation.
Pursuing the possibility that ING4 might be a tumor suppressor gene, Kim
et al. (2004) found inactivating mutations in ING4 transcripts from
various human cancer cell lines. In addition, they used comparative
genomic hybridization to detect deletion of the ING4 locus in 10 to 20%
of human breast cancer cell lines and primary breast tumors. Ectopic
expression of ING4 attenuated the growth of the human breast tumor cell
line T47D in soft agar. Kim et al. (2004) concluded that ING4 is a
strong candidate as a tumor suppressor gene.

REFERENCE 1. Doyon, Y.; Cayrou, C.; Ullah, M.; Landry, A.-J.; Cote, V.; Selleck,
W.; Lane, W. S.; Tan, S.; Yang, X.-J.; Cote, J.: ING tumor suppressor
proteins are critical regulators of chromatin acetylation required
for genome expression and perpetuation. Molec. Cell 21: 51-64, 2006.

2. Garkavtsev, I.; Kozin, S. V.; Chernova, O.; Xu, L.; Winker, F.;
Brown, E.; Barnett, G. H.; Jain, R. K.: The candidate tumour suppressor
protein ING4 regulates brain tumour growth and angiogenesis. Nature 428:
328-332, 2004.

3. Kim, S.; Chin, K.; Gray, J. W.; Bishop, J. M.: A screen for genes
that suppress loss of contact inhibition: identification of ING4 as
a candidate tumor suppressor gene in human cancer. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 101: 16251-16256, 2004.

4. Ozer, A.; Wu, L. C.; Bruick, R. K.: The candidate tumor suppressor
ING4 represses activation of the hypoxia inducible factor (HIF). Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 7481-7486, 2005.

5. Shiseki, M.; Nagashima, M.; Pedeux, R. M.; Kitahama-Shiseki, M.;
Miura, K.; Okamura, S.; Onogi, H.; Higashimoto, Y.; Appella, E.; Yokota,
J.; Harris, C. C.: p29ING4 and p28ING5 bind to p53 and p300, and
enhance p53 activity. Cancer Res. 62: 2373-2378, 2003.

6. Zhang, X.; Zhu, W.; Zhang, J.; Huo, S.; Zhou, L.; Gu, Z.; Zhang,
M.: MicroRNA-650 targets ING4 to promote gastric cancer tumorigenicity. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 395: 275-280, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/26/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/9/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/23/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/30/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/7/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/12/2004

EDITED mgross: 08/27/2013
mgross: 8/26/2013
mgross: 2/8/2013
mgross: 2/28/2006
mgross: 2/27/2006
terry: 2/9/2006
mgross: 7/13/2005
terry: 6/23/2005
tkritzer: 1/26/2005
terry: 12/30/2004
alopez: 4/8/2004
terry: 4/7/2004
mgross: 3/15/2004
joanna: 3/12/2004

126452	TITLE *126452 DOPAMINE RECEPTOR D4; DRD4
;;D4DR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DRD4 is a G protein-coupled receptor that belongs to the dopamine
D2-like receptor family. Functionally, the D2-like receptors are
characterized by their ability to inhibit adenylyl cyclase (Oldenhof et
al., 1998).

CLONING

Van Tol et al. (1991) cloned the gene for the human dopamine D4
receptor. DRD4 encodes a putative 387-amino acid protein with 7
transmembrane domains, a potential N-linked glycosylation site, and
several putative phosphorylation sites. It shares 28%, 41%, and 39%
sequence homology with DRD1 (126449), DRD2 (126450) and DRD3 (126451),
respectively. Northern blot analysis revealed a 5.3-kb DRD4 mRNA in a
human neuroblastoma cell line and in several regions of the brain in rat
and monkey. Relatively high levels of DRD4 were observed in the monkey
frontal cortex, midbrain area, amygdala, and medulla, with lower levels
in the basal ganglia.

Van Tol et al. (1992) identified 3 cDNA clones of DRD4 that differed
from each other in a 48-bp sequence in the putative third cytoplasmic
loop. The sequence occurred as a direct repeat sequence (D4.2), as a
4-fold repeat (D4.4), or as a 7-fold repeat (D4.7). The deduced amino
acid sequences of the clones implied the existence of 3 different forms
of the receptor with a variably sized putative third cytoplasmic loop.
In a note added in proof, Van Tol et al. (1992) stated that they had
identified 2 additional allelic forms of the DRD4 gene corresponding in
size with a 3- and 5-fold repeat sequence.

GENE STRUCTURE

Van Tol et al. (1991) determined that the DRD4 gene contains 4 exons.
Van Tol et al. (1992) identified a 48-bp sequence in exon 3 of the DRD4
gene that contained a variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR).

MAPPING

Using a probe for DRD4 that recognizes an informative HincII
polymorphism, Gelernter et al. (1991, 1992) studied linkage to DNA
markers in non-CEPH families. Linkage was found to tyrosine hydroxylase
(191290; lod = 7.4 with male and female recombination = 0.10 and 0.17,
respectively) and with the Harvey RAS oncogene (190020; lod = 11.1 with
male and female recombination = 0.02 and 0.0, respectively). Their
observations suggested that DRD4 is close to and probably distal to
HRAS, placing DRD4 in 11p15.5. By further linkage studies, Petronis et
al. (1993) determined that the DRD4 gene lies proximal to HRAS.

GENE FUNCTION

Van Tol et al. (1991) found that the affinity of DRD4 for the
antipsychotic clozapine was much higher than that of DRD2 and DRD3.

Van Tol et al. (1992) showed that expression of 3 variant forms of DRD4
showed different properties for the long form (D4.7) as contrasted with
the shorter forms with respect to clozapine and spiperone binding. They
suggested that variations in the 48-bp sequence in the third cytoplasmic
loop of DRD4 among humans may underlie individual differences in
susceptibility to neuropsychiatric disease and in responsiveness to
antipsychotic medication.

In vitro studies suggested that the receptor encoded by the DRD4 7R
allele may be subsensitive to endogenous dopamine compared with the
receptor encoded by the 2R allele (Asghari et al., 1995), although this
was apparently not due merely to the length of the third intracellular
loop (Jovanovic et al., 1999).

Seeman et al. (1993) found a selective 6-fold increase in the density of
dopamine D4 receptors in the brains of patients with schizophrenia (see
181500).

Oldenhof et al. (1998) showed that a proline-rich region within the
putative third cytoplasmic loop interacts in vitro with a variety of SH3
domain-containing proteins, including GRB2 (108355) and NCK (see
600508). Deletion of all putative SH3-binding domains in this region
resulted in constitutive internalization of the receptor.

Gong et al. (2003) described a large-scale screen to create an atlas of
CNS gene expression at the cellular level and to provide a library of
verified bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) vectors and transgenic
mouse lines that offer experimental access to CNS regions, cell classes,
and pathways. They observed that Drd4 BAC transgenic lines expressed at
high levels in the prefronal cortex. At high magnification, these cells
were identified as layer 5 pyramidal cells.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay, Rondou et al. (2008) showed that KLHL12
(614522) interacted with D4.2, D4.4, and D4.7, but not with other
dopamine receptors tested and not with mouse D4, which lacks the
polymorphic repeat in IC3. Domain mapping showed that the IC3 domain of
D4 and the kelch repeat domain of KLHL12 were required for the
interaction. Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that KLHL12
interacted with the CUL3 (603136) E3 ubiquitin ligase complex via direct
interaction with CUL3 and, possibly, ROC1 (RBX1; 603814). Binding of
KLHL12 to both D4 and CUL3 resulted in recruitment of D4 to the
ubiquitin ligase complex, leading to D4 ubiquitination. Knockdown of
KLHL12 in KLHL12-overexpressing HEK293 cells abolished association of D4
with CUL3, and knockdown of CUL3 decreased ubiquitination of D4.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Most of the diversity in the DRD4 gene is the result of length and
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) variation in the 48-bp VNTR in exon
3, which encodes the third intracellular loop of the receptor. Variant
alleles containing 2 (2R) to 11 (11R) repeats are found, with the
resulting proteins having 32 to 176 amino acids at this position. The
frequency of these alleles varies widely. The 7R allele, for example,
has an exceedingly low incidence in Asian populations yet a high
frequency in the Americas (Chang et al., 1996).

Chang et al. (1996) presented data that urged caution in the
interpretation of DRD4 association studies in mixed populations. They
focused particularly on the expressed polymorphism in exon 3, which may
have functional relevance. The polymorphism (an imperfect 48-bp tandem
repeat coding for 16 amino acids; alleles had been reported with 2 to 10
repeats) was found to be universal, suggesting that it is ancient and
arose before the global dispersion of modern humans. They described
diversity of allele frequencies for this expressed polymorphism among
different populations and emphasized the importance of population
considerations in the design and interpretation of association studies
using the polymorphism.

- Association with Attention Deficit-Hyperactivity Disorder

Attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD; 143465) is a
developmental syndrome expressed along 3 domains: inattention,
hyperactive-impulsive, and combined type. Several investigations
examined the role of the DRD4 exon 3 repeat polymorphism in ADHD. The
long 7R allele of this receptor was shown in population-based and
family-based studies (LaHoste et al., 1996; Rowe et al., 1998; Smalley
et al., 1998; Swanson et al., 1998), but not in 1 case-control design
(Castellanos et al., 1998), to be a risk factor for this disorder. In a
family-based study of the DRD4 exon 3 repeat region and ADHD, Eisenberg
et al. (2000) failed to observe preferential transmission of the DRD4 7R
allele, and there was no preferential transmission observed when
genotypes were compared. The reasons for the conflict with earlier
findings were discussed.

Swanson et al. (2000) evaluated ADHD subgroups defined by the presence
or absence of the 7R allele of the DRD4 gene, using neuropsychologic
tests with reaction time measures designed to probe attention networks
with neuroanatomic foci in D4-rich brain regions. Despite the same
severity of symptoms on parent and teacher ratings for the ADHD
subgroups, the average reaction times of the 7R-present subgroup showed
normal speed and variability of response, whereas the average reaction
times of the 7R-absent subgroup showed the expected abnormalities (slow
and variable responses). This was opposite the primary prediction of the
study. The 7R-present subgroup seemed to be free of some of the
neuropsychologic abnormalities thought to characterize ADHD. These
findings led Swanson et al. (2000) to reconceptualize the possible
association of the DRD4 gene with ADHD.

Ding et al. (2002) stated that 8 separate replications of the initial
observation of an increased frequency of the DRD4 7R alleles in ADHD
probands had been reported.

Langley et al. (2004) found that in children with ADHD, possession of
the DRD4 7R allele appeared to be associated with an inaccurate,
impulsive response style on neuropsychologic tasks that was not
explained by ADHD symptom severity. Children with the 7R allele had
significantly more incorrect responses and shorter mean reaction times
for incorrect responses, and displayed higher activity levels as
measured by actigraphy compared to children without the allele.

Lynn et al. (2005) investigated the link between ADHD in adults,
novelty-seeking temperament, and the DRD4 7R allele in 171 parents from
96 families with ADHD-affected sib pairs. Of the parents, 56 (33%) had a
lifetime history of ADHD with 28 (50%) continuing to meet DSM-IV
criteria. Novelty seeking and the 7R variant were associated with a
lifetime history of ADHD; however, novelty seeking and ADHD did not
appear to be due to the DRD4 7R variant.

Leung et al. (2005) noted that the DRD4 7R allele associated with ADHD
varies in prevalence across ethnic groups and is very low in Asian
populations. Leung et al. (2005) studied 32 Han Chinese children with a
confirmed ADHD diagnosis and normal IQ who were methylphenidate
responders and observed no evidence of 7R alleles. Instead, they found a
2-repeat (2R) allele in this clinical sample (33%) compared to
ethnically matched controls (20%) (p = 0.015). This 1.65-fold increase
in the 2R allele was close to the increase of the 7R allele observed in
ADHD children of European ancestry. Leung et al. (2005) postulated that
an increased frequency of any non-4R allele may define the association
of the DRD4 gene with ADHD.

Manor et al. (2002) noted that polymorphisms (specifically the short
exon 3 allele) of the DRD4 gene have been associated with ADHD in some
studies, but that 2 Israeli studies (Eisenberg et al., 2000; Kotler et
al., 2000) failed to observe this association. Manor et al. (2002)
studied 178 Israeli triads using the transmission disequilibrium test
(TDT). Preferential transmission of the short allele was associated with
ADHD. Study of the same triad using the Test of Variables of Attention
(TOVA) revealed that individuals with the short allele of the exon 3
repeat performed significantly worse on the TOVA measured both by errors
of commission and response time variable. A dosage effect was observed
in that increasing repeat size was accompanied by a reduced number of
errors of commission and a significant difference was observed between
the 2 versus 7 repeats.

McCracken et al. (2000) found significant preferential transmission of a
240-bp (long) allele of the DRD4 120-bp repeat promoter polymorphism
(126452.0003) in 371 children with ADHD, and further analyses
strengthened the evidence for linkage.

D'Souza et al. (2004) studied the function of the 120-bp tandem
duplication sequence of the DRD4 gene by using transient transfection in
4 human cell lines and luciferase reporter gene assays. The longer
allele had lower transcriptional activity than the shorter allele. Lower
levels of transcriptional activity observed with the long form of the
polymorphism could result in lower levels of expression of the DRD4 gene
which may affect levels of dopamine in the synaptic cleft. The authors
noted that their findings supported the hypothesis of McCracken et al.
(2000) that the 240-bp allele was a risk factor for ADHD.

The Attention Network Test (ANT) uses the flanker task to measure
conflict and shows strong activation in the dorsal anterior cingulate on
neuroimaging studies. Because the cingulate is modulated by the ventral
tegmental dopamine system, Fossella et al. (2002) tested 200 normal
individuals with the ANT and genotyped them for 4 genes related to the
dopamine system. Polymorphisms in the DRD4 and MAOA (309850) genes were
significantly related to the efficiency of conflict. To examine whether
this genetic variation contributed to differences in brain activation
within the anterior cingulate cortex, Fan et al. (2003) genotyped 16
subjects for the DRD4 and MAOA genes who had been scanned during the
ANT. In each of the 2 genes they identified a polymorphism in which
persons with the allele associated with better behavioral performance
showed significantly more activation in the anterior cingulate while
performing the ANT than those with the allele associated with worse
performance. The 2 polymorphisms were the -1217G insertion/deletion in
the upstream region of DRD4 and a 3-repeat allele of the 30-bp repeat in
the MAOA promoter (309850.0002). The results demonstrated how genetic
differences among individuals can be linked to individual differences in
neuromodulators and in the efficiency of the operation of an appropriate
attentional network.

- Association with Novelty-Seeking Personality Trait and Risk-Taking
Behavior

Human personality traits that can be reliably measured by rating scales
show a considerable heritable component. One such instrument is the
tridimensional personality questionnaire (TPQ), which was designed by
Cloninger et al. (1993) to measure 4 distinct domains of
temperament--novelty seeking (601696), harm avoidance, reward
dependence, and persistence--that are hypothesized to be based on
distinct neurochemical and genetic substrates. Cloninger et al. (1993)
proposed that individual variations in the novelty seeking trait are
mediated by genetic variability in dopamine transmission. Individuals
who score higher than average on the TPQ novelty seeking scale are
characterized as impulsive, exploratory, fickle, excitable,
quick-tempered, and extravagant, whereas those who score lower than
average tend to be reflective, rigid, loyal, stoic, slow-tempered, and
frugal.

In a study of 20 abstinent alcohol-dependent men, a significant
correlation was found between apomorphine-induced growth hormone release
and the 'novelty seeking' score of the individual (Wiesbeck et al.,
1995). This supported Cloninger's hypothesis by giving neuroendocrine
evidence that this personality dimension is related to dopaminergic
activity, albeit in the tuberoinfundibular dopaminergic system which is
not directly associated with human personality traits.

Benjamin et al. (1996) pointed out that the possibility of a causal
relationship between DRD4 and novelty seeking is supported by studies
showing that the number of exon 3 repeats can affect the binding of
ligands to the receptor; that DRD4 is expressed in limbic areas involved
in cognition and emotion; that dopamine mediates exploratory behavior in
experimental animals; that the rewarding effects of amphetamines and
cocaine are related to dopamine release; and that novelty seeking is low
in dopamine-deficient patients with Parkinson disease (168600).

In a group of 124 unrelated Israeli subjects, Ebstein et al. (1996)
showed that higher than average novelty seeking test scores were
significantly associated with a particular exonic polymorphism, the
7-repeat (7R) allele, in exon 3 of the DRD4 gene. The association of
high novelty seeking and the 7R allele was independent of ethnicity,
sex, or age of the subjects. These results were corroborated by Benjamin
et al. (1996) who investigated the relationship between DRD4 exon 3
sequence variants and personality test scores in a population of 315
mostly male sibs, other family members and individuals in the United
States. The association between long alleles of exon 3 and personality
traits related to novelty seeking was confirmed. Moreover, family
studies showed that this association is the result of genetic
transmission rather than a population stratification.

In 2 groups of Finnish subjects (193 psychiatrically screened normal
controls and 138 alcoholic offenders), Malhotra et al. (1996) determined
DRD4 genotypes and assessed novelty seeking with the TPQ. In the control
individuals, they found no significant association between novelty
seeking and the 7R allele despite similar allele frequencies and the use
of the same personality measure as employed by Ebstein et al. (1996).
The group of alcoholic offenders had significantly higher novelty
seeking than control individuals; however, Malhotra et al. (1996) could
not replicate the previous association in this group. They suggested
that DRD4 may require reevaluation as a candidate gene for personality
variation.

Gelernter et al. (1997) also could not replicate an association between
the 7-repeat allele (called DRD4*7R by them) and higher novelty seeking.
They raised the possibility that this might represent a false negative.
They concluded that if genetic variation at the DRD4 locus exerts an
effect on human novelty seeking, it is likely to be through a mutation
in linkage disequilibrium with the exon 3 VNTR rather than as a direct
consequence of that variation.

Using the Japanese version of the Temperament and Character Inventory
questionnaire, Tomitaka et al. (1999) studied the association between
novelty seeking and the long alleles of the polymorphic exon 3 repeat
sequence of DRD4 in 69 medical students and residents (average age of
25) of the Tokyo Women's Medical College Hospital. Although the long
alleles of DRD4 were low in the Japanese population, the authors found
an association between the long alleles and novelty seeking when
compared to short alleles (p less than 0.014). The scores for
exploratory excitability and extravagance were significantly higher in
subjects with the long allele.

Kluger et al. (2002) conducted a metaanalysis of 20 studies, with a
total of 3,907 individuals, involving the association between DRD4
polymorphisms and novelty seeking. Thirteen reports suggested that the
presence of longer alleles is associated with higher novelty seeking
scores and 7 reports suggested the opposite. Kluger et al. (2002)
concluded that, on average, there was no association between DRD4
polymorphism and novelty seeking (average d = 0.06, 95% CI +/- 0.09).
They found that there was true heterogeneity among the studies (i.e.,
unknown moderators exist), but that the strength of the association
between DRD4 polymorphisms and novelty seeking in the presence of any
moderator was likely to be weak. Kluger et al. (2002) also reported that
a search for moderators had not yielded any reliable explanation for the
variability among studies.

De Luca et al. (2001) presented evidence indicating that there is a
genetic influence of the DRD4 gene on human temperament at birth and at
1 month of age. On assessment at 5 months of age, differences were not
detected, denoting a strong environmental effect. De Luca et al. (2003)
presented a follow-up, assessing the previously genotyped children at 3
years of age. By this age, both positive and negative emotions were more
clearly differentiated than at 1 and 5 months of age. Moreover,
exploratory behavior was more explicit at 3 years, given the increased
competence of 3-year-old infants to explore the environment actively and
intentionally. The study corroborated only in part previous results of a
link between the DRD4 gene and human temperament. None of the
extraversion and/or exploratory behavior measures was related to the
long form of the DRD4 exon 3 repeat polymorphism, an unusually variable
repeat region in the third cytoplasmic loop of the receptor that varies
between 2 and 10 repeats in most populations and changes the length of
the receptor protein (Asghari et al., 1995).

Savitz and Ramesar (2004) reviewed the evidence that alleles of the SERT
(182138) and DRD4 genes impact variations in personality. They argued
for the existence of a genuine effect: a gene-personality relationship
rendered periodically latent through genetic epistasis, gene-environment
interactions, variation in genetic background, and the presence of other
variables.

In a study of financial risk taking of 94 young men assessed through a
game with real monetary payoffs, Dreber et al. (2009) found an
association between the 7R allele polymorphism in the DRD4 gene and
increased financial risk-taking (see 601696). The DRD4 polymorphism was
estimated to account for about 20% of the heritable variation in
financial risk-taking. The findings were consistent with evolutionary
selection for this allele for behaviors associated with migration and
male competition, which entail an element of risk.

Among 65 individuals, Kuhnen and Chiao (2009) found that carriers of the
DRD4 7R allele took 25% more risk in a financial investment risk game
compared to individuals lacking the 7R allele. The authors speculated
that financial risk-taking may result from evolutionarily adaptive
mechanisms that encourage novelty-seeking behavior.

- Association with Alcoholism

The ALDH2*2 allele of the aldehyde dehydrogenase-2 gene (100650.0001) is
considered to be a genetic deterrent for alcoholism; however, Muramatsu
et al. (1996) found that 80 of 655 Japanese alcoholics had the mutant
allele. They postulated that these alcoholics had some other factor
which overcame the adverse effects of acetaldehydemia and that this
factor might reside in the 'reward system' of the brain in which
dopamine plays a crucial role. Therefore, Muramatsu et al. (1996)
studied variation at the DRD4 locus and found in the alcoholics a higher
frequency of a 5-repeat (5R) allele of the DRD4 receptor 48-bp repeat
polymorphism in alcoholics with ALDH2*2 than in 100 other alcoholics and
144 controls. They found that alcoholics with the 5R allele also abused
other drugs more often.

- Association with Mood Disorders

Using the Cockrane Review Manager, Lopez Leon et al. (2005) conducted a
metaanalysis to reevaluate the role of DRD4 polymorphisms in mood
disorders. In 917 patients with unipolar or bipolar affective disorder
(see 125480) and 1,164 control individuals from 12 samples, an
association was found between the DRD4 2R allele and unipolar depression
(p less than 0.001) and unipolar and bipolar depression combined (p less
than 0.001).

EVOLUTION

The 48-bp tandem repeat polymorphism in the coding region of DRD4 shows
4 repeats (4R) as the most common allele, with rarer variants containing
2 to 11 repeats (Chang et al., 1996). Ding et al. (2002) showed by DNA
resequencing and haplotyping of 600 DRD4 alleles, representing a
worldwide population sample, that the origin of the 2R to 6R alleles can
be explained by simple 1-step recombination/mutation events. In
contrast, the 7R allele is not simply related to the other common
alleles, differing by greater than 6 recombinations/mutations. Strong
linkage disequilibrium was found between the 7R allele and surrounding
DRD4 polymorphisms, suggesting that this allele is at least 5- to
10-fold 'younger' than the common 4R allele. Based on an observed bias
toward nonsynonymous amino acid changes, the unusual DNA sequence
organization, and the strong linkage disequilibrium surrounding the DRD4
7R allele, Ding et al. (2002) proposed that this allele originated as a
rare mutational event that nevertheless increased to high frequency in
human populations by positive selection. Ding et al. (2002) estimated
that the 7R allele may have originated approximately 40,000 years ago
and that the appearance of radical new technology and/or the development
of agriculture could be related to the increase in DRD4 7R allele
frequency. They suggested that individuals with personality traits such
as novelty seeking may have driven the expansion. In discussing why the
7R allele is associated with ADHD, Ding et al. (2002) speculated that
the very traits that may be selected for in individuals possessing this
allele may predispose to behaviors that are deemed inappropriate in the
typical classroom setting.

To estimate directly haplotype diversity, Wang et al. (2004) resequenced
the entire DRD4 locus from 103 individuals homozygous for 2R, 4R, or 7R
variants of the 48-bp tandem repeat DNA from individuals of African,
European, Asian, North and South American, and Pacific Island ancestry
were used. 4R/4R homozygotes exhibited little linkage disequilibrium
(LD) over the region examined, with more polymorphisms observed in DNA
samples from African individuals. In contrast, the evidence for strong
LD surrounding the 7R allele is dramatic, with all 7R/7R individuals
(including those from Africa) exhibiting the same alleles at most
polymorphic sites. By intraallelic comparison at 18 high heterozygosity
sites spanning the locus, they estimated that the 7R allele arose before
the upper Paleolithic era (approximately 40,000-50,000 years ago).
Further, the pattern of recombination at these polymorphic sites is the
pattern expected for selection acting at the 7R VNTR itself, rather than
at an adjacent site. Wang et al. (2004) proposed a model for selection
at the DRD4 locus consistent with these observed LD patterns and with
the known biochemical and physiologic differences between receptor
variants.

Harpending and Cochran (2002) commented extensively on the mechanisms by
which the increased frequency of the 7R allele might have occurred.

ANIMAL MODEL

By homologous recombination, Rubinstein et al. (1997) created mice
lacking the dopamine D4 receptor. Mutant mice were less active than
wildtype controls in open field tests in both novel and familiar
environments. However, mutant mice outperformed wildtype mice on the
rotarod and displayed locomotor supersensitivity to ethanol, cocaine,
and methamphetamine. Biochemical analyses indicated that dopamine
synthesis and its conversion to DOPAC were elevated in the dorsal
striatum of mutant mice. Rubinstein et al. (1997) proposed that DRD4
modulates normal, coordinated, and drug-stimulated motor behaviors as
well as the activity of nigrostriatal dopamine neurons.

Using an in silico search, followed by PCR, Hejjas et al. (2007)
identified VNTR polymorphisms in genes of the dopaminergic system in 4
dog breeds and European gray wolves. Polymorphisms of the DRD4, DBH
(609312), and DAT (SLC6A3; 126455) genes were associated with attention
deficit, but not activity-impulsivity, in Belgian Tervuerens, a breed
that had almost all genetic variants identified.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
AUTONOMIC NERVOUS SYSTEM DYSFUNCTION
DRD4, 13-BP DEL, NT235

Nothen et al. (1994) identified a null mutation in the first exon of the
DRD4 gene, predicted to result in a truncated nonfunctional protein. The
mutation consisted of a 13-bp deletion of bases 235 to 247. The deletion
was situated in the second transmembrane domain and included asp80,
which is highly conserved within the family of catecholaminergic
receptors and is postulated to act as counterion in catecholamine
binding. The deletion altered the reading frame from amino acid 79 and
generated a new stop codon 20 amino acids downstream. The mRNA was
predicted to code for an aberrant protein of 98 amino acids with a
calculated molecular mass of 11 kD. The frequency of the deletion was
found to be about 2% in the general population. The distribution of the
mutation was found to be similar in healthy controls and patients
suffering from psychiatric illnesses which included schizophrenia,
bipolar affective disorder, and Tourette syndrome, indicating that
heterozygosity for this mutation is not causally related to major
psychiatric diseases. However, Nothen et al. (1994) identified an adult
male who was homozygous for the mutation. He showed no symptoms of major
psychiatric illness but displayed somatic ailments including acoustic
neurinoma, obesity, and some disturbances of the autonomic nervous
system. Some of these symptoms might be related to the absence of
functional DRD4 protein. The homozygous male was 50 years old at the
time of study, had 4 children, and worked successfully as an engineer.
Autonomic hyperactivity included severe dermatographism and excessive
sweating, which occurred mainly during moderately warm temperatures and
in social gatherings. The proband denied feelings of anxiety in these
situations. Frequent fluctuations of pulse rate leading to intermittent
sinus tachycardia and necessitating medication with a beta blocker had
been recognized over the previous 10 years. A left-sided acoustic
neurinoma (family history negative) had been operated on when he was 38;
a second operation for recurrence was required 6 years later. He had
been obese since adolescence. A reduced body temperature had repeatedly
been measured (35.4 degrees C rectally).

.0002
DOPAMINE RECEPTOR D4 POLYMORPHISM
DRD4, VAL194GLY

Seeman et al. (1994) found a val194-to-gly variant of the dopamine D4
receptor in 12.5% of 186 Afro-Caribbeans but in none of 147 Caucasians
tested. This variant, present in heterozygotes, was not associated with
schizophrenia or any obvious dopamine-based disease. The amino acid
substitution resulted from a T-to-G transversion. The amino acid
replacement is 1 amino acid away from a serine that is critical for
dopamine binding in the dopamine D2 receptor (126450). Liu et al. (1996)
reported that the val194-to-gly DRD4 variant is 2 orders of magnitude
less sensitive to dopamine, clozapine, and olanzapine than the normal
receptor. The variant receptor was insensitive to guanine nucleotide,
indicating the absence of a high-affinity state or functional state.
They described a 15-year-old individual homozygous for this variant, who
also had sickle cell disease. The patient had low weight and no axillary
or pubic hair.

.0003
ATTENTION DEFICIT-HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
DRD4, 120-BP INS

Seaman et al. (1999) identified a polymorphic tandem duplication of 120
bp located 1.2 kb upstream of the initiation codon of the DRD4 gene.
McCracken et al. (2000) analyzed the DRD4 120-bp repeat promoter
polymorphism in 371 children with attention deficit-hyperactivity
disorder (143465) using the transmission disequilibrium test. The
results showed a significant preferential transmission of the 240-bp
(long) allele with ADHD, and further analyses strengthened the evidence
for linkage.

Kustanovich et al. (2004) genotyped a large multiplex sample of
ADHD-affected children and their parents for polymorphisms in genes
reported to be associated with ADHD, including DRD4, and analyzed the
results using the transmission disequilibrium test. The DRD4 120-bp
insertion/deletion promoter polymorphism displayed a significant bias
for transmission of the insertion. The DRD4 240-bp allele showed a
significant association with ADHD in this sample, with an estimated
genotype relative risk of 1.37.

In 2 independent population samples from North and South India, Juyal et
al. (2006) found a significant association between Parkinson disease
(PD; 168600) and the 120-bp duplication polymorphism (dup). Allelic
analysis of 147 PD patients and 130 controls in the South Indian group
yielded an odds ratio for disease development of 0.67 for the dup allele
and 1.48 for the wildtype allele.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Cloninger et al. (1996); Cook et al. (1995); Swanson et al. (2000)
REFERENCE 1. Asghari, V.; Sanyal, S.; Buchwaldt, S.; Paterson, A.; Jovanovic,
V.; Van Tol, H. H.: Modulation of intracellular cyclic AMP levels
by different human dopamine D4 receptor variants. J. Neurochem. 65:
1157-1165, 1995.

2. Benjamin, J.; Li, L.; Patterson, C.; Greenberg, B. D.; Murphy,
D. L.; Hamer, D. H.: Population and familial association between
the D4 dopamine receptor gene and measures of novelty seeking. Nature
Genet. 12: 81-84, 1996.

3. Castellanos, F. X.; Lau, E.; Tayebi, N.; Lee, P.; Long, R. E.;
Giedd, J. N.; Sharp, W.; Marsh, W. L.; Walter, J. M.; Hamburger, S.
D.; Ginns, E. I.; Rapoport, J. L.; Sidransky, E.: Lack of an association
between a dopamine-4 receptor polymorphism and attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder: genetic and brain morphometric analyses. Molec. Psychiat. 3:
431-434, 1998.

4. Chang, F.-M.; Kidd, J. R.; Livak, K. J.; Pakstis, A. J.; Kidd,
K. K.: The world-wide distribution of allele frequencies at the human
dopamine D4 receptor locus. Hum. Genet. 98: 91-101, 1996.

5. Cloninger, C. R.; Adolfsson, R.; Svrakic, N. M.: Mapping genes
for human personality. Nature Genet. 12: 3-4, 1996.

6. Cloninger, C. R.; Svrakic, D. M.; Przybeck, T. R.: A psychobiological
model of temperament and character. Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 50: 975-990,
1993.

7. Cook, E. H.; Stein, M. A.; Krasowski, M. D.; Cox, N. J.; Olkon,
D. M.; Kieffer, J. E.; Leventhal, B. L.: Association of attention-deficit
disorder and the dopamine transporter gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56:
993-998, 1995.

8. D'Souza, U. M.; Russ, C.; Tahir, E.; Mill, J.; McGuffin, P.; Asherson,
P. J.; Craig, I. W.: Functional effects of a tandem duplication polymorphism
in the 5-prime flanking region of the DRD4 gene. Biol. Psychiat. 56:
691-697, 2004.

9. De Luca, A.; Rizzardi, M.; Buccino, A.; Alessandroni, R.; Salvioli,
G. P.; Filograsso, N.; Novelli, G.; Dallapiccola, B.: Association
of dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4) exon III repeat polymorphism with temperament
in 3-year-old infants. Neurogenetics 4: 207-212, 2003.

10. De Luca, A.; Rizzardi, M.; Torrente, I.; Alessandroni, R.; Salvioli,
G. P.; Filograsso, N.; Dallapiccola, B.; Novelli, G.: Dopamine D4
receptor (DRD4) polymorphism and adaptability trait during infancy:
a longitudinal study in 1- to 5-month-old neonates. Neurogenetics 3:
79-82, 2001.

11. Ding, Y.-C.; Chi, H.-C.; Grady, D. L.; Morishima, A.; Kidd, J.
R.; Kidd, K. K.; Flodman, P.; Spence, M. A.; Schuck, S.; Swanson,
J. M.; Zhang, Y.-P.; Moyzis, R. K.: Evidence of positive selection
acting at the human dopamine receptor D4 gene locus. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 99: 309-314, 2002.

12. Dreber, A.; Apicella, C. L.; Eisenberg, D. T. A.; Garcia, J. R.;
Zamore, R. S.; Lum, J. K.; Campbell, B.: The 7R polymorphism in the
dopamine receptor D4 gene (DRD4) is associated with financial risk
taking in men. Evol. Hum. Behav. 30: 85-92, 2009.

13. Ebstein, R. P.; Novick, O.; Umansky, R.; Pirelli, B.; Osher, Y.;
Blaine, D.; Bennett, E. R.; Nemanov, L.; Katz, M.; Belmaker, R. H.
: Dopamine D4 receptor exon III polymorphism associated with the human
personality trait of novelty seeking. Nature Genet. 12: 78-80, 1996.

14. Eisenberg, J.; Zohar, A.; Mei-Tal, G.; Steinberg, A.; Tartakovsky,
E.; Gritsenko, I.; Nemanov, L.; Ebstein, R. P.: A haplotype relative
risk study of the dopamine D4 receptor (DRD4) exon III repeat polymorphism
and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Am. J. Med.
Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 96B: 258-261, 2000.

15. Fan, J.; Fossella, J.; Sommer, T.; Wu, Y.; Posner, M. I.: Mapping
the genetic variation of executive attention onto brain activity. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 7406-7411, 2003.

16. Fossella, J.; Sommer, T.; Fan, J.; Wu, Y.; Swanson, J. M.; Pfaff,
D. W.; Posner, M. I.: Assessing the molecular genetics of attention
networks. BMC Neurosci. 3: 14, 2002. Note: Electronic Article.

17. Gelernter, J.; Kennedy, J. L.; Van Tol, H. H. M.; Civelli, O.;
Kidd, K. K.: The D4 dopamine receptor (DRD4) maps to distal 11p close
to HRAS. Genomics 13: 208-210, 1992.

18. Gelernter, J.; Kennedy, J. L.; Van Tol, H. H. M.; Niznik, H. B.;
Civelli, O.; Kidd, K. K.: The D4 dopamine receptor (DRD4) maps to
distal 11p close to HRAS. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58:
1960, 1991.

19. Gelernter, J.; Kranzler, H.; Coccaro, E.; Siever, L.; New, A.;
Mulgrew, C. L.: D4 dopamine-receptor (DRD4) alleles and novelty seeking
in substance-dependent, personality-disorder, and control subjects. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 61: 1144-1152, 1997.

20. Gong, S.; Zheng, C.; Doughty, M. L.; Losos, K.; Didkovsky, N.;
Schambra, U. B.; Nowak, N. J.; Joyner, A.; Leblanc, G.; Hatten, M.
E.; Heintz, N.: A gene expression atlas of the central nervous system
based on bacterial artificial chromosomes. Nature 425: 917-925,
2003.

21. Harpending, H.; Cochran, G.: In our genes. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 99: 10-12, 2002.

22. Hejjas, K.; Vas, J.; Kubinyi, E.; Sasvari-Szekely, M.; Miklosi,
A.; Ronai, Z.: Novel repeat polymorphisms of the dopaminergic neurotransmitter
genes among dogs and wolves. Mammalian Genome 18: 871-879, 2007.

23. Jovanovic, V.; Guan, H.-C.; Van Tol, H. H. M.: Comparative pharmacological
and functional analysis of the human dopamine D4.2 and D4.10 receptor
variants. Pharmacogenetics 9: 561-568, 1999.

24. Juyal, R. C.; Das, M.; Punia, S.; Behari, M.; Nainwal, G.; Singh,
S.; Swaminath, P. V.; Govindappa, S. T.; Jayaram, S.; Muthane, U.
B.; Thelma, B. K.: Genetic susceptibility to Parkinson's disease
among South and North Indians: I. Role of polymorphisms in dopamine
receptor and transporter genes and association of DRD4 120-bp duplication
marker. Neurogenetics 7: 223-229, 2006. Note: Erratum: Neurogenetics
9: 73 only, 2008.

25. Kluger, A. N.; Siegfried, Z.; Ebstein, R. P.: A meta-analysis
of the association between DRD4 polymorphism and novelty seeking. Molec.
Psychiat. 7: 712-717, 2002.

26. Kotler, M.; Manor, I.; Sever, Y.; Eisenberg, J.; Cohen, H.; Ebstein,
R. P.; Tyano, S.: Failure to replicate an excess of the long dopamine
D4 exon III repeat polymorphism in ADHD in a family-based study. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 96: 278-281, 2000.

27. Kuhnen, C. M.; Chiao, J. Y.: Genetic determinants of financial
risk taking. PLoS One 4: e4362, 2009. Note: Electronic Article.

28. Kustanovich, V.; Ishii, J.; Crawford, L.; Yang, M.; McGough, J.
J.; McCracken, J. T.; Smalley, S. L.; Nelson, S. F.: Transmission
disequilibrium testing of dopamine-related candidate gene polymorphisms
in ADHD: confirmation of association of ADHD with DRD4 and DRD5. Molec.
Psychiat. 9: 711-717, 2004.

29. LaHoste, G. J.; Swanson, J. M.; Wigal, S. B.; Glabe, C.; Wigal,
T.; King, N.; Kennedy, J. L.: Dopamine D4 receptor gene polymorphism
is associated with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Molec.
Psychiat. 1: 121-124, 1996.

30. Langley, K.; Marshall, L.; van den Bree, M.; Thomas, H.; Owen,
M.; O'Donovan, M.; Thapar, A.: Association of the dopamine D4 receptor
gene 7-repeat allele with neuropsychological test performance of children
with ADHD. Am. J. Psychiat. 161: 133-138, 2004.

31. Leung, P. W. L.; Lee, C. C.; Hung, S. F.; Ho, T. P.; Tang, C.
P.; Kwong, S. L.; Leung, S. Y.; Yuen, S. T.; Lieh-Mak, F.; Oosterlaan,
J.; Grady, D.; Harxhi, A.; Ding, Y. C.; Chi, H. C.; Flodman, P.; Schuck,
S.; Spence, M. A.; Moyzis, R.; Swanson, J.: Dopamine receptor D4
(DRD4) gene in Han Chinese children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity
disorder (ADHD): increased prevalence of the 2-repeat allele. Am.
J. Med. Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 133B: 54-56, 2005.

32. Liu, I. S. C.; Seeman, P.; Sanyal, S.; Ulpian, C.; Rodgers-Johnson,
P. E. B.; Serjeant, G. R.; Van Tol, H. H. M.: Dopamine D4 receptor
variant in Africans, D4(valine194glycine), is insensitive to dopamine
and clozapine: report of a homozygous individual. Am. J. Med. Genet. 61:
277-282, 1996.

33. Lopez Leon, S.; Croes, E. A.; Sayed-Tabatabaei, F. A.; Claes,
S.; Van Broeckhoven, C.; van Duijn, C. M.: The dopamine D4 receptor
gene 48-base-pair-repeat polymorphism and mood disorders: a meta-analysis. Biol.
Psychiat. 57: 999-1003, 2005.

34. Lynn, D. E.; Lubke, G.; Yang, M.; McCracken, J. T.; McGough, J.
J.; Ishii, J.; Loo, S. K.; Nelson, S. F.; Smalley, S. L.: Temperament
and character profiles and the dopamine D4 receptor gene in ADHD. Am.
J. Psychiat. 162: 906-914, 2005.

35. Malhotra, A. K.; Virkkunen, M.; Rooney, W.; Eggert, M.; Linnoila,
M.; Goldman, D.: The association between the dopamine D(4) receptor
(D4DR) 16 amino acid repeat polymorphism and novelty seeking. Molec.
Psychiat. 1: 388-391, 1996.

36. Manor, I.; Tyano, S.; Eisenberg, J.; Bachner-Melman, R.; Kotler,
M.; Ebstein, R. P.: The short DRD4 repeats confer risk to attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder in a family-based design and impair
performance on a continuous performance test (TOVA). Molec. Psychiat. 7:
790-794, 2002.

37. McCracken, J. T.; Smalley, S. L.; McGough, J. J.; Crawford, L.;
Del'Homme, M.; Cantor, R. M.; Liu, A.; Nelson, S. F.: Evidence for
linkage of a tandem duplication polymorphism upstream of the dopamine
D4 receptor gene (DRD4) with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD). Molec. Psychiat. 5: 531-536, 2000.

38. Muramatsu, T.; Higuchi, S.; Murayama, M.; Matsushita, S.; Hayashida,
M.: Association between alcoholism and the dopamine D4 receptor gene. J.
Med. Genet. 33: 113-115, 1996.

39. Nothen, M. M.; Cichon, S.; Hemmer, S.; Hebebrand, J.; Remschmidt,
H.; Lehmkuhl, G.; Poustka, F.; Schmidt, M.; Catalano, M.; Fimmers,
R.; Korner, J.; Rietschel, M.; Propping, P.: Human dopamine D4 receptor
gene: frequent occurrence of a null allele and observation of homozygosity. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 3: 2207-2212, 1994.

40. Oldenhof, J.; Vickery, R.; Anafi, M.; Oak, J.; Ray, A.; Schoots,
O.; Pawson, T.; von Zastrow, M.; Van Tol, H. H. M.: SH3-binding domains
in the dopamine D4 receptor. Biochemistry 37: 15726-15636, 1998.

41. Petronis, A.; Van Tol, H. H. M.; Lichter, J. B.; Livak, K. J.;
Kennedy, J. L.: The D4 dopamine receptor gene maps on 11p proximal
to HRAS. Genomics 18: 161-163, 1993.

42. Rondou, P.; Haegeman, G.; Vanhoenacker, P.; Van Craenenbroeck,
K.: BTB protein KLHL12 targets the dopamine D4 receptor for ubiquitination
by a Cul3-based E3 ligase. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 11083-11096, 2008.

43. Rowe, D. C.; Stever, C.; Giedinghagen, L. N.; Gard, J. M. C.;
Cleveland, H. H.; Terris, S. T.; Mohr, J. H.; Sherman, S.; Abramowitz,
A.; Waldman, I. D.: Dopamine DRD4 receptor polymorphism and attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder. Molec. Psychiat. 3: 419-426, 1998.

44. Rubinstein, M.; Phillips, T. J.; Bunzow, J. R.; Falzone, T. L.;
Dziewczapolski, G.; Zhang, G.; Fang, Y.; Larson, J. L.; McDougall,
J. A.; Chester, J. A.; Saez, C.; Pugsley, T. A.; Gershanik, O.; Low,
M. J.; Grandy, D. K.: Mice lacking dopamine D4 receptors are supersensitive
to ethanol, cocaine, and methamphetamine. Cell 90: 991-1001, 1997.

45. Savitz, J. B.; Ramesar, R. S.: Genetic variants implicated in
personality: a review of the more promising candidates. Am. J. Med.
Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 131B: 20-32, 2004.

46. Seaman, M. I.; Fisher, J. B.; Chang, F.-M.; Kidd, K. K.: Tandem
duplication polymorphism upstream of the dopamine D4 receptor gene
(DRD4). Am. J. Med. Genet. 88: 705-709, 1999.

47. Seeman, P.; Guan, H.-C.; Van Tol, H. H. M.: Dopamine D4 receptors
elevated in schizophrenia. Nature 365: 441-445, 1993.

48. Seeman, P.; Ulpian, C.; Chouinard, G.; Van Tol, H. H. M.; Dwosh,
H.; Lieberman, J. A.; Siminovitch, K.; Liu, I. S. C.; Waye, J.; Voruganti,
P.; Hudson, C.; Serjeant, G. R.; Masibay, A. S.; Seeman, M. V.: Dopamine
D4 receptor variant, D4GLYCINE194, in Africans, but not in Caucasians:
no association with schizophrenia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 54: 384-390,
1994.

49. Smalley, S. L.; Bailey, J. N.; Palmer, C. G.; Cantwell, D. P.;
McGough, J. J.; Del'Homme, M. A.; Asarnow, J. R.; Woodward, J. A.;
Ramsey, C.; Nelson, S. F.: Evidence that the dopamine D4 receptor
is a susceptibility gene in attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Molec.
Psychiat. 3: 427-430, 1998. Note: Erratum: Molec. Psychiat. 4: 100
only, 1999.

50. Swanson, J.; Oosterlaan, J.; Murias, M.; Schuck, S.; Flodman,
P.; Spence, M. A.; Wasdell, M.; Ding, Y.; Chi, H.-C.; Smith, M.; Mann,
M.; Carlson, C.; Kennedy, J. L.; Sergeant, J. A.; Leung, P.; Zhang,
Y.-P.; Sadeh, A.; Chen, C.; Whalen, C. K.; Babb, K. A.; Moyzis, R.;
Posner, M. I.: Attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder children
with a 7-repeat allele of the dopamine receptor D4 gene have extreme
behavior but normal performance on critical neuropsychological tests
of attention. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 4754-4759, 2000.

51. Swanson, J. M.; Flodman, P.; Kennedy, J.; Spence, M. A.; Moyzis,
R.; Schuck, S.; Murias, M.; Moriarity, J.; Barr, C.; Smith, M.; Posner,
M.: Dopamine genes and ADHD. Neurosci. Behav. Rev. 24: 21-25, 2000.

52. Swanson, J. M.; Sunohara, G. A.; Kennedy, J. L.; Regino, R.; Fineberg,
E.; Wigal, T.; Lerner, M.; Williams, L.; LaHoste, G. J.; Wigal, S.
: Association of the dopamine receptor D4 (DRD4) gene with a refined
phenotype of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): a family-based
approach. Molec. Psychiat. 3: 38-41, 1998.

53. Tomitaka, M.; Tomitaka, S.; Otuka, Y.; Kim, K.; Matuki, H.; Sakamoto,
K.; Tanaka, A.: Association between novelty seeking and dopamine
receptor D4 (DRD4) exon III polymorphism in Japanese subjects. Am.
J. Med. Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 88B: 469-471, 1999.

54. Van Tol, H. H. M.; Bunzow, J. R.; Guan, H. C.; Sunahara, R. K.;
Seeman, P.; Niznik, H. B.; Civelli, O.: Cloning of the gene for a
human dopamine D4 receptor with high affinity for the antipsychotic
clozapine. Nature 350: 610-614, 1991.

55. Van Tol, H. H. M.; Wu, C. M.; Guan, H.-C.; Ohara, K.; Bunzow,
J. R.; Civelli, O.; Kennedy, J.; Seeman, P.; Niznik, H. B.; Jovanovic,
V.: Multiple dopamine D4 receptor variants in the human population. Nature 358:
149-152, 1992.

56. Wang, E.; Ding, Y.-C.; Flodman, P.; Kidd, J. R.; Kidd, K. K.;
Grady, D. L.; Ryder, O. A.; Spence, M. A.; Swanson, J. M.; Moyzis,
R. K.: The genetic architecture of selection at the human dopamine
receptor D4 (DRD4) gene locus. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74: 931-944, 2004.

57. Wiesbeck, G. A.; Mauerer, C.; Thome, J.; Jakob, F.; Boening, J.
: Neuroendocrine support for a relationship between 'novelty seeking'
and dopaminergic function in alcohol-dependent men. Psychoneuroendocrinology 20:
755-761, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/8/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/4/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/24/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/7/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 4/21/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 4/10/2006
John Logan Black, III - updated: 8/8/2005
John Logan Black, III - updated: 7/22/2005
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/5/2005
John Logan Black, III - updated: 3/2/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/10/2005
John Logan Black, III - updated: 7/8/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/27/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/9/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/13/2003
John Logan Black, III - updated: 8/19/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/14/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/31/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/11/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/15/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 2/10/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/20/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/26/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/4/1997
Orest Hurko - updated: 3/7/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/30/1991

EDITED carol: 04/18/2013
carol: 4/2/2013
terry: 10/2/2012
mgross: 3/12/2012
mgross: 3/8/2012
terry: 3/8/2012
ckniffin: 11/16/2010
wwang: 5/7/2010
ckniffin: 5/4/2010
wwang: 12/11/2009
terry: 6/4/2009
wwang: 4/16/2009
mgross: 10/24/2008
terry: 8/15/2008
carol: 7/25/2008
carol: 7/24/2008
wwang: 12/7/2006
ckniffin: 12/7/2006
carol: 4/25/2006
terry: 4/21/2006
carol: 4/10/2006
carol: 4/4/2006
wwang: 11/7/2005
carol: 10/4/2005
wwang: 8/10/2005
terry: 8/8/2005
carol: 7/25/2005
terry: 7/22/2005
terry: 7/11/2005
mgross: 4/5/2005
tkritzer: 3/2/2005
mgross: 1/10/2005
tkritzer: 7/8/2004
alopez: 4/28/2004
terry: 4/27/2004
alopez: 1/9/2004
tkritzer: 10/24/2003
tkritzer: 10/14/2003
tkritzer: 10/13/2003
ckniffin: 9/29/2003
carol: 8/20/2003
terry: 8/19/2003
tkritzer: 7/25/2003
tkritzer: 7/23/2003
terry: 7/14/2003
carol: 2/18/2002
mcapotos: 2/7/2002
terry: 1/31/2002
cwells: 5/30/2001
mcapotos: 5/23/2001
terry: 5/11/2001
mcapotos: 2/16/2001
carol: 8/4/2000
mcapotos: 7/26/2000
mcapotos: 7/25/2000
mcapotos: 7/19/2000
mcapotos: 7/17/2000
mcapotos: 7/11/2000
terry: 6/15/2000
carol: 2/14/2000
yemi: 2/11/2000
yemi: 2/10/2000
alopez: 1/21/1998
alopez: 1/20/1998
terry: 12/3/1997
terry: 11/26/1997
alopez: 8/6/1997
alopez: 7/29/1997
alopez: 7/7/1997
jenny: 4/4/1997
terry: 3/31/1997
mark: 3/5/1997
mark: 6/19/1996
mark: 6/12/1996
terry: 6/6/1996
terry: 4/15/1996
terry: 3/27/1996
mark: 3/7/1996
terry: 2/23/1996
mark: 2/15/1996
terry: 2/9/1996
terry: 2/6/1996
mark: 1/4/1996
terry: 1/3/1996
terry: 12/29/1995
carol: 1/9/1995
pfoster: 12/29/1994
carol: 10/15/1993
carol: 2/15/1993
carol: 8/17/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

602118	TITLE *602118 CHROMODOMAIN HELICASE DNA-BINDING PROTEIN 1; CHD1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The murine gene 'chromodomain helicase DNA-binding protein-1' (Chd1) was
isolated by Delmas et al. (1993) in a search for proteins that bind a
DNA promoter element. The presence of chromo (chromatin organization
modifier) domains and an SNF2-related helicase/ATPase domain led to
speculation that this gene regulates chromatin structure or gene
transcription. Woodage et al. (1997) cloned and characterized 3 novel
human genes related to the mouse Chd1 gene, referred to as CHD1, CHD2
(602119), and CHD3 (602120). Human CHD1 encodes a 1,709-amino acid
predicted protein that shares 95.5% identity with the 1,711-amino acid
mouse Chd1 polypeptide. Examination of sequence databases revealed
several more related genes, most of which were not known to be similar
to mouse Chd1, yielding a total of 12 highly conserved CHD genes from
organisms as diverse as yeast and mammals. The major region of sequence
variation is in the C-terminal part of the proteins, a region with
DNA-binding activity in mouse Chd1. Targeted deletion of the sole CHD
gene of Saccharomyces cerevisiae demonstrated that deletion strains were
less sensitive than wildtype to the cytotoxic effect of 6-azauracil.
This finding suggested to Woodage et al. (1997) that enhanced
transcriptional arrest at RNA polymerase II pause sites due to
6-azauracil-induced nucleotide pool depletion was reduced in the
deletion strain and that yeast CHD1 inhibited transcription. This
observation, along with the known roles of other proteins with chromo or
SNF2-related helicase/ATPase domains, suggested that alteration of gene
expression by CHD genes might occur by modification of chromatin
structure, which could alter access of the transcriptional apparatus to
its chromosomal DNA template.

Yeast SAGA (Spt-Ada-Gcn5 acetyltransferase) and SLIK (SAGA-like) are 2
highly homologous and conserved multisubunit HAT complexes, which
preferentially acetylate histones H3 (see 602810) and H2B (see 609904)
and deubiquitinate histone H2B. Pray-Grant et al. (2005) identified the
chromatin remodeling protein Chd1 as a component of SAGA and SLIK. Their
findings indicated that 1 of the 2 chromodomains of Chd1 specifically
interacts with the methylated lys4 mark on histone H3 that is associated
with transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the SLIK complex showed
enhanced acetylation of a methylated substrate, and this activity was
dependent upon a functional methyl-binding chromodomain, both in vitro
and in vivo.

GENE FUNCTION

Flanagan et al. (2005) described the structure of the tandem arrangement
of human CHD1 chromodomains and its interactions with histone tails.
Unlike HP1 (see 604478) and Polycomb (see 602770) proteins that use
single chromodomains to bind to their respective methylated histone H3
tails, the 2 chromodomains of CHD1 cooperate to interact with 1
methylated H3 tail. Flanagan et al. (2005) showed that the human CHD1
double chromodomains target the lysine-4-methylated histone H3 tail
(H3K4me), a hallmark of active chromatin. Methylammonium recognition
involves 2 aromatic residues, not the 3-residue aromatic cage used by
chromodomains of HP1 and Polycomb proteins. Furthermore, unique inserts
within chromodomain 1 of CHD1 block the expected site of H3 tail binding
seen in HP1 and Polycomb, instead directing H3 binding to a groove at
the interchromodomain junction.

Gaspar-Maia et al. (2009) demonstrated that the chromatin remodeling
factor Chd1 is required to maintain the open chromatin of pluripotent
mouse embryonic stem cells. Chd1 is a euchromatin protein that
associates with the promoters of active genes, and downregulation of
Chd1 leads to accumulation of heterochromatin. Chd1-deficient embryonic
stem cells are no longer pluripotent, because they are incapable of
giving rise to primitive endoderm and have a high propensity for neural
differentiation. Furthermore, Chd1 is required for efficient
reprogramming of fibroblasts to the pluripotent stem cell state.
Gaspar-Maia et al. (2009) concluded that Chd1 is essential for open
chromatin and pluripotency of embryonic stem cells, and for somatic cell
reprogramming to the pluripotent state.

MAPPING

Woodage et al. (1997) mapped the human CHD1 gene to 5q15-q21 by PCR
screening of the CEPH YAC library.

REFERENCE 1. Delmas, V.; Stokes, D. G.; Perry, R. P.: A mammalian DNA-binding
protein that contains a chromodomain and an SNF2/SWI2-like helicase
domain. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 2414-2418, 1993.

2. Flanagan, J. F.; Mi, L.-Z.; Chruszcz, M.; Cymborowski, M.; Clines,
K. L.; Kim, Y.; Minor, W.; Rastinejad, F.; Khorasanizadeh, S.: Double
chromodomains cooperate to recognize the methylated histone H3 tail. Nature 438:
1181-1185, 2005.

3. Gaspar-Maia, A.; Alajem, A.; Polesso, F.; Sridharan, R.; Mason,
M. J.; Heidersbach, A.; Ramalho-Santos, J.; McManus, M. T.; Plath,
K.; Meshorer, E.; Ramalho-Santos, M.: Chd1 regulates open chromatin
and pluripotency of embryonic stem cells. Nature 460: 863-868, 2009.

4. Pray-Grant, M. G.; Daniel, J. A.; Schieltz, D.; Yates, J. R., III;
Grant, P. A.: Chd1 chromodomain links histone H3 methylation with
SAGA- and SLIK-dependent acetylation. Nature 433: 434-438, 2005.

5. Woodage, T.; Basrai, M. A.; Baxevanis, A. D.; Hieter, P.; Collins,
F. S.: Characterization of the CHD family of proteins. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 94: 11472-11477, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/4/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/12/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/23/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/30/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/13/1997

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
mgross: 1/29/2013
alopez: 9/8/2009
terry: 9/4/2009
alopez: 1/18/2006
terry: 1/12/2006
alopez: 2/23/2005
terry: 2/23/2005
mcapotos: 5/8/2001
mcapotos: 5/4/2001
terry: 4/30/2001
psherman: 11/6/1998
dholmes: 11/18/1997
mark: 11/13/1997

604384	TITLE *604384 ATPase, Ca(2+)-TRANSPORTING, TYPE 2C, MEMBER 1; ATP2C1
;;ATPase, Ca(2+)-SEQUESTERING;;
SECRETORY PATHWAY Ca(2+) ATPase 1; SPCA1;;
PMR1, RAT, HOMOLOG OF;;
KIAA1347
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ATP2C1 is a Golgi-localized ATPase that mediates Golgi uptake of
cytosolic Ca(2+) and Mg(2+) and has a role in regulating Ca(2+) and
Mn(2+) cellular content (Ton et al., 2002).

CLONING

Hu et al. (2000) identified an EST corresponding to the ATP2C1 gene
within a 1.3-Mb YAC/BAC contig spanning the region of chromosome
3q21-q24 deleted in a family with Hailey-Hailey disease (HHD; 169600).
This EST had been annotated as homologous to a yeast gene encoding a
calcium ATPase with a function predicted to be related to that of SERCA2
(ATP2A2; 108740). Hu et al. (2000) isolated the full-length cDNA
corresponding to the human EST. Similar to other Ca(2+) ATPase genes,
the ATP2C1 gene encodes 2 alternatively spliced transcripts, ATP2C1a and
ATP2C1b. These transcripts differed in their C termini (encoding amino
acids 877 to the end), but had the same expression patterns in all
tissues examined. ATP2C1a was predicted to encode 919 amino acids, and
ATP2C1b was predicted to encode 888 amino acids. The protein encoded by
ATP2C1 was highly homologous (97% identity) to rat Pmr1, which in turn
is homologous to the yeast calcium pump Pmr1, but less homologous to
other calcium pumps. Northern blot analysis detected a 4.4-kb ATP2C1
transcript in keratinocytes and in all 12 whole tissues examined.
Highest expression was in kidney and heart, and lowest expression was in
colon, thymus, and leukocytes. Patients with HHD are not known to have
extracutaneous manifestations of the disease. Hu et al. (2000) found no
differences in ATP2C1 mRNA levels between skin taken from the axilla and
skin from the buttock (sites particularly prone vs resistant to
blistering, respectively, in HHD patients) of one normal individual and
little change in ATP2C1 mRNA levels in normal human epidermal
keratinocytes cultured with glucocorticoid.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned ATP2C1 clone, which they designated
KIAA1347. The deduced 918-amino acid protein shares 97% identity with
its rat ortholog, a calcium-transporting ATPase. RT-PCR ELISA detected
variable ATP2C1 expression in all adult and fetal tissues examined, with
highest expression in ovary, followed by lung, testis, brain, liver, and
kidney. Within specific adult brain regions, highest expression was
detected in thalamus, followed by amygdala and substantia nigra.

Ton et al. (2002) showed that epitope-tagged human SPCA1 localized to
the Golgi compartment following expression in yeast and Chinese hamster
ovary cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hu et al. (2000) detected 27 exons in the ATP2C1 gene. Dobson-Stone et
al. (2002) detected 28 translated exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the ATP2C1
gene to chromosome 3. Hu et al. (2000) mapped the ATP2C1 gene to
chromosome 3q21-q24.

GENE FUNCTION

Pmr1, the yeast ortholog of SPCA1, is expressed in the Golgi compartment
and functions as a high-affinity Ca(2+)/Mn(2+) pump involved in Ca(2+)
and Mn(2+) secretion. Deletion of Pmr1 in yeast causes hypersensitivity
to Ca(2+) chelators and Mn(2+) toxicity, with defects in protein
glycosylation, processing, sorting, and endoplasmic reticulum
(ER)-related glycosylation. Ton et al. (2002) found that heterologous
expression of human SPCA1, but not SERCA-type Ca(2+)-transporting
ATPases, reduced Mn(2+) toxicity and complemented Ca(2+)-related
phenotypes in Pmr1-null yeast. Yeast Golgi vesicles expressing human
SPCA1 showed high-affinity Ca(2+) transport activity that was
inhibitable by Mn(2+), but not by thapsigargin, an inhibitor of
SERCA-type ATPases. Ton et al. (2002) proposed that SPCA1 plays a role
in maintaining Ca(2+) and Mn(2+) concentrations in Golgi and the
secretory pathway.

Using RNA interference with HeLa cells, Van Baelen et al. (2003) showed
that SPCA1 was completely responsible for thapsigargin-insensitive
Ca(2+) uptake into Golgi vesicles. Knockdown of SPCA1 did not alter
Ca(2+) handling in the ER and had only a small effect on baseline
histamine-induced Ca(2+) oscillations in whole cells.

Mukhopadhyay and Linstedt (2011) found that exposure of HeLa cells to
increased extracellular Mn(2+), but not Ca(2+), induced trafficking of
the Golgi phosphoprotein GPP130 (GOLIM4; 606805) from the Golgi to
multivesicular bodies and then to lysosomes, followed by GPP130
degradation. They showed that a gln747-to-ala (Q747A) point mutation in
SPCA1 increased Golgi uptake of cellular Mn(2+), leading to increased
GPP130 degradation and reduced Mn(2+) toxicity via secretion. In
contrast, SPCA1 containing either an asp350-to-ala (D350A) mutation,
which blocks autophosphorylation and transport of Mn(2+) and Ca(2+), or
a gly309-to-cys (G309C) mutation, which blocks transport of Mn(2+), but
not Ca(2+), reduced Golgi uptake of Mn(2+), resulting in reduced GPP130
degradation and increased Mn(2+) toxicity.

Kourtis et al. (2012) demonstrated that heat stroke triggers pervasive
necrotic cell death and neurodegeneration in C. elegans. Preconditioning
of animals at a mildly elevated temperature strongly protected from
heat-induced necrosis. The heat-shock transcription factor HSF1 (140580)
and the small heat-shock protein HSP-16.1 mediate cytoprotection by
preconditioning. HSP-16.1 localizes to the Golgi, where it functions
with the calcium- and magnesium-transporting ATPase PMR1 to maintain
calcium homeostasis under heat stroke. Preconditioning also suppresses
cell death inflicted by diverse insults, and protects mammalian neurons
from heat cytotoxicity. Kourtis et al. (2012) concluded that their
findings revealed an evolutionarily conserved mechanism that defends
against diverse necrotic stimuli. In mouse cortical neurons and striatal
cells, Kourtis et al. (2012) found that overexpression of crystallin
alpha-A (123580), which colocalizes with the Golgi marker
alpha-mannosidase-II (154582) and the PMR1 ATPase, was sufficient to
protect mammalian neurons from heat stroke-induced death, even in the
absence of preconditioning. Heat stroke caused massive necrotic death
and axonal degeneration in neurons expressing short hairpin RNAs against
Pmr1, even after preconditioning.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Hailey-Hailey disease (HHD; 169600) is an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by persistent blisters and erosions of the skin. By family
linkage studies, the HHD region was localized to 3q21-q24. Study of a
family carrying a deletion helped narrow the location. To screen HHD
patients for ATP2C1 mutations, Hu et al. (2000) identified intron sites
by comparison of genomic and cDNA sequences, designed primers flanking
the 27 identified exons, and assessed PCR products from patients and
controls by single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) or
conformation-sensitive gel electrophoresis (CSGE) analyses. Among 51
unrelated kindreds of European descent and 10 of Japanese descent, they
identified 21 abnormalities (16/51 and 5/10). Of the abnormal sequences,
6 predicted single amino acid substitutions, 2 predicted aberrant
splicing, and 13 predicted prematurely truncated products through
frameshifts or single-basepair substitution. A high frequency of the
last type of mutation supported a haploinsufficiency pathogenesis
consistent with the complete deletion of the gene in 1 kindred and
further suggested that calcium pumps of the PMR1 family function as
monomers. The mechanism by which mutant ATPC1 causes acantholysis is
unknown, but it may be through abnormally elevated cytoplasmic calcium
or abnormally low Golgi Ca(2+) levels. Elevated cytoplasmic calcium
might act by altering posttranslational modification of proteins or by
inducing changes in gene expression.

Sudbrak et al. (2000) identified 13 different mutations, including
nonsense, frameshift insertion and deletions, splice-site mutations, and
nonconservative missense mutations, in ATP2C1 in patients with
Hailey-Hailey disease. The identification of ATP2A2 as the gene
defective in Darier disease (124200) provided further evidence of the
critical role of Ca(2+) signaling in maintaining epidermal integrity.

Ikeda et al. (2001) reported ATP2C1 mutations in 11 Japanese patients
with Hailey-Hailey disease. Some affected individuals had unique
clinical features (generalization of Hailey-Hailey disease and
generalized skin eruption resembling keratotic papules in Darier
disease), but other affected individuals did not, suggesting the
presence of intrafamilial phenotypic variations. These findings
reinforced the conclusion that differences in clinical phenotypes in
Hailey-Hailey disease are probably related to factors other than the
type of causative mutation.

Chao et al. (2002) identified 7 different ATP2C1 mutations, 6 of them
novel, in 7 Taiwanese kindreds with Hailey-Hailey disease. They found 3
deletion mutations, 2 nonsense mutations, 1 missense mutation, and 1
splicing mutation.

Dobson-Stone et al. (2002) screened all 28 translated exons of ATP2C1 in
24 Hailey-Hailey disease families and 3 sporadic cases and identified 22
mutations (18 novel) in 25 probands. The novel mutations comprised 3
nonsense, 6 insertion/deletion, 3 splice site, and 6 missense mutations,
and were distributed throughout the ATP2C1 gene. They noted that 6 of
the mutations were found in multiple families in their study as well as
in the studies of Sudbrak et al. (2000) and Hu et al. (2000). Haplotype
analysis revealed that 2 of these were recurrent mutations. Comparison
between genotype and phenotype in 23 families failed to yield any clear
correlation between the nature of the mutation and clinical features of
Hailey-Hailey disease. The extensive inter- and intrafamilial phenotypic
variability suggested that modifying genes and/or environmental factors
may greatly influence the clinical features of this disease.

In a patient with unilateral segmental exacerbations of Hailey-Hailey
disease, Poblete-Gutierrez et al. (2004) identified heterozygosity for a
splice site mutation in exon 22 of the ATP2C1 gene (604384.0009).
Haplotype analysis of the more severely affected segmental skin regions
revealed consistent loss of the paternal wildtype allele, confirming the
authors' hypothesis that such segmental exacerbations represent a form
of mosaicism with hemizygosity for the mutation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, 4-BP INS, 767CCCT

In a family with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Hu et al. (2000) found
a 4-bp insertion after nucleotide 767 in exon 10 of the ATP2C1 gene. The
insertion resulted in a frameshift with a premature termination codon 42
amino acids downstream of the mutation.

.0002
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, ALA304THR

In a family with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Hu et al. (2000)
identified a G-to-T transversion of nucleotide 910 of the ATP2C1 gene,
resulting in an ala304-to-thr amino acid substitution.

.0003
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, ARG468TER

In a family with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Hu et al. (2000) found
a 1402C-T transition in the ATP2C1 gene that altered codon 468 from
arginine to stop.

.0004
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, 4-BP DEL, 2374TTTG

In 2 unrelated families with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Hu et al.
(2000) found an identical 4-bp deletion of 2374delTTTG in the ATP2C1
gene. The 2 families had different alleles of the D3S1587 marker, a
locus less than 100 kb from the mutant gene, on the mutant chromosome.
This may indicate that these were independent mutations. The deletion
resulted in a premature termination codon 10 amino acids downstream of
the mutation.

.0005
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, IVS11, G-A, -1

Sudbrak et al. (2000) identified a G-to-A transition at the 3-prime end
of intron 11 (nucleotide position 852) of the ATP2C1 gene in a family
with Hailey-Hailey disease (169600). The effect on the cDNA was not
determined.

.0006
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, CYS490PHE

In a Japanese patient who represented a sporadic occurrence of
Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Yokota et al. (2002) reported a
cys490-to-phe (C490F) amino acid substitution that arose from a 1469G-T
transversion in exon 17 of the ATP2C1 gene.

.0007
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, 1-BP DEL, 2460G

In a Japanese patient who represented a sporadic occurrence of
Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Yokota et al. (2002) reported a
frameshift mutation in the ATP2C1 gene, 2460delG, that resulted in a
premature termination codon at exon 25.

.0008
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, LEU584PRO

In a Japanese patient who represented a sporadic occurrence of
Hailey-Hailey disease (169600), Yokota et al. (2002) reported a T-to-C
transition at nucleotide 1751 in exon 19 of the ATP2C1 gene, resulting
in a leu584-to-pro (L584P) amino acid substitution.

.0009
HAILEY-HAILEY DISEASE
ATP2C1, IVS22, G-A, +1

In a patient with unilateral segmental exacerbations of Hailey-Hailey
disease (169600), originally reported by Vakilzadeh and Kolde (1985),
Poblete-Gutierrez et al. (2004) identified heterozygosity for a G-to-A
transition at the first base of the consensus splice donor site of exon
22 of the ATP2C1 gene. The mutation, which they designated 2146+1G-A,
resulted in the skipping of the 69-bp exon 22. Haplotype analysis of the
more severely affected segmental skin regions revealed consistent loss
of the paternal wildtype allele, confirming the authors' hypothesis that
such segmental exacerbations represent a form of mosaicism with
hemizygosity for the mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Chao, S.-C.; Tsai, Y.-M.; Yang, M.-H.: Mutation analysis of ATP2C1
gene in Taiwanese patients with Hailey-Hailey disease. Brit. J. Derm. 146:
595-600, 2002.

2. Dobson-Stone, C.; Fairclough, R.; Dunne, E.; Brown, J.; Dissanayake,
M.; Munro, C. S.; Strachan, T.; Burge, S.; Sudbrak, R.; Monaco, A.
P.; Hovnanian, A.: Hailey-Hailey disease: molecular and clinical
characterization of novel mutations in the ATP2C1 gene. J. Invest.
Derm. 118: 338-343, 2002.

3. Hu, Z.; Bonifas, J. M.; Beech, J.; Bench, G.; Shigihara, T.; Ogawa,
H.; Ikeda, S.; Mauro, T.; Epstein, E. H., Jr.: Mutations in ATP2C1,
encoding a calcium pump, cause Hailey-Hailey disease. Nature Genet. 24:
61-65, 2000.

4. Ikeda, S.; Shigihara, T.; Mayuzumi, N.; Yu, X.; Ogawa, H.: Mutations
of ATP2C1 in Japanese patients with Hailey-Hailey disease: intrafamilial
and interfamilial phenotype variations and lack of correlation with
mutation patterns. J. Invest. Derm. 117: 1654-1656, 2001.

5. Kourtis, N.; Nikoletopoulou, V.; Tavernarakis, N.: Small heat-shock
proteins protect from heat-stroke-associated neurodegeneration. Nature 490:
213-218, 2012.

6. Mukhopadhyay, S.; Linstedt, A. D.: Identification of a gain-of-function
mutation in a Golgi P-type ATPase that enhances Mn(2+) efflux and
protects against toxicity. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 108: 858-863, 2011.

7. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

8. Poblete-Gutierrez, P.; Wiederholt, T.; Konig, A.; Jugert, F. K.;
Marquardt, Y.; Rubben, A.; Merk, H. F.; Happle, R.; Frank, J.: Allelic
loss underlies type 2 segmental Hailey-Hailey disease, providing molecular
confirmation of a novel genetic concept. J. Clin. Invest. 114: 1467-1474,
2004.

9. Sudbrak, R.; Brown, J.; Dobson-Stone, C.; Carter, S.; Ramser, J.;
White, J.; Healy, E.; Dissanayake, M.; Larregue, M.; Perrussel, M.;
Lehrach, H.; Munro, C. S.; Strachan, T.; Burge, S.; Hovnanian, A.;
Monaco, A. P.: Hailey-Hailey disease is caused by mutations in ATP2C1
encoding a novel Ca2+ pump. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1131-1140, 2000.

10. Ton, V.-K.; Mandal, D.; Vahadji, C.; Rao, R.: Functional expression
in yeast of the human secretory pathway Ca(2+), Mn(2+)-ATPase defective
in Hailey-Hailey disease. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 6422-6427, 2002.

11. Vakilzadeh, F.; Kolde, G.: Relapsing linear acantholytic dermatosis. Brit.
J. Derm. 112: 349-355, 1985.

12. Van Baelen, K.; Vanoevelen, J.; Callewaert, G.; Parys, J. B.;
De Smedt, H.; Raeymaekers, L.; Rizzuto, R.; Missiaen, L.; Wuytack,
F.: The contribution of the SPCA1 Ca(2+) pump to the Ca(2+) accumulation
in the Golgi apparatus of HeLa cells assessed via RNA-mediated interference. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 306: 430-436, 2003.

13. Yokota, K.; Takizawa, Y.; Yasukawa, K.; Kimura, K.; Nishikawa,
T.; Shimizu, H.: Analysis of ATP2C1 gene mutation in 10 unrelated
Japanese families with Hailey-Hailey disease. J. Invest. Derm. 118:
550-551, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/8/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/25/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/19/2005
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 5/13/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/29/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 4/14/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/12/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/29/1999

EDITED mgross: 03/20/2013
terry: 3/8/2013
carol: 11/27/2012
alopez: 11/1/2012
terry: 10/25/2012
mgross: 10/13/2009
carol: 1/20/2005
terry: 1/19/2005
alopez: 5/13/2003
alopez: 4/29/2003
alopez: 4/14/2003
alopez: 8/7/2000
alopez: 5/12/2000
alopez: 12/29/1999

605677	TITLE *605677 ACYL-CoA SYNTHETASE LONG CHAIN FAMILY, MEMBER 5; ACSL5
;;FATTY ACID CoA LIGASE, LONG CHAIN 5; FACL5;;
ACYL-CoA SYNTHETASE 5; ACS5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Acyl-CoA synthetases (ACSs; EC 6.2.1.3), such as ACSL5, catalyze the
formation of acyl-CoA from fatty acid, ATP, and CoA. This reaction is
essential in mammalian fatty acid metabolism. In addition, ACSs mediates
transportation of fatty acids into cells by cooperating with the fatty
acid transporter protein (FATP; 600691) (summary by Watkins et al.,
2007).

CLONING

Oikawa et al. (1998) cloned rat Acs5 and found that it is highly
expressed in proliferating 3T3-L1 cells. By screening a liver cDNA
library with rat ACS5 as the probe, Yamashita et al. (2000) isolated a
cDNA encoding human ACS5. The deduced 683-amino acid protein shares
approximately 80% amino acid identity with the rat sequence. Northern
blot analysis detected 2 major ACS5 transcripts of 2.5 and 3.7 kb in a
wide range of tissues, with highest expression in uterus and spleen.

By searching databases for sequences containing acyl-CoA synthetase
motifs 1 and 2, Watkins et al. (2007) identified 3 splice variants of
human ACSL5. The full-length protein contains 739 amino acids. The 2
other splice variants differ from each other only in their 5-prime UTRs
and encode an N-terminally truncated protein of 683 amino acids.
Phylogenetic analysis revealed that ACSL5 belongs to a family of long
chain acyl-CoA synthetases.

GENE FUNCTION

Markedly increased levels of ACS5 transcripts were detected in a glioma
line and in primary gliomas of grade IV malignancy, while ACS5
expression was found to be low in normal brain. Yamashita et al. (2000)
found that cultured glioma cells infected with an adenovirus encoding
ACS5 displayed induced cell growth on exposure to palmitate. Consistent
with the induction of cell growth, the virus-infected cells displayed
induced uptake of palmitate. These results demonstrated a novel fatty
acid-induced glioma cell growth mediated by ACS5.

GENE STRUCTURE

Using BAC and YAC clones, Yamashita et al. (2000) determined that the
ACS5 gene spans approximately 46 kb and contains 21 exons.

MAPPING

Yamashita et al. (2000) determined that the 3-prime UTR of ACS5 contains
a specific STS marker that maps to 10q25.1-q25.2, a region frequently
deleted in malignant gliomas (see 601969).

Watkins et al. (2007) mapped the ACSL5 gene to the plus strand of
chromosome 10q25.1-q25.2 by genomic sequence analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Oikawa, E.; Iijima, H.; Suzuki, T.; Sasano, H.; Sato, H.; Kamataki,
A.; Nagura, H.; Kang, M. J.; Fujino, T.; Suzuki, H.; Yamamoto, T.
T.: A novel acyl-CoA synthetase, ACS5, expressed in intestinal epithelial
cells and proliferating preadipocytes. J. Biochem. 124: 679-685,
1998.

2. Watkins, P. A.; Maiguel, D.; Jia, Z.; Pevsner, J.: Evidence for
26 distinct acyl-coenzyme A synthetase genes in the human genome. J.
Lipid Res. 48: 2736-2750, 2007.

3. Yamashita, Y.; Kumabe, T.; Cho, Y.-Y.; Watanabe, M.; Kawagishi,
J.; Yoshimoto, T.; Fujino, T.; Kang, M.-J.; Yamamoto, T. T.: Fatty
acid induced glioma cell growth is mediated by the acyl-CoA synthetase
5 gene located on chromosome 10q25.1-q25.2, a region frequently deleted
in malignant gliomas. Oncogene 19: 5919-5925, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/4/2011

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/22/2001

EDITED mgross: 12/02/2011
mgross: 11/30/2011
terry: 10/4/2011
terry: 1/20/2010
terry: 9/19/2008
mgross: 2/22/2001

609038	TITLE *609038 RHO FAMILY GTPase 1; RND1
;;RHO6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the Rho GTPase family, such as RND1, regulate the
organization of the actin cytoskeleton in response to extracellular
growth factors (Nobes et al., 1998).

CLONING

By screening a human fetal brain cDNA library using bovine Rnd1 as
probe, Nobes et al. (1998) cloned RND1. The deduced protein contains 232
amino acids and has a calculated molecular mass of 26 kD. It contains 3
guanine-binding motifs, 2 loops and a threonine involved in phosphate
binding, and 3 major residues that coordinate magnesium in the GTP-bound
state. However, RND1 lacks the residues important for the intrinsic
GTPase activity of RAS (see 190020). RND1 ends with a CAAX box motif and
a terminal methionine residue, suggesting that RND1 is farnesylated.
Northern blot analysis detected a 1.9-kb RND1 transcript expressed at
highest levels in adult and fetal brain and liver, with little to no
expression in other tissues examined. Within specific brain regions,
RND1 expression was highest in cortex, occipital pole, and frontal and
temporal lobes. Immunohistochemical staining of rat brain found highest
Rnd1 protein in the pyramidal cells of the hippocampus, granule neurons
of dentate gyrus, and Purkinje cells of the cerebellum. Endogenous mouse
Rnd1 localized in adherens junctions of confluent fibroblast cultures.

GENE FUNCTION

Nobes et al. (1998) showed that RND1 exchanges GTP faster and has a much
lower affinity for GDP that most other small G proteins, but it has no
intrinsic GTPase activity. Expression of RND1 in fibroblasts inhibited
the formation of actin stress fibers, membrane ruffles, and
integrin-based focal adhesions, and it induced loss of cell-substrate
adhesion, leading to cell rounding.

Aoki et al. (2000) found that expression of human RND1 in rat
pheochromocytoma cells disrupted the cortical actin filaments and caused
the formation of many neuritic processes from the cell body. The
processes had microtubules but few filamentous actin and neurofilaments.
An inhibitor of actin polymerization mimicked the effects of RND1
overexpression. Process formation induced by RND1 was inhibited by
dominant-negative RAC1 (602048).

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, in vitro protein binding assays, and
pull-down experiments with a breast cancer cell line, Vayssiere et al.
(2000) showed that RND1 interacts with GRB7 (601522). They determined
that the interaction involves the switch II loop of RND1, a region
crucial for guanine nucleotide exchange in all GTPases, and an SH2
domain of GRB7, a region crucial for GRB7 interaction with several
activated receptors.

MAPPING

By FISH, Nobes et al. (1998) mapped the RND1 gene to chromosome
12q12-q13.

REFERENCE 1. Aoki, J.; Katoh, H.; Mori, K.; Negishi, M.: Rnd1, a novel Rho
family GTPase, induces the formation of neuritic processes in PC12
cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 278: 604-608, 2000.

2. Nobes, C. D.; Lauritzen, I.; Mattei, M.-G.; Paris, S.; Hall, A.;
Chardin, P.: A new member of the Rho family, Rnd1, promotes disassembly
of actin filament structures and loss of cell adhesion. J. Cell Biol. 141:
187-197, 1998.

3. Vayssiere, B.; Zalcman, G.; Mahe, Y.; Mirey, G.; Ligensa, T.; Weidner,
K. M.; Chardin, P.; Camonis, J.: Interaction of the Grb7 adapter
protein with Rnd1, a new member of the Rho family. FEBS Lett. 467:
91-96, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/23/2004

EDITED mgross: 11/23/2004

614758	TITLE *614758 DYNACTIN 4; DCTN4
;;DYN4;;
DYNACTIN, 62-KD SUBUNIT;;
p62
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DCTN4 is a subunit of the 20S dynactin complex. The dynactin complex is
involved in microtubule-dependent vesicular transport, spindle assembly,
and cell division (summary by Karki et al., 2000).

CLONING

By gene dosage analysis and sequencing candidate genes in a YAC contig
covering the critical region of the 5q deletion syndrome (153550),
followed by database analysis, Boultwood et al. (2000) identified a
DCTN4 clone designated 605d01. Northern blot analysis detected a 7.5-kb
DCTN4 transcript in all 15 human tissues examined.

By mass spectrometric analysis of the 62-kD protein that affinity
purified with human dynactin, followed by EST database analysis and PCR
of an NT2 human teratocarcinoma cDNA library, Karki et al. (2000) cloned
DCTN4, which they called p62. The deduced 460-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 52.3 kD. It has an N-terminal domain with
11 cysteines, the last 8 of which fit the consensus sequence for a RING
domain predicted to bind 2 Zn(2+) atoms. Northern blot analysis detected
variable expression of an approximately 4.2-kb transcript in all tissues
examined, with highest expression in heart and skeletal muscle.
Immunocytochemical analysis revealed that p62 had a punctate cytoplasmic
distribution as well as a centrosomal distribution typical of dynactin.

By immunohistochemical analysis, Ayalon et al. (2008) showed that Dyn4
colocalized with other dynactin subunits in adult mouse muscle fibers.
Dyn4 localized in a punctate distribution along costamere lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Karki et al. (2000) stated that p62 is present in the dynactin complex
at a stoichiometry of 1 copy per complex and that it localizes at 1 end
of the central ARP1 (ACTR1A; 605143) polymeric filament. Using
biochemical and immunoprecipitation analyses, they showed that p62
associated with the rat 20S dynactin complex. Recombinant human p62
bound immobilized in vitro-translated human ARP1. Overexpression of p62
in PtK2 porcine kidney cells did not disrupt microtubule organization or
the integrity of the Golgi, but it resulted in some p62 nuclear
localization.

ATP7B (606882) localizes to the trans-Golgi network, where it transports
copper to apoceruloplasmin (CP; 117700). When copper levels are in
excess, ATP7B redistributes to a vesicular compartment near the biliary
canalicular membranes, where excess copper is eliminated into bile.
Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human liver cDNA library, Lim et al.
(2006) found that the N-terminal domain of ATP7B, which contains 6
N-terminal metal-binding sites, interacted with the C-terminal domain of
p62. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis revealed that ATP7B, but not ATP7A
(300011), interacted with endogenous p62 in a human fibroblast line.
Depletion of copper reduced interaction of ATP7B with p62. Mutation
analysis revealed that the metal-binding CxxC motifs of ATP7B were
required for its interaction with p62, predominantly CxxC motifs 4
through 6. Lim et al. (2006) concluded that ATP7B is transported along
liver cell microtubules in a copper-dependent manner via interaction
with p62.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a mouse heart cDNA library, Ayalon et al.
(2008) found that Ankb (ANK2; 106410) interacted with Dyn4. Protein
pull-down assays confirmed the interaction. Depletion of Ankb in adult
mouse skeletal muscle fibers disrupted costamere-associated
microtubules, concomitant with loss of costamere-associated Dyn4
expression.

MAPPING

By database and YAC contig analyses, Boultwood et al. (2000) mapped the
DCTN4 gene to chromosome 5q31-q32.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Emond et al. (2012) used exome sequencing and an extreme phenotype study
design to discover genetic variants influencing Pseudomonas aeruginosa
infection in cystic fibrosis. Forty-three individuals with early age of
onset of chronic P. aeruginosa infection (all below the tenth percentile
of age at onset), and the 48 oldest individuals who had not reached
chronic P. aeruginosa infection (all past the mean age of onset) were
sequenced. After Bonferroni adjustment, a single gene, DCTN4, was
significantly associated with time to chronic P. aeruginosa infection
(naive P = 2.2 x 10(-6); adjusted P = 0.025). Twelve of the 43
individuals in the early extreme sample carried a missense variant in
DCTN4, 9 a phe349-to-leu substitution (F349L; dbSNP rs11954652) and 3 a
tyr270-to-cys substitution (Y270C; dbSNP rs35772018). None of the 48
individuals in the late P. aeruginosa extreme sample had either missense
variant. Subsequently, 696 individuals with varied CFTR genotypes were
studied. Seventy-eight participants were heterozygous and 9 were
homozygous for the F349L (614758.0001) mutation; 15 were heterozygous
for the Y270C (614758.0002) mutation; 1 individual was heterozygous for
both mutations. The presence of at least 1 DCTN4 missense variant was
significantly associated with both early age of first P.
aeruginosa-positive culture (p = 0.01, hazard ratio = 1.4) and with
early age of onset of chronic P. aeruginosa infection (p = 0.004, hazard
ratio = 1.9). The risk was highest in individuals with less selective
bias toward a P. aeruginosa-negative history, i.e., children enrolled
before 1.5 years of age and 103 enrollees who participated in the study
despite a history of P. aeruginosa-positive cultures. No significant
interaction was found between CFTR genotypes and DCTN4 mutations,
although power to detect such an interaction was low.

REFERENCE 1. Ayalon, G.; Davis, J. Q.; Scotland, P. B.; Bennett, V.: An ankyrin-based
mechanism for functional organization of dystrophin and dystroglycan. Cell 135:
1189-1200, 2008.

2. Boultwood, J.; Fidler, C.; Strickson, A. J.; Watkins, F.; Kostrzewa,
M.; Jaju, R. J.; Muller, U.; Wainscoat, J. S.: Transcription mapping
of the 5q- syndrome critical region: cloning of two novel genes and
sequencing, expression, and mapping of a further six novel cDNAs. Genomics 66:
26-34, 2000.

3. Emond, M. J.; Louie, T.; Emerson, J.; Zhao, W.; Mathias, R. A.;
Knowles, M. R.; Wright, F. A.; Rieder, M. J.; Tabor, H. K.; Nickerson,
D. A.; Barnes, K. C.; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI)
GO Exome Sequencing Project; Lung GO; Gibson, R. L.; Bamshad, M.
J.: Exome sequencing of extreme phenotypes identifies DCTN4 as a
modifier of chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection in cystic fibrosis. Nature
Genet. 44: 886-889, 2012.

4. Karki, S.; Tokito, M. K.; Holzbaur, E. L. F.: A dynactin subunit
with a highly conserved cysteine-rich motif interacts directly with
Arp1. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 4834-4839, 2000.

5. Lim, C. M.; Cater, M. A.; Mercer, J. F. B.; La Fontaine, S.: Copper-dependent
interaction of dynactin subunit p62 with the N terminus of ATP7B but
not ATP7A. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 14006-14014, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/26/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/10/2012

EDITED alopez: 03/04/2013
terry: 2/26/2013
mgross: 8/10/2012

607274	TITLE *607274 UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 14; USP14
;;tRNA-GUANINE TRANSGLYCOSYLASE, 60-KD SUBUNIT;;
TGT, 60-KD SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Eukaryotes synthesize queuosine by the irreversible exchange of queuine
for guanine at tRNA position 34, a reaction catalyzed by tRNA-guanine
transglycosylase (TGT). Mammalian TGT appears to be a dimer of 60- and
43-kD subunits. Deshpande et al. (1996) determined that the purified
rabbit 60-kD Tgt subunit, or Usp14, shares significant sequence identity
with human TRE2 (USP6; 604334) and ORF8 (USP8; 603158), particularly in
the conserved cys and his domains. Using the rabbit sequence, they
identified an EST containing human USP14 and cloned the cDNA from a
placenta cDNA library. The deduced human protein contains 494 amino
acids and shares 98% sequence identity with the rabbit protein.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the USP14
gene to chromosome 18 (TMAP SJGC-11272). Wilson et al. (2002) stated
that 2 human neurologic disorders possibly involving alterations of
synaptic function map to 18p near USP14: major affective disorder-1
(MAFD1; 125480) and schizophrenia disorder 8 (SCZD8; 603206).

GENE FUNCTION

Lee et al. (2010) showed that USP14, a proteasome-associated
deubiquitinating enzyme, can inhibit the degradation of
ubiquitin-protein conjugates both in vitro and in vivo and in cells. A
catalytically inactive variant of USP14 has reduced inhibitory activity,
indicating that inhibition is mediated by trimming of the ubiquitin
chain on the substrate. A high-throughput screen identified a selective
small-molecule inhibitor of the deubiquitinating activity of human
USP14. Treatment of cultured cells with this compound enhanced
degradation of several proteasome substrates that have been implicated
in neurodegenerative disease. USP14 inhibition accelerated the
degradation of oxidized proteins and enhanced resistance to oxidative
stress.

ANIMAL MODEL

Mice that are homozygous with respect to the spontaneous mutation ax(J)
in the ataxia (ax) gene develop severe tremors by 2 to 3 weeks of age
followed by hindlimb paralysis and death by 6 to 10 weeks of age. Wilson
et al. (2002) showed that ax encodes Usp14, one of the large family of
cysteine proteases that specifically feed ubiquitin conjugates. Although
Usp14 can cleave a ubiquitin-tagged protein in vitro, it is unable to
process polyubiquitin, which is believed to be associated with the
protein aggregates seen in Parkinson disease, spinocerebellar ataxia
type 1 (SCA1; 164400), and gracile axonal dystrophy (GAD) in mice. The
physiologic substrate of Usp14 may therefore contain a monoubiquitin
side chain, the removal of which would regulate processes such as
protein localization and protein activity. Expression of Usp14 is
altered in homozygous ax(J) mice as a result of the insertion of an
intracisternal A particle (IAP) into intron 5 of Usp14. In contrast to
other neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson disease and SCA1 in
humans and GAD in mice, neither ubiquitin-positive protein aggregates
nor neuronal cell loss was detectable in the CNS of ax(J) mice. Instead,
these mice had defects in synaptic transmission in both the central and
peripheral nervous systems. These results suggested that ubiquitin
proteases are important in regulating synaptic activity in mammals.

REFERENCE 1. Deshpande, K. L.; Seubert, P. H.; Tillman, D. M.; Farkas, W. R.;
Katze, J. R.: Cloning and characterization of cDNA encoding the rabbit
tRNA-guanine transglycosylase 60-kilodalton subunit. Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 326: 1-7, 1996.

2. Lee, B.-H.; Lee, M. J.; Park, S.; Oh, D.-C.; Elsasser, S.; Chen,
P.-C.; Gartner, C.; Dimova, N.; Hanna, J.; Gygi, S. P.; Wilson, S.
M.; King, R. W.; Finley, D.: Enhancement of proteasome activity by
a small-molecule inhibitor of USP14. Nature 467: 179-184, 2010.

3. Wilson, S. M.; Bhattacharyya, B.; Rachel, R. A.; Coppola, V.; Tessarollo,
L.; Householder, D. B.; Fletcher, C. F.; Miller, R. J.; Copeland,
N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.: Synaptic defects in ataxia mice result from
a mutation in Usp14, encoding a ubiquitin-specific protease. Nature
Genet. 32: 420-425, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/6/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/3/2002

EDITED alopez: 10/06/2010
terry: 10/6/2010
mgross: 9/28/2005
alopez: 11/7/2002
cwells: 10/7/2002
terry: 10/4/2002
mgross: 10/3/2002

185640	TITLE *185640 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L7a; RPL7A
;;SURFEIT 3; SURF3
DESCRIPTION The mammalian ribosome is composed of 4 RNA species (see 180450) and
approximately 80 different proteins (see 180466).

CLONING

Giallongo et al. (1989) demonstrated that the SURF3 gene encodes the L7a
ribosomal protein. The first 2 exons of the human SURF3 gene have been
found to be capable of activating the TRK oncogene (see 191315). The
SURF3 gene appears to be the only intron-containing member of the
surfeit family cluster on chromosome 9q34 (see SURF1, 185620).

GENE STRUCTURE

Angiolillo et al. (2002) determined that transcription start sites of
the MED22 (185641) and RPL7A genes are separated by a 110-bp region that
shows bidirectional promoter activity. This promoter region lacks a TATA
box but is characterized by a CpG island that extends through the first
exon into the first intron of both genes.

MAPPING

Yon et al. (1993) mapped the RPLA7 gene to chromosome 9q34.1. Kenmochi
et al. (1998) confirmed the mapping assignment.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mor et al. (1996) described a common polymorphism in the surfeit gene
cluster that was of interest because it occurs in the TSC1 (191100)
region of chromosome 9q34. By database analysis, Smith (1997) found that
the polymorphism reported by Mor et al. (1996) is due to mutation in the
SURF3 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Angiolillo, A.; Russo, G.; Procellini, A.; Smaldone, S.; D'Alessandro,
F.; Pietropaolo, C.: The human homologue of the mouse Surf5 gene
encodes multiple alternatively spliced transcripts. Gene 284: 169-178,
2002.

2. Giallongo, A.; Yon, J.; Fried, M.: The ribosomal protein L7a is
encoded by a gene (Surf-3) within the tightly clustered mouse surfeit
locus. Molec. Cell. Biol. 9: 224-231, 1989.

3. Kenmochi, N.; Kawaguchi, T.; Rozen, S.; Davis, E.; Goodman, N.;
Hudson, T. J.; Tanaka, T.; Page, D. C.: A map of 75 human ribosomal
protein genes. Genome Res. 8: 509-523, 1998.

4. Mor, O.; Duhig, T.; Fried, M.: A high frequency polymorphism in
the candidate region for tuberous sclerosis 1 (TSC1) at 9q34. Ann.
Hum. Genet. 60: 259-260, 1996.

5. Smith, M.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/2/1997.

6. Yon, J.; Jones, T.; Garson, K.; Sheer, D.; Fried, M.: The organization
and conservation of the human Surfeit gene cluster and its localization
telomeric to the c-abl and can proto-oncogenes at chromosome band
9q34.1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 237-240, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/30/2008
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 9/21/2000
Moyra Smith - updated: 1/2/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/29/1989

EDITED wwang: 10/30/2008
terry: 10/30/2008
carol: 8/20/2008
carol: 2/24/2004
psherman: 9/21/2000
psherman: 9/10/1999
psherman: 2/2/1999
terry: 8/12/1998
mark: 1/2/1997
carol: 9/13/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 12/15/1989
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 8/29/1989

615187	TITLE *615187 POST-GPI ATTACHMENT TO PROTEINS 2; PGAP2
;;FGF RECEPTOR-ACTIVATING PROTEIN 1; FRAG1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) modification of plasma membrane
proteins occurs in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and GPI-anchored
proteins are incorporated into rafts in the Golgi during their transport
to the cell surface. PGAP2 appears to be involved in maturation of the
GPI anchor on GPI-anchored proteins (Tashima et al., 2006).

CLONING

By screening an M426 human embryonic fibroblast cell line with rat
Frag1, Lorenzi et al. (1999) cloned PGAP2, which they called FRAG1. The
deduced 316-amino acid protein has 2 N-terminal FRAG1 homology (FH)
domains and 4 possible isoprenylation signals. Hydropathy analysis
suggested that FRAG1 has 7 transmembrane segments. Human and rat FRAG1
share 92% amino acid identity, but the rat protein has only 1 FH domain.
Northern blot analysis detected variable expression of a 2.0-kb FRAG1
transcript in all 16 tissues examined, with highest expression in testis
and pancreas, and lowest expression in brain and thymus. A transcript of
about 3.2 kb was also detected in several tissues, predominantly
pancreas, spleen, and prostate. FRAG1 was also detected in a number of
tumor cell lines at a level comparable to that observed in normal
tissues.

By database analysis and cloning using rat and hamster cDNA libraries,
Tashima et al. (2006) identified human, rat, and hamster cDNAs encoding
a 254-amino acid PGAP2 protein. They also identified a splice variant in
human and hamster that encodes a 250-amino acid isoform lacking a VSQE
sequence. Rat Pgap2 localized to Golgi in transfected NRK cells.

Hansen et al. (2013) stated that the PGAP2 gene encodes 16 different RNA
transcripts, 8 of which encode different isoforms and 8 that are
noncoding RNA. Isoform 8, which is 254 amino acids long and contains 5
alpha-helix domains embedded in the Golgi membrane, is believed to be
the biologically active isoform. The N terminus is in the cytoplasm and
the C terminus is in the Golgi lumen.

GENE FUNCTION

Tashima et al. (2006) found that transfected CHO cells lacking Pgap2
were deficient in cell surface expression of the human GPI-anchored
proteins CD59 (107271) and CD55 (125240). Cotransfection of rat Pgap2 or
the human or hamster variant encoding the short PGAP2 isoform restored
CD59 surface expression. GPI-anchored proteins appeared to traffic
normally through the ER and Golgi, but they were secreted upon arrival
at the plasma membrane via phospholipid D (see 602382)-like activity.
The secreted proteins showed an altered GPI anchor. Tashima et al.
(2006) proposed that remodeling of the GPI anchor occurs in GPI-anchored
proteins, and that in Pgap2-deficient cells, this remodeling is
defective, resulting in GPI-anchored proteins that are sensitive to
cleavage then secretion from the plasma membrane.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lorenzi et al. (1999) determined that the PGAP2 gene contains 6 exons
and spans over 7 kb. The tandem FH domains in the FRAG1 protein are
encoded by exons 1 and 2.

MAPPING

Using FISH and radiation hybrid analysis, Lorenzi et al. (1999) mapped
the PGAP2 gene to chromosome 11p15.5.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 2 unrelated consanguineous families with
hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation syndrome-3 (HPMRS3; 614207),
Hansen et al. (2013) identified 2 different homozygous missense
mutations in the PGAP2 gene (615187.0001 and 615187.0002, respectively).
In vitro functional expression studies showed that the mutant alleles
were hypomorphic and caused decreased enzyme activity. Hansen et al.
(2013) commented that the disorder due to PGAP2 mutations can be viewed
as part of a disease family representing a spectrum of disorders due to
mutations in genes involved in glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchor
biosynthesis. Mutations in genes earlier in the pathway appear to cause
a more severe phenotype, including dysmorphic features (e.g., MCAHS1,
614080), than mutations in genes that act later in the pathway.

Among 13 individuals with intellectual disability and increased serum
alkaline phosphatase who were screened for mutations in genes encoding
proteins in the GPI-anchor biosynthesis pathway, Krawitz et al. (2013)
found that 2 unrelated patients carried biallelic missense mutations in
the PGAP2 gene (615187.0003-615187.0005). In vitro studies showed that
the mutations caused decreased enzyme activity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, TYR99CYS

In 3 affected members of a consanguineous Syrian family (MR043) with
autosomal recessive hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation-3 (HPMRS3;
614207) originally reported by Abou Jamra et al. (2011), Hansen et al.
(2013) identified a homozygous c.296A-G transition in the PGAP2 gene,
resulting in a tyr99-to-cys (Y99C) substitution between transmembrane
segments 1 and 2 in the Golgi lumen. The mutation, which was found by
exome sequencing of the linked region on chromosome 11p15, was confirmed
by Sanger sequencing and segregated with the disorder in the family. In
vitro functional expression studies in CHO cells showed that the mutant
protein was expressed but had significantly decreased activity compared
to wildtype. Patient lymphoblastoid cells showed essentially normal
expression of the GPI-anchored proteins DAF (125240) and CD59 (107271),
supporting a hypomorphic effect of the Y99C mutation.

.0002
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, ARG177PRO

In affected members of a consanguineous Pakistani family (MR5) with
HPMRS3 (614207) originally reported by Rehman et al. (2011), Hansen et
al. (2013) identified a homozygous c.530G-C transversion in the PGAP2
gene, resulting in an arg177-to-pro (R177P) substitution between
transmembrane segments 3 and 4 in the Golgi lumen. The mutation, which
was found by exome sequencing of the linked region on chromosome 11p15,
was confirmed by Sanger sequencing and segregated with the disorder in
the family. In vitro functional expression studies in CHO cells showed
that the mutant protein was expressed but had significantly decreased
activity compared to wildtype. Patient lymphoblastoid cells showed
essentially normal expression of the GPI-anchored proteins DAF (125240)
and CD59 (107271), supporting a hypomorphic effect of the R177P
mutation.

.0003
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, LEU127SER

In a Turkish boy, born of consanguineous parents, with HPMRS3 (614207),
Krawitz et al. (2013) identified a homozygous c.380T-C transition in the
PGAP2 gene, resulting in a leu127-to-ser (L127S) substitution at a
highly conserved residue. The mutation segregated with the disorder in
the family. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
mutant protein had decreased activity compared to wildtype.

.0004
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, ARG16TRP

In a 28-year-old Finnish woman with mild HPMRS3 (614207), Krawitz et al.
(2013) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the PGAP2
gene: a c.46C-T transition resulting in an arg16-to-trp (R16W)
substitution, and a c.479C-T transition resulting in a thr160-to-ile
(T160I; 615187.0005) substitution. Both mutations occurred at highly
conserved residues. In vitro functional expression studies showed that
the mutant proteins had decreased activity compared to wildtype. Higher
residual activity of R16W may explain the milder phenotype in this
patient.

.0005
HYPERPHOSPHATASIA WITH MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME 3
PGAP2, THR160ILE

See 615187.0004 and Krawitz et al. (2013).

REFERENCE 1. Abou Jamra, R. A.; Wohlfart, S.; Zweier, M.; Uebe, S.; Priebe,
L.; Ekici, A.; Giesebrecht, S.; Abboud, A.; Al Khateeb, M. A.; Fakher,
M.; Hamdan, S.; Ismael, A.; Muhammad, S.; Nothen, M. M.; Schumacher,
J.; Reis, A.: Homozygosity mapping in 64 Syrian consanguineous families
with non-specific intellectual disability reveals 11 novel loci and
high heterogeneity. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 19: 1161-1166, 2011.

2. Hansen, L.; Tawamie, H.; Murakami, Y.; Mang, Y.; Rehman, S.; Buchert,
R.; Schaffer, S.; Muhammad, S.; Bak, M.; Nothen, M. M.; Bennett, E.
P.; Maeda, Y.; Aigner, M.; Reis, A.; Kinoshita, T.; Tommerup, N.;
Baig, S. M.; Abou Jamra, R.: Hypomorphic mutations in PGAP2, encoding
a GPI-anchor-remodeling protein, cause autosomal-recessive intellectual
disability. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92: 575-583, 2013.

3. Krawitz, P. M.; Murakami, Y.; Riess, A.; Hietala, M.; Kruger, U.;
Zhu, N.; Kinoshita, T.; Mundlos, S.; Hecht, J.; Robinson, P. N.; Horn,
D.: PGAP2 mutations, affecting the GPI-anchor-synthesis pathway,
cause hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation syndrome. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 92: 584-589, 2013.

4. Lorenzi, M. V.; Castagnino, P.; Aaronson, D. C.; Lieb, D. C.; Lee,
C. C.; Keck, C. L.; Popescu, N. C.; Miki, T.: Human FRAG1 encodes
a novel membrane-spanning protein that localizes to chromosome 11p15.5,
a region of frequent loss of heterozygosity in cancer. Genomics 62:
59-66, 1999.

5. Rehman, S.; Baig, S. M.; Eiberg, H.; Rehman, S.; Ahmad, I.; Malik,
N. A.; Tommerup, N.; Hansen, L.: Autozygosity mapping of a large
consanguineous Pakistani family reveals a novel non-syndromic autosomal
recessive mental retardation locus on 11p15-tel. Neurogenetics 12:
247-251, 2011.

6. Tashima, Y.; Taguchi, R.; Murata, C.; Ashida, H.; Kinoshita, T.;
Maeda, Y.: PGAP2 is essential for correct processing and stable expression
of GPI-anchored proteins. Molec. Biol. Cell 17: 1410-1420, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/9/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/18/2013

EDITED alopez: 05/23/2013
ckniffin: 5/9/2013
mgross: 4/18/2013

610781	TITLE *610781 GUANOSINE MONOPHOSPHATE REDUCTASE 2; GMPR2
;;GMP REDUCTASE 2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database searching with the sequence of GMPR1 (GMPR; 139265) as
query, Deng et al. (2002) identified and subsequently cloned GMPR2 from
a human fetal brain cDNA library. The deduced 348-amino acid protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 37.9 kD and shares 90% sequence identity
with GMPR1 and 69% identity with E. coli GMPR. Northern blot analysis
detected relatively high levels of both GMPR1 and GMPR2 in heart,
skeletal muscle, and kidney, and relatively low levels of both in colon,
thymus, and peripheral blood leukocyte. Strong signals of GMPR2 were
detected in brain, liver, and placenta, whereas weak signals of GMPR1
were observed in these tissues. The apparent Km of GMPR2 for NADPH and
GMP are 26.6 and 17.4 microM, respectively.

Zhang et al. (2003) cloned GMPR2 from a human dendritic cell cDNA
library. Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of an
approximately 2.2-kb transcript, with high expression in testis, ovary,
prostate, heart, liver, spleen, skeletal muscle, and kidney. An
additional transcript of about 1.3 kb was detected in placenta.
Expression was also detected in most cancer cell lines studied.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhang et al. (2003) showed that recombinant GMPR2 protein was able to
reduce GMP. Transfection experiments demonstrated that overexpression of
GMPR2 promoted the monocytic differentiation of HL-60 leukemia cells.

EVOLUTION

Deng et al. (2002) presented evidence that the 2 types of GMP reductase
are derived from duplication of an ancient gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Deng et al. (2002) determined that the GMPR2 gene contains 10 exons and
spans more than 6.6 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Deng et al. (2002) mapped the GMPR2 gene
to chromosome 14p11.2-p11.1. By the same method, Zhang et al. (2003)
mapped the gene to chromosome 14q11-q21.

REFERENCE 1. Deng, Y.; Wang, Z.; Ying, K.; Gu, S.; Ji, C.; Huang, Y.; Gu, X.;
Wang, Y.; Xu, Y.; Li, Y.; Xie, Y.; Mao, Y.: NADPH-dependent GMP reductase
isoenzyme of human (GMPR2): expression, purification, and kinetic
properties. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 34: 1035-1050, 2002.

2. Zhang, J.; Zhang, W.; Zou, D.; Chen, G.; Wan, T.; Zhang, M.; Cao,
X.: Cloning and functional characterization of GMPR2, a novel human
guanosine monophosphate reductase, which promotes the monocytic differentiation
of HL-60 leukemia cells. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 129: 76-83,
2003.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 2/21/2007

EDITED carol: 02/21/2007
carol: 2/21/2007

614003	TITLE *614003 NEUROBLASTOMA BREAKPOINT FAMILY, MEMBER 14; NBPF14
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NBPF14 is a member of the NBPF gene family, which consists of 22 genes
and pseudogenes that arose by gene duplication. NBPF genes contain
numerous low-copy repetitive elements and show high intergenic and
intragenic sequence identity in coding and noncoding regions (Vandepoele
et al., 2005).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to NBPF1 (610501),
Vandepoele et al. (2005) identified NBPF14. EST database analysis
revealed NBPF14 expression in fetal liver/spleen, prostate, uterus, and
leiomyosarcoma.

GENE STRUCTURE

Vandepoele et al. (2005) determined that the NBPF14 gene contains at
least 22 coding exons, several of which result from internal
duplication.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis and FISH, Vandepoele et al. (2005) mapped
the NBPF14 gene to an NBPF gene cluster on chromosome 1q21.1.

REFERENCE 1. Vandepoele, K.; Van Roy, N.; Staes, K.; Speleman, F.; van Roy,
F.: A novel gene family NBPF: intricate structure generated by gene
duplications during primate evolution. Molec. Biol. Evol. 22: 2265-2274,
2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/24/2011

EDITED carol: 07/05/2011
mgross: 5/25/2011

160760	TITLE *160760 MYOSIN, HEAVY CHAIN 7, CARDIAC MUSCLE, BETA; MYH7
;;MYOSIN, CARDIAC, HEAVY CHAIN, BETA; MYHCB
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The structural gene for the beta heavy chain of myosin is expressed
predominantly in fetal life and is switched on in older animals under
conditions of thyroid hormone depletion/replacement and in response to
some physical stresses. Jandreski et al. (1987) presented evidence
indicating that the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain mRNA is expressed in
skeletal muscle tissue. The expression of cardiac beta-myosin heavy
chain mRNA was particularly prominent in the soleus muscle, which is
rich in slow-twitch type I muscle fibers. There were only trace amounts
in the vastus lateralis and vastus medialis, which consist predominantly
of fast-twitch type II fibers.

Diederich et al. (1989) cloned the entire gene.

By scanning mouse myosin genes for intronic microRNAs (miRNAs), van
Rooij et al. (2009) identified Mir208b (613613) within intron 31 of the
Myh7 gene. Northern blot analysis showed that Myh7 and Mir208b were
highly expressed in mouse slow-twitch soleus muscle. Little to no
expression was detected in heart and in the fast-twitch
gastrocnemius/plantaris, tibialis anterior, and extensor digitorum
longus muscles. However, van Rooij et al. (2009) noted that Myh7 is the
predominant myosin in adult heart in large animals, whereas Myh6
(160710) predominates in adult mouse heart.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jaenicke et al. (1990) demonstrated that the MYH7 gene is 22,883 bp
long. The 1,935 amino acids of this protein are encoded by 38 exons. The
5-prime untranslated region (86 bp) is split by 2 introns. The 3-prime
untranslated region is 114 bp long. Three Alu repeats were identified
within the gene and a fourth one in the 3-prime flanking intergenic
region.

Liew et al. (1990) found that like the rat skeletal myosin heavy chain
gene, the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene is divided into 41 exons,
the first 2 of which are noncoding. However, exons 37 and 38 are fused;
they do not have an intervening intron. The gene extends for 21,828
nucleotides and encodes a deduced 1,1939-amino acid protein with a
molecular mass of 222,937 Da.

Van Rooij et al. (2009) identified a microRNA (miRNA), Mir208b (613613),
within intron 31 of the mouse Myh7 gene.

MAPPING

Matsuoka et al. (1989) found that both the alpha and the beta human
cardiac myosin heavy chain genes are located in the 14cen-q13 region;
the assignment was by somatic cell hybridization and in situ
hybridization. Qin et al. (1990) localized the MYH7 gene to 14q12 by in
situ hybridization.

The beta cardiac myosin heavy chain is located on chromosome 14, 3.6 kb
upstream from the alpha cardiac myosin gene. The 2 genes are oriented in
a head-to-tail tandem fashion (Yamauchi-Takihara et al., 1989;
Geisterfer-Lowrance et al., 1990).

GENE FUNCTION

Van Rooij et al. (2007) found that miRNA208A (MIR208A; 611116), a
cardiac-specific miRNA encoded by intron 27 of the mouse and human MYH6
gene, was required for cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, fibrosis, and
expression of Myh7 in response to stress and hypothyroidism in mice.

Van Rooij et al. (2009) found that expression of Myh7 and its
intronically encoded miRNA, Mir208b, was upregulated in mouse heart by
hypothyroidism caused by inhibition of triiodothyronine (T3; see 188450)
synthesis. This upregulation was reversed by T3 administration. Gain-
and loss-of-function experiments in mice showed that expression of Myh7
and Mir208b was controlled by the dominant miRNA in mouse heart,
Mir208a. However, van Rooij et al. (2009) noted that, in large animals,
Myh7 is the predominant myosin in adult heart. In contrast, the
predominant myosin in adult mouse heart is Myh6, the host gene of
Mir208a. Thus, van Rooij et al. (2009) suggested that Mir208b, which
shares the same seed sequence as Mir208a, may fulfill the function of
Mir208a in large animals.

In mice, adult cardiomyocytes primarily express alpha-myosin heavy chain
(alpha-MHC, also known as Myh6; 160710), whereas embryonic
cardiomyocytes express beta-MHC (Myh7). Cardiac stress triggers adult
hearts to undergo hypertrophy and a shift from alpha-MHC to fetal
beta-MHC expression. Hang et al. (2010) showed that BRG1 (603254), a
chromatin-remodeling protein, has a critical role in regulating cardiac
growth, differentiation, and gene expression. In embryos, Brg1 promotes
myocyte proliferation by maintaining Bmp10 (608748) and suppressing
p57(kip2) (600856) expression. It preserves fetal cardiac
differentiation by interacting with histone deacetylases (HDACs; see
601241) and poly(ADP ribose) polymerase (PARP; 173870) to repress
alpha-MHC and activate beta-MHC. In adults, Brg1 (also known as Smarca4)
is turned off in cardiomyocytes. It is reactivated by cardiac stresses
and forms a complex with its embryonic partners, HDAC and PARP, to
induce a pathologic alpha-MHC-to-beta-MHC shift. Preventing Brg1
reexpression decreases hypertrophy and reverses this MHC switch. BRG1 is
activated in certain patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, its
level correlating with disease severity and MHC changes. Hang et al.
(2010) concluded that their studies showed that BRG1 maintains
cardiomyocytes in an embryonic state, and demonstrated an epigenetic
mechanism by which 3 classes of chromatin-modifying factors, BRG1, HDAC,
and PARP, cooperate to control developmental and pathologic gene
expression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy 1

McKenna (1993) estimated that 40 to 50% of cases of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (CMH; 192600) are due to mutations in the MYH7 gene. He
stated that Kaplan-Meier survival curves for these mutations showed that
the val606-to-met mutation (160760.0005) was associated with normal
survivorship, whereas the arg453-to-cys mutation (160760.0003) was
associated with death in about half the affected individuals by age 40
years.

Anan et al. (1994) presented a schematic of 15 mutations within the MYH7
gene that cause CMH. They described a phe513-to-cys mutation
(160760.0016) in which affected family members had near-normal life
expectancy, and an arg719-to-trp mutation (160760.0017) in 4 unrelated
CMH families with a high incidence of premature death and an average
life expectancy in affected individuals of 38 years. They suggested that
these findings supported the hypothesis that mutations that alter the
charge of the encoded amino acid affects survival more significantly
than those that produce a conservative amino acid change. Kelly and
Strauss (1994) pointed out that all but one of the known mutations of
the MYH7 gene that produce hypertrophic cardiomyopathy result in amino
acid substitutions in the protein head or the region in which the head
and rod of the molecule intersect. In their Figure 2, they diagrammed
the cardiac myosin heavy-chain dimer and the site of the mutations. They
suggested that these mutations represent dominant negatives by
disturbing contractile function despite the production of a normal
protein by the remaining normal allele. Consistent with this conclusion
is the finding of Cuda et al. (1993) that mutant beta-myosin separated
from the heart muscle in cases of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy of the
chromosome 14 type translocate actin filaments with an abnormally low
sliding velocity in motility assays in vitro.

Lankford et al. (1995) compared the contractile properties of single
slow-twitch muscle fibers from patients with 3 distinct CMH-causing MYH7
mutations with those from normal controls. Fibers from the gly741-to-arg
mutation (160760.0011), located near the binding site of essential light
chain, demonstrated decreased maximum velocity of shortening (39% of
normal) and decreased isometric force generation (42% of normal). Fibers
with the arg403-to-gln mutation (160760.0001) (at the actin interface of
myosin) showed lower force/stiffness ratio (56% of normal) and depressed
velocity of shortening (50% of normal). Both of these
mutation-containing fibers displayed abnormal force-velocity
relationships and reduced power output. Fibers from the gly256-to-glu
mutation (160760.0012), located at the end of the ATP-binding pocket,
had contractile properties that were indistinguishable from normal.
Thus, variability was found in the nature and extent of functional
impairments in skeletal fibers containing different MYH7 gene mutations,
and this variability may correlate with the severity and penetrance of
the disease resulting from each mutation.

Rayment et al. (1995) examined 29 missense mutations in the MYH7 gene
that are responsible for 10 to 30% of familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy cases and analyzed their effects on the 3-dimensional
structure of skeletal muscle myosin. Arai et al. (1995) reported a
thirtieth missense mutation and stated that these had been found in 49
families worldwide at that time. Almost all were located in the region
of the gene coding for the globular head of the molecule and only 1
mutation was found in both Caucasian and Japanese families.

Seidman (2000) pointed out that correlations between genotype and
prognosis in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is possible. Life expectancy is
markedly diminished in individuals with the R719W (160760.0017) and
R403Q (160760.0001) mutations in the MYH7 gene but near normal in
individuals with the E542Q (600958.0006) and 791insG (600958.0011)
mutations in the MYBPC3 gene.

Woo et al. (2003) screened 70 probands with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
for mutations in the beta-MHC gene. Mutations in this gene were detected
in 15 of 70 probands (21%). Eleven mutations were detected, including 4
novel mutations. Median survival was 66 years (95% CI 64 to 77 years) in
all affected subjects. There was a significant difference in survival
between subjects according to the affected functional domain.
Significant independent predictors of decreased survival were the
nonconservative missense mutations that affected the actin binding site
and those that affected the rod portion of beta-MHC.

Hougs et al. (2005) screened for mutations in the rod region (exons 24
to 40) of MYH7 in 92 Danish patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Using capillary electrophoresis single-strand conformation polymorphism,
3 disease-causing mutations of the rod region were identified in 4
patients, including the R1712W (160760.0032) mutation in 2 patients. Two
of the patients had already been shown to carry other FHC-associated
mutations.

Arad et al. (2005) identified 2 different MYH7 missense mutations in 2
probands with apical hypertrophy from families in which the mutations
also caused other CMH morphologies (see 160760.0038 and 160760.0039,
respectively), and 1 in a sporadic patient with apical hypertrophy
(R243H; 160760.0040).

In a consanguineous British family in which 3 sibs developed
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, respiratory failure, and myosin storage
myopathy (608358), Tajsharghi et al. (2007) identified homozygosity for
a missense mutation in the MYH7 gene (160760.0035).

In a Japanese proband with CMH (CMH17; 613873), Matsushita et al. (2007)
identified heterozygosity for a missense mutation in the JPH2 gene
(605267.0004); subsequent analysis of 15 known CMH-associated genes
revealed that the proband also carried 2 mutations in MYH7, F513C
(160760.0016) and A26V. The authors suggested that mutations in both
JPH2 and MYH7 could be associated with the pathogenesis of CMH in this
proband.

In a 32-year-old African American woman with severe hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and a family history of CMH and sudden cardiac death,
Frazier et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous mutation in the TNNI3
gene (P82S; 191044.0003) and a heterozygous mutation in the MYH7 gene
(R453S; 160760.0043).

- Dilated Cardiomyopathy 1S

Kamisago et al. (2000) performed clinical evaluations in 21 kindreds
with familial dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD1S; 613426). In a genomewide
linkage study, a genetic locus for mutations associated with dilated
cardiomyopathy was identified at chromosome 14q11.2-q13 (maximum lod
score = 5.11 at theta = 0.0). Analysis of MYH7 and other genes for
sarcomere proteins revealed heterozygous missense mutations in MYH7 in 2
kindreds (S532P, 160760.0022 and P764L, 160760.0023, respectively).
Affected individuals had neither antecedent cardiac hypertrophy nor
histopathologic findings characteristic of hypertrophy.

- Myosin Storage Myopathy, Laing Distal Myopathy, and Scapuloperoneal
Myopathy

In affected members of a family and in an unrelated patient with myosin
storage myopathy (608358), Tajsharghi et al. (2003) identified a
heterozygous mutation in the MYH7 gene (160760.0028).

Laing et al. (1995) mapped Laing distal myopathy (160500) to chromosome
14. In affected members of 7 separate families with Laing distal
myopathy, Meredith et al. (2004) sequenced the MYH7 gene, a positional
candidate for the site of the causative mutation. They identified 5
heterozygous mutations in 6 families (see 160760.0029-160760.0030) and
no mutations in the seventh family. All 5 mutations were predicted, by
in silico analysis, to disrupt locally the ability of the myosin tail to
form a coiled coil, which is its normal structure. The findings
demonstrated that heterozygous mutations toward the 3-prime end of MYH7
can cause Laing distal myopathy.

Pegoraro et al. (2007) conducted MYH7 gene analysis by
RT-PCR/SSCP/sequencing in 2 patients diagnosed with myosin storage
myopathy and 17 patients diagnosed with scapuloperoneal myopathy of
unknown etiology. They found the R1845W mutation of the MYH7 gene in
both cases of myosin storage myopathy and in 2 of the 17 scapuloperoneal
patients (181430) studied. 5533C-T segregation analysis in the mutation
carrier families identified 11 additional patients. The clinical
spectrum in this cohort of patients included asymptomatic hyperCKemia
(elevated serum creatine kinase), scapuloperoneal myopathy, and proximal
and distal myopathy with muscle hypertrophy. Muscle MRI identified a
unique pattern in the posterior compartment of the thigh, characterized
by early involvement of the biceps femoris and semimembranosus, with
relative sparing of the semitendinosus. Muscle biopsy revealed hyaline
bodies characteristic of myosin storage myopathy in only half of
biopsied patients (2 of 4). These patients without hyaline bodies had
been diagnosed with scapuloperoneal myopathy prior to the identification
of hyaline bodies in other family members, prompting MYH7 gene analysis.
The authors pointed out that patients without hyaline bodies presented
later onset and milder severity.

Armel and Leinwand (2009) analyzed the functional effects of 4 different
MYH7 mutations in the rod or tail domain that were found to be
responsible for myosin storage myopathy: R1845W (160760.0028), H1901L
(160760.0031), E1886K (160760.0035), and L1793P (160760.0037). None of
the mutations altered the secondary structure of the protein, but L1793P
and H1901L showed decreased thermodynamic stability. All mutations
decreased the extent of self-assembly of the light meromyosin rod (less
than 50 to 60%) compared to the wildtype protein. R1845W and H1901L
showed formation of more stable and larger filaments, whereas L1793P and
E1886K showed more rapid filament degradation. Armel and Leinwand (2009)
noted that the assembly of muscle filaments is a multistep process that
involves both the proper folding of alpha-helices into coiled-coils, and
the assembly of these coiled-coils, in proper register, into filaments,
and concluded that defects in any one of these steps can result in
improper filament formation leading to muscle disease.

- Left Ventricular Noncompaction 5

Klaassen et al. (2008) analyzed 6 genes encoding sarcomere proteins in
63 unrelated adult probands with left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC)
but no other congenital heart anomalies (see LVNC5; 613426), and
identified 7 different heterozygous mutations in the MYH7 gene in the
probands from 4 families and in 4 sporadic patients (see, e.g.,
160760.0040-160760.0042). Klaassen et al. (2008) noted that 5 of the 7
mutations were located within the genomic sequence of exon 8 to exon 9
of MYH7, which appeared to be a cluster for LVNC mutations.

In a mother with myosin storage myopathy, who later developed CMH, and
in her daughter, who had early-symptomatic LVNC, Uro-Coste et al. (2009)
identified heterozygosity for the L1793P mutation in MYH7 (160760.0037).

In an analysis of the MYH7 gene in 141 white probands of western
European descent diagnosed with Ebstein anomaly (see 224700), Postma et
al. (2011) identified heterozygous mutations in 8 (see, e.g.,
160760.0045 and 160760.0046). Of these 8 probands, LVNC was present in 7
and uncertain in 1, whereas none of the 133 mutation-negative probands
had LVNC. Evaluation of all available family members of
mutation-positive probands revealed 3 families in which additional
mutation-positive individuals had cardiomyopathy or congenital heart
malformations, including type II atrial septal defect, ventricular
septal defect, bicuspid aortic valve, aortic coarctation, and pulmonary
artery stenosis/hypoplasia.

ANIMAL MODEL

Geisterfer-Lowrance et al. (1996) engineered the human CMH cardiac
myosin heavy chain gene mutation arg403-to-gln (R403Q) into the mouse
genome to create a murine model of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.
Homozygous mice died within a week after birth, while heterozygous mice
displayed both histologic and hemodynamic abnormalities characteristic
of CMH. In addition, the CMH mice demonstrated gender and developmental
differences. Male CMH mice demonstrated more severe myocyte hypertrophy,
disarray, and interstitial fibrosis than their female littermates, and
both sexes showed increased cardiac dysfunction and histopathology as
they aged. Heterozygous CMH mice also had sudden death of uncertain
etiology, especially during periods of exercise. Berul et al. (1997)
found that in contrast to wildtype mice which had completely normal
cardiac electrophysiology, CMH mice demonstrated (a)
electrocardiographic abnormalities including prolonged repolarization
intervals and rightward axis; (b) electrophysiologic abnormalities
including heterogeneous ventricular conduction properties and prolonged
sinus node recovery time; and (c) inducible ventricular ectopy.

Fatkin et al. (1999) reported further studies of the CMH mouse in which
the arg403-to-gln mutation had been introduced by homologous
recombination. Heterozygous mice developed myocardial histologic
abnormalities similar to those in human CMH by 15 weeks of age.
Sedentary heterozygous mice had a normal life span. Homozygous mutant
mice were liveborn, but, unlike their heterozygous littermates, all died
within 1 week. Fatkin et al. (1999) found that neonatal lethality was
caused by a fulminant dilated cardiomyopathy characterized by myocyte
dysfunction and loss. They studied cardiac dimensions and functions for
the first time in neonatal mice by high frequency (45 MHz)
echocardiography and found that both were normal at birth. Between days
4 and 6, homozygous deficient mice developed a rapidly progressive
cardiomyopathy with left ventricular dilation, wall thinning, and
reduced systolic contraction. Histopathology revealed myocardial
necrosis with dystrophic calcification. Electron microscopy showed
normal architecture intermixed with focal myofibrillar disarray. Fatkin
et al. (1999) speculated that variable incorporation of mutant and
normal MYHC into sarcomeres of heterozygotes may account for focal
myocyte death in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

In R403Q-knockin mice, Gao et al. (1999) observed that during twitch
contractions, peak intracellular Ca(2+) was higher in mutant muscles
than in wildtype muscles, but force development was equivalent in both.
Developed force fell at higher stimulation rates in the mutants but not
in controls. Gao et al. (1999) concluded that calcium cycling and
myofilament properties are both altered in CMH mutant mice.

Marian et al. (1999) created a transgenic rabbit model of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy by injecting a transgene carrying the R403Q mutation into
fertilized zygotes. Expression of transgene mRNA and protein were
confirmed by Northern blotting and 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis
followed by immunoblotting, respectively. Animals carrying the mutant
transgene showed substantial myocyte disarray and a 3-fold increase in
interstitial collagen expression in the myocardium. Mean septal
thickness was comparable between rabbits carrying the wildtype transgene
and nontransgenic littermates, but was significantly increased in the
mutant transgenic animals. Posterior wall thickness and left ventricular
mass were also increased, but dimensions and systolic function were
normal. Premature death was more common in mutant than in wildtype
transgenic rabbits or in nontransgenic littermates. Thus, the phenotype
of patients with the R403Q mutation of the MYH7 was reproduced.

To minimize confounding variables while assessing relationships between
CMH histopathology and arrhythmia vulnerability, Wolf et al. (2005)
generated inbred CMH mice carrying the R403Q mutation and observed
variable susceptibility to arrhythmias, differences in ventricular
hypertrophy, and variable amounts and distribution of fibrosis and
myocyte disarray. There was no correlation between the amount and/or
pattern of fibrosis or the quantity of myocyte disarray and the
propensity for arrhythmia as assessed by ex vivo high-resolution mapping
and in vivo electrophysiologic study; however, the amount of ventricular
hypertrophy was significantly associated with increased arrhythmia
susceptibility. Wolf et al. (2005) concluded that the 3 cardinal
manifestations of CMH (cardiac hypertrophy, myocyte fibrosis, and
disarray) reflect independent pathologic processes within myocytes
carrying a sarcomere gene mutation and that the severity of fibrosis and
disarray is substantially influenced by unknown somatic factors, and
they suggested that a shared pathway triggered by sarcomere gene
mutations links cardiac hypertrophy and arrhythmias in CMH.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG403GLN

In the large French-Canadian kindred originally reported by Pare et al.
(1961) and shown to have linkage of the cardiac disorder (192600) to
markers on the proximal portion of 14q, Geisterfer-Lowrance et al.
(1990) found a missense mutation in the beta cardiac myosin heavy chain
that converted arginine-403 to glutamine (R403Q). A guanine residue at
position 10,162 (enumerated as in Jaenicke et al., 1990) was mutated to
an adenine residue. The mutation generated a new DdeI site and changed
the CGG(arg) codon to CAG(gln). Perryman et al. (1992) found that the
R403Q mutation was identifiable in myocardial mRNA. Ross and Knowlton
(1992) reviewed this discovery beginning with the patients first seen by
Pare in the 1950s.

Using an isolated, isovolumic heart preparation where cardiac
performance was measured simultaneously with cardiac energetics using
(31)P nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, Spindler et al. (1998)
studied the effects of the codon 403 missense mutation. They observed 3
major alterations in the physiology and bioenergetics of the mutant
mouse hearts. First, while there was no evidence for systolic
dysfunction, diastolic function was impaired during inotropic
stimulation. Diastolic dysfunction was manifest as both a decreased rate
of left ventricular relaxation and an increase in end-diastolic
pressure. Second, under baseline conditions the mutant R403Q mouse
hearts had lower phosphocreatine and increased inorganic phosphate
contents resulting in a decrease in the calculated value for the free
energy released from ATP hydrolysis. Third, mutant hearts that were
studied unpaced responded to increased perfusate calcium by decreasing
heart rate approximately twice as much as wildtypes. The authors
concluded that the hearts from mice carrying the R403Q mutation have
workload-dependent diastolic dysfunction resembling the human form of
familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Changes in high-energy phosphate
content suggested that an energy-requiring process may contribute to the
observed diastolic dysfunction.

Bashyam et al. (2003) pointed out that polymorphism in the ACE1 gene
(106180) had been shown to affect the prognosis in familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. The DD allele of the ACE1 gene (106180.0001) was
associated with a severe form of hypertrophy and sudden death in
patients with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Iwai et al., 1994).
Tesson et al. (1997) established an association of the D allele at the
ACE1 locus with the R403Q mutation in MYH7, but not with MYBPC3 (600958)
mutations.

.0002
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG249GLN

Using a ribonuclease protection assay, Watkins et al. (1992) screened
the beta cardiac myosin heavy-chain genes of probands from 25 unrelated
families with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600). Seven
different mutations were identified in 12 of the 25 families; see
160760.0003-160760.0007. All were missense mutations; 5 were clustered
in the head of the beta-chain, which comprises the 5-prime 866 amino
acids, and 2 were located in the 5-prime or hinge portion of the rod
part. Six of the mutations resulted in a change in the charge of the
amino acid. These patients had a shorter life expectancy (mean age at
death, 33 years) than did patients with the one mutation that did not
produce a change in charge, val606-to-met. One of the mutations they
found was a substitution of glutamine for arginine-249.

.0003
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG453CYS

See 160760.0002. Watkins et al. (1992) found substitution of cysteine
for arginine-453 in 2 unrelated families with familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (192600). One of the families also had an alpha/beta
cardiac myosin heavy chain hybrid gene which was presumably of no
functional significance, inasmuch as the 5-prime promoter region was
derived from the alpha subunit.

In a 3-generation Chinese family, Ko et al. (1996) observed the
coexistence of sudden death and end-stage heart failure due to the
arg453-to-cys mutation. The average age of death in affected members of
the family was 34 years.

.0004
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLY584ARG

See 160760.0002. Watkins et al. (1992) found the gly584-to-arg mutation
in 2 unrelated families with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(192600).

.0005
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, VAL606MET

See 160760.0002. Watkins et al. (1992) found this mutation in 3
unrelated families with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600).
Of the 7 mutations they found, this was the only one that produced no
change in the charge of the amino acid. Although the affected patients
did not differ in other clinical manifestations of familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, patients in this family had nearly normal survival; mean
age at death was 33 years in the 11 families with one or another
mutation that substituted an amino acid with a different charge.

Blair et al. (2001) identified the val606-to-met mutation in a family in
which 2 individuals had suffered sudden death at an early age. The
mutation was found to be in cis with an ala728-to-val (A728V) mutation
(160760.0025).

.0006
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLU924LYS

See 160760.0002. Watkins et al. (1992) found this mutation in 1 family
with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600). The mutation was
found in exon 23 by RNase protection assay. It occurred as a new
mutation in a 44-year-old female; the parents lacked the mutation which,
however, was transmitted to her 24-year-old daughter.

.0007
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLU949LYS

See 160760.0002. Watkins et al. (1992) found this mutation in 1 family
with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600).

.0008
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG723CYS

Among 7 individuals with sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600),
Watkins et al. (1992) identified mutations in the beta cardiac MHC genes
in 2. Since the parents were neither clinically nor genetically
affected, the authors concluded that the mutations in each proband arose
de novo. Transmission of the mutation and disease to an offspring
occurred in 1 pedigree (160760.0006), predicting that these were
germline mutations. One proband, a 40-year-old female, was shown by
RNase protection assay to have a C-to-T transition in exon 20 at
nucleotide 2253, leading to a change from arginine to cysteine at codon
723. Arginine residue 723 is conserved among all known cardiac MHCs and
all vertebrate striated muscle MHCs except the human perinatal and
rabbit skeletal isoforms; mutation of a cysteine residue constitutes a
nonconservative substitution with a change in net charge.

.0009
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, 2.4-KB DEL

In a family with several members affected with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (192600), Marian et al. (1992) identified a novel 9.5-kb
BamHI RFLP detected by an MYH7 probe on Southern blots of DNA from the
proband. PCR was used to amplify the segment of the gene; sequence
analysis showed a 2.4-kb deletion involving 1 allele. The deletion
included part of intron 39, exon 40 including the 3-prime untranslated
region and the polyadenylation signal, and part of the region between
the beta and alpha myosin heavy chain genes. The deletion was inherited
by 2 daughters of the proband and a grandson, aged 33, 32, and 10 years,
respectively, who were, however, free of signs of the disorder. The
67-year-old proband had late onset of the disorder which was first
diagnosed in him at the age of 59 when he presented with atypical chest
pain, lightheadedness, and decreased exercise tolerance. On cardiac
examination, he showed an S4 heart sound and a systolic ejection murmur.
EKG showed left ventricular hypertrophy with repolarization
abnormalities. Ventricular hypertrophy was demonstrated by
echocardiogram which also showed systolic anterior motion of the
anterior leaflet of the mitral valve. There was a 25-mm Hg left
ventricular outflow tract gradient. From observations in C. elegans, it
was predicted that an unstable mRNA might result from this mutation.

.0010
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, LEU908VAL

Fananapazir et al. (1993) found evidence, on soleus muscle biopsy, of
central core disease (117000) in 10 of 13 hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
patients with the leu908-to-val mutation. Although the mutations in the
MYH7 gene were associated with skeletal muscle changes characteristic of
central core disease, such was not found in patients with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy unlinked to MYH7. Notably, in 1 branch of a family with
the L908V mutation, 2 adults and 3 children had histologic changes of
central core disease without evidence of cardiac hypertrophy by
echocardiogram. One of the adults had skeletal myopathic changes.
McKenna (1993), who stated that he had never seen clinical evidence of
skeletal myopathy in patients with CMH1 (192600), doubted the
significance of the findings.

.0011
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLY741ARG

In 1 of 3 patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600) and the
G741R mutation, Fananapazir et al. (1993) found microscopic changes of
central core disease on soleus muscle biopsy.

.0012
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLY256GLU

In 1 patient with the G256E mutation and familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (192600), Fananapazir et al. (1993) found histologic
changes on soleus muscle biopsy consistent with central core disease.

.0013
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ASP778GLY

Using PCR-DNA conformation polymorphism analysis, Harada et al. (1993)
found an A-to-G transition at codon 778 leading to replacement of the
asp residue by gly. The mutation was found in 5 unrelated Japanese
patients and their affected family members with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (192600).

.0014
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG403LEU

In 2 French pedigrees with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(192600), Dausse et al. (1993) performed linkage analysis using 2
microsatellite markers located in the MYH7 gene, as well as 4 highly
informative markers that mapped to the 14q11-q12 region. Linkage to the
markers was found in pedigree 720, but results were not conclusive for
pedigree 730. Haplotype of 6 markers allowed identification of affected
individuals and of some unaffected subjects who were carrying the
disease gene. Two novel missense mutations were identified in exon 13 by
direct sequencing: arg403-to-leu and arg403-to-trp in families 720 and
730, respectively. The arg403-to-leu mutation was associated with
incomplete penetrance, a high incidence of sudden deaths and severe
cardiac events, whereas the consequences of the arg403-to-trp mutation
appeared to be less severe. Codon 403 of the MYH7 gene appears,
therefore, to be a hotspot for mutations causing CMH. The first mutation
identified in this disorder involved codon 403 (160760.0001).

.0015
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG403TRP

See 160760.0014.

.0016
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, PHE513CYS

In a family of Japanese ancestry in which a mild form of familial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600) occurred, Anan et al. (1994) found
a 1624T-G transversion in exon 15, resulting in a phe513-to-cys (F513C)
substitution. The F513C mutation did not alter the charge of the encoded
amino acid, which may be related to the finding of near-normal life
expectancy in this family.

In a Japanese proband with CMH (CMH17; 613873), Matsushita et al. (2007)
identified heterozygosity for a missense mutation in the JPH2 gene
(605267.0004); subsequent analysis of 15 known CMH-associated genes
revealed that the proband also carried 2 heterozygous mutations in MYH7,
F513C and A26V. Her newborn son, who had no signs of CMH on
echocardiography at 1 day of age, carried both the JPH2 G505S mutation
and the MYH7 A26V mutation. The authors suggested that mutations in both
JPH2 and MYH7 could be associated with the pathogenesis of CMH in this
proband.

.0017
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG719TRP

In 4 unrelated families with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600) with a
high incidence of premature death and an average life expectancy in
affected individuals of 38 years, Anan et al. (1994) found an R719W
mutation in exon 19 changing the charge of the amino acid by -1. The
difference in survival of individuals bearing the R719W mutation as
compared with those with the F513C mutation (160760.0016) was
demonstrated by Kaplan-Meier product-limit curves (their Figure 4).

In a 6.5-year-old boy with a severe form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy,
Jeschke et al. (1998) identified 2 missense mutations: one was the R719W
mutation and the other was an M349T mutation (160760.0020), which was
inherited through the maternal grandmother. Six family members who were
carriers of the M349T mutation were clinically unaffected. The authors
hypothesized that compound heterozygosity for the R719W and M349T
mutations resulted in the particularly severe phenotype of early onset.

.0018
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLY716ARG

In a small family from the U.K. in which 2 individuals affected by
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600) were alive, including one who had
been resuscitated after sudden death at age 19, Anan et al. (1994) found
a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 2232 resulting in a gly716-to-arg
(G716R) substitution (charge change = +1) of the encoded amino acid.

.0019
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLU935LYS

In 2 brothers with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600) who died in
their thirties, Nishi et al. (1994) found a G-to-A transition in codon
935 of the MYH7 gene, leading to a replacement of glutamic acid with
lysine. The brothers were homozygous, whereas the parents, who were
first cousins, were heterozygous for the mutation and had cardiac
hypertrophy without clinical symptoms. An elder sister was also
heterozygous for the mutation but did not manifest cardiac hypertrophy.
Nishi et al. (1994) suggested that there was a gene dosage effect on
clinical manifestations in this family.

.0020
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, MET349THR

See 160760.0017 and Jeschke et al. (1998).

.0021
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG719GLN

In a study of mutations causing hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600) in
2 South African subpopulations, Moolman-Smook et al. (1999) identified
an arg719-to-gln (R719Q) mutation in the MYH7 gene. The mutation
occurred in a family of white ancestry and had previously been described
by Watkins et al. (1992) in a Canadian family. The codon is the same as
that involved in the arg719-to-trp mutation (160760.0017).

.0022
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1S
MYH7, SER532PRO

In a family with familial dilated cardiomyopathy-1S (613426), Kamisago
et al. (2000) demonstrated a T-to-C change at nucleotide 1680 in exon 16
of the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene, causing a ser532-to-pro
missense mutation. An affected member of this family had received a
cardiac transplant cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene. An affected
member of this family had received a cardiac transplant at 23 years of
age. A 20-year-old female suffered postpartum congestive heart failure
and sudden death. A female child developed congestive heart failure at 2
years of age.

.0023
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1S
MYH7, PHE764LEU

In a family with familial dilated cardiomyopathy-1S (613426), Kamisago
et al. (2000) found a C-to-G transversion at nucleotide 2378 in exon 21
of the cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene, causing a phe764-to-leu
missense mutation. The 33-year-old father was given a diagnosis of
dilated cardiomyopathy at age 11 years. A daughter died suddenly at the
age of 2 months. A 4-year-old daughter, diagnosed with dilated
cardiomyopathy at the time of birth, was found to have fetal left
ventricular dilatation.

.0024
CARDIOMYOPATHY, HYPERTROPHIC, MIDVENTRICULAR, DIGENIC
MYH7, GLU743ASP

Davis et al. (2001) identified a double point mutation in the MYLK2 gene
(606566) on the maternal haplotype in a 13-year-old white male proband
with early midventricular hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (see 192600). The
MYLK2 mutations were ala87 to val (A87V; 606566.0001) and ala95 to glu
(A95E; 606566.0002). The proband also inherited a glu743-to-asp mutation
(E743D) in the beta-myosin gene (MYH7) from his father. Although the son
had significant disease at an early age, the father and mother came to
medical attention only after the diagnosis of the son. Echocardiographic
evaluation showed that both parents had similarly abnormal
asymmetrically thickened hearts. The kindred was too small for linkage
analysis, and the authors proposed that the mutant MYLK2 may be
functionally abnormal and may consequently stimulate cardiac
hypertrophy. Davis et al. (2001) concluded that the increased severity
of the disease at such a young age in the proband suggests a compound
effect.

.0025
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ALA728VAL

Blair et al. (2001) identified a C-to-T transition in exon 20 resulting
in an ala728-to-val (A728V) mutation in cis with a val606-to-met (V606M;
160760.0005) mutation in a family in which 3 individuals had suffered
sudden death. Blair et al. (2001) suggested that this second mutation in
cis with the V606M mutation was responsible for the more severe
phenotype in this family.

.0026
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1S
MYH7, ALA223THR

In a series of 46 young patients with dilated cardiomyopathy-1S
(613426), Daehmlow et al. (2002) identified 2 mutations in the MYH7
gene, one of which was a G-to-A transition in exon 8 at nucleotide 7799,
resulting in an ala223-to-thr (A223T) substitution. The mutation
affected a buried residue near the ATP-binding site. The patient with
this mutation was 35 years old when diagnosed with dilated
cardiomyopathy.

.0027
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1S
MYH7, SER642LEU

In a series of 46 young patients with dilated cardiomyopathy-1S
(613426), Daehmlow et al. (2002) found 2 mutations in the MYH7 gene, one
of which was a C-to-T transition in exon 17 at nucleotide 12164,
resulting in a ser642-to-leu (S642L) substitution at a highly conserved
residue. The mutation occurred at the actin-myosin interface. The
patient with this mutation was 18 years old when diagnosed with dilated
cardiomyopathy.

.0028
MYOPATHY, MYOSIN STORAGE
SCAPULOPERONEAL MYOPATHY, MYH7-RELATED, INCLUDED
MYH7, ARG1845TRP

In affected members of a family and in an unrelated patient with myosin
storage myopathy (608358) without cardiomyopathy, Tajsharghi et al.
(2003) identified a heterozygous 23014C-T transition in the MYH7 gene,
resulting in an arg1845-to-trp (R1845W) substitution. The mutation is
located in the distal end of the filament-forming rod region of the
protein. Tajsharghi et al. (2003) suggested that the mutation may
interfere with the interaction of MYH7 with myosin-binding proteins and
inhibit myosin assembly into thick filaments.

Laing et al. (2005) identified the R1845W mutation in 2 unrelated
Belgian patients with myosin storage myopathy. Neither patient had a
family history of the disease. The mutation was predicted to impair the
coiled-coil structure of the protein.

Pegoraro et al. (2007) conducted MYH7 gene analysis by
RT-PCR/SSCP/sequencing in 2 patients diagnosed with myosin storage
myopathy and 17 patients diagnosed with scapuloperoneal myopathy of
unknown etiology. They found the arg1845-to-trp mutation of the MYH7
gene in both cases of myosin storage myopathy and in 2 of the 17
scapuloperoneal patients (181430) studied. 5533C-T segregation analysis
in the mutation carrier families identified 11 additional patients. The
clinical spectrum in this cohort of patients included asymptomatic
hyperCKemia (elevated serum creatine kinase), scapuloperoneal myopathy,
and proximal and distal myopathy with muscle hypertrophy. Muscle MRI
identified a unique pattern in the posterior compartment of the thigh,
characterized by early involvement of the biceps femoris and
semimembranosus, with relative sparing of the semitendinosus. Pegoraro
et al. (2007) concluded that phenotypic and histopathologic variability
may underlie MYH7 gene mutation and that the absence of hyaline bodies
in muscle biopsies does not rule out MYH7 gene mutations.

By functional analysis, Armel and Leinwand (2009) showed that the R1845W
mutant protein was nearly indistinguishable from wildtype in both
secondary structural characteristics and biophysical parameters.
However, compared to the wildtype protein, the mutant protein was unable
to assemble to the same extent, formed larger structures, and formed
more stable paracrystals. The results suggested that the R1845W mutation
alters the interactions between filaments such that their assembly is
less constrained, causing the formation of abnormally large,
degradation-resistant structures. Similar results were found for H1901L
(160760.0031).

.0029
LAING DISTAL MYOPATHY
MYH7, ARG1500PRO

In an Australian patient with sporadic Laing distal myopathy (160500),
Meredith et al. (2004) identified an arg1500-to-pro (R1500P) mutation in
exon 32 of the MYH7 gene. Mild talipes equinovarus had been noted at
birth but corrected itself. By the time the patient was 4 years old, she
was noted to have weakness of ankle dorsiflexion. Progressive weakness
of legs and hands followed, with involvement of the arms at 11 years of
age.

.0030
LAING DISTAL MYOPATHY
MYH7, LYS1617DEL

In affected members of previously reported families with Laing distal
myopathy (160500) from Germany (Voit et al., 2001) and Austria (Zimprich
et al., 2000), Meredith et al. (2004) identified deletion of a lysine at
position 1617 in exon 34 of the MYH7 gene.

.0031
MYOPATHY, MYOSIN STORAGE
MYH7, HIS1904LEU

In affected members of a Saudi Arabian family with autosomal dominant
hyaline body myopathy, or myosin storage myopathy (608358), reported by
Bohlega et al. (2003), Bohlega et al. (2004) identified a 25596A-T
transversion in the MYH7 gene, resulting in a his1904-to-leu (H1904L)
substitution in a highly conserved residue in the coiled-coil tail
region of the protein. The mutation was not identified in 130 control
chromosomes. None of the patients had cardiac abnormalities. The authors
noted that the H1904L mutation is adjacent to a critical assembly
competent domain and suggested that the mutation may cause improper
assembly of the thick filament or interfere with stability of the
protein.

Oldfors et al. (2005) used a different numbering system and stated that
the mutation described by Bohlega et al. (2004) should be HIS1901LEU.
They asserted that the histidine at residue 1901 occupies the 'f'
position of the heptad repeat of the coiled-coil domain, whereas residue
1904 is not at an 'f' position in the heptad repeat sequence. In
response, Meyer (2005) stated that the mutation occupies an 'f' position
regardless of the numbering system used.

By functional analysis, Armel and Leinwand (2009), who also referred to
this mutation as H1901L, indicated that the mutant protein had decreased
thermodynamic stability. In addition, the extent of assembly of the tail
region was decreased compared to wildtype, and the paracrystals were
much larger and more stable than wildtype. The findings suggested that
the E1901L mutation alters the interactions between filaments such that
larger, more stable structures are formed. Similar results were observed
for R1845W (160760.0028).

.0032
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG1712TRP

In 2 Danish patients with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600),
Hougs et al. (2005) identified a 21815C-T transition in exon 35 of the
MYH7 gene, resulting in an arg1712-to-trp substitution (R1712W) in the
myosin rod region.

.0033
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLU483LYS

In a family with CMH (192600) previously reported by Hengstenberg et al.
(1993, 1994), Richard et al. (1999) found that of 8 affected members, 4
had a G-to-A transition in exon 15 of the MYH7 gene, leading to a
glu483-to-lys (E483K) substitution; 2 had a G-to-T mutation at codon
1096 of the MYBPC3 gene (600958.0014) and 2 were doubly heterozygous for
the 2 mutations. The E483K mutation was thought to affect a protein
domain involved in actin fixation.

.0034
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG870HIS

In 3 affected members of a large consanguineous Indian kindred with
familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (192600), Tanjore et al. (2006)
identified a G-to-A transition in exon 22 of the MYH7 gene, resulting in
an arg870-to-his (R870H) substitution in the rod region. The 2 affected
homozygotes had asymmetric septal hypertrophy without obstructive
outflow, and one of them died of heart failure at age 37 years. The
third patient was heterozygous for the R870H mutation and had
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with obstructive outflow. Analysis of family
members identified the heterozygous R870H mutation in 18 individuals, of
whom 10 were symptomatic. Tanjore et al. (2006) estimated the penetrance
of the R870H mutation to be 59% in general, whereas 75% of males and 44%
of females were clinically symptomatic, suggesting that female mutation
carriers have a better prognosis.

.0035
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYOPATHY, MYOSIN STORAGE, INCLUDED
MYH7, GLU1883LYS

In a 44-year-old male with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and respiratory
failure (192600), born of second-cousin British parents, Tajsharghi et
al. (2007) identified homozygosity for a 24012G-A transition in exon 38
of the MYH7 gene, resulting in a glu1883-to-lys (E1883K) substitution at
a highly conserved residue in the distal end of the filament-forming rod
region. The proband had 2 similarly affected sibs who had died at ages
32 years and 57 years of cardiorespiratory failure; muscle biopsies from
all 3 sibs showed findings typical for myosin storage myopathy (608358).
The unaffected parents were presumed heterozygous carriers of the
mutation, and another sib was unaffected. There was no family history of
muscle weakness.

By functional analysis, Armel and Leinwand (2009), who referred to this
mutation as E1886K, showed that the mutant protein showed no major
differences in secondary structure or biophysical parameters from
wildtype. However, that mutant protein had a decreased ability to
assemble to the same extent as wildtype, and the paracrystals formed
were more readily degraded by proteolysis. The authors concluded that
altered packing of the filaments may destabilize them.

.0036
LAING DISTAL MYOPATHY
MYH7, THR441MET

In a Tanzanian boy with Laing distal myopathy (160500), Darin et al.
(2007) identified a heterozygous 1408C-T transition in the MYH7 gene,
resulting in a thr441-to-met (T441M) substitution in the globular head
of the myosin heavy chain. The patient had distal muscle weakness in the
lower limbs and mild atrial enlargement. Darin et al. (2007) noted that
most patients with Laing myopathy have mutations in the rod region of
the protein and suggested that the cardiac involvement in this child may
be due to the mutation affecting the globular region.

.0037
MYOPATHY, MYOSIN STORAGE
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1, INCLUDED;;
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 5, INCLUDED
MYH7, LEU1793PRO

In 1 of 2 sibs with myosin storage myopathy (608358) originally reported
by Cancilla et al. (1971), Dye et al. (2006) identified a heterozygous
5378T-C transition in exon 37 of the MYH7 gene, resulting in a
leu1793-to-pro (L1793P) substitution in the light meromyosin (LMM)
region of the myosin heavy chain tail. The sibs presumably had the
disease because of gonadal mosaicism in 1 of the unaffected parents,
although this could not be confirmed.

By functional analysis, Armel and Leinwand (2009) showed that the L1793P
mutation did not differ in protein secondary structure or in the
alpha-helical content compared to wildtype, but decreased thermodynamic
stability compared to wildtype. The L1793P mutation altered the ability
of LMM to assemble, presumably because of the increased instability of
the molecule. Although the paracrystals formed were similar to wildtype,
they were more susceptible to proteolytic cleavage. The authors
suggested that the L1793P mutation destabilized the dimer interface
under conditions similar to those found in vivo, which affects the
ability of LMM to assemble properly.

In a mother with myosin storage myopathy who later developed
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH1; 192600) and in her daughter who had
early symptomatic left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC5; see 613426),
Uro-Coste et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for the L1793P
mutation in MYH7. The daughter did not complain of muscle weakness, but
clinical examination revealed bilateral wasting of the distal leg
anterior compartment, and she had some difficulty with heel-walking.

.0038
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, GLU497ASP

In affected members of a family with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-1
(192600), Arad et al. (2005) identified heterozygosity for a
glu497-to-asp (E497D) substitution in the MYH7 gene. The proband had
apical hypertrophy with associated electrocardiographic changes of left
ventricular hypertrophy and deeply inverted precordial T waves, whereas
a family member with concurrent coronary artery disease who carried the
mutation had massive concentric hypertrophy with an interventricular
septal thickness of 29 mm.

.0039
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ASP906GLY

In 2 sibs with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-1 (192600), Arad et al.
(2005) identified heterozygosity for an asp906-to-gly (D906G)
substitution in the MYH7 gene. The proband had apical hypertrophy,
whereas the sib, who had sudden death at 45 years of age, was found on
necropsy to have massive asymmetrical left ventricular hypertrophy with
an interventricular septal thickness greater than 30 mm and a posterior
left ventricular wall that was 18 mm thick. Arad et al. (2005) noted
that the D906G mutation had previously been identified by Ho et al.
(2002) in 22 affected members of a CMH family with a range of maximum
left ventricular wall thickness of 13 to 29 mm; none had apical
hypertrophy.

.0040
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 5, INCLUDED
MYH7, ARG243HIS

In a 40-year-old man with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-1 (192600) who
presented with presyncope and was found to have apical hypertrophy, Arad
et al. (2005) identified heterozygosity for an arg243-to-his (R243H)
substitution in the MYH7 gene.

In affected members of a 3-generation family segregating autosomal
dominant left ventricular noncompaction but no other congenital heart
anomalies (LVNC5; see 613426), previously studied by Sasse-Klaassen et
al. (2003) as 'family INVM-107,' Klaassen et al. (2008) identified
heterozygosity for an 814G-A transition in the MYH7 gene, resulting in
the R243H substitution. Noncompaction in all 4 affected individuals
involved the apex and mid-left ventricular wall, and the right ventricle
was involved as well in 2 patients.

.0041
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 5
MYH7, IVS8DS, G-A, +1

In affected members of 2 families segregating autosomal dominant left
ventricular noncompaction but no other congenital heart anomalies
(LVNC5; see 613426), 1 of which was previously studied by Sasse-Klaassen
et al. (2003) as 'family INVM-101,' Klaassen et al. (2008) identified
heterozygosity for an 818+1G-A transition at the splice donor site in
intron 8 of the MYH7 gene. The mutation segregated with disease in both
families; haplotype analysis ruled out a founding mutation. Clinical
evaluation in both families was remarkable for the very pronounced
morphology of LVNC. The proband of family INVM-101 was diagnosed because
of inverted T-waves and later had a stroke and systemic peripheral
emboli, whereas his brother initially presented with decompensated heart
failure and pulmonary emboli; both patients remained stable over a
period of 8 years. Other affected members of family INVM-101 fulfilled
morphologic LVNC criteria but were clinically asymptomatic. The proband
of the other family was diagnosed because of atypical chest pain; he and
his affected 8-year-old son had no signs of heart failure.

.0042
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 5
MYH7, ALA1766THR

In a 20-year-old man with left ventricular noncompaction but no other
congenital heart anomalies (LVNC5; see 613426), Klaassen et al. (2008)
identified heterozygosity for a de novo 5382G-A transition in exon 37 of
the MYH7 gene, resulting in an ala1766-to-thr (A1766T) substitution. The
proband was initially diagnosed due to arrhythmias on routine
electrocardiogram, but his left ventricular systolic function
subsequently deteriorated over a period of 6 years; sustained
ventricular tachycardia resulted in implantation of an intracardiac
defibrillator. The mutation was not present in his unaffected parents.

.0043
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 1
MYH7, ARG453SER

In a 32-year-old African American woman with severe hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and a family history of CMH and sudden cardiac death,
Frazier et al. (2008) identified heterozygosity for a 1357C-A
transversion in exon 14 of the MYH7 gene, resulting in an arg453-to-ser
(R453S) substitution, as well as a heterozygous missense mutation in the
TNNI3 gene (191044.0003). Her affected 8-year-old daughter carried only
the heterozygous MYH7 mutation.

.0044
LAING DISTAL MYOPATHY
MYH7, 3-BP DEL, AAG

In affected members of an Italian American family with Laing distal
myopathy (160500) reported by Hedera et al. (2003), Meredith et al.
(2004) identified a heterozygous 3-bp deletion of 1 of 3 consecutive AAG
triplets in exon 36 of the MYH7 gene, resulting in the deletion of
lys1729 (lys1729del).

Muelas et al. (2010) identified the lys1729del mutation in 29 clearly
affected individuals from 4 unrelated families in the Safor region of
Spain. There was great phenotypic variability. The age at onset ranged
from congenital to 50 years, with a mean of 14 years. All patients
presented with weakness of great toe/ankle dorsiflexors, and many had
associated neck flexor (78%), finger extensor (78%), mild facial (70%),
or proximal muscle (65%) weakness. Five patients had cardiac
abnormalities, including dilated cardiomyopathy, left ventricular
relaxation impairment, and conduction abnormalities. The spectrum of
disability ranged from asymptomatic to wheelchair-confined, but life
expectancy was not affected. EMG showed myopathic and neurogenic
features, and muscle biopsies showed fiber type disproportion,
core/minicore lesions, and mitochondrial abnormalities. These findings
expanded the phenotypic spectrum of Laing myopathy, but the wide
spectrum associated with a single mutation was noteworthy.

Muelas et al. (2012) identified a common 41.2-kb short haplotype
including the lys1729del mutation in both Spanish patients from the
Safor region and in the Italian American family reported by Hedera et
al. (2003), indicating a founder effect. However, microsatellite markers
both up- and downstream of the mutation did not match, indicating
multiple recombination events. The mutation was estimated to have been
introduced into the Safor population about 375 to 420 years ago (15
generations ago). The region is located in the southeast of Valencia on
the Mediterranean coast of Spain. Muelas et al. (2012) hypothesized that
the families from Safor were descendants of the Genoese who had
repopulated this Spanish region in the 17th century after the Muslims
were expelled; in fact, many of the surnames of the Safor families with
Laing myopathy had an Italian origin.

.0045
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 5
MYH7, TYR283ASP

In affected individuals from 2 white families of western European
descent segregating autosomal dominant left ventricular noncompaction
(LVNC5; 613426), Postma et al. (2011) identified heterozygosity for a
mutation at nucleotide 933 in exon 10 of the MYH7 gene, resulting in a
tyr283-to-asp (Y283D) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
mutation segregated with disease in both families and was not found in
more than 980 ethnically matched control chromosomes. The 2 probands had
other cardiac malformations in addition to LVNC, including Ebstein
anomaly in both as well as type II atrial septal defect in 1 and
pulmonary artery hypoplasia in the other. One family had 5 more affected
individuals over 3 generations, 2 of whom had other cardiac
malformations, including Ebstein anomaly in 1 and perimembranous
ventricular septal defect in 1; 2 of the patients had only mild left
ventricular apical hypertrabeculation. In the other family, the
proband's asymptomatic mutation-positive father was found to have LVNC
by screening echocardiography; in addition, a paternal aunt was reported
to have heart failure, and the paternal grandfather had received an
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator.

.0046
LEFT VENTRICULAR NONCOMPACTION 5
MYH7, ASN1918LYS

In 4 affected individuals over 3 generations of a white family of
western European descent with left ventricular noncompaction (LVNC5;
613426), Postma et al. (2011) identified heterozygosity for a mutation
in exon 39 of the MYH7 gene, resulting in an asn1918-to-lys (N1918K)
substitution at a conserved residue. The mutation segregated with
disease in the family and was not found in more than 980 ethnically
matched control chromosomes. In addition to marked LVNC, the 39-year-old
proband exhibited Ebstein anomaly, which was discovered upon evaluation
of a cardiac murmur at 3 years of age. She remained asymptomatic despite
significant tricuspid regurgitation from age 30 years. She had a
mutation-positive son with bicuspid aortic valve and aortic coarctation
in whom echocardiography at age 5 years also showed LVNC. Her
asymptomatic mutation-positive mother and brother were both found to
have LVNC by echocardiography, and her brother also had LV dilation with
dysfunction. In an asymptomatic mutation-positive cousin, cardiomyopathy
could not be ruled out due to poor imaging quality.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Kurabayashi et al. (1988); Saez et al. (1987)
REFERENCE 1. Anan, R.; Greve, G.; Thierfelder, L.; Watkins, H.; McKenna, W.
J.; Solomon, S.; Vecchio, C.; Shono, H.; Nakao, S.; Tanaka, H.; Mares,
A., Jr.; Towbin, J. A.; Spirito, P.; Roberts, R.; Seidman, J. G.;
Seidman, C. E.: Prognostic implications of novel beta-cardiac myosin
heavy chain gene mutations that cause familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J.
Clin. Invest. 93: 280-285, 1994.

2. Arad, M.; Penas-Lado, M.; Monserrat, L.; Maron, B. J.; Sherrid,
M.; Ho, C. Y.; Barr, S.; Karim, A.; Olson, T. M.; Kamisago, M.; Seidman,
J. G.; Seidman, C. E.: Gene mutations in apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation 112:
2805-2811, 2005.

3. Arai, S.; Matsuoka, R.; Hirayama, K.; Sakurai, H.; Tamura, M.;
Ozawa, T.; Kimura, M.; Imamura, S.; Furutani, Y.; Joh-o, K.; Kawana,
M.; Takao, A.; Hosoda, S.; Momma, K.: Missense mutation of the beta-cardiac
myosin heavy-chain gene in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 58: 267-276, 1995.

4. Armel, T. Z.; Leinwand, L. A.: Mutations in the alpha-myosin rod
cause myosin storage myopathy via multiple mechanisms. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 106: 6291-6296, 2009.

5. Bashyam, M. D.; Savithri, G. R.; Kumar, M. S.; Narasimhan, C.;
Nallari, P.: Molecular genetics of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(FHC). J. Hum. Genet. 48: 55-64, 2003.

6. Berul, C. I.; Christe, M. E.; Aronovitz, M. J.; Seidman, C. E.;
Seidman, J. G.; Mendelsohn, M. E.: Electrophysiological abnormalities
and arrhythmias in alpha-MHC mutant familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
mice. J. Clin. Invest. 99: 570-576, 1997.

7. Blair, E.; Price, S. J.; Baty, C. J.; Ostman-Smith, I.; Watkins,
H.: Mutations in cis can confound genotype-phenotype correlations
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 38: 385-387,
2001.

8. Bohlega, S.; Abu-Amero, S. N.; Wakil, S. M.; Carroll, P.; Al-Amr,
R.; Lach, B.; Al-Sayed, Y.; Cupler, E. J.; Meyer, B. F.: Mutation
of the slow myosin heavy chain rod domain underlies hyaline body myopathy. Neurology 62:
1518-1521, 2004.

9. Bohlega, S.; Lach, B.; Meyer, B. F.; Al Said, Y.; Kambouris, M.;
Al Homsi, M.; Cupler, E. J.: Autosomal dominant hyaline body myopathy:
clinical variability and pathologic findings. Neurology 61: 1519-1523,
2003.

10. Cancilla, P. A.; Kalyanaraman, K.; Verity, M. A.; Munsat, T.;
Pearson, C. M.: Familial myopathy with probable lysis of myofibrils
in type 1 fibers. Neurology 21: 579-585, 1971.

11. Cuda, G.; Fananapazir, L.; Zhu, W.-S.; Sellers, J. R.; Epstein,
N. D.: Skeletal muscle expression and abnormal function of beta-myosin
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 91: 2861-2865,
1993.

12. Daehmlow, S.; Erdmann, J.; Knueppel, T.; Gille, C.; Froemmel,
C.; Hummel, M.; Hetzer, R.; Regitz-Zagrosek, V.: Novel mutations
in sarcomeric protein genes in dilated cardiomyopathy. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 298: 116-120, 2002.

13. Darin, N.; Tajsharghi, H.; Ostman-Smith, I.; Gilljam, T.; Oldfors,
A.: New skeletal myopathy and cardiomyopathy associated with a missense
mutation in MYH7. Neurology 68: 2041-2042, 2007.

14. Dausse, E.; Komajda, M.; Fetler, L.; Dubourg, O.; Dufour, C.;
Carrier, L.; Wisnewsky, C.; Bercovici, J.; Hengstenberg, C.; Al-Mahdawi,
S.; Isnard, R.; Hagege, A.; Bouhour, J.-B.; Desnos, M.; Beckmann,
J.; Weissenbach, J.; Schwartz, K.; Guicheney, P.: Familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy: microsatellite haplotyping and identification of a
hot spot for mutations in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene. J. Clin.
Invest. 92: 2807-2813, 1993.

15. Davis, J. S.; Hassanzadeh, S.; Winitsky, S.; Lin, H.; Satorius,
C.; Vemuri, R.; Aletras, A. H.; Wen, H.; Epstein, N. D.: The overall
pattern of cardiac contraction depends on a spatial gradient of myosin
regulatory light chain phosphorylation. Cell 107: 631-641, 2001.

16. Diederich, K. W.; Eisele, I.; Ried, T.; Jaenicke, T.; Lichter,
P.; Vosberg, H.-P.: Isolation and characterization of the complete
human beta-myosin heavy chain gene. Hum. Genet. 81: 214-220, 1989.

17. Dye, D. E.; Azzarelli, B.; Goebel, H. H.; Laing, N. G.: Novel
slow-skeletal myosin (MYH7) mutation in the original myosin storage
myopathy kindred. Neuromusc. Disord. 16: 357-360, 2006.

18. Fananapazir, L.; Dalakas, M. C.; Cyran, F.; Cohn, G.; Epstein,
N. D.: Missense mutations in the beta-myosin heavy-chain gene cause
central core disease in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 90: 3993-3997, 1993.

19. Fatkin, D.; Christe, M. E.; Aristizabal, O.; McConnell, B. K.;
Srinivasan, S.; Schoen, F. J.; Seidman, C. E.; Turnbull, D. H.; Seidman,
J. G.: Neonatal cardiomyopathy in mice homozygous for the arg403-to-gln
mutation in the alpha cardiac myosin heavy chain gene. J. Clin. Invest. 103:
147-153, 1999.

20. Frazier, A.; Judge, D. P.; Schulman, S. P.; Johnson, N.; Holmes,
K. W.; Murphy, A. M.: Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy associated
with cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain and troponin I mutations. Pediat.
Cardiol. 29: 846-850, 2008.

21. Gao, W. D.; Perez, N. G.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.; Marban,
E.: Altered cardiac excitation-contraction coupling in mutant mice
with familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 103:
661-666, 1999.

22. Geisterfer-Lowrance, A. A.; Christe, M.; Conner, D. A.; Ingwall,
J. S.; Schoen, F.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.: A mouse model
of familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Science 272: 731-734, 1996.

23. Geisterfer-Lowrance, A. A. T.; Kass, S.; Tanigawa, G.; Vosberg,
H.-P.; McKenna, W.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.: A molecular basis
for familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a beta cardiac myosin heavy
chain gene missense mutation. Cell 62: 999-1006, 1990.

24. Hang, C. T.; Yang, J.; Han, P.; Cheng, H.-L.; Shang, C.; Ashley,
E.; Zhou, B.; Chang, C.-P.: Chromatin regulation by Brg1 underlies
heart muscle development and disease. Nature 466: 62-67, 2010. Note:
Erratum: Nature 475: 532 only, 2011.

25. Harada, H.; Kimura, A.; Nishi, H.; Sasazuki, T.; Toshima, H.:
A missense mutation of cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene linked
to familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in affected Japanese families. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 194: 791-798, 1993.

26. Hedera, P.; Petty, E. M.; Bui, M. R.; Blaivas, M.; Fink, J. K.
: The second kindred with autosomal dominant distal myopathy linked
to chromosome 14q: genetic and clinical analysis. Arch. Neurol. 60:
1321-1325, 2003.

27. Hengstenberg, C.; Charron, P.; Beckmann, J. S.; Weissenbach, J.;
Isnard, R.; Komajda, M.; Schwartz, K.: Evidence for the existence
of a fifth gene causing familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. (Abstract) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 53 (suppl.): A1013 only, 1993.

28. Hengstenberg, C.; Charron, P.; Isnard, R.; Beckmann, J. S.; Fetler,
L.; Desnos, M.; Hagege, A.; Bouhour, J. B.; Souriant, G.; Dubourg,
O.; Schwartz, K.; Komajda, M.: Mise en evidence d'un cinquieme locus
implique dans les cardiomyopathies hypertrophiques familiales. Arch.
Mal. Coeur. 87: 1655-1662, 1994.

29. Ho, C. Y.; Sweitzer, N. K.; McDonough, B.; Maron, B. J.; Casey,
S. A.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.; Solomon, S. D.: Assessment
of diastolic function with Doppler tissue imaging to predict genotype
in preclinical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circulation 105: 2992-2997,
2002.

30. Hougs, L.; Havndrup, O.; Bundgaard, H.; Kober, L.; Vuust, J.;
Larsen, L. A.; Christiansen, M.; Andersen, P. S.: One-third of Danish
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients with MYH7 mutations have mutations
in rod region. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 13: 161-165, 2005. Note: Erratum:
Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 13: 694 only, 2005.

31. Iwai, N.; Ohmichi, N.; Nakamura, Y.; Kinoshita, M.: DD genotype
of the angiotensin-converting enzyme gene is a risk factor for left
ventricular hypertrophy. Circulation 90: 2622-2628, 1994.

32. Jaenicke, T.; Diederich, K. W.; Haas, W.; Schleich, J.; Lichter,
P.; Pfordt, M.; Bach, A.; Vosberg, H.-P.: The complete sequence of
the human beta-myosin heavy chain gene and a comparative analysis
of its product. Genomics 8: 194-206, 1990.

33. Jandreski, M. A.; Sole, M. J.; Liew, C.-C.: Two different forms
of beta myosin heavy chain are expressed in human striated muscle. Hum.
Genet. 77: 127-131, 1987.

34. Jeschke, B.; Uhl, K.; Weist, B.; Schroder, D.; Meitinger, T.;
Dohlemann, C.; Vosberg, H.-P.: A high risk phenotype of hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy associated with a compound genotype of two mutated
beta-myosin heavy chain genes. Hum. Genet. 102: 299-304, 1998.

35. Kamisago, M.; Sharma, S. D.; DePalma, S. R.; Solomon, S.; Sharma,
P.; McDonough, B.; Smoot, L.; Mullen, M. P.; Woolf, P. K.; Wigle,
E. D.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.: Mutations in sarcomere protein
genes as a cause of dilated cardiomyopathy. New Eng. J. Med. 343:
1688-1696, 2000.

36. Kelly, D. P.; Strauss, A. W.: Mechanisms of disease. New Eng.
J. Med. 330: 913-919, 1994.

37. Klaassen, S.; Probst, S.; Oechslin, E.; Gerull, B.; Krings, G.;
Schuler, P.; Greutmann, M.; Hurlimann, D.; Yegibasi, M.; Pons, L.;
Gramlich, M.; Drenckhahn, J.-D.; Heuser, A.; Berger, F.; Jenni, R.;
Thierfelder, L.: Mutations in sarcomere protein genes in left ventricular
noncompaction. Circulation 117: 2893-2901, 2008.

38. Ko, Y.-L.; Chen, J.-J.; Tang, T.-K.; Cheng, J.-J.; Lin, S.-Y.;
Liou, Y.-C.; Kuan, P.; Wu, C.-W.; Lien, W.-P.; Liew, C.-C.: Malignant
familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in a family with a 453arg-to-cys
mutation in the beta-myosin heavy chain gene: coexistence of sudden
death and end-stage heart failure. Hum. Genet. 97: 585-590, 1996.

39. Kurabayashi, M.; Tsuchimochi, H.; Komuro, I.; Takaku, F.; Yazaki,
Y.: Molecular cloning and characterization of human cardiac alpha-
and beta-form myosin heavy chain complementary DNA clones: regulation
of expression during development and pressure overload in human atrium. J.
Clin. Invest. 82: 524-531, 1988.

40. Laing, N. G.; Ceuterick-de Groote, C.; Dye, D. E.; Liyanage, K.;
Duff, R. M.; Dubois, B.; Robberecht, W.; Sciot, R.; Martin, J.-J.;
Goebel, H. H.: Myosin storage myopathy: slow skeletal myosin (MYH7)
mutation in two isolated cases. Neurology 64: 527-529, 2005.

41. Laing, N. G.; Laing, B. A.; Meredith, C.; Wilton, S. D.; Robbins,
P.; Honeyman, K.; Dorosz, S.; Kozman, H.; Mastaglia, F. L.; Kakulas,
B. A.: Autosomal dominant distal myopathy: linkage to chromosome
14. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56: 422-427, 1995.

42. Lankford, E. B.; Epstein, N. D.; Fananapazir, L.; Sweeney, H.
L.: Abnormal contractile properties of muscle fibers expressing beta-myosin
heavy chain gene mutations in patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J.
Clin. Invest. 95: 1409-1414, 1995.

43. Liew, C.-C.; Sole, M. J.; Yamauchi-Takihara, K.; Kellam, B.; Anderson,
D. H.; Lin, L.; Liew, J. C.: Complete sequence and organization of
the human cardiac beta-myosin heavy chain gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 18:
3647-3651, 1990.

44. Marian, A. J.; Wu, Y.; Lim, D.-S.; McCluggage, M.; Youker, K.;
Yu, Q.; Brugada, R.; DeMayo, F.; Quinones, M.; Roberts, R.: A transgenic
rabbit model for human hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 104:
1683-1692, 1999.

45. Marian, A. J.; Yu, Q.-T.; Mares, A., Jr.; Hill, R.; Roberts, R.;
Perryman, M. B.: Detection of a new mutation in the beta-myosin heavy
chain gene in an individual with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J.
Clin. Invest. 90: 2156-2165, 1992.

46. Matsuoka, R.; Yoshida, M. C.; Kanda, N.; Kimura, M.; Ozasa, H.;
Takao, A.: Human cardiac myosin heavy-chain gene mapped within chromosomal
region 14q11.2-q13. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51: 1040-1041,
1989.

47. Matsushita, Y.; Furukawa, T.; Kasanuki, H.; Nishibatake, M.; Kurihara,
Y.; Ikeda, A.; Kamatani, N.; Takeshima, H.; Matsuoka, R.: Mutation
of junctophilin type 2 associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J.
Hum. Genet. 52: 543-548, 2007.

48. McKenna, W. J.: Personal Communication. London, England  5/30/1993.

49. Meredith, C.; Herrmann, R.; Parry, C.; Liyanage, K.; Dye, D. E.;
Durling, H. J.; Duff, R. M.; Beckman, K.; de Visser, M.; van der Graaff,
M. M.; Hedera, P.; Fink, J. K.; Petty, E. M.; Lamont, P.; Fabian,
V.; Bridges, L.; Voit, T.; Mastaglia, F. L.; Laing, N. G.: Mutations
in the slow skeletal muscle fiber myosin heavy chain gene (MYH7) cause
Laing early-onset distal myopathy (MPD1). Am. J. Hum. Genet. 75:
703-708, 2004.

50. Meyer, B. F.: Reply to Oldfors et al. (Letter) Neurology 64:
581 only, 2005.

51. Moolman-Smook, J. C.; De Lange, W. J.; Bruwer, E. C. D.; Brink,
P. A.; Corfield, V. A.: The origins of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy-causing
mutations in two South African subpopulations: a unique profile of
both independent and founder events. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65: 1308-1320,
1999.

52. Muelas, N.; Hackman, P.; Luque, H.; Garces-Sanchez, M.; Azorin,
I.; Suominen, T.; Sevilla, T.; Mayordomo, F.; Gomez, L.; Marti, P.;
Maria Millan, J.; Udd, B.; Vilchez, J. J.: MYH7 gene tail mutation
causing myopathic profiles beyond Laing distal myopathy. Neurology 75:
732-741, 2010.

53. Muelas, N.; Hackman, P.; Luque, H.; Suominen, T.; Espinos, C.;
Garces-Sanchez, M.; Sevilla, T.; Azorin, I.; Millan, J. M.; Udd, B.;
Vilchez, J. J.: Spanish MYH7 founder mutation of Italian ancestry
causing a large cluster of Laing myopathy patients. Clin. Genet. 81:
491-494, 2012.

54. Nishi, H.; Kimura, A.; Harada, H.; Adachi, K.; Koga, Y.; Sasazuki,
T.; Toshima, H.: Possible gene dose effect of a mutant cardiac beta-myosin
heavy chain gene on the clinical expression of familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 200: 549-556, 1994.

55. Oldfors, A.; Tajsharghi, H.; Thornell, L. E.: Mutation of the
slow myosin heavy chain rod domain underlies hyaline body myopathy.
(Letter) Neurology 64: 580-581, 2005.

56. Pare, J. A. P.; Fraser, R. G.; Pirozynski, W. J.; Shanks, J. A.;
Stubington, D.: Hereditary cardiovascular dysplasia: a form of familial
cardiomyopathy. Am. J. Med. 31: 37-62, 1961.

57. Pegoraro, E.; Gavassini, B. F.; Borsato, C.; Melacini, P.; Vianello,
A.; Stramere, R.; Cenacchi, G.; Angelini, C.: MYH7 gene mutation
in myosin storage myopathy and scapulo-peroneal myopathy. Neuromuscular
Disord. 17: 321-329, 2007.

58. Perryman, M. B.; Yu, Q.; Marian, A. J.; Mares, A., Jr.; Czernuszewicz,
G.; Ifegwu, J.; Hill, R.; Roberts, R.: Expression of a missense mutation
in the messenger RNA for beta-myosin heavy chain in myocardial tissue
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 90: 271-277, 1992.

59. Postma, A. V.; van Engelen, K.; van de Meerakker, J.; Rahman,
T.; Probst, S.; Baars, M. J. H.; Bauer, U.; Pickardt, T.; Sperling,
S. R.; Berger, F.; Moorman, A. F. M.; Mulder, B. J. M.; Thierfelder,
L.; Keavney, B.; Goodship, J.; Klaassen, S.: Mutations in the sarcomere
gene MYH7 in Ebstein anomaly. Circ. Cardiovasc. Genet. 4: 43-50,
2011.

60. Qin, H.; Kemp, J.; Yip, M.-Y.; Lam-Po-Tang, P. R. L.; Hoh, J.
F. Y.; Morris, B. J.: Localization of human cardiac beta-myosin heavy
chain gene (MYH7) to chromosome 14q12 by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 54: 74-76, 1990.

61. Rayment, I.; Holden, H. M.; Sellers, J. R.; Fananapazir, L.; Epstein,
N. D.: Structural interpretation of the mutations in the beta-cardiac
myosin that have been implicated in familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 3864-3868, 1995.

62. Richard, P.; Isnard, R.; Carrier, L.; Dubourg, O.; Donatien, Y.;
Mathieu, B.; Bonne, G.; Gary, F.; Charron, P.; Hagege, A.; Komajda,
M.; Schwartz, K.; Hainque, B.: Double heterozygosity for mutations
in the beta-myosin heavy chain and in the cardiac myosin binding protein
C genes in a family with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Med. Genet. 36:
542-545, 1999.

63. Ross, R. S.; Knowlton, K. U.: Two brothers with unexplained cardiomegaly:
initial clues to the molecular basis of a hereditary cardiac disease. Trends
Cardiovasc. Med. 2: 2-5, 1992.

64. Saez, L. J.; Gianola, K. M.; McNally, E. M.; Feghali, R.; Eddy,
R.; Shows, T. B.; Leinwand, L. A.: Human cardiac myosin heavy chain
genes and their linkage in the genome. Nucleic Acids Res. 15: 5443-5459,
1987.

65. Sasse-Klaassen, S.; Gerull, B.; Oechslin, E.; Jenni, R.; Thierfelder,
L.: Isolated noncompaction of the left ventricular myocardium in
the adult is an autosomal dominant disorder in the majority of patients. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 119A: 162-167, 2003.

66. Seidman, C.: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: from man to mouse. J.
Clin. Invest. 106: S9-S13, 2000.

67. Spindler, M.; Saupe, K. W.; Christe, M. E.; Sweeney, H. L.; Seidman,
C. E.; Seidman, J. G.; Ingwall, J. S.: Diastolic dysfunction and
altered energetics in the alpha-MHC-403/+ mouse model of familial
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 101: 1775-1783, 1998.

68. Tajsharghi, H.; Oldfors, A.; Macleod, D. P.; Swash, M.: Homozygous
mutation in MYH7 in myosin storage myopathy and cardiomyopathy. Neurology 68:
962 only, 2007.

69. Tajsharghi, H.; Thornell, L.-E.; Lindberg, C.; Lindvall, B.; Henriksson,
K.-G.; Oldfors, A.: Myosin storage myopathy associated with a heterozygous
missense mutation in MYH7. Ann. Neurol. 54: 494-500, 2003.

70. Tanjore, R. R.; Sikindlapuram, A. D.; Calambur, N.; Thakkar, B.;
Kerkar, P. G.; Nallari, P.: Genotype-phenotype correlation of R870H
mutation in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. (Letter) Clin. Genet. 69:
434-436, 2006.

71. Tesson, F.; Dufour, C.; Moolman, J. C.; Carrier, L.; Al-Mahdawi,
S.; Chojnowska, L.; Dubourg, O.; Soubrier, F.; Brink, P.; Komajda,
M.; Guicheney, P.; Schwartz, K.; Feingold, J.: The influence of the
angiotensin I converting enzyme genotype in familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy varies with the disease gene mutation. J. Molec. Cell
Cardiol. 29: 831-838, 1997.

72. Uro-Coste, E.; Arne-Bes, M.-C.; Pellissier, J.-F.; Richard, P.;
Levade, T.; Heitz, F.; Figarella-Branger, D.; Delisle, M.-B.: Striking
phenotypic variability in two familial cases of myosin storage myopathy
with a MYH7 leu1793pro mutation. Neuromusc. Disord. 19: 163-166,
2009.

73. van Rooij, E.; Quiat, D.; Johnson, B. A.; Sutherland, L. B.; Qi,
X.; Richardson, J. A.; Kelm, R. J., Jr.; Olson, E. N.: A family of
microRNAs encoded by myosin genes governs myosin expression and muscle
performance. Dev. Cell 17: 662-673, 2009.

74. van Rooij, E.; Sutherland, L. B.; Qi, X.; Richardson, J. A.; Hill,
J.; Olson, E. N.: Control of stress-dependent cardiac growth and
gene expression by a microRNA. Science 316: 575-579, 2007.

75. Voit, T.; Kutz, P.; Leube, B.; Neuen-Jacob, E.; Schroder, J. M.;
Cavallotti, D.; Vaccario, M. L.; Schaper, J.; Broich, P.; Cohn, R.;
Baethmann, M.; Gohlich-Ratmann, G.; Scoppetta, C.; Herrmann, R.:
Autosomal dominant distal myopathy: further evidence of a chromosome
14 locus. Neuromusc. Disord. 11: 11-19, 2001.

76. Watkins, H.; Rosenzweig, A.; Hwang, D.-S.; Levi, T.; McKenna,
W.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.: Characteristics and prognostic
implications of myosin missense mutations in familial hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy. New Eng. J. Med. 326: 1108-1114, 1992.

77. Watkins, H.; Thierfelder, L.; Hwang, D.-S.; McKenna, W.; Seidman,
J. G.; Seidman, C. E.: Sporadic hypertrophic cardiomyopathy due to
de novo myosin mutations. J. Clin. Invest. 90: 1666-1671, 1992.

78. Wolf, C. M.; Moskowitz, I. P. G.; Arno, S.; Branco, D. M.; Semsarian,
C.; Bernstein, S. A.; Peterson, M.; Maida, M.; Morley, G. E.; Fishman,
G.; Berul, C. I.; Seidman, C. E.; Seidman, J. G.: Somatic events
modify hypertrophic cardiomyopathy pathology and link hypertrophy
to arrhythmia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 18123-18128, 2005.

79. Woo, A.; Rakowski, H.; Liew, J. C.; Zhao, M.-S.; Liew, C.-C.;
Parker, T. G.; Zeller, M.; Wigle, E. D.; Sole, M. J.: Mutations of
the beta myosin heavy chain gene in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: critical
functional sites determine prognosis. Heart 89: 1179-1185, 2003.

80. Yamauchi-Takihara, K.; Sole, M. J.; Liew, J.; Ing, D.; Liew, C.
C.: Characterization of human cardiac myosin heavy chain genes. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 3504-3508, 1989. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 86: 7416-7417, 1989.

81. Zimprich, F.; Djamshidian, A.; Hainfellner, J. A.; Budka, H.;
Zeitlhofer, J.: An autosomal dominant early adult-onset distal muscular
dystrophy. Muscle Nerve 23: 1876-1879, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/09/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/4/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/3/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/7/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/26/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/6/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/27/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/5/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/7/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/14/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/19/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/7/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/4/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/21/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/4/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/31/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/23/2006
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 8/12/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/13/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/27/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/9/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/11/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/25/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/9/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/15/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/24/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/9/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/7/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/5/2002
Michael J. Wright - updated: 8/2/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 12/17/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/4/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/19/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/15/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/1998
Clair A. Francomano - updated: 5/7/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED carol: 10/09/2013
carol: 10/8/2013
carol: 9/4/2013
carol: 4/1/2013
terry: 5/10/2012
carol: 5/9/2012
ckniffin: 5/3/2012
mgross: 8/9/2011
wwang: 4/7/2011
terry: 4/7/2011
wwang: 11/29/2010
ckniffin: 10/26/2010
mgross: 10/25/2010
terry: 10/6/2010
alopez: 9/28/2010
terry: 9/27/2010
wwang: 8/9/2010
terry: 8/5/2010
carol: 6/8/2010
carol: 6/7/2010
wwang: 10/26/2009
ckniffin: 10/14/2009
terry: 3/4/2009
alopez: 2/21/2008
alopez: 2/20/2008
terry: 2/19/2008
wwang: 1/17/2008
ckniffin: 1/7/2008
carol: 12/6/2007
carol: 12/4/2007
terry: 12/4/2007
carol: 11/26/2007
terry: 11/21/2007
carol: 9/4/2007
alopez: 6/15/2007
alopez: 6/12/2007
terry: 6/4/2007
wwang: 6/13/2006
ckniffin: 5/31/2006
carol: 4/18/2006
carol: 2/27/2006
joanna: 2/24/2006
wwang: 2/23/2006
terry: 1/17/2006
carol: 8/12/2005
terry: 7/13/2005
carol: 7/1/2005
wwang: 6/30/2005
ckniffin: 6/27/2005
wwang: 6/15/2005
wwang: 6/14/2005
ckniffin: 6/9/2005
wwang: 6/6/2005
ckniffin: 5/18/2005
wwang: 4/28/2005
wwang: 4/20/2005
terry: 4/11/2005
tkritzer: 2/2/2005
ckniffin: 1/25/2005
tkritzer: 9/9/2004
terry: 9/9/2004
cwells: 1/20/2004
terry: 1/15/2004
tkritzer: 12/31/2003
ckniffin: 12/24/2003
carol: 5/9/2003
terry: 5/9/2003
tkritzer: 5/7/2003
cwells: 3/12/2003
terry: 3/7/2003
carol: 11/12/2002
tkritzer: 11/11/2002
terry: 11/5/2002
tkritzer: 8/2/2002
carol: 3/1/2002
mgross: 12/17/2001
carol: 1/11/2001
cwells: 1/11/2001
cwells: 1/9/2001
terry: 1/4/2001
mcapotos: 2/2/2000
mcapotos: 2/1/2000
terry: 1/19/2000
mgross: 11/24/1999
terry: 11/15/1999
carol: 10/28/1999
alopez: 4/30/1999
dkim: 12/10/1998
carol: 6/9/1998
terry: 5/18/1998
alopez: 5/14/1998
dholmes: 5/7/1998
mark: 3/3/1998
mark: 12/26/1996
mark: 4/16/1996
terry: 4/9/1996
mark: 9/14/1995
davew: 8/5/1994
jason: 6/13/1994
warfield: 4/21/1994
carol: 4/2/1994
carol: 9/24/1993

604963	TITLE *604963 PEPTIDOGLYCAN RECOGNITION PROTEIN 1; PGLYRP1
;;PGLYRP; PGRP;;
PGRP, SHORT; PGRPS
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Innate nonself immune recognition relies on structures common among
invading microbes, a process termed pattern recognition. Peptidoglycan
is a fundamental component of the bacterial cell wall and is thus a
candidate for a pattern recognized by the immune system. Using
differential display to identify bacteria-induced genes in the moth
Trichoplusia ni, Kang et al. (1998) cloned a cDNA encoding the T. ni
peptidoglycan recognition protein (PGRP, or PGLYRP). Recombinant T. ni
PGLYRP bound to peptidoglycan and to gram-positive bacteria. By PCR of
human and mouse spleen cDNAs, they isolated human and mouse PGLYRP
cDNAs, respectively. The deduced human PGLYRP protein has 196 amino
acids. Both the human and mouse PGLYRP proteins share 43% sequence
identity with the T. ni PGLYRP protein. Recombinant mouse Pglyrp protein
expressed in insect cells possessed an affinity for peptidoglycan. Dot
blot analysis of a number of human tissue mRNAs detected strong
expression in bone marrow and weak expression in lung, kidney, liver,
small intestine, spleen, thymus, peripheral leukocyte, and fetal spleen.

Liu et al. (2001) cloned PGLYRP, which they called PGRPS, by PCR of a
bone marrow cDNA library. The deduced 196-amino acid protein contains an
N-terminal signal peptide, followed by the extracellular PGRP domains
III, II, and I, which are highly conserved in mammalian and insect
PGRPs. PGRPS shares 40%, 43%, and 42% amino acid identity with PGRPL
(608199), PGRPI-alpha (PGLYRP3; 608197), and PGRPI-beta (PGLYRP4;
608198). RNA dot blot analysis detected strong PGRPS expression in bone
marrow and expression that was 50 to 100 times lower in
polymorphonuclear leukocytes and fetal liver. Northern blot analysis
detected 1.4-, 0.9-, and 0.5-kb transcripts in bone marrow, a 0.9-kb
transcript in fetal liver, and 1.4- and 0.9-kb transcripts in peripheral
blood leukocytes. PCR detected low expression of PGRPS in spleen,
jejunum, and thymus, possibly due to the presence of polymorphonuclear
leukocytes in these tissues. Transiently transfected COS-7 and human
embryonic kidney cells expressed PGRPS as a protein with an apparent
molecular mass of 24 kD. About half of the expressed PGRPS was detected
in the culture medium, and the remainder was a Triton X-100-soluble
membrane protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Liu et al. (2001) determined that recombinant PGRPS expressed by COS-7
cells and human embryonic kidney cells bound to gram-positive bacteria,
B. subtilis and M. luteus, with high affinity.

Using purified PGLYRP1, PGLYRP3, PGLYRP4, and a PGLYRP3/PGLYRP4
heterodimer, Kashyap et al. (2011) showed that these PGRPs interacted
with the bacterial cell wall and activated bacterial 2-component
systems, resulting in membrane depolarization, cessation of
peptidoglycan, protein, DNA, and RNA synthesis, and production of
hydroxyl radicals to cause bacterial death. Fluorescence microscopy
demonstrated that, in B. subtilis, a gram-positive bacteria, PGRPs
entered the cell wall at the site of daughter cell separation during
cell division and activated the CssR-CssS 2-component system. In E.
coli, a gram-negative bacteria, PGRPs bound the outer membrane and
activated the CpxA-CpxR 2-component system. Kashyap et al. (2011)
excluded other bactericidal mechanisms, including inhibition of
peptidoglycan synthesis, peptidoglycan hydrolysis, and membrane
permeabilization. They concluded that PGRPs are innate immunity proteins
that bind the cell wall or outer membrane and exploit the bacterial
stress response to kill bacteria.

GENE STRUCTURE

Liu et al. (2001) determined that the PGLYRP gene contains 3 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Liu et al. (2001) mapped the PGLYRP gene
to chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Kang, D.; Liu, G.; Lundstrom, A.; Gelius, E.; Steiner, H.: A peptidoglycan
recognition protein in innate immunity conserved from insects to humans. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 10078-10082, 1998.

2. Kashyap, D. R.; Wang, M.; Liu, L.-H.; Boons, G.-J.; Gupta, D.;
Dziarski, R.: Peptidoglycan recognition proteins kill bacteria by
activating protein-sensing two-component systems. Nature Med. 17:
676-683, 2011.

3. Liu, C.; Xu, Z.; Gupta, D.; Dziarski, R.: Peptidoglycan recognition
proteins: a novel family of four human innate immunity pattern recognition
molecules. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 34686-34694, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/14/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/24/2003

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 5/12/2000

EDITED mgross: 09/15/2011
terry: 9/14/2011
mgross: 9/28/2004
mgross: 10/24/2003
terry: 11/14/2001
mcapotos: 6/2/2000
psherman: 5/19/2000

610631	TITLE *610631 PROTEIN TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, NONRECEPTOR-TYPE, 20B; PTPN20B
;;PTPN20, TELOMERIC COPY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PTPN20B is a nearly identical copy of the PTPN20A gene (610630).

MAPPING

Hartz (2006) determined that the PTPN20B gene is telomeric to the
PTPN20A gene on chromosome 10q11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  12/7/2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/7/2006

EDITED mgross: 12/07/2006

608665	TITLE *608665 PSMC3-INTERACTING PROTEIN; PSMC3IP
;;TBP1-INTERACTING PROTEIN; TBPIP;;
GT198;;
HOP2, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; HOP2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The PSMC3IP gene encodes a nuclear, tissue-specific protein with
multiple functions, including a role in meiotic recombination and as a
coactivator of ligand-dependent transcription mediated by nuclear
hormone receptors (summary by Zangen et al., 2011).

CLONING

By sequencing putative genes centromeric to the BRCA1 gene (113705) on
chromosome 17, followed by screening a breast cancer cell line cDNA
library, Rommens et al. (1995) cloned GT198. The deduced protein
contains 203 amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected a 1.6-kb
transcript in all adult and fetal tissues examined, with abundant
expression in testis, colon, a breast cancer cell line, and a lymphoma.

Tanaka et al. (1997) cloned Gt198, which they called Tbpip, from a mouse
testis cDNA library. The deduced 217-amino acid protein has several
putative phosphorylation sites. RT-PCR detected Tbpip expression in CD4
(186940)-positive T cells and in macrophages. In situ hybridization
found Tbpip mRNA colocalized with Tbp1 (186852) in seminiferous tubules
of adult mouse testis. Western blot analysis detected Tbpip at an
apparent molecular mass of 24 kD. Immunohistochemical analysis of mouse
testis detected Tbpip in nuclei of primary and secondary spermatocytes.

By PCR using primers designed from mouse Tbpip, Ijichi et al. (2000)
cloned full-length human TBPIP from breast cancer cell line mRNA and a
testis cDNA library. The deduced 217-amino acid protein contains an
acidic region near the C terminus and several putative phosphorylation
sites. Mouse and human TBPIP share 88% amino acid homology.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Rommens et al. (1995) mapped the TBPIP
gene to chromosome 17q21. Using radiation hybrid analysis, Ijichi et al.
(2000) mapped the TBPIP gene to chromosome 17q12-q21.

GENE FUNCTION

The human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) regulatory protein Tat is
essential for HIV-1 gene expression and replication in infected cells.
TBP1 is a cellular protein that suppresses Tat-mediated transactivation
of HIV replication. Tanaka et al. (1997) found that mouse Tbpip
synergistically cooperated with Tbp1 to suppress Tat-mediated
transactivation of the HIV-1 long terminal repeat promoter.

Ijichi et al. (2000) showed that human TBPIP interacted directly with
TBP1 and enhanced TBP1-mediated inhibition of HIV Tat-mediated
transactivation.

Enomoto et al. (2006) demonstrated that coexpression of human MND1
(611422) and HOP2 in E. coli resulted in the formation of stable
heterodimers. The HOP2-MND1 complex stimulated DMC1 (602721)- and RAD51
(179617)-mediated DNA strand exchange, and preferentially bound to a
3-stranded DNA branch, which mimics the strand-exchange intermediate.
Enomoto et al. (2006) concluded that the HOP2-MND1 complex may ensure
proper pairing between homologous chromosomes by stimulating strand
exchange during meiosis.

Chi et al. (2007) found that the Hop2 component of the mouse recombinant
Hop2-Mnd1 complex was the major DNA-binding subunit, and that Mnd1 was
the Rad51-interacting entity. Hop2-Mnd1 stabilized the
Rad51-single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) nucleoprotein filament, and enhanced
the ability of the Rad51-ssDNA nucleoprotein filament to capture duplex
DNA, which is an obligatory step in the formation of the synaptic
complex critical for DNA joint formation. Pezza et al. (2007) showed
that the mouse Hop2-Mnd1 complex stimulated Dmc1 to promote synaptic
complex formation on long duplex DNAs. Synaptic alignment was a
consequence of the ability of Hop2-Mnd1 to stabilize the Dmc1-ssDNA
nucleoprotein complex and facilitate the conjoining of DNA molecules
through the capture of double-stranded DNA by the Dmc1-ssDNA
nucleoprotein filament.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a large consanguineous Arab Palestinian pedigree with
hypergonadotropic ovarian dysgenesis mapping to chromosome 17 (ODG3;
614324), Zangen et al. (2011) analyzed candidate genes and identified
homozygosity for a 3-bp deletion in the PSMC3IP gene (608665.0001) that
segregated with disease in the family. In cell lines, the glu201del
mutation abolished PSMC3IP activation of estrogen-driven transcription.

ANIMAL MODEL

Petukhova et al. (2003) found that Hop2 knockout mice showed no gross
anomalies in somatic tissues but developed a profound deficiency in
gametogenesis. Hop2 -/- spermatocytes arrested at the stage of
pachytene-like chromosome condensation. Axial elements were fully
developed, but synapsis was limited. While meiotic double-stranded
breaks were formed and processed in Hop2 -/- mice, they failed to be
repaired.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OVARIAN DYSGENESIS 3
PSMC3IP, 3-BP DEL, 600GAG

In affected members of a large consanguineous Arab Palestinian pedigree
with hypergonadotropic ovarian dysgenesis (ODG3; 614324), Zangen et al.
(2011) identified homozygosity for an in-frame 3-bp deletion in the
acceptor splice junction of exon 8 of the PSMC3IP gene, resulting in
deletion of glu201. The unaffected parents were heterozygous for the
deletion, which was not found in 254 ethnically matched chromosomes.
RT-PCR analysis of leukocyte DNA from affected and unaffected family
members showed no alternative splicing, suggesting that the mutation
does not affect PSMC3IP splicing. Transfection studies in the IGROV1
ovarian carcinoma and MCF7 breast cancer cell lines demonstrated that
the glu201del mutation abolished PSMC3IP activation of estrogen-driven
transcription.

REFERENCE 1. Chi, P.; San Filippo, J.; Sehorn, M. G.; Petukhova, G. V.; Sung,
P.: Bipartite stimulatory action of the Hop2-Mnd1 complex on the
Rad51 recombinase. Genes Dev. 21: 1747-1757, 2007.

2. Enomoto, R.; Kinebuchi, T.; Sato, M.; Yagi, H.; Kurumizaka, H.;
Yokoyama, S.: Stimulation of DNA strand exchange by the human TBPIP/Hop2-Mnd1
complex. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 5575-5581, 2006.

3. Ijichi, H.; Tanaka, T.; Nakamura, T.; Yagi, H.; Hakuba, A.; Sato,
M.: Molecular cloning and characterization of a human homologue of
TBPIP, a BRCA1 locus-related gene. Gene 248: 99-107, 2000.

4. Petukhova, G. V.; Romanienko, P. J.; Camerini-Otero, R. D.: The
Hop2 protein has a direct role in promoting interhomolog interactions
during mouse meiosis. Dev. Cell 5: 927-936, 2003.

5. Pezza, R. J.; Voloshin, O. N.; Vanevski, F.; Camerini-Otero, R.
D.: Hop2/Mnd1 acts on two critical steps in Dmc1-promoted homologous
pairing. Genes Dev. 21: 1758-1766, 2007.

6. Rommens, J. M.; Durocher, F.; McArthur, J.; Tonin, P.; LeBlanc,
J.-F.; Allen, T.; Samson, C.; Ferri, L.; Narod, S.; Morgan, K.; Simard,
J.: Generation of a transcription map at the HSD17B locus centromeric
to BRCA1 at 17q21. Genomics 28: 530-542, 1995.

7. Tanaka, T.; Nakamura, T.; Takagi, H.; Sato, M.: Molecular cloning
and characterization of a novel TBP-1 interacting protein (TBPIP):
enhancement of TBP-1 action on Tat by TBPIP. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 239: 176-181, 1997.

8. Zangen, D.; Kaufman, Y.; Zeligson, S.; Perlberg, S.; Fridman, H.;
Kanaan, M.; Abdulhadi-Atwan, M.; Abu Libdeh, A.; Gussow, A.; Kisslov,
I.; Carmel, L.; Renbaum, P.; Levy-Lahad, E.: XX ovarian dysgenesis
is caused by a PSMC3IP/HOP2 mutation that abolishes coactivation of
estrogen-driven transcription. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89: 572-579, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/28/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/23/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/18/2004

EDITED alopez: 11/02/2011
alopez: 11/2/2011
terry: 10/28/2011
alopez: 9/11/2007
terry: 8/23/2007
mgross: 5/18/2004

608080	TITLE *608080 MAESTRO; MRO
;;GENE BESIDE THE MA29 DELETION; B29;;
C18ORF3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing a region of chromosome 18 that contains a segment deleted
in the Ma29 lung cancer cell line, followed by screening a brain cDNA
library, Yanaihara et al. (2001) cloned B29. B29 is located outside the
Ma29 deletion. The deduced B29 protein contains 248 amino acids.
Yanaihara et al. (2001) also identified 3 minor isoforms that differ in
the reading frame utilized and in the presence or absence of exon 3
and/or exon 6. Expression levels were below the limit of detection for
Northern blot analysis, but RT-PCR found near ubiquitous expression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yanaihara et al. (2001) determined that the B29 gene contains 8 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Yanaihara et al. (2001) mapped the B29
gene to chromosome 18q21.

REFERENCE 1. Yanaihara, N.; Kohno, T.; Takakura, S.; Takei, K.; Otsuka, A.;
Sunaga, N.; Takahashi, M.; Yamazaki, M.; Tashiro, H.; Fukuzumi, Y.;
Fujimori, Y.; Hagiwara, K.; Tanaka, T.; Yokota, J.: Physical and
transcriptional map of a 311-kb segment of chromosome 18q21, a candidate
lung tumor suppressor locus. Genomics 72: 169-179, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/8/2003

EDITED carol: 08/27/2008
mgross: 9/8/2003

602950	TITLE *602950 PROTEIN ARGININE N-METHYLTRANSFERASE 1; PRMT1
;;HETEROGENEOUS NUCLEAR RIBONUCLEOPROTEIN METHYLTRANSFERASE 1-LIKE 2;
HRMT1L2;;
HMT1-LIKE 2;;
INTERFERON RECEPTOR 1-BOUND PROTEIN 4; IR1B4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The PRMT1 gene encodes a protein arginine methyltransferase that
functions as a histone methyltransferase specific for H4 (see 602822).

CLONING

Protein arginine methylation is catalyzed by arginine
methyltransferases. The bulk of methylated arginine residues in
eukaryotic cells are found in heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins
(hnRNPs), RNA-binding proteins that play essential roles in the
metabolism of nuclear pre-mRNA. Lin et al. (1996) identified a rat cDNA
encoding PRMT1 (protein-arginine N-methyltransferase 1; EC 2.1.1.23).
Recombinant PRMT1 methylated histones and hnRNPA1 (164017) in vitro. By
using a yeast 2-hybrid screen to identify proteins that interact with
the intracytoplasmic domain of the interferon-alpha/beta receptor-1
(IFNAR1; 107450), Abramovich et al. (1997) identified a human cDNA
encoding a protein that was nearly identical to PRMT1. The deduced
361-amino acid protein was designated IR1B4 for 'interferon
receptor-1-bound protein 4.' Epitope-tagged IR1B4 bound the IFNAR1
intracytoplasmic domain in vitro. Antibodies against IFNAR1
coimmunoprecipitated a methyltransferase activity from human cell
extracts. An antisense oligonucleotide strongly reduced
methyltransferase activity in human cells, and caused them to become
more resistant to growth inhibition by interferon. Abramovich et al.
(1997) concluded that protein methylation, like phosphorylation, may be
an important signaling mechanism for certain cytokine receptors.

Scott et al. (1998) identified HRMT1L2 transcripts with variable 5-prime
ends that encode 3 protein variants with different N-terminal regions.
Rat PRMT1 and HRMT1L2 variant 2 (v2) share 95% sequence identity, but
diverge at their N termini. The amino acid sequences of HRMT1L2 and
HRMT1L1 (601961) are 27% identical. Recombinant protein methylated human
hnRNPA1 and a yeast hnRNP in vitro. The HRMT1L2 gene complemented
mutations in the yeast hnRNP methyltransferase gene HMT1. Northern blot
analysis revealed that HRMT1L2 is expressed as a predominant 1.4-kb mRNA
in various adult and fetal tissues. Additional larger and smaller bands
were observed in some tissues.

Scorilas et al. (2000) identified 3 splice variants of PRMT1, encoding
deduced polypeptides of 343 (variant 1), 361 (variant 2), and 347
(variant 3) amino acids with molecular masses of 39.6, 41.5, and 39.9
kD, respectively. The full-length protein (v3) contains an in-frame stop
codon in the middle of exon 3, and a second downstream start codon that
resumes transcription. Variant 2 is predicted to contain 3 hydrophobic
stretches, one of which may be a signal peptide. PRMT1 shares 96%, 34%
and 29% sequence identity with rat PRMT1, human PRMT3 (603190), and
human PRMT2 (HRMT1L1), respectively. RT-PCR revealed ubiquitous
expression of all 3 splice variants, with highest expression in
cerebellum, mammary gland, prostate, brain, and thyroid. The predominant
variant differed among tissues. By PCR analysis, Scorilas et al. (2000)
found that variants 1 and 2 were frequently downregulated in breast
cancers in comparison to normal breast tissue.

GENE FUNCTION

The S. cerevisiae ire15 mutation has an inositol auxotrophic phenotype
and a defect in the expression of the inositol 1-phosphate synthase
(INO1) gene. Nikawa et al. (1996) identified HRMT1L2, which they called
HCP1, as a gene that suppressed the ire15 mutation. Multicopy HRMT1L2
increased the level of INO1 mRNA in ire15 mutants. Both Abramovich et
al. (1997) and Scott et al. (1998) noted that the nucleotide sequence
reported by Nikawa et al. (1996) contained 3 deletions that resulted in
a frameshift between amino acids 147-175.

Wang et al. (2001) reported the purification, molecular identification,
and functional characterization of the histone H4-specific
methyltransferase PRMT1, a protein arginine methyltransferase. PRMT1
specifically methylates arginine-3 of histone H4 (see 602822) in vitro
and in vivo. Methylation of arg3 by PRMT1 facilitates subsequent
acetylation of H4 tails by p300 (602700). However, acetylation of H4
inhibits its methylation by PRMT1. Most important, a mutation in the
S-adenosyl-L-methionine-binding site of PRMT1 substantially crippled its
nuclear receptor coactivator activity. Wang et al. (2001) concluded that
their findings reveal arg3 of H4 as a novel methylation site by PRMT1
and indicate that arg3 methylation plays an important role in
transcriptional regulation.

Mowen et al. (2001) demonstrated that methylation of arg31 of STAT1
(600555) by PRMT1 is required for transcription induced by
IFN-alpha/IFN-beta. They concluded that arginine methylation of STAT1 is
an additional posttranslational modification regulating transcription
factor function, and alteration of arginine methylation might be
responsible for the lack of interferon responsiveness observed in many
malignancies.

Using systems reconstituted with recombinant chromatin templates and
coactivators, An et al. (2004) demonstrated the involvement of PRMT1 and
CARM1 (603934) in p53 (191170) function; both independent and ordered
cooperative functions of p300 (602700), PRMT1, and CARM1; and mechanisms
involving direct interactions with p53 and obligatory modifications of
corresponding histone substrates. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses
confirmed the ordered accumulation of these (and other) coactivators and
cognate histone modifications on a p53-responsive gene, GADD45 (126335),
following ectopic p53 expression and/or ultraviolet irradiation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Scorilas et al. (2000) determined that the PRMT1 gene (variant 3)
contains 12 exons and spans 11.2 kb, and that the 2 additional splice
variants contain 10 (variant 1) or 11 exons (variant 2). They found that
PRMT1 is located in close proximity to the IRF3 (603734) and RRAS
(165090) genes and is transcribed in the opposite direction. RRAS is the
most telomeric, followed by IRF3 and PRMT1.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrid panels and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Scott et al. (1998) mapped the HRMT1L2 gene to 19q13.
Noting sequence identity between HRMT1L2 and a BAC clone, Scorilas et
al. (2000) refined the mapping to 19q13.3.

Pawlak et al. (2000) mapped the mouse Prmt1 gene to chromosome 7 by
interspecific backcross analysis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Pawlak et al. (2000) characterized a null mutation of the mouse Prmt1
gene, which is 95% identical to HRMT1L2. Prmt1 expression was greatest
along the midline of the neural plate and in the forming head fold from
embryonic day 7.5 (E7.5) to E8.5 and in the developing central nervous
system from E8.5 to E13.5. Homozygous mutant embryos failed to develop
beyond E6.5, with death occurring shortly after implantation and before
gastrulation. Prmt1, however, was not detected in embryonic stem cell
lines established from mutant blastocysts, suggesting it is not
necessary for cell viability. Prmt1 -/- cells expressed approximately 8
times less methyltransferase activity than wildtype cells, indicating
that the loss of Prmt1 activity is not compensated by an increase in
other methyltransferases. In addition, high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) and methyl acceptor activity analysis determined
that the cell proteins of mutant cells were hypomethylated, whereas most
potential substrates were already methylated in wildtype cells.

REFERENCE 1. Abramovich, C.; Yakobson, B.; Chebath, J.; Revel, M.: A protein-arginine
methyltransferase binds to the intracytoplasmic domain of the IFNAR1
chain in the type I interferon receptor. EMBO J. 16: 260-266, 1997.

2. An, W.; Kim, J.; Roeder, R. G.: Ordered cooperative functions
of PRMT1, p300, and CARM1 in transcriptional activation by p53. Cell 117:
735-748, 2004.

3. Lin, W.-J.; Gary, J. D.; Yang, M. C.; Clarke, S.; Herschman, H.
R.: The mammalian immediate-early TIS21 protein and the leukemia-associated
BTG1 protein interact with a protein-arginine N-methyltransferase. J.
Biol. Chem. 271: 15034-15044, 1996.

4. Mowen, K. A.; Tang, J.; Zhu, W.; Schurter, B. T.; Shuai, K.; Herschman,
H. R.; David, M.: Arginine methylation of STAT1 modulates IFN-alpha/beta-induce
d transcription. Cell 104: 731-741, 2001.

5. Nikawa, J.; Nakano, H.; Ohi, N.: Structural and functional conservation
of human and yeast HCP1 genes which can suppress the growth defect
of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae ire15 mutant. Gene 171: 107-111,
1996.

6. Pawlak, M. R.; Scherer, C. A.; Chen, J.; Roshon, M. J.; Ruley,
H. E.: Arginine N-methyltransferase 1 is required for early postimplantation
mouse development, but cells deficient in the enzyme are viable. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 20: 4859-4869, 2000.

7. Scorilas, A.; Black, M. H.; Talieri, M.; Diamandis, E. P.: Genomic
organization, physical mapping, and expression analysis of the human
protein arginine methyltransferase 1 gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 278: 349-359, 2000.

8. Scott, H. S.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Lalioti, M. D.; Rossier, C.;
Silver, P. A.; Henry, M. F.: Identification and characterization
of two putative human arginine methyltransferases (HRMT1L1 and HRMT1L2). Genomics 48:
330-340, 1998.

9. Wang, H.; Huang, Z.-Q.; Xia, L.; Feng, Q.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.;
Strahl, B. D.; Briggs, S. D.; Allis, C. D.; Wong, J.; Tempst, P.;
Zhang, Y.: Methylation of histone H4 at arginine 3 facilitating transcriptional
activation by nuclear hormone receptor. Science 293: 853-857, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/5/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/5/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/26/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/27/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/15/2000

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/7/1998

EDITED mgross: 04/27/2006
mgross: 8/5/2004
carol: 8/5/2002
mgross: 9/26/2001
alopez: 8/31/2001
terry: 8/27/2001
mgross: 9/15/2000
carol: 6/21/2000
psherman: 10/23/1998
alopez: 8/7/1998

300793	TITLE *300793 CANCER/TESTIS ANTIGEN FAMILY 45, MEMBER A2; CT45A2
;;CANCER/TESTIS ANTIGEN 45, MEMBER 2; CT45.2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for genes upregulated in testis, followed by RT-PCR and
genomic sequence analysis, Chen et al. (2005) identified 6 nearly
identical copies of the CT45 gene, designated CT45A1 through CT45A6, on
chromosome X. The CT45 genes appeared to be products of a recent gene
duplication. RT-PCR and EST analysis revealed 3 CT45 transcript variants
that differ in their 3-prime ends and represent the accumulated
expression of the CT45 genes. All 3 transcripts encode a deduced
189-amino acid protein that shares significant similarity with DDX26B,
SAGE (300359), and DDX26 (604331). RT-PCR detected high CT45 expression
in testis and variable expression in several cell lines.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chen et al. (2005) determined that each CT45 gene contains 5 exons and
spans 8 to 9 kb. The first exon is untranslated.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Chen et al. (2005) mapped the CT45 gene
cluster to a 125-kb region on chromosome Xq26.3. The 3 centromeric genes
are transcribed in the centromeric-to-telomeric direction, and the 3
telomeric genes are transcribed in the opposite direction.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, Y.-T.; Scanlan, M. J.; Venditti, C. A.; Chua, R.; Theiler,
G.; Stevenson, B. J.; Iseli, C.; Gure, A. O.; Vasicek, T.; Strausberg,
R. L.; Jongeneel, C. V.; Old, L. J.; Simpson, A. J. G.: Identification
of cancer/testis-antigen genes by massively parallel signature sequencing. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 7940-7945, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/31/2009

EDITED wwang: 08/31/2009

601045	TITLE *601045 CATENIN, DELTA-1; CTNND1
;;CATENIN, DELTA; CTNND;;
CADHERIN-ASSOCIATED SRC SUBSTRATE; CAS;;
p120(CTN)
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Catenins were discovered as proteins that are linked ('catena' means
'chain' in Latin) to the cytoplasmic domain of transmembrane cadherin
(see 601120) proteins. Delta-catenin, also called CAS, p120(cas), or
p120(ctn), is a tyrosine kinase substrate implicated in ligand-induced
receptor signaling through the EGF receptor (131550), the PDGF receptor
(PDGFR; see 173490), and the CSF1 receptor (164770), as well as in cell
transformation by SRC (190090). Delta-catenin is a major component of
multiprotein cell-cell adhesion complexes containing E-cadherin
(192090), alpha-catenin (116805), beta-catenin (116806), and
gamma-catenin, also known as plakoglobin (173325) (summary by
Keirsebilck et al., 1998).

CLONING

Reynolds et al. (1992) isolated a mouse p120(ctn) cDNA. Like
beta-catenin and plakoglobin, the predicted protein contains copies of a
repeat originally identified in the Drosophila 'Armadillo' protein.

Keirsebilck et al. (1998) identified human p120(ctn) isoforms, which
they designated 1 to 4, that arise by alternative use of start codons
and additional isoforms that differ due to alternative splicing of 3
exons, which they named A, B, and C. The longest isoform was of type
1ABC and contained 968 amino acids. Isoform 1A contains 933 amino acids
and is 97% identical to mouse p120(ctn). Human p120(ctn) contains up to
10 Armadillo repeats. Keirsebilck et al. (1998) used RT-PCR to
demonstrate tissue-specific and cell line-specific expression of various
isoforms.

Independently, Nagase et al. (1997) identified KIAA0384, a human
p120(ctn) cDNA that encodes isoform 1AC, in a screen for brain cDNAs
encoding proteins larger than 100 kD. RT-PCR detected expression in all
tissues examined except skeletal muscle. Highest expression was detected
in placenta, lung, liver, and kidney, followed by ovary and small
intestine.

GENE FUNCTION

Dillon et al. (1998) reported that a complete loss of p120(ctn)
expression was observed in approximately 10% of invasive ductal breast
carcinomas investigated.

Wildenberg et al. (2006) found that depletion of p120-catenin in NIH3T3
mouse fibroblasts by small interfering RNA caused constitutive
activation of Rho (RHOA; 165390), cell transformation, loss of contact
inhibition, and growth in the absence of serum. Moreover, Pdgfr and
integrin (see 135630) signaling pathways involved in remodeling the
actin cytoskeleton were selectively impaired. Wildenberg et al. (2006)
traced these effects to obligatory roles of p120-catenin and Arhgap5
(602680) in a pathway that connects Rac (RAC1; 602048) activation to Rho
inhibition. They concluded that p120-catenin and ARHGAP5 use Rho GTPases
to mediate crosstalk between a wide variety of receptors to coordinate
cadherin function with other activities that direct cell adhesion,
motility, and proliferation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Keirsebilck et al. (1998) determined that the human p120(ctn) gene
contains 21 exons, potentially encoding up to 32 protein isoforms as
products of alternative splicing.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Reynolds et al. (1996) determined
that the human gene, symbolized CTNND, is localized immediately adjacent
to the centromere in band 11q11. By interspecific backcross analysis,
they assigned the murine gene, symbolized Catns, to the middle of mouse
chromosome 2. By analysis of radiation hybrids, Nagase et al. (1997)
confirmed that the p120 gene maps to human chromosome 11. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization and analysis of a somatic cell hybrid
mapping panel, Bonne et al. (1998) mapped the CTNND1 gene to chromosome
11q11.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using conditional targeting of p120(ctn) in mouse epidermis,
Perez-Moreno et al. (2006) found that p120-null neonatal epidermis
exhibited reduced intercellular adherens junction components, but no
overt disruption in barrier function or intercellular adhesion. As the
mice aged, they displayed epidermal hypoplasia and chronic inflammation,
typified by hair degeneration and loss of body fat. Use of skin
engraftments and antiinflammatory drugs showed that these features were
not due to reductions in junctional cadherins and catenins, but rather
to NF-kappa-B (see 164011) activation. Both in vivo and in vitro,
p120-null epidermal cells activated NF-kappa-B, triggering a cascade of
proinflammatory NF-kappa-B targets. NF-kappa-B activation in p120-null
keratinocytes was accompanied by alterations in Rho GTPase activity that
appeared to reside upstream from NF-kappa-B activation and downstream
from p120 loss.

REFERENCE 1. Bonne, S.; van Hengel, J.; van Roy, F.: Chromosomal mapping of
human armadillo genes belonging to the p120(ctn)/plakophilin subfamily. Genomics 51:
452-454, 1998.

2. Dillon, D. A.; D'Aquila, T.; Reynolds, A. B.; Fearon, E. R.; Rimm,
D. L.: The expression of p120ctn protein in breast cancer is independent
of alpha- and beta-catenin and E-cadherin. Am. J. Path. 152: 75-82,
1998.

3. Keirsebilck, A.; Bonne, S.; Staes, K.; van Hengel, J.; Nollet,
F.; Reynolds, A.; van Roy, F.: Molecular cloning of the human p120(ctn)
catenin gene (CTNND1): expression of multiple alternatively spliced
isoforms. Genomics 50: 129-146, 1998.

4. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

5. Perez-Moreno, M.; Davis, M. A.; Wong, E.; Pasolli, H. A.; Reynolds,
A. B.; Fuchs, E.: p120-catenin mediates inflammatory responses in
the skin. Cell 124: 631-644, 2006.

6. Reynolds, A. B.; Herbert, L.; Cleveland, J. L.; Berg, S. T.; Gaut,
J. R.: p120, a novel substrate of protein tyrosine kinase receptors
and of p60v-src, is related to cadherin-binding factors beta-catenin,
plakoglobin and armadillo. Oncogene 7: 2439-2445, 1992.

7. Reynolds, A. B.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Copeland, N. G.;
Shapiro, D. N.; Wu, J.; Daniel,  J. M.: The gene encoding p120(cas),
a novel catenin, localizes on human chromosome 11q11 (CTNND) and mouse
chromosome 2 (Catns). Genomics 31: 127-129, 1996.

8. Wildenberg, G. A.; Dohn, M. R.; Carnahan, R. H.; Davis, M. A.;
Lobdell, N. A.; Settleman, J.; Reynolds, A. B.: p120-catenin and
p190RhoGAP regulate cell-cell adhesion by coordinating antagonism
between Rac and Rho. Cell 127: 1027-1039, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/2/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/22/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/30/2009
Sheryl A. Jankowski - updated: 11/2/1999
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/7/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/7/1996

EDITED mgross: 05/21/2013
mgross: 9/27/2011
terry: 9/2/2011
mgross: 12/9/2010
wwang: 5/28/2009
mgross: 5/22/2009
mgross: 5/4/2009
terry: 4/30/2009
mgross: 11/12/2008
terry: 10/31/2008
psherman: 11/3/1999
psherman: 11/2/1999
alopez: 6/7/1999
dkim: 10/12/1998
alopez: 9/8/1998
carol: 6/2/1998
terry: 4/23/1998
mark: 2/7/1996

611053	TITLE *611053 RUN AND SH3 DOMAIN-CONTAINING 2; RUSC2
;;KIAA0375;;
IPORIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones from a size-fractionated brain cDNA library, Nagase
et al. (1997) cloned a partial RUSC2 cDNA, which they called KIAA0375.
RT-PCR detected high expression in human kidney, ovary, and testis,
followed by moderate expression in brain, placenta, lung, liver, and
skeletal muscle, and low expression in prostate and small intestine.

By yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human placental cDNA library with mutant
Rab1b (612565) as prey, Bayer et al. (2005) identified RUSC2, which they
called iporin. The deduced 1516-amino acid protein contains a RUN domain
and an SH3 domain, as well as proline and glutamic acid-rich regions.
The mouse homolog shares 84% similarity to human RUSC2. Northern blot
analysis of human tissues detected ubiquitous expression of a 5.5-kb
transcript, with highest levels in brain and testis. The RUN domain of
RUSC2 mediated binding to Rab1. Western blot analysis detected a 220-kD
protein mainly associated with membrane fractions. Immunofluorescence
microscopy showed a cytosolic distribution with punctate perinuclear
enrichment. RUSC2 interacted with the Rab1-binding protein GM130
(GOLGA2; 602580) on yeast 2-hybrid and in vitro binding assays.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bayer et al., 2005 determined that the RUSC2 gene contains 11 exons and
spans about 14 kb.

MAPPING

Bayer et al. (2005) noted that the RUSC2 gene maps to chromosome 9p13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Bayer, M.; Fischer, J.; Kremerskothen, J.; Ossendorf, E.; Matanis,
T.; Konczal, M.; Weide, T.; Barnekow, A.: Identification and characterization
of iporin as a novel interaction partner for rab1. BMC Cell Biol. 6:
15, 2005. Note: Electronic Article.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 5/23/2007

EDITED mgross: 01/29/2009
wwang: 5/23/2007

601762	TITLE *601762 CASPASE 10, APOPTOSIS-RELATED CYSTEINE PROTEASE; CASP10
;;MCH4
CASPASE 10, ISOFORM B, INCLUDED; CASP10B, INCLUDED;;
FADD-LIKE ICE 2, INCLUDED; FLICE2, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Caspase-10 is an aspartate-specific cysteine protease of the ICE/CED3
(see 147678) family. These proteases take part in a cascade of reactions
thought to be responsible for the apoptotic changes observed in
mammalian cells undergoing programmed cell death.

CLONING

Fernandes-Alnemri et al. (1996) used degenerate PCR to identify CASP10,
a novel member of the ICE/CED3 protease family. They subsequently cloned
the cDNA, which they termed MCH4, from a human Jurkat T-cell cDNA
library. Sequence analysis revealed that MCH4 encodes a 479-amino acid
polypeptide. They found that MCH4 is most closely related to MCH5
(CASP8; 601763) and that MCH4 and MCH5 contain the active site
pentapeptide QACQG instead of the QACRG present in all other known
members of the family. Furthermore, the authors found that the sequences
of MCH4 and MCH5 contain Fas-associating protein with death domain
(FADD; 602457)-like domains, suggesting possible interaction with FADD.
Northern blot analysis showed that MCH4 was expressed as a 4-kb message
in most human tissues examined.

By searching an EST database for clones containing the conserved GSW
sequences found in the small catalytic subunit of caspases, Vincenz and
Dixit (1997) identified a cDNA encoding a splice variant of CASP10,
CASP10B, which they called FLICE2. Sequence analysis predicted that the
deduced 521-amino acid FLICE2 protein contains a 50-amino acid insert in
the C terminus of the prodomain and a 48-amino acid sequence distinct
from CASP10 at the C terminus. FLICE2 also contains 2 death effector
domains (DEDs). Northern blot analysis detected a 4.4-kb FLICE2
transcript particularly in tissues enriched in lymphoid cells and in the
K562 chronic myelogenous leukemia cell line.

GENE FUNCTION

Fernandes-Alnemri et al. (1996) stated that MCH4, like other members of
the ICE/CED3 family, forms an active protease only after cleavage of its
proenzyme into 2 subunits which dimerize to form the active enzyme. They
found that the mature enzyme cleaves both CPP32 (CASP3; 600636) and MCH3
(601761) proenzymes into their mature forms.

Functional analysis by Vincenz and Dixit (1997) showed that FLICE2
cleaves poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP; 173870) to its 85-kD
apoptotic form, binds FADD through the DEDs of each molecule, and binds
to the CD95 (TNFRSF6, or FAS; 134637) and TNFR1 (191190) death
receptors. The binding of CD95 and TNFR1 by FLICE2 is enhanced in the
presence of FADD. Overexpression of FLICE2, but not overexpression of an
active-site mutant, induced apoptosis.

Wang et al. (2001) showed that caspase-10 can function independently of
caspase-8 (CASP8; 601763) in initiating FAS- and tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand-receptor-mediated apoptosis.
Moreover, FAS crosslinking in primary human T cells leads to the
recruitment and activation of caspase-10. They showed that the
death-effector domains of caspases 8 and 10 interact with the
death-effector domain of FADD. Nonetheless, they found that caspases 8
and 10 may have different apoptosis substrates and therefore potentially
distinct roles in death receptor signaling or other cellular processes.

Lee et al. (2007) showed that intrinsic apoptosis in human cells that
was induced by the chemotherapeutic agent etoposide or the antibiotic
staurosporine, but not by FAS ligand (TNFSF6; 134638) or TRAIL (TNFSF10;
603598), caused translocation of AK2 (103020) from mitochondria to the
cytoplasm, followed by formation of a complex between AK2, FADD, and
CASP10. Yeast 2-hybrid analysis, protein pull-down assays, and
immunoprecipitation analysis showed that the N- and C-terminal domains
of AK2, which include nucleoside- and substrate-binding domains,
respectively, bound the C-terminal death domain of FADD. AK2 binding
promoted association of CASP10 with FADD, and addition of purified AK2
protein to cell extracts induced activation of CASP10 via FADD, leading
to subsequent activation of CASP9 (602234) and CASP3. Apoptosis through
the AK2 complex did not correlate with the adenylate kinase activity of
AK2, did not require CASP8-mediated apoptotic responses, and did not
involve mitochondrial cytochrome c release. Immunodepletion or knockdown
of AK2, FADD, or CASP10 abrogated etoposide-induced apoptosis, and AK2
complexes were not observed in several etoposide-resistant human tumor
cell lines that were deficient in expression of FADD, CASP10, or CASP3.
In contrast to the findings in human cells, etoposide-induced apoptosis
was observed in mouse embryonic fibroblasts that lacked Fadd expression.
Since mice also lack Casp10, Lee et al. (2007) concluded that mice lack
an apoptotic pathway comparable to the AK2-FADD-CASP10 pathway in
humans.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hadano et al. (2001) determined that the CASP10 gene contains 11 exons
and spans about 48 kb. It is transcribed in the centromere-to-telomere
direction.

MAPPING

Fernandes-Alnemri et al. (1996) mapped the MCH4 gene to 2q33-q34 by
FISH. Hadano et al. (2001) determined that the CFLAR (603599), CASP10,
and CASP8 genes are tandemly located within 200 kb.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Autoimmune Lymphoproliferative Syndrome type IIA

In an African American girl with type IIA autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndrome (ALPS2A; 603909) characterized by abnormal lymphocyte and
dendritic cell homeostasis and immune regulatory defects, Wang et al.
(1999) identified a heterozygous mutation in the CASP10 gene (L285F;
601762.0001). The mutation resulted in decreased caspase activity and
interfered with death receptor-induced apoptosis, particularly that
stimulated by Fas ligand (134638) and TRAIL (603598). These results
provided evidence that inherited nonlethal caspase abnormalities cause
pleiotropic apoptosis defects underlying autoimmunity in ALPS2. A second
patient, of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, was reported to have a homozygous
substitution in the CASP10 gene (V410I), which was later determined to
be a polymorphism with apoptotic activity similar to the wildtype CASP10
protein (Gronbaek et al., 2000; Zhu et al., 2006). In addition, the
Ashkenazi Jewish patient was found to have a mutation in the TNFRSF1A
gene (191190), which is mutated in the TNF receptor-associated periodic
syndrome (TRAPS; 142680) (Zhu et al., 2006). Zhu et al. (2006) presented
association data suggesting that the V410I substitution may offer some
protection from severe disease in patients with ALPS1A (601859) who have
mutations in the TNFRSF6 gene (134637).

In 2 sisters and an unrelated boy with APLS2A, Zhu et al. (2006)
identified a heterozygous pathogenic mutation in the CASP10 gene (I406L;
601762.0007).

- Cancer

To explore the possibility that mutation in the CASP10 gene might be
involved in the development of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL; 605027), Shin
et al. (2002) analyzed the entire coding region and all splice sites of
the CASP10 gene for the detection of somatic mutations in 117 human
NHLs. Seventeen NHLs (14.5%) had CASP10 mutations, of which 3 were
identified in the coding regions of the prodomain, 11 in the p17 large
protease subunit, and 3 in the p12 small protease subunit. There were 2
frameshift mutations and 1 nonsense mutation; the remaining 14 were
missense mutations. Shin et al. (2002) expressed the tumor-derived
CASP10 mutants in 293 cells and found that apoptosis was suppressed.
These data suggested that the inactivating mutations of the CASP10 gene
may lead to the loss of its apoptotic function and contribute to the
pathogenesis of some human NHLs.

Park et al. (2002) analyzed the genetic alterations of the entire coding
region and all splice sites of the CASP8 and CASP10 genes in 99 gastric
cancers by PCR-SSCP and sequencing. Of the 99 gastric cancers, 3 had
CASP10 mutations, whereas no mutations were detected in CASP8. In vitro
expression studies showed that the met147-to-thr (M147T; 601762.0006)
and gln257-to-ter (Q257X; 601762.0004) mutants severely impaired
CASP10-mediated apoptosis. Park et al. (2002) suggested that somatic
alterations of the CASP10 gene may contribute to pathogenesis in a
subset of gastric cancers through loss of apoptotic function.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
AUTOIMMUNE LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE SYNDROME, TYPE IIA
CASP10, LEU285PHE

In an African American patient with ALPS2A (603909), Wang et al. (1999)
identified a heterozygous 724C-T transition in the CASP10 gene,
resulting in a leu242-to-phe (L242F) substitution (L285F in the longer
CASP10 isoform). The proband's mother, who exhibited high levels of
autoantibodies to nuclear antigens and defective lymphocyte apoptosis,
also had the mutation. The proband's unaffected father and 2 sisters did
not have the mutation. The mutation was not found in 200 normal
chromosomes or in any patient with ALPS type I (601859).

.0002
REMOVED FROM DATABASE
.0003
NON-HODGKIN LYMPHOMA, SOMATIC
CASP10, ALA414VAL

In a peripheral T-cell lymphoma (605027), Shin et al. (2002) observed a
1241C-T transition in exon 9 of the CASP10 gene, resulting in an
ala414-to-val (A414V) amino acid change.

.0004
NON-HODGKIN LYMPHOMA, SOMATIC
GASTRIC CANCER, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
CASP10, GLN257TER

In a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (605027), Shin et al. (2002) observed
a 769C-T transition in exon 7 of the CASP10 gene, converting gln257 to
ter (Q257X).

Park et al. (2002) identified a somatic Q257X mutation in gastric cancer
tissue. In vitro expression studies showed that Q257X mutation severely
impaired caspase-10-mediated apoptosis.

.0005
NON-HODGKIN LYMPHOMA, SOMATIC
CASP10, 1-BP INS, 1042A

In a patient with MALT (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue) lymphoma
(605027), Shin et al. (2002) found a 1-bp insertion, an adenine after
nucleotide 1042, resulting in frameshift and termination at amino acid
367.

.0006
GASTRIC CANCER, SOMATIC
CASP10, MET147THR

Park et al. (2002) identified 3 somatic mutations in the CASP10 gene in
gastric cancers (137215): met147 to thr (M147T), and the previously
described gln257 to ter (Q257X; 601762.0004). By in vitro expression
studies, they showed that the M147T and Q257X mutations severely
impaired caspase-10-mediated apoptosis.

.0007
AUTOIMMUNE LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE SYNDROME, TYPE IIA
CASP10, ILE406LEU

In a 7-year-old boy with ALPS2A (603909), Zhu et al. (2006) identified a
heterozygous 1400A-T transversion in exon 9 of the CASP10 gene,
resulting in an ile406-to-leu (I406L) substitution near the active site
of the protein. Neither parent had a history suggestive of ALPS, but his
father, an adult-onset diabetic, also carried the mutation. The I406L
mutation was also identified in 2 sisters of mixed Jamaican and Guyanese
ancestry who had early-onset ALPS2A. Their mother and a third sister
were mutation carriers and asymptomatic at the time of evaluation, but
showed defective T cell apoptosis in vitro, increased numbers of
double-negative T cells, and positive direct antiglobulin IgG tests and
antithyroid antibodies. In vitro functional expression studies showed
that the I406L mutant protein had defective apoptosis and exerted a
dominant-negative effect when cotransfected with the wildtype protein.
The I406L substitution was not identified in 576 controls.

REFERENCE 1. Fernandes-Alnemri, T.; Armstrong, R. C.; Krebs, J.; Srinivasula,
S. M.; Wang, L.; Bullrich, F.; Fritz, L. C.; Trapani, J. A.; Tomaselli,
K. J.; Litwack, G.; Alnemri, E. S.: In vitro activation of CPP32
and Mch3 by Mch4, a novel human apoptotic cysteine protease containing
two FADD-like domains. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 7464-7469, 1996.

2. Gronbaek, K.; Dalby, T.; Zeuthen, J.; Ralfkiaer, E.; Guidberg,
P.: The V410I (G1228A) variant of the caspase-10 gene is a common
polymorphism of the Danish population. (Letter) Blood 95: 2184-2185,
2000.

3. Hadano, S.; Yanagisawa, Y.; Skaug, J.; Fichter, K.; Nasir, J.;
Martindale, D.; Koop, B. F.; Scherer, S. W.; Nicholson, D. W.; Rouleau,
G. A.; Ikeda, J.-E.; Hayden, M. R.: Cloning and characterization
of three novel genes, ALS2CR1, ALS2CR2, and ALS2CR3, in the juvenile
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS2) critical region at chromosome
2q33-q34: candidate genes for ALS2. Genomics 71: 200-213, 2001.

4. Lee, H.-J.; Pyo, J.-O.; Oh, Y.; Kim, H.-J.; Hong, S.; Jeon, Y.-J.;
Kim, H.; Cho, D.-H.; Woo, H.-N.; Song, S.; Nam, J.-H.; Kim, H. J.;
Kim, K.-S.; Jung, Y.-K.: AK2 activates a novel apoptotic pathway
through formation of a complex with FADD and caspase-10. Nature Cell
Biol. 9: 1303-1310, 2007.

5. Park, W. S.; Lee, J. H.; Shin, M. S.; Park, J. Y.; Kim, H. S.;
Lee, J. H.; Kim, Y. S.; Lee, S. N.; Xiao, W.; Park, C. H.; Lee, S.
H.; Yoo, N. J.; Lee, J. Y.: Inactivating mutations of the caspase-10
gene in gastric cancer. Oncogene 21: 2919-2925, 2002.

6. Shin, M. S.; Kim, H. S.; Kang, C. S.; Park, W. S.; Kim, S. Y.;
Lee, S. N.; Lee, J. H.; Park, J. Y.; Jang, J. J.; Kim, C. W.; Kim,
S. H.; Lee, J. Y.; Yoo, N. J.; Lee, S. H.: Inactivating mutations
of CASP10 gene in non-Hodgkin lymphomas. Blood 99: 4094-4099, 2002.

7. Vincenz, C.; Dixit, V. M.: Fas-associated death domain protein
interleukin-1-beta-converting enzyme 2 (FLICE2), an ICE/Ced-3 homologue,
is proximally involved in CD95- and p55-mediated death signaling. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 6578-6583, 1997.

8. Wang, J.; Chun, H. J.; Wong, W.; Spencer, D. M.; Lenardo, M. J.
: Caspase-10 is an initiator caspase in death receptor signaling. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 13884-13888, 2001.

9. Wang, J.; Zheng, L.; Lobito, A.; Chan, F. K.; Dale, J.; Sneller,
M.; Yao, X.; Puck, J. M.; Straus, S. E.; Lenardo, M. J.: Inherited
human caspase 10 mutations underlie defective lymphocyte and dendritic
cell apoptosis in autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome type II. Cell 98:
47-58, 1999.

10. Zhu, S.; Hsu, A. P.; Vacek, M. M.; Zheng, L.; Schaffer, A. A.;
Dale, J. K.; Davis, J.; Fischer, R. E.; Straus, S. E.; Boruchov, D.;
Saulsbury, F. T.; Lenardo, M. J.; Puck, J. M.: Genetic alterations
in caspase-10 may be causative or protective in autoimmune lymphoproliferative
syndrome. Hum. Genet. 119: 284-294, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/28/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/22/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/23/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/7/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/21/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/20/1999

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 4/18/1997

EDITED mgross: 10/28/2008
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
terry: 11/3/2006
wwang: 5/23/2006
ckniffin: 5/11/2006
carol: 11/18/2004
ckniffin: 11/3/2004
mgross: 11/8/2002
tkritzer: 10/24/2002
terry: 10/22/2002
mgross: 9/10/2002
tkritzer: 9/10/2002
tkritzer: 8/28/2002
terry: 8/23/2002
carol: 1/20/2002
mcapotos: 1/10/2002
terry: 1/7/2002
mgross: 7/21/2000
mgross: 7/21/1999
mgross: 7/20/1999
alopez: 6/5/1997
alopez: 5/30/1997

602566	TITLE *602566 PURINERGIC RECEPTOR P2X, LIGAND-GATED ION CHANNEL, 7; P2RX7
;;PURINOCEPTOR P2X7; P2X7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cell surface ATP receptors can be divided into 2 classes. The
metabotropic class (P2Y/P2U) are members of the 7-transmembrane
superfamily of G protein-coupled receptors (see 602451). The ionotropic
class (P2X) are ligand-gated channels (see 600843). P2Z receptors are
ionotropic but also cause cell permeabilization. Rassendren et al.
(1997) cloned the human gene for a receptor, called P2X7, that is
structurally related to the P2X family and exhibits the properties of a
P2Z receptor. They screened a human monocyte cDNA library with the rat
P2X7 gene as a probe, and recovered a cDNA encoding a predicted
595-amino acid protein that is 80% identical to the rat P2X7 protein. On
Northern blots, P2X7 was expressed as a 6-kb mRNA in many tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Rassendren et al. (1997) found that treatment of P2X7-transfected cells
with ATP or 2-prime, 3-prime-(4-benzoyl)-benzoyl ATP (BzATP) elicited
cation-selective currents. Longer applications of agonists permeabilized
the cell.

Worthington et al. (2002) studied the role of various residues in ATP
binding of P2X7 receptor. This was done by transfecting into a cell line
or Xenopus oocytes with either wildtype or site-directed mutants of the
protein. They concluded that K193 and K311 are essential residues in ATP
binding.

Atkinson et al. (2002) demonstrated that the P2RX7 ATP-binding receptor
calcium channel spans the nuclear envelope. Atkinson et al. (2002) used
in situ hybridization of the rat hippocampus to detect mRNA encoding
P2RX7. A positive signal was seen in the cytoplasm of all neurons in the
cell-body layer, 90% of which are excitatory cells. P2RX7 mRNA was also
seen in inhibitory neurons of the hippocampus.

Sugiyama et al. (2004) tested whether diabetes increases the
vulnerability of retinal microvessels to the potentially lethal
consequences of having their P2X7 purinoceptors activated. In
experiments using pericyte-containing microvessels isolated from adult
rat retina, they found that soon after the onset of
streptozotocin-induced diabetes, markedly lower P2X7 agonist
concentrations effectively opened pores and triggered apoptosis in the
retinal microvasculature. Sugiyama et al. (2004) suggested that
microvascular damage in the diabetic retina may be mediated by receptors
for vasoactive molecules.

Using rat alveolar macrophages expressing native P2x7 and human
embryonic kidney cells expressing full-length rat P2x7 or a C-terminally
truncated P2x7 mutant, Lemaire et al. (2006) showed that P2X7 was
involved in the fusion process leading to multinucleated giant cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Buell et al. (1998) determined that the P2RX7 gene contains 13 exons.

MAPPING

By FISH, Buell et al. (1998) localized the P2RX7 gene to chromosome
12q24. By radiation hybrid analysis, they found that the gene lies
within 130 kb of the homologous P2RX4 gene (600846).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Several investigators had shown that P2X7 is nonfunctional both in
lymphocytes and monocytes from some subjects. To study a possible
genetic basis, Gu et al. (2001) sequenced DNA coding for the
carboxyl-terminal tail of P2X7. They found a 1513A-C substitution, which
resulted in a glu496-to-ala (E496A) mutation. Nine of 45 normal subjects
were heterozygous, whereas 1 subject was homozygous. Surface expression
of P2X7 on lymphocytes was not affected by this E496A polymorphism,
demonstrated both by confocal microscopy and immunofluorescent staining.
Monocytes and lymphocytes from the E496A homozygote subject expressed
nonfunctional receptor, whereas heterozygotes showed P2X7 function that
was half that of germline P2X7. Transfection experiments showed that the
mutant P2X7 receptor was nonfunctional when expressed at low receptor
density but regained function at a high receptor density. This density
dependence of mutant P2X7 function was also seen on differentiation of
fresh monocytes to macrophages with interferon-gamma, which upregulated
mutant P2X7 and partially restored its function. P2X7-mediated apoptosis
of lymphocytes was impaired in homozygous mutant P2X7 compared with
germline (8.6 vs 35.2%). The data suggested that the glutamic acid at
position 496 is required for optimal assembly of the P2X7 receptor.

Treatment of mycobacteria-infected macrophages with ATP induces
P2X7-mediated apoptosis that leads to death of the host cell and
intracellular bacilli. Saunders et al. (2003) found that neither
apoptosis nor killing of mycobacteria occurred in macrophages from
individuals homozygous for E496A after brief ATP exposure.

Cabrini et al. (2005) noted that in addition to the E496A variant,
several other polymorphisms cause loss of function of P2X7R in CLL
patients. By monitoring ATP-induced Ca(2+) influx in peripheral blood
lymphocytes from CLL patients and in embryonic kidney cells transfected
with P2X7R variants, they confirmed loss of function with E496A, but
found that other cytoplasmic tail variants resulted in only minor
functional decreases. Cabrini et al. (2005) identified the 489C-T
polymorphism, which causes a his155-to-tyr (H155Y) change in the
extracellular portion of the receptor, as a gain-of-function
polymorphism. Significant Ca(2+) flux increase was observed in CLL
patient lymphocytes bearing 489C/T and 489T/T genotypes. None of the
polymorphisms studied occurred at a significantly different frequency in
CLL patients compared with controls.

Wiley et al. (2002) investigated whether a glu496-to-ala (E496A;
1513A-C) single-nucleotide polymorphism that results in loss of function
of P2X7 in healthy individuals was present in leukemic B lymphocytes of
patients with chronic lymphatic leukemia (CLL; 151400). They studied
genomic DNA from the peripheral blood leukocytes of 36 unrelated
individuals with CLL, 4 individuals with familial CLL, and 46
age-matched controls. The prevalence of the polymorphic mutation and the
frequency of the mutant allele were 3-fold greater in individuals with
CLL than in white, elderly controls. Individuals homozygous for the
polymorphic allele had no P2X7 receptor function and heterozygotes had
half the normal function of that seen in individuals homozygous for the
wildtype allele; amounts of ATP-induced apoptosis varied accordingly. In
2 families in which Wiley et al. (2002) studied a father-son pair and a
sister-sister pair with CLL, loss of P2X7 function arose because of
inheritance of 1 or 2 1513A-C alleles for P2X7. They concluded that
activation of the P2X7 receptor leads to apoptosis of lymphocytes in
individuals with CLL, and reduced function of this receptor has an
antiapoptotic effect, resulting in an increase in B-cell numbers. Thus,
inheritance of a loss-of-function polymorphic mutation at position 1513
in the P2X7 gene would contribute to the pathogenesis of CLL.

To explore further the involvement of P2X7 as a susceptibility gene in
CLL, Dao-Ung et al. (2004) expanded the study of Wiley et al. (2002) to
include 42 cases of familial and 74 cases of sporadic CLL. Three
intergenerational pairs, 6 sib pairs, and 8 single familial cases
(affected relatives unavailable for study) were recruited. The 1513C
allele frequency was significantly increased in familial CLL patients
(0.286) compared with normal subjects (0.157) (OR = 2.1, p = 0.008). In
contrast, the 1513C allele frequency in patients with sporadic CLL was
very similar to that observed in normal subjects, with an OR close to 1.

Thunberg et al. (2002) found that the 1513A-C polymorphism affected
clinical outcome in CLL, especially in patients with mutated
immunoglobulin heavy chain variable genes (V(H); see 147070). Survival
was significantly longer for patients with CLL heterozygous for the
1513C allele than those with the 1513A/A genotype: median survival was
104 months and 72 months, respectively (P = 0.009). Of the 165 patients
with CLL in whom they assessed V(H) gene mutation status, the genes were
mutated in 71 (43%) patients and unmutated in 94; 18 (25%) of the 71
patients with mutated genes had the 1513C allele, compared with 17 (18%)
of the 94 who had unmutated genes. In patients with mutated
immunoglobulin heavy chain variable genes, those with CLL who were
1513C-positive had 53 months' longer median survival than those with the
1513A/A genotype (151 vs 98 months, P = 0.011). Di Virgilio and Wiley
(2002) commented on these findings.

ANIMAL MODEL

Solle et al. (2001) generated P2rx7-deficient mice by homologous
recombination. Macrophages from the mutant mice were unable to respond
to extracellular ATP as measured by fluorescent dye accumulation. In
addition, ATP or lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation of macrophages
resulted in the accumulation of 35-kD pro-Il1b (147720) in amounts
comparable to wildtype, but only wildtype macrophages secreted the 17-kD
Il1b. Both wildtype and mutant macrophages produced and released the
17-kD form in response to the potassium ionophore nigericin. Likewise,
in vivo, mutant mice primed with LPS and challenged with ATP failed to
generate significant levels of Il1b. Il6 (147620), on the other hand,
was produced by the mutant mice in response to LPS but without
additional production after ATP challenge, suggesting that ATP affects
IL6 production via both P2RX7-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

The capacity of P2X7R to form large pores and mediate apoptosis depends
on its large cytoplasmic tail, which harbors a putative TNFR-related
death domain. Adriouch et al. (2002) stated that transfected mouse P2x7r
forms pores less efficiently than its human and rat counterparts. Using
flow cytometric analysis, they demonstrated that splenic T cells from
C57BL/6 mice were less sensitive to extracellular ATP-induced calcium
uptake and apoptosis than were those from BALB/c mice. Adriouch et al.
(2002) identified a coding mutation in the C57BL/6 allele, a T-to-C
transition at nucleotide 1352, that led to a pro451-to-leu (P451L)
substitution in the TNFR-related death domain. In contrast, the BALB/c
sequence was in accord with those of human and rat P2X7R. The mutant
form of P2x7r was present in 2 C57BL and 2 DBA strains, but not in 10
other strains examined, including 4 derived from wild mice. Adriouch et
al. (2002) suggested that the P451L mutation has effects analogous to
those seen with the human E496A mutation.

Weber et al. (2010) found that P2x7 -/- mice were resistant to contact
hypersensitivity (CHS). Injection of Il1b restored the capacity to
develop CHS in P2x7 -/- mice. P2x7 -/- dendritic cells failed to make
Il1b in response to LPS and ATP, but they did make Il1b, in an Nlrp3
(606416)- and Asc (PYCARD; 606838)-dependent manner, if primed with LPS
and alum. Weber et al. (2010) concluded that P2X7 is a crucial receptor
for extracellular ATP released in skin in response to contact allergens
and for the release of IL1B, which is also essential in the
sensitization process.

REFERENCE 1. Adriouch, S.; Dox, C.; Welge, V.; Seman, M.; Koch-Nolte, F.; Haag,
F.: Cutting edge: a natural P451L mutation in the cytoplasmic domain
impairs the function of the mouse P2X7 receptor. J. Immun. 169:
4108-4112, 2002.

2. Atkinson, L.; Milligan, C. J.; Buckley, N. J.; Deuchars, J.: An
ATP-gated ion channel at the cell nucleus. Nature 420: 42 only,
2002.

3. Buell, G. N.; Talabot, F.; Gos, A.; Lorenz, J.; Lai, E.; Morris,
M. A.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Gene structure and chromosomal localization
of the human P2X7 receptor. Receptors Channels 5: 347-354, 1998.

4. Cabrini, G.; Falzoni, S.; Forchap, S. L.; Pellegatti, P.; Balboni,
A.; Agostini, P.; Cuneo, A.; Castoldi, G.; Baricordi, O. R.; Di Virgilio,
F.: A his-155 to tyr polymorphism confers gain-of-function to the
human P2X7 receptor of human leukemic lymphocytes. J. Immun. 175:
82-89, 2005.

5. Dao-Ung, L.-P.; Fuller, S. J.; Sluyter, R.; SkarRatt, K. K.; Thunberg,
U.; Tobin, G.; Byth, K.; Ban, M.; Rosenquist, R.; Stewart, G. J.;
Wiley, J. S.: Association of the 1513C polymorphism in the P2X7 gene
with familial forms of chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. (Letter) Brit.
J. Haemat. 125: 815-817, 2004.

6. Di Virgilio, F.; Wiley, J. S.: The P2X7 receptor of CLL lymphocytes--a
molecule with a split personality. (Commentary) Lancet 360: 1898-1899,
2002.

7. Gu, B. J.; Zhang, W.; Worthington, R. A.; Sluyter, R.; Dao-Ung,
P.; Petrou, S.; Barden, J. A.; Wiley, J. S.: A glu-496 to ala polymorphism
leads to loss of function of the human P2X(7) receptor. J. Biol.
Chem. 276: 11135-11142, 2001.

8. Lemaire, I.; Falzoni, S.; Leduc, N.; Zhang, B.; Pellegatti, P.;
Adinolfi, E.; Chiozzi, P.; Di Virgilio, F.: Involvement of the purinergic
P2X7 receptor in the formation of multinucleated giant cells. J.
Immun. 177: 7257-7265, 2006.

9. Rassendren, F.; Buell, G. N.; Virginio, C.; Collo, G.; North, R.
A.; Surprenant, A.: The permeabilizing ATP receptor, P2X(7). J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 5482-5486, 1997.

10. Saunders, B. M.; Fernando, S. L.; Sluyter, R.; Britton, W. J.;
Wiley, J. S.: A loss-of-function polymorphism in the human P2X(7)
receptor abolishes ATP-mediated killing of mycobacteria. J. Immun. 171:
5442-5446, 2003.

11. Solle, M.; Labasi, J.; Perregaux, D. G.; Stam, E.; Petrushova,
N.; Koller, B. H.; Griffiths, R. J.; Gabel, C. A.: Altered cytokine
production in mice lacking P2X7 receptors. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 125-132,
2001.

12. Sugiyama, T.; Kobayashi, M.; Kawamura, H.; Li, Q.; Puro, D. G.
: Enhancement of P2X7-induced pore formation and apoptosis: an early
effect of diabetes on the retinal microvasculature. Invest. Ophthal.
Vis. Sci. 45: 1026-1032, 2004. Note: Erratum: Invest. Ophthal. Vis.
Sci. 45: 1296 only, 2004.

13. Thunberg, U.; Tobin, G.; Johnson, A.; Soderberg, O.; Padyukov,
L.; Hultdin, M.; Klareskog, L.; Enblad, G.; Sundstrom, C.; Roos, G.;
Rosenquist, R.: Polymorphism in the P2X7 receptor gene and survival
in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Lancet 360: 1935-1939, 2002.

14. Weber, F. C.; Esser, P. R.; Muller, T.; Ganesan, J.; Pellegatti,
P.; Simon, M. M.; Zeiser, R.; Idzko, M.; Jakob, T.; Martin, S. F.
: Lack of the purinergic receptor P2X(7) results in resistance to
contact hypersensitivity. J. Exp. Med. 207: 2609-2619, 2010.

15. Wiley, J. S.; Dao-Ung, L. P.; Gu, B. J.; Sluyter, R.; Shemon,
A. N.; Li, C.; Taper, J.; Gallo, J.; Manoharan, A.: A loss-of-function
polymorphic mutation in the cytolytic P2X7 receptor gene and chronic
lymphocyte leukaemia: a molecular study. Lancet 359: 1114-1119,
2002.

16. Worthington, R. A.; Smart, M. L.; Gu, B. J.; Williams, D. A.;
Petrou, S.; Wiley, J. S.; Barden, J. A.: Point mutations confer loss
of ATP-induced human P2X(7) receptor function. FEBS Lett. 512: 43-46,
2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/5/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/18/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/4/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/5/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/4/2006
Jane Kelly - updated: 1/13/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/20/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/29/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/12/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/26/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/2/2001
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 4/20/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 4/24/1998

EDITED mgross: 05/06/2011
terry: 5/5/2011
carol: 2/3/2009
alopez: 1/27/2009
mgross: 10/26/2007
terry: 9/18/2007
mgross: 8/30/2006
terry: 8/4/2006
mgross: 5/8/2006
terry: 5/5/2006
mgross: 1/4/2006
carol: 1/14/2005
tkritzer: 1/13/2005
tkritzer: 8/20/2004
terry: 8/20/2004
tkritzer: 2/13/2003
tkritzer: 1/30/2003
terry: 1/29/2003
alopez: 11/14/2002
terry: 11/12/2002
cwells: 7/11/2002
terry: 6/26/2002
cwells: 2/7/2001
cwells: 2/2/2001
terry: 4/21/1999
carol: 4/20/1999
alopez: 4/24/1998

300463	TITLE *300463 POLYGLUTAMINE-BINDING PROTEIN 1; PQBP1
;;NUCLEAR PROTEIN CONTAINING A WW DOMAIN, 38-KD; NPW38
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PQBP1 is a nuclear polyglutamine-binding protein that contains a WW
domain (Waragai et al., 1999).

CLONING

Using the polyglutamine tract of murine Brn2 (POU3F2; 600494) as bait in
a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human embryonic brain cDNA library, Imafuku
et al. (1998) cloned PQBP1. The deduced protein contains an arginine-
and aspartic acid-rich domain that assumes a helical structure. Northern
blot analysis confirmed expression of PQBP1 in human brain.

Waragai et al. (1999) further characterized PQBP1, which they had
previously cloned (Imafuku et al., 1998). The deduced 265-amino acid
PQBP1 protein contains an N-terminal WW domain, a protein-protein
interaction motif that has 2 conserved trp (W) residues, which lies
between an acidic region and an acidic-basic amino acid repetitive
region. PQBP1 also has a putative nuclear localization signal. Using
Northern blot analysis, Waragai et al. (1999) detected a 1.0-kb
transcript in all 8 tissues examined. Northern blot analysis and in situ
hybridization revealed PQBP1 in several regions of the brain, with
highest expression in cerebellum, hippocampus, and olfactory bulb.
Immunohistochemistry indicated that, in the brain, PQBP1 was present
primarily in neurons. By immunofluorescence studies and expression of a
PQBP1-GFP fusion protein, Waragai et al. (1999) showed that the PQBP1
protein localized in the nucleus.

By searching a full-length cDNA database for sequences encoding proteins
with protein-protein interaction domains, Komuro et al. (1999)
identified PQBP1, which they called NPW38. Using SDS-PAGE and Western
blot analysis, Komuro et al. (1999) showed that PQBP1 had an apparent
molecular mass of 38 kD. Northern blot analysis detected a 1.3-kb PQBP1
transcript in all 16 tissues examined.

Iwamoto et al. (2000) identified 4 alternative PQBP1 transcripts, which
they designated PQBP1a to PQBP1d, in addition to the PQBP1 transcript
identified by Komuro et al. (1999) and Waragai et al. (1999). All of the
PQBP1 transcripts encode proteins that retain the WW domain in their
N-terminal regions, but there is wide variation in their C-terminal
regions. Iwamoto et al. (2000) noted that PQBP1a and PQBP1d lack the
domain responsible for interaction with homopolymeric glutamine repeats
and the nuclear localization signal.

GENE FUNCTION

Using deletion analysis, Imafuku et al. (1998) showed that the arg- and
asp-rich motif of PQBP1 was essential for binding the polyglutamine
tract of mouse Brn2.

Waragai et al. (1999) proposed that PQBP1 mediates cellular functions by
binding to polyglutamine tracts via its polar amino acid-rich domain.
Using immunoprecipitation, they confirmed that PQBP1 binds mouse Brn2.
In cotransfection experiments, PQBP1 suppressed the ability of Brn2 to
transactivate a target gene. Waragai et al. (1999) noted that PQBP1
binds with a higher affinity to an expanded polyglutamine tract, and
they confirmed that PQBP1 interacts with the polyglutamine tracts of
huntingtin (613004) and androgen receptor (AR; 313700). Overexpression
of PQBP1 suppressed the growth of cells in culture and increased their
susceptibility to various stresses.

Komuro et al. (1999) observed that the WW domain of PQBP1 functioned as
a transcriptional activator in yeast 2-hybrid assays and in mammalian
cells in vivo. However, the transcriptional activity of the WW domain
was repressed by regions of PQBP1 flanking the WW domain. In vitro
translated PQBP1 specifically bound to poly(rG) resin, suggesting that
PQBP1 functions as an RNA-binding protein.

Okazawa et al. (2002) proposed that modified transcription may underlie
polyglutamine-mediated pathology and that PQBP1 may be involved in the
pathology of spinocerebellar ataxia-1 (SCA1; 164400). Using in vitro and
in vivo assays, they showed that interaction between ataxin-1 (ATX1;
601556) and PQBP1 was positively influenced by expanded polyglutamine
sequences. In immunoprecipitation experiments, mutant ataxin-1 enhanced
interaction between PQBP1 and the RNA polymerase II (pol II) large
subunit (180660), and the authors proposed that a ternary complex is
formed by PQBP1 in the presence of mutant ataxin-1. PQBP1 and mutant
ataxin-1 acted cooperatively in cell lines to repress transcription and
induce cell death. Okazawa et al. (2002) hypothesized that high
expression of PQBP1 in the cerebellum promotes mutant ataxin-1-induced
cell death, contributing to the region-specific neurodegeneration seen
in SCA1 patient tissues.

Enokido et al. (2002) examined the effects of PQBP1 on primary-cultured
cerebellar neurons and concluded that overexpression of PQBP1 inhibits
the basal transcription in cerebellar neurons and increases their
vulnerability to low potassium conditions.

GENE STRUCTURE

Iwamoto et al. (2000) determined that the PQBP1 gene contains 6 exons
and spans at least 4.6 kb.

MAPPING

Kalscheuer et al. (2003) stated that the PQBP1 gene maps to chromosome
Xp11.23.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Based on the distribution of linkage intervals in 125 unrelated families
with X-linked mental retardation (XLMR), Ropers et al. (2003) estimated
that one-third of all mutations underlying XLMR are clustered on
proximal Xp. In 5 of 29 families with XLMR, Kalscheuer et al. (2003)
identified mutations in the PQBP1 gene that caused frameshifts in the
fourth coding exon, which contains a stretch of 6 AG dinucleotides in
the DR/ER repeat. In 1 family not previously reported and a family with
Sutherland-Haan syndrome (309500), Kalscheuer et al. (2003) found that
affected males carried an extra AG dinucleotide (300463.0001). Two other
families, one not previously reported and the other reported as MRX55
(see 309500) by Deqaqi et al. (1998), had a deletion of 2 AG
dinucleotides (300463.0002). A single AG unit was deleted (300463.0003)
in affected males of a family that had been reported by Hamel et al.
(1994) as having mental retardation, congenital heart defect, cleft
palate, short stature, and facial anomalies. Considerable phenotypic
variability was observed between families with different mutations and
even between families with the same mutation.

In affected members of a Canadian Mennonite family with Renpenning
syndrome (309500), Lenski et al. (2004) identified a 1-bp insertion in
the PQBP1 gene (300463.0004). They commented that mental retardation,
microcephaly, and short stature seem to be consistent findings among
individuals with PQBP1 mutations. As microcephaly is the most common
physical finding among males with mental retardation of unknown cause,
and is a reliably ascertained finding, they suggested that it may be
useful in the selection of cases for PQBP1 mutation testing.

Golabi et al. (1984) reported a family with X-linked mental retardation,
microcephaly, postnatal growth deficiency, and other anomalies including
atrial septal defect. Lubs et al. (2006) restudied the family, but no
significant linkage to X chromosome markers could be found. Because
microcephaly, short stature, and atrial septal defect in the family of
Golabi et al. (1984) had a clinical similarity to families with other
X-linked mental retardation syndromes, including Renpenning syndrome, in
which mutations in PQBP1 had been identified, Lubs et al. (2006) did a
mutation screen of that gene. A missense mutation in PQBP1 was
identified that changed the conserved tyrosine residue in the WW domain
at position 65 to a cysteine (Y65C; 300463.0007).

ANIMAL MODEL

Okuda et al. (2003) generated transgenic mice overexpressing human
PQBP1. The mice showed a late-onset and gradually progressive motor
neuron disease-like phenotype suggestive of the neurogenic muscular
atrophy observed in patients with SCA1. Ataxia could not be
discriminated from predominant progressive weakness. Pathologic
examinations of the transgenic mice revealed loss of Purkinje and
granular cells in the cerebellum as well as loss of motor neurons in the
spinal anterior horn, corresponding to the pathology of human SCA1.
Okuda et al. (2003) concluded that excessive action of PQBP1 causes
neuronal dysfunction and that PQBP1 may be involved in the pathology of
SCA1.

Ito et al. (2009) generated Pqbp1-knockdown mice using a transgene
expressing double-strand RNA that is endogenously cleaved to an siRNA,
which inhibited 50% of Pqbp1 expression. Pqbp1-knockdown mice possessed
normal ability in ordinary memory tests including water-maze test,
whereas they showed abnormal anxiety-related behavior in light/dark
exploration test and open-field test, and showed obvious declines of
anxiety-related cognition in the repetitive elevated plus maze or novel
object recognition test. C-fos upregulation and histone H3 acetylation
after behavior tests were decreased in neurons of amygdala, prefrontal
cortex, and hippocampus. Administration of 4-phenylbutyric acid (PBA),
an HDAC inhibitor, efficiently improved expression of these genes and
rescued the abnormal phenotypes in adult Pqbp1-knockdown mice. Ito et
al. (2009) suggested that Pqbp1 dysfunction in regulating gene
expression may underlie the abnormal behavior and cognition of
Pqbp1-knockdown mice and that recovery of expression of such PQBP1
target genes might improve the symptoms in adult patients with
Renpenning syndrome and PQBP1-linked mental retardation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RENPENNING SYNDROME
PQBP1, 2-BP INS, 3900AG

In all affected males from a family with an X-linked mental retardation
syndrome (309500) previously reported by Sutherland et al. (1988),
Kalscheuer et al. (2003) identified an insertion of an extra AG
dinucleotide at position 3900 of the PQBP1 gene. Affected males showed
mental retardation, short stature, microcephaly, brachycephaly, spastic
diplegia, small testes, and anal stenosis or atresia. Kalscheuer et al.
(2003) identified the same AG duplication in a second family with
X-linked mental retardation (see 309500), but the affected males showed
no spastic diplegia or small testes. In both families the disease was
not progressive.

.0002
RENPENNING SYNDROME
PQBP1, 4-BP DEL, 3896AGAG

In affected males of 2 families with X-linked mental retardation
(309500), Kalscheuer et al. (2003) identified a deletion of 2 AG
dinucleotides at position 3896 of the PQBP1 gene. The mutant protein was
predicted to differ by only 2 amino acids from the normal protein.
Affected individuals from 1 family, which had been reported as MRX55
(see 309500) by Deqaqi et al. (1998), were moderately retarded but had
no other clinical signs, except for a somewhat smaller body size in 1
individual. In contrast, all affected members of the second family,
which had not been reported previously, had microcephaly in addition to
mental retardation. One member also had anal atresia, and another had
complete situs inversus. Kalscheuer et al. (2003) suggested that this
clinical variability might be due to differences in the genetic
background; the mildly affected family was from Morocco, while the other
family was from the Netherlands. The disorder was not progressive in any
of these families.

In affected members and obligate carriers of a family with MRXS3,
previously described by Fichera et al. (2002), Fichera et al. (2005)
identified the 3896delAGAG mutation in the PQBP1 gene. The authors
observed skewed X inactivation in 8 of 9 heterozygous females in this
family; the inactivated X chromosome was of maternal origin.

In a family (K8600) with Renpenning syndrome, Stevenson et al. (2005)
identified a 4-bp deletion in exon 4 of the PQBP1 gene, which they
stated was identical to that previously identified by Kalscheuer et al.
(2003) in the MRX55 family, although Stevenson et al. (2005) denoted the
mutation as 459-462delAGAG. The deletion causes a frameshift and a
premature stop codon, resulting in a protein that partially lacks the
PRD domain and completely lacks the NLS and C2 domains. The deletion was
found in all affected males and obligate carriers.

.0003
RENPENNING SYNDROME
PQBP1, 2-BP DEL, 3898AG

In affected males from a family with an X-linked mental retardation
syndrome (309500) reported by Hamel et al. (1994), Kalscheuer et al.
(2003) identified a deletion of a single AG dinucleotide at position
3898 in the PQBP1 gene. All affected males had congenital heart defects
in addition to severe mental retardation, microcephaly, spasticity,
short stature, cleft or highly arched palate, and other craniofacial
abnormalities. The mother of 2 of the affected individuals had a
corrected atrial septal defect. Facial features coarsened with age.

Lenski et al. (2004) referred to this as the cerebropalatocardiac
syndrome or Hamel syndrome.

In 2 male cousins with right microphthalmia and left choroid coloboma,
microcephaly, mental retardation, renal hypoplasia, and spastic
diplegia, Martinez-Garay et al. (2007) identified a 2-bp deletion in the
PQBP1 gene that they designated 461delAG; they stated that it was the
same deletion previously reported by Kalscheuer et al. (2003). The
deletion was also found in both obligate carrier mothers; haplotype
analysis suggested germline mosaicism for the deletion in the maternal
grandmother.

.0004
RENPENNING SYNDROME
PQBP1, 1-BP INS, 641C

Renpenning et al. (1962) described a Canadian Mennonite family in which
20 males in 3 generations had mental retardation (309500).
Manifestations in affected males included microcephaly, short stature,
and small testes; carrier females appeared normal. Stevenson et al.
(1998) mapped the disorder in this family to Xp11.4-p11.2. In affected
members of this family, Lenski et al. (2004) identified a 1-bp insertion
in the PQBP1 gene, 641insC, resulting in a frameshift with a premature
stop codon.

.0005
RENPENNING SYNDROME
PQBP1, 23-BP DEL, NT547

In a French boy with X-linked mental retardation associated with
microcephaly, short stature, and hyperactivity (309500), Cossee et al.
(2006) identified a 23-bp deletion encompassing nucleotides 547-569 in
exon 4 of the PQBP1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and a truncated
PQPB1 protein lacking the NLS signal and the C2 domain. The same
mutation was identified in a maternal half-brother who had mild mental
retardation, microcephaly, short stature, facial dysmorphism, choanal
atresia, and anal imperforation.

.0006
RENPENNING SYNDROME
PQBP1, 21-BP DEL, NT334

In 3 unrelated boys with X-linked mental retardation (309500), Cossee et
al. (2006) identified a 21-bp in-frame deletion encompassing nucleotides
334 to 354 in exon 4 of the PQBP1 gene. Two of the boys had mild mental
retardation and mostly behavioral abnormalities without microcephaly or
short stature. The third boy had severe global developmental delay and
borderline short stature without microcephaly. The 21-bp deletion
affects a region of 5 imperfect 7-amino acid tandem repeats in the PRD
domain of the protein, present in the predominant isoform. The deletion
may not affect some of the rarer isoforms, and may not have drastic
functional effects, which may underlie the milder phenotype in these
patients.

.0007
RENPENNING SYNDROME
PQBP1, TYR65CYS

Lubs et al. (2006) identified a 194A-G transition, resulting in a
tyr65-to-cys (Y65C) substitution, in the PQBP1 gene in affected members
of a family with an X-linked mental retardation syndrome originally
described by Golabi et al. (1984) under the moniker 'Golabi-Ito-Hall
syndrome.' Features included microcephaly, postnatal growth deficiency,
and other anomalies, such as atrial septal defect, all of which are also
found in the Renpenning type of X-linked mental retardation (309500)
(Stevenson et al., 2005; Tapia et al., 2010). The Y65C substitution was
the first missense mutation identified in the PQBP1 gene and the first
mutation found in its WW domain. The WW domain had been shown to play an
important role in regulation of transcription by interacting with the
PPxY motif in transcription factors. The Y65C mutation was thought to
affect the proper functioning of the PQBP1 protein as a transcriptional
coactivator.

The highly conserved quartet of hydrophobic residues trp52, tyr65,
asn67, and pro78 of PQBP1 constitutes the core of its WW domain. Tapia
et al. (2010) found that the T65C substitution disturbed folding of the
isolated WW domain and rendered it vulnerable to oxidation and
dimerization compared with wildtype. The W65C mutant WW domain also
showed impaired binding to PPxY-containing peptides, and the full-length
mutant protein showed reduced binding to the mRNA splicing factor WBP11.
Consistent with these findings, lymphoblasts from a Golabi-Ito-Hall
syndrome patient showed more than 80% reduced splicing efficiency
compared with normal control cells. The T65C mutant protein did not show
reduced stability compared with wildtype, suggesting that it is not
recognized as a misfolded protein.

REFERENCE 1. Cossee, M.; Demeer, B.; Blanchet, P.; Echenne, B.; Singh, D.; Hagens,
O.; Antin, M.; Finck, S.; Vallee, L.; Dollfus, H.; Hegde, S.; Springell,
K.; Thelma, B. K.; Woods, G.; Kalscheuer, V.; Mandel, J.-L.: Exonic
microdeletions in the X-linked PQBP1 gene in mentally retarded patients:
a pathogenic mutation and in-frame deletions of uncertain effect. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 14: 418-425, 2006.

2. Deqaqi, S. C.; N'Guessan, M.; Forner, J.; Sbiti, A.; Beldjord,
C.; Chelly, J.; Sefiani, A.; Des Portes, V.: A gene for non-specific
X-linked mental retardation (MRX55) is located in Xp11. Ann. Genet. 41:
11-16, 1998.

3. Enokido, Y.; Maruoka, H.; Hatanaka, H.; Kanazawa, I.; Okazawa,
H.: PQBP-1 increases vulnerability to low potassium stress and represses
transcription in primary cerebellar neurons. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 294: 268-271, 2002.

4. Fichera, M.; Borgione, E.; Avola, E.; Amata, S.; Sturnio, M.; Romano,
C.; Ragusa, A.: A new MRXS locus maps to the X chromosome pericentromeric
region: a new syndrome or narrow definition of Sutherland-Haan genetic
locus? J. Med. Genet. 39: 276-280, 2002.

5. Fichera, M.; Falco, M.; Lo Giudice, M.; Castiglia, L.; Guarnaccia,
V.; Cali, F.; Spalletta, A.; Scuderi, C.; Avola, E.; Romano, C.:
Skewed X-inactivation in a family with mental retardation and PQBP1
gene mutation. (Letter) Clin. Genet. 67: 446-447, 2005.

6. Golabi, M.; Ito, M.; Hall, B. D.: A new X-linked multiple congenital
anomalies/mental retardation syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 17: 367-374,
1984.

7. Hamel, B. C. J.; Mariman, E. C. M.; van Beersum, S. E. C.; Schoonbrood-Lenssen,
A. M. J.; Ropers, H.-H.: Mental retardation, congenital heart defect,
cleft palate, short stature, and facial anomalies: a new X-linked
multiple congenital anomalies/mental retardation syndrome: clinical
description and molecular studies. Am. J. Med. Genet. 51: 591-597,
1994.

8. Imafuku, I.; Waragai, M.; Takeuchi, S.; Kanazawa, I.; Kawabata,
M.; Mouradian, M. M.; Okazawa, H.: Polar amino acid-rich sequences
bind to polyglutamine tracts. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 253:
16-20, 1998.

9. Ito, H.; Yoshimura, N.; Kurosawa, M.; Ishii, S.; Nukina, N.; Okazawa,
H.: Knock-down of PQBP1 impairs anxiety-related cognition in mouse. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 18: 4239-4254, 2009.

10. Iwamoto, K.; Huang, Y.; Ueda, S.: Genomic organization and alternative
transcripts of the human PQBP-1 gene. Gene 259: 69-73, 2000.

11. Kalscheuer, V. M.; Freude, K.; Musante, L.; Jensen, L. R.; Yntema,
H. G.; Gecz, J.; Sefiani, A.; Hoffmann, K.; Moser, B.; Haas, S.; Gurok,
U.; Haesler, S.; and 21 others: Mutations in the polyglutamine
binding protein 1 gene cause X-linked mental retardation. Nature
Genet. 35: 313-315, 2003.

12. Komuro, A.; Saeki, M.; Kato, S.: Npw38, a novel nuclear protein
possessing a WW domain capable of activating basal transcription. Nucleic
Acids Res. 27: 1957-1965, 1999.

13. Lenski, C.; Abidi, F.; Meindl, A.; Gibson, A.; Platzer, M.; Kooy,
R. F.; Lubs, H. A.; Stevenson, R. E.; Ramser, J.; Schwartz, C. E.
: Novel truncating mutations in the polyglutamine tract binding protein
1 gene (PQBP1) cause Renpenning syndrome and X-linked mental retardation
in another family with microcephaly. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74:
777-780, 2004.

14. Lubs, H.; Abidi, F. E.; Echeverri, R.; Holloway, L.; Meindl, A.;
Stevenson, R. E.; Schwartz, C. E.: Golabi-Ito-Hall syndrome results
from a missense mutation in the WW domain of the PQBP1 gene. (Letter) J.
Med. Genet. 43: e30, 2006. Note: Electronic Article.

15. Martinez-Garay, I.; Tomas, M.; Oltra, S.; Ramser, J.; Molto, M.
D.; Prieto, F.; Meindl, A.; Kutsche, K.; Martinez, F.: A two base
pair deletion in the PQBP1 gene is associated with microphthalmia,
microcephaly, and mental retardation. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 15:
29-34, 2007.

16. Okazawa, H.; Rich, T.; Chang, A.; Lin, X.; Waragai, M.; Kajikawa,
M.; Enokido, Y.; Komuro, A.; Kato, S.; Shibata, M.; Hatanaka, H.;
Mouradian, M. M.; Sudol, M.; Kanazawa, I.: Interaction between mutant
ataxin-1 and PQBP-1 affects transcription and cell death. Neuron 34:
701-713, 2002.

17. Okuda, T.; Hattori, H.; Takeuchi, S.; Shimizu, J.; Ueda, H.; Palvimo,
J. J.; Kanazawa, I.; Kawano, H.; Nakagawa, M.; Okazawa, H.: PQBP-1
transgenic mice show a late-onset motor neuron disease-like phenotype. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 711-725, 2003.

18. Renpenning, H. J.; Gerrard, J. W.; Zaleski, W. A.; Tabata, T.
: Familial sex-linked mental retardation. Canad. Med. Assoc. J. 87:
954-956, 1962.

19. Ropers, H.-H.; Hoeltzenbein, M.; Kalscheuer, V.; Yntema, H.; Hamel,
B.; Fryns, J.-P.; Chelly, J.; Partington, M.; Gecz, J.; Moraine, C.
: Nonsyndromic X-linked mental retardation: where are the missing
mutations? Trends Genet. 19: 316-320, 2003.

20. Stevenson, R. E.; Arena, J. F.; Ouzts, E.; Gibson, A.; Shokeir,
M. H. K.; Vnencak-Jones, C.; Lubs, H. A.; May, M.; Schwartz, C. E.
: Renpenning syndrome maps to Xp11. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 1092-1101,
1998.

21. Stevenson, R. E.; Bennett, C. W.; Abidi, F.; Kleefstra, T.; Porteous,
M.; Simensen, R. J.; Lubs, H. A.; Hamel, B. C. J.; Schwartz, C. E.
: Renpenning syndrome comes into focus. Am. J. Med. Genet. 134A:
415-421, 2005.

22. Sutherland, G. R.; Gedeon, A. K.; Haan, E. A.; Woodroffe, P.;
Mulley, J. C.: Linkage studies with the gene for an X-linked syndrome
of mental retardation, microcephaly and spastic diplegia. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 30: 493-508, 1988.

23. Tapia, V. E.; Nicolaescu, E.; McDonald, C. B.; Musi, V.; Oka,
T.; Inayoshi, Y.; Satteson, A. C.; Mazack, V.; Humbert, J.; Gaffney,
C. J.; Beullens, M.; Schwartz, C. E.; Landgraf, C.; Volkmer, R.; Pastore,
A.; Farooq, A.; Bollen, M.; Sudol, M.: Y65C missense mutation in
the WW domain of the Golabi-Ito-Hall syndrome protein PQBP1 affects
its binding activity and deregulates pre-mRNA splicing. J. Biol.
Chem. 285: 19391-19401, 2010.

24. Waragai, M.; Lammers, C.-H.; Takeuchi, S.; Imafuku, I.; Udagawa,
Y.; Kanazawa, I.; Kawabata, M.; Mouradian, M. M.; Okazawa, H.: PQBP-1,
a novel polyglutamine tract-binding protein, inhibits transcription
activation by Brn-2 and affects cell survival. Hum. Molec. Genet. 8:
977-987, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/27/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/4/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/7/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/1/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/27/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/9/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/24/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/20/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/17/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/8/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/4/2003

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 12/2/2003

EDITED mgross: 04/04/2011
ckniffin: 4/4/2011
mgross: 1/11/2011
terry: 12/27/2010
terry: 12/8/2010
wwang: 10/21/2010
terry: 10/4/2010
mgross: 7/8/2010
terry: 7/7/2010
carol: 9/15/2009
wwang: 2/4/2008
terry: 2/1/2008
carol: 7/14/2006
terry: 6/27/2006
wwang: 6/1/2006
ckniffin: 5/9/2006
wwang: 7/18/2005
terry: 6/24/2005
carol: 6/21/2005
carol: 6/20/2005
wwang: 2/22/2005
terry: 2/17/2005
terry: 7/20/2004
tkritzer: 4/26/2004
tkritzer: 4/16/2004
terry: 4/8/2004
ckniffin: 12/19/2003
carol: 12/15/2003
ckniffin: 12/11/2003
alopez: 12/9/2003
mgross: 12/5/2003
terry: 12/4/2003
mgross: 12/2/2003

600764	TITLE *600764 MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX, CLASS I-RELATED; MR1
;;MAJOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY COMPLEX, CLASS I-LIKE SEQUENCE; HLALS;;
MHC-RELATED PROTEIN 1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hashimoto et al. (1995) identified an expressed class I gene, which they
called MR1 (or MHC-related 1), by means of a PCR-based strategy using 2
primers that correspond to the 2 conserved regions in the alpha-3 domain
of class I molecules. Similar to a typical class I molecule, the MR1
protein comprises a signal sequence, 3 extracellular domains (alpha-1,
alpha-2, and alpha-3), a transmembrane domain, and a cytoplasmic domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Treiner et al. (2003) showed that T cells that express the canonical
hV-alpha-7.2-J-alpha-33 TCR rearrangement are preferentially located in
the gut lamina propria of humans and are therefore genuine
mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells. Selection and/or expansion
of this population requires B lymphocytes, as MAIT cells are absent in
B-cell-deficient patients. In addition, Treiner et al. (2003)
demonstrated that MAIT cells are selected and/or restricted by MR1, a
monomorphic major histocompatibility complex class I-related molecule
that is markedly conserved in diverse mammalian species. MAIT cells are
not present in germ-free mice, indicating that commensal flora are
required for their expansion in the gut lamina propria. Treiner et al.
(2003) concluded that this indicates that MAIT cells are probably
involved in the host response at the site of pathogen entry, and may
regulate intestinal B-cell activity.

Kjer-Nielsen et al. (2012) demonstrated that the structure and chemistry
within the antigen-binding cleft of MR1 is distinct from the MHC and CD1
families. MR1 is ideally suited to bind ligands originating from vitamin
metabolites. The structure of MR1 in complex with 6-formyl pterin, a
folic acid (vitamin B9) metabolite, shows the pterin ring sequestered
within MR1. Furthermore, Kjer-Nielsen et al. (2012) characterized
related MR1-restricted vitamin derivatives, originating from the
bacterial riboflavin (vitamin B2) biosynthetic pathway, which
specifically and potently activate MAIT cells. Accordingly, the authors
showed that metabolites of vitamin B represent a class of antigen that
are presented by MR1 for MAIT cell immunosurveillance. Kjer-Nielsen et
al. (2012) concluded that since many vitamin biosynthetic pathways are
unique to bacteria and yeast, MAIT cells use these metabolites to detect
microbial infection.

MAPPING

Hashimoto et al. (1995) mapped the MR1 gene by fluorescence in situ
hybridization to 1q25.3. The localization of MR1 on chromosome 1 was
also supported by the results of PCR amplification of the MR1 fragment
from somatic cell hybrid DNAs.

GENE FAMILY

Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules present
antigenic peptides to CD8-positive T cells. The HLA class I gene family
in humans consists of 6 members: polymorphic HLA-A (142800), HLA-B
(142830), and HLA-C (142840), and oligomorphic HLA-E (143010), HLA-F
(143110), and HLA-G (142871). The functions of HLA-E, -F, and -G
molecules are unknown, although HLA-G may play a role in the
maternal-fetal interaction. Several groups of human class I-related
molecules have been identified, including the CD1 family (e.g., CD1A;
188370), zinc-alpha-2-glycoprotein (AZGP1; 194460), MHC class I
chain-related molecule A (MICA; 600169), and a human homolog of the rat
neonatal Fc receptor (Simister and Mostov, 1989) (summary by Hashimoto
et al., 1995).

EVOLUTION

In contrast to other known human divergent class I genes, MR1 encodes
peptide-binding domains similar to those encoded by HLA class I genes on
chromosome 6 and by nonmammalian classical MHC class I genes.
Identification of a homolog of MR1 in the mouse genome implied that the
ancestor of MR1 was present in the primordial mammalian species.
Hashimoto et al. (1995) suggested that species at distinct evolutionary
stages may adapt distinct gene lineages for their MHC. For example, in a
New World primate (the cotton-top tamarin), the most broadly expressed
class I gene lineage is HLA-G, which in the human is expressed only in a
highly restricted manner and is oligomorphic. They suggested further
that the location of the CD1 gene family, also on 1q, as well as many
other members of the immunoglobulin gene superfamily, may be
significant.

REFERENCE 1. Hashimoto, K.; Hirai, M.; Kurosawa, Y.: A gene outside the human
MHC related to classical HLA class I genes. Science 269: 693-695,
1995.

2. Kjer-Nielsen, L.; Patel, O.; Corbett, A. J.; Le Nours, J.; Meehan,
B.; Liu, L.; Bhati, M.; Chen, Z.; Kostenko, L.; Reantragoon, R.; Williamson,
N. A.; Purcell, A. W.; Dudek, N. L.; McConville, M. J.; O'Hair, R.
A. J.; Khairallah, G. N.; Godfrey, D. I.; Fairlie, D. P.; Rossjohn,
J.; McCluskey, J.: MR1 presents microbial vitamin B metabolites to
MAIT cells. Nature 491: 717-723, 2012.

3. Simister, N. E.; Mostov, K. E.: An Fc receptor structurally related
to MHC class I antigens. Nature 337: 184-187, 1989.

4. Treiner, E.; Duban, L.; Bahram, S.; Radosavljevic, M.; Wanner,
V.; Tilloy, F.; Affaticati, P.; Gilfillan, S.; Lantz, O.: Selection
of evolutionarily conserved mucosal-associated invariant T cells by
MRI. Nature 422: 164-169, 2003. Note: Erratum: Nature 423: 1018
only, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/9/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/24/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/7/1995

EDITED carol: 04/01/2013
carol: 4/1/2013
alopez: 1/11/2013
terry: 1/9/2013
terry: 11/28/2012
alopez: 10/14/2003
alopez: 3/24/2003
terry: 3/24/2003
carol: 3/13/2003
terry: 12/11/2000
terry: 11/18/1998
mark: 2/24/1997
jenny: 2/21/1997
terry: 9/12/1995
mark: 9/7/1995

600412	TITLE *600412 GUANYLATE-BINDING PROTEIN 2, INTERFERON-INDUCIBLE; GBP2
;;GUANYLATE-BINDING PROTEIN 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; GBP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Guanylate-binding proteins, such as GBP2, are induced by interferon and
hydrolyze GTP to both GDP and GMP (Vestal, 2005).

CLONING

Cheng et al. (1991) cloned cDNAs for GBP1 (600411) and GBP2.

Vestal (2005) reported that the 592-amino acid GBP2 protein shares 76%
and 64% identity with GBP1 (600411) and GBP5 (611467), respectively.
Like GBP1 and GBP5, GBP2 has a C-terminal CaaX isoprenylation motif.

Olszewski et al. (2006) found that GBP2 shares 76% amino acid identity
with GBP3 (600413), but only 54% and 57% identity with GBP6 (612467) and
GBP7 (612468), respectively. All GBPs, including GBP2, have a conserved
N-terminal globular GTP-binding domain containing 2 consensus sequences
and a third T(L/V)RD sequence not found in other GTPases. EST database
analysis indicated wide expression of GBP2 in human tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RT-PCR, Tripal et al. (2007) detected high expression of GBP1,
GBP2, and GBP3 in endothelial cells after stimulation with IFNG
(147570), TNF (191160), or IL1B (147720). Immunofluorescence analysis
demonstrated cytoplasmic expression of GBP2. In the presence of aluminum
fluoride, IFNG induced translocation of GBP2 to the Golgi apparatus.

Kim et al. (2011) examined a complete mouse 65-kD guanylate-binding
protein (Gbp) gene family as part of a 43-member
interferon-gamma-inducible guanosine triphosphatase superfamily in mouse
and human genomes. Family-wide loss of function analysis found that at
least 4 Gbps--Gbp1, Gbp6, Gbp7 (612468), and Gbp10--conferred
cell-autonomous immunity to listerial or mycobacterial infection within
macrophages and gene-deficient animals. These Gbps solicited host
defense proteins, including the phagocyte oxidase, antimicrobial
peptides, and autophagy effectors, to kill intracellular bacteria. Thus,
Kim et al. (2011) concluded that specific 65-kD Gbps coordinate a potent
oxidative and vesicular trafficking program to protect the host from
infection.

GENE STRUCTURE

Olszewski et al. (2006) determined that, like other GBPs, the GBP2 gene
contains 11 exons and begins translation in exon 2.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Olszewski et al. (2006) mapped the GBP2
gene to the GBP gene cluster on chromosome 1p22.2. It is located
telomeric to GBP7 and centromeric to GBP1.

REFERENCE 1. Cheng, Y.-S. E.; Patterson, C. E.; Staeheli, P.: Interferon-induced
guanylate-binding proteins lack an N(T)KXD consensus motif and bind
GMP in addition to GDP and GTP. Molec. Cell. Biol. 11: 4717-4725,
1991.

2. Kim, B.-H.; Shenoy, A. R.; Kumar, P.; Das, R.; Tiwari, S.; MacMicking,
J. D.: A family of IFN-gamma-inducible 65-kD GTPases protects against
bacterial infection. Science 332: 717-721, 2011.

3. Olszewski, M. A.; Gray, J.; Vestal, D. J.: In silico genomic analysis
of the human and murine guanylate-binding protein (GBP) gene clusters. J.
Interferon Cytokine Res. 26: 328-352, 2006.

4. Tripal, P.; Bauer, M.; Naschberger, E.; Mortinger, T.; Hohenadl,
C.; Cornali, E.; Thurau, M.; Sturzl, M.: Unique features of different
members of the human guanylate-binding protein family. J. Interferon
Cytokine Res. 27: 44-52, 2007.

5. Vestal, D. J.: The guanylate-binding proteins (GBPs): proinflammatory
cytokine-induced members of the dynamin superfamily with unique GTPase
activity. J. Interferon Cytokine Res. 25: 435-443, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 08/16/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/11/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/14/1995

EDITED alopez: 08/16/2011
mgross: 12/11/2008
terry: 12/11/2008
wwang: 9/26/2007
carol: 2/14/1995

604791	TITLE *604791 TASTE RECEPTOR, TYPE 2, MEMBER 10; TAS2R10
;;T2R10;;
TASTE RECEPTOR, FAMILY B, MEMBER 2; TRB2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TAS2R10 belongs to a family of intronless genes that encode highly
related bitter taste receptors (TAS2Rs). TAS2Rs are G protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs), which are characterized by 7 transmembrane domains
(summary by Fischer et al., 2005). For further information on the TAS2R
gene family, see 604791.

CLONING

The gustatory system of mammals can sense 4 basic taste qualities,
bitter, sweet, salty, and sour, as well as umami, the taste of
glutamate. It had been suggested that the detection of bitter and sweet
tastants by taste receptor cells in the mouth may involve GPCRs. The
chemical diversity of bitter and sweet compounds leads one to expect a
large number of different receptors. Matsunami et al. (2000) used in
silico methods to identify a family of candidate taste receptors that
are members of the GPCR superfamily and that are specifically expressed
in taste receptor cells. In the mouse, the Prp (proline-rich protein)
gene locus is tightly associated with the SOA genetic locus, which is
involved in detecting the bitter compound sucrose octaacetate. The SOA
locus is on mouse chromosome 6, in a region that is syntenic to human
chromosome 12p13. The human homolog of the Prp gene (PRH1; 168730) was
found on a chromosome 12 contig. By searching the human chromosome 12
database with the sequence of V1R5, a candidate pheromone receptor,
Matsunami et al. (2000) identified an intronless gene encoding a
putative receptor protein in the contig containing the PRH1 gene. The
TRB2 gene (taste receptor, family B, member 2) encodes a 311-amino acid
protein with weak homology to the V1R5 protein. RT-PCR detected
expression of mouse Trb2 and Trb3 (604792) in the circumvallate and
foliate taste papillae, as well as the tip of the tongue, which contains
fungiform taste papillae, and the palate, which also contains taste
buds. Trb2 and Trb3 expression was not detected in the vomeronasal
organ, but appropriately sized PCR products were obtained from the
testis. In situ hybridization to mouse tissue showed that Trb genes are
expressed in taste receptor cells in both the circumvallate and foliate
taste papillae. Matsunami et al. (2000) concluded that the TRBs are
diverse in protein sequence, which is consistent with an ability to
detect a variety of tastants with very different chemical structures.

GENE FAMILY

Using the TRB2 sequence to search the chromosome 12 database, Matsunami
et al. (2000) identified 8 related genes, all in the same contig. Of the
8 TRB genes, 6 encode receptors related to TRB2 and 2 are pseudogenes.
Using these TRB sequences, Matsunami et al. (2000) were unable to find
any members of this family in either the NCBI or EST databases,
consistent with the idea that these receptors might be expressed
exclusively in taste tissue. However, Matsunami et al. (2000) did
identify the TRB7 gene (604796) in a contig assigned to human chromosome
5p15, the location of PROP (171200), the genetic locus that governs the
ability of humans to taste 6-n-propyl-2-thiouracil, a bitter compound.
Matsunami et al. (2000) also identified 5 TRB genes (1 a pseudogene) on
3 chromosome 7 contigs, 2 of which are assigned to 7q31-q32. All TRB
genes have the 7 transmembrane domain structure characteristic of GPCRs,
but are unrelated in sequence to both mouse GluR4 (138246), which
detects glutamate, and the candidate taste receptors TR1 and TR2. In
addition, GluR4, TR1, and TR2 have long extracellular N-terminal domains
that are proposed to bind ligand, whereas TRBs have very short N
termini, suggesting that they use a different mode of ligand binding.

Adler et al. (2000) identified members of a family of 40 to 80 human and
rodent GPCRs expressed in subsets of taste receptor cells of the tongue
and palate epithelia. These candidate taste receptors, which the authors
called T2Rs, are organized in the genome in clusters and are genetically
linked to loci that influence bitter perception in mice and humans. Each
T2R gene encodes a 7-transmembrane receptor protein. The amino acid
sequence identities between human and mouse T2Rs range from 46 to 67%.
The authors determined that a single taste receptor cell expresses a
large repertoire of T2Rs, suggesting that each cell may be capable of
recognizing multiple tastants. In situ hybridization demonstrated that
T2Rs are exclusively expressed in taste receptor cells that contain the
G protein subunit gustducin (see 139395), implying that they function as
gustducin-linked receptors.

Chandrashekar et al. (2006) reviewed the receptors and cells for
mammalian taste.

GENE STRUCTURE

The TAS2R10 is intronless (Matsunami et al., 2000).

MAPPING

Matsunami et al. (2000) identified the TAS2R10 gene on chromosome 12p13.

Adler et al. (2000) identified T2R10, which is identical to the TRB2
gene reported by Matsunami et al. (2000), in a BAC clone from 12p13.

GENE FUNCTION

Deshpande et al. (2010) found that bitter taste receptor agonists evoked
increased intracellular calcium in cultured human airway smooth muscle
(ASM) cells at levels comparable to GPCR agonists, such as bradykinin
and histamine. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis detected multiple TAS2R
transcripts in ASM cells, with highest expression of TAS2R10, TAS2R14
(604790), and TAS2R31 (612669), intermediate expression of TAS2R5
(605062), TAS2R4 (604869), and TAS2R19 (613961), and detectable
expression of 11 other TAS2Rs, with results normalized for expression of
ADRB2 (109690). Expression of 8 other TAS2Rs and TAS1R1 (606225) and
TAS1R2 (606226) was undetectable. Using isolated intact mouse airways,
Deshpande et al. (2010) observed dose-dependent relaxation in response
to bitter taste receptor agonists, such as chloroquine, denatorium, and
quinine, after challenge with contracting agents, such as acetylcholine
or serotonin. Magnet twisting cytometry showed that isolated ASM cells
challenged with histamine relaxed after treatment with bitter taste
receptor agonists. Bitter taste receptor agonists were a more effective
treatment than albuterol in a mouse model of allergic airway
inflammation. Deshpande et al. (2010) proposed that agents that bind
bitter taste receptors and cause bronchodilation may provide an
alternative and/or supplement to beta agonist for the treatment of
asthma.

- Reviews

Kinnamon (2000) reviewed the role of taste receptors in taste
transduction.

POPULATION GENETICS

Kim et al. (2005) sequenced 24 human TAS2R genes in 55 unrelated
individuals of African, Asian, European, and North American Native
ancestry, and found a high degree of nucleotide variation. A total of
144 SNPs were identified with an average of 4.2 variant amino acids per
gene. In aggregate, the 24 genes analyzed specified 151 different
protein-coding haplotypes. Data analysis showed that the observed excess
of nonsynonymous nucleotide substitutions was much higher than expected
given observations in other genes. Kim et al. (2005) hypothesized that
natural selection may have been relaxed on these genes and that local
adaptation in human bitter taste receptor genes is common, driven by the
fitness advantages of avoiding toxins found in plants. The findings were
consistent with the view that different alleles of the TAS2R genes
encode receptors that recognize different ligands.

EVOLUTION

Parry et al. (2004) compared all human T2R genes with those of the
closely related primate species Pan paniscus (bonobo) and Pan
troglodytes (chimpanzee). Several of the great ape T2Rs have significant
differences from the human homologs. Most differences are at the single
basepair level, and some are identical to SNPs within the human
population. Moreover, some genes that exist in humans are pseudogenes in
the animals studied, and vise versa. Parry et al. (2004) concluded that
there is ongoing evolutionary diversification of T2R receptors and that
the variability in T2R receptors may account for dietary adaptation and
personalized taste perception.

Bitter taste perception prevents mammals from ingesting poisonous
substances, because many toxins taste bitter and cause aversion. Wang et
al. (2004) examined intraspecific variations of all 25 genes of the
human TAS2R family. Their data showed hallmarks of neutral evolution,
including similar rates of synonymous (dS) and nonsynonymous (dN)
nucleotide changes among rare polymorphisms, common polymorphisms and
substitutions; no variation in dN/dS among functional domains;
segregation of pseudogene alleles within species and fixation of
loss-of-function mutations. Their results suggested surprisingly reduced
sensory capabilities of humans in comparison with many other mammals.
Wang et al. (2004) hypothesized that human TAS2R genes might be relaxed
from selective constraints because of dietary changes, use of fire, and
reliance on other means of toxin avoidance that emerged in human
evolution.

Fischer et al. (2005) stated that there are large T2R gene clusters on
chromosomes 12p13 and 7q31, in addition to the single T2R1 gene (TAS2R1;
604796) on chromosome 5p15. They sequenced the T2R gene repertoires of a
human and all extant ape species (chimpanzee, bonobo, gorilla, and
orangutan), as well as rhesus macaque and a baboon. Fischer et al.
(2005) found that the proportions of pseudogenes, and probably the total
number of genes, did not differ substantially among apes and humans.
Within the human T2R gene family, the sequence similarity between T2R
genes within the T2R gene cluster on chromosome 12 was higher than that
among the T2R genes on chromosome 7 (61% vs 47%, respectively),
suggesting that these genes evolved by tandem gene duplication and that
more recent duplication events occurred among the T2R genes on
chromosome 12 than among those on chromosome 7.

REFERENCE 1. Adler, E.; Hoon, M. A.; Mueller, K. L.; Chandrashekar, J.; Ryba,
N. J. P.; Zuker, C. S.: A novel family of mammalian taste receptors. Cell 100:
693-702, 2000.

2. Chandrashekar, J.; Hoon, M. A.; Ryba, N. J. P.; Zuker, C. S.:
The receptors and cells for mammalian taste. Nature 444: 288-294,
2006.

3. Deshpande, D. A.; Wang, W. C. H.; McIlmoyle, E. L.; Robinett, K.
S.; Schillinger, R. M.; An, S. S.; Sham, J. S. K.; Liggett, S. B.
: Bitter taste receptors on airway smooth muscle bronchodilate by
localized calcium signaling and reverse obstruction. Nature Med. 16:
1299-1304, 2010.

4. Fischer, A.; Gilad, Y.; Man, O.; Paabo, S.: Evolution of bitter
taste receptors in humans and apes. Molec. Biol. Evol. 22: 432-436,
2005. Note: Erratum: Molec. Biol. Evol. 22: 1157 only, 2005.

5. Kim, U.; Wooding, S.; Ricci, D.; Jorde, L. B.; Drayna, D.: Worldwide
haplotype diversity and coding sequence variation at human bitter
taste receptor loci. Hum. Mutat. 26: 199-204, 2005.

6. Kinnamon, S. C.: A plethora of taste receptors. Neuron 25: 507-510,
2000.

7. Matsunami, H.; Montmayeur, J.-P.; Buck, L. B.: A family of candidate
taste receptors in human and mouse. Nature 404: 601-604, 2000.

8. Parry, C. M.; Erkner, A.; le Coutre, J.: Divergence of T2R chemosensory
receptor families in humans, bonobos, and chimpanzees. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 101: 14830-14834, 2004.

9. Wang, X.; Thomas, S. D.; Zhang, J.: Relaxation of selective constraint
and loss of function in the evolution of human bitter taste receptor
genes. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 2671-2678, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/12/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/20/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/13/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/23/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/10/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/22/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/10/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/21/2000

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 4/5/2000

EDITED terry: 06/08/2012
mgross: 5/12/2011
terry: 4/20/2011
alopez: 12/3/2010
wwang: 6/15/2007
terry: 6/13/2007
terry: 1/23/2007
wwang: 1/10/2006
mgross: 11/22/2004
mgross: 3/22/2001
alopez: 7/10/2000
mgross: 4/24/2000
mgross: 4/21/2000
alopez: 4/5/2000

604398	TITLE *604398 SECRETOGLOBIN, FAMILY 2A, MEMBER 1; SCGB2A1
;;MAMMAGLOBIN 2; MGB2;;
MAMMAGLOBIN B;;
LACRYGLOBIN;;
LIPOPHILIN C; LPNC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the secretoglobin family, such as SCGB2A1, are secreted
proteins of about 10 kD that are found in high concentrations in fluids
of lung, lacrimal gland, salivary gland, prostate, uterus, and other
tissues. Secretoglobins form stable dimers prior to secretion (summary
by Jackson et al., 2011).

CLONING

The uteroglobin gene family includes the uteroglobin (UGB; 192020) and
mammaglobin (MGB) genes. By screening a human genomic library with an
MGB gene fragment, Becker et al. (1998) isolated a segment of a novel
gene showing high sequence similarity to MGB. Based on this similarity,
they named the novel gene mammaglobin B, which is also called
mammaglobin-2 (MGB2). The authors isolated a full-length MGB2 cDNA by
RACE PCR using mRNA from a human breast cancer cell line. The predicted
95-amino acid MGB2 protein contains the conserved residues
characteristic of the uteroglobin family. MGB2 shares 58% amino acid
sequence identity with MGB and 23% identity with UGB. Becker et al.
(1998) found that MGB2 is identical to a 68-amino acid peptide of
lacryglobin, a human tear protein identified and sequenced by Molloy et
al. (1997), except that MGB2 contains 18 additional amino acids at the N
terminus and 9 additional amino acids at the C terminus. Becker et al.
(1998) suggested that the 18 N-terminal amino acids are cleaved prior to
secretion from the lacrimal gland and that the 9 amino acids at the C
terminus represent amino acids not identified in the lacryglobin
fragment sequenced. RNA dot blot analysis found MGB2 expression in
normal human breast, uterus, and salivary gland, but not in prostate or
stomach. Northern blot analysis detected MGB2 expression in normal
breast and breast tumor samples, with an apparent overexpression in
tumor samples compared with patient-matched normal samples. Northern
blot analysis of uterus samples showed MGB2 expression in 2 of 8 normal
samples and 2 of 8 tumor samples.

Zhao et al. (1999) cloned SCGB2A1, which they called lipophilin C, from
a human lacrimal gland cDNA library. The deduced 95-amino acid
prelipophilin C protein has a calculated molecular mass of 10.9 kD.
Removal of the N-terminal signal sequence yields a mature 77-amino acid
protein with a predicted molecular mass of 8.9 kD. RT-PCR detected
lipophilin C expression in thymus, prostate, testis, salivary gland,
kidney, trachea, uterus, mammary gland, ovary, and lacrimal gland.
Little to no expression was present in skeletal muscle, small intestine,
spleen, placenta, bone marrow, and leukocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Becker et al. (1998) determined that the MGB2 gene contains 3 exons.

MAPPING

By FISH, Becker et al. (1998) mapped the MGB2 gene to 11q13, which is
where the MGB and UGB genes are located. Independently, Zhao et al.
(1999) mapped the SCGB2A1 gene to chromosome 11q12-q13.1 using FISH.

REFERENCE 1. Becker, R. M.; Darrow, C.; Zimonjic, D. B.; Popescu, N. C.; Watson,
M. A.; Fleming, T. P.: Identification of mammaglobin B, a novel member
of the uteroglobin gene family. Genomics 54: 70-78, 1998.

2. Jackson, B. C.; Thompson, D. C.; Wright, M. W.; McAndrews, M.;
Bernard, A.; Nebert, D. W.: Update of the human secretoglobin (SCGB)
gene superfamily and an example of 'evolutionary bloom' of androgen-binding
protein genes within the mouse Scgb gene superfamily. Hum. Genomics 5:
691-702, 2011.

3. Molloy, M. P.; Bolis, S.; Herbert, B. R.; Ou, K.; Tyler, M. I.;
van Dyk, D. D.; Willcox, M. D.; Gooley, A. A.; Williams, K. L.; Morris,
C. A.; Walsh, B. J.: Establishment of the human reflex tear two-dimensional
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis reference map: new proteins of
potential diagnostic value. Electrophoresis 18: 2811-2815, 1997.

4. Zhao, C.; Nguyen, T.; Yusifov, T.; Glasgow, B. J.; Lehrer, R. I.
: Lipophilins: human peptides homologous to rat prostatein. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 256: 147-155, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/30/2013

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 1/4/2000

EDITED mgross: 01/31/2013
mgross: 1/31/2013
terry: 1/30/2013
terry: 3/27/2002
mgross: 1/5/2000
psherman: 1/4/2000

606119	TITLE *606119 SECRETED LY6/PLAUR DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; SLURP1
;;SECRETED LY6/UPAR-RELATED PROTEIN 1;;
ARS COMPONENT B;;
ARS COMPONENT B-81/S PRECURSOR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the leukocyte antigen-6 (Ly6)/urokinase-type plasminogen
activator (uPAR, or PLAUR; 173391) protein family share 1 or several
repeat units of the Ly6/uPAR domain that is defined by a distinct
disulfide bonding pattern of 8 or 10 cysteine residues. The Ly6/uPAR
protein family can be divided into 2 subfamilies. One comprises
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored glycoprotein receptors with
10 cysteine residues. The other subfamily includes the secreted
single-domain snake and frog cytotoxins, and its members generally
possess only 8 cysteines and no GPI-anchoring signal sequence (Adermann
et al., 1999).

CLONING

Adermann et al. (1999) reported the purification and structural
characterization of human SLURP1 from blood and urine peptide libraries.
SLURP1 is encoded by the ARS component B-81/s locus, and appears to be
the first mammalian member of the Ly6/uPAR family lacking a
GPI-anchoring signal sequence.

GENE FUNCTION

Fischer et al. (2001) noted that secreted and receptor proteins of the
Ly6/uPAR superfamily have been implicated in transmembrane signal
transduction, cell activation, and cell adhesion.

The high degree of structural similarity between SLURP1 and the 3-finger
motif of snake neurotoxins and LYNX1 (606110) suggested that SLURP1 may
interact with neuronal acetylcholine receptors. Chimienti et al. (2003)
found that SLURP1 potentiated the human alpha-7 nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors (CHRNA7; 118511) present in keratinocytes. The authors
concluded that SLURP1 acts as a secreted epidermal neuromodulator that
may be essential for both epidermal homeostasis and inhibition of
TNF-alpha (191160) release by macrophages during wound healing. This may
explain both the hyperproliferative as well as the inflammatory clinical
phenotype of Mal de Meleda (MDM; 248300).

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SLURP1
gene to chromosome 8 (TMAP X99977).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mal de Meleda is a rare autosomal recessive skin disorder characterized
by transgressive palmoplantar keratoderma, keratotic skin lesions,
perioral erythema, brachydactyly, and nail abnormalities. Fischer et al.
(1998) first reported linkage of MDM to a 3-cM region on the distal long
arm of chromosome 8, and Fischer et al. (2001) identified mutations in
affected individuals in SLURP1. Three different homozygous mutations
(82delT, 606119.0001; 178G+1A, 606119.0002; and C286T, 606119.0003) were
detected in 19 families of Algerian and Croatian origin, suggesting
founder effects. Moreover, one of the common haplotypes presenting the
same mutation was shared by families from both populations.

Eckl et al. (2003) analyzed 4 MDM families for mutations in the SLURP1
gene, which they designated LY6LS. In a large Palestinian pedigree with
multiple consanguinity, patients were homozygous for a novel
gly86-to-arg (G86R; 606119.0004) mutation. A different mutation
(606119.0005) in Turkish patients resulted in the same amino acid
exchange. Some remarkable similarities were seen in the clinical picture
of patients in these 2 families. Patients in an Emirati Bedouin family
had a homozygous alteration of the translation initiation codon of the
SLURP1 gene (606119.0006). In a German family with no known
consanguinity, Eckl et al. (2003) found pseudodominant inheritance.
Three affected children and their affected mother were homozygous for a
trp15-to-arg (W15R; 606119.0007) mutation.

EVOLUTION

Adermann et al. (1999) showed that a phylogenetic analysis based on the
SLURP1 primary protein structure revealed a closer relationship to the
subfamily of cytotoxins. Since the SLURP1 gene maps to the same
chromosomal region as several members of the Ly6/uPAR subfamily of
glycoprotein receptors, the authors suggested that both biologically
distinct subfamilies might have coevolved from local chromosomal
duplication events.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, 1-BP DEL, 82T

In 13 mal de Meleda (248300) families of Algerian and/or Croatian
origin, Fischer et al. (2001) identified a single nucleotide deletion
(82delT) in the SLURP1 gene, which was predicted to result in premature
termination at codon 32.

In 2 Tunisian women with Mal de Meleda, Mokni et al. (2004) identified
the 82delT mutation in heterozygous state. Both had mild palmoplantar
keratodermas, and one had interdigital fissures.

.0002
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, IVS2, G-A, +1

In 3 Algerian mal de Meleda (248300) families, Fischer et al. (2001)
identified a donor splice site mutation, 178+1G-A, in the second intron
of the SLURP1 gene.

.0003
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, ARG96TER

In 3 Croatian families with mal de Meleda (248300), Fischer et al.
(2001) identified a point mutation at nucleotide position 286 (C286T) in
the SLURP1 gene, which was predicted to result in premature termination
at codon 96.

.0004
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, 1764G-A, GLY86ARG

In a Palestinian family, Eckl et al. (2003) found that mal de Meleda
(248300) was associated with a gly86-to-arg (G86R) mutation arising from
a 1764G-A transition in exon 3 of the SLURP1 gene. See also 606119.0005.

.0005
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, 1764G-C, GLY86ARG

In a Turkish family with mal de Meleda (248300), Eckl et al. (2003)
found a gly86-to-arg (G86R) mutation, as in the Palestinian family they
studied (606119.0004); the nucleotide substitution involved the same
base but was a transversion, 1764G-C, in the SLURP1 gene. The patients
in the Palestinian and Turkish families had clinical features similar to
those in patients from the island of Meleda. Patients from both families
had the characteristic 'glove-and-stocking' keratosis. However, they did
not show any extension onto the knees or elbows as seen in 2 other
families, one German and the other Emirati Bedouin, studied by Eckl et
al. (2003). Similarly, nail involvement present in the Bedouin and
German families and in many of the Algerian families described by
Fischer et al. (1998, 2001) was absent in these 2 families. Patients
from both families had had severe fungal infections of the
hyperkeratotic skin.

.0006
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, MET1LEU

Eckl et al. (2003) found that mal de Meleda (248300) in an Emirati
Bedouin family was associated with an initiator codon mutation in the
SLURP1 gene. A 578A-C change in the genomic DNA was predicted to change
the initiator codon from ATG (met) to CTG (leu).

.0007
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, TRP15ARG

In a German family with mal de Meleda (248300), Eckl et al. (2003) found
that 3 affected children and their affected mother were homozygous for a
trp15-to-arg (W15R) mutation. They showed palmoplantar erythema with
pronounced keratosis extending onto the dorsal surface of the hands and
feet. The hyperkeratosis was most extensive in the affected mother. Nail
dystrophy with subungual hyperkeratosis was present in all affected
family members, most distinctively in 1 of the twin brothers. He also
showed hyperkeratosis with erythema on the knees. Perioral involvement
was seen in the affected sister.

.0008
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, CYS77ALA

In 3 women from a Tunisian family with Mal de Meleda (248300), Mokni et
al. (2004) identified a heterozygous cys77-to-ala (C77A) mutation in the
SLURP1 gene. All 3 had mild palmoplantar keratodermas, 2 had keratotic
papules, and 1 had interdigital fissures. The authors illustrated
cobblestone changes in the skin of the palm of one of the women.
Charfeddine et al. (2003) had described homozygosity for this mutation
in this family.

.0009
MAL DE MELEDA
SLURP1, CYS99TYR

In 6 Tunisian women with Mal de Meleda (248300), 5 of whom were from 1
family, Mokni et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous cys99-to-tyr
(C99Y) mutation in the SLURP1 gene. The authors illustrated cobblestone
changes in the skin of the palm of one of the women and a homogeneous
diffuse plantar keratoderma on the sole of another. Charfeddine et al.
(2003) had described homozygosity for this mutation in this family.

REFERENCE 1. Adermann, K.; Wattler, F.; Wattler, S.; Heine, G.; Meyer, M.; Forssmann,
W. G.; Nehls, M.: Structural and phylogenetic characterization of
human SLURP-1, the first secreted member of the Ly6/uPAR protein superfamily. Protein
Sci. 8: 810-819, 1999.

2. Charfeddine, C.; Mokni, M.; Ben Mousli, R.; Elkares, R.; Bouchlaka,
C.; Boubaker, S.; Ghedamsi, S.; Baccouche, D.; Ben Osman, A.; Dellagi,
K.; Abdelhak, S.: A novel missense mutation in the gene encoding
SLURP-1 in patients with Mal de Meleda from northern Tunisia. Brit.
J. Derm. 149: 1108-1115, 2003.

3. Chimienti, F.; Hogg, R. C.; Plantard, L.; Lehmann, C.; Brakch,
N.; Fischer, J.; Huber, M.; Bertrand, D.; Hohl, D.: Identification
of SLURP-1 as an epidermal neuromodulator explains the clinical phenotype
of Mal de Meleda. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 3017-3024, 2003.

4. Eckl, K. M.; Stevens, H. P.; Lestringant, G. G.; Westenberger-Treumann,
M.; Traupe, H.; Hinz, B.; Frossard, P. M.; Stadler, R.; Leigh, I.
M.; Nurnberg, P.; Reis, A.; Hennies, H. C.: Mal de Meleda (MDM) caused
by mutations in the gene for SLURP-1 in patients from Germany, Turkey,
Palestine, and the United Arab Emirates. Hum. Genet. 112: 50-56,
2003.

5. Fischer, J.; Bouadjar, B.; Heilig, R.; Fizames, C.; Prudhomme,
J.F.; Weissenbach, J.: Genetic linkage of Meleda disease to chromosome
8qter. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 6: 542-547, 1998.

6. Fischer, J.; Bouadjar, B.; Heilig, R.; Huber, M.; Lefevre, C.;
Jobard, F.; Macari, F.; Bakija-Konsuo, A.; Ait-Belkacem, F.; Weissenbach,
J.; Lathrop, M.; Hohl, D.; Prudhomme, J.-F.: Mutations in the gene
encoding SLURP-1 in mal de Meleda. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 875-880,
2001.

7. Mokni, M.; Charfeddine, C.; Ben Mously, R.; Baccouche, D.; Kaabi,
B.; Ben Osman, A.; Dellagi, K.; Abdelhak, S.: Heterozygous manifestations
in female carriers of Mal de Meleda. (Letter) Clin. Genet. 65: 244-246,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 1/11/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/9/2003
Carol A. Bocchini - reorganized: 1/8/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/30/2002

CREATED George E. Tiller: 7/18/2001

EDITED wwang: 09/27/2006
wwang: 1/23/2006
terry: 1/11/2006
tkritzer: 3/3/2004
carol: 1/9/2003
ckniffin: 1/9/2003
carol: 1/8/2003
tkritzer: 1/3/2003
terry: 12/30/2002
cwells: 7/24/2001
cwells: 7/19/2001
cwells: 7/18/2001

613314	TITLE *613314 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L37A; RPL37A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RPL37A encodes a protein component of the large ribosomal subunit (Sim
et al., 2010).

CLONING

Saha et al. (1993) obtained a partial clone homologous to rat Rpl37a
from a human neuroblastoma cell line cDNA library, and by RT-PCR, they
obtained the full-length human RPL37A clone. The 5-prime terminus
contains a CTTTCC-like sequence characteristic of transcripts encoding
ribosomal proteins. The deduced 92-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 10.3 kD. It is highly basic and contains a putative
zinc finger domain. The human and rat transcripts share 85% nucleotide
identity, and the proteins are 100% identical. Northern blot analysis
detected RPL37A expression in normal human lymphocytes and in human
neuroblastoma and Molt4 cells. Variable Rpl37a expression was detected
in all rat tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RT-PCR, Sim et al. (2010) found that a subset of genes encoding
proteins of the large ribosomal subunit was differentially expressed in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (see 607107) cell lines compared with a normal
nasopharyngeal epithelial cell line. RPL37A was 1 of 3 genes
significantly downregulated in the carcinoma cell lines.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the RPL37A gene to chromosome 2q35 based on an
alignment of the RPL37A sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC000555) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/19/2010.

2. Saha, D. P.; Tirumalai, P. S.; Scala, L. A.; Howells, R. D.: Human
ribosomal protein L37a: cloning of the cDNA and analysis of differential
gene expression in tissues and cell lines. Gene 132: 285-289, 1993.

3. Sim, E. U. H.; Ang, C. H.; Ng, C. C.; Lee, C. W.; Narayanan, K.
: Differential expression of a subset of ribosomal protein genes in
cell lines derived from human nasopharyngeal epithelium. J. Hum.
Genet. 55: 118-120, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/7/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/22/2010

EDITED mgross: 04/08/2010
terry: 4/7/2010
mgross: 3/23/2010
mgross: 3/22/2010

142709	TITLE *142709 HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H1 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER A; HIST1H1A
;;HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H1A;;
HIST1 CLUSTER, H1A;;
H1A;;
H1.1;;
H1 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER 1, FORMERLY; H1F1, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The nucleosome is the fundamental repeat unit of eukaryotic chromatin.
The nucleosome core particle consists of an octamer formed by 2 each of
the core histones H2A (see 613499), H2B (see 609904), H3 (see 602810),
and H4 (see 602822), around which DNA is wrapped. A fifth histone, the
linker H1 histone, completes the nucleosome by interacting with DNA
entering and exiting the nucleosome core particle. H1 histones, such as
HIST1H1A, are involved in the formation of higher order chromatin
structures, and they modulate the accessibility of regulatory proteins,
chromatin-remodeling factors, and histone modification enzymes to their
target sites (reviewed by Izzo et al. (2008) and Happel and Doenecke
(2009)).

For additional background information on histones, histone gene
clusters, and the H1 histone family, see GENE FAMILY below.

GENE FAMILY

The H1 histone family is the most divergent class of histones, with at
least 11 different H1 histones present in humans. H1 histones have a
tripartite structure that consists of a short N-terminal domain enriched
in basic amino acids, a central conserved globular domain involved in
DNA binding, and a long C-terminal tail enriched in lysine, serine, and
proline. Like other histones, H1 histones can be subgrouped according to
their temporal expression. Replication-dependent histones, such as H1.1
through H1.5 (HIST1HB; 142711) and H1T (HIST1H1T; 142712), are mainly
expressed during S phase. In contrast, replication-independent histones,
or replacement histones, such as H1.0 (H1F0; 142708), H1T2 (H1FNT), H1OO
(H1FOO), H1X (H1FX; 602785), and HILS1 (608101), are expressed
throughout the cell cycle. All replication-dependent H1 histone genes,
as well as other core histone genes, are located within histone gene
cluster-1 (HIST1) on chromosome 6p22-p21. Two other histone gene
clusters, HIST2 and HIST3, are located on chromosomes 1q21 and 1q42,
respectively, but they are devoid of H1 genes. In mouse, the Hist1,
Hist2, and Hist3 gene clusters are located on chromosomes 13A2-A3,
3F1-F2, and 11B2, respectively. All replication-dependent histone genes
are intronless, and they encode mRNAs that lack a poly(A) tail, ending
instead in a conserved stem-loop sequence. Unlike replication-dependent
histone genes, replication-independent histone genes are solitary genes
that are located on chromosomes apart from any other H1 or core histone
genes. Some replication-independent histone genes contain introns and
encode mRNAs with poly(A) tails. H1 histones, as well as core histones,
can also be subgrouped based on their spatial expression. Somatic H1
histones (H1.1 through H1.5 and H1X) are expressed ubiquitously, whereas
other H1 histones are expressed mainly in terminally differentiated
cells (H1.0) or in germ cells (H1T, H1T2, H1OO, and HILS1) (summary by
Marzluff et al. (2002), Izzo et al. (2008), and Happel and Doenecke
(2009)).

CLONING

Eick et al. (1989) cloned the genes encoding H1.1 and H1.2 (HIST1H1C;
142710).

Using Northern blot analysis, Burfeind et al. (1994) found that the H1.1
gene was expressed in testis and thymus, but not in other human tissues.
In testis, it was restricted to early round spermatids that belonged to
the fraction of postmeiotic sperm cells. Burfeind et al. (1994) found
that the H1.1 gene is highly conserved in higher primates, whereas no
cross-hybridization could be detected with DNA from other mammalian
species, such as mouse, rat, hamster, and bull.

GENE FUNCTION

Histone H1 functions in the compaction of chromatin into higher order
structures derived from the repeating 'beads-on-a-string' nucleosome
polymer. Modulation of H1 binding activity is thought to be an important
step in the potentiation/depotentiation of chromatin structure for
transcription. It is generally accepted that H1 binds less tightly than
other histones to DNA in chromatin and can readily exchange in living
cells. Fusion proteins of histone H1 and green fluorescent protein (GFP)
have been shown to associate with chromatin in an apparently identical
fashion to native histone H1, providing a means by which to study
histone H1-chromatin interactions in living cells. Lever et al. (2000)
used human cells with a stably integrated H1.1-GFP fusion protein to
monitor histone H1 movement directly by fluorescence recovery after
photobleaching in living cells. They found that exchange is rapid in
both condensed and decondensed chromatin, occurs throughout the cell
cycle, and does not require fiber-fiber interactions. Treatment with
drugs that alter protein phosphorylation significantly reduced exchange
rates. Lever et al. (2000) concluded that histone H1 exchange in vivo is
rapid, occurs through a soluble intermediate, and is modulated by the
phosphorylation of a protein or proteins as yet to be determined.

Using techniques similar to those of Lever et al. (2000), Misteli et al.
(2000) showed that almost the entire population of H1-GFP is bound to
chromatin at any 1 time; however, H1-GFP is exchanged continuously
between chromatin regions. The residence time of H1-GFP on chromatin
between exchange events is several minutes in both euchromatin and
heterochromatin. In addition to the mobile fraction, Misteli et al.
(2000) detected a kinetically distinct, less mobile fraction. After
hyperacetylation of core histones, the residence time of H1-GFP was
reduced, suggesting a higher rate of exchange upon chromatin remodeling.
Misteli et al. (2000) concluded that their results support a model in
which linker histones bind dynamically to chromatin in a stop-and-go
mode.

Hizume et al. (2005) noted that addition of histone H1 to reconstituted
nucleosomes represses transcriptional activity and prevents sliding of
core histones along DNA. They used nucleosome core particles and histone
H1 purified from HeLa cells for in vitro nucleosome reconstitution
assays. Under optimal salt concentrations, nucleosome core particles
alone formed beads-on-a-string chromatin fibers on plasmid DNA. However,
addition of purified histone H1 induced higher order folding in a
concentration-dependent manner. Hizume et al. (2005) proposed a model of
chromatin fiber formation where fiber compaction is dependent on both
the local salt environment and histone H1 availability.

Krishnakumar et al. (2008) used genomic and gene-specific approaches to
show that 2 factors, histone H1 and PARP1 (173870), exhibit a reciprocal
pattern of chromatin binding at many RNA polymerase II-transcribed
promoters. PARP1 was enriched and H1 was depleted at these promoters.
This pattern of binding was associated with actively transcribed genes.
Furthermore, Krishnakumar et al. (2008) showed that PARP1 acts to
exclude H1 from a subset of PARP1-stimulated promoters, suggesting a
functional interplay between PARP1 and H1 at the level of nucleosome
binding. Krishnakumar et al. (2008) concluded that although H1 and PARP1
have similar nucleosome-binding properties and effects on chromatin
structure in vitro, they have distinct roles in determining gene
expression in vivo.

- Reviews

Doenecke et al. (1994) reviewed the organization and expression of H1
histone and H1 replacement histone genes.

Izzo et al. (2008) reviewed the H1 histone family and discussed specific
roles of H1 proteins that challenged the concept of H1 being a mere
structural component of chromatin and a general repressor of
transcription.

Happel and Doenecke (2009) reviewed the structural and functional
aspects of H1 histones, with an emphasis on the structural role and
impact of H1 histones on the functional state of chromatin.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of chromosomal DNA from a panel of human/rodent somatic
cell hybrids, Albig et al. (1993) found that 5 human H1 histone genes,
H1.1 through H1.5, and the gene encoding the testis-specific H1T subtype
are located on chromosome 6. They found that the H1.0 subtype, which is
not neighbored by core histone genes, maps to chromosome 22. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization with human metaphase chromosomes and
PCR analysis of somatic cell hybrid DNAs carrying only fragments of
chromosome 6, they demonstrated that the histone genes are clustered in
the 6p22.2-p21.1 region.

By PCR analysis of human/rodent cell hybrid DNAs, Burfeind et al. (1994)
confirmed the localization of histone H1.1 to chromosome 6 and by
radioactive in situ hybridization regionalized the locus to 6p21.3.

Through detailed localization of the H1 histone genes with radiation
hybrids and long range pulsed field gel electrophoresis, Volz et al.
(1997) found that the histone genes on the short arm of chromosome 6 are
organized into 2 clusters. The major cluster at 6p22-p21.3 contains 32
histone genes, including the H1 genes H1.1, H1.2, H1.3 (HIST1H1D;
142210), H1.4 (HIST1H1E; 142220), and H1T, numerous core histone genes,
and the HFE gene (613609).

By analysis of a YAC contig, Albig et al. (1997) mapped the H1.1 gene to
chromosome 6p21.3 within a cluster of 35 histone genes, including H1.1
to H1.4 and H1T. They found that the H1.5 gene is located in a second
cluster on 6p about 2 Mb centromeric of the major cluster. In a contig
of the histone gene-containing cosmids from this second cluster on
chromosome 6p, Albig and Doenecke (1997) found 1 H1 gene (H1.5), 5 H2A
genes, 4 H2B genes, 1 H2B pseudogene, 3 H3 genes, 3 H4 genes, and 1 H4
pseudogene. The cluster extends about 80 kb with a nonordered
arrangement of the histone genes. The dinucleotide repeat polymorphic
marker D6S105 was localized at the telomeric end of this histone gene
cluster. Almost all human histone genes isolated to that time had been
localized within the 2 clusters on 6p or in a small group of histone
genes on chromosome 1.

Albig and Doenecke (1997) reviewed the organization of histone genes in
mouse. Both the human and mouse histone gene clusters are found on 2
chromosomes and have nearly the same composition and number of genes.
The 2 histone gene clusters on human chromosome 6p correspond to 2
clusters located on mouse chromosome 13. The relative localization of
the histone H1 and H3 genes appears to be highly conserved. The 2
clusters are 0.6 Mb apart in mouse and 2 Mb apart in human. A third
cluster of mouse histone genes on chromosome 3 corresponds to the group
of human genes located on chromosome 1. The authors stated that, to that
time, a total of 55 clustered histone genes had been identified in
mouse. Albig and Doenecke (1997) gave a pictorial representation of the
mapping of the other histone genes as well as a tabular summary of human
histone gene sequences deposited in the EMBL nucleotide sequence
database.

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) determined that the
HIST1 cluster on chromosome 6p22-p21 contains 55 histone genes,
including all 6 replication-dependent H1 genes. The HIST1 cluster spans
over 2 Mb and includes 2 large gaps (over 250 kb each) where there are
no histone genes, but many other genes. The organization of histone
genes in the mouse Hist1 cluster on chromosome 13A2-A3 is essentially
identical to that in human HIST1. The HIST2 cluster on chromosome 1q21
contains 6 histone genes, and the HIST3 cluster on chromosome 1q42
contains 3 histone genes. Hist2 and Hist3 are located on mouse
chromosomes 3F1-F2 and 11B2, respectively.

NOMENCLATURE

Marzluff et al. (2002) provided a nomenclature for replication-dependent
histone genes located within the HIST1, HIST2, and HIST3 clusters. The
symbols for these genes all begin with HIST1, HIST2, or HIST3 according
to which cluster they are located in. The H1 genes, all of which are
located within HIST1, were named according to their mouse homologs.
Thus, HIST1H1A is homologous to mouse H1a, HIST1H1B is homologous to
mouse H1b, and so on. In contrast, the H2A, H2B, H3, and H4 genes were
named systematically according to their location within the HIST1,
HIST2, and HIST3 clusters. For example, HIST1H4A (602822) is the most
telomeric H4 gene within HIST1, and HIST1H4L (602831) is the most
centromeric.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Hardin and Thomas (1983)
REFERENCE 1. Albig, W.; Doenecke, D.: The human histone gene cluster at the
D6S105 locus. Hum. Genet. 101: 284-294, 1997.

2. Albig, W.; Drabent, B.; Kunz, J.; Kalff-Suske, M.; Grzeschik, K.-H.;
Doenecke, D.: All known human H1 histone genes except the H1(0) gene
are clustered on chromosome 6. Genomics 16: 649-654, 1993.

3. Albig, W.; Kioschis, P.; Poustka, A.; Meergans, K.; Doenecke, D.
: Human histone gene organization: nonregular arrangement within a
large cluster. Genomics 40: 314-322, 1997.

4. Burfeind, P.; Hoyer-Fender, S.; Doenecke, D.; Hochhuth, C.; Engel,
W.: Expression and chromosomal mapping of the gene encoding the human
histone H1.1. Hum. Genet. 94: 633-639, 1994.

5. Doenecke, D.; Albig, W.; Bouterfa, H.; Drabent, B.: Organization
and expression of H1 histone and H1 replacement histone genes. J.
Cell. Biochem. 54: 423-431, 1994.

6. Eick, S.; Nicolai, M.; Mumberg, D.; Doenecke, D.: Human H1 histones:
conserved and varied sequence elements in two H1 subtype genes. Europ.
J. Cell Biol. 49: 110-115, 1989.

7. Happel, N.; Doenecke, D.: Histone H1 and its isoforms: contribution
to chromatin structure and function. Gene 431: 1-12, 2009.

8. Hardin, J. A.; Thomas, J. O.: Antibodies to histones in systemic
lupus erythematosus: localization of prominent autoantigens on histones
H1 and H2B. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 7410-7414, 1983.

9. Hizume, K.; Yoshimura, S. H.; Takeyasu, K.: Linker histone H1
per se can induce three-dimensional folding of chromatin fiber. Biochemistry 44:
12978-12989, 2005.

10. Izzo, A.; Kamieniarz, K.; Schneider, R.: The histone H1 family:
specific members, specific functions? Biol. Chem. 389: 333-343,
2008.

11. Krishnakumar, R.; Gamble, M. J.; Frizzell, K. M.; Berrocal, J.
G.; Kininis, M.; Kraus, W. L.: Reciprocal binding of PARP-1 and histone
H1 at promoters specifies transcriptional outcomes. Science 319:
819-821, 2008.

12. Lever, M. A.; Th'ng, J. P. H.; Sun, X.; Hendzel, M. J.: Rapid
exchange of histone H1.1 on chromatin in living human cells. Nature 408:
873-876, 2000.

13. Marzluff, W. F.; Gongidi, P.; Woods, K. R.; Jin, J.; Maltais,
L. J.: The human and mouse replication-dependent histone genes. Genomics 80:
487-498, 2002.

14. Misteli, T.; Gunjan, A.; Hock, R.; Bustin, M.; Brown, D. T.:
Dynamic binding of histone H1 to chromatin in living cells. Nature 408:
877-881, 2000.

15. Volz, A.; Albig, W.; Doenecke, D.; Ziegler, A.: Physical mapping
of the region around the large histone gene cluster on human chromosome
6p22.2. DNA Seq. 8: 173-180, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/23/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/26/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/21/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 7/8/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/28/1993

EDITED mgross: 02/08/2013
mgross: 1/11/2013
carol: 10/21/2010
mgross: 6/24/2010
mgross: 6/23/2010
mgross: 5/26/2010
tkritzer: 3/31/2003
carol: 12/23/2000
terry: 12/21/2000
alopez: 8/26/1998
alopez: 7/14/1998
alopez: 7/8/1998
alopez: 2/11/1998
mark: 9/22/1996
carol: 1/12/1995
carol: 6/28/1993

605453	TITLE *605453 ATP-BINDING CASSETTE, SUBFAMILY B, MEMBER 9; ABCB9
DESCRIPTION For background information on the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family of
transporter proteins, see ABCA4 (601691). In addition to the 'full' ABC
transporters with 2 transmembrane domains and 2 nucleotide-binding
domains, there are 'half' proteins that contain only 1 of each domain
(e.g., ABCB1; 171050). Full transporters are usually found in the plasma
membrane, whereas half transporters are found in subcellular organelles.

By searching an EST database and screening a T-lymphoblast cDNA library,
Zhang et al. (2000) obtained a cDNA encoding ABCB9. Sequence analysis
predicted that the 766-amino acid ABCB9 protein has 10 potential
N-terminal transmembrane segments. ABCB9 shares 94% identity with the
rodent sequences and is approximately 39% identical to 2 human
endoplasmic reticulum half transporters, TAP1 (ABCB2; 170260) and TAP2
(ABCB3; 170261). RT-PCR and genomic sequence analysis established the
existence of a splice variant with a 129-bp deletion expressed in testis
and brain. Northern blot analysis detected low expression of a 3.7-kb
transcript in most tissues tested, with an additional 2.2-kb transcript
detected in tissues with relatively high expression, such as testis.
Western blot analysis showed expression of a 72-kD nonglycosylated
protein, significantly smaller than the predicted mass of 84.5 kD, that
was enriched in lysosomes. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated
colocalization of ABCB9 with the lysosomal proteins LAMP1 (153330) and
LAMP2 (309060). Immunohistochemical analysis detected ABCB9 expression
in Sertoli cells of rodent seminiferous tubules.

Allikmets et al. (1996) mapped an EST corresponding to the ABCB9 gene to
12q24.

REFERENCE 1. Allikmets, R.; Gerrard, B.; Hutchinson, A.; Dean, M.: Characterization
of the human ABC superfamily: isolation and mapping of 21 new genes
using the expressed sequence tags database. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5:
1649-1655, 1996.

2. Zhang, F.; Zhang, W.; Liu, L.; Fisher, C. L.; Hui, D.; Childs,
S.; Dorovini-Zis, K.; Ling, V.: Characterization of ABCB9, an ATP
binding cassette protein associated with lysosomes. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
23287-23294, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/5/2000

EDITED mgross: 12/05/2000

605876	TITLE *605876 Fc RECEPTOR-LIKE PROTEIN 4; FCRL4
;;IMMUNOGLOBULIN SUPERFAMILY RECEPTOR TRANSLOCATION-ASSOCIATED GENE
1; IRTA1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chromosomal abnormalities involving translocation breakpoints at
1q21-q23 are frequent in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (see BCL9; 602597)
and multiple myeloma (MM; see 254500). By cloning the breakpoints of a
(1;14)(q21;q32) chromosomal translocation in the FR4 multiple myeloma
cell line, followed by exon trapping and screening a spleen cDNA
library, Hatzivassiliou et al. (2001) obtained cDNAs encoding 3 isoforms
of IRTA1 and 4 isoforms of IRTA2 (605877). The differences in the
IRTA1A, IRTA1B, and IRTA1C isoforms arise from alternate usage of 3
potential polyadenylation sites in the 3-prime untranslated region;
however, the isoforms are identical at the amino acid level. Sequence
analysis predicted that the 515-amino acid IRTA1 protein contains a
signal peptide; 4 extracellular Ig-type domains with 3 potential
N-linked glycosylation sites; a 16-amino acid transmembrane region; and
a 106-amino acid cytoplasmic domain with 3 putative consensus
SH2-binding domains. The SH2-binding domains exhibit features of both
ITIMs (immune receptor tyrosine-based inhibition motifs) and ITAMs
(immune receptor tyrosine-based activation motifs) and have the
potential to give rise to either 3 ITIMs or 1 ITAM and 1 ITIM. Northern
blot analysis detected very low levels of 3.5-, 2.7-, and 2.5-kb
transcripts in spleen and lymph node, with no expression in other
tissues or lymphocyte cell lines tested. Expression of IRTA1 could be
induced in an estrogen-deprived, Epstein-Barr virus-immortalized cell
line. In situ hybridization and immunohistochemical analysis showed that
IRTA1 expression is concentrated in the perifollicular area of tonsil
tissue, a site rich in memory B cells.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hatzivassiliou et al. (2001) determined
that the IRTA1 and IRTA2 genes are separated by 21 kb and are
transcribed in the same orientation. Furthermore, the IRTA1 and IRTA2
genes form a contig on 1q21 with additional IRTA-related genes (IRTA3,
IRTA4, and IRTA5) and are telomeric to the MUC1 gene (158340) and
centromeric to the FCGR2B gene (604590).

CYTOGENETICS

By Northern blot, RT-PCR, sequence, and Western blot analyses,
Hatzivassiliou et al. (2001) demonstrated that the signal peptide and
first 2 extracellular residues of IRTA1 are fused to the extracellular
spacer, transmembrane domain, and cytoplasmic tail of the membrane IgA1
receptor (IGHA1; 146900) in the FR4 multiple myeloma cell line, but not
in other MM or lymphoma cell lines. They concluded that the IRTA1-IGHA1
fusion may be a rare event in B-cell malignancy.

REFERENCE 1. Hatzivassiliou, G.; Miller, I.; Takizawa, J.; Palanisamy, N.; Rao,
P. H.; Iida, S.; Tagawa, S.; Taniwaki, M.; Russo, J.; Neri, A.; Cattoretti,
G.; Clynes, R.; Mendelsohn, C.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Dalla-Favera,
R.: IRTA1 and IRTA2, novel immunoglobulin superfamily receptors expressed
in B cells and involved in chromosome 1q21 abnormalities in B cell
malignancy. Immunity 14: 277-289, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 4/24/2001

EDITED mgross: 09/14/2010
mgross: 4/25/2001
mgross: 4/24/2001

608537	TITLE *608537 VHL GENE; VHL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The evolutionarily conserved VHL gene encodes 2 protein products, a
30-kD full-length form (p30) and a 19-kD form (p19). The protein
products of the VHL gene play a role in the oxygen-sensing pathway, in
microtubule stability and orientation, tumor suppression, cilia
formation, regulation of senescence, cytokine signaling, collagen IV
(see 120130) regulation, and assembly of a normal extracellular
fibronectin matrix (summary by Nordstrom-O'Brien et al., 2010).

CLONING

By positional cloning, Latif et al. (1993) identified the VHL tumor
suppressor gene. The gene encodes a 213-amino acid protein with a
predicted acidic repeat domain found in the procyclic surface membrane
glycoprotein of Trypanosoma brucei. The authors identified 2 widely
expressed mRNA transcripts of approximately 6 and 6.5 kb.

Iliopoulos et al. (1995) demonstrated that the product of the VHL gene
is an approximately 30-kD protein.

By screening a rat liver cDNA library, Duan et al. (1995) isolated the
rat VHL gene, which is predicted to encode a 185-amino acid protein. The
rat protein is 88% identical to the aligned 213-amino acid human VHL
gene product. The human and rat proteins had molecular masses of 28 and
21 kD, respectively.

Richards et al. (1996) used in situ hybridization to investigate the
principal sites of VHL expression during embryogenesis. They also
analyzed a variety of fetal tissues for levels of the 2 VHL isoforms,
isoform I, which contains all 3 exons, and isoform II, which contains
only exons 1 and 3. Although VHL expression was found to be ubiquitous,
particularly high levels of expression were detected in the urogenital
system, brain, spinal cord, sensory ganglia, eyes, and bronchial
epithelium. Richards et al. (1996) noted that this expression pattern
correlated to some extent with the pattern of organ involvement in VHL
syndrome but that there were significant differences. Both isoforms of
VHL were detected in all tissues, and the ratio of isoforms was similar
between tissues.

Schoenfeld et al. (1998) identified a second native VHL gene product.
They showed that this 18-kD protein is initiated from the second
translation start site at codon 54, which contains a more conserved
Kozak consensus sequence and thus may serve as a second, internal,
translation initiation site. The significance of a second translation
start site is underscored by the lack of mutations found between the
first and second methionine codons of the VHL gene in both sporadic and
VHL-associated renal carcinomas. This observation suggested that
mutation in this region may not lead to VHL inactivation if translation
could be initiated at the second methionine codon, producing a
functional VHL protein. Furthermore, both the rat and mouse contain only
19 of the 53 amino acids present in this region in the human VHL ORF.
Schoenfeld et al. (1998) concluded that the 18-kD protein contains the
biologic activity of the VHL gene.

Iliopoulos et al. (1998) also demonstrated that in addition to the
213-amino acid VHL protein with an apparent molecular mass of 30 kD
(VHL30), a second VHL protein (VHL19) resulted from internal translation
from the second methionine within the VHL ORF. VHL30 resides primarily
in the cytosol, with lower amounts found in the nucleus or associated
with cell membranes. In contrast, VHL19 is equally distributed between
the nucleus and cytosol and is not found in association with membranes.
VHL19, like VHL30, can bind to elongin B (600787), elongin C (600788),
and Hs-Cul2 in coimmunoprecipitation assays and can inhibit the
production of hypoxia-inducing proteins such as VEGF (192240) and GLUT1
(138140) when reintroduced into renal carcinoma cells that lack a
wildtype VHL allele. Thus, cells contain 2 biologically active VHL gene
products.

GENE STRUCTURE

Latif et al. (1993) determined that the VHL gene contains at least 3
exons.

Zatyka et al. (2002) analyzed the promoter region of the VHL gene and
found 4 regions of conservation between human, primate, and rodent
sequences. In silico analysis identified binding sites for numerous
transcription factors within the conserved regions, and deletion
analysis of the promoter in a reporter assay in 293 and HeLa cells
identified 1 negative and 2 positive regulatory elements. The promoter
contains a functional SP1 (189906) site and overlapping SP1/AP2 (107580)
sites.

GENE FUNCTION

- Role in Tumor Suppression

Maher et al. (1990) compared age incidence curves for sporadic
cerebellar hemangioblastoma and sporadic renal cell carcinoma to those
for familial forms of these tumors that occur as part of von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300). The curves for tumors in VHL syndrome
were compatible with a single mutation model, whereas the age incidence
curves for sporadic tumors suggested a 2-stage mutation process. On the
whole, the findings suggested that the VHL gene functions as a recessive
tumor suppressor gene.

Crossey et al. (1994) presented convincing evidence that the VHL
syndrome gene functions as a recessive tumor suppressor gene and that
inactivation of both alleles of the VHL gene is a critical event in the
pathogenesis of VHL neoplasms. Studies of loss of heterozygosity (LOH)
showed that in 7 tumors from 7 familial cases in which the parental
origin of the 3p26-p25 allele loss could be determined, the allele had
been lost from the chromosome inherited from the unaffected parent. In 4
VHL tumors, LOH on other chromosomes (5q21, 13q, 17q) was found,
indicating that homozygous VHL gene mutations may be required but not
sufficient for tumorigenesis in von Hippel-Lindau syndrome.

When expressed in COS-7 cells, Duan et al. (1995) found that both the
human and the rat VHL proteins showed predominant nuclear, nuclear and
cytosolic, or predominant cytosolic VHL staining by immunofluorescence.
A complicated pattern of cellular proteins was seen that could be
specifically coimmunoprecipitated with the introduced VHL protein. A
complex containing VHL and proteins with apparent molecular masses of 16
and 9 kD was the most consistently observed. Certain naturally occurring
VHL missense mutations demonstrated either complete or partial loss of
the p16-p9 complex. Duan et al. (1995) concluded that the VHL tumor
suppressor gene product is a nuclear protein, perhaps capable of
specifically translocating between the nucleus and the cytosol. They
suggested that VHL may execute its function via formation of specific
multiprotein complexes.

Vogelstein (1995) referred to the VHL gene as a gatekeeper gene for
cancers such as those of the kidney. Rubenstein and Yaari (1994)
suggested that the VHL gene may serve that role in relation to
astrocytoma. They presented the pedigree of a Puerto Rican family in
which at least 9 members had von Hippel-Lindau syndrome and 2 of these
had astrocytoma.

To elucidate the biochemical mechanisms underlying tumor suppression by
the VHL protein, Duan et al. (1995) and Kibel et al. (1995) searched for
cellular proteins that bind to wildtype VHL protein but not to
tumor-derived VHL protein mutants. They found that 2 transcriptional
elongation factors, elongin B (600787) and elongin C (600788), bind in
vitro and in vivo to a short, colinear region of the VHL protein that is
frequently mutated in human tumors. Kibel et al. (1995) showed that a
peptide replica of this region inhibited binding of VHL protein to
elongin B and elongin C, whereas a point-mutant derivative,
corresponding to a naturally occurring VHL missense mutation, had no
effect. Duan et al. (1995) showed that recombinant VHL competes with
elongin A (600786) for elongin B and C binding in vitro. The results
were interpreted as indicating that the normal tumor suppression
function of VHL protein involves the inhibition of transcription
elongation by its binding to elongin B and elongin C.

In a review article, Tyers and Willems (1999) stated that the VHL
protein is part of a complex that includes elongin B, elongin C, and
cullin-2 (CUL2; 603135), proteins that are associated with
transcriptional elongation and ubiquitination. Components of the VCB
(VHL/elongin C/elongin B) complex share sequence similarities with the
E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes SCF (SKP1, (601434); CUL1, (603134); F-box
protein) and APC (anaphase promoting complex; see 603462). Thus, elongin
B is ubiquitin-like, and elongin C and CUL2 are similar to the SKP1 and
CUL1 components of SCF, respectively. Substrate recognition by E3
enzymes such as SCF and APC is crucial because protein degradation must
be highly selective. Both SCF and APC interact with a set of adaptor
proteins that recruit different binding partners through specific
protein-protein interaction domains. SOCS-box-containing proteins (see
603597) may act as adaptors for the VCB complex.

Feldman et al. (1999) demonstrated that the folding and assembly of VHL
into a complex with its partner proteins, elongin B and elongin C, is
directly mediated by the chaperonin TRiC, also called CCT (see 600114).
Association of VHL with TRiC is required for formation of the
VHL-elongin B-elongin C complex. A 55-amino acid domain of VHL (amino
acids 100 to 155) is both necessary and sufficient for binding to TRiC.
Mutation or deletion of this domain is associated with VHL syndrome, and
2 mutations that disrupt the normal interaction with TRiC and impair VHL
folding were identified. These results defined a novel role for TRiC in
mediating oligomerization and suggested that inactivating mutations can
impair polypeptide function by interfering with chaperone-mediated
folding.

Lee et al. (1996) demonstrated that there is a tightly regulated,
cell-density-dependent transport of the VHL protein into and/or out of
the nucleus. In densely grown cells, it is predominantly in the
cytoplasm, whereas in sparse cultures, most of the protein can be
detected in the nucleus. They identified a putative nuclear localization
signal in the first 60 and first 28 amino acids of the human and rat VHL
protein, respectively. Sequences in the C-terminal region of VHL protein
may also be required for localization to the cytosol. The findings
indicated a novel cell-density-dependent pathway responsible for the
regulation of VHL cellular localization.

Iliopoulos et al. (1995) showed that the renal cell carcinoma cell line
786-O, which is known to harbor a VHL mutation, fails to produce a
wildtype VHL protein. Reintroduction of wildtype, but not mutant, VHL
into these cells had no demonstrable effect on their growth in vitro but
inhibited their ability to form tumors in nude mice. Like many cancer
cells, the 786-0 RCC fails to exit the cell cycle upon serum withdrawal.
Pause et al. (1998) showed that reintroduction of the wildtype VHL gene
restores the ability of VHL-negative RCC cells to exit the cell cycle
and enter G0/quiescence in low serum. The cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p27 (CDKN1B; 600778) accumulates upon serum withdrawal, only
in the presence of VHL, as a result of an increase in protein stability.
Pause et al. (1998) proposed that loss of the wildtype VHL gene results
in a specific cellular defect in serum-dependent growth control, which
may initiate tumor formation. Thus, VHL appears to be the first tumor
suppressor involved in the regulation of cell cycle exit, which is
consistent with its gatekeeper function in the kidney.

To discover genes involved in VHL-mediated carcinogenesis, Ivanov et al.
(1998) used renal cell carcinoma cell lines stably transfected with
wildtype VHL-expressing transgenes. Large-scale RNA differential display
technology applied to these cell lines identified several differentially
expressed genes, including an alpha carbonic anhydrase gene, termed CA12
(603263). The deduced protein sequence was classified as a one-pass
transmembrane carbonic anhydrase possessing an apparently intact
catalytic domain in the extracellular CA module. Reintroduced wildtype
VHL strongly inhibited the overexpression of the CA12 gene in the
parental renal cell carcinoma cell lines. Similar results were obtained
with CA9 (603179) which encodes another transmembrane carbonic anhydrase
with an intact catalytic domain. Although both domains of the VHL
protein contributed to regulation of CA12 expression, the elongin
binding domain alone could effectively regulate CA9 expression. By
fluorescence in situ hybridization, Ivanov et al. (1998) mapped CA12 and
CA9 to chromosome bands 15q22 and 17q21.2, respectively, regions prone
to amplification in some human cancers. Ivanov et al. (1998) stated that
additional experiments were necessary to define the role of CA IX and CA
XII enzymes in the regulation of pH in the extracellular
microenvironment and its potential impact on cancer cell growth.

Roe et al. (2006) found that VHL directly associated with and stabilized
p53 (TP53; 191170) by suppressing MDM2 (164785)-mediated ubiquitination
and nuclear export of p53. Moreover, upon genotoxic stress, VHL invoked
an interaction between p53 and p300 (EP300; 602700) and the acetylation
of p53, which led to an increase in p53 transcriptional activity and
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Roe et al. (2006) concluded that VHL
has a function in upregulating p53.

Yang et al. (2007) noted that VHL-defective renal carcinoma cells
exhibit increased NF-kappa-B (see 164011) activity, which can promote
resistance to chemotherapy or cytokines. They showed that VHL
downregulates NF-kappa-B activity by acting as an adaptor to promote
casein kinase-2 (see 115440)-mediated inhibitory phosphorylation of
CARD9 (607212), an NF-kappa-B agonist.

- Role in Oxygen-Related Gene Expression

The highly vascular tumors associated with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome
overproduce angiogenic peptides such as vascular endothelial growth
factor/vascular permeability factor (VEGF/VPF; 192240). Iliopoulos et
al. (1996) found that renal carcinoma cells lacking wildtype VHL protein
produce mRNAs encoding VEGF/VPF, the glucose transporter GLUT1 (SLC2A1;
138140), and the platelet-derived growth factor B chain (190040) under
both normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Reintroduction of wildtype, but
not mutant, VHL protein into these cells specifically inhibited
production of these mRNAs under normoxic conditions, thus restoring
their previously described hypoxia-inducible profile. Iliopoulos et al.
(1996) concluded that the VHL protein appears to play a critical role in
the transduction of signals generated by changes in ambient oxygen
tension.

VEGF mRNA is upregulated in von Hippel-Lindau syndrome-associated
tumors. Mukhopadhyay et al. (1997) assessed the effect of the VHL gene
product on VEGF expression. Using a VEGF promoter-luciferase construct
for cotransfection with a wildtype VHL vector in embryonic kidney and
renal cell carcinoma cell lines, they showed that wildtype VHL protein
inhibited VEGF promoter activity in a dose-dependent manner up to 5- to
10-fold. Deletion analysis defined a 144-bp region of the VEGF promoter
necessary for VHL repression. This VHL-responsive element is GC rich and
specifically bound the transcription factor Sp1 (189906) in crude
nuclear extracts. They further demonstrated that VHL and Sp1 directly
interact with an inhibitory effect on Sp1, suggesting that loss of Sp1
inhibition may be important in the pathogenesis of von Hippel-Lindau
syndrome and renal cell carcinoma.

Maxwell et al. (1999) studied the involvement of VHL in oxygen-regulated
gene expression using ribonuclease protection analysis of 2
VHL-deficient renal carcinoma cell lines, RCC4 and 786-O. Eleven genes
encoding products involved in glucose transport, glycolysis, high energy
phosphate metabolism, and angiogenesis were examined; 9 were induced by
hypoxia in other mammalian cells and 2 were repressed by hypoxia. None
of these responses were seen in the VHL-defective cell lines. Responses
to hypoxia were restored by stable transfection of a wildtype VHL gene,
with effects ranging from a modest action of hypoxia to substantial
regulation. These results indicated that the previously described
upregulation of hypoxia-inducible mRNAs in VHL-defective cells extend to
a broad range of oxygen-regulated genes and involves a constitutive
'hypoxia pattern' for both positively and negatively regulated genes.

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF1; 603348) has a key role in cellular
response to hypoxia, including the regulation of genes involved in
energy metabolism, angiogenesis, and apoptosis. The alpha subunits of
HIF are rapidly degraded by the proteasome under normal conditions but
are stabilized by hypoxia. Cobaltous ions or iron chelators mimic
hypoxia, indicating that the stimuli may interact through effects on a
ferroprotein oxygen sensor. Maxwell et al. (1999) demonstrated a
critical role for the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene product
VHL in HIF1 regulation. In VHL-defective cells, HIF-alpha subunits were
constitutively stabilized and HIF1 was activated. Reexpression of VHL
restored oxygen-dependent instability. VHL and HIF-alpha subunits
coimmunoprecipitated, and VHL was present in the hypoxic HIF1
DNA-binding complex. In cells exposed to iron chelation or cobaltous
ions, HIF1 is dissociated from VHL. These findings indicated that the
interaction between HIF1 and VHL is iron dependent and that it is
necessary for the oxygen-dependent degradation of HIF-alpha subunits.
Maxwell et al. (1999) suggested that constitutive HIF1 activation may
underlie the angiogenic phenotype of VHL-associated tumors.

In the presence of oxygen, HIF is targeted for destruction by an E3
ubiquitin ligase containing the VHL tumor suppressor protein. Ivan et
al. (2001) found that human VHL protein binds to a short HIF-derived
peptide when a conserved proline residue at the core of this peptide is
hydroxylated. Because proline hydroxylation requires molecular oxygen
and iron, this protein modification may play a key role in mammalian
oxygen sensing. Jaakkola et al. (2001) also demonstrated that the
interaction between VHL protein and a specific domain of the HIF1-alpha
subunit is regulated through hydroxylation of a proline residue
(HIF1-alpha P564) by an enzyme which they termed HIF-alpha
prolyl-hydroxylase (HIF-PH). An absolute requirement for dioxygen as a
cosubstrate and iron as a cofactor suggests that HIF-PH functions
directly as a cellular oxygen sensor.

Mahon et al. (2001) showed that the N-terminal 155 residues of VHL
interact with HIF1AN (606615). They found that VHL functions as a
transcriptional corepressor inhibiting HIF1A transactivation by
recruiting HDAC1 (601241), HDAC2 (605164), and HDAC3 (605166). Epstein
et al. (2001) defined a conserved HIF-VHL-prolyl hydroxylase pathway in
C. elegans and identified Egl9 as a dioxygenase that regulates HIF by
prolyl hydroxylation. In mammalian cells, they showed that the
HIF-prolyl hydroxylases are represented by 3 proteins, PHD1 (606424),
PHD2 (606425), and PHD3 (606426), with a conserved
2-histidine-1-carboxylate iron coordination motif at the catalytic site.
Direct modulation of recombinant enzyme activity by graded hypoxia, iron
chelation, and cobaltous ions mirrored the characteristics of HIF
induction in vivo, fulfilling requirements for these enzymes being
oxygen sensors that regulate HIF.

Hoffman et al. (2001) reported that the products of 4 different type 2C
VHL alleles retain the ability to downregulate HIF but are defective for
promotion of fibronectin (135600) matrix assembly. Furthermore, leu188
to val (L188V; 608537.0014), a well-studied type 2C mutation, retained
the ability to suppress renal carcinoma growth in vivo.

Clifford et al. (2001) investigated in detail the effect of 13 naturally
occurring VHL mutations (11 missense), representing each phenotypic
subclass, on HIF-alpha subunit regulation. Mutations associated with the
PHE-only phenotype (type 2C) promoted HIF-alpha ubiquitylation in vitro
and demonstrated wildtype binding patterns with VHL interacting
proteins, suggesting that loss of other VHL functions are necessary for
PHE susceptibility. Mutations causing HAB susceptibility (types 1, 2A,
and 2B) demonstrated variable effects on HIF-alpha subunit and elongin
binding, but all resulted in defective HIF-alpha regulation and loss of
fibronectin binding. All RCC-associated mutations caused complete
HIF-alpha dysregulation and loss of fibronectin binding. These studies
strengthened the notion that HIF deregulation plays a causal role in
hemangioblastoma and renal carcinoma, and raised the possibility that
abnormal fibronectin matrix assembly contributes to pheochromocytoma
pathogenesis in the setting of VHL syndrome.

Hemangioblastomas of the central nervous system and retina in VHL
patients overexpress vascular endothelial growth factor, which
represents a potential target for anti-angiogenic drugs. In 3 VHL
patients with CNS or retinal hemangioblastomas treated by the anti-VEGF
receptor SU5416, Richard et al. (2002) observed, after 3 to 4 months of
treatment, a secondary paradoxical polycythemia. Hematocrit was normal
before the beginning of the trial, and no progression of
hemangioblastomas was observed. Polycythemia had never been reported in
SU5416 trials for advanced malignancies. In the studies of Richard et
al. (2002), the polycythemia may have represented a specific action on
red blood cell precursors occurring only in the absence of a functional
VHL gene.

Staller et al. (2003) demonstrated that the VHL tumor suppressor protein
negatively regulates CXCR4 (162643) expression owing to its capacity to
target HIF1A (603348) for degradation under normoxic conditions. This
process is suppressed under hypoxic conditions, resulting in
HIF-dependent CXCR4 activation. An analysis of clear cell renal
carcinoma that manifests mutations in the VHL gene in most cases
revealed an association of strong CXCR4 expression with poor
tumor-specific survival. Staller et al. (2003) concluded that their
results suggest a mechanism for CXCR4 activation during tumor cell
evolution and imply that VHL inactivation acquired by incipient tumor
cells early in tumorigenesis confers not only a selective survival
advantage but also the tendency to home to selected organs.

Corn et al. (2003) established that the VHL protein binds to Tat-binding
protein-1 (TBP1; 186852). TBP1 associates with the beta-domain of VHL
and complexes with VHL and HIF1A in vivo. Overexpression of TBP1
promotes degradation of HIF1A in a VHL-dependent manner that requires
the ATPase domain of TBP1. Several distinct mutations in exon 2 of the
VHL gene disrupt binding of VHL to TBP1. A VHL protein mutant containing
an exon 2 missense substitution coimmunoprecipitated with HIF1A, but not
TBP1, and did not promote degradation of HIF1A. Thus, the ability of the
VHL protein to degrade HIF1A depends in part on its interaction with
TBP1 and suggests a new mechanism for HIF1A stabilization in some
VHL-deficient tumors.

To identify novel target genes of the VHL protein, Zatyka et al. (2002)
investigated the effect of wildtype VHL protein on the expression of 588
cancer-related genes in 2 VHL-defective renal cell carcinoma cell lines.
Expression array analysis identified 9 genes that demonstrated a greater
than 2-fold decrease in expression in both RCC cell lines after
restoration of wildtype VHL protein. Three of the 9 genes, VEGF, PAI1
(173360), and LRP1 (107770), had previously been reported as targets of
the VHL protein and are hypoxia-inducible. In addition, 6 novel targets
were detected, including cyclin D1 (CCND1; 168461). No evidence was
found that CCND1 expression was influenced by hypoxia, suggesting that
VHL protein downregulates these targets by an HIF-independent mechanism.

Homozygous disruption of the Vhl gene in mice results in embryonic
lethality from lack of placental vasculogenesis (Gnarra et al., 1997).
To investigate Vhl function in the adult, Haase et al. (2001) generated
a conditional Vhl-null allele (2-lox allele) and a null allele (1-lox
allele) by Cre-mediated recombination in embryonic stem cells. They
showed that mice heterozygous for the 1-lox allele developed cavernous
hemangiomas of the liver, a rare manifestation in the human disease.
Histologically, these tumors were associated with hepatocellular
steatosis and focal proliferations of small vessels. To study the
cellular origin of these lesions, Haase et al. (2001) inactivated VHL
tissue specifically in hepatocytes. Deletion of VHL in the liver
resulted in severe steatosis, many blood-filled vascular cavities, and
foci of increased vascularization within the hepatic parenchyma. These
histopathologic changes were similar to those seen in livers from mice
heterozygous for the 1-lox allele. Hypoxia-inducible mRNAs encoding
vascular endothelial growth factor, glucose transporter-1, and
erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) were upregulated. Thus, targeted
inactivation of mouse Vhl replicated clinical features of the human
disease and underscored the importance of the VHL gene product in the
regulation of hypoxia-responsive genes in vivo.

Wang et al. (2007) showed that mice overexpressing Hif1a in osteoblasts
through selective deletion of Vhl expressed high levels of Vegf (192240)
and developed extremely dense, heavily vascularized long bones. In
contrast, mice lacking Hif1a in osteoblasts had long bones that were
significantly thinner and less vascularized than those of controls. Loss
of Vhl in osteoblasts increased endothelial sprouting from the embryonic
metatarsals in vitro but had little effect on osteoblast function in the
absence of blood vessels. Wang et al. (2007) concluded that activation
of the HIF1A pathway in osteoblasts during bone development couples
angiogenesis to osteogenesis.

Endocytosis plays a major role in the deactivation of receptors
localized to the plasma membrane, and early endocytic events require the
small GTPase RAB5 (179512) and its effector rabaptin-5 (RABEP1; 603616).
Wang et al. (2009) found that hypoxia, via the VHL-HIF2A (603349)
signaling pathway, downregulated rabaptin-5 expression, leading to
decelerated endocytosis and prolonged activation of ligand-bound EGFR
(131550). Primary kidney and breast tumors with strong hypoxic
signatures showed significantly lower expression of rabaptin-5 RNA and
protein. Wang et al. (2009) identified a conserved hypoxia-responsive
element (HRE) in the rabaptin-5 promoter that bound in vitro-translated
HIF1A and HIF2A, leading to displacement of RNA polymerase II and
attenuating rabaptin-5 transcription.

Mehta et al. (2009) reported that in C. elegans the loss of VHL1
significantly increased life span and enhanced resistance to
polyglutamine and beta-amyloid toxicity. Deletion of HIF1 (603348) was
epistatic to VHL1, indicating that HIF1 acts downstream of VHL1 to
modulate aging and proteotoxicity. VHL1 and HIF1 control longevity by a
mechanism distinct from both dietary restriction and insulin-like
signaling. Mehta et al. (2009) concluded that their findings define VHL1
and the hypoxic response as an alternative longevity and protein
homeostasis pathway.

Russell et al. (2011) demonstrated that VHL binds to SOCS1 (603597) and
promotes degradation of phosphorylated JAK2 (147796) via
ubiquitin-mediated destruction.

- Role in Protein Assembly

Ohh et al. (1998) showed that fibronectin coimmunoprecipitated with
normal VHL protein but not tumor-derived VHL mutants. Immunofluorescence
and biochemical fractionation experiments showed that fibronectin
colocalized with a fraction of VHL associated with the endoplasmic
reticulum, and cold competition experiments suggested that complexes
between fibronectin and VHL protein exist in intact cells. Assembly of
an extracellular fibronectin matrix by VHL -/- renal carcinoma cells, as
determined by immunofluorescence and ELISA assays, was grossly defective
compared with VHL +/+ renal carcinoma cells. Reintroduction of wildtype,
but not mutant, VHL protein into VHL -/- renal carcinoma cells partially
corrected this defect. Extracellular fibronectin matrix assembly by VHL
-/- mouse embryos and mouse embryo fibroblasts, unlike their VHL +/+
counterparts, was grossly impaired. Ohh et al. (1998) concluded that VHL
protein is important in fibronectin matrix assembly.

Hergovich et al. (2003) found that VHL is a microtubule-associated
protein that can protect microtubules from depolymerization in several
cell lines. Both the microtubule binding and stabilization functions
depended on amino acids 95-123, a hotspot for mutations in VHL syndrome.
They found that the syndrome-associated mutations Y98H (608537.0009) and
Y112H (608537.0012) disrupted the microtubule-stabilizing function of
the protein.

- Role in Ciliary Maintenance

Using immunofluorescence and confocal microscopy, Lolkema et al. (2008)
showed that Vhl localized to cilia extending from basal bodies stained
with gamma-tubulin (TUBG1; 191135) in primary mouse kidney cells. Cilia
were absent in renal cell carcinoma cells derived from a VHL patient,
but reintroduction of VHL into these cells resulted in rapid cilia
assembly. The cilia function of VHL required residues 1 to 53, which
constitute an acidic domain, and residues 95 to 123, which were
previously implicated in microtubule binding and tumor suppression.

- Role in Central Nervous System Development

Kanno et al. (2000) investigated the role of the VHL gene in CNS
development using rodent CNS progenitor cells. They showed that
expression of the VHL protein is correlated with neuronal
differentiation but not with glial differentiation in CNS progenitor
cells, and also that VHL gene transduction induces neuronal
differentiation. Furthermore, a VHL mRNA antisense oligonucleotide
inhibited differentiation of CNS progenitor cells and upregulated their
cell cycle.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

The ubiquitination of HIF by VHL plays a central role in the cellular
response to changes in oxygen availability. VHL protein binds to HIF
only when a conserved proline in HIF is hydroxylated, a modification
that is oxygen-dependent. Min et al. (2002) determined the 1.85-angstrom
structure of a 20-residue HIF1A-VHL protein-elongin B-elongin C complex
that shows that HIF1A binds to VHL protein in an extended beta
strand-like conformation. The hydroxyproline inserts into a gap in the
VHL hydrophobic core, at a site that is a hotspot for tumorigenic
mutations, with its 4-hydroxyl group recognized by buried serine and
histidine residues. Although the beta sheet-like interactions contribute
to the stability of the complex, the hydroxyproline contacts are central
to the strict specificity characteristic of signaling.

Hon et al. (2002) determined the crystal structure of a hydroxylated
HIF1A peptide bound to the VHL protein, elongin C, and elongin B and
performed solution binding assays, which revealed a single, conserved
hydroxyproline-binding pocket in the VHL protein. They found that
optimized hydrogen bonding to the buried hydroxyprolyl group confers
precise discrimination between hydroxylated and unmodified prolyl
residues. Hon et al. (2002) concluded that this mechanism provides a new
focus for development of therapeutic agents to modulate cellular
responses to hypoxia.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Nordstrom-O'Brien et al. (2010) provided a review of the molecular
genetics of the VHL gene, including the mutational spectrum and
associated phenotypes.

- Von Hippel-Lindau Syndrome

Using restriction fragment analysis, Latif et al. (1993) identified
rearrangements of the VHL gene in 28 of 221 kindreds with von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300). Eighteen of these rearrangements were
due to deletion in the candidate gene. Using pulsed field gel
electrophoresis and cosmid mapping, Latif et al. (1993) established a
physical map of the VHL gene region and identified 3 large
nonoverlapping constitutional deletions in 3 unrelated VHL patients; 1
of these was an in-frame 3-nucleotide deletion at nucleotide 434,
predicted to remove ile146 in the gene product (608537.0001).

Using single-strand conformation polymorphism and heteroduplex analysis
to investigate 94 VHL patients without large deletions, Crossey et al.
(1994) identified 40 different mutations in the VHL gene in 55 unrelated
kindreds: 19 missense mutations, 6 nonsense mutations, 12 frameshift
deletions or insertions, 2 in-frame deletions, and 1 splice donor site
mutation. The 2 most frequent mutations were arg238-to-gln (608537.0005)
and arg238-to-trp (608537.0003), which were detected in 5 and 4
unrelated kindreds, respectively.

Olschwang et al. (1998) screened 92 unrelated patients with VHL syndrome
for point mutations and found 61 DNA variants. In addition, a search for
EcoRI rearrangements revealed germline anomalies in 5 patients. The 61
variants could be subdivided into 20 mutations predicted to alter the
open reading frame and 43 DNA sequence variants that on a priori grounds
were of unknown biologic consequence. The 3-prime end of the coding
sequence of the VHL gene, which encodes the elongin (see 600787)-binding
domain, was the site of 5 of 20 truncating mutations (25%) and 18 of 41
DNA variants (44%) of uncertain functional significance. A similar
screening in 18 patients with sporadic hemangioblastoma revealed 2
missense DNA variants.

Wait et al. (2004) performed genetic analysis of 5 CNS hemangioblastomas
excised from 3 related VHL patients with the same germline VHL gene
deletion. All of the tumors showed distinct 'second-hit' point mutations
on the wildtype allele, even those tumors originating in the same
patient. Moreover, the same types of tumors from the same locations also
showed different point mutations. Wait et al. (2004) concluded that the
somatic mutations were random, and that there is a unique mechanism
underlying tumorigenesis in patients with germline deletion mutations.

Using markers specific for chromosome 3, Glasker et al. (2006) mapped
the deletion size of the 'second-hit' in 16 tumor tissue specimens from
a single patient with VHL syndrome who had a germline heterozygous
partial deletion in the VHL gene. The tumors consisted of 3 central
nervous system hemangioblastomas, 7 renal cell carcinomas, 3 cystic
renal structures, 2 pancreatic tumors, and 1 pancreatic cyst. Deletion
size was highly variable, ranging from short deletions around the VHL
gene to complete deletion of chromosome 3. However, there was no
correlation between deletion size and site of the germline mutation,
affected organ, or type or biological behavior of the tumor. Glasker et
al. (2006) concluded that loss of VHL gene function alone is not
immediately causative for neoplastic growth and suggested that further
molecular events may be required for tumor formation.

(For genotype/phenotype correlations in VHL syndrome, see 193300.)

- Cancer

The Knudson model predicts that sporadic cancers should be associated
with mutations in the same locus affected in the corresponding
hereditary cancer. Using SSCP and RT-PCR techniques, Latif et al. (1993)
identified aberrant patterns in the VHL gene in 5 renal cell carcinoma
(RCC) lines. In 4 of them, the pattern was due to small, 1- to
10-nucleotide deletions that created frameshift mutations and,
presumably, truncated proteins. In the fifth RCC line, the change was a
nonsense mutation, resulting from a 761C-A transversion.

Eng et al. (1995) identified mutations in the VHL gene in 4 of 48
sporadic pheochromocytomas (171300). Two mutations were somatic and 2
were germline. In a mother and 2 sons with pheochromocytoma, Crossey et
al. (1995) identified a VHL mutation (R238W; 6085327.0003) mutation.
None of them had evidence of VHL syndrome.

In 30 (11%) of 271 unrelated patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma,
Neumann et al. (2002) identified 22 different germline mutations in the
VHL gene (see, e.g., 608537.0014 and 608537.0026).

Zhuang et al. (1996) analyzed VHL gene alterations in sporadic human
colon carcinomas and adenomas using techniques that allowed for
procurement and analysis of selected subpopulations of cells from
paraffin embedded and frozen human tumor specimens. Allelic loss of the
VHL gene was detected in 7 of 11 (64%) of informative patients with
sporadic colon carcinoma. No allelic loss was shown in colon adenomas
from 8 informative patients. The authors suggested that VHL gene loss
may represent a relatively late event in colonic neoplasia progression.

Oberstrass et al. (1996) found abnormalities of the VHL gene in 10 of 20
capillary hemangioblastomas of the CNS. Seven tumors had a frameshift
mutation due either to deletion of 1 or more basepairs (6 cases) or to
insertion of 1 basepair (1 case). The remaining 3 tumors had either
point mutations with intron splice site sequences (2 cases) or a point
mutation resulting in an amino acid substitution (1 case). Evidence for
germline alterations of the VHL gene was found in 2 patients who showed
identical mutations in both tumors and corresponding leukocyte DNA.
Oberstrass et al. (1996) noted that it is significant that one of the 2
tumors with a germline mutation was in an 18-year-old male, and the
other in a 40-year-old female. The non-germline mutations included
tumors from individuals 70, 62, 60, 55, and 52 years old.

Kenck et al. (1996) investigated 91 different parenchymal tumors of the
kidney for mutation in the VHL gene by SSCP and/or heteroduplex
techniques. Evidence of mutation of the VHL gene was associated
exclusively with nonpapillary renal cell carcinoma.

Fearon (1997) reviewed more than 20 different hereditary cancer
syndromes that had been defined and attributed to specific germline
mutations in various inherited cancer genes. In a useful diagram, he
illustrated the roles of allelic variation ('1 gene - different
syndromes') and genetic heterogeneity ('different genes - 1 syndrome')
in inherited cancer syndromes. VHL mutations were used as an example of
the former: inactivating mutations, such as nonsense mutations or
deletions, predisposed to clear-cell renal carcinoma, retinal angioma,
and cerebellar and spinal hemangioblastoma; missense mutations, e.g., in
codon 167, predisposed to these tumors and pheochromocytoma in addition.

Van der Harst et al. (1998) screened the VHL gene for germline mutations
in 68 patients who were operated on for pheochromocytoma. This was
undertaken to follow up on the work of Neumann et al. (1993), who
reported that, according to clinical criteria, approximately 23% of the
apparently sporadic pheochromocytomas may in fact be related to a
familial disorder; these disorders are, in addition to von Hippel-Lindau
syndrome, neurofibromatosis-1 (NF1; 162200) and multiple endocrine
neoplasia types IIA (MEN2A; 171400) and IIB (MEN2B; 162300). They found
mutations in the VHL gene in 8 patients; 2 patients were an uncle and
nephew who had the same missense mutation, R64P (608537.0015). In 4
other patients, missense mutations, P25L, L63P (608537.0016), G144Q, and
I147T, were identified. Three of these mutations (P25L, L63P, and R64P)
were located closer to the N terminus of the VHL protein than any
previously reported VHL mutation. In 2 other cases, the mutations were
located not in the coding region but in the intronic sequence (but not
within splice sites), adjacent to the exon, so that they were probably
not related to the syndrome. The results suggested that 8.8% of patients
(6 of 68) with apparently sporadic pheochromocytomas may carry germline
mutations in the VHL gene. This is a relatively high proportion,
although not as high as the 23% reported earlier.

Gallou et al. (1999) investigated the nature of somatic VHL mutations in
173 primary sporadic human renal cell carcinomas using PCR and SSCP
analysis. They detected an abnormal SSCP pattern in 73 samples. After
sequencing, they identified microdeletions in 58% of cases,
microinsertions in 17%, nonsense mutations in 8%, and missense mutations
in 17%. VHL mutations were found only in the nonpapillary renal cell
carcinoma subtype, as previously reported. To compare somatic and
germline mutations, they used the VHL database, which included 507
mutations. The study of mutational events revealed a significant
difference between somatic and germline mutations. Mutations leading to
truncated proteins were observed in 78% of somatic mutations but in only
37% of germline mutations (P less than 0.001). The authors postulated
that a specific pattern of VHL mutations is associated with sporadic
RCC. This pattern corresponds to mutations leading to truncated
proteins, with few specific missense mutations.

Bender et al. (2000) studied 36 VHL-related pheochromocytomas for
somatic VHL and RET gene alterations and LOH of markers on chromosome
arms 1p, 3p, and 22q. For comparison, they performed the same analyses
in 17 sporadic pheochromocytomas. They found significantly different LOH
frequencies at 3 loci between sporadic and VHL tumors; the more than 91%
LOH of markers on 3p and the relatively low frequencies of LOH at 1p and
22q (15% and 21%, respectively) in VHL pheochromocytomas argue for the
importance of VHL gene dysregulation and dysfunction in the pathogenesis
of almost all VHL pheochromocytomas. In contrast, the relatively low
frequency of 3p LOH (24%) and the lack of intragenic VHL alterations
compared with the high frequency of 1p LOH (71%) and the moderate
frequency of 22q LOH (53%) in sporadic pheochromocytomas argue for genes
other than VHL, especially on 1p, that are significant for sporadic
tumorigenesis and suggest that the genetic pathways involved in sporadic
versus VHL pheochromocytoma genesis are distinct.

Renal cell carcinomas occur frequently in patients treated with
long-term dialysis, especially in cases of end-stage renal disease
(ESRD)/acquired cystic disease of the kidney (ACDK). In patients
receiving dialysis, Yoshida et al. (2002) examined 14 RCCs (7 clear-cell
and 7 papillary carcinomas) for somatic mutations of the VHL gene as
well as of the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET oncogene (164860) to
address the molecular pathogenesis of ESRD/ACDK-associated RCCs. They
found that 3 tumors had VHL frameshifts; 1 showed additional LOH at the
VHL gene locus. All 3 tumors were clear-cell RCCs occurring in ESRD with
55, 106, and 156 months of dialysis, respectively. No mutations were
found in the tyrosine kinase domain of the MET oncogene, where mutations
had previously been found in cases of papillary RCCs.

Maranchie et al. (2004) observed a paradoxically lower prevalence of RCC
in patients with complete germline deletion of VHL. They retrospectively
evaluated 123 patients from 55 families with large germline VHL
deletions, including 42 intragenic partial deletions and 13 complete VHL
deletions. An age-adjusted comparison demonstrated a higher prevalence
of RCC in patients with partial germline VHL deletions relative to
complete deletions (48.9% vs 22.6%, p = 0.007). This striking phenotypic
dichotomy was not seen for cystic renal lesions or for CNS (p = 0.22),
pancreas (p = 0.72), or pheochromocytoma (p = 0.34). Deletion mapping
demonstrated that development of RCC had an even greater correlation
with retention of HSPC300 (C3ORF10; 611183), located within the 30-kb
region of 3p, immediately telomeric to VHL (52.3% vs 18.9%, p less than
0.001), suggesting the presence of a neighboring gene or genes critical
to the development and maintenance of RCC.

Gallou et al. (2004) studied the renal phenotype in 274 individuals from
126 unrelated VHL families in whom 92 different VHL mutations were
identified. The incidence of renal involvement was increased in families
with mutations leading to protein truncation or large rearrangement, as
compared to families with missense mutations (81% vs 63%, respectively;
p = 0.03). In the group with missense mutations, Gallou et al. (2004)
identified 2 mutation cluster regions (MCRs) associated with a high risk
of harboring renal lesions: MCR-1 (codons 74-90) and MCR-2 (codons
130-136). In addition, the incidence of RCCs was higher in families with
mutations leading to protein truncation than in families with missense
mutations (75% vs 57%, respectively; p = 0.04). Furthermore, missense
mutations within MCR-1, but not MCR-2, conferred genetic susceptibility
to RCC.

- Autosomal Recessive Familial Erythrocytosis 2

Inheritance of germline mutations in both VHL alleles was found by Ang
et al. (2002) and by others (Pastore et al., 2003; Percy et al., 2002)
as the cause of autosomal recessive familial erythrocytosis (ECYT2,
263400; see 608537.0019). The VHL protein plays an important role in
hypoxia sensing. It binds to hydroxylated HIF1-alpha and serves as a
recognition component of an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. In hypoxia or
secondary to a mutated VHL gene, the nondegraded HIF1-alpha forms a
heterodimer with HIF1-beta and leads to increased transcription of
hypoxia-inducible genes, including EPO. Pastore et al. (2003) reported 7
erythrocytosis patients with VHL mutations in both alleles
(608537.0021-608537.0024). Two Danish sibs and an American boy were
homozygous for the R200W mutation (608537.0019). Three unrelated white
Americans were compound heterozygous for R200W and another VHL mutation:
L188V (608537.0014) in 2 and P192A (608537.0023) in the third.
Additionally, a Croatian boy was homozygous for an H191D mutation
(608537.0024). Pastore et al. (2003) stated that they had not observed
VHL syndrome-associated tumors in subjects with erythrocytosis or their
heterozygous relatives. They found that up to half of the consecutive
patients with apparent congenital erythrocytosis and increased serum EPO
(133170) whom they had examined had mutations of both VHL alleles. They
concluded that VHL mutations are the most frequent cause of recessive
congenital erythrocytosis and define a class of disorders due to
augmented hypoxia sensing.

ANIMAL MODEL

Gemmill et al. (2002) isolated the Drosophila homolog of TRC8 (603046)
and studied its function by genetic manipulations and a yeast 2-hybrid
screen. Human and Drosophila TRC8 proteins localize to the endoplasmic
reticulum. Loss of either Drosophila Trc8 or Vhl resulted in an
identical ventral midline defect. Direct interaction between Trc8 and
Vhl in Drosophila was confirmed by GST-pull-down and
coimmunoprecipitation experiments. Gemmill et al. (2002) found that in
Drosophila, overexpression of Trc8 inhibited growth consistent with its
presumed role as a tumor suppressor gene. Human JAB1 (604850)
localization was dependent on VHL mutant status. Thus, the VHL, TRC8,
and JAB1 proteins appear to be linked both physically and functionally,
and all 3 may participate in the development of kidney cancer.

Ding et al. (2006) used the Cre-loxP system to delete the Vhl gene from
podocytes in the glomerular basement membrane of mice. At about 4 weeks
of age, the mice developed rapidly progressive renal disease with
hematuria, proteinuria, and renal failure with crescentic
glomerulonephritis with prominent segmental fibrin deposition and
fibrinoid necrosis. No immune deposits were present; the phenotype was
similar to human 'pauci-immune' rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
(RPGN). Gene expression profiling showed increased expression of the HIF
target gene Cxcr4 (162643) in glomeruli from both mice and humans with
RPGN. Treatment of the mice with a Cxcr4 antibody resulted in clinical
improvement, and isolated overexpression of Cxcr4 was sufficient to
cause glomerular disease. Ding et al. (2006) hypothesized that
upregulation of Cxcr4 allowed terminally differentiated podocytes to
reenter the cell cycle, proliferate, and form cellular crescents.

Hickey et al. (2007) found that mice homozygous for the Chuvash
polycythemia-associated VHL mutation (R200W; 608537.0019) developed
polycythemia similar to the human disease. Although bone marrow
cellularity and morphology was similar to controls, spleens from the
mutant mice showed increased numbers of erythroid progenitors and
megakaryocytes, as well as erythroid differentiation of splenic cells in
vitro. Further analysis showed upregulation of HIF2A (603349) and of key
target genes, including EPO, VEGF (192240), GLUT1 (138140), and PAI1
(173360), that contribute to polycythemia.

Using immunofluorescence microscopy, Zehetner et al. (2008) found that
Vhl was expressed in mouse insulin-producing pancreatic beta cells.
Conditional inactivation of Vhl in beta cells promoted a diversion of
glucose away from mitochondria into lactate production, causing cells to
produce high levels of glycolytically derived ATP and to secrete
elevated levels of insulin at low glucose concentrations. Vhl-deficient
mice exhibited diminished glucose-stimulated changes in cytoplasmic
Ca(2+) concentration, electrical activity, and insulin secretion, which
culminated in impaired systemic glucose tolerance. Vhl deletion was
associated with upregulation of Hif1a and the glucose transporter Glut1,
an Hif1a target gene. Combined deletion of Vhl and Hif1a rescued the
defects due to Vhl deletion alone, implying that they resulted from
Hif1a activation.

Lee et al. (2009) generated transgenic mouse embryonic stem cells with
the homozygous VHL type 2B mutation R167Q (608537.0005). Mutant cells
had preserved regulation of both HIF-alpha factors with slightly greater
normotoxic dysregulation of HIF2-alpha. R167Q-derived teratomas had a
growth advantage and showed hemangioma formation. Homozygous mice were
embryonic lethal due to placental failure, and heterozygous mice
developed renal cysts and were predisposed to the carcinogen-promoted
renal carcinoma.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, 3-BP DEL, ILE75DEL

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ILE146DEL mutation has been renumbered as ILE75DEL.

In a patient with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300), Latif et al.
(1993) identified an in-frame 3-nucleotide deletion at nucleotide 434 of
the VHL gene, predicted to remove isoleucine-146 in the gene product.

.0002
RENAL CELL CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
VHL, SER183TER

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the SER254TER mutation has been renumbered as SER183TER (S183X).

In a cell line from a sporadic case of renal cell carcinoma (144700),
Latif et al. (1993) identified a 761C-A transversion in the VHL gene,
predicted to result in a ser254-to-ter (S254X) substitution.

.0003
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA, INCLUDED
VHL, ARG167TRP

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG238TRP mutation has been renumbered as ARG167TRP (R167W).

In a study of 94 VHL (193300) patients without large deletions, Crossey
et al. (1994) found that the 2 most frequent mutations were missense
mutations at codon 238: 4 kindreds had a 712C-T transition, resulting in
an arg238-to-trp (R238W) change, and 5 kindreds had a 713G-A transition,
leading to an arg238-to-gln (R238Q; 608537.0005) substitution. Another
mutation 712C-G transversion, resulting in an arg238-to-gly (R238G)
substitution (608537.0004). All 3 mutations at codon 238 occurred at a
CpG dinucleotide. The authors noted that although pheochromocytoma
occurs in only about 7% of patients with VHL, a codon 238 mutation
carried a high risk (62%) of pheochromocytoma.

The R238W mutation was found by Garcia et al. (1997) in a Spanish family
in which VHL was manifested predominantly as familial pheochromocytoma
in 2 generations, consistent with VHL syndrome type 2C.

In a mother and 2 sons with pheochromocytoma (171300), consistent with
VHL syndrome type 2C, Crossey et al. (1995) identified the R238W
mutation.

Zbar et al. (1996) confirmed previous observations that germline codon
167 mutations of the VHL gene (R167W and R167Q; 608537.0005) convey a
high risk for the development of pheochromocytoma and renal cell
carcinoma. In 21 of 33 families with mutations at codon 167,
pheochromocytoma occurred, compared to 15 of 223 families without a
mutation at codon 167. The association between codon 167 mutations and
pheochromocytoma was detected in all nationalities tested. Two of 4
Japanese VHL pheochromocytoma families had mutations at codon 167; and 3
of 10 French VHL pheochromocytoma families had mutations at codon 167.

Neumann et al. (2002) identified the R167Q substitution in the germline
of a patient with sporadic pheochromocytoma (171300).

In the germlines of 6 unrelated patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma
(171300), Neumann et al. (2002) identified the R167W substitution. The
mutation was not identified in 600 control chromosomes.

.0004
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, ARG167GLY

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG238GLY mutation has been renumbered as ARG167GLY (R167G).

See 608537.0003 and Crossey et al. (1994).

.0005
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, ARG167GLN

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG238GLN mutation has been renumbered as ARG167GLN (R167Q).

See 608537.0003 and Crossey et al. (1994).

.0006
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, ARG161TER

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the ARG232TER mutation has been renumbered as ARG161TER (R161X).

In a patient with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300), Loeb et al.
(1994) identified a 694C-T transition in exon 3 of the VHL gene,
resulting in an amber stop codon arg232-to-ter (R232X).

Gilcrease et al. (1995) found the identical 694C-T transition as a
somatic mutation in a clear cell papillary cystadenoma of the epididymis
in a patient who showed no evidence of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome and in
whom somatic cells did not contain this mutation.

.0007
HEMANGIOBLASTOMA, SPORADIC CEREBELLAR
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME, INCLUDED
VHL, TRP88SER

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the TRP159SER mutation has been renumbered as TRP88SER (W88S).

In 13 sporadic cases of cerebellar hemangioblastoma, Kanno et al. (1994)
sought somatic mutations in the VHL gene with single-strand conformation
polymorphism analyses of the tumor DNAs. An abnormal SSCP pattern was
detected in 7, and in 3 of these the mutation was successfully
characterized by direct sequencing. The somatic mutations were 2
missense mutations and 1 deletion of a single base. One of the missense
mutations was a 476G-C transversion, resulting in a trp-to-ser change.
The codon number was not noted.

In a Japanese patient with VHL (193300), the Clinical Research Group for
VHL in Japan (1995) identified the 476G-C transversion, which resulted
in a trp159-to-ser (W159S) substitution.

.0008
HEMANGIOBLASTOMA, SPORADIC CEREBELLAR
VHL, LEU135PHE

In a sporadic case of cerebellar hemangioblastoma, Kanno et al. (1994)
identified a missense mutation in exon 2 of the VHL gene: a 618A-C
transversion, resulting in a leu135-to-phe substitution.

.0009
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, TYR98HIS

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the TYR169HIS mutation has been renumbered as TYR98HIS (Y98H), resulting
from a 292T-C transition.

In 14 apparently unrelated von Hippel-Lindau syndrome type 2A (193300)
families from the Black Forest region of Germany, Brauch et al. (1995)
found a 505T-C transition in the VHL gene, resulting in a tyr169-to-his
(Y169H) substitution. Brauch et al. (1995) suggested that more than 75
VHL germline mutations had been identified in VHL patients to that date.
The same mutation, associated with pheochromocytoma, had been identified
by Chen et al. (1995) in 2 VHL 2A families in Pennsylvania. All affected
individuals in the 16 families shared the same VHL haplotype, indicating
a founder effect. In at least one of the Pennsylvania families, the
Y169H mutation probably derived from their Pfalz ancestors, who were
among Germans who migrated to Pennsylvania.

In a patient with the Y169H mutation as the cause of VHL, Schimke et al.
(1998) found a functioning carotid paraganglioma.

Allen et al. (2001) performed a longitudinal clinical study and DNA
analysis of 24 family members, 16 of whom exhibited a 505T-C change in
exon 1 of the VHL gene. Two of the 16 were asymptomatic carriers of the
505T-C mutation. Twelve of 16 (75%) of the gene carriers had 1 or more
ocular angiomas. The mean number of ocular angiomas per gene carrier was
3.3. Six eyes had optic disc angiomas. Five gene carriers (31%) lost
vision because of ocular angiomatosis. Four patients (25%) had
cerebellar hemangioblastomas and 11 patients (69%) had
pheochromocytomas. No patient had renal cell carcinoma, consistent with
the clinical diagnosis of VHL syndrome type 2A. The authors stated that
recognition of the VHL syndrome 2A phenotype suggested the presence of a
specific mutation (505T-C) in the VHL gene. They suggested that
confirmation of this genotype would increase a clinician's ability to
provide favorable prognostic information to affected family members.

Bender et al. (2001) studied 125 individuals in southern Germany
carrying the 505T-C mutation. Forty-seven percent had pheochromocytoma;
36% had retinal angioma; 36%, hemangioblastoma of the spine; and 16% had
hemangioblastoma of the brain. Forty-seven percent of patients were
symptomatic; 30% were asymptomatic despite the presence of at least 1
VHL-related tumor; and 23% of the carriers had no detectable VHL lesion.
Of the 19 patients who died, 10 died of symptomatic VHL lesions. Overall
penetrance by cumulative incidence was estimated at 48% by 35 years and
88% by 70 years. Bender et al. (2001) suggested that the mortality rate
for those carrying this mutation was much lower than in unselected VHL
mutations and was comparable to that of the general population of
Germany.

.0010
MOVED TO 608537.0003
.0011
MOVED TO 608537.0003
.0012
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, TYR112HIS

In a large VHL (193300) family with pheochromocytoma without renal
carcinoma (VHL type 2A) studied by Tisherman et al. (1962, 1993), Zbar
et al. (1996) identified a tyr112-to-his (Y112H) mutation in the VHL
gene. Of 22 affected family members, 19 were affected with
pheochromocytoma; no affected family member had renal cell carcinoma. In
the original report (Tisherman et al., 1962), at least 7 persons had
pheochromocytoma. One or more cafe-au-lait spots (in 22 persons),
extensive hemangiomas (in 2 persons), and angiomatosis retinae (in 2
persons) were discovered in the family.

.0013
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, VAL166PHE

In a family with VHL (193300), Gross et al. (1996) identified a
val166-to-phe (V166F) mutation in the VHL gene. Seven members had
pheochromocytoma, all without renal carcinoma.

.0014
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2, INCLUDED;;
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA, INCLUDED
VHL, LEU188VAL

In a family with VHL (193300), Neumann et al. (1995) identified a
leu188-to-val (L188V) mutation in the VHL gene. Nine patients had
pheochromocytoma without renal carcinoma (Zbar et al., 1996).

In 6 members of the same German family identified by Neumann et al.
(1995) with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome type 2C, Weirich et al. (2002)
found a P81S mutation in the VHL gene (608537.0020) which cosegregated
with the L188V mutation. Weirich et al. (2002) discussed the possible
impact of these mutations on protein function and phenotype.

In 2 unrelated white American children, a 15-year-old male and a
13-year-old female, who presented at 5 years of age with familial
erythrocytosis (ECYT2; 263400), Pastore et al. (2003) identified a
562C-G transversion in the VHL gene, resulting in the L188V mutation. In
both patients the mutation was in compound heterozygous state with the
common R200W mutation (608537.0019).

Neumann et al. (2002) identified the L188V mutation in the germline of a
patient with sporadic pheochromocytoma (171300). The mutation was not
identified in 600 control chromosomes.

.0015
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
VHL, ARG64PRO

In an uncle and his nephew with apparently isolated pheochromocytoma
(171300), van der Harst et al. (1998) found an arg64-to-pro (R64P)
mutation in the VHL gene. This mutation was 1 of 3 missense mutations
identified by van der Harst et al. (1998) that were located closer to
the N terminus of the VHL protein than any previously reported VHL
mutation (see also 608537.0016).

.0016
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
VHL, LEU63PRO

In a patient with apparently sporadic pheochromocytoma (171300), van der
Harst et al. (1998) found a leu63-to-pro (L63P) mutation in the VHL
gene. This mutation was 1 of 3 missense mutations identified by van der
Harst et al. (1998) that were located closer to the N terminus of the
VHL protein than any previously reported VHL mutation (see also
608537.0015).

.0017
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, TYR112ASN

In a family with VHL (193300), Bradley et al. (1999) identified a 547T-A
transversion in exon 1 of the VHL gene, resulting in a tyr112-to-asn
(Y112N) substitution. Of 13 affected individuals, 7 had renal cell
carcinoma and 1 had pheochromocytoma. The authors contrasted this family
to 2 families reported by Chen et al. (1996) that had a mutation at the
same position but causing a different amino acid change (tyr112 to his;
608537.0012). In these families, 19 of 22 affected individuals had
pheochromocytoma and none had renal cell carcinoma. Bradley et al.
(1999) concluded that different amino acid changes at the same position
can cause very distinct clinical phenotypes.

.0018
RENAL CELL CARCINOMA WITH PARANEOPLASTIC ERYTHROCYTOSIS
VHL, LEU163PRO

Wiesener et al. (2002) described a 50-year-old man, admitted to hospital
for acute myocardial infarction, who was found to have marked
erythrocytosis. Serum erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) was increased, and
ultrasonography demonstrated a mass at the upper pole of the left
kidney. Following nephrectomy, which confirmed the diagnosis of renal
cell carcinoma (144700), EPO serum concentration decreased within 7 days
and hemoglobin levels returned to normal. The patient was well 9 months
later with normal EPO serum concentration. In this patient, Wiesener et
al. (2002) reported that EPO mRNA was not detectable in normal kidney
tissue but markedly upregulated in the tumor. Hypoxia-inducible genes,
including VEGF (192240), GLUT1 (138140), carbonic anhydrase-9 (603179),
lactate dehydrogenase-A (150000), and aldolase A (103850), were also
strongly induced in the tumor. Immunoblots showed significant
overexpression of the HIF1A (603348) and HIF2A (603349) subunits in the
tumor, and immunohistochemistry performed for HIF1A showed nuclear
accumulation of the transcription factor in virtually every tumor cell.
A mutation analysis of the VHL gene in tumor cells revealed a
leu163-to-pro (L163P) missense mutation due to a 701T-C transition in
exon 3. This mutation had previously been identified in another RCC. The
mutation was not present in other tissues of the patient. In this case,
there was a clear indication that the pronounced erythrocytosis was a
precipitating factor in the coronary thrombosis.

.0019
POLYCYTHEMIA, CHUVASH TYPE
VHL, ARG200TRP

Chuvash polycythemia, familial erythrocytosis-2 (263400) caused by this
specific mutation, is an autosomal recessive disorder of erythrocytosis
that is endemic to the mid-Volga River region. Ang et al. (2002) studied
5 multiplex Chuvash families and confirmed that polycythemia was
associated with significant elevations of serum erythropoietin (EPO;
133170) levels and ruled out a location of the gene on chromosome 11 as
had been reported previously by Vasserman et al. (1999). They also ruled
out mutation in the HIF1A gene (603348), which is located in 14q. Using
a genomewide screen, they identified a region on 3p with a lod score
greater than 2 and identified a 598C-T transition in the VHL gene,
resulting in an arg200-to-trp (R200W) mutation in all cases. Ang et al.
(2002) concluded that the R200W substitution impairs the interaction of
VHL with HIF1-alpha, reducing the rate of degradation of HIF1-alpha and
resulting in increased expression of downstream target genes including
EPO, SLC2A1 (138140), transferrin (TF; 190000), transferrin receptor
(TFRC; 190010), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF; 192240).
Mutations in VHL had been associated with pheochromocytoma,
hemangioblastoma, and renal cell carcinoma, none of which were observed
in individuals with Chuvash polycythemia or obligate carriers of the
R200W mutation. Ang et al. (2002) stated that more than 700 mutations
had been reported in VHL (Beroud et al., 1998), but that no individual
had been found to be homozygous or compound heterozygous for germline
mutations.

Pastore et al. (2003) evaluated the role of the VHL gene in 8 children
with a history of polycythemia and an elevated serum EPO level and
identified 3 different germline VHL mutations in 4 of them. One child
was homozygous for the R200W mutation, and another was compound
heterozygous for the R200W mutation and a val130-to-leu mutation (V130L;
608537.0021). Of 2 sibs who were heterozygous for an asp126-to-tyr
mutation (D126Y; 608537.0022), 1 fulfilled some criteria of VHL syndrome
(193300); a pulmonary angioma was discovered at 10 years of age and
treated by coil embolization without effect on the polycythemia, and at
15 years of age nephrectomy was performed for a subcapsular hemangioma.

Percy et al. (2002) observed homozygosity for the R200W mutation in 3
Bangladeshi families with Chuvash-type congenital polycythemia living in
the United Kingdom.

By haplotype analysis of 101 ethnically diverse individuals with the
common R200W mutation, including 72 Chuvash individuals, Liu et al.
(2004) determined that the R200W mutation is due to a founder effect
that originated from 14,000 to 62,000 years ago.

In a matched cohort study, Gordeuk et al. (2004) found that homozygosity
for the 598C-T transition in the VHL gene was associated with vertebral
hemangiomas, varicose veins, lower blood pressures, and elevated serum
VEGF concentrations (p less than 0.0005), as well as premature mortality
related to cerebral vascular events and peripheral thrombosis.
Spinocerebellar hemangioblastomas, renal carcinomas, and
pheochromocytomas typical of classic VHL syndrome were not found,
suggesting that overexpression of HIF1-alpha and VEGF is not sufficient
for tumorigenesis. Although hemoglobin-adjusted serum erythropoietin
concentrations were approximately 10-fold higher in 598C-T homozygotes
than in controls, erythropoietin response to hypoxia was identical.
Gordeuk et al. (2004) concluded that Chuvash polycythemia is a distinct
VHL syndrome manifested by thrombosis, vascular abnormalities, and
intact hypoxic regulation despite increased basal expression of
hypoxia-regulated genes.

Cario et al. (2005) reported a Turkish patient who was homozygous for
the R200W mutation. Haplotype analysis showed a different haplotype than
that associated with the Chuvash population, indicating that the
mutation arose independently and is not geographically restricted.

Perrotta et al. (2006) found that the R200W missense mutation (598C-T)
causing Chuvash polycythemia is more frequent on the island of Ischia in
the Bay of Naples (0.070) than it is in Chuvashia (0.057). The haplotype
of all patients in Ischia matched that identified in the Chuvash
cluster, thus supporting the single founder hypothesis. Perrotta et al.
(2006) also found that unaffected heterozygotes had increased HIF1-alpha
activity, which might confer a biochemical advantage for mutation
maintenance. They suggested that this form of familial polycythemia may
be endemic in other regions of the world, a hypothesis supported by the
reports of Percy et al. (2002, 2003).

Russell et al. (2011) presented evidence suggesting 2 main molecular
mechanisms by which the R200W and H191D (608537.0024) VHL mutations
result in polycythemia. In vitro studies showed that the R200W mutation
attenuated formation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase and attenuated binding
of HIF1 (603348). In patients, this would lead to overproduction of the
HIF-target erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) and thus secondary polycythemia.
In addition, VHL mutations result in conformational changes causing
increased binding to SOCS1 (603597), which inhibits binding and
degradation of phosphorylated JAK2 (147796). The resulting pJAK2
stabilization promotes hyperactivation of the JAK2-STAT5 (601511)
pathway in erythroid progenitors, causing hypersensitivity to
erythropoietin and thereby to primary polycythemia. Treatment of
R200W/R200W transgenic mice with a JAK2 inhibitor resulted in decreased
hematocrit, smaller spleen, and decreased sensitivity to EPO compared to
untreated transgenic mice.

.0020
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, PRO81SER

In 6 members of a German family in which the L188V mutation in the VHL
gene (608537.0014) had previously been identified in association with
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome type 2C (193300), Weirich et al. (2002)
identified a 454C-T transition in exon 1 of the VHL gene, resulting in a
pro81-to-ser (P81S) mutation. The concurrent P81S mutation was
identified by novel screening approaches, including denaturing
high-performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) and sequencing. The 2
mutations cosegregated with the syndrome. Weirich et al. (2002)
discussed the possible impact of the mutations on protein function and
phenotype.

.0021
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, VAL130LEU

See 608537.0019 and Pastore et al. (2003).

.0022
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, ASP126TYR

See 608537.0019 and Pastore et al. (2003).

.0023
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, PRO192SER

In a 10-year-old white American boy who presented at age 9 years with
familial erythrocytosis (263400), Pastore et al. (2003) identified
compound heterozygosity for a 574C-T transition in the VHL gene,
resulting in a pro192-to-ser (P192S) change, and the common R200W
mutation (608537.0019).

.0024
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 2
VHL, HIS191ASP

In a 17-year-old Croatian boy who presented at age 1 year with familial
erythrocytosis (263400), Pastore et al. (2003) identified homozygosity
for a 571C-G transversion in the VHL gene, resulting in a his191-to-asp
(H191D) change.

Russell et al. (2011) presented evidence suggesting 2 main molecular
mechanisms by which the H191D and R200W (608537.0019) VHL mutations
result in polycythemia. In vitro studies showed that the H191D mutation
attenuated formation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase and attenuated binding
of HIF1 (603348). In patients, this would lead to overproduction of the
HIF-target erythropoietin (EPO; 133170) and thus secondary polycythemia.
In addition, VHL mutations result in conformational changes causing
increased binding to SOCS1 (603597), which inhibits binding and
degradation of phosphorylated JAK2 (147796). The resulting pJAK2
stabilization promotes hyperactivation of the JAK2-STAT5 (601511)
pathway in erythroid progenitors, causing hypersensitivity to
erythropoietin and thereby to primary polycythemia. Treatment of
R200W/R200W transgenic mice with a JAK2 inhibitor resulted in decreased
hematocrit, smaller spleen, and decreased sensitivity to EPO compared to
untreated transgenic mice.

.0025
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, VAL84LEU

Following the revised codon numbering system of Kuzmin et al. (1995),
the VAL155LEU (V155L) mutation has been renumbered as V84L.

In 2 sibs from Wales with bilateral pheochromocytoma without other
features of VHL syndrome, consistent with VHL type 2C (193300), Crossey
et al. (1995) identified a heterozygous 463G-T transversion in exon 1 of
the VHL gene, resulting in a val155-to-leu (V155L) substitution.

Abbott et al. (2006) identified the V84L substitution in affected
individuals from 3 unrelated families with early-onset isolated
pheochromocytoma consistent with VHL syndrome type 2C. Although no other
signs of VHL syndrome were present in 7 patients, 1 patient was
suspected to have a spinal hemangioblastoma based on imaging studies.

.0026
PHEOCHROMOCYTOMA
VHL, GLY93SER

In the germlines of 2 unrelated patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma
(171300), Neumann et al. (2002) identified a 490G-A transition in exon 1
of the VHL gene, resulting in a gly93-to-ser (G93S) substitution. The
mutation was not identified in 600 control chromosomes.

.0027
VON HIPPEL-LINDAU SYNDROME
VHL, GLN164ARG

In a 2.5-year-old girl who presented with a pheochromocytoma but no
other manifestations of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome (193300), Sovinz et
al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 491A-G transition in exon 3 of the
VHL gene, resulting in an gln164-to-arg (Q164R) substitution in a
protein surface residue. Genotyping of the family indicated that she
inherited the mutation from her father, in whom it occurred de novo.
Although he was in good health and asymptomatic, detailed physical
examination found a retinal angioma, an adrenal adenoma, and bilateral
pheochromocytoma, consistent with VHL syndrome. Sovinz et al. (2010)
noted that Ong et al. (2007) had identified the Q164R mutation in a
family in which a patient developed pheochromocytoma at age 10 years and
retinal angioma at age 23 years, suggesting that this mutation may be
associated with early onset of symptoms.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Herman et al. (1994); Neumann and Wiestler (1991)
REFERENCE 1. Abbott, M.-A.; Nathanson, K. L.; Nightingale, S.; Maher, E. R.;
Greenstein, R. M.: The von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) germline mutation
V84L manifests as early-onset bilateral pheochromocytoma. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 140A: 685-690, 2006.

2. Allen, R. C.; Webster, A. R.; Sui, R.; Brown, J.; Taylor, C. M.;
Stone, E. M.: Molecular characterization and ophthalmic investigation
of a large family with type 2A von Hippel-Lindau disease. Arch. Ophthal. 119:
1659-1665, 2001.

3. Ang, S. O.; Chen, H.; Gordeuk, V. R.; Sergueeva, A. I.; Polyakova,
L. A.; Miasnikova, G. Y.; Kralovics, R.; Stockton, D. W.; Prchal,
J. T.: Endemic polycythemia in Russia: mutation in the VHL gene. Blood
Cell Molec. Dis. 28: 57-62, 2002.

4. Ang, S. O.; Chen, H.; Hirota, K.; Gordeuk, V. R.; Jelinek, J.;
Guan, Y.; Liu, E.; Sergueeva, A. I.; Miasnikova, G. Y.; Mole, D.;
Maxwell, P. H.; Stockton, D. W.; Semenza, G. L.; Prchal, J. T.: Disruption
of oxygen homeostasis underlies congenital Chuvash polycythemia. Nature
Genet. 32: 614-621, 2002.

5. Bender, B. U.; Eng, C.; Olschewski, M.; Berger, D. P.; Laubenberger,
J.; Altehofer, C.; Kirste, G.; Orszagh, M.; van Velthoven, V.; Miosczka,
H.; Schmidt, D.; Neumann, H. P. H.: VHL c.505 T-C mutation confers
a high age related penetrance but no increased overall mortality. J.
Med. Genet. 38: 508-514, 2001.

6. Bender, B. U.; Gutsche, M.; Glasker, S.; Muller, B.; Kirste, G.;
Eng, C.; Neumann, H. P. H.: Differential genetic alterations in von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome-associated and sporadic pheochromocytomas. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 4568-4574, 2000.

7. Beroud, C.; Joly, D.; Gallou, C.; Staroz, F.; Orfanelli, M. T.;
Junien, C.: Software and database for the analysis of mutations in
the VHL gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 26: 256-258, 1998.

8. Bradley, J. F.; Collins, D. L.; Schimke, R. N.; Parrott, H. N.;
Rothberg, P. G.: Two distinct phenotypes caused by two different
missense mutations in the same codon of the VHL gene. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 87: 163-167, 1999.

9. Brauch, H.; Kishida, T.; Glavac, D.; Chen, F.; Pausch, F.; Hofler,
H.; Latif, F.; Lerman, M. I.; Zbar, B.; Neumann, H. P. H.: Von Hippel-Lindau
(VHL) disease with pheochromocytoma in the Black Forest region of
Germany: evidence for a founder effect. Hum. Genet. 95: 551-556,
1995.

10. Cario, H.; Schwarz, K.; Jorch, N.; Kyank, U.; Petrides, P. E.;
Schneider, D. T.; Uhle, R.; Debatin, K.-M.; Kohne, E.: Mutations
in the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene and VHL-haplotype
analysis in patients with presumable congenital erythrocytosis. Haematologica 90:
19-24, 2005.

11. Chen, F.; Kishida, T.; Yao, M.; Hustad, T.; Glavac, D.; Dean,
M.; Gnarra, J. R.; Orcutt, M. L.; Duh, F. M.; Glenn, G.; Green, J.;
Hsia, Y. E.; Lamiell, J.; Li, H.; Wei, M. H.; Schmidt, L.; Tory, K.;
Kuzman, I.; Stackhouse, T.; Latif, F.; Linehan, W. M.; Lerman, M.;
Zbar, B.: Germline mutations in the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor
suppressor gene: correlations with phenotype. Hum. Mutat. 5: 66-75,
1995.

12. Chen, F.; Slife, L.; Kishida, T.; Mulvihill, J.; Tisherman, S.
E.; Zbar, B.: Genotype-phenotype correlation in von Hippel-Lindau
disease: identification of a mutation associated with VHL type 2A. J.
Med. Genet. 33: 716-717, 1996.

13. Clifford, S. C.; Cockman, M. E.; Smallwood, A. C.; Mole, D. R.;
Woodward, E. R.; Maxwell, P. H.; Ratcliffe, P. J.; Maher, E. R.:
Contrasting effects on HIF-1-alpha regulation by disease-causing pVHL
mutations correlate with patterns of tumourigenesis in von Hippel-Lindau
disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1029-1038, 2001.

14. Clinical Research Group for VHL in Japan: Germline mutations
in the von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) gene in Japanese VHL. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 4: 2233-2237, 1995.

15. Corn, P. G.; McDonald, E. R., III; Herman, J. G.; El-Deiry, W.
S.: Tat-binding protein-1, a component of the 26S proteasome, contributes
to the E3 ubiquitin ligase function of the von Hippel-Lindau protein. Nature
Genet. 35: 229-237, 2003.

16. Crossey, P. A.; Eng, C.; Ginalska-Malinowska, M.; Lennard, T.
W. J.; Wheeler, D. C.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Maher, E. R.: Molecular
genetic diagnosis of von Hippel-Lindau disease in familial phaeochromocytoma. J.
Med. Genet. 32: 885-886, 1995.

17. Crossey, P. A.; Foster, K.; Richards, F. M.; Phipps, M. E.; Latif,
F.; Tory, K.; Jones, M. H.; Bentley, E.; Kumar, R.; Lerman, M. I.;
Zbar, B.; Affara, N. A.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.; Maher, E. R.: Molecular
genetic investigations of the mechanism of tumourigenesis in von Hippel-Lindau
disease: analysis of allele loss in VHL tumours. Hum. Genet. 93:
53-58, 1994.

18. Crossey, P. A.; Richards, F. M.; Foster, K.; Green, J. S.; Prowse,
A.; Latif, F.; Lerman, M. I.; Zbar, B.; Affara, N. A.; Ferguson-Smith,
M. A.; Maher, E. R.: Identification of intragenic mutations in the
von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour suppressor gene and correlation with
disease phenotype. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 1303-1308, 1994.

19. Ding, M.; Cui, S.; Li, C.; Jothy, S.; Haase, V.; Steer, B. M.;
Marsden, P. A.; Pippin, J.; Shankland, S.; Rastaldi, M. P.; Cohen,
C. D.; Kretzler, M.; Quaggin, S. E.: Loss of the tumor suppressor
Vhlh leads to upregulation of Cxcr4 and rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
in mice. Nature Med. 12: 1081-1087, 2006.

20. Duan, D. R.; Humphrey, J. S.; Chen, D. Y. T.; Weng, Y.; Sukegawa,
J.; Lee, S.; Gnarra, J. R.; Linehan, W. M.; Klausner, R. D.: Characterization
of the VHL tumor suppressor gene product: localization, complex formation,
and the effect of natural inactivating mutations. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 92: 6459-6463, 1995.

21. Duan, D. R.; Pause, A.; Burgess, W. H.; Aso, T.; Chen, D. Y. T.;
Garrett, K. P.; Conaway, R. C.; Conaway, J. W.; Linehan, W. M.; Klausner,
R. D.: Inhibition of transcription elongation by the VHL tumor suppressor
protein. Science 269: 1402-1406, 1995.

22. Eng, C.; Crossey, P. A.; Mulligan, L. M.; Healey, C. S.; Houghton,
C.; Prowse, A.; Chew, S. L.; Dahia, P. L. M.; O'Riordan, J. L. H.;
Toledo, S. P. A.; Smith, D. P.; Maher, E. R.; Ponder, B. A. J.: Mutations
in the RET proto-oncogene and the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour
suppressor gene in sporadic and syndromic phaeochromocytomas. J.
Clin. Genet. 32: 934-937, 1995.

23. Epstein, A. C. R.; Gleadle, J. M.; McNeill, L. A.; Hewitson, K.
S.; O'Rourke, J.; Mole, D. R.; Mukherji, M.; Metzen, E.; Wilson, M.
I.; Dhanda, A.; Tian, Y.-M.; Masson, N.; Hamilton, D. L.; Jaakkola,
P.; Barstead, R.; Hodgkin, J.; Maxwell, P. H.; Pugh, C. W.; Schofield,
C. J.; Ratcliffe, P. J.: C. elegans EGL-9 and mammalian homologs
define a family of dioxygenases that regulate HIF by prolyl hydroxylation. Cell
107: 43-54, 2001.

24. Fearon, E. R.: Human cancer syndromes: clues to the origin and
nature of cancer. Science 278: 1043-1050, 1997.

25. Feldman, D. E.; Thulasiraman, V.; Ferreyra, R. G.; Frydman, J.
: Formation of the VHL-elongin BC tumor suppressor complex is mediated
by the chaperonin TRiC. Molec. Cell 1051-1061, 1999.

26. Gallou, C.; Chauveau, D.; Richard, S.; Joly, D.; Giraud, S.; Olschwang,
S.; Martin, N.; Saquet, C.; Chretien, Y.; Mejean, A.; Correas, J.-M.;
Benoit, G.; Colombeau, P.; Grunfeld, J.-P.; Junien, C.; Beroud, C.
: Genotype-phenotype correlation in von Hippel-Lindau families with
renal lesions. Hum. Mutat. 24: 215-224, 2004. Note: Erratum: Hum.
Mutat. 24: 435-436, 2004.

27. Gallou, C.; Joly, D.; Mejean, A.; Staroz, F.; Martin, N.; Tarlet,
G.; Orfanelli, M. T.; Bouvier, R.; Droz, D.; Chretien, Y.; Marechal,
J. M.; Richard, S.; Junien, C.; Beroud, C.: Mutations of the VHL
gene in sporadic renal cell carcinoma: definition of a risk factor
for VHL patients to develop an RCC. Hum. Mutat. 13: 464-475, 1999.

28. Garcia, A.; Matias-Guiu, X.; Cabezas, R.; Chico, A.; Prat, J.;
Baiget, M.; De Leiva, A.: Molecular diagnosis of von Hippel-Lindau
disease in a kindred with a predominance of familial phaeochromocytoma. Clin.
Endocr. 46: 359-363, 1997.

29. Gemmill, R. M.; Bemis, L. T.; Lee, J. P.; Sozen, M. A.; Baron,
A.; Zeng, C.; Erickson, P. F.; Hooper, J. E.; Drabkin, H. A.: The
TRC8 hereditary kidney cancer gene suppresses growth and functions
with VHL in a common pathway. Oncogene 21: 3507-3516, 2002.

30. Gilcrease, M. Z.; Schmidt, L.; Zbar, B.; Truong, L.; Rutledge,
M.; Wheeler, T. M.: Somatic von Hippel-Lindau mutation in clear cell
papillary cystadenoma of the epididymis. Hum. Path. 26: 1341-1346,
1995.

31. Glasker, S.; Sohn, T.-S.; Okamoto, H.; Li, J.; Lonser, R. R.;
Oldfield, E. H.; Vortmeyer, A. O.; Zhuang, Z.: Second hit deletion
size in von Hippel-Lindau disease. Ann. Neurol. 59: 105-110, 2006.

32. Gnarra, J. R.; Ward, J. M.; Porter, F. D.; Wagner, J. R.; Devor,
D. E.; Grinberg, A.; Emmert-Buck, M. R.; Westphal, H.; Klausner, R.
D.; Marston Linehan, W.: Defective placental vasculogenesis causes
embryonic lethality in VHL-deficient mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94:
9102-9107, 1997.

33. Gordeuk, V. R.; Sergueeva, A. I.; Miasnikova, G. Y.; Okhotin,
D.; Voloshin, Y.; Choyke, P. L.; Butman, J. A.; Jedlickova, K.; Prchal,
J. T.; Polyakova, L. A.: Congenital disorder of oxygen sensing: association
of the homozygous Chuvash polycythemia VHL mutation with thrombosis
and vascular abnormalities but not tumors. Blood 103: 3924-3932,
2004.

34. Gross, D. J.; Avishai, N.; Meiner, V.; Filon, D.; Zbar, B.; Abeliovich,
D.: Familial pheochromocytoma associated with a novel mutation in
the von Hippel-Lindau gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 81: 147-149,
1996.

35. Haase, V. H.; Glickman, J. N.; Socolovsky, M.; Jaenisch, R.:
Vascular tumors in livers with targeted inactivation of the von Hippel-Lindau
tumor suppressor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 1583-1588, 2001.

36. Hergovich, A.; Lisztwan, J.; Barry, R.; Ballschmieter, P.; Krek,
W.: Regulation of microtubule stability by the von Hippel-Lindau
tumour suppressor protein pVHL. Nature Cell Biol. 5: 64-70, 2003.

37. Herman, J. G.; Latif, F.; Weng, Y.; Lerman, M. I.; Zbar, B.; Liu,
S.; Samid, D.; Duan, D.-S. R.; Guarra, J. R.; Linehan, W. M.; Baylin,
S. B.: Silencing of the VHL tumor-suppressor gene by DNA methylation
in renal carcinomas. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 9700-9704, 1994.

38. Hickey, M. M.; Lam, J. C.; Bezman, N. A.; Rathmell, W. K.; Simon,
M. C.: von Hippel-Lindau mutation in mice recapitulates Chuvash polycythemia
via hypoxia-inducible factor-2-alpha signaling and splenic erythropoiesis. J.
Clin. Invest. 117: 3879-3889, 2007.

39. Hoffman, M. A.; Ohh, M.; Yang, H.; Kico, J. M.; Ivan, M.; Kaelin,
W. G., Jr.: von Hippel-Lindau, protein mutants linked to type 2C
VHL disease preserve the ability to downregulated HIF. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 10: 1019-1027, 2001.

40. Hon, W.-C.; Wilson, M. I.; Harlos, K.; Claridge, T. D. W.; Schofield,
C. J.; Pugh, C. W.; Maxwell, P. H.; Ratcliffe, P. J.; Stuart, D. I.;
Jones, E. Y.: Structural basis for the recognition of hydroxyproline
in HIF-1-alpha by pVHL. Nature 417: 975-978, 2002.

41. Iliopoulos, O.; Kibel, A.; Gray, S.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: Tumour
suppression by the human von Hippel-Lindau gene product. Nature Med. 1:
822-826, 1995.

42. Iliopoulos, O.; Levy, A. P.; Jiang, C.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.; Goldberg,
M. A.: Negative regulation of hypoxia-inducible genes by the von
Hippel-Lindau protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 10595-10599, 1996.

43. Iliopoulos, O.; Ohh, M.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: pVHL(19) is a biologically
active product of the von Hippel-Lindau gene arising from internal
translation initiation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 11661-11666, 1998.

44. Ivan, M.; Kondo, K.; Yang, H.; Kim, W.; Valiando, J.; Ohh, M.;
Salic, A.; Asara, J. M.; Lane, W. S.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: HIF-alpha
targeted for VHL-mediated destruction by proline hydroxylation: implications
for O(2) sensing. Science 292: 464-468, 2001.

45. Ivanov, S. V.; Kuzmin, I.; Wei, M.-H.; Pack, S.; Geil, L.; Johnson,
B. E.; Stanbridge, E. J.; Lerman, M. I.: Down-regulation of transmembrane
carbonic anhydrases in renal cell carcinoma cell lines by wild-type
von Hippel-Lindau transgenes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 12596-12601,
1998.

46. Jaakkola, P.; Mole, D. R.; Tian, Y.-M.; Wilson, M. I.; Gielbert,
J.; Gaskell, S. J.; von Kriegsheim, A.; Hebestreit, H. F.; Mukherji,
M.; Schofield, C. J.; Maxwell, P. H.; Pugh, C. W.; Ratcliffe, P. J.
: Targeting of HIF-alpha to the von Hippel-Lindau ubiquitylation complex
by O(2)-regulated prolyl hydroxylation. Science 292: 468-472, 2001.

47. Kanno, H.; Kondo, K.; Ito, S.; Yamamoto, I.; Fujii, S.; Torigoe,
S.; Sakai, N.; Hosaka, M.; Shuin, T.; Yao, M.: Somatic mutations
of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene in sporadic central
nervous system hemangioblastomas. Cancer Res. 54: 4845-4847, 1994.

48. Kanno, H.; Saljooque, F.; Yamamoto, I.; Hattori, S.; Yao, M.;
Shuin, T.; U, H.-S.: Role of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor
protein during neuronal differentiation. Cancer Res. 60: 2820-2824,
2000.

49. Kenck, C.; Wilhelm, M.; Bugert, P.; Staehler, G.; Kovacs, G.:
Mutation of the VHL gene is associated exclusively with the development
of non-papillary renal cell carcinomas. J. Path. 179: 157-161, 1996.

50. Kibel, A.; Iliopoulos, O.; DeCaprio, J. A.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.
: Binding of the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein to elongin
B and C. Science 269: 1444-1446, 1995.

51. Kuzmin, I.; Duh, F.-M.; Latif, F.; Geil, L.; Zbar, B.; Lerman,
M. I.: Identification of the promoter of the human von Hippel-Landau
disease tumor suppressor gene. Oncogene 10: 2185-2194, 1995.

52. Latif, F.; Tory, K.; Gnarra, J.; Yao, M.; Duh, F.-M.; Orcutt,
M. L.; Stackhouse, T.; Kuzmin, I.; Modi, W.; Geil, L.; Schmidt, L.;
Zhou, F.; Li, H.; Wei, M. H.; Chen, F.; Glenn, G.; Choyke, P.; Walther,
M. M.; Weng, Y.; Duan, D.-S. R.; Dean, M.; Glavac, D.; Richards, F.
M.; Crossey, P. A.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.; Le Paslier, D.; Chumakov,
I.; Cohen, D.; Chinault, A. C.; Maher, E. R.; Linehan, W. M.; Zbar,
B.; Lerman, M. I.: Identification of the von Hippel-Lindau disease
tumor suppressor gene. Science 260: 1317-1320, 1993.

53. Lee, C. M.; Hickey, M. M.; Sanford, C. A.; McGuire, C. G.; Cowey,
C. L.; Simon, M. C.; Rathmell, W. K.: VHL type 2B gene mutation moderates
HIF dosage in vitro and in vivo. Oncogene 28: 1694-1705, 2009.

54. Lee, S.; Chen, D. Y. T.; Humphrey, J. S.; Gnarra, J. R.; Linehan,
W. M.; Klausner, R. D.: Nuclear/cytoplasmic localization of the von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene product is determined by cell
density. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 1770-1775, 1996.

55. Liu, E.; Percy, M. J.; Amos, C. I.; Guan, Y.; Shete, S.; Stockton,
D. W.; McMullin, M. F.; Polyakova, L. A.; Ang, S. O.; Pastore, Y.
D.; Jedlickova, K.; Lappin, T. R. J.; Gordeuk, V.; Prchal, J. T.:
The worldwide distribution of the VHL 598C-T mutation indicates a
single founder effect. Blood 103: 1937-1940, 2004.

56. Loeb, D. B.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.; Stajich, J. M.; Vance, J. M.
: A novel mutation in the von Hippel-Lindau gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3:
1423-1424, 1994.

57. Lolkema, M. P.; Mans, D. A.; Ulfman, L. H.; Volpi, S.; Voest,
E. E.; Giles, R. H.: Allele-specific regulation of primary cilia
function by the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 16: 73-78, 2008.

58. Maher, E. R.; Yates, J. R. W.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.: Statistical
analysis of the two stage mutation model in von Hippel-Lindau disease,
and in sporadic cerebellar haemangioblastoma and renal cell carcinoma. J.
Med. Genet. 27: 311-314, 1990.

59. Mahon, P. C.; Hirota, K.; Semenza, G. L.: FIH-1: a novel protein
that interacts with HIF-1-alpha and VHL to mediate repression of HIF-1
transcriptional activity. Genes Dev. 15: 2675-2686, 2001.

60. Maranchie, J. K.; Afonso, A.; Albert, P. S.; Kalyandrug, S.; Phillips,
J. L.; Zhou, S.; Peterson, J.; Ghadimi, B. M.; Hurley, K.; Riss, J.;
Vasselli, J. R.; Ried, T.; Zbar, B.; Choyke, P.; Walther, M. M.; Klausner,
R. D.; Linehan, W. M.: Solid renal tumor severity in von Hippel Lindau
disease is related to germline deletion length and location. Hum.
Mutat. 23: 40-46, 2004.

61. Maxwell, P. H.; Wiesener, M. S.; Chang, G.-W.; Clifford, S. C.;
Vaux, E. C.; Cockman, M. E.; Wykoff, C. C.; Pugh, C. W.; Maher, E.
R.; Ratcliffe, P. J.: The tumour suppressor protein VHL targets hypoxia-inducible
factors for oxygen-dependent proteolysis. Nature 399: 271-275, 1999.

62. Mehta, R.; Steinkraus, K. A.; Sutphin, G. L.; Ramos, F. J.; Shamieh,
L. S.; Huh, A.; Davis, C.; Chandler-Brown, D.; Kaeberlein, M.: Proteasomal
regulation of the hypoxic response modulates aging in C. elegans. Science 324:
1196-1198, 2009.

63. Min, J.-H.; Yang, H.; Ivan, M.; Gertler, F.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.;
Pavletich, N. P.: Structure of an HIF-1-alpha-pVHL complex: hydroxyproline
recognition in signaling. Science 296: 1886-1889, 2002.

64. Mukhopadhyay, D.; Knebelmann, B.; Cohen, H. T.; Ananth, S.; Sukhatme,
V. P.: The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene product interacts
with Sp1 to repress vascular endothelial growth factor promoter activity. Molec
. Cell. Biol. 17: 5629-5639, 1997.

65. Neumann, H. P. H.; Bausch, B.; McWhinney, S. R.; Bender, B. U.;
Gimm, O.; Franke, G.; Schipper, J.; Klisch, J.; Altehoefer, C.; Zerres,
K.; Januszewicz, A.; Eng, C.: Germ-line mutations in nonsyndromic
pheochromocytoma. New Eng. J. Med. 346: 1459-1466, 2002.

66. Neumann, H. P. H.; Berger, D. P.; Sigmund, G.; Blum, U.; Schmidt,
D.; Parmer, R. J.; Volk, B.; Kirste, G.: Pheochromocytomas, multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 2, and von Hippel-Lindau disease. New Eng.
J. Med. 329: 1531-1538, 1993. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 331:
1535 only, 1994.

67. Neumann, H. P. H.; Eng, C.; Mulligan, L. M.; Glavac, D.; Zauner,
I.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Crossey, P. A.; Maher, E. R.; Brauch, H.: Consequences
of direct genetic testing for germline mutations in the clinical management
of families with multiple endocrine neoplasia, type II. JAMA 274:
1149-1151, 1995.

68. Neumann, H. P. H.; Wiestler, O. D.: Clustering of features of
von Hippel-Lindau syndrome: evidence for a complex genetic locus. Lancet 337:
1052-1054, 1991.

69. Nordstrom-O'Brien, M.; van der Luijt, R. B.; van Rooijen, E.;
van den Ouweland, A. M.; Majoor-Krakauer, D. F.; Lolkema, M. P.; van
Brussel, A.; Voest, E. E.; Giles, R. H.: Genetic analysis of von
Hippel-Lindau disease. Hum. Mutat. 31: 521-537, 2010.

70. Oberstrass, J.; Reifenberger, G.; Reifenberger, J.; Wechsler,
W.; Collins, V. P.: Mutation of the von Hippel-Lindau tumour suppressor
gene in capillary haemangioblastomas of the central nervous system. J.
Path. 179: 151-156, 1996.

71. Ohh, M.; Yauch, R. L.; Lonergan, K. M.; Whaley, J. M.; Stemmer-Rachamimov,
A. O.; Louis, D. N.; Gavin, B. J.; Kley, N.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.; Iliopoulos,
O.: The von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein is required for
proper assembly of an extracellular fibronectin matrix. Molec. Cell 1:
959-968, 1998.

72. Olschwang, S.; Richard, S.; Boisson, C.; Giraud, S.; Laurent-Puig,
P.; Resche, F.; Thomas, G.: Germline mutation profile of the VHL
gene in von Hippel-Lindau disease and in sporadic hemangioblastoma. Hum.
Mutat. 12: 424-430, 1998.

73. Ong, K. R.; Woodward, E. R.; Killick, P.; Lim, C.; Macdonald,
F.; Maher, E. R.: Genotype-phenotype correlations in von Hippel-Lindau
disease. Hum. Mutat. 28: 143-149, 2007.

74. Pastore, Y.; Jedlickova, K.; Guan, Y.; Liu, E.; Fahner, J.; Hasle,
H.; Prchal, J. F.; Prchal, J. T.: Mutations of von Hippel-Lindau
tumor-suppressor gene and congenital polycythemia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 73:
412-419, 2003. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74: 598 only, 2004.

75. Pastore, Y. D.; Jelinek, J.; Ang, S.; Guan, Y.; Liu, E.; Jedlickova,
K.; Krishnamurti, L.; Prchal, J. T.: Mutations in the VHL gene in
sporadic apparently congenital polycythemia. Blood 101: 1591-1595,
2003.

76. Pause, A.; Lee, S.; Lonergan, K. M.; Klausner, R. D.: The von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene is required for cell cycle exit
upon serum withdrawal. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 993-998, 1998.

77. Percy, M. J.; McMullin, M. F.; Jowitt, S. N.; Potter, M.; Treacy,
M.; Watson, W. H.; Lappin, T. R. J.: Chuvash-type congenital polycythemia
in 4 families of Asian and Western European ancestry. Blood 102:
1097-1099, 2003.

78. Percy, M. J.; McMullin, M. F.; Treacy, M.; Potter, M.; Watson,
W. H.; Jowitt, S. N.; Lappin, T. R. J.: Identification of the Chuvash-type
congenital polycythemia in patients of Asian and Western European
ancestry. Blood 100: 660 only, 2002.

79. Perrotta, S.; Nobili, B.; Ferraro, M.; Migliaccio, C.; Borriello,
A.; Cucciolla, V.; Martinelli, V.; Rossi, F.; Punzo, F.; Cirillo,
P.; Parisi, G.; Zappia, V.; Rotoli, B.; Ragione, F. D.: Von Hippel-Lindau-dependent
polycythemia is endemic on the island of Ischia: identification of
a novel cluster. Blood 107: 514-519, 2006.

80. Richard, S.; Croisille, L.; Yvart, J.; Casadeval, N.; Eschwege,
P.; Aghakhani, N.; David, P.; Gaudric, A.; Scigalla, P.; Hermine,
O.: Paradoxical secondary polycythemia in von Hippel-Lindau patients
treated with anti-vascular endothelial growth factor receptor therapy. Blood 99:
3851-3853, 2002.

81. Richards, F. M.; Schofield, P. N.; Fleming, S.; Maher, E. R.:
Expression of the von Hippel-Lindau disease tumour suppressor gene
during human embryogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 639-644, 1996.

82. Roe, J.-S.; Kim, H.; Lee, S.-M.; Kim, S.-T.; Cho, E.-J.; Youn,
H.-D.: p53 stabilization and transactivation by a von Hippel-Lindau
protein. Molec. Cell 22: 395-405, 2006.

83. Rubenstein, J. L.; Yaari, H.: von Hippel-Lindau and the genetics
of astrocytoma. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 86: 142-143, 1994.

84. Russell, R. C.; Sufan, R. I.; Zhou, B.; Heir, P.; Bunda, S.; Sybingco,
S. S.; Greer, S. N.; Roche, O.; Heathcote, S. A.; Chow, V. W. K.;
Boba, L. M.; Richmond, T. D.; Hickey, M. M.; Barber, D. L.; Cheresh,
D. A.; Simon, M. C.; Irwin, M. S.; Kim, W. Y.; Ohh, M.: Loss of JAK2
regulation via a heterodimeric VHL-SOCS1 E3 ubiquitin ligase underlies
Chuvash polycythemia. Nature Med. 17: 845-853, 2011.

85. Schimke, R. N.; Collins, D. L.; Rothberg, P. G.: Functioning
carotid paraganglioma in the von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. (Letter) Am.
J. Med. Genet. 80: 533-534, 1998.

86. Schoenfeld, A.; Davidowitz, E. J.; Burk, R. D.: A second major
native von Hippel-Lindau gene product, initiated from an internal
translation start site, functions as a tumor suppressor. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 95: 8817-8822, 1998.

87. Sovinz, P.; Urban, C.; Uhrig, S.; Stepan, V.; Lackner, H.; Schwinger,
W.; Benesch, M.; Moser, A.; Spuller, E.; Speicher, M. R.: Pheochromocytoma
in a 2.75-year-old-girl with a germline von Hippel-Lindau mutation
Q164R. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 1752-1755, 2010.

88. Staller, P.; Sulitkova, J.; Lisztwan, J.; Moch, H.; Oakeley, E.
J.; Krek, W.: Chemokine receptor CXCR4 downregulated by von Hippel-Lindau
tumor suppressor pVHL. Nature 425: 307-311, 2003.

89. Tisherman, S. E.; Gregg, F. J.; Danowski, T. S.: Familial pheochromocytoma. JAMA 182:
152-156, 1962.

90. Tisherman, S. E.; Tisherman, B. G.; Tisherman, S. A.; Dunmire,
S.; Levey, G. S.; Mulvihill, J. J.: Three-decade investigation of
familial pheochromocytoma: an allele of von Hippel-Lindau disease? Arch.
Int. Med. 153: 2550-2556, 1993.

91. Tyers, M.; Willems, A. R.: One ring to rule a superfamily of
E3 ubiquitin ligases. Science 284: 602-604, 1999.

92. van der Harst, E.; de Krijger, R. R.; Dinjens, W. N. M.; Weeks,
L. E.; Bonjer, H. J.; Bruining, H. A.; Lamberts, S. W. J.; Koper,
J. W.: Germline mutations in the vhl gene in patients presenting
with phaeochromocytomas. Int. J. Cancer. 77: 337-340, 1998.

93. Vasserman, N. N.; Karzakova, L. M.; Tverskaya, S. M.; Saperov,
V. N.; Muchukova, O. M.; Pavlova, G. P.; Efimova, N. K.; Vankina,
N. N.; Evgrafov, O. V.: Localization of the gene responsible for
familial benign polycythemia to chromosome 11q23. Hum. Hered. 49:
129-132, 1999.

94. Vogelstein, B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/6/1995.

95. Wait, S. D.; Vortmeyer, A. O.; Lonser, R. R.; Chang, D. T.; Finn,
M. A.; Bhowmick, D. A.; Pack, S. D.; Oldfield, E. H.; Zhuang, Z.:
Somatic mutations in VHL germline deletion kindred correlate with
mild phenotype. Ann. Neurol. 55: 236-240, 2004.

96. Wang, Y.; Roche, O.; Yan, M. S.; Finak, G.; Evans, A. J.; Metcalf,
J. L.; Hast, B. E.; Hanna, S. C.; Wondergem, B.; Furge, K. A.; Irwin,
M. S.; Kim, W. Y.; Teh, B. T.; Grinstein, S.; Park, M.; Marsden, P.
A.; Ohh, M.: Regulation of endocytosis via the oxygen-sensing pathway. Nature
Med. 15: 319-324, 2009.

97. Wang, Y.; Wan, C.; Deng, L.; Liu, X.; Cao, X.; Gilbert, S. R.;
Bouxsein, M. L.; Faugere, M.-C.; Guldberg, R. E.; Gerstenfeld, L.
C.; Haase, V. H.; Johnson, R. S.; Schipani, E.; Clemens, T. L.: The
hypoxia-inducible factor alpha pathway couples angiogenesis to osteogenesis
during skeletal development. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 1616-1626, 2007.

98. Weirich, G.; Klein, B.; Wohl, T.; Engelhardt, D.; Brauch, H.:
VHL2C phenotype in a German von Hippel-Lindau family with concurrent
VHL germline mutations P81S and L188V. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87:
5241-5246, 2002.

99. Wiesener, M. S.; Seyfarth, M.; Warnecke, C.; Jurgensen, J. S.;
Rosenberger, C.; Morgan, N. V.; Maher, E. R.; Frei, U.; Eckardt, K.-U.
: Paraneoplastic erythrocytosis associated with an inactivating point
mutation of the von Hippel-Lindau gene in a renal cell carcinoma. Blood 99:
3562-3565, 2002.

100. Yang, H.; Minamishima, Y. A.; Yan, Q.; Schlisio, S.; Ebert, B.
L.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, L.; Kim, W. Y.; Olumi, A. F.; Kaelin, W. G.,
Jr.: pVHL acts as an adaptor to promote the inhibitory phosphorylation
of the NF-kappa-B agonist Card9 by CK2. Molec. Cell 28: 15-27, 2007.

101. Yoshida, M.; Yao, M.; Ishikawa, I.; Kishida, T.; Nagashima, Y.;
Kondo, K.; Nakaigawa, N.; Hosaka, M.: Somatic von Hippel-Lindau disease
gene mutation in clear-cell renal carcinomas associated with end-stage
renal disease/acquired cystic disease of the kidney. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 35: 359-364, 2002.

102. Zatyka, M.; da Silva, N. F.; Clifford, S. C.; Morris, M. R.;
Wiesener, M. S.; Eckardt, K.-U.; Houlston, R. S.; Richards, F. M.;
Latif, F.; Maher, E. R.: Identification of cyclin D1 and other novel
targets for the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene by expression
array analysis and investigation of cyclin D1 genotype as a modifier
in von Hippel-Lindau disease. Cancer Res. 62: 3803-3811, 2002.

103. Zatyka, M.; Morrissey, C.; Kuzmin, I.; Lerman, M. I.; Latif,
F.; Richards, F. M.; Maher, E. R.: Genetic and functional analysis
of the von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumour suppressor gene promoter. J.
Med. Genet. 39: 463-472, 2002.

104. Zbar, B.; Kishida, T.; Chen, F.; Schmidt, L.; Maher, E. R.; Richards,
F. M.; Crossey, P. A.; Webster, A. R.; Affara, N. A.; Ferguson-Smith,
M. A.; Brauch, H.; Glavac, D.; and 14 others: Germline mutations
in the Von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) gene in families from North
America, Europe, and Japan. Hum. Mutat. 8: 348-357, 1996.

105. Zehetner, J.; Danzer, C.; Collins, S.; Eckhardt, K.; Gerber,
P. A.; Ballschmieter, P.; Galvanovskis, J.; Shimomura, K.; Ashcroft,
F. M.; Thorens, B.; Rorsman, P.; Krek, W.: pVHL is a regulator of
glucose metabolism and insulin secretion in pancreatic beta cells. Genes
Dev. 22: 3135-3146, 2008.

106. Zhuang, Z.; Emmert-Buck, M. R.; Roth, M. J.; Gnarra, J.; Linehan,
W. M.; Liotta, L. A.; Lubensky, I. A.: Von Hippel-Lindau disease
gene deletion detected in microdissected sporadic human colon carcinoma
specimens. Hum. Path. 27: 152-156, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/3/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/28/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/30/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/8/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/1/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/28/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/13/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/14/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/1/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/1/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/14/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/13/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/23/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/17/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/28/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/6/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/30/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/24/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/2/2004

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 3/17/2004

EDITED carol: 04/22/2013
terry: 4/4/2013
carol: 8/5/2011
wwang: 8/5/2011
ckniffin: 8/3/2011
alopez: 1/10/2011
wwang: 11/10/2010
ckniffin: 10/28/2010
wwang: 9/3/2010
ckniffin: 8/30/2010
alopez: 4/14/2010
carol: 12/23/2009
ckniffin: 12/15/2009
wwang: 9/29/2009
alopez: 6/22/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
wwang: 6/11/2009
terry: 6/8/2009
terry: 6/3/2009
mgross: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/1/2009
carol: 9/23/2008
terry: 9/10/2008
terry: 6/6/2008
mgross: 5/29/2008
terry: 5/28/2008
wwang: 5/16/2008
ckniffin: 3/13/2008
mgross: 2/28/2008
terry: 1/14/2008
wwang: 8/13/2007
terry: 8/9/2007
terry: 8/1/2007
wwang: 7/12/2007
wwang: 11/13/2006
terry: 11/3/2006
ckniffin: 11/1/2006
wwang: 8/21/2006
wwang: 8/18/2006
ckniffin: 8/14/2006
mgross: 6/14/2006
terry: 6/13/2006
carol: 5/24/2006
ckniffin: 5/23/2006
wwang: 4/24/2006
ckniffin: 4/17/2006
alopez: 3/29/2006
terry: 3/28/2006
terry: 2/3/2006
carol: 1/12/2006
ckniffin: 1/6/2006
tkritzer: 10/6/2004
terry: 9/30/2004
tkritzer: 9/2/2004
terry: 8/24/2004
tkritzer: 6/3/2004
ckniffin: 6/2/2004
carol: 3/23/2004
ckniffin: 3/23/2004
ckniffin: 3/19/2004

608277	TITLE *608277 CARBOHYDRATE SULFOTRANSFERASE 15; CHST15
;;B-CELL RAG-ASSOCIATED GENE; BRAG;;
N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINE 4-SULFATE 6-O-SULFOTRANSFERASE;;
GalNAc4S-6ST;;
KIAA0598
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1998) cloned KIAA0598. The 3-prime untranslated
region of the transcript contains an Alu repeat. The deduced 561-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 72 kD. RT-PCR
detected high expression in all tissues examined.

By differential display of genes coexpressed with RAG1 (179615),
followed by screening a pre-B-cell cDNA library, Verkoczy et al. (1998)
cloned BRAG. The deduced protein contains 503 amino acids and has a
calculated molecular mass of 55 kD. In vitro translation resulted in a
doublet that migrated between 69 and 49 kD by SDS-PAGE. BRAG is a type
II transmembrane glycoprotein with an 81-amino acid cytoplasmic N
terminus, followed by a transmembrane domain, and a 405-amino acid
extracellular C terminus. The N terminus contains a putative
palmitoylation site and several phosphorylation sites, and the C
terminus contains 4 putative N-glycosylation sites. Verkoczy et al.
(1998) also identified a putative splice variant that contains an
in-frame 12-bp deletion. Northern blot analysis detected a 5.0-kb BRAG
transcript expressed in all B-cell lines that also expressed RAG1.
Little or no expression was detected in several nonlymphoid cell lines,
and no expression was detected in T-cell lines, irrespective of RAG1
expression. Northern blot analysis of whole tissues detected expression
in bone marrow and tonsil, but not in heart, thymus, or placenta. RNA
dot blot analysis detected high levels in fetal and adult spleen,
peripheral blood leukocytes, and lymph node, moderate levels in heart,
ovary, stomach, and brain putamen, and low levels in bone marrow and
several other tissues. Zoo blot analysis performed under low stringency
conditions indicated that the BRAG gene is conserved across eukaryotes.
High stringency conditions revealed predominant bands only in human and
baboon DNA.

Verkoczy et al. (2000) determined that BRAG is a membrane-integrated
glycoprotein that is expressed as a disulfide-linked dimer in B cells.
They found glycosylated and unglycosylated forms of BRAG, with apparent
molecular masses of about 63 and 52 kD, respectively, in the
intracellular fraction of tonsillar B cells and in transfected
erythroleukemia cells; only the glycosylated product associated with the
cell surface.

Ohtake et al. (2001) determined that the KIAA0589 protein (Nagase et
al., 1998) shares significant similarity with GalNAc4S-6ST purified from
squid cartilage. They also noted that the nucleotide sequence of
KIAA0598 is nearly identical to that of BRAG (Verkoczy et al., 1998),
but the deduced proteins are significantly different. However, the
KIAA0598 and BRAG proteins are both type II transmembrane proteins, and
both contain a 3-prime-phosphoadenosine 5-prime-phosphosulfate
(PAPS)-binding domain characteristic of most sulfotransferases.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yuki et al. (2000) determined that the BRAG gene contains 7 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Verkoczy et al. (1998) showed that BRAG induced RAG1 expression
following transfection into a B-cell line, but not following
transfection into a nonlymphoid cell line.

Verkoczy et al. (2000) found that BRAG associated with phosphorylated
proteins in unstimulated mature B cells, but not in B cells activated
through B-cell receptor cross-linking. They presented evidence that BRAG
functions as a cell surface receptor capable of cell signaling.

Ohtake et al. (2001) characterized the enzymatic activity of KIAA0598,
which they designated GalNAc4S-6ST, following transfection into COS-7
cells and confirmed that it displays sulfotransferase activity. They
found that GalNAc4S-6ST catalyzed the transfer of sulfate from PAPS to
position 6 of the nonreducing terminal and internal N-acetylgalatosamine
4-sulfate residues in chondroitin sulfate A and dermatan sulfate. Only
nonreducing terminal N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulfate residues were
sulfated when a trisaccharide and a pentasaccharide with sulfated groups
at position 4 of N-acetylgalactosamine residues were used as acceptors.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the KIAA0598
gene to chromosome 10.

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, Verkoczy et al. (1998) mapped
the CHST15 gene to chromosome 10q26. Using Southern blot analysis, they
determined that CHST15 is a single-copy gene that is not likely to be a
member of a multigene family.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.;
Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified
human genes. IX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from
brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 31-39,
1998.

2. Ohtake, S.; Ito, Y.; Fukuta, M.; Habuchi, O.: Human N-acetylgalactosamine
4-sulfate 6-O-sulfotransferase cDNA is related to human B cell recombination
activating gene-associated gene. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 43894-43900,
2001.

3. Verkoczy, L. K.; Guinn, B.; Berinstein, N. L.: Characterization
of the human B cell RAG-associated gene, hBRAG, as a B cell receptor
signal-enhancing glycoprotein dimer that associates with phosphorylated
proteins in resting B cells. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 20967-20979, 2000.

4. Verkoczy, L. K.; Marsden, P. A.; Berinstein, N. L.: hBRAG, a novel
B cell lineage cDNA encoding a type II transmembrane glycoprotein
potentially involved in the regulation of recombination activating
gene 1 (RAG1). Europ. J. Immun. 28: 2839-2853, 1998.

5. Yuki, M.; Yoshinaga, K.; Yamakawa, H.; Sakurada, K.; Sato, S.;
Yajima, A.; Horii, A.: Structure, expression and mutational analysis
of the hBRAG gene on 10q in the frequently deleted region in human
endometrial cancer. Oncol. Rep. 7: 1339-1342, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/8/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/21/2003

EDITED alopez: 06/17/2010
mgross: 3/9/2004
terry: 3/8/2004
mgross: 11/21/2003

612333	TITLE *612333 PROGRAMMED CELL DEATH 11; PDCD11
;;APOPTOSIS-LINKED GENE 4; ALG4;;
NF-KAPPA-B-BINDING PROTEIN; NFBP;;
KIAA0185
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PDCD11 is a NF-kappa-B (NFKB1; 164011)-binding protein that colocalizes
with U3 RNA (180710) in the nucleolus and is required for rRNA
maturation and generation of 18S rRNA (Sweet et al., 2003; Sweet et al.,
2008).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated myeloid leukemia
cell line cDNA library, Nagase et al. (1996) cloned PDCD11, which they
designated KIAA0185. The deduced protein contains 1,884 amino acids.
Northern blot analysis detected moderate expression in testis and low
expression in placenta, lung, liver, skeletal muscle, kidney, spleen,
thymus, ovary, small intestine, colon, and peripheral blood leukocytes.
Expression was weak in heart, brain, and pancreas, and no expression was
detected in prostate.

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a human astrocytoma cell line cDNA
library using NFKB1 as bait, Sweet et al. (2003) cloned PDCD11, which
they called NFBP. They identified 2 isoforms, which encode a deduced
1,871-amino acid protein and a deduced 131-amino acid NFBP fragment
(NFBPF) corresponding to the NFBP C-terminal region, respectively.
PDCD11 protein contains 7 S1 RNA-binding domains and a histone
acetyltransferase (HAT) repeat and shares 82% and 26% identities with
the mouse Pdcd11 and S. cerevisiae Rrp5 orthologs, respectively.
Northern blot analysis detected a 5.5-kb PDCD11 transcript in several
cell lines and tissues. Immunofluorescence studies localized PDCD11 to
granular aggregates in the nucleus and was confirmed to be nucleolar by
mass spectrometry of proteins isolated from HeLa cell nucleoli.

Lacana and D'Adamio (1999) cloned mouse Pdcd11, which they called Alg4,
using a strategy to identify genes involved in programmed cell death.

GENE FUNCTION

Lacana and D'Adamio (1999) demonstrated that mouse Pcdc11 induced
transcription of Fas ligand (TNFSF6; 134638) leading to apoptosis.

Sweet et al. (2008) showed that PDCD11 colocalized with and
coprecipitated U3 RNA in the nucleolus. Using siRNA knockdown of PDCD11
mRNA, they demonstrated that PDCD11 was required for cleavage and
maturation of rRNA precursor and generation of the 18S rRNA species.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sweet et al. (2003) determined that the PDCD11 gene contains over 35
exons.

MAPPING

By FISH analysis, Sweet et al. (2003) mapped the PDCD11 gene to
chromosome 10q24.2-q25.1.

REFERENCE 1. Lacana, E.; D'Adamio, L.: Regulation of Fas ligand expression
and cell death by apoptosis-linked gene 4. Nature Med. 5: 542-547,
1999.

2. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Tanaka, A.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. V. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0161-KIAA0200) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 3: 17-24, 1996.

3. Sweet, T.; Khalili, K.; Sawaya, B. E.; Amini, S.: Identification
of a novel protein from glial cells based on its ability to interact
with NF-kappa-B subunits. J. Cell. Biochem. 90: 884-891, 2003.

4. Sweet, T.; Yen, W.; Khalili, K.; Amini, S.: Evidence for involvement
of NFBP in processing or ribosomal RNA. J. Cell. Physiol. 214: 381-388,
2008.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 9/29/2008

EDITED wwang: 09/30/2008
wwang: 9/30/2008

608210	TITLE *608210 EXOSTOSIN GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 2; EXT2
;;EXOSTOSIN 2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hecht et al. (1995) identified the candidate region for the gene
responsible for hereditary multiple exostoses linked to chromosome 11
(133701) in an affected patient who also had a chondrosarcoma. By
positional cloning and use of a chromosome 11-specific fetal brain cDNA
library, Stickens et al. (1996) identified the putative EXT2 gene, which
was predicted to encode a 718-amino acid protein with a molecular mass
of 82 kD. Both protein and DNA sequence-based algorithms detected
significant similarity with the product of the EXT1 gene (608177),
suggesting that the 2 genes are evolutionarily and functionally related.
Northern blot analysis detected a major 3.5-kb mRNA transcript and a
minor band of 3.7 to 4.0 kb in most tissues. Stickens et al. (1996)
suggested that the EXT2 gene may be expressed as a complex set of
alternatively spliced forms.

Wuyts et al. (1996) constructed a contig of YAC and P1 clones covering
the EXT2 candidate region on chromosome 11p12-p11. The EXT2 region had
been defined in large families with multiple exostoses by linkage
analysis. They also defined the candidate region through deletion
analysis in families with the Potoki-Shaffer syndrome (601224). From the
EXT2 candidate region, Wuyts et al. (1996) isolated a transcribed
sequence with homology to EXT1. Alignment of the EXT1 and EXT2 genes at
the amino acid level revealed an overall sequence identity of 30.9%. The
amino acid homology is 18% in the 5-prime region and 48% in the 3-prime
region.

Stickens and Evans (1997) isolated and characterized the mouse EXT2
gene. They found that the mouse EXT2 cDNA contains an open reading frame
encoding a predicted protein of 718 amino acids. The mouse amino acid
sequence is 95% identical to the human EXT2 protein. Northern blot
analysis showed that the gene is expressed in early stages of embryonic
development, and in situ hybridization suggested that EXT2 plays a role
in limb development.

Clines et al. (1997) noted that at least 2 homologs of the human and
mouse EXT2 genes were found in Caenorhabditis elegans, suggesting to the
authors that the genes do not function exclusively as regulators of bone
growth.

GENE STRUCTURE

Clines et al. (1997) found that the EXT2 gene consists of 14 exons, plus
2 alternative exons.

MAPPING

By positional cloning, Stickens et al. (1996) identified the EXT2 gene
in the multiple exostoses type II critical region on chromosome
11p12-p11. Clines et al. (1997) mapped the mouse Ext2 gene to chromosome
2. Information on the mapping of the EXT2 locus to 11p12-p11 was
provided by Wu et al. (1994), Hecht et al. (1995), Wuyts et al. (1995),
and Blanton et al. (1996), using linkage methods.

GENE FUNCTION

Hecht et al. (1995) and Raskind et al. (1995) presented evidence
suggesting that the EXT1 gene on chromosome 8 and the EXT2 gene on
chromosome 11 have a tumor suppressor function. They found loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) for markers linked to these 2 genes in
chondrosarcomas originating in individuals with multiple exostoses as
well as in sporadic chondrosarcomas. To explain the fact that normal
bone growth occurs concurrently with abnormal exostosis tumor growth,
Hecht et al. (1995) and Raskind et al. (1995) proposed a 2-hit tumor
formation model according to the Knudson hypothesis (Knudson, 1971). In
this model, a single germline mutation results in the predisposition for
disease and a second somatic mutational hit, usually LOH, allows for
aberrant growth.

In addition to their presumed role as tumor suppressor genes, EXT1 and
EXT2 may have roles in modulation of the hedgehog signaling pathway (see
600725) and glycosaminoglycan synthesis. Bellaiche et al. (1998)
determined that the Drosophila homolog of EXT1, dubbed 'tout-velu,' is
required for diffusion of the signaling protein hedgehog. Lind et al.
(1998) concluded that EXT1 and EXT2 are glycosyltransferases, based on
copurification of EXT2 in a bovine serum extract exhibiting this
enzymatic activity as well as increased glycosyltransferase activity in
cells overexpressing EXT2 in vitro. Simmons et al. (1999) used a yeast
2-hybrid system to document a protein interaction between the EXT2 gene
product and a novel UDP-GalNAc:polypeptide
N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase. This interaction was abrogated by a
disease-causing EXT mutation. The authors contended that the data
described the first direct physical link between EXT proteins and
components of glycosaminoglycan synthesis.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Simmons et al. (1999) found that a
conserved C-terminal region of EXT2 interacted with TRAP1 (606219) and
the glycosyltransferase GALNT5 (615129). Deletion of a conserved
histidine in EXT2 (his601) weakened its interaction with GALNT5 and
abrogated its interaction with TRAP1.

McCormick et al. (2000) noted that the proteins encoded by the EXT1 and
EXT2 genes are endoplasmic reticulum-localized type II transmembrane
glycoproteins that possess or are tightly associated with
glycosyltransferase activities involved in the polymerization of heparan
sulfate. By testing a cell line with a specific defect in EXT1 in in
vivo and in vitro assays, McCormick et al. (2000) showed that EXT2 does
not harbor significant glycosyltransferase activity in the absence of
EXT1. Instead, it appears that EXT1 and EXT2 form a heterooligomeric
complex in vivo that leads to the accumulation of both proteins in the
Golgi apparatus. Remarkably, the Golgi-localized EXT1/EXT2 complex
possesses substantially higher glycosyltransferase activity than EXT1 or
EXT2 alone, suggesting that the complex represents the biologically
relevant form of the enzyme(s). These findings provided a rationale for
the causation of hereditary multiple exostoses by loss of activity in
either of the 2 EXT genes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a family with multiple exostoses (133701), Stickens et al. (1996)
identified a 4-bp deletion in the EXT2 gene (608210.0001), resulting in
a premature stop codon and truncated gene product. Stickens et al.
(1996) speculated that a second mutation event was necessary for the
development of exostoses, thus accounting for the asymmetry of exostoses
observed in the long bones.

In 2 families with multiple exostoses, Wuyts et al. (1996) identified 2
different mutations in the EXT2 gene: a nonsense mutation (608210.0002)
and a splice site mutation (608210.0003). In 5 of 17 (29%) families with
hereditary multiple exostoses, Philippe et al. (1997) identified 4
mutations in the EXT2 gene, including a missense mutation (608210.0004)
and 3 alterations that resulted in premature stop codons. Seven (41%) of
the families had mutations in the EXT1 gene.

Wuyts et al. (1998) analyzed the EXT1 and EXT2 genes in 26 EXT families
originating from 9 countries. Of the 26 families, 10 had an EXT1
mutation and 10 had an EXT2 mutation. Twelve of these mutations had not
previously been described. From a review of these and previously
reported mutations, Wuyts et al. (1998) concluded that mutations in
either the EXT1 or the EXT2 gene are responsible for most cases of
multiple exostoses. Most of the mutations in these 2 genes cause
premature termination of the EXT proteins, whereas missense mutations
are rare. The authors concluded that the development of exostoses is
mainly due to loss of function of EXT genes, consistent with the
hypothesis that the EXT genes have a tumor suppressor function.

Analyzing for EXT1 and EXT2 mutations in 34 sporadic and hereditary
osteochondromas and secondary peripheral chondrosarcomas, Bovee et al.
(1999) found mutations in the EXT1 gene, but none in the EXT2 gene.

Wuyts and Van Hul (2000) stated that 49 different EXT1 and 25 different
EXT2 mutations had been identified in patients with multiple exostoses
and that mutations in these 2 genes were responsible for over 70% of the
EXT cases. Most of the mutations caused loss of function, which is
consistent with the presumed tumor suppressor function of the EXT genes.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Ligon et al. (1998) showed that
the EXT2 gene is deleted in patients with the del(11)(p11.2p12)
syndrome. Since patients with mutations in EXT2 have only multiple
exostoses, deletions affecting only the EXT2 locus cannot explain the
craniofacial anomalies, biparietal foramina, mental retardation, or
genitourinary anomalies observed in patients with proximal 11p
deletions. Therefore, deletion of other neighboring genes must be
responsible for the additional anomalies, and this chromosomal
aberration represents a true contiguous gene deletion syndrome.

Heinritz et al. (2009) identified 9 different mutations in the EXT2 gene
in 11 of 23 German patients with multiple exostoses. Eleven other
patients had mutations in the EXT1 gene; 1 patient had no detectable
mutations. Among the EXT2 mutations, there were 3 recurrent mutations,
Q172X (608210.0002), D227N (608210.0004), and Q258X (608210.0006), and 6
novel mutations (see, e.g., 608210.0007).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE II
EXT2, 4-BP DEL

In a family with multiple exostoses type II (133701), Stickens et al.
(1996) identified a 4-bp deletion (784-787) in the EXT2 gene, resulting
in a frameshift and premature termination of translation, generating a
truncated EXT2 gene product.

.0002
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE II
EXT2, GLN172TER

In a large EXT2 (133701) family, Wuyts et al. (1996) identified a 514C-T
transition in the EXT2 gene, resulting in a gln172-to-ter (Q172X)
substitution. The mutation was detected by SSCP analysis.

Heinritz et al. (2009) identified the Q172X mutation in a German patient
with EXT2.

.0003
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE II
EXT2, IVSDS, G-A, +1

In a large Belgian EXT2 (133701) family, Wuyts et al. (1996) described a
G-A transition within a 5-prime donor splice site of EXT2, resulting in
aberrant splicing, exon skipping, and loss of 94 nucleotides of the
transcript (nucleotides 1080-1173) corresponding to amino acid residues
alanine-361 through glutamine-391. The deletion also produced a
frameshift and generated a stop signal at codon 404.

.0004
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE II
EXT2, ASP227ASN

In 2 families with multiple exostoses type II (133701), Philippe et al.
(1997) found that the probands had a G-A transition in exon 4 of the
EXT2 gene, resulting in an asp227-to-asn (D227N) substitution.

Heinritz et al. (2009) identified the D227N mutation in 3 unrelated
German patients with multiple exostoses. One patient developed a pelvic
chondrosarcoma at age 40 years: tumor DNA showed loss of heterozygosity
at the EXT1 and EXT2 loci.

.0005
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE II
EXT2, TYR222TER

In a family with multiple exostoses type II (133701), Philippe et al.
(1997) found a C-G transversion in exon 4 of the EXT2 gene, resulting in
a stop codon (Y222X).

.0006
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE II
EXT2, GLN258TER

In a German patient with multiple exostoses type II (113701), Heinritz
et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 772C-T transition in the EXT2
gene, resulting in a gln258-to-ter (Q258X) substitution.

.0007
EXOSTOSES, MULTIPLE, TYPE II
EXT2, IVS4AS, A-C, -2

In a German patient with multiple exotoses type II (113701), Heinritz et
al. (2009) identified a heterozygous A-to-C transversion (744-2A-C) in a
highly conserved nucleotide in intron 4 of the EXT2 gene. RT-PCR
analysis identified 2 different splice variants skipping either only
exon 5 or both exons 5 and 6. Loss of exon 5 results in a frameshift and
premature termination, whereas loss of exons 5 and 6 leads to an
in-frame deletion of 112 residues important for catalytic activity of
the protein.

REFERENCE 1. Bellaiche, Y.; The, I.; Perrimon, N.: Tout-velu is a Drosophila
homologue of the putative tumour suppressor EXT-1 and is needed for
Hh diffusion. Nature 394: 85-88, 1998.

2. Blanton, S. H.; Hogue, D.; Wagner, M.; Wells, D.; Young, I. D.;
Hecht, J. T.: Hereditary multiple exostoses: confirmation of linkage
to chromosomes 8 and 11. Am. J. Med. Genet. 62: 150-159, 1996.

3. Bovee, J. V. M. G.; Cleton-Jansen, A.-M.; Wuyts, W.; Caethoven,
G.; Taminiau, A. H. M.; Bakker, E.; Van Hul, W.; Cornelisse, C. J.;
Hogendoorn, P. C. W.: EXT-mutation analysis and loss of heterozygosity
in sporadic and hereditary osteochondromas and secondary chondrosarcomas. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 65: 689-698, 1999.

4. Clines, G. A.; Ashley, J. A.; Shah, S.; Lovett, M.: The structure
of the human multiple exostoses 2 gene and characterization of homologs
in mouse and Caenorhabditis elegans. Genome Res. 7: 359-367, 1997.

5. Hecht, J. T.; Hogue, D.; Strong, L. C.; Hansen, M. F.; Blanton,
S. H.; Wagner, M.: Hereditary multiple exostosis and chondrosarcoma:
linkage to chromosome 11 and loss of heterozygosity for EXT-linked
markers on chromosomes 11 and 8. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56: 1125-1131,
1995.

6. Heinritz, W.; Huffmeier, U.; Strenge, S.; Miterski, B.; Zweier,
C.; Leinung, S.; Bohring, A.; Mitulla, B.; Peters, U.; Froster, U.
G.: New mutations of EXT1 and EXT2 genes in German patients with
multiple osteochondromas. Ann. Hum. Genet. 73: 283-291, 2009.

7. Knudson, A. G., Jr.: Mutation and cancer: statistical study of
retinoblastoma. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 68: 820-823, 1971.

8. Ligon, A. H.; Potocki, L.; Shaffer, L. G.; Stickens, D.; Evans,
G. A.: Gene for multiple exostoses (EXT2) maps to 11(p11.2p12) and
is deleted in patients with a contiguous gene syndrome. (Letter) Am.
J. Med. Genet. 75: 538-540, 1998.

9. Lind, T.; Tufaro, F.; McCormick, C.; Lindahl, U.; Lidholt, K.:
The putative tumor suppressors EXT1 and EXT2 are glycosyltransferases
required for the biosynthesis of heparan sulfate. J. Biol. Chem. 273:
26265-26268, 1998.

10. McCormick, C.; Duncan, G.; Goutsos, K. T.; Tufaro, F.: The putative
tumor suppressors EXT1 and EXT2 form a stable complex that accumulates
in the Golgi apparatus and catalyzes the synthesis of heparan sulfate. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 668-673, 2000.

11. Philippe, C.; Porter, D. E.; Emerton, M. E.; Wells, D. E.; Simpson,
A. H. R. W.; Monaco, A. P.: Mutation screening of the EXT1 and EXT2
genes in patients with hereditary multiple exostoses. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 61: 520-528, 1997.

12. Raskind, W. H.; Conrad, E. U.; Chansky, H.; Matsushita, M.: Loss
of heterozygosity in chondrosarcomas for markers linked to hereditary
multiple exostoses loci on chromosomes 8 and 11. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56:
1132-1139, 1995.

13. Simmons, A. D.; Musy, M. M.; Lopes, C. S.; Hwang, L.-Y.; Yang,
Y.-P.; Lovett, M.: A direct interaction between EXT proteins and
glycosyltransferases is defective in hereditary multiple exostoses. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 8: 2155-2164, 1999.

14. Simmons, A. D.; Musy, M. M.; Lopes, C. S.; Hwang, L.-Y.; Yang,
Y.-P.; Lovett, M.: A direct interaction between EXT proteins and
glycosyltransferases is defective in hereditary multiple exostoses. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 8: 2155-2164, 1999.

15. Stickens, D.; Clines, G.; Burbee, D.; Ramos, P.; Thomas, S.; Hogue,
D.; Hecht, J. T.; Lovett, M.; Evans, G. A.: The EXT2 multiple exostoses
gene defines a family of putative tumour suppressor genes. Nature
Genet. 14: 25-32, 1996.

16. Stickens, D.; Evans, G. A.: Isolation and characterization of
the murine homolog of the human EXT2 multiple exostoses gene. Biochem.
Molec. Med. 61: 16-21, 1997.

17. Wu, Y.-Q.; Heutink, P.; de Vries, B. B. A.; Sandkuijl, L. A.;
van den Ouweland, A. M. W.; Niermeijer, M. F.; Galjaard, H.; Reyniers,
E.; Willems, P. J.; Halley, D. J. J.: Assignment of a second locus
for multiple exostoses to the pericentromeric region of chromosome
11. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 167-171, 1994.

18. Wuyts, W.; Ramlakhan, S.; Van Hul, W.; Hecht, J. T.; van den Ouweland,
A. M. W.; Raskind, W. H.; Hofstede, F. C.; Reyniers, E.; Wells, D.
E.; de Vries, B.; Conrad, E. U.; Hill, A.; Zalatayev, D.; Weissenbach,
J.; Wagner, M. J.; Bakker, E.; Halley, D. J. J.; Willems, P. J.:
Refinement of the multiple exostoses locus (EXT2) to a 3-cM interval
on chromosome 11. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 382-387, 1995.

19. Wuyts, W.; Van Hul, W.: Molecular basis of multiple exostoses:
mutations in the EXT1 and EXT2 genes. Hum. Mutat. 15: 220-227, 2000.

20. Wuyts, W.; Van Hul, W.; De Boulle, K.; Hendrickx, J.; Bakker,
E.; Vanhoenacker, F.; Mollica, F.; Ludecke, H.-J.; Sayli, B. S.; Pazzaglia,
U. E.; Mortier, G.; Hamel, B.; Conrad, E. U.; Matsushita, M.; Raskind,
W. H.; Willems, P. J.: Mutations in the EXT1 and EXT2 genes in hereditary
multiple exostoses. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 346-354, 1998.

21. Wuyts, W.; Van Hul, W.; Wauters, J.; Nemtsova, M.; Reyniers, E.;
Van Hul, E.; De Boulle, K.; de Vries, B. B. A.; Hendrickx, J.; Herrygers,
I.; Bossuyt, P.; Balemans, W.; Fransen, E.; Vits, L.; Coucke, P.;
Nowak, N. J.; Shows, T. B.; Mallet, L.; van den Ouweland, A. M. W.;
McGaughran, J.; Halley, D. J. J.; Willems, P. J.: Positional cloning
of a gene involved in hereditary multiple exostoses. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 5: 1547-1557, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/28/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/10/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2004

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 10/28/2003

EDITED carol: 10/11/2013
carol: 9/19/2013
mgross: 3/22/2013
terry: 2/28/2013
wwang: 3/3/2010
wwang: 12/8/2009
ckniffin: 11/10/2009
terry: 1/14/2004
carol: 10/30/2003
ckniffin: 10/29/2003

107269	TITLE *107269 CD44 ANTIGEN; CD44
;;HERMES ANTIGEN;;
Pgp1;;
MDU3;;
INLU-RELATED p80 GLYCOPROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CD44 is an integral cell membrane glycoprotein with a postulated role in
matrix adhesion lymphocyte activation and lymph node homing (Aruffo et
al., 1990).

CLONING

Telen et al. (1983) used a murine monoclonal antibody (A3D8) to identify
an erythrocyte antigen inhibited by the In(Lu) gene. Telen et al. (1984)
showed that the A3D8 antigenic property resides on an 80-kD red cell
membrane protein which is present in only trace amounts in In(Lu)
Lu(a-b-) red cells (INLU; 111150). Haynes (1986) had evidence that the
A1G3 and A3D8 monoclonal antibodies bind to different epitopes on the
same 80-kD molecule. The monoclonal antibody A3D8 recognized an antigen
officially called MDU3, for 'monoclonal Duke University, 3,' or CD44.
Telen (1992) knew of no evidence that the INLU and CD44 (MDU3) genes are
the same.

By screening cDNA libraries prepared from hemopoietic cell lines,
Stamenkovic et al. (1989) isolated CD44 clones. Immunoprecipitation of
CD44 from transfected COS cells and cultured cell lines detected
cell-specific expression of an 80- to 90-kD protein and a 160-kD
protein. Several minor forms of 52 to 200 kD were variably present in
different cell types. RNA blot analysis revealed transcripts of 1.6,
2.2, and 5.0 kb in hemopoietic cell lines. RNA blot analysis of
carcinoma cell lines revealed 3 patterns of expression: the first,
exemplified by melanoma cell lines, was identical to the hemopoietic
cell pattern associated with the 80- to 90-kD isoform; the second,
exemplified by a colon carcinoma cell line, showed transcripts of 2.0,
2.6, and 5.6 kb associated with the 160-kD isoform; and the third,
exemplified by another colon carcinoma cell line, was a composite of the
first 2 patterns. All primary carcinoma specimens examined showed
prevalent CD44 transcripts of either hemopoietic or composite type. The
CD44 cDNA encodes a 361-amino acid protein with a 20-residue secretory
signal peptide, a 248-residue extracellular N-terminal domain with
multiple N- and O-linked glycosylation sites, a 21-amino acid
transmembrane domain, and a 72-residue hydrophilic cytoplasmic domain.
The mature protein has a calculated molecular mass of 37 kD. Sequence
analysis suggested homology with chicken and rat cartilage link proteins
(HAPLN1; 115435).

Stefanova et al. (1989) demonstrated that the lymphocyte homing receptor
is identical to the human leukocyte surface glycoprotein called CDw44,
on the basis of studies at the Third International Workshop on Human
Leukocyte Differentiation Antigens. It also appears to be identical to
the Pgp-1 glycoprotein of Omary et al. (1988).

GENE FAMILY

A table of all the CD antigens was provided by Schlossman et al. (1994)
with a list of the common names, the size in kilodaltons, and the nature
of the protein (adhesion, myeloid, platelet, and B cell, T cell, etc.).

GENE STRUCTURE

Screaton et al. (1992) found that the CD44 gene contains 19 exons
spanning 50 kb of genomic DNA. They identified 10 alternatively spliced
exons within the extracellular domain, including 1 exon that had not
previously been reported. In addition to the inclusion or exclusion of
whole exons, additional diversity was generated through the utilization
of internal splice donor and acceptor sites within 2 of the exons. A
variation in the cytoplasmic domain was shown to result from the
alternative splicing of 2 exons. Thus the genomic structure of CD44 is
remarkably complex, and alternative splicing is the basis of its
structural and functional diversity.

Nedvetzki et al. (2003) noted that human CD44 isoforms are generated
from 9 variant exons (v2 to v10) inserted in different combinations
between 2 constant regions consisting of 5 exons at the N terminus and 4
exons at the C terminus (constant exon 19 is noncoding). Direct splicing
of constant exon 5 to constant exon 16, thereby skipping the variant
exons, generates the standard CD44 isoform.

GENE FUNCTION

Aruffo et al. (1990) demonstrated that CD44 is the main cell surface
receptor for hyaluronate. Mature lymphocytes in the circulation migrate
selectively from the bloodstream to different lymphatic tissues through
specialized high endothelial venules (HEV). Molecules on the surface of
lymphocytes called homing receptors interact specifically with HEV and
play a central role in the migration.

Splice variants of the glycoprotein CD44 may be associated with
metastases and therefore may be useful in the early detection of
metastatic potential in surgical biopsy specimens, as well as in the
early diagnosis of cancer in screening programs, assessment of remaining
disease, and early detection of recurrence (Matsumura and Tarin, 1992).
Mayer et al. (1993) found that expression of CD44, which is not found in
normal gastric mucosa and is found in only 49% of primary tumors, was
associated with distant metastases at time of diagnosis and with tumor
recurrence and increased mortality from gastric cancer.

Weber et al. (1996) noted that the CD44 gene encodes a transmembrane
protein that is expressed as a family of molecular isoforms generated
from alternative RNA splicing and posttranslational modifications.
Certain CD44 isoforms that regulate activation and migration of
lymphocytes and macrophages may also enhance local growth and metastatic
spread of tumor cells. One ligand of CD44 is hyaluronic acid, binding of
which to the NH2-terminal domain of CD44 enhances cellular aggregation
and tumor cell growth. (Krainer et al. (1991) referred to CD44 as a
'hyaladherin' -- see 601269.) Weber et al. (1996) demonstrated that
another ligand is osteopontin (166490). Osteopontin induces cellular
chemotaxis but not homotypic aggregation of cells, whereas the inverse
is true for the interaction between CD44 and hyaluronate. The
alternative responses to CD44 ligation may be exploited by tumor cells
to allow OPN-mediated metastatic spread and hyaluronate-dependent growth
in newly colonized tissues in the process of tumor metastasis.

Sherman et al. (1998) investigated the role of CD44 proteins in early
limb development. Members of this family of transmembrane glycoproteins
are expressed by cells of the limb bud, including those of the apical
ectodermal ridge (AER). Distinct CD44 variants are generated from a
single gene by alternative RNA splicing of up to 10 variant exons and by
extensive posttranslational modifications. The amino acid sequences
encoded by these variant exons are located in the extracellular portion
of the protein near the transmembrane domain. A standard form of CD44
lacking these variant sequences is expressed by numerous cell types and
is the smallest CD44 protein. It carries no variant exon sequences.
Splice variants are expressed in only a limited number of tissues and in
certain tumors. Signals from the AER of the developing vertebrate limb,
including fibroblast growth factor-8 (600483), can maintain limb
mesenchymal cells in proliferative state. Sherman et al. (1998) reported
that a specific CD44 splice variant is crucial for the proliferation of
these mesenchymal cells. Epitopes carried by this variant colocalize
temporally and spatially with FGF8 in the AER throughout early limb
development. A splice variant containing the same sequence expressed on
model cells binds both FGF4 (164980) and FGF8 and stimulates mesenchymal
cells in vitro. Sherman et al. (1998) found that when applied to the
AER, an antibody against a specific CD44 epitope blocked FGF
presentation and inhibited limb outgrowth. Therefore, CD44 is necessary
for limb development and functions in a novel growth factor presentation
mechanism likely relevant to other physiologic and pathologic situations
in which a cell surface protein presents a signaling molecule to a
neighboring cell.

Cywes and Wessels (2001) demonstrated that CD44-dependent group A
Streptococcus binding to polarized monolayers of human keratinocytes
induced marked cytoskeletal rearrangements manifested by membrane
ruffling and disruption of intercellular junctions. Transduction of the
signal induced by group A Streptococcus binding to CD44 on the
keratinocyte surface involved Rac1 (602048) and the cytoskeleton linker
protein ezrin (123900), as well as tyrosine phosphorylation of cellular
proteins. Studies of bacterial translocation in 2 models of human skin
indicated that cell signaling triggered by interaction of the group A
Streptococcus capsule with CD44 opened intercellular junctions and
promoted tissue penetration by group A Streptococcus through a
paracellular route. Cywes and Wessels (2001) concluded that their
results support a model of host cytoskeleton manipulation and tissue
invasion by an extracellular bacterial pathogen.

Nedvetzki et al. (2003) identified a CD44 variant, designated CD44vRA,
in synovial fluid aspirated from 23 of 30 patients with rheumatoid
arthritis (RA; 180300). Sequence analysis showed that the CD44vRA
isoform contains an intron-derived CAG trinucleotide inclusion 5-prime
to constant exon 5 within the CD44v3-v10 isoform. Functional expression
studies in human cells showed that the CD44vRA variant interacted with
FGF2 (134920) via the heparan sulfate on exon v3 in a way that enhanced
binding and activation of soluble FGFR1 (136350) to a greater extent
than CD44v3-v10. Synovial fluid cells from RA patients bound soluble
FGFR1 more intensively than control cells. Nedvetzki et al. (2003)
postulated that activation of FGFR1 may play a role in the RA
inflammatory process.

In a mouse hindlimb model of arteriogenesis, van Royen et al. (2004)
found that Cd44 expression increased strongly during collateral vessel
growth in wildtype mice and that arteriogenesis was severely impaired in
Cd44 -/- mice. The defective arteriogenesis was accompanied by reduced
leukocyte trafficking to sites of collateral artery growth and reduced
expression of FGF2 and platelet-derived growth factor-B protein (PDGFB;
190040). In 14 consecutive patients with single-vessel coronary artery
disease, van Royen et al. (2004) found that the maximal expression of
CD44 on activated monocytes was reduced in patients with poor
collateralization compared to patients with good collateralization. Van
Royen et al. (2004) concluded that CD44 plays a pivotal role in
arteriogenesis.

By analyzing a human breast cancer cell line transduced with a micro RNA
(miRNA) expression library, Huang et al. (2008) found that human miR373
(611954) and miR520C stimulated cell migration and invasion in vitro and
in vivo. Using expression array analysis, they found that the migration
phenotype of miR373- and miR520C-expressing cells depended on
suppression of CD44. Upregulation of miR373 correlated inversely with
CD44 expression in breast cancer metastasis samples. The authors noted
that increased expression of the most common CD44 isoform correlates
with overall survival of breast cancer patients.

Godar et al. (2008) found that p53 (TP53; 191170) negatively regulated
CD44 expression in normal human mammary epithelial cells by binding to a
noncanonical p53-binding sequence in the CD44 promoter. Inhibition of
CD44 enabled the cells to respond to stress-induced, p53-dependent
cytostatic and apoptotic signals that would have otherwise been blocked
by CD44. In the absence of p53, CD44 promoted growth in a highly
tumorigenic mammary epithelial cell line. In both normal and tumorigenic
cell lines, p63 (TP63; 603273) positively regulated CD44 expression.

MAPPING

Francke et al. (1983) showed that the antigens defined by monoclonal
antibodies A3D8 and A1G3 are determined by genes on 11p.

The mouse monoclonal antibody Hermes-3 recognizes the 85- to 95-kD human
lymphocyte homing receptor. Using mouse-human T-lymphocyte hybrids and
hybrids of Chinese hamster ovary cells with human amniotic fibroblasts,
Ala-Kapee et al. (1989) found that Hermes-3 expression, as demonstrated
by indirect immunofluorescence and immunoprecipitation, was determined
by 11pter-p13. Forsberg et al. (1989) refined the assignment of the
lymphocyte homing receptor gene to 11pter-p13 by study of Chinese
hamster-human cell hybrids in which the human parent cells had various
deletions of human chromosome 11. Although CD44 may have function as a
lymphocyte homing receptor, the gene that maps to chromosome 11 is
distinct from the lymph node homing receptor located on chromosome 1
(153240) (Seldin, 1990). In the mouse, the corresponding gene has been
referred to as Ly-24.

Cianfriglia et al. (1992) mapped a drug-sensitivity marker, MC56, to
11pter-p13. Identity of the protein to the CD44 antigen, suggested on
other grounds, was supported by the map location.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The Indian blood group (609027) comprises 2 antigens, In(a) and In(b),
which reside on CD44. By RT-PCR analysis of cDNA extracted from
In(a+b-)-transformed B lymphocytes, Telen et al. (1996) identified the
CD44 polymorphism that causes the In(b-) phenotype. The polymorphism
results in an arg46-to-pro change (R46P; 107269.0001), removing the
basically charged amino acid at the C terminus of the hyaluronan
(HA)-binding motif of CD44. In previous studies using chimeric proteins,
arg46 was shown to be crucial for HA binding by CD44 (Yang et al.,
1994). However, Telen et al. (1996) demonstrated that the R46P change
does not reduce HA binding to CD44.

ANIMAL MODEL

Schmits et al. (1997) generated mice deficient in all known isoforms of
Cd44 by targeting exons encoding the invariant N-terminal region of the
molecule. Mice were born in mendelian ratio without any obvious
developmental or neurologic deficits. Hematologic impairment was
evidenced by altered tissue distribution of myeloid progenitors with
increased levels of colony-forming unit-granulocyte-macrophage in bone
marrow and reduced numbers in spleen. Fetal liver colony-forming
unit-spleen and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor mobilization
assays, together with reduced colony-forming unit-granulocyte-macrophage
in peripheral blood, suggested that progenitor egress from the bone
marrow was defective. Mice also developed exaggerated granuloma
responses to Cryotosporidium parvum infection. Tumor studies showed that
SV40-transformed Cd44-deficient fibroblasts were highly tumorigenic in
nude mice, whereas reintroduction of Cd44 expression into these
fibroblasts resulted in a dramatic inhibition of tumor growth.

Teder et al. (2002) studied the role of Cd44 in lung inflammation by
using the Cd44-deficient mice generated by Schmits et al. (1997). After
intratracheal administration of bleomycin, 75% of Cd44-deficient mice
died by day 14. They developed unremitting inflammation, characterized
by impaired clearance of apoptotic neutrophils, persistent accumulation
of hyaluronan fragments at the site of the tissue injury, and impaired
activation of transforming growth factor beta-1 (190180). This phenotype
was partially reversed by reconstitution with Cd44+ cells, thus
demonstrating a critical role for this receptor in resolving lung
inflammation.

Using immunohistochemistry, Leemans et al. (2003) confirmed that
Cd44-high cells accumulated in mouse lungs following intranasal
infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Cd44 -/- mice, however, had a
50% reduction in pulmonary macrophages 2 weeks after infection, although
the absolute numbers of leukocytes were unchanged. By 5 weeks after
infection, a significant reduction in Cd4 (186940)-positive lymphocyte
numbers was observed in mutant mice. At both time points, the
Cd44-deficient mice displayed disorganized granulomas containing
predominantly polymorphonuclear neutrophils rather than well-demarcated
granulomas consisting of lymphocytes and macrophages. Splenocytes were
more numerous in mice lacking Cd44, and they secreted significantly more
Ifng (147570) in response to antigen-specific stimulation than
splenocytes of wildtype mice. Flow cytometric analysis showed that human
CD44 bound to M. tuberculosis, and Cd44 -/- mouse macrophages contained
fewer bacteria than wildtype macrophages. The mutant mice allowed
greater replication of M. tuberculosis in lung and liver and had reduced
survival compared with wildtype mice. Leemans et al. (2003) proposed
that CD44 mediates resistance to mycobacterial infection by promoting
binding and phagocytosis by macrophages and by recruiting these cells to
the site of infection.

TNF (191160) is a major inducer of chronic inflammation, and its
overexpression leads to chronic inflammatory arthritis. Hayer et al.
(2005) crossed Cd44 -/- mice with mice transgenic for human TNF and
found that destruction of joints and progressive crippling was far more
severe in Cd44 -/- transgenic mice than in transgenic mice expressing
Cd44. Cd44 -/- transgenic mice exhibited increased systemic bone
resorption due to an increase in the number, size, and activity of
osteoclasts. Bone formation and osteoblast differentiation were not
affected. Cd44 -/- osteoclasts had an enhanced response to TNF that was
associated with increased activation of p38 (MAPK14; 600289). Hayer et
al. (2005) concluded that CD44 is a critical inhibitor of TNF-induced
joint destruction and inflammatory bone loss.

Krause et al. (2006) found that mice lacking Cd44 were as susceptible as
wildtype mice to murine chronic myeloid leukemia (CML; 608232) after
challenge with BCR-ABL virus. However, bone marrow cells from Cd44 -/-
mice transduced with the virus showed defective homing to recipient bone
marrow, resulting in decreased engraftment and reduced CML-like disease.
In contrast, Cd44 was dispensable for induction of B-lymphoblastic
leukemia-like disease. Krause et al. (2006) concluded that CD44 is
required for leukemic stem cells that initiate CML.

Jin et al. (2006) found that treatment with activating monoclonal
antibodies to CD44 markedly reduced leukemic repopulation in nonobese
diabetic (NOD)/severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice challenged
with human acute myeloid leukemia (AML; 601626) cells. Absence of
leukemia following serial tumor transplantation experiments in mice
demonstrated direct targeting of AML leukemic stem cells (LSCs).
Treatment of engrafted mice with anti-CD44 reduced the number of Cd34
(142230)-positive/Cd38 (107270)-negative primitive stem cells and
increased the number of Cd14 (158120)-positive monocytic cells.
Anti-CD44 treatment also diminished the homing capacity of SCID
leukemia-initiating cells to bone marrow and spleen. Jin et al. (2006)
concluded that CD44 is a key regulator of AML LSCs, which require a
niche to maintain their stem cell properties. They suggested that CD44
targeting may help eliminate quiescent AML LSCs.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
INDIAN BLOOD GROUP SYSTEM POLYMORPHISM
CD44, ARG46PRO

The Indian blood group (609027) comprises 2 antigens, In(a) and In(b),
which reside on CD44. By RT-PCR analysis of cDNA extracted from
In(a+b-)-transformed B lymphocytes, Telen et al. (1996) identified the
CD44 polymorphism that causes the In(b-) phenotype. The G-to-C change at
nucleotide 252 results in an arg46-to-pro change (R46P), removing the
basically charged amino acid at the C terminus of the hyaluronan
(HA)-binding motif of CD44. In previous studies using chimeric proteins,
arg46 was shown to be crucial for HA binding by CD44 (Yang et al.,
1994). However, Telen et al. (1996) demonstrated that the R46P change
does not reduce HA binding to CD44.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Forsberg et al. (1989)
REFERENCE 1. Ala-Kapee, M.; Forsberg, U. H.; Jalkanen, S.; Schroder, J.: Mapping
of gene for human lymphocyte homing receptor to the short arm of chromosome
11. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51: 948-949, 1989.

2. Aruffo, A.; Stamenkovic, I.; Melnick, M.; Underhill, C. B.; Seed,
B.: CD44 is the principal cell surface receptor for hyaluronate. Cell 61:
1303-1313, 1990.

3. Cianfriglia, M.; Viora, M.; Tombesi, M.; Merendino, N.; Esposito,
G.; Samoggia, P.; Forsberg, U. H.; Schroder, J.: The gene encoding
for MC56 determinant (drug-sensitivity marker) is located on the short
arm of human chromosome 11. Int. J. Cancer 52: 585-587, 1992.

4. Cywes, C.; Wessels, M. R.: Group A Streptococcus tissue invasion
by CD44-mediated cell signalling. Nature 414: 648-652, 2001.

5. Forsberg, U. H.; Ala-Kapee, M. M.; Jalkanen, S.; Andersson, L.
C.; Schroder, J.: The gene for human lymphocyte homing receptor is
located on chromosome 11. Europ. J. Immun. 19: 409-412, 1989.

6. Forsberg, U. H.; Jalkanen, S.; Schroder, J.: Assignment of the
human lymphocyte homing receptor gene to the short arm of chromosome
11. Immunogenetics 29: 405-407, 1989.

7. Francke, U.; Foellmer, B. E.; Haynes, B. F.: Chromosome mapping
of human cell surface molecules: monoclonal anti-human lymphocyte
antibodies 4F2, A3D8, and A1G3 define antigens controlled by different
regions of chromosome 11. Somat. Cell Genet. 9: 333-344, 1983.

8. Godar, S.; Ince, T. A.; Bell, G. W.; Feldser, D.; Donaher, J. L.;
Bergh, J.; Liu, A.; Miu, K.; Watnick, R. S.; Reinhardt, F.; McAllister,
S. S.; Jacks, T.; Weinberg, R. A.: Growth-inhibitory and tumor-suppressive
functions of p53 depend on its repression of CD44 expression. Cell 134:
62-73, 2008.

9. Hayer, S.; Steiner, G.; Gortz, B.; Reiter, E.; Tohidast-Akrad,
M.; Amling, M.; Hoffmann, O.; Redlich, K.; Zwerina, J.; Skriner, K.;
Hilberg, F.; Wagner, E. F.; Smolen, J. S.; Schett, G.: CD44 is a
determinant of inflammatory bone loss. J. Exp. Med. 201: 903-914,
2005.

10. Haynes, B. F.: Personal Communication. Durham, N. C.  2/28/1986.

11. Huang, Q.; Gumireddy, K.; Schrier, M.; le Sage, C.; Nagel, R.;
Nair, S.; Egan, D. A.; Li, A.; Huang, G.; Klein-Szanto, A. J.; Gimotty,
P. A.; Katsaros, D.; Coukos, G.; Zhang, L.; Pure, E.; Agami, R.:
The microRNAs miR-373 and miR-520c promote tumour invasion and metastasis. Nature
Cell Biol. 10: 202-210, 2008.

12. Jin, L.; Hope, K. J.; Zhai, Q.; Smadja-Joffe, F.; Dick, J. E.
: Targeting of CD44 eradicates human acute myeloid leukemic stem cells. Nature
Med. 12: 1167-1174, 2006.

13. Krainer, A. R.; Mayeda, A.; Kozak, D.; Binns, G.: Functional
expression of cloned human splicing factor SF2: homology to RNA-binding
proteins, U1 70K, and Drosophila splicing regulators. Cell 66: 383-394,
1991.

14. Krause, D. S.; Lazarides, K.; von Andrian, U. H.; Van Etten, R.
A.: Requirement for CD44 in homing and engraftment of BCR-ABL-expressing
leukemic stem cells. Nature Med. 12: 1175-1180, 2006.

15. Leemans, J. C.; Florquin, S.; Heikens, M.; Pals, S. T.; van der
Neut, R.; van der Poll, T.: CD44 is a macrophage binding site for
Mycobacterium tuberculosis that mediates macrophage recruitment and
protective immunity against tuberculosis. J. Clin. Invest. 111:
681-689, 2003.

16. Matsumura, Y.; Tarin, D.: Significance of CD44 gene products
for cancer diagnosis and disease evaluation. Lancet 340: 1053-1058,
1992.

17. Mayer, B.; Jauch, K. W.; Gunthert, U.; Figdor, C. G.; Schildberg,
F. W.; Funke, I.; Johnson, J. P.: De-novo expression of CD44 and
survival in gastric cancer. Lancet 342: 1019-1022, 1993.

18. Nedvetzki, S.; Golan, I.; Assayag, N.; Gonen, E.; Caspi, D.; Gladnikoff,
M.; Yayon, A.; Naor, D.: A mutation in a CD44 variant of inflammatory
cells enhances the mitogenic interaction of FGF with its receptor. J.
Clin. Invest. 111: 1211-1220, 2003.

19. Omary, M. B.; Trowbridge, I. S.; Letarte, M.; Kagnoff, M. F.;
Isacke, C. M.: Structural heterogeneity of human Pgp-1 and its relationship
with p85. Immunogenetics 27: 460-464, 1988.

20. Schlossman, S. F.; Boumsell, L.; Gilks, W.; Harlan, J. M.; Kishimoto,
T.; Morimoto, C.; Ritz, J.; Shaw, S.; Silverstein, R. L.; Springer,
T. A.; Tedder, T. F.; Todd, R. F.: CD antigens 1993. Immun. Today 15:
98-99, 1994.

21. Schmits, R.; Filmus, J.; Gerwin, N.; Senaldi, G.; Kiefer, F.;
Kundig, T.; Wakeham, A.; Shahinian, A.; Catzavelos, C.; Rak, J.; Furlonger,
C.; Zakarian, A.; Simard, J. J.; Ohashi, P. S.; Paige, C. J.; Gutierrez-Romas,
J. C.; Mak, T. W.: CD44 regulates hematopoietic progenitor distribution,
granuloma formation, and tumorigenicity. Blood 90: 2217-2233, 1997.

22. Screaton, G. R.; Bell, M. V.; Jackson, D. G.; Cornelis, F. B.;
Gerth, U.; Bell, J. I.: Genomic structure of DNA encoding the lymphocyte
homing receptor CD44 reveals at least 12 alternatively spliced exons. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 12160-12164, 1992.

23. Seldin, M. F.: Personal Communication. Durham, N. C.  9/19/1990.

24. Sherman, L.; Wainwright, D.; Ponta, H.; Herrlich, P.: A splice
variant of CD44 expressed in the apical ectodermal ridge presents
fibroblast growth factors to limb mesenchyme and is required for limb
outgrowth. Genes Dev. 12: 1058-1071, 1998.

25. Stamenkovic, I.; Amiot, M.; Pesando, J. M.; Seed, B.: A lymphocyte
molecule implicated in lymph node homing is a member of the cartilage
link protein family. Cell 56: 1057-1062, 1989.

26. Stefanova, I.; Hilgert, I.; Bazil, V.; Kristofova, H.; Horejsi,
V.: Human leucocyte surface glycoprotein CDw44 and lymphocyte homing
receptor are identical molecules. Immunogenetics 29: 402-404, 1989.

27. Teder, P.; Vandivier, R. W.; Jiang, D.; Liang, J.; Cohn, L.; Pure,
E.; Henson, P. M.; Noble, P. W.: Resolution of lung inflammation
by CD44. Science 296: 155-158, 2002.

28. Telen, M. J.: Personal Communication. Durham, N. C.  12/30/1992.

29. Telen, M. J.; Eisenbarth, G. S.; Haynes, B. F.: Human erythrocyte
antigens: regulation of expression of a novel erythrocyte surface
antigen by the inhibitor Lutheran In(Lu) gene. J. Clin. Invest. 71:
1878-1886, 1983.

30. Telen, M. J.; Palker, T. J.; Haynes, B. F.: Human erythrocyte
antigens: II. The In(Lu) gene regulates expression of an antigen on
an 80-kilodalton protein of human erythrocytes. Blood 64: 599-606,
1984.

31. Telen, M. J.; Udani, M.; Washington, M. K.; Levesque, M. C.; Lloyd,
E.; Rao, N.: A blood group-related polymorphism of CD44 abolishes
a hyaluronan-binding consensus sequence without preventing hyaluronan
binding. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 7147-7153, 1996.

32. van Royen, N.; Voskuil, M.; Hoefer, I.; Jost, M.; de Graaf, S.;
Hedwig, F.; Andert, J.-P.; Wormhoudt, T. A. M.; Hua, J.; Hartmann,
S.; Bode, C.; Buschmann, I.; Schaper, W.; van der Neut, R.; Piek,
J. J.; Pals, S. T.: CD44 regulates arteriogenesis in mice and is
differentially expressed in patients with poor and good collateralization. Circulation 109:
1647-1652, 2004.

33. Weber, G. F.; Ashkar, S.; Glimcher, M. J.; Cantor, H.: Receptor-ligand
interaction between CD44 and osteopontin (Eta-1). Science 271: 509-512,
1996.

34. Yang, B.; Yang, B. L.; Savani, R. C.; Turley, E. A.: Identification
of a common hyaluronan binding motif in the hyaluronan binding proteins
RHAMM, CD44 and link protein. EMBO J. 13: 286-296, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/5/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/28/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/26/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/27/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/31/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/25/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/15/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/9/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/25/1998
Alan F. Scott - updated: 5/21/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/25/1990

EDITED mgross: 10/14/2013
wwang: 8/17/2011
mgross: 11/7/2008
terry: 11/5/2008
mgross: 10/30/2008
terry: 10/28/2008
wwang: 12/28/2007
ckniffin: 11/26/2007
mgross: 1/29/2007
mgross: 11/17/2006
terry: 10/27/2006
mgross: 10/26/2006
wwang: 2/3/2006
terry: 1/31/2006
terry: 12/21/2005
mgross: 2/25/2005
mgross: 11/15/2004
joanna: 11/15/2004
cwells: 4/11/2002
cwells: 4/10/2002
terry: 4/9/2002
alopez: 1/10/2002
terry: 1/9/2002
dkim: 7/24/1998
carol: 4/25/1998
terry: 4/25/1998
mark: 5/21/1996
terry: 5/21/1996
mark: 5/20/1996
mark: 2/10/1996
terry: 2/7/1996
terry: 7/29/1994
carol: 4/11/1994
warfield: 4/7/1994
carol: 9/8/1993
carol: 1/14/1993
carol: 1/13/1993

602587	TITLE *602587 ACYL-CoA THIOESTERASE 7; ACOT7
;;ACYL-CoA THIOESTERASE, LONG-CHAIN, CYTOSOLIC;;
CTE-II;;
ACYL-CoA THIOESTER HYDROLASE, LONG-CHAIN, 2;;
ACYL-CoA HYDROLASE, LONG-CHAIN, BRAIN; BACH;;
ACYL-CoA HYDROLASE, LONG-CHAIN, LIVER; LACH;;
ACYL-CoA THIOESTERASE 2, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Long-chain acyl-CoA thioesterases (EC 3.1.2.2), such as ACOT7, are found
in all organisms and cleave fatty acyl-CoAs into free fatty acids and
CoA.

CLONING

Engberg et al. (1997) purified a liver cytosolic isoform of long-chain
acyl-CoA thioesterase from peroxisome proliferator-treated rats and
named it CTE-II for 'cytosolic long-chain acyl-CoA thioesterase.'
Antibodies against CTE-II were used to screen an expression library of
peroxisome proliferator-induced rat liver cDNA. The predicted 338-amino
acid protein migrated at 40 kD on SDS-PAGE. Engberg et al. (1997)
observed many evenly distributed nucleotide differences and pronounced
differences in the C-terminal regions between CTE-II and the closely
related ACT (602586) and suggested that the 2 enzymes are encoded by
different genes. Engberg et al. (1997) noted that there are human ESTs
homologous to CTE-II.

Yamada et al. (1997) isolated cDNAs encoding long-chain acyl-CoA
hydrolases from rat brain and liver cDNA libraries and designated the
clones Bach and Lach, respectively. Since the nucleotide sequences of
the N-terminal regions were entirely different but the downstream
sequences were virtually identical, Yamada et al. (1997) suggested that
Bach and Lach are derived from the same gene by alternative splicing.

Using a rat Bach cDNA to screen a human brain cDNA library, Yamada et
al. (1999) cloned BACH. The deduced protein contains 338 amino acids and
shares 95% identity with rat Bach. Northern blot analysis detected a
1.9-kb BACH transcript in human brain RNA. Biochemical analysis of human
brain homogenates showed that BACH is a cytosolic enzyme. SDS-PAGE
detected BACH at 43 kD, but gel filtration detected BACH at about 100
kD, indicating that the protein forms multimers.

By 5-prime RACE and RT-PCR of human brain total RNA, Yamada et al.
(2002) identified 6 BACH splice variants. Four variants, designated
BACHa to BACHd, differ in their use of 1 of 4 alternate first exons
(exons 1a through 1d, respectively) and encode proteins of 329 to 380
amino acids. All 4 of these proteins contain the hydrolase domain and a
bipartite nuclear localization signal (NLS) in their C-terminal halves,
and BACHb and BACHc have N-terminal mitochondrial localization signals.
The 2 remaining variants contain exon X, an alternatively spliced exon
between exons 7 and 8 that causes a frameshift and introduces a
premature stop codon. These C-terminally truncated proteins of 246 and
283 amino acids lack the hydrolase domain and NLS. The BACH proteins
containing the mitochondrial localization signal were detected in
mitochondria of transfected mouse neuroblastoma cells, but those
containing only the NLS did not localize to nuclei, even though the
isolated NLS was functional when fused to a test protein.
Immunohistochemical analysis of human brain detected BACHa in the
cytosol of neurons such as pyramidal cells in the cerebral cortex and
Purkinje cells in the cerebellum. In mouse brain, Bacha was also
detected in nuclei as well as cytosol of certain large neurons in the
cerebellum, medulla oblongata, and spinal cord. Yamada et al. (2002)
suggested that the NLS of BACH may be masked by the full-length protein
as a regulatory mechanism.

GENE FUNCTION

Yamada et al. (1997) found that bacterial extracts of E. coli expressing
either rat Bach or Lach cDNAs had 100-fold higher acyl-CoA hydrolase
activity, demonstrating that both cDNAs encode long-chain acyl-CoA
hydrolases.

By analyzing the activity of purified BACH against several fatty
acyl-CoAs, Yamada et al. (1999) found that BACH showed a relatively
broad specificity, with acyl-CoAs with carbon chains of C8 to C18 being
good substrates. BACH activity was inhibited by a sulfhydryl blocking
agent. Recombinant BACH was also active against palmitoyl-CoA.

Yang et al. (2004) found significantly decreased levels of acyl-CoA
hydrolase in hippocampal tissue from 5 patients with mesial temporal
lobe epilepsy (608096) compared to controls.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yamada et al. (2002) determined that the ACOT7 gene contains 13 exons,
including 4 alternative first exons (exons 1a through 1d) and exon X, an
alternatively spliced exon between exons 7 and 8. The gene spans 129 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Yamada et al. (1999) mapped the ACOT7 gene
to chromosome 1p36.2. Hunt et al. (2005) stated that the human ACOT7
gene maps to chromosome 1p36.31-p36.11 and the mouse Acot7 gene maps to
chromosome 4E2.

NOMENCLATURE

Hunt et al. (2005) noted that acyl-CoA thioesterases are referred to in
the literature as acyl-CoA hydrolases, but the reaction catalyzed is the
cleavage of a thioester bond. They presented a revised nomenclature for
these enzymes using the name acyl-CoA thioesterase and the root gene
symbol ACOT.

REFERENCE 1. Engberg, S. T.; Aoyama, T.; Alexson, S. E. H.; Hashimoto, T.; Svensson,
L. T.: Peroxisome proliferator-induced acyl-CoA thioesterase from
rat liver cytosol: molecular cloning and functional expression in
Chinese hamster ovary cells. Biochem. J. 323: 525-531, 1997.

2. Hunt, M. C.; Yamada, J.; Maltais, L. J.; Wright, M. W.; Podesta,
E. J.; Alexson, S. E. H.: A revised nomenclature for mammalian acyl-CoA
thioesterases/hydrolases. J. Lipid Res. 46: 2029-2032, 2005.

3. Yamada, J.; Furihata, T.; Iida, N.; Watanabe, T.; Hosokawa, M.;
Satoh, T.; Someya, A.; Nagaoka, I.; Suga, T.: Molecular cloning and
expression of cDNAs encoding rat brain and liver cytosolic long-chain
acyl-CoA hydrolases. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 232: 198-203,
1997.

4. Yamada, J.; Kuramochi, Y.; Takagi, M.; Watanabe, T.; Suga, T.:
Human brain acyl-CoA hydrolase isoforms encoded by a single gene. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 299: 49-56, 2002.

5. Yamada, J.; Kurata, A.; Hirata, M.; Taniguchi, T.; Takama, H.;
Furihata, T.; Shiratori, K.; Iida, N.; Takagi-Sakuma, M.; Watanabe,
T.; Kurosaki, K.; Endo, T.; Suga, T.: Purification, molecular cloning,
and genomic organization of human brain long-chain acyl-CoA hydrolase. J.
Biochem. 126: 1013-1019, 1999.

6. Yang, J. W.; Czech, T.; Yamada, J.; Csaszar, E.; Baumgartner, C.;
Slavc, I.; Lubec, G.: Aberrant cytosolic acyl-CoA thioester hydrolase
in hippocampus of patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Amino
Acids 27: 269-275, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/6/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/21/2006

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/1/1998

EDITED wwang: 06/23/2006
ckniffin: 6/6/2006
mgross: 6/6/2006
terry: 4/21/2006
carol: 3/17/2006
alopez: 5/1/1998

164780	TITLE *164780 V-SKI AVIAN SARCOMA VIRAL ONCOGENE HOMOLOG; SKI
;;ONCOGENE SK, CHICKEN VIRAL;;
SK ONCOGENE; SKI
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nomura et al. (1989) isolated human cDNA clones of SKI and a SKI-related
gene, SNO (165340).

Doyle et al. (2012) performed a developmental survey of SKI expression
in wildtype mice and observed that at embryonic day 13.5, SKI protein
was robustly expressed throughout the vessel wall in the proximal
ascending aorta with less expression in the descending segment and was
localized to both the cytoplasm and nucleus. At birth, aortic expression
was somewhat reduced, and SKI was predominantly localized to the
cytoplasm. In adult mice (postnatal day 90), SKI expression was further
reduced in the medial layer of the aortic root, with exclusive
cytoplasmic localization; in the more distal ascending aorta, SKI
expression was largely absent from the central zone of the aortic media,
despite some residual expression in the intimal and adventitial layers.
Doyle et al. (2012) suggested that SKI might be predominantly required
in the very proximal aorta at early stages of development for the proper
regulation of TGF-beta signaling within the arterial media.

MAPPING

Shinagawa et al. (2001) mapped the SKI gene to chromosome 1p36.3.
Colmenares et al. (2002) confirmed the location of the gene in distal
1p36.3.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wu et al. (2002) determined the crystal structure of the SMAD4
(600993)-binding domain of SKI in complex with the MH2 domain of SMAD4
at 2.85-angstrom resolution. The structure revealed specific recognition
of the SMAD4 L3 loop region by a highly conserved interaction loop (I
loop) from SKI. The SKI-binding surface on SMAD4 was found to
significantly overlap with that required for binding of the
receptor-mediated SMADs (R-SMADs). Indeed, SKI disrupted the formation
of a functional complex between the comediator SMADs (Co-SMADs) and
R-SMADs, explaining how it could lead to repression of TGF-beta, activin
(see 147390), and bone morphogenetic protein (see 112264) responses. The
structure of the SKI fragment, stabilized by a bound zinc atom,
resembled the SAND domain found in transcription factors and other
nuclear proteins, in which the corresponding I loop is responsible for
DNA binding.

GENE FUNCTION

Transforming growth factor-beta (TGFB1; 190180) treatment of cells
induces a variety of physiologic responses, including growth inhibition,
differentiation, and induction of apoptosis. TGFB1 induces
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of SMAD3 (603109). Sun et al.
(1999) described the association of SMAD3 with the nuclear protooncogene
protein SKI in response to the activation of TGFB1 signaling.
Association with SKI repressed transcriptional activation by SMAD3, and
overexpression of SKI rendered cells resistant to the growth-inhibitory
effects of TGFB1. The transcriptional repression as well as the growth
resistance to TGFB1 by overexpression of SKI could be overcome by
overexpression of SMAD3. These results demonstrated that SKI is a novel
component of the TGFB1 signaling pathway and shed light on the mechanism
of action of the SKI oncoprotein.

Experiments involving overexpression of Ski suggest that this gene is
involved in neural tube development and muscle differentiation (Sutrave
et al., 1990; Amaravadi et al., 1997; Kaufman et al., 2000). Ski -/-
mice display a cranial neural tube defect that results in exencephaly
and a marked reduction in skeletal muscle mass (Berk et al., 1997).
Colmenares et al. (2002) showed that the penetrance and expressivity of
the Ski -/- phenotype changes when the null mutation is backcrossed into
the C57BL6/J background, with the principal change involving a switch
from a neural tube defect to midline facial clefting. Other defects,
including depressed nasal bridge, eye abnormalities, skeletal muscle
defects, and digit abnormalities, show increased penetrance in the
C57BL6/J background. Of note, these phenotypes resemble some of the
features observed in individuals with 1p36 deletion syndrome (607872)
(Shapira et al., 1997; Slavotinek et al., 1999). These similarities
prompted Colmenares et al. (2002) to examine the chromosomal location of
human SKI and to determine whether SKI is included in the deletions of
1p36. They found that human SKI indeed is located at distal 1p36.3 and
was deleted in all of the individuals tested to that time who had the
1p36 deletion syndrome. Thus, SKI may contribute to some of the
phenotypes common in 1p36 deletion syndrome, and particularly to facial
clefting.

Shinagawa et al. (2001) also mapped the SKI gene to 1p36.3 and
determined its relationship to the p73 tumor suppressor gene (TP73;
601990) which also maps to 1p36. They showed that loss of 1 copy of
c-ski increases susceptibility to tumorigenesis in mice. When challenged
with a chemical carcinogen, c-ski heterozygous mice showed an increased
level of tumor formation relative to wildtype mice. In addition,
c-ski-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts had increased proliferative
capacity, whereas overexpression of c-ski suppressed the proliferation.

Okamoto et al. (2002) found that the SKI gene was deleted in a Japanese
girl with the 1p36 deletion syndrome with manifestations of congenital
fiber-type disproportion myopathy (CFTD; 255310) and dilated
cardiomyopathy.

Atanasoski et al. (2004) found that overexpression of human SKI in
cultured rodent Schwann cells inhibited TGFB1-mediated proliferation and
prevented growth-arrested cells from reentering the cell cycle. Ski was
upregulated in myelinating Schwann cells cocultured with dorsal root
ganglion neurons, in myelinating mouse Schwann cells in vivo, and during
remyelination after injury. Myelination was blocked in myelin-competent
cultures derived from Ski-deficient mice, and genes encoding myelin
components were downregulated in Ski-deficient nerves. Conversely,
overexpression of Ski in Schwann cells caused an upregulation of
myelin-related genes. Ski and Oct6 (602479), a transcription factor
involved in myelination, appeared to mutually regulate each other.
Atanasoski et al. (2004) concluded that expression of SKI is regulated
by axon-Schwann cell interactions and that SKI is a crucial signal in
Schwann cell development and myelination.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 10 of 12 sporadic patients with Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome (SGS;
182212), Doyle et al. (2012) identified de novo heterozygous mutations
in the SKI gene, including 8 missense mutations and one 9-bp deletion
(see, e.g., 164780.0001-164780.0005). Cultured dermal fibroblasts from
affected individuals showed enhanced activation of TGF-beta signaling
cascades and higher expression of TGF-beta-responsive genes relative to
control cells.

In 18 of 19 patients from 13 families with characteristic features of
SGS, including 5 affected individuals over 3 generations in 1 family and
another family in which 3 sibs were affected, Carmignac et al. (2012)
identified heterozygosity for 2 different in-frame deletions and 10
missense mutations in the SKI gene (see, e.g., 164780.0002, 164780.0004,
164780.0005, and 164780.0007-164780.0010). All of the mutations were
located in exon 1 of the SKI gene, within the R-SMAD-binding domain. No
SKI mutations were found in a cohort of 11 patients with other marfanoid
craniosynostosis syndromes.

ANIMAL MODEL

Doyle et al. (2012) generated zebrafish with morpholino-based knockdown
of the 2 paralogs of mammalian SKI (skia and skib), and observed mutant
embryos with marked craniofacial cartilage deficits, including shortened
and flat Meckel cartilage, irregular lengths of palatoquadrates,
shortened ceratohyales, and depleted ceratobranchial arches. These
deficits manifested in larval fish as maxillary hypoplasia, malformed
ethmoid plate, micrognathia, and microcephaly, and were frequently
accompanied by ocular hypertelorism and spinal malformation. In
addition, the skia- and skib-morphant embryos showed severe cardiac
anomalies, characterized by partial to complete failure in cardiac
looping and malformations of the outflow tract. Doyle et al. (2012)
noted that in comparison to Ski-null mice, the zebrafish morphants more
closely recapitulated the human craniofacial phenotype of
Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome.

HISTORY

Balazs et al. (1984) mapped the SK (for Sloan-Kettering) chicken viral
oncogene to 1q12-qter. By in situ hybridization, Chaganti et al. (1986)
regionalized the SKI gene to 1q22-q24.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, GLY116GLU

In a 43-year-old woman with Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis
syndrome (SGS; 182212), Doyle et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity
for a de novo 347G-A transition in exon 1 of the SKI gene, resulting in
a gly116-to-glu (G116E) substitution at a highly conserved residue in an
exposed beta hairpin loop in the DHD domain. The mutation was not found
in her unaffected parents or in SNP databases.

.0002
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, LEU32VAL

In a 12-year-old boy and an unrelated 22-year-old woman with
Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome (182212), Doyle et al.
(2012) identified heterozygosity for a 94C-G transversion in exon 1 of
the SKI gene, resulting in a leu32-to-val (L32V) substitution at a
highly conserved residue in the SMAD2 (601366)/3 (603109)-binding
domain. The mutation was not found in dbSNP134, the 1000 Genomes Project
database, or more than 10,000 exomes reported on the National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute Exome Variant Server.

In 3 unrelated patients with SGS, Carmignac et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for the L32V mutation in the SKI gene. One of the
patients, a 32-year-old man, had aortic root dilation, mitral valve
prolapse, and mitral insufficiency.

.0003
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, GLY34ASP

In a 16-year-old boy with Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome
(182212), Doyle et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a 101G-A
transition in exon 1 of the SKI gene, resulting in a gly34-to-asp (G34D)
substitution at a highly conserved residue in the SMAD2 (601366)/3
(603109)-binding domain. The mutation was not found in dbSNP134, the
1000 Genomes Project database, or more than 10,000 exomes reported on
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Exome Variant Server.

.0004
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, GLY34SER

In a 21-year-old man with Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome
(182212), Doyle et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a 100G-A
transition in exon 1 of the SKI gene, resulting in a gly34-to-ser (G34S)
substitution at a highly conserved residue in the SMAD2 (601366)/3
(603109)-binding domain. The mutation was not found in dbSNP134, the
1000 Genomes Project database, or more than 10,000 exomes reported on
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Exome Variant Server.

In an 11-year-old girl with SGS, whose features included aortic root
dilation and mitral valve prolapse, Carmignac et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for the G34S mutation in the SKI gene.

.0005
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, GLY34CYS

In a 2-year-old girl with Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome
(182212), Doyle et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a 100G-T
transversion in exon 1 of the SKI gene, resulting in a gly34-to-cys
(G34C) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the SMAD2
(601366)/3 (603109)-binding domain. The mutation was not found in
dbSNP134, the 1000 Genomes Project database, or in more than 10,000
exomes reported on the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Exome
Variant Server.

In a 21-year-old woman with SGS, Carmignac et al. (2012) identified
heterozygosity for the G34C mutation in the SKI gene.

.0006
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, 9-BP DEL, NT283

In a 5-year-old boy with Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome
(182212), Doyle et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a 9-bp
deletion in exon 1 of the SKI gene (283_291del9), resulting in removal
of 3 highly conserved residues (asp95-ser97del) in the DHD domain. The
mutation was not found in dbSNP134, the 1000 Genomes Project database,
or more than 10,000 exomes reported on the National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute Exome Variant Server.

.0007
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, GLY34VAL

In 22-year-old female twins and their 20-year-old sister who had
Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome (182212), Carmignac et al.
(2012) identified a heterozygous 101G-T transversion in exon 1 of the
SKI gene, resulting in a gly34-to-val (G34V) substitution at a conserved
residue within the R-SMAD-binding domain. The mother had the mutation in
somatic mosaic state. The mutation was not found in the dbSNP or Exome
Variant Server databases.

.0008
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, 12-BP DEL, NT280

In 5 affected individuals over 3 generations of a family with
Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome (182212), Carmignac et al.
(2012) identified heterozygosity for a 12-bp deletion
(280_291delTCCGACCGCTCC) in exon 1 of the SKI gene, resulting in an
in-frame deletion within the R-SMAD-binding domain. The mutation was not
found in the dbSNP or Exome Variant Server databases.

.0009
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, PRO35GLN

In an 18-year-old man with Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis syndrome
(182212), Carmignac et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a 104C-A
transversion in exon 1 of the SKI gene, resulting in a pro35-to-gln
(P35Q) substitution at a conserved residue within the R-SMAD-binding
domain. The patient had dilation of the aortic root requiring surgery at
16 years of age, and also had vertebrobasilar and internal carotid
tortuosity, mitral valve prolapse, and a dilated pulmonary artery root.
The mutation was not found in the dbSNP or Exome Variant Server
databases.

.0010
SHPRINTZEN-GOLDBERG CRANIOSYNOSTOSIS SYNDROME
SKI, PRO35SER

In a 21-year-old woman with Shprintzen-Goldberg craniosynostosis
syndrome (182212), Carmignac et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for
a 103C-T transition in exon 1 of the SKI gene, resulting in a
pro35-to-gln (P35Q) substitution at a conserved residue within the
R-SMAD-binding domain. No aortic root dilation or valvular anomalies
were reported in this patient. The mutation was not found in the dbSNP
or Exome Variant Server databases.

REFERENCE 1. Amaravadi, L. S.; Neff, A. W.; Sleeman, J. P.; Smith, R. C.: Autonomous
neural axis formation by ectopic expression of the protooncogene c-ski. Dev.
Biol. 192: 392-404, 1997.

2. Atanasoski, S.; Notterpek, L.; Lee, H.-Y.; Castagner, F.; Young,
P.; Ehrengruber, M. U.; Meijer, D.; Sommer, L.; Stavnezer, E.; Colmenares,
C.; Suter, U.: The protooncogene Ski controls Schwann cell proliferation
and myelination. Neuron 43: 499-511, 2004.

3. Balazs, I.; Grzeschik, K. H.; Stavnezer, E.: Assignment of the
human homologue of a chicken oncogene to chromosome 1. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 37: 410-411, 1984.

4. Berk, M.; Desai, S. Y.; Heyman, H. C.; Colmenares, C.: Mice lacking
the ski proto-oncogene have defects in neurulation, craniofacial,
patterning, and skeletal muscle development. Genes Dev. 11: 2029-2039,
1997.

5. Carmignac, V.; Thevenon, J.; Ades, L.; Callewaert, B.; Julia, S.;
Thauvin-Robinet, C.; Gueneau, L.; Courcet, J.-B.; Lopez, E.; Holman,
K.; Renard, M.; Plauchu, H.; and 26 others: In-frame mutations
in exon 1 of SKI cause dominant Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 91: 950-957, 2012.

6. Chaganti, R. S. K.; Balazs, I.; Jhanwar, S. C.; Murty, V. V. V.
S.; Koduru, P. R. K.; Grzeschik, K.-H.; Stavnezer, E.: The cellular
homologue of the transforming gene of SKV avian retrovirus maps to
human chromosome region 1q22-q24. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 43: 181-186,
1986.

7. Colmenares, C.; Heilstedt, H. A.; Shaffer, L. G.; Schwartz, S.;
Berk, M.; Murray, J. C.; Stavnezer, E.: Loss of the SKI proto-oncogene
in individuals affected with 1p36 deletion syndrome is predicted by
strain-dependent defects in Ski -/- mice. Nature Genet. 30: 106-109,
2002.

8. Doyle, A. J.; Doyle, J. J.; Bessling, S. L.; Maragh, S.; Lindsay,
M. E.; Schepers, D.; Gillis, E.; Mortier, G.; Homfray, T.; Sauls,
K.; Norris, R. A.; and 22 others: Mutations in the TGF-beta repressor
SKI cause Shprintzen-Goldberg syndrome with aortic aneurysm. Nature
Genet. 44: 1249-1254, 2012.

9. Kaufman, C. D.; Martinez-Rodriguez, G.; Hackett, P. B., Jr.: Ectopic
expression of c-ski disrupts gastrulation and neural patterning in
zebrafish. Mech. Dev. 95: 147-162, 2000.

10. Nomura, N.; Sasamoto, S.; Ishii, S.; Date, T.; Matsui, M.; Ishizaki,
R.: Isolation of human cDNA clones of SKI and the SKI-related gene,
SNO. Nucleic Acids Res. 17: 5489-5500, 1989.

11. Okamoto, N.; Toribe, Y.; Nakajima, T.; Okinaga, T.; Kurosawa,
K.; Nonaka, I.; Shimokawa, O.; Matsumoto, N.: A girl with 1p36 deletion
syndrome and congenital fiber type disproportion myopathy. J. Hum.
Genet. 47: 556-559, 2002.

12. Shapira, S. K.; McCaskill, C.; Northrup, H.; Spikes, A. S.; Elder,
F. F. B.; Sutton, V. R.; Korenberg, J. R.; Greenberg, F.; Shaffer,
L. G.: Chromosome 1p36 deletions: the clinical phenotype and molecular
characterization of a common newly delineated syndrome. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 61: 642-650, 1997.

13. Shinagawa, T.; Nomura, T.; Colmenares, C.; Ohira, M.; Nakagawara,
A.; Ishii, S.: Increased susceptibility to tumorigenesis of ski-deficient
heterozygous mice. Oncogene 20: 8100-8108, 2001.

14. Slavotinek, A.; Shaffer, L. G.; Shapira, S. K.: Monosomy 1p36. J.
Med. Genet. 36: 657-663, 1999.

15. Sun, Y.; Liu, X.; Eaton, E. N.; Lane, W. S.; Lodish, H. F.; Weinberg,
R. A.: Interaction of the Ski oncoprotein with Smad3 regulates TGF-beta
signaling. Molec. Cell 4: 499-509, 1999.

16. Sutrave, P.; Kelly, A. M.; Hughes, S. H.: ski can cause selective
growth of skeletal muscle in transgenic mice. Genes Dev. 4: 1462-1472,
1990.

17. Wu, J.-W.; Krawitz, A. R.; Chai, J.; Li, W.; Zhang, F.; Luo, K.;
Shi, Y.: Structural mechanism of Smad4 recognition by the nuclear
oncoprotein Ski: insights on Ski-mediated repression of TFG-beta signaling. Cell 111:
357-367, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/10/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/5/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/12/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/7/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/26/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/24/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/19/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/23/1986

EDITED carol: 03/18/2013
carol: 12/10/2012
alopez: 11/13/2012
carol: 10/5/2012
terry: 10/5/2012
carol: 7/13/2005
ckniffin: 7/1/2005
wwang: 5/20/2005
wwang: 5/16/2005
terry: 5/12/2005
tkritzer: 1/5/2004
cwells: 1/8/2003
tkritzer: 1/7/2003
mgross: 11/26/2002
terry: 3/11/2002
carol: 1/24/2002
terry: 1/24/2002
alopez: 1/16/2002
terry: 1/14/2002
mgross: 11/19/1999
alopez: 5/12/1999
mark: 6/9/1996
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 10/9/1989
root: 3/6/1989
marie: 3/25/1988

614463	TITLE *614463 NMYC DOWNSTREAM-REGULATED GENE 4; NDRG4
;;SMOOTH MUSCLE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 8; SMAP8;;
KIAA1180
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Hirosawa et al. (1999) cloned NDRG4. The deduced protein
contains 273 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA detected highest expression in
adult and fetal brain and adult heart, followed by lung and testis.
Lower expression was detected in other adult tissues examined, but
little to no expression was detected in fetal liver. High NDRG4
expression was detected in all specific adult brain regions examined,
with highest expression in amygdala, cerebellum, and thalamus.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to NDRG1 (605262),
followed by 3-prime and 5-prime RACE of human brain and heart cDNA
libraries and cap-site hunting, Zhou et al. (2001) cloned 3 splice
variants of NDRG4. The variants NDRG4B and NDRG4B-var, which were
obtained from the brain library, encode deduced proteins of 339 and 352
amino acids with calculated molecular masses of 37.1 and 38.5 kD,
respectively. Compared with NDRG4B, NDRG4B-var has a 14-amino acid
insertion near the C terminus. The variant NDRG4H, which was obtained
from the heart library, encodes a deduced 371-amino acid protein with a
calculated molecular mass of 40.6 kD. NDRG4H differs from NDRG4B and
NDRG4B-var at its N-terminal end, and it lacks the 14-amino acid
insertion. Northern blot analysis detected NDRG4 transcripts of about
3.2 kb in brain and heart only. Variant-specific probes showed NDRG4B
expression in brain only, whereas NDRG4H was expressed in both brain and
heart, with higher expression in heart. RT-PCR confirmed expression of
all 3 variants in brain and of NDRG4H in heart. RNA dot-blot analysis
revealed NDRG4 expression in spinal cord, all specific brain regions
examined, and all specific heart regions examined except aorta.
Expression was also detected in spleen, lymph node, testis, adrenal
gland, and fetal brain and heart, but not in other tissues examined. In
situ hybridization of normal adult brain detected NDRG4 mRNA in
cytoplasm of neurons in cerebral cortex, cerebellum, mesencephalon,
pons, medulla oblongata, and spinal cord. No signal was detected in
peripheral nerves or other cell types, such as glial cells. Western blot
analysis of endogenous or exogenously expressed proteins showed that
NDRG4B, NDRG4B-var, and NDRG4H had apparent molecular masses of 37, 39,
and 41 kD, respectively.

Using expression profiling to identify genes expressed in aortic smooth
muscle, followed by screening a heart cDNA library, Nishimoto et al.
(2003) cloned NDRG4, which they called SMAP8. The deduced 371-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 40.7 kD. Northern blot
analysis detected high expression of an approximately 3.3-kb transcript
in heart and brain, with little to no expression in other tissues
examined. PCR analysis showed moderate expression in aorta and vascular
smooth muscle cells. Western blot analysis of heart and brain detected
SMAP8 at an apparent molecular mass of about 45 kD. SMAP8 localized to
the cytoplasmic fraction of transfected A10 embryonic rat aortic smooth
muscle cells.

By in situ hybridization of adult mouse brain, Yamamoto et al. (2011)
detected wide distribution of Ndrg4 in neurons, but not in astrocytes.
Western blot analysis of adult mouse brain detected 3 Ndrg4 isoforms
representing orthologs of human NDRG4B, NDRG4B-var, and NDRG4H.

GENE FUNCTION

Nishimoto et al. (2003) showed that homocysteine upregulated SMAP8
expression in primary human aortic smooth muscle cells and rat A10
cells, but not in human umbilical vein endothelial cells. Proliferation
and migration of A10 cells significantly decreased following expression
of human SMAP8. SMAP8 was phosphorylated by a serine/threonine kinase
via activation of a PDGF (see 173430) signaling pathway. In addition,
ERK1 (MAPK3; 601795)/ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948) and MEK1 (MAP2K1; 176872)/MEK2
(MAP2K2; 601263) were activated in SMAP8-transfected A10 cells.

Hongo et al. (2006) found that overexpression of 1 of the 6 isoforms of
rat Ndrg4, Ndrg4c2, in PC12 rat pheochromocytoma cells reduced NGF (see
162030)-induced phosphorylation of Elk1 (311040), a nuclear target of
Erk. Reporter gene assays revealed that Ndrg4c2 suppressed Elk1-mediated
activation of a serum response element.

By RT-PCR and immunohistochemical analysis, Schilling et al. (2009)
found that NDRG4 expression was increased in glioblastoma multiforme
(GBM; see 137800) compared with normal human astrocytes. Knockdown of
NDRG4 via short hairpin RNA reduced the viability of GBM cells via G1
cell cycle arrest and subsequent apoptosis. Knockdown of NDRG4 also
reduced the viability of several GBM cell lines and primary astrocytes.
Knockdown of NDRG4 in GBM tumor xenografts reduced tumor growth
following intracranial injection in immunocompromised mice.
Overexpression of NDRG4B or NDRG4H did not affect cell viability.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhou et al. (2001) determined that the NDRG4 gene contains 17 exons and
spans 26 kb. Exons 1 and 2 are specific for NDRG4H, exon 3 is specific
for NDRG4B and NDGR4B-var, and exon 16 is specific for NDRG4B-var. The
region upstream of exon 1 contains a GGCG sequence that may represent a
TATA-less promoter for NDRG4H expression. The region upstream of exon 3
contains a consensus TATA box and 2 CCAAT sequences and may represent
the promoter for NDRG4B and NDRG4B-var expression.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Zhou et al. (2001) mapped the NDRG4 gene
to chromosome 16q21-q22.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yamamoto et al. (2011) found that Ndrg4 -/- mice were born at the
expected mendelian ratio, appeared normal, and were fertile. However,
Ndrg4 -/- mice showed deficits in spatial learning and memory, and they
exhibited increased sensitivity to ischemic stress following middle
cerebral artery occlusion. Consistent with these findings, Ndrg4 -/-
mice had reduced expression of the neuroprotective factor Bdnf (113505).

REFERENCE 1. Hirosawa, M.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Kikuno, R.; Nomura, N.;
Ohara, O.: Characterization of cDNA clones selected by the GeneMark
analysis from size-fractionated cDNA libraries from human brain. DNA
Res. 6: 329-336, 1999.

2. Hongo, S.; Watanabe, T.; Takahashi, K.; Miyazaki, A.: Ndrg4 enhances
NGF-induced ERK activation uncoupled with Elk-1 activation. J. Cell.
Biochem. 98: 185-193, 2006.

3. Nishimoto, S.; Tawara, J.; Toyoda, H.; Kitamura, K.; Komurasaki,
T.: A novel homocysteine-responsive gene, smap8, modulates mitogenesis
in rat vascular smooth muscle cells. Europ. J. Biochem. 270: 2521-2531,
2003.

4. Schilling, S. H.; Hjelmeland, A. B.; Radiloff, D. R.; Liu, I. M.;
Wakeman, T. P.; Fielhauer, J. R.; Foster, E. H.; Lathia, J. D.; Rich,
J. N.; Wang, X.-F.; Datto, M. B.: NDRG4 is required for cell cycle
progression and survival in glioblastoma cells. J. Biol. Chem. 284:
25160-25169, 2009.

5. Yamamoto, H.; Kokame, K.; Okuda, T.; Nakajo, Y.; Yanamoto, H.;
Miyata, T.: NDRG4 protein-deficient mice exhibit spatial learning
deficits and vulnerabilities to cerebral ischemia. J. Biol. Chem. 286:
26158-26165, 2011.

6. Zhou, R.-H.; Kokame, K.; Tsukamoto, Y.; Yutani, C.; Kato, H.; Miyata,
T.: Characterization of the human NDRG gene family: a newly identified
member, NDRG4, is specifically expressed in brain and heart. Genomics 73:
86-97, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/31/2012

EDITED terry: 02/01/2012
mgross: 1/31/2012

600140	TITLE *600140 CREB-BINDING PROTEIN; CREBBP
;;CBP
CBP/MOZ FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

When cellular levels of cAMP increase, a cascade of events leads to the
induction of genes that contain cis-regulatory elements called
cAMP-response elements (CREs). Elevated cAMP levels cause stimulation
and nuclear translocation of protein kinase A (PKA; see 176911), which
activates the transcription factor CREB (CRE-binding protein; see
123810) by phosphorylating it at a single residue, serine-133 (Gonzalez
and Montminy, 1989).

Chrivia et al. (1993) reported the discovery of a nuclear
transcriptional coactivator protein, CREB-binding protein (CBP), that
binds specifically to the PKA-phosphorylated form of the CREB protein.
CBP is a large protein with a molecular mass of about 250 kD which
contains a bromodomain, i.e., a conserved structural unit important for
protein-protein interactions. In Drosophila and yeast, this domain is
found in coactivator proteins involved in signal-dependent, but not
basal, transcription (Nordheim, 1994).

To isolate the gene responsible for Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS1;
180849), which is associated with breakpoints in and microdeletions of
chromosome 16p13.3, Petrij et al. (1995) used FISH to situate all RSTS
breakpoints in an area of 150 kb, thus defining a candidate region.
Complementary DNAs from this area showed very high sequence homology
with mouse CBP. Further studies indicated that the human CBP gene spans
at least the 150-kb genomic area containing the RSTS breakpoints. Giles
et al. (1997) reported the cloning and sequencing of human CREBBP, which
encodes a deduced 2,442-amino acid protein with a molecular mass of 265
kD with 95% homology to the mouse protein.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Liu et al. (2008) described a high resolution x-ray crystal structure of
a semisynthetic heterodimeric p300 (602700) HAT domain in complex with a
bisubstrate inhibitor, Lys-CoA. This structure showed that p300/CBP is a
distant cousin of other structurally characterized HATs, but revealed
several novel features that explain the broad substrate specificity and
preference for nearby basic residues. Based on this structure and
accompanying biochemical data, Liu et al. (2008) proposed that p300/CBP
uses an unusual hit-and-run (Theorell-Chance) catalytic mechanism that
is distinct from other characterized HATs. Several disease-associated
mutations could also be readily accounted for by the p300 HAT structure.

MAPPING

Petrij et al. (1995) used FISH to show that mouse CBP hybridized to
human 16p13.3. Chen and Korenberg (1995) also mapped CREBBP to 16p13.3
using a cDNA probe for the mouse gene in fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Using a human genomic clone for FISH, Wydner et al.
(1995) mapped CREBBP to 16p13.3-p13.2.

GENE FUNCTION

Kwok et al. (1994) used fluorescence anisotropy measurements to define
the equilibrium binding parameters of the phosphoCREB:CBP interaction
and reported that CBP can activate transcription through a region in its
C terminus. The activation domain of CBP interacts directly with the
basal transcription factor TFIIB (189963). As TFIIB interacts with the
TATA-box-binding protein TBP1 (186852), a continuous chain of physical
contacts is established linking the stimulus-activated phosphoCREB,
bound distal to the promoter, with the polymerase II complex that
initiates transcription (Nordheim, 1994). Acting as a coactivator, CBP
augments the activity of phosphorylated CREB to activate transcription
of cAMP-responsive genes.

Arias et al. (1994) microinjected an anti-CBP antiserum into fibroblasts
and determined that transcription from a cAMP promoter can be inhibited.
Arias et al. (1994) also reported that CBP cooperates with upstream
activators, such as JUN (165160), that are involved in
mitogen-responsive transcription. Studies indicated that when JUN was
phosphorylated at the transcriptionally stimulatory sites ser73 and
ser63, it bound CBP with comparable affinity to CREB. They proposed that
CBP is recruited to the promoter through interaction with certain
phosphorylated factors and that CBP may thus play a critical role in the
transmission of inductive signals from cell surface receptors to the
transcriptional apparatus.

Sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBPs; e.g., 184756)
activate transcription of genes whose products are involved in the
cellular uptake and synthesis of cholesterol. Oliner et al. (1996)
showed that the putative activation domain of SREBP binds specifically
to the N-terminal domains of recombinant CBP and p300 (EP300; 602700), a
CREBBP-related protein. Transfection studies demonstrated that CBP
enhances the ability of SREBP to activate transcription of reporter
genes in HeLa cells, thus suggesting that CBP may serve as a coactivator
for SREBP.

Weaver et al. (1998) identified CREBBP/EP300 and IRF3 (603734) as
components of DRAF1 (double-stranded RNA-activated factor-1), a positive
regulator of interferon-stimulated gene transcription that functions as
a direct response to viral infection.

Lin et al. (2001) identified a compactly folded 46-residue domain in CBP
and p300, the IRF3-binding domain (IBID), and determined its structure
by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. IBID has a helical framework
containing an apparently flexible polyglutamine loop that participates
in ligand binding. Spectroscopic data indicated that induced folding
accompanies association of IBID with its partners, which exhibit no
evident sequence similarities. IBID is an important contributor to
signal integration by CBP and p300.

CBP binds to the ser133 phosphorylated region of CREB via a domain
called KIX (Parker et al., 1996). The phosphorylated domain of CREB was
termed KID for kinase-inducible domain. Radhakrishnan et al. (1997) used
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy to study the molecular
interactions of the KIX:KID domains of CBP and CREB, respectively. The
KIX domain of CBP comprises amino acid residues 586 to 666. The KID
domain of CREB comprises amino acid residues 101 to 160. The KID
undergoes a coil-to-helix folding transition upon binding to KIX,
forming 2 alpha helices. The amphipathic helix alpha-B of KID interacts
with a hydrophobic groove defined by helices alpha-1 and alpha-3 of KIX.
The other KID helix, alpha-A, contacts a different face of the alpha-3
helix. The phosphate group of the critical phosphoserine residue of KID
forms a hydrogen bond to the side chain of tyr658 of KIX. The structure
provides a model for interactions between other transactivation domains
and their targets.

Growth factors such as epidermal growth factor (EGF; 131530) and insulin
(176730) regulate development and metabolism via genes containing both
POU homeodomain (PIT1; 173110) and phorbol ester (AP1, or JNK) response
elements. Although CBP functions as a coactivator on these elements, the
mechanism of transactivation was unclear. Zanger et al. (2001)
demonstrated that CBP is recruited to these elements only after it is
phosphorylated at ser436 by growth factor-dependent signaling pathways.
In contrast, p300, a protein closely related to CBP that lacks this
phosphorylation site, binds only weakly to the transcription complex and
in a growth factor-independent manner. A small region of CBP (amino
acids 312 to 440), which the authors termed the GF box, contains a
potent transactivation domain and mediates this effect. Direct
phosphorylation represents a novel mechanism controlling coactivator
recruitment to the transcription complex.

To determine the physiologic significance of the phosphorylation site at
ser436 of the CREBBP protein, Zhou et al. (2004) generated knockin mice
containing a ser436-to-ala mutation. They demonstrated both in vitro and
in vivo that the mutant CREBBP was aberrantly recruited to CREB protein,
resulting in inappropriate activation of gluconeogenesis in the fed
state and glucose intolerance resulting from increased hepatic glucose
production. Zhou et al. (2004) proposed that insulin signaling may
directly regulate many cAMP signaling pathways at the transcriptional
level by controlling CREBBP recruitment.

To elucidate the molecular basis of assembling the multiprotein
activation complex, Demarest et al. (2002) undertook a structural and
thermodynamic analysis of the interaction domains of CBP and the
activator for thyroid hormone and retinoid receptors (TRAM1; 601937).
Demarest et al. (2002) demonstrated that although the isolated domains
are intrinsically disordered, they combine with high affinity to form a
cooperatively folded helical heterodimer. The authors concluded that
their study uncovers a unique mechanism, which they termed 'synergistic
folding,' through which p160 coactivators recruit CBP to allow
transmission of the hormone signal to the transcriptional machinery.

Zhong et al. (2002) demonstrated that transcriptionally inactive nuclear
NFKB in resting cells consists of homodimers of either p65 (164014) or
p50 (164011) complexed with the histone deacetylase HDAC1 (601241). Only
the p50-HDAC1 complexes bound to DNA and suppressed NFKB-dependent gene
expression in unstimulated cells. Appropriate stimulation caused nuclear
localization of NFKB complexes containing phosphorylated p65 that
associated with CBP and displaced the p50-HDAC1 complexes. These results
demonstrated that phosphorylation of p65 determines whether it
associates with either CBP or HDAC1, ensuring that only p65 entering the
nucleus from cytoplasmic NFKB-IKB (164008) complexes can activate
transcription.

TDG (601423) initiates repair of G/T and G/U mismatches, commonly
associated with CpG islands, by removing thymine and uracil moieties.
Tini et al. (2002) reported that TDG associates with transcriptional
coactivators CBP and p300 (602700) and that the resulting complexes are
competent for both the excision step of repair and histone acetylation.
TDG stimulated CBP transcriptional activity in transfected cells and
reciprocally served as a substrate for CBP/p300 acetylation. This
acetylation triggered release of CBP from DNA ternary complexes and also
regulated recruitment of repair endonuclease APE (107748). These
observations revealed a potential regulatory role for protein
acetylation in base mismatch repair and a role for CBP/p300 in
maintaining genomic stability.

Huntington disease (HD; 143100) belongs to the CAG repeat family of
neurodegenerative diseases and is characterized by the presence of an
expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) repeat in the huntingtin gene (HTT;
613004). PolyQ-expanded htt accumulates within large aggregates that are
found in various subcellular compartments, but are more often localized
within the nucleus. It has been suggested that the sequestration of
proteins essential to cell viability may be 1 mechanism that accounts
for toxicity generated by polyQ-expanded proteins. Nuclear inclusions
containing polyQ-expanded htt have been shown to recruit CREBBP. In a
hippocampal cell line, Jiang et al. (2003) found that toxicity within
individual cells induced by polyQ-expanded htt (as revealed by a TUNEL
assay) was associated with the localization of the mutant htt within
either nuclear or perinuclear aggregates. However, in addition to CREBBP
recruitment, CREBBP ubiquitylation and degradation were selectively
enhanced by polyQ-expanded htt. Jiang et al. (2003) concluded that
selected substrates may be directed to the
ubiquitin/proteasome-dependent protein degradation pathway in response
to polyQ-expanded htt within the nucleus.

Tsuda et al. (2003) found that SOX9 (608160) used CBP and p300 as
transcriptional coactivators. SOX9 bound CBP and p300 in vitro and in
vivo, and both coactivators enhanced SOX9-dependent COL2A1 (120140)
promoter activity. Disruption of the CBP-SOX9 complex inhibited COL2A1
mRNA expression and differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells into
chondrocytes.

Blobel et al. (1998) found that in mouse nonhematopoietic cells, Cbp
stimulated Gata1 (305371) transcriptional activity. Cbp and Gata1 also
coimmunoprecipitated from nuclear extracts of mouse erythroid cells.
Interaction mapping pinpointed the contact sites to the zinc finger
region of Gata1 and to the E1A-binding region of Cbp. Expression of
adenovirus E1A revealed that the interaction of Cbp with Gata1 in
erythroid cells affected differentiation and expression of endogenous
Gata1 target genes.

Turnell et al. (2005) showed that 2 anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome
(APC/C) components, APC5 (606948) and APC7 (606949), interact directly
with the coactivators CBP and p300 through protein-protein interaction
domains that are evolutionarily conserved in adenovirus E1A. This
interaction stimulates intrinsic CBP/p300 acetyltransferase activity and
potentiates CBP/p300-dependent transcription. Turnell et al. (2005) also
showed that APC5 and APC7 suppress E1A-mediated transformation in a
CBP/p300-dependent manner, indicating that these components of the APC/C
may be targeted during cellular transformation. Furthermore, Turnell et
al. (2005) established that CBP is required for APC/C function;
specifically, gene ablation of CBP by RNA-mediated interference markedly
reduces the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity of the APC/C and the
progression of cells through mitosis. Taken together, Turnell et al.
(2005) concluded that their results define discrete roles for the
APC/C-CBP/p300 complexes in growth regulation.

Wang et al. (2008) showed that an RNA-binding protein, TLS (137070),
serves as a key transcriptional regulatory sensor of DNA damage signals
that, on the basis of its allosteric modulation by RNA, specifically
binds to and inhibits CBP and p300 histone acetyltransferase activities
on a repressed gene target, cyclin D1 (CCND1; 168461), in human cell
lines. Recruitment of TLS to the CCND1 promoter to cause gene-specific
repression is directed by single-stranded, low copy-number noncoding RNA
(ncRNA) transcripts tethered to the 5-prime regulatory regions of CCND1
that are induced in response to DNA damage signals. Wang et al. (2008)
suggested that signal-induced noncoding RNAs localized to regulatory
regions of transcription units can act cooperatively as selective
ligands, recruiting and modulating the activities of distinct classes of
RNA-binding coregulators in response to specific signals, providing an
unexpected noncoding RNA/RNA-binding protein-based strategy to integrate
transcriptional programs.

Das et al. (2009) demonstrated that the histone acetyltransferase CBP in
flies, and CBP and p300 in humans, acetylate histone H3 on lys56
(H3K56), whereas Drosophila sir2 and human SIRT1 (604479) and SIRT2
(604480) deacetylate H3K56 acetylation. The histone chaperones ASF1A
(609189) in humans and Asf1 in Drosophila are required for acetylation
of H3K56 in vivo, whereas the histone chaperone CAF1 (see 601245) in
humans and Caf1 in Drosophila are required for the incorporation of
histones bearing this mark into chromatin. Das et al. (2009) showed
that, in response to DNA damage, histones bearing acetylated K56 are
assembled into chromatin in Drosophila and human cells, forming foci
that colocalize with sites of DNA repair. Furthermore, acetylation of
H3K56 is increased in multiple types of cancer, correlating with
increased levels of ASF1A in these tumors. Das et al. (2009) concluded
that their identification of multiple proteins regulating the levels of
H3K56 acetylation in metazoans will allow future studies of this
critical and unique histone modification that couples chromatin assembly
to DNA synthesis, cell proliferation, and cancer.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Acute Myelogenous Leukemia

Petrij et al. (1995) noted a case of acute myeloid leukemia (601626)
type M5b reported by Wessels et al. (1991) that was associated with a
translocation t(8;16) whose breakpoint was located in the same region as
the breakpoints in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (RSTS1; 180849) (see
below). Petrij et al. (1995) proposed that the translocation may have
joined CBP to an unknown gene on chromosome 8, leading to the
malignancy.

By positional cloning on chromosome 16, Borrow et al. (1996) implicated
the CREB-binding protein in the M4/M5 subtype of acute myeloid leukemia.
Borrow et al. (1996) also used positional cloning to identify a novel
gene at the chromosome 8 breakpoint, which they termed MOZ (601408) for
monocytic leukemia zinc finger protein.

Sobulo et al. (1997) stated that the recurring translocation
t(11;16)(q23;p13.3) has been observed only in cases of acute leukemia or
myelodysplasia secondary to therapy with drugs targeting DNA
topoisomerase II (126430). Sobulo et al. (1997) showed that in 2
patients the MLL gene was fused in-frame to a different exon of the
CREBBP gene, producing chimeric proteins containing the AT-hooks,
methyltransferase homology domain, and transcriptional repression domain
of MLL fused to the CREB-binding domain or to the bromodomain of CREBBP.
Both fusion products retained the histone acetyltransferase domain of
CREBBP and may lead to leukemia by promoting histone acetylation of
genomic regions targeted by the MLL AT-hooks, leading to transcriptional
deregulation via aberrant chromatin organization.

Panagopoulos et al. (2001) reported a novel t(10;16)(q22;p13)
chromosomal translocation in a childhood acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML-M5a) leading to a MORF (605880)-CBP chimera. RT-PCR experiments
yielded in-frame MORF-CBP and CBP-MORF fusion transcripts. Genomic
analyses revealed that the breaks were close to Alu elements in intron
16 of MORF and intron 2 of CBP and that duplications had occurred near
the breakpoints. The MORF-CBP protein retained the zinc fingers, 2
nuclear localization signals, the histone acetyltransferase (HAT)
domain, a portion of the acidic domain of MORF, and the CBP protein
downstream of codon 29. The part of CBP encoding the RARA-binding
domain, the CREB-binding domain, the 3 cys/his-rich regions, the
bromodomain, the HAT domain, and the glu-rich domains was present. In
the reciprocal CBP-MORF, part of the acidic domain and the C-terminal
ser- and met-rich regions of MORF may be driven by the CBP promoter.

The t(8;16)(p11;p13) translocation, which is strongly associated with
AML displaying monocytic differentiation, erythrophagocytosis by the
leukemic cells, and a poor response to chemotherapy, fuses the CBP gene
on chromosome 16p13 with the MOZ gene on chromosome 8p11. Panagopoulos
et al. (2003) sequenced the breakpoints in 4 t(8;16)-positive AML cases.
The breaks clustered in both CBP intron 2 and MOZ intron 16, and were
close to repetitive elements; in 1 case, an Alu-Alu junction for the
CBP/MOZ hybrid was identified. All 4 cases showed additional genomic
events (i.e., deletions, duplications, and insertions) in the breakpoint
regions in both the MOZ and CBP genes. Thus, the translocation did not
originate through a simple end-to-end fusion. The findings of multiple
breaks and rearrangements suggested the involvement of a damage repair
mechanism in the origin of this translocation.

- Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome 1

Petrij et al. (1995) found that all the breakpoints and microdeletions
in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome are located in 16p13.3, in a region
containing the CREBBP gene. They showed, furthermore, that RSTS results
not only from gross chromosomal rearrangements of 16p but also from
heterozygous point mutations in the CBP gene itself (see, e.g.,
600140.0001), suggesting that the loss of one functional copy of the CBP
gene underlies the developmental abnormalities in RSTS, and possibly the
propensity for malignancy and keloid formation. To search for mutations
in RSTS patients without rearrangements, Petrij et al. (1995) used the
protein truncation test. In 2 of 16 patients, a truncated protein
product was found; both patients, who had classic RSTS phenotype, had a
change of a glutamine codon to a stop codon (see 600140.0001 and
600140.0002).

Taine et al. (1998) found microdeletion of the RT1 probe (D16S237) in 3
of 30 French patients with RSTS. By pooling data from their study and
previous series, they found the cumulative frequency of the 16p13.3
microdeletion to be 11.9% (19 in 159). Most reported microdeletions of
the CREBBP gene in RSTS had been detected by FISH with a single cosmid
probe specific to the 3-prime region of the gene. To explore the
possibility that the rate of microdeletion-positive cases would be
greater if the entire gene were evaluated, Blough et al. (2000)
performed FISH on 66 patients with an established diagnosis of RSTS,
using a panel of 5 cosmids spanning the CREBBP gene. Five of the 66
patients had deletions by FISH (9%), consistent with those rates
reported in various series that ranged between 3% and 25%. The findings
of a partial 5-prime deletion and of interstitial deletions of the gene
added to the known spectrum of mutations and demonstrated the need for
evaluation of the entire CREBBP gene in RSTS patients. No phenotypic
differences between partial deletion, complete deletion, and nondeletion
patients were observed, supporting a haploinsufficiency model for this
disorder.

Petrij et al. (2000) reported diagnostic analysis of 194 patients with
RSTS. Of these, 86 had previously been reported. A total of 157
individuals were tested by FISH, 23 by protein truncation test, and 14
by both methods for microdeletions and truncating mutations in CBP.
Fourteen of 171 (8.2%) patients had microdeletions. Eighty-nine of the
171 were tested using 5 cosmid probes: RT1, RT100, RT102, RT191, RT203
and RT166. Eight microdeletions were found in this group, of which 4
were not deleted for RT1/RT100. Petrij et al. (2000) concluded that the
use of all 5 probes is essential to detect all microdeletions in
patients with clinical features of RSTS. The protein truncation test
revealed truncating mutations in 4 of 37 (10.8%) cases. Petrij et al.
(2000) concluded that microdeletions and truncating mutations in CBP
account for approximately 20% of mutations in individuals with the RSTS
phenotype.

Petrij et al. (2000) stated that the breakpoints of 6 translocations and
inversions described in RSTS patients clustered in a 13-kb intronic
region at the 5-prime end of the CBP gene and could theoretically result
only in proteins containing the extreme N-terminal region of
CREB-binding protein. Microdeletions had occurred more frequently, in
approximately 10% of cases. In contrast to the previous findings, Petrij
et al. (2000) showed that in one patient with a translocation
t(2;16)(q36.3;p13.3), the chromosome 16 breakpoint was located about 100
kb downstream of the previously identified breakpoint cluster. Fiber
FISH and Southern blot analysis were used in this determination. Western
blot analysis of extracts prepared from lymphoblasts showed both a
normal and an abnormal shorter protein lacking the C-terminal domain,
indicating expression of both the normal and the mutant allele. The
results suggested that the loss of C-terminal domains of the protein
product is sufficient to cause RSTS. Furthermore, the data indicated the
potential utility of Western blot analysis as an inexpensive and fast
approach for screening RSTS mutations.

Murata et al. (2001) analyzed the CBP gene in 16 RSTS patients. A
microdeletion was identified in 1 patient by FISH analysis;
heteroallelic mutations were identified in 5 patients. These included a
2-bp and an 11-bp deletion, a 14-bp insertion, and a missense mutation
resulting in an arg1378-to-pro substitution (600140.0003). This missense
mutation was introduced into the recombinant mouse CBP, where it
abolished the HAT activity of CBP and the ability of CBP to
transactivate CREB. The authors hypothesized that loss of HAT activity
of CBP may cause RSTS. They further speculated that treatment of RSTS
patients with histone deacetylase inhibitors might have beneficial
effects.

Among 63 patients with RSTS, Coupry et al. (2002) used several molecular
techniques, including cDNA probes to search for gross gene
rearrangements, intragenic microsatellite markers, and PCR with direct
sequencing, to identify 22 novel point mutations in the CBP gene. In 33
patients, no abnormality in the CBP gene was detected.

Kalkhoven et al. (2003) performed mutational analysis in 39 RSTS
patients and identified 8 heterozygous mutations in the HAT domain of
CBP, one of which altered a conserved plant homeodomain (PHD) zinc
finger amino acid (E1278K; 600140.0006), while a second deleted exon 22
(600140.0007), which encodes the central region of the PHD finger.
Functional analysis revealed that these PHD finger mutants lacked in
vitro acetyltransferase activity towards histones and CBP itself and
displayed reduced coactivator function for the transcription factor
CREB. In EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cells from the exon 22 deletion
patient, there was 50% less endogenous CBP HAT activity. The authors
stressed the functional importance of the PHD finger in vivo, and
implied that reduction of CBP HAT activity, as exemplified by disruption
of the PHD finger, may be sufficient to cause RSTS.

In 6 (28.6%) of 21 RSTS patients in whom no point mutations had been
identified, Stef et al. (2007) used comparative genomic hybridization on
microarrays and quantitative multiplex fluorescent-PCR to identify
deletions involving the CREBBP gene. The deletions ranged in size from
3.3 kb to 6.5 Mb; 1 patient had a deleterious duplication containing
exon 16. No phenotypic differences were observed, except for 1 patient
with a 6.5-Mb deletion, who had a severe phenotype and died at 34 days
of life. Stef et al. (2007) concluded that CREBBP dosage anomalies
constitute a common cause of the disorder and recommended
high-resolution gene dosage studies of the CREBBP gene in candidate
patients.

Gervasini et al. (2007) used FISH and microsatellite analysis to screen
42 Italian RSTS patients and identified deletions involving the CREBBP
gene that ranged in size from 150 kb to 2.6 Mb in 6 patients. Three of
the patients were low-level mosaics, with the deletion present in less
than 30% of lymphoctyes and in less than 20% of epithelial cells
analyzed. The authors noted that, despite the small number of deleted
cells in the investigated tissues, the clinical phenotype of the mosaic
patients was quite typical, thus emphasizing the dose sensitivity of
CREBBP.

- Spinal and Bulbar Muscular Atrophy

Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA; 313200) is an inherited
neurodegenerative disease caused by CAG repeat expansion within the gene
encoding the androgen receptor (AR; 313700). The expansion results in an
expanded polyglutamine tract, which likely confers a novel, toxic
function to the affected protein. Cell culture and transgenic mouse
studies have implicated the nucleus as a site for pathogenesis,
suggesting that a critical nuclear factor or process may be disrupted by
the polyglutamine expansion. McCampbell et al. (2000) demonstrated that
CREB-binding protein is incorporated into nuclear inclusions formed by
polyglutamine-containing proteins in cultured cells, transgenic mice,
and tissue from patients with SBMA. Soluble levels of CREB-binding
protein were reduced in cells expressing expanded polyglutamine despite
increased levels of CBP mRNA. Overexpression of CREBBP rescued cells
from polyglutamine-mediated toxicity in neuronal cell culture. The
authors proposed a CREBBP-sequestration model of polyglutamine expansion
disease.

- Chromosome 16p13.3 Duplication Syndrome

Thienpont et al. (2010) reported 12 unrelated patients with mild to
moderate mental retardation and mild skeletal anomalies associated with
interstitial duplication of chromosome 16p13.3 (613458). Ten of the 12
duplications occurred de novo, and 2 were inherited from unaffected
parents. The duplications ranged in size, but the smallest region of
overlap was 186 to 260 kb in size and included the CREBBP gene. None of
the breakpoints were recurrent, arguing against nonallelic homologous
recombination as a mechanism. The findings indicated that CREBBP is
dosage-sensitive. Thienpont et al. (2010) estimated the frequency of
CREBBP duplication to be 1 in 97,000 to 146,000 live births.

- Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma

Pasqualucci et al. (2011) reported that the 2 most common types of B
cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (605027), follicular lymphoma and diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma, harbor frequent structural alterations
inactivating CREBBP and, more rarely, EP300 (602700), 2 highly related
histone and nonhistone acetyltransferases (HATs) that act as
transcriptional coactivators in multiple signaling pathways. Overall,
about 39% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and 41% of follicular
lymphoma cases display genomic deletions and/or somatic mutations that
remove or inactivate the HAT coding domain of these 2 genes. These
lesions usually affect 1 allele, suggesting that reduction in HAT dosage
is important for lymphomagenesis. Pasqualucci et al. (2011) demonstrated
specific defects in acetylation-mediated inactivation of the BCL6
oncoprotein (109565) and activation of the p53 tumor suppressor
(191170).

- Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia

Mullighan et al. (2011) found that 18.3% of relapse cases of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia had sequence or deletion mutations in CREBBP and
that these frequently occurred in the histone acetyltransferase domain.

EVOLUTION

While mapping and cloning the human CREBBP gene on 16p13.3, Giles et al.
(1997) noticed an emerging pattern of relationship between this
chromosome band and a region of chromosome 22q. CBP exhibits extensive
homology to the adenovirus E1A-associated protein p300, whose gene
(EP300; 602700) maps to 22q13 (Eckner et al., 1994; Lundblad et al.,
1995). They noted that the heme oxygenase-1 gene (HMOX1; 141250) maps to
22q12 and the heme oxygenase-2 gene (HMOX2; 141251) to 16p13.3
Furthermore, the gene for phosphomannomutase-2 (PMM2; 601785) is on
16p13 and that for phosphomannomutase-1 (PMM1; 601786) is on 22q13.
Sequence comparison at the amino acid level revealed that homology
between these paralogous proteins is high: 63% between CBP and p300, 66%
between PMM1 and PMM2, and 74% between HMOX1 and HMOX2. By examination
of genome databases, e.g., OMIM, Giles et al. (1998) found 6 additional
sets of paralogs mapping to 16p13 and 22q11-q13, although the extent of
homology between these paralogous sets was not known. These pairs were
SSTR5 (182455) and SSTR3 (182453) on 16 and 22, respectively; CSNK2A2
(115442) and CSNK1E (600863); UBE2I (601661) and UB2L3; MYH11 (160745)
and MYH9 (160775); CRYM (123740) and a cluster of crystallin genes on
chromosome 22, e.g., CRYBB1 (600929); IL4RA (147781) and IL2RB (146710).
Giles et al. (1998) postulated that these bands show homology because of
an ancestral event of the type proposed by Ohno (1993). Arguing from the
fact that chromosome 14q carries SSTR1 (182451), UBE2L1 (600012), MYH6
(160710), and MYH7 (160760), whereas SSTR2 (182452), CSNK1D (600864),
and CRYBA1 (123610) map to 17q, combined with the location on leukemia
breakpoints, strongly suggested to Giles et al. (1998) that these gene
families arose by tetraploidization resulting in members on 14q, 16p,
17q, and 22q. Genetic redundancy is potentially of great relevance to
organismal evolution since it may protect against potentially harmful
mutations and may provide a pool of diverse yet functionally similar
proteins for further evolution.

ANIMAL MODEL

Tanaka et al. (1997) generated Cbp +/- mice with haploinsufficiency of
the Cbp protein, as demonstrated by Western blot analysis. Many of the
mutant mice exhibited abnormal skeletal patterning similar to some
features found in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, including delayed
ossification of the frontal bones, enlarged anterior fontanels, and
various anomalies of the sternum, rib cage, xiphoid process, and
vertebrae. The mutant mice also had decreased levels of bone
morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP7; 112267), a molecule believed to be part
of the signaling cascade in skeletal development. Tanaka et al. (1997)
found that mice homozygous for the mutation died in utero.

Kung et al. (2000) showed that Cbp +/- mice display an increased cancer
risk similar to that seen in patients with RSTS. These results provided
experimental evidence that CBP has tumor suppressing activity.

To identify the physiologic functions of the Cbp protein using a
loss-of-function mutant, Yamauchi et al. (2002) analyzed Cbp-deficient
mice. As Crebbp-null mice died during embryogenesis, they used
heterozygous mice. Unexpectedly, Crebbp +/- mice showed markedly reduced
weight of white adipose tissue but not of other tissues. Despite this
lipodystrophy, Crebbp +/- mice showed increased insulin sensitivity and
glucose tolerance and were completely protected from body weight gain
induced by high-fat diet. They observed increased leptin sensitivity and
increased serum adiponectin (605441) levels in Crebbp +/- mice. These
increased effects of insulin-sensitizing hormones secreted from white
adipose tissue may explain, at least in part, the phenotypes of Crebbp
+/- mice. The study demonstrated that CBP may function as a
'master-switch' between energy storage and expenditure.

Kasper et al. (2002) demonstrated that the protein-binding KIX domains
of CBP and p300 (602700) have nonredundant functions in mice. In mice
homozygous for point mutations in the KIX domain of p300 designed to
disrupt the binding surface for the transcription factors c-Myb (189990)
and Creb, multilineage defects occur in hematopoiesis, including anemia,
B-cell deficiency, thymic hypoplasia, megakaryocytosis, and
thrombocytosis. By contrast, age-matched mice homozygous for identical
mutations in the KIX domain of CBP are essentially normal. There is a
synergistic genetic interaction between mutations in c-MYB and mutations
in the KIX domain of p300, which suggests that the binding of c-MYB to
this domain of p300 is crucial for the development and function of
megakaryocytes. Thus, Kasper et al. (2002) concluded that conserved
domains in 2 highly related coactivators have contrasting roles in
hematopoiesis.

Bourtchouladze et al. (2003) reasoned that drugs that modulate CREB
function by enhancing cAMP signaling might yield an effective treatment
for the memory defect of CBP +/- mice. To this end, they designed a
cell-based drug screen and discovered inhibitors of phosphodiesterase-4
(see 600126, for example) to be particularly effective enhancers of CREB
function. They extended previous behavioral observations by showing that
CBP +/- mutants have impaired long-term memory but normal learning and
short-term memory in an objective recognition task. They demonstrated
that the prototypic PDE4 inhibitor, rolipram, and a novel one (HT0712)
abolish the long-term memory defect of CBP +/- mice. The genetic lesion
in CBP acts specifically to shift the dose sensitivity for HT0712 to
enhance memory formation, which conveys molecular specificity on the
drug's mechanism of action. The results suggested that PDE4 inhibitors
might be used to treat the cognitive dysfunction of RSTS patients.

Alarcon et al. (2004) found that transgenic mice haploinsufficient for
the Cbp protein exhibited normal activity, motivation, anxiety, and
working short-term memory, but had reduced long-term memory for fear and
object recognition. Electrophysiologic measurements showed that the
mutant mice had normal basal synaptic transmission, but had a defect in
the late phase of hippocampal long-term potentiation that is dependent
on transcriptional activation. Immunohistochemistry and Western blot
analysis showed that the Cbp +/- mice had decreased acetylation of
histone H2B (see 609904), indicating an alteration in chromatin. Both
enhancement of the expression of CREB-dependent genes and inhibition of
histone deacetylation ameliorated the long-term potentiation and memory
defects. Alarcon et al. (2004) concluded that some of the cognitive
deficits in RTS may result from the continued requirement throughout
life for both functions of CBP: activation of CREB and histone
acetylation with chromatin remodeling.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1
CREBBP, GLN136TER

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (RSTS1; 180849), Petrij et
al. (1995) identified a C-T transition in the CREBBP gene, resulting in
a stop codon and a truncated protein product.

.0002
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1
CREBBP, GLN357TER

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (RSTS1; 180849), Petrij et
al. (1995) identified a C-T transition in the CREBBP gene, resulting in
a stop codon and a truncated protein product. In this patient, the
mutation destroyed a PvuII restriction site. Since the site was found to
be intact in both chromosomes of the parents, the mutation in the
patient must have been de novo.

.0003
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1
CREBBP, ARG1378PRO

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (180849), Murata et al.
(2001) demonstrated a G-C transversion in the CREBBP gene, resulting in
an arg1378-to-pro (R1378P) substitution. In a transgenic mouse model,
this mutation abolished HAT activity of the CREB-binding protein.

.0004
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1
CREBBP, 2-BP DEL, NT5222

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (180849), Murata et al.
(2001) demonstrated a 2-bp deletion in the CREBBP gene of nucleotides
5222-5223, leading to missense translation from codons 1469-1476,
followed by premature termination at codon 1477.

.0005
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1, INCOMPLETE
CREBBP, TYR1175CYS

In a patient with a mild form of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (180849),
Bartsch et al. (2002) identified a 3524A-G transition in the CREBBP
gene, resulting in a tyr1175-to-cys (Y1175C) substitution. The authors
concluded that the missense mutation resulted in the milder phenotype.

.0006
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1
CREBBP, GLU1278LYS

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (180849), Kalkhoven et al.
(2003) identified a 3832G-A transition in the CREBBP gene, resulting in
a glu1278-to-lys (E1278K) substitution at a conserved residue within the
PHD finger of the HAT domain.

.0007
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1
CREBBP, IVS21, A-T, -2

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (180849), Kalkhoven et al.
(2003) identified an A-to-T transversion 2 bp 5-prime to exon 22 in the
CREBBP gene. The mutation was predicted to result in aberrant splicing
and loss of the 26 amino acids encoded by exon 22. These residues lie in
the middle of the PHD finger of the HAT domain. Expression studies
revealed loss of HAT activity in transiently transfected cells.

.0008
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 1, INCOMPLETE
CREBBP, THR910ALA

In a girl, her mother, and maternal grandmother with an incomplete form
of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (180849), Bartsch et al. (2010)
identified a heterozygous 2728A-G transition in exon 14 of the CREBBP
gene, resulting in a thr910-to-ala (T910A) substitution in a partially
conserved residue. The mutation occurred outside the crucial histone
acetyltransferase domain, which could explain the milder phenotype. The
12-year-old female proband had mild dysmorphic features, such as
high-arched eyebrows, elongated face, prominent nose, high-arched
palate, short broad thumbs, and broad halluces. She had a short
attention span, dyslexia, dyscalculia, reading difficulties, and needed
specal teaching in language and mathematics. Her mother had similar
facial features, was mildly obese, and had normal intelligence. The
grandmother reportedly had a similar appearance and had not finished
school. The report confirmed autosomal dominant inheritance of the
disorder.

REFERENCE 1. Alarcon, J. M.; Malleret, G.; Touzani, K.; Vronskaya, S.; Ishii,
S.; Kandel, E. R.; Barco, A.: Chromatin acetylation, memory, and
LTP are impaired in CBP+/- mice: a model for the cognitive deficit
in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome and its amelioration. Neuron 42: 947-959,
2004.

2. Arias, J.; Alberts, A. S.; Brindle, P.; Claret, F. X.; Smeal, T.;
Karin, M.; Feramisco, J.; Montminy, M.: Activation of cAMP and mitogen
responsive genes relies on a common nuclear factor. Nature 370:
226-229, 1994.

3. Bartsch, O.; Kress, W.; Kempf, O.; Lechno, S.; Haaf, T.; Zechner,
U.: Inheritance and variable expression in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 152A: 2254-2261, 2010.

4. Bartsch, O.; Locher, K.; Meinecke, P.; Kress, W.; Seemanova, E.;
Wagner, A.; Ostermann, K.; Rodel, G.: Molecular studies in 10 cases
of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, including a mild variant showing a missense
mutation in codon 1175 of CREBBP. J. Med. Genet. 39: 496-501, 2002.

5. Blobel, G. A.; Nakajima, T.; Eckner, R.; Montminy, M.; Orkin, S.
H.: CREB-binding protein cooperates with transcription factor GATA-1
and is required for erythroid differentiation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95:
2061-2066, 1998.

6. Blough, R. I.; Petrij, F.; Dauwerse, J. G.; Milatovich-Cherry,
A.; Weiss, L.; Saal, H. M.; Rubinstein, J. H.: Variation in microdeletions
of the cyclic AMP-responsive element-binding protein gene at chromosome
band 16p13.3 in the Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 90:
29-34, 2000.

7. Borrow, J.; Stanton, V. P., Jr.; Andresen, J. M.; Becher, R.; Behm,
F. G.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Civin, C. I.; Disteche, C.; Dube, I.; Frischauf,
A. M.; Horsman, D.; Mitelman, F.; Volinia, S.; Watmore, A. E.; Housman,
D. E.: The translocation t(8;16)(p11;p13) of acute myeloid leukaemia
fuses a putative acetyltransferase to the CREB-binding protein. Nature
Genet. 14: 33-41, 1996.

8. Bourtchouladze, R.; Lidge, R.; Catapano, R.; Stanley, J.; Gossweiler,
S.; Romashko, D.; Scott, R.; Tully, T.: A mouse model of Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome: defective long-term memory is ameliorated by inhibitors
of phosphodiesterase 4. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 10518-10522,
2003.

9. Chen, X.-N.; Korenberg, J. R.: Localization of human CREBBP (CREB
binding protein) to 16p13.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 71: 56-57, 1995.

10. Chrivia, J. C.; Kwok, R. P. S.; Lamb, N.; Hagiwara, M.; Montminy,
M. R.; Goodman, R. H.: Phosphorylated CREB binds specifically to
the nuclear protein CBP. Nature 365: 855-859, 1993.

11. Coupry, I.; Roudaut, C.; Stef, M.; Delrue, M.-A.; Marche, M.;
Burgelin, I.; Taine, L.; Cruaud, C.; Lacombe, D.; Arveiler, B.: Molecular
analysis of the CBP gene in 60 patients with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. J.
Med. Genet. 39: 415-421, 2002.

12. Das, C.; Lucia, M. S.; Hansen, K. C.; Tyler, J. K.: CBP/p300-mediated
acetylation of histone H3 on lysine56. Nature 459: 113-117, 2009.
Note: Erratum: Nature 460: 1164 only, 2009.

13. Demarest, S. J.; Martinez-Yamout, M.; Chung, J.; Chen, H.; Xu,
W.; Dyson, H. J.; Evans, R. M.; Wright, P. E.: Mutual synergistic
folding in recruitment of CBP/p300 by p160 nuclear receptor coactivators. Nature 415:
549-553, 2002.

14. Eckner, R.; Ewen, M. E.; Newsome, D.; Gerdes, M.; DeCaprio, J.
A.; Lawrence, J. B.; Livingston, D. M.: Molecular cloning and functional
analysis of the adenovirus E1A-associated 300-kD protein (p300) reveals
a protein with properties of a transcriptional adaptor. Genes Dev. 15:
869-884, 1994.

15. Gervasini, C.; Castronovo, P.; Bentivegna, A.; Mottadelli, F.;
Faravelli, F.; Giovannucci-Uzielli, M. L.; Pessagno, A.; Lucci-Cordisco,
E.; Pinto, A. M.; Salviati, L.; Selicorni, A.; Tenconi, R.; Neri,
G.; Larizza, L.: High frequency of mosaic CREBBP deletions in Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome patients and mapping of somatic and germ-line breakpoints. Genomics 90:
567-573, 2007.

16. Giles, R. H.; Dauwerse, H. G.; van Ommen, G.-J. B.; Breuning,
M. H.: Do human chromosomal bands 16p13 and 22q11-13 share ancestral
origins? (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63: 1240-1242, 1998.

17. Giles, R. H.; Petrij, F.; Dauwerse, H. G.; den Hollander, A. I.;
Lushnikova, T.; van Ommen, G.-J. B.; Goodman, R. H.; Deaven, L. L.;
Doggett, N. A.; Peters, D. J.; Breuning, M. H.: Construction of a
1.2-Mb contig surrounding, and molecular analysis of, the human CREB-binding
protein (CBP/CREBBP) gene on chromosome 16p13.3. Genomics 42: 96-114,
1997.

18. Gonzalez, G. A.; Montminy, M. R.: Cyclic AMP stimulates somatostatin
gene transcription by phosphorylation of CREB at serine 133. Cell 59:
675-680, 1989.

19. Jiang, H.; Nucifora, F. C., Jr.; Ross, C. A.; DeFranco, D. B.
: Cell death triggered by polyglutamine-expanded huntingtin in a neuronal
cell line is associated with degradation of CREB-binding protein. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 1-12, 2003.

20. Kalkhoven, E.; Roelfsema, J. H.; Teunissen, H.; den Boer, A.;
Ariyurek, Y.; Zantema, A.; Breuning, M. H.; Hennekam, R. C. M.; Peters,
D. J. M.: Loss of CBP acetyltransferase activity by PHD finger mutations
in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 441-450, 2003.

21. Kasper, L. H.; Boussouar, F.; Ney, P. A.; Jackson, C. W.; Rehg,
J.; van Deursen, J. M.; Brindle, P. K.: A transcription-factor-binding
surface of coactivator p300 is required for haematopoiesis. Nature 419:
738-743, 2002.

22. Kung, A. L.; Rebel, V. I.; Bronson, R. T.; Ch'ng, L.-E.; Sieff,
C. A.; Livingston, D. M.; Yao, T.-P.: Gene dose-dependent control
of hematopoiesis and hematologic tumor suppression by CBP. Genes
Dev. 14: 272-277, 2000.

23. Kwok, R. P. S.; Lundblad, J. R.; Chrivia, J. C.; Richards, J.
P.; Bachinger, H. P.; Brennan, R. G.; Roberts, S. G. E.; Green, M.
R.; Goodman, R. H.: Nuclear protein CBP is a coactivator for the
transcription factor CREB. Nature 370: 223-226, 1994.

24. Lin, C. H.; Hare, B. J.; Wagner, G.; Harrison, S. C.; Maniatis,
T.; Fraenkel, E.: A small domain of CBP/p300 binds diverse proteins:
solution structure and functional studies. Molec. Cell 8: 581-590,
2001.

25. Liu, X.; Wang, L.; Zhao, K.; Thompson, P. R.; Hwang, Y.; Marmorstein,
R.; Cole, P. A.: The structural basis of protein acetylation by the
p300/CBP transcriptional coactivator. Nature 451: 846-850, 2008.

26. Lundblad, J. R.; Kwok, R. P. S.; Laurance, M. E.; Harter, M. L.;
Goodman, R. H.: Adenoviral E1A-associated protein p300 as a functional
homologue of the transcriptional co-activator CBP. Nature 374: 85-88,
1995.

27. McCampbell, A.; Taylor, J. P.; Taye, A. A.; Robitschek, J.; Li,
M.; Walcott, J.; Merry, D.; Chai, Y.; Paulson, H.; Sobue, G.; Fischbeck,
K. H.: CREB-binding protein sequestration by expanded polyglutamine. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 2197-2202, 2000.

28. Mullighan, C. G.; Zhang, J.; Kasper, L. H.; Lerach, S.; Payne-Turner,
D.; Phillips, L. A.; Heatley, S. L.; Holmfeldt, L.; Collins-Underwood,
J. R.; Ma, J.; Buetow, K. H.; Pui, C.-H.; Baker, S. D.; Brindle, P.
K.; Downing, J. R.: CREBBP mutations in relapsed acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia. Nature 471: 235-239, 2011.

29. Murata, T.; Kurokawa, R.; Krones, A.; Tatsumi, K.; Ishii, M.;
Taki, T.; Masuno, M.; Ohashi, H.; Yanagisawa, M.; Rosenfeld, M. G.;
Glass, C. K.; Hayashi, Y.: Defect of histone acetyltransferase activity
of the nuclear transcriptional coactivator CBP in Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1071-1076, 2001.

30. Nordheim, A.: CREB takes CBP to tango. Nature 370: 177-178,
1994.

31. Ohno, S.: Patterns in genome evolution. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 3:
911-914, 1993.

32. Oliner, J. D.; Andresen, J. M.; Hansen, S. K.; Zhou, S.; Tjian,
R.: SREBP transcriptional activity is mediated through an interaction
with the CREB-binding protein. Genes Dev. 10: 2903-2911, 1996.

33. Panagopoulos, I.; Fioretos, T.; Isaksson, M.; Samuelsson, U.;
Billstrom, R.; Strombeck, B.; Mitelman, F.; Johansson, B.: Fusion
of the MORF and CBP genes in acute myeloid leukemia with the t(10;16)(q22;p13). Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 395-404, 2001.

34. Panagopoulos, I.; Isaksson, M.; Lindvall, C.; Hagemeijer, A.;
Mitelman, F.; Johansson, B.: Genomic characterization of MOZ/CBP
and CBP/MOZ chimeras in acute myeloid leukemia suggests the involvement
of a damage-repair mechanism in the origin of the t(8;16)(p11;p13). Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 36: 90-98, 2003.

35. Parker, D.; Ferreri, K.; Nakajima, T.; LaMorte, V. J.; Evans,
R.; Koerber, S. C.; Hoeger, C.; Montminy, M. R.: Phosphorylation
of CREB at ser-133 induces complex formation with CREB-binding protein
via a direct mechanism. Molec. Cell. Biol. 16: 694-703, 1996.

36. Pasqualucci, L.; Dominguez-Sola, D.; Chiarenza, A.; Fabbri, G.;
Grunn, A.; Trifonov, V.; Kasper, L. H.; Lerach, S.; Tang, H.; Ma,
J.; Rossi, D.; Chadburn, A.; Murty, V. V.; Mullighan, C. G.; Gaidano,
G.; Rabadan, R.; Brindle, P. K.; Dalla-Favera, R.: Inactivating mutations
of acetyltransferase genes in B-cell lymphoma. Nature 471: 189-195,
2011.

37. Petrij, F.; Dauwerse, H. G.; Blough, R. I.; Giles, R. H.; van
der Smagt, J. J.; Wallerstein, R.; Maaswinkel-Mooy, P. D.; van Karnebeek,
C. D.; van Ommen, G.-J. B.; van Haeringen, A.; Rubinstein, J. H.;
Saal, H. M.; Hennekam, R. C. M.; Peters, D. J. M.; Breuning, M. H.
: Diagnostic analysis of the Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: five cosmids
should be used for microdeletion detection and low number of protein
truncating mutations. J. Med. Genet. 37: 168-176, 2000.

38. Petrij, F.; Dorsman, J. C.; Dauwerse, H. G.; Giles, R. H.; Peeters,
T.; Hennekam, R. C. M.; Breuning, M. H.; Peters, D. J. M.: Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome caused by a de novo reciprocal translocation t(2;16)(q36.3;p13.3). Am.
J. Med. Genet. 92: 47-52, 2000.

39. Petrij, F.; Giles, R. H.; Dauwerse, H. G.; Saris, J. J.; Hennekam,
R. C. M.; Masuno, M.; Tommerup, N.; van Ommen, G.-J. B.; Goodman,
R. H.; Peters, D. J. M.; Breuning, M. H.: Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome
caused by mutations in the transcriptional co-activator CBP. Nature 376:
348-351, 1995.

40. Radhakrishnan, I.; Perez-Alvarado, G. C.; Parker, D.; Dyson, H.
J.; Montminy, M. R.; Wright, P. E.: Solution structure of the KIX
domain of CBP bound to the transactivation domain of CREB: a model
for activator:coactivator interactions. Cell 91: 741-752, 1997.

41. Sobulo, O. M.; Borrow, J.; Tomek, R.; Reshmi, S.; Harden, A.;
Schlegelberger, B.; Housman, D.; Doggett, N. A.; Rowley, J. D.; Zeleznik-Le,
N. J.: MLL is fused to CBP, a histone acetyltransferase, in therapy-related
acute myeloid leukemia with a t(11;16)(q23;p13.3). Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 94: 8732-8737, 1997.

42. Stef, M.; Simon, D.; Mardirossian, B.; Delrue, M.-A.; Burgelin,
I.; Hubert, C.; Marche, M.; Bonnet, F.; Gorry, P.; Longy, M.; Lacombe,
D.; Coupry, I.; Arveiler, B.: Spectrum of CREBBP gene dosage anomalies
in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome patients. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 15:
843-847, 2007.

43. Taine, L.; Goizet, C.; Wen, Z. Q.; Petrij, F.; Breuning, M. H.;
Ayme, S.; Saura, R.; Arveiler, B.; Lacombe, D.: Submicroscopic deletion
of chromosome 16p13.3 in patients with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 78: 267-270, 1998.

44. Tanaka, Y.; Naruse, I.; Maekawa, T.; Masuya, H.; Shiroishi, T.;
Ishii, S.: Abnormal skeletal patterning in embryos lacking a single
Cbp allele: a partial similarity with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 10215-10220, 1997.

45. Thienpont, B.; Bena, F.; Breckpot, J.; Philip, N.; Menten, B.;
Van Esch, H.; Scalais, E.; Salamone, J. M.; Fong, C. T.; Kussmann,
J. L.; Grange, D. K.; Gorski, J. L.; and 12 others: Duplications
of the critical Rubinstein-Taybi deletion region on chromosome 16p13.3
cause a novel recognisable syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 47: 155-161,
2010.

46. Tini, M.; Benecke, A.; Um, S.-J.; Torchia, J.; Evans, R. M.; Chambon,
P.: Association of CBP/p300 acetylase and thymine DNA glycosylase
links DNA repair and transcription. Molec. Cell 9: 265-277, 2002.

47. Tsuda, M.; Takahashi, S.; Takahashi, Y.; Asahara, H.: Transcriptional
co-activators CREB-binding protein and p300 regulate chondrocyte-specific
gene expression via association with Sox9. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 27224-27229,
2003.

48. Turnell, A. S.; Stewart, G. S.; Grand, R. J. A.; Rookes, S. M.;
Martin, A.; Yamano, H.; Elledge, S. J.; Gallimore, P. H.: The APC/C
and CBP/p300 cooperate to regulate transcription and cell-cycle progression. Nature 438:
690-695, 2005.

49. Wang, X.; Arai, S.; Song, X.; Reichart, D.; Du, K.; Pascual, G.;
Tempst, P.; Rosenfeld, M. G.; Glass, C. K.; Kurokawa, R.: Induced
ncRNAs allosterically modify RNA-binding proteins in cis to inhibit
transcription. Nature 454: 126-130, 2008.

50. Weaver, B. K.; Kumar, K. P.; Reich, N. C.: Interferon regulatory
factor 3 and CREB-binding protein/p300 are subunits of double-stranded
RNA-activated transcription factor DRAF1. Molec. Cell. Biol. 18:
1359-1368, 1998.

51. Wessels, J. W.; Mollevanger, P.; Dauwerse, J. G.; Cluitmans, F.
H. M.; Breuning, M. H.; Beverstock, G. C.: Two distinct loci on the
short arm of chromosome 16 are involved in myeloid leukemia. Blood 77:
1555-1559, 1991.

52. Wydner, K. L.; Bhattacharya, S.; Eckner, R.; Lawrence, J. B.;
Livingston, D. M.: Localization of human CREB-binding protein gene
(CREBBP) to 16p13.2-p13.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 30:
395-396, 1995.

53. Yamauchi, T.; Oike, Y.; Kamon, J.; Waki, H.; Komeda, K.; Tsuchida,
A.; Date, Y.; Li, M.-X.; Miki, H.; Akanuma, Y.; Nagai, R.; Kimura,
S.; Saheki, T.; Nakazato, M.; Naitoh, T.; Yamamura, K.; Kadowaki,
T.: Increased insulin sensitivity despite lipodystrophy in Crebbp
heterozygous mice. Nature Genet. 30: 221-226, 2002.

54. Zanger, K.; Radovick, S.; Wondisford, F. E.: CREB binding protein
recruitment to the transcription complex requires growth factor-dependent
phosphorylation of its GF box. Molec. Cell 7: 551-558, 2001.

55. Zhong, H.; May, M. J.; Jimi, E.; Ghosh, S.: The phosphorylation
status of nuclear NF-kappa-B determines its association with CBP/p300
or HDAC-1. Molec. Cell 9: 625-636, 2002.

56. Zhou, X. Y.; Shibusawa, N.; Naik, K.; Porras, D.; Temple, K.;
Ou, H.; Kaihara, K.; Roe, M. W.; Brady, M. J.; Wondisford, F. E.:
Insulin regulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis through phosphorylation
of CREB-binding protein. Nature Med. 10: 633-637, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/20/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/14/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/21/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/8/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/9/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/4/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/7/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/21/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/13/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/30/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/4/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/6/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/26/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/19/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 11/19/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/10/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/11/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/12/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/23/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/7/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/22/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/5/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/10/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/24/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/16/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/17/2000
Michael J. Wright - updated: 8/10/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/7/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/25/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/13/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 4/16/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/25/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/23/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/17/1998
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/23/1998
Ethylin Wang Jabs - updated: 11/18/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/10/1997
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 8/31/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/6/1994

EDITED mgross: 01/29/2013
wwang: 7/1/2011
ckniffin: 6/20/2011
alopez: 6/16/2011
terry: 6/14/2011
carol: 5/25/2011
wwang: 1/24/2011
ckniffin: 1/6/2011
wwang: 6/28/2010
ckniffin: 6/21/2010
carol: 4/5/2010
mgross: 1/4/2010
terry: 12/8/2009
carol: 9/15/2009
terry: 9/9/2009
alopez: 6/4/2009
terry: 2/2/2009
alopez: 9/11/2008
terry: 8/29/2008
wwang: 4/23/2008
alopez: 3/20/2008
terry: 3/7/2008
wwang: 12/26/2007
terry: 12/21/2007
wwang: 8/23/2007
ckniffin: 8/13/2007
alopez: 2/1/2006
terry: 1/30/2006
alopez: 9/27/2005
tkritzer: 5/13/2005
ckniffin: 5/4/2005
alopez: 1/6/2005
tkritzer: 10/26/2004
alopez: 6/28/2004
carol: 5/19/2004
ckniffin: 11/24/2003
carol: 11/19/2003
ckniffin: 11/13/2003
tkritzer: 11/6/2003
ckniffin: 11/3/2003
cwells: 10/10/2003
mgross: 3/14/2003
terry: 3/11/2003
tkritzer: 2/11/2003
alopez: 11/13/2002
terry: 11/12/2002
mgross: 9/23/2002
alopez: 2/7/2002
terry: 2/7/2002
alopez: 1/30/2002
terry: 1/22/2002
mgross: 11/5/2001
alopez: 10/15/2001
cwells: 10/15/2001
cwells: 10/10/2001
cwells: 5/2/2001
cwells: 4/24/2001
mgross: 4/16/2001
terry: 11/17/2000
alopez: 8/10/2000
mgross: 7/7/2000
mcapotos: 5/24/2000
mcapotos: 5/22/2000
terry: 4/25/2000
mgross: 1/18/2000
terry: 1/13/2000
psherman: 4/20/1999
psherman: 4/16/1999
mgross: 3/25/1999
dkim: 11/6/1998
terry: 10/27/1998
terry: 10/23/1998
carol: 8/18/1998
terry: 8/17/1998
terry: 6/4/1998
carol: 1/26/1998
carol: 1/23/1998
mark: 11/19/1997
jenny: 11/18/1997
terry: 9/12/1997
terry: 9/10/1997
mark: 9/10/1996
mark: 9/3/1996
mark: 8/31/1996
mark: 1/14/1996
terry: 11/16/1995
mark: 8/18/1995
carol: 3/2/1995
carol: 3/1/1995
carol: 10/7/1994
carol: 10/6/1994

613482	TITLE *613482 CYCLIN L2; CCNL2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By randomly sequencing clones obtained from a human bone marrow stromal
cell cDNA library, followed by database analysis and PCR of a Raji
leukemia cell cDNA library, Yang et al. (2004) cloned CCNL2. The deduced
520-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 58.1 kD. CCNL2
has 2 cyclin domains and 2 putative transmembrane regions in its
N-terminal half, several arg/ser (RS) repeats in its C-terminal half,
and several nuclear localization signals. It shares 65% and 90% amino
acid identity with human CCNL1 (613384) and mouse Ccnl2, respectively.
Raji cell cDNA also contained a CCNL2 splice variant that encodes a
deduced 227-amino acid protein lacking the C-terminal RS motifs.
Northern blot analysis detected a transcript of about 5.0 kb in all
normal tissues analyzed, with highest expression in ovary, heart, liver,
and pancreas, and lower expression in spleen, colon, peripheral blood
leukocytes, lung, and skeletal muscle. RT-PCR detected CCNL2 in all
human hematopoietic cell lines and solid tumor cell lines examined.
Immunofluorescence microscopy showed that epitope-tagged CCNL2 localized
to the nucleus in transfected human hepatoma SMMC-7721 cells. CCNL2
showed both a generalized nucleoplasmic distribution and a punctate
distribution, where it colocalized in nuclear speckles with the splicing
factors SC35 (SFRS2; 600813) and 9G8 (SFRS7; 600572).

By screening a human fetal brain expression library for proteins that
bound to and were phosphorylated by the nuclear protein kinase DYRK1A
(600855), followed by database analysis, de Graaf et al. (2004)
identified 3 CCNL2 transcripts. The longest transcript, T1, is about 4.5
kb long and contains all CCNL2 exons, including the alternatively
spliced exon 6a, which introduces a stop codon. T1 encodes a truncated
CCNL2 protein lacking the RS domain of full-length CCNL2. The T2
transcript is about 2.4 kb long, lacks exon 6a, and encodes the
full-length CCNL2 protein. Transcript T3 is about 1.2 kb long, includes
an alternative polyadenylation signal in exon 6a, and lacks all further
exons. T3 and T1 encode identical truncated proteins. Using
exon-specific probes for Northern blot analysis, de Graaf et al. (2004)
found variable T1 expression in all tissues examined. T2 was
predominantly expressed in testis, and T3 was weakly expressed in almost
all tissues. PCR analysis gave similar results, with T1 and T3 highly
expressed in pancreas, and T2 highly expressed in testis.

Using Northern blot and RT-PCR analyses, Loyer et al. (2008) identified
5 distinct cyclin L2 splice variants that were variably expressed in a
tissue-dependent manner in human brain, liver, testis, spleen, and
thymus. The 5 variants have 3 distinct ORFs and encode the cyclin
L2-alpha, L2-beta-A, and L2-beta-B isoforms, which differ at their
C-terminal ends. Immunofluorescence analysis of several human cell lines
detected all cyclin L1 and L2 isoforms in both nucleoplasm and large
nuclear speckles and showed colocalization with the p110 isoform of
CDK11 (see CDK11A; 116951).

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunoprecipitation analysis, Yang et al. (2004) showed that CCNL2
interacted with the hyperphosphorylated form of RNA polymerase II (RNA
pol II; see 180660), with the p110 subunit of the cyclin-dependent
kinase PITSLRE (see 176873), and with the splicing factors SC35 and 9G8.
Mutation analysis revealed that the cyclin domains of CCNL2 associated
with RNA pol II and p110 PITSLRE, whereas the RS domain of CCNL2
associated with the splicing factors. Using HeLa cell nuclear extracts
in an in vitro splicing assay, Yang et al. (2004) showed that CCNL2
stimulated splicing activity. Overexpression of CCNL2 in SMMC-7721 cells
suppressed cell growth and induced apoptosis, which involved
upregulation of the apoptotic proteins p53 (TP53; 191170) and BAX
(600040) and downregulation of the antiapoptotic protein BCL2 (151430).
Injection of CCNL2 into SMMC-7721 tumors in nude mice inhibited tumor
growth and induced apoptotic changes.

Using FRAP analysis and live cell imaging, de Graaf et al. (2004) showed
that fluorescence-tagged CCNL2 localized transiently to nuclear speckles
in COS-7 cells. Full-length CCNL2, but not the isoform lacking the RS
domain, associated with DYRK1A in pull-down assays. CCNL2 also
interacted with DYRK2 (603496) and with p110 PITSLRE. In vitro
phosphorylation assays showed that DYRK1A phosphorylated CCNL2 on
ser330, ser338, and ser369, all of which are N-terminal to a proline
residue. De Graaf et al. (2004) concluded that CCNL2 is a highly mobile
component of nuclear speckles and that DYRK1A may regulate splicing by
phosphorylating CCNL2.

By immunoprecipitation analysis and protein pull-down assays with human
cell lines, Loyer et al. (2008) found that the alpha and beta isoforms
of cyclin L1 and L2, but not the gamma isoform of cyclin L1, interacted
with the p110 isoform of CDK11 in a high molecular mass complex that
showed splicing activity in vitro. The alpha isoforms of cyclin L1 and
L2 also interacted with the p58 and p46 isoforms of CDK11. In vivo
splicing assays showed that expression of cyclin L1-alpha, L1-beta,
L2-alpha, or L2-beta and/or p110 CDK11 increased intron-splicing
activity and altered alternative splice-site selection in a cyclin L1
and L2 isoform- and cell type-specific manner.

GENE STRUCTURE

De Graaf et al. (2004) determined that the CCNL2 gene contains at least
11 exons and spans about 13 kb. The alternatively spliced exon 6a
contains an alternative stop codon and polyadenylation site. The 3-prime
region of the CCNL2 gene contains 2 additional polyadenylation sites.

Loyer et al. (2008) stated that the CCNL2 gene contains 14 exons and
spans about 11.8 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, de Graaf et al. (2004) mapped the CCNL2
gene to chromosome 1p36.33.

Yang et al. (2004) mapped the mouse Ccnl2 gene to the low terminus of
chromosome 4.

REFERENCE 1. de Graaf, K.; Hekerman, P.; Spelten, O.; Herrmann, A.; Packman,
L. C.; Bussow, K.; Muller-Newen, G.; Becker, W.: Characterization
of cyclin L2, a novel cyclin with an arginine/serine-rich domain:
phosphorylation by DYRK1A and colocalization with splicing factors. J.
Biol. Chem. 279: 4612-4624, 2004.

2. Loyer, P.; Trembley, J. H.; Grenet, J. A.; Busson, A.; Corlu, A.;
Zhao, W.; Kocak, M.; Kidd, V. J.; Lahti, J. M.: Characterization
of cyclin L1 and L2 interactions with CDK11 and splicing factors:
influence of cyclin L isoforms on splice site selection. J. Biol.
Chem. 283: 7721-7732, 2008.

3. Yang, L.; Li, N.; Wang, C.; Yu, Y.; Yuan, L.; Zhang, M.; Cao, X.
: Cyclin L2, a novel RNA polymerase II-associated cyclin, is involved
in pre-mRNA splicing and induces apoptosis of human hepatocellular
carcinoma cells. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 11639-11648, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/3/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/13/2010

EDITED mgross: 08/07/2012
mgross: 8/7/2012
terry: 8/3/2012
mgross: 7/13/2010

602366	TITLE *602366 INTEGRIN-LINKED KINASE; ILK
;;p59
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ILK is a serine-threonine protein kinase that associates with the
cytoplasmic domain of beta integrins and acts as a proximal receptor
kinase regulating integrin-mediated signal transduction (Melchior et
al., 2002).

CLONING

Transduction of extracellular matrix signals through integrins
influences intracellular and extracellular functions, and appears to
require interaction of integrin cytoplasmic domains with cellular
proteins. Using a 2-hybrid screen, Hannigan et al. (1996) isolated from
a placenta cDNA library a gene that interacts with the cytoplasmic
domain of beta-1 integrin (135630). The gene, designated integrin-linked
kinase (ILK), encodes a predicted 451-amino acid protein with an
apparent molecular mass of 59 kD based on SDS-PAGE. Northern blot
analysis showed that the 1.8-kb ILK mRNA is widely expressed. The ILK
protein is a serine/threonine protein kinase with 4 ankyrin-like
repeats.

Melchior et al. (2002) cloned the human ILK gene. The deduced 452-amino
acid protein has 4 N-terminal ankyrin repeats, followed by a pleckstrin
homology domain and a C-terminal kinase catalytic domain composed of 11
subdomains.

By immunofluorescence analysis on cryosections of wildtype mouse hearts,
White et al. (2006) detected ILK protein in a pattern consistent with
that of the Z-bands and costameres of cardiomyocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Melchior et al. (2002) determined that the ILK gene contains 13 exons
and spans 9.0 kb. The ATG codon is located within exon 2. Intron 2 is
more than 3.6 kb long and has an Alu-like repeat sequence. The promoter
region has characteristics typical of housekeeping genes, such as high
GC content, the presence of CpG islands, lack of TATA and CAAT boxes,
and the presence of multiple transcription initiation start sites.

MAPPING

Hannigan et al. (1997) mapped the ILK gene to 11p15.5-p15.4 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

Hannigan et al. (1996) found that ILK coimmunoprecipitated with beta-1
integrin from cell lysates, and that overexpression of ILK disrupted
cell architecture and inhibited adhesion to integrin substrates, while
inducing anchorage-independent growth in epithelial cells, suggesting
that ILK regulates integrin-mediated signal transduction.

By knockout of the ILK gene in human embryonic kidney cells and mouse
macrophages, Troussard et al. (2003) showed that ILK is essential for
regulation of AKT (see AKT1; 164730) activity. ILK knockout had no
effect on phosphorylation of AKT on thr308, but resulted in almost
complete inhibition of phosphorylation on ser473, causing significant
inhibition of AKT activity accompanied by significant stimulation of
apoptosis. ILK knockout also suppressed phosphorylation of GSK3B
(605004) on ser9 and cyclin D1 (168461) expression. Troussard et al.
(2003) concluded that ILK is an essential upstream regulator of AKT
activation.

Fukuda et al. (2003) found that PINCH1 (LIMS1; 602567) and ILK are
essential for prompt HeLa cell spreading and motility following passage,
and that they are crucial for cell survival. While ILK depletion reduced
AKT phosphorylation on ser473, PINCH1 depletion reduced AKT
phosphorylation on both ser473 and thr308. PINCH1 also regulated ILK
protein levels. Fukuda et al. (2003) concluded that PINCH1 is an
obligate partner of ILK and both are indispensable for proper control of
cell shape change, motility, and survival.

Bock-Marquette et al. (2004) demonstrated that the G-actin sequestering
peptide thymosin beta-4 (300159) promoted myocardial and endothelial
cell migration in the embryonic heart and retained this property in
postnatal cardiomyocytes. Survival of embryonic and postnatal
cardiomyocytes in culture was also enhanced by thymosin beta-4. Thymosin
beta-4 formed a functional complex with PINCH1 and ILK, resulting in
activation of the survival kinase AKT, also known as protein kinase B.
After coronary artery ligation in mice, thymosin beta-4 treatment
resulted in upregulation of Ilk and Akt activity in the heart, enhanced
early myocyte survival, and improved cardiac function. Bock-Marquette et
al. (2004) concluded that thymosin beta-4 promotes cardiomyocyte
migration, survival, and repair.

Lu et al. (2006) demonstrated a marked increase in ILK protein levels in
hypertrophic ventricles of patients with congenital and acquired outflow
tract obstruction. The increase in ILK was associated with the
activation of Rho family guanine triphosphatases, RAC1 (602048) and
CDC42 (116952), and known hypertrophic signaling kinases, including
extracellular signal-related kinases, such as ERK1/2 (see 601795) and
p70-S6-kinase (RPS6KB1; 608938). Transgenic mice with cardiac-specific
expression of a constitutively active or wildtype ILK exhibited a
compensated ventricular hypertrophic phenotype and displayed an
activation profile of guanine triphosphatases and downstream protein
kinases concordant with that seen in human hypertrophy. In contrast,
transgenic mice with cardiomyocyte-restricted expression of a
kinase-inactive ILK were unable to mount a compensatory hypertrophic
response to angiogensin II (see 106150) in vivo. Lu et al. (2006)
concluded that ILK-regulated signaling represents a broadly adaptive
hypertrophic response mechanism relevant to a wide range of clinical
heart disease.

Using a forward genetic screen in zebrafish to identify novel genes
required for myocardial function, Knoll et al. (2007) identified the
lost-contact (loc) mutant, which has a nonsense mutation in the ilk
gene. The loc/ilk mutant is associated with a severe defect in
cardiomyocytes and endothelial cells that leads to severe myocardial
dysfunction.

In primary cultures of human fetal myocardial cells, Traister et al.
(2012) observed that adenovirus-mediated overexpression of ILK potently
increased the number of new aggregates of primitive cardioblasts. The
number of cardioblast colonies was significantly decreased when ILK
expression was knocked down with ILK-targeted siRNA. Overexpression of
an activation-resistant ILK mutant, R211A, resulted in a much greater
increase in the number of new cell aggregates compared to wildtype. The
cardiomyogenic effects of both wildtype and mutant ILK were accompanied
by concurrent activation of beta-catenin (116806) and increased
expression of progenitor cell marker islet-1 (ISL1; 600366), which was
also observed in lysates of transgenic mice with cardiac-specific
overexpression of the R211A mutant and wildtype ILK. Endogenous ILK
expression was shown to increase in concert with those of cardiomyogenic
markers during directed cardiomyogenic differentiation in human
embryonic stem cells. Traister et al. (2012) concluded that ILK
represents a regulatory checkpoint in human cardiomyogenesis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Knoll et al. (2007) sequenced the ILK gene in 192 Caucasian individuals
with severe dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD; see 115200) and identified a
heterozygous missense mutation in 1 patient (A262V; 602366.0001) that
was not found in 712 controls.

ANIMAL MODEL

Sakai et al. (2003) found that embryonic mice lacking Ilk expression
died at the periimplantation stage due to failure of epiblast
polarization and cavitation. The impaired epiblast polarization was
associated with abnormal F-actin accumulation at sites of integrin
attachment to the basement membrane zone. Likewise, Ilk-deficient
fibroblasts showed abnormal F-actin aggregates associated with impaired
cell spreading and delayed formation of stress fibers and focal
adhesions. Ilk-deficient fibroblasts also had diminished proliferation
rates. The proliferation defect was not due to absent or reduced
Ilk-mediated phosphorylation of Akt or Gsk3b. Expression of mutant Ilk
lacking kinase activity and/or paxillin (602505) binding in
Ilk-deficient fibroblasts rescued cell spreading, F-actin organization,
focal adhesion formation, and proliferation.

Friedrich et al. (2004) found that endothelial cell-specific deletion of
Ilk in mice conferred placental insufficiency with decreased
labyrinthine vascularization, and yielded no viable offspring. Deletion
of Ilk in zebrafish resulted in marked patterning abnormalities of the
vasculature and was similarly lethal. Phenotypic rescue of Ilk-deficient
mouse lung endothelial cells with wildtype Ilk, but not by a
constitutively active mutant of Akt, suggested that regulation of
endothelial cell survival by ILK is independent of AKT.

The recessive 'main squeeze' (msq) mutation in zebrafish is embryonic
lethal due to heart failure. Bendig et al. (2006) found that
stretch-responsive genes, such as atrial natriuretic factor (ANF;
108780) and Vegf (192240), were downregulated in msq mutant hearts.
Through positional cloning, they found that heart failure in msq mutants
was due to a point mutation in the Ilk gene. In normal hearts, Ilk
specifically localized to costameres and sarcomeric Z discs. The msq
mutation reduced Ilk kinase activity and disrupted binding of Ilk to the
Z disc adaptor protein beta-parvin (PARVB; 608121). In msq mutant
embryos, heart failure could be suppressed by expression of Ilk or
constitutively active forms of Akt and Vegf. Antisense-mediated
abrogation of zebrafish beta-parvin phenocopied the msq phenotype.

White et al. (2006) performed targeted ablation of Ilk expression in the
mouse heart and observed spontaneous cardiomyopathy and heart failure by
6 weeks of age. The murine symptoms reflected classic human symptoms of
dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD; see 115200), with labored breathing, lack
of strength, and sudden death; postmortem examination revealed grossly
enlarged hearts in all animals, with dramatically dilated left
ventricular chambers and evidence of fibrosis on histology.
Immunofluorescence analysis of frozen heart sections from the mutant
mice revealed loss of Ilk from the sarcolemma, resulting in
disaggregation of adjacent cardiomyocytes within the heart tissue;
trichrome staining confirmed the dramatic disaggregation in mutant mice
compared to the compact arrangement of cardiomyocytes in controls.
Deletion of Ilk was associated with disruption of adhesion signaling
through the beta-1 integrin (135630)/Fak (PTK2; 600758) complex, and
loss of Ilk was accompanied by a reduction in cardiac Akt (164730)
phosphorylation, which normally provides a protective response against
stress. White et al. (2006) suggested that ILK plays a central role in
protecting the mammalian heart against cardiomyopathy and failure.

Lange et al. (2009) showed that mice carrying point mutations in the
proposed autophosphorylation site of the putative kinase domain and in
the pleckstrin homology domain of Ilk are normal. In contrast, mice with
point mutations in the conserved lysine residue of the potential
ATP-binding site of the kinase domain, which mediates Ilk binding to
alpha-parvin (608120), die owing to renal agenesis. Similar renal
defects occur in alpha-parvin-null mice. Lange et al. (2009) concluded
that their results provided genetic evidence that the kinase activity of
Ilk is dispensable for mammalian development; however, an interaction
between Ilk and alpha-parvin is critical for kidney development.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
ILK, ALA262VAL

This variant is classified as a variant of unknown significance because
its contribution to dilated cardiomyopathy (see 115200) has not been
confirmed.

In a Caucasian man with severe dilated cardiomyopathy who had been
diagnosed at 54 years of age and had an ejection fraction of only 25%,
Knoll et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a 785C-T transition in
the ILK gene, resulting in an ala262-to-val (A262V) substitution at a
highly conserved residue in a proline-rich region of the ILK kinase
domain. In vitro kinase assay revealed a 63% reduction in kinase
activity for the A262V variant compared to wildtype.
Immunohistochemistry on a myocardial biopsy sample from the patient
showed a significant loss of endothelial cells.

REFERENCE 1. Bendig, G.; Grimmler, M.; Huttner, I. G.; Wessels, G.; Dahme, T.;
Just, S.; Trano, N.; Katus, H. A.; Fishman, M. C.; Rottbauer, W.:
Integrin-linked kinase, a novel component of the cardiac mechanical
stretch sensor, controls contractility in the zebrafish heart. Genes
Dev. 20: 2361-2372, 2006.

2. Bock-Marquette, I.; Saxena, A.; White, M. D.; DiMaio, J. M.; Srivastava,
D.: Thymosin beta-4 activates integrin-linked kinase and promotes
cardiac cell migration, survival and cardiac repair. Nature 432:
466-472, 2004.

3. Friedrich, E. B.; Liu, E.; Sinha, S.; Cook, S.; Milstone, D. S.;
MacRae, C. A.; Mariotti, M.; Kuhlencordt, P. J.; Force, T.; Rosenzweig,
A.; St-Arnaud, R.; Dedhar, S.; Gerszten, R. E.: Integrin-linked kinase
regulates endothelial cell survival and vascular development. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 24: 8134-8144, 2004.

4. Fukuda, T.; Chen, K.; Shi, X.; Wu, C.: PINCH-1 is an obligate
partner of integrin-linked kinase (ILK) functioning in cell shape
modulation, motility, and survival. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 51324-51333,
2003.

5. Hannigan, G. E.; Bayani, J.; Weksberg, R.; Beatty, B.; Pandita,
A.; Dedhar, S.; Squire, J.: Mapping of the gene encoding the integrin-linked
kinase, ILK, to human chromosome 11p15.5-p15.4. Genomics 42: 177-179,
1997.

6. Hannigan, G. E.; Leung-Hagesteijn, C.; Fitz-Gibbon, L.; Coppolino,
M. G.; Radeva, G.; Filmus, J.; Bell, J. C.; Dedhar, S.: Regulation
of cell adhesion and anchorage-dependent growth by a new beta-1-integrin-linked
protein kinase. Nature 379: 91-96, 1996.

7. Knoll, R.; Postel, R.; Wang, J.; Kratzner, R.; Hennecke, G.; Vacaru,
A. M.; Vakeel, P.; Schubert, C.; Murthy, K.; Rana, B. K.; Kube, D.;
Knoll, G.; and 17 others: Laminin-alpha-4 and integrin-linked kinase
mutations cause human cardiomyopathy via simultaneous defects in cardiomyocytes
and endothelial cells. Circulation 116: 515-525, 2007.

8. Lange, A.; Wickstrom, S. A.; Jakobson, M.; Zent, R.; Sainio, K.;
Fassler, R.: Integrin-linked kinase is an adaptor with essential
functions during mouse development. Nature 461: 1002-1106, 2009.

9. Lu, H.; Fedak, P. W. M.; Dai, X.; Du, C.; Zhou, Y.-Q.; Henkelman,
M.; Mongroo, P. S.; Lau, A.; Yamabi, H.; Hinek, A.; Husain, M.; Hannigan,
G.; Coles, J. G.: Integrin-linked kinase expression is elevated in
human cardiac hypertrophy and induces hypertrophy in transgenic mice. Circulation 114:
2271-2279, 2006.

10. Melchior, C.; Kreis, S.; Janji, B.; Kieffer, N.: Promoter characterization
and genomic organization of the gene encoding integrin-linked kinase
1. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1575: 117-122, 2002.

11. Sakai, T.; Li, S.; Docheva, D.; Grashoff, C.; Sakai, K.; Kostka,
G.; Braun, A.; Pfeifer, A.; Yurchenco, P. D.; Fassler, R.: Integrin-linked
kinase (ILK) is required for polarizing the epiblast, cell adhesion,
and controlling actin accumulation. Genes Dev. 17: 926-940, 2003.

12. Traister, A.; Aafaqi, S.; Masse, S.; Dai, X.; Li, M.; Hinek, A.;
Nanthakumar, K.; Hannigan, G.; Coles, J. G.: ILK induces cardiomyogenesis
in the human heart. PloS One 7: e37802, 2012. Note: Electronic Article.

13. Troussard, A. A.; Mawji, N. M.; Ong, C.; Mui, A.; St.-Arnaud,
R.; Dedhar, S.: Conditional knock-out of integrin-linked kinase demonstrates
an essential role in protein kinase B/Akt activation. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
22374-22378, 2003.

14. White, D. E.; Coutu, P.; Shi, Y.-F.; Tardif, J.-C.; Nattel, S.;
St. Arnaud, R.; Dedhar, S.; Muller, W. J.: Targeted ablation of ILK
from the murine heart results in dilated cardiomyopathy and spontaneous
heart failure. Genes Dev. 20: 2355-2360, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 05/16/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/13/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/5/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/28/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/18/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/5/2004

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/18/1998

EDITED carol: 05/16/2013
alopez: 11/17/2009
terry: 11/13/2009
mgross: 10/6/2006
terry: 10/5/2006
tkritzer: 1/3/2005
terry: 12/28/2004
mgross: 10/18/2004
mgross: 10/5/2004
alopez: 2/24/1998
carol: 2/23/1998

609196	TITLE *609196 MELANOCORTIN 2 RECEPTOR ACCESSORY PROTEIN; MRAP
;;FAT TISSUE-SPECIFIC LOW MOLECULAR WEIGHT PROTEIN; FALP;;
CHROMOSOME 21 OPEN READING FRAME 61; C21ORF61
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Melanocortin receptors (MCRs; see 155555) are G protein-coupled
receptors with diverse physiologic functions. MRAP and MRAP2 (615410)
are accessory proteins responsible for melanocortin receptor targeting
and function (Chan et al., 2009).

CLONING

In a search for novel proteins that were differentially expressed during
adipose conversion, Xu et al. (2002) detected a fat tissue-specific low
molecular weight protein (Falp) in mouse adipocytes at day 8 after
differentiation, but not in preadipocytes, by 2-dimensional gel
electrophoresis. They identified the human homolog by sequence
comparison. Analysis by RACE demonstrated that the human FALP gene
encodes 2 isoforms, FALP-alpha and FALP-beta. The FALP-alpha and
FALP-beta transcripts differ in their 3-prime terminal exons and encode
173- and 102-amino acid isoforms, respectively. FALP-alpha and FALP-beta
share a common N terminus containing a transmembrane region, but they
have distinct C termini. The transmembrane domain is conserved in mouse
Falp. Immunofluorescent analyses of mouse adipocytes showed that Falp
strictly localizes at a compact perinuclear membrane compartment.
Treatment of cells with insulin (176730) induced the redistribution of
Falp into numerous discrete spotty structures spreading throughout the
cytoplasm. Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues showed expression
predominantly in white and brown adipose tissue.

Using RT-PCR, Metherell et al. (2005) detected highest expression of
both MRAP-alpha and MRAP-beta in adrenal gland. In other tissues, the
variants showed variable and tissue-specific expression. Other than
adrenal gland, MRAP-alpha showed highest expression in testis, breast,
thyroid, lymph node, and ovary, with weaker expression in fat, heart,
skin, jejunum, ileum, liver, stomach, and pituitary. In addition to
adrenal gland, MRAP-beta showed highest expression in breast and testis,
with lower expression in skin, brain, jejunum, ovary, and fat. Little to
no expression of either variant was detected in other tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Metherell et al. (2005) found that FALP and melanocortin-2 receptor
(MC2R; 607397) interacted and that both colocalized in endoplasmic
reticulum and plasma membrane. Therefore, they renamed FALP
'melanocortin-2 receptor accessory protein' (MRAP). They stated that
MRAP was required for MC2R expression in certain cell types, supporting
the idea that MRAP has a role in the processing, trafficking, or
function of MC2R.

By coimmunoprecipitation analysis of transfected CHO cells, Chan et al.
(2009) found that MRAP and MRAP2 formed homodimers and heterodimers.
Both proteins interacted with all MCRs examined. Both MRAP and MRAP2
showed similar functions in inhibiting or inducing cell surface
expression of individual MCRs and in their effects on MCR
ligand-dependent cAMP production.

Using fluorescence-tagged proteins expressed in CHO cells, Sebag and
Hinkle (2010) found that both MRAP and MRAP2 formed antiparallel
homodimers, with proteins inserted into the membrane in opposing
orientations. MRAP and MRAP2 also formed antiparallel heterodimers when
coexpressed. Both MRAP and MRAP2 escorted MC2R to the plasma membrane.
However, MRAP was essential for activation of MC2R signaling, whereas
MRAP2 functioned in a dominant-negative manner to inhibit MRAP-dependent
MC2R activation. Neither MRAP nor MRAP2 had any effect on alpha-MSH
(176830) binding to MC2R or on alpha-MSH-dependent MC2R activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Metherell et al. (2005) stated that the MRAP gene contains 6 exons that
extend 23 kb. MRAP-alpha, derived from exons 1 through 5, encodes a
172-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular weight of 19 kD;
MRAP-beta, derived from exons 1 through 4 and 6, encodes a 102-amino
acid protein with a predicted molecular weight of 14.1 kD.

MAPPING

Xu et al. (2002) identified the MRAP gene at chromosome 21q22.1 by
sequence analysis. Metherell et al. (2005) identified the MRAP gene as
mutant in the form of familial glucocorticoid deficiency that maps to
21q22.1 (FGD2; 607398).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Familial glucocorticoid deficiency (FGD), or hereditary unresponsiveness
to adrenocorticotropin (202200), is an autosomal recessive disorder
resulting from resistance to the action of ACTH on the adrenal cortex,
which normally stimulates glucocorticoid production. Affected
individuals are deficient in cortisol and, if untreated, are likely to
succumb to hypoglycemia or overwhelming infection in infancy or
childhood. Mutations of the ACTH receptor (melanocortin-2 receptor,
MC2R; 607397), account for approximately 25% of cases of familial
glucocorticoid deficiency. Several consanguineous families including 1
or more members with FGD whose disease did not segregate with either
MC2R or a locus at 8q12.1-q21.2 (609197) had been identified. In 1 such
family, Metherell et al. (2005) carried out a whole-genome scan by
microarray analysis of SNPs with genomic DNA from the parents, affected
children, and unaffected sibs. They identified a single candidate region
at 21q22.1 extending over a 2.75-Mbp region that gave a maximum lod
score of 2.64. Homozygosity of this region was confirmed and its size
was reduced to 2.2 Mbp in this and in another consanguineous family with
a single affected individual. Of 30 candidate genes located in the
critical region, only 1, MRAP, was expressed in the adrenal cortex but
not in liver or brain. Metherell et al. (2005) screened the entire exon
sequence and the relevant flanking intronic regions by DNA sequencing in
2 families showing linkage of glucocorticoid deficiency to 21q22.1
(GCCD2; 607398). Splice site mutations were identified in each of the 2
families, in each case involving nucleotide +1 of the donor site of
intron 3 (609196.0001, 609196.0002); another mutation at this position
was identified in an unrelated individual (609196.0003). Six other
individuals from 5 families carried a deletion, IVS3DS+1delG
(609196.0004). In 4 individuals from 3 families a 1-bp insertion at the
intron 3 donor site was found (609196.0005). Nine individuals from 8
families carried the missense mutation M1I (609196.0006) and 1
individual carried the nonsense mutation V44X (609196.0007). All of
these homozygous changes cosegregated with the disease and were not
found in 120 control chromosomes.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, IVS3, G-T, +1

In the proband of a family with glucocorticoid deficiency mapping to
chromosome 21q22.1 (607398) and in 2 affected sibs, Metherell et al.
(2005) found a homozygous G-to-T transversion at the splice donor site
of intron 3 of the MRAP gene (IVS3DS+1G-T).

.0002
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, IVS3, G-C, +1

In the proband of a family with glucocorticoid deficiency (607398),
Metherell et al. (2005) found a G-to-C transversion at the splice donor
site of intron 3 of the MRAP gene (IVS3DS+1G-C). This mutation was also
found in an unrelated affected individual.

.0003
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, IVS3, G-A, +1

In an individual with glucocorticoid deficiency (607398), Metherell et
al. (2005) found a G-to-A transition at the splice donor site of intron
3 of the MRAP gene (IVS3DS+1G-A).

.0004
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, IVS3, G DEL, +1

In 6 individuals from 5 families with glucocorticoid deficiency
(607398), Metherell et al. (2005) found deletion of the first nucleotide
in the donor site of intron 3 of the MRAP gene (IVS3DS+1delG). This was
the second most frequent mutation causing glucocorticoid deficiency
unrelated to defect in the MC2R gene (see 202200) in their study.

.0005
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, IVS3, T INS, +3

In 4 individuals from 3 families with glucocorticoid deficiency
(607398), Metherell et al. (2005) found an insertion of a T nucleotide
at the splice donor site of intron 3 of the MRAP gene (IVS3insT+3).

.0006
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, MET1ILE

Metherell et al. (2005) found the missense mutation met1-to-ile (M1I) in
the MRAP gene in 9 individuals from 8 families with glucocorticoid
deficiency (607398), making this the most frequent mutation causing
glucocorticoid deficiency unrelated to defect in the MC2R gene (see
202200) in their study.

.0007
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, 1-BP DEL, 128G

In an individual with glucocorticoid deficiency (607398), Metherell et
al. (2005) found homozygous deletion of a G nucleotide at position 128
of the MRAP gene, resulting in premature termination of the protein
(val44 to ter; V44X). This was the only MRAP mutation located in exon 4
found in their study.

.0008
GLUCOCORTICOID DEFICIENCY 2
MRAP, 7-BP DEL, NT17

Modan-Moses et al. (2006) reported a Jewish Ethiopian family with
glucocorticoid deficiency (607398). The proband presented at the age of
19 months with hypocortisolism, severe psychomotor retardation,
myoclonic seizures, spastic quadriparesis, and microcephaly. Before a
definite diagnosis was made, a female sib was born in another hospital
and succumbed during the neonatal period due to sepsis and adrenal
crisis. The proband was diagnosed and found to be homozygous for a novel
MRAP mutation, a seven-base deletion in exon 3 (ACGCCTC). This deletion
caused a frameshift, resulting in a stop codon after 23 amino acids
(L31X). The sister of the proband carried the same mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Chan, L. F.; Webb, T. R.; Chung, T.-T.; Meimaridou, E.; Cooray,
S. N.; Guasti, L.; Chapple, J. P.; Egertova, M.; Elphick, M. R.; Cheetham,
M. E.; Metherell, L. A.; Clark, A. J. L.: MRAP and MRAP2 are bidirectional
regulators of the melanocortin receptor family. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 106: 6146-6151, 2009.

2. Metherell, L. A.; Chapple, J. P.; Cooray, S.; David, A.; Becker,
C.; Ruschendorf, F.; Naville, D.; Begeot, M.; Khoo, B.; Nurnberg,
P.; Huebner, A.; Cheetham, M. E.; Clark, A. J. L.: Mutations in MRAP,
encoding a new interacting partner of the ACTH receptor, cause familial
glucocorticoid deficiency type 2. Nature Genet. 37: 166-170, 2005.

3. Modan-Moses, D.; Ben-Zeev, B.; Hoffmann, C.; Falik-Zaccai, T. C.;
Bental, Y. A.; Pinhas-Hamiel, O.; Anikster, Y.: Unusual presentation
of familial glucocorticoid deficiency with a novel MRAP mutation. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 3713-3717, 2006.

4. Sebag, J. A.; Hinkle, P. M.: Regulation of G protein-coupled receptor
signaling: specific dominant-negative effects of melanocortin 2 receptor
accessory protein 2. Sci. Signal. 3: ra28, 2010. Note: Electronic
Article.

5. Xu, A.; Choi, K.-L.; Wang, Y.; Permana, P. A.; Xu, L. Y.; Bogardus,
C.; Cooper, G. J. S.: Identification of novel putative membrane proteins
selectively expressed during adipose conversion of 3T3-L1 cells. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 293: 1161-1167, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 09/12/2013
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/11/2007
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 2/8/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/8/2005

EDITED mgross: 09/12/2013
alopez: 7/11/2007
alopez: 3/2/2005
alopez: 2/8/2005

600925	TITLE *600925 PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, RECEPTOR-TYPE, J; PTPRJ
;;DEP1;;
PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, ETA;;
SUSCEPTIBILITY TO COLON CANCER 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; SCC1;;
CD148
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Experimental evidence indicates that specific protein-tyrosine
phosphatases (PTPases) interact with members of cascades to modulate
biologic function differentiation and development. Experiments suggested
that the PTPases PTP-beta (176882) and PTP-epsilon (600926) are involved
in the early molecular events for in vitro differentiation of mouse
erythroleukemia (MEL) as well as embryonic carcinoma (F9) cells
(Watanabe et al., 1995).

CLONING

A human homolog of mouse Ptprj, encoding PTP-beta-2, was identified by
Ostman et al. (1994).

Honda et al. (1994) cloned and characterized the PTPRJ gene, which they
designated HPTP-eta. The predicted protein has a molecular mass of
approximately 220 to 250 kD and contains an extracellular region
homologous to fibronectin type III repeats, a transmembrane region, and
a cytoplasmic region containing a single PTPase-like domain.

MAPPING

Honda et al. (1994) mapped the PTPRJ gene to chromosome 11p11.2 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Using mouse cDNA for PTP-beta-2 and PTP-epsilon, Watanabe et al. (1995)
assigned the genes, Ptprj and Ptpre, to chromosome 2 and chromosome 7,
respectively.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Nonfamilial, 'sporadic' cancers, which represent most cancer cases, have
a significant hereditary component, but the genes involved have low
penetrance and are extremely difficult to detect. Therefore, mapping and
cloning of quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for cancer susceptibility in
animals may help identify homologous genes in humans. For example,
several cancer susceptibility QTLs were mapped in mouse and rat. One of
these, the mouse gene Scc1 (susceptibility to colon cancer-1), was
positionally cloned by Ruivenkamp et al. (2002) and identified as Ptprj,
which encodes a receptor-type protein-tyrosine phosphatase. Furthermore,
in human cancers of colon, lung, and breast, Ruivenkamp et al. (2002)
found frequent deletions, loss of heterozygosity, and missense mutations
in the PTPRJ gene (see, e.g., 600925.0001-600925.0002).

Lesueur et al. (2005) assessed common SNPs and haplotypes of the PTPRJ
gene in 4,512 breast cancer (114480) patients and 4,554 controls from
East Anglia, U.K. The authors observed a difference in the haplotype
frequency distributions between patients and controls (P = 0.0023; OR =
0.81; range 0.72-0.92). They concluded that carrying a specific PTPRJ
haplotype may confer a protective effect on the risk of breast cancer.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COLON CANCER, SOMATIC
PTPRJ, ARG214CYS

Ruivenkamp et al. (2002) identified 5 somatic missense mutations in the
PTPRJ gene in colon cancer (see 114500). Sequence alignments, secondary
structure prediction, and homology modeling predicted with high
confidence levels that most of these in the extracellular portion of the
gene product occur in exposed regions available for interactions with
ligands or other proteins and could affect the signaling process. One of
these missense mutations was an arg214-to-cys mutation (R214C) that
resulted in loss of a positive charge.

.0002
COLON CANCER, SOMATIC
PTPRJ, GLN276PRO

In a colon cancer (see 114500), Ruivenkamp et al. (2002) found a
gln276-to-pro (Q276P) mutation in exon 5 of the PTPRJ gene. The change
was predicted to result in torsional stress.

REFERENCE 1. Honda, H.; Inazawa, J.; Nishida, J.; Yazaki, Y.; Hirai, H.: Molecular
cloning, characterization, and chromosomal localization of a novel
protein-tyrosine phosphatase, HPTP eta. Blood 84: 4186-4194, 1994.

2. Lesueur, F.; Pharoah, P. D.; Laing, S.; Ahmed, S.; Jordan, C.;
Smith, P. L.; Luben, R.; Wareham, N. J.; Easton, D. F.; Dunning, A.
M.; Ponder, B. A. J.: Allelic association of the human homologue
of the mouse modifier Ptprj with breast cancer. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14:
2349-2356, 2005.

3. Ostman, A.; Yang, Q.; Tonks, N. K.: Expression of DEP-1, a receptor-like
protein-tyrosine-phosphatase, is enhanced with increasing cell density. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 9680-9684, 1994.

4. Ruivenkamp, C. A. L.; van Wezel, T.; Zanon, C.; Stassen, A. P.
M.; Vlcek, C.; Csikos, T.; Klous, A. M.; Tripodis, N.; Perrakis, A.;
Boerrigter, L.; Groot, P. C.; Lindeman, J.; Mooi, W. J.; Meijjer,
G. A.; Scholten, G.; Dauwerse, H.; Paces, V.; van Zandwijk, N.; van
Ommen, G. J. B.; Demant, P.: Ptprj is a candidate for the mouse colon-cancer
susceptibility locus Scc1 and is frequently deleted in human cancers. Nature
Genet. 31: 295-300, 2002.

5. Watanabe, T.; Mukouyama, Y.; Rhodes, M.; Thomas, M.; Kume, T.;
Oishi, M.: Chromosomal location of murine protein tyrosine phosphatase
(Ptprj and Ptpre) genes. Genomics 29: 793-795, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 1/9/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/2002
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 4/2/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/7/1995

EDITED alopez: 06/21/2011
wwang: 1/9/2009
carol: 4/18/2005
alopez: 6/24/2002
terry: 6/19/2002
carol: 4/2/1999
joanna: 1/7/1999
dkim: 7/23/1998
alopez: 8/7/1997
terry: 11/7/1995

603732	TITLE *603732 CRYPTOCHROME 2; CRY2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hsu et al. (1996) identified a human gene, CRY2, whose product had 73%
amino acid identity to the human (6-4)photolyase (CRY1; 601933). The
CRY2 protein shares 51% amino acid sequence identity to Drosophila
(6-4)photolyase. Hsu et al. (1996) purified the human CRY1 and CRY2
proteins and characterized them as maltose-binding fusion proteins that
contain FAD and a pterin cofactor. Both CRY1 and CRY2 proteins lacked
photolyase activity. Hsu et al. (1996) concluded that these proteins are
not photolyases, but may function as blue-light photoreceptors in
humans.

As part of a search for human brain cDNA clones with the potential to
encode large proteins in vitro, Ishikawa et al. (1998) independently
identified CRY2. The CRY2 open reading frame encodes a protein of 589
amino acids with an apparent molecular mass of 67 kD.

Kobayashi et al. (1998) isolated and characterized mouse Cry1 and Cry2.
While Cry1 is localized to the mitochondria, Cry2 is found mainly in the
nucleus. The C termini of both mouse Cry2 and human CRY2 each contain a
nuclear localization signal, and the N terminus of mouse Cry1 contains a
mitochondrial transport signal. Cry1 protein bound tightly to DNA
Sepharose, while Cry2 protein did not.

GENE FUNCTION

Griffin et al. (1999) showed that human CRY1 and CRY2 act as
light-independent inhibitors of a heterodimeric activator consisting of
CLOCK (601851) and BMAL1 (602550), the activator driving Per1 (602260)
transcription, very likely by means of direct contacts between CRY1 and
BMAL1 and between CRY2 and CLOCK. They concluded that CRY1 and CRY2
occupy a central position within the mammalian circadian clock,
virtually at the interface between CLOCK-BMAL1 and PER1, PER2 (603426),
and TIM (603887). Griffin et al. (1999) suggested that Drosophila CRY
exemplifies the ancestral role of the photoreceptor acting as a
light-dependent regulator of the circadian feedback loop, whereas
mammalian CRYs have preserved the role within the circadian feedback
loop but have shed their direct photoreceptor function.

Kume et al. (1999) determined that the mouse Cry1 and Cry2 genes act in
the negative limb of the clock feedback loop. They stated that mouse
Cry1 and Cry2 are nuclear proteins that interact with each of the Per
proteins, translocate each Per protein from cytoplasm to nucleus, and
are rhythmically expressed in the suprachiasmatic circadian clock.
Luciferase reporter gene assays showed that Cry1 or Cry2 alone abrogates
Clock/Bmal1 (602550) E box-mediated transcription. The mouse Per and Cry
proteins appeared to inhibit the transcriptional complex differentially.

Etchegaray et al. (2003) demonstrated that transcriptional regulation of
the core clock mechanism in mouse liver is accompanied by rhythms in H3
histone (see 602810) acetylation, and that H3 acetylation is a potential
target of the inhibitory action of Cry. The promoter regions of the
Per1, Per2, and Cry1 genes exhibited circadian rhythms in H3 acetylation
and RNA polymerase II (see 180660) binding that were synchronous with
the corresponding steady-state mRNA rhythms. The histone
acetyltransferase p300 (602700) precipitated with Clock in vivo in a
time-dependent manner. Moreover, the Cry proteins inhibited a
p300-induced increase in Clock/Bmal1-mediated transcription. Etchegaray
et al. (2003) concluded that the delayed timing of the Cry1 mRNA rhythm,
relative to the Per rhythms, was due to the coordinated activities of
Rev-Erb-alpha (602408) and Clock/Bmal1, and defined a novel mechanism
for circadian phase control.

Lamia et al. (2011) showed that 2 circadian coregulators, Cry1 (601933)
and Cry2, interact with glucocorticoid receptor (138040) in a
ligand-dependent fashion and globally alter the transcriptional response
to glucocorticoids in mouse embryonic fibroblasts: cryptochrome
deficiency vastly decreases gene repression and approximately doubles
the number of dexamethasone-induced genes, suggesting that cryptochromes
broadly oppose glucocorticoid receptor activation and promote
repression. In mice, genetic loss of Cry1 and/or 2 results in glucose
intolerance and constitutively high levels of circulating
corticosterone, suggesting reduced suppression of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis coupled with increased
glucocorticoid transactivation in the liver. Genomically, Cry1 and Cry2
associate with a glucocorticoid response element in the
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase-1 (PCK1; 614168) promoter in a
hormone-dependent manner, and dexamethasone-induced transcription of the
Pck1 gene was strikingly increased in cryptochrome-deficient livers.
Lamia et al. (2011) concluded that their results revealed a specific
mechanism through which cryptochromes couple the activity of clock and
receptor target genes to complex genomic circuits underpinning normal
metabolic homeostasis.

In mammals, PERIOD (PER1; 602260 and PER2; 603426) and CRYPTOCHROME
(CRY1 and CRY2) proteins accumulate, form a large nuclear complex (PER
complex), and repress their own transcription. Padmanabhan et al. (2012)
found that mouse PER complexes included RNA helicases DDX5 (180630) and
DHX9 (603115), active RNA polymerase II large subunit (180660), Per and
Cry pre-mRNAs, and SETX (608465), a helicase that promotes
transcriptional termination. During circadian negative feedback, RNA
polymerase II accumulated near termination sites on Per and Cry genes
but not on control genes. Recruitment of PER complexes to the elongating
polymerase at Per and Cry termination sites inhibited SETX action,
impeding RNA polymerase II release and thereby repressing
transcriptional reinitiation. Circadian clock negative feedback thus
includes direct control of transcriptional termination.

MAPPING

Kobayashi et al. (1998) mapped the mouse Cry1 and Cry2 genes to
chromosomes 10C and 2E, respectively. Using a GeneBridge 4 radiation
hybrid panel, Ishikawa et al. (1998) mapped the human CRY2 gene to
chromosome 11.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Xing et al. (2013) reported the crystal structures of mammalian CRY2 in
its apo, FAD-bound, and FBXL3 (605653)-SKP1 (601434)-complexed forms.
Distinct from other cryptochromes, mammalian CRY2 binds FAD dynamically
with an open cofactor pocket. Notably, the F-box protein FBXL3 captures
CRY2 by simultaneously occupying its FAD-binding pocket with a conserved
carboxy-terminal tail and burying its PER-binding interface.

ANIMAL MODEL

Van der Horst et al. (1999) disrupted the Cry1 and Cry2 genes in mice.
Homozygous Cry1 -/-, Cry2 -/-, and double-mutant mice had normal 24-hour
circadian rhythms when exposed to 12h/12h light/dark cycles. In total
darkness, Cry1 -/- mice had a faster running clock (22.51 +/- 0.06h, P =
0.00001) than wildtype mice, while Cry2 -/- mice had a slower clock
(24.63 +/- 0.06 hours, P = 0.00001). Double-mutant mice in total
darkness showed a striking instantaneous and complete arrhythmicity,
indicating the absence of an internal circadian clock. The 'clock'
mutant mouse differs in showing a more gradual onset of arrhythmicity.
Mice with only 1 copy of wildtype Cry2 displayed a free-running rhythm
even shorter than that of Cry1 knockouts, which gradually progressed
into arrhythmicity. Once returned to a light/dark cycle, the normal
24-hour period resumed. Mice with only one functional allele of Cry1
showed rhythmic activity with a period intermediate to those of Cry1 -/-
and Cry2 -/- mice. The authors concluded that their results demonstrated
that the Cry proteins are involved in maintaining period length and
circadian rhythmicity, and that a critical balance between Cry1 and Cry2
is required for proper clock functioning.

Thresher et al. (1998) disrupted the mouse Cry2 gene by homologous
recombination. The mutant mice had lowered sensitivity to acute light
induction of the Per1 gene in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), but
exhibited normal circadian oscillations of Per1 and Cry1 mRNA in the
SCN. Behaviorally, the mutants had an intrinsic circadian period about 1
hour longer than normal and exhibited high amplitude phase shifts in
response to light pulses administered at circadian time 17. The authors
considered these data consistent with the hypothesis that Cry2 protein
modulates circadian responses in mice and suggested that cryptochromes
have a role in circadian photoreception in mammals.

Freedman et al. (1999) studied circadian behavior in mice deficient in
both rods and cones. These mice maintained a light-entrained circadian
rhythm, which they lost with enucleation. Lucas et al. (1999) studied
pineal melatonin secretion in mice lacking both rods and cones. There
was normal suppression of pineal melatonin in response to monochromatic
light of wavelength 509 nm. These authors concluded that mammals have
additional ocular photoreceptors which they use in the regulation of
temporal physiology, and suggested CRY1 and CRY2 as candidates.

Okamura et al. (1999) demonstrated that, in mice lacking Cry1 and Cry2,
cyclic expression of the clock genes Per1 and Per2 is abolished in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus and peripheral tissues and that Per1 and Per2
mRNA levels are constitutively high. These findings indicated that the
biologic clock is eliminated in the absence of both Cry1 and Cry2 and
supported the idea that mammalian CRY proteins act in the negative limb
of the circadian feedback loop. The Cry double mutant mice retained the
ability to have Per1 and Per2 expression induced by a brief light
stimulus known to phase-shift the biologic clock in wildtype animals.
Thus, Cry1 and Cry2 are dispensable for light-induced phase shifting of
the biologic clock.

Shearman et al. (2000) demonstrated that in the mouse, the core
mechanism for the master circadian clock consists of interacting
positive and negative transcription and translation feedback loops.
Analysis of Clock/Clock mutant mice, homozygous Per2 mutants, and
Cry-deficient mice revealed substantially altered Bmal1 rhythms,
consistent with a dominant role of Per2 in the positive regulation of
the Bmal1 loop. In vitro analysis of Cry inhibition of
Clock:Bmal1-mediated transcription shows that the inhibition is through
direct protein-protein interactions, independent of the Per and Tim
proteins. Per2 is a positive regulator of the Bmal1 loop, and Cry1 and
Cry2 are the negative regulators of the Period and Cryptochrome cycles.

Yagita et al. (2001) used wildtype and Cry1 -/- and Cry2 -/- deficient
cell lines derived from Cry mutant mice to demonstrate that the
peripheral oscillator in cultured fibroblasts is identical to the
oscillator in the suprachiasmatic nucleus in (1) temporal expression
profiles of all known clock genes; (2) the phase of the various mRNA
rhythms (i.e., antiphase oscillation of Bmal1 (602550) and Per); (3) the
delay between maximum mRNA levels and appearance of nuclear Per1 and
Per2 protein; (4) the inability to produce oscillations in the absence
of functional Cry genes; and (5) the control of period length by Cry
proteins.

Van Gelder et al. (2003) tested pupillary light responses of
cryptochrome mutant mice (Cry1 -/-; Cry2 -/-), outer retinal degenerate
(rd/rd) mice, and mice mutant at all of these loci, as well littermate
controls. There was substantial loss of constriction in the rd/rd mice
compared with control mice. The double mutants for the cryptochromes
showed a pupillary response similar in magnitude to that in control
mice. Almost no pupillary constriction was observed in the triple
knockouts at a 470-nm light intensity. Pupillary responses of the triple
mutants were about 5% as sensitive to blue light as those of the rd/rd
mice. Some pupillary responses were retained in the triple mutant mice
under very bright light, although pupillary movement was somewhat
sluggish. The 50% constriction threshold of pupillary responses was
noted in Cry1 -/-;rd/rd and Cry2 -/-;rd/rd mice, and was comparable to
those of rd/rd mice, indicating that either Cry1 or Cry2 function is
sufficient for retention of pupillary responses in rd/rd animals. Since
all mice were of the same strain background, strain differences were
unlikely to account for the observed differences in pupillary light
responses. Van Gelder et al. (2003) suggested that murine cryptochromes
may function as inner retinal photopigments.

REFERENCE 1. Etchegaray, J.-P.; Lee, C.; Wade, P. A.; Reppert, S. M.: Rhythmic
histone acetylation underlies transcription in the mammalian circadian
clock. Nature 421: 177-182, 2003.

2. Freedman, M. S.; Lucas, R. J.; Soni, B.; von Schantz, M.; Munoz,
M.; David-Gray, Z.; Foster, R.: Regulation of mammalian circadian
behavior by non-rod, non-cone, ocular photoreceptors. Science 284:
502-504, 1999.

3. Griffin, E. A., Jr.; Staknis, D.; Weitz, C. J.: Light-independent
role of CRY1 and CRY2 in the mammalian circadian clock. Science 286:
768-771, 1999.

4. Hsu, D. S.; Zhao, X.; Zhao, S.; Kazantsev, A.; Wang, R.-P.; Todo,
T.; Wei, Y.-F.; Sancar, A.: Putative human blue-light photoreceptors
hCRY1 and hCRY2 are flavoproteins. Biochemistry 35: 13871-13877,
1996.

5. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Suyama, M.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.;
Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. X. The complete sequences of 100 new
cDNA clones from brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA
Res. 5: 169-176, 1998.

6. Kobayashi, K.; Kanno, S.; Smit, B.; van der Horst, G. T. J.; Takao,
M.; Yasui, A.: Characterization of photolyase/blue-light receptor
homologs in mouse and human cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 26: 5086-5092,
1998.

7. Kume, K.; Zylka, M. J.; Sriram, S.; Shearman, L. P.; Weaver, D.
R.; Jin, X.; Maywood, E. S.; Hastings, M. H.; Reppert, S. M.: mCRY1
and mCRY2 are essential components of the negative limb of the circadian
clock feedback loop. Cell 98: 193-205, 1999.

8. Lamia, K. A.; Papp, S. J.; Yu, R. T.; Barish, G. D.; Uhlenhaut,
N. H.; Jonker, J. W.; Downes, M.; Evans, R. M.: Cryptochromes mediate
rhythmic repression of the glucocorticoid receptor. Nature 480:
552-556, 2011.

9. Lucas, R. J.; Freedman, M. S.; Munoz, M.; Garcia-Fernandez, J.-M.;
Foster, R. G.: Regulation of the mammalian pineal by non-rod, non-cone,
ocular photoreceptors. Science 284: 505-507, 1999.

10. Okamura, H.; Miyake, S.; Sumi, Y.; Yamaguchi, S.; Yasui, A.; Muijtjens,
M.; Hoeijmakers, J. H. J.; van der Horst, G. T. J.: Photic induction
of mPer1 and mPer2 in Cry-deficient mice lacking a biological clock. Science 286:
2531-2534, 1999.

11. Padmanabhan, K.; Robles, M. S.; Westerling, T.; Weitz, C. J.:
Feedback regulation of transcriptional termination by the mammalian
circadian clock PERIOD complex. Science 337: 599-602, 2012.

12. Shearman, L. P.; Sriram, S.; Weaver, D. R.; Maywood, E. S.; Chaves,
I.; Zheng, B.; Kume, K.; Lee, C. C.; van der Horst, G. T. J.; Hastings,
M. H.; Reppert, S. M.: Interacting molecular loops in the mammalian
circadian clock. Science 288: 1013-1019, 2000.

13. Thresher, R. J.; Vitaterna, M. H.; Miyamoto, Y.; Kazantsev, A.;
Hsu, D. S.; Petit, C.; Selby, C. P.; Dawut, L.; Smithies, O.; Takahashi,
J. S.; Sancar, A.: Role of mouse cryptochrome blue-light photoreceptor
in circadian photoresponses. Science 282: 1490-1494, 1998.

14. van der Horst, G. T. J.; Muijtjens, M.; Kobayashi, K.; Takano,
R.; Kanno, S.; Takao, M.; de Wit, J.; Verkerk, A.; Eker, A. P. M.;
van Leenen, D.; Buijs, R.; Bootsma, D.; Hoeijmakers, J. H. J.; Yasui,
A.: Mammalian Cry1 and Cry2 are essential for maintenance of circadian
rhythms. Nature 398: 627-630, 1999.

15. Van Gelder, R. N.; Wee, R.; Lee, J. A.; Tu, D. C.: Reduced pupillary
light responses in mice lacking cryptochromes. Science 299: 222
only, 2003.

16. Xing, W.; Busino, L.; Hinds, T. R.; Marionni, S. T.; Saifee, N.
H.; Bush, M. F.; Pagano, M.; Zheng, N.: Scf(FBXL3) ubiquitin ligase
targets cryptochromes at their cofactor pocket. Nature 496: 64-68,
2013.

17. Yagita, K.; Tamanini, F.; van der Horst, G. T. J.; Okamura, H.
: Molecular mechanisms of the biological clock in cultured fibroblasts. Science 292:
278-281, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 05/29/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/28/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/7/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/21/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/6/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/12/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/27/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/22/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/30/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/19/1999

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 4/14/1999

EDITED alopez: 05/29/2013
mgross: 2/5/2013
alopez: 8/29/2012
terry: 8/28/2012
alopez: 2/8/2012
terry: 2/7/2012
alopez: 2/24/2003
terry: 2/21/2003
alopez: 2/10/2003
terry: 2/6/2003
alopez: 4/17/2001
terry: 4/16/2001
mcapotos: 8/8/2000
alopez: 5/12/2000
alopez: 12/27/1999
alopez: 10/22/1999
mgross: 7/30/1999
alopez: 5/20/1999
terry: 5/19/1999
alopez: 4/20/1999
terry: 4/15/1999
alopez: 4/14/1999

607045	TITLE *607045 RHABDOMYOSARCOMA 2-ASSOCIATED TRANSCRIPT; RMST
;;NONCODING RNA IN RHABDOMYOSARCOMA; NCRMS;;
NONCODING RNA 54; NCRNA00054
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Rhabdomyosarcoma is a malignant soft tissue tumor in children that
exists in 2 major types, embryonal, or RMS1 (268210), and the clinically
more aggressive alveolar, or RMS2 (268220). Using representational
difference analysis to compare gene expression in RMS1 and RMS2,
followed by RACE and EST database searching, Chan et al. (2002)
identified a gene encoding NCRMS, which was preferentially expressed in
RMS2. Northern blot analysis detected 1.25- and 1.8-kb transcripts in
RMS2 cells and in tissues, with weak expression in most other tumor
types tested. Sequence analysis identified multiple stop codons but no
likely protein-coding reading frames. Chan et al. (2002) concluded that
NCRMS is a noncoding RNA that may be important in myogenesis and in the
development of RMS.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Chan et al. (2002) determined that the
NCRMS gene contains at least 11 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis and radiation hybrid analysis, Chan et al.
(2002) mapped the RMST gene to chromosome 12q21.

REFERENCE 1. Chan, A. S.; Thorner, P. S.; Squire, J. A.; Zielenska, M.: Identification
of a novel gene NCRMS on chromosome 12q21 with differential expression
between Rhabdomyosarcoma subtypes. Oncogene 21: 3029-3037, 2002.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/18/2002

EDITED alopez: 11/01/2010
mgross: 6/18/2002

300462	TITLE *300462 A-KINASE ANCHOR PROTEIN 14; AKAP14
;;A-KINASE ANCHOR PROTEIN, 28-KD; AKAP28
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

A-kinase anchor proteins (AKAPs; see 602449) target protein kinase A
(PKA; see 176911) to discrete locations within the cell by binding the
regulatory subunit dimer of the PKA holoenzyme. AKAP28 is an axonemal
AKAP.

CLONING

Kultgen et al. (2002) identified AKAP28 as an axoneme-enriched PKA type
II regulatory subunit (RII)-binding protein by overlay analysis of
isolated cilia from well-differentiated human bronchial epithelial
(WD-HBE) cells. By screening a WD-HBE cDNA expression library using RII
as probe, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE and database analysis,
Kultgen et al. (2002) obtained a full-length cDNA encoding AKAP28. The
deduced AKAP28 protein contains 197 amino acids and has an apparent
molecular mass of 28 kD. By database analysis, Kultgen et al. (2002)
determined that there are at least 3 AKAP28 splice variants, and RT-PCR
detected all 3 variants in trachea and testis. Northern blot analysis of
HBE cells detected upregulation of a 0.8-kb AKAP28 transcript as cells
differentiated and began to display a mucociliary phenotype. Northern
blot analysis of a multiple-tissue array showed predominant expression
of AKAP28 in trachea and testis, the only tissues examined that contain
axoneme-based organelles. Faint expression was also detected in adult
and fetal lung. Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry localized
AKAP28 to airway cilia.

GENE FUNCTION

By mutation analysis, Kultgen et al. (2002) confirmed that amino acids
35 to 52 of AKAP28 mediate binding of RII. Coimmunoprecipitation
analysis showed that recombinant AKAP28 associated with RII and the PKA
catalytic subunit, but not with RI, in HeLa cells. When heterologously
expressed in a cervical adenocarcinoma cell line, AKAP28 preferentially
bound type II PKA and was able to copurify with the PKA catalytic
subunit. Kultgen et al. (2002) concluded that AKAP28 acts as a type II
PKA anchor within cells.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Kultgen et al. (2002) mapped the AKAP28
gene to chromosome Xq24.

REFERENCE 1. Kultgen, P. L.; Byrd, S. K.; Ostrowski, L. E.; Milgram, S. L.:
Characterization of an A-kinase anchoring protein in human ciliary
axonemes. Molec. Biol. Cell 13: 4156-4166, 2002.

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 11/26/2003

EDITED alopez: 03/04/2005
carol: 11/29/2003
mgross: 11/26/2003

600870	TITLE *600870 G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR KINASE 5; GRK5
;;GPRK5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) kinases (GRKs), such as GRK5, are
important regulators of GPCR function and mediate receptor
desensitization, internalization, and signaling. Several non-GPCR
proteins also serve as GRK substrates, and GRKs have been shown to have
kinase-independent functions in receptor and effector regulation
(summary by Michal et al., 2012).

CLONING

By PCR on neutrophil cDNA using primers based on sequences of known
receptor kinases, Haribabu and Snyderman (1993) identified GPRK5 and
GPRK6 (GRK6; 600869) sequences.

Using degenerate oligonucleotide primers to amplify GRK-conserved
sequences from a heart cDNA library, followed by screening the heart
cDNA library, Kunapuli and Benovic (1993) cloned GRK5. The deduced
590-amino acid protein has a predicted central protein kinase catalytic
domain and a calculated molecular mass of 67.7 kD. GRK5 shares 69% amino
acid identity with IT11 (GRK4; 137026) and is also closely related to
Drosophila Gprk2 and bovine rhodopsin kinase (GRK1; 180381). Northern
blot analysis detected a GRK5 transcript of about 3 kb that showed
highest expression in human heart, placenta, and lung, followed by
skeletal muscle, brain, liver, and pancreas, with little expression in
kidney.

By Western blot analysis and immunohistochemical analysis of human cell
lines, Michal et al. (2012) showed that GRK5 colocalized with
gamma-tubulin (see 191135), centrin (see 603187) and pericentrin (PCNT;
605925) at centrosomes and that it preferentially associated with the
mother centriole. In synchronized HeLa cells, GRK5 associated with
centrosomes predominantly during interphase and dispersed during
mitosis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kunapuli and Benovic (1993) determined that the 5-prime UTR of GPRK5 is
relatively GC rich.

MAPPING

Bullrich et al. (1995) used a rodent-human hybrid panel to map 2 newly
identified members of the GRK family: GPRK5 and GPRK6 (600869) to
10q24-qter and 5q35, respectively. The hybrid cells containing parts of
chromosomes 10 and 5 were used for the regionalization.

GENE FUNCTION

Kunapuli and Benovic (1993) showed that GRK5 expressed in insect cells
phosphorylated rhodopsin (RHO; 180380) in a light-dependent manner.

Fan and Malik (2003) noted that desensitization of GPCRs regulates the
number of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs), as well as their motility
and ability to stop upon contact with pathogens or target cells, and
this desensitization is mediated by GRKs. They found that MIP2 (CXCL2;
139110) induces GRK2 (109635) and GRK5 expression in PMNs through PI3KG
(PIK3CG; 601232) signaling. However, lipopolysaccharide (LPS), acting
through TLR4 (603030) signaling, mediated through MEK1 (176872)/MEK2
(601263), transcriptionally downregulates expression of GRK2 and GRK5 in
response to MIP2, which decreases chemokine receptor desensitization and
markedly augments PMN migration. Therefore, LPS-activated TLR4 signaling
regulates PMN migration by modulating the expression of chemokine
receptors in a GRK2- and GRK5-dependent manner.

By depolymerizing microtubules, Michal et al. (2012) showed that
association of GRK5 with centrosomes in human cell lines was independent
of microtubules. Knockdown of GRK5 expression in HeLa cells induced G2/M
arrest or delay, which appeared to be due to increased expression of p53
(TP53; 191170), inhibition of AURKA (603072), and subsequent delay in
PLK1 (602098) activation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Liggett et al. (2008) identified a leu41-to-gln (L41Q) polymorphism in
the GRK5 gene that was associated with decreased mortality in African
Americans with heart failure or cardiac ischemia. Studies in transfected
cells and transgenic mice showed that GRK5-L41 uncoupled
isoproterenol-stimulated responses more effectively than did GRK5-Q41
and protected against experimental catecholamine-induced cardiomyopathy,
similarly to pharmacologic beta-blockade. In 375 prospectively followed
African American patients with heart failure, GRK5-L41 protected against
death or cardiac transplantation. Liggett et al. (2008) concluded that
enhanced beta-adrenergic receptor desensitization of excessive
catecholamine signaling by GRK-L41 provides a 'genetic beta-blockade'
that improves survival in African Americans with heart failure,
suggesting a reason for conflicting results of beta-blocker clinical
trials in that population.

ANIMAL MODEL

By targeted deletion, Gainetdinov et al. (1999) created Grk5-null mice.
Homozygous mutant mice were viable and showed no anatomic or behavioral
abnormalities compared with wildtype littermates. However, the core body
temperature of mutant mice was about 0.9 degrees C below normal. Since
the central cholinergic system is involved in thermoregulation,
Gainetdinov et al. (1999) challenged mutant mice with a nonselective
muscarinic agonist, oxotremorine. Mutant mice showed enhanced classical
cholinergic responses, such as hypothermia, hypoactivity, tremor, and
salivation. The antinociceptive effect of oxotremorine was potentiated
and prolonged, and muscarinic receptors in brains of Grk5-null mice
resisted oxotremorine-induced desensitization.

REFERENCE 1. Bullrich, F.; Druck, T.; Kunapuli, P.; Gomez, J.; Gripp, K. W.;
Schlegelberger, B.; Lasota, J.; Aronson, M.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Huebner,
K.; Benovic, J. L.: Chromosomal mapping of the genes GPRK5 and GPRK6
encoding G protein-coupled receptor kinases GRK5 and GRK6. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 70: 250-254, 1995.

2. Fan, J.; Malik, A. B.: Toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) signaling augments
chemokine-induced neutrophil migration by modulating cell surface
expression of chemokine receptors. Nature Med. 9: 315-321, 2003.
Note: Erratum: Nature 9: 477 only, 2003.

3. Gainetdinov, R. R.; Bohn, L. M.; Walker, J. K. L.; Laporte, S.
A.; Macrae, A. D.; Caron, M. G.; Lefkowitz, R. J.; Premont, R. T.
: Muscarinic supersensitivity and impaired receptor desensitization
in G protein-coupled receptor kinase 5-deficient mice. Neuron 24:
1029-1036, 1999.

4. Haribabu, B.; Snyderman, R.: Identification of additional members
of human G-protein-coupled receptor kinase multigene family. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 9398-9402, 1993.

5. Kunapuli, P.; Benovic, J. L.: Cloning and expression of GRK5:
a member of the G protein-coupled receptor kinase family. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 90: 5588-5592, 1993.

6. Liggett, S. B.; Cresci, S.; Kelly, R. J.; Syed, F. M.; Matkovich,
S. J.; Hahn, H. S.; Diwan, A.; Martini, J. S.; Sparks, L.; Parekh,
R. R.; Spertus, J. A.; Koch, W. J.; Kardia, S. L. R.; Dorn, G. W.,
II: A GRK5 polymorphism that inhibits beta-adrenergic receptor signaling
is protective in heart failure. Nature Med. 14: 510-517, 2008.

7. Michal, A. M.; So, C. H.; Beeharry, N.; Shankar, H.; Mashayekhi,
R.; Yen, T. J.; Benovic, J. L.: G protein-coupled receptor kinase
5 is localized to centrosomes and regulates cell cycle progression. J.
Biol. Chem. 287: 6928-6940, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 05/18/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/19/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/29/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/20/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/17/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/16/1995

EDITED mgross: 05/18/2012
terry: 4/19/2012
carol: 5/29/2008
mgross: 10/26/2005
terry: 10/20/2005
mgross: 4/17/2003
carol: 7/1/2002
mark: 10/16/1995

601906	TITLE *601906 WINGLESS-TYPE MMTV INTEGRATION SITE FAMILY, MEMBER 10B; WNT10B
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Several members of the Wnt gene family have been shown to cause mammary
tumors in mice. Using degenerate primer PCR on human genomic DNA and
specific PCR of cDNA libraries, Bui et al. (1997) isolated a Wnt gene
that had not previously been described in human. It is the human homolog
of mouse Wnt10b, which had been shown to be one of the oncogenes
cooperating with FGF3 (164950) in the development of mouse mammary tumor
virus (MMTV)-induced mammary carcinomas in mice. The human WNT10B
sequence is 88% and 95% identical to the mouse gene at nucleotide and
amino acid levels, respectively. WNT10B expression was not observed in
normal and benign proliferations of human breast tissue but was found to
be elevated in 3 of 50 primary breast carcinomas. Southern blot analysis
of the carcinoma expressing the highest level of WNT10B showed no
amplification or rearrangement of the gene.

Hardiman et al. (1997) demonstrated that the WNT10B gene encodes a
389-amino acid protein with 96.6% sequence identity to mouse Wnt10b. The
expression pattern showed that it is synthesized in many adult tissues
with the highest levels found in heart and skeletal muscle.

GENE STRUCTURE

By analyzing human genome draft sequence, Kirikoshi et al. (2001)
determined that WNT10B is encoded by 5 exons and is clustered with WNT1
(164820) in a head-to-head manner with an interval of less than 7 kb.
They hypothesized that the WNT1-WNT10B gene cluster and the WNT6
(604663)-WNT10A (606268) gene cluster on chromosome 2 might be due to
duplication of an ancestral WNT gene cluster.

MAPPING

By YAC and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) mapping, Bui et al.
(1997) localized the WNT10B gene to 12q13, a chromosomal region
frequently rearranged in human tumors and also containing the WNT1 gene
(164820).

By PCR typing of a human/rodent monochromosomal panel and FISH, Hardiman
et al. (1997) mapped the WNT10B gene to chromosome 12q13.1.

GENE FUNCTION

Ross et al. (2000) showed that WNT signaling, likely mediated by WNT10B,
is a molecular switch that governs adipogenesis. WNT signaling maintains
preadipocytes in an undifferentiated state through inhibition of the
adipogenic transcription factors CEBPA (116897) and PPAR-gamma (601487).
When WNT signaling in preadipocytes is prevented by overexpression of
axin (603816) or dominant-negative TCF4 (TCF7L2; 602228), these cells
differentiate into adipocytes. Disruption of WNT signaling also causes
transdifferentiation of myoblasts into adipocytes in vitro, highlighting
the importance of this pathway not only in adipocyte differentiation but
also in mesodermal cell fate determination.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a consanguineous Turkish family with SHFM mapping to chromosome
12q31.11-q13, originally reported by Gul and Oktenli (2002), Ugur and
Tolun (2008) analyzed the candidate gene WNT10B and identified
homozygosity for a missense mutation (R332W; 601906.0001) in all but the
most mildly affected individual; it was also found in homozygosity in 1
unaffected family member. Ugur and Tolun (2008) proposed that either a
second locus contributed to the phenotype or a suppressor locus
prevented trait manifestation in the nonpenetrant female. Linkage
analysis for the 5 known SHFM loci (see SHFM1, 183600) excluded 4 of
them; however, a rare insertion polymorphism (dbSNP rs34201045) at an
alternate promoter used for transcription of an N-terminal-truncated p63
isotype (see TP63, 603273) was detected in heterozygosity or
homozygosity in all but 1 affected individual.

In a 30-year-old pregnant Swiss woman with SHFM6, who presented for
genetic counseling, Blattner et al. (2010) identified a homozygous
truncating mutation in the WNT10B gene (601906.0001). Blattner et al.
(2010) emphasized that this patient, who presented with apparent
sporadic occurrence of the disorder and could have been presumed to have
a de novo dominant mutation, was found to be homozygous for the WNT10B
mutation, resulting in serious implications for genetic counseling.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPLIT-HAND/FOOT MALFORMATION 6
WNT10B, ARG332TRP

In affected members of a consanguineous Turkish family with
split-hand/foot malformation-6 (SHFM6; 225300), originally reported by
Gul and Oktenli (2002), Ugur and Tolun (2008) identified homozygosity
for a 994C-T transition in exon 5 of the WNT10B gene, resulting in an
arg332-to-trp (R332W) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
mutation, which was not detected in 200 controls, was not found in the
most mildly affected individual, a man with only cutaneous syndactyly of
the right hand; however, it was present in homozygosity in 1 unaffected
female family member. All but 1 affected individual also carried a TP63
(603273) promoter polymorphism, dbSNP rs34201045, in homozygosity or
heterozygosity.

.0002
SPLIT-HAND/FOOT MALFORMATION 6
WNT10B, 4-BP DUP, 458AGCA

In a 30-year-old pregnant Swiss woman with split-hand/foot
malformation-6 (SHFM6; 225300) who presented for genetic counseling,
Blattner et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 4-bp duplication
(458dupAGCA) in exon 4 of the WNT10B gene, resulting in a frameshift and
premature truncation. Both unaffected parents and several other
unaffected family members were heterozygous for the mutation.
Consanguinity of the parents of the patient was not known. At 12 years
of age, based on radiographs, the malformation was described as
presenting with loss of second, third, and fourth toes of both feet,
bifid fifth toe on the right foot and fusion of the third and fourth
metatarsal of both feet. A surgical osteotomy of the fourth and fifth
metatarsal on the right foot was performed at 5 years. The right hand
impressed at birth with complete cutaneous syndactyly of the fourth and
fifth finger, hypoplasia of the third finger with loss of the distal
phalanx. The left hand showed proximal cutaneous syndactyly of the third
and fourth finger. Blattner et al. (2010) emphasized that this patient,
who presented with apparent sporadic occurrence of the disorder and
could have been presumed to have a de novo dominant mutation, was found
to be homozygous for the WNT10B mutation, resulting in serious
implications for genetic counseling.

REFERENCE 1. Blattner, A.; Huber, A. R.; Rothlisberger, B.: Homozygous nonsense
mutation in WNT10B and sporadic split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM)
with autosomal recessive inheritance. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 2053-2056,
2010.

2. Bui, T. D.; Rankin, J.; Smith, K.; Huguet, E. L.; Ruben, S.; Strachan,
T.; Harris, A. L.; Lindsay, S.: A novel human Wnt gene, WNT10B, maps
to 12q13 and is expressed in human breast carcinomas. Oncogene 14:
1249-1253, 1997.

3. Gul, D.; Oktenli, C.: Evidence for autosomal recessive inheritance
of split hand/split foot malformation: a report of nine cases. Clin.
Dysmorph. 11: 183-186, 2002.

4. Hardiman, G.; Kastelein, R. A.; Bazan, J. F.: Isolation, characterization
and chromosomal localization of human WNT10B. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 77:
278-282, 1997.

5. Kirikoshi, H.; Sekihara, H.; Katoh, M.: WNT10A and WNT6, clustered
in human chromosome 2q35 region with head-to-tail manner, are strongly
coexpressed in SW480 cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 283:
798-805, 2001.

6. Ross, S. E.; Hemati, N.; Longo, K. A.; Bennett, C. N.; Lucas, P.
C.; Erickson, R. L.; MacDougald, O. A.: Inhibition of adipogenesis
by Wnt signaling. Science 289: 950-953, 2000.

7. Ugur, S. A.; Tolun, A.: Homozygous WNT10b mutation and complex
inheritance in split-hand/foot malformation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17:
2644-2653, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/11/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/17/2009
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 10/8/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/10/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/20/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/27/1997

EDITED wwang: 01/28/2011
ckniffin: 1/11/2011
carol: 8/17/2009
mgross: 11/14/2007
joanna: 10/29/2001
carol: 10/8/2001
alopez: 8/10/2000
terry: 8/10/2000
carol: 7/28/1998
dkim: 7/17/1998
jenny: 10/22/1997
terry: 10/20/1997
mark: 7/1/1997
mark: 6/27/1997

601447	TITLE *601447 UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 5; USP5
;;ISOPEPTIDASE T; ISOT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ubiquitin (see 191339)-dependent proteolysis is a complex pathway of
protein metabolism implicated in such diverse cellular functions as
maintenance of chromatin structure, receptor function, and degradation
of abnormal proteins. A late step of the process involves disassembly of
the polyubiquitin chains on degraded proteins into ubiquitin monomers.
USP5 disassembles branched polyubiquitin chains by a sequential exo
mechanism, starting at the proximal end of the chain (Wilkinson et al.,
1995).

CLONING

Wilkinson et al. (1995) purified a 93-kD bovine protein with the
properties expected of a polyubiquitin disassembly protein. They
biochemically characterized the enzyme, which they called isopeptidase T
(ISOT), and cloned a cDNA encoding the human homolog (GenBank U35116).
The deduced 835-amino acid human polypeptide has a predicted molecular
mass of 93.3 kD.

Ansari-Lari et al. (1996) generated the genomic sequence of the human
CD4 gene (186940) and its neighboring region on chromosome 12 using the
large-scale shotgun sequencing strategy. A total of 117 kb of genomic
sequence and approximately 11 kb of cDNA sequence was obtained. They
identified in this sequence 8 genes, including CD4 and ISOT. Using a
battery of strategies, the exon/intron boundaries, splice variants, and
tissue expression patterns of the genes were determined. Tissue
expression analysis indicated a high level of expression of a 3.3-kb
ISOT transcript in brain, and a low level of expression in heart, lung,
spleen, and skeletal muscle. Sequence comparison showed that ISOT is a
member of the ubiquitin C-terminal hydroxylase family. Wilkinson et al.
(1995) originally cloned human ISOT and reported the sequence as 3,102
bp long. Ansari-Lari et al. (1996) stated that comparison of their cDNA
sequence with the sequence reported by Wilkinson et al. (1995) indicated
alternative splicing in exon 15. Four nucleotide differences were found
between the 2 sequences resulting in lys-to-arg and gly-to-asp
substitutions. The cDNA and genomic sequences were in full agreement.

Reyes-Turcu et al. (2006) stated that the 835-amino acid human USP5
protein contains 4 putative ubiquitin-binding domains: an N-terminal
zinc finger ubiquitin-binding domain (ZNF-UBP), a ubiquitin-specific
processing protease (UBP) domain formed by noncontiguous regions
containing the active-site cys and his boxes, and 2 ubiquitin-associated
domains (UBA1 and UBA2). UBA1 and UBA2 are located between the cys and
his boxes, which are in the central and C-terminal regions of USP5,
respectively.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Reyes-Turcu et al. (2006) reported the crystal structures of the ZNF-UBP
domain of USP5 alone and in complex with ubiquitin at 2.09-angstrom
resolution. They found that, unlike other ubiquitin-binding domains, the
ZNF-UBP domain contains a deep binding pocket where the C-terminal
diglycine motif of ubiquitin is inserted, thus explaining the
specificity of USP5 for an unmodified C terminus on the proximal subunit
of polyubiquitin. Mutation analysis showed that the ZNF-UBP domain was
required for optimal catalytic activation of USP5.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Ansari-Lari et al. (1996) mapped the USP5
gene to chromosome 12p13, near the CD4 gene (186940).

REFERENCE 1. Ansari-Lari, M. A.; Muzny, D. M.; Lu, J.; Lu, F.; Lilley, C. E.;
Spanos, S.; Malley, T.; Gibbs, R. A.: A gene-rich cluster between
the CD4 and triosephosphate isomerase genes at human chromosome 12p13. Genome
Res. 6: 314-326, 1996.

2. Reyes-Turcu, F. E.; Horton, J. R.; Mullally, J. E.; Heroux, A.;
Cheng, X.; Wilkinson, K. D.: The ubiquitin binding domain ZnF UBP
recognizes the C-terminal diglycine motif of unanchored ubiquitin. Cell 124:
1197-1208, 2006.

3. Wilkinson, K. D.; Tashayev, V. L.; O'Connor, L. B.; Larsen, C.
N.; Kasperek, E.; Pickart, C. M.: Metabolism of the polyubiquitin
degradation signal: structure, mechanism, and role of isopeptidase
T. Biochemistry 34: 14535-14546, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 3/3/2010
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 3/20/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/26/1996

EDITED wwang: 03/05/2010
mgross: 3/3/2010
carol: 5/12/2004
psherman: 2/26/1999
alopez: 2/5/1999
mark: 3/20/1997
terry: 3/20/1997
jamie: 10/23/1996
jamie: 10/16/1996
mark: 9/26/1996

613939	TITLE *613939 SPERMATOGENESIS-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 20; SPATA20
;;SPERM-SPECIFIC PROTEIN 411; SSP411
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Shi et al. (2004) cloned rat Spata20, which they called Ssp411, and they
identified human SSP411 by database analysis. The deduced 787-amino acid
human protein shares 87% identity with rat Ssp411. SSP411 contains an
N-terminal CxxC thioredoxin (TXN; 187700)-like motif (CHWC) that is
conserved in human, mouse, and rat. Rat Ssp411 also has putative sites
for N- and O-glycosylation and phosphorylation. The N-terminal region of
rat Ssp411 was predicted to assume a thioredoxin fold with a potential
active-site disulfide bond between the cysteines of the CHWC motif.
Northern blot and semiquantitative RT-PCR analyses of rat tissues
detected Ssp411 in testis only, where it was expressed in spermatids,
but not in spermatocytes or spermatogonia. In situ hybridization of
adult rat testis detected Ssp411 in round spermatids and early elongated
spermatids. Immunohistochemical analysis detected Ssp411 protein
predominantly in elongated spermatids.

GENE STRUCTURE

Shi et al. (2004) determined that the SPATA20 gene contains 16 exons and
spans 8.6 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Shi et al. (2004) mapped the SPATA20 gene
to chromosome 17. They mapped the mouse Spata20 gene to chromosome 11.

Hartz (2011) mapped the SPATA20 gene to chromosome 17q21.33 based on an
alignment of the SPATA20 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK025000) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/19/2011.

2. Shi, H.-J.; Wu, A. Z.; Santos, M.; Feng, Z.-M.; Huang, L.; Chen,
Y.-M.; Zhu, K.; Chen, C.-L. C.: Cloning and characterization of rat
spermatid protein SSP411: a thioredoxin-like protein. J. Androl. 25:
479-493, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/27/2011

EDITED mgross: 04/27/2011

164762	TITLE *164762 V-CRK AVIAN SARCOMA VIRUS CT10 ONCOGENE HOMOLOG; CRK
;;ONCOGENE CRK;;
CRKII
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The CRK oncogene was originally identified as a transforming component
of the avian sarcoma virus CT10. A cDNA encoding the chicken cellular
homolog of v-crk was isolated by Reichman et al. (1992) and shown to
consist primarily of the SRC (190090) homology domains SH2 and SH3.
Matsuda et al. (1992) isolated 2 distinct human CRK cDNA species and
showed that the deduced amino acid sequences of the corresponding
polypeptides differed in their C termini. The 2 cDNA species were
considered to derive from the same genomic locus by alternative
splicing.

MAPPING

Fioretos et al. (1993) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to map
the CRK gene to chromosome 17p13. Deletion of this region of chromosome
17 is one of the most frequent chromosomal abnormalities in human
cancer. The TP53 gene (191170) maps to 17p13.1; Fioretos et al. (1993)
mapped the CRK oncogene to 17p13.3, which is a second region on 17p that
has been shown to manifest frequent loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in a
number of different tumor types. Thus, the region is presumed to harbor
a tumor suppressor gene.

GENE FUNCTION

Feller et al. (1994) described the SRC homology domains SH2 and SH3 as
molecular adhesives on many proteins involved in signal transduction.
They reviewed the interactions of ABL (189980) and CRK as a model of SH2
and SH3 interaction.

Hallock et al. (2010) found that Crk and Crkl (602007) were recruited to
mouse skeletal muscle synapses and played redundant roles in synaptic
differentiation. Crk and Crkl bound the same tyrosine-phosphorylated
sequences in Dok7 (610285), a protein that functions downstream of agrin
(AGRN; 103320) and muscle-specific receptor kinase (MUSK; 601296) in
synapse formation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Cardoso et al. (2003) completed a physical and transcriptional map of
the 17p13.3 region from LIS1 to the telomere. Using Cardoso et al.
(2003), they mapped the deletion size in 19 children with ILS (607432),
11 children with Miller-Dieker syndrome (MDS; 164762), and 4 children
with 17p13.3 deletions not involving LIS1. They showed that the critical
region that differentiates ILS from MDS at the molecular level can be
reduced to 400 kb. Using somatic cell hybrids from selected patients,
the authors identified 8 genes that are consistently deleted in patients
classified as having MDS. These genes include ABR (600365),
14-3-3-epsilon (605066), CRK, MYO1C (606538), SKIP (603055), PITPNA
(600174), SCARF1, RILP, PRP8 (607300), and SERPINF1 (172860). In
addition, deletion of the genes CRK and 14-3-3-epsilon delineates
patients with the most severe lissencephaly grade. On the basis of
recent functional data and the creation of a mouse model suggesting a
role for 14-3-3-epsilon in cortical development, Cardoso et al. (2003)
suggested that deletion of 1 or both of these genes in combination with
deletion of LIS1 may contribute to the more severe form of lissencephaly
seen only in patients with MDS.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hallock et al. (2010) found that knockout of both Crk and Crkl in mouse
skeletal muscle, but not of either gene alone, caused perinatal
lethality. Lungs from Crk- and Crkl-deficient newborns failed to expand.
Embryonic day-18.5 muscle from Crk- and Crkl-deficient mice lacked
innervation and showed severe defects in presynaptic and postsynaptic
differentiation.

REFERENCE 1. Cardoso, C.; Leventer, R. J.; Ward, H. L.; Toyo-oka, K.; Chung,
J.; Gross, A.; Martin, C. L.; Allanson, J.; Pilz, D. T.; Olney, A.
H.; Mutchinick, O. M.; Hirotsune, S.; Wynshaw-Boris, A.; Dobyns, W.
B.; Ledbetter, D. H.: Refinement of a 400-kb critical region allows
genotypic differentiation between isolated lissencephaly, Miller-Dieker
syndrome, and other phenotypes secondary to deletions of 17p13.3. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 72: 918-930, 2003.

2. Feller, S. M.; Ren, R. B.; Hanafusa, H.; Baltimore, D.: SH2 and
SH3 domains as molecular adhesives: the interactions of crk and abl. Trends
Biochem. Sci. 19: 453-458, 1994.

3. Fioretos, T.; Heisterkamp, N.; Groffen, J.; Benjes, S.; Morris,
C.: CRK proto-oncogene maps to human chromosome band 17p13. Oncogene 8:
2853-2855, 1993.

4. Hallock, P. T.; Xu, C.-F.; Park, T.-J.; Neubert, T. A.; Curran,
T.; Burden, S. J.: Dok-7 regulates neuromuscular synapse formation
by recruiting Crk and Crk-L. Genes Dev. 24: 2451-2461, 2010.

5. Matsuda, M.; Tanaka, S.; Nagata, S.; Kojima, A.; Kurata, T.; Shibuya,
M.: Two species of human CRK cDNA encode proteins with distinct biological
activities. Molec. Cell. Biol. 12: 3482-3489, 1992.

6. Reichman, C. T.; Mayer, B. J.; Keshav, S.; Hanafusa, H.: The product
of the cellular crk gene consists primarily of SH2 and SH3 regions. Cell
Growth Differ. 3: 451-460, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/24/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/9/2003
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 8/29/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/2/1993

EDITED mgross: 11/08/2013
tpirozzi: 9/24/2013
cwells: 5/13/2003
terry: 5/9/2003
mgross: 10/30/2001
dkim: 10/28/1998
mark: 8/29/1996
mark: 6/9/1996
carol: 11/3/1993
carol: 11/2/1993

602209	TITLE *602209 RAS-RESPONSIVE ELEMENT BINDING PROTEIN 1; RREB1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In several neuroendocrine cell types, the RAS/RAF signal transduction
cascade results in cell differentiation (see HRAS; 190020). This signal
transduction cascade involves inactivation of several tiers of protein
kinases, including members of the RAF (e.g., RAF1; 164760), MAPKK, and
MAPK families (see 176872). Ultimately, activation of these protein
kinases results in the activation of transcription factors responsible
for changes in cell phenotype. In the human medullary thyroid carcinoma
cell line TT, an activated HRAS oncogene or activation of the RAF1 gene
induces a program of neuroendocrine differentiation (Carson et al.,
1995). One of the hallmarks of this differentiation process is an
increase in the expression of the calcitonin gene (114130). Thiagalingam
et al. (1996) reported the DNA affinity cloning of a RAS-responsive
element binding protein, RREB1, from the TT cell line. RREB1, a zinc
finger transcription factor, was shown to bind specifically to the
distal RAS-responsive element (RRE) in the calcitonin gene promoter and
to augment the RAS/RAF-mediated transcriptional response of that
promoter. Thus, they concluded that it may be involved in
RAS/RAF-mediated cell differentiation.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a promoter pull-down assay followed by mass spectrometry analysis,
Flajollet et al. (2009) identified RREB1 as a protein that bound the
HLA-G (142871) promoter. RREB1 exerted repressive activity on the
promoter in HLA-G-negative cells that was mediated by recruitment of
HDAC1 (601241) and CTBP1 (602618) and/or CTBP2 (602619). CTBP1 and CTBP2
are subunits of the C-terminal binding protein (CTBP) complex, a
corepressor involved in chromatin remodeling. The HLA-G promoter
contains 3 RREB1 target sites. Flajollet et al. (2009) proposed that the
repressive activity of RREB1 on the HLA-G promoter may be regulated by
posttranslational modifications governing its association with CTBP.

MAPPING

Thiagalingam et al. (1997) mapped the RREB1 gene to 6p25 by 3 mapping
methods: PCR analysis of a somatic cell hybrid panel, analysis of the
Stanford G3 radiation hybrid mapping panel, and fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Carson, E. B.; McMahon, M.; Baylin, S. B.; Nelkin, B. D.: Ret
gene silencing is associated with Raf-1-induced medullary thyroid
carcinoma cell differentiation. Cancer Res. 55: 2048-2052, 1995.

2. Flajollet, S.; Poras, I.; Carosella, E. D.; Moreau, P.: RREB-1
is a transcriptional repressor of HLA-G. J. Immun. 183: 6948-6959,
2009.

3. Thiagalingam, A.; De Bustros, A.; Borges, M.; Jasti, R.; Compton,
D.; Diamond, L.; Mabry, M.; Ball, D. W.; Baylin, S. B.; Nelkin, B.
D.: RREB-1, a novel zinc finger protein, is involved in the differentiation
response to Ras in human medullary thyroid carcinomas. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 16: 5335-5345, 1996.

4. Thiagalingam, A.; Lengauer, C.; Baylin, S. B.; Nelkin, B. D.:
RREB1, a Ras responsive element binding protein, maps to human chromosome
6p25. Genomics 45: 630-632, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/19/2012

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/19/1997

EDITED mgross: 11/26/2012
terry: 11/19/2012
alopez: 11/16/2010
dholmes: 1/23/1998
dholmes: 1/12/1998
mark: 12/19/1997

605918	TITLE *605918 SPONDIN 2; SPON2
;;MINDIN;;
M-SPONDIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a differential display technique, Manda et al. (1999) isolated 2
novel cDNAs, SPON2 and C20ORF1 (605917), which they designated
differentially expressed in cancerous and noncancerous lung cells-1
(DIL1) and -2 (DIL2), respectively. The full-length SPON2 cDNA encodes a
331-amino acid protein with a domain organization similar to those of
zebrafish mindin-1/mindin-2 and F-spondin (SPON1; 604989): a hydrophobic
signal sequence in the N terminus, an FS1 domain, an FS2 domain, and a
thrombospondin type I repeat. RT-PCR analysis detected no expression of
SPON2 in lung carcinoma cells. Northern blot analysis detected
expression of a 1.9-kb SPON2 transcript in various tissues, including
adult and fetal lung.

He et al. (2004) cloned mouse Spon2, which they termed mindin. The mouse
mindin protein, which is 85% identical to the human protein, is a
conserved member of a family of secreted extracellular matrix proteins.
RNA blot analysis detected expression in a variety of tissues, with
abundant expression in lung and lymphoid tissues. Immunoblot blot
analysis showed expression of a 42-kD protein under reducing conditions
and expression of dimers and oligomers in a concentration-dependent
manner under nonreducing conditions.

GENE STRUCTURE

He et al. (2004) determined that the mouse Spon2 gene contains 6 exons
spanning 5 kb.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SPON2
gene to chromosome 4p16.3 (TMAP WI-22263).

ANIMAL MODEL

By targeted replacement of part of exon 1 and all of exons 2 and 3 of
the Spon2 gene, He et al. (2004) generated Spon2-deficient mice. These
mice had a normal appearance and life span under pathogen-free
conditions. Spon2-deficient mice were resistant to lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced shock, and their macrophages only produced slightly
elevated inflammatory cytokines. Addition of Spon2 to Spon2-deficient,
but not Tlr4 (603030)-deficient, macrophages restored their ability to
produce inflammatory cytokines in response to LPS. Stimuli from most
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria and yeast also failed to induce
cytokine responses from Spon2-deficient macrophages and mast cells.
Spon2-deficient mice showed variable clearance of pathogens when
inoculated by the pulmonary and intraperitoneal routes. Fluorescence
microscopy demonstrated Spon2-dependent bacterial agglutination in the
presence of calcium due to a specific interaction with the carbohydrate
moiety of LPS and lipoteichoic acid. Phagocytosis experiments indicated
that Spon2 acts as an opsonin and pattern-recognition molecule for a
range of pathogens. He et al. (2004) proposed that Spon2 recognition of
carbohydrate structures is essential for the activation of macrophages
by pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs).

REFERENCE 1. He, Y.-W.; Li, H.; Zhang, J.; Hsu, C.-L.; Lin, E.; Zhang, N.; Guo,
J.; Forbush, K. A.; Bevan, M. J.: The extracellular matrix protein
mindin is a pattern-recognition molecule for microbial pathogens. Nature
Immun. 5: 88-97, 2004.

2. Manda, R.; Kohno, T.; Matsuno, Y.; Takenoshita, S.; Kuwano, H.;
Yokota, J.: Identification of genes (SPON2 and C20orf2) differentially
expressed between cancerous and noncancerous lung cells by mRNA differential
display. Genomics 61: 5-14, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/19/2004

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 5/9/2001

EDITED terry: 10/12/2005
alopez: 9/21/2005
mgross: 2/19/2004
mcapotos: 5/9/2001
carol: 5/9/2001

610735	TITLE *610735 MYOZENIN 3; MYOZ3
;;CALSARCIN 3;;
FATZ-RELATED PROTEIN 3; FRP3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis, followed by PCR of a human skeletal muscle cDNA
library, Frey and Olson (2002) cloned MYOZ3, which they called
calsarcin-3. The predicted 251-amino acid protein exhibits highest
homology to MYOZ1 (605603) and MYOZ2 (605602) at its N and C termini and
shares 75% identity with mouse Myoz3. Northern blot analysis of adult
human tissues revealed expression of a major 3.4-kb transcript, as well
as 2 other transcripts, in skeletal muscle only,

GENE FUNCTION

Frey and Olson (2002) showed that calsarcin-3 coimmunoprecipitated with
calcineurin (see 114105) and the Z disc proteins telethonin (TCAP;
604488), alpha-actinin-2 (ACTN2; 102573), and gamma-filamin (FLNC;
102565). Analysis of deletion mutants revealed 2 independent domains
that are sufficient to bind ACTN2, an N-terminal and a C-terminal
domain, with the former domain also required for calcineurin and
telethonin binding. A second N-terminal domain mediated binding to
gamma-filamin. By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, they showed that ZASP (LDB3;
605906) interacted strongly with all 3 calsarcins. Immunolocalization
experiments revealed a strong Z disc staining pattern in cryosections of
mouse hindlimb skeletal muscle, as indicated by colocalization with
alpha-actinin. Preferential expression of calsarcin-3 in fast-twitch
myofibers was observed using immunofluorescence. Frey and Olson (2002)
proposed that calsarcins may serve to crosslink Z disc proteins,
contributing to the formation and maintenance of the Z disc.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Frey and Olson (2002) mapped the MYOZ3
gene to chromosome 5q31.

GENE STRUCTURE

Frey and Olson (2002) determined that the MYOZ3 gene contains 7 exons
and spans approximately 19 kb.

REFERENCE 1. Frey, N.; Olson, E.N.: Calsarcin-3, a novel skeletal muscle-specific
member of the calsarcin family, interacts with multiple Z-disc proteins. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 13998-14004, 2002.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 1/30/2007

EDITED terry: 07/30/2008
wwang: 1/31/2007

188855	TITLE *188855 GRANULYSIN; GNLY
;;T-LYMPHOCYTE ACTIVATION GENE 519; TLA519;;
D2S69E;;
NKG5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The GNLY gene encodes granulysin, a member of the saposin-like protein
(SAPLIP) family that is present in cytotoxic granules of cytolytic T
cells (CTSs) and natural killer (NK) cells and is released from the
granules upon antigen stimulation (Jongstra et al., 1987; Pena et al.,
1997).

CLONING

Jongstra et al. (1987) isolated 2 overlapping clones corresponding to
the GNLY gene, which they termed '519,' from a human functional
cytolytic T cell cDNA library. The deduced 129-residue protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 14.6 kD. Northern blot analysis detected a
900-bp mRNA that was also detected in functional T-helper cell lines,
but not in several T-cell tumor lines or other tissues. The findings
indicated that 519 expression is restricted to IL2 (147680)-dependent,
antigen-driven functional T cells. Expression of 519 was induced at
least 10-fold in peripheral blood lymphocytes by antigenic or mitogenic
stimulation.

Yabe et al. (1990) cloned GNLY, which they termed NKG5, from a natural
killer cell cDNA library. The deduced 145-residue protein began at a
start codon at position 129, with significant homology with the 519 gene
reported by Jongstra et al. (1987). A sequence comparison showed that
the 519 and NKG5 sequences were identical except that NKG5 lacks a
242-bp segment that is found in 519, and that this deletion leads to the
use of a different putative translational start codon and different
N-terminal regions. Unlike 519, the predicted NKG5 protein has a
putative N-terminal signal peptide, suggesting that it is a secreted
protein. In contrast, the 519 protein is hydrophilic and proposed to act
intracellularly. Northern blot analysis detected 40-fold higher
expression of the NKG5 transcript compared to 519 in NK and T cells.
Southern blot analysis indicated that both mRNAs are transcripts from a
single gene, consistent with alternative splicing. Yabe et al. (1990)
concluded that the 519 transcript results from a nonproductive splicing
event and does not encode a functional protein.

Houchins et al. (1993) identified many potential regulatory segments
within the 5-prime flanking region of the NKG5 gene, including AP1, AP2,
AP3, and SRE motifs.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jongstra et al. (1987) identified 2 ATG translation initiation codons in
the 519 gene at positions 27 and 281: the latter at 281 was presumed to
be active, since the first ATG codon is followed by an in-frame stop
codon at position 69.

Houchins et al. (1993) determined that the GNLY gene contains 5 exons.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Donlon et al. (1990) assigned the GNLY gene to
chromosome 2p12-q11.

GENE FUNCTION

Stenger et al. (1998) showed that granulysin is a critical effector
molecule of the antimicrobial activity of CTLs. Cytolytic T cells are
required for protective immunity against intracelluar pathogens such as
Listeria monocytogenes and Trypanosoma cruzi, which escape from
phagocytic vacuoles into the cytoplasm of infected host cells, as well
as Salmonella typhimurium, Escherichia coli, and Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, which are phagocytized by macrophages and remain localized
within phagosomes (Pena et al., 1997). An explanation for the functional
role of CTLs in immunity against intracellular infection was provided by
analysis of CTLs in tuberculosis (Kaufmann, 1988; Stenger et al., 1997).
These experiments suggested that CTLs that kill infected cells through
the granule-exocytosis pathway may release 1 or more effector molecules
with the capacity to kill the intracellular microbial pathogen directly.

Two subsets of CTLs exist, which differ in phenotype, cytotoxic effector
pathway, and antimicrobial activity. CD8+ CTLs lyse M.
tuberculosis-infected macrophages by a granule-dependent mechanism that
results in killing of the intracellular pathogen. In contrast, the
cytotoxicity of double negative CD4-/CD8- T cells is mediated by Fas-Fas
ligand interaction and does not inhibit growth of the mycobacteria. By
protein immunoblot analysis, Stenger et al. (1998) demonstrated the
presence of granulysin in CD8+ CTLs and the lack of granulysin
expression in CD4-/CD8- CTLs. Confocal microscopy of
granulysin-expressing cells showed a punctate pattern consistent with
granule localization. Furthermore, double staining of CD8+ T cells with
antibodies against granulysin and perforin (PRF1; 170280), a molecule
known to be expressed in cytotoxic granules, showed substantial
colocalization. Stenger et al. (1998) used recombinant granulysin to
test directly its antimicrobial activity against M. tuberculosis and
other organisms.

Chung et al. (2008) showed that blister cells from skin lesions from
patients with Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) or toxic epidermolysis
necrosis (TEN) (see 608579) primarily consisted of cytotoxic T
lymphocytes and natural killer cells, and that both blister fluids and
cells were cytotoxic. Gene expression profiling identified granulysin as
the most highly expressed cytotoxic molecule, confirmed by quantitative
PCR and immunohistochemistry. Depletion of granulysin reduced
cytotoxicity. In blister fluids, granulysin was in a 15-kD secretory
form, and injection of this form into mouse skin resulted in features
mimicking the skin necrosis. Chung et al. (2008) concluded that
secretory granulysin is a key molecule responsible for the disseminated
keratinocyte death in SJS/TEN. The findings also implicated a CTL- or NK
cell-mediated cytotoxicity that does not require direct cellular
contact.

REFERENCE 1. Chung, W.-H.; Hung, S.-I.; Yang, J.-Y.; Su, S.-C.; Huang, S.-P.;
Wei, C.-Y.; Chin, S.-W.; Chiou, C.-C.; Chu, S.-C.; Ho, H.-C.; Yang,
C.-H.; Lu, C.-F.; Wu, J.-Y.; Liao, Y.-D.; Chen, Y.-T.: Granulysin
is a key mediator for disseminated keratinocyte death in Stevens-Johnson
syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Nature Med. 14: 1343-1350,
2008.

2. Donlon, T. A.; Krensky, A. M.; Clayberger, C.: Localization of
the human T lymphocyte activation gene 519 (D2S69E) to chromosome
2p12-q11. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 53: 230-231, 1990.

3. Houchins, J. P.; Kricek, F.; Chujor, C. S. N.; Heise, C. P.; Yabe,
T.; McSherry, C.; Bach, F. H.: Genomic structure of NKG5, a human
NK and T cell-specific activation gene. Immunogenetics 37: 102-107,
1993.

4. Jongstra, J.; Schall, T. J.; Dyer, B. J.; Clayberger, C.; Jorgensen,
J.; Davis, M. M.; Krensky, A. M.: The isolation and sequence of a
novel gene from a human functional T cell line. J. Exp. Med. 165:
601-614, 1987.

5. Kaufmann, S. H. E.: CD8+ T lymphocytes in intracellular microbial
infections. Immun. Today 9: 168-174, 1988.

6. Pena, S. V.; Hanson, D. A.; Carr, B. A.; Goralski, T. J.; Krensky,
A. M.: Processing, subcellular localization, and function of 519
(granulysin), a human late T cell activation molecule with homology
to small, lytic granule proteins. J. Immun. 158: 2680-2688, 1997.

7. Stenger, S.; Hanson, D. A.; Teitelbaum, R.; Dewan, P.; Niazi, K.
R.; Froelich, C. J.; Ganz, T.; Thoma-Uszynski, S.; Melian, A.; Bogdan,
C.; Porcelli, S. A.; Bloom, B. R.; Krensky, A. M.; Modlin, R. L.:
An antimicrobial activity of cytolytic T cells mediated by granulysin. Science 282:
121-125, 1998.

8. Stenger, S.; Mazzaccaro, R. J.; Uyemura, K.; Cho, S.; Barnes, P.
F.; Rosat, J. P.; Sette, A.; Brenner, M. B.; Porcelli, S. A.; Bloom,
B. R.; Modlin, R. L.: Differential effects of cytolytic T cell subsets
on intracellular infection. Science 276: 1684-1687, 1997.

9. Yabe, T.; McSherry, C.; Bach, F. H.; Houchins, J. P.: A cDNA clone
expressed in natural killer and T cells that likely encodes a secreted
protein. J. Exp. Med. 172: 1159-1163, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/12/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/16/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/23/1991

EDITED wwang: 01/20/2009
ckniffin: 1/12/2009
wwang: 12/23/2008
ckniffin: 12/16/2008
carol: 1/9/2003
tkritzer: 1/6/2003
terry: 12/30/2002
alopez: 2/1/2000
joanna: 1/31/2000
carol: 7/14/1999
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 4/23/1991

604633	TITLE *604633 EGF-CONTAINING FIBULIN-LIKE EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX PROTEIN 2; EFEMP2
;;FIBULIN 4; FBLN4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

A large number of extracellular matrix proteins contain variations of
the epidermal growth factor (EGF; 131530) domain, e.g., fibrillin (FBN1;
134797) and Notch (190198). As part of their efforts in transcriptional
mapping of the human 11q13.1-q13.2 genomic region, Katsanis et al.
(2000) identified a novel partial cDNA from a human brain cDNA library.
They called the cDNA 'EGF-containing fibulin-like extracellular matrix
protein-2' (EFEMP2) because of its significant homology to EFEMP1
(601548). Sequence analysis detected 6 putative calcium-binding EGF
domains and 4 EGF modules. Katsanis et al. (2000) observed expression of
a 2.0-kb EFEMP2 transcript in all adult tissues tested by Northern blot
analysis, with highest levels in heart. RT-PCR detected a 105-bp
amplicon from the 3-prime untranslated region in fetal brain, kidney,
and heart, but not in lung. EFEMP1 is likewise expressed in a wide range
of adult and fetal tissues. In contrast to EFEMP1, however, EFEMP2 was
not significantly overexpressed in senescent or quiescent fibroblasts,
suggesting a diversity of function within this EGF-like domain
subfamily. Katsanis et al. (2000) also cloned the mouse Efemp2 homolog.

MAPPING

By analysis of a somatic cell hybrid panel and by placement on a series
of genomic clones by PCR, Katsanis et al. (2000) mapped the EFEMP2 gene
to chromosome 11q13, in an area where several retinopathies have shown
genetic linkage.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Doyne Honeycomb Retinal Dystrophy

Given that EFEMP1 is the site of mutations causing Doyne honeycomb
retinal dystrophy (126600), Katsanis et al. (2000) suggested EFEMP2 as a
candidate for retinal dystrophies. Toto et al. (2002) studied linkage of
both the EFEMP2 and EFEMP1 genes to malattia leventinese in a
3-generation Swiss-Italian family. Linkage was found only to EFEMP1 in 2
of 5 affected family members.

- Autosomal Recessive Cutis Laxa

Cutis laxa is a condition characterized by redundant, pendulous, and
inelastic skin. A severe autosomal recessive form of cutis laxa (ARCL1A;
219100) is caused by mutation in the fibulin-5 gene (FBLN5; 604580).
Hucthagowder et al. (2006) hypothesized that mutations in other members
of the fibulin gene family may cause cutis laxa as well. In a child of
Iraqi descent with cutis laxa and severe systemic connective tissue
abnormalities (ARCL1B; 614437), Hucthagowder et al. (2006) detected a
homozygous missense mutation in the FBLN4 gene (604633.0001). The role
of fibulin-4 in elastic fiber formation is evolutionarily conserved in
mammals (McLaughlin et al., 2006); however, additional observations in
the patient of Hucthagowder et al. (2006) suggested that fibulin-4 may
have additional pleiotropic functions in vascular patterning and
collagen biosynthesis.

In an infant girl who died at day 27 of life with apparent
arachnodactyly, cutis laxa, and severe systemic vascular abnormalities
similar to those of the patient described by Hucthagowder et al. (2006),
and who was negative for mutation in the FBLN5 gene, Dasouki et al.
(2007) identified compound heterozygosity for a missense mutation and a
4-bp duplication in the FBLN4 gene (604633.0002 and 604633.0003,
respectively). Dasouki et al. (2007) concluded that deficiency in
fibulin-4 leads to a perinatal lethal condition associated with elastic
tissue abnormalities.

Hoyer et al. (2009) reported the third case of cutis laxa due to
mutation in FBLN4, an infant girl who died immediately after birth with
extreme bradycardia and who was found to be homozygous for a missense
mutation (604633.0004). Hoyer et al. (2009) stated that this case
extended the phenotypic spectrum of FBLN4 mutations to include
microcephaly, overgrowth, and arachnodactyly.

Renard et al. (2010) sequenced the FBLN4 gene in 17 patients with
prominent cutis laxa but no major cardiovascular findings, and detected
no mutations. Analysis of FBLN4 in a second cohort of 22 patients who
had mild skin involvement but significant cardiovascular features,
including arterial tortuosity, stenosis, and aneurysms, revealed
homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for mutations in the FBLN4 gene
in 3 patients (604633.0005-604633.0008). Renard et al. (2010) concluded
that patients with recessive FBLN4 mutations are predominantly
characterized by aortic aneurysms and arterial tortuosity and stenosis.
Immunostaining of aortic and lung tissue showed an increase in TGF-beta
(190180), which was confirmed by phosphorylated SMAD2 (601366)
immunoblotting of fibroblast cultures; Renard et al. (2010) stated that
this was the first evidence of involvement of altered TGFB signaling in
the pathogenesis of FBLN4 mutations in humans.

Kappanayil et al. (2012) reported 22 unrelated infants from the Malabar
region of the southern Indian state of Kerala. All were Muslims and came
from the community known as the Mappilas. Twenty-one of 22 were
homozygous for a missense mutation in exon 7 of FBLN4 (604633.0009). One
patient was compound heterozygous for this mutation and a second, de
novo, mutation (604633.0010) on her paternal chromosome. Both mutations
occurred in the same calcium-binding EGF domain of the protein. Neither
mutation was found among 200 control alleles.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, GLU57LYS

In a child of nonconsanguineous parents of Iraqi descent with cutis laxa
(ARCL1B; 614437), Hucthagowder et al. (2006) found homozygosity for a
169G-A transition in the FBLN4 gene that resulted in a glu57-to-lys
(E57K) amino acid substitution. Each of her parents was heterozygous for
this mutation. Multiple alignments showed that the E57 residue was
completely conserved in calcium-binding epidermal growth factor (EGF)
modules, consistent with this residue being essential for calcium
binding. Hucthagowder et al. (2006) pointed out that the same
substitution at a homologous residue in fibulin-1, E1073K (134797.0038),
causes severe, neonatal Marfan syndrome.

.0002
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, ARG279CYS

In an infant girl with cutis laxa, apparent arachnodactyly, and severe
systemic vascular abnormalities (ARCL1B; 614437), who died at day 27 of
life, Dasouki et al. (2007) identified compound heterozygosity for an
835C-T transition in exon 8 of the EFEMP2 gene, resulting in an
arg279-to-cys (R279C) substitution at a highly conserved residue at the
end of the fifth cbEGF module, and a 4-bp duplication in exon 10
(1070dupCCGC; 604633.0003), predicted to truncate the protein and
replace the last 85 amino acids of the FC domain with an incorrect arg
residue. The missense mutation was not found in 50 controls. Analysis of
the patient's fibroblasts revealed that fibulin-4 protein was barely
detectable in culture medium and not seen in cell extract and matrix,
and immunostaining of patient fibroblasts showed a total absence of
fibulin-4 fibers from the extracellular matrix.

Renard et al. (2010) performed immunohistochemical staining of fibulin-4
on aortic tissue from the patient previously studied by Dasouki et al.
(2007) and confirmed the near absence of extracellular fibulin-4 in the
aortic wall compared to the control, whereas intracellular staining was
similar to that of the control, suggesting that the mutant protein is
either not secreted or is secreted into extracellular space to a lesser
extent. Immunohistochemical staining for phosphorylated SMAD2 (601366)
and CTGF (121009), an effector of TGF-beta (190180) signaling and a
TGF-beta-driven gene product, respectively, in patient aorta and lungs
showed a more intense and increased nuclear staining compared to control
tissues.

.0003
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, 4-BP DUP, 1070CCGC

See 604633.0002 and Dasouki et al. (2007).

.0004
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, CYS267TYR

In an infant girl with cutis laxa (ARCL1B; 614437), born of
consanguineous Iraqi parents, Hoyer et al. (2009) identified
homozygosity for an 800G-A transition in exon 7 of the FBLN4 gene,
resulting in a cys267-to-tyr (C267Y) substitution involving the fifth of
six highly conserved residues in the fifth cbEGF module. The unaffected
parents were heterozygous for the mutation.

Renard et al. (2010) performed immunoblotting experiments on the culture
medium of dermal fibroblasts from the patient previously studied by
Hoyer et al. (2009), and observed a complete absence of fibulin-4.
Immunoblotting after TGF-beta (190180) stimulation of patient fibroblast
cultures indicated a significantly increased phosphorylated SMAD2
(601366) signal compared to controls, suggesting that mutation in FBLN4
has an effect on the TGFB signaling pathway.

.0005
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, GLU126LYS

In a 20-year-old woman with velvety skin and severe arterial tortuosity,
aneurysm, and stenosis (ARCL1B; 614437), originally reported by Ades et
al. (1996), Renard et al. (2010) identified homozygosity for a 376G-A
transition in exon 5 of the EFEMP2 gene, resulting in a glu126-to-lys
(E126K) substitution at an evolutionarily conserved residue in the DINE
consensus sequence of the second cbEGF-like domain. The mutation was not
found in 200 control chromosomes. Immunoblotting experiments on dermal
fibroblast culture medium showed only a slightly diminished amount of
fibulin-4 compared to control, which the authors suggested was
consistent with the longer survival of the patient. In addition,
immunoblotting after TGF-beta (190180) stimulation of patient fibroblast
cultures indicated a significantly increased phosphorylated SMAD2
(601366) signal compared to controls, suggesting that mutation in FBLN4
has an effect on the TGFB signaling pathway.

.0006
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, GLU126VAL

In a female infant with arterial tortuosity and aneurysm (ARCL1B;
614437), who suffered a large hemispheric stroke at 5 weeks of age and
died at age 18 months from cardiorespiratory failure, Renard et al.
(2010) identified compound heterozygosity for a 377A-T transversion in
exon 5 of the EFEMP2 gene, resulting in a glu126-to-val (E126V)
substitution at an evolutionarily conserved residue in the DINE
consensus sequence of the second cbEGF-like domain, and a 1-bp deletion
(577delC) in exon 6, causing a frameshift predicted to result in a
premature termination codon (Q193Sfs*12). The unaffected parents were
each heterozygous for 1 of the mutations, neither of which was present
in 200 control chromosomes. Clinical features in this patient included a
prominent forehead, mild hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures,
depressed nasal bridge, low-set and distorted external ears, and long
fingers. Echocardiogram showed severe dilation of the ascending aorta
and severe tortuosity of the entire aorta with hypoplasia of the
transverse aortic arch, proximal descending, thoracic, and abdominal
aorta. MRI showed severe tortuosity of the carotid and cerebral
arteries.

.0007
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, 1-BP DEL, 577C

See 604633.0006 and Renard et al. (2010).

.0008
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE IB
EFEMP2, ALA397THR

In a 7-year-old boy with arterial tortuosity, aneurysm, and joint laxity
(ARCL1B; 614437), originally reported by Baspinar et al. (2005), Renard
et al. (2010) identified homozygosity for a 1189G-A transition in exon
11 of the EFEMP2 gene, resulting in an ala397-to-thr (A397T)
substitution at a highly conserved residue in the C-terminal
fibulin-like module. His unaffected parents were heterozygous for the
mutation.

.0009
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE 1B
EFEMP2, ASP203ALA

In 21 patients, 11 male and 10 female, with ARCL1B (614437), Kappanayil
et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for an A-to-C transversion at
nucleotide 608 in exon 7 of the EFEMP2 gene that resulted in an aspartic
acid-to-alanine substitution at codon 203 (D203A). All patients were
Muslims from the Mappila community of the Malabar region of the Indian
state of Kerala; 8 came from consanguineous families. All parents tested
were normal and carried this mutation in heterozygosity. Homozygosity
was lethal in 17 of the 21 patients, who died at a median age of 4
months. In another patient from the same community, Kappanayil et al.
(2012) detected compound heterozygosity for this mutation and a de novo
missense mutation (604633.0010).

.0010
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, TYPE 1B
EFEMP2, ARG227CYS

In 1 patient with ARCL1B (614437) from the Indian Mappila community,
Kappanayil et al. (2012) detected compound heterozygosity for an
asp203-to-ala mutation (D203A; 604633.0009) and a de novo C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 679 resulting in an arginine-to-cysteine
substitution at codon 227 (R227C). The mutation was found on the
paternal allele; paternity was proven. Both the D203A and R227C
mutations occurred in the same calcium-binding EGF domain of FBLN4.
While this patient had vascular abnormalities similar to those seen in
D203A homozygotes, the majority of whom died before the age of 4 months,
she remained asymptomatic at the age of 7 years.

REFERENCE 1. Ades, L. C.; Knight, W. B.; Byard, R. W.; Bateman, J. F.; Esquivel,
J. A. D.; Mee, R. B. B.; Haan, E. A.; Milewicz, D. M.: Clinicopathologic
findings in congenital aneurysms of the great vessels. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 66: 289-299, 1996.

2. Baspinar, O.; Kilinc, M.; Bajat, A.; Celkan, M. A.; Coskun, Y.
: Long tortuous aorta in a child with Larsen syndrome. Can. J. Cardiol. 21:
299-301, 2005.

3. Dasouki, M.; Markova, D.; Garola, R.; Sasaki, T.; Charbonneau,
N. L.; Sakai, L. Y.; Chu, M.-L.: Compound heterozygous mutations
in fibulin-4 causing neonatal lethal pulmonary artery occlusion, aortic
aneurysm, arachnodactyly, and mild cutis laxa. Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A:
2635-2641, 2007.

4. Hoyer, J.; Kraus, C.; Hammersen, G.; Geppert, J.-P.; Rauch, A.
: Lethal cutis laxa with contractual arachnodactyly, overgrowth and
soft tissue bleeding due to a novel homozygous fibulin-4 gene mutation. Clin.
Genet. 76: 276-281, 2009.

5. Hucthagowder, V.; Sausgruber, N.; Kim, K. H.; Angle, B.; Marmorstein,
L. Y.; Urban, Z.: Fibulin-4: a novel gene for an autosomal recessive
cutis laxa syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 78: 1075-1080, 2006.

6. Kappanayil, M.; Nampoothiri, S.; Kannan, R.; Renard, M.; Coucke,
P.; Malfait, F.; Menon, S.; Ravindran, H. K.; Kurup, R.; Faiyaz-Ul-Haque,
M.; Kumar, K.; De Paepe, A.: Characterization of a distinct lethal
arteriopathy syndrome in twenty-two infants associated with an identical,
novel mutation in the FBLN4 gene, confirms fibulin-4 as a critical
determinant of human vascular elastogenesis. Orphanet J. Rare Dis. 7:
61, 2012. Note: Electronic Article.

7. Katsanis, N.; Venable, S.; Smith, J. R.; Lupski, J. R.: Isolation
of a paralog of the Doyne honeycomb retinal dystrophy gene from the
multiple retinopathy critical region on 11q13. Hum. Genet. 106:
66-72, 2000.

8. McLaughlin, P. J.; Chen, Q.; Horiguchi, M.; Starcher, B. C.; Stanton,
J. B.; Broekelmann, T. J.; Marmorstein, A. D.; McKay, B.; Mecham,
R.; Nakamura, T.; Marmorstein, L. Y.: Targeted disruption of fibulin-4
abolishes elastogenesis and causes perinatal lethality in mice. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 26: 1700-1709, 2006.

9. Renard, M.; Holm, T.; Veith, R.; Callewaert, B. L.; Ades, L. C.;
Baspinar, O.; Pickart, A.; Dasouki, M.; Hoyer, J.; Rauch, A.; Trapane,
P.; Earing, M. G.; Coucke, P. J.; Sakai, L. Y.; Dietz, H. C.; De Paepe,
A. M.; Loeys, B. L.: Altered TGF-beta signaling and cardiovascular
manifestations in patients with autosomal recessive cutis laxa type
I caused by fibulin-4 deficiency. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 18: 895-901,
2010.

10. Toto, L.; Parodi, M. B.; Baralle, F.; Casari, G.; Ravalico, G.;
Romano, M.: Genetic heterogeneity in malattia leventinese. Clin.
Genet. 62: 399-403, 2002. Note: Erratum: Clin. Genet. 66: 251 only,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 04/26/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/13/2013
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/7/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/5/2009
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 5/22/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/29/2000

EDITED alopez: 04/26/2013
alopez: 4/26/2013
carol: 2/15/2013
terry: 2/13/2013
alopez: 1/26/2012
alopez: 1/24/2012
wwang: 2/24/2011
terry: 2/7/2011
wwang: 9/1/2009
terry: 8/5/2009
alopez: 5/22/2006
terry: 5/18/2006
carol: 5/4/2005
carol: 8/31/2004
carol: 8/11/2004
carol: 12/23/2002
tkritzer: 12/20/2002
terry: 12/18/2002
alopez: 3/3/2000
alopez: 2/29/2000

601763	TITLE *601763 CASPASE 8, APOPTOSIS-RELATED CYSTEINE PROTEASE; CASP8
;;MORT1-ASSOCIATED CED3 HOMOLOG; MACH;;
FADD-HOMOLOGOUS ICE/CED3-LIKE PROTEASE;;
FADD-LIKE ICE; FLICE;;
MCH5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

A cascade of protease reactions is believed to be responsible for the
apoptotic changes observed in mammalian cells undergoing programmed cell
death. This cascade involves members of the aspartate-specific cysteine
proteases of the ICE/CED3 (147678) family, also known as the caspase
family.

CLONING

Fernandes-Alnemri et al. (1996) identified the novel gene MCH5 when they
found a human EST sequence with significant homology to the newly
identified cysteine protease MCH4 (601762). They used PCR to clone a
cDNA of the MCH5 gene from a Jurkat T-cell cDNA library. Sequence
analysis revealed that it encodes a polypeptide of 496 amino acids with
greatest homology to MCH4. The authors found that MCH4 and MCH5 both
contain the active site pentapeptide QACQG instead of the QACRG present
in all other known members of the family. Furthermore, the authors found
that the sequences of MCH4 and MCH5 contain Fas-associating protein with
death domain (FADD)-like domains, suggesting possible interaction with
FADD. Fernandes-Alnemri et al. (1996) stated that MCH5, like other
members of the ICE/CED3 family, forms an active protease only after
cleavage of its proenzyme into 2 subunits which dimerize to form the
active enzyme.

Using MORT1 (FADD; 602457) in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a B-cell cDNA
library, Boldin et al. (1996) cloned several splice variants of CASP8,
which they called MACH. The isoforms could be divided into 2 main
subgroups. All isoforms share a common 182-amino acid N-terminal region,
including 2 MORT modules (i.e., death effector domains, or DEDs), but
they have different C termini. Subgroup alpha isoforms have C termini
containing a CED3/ICE homology domain that contains the catalytic site
and the substrate-binding pocket, while subgroup beta isoforms are
truncated and lack the CED3/ICE homology domain. The longest isoform,
MACH-alpha-1, encodes a deduced 479-amino acid protein. The CED3/ICE
domain of MACH-alpha-1 shares 41% and 34% identity with the homologous
regions in CPP32 (CASP3; 600636) and C. elegans CED3, respectively.
Northern blot analysis detected MACH transcripts ranging in size between
2.85 and 3.5 kb in all tissues examined, with highest levels in resting
peripheral blood mononuclear leukocytes and lowest levels in testis and
skeletal muscle.

Eckhart et al. (2001) identified several CASP8 splice variants that
preferentially use a distant splice donor site at the 3-prime end of
exon 8. Use of this distant site, which they called exon 8b, results in
mRNAs with truncated open reading frames. RT-PCR indicated equal
expression of both mRNA species in tonsil, spleen, bone marrow, thymus,
and lymph nodes. Peripheral blood leukocytes, heart, and epidermis
predominantly expressed mRNA containing exon 8b, as did a promyelocytic
cell line and a T-cell line. Liver and nearly all immortalized cell
lines, as well as primary endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and
keratinocytes, expressed mRNA lacking the 8b extension.

GENE FUNCTION

Using fluorogenic peptide substrates corresponding to a sequence within
the nuclear protein PARP (173870), Boldin et al. (1996) confirmed that
MACH-alpha-1 is a thiol protease. By site-directed mutagenesis, they
identified cys360 as the catalytic cysteine. Using mutation analysis,
Boldin et al. (1996) determined that MACH binds to the N terminus of
MORT1. They also found that it self-associates, but it does not interact
directly with FAS/APO1 (TNRFSF6; 134637). Transfection of human
embryonic kidney cells and breast carcinoma cells with MACH-alpha-1 or
MACH-alpha-2 resulted in massive cell death.

Muzio et al. (1996) determined that CASP8, which they called FLICE,
interacts with wildtype FADD but not with FADD lacking the DED. They
also determined that granzyme B (GZMB; 123910) can remove the prodomain
and generate the active p20/p10 dimeric cysteine protease. Cleavage of
PARP by CASP8 resulted in the appearance of signature apoptotic
fragments. Transfection and overexpression of CASP8 in transfected
breast cancer cells resulted in apoptosis.

Expression of cDNAs that encode truncated polypeptides containing mostly
expanded polyglutamine repeats, but not of those that encode the
corresponding full-length proteins, has been shown to induce cell death
by apoptosis. Such truncated proteins have been shown to form aggregates
or inclusions (Ikeda et al., 1996). Sanchez et al. (1999) studied the
role of caspases in polyglutamine-induced cell death in established
cultures of primary cortical, striatal, and cerebellar neurons from
embryonic day 17 rat embryos, transfected with an expression construct
encoding truncated ataxin-3 that contained 79 glutamine (Q79) residues.
The authors showed that the apoptosis inhibitors Bcl2, CrmA, and a
truncated Fas/APO1-associated death domain protein (FADD DN) inhibited
polyglutamine repeat-induced neuronal cell death. A mutant Jurkat cell
line specifically lacking caspase-8 was resistant to
polyglutamine-induced cell death. Cells transfected with Q79 showed
insoluble inclusions. Caspase-8 was recruited and activated by these Q79
inclusions. Western blot analysis revealed the presence of activated
caspase-8 in the insoluble fraction of affected brain regions from
Huntington disease (143100) patients but not in those from controls. The
authors suggested that caspase-8 has an essential role in
Huntington-related neurodegenerative diseases.

Eckhart et al. (2001) found that different CASP8 isoforms were expressed
in resting and activated lymphocytes. Activation of lymphocytes shifted
the expression from mRNA species containing an exon 8b extension to
mRNAs that lack it. Differentiation in a promyelocytic cell line was
associated with the opposite shift, from mRNAs containing the shorter
exon 8 to mRNAs that include the exon 8b extension.

Gervais et al. (2002) found that HIP1 (601767) binds to the HIP1 protein
interactor (HIPPI; 606621), which has partial sequence homology to HIP1
and similar tissue and subcellular distribution. The availability of
free HIP1 is modulated by polyglutamine length within huntingtin
(613004), with disease-associated polyglutamine expansion favoring the
formation of proapoptotic HIPPI-HIP1 heterodimers. This heterodimer can
recruit procaspase-8 into a complex of HIPPI, HIP1, and procaspase-8,
and launch apoptosis through components of the extrinsic cell death
pathway. Gervais et al. (2002) proposed that huntingtin polyglutamine
expansion liberates HIP1 so that it can form a caspase-8 recruitment
complex with HIPPI, possibly contributing to neuronal death in
Huntington disease.

Yu et al. (2004) defined a novel molecular pathway in which activation
of the receptor-interacting protein (RIP; 603453), a serine-threonine
kinase, and Jun amino-terminal kinase (601158) induced cell death with
the morphology of autophagy. Autophagic death required the genes ATG7
(GSA7; 608760) and beclin-1 (604378) and was induced by caspase-8
inhibition. Yu et al. (2004) cautioned that clinical therapies involving
caspase inhibitors may arrest apoptosis but also have the unanticipated
effect of promoting autophagic cell death.

Poulaki et al. (2005) found that human retinoblastoma (RB1; 614041) cell
lines were resistant to death receptor (see DR5; 603612)-mediated
apoptosis because of a deficiency of CASP8 expression secondary to
epigenetic gene silencing by overmethylation. Treatment with a
demethylating agent restored CASP8 expression and sensitivity to
apoptosis.

Su et al. (2005) showed that caspase-8 deficiency (607271) in humans and
mice specifically abolishes activation of the transcription factor NF
kappa-B (164011) after stimulation through antigen receptors, Fc
receptors, or Toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4; 603030) in T, B, and natural
killer cells. Caspase-8 also causes the alpha-beta complex of the
inhibitor of NF-kappa-B kinase (IKK; 600644 and 300248, respectively) to
associate with the upstream BCL10 (603517)-MALT1 (604860) adaptor
complex. Recruitment of the IKK-alpha,beta complex, its activation, and
the nuclear translocation of NF-kappa-B require enzyme activity of
full-length caspase-8. Su et al. (2005) concluded that their findings
explained the paradoxical association of defective apoptosis and
combined immunodeficiency in human caspase-8 deficiency.

Stupack et al. (2006) showed that suppression of caspase-8 expression
occurs during the establishment of neuroblastoma (256700) metastases in
vivo, and that reconstitution of caspase-8 expression in deficient
neuroblastoma cells suppressed their metastases. Caspase-8 status was
not a predictor of primary tumor growth; rather, caspase-8 selectively
potentiated apoptosis in neuroblastoma cells invading the collagenous
stroma at the tumor margin. Apoptosis was initiated by unligated
integrins (see 605025) by means of a process known as integrin-mediated
death. Loss of caspase-8 or integrin rendered the cells refractory to
integrin-mediated death, allowed cellular survival in the stromal
microenvironment, and promoted metastases. Stupack et al. (2006)
concluded that these findings define caspase-8 as a metastasis
suppressor gene that, together with integrins, regulates the survival
and invasive capacity of neuroblastoma cells.

Oberst et al. (2011) showed that development of caspase-8-deficient mice
is completely rescued by ablation of receptor-interacting protein
kinase-3 (RIPK3; 605817). Adult animals lacking both caspase-8 and Ripk3
displayed a progressive lymphoaccumulative disease resembling that seen
with defects in Cd95 (FAS; 134637) or Cd95 ligand (FASL; 134638), and
resisted the lethal effects of Cd95 ligation in vivo. Oberst et al.
(2011) found that caspase-8 prevents RIPK3-dependent necrosis without
inducing apoptosis by functioning in a proteolytically active complex
with CFLAR (603599) and that this complex is required for the protective
function.

Kaiser et al. (2011) found that Ripk3 is responsible for the
midgestational death of Casp8-deficient embryos. Remarkably,
Casp8-null/Rip3-null-double mutant mice were viable and matured into
fertile adults with a full immune complement of myeloid and lymphoid
cell types. These mice seemed immunocompetent but developed
lymphadenopathy by 4 months of age marked by accumulation of abnormal T
cells in the periphery, a phenotype reminiscent of mice with Fas
deficiency. Thus, Kaiser et al. (2011) concluded that Casp8 contributes
to homeostatic control in the adult immune system; however, RIPK3 and
CASP8 are together completely dispensable for mammalian development.

Burguillos et al. (2011) showed that the orderly activation of caspase-8
and caspase-3/7 (600636/601761), known executioners of apoptotic cell
death, regulate microglia activation through a protein kinase C-delta
(PPKCD; 176977)-dependent pathway. Burguillos et al. (2011) found that
stimulation of microglia with various inflammogens activates caspase-8
and caspase-3/7 in microglia without triggering cell death in vitro and
in vivo. Knockdown or chemical inhibition of each of these caspases
hindered microglia activation and consequently reduced neurotoxicity.
The authors observed that these caspases are activated in microglia in
the ventral mesencephalon of Parkinson disease (168600) and the frontal
cortex of individuals with Alzheimer disease (104300). Burguillos et al.
(2011) concluded that caspase-8 and caspase-3/7 are involved in
regulating microglia activation, and suggested that inhibition of these
caspases could be neuroprotective by targeting the microglia rather than
the neurons themselves.

Gunther et al. (2011) demonstrated a critical role for caspase-8 in
regulating necroptosis of intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) and
terminal ileitis. Mice with a conditional deletion of caspase-8 in the
intestinal epithelium (Casp8-delta-IEC) spontaneously developed
inflammatory lesions in the terminal ileum were highly susceptible to
colitis. These mice lacked Paneth cells and showed reduced numbers of
goblet cells, indicating dysregulated antimicrobial immune cell
functions of the intestinal epithelium. Casp8-delta-IEC mice showed
increased cell death in the Paneth cell area of small intestinal crypts.
Epithelial cell death was induced by tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFA;
191160), was associated with increased expression of
receptor-interacting protein-3 (RIP3; 605817) and could be inhibited on
blockade of necroptosis. Lastly, Gunther et al. (2011) identified high
levels of RIP3 in human Paneth cells and increased necroptosis in the
terminal ileum of patients with Crohn disease, suggesting a potential
role of necroptosis in the pathogenesis of this disease. Gunther et al.
(2011) concluded that their data demonstrated a critical function of
caspase-8 in regulating intestinal homeostasis and in protecting IECs
from TNFA-induced necroptotic cell death.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Varfolomeev et al. (1998) determined that
the CASP8 gene contains 8 exons. Hadano et al. (2001) determined that
the CASP8 gene contains 13 exons and spans 51.2 kb.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), Kischkel et al. (1998)
mapped the CASP8 gene to human chromosome 2q33-q34 and mouse chromosome
1B-proximal C. This mapping further extended the known homology of
synteny between these regions of human chromosome 2 and mouse chromosome
1. By FISH, Grenet et al. (1999) also mapped the CASP8 gene to 2q33-q34.
They noted that CASP10 (601762), whose product is closely related to
that of CASP8, has been mapped to the same location, indicating that the
2 genes have evolved by tandem duplication.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Liu et al. (2002) identified a naturally occurring deletion of leu62
within the first DED of CASP8 in A431 human vulva squamous carcinoma
cells. This deletion resulted in defective CASP8-dependent apoptosis.
Unlike wildtype CASP8, CASP8 lacking leu62 failed to form oligomers with
wildtype CASP8 and failed to interact with FADD. The mutation did not
effect proteolytic activation by granzyme B, nor did it effect catalytic
activity against PARP.

In 2 affected sibs from a consanguineous family with caspase-8
deficiency (607271), Chun et al. (2002) identified a homozygous mutation
in the CASP8 gene (601763.0001). The patients had defects in the
activation of T and B lymphocytes and natural killer cells, which led to
immunodeficiency.

Soung et al. (2005) analyzed the entire coding region of the CASP8 gene
in 69 hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC; 114550), 2 with low-grade
dysplastic nodule (LGDN), 2 with high-grade dysplastic nodule (HGDN),
and 65 without dysplastic nodules, and detected a total of 9 somatic
mutations (13%). All 9 mutations were an identical 2-bp deletion
(nucleotides 1225-1226; 601763.0002), which was predicted to result in
frameshift and premature termination of amino acid synthesis in the p10
protease subunit. The change was detected both in HCC and in LGDN
lesions, suggesting that CASP8 mutation may be involved in the early
stage of HCC carcinogenesis. Soung et al. (2005) found that expression
of the tumor-derived caspase-8 mutant in cells abolished cell death
activity of caspase-8.

Cox et al. (2007) reported the findings of the Breast Cancer Association
Consortium (BCAC), which had been established to conduct combined
case-control analyses with augmented statistical power to try to confirm
putative genetic associations with breast cancer. They genotyped 9 SNPs
for which there was some prior evidence of an association with breast
cancer (114480). They included data from 9 to 15 studies, comprising
11,391 to 18,290 cases and 14,753 to 22,670 controls. They found
evidence of a protective association with breast cancer for a D302H
polymorphism in CASP8 (601763.0003), and weaker evidence for an L10P SNP
in the TGFB1 gene (190180.0007). These results demonstrated that common
breast cancer susceptibility alleles with small effects on risk can be
identified, given sufficiently powerful studies.

Caspases are important in the life and death of immune cells and
therefore influence immune surveillance of malignancies. Sun et al.
(2007) tested whether genetic variants in CASP8, CASP10, (601762), and
CFLAR (603599), 3 genes important for death receptor-induced cell
killing residing in tandem order on chromosome 2q33, are associated with
cancer susceptibility. Using a haplotype-tagging SNP approach, they
identified a 6-nucleotide deletion (-652 6N del) variant in the CASP8
promoter (601763.0004) associated with decreased risk of lung cancer.
The deletion destroyed a binding site for stimulatory protein-1 (SP1;
189906) and decreased transcription. Biochemical analyses showed that T
lymphocytes with the deletion variant had lower caspase-8 activity and
activation-induced cell death upon stimulation with cancer cell
antigens. Case-control analyses of 4,995 individuals with cancer and
4,972 controls in a Chinese population showed that this genetic variant
is associated with reduced susceptibility to multiple cancers, including
lung, esophageal, gastric, colorectal, cervical, and breast cancers,
acting in an allele dose-dependent manner. The results supported the
hypothesis that genetic variants influencing immune status modify cancer
susceptibility. Haiman et al. (2008) did not find an association between
this SNP and breast (114480), colorectal (114500), or prostate (176807)
cancer among 2,098, 1,139, and 2,825 patients, respectively. The study
included patients in Hawaii and California of various ethnic groups.

ANIMAL MODEL

Varfolomeev et al. (1998) generated mice deficient in Casp8 by
disrupting exons 1 and 2, which encode the N-terminal death effector
domains (DEDs) that interact with MORT1/FADD. Whereas wildtype and
heterozygous mice appeared normal, no homozygous mutant mice survived
beyond approximately embryonic day 13.5. Histopathologic analysis
revealed marked abdominal hyperemia with erythrocytosis in the liver,
major blood vessels, capillaries, and other organs. Cardiac ventricular
musculature was thin and similar to early mesenchyme. Colony forming
assays showed that hemopoietic precursor cells were markedly reduced in
the mutant mice. Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis indicated
that fibroblasts from mutant mice responded normally to the noncytocidal
effects of tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR; 191190) and death
receptor-3 (DR3, or TNFRSF12; 603366) stimulation, whereas wildtype
fibroblasts were killed by TNF (191160) treatment or FAS cross-linking.
Agents such as ultraviolet irradiation and protein kinase inhibitors
were lethal for mutant and normal fibroblasts. Varfolomeev et al. (1998)
concluded that CASP8 is necessary for death induction by receptors of
the TNF/nerve growth factor (see NGFR; 162010) family and is vital in
embryonal development.

Zender et al. (2003) evaluated the efficacy of small interfering RNA
(siRNA) in vivo in different mouse models with acute liver failure. They
directed 21-nucleotide siRNAs against caspase-8, which is a key enzyme
in death receptor-mediated apoptosis. Systemic administration of
caspase-8 siRNA resulted in inhibition of caspase-8 gene expression in
the liver, therefore preventing CD95-mediated apoptosis. Protection of
hepatocytes by caspase-8 siRNA significantly attenuated acute liver
damage induced by CD95 antibody or by adenovirus expressing FAS ligand.
In a clinical situation, siRNAs would most likely be administered after
the onset of acute liver failure. Therefore, Zender et al. (2003)
injected caspase-8 siRNA at a time during experimentally-induced liver
failure with already elevated liver transaminases. Improvement of
survival due to RNA interference was significant even when caspase-8
siRNA was applied during ongoing acute liver failure.

Salmena and Hakem (2005) used the Cre/lox recombinase system to generate
mice lacking Casp8 only in T cells (Tcasp8 -/- mice). Tcasp8 -/- mice
developed an age-dependent lethal lymphoproliferative and
lymphoinfiltrative immune disorder characterized by lymphoadenopathy,
splenomegaly, and T-cell infiltrates in lung, liver, and kidney.
Although there was lymphopenia in young Tcasp8 -/- mice, peripheral T
cells in old Tcasp8 -/- mice proliferated in the absence of infection or
stimulation. Salmena and Hakem (2005) proposed that Tcasp8 -/- mice may
serve as a model of human CASP8 deficiency and that CASP8 in T cells is
required for lymphocyte homeostasis.

To define the contribution of reduced caspase-8 to a wound healing
response, Lee et al. (2009) generated an epidermal knockout of
caspase-8. By postnatal day 10 the conditional knockout mouse had flaky
skin throughout its body, was slightly runted, and its epidermis was
dramatically thickened. Lee et al. (2009) found that even though
caspase-8 is normally expressed in the granular layer, it was the basal
and spinous layers that were markedly expanded in the knockout
epidermis. Lee et al. (2009) demonstrated that the loss of epidermal
caspase-8, an important mediator of apoptosis, recapitulated several
phases of a wound healing response in the mouse. The epidermal
hyperplasia in the caspase-8 null skin is the culmination of signals
exchanged between epidermal keratinocytes, dermal fibroblasts, and
leukocytic cells. This reciprocal interaction is initiated by the
paracrine signaling of interleukin 1-alpha (IL1-alpha; 147760), which
activates both skin stem cell proliferation and cutaneous inflammation.
The noncanonical secretion of IL1-alpha is induced by a p38-MAPK
(600289)-mediated upregulation of NALP3 (606416), leading to
inflammasome assembly and caspase-1 activation. Notably, the increased
proliferation of basal keratinocytes is counterbalanced by the growth
arrest of suprabasal keratinocytes in the stratified epidermis by
IL1-alpha-dependent NF-kappa-B (see 164011) signaling. Lee et al. (2009)
concluded that their findings illustrated how the loss of caspase-8 can
affect more than programmed cell death to alter the local
microenvironment and elicit processes common to wound repair and many
neoplastic skin disorders.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CASPASE 8 DEFICIENCY
CASP8, ARG248TRP

In 2 affected sibs from a consanguineous family with caspase-8
deficiency (607271), Chun et al. (2002) identified a homozygous C-to-T
transition in the CASP8 gene, resulting in an arg248-to-trp (R248W)
substitution within the p18 protease subunit of the protein. The
asymptomatic mother, father, and sister were heterozygous carriers of
the mutation. In 13 extended family members, Chun et al. (2002)
identified 7 asymptomatic heterozygous carriers but found no additional
homozygous or immunodeficient individuals.

.0002
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA, SOMATIC
CASP8, 2-BP DEL, 1225TG

In 9 unrelated patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (114550) and HBV
infection, Soung et al. (2005) identified the same somatic mutation, a
2-bp deletion (1225_1226delTG) in exon 7 that was predicted to result in
frameshift and premature termination of amino acid synthesis in the p10
protease subunit.

.0003
BREAST CANCER, PROTECTION AGAINST
CASP8, ASP302HIS

MacPherson et al. (2004) and Frank et al. (2005) found evidence that the
presence of a single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the CASP8 gene
resulting in an asp302-to-his (D302H) substitution (dbSNP rs1045485)
could reduce susceptibility to breast cancer (114480) in British and
German cohorts, respectively. Cox et al. (2007) found evidence for a
protective effect of the D302H polymorphism in an allele dose-dependent
manner in 16,423 cases and 17,109 controls from 14 studies that
contributed data to the Breast Cancer Association Consortium (BCAC). The
study achieved odds ratios of 0.89 and 0.74 for heterozygotes and rare
homozygotes, respectively, compared with common homozygotes. This site
was not found to be polymorphic in Korean, Han Chinese, or Japanese
women. Cox et al. (2007) noted that the functional consequences of the
aspartic acid-to-histidine substitution were not known, and further
experiments were required to establish whether D302H itself or another
variant in strong linkage disequilibrium with it is causative.

.0004
LUNG CANCER, PROTECTION AGAINST
CASP8, 6-BP DEL, NT-652

Sun et al. (2007) identified a 6-nucleotide insertion/deletion
polymorphism in the CASP8 promoter, -652 AGTAAG ins/del (dbSNP
rs3834129), the deletion variant of which was associated with decreased
risk of developing lung cancer (211980) in a population of Han Chinese
subjects. The -652 6N deletion was also associated with decreased risk
of cancer of various other forms including esophageal, gastric,
colorectal, cervical, and breast, acting in an allele dose-dependent
manner. The frequency of the -652 6N deletion was significantly lower in
individuals with lung cancer (P = 4.1 x 10(-5)).

Haiman et al. (2008) did not find an association between this SNP and
breast (114480), colorectal (114500), or prostate (176807) cancer among
2,098, 1,139, and 2,825 patients, respectively. The study included
patients in Hawaii and California of various ethnic groups.

REFERENCE 1. Boldin, M. P.; Goncharov, T. M.; Goltsev, Y. V.; Wallach, D.:
Involvement of MACH, a novel MORT1/FADD-interacting protease, in Fas/APO-1-
and TNF receptor-induced cell death. Cell 85: 803-815, 1996.

2. Burguillos, M. A.; Deierborg, T.; Kavanagh, E.; Persson, A.; Hajji,
N.; Garcia-Quintanilla, A.; Cano, J.; Brundin, P.; Englund, E.; Venero,
J. L.; Joseph, B.: Caspase signalling controls microglia activation
and neurotoxicity. Nature 472: 319-324, 2011.

3. Chun, H. J.; Zheng, L.; Ahmad, M.; Wang, J.; Speirs, C. K.; Siegel,
R. M.; Dale, J. K.; Puck, J.; Davis, J.; Hall, C. G.; Skoda-Smith,
S.; Atkinson, T. P.; Straus, S. E.; Lenardo, M. J.: Pleiotropic defects
in lymphocyte activation caused by caspase-8 mutations lead to human
immunodeficiency. Nature 419: 395-399, 2002.

4. Cox, A.; Dunning, A. M.; Garcia-Closas, M.; Balasubramanian, S.;
Reed, M. W. R.; Pooley, K. A.; Scollen, S.; Baynes, C.; Ponder, B.
A. J.; Chanock, S.; Lissowska, J.; Brinton, L.; and 67 others:
A common coding variant in CASP8 is associated with breast cancer
risk. Nature Genet. 39: 352-358, 2007. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet.
39: 688 only, 2007.

5. Eckhart, L.; Henry, M.; Santos-Beneit, A. M.; Schmitz, I.; Krueger,
A.; Fischer, H.; Bach, J.; Ban, J.; Kirchhoff, S.; Krammer, P. H.;
Mollinedo, F.; Tschachler, E.: Alternative splicing of caspase-8
mRNA during differentiation of human leukocytes. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 289: 777-781, 2001.

6. Fernandes-Alnemri, T.; Armstrong, R. C.; Krebs, J.; Srinivasula,
S. M.; Wang, L.; Bullrich, F.; Fritz, L. C.; Trapani, J. A.; Tomaselli,
K. J.; Litwack, G.; Alnemri, E. S.: In vitro activation of CPP32
and Mch3 by Mch4, a novel human apoptotic cysteine protease containing
two FADD-like domains. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 7464-7469, 1996.

7. Frank, B.; Bermejo, J. L.; Hemminki, K.; Klaes, R.; Bugert, P.;
Wappenschmidt, B.; Schmutzler, R. K.; Burwinkel, B.: Re: association
of a common variant of the CASP8 gene with reduced risk of breast
cancer. J. Nat. Cancer Inst. 97: 1012 only, 2005.

8. Gervais, F. G.; Singaraja, R.; Xanthoudakis, S.; Gutekunst, C.-A.;
Leavitt, B. R.; Metzler, M.; Hackam, A. S.; Tam, J.; Vaillancourt,
J. P.; Houtzager, V.; Rasper, D. M.; Roy, S.; Hayden, M. R.; Nicholson,
D. W.: Recruitment and activation of caspase-8 by the huntingtin-interacting
protein Hip-1 and a novel partner Hippi. Nature Cell Biol. 4: 95-105,
2002.

9. Grenet, J.; Teitz, T.; Wei, T.; Valentine, V.; Kidd, V. J.: Structure
and chromosome localization of the human CASP8 gene. Gene 226: 225-232,
1999.

10. Gunther, C.; Martini, E.; Wittkopf, N.; Amann, K.; Weigmann, B.;
Neumann, H.; Waldner, M. J.; Hedrick, S. M.; Tenzer, S.; Neurath,
M. F.; Becker, C.: Caspase-8 regulates TNF-alpha-induced epithelial
necroptosis and terminal ileitis. Nature 477: 335-339, 2011.

11. Hadano, S.; Yanagisawa, Y.; Skaug, J.; Fichter, K.; Nasir, J.;
Martindale, D.; Koop, B. F.; Scherer, S. W.; Nicholson, D. W.; Rouleau,
G. A.; Ikeda, J.-E.; Hayden, M. R.: Cloning and characterization
of three novel genes, ALS2CR1, ALS2CR2, and ALS2CR3, in the juvenile
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS2) critical region at chromosome
2q33-q34: candidate genes for ALS2. Genomics 71: 200-213, 2001.

12. Haiman, C. A.; Garcia, R. R.; Kolonel, L. N.; Henderson, B. E.;
Wu, A. H.; Le Marchand, L.: A promoter polymorphism in the CASP8
gene is not associated with cancer risk. (Letter) Nat. Genet. 40:
259-260, 2008.

13. Ikeda, H.; Yamaguchi, M.; Sugai, S.; Aze, Y.; Narumiya, S.; Kakizuka,
A.: Expanded polyglutamine in the Machado-Joseph disease protein
induces cell death in vitro and in vivo. Nature Genet. 13: 196-202,
1996.

14. Kaiser, W. J.; Upton, J. W.; Long, A. B.; Livingston-Rosanoff,
D.; Daley-Bauer, L. P.; Hakem, R.; Caspary, T.; Mocarski, E. S.:
RIP3 mediates the embryonic lethality of caspase-8-deficient mice. Nature 471:
368-372, 2011.

15. Kischkel, F. C.; Kioschis, P.; Weitz, S.; Poustka, A.; Lichter,
P.; Krammer, P. H.: Assignment of CASP8 to human chromosome band
2q33-q34 and Casp8 to the murine syntenic region on chromosome 1B-proximal
C by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 95-96, 1998.

16. Lee, P.; Lee, D.-J.; Chan, C.; Chen, S.-W.; Ch'en, I.; Jamora,
C.: Dynamic expression of epidermal caspase 8 simulates a wound healing
response. Nature 458: 519-523, 2009.

17. Liu, B.; Peng, D.; Lu, Y.; Jin, W.; Fan, Z.: A novel single amino
acid deletion caspase-8 mutation in cancer cells that lost proapoptotic
activity. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 30159-30164, 2002.

18. MacPherson, G.; Healey, C. S.; Teare, M. D.; Balasubramanian,
S. P.; Reed, M. W. R.; Pharoah, P. D. P.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Meuth,
M.; Bhattacharyya, N. P.; Cox, A.: Association of a common variant
of the CASP8 gene with reduced risk of breast cancer. J. Nat. Cancer
Inst. 96: 1866-1869, 2004.

19. Muzio, M.; Chinnaiyan, A. M.; Kischkel, F. C.; O'Rourke, K.; Shevchenko,
A.; Ni, J.; Scaffidi, C.; Bretz, J. D.; Zhang, M.; Gentz, R.; Mann,
M.; Krammer, P. H.; Peter, M. E.; Dixit, V. M.: FLICE, a novel FADD-homologous
ICE/CED-3-like protease, is recruited to the CD95 (Fas/APO-1) death-inducing
signaling complex. Cell 85: 817-827, 1996.

20. Oberst, A.; Dillon, C. P.; Weinlich, R.; McCormick, L. L.; Fitzgerald,
P.; Pop, C.; Hakem, R.; Salvesen, G. S.; Green, D. R.: Catalytic
activity of the caspase-8-FLIP(L) complex inhibits RIPK3-dependent
necrosis. Nature 471: 363-367, 2011.

21. Poulaki, V.; Mitsiades, C. S.; McMullan, C.; Fanourakis, G.; Negri,
J.; Goudopoulou, A.; Halikias, I. X.; Voutsinas, G.; Tseleni-Balafouta,
S.; Miller, J. W.; Mitsiades, N.: Human retinoblastoma cells are
resistant to apoptosis induced by death receptors: role of caspase-8
gene silencing. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 46: 358-366, 2005.

22. Salmena, L.; Hakem, R.: Caspase-8 deficiency in T cells leads
to a lethal lymphoinfiltrative immune disorder. J. Exp. Med. 202:
727-732, 2005.

23. Sanchez, I.; Xu, C.-J.; Juo, P.; Kakizaka, A.; Blenis, J.; Yuan,
J.: Caspase-8 is required for cell death induced by expanded polyglutamine
repeats. Neuron 22: 623-633, 1999.

24. Soung, Y. H.; Lee, J. W.; Kim, S. Y.; Sung, Y. J.; Park, W. S.;
Nam, S. W.; Kim, S. H.; Lee, J. Y.; Yoo, N. J.; Lee, S. H.: Caspase-8
gene is frequently inactivated by the frameshift somatic mutation
1225_1226delTG in hepatocellular carcinomas. Oncogene 24: 141-147,
2005.

25. Stupack, D. G.; Teitz, T.; Potter, M. D.; Mikolon, D.; Houghton,
P. J.; Kidd, V. J.; Lahti, J. M.; Cheresh, D. A.: Potentiation of
neuroblastoma metastasis by loss of caspase-8. Nature 439: 95-99,
2006.

26. Su, H.; Bidere, N.; Zheng, L.; Cubre, A.; Sakai, K.; Dale, J.;
Salmena, L.; Hakem, R.; Straus, S.; Lenardo, M.: Requirement for
caspase-8 in NF-kappa-B activation by antigen receptor. Science 307:
1465-1468, 2005.

27. Sun, T.; Gao, Y.; Tan, W.; Ma, S.; Shi, Y.; Yao, J.; Guo, Y.;
Yang, M.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, Q.; Zeng, C.; Lin, D.: A six-nucleotide
insertion-deletion polymorphism in the CASP8 promoter is associated
with susceptibility to multiple cancers. Nature Genet. 39: 605-613,
2007.

28. Varfolomeev, E. E.; Schuchmann, M.; Luria, V.; Chiannilkulchai,
N.; Beckmann, J. S.; Mett, I. L.; Rebrikov, D.; Brodianski, V. M.;
Kemper, O. C.; Kollet, O.; Lapidot, T.; Soffer, D.; Sobe, T.; Avraham,
K. B.; Goncharov, T.; Holtmann, H.; Lonai, P.; Wallach, D.: Targeted
disruption of the mouse Caspase 8 gene ablates cell death induction
by the TNF receptors, Fas/Apo1, and DR3 and is lethal prenatally. Immunity 9:
267-276, 1998.

29. Yu, L.; Alva, A.; Su, H.; Dutt, P.; Freundt, E.; Welsh, S.; Baehrecke,
E. H.; Lenardo, M. J.: Regulation of an ATG7-beclin 1 program of
autophagic cell death by caspase-8. Science 304: 1500-1502, 2004.

30. Zender, L.; Hutker, S.; Liedtke, C.; Tillmann, H. L.; Zender,
S.; Mundt, B.; Waltemathe, M.; Gosling, T.; Flemming, P.; Malek, N.
P.; Trautwein, C.; Manns, M. P.; Kuhnel, F.; Kubicka, S.: Caspase
8 small interfering RNA prevents acute liver failure in mice. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 7797-7802, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/22/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/7/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/19/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/24/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/4/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/3/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/8/2005
Jane Kelly - updated: 3/25/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/15/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/22/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/22/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/16/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/11/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/1/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/25/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/16/2002
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 4/5/2000
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 3/24/1999
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 11/17/1998

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 4/18/1997

EDITED carol: 02/06/2012
carol: 2/6/2012
alopez: 11/30/2011
terry: 11/22/2011
alopez: 7/12/2011
terry: 7/8/2011
alopez: 6/17/2011
alopez: 6/14/2011
terry: 6/7/2011
carol: 9/15/2009
alopez: 5/4/2009
terry: 4/28/2009
wwang: 5/19/2008
ckniffin: 5/19/2008
alopez: 6/6/2007
terry: 5/24/2007
alopez: 4/10/2007
terry: 4/4/2007
alopez: 5/3/2006
terry: 5/1/2006
mgross: 4/3/2006
carol: 1/20/2006
tkritzer: 4/8/2005
carol: 4/1/2005
wwang: 3/25/2005
wwang: 3/22/2005
wwang: 3/21/2005
wwang: 3/18/2005
terry: 3/15/2005
carol: 11/18/2004
ckniffin: 11/3/2004
tkritzer: 11/2/2004
terry: 10/22/2004
alopez: 6/22/2004
terry: 6/22/2004
cwells: 7/22/2003
terry: 7/16/2003
mgross: 11/11/2002
alopez: 10/2/2002
cwells: 10/1/2002
mgross: 4/25/2002
alopez: 2/5/2002
alopez: 1/17/2002
terry: 1/16/2002
carol: 6/15/2000
terry: 4/5/2000
terry: 3/25/1999
carol: 3/24/1999
alopez: 12/21/1998
terry: 11/17/1998
carol: 11/16/1998
alopez: 6/5/1997
alopez: 5/30/1997

605578	TITLE *605578 INTERFERON-INDUCED TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN 2; IFITM2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The 1-8 gene family, which includes IFITM1 (604456), IFITM2, and IFITM3
(605579), is highly inducible by both type I (IFNA (147660)/IFNB
(147640)) and type II (IFNG; 147570) interferons (summary by Lewin et
al., 1991).

CLONING

By screening a lymphoid cell cosmid library with a probe corresponding
to the 3-prime untranslated region of IFITM1, Lewin et al. (1991)
isolated a cosmid containing the IFITM1, IFITM2, and IFITM3 genes, which
they termed 9-27, 1-8D, and 1-8U, respectively, within a single 18-kb
fragment. The predicted 132-amino acid IFITM2 protein, which is
approximately 90% identical to IFITM3, has an N-terminal signal
sequence, 3 potential phosphorylation sites, and a C-terminal leucine
zipper. Sequence variability is greatest at the C terminus. Immunoblot
analysis showed that in response to IFNA, all 3 IFITMs were expressed as
14-kD proteins that could be further resolved by isoelectric focusing.

By whole-mount in situ hybridization, Lange et al. (2003) found that
expression of mouse fragilis, fragilis-2, and fragilis-3 was restricted
to the epiblast at embryonic days 5.5 and 6.5. By embryonic day 7.5, all
3 transcripts showed variable expression in a cluster of founder
premordial germ cells, and at embryonic days 11.5 and 12.5, all 3
transcripts were detected in gonadal germ cells. The 3 transcripts
showed unique patterns of expression in other tissues during mouse
development.

GENE FUNCTION

By Northern blot analysis of cells expressing IFITM genes, Lewin et al.
(1991) showed that IFITM2 was not as responsive to IFNA treatment as
IFITM3 or IFITM1.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lewin et al. (1991) determined that all the IFITM1, IFITM2, and IFITM3
genes each contain 2 exons, with interferon-stimulated response elements
(ISREs) in the immediately 5-prime flanking sequence of the
promoter/enhancer region. Unlike IFITM1, which has an ISRE and 2 CCAAT
boxes but lacks a TATA box, IFITM2 and IFITM3 have 2 ISREs and no TATA
or CCAAT boxes.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lange et al. (2003) mapped the IFITM2 gene
to an IFITM gene cluster on chromosome 11p15.5. The order of the genes,
from telomere to centromere, is IFITM5 (614757), IFITM2, IFITM1, and
IFITM3, and the cluster spans about 26.5 kb. Lange et al. (2003) stated
that IFITM2 maps to the plus strand and that all other IFITM genes map
to the minus strand. However, Gross (2012) determined that, in addition
to IFITM2, the IFITM1 gene maps to the plus strand based on an alignment
of the IFITM1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC000897) with the genomic
sequence (GRCh37).

Lange et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Ifitm gene cluster to a region of
chromosome 7F5 that shares homology of synteny with human chromosome
11p15.5. The mouse Ifitm gene cluster contains 5 genes, whereas the
human cluster contains only 4 genes.

EVOLUTION

By phylogenetic analysis, Lange et al. (2003) found that only 2 mouse
fragilis genes, fragilis-4 (Ifitm5) and either fragilis (Ifitm3),
fragilis-2 (Ifitm1), or fragilis-3 (Ifitm2), have been conserved from
mouse to human. They suggested that subsequent gene duplications may
have occurred independently in both species.

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/9/2012.

2. Lange, U. C.; Saitou, M.; Western, P. S.; Barton, S. C.; Surani,
M. A.: The fragilis interferon-inducible gene family of transmembrane
proteins is associated with germ cell specification in mice. BMC
Dev. Biol. 3: 1, 2003. Note: Electronic Article.

3. Lewin, A. R.; Reid, L. E.; McMahon, M.; Stark, G. R.; Kerr, I.
M.: Molecular analysis of a human interferon-inducible gene family. Europ.
J. Biochem. 199: 417-423, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 08/10/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2012

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/24/2001

EDITED mgross: 08/10/2012
terry: 8/9/2012
terry: 5/4/2012
mgross: 1/24/2001

190232	TITLE *190232 TRANSITION PROTEIN 2; TNP2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

During mammalian spermiogenesis, histones are transiently replaced by
several low molecular weight, highly basic proteins called transition
proteins (TNPs), and finally by protamines, which are the principal
basic nuclear proteins of mature sperm. Four species of transition
proteins, Tnp1 through Tnp4, which facilitate chromatin transformation
from the nucleosome structure to the nucleoprotamine structure during
spermatid differentiation, were thought to occur in rat, ram, and boar.
Using cDNA probes for Tnp2 from these species, transcripts for human
TNP2 were not found in human testicular RNA or human testis cDNA
libraries. Finding homologous sequences in the human genome was greatly
facilitated, however, by the finding that, in the boar and bull genomes,
the genes for protamine-1 (PRM1, 182880) and Prm2 (182890) are clustered
with Tnp2. Schluter et al. (1992) tested a genomic human cosmid clone
containing the genes for both protamines and found that the TNP2 gene
was within a distance of 7.5 kb 3-prime of the PRM2 gene. The gene was
transcribed in human testicular RNA only at a level demonstrable by
RT-PCR and RNase protection assay. In contrast to the TNP2 genes of
mouse, rat, boar, and bull, the human TNP2 gene lacks the nucleotide
sequence GCCATCAC in its 3-prime UTR.

GENE FUNCTION

Pradeepa et al. (2008) showed that importin alpha-4 (KPNA3; 601892) was
required for active transport of Tnp2 into nuclei of rat testis germ
cells.

MAPPING

Schluter et al. (1992) determined that the TNP2 gene is clustered with
the PRM1 and PRM2 genes on chromosome 16p13.3. The 3 genes are arranged
in a DNA stretch of 13 kb, and these 3 genes are also closely linked in
boar and bull. From the restriction map of a cosmid clone, Engel et al.
(1992) concluded that the distance between PRM2 and TNP2 is about 7.5
kb. Engel et al. (1992) presented in situ hybridization data indicating
that the TNP2 gene is near the centromere of chromosome 16, in the same
area occupied by the mouse homologs of PRM1 and PRM2. Nelson and Krawetz
(1993) likewise showed from a study of a cosmid clone containing the
PRM1, PRM2 and TNP2 genes that they are closely clustered, with the TNP2
gene located 3-prime of the PRM2 gene at a distance of approximately 7
kb. A computer-assisted comparison of the sequences predicted that the
order of emergence of the 3 genes was similar to their spatial order:
PRM1-PRM2-TNP2. Presumably, the gene cluster arose from the PRM1 gene
through a series of gene duplication events.

ANIMAL MODEL

Zhao et al. (2001) found that spermatogenesis in Tnp2-null mice was
almost normal, with testis weights and epididymal sperm counts
unaffected. The only abnormality in testicular histology was a slight
increase in sperm retention in stage IX to XI tubules. Epididymal sperm
from Tnp2-null mice showed an increase in tail abnormalities. Mutant
mice were fertile but produced small litters. In step-12 to -16
spermatid nuclei from Tnp2-null mice, there was normal displacement of
histones, a compensatory translationally regulated increase in Tnp1
levels, and elevated levels of precursor and partially processed forms
of Prm2. Electron microscopy revealed abnormal focal condensations of
chromatin in step-11 to -13 spermatids and progressive chromatin
condensation in later spermatids, but condensation was still incomplete
in epididymal sperm. Compared with wildtype, mutant sperm chromatin was
more accessible to intercalating dyes and more susceptible to acid
denaturation, suggesting DNA strand breaks. Zhao et al. (2001) concluded
that TNP2 is not critical for shaping sperm nuclei, histone
displacement, initiation of chromatin condensation, binding of
protamines to DNA, or fertility, but it is necessary to maintain normal
processing of Prm2 and, consequently, the completion of chromatin
condensation.

REFERENCE 1. Engel, W.; Keime, S.; Kremling, H.; Hameister, H.; Schluter, G.
: The genes for protamine 1 and 2 (PRM1 and PRM2) and transition protein
2 (TNP2) are closely linked in the mammalian genome. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 61: 158-159, 1992.

2. Nelson, J. E.; Krawetz, S. A.: Linkage of human spermatid-specific
basic nuclear protein genes: definition and evolution of the P1-to-P2-to-TP2
locus. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 2932-2936, 1993.

3. Pradeepa, M. M.; Manjunatha, S.; Sathish, V.; Agrawal, S.; Rao,
M. R. S.: Involvement of importin-4 in the transport of transition
protein 2 into the spermatid nucleus. Molec. Cell. Biol. 28: 4331-4341,
2008.

4. Schluter, G.; Kremling, H.; Engel, W.: The gene for human transition
protein 2: nucleotide sequence, assignment to the protamine gene cluster,
and evidence for its low expression. Genomics 14: 377-383, 1992.

5. Zhao, M.; Shirley, C. R.; Yu, Y. E.; Mohapatra, B.; Zhang, Y.;
Unni, E.; Deng, J. M.; Arango, N. A.; Terry, N. H. A.; Weil, M. M.;
Russell, L. D.; Behringer, R. R.; Meistrich, M. L.: Targeted disruption
of the transition protein 2 gene affects sperm chromatin structure
and reduces fertility in mice. Molec. Cell. Biol. 21: 7243-7255,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/8/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/8/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/14/1992

EDITED carol: 07/30/2010
mgross: 1/4/2010
terry: 12/8/2009
mgross: 1/8/2009
terry: 1/8/2009
kayiaros: 7/13/1999
mark: 12/26/1996
carol: 3/11/1993
carol: 12/21/1992
carol: 10/14/1992

171500	TITLE *171500 ACID PHOSPHATASE 1, SOLUBLE; ACP1
;;PHOSPHATASE, ACID, OF ERYTHROCYTE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Wo et al. (1992) cloned genes encoding 2 low molecular weight
phosphotyrosyl protein phosphatases from a human placenta cDNA library.
They were found to have identical nucleotide sequences, with the
exception of a 108-bp segment in the middle of the open reading frame.
From further studies they concluded that the 2 represent the fast and
slow electrophoretic forms of red cell acid phosphatase and that this
enzyme is not unique to the red cell but instead is expressed in all
human tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Sensabaugh and Golden (1978) showed that ACP1 is inhibited by folic acid
and various folates, and that the inhibition is phenotype dependent:
ACP1(C) more than ACP1(A) more than ACP1(B). This explains elevation of
ACP levels in red cells of patients with megaloblastic anemia and also
variation in incidence and severity of favism (134700) in G6PD
(305900)-deficient persons.

Swallow et al. (1973) showed that 'red cell' acid phosphatase is not
limited to erythrocytes but can be demonstrated in other tissues,
including cultured fibroblasts and lymphoblastoid cells where there is
no possibility of contamination by blood.

MAPPING

Weitkamp et al. (1969) presented data suggesting that the acid
phosphatase locus may be on chromosome 2. Renwick (1971) presented an
analysis of the Weitkamp data supporting assignment to chromosome 2.

Ferguson-Smith et al. (1973) presented deletion mapping evidence that
the acid phosphatase locus is on the distal end of the short arm of
chromosome 2, somewhere between 2p23 and 2pter. A child lacking this
segment was of phenotype B whereas the father and mother were homozygous
phenotype B and A, respectively.

Hulten et al. (1966) described a family in which studies of a reciprocal
translocation involving chromosome 2 suggested that the Kidd locus may
be on one of the involved chromosomes. Cell hybrid studies confirmed the
localization of acid phosphatase-1 on chromosome 2 (Povey et al., 1974).

Chu et al. (1975) presented cell-hybrid evidence for synteny of
gal-1-PT, acid phosphatase, MDH1 (154200), and gal-plus-activator (GLAT;
137030) and for assignment to chromosome 2. Junien et al. (1979)
assigned the ACP1 locus to 2p25.

Larson et al. (1982) studied 4 patients who had inherited an unbalanced
form of a familial reciprocal translocation, t(2;10)(p24;q26), giving
them partial duplication of 2p. Increased levels of acid phosphatase
indicated that ACP1 is located in the 2p24-2pter region and that MDH is
not. The previous inconsistency of the SRO (smallest region of overlap)
was now resolved; ACP1 is at 2p25.

By deletion mapping, Beemer et al. (1983) concluded that ACP1 is located
at 2p25 whereas MDH is closer to the centromere, i.e., in 2p25-p23. They
pointed to the report of Larson et al. (1982) as confirming their
findings.

Wakita et al. (1985) presented evidence in support of location of ACP1
at 2p25. In a patient with duplication of 2p25.3-p25.1, ACP activity was
1.4 times the mean value for normal persons.

Lothe et al. (1986) found that ACP1 is very closely linked (theta =
0.01) to a RFLP called D2S1 that maps to 2pter-p23. Siciliano et al.
(1987) and Thompson et al. (1987) resolved earlier ambiguity of the ACP1
assignment (2p23 or 2p25) by demonstrating in hybrid cells with
rearranged chromosomes that ACP1 is located at band 2p23, proximal to
MDH1 (154200). ACP1 is seemingly remote from APOB (107730); linkage
studies demonstrate no close linkage (Berg, 1987). There may be a large
amount of recombination in that region of 2p.

Wo et al. (1992) examined a human chromosome 2-specific library and
demonstrated that the sequences encoding 2 low molecular weight
phosphotyrosyl protein phosphatases that they were studying are located
on chromosome 2.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Bryson et al. (1995) mapped the
ACP1 gene to the distal portion of 2p25.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bryson et al. (1995) showed that ACP1 contains 7 exons spanning 18 kb
with a GC-rich promoter. Alternative splicing of exons 3 and 4 was shown
to account for 2 different isozymes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Hopkinson et al. (1963) described a new human polymorphism involving
erythrocyte acid phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.2) as demonstrated in starch-gel
electrophoresis. Three alleles, P(a), P(b) and P(c), were thought to be
involved, their frequency being estimated to be 0.35, 0.60 and 0.05,
respectively. Another rare allele, P(r), was described by Giblett and
Scott (1965).

Dissing et al. (1991) concluded that 2 electrophoretically distinct
isozymes, f and s, which are produced in allele-specific ratios and are
associated with each of the 3 major alleles, are generated by
alternative splicing of the primary RNA transcript.

Mohrenweiser and Novotny (1982) described a low activity variant of ACP1
(GUA-1) that is frequent (gene frequency of 0.132) in Guaymi Indians of
Central America. This variant has an electrophoretic mobility similar to
the common B- and C-type variants, but individuals of the GUA-1
phenotype have a level of enzyme activity only 27% of the activity
expected for the ACP1C variant. Red cells of persons with the GUA-1
phenotype had increased basal levels of the flavoenzyme glutathione
reductase and a larger fraction of the glutathione reductase protein in
the form of the holoenzyme, indicating increased levels of flavin
adenine dinucleotide in the red cells of these persons. The finding was
consistent with the suggestion that ACP1 has a physiologic function as a
flavin mononucleotide phosphatase. This function could regulate the
intracellular concentrations of flavin coenzymes and, ultimately, of
flavoenzymes, and could be the mechanism for the association between
ACP1 type and certain disease states.

Miller et al. (1987) gave a general review of the electrophoretic
variants of red blood cell acid phosphatase. Arnaud et al. (1989)
identified in Czechoslovakia a rare variant of ACP1, called ACP1*KUK.
Arnaud et al. (1992) reported kinetic and thermodynamic characteristics
of the KUK variant.

Data on gene frequencies of allelic variants were tabulated by
Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

HISTORY

Van Cong and Moullec (1971) suggested that the acid phosphatase and
Lewis (111100) loci are linked, but Chautard-Freire-Maia (1974) could
not corroborate this linkage.

Mace and Robson (1974) and Weitkamp et al. (1975) presented data
consistent with loose linkage of red cell acid phosphatase and MNS blood
group (111300); these loci were later shown to be on separate
chromosomes (2 and 4, respectively). Mace and Robson (1974) found also a
hint of linkage between ACP and Kidd blood group (Jk; 111000); the Kidd
gene (SLC14A1; 613868) was subsequently shown to be on chromosome 18,
not 2.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ACID PHOSPHATASE 1, SOLUBLE, A/B POLYMORPHISM OF
ACP1, ARG105GLN

Dissing and Johnsen (1992) provided evidence for the molecular basis of
the 3 common alleles in Caucasians: ACP1*A, ACP1*B, and ACP1*C, which
give rise to 6 phenotypes (A, B, C, AB, AC, and BC). Each allele encodes
2 isozymes, f and s, which show fast and slow electrophoretic mobility,
respectively. The f and s isozymes are produced in allele-specific
ratios: 2:1 for Af and As, 4:1 for Bf and Bs, and 1:4 for Cf and Cs,
respectively. The f and s isozymes appear to be generated by alternative
splicing of exons in the primary RNA transcript. The coding portions of
the ACP1*B and ACP1*C alleles are identical; the only difference at the
protein level is the ratio of f and s isozyme. Thus, a difference in the
splicing mechanism presumably accounts for the difference in ratio. Af
and As differ from the Bf and Bs isozymes by a single substitution at
residue 105: arg and gln, respectively. These observations explain the
electrophoretic identity of the B and C isozyme pairs.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bottini et al. (1980); Emanuel et al. (1979); Fisher and Harris (1971);
Fuhrmann and Lichte (1966); Hamerton et al. (1975); Herbich et al.
(1970); Herbich and Meinhart (1972); Karp and Sutton (1967); Mace
et al. (1975); Magenis et al. (1975); Mayr  (1976); Nezbeda  (1979);
Palmarino et al. (1975); Yoshihara and Mohrenweiser (1980)
REFERENCE 1. Arnaud, J.; Vavrusa, B.; Sevin, J.; Constans, J.: Human red-cell
acid phosphatase (ACP1): a new mutant (ACP1*KUK) detected by isoelectric
focusing, kinetics of thermostability and substrate activity. Hum.
Hered. 39: 288-293, 1989.

2. Arnaud, J.; Vavrusa, B.; Wiederanders, G.; Constans, J.: Human
red-cell acid phosphatase (ACP1): kinetic and thermodynamic characterization
of the KUK variant. Hum. Hered. 42: 140-142, 1992.

3. Beemer, F. A.; van der Heiden, C.; Van Hemel, J. O.; Jansen, M.
: Letter to the editors. (Letter) Clin. Genet. 24: 151, 1983.

4. Berg, K.: Close linkage between APOB and ACP1 excluded. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 46: 580, 1987.

5. Bottini, E.; Carapella, E.; Orzalesi, M.; Lucarelli, P.; Pascone,
R.; Gloria-Bottini, F.; Coccia, M.: Is there a role of erythrocyte
acid phosphatase polymorphism in intrauterine development? (Letter) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 32: 764-767, 1980.

6. Bryson, G. L. M.; Massa, H.; Trask, B. J.; Van Etten, R. L.: Gene
structure, sequence, and chromosomal localization of the human red
cell-type low molecular weight acid phosphotyrosyl phosphatase gene,
ACP1. Genomics 30: 133-140, 1995.

7. Chautard-Freire-Maia, E. A.: Linkage relationships between 22
autosomal markers. Ann. Hum. Genet. 38: 191-198, 1974.

8. Chu, E. H. Y.; Chang, C. C.; Sun, N. C.: Synteny of the human
genes for gal-1-PT, ACP-1, MDH-1, and gal-plus-activator and assignment
to chromosome 2. Birth Defects Orig. Art. Ser. XI(3): 103-106, 1975.
Note: Alternate: Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 14: 273-276, 1975...

9. Dissing, J.; Johnsen, A. H.: Human red cell acid phosphatase (ACP1):
the primary structure of the two pairs of isozymes encoded by the
ACP1*A and ACP1*C alleles. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1121: 261-268,
1992.

10. Dissing, J.; Johnsen, A. H.; Sensabaugh, G. F.: Human red cell
acid phosphatase (ACP1): the amino acid sequence of the two isozymes
Bf and Bs encoded by the ACP1*B allele. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 20619-20625,
1991.

11. Emanuel, B. S.; Zackai, E. H.; Van Dyke, D. C.; Swallow, D. M.;
Allen, F. H.; Mellman, W. J.: Deletion mapping: further evidence
for the location of acid phosphatase (ACP-1) within 2p23. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 4: 167-172, 1979.

12. Ferguson-Smith, M. A.; Newman, B. F.; Ellis, P. M.; Thomson, D.
M. G.; Riley, I. D.: Assignment by deletion of human red cell acid
phosphatase gene locus to the short arm of chromosome 2. Nature 243:
271-273, 1973.

13. Fisher, R. A.; Harris, H.: Studies on the separate isoenzymes
of red cell acid phosphatase phenotypes A and B: chromatographic separation
of the isoenzymes. Ann. Hum. Genet. 34: 431-438, 1971.

14. Fuhrmann, W.; Lichte, K. H.: Human red cell acid phosphatase
polymorphism: a study on gene frequency and forensic use of the system
in cases of disputed paternity. Humangenetik 3: 121-126, 1966.

15. Giblett, E. R.; Scott, N. M.: Red cell acid phosphatase: racial
distribution and report of a new phenotype. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 17:
425-432, 1965.

16. Hamerton, J. L.; Mohandas, T.; McAlpine, P. J.; Douglas, G. R.
: Localization of human gene loci using spontaneous chromosome rearrangements
in human-Chinese hamster somatic cell hybrids. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 27:
595-608, 1975.

17. Herbich, J.; Fisher, R. A.; Hopkinson, D. A.: Atypical segregation
of human red cell acid phosphatase phenotypes: evidence for a rare
'silent' allele P(O). Ann. Hum. Genet. 34: 145-152, 1970.

18. Herbich, J.; Meinhart, K.: The rare 'silent' allele P(O) or P(V)
(P Vienna) of human red cell acid phosphatase, typed in a second family. Humangenetik 15:
345-348, 1972.

19. Hopkinson, D. A.; Spencer, N.; Harris, H.: Red cell acid phosphatase
variants: a new human polymorphism. Nature 199: 969-971, 1963.

20. Hulten, M.; Lindsten, J.; Pen-Ming, L. M.; Fraccaro, M.; Mannini,
A.; Tiepolo, L.; Robson, E. B.; Heiken, A.; Tillinger, K. G.: Possible
localization of the genes for the Kidd blood group on an autosome
involved in a reciprocal translocation. Nature 211: 1067-1068, 1966.

21. Junien, C.; Kaplan, J.-C.; Bernheim, A.; Berger, R.: Regional
assignment of red cell acid phosphatase locus to band 2p25. Hum.
Genet. 48: 17-21, 1979.

22. Karp, G. W., Jr.; Sutton, H. E.: Some new phenotypes of human
red cell acid phosphatase. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 19: 54-62, 1967.

23. Larson, L. M.; Bruce, A. W.; Saumur, J. H.; Wasdahl, W. A.: Further
evidence by gene dosage for the regional assignment of erythrocyte
acid phosphatase (ACP1) and malate dehydrogenase (MDH1) loci on chromosome
2p. Clin. Genet. 22: 220-225, 1982.

24. Lothe, R. A.; Gedde-Dahl, T.; Olaisen, B.; Bakker, E.; Pearson,
P.: Very close linkage between D2S1 and ACP1 on chromosome 2p. Ann.
Hum. Genet. 50: 361-367, 1986.

25. Mace, M. A.; Cook, P. J. L.; Robson, E. B.: Linkage data on red
cell acid phosphatase from family studies. Ann. Hum. Genet. 38:
471-477, 1975.

26. Mace, M. A.; Robson, E. B.: Linkage data on ACP-1 and MNSs. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 13: 123-125, 1974.

27. Magenis, R. E.; Koler, R. D.; Lovrien, E. W.; Bigley, R. H.; Duval,
M. C.; Overton, K. M.: Gene dosage: evidence for assignment of erythrocyte
acid phosphatase locus to chromosome 2. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 72:
4526-4530, 1975.

28. Mayr, W. R.: No close linkage between MNSs and red cell acid
phosphatase. Hum. Hered. 26: 1-3, 1976.

29. Miller, S. A.; Nelson, M. S.; Dykes, D. D.; Polesky, H. F.: Comparison
of acid phosphatase ACP1 variants by isoelectric focusing and conventional
electrophoresis: identification of three new alleles, ACP1*N, ACP1*P
and ACP1*S. Hum. Hered. 37: 371-375, 1987.

30. Mohrenweiser, H. W.; Novotny, J. E.: ACP-1-GUA-1: a low-activity
variant of human erythrocyte acid phosphatase: association with increased
glutathione reductase activity. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 34: 425-433,
1982.

31. Nezbeda, P.: Occurrence of the ACP-1 null allele in Czechoslovakia. Hum.
Genet. 46: 227-229, 1979.

32. Palmarino, R.; Agostino, R.; Gloria, F.; Lucarelli, P.; Businco,
L.; Antognoni, G.; Maggioni, G.; Workman, P. L.; Bottini, E.: Red
cell acid phosphatase: another polymorphism correlated with malaria? Am.
J. Phys. Anthrop. 43: 177-186, 1975.

33. Povey, S.; Swallow, D. M.; Bobrow, M.; Craig, I.; Van Heyningen,
V.: Probable assignment of the locus determining human red cell acid
phosphatase ACP(1) to chromosome 2 using somatic cell hybrids. Ann.
Hum. Genet. 38: 1-5, 1974.

34. Renwick, J. H.: Assignment and map-positioning of human loci
using chromosomal variation. Ann. Hum. Genet. 35: 79-97, 1971.

35. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World
Distribution.  New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

36. Sensabaugh, G. F.; Golden, V. L.: Phenotype dependence in the
inhibition of red cell acid phosphatase (ACP) by folates. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 30: 553-560, 1978.

37. Siciliano, M. J.; Bachinski, L.; Dolf, G.; Carrano, A. V.; Thompson,
L. H.: Chromosomal assignments of human DNA repair genes that complement
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell mutants. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 46: 691-692, 1987.

38. Swallow, D. M.; Povey, S.; Harris, H.: Activity of the 'red cell'
acid phosphatase locus in other tissues. Ann. Hum. Genet. 37: 31-38,
1973.

39. Thompson, L. H.; Carrano, A. V.; Sato, K.; Salazar, E. P.; White,
B. F.; Stewart, S. A.; Minkler, J. L.; Siciliano, M. J.: Identification
of nucleotide-excision-repair genes on human chromosomes 2 and 13
by functional complementation in hamster-human hybrids. Somat. Cell
Molec. Genet. 13: 539-551, 1987.

40. Van Cong, N.; Moullec, J.: Linkage probable entre les groupes
de phosphatase acide des globules rouges et le systeme Lewis. Ann.
Genet. 14: 121-125, 1971.

41. Wakita, Y.; Narahara, K.; Takahashi, Y.; Kikkawa, K.; Kimura,
S.; Oda, M.; Kimoto, H.: Duplication of 2p25: confirmation of the
assignment of soluble acid phosphatase (ACP1) locus to 2p25. Hum.
Genet. 71: 259-260, 1985.

42. Weitkamp, L. R.; Janzen, M. K.; Guttormsen, S. A.; Gershowitz,
H.: Inherited pericentric inversion of chromosome number two: a linkage
study. Ann. Hum. Genet. 33: 53-59, 1969.

43. Weitkamp, L. R.; Lovrien, E. W.; Olaisen, B.; Fenger, K.; Gedde-Dahl,
T., Jr.; Sorensen, S. A.; Conneally, P. M.; Bias, W. B.; Ott, J.:
Linkage relations of the loci for the MN blood group and red cell
phosphate. Birth Defects Orig. Art. Ser. 11(3): 276-280, 1975. Note:
Alternate: Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 14: 446-450, 1975...

44. Wo, Y.-Y. P.; McCormack, A. L.; Shabanowitz, J.; Hunt, D. F.;
Davis, J. P.; Mitchell, G. L.; Van Etten, R. L.: Sequencing, cloning,
and expression of human red cell-type acid phosphatase, a cytoplasmic
phosphotyrosyl protein phosphatase. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 10856-10865,
1992.

45. Yoshihara, C. M.; Mohrenweiser, H. W.: Characterization of ACP1(TIC-1),
an electrophoretic variant of erythrocyte acid phosphatase restricted
to the Ticuna Indians of Central Amazonas. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 32:
898-907, 1980.

CONTRIBUTORS Alan F. Scott - updated: 1/15/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED alopez: 04/05/2011
carol: 8/1/2000
kayiaros: 7/13/1999
terry: 5/5/1999
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 1/15/1996
mimadm: 1/14/1995
warfield: 3/30/1994
carol: 10/8/1992
carol: 9/8/1992
carol: 8/31/1992
carol: 8/11/1992

607242	TITLE *607242 ADAPTOR-RELATED PROTEIN COMPLEX 2, ALPHA-2 SUBUNIT; AP2A2
;;KIAA0899
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By randomly sequencing cDNA clones from size-fractionated human brain
cDNA libraries, Nagase et al. (1998) identified AP2A2, which they
designated KIAA0899. The deduced 929-amino acid protein shares more than
97% sequence identity with rat alpha-adaptin. By RT-PCR analysis
followed by ELISA for quantitation, they detected ubiquitous,
low-to-moderate expression of KIAA0899, with highest levels in spinal
cord and fetal and adult brain and lowest levels in spleen.

Using the N terminus of huntingtin (HTT; 613004) in a yeast 2-hybrid
screen of a testis cDNA library, Faber et al. (1998) identified AP2A2,
which they designated huntingtin yeast partner J (HYPJ). The predicted
protein shares significant sequence identity with mouse alpha-adaptin C.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the AP2A2 gene
to chromosome 11.

REFERENCE 1. Faber, P. W.; Barnes, G. T.; Srinidhi, J.; Chen, J.; Gusella, J.
F.; MacDonald, M. E.: Huntingtin interacts with a family of WW domain
proteins. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 1463-1474, 1998.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 355-364, 1998.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/19/2002

EDITED wwang: 09/15/2009
joanna: 5/12/2008
mgross: 9/19/2002

611853	TITLE *611853 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L48; MRPL48
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
inner membrane proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPL48
is a component of the large subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome that
is encoded by the nuclear genome (Koc et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching databases using bovine Mrpl48 as query, Koc et al. (2001)
identified human MRPL48. They also identified MRPL48 homologs in mouse,
Drosophila, and C. elegans, but not in yeast, E. coli, or Arabidopsis.
Mouse and human MRPL48 share 81% amino acid identity.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Zhang and Gerstein (2003) mapped the
MRPL48 gene to chromosome 11q13.2. They identified an MRPL48 pseudogene
on chromosome 6.

REFERENCE 1. Koc, E. C.; Burkhart, W.; Blackburn, K.; Moyer, M. B.; Schlatzer,
D. M.; Moseley, A.; Spremulli, L. L.: The large subunit of the mammalian
mitochondrial ribosome: analysis of the complement of ribosomal proteins
present. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 43958-43969, 2001.

2. Zhang, Z.; Gerstein, M.: Identification and characterization of
over 100 mitochondrial ribosomal protein pseudogenes in the human
genome. Genomics 81: 468-480, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/26/2008

EDITED mgross: 03/04/2008

189965	TITLE *189965 CCAAT/ENHANCER-BINDING PROTEIN, BETA; CEBPB
;;C/EBP-BETA;;
INTERLEUKIN 6-DEPENDENT DNA-BINDING PROTEIN; IL6DBP;;
LIVER ACTIVATOR PROTEIN; LAP;;
LIVER-ENRICHED TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVATOR PROTEIN;;
TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 5; TCF5;;
NFIL6
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Interleukin-6 (147620), an important polypeptide hormone produced by
various cell types, plays a central role in a variety of biologic
phenomena. It modulates the immune response, is involved in the control
of body temperature, and in the liver regulates the synthesis of plasma
proteins, the 'acute phase' proteins. The IL6 receptor (IL6R; 147880)
consists of 2 chains, a ligand-binding chain and a glycoprotein
essential for transmembrane signaling which associates with the
ligand-binding chain only after binding of the ligand. Two different
IL6-responsive elements involved in the induction of acute phase
proteins (IL6REs) were identified, one in the promoter of the
haptoglobin and hemopexin genes and another in the promoter of the
alpha-2 macroglobulin gene. The haptoglobin and hemopexin gene IL6RE
sequence contains the recognition site for a family of nuclear proteins.
One of these proteins, IL6-dependent DNA-binding protein (IL6DBP), is
induced by IL6. It is identical to the liver-enriched transcriptional
activator protein of Descombes et al. (1990). This protein was found to
have a molecular weight of 32 kD and to stimulate transcription of
chimeric genes containing the albumin D-promoter elements both in vivo
and in vitro. LAP shared extensive sequence homology (71%) in its
DNA-binding and leucine zipper domains with CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein (CEBPA; 116897). As a consequence, these 2 proteins show an
indistinguishable DNA-binding specificity and readily heterodimerize.
TCF5 is also identical to NF-IL6 (Akira et al., 1990). CEBPA and NF-IL6
(CEBPB, according to the nomenclature proposed by Cao et al., 1991) are
2 transcription factors belonging to a family of DNA-binding proteins
predominantly characterized by a leucine zipper motif that mediates
dimerization and a basic DNA binding domain. Notably, the CEBPA and
CEBPB genes contain no introns.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Although collagen is known to enhance hepatocyte differentiation and
hepatocytes produce collagen in vivo, the transcription factors
responsible for collagen type I gene expression in hepatic cells is not
known. Houglum et al. (1994) showed that LAP binds to the COL1A1
(120150) promoter at both reverse CCAAT motifs and activates
transcription. Furthermore, they found an upstream element, collagen
element I (-370/-344), which shares homology with the LAP binding
cis-element of the albumin promoter (9 of 13 bp). This collagen element
I stimulates transcription in both orientations and when placed in front
of either a homologous or a heterologous chimeric report construct.
Thus, LAP may be important in the expression of collagen and
differentiated hepatocytes through both the promoter and the newly
described upstream element.

Hormonal induction of growth-arrested 3T3-L1 preadipocytes rapidly
activates expression of CEBPB. Acquisition of DNA-binding activity by
CEBPB, however, is delayed until the cells synchronously enter the S
phase of mitotic clonal expansion (MCE). After MCE, CEBPB activates
expression of CEBPA and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPARG; 601487), which then transcriptionally activate genes that give
rise to the adipocyte phenotype. Zhang et al. (2004) studied the effect
on adipogenesis of the CEBPB dominant-negative mutation that blocks
CEBPB DNA binding by dimerizing with its leucine zipper. They provided
evidence that the dominant-negative mutant prevented entry of CEBPB into
the nucleus of 3T3-L1 preadipocytes and thereby blocks MCE and
adipogenesis.

GENE FUNCTION

Menard et al. (2002) showed that Cebpb was expressed in mouse cortical
progenitor cells and could induce expression of a reporter gene
containing the minimal promoter of alpha-tubulin (TUBA1A; 602529), a
neuron-specific gene. Gel and supershift assays confirmed that Cebpb
bound the alpha-tubulin promoter in embryonic mouse brain. Menard et al.
(2002) also showed that Cebpb was a downstream target of Mek (see
176872), which activated Rsk (see 601684) to phosphorylate Cebpb.

By computational analysis of the expression patterns of thousands of
genes across hundreds of tumor specimens, Lamb et al. (2003) found that
CEBP-beta participates in the consequences of cyclin D1 (CCND1; 168461)
overexpression. Functional analysis confirmed the involvement of CEBPB
in the regulation of genes affected by cyclin D1 and established CEBPB
as a principal effector of cyclin D1 activity in human cancer.

By expression profiling of ALK (105590)-positive anaplastic large cell
lymphomas (ALCLs), Piva et al. (2006) identified a large group of
ALK-regulated genes. Functional RNA interference screening on a set of
these transcriptional targets revealed that CEBPB and BCL2A1 (601056)
were absolutely necessary to induce cell transformation and/or to
sustain growth and survival of ALK-positive ALCL cells.

Dudaronek et al. (2007) showed that Ifnb (147720) induced expression of
Lip, a truncated, dominant-negative isoform of Cebpb, and suppressed
active simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV) replication in macaque
macrophages. In a human monocyte cell line, IFNB induced phosphorylation
of CUGBP1 (601074) and formation of CUGBP1-CEBPB mRNA complexes.
Depletion of Cugbp1 in macaque macrophages via small interfering RNA
showed that Cugbp1 was required for Ifnb-mediated induction of Lip and
for Ifnb-mediated suppression of SIV replication. Dudaronek et al.
(2007) concluded that CUGBP1 is a downstream effector of IFNB signaling
in primary macrophages that plays an important role in innate immune
responses controlling acute human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) or SIV
replication in brain.

Using a cDNA complementation screen, Kinoshita and Taguchi (2008)
identified NFIL6 as a host molecule that rendered primary CD4
(186940)-positive T cells permissive for HIV-1 replication. They found
that NFIL6 regulated HIV-1 replication during reverse transcription
after infection by binding to and inactivating the cytidine deaminase
activity of APOBEC3G (607113) and also during gene transcription after
integration. Binding and inactivation of APOBEC3G required ser288 in
NFIL6. Overexpression of NFIL6 in nonpermissive cells enhanced HIV-1
replication, even in the absence of the HIV-1 protein Vif. Kinoshita and
Taguchi (2008) proposed that NFIL6 evolved to negatively regulate
APOBEC3G to limit DNA mutations, but that this mechanism backfires
during HIV-1 infection, where it facilitates viral reverse transcription
and replication.

Ishikawa et al. (2008) demonstrated that cAMP-induced binding of
CEBP-beta to multiple motifs in the CYP19A1 (107910) promoter I.3/II
region is a critical mechanism regulating aromatase expression in
leiomyoma (see 150699) smooth muscle cells in primary culture. The
authors concluded that definition of this mechanism further may assist
in designing inhibitors of aromatase specific for leiomyoma tissue.

Kajimura et al. (2009) demonstrated that PRDM16 (605557) forms a
transcriptional complex with the active form of C/EBP-beta, acting as a
critical molecular unit that controls the cell fate switch from
myoblastic precursors to brown fat cells. Forced expression of PRDM16
and C/CEBP-beta was sufficient to induce a fully functional brown fat
program in naive fibroblastic cells, including skin fibroblasts from
mouse and man. Transplantation of fibroblasts expressing these 2 factors
into mice gave rise to an ectopic fat pad with the morphologic and
biochemical characteristics of brown fat. Like endogenous brown fat,
this synthetic brown fat tissue acted as a sink for glucose uptake, as
determined by positron emission tomography with fluorodeoxyglucose.
Kajimura et al. (2009) concluded that the PRMD16-C/EBP-beta complex
initiates brown fat formation from myoblastic precursors and may provide
opportunities for the development of therapeutics for obesity and type 2
diabetes.

Carro et al. (2010) used reverse engineering and an unbiased
interrogation of a glioma-specific regulatory network to reveal the
transcriptional module that activates expression of mesenchymal genes in
malignant glioma. Two transcription factors, C/EBP-beta and STAT3
(102582), emerged as synergistic initiators and master regulators of
mesenchymal transformation. Ectopic coexpression of C/EBP-beta and STAT3
reprogrammed neural stem cells along the aberrant mesenchymal lineage,
whereas elimination of the 2 factors in glioma cells led to collapse of
the mesenchymal signature and reduced tumor aggressiveness. In human
glioma, expression of C/EBP-beta and STAT3 correlated with mesenchymal
differentiation and predicted poor clinical outcome. Carro et al. (2010)
concluded that the activation of a small regulatory module is necessary
and sufficient to initiate and maintain an aberrant phenotypic state in
cancer cells.

Bostrom et al. (2010) found that expression of Cebpb in mice was
significantly downregulated during cardiac hypertrophy induced by
exercise endurance training, but not during pathologic cardiac
hypertrophy. Knockdown of Cebpb by small interfering RNA in primary rat
cardiomyocytes increased cell size, the rate of protein synthesis, and
cell number. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis showed that Cebpb interacted
with Srf (600589), and knockdown of Cebpb increased binding of Srf to
the promoters of the critical cardiac genes alpha-MHC (MYH6; 160710) and
Gata4 (600576). Expression of Cited4 (606815) increased robustly in
exercised hearts, and its expression level was altered by Cebpb gain or
loss of function in vitro. Knockdown of Cited4 completely abolished the
effect of Cebpb reduction on cardiomyocyte proliferation.

Overexpression of P-cadherin (CDH3; 114021) has been associated with
proliferative lesions of high histologic grade, decreased cell polarity,
and poor survival of patients with breast cancer. In vitro studies
showed that it can be upregulated by the antiestrogen drug ICI 182,780,
suggesting that the lack of estrogen receptor-alpha (ESRA; 133430)
signaling may responsible for the aberrant P-cadherin overexpression and
for its role in inducing breast cancer cell invasion and migration.
Albergaria et al. (2010) showed that ICI 182,780 was able to increase
P-cadherin promoter activity, inducing high levels of the active
chromatin marker H3 lysine-4 dimethylation (H3K4me2). Albergaria et al.
(2010) also showed that CEBPB was able to upregulate P-cadherin promoter
activity in breast cancer cells. Moreover, the expression of P-cadherin
and CEBPB were highly associated in human breast carcinomas and linked
with a worse prognosis in breast cancer patients. The authors concluded
that epigenetic upregulation of P-cadherin by ICI 182,780 in MCF-7/AZ
breast cancer cells occurs through chromatin remodeling at the CDH3
promoter, bringing forward the growing evidence that ESRA signaling
abrogation by antiestrogens may be able to induce the expression of
ESRA-repressed genes which, in the appropriate cell biology context, may
contribute to a breast cancer cell invasion phenotype.

MAPPING

By analysis of human/mouse somatic cell hybrids, Szpirer et al. (1991)
assigned the TCF5 gene to human chromosome 20. By corresponding studies
in rat/mouse hybrids, they localized the gene to rat chromosome 3.
Hendricks-Taylor et al. (1992) mapped the human CEBPB gene to chromosome
20 by Southern blot analysis of Chinese hamster/human and mouse/human
somatic cell hybrids and regionalized the gene to 20q13.1 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Using interspecific backcross
analysis, Jenkins et al. (1995) showed that the Cebpb gene maps to mouse
chromosome 2.

EVOLUTION

Lynch et al. (2011) showed that amino acid changes in the transcription
factor CEBPB in the stem lineage of placental mammals changed the way it
responds to cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA; see 176911) signaling. By
functionally analyzing resurrected ancestral proteins, they identified 3
amino acid substitutions in an internal regulatory domain of CEBPB that
are responsible for the novel function. These amino acid substitutions
reorganize the location of key phosphorylation sites, introducing a new
site and removing 2 ancestral sites, reversing the response of CEBPB to
GSK-3-beta (605004)-mediated phosphorylation from repression to
activation. Lynch et al. (2011) concluded that changing the response of
transcription factors to signaling pathways can be an important
mechanism of gene regulatory evolution.

ANIMAL MODEL

To determine the role of C/EBP-beta in the regenerating liver, Greenbaum
et al. (1998) examined the regenerative response after partial
hepatectomy in mice that had a targeted disruption of the gene.
Posthepatectomy, hepatocyte DNA synthesis was decreased to 25% of normal
in the homozygous deficient mice. The reduced regenerative response was
associated with a prolonged period of hypoglycemia that was independent
of expression of C/EBP-alpha protein and gluconeogenic genes. The
homozygous C/EBP-beta-deficient livers showed reduced expression of
immediate-early growth-control genes. This study demonstrated that C/EBP
is required for a normal proliferative response.

Wang et al. (2000) performed detailed biochemical experiments on
CEBPB-deficient mice. They found that the deletion caused decreased
plasma free fatty acid levels and increased insulin signal transduction,
specifically in skeletal muscle, and that both contribute to increased
whole-body insulin sensitivity.

Croniger et al. (2001) noted that there are 2 distinct phenotypes, A and
B, in Cebpb-deficient mice. Phenotype A mice survive to adulthood but
have hypoglycemia as well as lipid, amino acid, and immunologic
deficiencies. Phenotype B mice survive only 2 hours after birth and
display profound hypoglycemia in spite of above normal levels of hepatic
glycogen. Croniger et al. (2001) detailed the metabolic consequences in
Cebpb-deficient mice. In these mice, relatively small changes in the
rate of hepatic cAMP degradation and a shift in the pattern of protein
kinase A (PKA; see 176911) isoform gene expression result in a lower
concentration of cAMP in the liver. More cAMP is required to activate
PKA, and the result is a failure of the normal response to glucagon.

Upon activation by liver injury, hepatic stellate cells produce
excessive fibrous tissue leading to cirrhosis. Buck et al. (2001) found
that the hepatotoxin CCl4 induced activation of Rsk (601684),
phosphorylation of Cebpb on thr217 (Cebpb-Pthr217), and proliferation of
stellate cells in normal mice, but it caused apoptosis of these cells in
Cebpb -/- or Cebpb-ala217 (a dominant-negative nonphosphorylatable
mutant) transgenic mice. Both Cebpb-Pthr217 and the phosphorylation
mimicked Cebpb-glu217, but not Cebpb-ala217; were associated with
procaspase-1 (147678) and -8 (601763) in vivo and in vitro; and
inhibited activation of these procaspases. These data suggested that
Cebpb phosphorylation on thr217 creates a functional XEXD caspase
substrate/inhibitor box (K-phospho-T(217)VD) that is mimicked by
Cebpb-glu217 (KE(217)VD). Cebpb -/- and Cebpb-ala217 stellate cells were
rescued from apoptosis by the cell-permeant KE(217)VD tetrapeptide or
Cebpb-glu217.

A surge of luteinizing hormone (LH; see 152780) from the pituitary gland
triggers ovulation, oocyte maturation, and luteinization for successful
reproduction in mammals. Because the signaling molecules RAS (190020)
and ERK1/2 (see 601795) are activated by an LH surge in granulosa cells
of preovulatory follicles, Fan et al. (2009) disrupted Erk1/2 in mouse
granulosa cells and provided in vivo evidence that these kinases are
necessary for LH-induced oocyte resumption of meiosis, ovulation, and
luteinization. In addition, biochemical analyses and selected disruption
of the Cebpb gene in granulosa cells demonstrated that C/EBP-beta is a
critical downstream mediator of ERK1/2 activation. Thus, Fan et al.
(2009) concluded that ERK1/2 and C/EBP-beta constitute an in vivo
LH-regulated signaling pathway that controls ovulation- and
luteinization-related events.

Bostrom et al. (2010) stated that homozygous Cebpb deletion in mice
results in pre- and perinatal lethality, but that Cebpb +/- mice are
relatively normal. They found increased heart weight and cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy in Cebpb +/- mice, similar to that found in wildtype mice
following endurance training. Cebpb +/- mice displayed a clear increase
in exercise capacity at baseline, but no hypertrophy following training.
Cultured cardiomyocytes from Cebpb +/- mice proliferated more readily
than wildtype cardiomyocytes. Cebpb +/- mice also showed resistance to
pathologic cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction caused by pressure
overload. Knockdown of Cebpb in zebrafish caused an increase in
cardiomyocyte cell number, but no change in cardiomyocyte size. Bostrom
et al. (2010) concluded that reduced CEBPB activity during exercise
contributes to physiologic cardiac hypertrophy.

REFERENCE 1. Akira, S.; Isshiki, H.; Sugita, T.; Tanabe, O.; Kinoshita, S.;
Nishio, Y.; Nakajima, T.; Hirano, T.; Kishimoto, T.: A nuclear factor
for IL-6 expression (NF-IL6) is a member of a C/EBP family. EMBO
J. 9: 1897-1906, 1990.

2. Albergaria,  A.; Ribeiro, A. S.; Pinho, S.; Milanezi, F.; Carneiro,
V.; Sousa, B.; Sousa, S.; Oliveira, C.; Machado, J. C.; Seruca, R.;
Paredes, J.; Schmitt, F.: ICI 182,780 induces P-cadherin overexpression
in breast cancer cells through chromatin remodelling at the promoter
level: a role for C/EBP beta in CDH3 gene activation. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 19: 2554-2566, 2010.

3. Bostrom, P.; Mann, N.; Wu, J.; Quintero, P. A.; Plovie, E. R.;
Panakova, D.; Gupta, R. K.; Xiao, C.; MacRae, C. A.; Rosenzweig, A.;
Spiegelman, B. M.: C/EBP-beta controls exercise-induced cardiac growth
and protects against pathological cardiac remodeling. Cell 143:
1072-1083, 2010.

4. Buck, M.; Poli, V.; Hunter, T.; Chojkier, M.: C/EBP-beta phosphorylation
by RSK creates a functional XEXD caspase inhibitory box critical for
cell survival. Molec. Cell 8: 807-816, 2001.

5. Cao, Z.; Umek, R. M.; McKnight, S. L.: Regulated expression of
three C/EBP isoforms during adipose conversion of 3T3-L1 cells. Genes
Dev. 5: 1538-1552, 1991.

6. Carro, M. S.; Lim, W. K.; Alvarez, M. J.; Bollo, R. J.; Zhao, X.;
Snyder, E. Y.; Sulman, E. P.; Anne, S. L.; Doetsch, F.; Colman, H.;
Lasorella, A.; Aldape, K.; Califano, A.; Iavarone, A.: The transcriptional
network for mesenchymal transformation of brain tumours. Nature 463:
318-325, 2010.

7. Croniger, C. M.; Millward, C.; Yang, J.; Kawai, Y.; Arinze, I.
J.; Liu, S.; Harada-Shiba, M.; Chakravarty, K.; Friedman, J. E.; Poli,
V.; Hanson, R. W.: Mice with a deletion in the gene for CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein beta have an attenuated response to cAMP and impaired carbohydrate
metabolism. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 629-638, 2001.

8. Descombes, P.; Chojkier, M.; Lichtsteiner, S.; Falvey, E.; Schibler,
U.: LAP, a novel member of the C/EBP gene family, encodes a liver-enriched
transcriptional activator protein. Genes Dev. 4: 1541-1551, 1990.

9. Dudaronek, J. M.; Barber, S. A.; Clements, J. E.: CUGBP1 is required
for IFN-beta-mediated induction of dominant-negative CEBP-beta and
suppression of SIV replication in macrophages. J. Immun. 179: 7262-7269,
2007.

10. Fan, H.-Y.; Liu, Z.; Shimada, M.; Sterneck, E.; Johnson, P. F.;
Hedrick, S. M.; Richards, J. S.: MAPK3/1 (ERK1/2) in ovarian granulosa
cells are essential for female fertility. Science 324: 938-941,
2009.

11. Greenbaum, L. E.; Li, W.; Cressman, D. E.; Peng, Y.; Ciliberto,
G.; Poli, V.; Taub, R.: CCAAT enhancer-binding protein beta is required
for normal hepatocyte proliferation in mice after partial hepatectomy. J.
Clin. Invest. 102: 996-1007, 1998.

12. Hendricks-Taylor, L. R.; Bachinski, L. L.; Siciliano, M. J.; Fertitta,
A.; Trask, B.; de Jong, P. J.; Ledbetter, D. H.; Darlington, G. J.
: The CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP-alpha) gene (CEBPA) maps
to human chromosome 19q13.1 and the related nuclear factor NF-IL6
(C/EBP-beta) gene (CEBPB) maps to human chromosome 20q13.1. Genomics 14:
12-17, 1992.

13. Houglum, K.; Buck, M.; Adir, V.; Chojkier, M.: LAP (NF-IL6) transactivates
the collagen alpha-1(I) gene from a 5-prime regulatory region. J.
Clin. Invest. 94: 808-814, 1994.

14. Ishikawa, H.; Fenkci, V.; Marsh, E. E.; Yin, P.; Chen, D.; Cheng,
Y.-H.; Reisterd, S.; Lin, Z.; Bulun, S. E.: CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein beta regulates aromatase expression via multiple and novel
cis-regulatory sequences in uterine leiomyoma. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 93:
981-991, 2008. Note: Erratum: J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 94: 1476 only,
2009.

15. Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Cho, B. C.; Strobel, M. C.; Williams,
S. C.; Copeland, N. G.; Johnson, P. F.: Mouse chromosomal location
of the CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins C/EBP-beta (Cebpb), C/EBP-delta
(Cebpd), and CRP1 (Cebpe). Genomics 28: 333-336, 1995.

16. Kajimura, S.; Seale, P.; Kubota, K.; Lunsford, E.; Frangioni,
J. V.; Gygi, S. P.; Spiegelman, B. M.: Initiation of myoblast to
brown fat switch by a PRDM16/C/EBP-beta transcriptional complex. Nature 460:
1154-1158, 2009.

17. Kinoshita, S. M.; Taguchi, S.: NF-IL6 (C/EBP-beta) induces HIV-1
replication by inhibiting cytidine deaminase APOBEC3G. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 105: 15022-15027, 2008.

18. Lamb, J.; Ramaswamy, S.; Ford, H. L.; Contreras, B.; Martinez,
R. V.; Kittrell, F. S.; Zahnow, C. A.; Patterson, N.; Golub, T. R.;
Ewen, M. E.: A mechanism of cyclin D1 action encoded in the patterns
of gene expression in human cancer. Cell 114: 323-334, 2003.

19. Lynch, V. J.; May, G.; Wagner, G. P.: Regulatory evolution through
divergence of a phosphoswitch in the transcription factor CEBPB. Nature 480:
383-386, 2011.

20. Menard, C.; Hein, P.; Paquin, A.; Savelson, A.; Yang, X. M.; Lederfein,
D.; Barnabe-Heider, F.; Mir, A. A.; Sterneck, E.; Peterson, A. C.;
Johnson, P. F.; Vinson, C.; Miller, F. D.: An essential role for
a MEK-C/EBP pathway during growth factor-regulated cortical neurogenesis. Neuron 36:
597-610, 2002.

21. Piva, R.; Pellegrino, E.; Mattioli, M.; Agnelli, L.; Lombardi,
L.; Boccalatte, F.; Costa, G.; Ruggeri, B. A.; Cheng, M.; Chiarle,
R.; Palestro, G.; Neri, A.; Inghirami, G.: Functional validation
of the anaplastic lymphoma kinase signature identifies CEBPB and BCL2A1
as critical target genes. J. Clin. Invest. 116: 3171-3182, 2006.

22. Szpirer, J.; Szpirer, C.; Riviere, M.; Houart, C.; Baumann, M.;
Fey, G. H.; Poli, V.; Cortese, R.; Islam, M. Q.; Levan, G.: The interleukin-6-dependent
DNA-binding protein gene (transcription factor 5: TCF5) maps to human
chromosome 20 and rat chromosome 3, the IL6 receptor locus (IL6R)
to human chromosome 1 and rat chromosome 2, and the rat IL6 gene to
rat chromosome 4. Genomics 10: 539-546, 1991.

23. Wang, L.; Shao, J.; Muhlenkamp, P.; Liu, S.; Klepcyk, P.; Ren,
J.; Friedman, J. E.: Increased insulin receptor substrate-1 and enhanced
skeletal muscle insulin sensitivity in mice lacking CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein beta. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 14173-14181, 2000.

24. Zhang, J.-W.; Tang, Q.-Q.; Vinson, C.; Lane, M. D.: Dominant-negative
C/EBP disrupts mitotic clonal expansion and differentiation of 3T3-L1
preadipocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 43-47, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 09/13/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/27/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/15/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/18/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/9/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/17/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/23/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/24/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/18/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/28/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/25/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/8/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/6/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/13/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/15/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/14/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/25/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/26/1990

EDITED alopez: 09/13/2013
alopez: 1/30/2013
alopez: 3/2/2012
terry: 2/27/2012
mgross: 3/17/2011
terry: 3/15/2011
alopez: 2/22/2010
terry: 2/18/2010
alopez: 9/11/2009
terry: 9/9/2009
alopez: 8/21/2009
terry: 8/17/2009
alopez: 4/23/2009
mgross: 3/24/2009
terry: 3/24/2009
mgross: 12/18/2008
mgross: 12/5/2008
terry: 10/28/2008
mgross: 1/25/2007
mgross: 6/6/2006
terry: 5/8/2006
cwells: 2/10/2004
terry: 2/6/2004
mgross: 11/13/2001
mgross: 3/15/2001
alopez: 8/17/2000
terry: 8/14/2000
carol: 3/23/1999
alopez: 9/25/1998
carol: 9/25/1998
dkim: 7/23/1998
mark: 4/8/1996
mark: 8/25/1995
carol: 10/11/1994
mimadm: 5/18/1994
carol: 4/7/1993
carol: 9/25/1992
carol: 8/25/1992

607001	TITLE *607001 EUCHROMATIC HISTONE METHYLTRANSFERASE 1; EHMT1
;;EUHMTASE1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ogawa et al. (2002) identified the components of the E2F6 (602944)
complex, which represses transcription. Although histone acetylase and
deacetylase activities were not detected in the E2F6 complex,
methyltransferase activity was. Ogawa et al. (2002) identified
euchromatic histone methyltransferase-1 as a component of the E2F6
complex. The 1,267-amino acid EU-HMTase-1 protein contains ankyrin
repeats and a SET domain. EU-HMTase-1 shares 63% sequence similarity
with NG36/G9A (604599). EU-HMTase-1 exhibited histone methyltransferase
activity with a specificity for histone H3 in core histones, whereas it
hardly methylated nucleosomes, suggesting that other subunits in the
E2F6 complex are required for modification of nucleosomal substrates.
Ogawa et al. (2002) demonstrated that lysine-9 of histone H3 is the
target of euchromatic histone methyltransferase-1.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kleefstra et al. (2006) stated that the EHMT1 gene contains 28 exons.
The initiation ATG occurs in exon 2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The chromosome 9q subtelomeric deletion syndrome, or Kleefstra syndrome
(610253), is a mental retardation syndrome that was thought to be caused
by small interstitial deletions in the 9q subtelomeric region. Kleefstra
et al. (2005) characterized the breakpoints in a female with a balanced
translocation t(X;9)(p11.23;q34.3) and found that the chromosome
breakpoint disrupted the EHMT1 gene in intron 9. The patient presented
typical features of 9q subtelomeric deletion syndrome, which suggested
that the core phenotype of this entity is due to haploinsufficiency of
EHMT1. Kleefstra et al. (2006) performed a comprehensive mutation
analysis of the EHMT1 gene in 23 patients with clinical presentations
consistent with 9q subtelomeric deletion syndrome. Three patients had
microdeletions that comprised the EHMT1 gene; 1 interstitial deletion
reduced the critical region for this syndrome. Two patients had de novo
mutations, a nonsense mutation and a frameshift mutation, in the EHMT1
gene (607001.0001-607001.0002). These results appeared to establish that
haploinsufficiency of EHMT1 is causative for the 9q subtelomeric
deletion syndrome.

In 6 of 24 patients with a clinical phenotype consistent with 9q
deletion syndrome who had normal chromosome studies, Kleefstra et al.
(2009) identified 6 different intragenic mutations in the EHMT1 gene
(see, e.g., C1042Y, 607001.0003 and R260X, 607001.0004). There were 2
nonsense mutations, a deletion, 2 splice site mutations, and 1 missense
mutation in a highly conserved residue. A comparison of the phenotype
between these 6 patients and 16 additional patients with larger
deletions of 9q showed no genotype/phenotype correlations. Kleefstra et
al. (2009) concluded that haploinsufficiency for EHMT1 is the basis for
the phenotypic features in this disorder.

ANIMAL MODEL

Schaefer et al. (2009) found that conditional ablation of Ehmt2 (604599)
or Ehmt1 in postnatal mouse forebrain neurons caused a reduction in
euchromatic H3K9 methylation in the forebrain and
upregulation/derepression of neuronal and nonneuronal genes (e.g., AFP;
104150), including those involved in developmental stage-dependent gene
expression (e.g., Dach2; 300608). These changes were not associated with
alterations in neuronal architecture or electrophysiologic features.
Mice with postnatal knockout of Ehmt1 or Ehmt2 in the forebrain showed
decreased exploratory behavior in a novel environment and had a decrease
in the preference for sucrose solution compared to wildtype mice, the
latter of which may indicate an underlying dysfunction in
motivation/reward. Both Ehmt2-null and Ehmt1-null mice became obese.
Ehmt1-null mice also showed defects in contextual and cued fear
conditioning, indicating a problem with learning and memory. Mice
lacking Ehmt2 specifically in Drd1 (126449)- or Drd2 (126450)-expressing
neurons in the striatum showed altered locomotor and behavioral
responses to Drd-specific receptor agonist or antagonists, reflecting
reductions of cell type-specific activity. The changes in these mice
resembled the features of the human chromosome 9q34.3 deletion syndrome.
Schaefer et al. (2009) concluded that Ehmt1 and Ehmt2 are key regulators
of cognition and adaptive behavior in adult mice through regulation of
transcriptional homeostasis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
KLEEFSTRA SYNDROME
EHMT1, ARG1137TER

In a patient with clinical features of the 9q subtelomeric deletion
syndrome (610253), Kleefstra et al. (2006) identified a heterozygous
3409C-T transition in exon 24 of the EHMT1 gene that caused an
arg1137-to-stop substitution (R1137X).

.0002
KLEEFSTRA SYNDROME
EHMT1, 13-BP DEL

In a patient with clinical features of the 9q subtelomeric deletion
syndrome (610253), Kleefstra et al. (2006) identified a heterozygous
13-bp deletion in exon 8 of the EHMT1 gene (1320_1332del13). The
deletion resulted in a frameshift (P442fs) and a premature stop that
predicted a mutant protein of 526 amino acids.

.0003
KLEEFSTRA SYNDROME
EHMT1, CYS1042TYR

In a 20-year-old woman with a phenotype consistent with chromosome 9q
subtelomeric deletion syndrome (610253), Kleefstra et al. (2009)
identified a de novo heterozygous 3125G-A transition in the EHMT1 gene,
resulting in a cys1042-to-tyr (C1042Y) substitution in a highly
conserved residue in the pre-SET domain of the protein. Protein modeling
predicted that the substitution would abolish a strong cysteine-zinc
interaction and interfere with the local conformation of the pre-SET
domain. The phenotype was fully compatible with the deletion syndrome,
and included severe psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, and
characteristic facial features of midface hypoplasia, synophrys, and
eversion of the lower lip. She also had pulmonary stenosis. Kleefstra et
al. (2009) postulated loss of protein function and haploinsufficiency
rather than a dominant-negative effect.

.0004
KLEEFSTRA SYNDROME
EHMT1, ARG260TER

In a 19-year-old man with a phenotype consistent with chromosome 9q
subtelomeric deletion syndrome (610253), Kleefstra et al. (2009)
identified a de novo heterozygous 778C-T transition in the EHMT1 gene,
resulting in an arg260-to-ter (R260X) substitution, predicted to result
in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. The man had mental retardation,
seizures, and characteristic facial abnormalities.

REFERENCE 1. Kleefstra, T.; Brunner, H. G.; Amiel, J.; Oudakker, A. R.; Nillesen,
W. M.; Magee, A.; Genevieve, D.; Cormier-Daire, V.; van Esch, H.;
Fryns, J.-P.; Hamel, B. C. J.; Sistermans, E. A.; de Vries, B. B.
A.; van Bokhoven, H.: Loss-of-function mutations in Euchromatin histone
methyl transferase 1 (EHMT1) cause the 9q34 subtelomeric deletion
syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 79: 370-377, 2006.

2. Kleefstra, T.; Smidt, M.; Banning, M. J. G.; Oudakker, A. R.; Van
Esch, H.; de Brouwer, A. P.; Nillesen, W.; Sistermans, E. A.; Hamel,
B. C.; de Bruijn, D.; Fryns, J.-P.; Yntema, H. G.; Brunner, H. G.;
de Vries, B. B. A.; van Bokhoven, H.: Disruption of the gene euchromatin
histone methyl transferase1 (Eu-HMTase1) is associated with the 9q34
subtelomeric deletion syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 42: 299-306, 2005.

3. Kleefstra, T.; van Zelst-Stams, W. A.; Nillesen, W. M.; Cormier-Daire,
V.; Houge, G.; Foulds, N.; van Dooren, M.; Willemsen, M. H.; Pfundt,
R.; Turner, A.; Wilson, M.; McGaughran, J.; and 16 others: Further
clinical and molecular delineation of the 9q subtelomeric deletion
syndrome supports a major contribution of EHMT1 haploinsufficiency
to the core phenotype. J. Med. Genet. 46: 598-606, 2009.

4. Ogawa, H.; Ishiguro, K.; Gaubatz, S.; Livingston, D. M.; Nakatani,
Y.: A complex with chromatin modifiers that occupies E2F- and Myc-responsive
genes in G0 cells. Science 296: 1132-1136, 2002.

5. Schaefer, A.; Sampath, S. C.; Intrator, A.; Min, A.; Gertler, T.
S.; Surmeier, D. J.; Tarakhovsky, A.; Greengard, P.: Control of cognition
and adaptive behavior by the GLP/G9a epigenetic suppressor complex. Neuron 64:
678-691, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/26/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/29/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/7/2006

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 5/30/2002

EDITED carol: 10/11/2013
tpirozzi: 10/11/2013
ckniffin: 9/26/2013
carol: 1/8/2010
ckniffin: 12/29/2009
terry: 8/24/2006
carol: 7/22/2006
alopez: 7/13/2006
terry: 7/7/2006
joanna: 6/30/2006
alopez: 5/30/2002

604158	TITLE *604158 SECRETED FRIZZLED-RELATED PROTEIN 5; SFRP5
;;SECRETED APOPTOSIS-RELATED PROTEIN 3; SARP3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the 'frizzled' (FZ) transmembrane protein family (see 600667)
are receptors for Wnt family members (see 164975), cysteine-rich
glycosylated ligands implicated in a variety of cellular processes,
including control of cell polarity in a number of systems, including
Drosophila retina. Secreted frizzled-related proteins (SFRPs), such as
SFRP5, appear to act as soluble modulators of Wnt signaling by competing
with membrane-bound frizzled receptors for the binding of secreted Wnt
ligands (Chang et al., 1999).

CLONING

Chang et al. (1999) isolated bovine cDNAs encoding Sfrp5, an SFRP highly
expressed in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). By screening human
genomic and RPE/retina libraries, they identified human SFRP5 genomic
and cDNA clones. The predicted 317-amino acid human protein shares 98%
and 95% sequence identity with bovine and mouse Sfrp5, respectively.
Like other SFRPs, SFRP5 contains an N-terminal signal peptide followed
by a region homologous to the frizzled cysteine-rich domain (CRD). Chang
et al. (1999) reported that although human SFRP5 was expressed in the
RPE, Sfrp2 (604157) was highly and preferentially expressed in bovine
retina throughout the inner nuclear layer. Thus, photoreceptors appear
to be bathed by complementary gradients of SFRP signaling
molecules/modulators. The authors speculated that these putative inverse
gradients of SFRP2 and SFRP5 might be involved in determining the
polarity of photoreceptors and perhaps other cells in the retina.

Independently, Melkonyan et al. (1997) isolated cDNAs encoding the
related proteins SARP1 (SFRP2), SARP2 (SFRP1; 604156), and SARP3
(SFRP5). Northern blot analysis revealed that the 2.2-kb SARP3 mRNA is
expressed in pancreas.

GENE FUNCTION

Chang et al. (1999) found that SFRP5 inhibited Wnt signaling in an assay
based on Wnt8 (see 601396)-induced axis duplication in Xenopus embryos.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chang et al. (1999) determined that the SFRP5 gene contains 3 coding
exons.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, as well as radiation hybrid
and somatic cell hybrid analyses, Chang et al. (1999) determined that
the SFRP5 gene maps to chromosome 10q24.1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Li et al. (2008) found that Sfrp5-depleted Xenopus embryos had
dramatically reduced foregut gene expression and hypoplastic liver and
pancreatic buds. Cells of the foregut epithelium lacked apical-basal
polarity and were loosely adherent, resulting in collapse of the foregut
cavity. The foregut specification and morphogenesis defects were
separable and resulted from elevated canonical Wnt/beta-catenin and
noncanonical Wnt/planar cell polarity signaling, respectively, and both
were mediated by Wnt11 (603699). Furthermore, Sfrp5 locally inhibited
Wnt11 to maintain foregut identity and allow foregut epithelium to form
over the mass of deep endoderm.

Ouchi et al. (2010) demonstrated that Sfrp5, a protein linked to the Wnt
signaling pathway, is an antiinflammatory adipokine whose expression is
perturbed in models of obesity and type 2 diabetes (see 125853).
Sfrp5-deficient mice fed a high-calorie diet developed severe glucose
intolerance and hepatic steatosis, and their adipose tissue showed an
accumulation of activated macrophages that was associated with
activation of the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK1; 601158) signaling
pathway. Adenovirus-mediated delivery of Sfrp5 to mouse models of
obesity ameliorated glucose intolerance and hepatic steatosis. Ouchi et
al. (2010) concluded that in the setting of obesity, Sfrp5 secretion by
adipocytes exerts salutary effects on metabolic dysfunction by
controlling inflammatory cells within adipose tissue.

REFERENCE 1. Chang, J. T.; Esumi, N.; Moore, K.; Li, Y.; Zhang, S.; Chew, C.;
Goodman, B.; Rattner, A.; Moody, S.; Stetten, G.; Campochiaro, P.
A.; Zack, D. J.: Cloning and characterization of a secreted frizzled-related
protein that is expressed by the retinal pigment epithelium. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 8: 575-583, 1999.

2. Li, Y.; Rankin, S. A.; Sinner, D.; Kenny, A. P.; Krieg, P. A.;
Zorn, A. M.: Sfrp5 coordinates foregut specification and morphogenesis
by antagonizing both canonical and noncanonical Wnt11 signaling. Genes
Dev. 22: 3050-3063, 2008.

3. Melkonyan, H. S.; Chang, W. C.; Shapiro, J. P.; Mahadevappa, M.;
Fitzpatrick, P. A.; Kiefer, M. C.; Tomei, L. D.; Umansky, S. R.:
SARPs: a family of secreted apoptosis-related proteins. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 94: 13636-13641, 1997.

4. Ouchi, N.; Higuchi, A.; Ohashi, K.; Oshima, Y.; Gokce, N.; Shibata,
R.; Akasaki, Y.; Shimono, A.; Walsh, K.: Sfrp5 is an anti-inflammatory
adipokine that modulates metabolic dysfunction in obesity. Science 329:
454-457, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/1/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/3/2009

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 9/5/1999

EDITED alopez: 09/02/2010
terry: 9/1/2010
carol: 4/22/2009
mgross: 3/4/2009
terry: 3/3/2009
alopez: 9/7/1999
alopez: 9/5/1999

600242	TITLE *600242 CHEMOKINE, CC MOTIF, RECEPTOR 7; CCR7
;;EPSTEIN-BARR VIRUS-INDUCED GENE 1; EBI1;;
CMKBR7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using PCR with degenerate oligonucleotides, Schweickart et al. (1994)
identified a lymphoid-specific member of the G protein-coupled receptor
family. They showed that this receptor had been independently identified
by Birkenbach et al. (1993) as the Epstein-Barr-induced cDNA (symbol
EBI1). EBI1 is expressed in normal lymphoid tissues and in several B-
and T-lymphocyte cell lines. While the function and the ligand for EBI1
remains unknown, its sequence and gene structure suggest that it is
related to receptors that recognize chemoattractants, such as
interleukin-8 (146928), RANTES (187011), C5a, and fMet-Leu-Phe. Like the
chemoattractant receptors, EBI1 contains intervening sequences near its
5-prime end; however, EBI1 is unique in that both of its introns
interrupt the coding region of the first extracellular domain.
Schweickart et al. (1994) isolated the mouse Ebi1 cDNA and found that it
encodes a protein with 86% identity to the human homolog. Yoshida et al.
(1997) cloned a novel chemokine, a highly specific ligand for EBI1, that
they termed 'EBI1-ligand chemokine,' or ELC (602227).

GENE FUNCTION

Subsets of murine CD4+ T cells localize to different areas of the spleen
after adoptive transfer. Naive and T helper-1 (TH1) cells, which express
CCR7, home to the periarteriolar lymphoid sheath, whereas activated TH2
cells, which lack CCR7, form rings at the periphery of the T-cell zones
near B-cell follicles. Randolph et al. (1999) found that retroviral
transduction of TH2 cells with CCR7 forced them to localize in a
TH1-like pattern and inhibited their participation in B-cell help in
vivo but not in vitro. Randolph et al. (1999) concluded that
differential expression of chemokine receptors results in unique
cellular migration patterns that are important for effective immune
responses.

Sallusto et al. (1999) demonstrated that expression of CCR7 divides
human memory T cells into 2 functionally distinct subsets. CCR7- memory
cells express receptors for migration to inflamed tissues and display
immediate effector function. In contrast, CCR7+ memory cells express
lymph node homing receptors and lack immediate effector function, but
efficiently stimulate dendritic cells and differentiate into CCR7-
effector cells upon secondary stimulation. The CCR7+ and CCR7- T cells,
which Sallusto et al. (1999) named central memory (T-CM) and effector
memory (T-EM), differentiate in a step-wise fashion from naive T cells,
persist for years after immunization, and allow a division of labor in
the memory response.

For information on the role of CD45 expression in T lymphocytes, see
entry 151460. Champagne et al. (2001) evaluated CCR7 expression in
memory CD8+ T lymphocyte responses to HIV and to cytomegalovirus (CMV)
tetramers. Most memory T lymphocytes express CD45RO, but a fraction
express instead the CD45RA marker. Flow cytometric analyses of marker
expression and cell division identified 4 subsets of HIV- and
CMV-specific CD8+ T cells, representing a lineage differentiation
pattern: CD45RA+CCR7+ (double-positive); CD45RA-CCR7+; CD45RA-CCR7-
(double-negative); CD45RA+CCR7-. The capacity for cell division, as
measured by 5-(and 6-)carboxyl-fluorescein diacetate, succinimidyl
ester, and intracellular staining for the Ki67 nuclear antigen (176741),
is largely confined to the CCR7+ subsets and occurred more rapidly in
cells that are also CD45RA+. Although the double-negative cells did not
divide or expand after stimulation, they did revert to positivity for
either CD45RA or CCR7 or both. The CD45RA+CCR7- cells, considered to be
terminally differentiated, fail to divide, but do produce
interferon-gamma (147570) and express high levels of perforin (170280).
The representation of subsets specific for CMV and for HIV is distinct.
Approximately 70% of HIV-specific CD8+ memory T cells are
double-negative or preterminally differentiated compared to 40% of
CMV-specific cells. Approximately 50% of the CMV-specific CD8+ memory T
cells are terminally differentiated compared to fewer than 10% of the
HIV-specific cells. Champagne et al. (2001) proposed that terminally
differentiated CMV-specific cells are poised to rapidly intervene, while
double-positive precursor cells remain for expansion and replenishment
of the effector cell pool. Furthermore, high-dose antigen tolerance and
the depletion of HIV-specific CD4+ helper T-cell activity may keep the
HIV-specific memory CD8+ T cells at the double-negative stage, unable to
differentiate to the terminal effector state.

B lymphocytes recirculate between B cell-rich compartments (follicles or
B zones) in secondary lymphoid organs, surveying for antigen. After
antigen binding, B cells move to the boundary of B and T zones to
interact with T-helper cells. Reif et al. (2002) demonstrated that
antigen-engaged B cells have increased expression of CCR7, the receptor
for the T-zone chemokines CCL19 (also known as ELC) and CCL21 (602737),
and that they exhibit increased responsiveness to both chemoattractants.
In mice lacking lymphoid CCL19 and CCL21 chemokines, or with B cells
that lack CCR7, antigen engagement fails to cause movement to the T
zone. Using retroviral-mediated gene transfer, the authors demonstrated
that increased expression of CCR7 is sufficient to direct B cells to the
T zone. Reciprocally, overexpression of CXCR5 (601613), the receptor for
the B-zone chemokine CXCL13 (605149), is sufficient to overcome
antigen-induced B-cell movement to the T zone. Reif et al. (2002)
concluded that their findings defined the mechanism of B-cell
relocalization in response to antigen, and established that cell
position in vivo can be determined by the balance of responsiveness to
chemoattractants made in separate but adjacent zones.

Using RT-PCR, Pan et al. (2008) showed that both COX2 (PTGS2; 600262)
and CCR7 were upregulated in a significant number of breast tumor
samples compared with adjacent normal tissue, and that this upregulation
was associated with enhanced lymph node metastasis. Overexpression and
knockdown studies in human breast cancer cell lines revealed that COX2
acted via the prostaglandin receptors EP2 (PTGER2; 176804) and EP4
(PTGER4; 601586), resulting in increased intracellular cAMP and
activation of the PKA (see 188830)-AKT (see 164730) signaling pathway,
which led to induction of CCR7 expression. Elevated CCR7 enhanced the
migration of breast cancer cells toward lymphatic endothelial cells,
suggesting that CCR7 upregulation ultimately mediates COX2-associated
lymph node metastasis.

Using animal modeling and gene expression profiling, Buonamici et al.
(2009) showed that the chemokine receptor CCR7 is the essential adhesion
signal required for the targeting of leukemic T cells into the central
nervous system (CNS) in T-ALL. Ccr7 gene expression is controlled by the
activity of the T-ALL oncogene Notch1 (190198) and is expressed in human
tumors carrying Notch1-activating mutations. Silencing of either CCR7 or
its chemokine ligand CCL19 (602227) in an animal model of T-ALL
specifically inhibited CNS infiltration. Furthermore, murine CNS
targeting by human T-ALL cells depended on their ability to express
CCR7. Buonamici et al. (2009) concluded that their studies identified a
single chemokine-receptor interaction as a CNS 'entry' signal, and
opened the way for future pharmacologic targeting. Targeted inhibition
of CNS involvement in T-ALL could potentially decrease the intensity of
CNS-targeted therapy, thus reducing its associated short- and long-term
complications.

Using flow cytometric analysis, Beauvillain et al. (2011) demonstrated
that 10 to 30% of human and mouse neutrophils expressed surface and
intracellular CCR7 after purification. RT-PCR analysis detected CCR7
mRNA in mouse bone marrow neutrophils, but not in human or mouse
circulating neutrophils. Transwell assays showed that CCL19 and CCL21
induced human neutrophil migration after stimulation with
lipopolysaccharide and GMCSF (CSF2; 138960), indicating that CCR7
expressed on neutrophils is functional. Neutrophils from mice lacking
Ccr7 did not migrate to lymph nodes. Beauvillain et al. (2011) concluded
that a subpopulation of neutrophils constitutively express CCR7 and that
CCR7 is involved in migration of neutrophils from the periphery to lymph
nodes.

MAPPING

Schweickart et al. (1994) mapped the EBI1 gene to 17q12-q21.2 by
analysis of human/mouse somatic cell hybrid DNAs and fluorescence in
situ hybridization.

ANIMAL MODEL

To test the function of CCR7, Forster et al. (1999) generated mice in
which the Ccr7 gene had been disrupted by gene targeting. Lymph nodes of
Ccr7-deficient mice were devoid of naive T cells and dendritic cells,
whereas the T-cell population was heavily expanded in the blood, the red
pulp of the spleen, and the bone marrow. Adoptive transfer experiments
to wildtype recipients demonstrated that the migration of Ccr7-deficient
B and T cells into lymph nodes and Peyer patches, and of T cells into
the splenic periarteriolar lymphoid sheath, was severely hampered. When
compared to wildtype B cells, Ccr7-deficient B cells rapidly left the
outer periarteriolar lymphoid sheath after being transferred into
wildtype recipients, indicating that expression of CCR7 keeps B cells
for a defined period of time in close contact with T cells to allow
effective T-cell/B-cell interactions. Therefore, the authors suggested
that the overall disturbed microarchitecture of secondary lymphoid
organs, caused by the impaired entry and retention of lymphocytes and
antigen-presenting dendritic cells, might explain why Ccr7-deficient
mice failed to mount a rapid primary B- or T-cell response.

Using transgenic mice, adoptive transfer, and flow cytometric analysis,
Ploix et al. (2001) showed that expression of a CCR7 ligand, CCL21, is
necessary for CD4+ but not CD8+ T cells to reach their steady state 'set
point,' even in lymphopenic recipients. In addition, adoptive transfer
of antigen-specific T cells into nonlymphopenic mice overexpressing
CCL21 caused autoimmune diabetes. The authors proposed that
perturbations in the expression of CCR7 ligands, such as CCL21 or CCL19,
may alter susceptibility to autoimmunity.

REFERENCE 1. Beauvillain, C.; Cunin, P.; Doni, A.; Scotet, M.; Jaillon, S.;
Loiry, M.-L.; Magistrelli, G.; Masternak, K.; Chevailler, A.; Delneste,
Y.; Jeannin, P.: CCR7 is involved in the migration of neutrophils
to lymph nodes. Blood 117: 1196-1204, 2011.

2. Birkenbach, M.; Josefsen, K.; Yalamanchili, R.; Lenoir, G.; Kieff,
E.: Epstein-Barr virus-induced genes: first lymphocyte-specific G
protein-coupled peptide receptors. J. Virol. 67: 2209-2220, 1993.

3. Buonamici, S.; Trimarchi, T.; Ruocco, M. G.; Reavie, L.; Cathelin,
S.; Mar, B. G.; Klinakis, A.; Lukyanov, Y.; Tseng, J.-C.; Sen, F.;
Gehrie, E.; Li, M.; and 10 others: CCR7 signalling as an essential
regulator of CNS infiltration in T-cell leukaemia. Nature 459: 1000-1004,
2009.

4. Champagne, P.; Ogg, G. S.; King, A. S.; Knabenhans, C.; Ellefsen,
K.; Nobile, M.; Appay, V.; Rizzardi, G. P.; Fleury, S.; Lipp, M.;
Forster, R.; Rowland-Jones, S.; Sekaly, R.-P.; McMichael, A. J.; Pantaleo,
G.: Skewed maturation of memory HIV-specific CD8 T lymphocytes. Nature 410:
106-111, 2001.

5. Forster, R.; Schubel, A.; Breitfeld, D.; Kremmer, E.; Renner-Muller,
I.; Wolf, E.; Lipp, M.: CCR7 coordinates the primary immune response
by establishing functional microenvironments in secondary lymphoid
organs. Cell 99: 23-33, 1999.

6. Pan, M.-R.; Hou, M.-F.; Chang, H.-C.; Hung, W.-C.: Cyclooxygenase-2
up-regulates CCR7 via EP2/EP4 receptor signaling pathways to enhance
lymphatic invasion of breast cancer cells. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 11155-11163,
2008.

7. Ploix, C.; Lo, D.; Carson, M. J.: A ligand for the chemokine receptor
CCR7 can influence the homeostatic proliferation of CD4 T cells and
progression of autoimmunity. J. Immun. 167: 6724-6730, 2001.

8. Randolph, D. A.; Huang, G.; Carruthers, C. J. L.; Bromley, L. E.;
Chaplin, D. D.: The role of CCR7 in TH1 and TH2 cell localization
and delivery of B cell help in vivo. Science 286: 2159-2162, 1999.

9. Reif, K.; Ekland, E. H.; Ohl, L.; Nakano, H.; Lipp, M.; Forster,
R.; Cyster, J. G.: Balanced responsiveness to chemoattractants from
adjacent zones determines B-cell position. Nature 416: 94-99, 2002.

10. Sallusto, F.; Lenig, D.; Forster, R.; Lipp, M.; Lanzavecchia,
A.: Two subsets of memory T lymphocytes with distinct homing potentials
and effector functions. Nature 401: 708-712, 1999.

11. Schweickart, V. L.; Raport, C. J.; Godiska, R.; Byers, M. G.;
Eddy, R. L., Jr.; Shows, T. B.; Gray, P. W.: Cloning of human and
mouse EBI1, a lymphoid-specific G-protein-coupled receptor encoded
on human chromosome 17q12-q21.2. Genomics 23: 643-650, 1994.

12. Yoshida, R.; Imai, T.; Hieshima, K.; Kusuda, J.; Baba, M.; Kitaura,
M.; Nishimura, M.; Kakizaki, M.; Nomiyama, H.; Yoshie, O.: Molecular
cloning of a novel human CC chemokine EBI1-ligand chemokine that is
a specific ligand for EBI1, CCR7. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 13803-13809,
1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/3/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/19/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/14/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/14/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/28/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/7/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/9/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/25/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/13/1994

EDITED mgross: 11/07/2011
terry: 11/3/2011
mgross: 5/10/2011
mgross: 8/19/2010
alopez: 8/20/2009
terry: 8/14/2009
mgross: 9/26/2002
cwells: 4/5/2002
cwells: 4/4/2002
terry: 4/2/2002
mgross: 2/14/2002
joanna: 9/19/2001
mgross: 4/4/2001
terry: 3/21/2001
alopez: 2/28/2001
alopez: 2/9/2000
terry: 2/7/2000
alopez: 12/9/1999
terry: 12/9/1999
mgross: 10/25/1999
alopez: 7/27/1999
alopez: 1/26/1998
alopez: 10/7/1997
jamie: 1/17/1997
mark: 2/15/1996
mark: 2/8/1996
carol: 12/13/1994

138610	TITLE *138610 OROSOMUCOID 2; ORM2
;;GLYCOPROTEIN, ALPHA-1-ACID, OF SERUM, TYPE 2;;
ALPHA-1-ACID GLYCOPROTEIN, TYPE 2; AGP2
DESCRIPTION Yuasa et al. (1986) performed orosomucoid phenotyping by isoelectric
focusing and immunoprinting. The band pattern of desialyzed ORM
indicated to these workers that the ORM system is controlled by 2
structural loci, ORM1 (138600) and ORM2. Whereas the ORM1 locus was
polymorphic, the ORM2 locus appeared to be monomorphic. Later, however,
Yuasa et al. (1987) demonstrated polymorphism of the ORM2 locus, with 6
alleles in the Japanese population. By studies of orosomucoid cDNA
clones isolated from mouse liver, Cooper and Papaconstantinou (1986)
showed that 2 species of ORM mRNA are transcribed from 2 distinct genes.
Escallon et al. (1987) presented evidence for the expression of a second
structural locus (ORM2) in human plasma as well as for the detection of
genetically determined variation at the ORM2 locus in American blacks by
the use of a sensitive enzyme-linked immunoblotting technique. After
thin-layer polyacrylamide isoelectric focusing (IEF) in gels containing
6 M urea, the isoprotein species coded by the second locus did not
segregate with the predominant alleles at the ORM1 locus. Variation in
ORM2 was not observed in U.S. whites or in several other populations
studied. Because of the low frequency and unlimited distribution of ORM2
variation, Escallon et al. (1987) were unable to test for linkage
between the 2 ORM loci.

By in situ hybridization using a cDNA clone for AGP2, Webb et al. (1988)
mapped both alpha-1-acid glycoprotein genes in the 9q34 band. Yuasa et
al. (1988) used a modified isoelectric focusing, in which glycerine was
omitted from gels, to differentiate ORM1 and ORM2 variants. They
demonstrated linkage disequilibrium between alleles at the 2 loci, thus
corroborating the close linkage demonstrated physically by Dente et al.
(1987). Merritt and Board (1988) presented the complete nucleotide
sequence of the ORM2 gene, which is located approximately 3.3 kb
downstream from ORM1. The derived amino acid sequence indicated at least
21 amino acid differences between the products of the 2 genes.

Data on gene frequencies of allelic variants were tabulated by
Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

REFERENCE 1. Cooper, R.; Papaconstantinou, J.: Evidence of multiple alpha-1
acid glycoprotein genes in the mouse. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 1849-1853,
1986.

2. Dente, L.; Pizza, M. G.; Metspalu, A.; Cortese, R.: Structure
and expression of the genes coding for human alpha-1-acid glycoprotein.
EMBO J. 6: 2289-2296, 1987.

3. Escallon, M. H.; Ferrell, R. E.; Kamboh, M. I.: Genetic studies
of low-abundance human plasma proteins. V. Evidence for a second orosomucoid
structural locus (ORM2) expressed in plasma. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 41:
418-427, 1987.

4. Merritt, C. M.; Board, P. G.: Structure and characterisation of
a duplicated human alpha-1 acid glycoprotein gene. Gene 66: 97-106,
1988.

5. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World Distribution.
New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

6. Webb, G. C.; Earle, M. E.; Merritt, C.; Board, P. G.: Localization
of human alpha-1 acid glycoprotein genes to 9q31-q34.1. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 47: 18-21, 1988.

7. Yuasa, I.; Suenaga, K.; Umetsu, K.; Ito, K.; Robinet-Levy, M.:
Orosomucoid (ORM) typing by isoelectric focusing: evidence for gene
duplication of ORM1 and genetic polymorphism of ORM2. Hum. Genet. 77:
255-258, 1987.

8. Yuasa, I.; Umetsu, K.; Suenaga, K.: Orosomucoid (ORM) typing by
isoelectric focusing: evidence for an additional duplicated ORM1 locus
haplotype and close linkage of two ORM loci. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 43:
165-169, 1988.

9. Yuasa, I.; Umetsu, K.; Suenaga, K.; Robinet-Levy, M.: Orosomucoid
(ORM) typing by isoelectric focusing: evidence for two structural
loci ORM1 and ORM2. Hum. Genet. 74: 160-161, 1986.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/15/1986

EDITED mark: 06/07/1996
pfoster: 2/18/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/26/1991
carol: 2/8/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989

610779	TITLE *610779 NUCLEOTIDE-BINDING PROTEIN 2; NUBP2
;;CYTOSOLIC Fe-S CLUSTER DEFICIENT 1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; CFD1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NUBP2 is a member of the NUBP/MRP gene subfamily of ATP-binding proteins
(see NUBP1; 600280) (Nakashima et al., 1999).

CLONING

Nakashima et al. (1999) cloned mouse Nubp2 and used the murine sequence
as a probe in EST database analysis, followed by screening a human
teratoma cDNA library to clone full-length human NUBP2. The 271-amino
acid human NUBP2 protein shares 72.6% amino acid similarity with mouse
Nubp2. Northern blot analysis detected a 1.4-kb NUBP2 transcript with
ubiquitous expression in all human adult and fetal tissues tested, with
highest expression in adult skeletal muscle. NUBP2 contains conserved an
ATP/GTP binding motif A (P-loop), an ATP/GTP binding motif A-prime, and
NUBP/MRP alpha and beta motifs. NUBP2 lacks an additional N-terminal
sequence with 4 cysteine residues that is present in NUBP1.

GENE FUNCTION

Roy et al. (2003) showed that yeast Cfd1 was required for cytosolic Fe-S
cluster biogenesis and conversion of mammalian IRP1 (ACO1; 100880) to
cytosolic aconitase in yeast.

Stehling et al. (2008) found that NBP35 (NUBP1) interacted with
coexpressed CFD1 in transfected HeLa cells, suggesting that, like NBP35,
CFD1 may function in the regulation of cellular iron homeostasis and
cytosolic Fe-S protein assembly.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the NUBP2 gene to chromosome 16p13.3 based on an
alignment of the NUBP2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF118394) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Nakashima et al. (1999) mapped the mouse Nubp2 gene to the t-complex
region of chromosome 17, which shows homology of synteny to human
chromosome 16p13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/11/2012.

2. Nakashima, H.; Grahovac, M. J.; Mazzarella, R.; Fujiwara, H.; Kitchen,
J. R.; Threat, T. A.; Ko, M. S. H.: Two novel mouse genes--Nubp2,
mapped to the t-complex on chromosome 17, and Nubp1, mapped to the
chromosome 16--establish a new gene family of nucleotide-binding proteins
in eukaryotes. Genomics 60: 152-160, 1999.

3. Roy, A.; Solodovnikova, N.; Nicholson, T.; Antholine, W.; Walden,
W. E.: A novel eukaryotic factor for cytosolic Fe-S cluster assembly. EMBO
J. 22: 4826-4835, 2003.

4. Stehling, O.; Netz, D. J. A.; Niggemeyer, B.; Rosser, R.; Eisenstein,
R. S.; Puccio, H.; Pierik, A. J.; Lill, R.: Human Nbp35 is essential
for both cytosolic iron-sulfur protein assembly and iron homeostasis. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 28: 5517-5528, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 09/17/2012

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 2/20/2007

EDITED mgross: 09/17/2012
carol: 10/21/2011
wwang: 2/21/2007

613555	TITLE *613555 TET ONCOGENE FAMILY, MEMBER 3; TET3
;;KIAA0401
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the ten-eleven translocation (TET) gene family, including
TET3, play a role in the DNA methylation process (Langemeijer et al.,
2009).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Ishikawa et al. (1997) cloned partial TET3, which they
designated KIAA0401. RT-PCR showed expression in a variety of human
tissues, most prominently in brain, placenta, lung, and thymus.

Langemeijer et al. (2009) noted that the deduced TET3 protein contains
1,660 amino acids and shares 2 C-terminal highly conserved domains, a
cys-rich region and a 2OGFeDO homology domain, with TET1 (607790) and
TET2 (612839). By real-time PCR analysis, they demonstrated that TET3,
like TET2, is ubiquitously expressed with highest expression in
hematopoietic cells, particularly of myeloid and monocytic lineage.

GENE FUNCTION

In a computational search for enzymes that could modify 5-methylcytosine
(5mC), Tahiliani et al. (2009) identified TET proteins as mammalian
homologs of the trypanosome proteins JBP1 and JBP2, which have been
proposed to oxidize the 5-methyl group of thymine. They showed that
TET1, a fusion partner of the MLL gene in acute myeloid leukemia, is a
2-oxoglutarate (2OG)- and Fe(II)-dependent enzyme that catalyzes
conversion of 5mC to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) in cultured cells
and in vitro. 5hmC is present in the genome of mouse embryonic stem
cells, and 5hmC levels decrease upon RNA interference-mediated depletion
of TET1. Thus, Tahiliani et al. (2009) concluded that TET proteins have
potential roles in epigenetic regulation through modification of 5mC to
5hmC.

Ito et al. (2010) extended the study of Tahiliani et al. (2009) by
demonstrating that all 3 mouse TET proteins, Tet1, Tet2, and Tet3, can
also catalyze the conversion of 5mC to 5hmC. Tet1 has an important role
in mouse embryonic stem cell maintenance through maintaining the
expression of Nanog (607937) in embryonic stem cells. Downregulation of
Nanog via Tet1 knockdown correlated with methylation of the Nanog
promoter, supporting a role for Tet1 in regulating DNA methylation
status. Furthermore, knockdown of Tet1 in preimplantation embryos
resulted in a bias towards trophectoderm differentiation. Thus, Ito et
al. (2010) concluded that their studies not only uncovered the enzymatic
activity of the Tet proteins, but also demonstrated a role for Tet1 in
embryonic stem cell maintenance and inner cell mass cell specification.

Ito et al. (2011) showed that, in addition to 5hmC, the Tet proteins can
generate 5-formylcytosine (5fC) and 5-carboxylcytosine (5caC) from 5mC
in an enzymatic activity-dependent manner. Furthermore, Ito et al.
(2011) revealed the presence of 5fC and 5caC in genomic DNA of mouse
embryonic stem cells and mouse organs. The genomic content of 5hmC, 5fC,
and 5caC can be increased or reduced through overexpression or depletion
of Tet proteins. Thus, Ito et al. (2011) concluded that they identified
2 previously unknown cytosine derivatives in genomic DNA as the products
of Tet proteins, and raised the possibility that DNA demethylation may
occur through Tet-catalyzed oxidation followed by decarboxylation.

He et al. (2011) demonstrated that 5mC and 5hmC in DNA are oxidized to
5caC by Tet dioxygenases in vitro and in cultured cells. 5caC is
specifically recognized and excised by thymine-DNA glycosylase (TDG;
601423). Depletion of TDG in mouse embryonic stem cells leads to
accumulation of 5caC to a readily detectable level. He et al. (2011)
concluded that oxidation of 5mC by Tet proteins followed by TDG-mediated
base excision of 5caC constitutes a pathway for active DNA
demethylation.

Gu et al. (2011) reported that, within mouse zygotes, oxidation of
5-methylcytosine (5mC) occurs on the paternal genome, changing 5mC into
5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC). Furthermore, they demonstrated that the
dioxygenase Tet3 is enriched specifically in the male pronucleus. In
Tet3-deficient zygotes from conditional knockout mice, paternal genome
conversion of 5mC into 5hmC failed to occur and the level of 5mC remains
constant. Deficiency of Tet3 also impeded the demethylation process of
the paternal Oct4 (164177) and Nanog genes and delayed the subsequent
activation of a paternally derived Oct4 transgene in early embryos.
Female mice depleted of Tet3 in the germline showed severely reduced
fecundity, and their heterozygous mutant offspring lacking maternal Tet3
suffered an increased incidence of developmental failure. Oocytes
lacking Tet3 also seemed to have a reduced ability to reprogram the
injected nuclei from somatic cells. Therefore, Gu et al. (2011)
concluded that Tet3-mediated DNA hydroxylation is involved in epigenetic
reprogramming of the zygotic paternal DNA following natural
fertilization and may also contribute to somatic cell nuclear
reprogramming during animal cloning.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Ishikawa et al. (1997) mapped the TET3
gene to chromosome 2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Exclusion Studies

Abdel-Wahab et al. (2009) did not find somatic mutations in the TET3
gene among 96 patients with myeloproliferative neoplasms.

REFERENCE 1. Abdel-Wahab, O.; Mullally, A.; Hedvat, C.; Garcia-Manero, G.; Patel,
J.; Wadleigh, M.; Malinge, S.; Yao, J.; Kilpivaara, O.; Bhat, R.;
Huberman, K.; Thomas, S.; and 12 others: Genetic characterization
of TET1, TET2, and TET3 alterations in myeloid malignancies. Blood 114:
144-147, 2009.

2. Gu, T.-P.; Guo, F.; Yang, H.; Wu, H.-P.; Xu, G.-F.; Liu, W.; Xie,
Z.-G.; Shi, L.; He, X.; Jin, S.; Iqbal, K.; Shi, Y. G.; Deng, Z.;
Szabo, P. E.; Pfeifer, G. P.; Li, J.; Xu, G.-L.: The role of Tet3
DNA dioxygenase in epigenetic reprogramming by oocytes. Nature 477:
606-610, 2011.

3. He, Y.-F.; Li, B.-Z.; Li, Z.; Liu, P.; Wang, Y.; Tang, Q.; Ding,
J.; Jia, Y.; Chen, Z.; Li, L.; Sun, Y.; Li, X.; Dai, Q.; Song, C.-X.;
Zhang, K.; He, C.; Xu, G.-L.: Tet-mediated formation of 5-carboxylcytosine
and its excision by TDG in mammalian DNA. Science 333: 1303-1307,
2011.

4. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Nakajima, D.; Seki, N.; Ohira, M.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VIII. 78 new cDNA
clones from brain which code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4:
307-313, 1997.

5. Ito, S.; D'Alessio, A. C.; Taranova, O. V.; Hong, K.; Sowers, L.
C.; Zhang, Y.: Role of Tet proteins in 5mC to 5hmC conversion, ES-cell
self-renewal and inner cell mass specification. Nature 466: 1129-1133,
2010.

6. Ito, S.; Shen, L.; Dai, Q.; Wu, S. C.; Collins, L. B.; Swenberg,
J. A.; He, C.; Zhang, Y.: Tet proteins can convert 5-methylcytosine
to 5-formylcytosine and 5-carboxylcytosine. Science 333: 1300-1303,
2011.

7. Langemeijer, S. M. C.; Aslanyan, M. G.; Jansen, J. H.: TET proteins
in malignant hematopoiesis. Cell Cycle 24: 4044-4048, 2009.

8. Tahiliani, M.; Koh, K. P.; Shen, Y.; Pastor, W. A.; Bandukwala,
H.; Brudno, Y.; Agarwal, S.; Iyer, L. M.; Liu, D. R.; Aravind, L.;
Rao, A.: Conversion of 5-methylcytosine to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine
in mammalian DNA by MLL partner TET1. Science 324: 930-935, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/7/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/21/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/25/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/14/2010

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 9/8/2010

EDITED alopez: 03/09/2012
alopez: 3/9/2012
terry: 3/7/2012
alopez: 9/23/2011
terry: 9/21/2011
terry: 12/21/2010
wwang: 10/29/2010
ckniffin: 10/25/2010
alopez: 9/15/2010
terry: 9/14/2010
wwang: 9/8/2010
ckniffin: 9/8/2010

312180	TITLE *312180 UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME E2A; UBE2A
;;RAD6, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF, TYPE A; RAD6A;;
HHR6A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

As deduced from the pleiotropic phenotype of rad6 deletion mutants in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the RAD6 protein plays an important role in
various cellular processes. The protein is strongly conserved in
eukaryotic evolution, a property that permitted Koken et al. (1991) to
clone to human homologs by evolutionary walking using
Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Drosophila melanogaster homologs as
'intermediates.' The human HHR6A and HHR6B (179095) proteins (HHR for
human homolog of rad6) shared about 95% amino acid sequence identity
with each other and about 70% amino acid sequence with their yeast
counterparts, but notably lacked the acidic C-terminal domain, the
occurrence of which seemed to be limited to S. cerevisiae rad6.

GENE FUNCTION

Ulrich and Jentsch (2000) demonstrated that RAD18 (605256) and RAD5
(608048), play a central role in mediating physical contacts between the
members of the RAD6 pathway. RAD5 recruits the UBC13 (603679)-MMS2
(603001) complex to DNA by means of its RING finger domain. Moreover,
RAD5 association with RAD18 brings UBC13-MMS2 into contact with the
RAD6-RAD18 complex. Interaction between the 2 RING finger proteins thus
promotes the formation of a heteromeric complex in which the 2 distinct
ubiquitin-conjugating activities of RAD6 and UBC13-MMS2 can be closely
coordinated. Ulrich and Jentsch (2000) found that while UBC13 and MMS2
are largely cytosolic proteins, DNA damage triggers their redistribution
to the nucleus.

Hishida et al. (2009) examined the response of yeast cells to chronic
low dose ultraviolet light (CLUV) and identified a key role for the
RAD6-RAD18-RAD5 error-free postreplication repair (PRR) pathway in
promoting cell growth and survival. They found that loss of the RAD6
error-free PRR pathway resulted in DNA damage checkpoint-induced G2
arrest in CLUV-exposed cells, whereas wildtype and nucleotide excision
repair-deficient cells were largely unaffected. Cell cycle arrest in the
absence of the RAD6 error-free PRR pathway was not caused by a repair
defect or by the accumulation of ultraviolet-induced photoproducts.
Hishida et al. (2009) observed increased replication protein A (RPA; see
179835)- and Rad52 (600392)-yellow fluorescent protein foci in the
CLUV-exposed Rad18 (605256)-delta cells and demonstrated that
Rad52-mediated homologous recombination is required for the viability of
the Rad18-delta cells after release from CLUV-induced G2 arrest. These
and other data presented suggest that, in response to environmental
levels of ultraviolet exposure, the RAD6 error-free PRR pathway promotes
replication of damaged templates without the generation of extensive
single-stranded DNA regions. Thus this pathway is specifically important
during chronic low dose ultraviolet exposure to prevent
counterproductive DNA checkpoint activation and allow cells to
proliferate normally.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization with biotinylated probes, Koken et al. (1992)
localized the RAD6A gene to Xq24-q25 and the RAD6B gene (179095) to
5q23-q31. The assignment of RAD6A to the X chromosome was confirmed with
an X-specific human-mouse/hamster somatic cell hybrid panel.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 males with X-linked syndromic mental retardation (MRXSN; 300860),
Nascimento et al. (2006) identified a nonsense mutation in the UBE2A
gene (Q128X; 312180.0001). The presumptive obligate carriers had
completely skewed X inactivation in leukocytes, as demonstrated by the
methylation status of the CAG repeat of the androgen receptor gene
(313700). Indeed, skewed X-chromosome inactivation appears to be
characteristic of carriers of many gene mutations involved in XLMR
(Plenge et al., 2002). This prompted a search for an X-linked gene
involved in the syndrome in this family. Given the family's small size,
an inclusion-mapping strategy was performed. Genotyping of 36 markers
spaced at approximately 5 cM disclosed 3 loci, at Xq23-q25, harboring
alleles shared by all 3 affected males. Nascimento et al. (2006) found
30 genes within a narrowed candidate region that were expressed in
brain. However, only 1 of these gene, UBE2A, was expressed in both brain
and lymphocytes. Because of the skewed X-inactivation in the patients'
mothers, which likely represented the survival/proliferation advantage
of lymphocytes with the active normal allele in a woman with the
mutation, the authors sequenced the UBE2A gene and found a 382C-T
substitution leading to a premature stop codon (Q128X; 312180) in all 3
affected males and in their mothers. The sister of 1 of the affected
males, with a rather random X-inactivation pattern as documented by the
methylation status of the AR gene, did not carry this mutation. No
mutations in UBE2A were found in 19 idiopathic XLMR-affected families
mapped to intervals encompassing UBE2A.

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with syndromic XLMR, Budny
et al. (2010) identified 2 different missense mutations in the UBE2A
gene (312180.0002 and 312180.0003, respectively). The phenotype was
characterized by mental retardation and very poor speech, as well as
striking dysmorphic features, including large head, synophrys, prominent
supraorbital ridges, almond-shaped and deep-set eyes, large ears, wide
mouth, myxedematous appearance, hirsutism, abnormal hair whorls,
micropenis, and onychodystrophy.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED, SYNDROMIC, NASCIMENTO TYPE
UBE2A, GLN128TER

In 3 males with an X-linked mental retardation syndrome (300860) in 3
sibships connected through carrier females in 2 generations, Nascimento
et al. (2006) identified a 382C-T transition in the UBE2A gene leading
to a premature UAG stop codon (gln128 to stop; Q128X). As a consequence
of the mutation, the predicted polypeptide lacked the 25 C-terminal
amino acid residues. The importance of this terminal sequence for UBE2
function was inferred by its conservation in vertebrates and in
Drosophila. No UBE2A mutations were found in 15 families with
nonsyndromic and 4 families with syndromic idiopathic XLMR previously
mapped to intervals encompassing this gene. This was the first
description of a mutation in a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme gene as the
cause of a human disease. The affected males in the family presented a
neurodevelopmental disorder that included seizures, severe speech
impairment, marked general hirsutism, synophrys, and a low posterior
hairline.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED, SYNDROMIC, NASCIMENTO TYPE
UBE2A, GLY23ARG

In affected members of a large 5-generation family with X-linked
syndromic mental retardation (300860), Budny et al. (2010) identified a
67G-A transition in exon 2 of the UBE2A gene, resulting in a
gly23-to-arg (G23R) substitution in a highly conserved residue. The
mutation was not found in unaffected family members or in 168 male
controls. Three obligate female carriers showed skewed X-inactivation
profiles. The mutation was found by linkage analysis followed by
candidate gene sequencing. Functional studies were not performed.

.0003
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED, SYNDROMIC, NASCIMENTO TYPE
UBE2A, ARG11GLN

In 2 males from a family with X-linked syndromic mental retardation
(300860), Budny et al. (2010) identified a 32G-A transition in exon 1 of
the UBE2A gene, resulting in an arg11-to-gln (R11Q) substitution in a
highly conserved residue. The mutation was not found in unaffected
family members or in 168 male controls. Functional studies were not
performed.

REFERENCE 1. Budny, B.; Badura-Stronka, M.; Materna-Kiryluk, A.; Tzschach, A.;
Raynaud, M.; Latos-Bielenska, A.; Ropers, H. H.: Novel missense mutations
in the ubiquitination-related gene UBE2A cause a recognizable X-linked
mental retardation syndrome. Clin. Genet. 77: 541-551, 2010.

2. Hishida, T.; Kubota, Y.; Carr, A. M.; Iwasaki, H.: RAD6-RAD18-RAD5-pathway-dependent
tolerance to chronic low-dose ultraviolet light. Nature 457: 612-615,
2009.

3. Koken, M. H. M.; Reynolds, P.; Jaspers-Dekker, I.; Prakash, L.;
Prakash, S.; Bootsma, D.; Hoeijmakers, J. H. J.: Structural and functional
conservation of two human homologs of the yeast DNA repair gene RAD6. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 8865-8869, 1991.

4. Koken, M. H. M.; Smit, E. M. E.; Jaspers-Dekker, I.; Oostra, B.
A.; Hagemeijer, A.; Bootsma, D.; Hoeijmakers, J. H. J.: Localization
of two human homologs, HHR6A and HHR6B, of the yeast DNA repair gene
RAD6 to chromosomes Xq24-q25 and 5q23-q31. Genomics 12: 447-453,
1992.

5. Nascimento, R. M. P.; Otto, P. A.; de Brouwer, A. P. M.; Vianna-Morgante,
A. M.: UBE2A, which encodes a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, is mutated
in a novel X-linked mental retardation syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 79:
549-555, 2006.

6. Plenge, R. M.; Stevenson, R. A.; Lubs, H. A.; Schwartz, C. E.;
Willard, H. F.: Skewed X-chromosome inactivation is a common feature
of X-linked mental retardation disorders. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71:
168-173, 2002.

7. Ulrich, H. D.; Jentsch, S.: Two RING finger proteins mediate cooperation
between ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes in DNA repair. EMBO J. 19:
3388-3397, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/20/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/13/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/23/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/21/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/21/1992

EDITED carol: 04/06/2012
carol: 12/22/2011
ckniffin: 12/20/2011
carol: 10/28/2011
carol: 10/26/2011
ckniffin: 10/25/2011
carol: 10/25/2011
alopez: 2/16/2009
terry: 2/13/2009
alopez: 1/29/2007
alopez: 8/28/2006
terry: 8/23/2006
alopez: 11/21/2002
terry: 11/18/2002
alopez: 3/4/1999
mark: 2/20/1997
mark: 10/26/1996
mark: 9/12/1995
carol: 3/17/1994
mimadm: 2/28/1994
supermim: 3/17/1992
carol: 3/2/1992

603608	TITLE *603608 CARBONYL REDUCTASE 3; CBR3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Carbonyl reductase (CBR; EC 1.1.1.184) catalyzes the reduction of a
large number of biologically and pharmacologically active carbonyl
compounds to their corresponding alcohols.

CLONING

By analyzing sequences from the 21q22.2 chromosomal region, Watanabe et
al. (1998) identified genomic clones corresponding to CBR1 (114830) and
to CBR3, a novel carbonyl reductase gene. The deduced 277-amino acid
CBR3 protein is 84% similar to the CBR1 protein.

GENE STRUCTURE

The CBR3 gene contains 3 exons spanning 11.2 kb (Watanabe et al., 1998).

MAPPING

Watanabe et al. (1998) found that the CBR3 gene is located 62 kb
telomeric of CBR1 on chromosome 21q22.2.

REFERENCE 1. Watanabe, K.; Sugawara, C.; Ono, A.; Fukuzumi, Y.; Itakura, S.;
Yamazaki, M.; Tashiro, H.; Osoegawa, K.; Soeda, E.; Nomura, T.: Mapping
of a novel human carbonyl reductase, CBR3, and ribosomal pseudogenes
to human chromosome 21q22.2. Genomics 52: 95-100, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 3/4/1999

EDITED carol: 07/09/2009
mgross: 3/8/1999
mgross: 3/4/1999

182257	TITLE *182257 PROTEINASE INHIBITOR 3; PI3
;;SKIN-DERIVED ANTILEUKOPROTEINASE; SKALP;;
ANTILEUKOPROTEINASE, SKIN-DERIVED;;
ELAFIN;;
ELASTASE-SPECIFIC INHIBITOR; ESI;;
TRAPPIN 2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PI3 is a serine protease inhibitor that plays a major role as an
antiinflammatory mediator at mucosal surfaces. In addition, PI3 has
antibacterial activity against gram-positive and gram-negative bacterial
and fungal pathogens (summary by Ghosh et al., 2009).

CLONING

Chang et al. (1990) and Schalkwijk et al. (1990, 1991) described a low
molecular weight elastase inhibitor derived from psoriatic skin and
termed SKALP for 'skin-derived antileukoproteinase.' They demonstrated
that this inhibitor can be found in the epidermis of several
inflammatory skin diseases, but not in normal human epidermis. Wiedow et
al. (1990) referred to this molecule as elafin, and Sallenave and Ryle
(1991) referred to it as elastase-specific inhibitor. It is found in the
urine of psoriatic patients, and immunohistochemical studies showed that
SKALP/elafin is found in the suprabasal differentiated keratinocytes of
psoriatic epidermis. Molhuizen et al. (1993) isolated a precursor of
SKALP/elafin from cultured keratinocytes and cloned its cDNA.

GENE FUNCTION

Elafin is an antiproteinase and antimicrobial molecule that is expressed
at epithelial sites (for example, cervix) (Sallenave, 2000). King et al.
(2003) studied the expression and regulation of elafin in human
endometrium. Real-time quantitative PCR showed that expression of elafin
mRNA peaked during menstruation. Elafin protein was localized to
leukocytes scattered in the endometrial stroma during the late secretory
and menstrual phases. The authors concluded that endometrium expresses
elafin in a menstruation-dependent manner.

Using RT-PCR and ELISA, Ghosh et al. (2009) detected elafin production
in the female reproductive tract. Elafin production was enhanced
following poly (I:C) stimulation. Recombinant elafin inhibited both
lymphotropic and macrophage-tropic human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1
strains in a dose-dependent manner, possibly through direct interaction
with the virus. Secreted elafin levels were higher, although not
significantly, in cervico-vaginal lavages of HIV-1-negative women
compared with HIV-1-positive women, and they were also higher in the
secretory phase of the menstrual cycle compared with the proliferative
phase. Ghosh et al. (2009) proposed that elafin may be an important
endogenous microbicide in the female reproductive tract that is
protective against HIV-1.

MAPPING

Molhuizen et al. (1994) localized the PI3 gene to chromosome 20 by study
of somatic cell hybrids and to 20q12-q13 by in situ hybridization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kuijpers et al. (1998) could find no allelic association between
pustular psoriasis, or psoriasis in general (see 177900), and
polymorphism of the PI3 gene. The study was prompted by the finding of a
decrease of SKALP, at the protein level, in lesional skin of patients
with pustular psoriasis compared with plaque-type psoriasis.

REFERENCE 1. Chang, A.; Schalkwijk, J.; Happle, R.; van de Kerkhof, P. C. M.
: Elastase-inhibiting activity in scaling skin disorders. Acta Derm.
Venerol. 70: 147-151, 1990.

2. Ghosh, M.; Shen, Z.; Fahey, J. V.; Cu-Uvin, S.; Mayer, K.; Wira,
C. R.: Trappin-2/Elafin: a novel innate anti-human immunodeficiency
virus-1 molecule of the human female reproductive tract. Immunology 129:
207-219, 2009.

3. King, A. E.; Critchley, H. O. D.; Sallenave, J.-M.; Kelly, R. W.
: Elafin in human endometrium: an antiprotease and antimicrobial molecule
expressed during menstruation. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 4426-4431,
2003.

4. Kuijpers, A. L. A.; Pfundt, R.; Zeeuwen, P. L. J. M.; Molhuizen,
H. O. F.; Mariman, E. C. M.; van de Kerkhof, P. C. M.; Schalkwijk,
J.: SKALP/elafin gene polymorphisms are not associated with pustular
forms of psoriasis. Clin. Genet. 54: 96-101, 1998.

5. Molhuizen, H. O. F.; Alkemade, H. A. C.; Zeeuwen, P. L. J. M.;
de Jongh, G. J.; Wieringa, B.; Schalkwijk, J.: SKALP/elafin: an elastase
inhibitor from cultured human keratinocytes: purification, cDNA sequence,
and evidence for transglutaminase cross-linking. J. Biol. Chem. 268:
12028-12032, 1993.

6. Molhuizen, H. O. F.; Zeeuwen, P. L. J. M.; Olde Weghuis, D.; Geurts
van Kessel, A.; Schalkwijk, J.: Assignment of the human gene encoding
the epidermal serine proteinase inhibitor SKALP (PI3) to chromosome
region 20q12-q13. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 66: 129-131, 1994.

7. Sallenave, J.-M.: The role of secretory leukocyte proteinase inhibitor
and elafin (elastase-specific inhibitor/skin-derived antileukoprotease)
as alarm antiproteinases in inflammatory lung disease. Resp. Res. 1:
87-92, 2000.

8. Sallenave, J.-M.; Ryle, A. P.: Purification and characterization
of elastase-specific inhibitor: sequence homology with mucus proteinase
inhibitor. Biol. Chem. Hoppe Seyler 372: 13-21, 1991.

9. Schalkwijk, J.; Chang, A.; Janssen, P.; de Jongh, G. J.; Mier,
P. D.: Skin-derived antileucoproteases (SKALPs): characterization
of two new elastase inhibitors from psoriatic epidermis. Brit. J.
Derm. 122: 631-641, 1990.

10. Schalkwijk, J.; de Roo, C.; de Jongh, G. J.: Skin-derived antileukoproteinase
(SKALP), an elastase inhibitor from human keratinocytes: purification
and biochemical properties. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1096: 148-154,
1991.

11. Wiedow, O.; Schroeder, J.-M.; Gregory, H.; Young, J. A.; Christophers,
E.: Elafin: an elastase-specific inhibitor of human skin: purification,
characterization, and complete amino acid sequence. J. Biol. Chem. 265:
14791-14795, 1990. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 266: 3356 only, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/19/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/18/2010
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/6/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/2/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/6/1993

EDITED terry: 07/27/2012
terry: 9/17/2010
mgross: 5/19/2010
terry: 5/18/2010
carol: 4/24/2007
alopez: 7/6/2005
kayiaros: 7/13/1999
terry: 9/2/1998
mark: 10/14/1997
mimadm: 3/25/1995
carol: 4/20/1994
carol: 7/13/1993
carol: 7/6/1993

611558	TITLE *611558 UROPLAKIN 2; UPK2
;;UP2;;
UPII
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The asymmetric unit membrane (AUM) forms the apical plaques of mammalian
urothelium and is believed to strengthen the urothelial apical surface
and prevent the cells from rupturing during bladder distention. The
major conserved integral membrane proteins of the AUM are UPK1A
(611557), UPK1B (602380), UPK2, and UPK3 (UPK3A; 611559).

CLONING

Wu et al. (1994) isolated AUMs from 8 mammalian species, including
human. Western blot analysis detected UPK2 at an apparent molecular mass
slightly lower than that of 15-kD bovine Upk2. Electron microscopy
revealed that AUMs isolated from cattle, dog, mouse, and monkey were
12-nm protein particles forming hexagonally packed crystalline patches.

Using murine and bovine Upk2 sequences as query, followed by RT-PCR of
human urothelial mRNA, Lobban et al. (1998) cloned full-length UPK2,
which they called UPII. The deduced 184-amino acid protein shares 87%
and 89% identity with the murine and bovine proteins, respectively.
RT-PCR showed that UPK2 was expressed at high levels in normal
urothelium and in moderately differentiated transitional cell urothelium
carcinomas. In situ hybridization detected UPK2 expression restricted to
the superficial cells of normal urothelium. No expression was detected
in any of the nonurothelial tissues examined.

MAPPING

Hartz (2007) mapped the UPK2 gene to chromosome 11q23.3 based on an
alignment of the UPK2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB009454) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1.).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/12/2007.

2. Lobban, E. D.; Smith, B. A.; Hall, G. D.; Harnden, P.; Roberts,
P.; Selby, P. J.; Trejdosiewicz, L. K.; Southgate, J.: Uroplakin
gene expression by normal and neoplastic human urothelium. Am. J.
Path. 153: 1957-1967, 1998.

3. Wu, X.-R.; Lin, J.-H.; Walz, T.; Haner, M.; Yu, J.; Aebi, U.; Sun,
T.-T.: Mammalian uroplakins: a group of highly conserved urothelial
differentiation-related membrane proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 13716-13724,
1994.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/26/2007

EDITED wwang: 10/26/2007

176875	TITLE *176875 PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 1, CATALYTIC SUBUNIT, ALPHA ISOFORM; PPP1CA
;;PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 1, ALPHA SUBUNIT; PPP1A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Protein phosphorylation, a crucial posttranslational modification that
controls many diverse cellular functions, is dependent on the opposing
actions of protein kinases and protein phosphatases. Protein
phosphatase-1 (PP1) is 1 of 4 major protein phosphatases identified in
the cytosol of eukaryotic cells that are responsible for the
dephosphorylation of serine and threonine residues in proteins. Although
all 4 protein phosphatases have overlapping substrate specificities in
vitro, they can be distinguished by the use of inhibitor proteins and by
their dependence on metal ions. PP1 is inhibited by nanomolar
concentrations of 2 thermostable proteins, inhibitor-1 (PPP1R1A; 613246)
and inhibitor-2 (PPP1R2; 601792), whereas the other 3 phosphatases (see
PPP2CA; 176915) are unaffected by these inhibitors. PPP1CA encodes a
catalytic subunit of PP1 that forms heterodimers with various PP1
regulatory subunits (e.g., PPP1R3A; 600917). These regulatory subunits
target PP1 to particular subcellular locations and selectively enhance
its activity toward certain substrates (Cohen and Cohen, 1989).

CLONING

Barker et al. (1990) isolated a cDNA encoding 1 isoform (PP1-alpha) of
the catalytic subunit of human protein phosphatase-1.

Using 2 regions conserved within PP1 genes, Song et al. (1993) amplified
a partial PPP1CA sequence by PCR, and they screened a cDNA library using
this product to obtain a full-length clone. The deduced 330-amino acid
protein shows complete concordance with the rabbit protein. Northern
blot analysis revealed 1.6-kb transcript.

GENE FUNCTION

Genoux et al. (2002) demonstrated that PP1 determined the efficacy of
learning and memory by limiting acquisition and favoring memory decline.
When PP1 is genetically inhibited during learning, short intervals
between training episodes are sufficient for optimal performance.
Enhanced learning correlates with increased phosphorylation of CREB
(123810), of CAMKII (114078), and of the GLUR1 subunit of the AMPA
receptor (138248); it also correlates with CREB-dependent gene
expression that, in control mice, occurs only with widely distributed
training. Inhibition to PP1 prolongs memory when induced after learning,
suggesting that PP1 also promotes forgetting. Genoux et al. (2002)
suggested that this property may account for age-related cognitive
decay, as old mutant mice had preserved memory. They concluded that
their findings emphasized the physiologic importance of PP1 as a
suppressor of learning and memory, and as a potential mediator of
cognitive decline during aging.

Danial et al. (2003) undertook a proteomic analysis to assess whether
BAD (603167) might participate in mitochondrial physiology. In liver
mitochondria, BAD resides in a functional holoenzyme complex together
with protein kinase A (see 176911) and PP1 catalytic units, WAVE1
(605035) as an A kinase-anchoring protein, and glucokinase (138079).
Using mitochondria from hepatocytes of Bad-deficient mice, Danial et al.
(2003) demonstrated that BAD is required to assemble the complex, the
lack of which results in diminished mitochondria-based glucokinase
activity and blunted mitochondrial respiration in response to glucose.
Glucose deprivation results in dephosphorylation of BAD, and
BAD-dependent cell death.

In CT26 mouse colon cancer cells, Obeid et al. (2007) demonstrated that
anthracyclins induced immunogenic cell death by way of a rapid,
preapoptotic translocation of calreticulin (CALR; 109091) to the cell
surface. Anthracyclin-induced Calr translocation was mimicked by
inhibition of the Ppp1ca/Gadd34 (PPP1R15A; 611048) complex.
Administration of recombinant Calr or inhibitors of Ppp1ca/Gadd34
restored the immunogenicity of cell death elicited by etoposide and
mitomycin C and enhanced their antitumor effects in vivo.

Novoyatleva et al. (2008) identified a consensus PP1-binding motif,
RVxF, in the RNA recognition motifs of several splicing factors,
including TRA2-beta (SFRS10; 602719), SF2/ASF (SFRS1; 600812), and
SRp30c (SFRS9; 601943). PP1 bound directly to this motif in TRA2-beta
and dephosphorylated the protein, altering its interaction with other
proteins. Reducing PP1 activity promoted usage of numerous alternative
exons, including the inclusion of the SMN2 (601627) exon 7 in mice
expressing the human gene. Novoyatleva et al. (2008) concluded that PP1
has a role in splice site selection.

By immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometric analysis of PP1 complexes
in HEK293 cells, Lee et al. (2010) identified a complex containing PNUTS
(PPP1R10; 603771), TOX4 (614032), WDR82 (611059), and any 1 of the 3 PP1
catalytic subunits, PP1-alpha, PP1-beta (PPP1CB; 600590), or PP1-gamma
(PPP1CC; 176914). The complex, which they called PTW/PP1, had an
apparent molecular mass of about 200 kD, suggesting that it contains 1
molecule of each subunit. Mutation analysis revealed that human
PP1-alpha interacted with the RVxF motif of mouse Pnuts. PP1-alpha did
not interact directly with human TOX4 and WDR82. The PTW/PP1 complex
efficiently dephosphorylated the isolated C-terminal domain of the large
subunit of mouse RNA polymerase II (POLR2A; 180660) in vitro. The
PTW/PP1 complex was stable throughout the cell cycle in HEK293 cells,
but its association with chromatin was regulated. PTW/PP1 associated
with chromatin during interphase, was excluded from condensed
chromosomes during early mitosis, and was reloaded onto chromosomes at
late telophase.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Terrak et al. (2004) demonstrated the crystal structure at 2.7-angstrom
resolution of the complex between PP1 and a 34-kD N-terminal domain of
the myosin phosphatase targeting subunit MYPT1 (602021). MYPT1 is the
protein that regulates PP1 function in smooth muscle relaxation.
Structural elements amino- and carboxy-terminal to the RVXF motif of
MYPT1 are positioned in a way that leads to a pronounced reshaping of
the catalytic cleft of PP1, contributing to the increased myosin
specificity of this complex. Terrak et al. (2004) concluded that the
structure has general implications for the control of PP1 activity by
other regulatory subunits.

MAPPING

Barker et al. (1990) mapped the PPP1A gene to 11q13 by Southern analysis
of somatic cell hybrids and by in situ hybridization. Because of
evidence that PP1-alpha is a tumor suppressor and because of the
assignment to 11q13, PPP1A is a candidate gene for type I multiple
endocrine neoplasia (131100), which maps to the same area.
Translocations involving breakpoints at 11q13 have been observed in
lymphomas, chronic lymphocytic leukemia of the B-cell type (see 151400),
and multiple myeloma. Other oncogenes or suppressors mapping to 11q13
include HST (164980), INT2 (164950), SEA (165110), and ST3 (191181).

Richard et al. (1991) described a high resolution radiation hybrid map
of 11q12-q13, which placed the PPP1A locus at the extreme end of a
cluster of more than 12 genes with C1NH (606860) at the other end and
with GST3 (134660) as its closest neighbor in the linear array. Using
fluorescence in situ hybridization, Saadat et al. (1995) mapped PPP1CA
to human 11q13, rat 1q43, and mouse 7E3-F2. The results indicated that
PPP1CA is a member of a group of genes showing homology of synteny.

ANIMAL MODEL

Carr et al. (2002) noted that increased PP1 activity has been observed
in end-stage human heart failure. They developed a mouse model for
cardiac tissue-specific overexpression of PP1 by introducing PPP1CA
inserted downstream of the mouse alpha-myosin heavy chain promoter.
Overexpression of PP1 was associated with depressed cardiac function,
dilated cardiomyopathy, and premature mortality, consistent with heart
failure. Knockout of Ipp1 was associated with moderate increases in PP1
activity and impaired beta-adrenergic contractile responses. Expression
of constitutively active IPP1 in failing human myocytes in culture was
associated with rescue of beta-adrenergic responsiveness.

REFERENCE 1. Barker, H. M.; Jones, T. A.; da Cruz e Silva, E. F.; Spurr, N.
K.; Sheer, D.; Cohen, P. T. W.: Localization of the gene encoding
a type I protein phosphatase catalytic subunit to human chromosome
band 11q13. Genomics 7: 159-166, 1990.

2. Carr, A. N.; Schmidt, A. G.; Suzuki, Y.; del Monte, F.; Sato, Y.;
Lanner, C.; Breeden, K.; Jing, S.-L.; Allen, P. B.; Greengard, P.;
Yatani, A.; Hoit, B. D.; Grupp, I. L.; Hajjar, R. J.; DePaoli-Roach,
A. A.; Kranias, E. G.: Type 1 phosphatase, a negative regulator of
cardiac function. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 4124-4135, 2002.

3. Cohen, P.; Cohen, P. T. W.: Protein phosphatases come of age. J.
Biol. Chem. 264: 21435-21438, 1989.

4. Danial, N. N.; Gramm, C. F.; Scorrano, L.; Zhang, C.-Y.; Krauss,
S.; Ranger, A. M.; Datta, S. R.; Greenberg, M. E.; Licklider, L. J.;
Lowell, B. B.; Gygi, S. P.; Korsmeyer, S. J.: BAD and glucokinase
reside in a mitochondrial complex that integrates glycolysis and apoptosis. Nature 424:
952-956, 2003.

5. Genoux, D.; Haditsch, U.; Knobloch, M.; Michalon, A.; Storm, D.;
Mansuy, I. M.: Protein phosphatase 1 is a molecular constraint on
learning and memory. Nature 418: 970-975, 2002.

6. Lee, J.-H.; You, J.; Dobrota, E.; Skalnik, D. G.: Identification
and characterization of a novel human PP1 phosphatase complex. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 24466-24476, 2010.

7. Novoyatleva, T.; Heinrich, B.; Tang, Y.; Benderska, N.; Butchbach,
M. E. R.; Lorson, C. L.; Lorson, M. A.; Ben-Dov, C.; Fehlbaum, P.;
Bracco, L.; Burghes, A. H. M.; Bollen, M.; Stamm, S.: Protein phosphatase
1 binds to the RNA recognition motif of several splicing factors and
regulates alternative pre-mRNA processing. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17:
52-79, 2008.

8. Obeid, M.; Tesniere, A.; Ghiringhelli, F.; Fimia, G. M.; Apetoh,
L.; Perfettini, J.-L.; Castedo, M.; Mignot, G.; Panaretakis, T.; Casares,
N.; Metivier, D.; Larochette, N.; van Endert, P.; Ciccosanti, F.;
Piacentini, M.; Zitvogel, L.; Kroemer, G.: Calreticulin exposure
dictates immunogenicity of cancer cell death. Nature Med. 13: 54-61,
2007.

9. Richard, C. W.; Withers, D. A.; Meeker, T. C.; Myers, R. M.: A
radiation hybrid map of the proximal long arm of human chromosome
11 containing the MEN-1 and bcl-1 disease locus. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 58: 1970 only, 1991.

10. Saadat, M.; Mizuno, Y.; Kikuchi, K.; Yoshida, M. C.: Comparative
mapping of the gene encoding the catalytic subunit of protein phosphatase
type 1-alpha (PPP1CA) to human, rat, and mouse chromosomes. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 70: 55-57, 1995.

11. Song, Q.; Khanna, K. K.; Lu, H.; Lavin, M. F.: Cloning and characterization
of a human protein phosphatase 1-encoding cDNA. Gene 129: 291-295,
1993.

12. Terrak, M.; Kerff, F.; Langsetmo, K.; Tao, T.; Dominguez, R.:
Structural basis of protein phosphatase 1 regulation. Nature 429:
780-784, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 06/08/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/2/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/21/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/26/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/11/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/16/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/2003
Patricia A. Hartz -updated: 10/4/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/17/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1990

EDITED mgross: 06/08/2011
mgross: 2/4/2010
mgross: 10/2/2009
terry: 9/21/2009
wwang: 8/24/2009
terry: 8/12/2009
mgross: 5/21/2007
wwang: 2/26/2007
alopez: 6/28/2004
alopez: 6/15/2004
terry: 6/11/2004
alopez: 9/16/2003
carol: 8/1/2003
alopez: 6/24/2003
terry: 6/19/2003
alopez: 5/1/2003
mgross: 10/4/2002
alopez: 9/17/2002
carol: 4/25/2002
carol: 8/20/1998
mark: 7/11/1995
warfield: 3/31/1994
carol: 4/2/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/23/1992
carol: 10/10/1991

602918	TITLE *602918 PHENYLALANINE-tRNA SYNTHETASE, ALPHA SUBUNIT; FARSA
;;PHENYLALANINE-tRNA SYNTHETASE, CYTOPLASMIC, ALPHA SUBUNIT; FRSA;;
PHENYLALANINE-tRNA SYNTHETASE-LIKE, ALPHA SUBUNIT; FARSLA;;
CML33
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases are enzymes that charge tRNAs with specific
amino acids. Cytoplasmic phenylalanine-tRNA synthetase is a heterodimer
consisting of a catalytic alpha subunit, FARSA, and a regulatory beta
subunit, FARSB (609690) (Rodova et al., 1999).

CLONING

Using subtractive hybridization, Sen et al. (1997) identified a gene
that is differentially expressed between a tumorigenic human acute-phase
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML; 608232) cell line and its nontumorigenic
variant. Sequence analysis of the predicted 508-amino acid protein,
called CML33, revealed that it has homology to the catalytic subunit of
prokaryotic and S. cerevisiae phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetases (PheRS).
Recombinant CML33 reacted with antibodies against sheep liver PheRS on
Western blots. Since CML33 does not have the leader sequence
characteristic of mitochondrial proteins and does not resemble yeast
mitochondrial PheRS, Sen et al. (1997) suggested that it is a subunit of
human cytoplasmic PheRS. Using Northern blot analysis, the authors
determined that CML33 expression is sensitive to the stage of the cell
cycle and to induction of differentiation. Expression of the 1.8-kb
transcript is also substantially enhanced in tumorigenic cells. Sen et
al. (1997) noted that CML33 is the first member of the tRNA synthetase
gene family shown to exhibit this type of regulated expression.

By database analysis, RT-PCR using embryonic kidney cell RNA, and
screening a fetal kidney cDNA library, Rodova et al. (1999) cloned
FARSA. The 508-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 57
kD. Sequence alignment of FARSA orthologs from multiple species showed
conservation of active site regions and suggested that the heterodimer
of FARSA and FARSB forms a 4-helix bundle interface similar to that in
Thermus thermophilus. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.4-kb
transcript in heart, brain, placenta, skeletal muscle, kidney, and
pancreas. Expression was stronger in malignant cell lines compared with
normal tissue.

GENE FUNCTION

Rodova et al. (1999) showed that COS-7 cells transfected with FARSA and
FARSB increase phenylalanine charging of tRNA.

MAPPING

By analysis of a somatic cell hybrid panel, Sen et al. (1997) mapped the
CML33 gene to chromosome 19. Rasooly (1998) noted that the CML33 gene
was contained within genomic clones from chromosomal region 19p13.2
(Genbank GENBANK AD000092).

REFERENCE 1. Rasooly, R. S.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/29/1998.

2. Rodova, M.; Ankilova, V.; Safro, M. G.: Human phenylalanyl-tRNA
synthetase: cloning, characterization of the deduced amino acid sequences
in terms of the structural domains and coordinately regulated expression
of the alpha and beta subunits in chronic myeloid leukemia cells. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 255: 765-773, 1999.

3. Sen, S.; Zhou, H.; Ripmaster, T.; Hittelman, W. N.; Schimmel, P.;
White, R. A.: Expression of a gene encoding a tRNA synthetase-like
protein is enhanced in tumorigenic human myeloid leukemia cells and
is cell cycle stage- and differentiation-dependent. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 94: 6164-6169, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Laura L. Baxter - updated: 10/28/2005

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/3/1998

EDITED wwang: 11/08/2007
wwang: 11/8/2007
wwang: 10/28/2005
alopez: 11/17/2003
alopez: 8/3/1998

606286	TITLE *606286 DEAD/H BOX 43; DDX43
;;HELICASE ANTIGEN; HAGE
DESCRIPTION For background information on tumor antigens recognized by cytolytic T
lymphocytes, see SAGE (300359).

CLONING

To identify genes with tumor-specific expression, Martelange et al.
(2000) applied a cDNA subtraction approach, i.e., representational
difference analysis, to a human rhabdomyosarcoma cell line. They
obtained 2 cDNAs that appeared to be tumor specific and named the
corresponding genes SAGE and HAGE because they had the same pattern of
expression as genes of the MAGE family (e.g., MAGEA1; 300016). The
putative HAGE protein contains 648 amino acids and is a member of the
DEAD box family of ATP-dependent RNA helicases (see 600396). Northern
blot analysis detected expression of a 2.2-kb HAGE transcript in tumors
of various histologic types at a level that was 100-fold higher than
that observed in normal tissues, except for testis.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Martelange et al. (2000) mapped the HAGE
gene to 6q12-q13.

REFERENCE 1. Martelange, V.; De Smet, C.; De Plaen, E.; Lurquin, C.; Boon, T.
: Identification on a human sarcoma of two new genes with tumor-specific
expression. Cancer Res. 60: 3848-3855, 2000.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/26/2001

EDITED carol: 12/02/2003
mgross: 9/26/2001

602044	TITLE *602044 UNCOUPLING PROTEIN 3; UCP3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Boss et al. (1997) and Vidal-Puig et al. (1997) described the cloning of
UCP3 cDNAs. Both groups derived their clones from human skeletal muscle
libraries, and both reported that UCP3 is approximately 57% and 73%
identical to human UCP1 (113730) and UCP2 (601693), respectively. Boss
et al. (1997) and Solanes et al. (1997) cloned a short isoform of UCP3
(UCP3S) containing 275 amino acids and a long isoform of UCP3 (UCP3L)
containing 312 amino acids. UCP3S contains 3 mitochondrial
energy-transfer-protein domains and 5 putative transmembrane domains,
while UCP3L contains an additional 37 amino acids at its C terminus that
encodes a putative transmembrane domain and a putative purine
nucleotide-binding domain. Solanes et al. (1997) determined that UCP3S
is generated when a cleavage and polyadenylation signal within the last
intron prematurely terminates message elongation. Boss et al. (1997)
used Northern blot analysis to show that in human tissue UCP3 is
expressed as a 2.3-kb message in skeletal muscle and heart. In rat
tissue, UCP3 transcripts were found in heart, brown adipose tissue,
white adipose tissue, and skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Boss et al. (1997) examined UCP expression in cold-adapted rats and
found that, unlike UCP1, the expression levels of UCP2 and UCP3 were not
affected by cold. Nonetheless, the authors concluded that UCP3 may be
involved in thermogenesis through the uncoupling of oxidative
phosphorylation in skeletal muscle.

Millet et al. (1997) observed an increase in the levels of UCP2 and UCP3
mRNA in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue from both lean and obese
individuals undergoing fasting. They suggested that the increase
indicates a role for these proteins in the metabolic adaptation to
fasting. The similar induction of gene expression observed during
fasting in lean and obese subjects show that there is no major
alteration of UCP2 and UCP3 gene regulation in adipose tissue and
skeletal muscle of obese subjects. UCP2 is widely expressed in human
tissues, whereas UCP3 expression seems to be restricted to skeletal
muscle, an important site of thermogenesis in humans.

With the capacity to participate in thermogenesis and energy balance,
UCP3 is an important obesity candidate gene. Bouchard et al. (1997)
demonstrated linkage between markers at the UCP2/UCP3 region with
resting metabolic rate. This region is syntenic to a region of mouse
chromosome 7 that has been linked to hyperinsulinemia and obesity
(Fleury et al., 1997).

Liu et al. (1998) and Hinz et al. (1999) showed that expression of UCP3
in yeast resulted in reduced cellular growth and a significant decrease
in mitochondria membrane potential. Hinz et al. (1999) found that
cellular respiration coupled to oxidative phosphorylation decreased,
while cellular heat production increased. Liu et al. (1998) found that
adenovirus-mediated leptin (164160) expression in obese ob/ob mice led
to increased expression of Ucp3 in skeletal muscle, as well as
significant weight loss.

UCP1 diverts energy from ATP synthesis to thermogenesis in the
mitochondria of brown adipose by catalyzing a regulated leak of protons
across the inner membrane. UCP2 and UCP3 are present at much lower
abundance than UCP1, and the uncoupling with which they are associated
is not significantly thermogenic. Mild uncoupling would, however,
decrease the mitochondrial production of reactive oxygen species, which
are important mediators of oxidative damage. Echtay et al. (2002)
demonstrated that superoxide increases mitochondrial proton conductance
through effects on UCP1, UCP2, and UCP3. Superoxide-induced uncoupling
requires fatty acids and is inhibited by purine nucleotides.
Superoxide-induced uncoupling correlates with the tissue expression of
UCPs and appears in mitochondria from yeast expressing UCP1. Skeletal
muscle mitochondria express only UCP3; therefore superoxide-induced
uncoupling is absent in the skeletal muscle of UCP3 knockout mice.
Echtay et al. (2002) concluded that the interaction of superoxide with
UCPs may be a mechanism for decreasing the concentrations of reactive
oxygen species inside mitochondria.

In 9 healthy male volunteers, Hesselink et al. (2003) measured the
phosphocreatine resynthesis rate following intense anoxic contraction,
which is a sensitive index of in vivo mitochondrial function, after 7
days on a low-fat diet and again after 7 days on a high-fat diet. The
high-fat diet increased UCP3 protein content in muscle by 44% compared
to the low-fat diet, but this increase in UCP3 was not associated with
any changes in the rate of muscle phosphocreatine resynthesis during
conditions of maximal flux through oxidative phosphorylation. Hesselink
et al. (2003) concluded that the primary role of UCP3 in humans is not
uncoupling.

GENE STRUCTURE

Solanes et al. (1997) determined that the UCP3 gene contains 7 exons and
spans about 8.5 kb. The coding sequence uses exons 2 to 7 and spans
about 5.25 kb.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

The observation that UCP3 is increased in situations where fatty acid
entry into the mitochondria may exceed the beta-oxidation capacity
suggested to Russell et al. (2003) that this protein may be involved in
the outward translocation of fatty acid from the mitochondrial matrix.
The authors performed biochemical and molecular tests using muscle from
patients with riboflavin-responsive multiple acylcoenzyme A
dehydrogenase deficiency (MADD; 231680), a lipid storage myopathy
characterized by a decrease in fatty acid beta-oxidation capacity. The
results demonstrated decreases in fatty acid beta-oxidation and in the
activities of respiratory chain complexes I (see 157655) and II (see
600857), associated with increases of 3.1- and 1.7-fold in UCP3 mRNA and
protein expression, respectively. The authors postulated that
upregulation of UCP3 in MADD is due to the accumulation of muscle fatty
acid/acylCoA. The authors considered MADD an optimal model to study the
hypothesis that UCP3 is involved in the outward translocation of an
excess of fatty acid from the mitochondria and to show that, in humans,
the effects of fatty acid on UCP3 expression are direct and independent
of fatty acid beta-oxidation.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis and PCR of P1 and BAC genomic clones,
Solanes et al. (1997) mapped the UCP3 gene to chromosome 11q13, adjacent
to the UCP2 gene. Walder et al. (1998) pointed out that the UCP2 and
UCP3 genes constitute a cluster that maps to 11q13. Boss et al. (1998)
described the genomic structure of the UCP3 gene and mapped the gene to
11q13 by somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid analysis. Pecqueur et
al. (1999) determined that the UCP2 gene is located 7 kb downstream of
the UCP3 gene.

By PCR of mouse P1 and BAC clones, Solanes et al. (1997) mapped the
mouse Ucp3 and Ucp2 genes to chromosome 7.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Argyropoulos et al. (1998) identified a missense polymorphism in exon 3
(V102I; 602044.0001) of the UCP3 gene. A mutation introducing a stop
codon in exon 4 (R143X; 602044.0002) and a terminal polymorphism in the
splice donor junction of exon 6 (602044.0003) were also identified in an
individual who was morbidly obese and diabetic. Allele frequencies of
the exon 3 and exon 6 splice junction polymorphisms were determined and
found to be similar in Gullah-speaking African Americans and the Mende
tribe of Sierra Leone, but absent in Caucasians. Moreover, in exon 6
splice donor heterozygotes, basal fat oxidation rates were reduced by
50%, and the respiratory quotient was markedly increased compared with
wildtype individuals, implicating a role for UCP3 in metabolic fuel
partitioning.

Brown et al. (1999) found that expression of native human UCP3 mutations
in yeast showed complete loss (R70W; 602044.0004), significant reduction
(R143X; 602044.0002), or no effect (V102I; 602044.0001 and +1G-A;
602044.0003) on the uncoupling activity of UCP3. The authors concluded
that certain mutations in UCP3 alter its functional impact on membrane
potential, possibly conferring susceptibility to metabolic diseases.

Dalgaard et al. (2001) tested whether variation of the UCP3 promoter is
associated with either juvenile or maturity-onset obesity or body weight
change over a 26-year follow-up among Danish subjects. Mutation
screening of approximately 1 kb 5-prime upstream of the UCP3 gene
revealed a C-to-T variant at -55 (dbSNP rs1800849). The frequency of
this polymorphism was evaluated by restriction fragment length
polymorphism analysis in 4 groups: 1) a group of 744 obese Danish men
who at the draft board examinations had a BMI of at least 31 kg/m2; 2) a
randomly selected control group consisting of 857 draftees; 3) 258
middle-aged subjects; and 4) 409 sixty-year-old subjects. The frequency
of the T allele was 26.0% among the obese draftees and 26.9% in the
control group. The authors concluded that this variant does not play a
major role in the development of common obesity among Danish subjects.

ANIMAL MODEL

Clapham et al. (2000) created transgenic mice that overexpress human
UCP3 in skeletal muscle. UCP3 expression was driven by the human
alpha-skeletal actin (102610) promoter, limiting expression to skeletal
muscle. Clapham et al. (2000) bred 3 independent lines to homozygosity
and selected a line of mice that had a 66-fold increase in UCP3
expression. These mice were hyperphagic but weighed less than their
wildtype littermates. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a striking
reduction in adipose tissue mass. The mice also exhibited lower fasting
plasma glucose and insulin levels and an increased glucose clearance
rate. Clapham et al. (2000) concluded that their data provided evidence
that skeletal muscle UCP3 has the potential to influence metabolic rates
and glucose homeostasis in the whole animal. Choi et al. (2007) showed
that transgenic mice that overexpress human UCP3 in skeletal muscle were
completely protected against the fat-induced defects and insulin
resistance developed in wildtype mice fed a high-fat diet. Protection
was associated with a lower membrane-to-cytosolic ratio of
diacylglycerol and reduced PKC-theta (600448) activity.

Uncoupling protein-3 is a mitochondrial protein that can diminish the
mitochondrial membrane potential. Levels of muscle UCP3 mRNA are
increased by thyroid hormone and fasting. Gong et al. (2000) produced
Ucp3 knockout mice to test the hypothesis that UCP3 influences metabolic
efficiency and is a candidate obesity gene. The Ucp3 -/- mice had no
detectable immunoreactive UCP3 by Western blot analysis. In mitochondria
from the knockout mice, proton leak was greatly reduced in muscle,
minimally reduced in brown fat, and not reduced at all in liver. These
data suggested that UCP3 accounts for much of the proton leak in
skeletal muscle. Despite the lack of UCP3, no consistent phenotypic
abnormality was observed in the mice. They were not obese and had normal
serum insulin, triglyceride, and leptin levels, with a tendency toward
reduced free fatty acids and glucose. Knockout mice showed a normal
circadian rhythm in body temperature and motor activity and had normal
body temperature responses to fasting, stress, thyroid hormone, and cold
exposure. The baseline metabolic rate and respiratory exchange ratio
were the same in knockout and control mice, as were the effects of
fasting, a beta-3 adrenergic agonist, and thyroid hormone on these
parameters. The phenotype of Ucp1/Ucp3 double knockout mice was
indistinguishable from Ucp1 single knockout mice. The data suggested
that Ucp3 is not a major determinant of metabolic rate but, rather, has
other functions.

In Ucp3 knockout mice, Vidal-Puig et al. (2000) found that skeletal
muscle mitochondria lacking Ucp3 are more coupled (i.e., increased state
3/state 4 ratio), indicating that Ucp3 has uncoupling activity. In
addition, production of reactive oxygen species was increased in
mitochondria lacking Ucp3. Despite these effects on mitochondrial
function, Ucp3 did not seem to be required for body weight regulation,
exercise tolerance, fatty acid oxidation, or cold-induced thermogenesis.

Mills et al. (2003) found that mice deficient in Ucp3 have a diminished
thermogenic response to the drug MDMA, also known as 'ecstasy,' and did
not die from a dose of 40 mg kg(-1), which killed 30% of wildtype
littermates. Although the baseline temperature of Ucp3 -/- mice was
indistinguishable from that of wildtype animals, Ucp3-deficient mice
showed a significantly blunted rise in both skeletal muscle and rectal
temperature following MDMA administration. Mills et al. (2003) concluded
that UCP3 is important in MDMA-induced hyperthermia.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
UCP3 POLYMORPHISM G/A
OBESITY, SEVERE, AND TYPE II DIABETES
UCP3, 304G-A, VAL102ILE

In a Gullah-speaking African American woman with severe obesity (601665)
and type II diabetes (125853), Argyropoulos et al. (1998) found
heterozygosity for a val102-to-ile (V102I) mutation of the UCP3 gene,
located in the first cytosol-oriented extramembranous loop. Three
overweight children in this family were found to be homozygous for the
V102I polymorphism. The fourth child, a 9-year-old male with a body mass
index (BMI) of 18.5, was heterozygous for the V102I polymorphism. No
paternal sample was available but the father was presumed to be at least
heterozygous for the V102I polymorphism. The polymorphism was not found
in genomic DNA from 128 Caucasian Americans. However, examination of 280
African Americans revealed that 4% of individuals were homozygous and
28% heterozygous for the polymorphism. In the Mende tribe in Sierra
Leone, 3% of the population was found to be homozygous A/A and 21%
heterozygous G/A.

.0002
OBESITY, SEVERE, AND TYPE II DIABETES
UCP3, ARG143TER

In a 16-year-old with morbid obesity (601665) (BMI = 51.8) and type II
diabetes (125853), Argyropoulos et al. (1998) found compound
heterozygosity for a 427C-T transition in exon 4, resulting in the
introduction of a premature stop codon at residue 143, arg143 to ter
(R143X), in the third, matrix-oriented loop. In addition, the patient
was heterozygous for a guanine to adenine polymorphism at the splice
donor site of exon 6 (Ggt-Gat), resulting in loss of the splice junction
and premature termination of the protein product in the sixth,
matrix-oriented loop (602044.0003). A putative protein resulting from
this mutation would be identical to that encoded by the short transcript
of UCP3 mRNA. Pedigree analysis and DNA sequence determination of family
members showed that the R143X mutation was transmitted to the compound
heterozygous proband from the grandmother, through the mother, in
typical mendelian fashion. The heterozygous polymorphism at the exon 6
splice donor junction (Ggt-Gat) was not detected in the maternal lineage
and was most likely transmitted from the father, whose DNA was not
available for analysis, but may have arisen as a new change.
Argyropoulos et al. (1998) examined an additional 168 individuals
comprising both African Americans and Caucasians for the 2 nucleotide
changes. The R143X mutation was not detected in any other individual in
either racial group. The exon 6 splice donor stop mutation, however, was
detected in African-American subjects but not in Caucasians. An
identical allele frequency (G, 90% and A, 10%) was found in
Gullah-speaking African Americans and the Mende tribe. No homozygous
subjects for the polymorphism (a/a) were detected in 287 Gullah-speaking
African Americans and only 3 homozygotes were identified in 192 subjects
of the Mende tribe. Haplotype analysis of 2 polymorphisms, V102I
(602044.0001) and the exon 6 splice donor Ggt-Gat, showed that the 2
genotypes were independent.

.0003
UCP3 POLYMORPHISM, EXON 6 SPLICE DONOR JUNCTION
OBESITY, SEVERE
UCP3, IVS6, G-A, +1

In a 16-year-old female with morbid obesity (601665), Argyropoulos et
al. (1998) found compound heterozygosity for a polymorphism at the exon
6 splice donor junction (Ggt-Gat) and the R143X mutation (602004.0002).
The rare R143X mutation was inherited in the maternal line; the splice
site polymorphism was presumably transmitted from the father. The g-to-a
transition at the splice donor site of exon 6 resulted in loss of the
splice junction and truncation of the protein product at the first tga
stop codon of the adjacent intron.

Among unrelated individuals, Argyropoulos et al. (1998) found that
heterozygotes for the exon 6 splice donor polymorphism had a 50%
reduction in fat oxidation adjusted for lean body mass and a marked
elevation in the nonprotein respiratory quotient, compared with wildtype
subjects. No significant differences were found between heterozygotes
and wildtype individuals for BMI, percentage of body fat, and resting
energy expenditure adjusted for lean body mass. The same analyses
performed for the V102I polymorphism (602044.0001) showed no significant
differences between heterozygotes and wildtype individuals for any of
the aforementioned quantitative traits. Nonetheless, the African
American population studied had a high prevalence of obesity; therefore,
the possibility that this could mask a potential effect of UCP3
mutations on BMI was also examined. Indeed, Argyropoulos et al. (1998)
found that the frequency of the g/a heterozygous genotype was nearly
twice as high (P = 0.04) in obese (30%) compared with lean (16%)
individuals.

.0004
OBESITY, SEVERE, AND TYPE II DIABETES
UCP3, ARG70TRP

Brown et al. (1999) identified a rare mutation in UCP3, arg70-to-trp, in
a 15-year-old male of Chinese descent with severe obesity (601665) and
type II diabetes (125853). Alignments showed that the mutated valine and
arginine residues in V102I (602044.0001) and R70W are completely
conserved in all known UCPs, including the plant UCP, suggesting that
these residues may play an important functional role. Brown et al.
(1999) expressed native human UCP3 mutations in yeast and showed
complete loss on the uncoupling activity of UCP3 with R70W and no effect
on this activity with V102I.

REFERENCE 1. Argyropoulos, G.; Brown, A. M.; Willi, S. M.; Zhu, J.; He, Y.;
Reitman, M.; Gevao, S. M.; Spruill, I.; Garvey, W. T.: Effects of
mutations in the human uncoupling protein 3 gene on the respiratory
quotient and fat oxidation in severe obesity and type 2 diabetes. J.
Clin. Invest. 102: 1345-1351, 1998.

2. Boss, O.; Giacobino, J.-P.; Muzzin, P.: Genomic structure of uncoupling
protein-3 (UCP3) and its assignment to chromosome 11q13. Genomics 47:
425-426, 1998.

3. Boss, O.; Samec, S.; Paoloni-Giacobino, A.; Rossier, C.; Dulloo,
A.; Seydoux, J.; Muzzin, P.; Giacobino, J.-P.: Uncoupling protein-3:
a new member of the mitochondrial carrier family with tissue-specific
expression. FEBS Lett. 408: 39-42, 1997.

4. Bouchard, C.; Perusse, L.; Chagnon, Y. C.; Warden, C.; Ricquier,
D.: Linkage between markers in the vicinity of the uncoupling protein
2 gene and resting metabolic rate in humans. Hum. Molec. Genet. 6:
1887-1889, 1997.

5. Brown, A. M.; Dolan, J. W.; Willi, S. M.; Garvey, W. T.; Argyropoulos,
G.: Endogenous mutations in human uncoupling protein 3 alter its
functional properties. FEBS Lett. 464: 189-193, 1999.

6. Brown, A. M.; Willi, S. M.; Argyropoulos, G.; Garvey, W. T.: A
novel missense mutation, R70W, in the human uncoupling protein 3 gene
in a family with type 2 diabetes. (Abstract) Hum. Mutat. 13: 508
only, 1999. Note: Full article online.

7. Choi, C. S.; Fillmore, J. J.; Kim, J. K.; Liu, Z.-X.; Kim, S.;
Collier, E. F.; Kulkarni, A.; Distefano, A.; Hwang, Y.-J.; Kahn, M.;
Chen, Y.; Yu, C.; Moore, I. K.; Reznick, R. M.; Higashimori, T.; Shulman,
G. I.: Overexpression of uncoupling protein 3 in skeletal muscle
protects against fat-induced insulin resistance. J. Clin. Invest. 117:
1995-2003, 2007.

8. Clapham, J. C.; Arch, J. R. S.; Chapman, H.; Haynes, A.; Lister,
C.; Moore, G. B. T.; Piercy, V.; Carter, S. A.; Lehner, I.; Smith,
S. A.; Beeley, L. J.; Godden, R. J.; and 15 others: Mice overexpressing
human uncoupling protein-3 in skeletal muscle are hyperphagic and
lean. Nature 406: 415-418, 2000.

9. Dalgaard, L. T.; Sorensen, T. I. A.; Drivsholm, T.; Borch-Johnsen,
K.; Andersen, T.; Hansen, T.; Pedersen, O.: A prevalent polymorphism
in the promoter of the UCP3 gene and its relationship to body mass
index and long term body weight change in the Danish population. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 1398-1402, 2001.

10. Echtay, K. S.; Roussel, D.; St-Pierre, J.; Jekabsons, M. B.; Cadenas,
S.; Stuart, J. A.; Harper, J. A.; Roebuck, S. J.; Morrison, A.; Pickering,
S.; Clapham, J. C.; Brand, M. D.: Superoxide activates mitochondrial
uncoupling proteins. Nature 415: 96-99, 2002.

11. Fleury, C.; Neverova, M.; Collins, S.; Raimbault, S.; Champigny,
O.; Levi-Meyrueis, C.; Bouillaud, F.; Seldin, M. F.; Surwit, R. S.;
Ricquier, D.; Warden, C. H.: Uncoupling protein-2: a novel gene linked
to obesity and hyperinsulinemia. Nature Genet. 15: 269-272, 1997.

12. Gong, D.-W.; Monemdjou, S.; Gavrilova, O.; Leon, L. R.; Marcus-Samuels,
B.; Chou, C. J.; Everett, C.; Kozak, L. P.; Li, C.; Deng, C.; Harper,
M.-E.; Reitman, M. L.: Lack of obesity and normal response to fasting
and thyroid hormone in mice lacking uncoupling protein-3. J. Biol.
Chem. 275: 16251-16257, 2000.

13. Hesselink, M. K. C.; Greenhaff, P. L.; Constantin-Teodosiu, D.;
Hultman, E.; Saris, W. H. M.; Nieuwlaat, R.; Schaart, G.; Kornips,
E.; Schrauwen, P.: Increased uncoupling protein 3 content does not
affect mitochondrial function in human skeletal muscle in vivo. J.
Clin. Invest. 111: 479-486, 2003.

14. Hinz, W.; Faller, B.; Gruninger, S.; Gazzotti, P.; Chiesi, M.
: Recombinant human uncoupling protein-3 increases thermogenesis in
yeast cells. FEBS Lett. 448: 57-61, 1999.

15. Liu, Q.; Bai, C.; Chen, F.; Wang, R.; MacDonald, T.; Gu, M.; Zhang,
Q.; Morsy, M. A.; Caskey, C. T.: Uncoupling protein-3: a muscle-specific
gene upregulated by leptin in ob/ob mice. Gene 207: 1-7, 1998.

16. Millet, L.; Vidal, H.; Andreelli, F.; Larrouy, D.; Riou, J.-P.;
Ricquier, D.; Laville, M.; Langin, D.: Increased uncoupling protein-2
and -3 mRNA expression during fasting in obese and lean humans. J.
Clin. Invest. 100: 2665-2670, 1997.

17. Mills, E. M.; Banks, M. L.; Sprague, J. E.; Finkel, T.: Uncoupling
the agony from ecstasy: deactivating a single protein could prevent
one of the drug's most dangerous effects. Nature 426: 403-404, 2003.

18. Pecqueur, C.; Cassard-Doulcier, A.-M.; Raimbault, S.; Miroux,
B.; Fleury, C.; Gelly, C.; Bouillaud, F.; Ricquier, D.: Functional
organization of the human uncoupling protein-2 gene and juxtaposition
to the uncoupling protein-3 gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 255:
40-46, 1999.

19. Russell, A. P.; Schrauwen, P.; Somm, E.; Gastaldi, G.; Hesselink,
M. K. C.; Schaart, G.; Kornips, E.; Lo, S. K.; Bufano, D.; Giacobino,
J.-P.; Muzzin, P.; Ceccon, M.; Angelini, C.; Vergani, L.: Decreased
fatty acid beta-oxidation in riboflavin-responsive, multiple acylcoenzyme
A dehydrogenase-deficient patients is associated with an increase
in uncoupling protein-3. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 5921-5926,
2003.

20. Solanes, G.; Vidal-Puig, A.; Grujic, D.; Flier, J. S.; Lowell,
B. B.: The human uncoupling protein-3 gene: genomic structure, chromosomal
localization, and genetic basis for short and long form transcripts. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 25433-25436, 1997.

21. Vidal-Puig, A.; Solanes, G.; Grujic, D.; Flier, J. S.; Lowell,
B. B.: UCP3: an uncoupling protein homologue expressed preferentially
and abundantly in skeletal muscle and brown adipose tissue. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 235: 79-82, 1997.

22. Vidal-Puig, A. J.; Grujic, D.; Zhang, C.-Y.; Hagen, T.; Boss,
O.; Ido, Y.; Szczepanik, A.; Wade, J.; Mootha, V.; Cortright, R.;
Muoio, D. M.; Lowell, B. B.: Energy metabolism in uncoupling protein
3 gene knockout mice. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 16258-16266, 2000.

23. Walder, K.; Norman, R. A.; Hanson, R. L.; Schrauwen, P.; Neverova,
M.; Jenkinson, C. P.; Easlick, J.; Warden, C. H.; Pecqueur, C.; Raimbault,
S.; Ricquier, D.; Harper, M.; Silver, K.; Shuldiner, A. R.; Solanes,
G.; Lowell, B. B.; Chung, W. K.; Leibel, R. L.; Pratley, R.; Ravussin,
E.: Association between uncoupling protein polymorphisms (UCP2-UCP3)
and energy metabolism/obesity in Pima Indians. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7:
1431-1435, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/2/2007
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 4/1/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/4/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/1/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/15/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/2/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/1/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/28/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/27/2000
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 5/25/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/24/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/17/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/17/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/19/1998

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/10/1997

EDITED joanna: 09/02/2008
wwang: 8/15/2007
terry: 8/2/2007
wwang: 9/19/2006
alopez: 4/1/2005
wwang: 3/10/2005
terry: 3/4/2005
alopez: 12/2/2003
terry: 12/1/2003
mgross: 11/15/2002
cwells: 8/8/2002
alopez: 1/3/2002
terry: 1/2/2002
mgross: 8/1/2001
mcapotos: 10/17/2000
mcapotos: 10/16/2000
terry: 10/6/2000
terry: 9/28/2000
alopez: 7/27/2000
terry: 6/1/2000
joanna: 5/25/2000
carol: 2/8/2000
carol: 2/3/2000
carol: 1/31/2000
carol: 1/30/2000
terry: 1/24/2000
carol: 11/23/1998
carol: 10/28/1998
terry: 10/17/1998
terry: 9/17/1998
mark: 1/19/1998
alopez: 10/22/1997
alopez: 10/10/1997

614855	TITLE *614855 TBC1 DOMAIN FAMILY, MEMBER 14; TBC1D14
;;KIAA1322
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Autophagy is a bulk degradation process induced in cells by a range of
pathologic conditions, including starvation. In autophagy, portions of
cytoplasm are enclosed in a double-membrane autophagosome and targeted
for degradation by fusion with endosomes and lysosomes. TBC1D14 is a
negative regulator of autophagosome formation (Longatti et al., 2012).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned TBC1D14, which they designated
KIAA1322. The deduced protein contains 702 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA
detected variable TBC1D14 expression in all adult and fetal tissues
examined, with highest expression in adult brain, lung, and ovary and in
most specific adult brain regions examined. Expression in fetal brain
was lower than that in adult brain.

Longatti et al. (2012) reported that full-length TBC1D14 contains 693
amino acids and has a C-terminal TRE2 (USP6; 604334)-yeast Bub2-CDC16
(603461) (TBC) domain. Fluorescence-tagged TBC1D14 colocalized with
Golgi and endosome markers in transfected HEK293A cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Longatti et al. (2012) identified TBC1D14 as a negative regulator of
starvation-induced autophagosome formation in HEK293A cells. In
serum-starved HEK293A cells, TBC1D14 directly bound the
autophagy-related kinase ULK1 (603168) and the recycling
endosome-related small GTPases RAB11A (605570) and RAB11B (604198), but
it did not appear to function as a GTPase-activating protein (GAP) for
RAB11. Overexpression of TBC1D14 caused tubulation of recycling
endosomes, inhibited autophagosome formation, and delayed recycling of
transferrin receptor (TFRC; 190010)-associated endosomes back to the
plasma membrane. In contrast, knockdown of TBC1D14 via small interfering
RNA increased starvation-induced autophagy. Like TBC1D14 overexpression,
a dominant-negative RAB11A mutant defective for GTP binding also
inhibited starvation-induced autophagy. Longatti et al. (2012)
hypothesized that TBC1D14 inhibits autophagosome formation by
functioning as a non-GAP activator of RAB11.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the TBC1D14
gene to chromosome 4. Hartz (2012) mapped the TBC1D14 gene to chromosome
4p16.1 based on an alignment of the TBC1D14 sequence (GenBank GENBANK
AB037743) with the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/2/2012.

2. Longatti, A.; Lamb, C. A.; Razi, M.; Yoshimura, S.; Barr, F. A.;
Tooze, S. A.: TBC1D14 regulates autophagosome formation via Rab11-
and ULK1-positive recycling endosomes. J. Cell Biol. 197: 659-675,
2012.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/10/2012

EDITED mgross: 10/10/2012

610607	TITLE *610607 CYTOPLASMIC POLYADENYLATION ELEMENT-BINDING PROTEIN 4; CPEB4
;;CPE-BINDING PROTEIN 4;;
KIAA1673
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements (CPEs) are located in the 3-prime
UTRs of hundreds of mRNAs involved in cell proliferation, chromosome
segregation, and cell differentiation. CPEs function as docking sites
for CPE-binding proteins (CPEBs), which can either repress or activate
mRNA translation. CPEB4 activates mRNA translation by adding poly(A)
tails to target mRNAs (Ortiz-Zapater et al., 2012).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned CPEB4, which they designated
KIAA1673. The deduced 712-amino acid protein shares significant identity
with mouse Cpeb1 (607342). RT-PCR ELISA detected intermediate to high
expression of CPEB4 in all tissues examined, with highest levels in
brain, kidney, heart, and fetal liver. CPEB4 was expressed in all
specific adult brain regions examined, with highest levels in
cerebellum, spinal cord, caudate nucleus, hippocampus, and substantia
nigra.

GENE FUNCTION

Ortiz-Zapater et al. (2012) observed increased expression of CPEB4 in
several human pancreatic tumor cell lines and in pancreatic tumor tissue
compared with a nontumorigenic pancreatic cell line and normal pancreas,
respectively. CPEB4 expression was also absent in normal astrocytes but
abundant in high-grade gliomas. Knockdown of CPEB4 expression in RWP-1
and Capan-1 human pancreatic tumor cells and in T98G glioblastoma cells
reduced invasiveness in vitro and malignancy and mortality following
injection into nude mice. Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that
CPEB4 associated with a large number of CPE-containing mRNAs in RWP-1
cells, with most significant enrichment in mRNAs encoding general
translation factors and ribosomal proteins. One of these mRNAs, TPA
(PLAT; 173370), contains 2 CPEs in its 3-prime UTR. In normal pancreas,
TPA mRNA had a short poly(A) tail, but in pancreatic cancers, TPA mRNA
had a long poly(A) tail that was associated with upregulated TPA protein
expression. Downregulation of CPEB4 in RWP-1 cells resulted in TPA mRNAs
with shorter poly(A) tails and reduced TPA protein expression.
Ortiz-Zapater et al. (2012) concluded that TPA mRNA is translationally
activated in tumors through recruitment of CPEB4 to CPEs in its 3-prime
UTR.

MAPPING

Using a human-rodent hybrid panel, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the CPEB4
gene to chromosome 5.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Hattori, A.; Kondo, Y.; Okumura, K.; Ohara,
O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
XIX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which
code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 347-355, 2000.

2. Ortiz-Zapater, E.; Pineda, D.; Martinez-Bosch, N.; Fernandez-Miranda,
G.; Iglesias, M.; Alameda, F.; Moreno, M.; Eliscovich, C.; Eyras,
E.; Real, F. X.; Mendez, R.; Navarro, P.: Key contribution of CPEB4-mediated
translational control to cancer progression. Nature Med. 18: 83-90,
2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/24/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/29/2006

EDITED mgross: 01/24/2012
terry: 1/24/2012
mgross: 11/29/2006

608953	TITLE *608953 TEKTIN 2; TEKT2
;;TEKTIN, TESTICULAR;;
TEKTIN-T;;
TEKTIN B1; TEKTB1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TEKT2 and other members of the tektin protein family form filamentous
polymers in the walls of ciliary and flagellar microtubules (Iguchi et
al., 2002).

CLONING

Using mouse tektin-t to screen a human testis cDNA library, Iguchi et
al. (2002) cloned TEKT2, which they called tektin-t. The deduced
430-amino acid protein contains evolutionarily conserved tektin motifs
and 5 N-glycosylation sites. Human and mouse TEKT2 share 83% amino acid
identity. Northern blot analysis detected a 1.7-kb transcript expressed
strongly in testis and weakly in ovary. Western blot analysis of testis
showed a TEKT2 protein with an apparent molecular mass of 54 kD. In
sperm, a major protein of 56 kD, a minor protein of 46 kD, and a weakly
expressed protein of 54 kD were detected. The 56- and 54-kD proteins
bound concanavalin A, indicating that they were N-glycosylated, but the
46-kD protein did not. Immunostaining of human sperm revealed TEKT2
expressed in a discontinuous punctate pattern in the flagellum and in
the postacrosomal head region, with 2 positive spots in the tangential
view. A somewhat different staining pattern was found in mouse sperm.

By sequencing tryptic fragments of purified human TEKT2 protein,
followed by RT-PCR of testis mRNA and screening a testis cDNA library,
Wolkowicz et al. (2002) cloned TEKT2, which they called TEKB1. The
deduced 430-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 49.7
kD. TEKT2 contains a chaperonin signature motif, several
serine/threonine and tyrosine kinase phosphorylation sites, and 5
N-glycosylation sites. The central region of TEKT2 shares significant
similarity with sea urchin tektin B1, but the N and C termini differ.
Northern blot analysis detected a 1.5-kb transcript only in testis. RNA
dot blot analysis detected highest TEKT2 expression in testis, followed
by adult trachea and fetal lung. Weaker expression was detected in
ovary, pituitary, adult lung, fetal brain, and fetal kidney. SAGE data
indicated that TEKT2 was also expressed in cerebellum and mammary gland
tumors. Immunofluorescence analysis did not detect TEKT2 on the sperm
surface. In permeabilized sperm, TEKT2 localized to the principal piece
of the sperm flagellum, suggesting an axonemal location. TEKT2 was also
found at the base of the sperm head in a location corresponding to the
basal body.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wolkowicz et al. (2002) determined that the TEKT2 gene contains 10 exons
and spans 4.2 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis and genomic sequence analysis, Iguchi et
al. (2002) mapped the TEKT2 gene to chromosome 1pter-p32.3. Wolkowicz et
al. (2002) also mapped the TEKT2 gene to chromosome 1pter-p32.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Tanaka et al. (2004) found that Tekt2 null male mice were infertile, but
Tekt2 null female mice were fully fertile. Sperm morphology and function
were abnormal, with frequent bending of the sperm flagella and marked
defects in motility. In vitro fertilization assays showed that the
defective spermatozoa were able to fertilize eggs. However, electron
microscopic examination showed that the dynein inner arm structure was
disrupted. Homozygous mutant mice also had functionally defective
tracheal cilia with altered dynein arm morphology. Tanaka et al. (2004)
concluded that TEKT2 participates in dynein inner arm formation or
attachment and that the loss of TEKT2 results in impaired motility of
both flagella and cilia.

REFERENCE 1. Iguchi, N.; Tanaka, H.; Nakamura, Y.; Nozaki, M.; Fujiwara, T.;
Nishimune, Y.: Cloning and characterization of the human tektin-t
gene. Molec. Hum. Reprod. 8: 525-530, 2002.

2. Tanaka, H.; Iguchi, N.; Toyama, Y.; Kitamura, K.; Takahashi, T.;
Kaseda, K.; Maekawa, M.; Nishimune, Y.: Mice deficient in the axonemal
protein tektin-t exhibit male infertility and immotile-cilium syndrome
due to impaired inner arm dynein function. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24:
7958-7964, 2004.

3. Wolkowicz, M. J.; Naaby-Hansen, S.; Gamble, A. R.; Reddi, P. P.;
Flickinger, C. J.; Herr, J. C.: Tektin B1 demonstrates flagellar
localization in human sperm. Biol. Reprod. 66: 241-250, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/29/2004

EDITED mgross: 09/29/2004

602313	TITLE *602313 OVO, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG-LIKE, 1; OVOL1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

A critical role in Drosophila oogenesis and germline sex differentiation
is played by ovo, a female germline-specific nuclear protein.
Chidambaram et al. (1997) noted that homozygous ovo mutants result in
female germ cell degeneration and revertants of dominant ovo mutations
can result in shaven baby (svb) and lozenge-like (lzl) phenotypes that
affect cuticle (epidermal/locomotor) and eye (sensory) development,
respectively, suggesting a tight structural link between ovo and svb.
Human OVOL1, which contains an open reading frame with zinc finger
domains, is similar to Drosophila ovo and is conserved in C. elegans as
well. An EST database search suggested the presence of ovo-related
sequences in both the mouse and the human genome.

MAPPING

The human OVOL1 gene maps to 11q13, less than 200 kb proximal to the
oncogene SEA (165110) (Debelenko et al., 1997). Comparative mapping data
indicated that the mouse Ovol1 locus is located on MMU 19.

REFERENCE 1. Chidambaram, A.; Allikmets, R.; Chandrasekarappa, S.; Guru, S.
C.; Modi, W.; Gerrard, B.; Dean, M.: Characterization of a human
homolog (OVOL1) of the Drosophila ovo gene, which maps to chromosome
11q13. Mammalian Genome 8: 950-951, 1997.

2. Debelenko, L. V.; Emmert-Buck, M. R.; Manickam, P.; Kester, M.-B.;
Guru, S. C.; DiFranco, E. M.; Olufemi, S.-E.; Agarwal, S.; Lubensky,
I. A.; Zhuang, Z.; Burns, A. L.; Spiegel, A. M.; Liotta, L. A.; Collins,
F. S.; Marx, S. J.; Chandrasekharappa, S. C.: Haplotype analysis
defines a minimum interval for the multiple endocrine neoplasia type
1 (MEN1) gene. Cancer Res. 57: 1039-1042, 1997.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/2/1998

EDITED alopez: 11/16/2010
dholmes: 3/6/1998
mark: 2/2/1998

601529	TITLE *601529 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR SUBFAMILY 2, GROUP C, MEMBER 1; NR2C1
;;NUCLEAR HORMONE RECEPTOR TR2; TR2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chang and Kokontis (1988) used an oligonucleotide probe based on the
zinc finger DNA-binding domain of steroid receptors to isolate a
putative steroid receptor, termed TR2, from a human testis cDNA library.
Subsequent studies (Chang et al., 1989) showed that several splice
variants of TR2 exist and the original TR2 clone was renamed TR2-5.
Northern blot analysis by Chang and Kokontis (1988) showed that TR2-5
produced a 2.5-kb transcript that was abundant in androgen-sensitive
organs, such as ventral prostate and seminal vesicle. Dot blot
hybridization indicated that TR2-5 mRNA levels increased after
castration of rats and that this increase was reversed by
5-alpha-dihydrotestosterone injection. Expression of TR2-5 resulted in a
52-kD protein.

Chang et al. (1989) described 4 splice variants of the TR2 gene, TR2-5,
TR2-7, TR2-9, and TR2-11, which encode proteins of 483, 184, 467, and
603 amino acids, respectively. All were isolated from human testis or
prostate cDNA libraries. The DNA-binding domains of the 4 variants are
identical and share 50 to 60% amino acid identity with other steroid
receptors. The TR2-7 receptor has no apparent hormone-binding region,
whereas the other 3 variants have the same hormone-binding region
followed by variant C termini. In vitro transcription and translation of
the TR2-11 receptor indicated that this receptor did not bind any known
steroids, suggesting to Chang et al. (1989) that this receptor could be
steroid independent or dependent on an unknown hormone. The authors
noted that the identity of the DNA-binding regions of these receptors
suggests that they regulate the same target gene(s), but the differences
in the C termini may allow them to bind different ligands or bind the
same ligand with differing affinities. By analogy to the splice variants
of the thyroid hormone receptor, the authors suggested that the
expression ratio of the TR2 splice variants could vary in a
tissue-specific or developmental stage-specific manner regulated at the
level of RNA splicing.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Lee et al. (1998) identified an
interaction between mouse Tr2 and Rip140 (NRIP1; 602490). By mutation
analysis, they determined that the LxxLL motifs of mouse Rip140
interacted with the activation function-2 region of Tr2.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments detected interaction between the 2
proteins in cell extracts. Rip140 repressed binding of Tr2 to target
DNA. In the presence of Rip140, Tr2 translocated into the nucleus.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the NR2C1
gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP STS-H68838).

ANIMAL MODEL

Shyr et al. (2002) detected Tr2 expression in mice at 3 weeks of age,
and the expression was restricted mainly to spermatocytes and round
spermatids. They found that mice lacking Tr2 were viable with no serious
developmental defects. Male mice lacking Tr2 had functional testes,
including normal sperm number and motility, and both male and female
mice lacking Tr2 were fertile.

REFERENCE 1. Chang, C.; Kokontis, J.: Identification of a new member of the
steroid receptor super-family by cloning and sequence analysis. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 155: 971-977, 1988.

2. Chang, C.; Kokontis, J.; Acakpo-Satchivi, L.; Liao, S.; Takeda,
H.; Chang, Y.: Molecular cloning of new human TR2 receptors: a class
of steroid receptor with multiple ligand-binding domains. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 165: 735-741, 1989.

3. Lee, C.-H.; Chinpaisal, C.; Wei, L.-N.: Cloning and characterization
of mouse RIP140, a corepressor for nuclear orphan receptor TR2. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 18: 6745-6755, 1998.

4. Shyr, C.-R.; Collins, L. L.; Mu, X.-M.; Platt, K. A.; Chang, C.
: Spermatogenesis and testis development are normal in mice lacking
testicular orphan nuclear receptor 2. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 4661-4666,
2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/7/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/5/2005

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 11/22/1996

EDITED mgross: 10/07/2005
mgross: 10/7/2005
mgross: 8/8/2005
terry: 8/5/2005
mgross: 9/24/1999
carol: 5/18/1998
jamie: 2/4/1997
jamie: 11/22/1996

604790	TITLE *604790 TASTE RECEPTOR, TYPE 2, MEMBER 14; TAS2R14
;;T2R14;;
TASTE RECEPTOR, FAMILY B, MEMBER 1; TRB1
DESCRIPTION For background information on the TAS2R gene family, see 604791.

CLONING

Matsunami et al. (2000) used in silico methods to identify a family of
candidate taste receptors that are members of the G protein-coupled
receptor (GPCR) superfamily and that are specifically expressed in taste
receptor cells. Using the TRB2 sequence to search the human chromosome
12 database, Matsunami et al. (2000) identified TRB1 and 7 other related
genes, all in the same contig. Two of these were pseudogenes. Matsunami
et al. (2000) identified the TRB7 gene (604796) in a contig assigned to
human chromosome 5p15, the location of PROP (171200), the genetic locus
that governs the ability of humans to taste 6-n-propyl-2-thiouracil, a
bitter compound. Matsunami et al. (2000) also identified 5 TRB genes (1
a pseudogene) on 3 chromosome 7 contigs, 2 of which are assigned to
7q31-q32. All TRB genes have the 7 transmembrane domain structure
characteristic of GPCRs, but lack a long extracellular N-terminal domain
proposed to bind ligand, suggesting that they use a different mode of
ligand binding. Matsunami et al. (2000) concluded that the TRBs are
diverse in protein sequence, which is consistent with an ability to
detect a variety of tastants with very different chemical structures.

GENE FUNCTION

Kinnamon (2000) reviewed the role of taste receptors in taste
transduction.

Deshpande et al. (2010) found that bitter taste receptor agonists evoked
increased intracellular calcium in cultured human airway smooth muscle
(ASM) cells at levels comparable to GPCR agonists, such as bradykinin
and histamine. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis detected multiple TAS2R
transcripts in ASM cells, with highest expression of TAS2R10 (604791),
TAS2R14, and TAS2R31 (612669), intermediate expression of TAS2R5
(605062), TAS2R4 (604869), and TAS2R19 (613961), and detectable
expression of 11 other TAS2Rs, with results normalized for expression of
ADRB2 (109690). Expression of 8 other TAS2Rs and TAS1R1 (606225) and
TAS1R2 (606226) was undetectable. Using isolated intact mouse airways,
Deshpande et al. (2010) observed dose-dependent relaxation in response
to bitter taste receptor agonists, such as chloroquine, denatorium, and
quinine, after challenge with contracting agents, such as acetylcholine
or serotonin. Magnet twisting cytometry showed that isolated ASM cells
challenged with histamine relaxed after treatment with bitter taste
receptor agonists. Bitter taste receptor agonists were a more effective
treatment than albuterol in a mouse model of allergic airway
inflammation. Deshpande et al. (2010) proposed that agents that bind
bitter taste receptors and cause bronchodilation may provide an
alternative and/or supplement to beta agonist for the treatment of
asthma.

GENE FAMILY

Adler et al. (2000) identified members of a family of 40 to 80 human and
rodent GPCRs expressed in subsets of taste receptor cells of the tongue
and palate epithelia. These candidate taste receptors, which the authors
called T2Rs, are organized in the genome in clusters and are genetically
linked to loci that influence bitter perception in mice and humans. Each
T2R gene encodes a 7-transmembrane receptor protein. The amino acid
sequence identities between human and mouse T2Rs range from 46 to 67%.
The authors determined that a single taste receptor cell expresses a
large repertoire of T2Rs, suggesting that each cell may be capable of
recognizing multiple tastants. In situ hybridization demonstrated that
T2Rs are exclusively expressed in taste receptor cells that contain the
G protein subunit gustducin (139395), implying that they function as
gustducin-linked receptors.

Chandrashekar et al. (2006) reviewed the receptors and cells for
mammalian taste.

MAPPING

Matsunami et al. (2000) identified the TAS2R14 gene on chromosome 12p13.

Adler et al. (2000) identified T2R14, which is identical to the TRB1
gene reported by Matsunami et al. (2000), in a BAC clone from 12p13.

REFERENCE 1. Adler, E.; Hoon, M. A.; Mueller, K. L.; Chandrashekar, J.; Ryba,
N. J. P.; Zuker, C. S.: A novel family of mammalian taste receptors. Cell 100:
693-702, 2000.

2. Chandrashekar, J.; Hoon, M. A.; Ryba, N. J. P.; Zuker, C. S.:
The receptors and cells for mammalian taste. Nature 444: 288-294,
2006.

3. Deshpande, D. A.; Wang, W. C. H.; McIlmoyle, E. L.; Robinett, K.
S.; Schillinger, R. M.; An, S. S.; Sham, J. S. K.; Liggett, S. B.
: Bitter taste receptors on airway smooth muscle bronchodilate by
localized calcium signaling and reverse obstruction. Nature Med. 16:
1299-1304, 2010.

4. Kinnamon, S. C.: A plethora of taste receptors. Neuron 25: 507-510,
2000.

5. Matsunami, H.; Montmayeur, J.-P.; Buck, L. B.: A family of candidate
taste receptors in human and mouse. Nature 404: 601-604, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/20/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/25/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/10/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/21/2000

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 4/5/2000

EDITED mgross: 05/12/2011
terry: 4/20/2011
alopez: 12/3/2010
alopez: 1/25/2007
mgross: 3/22/2001
alopez: 7/10/2000
mgross: 4/24/2000
mgross: 4/21/2000
alopez: 4/5/2000

611123	TITLE *611123 EPHRIN RECEPTOR EphA10; EPHA10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ephrin receptors, the largest subfamily of receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTKs), and their ephrin ligands are important mediators of cell-cell
communication regulating cell attachment, shape, and mobility in
neuronal and epithelial cells (Aasheim et al., 2005). See 179610 for
additional background on Eph receptors and ephrins.

CLONING

By database analysis, Robinson et al. (2000) identified EPHA10. By
further database analysis and PCR of a testis cDNA library, Aasheim et
al. (2005) cloned EPHA10 and identified 3 isoforms. A 295-amino acid
soluble secreted Eph receptor (EphA10s) contains the Eph receptor
ligand-binding domain but lacks fibronectin III repeats. Full-length
EphA10 is composed of 1008 predicted amino acids, the first 283 of which
are identical to EphA10s, and its sequence predicts the canonic Eph
receptor structure containing an Eph ligand-binding domain, 2
fibronectin III repeats, an intracellular conserved kinase domain, and a
SAM domain. The third isoform, EphA10*, lacks the SAM domain. EPHA10
shares 91% amino acid identity with its mouse ortholog. Northern blot
analysis of human tissues detected expression in testis only. Binding
studies with EphA10s showed strong binding to EFNA3 (601381), EFNA4
(601380) and EFNA5 (601535), but weak binding to EFNB1 (300035) and
EFNB2 (600527).

GENE STRUCTURE

Aasheim et al. (2005) determined that the EPHA10 gene contains 17 exons.
Alternative splicing of exons 3 and 15 results in a soluble isoform
EphA10s, which contains only the first 3 exons, and an isoform lacking
the SAM domain, which they called EphA10*.

MAPPING

Aasheim et al. (2005) noted that the EPHA10 gene maps to chromosome
1p34.3.

REFERENCE 1. Aasheim, H.-C.; Patzke, S.; Hjorthaug, H. S.; Finne, E. F.: Characterization
of a novel Eph receptor tyrosine kinase, EphA10, expressed in testis. Biochem.
Biophys. Acta 1723: 1-7, 2005.

2. Robinson, D. R.; Wu, Y.-M.; Lin, S.-F.: The protein tyrosine kinase
family of the human genome. Oncogene 19: 5548-5557, 2000.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 6/20/2007

EDITED terry: 09/20/2007
wwang: 6/20/2007

605453	TITLE *605453 ATP-BINDING CASSETTE, SUBFAMILY B, MEMBER 9; ABCB9
DESCRIPTION For background information on the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family of
transporter proteins, see ABCA4 (601691). In addition to the 'full' ABC
transporters with 2 transmembrane domains and 2 nucleotide-binding
domains, there are 'half' proteins that contain only 1 of each domain
(e.g., ABCB1; 171050). Full transporters are usually found in the plasma
membrane, whereas half transporters are found in subcellular organelles.

By searching an EST database and screening a T-lymphoblast cDNA library,
Zhang et al. (2000) obtained a cDNA encoding ABCB9. Sequence analysis
predicted that the 766-amino acid ABCB9 protein has 10 potential
N-terminal transmembrane segments. ABCB9 shares 94% identity with the
rodent sequences and is approximately 39% identical to 2 human
endoplasmic reticulum half transporters, TAP1 (ABCB2; 170260) and TAP2
(ABCB3; 170261). RT-PCR and genomic sequence analysis established the
existence of a splice variant with a 129-bp deletion expressed in testis
and brain. Northern blot analysis detected low expression of a 3.7-kb
transcript in most tissues tested, with an additional 2.2-kb transcript
detected in tissues with relatively high expression, such as testis.
Western blot analysis showed expression of a 72-kD nonglycosylated
protein, significantly smaller than the predicted mass of 84.5 kD, that
was enriched in lysosomes. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated
colocalization of ABCB9 with the lysosomal proteins LAMP1 (153330) and
LAMP2 (309060). Immunohistochemical analysis detected ABCB9 expression
in Sertoli cells of rodent seminiferous tubules.

Allikmets et al. (1996) mapped an EST corresponding to the ABCB9 gene to
12q24.

REFERENCE 1. Allikmets, R.; Gerrard, B.; Hutchinson, A.; Dean, M.: Characterization
of the human ABC superfamily: isolation and mapping of 21 new genes
using the expressed sequence tags database. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5:
1649-1655, 1996.

2. Zhang, F.; Zhang, W.; Liu, L.; Fisher, C. L.; Hui, D.; Childs,
S.; Dorovini-Zis, K.; Ling, V.: Characterization of ABCB9, an ATP
binding cassette protein associated with lysosomes. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
23287-23294, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/5/2000

EDITED mgross: 12/05/2000

180231	TITLE *180231 RETINOIC ACID-BINDING PROTEIN, CELLULAR, TYPE II; CRABP2
DESCRIPTION CRABP2 is highly expressed in human skin. Giguere et al. (1990) isolated
a cDNA encoding mouse Crabp-2 by a low stringency cloning strategy using
a probe from previously cloned CRABP1 cDNA (180230). MacGregor et al.
(1992) determined the genomic organization of the murine Crabp-2 gene
and performed a detailed analysis of its transcriptional unit. It was
shown to be approximately 4.6 kb long and divided into 4 exons in a
structure common to other members of the family of serum and cellular
retinoid-binding proteins. The chromosomal location of the Crabp-2 locus
was determined by interspecific backcross analysis using progeny derived
from matings of C57BL/6J and M. spretus. Mapping results indicated that
the gene is located on mouse chromosome 2 linked to muscle nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor alpha-chain (Acra) and catalase-1 (Cas-1).
MacGregor et al. (1992) suggested that the human homolog is located on
2q or 11p. Elder et al. (1992) localized the CRABP2 gene to 1q21 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Localization was confirmed by
hybridization of a CRABP2 cDNA clone against a human/mouse hybrid cell
line containing a t(1;6)(q21;q13) translocation chromosome.

Flagiello et al. (1997) mapped CRABP2 to 1q21.3 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Elder, J. T.; Astrom, A.; Pettersson, U.; Voorhees, J. J.; Trent,
J. M.: Assignment of the human CRABP-II gene to chromosome 1q21 by
nonisotopic in situ hybridization. Hum. Genet. 89: 487-490, 1992.

2. Flagiello, D.; Apiou, F.; Gibaud, A.; Poupon, M. F.; Dutrillaux,
B.; Malfoy, B.: Assignment of the genes for cellular retinoic acid
binding protein 1 (CRABP1) and 2 (CRABP2) to human chromosome band
15q24 and 1q21.3, respectively, by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 76: 17-18, 1997.

3. Giguere, V.; Lyn, S.; Yip, P.; Siu, C.-H.; Amin, S.: Molecular
cloning of cDNA encoding a second cellular retinoic acid-binding protein. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 6233-6237, 1990.

4. MacGregor, T. M.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Giguere, V.
: The murine gene for cellular retinoic acid-binding protein type
II: genomic organization, chromosomal localization, and post-transcriptional
regulation by retinoic acid. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 7777-7783, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/15/1992

EDITED jenny: 06/23/1997
mark: 6/19/1997
carol: 4/7/1993
carol: 9/18/1992
carol: 6/19/1992
carol: 6/15/1992

610865	TITLE *610865 FELINE LEUKEMIA VIRUS SUBGROUP C RECEPTOR 2; FLVCR2
;;FLVCR-LIKE ON CHROMOSOME 14q; FLVCRL14q;;
CALCIUM CHELATE TRANSPORTER; CCT;;
CHROMOSOME 14 OPEN READING FRAME 58; C14ORF58
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The FLVCR2 gene encodes a transmembrane protein that belongs to the
major facilitator superfamily of secondary carriers that transport small
solutes in response to chemiosmotic ion gradients, such as calcium
(summary by Meyer et al., 2010).

CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to FLVCR1 (609144),
Lipovich et al. (2002) identified FLVCR2, which they called FLVCRL14q.
The deduced 527-amino acid protein contains 12 transmembrane domains and
the N- and C-terminal domains are cytoplasmic. A splice variant, in
which exon 1 is directly spliced to exon 9, encodes a putative 83-amino
acid protein that lacks all transmembrane domains.

Brasier et al. (2004) used a rat cDNA for a calcitonin (114130)-like
receptor to design 5-prime and 3-prime RACE primers, and they cloned 4
CCT transcripts from a human pituitary cDNA library. All transcripts
encode a deduced 526-amino acid protein that has an N-terminal hexad
repeat, 6 extracellular loops, and a C-terminal polyglutamate sequence.
EST analysis detected CCT in brain, heart, kidney, lung, placenta,
uterus, cervix, prostate, testis, germ cells, and whole fetus.
Immunofluorescence analysis of human pituitary detected CCT
predominantly in acidophils. Brasier et al. (2004) also identified 3 Cct
transcripts in mouse, which encode a deduced 551-amino acid protein. In
developing rat, Cct expression was restricted to osteoclasts,
chondrocytes, thyroid, pituitary, central nervous system, eye, liver,
kidney, and heart, and in mouse, intraplacental yolk sac showed Cct
expression. In mouse and rat kidney, Cct was expressed in the distal
portions of nephrons and collecting ducts.

By searching a database for sequences similar to FLVCR1, followed by PCR
of a rhabdomyosarcoma cell line cDNA library, Brown et al. (2006) cloned
FLVCR2, which encodes a protein with a calculated molecular mass of 60
kD. It has 3 potential N-glycosylation motifs. Western blot analysis
detected FLVCR2 proteins at 55 kD and 40 kD. However, N-glycosidase
treatment did not alter the molecular mass of the larger protein.

Using quantitative real-time PCR, Duffy et al. (2010) detected variable
FLVCR2 expression in all human tissues examined, with highest expression
in placenta, followed by adult and fetal liver.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lipovich et al. (2002) determined that the FLVCR2 gene contains 10
exons. The transcription start site is within a predicted CpG island,
and there are 2 polyadenylation signals at the 3-prime end.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Brasier et al. (2004) mapped the FLVCR2
gene to chromosome 14q24.3. They mapped the mouse Flvcr2 gene to
chromosome 12.

EVOLUTION

Lipovich et al. (2002) identified genes, including the FLVCR1-FLVCR2
paralogs, involved in a chromosome 1q/14q block duplication.
Phylogenetic analysis suggested that the duplication occurred early
within or immediately prior to the divergence of the vertebrate lineage,
between the protostome-deuterostome and amniote-amphibian divergences.

GENE FUNCTION

Infection of cells by the highly anemogenic feline leukemia virus
subgroup C (FeLV-C) is mediated by the binding of FeLV-C envelope
protein to FLVCR1. By assaying transfected mouse cells, Brown et al.
(2006) determined that, unlike FLVCR1, FLVCR2 does not bind FeLV-C
envelope protein. However, an asn463-to-asp mutation rendered FLVCR2
functional as an FeLV-C receptor.

Duffy et al. (2010) found that both human FLVCR1 and FLVCR2 bound
immobilized heme. Using hamster or human cell lines and Xenopus oocytes,
they confirmed that overexpression of human FLVCR1 resulted in heme
export, but in contrast, overexpression of FLVCR2 resulted in heme
import. Overexpression of FLVCR2 also rendered transfected cells more
sensitive to heme toxicity. Downregulation of FLVCR2 via small
interfering RNA inhibited heme import. Duffy et al. (2010) concluded
that FLVCR2 functions in heme import.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By genomewide linkage analysis, followed by candidate gene sequencing,
Meyer et al. (2010) identified a homozygous mutation in the FLVCR2 gene
(T430R; 610865.0001) in 5 fetuses with proliferative vasculopathy and
hydranencephaly-hydrocephaly syndrome (PVHH; 225790) from 3
consanguineous Pakistani families. The disorder is also known as Fowler
syndrome. Two additional fetuses of Northern European origin with the
disorder were each found to be compound heterozygous for 2 mutations in
the FLVCR2 gene (610865.0002-610865.0005). Meyer et al. (2010) suggested
that the disorder may involve defects in proliferation and motility of
vascular endothelial cells in the brain, which are calcium-dependent
events.

Using exome sequencing, Lalonde et al. (2010) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the FLVCR2 gene (610865.0006 and
610865.0007) in a fetus with proliferative vasculopathy and
hydranencephaly-hydrocephaly syndrome.

By genomewide linkage analysis followed by high-throughput sequencing of
7 families with Fowler syndrome, Thomas et al. (2010) identified
homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations affecting the FLVCR2 gene
(see, e.g., Y134X; 610865.0008). Two of the families, of Turkish origin,
carried a large deletion. The patients and families had previously been
reported by Bessieres-Grattagliano et al. (2009).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PROLIFERATIVE VASCULOPATHY AND HYDRANENCEPHALY-HYDROCEPHALY SYNDROME
FLVCR2, THR430ARG

In 5 fetuses with proliferative vasculopathy and
hydranencephaly-hydrocephaly syndrome (PVHH; 225790) from 3
consanguineous Pakistani families, Meyer et al. (2010) identified a
homozygous 1289C-G transversion in exon 7 of the FLVCR2 gene, resulting
in a thr430-to-arg (T430R) substitution in a highly conserved region in
an intracellular loop of the protein. The mutation was not found in 646
control chromosomes.

.0002
PROLIFERATIVE VASCULOPATHY AND HYDRANENCEPHALY-HYDROCEPHALY SYNDROME
FLVCR2, 6-BP DEL, NT329

In a fetus of Northern European origin with proliferative vasculopathy
and hydranencephaly-hydrocephaly syndrome (225790), Meyer et al. (2010)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the FLVCR2 gene: a
6-bp deletion (329_334del) in exon 1, and a 1192C-G transversion in exon
6, resulting in a leu398-to-val (L398V; 610865.0003) substitution. The
6-bp deletion removed 3 conserved amino acids (asn110 to phe 112) and
introduced an isoleucine residue in the predicted first extracellular
loop (Asn110_Phe112delinsIle). The L398V substitution occurred in a
highly conserved residue in close proximity to transmembrane domain-9
(TM9). Neither mutation was found in at least 936 control chromosomes.
Lalonde et al. (2010) identified the same compound heterozygous
mutations in a second affected fetus from the family reported by Meyer
et al. (2010).

.0003
PROLIFERATIVE VASCULOPATHY AND HYDRANENCEPHALY-HYDROCEPHALY SYNDROME
FLVCR2, LEU398VAL

See 610865.0002 and Meyer et al. (2010).

.0004
PROLIFERATIVE VASCULOPATHY AND HYDRANENCEPHALY-HYDROCEPHALY SYNDROME
FLVCR2, SER158TER

In a fetus of northern European origin with proliferative vasculopathy
and hydranencephaly-hydrocephaly syndrome (225790), Meyer et al. (2010)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the FLVCR2 gene: a
473C-A transversion in exon 1, resulting in a ser158-to-ter (S158X)
substitution in the predicted transmembrane domain-3 (TM3), and an
839C-G transversion in exon 3, resulting in a pro280-to-arg (P280R;
610865.0005) substitution. The P280R substitution occurred in a highly
conserved residue in an intracellular loop. Neither mutation was found
in at least 936 control chromosomes.

.0005
PROLIFERATIVE VASCULOPATHY AND HYDRANENCEPHALY-HYDROCEPHALY SYNDROME
FLVCR2, PRO280ARG

See 610865.0004 and Meyer et al. (2010).

.0006
PROLIFERATIVE VASCULOPATHY AND HYDRANENCEPHALY-HYDROCEPHALY SYNDROME
FLVCR2, ALA326VAL

In a fetus, born of French Canadian parents, with proliferative
vasculopathy and hydranencephaly-hydrocephaly syndrome (225790), Lalonde
et al. (2010) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the
FLVCR2 gene: a 997C-T transition in exon 4, resulting in an
ala326-to-val (A326V) substitution at the end of the sixth transmembrane
domain (TM6), and a T-to-C transition in intron 7 (1341+2T-C;
610865.0007), predicted to result in the skipping of exon 7 or retention
of intron 7, disrupting the tenth transmembrane domain (TM10) and
potentially resulting in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. The parents had
previously lost a fetus with a similar phenotype, but no DNA sample was
available for study.

.0007
PROLIFERATIVE VASCULOPATHY AND HYDRANENCEPHALY-HYDROCEPHALY SYNDROME
FLVCR2, IVS7DS, T-C, +2

See 610865.0006 and Lalonde et al. (2010).

.0008
PROLIFERATIVE VASCULOPATHY AND HYDRANENCEPHALY-HYDROCEPHALY SYNDROME
FLVCR2, TYR134TER

In 2 fetuses from a nonconsanguineous French family with Fowler syndrome
(225790), previously reported by Bessieres-Grattagliano et al. (2009),
Thomas et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 402C-G transversion in the
FLVCR2 gene, resulting in a tyr134-to-ter (Y134X) substitution in
transmembrane domain-2 (TM2). The sibs had macrocrania, limb
contractures, hydrocephlus, and thin cerebral walls with characteristic
encephaloclastic proliferative vasculopathy affecting both the brain and
spinal cord.

REFERENCE 1. Bessieres-Grattagliano, B.; Foliguet, B.; Devisme, L.; Loeuillet,
L.; Marcorelles, P.; Bonniere, M.; Laquerriere, A.; Fallet-Bianco,
C.; Martinovic, J.; Zrelli, S.; Leticee, N.; Cayol, V.; Etchevers,
H. C.; Vekemans, M.; Attie-Bitach, T.; Encha-Razavi, F.: Refining
the clinicopathological pattern of cerebral proliferative glomeruloid
vasculopathy (Fowler syndrome): report of 16 fetal cases. Europ.
J. Med. Genet. 52: 386-392, 2009.

2. Brasier, G.; Tikellis, C.; Xuereb, L.; Craigie, J.; Casley, D.;
Kovacs, C. S.; Fudge, N. J.; Kalnins, R.; Cooper, M. E.; Wookey, P.
J.: Novel hexad repeats conserved in a putative transporter with
restricted expression in cell types associated with growth, calcium
exchange and homeostasis. Exp. Cell Res. 293: 31-42, 2004.

3. Brown, J. K.; Fung, C.; Tailor, C. S.: Comprehensive mapping of
receptor-functioning domains in feline leukemia virus subgroup C receptor
FLVCR1. J. Virol. 80: 1742-1751, 2006.

4. Duffy, S. P.; Shing, J.; Saraon, P.; Berger, L. C.; Eiden, M. V.;
Wilde, A.; Tailor, C. S.: The Fowler syndrome-associated protein
FLVCR2 is an importer of heme. Molec. Cell. Biol. 30: 5318-5324,
2010.

5. Lalonde, E.; Albrecht, S.; Ha, K. C. H.; Jacob, K.; Bolduc, N.;
Polychronakos, C.; Dechelotte, P.; Majewski, J.; Jabado, N.: Unexpected
allelic heterogeneity and spectrum of mutations in Fowler syndrome
revealed by next-generation exome sequencing. Hum. Mutat. 31: 918-923,
2010.

6. Lipovich, L.; Hughes, A. L.; King, M.-C.; Abkowitz, J. L.; Quigley,
J. G.: Genomic structure and evolutionary context of the human feline
leukemia virus subgroup C receptor (hFLVCR) gene: evidence for block
duplications and de novo gene formation within duplicons of the hFLVCR
locus. Gene 286: 203-213, 2002.

7. Meyer, E.; Ricketts, C.; Morgan, N. V.; Morris, M. R.; Pasha, S.;
Tee, L. J.; Rahman, F.; Bazin, A.; Bessieres, B.; Dechelotte, P.;
Yacoubi, M. T.; Al-Adnani, M.; Marton, T.; Tannahill, D.; Trembath,
R. C.; Fallet-Bianco, C.; Cox, P.; Williams, D.; Maher, E. R.: Mutations
in FLVCR2 are associated with proliferative vasculopathy and hydranencephaly-hydrocephaly
syndrome (Fowler syndrome). Am. J. Hum. Genet. 86: 471-478, 2010.

8. Thomas, S.; Encha-Razavi, F.; Devisme, L.; Etchevers, H.; Bessieres-Grattagliano,
B.; Goudefroye, G.; Elkhartoufi, N.; Pateau, E.; Ichkou, A.; Bonniere,
M.; Marcorelle, P.; Parent, P.; and 20 others: High-throughput
sequencing of a 4.1 Mb linkage interval reveals FLVCR2 deletions and
mutations in lethal cerebral vasculopathy. Hum. Mutat. 31: 1134-1141,
2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/22/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/8/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/23/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/15/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/21/2007

EDITED mgross: 01/09/2012
terry: 12/22/2011
wwang: 3/22/2011
ckniffin: 3/8/2011
carol: 2/11/2011
wwang: 11/30/2010
ckniffin: 11/23/2010
wwang: 4/16/2010
ckniffin: 4/15/2010
wwang: 3/21/2007

603805	TITLE *603805 TRANSGLUTAMINASE 5; TGM5
;;TRANSGLUTAMINASE X; TGX
DESCRIPTION Transglutaminases (EC 2.3.2.13) represent a family of enzymes capable of
stabilizing protein assemblies by gamma-glutamyl-epsilon-lysine
crosslinks. For additional background information about
transglutaminases, see TGM1 (190195).

CLONING

By RT-PCR of keratinocyte mRNA with degenerate primers based on the
conserved transglutaminase active-site region, Aeschlimann et al. (1998)
isolated a partial cDNA encoding a novel member of this family, TGM5,
which they designated transglutaminase X (TGX). Using anchored PCR, the
authors cloned additional cDNAs encoding 2 TGX isoforms: a long
720-amino acid form and a short 638-amino acid form. The long form
contains an insert in the N-terminal region. Grenard et al. (2001)
identified the 2 isoforms as products of alternative gene splicing.
Aeschlimann et al. (1998) found that TGM5 contains the conserved
structural requirements for transglutaminase activity and calcium
binding. Overall, TGM5 shares 40%, 42%, 35%, and 31% protein sequence
identity with TGC (TGM2; 190196), TGE (TGM3; 600238), TGK (TGM1;
190195), and TGP (TGM4; 600585), respectively. Northern blot analysis
revealed that TGM5 is expressed as 2.2- and 2.8-kb mRNAs in foreskin
keratinocytes. By Northern dot blot analysis, Grenard et al. (2001)
found ubiquitous expression of TGM5, with highest levels in the female
reproductive system, skeletal muscle, and fetal tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Aeschlimann et al. (1998) found that expression of TGM5 increased
severalfold when keratinocyte cultures were induced to differentiate by
suspension or growth to postconfluency. They suggested that TGM5
contributes to the formation of the cornified cell envelope of
keratinocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Grenard et al. (2001) determined that the TGM5 gene contains 13 exons
and spans about 35 kb. They identified a number of potential
transcription factor binding sites in the promoter region but no classic
TATA box.

MAPPING

By FISH, Grenard et al. (2001) mapped the TGM5 gene to chromosome
15q15.2. Using long-range genomic PCR, they found that TGM5 is part of a
tandemly arranged cluster of TGM genes, including EPB42 (177070) and
TGM7 (606776), in a 100-kb region. By radiation hybrid analysis, they
mapped the mouse Tgm5, Tgm7, and Epb42 genes in close proximity in a
region of syntenic homology on chromosome 2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Peeling skin syndrome (270300) is an autosomal recessive disorder
characterized by the continuous shedding of the outer layers of the
epidermis from birth and throughout life. In some families, an acral
form of peeling skin syndrome (609796) has been reported, in which skin
peeling is strictly limited to the dorsa of the hands and the feet;
ultrastructural and histologic analysis showed a level of blistering
high in the epidermis at the stratum granulosum-stratum corneum junction
(Shwayder et al., 1997; Hashimoto et al., 2000). Cassidy et al. (2005)
mapped a gene for acral peeling skin syndrome to 15q15.2 and identified
the same loss-of-function mutation in homozygous state in the TGM5 gene
in 2 unrelated families (603805.0001).

Cassidy et al. (2005) excluded the TGM5 locus in a large, consanguineous
kindred of Middle Eastern origin with more widespread peeling skin and,
in addition, failed to detect TGM5 mutations in 3 small, outbred
families with widespread peeling skin phenotypes. In all these families,
onset was in infancy and the phenotype was similar to the classic,
generalized form of peeling skin syndrome.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PEELING SKIN SYNDROME, ACRAL TYPE
TGM5, GLY113CYS

Cassidy et al. (2005) described a homozygous missense mutation in exon 3
of the TGM5 gene in members of 2 unrelated families, 1 Dutch and 1
Scottish, who suffered from the acral form of peeling skin syndrome
(609796). A gly113-to-cys (G113C) mutation arose from a 337G-to-T
transversion. In fact, 2 homozygous missense mutations were found;
evidence was presented that one was a rare polymorphism and that G113C
was the pathogenic change.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Judge et al. (2004); Traupe  (1989); Uitto and Richard (2004)
REFERENCE 1. Aeschlimann, D.; Koeller, M. K.; Allen-Hoffmann, B. L.; Mosher,
D. F.: Isolation of a cDNA encoding a novel member of the transglutaminase
gene family from human keratinocytes: detection and identification
of transglutaminase gene products based on reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction with degenerate primers. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 3452-3460,
1998.

2. Cassidy, A. J.; van Steensel, M. A. M.; Steijlen, P. M.; van Geel,
M.; van der Velden, J.; Morley, S. M.; Terrinoni, A.; Melino, G.;
Candi, E.; McLean, W. H. I.: A homozygous missense mutation in TGM5
abolishes epidermal transglutaminase 5 activity and causes acral peeling
skin syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 77: 909-917, 2005.

3. Grenard, P.; Bates, M. K.; Aeschlimann, D.: Evolution of transglutaminase
genes: identification of a transglutaminase gene cluster on human
chromosome 15q15: structure of the gene encoding transglutaminase
X and a novel gene family member, transglutaminase Z. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
33066-33078, 2001.

4. Hashimoto, K.; Hamzavi, I.; Tanaka, K.; Shwayder, T.: Acral peeling
skin syndrome. J. Am. Acad. Derm. 43: 1112-1119, 2000.

5. Judge, M. R.; McLean, W. H. I.; Munro, C. S.: Disorders of keratinization.In:
Burns, T.; Breathnach, S.; Cox, C.; Griffiths, C. (eds.): Rook's
Textbook of Dermatology. Vol. 2: Oxford  Blackwell Scientific
2004. Pp. 54-56.

6. Shwayder, T.; Conn, S.; Lowe, L.: Acral peeling skin syndrome. Arch.
Derm. 133: 535-536, 1997.

7. Traupe, H.: The Ichthyoses: A Guide to Clinical Diagnosis, Genetic
Counseling, and Therapy.  Berlin: Springer-Verlag (pub.)  1989.

8. Uitto, J.; Richard, G.: Progress in epidermolysis bullosa: genetic
classification and clinical implications. Am. J. Med. Genet. C Semin.
Med. Genet. 131C: 61-74, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/12/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/25/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/12/1999

EDITED terry: 12/08/2010
terry: 5/12/2010
wwang: 1/17/2006
alopez: 12/15/2005
terry: 12/12/2005
carol: 3/25/2002
alopez: 5/13/1999
alopez: 5/12/1999

600778	TITLE *600778 CYCLIN-DEPENDENT KINASE INHIBITOR 1B; CDKN1B
;;p27(KIP1);;
KIP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CDKN1B, or p27(KIP1), is a cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor that blocks
the cell cycle in the G0/G1 phase upon differentiation signals or
cellular insult. CDKN1B also regulates cell motility and apoptosis
(summary by Cuesta et al., 2009).

CLONING

Using a cDNA probe amplified from the MV1Lu mink cell line to screen a
kidney cDNA library, Polyak et al. (1994) cloned human CDKN1B, which
they called KIP1. The deduced 198-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 22.3 kD. It has a 60-amino acid N-terminal domain that
shares 44% identity with the corresponding region of CIP1/WAF1 (CDKN1A;
116899). It also has a C-terminal bipartite nuclear localization signal
and a consensus CDC2 (CDK1; 116940) phosphorylation site. KIP1 shares
about 90% amino acid identity with mink and mouse Kip1, with highest
identity in the N-terminal domain. Northern blot analysis detected
variable expression of a 2.5-kb transcript in all human tissues
examined.

Stegmaier et al. (1995) studied loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the
region 12p13-p12 in acute lymphoblastic leukemia; this chromosomal
region often shows deletion in such patients. In 15% of informative
patients, there was evidence of LOH of the TEL locus (600618) which was
not evident on cytogenetic analysis. Detailed examination of patients
with LOH showed that the critically deleted region included a second
candidate tumor suppressor gene, referred to by them as KIP1, which
encodes the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor previously called p27
(Toyoshima and Hunter, 1994 and Polyak et al., 1994). Based on the STS
content of TEL-positive YACs, Stegmaier et al. (1995) reported that KIP1
and TEL were in close proximity.

GENE FUNCTION

Polyak et al. (1994) showed that recombinant mouse Kip1 inhibited
phosphorylation of histone H1 (see 142709) by human cyclin A (see CCNA1;
604036)-CDK2 (116953), cyclin E (CCNE1; 123837)-CDK2, and cyclin B1
(CCNB1; 123836)-CDK2 complexes. Addition of Kip1 also inhibited
phosphorylation of RB (614041) by cyclin E-CDK2, cyclin A-CDK2, and
cyclin D2 (CCND2; 123833)-CDK4 (123829). The isolated N-terminal domain
of Kip1 had similar inhibitory activity in these assays. Kip1 bound to
preactivated cyclin E-CDK2 complexes and prevented phosphorylation and
activation of CDK2 in A549 human lung carcinoma cells. Kip1 activity was
lowest in S phase in MV1Lu cells, and Kip1 overexpression inhibited S
phase entry. Kip1 mRNA content remained unchanged during the cell cycle,
suggesting that Kip1 activity was controlled at a posttranscriptional
level. Polyak et al. (1994) concluded that KIP1 can inhibit both CDK
activation and the kinase activity of assembled and activated
cyclin-CDK.

CDK activation requires association with cyclins and phosphorylation by
CAK (CCNH; 601953) and leads to cell proliferation. Inhibition of
cellular proliferation occurs upon association of CDK inhibitor (e.g.,
CDKN1B) with a cyclin-CDK complex. Sheaff et al. (1997) showed that
expression of CCNE1-CDK2 at physiologic levels of ATP resulted in
phosphorylation of CDKN1B at thr187, leading to elimination of CDKN1B
from the cell and progression of the cell cycle from G1 to S phase. At
low ATP levels, the inhibitory functions of CDKN1B were enhanced,
thereby arresting cell proliferation.

Apoptosis of human endothelial cells after growth factor deprivation is
associated with rapid and dramatic upregulation of cyclin A (see
604036)-associated CDK2 activity. Levkau et al. (1998) showed that in
apoptotic cells the carboxyl-termini of the CDK inhibitors CDKN1A and
CDKN1B are truncated by specific cleavage. The enzyme involved in this
cleavage is CASP3 (600636) and/or a CASP3-like caspase. After cleavage,
CDKN1A loses its nuclear localization sequence and exits the nucleus.
Cleavage of CDKN1A and CDKN1B resulted in a substantial reduction in
their association with nuclear cyclin-CDK2 complexes, leading to a
dramatic induction of CDK2 activity. Dominant-negative CDK2, as well as
a mutant CDKN1A resistant to caspase cleavage, partially suppressed
apoptosis. These data suggested that CDK2 activation, through
caspase-mediated cleavage of CDK inhibitors, may be instrumental in the
execution of apoptosis following caspase activation.

High levels of p27(KIP1), present in quiescent (G0) cells, have been
shown to decline upon mitogen induction (Sherr and Roberts, 1995).
Braun-Dullaeus et al. (1999) explored the role of p27(KIP1) and other
cell cycle proteins in mediating angiotensin II (see 106150)-induced
vascular smooth muscle cell hypertrophy or hyperplasia. Angiotensin II
treatment (100 nM) of quiescent vascular smooth muscle cells led to
upregulation of the cell cycle regulatory proteins cyclin D1 (168461),
CDK2, proliferating cell nuclear antigen (176740), and CDK1. Levels of
p27(KIP1), however, remained high, and the activation of the G1-phase
CDK2 was inhibited as the cells underwent hypertrophy. Angiotensin II
stimulated an increase in [(3)H]thymidine incorporation and the
percentage of S-phase cells in p27(KIP1) antisense oligodeoxynucleotide
(ODN)-transfected cells but not in control ODN transfected cells. The
authors concluded that angiotensin II stimulation of quiescent cells in
which p27(KIP1) levels are high results in hypertrophy but promotes
hyperplasia when levels of p27(KIP1) are low, as in the presence of
other growth factors.

Medema et al. (2000) demonstrated that p27(KIP1) is a major target of
AFX-like forkhead proteins. They demonstrated that AFX integrates
signals from PI3K/PKB (see AKT1; 164730) signaling and RAS (see
190020)/RAL (see 179551) signaling to regulate transcription of
p27(KIP1). They demonstrated that p27 -/- cells are significantly less
inhibited by AFX activity than their p27 +/+ counterparts.

Dijkers et al. (2002) showed that both cytokine withdrawal and Fkhrl1
(FOXO3A; 602681) activation induced apoptosis in mammalian cell lines
through a death receptor-independent pathway. This involved
transcriptional upregulation of p27(KIP1) and proapoptotic Bim (BCL2L11;
603827), loss of mitochondrial integrity, cytochrome c release, and
caspase activation. PKB protected cells from cytokine withdrawal-induced
apoptosis by inhibiting Fkhrl1, resulting in the maintenance of
mitochondrial integrity.

Peters and Ostrander (2001) commented on the work of Di Cristofano et
al. (2001), demonstrating how cooperation between Cdkn1b and Pten
(601728) contribute to suppression of prostate tumors. They gave a
useful tabulation of the cytogenetic location of 16 mapped prostate
cancer susceptibility loci and candidate genes.

Phosphorylation leads to the ubiquitination and degradation of CDKN1B.
Carrano et al. (1999) determined that SKP2 (601436) specifically
recognizes phosphorylated CDKN1B predominantly in S phase rather than in
G1 phase, and is the ubiquitin-protein ligase necessary for CDKN1B
ubiquitination.

Shin et al. (2002) demonstrated a novel mechanism of AKT-mediated
regulation of p27(KIP1). Blockade of HER2/NEU (164870) in tumor cells
inhibited AKT kinase activity and upregulated nuclear levels of
p27(KIP1). Recombinant AKT and AKT precipitated from tumor cells
phosphorylated wildtype p27 in vitro. P27 contains an AKT consensus
RXRXXT(157)D within its nuclear localization motif. Active
(myristoylated) AKT phosphorylated wildtype p27 in vivo but was unable
to phosphorylate a T157A-p27 mutant. Wildtype p27 localized in the
cytosol and nucleus, whereas the mutant p27 localized exclusively in the
nucleus and was resistant to nuclear exclusion by AKT. Expression of
phosphorylated AKT in primary human breast cancers statistically
correlated with the expression of p27 in tumor cytosol. Shin et al.
(2002) concluded that AKT may contribute to tumor cell proliferation by
phosphorylation and cytosolic retention of p27, thus relieving CDK2 from
p27-induced inhibition.

Liang et al. (2002) demonstrated that AKT phosphorylates p27, impairs
the nuclear import of p27, and opposes cytokine-mediated G1 arrest. In
cells transfected with constitutively active AKT, wildtype p27
mislocalized to the cytoplasm, but mutant p27 was nuclear. In cells with
activated AKT, wildtype p27 failed to cause G1 arrest, while the
antiproliferative effect of the mutant p27 was not impaired. Cytoplasm
p27 was seen in 41% (52 of 128) primary human breast cancers in
conjunction with AKT activation and was correlated with a poor patient
prognosis. Liang et al. (2002) concluded that their data showed a novel
mechanism whereby AKT impairs p27 function that is associated with an
aggressive phenotype in human breast cancer.

Viglietto et al. (2002) independently demonstrated that AKT regulates
cell proliferation in breast cancer cells by preventing
p27(KIP1)-mediated growth arrest. They also showed that threonine at
position 157 is an AKT phosphorylation site and causes retention of
p27(KIP1) in the cytoplasm, precluding p27(KIP1)-induced G1 arrest.

Gopfert et al. (2003) analyzed fragments of the p27 transcript for their
contribution to cell cycle-regulated translation. An element in the p27
5-prime UTR rendered reporter translation cell cycle-sensitive with
maximal translation in G1-arrested cells. The 114-bp element contained a
G/C-rich hairpin domain that was predicted to form multiple stable
stemloops and also overlapped with a small upstream open reading frame
(ORF). Both structures contributed to cell cycle-regulated translation.
The upstream ORF could be translated in vitro, and its sequence and
position were evolutionarily conserved in mouse and chicken. The precise
sequence or length of the upstream ORF-encoded peptide were not
important for p27 translation, suggesting that ribosomal recruitment to
its initiation codon, rather than the translation product itself,
contributes to the regulation.

Using NIH-3T3 mouse fibroblasts and mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Kamura
et al. (2004) found that Skp2 was the major ubiquitin ligase involved in
ubiquitination of nuclear p27(KIP1) at the S and G2 phases, and that a
complex made up of Kpc1 (RNF123; 614472) and Kpc2 (UBAC1; 608129)
ubiquitinated cytoplasmic p27(KIP1) at G1 phase. Cytoplasmic degradation
of p27(KIP1) required p27(KIP1) nuclear export by Crm1 (XPO1; 602559).

The inverse relationship between proliferation and differentiation in
osteoblasts has been well documented. Thomas et al. (2004) found that
Runx2 (600211), a master regulator of osteoblast differentiation in
mammalian cells, was disrupted in 6 of 7 mammalian osteosarcoma cell
lines. Immunohistochemical analysis of human osteosarcomas indicated
that expression of p27(KIP1) was also lost as tumors lost osteogenic
differentiation. Thomas et al. (2004) found that ectopic expression of
Runx2 induced growth arrest through p27(KIP1)-induced inhibition of
S-phase cyclin complexes, followed by dephosphorylation of RB1 (614041)
and G1 cell cycle arrest. They concluded that RUNX2 establishes a
terminally differentiated state in osteoblasts through RB1- and
p27(KIP1)-dependent mechanisms that are disrupted in osteosarcomas.

White et al. (2006) showed that postmitotic supporting cells purified
from the postnatal mouse cochlea retain the ability to divide and
trans-differentiate into new hair cells in culture. Furthermore, they
demonstrated that age-dependent changes in supporting cell proliferative
capacity are due in part to changes in the ability to downregulate
p27(Kip1). White et al. (2006) concluded that postnatal mammalian
supporting cells are potential targets for therapeutic manipulation.

Grimmler et al. (2007) found that a conserved tyrosine (Y88) in the
CDK-inhibitory domain of human p27 could be phosphorylated by the Src
family kinase LYN (165120) and the oncogene product BCR-ABL (see
189980). Phosphorylation of Y88 did not prevent binding of p27 to cyclin
A/CDK2, but it caused phosphorylated Y88 and the inhibitory domain of
p27 to be ejected from the CDK2 active site, restoring partial CDK
activity. This allowed Y88-phosphorylated p27 to be efficiently
phosphorylated on thr187 by CDK2, which in turn promoted its
SCF-SKP2-dependent degradation.

Chu et al. (2007) showed that the oncogenic kinase SRC (190090)
phosphorylated human p27 at Y74 and Y88. SRC inhibitors increased
cellular p27 stability, whereas SRC overexpression accelerated p27
proteolysis. SRC-phosphorylated p27 inhibited cyclin E/CDK2 poorly in
vitro, and SRC transfection reduced p27/cyclin E/CDK2 complexes.
SRC-activated human breast cancer cell lines exhibited reduced p27, and
there was a correlation between SRC activation and reduced nuclear p27
in 482 primary human breast cancers. In tamoxifen-resistant breast
cancer cell lines, SRC inhibition increased p27 levels and restored
tamoxifen sensitivity. Chu et al. (2007) concluded that SRC-mediated
phosphorylation of p27 reduces its inhibitory action on cyclin E/CDK2,
facilitating subsequent p27 proteolysis.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of an adult human heart cDNA library, Hauck
et al. (2008) showed that p27 interacted with the C-terminal region of
casein kinase-2 (CK2)-alpha-prime (CSNK2A2; 115442). Immunocytochemical
analysis of primary rat ventricular cardiomyocytes revealed
colocalization of p27 with CK2-alpha-prime. Angiotensin II, a potent
inducer of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, induced proteasomal degradation of
p27 in primary rat cardiomyocytes through CK2-alpha-prime-dependent
phosphorylation of p27 on ser83 and thr187, which are conserved in
humans and rodents. Conversely, unphosphorylated p27 potently inhibited
CK2-alpha-prime. Hauck et al. (2008) concluded that downregulation of
p27 by CK2-alpha-prime is necessary for development of agonist- and
stress-induced cardiac hypertrophy.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short noncoding RNAs that bind to complementary
sequences in the 3-prime UTRs of target mRNAs and inhibit their
expression. Kedde et al. (2007) showed that the expression of DND1
(609385), an evolutionarily conserved RNA-binding protein, counteracted
the inhibitory effect of several miRNAs in human cells and in primordial
germ cells of zebrafish by preventing the association of miRNAs with
their target mRNAs. Kedde et al. (2007) detailed the effect of DND1 on
the downregulation of p27 mRNA by miR221 (MIRN221; 300568) in human
cells. Introduction of DND1 abolished the interaction between miR221 and
the 3-prime UTR of p27 mRNA and countered the downregulation of p27
expression by miR221. DND1 bound a uridine-rich region in the 3-prime
UTR of p27 mRNA that is near the miR221-binding site and prevented
miR221 binding. At least 1 of the 2 uridine-rich regions in the p27
3-prime UTR and the RNA-binding domain of DND1 were required to rescue
p27 expression.

Cuesta et al. (2009) found that translation of p27 in HeLa cells and
HL60 human promyelocytic leukemia cells was cap dependent. Translation
via a proposed internal ribosome entry site appeared to be artifactual,
resulting from the presence of cryptic promoters in the 5-prime UTR.
Cuesta et al. (2009) showed that the dramatic increase in p27 following
phorbol ester treatment was not due to increased mRNA levels, but rather
to downregulation of MIR181A (see 612742) and relief of
MIR181A-dependent translational repression. The 3-prime UTR of p27 mRNA
contains 2 possible MIR181A-binding sites, 1 of which overlaps the
MIR221-binding site. Both MIR181A-binding sites could repress p27
translation either individually or synergistically.

Lin et al. (2010) showed that although Skp2 inactivation on its own does
not induce cellular senescence, aberrant protooncogenic signals as well
as inactivation of tumor suppressor genes do trigger a potent,
tumor-suppressive senescence response in mice and cells devoid of Skp2.
Notably, Skp2 inactivation and oncogenic stress-driven senescence
neither elicit activation of the p19(Arf) (see 600160)-p53 (191170)
pathway nor DNA damage, but instead depend on Aft4 (604064), p27, and
p21 (116899). Lin et al. (2010) further demonstrated that genetic Skp2
inactivation evokes cellular senescence even in oncogenic conditions in
which the p19(Arf)-p53 response is impaired, whereas a Skp2-SCF complex
inhibitor can trigger cellular senescence in p53/Pten (601728)-deficient
cells and tumor regression in preclinical studies. Lin et al. (2010)
concluded that their findings provided proof-of-principle evidence that
pharmacologic inhibition of Skp2 may represent a general approach for
cancer prevention and therapy.

MAPPING

Baens et al. (1995) characterized 117 cDNAs isolated by direct cDNA
selection using pools of human chromosome 12p cosmids. Among these, 3
matched previously determined cDNA sequences, including the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor referred to as KIP1. STSs were
developed for all cosmids. Regional assignment of the STSs by PCR
analysis with somatic cell hybrids and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) showed that the loci mapped to 12p13. Martin et al.
(1995) mapped this gene, which they referred to as CDKN4, to 12p12.3 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. By PCR-based screening of genomic
YAC clones of the CEPH library, they isolated 7 containing the KIP1
gene. In 4 of these YACs, they found a common STS, D12S358, and 1 of the
4 YACs also contained an additional STS, D12S320, which had been located
4 cM apart from D12S358 on the Genethon genetic map. Most of the YACs
containing the KIP1 gene had been assigned to chromosome 12 from
hybridization data of inter-Alu PCR products from somatic hybrids.

By FISH, Saito et al. (1999) mapped the mouse Kip gene to chromosome
7D3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia, Type IV

In a 48-year-old Caucasian female with primary hyperparathyroidism and a
history of pituitary adenoma, consistent with multiple endocrine
neoplasia type IV (MEN4; 610755), Pellegata et al. (2006) identified a
heterozygous nonsense mutation in the CDKN1B gene (600778.0001). The
mutation was also identified in her older sister who had renal
angiomyolipoma, her youngest sister, and that sister's teenage daughter,
who reported no symptoms but did not undergo thorough examination. No
mutations in the MEN1 gene (613733) were found in the proband or her
older sister.

- Other Disease Associations

Chang et al. (2004) analyzed the CDKN1B gene in 188 families with
hereditary prostate cancer (see 176807) and found a significant
association between the SNP -79C/T (dbSNP rs34330) and prostate cancer.
The -79C allele was overtransmitted from parents to affected offspring,
an association that was observed primarily in offspring whose age at
diagnosis was less than 65 years. Chang et al. (2004) suggested that
germline variants of this gene play a role in prostate cancer
susceptibility.

Grey et al. (2013) found biallelic loss of CDKN1B gene expression in a
boy with overgrowth and severe neurodevelopmental delay with autism. He
also had left-sided strabismus, maldescended testes, and challenging
behavior. Array CGH identified a heterozygous, approximately 108-kb
deletion on chromosome 12p13 encompassing the 5-prime end of CDKN1B,
APOLD1 (612456), and the 5-prime untranslated region of DDX47 (615428).
The patient's unaffected mother also carried this deletion. Both
individuals had decreased CDKN1B mRNA expression, but only the boy had
decreased protein levels. Sanger sequencing showed that the proband also
had a de novo heterozygous -73G-A transition in the promoter of the
CDKN1B gene that was demonstrated to result in significantly decreased
protein expression. Grey et al. (2013) postulated that the neurologic
phenotype in the proband fit a recessive model of inheritance and was
due to decreased expression of the CDKN1B below a threshold necessary to
ensure normal neurodevelopment. The findings were also consistent with a
mouse knockout model that has gigantism and hyperplasia of multiple
organs (Fero et al., 1996).

ANIMAL MODEL

Fero et al. (1996) found that targeted disruption of the murine
p27(Kip1) gene caused a gene dose-dependent increase in animal size
without other gross morphologic abnormalities. All tissues were enlarged
and contained more cells, although endocrine abnormalities were not
evident. Thymic hyperplasia was associated with increased T-lymphocyte
proliferation, and T cells showed enhanced IL2 (147680) responsiveness
in vitro. Thus, p27 deficiency may cause a cell-autonomous defect
resulting in enhanced proliferation in response to mitogens. In the
spleen, the absence of p27 selectively enhanced proliferation of
hematopoietic progenitor cells. That p27 and Rb function in the same
regulatory pathway was suggested by the finding that p27 deletion, like
deletion of the Rb gene, uniquely caused neoplastic growth of the
pituitary pars intermedia. The absence of p27 also caused an ovulatory
defect and female sterility. Maturation of second ovarian follicles into
corpora lutea, which express high levels of p27, was markedly impaired.

Zindy et al. (1999) generated mice with targeted deletions of both the
Ink4d (600927) and Kip1 genes. They found that terminally
differentiated, postmitotic neurons in these mice reentered the cell
cycle, divided, and underwent apoptosis. Zindy et al. (1999) noted that
when either Ink4d or Kip1 alone are deleted, the postmitotic state is
maintained, suggesting a redundant role for these genes in mature
neurons.

Mitsuhashi et al. (2001) described a mouse model in which p27(Kip1)
transgene expression was spatially restricted to the central nervous
system neuroepithelium and temporally controlled with doxycycline.
Transgene-specific transcripts were detectable within 6 hours of
doxycycline administration, and maximum nonlethal expression was
approached within 12 hours. After 18 to 26 hours of transgene
expression, the G1 phase of the cell cycle was estimated to increase
from 9 to 13 hours in the neocortical neuroepithelium, the maximum G1
phase length attainable in this proliferative population in normal mice.
Thus, the data established a direct link between p27(Kip1) and control
of G1 phase length in the mammalian central nervous system and unveiled
intrinsic mechanisms that constrain the G1 phase length to a putative
physiologic maximum despite ongoing p27(Kip1) transgene expression.

Phosphorylation of p27(Kip1) on threonine-187 by CDK2 is thought to
initiate the major pathway for p27 proteolysis. To test the importance
of this pathway critically in vivo, Malek et al. (2001) replaced the
murine p27 gene with one that encoded alanine instead of threonine at
position 187. Malek et al. (2001) demonstrated that cells expressing p27
with the T187A change were unable to downregulate p27 during the S and
G2 phases of the cell cycle, but that this had a surprisingly modest
effect on cell proliferation both in vitro and in vivo. Malek et al.
(2001) demonstrated a second proteolytic pathway for controlling p27,
one that is activated by mitogens and degrades p27 exclusively during
G1.

Uchida et al. (2005) generated mice expressing human CDKN1B under the
control of the promoter of the rat insulin gene and observed that
increased expression of p27 in pancreatic beta cells induced severe
diabetes as a result of inhibition of beta-cell proliferation. In mice
lacking either insulin receptor substrate-2 (Irs2 -/-; see 600797) or
the long form of the leptin receptor (Lepr -/-; see 601007), they found
progressive accumulation of p27 in the nucleus of beta cells. Deletion
of Cdkn1b ameliorated hyperglycemia in these mouse models of type II
diabetes (125853) by increasing islet mass and maintaining compensatory
hyperinsulinemia, which the authors attributed predominantly to
stimulation of pancreatic beta-cell proliferation. Uchida et al. (2005)
concluded that p27 contributes to beta-cell failure in the development
of type II diabetes in Irs2 -/- and Lepr -/- (db/db) mice.

Wolfraim and Letterio (2005) found increased numbers of both Cd4
(186940)-positive and Cd8 (see 186910)-positive T cells in
p27(Kip1)-deficient mice. However, there was a greater increase in the
numbers of Cd8-positive T cells, resulting in a lower Cd4:Cd8 ratio, due
in part to enhanced proliferation of naive Cd8-positive T cells, but not
naive Cd4-positive T cells, under conditions of limiting Cd28
(186760)-mediated costimulation.

Nmyc (164840) promotes rapid cell division of granule neuron progenitors
(GNPs) in mice, and its conditional loss during embryonic cerebellar
development results in severe GNP deficiency, perturbs foliation, and
leads to reduced cerebellar mass. Since loss of Nmyc triggers precocious
expression of Kip1 and Ink4c (CDKN2C; 603369) in the cerebellar
primordium, Zindy et al. (2006) disrupted Kip1 and Ink4c in Nmyc-null
cerebella and found that this partially rescued GNP cell proliferation
and cerebellar foliation. They concluded that expression of NMYC and
concomitant downregulation of INK4C and KIP1 contribute to the proper
development of the cerebellum.

Sharov et al. (2006) showed that inhibition of BMP (see BMP1, 112264)
signaling in mouse keratinocytes altered the development of hair
follicles. Microarray and real-time PCR analysis of laser-captured hair
matrix cells showed a strong decrease in the expression of p27(Kip1) and
increased expression of selected cyclins in the transgenic mice.
p27(Kip1) knockout mice showed a similar increase in anagen hair
follicles associated with increased cell proliferation in hair bulbs.
Alternatively, activation of BMP signaling in human keratinocytes
induced growth arrest and stimulated p27(Kip1) expression. Sharov et al.
(2006) concluded that p27(Kip1) mediates the effects of BMP signaling on
hair follicle size.

Fritz et al. (2002) described a multiple endocrine neoplasia-like
autosomal recessive disorder in the rat. Animals exhibiting the mutant
phenotype developed multiple neuroendocrine malignancies within the
first year of life, including bilateral adrenal pheochromocytoma,
multiple extraadrenal pheochromocytoma, bilateral medullary thyroid cell
neoplasia, bilateral parathyroid hyperplasia, and pituitary adenoma. The
appearance of neoplastic disease was preceded by the development of
bilateral juvenile cataracts. Although the spectrum of affected tissues
was reminiscent of human forms of MEN, no germline mutations were
detected in the RET (164761) or MEN1 (613733) genes. Segregation studies
in F1 and F2 crosses yielded frequencies of affected animals consistent
with an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance.

In rats with an MEN-like syndrome (Menx), with phenotypic overlap of
MEN1 (131100) and MEN2A (171400), Pellegata et al. (2006) performed
linkage analysis and identified a locus in a 4-Mb segment on rat
chromosome 4, which includes the Cdkn1b gene. Sequencing revealed a
homozygous frameshift mutation in the Cdkn1b gene resulting in a
dramatic reduction of p27(Kip1) protein.

Besson et al. (2007) generated knockin mice expressing a mutant p27
protein, called p27(CK-), that was unable to interact with cyclins and
cyclin-dependent kinases. In contrast to complete deletion of the Cdkn1b
gene, which causes spontaneous tumors only in pituitary, p27(CK-)
dominantly caused hyperplastic lesions and tumors in multiple organs.
The high incidence of spontaneous tumors in lung and retina was
associated with amplification of stem/progenitor cell populations.

Karlas et al. (2010) reported the discovery of 287 human host cell
genes, including CDKN1B, influencing influenza A virus replication in a
genomewide RNA interference screen. Using an independent assay, Karlas
et al. (2010) confirmed 168 hits (59%) inhibiting either the endemic
HIN1 (119 hits) or the pandemic swine-origin (121 hits) influenza A
virus strains, with an overlap of 60%. CDKN1B inhibited both viral
strains. Furthermore, H1N1 virus-infected p27-null mice accumulated
significantly lower viral titers in the lung, providing in vivo evidence
for the importance of this gene.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA, TYPE IV
CDKN1B, TRP76TER

In a 48-year-old Caucasian female with primary hyperparathyroidism and a
history of pituitary adenoma (MEN4; 610755), Pellegata et al. (2006)
identified a heterozygous 692G-A transition in the CDKN1B gene,
resulting in a trp76-to-ter (W76X) substitution. The mutation was also
identified in her older sister who had renal angiomyolipoma, her
youngest sister, and that sister's teenaged daughter, who reported no
symptoms but did not undergo thorough examination. The mutation was not
found in 380 unrelated healthy controls. Molecular and
immunohistochemical analysis of the renal angiomyolipoma showed that it
retained the CDKN1B wildtype allele and demonstrated RNA expression but
showed no p27 protein staining.

REFERENCE 1. Baens, M.; Aerssens, J.; Van Zand, K.; Van den Berghe, H.; Marynen,
P.: Isolation and regional assignment of human chromosome 12p cDNAs. Genomics 29:
44-52, 1995.

2. Besson, A.; Hwang, H. C.; Cicero, S.; Donovan, S. L.; Gurian-West,
M.; Johnson, D.; Clurman, B. E.; Dyer, M. A.; Roberts, J. M.: Discovery
of an oncogenic activity in p27(Kip1) that causes stem cell expansion
and a multiple tumor phenotype. Genes Dev. 21: 1731-1746, 2007.

3. Braun-Dullaeus, R. C.; Mann, M. J.; Ziegler, A.; von der Leyen,
H. E.; Dzau, V. J.: A novel role for the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p27(Kip1) in angiotensin II-stimulated vascular smooth muscle
cell hypertrophy. J. Clin. Invest. 104: 815-823, 1999.

4. Carrano, A. C.; Eytan, E.; Hershko, A.; Pagano, M.: SKP2 is required
for ubiquitin-mediated degradation of the CDK inhibitor p27. Nature
Cell Biol. 1: 193-199, 1999.

5. Chang, B.; Zheng, S. L.; Isaacs, S. D.; Wiley, K. E.; Turner, A.;
Li, G.; Walsh, P. C.; Meyers, D. A.; Isaacs, W. B.; Xu, J.: A polymorphism
in the CDKN1B gene is associated with increased risk of hereditary
prostate cancer. Cancer Res. 64: 1997-1999, 2004.

6. Chu, I.; Sun, J.; Arnaout, A.; Kahn, H.; Hanna, W.; Narod, S.;
Sun, P.; Tan, C.-K.; Hengst, L.; Slingerland, J.: p27 phosphorylation
by Src regulates inhibition of cyclin E-Cdk2. Cell 128: 281-294,
2007.

7. Cuesta, R.; Martinez-Sanchez, A.; Gebauer, F.: miR-181a regulates
cap-dependent translation of p27(kip1) mRNA in myeloid cells. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 29: 2841-2851, 2009.

8. Di Cristofano, A.; De Acetis, M.; Koff, A.; Cordon-Cardo, C.; Pandolfi,
P. P.: Pten and p27(KIP1) cooperate in prostate cancer tumor suppression
in the mouse. Nature Genet. 27: 222-224, 2001.

9. Dijkers, P. F.; Birkenkamp, K. U.; Lam, E. W.-F.; Thomas, N. S.
B.; Lammers, J.-W. J.; Koenderman, L.; Coffer, P. J.: FKHR-L1 can
act as a critical effector of cell death induced by cytokine withdrawal:
protein kinase B-enhanced cell survival through maintenance of mitochondrial
integrity. J. Cell Biol. 156: 531-542, 2002.

10. Fero, M. L.; Rivkin, M.; Tasch, M.; Porter, P.; Carow, C. E.;
Firpo, E.; Polyak, K.; Tsai, L.-H.; Broudy, V.; Perlmutter, R. M.;
Kaushansky, K.; Roberts, J. M.: A syndrome of multiorgan hyperplasia
with features of gigantism, tumorigenesis, and female sterility in
p27(Kip1)-deficient mice. Cell 85: 733-744, 1996.

11. Fritz, A.; Walch, A.; Piotrowska, K.; Rosemann, M.; Schaffer,
E.; Weber, K.; Timper, A.; Wildner, G.; Graw, J.; Hofler, H.; Atkinson,
M. J.: Recessive transmission of a multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome
in the rat. Cancer Res. 62: 3048-3051, 2002.

12. Gopfert, U.; Kullmann, M.; Hengst, L.: Cell cycle-dependent translation
of p27 involves a responsive element in its 5-prime-UTR that overlaps
with a uORF. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 1767-1779, 2003.

13. Grey, W.; Izatt, L.; Sahraoui, W.; Ng, Y.-M.; Ogilvie, C.; Hulse,
A.; Tse, E.; Holic, R.; Yu, V.: Deficiency of the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor, CDKN1B, results in overgrowth and neurodevelopmental
delay. Hum. Mutat. 34: 864-868, 2013.

14. Grimmler, M.; Wang, Y.; Mund, T.; Cilensek, Z.; Keidel, E.-M.;
Waddell, M. B.; Jakel, H.; Kullmann, M.; Kriwacki, R. W.; Hengst,
L.: Cdk-inhibitory activity and stability of p27(Kip1) are directly
regulated by oncogenic tyrosine kinases. Cell 128: 269-280, 2007.

15. Hauck, L.; Harms, C.; An, J.; Rohne, J.; Gertz, K.; Dietz, R.;
Endres, M.; von Harsdorf, R.: Protein kinase CK2 links extracellular
growth factor signaling with the control of p27(Kip1) stability in
the heart. Nature Med. 14: 315-324, 2008. Note: Erratum: Nature
Med. 14: 585 only, 2008.

16. Kamura, T.; Hara, T.; Matsumoto, M.; Ishida, N.; Okumura, F.;
Hatakeyama, S.; Yoshida, M.; Nakayama, K.; Nakayama, K. I.: Cytoplasmic
ubiquitin ligase KPC regulates proteolysis of p27(Kip1) at G1 phase. Nature
Cell Biol. 6: 1229-1235, 2004.

17. Karlas, A.; Machuy, N.; Shin, Y.; Pleissner, K.-P.; Artarini,
A.; Heuer, D.; Becker, D.; Khalil, H.; Ogilvie, L. A.; Hess, S.; Maurer,
A. P.; Muller, E.; Wolff, T.; Rudel, T.; Meyer, T. F.: Genome-wide
RNAi screen identifies human host factors crucial for influenza virus
replication. Nature 463: 818-822, 2010.

18. Kedde, M.; Strasser, M. J.; Boldajipour, B.; Oude Vrielink, J.
A. F.; Slanchev, K.; Sage, C. I.; Nagel, R.; Voorhoeve, P. M.; van
Duijse, J.; Orom, U. A.; Lund, A. H.; Perrakis, A.; Raz, E.; Agami,
R.: RNA-binding protein Dnd1 inhibits microRNA access to target mRNA. Cell 131:
1273-1286, 2007.

19. Levkau, B.; Koyama, H.; Raines, E. W.; Clurman, B. E.; Herren,
B.; Orth, K.; Roberts, J. M.; Ross, R.: Cleavage of p21(Cip1/Waf1)
and p27(Kip1) mediates apoptosis in endothelial cells through activation
of Cdk2: role of a caspase cascade. Molec. Cell 1: 553-563, 1998.

20. Liang, J.; Zubovitz, J.; Petrocelli, T.; Kotchetkov, R.; Connor,
M. K.; Han, K.; Lee, J.-H.; Ciarallo, S.; Catzavelos, C.; Beniston,
R.; Franssen, E.; Slingerland, J. M.: PKB/Akt phosphorylates p27,
impairs nuclear import of p27 and opposes p27-mediated G1 arrest. Nature
Med. 8: 1153-1160, 2002.

21. Lin, H.-K.; Chen, Z.; Wang, G.; Nardella, C.; Lee, S.-W.; Chan,
C.-H.; Yang, W.-L.; Wang, J; Egia, A.; Nakayama, K. I.; Cordon-Cardo,
C.; Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Skp2 targeting suppresses
tumorigenesis by Arf-p53-independent cellular senescence. Nature 464:
374-379, 2010. Note: Erratum: Nature 466: 398 only, 2010.

22. Malek, N. P.; Sundberg, H.; McGrew, S.; Nakayama, K.; Kyriakides,
T. R.; Roberts, J. M.: A mouse knock-in model exposes sequential
proteolytic pathways that regulate p27(Kip1) in G1 and S phase. Nature 413:
323-327, 2001. Note: Erratum: Nature 413: 652 only, 2001.

23. Martin, E.; Cacheux, V.; Cave, H.; Lapierre, J. M.; Le\Paslier,
D.; Grandchamp, B.: Localization of the CDKN4/p27(Kip1) gene to human
chromosome 12p12.3. Hum. Genet. 96: 668-670, 1995.

24. Medema, R. H.; Kops, G. J. P. L.; Bos, J. L.; Burgering, B. M.
T.: AFX-like forkhead transcription factors mediate cell-cycle regulation
by Ras and PKB through p27(kip1). Nature 404: 782-787, 2000.

25. Mitsuhashi, T.; Aoki, Y.; Eksioglu, Y. Z.; Takahashi, T.; Bhide,
P. G.; Reeves, S. A.; Caviness, V. S., Jr.: Overexpression of p27(Kip1)
lengthens the G1 phase in a mouse model that targets inducible gene
expression to central nervous system progenitor cells. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 98: 6435-6440, 2001.

26. Pellegata, N. S.; Quintanilla-Martinez, L.; Siggelkow, H.; Samson,
E.; Bink, K.; Hofler, H.; Fend, F.; Graw, J.; Atkinson, M. J.: Germ-line
mutations in p27(Kip1) cause a multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome
in rats and humans. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 15558-15563, 2006.
Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 19213 only, 2006.

27. Peters, M. A.; Ostrander, E. A.: Prostate cancer: more than two
to tango. Nature Genet. 27: 134-135, 2001.

28. Polyak, K.; Lee, M.-H.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Koff, A.; Roberts,
J. M.; Tempst, P.; Massague, J.: Cloning of p27(Kip1), a cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor and a potential mediator of extracellular antimitogenic
signals. Cell 78: 59-66, 1994.

29. Saito, T.; Seki, N.; Hattori, A.; Hayashi, A.; Abe, M.; Araki,
R.; Fujimori, A.; Fukumura, R.; Kozuma, S.; Matsuda, Y.: Structure,
expression profile, and chromosomal location of a mouse gene homologous
to human DNA-PK(cs) interacting protein (KIP) gene. Mammalian Genome 10:
315-317, 1999.

30. Sharov, A. A.; Sharova, T. Y.; Mardaryev, A. N.; di Vignano, A.
T.; Atoyan, R.; Weiner, L.; Yang, S.; Brissette, J. L.; Dotto, G.
P.; Botchkarev, V. A.: Bone morphogenetic protein signaling regulates
the size of hair follicles and modulates the expression of cell cycle-associated
genes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 18166-18171, 2006.

31. Sheaff, R. J.; Groudine, M.; Gordon, M.; Roberts, J. M.; Clurman,
B. E.: Cyclin E-CDK2 is a regulator of p27(Kip1). Genes Dev. 11:
1464-1478, 1997.

32. Sherr, C. J.; Roberts, J. M.: Inhibitors of mammalian G1 cyclin-dependent
kinases. Genes Dev. 9: 1149-1163, 1995.

33. Shin, I.; Yakes, F. M.; Rojo, F.; Shin, N.-Y.; Bakin, A. V.; Baselga,
J.; Arteaga, C. L.: PKB/Akt mediates cell-cycle progression by phosphorylation
of p27(Kip1) at threonine 157 and modulation of its cellular localization. Nature
Med. 8: 1145-1152, 2002.

34. Stegmaier, K.; Pendse, S.; Barker, G. F.; Bray-Ward, P.; Ward,
D. C.; Montgomery, K. T.; Krauter, K. S.; Reynolds, C.; Sklar, J.;
Donnelly, M.; Bohlander, S. K.; Rowley, J. D.; Sallan, S. E.; Gilliland,
D. G.; Golub, T. R.: Frequent loss of heterozygosity at the TEL gene
locus in acute lymphoblastic leukemia of childhood. Blood 86: 38-44,
1995.

35. Thomas, D. M.; Johnson, S. A.; Sims, N. A.; Trivett, M. K.; Slavin,
J. L.; Rubin, B. P.; Waring, P.; McArthur, G. A.; Walkley, C. R.;
Holloway, A. J.; Diyagama, D.; Grim, J. E.; Clurman, B. E.; Bowtell,
D. D. L.; Lee, J.-S.; Gutierrez, G. M.; Piscopo, D. M.; Carty, S.
A.; Hinds, P. W.: Terminal osteoblast differentiation, mediated by
runx2 and p27(KIP1) is disrupted in osteosarcoma. J. Cell Biol. 167:
925-934, 2004.

36. Toyoshima, H.; Hunter, T.: p27, a novel inhibitor of G1 cyclin-Cdk
protein kinase activity, is related to p21. Cell 78: 67-74, 1994.

37. Uchida, T.; Nakamura, T.; Hashimoto, N.; Matsuda, T.; Kotani,
K.; Sakaue, H.; Kido, Y.; Hayashi, Y.; Nakayama, K. I.; White, M.
F.; Kasuga, M.: Deletion of Cdkn1b ameliorates hyperglycemia by maintaining
compensatory hyperinsulinemia in diabetic mice. Nature Med. 11:
175-182, 2005.

38. Viglietto, G.; Motti, M. L.; Bruni, P.; Melillo, R. M.; D'Alessio,
A.; Califano, D.; Vinci, F.; Chiappetta, G.; Tsichlis, P.; Bellacosa,
A.; Fusco, A.; Santoro, M.: Cytoplasmic relocalization and inhibition
of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1) by PKB/Akt-mediated
phosphorylation in breast cancer. Nature Med. 8: 1136-1144, 2002.

39. White, P. M.; Doetzlhofer, A.; Lee, Y. S.; Groves, A. K.; Segil,
N.: Mammalian cochlear supporting cells can divide and trans-differentiate
into hair cells. Nature 441: 984-987, 2006.

40. Wolfraim, L. A.; Letterio, J. J.: Cutting edge: p27(Kip1) deficiency
reduces the requirement for CD28-mediated costimulation in naive CD8+
but not CD4+ T lymphocytes. J. Immun. 174: 2481-2484, 2005.

41. Zindy, F.; Cunningham, J. J.; Sherr, C. J.; Jogal, S.; Smeyne,
R. J.; Roussel, M. F.: Postnatal neuronal proliferation in mice lacking
Ink4d and Kip1 inhibitors of cyclin-dependent kinases. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 96: 13462-13467, 1999.

42. Zindy, F.; Knoepfler, P. S.; Xie, S.; Sherr, C. J.; Eisenman,
R. N.; Roussel, M. F.: N-Myc and the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
p18(Ink4c) and p27(Kip1) coordinately regulate cerebellar development. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 11579-11583, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/24/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/9/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/24/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/5/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/15/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/5/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/6/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/28/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/23/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/12/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/2/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/19/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/3/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/1/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/7/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/25/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/8/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/21/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/4/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/29/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/19/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/21/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/27/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/18/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/8/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/26/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/12/2000
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 6/15/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/21/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/4/1995

EDITED mgross: 09/24/2013
carol: 7/26/2013
ckniffin: 7/24/2013
terry: 3/28/2013
alopez: 3/21/2013
mgross: 2/6/2012
terry: 12/9/2011
terry: 10/24/2011
carol: 6/17/2011
carol: 2/9/2011
carol: 7/23/2010
wwang: 5/14/2010
mgross: 5/5/2010
alopez: 4/19/2010
terry: 4/15/2010
alopez: 3/8/2010
terry: 3/5/2010
wwang: 10/14/2008
wwang: 6/12/2008
terry: 6/6/2008
mgross: 6/3/2008
terry: 5/28/2008
mgross: 8/31/2007
terry: 8/23/2007
carol: 5/3/2007
wwang: 2/12/2007
alopez: 2/2/2007
mgross: 10/23/2006
terry: 10/19/2006
mgross: 10/10/2006
terry: 10/3/2006
alopez: 8/3/2006
terry: 8/1/2006
wwang: 12/7/2005
mgross: 7/25/2005
wwang: 7/20/2005
wwang: 7/15/2005
terry: 7/8/2005
wwang: 6/24/2005
terry: 6/21/2005
tkritzer: 5/4/2005
terry: 7/30/2003
mgross: 5/30/2003
terry: 5/29/2003
cwells: 11/19/2002
terry: 11/18/2002
alopez: 9/24/2001
terry: 9/21/2001
cwells: 7/12/2001
cwells: 7/6/2001
terry: 6/27/2001
mgross: 4/18/2001
cwells: 2/13/2001
cwells: 2/8/2001
alopez: 1/29/2001
terry: 1/26/2001
alopez: 4/12/2000
terry: 4/12/2000
carol: 11/23/1999
carol: 6/15/1999
carol: 1/21/1999
mark: 5/7/1997
mark: 3/28/1997
mark: 10/3/1996
terry: 9/17/1996
mark: 1/10/1996
mark: 1/4/1996
mark: 12/5/1995
terry: 10/30/1995
mark: 10/4/1995

604249	TITLE *604249 RETICULON 3; RTN3
;;NEUROENDOCRINE-SPECIFIC PROTEIN-LIKE 2; NSPL2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The reticulons are a group of highly conserved genes with preferential
expression in neuroendocrine tissues (see, e.g., RTN1; 600865).

CLONING

During a subtraction cloning between macula and peripheral retina,
Moreira et al. (1999) isolated a novel member of the reticulon gene
family, which they designated reticulon-3. The mRNA for RTN3 was
approximately 3-fold more abundant in macula than in peripheral retina.
The 2,527-bp cDNA encodes a predicted 236-amino acid protein that shows
strong sequence similarity with other members of the RTN gene family
(see, e.g., 600865). Northern blot analysis showed that RTN3 is widely
expressed in human tissues, with highest expression in the brain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Moreira et al. (1999) determined that the RTN3 gene contains 7 exons and
spans more than 15 kb.

MAPPING

By use of somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid panels, Moreira et
al. (1999) mapped the RTN3 gene to 11q13, between markers D11S4535 and
D11S4627. Southern blot analysis identified the presence of at least one
pseudogene that was subsequently localized to chromosome 4.

GENE FUNCTION

He et al. (2004) found that BACE1 (604252) coimmunoprecipitated with
members of the reticulon family of proteins: RTN1, RTN2 (603183), RTN3,
and RTN4 (604475). BACE1 colocalized with RTN3 in neurons of human brain
gray matter, and with RTN4 in oligodendrocytes in white matter.
Overexpression of RTN3 in vitro inhibited BACE1 activity and decreased
amyloid precursor protein (APP; 104760) processing. The findings
suggested that reticulon proteins are negative modulators of BACE1
activity, and that RTN3 specifically blocks access of BACE1 to APP
within neurons.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Windpassinger et al. (2003) excluded RTN3 as the gene mutant in Silver
spastic paraplegia syndrome (270685), the locus for which maps to
11q12-q14, as no mutations in RTN3 were found on sequence analysis of at
least 2 affected individuals from each of 4 different families and 1
healthy control.

REFERENCE 1. He, W.; Lu, Y.; Qahwash, I.; Hu, X.-Y.; Chang, A.; Yan, R.: Reticulon
family members modulate BACE1 activity and amyloid-beta peptide generation. Nature
Med. 10: 959-965, 2004.

2. Moreira, E. F.; Jaworski, C. J.; Rodriguez, I. R.: Cloning of
a novel member of the reticulon gene family (RTN3): gene structure
and chromosomal localization to 11q13. Genomics 58: 73-81, 1999.

3. Windpassinger, C.; Wagner, K.; Petek, E.; Fischer, R.; Auer-Grumbach,
M.: Refinement of the 'Silver syndrome locus' on chromosome 11q12-q14
in four families and exclusion of eight candidate genes. Hum. Genet. 114:
99-109, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/27/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/9/2003

CREATED Wilson H. Y. Lo: 10/20/1999

EDITED tkritzer: 09/28/2004
ckniffin: 9/27/2004
tkritzer: 12/16/2003
terry: 12/9/2003
carol: 10/20/1999

607860	TITLE *607860 YY1 ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; YY1AP1
;;YY1-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; YAP;;
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; HCCA2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By differential display PCR of normal hepatic tissue and hepatocellular
carcinomas, followed by screening a placenta cDNA library, Wang et al.
(2001) cloned YY1AP1, which they called HCCA2. The deduced 467-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 50.65 kD. HCCA2 contains
2 SH3-binding domains, 2 N-glycosylation sites, 6 N-myristoylation
sites, and numerous phosphorylation sites, but it does not have a
transmembrane domain, signal peptide, or targeting sequences. Northern
blot analysis detected 1.8- and 2.5-kb transcripts in all adult tissues
examined except liver. Expression was also detected in fetal liver,
lung, brain, and spleen. Western blot analysis of transfected embryonic
kidney fibroblasts detected HCCA2 at an apparent molecular mass of about
50 kD. Immunohistochemical staining showed that HCCA2 protein was
localized in the cytoplasm of liver cancer tissues, and it was not found
in surrounding nontumor hepatocytes.

Kuryshev et al. (2006) determined that YY1AP1 was formed by fusion of
the 5-prime region of the ASH1L gene (607999) and the 3-prime region of
the GON4L gene (610393) during a tandem segmental duplication on
chromosome 1. YY1AP1 contains the partial promoter and untranslated
first exon of ASH1L and coding exons 13 to 21 of GON4L. The 3-prime
region of YY1AP1 originated from a long terminal repeat of an endogenous
retrovirus, known as the MER51A repeat, that was inserted into exon 21
of GON4L after the duplication. The deduced YY1AP1 protein contains 750
amino acids, 748 of which correspond to amino acids 590 to 1,337 of the
GON4L protein. The last 2 C-terminal residues of YY1AP1 come from the
long terminal repeat of MER51A. RT-PCR detected ubiquitous expression of
YY1AP1, with highest levels in testis and skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2001) determined that HCCA2 was not expressed in normal
adult liver tissue, but it was expressed in 79% of hepatocellular
carcinomas tested. HCCA2 expression was associated with invasion of the
tumor capsule.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Kuryshev et al. (2006) mapped the YY1AP1
gene to chromosome 1q22.

REFERENCE 1. Kuryshev, V. Y.; Vorobyov, E.; Zink, D.; Schmitz, J.; Rozhdestvensky,
T. S.; Munstermann, E.; Ernst, U.; Wellenreuther, R.; Moosmayer, P.;
Bechtel, S.; Schupp, I.; Horst, J.; Korn, B.; Poustka, A.; Wiemann,
S.: An anthropoid-specific segmental duplication on human chromosome
1q22. Genomics 88: 143-151, 2006.

2. Wang, Z.-X.; Wang, H.-Y.; Wu, M.-C.: Identification and characterization
of a novel human hepatocellular carcinoma-associated gene. Brit.
J. Cancer 85: 1162-1167, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/29/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/6/2003

EDITED wwang: 04/18/2008
mgross: 9/11/2006
terry: 8/29/2006
mgross: 6/6/2003

606839	TITLE *606839 CADHERIN-RELATED FAMILY, MEMBER 5; CDHR5
;;MUCIN AND CADHERIN-LIKE; MUCDHL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Paris and Williams (2000) identified several genes, including CDHR5,
which they called MUCDHL, by constructing a physical map of chromosome
11p15.5. They found that MUCDHL contains nonpolymorphic tandem repeats
similar to mucin proteins and a consensus calcium-binding motif found in
all cadherins.

MAPPING

Paris and Williams (2000) constructed a physical map of chromosome
11p15.5 and located the CDHR5 gene less than 250 kb telomeric to a mucin
gene cluster.

REFERENCE 1. Paris, M. J.; Williams, B. R. G.: Characterization of a 500-kb
contig spanning the region between c-Ha-Ras and MUC2 on chromosome
11p15.5. Genomics 69: 196-202, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/10/2002

EDITED wwang: 12/03/2010
carol: 4/10/2002

126063	TITLE *126063 DIHYDROLIPOAMIDE S-SUCCINYLTRANSFERASE; DLST
;;ALPHA-KETOGLUTARATE DEHYDROGENASE COMPLEX, E2 COMPONENT OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase complexes (pyruvate dehydrogenase
complex, alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase complex, and branched chain
alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase complex) are a family of multienzyme
complexes. They are localized in mitochondria and catalyze the oxidative
decarboxylation of alpha-keto acids. These 3 alpha-keto acid
dehydrogenase complexes are composed of 3 different enzymes: alpha-keto
acid dehydrogenase (E1; 300502), dihydrolipoamide acyltransferase (E2),
and dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase (E3; 238331). Dihydrolipoamide
succinyltransferase, which is a component of the structural core of the
alpha-keto glutarate dehydrogenase complex, was studied by Nakano et al.
(1993), who isolated a cDNA from a human fibroblast cDNA library. Amino
acid sequence analysis supported their previous observation (Nakano et
al., 1993) that human dihydrolipoamide succinyltransferase lacks a
sequence motif for an E1 and/or E3 binding site. By Northern blot
analysis, Ali et al. (1994) detected ubiquitous expression of DLST in
peripheral tissues and brain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nakano et al. (1993) found that the DLST gene contains 3 exons and 4
introns and that the nucleotide sequence at the 5-prime donor and
3-prime acceptor sites of all introns conformed to the gt-ag rule.

GENE FUNCTION

DLST is the E2 component of the alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
complex. In contrast to the E2 components of the other 2 alpha-keto acid
dehydrogenase complexes, the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (see 300502)
and the branched-chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase complex (see
608348), the alpha-KGDC E2 has a unique structure consisting of 2
domains and lacking a sequence motif of an E3 and/or E1 binding site
(Patel and Harris, 1995).

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Nakano et al. (1993) found that
the DLST gene is located on 14q24.2-q24.3 and that a related sequence is
located on 1p31. The gene for the dihydrolipoamide acyltransferase of
the branched chain alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase complex (DBT; 248610),
the site of the mutation in type 2 maple syrup urine disease (see
248600), is located on 1p31. Nakano et al. (1993) mentioned the
possibility that mutation of the DLST gene may be a cause of familial
Alzheimer disease that maps to 14q24.3 (AD3; 607822). Ali et al. (1994)
mapped the DLST gene (symbolized by them KGDHC) to 14q24.3 by isotopic
in situ hybridization. The cDNA they used also cross-hybridized to an
apparent E2k pseudogene on 1p31.

REFERENCE 1. Ali, G.; Wasco, W.; Cai, X.; Szabo, P.; Sheu, K.-F. R.; Cooper,
A. J. L.; Gaston, S. M.; Gusella, J. F.; Tanzi, R. E.; Blass, J. P.
: Isolation, characterization, and mapping of gene encoding dihydrolipoyl
succinyltransferase (E2k) of human alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
complex. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 20: 99-105, 1994.

2. Nakano, K.; Matuda, S.; Sakamoto, T.; Takase, C.; Nakagawa, S.;
Ohta, S.; Ariyama, T.; Inazawa, J.; Abe, T.; Miyata, T.: Human dihydrolipoamide
succinyltransferase: cDNA cloning and localization on chromosome 14q24.2-q24.3. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1216: 360-368, 1993.

3. Nakano, K.; Takase, C.; Sakamoto, T.; Ohta, S.; Nakagawa, S.; Ariyama,
T.; Inazawa, J.; Abe, T.; Matuda, S.: An unspliced cDNA for human
dihydrolipoamide succinyltransferase: characterization and mapping
of the gene to chromosome 14q24.2-q24.3. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 196:
527-533, 1993.

4. Patel, M. S.; Harris, R. A.: Mammalian alpha-keto acid dehydrogenase
complexes: gene regulation and genetic defects. FASEB J. 9: 1164-1172,
1995.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/21/1994

EDITED alopez: 06/13/2005
ckniffin: 7/15/2004
ckniffin: 5/28/2003
mark: 11/1/1995
carol: 9/21/1994

605328	TITLE *605328 KRUPPEL-LIKE FACTOR 13; KLF13
;;RANTES FACTOR OF LATE-ACTIVATED T LYMPHOCYTES 1; RFLAT1;;
FKLF2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

KLF13 belongs to a family of transcription factors that contain 3
classical zinc finger DNA-binding domains consisting of a zinc atom
tetrahedrally coordinated by 2 cysteines and 2 histidines (C2H2 motif).
These transcription factors bind to GC-rich sequences and related GT and
CACCC boxes (Scohy et al., 2000).

CLONING

Although many genes are induced early after T-cell activation, a few,
like RANTES (187011), are induced at the T-cell differentiation stage.
The A promoter region of the RANTES gene binds REL (e.g., RELA, 164014)
as well as non-REL proteins. Using Southwestern blotting of nuclear
extracts of activated peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) probed with
oligonucleotides from the RANTES promoter A and B sites, Song et al.
(1999) identified proteins detected only at late activation stages. By
screening a day 5 activated PBL library with a 3-tandem A site probe,
Song et al. (1999) obtained a cDNA encoding the KLF13 protein, which
they termed RFLAT (RANTES factor of late-activated T lymphocytes). The
deduced 228-amino acid protein contains 3 contiguous TFIIIA (GTF3A;
600860)-like C-terminal DNA-binding zinc finger motifs, which are 65 to
73% homologous to SP1 (189906), SP3 (601804), and BTEB (602902). Its N
terminus, which is preceded by a stretch rich in basic amino acids, is
rich in proline, serine, and alanine residues. SDS-PAGE and Western blot
analysis indicated that KLF13 is expressed as a phosphorylated 38-kD
protein. Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous expression of 7.5-
and 5.0-kb transcripts, with greatest abundance in PBL and thymus.
Immunofluorescence and Western blot analysis showed that KLF13 is
localized in the nucleus.

Using degenerate PCR primers based on the sequence for KLF1 (600599),
Asano et al. (2000) cloned a cDNA from fetal liver erythroid cells that
encodes KLF13, which they termed FKLF2 based on its structural
similarity to FKLF (TIEG2; 603301). By Northern blot analysis, they
showed that KLF13 was expressed as 4.4- and 1.5-kb transcripts in the
bone marrow and striated muscles but not in 12 other human tissues
analyzed.

By searching for sequences related to the zinc finger DNA-binding domain
of SP1, followed by screening a fetal mouse liver cDNA library, Scohy et
al. (2000) cloned mouse Klf13. Like the human protein, mouse Klf13
encodes a deduced 288-amino acid protein. Mouse and human KLF13 share
98% amino acid identity through the zinc finger domains and 87% identity
overall. Residues within each of the 3 zinc fingers that establish
specific contacts with DNA are completely conserved in KLF13, suggesting
that both mouse and human KLF13 recognize a classical GC box. Klf13 also
contains an N-terminal region rich in proline and alanine. RT-PCR
analysis revealed Klf13 expression in all mouse tissues examined, with
lowest levels in testis and liver.

GENE FUNCTION

Gelshift binding analysis by Song et al. (1999) demonstrated that KLF13
binds to the A and A/B RANTES promoter binding sites, but not the B site
alone, and that NFKB (164011) also binds to these sites. Northern and
Western blot analysis demonstrated that while KLF13 mRNA is detectable
at constant steady state levels in resting and activated T cells, KLF13
protein appears only late after activation. Luciferase reporter assays
showed that KLF13 can transactivate the RANTES gene; whereas KLF13 is
the dominant transactivator of RANTES in T-cells, RELA is the dominant
transactivator in fibroblasts.

Luciferase reporter assays by Asano et al. (2000) showed that KLF13
activates predominantly the gamma- (HBG1; 142200) and, to a lesser
degree, the epsilon- (HBE1; 142100) and beta- (HBB; 141900) globin gene
promoters. They found that KLF13 is involved in activation of
transcription of a wide variety of genes in the cells of erythroid
lineage, including GATA1 (305371), glycophorin B (111740),
ferrochelatase (612386), porphobilinogen deaminase (HMBS; 609806), and
5-aminolevulinate synthase (125290).

MAPPING

Scott (2000) mapped the KLF13 gene to chromosome 15 based on sequence
similarity between the KLF13 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF150628) and a
chromosome 15 clone (GenBank GENBANK AC009873). By somatic cell hybrid
analysis, Scohy et al. (2000) mapped the KLF13 gene to chromosome 15.
Suske et al. (2005) stated that the human KLF13 gene maps to chromosome
15q13.2, and the mouse Klf13 gene to chromosome 7C.

REFERENCE 1. Asano, H.; Li, X. S.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.: FKLF-2: a novel
Kruppel-like transcriptional factor that activates globin and other
erythroid lineage genes. Blood 95: 3578-3584, 2000.

2. Scohy, S.; Gabant, P.; Van Reeth, T.; Hertveldt, V.; Dreze, P.-L.;
Van Vooren, P.; Riviere, M.; Szpirer, J.; Szpiper, C.: Identification
of KLF13 and KLF14 (SP6), novel members of the SP/XKLF transcription
factor family. Genomics 70: 93-101, 2000.

3. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/25/2000.

4. Song, A.; Chen, Y. F.; Thamatrakoln, K.; Storm, T. A.; Krensky,
A. M.: RFLAT-1: a new zinc finger transcription factor that activates
RANTES gene expression in T lymphocytes. Immunity 10: 93-103, 1999.

5. Suske, G.; Bruford, E.; Philipsen, S.: Mammalian SP/KLF transcription
factors: bring in the family. Genomics 85: 551-556, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/31/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/27/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/2000

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/11/2000

EDITED carol: 11/06/2008
ckniffin: 1/5/2006
wwang: 5/31/2005
mgross: 4/27/2004
carol: 10/12/2000
carol: 10/11/2000

604695	TITLE *604695 ADP-RIBOSYLATION FACTOR-LIKE 3; ARL3
;;ARFL3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

ADP-ribosylation factors (ARFs) are low molecular weight GTP-binding
proteins belonging to the RAS superfamily; see ARF1 (103180). By
sequence analysis of clones randomly isolated from a fetal brain cDNA
library, Cavenagh et al. (1994) obtained an EST encoding ARL3. The
predicted 182-amino acid ARL3 protein shares 97% amino acid identity
with rat Arl3 and 43% identity with human ARF1. Like the ARFs, ARL3 has
a glycine at position 2, the site of N myristoylation, and lacks
cysteine residues near the C terminus, which are found in other members
of the RAS family. Northern blot analysis detected a 1-kb ARL3
transcript in all tissues tested, with highest expression in heart and
lung, and lower expression in brain, liver, kidney, ovary, and testis. A
5.5-kb transcript was also detected in most tissues, with highest
expression in brain. Immunoblot analysis detected ARL3 in human tumor
cell lines but not in normal rodent cells. Although ARL3 binds GTP, it
is devoid of activity in the cholera toxin-dependent ADP-ribosylation of
Gs (see 139320), and is therefore classified as an ARF-like protein.

By immunohistochemical analysis of several mammalian cell lines,
including human, Zhou et al. (2006) found that both ARL2 (601175) and
ARL3 were expressed at centrosomes, in cytoplasmic punctae, and in the
nucleus. ARL3 was also expressed at Golgi membranes and at the mitotic
spindle, particularly in metaphase and anaphase. Both ARL2 and ARL3
localized to centrosomes throughout the cell cycle, and their expression
in other structures was cell type specific.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid analyses, Kim (1998) mapped
the ARL3 gene to chromosome 10q23.3.

GENE FUNCTION

Mutations in the retinitis pigmentosa-2 gene (RP2; 300757) cause a
severe form of X-linked retinal degeneration (see 312600). RP2 is a
plasma membrane-associated protein which shares homology with
tubulin-specific chaperone cofactor C (TBCC; 602971). The RP2 protein,
like cofactor C, stimulates the GTPase activity of tubulin in
combination with cofactor D. RP2 has also been shown to interact with
ARL3 in a nucleotide- and myristoylation-dependent manner. Grayson et
al. (2002) examined the relationship between RP2, cofactor C, and ARL3
in patient-derived cell lines and in the retina. In human retina, RP2
was localized to the plasma membrane in both rod and cone
photoreceptors, extending from the outer segment through the inner
segment to the synaptic terminals. In contrast, cofactor C and ARL3
localized predominantly to the photoreceptor-connecting cilium in rod
and cone photoreceptors. Cofactor C was cytoplasmic in distribution,
whereas ARL3 localized to other microtubule structures within all cells.
Grayson et al. (2002) suggested that RP2 may function in concert with
ARL3 to link the cell membrane with the cytoskeleton in photoreceptors
as part of the cell signaling or vesicular transport machinery.

Veltel et al. (2008) found that recombinant human RP2 formed a complex
with murine Arl3 and with human HRG4 (UNC119; 604011), the retinal
homolog of PDE-delta (PDE6D; 602676). RP2 induced hydrolysis of Arl3-GTP
in the Arl3-HRG4 complex, leading to the release of HRG4, which bound
only weakly to Arl3-GDP.

Zhou et al. (2006) stated that ARL2 and ARL3 arose from a common
ancestor early in eukaryotic evolution and that they remain highly
related. However, Zhou et al. (2006) found that the 2 GTPases had
distinct effects on microtubule function in mammalian cells. Knockdown
of ARL3 using RNA interference changed HeLa cell morphology, caused
Golgi fragmentation, and increased acetylation of alpha-tubulin (see
602529), which resulted in failure of cytokinesis, with increased number
of binucleated cells. Overexpression of ARL3 had little effect. In
contrast, knockdown of ARL2 in HeLa cells showed little effect, but
expression of ARL2 with a dominant activating mutation caused failure of
tubulin polymerization, with loss of microtubules and microtubule-based
mitotic spindle, resulting in cell cycle arrest in M phase.

Ismail et al. (2011) stated that PDE-delta binds to farnesylated small G
proteins. They presented the 1.7-angstrom structure of human PDE-delta
in complex with C-terminally farnesylated human RHEB (601293). PDE-delta
interacted almost exclusively with the C-terminal farnesyl moiety of
RHEB, which was inserted within the farnesyl-binding pocket of
PDE-delta. The interaction did not require guanine nucleotide, which
bound RHEB on a surface nearly opposite to the PDE-delta-binding site.
PDE-delta also interacted with mouse Arl2. The interaction of PDE-delta
with Arl2 was dependent upon GTP and caused a conformational change in
PDE-delta that closed its farnesyl-binding pocket. In solution, addition
of Arl2-GTP dissociated the PDE-delta-farnesylated RHEB complex.
Addition of Arl3-GTP also caused release of farnesylated RHEB from
PDE-delta. In transfected canine kidney cells, fluorescence-labeled RHEB
showed endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and Golgi localization. Addition of
PDE-delta relocalized RHEB into a cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution,
and subsequent addition of Arl2-GTP restored RHEB localization to ER and
Golgi membranes. Ismail et al. (2011) concluded that PDE-delta functions
as a solubilization factor for farnesylated RHEB and that ARL2 and ARL3
act in a GTP-dependent manner as allosteric release factors for
farnesylated RHEB.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Veltel et al. (2008) solved the crystal structure of the central G
domain of mouse Arl3 bound to a GTP analog and human RP2 to 2.6-angstrom
resolution. Both switch regions of Arl3 interacted with the N-terminal
beta-helix domain of RP2. Biochemical analysis showed that Arl3 had a
slow intrinsic rate of GTP hydrolysis, which was accelerated more than
1,400-fold by catalytic amounts of RP2. Veltel et al. (2008) also
determined that arg118 of RP2 and gln71 of Arl3 were crucial active site
catalytic residues. They concluded that RP2 is a GTPase-activating
protein (GAP) for ARL3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Schrick et al. (2006) found that while Arl3 +/- mice appeared normal,
Arl3 -/- mice were obtained at a submendelian ratio, were small and
sickly, and had markedly swollen abdomens. Arl3 -/- mice failed to
thrive and all died by 3 weeks of age. They exhibited abnormal
development of renal, hepatic, and pancreatic epithelial tubule
structures, with abnormal epithelial cell proliferation and cyst
formation characteristic of ARPKD (263200). Moreover, mice lacking Arl3
exhibited photoreceptor degeneration as early as postnatal day 14.
Schrick et al. (2006) concluded that absence of Arl3 causes a ciliary
disease affecting the kidney, biliary tract, pancreas, and retina.

REFERENCE 1. Cavenagh, M. M.; Breiner, M.; Schurmann, A.; Rosenwald, A. G.;
Terui, T.; Zhang, C.; Randazzo, P. A.; Adams, M.; Joost, H. G.; Kahn,
R. A.: ADP-ribosylation factor (ARF)-like 3, a new member of the
ARF family of GTP-binding proteins cloned from human and rat tissues. J.
Biol. Chem. 269: 18937-18942, 1994.

2. Grayson, C.; Bartolini, F.; Chapple, J. P.; Willison, K. R.; Bhamidipati,
A.; Lewis, S. A.; Luthert, P. J.; Hardcastle, A. J.; Cowan, N. J.;
Cheetham, M. E.: Localization in the human retina of the X-linked
retinitis pigmentosa protein RP2, its homologue cofactor C and the
RP2 interacting protein Arl3. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 3065-3074,
2002.

3. Ismail, S. A.; Chen, Y.-X.; Rusinova, A.; Chandra, A.; Bierbaum,
M.; Gremer, L.; Triola, G.; Waldmann, H.; Bastiaens, P. I. H.; Wittinghofer,
A.: Arl2-GTP and Arl3-GTP regulate a GDI-like transport system for
farnesylated cargo. Nature Chem. Biol. 7: 942-949, 2011.

4. Kim, H.-S.: Assignment of the human ADP-ribosylation factor-like
3 (ARL3) gene to chromosome 10 band q23.3 by radiation hybrid mapping. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 83: 246 only, 1998.

5. Schrick, J. J.; Vogel, P.; Abuin, A.; Hampton, B.; Rice, D. S.
: ADP-ribosylation factor-like 3 is involved in kidney and photoreceptor
development. Am. J. Path. 168: 1288-1298, 2006.

6. Veltel, S.; Gasper, R.; Eisenacher, E.; Wittinghofer, A.: The
retinitis pigmentosa 2 gene product is a GTPase-activating protein
for Arf-like 3. Nature Struct. Molec. Biol. 15: 373-380, 2008.

7. Veltel, S.; Kravchenko, A.; Ismail, S.; Wittinghofer, A.: Specificity
of Arl2/Arl3 signaling is mediated by a ternary Arl3-effector-GAP
complex. FEBS Letters 582: 2501-2507, 2008.

8. Zhou, C.; Cunningham, L.; Marcus, A. I.; Li, Y.; Kahn, R. A.:
Arl2 and Arl3 regulate different microtubule-dependent processes. Molec.
Biol. Cell 17: 2476-2487, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/2/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/30/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/25/2004

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/17/2000

EDITED mgross: 10/23/2013
tpirozzi: 10/2/2013
alopez: 7/6/2009
terry: 6/30/2009
alopez: 2/16/2009
tkritzer: 8/25/2004
mgross: 3/21/2000
mgross: 3/20/2000
mgross: 3/17/2000

611616	TITLE *611616 NAD KINASE; NADK
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NADK catalyzes the transfer of a phosphate group from ATP to NAD to
generate NADP, which in its reduced form acts as an electron donor for
biosynthetic reactions (Lerner et al., 2001).

CLONING

By EST database analysis using prokaryotic DNA kinase sequences as
probe, followed by PCR of a human fibroblast cDNA library, Lerner et al.
(2001) cloned NADK. The deduced 446-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 49.2 kD. Northern blot analysis detected a 3.0-kb
transcript with high expression in placenta, moderate expression in
brain, colon, heart, liver, kidney, lung, spleen, stomach, and testis,
and low expression in small intestine. A band of 1.8 kb was detected in
several tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Using recombinant NADK overexpressed in E. coli, Lerner et al. (2001)
showed that purified NADK catalyzed the synthesis of NADP from NAD and
ATP. By gel filtration analysis, they determined that catalytically
active human NADK was a homotetramer. NADK exhibited a specific activity
of 6.7 microM with a high specificity for NAD and ATP substrates. NADK
activity was resistant to heat treatment, had an optimum pH of 7-8, and
required divalent cations. NADK displayed a preference for zinc and
manganese ions over magnesium ions, while copper and nickel ions had no
effect on enzyme activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lerner et al. (2001) determined that the NADK gene contains 11 exons
spanning 14 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lerner et al. (2001) mapped the NADK gene
to chromosome 1p36.33-p36.21.

REFERENCE 1. Lerner, F.; Niere, M.; Ludwig, A.; Ziegler, M.: Structural and
functional characterization of human NAD kinase. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 288: 69-74, 2001.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 11/26/2007

EDITED wwang: 11/26/2007

607290	TITLE *607290 SHISA, XENOPUS, HOMOLOG OF, 5; SHISA5
;;SCOTIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Zhang et al. (2000) cloned a cDNA encoding Scotin, which they called
HSPC217, from CD34 (142230)-positive hematopoietic stem/progenitor
cells. The deduced 170-amino acid protein contains an MYB (189990)
DNA-binding domain repeat signature. Microarray analysis of 5
hematopoietic cell lines detected low-level expression of Scotin in NB4
and Jurkat cells, but no expression was detected in HL60, K562, and U937
cells.

Bourdon et al. (2002) identified mouse Scotin by differential display of
spleen and thymus of normal and p53 (191170) null mice after gamma
irradiation of whole animals. The induced 1.85-kb transcript encodes a
deduced 235-amino acid protein. By searching an EST database using the
mouse sequence as probe, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, Bourdon
et al. (2002) cloned a full-length cDNA encoding Scotin from a placenta
cDNA library. The deduced 240-amino acid human protein shares 70%
identity with mouse Scotin. Both the human and the mouse proteins
contain an N-terminal signal sequence, a central transmembrane domain
composed of 18 hydrophobic amino acids, and a proline/tyrosine domain,
and both show an apparent molecular mass of 25 kD by Western blot
analysis. Immunolocalization of exogenously expressed Scotin revealed
colocalization with endoplasmic reticulum (ER) markers. By mutation
analysis, Bourdon et al. (2002) determined that the proline-rich domain
is required for ER localization.

GENE FUNCTION

Bourdon et al. (2002) noted that mouse thymus and spleen cells underwent
massive p53-dependent apoptosis following ultraviolet irradiation or
exposure to actinomycin D. They found that Scotin mRNA was induced
coincident with apoptosis and was expressed only in spleen and thymus of
irradiated wildtype mice and not in the spleen or thymus of irradiated
p53 null mice. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, they
confirmed direct binding between p53 and Scotin, and using a luciferase
reporter plasmid driven by the mouse Scotin promoter, they confirmed
dose-dependent p53 transactiviation. Furthermore, Bourdon et al. (2002)
showed that the apoptosis induced by the p53/Scotin pathway is caspase
dependent.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Bourdon et al. (2002) determined that the
human Scotin gene contains 6 exons. They identified a p53-responsive
element of 9 decamers within the mouse Scotin promoter.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Zhang et al. (2000) mapped the human
Scotin gene to chromosome 3. By genomic sequence analysis, Bourdon et
al. (2002) mapped the Scotin gene to chromosome 3p21.3. They also
identified a Scotin pseudogene on chromosome Xq13.1-q13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Bourdon, J.-C.; Renzing, J.; Robertson, P. L.; Fernandes, K. N.;
Lane, D. P.: Scotin, a novel p53-inducible proapoptotic protein located
in the ER and the nuclear membrane. J. Cell Biol. 158: 235-246,
2002.

2. Zhang, Q.-H.; Ye, M.; Wu, X.-Y.; Ren, S.-X.; Zhao, M.; Zhao, C.-J.;
Fu, G.; Shen, Y.; Fan, H.-Y.; Lu, G.; Zhong, M.; Xu, X.-R.; and 9
others: Cloning and functional analysis of cDNAs with open reading
frames for 300 previously undefined genes expressed in CD34+ hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells. Genome Res. 10: 1546-1560, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/10/2002

EDITED mgross: 04/07/2010
mgross: 10/10/2002

172471	TITLE *172471 PHOSPHORYLASE KINASE, TESTIS/LIVER, GAMMA-2; PHKG2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The PHKG2 gene encodes the hepatic and testis isoform of the gamma
subunit of phosphorylase kinase (PHK; EC 2.7.11.19). The skeletal muscle
isoform of the gamma subunit is encoded by the PHKG1 gene (172470).

CLONING

Whitmore et al. (1994) isolated a clone identified as the PHKG2 gene
from a heteronuclear cDNA library constructed from a mouse/human somatic
cell hybrid that contained chromosome 16. Most of the sequence showed
100% homology with the sequence of an isoform of a catalytic subunit of
phosphorylase kinase (Hanks, 1989).

GENE STRUCTURE

Burwinkel et al. (1998) determined that the PHKG2 gene contains 10 exons
and spans 9.5 kb. The positions of introns were highly conserved between
PHKG2 and PHKG1. The beginning of intron 2 harbors a highly polymorphic
GGT/GT microsatellite repeat.

MAPPING

Whitmore et al. (1994) mapped the PHKG2 gene to chromosome 16p12.1-p11.2
by use of a high-resolution somatic cell panel.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Maichele et al. (1996) reported that autosomal liver-specific PHK
deficiency (glycogen storage disease IXc; GSD9C; 613027) was caused by
mutations in the PHKG2 gene. They found homozygous PHKG2 mutations in 3
patients of consanguineous parentage. One mutation was a single basepair
insertion in codon 89 that caused a frameshift and premature chain
termination (172471.0001). The 3 other mutations resulted in
nonconservative replacements of amino acid residues that are highly
conserved within the catalytic core regions of all protein kinases. The
findings suggested that the PHKG2 gene product is the predominant
isoform of catalytic gamma subunit of PHK not only in testis but also in
liver, erythrocytes, and possibly other nonmuscle tissues.

Burwinkel et al. (1998) identified homozygous translation-terminating
mutations in the PHKG2 gene, R442X (17241.0004) and 277delC
(172471.0005), in 2 patients with liver phosphorylase kinase deficiency
who developed cirrhosis in childhood. As liver phosphorylase kinase
deficiency is generally a benign condition and progression to cirrhosis
is very rare, the findings suggested to the authors that PHKG2 mutations
are particularly associated with an increased cirrhosis risk.

Burwinkel et al. (2000) reported compound heterozygosity for missense
mutations in the PHKG2 gene (172471.0006; 172471.0007) in a child with
phosphorylase kinase deficiency and cirrhosis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Malthus et al. (1980) described deficiency of liver phosphorylase kinase
in rats and concluded that it was an autosomal recessive trait. Apart
from hepatomegaly, the affected rats appear healthy. Clark and Haynes
(1988) described autosomal recessive glycogen storage disease in the rat
(gsd/gsd). Maichele et al. (1996) identified a homozygous mutation in
the rat Phkg2 gene (D215N) as responsible for the gsd phenotype in the
rat.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE IXc
PHKG2, 1-BP INS

In a Norwegian girl with autosomal recessive glycogen storage disease
IXc (613027) Sovik et al. (1982), Maichele et al. (1996) identified
homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion in codon 89 of the PHKG2 gene; the
resultant frameshift (after 22% of the normal length of the reading
frame) led to premature termination of the predicted polypeptide after
12 additional amino acids. The parents, who were fourth cousins, and a
sister were unaffected. She proband presented at 5 months of age, and
again at 3 years, with marked hepatomegaly, generalized muscular
hypotonia, growth retardation, elevated serum transaminases, and massive
liver glycogenosis. PHK activity was barely detectable in liver; in a
muscle biopsy, PHK activity was moderately reduced (35% of controls) but
muscle glycogen content was nevertheless low. No liver fibrosis was
observed. She attained a normal height of 172 cm at age 18, and menarche
was at age 17. The relative size of the liver gradually decreased, and
at age 18 serum activities of gamma-glutamyltransferase and alanine
aminotransferase were approaching normal ranges. Serum cholesterol was
normal, hypoglycemic symptoms were not noted, and body weight was
normal.

.0002
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE IXc
PHKG2, GLY189GLU

In a French girl with glycogen storage disease IXc (613027), whose
parents were first cousins, Maichele et al. (1996) identified
homozygosity for a G-to-A transition in the PHKG2 gene that led to a
gly189-to-glu (G189E) substitution. G189 is absolutely conserved between
the testicular and muscle forms of the gamma subunit of several species
and is never occupied by charged amino acids. The patient had been
hospitalized at 7 months of age because of hypoglycemic episodes and
pronounced hepatomegaly. Mild muscle hypotonia and retardation of growth
and motor development were also observed. Notable laboratory findings
were persistent hypoglycemia with acidosis, and elevated triglycerides
and transaminases. Liver histology revealed fine portal fibrosis.

.0003
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE IXc
PHKG2, VAL106GLU

In a Pakistani girl with glycogen storage disease IXc (613027), whose
parents were first cousins, Maichele et al. (1996) demonstrated
homozygosity for a val106-to-glu (V106E) missense mutation in the PHKG2
gene. The girl was admitted at the age of 15 months for investigation of
a distended abdomen due to hepatomegaly with no other clinical symptoms
except growth retardation. However, she had increased serum ALT and
triglycerides, increased liver glycogen, and severe fibrosis and
proliferation of bile ducts on liver biopsy.

.0004
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE IXc
PHKG2, ARG44TER

In a female with liver phosphorylase kinase deficiency and cirrhosis
(GSD9C; 612027), whose parents were consanguineous, Burwinkel et al.
(1998) found point mutations in the PHKG2 gene. One patient had a C-to-T
transition in exon 3, resulting in an arg44-to-ter (R44X) nonsense
mutation. In an earlier biochemical analysis of her family (Kagalwalla
et al., 1995), her father and 2 sibs had PHK activities in the
heterozygous range, whereas her mother had normal PHK activity in
repeated tests, so that a new maternal mutation was suspected in spite
of her parents' consanguinity. However, analysis of the parents' DNA
indicated that both were heterozygous for the nonsense mutation.

.0005
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE IXc
PHKG2, 1-BP DEL, 277C

In a female with deficiency of liver phosphorylase kinase and cirrhosis
(GSD9C; 613027) who had previously been described by Shiomi et al.
(1989), Burwinkel et al. (1998) identified deletion of a cytosine
residue in codon 93 (exon 4) of the PHKG2 gene, leading to a frameshift
after 23% of the coding sequence and termination of translation after 17
additional codons. The patient's parents were consanguineous.

.0006
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE IXc
PHKG2, HIS144TYR

In a male child of unrelated English parents with liver phosphorylase
kinase deficiency and cirrhosis (GSD9C; 613027), Burwinkel et al. (2000)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the PHKG2 gene: a
C-to-T transition resulting in a his144-to-tyr (H144Y) substitution,
which was inherited from his father, and a T-to-G transversion resulting
in a leu225-to-arg (L225R) substitution (172471.0007), which was
inherited from his mother.

.0007
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE IXc
PHKG2, LEU225ARG

See 172471.0006 and Burwinkel et al. (2000).

REFERENCE 1. Burwinkel, B.; Shiomi, S.; Al Zaben, A.; Kilimann, M. W.: Liver
glycogenosis due to phosphorylase kinase deficiency: PHKG2 gene structure
and mutations associated with cirrhosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 149-154,
1998.

2. Burwinkel, B.; Tanner, M. S.; Kilimann, M. W.: Phosphorylase kinase
deficient liver glycogenosis: progression to cirrhosis in infancy
associated with PHKG2 mutations (H144Y and L225R). (Letter) J. Med.
Genet. 37: 376-377, 2000.

3. Clark, D.; Haynes, D.: The glycogen storage disease (gsd/gsd)
rat. Curr. Top. Cell. Regul. 29: 217-263, 1988.

4. Hanks, S. K.: Messenger ribonucleic acid encoding an apparent
isoform of phosphorylase kinase catalytic subunit is abundant in the
adult testis. Molec. Endocr. 3: 110-116, 1989.

5. Kagalwalla, A. F.; Kagalwalla, Y. A.; al Ajaji, S.; Gorka, W.;
Ali, M. A.: Phosphorylase b kinase deficiency glycogenosis with cirrhosis
of the liver. J. Pediat. 127: 602-605, 1995.

6. Maichele, A. J.; Burwinkel, B.; Maire, I.; Sovik, O.; Kilimann,
M. W.: Mutations in the testis/liver isoform of the phosphorylase
kinase gamma subunit (PHKG2) cause autosomal liver glycogenosis in
the gsd rat and in humans. Nature Genet. 14: 337-340, 1996.

7. Malthus, R.; Clark, D. G.; Watts, C.; Sneyd, J. G. T.: Glycogen-storage
disease in rats, a genetically determined deficiency of liver phosphorylase
kinase. Biochem. J. 188: 99-106, 1980.

8. Shiomi, S.; Saeki, Y.; Kim. K.; Nishiguchi, S.; Seki, S.; Kuroki,
T.; Kobayashi, K.; Harihara, S.; Owada, M.: A female case of type
VIII glycogenosis who developed cirrhosis of the liver and hepatocellular
tumor. Gastroent. Jpn. 24: 711-714, 1989.

9. Sovik, O.; deBarsy, T.; Maehle, B.: Phosphorylase kinase deficiency:
severe glycogen storage disease with evidence of autosomal recessive
mode of inheritance. (Letter) Europ. J. Pediat. 139: 210 only, 1982.

10. Whitmore, S. A.; Apostolou, S.; Lane, S.; Nancarrow, J. K.; Phillips,
H. A.; Richards, R. I.; Sutherland, G. R.; Callen, D. F.: Isolation
and characterization of transcribed sequences from a chromosome 16
hn-cDNA library and the physical mapping of genes and transcribed
sequences using a high-resolution somatic cell panel of human chromosome
16. Genomics 20: 169-175, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/24/2009
Michael J. Wright  - updated: 7/20/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/26/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/4/1994

EDITED ckniffin: 10/06/2009
carol: 10/1/2009
ckniffin: 9/24/2009
terry: 3/3/2009
carol: 1/6/2009
carol: 4/17/2007
mgross: 3/17/2004
alopez: 7/27/2001
terry: 7/20/2001
dkim: 7/7/1998
alopez: 3/26/1998
terry: 3/20/1998
jamie: 11/6/1996
terry: 10/31/1996
terry: 10/29/1996
carol: 4/4/1994

612695	TITLE *612695 VAULT RNA 1-1; VTRNA1-1
;;HVG1;;
VAULT RNA COMPONENT 1; VAULTRC1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Vaults are large cytoplasmic ribonucleoproteins of about 13 MD. They are
composed of a major vault protein, MVP (605088), 2 minor vault proteins,
TEP1 (601686) and PARP4 (607519), and a nontranslated RNA component,
VTRNA1-1 (Kickhoefer et al., 1999).

CLONING

By PCR of a human genomic DNA library, Kickhoefer et al. (1998) cloned
VTRNA1-1, which they called HVG1. The 96-base RNA contains an internal
RNA polymerase III (see 606007)-type promoter element and ends with a
typical polymerase III termination signal.

Kickhoefer et al. (2003) found that the mouse genome contains only 1
expressed vault RNA gene, which they called Mvr1. Northern blot analysis
detected a single Mvr1 transcript in all mouse tissues examined, with
highest expression in lung, heart, and spleen and lowest expression in
brain.

Nandy et al. (2009) described the structure of VTRNA1-1. The
99-nucleotide RNA forms an extended stem-loop structure with asymmetric
internal bulges. It contains characteristic internal polymerase III
A-box and B-box promoter elements and a downstream B2-box motif. Size
exclusion chromatography of fractionated HeLa cells, followed by
Northern and Western blot analyses, detected about 5% of the VTRNA1-1
and VTRNA1-2 content eluting with MVP, while 95% remained in the
supernatant.

GENE FUNCTION

Kickhoefer et al. (1998) found that HVG1, but not HVG2 (VTRNA1-2;
612696) or HVG3 (VTRNA1-3; 612696), associated with vaults in human cell
lines. However, only a proportion of HVG1 associated with vaults, and
HVG1 not associated with vaults remained in the soluble fraction.
Expression of MVP and HVG1 and assembly of vaults increased up to
15-fold in several drug-resistant cell lines compared with the parental
cell lines. Increased vault assembly was associated with a concomitant
shift of HVG1 from the soluble to the pellet fraction. Kickhoefer et al.
(1998) hypothesized that the absolute vault level in cell lines may
dictate the extent of drug resistance.

Using Northern blot analysis, Kickhoefer et al. (1999) found that the
vault RNAs HVG1 and HVG4 copurified with vaults from all human cell
types examined and interacted with mouse Tep1 in a yeast 3-hybrid
screen. However, Kickhoefer et al. (2003) reported that HVG4 is not
expressed.

Nandy et al. (2009) found that expression of VTRNA1-1, VTRNA1-2,
VTRNA1-3, and CBL3 (VTRNA2-1; 614938) was upregulated in cord blood
lymphocytes infected with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Upregulation was
highest for VTRNA1-1 (about 1,100-fold) and lowest for CBL3 (about
3-fold). Expression of VTRNA1-1, VTRNA1-2, and CBL3 was also upregulated
by the EBV-related Kaposi sarcoma virus, but not by members of other
virus families.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kickhoefer et al. (2003) determined that the upstream region of the
VTRNA1-1 gene contains a TATA-like element, a consensus proximal
sequence, and a cAMP response element.

MAPPING

Kickhoefer et al. (2003) stated that the VTRNA1-1, VTRNA1-2, and
VTRNA1-3 genes map to a 16-kb region of chromosome 5. A vault RNA
pseudogene, HVG4, maps to chromosome X. The only expressed mouse vault
RNA gene, Mvr1, maps to chromosome 18.

Nandy et al. (2009) stated that the VTRNA1-1 gene is located near the
PCDHA gene cluster (604966), which Wu and Maniatis (1999) mapped to
chromosome 5q31.

REFERENCE 1. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Emre, N.; Stephen, A. G.; Poderycki, M. J.;
Rome, L. H.: Identification of conserved vault RNA expression elements
and a non-expressed mouse vault RNA gene. Gene 309: 65-70, 2003.

2. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Rajavel, K. S.; Scheffer, G. L.; Dalton, W.
S.; Scheper, R. J.; Rome, L. H.: Vaults are up-regulated in multidrug-resistant
cancer cell lines. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 8971-8974, 1998.

3. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Stephen, A. G.; Harrington, L.; Robinson, M.
O.; Rome, L. H.: Vaults and telomerase share a common subunit, TEP1. J.
Biol. Chem. 274: 32712-32717, 1999.

4. Nandy, C.; Mrazek, J.; Stoiber, H.; Grasser, F. A.; Huttenhofer,
A.; Polacek, N.: Epstein-Barr virus-induced expression of a novel
human vault RNA. J. Molec. Biol. 388: 776-784, 2009.

5. Wu, Q.; Maniatis, T.: A striking organization of a large family
of human neural cadherin like cell adhesion genes. Cell 97: 779-790,
1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/19/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/25/2009

EDITED mgross: 11/15/2012
terry: 10/19/2012
mgross: 3/26/2009

611966	TITLE *611966 TRAFFICKING PROTEIN PARTICLE COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 9; TRAPPC9
;;NIK- AND IKBKB-BINDING PROTEIN; NIBP;;
KIAA1882
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NIBP binds NIK (604655) and IKK-beta (IKBKB; 603258) and plays a role in
the neuronal NF-kappa-B (see 164011) signaling pathway (Hu et al.,
2005).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from an adult amygdala cDNA library,
Nagase et al. (2001) cloned a partial cDNA encoding NIBP, which they
designated KIAA1882. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate expression in all
tissues and specific brain regions examined.

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a human brain cDNA library using
N-terminal NIK (MAP3K14; 604655) as bait, followed by database analysis,
Hu et al. (2005) cloned NIBP. The deduced 1,246-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 139.4 kD and shares 80 to 90% homology with
the corresponding rodent sequences. Northern blot analysis of human
tissues detected a 4.5-kb transcript with high expression in muscle and
kidney, and lower levels in brain, heart, and placenta; 2 smaller
transcripts of 2.1 and 1.5 kb were also detected. Immunohistochemical
studies detected NIBP protein in neuronal cells in mouse brain with
staining localized to cell bodies and neuronal processes in the
pyramidal layer of mouse cortex, spinal cord motor neurons, and white
matter neurons.

Mochida et al. (2009) noted that there are 2 transcript variants of
TRAPPC9 in humans. Variant 1 is the longer form and encodes a
1,246-amino acid protein. Variant 2 uses an alternate 5-prime exon
initiating translation at a downstream start codon and encodes a
1,148-amino acid protein. In situ hybridization showed low levels of
expression in mouse embryonic brain with strong expression in adult
brain. Trappc9 was found in neurons of the cerebral cortex, hippocampus,
and deep gray matter. Trappc9 immunoreactivity was widespread in the
cytoplasm, without specific localization to any particular organelle,
and was not found in the nucleus. In 11.5-week human embryonic brain,
there was higher expression in the developing cortical plate compared to
the ventricular zone, indicating higher expression in postmitotic
neurons than in progenitor cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hu et al. (2005) determined that the TRAPPC9 gene contains 23 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hu et al. (2005) mapped the TRAPPC9 gene
to chromosome 8q24.3.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitation and GST pull-down assays, Hu et al. (2005)
showed that NIBP interacted with NIK and IKK-beta but showed no
interaction with IKK-alpha (CHUK; 600664) or IKK-gamma (IKBKG; 300248).
NIBP overexpression in HEK293T cells potentiated TNFA (191160)-induced
NF-kappa-B activation through increased phosphorylation of the IKK
complex and its downstream substrates IKBA (NFKBIA; 164008) and p65
(NFKB3; 164014). Mobility shift assays demonstrated increased NF-kappa-B
DNA binding. Knockdown of NIBP by siRNA reduced TNFA-induced NF-kappa-B
activation, prevented NGF (see 162030)-induced neuronal differentiation,
and decreased BCLXL (see BCL2L1; 600039) gene expression in PC12 cells.
Hu et al. (2005) suggested that NIBP may act as an adaptor to recruit
NIK or other kinases to the IKK complex, and that NIBP acts as a
downstream component of NGF in neuronal cells.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By genomewide linkage analysis, followed by candidate gene sequencing,
of an Israeli Arab family with nonsyndromic mental retardation (MRT13;
613192), Mochida et al. (2009) identified a homozygous truncating
mutation in the TRAPPC9 gene (R475X; 611966.0001).

Mir et al. (2009) identified the R475X mutation in affected members of a
Pakistani family with MRT13 and identified a 4-bp deletion (611966.0003)
in affected members of an Iranian family with MRT13, previously reported
by Najmabadi et al. (2007).

Philippe et al. (2009) identified a nonsense mutation in the TRAPPC9
gene (611966.0002) in 3 Tunisian brothers with autosomal recessive
mental retardation.

In 2 sisters, born of unrelated parents from southern Italy, with MRT13,
Marangi et al. (2013) identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the
TRAPPC9 gene (611966.0004).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, ARG475TER

In affected members of an Israeli Arab family with nonsyndromic
autosomal recessive mental retardation and postnatal microcephaly
(MRT13; 613192), Mochida et al. (2009) identified a homozygous 1423C-T
transition in exon 7 of the TRAPPC9 gene, resulting in an arg475-to-ter
(R475X) substitution in TRAPPC9 variant 1. The same change represents
1129C-T, resulting in an arg377-to-ter (R377X) substitution, in TRAPPC9
variant 2. Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for the mutation, and
it was not identified in 306 control chromosomes. The protein was not
detected in patient lymphoblast cell lines.

Mir et al. (2009) identified a homozygous 1422C-T transition in the
TRAPPC9 gene, resulting in an R475X mutation, in affected members of a
large consanguineous Pakistani family with mental retardation. The
mutant protein was not expressed, consistent with nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay. Affected individuals had borderline microcephaly, delayed
walking, and white matter abnormalities on brain MRI.

Abou Jamra et al. (2011) identified homozygosity for the R475X mutation
in affected members of a large consanguineous Syrian family with
autosomal recessive mental retardation. The patients had neonatal
hypotonia, severe motor delay with walking between ages 5 and 7 years,
single words or no speech, growth retardation, stereotypic movements,
and hand flapping. They also shared some dysmorphic features, including
low frontal hairline, synophrys, and microcephaly.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, ARG570TER

In 3 brothers, born of consanguineous Tunisian parents, with autosomal
recessive mental retardation (MRT13; 613192), Philippe et al. (2009)
identified a homozygous 1708C-T transition in exon 9 of the TRAPPC9
gene, resulting in an arg570-to-ter (R570X) substitution. The mutation
was not found in 1,120 control chromosomes. The protein was not detected
in patient fibroblasts, and the authors postulated nonsense-mediated
mRNA decay. In cultured patient fibroblasts, stimulation with TNF-alpha
(191160) showed a defect in IKBA (NFKBIA; 164008) degradation,
suggesting impaired function of the NF-kappa-B (see 164011) signaling
pathway.

.0003
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, 4-BP DEL, 2311TGTT

In affected members of an Iranian family (M001) with mental retardation
(613192), previously reported by Najmabadi et al. (2007) as showing
linkage to chromosome 8q24, Mir et al. (2009) identified a 4-bp deletion
(2311delTGTT) in the TRAPPC9 gene, resulting in a frameshift and
premature termination. Affected members had severe nonsyndromic mental
retardation, were ambulatory but nonverbal, and had microcephaly. There
were no seizures or dysmorphic features.

.0004
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 13
TRAPPC9, IVS17AS, A-C, -2

In 2 sisters, born of unrelated parents from southern Italy, with MRT13
(613192), Marangi et al. (2013) identified a homozygous A-to-C
transversion in intron 17 of the TRAPPC9 gene (2851-2A-C), resulting in
the skipping of exon 18, a frameshift, and premature termination
(Thr951TyrfsTer17). Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for the
mutation, which was identified by exome sequencing. PCR analysis of
patient cells did not show reduction of the TRAPPC9 transcript in the 2
sisters.

REFERENCE 1. Abou Jamra, R. A.; Wohlfart, S.; Zweier, M.; Uebe, S.; Priebe,
L.; Ekici, A.; Giesebrecht, S.; Abboud, A.; Al Khateeb, M. A.; Fakher,
M.; Hamdan, S.; Ismael, A.; Muhammad, S.; Nothen, M. M.; Schumacher,
J.; Reis, A.: Homozygosity mapping in 64 Syrian consanguineous families
with non-specific intellectual disability reveals 11 novel loci and
high heterogeneity. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 19: 1161-1166, 2011.

2. Hu, W.-H.; Pendergast, J. S.; Mo, X.-M.; Brambilla, R.; Bracchi-Ricard,
V.; Li, F.; Walters, W. M.; Blits, B.; He, L.; Schaal, S. M.; Bethea,
J. R.: NIBP, a novel NIK and IKK-beta-binding protein that enhances
NF-kappa-B activation. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 29233-29241, 2005.

3. Marangi, G.; Leuzzi, V.; Manti, F.; Lattante, S.; Orteschi, D.;
Pecile, V.; Neri, G.; Zollino, M.: TRAPPC9-related autosomal recessive
intellectual disability: report of a new mutation and clinical phenotype. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 21: 229-232, 2013.

4. Mir, A.; Kaufman, L.; Noor, A.; Motazacker, M. M.; Jamil, T.; Azam,
M.; Kahrizi, K.; Rafiq, M. A.; Weksberg, R.; Nasr, T.; Naeem, F.;
Tzschach, A.; Kuss, A. W.; Ishak, G. E.; Doherty, D.; Ropers, H. H.;
Barkovich, A. J.; Najmabadi, H.; Ayub, M.; Vincent, J. B.: Identification
of mutations in TRAPPC9, which encodes the NIK- and IKK-beta-binding
protein, in nonsyndromic autosomal-recessive mental retardation. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 85: 909-915, 2009.

5. Mochida, G. H.; Mahajnah, M.; Hill, A. D.; Basel-Vanagaite, L.;
Gleason, D.; Hill, R. S.; Bodell, A.; Crosier, M.; Straussberg, R.;
Walsh, C. A.: A truncating mutation of TRAPPC9 is associated with
autosomal-recessive intellectual disability and postnatal microcephaly. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 85: 897-902, 2009.

6. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. XXI. The complete sequences of 60 new
cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins. DNA Res. 8:
179-187, 2001.

7. Najmabadi, H.; Motazacker, M. M.; Garshasbi, M.; Kahrizi, K.; Tzschach,
A.; Chen, W.; Behjati, F.; Hadavi, V.; Nieh, S. E.; Abedini, S. S.;
Vazifehmand, R.; Firouzabadi, S. G.; and 9 others: Homozygosity
mapping in consanguineous families reveals extreme heterogeneity of
non-syndromic autosomal recessive mental retardation and identifies
8 novel gene loci. Hum. Genet. 121: 43-48, 2007.

8. Philippe, O.; Rio, M.; Carioux, A.; Plaza, J.-M.; Guigue, P.; Molinari,
F.; Boddaert, N.; Bole-Feysot, C.; Nitschke, P.; Smahi, A.; Munnich,
A.; Colleaux, L.: Combination of linkage mapping and microarray-expression
analysis identifies NF-kappa-B signaling defect as a cause of autosomal-recessive
mental retardation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 85: 903-908, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/20/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/17/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/21/2009

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 4/18/2008

EDITED carol: 09/13/2013
carol: 5/8/2013
carol: 3/27/2013
ckniffin: 3/20/2013
carol: 1/3/2012
carol: 11/17/2011
ckniffin: 11/17/2011
wwang: 12/30/2009
ckniffin: 12/21/2009
mgross: 12/17/2009
carol: 4/18/2008
wwang: 4/18/2008

313475	TITLE *313475 SYNAPTOPHYSIN; SYP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Synaptophysin is an integral membrane protein that regulates synaptic
vesicle endocytosis. It is the most abundant synaptic vesicle protein by
mass, accounting for about 10% of total vesicle protein (Kwon and
Chapman, 2011).

CLONING

Sudhof et al. (1987) presented the nucleotide and derived amino acid
sequences of human and rat synaptophysin. The deduced human and rat
proteins contain 296 and 307 amino acids, respectively, and both contain
4 transmembrane domains.

Kwon and Chapman (2011) stated that SYP has a short N-terminal segment,
followed by 4 transmembrane domains and a long C-terminal tail. Both N-
and C-terminal tails are located on the cytoplasmic surface of synaptic
vesicles, and the C-terminal tail is phosphorylated. The 2
intravesicular loops of SYP contain disulfide bonds, and the first loop
has an N-glycosylation site.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ozcelik et al. (1990) concluded that the SYP gene has 7 exons
distributed over about 20 kb.

MAPPING

By linkage analysis performed using CEPH families, Ozcelik et al. (1990)
mapped the SYP locus to Xp11.23-p11.22. Regionalization of the gene on
the X chromosome was also done with hamster/human hybrid cells in which
various portions of the human X chromosome were present. Using a RFLP of
SYP, Ozcelik et al. (1990) concluded that SYP lies between TIMP and
DXS14. Ozcelik et al. (1990) mapped the Syp gene to the X chromosome in
the mouse by the study of somatic hybrid cells between mouse and hamster
or rat, with regionalization by the study of hybrid cells containing
rearranged mouse X chromosomes.

Cremin et al. (1993) found that SYP and the TFE3 gene (314310) are
closely linked to the gene for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (301000).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Tarpey et al. (2009) sequenced the coding exons of the X chromosome in
208 families with X-linked mental retardation. They identified 4
independent mutations in the SYP gene that segregated precisely with the
phenotype (MRX96; 300802) in affected family members and were not
detected in any unaffected family members. In addition to X-linked
mental retardation, some affected family members had epilepsy.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using gene targeting, McMahon et al. (1996) disrupted the murine Syp
gene. Mutant mice were viable and fertile with no detectable changes in
brain. The authors concluded that Syp, one of the major synaptic vesicle
membrane proteins, is not essential for synaptic transmission. They
hypothesized that the function of Syp is either redundant or that it has
a more subtle function not apparent in the assays used.

Janz et al. (1999) generated mice lacking Syngr1 (603925) and bred them
to the Syp knockout generated by McMahon et al. (1996) to create
double-knockout mice deficient in both Syp and Syngr1. Short- and
long-term synaptic plasticity was severely reduced in the Syngr1/Syp
double-knockout mice.

Using optical imaging and electrophysiologic experiments with cultured
wildtype and Syp -/- mouse hippocampal neurons, Kwon and Chapman (2011)
found that Syp was required for efficient endocytosis of synaptic
vesicles. The defect in Syp -/- neurons was most evident following rapid
and sustained stimulation. Voltage clamp experiments with Syp -/-
neurons showed pronounced synaptic depression during sustained activity
and slower recovery of the recycling vesicle pool following depletion.
Neurotransmitter release probability, postsynaptic responses, and
short-term synaptic plasticity appeared normal in Syp -/- neurons.
Expression of C-terminally truncated Syp in Syp -/- neurons rescued
endocytosis that occurred during the recovery period following activity,
but not endocytosis that occurred during activity. Kwon and Chapman
(2011) concluded that Syp has 2 structural elements that regulate
vesicle retrieval during and after stimulation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED 96
SYP, 1-BP INS, 274A

In a family segregating X-linked mental retardation (MRX96; 300802),
Tarpey et al. (2009) identified a 1-basepair insertion at nucleotide 274
of the SYP gene, resulting in frameshift and premature termination
(T92fsX45). This mutation was not found in 272 control chromosomes and
was not found in unaffected family members.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED 96
SYP, 2-BP DEL/INS

In a 3-generation pedigree segregating X-linked mental retardation
(300802), Tarpey et al. (2009) identified a 2-bp substitution in the SYP
gene resulting in premature protein termination (177_178CA-GT,
N59_K60-KX).

.0003
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED 96
SYP, 4-BP DEL, 829GACT

In a family segregating X-linked mental retardation (300802), Tarpey et
al. (2009) identified a 4-bp deletion in the SYP gene beginning at
nucleotide 829, resulting in frameshift and premature termination of the
protein (D277fsX59).

.0004
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED 96
SYP, GLY217ARG

In a large 4-generation pedigree segregating X-linked mental retardation
(300802), Tarpey et al. (2009) identified a G-to-C transversion at
nucleotide 649 of the SYP gene, resulting in a gly-to-arg substitution
at codon 217 (G217R). The mutation segregated with the phenotype and was
not detected in any unaffected male family members. In addition to
X-linked mental retardation, some affected individuals manifested
epilepsy.

REFERENCE 1. Cremin, S. M.; Greer, W. L.; Bodok-Nutzati, R.; Schwartz, M.; Peacocke,
M.; Siminovitch, K. A.: Linkage of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome with
three marker loci, DXS426, SYP and TFE3, which map to the Xp11.3-p11.22
region. Hum. Genet. 92: 250-253, 1993.

2. Janz, R.; Sudhof, T. C.; Hammer, R. E.; Unni, V.; Siegelbaum, S.
A.; Bolshakov, V. Y.: Essential roles in synaptic plasticity for
synaptogyrin I and synaptophysin I. Neuron 24: 687-700, 1999.

3. Kwon, S. E.; Chapman, E. R.: Synaptophysin regulates the kinetics
of synaptic vesicle endocytosis in central neurons. Neuron 70: 847-854,
2011.

4. McMahon, H. T.; Bolshakov, V. Y.; Janz, R.; Hammer, R. E.; Siegelbaum,
S. A.; Sudhof, T. C.: Synaptophysin, a major synaptic vesicle protein,
is not essential for neurotransmitter release. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93:
4760-4764, 1996.

5. Ozcelik, T.; Lafreniere, R. G.; Archer, B. T., III; Johnston, P.
A.; Willard, H. F.; Francke, U.; Sudhof, T. C.: Synaptophysin: structure
of the human gene and assignment to the X chromosome in man and mouse. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 47: 551-561, 1990.

6. Sudhof, T. C.; Lottspeich, F.; Greengard, P.; Mehl, E.; Jahn, R.
: The cDNA and derived amino acid sequences for rat and human synaptophysin. Nucleic
Acids Res. 15: 9607 only, 1987.

7. Tarpey, P. S.; Smith, R.; Pleasance, E.; Whibley, A.; Edkins, S.;
Hardy, C.; O'Meara, S.; Latimer, C.; Dicks, E.; Menzies, A.; Stephens,
P.; Blow, M.; and 67 others: A systematic, large-scale resequencing
screen of X-chromosome coding exons in mental retardation. Nature
Genet. 41: 535-543, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/15/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/1/2009
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 11/28/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/9/1990

EDITED carol: 09/17/2013
mgross: 2/17/2012
terry: 2/15/2012
carol: 10/26/2011
alopez: 10/7/2009
terry: 10/1/2009
carol: 11/28/2001
mimadm: 2/28/1994
carol: 12/14/1993
supermim: 3/17/1992
carol: 10/3/1990
carol: 9/9/1990

608218	TITLE *608218 KERATIN 20; KRT20
;;K20;;
CYTOKERATIN 20; CK20;;
KERATIN 21, RAT, HOMOLOG OF; KRT21
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

KRT20 is an integral intermediate filament component and is a major
cytoskeletal keratin of the intestinal epithelium (Moll et al., 1990).

CLONING

Moll et al. (1990) purified KRT20, which they designated protein IT,
from human intestinal mucosa and from cytoskeletal intermediate
filaments. KRT20 has an apparent molecular mass of about 46 kD.
Antibodies raised against KRT20 decorated typical cytokeratin fibril
arrays in normal and transformed intestinal cells. Immunocytochemical
analysis of several human and rat tissues showed that KRT20 is a
prominent component of intestinal and gastric foveolar epithelium,
urothelial umbrella cells, and Merkel cells of epidermis. Sparse
positive epithelial cells were noted in the thymus, bronchus,
gallbladder, and prostate gland.

Using rat Krt21 as probe, Calnek and Quaroni (1993) obtained a partial
cDNA encoding KRT20, which they called CK20, from a colon tumor cell
line cDNA library. The partial sequence, extending from the end of
coil-1a of the alpha-helical rod domain to the polyadenylation tail
region, contains a highly conserved consensus sequence typically found
in the coil-1b alpha-helical rod domain of type I keratins. The partial
KRT20 protein shares 83% amino acid identity with the comparable
sequence of rat Krt21, which the authors renamed Ck20, or Krt20, to
reflect its homology with the human protein. The human and rat proteins
share 86% amino acid identity in the C-terminal nonhelical extension. In
situ hybridization of rat intestine detected expression of Krt20 only
after 20 days gestation (2 days before birth), when the intestinal
epithelium contained terminally differentiated epithelial cells; Krt20
was expressed with Krt8 (148060) by the entire epithelium.

GENE FUNCTION

Moll et al. (1990) found that KRT20 formed heterotypic complexes with
KRT8 in vitro, and the complexes assembled into intermediate filaments
under appropriate conditions.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Rogers et al. (2001) mapped the KRT20 gene
to the keratin gene cluster on chromosome 17q12-q21, which contains
KRT12 (601687) and several type I hair keratin genes (see 601077).

REFERENCE 1. Calnek, D.; Quaroni, A.: Differential localization by in situ
hybridization of distinct keratin mRNA species during intestinal epithelial
cell development and differentiation. Differentiation 53: 95-104,
1993.

2. Moll, R.; Schiller, D. L.; Franke, W. W.: Identification of protein
IT of the intestinal cytoskeleton as a novel type I cytokeratin with
unusual properties and expression patterns. J. Cell Biol. 111: 567-580,
1990.

3. Rogers, M. A.; Langbein, L.; Winter, H.; Ehmann, C.; Praetzel,
S.; Korn, B.; Schweizer, J.: Characterization of a cluster of human
high/ultrahigh sulfur keratin-associated protein genes embedded in
the type I keratin gene domain on chromosome 17q12-21. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
19440-19451, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/31/2003

EDITED terry: 03/16/2005
mgross: 10/31/2003

600031	TITLE *600031 CHITINASE 1; CHIT1
;;CHITINASE, MACROPHAGE; CHIT;;
CHITOTRIOSIDASE;;
METHYLUMBELLIFERYL-TETRA-N-ACETYLCHITOTETRAOSIDE HYDROLASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The CHIT1 gene encodes plasma methylumbelliferyl
tetra-N-acetylchitotetraoside hydrolase (chitotriosidase), a human
chitinase (EC 3.2.1.14). Chitinases play a role in degrading the chitin
walls of some microorganisms (Boot et al., 1995).

CLONING

Renkema et al. (1995) purified and characterized the chitotriosidase
protein from the spleen of a patient with Gaucher disease (230800) who
had increased serum CHIT1 enzyme activity. Two major isoforms with
isoelectric points of 7.2 and 8.0 and molecular masses of 50 and 39 kD,
respectively, were found to have identical N-terminal amino acid
sequences. An antiserum raised against the purified 39-kD
chitotriosidase precipitated all isozymes. The findings suggested that a
single gene encodes the different isoforms of chitotriosidase. The
authors postulated that the enzyme may be involved in defense against
and in degradation of chitin-containing pathogens such as fungi,
nematodes, and insects.

Boot et al. (1995) isolated a cDNA corresponding to the chitotriosidase
gene from a macrophage cDNA library. The deduced 445-amino acid protein
has a molecular mass of 49 kD, similar to the larger isoform detected by
Renkema et al. (1995). Secretion of active chitotriosidase was obtained
after transient transfection of COS-1 cells with the cloned cDNA.
Chitotriosidase contains several regions with high homology to those
present in chitinases from different species belonging to family 18 of
glycosylhydrolases. Northern blot analysis showed that expression of
chitotriosidase mRNA occurred only at a late stage of differentiation of
monocytes to activated macrophages in cell culture. The authors
speculated that the enzyme may play a role in the degradation of
chitin-containing pathogens.

GENE STRUCTURE

Boot et al. (1998) determined that the CHIT1 gene contains 12 exons and
spans about 20 kb.

MAPPING

Eiberg and Den Tandt (1997) mapped the CHIT locus to chromosome
1q31-qter between flanking markers D1S191 and D1S245. By fluorescence in
situ hybridization, Boot et al. (1998) assigned the CHIT gene to
1q31-q32.

GENE FUNCTION

Hollak et al. (1994) observed a very marked increase (more than
600-fold) of chitotriosidase activity in the plasma of 30 of 32
symptomatic patients with type I Gaucher disease (230800), which is due
to mutation in the gene encoding beta-glucosidase (GBA; 606463). The
increase in plasma chitotriosidase that they observed in Gaucher disease
patients was far more pronounced than the increase in alkaline
phosphatase (ALPL; 171760), which had been used as an important
diagnostic hallmark of the disease. Chitotriosidase activity declined
dramatically during enzyme supplementation therapy. In contrast, 3
GBA-deficient individuals without clinical symptoms had only slight
increases in chitotriosidase. The authors considered it unlikely that
chitotriosidase itself contributes to the clinical presentation of
Gaucher disease. Hollak et al. (1994) noted that the similarity between
lysozyme (LYZ; 153450) and chitotriosidase with respect to catalytic
activity toward particular substrates suggested that the latter may also
function in host defense mechanisms, e.g., through cleavage of bacterial
cell wall polysaccharide. Hollak et al. (1994) suggested that the
macrophages loaded with glucosylceramide in Gaucher disease are the main
source of the plasma enzyme activity. No elevation, or only moderate
elevation, of plasma chitotriosidase was found in a variety of
granulomatous immunologic disorders.

Boot et al. (1995) noted that homologous chitinases in plants are known
to defend against fungal pathogens. The bactericidal function of
lysozyme is also well established; nevertheless, in rabbits an inherited
deficiency in lysozyme occurs that seems to have little consequence for
susceptibility to infections. The diverse array of defense mechanisms of
the immune system in mammals probably renders sufficient tolerance to
defects in single enzymes such as lysozyme and chitotriosidase.

By comparing the antifungal properties of human macrophage
chitotriosidase and its isolated domains, Vandevenne et al. (2011)
showed that the catalytic domain was sufficient for antifungal activity
and tended to be more efficient than the intact enzyme. In contrast, the
chitin-binding domain did not possess any antifungal properties.
Mutations in chitotriosidase that rendered the macrophage enzyme
inactive could be compensated by lysozyme, which had even greater
antifungal activity than chitotriosidase, as well as antibacterial
activity.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In individuals with chitotriosidase deficiency (614122), Boot et al.
(1998) identified a homozygous 24-bp duplication in the CHIT1 gene
(600031.0001). The observed carrier frequency of about 35% indicated
that the duplication is the predominant cause of chitotriosidase
deficiency. The presence of the duplication in individuals from various
ethnic backgrounds suggested that this mutation is relatively old.

Grace et al. (2007) noted that the identification of CHIT1 gene
mutations that alter plasma activity is important for the use of this
biomarker to monitor disease activity and therapeutic response in
Gaucher disease. They genotyped the CHIT1 gene in 320 unrelated patients
with Gaucher disease, including 272 of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. Among
all patients, 4% and 37.2% were homozygous and heterozygous,
respectively, for the 24-bp duplication. In addition, Grace et al.
(2007) identified 3 novel mutations in the CHIT1 gene
(600031.0002-600031.0004) in individuals with Gaucher disease and
chitotriosidase deficiency.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CHITOTRIOSIDASE DEFICIENCY
CHIT1, 24-BP DUP

Boot et al. (1998) found that chitotriosidase deficiency (614122) can be
caused by a 24-bp duplication in exon 10 of the CHIT1 gene, resulting in
activation of a cryptic 3-prime splice site, generating an mRNA with an
in-frame deletion of 87 nucleotides. All chitotriosidase-deficient
individuals tested were homozygous for the duplication. Among 171 Dutch
persons, 6.4% were homozygous and 35.1% were heterozygous for the
mutation. Among 68 Ashkenazi Jewish subjects, 5.9% were homozygous and
33.8% were heterozygous. The mutant chitotriosidase is predicted to lack
amino acids 344-372. On the basis of homology with several chitinases
for which the 3-dimensional structure has been resolved by
crystallographic analysis, the authors predicted that the internal
deletion in the mutant chitotriosidase prevents the formation of a
proper barrel conformation, with resulting loss of chitinolytic
activity.

Among a total of 320 unrelated patients with Gaucher disease (232800),
including 272 of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, Grace et al. (2007) found
that 4% and 37.2% were homozygous or heterozygous for the CHIT1 24-bp
dup, respectively. The allele frequency was 0.227.

.0002
CHITOTRIOSIDASE DEFICIENCY
CHIT1, GLY354ARG, LEU385LEU, AND 4-BP DEL

In a Caribbean Hispanic/African type 1 Gaucher disease (230800) patient
with chitotriosidase deficiency (614122), Grace et al. (2007) identified
a complex allele of the CHIT1 gene with 3 different variations in cis: a
1060G-A transition in exon 10 resulting in a gly354-to-arg (G354R)
substitution, a 1155G-A transition in exon 10 resulting in a synonymous
leu385-to-leu (L385L) substitution, and a 4-bp deletion in intron 10
(1156delGTAA). The complex allele was designated 'E/I-10'
(exon/intron-10) allele. The patient was compound heterozygous for the
E/I-10 complex allele and the common 24-bp duplication (600031.0001). In
vitro functional expression studies showed that the complex mutant had
no residual enzyme activity. Further screening identified the complex
allele in individuals of Caribbean Hispanic, Dominican, Caribbean Black,
Puerto Rican, and American Black descent. It was not identified in those
of Caucasian or Ashkenazi Jewish descent.

.0003
CHITOTRIOSIDASE DEFICIENCY
CHIT1, GLU74LYS

In a type I Gaucher disease (230800) patient with chitotriosidase
deficiency (614122), Grace et al. (2007) identified a 220G-A transition
in exon 3 of the CHIT1 gene, resulting in a glu74-to-lys (E74K)
substitution. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
E74K mutant had 51% activity compared to control values. The E74K allele
was found in 3 (1.4%) of 208 Ashkenazi Jewish alleles, but not in
non-Ashkenazi Jewish alleles, indicating that it is very rare. This
mutation was not found in normal controls.

.0004
CHITOTRIOSIDASE DEFICIENCY
CHIT1, GLY102SER

In 3 Ashkenazi Jewish type I Gaucher disease (230800) patients with
chitotriosidase deficiency (614122), Grace et al. (2007) identified a
304G-A transition in exon 4 of the CHIT1 gene, resulting in a
gly102-to-ser (G102S) substitution. In vitro functional expression
studies showed that the G102S mutant had 23% activity compared to
control values. The G102S allele had a frequency of 0.2 to 0.3 in
various control populations.

REFERENCE 1. Boot, R. G.; Renkema, G. H.; Verhoek, M.; Strijland, A.; Bliek,
J.; de Meulemeester, T. M. A. M. O.; Mannens, M. M. A. M.; Aerts,
J. M. F. G.: The human chitotriosidase gene: nature of inherited
enzyme deficiency. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 25680-25685, 1998.

2. Boot, R. G.; Renkema. H.; Strijland, A.; van Zonneveld, A. J.;
Aerts, J. M. F. G.: Cloning of a cDNA encoding chitotriosidase, a
human chitinase produced by macrophages. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 26252-26256,
1995.

3. Eiberg, H.; Den Tandt, W. R.: Assignment of human plasma methylumbelliferyl-tetra-N-acetylchitotetraoside
hydrolase or chitinase to chromosome 1q by a linkage study. Hum.
Genet. 101: 205-207, 1997.

4. Grace, M. E.; Balwani, M.; Nazarenko, I.; Prakash-Cheng, A.; Desnick,
R. J.: Type 1 Gaucher disease: null and hypomorphic novel chitotriosidase
mutations--implications for diagnosis and therapeutic monitoring. Hum.
Mutat. 28: 866-873, 2007.

5. Hollak, C. E. M.; van Weely, S.; van Oers, M. H. J.; Aerts, J.
M. F. G.: Marked elevation of plasma chitotriosidase activity: a
novel hallmark of Gaucher disease. J. Clin. Invest. 93: 1288-1292,
1994.

6. Renkema, G. H.; Boot, R. G.; Muijsers, A. O.; Donker-Koopman, W.
E.; Aerts, J. M. F. G.: Purification and characterization of human
chitotriosidase, a novel member of the chitinase family of proteins. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 2198-2202, 1995.

7. Vandevenne, M.; Campisi, V.; Freichels, A.; Gillard, C.; Gaspard,
G.; Frere, J.-M.; Galleni, M.; Filee, P.: Comparative functional
analysis of the human macrophage chitotriosidase. Protein Sci. 20:
1451-1463, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/2/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 10/24/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/17/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/2/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/2/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/14/1994

EDITED mgross: 01/07/2013
terry: 1/2/2013
terry: 8/2/2011
carol: 7/26/2011
carol: 10/24/2007
ckniffin: 10/17/2007
alopez: 2/11/1999
carol: 11/11/1998
terry: 11/2/1998
mark: 12/9/1997
terry: 12/2/1997
mark: 1/24/1996
mark: 1/22/1996
mimadm: 9/23/1995
mark: 3/20/1995
mimadm: 7/30/1994
jason: 7/14/1994

600128	TITLE *600128 PHOSPHODIESTERASE 4C, cAMP-SPECIFIC; PDE4C
;;DUNCE-LIKE PHOSPHODIESTERASE E1, FORMERLY; DPDE1, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cyclic nucleotides are important second messengers that regulate and
mediate a number of cellular responses to extracellular signals, such as
hormones, light, and neurotransmitters. Cyclic nucleotide
phosphodiesterases (PDEs) regulate the cellular concentrations of cyclic
nucleotides and thereby play a role in signal transduction. PDE4C is a
class IV cAMP-specific PDE (summary by Milatovich et al., 1994).

CLONING

Using degenerate primers based on Drosophila dnc and rat Dpd to amplify
human DPD orthologs, followed by low-stringency hybridization of a brain
cDNA library, Bolger et al. (1993) cloned a partial DPDE1 cDNA, which
they called PDE21. RNase protection assays detected the PDE21 transcript
in retinoblastoma and neuroblastoma cell lines, but not in 5 other cell
lines examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sullivan et al. (1999) determined that the PDE4C gene spans at least 38
kb and contains at least 18 exons. Comparison of the published human
PDE4C cDNA sequences with those of the genomic DNA revealed 4
alternatively spliced exons and suggested that the PDE4C gene has at
least 3 alternative promoters.

MAPPING

Using Southern analyses of somatic cell hybrid lines and of recombinant
inbred mouse strains, as well as FISH, Milatovich et al. (1994) mapped
the 4 PDE4 genes in human and mouse. They assigned the PDE4C gene to
human chromosome 19 and mouse chromosome 8.

By FISH, Sullivan et al. (1999) localized the PDE4C gene to 19p13.1.

Sullivan et al. (1999) found that cosmids containing PDE4C also
contained the JUND (165162) and RAB3A (179490) genes. Analysis of the
cosmids showed that 27 kb separate JUND and PDE4C, while only 3.7 kb
separate PDE4C and RAB3A. The 3 genes share the same orientation of
transcription and are arranged in the 5-prime-to-3-prime order as
follows: JUND--PDE4C--RAB3A--tel.

REFERENCE 1. Bolger, G.; Michaeli, T.; Martins, T.; St. John, T.; Steiner, B.;
Rodgers, L.; Riggs, M.; Wigler, M.; Ferguson, K.: A family of human
phosphodiesterases homologous to the dunce learning and memory gene
product of Drosophila melanogaster are potential targets for antidepressant
drugs. Molec. Cell. Biol. 13: 6558-6571, 1993.

2. Milatovich, A.; Bolger, G.; Michaeli, T.; Francke, U.: Chromosome
localizations of genes for five cAMP-specific phosphodiesterases in
man and mouse. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 20: 75-86, 1994.

3. Sullivan, M.; Olsen, A. S.; Houslay, M. D.: Genomic organisation
of the human cyclic AMP-specific phosphodiesterase PDE4C gene and
its chromosomal localisation to 19p13.1, between RAB3A and JUND. Cell.
Signal. 11: 735-742, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/3/2010
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/7/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/23/1994

EDITED mgross: 02/16/2010
terry: 2/3/2010
mgross: 12/4/2009
mcapotos: 12/10/1999
terry: 12/7/1999
alopez: 1/4/1999
alopez: 6/13/1997
carol: 9/29/1994
carol: 9/23/1994

611435	TITLE *611435 DOCKING PROTEIN 3; DOK3
;;DOK-LIKE PROTEIN; DOKL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis using Abl (ABL1; 189980) as bait, followed by
5-prime RACE of a mouse liver cDNA library, Cong et al. (1999) cloned
mouse Dok3, which they called Dokl. The deduced 444-amino acid mouse
protein contains an N-terminal PH domain, a central PTB domain, and a
proline-rich C-terminal domain. Dokl is relatively serine/threonine-rich
overall and contains several potential phosphorylation sites for ser/thr
protein kinases. Dokl shares 60% and 57% sequence similarity with p62dok
(DOK1; 602919) over the PH and PTB domains, respectively, with lower
similarity over the C-terminal regions. Northern blot analysis of mouse
tissues detected several species with high expression in spleen and lung
and low levels in other tissues. RNAse protection studies detected very
high Dokl expression in bone marrow and spleen, low expression in
thymus, and no expression in NIH3T3 cells. Immunofluorescence studies
localized Dokl to the cytoplasm in NIH3T3 cells.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis using Csk (124095) as bait, followed by
5-prime RACE of a mouse fetal thymus cDNA library, Lemay et al. (2000)
independently cloned mouse Dok3. RNAse protection assay of mouse tissues
detected high expression in spleen and bone marrow but not in thymus,
with little or no expression in nonlymphoid organs.

MAPPING

Berger et al. (2010) stated that the DOK3 gene maps to chromosome
5q35.3.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid and immunoprecipitation analysis of Dokl and Abl
mutants, Cong et al. (1999) showed that the Dokl PTB domain bound
phosphotyrosines on Abl in a kinase-dependent manner. In addition, the
Dokl PTB domain bound weakly to insulin receptor (INSR; 147670).
Immunoprecipitation and phosphorylation studies showed that Dokl served
as a substrate for phosphorylation by v-Abl, c-Abl, and Bcr-Abl (see
BCR; 151410). Overexpression of Dokl inhibited v-Abl-dependent
activation of MAPK1 (176948) and v-Abl transforming activity.

Lemay et al. (2000) showed that, in response to immunoreceptor
stimulation, Dok3 was tyrosine phosphorylated by Src (190090) family
members Lck (153390), Fyn (137025), and Lyn (165120).
Immunoprecipitation studies showed that Dok3 bound inhibitors SHIP
(INPP5D; 601582) and Csk (124095) but did not bind RasGAP (RASA1;
139150). Dok3 binding to SHIP occurred via the SH2 domain. Dok3 also
bound Csk via the Csk SH2 domain with possible involvement of the Csk
SH3 domain as well. Overexpression of Dok3 in a murine B-cell line
inhibited immunoreceptor-mediated NFAT (see 600490) activation. Lemay et
al. (2000) concluded that Dok3 acts as an adaptor in the recruitment of
inhibitory molecules and may play a role in negative regulation of
immunoreceptor signaling in hematopoietic cells.

Using a constitutively active form of Src, Honma et al. (2006)
identified Grb2 (108355) as a protein that bound Dok3 downstream of its
tyrosine phosphorylation. Dok3 sequestered Grb2 from Shc (600560),
resulting in negative regulation of the Ras-Erk pathway.

ANIMAL MODEL

Berger et al. (2010) found that mice with knockout of Dok1 (602919),
Dok2 (604997), or Dok3 each developed lung adenocarcinoma (211980). Mice
with double-knockouts of different combinations of these 3 genes
developed lung adenocarcinoma at an earlier age and with high
penetrance, suggesting that the proteins have partially redundant or
overlapping functions. Compared to wildtype lung tissue, Dok-mutant
tumors showed moderate staining for phosphorylated Akt (164730) and
strong staining for phosphorylated Erk (176872). Immunohistochemical
studies on isolated cells showed that the tumor cells arose from a
population of bronchioalveolar stem cells with inactivation of the Dok
proteins. These findings were consistent with a model of tumorigenesis
in which inactivation of the Dok1, Dok2, and Dok3 genes leads to
hyperactivation of Akt and Erk, and an expansion of the stem cells that
differentiate into alveolar type II cells.

REFERENCE 1. Berger, A. H.; Niki, M.; Morotti, A.; Taylor, B. S.; Socci, N.
D.; Viale, A.; Brennan, C.; Szoke, J.; Motoi, N.; Rothman, P. B.;
Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Gerald, W. L.; Ladanyi, M.; Pandolfi, P. P.
: Identification of DOK genes as lung tumor suppressors. Nature Genet. 42:
216-223, 2010.

2. Cong, F.; Yuan, B.; Goff, S. P.: Characterization of a novel member
of the DOK family that binds and modulates Abl signaling. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 19: 8314-8325, 1999.

3. Honma, M.; Higuchi, O.; Shirakata, M.; Yasuda, T.; Shibuya, H.;
Iemura, S.; Natsume, T.; Yamanashi, Y.: Dok-3 sequesters Grb2 and
inhibits the Ras-Erk pathway downstream of protein-tyrosine kinases. Genes
Cells 11: 143-151, 2006.

4. Lemay, S.; Davidson, D.; Latour, S.; Veillette, A.: Dok-3, a novel
adapter molecule involved in the negative regulation of immunoreceptor
signaling. Molec. Cell. Biol. 20: 2743-2754, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/14/2010

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 9/14/2007

EDITED wwang: 05/20/2010
ckniffin: 5/14/2010
wwang: 9/14/2007

176910	TITLE *176910 PROTEIN KINASE, cAMP-DEPENDENT, REGULATORY, TYPE II, ALPHA; PRKAR2A
;;PROTEIN KINASE A, RII-ALPHA SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION See 188830. Phosphorylation by cAMP-dependent protein kinases is
essential for sperm motility. A cAMP-dependent protein kinase is bound
to sperm flagella by a regulatory subunit (RII). Oyen et al. (1989)
observed high testis-specific expression of a human homolog to the rat
RII-alpha mRNA induced in haploid germ cells. They cloned a human cDNA
that encodes a 404-amino acid polypeptide with a region (amino acids
45-75) divergent from that of the previously published mouse and rat
sequences.

By PCR and Southern blot analysis of somatic cell hybrid mapping panels
and by radiation hybrid analysis, Tasken et al. (1998) mapped the
PRKAR2A gene to chromosome 3p21.3-p21.2.

REFERENCE 1. Oyen, O.; Myklebust, F.; Scott, J. D.; Hansson, V.; Jahnsen, T.
: Human testis cDNA for the regulatory subunit RII alpha of cAMP-dependent
protein kinase encodes an alternate amino-terminal region. FEBS Lett. 246:
57-64, 1989.

2. Tasken, K.; Naylor, S. L.; Solberg, R.; Jahnsen, T.: Mapping of
the gene encoding the regulatory subunit RII-alpha of cAMP-dependent
protein kinase (locus PRKAR2A) to human chromosome region 3p21.3-p21.2. Genomics 50:
378-381, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 4/4/1999
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 9/5/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/9/1987

EDITED alopez: 07/24/2001
mgross: 4/6/1999
carol: 4/4/1999
mark: 9/5/1996
terry: 9/5/1996
carol: 3/18/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 10/30/1991
carol: 9/17/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989

604100	TITLE *604100 GLUTAMATE RECEPTOR, METABOTROPIC, 4; GRM4
;;MGLUR4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

L-glutamate is the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the central
nervous system and activates both ionotropic and metabotropic glutamate
receptors, such as GRM4. The metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs),
which are G protein-coupled receptors, have been divided into 3 groups
on the basis of sequence homology, putative signal transduction
mechanisms, and pharmacologic properties. Group II and group III mGluRs
are linked to the inhibition of the cyclic AMP cascade, but differ in
their agonist selectivities. Group III agonists include
L-2-amino-4-phosphonobutyrate (L-AP4) and L-serine-O-phosphate (summary
by Wu et al., 1998).

CLONING

Using a PCR strategy with primers based on consensus regions of rat
mGluR1-5, Makoff et al. (1996) isolated partial cDNAs corresponding to
the human homologs of these genes. By probing a cerebellum library with
the partial human mGluR4 cDNA, the authors isolated additional mGluR4
cDNAs which between them contained the complete coding sequence for the
human protein. The predicted 912-amino acid human mGluR4 protein shares
90% identity with rat mGluR4. Northern blot analysis of human tissues
revealed that the approximately 5-kb mGluR4 mRNA was only expressed in
brain. In situ hybridization to brain tissues indicated that human
mGluR4 mRNA, like that of rat mGluR4, has a narrow distribution. In both
organisms, the highest level of expression was detected in the granule
cells of the cerebellum. Wu et al. (1998) isolated cDNAs encoding 3
human group III mGluRs, mGluR4, mGluR7 (604101) and mGluR8 (601116), and
compared the pharmacologic properties of these receptors.

By database analysis, Bjarnadottir et al. (2005) identified GRM4
orthologs in mouse and fish. The deduced mouse protein contains 912
amino acids.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bjarnadottir et al. (2005) determined that the GRM4 gene contains 7
exons.

MAPPING

Barbon et al. (2000) mapped the GRM4 gene to chromosome 6p21.3 by
radiation hybrid mapping.

Bjarnadottir et al. (2005) mapped the mouse Grm4 gene to chromosome 17.

ANIMAL MODEL

To provide a better understanding of the L-AP4 receptors, Pekhletski et
al. (1996) generated knockout mice lacking the mGluR4 gene. The mutant
mice did not display any gross motor abnormalities, impairments of
novelty-induced exploratory behaviors, or alterations in fine motor
coordination. However, they were deficient on the rotating rod
motor-learning test, suggesting that they may have an impaired ability
to learn complex motor tasks. Analysis of presynaptic short-term
synaptic plasticity at the parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapse
demonstrated that paired-pulse facilitation and post-tetanic
potentiation were impaired in the mutant mice, although long-term
depression was unaffected. Pekhletski et al. (1996) concluded that an
important function of mGluR4 is to provide a presynaptic mechanism for
maintaining synaptic efficacy during repetitive activation, and that the
presence of mGluR4 at the parallel fiber-Purkinje cell synapse is
required for maintaining normal motor function. Gerlai et al. (1998)
found that mGluR4 mutant mice exhibited significantly accelerated
learning performance in a spatial reversal learning task. In a probe
trial administered 6 weeks posttraining, the mice showed impaired
spatial accuracy. These results suggested that mGluR4 mutant mice differ
in their ability to learn and integrate new spatial information into
previously formed memory traces and that their use of stored spatial
information is altered.

Fallarino et al. (2010) observed that mGluR4-null mice were markedly
vulnerable to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE), a mouse
model of multiple sclerosis (MS; 126200), and developed immune responses
dominated by IL17 (603149)-producing T helper (TH17) cells. MGluR4 was
constitutively expressed on dendritic cells isolated from wildtype mice.
Signaling through mGluR4 decreased commitment to the TH17 phenotype by
decreasing intracellular cAMP. Treatment of wildtype mice with a
selective mGluR4 enhancer increased EAE resistance and offered a
protective response via a shift toward regulatory CD4+ T cells. In
contrast, dendritic cells from mGluR4-null mice showed defective mGluR4
signaling with resultant bias toward the TH17 phenotype. The findings
provided evidence that glutamate acts at the interface between the
nervous and immune systems, with mGluR4 present on dendritic cells in
the central nervous system. Fallarino et al. (2010) suggested that the
high amounts of glutamate associated with neuroinflammation might
reflect a counterregulatory mechanism that is protective in nature by
decreasing activation of pathogenic IL17-producing T cells.

REFERENCE 1. Barbon, A.; Ferraboli, S.; Barlati, S.: Assignment of the human
metabotropic glutamate receptor gene GRM4 to chromosome 6 band p21.3
by radiation hybrid mapping. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 88: 210 only,
2000.

2. Bjarnadottir, T. K.; Fredriksson, R.; Schioth, H. B.: The gene
repertoire and the common evolutionary history of glutamate, pheromone
(V2R), taste(1) and other related G protein-coupled receptors. Gene 362:
70-84, 2005.

3. Fallarino, F.; Volpi, C.; Fazio, F.; Notartomaso, S.; Vacca, C.;
Busceti, C.; Bicciato, S.; Battaglia, G.; Bruno, V.; Puccetti, P.;
Fioretti, M. C.; Nicoletti, F.; Grohmann, U.; Di Marco, R.: Metabotropic
glutamate receptor-4 modulates adaptive immunity and restrains neuroinflammation. Nature
Med. 16: 897-902, 2010.

4. Gerlai, R.; Roder, J. C.; Hampson, D. R.: Altered spatial learning
and memory in mice lacking the mGluR4 subtype of metabotropic glutamate
receptor. Behav. Neurosci. 112: 525-532, 1998.

5. Makoff, A.; Lelchuk, R.; Oxer, M.; Harrington, K.; Emson, P.:
Molecular characterization and localization of human metabotropic
glutamate receptor type 4. Molec. Brain Res. 37: 239-248, 1996.

6. Pekhletski, R.; Gerlai, R.; Overstreet, L. S.; Huang, X. P.; Agopyan,
N.; Slater, N. T.; Abramow-Newerly, W.; Roder, J. C.; Hampson, D.
R.: Impaired cerebellar synaptic plasticity and motor performance
in mice lacking the mGluR4 subtype of metabotropic glutamate receptor. J.
Neurosci. 16: 6364-6373, 1996.

7. Wu, S.; Wright, R. A.; Rockey, P. K.; Burgett, S. G.; Arnold, J.
S.; Rosteck, P. R., Jr.; Johnson, B. G.; Schoepp, D. D.; Belagaje,
R. M.: Group III human metabotropic glutamate receptors 4, 7 and
8: molecular cloning, functional expression, and comparison of pharmacological
properties in RGT cells. Molec. Brain Res. 53: 88-97, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/12/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/4/2010
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 3/7/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/4/1999

EDITED mgross: 04/17/2012
terry: 3/12/2012
wwang: 10/11/2010
ckniffin: 10/4/2010
terry: 3/8/2001
joanna: 3/7/2001
mgross: 8/5/1999
mgross: 8/4/1999

601418	TITLE *601418 RIBOSOME BINDING PROTEIN 1; RRBP1
;;EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX GLYCOPROTEIN ES/130, CHICKEN, HOMOLOG OF; ES130
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

To clone genes for proteins involved in the formation of cardiac
mesenchyme, Rezaee et al. (1993) used anti-cardiac extracellular matrix
polyclonal antibodies to screen an embryonic chicken cardiocyte
expression library. They used cultured chicken embryonic cardiocytes
because the conditioned medium from such cultures induced
epithelial/mesenchymal transformation; also, it was easier to obtain
good quality RNA from cultured tissue. They identified a 130-kD protein
and designated the protein ES/130. ES/130, which is expressed in
endocardial cushions, was viewed as a candidate for a central role in
atrioventricular septal defect because expression of the gene in the
myocardium induces expression of the same gene in the endocardium.
Basson et al. (1996) stated that ES/130 is also expressed in noncardiac
chicken tissues such as limb and notochord.

Basson et al. (1996) identified the human homolog of chicken ES/130.
RT-PCR studies revealed that human ES130 is expressed in both fetal and
adult tissue and that its expression in the left ventricle is increased
in the failing adult heart.

MAPPING

Basson et al. (1996) localized the human ES/130 gene to chromosome
20p12-p11.2 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

- Exclusion Studies

By FISH analysis of individuals with Alagille syndrome (118450) and
deletions of 20p12, Basson et al. (1996) excluded ES/130 as a candidate
gene for this disorder.

REFERENCE 1. Basson, C. T.; MacRae, C. A.; Schoenberg-Fejzo, M.; Morton, C.
C.; Spinner, N. B.; Genin, A.; Krug, E.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman,
C. E.: Identification, characterization, and chromosomal localization
of the human homolog (hES) of ES/130. Genomics 35: 628-631, 1996.

2. Rezaee, M.; Isokawa, K.; Halligan, N.; Markwald, R. R.; Krug, E.
L.: Identification of an extracellular 130 kDa protein involved in
early cardiac morphogenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 14404-14411, 1993.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/9/1996

EDITED carol: 08/02/2011
carol: 5/19/1998
alopez: 11/26/1997
alopez: 11/21/1997
mark: 9/9/1996

116945	TITLE *116945 MINICHROMOSOME MAINTENANCE, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF, 2; MCM2
;;MITOTIN;;
CELL DIVISION CYCLE-LIKE 1; CDCL1;;
NUCLEAR PROTEIN BM28; BM28
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MCM2, also called CDCL1 and BM28, is a human nuclear protein that plays
an important role in 2 crucial steps of the cell cycle, namely, onset of
DNA replication and cell division (Mincheva et al., 1994). It is similar
to members of the family of early S-phase proteins.

CLONING

The replication of DNA occurs only once per cell cycle in eukaryotes.
Blow and Laskey (1988) attempted to explain this tight control by
proposing the existence of a hypothetical licensing factor that would
bind to chromatin during mitosis to permit DNA replication during the
ensuing S phase in Xenopus egg extracts. Kubota et al. (1995), Chong et
al. (1995), and Madine et al. (1995) identified a replication licensing
activity in a complex containing MCM/P1 family proteins in Xenopus
oocytes. Burkhart et al. (1995) showed that human MCM2 and MCM5 (602696)
proteins form a complex. Hu et al. (1993) reported cDNA sequences for 5
MCM/P1 family members.

MAPPING

Using plasmid DNA containing the complete coding sequence of the CDCL1
gene as a probe for fluorescence in situ hybridization, Mincheva et al.
(1994) mapped the gene to 3q21. From its localization, CDCL1 became a
candidate for an oncogene affected by chromosomal breaks in acute
myeloid leukemia (AML).

GENE FUNCTION

Tsuruga et al. (1997) reported the comparative analysis of the human MCM
proteins MCM2, MCM3 (602693), MCM5, and MCM7 (600592). The 4 MCM
proteins underwent unequal regulation, suggesting that they play
somewhat distinct roles in the regulation of the mammalian cell cycle.
The mRNA levels of these genes underwent cell cycle-dependent
oscillations with a peak at G1/S phase; they may be regulated by E2F
motifs (see E2F1; 189971), 2 of which were detected in the 5-prime
regulatory region of the MCM5 gene. In contrast, the levels of these MCM
proteins remained rather constant during the HeLa cell cycle. However,
their levels gradually increased in a variable manner as normal cells
progressed from G0 into the G1/S phase. In the G0 stage, the MCM2 and
MCM5 proteins were much less abundant than the MCM7 and MCM3 proteins.
This suggests that the MCM proteins are not present in stoichiometric
amounts and that only a proportion of these molecules actively
participate in cell cycle regulation as part of MCM complexes.

Using an improved method for constructing conditional degron mutants,
Labib et al. (2000) demonstrated that depletion of minichromosome
maintenance protein complexes after initiation irreversibly blocks the
progression of replication forks in S. cerevisiae. Their experiments
demonstrated that MCM complex is loaded at origins before initiation and
is essential for elongation. Disruption of any one of the MCMs resulted
in cells that were unable to complete the S phase, indicating that all
MCM proteins are equally important for chromosome replication to
continue after the activation of early origins of DNA replication. Labib
et al. (2000) concluded that restricting MCM loading to the G1 phase
ensures that initiation and elongation occur just once per cell cycle.

The MCM2-7 complex is comprised of 6 subunits, MCM2 through MCM7, and is
a ring-shaped heterohexameric ATPase involved in DNA replication. In
Xenopus egg extracts, Pacek et al. (2006) showed that the MCM2-7
complex, the GINS complex (see GINS1; 610608), and Cdc45 (CDC45L;
603465) were enriched at stalled replication forks. They proposed that
these components unwind DNA and separate DNA strands at replication
forks.

Groth et al. (2007) characterized the complex in which the human histone
chaperone ASF1 (see 609189) and MCM2-7, the putative replicative
helicase, are connected through a histone H3-H4 bridge. Depletion of
ASF1 by RNA interference impeded DNA unwinding at replication sites, and
similar defects arose from overproduction of new histone H3-H4 that
compromised ASF1 function. Groth et al. (2007) concluded that their data
link ASF1 chaperone function, histone supply, and replicative unwinding
of DNA in chromatin. Groth et al. (2007) proposed that ASF1, as a
histone acceptor and donor, handles parental and new histones at the
replication fork via an ASF1-(H3-H4)-MCM2-7 intermediate and thus
provides a means to fine-tune replication fork progression and histone
supply and demand.

NOMENCLATURE

This gene has also been referred to as cdc19 and D3S3194. See MCM7
(600592), which also has been referred to as MCM2.

REFERENCE 1. Blow, J. J.; Laskey, R. A.: A role for the nuclear envelope in
controlling DNA replication within the cell cycle. Nature 332: 546-548,
1988.

2. Burkhart, R.; Schulte, D.; Hu, D.; Musahl, C.; Gohring, F.; Knippers,
R.: Interactions of human nuclear proteins P1Mcm3 and P1Cdc46. Europ.
J. Biochem. 228: 431-438, 1995.

3. Chong, J. P.; Mahbubani, H. M.; Khoo, C. Y.; Blow, J. J.: Purification
of an MCM-containing complex as a component of the DNA replication
licensing system. Nature 375: 418-421, 1995.

4. Groth, A.; Corpet, A.; Cook, A. J. L.; Roche, D.; Bartek, J.; Lukas,
J.; Almouzni, G.: Regulation of replication fork progression through
histone supply and demand. Science 318: 1928-1931, 2007.

5. Hu, B.; Burkhart, R.; Schulte, D.; Musahl, C.; Knippers, R.: The
P1 family: a new class of nuclear mammalian proteins related to the
yeast Mcm replication proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 21: 5289-5293,
1993.

6. Kubota, Y.; Mimura, S.; Nishimoto, S.; Takisawa, H.; Nojima, H.
: Identification of the yeast MCM3-related protein as a component
of Xenopus DNA replication licensing factor. Cell 81: 601-609, 1995.

7. Labib, K.; Tercero, J. A.; Diffley, J. F. X.: DNA replication
fork progression requires uninterrupted MCM2-7 function. Science 288:
1643-1647, 2000. Note: Erratum: Science 289: 2052 only, 2000.

8. Madine, M. A.; Khoo, C. Y.; Mills, A. D.; Laskey, R. A.: MCM3
complex required for cell cycle regulation of DNA replication in vertebrate
cells. Nature 375: 421-424, 1995.

9. Mincheva, A.; Todorov, I.; Werner, D.; Fink, T. M.; Lichter, P.
: The human gene for nuclear protein BM28 (CDCL1), a new member of
the early S-phase family of proteins, maps to chromosome band 3q21. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 65: 276-277, 1994.

10. Pacek, M.; Tutter, A. V.; Kubota, Y.; Takisawa, H.; Walter, J.
C.: Localization of MCM2-7, Cdc45, and GINS to the site of DNA unwinding
during eukaryotic DNA replication. Molec. Cell 21: 581-587, 2006.

11. Tsuruga, H.; Yabuta, N.; Hashizume, K.; Ikeda, M.; Endo, Y.; Nojima,
H.: Expression, nuclear localization and interactions of human MCM/P1
proteins. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 236: 118-125, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/11/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/28/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/1/2000
Ethylin Wang Jabs - updated: 6/9/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/17/1994

EDITED terry: 12/21/2012
alopez: 2/14/2008
terry: 2/11/2008
wwang: 11/29/2006
wwang: 4/24/2006
terry: 3/28/2006
terry: 6/1/2000
alopez: 1/27/1999
psherman: 6/9/1998
psherman: 5/20/1998
mark: 6/3/1997
mark: 1/9/1997
jason: 6/17/1994

604064	TITLE *604064 ACTIVATING TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 4; ATF4
;;CYCLIC AMP RESPONSE ELEMENT-BINDING PROTEIN 2; CREB2;;
TAX-RESPONSIVE ENHANCER ELEMENT B67; TAXREB67
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ATF4 belongs to the large ATF/CREB family of transcription factors.
These proteins bind DNA via their basic region and dimerize via their
leucine zipper domain to form a variety of homo- and heterodimers to
regulate gene transcription (De Angelis et al., 2003).

CLONING

An activating transcription factor (ATF)-binding site is a promoter
element present in a wide variety of viral and cellular genes, including
E1A-inducible adenoviral genes and cAMP-inducible cellular genes. Hai et
al. (1989) identified cDNAs encoding 8 different human ATF
consensus-binding proteins, including a partial cDNA corresponding to
ATF4. They found that members of this family share significant sequence
similarity within a leucine zipper DNA-binding motif and an adjacent
basic region; the proteins show little similarity outside of these
regions.

The cAMP response element (CRE) is an octanucleotide motif that mediates
diverse transcriptional regulatory effects. By screening a Jurkat T-cell
line expression library for the ability to bind CRE, Karpinski et al.
(1992) isolated a full-length cDNA corresponding to ATF4, which they
called CREB2 (CRE-binding protein-2). The predicted protein contains 351
amino acids. Northern blot analysis revealed that the 1.5-kb CREB2 mRNA
was expressed in all human tumor cell lines and mouse organs tested.

GENE FUNCTION

Karpinski et al. (1992) found that, unlike CREB (123810), which
activates transcription from CRE-containing promoters, CREB2 functions
as a specific repressor of CRE-dependent transcription. The
transcriptional repressor activity resides within the C-terminal leucine
zipper and basic domain region of the CREB2 protein.

The p40tax gene product of human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1)
activates HTLV-1 viral transcription in trans through tax-responsive
enhancers in the long terminal repeats. Tsujimoto et al. (1991)
identified ATF4 as TAXREB67, a protein that binds to the tax-responsive
enhancer element in HTLV-1.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay, He et al. (2001) found that mouse Nrf2
(NFE2L2; 600492) interacted with rat Atf4. Coimmunoprecipitation and
mammalian 2-hybrid analyses confirmed the interaction. An Nrf2-Atf4
dimer bound a stress response element (StRE) sequence from an Nrf2
target gene, Ho1 (HMOX1; 141250). CdCl2, an Ho1 inducer, increased
expression of Atf4 in mouse hepatoma cells prior to induction of Ho1. A
dominant-negative Atf4 mutant inhibited basal and CdCl2-induced
expression of an StRE-dependent construct in hepatoma cells, but it only
inhibited basal expression in a human mammary epithelial cell line. He
et al. (2001) concluded that ATF4 regulates HO1 expression in a
cell-specific manner, possibly in a complex with NRF2.

Siu et al. (2002) presented evidence that ATF4 binds nutrient-sensing
response element-1 (NSRE1) in the human asparagine synthetase (ASNS;
108370) gene and activates ASNS transcription in response to nutrient
stress.

Bagheri-Yarmand et al. (2003) found that expression of Atf4 was high in
virgin mouse mammary glands and in pregnant mammary glands, but it was
dramatically reduced during lactation and higher after weaning.
Transgenic mice overexpressing Atf4 in mammary epithelium showed
decreased proliferation and impaired differentiation of alveolar
epithelial cells during pregnancy and lactation. In addition, Atf4
overexpression induced apoptosis and accelerated involution of the
mammary gland, suggesting a role for ATF4 in the regulation of normal
mammary gland involution.

De Angelis et al. (2003) showed that human ATF4 and RBP3 (E2F1; 189971)
dimerized in vitro and in vivo and that RBP3 enhanced ATF4
transactivating activity. Expression of both proteins increased during
differentiation of a mouse myogenic cell line.

ATF4 has 2 upstream ORFs (uORFs) that are conserved in vertebrates. The
more 3-prime uORF, uORF2, extends into the coding region of full-length
ATF4. Independently, Lu et al. (2004) and Vattem and Wek (2004) found
that scanning ribosomes initiated translation at both uORFs of mouse
Atf4, and that ribosomes that translated uORF1 efficiently reinitiated
translation at downstream AUGs. In unstressed mouse fibroblasts, low
levels of phosphorylated Eif2 (see EIF2S1; 603907) favored early
capacitation of reinitiating ribosomes, directing them to the inhibitory
uORF2 downstream of uORF1, which precluded translation of Atf4 and
repressed the integrated stress response. In stressed cells, high levels
of phosphorylated Eif2 delayed capacitation of reinitiating ribosomes,
favoring reinitiation at the Atf4 coding sequence over uORF2, which
permitted Atf4 expression and activated the integrated stress response.

Using Rsk2 (300075) -/- mice, Yang et al. (2004) showed that RSK2 is
required for osteoblast differentiation and function. They identified
the transcription factor ATF4 as a critical substrate of RSK2 that is
required for the timely onset of osteoblast differentiation, for
terminal differentiation of osteoblasts, and for osteoblast-specific
gene expression. Additionally, RSK2 and ATF4 were found to
posttranscriptionally regulate the synthesis of type I collagen (see
120150), the main constituent of the bone matrix. Accordingly, Atf4
deficiency in mice resulted in delayed bone formation during embryonic
development and low bone mass throughout postnatal life. Yang et al.
(2004) concluded that ATF4 is a critical regulator of osteoblast
differentiation and function and that lack of ATF4 phosphorylation by
RSK2 may contribute to the skeletal phenotype of Coffin-Lowry syndrome
(303600).

Blais et al. (2004) determined that EIF2-alpha (EIF2S1), PERK (EIF2AK3;
604032), ATF4, and GADD34 (PPP1R15A; 611048) are involved in an
integrated adaptive response to hypoxic stress in HeLa cells.

Sayer et al. (2006) performed a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human fetal
brain expression library and identified ATF4 as a direct interaction
partner of CEP290 (NPHP6; 610142). The protein-interaction domains
mapped to the N-terminal third of CEP290, encoded by exons 2 through 21,
and the C-terminal two-thirds of ATF4. To confirm that CEP290 and ATF4
interact physiologically in vivo, Sayer et al. (2006) performed
coimmunoprecipitation experiments using bovine retina extracts.
Immunoblot analysis demonstrated that endogenous ATF4 can be
immunoprecipitated using an antibody to CEP290 but not using a control
IgG. Reverse coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that antibody to
ATF4 can also precipitate endogenous CEP290.

Lin et al. (2010) showed that although Skp2 (601436) inactivation on its
own does not induce cellular senescence, aberrant protooncogenic signals
as well as inactivation of tumor suppressor genes do trigger a potent,
tumor-suppressive senescence response in mice and cells devoid of Skp2.
Notably, Skp2 inactivation and oncogenic stress-driven senescence
neither elicit activation of the p19(Arf) (see 600160)-p53 (191170)
pathway nor DNA damage, but instead depend on Aft4, p27 (600778), and
p21 (116899). Lin et al. (2010) further demonstrated that genetic Skp2
inactivation evokes cellular senescence even in oncogenic conditions in
which the p19(Arf)-p53 response is impaired, whereas a Skp2-SCF complex
inhibitor can trigger cellular senescence in p53/Pten (601728)-deficient
cells and tumor regression in preclinical studies. Lin et al. (2010)
concluded that their findings provided proof-of-principle evidence that
pharmacologic inhibition of Skp2 may represent a general approach for
cancer prevention and therapy.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the ATF4
gene to chromosome 22 (TMAP stSG29796).

ANIMAL MODEL

Tanaka et al. (1998) used gene targeting to generate mice lacking Atf4.
They found that Atf4-deficient mice exhibited severe microphthalmia. The
Atf4-deficient eyes revealed a normal gross lens structure up to
embryonic day 14.5, after which the lens degenerated due to apoptosis
without the formation of lens secondary fiber cells. Retinal development
was normal in the mutant mice. The lens-specific expression of Atf4 in
the mutant mice led not only to the recovery of lens secondary fibers
but also to the induction of hyperplasia of these fibers. Tanaka et al.
(1998) concluded that ATF4 is essential for the later stages of lens
fiber cell differentiation.

NOMENCLATURE

The ATF4 gene, which Karpinski et al. (1992) referred to as CREB2,
should not be confused with the ATF2 gene (123811), which was formerly
known as CREB2.

REFERENCE 1. Bagheri-Yarmand, R.; Vadlamudi, R. K.; Kumar, R.: Activating transcription
factor 4 overexpression inhibits proliferation and differentiation
of mammary epithelium resulting in impaired lactation and accelerated
involution. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 17421-17429, 2003.

2. Blais, J. D.; Filipenko, V.; Bi, M.; Harding, H. P.; Ron, D.; Koumenis,
C.; Wouters, B. G.; Bell, J. C.: Activating transcription factor
4 is translationally regulated by hypoxic stress. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24:
7469-7482, 2004.

3. De Angelis, R.; Iezzi, S.; Bruno, T.; Corbi, N.; Di Padova, M.;
Floridi, A.; Fanciulli, M.; Passananti, C.: Functional interaction
of the subunit 3 of RNA polymerase II (RPB3) with transcription factor-4
(ATF4). FEBS Lett. 547: 15-19, 2003.

4. Hai, T.; Liu, F.; Coukos, W. J.; Green, M. R.: Transcription factor
ATF cDNA clones: an extensive family of leucine zipper proteins able
to selectively form DNA-binding heterodimers. Genes Dev. 3: 2083-2090,
1989. Note: Erratum: Genes Dev. 4: 682 only, 1990.

5. He, C. H.; Gong, P.; Hu, B.; Stewart, D.; Choi, M. E.; Choi, A.
M. K.; Alam, J.: Identification of activating transcription factor
4 (ATF4) as an Nrf2-interacting protein: implication for heme oxygenase-1
gene regulation. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 20858-20865, 2001.

6. Karpinski, B. A.; Morle, G. D.; Huggenvik, J.; Uhler, M. D.; Leiden,
J. M.: Molecular cloning of human CREB-2: an ATF/CREB transcription
factor that can negatively regulate transcription from the cAMP response
element. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4820-4824, 1992.

7. Lin, H.-K.; Chen, Z.; Wang, G.; Nardella, C.; Lee, S.-W.; Chan,
C.-H.; Yang, W.-L.; Wang, J; Egia, A.; Nakayama, K. I.; Cordon-Cardo,
C.; Teruya-Feldstein, J.; Pandolfi, P. P.: Skp2 targeting suppresses
tumorigenesis by Arf-p53-independent cellular senescence. Nature 464:
374-379, 2010. Note: Erratum: Nature 466: 398 only, 2010.

8. Lu, P. D.; Harding, H. P.; Ron, D.: Translation reinitiation at
alternative open reading frames regulates gene expression in an integrated
stress response. J. Cell Biol. 167: 27-33, 2004.

9. Sayer, J. A.; Otto, E. A.; O'Toole, J. F.; Nurnberg, G.; Kennedy,
M. A.; Becker, C.; Hennies, H. C.; Helou, J.; Attanasio, M.; Fausett,
B. V.; Utsch, B.; Khanna, H.; and 30 others: The centrosomal protein
nephrocystin-6 is mutated in Joubert syndrome and activates transcription
factor ATF4. Nature Genet. 38: 674-681, 2006.

10. Siu, F.; Bain, P. J.; LeBlanc-Chaffin, R.; Chen, H.; Kilberg,
M. S.: ATF4 is a mediator of the nutrient-sensing response pathway
that activates the human asparagine synthetase gene. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
24120-24127, 2002.

11. Tanaka, T.; Tsujimura, T.; Takeda, K.; Sugihara, A.; Maekawa,
A.; Terada, N.; Yoshida, N.; Akira, S.: Targeted disruption of ATF4
discloses its essential role in the formation of eye lens fibres. Genes
Cells 3: 801-810, 1998.

12. Tsujimoto, A.; Nyunoya, H.; Morita, T.; Sato, T.; Shimotohno,
K.: Isolation of cDNAs for DNA-binding proteins which specifically
bind to a tax-responsive enhancer element in the long terminal repeat
of human T-cell leukemia virus type I. J. Virol. 65: 1420-1426,
1991.

13. Vattem, K. M.; Wek, R. C.: Reinitiation involving upstream ORFs
regulates ATF4 mRNA translation in mammalian cells. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 101: 11269-11274, 2004.

14. Yang, X.; Matsuda, K.; Bialek, P.; Jacquot, S.; Masuoka, H. C.;
Schinke, T.; Li, L.; Brancorsini, S.; Sassone-Corsi, P.; Townes, T.
M.; Hanauer, A.; Karsenty, G.: ATF4 is a substrate of RSK2 and an
essential regulator of osteoblast biology: implication for Coffin-Lowry
Syndrome. Cell 117: 387-398, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/15/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/8/2009
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 6/15/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/23/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/9/2004
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 11/7/2001
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 8/9/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/26/1999

EDITED terry: 09/14/2012
carol: 7/23/2010
alopez: 4/19/2010
terry: 4/15/2010
mgross: 4/9/2009
terry: 4/8/2009
mgross: 5/21/2007
alopez: 6/15/2006
mgross: 9/23/2004
mgross: 6/9/2004
carol: 11/7/2001
mgross: 10/16/2000
mgross: 8/9/1999
alopez: 7/26/1999

601020	TITLE *601020 CD86 ANTIGEN; CD86
;;CD28 ANTIGEN LIGAND 2; CD28LG2;;
B-LYMPHOCYTE ACTIVATION ANTIGEN B7-2; LAB7-2;;
B72 ANTIGEN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Induction of an immune response requires that T cells receive 2 sets of
signals from antigen-presenting cells. The first signal is delivered
through the T-cell receptor complex, while the second is provided by the
B-cell activation antigens B7-1, or CD80 (112203), and B7-2, or CD86, by
interaction with the T-cell surface molecules, CD28 (186760) and CTLA4
(123890). A cDNA for B7-2 was obtained by Freeman et al. (1993). B7-2
mRNA is constitutively expressed in unstimulated B cells. The predicted
protein is a type I membrane protein of the immunoglobin superfamily.

Jeannin et al. (2000) detected a soluble form of CD86 in human serum
that could be generated either by shedding of the membrane form or
through alternative splicing. RT-PCR analysis revealed the expression of
2 transcripts in nonstimulated monocytes but only the full-length
transmembrane form in activated monocytes. The smallest transcript, 828
bp, which the authors termed CD86deltaTM, has a deletion from nucleotide
686 to nucleotide 829 (i.e., exon 6) and encodes a 275-amino acid
protein. SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis detected expression of CD86
and CD86deltaTM in COS cells as 65- and 48-kD proteins, respectively.
FACS analysis detected only CD86 transfected cells and ELISA analysis
detected only CD86deltaTM in cell-free supernatants. Binding analysis
demonstrated that CD86deltaTM binds to CD28- or CTLA4-expressing cells.
Functional analysis indicated that CD86deltaTM enhances proliferation
and cytokine production by both naive and memory T cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Resting eosinophils express neither MHC class II proteins or
costimulatory B7 molecules and fail to induce proliferation of T cells
to antigens. Celestin et al. (2001) reported that IL3 (147740) induces
expression of HLA-DR and B7.2 on eosinophils, but, unlike IL5 (147580)
and GMCSF (CSF2; 138960), it does not induce expression of B7.1.
IL3-treated eosinophils supported modest T-cell proliferation in
response to superantigen toxic shock syndrome-1 antigen, as well as
proliferation of HLA-DR-restricted T-cell clones to tetanus toxoid (TT)
and influenza virus antigenic peptides. The response was blocked by
anti-B7.2 monoclonal antibody. IL3-treated eosinophils were unable to
present native TT antigen to either resting or TT-specific cloned T
cells. Parallel experiments established that IL5 and GMCSF induce T-cell
proliferation to peptides but not to native TT antigen. Celestin et al.
(2001) suggested that eosinophils activated by IL3 may contribute to
T-cell activation in allergic and parasitic diseases by presenting
superantigens and peptides to T cells.

An immune response against thyroid carcinoma could be important for
long-term survival. Gupta et al. (2001) reported that infiltration of
thyroid carcinoma by proliferating lymphocytes is associated with
improved disease-free survival. Shah et al. (2002) hypothesized that the
antigen presentation coactivators B71 (112203) and B72, which are
important in other immune-mediated thyroid diseases, might be important
in lymphocytic infiltration of thyroid carcinoma. To test this, they
determined B71 and B72 expression by immunohistochemistry in 27
papillary (PTC; 188550) and 8 follicular (FTC; 188470) thyroid
carcinomas and 9 benign thyroid lesions. B72 expression was of similar
intensity in benign and malignant tumors, but was more intense than in
presumably normal adjacent thyroid. B72 expression also correlated with
the number of tumor-associated lymphocytes per high-power field.
Recurrence developed exclusively from tumors that expressed B72, and
intense B72 expression was associated with a reduced probability of
remission. Shah et al. (2002) concluded that these data support the
hypothesis that the antigen presentation coactivators B71 and B72 may be
important for lymphocytic infiltration and the immune response against
thyroid carcinoma.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Schwartz et al. (2001) reported the crystal structure of the complex
between the disulfide-linked homodimer of human CTLA4 (123890) and the
receptor-binding domain of human B7.2 at 3.2-angstrom resolution.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jellis et al. (1995) isolated the gene for B7-2, which is composed of 8
exons and spans more than 22 kb. The authors found that alternatively
spliced cDNAs result from the use of either exon 1 or 2. Exon 3
corresponds to the signal peptide, exon 4 to an IgV-like domain, exon 5
to an IgC-like domain and exon 6 corresponds to the transmembrane region
and part of the cytoplasmic tail. Exons 7 and 8 encode the remainder of
the tail.

MAPPING

Reeves et al. (1997) demonstrated that the CD86 and CD80 genes are
linked on human chromosome 3 and mouse chromosome 16. Reeves et al.
(1997) used fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping to show that
CD86, like CD80, maps to human 3q21 and mouse chromosome 16, band B5.

REFERENCE 1. Celestin, J.; Rotschke, O.; Falk, K.; Ramesh, N.; Jabara, H.; Strominger,
J.; Geha, R. S.: IL-3 induces B7.2 (CD86) expression and costimulatory
activity in human eosinophils. J. Immun. 167: 6097-6104, 2001.

2. Freeman, G. J.; Gribben, J. G.; Boussiotis, V. A.; Ng, J. W.; Restivo,
V. A.; Lombard, L. A.; Gray, G. S.; Nadler, L. M.: Cloning of B7-2:
a CTLA-4 counter-receptor that costimulates human T cell proliferation. Science 262:
909-911, 1993.

3. Gupta, S.; Patel, A.; Folstad, A.; Fenton, C.; Dinauer, C. A.;
Tuttle, R. M.; Conran, R.; Francis, G. L.: Infiltration of differentiated
thyroid carcinoma by proliferating lymphocytes is associated with
improved disease-free survival for children and young adults. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 1346-1354, 2001.

4. Jeannin, P.; Magistrelli, G.; Aubry, J.-P.; Caron, G.; Gauchat,
J.-F.; Renno, T.; Herbault, N.; Goetsch, L.; Blaecke, A.; Dietrich,
P.-Y.; Bonnefoy, J.-Y.; Delneste, Y.: Soluble CD86 is a costimulatory
molecule for human T lymphocytes. Immunity 13: 303-312, 2000.

5. Jellis, C. L.; Wang, S. S.; Rennert, P.; Borriello, F.; Sharpe,
A. H.; Green, N. R.; Gray, G. S.: Genomic organization of the gene
coding for the costimulatory human B-lymphocyte antigen B7-2 (CD86). Immunogenetics 42:
85-89, 1995.

6. Reeves, R. H.; Patch, D.; Sharpe, A. H.; Borriello, F.; Freeman,
G. J.; Edelhoff, S.; Disteche, C.: The costimulatory genes Cd80 and
Cd86 are linked on mouse chromosome 16 and human chromosome 3. Mammalian
Genome 8: 581-582, 1997.

7. Schwartz, J.-C. D.; Zhang, X.; Fedorov, A. A.; Nathenson, S. G.;
Almo, S. C.: Structural basis for co-stimulation by the human CTLA-4/B7-2
complex. Nature 410: 604-608, 2001.

8. Shah, R.; Banks, K.; Patel, A.; Dogra, S.; Terrell, R.; Powers,
P. A.; Fenton, C.; Dinauer, C. A.; Tuttle, R. M.; Francis, G. L.:
Intense expression of the B7-2 antigen presentation coactivator is
an unfavorable prognostic indicator for differentiated thyroid carcinoma
of children and adolescents. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 4391-4397,
2002.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 12/6/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/28/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/4/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/13/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/10/1997

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 1/29/1996

EDITED terry: 01/20/2010
alopez: 12/6/2002
mgross: 1/28/2002
mgross: 4/4/2001
mcapotos: 10/19/2000
terry: 10/13/2000
terry: 9/16/1997
terry: 9/15/1997
terry: 9/10/1997
mark: 1/29/1996

605313	TITLE *605313 RNA-BINDING MOTIF PROTEIN 8A; RBM8A
;;RNA-BINDING MOTIF PROTEIN 8; RBM8;;
Y14
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RBM8A gene encodes Y14, 1 of the 4 components of the exon-junction
complex (EJC), which is involved in basic cellular functions such as
nuclear export and subcellular localization of specific transcripts,
translational enhancement, and nonsense-mediated RNA decay (NMD)
(summary by Albers et al., 2012).

CLONING

Mago nashi (MAGOH; 602603), meaning grandchildless, is the homolog of a
Drosophila protein required for normal germ plasm development in fly
embryos. By performing a yeast 2-hybrid screen on a fetal brain cDNA
library with MAGOH as the bait, Zhao et al. (2000) recovered a cDNA
encoding RBM8. The 173-amino acid RBM8 protein is more than 93%
identical to the mouse and zebrafish sequences, and the mouse
differences are all accounted for by an 11-amino acid N-terminal
insertion and another single-residue insertion in the mouse sequence.
Exchange partner and GST pull-down assays confirmed the MAGOH-RBM8
interaction and showed that RBM8 is expressed as a 26-kD protein,
slightly larger than the predicted mass of 23 kD. Northern blot analysis
detected a major RBM8 transcript of less than 1.0 kb in all tissues
tested, with weakest expression in pancreas and brain.

By searching an EST database for homologs of the gonadotropin-releasing
hormone receptor (GNRHR; 138850), followed by 5-prime RACE on a skeletal
muscle cDNA library, Conklin et al. (2000) identified a cDNA encoding
RBM8. Northern blot analysis detected a major 0.9-kb transcript in all
tissues tested. Sequence analysis of the 174-amino acid protein
predicted an RNA-binding domain, which is composed of 2 amphipathic
alpha helices packed against a 4-stranded beta sheet, and a C-terminal
arg-rich segment.

By performing a yeast 2-hybrid screen on a HeLa cell cDNA library to
identify potential cargoes for RAN-binding protein-5 (RANBP5; 602008),
Kataoka et al. (2000) isolated cDNAs encoding RBM8, which they called
Y14. RBM8 encodes a predicted 174-amino acid, predominantly nuclear
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein.

Salicioni et al. (2000) used a yeast 2-hybrid screen to identify cDNAs
from a human fetal brain cDNA library encoding proteins that interact
with OVCA1 (603527), a candidate tumor suppressor protein. They
identified cDNAs, which they initially referred to as BOV1, that
appeared to encode a new member of the conserved RNA-binding motif
protein family. One of the cDNAs isolated was identical to RBM8A;
another, designated RBM8B, was thought by Salicioni et al. (2000) to be
a novel functional gene, but was later determined to be a pseudogene.
Northern blot analysis revealed that BOV1 is ubiquitously expressed as 3
distinct mRNA species of 1, 3.2, and 5.8 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Kataoka et al. (2000) found that RBM8 associates preferentially with
mRNAs produced by splicing and not with pre-mRNAs, introns, or mRNAs
produced from intronless cDNAs. RBM8 associates with both nuclear mRNAs
and newly exported cytoplasmic mRNAs. Splicing of a single intron is
sufficient for RBM8 association. RBM8-containing nuclear complexes are
different from general heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP)
complexes in that they contain hnRNP proteins and several unique
proteins, including the mRNA export factor TAP (NXF1; 602647). Thus,
RBM8 defines novel intermediates in the pathway of gene expression,
postsplicing nuclear preexport mRNPs, and newly exported cytoplasmic
mRNPs, whose composition is established by splicing. These findings
suggested that pre-mRNA splicing imprints mRNA with a unique set of
proteins that persists in the cytoplasm and thereby communicates the
history of the transcript.

Kim et al. (2001) analyzed the binding of RBM8A, which they called Y14,
to pre-mRNAs injected into nuclei of Xenopus oocytes. They found that
RBM8A stably bound mRNA sequences approximately -20 nucleotides upstream
of exon-exon junctions.

Oskar mRNA localization at the posterior pole of the Drosophila oocyte
is essential for germline and abdomen formation in the future embryo.
Y14/RBM8 and MAGOH (602603), human homologs of nuclear shuttling
proteins required for oskar mRNA localization, are core components of
the exon-exon junction complex (EJC). The EJC is deposited on mRNAs in a
splicing-dependent manner, 20 to 24 nucleotides upstream of exon-exon
junctions, independent of the RNA sequence. This indicates a possible
role of splicing in oskar mRNA localization, challenging the established
notion that the oskar 3-prime untranslated region is sufficient for this
process. Hachet and Ephrussi (2004) demonstrated that splicing at the
first exon-exon junction of oskar RNA is essential for oskar mRNA
localization at the posterior pole. They revisited the issue of
sufficiency of the oskar 3-prime untranslated region for posterior
localization and showed that the localization of unrelated transcripts
bearing the oskar 3-prime untranslated region is mediated by endogenous
oskar mRNA. Hachet and Ephrussi (2004) concluded that their results
revealed an important new function for splicing: regulation of messenger
ribonucleoprotein complex assembly and organization for mRNA cytoplasmic
localization.

Albers et al. (2012) showed that RBM8A is expressed in all hematopoietic
lineages, and that its encoded protein sequence is highly conserved
between species. Albers et al. (2012) suggested that, given the
important functions of the EJC, it is likely that a complete lack of Y14
in humans is not viable. Indeed, in Drosophila melanogaster, knockdown
of its ortholog tsu leads to major defects in abdomen formation (Hachet
and Ephrussi, 2001), and Albers et al. (2012) found that knockdown of
the orthologous rbm8a transcript in Danio rerio using antisense
morpholinos resulted in extreme malformations and death at 2 days
post-fertilization.

GENE STRUCTURE

Albers et al. (2012) determined that the RBM8A gene comprises 6 exons.

MAPPING

By PCR and radiation hybrid analysis, Zhao et al. (2000) mapped the
RBM8A gene to 1q12. Conklin et al. (2000) mapped the RBM8 gene to
14q21-q23 using radiation hybrid analysis, but it appears that the
sequence on chromosome 14 is a pseudogene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

It had been shown that an inherited or de novo deletion on chromosome
1q21.1 (Klopocki et al., 2007) is found in the majority of individuals
with TAR syndrome (274000), but the apparent autosomal recessive nature
of that syndrome required the existence of an additional causative
allele. To identify the additional causative allele, Albers et al.
(2012) selected 5 individuals with TAR of European ancestry who had the
1q21.1 deletion and sequenced their exomes, but were unable to find
TAR-associated coding mutations in any gene. However, 4 of the cases
carried the minor allele of a low-frequency SNP in the 5-prime UTR of
the RBM8A gene (dbSNP rs139428292; 605313.0001), while the remaining
case carried a previously unknown SNP in the first intron of the same
gene (605313.0002). Genotyping by Sanger sequencing of another 48 cases
of European ancestry identified the 2 SNPs in 35 and 11 samples,
respectively. In the 25 trios where the deletion in the child was not a
de novo event, Albers et al. (2012) confirmed that the deletion and the
newly identified SNPs were inherited from different parents. The minor
allele frequency of the 5-prime UTR and intronic SNPs were 3.05% and
0.42%, respectively, in 7,504 healthy individuals of the Cambridge
BioResource, and the deletion was absent from 5,919 shared healthy
controls of the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium. There were 2 TAR
cases who did not carry the 1q21.1 deletion but were found to carry the
5-prime UTR SNP. Albers et al. (2012) identified a 4-bp frameshift
insertion at the start of the fourth exon (605313.0003) in the first
case and established that the noncoding SNP and insertion were on
different chromosomes; in the second case, they identified a nonsense
mutation in the last exon of RBM8A (605313.0004). Both mutations were
absent from 458 exome samples of the 1000 Genomes Project and 416
samples from the Cohorte Lausannoise. Albers et al. (2012) concluded
that in the vast majority of cases, compound inheritance of a rare null
allele (containing a deletion, frameshift mutation, or encoded premature
stop codon) and 1 of 2 low-frequency noncoding SNPs in RBM8A causes TAR
syndrome. Albers et al. (2012) showed that the 2 regulatory SNPs result
in diminished RBM8A transcription in vitro and that expression of Y14 is
reduced in platelets from individuals with TAR. Albers et al. (2012)
concluded that their data implicated Y14 insufficiency and, presumably,
an EJC defect as the cause of TAR syndrome.

Given the expression of Y14 in hematopoietic lineages and major defects
observed in Drosophila and zebrafish resulting from knockdown of the
respective Y14 orthologs, Albers et al. (2012) suggested that their
results are compatible with both a dose-effect phenomenon and a
lineage-dependent deficiency in Y14. The possibility of a dose-effect
phenomenon was supported by the observation that simple
haploinsufficiency is not sufficient to create an aberrant phenotype, as
evidenced by the seemingly healthy carriers of the 1q21.1 deletion.
Albers et al. (2012) did not observe an effect on platelet count for
either the 5-prime UTR or the intronic SNP in the 403 and 59 individuals
from the Cambridge BioResource who carried the minor allele for each
SNP, respectively. The authors suggested that compound inheritance of a
null allele together with the minor allele of 1 of the 2 regulatory SNPs
brings Y14 levels below a critical threshold in certain tissues. The
cell line-dependent effect shown in luciferase assays suggested a
combinatorial binding of transcription factors, including EVI1 (165215),
in the context of regulatory SNPs.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
THROMBOCYTOPENIA-ABSENT RADIUS SYNDROME
RBM8A, 5-PRIME UTR, G-A (dbSNP rs139428292)

In 41 of 55 patients with thrombocytopenia-absent radius syndrome (TAR;
274000), Albers et al. (2012) identified the presence of the minor
allele (A) of a G-to-A SNP, dbSNP rs139428292 (chr1:145507646, GRCh37),
in the 5-prime untranslated region (UTR) of the RBM8A gene. In 39 of
these patients this SNP was found in compound heterozygosity with a
200-kb deletion including the RBM8A gene and 10 other genes; in 2
patients the SNP occurred in compound heterozygosity with 1 of 2 null
mutations in the RBM8A gene. The minor allele frequency of the SNP dbSNP
rs139428292 was 3.05% in 7,504 healthy individuals of the Cambridge
BioResource. This SNP resulted in diminished RBM8A transcription in
vitro.

.0002
THROMBOCYTOPENIA-ABSENT RADIUS SYNDROME
RBM8A, IVS1, G-C

In 12 of 55 patients with thrombocytopenia-absent radius syndrome (TAR;
274000), Albers et al. (2012) identified the presence of the minor
allele (C) of a SNP in the first intron of the RBM8A gene
(chr1:145507765, GRCh37). The SNP occurred in compound heterozygosity
with a 200-kb deletion including the RBM8A gene and 10 other genes. The
minor allele frequency of this intronic SNP was 0.42% in 7,504 healthy
individuals of the Cambridge BioResource. This SNP resulted in
diminished RBM8A transcription in vitro.

.0003
THROMBOCYTOPENIA-ABSENT RADIUS SYNDROME
RBM8A, 4-BP INS, EX4

In a patient with thrombocytopenia-absent radius syndrome (TAR; 274000),
Albers et al. (2012) found compound heterozygosity for a 4-bp insertion
(AGCG, chr1:145508476, GRCh37) in exon 4 of the RBM8A gene, resulting in
frameshift, and a SNP in the 5-prime UTR (605313.0001).

.0004
THROMBOCYTOPENIA-ABSENT RADIUS SYNDROME
RBM8A, C-T, EX6

In a patient with thrombocytopenia-absent radius syndrome (TAR; 274000),
Albers et al. (2012) found compound heterozygosity for a premature
termination mutation in the last exon of the RBM8A gene (C-T,
chr1:145509173, GRCh37) and a SNP in the 5-prime UTR (605313.0001).

REFERENCE 1. Albers, C. A.; Paul, D. S.; Schulze, H.; Freson, K.; Stephens,
J. C.; Smethurst, P. A.; Jolley, J. D.; Cvejic, A.; Kostadima, M.;
Bertone, P.; Breuning, M. H.; Debili, N.; and 19 others: Compound
inheritance of a low-frequency regulatory SNP and a rare null mutation
in exon-junction complex subunit RBM8A causes TAR syndrome. Nature
Genet. 44: 435-439, 2012.

2. Conklin, D. C.; Rixon, M. W.; Kuestner, R. E.; Maurer, M. F.; Whitmore,
T. E.; Millar, R. P.: Cloning and gene expression of a novel human
ribonucleoprotein. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1492: 465-469, 2000.

3. Hachet, O.; Ephrussi, A.: Drosophila Y14 shuttles to the posterior
of the oocyte and is required for oskar mRNA transport. Curr. Biol. 11:
1666-1674, 2001.

4. Hachet, O.; Ephrussi, A.: Splicing of oskar RNA in the nucleus
is coupled to its cytoplasmic localization. Nature 428: 959-963,
2004.

5. Kataoka, N.; Yong, J.; Kim, V. N.; Velazquez, F.; Perkinson, R.
A.; Wang, F.; Dreyfuss, G.: Pre-mRNA splicing imprints mRNA in the
nucleus with a novel RNA-binding protein that persists in the cytoplasm. Molec.
Cell 6: 673-682, 2000.

6. Kim, V. N.; Yong, J.; Kataoka, N.; Abel, L.; Diem, M. D.; Dreyfuss,
G.: The Y14 protein communicates to the cytoplasm the position of
exon-exon junctions. EMBO J. 20: 2062-2068, 2001.

7. Klopocki, E.; Schulze, H.; Strauss, G.; Ott, C.-E.; Hall, J.; Trotier,
F.; Fleischhauer, S.; Greenhalgh, L.; Newbury-Ecob, R. A.; Neumann,
L. M.; Habenicht, R.; Konig, R.; Seemanova, E.; Megarbane, A.; Ropers,
H.-H.; Ullmann, R.; Horn, D.; Mundlos, S.: Complex inheritance pattern
resembling autosomal recessive inheritance involving a microdeletion
in thrombocytopenia-absent radius syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 80:
232-240, 2007.

8. Salicioni, A. M.; Xi. M.; Vanderveer, L. A.; Balsara, B.; Testa,
J. R.; Dunbrack, R. L., Jr.; Godwin, A. K.: Identification and structural
analysis of human RBM8A and RBM8B: two highly conserved RNA-binding
motif proteins that interact with OVCA1, a candidate tumor suppressor. Genomics 69:
54-62, 2000.

9. Zhao, X.-F.; Nowak, N. J.; Shows, T. B.; Aplan, P. D.: MAGOH interacts
with a novel RNA-binding protein. Genomics 63: 145-148, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/18/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/27/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/16/2003
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 12/21/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/9/2000

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 10/2/2000

EDITED alopez: 04/19/2012
alopez: 4/18/2012
terry: 4/18/2012
wwang: 3/26/2007
alopez: 4/27/2004
terry: 4/27/2004
cwells: 1/17/2003
terry: 1/16/2003
mgross: 10/7/2002
carol: 12/14/2001
carol: 12/26/2000
carol: 12/21/2000
mgross: 11/9/2000
mgross: 10/2/2000

608122	TITLE *608122 PARVIN, GAMMA; PARVG
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the parvin family, including PARVG, are actin-binding
proteins associated with focal contacts.

CLONING

By searching EST databases for sequences similar to mouse Parva
(608120), followed by RT-PCR of a human T-cell line cDNA library, Olski
et al. (2001) cloned human PARVG. Mouse and human PARVG encode a deduced
331-amino acid protein that contains a single actin-binding domain made
up of 2 calponin (600806) homology domains separated by a linker region.
Unlike PARVA and PARVB (608121), the N terminus of PARVG does not
contain nuclear localization signals or SH3-binding domains.

By analyzing PARVG ESTs, Korenbaum et al. (2001) identified
alternatively spliced sequences and a single polyadenylation site.
Northern blot analysis revealed a strong smeared signal in heart, liver,
and several other tissues. Bands of about 1.6 and 4.0 kb were detected
in peripheral blood and spleen. RNA dot blot analysis detected highest
expression in lymphatic organs (spleen, thymus, lymph node, bone marrow,
and peripheral blood leukocytes) and moderate expression in the
digestive tract (stomach, duodenum, jejunum, ileum, ileocecum, and
appendix), lung, and liver. In contrast, mouse Parvg showed highest
expression in testis, where there were at least 6 mRNA species. A 2.8-kb
Parvg transcript was expressed highly in spleen, moderately in lung, and
weakly in brain and heart. Parvg was expressed throughout mouse
embryonic development, with downregulation at embryonic day 11.
Korenbaum et al. (2001) stated that fluorescence-tagged PARVG, like
PARVA, localized at focal contacts.

GENE STRUCTURE

Korenbaum et al. (2001) determined that the PARVG gene contains 15 exons
and spans about 25 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Korenbaum et al. (2001) mapped the PARVG
gene to chromosome 22q13.31, where it lies head to tail about 12 kb
telomeric to the PARVB gene.

REFERENCE 1. Korenbaum, E.; Olski, T. M.; Noegel, A. A.: Genomic organization
and expression profile of the parvin family of focal adhesion proteins
in mice and humans. Gene 279: 69-79, 2001.

2. Olski, T. M.; Noegel, A. A.; Korenbaum, E.: Parvin, a 42 kDa focal
adhesion protein, related to the alpha-actinin superfamily. J. Cell
Sci. 114: 525-538, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/25/2003

EDITED mgross: 09/25/2003

138850	TITLE *138850 GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE RECEPTOR; GNRHR
;;GNRHR1;;
GRHR;;
LUTEINIZING HORMONE-RELEASING HORMONE RECEPTOR; LHRHR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GNRH; 152760), a hypothalamic
decapeptide, is a key neuroregulator of the reproductive process. It is
synthesized by hypothalamic neurons, secreted in a pulsatile manner, and
carried to the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland by way of the
hypothalamohypophyseal portal circulation. The primary site of action of
GNRH in the pituitary gland is the gonadotrope, the cell that expresses
GNRH receptors and secretes gonadotropic hormones, which in turn
regulate gametogenic and hormonal functions of the gonads. GNRH receptor
is a member of the G protein-coupled, Ca(2+)-dependent family of
receptors. Located on the cell surface of pituitary gonadotropes, GNRHR
transduces signals from GNRH and modulates the synthesis and secretion
of luteinizing hormone (152780) and follicle-stimulating hormone
(136530).

CLONING

Kakar et al. (1992) isolated a cDNA for the GNRH receptor and showed
that it encodes a protein with a transmembrane topology similar to that
of other G protein-coupled 7-transmembrane-domain receptors.

Grosse et al. (1997) used RT-PCR of human pituitary poly(A)+ RNA to
clone the full-length GNRHR gene and a second truncated cDNA
characterized by a 128-bp deletion between nucleotide positions 522 and
651. The deletion causes a frameshift in the open reading frame, thus
generating new coding sequence for a further 75 amino acids. The
truncated cDNA arises from alternative splicing that uses a cryptic
3-prime splice site in exon 2. Translation products of approximately 45
to 50 and 42 kD were immunoprecipitated from COS-7 cells transfected
with wildtype and truncated GNRHR cDNAs, respectively. The splice
variant was incapable of ligand binding and signal transduction.
Coexpression of wildtype and truncated proteins in transiently or stably
transfected cells, resulted in impaired signaling via the wildtype GNRHR
by reducing maximal agonist-induced inositol phosphate accumulation.
This inhibitory effect depended on the amount of splice variant cDNA
cotransfected and was specific for GNRHR. Coexpression of the wildtype
and truncated GNRHRs resulted in impaired insertion of wildtype GNRHR
into the plasma membrane.

GENE STRUCTURE

Using cDNA probes derived from a human pituitary cDNA library, Fan et
al. (1994) screened a human genomic library and isolated 7 positive
clones. The clones contained the entire protein coding region of the
GNRHR gene, which is distributed among 3 exons and spans over 18.9 kb.
The 2 introns, measuring 4.2 and 5.0 kb, were located within the open
reading frame, indicating that the GNRHR gene is a member of the
intron-containing class of the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily.
Genomic Southern blot analysis demonstrated the presence of a single
copy of the gene in the human genome.

Fan et al. (1995) showed that the GNRHR mRNA is approximately 5 kb long,
of which 987 bp comprise the coding region. The gene appears to have
large 5-prime and 3-prime untranslated regions, including, respectively,
multiple transcription initiation sites and polyadenylation signals.

MAPPING

Kaiser et al. (1994) used mapping panels of human/rodent somatic cell
hybrids containing different human chromosomes or different regions of
human chromosome 4 to localize the GNRHR gene to 4q13.1-q21.1.
Furthermore, using linkage analysis of single-strand conformation
polymorphisms, they localized the murine homolog to mouse chromosome 5.
Using PCR analysis of DNA from human/hamster somatic hybrid cell lines,
Fan et al. (1994) assigned the GNRHR gene to chromosome 4. By in situ
hybridization using a biotinylated cDNA probe, Morrison et al. (1994)
localized the GNRHR gene to 4q13.2-q13.3. By fluorescence in situ
hybridization using a larger genomic clone as a probe, Leung et al.
(1995) apparently achieved a more precise localization of the GNRHR gene
to 4q21.2.

Kottler et al. (1995) isolated YAC clones containing the GNRHR gene.
Genetic analysis of the YACs showed that the gene lies between D4S409
and D4S392, which are located 76 and 77 cM, respectively, from the end
of the short arm of chromosome 4. Furthermore, by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Kottler et al. (1995) demonstrated colocalization of
GNRHR with the KIT gene (164920), which has been mapped to 4q12. Kakar
and Neill (1995) mapped the gene to 4q13 by PCR analysis of genomic DNA
from human/hamster somatic cell hybrids combined with fluorescence in
situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

The growth of sex hormone-dependent tumors is inhibited by analogs of
luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH; 152760). The use of LHRH
agonists for treatment of prostatic and breast cancer is based on
suppression of pituitary-gonadal function and the consequent creation of
a state of sex-steroid deficiency. In addition, LHRH agonists and
antagonists exert a direct effect on these tumors that probably is
mediated by specific high-affinity LHRH receptors found on these cells.
LHRH agonists and antagonists also suppress the growth of experimental
pancreatic cancers. Szende et al. (1991) demonstrated that pancreatic
tumor cells exhibit high-affinity binding sites for LHRH, but only in
their nuclei; low-affinity sites are associated with the cell membranes.
These binding sites appear to be LHRH receptors since electron
microscopic immunohistochemical studies show that an antibody to the
LHRH receptor reacted with sites in the nucleus of pancreatic tumor
cells.

Maji et al. (2009) found that peptide and protein hormones, including
GNRH, in secretory granules of the endocrine system are stored in an
amyloid-like cross-beta-sheet-rich conformation, and concluded that
functional amyloids in the pituitary and other organs can contribute to
normal cell and tissue physiology.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a family in which a brother and sister had idiopathic
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH7; 146110), de Roux et al. (1997)
demonstrated that the affected individuals were compound heterozygous
for mutations of the GNRHR gene (see 138850.0001). Layman et al. (1998)
also demonstrated compound heterozygosity for 2 missense mutations in
the GNRHR gene in each of 4 affected sibs of a family (see 138850.0003).

Caron et al. (1999) studied a kindred with 3 sibs with isolated
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism who were genetic compounds for the
arg262-to-gln mutation (138850.0002) and an ala129-to-asp (138850.0004)
mutation that resulted in a complete loss of function. The 2 brothers
had microphallus and bilateral cryptorchidism and were referred for lack
of puberty; their sister had primary amenorrhea and a complete lack of
puberty. The authors concluded that these hypogonadal patients were
partially resistant to pulsatile GNRH administration, suggesting that
they should be treated with gonadotropins to induce spermatogenesis or
ovulation rather than with pulsatile GNRH. Kottler et al. (1999)
analyzed in detail the GNRHR mutations in 7 independent familial and
sporadic cases of idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism reported to
that time. The Q106R (138850.0001) and R262Q (138850.0002) mutations
were frequent in patients from all geographic areas (North or South
America or Europe).

To determine the frequency and distribution of GNRHR mutations in a
heterogeneous population of patients with idiopathic hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism, Beranova et al. (2001) screened 108 probands with
idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism for mutations in the coding
sequence of GNRHR. Forty-eight of the 108 patients had a normal sense of
smell, whereas the remaining 60 had anosmia or hyposmia (Kallmann
syndrome). Five unrelated probands (3 men and 2 women), all normosmic,
were documented to have changes in the coding sequence of the GNRHR. Two
of these probands were from a subgroup of 5 kindreds consistent with a
recessive mode of inheritance, establishing a GNRHR mutation frequency
of 2 of 5 (40%) in patients with normosmic, autosomal recessive
idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The remaining 3 probands with
GNRHR mutations were from a subgroup of 18 patients without evidence of
familial involvement, indicating a prevalence of 3 of 18 (16.7%) in
patients with sporadic idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and a
normal sense of smell. Among the 5 individuals bearing GNRHR mutations,
a broad spectrum of phenotypes was noted, including testicular sizes
that varied from prepubertal to the normal adult male range. Three
probands had compound heterozygous mutations, and 2 had homozygous
mutations. Of the 8 DNA sequence changes identified, 4 were novel. COS-7
cells transiently transfected with cDNAs encoding the human GNRHR
containing each of these 4 novel mutations failed to respond to GNRH
agonist stimulation.

Janovick et al. (2002) showed pharmacologic rescue, assessed by ligand
binding and restoration of receptor coupling to effector, of 5 naturally
occurring GNRHR mutants identified from patients with hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism, as well as rescue of other defective receptors
manufactured with internal or terminal deletions or substitutions at
sites expected to be involved in establishment of tertiary receptor
structure. The pharmacologic agent used was a small, membrane-permeant
molecule, originally designed as an orally active, nonpeptide receptor
antagonist, but is believed to function as a folding template, capable
of correcting the structural defects caused by the mutations and thereby
restoring function. The rescued receptor, stabilized in the plasma
membrane, coupled ligand binding to activation of the appropriate
effector system. For comparison, low-, intermediate-, or high-affinity
peptide antagonists of GNRHR (that do not penetrate the cell) were
unable to effect rescue, as was a nonbinding peptidomimetic congener of
the rescue agent; this latter effect demonstrates specificity of the
rescue agent. Janovick et al. (2002) concluded that mutant GNRHRs
frequently have not lost intrinsic functionality and are subject to
rescue by techniques that enhance membrane expression.

Bedecarrats et al. (2003) analyzed 2 common mutations in GNRHR, gln106
to arg (Q106R; 138850.0001) and arg262 to gln (R262Q; 138850.0002), for
their effects on the stimulation of gonadotropin subunit and GNRHR gene
expression by GNRH. Despite similar impairment of GNRH-stimulated
inositol phosphate production, dose-response analyses indicated that
Q106R and R262Q both reduced the sensitivity of the FSH-beta (136530)
gene promoter to a greater extent than LH-beta (152780) or the
alpha-glycoprotein subunit (alpha-GSU; 118850), suggesting the
involvement of more than one signaling pathway. Furthermore, although
the sensitivities of the LH-beta and FSH-beta gene promoters to GNRH
were similarly affected by both mutants, alpha-GSU sensitivity was
decreased to a greater extent by R262Q than by Q106R. Similarly, GNRHR
gene promoter sensitivity was significantly reduced only by R262Q. The
authors concluded that differential stimulation of LH-beta, FSH-beta,
and alpha-GSU gene expression may contribute to the varied phenotypes
observed among patients harboring these mutations.

Leanos-Miranda et al. (2003) demonstrated that GNRHR mutants inhibited
the function of wildtype GNRHR, measured by activation of effector and
ligand binding. Inhibition varied depending on the particular GNRHR
mutant coexpressed and the ratio of GNRHR mutant to wildtype GNRHR cDNA
cotransfected. The GNRHR mutants did not interfere with the function of
genetically modified GNRHRs bearing either a deletion of
primate-specific lys191 or the carboxyl-terminal tail of catfish GNRHR.
The dominant-negative effect of the naturally occurring receptor mutants
occurred only for the wildtype GNRHR, which has intrinsic low maturation
efficiency. The data suggested that this dominant-negative effect
accompanies the diminished plasma membrane expression as a recent
evolutionary event.

To determine whether genetic variation within either the GNRHR or GNRH1
genes contributes to the regulation of pubertal timing in the general
population, Sedlmeyer et al. (2005) performed sequence analysis and
haplotype-based association studies in individuals with later than
average pubertal development. All observed associations were relatively
modest and only nominally statistically significant. The authors
concluded that genetic variation in GHRH1 and GNRHR is not likely to be
a substantial modulator of pubertal timing in the general population.

In 2 sisters with primary amenorrhea and no breast development at 25 and
18 years of age, respectively (146110), Seminara et al. (2000)
identified compound heterozygosity for Q106R on one allele and R262Q
(138850.0002) on the other. The apparently unaffected parents were
heterozygous for the mutations. Pitteloud et al. (2007) reexamined the
family studied by Seminara et al. (2000) and identified heterozygosity
for an additional missense mutation in the FGFR1 gene (136350.0016) in
the 2 sisters and in their father, who had a history of delayed puberty.
Mutation analysis of the children of the younger sister revealed that
her unaffected daughter, who had undergone normal puberty, was
heterozygous for the mutation in FGFR1 but had no mutations in the GNRHR
gene, and that her prepubertal 10-year-old twin sons, born without
cryptorchidism or microphallus, were each heterozygous for 1 of the
mutations in GNRHR but did not have any mutations in the FGFR1 gene.
Pitteloud et al. (2007) concluded that defects in 2 different genes can
synergize to produce a more severe phenotype in families with
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism than either alone, and that this digenic
model may account for some of the phenotypic heterogeneity seen in GnRH
deficiency.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 7 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
FERTILE EUNUCH SYNDROME, INCLUDED
GNRHR, GLN106ARG

In a sibship in which a brother and sister had hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism (HH7; 146110), de Roux et al. (1997) found that the
affected persons were compound heterozygotes for a gln106-to-arg (Q106R)
mutation and an arg262-to-gln (R262Q) mutation (138850.0002) in the GNRH
receptor. The propositus was a 22-year-old man who was referred because
of hypogonadism. Puberty had occurred at the age of 16. His height was
180 cm and his arm span 186 cm. He reported impaired libido. Physical
examination revealed absence of facial hair, sparse pubic hair (Tanner
stage 3), and a penis of 6 cm. He had scrotal testes, and the volume of
each was 8 ml (normal, 15 to 25 ml). There was no gynecomastia. He had a
normal sense of smell and no mirror movements of the upper limbs, no
abnormal eye movements, no colorblindness, and no renal or craniofacial
abnormalities. The karyotype was 46,XY. The patient's older sister was a
37-year-old woman with a history of primary amenorrhea and infertility.
Spontaneous thelarche had occurred at the age of 14 years. She had a
single episode of uterine bleeding at the age of 18, and afterward
received combined oral contraceptive treatment. This treatment was
interrupted when she desired children. However, amenorrhea and absence
of pregnancy led to ovulation-inducing treatment, which resulted in 2
normal pregnancies and the births of a girl and a boy, 4 and 7 years old
at the time of report. After each pregnancy, she had persistent
amenorrhea, and oral contraceptive treatment was resumed. Her height was
165 cm. Pubic hair development was at Tanner stage 5, and her breasts
and external genitalia were those of a normal woman. Both parents and a
sister who was found to be heterozygous for 1 of the 2 mutations were
clinically and endocrinologically normal. A G-to-A transition at
nucleotide 317 was responsible for the gln106-to-arg mutation in the
first extracellular loop of the receptor.

De Roux et al. (1999) found this mutation in compound heterozygosity
with S217R (138850.0005) on the same allele and R262Q (138850.0002) on
the other allele.

In 2 sisters with primary amenorrhea and no breast development at 25 and
18 years of age, respectively, Seminara et al. (2000) identified
compound heterozygosity for Q106R on one allele and R262Q (138850.0002)
on the other. The apparently unaffected parents were heterozygous for
the mutations. Pitteloud et al. (2007) reexamined this family and
identified heterozygosity for an additional missense mutation in the
FGFR1 gene (136350.0016) in the 2 sisters and in their father, who had a
history of delayed puberty. Mutation analysis of the children of the
younger sister revealed that her unaffected daughter, who underwent
normal puberty, was heterozygous for the mutation in FGFR1 but had no
mutations in the GNRHR gene, and that her prepubertal 10-year-old twin
sons, born without cryptorchidism or microphallus, were each
heterozygous for 1 of the mutations in the GNRHR gene but did not have
any mutations in the FGFR1 gene. Pitteloud et al. (2007) concluded that
defects in 2 different genes can synergize to produce a more severe
phenotype in families with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism than either
alone, and that this digenic model may account for some of the
phenotypic heterogeneity seen in GnRH deficiency.

Pitteloud et al. (2001) described a 26-year-old male with a mild
phenotypic form of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, the fertile eunuch
syndrome (228300) (hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in the presence of
normal testicular size and some degree of spermatogenesis), associated
with a homozygous gln106-to-arg GNRHR mutation. De Roux et al. (1997)
had shown that this mutation, located in the first extracellular loop of
the GNRHR, decreases but does not eliminate GNRH binding. The proband
had hypogonadal testosterone levels, detectable but apulsatile
gonadotropin secretion, and a normal adult male testicular size of 17 mL
at baseline. After only 4 months of treatment with CG (see 118860)
alone, he developed sperm in his ejaculate and his wife conceived.
Following cessation of CG therapy, the patient demonstrated reversal of
his hypogonadotropism as evidenced by normal adult male testosterone
levels and the appearance of pulsatile luteinizing hormone (see 152780)
secretion. The authors concluded that this case expands the clinical
spectrum of GNRHR mutations, provides the first genetic basis for the
fertile eunuch variant of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, and documents
the occurrence of reversible hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in a patient
with a GNRHR mutation.

Costa et al. (2001) found this mutation in compound heterozygosity with
asn10 to lys (138850.0009). In vitro analysis indicated that the Q106R
mutation, located in the first extracellular loop, was able to bind
GNRH, but with a reduced affinity.

.0002
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 7 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
GNRHR, ARG262GLN

See 138850.0001 and de Roux et al. (1997). A G-to-A transition at
nucleotide 785 yielded the arg262-to-gln (R262Q) mutation in the third
intracellular loop of the GNRH receptor. Caron et al. (1999) detected
the R262Q mutation in compound heterozygosity with an A129D mutation
(138850.0004) in 3 sibs.

De Roux et al. (1999) found this mutation in compound heterozygosity
with Q106R (138850.0001) and S217R (138850.0005) on the other allele.

See 138850.0001 and Seminara et al. (2000).

Lin et al. (2006) reported a homozygous R262Q mutation in the GNRH
receptor in 2 brothers with IHH (HH7; 146110). The proband presented at
15 years of age with delayed puberty. After a short course of
testosterone, he seemed to be progressing through puberty appropriately
and was discharged from follow-up. His younger brother was also referred
with delayed puberty but showed little progress after treatment. Lin et
al. (2006) concluded that homozygous partial loss-of-function mutations
in the GNRHR such as R262Q can present with variable phenotypes,
including apparent delayed puberty.

.0003
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 7 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
GNRHR, TYR284CYS

In a screening of 46 unrelated patients with idiopathic hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism (32 males at least 18 years of age and 14 females at least
17 years of age) without anosmia (HH7; 146110), using denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis of GC-clamped PCR products, Layman et al.
(1998) found 2 missense mutations in affected members of 1 family. One
was a CGG-to-CAG (arg262 to gln; R262Q) mutation in intracellular loop 3
(138850.0002); the other was a TAT-to-TGT (tyr284 to cys; Y284C)
mutation in transmembrane region 6. All 4 affected sibs were compound
heterozygotes for these mutations, whereas an unaffected sib and all 75
unrelated controls were normal. At least 1 of the affected females
ovulated with exogenous gonadotropins. The 2 GNRHR mutations had minimal
effects upon receptor affinity, but receptor expression was decreased
for both.

.0004
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 7 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
GNRHR, ALA129ASP

Caron et al. (1999) found that 3 sibs with isolated hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism (HH7; 146110) were compound heterozygotes for mutations in
the GNRHR gene. One mutation was a change of amino acid 129 from alanine
to aspartic acid (A129D), and the other was a replacement of arginine by
glutamine at amino acid 262 (R262Q; 138850.0002). The A129D change was
caused by a C-to-A transversion at nucleotide position 386. The father
was heterozygous for the R262Q mutation, the mother for the A129D
mutation.

.0005
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 7 WITH ANOSMIA
GNRHR, SER217ARG

De Roux et al. (1999) performed detailed endocrinologic studies in 3
affected members of a family with IHH (HH7; 146110) who had GNRHR
mutations. All 3 were compound heterozygotes for an arg262-to-gln
(R262Q; 138850.0002) substitution on one allele and gln106-to-arg
(Q106R; 138850.0001) and ser217-to-arg (S217R) substitutions on the
other. When expressed in heterologous cells, both the Q106R and S217R
mutations altered hormone binding, whereas the R262Q mutation altered
activation of phospholipase C (see 600810). The proband, a 30-year-old
male, had complete hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (146110) with extremely
low plasma levels of gonadotropins, absence of pulsatility of endogenous
LH and alpha subunit (see 152780), absence of response to GNRH (152760)
and GNRH agonist (triptorelin), and absence of effect of pulsatile
administration of GNRH. His affected 18- and 24-year-old sisters had
only partial hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. They both had primary
amenorrhea and normal breast development, but the younger sister had
retarded bone maturation and uterus development. Gonadotropin
concentrations were normal or low, but in both cases were restored to
normal levels by a single injection of GNRH. In both sisters, there were
no spontaneous pulses of LH, but pulsatile administration of GNRH
provoked pulsatile secretion of LH in the younger one. The authors
concluded that the same GNRHR mutations may exhibit varying degrees of
alteration of gonadotropin function in affected members of the same
family.

.0006
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 7 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
GNRHR, SER168ARG

Pralong et al. (1999) described a male patient with complete
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH7; 146110) who presented primary
failure of pulsatile GNRH (152760) therapy, but responded to exogenous
gonadotropin administration. The patient had a T-to-A transversion at
codon 168 of the gene encoding the GNRH receptor (GNRHR), resulting in a
ser168-to-arg (S168R) change in the fourth transmembrane domain of
GNRHR. This mutation was present in homozygous state in the patient,
whereas it was in heterozygous state in both phenotypically normal
parents. When introduced into GNRHR cDNA, S168R resulted in complete
loss of the receptor-mediated signaling response to GNRH.

.0007
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 7 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
GNRHR, LEU314TER

Kottler et al. (2000) described a woman with complete hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism (HH7; 146110) and a new compound heterozygous mutation of
the GNRHR gene. A null mutation L314X leading to a partial deletion of
the seventh transmembrane domain of GNRHR was associated with the Q106R
mutation (138850.0001). The L314X mutant receptor showed neither
measurable binding nor inositol phosphate production when transfected in
CHO-K1 cells compared to the wildtype receptor. The disease was
transmitted by an autosomal recessive mode, and heterozygous individuals
with GNRHR mutations had normal pubertal development and fertility.

.0008
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 7 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
GNRHR, ARG139HIS

Costa et al. (2001) investigated 17 Brazilian patients (10 males and 7
females) from 14 different families with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism
and normal olfaction (HH7; 146110). The diagnosis of hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism was based on absent or incomplete sexual development after
17 years of age associated with low or normal levels of LH (152780) in
both sexes and low levels of testosterone in males and of estradiol in
females. All patients presented with a normal sense of smell in an
olfactory-specific test. In 1 female with complete hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism, Costa et al. (2001) identified an arg139-to-his mutation
(R139H), located in the conserved DRS motif at the junction of the third
transmembrane and the second intracellular loop of the GNRHR, in the
homozygous state. The R139H mutation completely eliminated detectable
GNRH-binding activity and prevented GNRH-induced stimulation of inositol
phosphate accumulation in vitro. The patient had undetectable serum
basal LH and FSH levels that failed to respond to GNRH stimulation.

.0009
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 7 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
GNRHR, ASN10LYS

In 4 sibs (2 males and 2 females) with partial hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism (HH7; 146110), Costa et al. (2001) identified a novel
compound heterozygous mutation, asn10-to-lys (N10K) and gln106-to-arg
(Q106R; 138850.0001). The Q106R mutation binds GNRH with a reduced
affinity; the N10K mutation, in the extracellular amino-terminal domain
of the receptor, also reduces the affinity for GNRH in vitro. Affected
patients with the N10K/Q106R mutations had partial hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism with low serum basal LH levels that were responsive to GNRH
stimulation.

.0010
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 7 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
GNRHR, GLU90LYS

In 2 sibs with the complete form of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH7;
146110), Soderlund et al. (2001) detected a novel homozygous G-to-A
transition at nucleotide 268 of the GNRHR gene, which resulted in a
glu90-to-lys (E90K) amino acid substitution. This mutation is located in
the second transmembrane domain of the GNRH receptor. To assess the
functional role of E90, Maya-Nunez et al. (2002) performed mutation
analysis of the E90K substitution. Transient expression of the mutant
receptor in COS-7 cells resulted in a virtual abolition of GNRH agonist
binding and agonist-stimulated phosphoinositide turnover, initially
suggesting that E90 may be essential for GNRH binding. To examine the
role of a site known to suppress GNRHR function, mutants with deletion
of K191 from the GNRHR and/or addition of catfish Gnrhr intracellular
C-terminal tail to GNRHR were prepared. Activation of intracellular
signaling in response to buserelin was restored by deletion of K191 from
the E90K mutant receptor but minimally by addition of the catfish GNRHR
C-terminal tail. This study provided evidence that the E90K mutation
impairs GNRHR-effector coupling. Maya-Nunez et al. (2002) concluded that
the observation that sequence modifications that enhance surface
expression of the receptor restore function presents the possibility
that loss of surface expression may underlie the severe phenotype
exhibited by hypogonadotropic hypogonadism patients bearing this
mutation.

.0011
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 7 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
GNRHR, IVS1, G-A, -1

Silveira et al. (2002) reported a woman with complete GNRH resistance
(HH7; 146110) secondary to a novel homozygous GNRHR gene mutation,
transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait. She presented with primary
amenorrhea and absent thelarche and pubarche. Dynamic tests demonstrated
absent spontaneous gonadotropin pulsatility, and no response to either
exogenous pulsatile or acute GNRH administration. However, she responded
to exogenous gonadotropin administration with a resulting normal
pregnancy. Analysis of genomic DNA revealed a homozygous splice junction
mutation, a G-to-A transition at the intron 1-exon 2 boundary. Her
unaffected sister was heterozygous for this mutation. Results of RT-PCR
analysis of RNA showed a transcript lacking all of exon 2, with splicing
of exon 1 to exon 3. This created a frameshift, generating a coding
sequence for 3 new amino acids followed by a stop codon. Although it is
not clear whether the mutant receptor was actually expressed, the
resultant mRNA sequence was presumed to produce a truncated receptor
with no binding or signaling capacity.

.0012
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 7 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
GNRHR, ALA171THR

In 2 brothers with severe hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH7; 146110),
Karges et al. (2003) found a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 511 of the
LHCGR gene that resulted in an ala171-to-thr (A171T) substitution at
transmembrane helix 4 (TMH4). After in vitro expression in human
embryonic kidney 293T cells, the A171T mutant LHCGR exhibited a lack of
phospholipase C activity in signal transduction. Specific receptor
binding of radioisotope-labeled GNRH ligand was undetectable in
transfected cells. Molecular modeling and dynamic simulation of the
mutant receptor suggested the introduction of a stable hydrogen bond
that impeded conformational mobility of the TMH3 and TMH4 domains
required for sequential ligand binding and receptor activation, thus
stabilizing the LHCGR in its inactive conformation.

.0013
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 7 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
GNRHR, ASN10LYS AND GLN11LYS

Meysing et al. (2004) reported a normosmic female subject with
congenital idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH7; 146110) in
whom treatment with pulsatile GNRH resulted in an unusual response. The
subject not only required an increased dose of pulsatile GNRH for
ovarian follicular development, but LH secretion did not increase
appropriately, estradiol levels remained low, and she did not ovulate
spontaneously. Sequencing of the GNRHR coding sequence revealed compound
heterozygosity for a 30T-A transversion in exon 1 of the GNRHR gene,
resulting in a 2-amino acid substitution on one allele (N10K+Q11K), and
a missense mutation on the other allele (P320L; 138850.0014).
Introduction of the P320L mutation into the GNRH receptor led to failure
of detectable ligand binding and failure of stimulation of inositol
phosphate production and gonadotropin subunit gene promoter activity in
response to GnRH in transiently transfected cells. Introduction of the
N10K+Q11K mutation into the GNRH receptor resulted in reduced binding of
a GNRH agonist to 25% of the wildtype receptor. In addition, the EC50
value for GNRH stimulation of inositol phosphate production was
significantly increased, and the dose-response curves for stimulation of
alpha-gonadotropin subunit (118850), LH-beta (152780), and FSH-beta
(136530) gene transcription by GNRH were similarly shifted to the right.
The authors proposed that these GNRHR mutations result in a rightward
shift of the dose-response curves of gonadotropin responses to pulsatile
GNRH in the subject and unmask the differential sensitivities of LH and
FSH to GNRH, resulting in low LH and estradiol levels despite
appropriate FSH secretion and follicular growth.

.0014
HYPOGONADOTROPIC HYPOGONADISM 7 WITHOUT ANOSMIA
GNRHR, PRO320LEU

The patient with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH7; 146110) reported by
Meysing et al. (2004) was a compound heterozygote for a 2-amino acid
substitution on one allele of the GNRHR gene (138850.0013) and a 959C-T
transition in exon 3 on the other that resulted in a pro320-to-leu
substitution (P320L).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Acierno et al. (2003); Bo-Abbas et al. (2003); Mason et al. (1986);
Seminara et al. (2003)
REFERENCE 1. Acierno, J. S., Jr.; Shagoury, J. K.; Bo-Abbas, Y.; Crowley, W.
F., Jr.; Seminara, S. B.: A locus for autosomal recessive idiopathic
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism on chromosome 19p13.3. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 88: 2947-2950, 2003.

2. Bedecarrats, G. Y.; Linher, K. D.; Kaiser, U. B.: Two common naturally
occurring mutations in the human gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
receptor have differential effects on gonadotropin gene expression
and on GnRH-mediated signal transduction. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
834-843, 2003.

3. Beranova, M.; Oliveira, L. M. B.; Bedecarrats, G. Y.; Schipani,
E.; Vallejo, M.; Ammini, A. C.; Quintos, J. B.; Hall, J. E.; Martin,
K. A.; Hayes, F. J.; Pitteloud, N.; Kaiser, U. B.; Crowley, W. F.,
Jr.; Seminara, S. B.: Prevalence, phenotypic spectrum, and modes
of inheritance of gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor mutations
in idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86:
1580-1588, 2001.

4. Bo-Abbas, Y.; Acierno, J. S., Jr.; Shagoury, J. K.; Crowley, W.
F., Jr.; Seminara, S. B.: Autosomal recessive idiopathic hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism: genetic analysis excludes mutations in the gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH) and GnRH receptor genes. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
2730-2737, 2003.

5. Caron, P.; Chauvin, S.; Christin-Maitre, S.; Bennet, A.; Lahlou,
N.; Counis, R.; Bouchard, P.; Kottler, M.-L.: Resistance of hypogonadic
patients with mutated GnRH receptor genes to pulsatile GnRH administration. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 990-996, 1999.

6. Costa, E. M. F.; Bedecarrats, G. Y.; Mendonca, B. B.; Arnhold,
I. J. P.; Kaiser, U. B.; Latronico, A. C.: Two novel mutations in
the gonadotropin- releasing hormone receptor gene in Brazilian patients
with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and normal olfaction. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 86: 2680-2686, 2001.

7. de Roux, N.; Young, J.; Brailly-Tabard, S.; Misrahi, M.; Milgrom,
E.; Schaison, G.: The same molecular defects of the gonadotropin-releasing
hormone receptor determine a variable degree of hypogonadism in affected
kindred. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 567-572, 1999.

8. de Roux, N.; Young, J.; Misrahi, M.; Genet, R.; Chanson, P.; Schaison,
G.; Milgrom, E.: A family with hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and
mutations in the gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor. New Eng.
J. Med. 337: 1597-1602, 1997.

9. Fan, N. C.; Jeung, E.-B.; Peng, C.; Olofsson, J. I.; Krisinger,
J.; Leung, P. C. K.: The human gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
receptor gene: cloning, genomic organization and chromosomal assignment. Molec.
Cell. Endocr. 103: R1-R6, 1994.

10. Fan, N. C.; Peng, C.; Krisinger, J.; Leung, P. C. K.: The human
gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor gene: complete structure including
multiple promoters, transcription initiation sites, and polyadenylation
signals. Molec. Cell. Endocr. 107: R1-R8, 1995.

11. Grosse, R.; Schoneberg, T.; Schultz, G.; Gudermann, T.: Inhibition
of gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor signaling by expression
of a splice variant of the human receptor. Molec. Endocr. 11: 1305-1318,
1997.

12. Janovick, J. A.; Maya-Nunez, G.; Conn, P. M.: Rescue of hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism-causing and manufactured GnRH receptor mutants by a specific
protein-folding template: misrouted proteins as a novel disease etiology
and therapeutic target. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 3255-3262, 2002.

13. Kaiser, U. B.; Dushkin, H.; Altherr, M. R.; Beier, D. R.; Chin,
W. W.: Chromosomal localization of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone
receptor gene to human chromosome 4q13.1-q21.1 and mouse chromosome
5. Genomics 20: 506-508, 1994.

14. Kakar, S. S.; Musgrove, L. C.; Devor, D. C.; Sellers, J. C.; Neill,
J. D.: Cloning, sequencing, and expression of human gonadotropin
releasing hormone (GnRH) receptor. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 189:
289-295, 1992.

15. Kakar, S. S.; Neill, J. D.: The human gonadotropin-releasing
hormone receptor gene (GNRHR) maps to chromosome band 4q13. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 70: 211-214, 1995.

16. Karges, B.; Karges, W.; Mine, M.; Ludwig, L.; Kuhne, R.; Milgrom,
E.; de Roux, N.: Mutation ala(171)thr stabilizes the gonadotropin-releasing
hormone receptor in its inactive conformation, causing familial hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 1873-1879, 2003.

17. Kottler, M.-L.; Chauvin, S.; Lahlou, N.; Harris, C. E.; Johnston,
C. J.; Lagarde, J.-P.; Bouchard, P.; Farid, N. R.; Counis, R.: A
new compound heterozygous mutation of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone
receptor (L314X, Q106R) in a woman with complete hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism: chronic estrogen administration amplifies the gonadotropin
defect. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 3002-3008, 2000.

18. Kottler, M.-L.; Counis, R.; Bouchard, P.: Mutations of the GnRH
receptor gene: a new cause of autosomal-recessive hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism. Arch. Med. Res. 30: 481-485, 1999.

19. Kottler, M. L.; Lorenzo, F.; Bergametti, F.; Commercon, P.; Souchier,
C.; Counis, R.: Subregional mapping of the human gonadotropin-releasing
hormone receptor (GnRH-R) gene to 4q between the markers D4S392 and
D4S409. Hum. Genet. 96: 477-480, 1995.

20. Layman, L. C.; Cohen, D. P.; Jin, M.; Xie, J.; Li, Z.; Reindollar,
R. H.; Bolbolan, S.; Bick, D. P.; Sherins, R. R.; Duck, L. W.; Musgrove,
L. C.; Sellers, J. C.; Neill, J. D.: Mutations in gonadotropin-releasing
hormone receptor gene cause hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. (Letter) Nature
Genet. 18: 14-15, 1998.

21. Leanos-Miranda, A.; Ulloa-Aguirre, A.; Ji, T. H.; Janovick, J.
A.; Conn, P. M.: Dominant-negative action of disease-causing gonadotropin-releasing
hormone receptor (GnRHR) mutants: a trait that potentially coevolved
with decreased plasma membrane expression of GnRHR in humans. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 3360-3367, 2003.

22. Leung, P. C. K.; Squire, J.; Peng, C.; Fan, N.; Hayden, M. R.;
Olofsson, J. I.: Mapping of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)
receptor gene to human chromosome 4q21.2 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Mammalian
Genome 6: 309-310, 1995.

23. Lin, L; Conway, G. S; Hill, N. R; Dattani, M. T; Hindmarsh, P.
C; Achermann, J. C.: A homozygous R262Q mutation in the gonadotropin-releasing
hormone receptor presenting as constitutional delay of growth and
puberty with subsequent borderline oligospermia. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 91: 5117-5121, 2006.

24. Maji, S. K.; Perrin, M. H.; Sawaya, M. R.; Jessberger, S.; Vadodaria,
K.; Rissman, R. A.; Singru, P. S.; Nilsson, K. P. R.; Simon, R.; Schubert,
D.; Eisenberg, D.; Rivier, J.; Sawchenko, P.; Vale, W.; Riek, R.:
Functional amyloids as natural storage of peptide hormones in pituitary
secretory granules. Science 325: 328-332, 2009.

25. Mason, A. J.; Hayflick, J. S.; Zoeller, R. T.; Young, W. S., III;
Phillips, H. S.; Nikolics, K.; Seeburg, P. H.: A deletion truncating
the gonadotropin-releasing hormone gene is responsible for hypogonadism
in the 'hpg' mouse. Science 234: 1366-1371, 1986.

26. Maya-Nunez, G.; Janovick, J. A.; Ulloa-Aguirre, A.; Soderlund,
D.; Conn, P. M.; Mendez, J. P.: Molecular basis of hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism: restoration of mutant (E90K) GnRH receptor function
by a deletion at a distant site. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 2144-2149,
2002.

27. Meysing, A. U.; Kanasaki, H.; Bedecarrats, G. Y.; Acierno, J.
S., Jr.; Conn, P. M.; Martin, K. A.; Seminara, S. B.; Hall, J. E.;
Crowley, W. F., Jr.; Kaiser, U. B.: GNRHR mutations in a woman with
idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism highlight the differential
sensitivity of luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone
to gonadotropin-releasing hormone. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 3189-3198,
2004.

28. Morrison, N.; Sellar, R. E.; Boyd, E.; Eidne, K. A.; Connor, J.
M.: Assignment of the gene encoding the human gonadotropin-releasing
hormone receptor to 4q13.2-13.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Hum.
Genet. 93: 714-715, 1994.

29. Pitteloud, N.; Boepple, P. A.; DeCruz, S.; Valkenburgh, S. B.;
Crowley, W. F., Jr.; Hayes, F. J.: The fertile eunuch variant of
idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism: spontaneous reversal associated
with a homozygous mutation in the gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 2470-2475, 2001.

30. Pitteloud, N.; Quinton, R.; Pearce, S.; Raivio, T.; Acierno, J.;
Dwyer, A.; Plummer, L.; Hughes, V.; Seminara, S.; Cheng, Y.-Z.; Li,
W.-P.; Maccoll, G.; Eliseenkova, A. V.; Olsen, S. K.; Ibrahimi, O.
A.; Hayes, F. J.; Boepple, P.; Hall, J. E.; Bouloux, P.; Mohammadi,
M.; Crowley, W., Jr.: Digenic mutations account for variable phenotypes
in idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. J. Clin. Invest. 117:
457-463, 2007.

31. Pralong, F. P.; Gomez, F.; Castillo, E.; Cotecchia, S.; Abuin,
L.; Aubert, M. L.; Portmann, L.; Gaillard, R. C.: Complete hypogonadotropic
hypogonadism associated with a novel inactivating mutation of the
gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84:
3811-3816, 1999.

32. Sedlmeyer, I. L.; Pearce, C. L.; Trueman, J. A.; Butler, J. L.;
Bersaglieri, T.; Read, A. P.; Clayton, P. E.; Kolonel, L. N.; Henderson,
B. E.; Hirschhorn, J. N.; Palmert, M. R.: Determination of sequence
variation and haplotype structure for the gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) and GnRH receptor genes: investigation of role in pubertal
timing. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 1091-1099, 2005.

33. Seminara, S. B.; Beranova, M.; Oliveira, L. M. B.; Martin, K.
A.; Crowley, W. F., Jr.; Hall, J. E.: Successful use of pulsatile
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) for ovulation induction and
pregnancy in a patient with GnRH receptor mutations. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 85: 556-562, 2000.

34. Seminara, S. B.; Messager, S.; Chatzidaki, E. E.; Thresher, R.
R.; Acierno, J. S.; Shagoury, J. K.; Bo-Abbas, Y.; Kuohung, W.; Schwinof,
K. M.; Hendrick, A. G.; Zahn, D.; Dixon, J.; Kaiser, U. B.; Slaugenhaupt,
S. A.; Gusella, J. F.; O'Rahilly, S.; Carlton, M. B. L.; Crowley,
W. F., Jr.; Aparicio, S. A. J. R.; Colledge, W. H.: The GPR54 gene
as a regulator of puberty. New Eng. J. Med. 349: 1614-1627, 2003.

35. Silveira, L. F. G.; Stewart, P. M.; Thomas, M.; Clark, D. A.;
Bouloux, P. M. G.; MacColl, G. S.: Novel homozygous splice acceptor
site GnRH receptor (GnRHR) mutation: human GnRHR 'knockout'. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 87: 2973-2977, 2002.

36. Soderlund, D.; Canto, P.; de la Chesnaye, E.; Ulloa-Aguirre, A.;
Mendez, J. P.: A novel homozygous mutation in the second transmembrane
domain of the gonadotrophin releasing hormone receptor gene. Clin.
Endocr. 54: 493-498, 2001.

37. Szende, B.; Srkalovic, G.; Timar, J.; Mulchahey, J. J.; Neill,
J. D.; Lapis, K.; Csikos, A.; Szepeshazi, K.; Schally, A. V.: Localization
of receptors for luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone in pancreatic
and mammary cancer cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 4153-4156, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/27/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/27/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/1/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/13/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/20/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/22/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/6/2004
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/29/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/3/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/2/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/23/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/6/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/31/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/6/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/13/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/8/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/16/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/13/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/3/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/29/1999
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/14/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/29/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/5/1997
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/8/1997
Alan F. Scott - updated: 7/6/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/1/1993

EDITED carol: 10/16/2012
carol: 10/11/2012
carol: 10/1/2012
carol: 9/27/2012
alopez: 9/3/2009
terry: 8/27/2009
carol: 6/24/2009
alopez: 10/1/2007
carol: 3/13/2007
carol: 2/22/2007
alopez: 10/20/2006
alopez: 8/22/2006
alopez: 8/6/2004
terry: 2/20/2004
alopez: 1/29/2004
cwells: 11/7/2003
tkritzer: 11/5/2003
terry: 11/3/2003
alopez: 10/2/2003
alopez: 1/23/2003
alopez: 1/6/2003
alopez: 10/31/2002
alopez: 11/6/2001
alopez: 8/13/2001
alopez: 8/8/2001
alopez: 3/16/2001
alopez: 7/21/2000
terry: 7/13/2000
alopez: 6/5/2000
terry: 4/3/2000
alopez: 11/29/1999
alopez: 10/14/1999
alopez: 3/1/1999
dkim: 10/13/1998
terry: 1/7/1998
terry: 12/30/1997
terry: 12/29/1997
alopez: 12/12/1997
mark: 12/5/1997
alopez: 12/4/1997
alopez: 12/3/1997
mark: 10/20/1995
mark: 7/6/1995
terry: 1/27/1995
mimadm: 9/24/1994
carol: 5/13/1994
carol: 2/1/1993

601012	TITLE *601012 CALCIUM CHANNEL, VOLTAGE-DEPENDENT, N TYPE, ALPHA-1B SUBUNIT; CACNA1B
;;CALCIUM CHANNEL, L TYPE, ALPHA-1 POLYPEPTIDE, ISOFORM 5; CACNL1A5;;
CaV2.2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Voltage-dependent Ca(2+) channels are multisubunit complexes found in
the membrane of many excitable cells that regulate calcium entry (see
601011). N-type calcium channels, which control neurotransmitter release
from neurons, are dihydropyridine-insensitive and
omega-conotoxin-sensitive. The alpha-1 subunit forms the pore through
which calcium enters the cell, and is encoded by a family of at least 5
genes.

CLONING

Williams et al. (1992) cloned the neuronal alpha-1B subunit by probing
brain cDNA libraries with a rabbit probe. RT-PCR revealed 2
alternatively spliced isoforms, encoding predicted products of 2,339
(alpha-1B-1) and 2,237 (alpha-1B-2) amino acids, with 64% and 73%
identity to the rabbit gene product, respectively. Both isoforms are
transcribed only in central nervous system tissue.

MAPPING

Diriong et al. (1995) and Kim et al. (1997) mapped the CACNA1B gene to
chromosome 9q34 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

Williams et al. (1992) used transient expression studies in HEK293 cells
to demonstrate that CACNA1B had N-type calcium channel activity.

Using binding and immunoprecipitation assays on adult rat cortical
tissue, Maeno-Hikichi et al. (2003) showed that the enigma-like LIM
domain protein (ENH; 605904) interacts specifically with protein kinase
C-epsilon (PRKCE; 176975) and the C terminus of CACNA1B to form a
macromolecular complex. Functional studies in Xenopus oocytes indicated
that expression of ENH resulted in increased rapid and specific
modulation of N-type calcium channels by PKCE. The authors concluded
that through interactions with a common adaptor protein, the formation
of a kinase-substrate complex is the molecular basis for the specificity
and efficiency of cellular signaling.

The CaV2.2 calcium channel interacts with and is modulated by CRMP2
(602463). Overexpression of CRMP2 leads to increased surface expression
of CaV2.2 on neurons, enhanced calcium currents, and an increase in
stimulated release of the neuropeptide calcitonin gene-related peptide
(CGRP; 114130) from dorsal root ganglia (summary by Brittain et al.,
2011).

ANIMAL MODEL

Kim et al. (2001) found that CaV2.2-null mice were viable and fertile
and showed normal motor coordination. CaV2.2-null mice exhibited reduced
responses to certain pain stimuli, suggesting that CaV2.2 plays a role
in pain perception at the spinal level, but not at the supraspinal
level.

Kim et al. (2009) observed elevated aggression in CaV2.2-null mice.
CaV2.2 is highly expressed in the dorsal raphe nucleus of adult rats,
and injection of an N-type Ca(2+) channel blocker into the dorsal raphe
nucleus of wildtype mice resulted in increased aggressive behavior. Kim
et al. (2009) concluded that N-type Ca(2+) channels in the dorsal raphe
nucleus have a role in the control of aggression.

In rats, Brittain et al. (2011) demonstrated that inflammatory and
neuropathic hypersensitivity can be suppressed by a synthetic 15-mer
peptide (CBD3) that uncouples Crmp2 and CaV2.2 calcium channels in
neurons. Studies in cultured neurons and spinal cord slices showed that
CBD3 peptide bound CaV2.2, interfered with the interaction of Crmp2 and
CaV2.2, and reduced channel function, as evidenced by decreased CGRP
neuropeptide release from sensory neurons and decreased excitatory
synaptic transmission in dorsal horn neurons. In rats, treatment with
CBD3 also reduced meningeal blood flow and reduced nocifensive behavior
induced by peripheral formalin injection or corneal capsaicin
application, as well as reversed neuropathic hypersensitivity produced
by an antiretroviral drug. The peptide was mildly anxiolytic without
affecting memory retrieval, sensorimotor function or depression.

REFERENCE 1. Brittain, J. M.; Duarte, D. B.; Wilson, S. M.; Zhu, W.; Ballard,
C.; Johnson, P. L.; Liu, N.; Xiong, W.; Ripsch, M. S.; Wang, Y.; Fehrenbacher,
J. C.; Fitz, S. D.; and 20 others: Suppression of inflammatory
and neuropathic pain by uncoupling CRMP-2 from the presynaptic Ca(2+)
channel complex. Nature Med. 17: 822-829, 2011.

2. Diriong, S.; Lory, P.; Williams, M. E.; Ellis, S. B.; Harpold,
M. M.; Taviaux, S.: Chromosomal localization of the human genes for
alpha-1A, alpha-1B, and alpha-1E voltage-dependent Ca(2+) channel
subunits. Genomics 30: 605-609, 1995.

3. Kim, C.; Jeon, D.; Kim, Y.-H.; Lee, C. J.; Kim, H.; Shin, H.-S.
: Deletion of N-type Ca(2+) channel Ca(V)2.2 results in hyperaggressive
behaviors in mice. J. Biol. Chem. 284: 2738-2745, 2009.

4. Kim, C.; Jun, K.; Lee, T.; Kim, S.-S.; McEnery, M. W.; Chin, H.;
Kim, H.-L.; Park, J. M.; Kim, D. K.; Jung, S. J.; Kim, J.; Shin, H.-S.
: Altered nociceptive response in mice deficient in the alpha-1B subunit
of the voltage-dependent calcium channel. Molec. Cell. Neurosci. 18:
235-245, 2001.

5. Kim, D. S.; Jung, H.-H.; Park, S.-H.; Chin, H.: Isolation and
characterization of the 5-prime-upstream region of the human N-type
calcium channel alpha-1B subunit gene: chromosomal localization and
promoter analysis. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 5098-5104, 1997.

6. Maeno-Hikichi, Y.; Chang, S.; Matsumura, K.; Lai, M.; Lin, H.;
Nakagawa, N.; Kuroda, S.; Zhang, J.: A PKC-epsilon-ENH-channel complex
specifically modulates N-type Ca2+ channels. Nature Neurosci. 6:
468-475, 2003.

7. Williams, M. E.; Brust, P. F.; Feldman, D. H.; Patthi, S.; Simerson,
S.; Maroufi, A.; McCue, A. F.; Velicelebi, G.; Ellis, S. B.; Harpold,
M. M.: Structure and functional expression of an omega-conotoxin-sensitive
human N-type calcium channel. Science 257: 389-395, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/3/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/14/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/22/2003
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 2/13/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/23/1996

EDITED wwang: 08/05/2011
ckniffin: 8/3/2011
mgross: 7/15/2009
terry: 7/14/2009
cwells: 5/27/2003
ckniffin: 5/22/2003
carol: 2/13/1998
mark: 6/12/1997
mark: 1/23/1996

600025	TITLE *600025 KINESIN LIGHT CHAIN 1; KLC1
;;KINESIN 2; KNS2;;
KNS2A;;
KLC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Kinesins are tubulin (see 191130) molecular motors that transport
organelles within cells and move chromosomes along microtubules during
cell division. In sea urchin and mammalian cells, kinesins have been
characterized as tetrameric proteins containing 2 heavy (alpha) chains
of approximately 120 kD and 2 light (beta) chains of approximately 70
kD. The alpha chains provide the tubulin binding site and the ATPase
domains, whereas the beta chains are responsible for the specific
attachment of the organelle to be moved by the kinesin tetramer.
Kinesins transport their bound organelle to the plus end of the
microtubule (summary by Chernajovsky et al., 1996).

CLONING

Chernajovsky et al. (1996) noted that differential splicing occurs for
the kinesin beta (light chain) cDNA sequences at the 3-prime end of the
rat kinesin mRNA, producing kinesins having different C-terminal ends
that seem to confer the kinesin specificity for organelle binding.
Cabeza-Arvelaiz et al. (1993) isolated and sequenced a cDNA encoding the
human kinesin light chain protein (KLC). The cDNA encodes a deduced
polypeptide of 569 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 64,789
Da. The predicted secondary internal structure of the KLC molecule
consists of about 27 contiguous repeats, each of approximately 21 amino
acids, and could be divided into 3 domains.

Rahman et al. (1998) cloned mouse Klc1. The deduced 581-amino acid
protein has an N-terminal coiled-coil region of about 100 amino acids
and 6 imperfect tetratricopeptide repeats of about 34 amino acids each.
Northern and Western blot analyses detected Klc1 predominantly in mouse
central and peripheral neuronal tissues. Immunofluorescence analysis of
cultured rat hippocampal precursor cells showed that Klc1 levels
increased with differentiation. In situ hybridization of mouse brain
showed that both Klc1 and Klc2 (611729) were enriched in olfactory bulb,
hippocampus, dentate gyrus, and the granular layer of cerebellum. Klc1
was expressed in a subset of cells in the sciatic nerve and showed
diffuse axonal staining. Fractionation of whole mouse brain extracts
revealed Klc1 and Klc2 in the cytosolic fraction and Klc2 in the
microsomal fraction.

GENE FUNCTION

Chernajovsky et al. (1996) characterized the human KNS2 gene product of
a differentially spliced, T-cell-derived mRNA and cloned its promoter
region. The promoter region transcribes constitutively. In permanently
transfected human HeLa and NB100 neuroblastoma cells, a reporter gene
containing the promoter and part of the first exon of beta kinesin was
75-fold more active than the HSV-tk promoter. The first exon contains a
5-prime untranslated sequence capable of forming a stable double-hairpin
loop, which functions as a translational enhancer. Its deletion
decreases the efficiency of in vitro translation of beta kinesin mRNA.

Kamal et al. (2000) demonstrated that the axonal transport of APP
(104760) in neurons is mediated by the direct binding of APP to the
light chain subunit of kinesin-1.

Using anti-mouse Klc1 antibodies to immunoprecipitate proteins from
mouse brain lysates, Rahman et al. (1998) showed that Klc1 associated
with Nkhc (KIF5A; 602821) and Ukhc (KIF5B; 602809), but not with Klc2.
In the presence of a nonhydrolyzable ATP analog, both Klc1 and Klc2
cosedimented with taxol-stabilized mouse brain microtubules.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chernajovsky et al. (1996) determined that the entire KNS2 gene spans 90
kb and encodes a 70-kD protein.

MAPPING

Cabeza-Arvelaiz et al. (1993) assigned the KLC gene to chromosome 14 by
screening of a human/hamster somatic cell hybrid panel. Goedert et al.
(1996) mapped the KNS2 gene to 14q32.3 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Cabeza-Arvelaiz, Y.; Shih, L.-C. N.; Hardman, N.; Asselbergs, F.;
Bilbe, G.; Schmitz, A.; White, B.; Siciliano, M. J.; Lachman, L. B.
: Cloning and genetic organization of the human kinesin light-chain
(KLC) gene. DNA Cell Biol. 12: 881-892, 1993.

2. Chernajovsky, Y.; Brown, A.; Clark, J.: Human kinesin light (beta)
chain gene: DNA sequence and functional characterization of its promoter
and first exon. DNA Cell Biol. 15: 965-974, 1996.

3. Goedert, M.; Marsh, S.; Carter, N.: Localization of the human
kinesin light chain gene (KNS2) to chromosome 14q32.3 by fluorescence
in situ hybridization. Genomics 32: 173-175, 1996.

4. Kamal, A.; Stokin, G. B.; Yang, Z.; Xia, C.; Goldstein, L. S.:
Axonal transport of amyloid precursor protein is mediated by direct
binding to the kinesin light chain subunit of kinesin-I. Neuron 28:
449-459, 2000.

5. Rahman, A.; Friedman, D. S.; Goldstein, L. S. B.: Two kinesin
light chain genes in mice: identification and characterization of
the encoded proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 15395-15403, 1998. Note:
Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 273: 24280 only, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/12/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2002
Ethylin Wang Jabs - updated: 8/29/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/12/1994

EDITED carol: 07/26/2013
terry: 4/4/2013
carol: 3/9/2009
mgross: 1/16/2008
terry: 12/12/2007
joanna: 3/9/2007
alopez: 1/8/2002
mark: 9/16/1997
mark: 7/8/1996
terry: 6/26/1996
mark: 3/13/1996
mark: 3/11/1996
terry: 3/7/1996
mimadm: 7/30/1994
jason: 7/12/1994

600301	TITLE *600301 ACYL-CoA DEHYDROGENASE, SHORT/BRANCHED CHAIN; ACADSB
;;SBCAD;;
2-@METHYLBUTYRYL-CoA DEHYDROGENASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The acyl-CoA dehydrogenases (ACADs) are a group of mitochondrial enzymes
involved in the metabolism of fatty acids or branched-chain amino acids
(Rozen et al., 1994).

CLONING

Rozen et al. (1994) isolated and characterized a cDNA encoding the
precursor for a novel member of the acyl-CoA dehydrogenase gene family.
The open reading frame of 1.3 kb encoded a precursor protein of 431
amino acids, which is processed in vitro to yield a mature protein of
399 amino acids. The cDNA had significant sequence similarity to other
members of the family, with the greatest homology (38%) to short-chain
acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (606885). The cDNA was expressed in eukaryotic
(COS) and prokaryotic (E. coli) cells, producing a protein of the
expected size with unique substrate specificities. The gene product had
the greatest activity toward the short/branched chain acyl-CoA
derivative, (S)-2-methylbutyryl-CoA, but also reacted significantly with
other 2-methyl-branched chain substrates and with short/straight chain
acyl-CoA. Because of the substrate specificity, they proposed the
designation short/branched chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase.

GENE STRUCTURE

Andresen et al. (2000) determined that the ACADSB gene contains 11
exons.

MAPPING

Arden et al. (1995) assigned the ACADSB gene to chromosome 10 by
hybridization to human/rodent somatic cell hybrid DNAs and localized the
gene to 10q25-q26 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a patient with isolated 2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
(610006), Andresen et al. (2000) identified a homozygous mutation in the
ACADSB gene (600301.0001), resulting in a 100-bp deletion. Enzyme assay
of the patient's fibroblasts, using 2-methylbutyryl-CoA as substrate,
confirmed the defect. Sequence analysis of candidate acyl-CoA
dehydrogenases revealed heterozygosity for the common short-chain ACAD
A625 variant allele and no mutations in ACAD8 (604773). The study showed
that ACAD8 is an isobutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase and that both wildtype
ACAD8 and ACADSB proteins are imported into mitochondria and form
tetramers.

In patients with isolated 2-methylbutyryl glycinuria due to ACADSB
deficiency, Gibson et al. (2000) and Madsen et al. (2006) identified
mutations in the ACADSB gene (600301.0002; 600301.0003).

Sass et al. (2008) reported 6 patients, including 2 sets of sibs, with
2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency confirmed by genetic
analysis (T148I, 600301.0004 and E387K, 600301.0005). The patients were
of Turkish or Lebanese Arab origin. None of the patients had clinical
symptoms, and the 3 probands were all ascertained by newborn screening.
For the 3 probands, development was normal at age 3, 6, and 6 years,
respectively, even without treatment. In vitro studies of patient
fibroblasts confirmed an impairment in isoleucine degradation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
2-@METHYLBUTYRYL-CoA DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY
ACADSB, 1228G-A, EX10DEL

Andresen et al. (2000) identified homozygosity for a 1228G-A mutation in
the ACADSB gene, causing skipping of exon 10, in a patient with
methylbutyryl glycinuria (610006). The patient was a 3-year-old boy, the
son of first-cousin parents from Pakistan. During his second year of
life he became increasingly floppy, with retarded motor development,
generalized muscular atrophy, and strabismus. At age 3 years he was able
to walk with support. Although both parents and 2 sibs were
asymptomatic, the mother was shown also to excrete 2-methylbutyryl
glycine.

.0002
2-@METHYLBUTYRYL-CoA DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY
ACADSB, LEU222PHE

In a male infant born of a northern European mother and Eritrean father,
Gibson et al. (2000) observed an isolated increase in 2-methylbutyryl
glycine and 2-methylbutyryl carnitine in blood and urine (610006). An
isolated block in 2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase was demonstrated in
cultured fibroblasts. The DNA sequence of ACADSB contained a
heterozygous 768C-T substitution causing a leu222-to-phe (L222F) change
in the protein. Although pregnancy and birth were normal, the infant was
readmitted at age 3 days for poor feeding, lethargy, hypothermia,
hypoglycemia, and episodes of apnea. EEG and MRI of the brain showed
changes. A female fetus in a subsequent pregnancy was found to be
affected.

Madsen et al. (2006) found that the 2 sibs reported by Gibson et al.
(2000) were compound heterozygous for the L222F mutation and a splice
site mutation (600301.0003). Madsen et al. (2006) reported that the
L222F substitution resulted from a 763C-T transition.

.0003
2-@METHYLBUTYRYL-CoA DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY
ACADSB, IVS3DS, A-G, +3

In a boy with 2-methylbutyryl glycinuria (610006), whose parents were
from Somalia, Madsen et al. (2006) identified a homozygous A-to-G
transition in intron 3 of the ACADSB gene, resulting in the skipping of
exon 3 as confirmed by mRNA analysis. The resultant mRNA likely leads to
nonsense-mediated decay, but any residual protein was predicted to lack
vital enzyme activity. Madsen et al. (2006) also identified the splice
site mutation in 2 affected sibs previously reported by Gibson et al.
(2000); see 600301.0002.

.0004
2-@METHYLBUTYRYL-CoA DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY
ACADSB, THR148ILE

In 2 brothers, born of a consanguineous Arab couple from Lebanon, with
2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (610006), Sass et al.
(2008) identified compound heterozygosity for mutation in the ACADSB
gene: a 443C-T transition in exon 4, resulting in a thr148-to-ile
(T148I) substitution, and the E387K mutation (600301.0005). One was
diagnosed via newborn screening, and the other was diagnosed at age 3
years after his brother's diagnosis. Neither patient showed any clinical
abnormalities, and both had normal development, but were lost to
follow-up when the proband was 10 months old. The authors also
identified homozygosity for the T148I mutation in 2 sibs from a
consanguineous Turkish family. Both boys had normal development at age 6
and 7 years, respectively. In vitro studies of patient fibroblasts
confirmed an impairment in isoleucine degradation.

.0005
2-@METHYLBUTYRYL-CoA DEHYDROGENASE DEFICIENCY
ACADSB, GLU387LYS

In a Turkish girl with 2-methylbutyryl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
(610006), Sass et al. (2008) identified a homozygous 1159G-A transition
in exon 10 of the ACADSB gene, resulting in a glu387-to-lys (E387K)
substitution. She showed normal development at age 3 years. The E387K
mutation was found in 2 of 146 Turkish control chromosomes and in 2 of
96 Lebanese control chromosomes, yielding an allelic frequency of about
2% in these populations. In vitro studies of patient fibroblasts
confirmed an impairment in isoleucine degradation.

REFERENCE 1. Andresen, B. S.; Christensen, E.; Corydon, T. J.; Bross, P.; Pilgaard,
B.; Wanders, R. J. A.; Ruiter, J. P. N.; Simonsen, H.; Winter, V.;
Knudsen, I.; Schroeder, L. D.; Gregersen, N.; Skovby, F.: Isolated
2-methylbutyrylglycinuria caused by short/branched-chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency: identification of a new enzyme defect, resolution
of its molecular basis, and evidence for distinct acyl-CoA dehydrogenases
in isoleucine and valine metabolism. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 1095-1103,
2000.

2. Arden, K. C.; Viars, C. S.; Fu, K.; Rozen, R.: Localization of
short/branched chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (ACADSB) to human chromosome
10. Genomics 25: 743-745, 1995.

3. Gibson, K. M.; Burlingame, T. G.; Hogema, B.; Jakobs, C.; Schutgens,
R. B. H.; Millington, D.; Roe, C. R.; Roe, D. S.; Sweetman, L.; Steiner,
R. D.; Linck, L.; Pohowalla, P.; Sacks, M.; Kiss, D.; Rinaldo, P.;
Vockley, J.: 2-Methylbutyryl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency:
a new inborn error of L-isoleucine metabolism. Pediat. Res. 47:
830-833, 2000.

4. Madsen, P. P.; Kibaek, M.; Roca, X.; Sachidanandam, R.; Krainer,
A. R.; Christensen, E.; Steiner, R. D.; Gibson, K. M.; Corydon, T.
J.; Knudsen, I.; Wanders, R. J. A.; Ruiter, J. P. N.; Gregersen, N.;
Andresen, B. S.: Short/branched-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency
due to an IVS3+3A-G mutation that causes exon skipping. Hum. Genet. 118:
680-690, 2006.

5. Rozen, R.; Vockley, J.; Zhou, L.; Milos, R.; Willard, J.; Fu, K.;
Vicanek, C.; Low-Nang, L.; Torban, E.; Fournier, B.: Isolation and
expression of a cDNA encoding the precursor for a novel member (ACADSB)
of the acyl-CoA dehydrogenase gene family. Genomics 24: 280-287,
1994.

6. Sass, J. O.; Ensenauer, R.; Roschinger, W.; Reich, H.; Steuerwald,
U.; Schirrmacher, O.; Engel, K.; Haberle, J.; Andresen, B. S.; Megarbane,
A.; Lehnert, W.; Zschocke, J.: 2-Methylbutyryl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase
deficiency: functional and molecular studies on a defect in isoleucine
catabolism. Molec. Genet. Metab. 93: 30-35, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/19/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/27/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/19/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/14/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/9/1995

EDITED carol: 02/11/2011
wwang: 3/29/2010
ckniffin: 3/19/2010
carol: 4/4/2006
ckniffin: 3/27/2006
alopez: 3/17/2004
carol: 4/30/2002
carol: 12/19/2000
terry: 12/19/2000
carol: 12/14/2000
terry: 12/14/2000
mark: 4/19/1995
carol: 1/9/1995

608937	TITLE *608937 SH2B ADAPTOR PROTEIN 1; SH2B1
;;SH2B, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; SH2B;;
KIAA1299
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human fetal brain
cDNA library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned SH2B, which they designated
KIAA1299. The 5-prime UTR contains several repetitive elements, and the
deduced protein contains 730 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate
to high expression in all fetal and adult tissues and specific brain
regions examined. Highest expression was detected in adult lung and
ovary.

Using N-terminally truncated murine Jak2 (147796) as bait in a yeast
2-hybrid screen of a rat adipocyte cDNA library, Rui et al. (1997)
cloned a splice variant of Sh2b that they designated Sh2b-beta. The
deduced 670-amino acid protein contains an SH2 domain in its C-terminal
half. The rat Sh2b-alpha protein contains 757 amino acids and is
identical to Sh2b-beta through the SH2 domain, but the proteins have
different C termini.

Nelms et al. (1999) cloned a variant of mouse SH2b that they designated
Sh2b-gamma. The deduced 682-amino acid protein differs from Sh2b-alpha
and Sh2b-beta only in the C terminus. Northern blot analysis detected
expression in all mouse tissues examined.

Yousaf et al. (2001) compared the 4 mouse Sh2b splice variants.
Differences arise by alternative splicing of the last exons (exons 7, 8,
and 9), resulting in frameshifts and unique C-terminal sequences after
the last common amino acid, gln631. The alpha, beta, gamma, and delta
isoforms contain 756, 670, 682, and 724 amino acids, respectively, and
have apparent molecular masses of about 90, 80, 80, and 85 kD,
respectively. All 4 variants have proline-rich and serine-rich regions,
as well as a PH domain, an SH2 domain, and numerous potential
phosphorylation target motifs. The unique C-terminal domains of the
alpha, gamma, and delta isoforms contain a proline-rich SH3
domain-interacting site. In addition, the delta isoform has 2 consensus
nuclear localization sequences and a third serine-tryptophan-rich
region. Homologs of all 4 mouse Sh2b isoforms are found in human, with
differences in the C terminus following gln631. RT-PCR detected at least
2 Sh2b variants in all mouse tissues examined. Expression of each
variant was tissue specific, and the variants were usually expressed in
pairs of alpha and delta or beta and gamma.

GENE FUNCTION

Rui et al. (1997) found that the C terminus of rat Sh2b-beta, which
contains the SH2 domain, specifically interacted with kinase-active,
tyrosyl-phosphorylated murine Jak2, but not with kinase-inactive,
unphosphorylated Jak2. In a mouse fibroblast cell line, growth hormone
(GH; 139250) stimulated the interaction of Sh3b-beta with
tyrosyl-phosphorylated Jak2 both in vitro and in vivo. GH promoted a
transient and dose-dependent tyrosyl phosphorylation of Sh2b-beta in the
mouse fibroblasts. Sh2b-beta was also tyrosyl phosphorylated in response
to gamma-interferon (147570), a cytokine that activates JAK2 and JAK1
(147795).

Kong et al. (2002) found that mouse Sh2b-beta interacted with Fgfr3
(134934) through its SH2 domain. SH2b-beta was tyrosine phosphorylated
when coexpressed with activated mutants of Fgfr3, and the extent of
Sh2b-beta phosphorylation correlated with the degree of receptor
activation. Overexpression of Sh2b-beta also increased the
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of Stat5b (604260) by
activated Fgfr3.

Nelms et al. (1999) found that mouse Sh2b-gamma interacted specifically
with insulin receptor (147670). The interaction required phosphorylation
within the triple tyrosine motif of the receptor kinase domain.

Yousaf et al. (2001) found that all 4 Sh2b variants were phosphorylated
on tyrosine specifically in response to IGFI (147440) and PDGF (see
190040) stimulation of a mouse fibroblast cell line. Expression of the
cDNAs caused variant-dependent levels of IGFI- and PDGF-induced
mitogenesis. The most pronounced increase in mitogenesis was
consistently observed for the gamma variant, followed by delta, alpha,
and beta with decreasing responses. The mitogenic response to EGF
(131530) was unaffected.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nelms et al. (1999) determined that the mouse Sh2b gene contains 9
exons. The Sh2b-alpha, -beta, and -gamma splice variants are identical
through exon 6 and most of exon 7, which encodes the core of the SH2
domain. The use of alternate splice sites at the 3-prime end of exon 7
results in the different Sh2b variants.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the SH2B gene
to chromosome 16. By interspecific backcross analysis, Nelms et al.
(1999) mapped the mouse Sh2b gene to the distal arm of chromosome 7.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

SH2B1 is one of the genes disrupted in patients with the 220-kb deletion
of chromosome 16p11.2 (613444). The deletion syndrome is characterized
by obesity and developmental delay.

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the
SH2B1 gene and obesity, see BMIQ16 (see 613444).

ANIMAL MODEL

Ohtsuka et al. (2002) generated Sh2b-null mice. Both male and female
Sh2b -/- mice showed slight retardation in growth and impaired
fertility. Female knockout mice possessed small, anovulatory ovaries
with reduced numbers of follicles, and male Sh2b -/- mice had small
testes with reduced sperm number. Sh2b -/- cumulus cells did not respond
to either follicle-stimulating hormone (see 136530) or IGF1.

Duan et al. (2004) demonstrated that systemic deletion of the mouse Sh2b
gene severely impaired insulin signaling in skeletal muscle, liver, and
fat. Sh2b -/- mice progressively developed hyperinsulinemia,
hyperglycemia, and glucose intolerance. Duan et al. (2004) concluded
that SH2B is a physiologic enhancer of insulin action and is required
for glucose homeostasis during aging.

Ren et al. (2007) generated Sh2b1-knockout mice that developed
hyperlipidemia, leptin (164160) resistance, hyperphagia, obesity,
hyperglycemia, insulin resistance, and glucose intolerance.
Neuron-specific restoration of Sh2b1 corrected the metabolic disorders
in the knockout mice and improved leptin signaling and leptin regulation
of orexigenic neuropeptide expression in the hypothalamus.
Neuron-specific overexpression of Sh2b1 dose-dependently protected
against high fat diet-induced leptin resistance and obesity. Ren et al.
(2007) suggested that neuronal SH2B1 regulates energy balance, body
weight, peripheral insulin sensitivity, and glucose homeostasis at least
in part by enhancing hypothalamic leptin sensitivity.

REFERENCE 1. Duan, C.; Yang, H.; White, M. F.; Rui, L.: Disruption of the SH2-B
gene causes age-dependent insulin resistance and glucose intolerance. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 24: 7435-7443, 2004.

2. Kong, M.; Wang, C. S.; Donoghue, D. J.: Interaction of fibroblast
growth factor receptor 3 and the adapter protein SH2-B: a role in
Stat5 activation. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 15962-15970, 2002.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

4. Nelms, K.; O'Neill, T. J.; Li, S.; Hubbard, S. R.; Gustafson, T.
A.; Paul, W. E.: Alternative splicing, gene localization, and binding
of SH2-B to the insulin receptor kinase domain. Mammalian Genome 10:
1160-1167, 1999.

5. Ohtsuka, S.; Takaki, S.; Iseki, M.; Miyoshi, K.; Nakagata, N.;
Kataoka, Y.; Yoshida, N.; Takatsu, K.; Yoshimura, A.: SH2-B is required
for both male and female reproduction. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 3066-3077,
2002.

6. Ren, D.; Zhou, Y.; Morris, D.; Li, M.; Li, Z.; Rui, L.: Neuronal
SH2B1 is essential for controlling energy and glucose homeostasis. J.
Clin. Invest. 117: 397-406, 2007.

7. Rui, L.; Mathews, L. S.; Hotta, K.; Gustafson, T. A.; Carter-Su,
C.: Identification of SH2-B-beta as a substrate of the tyrosine kinase
JAK2 involved in growth hormone signaling. Molec. Cell. Biol. 17:
6633-6644, 1997.

8. Yousaf, N.; Deng, Y.; Kang, Y.; Riedel, H.: Four PSM/SH2-B alternative
splice variants and their differential roles in mitogenesis. J. Biol.
Chem. 276: 40940-40948, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/15/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/8/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/22/2004

EDITED wwang: 10/18/2010
alopez: 6/15/2010
wwang: 3/16/2007
terry: 3/15/2007
carol: 11/6/2006
mgross: 11/9/2004
terry: 11/8/2004
mgross: 9/22/2004

602214	TITLE *602214 CASEIN KINASE I, GAMMA-2; CSNK1G2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kitabayashi et al. (1997) isolated a clone of immature cDNA encoding
human casein kinase I gamma-2 (CSNK1G2) by screening a human testis cDNA
library with a PCR-amplified probe representing the kinase domain of rat
casein kinase I gamma-2. The predicted amino acid sequence consists of
416 residues, 94% of which are identical to those of the rat homolog.

MAPPING

Kitabayashi et al. (1997) mapped the human CSNK1G2 gene to 19p13.3 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization and PCR analysis of a human/rodent
hybrid cell panel.

REFERENCE 1. Kitabayashi, A. N.; Kusuda, J.; Hirai, M.; Hashimoto, K.: Cloning
and chromosomal mapping of human casein kinase I gamma 2 (CSNK1G2). Genomics 46:
133-137, 1997.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/22/1997

EDITED alopez: 05/03/2010
psherman: 10/25/1999
psherman: 10/22/1999
mark: 12/22/1997

194536	TITLE *194536 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 12; ZNF12
;;KOX3
DESCRIPTION 
MAPPING

Seite et al. (1991) localized 1 member of the human zinc finger Kruppel
family, ZNF12 (KOX3), to chromosome 7p22-p21 by a combination of
analysis of mouse-human somatic cell hybrids and in situ hybridization.
Rousseau-Merck et al. (1993) described pulsed field gel electrophoresis
experiments indicating that ZNF12 and ZNF26 (194537) are within the same
DNA fragment less than 300 kb long.

HISTORY

The control of gene expression in prokaryotes and eukaryotes is
mediated, at least in part, by the binding of regulatory proteins to
specific DNA sequences. Many of these proteins share evolutionarily
conserved DNA binding domains, e.g. homeodomains (Gehring, 1987) or zinc
finger structures (Schuh et al., 1986). These homologies have been used
to clone individual genes of these multigene families from higher
eukaryotic organisms.

REFERENCE 1. Gehring, W. J.: Homeo boxes in the study of development. Science 236:
1245-1252, 1987.

2. Rousseau-Merck, M.-F.; Hillion, J.; Jonveaux, P.; Couillin, P.;
Seite, P.; Thiesen, H.-J.; Berger, R.: Chromosomal localization of
9 KOX zinc finger genes: physical linkages suggest clustering of KOX
genes on chromosomes 12, 16, and 19. Hum. Genet. 92: 583-587, 1993.

3. Schuh, R.; Aicher, W.; Gaul, U.; Cote, S.; Preiss, A.; Maier, D.;
Seifert, E.; Nauber, U.; Schroder, C.; Kemler, R.; Jackle, H.: A
conserved family of nuclear proteins containing structural elements
of the finger protein encoded by Kruppel, a Drosophila segmentation
gene. Cell 47: 1025-1032, 1986.

4. Seite, P.; Huebner, K.; Rousseau-Merck, M. F.; Berger, R.; Thiesen,
H. J.: Two human genes encoding zinc finger proteins, ZNF12 (KOX3)
and ZNF26 (KOX20), map to chromosomes 7p22-p21 and 12q24.33, respectively. Hum.
Genet. 86: 585-590, 1991.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/28/1991

EDITED alopez: 07/07/2010
terry: 3/19/2004
dkim: 6/25/1998
mark: 5/14/1996
carol: 2/24/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 5/28/1991

603762	TITLE *603762 PHOSPHORIBOSYLPYROPHOSPHATE SYNTHETASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; PRPSAP2
;;PAP41
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate (PRPP) is a primary substrate and a critical
control factor for de novo synthesis of purine and pyrimidine
nucleotides, histidine, tryptophan, and NAD. The enzyme PRPP synthetase
(PRPS), which catalyzes the formation of PRPP, exists in an aggregate
composed of 2 catalytic subunits, PRPS I (PRPS1; 311850) and PRPS II
(PRPS2; 311860), and 2 associated subunits, PAP39 (601249) and PAP41. By
searching an EST database for sequences related to PAP39, Katashima et
al. (1998) identified cDNAs encoding PAP41. The predicted 369-amino acid
protein exhibited 72%, 51%, and 50% sequence identity with PAP39, PRPS2,
and PRPS2, respectively. The rat and human PAP41 proteins are 99%
identical. Northern blot analysis revealed that PAP41 is expressed as a
2.1-kb mRNA in several human cell lines.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Katashima et al. (1998) mapped
the PRPSAP2 gene to 17p12-p11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Katashima, R.; Iwahana, H.; Fujimura, M.; Yamaoka, T.; Ishizuka,
T.; Tatibana, M.; Itakura, M.: Molecular cloning of a human cDNA
for the 41-kDa phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase-associated protein. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1396: 245-250, 1998.

2. Katashima, R.; Iwahana, H.; Fujimura, M.; Yamaoka, T.; Itakura,
M.: Assignment of the human phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase-associated
protein 41 gene (PRPSAP2) to 17p11.2-p12. Genomics 54: 180-181,
1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 4/21/1999

EDITED carol: 08/17/2007
alopez: 4/21/1999

603182	TITLE *603182 INTERLEUKIN ENHANCER-BINDING FACTOR 3; ILF3
;;NUCLEAR FACTOR OF ACTIVATED T CELLS, 90-KD; NF90;;
DOUBLE-STRANDED RNA-BINDING PROTEIN, 76-KD; DRBP76;;
M-PHASE PHOSPHOPROTEIN 4; MPP4; MPHOSPH4;;
NUCLEAR FACTOR ASSOCIATED WITH DOUBLE-STRANDED RNA; NFAR
DESCRIPTION For background information, see NF45 (ILF2; 603181).

CLONING

Kao et al. (1994) cloned cDNAs encoding NF45 and NF90. The NF90 gene
encodes a 671-amino acid polypeptide with limited similarity to several
RNA-binding proteins. The NF90 gene also appears to encode an
alternatively spliced 404-amino acid polypeptide, of which the first 394
amino acids are identical to the longer clone. Northern and Western blot
analysis demonstrated NF45 and NF90 expression in several cell types,
including both unstimulated and stimulated Jurkat T cells.

By immunoscreening a HeLa cell cDNA library for phosphoproteins,
Matsumoto-Taniura et al. (1996) isolated a partial cDNA encoding ILF3,
which they termed MPP4. Immunoprecipitation analysis indicated that MPP4
encodes 90- and 110-kD proteins. Immunofluorescence microscopy
demonstrated cytoplasmic expression during M phase and nuclear/nucleolar
expression during interphase.

Patel et al. (1999) purified double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-binding
proteins from HeLa cell extracts and microsequenced a 90-kD protein with
identity to MPP4 in its N terminus. Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen with a
mutant RNA-activated protein kinase (PRKR; 176871) as bait, followed by
RT-PCR, they isolated a full-length cDNA encoding ILF3, which they
called DRBP76. Sequence analysis predicted that the 702-amino acid
protein has a bipartite nuclear localization signal, 2 dsRNA-binding
domains, an RG2 domain, and multiple potential phosphorylation sites.
SDS-PAGE analysis showed expression of a 90-kD protein, larger than the
calculated 76 kD. EMSA analysis confirmed the dsRNA binding activity of
DRBP76. Autoradiographic analysis indicated that DRBP76 is
phosphorylated by PRKR.

Langland et al. (1999) noted that NF90 is primarily localized to
ribosomes.

Saunders et al. (2001) obtained a cDNA encoding DRBP76, which they
termed NFAR1, as well as a variant cDNA encoding a 110-kD, 894-amino
acid protein they designated NFAR2. Sequence analysis showed that the
NFAR proteins share homology with a known PRKR substrate, the
translation initiation factor EIF2S1 (603907). Northern blot analysis
revealed ubiquitous expression of multiple transcripts ranging from 4.0
to 8.0 kb. Immunoblot analysis indicated variable expression with lower
amounts particularly notable in liver and spleen, suggesting
differential regulation at the translational or posttranslational level.
Immunoblot analysis and confocal microscopy demonstrated that PRKR and
both NFAR variants reciprocally coimmunoprecipitate and colocalize in
the nucleus. Immunoprecipitation analysis indicated an association with
spliceosomes.

Viranaicken et al. (2006) identified splice variants of human and mouse
ILF3 that encode long and short isoforms of the ILF3 and NF90 proteins
via inclusion or exclusion of 13 N-terminal residues, respectively.

GENE FUNCTION

Kao et al. (1994) showed that the NF45 and NF90 proteins form an NFAT
DNA-binding activity that is enhanced by T-cell stimulation and
inhibited by cyclosporin A and FK506.

Functional analysis by Saunders et al. (2001) indicated that both NFAR
proteins regulate gene transcription, probably at the level of mRNA
elongation. NFAR2 exhibited potent, constitutive regulatory activity
through its unique C-terminal region, which specifically interacted with
FUS (137070) and SMN1 (600354). Saunders et al. (2001) concluded that
NFARs facilitate dsRNA-regulated gene expression at the level of
posttranscription.

Shim et al. (2002) showed that NF90 binds to a subregion of the 3-prime
untranslated region that contains several AU-rich elements (AREs) and
slows down the degradation of IL2 (147680) mRNA. In nonstimulated cells,
NF90 was mostly nuclear, but T-cell activation resulted in its
accumulation in the cytoplasm. The authors concluded that nuclear export
of NF90 is required for IL2 mRNA stabilization.

Pfeifer et al. (2008) found that NFAR1 and NFAR2 were involved in
retaining cellular transcripts in intranuclear foci and could regulate
mRNA export to the cytoplasm. They also remained associated with
exported ribonucleoprotein complexes. Treatment of HeLa cells with small
interfering RNA to NFAR1 and/or NFAR2 resulted in an increase in protein
synthesis rates, particularly in the presence the mRNA export factors
TAP (NXF1; 602647), p15 (NXT1; 605811), or RAE1 (603343). Depletion of
NFAR in mouse fibroblasts or HeLa cells dramatically increased their
susceptibility to vesicular stomatitis virus or influenza virus,
respectively. Pfeifer et al. (2008) concluded that NFAR1 and NFAR2 are
retained on polyribosomes and act to govern translation rates, and that
they also play a role in innate immune defense to virus infection.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Saunders et al. (2001) determined that the
NFAR gene contains 21 exons and spans 16.2 kb. The 90-kD NFAR1 variant
expresses exon 18, which contains several stop codons that lead to
termination at amino acid 702. The 110-kD NFAR2 variant lacks exon 18
but contains exons 19, 20, and 21.

Viranaicken et al. (2006) identified an additional alternatively spliced
exon within intron 2 of the mouse and human ILF3 genes, increasing the
total number of exons to 22.

MAPPING

Saunders et al. (2001) mapped the NFAR gene to chromosome 19p13 by FISH.

ANIMAL MODEL

Pfeifer et al. (2008) found that mice lacking Nfar died in utero.

REFERENCE 1. Kao, P. N.; Chen, L.; Brock, G.; Ng, J.; Kenny, J.; Smith, A. J.;
Corthesy, B.: Cloning and expression of cyclosporin A- and FK506-sensitive
nuclear factor of activated T-cells: NF45 and NF90. J. Biol. Chem. 269:
20691-20699, 1994.

2. Langland, J. O.; Kao, P. N.; Jacobs, B. L.: Nuclear factor-90
of activated T-cells: a double-stranded RNA-binding protein and substrate
for the double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase, PKR. Biochemistry 38:
6361-6368, 1999.

3. Matsumoto-Taniura, N.; Pirollet, F.; Monroe, R.; Gerace, L.; Westendorf,
J. M.: Identification of novel M phase phosphoproteins by expression
cloning. Molec. Biol. Cell 7: 1455-1469, 1996.

4. Patel, R. C.; Vestal, D. J.; Xu, Z.; Bandyopadhyay, S.; Guo, W.;
Erme, S. M.; Williams, B. R. G.; Sen, G. C.: DRBP76, a double-stranded
RNA-binding nuclear protein, is phosphorylated by the interferon-induced
protein kinase, PKR. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 20432-20437, 1999.

5. Pfeifer, I.; Elsby, R.; Fernandez, M.; Faria, P. A.; Nussenzveig,
D. R.; Lossos, I. S.; Fontoura, B. M. A.; Martin, W. D.; Barber, G.
N.: NFAR-1 and -2 modulate translation and are required for efficient
host defense. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 4173-4178, 2008.

6. Saunders, L. R.; Jurecic, V.; Barber, G. N.: The 90- and 110-kDa
human NFAR proteins are translated from two differentially spliced
mRNAs encoded on chromosome 19p13. Genomics 71: 256-259, 2001.

7. Saunders, L. R.; Perkins, D. J.; Balachandran, S.; Michaels, R.;
Ford, R.; Mayeda, A.; Barber, G. N.: Characterization of two evolutionarily
conserved, alternatively spliced nuclear phosphoproteins, NFAR-1 and
-2, that function in mRNA processing and interact with the double-stranded
RNA-dependent protein kinase, PKR. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 32300-32312,
2001.

8. Shim, J.; Lim, H.; Yates, J. R., III; Karin, M.: Nuclear export
of NF90 is required for interleukin-2 mRNA stabilization. Molec.
Cell 10: 1331-1344, 2002.

9. Viranaicken, W.; Gasmi, L.; Chauvin, C.; Denoulet, P.; Larcher,
J.-C.: Identification of a newly spliced exon in the mouse Ilf3 gene
generating two long and short isoforms of Ilf3 and NF90. Genomics 88:
622-632, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/2/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/8/2006
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/28/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/4/2002

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/22/1998

EDITED mgross: 07/11/2008
mgross: 7/11/2008
terry: 7/2/2008
mgross: 11/28/2006
terry: 11/8/2006
mgross: 4/28/2003
mgross: 3/4/2002
alopez: 10/22/1998

610684	TITLE *610684 C-TERMINAL DOMAIN NUCLEAR ENVELOPE PHOSPHATASE 1; CTDNEP1
;;CTD NUCLEAR ENVELOPE PHOSPHATASE 1;;
DULLARD, XENOPUS, HOMOLOG OF; DULLARD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Satow et al. (2002) cloned Xenopus Dullard and, by database analysis,
identified its human homolog. The deduced 261-amino acid human protein
shares 92% identity with Xenopus Dullard, and both have the conserved
C-terminal domain of NLIIF (CTDSP1; 605323). In Xenopus embryos, Dullard
mRNA localized to the animal hemisphere before the gastrula stage. It
was restricted to the neural region as gastrulation proceeded and
subsequently localized to the neural tissues, branchial arches, and
pronephroi at the tail-bud stages.

GENE FUNCTION

By translational knockdown, Satow et al. (2002) found that Dullard was
involved in neural development in Xenopus embryos. Overexpression of
Dullard led to apoptosis in early Xenopus development.

Satow et al. (2006) found that Dullard negatively regulated BMP (see
BMP1; 112264) signaling by promoting ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal
degradation of BMP receptors (see BMPR2; 600799) in Xenopus. Dullard
phosphatase activity was essential for degradation of BMP receptors and
neural induction in Xenopus.

MAPPING

Hartz (2007) mapped the CTDNEP1 (DULLARD) gene to chromosome 17p13.1
based on an alignment of the CTDNEP1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AJ011916)
with the genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/4/2007.

2. Satow, R.; Chan, T.; Asashima, M.: Molecular cloning and characterization
of dullard: a novel gene required for neural development. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 295: 85-91, 2002.

3. Satow, R.; Kurisaki, A.; Chan, T.; Hamazaki, T. S.; Asashima, M.
: Dullard promotes degradation and dephosphorylation of BMP receptors
and is required for neural induction. Dev. Cell 11: 763-774, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/4/2007

EDITED alopez: 09/21/2012
mgross: 1/4/2007

610589	TITLE *610589 RHO GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN 11A; ARHGAP11A
;;KIAA0013
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated immature myeloid
leukemia cell line cDNA library, Nomura et al. (1994) cloned ARHGAP11A,
which they designated KIAA0013. The cDNA contains a repetitive element
at its 3-prime end, and the deduced 1,023-amino acid protein has a
rhoGAP domain and a putative tyrosine phosphorylation site. Northern
blot analysis detected highest expression in thymus, intermediate
expression in placenta, kidney, testis, and colon, weak expression in
heart, brain, lung, liver, skeletal muscle, pancreas, spleen, ovary,
small intestine, and peripheral blood leukocytes, and none in prostate.

Nomura et al. (1994) presented sequence features, including
hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity and regions of similarity to other known
genes, of genes identified by Nomura et al. (1994).

MAPPING

By PCR of a panel of human-rodent hybrid cell lines, Nomura et al.
(1994) mapped the ARHGAP11A gene to chromosome 15.

REFERENCE 1. Nomura, N.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Kawarabayasi,
Y.; Sato, S.; Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. I. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0001-KIAA0040) deduced by analysis
of randomly sampled cDNA clones from human immature myeloid cell line
KG-1 (Supplement). DNA Res. 1 (Suppl.): 47-56, 1994.

2. Nomura, N.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Kawarabayasi,
Y.; Sato, S.; Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. I. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0001-KIAA0040) deduced by analysis
of randomly samples cDNA clones from human immature myeloid cell line
KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 27-35, 1994. Note: Erratum: DNA Res. 2: 210 only,
1995.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/21/2006

EDITED alopez: 04/30/2013
alopez: 6/27/2007
wwang: 11/21/2006

612169	TITLE *612169 Fc FRAGMENT OF IgG, LOW AFFINITY IIc, RECEPTOR FOR; FCGR2C
;;Fc-GAMMA-RIIC;;
FcRIIC;;
CD32C
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

FCGR2C is 1 of 3 genes that encode isoforms of FCGR2, also known as
CD32, a 40-kD glycoprotein that binds IgG with low affinity. FCGR2 is
widely distributed, being expressed on myeloid and lymphoid cells, as
well as nonhematopoietic cells. The FCGR2 isoforms exhibit differences
in ligand binding specificities, and triggering through different
isoforms results in distinct functions. FCGR2C is expressed on
monocytes, macrophages, and polymorphonuclear cells, and it appears to
be the only FCGR2 isoform expressed on natural killer (NK) cells. Due to
an allelic polymorphism, most individuals lack FCGR2C expression,
although some express high levels of FCGR2C capable of triggering
cytotoxicity by NK cells (Metes et al., 1998).

CLONING

Using mouse Fcgr2b2 to probe a placenta cDNA library, Stuart et al.
(1989) cloned human FCGR2C, which they termed FcRIIC. The predicted
323-amino acid protein has an N-terminal signal sequence, followed by a
175-amino acid ectodomain, a transmembrane segment, and a hydrophilic
44-amino acid cytoplasmic domain. The ectodomain of FCGR2C, which
contains evenly spaced cys residues and 3 potential N-glycosylation
sites, is identical to that of FCGR2B (604590) and highly similar to
that of FCGR2A (146790). In contrast, the cytoplasmic domain of FCGR2C
shares little sequence similarity with those of FCGR2A and FCGR2B.
Northern blot analysis detected expression of 2.5- and 1.6-kb FCGR2C
transcripts in macrophages, B cells, and trophoblasts, but not in
fibroblasts or T cells. Immunofluorescence microscopy of transfected
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells showed surface expression of FCGR2C.

By RT-PCR of resting and IL2 (147680)-activated NK cells, Metes et al.
(1998) isolated full-length FCGR2C and 3 FCGR2C splice variants. Two of
the variants encode proteins with truncated cytoplasmic tails, and the
third encodes a putative soluble protein truncated prior to the
transmembrane region. Flow cytometric and immunoprecipitation analyses
showed surface expression of a 40-kD FCGR2C protein on purified NK
cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Metes et al. (1998) determined that the FCGR2C gene contains 7 exons.

MAPPING

Using a BAC library, Su et al. (2002) determined that the FCGR2C gene
maps to chromosome 1q23, telomeric to the FCGR3A gene (146740) and
centromeric to the FCGR3B gene (610665).

GENE FUNCTION

By immunofluorescence analysis of transfected CHO cells, Stuart et al.
(1989) showed that FCGR2C bound heat-aggregated human IgG, but not human
myeloma IgA.

Metes et al. (1998) showed that NK cells expressing FCGR2C mediated
reverse antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity.

Breunis et al. (2008) found that, in individuals with a functional
FCGR2C (see MOLECULAR GENETICS), expression of FCGR2C on phagocytes and
NK cells enhanced effector function toward antibody-coated targets.
FCGR2C function was further enhanced under inflammatory conditions,
i.e., in the presence of IL15 (600554) or GMCSF (CSF2; 138960).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Metes et al. (1998) identified an allelic polymorphism within exon 3 of
FCGR2C that resulted in either a functional ORF containing gln13 or a
null allele containing a stop codon at position 13. They found that an
individual homozygous for the ORF allele exhibited a high level of
functional FCGR2C expression on NK cells, whereas an individual
homozygous for the null allele lacked FCGR2C expression on NK cells.
Distribution of the 4 FCGR2C isoforms on NK cells also appeared to be
donor dependent.

Su et al. (2002) found that the FCGR2C functional allele (202C) and the
FCGR2C null allele (202T) had frequencies of 0.12 and 0.88,
respectively, among 73 normal individuals.

Using an FCGR-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
assay, Breunis et al. (2008) demonstrated extensive variation in the
FCGR2 and FCGR3 gene clusters, including copy number variation in
FCGR2C. They found that 82% of a white control population had only the
FCGR2C null allele, resulting in the presence of a pseudogene, while the
remaining 18% had at least 1 ORF allele and expressed a functionally
activating FCGR2C on their immune cells. The FCGR2C ORF allele was
significantly overrepresented in patients with immune idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP; 188030), with 34% of ITP patients having
at least 1 ORF allele.

Mueller et al. (2013) found that the increased risk of SLE associated
with reduced copy number of FCGR3B (610665) can be explained by the
presence of a chimeric gene, FCGR2B-prime, that occurs as a consequence
of FCGR3B deletion on FCGR3B zero-copy haplotypes. The FCGR2B-prime gene
consists of upstream elements and a 5-prime coding region that derive
from FCGR2C, and a 3-prime coding region that derives from FCGR2B
(604590). The coding sequence of FCGR2B-prime is identical to that of
FCGR2B, but FCGR2B-prime would be expected to be under the control of
5-prime flanking sequences derived from FCGR2C. Mueller et al. (2013)
found by flow cytometry, immunoblotting, and cDNA sequencing that
presence of the chimeric FCGR2B-prime gene results in the ectopic
presence of Fc-gamma-RIIb on NK cells, providing an explanation for SLE
risk associated with reduced FCGR3B copy number. To pursue the
underlying mechanism of SLE disease association with FCGR3B copy number
variation, Mueller et al. (2013) aligned the reference sequence (GRCh37)
of the proximal block of the FCGR locus (chr1:161,480,906-161,564,008)
to that of the distal block (chr1:161,562,570-161,645,839).
Identification of informative paralogous sequence variants (PSVs)
enabled Mueller et al. (2013) to narrow the potential breakpoint region
to a 24.5-kb region of paralogy between then 2 ancestral duplicated
blocks. The complete absence of nonpolymorphic PSVs in the 24.5-kb
region prevented more precise localization of the breakpoints in
FCGR3B-deleted or FCGR3B-duplicated haplotypes.

EVOLUTION

By determining the nature and rate of copy number variation (CNV)
mutation and investigating the global variation of disease-associated
variation at the FCGR locus, Machado et al. (2012) determined that CNV
of the FCGR3 genes is mediated by recurrent nonallelic homologous
recombination between the 2 segmental duplications that carry FCGR3A and
FCGR3B. They showed that pathogen richness, particularly helminth
pathogens, is likely to have influenced the patterns of variation in
FCGRs in humans. Machado et al. (2012) proposed that alterations to IgG
binding in the context of helminth infection have driven positive
selection in FCGR among different mammalian species, linking
evolutionary pressure of helminth infection with autoimmune disease via
adaptation at the genetic level. This model supports the 'hygiene
hypothesis,' which states that in the absence of chronic helminth
infection in modern populations, previously selected alleles respond to
immune system challenges differently and therefore may alter
susceptibility to autoimmune disease.

REFERENCE 1. Breunis, W. B.; van Mirre, E.; Bruin, M.; Geissler, J.; de Boer,
M.; Peters, M.; Roos, D.; de Haas, M.; Koene, H. R.; Kuijpers, T.
W.: Copy number variation of the activating FCGR2C gene predisposes
to idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. Blood 111: 1029-1038, 2008.

2. Machado, L. R.; Hardwick, R. J.; Bowdrey, J.; Bogle, H.; Knowles,
T. J.; Sironi, M.; Hollox, E. J.: Evolutionary history of copy-number-variable
locus for the low-affinity Fc-gamma receptor: mutation rate, autoimmune
disease, and the legacy of helminth infection. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90:
973-985, 2012.

3. Metes, D.; Ernst, L. K.; Chambers, W. H.; Sulica, A.; Herberman,
R. B.; Morel, P. A.: Expression of functional CD32 molecules on human
NK cells is determined by an allelic polymorphism of the Fc-gamma-RIIC
gene. Blood 91: 2369-2380, 1998.

4. Mueller, M.; Barros, P.; Witherden, A. S.; Roberts, A. L.; Zhang,
Z.; Schaschl, H.; Yu, C.-Y.; Hurles, M. E.; Schaffner, C.; Floto,
R. A.; Game, L.; Steinberg, K. M.; Wilson, R. K.; Graves, T. A.; Eichler,
E. E.; Cook, H. T.; Vyse, T. J.; Aitman, T. J.: Genomic pathology
of SLE-associated copy-number variation at the FCGR2C/FCGR3B/FCGR2B
locus. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92: 28-40, 2013.

5. Stuart, S. G.; Simister, N. E.; Clarkson, S. B.; Kacinski, B. M.;
Shapiro, M.; Mellman, I.: Human IgG Fc receptor (hFcRII; CD32) exists
as multiple isoforms in macrophages, lymphocytes and IgG-transporting
placental epithelium. EMBO J. 8: 3657-3666, 1989.

6. Su, K.; Wu, J.; Edberg, J. C.; McKenzie, S. E.; Kimberly, R. P.
: Genomic organization of classical human low-affinity Fc-gamma receptor
genes. Genes Immunity 3: S51-S56, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/27/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/26/2012

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/11/2008

EDITED alopez: 02/27/2013
alopez: 2/27/2013
mgross: 7/30/2012
terry: 7/26/2012
carol: 7/31/2008
mgross: 7/14/2008
mgross: 7/11/2008

607583	TITLE *607583 PEROXISOME BIOGENESIS FACTOR 11G; PEX11G
;;PEX11-GAMMA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By genomic sequence analysis and EST database searching using PEX11B
(603867) as query, Li et al. (2002) identified PEX11G and obtained the
full-length human and mouse cDNAs. Both human and mouse PEX11G contain
241 amino acids. Phylogenic analysis determined that PEX11G represents a
subfamily of PEX11 proteins distinct from the branch that includes
PEX11A (603866) and PEX11B. Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues
detected tissue-specific expression, with high levels in liver and much
lower levels in other tissues. Pex11g expression was below the level of
detection in mouse fibroblasts. Transfection of epitope-tagged PEX11G
into a human fibroblast cell line revealed colocalization with PEX14
(601791), a peroxisome marker protein. Analysis of PEX11G domains
detected in permeabilized cells suggested that PEX11G is a peroxisomal
membrane protein with both the N and C termini exposed to the cytoplasm.

Using homology with PEX11A, Tanaka et al. (2003) identified PEX11G. They
cloned the full-length PEX11G cDNA by RT-PCR of fibroblasts from a
patient with peroxisome biogenesis disorder, complementation group 11
(601757). The deduced 241-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular
mass of about 27 kD. PEX11G contains 2 membrane-spanning segments. By
differential permeabilization, Tanaka et al. (2003) confirmed that the N
and C termini of PEX11G are exposed to the cytosol.

GENE FUNCTION

Li et al. (2002) found that Pex11g expression in mouse liver was not
induced by ciprofibrate, and no change in Pex11g expression was detected
in cells lacking either Pex11a or Pex11b. Overexpression of PEX11G did
not increase peroxisome abundance, but induced tubulation, enlargement,
and clustering of peroxisomes.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Tanaka et al. (2003) mapped the PEX11G
gene to chromosome 19p13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Li, X.; Baumgart, E.; Dong, G.-X.; Morrell, J. C.; Jimenez-Sanchez,
G.; Valle, D.; Smith, K. D.; Gould, S. J.: PEX11-alpha is required
for peroxisome proliferation in response to 4-phenylbutyrate but is
dispensable for peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha-mediated
peroxisome proliferation. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 8226-8240, 2002.

2. Tanaka, A.; Okumoto, K.; Fujiki, Y.: cDNA cloning and characterization
of the third isoform of human peroxin Pex11p. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 300: 819-823, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/26/2003

EDITED alopez: 06/18/2007
mgross: 2/26/2003

601021	TITLE *601021 NUCLEOPORIN, 98-KD; NUP98
NUP98-NUP96 PRECURSOR PROTEIN, INCLUDED;;
NUCLEOPORIN, 96-KD, INCLUDED; NUP96, INCLUDED;;
NUP98/NSD1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
NUP98/NSD3 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
NUP98/PMX1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
NUP98/HOXA9 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
NUP98/TOP1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
NUP98/DDX10 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
NUP98/HOXD11 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
NUP98/HOXC13 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
NUP98/ADD3 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
NUP98/SETBP1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
NUB98/PHF23 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
NUB98/RARG FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
NUP98/CCDC28A FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

In eukaryotic cells, the nucleus is spatially and functionally separated
from the cytoplasm by the nuclear envelope. All molecular transport
across the nuclear envelope takes place exclusively through the nuclear
pore. Small molecules, such as ions and polypeptides smaller than
approximately 40 kD, pass freely through the nuclear pore, but larger
molecules require a carrier protein. The nuclear pore is formed by the
nuclear pore complex (NPC), an 8-fold symmetrical structure composed of
multiple copies of about 30 different proteins called nucleoporins. The
NUP98 gene encodes a NUP98-NUP96 precursor protein that is cleaved by
its own peptidase activity to produce 2 distinct nucleoporins, NUP98 and
NUP96. Alternative splicing also generates NUP98 transcripts that encode
NUP98, but not NUP96. NUP98 is a peripheral nucleoporin located at both
the cytoplasmic and nuclear sides of the central channel of the NPC. It
contains a characteristic gly-leu-phe-gly (GFLG) repeat region that
contributes to nuclear-cytoplasmic trafficking, including mRNA export.
NUP98 also plays roles in gene expression, mitotic checkpoint, and
pathogenesis. NUP96 is a scaffold component of the NPC (review by
Iwamoto et al., 2010).

CLONING

Fontoura et al. (1999) identified NUP96 as a nucleoporin with a
predicted molecular mass of 96 kD. NUP96 is generated through an unusual
biogenesis pathway that involves synthesis of a 186-kD precursor
protein. Proteolytic cleavage of the precursor yields 2 nucleoporins:
NUP98 and NUP96. NUP96 is proteolytically cleaved in vivo. NUP96 is
localized to the nucleoplasmic side of the NPC at or near the
nucleoplasmic basket. The correct targeting of both NUP96 and NUP98 to
the nucleoplasmic side of the NPC was found to be dependent on
proteolytic cleavage, suggesting that the cleavage process may regulate
NPC assembly.

In their review, Iwamoto et al. (2010) noted that alternative splicing
produces 4 human NUP98 variants. Variants 1 and 4 are generated by
alternative splicing in exon 20 and are translated into the NUP98-NUP96
precursor protein. Variants 2 and 3 are generated without splicing in
exon 20 and are translated into NUP98 connected to a 57-amino acid
polypeptide tail that is removed from NUP98 by autocleavage. Variants 1
and 4 differ from one another due to alternative splicing in exon 29,
and variants 2 and 3 differ from one another due to alternative splicing
in exon 10.

MAPPING

Nakamura et al. (1996) mapped the NUP98 gene to 11p15 by analysis of a
panel of somatic cell hybrids and by pulsed field gel electrophoresis.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunogold electron microscopy, Radu et al. (1995) localized the
NUP98 protein to the nucleoplasmic side of the nuclear pore. Nakamura et
al. (1996) stated that ligand blot analysis suggested that NUP98
functions as a docking protein for cytosol-mediated docking of import
substrates. The docking function has been localized to the N-terminal
half of NUP98, the part of NUP98 that is retained in the NUP98/HOXA9
fusion (Radu et al., 1995).

Rosenblum and Blobel (1999) determined that no protease is involved in
the processing of the NUP98-NUP96 precursor, but the molecule
specifically cleaves itself between phe863 and ser864. The 2 fragments
then form a low-affinity complex.

Von Kobbe et al. (2000) demonstrated that NUP98 is a target of the
vesicular stomatitis virus M protein-mediated inhibition of mRNA nuclear
export.

Enninga et al. (2002) demonstrated that NUP98 and NUP96 are upregulated
by interferon. M protein-mediated inhibition of mRNA nuclear export was
reversed when cells were treated with interferon-gamma (IFNG; 147570) or
transfected with a cDNA encoding NUP98 and NUP96. Enninga et al. (2002)
concluded that increased NUP98 and NUP96 expression constitutes an
IFN-mediated mechanism that reverses M protein-mediated inhibition of
gene expression.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Enninga et al. (2003) determined that
SEC13L1 (600152) and an N-terminal region of NUP96 interact. By mutation
analysis, they determined that the WD repeat region of SEC13L1 and
residues 201 to 378 of NUP96 were required for the interaction. SEC13L1
did not bind NUP98. During mitosis, SEC13L1 was dispersed throughout the
cell, whereas a pool of NUP96 colocalized with the spindle apparatus.

Jeganathan et al. (2005) showed that in mitosis, timely destruction of
securin (604147) by the anaphase-promoting complex (APC) is regulated by
the nucleocytoplasmic transport factors Rae1 (603343) and Nup98. They
showed that combined haploinsufficiency for Rae1 and Nup98 in mice
results in premature separation of sister chromatids, severe aneuploidy,
and untimely degradation of securin. They also determined that Rae1 and
Nup98 form a complex with cadherin-1 (Cdh1; 192090)-activated APC,
APC(Cdh1), in early mitosis and specifically inhibit APC(Cdh1)-mediated
ubiquitination of securin. Dissociation of Rae1 and Nup98 from APC(Cdh1)
coincides with the release of the mitotic checkpoint protein BubR1
(602860) from Cdc20 (603618)-activated APC at the metaphase to anaphase
transition. Jeganathan et al. (2005) concluded that together, their
results suggest that Rae1 and Nup98 are temporal regulators of APC(Cdh1)
that maintain euploidy by preventing unscheduled degradation of securin.

Wang et al. (2009) reported that fusing an histone H3 lysine-4
trimethylation (H3K4me3)-binding PHD finger, such as the C-terminal PHD
finger of PHF23 (612910) or JARID1A (180202), to a common fusion partner
NUP98, as identified in human leukemias (Reader et al., 2007; van Zutven
et al., 2006), generated potent oncoproteins that arrested hematopoietic
differentiation and induced acute myeloid leukemia in murine models. In
these processes, a PHD finger that specifically recognizes H3K4me3/2
marks was essential for leukemogenesis. Mutations in PHD fingers that
abrogated H3K4me3 binding also abolished leukemic transformation.
NUP98-PHD fusion prevented the differentiation-associated removal of
H3K4me3 at many loci encoding lineage-specific transcription factors
such as Hox(s) (see 142950), Gata3 (131320), Meis1 (601739), Eya1
(601653), and Pbx1 (176310), and enforced their active gene
transcription in murine hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells.
Mechanistically, NUP98-PHD fusions act as 'chromatin boundary factors,'
dominating over polycomb-mediated gene silencing to 'lock'
developmentally critical loci into an active chromatin state (H3K4me3
with induced histone acetylation), a state that defined leukemia stem
cells. Wang et al. (2009) concluded that their studies represented the
first report that deregulation of the PHD finger, an effector of
specific histone modification, perturbs the epigenetic dynamics on
developmentally critical loci, leading to catastrophic cell fate
decision making and oncogenesis during mammalian development.

Rapid disassembly of the NPC during mitotic entry requires the master
mitotic kinase CDK1 (116940) and involves phosphorylation of many
nucleoporins. Laurell et al. (2011) identified phosphorylation of NUP98
as an early and crucial step during NPC disassembly in HeLa cells.
Recombinant NUP98 was hyperphosphorylated by PLK1 (602098), NEK6
(604884), and other NEK family members in vitro. Mass spectrometric
analysis revealed that NUP98 was phosphorylated on ser591 and ser822 by
NEK6 and on thr529, thr536, ser595, ser606, and thr653 by CDK1.
Phosphomimetic mutants of NUP98 localized to the cytoplasm instead of
NPCs. Conversely, phosphodeficient NUP98 mutants significantly delayed
NPC disassembly and loss of the nuclear envelope permeability barrier.
Laurell et al. (2011) concluded that NUP98 phosphorylation is critical
for NPC disassembly at the onset of mitosis.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Hodel et al. (2002) reported that the 3-dimensional structure of the
C-terminal domain of NUP98 revealed a novel protein fold, and thus a new
class of autocatalytic proteases. The structure further indicated that
the nucleoporin RNA-binding motif is unlikely to bind to RNA. The C
terminus was found to contain sequences that target NUP98 to the nuclear
pore complex. Noncovalent interactions between the C-terminal domain and
the cleaved peptide tail were visible and suggested a model for
cleavage-dependent targeting of NUP98 to the nuclear pore.

CYTOGENETICS

Lam and Aplan (2001) reviewed gene fusions involving NUP98. The NUP98
gene is fused to 1 of a considerable number of other genes in various
hematologic malignancies as a consequence of chromosomal translocation.
The common theme in all NUP98 chimeras is a transcript consisting of the
5-prime part of NUP98 and the 3-prime portion of the partner gene.
However, apart from the frequent fusion to different homeobox genes,
there is no apparent similarity among the other partners.

Nakamura et al. (1996) showed that in 3 patients with t(7;11), the
chromosome rearrangement created a genomic fusion between the HOXA9 gene
(142956) and the nucleoporin gene NUP98 on 11p15. Expression of Hoxa7
and Hoxa9 is activated by proviral integration in BXH2 murine myeloid
leukemias; this result, combined with the mapping of the HOXA cluster to
7p15, suggested that one of the HOXA genes may be involved in the human
t(7;11)(p15;p15) translocation found in some myeloid leukemia patients.
The translocation produced an invariant chimeric NUP98/HOXA9 transcript
containing the amino terminal half of NUP98 fused in-frame to HOXA9.
These studies identified HOXA9 as an important human myeloid leukemia
gene and suggested an important role for nucleoporins in human myeloid
leukemia, given that a second nucleoporin, NUP214 (114350), had also
been implicated in human myeloid leukemia. The 11p15 gene was identified
by exon trapping experiments.

Borrow et al. (1996) likewise identified the HOXA9 and NUP98 genes as
the parents of the fusion in t(7;11)(p15;p15) in acute myeloid leukemia
of the FABM2 and M4 types. Borrow et al. (1996) suggested that the
predicted NUP98/HOXA9 fusion protein may promote leukemogenesis through
inhibition of HOXA9-mediated terminal differentiation and/or aberrant
nucleocytoplasmic transport.

Hussey et al. (1999) identified the breakpoint genes of the
translocation t(4;11)(q21;p15) that occurred in a case of adult T-cell
acute lymphocytic leukemia (T-ALL). By analysis of somatic cell hybrids,
they showed that the chromosome 11 breakpoint occurred within the NUP98
gene, which is rearranged in several acute myeloid leukemia
translocations. Using 3-prime RACE, Hussey et al. (1999) identified the
fusion partner of NUP98 as RAP1GDS1 (179502). This was the first report
of the involvement of RAP1GDS1 in any malignancy. The product of the
RAP1GDS1 gene, usually referred to as smgGDS, has guanine nucleotide
exchange factor activity (Mizuno et al., 1991). In the fusion
transcript, which the authors referred to as NRG, the 5-prime end of the
NUP98 gene was joined in-frame to the coding region of the RAP1GDS1
gene. This joined the FG repeat-rich region of NUP98 to RAP1GDS1, which
largely consists of tandem armadillo repeats. Hussey et al. (1999) found
that the NRG fusion maintained the reading frame of RAP1GDS1. The
RAP1GDS1 sequence in NRG started at nucleotide 5 of the coding sequence.
The methionine and the first G of the codon for aspartic acid were lost.
However, the first aspartic acid was retained in the fusion protein,
because the last base of NUP98 exon B is a G. Hussey et al. (1999)
showed that this translocation is recurrent in T-ALL.

Nakamura et al. (1999) studied a translocation fusion gene in acute
myelogenous leukemia in which the promoter of the nucleoporin gene on
11p15 was fused to the DNA-binding domain of PRRX1 (167420).

Jaju et al. (1999) identified a recurrent cryptic translocation,
t(5;11)(q35;p15.5), associated with a deletion of the long arm of
chromosome 5 in de novo childhood acute myeloid leukemia (AML; see
601626). Jaju et al. (2001) confirmed that the chromosome 11 breakpoint
gene is NUP98 and cloned the chromosome 5 fusion partner, NSD1 (606681).
Nucleotide 1552 of NUP98 was fused in-frame to nucleotide 3504 of NSD1.

Constitutive activation of tyrosine kinases, such as the BCR/ABL
(151410, 189980) fusion associated with t(9;22)(q34;q22), is a hallmark
of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML; 608232) in humans. Expression of
BCR/ABL is both necessary and sufficient to cause a chronic
myeloproliferative syndrome in murine bone marrow transplantation
models, and depends absolutely on kinase activity. Progression of CML to
acute leukemia (blast crisis) in humans had been associated with
acquisition of secondary chromosomal translocations, including the
t(7;11)(p15;p15) resulting in the NUP98/HOXA9 fusion protein. Dash et
al. (2002) demonstrated that BCR/ABL cooperates with NUP98/HOXA9 to
cause blast crisis in the murine model. The phenotype depends on
expression of both BCR/ABL and NUP98/HOXA9, but tumors retain
sensitivity to the ABL inhibitor STI571 in vitro and in vivo. This
paradigm is applicable to other constitutively activated tyrosine
kinases such as TEL/PDGFRB (600618, 173410). The experiments of Dash et
al. (2002) documented cooperative effects between constitutively
activated tyrosine kinases, which confer proliferative and survival
properties to hematopoietic cells, with mutations that impair
differentiation, such as the NUP98/HOXA9 fusion, giving rise to the
acute myeloid leukemia phenotype. Furthermore, these data indicated that
despite acquisition of additional mutations, CML blast crisis cells
retain their dependence on BCR/ABL for proliferation and survival.

Rosati et al. (2002) reported a fusion between the NUP98 and NSD3
(607083) genes in a patient with acute myeloid leukemia associated with
t(8;11)(p11.2;p15). Hitherto, acute myeloid leukemia had been reported
with translocations creating chimeric genes between NUP98 and PMX1
(PRRX1), HOXD13 (142989), NSD1, HOXA9, LEDGF, DDX10 (601235), and TOP1
(126420). In patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and
t(4;11)(q21;p21), fusion of the NUP98 gene to the RAP1GDS1 gene had been
observed (Hussey et al., 1999).

Arai et al. (1997) showed that the recurrent chromosome abnormality
inv(11)(p15q22), which is associated with de novo and therapy-related
myeloid malignancies, results in fusion of the nucleoporin gene NUP98
with DDX10. In DDX10 and NUP98, the inv(11) breakpoints occurred within
2 introns of each gene, and the 2 genes merged in-frame to produce the
chimeric transcripts characteristic of this translocation. Although 2
reciprocal chimeric products, NUP98-DDX10 and DDX10-NUP98, were
predicted, only NUP98-DDX10 appeared to be implicated in tumorigenesis.
DDX10 is involved in ribosome assembly, and NUP98 is a nuclear pore
complex protein and a target of other chromosomal translocations found
in AML. Arai et al. (1997) predicted the NUP98-DDX10 fusion protein may
promote leukemogenesis through aberrant nucleoplasmic transport of mRNA
or alterations in ribosome assembly.

Ahuja et al. (1999) cloned and characterized a t(11;20)(p15;q11)
translocation from patients with therapy-related AML and therapy-related
myelodysplastic syndromes. They found that the breakpoint on 11p15
targets the NUP98 gene and results in the separation of the N-terminal
FXFG repeats from the RNA-binding domain located in the C terminus. The
breakpoint on 20q11 occurred within the TOP1 gene. As a result, a
chimeric mRNA encoding the NUP98 FXFG repeats fused to the body of TOP1.
Ahuja et al. (1999) concluded that NUP98 is a recurrent target in
therapy-related malignancies and that TOP1 is a previously unrecognized
target for chromosomal translocations.

Taketani et al. (2002) found that in the t(2;11)(q31;p15) translocation
2 alternatively spliced 5-prime NUP98 transcripts were fused in-frame to
the HOXD11 gene (142986). The NUP98/HOXD fusion genes encode similar
fusion proteins, suggesting that NUP98/HOXD11 and NUP98/HOXD13 fusion
proteins play a role in leukemogenesis through similar mechanisms.

The NUP98 gene had been found at the breakpoints of several distinct
chromosomal translocations in patients with both de novo and
therapy-related myelodysplastic syndromes and AML. Using combined
cytogenetic and molecular analyses, Ahuja et al. (2001) found
rearrangements of the NUP98 gene in the leukemic cells of 2 patients
with Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML during disease evolution.
Analysis of the t(7;11)(p15;p15) translocation from 1 of the patients
showed an in-frame NUP98/HOXA9 fusion. The fusion points were similar to
those previously reported from patients with myelodysplastic syndromes
or AML. The results indicated that the NUP98 gene is an additional,
albeit infrequent, genetic target during clonal evolution of CML.

Panagopoulos et al. (2003) reported a patient with de novo AML with a
t(11;12)(p15;q13) translocation resulting in a novel NUP98/HOXC13
(142976) fusion gene. FISH analyses showed a fusion signal on the
derivative chromosome 11, indicating a NUP98/HOXC chimera, whereas no
fusion was found on the derivative chromosome 12, suggesting that the
reciprocal fusion gene was deleted. Thus, NUP98/HOXC13 is of
pathogenetic importance in t(11;12)-positive AML.

Lahortiga et al. (2003) noted that the NUP98 gene had been reported to
be fused to 13 partner genes in hematologic malignancies with 11p15
translocations. Twelve of the 13 had been identified in patients with
myeloid neoplasias and only 1, RAP1GDS1, was fused with NUP98 in 5
patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Three of these
patients coexpressed T cell and myeloid markers, suggesting a specific
association of RAP1GDS1 fusion with a subset of T-ALL originated from an
early progenitor, which has a potential to express mature T-cell
antigens as well as myeloid markers. Lahortiga et al. (2003) described a
new NUP98 partner involved in a t(10;11)(q25;p15) in a patient with
acute biphenotypic leukemia, showing coexpression of mature T cell and
myeloid markers. The gene involved, located at 10q25, was identified as
adducin-3 (ADD3; 601568) using 3-prime RACE. ADD3 codes for the
ubiquitously expressed subunit gamma of the adducin protein and it seems
to play an important role in the skeletal organization of the cell
membrane. Both NUP98/ADD3 and ADD3/NUP98 fusion transcription were
expressed in the patient. Adducin shares with the product of RAP1GDS1,
and with all of the nonhomeobox NUP98 partners, the presence of a region
with significant probability of adopting a coiled-coil conformation.
This region is always retained in the fusion transcript with the NH2
terminus FG repeats of NUP98, suggesting an important role in the
mechanism of leukemogenesis.

Panagopoulos et al. (2006) reported the case of a fourth NUP98 chimera
in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia; a t(11;18)(p15;q12) resulted in
a novel NUP98 fusion. They found that exon 12 of NUP98 was fused
in-frame with exon 5 SETBP1. Nested PCR did not amplify the reciprocal
SETBP1/NUP98, suggesting that the NUP98/SETBP1 transcript is
pathogenetically important.

In a 42-year-old man with AML, Reader et al. (2007) identified a cryptic
translocation, t(11;17)(p15;p13), that resulted in in-frame fusion of
exon 13 of NUP98 to exon 4 of PHF23 (612910). The deduced chimeric
protein contains the N-terminal half of NUP98 fused to the C-terminal
functional domains of PHF23.

Such et al. (2011) identified a NUP98/RARG (180190) fusion gene
resulting from a t(11;12)(p15;p13) translocation in bone marrow cells
derived from a 35-year-old man with AML that had morphologic and
immunophenotypic features of the hypergranular subtype of acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL; 612376). Sequence analysis determined that
NUP98 exon 12 was fused in-frame to RARG exon 4, predicted to encode an
862-residue protein with aberrant RARG receptor function. The patient
was treated with standard chemotherapy and bone marrow transplantation;
response to ATRA was not assessed.

Tosi et al. (2005) identified a translocation, t(6;11)(q24.1;p15.5), in
a patient with acute megakaryoblastic leukemia. RT-PCR and sequencing
revealed a transcript that contained exon 13 of NUP98 fused in-frame
with exon 2 of C6ORF80 (CCDC28A; 615353). The reciprocal fusion
transcript was not detected.

Petit et al. (2012) found that the NUP98-CCDC28A transcript contains
1,833 nucleotides of NUP98 fused in-frame to nucleotide 384 of CDCD28A.
The resultant 712-amino acid protein contains the N-terminal
transactivating GLFG repeats of NUP98 fused to CCDC28A beginning at
amino acid 77 and including its C-terminal coiled-coil domain. The
fusion protein was expressed in the nucleus following transfection of
primary mouse bone marrow cells. Immortalized mouse cells expressing
human NUP98-CCDC28A exhibited myeloblast morphology, proliferated in a
cytokine-independent manner, and caused fatal myeloproliferative
neoplasms in transplanted mice, with selective expansion of
granulocyte-macrophage progenitors in bone marrow.

ANIMAL MODEL

Iwasaki et al. (2005) generated transgenic mice in which the NUP98/HOXA9
fusion gene was specifically expressed in the myeloid lineage under the
control of the cathepsin G promoter. Approximately 20% of the transgenic
mice developed acute myeloid leukemia after a long latency period. When
NUP98/HOXA9 was introduced into the sensitive BXH2 mouse strain, it
promoted onset of retrovirus-induced myeloid leukemia. By examining
common retrovirus integration sites in these mice, Iwasaki et al. (2005)
found that Meis1 (601739), Dnalc4 (610565), Fcgr2b (604590), Fcrl
(606891), and Con1 cooperated with NUP98/HOXA9 in promoting the
development of myeloid leukemias. Using a transformation assay with
mouse NIH3T3 cells, Iwasaki et al. (2005) confirmed that these genes
cooperated with NUP98/HOXA9 in inducing the transformed phenotype,
although none alone were transforming.

REFERENCE 1. Ahuja, H. G.; Felix, C. A.; Aplan, P. D.: The t(11;20)(p15;q11)
chromosomal translocation associated with therapy-related myelodysplastic
syndrome results in an NUP98-TOP1 fusion. Blood 94: 3258-3261, 1999.

2. Ahuja, H. G.; Popplewell, L.; Tcheurekdjian, L.; Slovak, M. L.
: NUP98 gene rearrangements and the clonal evolution of chronic myelogenous
leukemia. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 30: 410-415, 2001.

3. Arai, Y.; Hosoda, F.; Kobayashi, H.; Arai, K.; Hayashi, Y.; Kamada,
N.; Kaneko, Y.; Ohki, M.: The inv(11)(p15q22) chromosome translocation
of de novo and therapy-related myeloid malignancies results in fusion
of the nucleoporin gene, NUP98, with the putative RNA helicase gene,
DDX10. Blood 89: 3936-3944, 1997.

4. Borrow, J.; Shearman, A. M.; Stanton, V. P., Jr.; Becher, R.; Collins,
T.; Williams, A. J.; Dube, I.; Katz, F.; Kwong, Y. L.; Morris, C.;
Ohyashiki, K.; Toyama, K.; Rowley, J.; Housman, D. E.: The t(7;11)(p15;p15)
translocation in acute myeloid leukaemia fuses the genes for nucleoporin
NUP98 and class I homeoprotein HOXA9. Nature Genet. 12: 159-167,
1996.

5. Dash, A. B.; Williams, I. R.; Kutok, J. L.; Tomasson, M. H.; Anastasiadou,
E.; Lindahl, K.; Li, S.; Van Etten, R. A.; Borrow, J.; Housman, D.;
Druker, B.; Gilliland, D. G.: A murine model of CML blast crisis
induced by cooperation between BCR/ABL and NUP98/HOXA9. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 99: 7622-7627, 2002.

6. Enninga, J.; Levay, A.; Fontoura, B. M. A.: Sec13 shuttles between
the nucleus and the cytoplasm and stably interacts with Nup96 at the
nuclear pore complex. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23: 7271-7284, 2003.

7. Enninga, J.; Levy, D. E.; Blobel, G.; Fontoura, B. M. A.: Role
of nucleoporin induction in releasing an mRNA nuclear export block. Science 295:
1523-1525, 2002.

8. Fontoura, B. M.; Blobel, G.; Matunis, M. J.: A conserved biogenesis
pathway for nucleoporins: proteolytic processing of a 186-kilodalton
precursor generates Nup98 and the novel nucleoporin, Nup96. J. Cell
Biol. 144: 1097-1112, 1999.

9. Hodel, A. E.; Hodel, M. R.; Griffis, E. R.; Hennig, K. A.; Ratner,
G. A.; Xu, S.; Powers, M. A.: The three-dimensional structure of
the autoproteolytic, nuclear pore-targeting domain of the human nucleoporin
Nup98. Molec. Cell 10: 347-358, 2002.

10. Hussey, D. J.; Nicola, M.; Moore, S.; Peters, G. B.; Dobrovic,
A.: The (4;11)(q21;p15) translocation fuses the NUP98 and RAP1GDS1
genes and is recurrent in T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia. Blood 94:
2072-2079, 1999.

11. Iwamoto, M.; Asakawa, H.; Hiraoka, Y.; Haraguchi, T.: Nucleoporin
Nup98: a gatekeeper in the eukaryotic kingdoms. Genes Cells 15:
661-669, 2010.

12. Iwasaki, M.; Kuwata, T.; Yamazaki, Y.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland,
N. G.; Osato, M.; Ito, Y.; Kroon, E.; Sauvageau, G.; Nakamura, T.
: Identification of cooperative genes for NUP98-HOXA9 in myeloid leukemogenesis
using a mouse model. Blood 105: 784-793, 2005.

13. Jaju, R. J.; Fidler, C.; Haas, O. A.; Strickson, A. J.; Watkins,
F.; Clark, K.; Cross, N. C. P.; Cheng, J.-F.; Aplan, P. D.; Kearney,
L.; Boultwood, J.; Wainscoat, J. S.: A novel gene, NSD1, is fused
to NUP98 in the t(5;11)(q35;p15.5) in de novo childhood acute myeloid
leukemia. Blood 98: 1264-1267, 2001.

14. Jaju, R. J.; Haas, O. A.; Neat, M.; Harbott, J.; Saha, V.; Boultwood,
J.; Brown, J. M.; Pirc-Danoewinata, H.; Krings, B. W.; Muller, U.;
Morris, S. W.; Wainscoat, J. S.; Kearney, L.: A new recurrent translocation,
t(5;11)(q35p15.5), associated with del(5q) in childhood acute myeloid
leukemia. Blood 94: 773-780, 1999.

15. Jeganathan, K. B.; Malureanu, L.; van Deursen, J. M.: The Rae1-Nup98
complex prevents aneuploidy by inhibiting securin degradation. Nature 438:
1036-1039, 2005.

16. Lahortiga, I.; Vizmanos, J. L.; Agirre, X.; Vazquez, I.; Cigudosa,
J. C.; Larrayoz, M. J.; Sala, F.; Gorosquieta, A.; Perez-Equiza, K.;
Calasanz, M. J.; Odero, M. D.: NUP98 is fused to Adducin 3 in a patient
with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and myeloid markers, with
a new translocation t(10;11)(q25;p15). Cancer Res. 63: 3079-3083,
2003.

17. Lam, D. H.; Aplan, P. D.: NUP98 gene fusions in hematologic malignancies. Leukemia 15:
1689-1695, 2001.

18. Laurell, E.; Beck, K.; Krupina, K.; Theerthagiri, G.; Bodenmiller,
B.; Horvath, P.; Aebersold, R.; Antonin, W.; Kutay, U.: Phosphorylation
of Nup98 by multiple kinases is crucial for NPC disassembly during
mitotic entry. Cell 144: 539-550, 2011.

19. Mizuno, T.; Kaibuchi, K.; Yamamoto, T.; Kawamura, M.; Sakoda,
T.; Fujioka, H.; Matsuura, Y.; Takai, Y.: A stimulatory GDP/GTP exchange
protein for smg p21 is active on the post-translationally processed
form of c-Ki-ras p21 and rhoA p21. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 6442-6446,
1991.

20. Nakamura, T.; Largaespada, D. A.; Lee, M. P.; Johnson, L. A.;
Ohyashiki, K.; Toyama, K.; Chen, S. J.; Willman, C. L.; Chen, I.-M.;
Feinberg, A. P.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.; Shaughnessy, J.
D., Jr.: Fusion of the nucleoporin gene NUP98 to HOXA9 by the chromosome
translocation t(7;11)(p15;p15) in human myeloid leukaemia. Nature
Genet. 12: 154-158, 1996.

21. Nakamura, T.; Yamazaki, Y.; Hatano, Y.; Miura, I.: NUP98 is fused
to PMX1 homeobox gene in human acute myelogenous leukemia with chromosome
translocation t(1;11)(q23;p15). Blood 94: 741-747, 1999.

22. Panagopoulos, I.; Isaksson, M.; Billstrom, R.; Strombeck, B.;
Mitelman, F.; Johansson, B.: Fusion of the NUP98 gene and the homeobox
gene HOXC13 in acute myeloid leukemia with t(11;12)(p15;q13). Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 36: 107-112, 2003.

23. Panagopoulos, I.; Kerndrup, G.; Carlsen, N.; Strombeck, B.; Isaksson,
M.; Johansson, B.: Fusion of NUP98 and the SET binding protein 1
(SETBP1) gene in a paediatric acute T cell lymphoblastic leukaemia
with t(11;18)(p15;q12). Brit. J. Haemat. 136: 294-296, 2006.

24. Petit, A.; Ragu, C.; Soler, G.; Ottolenghi, C.; Schluth, C.; Radford-Weiss,
I.; Schneider-Maunoury, S.; Callebaut, I.; Dastugue, N.; Drabkin,
H. A.; Bernard, O. A.; Romana, S.; Penard-Lacronique, V.: Functional
analysis of the NUP98-CCDC28A fusion protein. Haematologica 97:
379-387, 2012.

25. Radu, A.; Moore, M. S.; Blobel, G.: The peptide repeat domain
of nucleoporin Nup98 functions as a docking site in transport across
the nuclear pore complex. Cell 81: 215-222, 1995.

26. Reader, J. C.; Meekins, J. S.; Gojo, I.; Ning, Y.: A novel NUP98-PHF23
fusion resulting from a cryptic translocation t(11;17)(p15;p13) in
acute myeloid leukemia. (Letter) Leukemia 21: 842-844, 2007.

27. Rosati, R.; La Starza, R.; Veronese, A.; Aventin, A.; Schwienbacher,
C.; Vallespi, T.; Negrini, M.; Martelli, M. F.; Mecucci, C.: NUP98
is fused to the NSD3 gene in acute myeloid leukemia associated with
t(8;11)(p11.2;p15). Blood 99: 3857-3860, 2002. Note: Erratum: Blood
100: 1132 only, 2002.

28. Rosenblum, J. S.; Blobel, G.: Autoproteolysis in nucleoporin
biogenesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 11370-11375, 1999.

29. Such, E.; Cervera, J.; Valencia, A.; Barragan, E.; Ibanez, M.;
Luna, I.; Fuster, O.; Perez-Sirvent, M. L.; Senent, L.; Sempere, A.;
Martinez, J.; Martin-Aragones, G.; Sanz, M. A.: A novel NUPR98/RARG
gene fusion in acute myeloid leukemia resembling acute promyelocytic
leukemia. Blood 117: 242-245, 2011.

30. Taketani, T.; Taki, T.; Shibuya, N.; Ito, E.; Kitazawa, J.; Terui,
K.; Hayashi, Y.: The HOXD11 gene is fused to the NUP98 gene in acute
myeloid leukemia with t(2;11)(q31;p15). Cancer Res. 62: 33-37, 2002.

31. Tosi, S.; Ballabio, E.; Teigler-Schlegel, A.; Boultwood, J.; Bruch,
J.; Harbott, J.: Characterization of 6q abnormalities in childhood
acute myeloid leukemia and identification of a novel t(6:11)(q24.1;p15.5)
resulting in a NUP98-C6orf80 fusion in a case of acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 44: 225-232, 2005.

32. van Zutven, L. J. C. M.; Onen, E.; Velthuizen, S. C. J. M.; van
Drunen, E.; von Bergh, A. R. M.; van den Heuvel-Eibrink, M. M.; Veronese,
A.; Mecucci, C.; Negrini M.; de Greef, G. E.; Berna Beverloo, H.:
Identification of NUP98 abnormalities in acute leukemia: JARID1A (12p13)
as a new partner gene. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 45: 437-446, 2006.

33. von Kobbe, C.; van Deursen, J. M. A.; Rodrigues, J. P.; Sitterlin,
D.; Bachi, A.; Wu, X.; Wilm, M.; Carmo-Fonseca, M.; Izaurralde, E.
: Vesicular stomatitis virus matrix protein inhibits host cell gene
expression by targeting the nucleoporin Nup98. Molec. Cell 6: 1243-1252,
2000.

34. Wang, G. G.; Song, J.; Wang, Z.; Dormann, H. L.; Casadio, F.;
Li, H.; Luo, J.-L.; Patel, D. J.; Allis, C. D.: Haematopoietic malignancies
caused by dysregulation of a chromatin-binding PHD finger. Nature 459:
847-851, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 08/01/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/17/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/13/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/3/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/14/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/14/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/22/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/8/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/10/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/12/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/14/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/4/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/6/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/22/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/11/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/31/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/17/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/29/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/11/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/29/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/12/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/29/1996

EDITED carol: 08/01/2013
tpirozzi: 8/1/2013
tpirozzi: 7/31/2013
terry: 3/14/2013
terry: 2/15/2012
terry: 1/25/2012
carol: 11/22/2011
ckniffin: 11/17/2011
mgross: 6/13/2011
mgross: 6/10/2011
terry: 5/3/2011
terry: 10/21/2009
alopez: 8/18/2009
terry: 8/14/2009
mgross: 7/14/2009
alopez: 1/23/2008
terry: 1/22/2008
alopez: 6/12/2007
terry: 6/8/2007
wwang: 11/14/2006
terry: 11/10/2006
alopez: 1/13/2006
terry: 1/12/2006
mgross: 3/16/2005
terry: 3/14/2005
terry: 3/18/2004
alopez: 11/17/2003
cwells: 9/8/2003
terry: 9/4/2003
tkritzer: 2/11/2003
terry: 2/6/2003
tkritzer: 12/11/2002
terry: 12/6/2002
cwells: 11/22/2002
mgross: 9/11/2002
tkritzer: 9/9/2002
cwells: 7/31/2002
cwells: 7/8/2002
terry: 6/27/2002
terry: 6/21/2002
terry: 6/17/2002
cwells: 4/3/2002
cwells: 4/2/2002
terry: 3/29/2002
carol: 2/11/2002
carol: 1/29/2001
terry: 2/28/2000
mgross: 1/12/2000
alopez: 7/29/1998
terry: 6/4/1998
mark: 1/29/1996

