130160	TITLE *130160 ELASTIN; ELN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Elastic fibers are comprised of 2 distinct components, a more abundant
amorphous component (elastin) and the microfibrillar component. Elastin
is composed largely of glycine, proline, and other hydrophobic residues
and contains multiple lysine-derived crosslinks, such as desmosines,
which link the individual polypeptide chains into a rubberlike network.
The hydrophobic regions of the chains between the crosslinks are highly
mobile. The hydrophobic and crosslinking domains are coded by separate,
small (27 to 114 bp) exons that are separated by large introns. The
initial translation product is a 72-kD polypeptide, designated
tropoelastin (Rosenbloom, 1984).

Indik et al. (1987) cloned human elastin cDNA and found that it encodes
a deduced 786-amino acid protein. They described alternative splicing of
elastin mRNA.

Uitto et al. (1991) reviewed the molecular biology of human elastin.
Elastin is initially synthesized as a soluble polypeptide of
approximately 72 kD. The individual elastin molecules are aligned on a
scaffolding of microfibrils composed of fibrillin (134797). This
alignment is stabilized by the formation of intermolecular crosslinks
known as desmosines, which contribute to the insolubility of elastin.
Formation of desmosines is initiated by oxidative deamination of certain
lysyl residues by lysyl oxidase, a copper-dependent enzyme. The elastin
polypeptides are encoded by an mRNA of approximately 3.5 kb which
comprises a 2.2-kb coding segment and a relatively large 1.3-kb, 3-prime
untranslated region.

MAPPING

Emanuel et al. (1985) provisionally assigned the elastin gene to
2q31-qter. Fazio et al. (1991) used human elastin cDNAs in both in situ
hybridization and Southern analysis of human-rodent cell hybrids to map
the elastin gene to 7q11.2. PCR analysis with elastin-specific primers
of DNA from a hybrid cell line containing only human chromosome 7
yielded a product of the expected size, while DNA containing human
chromosome 2, but not chromosome 7, did not result in a product. Foster
et al. (1993) described a dinucleotide repeat polymorphism in the ELN
gene and used it to confirm assignment to chromosome 7 as well as to
exclude the gene from chromosome 2 by linkage studies.

Wydner et al. (1994) used PCR primers complementary to regions of the
mouse tropoelastin mRNA to define a novel intron length polymorphism
(ILP) within intron 8 of the mouse elastin gene. Using this polymorphism
in an interspecific backcross, they mapped the mouse Eln gene to the
distal half of chromosome 5 in a region of homology of synteny of human
chromosome 7.

GENE STRUCTURE

Indik et al. (1987) found a dearth of coding sequences and a remarkable
abundance of Alu repetitive sequences in the 3-prime region of the human
elastin gene. This suggested to them that, mediated by recombination
between Alu sequences, considerable polymorphism may exist in the human
population and between species. Tromp et al. (1991) identified a RFLP in
the ELN gene.

The human ELN gene has 34 exons and spans a total of approximately 45 kb
of genomic DNA. The exon/intron ratio is unusually low, approximately
1:19 (Uitto et al., 1991).

GENE FUNCTION

Li et al. (1998) defined the role of elastin in arterial development and
disease by generating mice lacking elastin. These mice died of an
obstructive arterial disease that resulted from subendothelial cell
proliferation and reorganization of smooth muscle. These cellular
changes were similar to those seen in atherosclerosis; however, lack of
elastin was not associated with endothelial damage, thrombosis, or
inflammation, which occur in models of atherosclerosis. Hemodynamic
stress was not associated with arterial obstruction in these mice
either, as the disease still occurred in arteries that were isolated in
organ culture and therefore not subject to hemodynamic stress.
Disruption of elastin was enough to induce subendothelial proliferation
of smooth muscle and may contribute to obstructive arterial disease.

To investigate why a loss-of-function mutation in 1 elastin allele
causes an inherited obstructive arterial disease, supravalvular aortic
stenosis, Li et al. (1998) generated mice hemizygous for the elastin
gene (Eln +/-). Although ELN mRNA and protein were reduced by 50% in Eln
+/- mice, arterial compliance at physiologic pressures was nearly
normal. This discrepancy was explained by a paradoxical increase of 35%
in the number of elastic lamellae and smooth muscle in Eln +/- arteries.
Examination of humans with ELN hemizygosity revealed a 2.5-fold increase
in elastic lamellae and smooth muscle. Thus, ELN hemizygosity in mice
and humans induces a compensatory increase in the number of rings of
elastic lamellae and smooth muscle during arterial development. Humans
are exquisitely sensitive to reduced ELN expression, developing profound
arterial thickening and markedly increased risk of obstructive vascular
disease.

Lee et al. (2007) studied the immune responses of age-matched smokers
with and without emphysema (see COPD; 606963) and found that
differential responsiveness of T cells to elastin peptides, but not to
collagen (see COL6A1; 120220) or albumin (ALB; 103600), correlated with
emphysema severity. Compared with controls, COPD patients secreted
increased levels of IFNG (147570) and IL10 (124092) in response to
elastin peptides in an MHC II-dependent manner. Antibody to elastin, but
not to collagen, was also increased in emphysema patients, as were lung
B cells secreting antibody to the protein. Although regulatory T cell
(Treg) responses did not differ between subject and control peripheral
blood cells, emphysema patients showed a significant reduction of lung
Tregs compared with controls. Lee et al. (2007) concluded that
antielastin autoimmunity, possibly resulting from secretion of
proteolytic enzymes induced by cigarette smoke exposure, is associated
with an inflammatory response leading to emphysema and to
tobacco-related pathology in other organs.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Role in Williams-Beuren Syndrome

Curran et al. (1993) showed that the ELN gene was disrupted in a
translocation with a breakpoint at 7q11.23. Exon 28 of the gene was the
site of the breakpoint. Furthermore, Ewart et al. (1993) showed close
linkage of ELN and supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS; 185500) in 2
families. Ewart et al. (1993) found that deletion involving 7q11.23 and
resulting in hemizygosity of the elastin gene is responsible for the
Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS; 194050). Deletions limited to the elastin
gene appear to result in SVAS, whereas deletions spanning at least 114
kb lead to the Williams syndrome. Thus, the latter is a contiguous gene
syndrome with neurobehavioral features and mental retardation not easily
accounted for by the disruption of the elastin gene alone.

Perez Jurado et al. (1996) reported that 61 of 65 clinically defined
patients with Williams-Beuren syndrome had a deletion of the ELN locus.
They noted that no variability in the size of the deletion could be
detected between WBS patients by genotyping of polymorphic markers,
suggesting that the chromosomal breakpoints in these patients fell into
narrowly defined physical regions. Perez Jurado et al. (1996) also
compared clinical differences between maternally and paternally
inherited ELN deletions and postulated that an imprinted locus, silent
on the paternal chromosome and contributing to statural growth, may be
affected by the deletion.

Duba et al. (2002) investigated a family with a cytogenetically balanced
translocation t(7;16)(q11.23;q13) in which the 5 translocation carriers
manifested a wide variation in phenotype, ranging from a hoarse voice as
the only feature, partial WBS with or without SVAS, to the full WBS
phenotype. DNA sequence analysis showed that the breakpoint on
chromosome 7 was within intron 5 of the ELN gene and on chromosome 16
within intron 1 of the GPR56 gene (604110). In the course of the
rearrangement, no basepair was lost from either the chromosome 7 or
chromosome 16 sequences. Duba et al. (2002) speculated that the expected
phenotype in the reported family would be SVAS, not WBS, and proposed a
long-range position effect caused by the translocation event as the most
likely explanation.

- Supravalvular Aortic Stenosis

In a family with SVAS (185500), Ewart et al. (1994) found, by pulsed
field, PCR, and Southern analysis, a 100-kb deletion of the 3-prime end
of the elastin gene cosegregating with the disease (130160.0001). DNA
sequence analysis localized the breakpoint of the deletion between
elastin exons 27 and 28, the same region disrupted by the
SVAS-associated translocation. The family included an affected mother
and daughter. The daughter had right ventricular hypertrophy,
supravalvular pulmonic stenosis, bilateral narrowing of the pulmonary
arteries (left more severe than right), and a diffusely narrowed
ascending aorta with a discrete supravalvular narrowing diagnosed by
cardiac catheterization at 6 weeks of age. The patient also had
intermittent acrocyanosis and hypertension. At 16 months of age, the
supravalvular pulmonic stenosis had improved. The proband also had some
features common to Williams syndrome, including dolichocephaly,
bitemporal narrowness, outer canthal distance less than 2 SD below the
mean, periorbital fullness, broad mouth, full cheeks, hoarse voice, and
hypersensitivity to loud noises. The diagnosis of Williams syndrome was
not made because she had normal serum calcium levels, a normal urine
calcium/creatinine ratio, normal psychomotor development, and normal
growth parameters. The child was treated with phenobarbital for
seizures. The mother had had seizures in adolescence. Since childhood,
she had had a grade III (out of VI) early systolic murmur heard best at
the suprasternal notch and radiating to the left carotid. At least 2
other family members were affected by SVAS. The mother's brother had
narrowing of the entire pulmonary arterial tree documented by cardiac
catheterization and was treated for seizures. A maternal first cousin
had severe bilateral peripheral pulmonic stenosis, right ventricular
hypertrophy, and mild SVAS demonstrated by echocardiogram.

Gross rearrangements of the ELN gene have not been identified in most
cases of autosomal dominant SVAS. To define the spectrum of ELN
mutations responsible for SVAS, Li et al. (1997) refined the genomic
structure of the gene and used this information in mutation analyses.
ELN point mutations were found to cosegregate with the disease in 4
familial cases (e.g., 130160.0005) and to be associated with SVAS in 3
sporadic cases (130160.0004). Two of the mutations were nonsense, 1 was
a single bp deletion, and 4 were splice site mutations. In 1 sporadic
case, the mutation had arisen de novo.

Tassabehji et al. (1997) described the complete exon-intron structure of
the ELN gene. All exons are in-frame, allowing exon skipping without
disrupting the reading frame. Microsatellites were located in introns 17
and 18. They found that isolated SVAS was associated with point
mutations that predicted premature chain termination. They stated that
in their experience all patients with a classic Williams syndrome
phenotype had been found to be hemizygous at the elastin locus;
nevertheless, only 5% had severe clinical SVAS. In their 2 SVAS families
with point mutations, each mutation manifested as severe SVAS in the
proband, but as mild cardiac features or nonpenetrance in the mothers.
Tassabehji et al. (1997) considered such variability typical of
phenotypes produced by haploinsufficiency, where genetic background is
expected to have a major modifying effect. An alternative hypothesis is
that a dominant-negative elastin mutation results if truncated proteins
have some but not all domains critical for intermolecular interactions
and thus may disrupt posttranslational processing and development of
elastic fibers.

Koch et al. (2003) similarly found the complete spectrum of arterial
stenoses in 5 members of an extended pedigree with a confirmed nonsense
mutation haplotype.

Urban et al. (2000) used single-strand conformation and heteroduplex
analyses of genomic amplimers to identify point mutations within the ELN
gene in patients with nonsyndromic SVAS from a total of 8 unrelated
families. They identified 6 novel point mutations. Nonpenetrance was
demonstrated in some of the families. Together with the new mutations
they found, 14 point mutations had been reported in SVAS patients, and
10 of these resulted in premature stop codons (PTCs). They analyzed the
expression of ELN alleles in skin fibroblasts from 1 SVAS patient and
showed that PTC mutations resulted in selective elimination of mutant
transcripts. Inhibition of the nonsense-mediated decay mechanism by
cycloheximide resulted in the stabilization of mutant elastin mRNA.
Allelic inactivation by the ELN mutation in this patient led to an
overall decrease of the steady state levels of elastin mRNA. In the skin
fibroblasts from the same SVAS patient, they demonstrated reduced
synthesis and secretion of tropoelastin. Given the predominance of PTC
mutations in SVAS, Urban et al. (2000) suggested that functional
haploinsufficiency may be the pathomechanism underlying most cases of
nonsyndromic SVAS.

Metcalfe et al. (2000) used SSCP and heteroduplex analysis to screen 100
unrelated patients with SVAS and normal karyotypes without major
deletions of the ELN gene as determined by FISH. All 34 exons of the ELN
gene were screened and mutations were identified in 35 of the patients.
The mutations were 23 nonsense or frameshift mutations predicted to
cause premature termination, 6 splice site mutations, 4 missense
mutations, and 2 small deletions in exon 1 encompassing the ATG
initiation codon. The 35 patients represented 24 familial cases, 10
sporadic cases, and 1 of unknown status. Recurrent mutations were the
nonsense mutations Y150X in exon 9 (130160.0013), Q442X in exon 21
(130160.0003), and K176X in exon 10 (130160.0014), which appeared to be
mutation hotspots. A marked phenotypic intrafamilial variability was
illustrated by 2 large families with multiple affected members with
disease severity ranging from asymptomatic carriers to mild or severe
SVAS requiring surgery, or sudden infant death. No obvious
genotype-phenotype correlation was detected; cases with missense or
splicing mutations were as likely to have severe SVAS as cases with
truncating mutations.

Urban et al. (2002) compared both elastogenesis and proliferation rate
of cultured aortic smooth-muscle cells (SMCs) and skin fibroblasts from
5 healthy control subjects, 4 patients with isolated SVAS, and 5
patients with WBS. Three mutations found in patients with SVAS were
found to result in null alleles. RNA blood hybridization,
immunostaining, and metabolic labeling experiments demonstrated that
SVAS cells and WBS cells have reduced elastin mRNA levels and that they
consequently deposit low amounts of insoluble elastin. Abnormally low
levels of elastin deposition in SVAS cells and in WBS cells were found
to coincide with an increase in proliferation rate, which could be
reversed by addition of exogenous insoluble elastin. This led to the
conclusion that insoluble elastin is an important regulator of cellular
proliferation. The reduced net deposition of insoluble elastin in
arterial walls of patients with either SVAS or WBS leads to the
increased proliferation of arterial SMCs, which results in the formation
of multilayer thickening of the tunica media of large arteries and,
consequently, in the development of hyperplastic intimal lesions leading
to segmental arterial occlusion.

Micale et al. (2010) analyzed the ELN gene in 31 familial and sporadic
cases of SVAS and identified 7 novel mutations, including 5 frameshift
mutations and 2 splice site mutations (see, e.g., 130160.0020). In vitro
analysis of 3 of the frameshift mutations using minigene constructs and
transfection assays confirmed that functional haploinsufficiency of the
ELN gene is the main pathomechanism underlying SVAS. In addition,
molecular analysis of patient fibroblasts showed that the 2044+5G-C
(130160.0020) mutant allele encodes an aberrant shorter form of the
elastin polypeptide that may hamper the normal assembly of elastin
fibers in a dominant-negative manner.

- Cutis Laxa

In the cell line from a patient with cutis laxa (123700), Zhang et al.
(1997) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion in exon 30 of the
ELN gene (130160.0008). In a 30-year-old woman and her 2-year-old son,
both of whom had classic cutis laxa, Zhang et al. (1999) identified
heterozygosity for a different 1-bp deletion in the ELN gene
(130160.0010), also in exon 30.

In a 37-year-old Caucasian woman with cutis laxa, Tassabehji et al.
(1998) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion in the ELN gene
(130160.0009).

In a mother and daughter with cutis laxa and severe pulmonary disease,
originally described by Beighton (1972) and Corbett et al. (1994), Urban
et al. (2005) identified no mutations in the elastin gene by direct
sequencing, but detected an abnormal protein in cultured dermal
fibroblasts using metabolic labeling and immunoprecipitation. Mutation
and gene expression analyses established the presence of a complex
tandem duplication in the elastin gene (130160.0016).

In affected members of a 3-generation family of Japanese and German
ancestry and an unrelated Singaporean girl of Chinese descent with cutis
laxa and aortic aneurysmal disease, Szabo et al. (2006) identified
heterozygosity for a 25-bp deletion (130160.0017) and a 1-bp deletion
(130160.0018) in exon 30 of the ELN gene, respectively.

- Role in Other Disorders

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the ELN
gene and susceptibility to intracranial berry aneurysm, see ANIB1
(105800).

ANIMAL MODEL

Faury et al. (2003) reported that Eln +/- mice were stably hypertensive
from birth, with a mean arterial pressure 25 to 30 mm Hg higher than
their wildtype counterparts. The animals had only moderate cardiac
hypertrophy and lived a normal life span with no overt signs of
degenerative vascular disease. Examination of arterial mechanical
properties showed that the inner diameters of Eln +/- arteries were
generally smaller than wildtype arteries at any given intravascular
pressure. Because the Eln +/- mice were hypertensive, however, the
effective arterial working diameter was comparable to that of the
normotensive wildtype animal. Physiologic studies indicated a role for
the renin (179820)-angiotensin (see 106150) system in maintaining the
hypertensive state. Faury et al. (2003) concluded that the association
of hypertension with elastin haploinsufficiency in humans and mice
strongly suggested that elastin and other proteins of the elastic fiber
should be considered as causal genes for essential hypertension.

Hirano et al. (2008) stated that the Eln gene in most mammalian species
contains 36 exons. The rat and mouse Eln genes have 37 exons, whereas
the human ELN gene has only 34 exons due to the sequential loss of 2
exons during primate evolution. In addition, although still contained
within the human gene, exon 22 is rarely included in the elastin
transcript. The mouse and human ELN proteins share only 64.1% amino acid
identity. Because of the structural differences between mouse and human
ELN, Hirano et al. (2008) developed a humanized elastin mouse in which
elastin production was controlled by a human ELN transgene. Expression
of the human transgene reversed the hypertension and cardiovascular
changes associated with Eln haploinsufficiency and rescued the perinatal
lethality of the Eln-null phenotype.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 100-KB DEL

In a family with SVAS (185500), Ewart et al. (1994) found a heterozygous
100-kb deletion in the 3-prime end of the elastin gene with a breakpoint
between elastin exons 27 and 28. The same region was disrupted in the
familial reciprocal translocation reported by Morris et al. (1993).
Ewart et al. (1994) pointed out that the protein product of the mutant
gene would lack a microfibril-associated glycoprotein (MAGP; 156790)
binding site that normally exists in the C terminus of elastin.

.0002
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 30-KB DEL

Olson et al. (1995) used Southern blot analysis to screen for mutations
in the ELN gene in 6 familial and 3 sporadic cases of SVAS (185500)
without features of Williams-Beuren syndrome (194050). The familial
cases included members of a previously reported large pedigree with
linkage to the elastin gene region (Olson et al., 1993). A 30-kb
deletion extending from breakpoints in intron 1 and intron 27 was found
in 2 members of a Middle Eastern family. The proband developed severe
SVAS and peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis and underwent aortic
operation in early childhood. He had no evidence of Williams syndrome or
clinically apparent abnormalities of other elastin-containing tissue.
The deletion was also demonstrated in his mother, an obligate carrier
with subtle disease (a heart murmur and a nondiagnostic echocardiogram).
Blood for DNA analysis was not available from a maternal uncle with SVAS
and a sister with isolated peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis.

.0003
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, GLN442TER

Li et al. (1997) found a heterozygous nonsense mutation in a sporadic
case of SVAS (185500): a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1324, resulting
in conversion of a glutamine to a premature stop codon (Q442X) in exon
21. DNA samples could not be obtained from the parents of the proband.

Tassabehji et al. (1997) found the same mutation in a patient with SVAS.
The patient had presented at the age of 8 weeks with a heart murmur and
episodes of cyanosis. Echocardiography at 4 months of age showed SVAS
and pulmonary arterial stenosis. These changes were progressive.
Corrective open heart surgery was performed at the age of 21 months, at
which time it was noted that the aorta and pulmonary arteries were very
thick and abnormal. His mother had had cardiac follow-up for a heart
murmur until the age of 6 years, but echocardiogram showed no evidence
of SVAS and no pulmonary artery stenosis.

Metcalfe et al. (2000) found the Q442X mutation in 3 unrelated patients
with SVAS among 100 patients screened. Haplotype analysis using ELN
flanking and intragenic markers showed no evidence of a founder effect;
therefore this appeared to be a mutation hotspot.

.0004
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, ARG570TER

In a sporadic case of SVAS (185500), Li et al. (1997) found a nonsense
mutation: a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1708, resulting in
conversion of arginine-570 to a premature stop codon in exon 25 (R570X).
DNA samples could not be obtained from the parents of the proband.

Metcalfe et al. (2000) detected the R570X mutation in a sporadic case of
SVAS with peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis and bilateral inguinal
hernias.

.0005
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 1821C

Using primers amplifying exon 26 of the ELN gene, Li et al. (1997)
identified an anomalous band that cosegregated with SVAS (185500) in 1
family. The aberrant conformer showed a single-nucleotide deletion at
position 1821 in exon 26 (1821delC). This deletion caused a frameshift
resulting in a premature stop codon in exon 28.

.0006
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, IVS15AS, A-G, -2

In 2 unrelated kindreds, Li et al. (1997) found that SVAS (185500)
segregated with an A-to-G transition at position -2 in the splice
acceptor site of intron 15 preceding exon 16.

.0007
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 1-BP INS, FS615TER

In a patient with SVAS (185500), Tassabehji et al. (1997) identified
insertion of a T in codon 606 of exon 26 of the ELN gene, producing a
frameshift predicted to cause premature termination 10 codons
downstream. The patient presented at birth with a heart murmur. At the
age of 3 years, echocardiography suggested SVAS on the basis of
'waisting' of the ascending aorta and poststenotic dilatation. A brother
had died suddenly in the first year of life and at autopsy was noted to
have spontaneously repaired SVAS, repaired central pulmonary artery
stenosis, and marked ventricular hypertrophy. The aortic valve and
proximal aorta were markedly dysplastic with extreme thickening beyond
the valve. The proband's mother had presented to cardiologists in
childhood with a murmur and a clinical diagnosis of aortic stenosis had
been made.

.0008
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 2012G

In a patient with cutis laxa (123700), Zhang et al. (1995) demonstrated
decreased elastin mRNA levels in skin fibroblasts due to transcript
instability. Zhang et al. (1997) cloned and sequenced both ELN cDNA
alleles in the cell line from this patient and identified a frameshift
mutation, deletion of 2012G, in the C-terminal coding region of 1
allele. The patient was heterozygous for the single base deletion, which
was not found in genomic DNA from either parent or from 65 unrelated
control samples. The mutant transcript was overrepresented compared to
the normal transcript.

.0009
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 748A

In a 37-year-old Caucasian patient with autosomal dominant cutis laxa
(123700), Tassabehji et al. (1998) identified heterozygosity for a
frameshift mutation in exon 32 of the elastin gene which was predicted
to replace 37 amino acids at the C terminus of elastin by a novel
sequence of 62 amino acids. Immunoprecipitation studies and mRNA showed
that the mutant allele was expressed. Electron microscopy of the skin
sections showed abnormal branching and fragmentation in the amorphous
elastin component, and immunocytochemistry showed reduced elastin
deposition in the elastic fibers and fewer microfibrils in the dermis.
These findings suggested that the mutant tropoelastin protein was
synthesized, secreted, and incorporated into the elastic matrix, where
it altered the architecture of elastic fibers. Interference with
crosslinking would reduce elastic recoil in affected tissues and explain
the cutis laxa phenotype.

.0010
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 2039C

In a 30-year-old woman and her 2-year-old son, both of whom had classic
cutis laxa (123700), Zhang et al. (1999) identified heterozygosity for a
deletion of 2039C from exon 30 of the ELN gene. The same exon was the
site of the mutation in the 2012delG deletion (130160.0008).

.0011
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, IVS15AS, C-G, -3

In 2 large, independently collected midwestern US pedigrees with
supravalvular aortic stenosis (185500), Urban et al. (1999) found a
C-to-G transversion in the acceptor splice site of intron 15 of the
elastin gene. The mutation segregated in both families with high
penetrance of SVAS, and all affected individuals carried the mutation.
Haplotype analysis indicated that the mutations in the 2 apparently
nonoverlapping kindreds were identical by descent. RT-PCR of elastin
from skin fibroblasts of an affected individual showed 2 abnormal
elastin species present as 0.9% and 0.3% of the total elastin message.
One transcript arose from activation of a cryptic splice site in intron
15 that added 44 bp of intronic sequence to the sequence encoded by exon
16 and led to a premature termination codon in exon 17 because of
frameshift; the other transcript arose from skipping of exon 16. The
miniscule amount of transcript associated with this mutation supported
haploinsufficiency of elastin as the etiology of SVAS.

.0012
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 1040C

In a large German family with SVAS (185500), Boeckel et al. (1999)
identified a 1-bp deletion (1040delC) in codon 347 of exon 18 of the ELN
gene, resulting in a stop codon in exon 22. The mutation was present in
heterozygous state. The family studied had affected individuals in 4
generations and by implication in a fifth earlier generation. The
severity of the phenotype appeared to increase in successive
generations, i.e., the phenomenon of anticipation. Tassabehji et al.
(1997) noted that the mothers of their severely affected SVAS patients
with ELN point mutations had only mild cardiac features or
nonpenetrance. Boeckel et al. (1999) observed nonpenetrance in at least
2 individuals, brothers, both of whom transmitted the disorder to
children.

.0013
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, TYR150TER

Metcalfe et al. (2000) identified a tyr150-to-ter (Y150X) mutation in
exon 9 of the ELN gene in 4 unrelated patients with SVAS (185500) among
100 patients screened. Haplotype analysis using ELN flanking and
intragenic markers showed no evidence of a founder effect; therefore
this appeared to be a mutation hotspot.

.0014
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, LYS176TER

Metcalfe et al. (2000) detected a lys176-to-ter (K176X; 526A-T) mutation
in exon 10 of the ELN gene in 2 apparently unrelated familial cases of
SVAS (185500) among 100 patients screened.

.0015
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, ARG610GLN AND 24-BP DUP, NT1034

In 2 related families with supravalvular aortic stenosis (185500), Urban
et al. (2001) identified 2 ELN mutations located on the same allele: an
in-frame duplication of nucleotides 1034-1057 in exon 18, and an 1829G-A
change in exon 26 predicted to result in an arg610-to-gln (R610Q)
substitution. In 1 family, an individual was identified with a
recombination between exons 18 and 26 of the ELN gene. This individual
was unaffected and carried the exon 18 insertion mutation but not
1829G-A. Skin fibroblasts were established from this recombinant normal
individual and from an affected individual carrying both of the
mutations. RT-PCR analysis indicated that the expression of the mutant
allele was reduced to 12 to 27% of that of the normal allele in the
affected but not in the unaffected individual. Further studies showed
reduced steady state elastin mRNA levels and tropoelastin synthesis in
the affected individual. RT-PCR analysis of the mRNA rescued by
cycloheximide treatment indicated that the 1829G-A mutation created a
cryptic donor splice site within exon 26, resulting in the deletion of 4
nucleotides at the 3-prime end of exon 26 and a frameshift in the mRNA.
This frameshift mutation generated a premature termination codon in the
domain encoded by exon 28, clearly resulting in nonsense-mediated decay
of this frameshift RNA product. Despite considerable variability in the
molecular nature of mutations responsible for SVAS, the unifying
mechanism appears to be the generation of null alleles by
nonsense-mediated decay leading to elastin haploinsufficiency.

.0016
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, EX9-33DUP

In a mother and daughter with cutis laxa (123700) and severe pulmonary
disease, originally described by Beighton (1972) and Corbett et al.
(1994), Urban et al. (2005) identified no mutations in the elastin gene
by direct sequencing, but detected an abnormal protein in cultured
dermal fibroblasts using metabolic labeling and immunoprecipitation.
Mutation and gene expression analyses established the presence of a
heterozygous complex rearrangement involving the duplication of exons 9
to 33, with a third copy of exons 9 and 10 and intron 10 added to the
end of the mRNA; nucleotides 3-65 of intron 10 encode a 21-amino acid
missense peptide sequence before ending in a stop codon.
Immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that the mutant tropoelastin is
partially secreted and partially retained intracellularly; a polyclonal
antibody raised against a unique peptide in the mutant molecule showed
both intracellular and matrix staining.

.0017
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 25-BP DEL, NT2114

In affected members of a 3-generation family of Japanese and German
ancestry with cutis laxa (123700) and aortic aneurysmal disease, Szabo
et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a 25-bp deletion beginning
at nucleotide 2114 in exon 30 of the ELN gene. There was variable
expression of cutis laxa, hernias, and aortic lesions in affected family
members. The mutation was not found in 121 controls.

.0018
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 2159C

In a Singaporean girl of Chinese descent with cutis laxa (123700) and
aortic aneurysmal disease, Szabo et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity
for a de novo 1-bp deletion (2159delC) in exon 30 of the ELN gene. The
mutation was not found in either of her parents or in 121 controls.

.0019
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1621C-T

In a boy with severe cutis laxa (123700), severe congenital pulmonary
disease (previously not reported in ADCL), and supravalvular pulmonary
artery stenosis, Graul-Neumann et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous
1621C-T transition in the ELN gene, resulting in an in-frame deletion of
exon 25 and predicting a protein lacking amino acids 527-540. The same
mutation was present in the clinically healthy father, but not in the
mother, the paternal grandparents, or 96 healthy controls. Analysis of
ELN expression in fibroblasts revealed the same amount of complete ELN
mRNA in the proband as in normal age-matched controls, whereas the
father had a more than 50% reduction of ELN mRNA expression as compared
to corresponding age-matched controls. In contrast, addition of the
translation inhibitor puromcin caused an increase in total ELN mRNA
expression in the father. Graul-Neumann et al. (2008) concluded that the
variable processing of an identically mutated gene (dominant negative in
the child and haploinsufficiency in the father) caused the highly
variable clinical appearance of ADCL in this family.

.0020
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, IVS28, G-C, +5

In a 3-generation family with supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS;
185500), Micale et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 2044+5G-C
transversion in intron 28 of the ELN gene. The mutation was present in
all 3 family members who had been diagnosed with SVAS as well as in 1
asymptomatic family member; it was not found in 2 more unaffected family
members or in 100 unrelated control samples. RT-PCR analysis of elastin
mRNA from transfected HEK293 cells as well as patient fibroblasts
demonstrated 2 distinct transcripts, a 200-bp band corresponding to
wildtype mRNA product and a 300-bp mutant; sequencing confirmed that the
longer transcript resulted from splicing failure and inclusion of intron
28 in the mRNA, predicting a shorter elastin protein with a premature
termination codon within the same intron. Assessment of ELN mRNA
expression level after incubation of patient fibroblasts with an
inhibitor of nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) showed no significant
increase in ELN mRNA aberrant transcript, indicating that this mutation
is conceivably not a substrate of NMD.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Reidy  (1963); Sephel et al. (1989)
REFERENCE 1. Beighton, P. H.: The dominant and recessive forms of cutis laxa. J.
Med. Genet. 9: 216-221, 1972.

2. Boeckel, T.; Dierks, A.; Vergopoulos, A.; Bahring, S.; Knoblauch,
H.; Muller-Myhsok, B.; Baron, H.; Aydin, A.; Bein, G.; Luft, F. C.;
Schuster, H.: A new mutation in the elastin gene causing supravalvular
aortic stenosis. Am. J. Cardiol. 83: 1141-1143, 1999.

3. Corbett, E.; Glaisyer, H.; Chan, C.; Madden, B.; Khaghani, A.;
Yacoub, M.: Congenital cutis laxa with a dominant inheritance and
early onset emphysema. Thorax 49: 836-837, 1994.

4. Curran, M. E.; Atkinson, D. L.; Ewart, A. K.; Morris, C. A.; Leppert,
M. F.; Keating, M. T.: The elastin gene is disrupted by a translocation
associated with supravalvular aortic stenosis. Cell 73: 159-168,
1993.

5. Duba, H.-C.; Doll, A.; Neyer, M.; Erdel, M.; Mann, C.; Hammerer,
I.; Utermann, G.; Grzeschik, K.-H.: The elastin gene is disrupted
in a family with a balanced translocation t(7;16)(q11.23;q13) associated
with a variable expression of the Williams-Beuren syndrome. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 10: 351-361, 2002.

6. Emanuel, B. S.; Cannizzaro, L.; Ornstein-Goldstein, N.; Indik,
Z. K.; Yoon, K.; May, M.; Oliver, L.; Boyd, C.; Rosenbloom, J.: Chromosomal
localization of the human elastin gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 37: 873-882,
1985.

7. Ewart, A. K.; Jin, W.; Atkinson, D.; Morris, C. A.; Keating, M.
T.: Supravalvular aortic stenosis associated with a deletion disrupting
the elastin gene. J. Clin. Invest. 93: 1071-1077, 1994.

8. Ewart, A. K.; Morris, C. A.; Atkinson, D.; Jin, W.; Sternes, K.;
Spallone, P.; Stock, A. D.; Leppert, M.; Keating, M. T.: Hemizygosity
at the elastin locus in a developmental disorder, Williams syndrome. Nature
Genet. 5: 11-16, 1993.

9. Ewart, A. K.; Morris, C. A.; Ensing, G. J.; Loker, J.; Moore, C.;
Leppert, M.; Keating, M.: A human vascular disorder, supravalvular
aortic stenosis, maps to chromosome 7. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90:
3226-3230, 1993.

10. Faury, G.; Pezet, M.; Knutsen, R. H.; Boyle, W. A.; Heximer, S.
P.; McLean, S. E.; Minkes, R. K.; Blumer, K. J.; Kovacs, A.; Kelly,
D. P.; Li, D. Y.; Starcher, B.; Mecham, R. P.: Developmental adaptation
of the mouse cardiovascular system to elastin haploinsufficiency. J.
Clin. Invest. 112: 1419-1428, 2003.

11. Fazio, M. J.; Mattei, M.-G.; Passage, E.; Chu, M.-L.; Black, D.;
Solomon, E.; Davidson, J. M.; Uitto, J.: Human elastin gene: new
evidence for localization to the long arm of chromosome 7. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 48: 696-703, 1991.

12. Foster, K.; Ferrell, R.; King-Underwood, L.; Povey, S.; Attwood,
J.; Rennick, R.; Humphries, S. E.; Henney, A. M.: Description of
a dinucleotide repeat polymorphism in the human elastin gene and its
use to confirm assignment of the gene to chromosome 7. Ann. Hum.
Genet. 57: 87-96, 1993.

13. Graul-Neumann, L. M.; Hausser, I.; Essayie, M.; Rauch, A.; Kraus,
C.: Highly variable cutis laxa resulting from a dominant splicing
mutation of the elastin gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A: 977-983,
2008.

14. Hirano, E.; Knutsen, R. H.; Sugitani, H.; Ciliberto, C. H.; Mecham,
R. P.: Functional rescue of elastin insufficiency in mice by the
human elastin gene. Circ. Res. 101: 523-531, 2008.

15. Indik, Z.; Yeh, H.; Ornstein-Goldstein, N.; Sheppard, P.; Anderson,
N.; Rosenbloom, J. C.; Peltonen, L.; Rosenbloom, J.: Alternative
splicing of human elastin mRNA indicated by sequence analysis of cloned
genomic and complementary DNA. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 5680-5684,
1987.

16. Indik, Z.; Yoon, K.; Morrow, S. D.; Cicila, G.; Rosenbloom, J.;
Rosenbloom, J.; Ornstein-Goldstein, N.: Structure of the 3-prime
region of the human elastin gene: great abundance of Alu repetitive
sequences and few coding sequences. Connect. Tissue Res. 16: 197-211,
1987.

17. Koch, A.; Buheitel, G.; Hofbeck, M.; Rauch, A.; Kraus, C.; Tassabehji,
M.; Singer, H.: Spectrum of arterial obstructions caused by one elastin
gene point mutation. Europ. J. Pediat. 162: 53-54, 2003.

18. Lee, S.-H.; Goswami, S.; Grudo, A.; Song, L.; Bandi, V.; Goodnight-White,
S.; Green, L.; Hacken-Bitar, J.; Huh, J.; Bakaeen, F.; Coxson, H.
O.; Cogswell, S.; Storness-Bliss, C.; Corry, D. B.; Kheradmand, F.
: Antielastin autoimmunity in tobacco smoking-induced emphysema. Nature
Med. 13: 567-569, 2007.

19. Li, D. Y.; Brooke, B.; Davis, E. C.; Mecham, R. P.; Sorensen,
L. K.; Boak, B. B.; Eichwald, E.; Keating, M. T.: Elastin is an essential
determinant of arterial morphogenesis. Nature 393: 276-280, 1998.

20. Li, D. Y.; Faury, G.; Taylor, D. G.; Davis, E. C.; Boyle, W. A.;
Mecham, R. P.; Stenzel, P.; Boak, B.; Keating, M. T.: Novel arterial
pathology in mice and humans hemizygous for elastin. J. Clin. Invest. 102:
1783-1787, 1998.

21. Li, D. Y.; Toland, A. E.; Boak, B. B.; Atkinson, D. L.; Ensing,
G. J.; Morris, C. A.; Keating, M. T.: Elastin point mutations cause
an obstructive vascular disease, supravalvular aortic stenosis. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 6: 1021-1028, 1997.

22. Metcalfe, K.; Rucka, A. K.; Smoot, L.; Hofstadler, G.; Tuzler,
G.; McKeown, P.; Siu, V.; Rauch, A.; Dean, J.; Dennis, N.; Ellis,
I.; Reardon, W.; Cytrynbaum, C.; Osborne, L.; Yates, J. R.; Read,
A. P.; Donnai, D.; Tassabehji, M.: Elastin: mutational spectrum in
supravalvular aortic stenosis. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 8: 955-963,
2000.

23. Micale, L.; Turturo, M. G.; Fusco, C.; Augello, B.; Jurado, L.
A. P.; Izzi, C.; Digilio, M. C.; Milani, D.; Lapi, E.; Zelante, L.;
Merla, G.: Identification and characterization of seven novel mutations
of elastin gene in a cohort of patients affected by supravalvular
aortic stenosis. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 18: 317-323, 2010.

24. Morris, C. A.; Loker, J.; Ensing, G.; Stock, A. D.: Supravalvular
aortic stenosis cosegregates with a familial 6;7 translocation which
disrupts the elastin gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 46: 737-744, 1993.

25. Olson, T. M.; Michels, V. V.; Lindor, N. M.; Pastores, G. M.;
Weber, J. L.; Schaid, D. J.; Driscoll, D. J.; Feldt, R. H.; Thibodeau,
S. N.: Autosomal dominant supravalvular aortic stenosis: localization
to chromosome 7. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 869-873, 1993.

26. Olson, T. M.; Michels, V. V.; Urban, Z.; Csiszar, K.; Christiano,
A. M.; Driscoll, D. J.; Feldt, R. H.; Boyd, C. D.; Thibodeau, S. N.
: A 30 kb deletion within the elastin gene results in familial supravalvular
aortic stenosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1677-1679, 1995.

27. Perez Jurado, L. A.; Peoples, R.; Kaplan, P.; Hamel, B. C. J.;
Francke, U.: Molecular definition of the chromosome 7 deletion in
Williams syndrome and parent-of-origin effects on growth. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 59: 781-792, 1996.

28. Reidy, J. P.: Cutis hyperelastica (Ehlers-Danlos) and cutis laxa. Brit.
J. Plast. Surg. 16: 84-94, 1963.

29. Rosenbloom, J.: Elastin: relation of protein and gene structure
to disease. Lab. Invest. 51: 605-623, 1984.

30. Sephel, G. C.; Byers, P. H.; Holbrook, K. A.; Davidson, J. M.
: Heterogeneity of elastin expression in cutis laxa fibroblast strains. J.
Invest. Derm. 93: 147-153, 1989.

31. Szabo, Z.; Crepeau, M. W.; Mitchell, A. L.; Stephan, M. J.; Puntel,
R. A.; Loke, K. Y.; Kirk, R. C.; Urban, Z.: Aortic aneurysmal disease
and cutis laxa caused by defects in the elastin gene. (Letter) J.
Med. Genet. 43: 255-258, 2006.

32. Tassabehji, M.; Metcalfe, K.; Donnai, D.; Hurst, J.; Reardon,
W.; Burch, M.; Read, A. P.: Elastin: genomic structure and point
mutations in patients with supravalvular aortic stenosis. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 6: 1029-1036, 1997.

33. Tassabehji, M.; Metcalfe, K.; Hurst, J.; Ashcroft, G. S.; Kielty,
C.; Wilmot, C.; Donnai, D.; Read, A. P.; Jones, C. J. P.: An elastin
gene mutation producing abnormal tropoelastin and abnormal elastic
fibres in a patient with autosomal dominant cutis laxa. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 7: 1021-1028, 1998.

34. Tromp, G.; Christiano, A.; Goldstein, N.; Indik, Z.; Boyd, C.;
Rosenbloom, J.; Deak, S.; Prockop, D.; Kuivaniemi, H.: A to G polymorphism
in ELN gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 19: 4314 only, 1991.

35. Uitto, J.; Christiano, A. M.; Kahari, V.-M.; Bashir, M. M.; Rosenbloom,
J.: Molecular biology and pathology of human elastin. Biochem. Soc.
Trans. 19: 824-829, 1991.

36. Urban, Z.; Gao, J.; Pope, F. M.; Davis, E. C.: Autosomal dominant
cutis laxa with severe lung disease: synthesis and matrix deposition
of mutant tropoelastin. J. Invest. Derm. 124: 1193-1199, 2005.

37. Urban, Z.; Michels, V. V.; Thibodeau, S. N.; Davis, E. C.; Bonnefont,
J.-P.; Munnich, A.; Eyskens, B.; Gewillig, M.; Devriendt, K.; Boyd,
C. D.: Isolated supravalvular aortic stenosis: functional haploinsufficiency
of the elastin gene as a result of nonsense-mediated decay. Hum.
Genet. 106: 577-588, 2000.

38. Urban, Z.; Michels, V. V.; Thibodeau, S. N.; Donis-Keller, H.;
Csiszar, K.; Boyd, C. D.: Supravalvular aortic stenosis: a splice
site mutation within the elastin gene results in reduced expression
of two aberrantly spliced transcripts. Hum. Genet. 104: 135-142,
1999.

39. Urban, Z.; Riazi, S.; Seidl, T. L.; Katahira, J.; Smoot, L. B.;
Chitayat, D.; Boyd, C. D.; Hinek, A.: Connection between elastin
haploinsufficiency and increased cell proliferation in patients with
supravalvular aortic stenosis and Williams-Beuren syndrome. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 71: 30-44, 2002.

40. Urban, Z.; Zhang, J.; Davis, E. C.; Maeda, G. K.; Kumar, A.; Stalker,
H.; Belmont, J. W.; Boyd, C. D.; Wallace, M. R.: Supravalvular aortic
stenosis: genetic and molecular dissection of a complex mutation in
the elastin gene. Hum. Genet. 109: 512-520, 2001.

41. Wydner, K. S.; Sechler, J. L.; Boyd, C. D.; Passmore, H. C.:
Use of an intron length polymorphism to localize the tropoelastin
gene to mouse chromosome 5 in a region of linkage conservation with
human chromosome 7. Genomics 23: 125-131, 1994.

42. Zhang, M.-C.; Giro, M.; Quaglino, D., Jr.; Davidson, J. M.: Transforming
growth factor-beta reverses a posttranscriptional defect in elastin
synthesis in a cutis laxa skin fibroblast strain. J. Clin. Invest. 95:
986-994, 1995.

43. Zhang, M.-C.; He, L.; Giro, M.; Yong, S. L.; Tiller, G. E.; Davidson,
J. M.: Cutis laxa arising from frameshift mutations in exon 30 of
the elastin gene (ELN). J. Biol. Chem. 274: 981-986, 1999.

44. Zhang, M. C.; He, L.; Yong, S. L.; Tiller, G. E.; Davidson, J.
M.: Cutis laxa arising from a frame shift mutation in the elastin
gene (ELN). (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61 (suppl.): A353 only,
1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/14/2012
Kelly A. Przylepa - updated: 11/20/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/1/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/11/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/19/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/10/2004
Natalie E. Krasikov - updated: 2/19/2004
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 2/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/17/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/6/2001
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 4/17/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/16/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/14/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/18/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/5/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/1/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/15/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/24/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/15/1997
Moyra Smith - updated: 10/21/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 03/15/2012
terry: 3/14/2012
alopez: 1/26/2012
alopez: 1/24/2012
carol: 9/1/2010
wwang: 8/25/2010
ckniffin: 8/16/2010
carol: 8/9/2010
alopez: 1/6/2010
carol: 11/26/2008
terry: 11/20/2008
wwang: 10/14/2008
terry: 9/25/2008
mgross: 5/1/2008
mgross: 6/11/2007
carol: 4/20/2006
carol: 4/19/2006
terry: 4/19/2006
tkritzer: 5/26/2004
terry: 5/10/2004
carol: 2/19/2004
terry: 2/19/2004
cwells: 2/11/2003
tkritzer: 7/29/2002
tkritzer: 7/26/2002
terry: 7/17/2002
carol: 1/2/2002
mcapotos: 12/13/2001
terry: 12/6/2001
carol: 5/18/2001
mcapotos: 5/10/2001
mcapotos: 4/17/2001
carol: 8/29/2000
terry: 8/16/2000
carol: 3/15/2000
mgross: 5/25/1999
mgross: 5/18/1999
terry: 5/14/1999
alopez: 3/19/1999
alopez: 3/18/1999
mgross: 3/17/1999
carol: 1/6/1999
terry: 1/5/1999
carol: 12/2/1998
terry: 12/1/1998
terry: 8/11/1998
carol: 6/22/1998
terry: 6/19/1998
alopez: 6/18/1998
terry: 6/15/1998
terry: 5/29/1998
terry: 10/28/1997
alopez: 10/27/1997
terry: 10/24/1997
mark: 10/6/1997
mark: 9/9/1997
mark: 8/19/1997
jenny: 8/19/1997
terry: 8/15/1997
mark: 1/29/1997
mark: 10/21/1996
mark: 11/6/1995
terry: 11/7/1994
mimadm: 9/24/1994
jason: 6/8/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994
pfoster: 4/1/1994

615166	TITLE *615166 COX ASSEMBLY MITOCHONDRIAL PROTEIN 1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; CMC1
;;MITOCHONDRIAL METALLOCHAPERONE-LIKE PROTEIN;;
C3ORF68
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Based on experiments in yeast, CMC1 is predicted to be a mitochondrial
copper chaperone that facilitates copper incorporation into
mitochondrial enzymes that require copper as a cofactor (Horn et al.,
2008).

CLONING

By searching databases, Horn et al. (2008) identified orthologs of yeast
Cmc1 in vertebrates, flies, and plants. The deduced 106-amino acid human
CMC1 protein contains 4 conserved cysteines in twin Cx(9)C motifs that
are predicted to coordinate copper. Epitope-tagged CMC1 colocalized with
COX subunit 1 (MTCO1; 516030) in a typical mitochondrial network
pattern. In yeast, Cmc1 localized to the mitochondrial intermembrane
space.

GENE FUNCTION

Horn et al. (2008) found that deletion of Cmc1 in yeast impaired cell
growth and respiratory capacity, and reduced synthesis of Cox1. Growth
was significantly increased with exogenous copper supplementation.
Spectroscopic analysis of recombinant yeast Cmc1 was consistent with
Cmc1 coordination of copper as Cu(I)-thiolate.

GENE STRUCTURE

Horn et al. (2008) determined that the CMC1 gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Horn et al. (2008) mapped the CMC1 gene to
chromosome 3p24.

REFERENCE 1. Horn, D.; Al-Ali, H.; Barrientos, A.: Cmc1p is a conserved mitochondrial
twin CX(9)C protein involved in cytochrome c oxidase biogenesis. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 28: 4354-4364, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/8/2013

EDITED alopez: 04/08/2013

