611282	TITLE *611282 DYNAMIN-BINDING PROTEIN; DNMBP
;;TUBA;;
KIAA1010
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DNMBP belongs to the DBL (311030) family of guanine nucleotide exchange
factors and plays a role in the regulation of cell junctions (Otani et
al., 2006).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned DNMBP, which they designated
KIAA1010. The transcript contains a repetitive element in its 3-prime
UTR, and the deduced protein contains motifs suggesting it is a guanine
nucleotide regulatory protein. RT-PCR ELISA detected moderate expression
in ovary, testis, liver, and lung and low expression in all other
tissues examined. Expression was low in all specific brain regions
examined and moderate in spinal cord.

Using the partial KIAA1010 sequence for 5-prime RACE of muscle and brain
cDNA libraries, Salazar et al. (2003) obtained a full-length cDNA
encoding DNMBP, which they called Tuba, in line with the tradition of
naming large synaptic proteins after musical instruments. The deduced
1,577-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 178 kD. It
has 4 N-terminal SH3 domains, followed by a proline-rich region, a
coiled-coil domain, a DBL homology (DH) domain, a BIN (see 601248)/
amphiphysin (see 600418)/Rvs (BAR) domain, and 2 C-terminal SH3 domains.
Northern blot analysis detected variable expression of 7.3- and 6.0-kb
transcripts in all tissues examined. Mouse tissues expressed an
additional smaller transcript. Immunohistochemical analysis of rat brain
cryosections revealed colocalization of Dnmbp with synaptic markers in
neuronal perikarya and dendrites. In addition, Dnmbp localized with the
Golgi complex in neuronal cell bodies.

GENE FUNCTION

Salazar et al. (2003) found that the isolated N-terminal SH3 domains of
Tuba interacted with dynamin-1 (DNM1; 602377) in rat brain extracts and
Chinese hamster ovary cells. The C-terminal SH3 domain of Tuba bound a
variety of actin regulatory proteins, including N-Wasp (WASL; 605056),
Wire (WIPF2; 609692), Wave1 (WASF1; 605035), and Mena (ENAH; 609061), in
rat brain extracts, and it promoted F-actin (see 102610) recruitment in
a mouse neuronal cell line. The isolated DH domain of Tuba showed
concentration-dependent guanyl nucleotide exchange activity with Cdc42
(116952), but not with Rho (ARHA; 165390) or Rac (602048).

Otani et al. (2006) showed that Tuba concentrated at the apical-most
region of cell junctions in a human colon carcinoma cell line via its
interaction with ZO1 (TJP1; 601009). RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated
depletion of Tuba altered the geometric configuration of cell junctions,
resulting in a curved and slack appearance. At the subcellular level,
Tuba inactivation modified the assembly of junctional F-actin and
E-cadherin (CDH1; 192090). Tuba RNAi also retarded cell junction
formation in calcium-switch experiments. Suppression of CDC42 activity
or depletion of N-WASP, an effector of CDC42, mimicked the effect of
Tuba depletion. Conversely, overexpression of dominant-active CDC42 or
N-WASP enhanced junction formation in Tuba-depleted cells. Otani et al.
(2006) concluded that Tuba controls the shaping of cell junctions
through local activation of CDC42 and its effectors.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the DNMBP gene
to chromosome 10. Salazar et al. (2003) stated that the mouse Dnmbp gene
maps to chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

2. Otani, T.; Ichii, T.; Aono, S.; Takeichi, M.: Cdc42 GEF Tuba regulates
the junctional configuration of simple epithelial cells. J. Cell
Biol. 175: 135-146, 2006.

3. Salazar, M. A.; Kwiatkowski, A. V.; Pellegrini, L.; Cestra, G.;
Butler, M. H.; Rossman, K. L.; Serna, D. M.; Sondek, J.; Gertler,
F. B.; De Camilli, P.: Tuba, a novel protein containing Bin/amphiphysin/Rvs
and Dbl homology domains, links dynamin to regulation of the actin
cytoskeleton. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 49031-49043, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/1/2007

EDITED mgross: 08/01/2007

120105	TITLE *120105 COLIPASE, PANCREATIC; CLPS
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Pancreatic colipase is a 12-kD polypeptide cofactor for pancreatic
lipase (EC 3.1.1.3; 246600), an enzyme essential for the absorption of
dietary long-chain triglyceride fatty acids. Colipase is thought to
anchor lipase noncovalently to the surface of lipid micelles,
counteracting the destabilizing influence of intestinal bile salts
(summary by Davis et al., 1991).

CLONING

Using primers derived from the known amino acid sequence, Davis et al.
(1991) employed the PCR to produce a cDNA clone corresponding to the
complete coding region of the human procolipase mRNA.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sims and Lowe (1992) found that the CLPS gene has 3 exons and that the
5-prime-flanking region contains a TATA box, a GC box, and a 28-bp
region with homology to the rat pancreatic-specific enhancer.

MAPPING

By the study of mouse/human somatic cell hybrids, Davis et al. (1991)
determined that the CLPS gene is located in the region 6pter-p21.1.

Sims and Lowe (1992) confirmed the assignment of the CLPS gene to
chromosome 6 by blots of hamster-human somatic cell hybrid DNA using the
entire colipase cDNA.

ANIMAL MODEL

Zhang et al. (2006) reported a mechanism by which constant darkness
regulates the gene expression of fat catabolic enzymes in mice. Genes
for murine procolipase (Clps) and pancreatic lipase-related protein-2
(Plrp2; 604423) are activated in a circadian manner in peripheral organs
during 12-hour dark:12-hour dark (DD) but not light-dark (LD) cycles.
This mechanism is deregulated in circadian-deficient Per1/Per2 double
mutant mice. Zhang et al. (2006) identified circadian-regulated
5-prime-AMP, which is elevated in the blood of DD mice, as a key
mediator of this response. Synthetic 5-prime-AMP induced torpor (a
hibernation-like state) and murine Clps expression in LD mice. Torpor
induced by metabolic stress was associated with elevated 5-prime-AMP
levels in DD mice. Levels of glucose and nonesterified fatty acid in the
blood were reversed in DD and LD mice. Induction of murine Clps
expression by 5-prime-AMP in LD mice was reciprocally linked to blood
glucose levels. Zhang et al. (2006) concluded that their findings
uncovered a circadian metabolic rhythm in mammals.

REFERENCE 1. Davis, R. C.; Xia, Y.; Mohandas, T.; Schotz, M. C.; Lusis, A. J.
: Assignment of the human pancreatic colipase gene to chromosome 6p21.1
to pter. Genomics 10: 262-265, 1991.

2. Sims, H. F.; Lowe, M. E.: The human colipase gene: isolation,
chromosomal location, and tissue-specific expression. Biochemistry 31:
7120-7125, 1992.

3. Zhang, J.; Kaasik, K.; Blackburn, M. R.; Lee, C. C.: Constant
darkness is a circadian metabolic signal in mammals. Nature 439:
340-343, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/26/2006

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/5/1991

EDITED carol: 11/15/2011
alopez: 6/7/2006
terry: 5/26/2006
mark: 11/27/1996
carol: 10/26/1993
carol: 10/1/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 8/7/1991
carol: 4/18/1991
carol: 2/7/1991

611883	TITLE *611883 BRCA2- AND CDKN1A-INTERACTING PROTEIN; BCCIP
;;p21- AND CDK-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; TOK1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using the C-terminal half of p21 (CDK1A; 116899) as bait in a yeast
2-hybrid screen of a brain cDNA library, Ono et al. (2000) cloned BCCIP,
which they called TOK1. EST database analysis and PCR of a brain cDNA
library revealed 2 TOK1 variants, TOK1-alpha and -beta. The deduced
proteins contain 322 and 314 amino acids, respectively, and are
identical for the first 259 amino acids. Northern blot analysis using a
probe common to both TOK1 variants detected a major 1.5-kb transcript
and a minor 3-kb transcript. Specific probes detected both TOK1 variants
as 1.5-kb transcripts. TOK1-alpha was highly expressed in skeletal
muscle, with little to no expression in other tissues examined.
TOK1-beta was highly expressed in skeletal muscle and heart, moderately
expressed in placenta and pancreas, and weakly expressed in brain,
kidney, and liver. Western blot analysis detected TOK1-alpha and
TOK1-beta as 50- and 45-kD proteins, respectively. In synchronized HeLa
cells, expression of TOK1-alpha began after G2/M phase and peaked before
S phase. TOK1-beta was expressed throughout the cell cycle, but like
TOK1-alpha, its expression increased before S phase.

Using an internal conserved region of BRCA2 (600185) as bait in a yeast
2-hybrid screen, followed by database analysis, Liu et al. (2001) cloned
BCCIP-alpha and -beta, which correspond to TOK1-alpha and -beta,
respectively. Both BCCIP isoforms have an N-terminal acidic domain and
an evolutionarily conserved internal domain, followed by the C-terminal
variable domain. The internal domain contains a putative calcium-binding
domain. Western blot analysis detected both BCCIP proteins in all
tissues examined. Immunohistochemical analysis of several human cell
lines showed nuclear expression of endogenous BCCIP.

GENE FUNCTION

Using mutation analysis, Ono et al. (2000) found that TOK1-alpha bound
to the C-terminal proximal region of p21. However, TOK1-beta did not
bind p21. TOK1-alpha formed a ternary complex with p21 and an active
form of CDK2 (116953) in human embryonic kidney cells via its
interaction with p21. TOK1-alpha enhanced the inhibitory activity of p21
toward the histone H1 (see 142709) kinase activity of CDK2.

By coimmunoprecipitation analysis of transfected human embryonic kidney
cells, Liu et al. (2001) confirmed that BCCIP-alpha interacted with
endogenous BRCA2. Expression of BCCIP-beta protein was relatively
consistent among various tumor cell lines examined. In contrast,
expression of BCCIP-alpha protein was reduced in some brain, breast, and
endometrial tumor cell lines and increased in some endometrial tumor
cell lines, with relatively consistent expression among lung cancer cell
lines. BCCIP-alpha expression inhibited growth of some breast and brain
tumor cells, but it had no effect on other types of cancer cells.

Lu et al. (2007) stated that BCCIP regulates BRCA2 and RAD51 (179617)
nuclear focus formation, DNA double-strand break-induced homologous
recombination, and cell cycle progression. They transfected full-length
and truncated fragments of BCCIP into a human fibrosarcoma cell line and
found that BCCIP fragments that interacted with either BRCA2 or p21
inhibited homologous recombination similarly. Transient downregulation
of BCCIP in human cells did not affect nonspecific integration of
transfected DNA, but it significantly inhibited homology-directed gene
targeting. Cells with constitutive downregulation of BCCIP showed
increased levels of spontaneous single-stranded DNA and double-strand
breaks. Lu et al. (2007) concluded that multiple domains of BCCIP are
involved in homologous recombination and that BCCIP plays a critical
role in resolving spontaneous DNA damage.

Using a matched normal/tumor cDNA array, Meng et al. (2003) found
reduced expression of both BCCIP-alpha and -beta in kidney tumors.

GENE STRUCTURE

Meng et al. (2003) determined that the BCCIP gene contains 9 exons and
spans about 30 kb. The 5-prime end of the BCCIP gene abuts the UROS gene
(606938) on the opposite strand in a head-to-head manner. BCCIP and UROS
share a functional intergenic bidirectional promoter that contains
binding sites for various transcription factors. The last 3 exons of
BCCIP overlap with seven 3-prime exons of the DHX32 gene (607960) on the
opposite strand.

MAPPING

By FISH and genomic sequence analysis, Liu et al. (2001) mapped the
BCCIP gene to chromosome 10q25.3-q26.2.

REFERENCE 1. Liu, J.; Yuan, Y.; Huan, J.; Shen, Z.: Inhibition of breast and
brain cancer cell growth by BCCIP-alpha, an evolutionarily conserved
nuclear protein that interacts with BRCA2. Oncogene 20: 336-345,
2001.

2. Lu, H.; Yue, J.; Meng, X.; Nickoloff, J. A.; Shen, Z.: BCCIP regulates
homologous recombination by distinct domains and suppresses spontaneous
DNA damage. Nucleic Acids Res. 35: 7160-7170, 2007.

3. Meng, X.; Liu, J.; Shen, Z.: Genomic structure of the human BCCIP
gene and its expression in cancer. Gene 302: 139-146, 2003.

4. Ono, T.; Kitaura, H.; Ugai, H.; Murata, T.; Yokoyama, K. K.; Iguchi-Ariga,
S. M. M.; Ariga, H.: TOK-1, a novel p21(Cip1)-binding protein that
cooperatively enhances p21-dependent inhibitory activity toward CDK2
kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 31145-31154, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/7/2008

EDITED wwang: 03/31/2010
mgross: 3/7/2008

613771	TITLE *613771 TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN 205; TMEM205
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening for genes upregulated in cisplatin-resistant human cancer
cell lines compared with parental cell lines, Shen et al. (2010) cloned
TMEM205. The deduced 189-amino acid protein has 4 transmembrane domains.
Quantitative real-time PCR detected variable TMEM205 expression in all
29 human tissues examined, with highest expression in pancreas, followed
by adrenal gland, thyroid, liver, mammary gland, prostate, kidney, and
retina. Lowest expression was detected in skeletal muscle. Western blot
analysis detected TMEM205 at an apparent molecular mass of about 21 kD
in membrane fractions of early cisplatin-resistant cells. Immunoelectron
microscopy showed that TMEM205 localized to cell surface microvilli.

GENE FUNCTION

Using RT-PCR and immunoblot analyses, Shen et al. (2010) confirmed that
expression of TMEM205 was upregulated in cisplatin-resistant human and
mouse cells compared with parental cell lines. Transfection of TMEM205
into naive cells induced cisplatin resistance. Development of cisplatin
resistance was associated with reduced intracellular cisplatin levels
and redistribution of TMEM205 from the cell surface to the trans-Golgi
region. Shen et al. (2010) hypothesized that TMEM205 may be a cisplatin
transporter that permits drug resistance by reducing the intracellular
cisplatin concentration.

MAPPING

Hartz (2011) mapped the TMEM205 gene to chromosome 19p13.2 based on an
alignment of the TMEM205 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AY358949) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/23/2011.

2. Shen, D.-W.; Ma, J.; Okabe, M.; Zhang, G.; Xia, D.; Gottesman,
M. M.: Elevated expression of TMEM205, a hypothetical membrane protein,
is associated with cisplatin resistance. J. Cell. Physiol. 225:
822-828, 2010.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/24/2011

EDITED mgross: 02/24/2011
mgross: 2/24/2011

