605581	TITLE *605581 BETA-1,3-N-ACETYLGLUCOSYAMINYLTRANSFERASE 2; B3GNT2
;;BETA-1,3-N-ACETYLGLUCOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE 1, FORMERLY; B3GNT1, FORMERLY;;
B3GNT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

B3GNT2 encodes a poly-N-acetyllactosamine synthase enzyme (EC 2.4.1.149)
that catalyzes both the initiation and elongation of N-acetyllactosamine
chains (Zhou et al., 1999).

CLONING

By searching EST databases for sequences similar to beta-3 GalT enzymes,
PCR, and probing a fetal brain cDNA library, Zhou et al. (1999) isolated
a cDNA encoding B3GNT2, which they called B3GNT. In an erratum, the
authors noted that a laboratory designation error resulted in the
publication of the sequence and expression pattern of B3GNT6 (615291) in
the original paper instead of those of B3GNT2. The correct B3GNT2
sequence, published in the erratum, encodes a 397-amino acid protein
that is 87% identical to the 397-amino acid mouse protein. B3GNT2
contains 3 potential N-glycosylation sites and 3 conserved cysteines.
Northern blot analysis detected a single major 3.3-kb B3GNT2 transcript
that was ubiquitously expressed.

GENE FUNCTION

Functional analysis by Zhou et al. (1999) showed that B3GNT had a marked
preference for Gal(beta1-4)GlcNAc-based acceptors, whereas it had no
activity on type-1 Gal(beta1-3)GlcNAc or O-glycan core-1
Gal(beta1-3)GalNAc acceptors. B3GNT could both initiate and elongate
poly-N-acetyllactosamine chains, activities that confirmed its identity
with poly-N-acetyllactosamine synthase (EC 2.4.1.149).

Seko and Yamashita (2008) stated that a mixture of soluble forms of
B3GNT2 and B3GNT8 (615337) in vitro had increased enzymatic activity
over that shown for either enzyme alone (Seko and Yamashita, 2005). By
coimmunoprecipitation analysis they found that the 2 enzymes interacted
in transfected COS-7 cells. Mutation in the DDD motif of B3GNT2 or QDD
motif of B3GNT8 inactivated the enzymes but did not abrogate their
interaction. Mixing active and inactive enzymes revealed that the
activity of B3GNT2, but not B3GNT8, was increased by the interaction.
B3GNT8 did not alter the substrate specificity of B3GNT2, but augmented
its turnover velocity. Murine B3gnt8 also activated human B3GNT2, and
human B3GNT8 activated murine B3gnt2, indicating conservation of effect.
Levels of both B3GNT8 and poly-N-acetyllactosamine (polyLacNAc) moieties
increased in differentiated HL-60 cells. Overexpression of either active
or inactive B3GNT8, but not B3GNT2, increased polyLacNAc content in
differentiated HL-60 cells, suggesting that exogenous B3GNT8 activated
preexisting free B3GNT2.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhou et al. (1999) noted that the GC content of the human and mouse
B3GNT2 genes is elevated, at 75% and 67%, respectively.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the B3GNT2 gene to chromosome 2p15 based on an
alignment of the B3GNT2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB049584) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Togayachi et al. (2010) stated that the mouse B3gnt2 gene maps to
chromosome 11.

ANIMAL MODEL

Togayachi et al. (2010) observed a reduced number of repeating
polylactosamine chains on N-glycans in tissues of B3gnt2 -/- mice.
N-glycan core structures were unaltered. B3gnt2 -/- splenic T cells
showed hyperactivation with prolonged calcium influx upon T-cell
receptor (see 186830) stimulation, resulting in an elevated
proliferative response. B3gnt2 -/- B cells also exhibited
hyperproliferation upon B-cell receptor (see 147020) stimulation.
Togayachi et al. (2010) concluded that B3GNT2 encodes a major
polylactosamine synthase and that the lack of polylactosamine repeats on
B3gnt2 -/- mouse lymphocyte receptor molecules results in lymphocyte
hyperactivation.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/27/2013.

2. Seko, A.; Yamashita, K.: Characterization of a novel galactose
beta-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase (beta-3Gn-T8): the complex
formation of beta-3Gn-T2 and beta-3Gn-T8 enhances enzymatic activity. Glycobiology 15:
943-945, 2005.

3. Seko, A.; Yamashita, K.: Activation of beta-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase-2
(beta-3Gn-T2) by beta-3Gn-T8. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 33094-33100, 2008.

4. Togayachi, A.; Kozono, Y.; Kuno, A.; Ohkura, T.; Sato, T.; Hirabayashi,
J.; Ikehara, Y.; Narimatsu, H.: Beta-3-GNT2 (B3GNT2), a major polylactosamine
synthase: analysis of B3GNT2-deficient mice. Methods Enzymol. 479:
185-204, 2010.

5. Zhou, D.; Dinter, A.; Gallego, R. G.; Kamerling, J. P.; Vliegenthart,
J. F. G.; Berger, E. G.; Hennet, T.: A beta-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase
with poly-N-acetyllactosamine synthase activity is structurally related
to beta-1,3-galactosyltransferases. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 406-411,
1999. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 11673-11675, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/27/2013

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/24/2001

EDITED tpirozzi: 08/06/2013
tpirozzi: 8/5/2013
tpirozzi: 7/25/2013
mgross: 6/27/2013
joanna: 6/26/2013
ckniffin: 6/25/2013
carol: 5/16/2001
mgross: 4/20/2001
mgross: 1/25/2001
mgross: 1/24/2001

608237	TITLE *608237 GALACTOSE-3-O-SULFOTRANSFERASE 2; GAL3ST2
;;GLYCOPROTEIN BETA-GALACTOSE 3-PRIME-SULFOTRANSFERASE; GP3ST
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Sulfated glycoconjugates are found in glycoproteins, proteoglycans,
glycolipids, and polysaccharides. GAL3ST2 transfers a sulfate group to
the hydroxyl at C3 of nonreducing beta-galactosyl residues (Honke et
al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to CST (602300),
followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE of a colon cDNA library, Honke et
al. (2001) cloned GAL3ST2, which they called GP3ST. The deduced
398-amino acid type II membrane protein has a calculated molecular mass
of about 46 kD. GP3ST contains an N-terminal transmembrane domain, two
5-prime-phosphoadenosine 3-prime phosphosulfate (PAPS)-binding motifs,
which are characteristic of sulfotransferases, and 6 potential
N-glycosylation sites. Northern blot and RT-PCR analyses detected
ubiquitous expression of GP3ST; highest expression was in heart,
stomach, colon, liver, and spleen. In situ hybridization detected
expression of GP3ST in epithelial cells lining the lower to middle layer
of the crypts in colonic mucosa, hepatocytes surrounding the central
vein of the liver, extravillous cytotrophoblasts in the basal plate and
septum of the placenta, renal tubules of the kidney, and neuronal cells
of the cerebral cortex.

GENE FUNCTION

Using radiolabeled PAPS as the sulfate donor, Honke et al. (2001)
determined that recombinant GP3ST in lysates of overexpressing COS-1
cells showed sulfotransferase activity toward oligosaccharides
containing nonreducing beta-galactosides, such as N-acetyllactosamine,
lactose, lacto-N-tetraose, lacto-N-neotetraose, and O-glycoside core-1
oligosaccharide. Nuclear magnetic resonance analysis of purified
products indicated that the hydroxyl group at C3 was esterified by a
sulfate. The optimal pH was between 6.0 and 6.5, and Cu(2+) and Zn(2+)
strongly inhibited the sulfotransferase activity.

Carbohydrates, predominantly sulfated N-linked glycans, account for
approximately 30% of the mass of Tamm-Horsfall glycoprotein (THP, or
UMOD; 191845), a major protein of human urine. Greimel et al. (2006)
showed that both membrane-bound and soluble recombinant human GP3ST
incorporated radiolabeled SO4 into purified human urine THP in a
concentration-dependent manner.

GENE STRUCTURE

Honke et al. (2001) determined that the GP3ST gene contains 2 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Honke et al. (2001) mapped the GP3ST gene
to chromosome 2q37.3.

REFERENCE 1. Greimel, P.; Jabs, S.; Storch, S.; Cherif, S.; Honke, K.; Braulke,
T.; Thiem, J.: In vitro sulfation of N-acetyllactosaminide by soluble
recombinant human beta-Gal-3-prime-sulfotransferase. Carbohydrate
Res. 341: 918-924, 2006.

2. Honke, K.; Tsuda, M.; Koyota, S.; Wada, Y.; Iida-Tanaka, N.; Ishizuka,
I.; Nakayama, J.; Taniguchi, N.: Molecular cloning and characterization
of a human beta-Gal-3-prime-sulfotransferase that acts on both type
1 and type 2 (Gal-beta-1-3/1-4-GlcNAc-R) oligosaccharides. J. Biol.
Chem. 276: 267-274, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/8/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/10/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/11/2013
terry: 2/8/2013
alopez: 2/21/2007
terry: 2/20/2007
mgross: 2/1/2007
mgross: 11/10/2003

600983	TITLE *600983 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR SUBFAMILY 3, GROUP C, MEMBER 2; NR3C2
;;MINERALOCORTICOID RECEPTOR; MLR; MCR; MR;;
ALDOSTERONE RECEPTOR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mineralocorticoids, such as aldosterone, are mainly involved in the
maintenance of water and salt homeostasis by regulating vectorial sodium
transport in tight epithelia. Aldosterone has also been implicated in
other physiologic processes, including development of cardiac fibrosis
and differentiation of brown adipose tissue. NR3C2, or mineralocorticoid
receptor (MR), belongs to the nuclear receptor superfamily and functions
as a ligand-dependent transcription factor that mediates the effects of
aldosterone on a variety of target tissues, including the distal parts
of the nephron, the distal colon, the cardiovascular and central nervous
systems, and brown adipose tissue. MR possesses the same affinity for
glucocorticoids as for mineralocorticoids, suggesting that it may also
function as a high-affinity glucocorticoid receptor (summary by Zennaro
et al., 2001).

CLONING

By low-stringency Southern analysis of placenta DNA using human
glucocorticoid receptor (GR, or GCCR; 138040) cDNA as probe, followed by
screening human kidney cDNA libraries, Arriza et al. (1987) cloned
NR3C2, which they called MR. The deduced 984-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 107 kD. Like glucocorticoid receptor,
mineralocorticoid receptor has an N-terminal cysteine-rich DNA-binding
region and a C-terminal steroid-binding domain separated by a putative
hinge region. Northern blot analysis of rat tissues detected Mr
expression in classic mineralocorticoid target tissues, such as kidney
and gut, as well as in brain, pituitary, and heart. It was also highly
expressed in hippocampus.

Using Western blot analysis, Alnemri et al. (1991) showed that human MR
was expressed in insect cells as 3 proteins with apparent molecular
masses of 115, 119, and 125 kD. These proteins were highly
phosphorylated. Immunofluorescence analysis showed that MR was primarily
cytoplasmic in the absence of aldosterone, and that activation by
aldosterone provoked translocation of the receptor to the nucleus.
Analytical gel filtration and sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation
revealed that MR associated in a complex of 9S to 10S, which was reduced
to about 4S following activation by aldosterone.

Zennaro et al. (1995) identified 2 splice variants of MR, called
MR-alpha and -beta, that contain alternative first exons. The coding
region beginning in exon 2 is identical in MR-alpha and -beta. Using in
situ hybridization with exon-specific probes, Zennaro et al. (1997)
detected expression of both variants in all typical human MR-expressing
cells and tissues analyzed. MR-alpha and -beta were present in distal
tubules of kidney, in cardiomyocytes, in enterocytes of colonic mucosa,
and in keratinocytes and sweat glands. Zennaro et al. (1997)
demonstrated that MR-alpha and -beta were coexpressed in aldosterone
target tissues.

Bloem et al. (1995) identified an MR splice variant in both human and
rat that contains an additional 12 nucleotides at the 3-prime end of
exon 3, resulting in a 4-amino acid insertion in the DNA-binding domain.
RT-PCR detected the short and long MR variants in all rat tissues
examined and in human white blood cell mRNA. The long transcript was
less abundant in all rat tissues except liver, where both transcripts
appeared equally expressed.

Using RT-PCR, Zennaro et al. (2001) identified 3 splice variants of MR
that were variably expressed in human tissues and cell lines:
full-length MR, a variant lacking exon 5, and a variant lacking both
exons 5 and 6, which they called MR-delta-5,6. The variant lacking exon
5 encodes a protein lacking part of the N-terminal DNA-binding domain
and all of the hinge region. Skipping of both exons 5 and 6 in
MR-delta-5,6 introduces a frameshift and a premature stop codon,
resulting in a 706-amino acid protein with a calculated molecular mass
of 75 kD. MR-delta-5,6 includes the complete N-terminal DNA-binding
region of full-length MR, but it has a novel 35-amino acid tail
replacing the hinge region and hormone-binding domain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zennaro et al. (1995) determined that the human MR gene spans over
approximately 400 kb and contains 10 exons. Exons 1-alpha and 1-beta are
composed only of 5-prime untranslated sequence and splice into a common
translated region. The N-terminal part of the receptor is encoded by
exon 2; small exons 3 and 4 encode each of the 2 zinc fingers of the
DNA-binding domain. The hormone-binding domain is encoded by exons 5
through 9.

MAPPING

Arriza et al. (1987) mapped the NR3C2 gene to chromosome 4 by testing
their cDNA against a panel of rodent-human somatic cell hybrids. To
confirm the assignment to chromosome 4, they tested a restricted set of
microcell hybrids, each of which carries 1 to 3 human chromosomes. By in
situ hybridization using a biotinylated cDNA clone, Morrison et al.
(1989, 1990) regionalized the NR3C2 gene to 4q31.1; by the same method,
Fan et al. (1989) assigned NR3C2 gene to 4q31.2.

GENE FUNCTION

Expression studies by Arriza et al. (1987) demonstrated the ability of
MR to bind aldosterone with high affinity and to activate gene
transcription in response to aldosterone. MR also showed high affinity
for glucocorticoids. Arriza et al. (1987) speculated that, since the
circulating level of glucocorticoids is several times higher than those
of aldosterone, the primary mineralocorticoid, glucocorticoid activation
of MR may be functionally significant.

By assaying human MR overexpressed in insect cells, Alnemri et al.
(1991) showed that MR bound aldosterone, cortisol, cortexolone, and
progesterone with high affinity. MR bound immobilized DNA even as a
large inactive complex, and activation did not increase its DNA-binding
capacity.

Zennaro et al. (1995) found that expression of MR-beta was reduced in
sweat glands of 2 patients with mineralocorticoid abnormalities, one
with Conn syndrome and the other with Liddle syndrome (177200). However,
MR expression was not altered in a patient with type I
pseudohypoaldosteronism (see 177735).

The hormone-binding domain (HBD) of MR contains 4 cysteine residues,
C808, C849, C910, and C942, and Lupo et al. (1998) mutated each of these
into serine in an MR construct containing only the DNA-binding domain
(DBD), the hinge region, and the HBD. Most of these mutations altered
substrate affinity, but not substrate specificity, of the construct. The
C849S substitution reduced binding to aldosterone, and the C942S
substitution abrogated binding to all substrates tested. The wildtype
DBD-hinge-HBD construct showed about 20% of the transcriptional activity
of full-length MR in reporter gene assays. The C849S substitution
reduced the transcriptional activity of the construct, and the C942S
substitution inactivated the construct. Lupo et al. (1998) concluded
that C849 and C943 are critical for ligand binding of MR.

Using alanine scanning mutagenesis, Hellal-Levy et al. (2000) studied
the role of the residues of the loop connecting H11 and H12 in the
activation of the human mineralocorticoid receptor (MR). H950A retained
the ligand binding and transcriptional activities of the wildtype
receptor and interacted with coactivators. In contrast, F956A had no
receptor functions. Aldosterone bound to the mutant MRs (L952A, K953A,
V954A, E955A, P957A) with nearly the same affinity as to the wildtype
receptor and caused a receptor conformational change in these mutant MRs
as it does for the wildtype receptor. The authors proposed that the
integrity of the H11-H12 loop is crucial for folding the receptor into a
ligand-binding competent state and for establishing the network of
contacts that stabilize the active receptor conformation.

Zennaro et al. (2001) showed that in vitro-translated MR-delta-5,6
lacked the ability to bind aldosterone or dexamethasone. MR-delta-5,6
bound DNA and functioned as a ligand-independent transactivator of the
consensus glucocorticoid response element (GRE) from the mouse mammary
tumor virus promoter. MR-delta-5,6 did not interact with full-length MR,
but coexpression of MR-delta-5,6 increased the transactivation potential
of full-length MR or GR at high doses of hormone. In addition,
MR-delta-5,6 recruited the coactivators SRC1 (NCOA1; 602691), RIP140
(NRIP1; 602490), and TIF1-alpha (TRIM24; 603406), which enhanced its
transcriptional activity. Zennaro et al. (2001) concluded that
MR-delta-5,6 may modulate corticosteroid effects in target tissues.

Aldosterone enhances angiotensin II (see 106150)-induced PAI1 (173360)
expression in vitro. Sawathiparnich et al. (2003) tested the hypothesis
that angiotensin II type 1 and aldosterone receptor antagonism interact
to decrease PAI1 in humans. Effects of candesartan, spironolactone, or
combined candesartan/spironolactone on mean arterial pressure,
endocrine, and fibrinolytic variables were measured in 18 normotensive
subjects in whom the renin (179820)-angiotensin-aldosterone system was
activated by furosemide. This study evidenced an interactive effect of
endogenous angiotensin II and aldosterone on PAI1 production in humans.

Shibata et al. (2008) showed that a constitutively active RAC1 (602048)
mutant potentiated aldosterone-induced mineralocorticoid receptor
nuclear accumulation and transcriptional activity in HEK293 cells
transfected with human constructs. In cultured rat podocytes, activated
RAC1 facilitated mineralocorticoid receptor nuclear accumulation via
p21-activated kinase (PAK; see 602590) phosphorylation. Shibata et al.
(2008) found that mice lacking Rho GDP-dissociation inhibitor-alpha
(ARHGDIA; 601925) developed progressive renal disease characterized by
heavy albuminuria and podocyte damage. These renal changes were
associated with increased Rac1 and mineralocorticoid receptor signaling
in the kidney without alteration in systemic aldosterone status.
Pharmacologic intervention with a Rac-specific small molecule inhibitor
diminished mineralocorticoid receptor overactivity and renal damage.
Furthermore, mineralocorticoid receptor blockade suppressed albuminuria
and histologic changes in Arhgdia -/- mice. Shibata et al. (2008)
concluded that RAC1 modulates mineralocorticoid receptor activity, and
that activation of the RAC1-mineralocorticoid receptor pathway has a
major role in the pathogenesis of renal damage.

Jeong et al. (2009) noted that aldosterone interacts with MR to activate
transcription of proinflammatory genes, in addition to activating
inflammatory signaling pathways in an MR-independent manner. They showed
that aldosterone triggered exocytosis of Weibel-Palade bodies from human
aortic endothelial cells, causing the release of proinflammatory
mediators. Small interfering RNA directed against MR reduced the effect
of aldosterone on exocytosis. Exocytosis also required calcium
signaling.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Some evidence has been presented that the mutation causing autosomal
recessive pseudohypoaldosteronism (PHA) type I (264350) is located in
the MLR gene; however, this possibility was excluded by Chung et al.
(1995) by linkage analysis which demonstrated lod scores less than -2
over the whole region from D4S192 to D4S413 encompassing MLR. The
analysis was carried out in 10 inbred families using 3 simple sequence
length (SSL) polymorphisms spanning the MLR region; the approach
represented homozygosity mapping.

Although the studies of Chung et al. (1995) excluded MLR as the site of
the mutation causing autosomal recessive pseudohypoaldosteronism type I,
Geller et al. (1998) presented evidence that the autosomal dominant form
of the disorder (177735) can be caused by mutations in the MLR gene.
Autosomal dominant or sporadic PHA1 is a milder disease than the
autosomal recessive form and remits with age. Among 6 dominant and 7
sporadic PHA1 kindreds, Geller et al. (1998) found no mutations in the
epithelial sodium channel (ENaC) genes (600228, 600760) in which
mutations have been found in the autosomal recessive form of PHA1. As
ENaC activity in the kidney is regulated by aldosterone acting through
the mineralocorticoid receptor, Geller et al. (1998) screened the MLR
gene for variants and identified heterozygous mutations in 1 sporadic
and 4 dominant kindreds. These included 2 frameshift mutations (1 a de
novo mutation), 2 premature termination codons, and a splice donor
mutation.

Geller et al. (2000) screened the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) in 75
patients with early onset of severe hypertension (605115). A 15-year-old
boy with severe hypertension, suppressed plasma renin activity, low
serum aldosterone, and no other underlying cause of hypertension was
heterozygous for a missense mutation, resulting in substitution of a
leucine for serine at codon 810 (600983.0005). Of 23 relatives of the
proband, 11 were diagnosed with severe hypertension before age 20 years,
and the MR S810L mutation precisely cosegregated with early-onset
hypertension in this family. This mutation resulted in constitutive MR
activity and altered receptor specificity, with progesterone and other
steroids lacking 21-hydroxyl groups, normally MR antagonists, becoming
potent agonists.

In a Japanese patient with sporadic PHA, Arai et al. (2003) found 3
homozygous substitutions in the MR gene that had previously been
reported to occur in healthy populations. Luciferase activities induced
by MR were significantly lower for each of the 3 substitutions than
those for wildtype MR with aldosterone at 3 different concentrations..
Arai et al. (2003) suggested that 2 or more 'functional' polymorphisms,
any of which exhibits only slight effects on MR function alone and is
incapable of causing PHA, may in the right allelic combination induce
the negative salt conservation characteristic of PHA.

Sartorato et al. (2003) analyzed the NR3C2 gene in 14 families with
autosomal dominant or sporadic PHA1. They detected 6 heterozygous
mutations that differently affected protein structure and function. The
authors concluded that NR3C2 mutations are a common feature of autosomal
dominant PHA1, being found in 70% of their familial cases. Sartorato et
al. (2003) used the numbering of Arriza et al. (1987) to refer to the
mutations.

Pujo et al. (2007) identified 22 abnormalities of the NR3C2 gene in 33
patients with type 1 pseudohypoaldosteronism. Altogether, 68% of the
mutations were dominantly transmitted, while 18% were de novo mutations.

Riepe et al. (2006) detected 6 heterozygous NR3C2 mutations in 7
pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1 (PHA1) patients from 6 unrelated
families. Two frameshift mutations, 1131dupT (600983.0008) and 2871dupC
(600983.0006) had been reported. They also reported 2 novel nonsense
mutations and 2 missense mutations.

ANIMAL MODEL

Berger et al. (1998) generated MLR-deficient mice by gene targeting.
These mice had a normal prenatal development. During the first week of
life, the MLR-deficient mice developed symptoms of
pseudohypoaldosteronism. They lost weight and eventually died at
approximately 10 days after birth from dehydration by renal sodium and
water loss. At day 8, MLR -/- mice showed hyperkalemia, hyponatremia,
and a strong increase in renin, angiotensin II, and aldosterone plasma
concentrations. The fractional renal Na+ excretion was elevated more
than 8-fold. The glomerular filtration rate in MLR -/- mice was not
different from that in controls. The effect of amiloride on renal Na+
excretion in colonic transepithelial voltage reflected the function of
amiloride-sensitive epithelial Na+ channels.

Le Menuet et al. (2001) generated transgenic (TG) mice with the proximal
human MR promoter to drive expression of human MR in aldosterone target
tissues. Ribonuclease protection analysis revealed human MR expression
in mineralocorticoid-sensitive tissues, notably kidney and heart.
Histologic analysis showed that enlarged kidneys were associated with
renal tubular dilation and cellular vacuolization, the prevalence of
which increased with aging. Urinary potassium excretion rates were
decreased in the TG mice. Although blood pressure was normal, the TG
mice developed mild dilated cardiomyopathy accompanied by a significant
heart rate increase and an increase in cardiac ANP (NPPA; 108780), renal
and cardiac serum- and glucocorticoid-induced kinase (SGK; 602958), and
early growth response-1 (EGR1; 128990).

Berger et al. (2006) conditionally deleted the MR gene in the forebrain
of mice and screened them in various learning and exploration tests.
Mutant mice showed impaired learning of the water maze task and deficits
in measures of working memory on the radial maze due to behavioral
perseverance and stereotypy. They showed hyperactive exploration toward
novel objects but normal anxiety-like behavior. The behavioral changes
were associated with abnormalities of the mossy fiber projection and
upregulated glucocorticoid receptor (GCCR; 138040) expression in the
hippocampus. Adult mutant mice showed normal basal circadian
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis activity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C2, 1-BP DEL, 1226G

In a sporadic case of type I pseudohypoaldosteronism (177735), Geller et
al. (1998) found heterozygosity for a de novo single-bp deletion,
introducing a frameshift at codon 335 and resulting in premature
termination at codon 337.

.0002
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C2, 1-BP DEL, 1597T

In a mother and son with type I pseudohypoaldosteronism (177735), Geller
et al. (1998) found heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion, introducing a
frameshift at codon 459 and resulting in premature termination at codon
474.

.0003
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C2, ARG537TER

In multiple subjects affected with type I pseudohypoaldosteronism
(177735) in each of 2 presumably unrelated families, Geller et al.
(1998) found heterozygosity for a C-to-T transition that converted codon
537 from CGA (arg) to TGA (stop).

.0004
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C2, IVS5, 1-BP DEL, A, +3

In affected subjects in a kindred with type I pseudohypoaldosteronism
(177735), Geller et al. (1998) found heterozygosity for a single-bp
deletion in the donor splice site following exon 5. The third basepair
of the splice donor site was deleted in the mutant allele so that gtagg
became gtgg.

.0005
HYPERTENSION, EARLY-ONSET, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, WITH EXACERBATION IN
PREGNANCY
NR3C2, SER810LEU

Geller et al. (2000) screened the mineralocorticoid receptor in 75
patients with early onset of severe hypertension (605115). In a
15-year-old boy with severe hypertension, a C-to-T substitution,
changing codon 810 of the hormone-binding domain from a serine to a
leucine, was identified. The ser810-to-leu (S810L) mutation was
identified in heterozygous state in 11 family members of this proband
who had been diagnosed with severe hypertension before the age of 20
years, resulting in constitutive MR activity and altered receptor
specificity, with progesterone and other steroids lacking 21-hydroxyl
groups, normally MR antagonists, becoming potent agonists. This resulted
in profound exacerbation of hypertension during 5 pregnancies in 2
affected women in this kindred. Structural and biochemical studies
indicated that S810L results in the gain of a van der Waals interaction
between helix 5 and helix 3 that substitutes for interaction of the
steroid 21-hydroxyl group with helix 3 in the wildtype receptor. This
helix 5-helix 3 interaction is highly conserved among diverse nuclear
hormone receptors, suggesting its general role in receptor activation.
The effect of the S810L mutation was to invert the mineralocorticoid
receptor from aldosterone-responsive to progesterone-responsive, with
development of hypertension during pregnancy. This was the first
mendelian form of preeclampsia to be identified. Ordinarily, blood
pressure goes down during early stages of pregnancy.

.0006
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C2, 1-BP INS, 2871C

In a sporadic case of type I pseudohypoaldosteronism (177735), Viemann
et al. (2001) found a heterozygous insertion of a cytosine at position
2871 in exon 9. This mutation leads to a frameshift, which results in a
nonsense protein from codon 958 and a first stop codon at position 1012.

Riepe et al. (2006) detected this mutation in a patient with PHA1. They
showed that the receptor lacked aldosterone-binding and transactivation
capabilities because of a major change in receptor conformation.

.0007
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C2, LEU924PRO

Tajima et al. (2000) studied the molecular mechanisms of 1 Japanese
family with a renal form of PHA1 (177735). PCR and direct sequencing of
the mineralocorticoid receptor gene identified a heterozygous point
mutation changing codon 924, leucine (CTG) to CCG (proline) (L924P), in
all affected members. In vitro expression studies demonstrated that the
L924P mutation results in complete absence of MR function.

.0008
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C2, 1-BP INS, 1354T

In twins and their brother and mother in a family with PHA1 (177735),
Sartorato et al. (2003) found insertion of a thymine at nucleotide
position 1345 in exon 2 of the MR gene, resulting in frameshift and
premature termination of the receptor at amino acid 378 (E378X).

Riepe et al. (2006) detected this mutation in an Italian family. They
referred to the mutation as 1131dupT, with numbering beginning at the A
of the initiation codon.

.0009
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C2, 8-BP DEL, NT537

In a family with PHA1 (177735), Sartorato et al. (2003) found in 2 sibs
and their mother a deletion of 8 bp in exon 2 of the MR gene
(del8bp537). The frameshift resulted in a truncated protein with 8 novel
residues after ser104, followed by a premature stop codon.

.0010
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C2, CYS645TER

In a patient with PHA1 (177735), Sartorato et al. (2003) found a C-to-A
transversion at nucleotide 2157 in exon 4 of the MR gene that caused a
cys645-to-ter (C645X) truncation in the second zinc finger of the MR
DNA-binding domain. The mutation was apparently sporadic.

.0011
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C2, GLN776ARG

In a proband, her mother, and maternal grandfather with PHA1 (177735),
Sartorato et al. (2003) found an A-to-G transition at nucleotide 2549 in
exon 5 of the MR gene, changing gln776 to arg (Q776R) in the
ligand-binding domain of the mineralocorticoid receptor. Q776R mutant
protein displayed only 30% of maximal aldosterone binding.

.0012
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C2, GLY633ARG

In 2 brothers and all 4 of their offspring with PHA1 (177735), Sartorato
et al. (2003) found a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 2119, the last
nucleotide of exon 3, that caused substitution of gly633 with arg
(G633R). The G633R mutation exhibited reduced maximal transactivation,
although its binding characteristics and ED50 of transactivation were
comparable with those of wildtype MR.

.0013
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C2, LEU979PRO

In a proband and her mother with PHA1 (177735), Sartorato et al. (2003)
found a T-to-C transition at nucleotide 3158 in exon 9 of the MR gene,
resulting in a leu-to-pro change at codon 979 (L979P) in the
ligand-binding domain. L979P was shown to exert a transdominant-negative
effect on wildtype MR activity, and mutant protein demonstrated no
aldosterone-binding activity.

.0014
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C2, SER163TER

In a German patient with a renal form of PHA1 (177735), Riepe et al.
(2003) detected a heterozygous point mutation, 488C-G in exon 2 of the
NR3C2 gene, that resulted in substitution of a premature termination
codon for serine-163 (S163X). Segregation analysis revealed the same
mutation in the patient's father, who had shown no symptoms of PHA.
Riepe et al. (2003) sought polymorphisms in the amiloride-sensitive
epithelial sodium channel (ENaC; see 600228) as the basis of the
phenotypic differences within the family; sequencing revealed identical
ENaC haplotypes in the patient and his father, indicating that these
polymorphisms could not be responsible for the difference in clinical
presentation.

.0015
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C2, ARG947TER

In a Turkish infant with a renal form of PHA1 (177735), Riepe et al.
(2004) detected a heterozygous C-to-T transition at nucleotide 3055 in
exon 9 of the NR3C2 gene that caused premature termination of the
mineralocorticoid receptor at arginine-947 (R947X). The truncated
receptor was free of aldosterone binding. Segregation analysis revealed
the identical mutation in the patient's father, who was clinically free
of symptoms and showed normal plasma electrolytes and aldosterone
urinary metabolites and only slightly elevated plasma renin and
aldosterone levels. The authors concluded that their findings supported
the hypothesis that PHA1 due to NR3C2 mutations can show incomplete
penetrance, although a mild salt loss might have been overlooked in the
father's childhood.

In 2 families with autosomal dominant PHA1, unrelated to the family
described by Riepe et al. (2004), Fernandes-Rosa et al. (2006)
identified the R947X mutation. Different haplotypes segregated with the
mutation in each family, suggested that codon 947 is a mutation hotspot.

.0016
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C1, CYS436TER

In the index patient of a 5-generation Swedish family with 15 affected
members with autosomal dominant PHA1 (177735), Nystrom et al. (2004)
found a heterozygous T-to-A transversion at nucleotide 1308 in exon 2 of
the NR3C1 gene that caused premature termination of the
mineralocorticoid receptor at codon 436 (C436X). The mutation was found
to segregate with PHA1 in the family. Complete abrogation of the DNA-
and hormone-binding domains was predicted in the truncated mutant
protein. Interestingly, neuropathy was found in 2 of 5 affected
individuals. It was unclear whether the neuropathy was associated with
the mutation found.

.0017
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C1, ARG673TER

In a proband and her mother with PHA1 (177735), Riepe et al. (2006)
found a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 2017 in exon 5 of the NR3C1
gene, resulting in premature termination of the protein at arg673
(R673X). The mutation deleted the ligand-binding domain. While plasma
aldosterone and renin activity were elevated in the mother, she had no
recollection of treatment or hospitalization related to this condition.

.0018
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C1, SER675TER

In a patient with PHA1 (177735), Riepe et al. (2006) detected a C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 2024 in exon 5 of the NR3C1 gene that caused
termination of the protein at ser675 (S675X). The mutation deleted the
ligand-binding domain.

.0019
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C1, SER181LEU

In 2 sibs with PHA1 (177735) and their father, Riepe et al. (2006)
detected a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 2453 in exon 6 of the NR3C1
gene, resulting in substitution of leu for ser at codon 181 (S181L).
This mutation had been reported by Geller et al. (2006). The S181L
mutant showed no aldosterone binding, transcription activation, or
translocation to the nucleus. Based on in vitro studies Riepe et al.
(2006) hypothesized that substitution of the bulky apolar leucine for
serine-818 displaces beta-sheet-1, which severely disturbs the
interaction of the receptor with its ligand.

.0020
PSEUDOHYPOALDOSTERONISM, TYPE I, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
NR3C1, GLU972GLY

In a patient with PHA1 (177735) and his mother, Riepe et al. (2006)
detected a 2915A-G transition in exon 9 of the NR3C1 gene that resulted
in substitution of gly for glu972 (E972G). The novel E972G mutation
showed a significantly lower ligand-binding affinity and only 9% of
wildtype transcriptional activity caused by major changes in receptor
conformation. The mutation was predicted to open the hydrophobic core of
the protein and displace helix H10, disturbing the interaction of the
receptor with its ligand.

REFERENCE 1. Alnemri, E. S.; Maksymowych, A. B.; Robertson, N. M.; Litwack,
G.: Overexpression and characterization of the human mineralocorticoid
receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 18072-18081, 1991.

2. Arai, K.; Nakagomi, Y.; Iketani, M.; Shimura, Y.; Amemiya, S.;
Ohyama, K.; Shibasaki, T.: Functional polymorphisms in the mineralocorticoid
receptor and amirolide(sic)-sensitive sodium channel genes in a patient
with sporadic pseudohypoaldosteronism. Hum. Genet. 112: 91-97, 2003.

3. Arriza, J. L.; Weinberger, C.; Cerelli, G.; Glaser, T. M.; Handelin,
B. L.; Housman, D. E.; Evans, R. M.: Cloning of human mineralocorticoid
receptor complementary DNA: structural and functional kinship with
the glucocorticoid receptor. Science 237: 268-275, 1987.

4. Berger, S.; Bleich, M.; Schmid, W.; Cole, T. J.; Peters, J.; Watanabe,
H.; Kriz, W.; Warth, R.; Greger, R.; Schutz, G.: Mineralocorticoid
receptor knockout mice: pathophysiology of Na+ metabolism. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 9424-9429, 1998.

5. Berger, S.; Wolfer, D. P.; Selbach, O.; Alter, H.; Erdmann, G.;
Reichardt, H. M.; Chepkova, A. N.; Welzl, H.; Haas, H. L.; Lipp, H.-P.;
Schutz, G.: Loss of the limbic mineralocorticoid receptor impairs
behavioral plasticity. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 195-200, 2006.

6. Bloem, L. J.; Guo, C.; Pratt, J. H.: Identification of a splice
variant of the rat and human mineralocorticoid receptor genes. J.
Steroid Biochem. Molec. Biol. 55: 159-162, 1995.

7. Chung, E.; Hanukoglu, A.; Rees, M.; Thompson, R.; Dillon, M.; Hanukoglu,
I.; Bistritzer, T.; Kuhnle, U.; Seckl, J.; Gardiner, R. M.: Exclusion
of the locus for autosomal recessive pseudohypoaldosteronism type
1 from the mineralocorticoid receptor gene region on human chromosome
4q by linkage analysis. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 80: 3341-3345, 1995.

8. Fan, Y.-S.; Eddy, R. L.; Byers, M. G.; Haley, L. L.; Henry, W.
M.; Nowak, N. J.; Shows, T. B.: The human mineralocorticoid receptor
gene (MLR) is located on chromosome 4 at q31.2. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 52:
83-84, 1989.

9. Fernandes-Rosa, F. L.; de Castro, M.; Latronico, A. C.; Sippell,
W. G.; Riepe, F. G.; Antonini, S. R.: Recurrence of the R947X mutation
in unrelated families with autosomal dominant pseudohypoaldosteronism
type 1: evidence for a mutational hot spot in the mineralocorticoid
receptor gene. J. Clin. Endocr. 9: 3671-3675, 2006.

10. Geller, D. S.; Farhi, A.; Pinkerton, N.; Fradley, M.; Moritz,
M.; Spitzer, A.; Meinke, G.; Tsai, F. T. F.; Sigler, P. B.; Lifton,
R. P.: Activating mineralocorticoid receptor mutation in hypertension
exacerbated by pregnancy. Science 289: 119-123, 2000.

11. Geller, D. S.; Rodriguez-Soriano, J.; Vallo Boado, A.; Schifter,
S.; Bayer, M.; Chang, S. S.; Lifton, R. P.: Mutations in the mineralocorticoid
receptor gene cause autosomal dominant pseudohypoaldosteronism type
I. Nature Genet. 19: 279-281, 1998.

12. Geller, D. S.; Zhang, J.; Zennaro, M.-C.; Vallo-Boado, A.; Rodriguez-Soriano,
J.; Furu, L.; Haws, R.; Metzger, D.; Botelho, B.; Karaviti, L.; Haqq,
A. M.; Corey, H.; Janssens, S.; Corvol, P.; Lifton, R. P.: Autosomal
dominant pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1: mechanisms, evidence for
neonatal lethality, and phenotypic expression in adults. J. Am. Soc.
Nephrol. 17: 1429-1436, 2006.

13. Hellal-Levy, C.; Fagart, J.; Souque, A.; Wurtz, J.-M.; Moras,
D.; Rafestin-Oblin, M.-E.: Crucial role of the H11-H12 loop in stabilizing
the active conformation of the human mineralocorticoid receptor. Molec.
Endocr. 14: 1210-1221, 2000.

14. Jeong, Y.; Chaupin, D. F.; Matsushita, K.; Yamakuchi, M.; Cameron,
S. J.; Morrell, C. N.; Lowenstein, C. J.: Aldosterone activates endothelial
exocytosis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 3782-3787, 2009.

15. Le Menuet, D.; Isnard, R.; Bichara, M.; Viengchareun, S.; Muffat-Joly,
M.; Walker, F.; Zennaro, M.-C.; Lombes, M.: Alteration of cardiac
and renal functions in transgenic mice overexpressing human mineralocorticoid
receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 38911-38920, 2001.

16. Lupo, B.; Mesnier, D.; Auzou, G.: Cysteines 849 and 942 of human
mineralocorticoid receptor are crucial for steroid binding. Biochemistry 37:
12153-12159, 1998.

17. Morrison, N.; Harrap, S. B.; Arriza, J. L.; Boyd, E.; Connor,
J. M.: Regional chromosomal assignment of the human mineralocorticoid
receptor gene to 4q31.1. Hum. Genet. 85: 130-132, 1990.

18. Morrison, N.; Harrap, S. B.; Arriza, J. L.; Boyd, E.; Connor,
J. M.: Regional chromosomal assignment of the human mineralocorticoid
receptor gene to 4q31.1. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51: 1048,
1989.

19. Nystrom, A.-M.; Bondeson, M.-L.; Skanke, N.; Martensson, J.; Stromberg,
B.; Gustafsson, J.; Anneren, G.: A novel nonsense mutation of the
mineralocorticoid receptor gene in a Swedish family with pseudohypoaldosteronism
type I (PHA1). J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 227-231, 2004.

20. Pujo, L.; Fagart, J.; Gary, F.; Papadimitriou, D. T.; Claes, A.;
Jeunemaitre, X.; Zennaro, M.-C.: Mineralocorticoid receptor mutations
are the principal cause of renal type 1 pseudohypoaldosteronism. Hum.
Mutat. 28: 33-40, 2007.

21. Riepe, F. G.; Finkeldei, J.; de Sanctis, L.; Einaudi, S.; Testa,
A.; Karges, B.; Peter, M.; Viemann, M.; Grotzinger, J.; Sippell, W.
G.; Fejes-Toth, G.; Krone, N.: Elucidating the underlying molecular
pathogenesis of NR3C2 mutants causing autosomal dominant pseudohypoaldosteronism
type I. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 4552-4561, 2006.

22. Riepe, F. G.; Krone, N.; Morlot, M.; Ludwig, M.; Sippell, W. G.;
Partsch, C.-J.: Identification of a novel mutation in the human mineralocorticoid
receptor gene in a German family with autosomal-dominant pseudohypoaldosteronism
type 1: further evidence for marked interindividual clinical heterogeneity. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 1683-1686, 2003.

23. Riepe, F. G.; Krone, N.; Morlot, M.; Peter, M.; Sippell, W. G.;
Partsch, C.-J.: Autosomal-dominant pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1
in a Turkish family is associated with a novel nonsense mutation in
the human mineralocorticoid receptor gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89:
2150-2152, 2004.

24. Sartorato, P.; Lapeyraque, A.-L.; Armanini, D.; Kuhnle, U.; Khaldi,
Y.; Salomon, R.; Abadie, V.; Di Battista, E.; Naselli, A.; Racine,
A.; Bosio, M.; Caprio, M.; and 10 others: Different inactivating
mutations of the mineralocorticoid receptor in fourteen families affected
by type 1 pseudohypoaldosteronism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 2508-2517,
2003.

25. Sawathiparnich, P.; Murphey, L. J.; Kumar, S.; Vaughan, D. E.;
Brown, N. J.: Effect of combined AT(1) receptor and aldosterone receptor
antagonism on plasminogen activator inhibitor-1. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 88: 3867-3873, 2003.

26. Shibata, S.; Nagase, M.; Yoshida, S.; Kawarazaki, W.; Kurihara,
H.; Tanaka, H.; Miyoshi, J.; Takai, Y.; Fujita, T.: Modification
of mineralocorticoid receptor function by Rac1 GTPase: implication
in proteinuric kidney disease. Nature Med. 14: 1370-1376, 2008.

27. Tajima, T.; Kitagawa, H.; Yokoya, S.; Tachibana, K.; Adachi, M.;
Nakae, J.; Suwa, S; Katoh, S.; Fujieda, K.: A novel missense mutation
of mineralocorticoid receptor gene in one Japanese family with a renal
form of pseudohypoaldosteronism type 1. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85:
4690-4694, 2000.

28. Viemann, M.; Peter, M.; Lopez-Siguero, J. P.; Simic-Schleicher,
G.; Sippell, W. G.: Evidence for genetic heterogeneity of pseudohypoaldosteronism
type 1: identification of a novel mutation in the human mineralocorticoid
receptor in one sporadic case and no mutations in two autosomal dominant
kindreds. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 2056-2059, 2001.

29. Zennaro, M.-C.; Farman, N.; Bonvalet, J.-P.; Lombes, M.: Tissue-specific
expression of alpha and beta messenger ribonucleic acid isoforms of
the human mineralocorticoid receptor in normal and pathological states. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 82: 1345-1352, 1997.

30. Zennaro, M.-C.; Keightley, M.-C.; Kotelevtsev, Y.; Conway, G.
S.; Soubrier, F.; Fuller, P. J.: Human mineralocorticoid receptor
genomic structure and identification of expressed isoforms. J. Biol.
Chem. 270: 21016-21020, 1995.

31. Zennaro, M.-C.; Souque, A.; Viengchareun, S.; Poisson, E.; Lombes,
M.: A new human MR splice variant is a ligand-independent transactivator
modulating corticosteroid action. Molec. Endocr. 15: 1586-1598,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/06/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/2/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/19/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/8/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/5/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/16/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/12/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/27/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/22/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 6/28/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/12/2004
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/28/2004
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 7/28/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/30/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/12/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/7/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/1/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/3/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/5/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/11/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/24/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/15/1996

EDITED mgross: 10/06/2010
mgross: 10/5/2010
terry: 8/2/2010
mgross: 1/5/2009
terry: 12/19/2008
alopez: 11/8/2007
carol: 7/5/2007
alopez: 5/16/2007
terry: 3/12/2007
wwang: 4/4/2006
terry: 3/27/2006
carol: 9/30/2005
alopez: 7/22/2005
alopez: 6/28/2005
alopez: 10/12/2004
alopez: 7/28/2004
carol: 1/9/2003
tkritzer: 1/6/2003
terry: 12/30/2002
mgross: 10/18/2002
alopez: 7/12/2002
alopez: 3/12/2002
terry: 3/7/2002
mgross: 2/4/2002
terry: 2/1/2002
alopez: 8/3/2001
cwells: 7/18/2001
joanna: 7/7/2000
alopez: 7/6/2000
terry: 7/5/2000
mcapotos: 1/13/2000
carol: 10/27/1999
mgross: 9/24/1999
carol: 9/16/1998
terry: 9/11/1998
alopez: 6/29/1998
terry: 6/24/1998
mark: 1/23/1996
joanna: 1/15/1996

606090	TITLE *606090 CARNITINE OCTANOYLTRANSFERASE; CROT
;;COT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Carnitine octanoyltransferase (EC 2.3.1.137) is a carnitine
acyltransferase that catalyzes the reversible transfer of fatty acyl
groups between CoA and carnitine. This provides a crucial step in the
transport of medium- and long-chain acyl-CoA out of the mammalian
peroxisome to the cytosol and mitochondria. See also CRAT (600184).

Van der Leij et al. (2000) reviewed the function, structural features,
and phylogenetics of human carnitine acyltransferase genes, including
CROT.

CLONING

By screening an EST database with rat and bovine CROT sequences,
Ferdinandusse et al. (1999) identified human CROT EST sequences. Using
RT-PCR with human skin fibroblast RNA, they cloned a CROT cDNA encoding
a 612-amino acid, 66-kD protein containing a putative C-terminal
peroxisomal targeting signal type 1. CROT shares 85% sequence identity
with both the bovine and rat CROT proteins.

Using enzyme activity measurements of CROT expressed in a carnitine
acetyltransferase-deficient yeast strain, Ferdinandusse et al. (1999)
demonstrated that CROT efficiently converts a branched-chain fatty
acyl-CoA (4,8-dimethylnonanoyl-CoA) to its corresponding carnitine
ester. They hypothesized that CROT plays a crucial role in the
beta-oxidation of branched-chain fatty acids including pristanic acid.

GENE STRUCTURE

Van der Leij et al. (2000) determined that the CROT gene contains 18
exons spanning 54 kb of genomic DNA.

MAPPING

Using database analysis, van der Leij et al. (2000) identified the CROT
sequence on a chromosome 7q21.1 YAC contig.

REFERENCE 1. Ferdinandusse, S.; Mulders, J.; IJlst, L.; Denis, S.; Dacremont,
G.; Waterham, H. R.; Wanders, R. J. A.: Molecular cloning and expression
of human carnitine octanoyltransferase: evidence for its role in the
peroxisomal beta-oxidation of branched-chain fatty acids. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 263: 213-218, 1999.

2. van der Leij, F. R.; Huijkman, N. C. A.; Boomsma, C.; Kuipers,
J. R. G.; Bartelds, B.: Genomics of the human carnitine acyltransferase
genes. Molec. Genet. Metab. 71: 139-153, 2000.

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 7/9/2001

EDITED carol: 07/09/2001
carol: 7/9/2001

602921	TITLE *602921 PERSEPHIN; PSPN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Neurotrophic factors, including persephin, are important for the proper
development and maintenance of the nervous system. These factors promote
neuronal survival and can prevent the neuronal degeneration associated
with injury, toxin exposure, or neurodegenerative disease (summary by
Milbrandt et al., 1998).

CLONING

To identify genes related to the neurotrophic factors GDNF (600837) and
NRTN (602018), Milbrandt et al. (1998) carried out PCR using primers
based on regions that were similar in these 2 proteins. They isolated
human, mouse and rat genomic fragments encoding a protein that they
designated persephin, symbolized PSP. The predicted 156-amino acid human
protein contains a 21-residue signal peptide. On Western blots, mature
mouse PSP has a molecular mass of 10 to 12 kD. The human PSP protein
shares 80% sequence identity with rat and mouse PSP, and 38% and 30%
identity with NTRN and GDNF, respectively. Like other GDNF family
members, the PSP gene contains an intron interrupting the prodomain.
RT-PCR analysis revealed that rat PSP mRNA was expressed at low levels
and was inefficiently spliced, leading Milbrandt et al. (1998) to
suggest that regulation of transcript processing is an important means
of regulating PSP protein production.

GENE FUNCTION

Milbrandt et al. (1998) found that PSP resembled GDNF and NTRN in that
it exhibited neurotrophic activity on mesencephalic dopaminergic and
motor neurons. Like GDNF, PSP also had effects on kidney development, as
evidenced by its ability to promote ureteric bud branching. However, in
contrast to GDNF and NTRN, PSP did not support any of the peripheral
neurons examined. Milbrandt et al. (1998) suggested that PSP utilizes
different, or additional, receptor components than do other members of
the GDNF family.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid mapping and somatic cell hybrid PCR, Chadwick et al.
(1998) mapped the PSPN gene to chromosome 19p13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Chadwick, B. P.; Helbling, L. A.; Angrist, M.; Chakravarti, A.;
Gusella, J. F.; Slaugenhaupt, S. A.: Assignment of persephin (PSPN),
a human neurotrophic factor, to chromosome 19p13.3 by radiation hybrid
mapping and somatic cell hybrid PCR. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 83:
236-237, 1998.

2. Milbrandt, J.; de Sauvage, F. J.; Fahrner, T. J.; Baloh, R. H.;
Leitner, M. L.; Tansey, M. G.; Lampe, P. A.; Heuckeroth, R. O.; Kotzbauer,
P. T.; Simburger, K. S.; Golden, J. P.; Davies, J. A.; and 15 others
: Persephin, a novel neurotrophic factor related to GDNF and neurturin. Neuron 20:
245-253, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 4/6/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/3/1998

EDITED carol: 05/31/2012
mgross: 4/7/1999
carol: 4/6/1999
alopez: 8/3/1998

605392	TITLE *605392 FIBROBLAST GROWTH FACTOR RECEPTOR 1 ONCOGENE PARTNER; FGFR1OP
;;FGFR1 ONCOGENE PARTNER; FOP
FOP/FGFR1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using 5-prime RACE with FGFR1 primers on t(6;8) malignant cell cDNA,
followed by database searches, Popovici et al. (1999) isolated a cDNA
encoding FOP from a PAC localized on 6q27. The deduced 399-amino acid,
hydrophilic FOP protein has N- and C-terminal alpha helices harboring
leucine-rich repeats. Popovici et al. (1999) identified additional cDNAs
encoding a variant 331-amino acid protein, in which exon 11 is not
spliced out, resulting in a truncation due to an in-frame stop codon.
EST database searches suggested that FOP may be a member of a novel gene
family. Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of major
FOP transcripts of 1.2 and 1.7 kb. Highest expression, with an
additional 3.0-kb transcript, was found in heart. RT-PCR analysis
detected expression in hematopoietic cells and various malignant cell
lines.

- FOP-FGFR1 Fusion Gene

The 8p11 myeloproliferative disorder (613523) is caused by
translocations involving the tyrosine kinase-bearing FGFR1 gene (136350)
on chromosome 8p11 and various partner genes. Using RT-PCR, Popovici et
al. (1999) detected both FGFR1-FOP and FOP-FGFR1 fusion transcripts,
with the break occurring in intron 8 of FGFR1 or intron 6 of FOP, in 2
patients with the disorder but not in normal subjects or those with
other tumors.

GENE STRUCTURE

Popovici et al. (1999) determined that the FOP gene contains 13 exons
and spans more than 40 kb.

REFERENCE 1. Popovici, C.; Zhang, B.; Gregoire, M.-J.; Jonveaux, P.; Lafage-Pochitaloff,
M.; Birnbaum, D.; Pebusque, M.-J.: The t(6;8)(q27;p11) translocation
in a stem cell myeloproliferative disorder fuses a novel gene, FOP,
to fibroblast growth factor receptor 1. Blood 93: 1381-1389, 1999.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/7/2000

EDITED carol: 11/11/2010
carol: 9/2/2010
mgross: 5/21/2003
mgross: 12/27/2000
mgross: 11/8/2000
mgross: 11/7/2000

609051	TITLE *609051 CASPASE RECRUITMENT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 8; CARD8
;;TUMOR-UPREGULATED CARD-CONTAINING ANTAGONIST OF CASP9; TUCAN;;
CARD INHIBITOR OF NFKB-ACTIVATING LIGANDS; CARDINAL;;
NDPP1;;
KIAA0955
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Caspase recruitment domain (CARD)-containing proteins, such as CARD8,
are involved in pathways leading to activation of caspases or nuclear
factor kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011) in the context of apoptosis or
inflammation, respectively (Bouchier-Hayes et al., 2001).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned CARD8, which they designated
KIAA0955. The transcript contains several repetitive elements in the
3-prime UTR, and the deduced protein contains 431 amino acids. RT-PCR
ELISA detected highest expression of CARD8 in kidney and corpus callosum
and lowest expression in pancreas. All other tissues and specific brain
regions examined showed intermediate expression.

By searching databases for sequences similar to the CARD domain of APAF1
(602233), followed by PCR, Pathan et al. (2001) cloned CARD8, which they
designated TUCAN. CARD8 contains an N-terminal segment that shares 50%
amino acid identity with a region of the proapoptotic protein DEFCAP
(NALP1; 606636), as well as a C-terminal CARD domain.

By Western blot analysis of several tissues, Bouchier-Hayes et al.
(2001) found CARD8 expressed at an apparent molecular mass of 50 kD,
close to the predicted molecular mass of 49 kD. Highest expression was
in lung, ovary, testis, and placenta, with low or absent expression in
brain, skeletal muscle, and spleen.

By RT-PCR, Razmara et al. (2002) found highest CARD8 expression in
placenta, spleen, lymph node, and bone marrow.

By EST analysis, Zhang and Fu (2002) identified 5 splice variants of
CARD8, which they called NDPP1. The variants all have different
translation start sites.

Yamamoto et al. (2005) cloned a splice variant of CARD8 that they named
TUCAN54 after the calculated molecular mass of the encoded protein. The
deduced 487-amino acid TUCAN54 protein has a unique 80-amino acid N
terminus compared with the 48-kD isoform, TUCAN48, but both proteins
contain a NALP homology domain, a candidate caspase cleavage site
(DEED), a C-terminal CARD domain, and several putative phosphorylation
sites. The N terminus of TUCAN54 provides phosphorylation sites not
found in TUCAN48. RT-PCR detected high TUCAN54 expression in leukocytes
and spleen. Expression was lower in heart, lung, thymus, liver,
pancreas, and testis, and little to no expression was detected in other
tissues examined. TUCAN54 was widely expressed in a variety of tumor
cell lines.

By EST database and RT-PCR analyses, Bagnall et al. (2008) characterized
5 isoforms of CARD8 that differ in their N termini and have predicted
molecular masses of 47.5, 48, 51, 54, and 60 kD. The major 48-kD isoform
has 432 amino acids and starts in exon 5, and the 54-kD isoform has 487
amino acids and starts in exon 4. The 47.5-kD isoform differs in the
first 20 amino acids from the 48-kD isoform and results from a putative
initiation codon 20 bp upstream of exon 6. Western blot analysis of
lymphoblastoid cell lines from 6 Crohn disease (see IBD1; 266600)
patients showed a 48- or 47.5-kD band in all cell lines and an
additional band of 54 kD in only 1 cell line.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang and Fu (2002) determined that the CARD8 gene contains 14 exons and
spans more than 50 kb. The first 3 exons are noncoding.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Zhang and Fu (2002) mapped the CARD8 gene
to chromosome 19q13.3.

GENE FUNCTION

By overexpression in Jurkat human T cells, Pathan et al. (2001) found
that CARD8 inhibited apoptosis and caspase activation induced by APAF1-
and CASP9 (602234)-dependent stimuli but not APAF1- and
CASP9-independent stimuli. Immunohistochemical analysis detected
elevated CARD8 immunostaining in 42 of 66 (64%) colon cancer specimens
compared with the adjacent normal tissues. Higher endogenous CARD8
immunostaining correlated with shorter patient survival.

Bouchier-Hayes et al. (2001) found that CARD8 suppressed NFKB activation
associated with overexpression of NFKB activators or with ligand-induced
stimulation of IL1 receptor (see 147810) or TNF receptor (see 191190).
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments revealed that CARD8 interacted with
the regulatory subunit of the I-kappa-B kinase complex, IKK-gamma
(IKBKG; 300248). Bouchier-Hayes et al. (2001) concluded that CARD8 is a
regulator of NFKB activation in the context of proinflammatory signals.

Razmara et al. (2002) found that CARD8 mediated apoptosis.
Overexpression of CARD8 induced apoptosis in transfected breast cancer
and green monkey kidney cells. In contrast to the findings of Pathan et
al. (2001), inhibitor studies by Razmara et al. (2002) indicated that
apoptosis was induced by CARD8 via the APAF1/CASP9 apoptotic complex.
CARD8 also suppressed NFKB activation by diverse stimuli, and stable
CARD8 expression sensitized monocytes to differentiation-induced
apoptosis. Razmara et al. (2002) found that CARD8 bound CASP1 (147678)
and negatively regulated CASP1-dependent IL1B secretion in monocytes. In
addition, CARD8 bound the CASP1 inhibitors ICEBERG (605354) and
pseudo-ICE. Razmara et al. (2002) concluded that CARD8 may be an adaptor
molecule that regulates CASP1 activation, NFKB activation, and
apoptosis.

Zhang and Fu (2002) found that expression of CARD8 blocked BAX
(600040)-induced apoptosis in several human cell lines and in rat
embryonic fibroblasts. TNF-alpha-induced NFKB activation was suppressed
in a CARD8-transfected hepatoma cell line.

Agostini et al. (2004) noted that NALP1, unlike other short NALP
proteins, contains a C-terminal CARD domain that interacts with and
activates CASP5 (602665). CASP1 and CASP5 are activated when they
assemble with NALP1 and ASC (PYCARD; 606838) to form the inflammasome,
which is responsible for processing the inactive IL1B (147720) precursor
(proIL1B) to release active IL1B cytokine. Using immunoprecipitation
analysis, Agostini et al. (2004) found that CARD8, which contains
C-terminal FIIND (function to find) and CARD domains, associated with
constructs of NALP2 (609364) and NALP3 (CIAS1; 606416) lacking the
N-terminal pyrin domain and/or the C-terminal leucine-rich repeat
domain. They determined that the interaction was mediated by the FIIND
domain of CARD8 and the centrally located NACHT domain of NALP2 and
NALP3. The pyrin domain of NALP2 and NALP3, like that of NALP1,
interacted with the pyrin domain of ASC, which recruits CASP1.
Transfection experiments showed that an inflammasome could be assembled
containing ASC, CARD8, CASP1, and a short NALP, resulting in activation
of CASP1, but not CASP5, and strong processing of proIL1B.

Yamamoto et al. (2005) found that overexpression of TUCAN54 in human
cell lines inhibited pro-CASP9 activation and suppressed apoptosis
induced by staurosporin, a protein kinase inhibitor, and by etoposide, a
chemotherapeutic reagent. In contrast, suppression of TUCAN54 expression
via small interfering RNA increased etoposide-induced cell death.
TUCAN54 also inhibited CASP8 (601763) activation, thereby suppressing
FAS (TNFRSF6; 134637)-induced cell death. TUCAN48 inhibited CASP9
activation and, more weakly, CASP8 activation, but only TUCAN54
physically associated with FADD (602457). FADD constitutively associated
with pro-CASP8 in transfected cells, suggesting that TUCAN54 inhibits
pro-CASP8 activation by forming a molecular complex with FADD and
pro-CASP8.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using RNA from lymphoblastoid cell lines of Crohn disease patients,
Bagnall et al. (2008) showed that an A-to-T transversion in exon 5 of
the CARD8 gene (dbSNP rs2043211), predicted to result in a cys10-to-ter
(C10X) substitution in the 48-kD isoform of CARD8, did not affect the
47.5-kD isoform. Patients who were TT homozygous showed somewhat reduced
expression of CARD8 mRNA, but expressed a 47.5-kD protein. The authors
showed that the dbSNP rs2043211 variant had multiple outcomes including
unaffected, cys10 to ter, cys34 to ter, phe52 to ile, and phe102 to ile.
Bagnall et al. (2008) noted that the multiple isoforms and differing
consequences for a predicted stop codon polymorphism underline the
importance of detailed analysis of the effects of proposed functional
variants on gene expression.

Using a genomewide screen of Salmonella typhimurium-infected HapMap
lymphoblastoid cells from individuals of northern and western European
or Nigerian ancestry, Ko et al. (2009) identified a loss-of-function
allele of CARD8 (cys10 to ter; dbSNP rs2043211) that was associated with
increased cell death in vitro. Overexpression of alternative alleles and
RNA interference analysis supported the association. Genotyping of
individuals with systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) showed a
modestly increased risk with the variant. Ko et al. (2009) proposed that
loss of CARD8 function and an increased inflammatory response may
protect against Salmonella but lead to increased inflammatory disease.

REFERENCE 1. Agostini, L.; Martinon, F.; Burns, K.; McDermott, M. F.; Hawkins,
P. N.; Tschopp, J.: NALP3 forms an IL-1-beta-processing inflammasome
with increased activity in Muckle-Wells autoinflammatory disorder. Immunity 20:
319-325, 2004.

2. Bagnall, R. D.; Roberts, R. G.; Mirza, M. M.; Torigoe, T.; Prescott,
N. J.; Mathew, C. G.: Novel isoforms of the CARD8 (TUCAN) gene evade
a nonsense mutation. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 16: 619-625, 2008.

3. Bouchier-Hayes, L.; Conroy, H.; Egan, H.; Adrain, C.; Creagh, E.
M.; MacFarlane, M.; Martin, S. J.: CARDINAL, a novel caspase recruitment
domain protein, is an inhibitor of multiple NF-kappa-B activation
pathways. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 44069-44077, 2001.

4. Ko, D. C.; Shukla, K. P.; Fong, C.; Wasnick, M.; Brittnacher, M.
J.; Wurfel, M. M.; Holden, T. D.; O'Keefe, G. E.; Van Yserloo, B.;
Akey, J. M.; Miller, S. I.: A genome-wide in vitro bacterial-infection
screen reveals human variation in the host response associated with
inflammatory disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 85: 214-227, 2009.

5. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

6. Pathan, N.; Marusawa, H.; Krajewska, M.; Matsuzawa, S.; Kim, H.;
Okada, K.; Torii, S.; Kitada, S.; Krajewski, S.; Welsh, K.; Pio, F.;
Godzik, A.; Reed, J. C.: TUCAN, an antiapoptotic caspase-associated
recruitment domain family protein overexpressed in cancer. J. Biol.
Chem. 276: 32220-32229, 2001.

7. Razmara, M.; Srinivasula, S. M.; Wang, L.; Poyet, J.-L.; Geddes,
B. J.; DiStefano, P. S.; Bertin, J.; Alnemri, E. S.: CARD-8 protein,
a new CARD family member that regulates caspase-1 activation and apoptosis. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 13952-13958, 2002.

8. Yamamoto, M.; Torigoe, T.; Kamiguchi, K.; Hirohashi, Y.; Nakanishi,
K.; Nabeta, C.; Asanuma, H.; Tsuruma, T.; Sato, T.; Hata, F.; Ohmura,
T.; Yamaguchi, K.; Kurotaki, T.; Hirata, K.; Sato, N.: A novel isoform
of TUCAN is overexpressed in human cancer tissues and suppresses both
caspase-8- and caspase-9-mediated apoptosis. Cancer Res. 65: 8706-8714,
2005.

9. Zhang, H.; Fu, W.: NDPP1 is a novel CARD domain containing protein
which can inhibit apoptosis and suppress NF-kappa-B activation. Int.
J. Oncol. 20: 1035-1040, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/27/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/4/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/18/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/1/2005

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/29/2004

EDITED mgross: 10/27/2009
terry: 10/27/2009
mgross: 6/5/2009
terry: 6/4/2009
wwang: 12/30/2008
terry: 12/18/2008
mgross: 5/13/2005
mgross: 3/1/2005
mgross: 11/29/2004

602352	TITLE *602352 GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE 2; GNRH2
DESCRIPTION Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 1 (GNRH1; 152760) is a decapeptide widely
known for its role in regulating reproduction by serving as a signal
from the hypothalamus to pituitary gonadotropes. This function for GNRH1
has been highly conserved during 500 million years of vertebrate
evolution despite the fact that its amino acid sequence varies by 50%.
In addition to the hypothalamic GNRH1 of variable sequence, many
vertebrate species express a second, invariant GNRH form, GNRH-II (or
GNRH2), with the primary structure
gln-his-trp-ser-his-gly-trp-tyr-pro-gly. Antibody staining demonstrates
GNRH2 in the midbrain of all species where its location has been
described (Kasten et al., 1996). Furthermore, nucleic acid probes have
been used to identify GNRH2 expression in the midbrain of several fish
species and one mammal. White et al. (1998) showed that a gene encoding
GNRH2 is expressed in humans and is located on chromosome 20p13,
distinct from the GNRH1 gene on 8p21-p11.2. The genomic and mRNA
structures of GNRH2 parallel those of GNRH1. However, in contrast to
GNRH1, GNRH2 is expressed at significantly higher levels outside the
brain (up to 30-fold), particularly in the kidney, bone marrow, and
prostate. The widespread expression of GNRH2 suggests it may have
multiple functions. Molecular phylogenetic analysis shows that GNRH2 is
likely the result of a duplication before the appearance of vertebrates,
and predicts the existence of a third GNRH form in humans and other
vertebrates. White et al. (1998) used fluorescence in situ hybridization
to map GNRH2 to 20p13.

Chen et al. (2002) found that human normal and leukemic T cells produce
GNRH2 and GNRH1. Exposure of normal or cancerous human or mouse T cells
to GNRH2 or GNRH1 triggered de novo gene transcription and cell-surface
expression of the laminin receptor (150370), which is involved in
cellular adhesion and migration and in tumor invasion and metastasis.
GNRH2 or GNRH1 also induced adhesion to laminin and chemotaxis toward
SDF1A (600835), and augmented entry in vivo of metastatic T-lymphoma
into the spleen and bone marrow. Homing of normal T cells into specific
organs was reduced in mice lacking GNRH1. A specific GNRH1 receptor
antagonist blocked GNRH1 but not GNRH2-induced effects, which was
suggestive of signaling through distinct receptors. Chen et al. (2002)
suggested that GNRH2 and GNRH1, secreted from nerves or autocrine or
paracrine sources, interact directly with T cells and trigger gene
transcription, adhesion, chemotaxis, and homing to specific organs.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, A.; Ganor, Y.; Rahimipour, S.; Ben-Aroya, N.; Koch, Y.; Levite,
M.: The neuropeptides GnRH-II and GnRH-I are produced by human T
cells and trigger laminin receptor gene expression, adhesion, chemotaxis
and homing to specific organs. Nature Med. 8: 1421-1426, 2002.

2. Kasten, T. L.; White, S. A.; Norton, T. T.; Bond, C. T.; Adelman,
J. P.; Fernald, R. D.: Characterization of two new preproGnRH mRNAs
in the tree shrew: first direct evidence for mesencephalia GnRH gene
expression in a placental mammal. Gen. Comp. Endocr. 104: 7-19,
1996.

3. White, R. B.; Eisen, J. A.; Kasten, T. L.; Fernald, R. D.: Second
gene for gonadotropin-releasing hormone in humans. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 95: 305-309, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/13/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/1998

EDITED alopez: 02/19/2003
terry: 2/13/2003
dholmes: 3/10/1998
mark: 2/13/1998

607824	TITLE *607824 HOOK, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 2; HOOK2
;;HK2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Hook proteins are cytosolic coiled-coil proteins that contain conserved
N-terminal domains, which attach to microtubules, and more divergent
C-terminal domains, which mediate binding to organelles. The Drosophila
Hook protein is a component of the endocytic compartment (summary by
Walenta et al., 2001).

CLONING

Using homology with the Drosophila Hook gene, Kramer and Phistry (1999)
identified ESTs containing the HOOK2 sequence, which they called HK2. By
5-prime RACE of a placenta cDNA library, they cloned a full-length HOOK2
cDNA. The deduced 728-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal domain,
a central coiled-coil domain, and a C-terminal domain. HOOK2 shares 30%
identity with Drosophila Hook, with highest conservation in the
N-terminal domain. Kramer and Phistry (1999) also identified a shorter,
alternatively spliced transcript.

By Western blot analysis, Walenta et al. (2001) determined that
endogenous HOOK2 detected in HEK293 cells had an apparent molecular mass
of about 83 kD. Endogenous HOOK2 localized to discrete punctate
subcellular structures that were often observed in linear tracks that
colocalized with microtubule markers.

GENE FUNCTION

By Western blot analysis of HEK293 immunoprecipitates, Walenta et al.
(2001) determined that HOOK2 exists in a protein complex that is
distinct from complexes containing HOOK1 (607820) and HOOK3 (607825). By
microtubule spin-down assay, they determined that full-length HOOK2 and
a C-terminal truncation mutant bound to microtubules.

REFERENCE 1. Kramer, H.; Phistry, M.: Genetic analysis of hook, a gene required
for endocytic trafficking in Drosophila. Genetics 151: 675-684,
1999.

2. Walenta, J. H.; Didier, A. J.; Liu, X.; Kramer, H.: The Golgi-associated
Hook3 protein is a member of a novel family of microtubule-binding
proteins. J. Cell Biol. 152: 923-934, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/23/2003

EDITED carol: 12/29/2011
carol: 7/7/2010
mgross: 5/23/2003

600514	TITLE *600514 REELIN; RELN
;;RL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The RELN gene encodes reelin, a large secreted glycoprotein that is
produced by specific cell types within the developing brain and
activates a signaling pathway in postmitotic migrating neurons required
for proper positioning of neurons within laminated nervous system
parenchyma (summary by Zaki et al., 2007).

CLONING

The autosomal recessive mouse mutation 'reeler' (rl) leads to impaired
motor coordination, tremors, and ataxia. Neurons in affected mice fail
to reach their correct locations in the developing brain, disrupting the
organization of the cerebellar and cerebral cortices and other laminated
regions. D'Arcangelo et al. (1995) isolated a gene called reelin (Reln)
that was deleted in 2 reeler alleles. The allele used in cloning the
gene was produced by transgene insertion. Normal but not mutant mice
expressed reelin in embryonic and postnatal neurons during periods of
neuronal migration. The encoded protein resembled extracellular matrix
proteins involved in cell adhesion. D'Arcangelo et al. (1995) found that
the 10,383-bp reelin open reading frame (ORF) begins with a methionine
codon preceded by a consensus sequence for translation initiation. The
stop codon is followed by about 1 kb of 3-prime untranslated sequence
and a potential polyadenylation signal. The ORF encodes a protein of
3,461 amino acids with a relative molecular mass of 388 kD. A single
reelin transcript of about 12 kb was detected in RNA from the brains of
normal mice, but not from brains of affected mice.

Hirotsune et al. (1995) also identified a strong candidate cDNA for the
mouse reeler gene. This 5-kb transcript encoded a 94.4-kD protein
consisting of 881 amino acids and possessing 2 EGF-like motifs. They
analyzed 2 mutant alleles: 'Jackson reeler,' which was found to have a
deletion of the entire gene, and 'Orleans reeler,' which exhibited a
220-bp deletion in the ORF that included the second EGF-like motif and
resulted in a frameshift. In situ hybridization demonstrated that the
transcript is detected exclusively in the pioneer neurons that guide
neuronal cell migration along the radial array. The findings offered an
explanation of how the reeler mutant phenotype causes a disturbance of
the complex architecture of the neuronal network.

DeSilva et al. (1997) found that, like its murine counterpart, human
reelin (RELN) is large, encoding an mRNA of approximately 12 kb. The
mouse and human proteins, predicted from the ORF of the overlapping cDNA
clones, are similar in size (388 kD) and the amino acid and nucleotide
sequences are 94.2% and 87.2% identical, respectively. Northern
hybridization analysis revealed that RELN is expressed in fetal and
postnatal brain as well as in liver. The expression of RELN in postnatal
human brain was high in the cerebellum.

GENE STRUCTURE

Royaux et al. (1997) described the genomic structure of the mouse Reln
gene and the 5-prime-flanking genomic DNA sequences. The gene contains
65 exons spanning approximately 450 kb of genomic DNA. They identified
different reelin transcripts, formed by alternative splicing of a
microexon as well as by use of 2 different polyadenylation sites. All
splice sites conform to the GT-AG rule, except for the splice donor site
of intron 30, which is GC instead of GT. A processed pseudogene was
present in intron 42. Its nucleotide sequence was 86% identical to the
sequence of the rat RDJ1 cDNA which codes for a DnaJ-like protein of the
Hsp40 family. The genomic structures of the mouse and human RELN genes
appear to be highly conserved. The presence of tandemly repeated regions
in the reelin protein suggested that gene duplication events occurred
during evolution. By comparison of the amino acid sequences of the 8
repeats and the positions of introns, Royaux et al. (1997) suggested a
model for the evolution of the repeat coding portion of the reelin gene
from a putative ancestral minigene.

MAPPING

To map the RL gene, D'Arcangelo (1995) used a mouse reelin probe to
isolate a human cDNA from a cerebellum phage library. A P1 clone was
then used for fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The human
reelin gene maps to 7q22, a chromosomal region that had not yet been
linked to any human genetic disease (D'Arcangelo et al., 1995). RL was
also mapped to YAC contigs spanning the 7q22 region. In the mouse, the
rl gene maps to chromosome 5 (Green, 1989), which is known to have a
long region of homology to human chromosome 7. Based on both FISH and
localization within a well-positioned YAC contig, DeSilva et al. (1997)
mapped the RELN gene to chromosome 7q22.

GENE FUNCTION

Impagnatiello et al. (1998) suggested that reelin may have a role in
schizophrenia (181500) because it regulates positioning and/or trophism
of cortical pyramidal neurons, interneurons, and Purkinje cells during
brain development. Another factor that plays an important role in
guiding the migration of embryonic cortical neurons to their final
destinations in the subcortical plate is the gene that is mutant in the
mouse 'disabled-1' mutation. This gene encodes an adaptor protein (Dab1;
603448) that is a phosphorylation target for a signaling cascade
putatively triggered by the Reln protein interaction with extracellular
matrix (ECM) proteins. Dab1 expression is deficient in another
neurologic genetic phenotype, the 'scrambler' mouse, which is
neurologically and behaviorally similar to the reeler mouse. During
ontogenesis of a mammalian brain, including human brain, RELN is
abundantly synthesized by the Cajal-Retzius cells and other pioneer
neurons located in the telencephalic marginal zone and by granule cells
of the external granular layer of the cerebellum. In wildtype and
scrambler mice, Reln is secreted into the ECM, but the reeler mouse
neither synthesizes nor secretes typical Reln protein. During
development, telencephalic migrating neurons and interneurons express
DAB1, but they neither express nor secrete RELN. In the reeler mouse,
the telencephalic neurons (which are misplaced following migration)
express approximately 10-fold more Dab1 than their wildtype counterpart.
Such an increase in the expression of a protein that virtually functions
as a receptor is expected to occur when the specific signal for the
receptor is missing. The function of RELN in embryos may ultimately
depend on the phosphorylation of DAB1 expressed selectively in migrating
telencephalic pyramidal neurons and cerebellar Purkinje neurons.
Impagnatiello et al. (1998) studied postmortem prefrontal cortices,
temporal cortices, hippocampi, caudate nuclei, and cerebella of
schizophrenia patients and their matched nonpsychiatric subjects. In all
of the brain areas studied, RELN and its mRNA were significantly reduced
(approximately 50%) in patients with schizophrenia; this decrease was
similar in patients affected by undifferentiated or paranoid
schizophrenia. On the other hand, DAB1 was expressed at normal levels in
all of these areas that showed a decrease in RELN. The frequency of RELN
DNA polymorphism in schizophrenia patients and the location of this
variation in a stretch of genomic DNA important for the regulation of
RELN protein secretion (Royaux et al., 1997) increased the clinical
interest in RELN gene abnormalities as putative vulnerability factors in
schizophrenia.

Layering of neurons in the cerebral cortex and cerebellum requires RELN
and DAB1. By targeted disruption experiments in mice, Trommsdorff et al.
(1999) showed that 2 cell surface receptors, very low density
lipoprotein receptor (VLDLR; 192977) and apolipoprotein E receptor-2
(APOER2; 602600), are also required. Both receptors bound Dab1 on their
cytoplasmic tails and were expressed in cortical and cerebellar layers
adjacent to layers expressing Reln. Dab1 expression was upregulated in
knockout mice lacking both the Vldlr and Apoer2 genes. Inversion of
cortical layers, absence of cerebellar foliation, and the migration of
Purkinje cells in these animals precisely mimicked the phenotype of mice
lacking Reln or Dab1. These findings established novel signaling
functions for the LDL receptor gene family and suggested that VLDLR and
APOER2 participate in transmitting the extracellular RELN signal to
intracellular signaling processes initiated by DAB1.

Using in vitro binding experiments, Hiesberger et al. (1999) showed that
Reln binds directly and specifically to the extracellular domains of
Vldlr and ApoER2. In primary embryonic neuron cultures, they
demonstrated that blockade of Vldlr and ApoER2 ligand binding correlates
with loss of Reelin-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of Dab1. With
Western blot analysis, they demonstrated that mice that lack either Reln
or Vldlr and ApoER2 (Trommsdorff et al., 1999) exhibit a dramatic
increase in the phosphorylation level of the microtubule-stabilizing
protein tau (MAPT; 157140). Hiesberger et al. (1999) concluded that Reln
acts via Vldlr and ApoER2 to regulate Dab1 tyrosine phosphorylation and
microtubule function in neurons.

D'Arcangelo et al. (1999) transfected 293T cells with expression
constructs encoding full-length VLDLR, APOER2, and LDLR (606945) cDNA.
Cells were incubated in the presence of reelin. By Western blotting, all
3 reelin isoforms (400, 250, and 180 kD) were found to associate with
293T cells expressing VLDLR and APOER2, and to a lower extent with cells
expressing LDLR; no binding was detected using mock transfected cells.
Binding required calcium and was inhibited in the presence of APOE
(107741). Furthermore, the CR-50 monoclonal antibody, which inhibits
reelin function, blocked the association of reelin with VLDLR. After
binding to VLDLR on the cell surface, reelin was internalized into
vesicles. In dissociated embryonic cortical neurons, APOE reduced the
level of reelin-induced intracellular tyrosine phosphorylation of Dab1.
The authors suggested that reelin directs neuronal migration by binding
to VLDLR and APOER2.

Mutation of the Reln gene in the mouse disrupts neuronal migration in
several brain regions and gives rise to functional deficits, such as
ataxic gait and trembling. Thus, reelin is thought to control cell-cell
interactions critical for cell positioning in the brain. Although an
abundance of reelin transcript is found in the embryonic spinal cord, it
was generally thought that neuronal migration in the spinal cord is not
affected by reelin. However, Yip et al. (2000) showed that migration of
sympathetic preganglionic neurons in the spinal cord is affected by
reelin. This study indicated that reelin affects neuronal migration
outside of the brain. Moreover, the relationship between reelin and
migrating preganglionic neurons suggests that reelin acts as a barrier
to neuronal migration.

Using neuronal precursors from postnatal mice in a Matrigel culture
system, Hack et al. (2002) showed that reelin acted as a detachment
signal for chain-migrating interneuron precursors in the olfactory bulb,
inducing their dispersal into individual cells. In vivo studies of
reeler mutant mice showed disrupted organization of the olfactory bulb
as well as failure of individual neuronal migration. Reelin did not act
as a stop signal, did not provide directional cues, and did not affect
migration distance.

Using in vitro and in vivo migration assays, Dulabon et al. (2000)
showed that reelin inhibits migration of cortical neurons in mouse
embryonic brain. Immunoprecipitation experiments showed that reelin
associates with alpha-3-beta-1 integrin (see 605025 and 135630), a
receptor that mediates neuronal adhesion to radial glial fibers and
radial migration. Using alpha-3-beta-1 integrin-deficient mouse embryos
for migration assays, Dulabon et al. (2000) showed that deficiency in
functional alpha-3-beta-1 integrins leads to deficiency in reelin
function. They observed reduced levels of Dab1 protein and elevated
expression of a 180-kD reelin fragment in cerebral cortices of
alpha-3-beta-1 integrin-deficient mice. Dulabon et al. (2000) concluded
that reelin may arrest neuronal migration and promote normal cortical
lamination by binding alpha-3-beta-1 integrin and modulating
integrin-mediated cellular adhesion.

By examining mice deficient in either Reln or Dab1, Rice et al. (2001)
found that expression of both genes was essential for the patterning of
synaptic connectivity in the retina. Physiologic studies of mice
deficient in either gene detected attenuated rod-driven retinal
responses that were associated with a decrease in rod bipolar cell
density and an abnormal distribution of processes in the inner plexiform
layer.

Grayson et al. (2005) found that postmortem brains from patients with
schizophrenia had increased methylation of the RELN gene within the
promoter region, particularly at positions -134 and -139, compared to
controls. The authors hypothesized that hypermethylation of this
promoter region results in decreased expression of RELN in
schizophrenia.

Botella-Lopez et al. (2006) found increased levels of a 180-kD reelin
fragment in CSF from 19 patients with Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300)
compared to 11 nondemented controls. Western blot and PCR analysis
confirmed increased levels of reelin protein and mRNA in tissue samples
from the frontal cortex of AD patients. Reelin was not increased in
plasma samples, suggesting distinct cellular origins. The reelin 180-kD
fragment was also increased in CSF samples of other neurodegenerative
disorders, including frontotemporal dementia (600274), progressive
supranuclear palsy (PSP; 601104), and Parkinson disease (PD; 168600).

Using overexpression and knockdown studies with cultured rat and mouse
hippocampal and cortical neurons, Matsuki et al. (2010) found that a
signaling pathway containing Stk25 (602255), Lkb1 (STK11; 602216), Strad
(STRADA; 608626), and the Golgi protein Gm130 (GOLGA2; 602580) promoted
Golgi condensation and multiple axon outgrowth while inhibiting Golgi
deployment into dendrites and dendritic growth. This signaling pathway
acted in opposition to the reelin-Dab1 pathway, which tended to inhibit
Golgi condensation and axon outgrowth and favor Golgi deployment into
dendrites and dendrite outgrowth.

Thirty percent of all cortical interneurons arise from a relatively
novel source within the ventral telencephalon, the caudal ganglionic
eminence (CGE) (summary by De Marco Garcia et al., 2011). Owing to their
late birth date, these interneurons populate the cortex only after the
majority of other interneurons and pyramidal cells are already in place
and have started to functionally integrate. De Marco Garcia et al.
(2011) demonstrated in mice that for CGE-derived reelin-positive and
calretinin (114051)-positive, but not vasoactive intestinal peptide
(VIP; 192320)-positive, interneurons, activity is essential before
postnatal day 3 for correct migration, and that after postnatal day 3,
glutamate-mediated activity controls the development of their axons and
dendrites. Furthermore, De Marco Garcia et al. (2011) showed that the
engulfment and cell motility-1 gene (Elmo1; 606420), a target of the
transcription factor distal-less homeobox-1 (Dlx1; 600029), is
selectively expressed in reelin-positive and calretinin-positive
interneurons and is both necessary and sufficient for activity-dependent
interneuron migration. De Marco Garcia et al. (2011) concluded that
their findings revealed a selective requirement for activity in shaping
the cortical integration of specific neuronal subtypes.

Senturk et al. (2011) showed that the neuronal guidance cues ephrin B
proteins are essential for Reelin signaling during the development of
laminated structures in the brain. They showed that ephrin Bs
genetically interact with Reelin. Notably, compound mouse mutants (Reln
heterozygotes null for either Efnb2 (600527) or Efnb3 (602297)) and
triple Efnb1 (300035)/Efnb2/Efnb3 knockouts showed neuronal migration
defects that recapitulated the ones observed in the neocortex,
hippocampus, and cerebellum of the reeler mouse. Mechanistically,
Senturk et al. (2011) showed that Reelin binds to the extracellular
domain of ephrin Bs, which associate at the membrane with VLDLR (192977)
and ApoER2 (602600) in neurons. Clustering of ephrin Bs leads to the
recruitment and phosphorylation of Dab1 (603448) which is necessary for
Reelin signaling. Conversely, loss of function of ephrin Bs severely
impairs Reelin-induced Dab1 phosphorylation. Importantly, activation of
ephrin Bs can rescue the reeler neuronal migration defects in the
absence of Reelin protein. Senturk et al. (2011) concluded that their
results identified ephrin Bs as essential components of the Reelin
receptor/signaling pathway to control neuronal migration during the
development of the nervous system.

Shim et al. (2012) showed that SOX4 (184430) and SOX11 (600898) are
crucial in regulating reelin expression and the inside-out pattern of
cortical layer formation. This regulation is independent of E4, a
conserved nonexonic element required for the specification of
corticospinal neuron identity and connectivity, and Fezf2 (607414), and
probably involves interactions with distinct regulatory elements.
Cortex-specific double deletion of Sox4 and Sox11 in mice led to the
loss of Fezf2 expression, failed specification of corticospinal neurons
and, independent of Fezf2, a reeler-like inversion of layers.

CYTOGENETICS

Zaki et al. (2007) reported 2 sibs from a consanguineous Egyptian
marriage who had cortical lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia,
severe epilepsy, and mental retardation. Karyotype analysis identified a
homozygous, apparently balanced reciprocal translocation,
t(7;12)(q22;p13), in both children. Further analysis confirmed
disruption of the RELN gene at chromosome 7q22.1 and undetectable levels
of the protein in both children. The unaffected parents were related as
double first cousins were heterozygous for the translocation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Normal development of the cerebral cortex requires long-range migration
of cortical neurons from proliferative regions deep in the brain.
Lissencephaly ('smooth brain,' from 'lissos,' meaning 'smooth,' and
'encephalos,' meaning 'brain') is a severe developmental disorder in
which neuronal migration is impaired, leading to a thickened cerebral
cortex whose normally folded contour is simplified and smooth. X-linked
lissencephaly (300067) is caused by mutation in the gene encoding
doublecortin (DCX; 300121). Deletion of or mutation in the PAFAH1B1 gene
(601545), located on 17p, causes isolated lissencephaly sequence (LIS1;
607432), and haploinsufficiency of this and other neighboring genes is
responsible for the Miller-Dieker lissencephaly syndrome (247200), a
contiguous gene deletion syndrome. Hong et al. (2000) studied an
autosomal recessive form of lissencephaly associated with severe
abnormalities of the cerebellum, hippocampus, and brainstem; see
lissencephaly syndrome, Norman-Roberts type (LIS2; 257320). They tested
for linkage to markers near RELN on chromosome 7 and DAB1 on chromosome
1p32-p31, because mutations in the mouse homologs of these 2 genes cause
brain defects in mice that resemble lissencephaly, including hypoplasia
of the cerebellum, brainstem abnormalities, and a neuronal migration
disorder of the neocortex and hippocampus. In 2 unrelated pedigrees,
they found substantial regions of homozygosity in affected children near
the RELN gene on chromosome 7q22. In these 2 families, they demonstrated
different splice site mutations in the RELN gene (600514.0001 and
600514.0002, respectively). The study of these human patients pointed to
several previously unsuspected functions of reelin in and outside of the
brain. Although abnormalities of RELN mRNA had been reported in
postmortem brains of schizophrenic humans (Impagnatiello et al., 1998),
no evidence of schizophrenia was found in individuals with heterozygous
or homozygous RELN mutations. On the other hand, one of the
lissencephaly patients studied with a muscle biopsy showed evidence of
abnormal neuromuscular connectivity (Hourihane et al., 1993). Moreover,
at least 3 patients had persistent lymphedema neonatally, and one showed
accumulation of chylous (i.e., fatty) ascites fluid that required
peritoneal shunting (Hourihane et al., 1993). The apparent role for
reelin in serum homeostasis may reflect reelin interactions with LDL
superfamily receptors outside the brain, as well as in the brain.

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the RELN
gene and otosclerosis, see 166800.

ANIMAL MODEL

To investigate Reln function, Magdaleno et al. (2002) generated
transgenic mice using the nestin (NES; 600915) promoter to drive ectopic
expression of Reln in the ventricular zone during early brain
development. Ectopic Reln expression in transgenic reelin mice, which
lack endogenous Reln expression, induced tyrosine phosphorylation of
Dab1 in the ventricular zone. The transgene also rescued some, but not
all, of the neuroanatomic and behavioral abnormalities characteristic of
the reeler phenotype, including ataxia and the migration of Purkinje
cells. Magdaleno et al. (2002) hypothesized that Reln functions in
concert with other positional cues to promote cell-cell interactions
that are required for layer formation during development.

Assadi et al. (2003) investigated interactions between the reelin
signaling pathway and Lis1 in brain development. Compound mutant mice
with disruptions in the Reln pathway and heterozygous mutations in the
Pafah1b1 gene, which encodes Lis1, had a higher incidence of
hydrocephalus and enhanced cortical and hippocampal layering defects.
The Dab1 signaling molecule and Lis1 bound in a reelin-induced
phosphorylation-dependent manner. These data indicated genetic and
biochemical interaction between the reelin signaling pathway and LIS1.

In the mouse ventral spinal cord, Hochstim et al. (2008) identified 3
subtypes of white matter astrocytes with differential gene expression
corresponding to position. Astrocytes expressing both Reln and Slit1
(603742) were in the ventrolateral domain, those expressing Reln only
were at the dorsolateral domain, and those expressing Slit1 only were at
the ventromedial domain. The distinct positions of these astrocytes were
specified by varying expression of the homeodomain transcription factors
Pax6 (607108) and Nkx6.1 (602563). The findings indicated that
positional identity is an organizing principle underlying phenotypic
diversity among white matter astrocytes, as well as among neurons, and
that this diversity is prespecified within precursor cells in the
germinal zone of the CNS.

Miller and Sweatt (2007) found that DNA methylation, which is mediated
by DNA methyltransferase, was dynamically regulated during learning and
memory consolidation in adult rats. Animals exposed to an associative
context plus shock showed increased Dnmt3a (602769) and Dnmt3b (602900)
mRNA in hippocampal area CA1 compared to context-only animals. Context
plus shock rats showed increased methylation and decreased mRNA of the
memory suppressor gene PP1C-beta (PPP1CB; 600590) compared to shock-only
controls, as well as increased demethylation and increased mRNA levels
of reelin, which is involved in synaptic plasticity, compared to
controls. The methylation levels of both these target genes returned to
baseline within a day, indicating rapid and dynamic changes. Treatment
with a DNMT inhibitor blocked the methylation changes and prevented
memory consolidation of fear-conditioned learning, but the memory
changes were plastic, and memory consolidation was reestablished after
the inhibitor wore off. Miller and Sweatt (2007) noted that DNA
methylation has been viewed as having an exclusive role in development,
but they emphasized that their findings indicated that rapid and dynamic
alteration of DNA methylation can occur in the adult central nervous
system in response to environmental stimuli during associative learning
in the hippocampus.

HISTORY

Quattrocchi et al. (2003) concluded that mouse reelin functions
postnatally to regulate the development of the neuromuscular junction.
Because these results could not be replicated, Quattrocchi et al. (2004)
retracted their paper from Science of 2003. The results had been called
into question by Bidoia et al. (2004) and others. D'Arcangelo (2004)
could not reproduce the findings described by Quattrocchi et al. (2003)
and concluded that reelin does not regulate the development of the
neuromuscular junction.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LISSENCEPHALY SYNDROME, NORMAN-ROBERTS TYPE
RELN, IVS37AS, G-A, -1

In a Saudi Arabian family with first-cousin parents and 3 children with
lissencephaly-2 (257320), Hong et al. (2000) found a splice acceptor
site mutation in the RELN gene: IVS37AS, G-A, -1. The patients were
homozygous for the splice acceptor mutation and both parents were
heterozygous. In their paper Hong et al. (2000) referred to this
mutation as IVS36AS, G-A, -1; however, in an erratum, they noted that
their system for exon numbering differed from that adopted in the mouse
and clarified the human-mouse comparison so that a single numbering
system could be used in both species.

.0002
LISSENCEPHALY SYNDROME, NORMAN-ROBERTS TYPE
RELN, 148-BP DEL

Hong et al. (2000) studied a family in which 3 brothers, including a set
of identical twins, had lissencephaly-2 (257320) and the parents were
related as half first cousins. The brothers were found to have a 148-bp
deletion in the RELN gene corresponding to the removal of exon 42
(EX42DEL). The family was British and had previously been reported by
Hourihane et al. (1993). At birth, affected children showed normal head
size, congenital lymphedema, and hypotonia. Brain MRI showed moderate
lissencephaly and profound cerebellar hypoplasia. Cognitive development
was delayed for all affected children, with little or no language and no
ability to sit or stand unsupported. There was also myopia, nystagmus,
and generalized seizures that could be controlled with medication. In
one patient in this family muscle biopsy showed evidence of abnormal
neuromuscular connectivity. Patients from this family had persistent
lymphedema neonatally, and 1 showed accumulation of chylous (that is,
fatty) ascites fluid that required peritoneal shunting.

REFERENCE 1. Assadi, A. H.; Zhang, G.; Beffert, U.; McNeil, R. S.; Renfro, A.
L.; Niu, S.; Quattrocchi, C. C.; Antalffy, B. A.; Sheldon, M.; Armstrong,
D. D.; Wynshaw-Boris, A.; Herz, J.; D'Arcangelo, G.; Clark, G. D.
: Interaction of reelin signaling and Lis1 in brain development. Nature
Genet. 35: 270-276, 2003.

2. Bidoia, C.; Misgeld, T.; Weinzierl, E.; Buffelli, M.; Feng, G.;
Cangiano, A.; Lichtman, J. W.; Sanes, J. R.: Comment on 'reelin promotes
peripheral synapse elimination and maturation.' Science 303: 1977b,
2004.

3. Botella-Lopez, A.; Burgaya, F.; Gavin, R.; Garcia-Ayllon, M. S.;
Gomez-Tortosa, E.; Pena-Casanova, J.; Urena, J. M.; Del Rio, J. A.;
Blesa, R.; Soriano, E.; Saez-Valero, J.: Reelin expression and glycosylation
patterns are altered in Alzheimer's disease. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
5573-5578, 2006.

4. D'Arcangelo, G.: Personal Communication. Nutley, N. J.  6/2/1995.

5. D'Arcangelo, G.: Response to comment on 'reelin promotes peripheral
synapse elimination and maturation.' Science 303: 1977c only, 2004.

6. D'Arcangelo, G.; Homayouni, R.; Keshvara, L.; Rice, D. S.; Sheldon,
M.; Curran, T.: Reelin is a ligand for lipoprotein receptors. Neuron 24:
471-479, 1999.

7. D'Arcangelo, G.; Miao, G. G.; Chen, S.-C.; Soares, H. D.; Morgan,
J. I.; Curran, T.: A protein related to extracellular matrix proteins
deleted in the mouse mutant reeler. Nature 374: 719-723, 1995.

8. De Marco Garcia, N. V.; Karayannis, T.; Fishell, G.: Neuronal
activity is required for the development of specific cortical interneuron
subtypes. Nature 472: 351-355, 2011.

9. DeSilva, U.; D'Arcangelo, G.; Braden, V. V.; Chen, J.; Miao, G.
G.; Curran, T.; Green, E. D.: The human reelin gene: isolation, sequencing,
and mapping on chromosome 7. Genome Res. 7: 157-164, 1997.

10. Dulabon, L.; Olson, E. C.; Taglienti, M. G.; Eisenhuth, S.; McGrath,
B.; Walsh, C. A.; Kreidberg, J. A.; Anton, E. S.: Reelin binds alpha-3-beta-1
integrin and inhibits neuronal migration. Neuron 27: 33-44, 2000.

11. Grayson, D. R.; Jia, X.; Chen, Y.; Sharma, R. P.; Mitchell, C.
P.; Guidotti, A.; Costa, E.: Reelin promoter hypermethylation in
schizophrenia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 9341-9346, 2005.

12. Green, M. C.: Catalog of mutant genes and polymorphic loci.In:
Lyon, M. F.; Searle, A. G.: Genetic Variants and Strains of the Laboratory
Mouse.  Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  (2nd ed.): 1989.

13. Hack, I.; Bancila, M.; Loulier, K.; Carroll, P.; Cremer, H.:
Reelin is a detachment signal in tangential chain-migration during
postnatal neurogenesis. Nature Neurosci. 5: 939-945, 2002.

14. Hiesberger, T.; Trommsdorff, M.; Howell, B. W.; Goffinet, A.;
Mumby, M. C.; Cooper, J. A.; Herz, J.: Direct binding of reelin to
VLDL receptor and apoE receptor 2 induces tyrosine phosphorylation
of disabled-1 and modulates tau phosphorylation. Neuron 24: 481-489,
1999.

15. Hirotsune, S.; Takahara, T.; Sasaki, N.; Hirose, K.; Yoshiki,
A.; Ohashi, T.; Kusakabe, M.; Murakami, Y.; Muramatsu, M.; Watanabe,
S.; Nakao, K.; Katsuki, M.; Hayashizaki, Y.: The reeler gene encodes
a protein with an EGF-like motif expressed by pioneer neurons. Nature
Genet. 10: 77-83, 1995.

16. Hochstim, C.; Deneen, B.; Lukaszewicz, A.; Zhou, Q.; Anderson,
D. J.: Identification of positionally distinct astrocyte subtypes
whose identities are specified by a homeodomain code. Cell 133:
510-522, 2008.

17. Hong, S. E.; Shugart, Y. Y.; Huang, D. T.; Al Shahwan, S.; Grant,
P. E.; Hourihane, J. O.; Martin, N. D. T.; Walsh, C. A.: Autosomal
recessive lissencephaly with cerebellar hypoplasia is associated with
human RELN mutations. Nature Genet. 26: 93-96, 2000. Note: Erratum:
Nature Genet. 27: 225 only, 2001.

18. Hourihane, J. O.; Bennett, C. P.; Chaudhuri, R.; Robb, S. A.;
Martin, N. D. T.: A sibship with a neuronal migration defect, cerebellar
hypoplasia and congenital lymphedema. Neuropediatrics 24: 43-46,
1993.

19. Impagnatiello, F.; Guidotti, A. R.; Pesold, C.; Dwivedi, Y.; Caruncho,
H.; Pisu, M. G.; Uzunov, D. P.; Smalheiser, N. R.; Davis, J. M.; Pandey,
G. N.; Pappas, G. D.; Tueting, P.; Sharma, R. P.; Costa, E.: A decrease
of reelin expression as a putative vulnerability factor in schizophrenia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 15718-15723, 1998.

20. Magdaleno, S.; Keshvara, L.; Curran, T.: Rescue of ataxia and
preplate splitting by ectopic expression of reelin in reeler mice. Neuron 33:
573-586, 2002.

21. Matsuki, T.; Matthews, R. T.; Cooper, J. A.; van der Brug, M.
P.; Cookson, M. R.; Hardy, J. A.; Olson, E. C.; Howell, B. W.: Reelin
and Stk25 have opposing roles in neuronal polarization and dendritic
Golgi deployment. Cell 143: 826-836, 2010.

22. Miller, C. A.; Sweatt, J. D.: Covalent modification of DNA regulates
memory formation. Neuron 53: 857-869, 2007. Note: Erratum: Neuron
59: 1051 only, 2008.

23. Quattrocchi, C. C.; Huang, C.; Niu, S.; Sheldon, M.; Benhayon,
D.; Cartwright, J., Jr.; Mosier, D. R.; Keller, F.; D'Arcangelo, G.
: Reelin promotes peripheral synapse elimination and maturation. Science 301:
649-653, 2003. Note: Erratum: Science 301: 1849 only, 2003. Retraction:
Science 303: 1974 only, 2004.

24. Quattrocchi, C. C.; Huang, C.; Niu, S.; Sheldon, M.; Benhayon,
D.; Cartwright, J., Jr.; Mosier, D. R.; Keller, F.; D'Arcangelo, G.
: Retraction. (Letter) Science 303: 1974 only, 2004.

25. Rice, D. S.; Nusinowitz, S.; Azimi, A. M.; Martinez, A.; Soriano,
E.; Curran, T.: The reelin pathway modulates the structure and function
of retinal synaptic circuitry. Neuron 31: 929-941, 2001.

26. Royaux, I.; Lambert de Rouvroit, C.; D'Arcangelo, G.; Demirov,
D.; Goffinet, A. M.: Genomic organization of the mouse reelin gene. Genomics 46:
240-250, 1997.

27. Senturk, A.; Pfennig, S.; Weiss, A.; Burk, K.; Acker-Palmer, A.
: Ephrin Bs are essential components of the Reelin pathway to regulate
neuronal migration. Nature 472: 356-360, 2011. Note: Erratum: Nature
478: 274 only, 2011.

28. Shim, S.; Kwan, K. Y.; Li, M.; Lefebvre, V.; Sestan, N.: Cis-regulatory
control of corticospinal system development and evolution. Nature 486:
74-79, 2012.

29. Trommsdorff, M.; Gotthardt, M.; Hiesberger, T.; Shelton, J.; Stockinger,
W.; Nimpf, J.; Hammer, R. E.; Richardson, J. A.; Herz, J.: Reeler/Disabled-like
disruption of neuronal migration in knockout mice lacking the VLDL
receptor and ApoE receptor 2. Cell 97: 689-701, 1999.

30. Yip, J. W.; Yip, Y. P. L.; Nakajima, K.; Capriotti, C.: Reelin
controls position of autonomic neurons in the spinal cord. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 8612-8616, 2000.

31. Zaki, M.; Shehab, M.; El-Aleem, A. A.; Abdel-Salam, G.; Koeller,
H. B.; Ilkin, Y.; Ross, M. E.; Dobyns, W. B.; Gleeson, J. G.: Identification
of a novel recessive RELN mutation using a homozygous balanced reciprocal
translocation. Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A: 939-944, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 07/17/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/10/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/13/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/15/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/18/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/24/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/7/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/11/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/7/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/31/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/12/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 10/31/2002
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/16/2002
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 6/13/2002
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 11/25/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/29/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 4/6/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/8/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/1/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/8/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/4/1995

EDITED alopez: 07/17/2012
carol: 5/24/2012
alopez: 11/29/2011
alopez: 7/12/2011
terry: 7/8/2011
carol: 6/2/2011
mgross: 2/16/2011
terry: 2/10/2011
alopez: 1/10/2011
carol: 11/15/2010
carol: 11/11/2010
wwang: 1/13/2010
wwang: 4/14/2009
terry: 4/13/2009
carol: 7/8/2008
wwang: 6/16/2008
ckniffin: 5/15/2008
wwang: 7/19/2007
ckniffin: 7/18/2007
wwang: 5/25/2006
ckniffin: 5/24/2006
wwang: 12/15/2005
wwang: 12/7/2005
wwang: 7/28/2005
ckniffin: 7/11/2005
terry: 6/3/2004
alopez: 4/8/2004
terry: 4/7/2004
tkritzer: 11/3/2003
terry: 10/31/2003
mgross: 8/12/2003
terry: 8/12/2003
carol: 11/4/2002
tkritzer: 10/31/2002
alopez: 10/18/2002
carol: 9/16/2002
ckniffin: 9/16/2002
cwells: 6/13/2002
ckniffin: 6/5/2002
carol: 11/25/2001
carol: 3/13/2001
alopez: 1/29/2001
mcapotos: 10/13/2000
mcapotos: 10/10/2000
terry: 9/27/2000
alopez: 8/31/2000
terry: 8/29/2000
carol: 4/7/2000
terry: 4/6/2000
mgross: 7/8/1999
carol: 3/22/1999
terry: 3/1/1999
alopez: 1/19/1999
carol: 8/12/1998
mark: 7/22/1997
mark: 4/8/1997
terry: 4/2/1997
mark: 6/29/1995
mark: 5/23/1995
mark: 5/4/1995

609928	TITLE *609928 MYOSIN, HEAVY CHAIN 7B, CARDIAC MUSCLE, BETA; MYH7B
;;MYOSIN HEAVY CHAIN 14; MYH14;;
KIAA1512
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned MYH7B, which they designated
KIAA1512. The deduced 1,692-amino acid protein shares 71% identity with
MYH7 (160760). RT-PCR ELISA detected high MYH7B expression in heart,
skeletal muscle, testis, adult and fetal brain, and all specific adult
brain regions examined. Slightly lower expression was detected in ovary
and kidney, and intermediate expression was detected in lung, pancreas,
spleen, and adult and fetal liver.

By screening genomic cosmid libraries for myosin heavy chain genes,
followed by cDNA hybridization and PCR amplification, Desjardins et al.
(2002) cloned MYH7B, which they called MYH14. The deduced protein
contains several class II myosin consensus sequences and has a tail
region of about 1,100 amino acids with homology to both class II myosins
and dimerization domains of leucine zipper proteins. In its N-terminal
catalytic domain, MYH14 has novel surface loop sequences, including
substitutions in the aliphatic sequence of loop 1 and paired prolines in
loop 2. Desjardins et al. (2002) compared the motor domain of MYH14 with
those of other MYHs and concluded that MYH14 is a slow-twitch myosin.
Database analysis identified MYH14 ESTs in libraries obtained from whole
embryo, pooled human tissue cDNA, and well-differentiated endometrial
adenocarcinoma.

By scanning mouse myosin genes for intronic microRNAs (miRNAs), van
Rooij et al. (2009) identified Mir499 (613614) within intron 19 of the
Myh7b gene. Northern blot analysis showed that Mir499 and Myh7b were
highly expressed in mouse heart and the slow-twitch soleus muscle, but
not in the fast-twitch gastrocnemius/plantaris, tibialis anterior, and
extensor digitorum longus muscles.

GENE STRUCTURE

Desjardins et al. (2002) determined that the MYH7B gene contains at
least 40 coding exons and spans about 24 kb.

Van Rooij et al. (2009) identified an miRNA, Mir499 (613614), within
intron 19 of the mouse Myh7b gene.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the MYH7B gene
to chromosome 20. Desjardins et al. (2002) confirmed this localization
by genomic sequence analysis.

GENE FUNCTION

Van Rooij et al. (2009) found that expression of Myh7b and its
intronically encoded miRNA, Mir499, was upregulated in mouse heart by
hypothyroidism caused by inhibition of triiodothyronine (T3; see 188450)
synthesis. This upregulation was reversed by T3 administration. Gain-
and loss-of-function experiments in mice showed that expression of Myh7b
and Mir499 was controlled by the dominant miRNA in mouse heart, Mir208a
(611116).

REFERENCE 1. Desjardins, P. R.; Burkman, J. M.; Shrager, J. B.; Allmond, L.
A.; Stedman, H. H.: Evolutionary implications of three novel members
of the human sarcomeric myosin heavy chain gene family. Molec. Biol.
Evol. 19: 375-393, 2002.

2. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 143-150, 2000.

3. van Rooij, E.; Quiat, D.; Johnson, B. A.; Sutherland, L. B.; Qi,
X.; Richardson, J. A.; Kelm, R. J., Jr.; Olson, E. N.: A family of
microRNAs encoded by myosin genes governs myosin expression and muscle
performance. Dev. Cell 17: 662-673, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/25/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/24/2006

EDITED mgross: 10/25/2010
mgross: 2/24/2006

608486	TITLE *608486 METASTASIS SUPPRESSOR 1; MTSS1
;;MIM;;
KIAA0429
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening human brain cDNAs for the potential to encode proteins that
are at least 50 kD, Ishikawa et al. (1997) isolated an MTSS1 cDNA, which
they called KIAA0429. The cDNA encodes a deduced 356-amino acid protein.

Using a modified differential display technique to analyze human bladder
cancer cell lines, Lee et al. (2002) identified MTSS1, which was not
expressed in metastatic cells. They designated the gene MIM (missing in
metastasis) and found that it contains a proline-rich region and an
actin-binding Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein homology-2 motif (WH2).
It has a predicted molecular mass of 38 kD. Northern blot analysis
revealed expression of a 5.3-kb MTSS1 transcript in human spleen,
thymus, prostate, testis, uterus, colon, and peripheral blood.
Expression was not seen in 1 metastatic breast cancer cell line or in 2
metastatic prostate cancer cell lines.

Mattila et al. (2003) cloned mouse Mtss1 and found that it encodes 2
isoforms: a primary protein of 759 amino acids and a less abundant
shorter protein. The human and mouse proteins share 96% sequence
identity. Northern blot analysis of adult mouse tissues showed strong
expression of Mtss1 in liver, and moderate expression in kidney, heart,
lung, spleen, and brain. RNA in situ hybridization demonstrated
expression in embryonic central nervous system, heart, and muscle cells,
and in adult kidney, liver, and Purkinje cells.

Using in situ hybridization, Callahan et al. (2004) detected MIM
transcripts in the outer root sheath of anagen hair follicles, but not
in the interfollicular epithelium. MIM RNA and protein also accumulated
at sites of inappropriately active Sonic hedgehog (SHH; 600725)
signaling, such as tumor epithelium of human basal cell carcinomas.

GENE FUNCTION

Mattila et al. (2003) showed that the C-terminal half of mouse Mtss1
protein, which contains the WH2 domain, binds actin monomers. Steady
state and kinetic assembly assays showed that Mtss1 inhibits pointed-end
actin assembly and actin monomer nucleotide exchange. Overexpression of
Mtss1 in NIH 3T3 cells caused formation of abnormal actin structures.

Callahan et al. (2004) showed that MIM is an SHH-responsive gene that
can potentiate the transcriptional activity of GLI1 (165220) and GLI2
(165230). MIM and GLI1 acted synergistically to recapitulate
SHH-mediated epidermal proliferation and invasion in regenerated human
skin. Coimmunoprecipitation and protein-binding studies indicated that
MIM is part of a GLI/suppressor of fused (SUFU; 607035) complex. SUFU
appeared to associate with MIM in the absence of GLI. Mutation analysis
indicated that an N-terminal domain of MIM distinct from those used for
monomeric actin binding was required for both complex association and
transcriptional potentiation.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Ishikawa et al. (1997) mapped the MTSS1
gene to chromosome 8. By genomic sequence analysis, Lee et al. (2002)
localized the gene to 8q24.1.

REFERENCE 1. Callahan, C. A.; Ofstad, T.; Horng, L.; Wang, J. K.; Zhen, H. H.;
Coulombe, P. A.; Oro, A. E.: MIM/BEG4, a Sonic hedgehog-responsive
gene that potentiates Gli-dependent transcription. Genes Dev. 18:
2724-2729, 2004.

2. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Nakajima, D.; Seki, N.; Ohira, M.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VIII. 78 new cDNA
clones from brain which code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4:
307-313, 1997.

3. Lee, Y.-G.; Macoska, J. A.; Korenchuk, S.; Pienta, K. J.: MIM,
a potential metastasis suppressor gene in bladder cancer. Neoplasia 4:
291-294, 2002.

4. Mattila, P. K.; Salminen, M.; Yamashiro, T.; Lappalainen, P.:
Mouse MIM, a tissue-specific regulator of cytoskeletal dynamics, interacts
with ATP-actin monomers through its C-terminal WH2 domain. J. Biol.
Chem. 278: 8452-8459, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/5/2005

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 2/25/2004

EDITED terry: 10/08/2008
mgross: 1/11/2005
terry: 1/5/2005
carol: 2/26/2004

602649	TITLE *602649 COLD-INDUCIBLE RNA-BINDING PROTEIN; CIRBP
;;CIRP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cold stress induces in microorganisms the synthesis of several proteins
that are involved in various cellular processes such as transcription,
translation, and recombination. The cold-inducible RNA-binding protein
(Cirp) is induced in rodent cells by mild cold stress (32 degrees C).
Cirp consists of an N-terminal RNA-binding domain and a C-terminal
gly-rich domain, and plays an essential role in cold-induced suppression
of cell proliferation. Nishiyama et al. (1997) cloned a cDNA encoding an
18-kD protein with 95.3% amino acid sequence identity to the mouse Cirp
protein. CIRBP mRNA was constitutively expressed in all cell lines
examined. In all of the cell lines, the levels of CIRBP mRNA and protein
were increased within 12 hours after a temperature downshift from 37
degrees C to 32 degrees C. These results demonstrated that CIRBP is a
cold-shock protein in human cells.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Nishiyama et al. (1997) mapped
the CIRBP gene to chromosome 19p13.3.

GENE FUNCTION

Morf et al. (2012) showed that simulated body temperature cycles, but
not peripheral oscillators, controlled the rhythmic expression of
cold-inducible RNA-binding protein (CIRBP) in cultured fibroblasts. In
turn, loss-of-function experiments indicated that CIRBP was required for
high-amplitude circadian gene expression. The transcriptomewide
identification of CIRBP-bound RNAs by a biotin-streptavidin-based
crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (CLIP) procedure revealed several
transcripts encoding circadian oscillator proteins, including CLOCK
(601851). Moreover, CLOCK accumulation was strongly reduced in
CIRBP-depleted fibroblasts. Because ectopic expression of CLOCK improved
circadian gene expression in these cells, Morf et al. (2012) concluded
that CIRBP confers robustness to circadian oscillators through
regulation of CLOCK expression.

REFERENCE 1. Morf, J.; Rey, G.; Schneider, K.; Stratmann, M.; Fujita, J.; Naef,
F.; Schibler, U.: Cold-inducible RNA-binding protein modulates circadian
gene expression posttranscriptionally. Science 338: 379-383, 2012.

2. Nishiyama, H.; Higashitsuji, H.; Yokoi, H.; Itoh, K.; Danno, S.;
Matsuda, T.; Fujita, J.: Cloning and characterization of human CIRP
(cold-inducible RNA-binding protein) cDNA and chromosomal assignment
of the gene. Gene 204: 115-120, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/7/2012

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/22/1998

EDITED alopez: 11/07/2012
terry: 11/7/2012
carol: 5/22/1998

610398	TITLE *610398 SAP30-LIKE PROTEIN; SAP30L
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using differential display analysis to search for genes upregulated by
TGFB1 (190180) in differentiating intestinal epithelial cells, followed
by screening a human heart cDNA library, Lindfors et al. (2003) cloned
SAP30L. The deduced 183-amino acid protein contains 2 potential
N-glycosylation sites, 1 N-myristoylation site, and several
phosphorylation sites. Transient transfection studies showed that SAP30L
localized to the nucleus in small dense bodies that are not PML bodies.
Mutation of the SAP30L nuclear localization signal caused the protein to
also be expressed throughout the cytoplasm. SAP30L shares 70% identity
with SAP30 (603378) and 97% identity with mouse Sap30l. Northern blot
detected a 1.30-kb transcript in all human tissues examined, with
highest expression in testis, followed by heart, kidney, and placenta. A
6.5-kb transcript had high expression in brain and lung.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lindfors et al. (2003) determined that the SAP30L gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lindfors et al. (2003) mapped the SAP30L
gene to chromosome 5q33.2.

REFERENCE 1. Lindfors, K.; Viiri, K. M.; Niittynen, M.; Heinonen, T. Y. K.;
Maki, M.; Kainulainen, H.: TGF-beta induces expression of SAP30L,
a novel nuclear protein. BMC Genomics 4: 53, 2003. Note: Electronic
Article.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 9/12/2006

EDITED wwang: 09/12/2006

301000	TITLE #301000 WISKOTT-ALDRICH SYNDROME; WAS
;;WISKOTT-ALDRICH SYNDROME 1; WAS1;;
ALDRICH SYNDROME;;
ECZEMA-THROMBOCYTOPENIA-IMMUNODEFICIENCY SYNDROME;;
IMMUNODEFICIENCY 2; IMD2
DESCRIPTION A number sign (#) is used with this entry because Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome is caused by mutation in the WAS gene (300392).

See 614493 for information on a similar disorder, Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome-2 (WAS2), caused by mutation in the WIPF1 gene (602357).

DESCRIPTION

Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is an X-linked recessive immunodeficiency
characterized by thrombocytopenia, eczema, and recurrent infections
(Lemahieu et al., 1999).

CLINICAL FEATURES

The manifestations of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome are eczema,
thrombocytopenia, proneness to infection, and bloody diarrhea. Death
usually occurs before age 10 years. The original American kindred
reported by Aldrich et al. (1954) was of Dutch extraction; the 3
patients of Wiskott (1937) were German. Wiskott, who worked in Munich,
referred to the disorder in his patients as 'Werlhof's disease,' the
eponymic designation for thrombocytopenic purpura. Van den Bosch and
Drukker (1964) described several families in the Netherlands. In 3 of 5
female carriers, the platelet count was below the lower limit of normal.

Perry et al. (1980) reported that median survival increased from 8
months for patients born before 1935 to 6.5 years for those born after
1964. One patient had survived to age 36 years at the time of the
survey. Causes of death were mainly infections or bleeding, but 36 of
the 301 patients (12%) developed malignancies: lymphoreticular tumors in
23 and leukemia in 7. Ten Bensel et al. (1966) called attention to the
occurrence of malignancy of the reticuloendothelial system, which they
saw in 2 of 4 sibs and found in 5 reported cases.

Capsoni et al. (1986) described a 19-year-old man with WAS. Only 7
affected persons over age 18 had been described previously. Standen et
al. (1986) reported a kindred with 13 males in 6 sibships, related
through females, with inherited thrombocytopenia thought to be a variant
of WAS because it was associated with elevated serum IgA and mild
nephropathy. Five suffered from severe eczema since infancy but had no
unusual susceptibility to infections. Platelet volume was reduced.
Gutenberger et al. (1970) reported a similar family. Renal biopsy was
performed in 3 patients. In the first, advanced membranoproliferative
glomerulonephritis was found with deposition of complement and IgG on
the basement membrane. In the second, mesangial glomerulonephritis with
focal glomerulosclerosis and deposition of complement and IgA were
found. The third showed minimal glomerulonephritis. Standen et al.
(1986) concluded that despite the clinical similarities and the elevated
IgA in both conditions, the disorder is distinct from Berger disease
(161950). Spitler et al. (1980) found nephropathy in 5 of 32 patients
with WAS who participated in a study of treatment with transfer factor,
a dialyzable extract of leukocytes that enhances cellular immunity.
Although nephropathy occurred without such treatment, the temporal
relationships suggested that transfer factor aggravated the problem.

McEnery and Nash (1973) described 2 unrelated males with the association
of WAS and infantile cortical hyperostosis (Caffey disease; 114000), and
Abinun et al. (1988) also described a case. Thus, an immunologic defect
may play a role in the pathogenesis of infantile cortical hyperostosis.
Meropol et al. (1992) reported the case of a 24-year-old man with WAS
complicated by T-cell large cell lymphoma and Kaposi sarcoma (148000).
Kaposi sarcoma is well known in connection with the immunosuppression
used with allograft transplantation and in patients with HIV infection,
but this was the first incidence of its occurrence in this form of
immunodeficiency.

Sullivan et al. (1994) reported on a multiinstitutional survey of WAS in
the U.S. in which laboratory and clinical data were collected on 154
affected individuals. There was a family history of the disorder in the
case of 74 of the patients. Thrombocytopenia was a prerequisite for
entry into the study; however, only 27% of patients had the typical set
of 3 symptoms described originally by Aldrich et al. (1954). The
immunologic findings in particular varied considerably with the most
distinctive finding: that 61% of the patients had a low CD8+ count.
Eczema developed in 81% but was not always present at diagnosis. In
those patients in whom platelet size was measured, Sullivan et al.
(1994) found them to be small, although they did increase in size
following splenectomy. The average age at diagnosis was 21 months; the
average age at death was 8 years. There were 16 patients who lived
beyond 18 years, and the prognosis for the disorder had improved
considerably in recent years. Bone marrow transplantation had been
carried out in 47 cases and a good outcome was reported in two-thirds of
them. Autoimmune disorders occurred in 40% of patients; this group had a
poor prognosis as they were more likely to develop a malignancy.
Malignancies were seen in 13% of patients and were mainly of the
lymphoreticular system.

Du et al. (2006) described somatic mosaicism in a 15-year-old male WAS
patient due to a second-hit mutation in the initiation codon. See
300392.0019-300392.0020. The patient had no clear family history.
Thrombocytopenia was noticed at 1 month of age and thereafter eczema and
recurrent infections were clinical features. At 8 years of age, he had
persistent cough due to pulmonary hilar lymph node swelling. From the
result of hilar lymph node biopsy, he was diagnosed with Hodgkin disease
and received chemotherapy and local radiotherapy (Sasahara et al., 2001;
Sasahara et al., 2002). The patient had remained in complete remission
thereafter. His platelet count was in the range of
6,000-15,000/microliter. Episodes of respiratory infections occurred
less frequently, although severe eczema and thrombocytopenia persisted.

DIAGNOSIS

In an obligate heterozygote who was heterozygous for the AB polymorphism
of G6PD, Gealy et al. (1980) found that only the B isoenzyme was present
in platelets and T lymphocytes, although both were present in
erythrocytes and neutrophils. Prchal et al. (1980) pursued the
implications of this finding for genetic counseling. Although G6PD is
likely to be useful in only a limited number of potential carriers, the
large number of X-chromosome markers, DNA polymorphisms and other
markers now available make it likely that carrier detection will be
possible. Shapiro et al. (1978) concluded that carriers can be
identified by study of platelets, which show a defect in oxidative
phosphorylation.

Fearon et al. (1988) studied the pattern of X-chromosome inactivation in
various cell populations from female relatives of patients with WAS,
through analysis of the methylation patterns of X-linked genes that
display RFLPs. They found that carriers could be accurately identified
by the fact that peripheral blood T cells, granulocytes, and B cells of
obligate heterozygotes display specific patterns of X-chromosome
inactivation that are clearly different from those of normal controls.

Puck et al. (1990) pointed out that the diagnosis of WAS may be
difficult in infancy when sporadic thrombocytopenia with no, or only
questionable, immunologic abnormalities are present. In the case of 2
unrelated males with this problem, X-chromosome inactivation in the T
cells of the mothers showed each of them to have a highly skewed
X-chromosome inactivation pattern typical of WAS carriers. In one of the
patients, a T-cell defect was subsequently demonstrated directly by
studies of the lymphocytes, which failed to proliferate in periodate and
anti-CD43. Notarangelo et al. (1991) reported a similar case of a boy
with WAS presenting as idiopathic thrombocytopenia.

Notarangelo et al. (1991) studied a presumably heterozygous,
thrombocytopenic female from a WAS pedigree. Her carrier status was
confirmed by linkage studies. Both small-sized and normal-sized
platelets were present, suggesting that, unlike the vast majority of WAS
carriers, she did not manifest nonrandom X-chromosome inactivation in
the thrombopoietic cell lineage. Studies of X-chromosome inactivation by
means of RFLP and methylation analysis showed that the pattern of
X-chromosome inactivation was nonrandom in T lymphocytes but random in
granulocytes. Notarangelo et al. (1993) reviewed the use of the biased
inactivation of the X chromosome in hematopoietic cells as a tool for
carrier detection in connection with genetic counseling. A closely
linked hypervariable marker, M27-beta (DXS255), was used.

Yamada et al. (1999) showed that flow cytometric analysis of WASP
expression in lymphocytes is useful in the diagnosis of WAS. They found
that intracellular WASP is expressed as distinctly 'bright' and 'dim'
phenotypes in lymphocytes from normal individuals and WAS patients,
respectively. Yamada et al. (2000) demonstrated that WAS carriers could
also be identified by flow cytometric analysis of monocytes but not
lymphocytes. Bright and dim phenotypes for normal individuals and
patients, respectively, were observed in monocytes, whereas in carriers,
mixed populations (to varying degrees) of bright- and dim-staining cells
were detected. The authors noted that flow cytometry is a simpler and
more rapid method of diagnosis than molecular methods but may not be
sensitive enough to detect carriers with low percentages of WASP-dim
monocytes.

- Prenatal Diagnosis

Holmberg et al. (1983) found that normal midtrimester fetuses have
platelets of the same size as normal newborns and adults. They used
these data 'to exclude Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome in an 18-week fetus at
50% risk of being affected.' Unfortunately, we do not know that the
platelets of the WAS fetus are abnormally small.

Schwartz et al. (1989) described the first-trimester diagnosis and
exclusion of WAS by means of closely linked DNA markers.

In 2 unrelated families, Giliani et al. (1999) performed successful
prenatal diagnosis of WAS at week 12 of gestation, using a combined
nonradioactive analysis of SSCP and heteroduplex formation, followed by
automated sequencing.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

Corash et al. (1985) studied the mechanism of the usual improvement in
thrombocytopenia in WAS after splenectomy. The thrombocytopenia is
accompanied by elevated platelet-associated IgG and low mean platelet
size. Both return to normal after splenectomy. Patients who relapse
redevelop elevated IgG but maintain normal platelet size.

Webb et al. (1993) described their experience with renal transplantation
in a 46-year-old man with the syndrome of thrombocytopenia with raised
IgA levels and impaired renal function. The man had a strong family
history of hereditary thrombocytopenia and had presented in early
childhood with allergic eczema, asthma, thrombocytopenic purpura, and
recurrent middle ear infections. He had a normal platelet count after
splenectomy was performed at the age of about 30. In his mid-thirties,
he had subtotal colectomy and ileostomy for severe ulcerative colitis.
This disorder later recurred, associated with keratitis and arthritis of
large joints. He was later admitted to the hospital with a febrile
illness, biopsy-proven cutaneous vasculitis, raised IgA levels, and
impaired renal function. Renal biopsy demonstrated mesangioproliferative
glomerulonephritis, old crescents, and mesangial IgA deposition. After
renal transplant, a 'reduced immunosuppressive protocol' was instituted
because of his underlying immunologic disorder. Despite this, no
rejection episodes occurred.

The first reports of successful bone marrow transplantation for severe
combined immunodeficiency (XSCID; 300400) and for WAS were provided by
Gatti et al. (1968) and Bach et al. (1968). Fischer et al. (1986) gave a
retrospective analysis of results in 162 patients who had undergone
transplantation in 14 European centers between 1969 and 1985. Brochstein
et al. (1991) reported on the bone marrow transplantation in 17 patients
with WAS.

Boztug et al. (2010) reported successful treatment of 2 patients with
Wiscott-Aldrich syndrome with transfusion of autologous, genetically
modified hematopoietic stem cells. They found sustained expression of
WAS protein expression in hematopoietic stem cells, lymphoid and myeloid
cells, and platelets after gene therapy. T and B cells, natural killer
cells, and monocytes were functionally corrected. After treatment, the
patients' clinical condition markedly improved, with resolution of
hemorrhagic diathesis, eczema, autoimmunity, and predisposition to
severe infection. Comprehensive insertion-site analysis showed vector
integration that targeted multiple genes controlling growth and
immunologic responses in a persistently polyclonal hematopoiesis that
was followed for 3 years in both boys.

POPULATION GENETICS

Perry et al. (1980) found an incidence of 4.0 per million live male
births in the United States.

PATHOGENESIS

Several groups (Blaese et al., 1968; Cooper et al., 1968) presented
evidence that the immune defect is in the afferent limb, i.e., is one of
antigen processing or recognition. In an obligate heterozygote who was
heterozygous for the AB polymorphism of G6PD (305900), Gealy et al.
(1980) found that only the B isoenzyme was present in platelets and T
lymphocytes, although both were present in erythrocytes and neutrophils.
The findings suggested selection against the WAS gene in these tissues,
which are also the ones that express the defect in the hemizygous
affected male.

Parkman et al. (1981) studied the surface proteins of lymphocytes and
platelets by radioiodination followed by SDS-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis and autoradiography. All 3 WAS patients studied showed,
in lymphocytes, absence of a protein, molecular weight 115,000, found in
normals. Platelets also showed an abnormality of surface glycoproteins.
CD43 (182160), or sialophorin, is a cell-surface sialoglycoprotein that
is deficient in quantity and/or is defective in lymphocytes of patients
with this disorder (Parkman et al., 1981; Remold-O'Donnell et al.,
1984). Mentzer et al. (1987) suggested that sialophorin functions in
T-cell activation.

Simon et al. (1992) presented experimental results indicating the
association of WAS with a defect in the coupling of surface
immunoglobulin (sIg) on B cells to signal transduction pathways
considered prerequisite for B-cell activation, probably at the level of
tyrosine phosphorylation.

Symons et al. (1996) proposed that the Wiskott-Aldrich protein provides
a link between CDC42 and the actin cytoskeleton. T lymphocytes of
affected males with WAS exhibit a severe disturbance of the actin
cytoskeleton, suggesting that the WAS protein may regulate its
organization. Kolluri et al. (1996) showed that WAS protein interacts
with Cdc42, a member of the RHO family of GTPases. This interaction,
which is GTP-dependent, was detected in cell lysates, in transient
transfections, and with purified recombinant proteins. Different mutant
WAS proteins from 3 unrelated affected males retained their ability to
interact with Cdc42 but the level of expression of the WAS protein in
these mutants was only 2 to 5% of normal. Taken together, these data
suggested to Kolluri et al. (1996) that the WAS protein may function as
a signal transduction adaptor downstream of Cdc42, and that, in affected
males, the cytoskeletal abnormalities may result from a defect in Cdc42
signaling.

MAPPING

Peacocke and Siminovitch (1987) studied 10 kindreds for linkage with
RFLPs. Significant linkage was found between WAS and 2 loci, DXS14 and
DXS7, that mapped to the proximal short arm of the X chromosome. Maximal
lod scores were 4.29 (at theta = 0.03) and 4.12 (at theta = 0.00),
respectively. Arveiler et al. (1987) found a strong suggestion of
linkage between IMD2 and DXS1, which is located in Xq11-q12. Kwan et al.
(1988) concluded from linkage studies that the WAS gene lies between
DXS7 (Xp11.3) and DXS14 (Xp11); the likelihood of this position was at
least 128 times higher than that of any other interval studied. In a
study of 12 WAS families, Kwan et al. (1989) demonstrated linkage to
another DNA marker, DXS255, located at Xp11.22; peak lod score = 4.65 at
theta = 0.05. Greer et al. (1989) showed linkage between WAS and DXZ1
(lod score = 7.08 at theta = 0.03) and between WAS and the TIMP (305370)
locus (lod score = 5.09 at theta = 0.0). Greer et al. (1990) extended
the linkage studies, demonstrating strongest linkage (maximum lod score
= 10.19 at theta = 0.0) between WAS and the hypervariable DXS255 locus,
a marker already mapped between DXS7 and DXS14. De Saint Basile et al.
(1989) found close linkage of WAS to DXS255 (maximum lod = 5.42 at theta
= 0.00). Kwan et al. (1991) likewise concluded that DXS255 is the
closest marker identified; WAS showed a multipoint maximum lod score of
8.59 at 1.2 cM distal to DXS255. Furthermore, they concluded that the
TIMP gene must lie distal to WAS; thus, WAS was thought to lie between
DXS255 (Xp11.22) and TIMP (Xp11.3). Greer et al. (1992) demonstrated
close linkage between the WAS and OATL1 (311240) loci; maximum lod =
6.08 at theta = 0.00. The finding localized the TIMP, OATL1, and WAS
loci distal to DXS146 and the OATL1 and WAS loci proximal to TIMP.

Arveiler et al. (1990) showed that failure to demonstrate linkage of WAS
to markers known from other families to be closely situated was
attributable to germ cell mosaicism in the grandfather of affected
males. The same phenomenon has been described in X-linked
agammaglobulinemia; see 300300.

De Saint-Basile et al. (1991) studied a family in which 4 members had
X-linked thrombocytopenia. Linkage studies showed mapping to the same
region of the X chromosome as that found in WAS. Although
polymorphonuclear leukocytes showed a normal pattern of X-inactivation,
a skewed pattern was demonstrated in lymphocytes. De Saint-Basile et al.
(1991) concluded that this was consistent with allelic mutations at the
same locus, with the severity of disease varying according to the
distinct patterns of hematopoietic cell involvement in obligate
carriers.

Kwan et al. (1995) isolated and characterized a polymorphic CA
dinucleotide repeat, DXS6940, that lies within 30 kb of the WAS gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Derry et al. (1994) found that the WAS gene was not expressed in 2
unrelated patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, 1 of whom had a single
base deletion that produced a frameshift and premature termination of
translation (300392.0001). Two additional patients were identified with
point mutations that changed the same arginine residue to either a
histidine or a leucine (300392.0002-300392.0003).

Villa et al. (1995) presented proof that mutations in the WAS gene can
result in X-linked thrombocytopenia characterized by thrombocytopenia
with small-sized platelets as an isolated finding (313900). Why some
mutations impair only the megakaryocytic lineage and have no apparent
effect on the lymphoid lineage was unclear. In a study of 16 WAS
patients and 4 X-linked thrombocytopenia patients, Thompson et al.
(1999) identified 14 distinct mutations, including 7 novel gene defects.

In an affected grandson of a female first cousin of the 3 patients
described originally by Wiskott (1937), Binder et al. (2006) found a
2-nucleotide deletion in exon 1 of the WAS gene (300392.0021).

Dobbs et al. (2007) identified 2 different but contiguous single
basepair deletions in maternal cousins with WAS (300392.0022 and
300392.0023, respectively). Their maternal grandmother was found to be a
mosaic for the deletions, both of which occurred on the haplotype from
the unaffected maternal great-grandfather, consistent with a bichromatid
mutation in a male gamete.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Schindelhauer et al. (1996) found no genotype/phenotype correlation
emerge after a comparison of the identified mutations with the resulting
clinical picture for a classical WAS phenotype. A mild course,
reminiscent of X-linked thrombocytopenia, or an attenuated phenotype was
more often associated with missense than with the other types of
mutations.

Greer et al. (1996) examined the genotypes and phenotypes of 24 patients
with WAS and compared them with other known mutations of the WASP gene.
They demonstrated clustering of WASP mutations within the 4 most
N-terminal exons of the gene and identified arg86 as the most prominent
hotspot for WASP mutations. They noted the prominence of missense
mutations among patients with milder forms of WAS, while noting that
missense mutations also comprise a substantial portion of mutations in
patients with severe forms of the disease. Greer et al. (1996) concluded
that phenotypes and genotypes of WAS are not well correlated; phenotypic
outcome cannot be reliably predicted on the basis of WASP genotype.

Lemahieu et al. (1999) identified 17 WASP gene mutations, 12 of which
were novel. All missense mutations were located in exons 1 to 4. Most of
the nonsense, frameshift, and splice site mutations were found in exons
6 to 11. Mutations that alter splice sites led to the synthesis of
several types of mRNAs, a fraction of which represented the normally
spliced product. The presence of normally spliced transcripts was
correlated with a milder phenotype. When one such case was studied by
Western blot analysis, reduced amounts of normal-sized WASP were
present. In other cases as well, a correlation was found between the
amount of normal or mutant WASP present and the phenotypes of the
affected individuals. No protein was detected in 2 individuals with
severe Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Reduced levels of a normal-sized WASP
with a missense mutation were seen in 2 individuals with X-linked
thrombocytopenia. Lemahieu et al. (1999) concluded that mutation
analysis at the DNA level is not sufficient for predicting clinical
course, and that studies at the transcript and protein levels are needed
for a better assessment.

Wada et al. (2001) provided evidence that in vivo reversion had occurred
in the WAS gene in a patient with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, resulting in
somatic mosaicism. The mutation was a 6-bp insertion (ACGAGG;
300392.0013) which abrogated expression of the WAS protein. Most of the
patient's T lymphocytes expressed nearly normal levels of WAS protein.
These lymphocytes were found to lack the deleterious mutation and showed
a selective growth advantage in vivo. Analysis of the sequence
surrounding the mutation site showed that the 6-bp insertion followed a
tandem repeat of the same 6 nucleotides. These findings strongly
suggested that DNA polymerase slippage was the cause of the original
germline insertion mutation in this family and that the same mechanism
was responsible for its deletion in one of the proband's T-cell
progenitors, thus leading to reversion mosaicism.

That some mutations in WASP result in X-linked thrombocytopenia without
the associated features of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome is well
established. Devriendt et al. (2001) demonstrated, furthermore, that a
constitutively activating mutation in WASP can cause X-linked severe
congenital neutropenia (SCNX; 300299). See 300392.0012 for the L270P
mutation in WASP demonstrated by Devriendt et al. (2001).

Wada et al. (2004) described 2 additional patients from the same family
of the man with revertant T-cell lymphocytes reported by Wada et al.
(2001). Somatic mosaicism was demonstrated in leukocytes from the first
patient that were cryopreserved when he was 22 years old, 11 years
before his death from kidney failure. The second patient, 16 years old
at the time of report, had a moderate clinical phenotype and developed
revertant cells after the age of 14 years. T lymphocytes showed
selective in vivo advantage. These results supported DNA polymerase
slippage as a common underlying mechanism and indicated that T-cell
mosaicism may have different clinical effects in WAS. Wada et al. (2004)
stated that sibs with revertant mosaicism had previously been reported
(Wada et al., 2003; Waisfisz et al., 1999), but 3 patients with
revertant disease in a single kindred was unprecedented.

Boztug et al. (2008) reported 2 Ukrainian brothers, aged 3 and 4 years,
respectively, with WAS due to somatic mosaicism for a truncation
mutation and multiple different second-site mutations. Flow cytometric
analysis of peripheral blood cells showed that each patient had
WAS-negative cells resulting from the truncation mutation and a subset
of WAS-positive cells that expressed second-site missense WAS mutations.
The second-site mutations resulted in the production of altered, but
possibly functional, protein. All second-site mutations in both patients
occurred in the same nucleotide triplet in which the truncation mutation
occurred. Over time, both boys had a decrease in bleeding diathesis and
eczema, and normalization of platelet counts. Boztug et al. (2008)
suggested that the second-site mutations may confer a proliferative
advantage to the affected cells in these patients.

- X-Inactivation Status

Wengler et al. (1995) stated that obligate female carriers of the gene
for X-linked agammaglobulinemia (300300) show nonrandom X-chromosome
inactivation only in B lymphocytes, and obligate female carriers of the
gene for X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency (XSCID) show
nonrandom X-chromosome inactivation in both T and B lymphocytes, as well
as natural killer cells. However, all formed elements of the blood
appear to be affected, as a rule, in obligate carriers of WAS, as judged
by the criteria of nonrandom X-chromosome inactivation and segregation
of G6PD alleles in informative females. Wengler et al. (1995)
demonstrated that CD34+ hematopoietic progenitor cells collected from
obligate carriers of WAS by apheresis showed nonrandom inactivation.
They used PCR analysis of a polymorphic VNTR within the X-linked
androgen receptor gene (313700) to demonstrate nonrandom inactivation
which clearly must occur early during hematopoietic differentiation.

Parolini et al. (1998) reported X-linked WAS in an 8-year-old girl. She
had a sporadic mutation, glu133 to lys, on the paternally derived X
chromosome, but had nonrandom X inactivation of the maternal X
chromosome in both blood and buccal mucosa. Her mother and maternal
grandmother also had nonrandom X inactivation, which suggested to the
authors the possibility of a defect in XIST (314670) or some other gene
involved in the X-inactivation process. Puck and Willard (1998)
commented on the subject of X inactivation in females with X-linked
disease in reference to the paper by Parolini et al. (1998).

Lutskiy et al. (2002) described a female heterozygote for a splice site
mutation (300392.0017) who presented at 14 months of age with features
of WAS (thrombocytopenia, small platelets, and immunologic dysfunction)
and had random inactivation of the X chromosome. She appeared to have a
defect in the mechanisms that, in disease-free WAS carriers, lead to
preferential survival/proliferation of cells bearing the active wildtype
X chromosome.

ANIMAL MODEL

Derry et al. (1995) stated that Wasp may be a candidate for involvement
in 'scurfy,' a T cell-mediated fatal lymphoreticular disease of mice
that had previously been proposed as a mouse homolog of Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome (Lyon et al., 1990). Northern analysis of sf tissue samples
indicated the presence of Wasp mRNA in liver and skin, presumably as a
consequence of lymphocyte infiltration, but no abnormalities in the
amount or size of mRNA were identified.

HISTORY

Puck and Candotti (2006) reviewed lessons from the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome. Alfred Wiskott (1898-1978) was a German authority on childhood
pneumonias who reported 3 affected brothers in 1937. In 1954, Robert
Aldrich (1917-1998) and colleagues published an independent description
of a large Dutch kindred in which segregation analysis showed X-linked
recessive inheritance (Aldrich et al., 1954). By 2006, more than 160
different WAS mutations spanning all 12 exons of the gene had been found
in more than 270 unrelated families and functional domains had been
defined. Binder et al. (2006) described an affected member from the
family reported by Wiskott (1937) and defined the specific mutation
(300392.0021). The patient studied was a first cousin twice removed of
the originally reported brothers. In a span of 2 generations, a fatal
condition had become treatable. The patient had been successfully cured
by transplantation by bone marrow from a matched, unrelated donor.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Blaese et al. (1971); Diaz-Buxo et al. (1974); Filipovich et al. (1979);
Gelzer and Gasser (1961); Hutter and Jones (1981); Kapoor et al. (1981);
Knox-Macaulay et al. (1993); Krivit and Good (1959); Levin et al.
(1970); Lum et al. (1980); Nathan  (1980); Ochs et al. (1980); Parkman
et al. (1978); Steinberg  (1959); Weiden and Blaese (1972); Wolff
(1967)
REFERENCE 1. Abinun, M.; Mikuska, M.; Filipovic, B.: Infantile cortical hyperostosis
associated with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Europ. J. Pediat. 147:
518-519, 1988.

2. Aldrich, R. A.; Steinberg, A. G.; Campbell, D. C.: Pedigree demonstrating
a sex-linked recessive condition characterized by draining ears, eczematoid
dermatitis and bloody diarrhea. Pediatrics 13: 133-139, 1954.

3. Arveiler, B.; de Saint-Basile, G.; Fischer, A.; Griscelli, C.;
Mandel, J. L.: Germ-line mosaicism simulates genetic heterogeneity
in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 46: 906-911, 1990.

4. Arveiler, B.; de Saint Basile, G.; Debre, M.; Fischer, A.; Griscelli,
C.; Mandel, J. L.: Linkage analysis of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
(IMD2) using X-linked DNA polymorphisms. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 46: 573 only, 1987.

5. Bach, F. H.; Albertini, R. J.; Anderson, J. L.; Joo, P.; Bortin,
M.: Bone marrow transplantation in a patient with the Wiskott Aldrich
syndrome. Lancet 292: 1364-1366, 1968. Note: Originally Volume II.

6. Binder, V.; Albert, M. H.; Kabus, M.; Bertone, M.; Meindl, A.;
Belohradsky, B. H.: The genotype of the original Wiskott phenotype. New
Eng. J. Med. 355: 1790-1793, 2006.

7. Blaese, R. M.; Strober, W.; Brown, R. S.; Waldmann, T. A.: The
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: a disorder with a possible defect in antigen
processing or recognition. Lancet 292: 1056-1060, 1968. Note: Originally
Volume I.

8. Blaese, R. M.; Strober, W.; Levy, A. L.; Waldmann, T. A.: Hypercatabolism
of IgG, IgA, IgM, and albumin in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: a unique
disorder of serum protein metabolism. J. Clin. Invest. 50: 2331-2338,
1971.

9. Boztug, K.; Germeshausen, M.; Avedillo Diez, I.; Gulacsy, V.; Diestelhorst,
J.; Ballmaier, M.; Welte, K.; Marodi, L.; Chernyshova, L. I.; Klein,
C.: Multiple independent second-site mutations in two siblings with
somatic mosaicism for Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Clin. Genet. 74:
68-74, 2008.

10. Boztug, K.; Schmidt, M.; Schwarzer, A.; Banerjee, P. P.; Diez,
I. A.; Dewey, R. A.; Bohm, M.; Nowrouzi, A.; Ball, C. R.; Glimm, H.;
Naundorf, S.; Kuhlcke, K.; Blasczyk, R.; Kondratenko, I.; Marodi,
L.; Orange, J. S.; von Kalle, C.; Klein, C.: Stem-cell gene therapy
for the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. New Eng. J. Med. 363: 1918-1927,
2010.

11. Brochstein, J. A.; Gillio, A. P.; Ruggiero, M.; Kernan, N. A.;
Emanuel, D.; Laver, J.; Small, T.; O'Reilly, R. J.: Marrow transplantation
from human leukocyte antigen-identical or haploidentical donors for
correction of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J. Pediat. 119: 907-912,
1991.

12. Capsoni, F.; Acerbi, L.; Bonora, G.; Perletti, L.; Ongari, A.
M.; Vanoli, M.; Zanussi, C.: Phagocyte function and immunological
findings in a Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome long-term survivor. J. Lab.
Clin. Immun. 19: 91-97, 1986.

13. Cooper, M. D.; Chae, H. P.; Lowman, J. T.; Krivit, W.; Good, R.
A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: an immunologic deficiency disease involving
the afferent limb of immunity. Am. J. Med. 44: 499-513, 1968.

14. Corash, L.; Shafer, B.; Blaese, R. M.: Platelet-associated immunoglobulin,
platelet size, and the effect of splenectomy in the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome. Blood 65: 1439-1443, 1985.

15. Derry, J. M. J.; Ochs, H. D.; Francke, U.: Isolation of a novel
gene mutated in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Cell 78: 635-644, 1994.
Note: Erratum: Cell 79: following 922, 1994.

16. Derry, J. M. J.; Wiedemann, P.; Blair, P.; Wang, Y.; Kerns, J.
A.; Lemahieu, V.; Godfrey, V. L.; Wilkinson, J. E.; Francke, U.:
The mouse homolog of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein (WASP) gene
is highly conserved and maps near the scurfy (sf) mutation on the
X chromosome. Genomics 29: 471-477, 1995.

17. de Saint-Basile, G.; Schlegel, N.; Caniglia, M.; Le Deist, F.;
Kaplan, C.; Lecompte, T.; Piller, F.; Fischer, A.; Griscelli, C.:
X-linked thrombocytopenia and Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: similar regional
assignment but distinct X-inactivation pattern in carriers. Ann.
Hemat. 63: 107-110, 1991.

18. de Saint Basile, G.; Arveiler, B.; Fraser, N. F.; Boyd, Y.; Graig,
I. W.; Griscelli, G.; Fischer, A.: Close linkage of hypervariable
marker DXS255 to disease locus of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Lancet 334:
1319-1321, 1989. Note: Originally Volume II.

19. Devriendt, K.; Kim, A. S.; Mathijs, G.; Frints, S. G. M.; Schwartz,
M.; Van den Oord, J. J.; Verhoef, G. E. G.; Boogaerts, M. A.; Fryns,
J.-P.; You, D.; Rosen, M. K.; Vandenberghe, P.: Constitutively activating
mutation in WASP causes X-linked severe congenital neutropenia. Nature
Genet. 27: 313-317, 2001.

20. Diaz-Buxo, J. A.; Hermans, P. E.; Ritts, R. E., Jr.: Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome in an adult. Mayo Clin. Proc. 49: 455-459, 1974.

21. Dobbs, A. K.; Yang, T.; Farmer, D. M.; Howard, V.; Conley, M.
E.: A possible bichromatid mutation in a male gamete giving rise
to a female mosaic for two different mutations in the X-linked gene
WAS. Clin. Genet. 71: 171-176, 2007.

22. Du, W.; Kumaki, S.; Uchiyama, T.; Yachie, A.; Looi, C. Y.; Kawai,
S.; Minegishi, M.; Ramesh, N.; Geha, R. S.; Sasahara, Y.; Tsuchiya,
S.: A second-site mutation in the initiation codon of WAS (WASP)
results in expansion of subsets of lymphocytes in an Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome patient. Hum. Mutat. 27: 370-375, 2006.

23. Fearon, E. R.; Kohn, D. B.; Winkelstein, J. A.; Vogelstein, B.;
Blaese, R. M.: Carrier detection in the Wiskott Aldrich syndrome. Blood 72:
1735-1739, 1988.

24. Filipovich, A. H.; Krivit, W.; Kersey, J. H.; Burke, B. A.: Fatal
arteritis as a complication of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J. Pediat. 95:
742-744, 1979.

25. Fischer, A.; Friedrich, W.; Levinsky, R.; Vossen, J.; Griscelli,
C.; Kubanek, B.; Morgan, G.; Wagemaker, G.; Landais, P.: Bone-marrow
transplantation for immunodeficiencies and osteopetrosis: European
survey, 1968-1985. Lancet 328: 1080-1084, 1986. Note: Originally
Volume II.

26. Gatti, R. A.; Meuwissen, J. J.; Allen, H. D.; Hong, R.; Good,
R. A.: Immunological reconstitution of sex-linked lymphopenic immunological
deficiency. Lancet 292: 1366-1369, 1968. Note: Originally Volume
I.

27. Gealy, W. J.; Dwyer, J. M.; Harley, J. B.: Allelic exclusion
of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase in platelets and T lymphocytes
from a Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome carrier. Lancet 315: 63-65, 1980.
Note: Originally Volume I.

28. Gelzer, J.; Gasser, C.: Wiskott-Aldrich-Syndrom. Helv. Paediat.
Acta 16: 17-39, 1961.

29. Giliani, S.; Fiorini, M.; Mella, P.; Candotti, F.; Schumacher,
R. F.; Wengler, G. S.; Lalatta, F.; Fasth, A.; Badolato, R.; Ugazio,
A. G.; Albertini, A.; Notarangelo, L. D.: Prenatal molecular diagnosis
of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome by direct mutation analysis. Prenatal
Diag. 19: 36-40, 1999.

30. Greer, W. L.; Mahtani, M. M.; Kwong, P. C.; Rubin, L. A.; Peacocke,
M.; Willard, H. F.; Siminovitch, K. A.: Linkage studies of the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome: polymorphisms at TIMP and the X chromosome centromere are
informative markers for genetic prediction. Hum. Genet. 83: 227-230,
1989.

31. Greer, W. L.; Peacocke, M.; Siminovitch, K. A.: The Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome: refinement of the localization on Xp and identification
of another closely linked marker locus, OATL1. Hum. Genet. 88: 453-456,
1992.

32. Greer, W. L.; Shehabeldin, A.; Schulman, J.; Junker, A.; Siminovitch,
K. A.: Identification of WASP mutations, mutation hotspots and genotype-phenotype
disparities in 24 patients with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Hum.
Genet. 98: 685-690, 1996.

33. Greer, W. L.; Somani, A.-K.; Kwong, P. C.; Peacocke, M.; Rubin,
L. A.; Siminovitch, K. A.: Linkage relationships of the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome to 10 loci in the pericentromeric region of the human X chromosome. Genomics 6:
568-571, 1990.

34. Gutenberger, J.; Trygstad, C. W.; Stiehm, E. R.; Opitz, J. M.;
Thatcher, L. G.; Bloodworth, J. M. B.: Familial thrombocytopenia,
elevated serum IgA and renal disease. Am. J. Med. 49: 729-741, 1970.

35. Holmberg, L.; Gustavii, B.; Jonsson, A.: A prenatal study of
fetal platelet count and size with application to fetus at risk for
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J. Pediat. 102: 773-776, 1983.

36. Hutter, J. J., Jr.; Jones, J. F.: Results of a thymic epithelial
transplant in a child with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and central nervous
system lymphoma. Clin. Immun. Immunopath. 18: 121-125, 1981.

37. Kapoor, N.; Kirkpatrick, D.; Blaese, R. M.; Oleske, J.; Hilgartner,
M. H.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Good, R. A.; O'Reilly, R. J.: Reconstitution
of normal megakaryocytopoiesis and immunologic functions in Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome by marrow transplantation following myelo-ablation and immunosuppression
with busulphan and cyclophosphamide. Blood 57: 692-696, 1981.

38. Knox-Macaulay, H. H. M.; Bashawri, L.; Davies, K. E.: X linked
recessive thrombocytopenia. J. Med. Genet. 30: 968-969, 1993.

39. Kolluri, R.; Tolias, K. F.; Carpenter, C. L.; Rosen, F. S.; Kirchhausen,
T.: Direct interaction of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein with
the GTPase Cdc42. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 5615-5618, 1996.

40. Krivit, W.; Good, R. A.: Aldrich's syndrome (thrombocytopenia,
eczema and infection in infants). Studies of the defense mechanisms. Am.
J. Dis. Child. 97: 137-153, 1959.

41. Kwan, S.-P.; Hagemann, T. L.; Radtke, B. E.; Blaese, R. M.; Rosen,
F. S.: Identification of mutations in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
gene and characterization of a polymorphic dinucleotide repeat at
DXS6940, adjacent to the disease gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92:
4706-4710, 1995.

42. Kwan, S.-P.; Lehner, T.; Hagemann, T.; Lu, B.; Blaese, M.; Ochs,
H.; Wedgwood, R.; Ott, J.; Craig, I. W.; Rosen, F. S.: Localization
of the gene for the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome between two flanking
markers, TIMP and DXS255, on Xp11.22-Xp11.3. Genomics 10: 29-33,
1991.

43. Kwan, S.-P.; Lehner, T.; Lu, B.; Raghu, G.; Blaese, M.; Sandkuyl,
L. A.; Ott, J.; Fraser, N.; Boyd, Y.; Craig, I. W.; Fischer, S.; Rosen,
F.: Linkage of DXS255 to the Wiskott Aldrich syndrome gene. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 51: 1027 only, 1989.

44. Kwan, S.-P.; Sandkuyl, L. A.; Blaese, M.; Kunkel, L. M.; Bruns,
G.; Parmley, R.; Skarshaug, S.; Page, D. C.; Ott, J.; Rosen, F. S.
: Genetic mapping of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome with two highly-linked
polymorphic DNA markers. Genomics 3: 39-43, 1988.

45. Lemahieu, V.; Gastier, J. M.; Francke, U.: Novel mutations in
the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein gene and their effects on transcriptional,
translational, and clinical phenotypes. Hum. Mutat. 14: 54-66, 1999.

46. Levin, A. S.; Spitler, L. E.; Stiles, D. P.; Fudenberg, H. H.
: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, a genetically determined cellular immunologic
deficiency: clinical and laboratory responses to therapy with transfer
factor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 67: 821-828, 1970.

47. Lum, L. G.; Tubergen, D. G.; Corash, L.; Blaese, R. M.: Splenectomy
in the management of the thrombocytopenia of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. New
Eng. J. Med. 302: 892-896, 1980.

48. Lutskiy, M. I.; Sasahara, Y.; Kenney, D. M.; Rosen, F. S.; Remold-O'Donnell,
E.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome in a female. Blood 100: 2763-2768,
2002.

49. Lyon, M. F.; Peters, J.; Glenister, P. H.; Ball, S.; Wright, E.
: The scurfy mouse mutant has previously unrecognized hematological
abnormalities and resembles Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 87: 2433-2437, 1990.

50. McEnery, G.; Nash, F. W.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome associated
with idiopathic infantile cortical hyperostosis (Caffey's disease). Arch.
Dis. Child. 48: 818-821, 1973.

51. Mentzer, S. J.; Remold-O'Donnell, E.; Crimmins, M. A. V.; Bierer,
B. E.; Rosen, F. S.; Burakoff, S. J.: Sialophorin, a surface sialoglycoprotein
defective in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, is involved in human T
lymphocyte proliferation. J. Exp. Med. 165: 1383-1392, 1987.

52. Meropol, N. J.; Hicks, D.; Brooks, J. J.; Siminovitch, K. A.;
Fishman, N. O.; Kant, J. A.; Bennett, J. S.: Coincident Kaposi sarcoma
and T-cell lymphoma in a patient with the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Am.
J. Hemat. 40: 126-134, 1992.

53. Nathan, D. G.: Splenectomy in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. (Editorial) New
Eng. J. Med. 302: 916-917, 1980.

54. Notarangelo, L. D.; Candotti, F.; Parolini, O.; Mantuano, E.;
Giliani, S.; Lanfranchi, A.; Albertini, A.: Application of molecular
analysis to genetic counseling in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS). DNA
Cell Biol. 12: 645-649, 1993.

55. Notarangelo, L. D.; Parolini, O.; Faustini, R.; Porteri, V.; Albertini,
A.; Ugazio, A. G.: Presentation of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome as isolated
thrombocytopenia. (Letter) Blood 77: 1125-1126, 1991.

56. Notarangelo, L. D.; Parolini, O.; Porta, F.; Locatelli, F.; Lanfranchi,
A.; Marconi, M.; Nespoli, L.; Albertini, A.; Craig, I. W.; Ugazio,
A. G.: Analysis of X-chromosome inactivation and presumptive expression
of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) gene in hematopoietic cell lineages
of a thrombocytopenic carrier female of WAS. Hum. Genet. 88: 237-241,
1991.

57. Ochs, H. D.; Slichter, S. J.; Harker, L. A.; Von Behrens, W. E.;
Clark, R. A.; Wedgwood, R. J.: The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: studies
of lymphocytes, granulocytes, and platelets. Blood 55: 243-252,
1980.

58. Parkman, R.; Kenney, D. M.; Remold-O'Donnell, E.; Perrine, S.;
Rosen, F. S.: Surface protein abnormalities in lymphocytes and platelets
from patients with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Lancet 318: 1387-1389,
1981. Note: Originally Volume II.

59. Parkman, R.; Rappeport, J.; Geha, R.; Belli, J.; Cassady, R.;
Levey, R.; Nathan, D. G.; Rosen, F. S.: Complete correction of the
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome by allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. New
Eng. J. Med. 298: 921-927, 1978.

60. Parolini, O.; Ressmann, G.; Haas, O. A.; Pawlowsky, J.; Gadner,
H.; Knapp, W.; Holter, W.: X-linked Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome in a
girl. New Eng. J. Med. 338: 291-295, 1998.

61. Peacocke, M.; Siminovitch, K. A.: Linkage of the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome with polymorphic DNA sequences from the human X chromosome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 3430-3433, 1987.

62. Perry, G. S., III; Spector, B. D.; Schuman, L. M.; Mandel, J.
S.; Anderson, V. E.; McHugh, R. B.; Hanson, M. R.; Fahlstrom, S. M.;
Krivit, W.; Kersey, J. H.: The Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome in the United
States and Canada (1892-1979). J. Pediat. 97: 72-78, 1980.

63. Prchal, J. T.; Carroll, A. J.; Prchal, J. F.; Crist, W. M.; Skalka,
H. W.; Gealy, W. J.; Harley, J.; Malluh, A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome:
cellular impairments and their implication for carrier detection. Blood 56:
1048-1054, 1980.

64. Puck, J. M.; Candotti, F.: Lessons from the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. New
Eng. J. Med. 355: 1759-1761, 2006.

65. Puck, J. M.; Siminovitch, K. A.; Poncz, M.; Greenberg, C. R.;
Rottem, M.; Conley, M. E.: Atypical presentation of Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome: diagnosis in two unrelated males based on studies of maternal
T cell X chromosome inactivation. Blood 75: 2269-2374, 1990.

66. Puck, J. M.; Willard, H. F.: X inactivation in females with X-linked
disease. New Eng. J. Med. 338: 325-327, 1998.

67. Remold-O'Donnell, E.; Kenney, D. M.; Parkman, R.; Cairns, L.;
Savage, B.; Rosen, F. S.: Characterization of a human lymphocyte
surface sialoglycoprotein that is defective in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J.
Exp. Med. 159: 1705-1723, 1984.

68. Sasahara, Y.; Fujie, H.; Kumaki, S.; Ohashi, Y.; Minegishi, M.;
Tsuchiya, S.: Epstein-Barr virus-associated Hodgkin's disease in
a patient with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Acta Pediat. 90: 1348-1351,
2001.

69. Sasahara, Y.; Rachid, R.; Byrne, M. J.; de la Fuente, M. A.; Abraham,
R. T.; Ramesh, N.; Geha, R. S.: Mechanism of recruitment of WASP
to the immunological synapse and of its activation following TCR ligation. Molec.
Cell 10: 1269-1281, 2002.

70. Schindelhauer, D.; Weiss, M.; Hellebrand, H.; Golla, A.; Hergersberg,
M.; Seger, R.; Belohradsky, B. H.; Meindl, A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome:
no strict genotype-phenotype correlations but clustering of missense
mutations in the amino-terminal part of the WASP gene product. Hum.
Genet. 98: 68-76, 1996.

71. Schwartz, M.; Mibashan, R. S.; Nicolaides, K. H.; Millar, D. S.;
Jenkins, E.; Rodeck, C. H.; Orstavik, K. H.; Stormorken, H.: First-trimester
diagnosis of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome by DNA markers. (Letter) Lancet 334:
1405 only, 1989. Note: Originally Volume II.

72. Shapiro, R. S.; Perry, G. S., III; Krivit, W.; Gerrard, J. M.;
White, J. G.; Kersey, J. H.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: detection
of carrier state by metabolic stress of platelets. Lancet 311: 121-123,
1978. Note: Originally Volume I.

73. Simon, H.-U.; Mills, G. B.; Hashimoto, S.; Siminovitch, K. A.
: Evidence for defective transmembrane signaling in B cells from patients
with Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J. Clin. Invest. 90: 1396-1405, 1992.

74. Spitler, L. E.; Wray, B. B.; Mogerman, S.; Miller, J. J., III;
O'Reilly, R. J.; Lagios, M.: Nephropathy in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Pediatrics 66:
391-398, 1980.

75. Standen, G. R.; Lillicrap, D. P.; Matthews, N.; Bloom, A. L.:
Inherited thrombocytopenia, elevated serum IgA and renal disease:
identification as a variant of the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Quart.
J. Med. 59: 401-408, 1986.

76. Steinberg, A. G.: Methodology in human genetics. J. Med. Educ. 34:
315-334, 1959.

77. Sullivan, K. E.; Mullen, C. A.; Blaese, R. M.; Winkelstein, J.
A.: A multiinstitutional survey of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. J.
Pediat. 125: 876-885, 1994.

78. Symons, M.; Derry, J. M. J.; Karlak, B.; Jiang, S.; Lemahieu,
V.; McCormick, F.; Francke, U.; Abo, A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
protein, a novel effector for the GTPase CDC42Hs, is implicated in
actin polymerization. Cell 84: 723-734, 1996.

79. ten Bensel, R. W.; Stadlan, E. M.; Krivit, W.: The development
of malignancy in the course of the Aldrich syndrome. J. Pediat. 68:
761-767, 1966.

80. Thompson, L. J.; Lalloz, M. R. A.; Layton, D. M.: Unique and
recurrent WAS gene mutations in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and X-linked
thrombocytopenia. Blood Cells Molec. Dis. 25: 218-226, 1999.

81. Van den Bosch, J.; Drukker, J.: Het Syndroom van Aldrich: een
klinisch en genetisch Onderzoek van enige nederlandse Families. Maandschr.
Kindergeneesk. 32: 359-373, 1964.

82. Villa, A.; Notarangelo, L.; Macchi, P.; Mantuano, E.; Cavagni,
G.; Brugnoni, D.; Strina, D.; Patrosso, M. C.; Ramenghi, U.; Sacco,
M. G.; Ugazio, A.; Vezzoni, P.: X-linked thrombocytopenia and Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome are allelic diseases with mutations in the WASP gene. Nature
Genet. 9: 414-417, 1995.

83. Wada, T.; Konno, A.; Schurman, S. H.; Garabedian, E. K.; Anderson,
S. M.; Kirby, M.; Nelson, D. L.; Candotti, F.: Second-site mutation
in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS) protein gene causes somatic
mosaicism in two WAS siblings. J. Clin. Invest. 111: 1389-1397,
2003.

84. Wada, T.; Schurman, S. H.; Jagadeesh, G. J.; Garabedian, E. K.;
Nelson, D. L.; Candotti, F.: Multiple patients with revertant mosaicism
in a single Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome family. Blood 104: 1270-1272,
2004.

85. Wada, T.; Schurman, S. H.; Otsu, M.; Garabedian, E. K.; Ochs,
H. D.; Nelson, D. L.; Candotti, F.: Somatic mosaicism in Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome suggests in vivo reversion by a DNA slippage mechanism. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 8697-8702, 2001.

86. Wada, T.; Schurman, S. H.; Otsu, M.; Garabedian, E. K.; Ochs,
H. D.; Nelson, D. L.; Candotti, F.: Somatic mosaicism in Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome suggests in vivo reversion by a DNA slippage mechanism. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 8697-8702, 2001.

87. Waisfisz, Q.; Morgan, N. V.; Savino, M.; de Winter, J. P.; van
Berkel, C. G. M.; Hoatlin, M. E.; Ianzano, L.; Gibson, R. A.; Arwert,
F.; Savoia, A.; Mathew, C. G.; Pronk, J. C.; Joenje, H.: Spontaneous
functional correction of homozygous Fanconi anaemia alleles reveals
novel mechanistic basis for reverse mosaicism. Nature Genet. 22:
379-383, 1999.

88. Webb, M. C.; Andrews, P. A.; Koffman, C. G.; Cameron, J. S.:
Renal transplantation in Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Transplantation 56:
747-748, 1993.

89. Weiden, P. L.; Blaese, R.: Hereditary thrombocytopenia: relation
to Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome with special reference to splenectomy. J.
Pediat. 80: 226-234, 1972.

90. Wengler, G.; Gorlin, J. B.; Williamson, J. M.; Rosen, F. S.; Bing,
D. H.: Nonrandom inactivation of the X chromosome in early lineage
hematopoietic cells in carriers of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Blood 85:
2471-2477, 1995.

91. Wiskott, A.: Familiarer, angeborener Morbus Werlhofii? Mschr.
Kinderheilk. 68: 212-216, 1937.

92. Wolff, J. A.: Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome: clinical, immunologic,
and pathologic observations. J. Pediat. 70: 221-232, 1967.

93. Yamada, M.; Ariga, T.; Kawamura, N.; Yamaguchi, K.; Ohtsu, M.;
Nelson, D. L.; Kondoh, T.; Kobayashi, I.; Okano, M.; Kobayashi, K.;
Sakiyama, Y.: Determination of carrier status for the Wiskott-Aldrich
syndrome by flow cytometric analysis of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein
expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. J. Immun. 165:
1119-1122, 2000.

94. Yamada, M.; Ohtsu, M.; Kobayashi, I.; Kawamura, N.; Kobayashi,
K.; Ariga, T.; Sakiyama, Y.; Nelson, D. L.; Tsuruta, S.; Anakura,
M.; Ishikawa, N.: Flow cytometric analysis of Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
(WAS) protein in lymphocytes from WAS patients and their familial
carriers. Blood 93: 756-759, 1999.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS INHERITANCE:
X-linked recessive

HEAD AND NECK:
[Head];
Sinusitis;
[Ears];
Otitis media;
[Nose];
Epistaxis;
[Mouth];
Oral bleeding

RESPIRATORY:
[Airways];
Upper respiratory tract infections;
Lower respiratory tract infections;
[Lung];
Pneumonia

ABDOMEN:
[Gastrointestinal];
Diarrhea;
Hematemesis;
Melena;
Inflammatory bowel disease

GENITOURINARY:
[Kidneys];
Nephropathy

SKIN, NAILS, HAIR:
[Skin];
Eczema;
Petechiae;
Purpura

NEUROLOGIC:
[Central nervous system];
Meningitis

HEMATOLOGY:
Thrombocytopenia;
Small platelets size;
Hemolytic anemia;
Small and large vessel vasculitis;
Iron deficiency anemia;
CD43 (sialophorin) defectively expressed on surface of blood cells

IMMUNOLOGY:
Moderately depressed antibody response to polysaccharide antigens;
Lymphopenia;
Abnormal delayed hypersensitivity skin test;
Absent microvilli on the surface of peripheral blood lymphocytes

LABORATORY ABNORMALITIES:
Prolonged bleeding time;
Normal IgG levels;
Increased IgA levels;
Increased IgE levels;
Reduced IgM levels;
Raised ESR;
Raised CRP

MOLECULAR BASIS:
Caused by mutation in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome protein gene (WASP,
301000.0001)

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - reviewed: 1/4/2001
Assil Saleh - revised: 8/25/2000

CREATED John F. Jackson: 6/15/1995

EDITED joanna: 10/22/2013
joanna: 7/23/2013
joanna: 1/5/2001
joanna: 1/4/2001
kayiaros: 8/25/2000

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/11/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/27/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/21/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/30/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/13/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/27/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/10/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 5/13/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/21/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/10/2001
Sonja A. Rasmussen - updated: 6/8/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/28/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/21/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/16/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/19/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/16/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/18/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/4/1998
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/23/1998
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 6/9/1997
Cynthia K. Ewing - updated: 10/14/1996
Alan F. Scott - updated: 4/23/1996
Moyra Smith - updated: 4/22/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED terry: 03/28/2013
mgross: 2/23/2012
terry: 1/27/2012
carol: 6/7/2011
alopez: 11/16/2010
terry: 11/11/2010
wwang: 5/13/2009
ckniffin: 4/27/2009
terry: 3/27/2009
carol: 11/26/2007
terry: 11/21/2007
alopez: 12/8/2006
terry: 11/30/2006
alopez: 6/13/2006
tkritzer: 12/27/2004
tkritzer: 2/18/2004
tkritzer: 1/23/2003
tkritzer: 1/13/2003
terry: 1/10/2003
carol: 5/13/2002
ckniffin: 5/10/2002
ckniffin: 5/9/2002
mgross: 2/21/2002
carol: 2/12/2002
mcapotos: 8/15/2001
mcapotos: 8/14/2001
mcapotos: 8/10/2001
mcapotos: 6/8/2001
mcapotos: 5/25/2001
terry: 5/18/2001
alopez: 3/5/2001
alopez: 3/1/2001
terry: 2/28/2001
mgross: 9/21/2000
alopez: 5/16/2000
mcapotos: 1/27/2000
terry: 1/19/2000
alopez: 8/24/1999
jlewis: 8/24/1999
terry: 8/16/1999
jlewis: 6/30/1999
terry: 6/18/1999
terry: 5/20/1999
dkim: 11/13/1998
carol: 11/12/1998
terry: 11/4/1998
dkim: 9/10/1998
dkim: 7/21/1998
alopez: 6/9/1998
alopez: 4/23/1998
jenny: 8/27/1997
mark: 7/8/1997
jamie: 10/18/1996
jamie: 10/16/1996
jamie: 10/14/1996
mark: 8/12/1996
terry: 7/16/1996
terry: 7/15/1996
mark: 6/25/1996
terry: 6/25/1996
mark: 6/19/1996
terry: 6/11/1996
carol: 4/26/1996
mark: 4/23/1996
carol: 4/22/1996
mark: 2/5/1996
mark: 1/8/1996
mark: 10/25/1995
terry: 7/28/1995
carol: 12/14/1994
davew: 7/6/1994
pfoster: 7/1/1994
jason: 6/17/1994

139250	TITLE *139250 GROWTH HORMONE 1; GH1
;;GH;;
GROWTH HORMONE, NORMAL; GHN;;
GROWTH HORMONE, PITUITARY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Growth hormone (GH) is synthesized by acidophilic or somatotropic cells
of the anterior pituitary gland. Human growth hormone has a molecular
mass of 22,005 and contains 191 amino acid residues with 2 disulfide
bridges (Niall et al., 1971).

CLONING

By 1977, not only had the amino acid sequence of GH been determined, but
the sequence of nucleotides in the structural gene for GH had been
determined as well (Baxter et al., 1977).

By molecular cloning of cDNA, Masuda et al. (1988) demonstrated that the
20-kD variant of human GH is produced by the same gene (GHN or GH1) as
the 22-kD form, and that a process of alternative splicing is involved.

Chen et al. (1989) sequenced the entire 66,500 bp of the GH gene
cluster. The expression of the 5 genes in this cluster was examined by
screening pituitary and placenta cDNA libraries, using gene-specific
oligonucleotides. According to this analysis, the GHN gene is
transcribed exclusively in the pituitary, whereas the other 4 genes
(CSL, 603515; CSA, 150200; GHV, 139240; and CSB, 118820) are expressed
only in placental tissues. The CSL gene carries a G-to-A transition in a
sequence used by the other 4 genes as an intronic 5-prime splice donor
site. The mutation results in a different splicing pattern and, hence,
in a novel sequence of the CSL gene mRNA and the deduced polypeptide.

GH and CSH (CSA) have 191 amino acid residues and show about 85%
homology in amino acid sequence (Owerbach et al., 1980). Their messenger
RNAs have more than 90% homology.

GENE FUNCTION

Human GH binds 2 GHR (600946) molecules and induces signal transduction
through receptor dimerization. Sundstrom et al. (1996) noted that at
high concentrations, GH acts as an antagonist because of a large
difference in affinities at the respective binding sites. This
antagonist action can be enhanced further by reducing binding in the
low-affinity binding site. A possible mechanism by which mutant,
biologically inactive GH may have its effect is to act as an antagonist
to the binding of normal GH to its receptor, GHR.

The regulation of GH synthesis and release is modulated by a family of
genes that include the transcription factors PROP1 (601538) and PIT1
(173110). PROP1 and PIT1 regulate differentiation of pituitary cells
into somatotrophs, which synthesize and release GH. Genes that are
important in the release of GH include the GHRH (139190) and GHRHR
(139191) genes. After GHRH is synthesized and released from the
hypothalamus, it travels to the anterior pituitary where it binds to
GHRHR, resulting in transduction of a signal into the somatotroph which
promotes release of presynthesized GH that is stored in secretory
granules. Other gene products that are important in GH synthesis and
release are GHR and the growth hormone-binding proteins (GHBP). The
GHBPs are derived from the membrane bound receptor (GHR) and they remain
bound to GH in the circulation. Following binding of GH to 2 GHR
molecules, the signal to produce IGF1 (147440) is transduced. The GH
molecules that are bound to membrane-anchored GH receptors can be
released into the circulation by excision of the extracellular portion
of the GHR molecules. At this point, the extracellular portion of the
GHR, which is referred to as the GHBP, serves to stabilize GH in the
circulation. The final genes in the GH synthetic pathway include IGF1
and its receptor (IGF1R; 147370), whose products stimulate growth in
various tissues including bones and muscle (Phillips, 1995; Rimoin and
Phillips, 1997).

Boguszewski et al. (1997) investigated the proportion of circulating
non-22-kD GH1 isoforms in prepubertal children with short stature
(height less than -2 SD score) of different etiologies. The study groups
consisted of 17 girls with Turner syndrome (TS), aged 3 to 13 years; 25
children born small for gestational age (SGA) without postnatal catch-up
growth, aged 3 to 13 years; and 24 children with idiopathic short
stature (ISS), aged 4 to 15 years. The results were compared with those
from 23 prepubertal healthy children of normal stature (height +/- 2 SD
score), aged 4 to 13 years. Serum non-22-kD GH levels, expressed as a
percentage of the total GH concentration, were determined by the 22-kD
GH exclusion assay. The median proportion of non-22-kD GH isoforms was
8.1% in normal children; it was increased in children born SGA (9.8%; P
= 0.05) and in girls with TS (9.9%; P = 0.01), but not in children with
ISS (8.9%). In children born SGA, the proportion of non-22-kD GH
isoforms directly correlated with different estimates of spontaneous GH
secretion and inversely correlated with height SD score. The authors
concluded that the ratio of non-22-kD GH isoforms in the circulation may
have important implications for normal and abnormal growth.

Mendlewicz et al. (1999) studied the contributions of genetic and
environmental factors in the regulation of the 24-hour GH secretion. The
24-hour profile of plasma GH was obtained at 15-minute intervals in 10
pairs of monozygotic and 9 pairs of dizygotic normal male twins, aged 16
to 34 years. A major genetic effect was evidenced on GH secretion during
wakefulness (heritability estimate of 0.74) and, to a lesser extent, on
the 24-hour GH secretion. Significant genetic influences were also
identified for slow-wave sleep and height. These results suggested that
human GH secretion in young adulthood is markedly dependent on genetic
factors.

Hindmarsh et al. (1999) studied GH secretory patterns in the elderly by
constructing 24-hour serum GH profiles in 45 male and 38 female
volunteers, aged 59.4 to 73.0 years, and related patterns to IGF1,
IGFBP3 (146732), and GH-binding protein levels; body mass index; and
waist/hip ratio. There was a highly significant difference in mean
24-hour serum GH concentrations in females compared to males as a result
of significantly higher trough GH levels in females. Peak values were
not significantly different. Serum IGF1 levels were significantly higher
in males. Peak GH values were related to serum IGF1 levels, whereas
trough GH levels were not. GH was secreted with a dominant periodicity
of 200 minutes in males and 280 minutes in females. GH secretion
assessed by ApEn was more disordered in females, and increasing disorder
was associated with lower IGF1 levels. Body mass index was negatively
related to GH in both sexes. In males, trough values were the major
determinant, whereas in females, the peak value was the major
determinant. Trough GH levels were inversely related in both sexes to
waist/hip ratio and to increasing secretory disorder. These data
demonstrated a sexually dimorphic pattern of GH secretion in the
elderly.

De Groof et al. (2002) evaluated the GH/IGF1 axis and the levels of
IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs), IGFBP3 protease, glucose, insulin
(176730), and cytokines in 27 children with severe septic shock due to
meningococcal sepsis during the first 3 days after admission. The median
age was 22 months. Significant differences were found between
nonsurvivors and survivors for the levels of total IGF1, free IGF1,
IGFBP1 (146730), IGFBP3 protease activity, IL6 (147620), and TNFA
(191160). The pediatric risk of mortality score correlated significantly
with levels of IGFBP1, IGFBP3 protease activity, IL6, and TNFA and with
levels of total IGFI and free IGFI. Levels of GH and IGFBP1 were
extremely elevated in nonsurvivors, whereas total and free IGFI levels
were markedly decreased and were accompanied by high levels of the
cytokines IL6 and TNFA.

In rodents and humans there is a sexually dimorphic pattern of GH
secretion that influences the serum concentration of IGF1. Geary et al.
(2003) studied the plasma concentrations of IGF1, IGF2 (147470), IGFBP3,
and GH in cord blood taken from the offspring of 987 singleton Caucasian
pregnancies born at term and related these values to birth weight,
length, and head circumference. Cord plasma concentrations of IGF1,
IGF2, and IGFBP3 were influenced by factors related to birth size:
gestational age at delivery, mode of delivery, maternal height, and
parity of the mother. Plasma GH concentrations were inversely related to
the plasma concentrations of IGF1 and IGFBP3; 10.2% of the variability
in cord plasma IGF1 concentration and 2.7% for IGFBP3 was explained by
sex of the offspring and parity. Birth weight, length, and head
circumference measurements were greater in males than females (P less
than 0.001). Mean cord plasma concentrations of IGF1 and IGFBP3 were
significantly lower in males than females. Cord plasma GH concentrations
were higher in males than females, but no difference was noted between
the sexes for IGF2. After adjustment for gestational age, parity, and
maternal height, cord plasma concentrations of IGF1 and IGFBP3 along
with sex explained 38.0% of the variability in birth weight, 25.0% in
birth length, and 22.7% in head circumference.

Ho et al. (2002) noted that the human GH gene cluster encompasses GHN,
which is expressed primarily in pituitary somatotropes, and 4 genes,
CSA, CSB, CSL, and GHV, which are expressed specifically in
syncytiotrophoblast cells lining the placental villi. A multicomponent
locus control region (LCR) is required for transcriptional activation in
both pituitary and placenta. In addition, 2 genes overlap with the GH
LCR: SCN4A (603967) on the 5-prime end and CD79B (147245) on the 3-prime
end. Ho et al. (2002) studied mice carrying an 87-kb human transgene
encompassing the GH LCR and most of the GH gene cluster. By deleting a
fragment of the transgene, they showed that a single determinant of the
human GH LCR located 14.5 kb 5-prime to the GHN promoter has a critical,
specific, and nonredundant role in facilitating promoter trans factor
binding and activating GHN transcription. Ho et al. (2002) found that
this same determinant plays an essential role in establishing a 32-kb
acetylated domain that encompasses the entire GH LCR and the contiguous
GHN promoter. These data supported a model for long-range gene
activation via LCR-mediated targeting and extensive spreading of core
histone acetylation.

Using mice carrying the 87-kb human GH transgene, Ho et al. (2006) found
that insertion of a Pol II terminator within the GH LCR blocked
transcription of the CD79B gene adjacent to the LCR and repressed GHN
expression. However, the insertion had little effect on acetylation
within the GH locus. Selective elimination of CD79B also repressed GHN
expression. Ho et al. (2006) concluded that Pol II tracking and histone
acetylation are not linked and that transcription, but not translation,
of the CD79B gene is required for GHN expression.

In addition to expression in pituitary and placenta and functions in
growth and reproduction, prolactin (PRL; 176760), GH, and placental
lactogen (CSH1; 150200) are expressed in endothelial cells and have
angiogenic effects. Ge et al. (2007) found that BMP1 (112264) and
BMP1-like proteinases processed PRL and GH in vitro and in vivo to
produce approximately 17-kD N-terminal fragments with antiangiogenic
activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

The GH, PL (CSH1), and PRL genes contain 5 exons separated by 4 introns.
The introns occur at the same sites, supporting evolutionary homology
(Baxter, 1981). All 5 genes in the GH gene cluster are in the same
transcriptional orientation (Ho et al., 2002).

Baxter (1981) found evidence for the existence of at least 3 GH and 3
CSH, also called placental lactogen (PL), genes on chromosome 17.
Whether they are situated GH:GH:GH:PL:PL:PL or arranged
GH:PL:GH:PL:GH:PL was not clear.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Sundstrom et al. (1996) crystallized a GH antagonist mutant, gly120 to
arg, with its receptor as a 1-to-1 complex and determined the crystal
structure at 2.9-angstrom resolution. The 1-to-1 complex with the
agonist is remarkably similar to the native GHR 1-to-2 complex. A
comparison between the 2 structures revealed only minimal differences in
the conformations of the hormone or its receptor in the 2 complexes.

EVOLUTION

Owerbach et al. (1980) estimated that the GH and CSH genes diverged
about 50 to 60 million years ago, whereas the PRL and GH genes diverged
about 400 million years ago.

Human PL and human GH are more alike than are rat GH and human GH. (PL
has more growth-promoting effects than milk-producing effects.) Baxter
(1981) proposed that in evolution the prolactin gene diverged early from
the gene that was the common progenitor of the GH and PL genes.
(Placental lactogen was the official Endocrine Society designation;
Grumbach (1981) promoted the term chorionic somatomammotropin, which has
functional legitimacy.)

MAPPING

By a combination of restriction mapping and somatic cell hybridization,
Owerbach et al. (1980) assigned genes for growth hormone, chorionic
somatomammotropin (CSH), and a third growth hormone-like gene (GH2;
139240) to the growth hormone gene cluster that is assigned to
chromosome 17.

Lebo (1980) corroborated the assignment of the GH gene to chromosome 17
by the technique of fluorescence-activated chromosome sorting. George et
al. (1981) assigned the genes for GH and CSH to the 17q21-qter region.

Ruddle (1982) found that the GH family of genes is between galactokinase
(604313) and thymidine kinase (TK1; 188300), with galactokinase being
closer to the centromere.

Harper et al. (1982) used in situ hybridization to assign the GH gene
cluster to 17q22-q24. A gene copy number experiment showed that both
genes are present in about 3 copies per haploid genome. The sequence of
genes in the GH gene cluster is thought to be GHN--CSL--CSA--GHV--CSB
(Phillips, 1983). Normal growth hormone (GHN, referred to now as GH1)
encodes GH. CSA and CSB both encode chorionic somatomammotropin. GHV, or
growth hormone variant, is now designated GH2.

Xu et al. (1988) assigned the growth hormone complex to 17q23-q24 by in
situ hybridization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using GH cDNA as a specific DNA probe in Southern blot analyses,
Phillips et al. (1981) found that the GHN (GH1) gene was deleted in 2
families with type IA growth hormone deficiency (Illig type; 262400). On
the other hand, the GH genes of persons with type IB (612781) (in 6
families) had normal restriction patterns. Two affected sibs in 2 of the
6 families were discordant for 2 restriction markers closely linked to
the GH cluster.

Braga et al. (1986) reported the cases of a son and daughter of
first-cousin Italian parents who had isolated growth hormone deficiency
(IGHD) resulting from homozygosity for a 7.6-kb deletion within the GH
gene cluster. Both developed antibodies in response to treatment with
human GH, but in neither was there interference with growth. The
deletion affected not only the structural gene for GH (GH1) but also
sequences adjacent to CSL.

Goossens et al. (1986) described a double deletion in the GH gene
cluster in cases of inherited growth hormone deficiency. A total of
about 40 kb of DNA was absent due to 2 separate deletions flanking the
CSL gene (603515). Two affected sibs were homozygous. The parents were
'Romany of French origin' (i.e., French gypsies) and related as first
cousins once removed. Restriction patterns in them were consistent with
heterozygosity.

Vnencak-Jones et al. (1988) described the molecular basis of deletions
within the human GH gene cluster in 9 unrelated patients. Their results
suggested that the presence of highly repetitive DNA sequences flanking
the GH1 gene predisposed to unequal recombinant events through
chromosomal misalignment.

In a Chinese family, He et al. (1990) found that 2 sibs with GH
deficiency had a deletion of approximately 7.1 kb of DNA. The parents,
who were related as second cousins, were heterozygous but of normal
stature. The affected children had not received exogenous GH, but the
authors suspected that their disorder represented IGHD type IA.

Akinci et al. (1992) described a Turkish family in which 3 children had
IGHD type IA. A homozygous deletion of approximately 45 kb encompassing
the GH1, CSL, CSA, and GH2 genes was found. The end points of the
deletion lay within 2 regions of highly homologous DNA sequence situated
5-prime to the GH1 gene and 5-prime to the CSB gene. The parents, who
were consanguineous, were both heterozygous for the deletion.

Mullis et al. (1992) analyzed GH1 DNA from circulating lymphocytes of 78
subjects with severe IGHD. The subjects analyzed were broadly grouped
into 3 different populations: 32 north European, 22 Mediterranean, and
24 Turkish. Of the 78 patients, 10 showed a GH1 deletion; 8 had a 6.7-kb
deletion, and the remaining 2 had a 7.6-kb GH1 deletion. Five of the 10
subjects developed anti-hGH antibodies to hGH replacement followed by a
stunted growth response. Parental consanguinity was found in all
families, and heterozygosity for the corresponding deletion was present
in each parent. The proportion of deletion cases was about the same in
each of the 3 population groups.

Phillips and Cogan (1994) tabulated mutations found in the GH gene.

Takahashi et al. (1996) reported the case of a boy with short stature
and heterozygosity for a mutant GH gene (139250.0008). In this child,
the GH not only could not activate the GH receptor (GHR; 600946) but
also inhibited the action of wildtype GH because of its greater affinity
for GHR and GH-binding protein (GHBP), which is derived from the
extracellular domain of the GHR. Thus, a dominant-negative effect was
observed. See Kowarski syndrome, 262650.

Splicing of pre-mRNA transcripts is regulated by consensus sequences at
intron boundaries and the branch site. In vitro studies showed that the
small introns of some genes also require intron splice enhancers (ISE)
to modulate splice site selection. An autosomal dominant form of
isolated growth hormone deficiency (IGHD II; 173100) can be caused by
mutations in intron 3 (IVS3) of the GH1 gene that cause exon 3 skipping,
resulting in truncated GH1 gene products that prevent secretion of
normal GH. Some of these GH1 mutations are located 28 to 45 nucleotides
into IVS3 (which is 92 nucleotides long). McCarthy and Phillips (1998)
localized this ISE by quantitating the effects of deletions within IVS3
on skipping of exon 3. The importance of individual nucleotides to ISE
function was determined by analyzing the effects of point mutants and
additional deletions. The results showed that (1) an ISE with a
G(2)X(1-4)G(3) motif resides in IVS3 of the GH1 gene; (2) both runs of
Gs are required for ISE function; (3) a single copy of the ISE regulates
exon 3 skipping; and (4) ISE function can be modified by an adjacent AC
element. The findings revealed a new mechanism by which mutations can
cause inherited human endocrine disorders and suggested that (1) ISEs
may regulate splicing of transcripts of other genes, and (2) mutations
of these ISEs or of the transacting factors that bind them may cause
other genetic disorders.

Hasegawa et al. (2000) studied polymorphisms in the GH1 gene that were
associated with altered GH production. The subjects included 43
prepubertal short children with GHD without gross pituitary
abnormalities, 46 short children with normal GH secretion, and 294
normal adults. A polymorphism in intron 4 (A or T at nucleotide 1663,
designated P1) was identified. Two additional polymorphic sites (T or G
at nucleotide 218, designated P2, and G or T at nucleotide 439,
designated P3) in the promoter region of the GH1 gene were also
identified and matched with the P1 polymorphism (A or T, respectively)
in more than 90% of the subjects. P1, P2, and P3 were considered to be
associated with GH production. For example, the allele frequency of T at
P2 in prepubertal short children with GHD without gross pituitary
abnormalities (58%) was significantly different from that in short
children with normal GH secretion and normal adults (37% and 44%,
respectively). Furthermore, significant differences were observed in
maximal GH peaks in provocative tests, IGF1 (147440) SD scores, and
height SD scores in children with the T/T or G/G genotypes at P2. In the
entire study group, significant differences in IGF1 SD scores and height
SD scores were observed between the T/T and G/G genotypes at P2.
Hasegawa et al. (2000) concluded that GH secretion is partially
determined by polymorphisms in the GH1 gene, explaining some of the
variations in GH secretion and height.

Dennison et al. (2004) examined associations between common SNPs in the
GH1 gene and weight in infancy, adult bone mass and bone loss rates, and
circulating GH profiles. Genomic DNA was examined for 2 SNPs in the GH
gene, 1 in the promoter region and 1 in intron 4. Homozygotes at loci
GH1 A5157G and T6331A displayed low baseline bone density and
accelerated bone loss; there was also a significant (P = 0.04)
interaction among weight at 1 year, GH1 genotype, and bone loss rate.
There was a graded association between alleles and circulating GH
concentration among men. The authors concluded that common diversity in
the GH1 region predisposes to osteoporosis via effects on the level of
GH expression.

The proximal promoter region of the GH1 gene is highly polymorphic,
containing at least 15 SNPs. This variation is manifest in 40 different
haplotypes, the high diversity being explicable in terms of gene
conversion, recurrent mutation, and selection. Horan et al. (2003)
showed by functional analysis that 12 haplotypes were associated with a
significantly reduced level of reporter gene expression, whereas 10
haplotypes were associated with a significantly increased level. The
former tended to be more prevalent in the general population than the
latter (p less than 0.01), possibly as a consequence of selection.
Haplotype partitioning identified 6 SNPs as major determinants of GH1
gene expression, which is influenced by an LCR located between 14.5 and
32 kb upstream of the GH1 gene (Jones et al., 1995). Horan et al. (2003)
used a series of LCR-GH1 proximal promoter constructs to demonstrate
that the LCR enhanced proximal promoter activity by up to 2.8-fold
depending upon proximal promoter haplotype, and that the activity of a
given proximal promoter haplotype was also differentially enhanced by
different LCR haplotypes. The genetic basis of interindividual
differences in GH1 gene expression thus appeared to be extremely
complex.

Millar et al. (2003) sought to identify subtle mutations in the GH1
gene, which had been regarded as a comparatively rare cause of short
stature, in 3 groups: 41 individuals selected for short stature, reduced
height velocity, and bone age delay, 11 individuals with short stature
and IGHD, and 154 controls. Heterozygous mutations were identified in
all 3 groups but disproportionately in the individuals with short
stature, both with and without IGHD. Twenty-four novel GH1 gene lesions
were found. Fifteen novel GH1 gene mutations were considered to be of
probable phenotypic significance. Although most such lesions may be
insufficient on their own to account for the observed clinical
phenotype, they were considered likely to play a contributory role in
the etiology of short stature.

In a screen of the GH1 gene for mutations in a group of 74 children with
familial short stature, Lewis et al. (2004) identified 4 mutations, 2 of
which were novel: an ile179-to-met (I179M) substitution and a
single-basepair substitution in the promoter region. Resistance to
proteolysis and secretion from rat pituitary cells of I179M GH were
consistent with a lack of significant misfolding. Receptor binding
studies were normal, but molecular modeling studies suggested that the
I179M substitution might perturb interactions between GH and the GH
receptor loop containing residue trp169, thereby affecting signal
transduction. In contrast to its ability to activate STAT5 (601511)
normally, activation of ERK (see 176948) by the I179M variant was
reduced to half that observed with wildtype. The subject exhibited
normal GH secretion after pharmacologic stimulation. That the I179M
variant did not cosegregate with the short stature phenotype in the
family strongly suggested to Lewis et al. (2004) that this variant was
on its own insufficient to fully account for the observed clinical
phenotype.

Cogan et al. (1995, 1997) and Moseley et al. (2002) described 3
mutations (139250.0016; 139250.0011; 139250.0012) that are not located
at the 5-prime splice site in intron 3 but still alter splicing of GH1
to cause increased production of a 17.5-kD isoform. All 3 mutations
reside within purine-rich sequences that resemble exonic and intronic
splicing enhancers (ESE and ISE). Since splicing enhancers often
activate specific splice sites to facilitate exon definition, Ryther et
al. (2003) considered that the splicing defects caused by these
mutations could be due to a defect in exon definition, resulting in exon
skipping. They showed that overexpression of the dominant-negative
17.5-kD isoform also destroyed the majority of somatotrophs, leading to
anterior pituitary hypoplasia in transgenic mice. They demonstrated that
dual splicing enhancers are required to ensure exon 3 definition to
produce full-length 22-kD hormone. They also showed that splicing
enhancer mutations that weaken exon 3 recognition produce variable
amounts of the 17.5-kD isoform, a result that could potentially explain
the clinical variability observed in IGHD II. Noncanonical splicing
mutations that disrupt splicing enhancers, such as those represented by
the 3 mutations discussed, demonstrate the importance of enhancer
elements in regulating alternative splicing to prevent human disease.

Mullis et al. (2005) studied a total of 57 subjects with IGHD type II
(173100) belonging to 19 families with different splice site as well as
missense mutations within the GH1 gene. The subjects presenting with a
splice site mutation within the first 2 bp of intervening sequence 3
(5-prime IVS +1/+2 bp; 139250.0009) leading to a skipping of exon 3 were
more likely to present in the follow-up with other pituitary hormone
deficiencies. In addition, although the patients with missense mutations
had been reported to be less affected, a number of patients presenting
with a missense GH form showed some pituitary hormone impairment. The
development of multiple hormonal deficiencies is not age-dependent, and
there is a clear variability in onset, severity, and progression, even
within the same families. Mullis et al. (2005) concluded that the
message of clinical importance from these studies is that the pituitary
endocrine status of all such patients should continue to be monitored
closely over the years because further hormonal deficiencies may evolve
with time.

Shariat et al. (2008) studied a 4-generation family segregating
autosomal dominant growth hormone deficiency and identified a
heterozygous missense mutation in the GH gene (EX3+1G-A; 139250.0025) in
affected individuals. Analysis of the effects of this variant as well as
G-T and G-C changes at the first nucleotide of exon 3 illustrated the
multiple mechanisms by which changes in sequence can cause disease:
splice site mutations, splicing enhancer function, messenger RNA decay,
missense mutations, and nonsense mutations. The authors noted that for
IGHD II, only exon skipping leads to production of the dominant-negative
isoform, with increasing skipping correlating with increasing disease
severity.

Horan et al. (2006) observed an association between 4 core promoter
haplotypes in the GH1 gene and increased risk for hypertension and
stroke in a study of 111 hypertensive patients and 155 stroke patients.
The association was more significant for females than males. Horan et
al. (2006) also observed an association between an isoform of the GHR
gene lacking exon 3 (GHRd3) and hypertension in female stroke patients.
The authors postulated a complex interaction between variants in the GH1
and GHR genes involving height.

Giordano et al. (2008) studied the contribution to IGHD of genetic
variations in the GH1 gene regulatory regions. The T allele of a G-to-T
polymorphism at position -57 (dbSNP rs2005172), within the vitamin
D-responsive element, showed a positive significant association when
comparing patients with normal (P = 0.006) or short stature (P = 0.0011)
controls. The genotype -57TT showed an odds ratio of 2.93 (1.44-5.99)
and 2.99 (1.42-6.31), respectively. Giordano et al. (2008) concluded
that the common -57G-T polymorphism contributes to IGHD susceptibility,
indicating that it may have a multifactorial etiology.

ANIMAL MODEL

By Southern analysis of DNA from mouse-rat somatic cell hybrids, Cooke
et al. (1986) found that the GH gene is on rat chromosome 10 and the PRL
gene (176760) is on rat chromosome 17. Thus, in the rat, as in man,
these genes are on different chromosomes even though they show an
evolutionary relationship.

Morgan et al. (1987) showed that retrovirus-mediated gene transfer can
be used to introduce a recombinant human GH1 gene into cultured human
keratinocytes. The transduced keratinocytes secreted biologically active
GH into the culture medium. When grafted as an epithelial sheet onto
athymic mice, these cultured keratinocytes reconstituted a
normal-appearing epidermis from which, however, human growth hormone
could be extracted. Transduced epidermal cells may be a general vehicle
for the delivery of gene products by means of grafting.

Smith et al. (1997) demonstrated a role of GH in retinal
neovascularization, which is the major cause of untreatable blindness.
They found that retinal neovascularization was inhibited in transgenic
mice expressing a GH antagonist gene and in normal mice given an
inhibitor of GH secretion. In these mice retinal neovascularization was
inhibited in inverse proportion to serum levels of GH and IGF1.
Inhibition was reversed with exogenous IGF1 administration. GH
inhibition did not diminish hypoxia-stimulated retinal vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF; 192240) or VEGF receptor (VEGFR;
191306) expression. Smith et al. (1997) suggested that systemic
inhibition of GH or IGF1, or both, may have therapeutic potential in
preventing some forms of retinopathy.

Growth hormones from primates are unique in that they are able to bind
with and activate both primate and nonprimate GHRs, whereas GHs from
nonprimates are ineffective in primates. Behncken et al. (1997)
investigated the basis of primate specificity of binding by the GHR.
They examined the interaction between GHR residues arg43 (primate) or
leu43 (nonprimate) and their complementary hormone residues asp171
(primate) and his170 (nonprimate). They found that the interaction
between arg43 and his170/171 is sufficient to explain virtually all of
the primate species specificity.

In mouse preadipocytes, Wolfrum et al. (2003) found that Foxa2 (600288)
inhibited adipocyte differentiation by activating transcription of
preadipocyte factor-1 (DLK1; 176290), and that expression of both Foxa2
and Dlk1 was enhanced by growth hormone in primary preadipocytes.
Wolfrum et al. (2003) suggested that the antiadipogenic activity of
growth hormone is mediated by Foxa2.

Using GH-deficient Socs2 (605117) -/- mice, Greenhalgh et al. (2005)
demonstrated that the Socs2 -/- phenotype is dependent upon the presence
of endogenous GH. Treatment with exogenous GH induced excessive growth
in terms of overall body weight, body and bone lengths, and the weight
of internal organs and tissues. Microarray analysis on liver RNA
extracts after exogenous GH administration revealed a heightened
response to GH. The conserved C-terminal SOCS-box motif was essential
for all inhibitory function. SOCS2 was found to bind 2 phosphorylated
tyrosines on the GH receptor, and mutation analysis of these amino acids
showed that both were essential for SOCS2 function. Greenhalgh et al.
(2005) concluded that SOCS2 is a negative regulator of GH signaling.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE IA
GH1, 2-BP DEL, FS132TER

Igarashi et al. (1993) identified a Japanese patient with growth
retardation (IGHD IA; 262400) with a compound heterozygous pattern
consisting of total deletion of 1 GH1 gene and retention of a GH1 gene
of apparently normal size. DNA sequence analysis demonstrated deletion
of 2 bases of exon 3 of 1 GH1 allele of the mother and the patient. The
father carried a 6.7-kb deletion (139250.0003), present also on the
patient's paternal allele. The patient was a 13-year-old female, the
offspring of healthy, nonconsanguineous parents. GH therapy, begun at
the age of 9 years and 2 months, resulted in catch-up growth without
development of anti-GH antibodies. Deletion of the 2 bases in exon 3 was
predicted to introduce a termination codon after the codon of amino acid
residue 131 in exon 4.

.0002
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE IA
GH1, TRP20TER

In a Turkish family with IGHD IA (262400), Cogan et al. (1993) found a
G-to-A transition converting codon 20 from tryptophan (TGG) to stop
(TAG) in the signal peptide of GH1. The mutation resulted in termination
of translation after residue 19 of the signal peptide and no production
of mature GH. Patients homozygous for the mutation had no detectable GH
and produced anti-GH antibodies in response to exogenous GH treatment.

.0003
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE IA
GH1, 6.7-KB DEL

Duquesnoy et al. (1990) described the cases of 2 sibs with IGHD IA
(262400) who were found to be compound heterozygotes for deletion and
frameshift mutations of the GH1 gene. Southern blot analysis showed them
to be heterozygous for a 6.7-kb GH deletion; DNA sequence analysis
demonstrated deletion of a cytosine at position 371, resulting in a
frameshift within the signal peptide coding region which prevented the
synthesis of any mature GH protein (139250.0004). The patients presented
with severe growth failure, and after an initial growth response to
treatment with exogenous GH, developed high titers of anti-GH
antibodies.

Vnencak-Jones et al. (1990) and Igarashi et al. (1993) also described
patients with 6.7-kb deletions deleting 1 GH1 allele.

.0004
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE IA
GH1, 1-BP DEL, 371C

See 139250.0003 and Duquesnoy et al. (1990).

.0005
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE IB
GH1, IVS4, G-C, +1

In a consanguineous Saudi Arabian family with IGHD IB (612781), Cogan et
al. (1993) detected a G-to-C transversion of the first base of the donor
splice site of intron 4 as the basis of growth hormone deficiency. The
effect of this mutation on mRNA splicing was determined by transfecting
the mutant gene into cultured mammalian cells and DNA sequencing the
resulting GH cDNAs. Mutation was found to cause the activation of a
cryptic splice site 73 bases upstream of the exon 4 donor splice site.
The altered splicing resulted in loss of amino acids 103 to 126 of exon
4 and created a frameshift that altered the amino acids encoded by exon
5.

.0006
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE IB
GH1, IVS4, G-T, +1

In another consanguineous Saudi family with IGHD IB (612781), Phillips
and Cogan (1994) found a mutation at the same nucleotide as that
described in 139250.0005. A G-to-T transversion in the first base of the
donor splice site of intron 4 had the same effect on splicing as the
G-to-C transversion. Patients homozygous for these 2 different defects
in 2 different families responded well to exogenous GH treatment and did
not develop anti-GH antibodies. Analogous splicing mutations occurred in
the beta-globin gene, causing milder forms of beta-thalassemia called
beta-plus-thalassemia.

.0007
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II
GH1, IVS3, T-C, +6

Phillips and Cogan (1994) demonstrated a T-to-C transition in the sixth
base of the donor splice site of intron 3 in a Turkish family with IGHD
II (173100). The mutant GH gene was transfected into cultured mammalian
cells, and the GH mRNA transcripts were analyzed by direct sequencing of
their corresponding cDNAs. The mutation was found to inactivate the
donor splice site of intron 3, resulting in alternative use of the donor
splice site of intron 2 in conjunction with the acceptor site of intron
3. This alternative splicing pattern deleted or skipped exon 3,
resulting in the loss of amino acids 32 to 71 from the corresponding
mature GH protein products. All affected members of the family were
heterozygous for the mutation and had low but measurable GH levels after
stimulation. All responded well to treatment with exogenous GH. The
mechanism of the dominant-negative effect is unknown; the mutant GH
allele may inactivate the normal GH allele by formation of GH dimers or
disruption of normal intracellular protein transport.

.0008
KOWARSKI SYNDROME
GH1, ARG77CYS

Takahashi et al. (1996) reported a patient with short stature in whom
the bioactivity of growth hormone was below the normal range (Kowarski
syndrome; 262650). The patient was heterozygous for a C-to-T transition
in the GH1 gene that converted codon 77 from CGC (arg) to TGC (cys)
(R77C). Isoelectric focusing of the proband's serum revealed the
presence of an abnormal growth hormone peak in addition to the normal
peak. Further studies demonstrated that the child's growth hormone not
only could not activate the growth hormone receptor but also inhibited
the action of wildtype growth hormone because of its greater affinity
for growth hormone-binding protein and growth hormone receptor.

Petkovic et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for the R77C mutation
in a Syrian boy with short stature and partial GH insensitivity. His
mother and grandfather had the same mutation and showed partial GH
insensitivity with modest short stature. Functional analyses showed no
differences in the binding affinity or bioactivity between wildtype and
GH-R77C, nor were differences found in the extent of subcellular
localization within endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi, or secretory vesicles
between wildtype and GH-R77C. There was, however, a reduced capability
of GH-R477C to induce GHR/GHBP gene transcription rate when compared to
wildtype GH. Petkovic et al. (2007) concluded that reduced GHR/GHBP
expression might be a cause of the partial GH insensitivity with delay
in growth in this family.

.0009
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II
GH1, IVS3, G-A, +1

Cogan et al. (1995) reported a G-to-A transition of the first base of
the donor splice site of intron 3 (+1G to A) in IGHD II (173100)
subjects from 3 unrelated kindreds from Sweden, North America, and South
Africa. This transition created an NlaIII site that was used to
demonstrate that all affected individuals in all 3 families were
heterozygous for the mutation. In expression studies the transition was
found to destroy the GH intron 3 donor splice site, causing skipping of
exon 3 and loss of amino acids 32 to 71 of the mature GH peptide from
the mutant GH mRNA. Microsatellite analysis indicated that the mutation
arose independently in each family. In 1 family, the finding that
neither grandparent had the mutation suggests that it arose de novo.

Hayashi et al. (1999) identified 2 mutations in Japanese patients with
IGHD II, G-to-A transitions at the first (mutA) and fifth (mutE;
139250.0014) nucleotides of intron 3. GH1 mRNAs skipping exon 3 were
transcribed from both mutant genes. The authors studied the synthesis
and secretion of GH encoded by the mutant GH1 genes and tested whether
inhibition of wildtype GH secretion by mutant products could be
demonstrated in cultured cell lines. A metabolic labeling study in COS-1
cells revealed that a mutant GH with a reduced molecular mass was
synthesized from the mutant mRNAs and retained in the cells for at least
6 hours. On the other hand, the wildtype GH was rapidly secreted into
the medium. Coexpression of mutant and wildtype GH did not result in any
inhibition of wildtype GH secretion in COS-1 or HepG2 cells. However,
coexpression of mutant GH resulted in significant inhibition of wildtype
GH secretion in somatotroph-derived MtT/S cells as well as in
adrenocorticotroph-derived AtT-20 cells, without affecting cell
viability. Hayashi et al. (1999) concluded that the dominant-negative
effect of mutant GH on the secretion of wildtype GH is at least in part
responsible for the pathogenesis of IGHD II. They also suggested that
neuroendocrine cell type-specific mechanisms, including intracellular
storage of the secretory proteins, are involved in the inhibition.

Saitoh et al. (1999) described a 1-year-old Japanese boy and his father
with IGHD II, both of whom had a G-to-A transition of the first base of
the donor splice site of intron 3 of the GH1 gene. The mutation occurred
de novo in the father. No unaffected family members had the mutation.

.0010
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II
GH1, IVS3, G-C, +1

Binder and Ranke (1995) reported a G-to-C transversion of the first base
of the donor splice site of intron 3 (+1G to C) in a sporadic case of
IGHD II (173100) in a German patient. This mutation was dominant
negative and arose de novo. They also reported RT-PCR data suggesting
overexpression of the mutant GH1 allele and speculated that the
dominant-negative effect might occur because of this imbalance in
expression of the mutant and normal alleles. However, Binder et al.
(1996) found equal quantities of transcripts in studies using an RNA
protection assay to determine the relative expression of the intron 3 +1
G-to-C mutant and normal GH1 alleles. In normal pituitary, they found 3
GH1 mRNA species with the variant lacking exon 3, which comprised
approximately 5% of the total GH1 mRNA. In contrast, lymphoblasts from
the proband, who was heterozygous for the transition at intron 1,
contained equal amounts of mRNA with or without exon 3. Furthermore,
secreted GH1, measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, was present
in equal concentrations in media from normal and mutant cells. Thus, GH1
mRNA lacking exon 3 was expressed in proportion to the dosage of the
mutant gene, and dominant-negative effects on GH1 secretion were not
seen in lymphoblasts. Their findings are compatible with a
dominant-negative mechanism involving interaction between normal and
mutant proteins in secretory vesicles of somatotropes, as suggested by
Cogan et al. (1995).

.0011
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II
GH1, IVS3, G-A, +28

Cogan et al. (1997) reported 2 intron 3 mutations in 2 unrelated
kindreds with autosomal dominant growth hormone deficiency (173100).
These mutations perturbed splicing and caused exon 3 skipping; however,
the mutations did not occur within the intron 3 branch consensus sites
or the 5-prime or 3-prime splice sites. Instead, these mutations
deranged sequences homologous to XGGG repeats that regulate alternative
mRNA splicing in other genes. Eukaryotic pre-mRNA splicing is regulated
by consensus sequences at the intron boundaries and branch site.
Sirand-Pugnet et al. (1995) demonstrated the importance of an additional
intronic sequence, an (A/U)GGG repeat in chicken beta-tropomyocin that
is a binding site for a protein required for spliceosome assembly. The
mutations found by Cogan et al. (1997) in the third intron of the GH
gene affected a putative, homologous consensus sequence and disturbed
splicing. The first mutation was a G-to-A transition base 28 of intron 3
and the second deleted 18 bp (del+28-45; 139250.0012) of intron 3 of the
human GH gene. The findings suggested that XGGG repeats may regulate
alternative splicing in the human growth hormone gene and that mutations
of these repeats cause growth hormone deficiency by perturbing
alternative splicing.

.0012
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II
GH1, IVS3, 18-BP DEL, +28-45

See 139250.0011 and Cogan et al. (1997). McCarthy and Phillips (1998)
presented evidence that this mutation and the G-to-A transition at
position +28 of IVS3 (139250.0011) disturb an intron splice enhancer
(ISE) that is critical for the proper splicing of transcripts of the GH1
gene.

.0013
KOWARSKI SYNDROME
GH1, ASP112GLY

In a child presenting with short stature, Takahashi et al. (1997)
demonstrated a biologically inactive growth hormone (262650) resulting
from a heterozygous single-base substitution (A to G) in exon 4 of the
GH1 gene. This change resulted in an asp112-to-gly amino acid
substitution. At age 3 years, the girl's height was 3.6 standard
deviations below the mean for age and sex. Bone age was delayed by 1.5
years. She had a prominent forehead and a hypoplastic nasal bridge with
normal body proportions. She showed lack of growth hormone action
despite high immunoassayable GH levels in serum and marked catch-up
growth to exogenous GH administration. Results of other studies were
compatible with the production of a bioinactive GH, which prevented
dimerization of the growth hormone receptor, a crucial step in GH signal
transduction.

.0014
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II
GH1, IVS3, G-A, +5

In a father and his 2 daughters with autosomal dominant isolated growth
hormone deficiency (173100), Kamijo et al. (1999) found a G-to-A
transition at the fifth base of intron 3 of the GH1 gene. The paternal
grandparents did not show the mutation, indicating that it was a new
mutation in the case of the father. Kamijo et al. (1999) studied 2 other
(sporadic) cases of IGHD II. It is curious and undoubtedly significant
that so many mutations have been found in the splice donor site of IVS3
in cases of isolated growth hormone deficiency type II.

See also 139250.0009 and Hayashi et al. (1999).

.0015
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE IB
GH1, IVS4, G-C, +5

Abdul-Latif et al. (2000) identified an extended, highly inbred Bedouin
kindred with IGHD that clinically fulfilled the criteria for type IB
(612781). Molecular studies demonstrated a novel mutation in the GH1
gene: a G-to-C transversion of the fifth base of intron 4, which
appeared to cause GH deficiency through the use of a cryptic splice site
and, consequently, formation of a different protein. Clinical
observations suggested that apparently healthy, non-GH-deficient
individuals in this family were of relatively short stature. Leiberman
et al. (2000) correlated height measurements of potential heterozygotes
with carrier status for the newly identified mutation. Indeed, they
found that carriers of the mutant allele in heterozygous state had
significantly shorter stature than normal homozygotes. They found that
11 of 33 (33%) of heterozygotes, but only 1 of 17 (5.9%) of normal
homozygotes had their height at 2 or more standard deviations below the
mean. Overall, 48.5% of studied heterozygotes were found to be of
appreciably short stature with height at or lower than the 5th centile,
whereas only 5.9% of the normal homozygotes fell into that range (P less
than 0.004).

.0016
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II
GH1, EX3, A-G, +5

Moseley et al. (2002) reported an A-to-G transition of the fifth base of
exon 3 (exon 3+5A-G) in affected individuals from an IGHD II (173100)
family. This mutation disrupts a (GAA)n exon splice enhancer (ESE) motif
immediately following the weak IVS2 3-prime splice site. The mutation
also destroys a MboII site used to demonstrate heterozygosity in all
affected family members. To determine the effect of ESE mutations on GH
mRNA processing, GH3 cells were transfected with expression constructs
containing the normal ESE, +5A-G, or other ESE mutations, and cDNAs
derived from the resulting GH mRNAs were sequenced. All ESE mutations
studied reduced activation of the IVS2 3-prime splice site and caused
either partial exon 3 skipping, due to activation of an exon 3 +45
cryptic 3-prime splice site, or complete exon 3 skipping. Partial or
complete exon 3 skipping led to loss of the codons for amino acids 32-46
or 32-71, respectively, of the mature GH protein. They concluded that
the exon 3 +5A-G mutation causes IGHD II because it perturbs an ESE
required for GH splicing.

.0017
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II
GH1, EX3DEL

In affected members of a Japanese family with autosomal dominant
isolated growth hormone deficiency (173100), Takahashi et al. (2002)
found a heterozygous G-to-T transversion at the first 5-prime site
nucleotide of exon 3. Analysis of the GH1 cDNA, synthesized from
lymphoblasts of the patients, revealed an abnormally short transcript as
well as a normal-sized transcript. Direct sequencing of the abnormal
transcript showed that it completely lacked exon 3. In IGHD II, several
heterozygous mutations have been reported at the donor splice site in
intron 3 of the GH1 gene or inside intron 3 (e.g., 139250.0007,
139250.0009, 139250.0010), which cause aberrant growth hormone mRNA
splicing, resulting in the deletion of exon 3. Loss of exon 3 results in
lack of amino acid residues 32 to 71 in the mature growth hormone
protein. This mutant growth hormone exerts a dominant-negative effect on
the secretion of mature normal growth hormone protein. Thus, in the
family reported by Takahashi et al. (2002), the G-to-T transversion at
the first nucleotide resulted in deletion of exon 3 and caused growth
hormone deficiency. Takahashi et al. (2002) suggested that the first
nucleotide of exon 3 is critical for the splicing of GH1 mRNA.

.0018
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II
GH1, IVS2, A-T, -2

Fofanova et al. (2003) studied mutations in 28 children from 26 families
with total IGHD living in Russia. They found 3 dominant-negative
mutations causing IGHD type II (173100): 1) an A-to-T transversion of
the second base of the 3-prime acceptor splice site of intron 2 (IVS2
-2A-T); 2) a T-to-C transition of the second base of the 5-prime donor
splice site of intron 3 (IVS3 +2T-C; 139250.0019); 3) and a G-to-A
transition of the first base of the 5-prime donor splice site of intron
3 (IVS3 +1G-A; 139250.0009). The IVS -2A-T mutation was the first
identified mutation in intron 2 of GH1. The authors concluded that the
5-prime donor splice site of intron 3 of GH1 is a mutation hotspot, and
the IVS3 +1G-A mutation can be considered to be a common molecular
defect in IGHD II in Russian patients.

.0019
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II
GH1, IVS3, T-C, +2

See 139250.0018 and Fofanova et al. (2003).

.0020
REMOVED FROM DATABASE
.0021
KOWARSKI SYNDROME
GH1, CYS53SER

In a Serbian patient with short stature and bioinactive growth hormone
(Kowarski syndrome; 262650) Besson et al. (2005) detected a homozygous
cys53-to-ser (C53S) mutation in the GH1 gene. The mutation arose from a
G-to-C transversion at nucleotide position 705 (G705C). The
phenotypically normal first-cousin parents were heterozygous for the
mutation. This mutation was predicted to lead to the absence of the
disulfide bridge cys53 to cys165. In GH receptor (GHR; 600946) binding
and Jak2 (147796)/Stat5 (601511) activation experiments, Besson et al.
(2005) observed that at physiologic concentrations (3-50 ng/ml), both
GHR binding and Jak2/Stat5 signaling pathway activation were
significantly reduced in the mutant GH-C53S, compared with wildtype.
Higher concentrations (400 ng/ml) were required for this mutant to
elicit responses similar to wildtype GH. Besson et al. (2005) concluded
that the absence of the disulfide bridge cys53 to cys165 affects the
binding affinity of GH for the GHR and subsequently the potency of GH to
activate the Jak2/Stat5 signaling pathway.

.0022
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II
GH1, IVS3, 22-BP DEL

In a 2-year-old child and her mother with severe growth failure at
diagnosis (IGHD II; 173100) (-5.8 and -6.9 SD score, respectively),
Vivenza et al. (2006) identified a heterozygous 22-bp deletion in IVS3
of the GH1 gene, designated IVS3del+56-77, removing the putative branch
point sequence (BPS). Both patients showed 2 principal mRNA species
approximately in equal amount, i.e., a full-length species encoded by
the normal allele, and an aberrant splicing product with the skipping of
exon 3 encoded by the mutant allele. Their clinical phenotype correlated
with that observed in other IGHD II patients harboring splice site
mutations.

.0023
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II
GH1, ARG183HIS

In a large kindred with dominant growth hormone deficiency (IGHD II;
173100) Gertner et al. (1998) detected a heterozygous G-to-A transition
at nucleotide 6664 in exon 5 of the GH1 gene, resulting in an
arg183-to-his substitution (R183H).

Hess et al. (2007) studied the phenotype-genotype correlation of
subjects with IGHD II caused by a R183H mutation in the GH1 gene in 34
affected members of 2 large families. Twenty-four of the 52 members from
family 1 and 10 of the 14 from family 2 carried the same mutation in a
heterozygous state. The affected subjects in family 1 were significantly
shorter (-2.6 vs -0.1 standard deviation score (SDS), p less than
0.0001) and had significantly lower IGF1 (147440) serum levels (-1.9 vs
-0.5 SDS, p less than 0.0001), compared with family members with a
normal genotype. The affected adults exhibited great variability in
their stature, ranging from -4.5 to -1.0 SD (mean -2.8 SDS), with 5
members being of normal height (greater than -2 SDS). Twelve children
were diagnosed with IGHD. Two affected children had normal peak GH
levels, although 1 of these subsequently demonstrated GH insufficiency.
The affected children from both families exhibited large variability in
their height, growth velocity, delay in bone age, age at diagnosis, peak
GH response, and IGF1 levels. Hess et al. (2007) concluded that these
detailed phenotypic analyses show the variable expressivity of patients
bearing the R183H mutation, reflecting the spectrum of GH deficiency in
affected patients, even within families, and the presence of additional
genes modifying height determination.

.0024
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II
GH1, EX3, A-C, +2

In 2 independent pedigrees with IGHD II (173100), Petkovic et al. (2007)
identified a heterozygous splice enhancer mutation in exon 3, exon
3+2A-C, that encodes a glutamic acid-to-alanine change at position 32 in
the GH protein (E32A) and leads to missplicing at the mRNA level,
producing large amounts of the 17.5-kD GH isoform. Mouse pituitary cells
coexpressing both wildtype and mutant GH-E32A protein presented a
significant reduction in cell proliferation as well as GH production
after forskolin stimulation when compared with the cells expressing
wildtype GH. These results were complemented with confocal microscopy
analysis, which revealed a significant reduction of the GH-E32A-derived
isoform colocalized with secretory granules, compared with wildtype GH.
Petkovic et al. (2007) concluded that the GH-E32A mutation, which
occurred in the exon splice enhancer (ESE1), weakens recognition of exon
3 directly, and therefore increases production of the exon 3-skipped
17.5-kD GH isoform in relation to the 22-kD, wildtype GH isoform.

.0025
ISOLATED GROWTH HORMONE DEFICIENCY, TYPE II
GH1, EX3, G-A, +1

In affected members of a 4-generation family segregating autosomal
dominant growth hormone deficiency (173100), Shariat et al. (2008)
identified heterozygosity for a +1G-A transition in exon 3 of the GH
gene. The change was predicted to encode a glu32-to-lys (E32K)
substitution; however, transfection studies showed that when the mutant
was expressed, there was an approximately 6-fold increase in skipping of
exon 3 compared to wildtype (39% and 6%, respectively). Functional
analysis revealed that the variant weakens the 3-prime splice site and
simultaneously disrupts a splicing enhancer located within the first 7
bases of exon 3.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Chakravarti et al. (1984); Dayhoff  (1972); Fiddes et al. (1979);
Martial et al. (1979); Paladini et al. (1979)
REFERENCE 1. Abdul-Latif, H.; Leiberman, E.; Brown, M. R.; Carmi, R.; Parks,
J. S.: Growth hormone deficiency type IB caused by cryptic splicing
of the GH-1 gene. J. Pediat. Endocr. Metab. 13: 21-28, 2000.

2. Akinci, A.; Kanaka, C.; Eble, A.; Akar, N.; Vidinlisan, S.; Mullis,
P. E.: Isolated growth hormone (GH) deficiency type IA associated
with a 45-kilobase gene deletion within the human GH gene cluster. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 75: 437-441, 1992.

3. Baxter, J. D.: Personal Communication. San Francisco, Calif.
4/1981.

4. Baxter, J. D.; Seeburg, P. H.; Shine, J.; Martial, J. A.; Goodman,
H. M.: The gene for growth hormone (GH): DNA sequence, expression,
regulation. (Abstract) Clin. Res. 25: 461A, 1977.

5. Behncken, S. N.; Rowlinson, S. W.; Rowland, J. E.; Conway-Campbell,
B. L.; Monks, T. A.; Waters, M. J.: Aspartate 171 is the major primate-specific
determinant of human growth hormone. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 27077-27083,
1997.

6. Besson, A.; Salemi, S.; Deladoey, J.; Vuissoz, J.-M.; Eble, A.;
Bidlingmaier, M.; Burgi, S.; Honegger, U.; Fluck, C.; Mullis, P. E.
: Short stature caused by a biologically inactive mutant growth hormone
(GH-C53S). J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 2493-2499, 2005.

7. Binder, G.; Brown, M.; Parks, J. S.: Mechanisms responsible for
dominant expression of human growth hormone gene mutations. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 81: 4047-4050, 1996.

8. Binder, G.; Ranke, M. B.: Screening for growth hormone (GH) gene
splice-site mutations in sporadic cases with severe isolated GH deficiency
using ectopic transcript analysis. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 80: 1247-1252,
1995.

9. Boguszewski, C. L.; Jansson, C.; Boguszewski, M. C. S.; Rosberg,
S.; Carlsson, B.; Albertsson-Wikland, K.; Carlsson, L. M. S.: Increased
proportion of circulating non-22-kilodalton growth hormone isoforms
in short children: a possible mechanism for growth failure. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 82: 2944-2949, 1997.

10. Braga, S.; Phillips, J. A., III; Joss, E.; Schwarz, H.; Zuppinger,
K.: Familial growth hormone deficiency resulting from a 7.6 kb deletion
within the growth hormone gene cluster. Am. J. Med. Genet. 25: 443-452,
1986.

11. Chakravarti, A.; Phillips, J. A., III; Mellits, K. H.; Buetow,
K. H.; Seeburg, P. H.: Patterns of polymorphism and linkage disequilibrium
suggest independent origins of the human growth hormone gene cluster. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 6085-6089, 1984.

12. Chen, E. Y.; Liao, Y.-C.; Smith, D. H.; Barrera-Saldana, H. A.;
Gelinas, R. E.; Seeburg, P. H.: The human growth hormone locus: nucleotide
sequence, biology, and evolution. Genomics 4: 479-497, 1989.

13. Cogan, J. D.; Phillips, J. A., III; Sakati, N.; Frisch, H.; Schober,
E.; Milner, R. D. G.: Heterogeneous growth hormone (GH) gene mutations
in familial GH deficiency. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 76: 1224-1228,
1993.

14. Cogan, J. D.; Prince, M. A.; Lekhakula, S.; Bundey, S.; Futrakul,
A.; McCarthy, E. M. S.; Phillips, J. A., III: A novel mechanism of
aberrant pre-mRNA splicing in humans. Hum. Molec. Genet. 6: 909-912,
1997.

15. Cogan, J. D.; Ramel, B.; Lehto, M.; Phillips, J., III; Prince,
M.; Blizzard, R. M.; de Ravel, T. J. L.; Brammert, M.; Groop, L.:
A recurring dominant negative mutation causes autosomal dominant growth
hormone deficiency: a clinical research center study. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 80: 3591-3595, 1995.

16. Cooke, N. E.; Szpirer, C.; Levan, G.: The related genes encoding
growth hormone and prolactin have been dispersed to chromosomes 10
and 17 in the rat. Endocrinology 119: 2451-2454, 1986.

17. Dayhoff, M. O.: Atlas of Protein Sequence and Structure. Hormones,
active peptides and toxins.  Washington: Biomedical Research Foundation
(pub.)  5: 1972. P. D202.

18. De Groof, F.; Joosten, K. F. M.; Janssen, J. A. M. J. L.; De Kleijn,
E. D.; Hazelzet, J. A.; Hop, W. C. J.; Uitterlinden, P.; Van Doorn,
J.; Hokken-Koelega, A. C. S.: Acute stress response in children with
meningococcal sepsis: important differences in the growth hormone/insulin-like
growth factor I axis between nonsurvivors and survivors. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 87: 3118-3124, 2002.

19. Dennison, E. M.; Syddall, H. E.; Rodriguez, S.; Voropanov, A.;
Day, I. N. M.; Cooper, C.; Southampton Genetic Epidemiology Research
Group: Polymorphism in the growth hormone gene, weight in infancy,
and adult bone mass. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 4898-4903, 2004.

20. Duquesnoy, P.; Amselem, S.; Gourmelen, M.; LeBouc, Y.; Goossens,
M.: A frameshift mutation causing isolated growth hormone deficiency
type 1A. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 47: A110, 1990.

21. Fiddes, J. C.; Seeburg, P. H.; DeNoto, F. M.; Hallewell, R. A.;
Baxter, J. D.; Goodman, H. M.: Structure of genes for human growth
hormone and chorionic somatomammotropin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 76:
4294-4298, 1979.

22. Fofanova, O. V.; Evgrafov, O. V.; Polyakov, A. V.; Poltaraus,
A. B.; Peterkova, V. A.; Dedov, I. I.: A novel IVS2 -2A-T splicing
mutation in the GH-1 gene in familial isolated growth hormone deficiency
type II in the spectrum of other splicing mutations in the Russian
population. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 820-826, 2003.

23. Ge, G.; Fernandez, C. A.; Moses, M. A.; Greenspan, D. S.: Bone
morphogenetic protein 1 processes prolactin to a 17-kDa antiangiogenic
factor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 10010-10015, 2007.

24. Geary, M. P. P.; Pringle, P. J.; Rodeck, C. H.; Kingdom, J. C.
P.; Hindmarsh, P. C.: Sexual dimorphism in the growth hormone and
insulin-like growth factor axis at birth. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
3708-3714, 2003.

25. George, D. L.; Phillips, J. A., III; Francke, U.; Seeburg, P.
H.: The genes for growth hormone and chorionic somatomammotropin
are on the long arm of human chromosome 17 in region q21-to-qter. Hum.
Genet. 57: 138-141, 1981.

26. Gertner, J. M.; Wajnrajch, M. P.; Leibel, R. L.: Genetic defects
in the control of growth hormone secretion. Horm. Res. 49: 9-14,
1998.

27. Giordano, M.; Godi, M.; Mellone, S.; Petri, A.; Vivenza, D.; Tiradani,
L.; Carlomagno, Y.; Ferrante, D.; Arrigo, T.; Corneli, G.; Bellone,
S.; Giacopelli, F.; Santoro, C.; Bona, G.; Momigliano-Richiardi, P.
: A functional common polymorphism in the vitamin D-responsive element
of the GH1 promoter contributes to isolated growth hormone deficiency. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 93: 1005-1012, 2008.

28. Goossens, M.; Brauner, R.; Czernichow, P.; Duquesnoy, P.; Rappaport,
R.: Isolated growth hormone (GH) deficiency type 1A associated with
a double deletion in the human GH gene cluster. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 62: 712-716, 1986.

29. Greenhalgh, C. J.; Rico-Bautista, E.; Lorentzon, M.; Thaus, A.
L.; Morgan, P. O.; Willson, T. A.; Zervoudakis, P.; Metcalf, D.; Street,
I.; Nicola, N. A.; Nash, A. D.; Fabri, L. J.; Norstedt, G.; Ohlsson,
C.; Flores-Morales, A.; Alexander, W. S.; Hilton, D. J.: SOCS2 negatively
regulates growth hormone action in vitro and in vivo. J. Clin. Invest. 115:
397-406, 2005.

30. Grumbach, M. M.: Personal Communication. San Francisco, Calif.
1981.

31. Harper, M. E.; Barrera-Saldana, H. A.; Saunders, G. F.: Chromosomal
localization of the human placental lactogen-growth hormone gene cluster
to 17q22-24. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 34: 227-234, 1982.

32. Hasegawa, Y.; Fujii, K.; Yamada, M.; Igarashi, Y.; Tachibana,
K.; Tanaka, T.; Onigata, K.; Nishi, Y.; Kato, S.; Hasegawa, T.: Identification
of novel human GH-1 gene polymorphisms that are associated with growth
hormone secretion and height. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 1290-1295,
2000.

33. Hayashi, Y.; Yamamoto, M.; Ohmori, S.; Kamijo, T.; Ogawa, M.;
Seo, H.: Inhibition of growth hormone (GH) secretion by a mutant
GH-I gene product in neuroendocrine cells containing secretory granules:
an implication for isolated GH deficiency inherited in an autosomal
dominant manner. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 2134-2139, 1999.

34. He, Y. A.; Chen, S. S.; Wang, Y. X.; Lin, X. Y.; Wang, D. F.:
A Chinese familial growth hormone deficiency with a deletion of 7.1
kb of DNA. J. Med. Genet. 27: 151-154, 1990.

35. Hess, O.; Hujeirat, Y.; Wajnrajch, M. P.; Allon-Shalev, S.; Zadik,
Z.; Lavi, I.; Tenenbaum-Rakover, Y.: Variable phenotypes in familial
isolated growth hormone deficiency caused by a G6664A mutation in
the GH-1 gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 4387-4393, 2007.

36. Hindmarsh, P. C.; Dennison, E.; Pincus, S. M.; Cooper, C.; Fall,
C. H. D.; Matthews, D. R.; Pringle, P. J.; Brook, C. G. D.: A sexually
dimorphic pattern of growth hormone secretion in the elderly. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 2679-2685, 1999.

37. Ho, Y.; Elefant, F.; Cooke, N.; Liebhaber, S.: A defined locus
control region determinant links chromatin domain acetylation with
long-range gene activation. Molec. Cell 9: 291-302, 2002.

38. Ho, Y.; Elefant, F.; Liebhaber, S. A.; Cooke, N. E.: Locus control
region transcription plays an active role in long-range gene activation. Molec.
Cell 23: 365-375, 2006. Note: Erratum: Molec. Cell 23: 619 only,
2006.

39. Horan, M.; Millar, D. S.; Hedderich, J.; Lewis, G.; Newsway, V.;
Mo, N.; Fryklund, L.; Procter, A. M.; Krawczak, M.; Cooper, D. N.
: Human growth hormone 1 (GH1) gene expression: complex haplotype-dependent
influence of polymorphic variation in the proximal promoter and locus
control region. Hum. Mutat. 21: 408-423, 2003.

40. Horan, M.; Newsway, V.; Yasmin, (NI); Lewis, M. D.; Easter, T.
E.; Rees, D. A.; Mahto, A.; Millar, D. S.; Procter, A. M.; Scanlon,
M. F.; Wilkinson, I. B.; Hall, I. P.; Wheatley, A.; Blakey, J.; Bath,
P. M. W.; Cockcroft, J. R.; Krawczak, M.; Cooper, D. N.: Genetic
variation at the growth hormone (GH1) and growth hormone receptor
(GHR) loci as a risk factor for hypertension and stroke. Hum. Genet. 119:
527-540, 2006.

41. Igarashi, Y.; Ogawa, M.; Kamijo, T.; Iwatani, N.; Nishi, Y.; Kohno,
H.; Masumura, T.; Koga, J.: A new mutation causing inherited growth
hormone deficiency: a compound heterozygote of a 6.7 kb deletion and
a two base deletion in the third exon of the GH-1 gene. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 2: 1073-1074, 1993.

42. Jones, B. K.; Monks, B. R.; Liebhaber, S. A.; Cooke, N. E.: The
human growth hormone gene is regulated by a multicomponent locus control
region. Molec. Cell. Biol. 15: 7010-7021, 1995.

43. Kamijo, T.; Hayashi, Y.; Shimatsu, A.; Kinoshita, E.; Yoshimoto,
M.; Ogawa, M.; Seo, H.: Mutations in intron 3 of GH-1 gene associated
with isolated GH deficiency type II in three Japanese families. Clin.
Endocr. 51: 355-360, 1999.

44. Lebo, R. V.: Personal Communication. San Francisco, Calif.
7/31/1980.

45. Leiberman, E.; Pesler, D.; Parvari, R.; Elbedour, K.; Abdul-Latif,
H.; Brown, M. R.; Parks, J. S.; Carmi, R.: Short stature in carriers
of recessive mutation causing familial isolated growth hormone deficiency. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 90: 188-192, 2000.

46. Lewis, M. D.; Horan, M.; Millar, D. S.; Newsway, V.; Easter, T.
E.; Fryklund, L.; Gregory, J. W.; Norin, M.; Del Valle, C.-J.; Lopez-Siguero,
J. P.; Canete, R.; Lopez-Canti, L. F.; Diaz-Torrado, N.; Espino, R.;
Ulied, A.; Scanlon, M. F.; Procter, A. M.; Cooper, D. N.: A novel
dysfunctional growth hormone variant (ile179met) exhibits a decreased
ability to activate the extracellular signal-regulated kinase pathway. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 1068-1075, 2004.

47. Martial, J. A.; Hallewell, R. A.; Baxter, J. D.; Goodman, H. M.
: Human growth hormone: complementary DNA cloning and expression in
bacteria. Science 205: 602-607, 1979.

48. Masuda, N.; Watahiki, M.; Tanaka, M.; Yamakawa, M.; Shimizu, K.;
Nagai, J.; Nakashima, K.: Molecular cloning of cDNA encoding 20 kDa
variant human growth hormone and the alternative splicing mechanism. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 949: 125-131, 1988.

49. McCarthy, E. M. S.; Phillips, J. A., III: Characterization of
an intron splice enhancer that regulates alternative splicing of human
GH pre-mRNA. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 1491-1496, 1998.

50. Mendlewicz, J.; Linkowski, P.; Kerkhofs, M.; Leproult, R.; Copinschi,
G.; Van Cauter, E.: Genetic control of 24-hour growth hormone secretion
in man: a twin study. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 856-862, 1999.

51. Millar, D. S.; Lewis, M. D.; Horan, M.; Newsway, V.; Easter, T.
E.; Gregory, J. W.; Fryklund, L.; Norin, M.; Crowne, E. C.; Davies,
S. J.; Edwards, P.; Kirk, J.; Waldron, K.; Smith, P. J.; Phillips,
J. A., III; Scanlon, M. F.; Krawczak, M.; Cooper, D. N.; Procter,
A. M.: Novel mutations of the growth hormone 1 (GH1) gene disclosed
by modulation of the clinical selection criteria for individuals with
short stature. Hum. Mutat. 21: 424-440, 2003.

52. Morgan, J. R.; Barrandon, Y.; Green, H.; Mulligan, R. C.: Expression
of an exogenous growth hormone gene by transplantable human epidermal
cells. Science 237: 1476-1479, 1987.

53. Moseley, C. T.; Mullis, P. E.; Prince, M. A.; Phillips, J. A.,
III: An exon splice enhancer mutation causes autosomal dominant GH
deficiency. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 847-852, 2002.

54. Mullis, P. E.; Akinci, A.; Kanaka, C.; Eble, A.; Brook, C. G.
D.: Prevalence of human growth hormone-1 gene deletions among patients
with isolated growth hormone deficiency from different populations. Pediat.
Res. 31: 532-534, 1992.

55. Mullis, P. E.; Robinson, I. C. A. F.; Salemi, S.; Eble, A.; Besson,
A.; Vuissoz, J.-M.; Deladoey, J.; Simon, D.; Czernichow, P.; Binder,
G.: Isolated autosomal dominant growth hormone deficiency: an evolving
pituitary deficit? A multicenter follow-up study. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 90: 2089-2096, 2005.

56. Niall, H. D.; Hogan, M. L.; Sauer, R.; Rosenblum, I. Y.; Greenwood,
F. C.: Sequence of pituitary and placental lactogenic and growth
hormones: evolution from a primordial peptide by gene reduplication. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 68: 866-869, 1971.

57. Owerbach, D.; Rutter, W. J.; Martial, J. A.; Baxter, J. D.; Shows,
T. B.: Genes for growth hormone, chorionic somatomammotropin and
growth hormone-like genes on chromosome 17 in humans. Science 209:
289-292, 1980.

58. Paladini, A. C.; Pena, C.; Retegui, L. A.: The intriguing nature
of the multiple actions of growth hormone. Trends Biochem. Sci. 4:
256-260, 1979.

59. Petkovic, V.; Besson, A.; Thevis, M.; Lochmatter, D.; Eble, A.;
Fluck, C. E.; Mullis, P. E.: Evaluation of the biological activity
of a growth hormone (GH) mutant (R77C) and its impact on GH responsiveness
and stature. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 2893-2901, 2007.

60. Petkovic, V.; Lochmatter, D.; Turton, J.; Clayton, P. E.; Trainer,
P. J.; Dattani, M. T.; Eble, A.; Robinson, I. C.; Fluck, C. E.; Mullis,
P. E.: Exon splice enhancer mutation (GH-E32A) causes autosomal dominant
growth hormone deficiency. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 4427-4435,
2007.

61. Phillips, J. A., III: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.
1/17/1983.

62. Phillips, J. A., III: Inherited defects in growth hormone synthesis
and action.In: Scriver, C. R.; Beaudet, A. L.; Sly, W. S.; Valle,
D. (eds.): The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease.
Vol. II.  New York: McGraw-Hill  (7th ed.): 1995. Pp. 3023-3044.

63. Phillips, J. A., III; Cogan, J. D.: Genetic basis of endocrine
disease 6: molecular basis of familial human growth hormone deficiency. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 78: 11-16, 1994.

64. Phillips, J. A., III; Hjelle, B. L.; Seeburg, P. H.; Plotnick,
L. P.; Migeon, C. J.; Zachmann, M.: Heterogeneity in the molecular
basis of familial growth hormone deficiency (IGHD). (Abstract) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 33: 52A, 1981.

65. Rimoin, D. L.; Phillips, J. A., III: Genetic disorders of the
pituitary gland.In: Rimoin, D. L.; Connor, J. M.; Pyeritz, R. E. (eds.)
: Principles and Practice of Medical Genetics. Vol. I.  New York:
Churchill Livingstone  (3rd ed.): 1997. Pp. 1331-1364.

66. Ruddle, F. H.: Personal Communication. New Haven, Conn.  2/7/1982.

67. Ryther, R. C. C.; McGuinness, L. M.; Phillips, J. A., III; Moseley,
C. T.; Magoulas, C. B.; Robinson, I. C. A. F.; Patton, J. G.: Disruption
of exon definition produces a dominant-negative growth hormone isoform
that causes somatotroph death and IGHD II. Hum. Genet. 113: 140-148,
2003.

68. Saitoh, H.; Fukushima, T.; Kamoda, T.; Tanae, A.; Kamijo, T.;
Yamamoto, M.; Ogawa, M.; Hayashi, Y.; Ohmori, S.; Seo, H.: A Japanese
family with autosomal dominant growth hormone deficiency. Europ.
J. Pediat. 158: 624-627, 1999.

69. Shariat, N.; Holladay, C. D.; Cleary, R. K.; Phillips, J. A.,
III; Patton, J. G.: Isolated growth hormone deficiency type II caused
by a point mutation that alters both splice site strength and splicing
enhancer function. Clin. Genet. 74: 539-545, 2008.

70. Sirand-Pugnet, P.; Durosay, P.; Brody, E.; Marie, J.: An intronic
(A/U)GGG repeat enhances the splicing of an alternative intron of
the chicken beta-tropomyosin pre-mRNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 23: 3501-3507,
1995.

71. Smith, L. E. H.; Kopchick, J. J.; Chen, W.; Knapp, J.; Kinose,
F.; Daley, D.; Foley, E.; Smith, R. G.; Schaeffer, J. M.: Essential
role of growth hormone in ischemia-induced retinal neovascularization. Science 276:
1706-1709, 1997.

72. Sundstrom, M.; Lundqvist, T.; Rodin, J.; Giebel, L. B.; Milligan,
D.; Norstedt, G.: Crystal structure of an antagonist mutant of human
growth hormone, G120R, in complex with its receptor at 2.9 angstrom
resolution. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 32197-32203, 1996.

73. Takahashi, I.; Takahashi, T.; Komatsu, M.; Sato, T.; Takada, G.
: An exonic mutation of the GH-1 gene causing familial isolated growth
hormone deficiency type II. Clin. Genet. 61: 222-225, 2002.

74. Takahashi, Y.; Kaji, H.; Okimura, Y.; Goji, K.; Abe, H.; Chihara,
K.: Short stature caused by a mutant growth hormone. New Eng. J.
Med. 334: 432-436, 1996. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 334: 1207
only, 1996.

75. Takahashi, Y.; Shirono, H.; Arisaka, O.; Takahashi, K.; Yagi,
T.; Koga, J.; Kaji, H.; Okimura, Y.; Abe, H.; Tanaka, T.; Chihara,
K.: Biologically inactive growth hormone caused by an amino acid
substitution. J. Clin. Invest. 100: 1159-1165, 1997.

76. Vivenza, D.; Guazzarotti, L.; Godi, M.; Frasca, D.; di Natale,
B.; Momigliano-Richiardi, P.; Bona, G.; Giordano, M.: A novel deletion
in the GH1 gene including the IVS3 branch site responsible for autosomal
dominant isolated growth hormone deficiency. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91:
980-986, 2006.

77. Vnencak-Jones, C. L.; Phillips, J. A., III; Chen, E. Y.; Seeburg,
P. H.: Molecular basis of human growth hormone gene deletions. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 5615-5619, 1988.

78. Vnencak-Jones, C. L.; Phillips, J. A., III; Wang, D.-F.: Use
of polymerase chain reaction in detection of growth hormone gene deletions. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 70: 1550-1553, 1990.

79. Wolfrum, C.; Shih, D. Q.; Kuwajima, S.; Norris, A. W.; Kahn, C.
R.; Stoffel, M.: Role of Foxa-2 in adipocyte metabolism and differentiation. J.
Clin. Invest. 112: 345-356, 2003.

80. Xu, W.; Gorman, P. A.; Rider, S. H.; Hedge, P. J.; Moore, G.;
Prichard, C.; Sheer, D.; Solomon, E.: Construction of a genetic map
of human chromosome 17 by use of chromosome-mediated gene transfer. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 8563-8567, 1988.

CONTRIBUTORS Anne M. Stumpf - reorganized: 6/1/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/23/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/30/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 9/17/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/6/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/24/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/14/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/6/2007
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/8/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/1/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/21/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/24/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/21/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/18/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/25/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/27/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/14/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/12/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/29/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/18/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/18/2004
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/15/2004
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/20/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/9/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 6/13/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/5/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/8/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/10/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/23/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/12/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/7/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/29/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 6/11/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 2/20/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/9/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/10/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/13/2000
Armand Bottani - updated: 3/14/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/6/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/3/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/24/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 2/23/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/7/1999
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/9/1999
John A. Phillips, III - reorganized: 11/9/1999
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/7/1999
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/1/1999
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 2/9/1999
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/7/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/17/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/12/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/17/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 12/25/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/30/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/23/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/12/1997
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/29/1997
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/29/1997
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/8/1997
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/4/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 03/26/2013
joanna: 8/25/2010
terry: 4/30/2010
carol: 12/24/2009
alopez: 6/5/2009
alopez: 6/2/2009
alopez: 6/1/2009
alopez: 5/8/2009
alopez: 4/23/2009
carol: 3/31/2009
terry: 3/30/2009
alopez: 9/17/2008
carol: 5/6/2008
mgross: 8/29/2007
terry: 8/24/2007
alopez: 5/14/2007
carol: 5/14/2007
carol: 4/6/2007
carol: 10/31/2006
terry: 10/18/2006
mgross: 9/8/2006
mgross: 9/7/2006
terry: 9/1/2006
alopez: 8/21/2006
alopez: 7/24/2006
alopez: 7/21/2006
carol: 7/21/2006
ckniffin: 7/18/2006
carol: 5/23/2006
ckniffin: 5/12/2006
alopez: 4/25/2006
alopez: 1/6/2006
alopez: 10/27/2005
terry: 8/3/2005
alopez: 7/14/2005
tkritzer: 4/12/2005
alopez: 3/29/2005
wwang: 2/22/2005
terry: 2/18/2005
alopez: 10/18/2004
alopez: 10/15/2004
joanna: 3/17/2004
alopez: 8/20/2003
terry: 7/28/2003
carol: 7/18/2003
cwells: 7/17/2003
terry: 7/9/2003
alopez: 6/13/2003
tkritzer: 5/6/2003
tkritzer: 5/5/2003
tkritzer: 4/22/2003
tkritzer: 4/21/2003
terry: 4/8/2003
alopez: 1/10/2003
mgross: 9/23/2002
tkritzer: 8/15/2002
tkritzer: 8/14/2002
terry: 8/12/2002
cwells: 8/7/2002
alopez: 7/31/2002
tkritzer: 7/29/2002
alopez: 6/11/2002
alopez: 2/20/2002
alopez: 8/9/2001
mgross: 5/11/2001
terry: 5/10/2001
alopez: 3/26/2001
alopez: 3/23/2001
terry: 11/13/2000
carol: 10/16/2000
mgross: 10/12/2000
terry: 10/2/2000
carol: 3/14/2000
terry: 3/14/2000
mgross: 3/6/2000
mgross: 3/3/2000
terry: 2/24/2000
mgross: 2/23/2000
carol: 2/22/2000
mcapotos: 2/21/2000
yemi: 2/18/2000
carol: 12/7/1999
terry: 12/7/1999
mgross: 11/24/1999
carol: 11/9/1999
mgross: 10/7/1999
mgross: 10/1/1999
alopez: 2/10/1999
mgross: 2/9/1999
alopez: 1/7/1999
carol: 9/21/1998
terry: 9/17/1998
dkim: 9/11/1998
terry: 5/29/1998
alopez: 5/12/1998
psherman: 3/17/1998
alopez: 1/23/1998
mark: 1/5/1998
terry: 12/3/1997
alopez: 10/30/1997
alopez: 10/28/1997
dholmes: 10/1/1997
terry: 9/30/1997
dholmes: 9/29/1997
jenny: 9/9/1997
terry: 7/10/1997
terry: 7/7/1997
joanna: 7/7/1997
terry: 7/7/1997
mark: 7/3/1997
jenny: 6/23/1997
terry: 6/19/1997
mark: 6/12/1997
terry: 6/10/1997
jenny: 6/5/1997
jenny: 5/29/1997
jenny: 5/14/1997
jenny: 4/29/1997
jenny: 4/8/1997
jenny: 4/4/1997
mark: 1/3/1997
carol: 10/7/1996
joanna: 4/19/1996
mark: 3/3/1996
terry: 2/28/1996
carol: 10/10/1994
davew: 8/5/1994
pfoster: 4/22/1994
warfield: 4/21/1994
carol: 8/16/1993
carol: 10/8/1992

602917	TITLE *602917 REGULATOR OF CALCINEURIN 1; RCAN1
;;DOWN SYNDROME CRITICAL REGION GENE 1; DSCR1;;
MYOCYTE-ENRICHED CALCINEURIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; MCIP1;;
MODULATORY CALINEURIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1;;
CALCIPRESSIN 1; CSP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The study of patients with partial trisomy 21 has defined an area of
approximately 3 Mb at chromosomal region 21q22 as the minimal candidate
region for the Down syndrome phenotype (190685). Using a novel exon
cloning strategy, Fuentes et al. (1995) identified several putative
exons from region 21q22.1-q22.2. One exon was used to isolate fetal
brain cDNAs corresponding to the RCAN1 gene, which the authors
designated DSCR1. The predicted 171-amino acid protein contains 2
proline-rich regions, a putative DNA-binding domain, and an acidic
region. Northern blot analysis revealed that the 2.2-kb DSCR1 transcript
is expressed at the highest levels in fetal brain and adult heart and at
lower levels in various other tissues. An additional 2-kb mRNA was
detected in fetal and adult liver. Increased expression in the brains of
young rats compared with adults suggested to Fuentes et al. (1995) that
DSCR1 plays a role during central nervous system development.

By screening a human liver cDNA library and by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE
of whole human fetus, fetal brain, adult cerebellum, and adult brain,
Fuentes et al. (1997) identified splice variants of DSCR1 containing 4
alternative first exons. Northern blot analysis revealed expression of
transcripts containing exon 1 or exon 4 in a wide range of tissues, and
both transcripts were about 2.2 kb. Transcripts containing exon 1 were
expressed at highest levels in fetal brain and adult heart, brain, and
skeletal muscle. Transcripts containing exon 4 were expressed at highest
levels in fetal kidney and adult heart, skeletal muscle, and placenta.
RT-PCR detected transcripts containing exon 2 in fetal brain and liver,
but no transcripts containing exon 3 were observed.

GENE STRUCTURE

Fuentes et al. (1997) determined that RCAN1 spans nearly 45 kb and
contains 7 exons, including 4 alternative first exons. They identified
potential promoter regions upstream of exons 1, 2, and 4. The promoter
regions associated with exons 1 and 2 contain CpG islands with numerous
SP1 (189906)-binding sites, but no CAAT or TATA box elements. The
promoter region associated with exon 4 contains a possible TATA box, but
no SP1-binding sites.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids and YACs, Fuentes et al. (1995)
confirmed that the RCAN1 gene is located at chromosome 21q22.1-q22.2.
Strippoli et al. (2000) mapped the mouse Rcan1 gene to chromosome 16.

GENE FUNCTION

Fuentes et al. (2000) demonstrated that DSCR1 protein is overexpressed
in the brain of Down syndrome fetuses, and interacts physically and
functionally with calcineurin A (114105), the catalytic subunit of the
Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein phosphatase PP2B. The DSCR1-binding
region in calcineurin A is located in the linker region between the
calcineurin A catalytic domain and the calcineurin B-binding domain,
outside of other functional domains previously defined in calcineurin A.
DSCR1 belongs to a family of evolutionarily conserved proteins with 3
members in humans: DSCR1, RCAN2 (604876), and RCAN3 (605860).
Overexpression of DSCR1 and RCAN2 inhibited calcineurin-dependent gene
transcription through the inhibition of NFAT (see 600489) translocation
to the nucleus. The authors hypothesized that members of this family of
human proteins are endogenous regulators of calcineurin-mediated
signaling pathways and may be involved in many physiologic processes.

In mice and humans, MCIP1 (RCAN1) is expressed primarily in cardiac and
skeletal muscles (Rothermel et al., 2000), and transcription of the
MCIP1 gene, but not of the MCIP2 (RCAN2) gene, is potently stimulated by
activated calcineurin, thereby establishing a negative feedback
mechanism that presumably serves to protect cells from otherwise
deleterious consequences of unrestrained calcineurin activity (Yang et
al., 2000). Yang et al. (2000) identified an alternative
calcineurin-responsive promoter 5-prime of exon 4 in the MCIP1 gene.

Kingsbury and Cunningham (2000) referred to the proteins encoded by the
MCIP genes as calcipressins. Functional analysis showed that when
expressed in yeast, DSCR1 and RCAN2 inhibited calcineurin function. The
authors proposed that increased expression of DSCR1 in trisomy-21
individuals may contribute to the neurologic, cardiac, or immunologic
defects of Down syndrome.

Ermak et al. (2001) showed significant expression of DSCR1 in brain,
spinal cord, kidney, liver, mammary gland, skeletal muscle, and heart.
Within the brain, DSCR1 was predominantly expressed in neurons of the
cerebral cortex, hippocampus, substantia nigra, thalamus, and medulla
oblongata without regard to age in humans or rats. Postmortem studies of
8 patients with Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300) and 8 controls showed
that DSCR1 expression in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus of AD
patients was approximately double that of controls, and moreover, that
DSCR1 levels in brains with extensive neurofibrillary tangles were 3
times higher than in controls. Previous studies had shown that decreased
calcineurin phosphatase activity allowed accumulation of
hyperphosphorylated tau protein and cytoskeletal changes in the brain
similar to those observed in AD (Kayyali et al., 1997). Since DSCR1
inhibits calcineurin activity, Ermak et al. (2001) suggested that
increased DSCR1 levels may cause accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau
protein and production of neurofibrillary tangles, thereby promoting the
development of AD. Cell studies showed that toxic levels of aggregated
amyloid beta 1-42 peptide directly stimulated DSCR1 expression, perhaps
as a protective mechanism against calcineurin-induced apoptosis. The
authors suggested that while DSCR1 overexpression may initially be
protective, chronic overexpression may eventually lead to the formation
of neurofibrillary tangles associated with AD.

Yao and Duh (2004) demonstrated that DSCR1 was induced in human
endothelial cells in response to VEGF (192240), TNFA (191160), and
calcium mobilization, and this upregulation was inhibited by inhibitors
of the calcineurin (see 114105)-NFAT (see 600490) signaling pathway, as
well as by PKC (see 176960) inhibition and a calcium chelator. Yao and
Duh (2004) hypothesized that upregulation of DSCR1 in endothelial cells
may act as an endogenous feedback inhibitor of angiogenesis by
regulating the calcineurin-NFAT signaling pathway.

Using DNA microarray analysis, Minami et al. (2004) found that treatment
of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) with VEGF or thrombin
(F2; 176930) upregulated expression of DSCR1 variant-4, which contains
exons 4 through 7. DSCR1 expression was induced by VEGF and thrombin via
KDR (191306) and PAR1 (F2R; 187930), respectively, and involved
cooperative binding of NFATC and GATA2 (137295)/GATA3 (131320) to
neighboring consensus motifs in the DSCR1 internal promoter between
exons 3 and 4. Cyclosporine A, a calcineurin inhibitor, inhibited both
VEGF- and thrombin-induced DSCR1 induction. In HUVECs, VEGF induced
formation of capillary or tube-like structures, and DSCR1 overexpression
reduced tube formation. DSCR1 treatment also reduced blood vessel
density and tumor size in mice injected subcutaneously with B16 melanoma
cells. Minami et al. (2004) concluded that VEGF- and thrombin-mediated
induction of endothelial cell proliferation triggers a negative feedback
loop of DSCR1 induction leading to reduced NFAT signaling.

Arron et al. (2006) reported that 2 genes, DSCR1 and DYRK1A (600855),
that lie within the Down syndrome critical region of human chromosome 21
act synergistically to prevent nuclear occupancy of NFATc transcription
factors (see 600489), which are regulators of vertebrate development.
Arron et al. (2006) used mathematical modeling to predict that
autoregulation within the pathway accentuates the effects of trisomy of
DSCR1 and DYRK1A, leading to failure to activate NFATc target genes
under specific conditions. The authors' observations of calcineurin- and
Nfatc-deficient mice, Dscr1- and Dyrk1a-overexpressing mice, mouse
models of Down syndrome, and human trisomy 21 are consistent with these
predictions. Arron et al. (2006) suggested that the 1.5-fold increase in
dosage of DSCR1 and DYRK1A cooperatively destabilizes a regulatory
circuit, leading to reduced NFATc activity and many of the features of
Down syndrome. Arron et al. (2006) concluded that more generally, their
observations suggest that the destabilization of regulatory circuits can
underlie human disease.

To investigate the role of DSCR1 overexpression in Down syndrome and
development, Kluetzman et al. (2005) injected mouse embryos with
full-length human DSCR1, including extensive upstream and downstream
sequence. They found that DSCR1 overexpression was embryonic lethal and
proposed that other genes overrepresented in trisomy 21 may suppress the
lethality of DSCR1 overexpression.

Kim et al. (2006) stated that DSCR1 inhibits the induction of genes
involved in the inflammatory response. They found that overexpression of
the DSCR1 variant-4 attenuated phorbol ester-induced COX2 (PTGS2;
600262) upregulation in a human glioblastoma cell line. This response
was independent of calcineurin and involved stabilization
I-kappa-B-alpha (NFKBIA; 164008), an inhibitor of the transcription
factor NF-kappa-B (see 164011). Both full-length DSCR1 variant-4 and an
N-terminally truncated variant-4 decreased the steady-state activity of
NF-kappa-B as well as phorbol ester-induced activation of NF-kappa-B.

Using mouse cortical neurons, Porta et al. (2007) showed that Rcan1
increased neuronal susceptibility to oxidative stress.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a human fetal brain library, Lee et al.
(2008) showed that DSCR1 interacted with NF-kappa-B-inducing kinase
(NIK, or MAP3K14; 604655). NIK phosphorylated the C-terminal region of
Dscr1 in a rat hippocampal cell line and in primary cortical neurons.
NIK-mediated phosphorylation of Dscr1 increased its protein stability
and blocked its proteasomal degradation, which led to increased levels
of soluble and insoluble Dscr1. Insoluble Dscr1 formed cytosolic
aggregates. Whereas formation of Dscr1 aggregates was not neurotoxic,
overexpression of Dscr1 without formation of aggregates led to
apoptosis.

Using microarray and RT-PCR analyses, Belmont et al. (2008) showed that
Rcan1 variant-4 was induced in mouse heart by activation of the Atf6
gene (605537), a transcription factor involved in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress response that fosters cell survival. Rcan1 was
also induced in neonatal rat ventricular myocytes following ER stress.
Overexpression of activated Atf6 in cultured cardiomyocytes induced the
Rcan1 promoter, upregulated Rcan1 mRNA, inhibited calcineurin
phosphatase activity, and inhibited cell growth. These effects were
inhibited by Rcan1-targeted small interfering RNA.

Baek et al. (2009) demonstrated that DSCR1 expression is increased in
tissue samples from Down syndrome (190685) patients and in a mouse model
of Down syndrome. Furthermore, the modest increase in expression
afforded by a single extra transgenic copy of Dscr1 in mice is
sufficient to confer significant suppression of tumor growth, and such
resistance is a consequence of a deficit in tumor angiogenesis arising
from suppression of the calcineurin pathway. Baek et al. (2009) also
provided evidence that attenuation of calcineurin activity by DSCR1,
together with another chromosome 21 gene Dyrk1a, may be sufficient to
markedly diminish angiogenesis. Baek et al. (2009) concluded that their
data provided a mechanism for the reduced cancer incidence of Down
syndrome and identified the calcineurin signaling pathway, and its
regulators DSCR1 and DYRK1A, as potential therapeutic targets in cancer
arising in all individuals.

Using an integrative genomics approach, Lee et al. (2010) identified
DSCR1 (RCAN1) as an NFAT-dependent injury-response gene in mouse smooth
muscle cells (SMC). Induction of DSCR1 inhibited calcineurin/NFAT
signaling through a negative feedback mechanism. DSCR1 overexpression
attenuated NFAT transcriptional activity and COX2 protein expression,
whereas knockdown of endogenous DSCR1 enhanced NFAT transcriptional
activity. Lee et al. (2010) concluded that DSCR1 is a novel
NFAT-dependent, injury-inducible, early gene that may serve to
negatively regulate SMC phenotypic switching.

CYTOGENETICS

Eggermann et al. (2010) reported a patient with a paternally inherited
0.46-Mb duplication of chromosome 21q22, including the KCNE1 (176261)
and RCAN1 genes, who did not have typical facial or cardiac features of
Down syndrome. The patient had a clinical phenotype resembling
Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS; 180860), which is characterized by poor
growth, but typical epigenetic changes associated with SRS were
excluded. The duplication was inherited from his unaffected father.
Eggermann et al. (2010) concluded that the RCAN1 gene is not sufficient
for generating the phenotypic features associated with Down syndrome.

ANIMAL MODEL

To investigate the involvement of MCIP1 in cardiac hypertrophy in vivo,
Vega et al. (2003) generated Mcip1-null mice and subjected them to a
variety of stress stimuli that induced cardiac hypertrophy. In the
absence of stress, Mcip1 -/- animals exhibited no overt phenotype.
However, the lack of Mcip1 exacerbated the hypertrophic response to
activated calcineurin expressed from a muscle-specific transgene,
consistent with the role of MCIP1 as the negative regulator of
calcineurin signaling. Paradoxically, however, cardiac hypertrophy in
response to pressure overload or chronic adrenergic stimulation was
blunted in Mcip1 -/- mice. These findings suggested that MCIP1 can
facilitate or suppress cardiac calcineurin signaling depending on the
nature of the hypertrophic stimulus. These opposing roles of MICP1 have
important implications for therapeutic strategies to regulate cardiac
hypertrophy through modulation of calcineurin-MCIP1 activity.

Ryeom et al. (2003) showed that Csp1-deficient mice had altered
transactivation thresholds for a number of genes triggered in an immune
response. The transactivation thresholds were shifted due to enhanced
calcineurin activity, which drove Fasl (TNFSF6; 134638) expression and
led to premature death of Th1 cells, resulting in defective Th1
responses. Ryeom et al. (2003) concluded that CSP1 acts to ensure that
high-threshold genes, such as FASL, remain silent during the primary
stimulation associated with the clonal expansion of T cells.

REFERENCE 1. Arron, J. R.; Winslow, M. M.; Polleri, A.; Chang, C.-P.; Wu, H.;
Gao, X.; Neilson, J. R.; Chen, L.; Heit, J. J.; Kim, S. K.; Yamasaki,
N.; Miyakawa, T.; Francke, U.; Graef, I. A.; Crabtree, G. R.: NFAT
dysregulation by increased dosage of DSCR1 and DYRK1A on chromosome
21. Nature 441: 595-600, 2006.

2. Baek, K.-H.; Zaslavsky, A.; Lynch, R. C.; Britt, C.; Okada, Y.;
Siarey, R. J.; Lensch, M. W.; Park, I.-H.; Yoon, S. S.; Minami, T.;
Korenberg, J. R.; Folkman, J.; Daley, G. Q.; Aird, W. C.; Galdzicki,
Z.; Ryeom, S.: Down's syndrome suppression of tumour growth and the
role of the calcineurin inhibitor DSCR1. Nature 459: 1126-1130,
2009.

3. Belmont, P. J.; Tadimalla, A.; Chen, W. J.; Martindale, J. J.;
Thuerauf, D. J.; Marcinko, M.; Gude, N.; Sussman, M. A.; Glembotski,
C. C.: Coordination of growth and endoplasmic reticulum stress signaling
by regulator of calcineurin 1 (RCAN1), a novel ATF6-inducible gene. J.
Biol. Chem. 283: 14012-14021, 2008.

4. Eggermann, T.; Schonherr, N.; Spengler, S.; Jager, S.; Denecke,
B.; Binder, G.; Baudis, M.: Identification of a 21q22 duplication
in a Silver-Russell syndrome patient further narrows down the Down
syndrome critical region. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 356-359, 2010.

5. Ermak, G.; Morgan, T. E.; Davies, K. J. A.: Chronic overexpression
of the calcineurin inhibitory gene DSCR1 (Adapt78) is associated with
Alzheimer's disease. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 38787-38794, 2001.

6. Fuentes, J.-J.; Pritchard, M. A.; Planas, A. M.; Bosch, A.; Ferrer,
I.; Estivill, X.: A new human gene from the Down syndrome critical
region encodes a proline-rich protein highly expressed in fetal brain
and heart. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1935-1944, 1995.

7. Fuentes, J. J.; Genesca, L.; Kingsbury, T. J.; Cunningham, K. W.;
Perez-Riba, M.; Estivill, X.; de la Luna, S.: DSCR1, overexpressed
in Down syndrome, is an inhibitor of calcineurin-mediated signaling
pathways. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1681-1690, 2000.

8. Fuentes, J. J.; Pritchard, M. A.; Estivill, X.: Genomic organization,
alternative splicing, and expression patterns of the DSCR1 (Down syndrome
candidate region 1) gene. Genomics 44: 358-361, 1997.

9. Kayyali, U. S.; Zhang, W.; Yee, A. G.; Seidman, J. G.; Potter,
H.: Cytoskeletal changes in the brains of mice lacking calcineurin
A-alpha. J. Neurochem. 68: 1668-1678, 1997.

10. Kim, Y. S.; Cho, K.-O.; Lee, H. J.; Kim, S. Y.; Sato, Y.; Cho,
Y.-J.: Down syndrome candidate region 1 increases the stability of
the I-kappa-B-alpha protein: implications for its anti-inflammatory
effects. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 39051-39061, 2006.

11. Kingsbury, T. J.; Cunningham, K. W.: A conserved family of calcineurin
regulators. Genes Dev. 14: 1595-1604, 2000.

12. Kluetzman, K. S.; Perez, A. V.; Crawford, D. R.: DSCR1 (ADAPT78)
lethality: evidence for a protective effect of trisomy 21 genes? Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 337: 595-601, 2005.

13. Lee, E. J.; Seo, S. R.; Um, J. W.; Park, J.; Oh, Y.; Chung, K.
C.: NF-kappa-B-inducing kinase phosphorylates and blocks the degradation
of Down syndrome candidate region 1. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 3392-3400,
2008.

14. Lee, M. Y.; Garvey, S. M.; Baras, A. S.; Lemmon, J. A.; Gomez,
M. F.; Schoppee Bortz, P. D.; Daum, G.; LeBoeuf, R. C.; Wamhoff, B.
R.: Integrative genomics identifies DSCR1 (RCAN1) as a novel NFAT-dependent
mediator of phenotypic modulation in vascular smooth muscle cells. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 468-479, 2010.

15. Minami, T.; Horiuchi, K.; Miura, M.; Abid, M. R.; Takabe, W.;
Noguchi, N.; Kohro, T.; Ge, X.; Aburatani, H.; Hamakubo, T.; Kodama,
T.; Aird, W. C.: Vascular endothelial growth factor- and thrombin-induced
termination factor, Down syndrome critical region-1, attenuates endothelial
cell proliferation and angiogenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 50537-50554,
2004.

16. Porta, S.; Serra, S. A.; Huch, M.; Valverde, M. A.; Llorens, F.;
Estivill, X.; Arbones, M. L.; Marti, E.: RCAN1 (DSCR1) increases
neuronal susceptibility to oxidative stress: a potential pathogenic
process in neurodegeneration. Hum. Molec. Genet. 16: 1039-1050,
2007.

17. Rothermel, B.; Vega, R. B.; Yang, J.; Wu, H.; Bassel-Duby, R.;
Williams, R. S.: A protein encoded within the Down syndrome critical
region is enriched in striated muscles and inhibits calcineurin signaling. J.
Biol. Chem. 275: 8719-8725, 2000.

18. Ryeom, S.; Greenwald, R. J.; Sharpe, A. H.; McKeon, F.: The threshold
pattern of calcineurin-dependent gene expression is altered by loss
of the endogenous inhibitor calcipressin. Nature Immun. 4: 874-881,
2003.

19. Strippoli, P.; Petrini, M.; Lenzi, L.; Carinci, P.; Zannotti,
M.: The murine DSCR1-like (Down syndrome candidate region 1) gene
family: conserved synteny with the human orthologous genes. Gene 257:
223-232, 2000.

20. Vega, R. B.; Rothermel, B. A.; Weinheimer, C. J.; Kovacs, A.;
Naseem, R. H.; Bassel-Duby, R.; Williams, R. S.; Olson, E. N.: Dual
roles of modulatory calcineurin-interacting protein 1 in cardiac hypertrophy. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 669-674, 2003.

21. Yang, J.; Rothermel, B.; Vega, R. B.; Frey, N.; McKinsey, T. A.;
Olson, E. N.; Bassel-Duby, R.; Williams, R. S.: Independent signals
control expression of the calcineurin inhibitory proteins MCIP1 and
MCIP2 in striated muscles. Circ. Res. 87: E61-E68, 2000.

22. Yao, Y.-G.; Duh, E. J.: VEGF selectively induces Down syndrome
critical region 1 gene expression in endothelial cells: a mechanism
for feedback regulation of angiogenesis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 321:
648-656, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/7/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/5/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/18/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/31/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/4/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/28/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/12/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/4/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/19/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/11/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/19/2000

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/2/1998

EDITED terry: 07/21/2011
wwang: 7/14/2011
ckniffin: 7/7/2011
wwang: 1/14/2011
terry: 1/5/2011
mgross: 3/22/2010
terry: 3/18/2010
alopez: 7/16/2009
terry: 7/9/2009
mgross: 1/9/2009
terry: 12/31/2008
carol: 9/24/2008
alopez: 7/31/2006
terry: 7/24/2006
terry: 4/5/2005
mgross: 2/4/2005
alopez: 9/2/2003
mgross: 8/28/2003
terry: 6/9/2003
mgross: 2/21/2003
terry: 2/12/2003
carol: 2/11/2003
ckniffin: 2/4/2003
alopez: 6/4/2001
mgross: 4/19/2001
mgross: 4/12/2001
mgross: 4/11/2001
terry: 4/11/2001
alopez: 9/19/2000
alopez: 8/21/1998
alopez: 8/2/1998

603420	TITLE *603420 CALUMENIN; CALU
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Many calcium-binding proteins are reported to be localized in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and involved in such ER functions as protein
folding and sorting. Among these are RCN1 (602735), RCN2 (602584), and
calumenin (CALU), which form a novel family of calcium-binding proteins
in the ER and Golgi apparatus. By searching sequence databases with a
mouse Calu cDNA sequence (Yabe et al., 1997), Yabe et al. (1998)
identified a human CALU EST, which they used to clone a full-length CALU
cDNA. The cDNA encodes a deduced 315-amino acid protein containing 6
EF-hand motifs, 1 potential N-glycosylation site, and a C-terminal ER
retention signal. The human and mouse CALU proteins are 98% identical.
Northern blot analysis demonstrated that the 3.4-kb CALU mRNA is
ubiquitously expressed in human tissues. Southern blot analysis using a
human CALU cDNA probe detected bands in a variety of species.

MAPPING

Yabe et al. (1997) mapped the mouse Calu gene to the proximal portion of
chromosome 7. By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Yabe et al. (1998)
localized the human CALU gene to 7q32, which was an unexpected result
due to the homology of synteny between proximal mouse chromosome 7 and
human 19q13.2-q13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Yabe, D.; Nakamura, T.; Kanazawa, N.; Tashiro, K.; Honjo, T.:
Calumenin, a Ca(2+)-binding protein retained in the endoplasmic reticulum
with a novel carboxyl-terminal sequence, HDEF. J. Biol. Chem. 272:
18232-18239, 1997.

2. Yabe, D.; Taniwaki, M.; Nakamura, T.; Kanazawa, N.; Tashiro, K.;
Honjo, T.: Human calumenin gene (CALU): cDNA isolation and chromosomal
mapping to 7q32. Genomics 49: 331-333, 1998.

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 1/12/1999

EDITED carol: 06/22/2012
psherman: 1/12/1999

603107	TITLE *603107 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 20; TCF20
;;STROMELYSIN 1 PDGF-RESPONSIVE ELEMENT-BINDING PROTEIN; SPBP;;
SPRE-BINDING PROTEIN;  AR1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Sanz et al. (1995) screened a mouse fibroblast expression library to
identify factors that bind to a 19-nucleotide promoter element called
the SPRE (stromelysin-1 PDGF-responsive element), which controls
stromelysin-1 (185250) expression in response to mitogen stimulation.
They isolated a cDNA encoding a predicted 937-amino acid protein
designated SPBP for 'SPRE-binding protein.' SPBP contains several
features characteristic of transcription factors, including a putative
leucine zipper region, a nuclear localization signal, and a basic domain
similar to the DNA-binding domain found in the Fos (164810)-Jun (165160)
family of transcription factors. However, whereas in Fos and Jun the ZIP
and DNA-binding domains lie very close together, in SPBP they are widely
separated. Sanz et al. (1995) found that expression of SPBP in mammalian
cells activated transcription of a reporter gene construct containing
either the full-length stromelysin promoter or a single copy of the SPRE
inserted upstream of a heterologous promoter.

Rajadhyaksha et al. (1998) identified cDNAs encoding AR1, a human SPBP
homolog.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Rajadhyaksha et al. (1998) localized the AR1 gene to
22q13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Rajadhyaksha, A.; Riviere, M.; Van Vooren, P.; Szpirer, J.; Szpirer,
C.; Babin, J.; Bina, M.: Assignment of AR1, transcription factor
20 (TCF20), to human chromosome 22q13.3 with somatic cell hybrids
and in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 81: 176-177, 1998.

2. Sanz, L.; Moscat, J.; Diaz-Meco, M. T.: Molecular characterization
of a novel transcription factor that controls stromelysin expression. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 15: 3164-3170, 1995.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 10/9/1998

EDITED carol: 06/14/2012
cwells: 11/10/2003
alopez: 8/18/2000
alopez: 10/9/1998

609079	TITLE *609079 F-BOX AND LEUCINE-RICH REPEAT PROTEIN 12; FBXL12
;;FBL12
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the F-box protein family, such as FBXL12, are characterized
by an approximately 40-amino acid F-box motif. SCF complexes, formed by
SKP1 (601434), cullin (see CUL1; 603134), and F-box proteins, act as
protein-ubiquitin ligases. F-box proteins interact with SKP1 through the
F box, and they interact with ubiquitination targets through other
protein interaction domains (Jin et al., 2004).

CLONING

Winston et al. (1999) cloned mouse Fbl12. The deduced protein contains
an N-terminal F box, followed by 7 tandem leucine-rich repeats.

Jin et al. (2004) reported that the human FBXL12 protein contains an
N-terminal F box, followed by 7 leucine-rich repeats.

MAPPING

Jin et al. (2004) stated that the FBXL12 gene maps to chromosome 19p13.2
and the mouse Fbxl12 gene maps to chromosome 9A3.

REFERENCE 1. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

2. Winston, J. T.; Koepp, D. M.; Zhu, C.; Elledge, S. J.; Harper,
J. W.: A family of mammalian F-box proteins. Curr. Biol. 9: 1180-1182,
1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/14/2004

EDITED mgross: 12/14/2004

604155	TITLE *604155 LanC-LIKE 1; LANCL1
;;LANTHIONINE-SYNTHETASE COMPONENT C-LIKE 1 G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR;;
G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 69A; GPR69A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By affinity chromatography of solubilized human erythrocyte membrane
proteins, Mayer et al. (1998) identified p40, a 40-kD protein that
interacts with the C-terminus of the membrane protein stomatin (133090).
They used the sequence of p40 peptides to identify partial cDNAs in an
EST database, and then cloned cDNAs corresponding to the entire coding
region using a PCR strategy. The predicted 399-amino acid protein
contains the characteristic features of G protein-coupled receptors
(GPCRs), including 7 transmembrane domains. Northern blot analysis
revealed that p40 is expressed as a major 4.8-kb mRNA and as a minor
1.9-kb mRNA in all tissues. Dot blot experiments indicated that the
highest levels of expression were in brain, spinal cord, testis,
pituitary gland, and kidney. Using in situ hybridization to monkey
tissues, Mayer et al. (1998) determined that p40 is expressed at high
levels in neurons of the brain and spinal cord, in thymocytes,
megakaryocytes, and macrophages.

Bauer et al. (2000) determined that LANCL1 is not an integral membrane
protein, but rather a weakly associated peripheral membrane protein, and
is not a GPCR. They found that LANCL1 contains 7 highly conserved
hydrophobic repeats and may play a role in peptide modification. Western
blot analysis showed that LANCL1 is mainly expressed in brain, testis,
ovary, and kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhang et al. (2009) showed that LANCL1 exhibited Zn(2+)-dependent
glutathione binding. LANCL1 also bound the SH3 domain of mouse Eps8
(600206), but not other SH3-containing proteins. The interaction between
LANCL1 and Eps8 did not require either of the PxxP motifs of LANCL1, but
it was inhibited by glutathione. Overexpression of LANCL1 in rat PC12
cells had no effect on NGF (see 162030)-induced neurite outgrowth, but
overexpression of an LANCL1 mutant defective in Eps8 binding inhibited
NGF-induced neurite outgrowth by 50%.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Zhang et al. (2009) reported the crystal structure of LANCL1, which
consists of 2 concentric alpha-helical barrels made up of 7 helices
each. A GxxG-containing bulge that mediates Zn(2+) binding is located at
the N terminus of each of the 7 inner helices. LANCL1 had a similar
structure when cocrystalized with glutathione. In addition to
Zn(2+)-mediated binding, there were extensive interactions between
LANCL1 and glutathione.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mayer et al. (2001) determined that the human and mouse LANCL1 genes
span 45 kb and 38 kb, respectively, each comprising 10 exons.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the LANCL1
gene to 2q33-q35 (TMAP WI-13674). By FISH, Mayer et al. (2001) mapped
the LANCL1 gene to 2q34 and the mouse homolog to a region of conserved
synteny at chromosome 1C2-C5.

REFERENCE 1. Bauer, H.; Mayer, H.; Marchler-Bauer, A.; Salzer, U.; Prohaska,
R.: Characterization of p40/GPR69A as a peripheral membrane protein
related to the lantibiotic synthetase component C. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 275: 69-74, 2000.

2. Mayer, H.; Bauer, H.; Prohaska, R.: Organization and chromosomal
localization of the human and mouse genes coding for LanC-like protein
1 (LANCL1). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 93: 100-104, 2001.

3. Mayer, H.; Salzer, U.; Breuss, J.; Ziegler, S.; Marchler-Bauer,
A.; Prohaska, R.: Isolation, molecular characterization, and tissue-specific
expression of a novel putative G protein-coupled receptor. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1395: 301-308, 1998.

4. Zhang, W.; Wang, L.; Liu, Y.; Xu, J.; Zhu, G.; Cang, H.; Li, X.;
Bartlam, M.; Hensley, K.; Li, G.; Rao, Z.; Zhang, X. C.: Structure
of human lanthionine synthetase C-like protein 1 and its interaction
with Eps8 and glutathione. Genes Dev. 23: 1387-1392, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/17/2009
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 8/28/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/7/2000

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 9/3/1999

EDITED mgross: 07/17/2009
mgross: 7/17/2009
terry: 7/17/2009
carol: 11/6/2003
carol: 9/10/2001
mcapotos: 8/28/2001
mgross: 12/8/2000
terry: 12/7/2000
carol: 10/2/2000
alopez: 9/3/1999

611605	TITLE *611605 ENDOPLASMIC RETICULUM LIPID RAFT-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; ERLIN2
;;SPFH DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; SPFH2;;
CHROMOSOME 8 OPEN READING FRAME 2; C8ORF2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By genomic sequence analysis, followed by PCR and RACE of adult and
fetal cDNA libraries, Ikegawa et al. (1999) cloned 2 splice variants of
ERLIN2, which they designated C8ORF2. The deduced 339- and 152-amino
acid proteins share the first 141 N-terminal amino acids, then diverge.
Both proteins have an N-glycosylation site and type-2 membrane topology,
and the longer protein has a lysine- and glutamic acid-rich region.
Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of 1.6- and 2.5-kb
transcripts; a minor 4.4-kb transcript was also observed.

Using monoclonal antibodies to human lipid raft proteins, Browman et al.
(2006) identified ERLIN1 (611604) and ERLIN2 as components of lipid
rafts. Immunohistochemical analysis of endogenous and
fluorescence-tagged proteins revealed that ERLIN1 and ERLIN2 localized
specifically to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and nuclear envelope. The
2 proteins share 83% identity, and both contain a conserved prohibitin
(PHB; 176705) homology domain of about 160 amino acids.

GENE FUNCTION

The ER-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway removes aberrant proteins
and metabolically regulated native proteins from the ER. Pearce et al.
(2007) found that SPFH2 associated rapidly with activated IP3 receptors
(see IP3R1; 147265), which are substrates for the ERAD pathway, in
various mammalian cell lines. A proportion of SPFH2 associated with
several components of the ERAD pathway, and RNA interference-mediated
depletion of SPFH2 inhibited polyubiquitination and degradation of IP3R1
and turnover of model ERAD substrates. Pearce et al. (2007) concluded
that SPFH2 is a key ERAD pathway component that may act as a substrate
recognition factor.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ikegawa et al. (1999) determined that the ERLIN2 gene contains 16 exons
and spans more than 16.5 kb. The first 4 exons encode alternative
5-prime UTRs, exon 5 contains the initiating methionine, and exons 10
and 16 encode alternative 3-prime UTRs.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Ikegawa et al. (1999) mapped the ERLIN2
gene to chromosome 8p11.2.

CYTOGENETICS

By autozygosity mapping followed by candidate gene sequencing in a
consanguineous Saudi family with complicated SPG18 (611225), Alazami et
al. (2011) identified a homozygous 20-kb deletion on chromosome 8, with
the distal breakpoint near physical position 37,694,857 (NCBI36) and the
proximal breakpoint near 37,714,575 immediately upstream of exon 2 of
the ERLIN2 gene. This 20-kb interval spans 2 protein-coding genes,
ERLIN2 and FLJ34378. RT-PCR analysis of patient lymphoblasts showed loss
of ERLIN2 transcription, consistent with a null allele. Alazami et al.
(2011) noted that ERLIN2 is involved in the endoplasmic
reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway, and postulated that
loss of ERLIN2 may result in persistent activation of IP3 signaling and
neuronal channel activity since ERAD normally degrades IP3 receptors.
Alazami et al. (2011) concluded that ERLIN2 depletion caused the
phenotype, although they could not exclude a role for FLJ34378.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of a consanguineous Turkish family with autosomal
recessive spastic paraplegia-18 (SPG18; 611225), Yildirim et al. (2011)
identified a truncation mutation in the ERLIN2 gene (611605.0001) by
linkage analysis followed by candidate gene sequencing. The authors
termed the disorder 'intellectual disability, motor dysfunction, and
contractures (IDMDC).' Affected individuals presented between ages 6
months and 2 years with an arrest and regression of motor function. They
developed progressive severe contractures of all joints, resulting in
severe motor disability and a fixed position. All had severe
intellectual disability, and none could speak, read, or write. Features
suggestive of spasticity included hyperactive reflexes, ankle clonus,
and extensor plantar responses, but the neurologic examination was
difficult to perform in most. Electron microscopy of white blood cells
from 2 affected sibs showed large membrane-bound vacuoles containing
flocculent material in 7 to 10% of cells, and these vacuoles appeared to
be associated with the endoplasmic reticulum.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 18, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
ERLIN2, 2-BP INS, 812AC

In affected members of a consanguineous Turkish family with autosomal
recessive intellectual disability, motor dysfunction, and contractures,
or spastic paraplegia-18 (SPG18; 611225), Yildirim et al. (2011)
identified a 2-bp insertion (812insAC) in exon 11 of the ERLIN2 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination in the
oligomerization domain. The protein was predicted to be truncated by
20%, but the mutant transcript did not appear to undergo
nonsense-mediated decay. The mutation was not found in 109 control
individuals.

REFERENCE 1. Alazami, A. M.; Adly, N.; Al Dhalaan, H.; Alkuraya, F. S.: A nullimorphic
ERLIN2 mutation defines a complicated hereditary spastic paraplegia
locus (SPG18). Neurogenetics 12: 333-336, 2011.

2. Browman, D. T.; Resek, M. E.; Zajchowski, L. D.; Robbins, S. M.
: Erlin-1 and erlin-2 are novel members of the prohibitin family of
proteins that define lipid-raft-like domains of the ER. J. Cell Sci. 119:
3149-3160, 2006.

3. Ikegawa, S.; Isomura, M.; Koshizuka, Y.; Nakamura, Y.: Cloning
and characterization of a novel gene (C8orf2), a human representative
of a novel gene family with homology to C. elegans C42.C1.9. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 85: 227-231, 1999.

4. Pearce, M. M. P.; Wang, Y.; Kelley, G. G.; Wojcikiewicz, R. J.
H.: SPFH2 mediates the endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation
of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors and other substrates in
mammalian cells. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 20104-20115, 2007.

5. Yildirim, Y.; Orhan, E. K.; Iseri, S. A. U.; Serdaroglu-Oflazer,
P.; Kara, B.; Solakoglu, S.; Tolun, A.: A frameshift mutation of
ERLIN2 in recessive intellectual disability, motor dysfunction and
multiple joint contractures. Hum. Molec. Genet. 20: 1886-1892, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/3/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/20/2007

EDITED carol: 09/12/2013
carol: 1/3/2012
ckniffin: 1/3/2012
mgross: 11/20/2007

611574	TITLE *611574 SPHINGOMYELIN SYNTHASE 2; SGMS2
;;SMS2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Sphingomyelin (SM) is a major component of plasma membranes. It is
preferentially concentrated in the outer leaflet and has a role in the
formation of lipid rafts. SM synthases (EC 2.7.8.27), such as SGMS2,
produce SM in the lumen of the Golgi and on the cell surface through the
transfer of phosphocholine from phosphatidylcholine onto ceramide,
yielding diacylglycerol as a side product (Huitema et al., 2004).

CLONING

By searching databases for sequences encoding motifs characteristic of
SM synthases, Huitema et al. (2004) identified SGMS2, which they called
SMS2. The deduced 366-amino acid protein contains 5 membrane-spanning
alpha helices connected by hydrophilic extramembrane loops as well as 4
highly conserved motifs, designated D1 to D4. Protease protection
analysis of transfected HeLa cells revealed that the C terminus was
cytosolic, indicating that the putative active site residues are in the
extracellular space. Northern blot analysis of human tissues detected a
1.9-kb transcript in brain, heart, kidney, liver, muscle, and stomach.
SGMS2 localized primarily to the plasma membrane as well as to the Golgi
apparatus.

GENE FUNCTION

By heterologous expression in S. cerevisiae, Huitema et al. (2004)
showed that human SGMS2 formed SM in the presence of choline and
ceramide. Both phosphatidylcholine and SM itself were utilized as
phosphorylcholine group donors, but lysophosphatidylcholine was a very
poor substrate, and other donors, including other phospholipids, did not
support SM formation. Huitema et al. (2004) concluded that SGMS2
requires 2 fatty chains on the phosphocholine donor molecule for it to
be utilized as a substrate. SGMS2 could also catalyze the reverse
reaction.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SGMS2
gene to chromosome 4 (TMAP STS-H01973).

REFERENCE 1. Huitema, K.; van den Dikkenberg, J.; Brouwers, J. F. H. M.; Holthuis,
J. C. M.: Identification of a family of animal sphingomyelin synthases. EMBO
J. 23: 33-44, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/31/2007

EDITED wwang: 11/05/2007

610611	TITLE *610611 GINS COMPLEX SUBUNIT 4; GINS4
;;SLD5, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; SLD5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The yeast heterotetrameric GINS complex is made up of Sld5, Psf1 (GINS1;
610608), Psf2 (GINS2; 610609), and Psf3 (GINS3; 610610). The formation
of the GINS complex is essential for the initiation of DNA replication
in yeast and Xenopus egg extracts (Ueno et al., 2005). See GINS1 for
additional information about the GINS complex.

CLONING

By searching a human database for sequences similar to yeast SLD5,
Takayama et al. (2003) identified GINS4, which they called SLD5. The
deduced protein contains 223 amino acids.

Using mouse Psf1 as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid analysis of an 11-day mouse
embryo cDNA library, Kong et al. (2006) cloned Sld5. The deduced
223-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal coiled-coil domain, a
central basic region, and a C-terminal domain that is conserved between
the mouse and yeast proteins. RT-PCR of mouse tissues detected abundant
expression in adult testis, and weak expression in thymus and bone
marrow. No Sld5 was detected in brain, lung, liver, spleen, kidney, and
heart. Immunohistochemical analysis detected Psf1 and Sld5 in the
cytoplasm of transfected NIH3T3 mouse fibroblast.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitation analysis, Kong et al. (2006) demonstrated that
mouse Sld5 and Psf1 interacted in transfected NIH3T3 cells.

MAPPING

International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the GINS4 gene
to chromosome 8 (TMAP RH102031).

NOMENCLATURE

The GINS complex derives its name from the Japanese words Go, Ichi, Nii,
and San, which mean 5, 1, 2, and 3, respectively, and refer to the
numbering of the yeast homologs of the GINS complex (Takayama et al.,
2003).

REFERENCE 1. Kong, L.; Ueno, M.; Itoh, M.; Yoshioka, K.; Takakura, N.: Identification
and characterization of mouse PSF1-binding protein, SLD5. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 339: 1204-1207, 2006.

2. Takayama, Y.; Kamimura, Y.; Okawa, M.; Muramatsu, S.; Sugino, A.;
Araki, H.: GINS, a novel multiprotein complex required for chromosomal
DNA replication in budding yeast. Genes Dev. 17: 1153-1165, 2003.

3. Ueno, M.; Itoh, M.; Kong, L.; Sugihara, K.; Asano, M.; Takakura,
N.: PSF1 is essential for early embryogenesis in mice. Molec. Cell
Biol. 25: 10528-10532, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/29/2006

EDITED wwang: 12/04/2006
wwang: 11/29/2006

611800	TITLE *611800 THYROID ADENOMA-ASSOCIATED GENE; THADA
;;KIAA1767
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned THADA, which they designated
KIAA1767. The cDNA contains repetitive elements in its 5-prime end, and
the deduced protein contains 894 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA detected high
expression in liver and moderate expression in all other adult and fetal
tissues examined.

Using positional cloning and 3-prime RACE to identify the gene disrupted
in thyroid adenomas with chromosome 2p21 aberrations, Rippe et al.
(2003) cloned THADA. The full-length protein contains 1,954 amino acids
and has a calculated molecular mass of 220 kD. Rippe et al. (2003) also
identified a THADA splice variant lacking exons 27 and 28. Northern blot
analysis detected variable expression of a 6.2-kb THADA transcript in
all tissues examined.

Drieschner et al. (2007) determined that the full-length THADA protein
contains an ARM repeat for protein-protein interactions. Human THADA
shares 95.9%, 78.2%, and 64.9% amino acid similarity with African green
monkey, mouse, and chicken Thada, respectively. The most conserved
region of THADA among vertebrates corresponds to amino acids 1033 to
1415 of human THADA.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rippe et al. (2003) determined that the THADA gene contains 38 exons and
spans about 365 kb. Drieschner et al. (2007) stated that the start codon
of THADA is in exon 2.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Rippe et al. (2003) mapped the THADA gene
to chromosome 2p21.

CYTOGENETICS

Rearrangements at chromosome 2p21 are found in about 10% of benign
thyroid tumors. Rippe et al. (2003) found that the 2p21 breakpoint in 2
thyroid adenomas characterized by translocations t(2;20;3)
(p21;q11.2;p25) and t(2;7)(p21;p15), respectively, occurred in exon 28
of the THADA gene. The sequences derived from chromosomes 3p25 and 7p15
did not appear to include a coding region. Drieschner et al. (2007)
determined that the THADA truncations observed in thyroid adenomas by
Rippe et al. (2003) disrupted the most conserved region of the THADA
protein among vertebrates.

EVOLUTION

Green et al. (2010) published a draft sequence of the Neandertal genome.
Comparisons of the Neandertal genome to the genomes of 5 present-day
humans from different parts of the world identified a number of genomic
regions that may have been affected by positive selection in ancestral
modern humans, including genes involved in metabolism and in cognitive
and skeletal development. Green et al. (2010) identified a total of 212
regions containing putative selective sweeps. Of the 20 widest regions,
5 contained no protein-coding genes and the others had 1 to 12 genes.
The widest region is located on chromosome 2 and contains the gene
THADA, where a region of 336 kb is depleted of derived alleles in
Neandertals. SNPs in the vicinity of THADA have been associated with
type 2 diabetes (125853), and THADA expression differs between
individuals with diabetes and healthy controls (Parikh et al., 2009).
Green et al. (2010) also showed that Neandertals shared more genetic
variants with present-day humans in Eurasia than with present-day humans
in sub-Saharan Africa, suggesting that gene flow from Neandertals into
the ancestors of non-Africans occurred before the divergence of Eurasian
groups from each other.

REFERENCE 1. Drieschner, N.; Kerschling, S.; Soller, J. T.; Rippe, V.; Belge,
G.; Bullerdiek, J.; Nimzyk, R.: A domain of the thyroid adenoma associated
gene (THADA) conserved in vertebrates becomes destroyed by chromosomal
rearrangements observed in thyroid adenomas. Gene 403: 110-117,
2007.

2. Green, R. E.; Krause, J.; Briggs, A. W.; Maricic, T.; Stenzel,
U.; Kircher, M.; Patterson, N.; Li, H.; Zhai, W.; Fritz, M. H.-Y.;
Hansen, N. F.; Durand, E. Y.; and 44 others: A draft sequence of
the Neandertal genome. Science 328: 710-722, 2010.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Hattori, A.; Kondo, Y.; Okumura, K.; Ohara,
O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
XIX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which
code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 347-355, 2000.

4. Parikh, H.; Lyssenko, V.; Groop, L. C.: Prioritizing genes for
follow-up from genome wide association studies using information on
gene expression in tissues relevant for type 2 diabetes mellitus. BMC
Med. Genomics 2: 72, 2009. Note: Electronic Article.

5. Rippe, V.; Drieschner, N.; Meiboom, M.; Escobar, H. M.; Bonk, U.;
Belge, G.; Bullerdiek, J.: Identification of a gene rearranged by
2p21 aberrations in thyroid adenomas. Oncogene 22: 6111-6114, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 06/09/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/18/2008

EDITED alopez: 06/09/2010
mgross: 2/18/2008

611272	TITLE *611272 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN WITH KRAB AND SCAN DOMAINS 5; ZKSCAN5
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 95; ZFP95;;
KIAA1015
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a brain cDNA library, Nagase et al.
(1999) cloned ZKSCAN5, which they designated KIAA1015. The transcript
contains a repetitive element in its 3-prime UTR, and the deduced
protein contains 839 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA detected low to moderate
expression in all tissues and specific brain regions examined.

By screening a fetal cartilage cDNA library with a degenerate probe
corresponding to the Kruppel zinc finger motif, followed by screening
amniocyte and testis cDNA libraries, Dreyer et al. (1999) obtained a
full-length cDNA encoding ZKSCAN5, which they called ZFP95. The deduced
839-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal SCAN box, followed by a
KRAB A domain and a C-terminal zinc finger domain. Dreyer et al. (1999)
also identified 2 alternatively spliced transcripts, one encoding a
protein lacking the KRAB A domain, and the other encoding a protein
lacking the KRAB A domain and an additional 26 amino acids. Northern
blot analysis detected 4.2- and 4.6-kb transcripts in all tissues
examined, with highest expression in testis. A 3.8-kb transcript was
also detected in adult testis.

Weissig et al. (2003) cloned 3 cDNAS for mouse Zfp95. The longest
deduced protein contains 819 amino acids and has 12 zinc finger domains
in its C-terminal half. Northern blot analysis detected highest Zfp95
expression in testis, with lower levels in brain, heart, kidney, liver,
tongue, lung, and striated muscle. A second transcript was expressed
exclusively in testis. Expression of the testis-specific Zfp95
transcript in isolated germ cells was highest in pachytene
spermatocytes, followed by round spermatids. Mice with the recessive
atrichosis (at) mutation are almost hairless and sterile, with small
gonads that contain few germ cells. Weissig et al. (2003) found
homozygous at mutant mice lacked expression of the testis-specific Zfp95
transcript, whereas the more widely expressed Zfp95 transcript was
expressed in testis, epididymis, seminal vesicle, and prostate. They
concluded that Zfp95 shows differential splicing in meiotic and
postmeiotic germ cells only.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dreyer et al. (1999) determined that the ZKSCAN5 gene contains 7 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the ZKSCAN5
gene to chromosome 7. Using radiation hybrid analysis and FISH, Dreyer
et al. (1999) mapped the ZKSCAN5 gene to chromosome 7q22.

Weissig et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Zkscan5 gene to chromosome 5.

REFERENCE 1. Dreyer, S. D.; Zheng, Q.; Zabel, B.; Winterpacht, A.; Lee, B.:
Isolation, characterization, and mapping of a zinc finger gene, ZFP95,
containing both a SCAN box and an alternatively spliced KRAB A domain. Genomics 62:
119-122, 1999.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

3. Weissig, H.; Narisawa, S.; Sikstrom, C.; Olsson, P. G.; McCarrey,
J. R.; Tsonis, P. A.; Del Rio-Tsonis, K.; Millan, J. L.: Three novel
spermatogenesis-specific zinc finger genes. FEBS Lett. 547: 61-68,
2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/31/2007

EDITED mgross: 07/31/2007

602130	TITLE *602130 MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE 3; MAPKAPK3
;;MAPKAP3;;
MAPKAP KINASE 3;;
3PK
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Sithanandam et al. (1996) identified a mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK)-activated protein kinase with a single potential SH3-binding site
in the proline-rich N terminus, a putative ATP-binding site, 2 MAP
kinase phosphorylation site motifs, and a putative nuclear localization
signal. They called the protein 3pK. The gene was cloned from NotI
linking clones and codes for a 2.5-kd mRNA that was expressed in all
human tissues examined, being especially high in the heart and skeletal
muscle. Sequence analysis revealed a 382-amino acid protein of 42 kD. It
shares 72% nucleotide and 75% amino acid identity with MAPKAP kinase-2
(602006). In HL60 cells and transiently transfected HEK293 cells,
activation of 3pK in vivo by the growth inducers serum and tetradecanoyl
phorbol acetate was Raf dependent and was mediated by the Raf/MEK/ERK
kinase cascade.

GENE FUNCTION

Ludwig et al. (1996) showed that 3pK is the first kinase to be activated
through all 3 MAPK cascades: extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK;
see 176948), MAPKAP kinase-2, and Jun-N-terminal
kinases/stress-activated protein kinases. They showed also that 3pK has
a novel substrate specificity from other MAPKAPs. Thus, Ludwig et al.
(1996) concluded that 3pK functions as an integrative element of
signaling in both mitogen and stress responses.

Maizels et al. (2001) investigated the activation in vivo and regulation
of the expression of components of the p38 MAPK (600289) pathway during
gonadotropin-induced formation and development of the rat corpus luteum.
They postulated that the p38 MAPK pathway could serve to promote
phosphorylation of key substrates during luteal maturation, since
maturing luteal cells, thought to be cAMP-nonresponsive, nevertheless
maintain critical phosphoproteins. The p38 MAPK downstream protein
kinase target MAPKAPK3 was newly induced at both mRNA and protein levels
during luteal formation and maturation, while mRNA and protein
expression of the closely related MAPKAPK2 diminished. MAPKAPK3-specific
immune complex kinase assays provided direct evidence that MAPKAPK3 was
in an activated state during luteal maturation in vivo. Transient
transfection studies provided direct evidence that MAPKAPK3 was capable
of signaling to activate CREB (123810) transcriptional activity, as
assessed by means of GAL4-CREB fusion protein construct coexpressed with
GAL4-luciferase reporter construct. Introduction of wildtype, but not
kinase-dead mutant, MAPKAPK3 cDNA, into a mouse ovarian cell line
stimulated GAL4-CREB-dependent transcriptional activity approximately
3-fold. Maizels et al. (2001) concluded that MAPKAPK3 is uniquely poised
to support luteal maturation through the phosphorylation and activation
of the nuclear transcription factor CREB.

GENE STRUCTURE

Maizels et al. (2001) determined that the MAPKAPK3 gene contains 10
exons.

MAPPING

Maizels et al. (2001) mapped the MAPKAPK3 gene to chromosome 3p21.3.

REFERENCE 1. Ludwig, S.; Engel, K.; Hoffmeyer, A.; Sithanandam, G.; Neufeld,
B.; Palm, D.; Gaestel, M.; Rapp, U.: 3pK, a novel mitogen-activated
protein (MAP) kinase-activated protein kinase, is targeted by three
MAP kinase pathways. Molec. Cell. Biol. 16: 6687-6697, 1996.

2. Maizels, E. T.; Mukherjee, A.; Sithanandam, G.; Peters, C. A.;
Cottom, J.; Mayo, K. E.; Hunzicker-Dunn, M.: Developmental regulation
of mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated kinases-2 and -3 (MAPKAPK-2/-3)
in vivo during corpus luteum formation in the rat. Molec. Endocr. 15:
716-733, 2001.

3. Sithanandam, G.; Latif, F.; Duh, F.-M.; Bernal, R.; Smola, U.;
Li, H.; Kuzmin, I.; Wixler, V.; Geil, L.; Shrestha, S.; Lloyd, P.;
Bader, S.; Sekido, Y.; Tartof, K. D.; Kashuba, V. I.; Zabarovsky,
E. R.; Dean, M.; Klein, G.; Lerman, M. I.; Minna, J. D.; Rapp, U.
R.; Allikmets, R.: 3pK, a new mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated
protein kinase located in the small cell lung cancer tumor suppressor
gene region. Molec. Cell. Biol. 16: 868-876, 1996. Note: Erratum:
Molec. Cell. Biol. 16: 1880 only, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/11/2002

CREATED Ethylin Wang Jabs: 11/19/1997

EDITED carol: 04/12/2013
carol: 9/8/2003
alopez: 7/11/2002
psherman: 3/26/1999
psherman: 4/21/1998
mark: 12/19/1997

