603422	TITLE *603422 PDZ AND LIM DOMAIN PROTEIN 4; PDLIM4
;;LIM DOMAIN PROTEIN RIL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kiess et al. (1995) identified the rat ril gene based on its
downregulation in Hras-transformed cells. The gene contains a LIM/double
zinc finger domain but lacks a homeodomain. Northern blot analysis
revealed expression in a wide variety of mouse tissues.

Searching for novel genes in the human 5q31.1 region by cDNA selection,
Bashirova et al. (1998) isolated a human RIL cDNA. The human RIL gene
encodes a 328-amino acid polypeptide. PCR of human fetal brain
identified an alternatively spliced mRNA that lacks the sixth exon,
leading to the loss of the LIM domain.

Using RT-PCR, Boumber et al. (2007) found that RIL was expressed in all
15 normal human tissues tested.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bashirova et al. (1998) determined that the human RIL gene contains 7
exons distributed over 14.5 kb of genomic DNA. Exons 6 and 7 encode the
LIM domain.

MAPPING

Bashirova et al. (1998) characterized the 5q31.1 genomic region. They
ordered the genes in this region
cen--IL4(147780)--IL13(147683)--RAD50(604040)--IL5(147850)--IRF1(147575)--RIL--CSF2
(138960)--IL3(147740)--tel.

GENE FUNCTION

Boumber et al. (2007) found that the RIL gene was methylated in a high
proportion of cancers, with highest methylation in acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML; 601626) and colon cancer (114500). Methylation was
associated with loss of RIL expression, and RIL could be reactivated by
the hypomethylating agent 5-aza-2-prime-deoxycytidine. Restoration of
RIL expression in colon cancer cells by stable transfection resulted in
reduced cell growth and clonogenicity and an approximately 2-fold
increase in apoptosis following ultraviolet exposure.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The expression of RIL mRNA in human bone marrow stromal cells suggests a
possible involvement in osteoblast development/function. Omasu et al.
(2003) carried out a correlation study between genetic variations in RIL
and bone mineral density (BMD). A significant association was identified
between a -3333T-C polymorphism in the 5-prime flanking region of the
RIL gene with radial BMD in adult Japanese women. The radial BMD
represented the quality of both cortical bone thickness and cancellous
bone volume when the distal part of the radial bone near the wrist joint
was measured. Omasu et al. (2003) concluded that the RIL locus may be an
important determinant of osteoporosis. Homozygous T-allele carriers had
the lowest adjusted BMD, heterozygous individuals have an intermediate
adjusted BMD, and homozygous C-allele carriers had the highest adjusted
BMD, implying an allelic dosage effect of this variation on BMD. In the
370 individuals studied, the frequency of the C allele was 0.81 and that
of the T allele was 0.19.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OSTEOPOROSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RIL, -3333T-C

In adult Japanese women, Omasu et al. (2003) found an association
between the T allele in the -3333T-C polymorphism in the 5-prime
flanking region of the RIL gene to low bone mineral density (BMD) in an
allele-dosage-related manner. They hypothesized that the variation may
be an important determinant of osteoporosis (166710).

REFERENCE 1. Bashirova, A. A.; Markelov, M. L.; Shlykova, T. V.; Levshenkova,
E. V.; Alibaeva, R. A.; Frolova, E. I.: The human RIL gene: mapping
to human chromosome 5q31.1, genomic organization and alternative transcripts. Gene 210:
239-245, 1998.

2. Boumber, Y. A.; Kondo, Y.; Chen, X.; Shen, L.; Gharibyan, V.; Konishi,
K.; Estey, E.; Kantarjian, H.; Garcia-Manero, G.; Issa, J.-P. J.:
RIL, a LIM gene on 5q31, is silenced by methylation in cancer and
sensitizes cancer cells to apoptosis. Cancer Res. 67: 1997-2005,
2007.

3. Kiess, M.; Scharm, B.; Aguzzi, A.; Hajnal, A.; Klemenz, R.; Schwarte-Waldhoff,
I.; Schafer, R.: Expression of ril, a novel LIM domain gene, is down-regulated
in Hras-transformed cells and restored in phenotypic revertants. Oncogene 10:
61-68, 1995.

4. Omasu, F.; Ezura, Y.; Kajita, M.; Ishida, R.; Kodaira, M.; Yoshida,
H.; Suzuki, T.; Hosoi, T.; Inoue, S.; Shiraki, M.; Orimo, H.; Emi,
M.: Association of genetic variation of the RIL gene, encoding a
PDZ-LIM domain protein and localized in 5q31.1, with low bone mineral
density in adult Japanese women. J. Hum. Genet. 48: 342-345, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/31/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/27/2003

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 1/12/1999

EDITED carol: 02/26/2013
mgross: 1/5/2009
terry: 12/31/2008
carol: 3/18/2004
cwells: 8/29/2003
terry: 8/27/2003
mgross: 7/22/1999
alopez: 1/12/1999

602352	TITLE *602352 GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE 2; GNRH2
DESCRIPTION Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 1 (GNRH1; 152760) is a decapeptide widely
known for its role in regulating reproduction by serving as a signal
from the hypothalamus to pituitary gonadotropes. This function for GNRH1
has been highly conserved during 500 million years of vertebrate
evolution despite the fact that its amino acid sequence varies by 50%.
In addition to the hypothalamic GNRH1 of variable sequence, many
vertebrate species express a second, invariant GNRH form, GNRH-II (or
GNRH2), with the primary structure
gln-his-trp-ser-his-gly-trp-tyr-pro-gly. Antibody staining demonstrates
GNRH2 in the midbrain of all species where its location has been
described (Kasten et al., 1996). Furthermore, nucleic acid probes have
been used to identify GNRH2 expression in the midbrain of several fish
species and one mammal. White et al. (1998) showed that a gene encoding
GNRH2 is expressed in humans and is located on chromosome 20p13,
distinct from the GNRH1 gene on 8p21-p11.2. The genomic and mRNA
structures of GNRH2 parallel those of GNRH1. However, in contrast to
GNRH1, GNRH2 is expressed at significantly higher levels outside the
brain (up to 30-fold), particularly in the kidney, bone marrow, and
prostate. The widespread expression of GNRH2 suggests it may have
multiple functions. Molecular phylogenetic analysis shows that GNRH2 is
likely the result of a duplication before the appearance of vertebrates,
and predicts the existence of a third GNRH form in humans and other
vertebrates. White et al. (1998) used fluorescence in situ hybridization
to map GNRH2 to 20p13.

Chen et al. (2002) found that human normal and leukemic T cells produce
GNRH2 and GNRH1. Exposure of normal or cancerous human or mouse T cells
to GNRH2 or GNRH1 triggered de novo gene transcription and cell-surface
expression of the laminin receptor (150370), which is involved in
cellular adhesion and migration and in tumor invasion and metastasis.
GNRH2 or GNRH1 also induced adhesion to laminin and chemotaxis toward
SDF1A (600835), and augmented entry in vivo of metastatic T-lymphoma
into the spleen and bone marrow. Homing of normal T cells into specific
organs was reduced in mice lacking GNRH1. A specific GNRH1 receptor
antagonist blocked GNRH1 but not GNRH2-induced effects, which was
suggestive of signaling through distinct receptors. Chen et al. (2002)
suggested that GNRH2 and GNRH1, secreted from nerves or autocrine or
paracrine sources, interact directly with T cells and trigger gene
transcription, adhesion, chemotaxis, and homing to specific organs.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, A.; Ganor, Y.; Rahimipour, S.; Ben-Aroya, N.; Koch, Y.; Levite,
M.: The neuropeptides GnRH-II and GnRH-I are produced by human T
cells and trigger laminin receptor gene expression, adhesion, chemotaxis
and homing to specific organs. Nature Med. 8: 1421-1426, 2002.

2. Kasten, T. L.; White, S. A.; Norton, T. T.; Bond, C. T.; Adelman,
J. P.; Fernald, R. D.: Characterization of two new preproGnRH mRNAs
in the tree shrew: first direct evidence for mesencephalia GnRH gene
expression in a placental mammal. Gen. Comp. Endocr. 104: 7-19,
1996.

3. White, R. B.; Eisen, J. A.; Kasten, T. L.; Fernald, R. D.: Second
gene for gonadotropin-releasing hormone in humans. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 95: 305-309, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/13/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/1998

EDITED alopez: 02/19/2003
terry: 2/13/2003
dholmes: 3/10/1998
mark: 2/13/1998

112262	TITLE *112262 BONE MORPHOGENETIC PROTEIN 4; BMP4
;;BONE MORPHOGENETIC PROTEIN 2B; BMP2B;;
BMP2B1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

BMP4 is a vital regulatory molecule that functions throughout
development in mesoderm induction, tooth development, limb formation,
bone induction, and fracture repair. BMP4 is a member of the BMP family
and transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGFB1; 190180) superfamily of
secretory signaling molecules that play essential roles in embryonic
development (summary by Bakrania et al., 2008).

CLONING

Bakrania et al. (2008) stated that the BMP4 protein is 408 amino acids
long and consists of a TGFB1 propeptide domain and a TGFB domain that
forms an active dimer.

GENE STRUCTURE

The transcriptional unit of the human BMP4 gene is encoded by 5 exons
and spans approximately 7 kb (van den Wijngaard et al., 1996). The human
BMP4 gene has at least 2 functional promoters, which are used in a cell
type-specific manner.

Shore et al. (1998) determined that alternate first exons may be used
and that the first 2 exons are untranslated. The promoter region is
GC-rich and contains no obvious TATA or CAAT consensus sequences. Both
positive and negative transcriptional regulatory elements are contained
within the 5-prime flanking region.

Bakrania et al. (2008) stated that the BMP4 gene contains 4 exons. The
first 2 exons are noncoding.

MAPPING

Dickinson et al. (1990) demonstrated that in the mouse the Bmp2b1 gene
is located on chromosome 14 and maps to the same area as 'pug nose'
(pn). The mutation in that disorder may reside in the Bmp2b1 gene.
Arguing from homology of synteny, Dickinson et al. (1990) suggested that
the human BMP2B1 gene may be located on chromosome 14. Furthermore, they
suggested that a human homolog of the murine Bmp2b2 gene resides on the
X chromosome, as it does in the mouse. There is, however, no direct
evidence of a second BMP2B gene in the human (McAlpine, 1992).

By analysis of human/rodent somatic cell hybrids, Tabas et al. (1993)
assigned the BMP4 gene to human chromosome 14. Using fluorescence in
situ hybridization, van den Wijngaard et al. (1995) localized the BMP4
gene to 14q22-q23. By FISH, Shore et al. (1998) mapped the BMP4 gene to
chromosome 14q21, a region more centromeric than previously reported.

GENE FUNCTION

Shafritz et al. (1996) found overexpression of BMP4 in lymphoblastoid
cell lines from 26 of 32 patients with FOP (135100), but from only 1 of
12 normal subjects (P less than 0.001). Furthermore, BMP4 and its mRNA
were detected in the lymphoblastoid cell lines from a man with FOP and
his 3 affected children, but not from the children's unaffected mother.
Cosegregation of DNA markers for the BMP4 locus on chromosome 14 in the
rare families in which FOP is inherited would strengthen the candidacy
of BMP4, and the demonstration of mutations in the BMP4 gene, especially
in the promoter sequences, would be confirmatory.

In a series of expression studies in mouse, Tucker et al. (1998)
demonstrated that BMP4 activates the expression of Msx1 (142983),
leading to incisor tooth development. BMP4 inhibited expression of Barx1
(603260), which marks presumptive molar teeth, and limits expression to
the proximal, presumptive molar mesenchyme at embryonic day 10.
Fibroblast growth factor-8 (FGF8; 600483) stimulated Barx1 expression.
When BMP4 signaling in early development was inhibited by application of
exogenous noggin (NOG; 602991) protein, ectopic Barx1 expression
resulted in transformation of tooth identity from incisor to molar.

Dlx1 (600029) and Dlx2 (126255) are involved in the patterning of murine
dentition, since loss of these transcription factors results in early
developmental failure in upper molar teeth. Thomas et al. (2000) found
that Bmp4 was coexpressed with Dlx2 in distal oral epithelium and that
it regulated Dlx2 expression by planar signaling. They presented
evidence that Bmp4 and Fgf8 cooperate and regulate the strict expression
of Dlx2 in the epithelium and the mesenchyme in the first branchial arch
in developing mice.

Dooley et al. (2000) investigated the effect of BMP4 on androgen
production in a human ovarian theca-like tumor (HOTT) cell culture
model. BMP4 decreased forskolin-stimulated HOTT cell secretion of
androstenedione and 17-alphahydroxyprogesterone (17OHP) by 50% but
increased progesterone production 3-fold above forskolin treatment
alone. BMP4 markedly inhibited forskolin stimulation of CYP17 (609300)
expression but had little effect on 3-beta-HSD (see 109715), CYP11A1
(118485), or STAR (600617) protein levels. The authors identified the
presence of mRNA for 3 BMP receptors in the HOTT cells model: BMPR1A
(601299), BMPR1B (603248), and BMPR2 (600799). The authors concluded
that BMP4 inhibits HOTT cell expression of CYP17, leading to an
alteration of the steroidogenic pathway resulting in reduced
androstenedione accumulation and increased progesterone production. They
also noted that the effects of BMP4 seem similar to those caused by
activin (see 147290), another member of the transforming growth
factor-beta (TGFB; see 190180) superfamily of proteins.

In chick embryos, the first signs of left-right asymmetry are detected
in Hensen's node, essentially by left-sided Sonic hedgehog (SHH; 600725)
expression. After a gap of several hours, Shh induces polarized gene
activities in the left paraxial mesoderm. Monsoro-Burq and Le Douarin
(2001) showed that during this time period, Bmp4 signaling is necessary
and sufficient to maintain Shh asymmetry within the node. Shh and Bmp4
proteins negatively regulate each other's transcription, resulting in a
strict complementarity between these 2 gene patterns on each side of the
node. Noggin, which is present in the midline at this stage, limits Bmp4
spreading. Moreover, Bmp4 is downstream to activin signals and controls
Fgf8. Thus, the authors concluded that early Bmp4 signaling coordinates
left and right pathways in Hensen's node.

Chen et al. (2002) studied BMP4 gene transfer and osteoinduction by BMP4
using an adenoviral vector to transduce mouse myoblast cells. BMP4
expressed by transduced myoblasts was located in the cytoplasm, and the
differentiation pathway utilized by these cells was converted from a
myogenic to an osteogenic pathway. Injection of the adenoviral vector
carrying BMP4 into the hindlimb muscles of male athymic nude rats
resulted in new bone formation that could be visualized on x-ray films
as early as 3 weeks post injection. Histologic staining of bone tissue
revealed a typical remodeled bone structure.

Cheng et al. (2003) measured the ability of 14 human BMPs to induce
osteogenic transformation in a mouse pluripotential stem cell line, a
mouse mesenchymal stem cell line, and a mature human osteoblastic cell
line. Osteogenic activity was determined by measuring induction of
alkaline phosphatase (see 171760), osteocalcin (112260), and matrix
mineralization upon BMP stimulation. All BMPs except BMP3 (112263) and
BMP12 (604651) were able to stimulate alkaline phosphatase activity in
the mature osteoblasts. BMP4 was able to induce all markers of
osteoblast differentiation in pluripotential and mesenchymal stem cells;
however, BMP4 was a weaker inducer than BMP2 (112261), BMP6 (112266),
and BMP9 (GDF2; 605120).

Paez-Pereda et al. (2003) stated that there is little doubt that
estrogens and growth factors are involved in the control of lactotroph
cell proliferation in the pituitary and that the tumorigenic action of
estrogen in prolactinomas had been demonstrated by in vitro and clinical
evidence. Thus, the number of lactotroph cells increases during
pregnancy. Prolactinomas occur more frequently in women and increase in
size during pregnancy or estrogen treatment, and, at least in human
prolactinomas, estrogen receptor expression is positively related to
size. Paez-Pereda et al. (2003) reported a previously undescribed
mechanism for prolactinoma growth that involved BMP4, SMAD4 (600993),
and estrogens.

By in situ hybridization, Zhu et al. (2004) found overlapping expression
of Bmp4 and Nkx2.1 (600635) in embryonic mouse lung. They presented
evidence that Nkx2.1 activated Bmp4 transcription through 2 Nkx2.1
elements in each of the 2 Bmp4 promoters.

Haramis et al. (2004) used mouse models to demonstrate that BMP4
expression occurs exclusively in the intravillus mesenchyme of the
intestine. Villus epithelial cells respond to the BMP signal. Inhibition
of BMP signaling by transgenic expression of noggin results in the
formation of numerous ectopic crypt units perpendicular to the
crypt-villus axis. These changes phenocopy the intestinal histopathology
of patients with the cancer predisposition syndrome juvenile polyposis
(174900), including the frequent occurrence of intraepithelial
neoplasia. Many juvenile polyposis cases are known to harbor mutations
in BMP pathway genes. Haramis et al. (2004) concluded that their data
indicated that intestinal BMP signaling represses de novo crypt
formation and polyp growth.

The mouse C3H10T1/2 stem cell line can be induced to differentiate into
adipocytes by exposing proliferating cells to BMP4 during a specific
time window prior to induction of differentiation (Tang et al., 2004).
Bowers et al. (2006) identified a subclone of these cells, the A33 cell
line, that was committed to the adipocyte lineage. A33 cells expressed
and secreted Bmp4 during the critical time point in the proliferative
stage. Inhibition of Bmp4 activity by the addition of noggin at the
critical time blocked the ability of A33 cells to differentiate into
adipocytes.

Piccirillo et al. (2006) reported that bone morphogenetic proteins,
among which BMP4 elicits the strongest effect, trigger a significant
reduction in the stem-like, tumor-initiating precursors of human
glioblastomas. Transient in vitro exposure to BMP4 abolished the
capacity of transplanted glioblastoma cells to establish intracerebral
glioblastomas. Most importantly, in vivo delivery of BMP4 effectively
blocked the tumor growth and associated mortality that occurred in 100%
of mice after intracerebral grafting of human glioblastoma cells.
Piccirillo et al. (2006) demonstrated that BMPs activate their cognate
receptor BMPRs and trigger the SMAD signaling cascade in cells isolated
from human glioblastomas. This is followed by a reduction in
proliferation, and increased expression of markers of neural
differentiation, with no effect on cell viability. The concomitant
reduction in clonogenic ability, in the size of the CD133
(604365)-positive population, and in the growth kinetics of glioblastoma
cells indicated that BMP4 reduces the tumor-initiating cell pool of
glioblastomas. These findings showed that the BMP-BMPR signaling
system--which controls the activity of normal brainstem cells--may also
act as a key inhibitory regulator of tumor-initiating, stem-like cells
from glioblastomas and the results also identified BMP4 as a novel,
noncytotoxic therapeutic effector, which may be used to prevent growth
and recurrence of glioblastomas in humans.

Wordinger et al. (2007) studied the effects of altered BMP signaling on
intraocular pressure (IOP) in primary open angle glaucoma (POAG; see
137760). They found that the human trabecular meshwork (TM) synthesized
and secreted BMP4 as well as expressed the BMP receptor subtypes BMPR1
(see BMPR1A; 601299) and BMPR2 (600799). TM cells responded to exogenous
BMP4 by phosphorylating SMAD signaling proteins. Cultured human TM cells
treated with TGFB2 significantly increased fibronectin (FN; 135600)
levels, and BMP4 blocked this FN induction. There was significant
elevation of mRNA and protein levels of the BMP antagonist Gremlin
(GREM1; 603054) in glaucomatous TM cells. In addition, Gremlin was
present in human aqueous humor. Gremlin blocked the negative effect of
BMP4 on TGFB2 induction of FN. Addition of recombinant Gremlin to the
medium of ex vivo perfusion-cultured human eye anterior segments caused
the glaucoma phenotype of elevated IOP. Wordinger et al. (2007)
concluded that these results were consistent with the hypothesis that,
in POAG, elevated expression of Gremlin by TM cells inhibited BMP4
antagonism of TGFB2 and led to increased extracellular matrix deposition
and elevated IOP.

Using RT-PCR, immunofluorescence, and flow cytometric analyses, Cejalvo
et al. (2007) demonstrated that human thymus and cortical epithelial
cells produced BMP2 and BMP4 and that both thymocytes and thymic
epithelium expressed the molecular machinery to respond to these
proteins. The receptors BMPR1A and BMPR2 were mainly expressed by
cortical thymocytes, whereas BMPR1B was expressed in the majority of
thymocytes. BMP4 treatment of chimeric human-mouse fetal thymic organ
cultures seeded with CD34 (142230)-positive human thymic progenitors
resulted in reduced cell recovery and inhibition of differentiation of
CD4 (186940)/CD8 (see 186910) double-negative to double-positive stages.
Cejalvo et al. (2007) concluded that BMP2 and BMP4 have a role in human
T-cell differentiation.

A hair follicle cycles through anagen (growth), catagen (involution),
and telogen (resting) phases and then reenters the anagen phase. Plikus
et al. (2008) demonstrated that unexpected periodic expression of BMP2
and BMP4 in the dermis regulates the process of hair follicle
regeneration. This BMP cycle is out of phase with the WNT/beta catenin
cycle (see 116806), thus dividing the conventional telogen into new
functional phases: one refractory and the other competent for hair
regeneration, characterized by high and low BMP signaling, respectively.
Overexpression of noggin (602991), a BMP antagonist, in mouse skin
resulted in a markedly shortened refractory phase and faster propagation
of the regenerative wave. Transplantation of skin from this mutant onto
a wildtype host showed that follicles and donor and host can affect
their cycling behaviors mutually, with the outcome depending on the
equilibrium of BMP activity in the dermis. Administration of BMP4
protein caused the competent region to become refractory. The existence
of a substance termed 'chalone' had been proposed to explain the
phenomenon of telogen refractivity, which can inhibit anagen
development. Plikus et al. (2008) suggested that BMPs may be the
long-sought chalone postulated by classical experiments. Plikus et al.
(2008) concluded that, taken together, the results presented in this
study provided an example of hierarchical regulation of local organ stem
cell homeostasis by the interorgan macroenvironment. The expression of
Bmp2 in subcutaneous adipocytes indicates physiologic integration
between the 2 thermoregulatory organs.

Using in situ hybridization in human embryos, Bakrania et al. (2008)
authors demonstrated expression of BMP4 in optic vesicle, developing
lens, the diencephalic floor, consistent with a role in pituitary
development, and in the interdigital mesenchyme and the joint primordium
at the stage at which limb buds have formed and are starting to
differentiate into fingers. Because BMP4 interacts with hedgehog
signaling genes in animals, Bakrania et al. (2008) evaluated gene
expression in embryos and demonstrated cotemporal and cospatial
expression of BMP4 and hedgehog signaling genes.

Wang et al. (2008) demonstrated binding between human full-length
triple-helical type IV collagen (see 120130) and BMP4. Based on
experiments in Drosophila, Wang et al. (2008) predicted that a conserved
sequence in type IV collagen functions as a BMP-binding module, and that
type IV collagens affect BMP signaling during vertebrate development.

Limb development is regulated by epithelial-mesenchymal feedback loops
between sonic hedgehog (SHH; 600725) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF)
signaling involving the bone morphogenetic protein antagonist Grem1. By
combining mouse molecular genetics with mathematical modeling, Benazet
et al. (2009) showed that BMP4 first initiates and SHH then propagates
epithelial-mesenchymal feedback signaling through differential
transcriptional regulation of Grem1 to control digit specification. This
switch occurs by linking a fast BMP4/GREM1 module to the slower
SHH/GREM1/FGF epithelial-mesenchymal feedback loop. This self-regulatory
signaling network results in robust regulation of distal limb
development that is able to compensate for variations by
interconnectivity among the 3 signaling pathways.

Wandzioch and Zaret (2009) investigated how BMP4, transforming growth
factor-beta (TGF-beta; 190180), and fibroblast growth factor signaling
pathways converge on the earliest genes that elicit pancreas and liver
induction in mouse embryos. These genes include ALB1 (103600), PROX1
(601546), HNF6 (604164), HNF1B (189907), and PDX1 (600733). The
inductive network was found to be dynamic; it changed within hours.
Different signals functioned in parallel to induce different early
genes, and 2 permutations of signals induced liver progenitor domains,
which revealed flexibility in cell programming. Also, the specification
of pancreas and liver progenitors was restricted by the TGF-beta
pathway.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Bakrania et al. (2008) considered BMP4 as a candidate gene for ocular
malformation and digit anomalies (MCOPS6; 607932) and screened 215
individuals with ocular defects, mainly microphthalmia, for cytogenetic
defects by chromosomal analysis, for gene deletions by multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA), and for mutations in the
BMP4 gene by direct sequencing. They identified 2 individuals with a
14q22-q23 deletion associated with anophthalmia-microphthalmia, 1 with
associated pituitary anomaly. Sequence analysis of the BMP4 gene
identified 2 mutations: a frameshift mutation (112262.0001) in a family
with anophthalmia-microphthalmia, retinal dystrophy, myopia, poly-
and/or syndactyly, and brain anomalies, and a missense mutation
(112262.0002) in an individual with anophthalmia-microphthalmia and
brain anomalies. The finding of expression of BMP4 in developing human
optic vesicle, retina and lens, pituitary region, and digits strongly
supported BMP4 as a causative gene for anophthalmia-microphthalmia with
pituitary abnormalities and digit anomalies. Bakrania et al. (2008) also
identified 4 cases, some of which had retinal dystrophy, with 'low
penetrant' mutations in both BMP4 and hedgehog signaling genes, namely,
Sonic hedgehog (SHH; 600725) or Patched (PTCH1; 601309). Bakrania et al.
(2008) concluded that BMP4 is a major gene for
anophthalmia-microphthalmia and/or retinal dystrophy and brain anomalies
and may be a candidate for myopia and poly/syndactyly. The finding of
low-penetrant variants of BMP4 and hedgehog signaling partners suggested
an interaction between the 2 pathways in humans.

Suzuki et al. (2009) identified mutations in the BMP4 gene (see, e.g.,
112262.0003-112262.0005 and 112262.0007) in patients with cleft lip and
cleft palate (OFC11; 600625). The parents, who also carried the
mutation, had subtle defects in the orbicularis oris muscle on
ultrasound. Overall, BMP4 mutations were identified in 1 of 30 patients
with microform clefts, 2 of 87 patients with subepithelial defects in
the orbicularis oris muscle, and 5 of 968 patients with overt cleft
lip/palate (CL/P). These results indicated that microforms and
subepithelial defects in the orbicularis oris muscle are part of the
spectrum of CL/P and should be considered during the clinical evaluation
of families with clefts.

Reis et al. (2011) analyzed the BMP4 coding region in 133 patients with
various ocular conditions, including 60 with clinical
anophthalmia/microphthalmia (34 syndromic), 38 with anterior segment
anomalies (including 3 patients with SHORT syndrome, 269880), 16 with
cataract, 4 with coloboma, 5 with high myopia, and 10 with other
disorders. In 1 patient with SHORT syndrome, they identified a
heterozygous 2.263-Mb deletion encompassing BMP4 and 13 other genes. In
3 probands with syndromic microphthalmia, they identified heterozygosity
for a 158-kb deletion involving only the BMP4 gene (112262.0006), a
nonsense mutation (R198X; 122262.0007), and a frameshift mutation
(112262.0008), respectively; the affected sister of the proband with the
frameshift mutation carried both the frameshift and a missense mutation
(H121R; 112262.0009).

ANIMAL MODEL

Connor (1996) speculated that transgenic mice with selective
overexpression of Bmp4 may serve as animal models of fibrodysplasia
ossificans progressiva (FOP; 135100) and may make it possible to
evaluate potential therapies directed at influencing the expression of
BMP4 or its 2 types of cell-surface receptors. Not only may this
knowledge provide a rational basis for therapy for FOP, but possibly
also measures for the control of local ectopic bone development, which
occurs in 10 to 20% of patients who have undergone surgical hip
replacement. According to Connor (1996), there appears to be an
individual propensity to the phenomenon of secondary ectopic
ossification of soft tissue. In the 10 to 20% of patients who develop
local ectopic bone formation after hip replacement, if surgical removal
of that bone is attempted or the opposite hip is replaced, ectopic bone
almost invariably recurs or occurs.

Furuta and Hogan, (1998) showed that Bmp4, which is expressed strongly
in the mouse optic vesicle and weakly in surrounding mesenchyme and
surface ectoderm, plays a crucial role in lens induction. In Bmp4-null
mouse embryos, lens induction was absent but could be rescued by
exogenous BMP4 protein applied into the optic vesicle in explant
cultures. In Bmp4-null embryos, Msx2 (123101) expression was absent, and
expression mutant eye explants was rescued by BMP4-carrying beads,
suggesting that BMP4 functions to regulate specific gene expression in
the optic vesicle. No change in Pax6 (607108) was detected in Bmp4-null
eyes.

Using a hypomorphic Bmp4 allele and conditional gene inactivation, Jiao
et al. (2003) circumvented the early lethality of Bmp4 null mouse
embryos and manipulated Bmp4 expression specifically in developing
cardiomyocytes. They found that Bmp4 was dispensable for cushion
formation but was required for proper atrioventricular septation after
cushions had formed. Defects in septation caused atrioventricular canal
defects (AVCD; 600309) that recapitulated the range of AVCDs diagnosed
in patients.

Kan et al. (2004) generated mice overexpressing BMP4 under the control
of the neuron-specific enolase promoter (ENO2; 131360) and observed the
development of progressive postnatal heterotopic endochondral
ossification, a phenotype that matches the anatomic, spatial, and
temporal characteristics of human FOP. The phenotype was completely
rescued in double-transgenic mice that also overexpressed the BMP4
inhibitor noggin, confirming the role of BMP4 in the pathogenesis of the
disease.

Liu et al. (2005) demonstrated that mice with conditional inactivation
of the Bmpr1a gene in the facial primordia developed completely
penetrant, bilateral cleft lip/palate (119530) with arrested tooth
formation. The cleft secondary palate of Bmpr1a-mutant embryos was
associated with diminished cell proliferation in maxillary process
mesenchyme and defective anterior posterior patterning. In contrast, the
mutant mice showed elevated apoptosis in the fusing lip region of the
medial nasal process. Conditional inactivation of the Bmp4 gene resulted
in delayed fusion of the medial nasal process to form the lip, resulting
in isolated cleft lip in all mouse embryos at 12 days after conception.
However, cleft lip was only present in 22% of mouse embryos at 14.5 days
after conception, indicating spontaneous repair of cleft lip in utero
(see 600625). The findings implicated a BMP4-BMPR1A genetic pathway that
functions in lip fusion, and revealed that BMP signaling has distinct
roles in lip and palate fusion.

Fuller et al. (2007) found that Bmp4 and Bmp7 (112267) increased rapidly
at the site of chemically-induced demyelinating lesions in adult rat
spinal cord. The Bmp proteins stimulated Smad (see, e.g., SMAD1; 601595)
activation in mature astrocytes, resulting in increased expression of
chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans and glial scar formation.

Goldman et al. (2009) used Bmp4-hypomorphic mice to investigate the
regulation of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) function and the maintenance
of steady-state hematopoiesis in adults. Reporter gene analysis showed
that Bmp4 was expressed in osteoblasts, endothelial cells, and
megakaryocytes. Resting hematopoiesis was normal in Bmp4-deficient mice,
but cells expressing Kit (164920) and Sca1 (also known as Ly6a, a
mouse-specific gene) were significantly reduced. Serial transplantation
revealed that Bmp4-deficient recipients had a microenvironmental defect
that reduced the repopulating activity of wildtype HSCs. When wildtype
HSCs did engraft in Bmp4-deficient bone marrow, they showed a marked
decrease in functional stem cell activity. Goldman et al. (2009)
concluded that BMP4 is a critical component of the hematopoietic
microenvironment and is involved in regulating HSC number and function.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MICROPHTHALMIA, SYNDROMIC 6
BMP4, 2-BP DEL, 226AG

Bakrania et al. (2008) described a kindred in which members of 3
generations had eye, brain, and digit developmental anomalies (MCOPS6;
607932) related to a frameshift mutation in the BMP4 gene (222del2AG,
S76fs104X). The proband had clinical anophthalmia with no light
perception on the right; the left eye showed microcornea, coloboma,
retinal dystrophy, and tilted optic disc. He had mild learning
difficulties and polydactyly. Cranial MRI showed enlarged trigones,
hypoplastic corpus callosum, and sulcal widening. The maternal
grandmother, who carried the same mutation, showed on MRI enlarged
ventricles, hypoplastic corpus callosum, and marked sulcal widening
associated with diffuse brain atrophy; additionally, she had polydactyly
and finger webbing.

.0002
MICROPHTHALMIA, SYNDROMIC 6
BMP4, GLU93GLY

In a patient with eye, brain, and digit developmental anomalies (MCOPS6;
607932), Bakrania et al. (2008) identified a 278A-G transition in the
BMP4 gene that resulted in a glu93-to-gly substitution (E93G). The right
eye of the patient showed microphthalmia, sclerocornea, and orbital
cyst; the left eye showed microphthalmia, coloboma, and microcornea.
Cranial MRI showed delayed myelination and mild reduction in white
matter. The proband had developmental delay, seizures, undescended
testes, simple prominent ears, broad hands, low-placed thumbs, and
dysplastic nails.

.0003
OROFACIAL CLEFT 11
BMP4, ALA346VAL

In a child with a microform cleft lip and cleft palate (OFC11; 600625),
Suzuki et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 1037C-T transition in the
BMP4 gene, resulting in an ala346-to-val (A346V) substitution. His
father, who also carried the mutation, had subtle right microform cleft
lip and a bifid uvula. The microform cleft lip was confirmed by
ultrasound, which detected defects in the orbicularis oris muscle in
both patients.

.0004
OROFACIAL CLEFT 11
BMP4, SER91CYS

In a child with a cleft lip and cleft palate (OFC11; 600625), Suzuki et
al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 271A-T transversion in the BMP4
gene, resulting in a ser91-to-cys (S91C) substitution. The child's
parent, who also carried the mutation, had defects of the orbicularis
oris muscle on ultrasonography.

.0005
OROFACIAL CLEFT 11
BMP4, ARG287HIS

In a child with a cleft lip and cleft palate (OFC11; 600625), Suzuki et
al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 860G-A transition in the BMP4 gene,
resulting in an arg287-to-his (R287H) substitution. The child's parent,
who also carried the mutation, had defects of the orbicularis oris
muscle on ultrasonography.

.0006
MICROPHTHALMIA, SYNDROMIC 6
BMP4, DEL

In a 12-year-old Caucasian girl with bilateral microphthalmia and other
eye anomalies, facial dysmorphism, cognitive impairment, and a history
of hypotonia (MCOPS6; 607932), Reis et al. (2011) identified
heterozygosity for a 158-kb deletion on chromosome 14q22.2, with a
minimum interval chr14:53,361,728-53,520,165 and a maximum interval
chr14:53,352,059-53,520,859 (NCBI36), deleting only the BMP4 gene. In
addition to bilateral microphthalmia, the patient had bilateral
persistence of the pupillary membrane, high myopia, strabismus, and
nystagmus. Her dysmorphic facial features included maxillary hypoplasia
with midface flattening, thin upper lip, broad nasal bridge and tip, and
telecanthus, with a preauricular ear tag on the right. She had normal
growth, head circumference, umbilicus, hands, and feet. The patient was
adopted, and no family members were available for study.

.0007
OROFACIAL CLEFT 11
MICROPHTHALMIA, SYNDROMIC 6, INCLUDED
BMP4, ARG198TER

In a Mongolian patient with cleft lip and palate (OFC11; 600625), Suzuki
et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for a 592C-T transition in exon
4 of the BMP4 gene, resulting in an arg198-to-ter (R198X) substitution.
The parents were unavailable for testing.

In a 19-month-old boy with right clinical anophthalmia and left
microphthalmia, sclerocornea, facial asymmetry, and right-sided
diaphragmatic hernia (MCOPS6; 607932), Reis et al. (2011) identified
heterozygosity for the R198X mutation in BMP4. The boy also had mild to
moderate laryngomalacia, with indentation from the innominate artery,
and bilateral inguinal hernias. He was macrocephalic with a large
anterior fontanel, and had hydrocephalus that was treated with a large
subdural-peritoneal shunt. Brain MRI at 4 months of age confirmed the
ocular findings and showed macrocrania with very prominent subarachnoid
spaces, superimposed overlying subdural collections, as well as diffuse
cerebral atrophy with ventricular prominence. The mutation was not found
in 179 Caucasian, 89 African American, 91 Asian, and 93 Hispanic
controls.

.0008
MICROPHTHALMIA, SYNDROMIC 6
BMP4, 1-BP DUP, 171C

In a 3.5-year-old Caucasian girl with bilateral clinical anophthalmia,
small ears, and small left renal cyst (MCOPS6; 607932), Reis et al.
(2011) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp duplication (171dupC) in
exon 2 of the BMP4 gene, predicted to cause a frameshift and premature
termination. The proband had normal development, without craniofacial
dysmorphism or anomalies of the hands or feet. Head CT in the neonatal
period showed significantly small globes, minimal ocular tissue, and
absent optic nerves, but otherwise normal brain structures. Her affected
9-year-old maternal half sister was found to be compound heterozygous
for 171dupC and a 362A-G transition in exon 2 of BMP4, resulting in a
his121-to-arg (H121R; 112262.0009) substitution at a conserved residue.
The sister had unilateral clinical anophthalmia, blepharophimosis,
telecanthus, and bilateral postaxial polydactyly of the hands. She had
poor growth, with height and weight less than the third centile, and
relative macrocephaly with frontal bossing. Head CT showed atrophic left
globe and small left orbit. Their asymptomatic mother was heterozygous
for the frameshift mutation, with no evidence of mosaicism; the mutation
was apparently de novo, as the maternal grandparents carried wildtype
BMP4 alleles. The mother was unavailable for examination, so mild ocular
anomalies could not be ruled out, and the father was also unavailable
for study. Neither mutation was found in 179 Caucasian, 89 African
American, 91 Asian, and 93 Hispanic controls.

.0009
MICROPHTHALMIA, SYNDROMIC 6
BMP4, HIS121ARG

See 112262.0008 and Reis et al. (2011).

REFERENCE 1. Bakrania, P.; Efthymiou, M.; Klein, J. C.; Salt, A.; Bunyan, D.
J.; Wyatt, A.; Ponting, C. P.; Martin, A.; Williams, S.; Lindley,
V.; Gilmore, J.; Restori, M.; and 9 others: Mutations in BMP4 cause
eye, brain, and digit developmental anomalies: overlap between the
BMP4 and hedgehog signaling pathways. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 82: 304-319,
2008.

2. Benazet, J.-D.; Bischofberger, M.; Tiecke, E.; Goncalves, A.; Martin,
J. F.; Zuniga, A.; Naef, F.; Zeller, R.: A self-regulatory system
of interlinked signaling feedback loops controls mouse limb patterning. Science 323:
1050-1053, 2009.

3. Bowers, R. R.; Kim, J. W.; Otto, T. C.; Lane, M. D.: Stable stem
cell commitment to the adipocyte lineage by inhibition of DNA methylation:
role of the BMP-4 gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 13022-13027,
2006.

4. Cejalvo, T.; Sacedon, R.; Hernandez-Lopez, C.; Diez, B.; Gutierrez-Frias,
C.; Valencia, J.; Zapata, A. G.; Varas, A.; Vicente, A.: Bone morphogenetic
protein-2/4 signalling pathway components are expressed in the human
thymus and inhibit early T-cell development. Immunology 121: 94-104,
2007.

5. Chen, Y.; Cheung, K. M. C.; Kung, H.; Leong, J. C. Y.; Lu, W. W.;
Luk, K. D. K.: In vivo new bone formation by direct transfer of adenoviral-mediated
bone morphogenetic protein-4 gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 298:
121-127, 2002.

6. Cheng, H.; Jiang, W.; Phillips, F. M.; Haydon, R. C.; Peng, Y.;
Zhou, L.; Luu, H. H.; An, N.; Breyer, B.; Vanichakarn, P.; Szatkowski,
J. P.; Park, J. Y.; He, T.-C.: Osteogenic activity of the fourteen
types of human bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs). J. Bone Joint
Surg. Am. 85: 1544-1552, 2003. Note: Erratum: J. Bone Joint Surg.
Am. 86: 141 only, 2003.

7. Connor, J. M.: Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva: lessons
from rare maladies. (Editorial) New Eng. J. Med. 335: 591-593, 1996.

8. Dickinson, M. E.; Kobrin, M. S.; Silan, C. M.; Kingsley, D. M.;
Justice, M. J.; Miller, D. A.; Ceci, J. D.; Lock, L. F.; Lee, A.;
Buchberg, A. M.; Siracusa, L. D.; Lyons, K. M.; Derynck, R.; Hogan,
B. L. M.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.: Chromosomal localization
of seven members of the murine TGF-beta superfamily suggests close
linkage to several morphogenetic mutant loci. Genomics 6: 505-520,
1990.

9. Dooley, C. A.; Attia, G. R.; Rainey, W. E.; Moore, D. R.; Carr,
B. R.: Bone morphogenetic protein inhibits ovarian androgen production. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 3331-3337, 2000.

10. Fuller, M. L.; DeChant, A. K.; Rothstein, B.; Caprariello, A.;
Wang, R.; Hall, A. K.; Miller, R. H.: Bone morphogenetic proteins
promote gliosis in demyelinating spinal cord lesions. Ann. Neurol. 62:
288-300, 2007.

11. Furuta, Y.; Hogan, B. L.: BMP4 is essential for lens induction
in the mouse embryo. Genes Dev. 12: 3764-3775, 1998.

12. Goldman, D. C.; Bailey, A. S.; Pfaffle, D. L.; Al Masri, A.; Christian,
J. L.; Fleming, W. H.: BMP4 regulates the hematopoietic stem cell
niche. Blood 114: 4393-4401, 2009.

13. Haramis, A.-P. G.; Begthel, H.; van den Born, M.; van Es, J.;
Jonkheer, S.; Offerhaus, G. J. A.; Clevers, H.: De novo crypt formation
and juvenile polyposis on BMP inhibition in mouse intestine. Science 303:
1684-1686, 2004.

14. Jiao, K.; Kulessa, H.; Tompkins, K.; Zhou, Y.; Batts, L.; Baldwin,
H. S.; Hogan, B. L. M.: An essential role of Bmp4 in the atrioventricular
septation of the mouse heart. Genes Dev. 17: 2362-2367, 2003.

15. Kan, L.; Hu, M.; Gomes, W. A.; Kessler, J. A.: Transgenic mice
overexpressing BMP4 develop a fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva
(FOP)-like phenotype. Am. J. Path. 165: 1107-1115, 2004.

16. Liu, W.; Sun, X.; Braut, A.; Mishina, Y.; Behringer, R. R.; Mina,
M.; Martin, J. F.: Distinct functions for Bmp signaling in lip and
palate fusion in mice. Development 132: 1453-1461, 2005.

17. McAlpine, P. J.: Personal Communication. Winnipeg, Manitoba,
Canada  7/15/1992.

18. Monsoro-Burq, A.-H.; le Douarin, N. M.: BMP4 plays a key role
in left-right patterning in chick embryos by maintaining Sonic hedgehog
asymmetry. Molec. Cell 7: 789-799, 2001.

19. Paez-Pereda, M.; Giacomini, D.; Refojo, D.; Nagashima, A. C.;
Hopfner, U.; Grubler, Y.; Chervin, A.; Goldberg, V.; Goya, R.; Hentges,
S. T.; Low, M. J.; Holsboer, F.; Stalla, G. K.; Arzt, E.: Involvement
of bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP-4) in pituitary prolactinoma
pathogenesis through a Smad/estrogen receptor crosstalk. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 100: 1034-1039, 2003.

20. Piccirillo, S. G. M.; Reynolds, B. A.; Zanetti, N.; Lamorte, G.;
Binda, E.; Broggi, G.; Brem, H.; Olivi, A.; Dimeco, F.; Vescovi, A.
L.: Bone morphogenetic proteins inhibit the tumorigenic potential
of human brain tumour-initiating cells. Nature 444: 761-765, 2006.

21. Plikus, M. V.; Mayer, J. A.; de la Cruz, D.; Baker, R. E.; Maini,
P. K.; Maxson, R.; Chuong, C.-M.: Cyclic dermal BMP signalling regulates
stem cell activation during hair regeneration. Nature 451: 340-344,
2008.

22. Reis, L. M.; Tyler, R. C.; Schilter, K. F.; Abdul-Rahman, O.;
Innis, J. W.; Kozel, B. A.; Schneider, A. S.; Bardakjian, T. M.; Lose,
E. J.; Martin, D. M.; Broeckel, U.; Semina, E. V.: BMP4 loss-of-function
mutations in developmental eye disorders including SHORT syndrome. Hum.
Genet. 130: 495-504, 2011.

23. Shafritz, A. B.; Shore, E. M.; Gannon, F. H.; Zasloff, M. A.;
Taub, R.; Muenke, M.; Kaplan, F. S.: Overexpression of an osteogenic
morphogen in fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva. New Eng. J. Med. 335:
555-561, 1996.

24. Shore, E. M.; Xu, M.; Shah, P. B.; Janoff, H. B.; Hahn, G. V.;
Deardorff, M. A.; Sovinsky, L.; Spinner, N. B.; Zasloff, M. A.; Wozney,
J. M.; Kaplan, F. S.: The human bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP-4)
gene: molecular structure and transcriptional regulation. Calcif.
Tissue Int. 63: 221-229, 1998.

25. Suzuki, S.; Marazita, M. L.; Cooper, M. E.; Miwa, N.; Hing, A.;
Jugessur, A.; Natsume, N.; Shimozato, K.; Ohbayashi, N.; Suzuki, Y.;
Niimi, T.; Minami, K.; and 15 others: Mutations in BMP4 are associated
with subepithelial, microform, and overt cleft lip. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 84:
406-411, 2009.

26. Tabas, J. A.; Hahn, G. V.; Cohen, R. B.; Seaunez, H. N.; Modi,
W. S.; Wozney, J. M.; Zasloff, M.; Kaplan, F. S.: Chromosomal assignment
of the human gene for bone morphogenetic protein 4. Clin. Orthop.
Rel. Res. 293: 310-316, 1993.

27. Tang, Q.-Q.; Otto, T. C.; Lane, M. D.: Commitment of CH3H10T1/2
pluripotent stem cells to the adipocyte lineage. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 101: 9607-9611, 2004.

28. Thomas, B. L.; Liu, J. K.; Rubenstein, J. L. R.; Sharpe, P. T.
: Independent regulation of Dlx2 expression in the epithelium and
mesenchyme of the first branchial arch. Development 127: 217-224,
2000.

29. Tucker, A. S.; Matthews, K. L.; Sharpe, P. T.: Transformation
of tooth type induced by inhibition of BMP signaling. Science 282:
1136-1138, 1998.

30. van den Wijngaard, A.; Olde Weghuis, D.; Boersma, C. J. C.; van
Zoelen, E. J. J.; Geurts van Kessel, A.; Olijve, W.: Fine mapping
of the human bone morphogenetic protein-4 gene (BMP4) to chromosome
14q22-q23 by in situ hybridization. Genomics 27: 559-560, 1995.

31. van den Wijngaard, A.; van Kraay, M.; van Zoelen, E. J. J.; Olijve,
W.; Boersma, C. J. C.: Genomic organization of the human bone morphogenetic
protein-4 gene: molecular basis for multiple transcripts. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 219: 789-794, 1996.

32. Wandzioch, E.; Zaret, K. S.: Dynamic signaling network for the
specification of embryonic pancreas and liver progenitors. Science 324:
1707-1710, 2009.

33. Wang, X.; Harris, R. E.; Bayston, L. J.; Ashe, H. L.: Type IV
collagens regulate BMP signalling in Drosophila. Nature 455: 72-77,
2008.

34. Wordinger, R. J.; Fleenor, D. L.; Hellberg, P. E.; Pang, I.-H.;
Tovar, T. O.; Zode, G. S.; Fuller, J. A.; Clark, A. F.: Effects of
TGF-beta-2, BMP-4, and gremlin in the trabecular meshwork: implications
for glaucoma. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 48: 1191-1200, 2007.

35. Zhu, N. L.; Li, C.; Xiao, J.; Minoo, P.: NKX2.1 regulates transcription
of the gene for human bone morphogenetic protein-4 in lung epithelial
cells. Gene 327: 25-36, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/23/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/11/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/18/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/3/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/17/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/24/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/31/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/21/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/2/2008
Jane Kelly - updated: 11/28/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/23/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/12/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/30/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/12/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/23/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/10/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/12/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/17/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/6/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/15/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/5/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/15/1990

EDITED alopez: 03/11/2013
mgross: 1/19/2012
terry: 11/23/2011
carol: 11/15/2011
carol: 11/14/2011
terry: 11/11/2011
carol: 10/13/2011
wwang: 5/25/2011
wwang: 5/23/2011
wwang: 5/20/2011
alopez: 3/2/2011
terry: 1/13/2011
mgross: 10/18/2010
wwang: 4/2/2010
alopez: 7/16/2009
terry: 7/9/2009
wwang: 4/8/2009
ckniffin: 4/3/2009
alopez: 3/23/2009
terry: 3/17/2009
terry: 10/8/2008
alopez: 9/25/2008
terry: 9/24/2008
alopez: 4/2/2008
terry: 3/31/2008
alopez: 3/19/2008
terry: 2/21/2008
wwang: 1/22/2008
ckniffin: 1/2/2008
carol: 11/28/2007
alopez: 1/24/2007
terry: 1/23/2007
terry: 11/3/2006
mgross: 10/16/2006
terry: 10/12/2006
wwang: 6/22/2006
alopez: 2/2/2006
terry: 2/1/2006
wwang: 8/30/2005
alopez: 4/14/2004
terry: 4/12/2004
mgross: 4/12/2004
terry: 3/23/2004
mgross: 11/11/2003
terry: 11/10/2003
tkritzer: 3/25/2003
terry: 3/12/2003
mgross: 1/2/2003
terry: 12/17/2002
mgross: 8/6/2001
alopez: 3/15/2001
carol: 7/19/2000
alopez: 11/9/1998
alopez: 11/5/1998
terry: 6/18/1998
mark: 12/31/1996
jenny: 12/19/1996
terry: 12/13/1996
mark: 4/28/1996
terry: 4/22/1996
mark: 7/31/1995
terry: 7/24/1995
mimadm: 4/29/1994
warfield: 4/7/1994
carol: 12/13/1993
carol: 11/4/1993

176883	TITLE *176883 PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, NONRECEPTOR-TYPE, 6; PTPN6
;;PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE 1C; PTP1C;;
TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE SHP1; SHP1;;
HEMATOPOIETIC CELL PHOSPHATASE; HCPH
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The growth and functional responses of hematopoietic cells are regulated
through tyrosine phosphorylation of proteins. Using a PCR approach, Yi
et al. (1991) identified 3 novel tyrosine protein phosphatases in
hematopoietic cells. One of these, expressed predominantly in
hematopoietic cells, was termed hematopoietic cell phosphatase (HCPH).
From a pre-B-cell-derived library, Matthews et al. (1992) cloned the
mouse PTPN6 cDNA, which they designated SHP (Src homology region
2-domain phosphatase). Yi et al. (1992) obtained complete cDNAs for both
the human and murine HCPH genes. The human gene was also cloned from a
breast cancer cell line and termed PTP1C by Shen et al. (1991). PTP1C
encodes a cytoplasmic protein that contains a phosphatase-catalytic
domain in the C-terminal region and 2 tandemly repeated, src-homology 2
(SH2) domains in the N-terminal region. SH2 domains were first
identified in the SRC gene family and found in a variety of proteins
involved in signal transduction. The SH2 domains may recognize
phosphorylated tyrosine residues and direct protein-protein
associations.

GENE STRUCTURE

Banville et al. (1995) demonstrated that the PTPN6 gene consists of 17
exons spanning 17 kb of DNA. Three nonhematopoietic PTPN6 transcripts
were identified in a variety of cell lines and were shown to be
transcribed from a common promoter. The hematopoietic form of the PTPN6
transcript is initiated at a downstream promoter separated by 7 kb from
the upstream promoter. This downstream promoter is active exclusively in
cells of the hematopoietic lineage.

MAPPING

Yi et al. (1992) mapped the human HCPH gene to chromosome 12p13-p12 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. By study of panels of somatic cell
hybrids and fluorescence in situ hybridization, Plutzky et al. (1992)
determined that the gene encoding the nontransmembrane protein-tyrosine
phosphatase of the nonreceptor type 6 is located in region 12p13.

Using a genomic probe in interspecific backcross analysis, Yi et al.
(1992) mapped the murine Hcph gene to chromosome 6 where it was found to
be tightly linked to the Tnfr2 and Ly4 genes.

GENE FUNCTION

Plutzky et al. (1992) suggested that since PTPN6 is expressed at high
levels in hematopoietic cells of all lineages and its expression is
induced early in hematopoietic differentiation, and since 12p13 is a
region commonly involved in leukemia-associated chromosomal
abnormalities, altered expression and/or structure of PTPN6 may play a
role in leukemogenesis.

T-cell lymphomas lose expression of SHP1 due to DNA methylation of its
promoter. Zhang et al. (2005) demonstrated that malignant T cells
expressed DNMT1 (126375) and that STAT3 (102582) could bind sites in the
SHP1 promoter in vitro. STAT3, DNMT1, and HDAC1 (601241) formed
complexes and bound to the SHP1 promoter in vivo. Antisense DNMT1 and
STAT3 small interfering RNA induced DNA demethylation in malignant T
cells and expression of SHP1. Zhang et al. (2005) concluded that STAT3
may transform cells by inducing epigenetic silencing of SHP1 in
cooperation with DNMT1 and HDAC1.

Combining computer modeling and single-cell measurements, Feinerman et
al. (2008) examined how endogenous variation in the expression levels of
signaling proteins might affect antigen responsiveness during T-cell
activation. They found that the CD8 (186910) coreceptor fine-tuned
activation thresholds, whereas SHP1 digitally regulated cell
responsiveness. Stochastic variation in expression of these proteins
generated substantial diversity of activation within a clonal population
of T cells, but coregulation of CD8 and SHP1 levels ultimately limited
this very diversity. Feinerman et al. (2008) concluded that these
findings revealed how eukaryotic cells can draw on regulated variation
in gene expression to achieve phenotypic variability in a controlled
manner.

In a cultured bovine retinal pericyte model, Geraldes et al. (2009)
demonstrated that hyperglycemia persistently activates PRKCD (176977)
and p38-alpha MAPK (MAPK14; 600289), thus increasing expression of SHP1,
and that this occurs independently of NFKB (see 164011) activation. This
signaling cascade leads to PDGF receptor-beta (PDGFRB; 173410)
dephosphorylation and a reduction in downstream signaling from this
receptor, resulting in pericyte apoptosis, the most specific vascular
histopathology associated with diabetic complications. The authors
observed increased PRKCD activity and an increase in the number of
acellular capillaries in diabetic mouse retinas, which were not
reversible with insulin treatment that achieved normoglycemia. Unlike
diabetic age-matched wildtype mice, diabetic Prkcd -/- mice did not show
activation of MAPK14 or SHP1, inhibition of PDGFB (190040) signaling in
vascular cells, or the presence of acellular capillaries. The authors
also observed PRKCD, MAPK14, and SHP1 activation in brain pericytes and
in the renal cortex of diabetic mice. Geraldes et al. (2009) concluded
that this represents a new signaling pathway by which hyperglycemia can
induce PDGFB resistance and increased vascular cell apoptosis to cause
diabetic vascular complications.

Khalil et al. (2012) showed that most proliferating germinal center B
cells do not demonstrate active B cell receptor signaling. Rather,
spontaneous and induced signaling was limited by increased phosphatase
activity. Accordingly, both SHP1 and SH2 domain-containing inositol
5-phosphatase (SHIP1; 601582) were hyperphosphorylated in germinal
center cells and remained colocalized with B cell receptors after
ligation. Furthermore, SHP1 was required for germinal cell maintenance.
Intriguingly, germinal center B cells in the cell cycle G2 period
regained responsiveness to B cell receptor stimulation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Beghini et al. (2000) examined the expression of PTPN6 in CD34+/CD117+
blasts from acute myeloid leukemia patients. They identified and cloned
novel PTPN6 mRNA species, derived from aberrant splicing within the
N-SH2 domain leading to retention of intron 3. Sequence analysis
revealed an A-to-G conversion of A7866, which represents the putative
branch site in IVS3 of PTPN6 mRNA. The level of the aberrant
intron-retaining splice variant, evaluated by semiquantitative RT-PCR,
was lower in CD117 +/- AML bone marrow mononuclear cells at remission
than at diagnosis, suggesting an involvement of posttranscriptional
PTPN6 processing in leukemogenesis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Mice with the recessive 'moth eaten' (me) or the allelic 'viable moth
eaten' mutations express a severe autoimmune and immunodeficiency
syndrome. Tsui et al. (1993) showed that the basic defect involves
lesions in the gene that encodes hematopoietic cell phosphatase. Shultz
et al. (1993) showed that 2 allelic 'motheaten' mutations result in
aberrant splicing of the Hcph transcript. Thus, 'motheaten' was the
first animal model for a specific protein-tyrosine phosphatase
deficiency, useful in determining the precise role of HCPH in
hematopoiesis.

Kamata et al. (2003) found that CD4 T cells in mice heterozygous for the
motheaten mutation express about half the normal amount of SHP1. Th2
cell differentiation and Th2 cytokine production in CD4 T cells and
specific cytokine production in mast cells were enhanced in these mice.
Eosinophilic infiltration and enhanced airway hyperresponsiveness were
also noted in OVA-sensitized heterozygous mice, but only after OVA
inhalation. Kamata et al. (2003) suggested that SHP1 may be a negative
regulator in the development of allergic responses such as allergic
asthma.

Dubois et al. (2006) demonstrated that 'viable motheaten' mice bearing a
functionally deficient SHP1 protein are markedly glucose tolerant and
insulin sensitive compared to wildtype littermates, due to enhanced
insulin receptor signaling to IRS (see 147545)-PI3K (see PIK3CA;
171834)-Akt (164730) in liver and muscle and increased phosphorylation
of CEACAM1 (109770). This metabolic phenotype was recapitulated in
normal mice through adenoviral expression of a dominant-negative
inactive form of SHP1 in the liver or hepatic knockdown of SHP1 by small
hairpin RNA-mediated gene silencing. Dubois et al. (2006) concluded that
SHP1 plays a crucial role in negatively modulating insulin action and
clearance in the liver, thereby regulating whole-body glucose
homeostasis.

Using chemical mutagenesis, Croker et al. (2008) obtained mice with a
recessive phenotype they termed 'spin,' for spontaneous inflammation.
Homozygous spin mice had chronic lesions in feet, salivary glands, and
lungs and antichromatin antibodies. Spin mice had enhanced resistance to
Listeria monocytogenes infection. Testing the suppressive effects of
mutations at other loci showed that the autoinflammatory phenotype of
spin mice required Myd88 (602170), Irak4 (606883), and Il1r1 (147810),
but not Ticam1 (607601), Stat1 (600555), or Tnf (191160). Spin mice
derived into a germ-free environment did not show either autoimmune or
autoinflammatory phenotypes. Positional cloning mapped spin to the
distal region of chromosome 6, and Croker et al. (2008) identified a
T-to-A transversion in exon 5 of the Ptpn6 gene, resulting in a
tyr208-to-asn (Y208N) substitution in the N-terminal SH2 domain of the
protein. Croker et al. (2008) concluded that the spin phenotype is due
to a viable hypomorphic allele of Ptpn6 and that spin autoimmunity is
driven by commensal microbes acting through the Tlr (e.g., TLR4; 603030)
pathway requiring Myd88, Irak4, and Il1r1.

PTPN6(spin) mice spontaneously develop a severe inflammatory syndrome
that resembles neutrophilic dermatosis in humans and is characterized by
persistent footpad swelling and suppurative inflammation. Lukens et al.
(2013) reported that receptor-interacting protein-1 (RIP1;
603453)-regulated interleukin 1-alpha (IL1A; 147760) production by
hematopoietic cells critically mediates chronic inflammatory disease in
Ptpn6(spin) mice, whereas inflammasome signaling and IL1-beta
(147720)-mediated events are dispensable. IL1A was also crucial for
exacerbated inflammatory responses and unremitting tissue damage upon
footpad microabrasion of Ptpn6(spin) mice. Notably, pharmacologic and
genetic blockade of the kinase RIP1 protected against wound-induced
inflammation and tissue damage in Ptpn6(spin) mice, whereas RIP3
(605817) deletion failed to do so. Moreover, RIP1-mediated inflammatory
cytokine production was attenuated by NF-kappa-B (see 164011) and ERK
(see 601795) inhibition. Lukens et al. (2013) concluded that
wound-induced tissue damage and chronic inflammation in Ptpn6(spin) mice
are critically dependent on RIP1-mediated IL1-alpha production, whereas
inflammasome signaling and RIP3-mediated necroptosis are dispensable.

REFERENCE 1. Banville, D.; Stocco, R.; Shen, S.-H.: Human protein tyrosine
phosphatase 1C (PTPN6) gene structure: alternate promoter usage and
exon skipping generate multiple transcripts. Genomics 27: 165-173,
1995.

2. Beghini, A.; Ripamonti, C. B.; Peterlongo, P.; Roversi, G.; Cairoli,
R.; Morra, E.; Larizza, L.: RNA hyperediting and alternative splicing
of hematopoietic cell phosphatase (PTPN6) gene in acute myeloid leukemia. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 2297-2304, 2000.

3. Croker, B. A.; Lawson, B. R.; Rutschmann, S.; Berger, M.; Eidenschenk,
C.; Blasius, A. L.; Moresco, E. M. Y.; Sovath, S.; Cengia, L.; Shultz,
L. D.; Theofilopoulos, A. N.; Pettersson, S.; Beutler, B. A.: Inflammation
and autoimmunity caused by a SHP1 mutation depend on IL-1, MyD88,
and microbial trigger. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 15028-15033, 2008.
Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 19561 only, 2008.

4. Dubois, M.-J.; Bergeron, S.; Kim, H.-J.; Dombrowski, L.; Perreault,
M.; Fournes, B.; Faure, R.; Olivier, M.; Beauchemin, N.; Shulman,
G. I.; Siminovitch, K. A.; Kim, J. K.; Marette, A.: The SHP-1 protein
tyrosine phosphatase negatively modulates glucose homeostasis. Nature
Med. 12: 549-556, 2006.

5. Feinerman, O.; Veiga, J.; Dorfman, J. R.; Germain, R. N.; Altan-Bonnet,
G.: Variability and robustness in T cell activation from regulated
heterogeneity in protein levels. Science 321: 1081-1084, 2008.

6. Geraldes, P.; Hiraoka-Yamamoto, J.; Matsumoto, M.; Clermont, A.;
Leitges, M.; Marette, A.; Aiello, L. P.; Kern, T. S.; King, G. L.
: Activation of PKC-delta and SHP-1 by hyperglycemia causes vascular
cell apoptosis and diabetic retinopathy. Nature Med. 15: 1298-1306,
2009.

7. Kamata, T.; Yamashita, M.; Kimura, M.; Murata, K.; Inami, M.; Shimizu,
C.; Sugaya, K.; Wang, C.-R.; Taniguchi, M.; Nakayama, T.: Src homology
2 domain-containing tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1 controls the development
of allergic airway inflammation. J. Clin. Invest. 111: 109-119,
2003.

8. Khalil, A. M.; Cambier, J. C.; Shlomchik, M. J.: B cell receptor
signal transduction in the GC is short-circuited by high phosphatase
activity. Science 336: 1178-1181, 2012.

9. Lukens, J. R.; Vogel, P.; Johnson, G. R.; Kelliher, M. A.; Iwakura,
Y.; Lamkanfi, M.; Kanneganti, T. D.: RIP1-driven autoinflammation
targets IL-1-alpha independently of inflammasomes and RIP3. Nature 498:
224-227, 2013.

10. Matthews, R. J.; Bowne, D. B.; Flores, E.; Thomas, M. L.: Characterization
of hematopoietic intracellular protein tyrosine phosphatases: description
of a phosphatase containing an SH2 domain and another enriched in
proline-, glutamic acid-, serine-, and threonine-rich sequences. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 12: 2396-2405, 1992.

11. Plutzky, J.; Neel, B. G.; Rosenberg, R. D.; Eddy, R. L.; Byers,
M. G.; Jani-Sait, S.; Shows, T. B.: Chromosomal localization of an
SH2-containing tyrosine phosphatase (PTPN6). Genomics 13: 869-872,
1992.

12. Shen, S.-H.; Bastien, L.; Posner, B. I.; Chretien, P.: A protein-tyrosine
phosphatase with sequence similarity to the SH2 domain of the protein-tyrosine
kinases. Nature 352: 736-739, 1991. Note: Erratum: Nature: 353:
868 only, 1991.

13. Shultz, L. D.; Schweitzer, P. A.; Rajan, T. V.; Yi, T.; Ihle,
J. N.; Matthews, R. J.; Thomas, M. L.; Beier, D. R.: Mutations at
the murine motheaten locus are within the hematopoietic cell protein-tyrosine
phosphatase (Hcph) gene. Cell 73: 1445-1454, 1993.

14. Tsui, H. W.; Siminovitch, K. A.; de Souza, L.; Tsui, F. W. L.
: Motheaten and viable motheaten mice have mutations in the haematopoietic
cell phosphatase gene. Nature Genet. 4: 124-129, 1993.

15. Yi, T.; Cleveland, J. L.; Ihle, J. N.: Protein tyrosine phosphatase
containing SH2 domains: characterization, preferential expression
in hematopoietic cells, and localization to human chromosome 12p12-p13. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 12: 836-846, 1992.

16. Yi, T.; Cleveland, J. L.; Ihle, J. N.: Identification of novel
protein tyrosine phosphatases of hematopoietic cells by PCR amplification. Blood 78:
2222-2228, 1991.

17. Yi, T.; Gilbert, D. J.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.; Ihle,
J. N.: Assignment of a novel protein tyrosine phosphatase gene (Hcph)
to mouse chromosome 6. Genomics 14: 793-795, 1992.

18. Zhang, Q.; Wang, H. Y.; Marzec, M.; Raghunath, P. N.; Nagasawa,
T.; Wasik, M. A.: STAT3- and DNA methyltransferase 1-mediated epigenetic
silencing of SHP-1 tyrosine phosphatase tumor suppressor gene in malignant
T lymphocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 6948-6953, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/19/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/2/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/24/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/4/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/4/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/14/2006
Denise L. M. Goh - updated: 4/17/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/14/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/22/1991

EDITED carol: 10/22/2013
alopez: 7/24/2013
carol: 4/22/2013
alopez: 7/24/2012
terry: 7/19/2012
wwang: 12/7/2009
terry: 12/2/2009
mgross: 3/24/2009
terry: 3/24/2009
mgross: 2/4/2009
terry: 2/4/2009
alopez: 9/12/2008
terry: 9/4/2008
wwang: 9/18/2006
terry: 9/14/2006
carol: 4/17/2003
cwells: 1/16/2001
terry: 12/14/2000
dkim: 7/23/1998
carol: 6/22/1998
terry: 8/4/1995
mark: 6/1/1995
carol: 11/18/1994
carol: 6/21/1993
carol: 4/6/1993
carol: 12/14/1992

611255	TITLE *611255 NADPH OXIDASE ACTIVATOR 1; NOXA1
;;NOX ACTIVATOR 1;;
p51-NOX
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NADPH oxidases (NOXs) catalyze the transfer of electrons from NADPH to
molecular oxygen to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS). The NOX
activator NOXA1 can stimulate both NOX1 (300225) and NOX2 (CYBB;
300481), but it appears to be more effective in activating NOX1 (Opitz
et al., 2007).

CLONING

By searching EST databases with the C-terminal SH3 domain of p67-PHOX
(NCF2; 608515), followed by PCR, Takeya et al. (2003) cloned NOXA1,
which they called p51-NOX. The deduced 476-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 51 kD. It has 4 N-terminal
tetratricopeptide repeat motifs, followed by a central activation
domain, a PB1 (Phox and Bem1) domain, and a C-terminal SH3 domain. PCR
analysis detected abundant p51-NOX expression in pancreas, with weaker
expression in liver, kidney, spleen, prostate, small intestine, and
colon. p51-NOX expressed in COS-7 cells had an apparent molecular mass
of 53 to 54 kD by SDS-PAGE.

By Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues, Banfi et al. (2003) found
predominant expression of Noxa1 and Noxo1 (611256) in colon, with lower
levels in uterus, small intestine, and stomach. Testis expressed Noxo1,
but not Noxa1. In situ hybridization showed both Noxa1 and Noxo1 in
colon epithelial cells.

Using Western blot analysis, Ambasta et al. (2006) detected Noxa1 in the
cytosolic fraction of mouse vascular smooth muscle cells, but not in
human leukocytes, which expressed p67-PHOX. Immunohistochemical analysis
revealed that Noxa1 was expressed in the smooth muscle layer, but not in
endothelium or the adventitia, of mouse carotid artery.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid assays, Takeya et al. (2003) showed that human
p51-NOX interacted with constitutively active forms of RAC1 (602048) and
RAC2 (602049). In vitro binding assays revealed that p51-NOX bound
GTP-bound RAC1, but not GDP-bound RAC1. p51-NOX also bound p47-PHOX
(NCF1; 608512) and p41-NOX (NOXO1), and trp436 within the SH3 domain of
p51-NOX was required for these interactions. Human cell lines or COS-7
cells cotransfected with p51-NOX and p41-NOX and either gp91-PHOX (CYBB;
300481) or NOX1 produced superoxide. Cells individually transfected with
NOX1, p41-NOX, or p51-NOX and cells transfected with only p41-NOX and
p51-NOX showed no superoxide production.

Banfi et al. (2003) showed that coexpression of mouse Nox1, Noxo1, and
Noxa1 increased ROS production in the absence of external stimuli in all
cell lines examined.

Ambasta et al. (2006) showed that coexpression of Noxa1 with Noxo1
targeted the Noxo1/Noxa1 complex to membranes in mouse vascular smooth
muscle cells. Antisense Noxa1 attenuated endogenous Noxa1 expression and
ROS formation in mouse vascular smooth muscle cells and prevented
agonist-induced ROS production in response to basic FGF (FGF2; 134920)
and EGF (131530).

MAPPING

Hartz (2007) mapped the NOXA1 gene to chromosome 9q34.3 based on an
alignment of the NOXA1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF039697) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

Banfi et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Noxa1 gene to chromosome 2.

REFERENCE 1. Ambasta, R. K.; Schreiber, J. G.; Janiszewski, M.; Busse, R.; Brandes,
R. P.: Noxa1 is a central component of the smooth muscle NADPH oxidase
in mice. Free Radical Biol. Med. 41: 193-201, 2006.

2. Banfi, B.; Clark, R. A.; Steger, K.; Krause, K.-H.: Two novel
proteins activate superoxide generation by the NADPH oxidase NOX1. J.
Biol. Chem. 278: 3510-3513, 2003.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/25/2007.

4. Opitz, N.; Drummond, G. R.; Selemidis, S.; Meurer, S.; Schmidt,
H. H. H. W.: The 'A's and 'O's of NADPH oxidase regulation: a commentary
on 'Subcellular localization and function of alternatively spliced
Noxo1 isoforms.' (Commentary) Free Radical Biol. Med. 42: 175-179,
2007.

5. Takeya, R.; Ueno, N.; Kami, K.; Taura, M.; Kohjima, M.; Izaki,
T.; Nunoi, H.; Sumimoto, H.: Novel human homologues of p47(phox)
and p67(phox) participate in activation of superoxide-producing NADPH
oxidases. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 25234-25246, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/25/2007

EDITED mgross: 07/25/2007

194521	TITLE *194521 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 33A; ZNF33A
;;ZINC FINGER AND ZAK-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN WITH KRAB DOMAIN; ZZAPK;;
KIAA0065;;
ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 11A; ZNF11A;;
ZNF11;;
KOX2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated immature myeloid
cell line cDNA library, Nomura et al. (1994) cloned ZNF33A, which they
designated KIAA0065. The transcript has an Alu element in its 3-prime
UTR. The deduced 848-amino acid protein contains a C2H2-type zinc finger
domain and shares 93.1% identity with ZNF11B (ZNF33B; 194522) over 374
amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected ZNF33A expression in all
tissues examined, with highest expression in skeletal muscle, and lowest
expression in testis and colon.

Using ZAK (609479) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a heart cDNA
library, followed by screening a placenta cDNA library and 5-prime RACE,
Yang (2003) cloned ZNF33A, which they designated ZZAPK. The deduced
810-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 94.3 kD. ZZAPK
contains an N-terminal KRAB domain, followed by a 256-amino acid linker
region and 16 tandemly repeated Kruppel-type zinc fingers at its C
terminus. Northern blot analysis detected variable expression of a major
5.5-kb transcript in all tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunoprecipitation of cotransfected human embryonic kidney (HEK293)
cells, Yang (2003) confirmed direct interaction between epitope-tagged
ZZAPK and ZAK. Mutation analysis indicated that the SAM domain of ZAK
was required to bind ZZAPK. By coexpression in a rat fibroblast cell
line, Yang (2003) determined that ZZAPK countered the effect of ZAK on
G2/M cell cycle arrest. When expressed alone, ZZAPK increased entry of
cells into S phase. ZZAPK increased expression of cyclin E (CCNE1;
123837) in rat fibroblasts and HEK293 cells. ZZAPK also increased
expression of transcription factor E2F (see 189971) and the activity of
an E2F-dependent reporter gene.

MAPPING

By a combination of in situ chromosomal hybridization and somatic cell
hybrid analysis, Rousseau-Merck et al. (1992) concluded that there are
sequences hybridizing to the KOX2 probe at 2 loci, which they called
ZNF11A (ZNF33A) and ZNF11B (ZNF33B), that map proximal and distal to a
10q11.2 breakpoint, respectively. They suggested that the 2 ZNF11 loci
represent related sequences. Rousseau-Merck et al. (1992) suggested that
this cluster of zinc finger protein genes (ZNF11, ZNF22 (194529), and
ZNF25 (194528)) is of particular interest since the loci for MEN2A and
MEN2B map to this region.

Tunnacliffe et al. (1993) identified 2 related zinc finger gene clusters
mapping to the pericentromeric region of chromosome 10. Cluster A
contains ZNF11A (ZNF33A) and ZNF37A and maps to chromosome 10p11.2.
Cluster B contains ZNF11B (ZNF33B) and ZNF37B and maps to chromosome
10q11.2. Southern blot analysis indicated that the 2 clusters evolved by
duplication of an ancestral gene cluster before the divergence of the
human and great ape lineages.

REFERENCE 1. Nomura, N.; Nagase, T.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Sato,
S.; Seki, N.; Kawarabayasi, Y.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. II. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0041-KIAA0080) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 223-229, 1994.

2. Rousseau-Merck, M. F.; Tunnacliffe, A.; Berger, R.; Ponder, B.
A. J.; Thiesen, H. J.: A cluster of expressed zinc finger protein
genes in the pericentromeric region of human chromosome 10. Genomics 13:
845-848, 1992.

3. Tunnacliffe, A.; Liu, L.; Moore, J. K.; Leversha, M. A.; Jackson,
M. S.; Papi, L.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.; Thiesen, H.-J.; Ponder, B.
A. J.: Duplicated KOX zinc finger gene clusters flank the centromere
of human chromosome 10: evidence for a pericentric inversion during
primate evolution. Nucleic Acids Res. 21: 1409-1417, 1993.

4. Yang, J.-J.: A novel zinc finger protein, ZZaPK, interacts with
ZAK and stimulates the ZAK-expressing cells re-entering the cell cycle. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 301: 71-77, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/13/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/21/1992

EDITED carol: 03/13/2007
mgross: 7/19/2005
terry: 6/13/2005
dkim: 6/25/1998
mark: 5/14/1996
carol: 7/21/1992

300722	TITLE *300722 MICRO RNA 19B2; MIR19B2
;;miRNA19B2;;
MIRN19B2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), such as miRNA19B2, are 20- to 23-nucleotide RNAs
that regulate gene expression posttranscriptionally by mediating
sequence-specific repression of mRNA translation (Lagos-Quintana et al.,
2001).

CLONING

Using a directional cloning procedure to identify miRNAs from HeLa cell
total RNA, Lagos-Quintana et al. (2001) cloned miRNA19B2.

GENE FUNCTION

Mourelatos et al. (2002) identified miRNA19B2 as 1 of at least 40 miRNAs
present in a large 15S ribonucleoprotein complex containing EIF2C2
(606229), GEMIN3 (606168), and GEMIN4 (606969).

Using RT-PCR, Mavrakis et al. (2011) analyzed the expression of 430
miRNAs in 50 clinical T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL; see
613065) specimens representing 7 cytogenetic groups and in 18 T-ALL cell
lines. They identified 10 miRNAs that accounted for most detectable
miRNAs in T-ALL cells, 5 of which, MIR19B, MIR20A (609420), MIR26A (see
612151), MIR92 (see 609422), and MIR223 (300694), were predicted to
target tumor suppressor genes. All 5 of these miRNAs accelerated
leukemia development in a mouse model. These 5 miRNAs also produced
overlapping and cooperative effects on tumor suppressors implicated in
T-ALL pathogenesis, including IKAROS (IKZF1; 603023), PTEN (601728), BIM
(BCL2L11; 603827), PHF6 (300414), NF1 (162200), and FBXW7 (606278).

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lagos-Quintana et al. (2001) mapped the
MIRN19B2 gene to the X chromosome. Mourelatos et al. (2002) determined
that the MIRN19B2 gene is clustered with the MIRN92A2 gene within a
250-nucleotide region of the X chromosome.

Gross (2008) mapped the MIRN19B2 gene to chromosome Xq26.2 based on an
alignment of the MIRN19B2 stem-loop sequence
(ACAUUGCUACUUACAAUUAGUUUUGCAGGUUUGCAUUUCAGCGUAUAUAUGUAUAUGUGGCUGUGCAAAUCCAUGCAAAACUGAUUGUGAUAAUGU)
with the genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/30/2008.

2. Lagos-Quintana, M.; Rauhut, R.; Lendeckel, W.; Tuschl, T.: Identification
of novel genes coding for small expressed RNAs. Science 294: 853-858,
2001.

3. Mavrakis, K. J.; Van Der Meulen, J.; Wolfe, A. L.; Liu, X.; Mets,
E.; Taghon, T.; Khan, A. A.; Setty, M.; Rondou, P.; Vandenberghe,
P.; Delabesse, E.; Benoit, Y.; Socci, N. B.; Leslie, C. S.; Van Vlierberghe,
P.; Speleman, F.; Wendel, H.-G.: A cooperative microRNA-tumor suppressor
gene network in acute T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). Nature
Genet. 43: 673-678, 2011. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 43: 815 only,
2011.

4. Mourelatos, Z.; Dostie, J.; Paushkin, S.; Sharma, A.; Charroux,
B.; Abel, L.; Rappsilber, J.; Mann, M.; Dreyfuss, G.: miRNPs: a novel
class of ribonucleoproteins containing numerous microRNAs. Genes
Dev. 16: 720-728, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/11/2011

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 6/30/2008

EDITED carol: 04/11/2013
mgross: 8/11/2011
wwang: 7/1/2008
mgross: 6/30/2008

150150	TITLE *150150 LACTATE DEHYDROGENASE C; LDHC
;;LDH, TESTICULAR FORM; LDHX
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Zinkham et al. (1964) found a distinctive LDH isozyme in mature testes
of many species including man. It is polymorphic in the pigeon, and one
can infer that a locus separate from LDHA (150000) and LDHB (150100)
controls it. The same is almost certainly true in the human. This is a
gene that functions only in one sex and only in one tissue.

Sakai et al. (1987) isolated and sequenced cDNA clones of LDHC from the
mouse. Northern blot analysis of poly(A)-containing RNAs from mouse
testes and liver indicated that the Ldhc gene was expressed in testes
but not in liver. The nucleotide and amino acid sequences of mouse Ldhc
showed 73 and 72% homology, respectively, with those of mouse Ldha.
Southern blot analysis of genomic DNAs from mouse liver and human
placenta indicated the presence of multiple LDH-C gene-related
sequences. From the amino acid sequence deduced from cDNA, Millan et al.
(1987) found that human LDHC is as different from rodent Ldhc (73%
homology) as it is from human LDHA (76% homology) and porcine LDHB (68%
homology).

MAPPING

Zinkham et al. (1969) found that the LDHB and LDHC loci are closely
linked in pigeons. Edwards et al. (1987) used an LDHC cDNA to analyze
genomic DNA from rodent/human somatic cell hybrids. These showed that
LDHA and LDHC are syntenic on human chromosome 11. The assignment of
LDHC was confirmed by Kao et al. (1988), who localized the gene to
11p15.5-p14.3 by use of somatic cell hybrids and in situ chromosome
hybridization. Li et al. (1988) also assigned LDHC to chromosome 11 by
hybridization of DNA from flow-sorted chromosomes. The close physical
proximity of the LDHC and LDHA genes supports the evolutionary
relatedness of the 2 isozymes. Edwards et al. (1989) reported mapping of
LDHC to 11p15.5-p15.3 by combination of somatic cell hybrid studies and
in situ hybridization.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Blanco  (1980); Blanco et al. (1964); Burkhart et al. (1982); Edwards
et al. (1987); Markert et al. (1975); Zinkham  (1972); Zinkham et
al. (1964); Zinkham and Isensee (1972)
REFERENCE 1. Blanco, A.: On the functional significance of LDH X. Johns Hopkins
Med. J. 146: 231-235, 1980.

2. Blanco, A.; Zinkham, W. H.; Kupchyk, L.: Genetic control and ontogeny
of lactate dehydrogenase in pigeon testes. J. Exp. Zool. 156: 137-152,
1964.

3. Burkhart, J. G.; Ansari, A. A.; Malling, H. V.: Localization of
cytoplasmic lactate dehydrogenase-X in spermatozoa. Arch. Androl. 9:
115-120, 1982.

4. Edwards, Y.; West, L.; Van Heyningen, V.; Cowell, J.; Goldberg,
E.: Regional localization of the sperm-specific lactate dehydrogenase,
LDHC, gene on human chromosome 11. Ann. Hum. Genet. 53: 215-219,
1989.

5. Edwards, Y. H.; Povey, S.; LeVan, K. M.; Driscoll, C. E.; Millan,
J. L.; Goldberg, E.: Locus determining the human sperm specific lactate
dehydrogenase, LDHC, is syntenic with LDHA. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 46: 609 only, 1987.

6. Edwards, Y. H.; Povey, S.; LeVan, K. M.; Driscoll, C. E.; Millan,
J. L.; Goldberg, E.: Locus determining the human sperm-specific lactate
dehydrogenase, LDHC, is syntenic with LDHA. Dev. Genet. 8: 219-232,
1987.

7. Kao, F.-T.; Wu, K. C.; Law, M. L.; Hartz, J. A.; Lau, Y.-F.: Assignment
of human gene encoding testis-specific lactate dehydrogenase C to
chromosome 11, region p14.3-p15.5. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 14:
515-518, 1988.

8. Li, S. S.-L.; Luedemann, M.; Sharief, F. S.; Takano, T.; Deaven,
L. L.: Mapping of human lactate dehydrogenase-A, -B, and -C genes
and their related sequences: the gene for LDHC is located with that
for LDHA on chromosome 11. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 48: 16-18, 1988.

9. Markert, C. L.; Shaklee, J. B.; Whitt, G. S.: Evolution of a gene:
multiple genes for LDH isozymes provide a model of the evolution of
gene structure, function, and regulation. Science 189: 102-114,
1975.

10. Millan, J. L.; Driscoll, C. E.; LeVan, K. M.; Goldberg, E.: Epitopes
of human testis-specific lactate dehydrogenase deduced from a cDNA
sequence. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 5311-5315, 1987.

11. Sakai, I.; Sharief, F. S.; Li, S. S.-L.: Molecular cloning and
nucleotide sequence of the cDNA for sperm-specific lactate dehydrogenase-C
from mouse. Biochem. J. 242: 619-622, 1987.

12. Zinkham, W. H.: A unique form of lactate dehydrogenase in human
sperm: biological and clinical significance. Johns Hopkins Med. J. 130:
1-10, 1972.

13. Zinkham, W. H.; Blanco, A.; Clowry, L. J., Jr.: An unusual isozyme
of lactic dehydrogenase in mature testes: localization, ontogeny,
and kinetic properties. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 121: 571-588, 1964.

14. Zinkham, W. H.; Blanco, A.; Kupchyk, L.: Lactate dehydrogenase
in pigeon testes: genetic control of three loci. Science 144: 1353-1354,
1964.

15. Zinkham, W. H.; Isensee, H.: Genetic control of lactate dehydrogenase
synthesis in the somatic and genetic tissues of pigeons. Johns Hopkins
Med. J. 130: 11-25, 1972.

16. Zinkham, W. H.; Isensee, H.; Renwick, J. H.: Linkage of lactate
dehydrogenase B and C loci in pigeons. Science 164: 185-187, 1969.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED carol: 07/31/2009
alopez: 6/2/1997
terry: 1/15/1997
terry: 5/13/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 10/11/1989
root: 1/4/1989

605344	TITLE *605344 NUCLEAR TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR Y, GAMMA; NFYC
;;TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR NF-Y, C SUBUNIT;;
CCAAT-BINDING FACTOR, C SUBUNIT; CBFC
DESCRIPTION The CCAAT box is a widespread element found in promoters and enhancers.
Nuclear factor Y (NFY), also termed CCAAT-binding factor (CBF), is a
ubiquitous heterotrimeric protein containing NFYA (189903), NFYB
(189904), and NFYC. NFYB and NFYC must interact and dimerize for NFYA
association and DNA binding, most notably to Y-box elements such as
CCAAT in major histocompatibility (MHC) class II promoters (see MHC2TA;
600005), to occur.

Using the rat Nfyc sequence and PCR to screen HeLa cell cDNA libraries,
Nakshatri et al. (1996) and Bellorini et al. (1997) isolated cDNAs
encoding NFYC. By differential hybridization of a gridded fetal brain
cDNA library, Dmitrenko et al. (1997) also cloned the NFYC gene, which
they termed CBFC. Sequence analysis predicted that the 335-amino acid
NFYC protein, which is approximately 97% identical to the rodent Nfyc
sequences, contains a yeast Hap5 homology region (approximately 75%
identity with the corresponding region in Hap5) and a glutamine-rich
region. Northern blot analysis detected a major 2.3- and a minor 1.5-kb
NFYC transcript in all tissues tested, with higher amounts of both mRNAs
in testis (Bellorini et al., 1997).

GENE STRUCTURE

Chang et al. (2008) showed that the NFYC gene has 10 exons and that the
microRNAs MIRN30E and MIRN30C1 are contained within intron 5.

MAPPING

By interspecific backcross and segregation analysis, Sinha et al. (1996)
mapped the mouse Nfyc gene to chromosome 4 in a region showing homology
of synteny to human 1p32. Scott (2000) mapped the NFYC gene to
1p34.2-p33 based on sequence similarity between the NFYC sequence
(GenBank GENBANK D89986) and the chromosome 1 clone RP5-1066H13 (GenBank
GENBANK AL158843).

REFERENCE 1. Bellorini, M.; Zemzoumi, K.; Farina, A.; Berthelsen, J.; Piaggio,
G.; Mantovani, R.: Cloning and expression of human NF-YC. Gene 197:
119-125, 1997.

2. Chang, T.-C.; Yu, D.; Lee, Y.-S.; Wentzel, E. A.; Arking, D. E.;
West, K. M.; Dang, C. V.; Thomas-Tikhonenko, A.; Mendell, J. T.:
Widespread microRNA repression by Myc contributes to tumorigenesis. Nature
Genet. 40: 43-50, 2008.

3. Dmitrenko, V.; Garifulin, O.; Kavsan, V.: Isolation and sequence
analysis of the cDNA encoding subunit C of human CCAAT-binding transcription
factor. Gene 197: 161-163, 1997.

4. Nakshatri, H.; Bhat-Nakshatri, P.; Currie, R. A.: Subunit association
and DNA binding activity of the heterotrimeric transcription factor
NF-Y is regulated by cellular redox. J. Biol. Chem. 271: 28784-28791,
1996.

5. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/16/2000.

6. Sinha, S.; Maity, S. N.; Seldin, M. F.; de Crombrugghe, B.: Chromosomal
assignment and tissue expression of CBF-C/NFY-C, the third subunit
of the mammalian CCAAT-binding factor. Genomics 37: 260-263, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/22/2008

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/16/2000

EDITED carol: 05/23/2008
terry: 5/22/2008
mgross: 10/16/2000

602891	TITLE *602891 KILLER CELL LECTIN-LIKE RECEPTOR, SUBFAMILY C, MEMBER 2; KLRC2
;;NKG2C
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Houchins et al. (1991) reported the cDNA sequences of a series of
related transcripts that are expressed primarily in natural killer (NK)
cells. This group of genes, designated NKG2, encodes a family of C-type
lectins. See NKG2A, 161555. By Northern blot analysis, Yabe et al.
(1993) found that 1 gene, NKG2C, was expressed as 3 transcripts, 1.1- to
1.6-kb in size, in NK cell lines and in 1 of the T-cell lines tested.

The protein HLA-E (143010) is a nonclassical MHC molecule of limited
sequence variability. Its expression on the cell surface is regulated by
the binding of peptides derived from the signal sequence of some other
MHC class I molecules. Braud et al. (1998) reported the identification
of ligands for HLA-E. Braud et al. (1998) constructed tetramers in which
recombinant HLA-E and beta-2 microglobulin were refolded with an MHC
leader-sequence peptide, biotinylated, and conjugated to Extravidin.
This HLA-E tetramer bound to natural killer (NK) cells and a small
subset of T cells from peripheral blood. On transfectants, the tetramer
bound to the CD94/NKG2A, CD94/NKG2B, and CD94/NKG2C NK cell receptors,
but did not bind to the immunoglobulin family of NK cell receptors
(KIRs; see 604936). Surface expression of HLA-E was enough to protect
target cells from lysis by CD94/NKG2A+ NK cell clones. A subset of HLA
class I alleles had been shown to inhibit killing by CD94/NKG2A+ NK cell
clones. Only the HLA alleles that possess a leader peptide capable of
upregulating HLA-E surface expression confer resistance to NK
cell-mediated lysis, implying that their action is mediated by HLA-E,
the predominant ligand for the NK cell inhibitory receptor CD94/NKG2A.

GENE STRUCTURE

Glienke et al. (1998) determined that the NKG2C, NKG2E (602892), and
NKG2F (602893) genes are highly similar except for variability at their
3-prime ends. The NKG2C gene contains 6 exons, whereas NKG2E has 7 exons
and NKG2F has only 4 exons.

MAPPING

By analysis of a cosmid contig, Plougastel and Trowsdale (1998) found
that the NKG2C gene and other members of the NKG2 gene family are
clustered within 350 kb on 12p13.2-p12.3, a region known as the NK
complex.

REFERENCE 1. Braud, V. M.; Allan, D. S. J.; O'Callaghan, C. A.; Soderstrom,
K.; D'Andrea, A.; Ogg, G. S.; Lazetic, S.; Young, N. T.; Bell, J.
I.; Phillips, J. H.; Lanier, L. L.; McMichael, A. J.: HLA-E binds
to natural killer cell receptors CD94/NKG2A, B and C. Nature 391:
795-799, 1998.

2. Glienke, J.; Sobanov, Y.; Brostjan, C.; Steffens, C.; Nguyen, C.;
Lehrach, H.; Hofer, E.; Francis, F.: The genomic organization of
NKG2C, E, F, and D receptor genes in the human natural killer gene
complex. Immunogenetics 48: 163-173, 1998.

3. Houchins, J. P.; Yabe, T.; McSherry, C.; Bach, F. H.: DNA sequence
analysis of NKG2, a family of related cDNA clones encoding type II
integral membrane proteins on human natural killer cells. J. Exp.
Med. 173: 1017-1020, 1991.

4. Plougastel, B.; Trowsdale, J.: Sequence analysis of a 62-kb region
overlapping the human KLRC cluster of genes. Genomics 49: 193-199,
1998.

5. Yabe, T.; McSherry, C.; Bach, F. H.; Fisch, P.; Schall, R. P.;
Sondel, P. M.; Houchins, J. P.: A multigene family on human chromosome
12 encodes natural killer-cell lectins. Immunogenetics 37: 455-460,
1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 01/21/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/30/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/24/1998

EDITED mgross: 01/21/2005
alopez: 4/30/2001
alopez: 8/20/1998
alopez: 7/24/1998

180475	TITLE *180475 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L12; RPL12
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Biogenesis of the mammalian ribosome, the site of protein synthesis,
involves coordinated expression of 4 ribosomal RNA molecules and
approximately 75 ribosomal proteins. Chu et al. (1993) isolated a cDNA
clone encoding human ribosomal protein L12 from a dermal microvascular
endothelial cell cDNA library. The protein contains 165 amino acids and
exhibits 99.4% sequence identity with rat ribosomal protein L12.
Northern blot analysis detected an mRNA transcript of 800 bases.

Cuccurese et al. (2005) identified an RPL12 splice variant in a human
lung carcinoma cell line that was induced following inhibition of
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. The variant retains part of intron 1,
resulting in a premature termination codon. Northern blot analysis
showed that the variant is 0.8 kb, while the major species is 0.63 kb.
Intron 1 is highly conserved in human, mouse, and bovine RPL12 genes.

MAPPING

Hartz (2007) mapped the RPL12 gene to chromosome 9q33.3 based on an
alignment of the RPL12 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB209471) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Chu, W.; Presky, D. H.; Swerlick, R. A.; Burns, D. K.: The primary
structure of human ribosomal protein L12. Nucleic Acids Res. 21:
749 only, 1993.

2. Cuccurese, M.; Russo, G.; Russo, A.; Pietropaolo, C.: Alternative
splicing and nonsense-mediated mRNA decay regulate mammalian ribosomal
gene expression. Nucleic Acids Res. 33: 5965-5977, 2005.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/1/2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/8/2007

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/17/1993

EDITED mgross: 06/01/2007
mgross: 6/1/2007
terry: 5/8/2007
carol: 9/17/1993

