611600	TITLE *611600 PROTEIN REGULATING SYNAPTIC MEMBRANE EXOCYTOSIS 3; RIMS3
;;RIM3-GAMMA;;
NIM3;;
KIAA0237
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a human immature myeloid cell line
cDNA library, Nagase et al. (1996) cloned RIMS3, which they designated
KIAA0237. The deduced 308-amino acid protein has a glycosyl hydrolase
motif. Northern blot analysis detected RIMS3 expression in all tissues
examined, with highest expression in brain.

Wang et al. (2000) cloned rat Rims3, which they called Nim3, and
identified human RIMS3 by database analysis. The deduced protein
contains a C2B domain and is highly homologous to the C-terminal parts
of RIMS1 and RIMS2, but it lacks all of the N-terminal domains of RIMS1
and RIMS2. Northern blot analysis of rat tissues detected Rims3
expression in brain only.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2000) found that rat Nim3 enhanced Ca(2+)-dependent
secretion from transfected rat pheochromocytoma cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wang and Sudhof (2003) determined that the RIMS3 gene contains 6 exons
and spans 15.4 kb.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1996) mapped the RIMS3
gene to chromosome 1. By genomic sequence analysis, Wang and Sudhof
(2003) mapped the RIMS3 gene to human chromosome 1p34.1 and to mouse
chromosome 4D2.2.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Ohira, M.; Kawarabayasi, Y.;
Ohara, O.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Miyajima, N.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VI. The coding
sequences of 80 new genes (KIAA0201-KIAA0280) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from cell line KG-1 and brain. DNA Res. 3: 321-329,
1996.

2. Wang, Y.; Sudhof, T. C.: Genomic definition of RIM proteins: evolutionary
amplification of a family of synaptic regulatory proteins. Genomics 81:
126-137, 2003.

3. Wang, Y.; Sugita, S.; Sudhof, T. C.: The RIM/NIM family of neuronal
C2 domain proteins: interactions with Rab3 and a new class of Src
homology 3 domain proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 20033-20044, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/19/2007

EDITED mgross: 11/19/2007

169720	TITLE *169720 PEPSINOGEN 4, GROUP I; PGA4
DESCRIPTION See 169700.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986
EDITED supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
marie: 3/25/1988
reenie: 6/2/1986
605453	TITLE *605453 ATP-BINDING CASSETTE, SUBFAMILY B, MEMBER 9; ABCB9
DESCRIPTION For background information on the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) family of
transporter proteins, see ABCA4 (601691). In addition to the 'full' ABC
transporters with 2 transmembrane domains and 2 nucleotide-binding
domains, there are 'half' proteins that contain only 1 of each domain
(e.g., ABCB1; 171050). Full transporters are usually found in the plasma
membrane, whereas half transporters are found in subcellular organelles.

By searching an EST database and screening a T-lymphoblast cDNA library,
Zhang et al. (2000) obtained a cDNA encoding ABCB9. Sequence analysis
predicted that the 766-amino acid ABCB9 protein has 10 potential
N-terminal transmembrane segments. ABCB9 shares 94% identity with the
rodent sequences and is approximately 39% identical to 2 human
endoplasmic reticulum half transporters, TAP1 (ABCB2; 170260) and TAP2
(ABCB3; 170261). RT-PCR and genomic sequence analysis established the
existence of a splice variant with a 129-bp deletion expressed in testis
and brain. Northern blot analysis detected low expression of a 3.7-kb
transcript in most tissues tested, with an additional 2.2-kb transcript
detected in tissues with relatively high expression, such as testis.
Western blot analysis showed expression of a 72-kD nonglycosylated
protein, significantly smaller than the predicted mass of 84.5 kD, that
was enriched in lysosomes. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated
colocalization of ABCB9 with the lysosomal proteins LAMP1 (153330) and
LAMP2 (309060). Immunohistochemical analysis detected ABCB9 expression
in Sertoli cells of rodent seminiferous tubules.

Allikmets et al. (1996) mapped an EST corresponding to the ABCB9 gene to
12q24.

REFERENCE 1. Allikmets, R.; Gerrard, B.; Hutchinson, A.; Dean, M.: Characterization
of the human ABC superfamily: isolation and mapping of 21 new genes
using the expressed sequence tags database. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5:
1649-1655, 1996.

2. Zhang, F.; Zhang, W.; Liu, L.; Fisher, C. L.; Hui, D.; Childs,
S.; Dorovini-Zis, K.; Ling, V.: Characterization of ABCB9, an ATP
binding cassette protein associated with lysosomes. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
23287-23294, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/5/2000

EDITED mgross: 12/05/2000

605088	TITLE *605088 MAJOR VAULT PROTEIN, RAT, HOMOLOG OF; MVP
;;LUNG RESISTANCE-RELATED PROTEIN; LRP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Vaults are hollow intracellular organelles with dimensions of about 57
by 32 nm and a nuclear mass of about 13 MD, 3 times the size of a
ribosome. They are composed of a small RNA (VTRNA1-1; 612695), the
100-kD major vault protein (MVP), and minor vault proteins of 193 kD
(PARP4; 607519) and 240 kD (TEP1; 601686). MVP accounts for over 70% of
the particle mass (Izquierdo et al., 1996; Kickhoefer et al., 1999).

CLONING

Multidrug-resistant (MDR) cancer cells frequently overexpress the 110-kD
lung resistance-related protein (LRP). Overexpression of LRP often
predicts a poor response to chemotherapy. By screening a
multidrug-resistant non-P-glycoprotein (see ABCB1; 171050) fibrosarcoma
cell line with an LRP-specific monoclonal antibody, Scheffer et al.
(1995) isolated a cDNA encoding LRP. The deduced 896-amino acid LRP
protein shares 88% amino acid identity with the rat major vault protein
(Mvp). RNase protection assays showed that LRP expression was enhanced
4- to 8-fold in non-P-glycoprotein MDR cell lines.

Using immunohistochemical analysis, Izquierdo et al. (1996) found that
LRP was widely expressed in normal and tumor tissues and showed a
characteristic cytoplasmic granular pattern. High LRP expression was
detected in the epithelial lining of bronchioles and upper and lower
digestive tract, renal proximal tubules, epidermal keratinocytes and
melanocytes, macrophages, and adrenal cortex. Lower and variable
expression of LRP was detected in other tissues. LRP was expressed in
all tumor types tested, and its level of expression fairly reflected the
chemosensitivity of the tumors, with lower expression in highly
chemosensitive tumors. Immunoprecipitated LRP had an apparent molecular
mass of 110 kD by SDS-PAGE.

By EST database analysis, Holzmann et al. (2001) identified a long MVP
splice variant, L-MVP, that contains a 41-bp stretch in the 5-prime
region that is intronic in the shorter S-MVP splice variant. This 41-bp
stretch introduces an upstream ORF encoding a deduced 18-amino acid
peptide. RT-PCR detected ubiquitous expression of both variants, and
S-MVP was always the major variant.

Van Zon et al. (2002) identified a central calcium-binding EF-hand motif
and a C-terminal coiled-coil domain in MVP.

Using confocal immunocytochemistry with anti-MVP antibody, Slesina et
al. (2005) found a dense distribution of vault particles in the
cytoplasm of human U373 astroglioma cell line. A punctate staining
pattern was also detected in the nucleus. Cryoimmunoelectron microscopy
revealed clusters of immunogold particles at nuclear pores and in the
nucleoplasm, suggesting that nuclear MVP was also associated with
vaults. Quantification of fluorescent MVP in the cytosol and nucleus of
U373 cells revealed about 5% of MVP in the nucleus.

GENE FUNCTION

Kickhoefer et al. (1998) found that expression of MVP and VTRNA1-1 and
assembly of vaults increased up to 15-fold in several drug-resistant
cell lines compared with the parental cell lines. They hypothesized that
the absolute vault level in cell lines may dictate the extent of drug
resistance.

Abbondanza et al. (1998) found that MVP coprecipitated with estrogen
receptor (ER, or ESR1; 133430) from nuclear extracts of MCF-7 human
breast cancer cells and that ER associated with intact vaults. Mutation
analysis showed that a central region of ER containing nuclear
localization signals was involved in the interaction. A limited amount
of ER molecules in the nuclear extract appeared to be associated with
MVP. Physiologic concentrations of estradiol increased the amount of MVP
present in MCF-7 nuclear extracts and coimmunoprecipitated with ER. The
hormone-dependent interaction of vaults with ER was reproduced in vitro.
Antibodies to progesterone receptor (PGR; 607311) and glucocorticoid
receptor (GCCR; 138040) also coimmunoprecipitated MVP, but more weakly.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis and by in vitro binding assays with
recombinant proteins, Kickhoefer et al. (1999) confirmed direct
interaction between MVP and PARP4, which they called VPARP. The
C-terminal domain was the smallest sequence of PARP4 that could bind
MVP. The PARP-like catalytic domain, when expressed as a recombinant
protein in E. coli, showed ADP-ribosylase activity. Vault particles
purified from rat liver and incubated with radiolabeled NAD showed
prominent ADP-ribosylation of Mvp and some automodification of Parp4.

Holzmann et al. (2001) showed that in vitro translation of L-MVP was low
relative to translation of S-MVP. Mutation of the start codon of the
upstream ORF in the L-MVP transcript reversed the suppression of MVP
translation, suggesting that translation of the upstream ORF controls
expression of the larger protein.

Using yeast 2- and 3-hybrid analysis and mutation analysis, van Zon et
al. (2002) found that MVP molecules interacted with each other via their
coiled-coil domains. MVP also bound calcium, likely via its EF-hand
motif. The N-terminal half of MVP bound a C-terminal domain of VPARP,
but TEP1 did not appear to interact with either MVP or VPARP.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Yu et al. (2002) showed that MPV
interacted with PTEN (601728), a protein phosphatase that can function
as a tumor suppressor. Endogenous PTEN associated with vault particles
isolated from HeLa cells. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis confirmed the
interaction between PTEN and MVP. Deletion analysis mapped the
interacting regions to the C2 domain of PTEN and the EF-hand motifs of
MVP. The interaction was independent of tyrosine phosphorylation, but
required calcium, consistent with a calcium-induced conformational
change in the MVP EF-hand motifs.

Using human airway epithelial cells, Kowalski et al. (2007) showed that
MVP accumulated rapidly into lipid rafts during Pseudomonas aeruginosa
infection, and this accumulation was markedly reduced in cells from
cystic fibrosis (219700) patients expressing the delF508 mutation
(602421.0001) in CFTR (602421). Immunofluorescence microscopy and
coimmunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated colocalization of
bacteria, CFTR, and MVP, without direct physical association. The outer
core oligosaccharide of P. aeruginosa bound CFTR and was required for
recruitment of MVP to lipid rafts. Small interfering RNA-mediated
knockdown of MVP decreased recruitment of MVP to lipid rafts following
P. aeruginosa infection without affecting NFKB (see 164011) activation,
IL8 (146930) secretion, or apoptosis induction, suggesting a key role
for MVP in bacterial uptake.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lange et al. (2000) determined that the MVP gene contains 15 exons. They
found that the promoter region has an inverted CCAAT box but no TATA
box. They identified several putative promoter binding sites including
an SP1 (189901)-binding site located close to a p53 (191170)-binding
motif. An alternative 3-prime splice site of intron 1 results in a
splicing variant within the 5-prime untranslated region of MVP mRNA.

MAPPING

By FISH, Scheffer et al. (1995) mapped the LRP gene to chromosome
16p13.1-p11.2, in the same chromosomal region as the MDR-associated
genes MRP (ABCC1; 158343) and PRKCB1 (176970). The authors noted that
acute myeloid leukemia patients with a deletion of an MRP gene,
resulting from a chromosome 16 inversion, often have a favorable
outcome.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kowalski et al. (2007) found that Mvp -/- mice infected with P.
aeruginosa internalized fewer bacteria in lung epithelial cells than
wildtype mice, resulting in increased bacterial burden in the lung. Mvp
-/- mice also had increased mortality after P. aeruginosa infection.
Kowalski et al. (2007) concluded that MVP contributes to resistance
against P. aeruginosa lung infection.

REFERENCE 1. Abbondanza, C.; Rossi, V.; Roscigno, A.; Gallo, L.; Belsito, A.;
Piluso, G.; Medici, N.; Nigro, V.; Molinari, A. M.; Moncharmont, B.;
Puca, G. A.: Interaction of vault particles with estrogen receptor
in the MCF-7 breast cancer cell. J. Cell Biol. 141: 1301-1310, 1998.

2. Holzmann, K.; Ambrosch, I.; Elbling, L.; Micksche, M.; Berger,
W.: A small upstream open reading frame causes inhibition of human
major vault protein expression from a ubiquitous mRNA splice variant. FEBS
Lett. 494: 99-104, 2001.

3. Izquierdo, M. A.; Scheffer, G. L.; Flens, M. J.; Giaccone, G.;
Broxterman, H. J.; Meijer, C. J. L. M.; van der Valk, P.; Scheper,
R. J.: Broad distribution of the multidrug resistance-related vault
lung resistance protein in normal human tissues and tumors. Am. J.
Path. 148: 877-887, 1996.

4. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Rajavel, K. S.; Scheffer, G. L.; Dalton, W.
S.; Scheper, R. J.; Rome, L. H.: Vaults are up-regulated in multidrug-resistant
cancer cell lines. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 8971-8974, 1998.

5. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Siva, A. C.; Kedersha, N. L.; Inman, E. M.;
Ruland, C.; Streuli, M.; Rome, L. H.: The 193-kD vault protein, VPARP,
is a novel poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase. J. Cell Biol. 146: 917-928,
1999.

6. Kickhoefer, V. A.; Stephen, A. G.; Harrington, L.; Robinson, M.
O.; Rome, L. H.: Vaults and telomerase share a common subunit, TEP1. J.
Biol. Chem. 274: 32712-32717, 1999.

7. Kowalski, M. P.; Dubouix-Bourandy, A.; Bajmoczi, M.; Golan, D.
E.; Zaidi, T.; Coutinho-Sledge, Y. S.; Gygi, M. P.; Gygi, S. P.; Wiemer,
E. A. C.; Pier, G. B.: Host resistance to lung infection mediated
by major vault protein in epithelial cells. Science 317: 130-132,
2007.

8. Lange, C.; Walther, W.; Schwabe, H.; Stein, U.: Cloning and initial
analysis of the human multidrug resistance-related MVP/LRP gene promoter. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 278: 125-133, 2000.

9. Scheffer, G. L.; Wijngaard, P. L. J.; Flens, M. J.; Izquierdo,
M. A.; Slovak, M. L.; Pinedo, H. M.; Meijer, C. J. L. M.; Clevers,
H. C.; Scheper, R. J.: The drug resistance-related protein LRP is
the human major vault protein. Nature Med. 1: 578-582, 1995.

10. Slesina, M.; Inman, E. M.; Rome, L. H.; Volknandt, W.: Nuclear
localization of the major vault protein in U373 cells. Cell Tissue
Res. 321: 97-104, 2005.

11. van Zon, A.; Mossink, M. H.; Schoester, M.; Scheffer, G. L.; Scheper,
R. J.; Sonneveld, P.; Wiemer, E. A. C.: Structural domains of vault
proteins: a role for the coiled coil domain in vault assembly. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 291: 535-541, 2002.

12. Yu, Z.; Fotouhi-Ardakani, N.; Wu, L.; Maoui, M.; Wang, S.; Banville,
D.; Shen, S.-H.: PTEN associates with the vault particles in HeLa
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 40247-40252, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/6/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/17/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/30/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/28/2000

EDITED mgross: 03/26/2009
terry: 3/6/2009
mgross: 7/18/2007
terry: 7/17/2007
carol: 7/30/2002
mgross: 8/11/2000
mgross: 6/29/2000
mgross: 6/28/2000

153390	TITLE *153390 LYMPHOCYTE-SPECIFIC PROTEIN-TYROSINE KINASE; LCK
;;ONCOGENE LCK;;
p56(LCK)
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The LCK gene encodes p56(LCK), a nonreceptor protein-tyrosine kinase of
the SRC (190090) oncogene family that is involved in transduction of
T-cell receptor (TCR; see 186880)-mediated activation. The p56(LCK)
protein is anchored to the plasma membrane and interacts with the
intracellular domains of CD4 (186940)/CD8 (see 186910) coreceptors. It
is composed of 4 SRC homology (SH) domains that are variably conserved
among members of the SRC family (Germani et al., 2003).

CLONING

Using RT-PCR, Rouer et al. (1999) identified the full-length LCK
transcript and a splice variant lacking exon 7 in various T-cell lines
and in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) from healthy donors.

By RT-PCR of PBLs from diabetic patients and healthy controls, Nervi et
al. (2005) obtained cDNAs corresponding to full-length LCK, LCK lacking
exon 7 (LCK delta-7), and a novel LCK variant lacking exon 7 but
containing an additional 174 bp corresponding intron B between exons 2
and 3 (LCKB+7-). LCKB+7- encodes a 516-amino acid protein that, compared
with the full-length 509-amino acid protein, has a proline-rich 58-amino
acid insertion upstream of the SH3 domain and, like LCK delta-7, a
deletion of the ATP-binding site upstream of the catalytic domain. Far
Western blot analysis showed that the 58-amino acid insertion reduced
SH3 binding ability. RT-PCR analysis suggested that LCKB+7- is present
in all individuals but is sequestered in the nucleus. Nervi et al.
(2005) concluded that LCKB+7- is a rare transcript that may be present
in conditions with T-cell dysfunction.

GENE FUNCTION

Welte et al. (1999) analyzed the role of STAT (signal transducer and
activator of transcription) proteins in TCR signaling. STAT5 (601511)
became immediately and transiently phosphorylated on tyrosine-694 in
response to TCR stimulation. Expression of the protein-tyrosine kinase
LCK, a key signaling protein in the TCR complex, activated DNA binding
of transfected STAT5A and STAT5B to specific STAT-inducible elements.
The role of LCK in STAT5 activation was confirmed in a LCK-deficient
T-cell line in which the activation of STAT5 by TCR stimulation was
abolished. Inhibition of STAT5 function by expression of a
dominant-negative mutant STAT5 reduced antigen-stimulated proliferation
of T cells. Thus, TCR stimulation appears to directly activate STAT5,
which may participate in the regulation of gene transcription and T-cell
proliferation during immunologic responses.

Animals deficient in pre-TCR-alpha have few alpha-beta lineage cells but
an increased number of gamma-delta T cells. These gamma-delta T cells
exhibit more extensive TCR-beta rearrangement than gamma-delta T cells
from wildtype mice. These observations are consistent with the idea that
different signals emanating from the gamma-delta-TCR and pre-TCR
instruct lineage commitment. Using confocal microscopy and biochemistry
to analyze the initiation of signaling, Saint-Ruf et al. (2000) showed
that the pre-TCR, but not the gamma-delta TCR, colocalizes with the
p56(lck) Src kinase into glycolipid-enriched membrane domains (rafts)
apparently without any need for ligation. This results in the
phosphorylation of CD3-epsilon (186830) and ZAP70 signal transducing
molecules. Saint-Ruf et al. (2000) stated that their results indicated
clear differences between pre-TCR and gamma-delta-TCR signaling.

Type 1 diabetic (IDDM1; 222100) patients have diminished responses
following T-cell activation. By immunoblot analysis, Nervi et al. (2000)
found reduced levels of phosphorylated CD3Z (186780) in IDDM1 patients
after T-cell stimulation. Immunoblot, immunoprecipitation, and
densitometric analyses revealed significantly reduced LCK expression in
unstimulated peripheral blood cells of IDDM1 patients compared to
controls. The reduced LCK expression correlated with a lower
proliferative response. Very low LCK expression may also correlate with
the HLA-DQB1*0201/0302 (see 604305) genotype. Confocal microscopy
demonstrated normal plasma membrane expression of LCK in patients and
controls. Downstream signal transducing molecules were not affected in
these patients.

Kim et al. (2003) noted that the T-cell coreceptors CD4 and CD8 each
associate via their cytoplasmic tails with the N terminus of LCK in a
zinc-dependent manner. These interactions are required for T-cell
development and activation. By structural analysis, Kim et al. (2003)
showed that, in the absence of zinc, the coreceptor tails and the LCK N
terminus lack structure, but they assemble in the presence of zinc to
form compactly folded heterodimeric domains.

Using flow cytometry, Germani et al. (2003) deduced that the LCK delta-7
protein accounted for 15% of the total LCK protein in the Jurkat T-cell
line. Exon 7 encodes the first 51 amino acids of the LCK catalytic
domain, and deletion of this region reduced kinase activity of the
recombinant protein. However, the residual activity could be enhanced by
addition of Mn(2+). Enforced production of LCK delta-7 in transfected
Jurkat cells resulted in slower cell proliferation than did transfection
with full-length LCK. Germani et al. (2003) proposed that LCK delta-7 is
a cell signaling regulator. They noted that a case of severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID) had been reported in which levels of full-length
LCK were low and LCK delta-7 appeared as the main LCK transcript (see
Goldman et al. (1998) and MOLECULAR GENETICS).

Using protein pull-down assays, Park et al. (2002) showed that the
N-terminal ser-rich portion of the herpesvirus Tip protein interacted
with the N terminus of the lysosomal protein WDR48 (612167). Interaction
of Tip with WDR48 induced lysosomal vesicle formation and, via the
C-terminal region of Tip, recruitment of LCK to these lysosomal vesicles
for degradation. Tip interactions with WDR48 and LCK resulted in
downregulation of TCR and CD4 surface expression, respectively, leading
to inhibition of T-lymphocyte signal transduction.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nervi et al. (2005) stated that the LCK gene contains 12 exons and spans
14 kb. Expression of LCK is controlled by 2 distinct promoters separated
by 35 kb. Alternate usage of the promoters produces 2 major classes of
mRNAs that differ only in their noncoding 5-prime ends. Alternative
splicing and the use of alternative transcription initiation sites
generates several variants in each mRNA class.

MAPPING

Marth et al. (1986) mapped the mouse Lck gene to distal chromosome 4.
Using molecular analysis by somatic cell hybridization and in situ
hybridization, they mapped the human LCK gene to chromosome 1p35-p32.
They noted that LCK closely resembles other protein-tyrosine kinase
oncogenes, notably SRC, YES (164880), and FGR (164940), and that
virus-induced murine lymphomas have been found with rearrangement of the
Lck gene, suggesting that aberrant expression of LCK may contribute to
lymphoid transformation. In man, chromosome abnormalities, deletions, or
translocations are seen in 1p34 in neuroblastomas (Gilbert et al., 1982)
and in non-Hodgkin lymphoma (Levine et al., 1985).

Volpi et al. (1994) mapped the LCK gene to 1p35-p34.3 by fluorescence in
situ hybridization. By dual-color in situ hybridization with an LCK
probe and a probe for D1S57, which was mapped to 1p34.3-p34.2 by Van Roy
et al. (1993), they found that the LCK gene was telomeric to the
anonymous marker.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Goldman et al. (1998) noted that the T-cell antigen receptor plays a
crucial role in thymocyte differentiation and T-cell activation. After
antigen binding to the TCR, and in concert with engagement of other
coreceptors and their associated ligands (such as CD4 and major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II, CD28 (186760), B7 (112203),
CD8, and MHC I), signal transduction cascades are activated. The
earliest measurable biochemical event is the activation of
protein-tyrosine kinases, resulting in the phosphorylation of multiple
cellular substrates. At least 3 protein-tyrosine kinases are known to be
involved in TCR signaling at the level of the receptor, including
p59(fyn) (FYN; 137025), p56(lck), and ZAP70 (176947). Individuals with
mutations in the gene coding for the ZAP70 protein show severe combined
immunodeficiency (SCID), a heterogeneous disorder characterized by
profound defects in cellular and humoral immunity, due to selective
T-cell defect, e.g., 176947.0001. Patients present with an absence of
peripheral CD8(+) T cells and normal to high levels of peripheral CD4(+)
T cells which are unable to signal through the TCR. SCID-like phenotypes
have also been observed in mice rendered p56(lck) or p59(fyn) deficient
by homologous recombination. Mice lacking p56(lck) as well as transgenic
mice expressing dominant-negative mutations of p56(lck) demonstrate
severe T-cell developmental defects (Molina et al., 1992; Levin et al.,
1993).

Goldman et al. (1998) described an infant with clinical and laboratory
features of SCID and selective CD4 lymphopenia and lack of CD28
expression on CD8(+) T cells. T cells from this patient showed poor
blastogenic responses to various mitogens and to interleukin-2 (IL2;
147680). Other T-cell antigen receptor-induced responses, including
upregulation of CD69 (107273), were similarly inhibited. However, more
proximal T-cell antigen receptor signaling events, such as anti-CD3
induced protein-tyrosine phosphorylation, phosphorylation of
mitogen-associated protein kinase, and calcium mobilization, were
intact. Although p59(fyn) and ZAP70 protein-tyrosine kinases were
expressed at normal levels, a marked decrease in the level of p56(lck)
was noted. Furthermore, this decrease was associated with the presence
of an alternatively spliced LCK transcript lacking the exon 7
kinase-encoding domain. These data suggested that deficiency in p56(lck)
expression can produce a SCID phenotype in humans. The patient was a
male infant from a nonconsanguineous union who was noted to have loose
stools and poor weight gain at 1 month of age. He was first hospitalized
at 2 months of age for dehydration, failure to thrive, and sepsis. Oral
candidiasis and weight below the fifth percentile were found at that
time. Rotavirus was isolated from the stool, Enterobacter cloacae from
the blood, and cytomegalovirus from the urine and intestinal biopsies.
Lymphopenia and hypogammaglobulinemia were noted. Tests for HIV and for
other causes of SCID, including deficiencies of adenosine deaminase and
purine nucleoside phosphorylase, excluded those diagnoses. A 2-month
trial of IL2, begun when the patient was 26 months old, elicited neither
a clinical response nor an improvement in lymphocyte numbers (total
lymphocyte count ranged between 780 and 1,890). At the age of 32 months,
the patient underwent an allogeneic bone marrow transplant from a
matched unrelated donor. All sequences normally found in exon 7 were
absent in the patient. To test whether the skipping of exon 7 was due to
splice site mutations, intron 6, exon 7, and intron 7 were PCR amplified
from patient and control genomic DNA and then sequenced. No differences
were observed in the splice sequences flanking exon 7 or within 20 bp on
either side. The RT-PCR products generated from the patient's cDNA using
forward and reverse primers within the 5-prime and 3-prime ends of the
molecule yielded 2 bands of approximately equal intensity, whereas 1
band was barely detectable or absent when cDNA from control peripheral
blood mononuclear cells, the parents, or Jurkat cDNA was used. While the
precise genetic defect responsible for the decreased expression p56(lck)
in this patient was not fully understood, Goldman et al. (1998) thought
it likely that aberrant alternative splicing of exon 7 was responsible.

CYTOGENETICS

In a patient with T-lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) and a translocation
t(1;7)(p34;q34) as the sole karyotypic abnormality, Tycko et al. (1991)
found evidence of joining of the LCK gene with the gene encoding the
T-cell antigen receptor beta subunit (TCRB; see 186930). The chromosomal
breakpoint was located 2 kb upstream of the LCK upstream promoter and
first nontranslated exon. In a second t(1;7) translocation, the
breakpoint was found between 2 alternative LCK promoters, upstream of
the second exon. Relative to normal thymus and activated T cells, levels
of LCK mRNA were greatly elevated in the first case and moderately
elevated in the second. Burnett et al. (1991) also studied involvement
of the LCK gene in a t(1;7) leukemia translocation.

Burnett et al. (1994) provided a molecular analysis of the
t(1;7)(p34;q34) in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia that fuses LCK
and TCRB.

ANIMAL MODEL

During T-cell development, assembly and expression of a complete gene
for the beta chain of the T-cell receptor blocks further rearrangement
at the TCRB locus (a process referred to as allelic exclusion) and
drives the generation and expansion of cells positive for CD4 and CD8.
Studies in transgenic animals suggested that the lymphocyte-specific
protein-tyrosine kinase p56(lck) may impinge on the same pathway used by
TCR-beta chains to deliver such signals. This hypothesis predicts that
interference with p56(lck) function would mitigate the effects of a
simultaneously expressed TCR-beta chain. Anderson et al. (1993)
confirmed this prediction through examination of allelic exclusion in
mice expressing both a functional TCRB transgene and a catalytically
inactive form of p56(lck). Thus, the oncogene LCK is the
protein-tyrosine kinase that regulates allelic exclusion at the T-cell
receptor beta locus.

By creating a lck-knockout mouse with a doxycycline-inducible lck
transgene, Seddon et al. (2000) assessed the role of LCK in T cell
development and population of the peripheral T cell pool. Knockout mice
fed doxycycline (dox) had functional T cell phenotypes similar to those
of wildtype control mice, whereas the phenotype of knockout mice that
had dox removed from their diets (Lck1 OFF) resembled that of
Lck-negative mice. Analysis of thymic cellularity revealed a rapid
atrophy in the Lck1 OFF mice due to loss of double-positive (CD4+/CD8+)
cells. Although expression of lck is essential for full activation of
naive T cells, flow cytometric and immunoblot analyses showed that
continued expression of lck is not required for their prolonged
survival. Adoptive transfer experiments showed that homeostatic
proliferation of naive T cells does require sustained lck expression.
Therefore, the signals that mediate survival and homeostasis appear to
be distinct.

By flow cytometric analysis of mice expressing an inducible Lck
transgene in T cells, Tewari et al. (2006) found that immunologically
naive mice lacking Lck were unable to activate or expand viral
antigen-specific Cd8-positive T cells. The magnitude of primary
Cd8-positive T-cell expansion depended on the duration of Lck-dependent
signaling. Memory Cd8-positive T cells, however, did not require Lck for
functional avidity, maintenance, or reactivation. Tewari et al. (2006)
concluded that naive, but not memory, CD8-positive T cells require LCK
for activation, possibly accounting for the hyperreactivity to antigen
of memory cells and accelerated immune control during secondary
infections.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Marth et al. (1988)
REFERENCE 1. Anderson, S. J.; Levin, S. D.; Perlmutter, R. M.: Protein tyrosine
kinase p56(lck) controls allelic exclusion of T-cell receptor beta-chain
genes. Nature 365: 552-554, 1993.

2. Burnett, R. C.; David, J.-C.; Harden, A. M.; Le Beau, M. M.; Rowley,
J. D.; Diaz, M. O.: The LCK gene is involved in the t(1;7)(p34;q34)
in the T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia derived cell line, HSB-2. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 3: 461-467, 1991.

3. Burnett, R. C.; Thirman, M. J.; Rowley, J. D.; Diaz, M. O.: Molecular
analysis of the T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia-associated t(1;7)(p34;q34)
that fuses LCK and TCRB. Blood 84: 1232-1236, 1994.

4. Germani, A.; Malherbe, S.; Rouer, E.: The exon 7-spliced Lck isoform
in T lymphocytes: a potential regulator of p56lck signaling pathways. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 301: 680-685, 2003.

5. Gilbert, F.; Balaban, G.; Moorhead, P.; Bianchi, D.; Schlesinger,
H.: Abnormalities of chromosome 1p in human neuroblastoma tumors
and cell lines. Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 7: 33-42, 1982.

6. Goldman, F. D.; Ballas, Z. K.; Schutte, B. C.; Kemp, J.; Hollenback,
C.; Noraz, N.; Taylor, N.: Defective expression of p56lck in an infant
with severe combined immunodeficiency. J. Clin. Invest. 102: 421-429,
1998.

7. Kim, P. W.; Sun, Z.-Y. J.; Blacklow, S. C.; Wagner, G.; Eck, M.
J.: A zinc clasp structure tethers Lck to T cell coreceptors CD4
and CD8. Science 301: 1725-1728, 2003.

8. Levin, S. D.; Anderson, S. J.; Forbush, K. A.; Perlmutter, R. M.
: A dominant-negative transgene defines a role for p56lck in thymopoiesis. EMBO
J. 12: 1671-1680, 1993.

9. Levine, E. G.; Arthur, D. S.; Frizzera, G.; Peterson, B. A.; Hurd,
D. D.; Bloomfield, C. D.: There are differences in cytogenetic abnormalities
among histologic subtypes of the non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Blood 66:
1414-1422, 1985.

10. Marth, J. D.; Disteche, C.; Pravtcheva, D.; Ruddle, F.; Krebs,
E. G.; Perlmutter, R. M.: Localization of a lymphocyte-specific protein
tyrosine kinase gene (lck) at a site of frequent chromosomal abnormalities
in human lymphomas. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 7400-7404, 1986.

11. Marth, J. D.; Overell, R. W.; Meier, K. E.; Krebs, E. G.; Perlmutter,
R. M.: Translational activation of the lck proto-oncogene. Nature 332:
171-173, 1988.

12. Molina, T. J.; Kishihara, K.; Siderovski, D. P.; van Ewijk, W.;
Narendran, A.; Timms, E.; Wakeham, A.; Paige, C. J.; Hartmann, K.-U.;
Veillette, A.; Davidson, D.; Mak, T. W.: Profound block in thymocyte
development in mice lacking p56'lck'. Nature 357: 161-164, 1992.

13. Nervi, S.; Atlan-Gepner, C.; Kahn-Perles, B.; Lecine, P.; Vialettes,
B.; Imbert, J.; Naquet, P.: Specific deficiency of p56(lck) expression
in T lymphocytes from type 1 diabetic patients. J. Immun. 165: 5874-5883,
2000.

14. Nervi, S.; Guinamard, R.; Delaval, B.; Lecine, P.; Vialettes,
B.; Naquet, P.; Imbert, J.: A rare mRNA variant of the human lymphocyte-specific
protein tyrosine kinase LCK gene with intron B retention and exon
7 skipping encodes a putative protein with altered SH3-dependent molecular
interactions. Gene 359: 18-25, 2005.

15. Park, J.; Lee, B.-S.; Choi, J.-K.; Means, R. E.; Choe, J.; Jung,
J. U.: Herpesviral protein targets a cellular WD repeat endosomal
protein to downregulate T lymphocyte receptor expression. Immunity 17:
221-233, 2002.

16. Rouer, E.; Brule, F.; Benarous, R.: A single base mutation in
the 5-prime splice site of intron 7 of the lck gene is responsible
for the deletion of exon 7 in lck mRNA of the JCaM1 cell line. Oncogene 18:
4262-4268, 1999.

17. Saint-Ruf, C.; Panigada, M.; Azogui, O.; Debey, P.; von Boehmer,
H.; Grassi, F.: Different initiation of pre-TCR and gamma-delta-TCR
signalling. Nature 406: 524-527, 2000.

18. Seddon, B.; Legname, G.; Tomlinson, P.; Zamoyska, R.: Long-term
survival but impaired homeostatic proliferation of naive T cells in
the absence of p56(lck). Science 290: 127-131, 2000.

19. Tewari, K.; Walent, J.; Svaren, J.; Zamoyska, R.; Suresh, M.:
Differential requirement for Lck during primary and memory CD8+ T
cell responses. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 16388-16393, 2006.

20. Tycko, B.; Smith, S. D.; Sklar, J.: Chromosomal translocations
joining LCK and TCRB loci in human T cell leukemia. J. Exp. Med. 174:
867-873, 1991.

21. Van Roy, N.; Laureys, G.; Versteeg, R.; Opdenakker, G.; Speleman,
F.: High-resolution fluorescence mapping of 46 DNA markers to the
short arm of human chromosome 1. Genomics 18: 71-78, 1993.

22. Volpi, E. V.; Romani, M.; Siniscalco, M.: Subregional mapping
of the human lymphocyte-specific protein tyrosine kinase gene (LCK)
to 1p35-p34.3 and its position relative to the 1p marker D1S57. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 67: 187-189, 1994.

23. Welte, T.; Leitenberg, D.; Dittel, B. N.; al-Ramadi, B. K.; Xie,
B.; Chin, Y. E.; Janeway, C. A., Jr.; Bothwell, A. L. M.; Bottomly,
K.; Fu, X.-Y.: STAT5 interaction with the T cell receptor complex
and stimulation of T cell proliferation. Science 283: 222-225, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/10/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 1/19/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/19/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/24/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/16/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/24/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/2/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/7/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/13/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/25/1986

EDITED mgross: 10/07/2013
mgross: 7/10/2008
mgross: 1/19/2007
mgross: 9/24/2003
mcapotos: 2/21/2001
mcapotos: 2/20/2001
terry: 2/16/2001
alopez: 10/24/2000
alopez: 8/2/2000
alopez: 1/7/1999
terry: 1/7/1999
terry: 8/20/1998
carol: 8/18/1998
carol: 8/17/1998
terry: 8/13/1998
carol: 1/17/1995
mimadm: 11/6/1994
terry: 10/31/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/5/1992
carol: 1/22/1992

611859	TITLE *611859 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L55; MRPL55
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
inner membrane proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPL55
is a component of the large subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome that
is encoded by the nuclear genome (Koc et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching databases using bovine Mrpl55 as query, Koc et al. (2001)
identified human MRPL55. They also identified MRPL55 homologs in mouse,
Drosophila, and C. elegans, but not in yeast, E. coli, or Arabidopsis.
Mouse and human MRPL55 share 71.7% amino acid identity.

MAPPING

Hartz (2008) mapped the MRPL55 gene to chromosome 1q42.13 based on an
alignment of the MRPL55 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AY358771) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/5/2008.

2. Koc, E. C.; Burkhart, W.; Blackburn, K.; Moyer, M. B.; Schlatzer,
D. M.; Moseley, A.; Spremulli, L. L.: The large subunit of the mammalian
mitochondrial ribosome: analysis of the complement of ribosomal proteins
present. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 43958-43969, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/26/2008

EDITED mgross: 03/05/2008

612220	TITLE *612220 BETA-1,4-N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINYLTRANSFERASE 3; B4GALNT3
;;B4GalNAcT3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

B4GALNT3 transfers N-acetylgalactosamine (GalNAc) onto glucosyl residues
to form N,N-prime-diacetyllactosediamine (LacdiNAc, or LDN), a unique
terminal structure of cell surface N-glycans (Ikehara et al., 2006).

CLONING

By searching a human database for sequences encoding
beta-1,4-glycosyltransferase (beta-4GT) motifs, followed by 5-prime RACE
and PCR of a human stomach cDNA library, Sato et al. (2003) cloned
B4GALNT3, which they designated B4GalNAcT3. The deduced 999-amino acid
protein has a typical type II topology, with an N-terminal transmembrane
domain, 4 potential N-glycosylation sites, a DXH sequence thought to
participate in divalent cation binding, and a C-terminal WGGED motif
characteristic of beta-4GTs. Sato et al. (2003) also identified mouse
B4galnt3, which encodes a deduced 986-amino acid protein that shares
82.2% identity with human B4GALNT3. RT-PCR of human tissues detected
high B4GALNT3 expression in stomach, colon, and testis, and lower
expression in other tissues. B4GALNT3 was also expressed in colon and
stomach cancer cell lines and some other cell lines.

Using Western blot analysis with reducing and nonreducing SDS-PAGE,
Ikehara et al. (2006) found that recombinant soluble B4GalNAcT3, lacking
the N-terminal transmembrane domain, was processed into N- and
C-terminal fragments that were coupled through disulfide bonds.
Immunohistochemical analysis of human gastric tissues showed that
B4GalNAcT3 was expressed only in surface mucous cells of pyloric and
fundic glands and in the glandular compartment of fundic glands.
Confocal microscopy showed that B4GalNAcT3 localized specifically to the
trans-Golgi region.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a variety of UDP donors and monosaccharide acceptors, Sato et al.
(2003) found that a soluble form of B4GalNAcT3 expressed in human
embryonic kidney cells transferred GalNAc to N-acetylglucosyl (GlcNAc)
beta-benzyl through a beta-1,4-linkage to form LDN. B4GalNAcT3
transferred GalNAc to all N- and O-glycans examined that contained
GlcNAc at their nonreducing termini. Some glycohormones contain
N,N-prime-LDN structures in their N-glycans. Sato et al. (2003) showed
that B4GalNAcT3 could synthesize this structure using modified fetal
calf fetuin as a model protein substrate.

Using fluorescence-labeled plant lectin Wisteria floribunda agglutinin
(WFA), which binds to terminal GalNAc residues of N-glycans, and an
anti-B4GalNAcT3 monoclonal antibody, Ikehara et al. (2006) showed that
LDN and B4GalNAcT3 localized to the same human gastric mucous cells,
with LDN appearing on the cell surface and B4GalNAcT3 in the apical side
of the nucleus in association with the trans-Golgi network.

Using real-time RT-PCR, Huang et al. (2007) found that expression of
B4GalNAcT3 was upregulated in 29 (72.5%) of 40 primary colon tumors
compared with normal colon tissue. B4GalNAcT3 overexpression in a human
colon cancer cell line enhanced cell-extracellular matrix adhesion,
migration, anchorage-independent growth, and invasion. B4GalNAcT3
overexpression increased tumor growth and metastasis and decreased
survival of tumor-bearing nude mice. The increase in malignant
phenotypes was associated with activation of focal adhesion kinase
(PTK2; 600758) and ERK/MAPK signaling. Huang et al. (2007) concluded
that upregulation of B4GalNAcT3 may contribute to the malignant behavior
of colon cancer cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sato et al. (2003) determined that the B4GALNT3 gene contains at least
20 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Sato et al. (2003) mapped the B4GALNT3
gene to chromosome 12p13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Huang, J.; Liang, J.-T.; Huang, H.-C.; Shen, T.-L.; Chen, H.-Y.;
Lin, N.-Y.; Che, M.; Lin, W.-C.; Huang, M.-C.: Beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase
III enhances malignant phenotypes of colon cancer cells. Molec. Cancer
Res. 5: 543-552, 2007.

2. Ikehara, Y.; Sato, T.; Niwa, T.; Nakamura, S.; Gotoh, M.; Ikehara,
S. K.; Kiyohara, K.; Aoki, C.; Iwai, T.; Nakanishi, H.; Hirabayashi,
J.; Tatematsu, M.; Narimatsu, H.: Apical Golgi localization of N,N-prime-diacetyllactosediamine
synthase, beta-4GalNAc-T3, is responsible for LacdiNAc expression
on gastric mucosa. Glycobiology 16: 777-785, 2006.

3. Sato, T.; Gotoh, M.; Kiyohara, K.; Kameyama, A.; Kubota, T.; Kikuchi,
N.; Ishizuka, Y.; Iwasaki, H.; Togayachi, A.; Kudo, T.; Ohkura, T.;
Nakanishi, H.; Narimatsu, H.: Molecular cloning and characterization
of a novel human beta-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase, beta-4GalNAc-T3,
responsible for the synthesis of N,N-prime-diacetyllactosediamine,
GalNAc-beta-1-4GlcNAc. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 47534-47544, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/1/2008

EDITED carol: 07/01/2010
wwang: 8/1/2008

