607814	TITLE *607814 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 9-BINDING PROTEIN; RGS9BP
;;RGS9-BINDING PROTEIN;;
RGS9 ANCHOR PROTEIN; R9AP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hu and Wensel (2002) cloned bovine R9ap from a retina cDNA library and
identified the homologous human sequence by database analysis. The
deduced R9AP protein contains 235 amino acids and has a C-terminal
transmembrane domain. Northern blot analysis of several bovine and mouse
tissues detected R9ap expression only in retina. By fractionation and
Western blot analysis of bovine rod outer segment (ROS) membranes, Hu
and Wensel (2002) determined that R9ap associates with Rgs9 (604067) in
the ROS. Immunohistochemical analysis of mouse retina showed R9ap
staining in the ROS and minor staining in the outer plexiform layer.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitation analysis, Hu and Wensel (2002) determined that
bovine R9ap associated with a heterotetrameric complex containing Rgs9,
Gnb5 (604447), and Gnat (see 139330) in detergent-solubilized ROS
membranes. R9ap interacted specifically with the N-terminal domain of
Rgs9. Hu and Wensel (2002) concluded that the C-terminal transmembrane
domain of R9ap functions as the membrane anchor for the other largely
soluble interacting partners.

Hu et al. (2003) determined that the formation of a membrane-bound
complex with bovine R9ap increased the GTPase-accelerating activity of
Rgs9 by a factor of 4.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hu and Wensel (2002) mapped the R9AP gene
to chromosome 19q13.11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Nishiguchi et al. (2004) identified a Guatemalan patient with bradyopsia
(608415) who was homozygous for a frameshift mutation, insertion of a C
at cDNA nucleotide 194 within codon 65 (R65) of the R9AP protein
(607814.0001).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BRADYOPSIA
R9AP, 1-BP INS, 194C

In a Guatemalan patient from a consanguineous union with prolonged
electroretinal response suppression (PERRS; 608415), Nishiguchi et al.
(2004) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp insertion of a cytidine at
cDNA nucleotide 194 within codon 65 (R65) of the R9AP gene, likely to be
a null allele. The patient's 2 sibs were unaffected heterozygotes. This
mutation was not found among 93 control individuals or among screens of
614 patients with other hereditary retinal diseases.

REFERENCE 1. Hu, G.; Wensel, T. G.: R9AP, a membrane anchor for the photoreceptor
GTPase accelerating protein, RGS9-1. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 9755-9760,
2002.

2. Hu, G.; Zhang, Z.; Wensel, T. G.: Activation of RGS9-1GTPase acceleration
by its membrane anchor, R9AP. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 14550-14554, 2003.

3. Nishiguchi, K. M.; Sandberg, M. A.; Kooijman, A. C.; Martemyanov,
K. A.; Pott, J. W. R.; Hagstrom, S. A.; Arshavsky, V. Y.; Berson,
E. L.; Dryja, T. P.: Defects in RGS9 or its anchor protein R9AP in
patients with slow photoreceptor deactivation. Nature 427: 75-78,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/22/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/21/2003

EDITED carol: 02/02/2007
alopez: 1/22/2004
terry: 1/22/2004
mgross: 5/21/2003

610641	TITLE *610641 TERMINAL URIDYLYL TRANSFERASE 1, U6 snRNA-SPECIFIC; TUT1
;;U6-TUTase;;
POLY(A) POLYMERASE-ASSOCIATED DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; PAPD2;;
PAP-ASSOCIATED DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2;;
NUCLEAR SPECKLE-TARGETED PIPK1A-REGULATED POLY(A) POLYMERASE; STAR-PAP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TUT1 specifically catalyzes uridylylation of U6 snRNA (RNU6; 180692) and
is essential for cell proliferation (Trippe et al., 2006).

CLONING

By purifying U6 snRNA-specific terminal uridylyl transferase activity
from HeLa cell extracts, followed by microsequence analysis, Trippe et
al. (2006) cloned TUT1, which they called U6-TUTase. The deduced
874-amino acid TUT1 protein has a calculated molecular mass of 93.4 kD.
It contains an N-terminal C2H2 zinc finger RNA-binding domain, an RNA
recognition motif, and a central TRF4 element (see POLS; 605198) that
overlaps with a poly(A) polymerase (PAP)-associated domain (see PAPOLA;
605553). Immunofluorescence studies in HeLa cells localized TUT1
primarily to the nucleolus, with minor distribution throughout the
nucleus.

GENE FUNCTION

Trippe et al. (2006) found that recombinant TUT1 expressed in HeLa cells
exhibited uridylyl transferase activity in vitro against a synthesized
U6-3 snRNA substrate. TUT1 activity was specific for U6 snRNA, and it
showed no uridylating activity against U6atac RNA (601429), a component
of the minor spliceosome. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of
TUT1 in HeLa cells resulted in decreased cell proliferation and
viability.

To determine roles for nuclear phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate
(PtdIns4,5P(2)), Mellman et al. (2008) set out to identify proteins that
interact with the nuclear phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase (PIPK)
PIPK1A (603275). Mellman et al. (2008) found that PIPK1A colocalizes at
nuclear speckles and interacts with a noncanonical poly(A) polymerase,
TUT1, which they termed Star-PAP for 'nuclear speckle-targeted
PIPK1A-regulated poly(A) polymerase,' and that the activity of TUT1 can
be specifically regulated by PtdIns4,5P(2). TUT1 and PIPK1A function
together in a complex to control the expression of select mRNAs,
including the transcript encoding the key cytoprotective enzyme heme
oxygenase-1 (141250) and other oxidative stress response genes, by
regulating the 3-prime-end formation of their mRNAs. Mellman et al.
(2008) concluded that, taken together, the data demonstrated a model by
which phosphoinositide signaling works in tandem with complement
pathways to regulate the activity of TUT1 (Star-PAP) and the subsequent
biosynthesis of its target mRNA. Mellman et al. (2008) suggested that
their results revealed a mechanism for the integration of nuclear
phosphoinositide signals and a method for regulating gene expression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Trippe et al. (2006) determined that the TUT1 gene contains 9 exons and
spans 17 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Trippe et al. (2006) mapped the TUT1 gene
to chromosome 11.

REFERENCE 1. Mellman, D. L.; Gonzales, M. L.; Song, C.; Barlow, C. A.; Wang,
P.; Kendziorski, C.; Anderson, R. A.: A PtdIns4,5P(2)-regulated nuclear
poly(A) polymerase controls expression of select mRNAs. Nature 451:
1013-1017, 2008.

2. Trippe, R.; Guschina, E.; Hossbach, M.; Urlaub, H.; Luhrmann, R.;
Benecke, B.-J.: Identification, cloning, and functional analysis
of the human U6 snRNA-specific terminal uridylyl transferase. RNA 12:
1494-1504, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/18/2008

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 12/11/2006

EDITED alopez: 03/26/2008
terry: 3/18/2008
mgross: 12/11/2006

602035	TITLE *602035 PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 4, CATALYTIC SUBUNIT; PPP4C
;;SERINE/THREONINE PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE 4; PP4;;
PROTEIN PHOSPHATASE X; PPX
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Protein phosphatases are involved in determining the phosphorylation
state of many regulatory proteins. Other members of this family include
PP1 (see 176875), PP2A (see 176915), and PP5 (see 600658). Brewis and
Cohen (1992) cloned a cDNA that they termed PPX from a human
teratocarcinoma library. The sequence predicted a protein of 307 amino
acids with a mass of 35 kD. Brewis and Cohen (1992) found that PPX
shares 66% identity with the human PP2 isoforms PP2A-alpha and PP2A-beta
(176916).

GENE FUNCTION

Hastie et al. (2000) identified Ppp4r2 (613822) and Ppp4c as the sole
components of a 450-kD PPP4 complex purified from rabbit skeletal muscle
and pig testis. Ppp4r2 and Ppp4c were also present in a 600-kD PPP4
complex that could be converted to a 450-kD species. Protein pull-down
and coimmunoprecipitation analyses showed that recombinant human PPP4R2
interacted specifically with purified pig Ppp4c and not with related
protein phosphatases. Gel filtration and sediment analyses suggested
that recombinant human PPP4R2 formed dimers. Ppp4r2 and Ppp4c were
present in a 1:1 ratio in the purified rabbit and pig PPP4 complexes,
suggesting that the PPP4 complex is a tetramer comprised of 2 PPP4R2
molecules and 2 PPP4C molecules. The 450-kD and 600-kD PPP4 complexes
showed very little phosphatase activity, but they could be activated by
exposure to a basic protein, such as protamine (PRM1; 182880).

Zhang et al. (2005) found that in HeLa cells HDAC3 (605166) was
activated by the phosphorylation of ser424 by casein kinase II (see
CSNK2A1; 115440) and was deactivated by dephosphorylation of ser424 by
protein phosphatase-4. HDAC3 copurified with PPP4C and its regulatory
subunit, PPP4R1 (604908), in an HDAC3 complex that showed phosphatase
activity. Both PP4 proteins interacted directly with HDAC3, and mutation
analysis indicated that the N terminus of HDAC3 was necessary and
sufficient for HDAC3-PPP4C interaction. Both overexpression and RNA
interference experiments indicated that HDAC3 activity was inversely
proportional to the cellular abundance of PPP4C.

Using protein pull-down assays, Gingras et al. (2005) showed that
PP4R3-alpha (SMEK1; 610351), PPP4C, and PPP4R2 interacted in a complex.

Lee et al. (2010) stated that PPP4C, PPP4R2, and PPP4R3-beta (SMEK2;
610352) form a heterotrimeric complex involved in DNA double-strand
break repair. They found that a dimeric PPP4 complex containing PPP4C
and PPP4R2 dephosphorylated replication protein A2 (RPA2; 179836),
regulating its role in the DNA double-stranded break response. PPP4C
efficiently dephosphorylated phospho-RPA2 in vitro. Silencing PPP4R2 in
human cell lines, or introduction of a PPP4R2 mutant unable to interact
with PPP4C, altered the kinetics and pattern of RPA2 phosphorylation.
Depletion of PPP4R2 impeded homologous recombination via inefficient
loading of the essential factor RAD51 (179617), causing an extended G2-M
checkpoint and hypersensitivity to DNA damage. Cells expressing
phosphomimetic RPA2 mutants had a comparable phenotype, suggesting that
PPP4-mediated dephosphorylation of RPA2 is necessary for efficient DNA
damage response.

MAPPING

Bastians et al. (1997) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to map
the PPP4C gene to chromosome 16p12-p11. They noted that several
translocations associated with acute leukemias have been mapped to this
region of chromosome 16p.

REFERENCE 1. Bastians, H.; Krebber, H.; Hoheisel, J.; Ohl, S.; Lichter, P.;
Ponstingl, H.; Joos, S.: Assignment of the human serine/threonine
protein phosphatase 4 gene (PPP4C) to chromosome 16p11-p12 by fluorescence
in situ hybridization. Genomics 42: 181-182, 1997.

2. Brewis, N. D.; Cohen, P. T. W.: Protein phosphatase X has been
highly conserved during mammalian evolution. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1171:
231-233, 1992.

3. Gingras, A.-C.; Caballero, M.; Zarske, M.; Sanchez, A.; Hazbun,
T. R.; Fields, S.; Sonenberg, N.; Hafen, E.; Raught, B.; Aebersold,
R.: A novel, evolutionarily conserved protein phosphatase complex
involved in cisplatin sensitivity. Molec. Cell. Proteomics 4: 1725-1740,
2005.

4. Hastie, C. J.; Carnegie, G. K.; Morrice, N.; Cohen, P. T. W.:
A novel 50 kDa protein forms complexes with protein phosphatase 4
and is located at centrosomal microtubule organizing centres. Biochem.
J. 347: 845-855, 2000.

5. Lee, D.-H.; Pan, Y.; Kanner, S.; Sung, P.; Borowiec, J. A.; Chowdhury,
D.: A PP4 phosphatase complex dephosphorylates RPA2 to facilitate
DNA repair via homologous recombination. Nature Struct. Molec. Biol. 17:
365-372, 2010.

6. Zhang, X.; Ozawa, Y.; Lee, H.; Wen, Y.-D.; Tan, T.-H.; Wadzinski,
B. E.; Seto, E.: Histone deacetylase 3 (HDAC3) activity is regulated
by interaction with protein serine/threonine phosphatase 4. Genes
Dev. 19: 827-839, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 03/21/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/9/2005

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/8/1997

EDITED mgross: 03/21/2011
wwang: 11/29/2005
terry: 11/9/2005
alopez: 10/10/1997
alopez: 10/8/1997

147700	TITLE *147700 ISOCITRATE DEHYDROGENASE 1; IDH1
;;ISOCITRATE DEHYDROGENASE, NADP(+)-SPECIFIC, SOLUBLE;;
PEROXISOMAL ISOCITRATE DEHYDROGENASE; PICD;;
ISOCITRATE DEHYDROGENASE, NADP(+)-DEPENDENT, CYTOSOLIC; IDPC; ICDC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IDH1 is a dimeric cytosolic NADP-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase (EC
1.1.1.42) that catalyzes decarboxylation of isocitrate into
alpha-ketoglutarate (Nekrutenko et al., 1998).

CLONING

By RT-PCR of placenta RNA, followed by PCR of an adult liver cDNA
library, Nekrutenko et al. (1998) cloned human IDH1. The deduced
414-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 46.7 kD. It
contains a dehydrogenase and isopropylmalate dehydrogenase signature
sequence, 7 conserved residues predicted to be involved in isocitrate
binding, and a C-terminal peroxisomal-targeting signal. Human IDH1
shares about 95% amino acid identity with Idh1 from mouse and 2 species
of vole.

By searching databases for sequences similar to S. cerevisiae Idp3,
Geisbrecht and Gould (1999) identified a human colon carcinoma cDNA
encoding IDH1, which they called PICD. The deduced protein shares 59%
identity with yeast Idp3. Western blot analysis of a human
hepatocellular carcinoma cell line detected PICD at an apparent
molecular mass of 46 kD. In fractionated cells, most PICD associated
with the cytosolic fraction, although a significant amount colocalized
with a peroxisomal marker. In rat liver cells, about 27% of total Picd
protein was associated with peroxisomes.

GENE FUNCTION

Geisbrecht and Gould (1999) found that purified recombinant human PICD
catalyzed oxidative decarboxylation of isocitric acid and required NADP+
for the reaction. In addition, human PICD could complement the oleate
growth defect in Idp3-null yeast.

Shechter et al. (2003) found that expression of IDH1 mRNA increased
2.3-fold and IDH1 activity increased 63% in sterol-deprived HepG2 cells.
The IDH1 promoter region was activated by expression of SREBP1A (SREBF1;
184756) and, to a lesser degree, SREBP2 (SREBF2; 600481).
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays confirmed preferential binding of
SREBP1A to an SREBP-binding element located at nucleotides -44 to -25 in
the IDH1 promoter region. Shechter et al. (2003) concluded that IDH1
activity is coordinately regulated with the cholesterol and fatty acid
biosynthetic pathways, suggesting that IDH1 provides the cytosolic NADPH
required by these pathways.

Using 2-dimensional PAGE and Western blot analysis, Memon et al. (2005)
found that expression of IDPC was downregulated in a poorly
differentiated bladder cancer cell line compared with a
well-differentiated bladder cancer cell line. Tissue biopsies of
late-stage bladder cancers also showed IDPC downregulation compared with
early-stage bladder cancers.

Ronnebaum et al. (2006) found that downregulation of Icdc via small
interfering RNA impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in 2 rat
insulinoma cell lines and in primary rat islets. Suppression of Icdc
also attenuated the glucose-induced increments in pyruvate cycling
activity and in NADPH levels, as well as total cellular NADP(H) content.
Metabolic profiling of 8 organic acids in cell extracts revealed that
suppression of Icdc increased lactate production, consistent with
attenuation of pyruvate cycling, with no significant changes in other
intermediates. Ronnebaum et al. (2006) concluded that ICDC plays an
important role in the control of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion.

Metallo et al. (2012) showed that human cells use reductive metabolism
of alpha-ketoglutarate to synthesize acetyl-coenzyme A (AcCoA) for lipid
synthesis. This IDH1-dependent pathway is active in most cell lines
under normal culture conditions, but cells grown under hypoxia rely
almost exclusively on the reductive carboxylation of glutamine-derived
alpha-ketoglutarate for de novo lipogenesis. Furthermore, renal cell
lines deficient in the von Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor protein (VHL;
608537) preferentially use reductive glutamine metabolism for lipid
biosynthesis even at normal oxygen levels. Metallo et al. (2012)
concluded that their results identified a critical role for oxygen in
regulating carbon use to produce AcCoA and support lipid synthesis in
mammalian cells.

Mullen et al. (2012) showed that tumor cells with defective mitochondria
use glutamine-dependent reductive carboxylation rather than oxidative
metabolism as the major pathway of citrate formation. This pathway uses
mitochondrial and cytosolic isoforms of NADP+/NADPH-dependent IDH1, and
subsequent metabolism of glutamine-derived citrate provides both the
AcCoA for lipid synthesis and the 4-carbon intermediates needed to
produce the remaining citric acid cycle (CAC) metabolites and related
macromolecular precursors. This reductive, glutamine-dependent pathway
is the dominant mode of metabolism in rapidly growing malignant cells
containing mutations in complex I or complex III of the electron
transport chain (ECT), in patient-derived renal carcinoma cells with
mutations in fumarate hydratase (136850), and in cells with normal
mitochondria subjected to acute pharmacologic ECT inhibition. Mullen et
al. (2012) concluded that their findings revealed the novel induction of
a versatile glutamine-dependent pathway that reverses many of the
reactions of the canonical CAC, supports tumor cell growth, and explains
how cells generate pools of CAC intermediates in the face of impaired
mitochondrial metabolism.

Lu et al. (2012) reported that 2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG)-producing IDH
mutants can prevent the histone demethylation that is required for
lineage-specific progenitor cells to differentiate into terminally
differentiated cells. In tumor samples from glioma patients, IDH
mutations were associated with a distinct gene expression profile
enriched for genes expressed in neural progenitor cells, and this was
associated with increased histone methylation. To test whether the
ability of IDH mutants to promote histone methylation contributes to a
block in cell differentiation in nontransformed cells, Lu et al. (2012)
tested the effect of neomorphic IDH mutants on adipocyte differentiation
in vitro. Introduction of either mutant IDH or cell-permeable 2HG was
associated with repression of the inducible expression of
lineage-specific differentiation genes and a block to differentiation.
This correlated with a significant increase in repressive histone
methylation marks without observable changes in promoter DNA
methylation. Gliomas were found to have elevated levels of similar
histone repressive marks. Stable transfection of a 2HG-producing mutant
IDH into immortalized astrocytes resulted in progressive accumulation of
histone methylation. Of the marks examined, increased H3K9 methylation
reproducibly preceded a rise in DNA methylation as cells were passaged
in culture. Furthermore, Lu et al. (2012) found that the 2HG-inhibitable
H3K9 demethylase KDM4C (605469) was induced during adipocyte
differentiation, and that RNA-interference suppression of KDM4C was
sufficient to block differentiation. Lu et al. (2012) concluded that,
taken together, their data demonstrated that 2HG can inhibit histone
demethylation and that inhibition of histone demethylation can be
sufficient to block the differentiation of nontransformed cells.

Turcan et al. (2012) showed that mutation of IDH1 establishes the glioma
CpG island methylator (G-CIMP) phenotype by remodeling the methylome.
This remodeling results in reorganization of the methylome and
transcriptome. Examination of the epigenome of a large set of
intermediate-grade gliomas demonstrated a distinct G-CIMP phenotype that
is highly dependent on the presence of IDH mutation. Introduction of
mutant IDH1 into primary human astrocytes altered specific histone
marks, induced extensive DNA hypermethylation, and reshaped the
methylome in a fashion that mirrored the changes observed in
G-CIMP-positive lower-grade gliomas. Furthermore, the epigenomic
alterations resulting from mutant IDH1 activated key gene expression
programs, characterized G-CIMP-positive proneural glioblastomas but not
other glioblastomas, and were predictive of improved survival. Turcan et
al. (2012) concluded that their findings demonstrated that IDH mutation
is the molecular basis of CIMP in gliomas, provided a framework for
understanding oncogenesis in these gliomas, and highlighted the
interplay between genomic and epigenomic changes in human cancers.

Koivunen et al. (2012) showed that the R-enantiomer of 2HG (R-2HG),
produced by cancer-associated mutant IDH1 or IDH2, but not S-2HG,
stimulates EGLN (e.g., EGLN1; 606425) activity, leading to diminished
HIF (see 603348) levels, which enhances the proliferation and soft agar
growth of human astrocytes. Koivunen et al. (2012) concluded that their
findings defined an enantiomer-specific mechanism by which the R-2HG
that accumulates in IDH mutant brain tumors promotes transformation.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Xu et al. (2004) performed structural studies of human IDH1 in complex
with NADP and with NADP, isocitrate, and Ca(2+) and identified 3
conformational states of the enzyme. A structural segment at the active
site assumed a loop conformation in the open, inactive state, a
partially unraveled alpha helix in the semi-open, intermediate state,
and an alpha helix in the closed, active state. In the active
conformation, asp279 formed a hydrogen bond with Ca(2+) to participate
in the catalytic reaction. In the inactive conformation, asp279 formed a
hydrogen bond with ser94 and hindered access of isocitrate to the active
site. Since serine phosphorylation inactivates E. coli Idh, Xu et al.
(2004) proposed that the hydrogen bond formed between asp279 and ser94
may mimic an inactivating serine phosphorylation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Shechter et al. (2003) determined that the IDH1 gene contains 10 exons
and spans 18.9 kb. The first 2 exons are untranslated and contain 5
putative transcription start sites. Nucleotides -44 to -25 contain an
SREBP-binding element (GTGGGCTGAG).

MAPPING

Chen et al. (1972) found rare variants of soluble IDH and concluded that
the structural gene is probably autosomal and that it is distinct from
the locus governing the mitochondrial form. Shows (1972) presented cell
hybridization data suggesting that soluble malate dehydrogenase (MDH1;
154200) and IDH are syntenic. Using the cell-hybrid method which relies
on interspecies variation rather than polymorphism, Boone et al. (1972)
concluded that the IDH locus is on chromosome 20. The assignment of
soluble IDH and soluble MDH to chromosome 20 was withdrawn (Ruddle,
1973). Creagan et al. (1974) presented evidence that these 2 syntenic
loci are on chromosome 2. From study of a balanced reciprocal
translocation (X;2)(p22;q32) in man-mouse hybrids, Van Cong (1976)
concluded that IDH1 is located in the region 2q32-qter. By dosage effect
in cases of chromosome 2 aberrations, Narahara et al. (1985) concluded
that the IDH1 locus is on chromosome 2q33.3, probably in the proximal
portion.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Role in Gliomas

To identify the genetic alterations in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM; see
137800), Parsons et al. (2008) sequenced 20,661 protein-coding genes,
determined the presence of amplifications and deletions using
high-density oligonucleotide arrays, and performed gene expression
analyses using next-generation sequencing technologies in 22 human tumor
samples. This comprehensive analysis led to the discovery of a variety
of genes that were not known to be altered in GBMs. Most notably,
Parsons et al. (2008) found recurrent mutations in the active site of
IDH1 in 12% of GBM patients. Mutations in IDH1 occurred in a large
fraction of young patients and in most patients with secondary GBMs and
were associated with an increase in overall survival. Parsons et al.
(2008) concluded that their studies demonstrated the value of unbiased
genomic analyses in the characterization of human brain cancer and
identified a potentially useful genetic alteration for the
classification and targeted therapy of GBMs. Parsons et al. (2008) found
that the hazard ratio for death among 79 patients with wildtype IDH1, as
compared to 11 with mutant IDH1, was 3.7 (95% confidence interval, 2.1
to 6.5; p less than 0.001). The median survival was 3.8 years for
patients with mutated IDH1, as compared to 1.1 years for patients with
wildtype IDH1. Parsons et al. (2008) found that a majority of tumors
analyzed had alterations in genes encoding components of each of the
TP53 (191170), RB1 (614041), and PI3K (see 171834) pathways.

Yan et al. (2009) determined the sequence of the IDH1 gene and related
IDH2 (147650) gene in 445 central nervous system (CNS) tumors and 494
non-CNS tumors. The enzymatic activity of the proteins that were
produced from normal and mutant IDH1 and IDH2 genes was determined in
cultured glioma cells that were transfected with these genes. Yan et al.
(2009) identified mutations that affected amino acid 132 of IDH1 in more
than 70% of World Health Organization (WHO) grade II and III
astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas and in glioblastomas that developed
from these lower-grade lesions. Tumors without mutations in IDH1 often
had mutations affecting the analogous amino acid (R172) of the IDH2
gene. Tumors with IDH1 or IDH2 mutations had distinctive genetic and
clinical characteristics, and patients with such tumors had a better
outcome than those with wildtype IDH genes. Each of the 4 tested IDH1
and IDH2 mutations reduced the enzymatic activity of the encoded
protein. Yan et al. (2009) concluded that mutations of NADP(+)-dependent
isocitrate dehydrogenases encoded by IDH1 and IDH2 occur in a majority
of several types of malignant gliomas.

Zhao et al. (2009) showed that mutation to arginine of codon 132 of IDH1
impairs the enzyme's affinity for its substrate and dominantly inhibits
wildtype IDH1 activity through the formation of catalytically inactive
heterodimers. Forced expression of mutant IDH1 in cultured cells reduced
formation of the enzyme product, alpha ketoglutarate (alpha-KG), and
increased the levels of hypoxia-inducible factor subunit HIF1-alpha
(603348), a transcription factor that facilitates tumor growth when
oxygen is low and whose stability is regulated by alpha-KG. The rise in
HIF1-alpha levels was reversible by an alpha-KG derivative. HIF1-alpha
levels were higher in human gliomas harboring an IDH1 mutation than in
tumors without a mutation. Thus, Zhao et al. (2009) concluded that IDH1
appears to function as a tumor suppressor that, when mutationally
inactivated, contributes to tumorigenesis in part through induction of
the HIF1 pathway.

Dang et al. (2009) showed that cancer-associated IDH1 mutations result
in a new ability of the enzyme to catalyze the NADPH-dependent reduction
of alpha-ketoglutarate to D-2-hydroxyglutarate (2HG). Structural studies
demonstrated that when arg132 is mutated to his (R132H), residues in the
active site are shifted to produce structural changes consistent with
reduced oxidative decarboxylation of isocitrate and acquisition of the
ability to convert alpha-ketoglutarate to 2HG. Excess accumulation of
2HG has been shown to lead to an elevated risk of malignant brain tumors
in patients with inborn errors of 2HG metabolism (Aghili et al., 2009)
(see 600721). Similarly, in human malignant gliomas harboring IDH1
mutations, Dang et al. (2009) found markedly elevated levels of 2HG.
Dang et al. (2009) concluded that their data demonstrated that the IDH1
mutations result in production of the oncometabolite 2HG, and indicated
that the excess 2HG which accumulates in vivo contributes to the
formation and malignant progression of gliomas.

In a retrospective study of 49 progressive astrocytomas, 42 (86%) of
which had somatic mutations in the IDH1 gene, Dubbink et al. (2009)
found that the presence of IDH1 mutations was significantly associated
with increased patient survival (median survival, 48 vs 98 months), but
did not affect outcome of treatment with temozolomide.

Bralten et al. (2011) found that overexpression of IDH1-R132H in
established glioma cell lines resulted in decreased proliferation and
more contact-dependent cell migration compared to wildtype.
Intracerebral injection of IDH1-R132H in mice, as compared to injection
of wildtype IDH1, resulted in increased survival and even absence of
tumor in 1 mouse. Reduced cellular proliferation was associated with
accumulation of D-2-hydroxyglutarate that is produced by the R132H
variant protein. The decreased proliferation was not associated with
increased apoptosis, but was associated with decreased AKT1 (164730)
activity. The findings indicated that R132H dominantly reduces
aggressiveness of established glioma cell lines in vitro and in vivo.
Bralten et al. (2011) noted that the findings were apparently
contradictory because the presence of an IDH1 mutation was thought to
contribute to tumorigenesis. The authors suggested that IDH1 mutations
may be involved in tumor initiation and not in tumor progression.

- Role in Acute Myeloid Leukemia

Mardis et al. (2009) identified the R132C mutation in 8 of 188 acute
myeloid leukemia (AML; 601626) samples and the R132H mutation in 7 of
188 samples. The R132S mutation was seen in 1 sample. Mutation of the
IDH1 gene was strongly correlated with a normal cytogenetic status; it
was present in 13 of 80 cytogenetically normal samples (16%).

Schnittger et al. (2010) identified somatic heterozygous mutations in
the IDH1 gene in samples from 93 (6.6%) of 1,414 patients with AML. Five
different mutations at codon arg132 were observed, with R132C being the
most common (54.8%). Patients with IDH1 mutations more commonly had an
immature immunophenotype (p less than 0.001), were female (p = 0.003),
had shorter overall survival (p = 0.110), a shorter event-free survival
(p less than 0.003), and a higher cumulative risk for relapse (p =
0.001). More than 73% of all IDH1-mutated cases had additional molecular
defects, most frequently in NPM1 (164040), compatible with a
multiple-hit hypothesis of AML pathogenesis. The data indicated that
IDH1 status may add information regarding characterization and
prognostication in AML.

Losman et al. (2013) found that expression of the canonical IDH1 mutant
R132H in human erythroleukemia cells and immortalized
granulocyte-macrophage progenitor cells promoted growth factor
independence and impaired differentiation, 2 hallmarks of leukemic
transformation. These effects could be recapitulated by
(R)-2-hydroxyglutarate, but not (S)-2-hydroxyglutarate, despite the fact
that (S)-2-hydroxyglutarate more potently inhibits enzymes, such as the
5-prime-methylcytosine TET2 (300255), that had been linked to the
pathogenesis of IDH mutant tumors. Losman et al. (2013) provided
evidence that this paradox relates to the ability of
(S)-2-hydroxyglutarate but not not (R)-2-hydroxyglutarate to inhibit the
EglN (606425) prolyl hydroxylases. Additionally, Losman et al. (2013)
showed that transformation by (R)-2-hydroxyglutarate is reversible.

The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network (2013) analyzed the genomes of
200 clinically annotated adult cases of de novo AML, using either
whole-genome sequencing (50 cases) or whole-exome sequencing (150
cases), along with RNA and microRNA sequencing and DNA methylation
analysis. The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network (2013) identified
recurrent mutations in the IDH1 or IDH2 (147650) genes in 39/200 (20%)
samples.

- Role in Multiple Endochondromatosis

For a discussion of somatic IDH1 and IDH2 mutations in multiple
endochondromatosis, see Ollier disease (166000) and Maffucci syndrome
(614569).

ANIMAL MODEL

Sasaki et al. (2012) reported the characterization of conditional
knockin mice in which the most common IDH1 mutation, R132H, is inserted
into the endogenous murine Idh1 locus and is expressed in all
hematopoietic cells or specifically in cells of the myeloid lineage.
These mutants showed increased numbers of early hematopoietic
progenitors and developed splenomegaly and anemia with extramedullary
hematopoiesis, suggesting a dysfunctional bone marrow niche.
Furthermore, the myeloid-specific knockin cells had hypermethylated
histones and changes to DNA methylation similar to those observed in
human IDH1- or IDH2-mutant AML. Sasaki et al. (2012) concluded that, to
their knowledge, theirs was the first study to describe the generation
and characterization of conditional IDH1(R132H)-knockin mice, and also
the first to report the induction of a leukemic DNA methylation
signature in a mouse model.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Henderson  (1968); Henderson  (1965); Turner et al. (1974); Weil et
al. (1977)
REFERENCE 1. Aghili, M.; Zahedi, F.; Rafiee, E.: Hydroxyglutaric aciduria and
malignant brain tumor: a case report and literature review. J. Neurooncol. 91:
233-236, 2009.

2. Boone, C.; Chen, T.-R.; Ruddle, F. H.: Assignment of three human
genes to chromosomes (LDH-A to 11, TK to 17 and IDH to 20) and evidence
for translocation between human and mouse chromosomes in somatic cell
hybrids. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 68: 510-514, 1972.

3. Bralten, L. B. C.; Kloosterhof, N. K.; Balvers, R.; Sacchetti,
A.; Lapre, L.; Lamfers, M.; Leenstra, S.; de Jonge, H.; Kros, J. M.;
Jansen, E. E. W.; Struys, E. A.; Jakobs, C.; Salomons, G. S.; Diks,
S. H.; Peppelenbosch, M.; Kremer, A.; Hoogenraad, C. C.; Smitt, P.
A. E. S.; French, P. J.: IDH1 R132H decreases proliferation of glioma
cell lines in vitro and in vivo. Ann. Neurol. 69: 455-463, 2011.

4. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network: Genomic and epigenomic
landscapes of adult de novo acute myeloid leukemia. New Eng. J. Med. 368:
2059-2074, 2013. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 369: 98 only, 2013.

5. Chen, S.-H.; Fossum, B. L. G.; Giblett, E. R.: Genetic variation
of the soluble form of NADP-dependent isocitric dehydrogenase in man. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 24: 325-329, 1972.

6. Creagan, R. P.; Carritt, B.; Chen, S.-H.; Kucherlapati, R. S.;
McMorris, F. A.; Ricciuti, F.; Tan, Y. H.; Tischfield, J. A.; Ruddle,
F. H.: Chromosome assignments of genes in man using mouse-human somatic
cell hybrids: cytoplasmic isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH 1) and malate
dehydrogenase (MDH 1) to chromosome 2. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 26: 604-613,
1974.

7. Dang, L.; White, D. W.; Gross, S.; Bennett, B. D.; Bittinger, M.
A.; Driggers, E. M.; Fantin, V. R.; Jang, H. G.; Jin, S.; Keenan,
M. C.; Marks, K. M.; Prins, R. M.; Ward, P. S.; Yen, K. E.; Liau,
L. M.; Rabinowitz, J. D.; Cantley, L. C.; Thompson, C. B.; Vander
Heiden, M. G.; Su, S. M.: Cancer-associated IDH1 mutations produce
2-hydroxyglutarate. Nature 462: 739-744, 2009. Note: Addendum: Nature
465: 966 only, 2010.

8. Dubbink, H. J.; Taal, W.; van Marion, R.; Kros, J. M.; van Heuvel,
I.; Bromberg, J. E.; Zonnenberg, B. A.; Zonnenberg, C. B. L.; Postma,
T. J.; Gijtenbeek, J. M. M.; Boogerd, W.; Groenendijk, F. H.; Smitt
Sillevis, P. A. E.; Dinjens, W. N. M.; van den Bent, M. J.: IDH1
mutations in low-grade astrocytomas predict survival but not response
to temozolomide. Neurology 73: 1792-1795, 2009.

9. Geisbrecht, B. V.; Gould, S. J.: The human PICD gene encodes a
cytoplasmic and peroxisomal NADP+-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase. J.
Biol. Chem. 274: 30527-30533, 1999.

10. Henderson, N. S.: Intracellular location and genetic control
of isozymes of NADP-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase and malate
dehydrogenase. Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 151: 429-440, 1968.

11. Henderson, N. S.: Isozymes of isocitrate dehydrogenase: subunit
structure and intracellular location. J. Exp. Zool. 158: 263-273,
1965.

12. Koivunen, P.; Lee, S.; Duncan, C. G.; Lopez, G.; Lu, G.; Ramkissoon,
S.; Losman, J. A.; Joensuu, P.; Bergmann, U.; Gross, S.; Travins,
J.; Weiss, S.; Looper, R.; Ligon, K. L.; Verhaak, R. G. W.; Yan, H.;
Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: Transformation by the (R)-enantiomer of 2-hydroxyglutarate
linked to EGLN activation. Nature 483: 484-488, 2012.

13. Losman, J.-A.; Looper, R. E.; Koivunen, P.; Lee, S.; Schneider,
R. K.; McMahon, C.; Cowley, G. S.; Root, D. E.; Ebert, B. L.; Kaelin,
W. G., Jr: (R)-2-hydroxyglutarate is sufficient to promote leukemogenesis
and its effects are reversible. Science 339: 1621-1625, 2013.

14. Lu, C.; Ward, P. S.; Kapoor, G. S.; Rohle, D.; Turcan, S.; Abdel-Wahab,
O.; Edwards, C. R.; Khanin, R.; Figueroa, M. E.; Melnick, A.; Wellen,
K. E.; O'Rourke, D. M.; Berger, S. L.; Chan, T. A.; Levine, R. L.;
Mellinghoff, I. K.; Thompson, C. B.: IDH mutation impairs histone
demethylation and results in a block to cell differentiation. Nature 483:
474-478, 2012.

15. Mardis, E. R.; Ding, L.; Dooling, D. J.; Larson, D. E.; McLellan,
M. D.; Chen, K.; Koboldt, D. C.; Fulton, R. S.; Delehaunty, K. D.;
McGrath, S. D.; Fulton, L. A.; Locke, D. P.; and 46 others: Recurring
mutations found by sequencing an acute myeloid leukemia genome. New
Eng. J. Med. 361: 1058-1066, 2009.

16. Memon, A. A.; Chang, J. W.; Oh, B. R.; Yoo, Y. J.: Identification
of differentially expressed proteins during human urinary bladder
cancer progression. Cancer Detect. Prev. 29: 249-255, 2005.

17. Metallo, C. M.; Gameiro, P. A.; Bell, E. L.; Mattaini, K. R.;
Yang, J.; Hiller, K.; Jewell, C. M.; Johnson, Z. R.; Irvine, D. J.;
Guarente, L.; Kelleher, J. K.; Vander Heiden, M. G.; Iliopoulos, O.;
Stephanopoulos, G.: Reductive glutamine metabolism by IDH1 mediates
lipogenesis under hypoxia. Nature 481: 380-384, 2012.

18. Mullen, A. R.; Wheaton, W. W.; Jin, E. S.; Chen, P.-H.; Sullivan,
L. B.; Cheng, T.; Yang, Y.; Linehan, W. M.; Chandel, N. S.; DeBarardinis,
R. J.: Reductive carboxylation supports growth in tumour cells with
defective mitochondria. Nature 481: 385-388, 2012.

19. Narahara, K.; Kimura, S.; Kikkawa, K.; Takahashi, Y.; Wakita,
Y.; Kasai, R.; Nagai, S.; Nishibayashi, Y.; Kimoto, H.: Probable
assignment of soluble isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH-1) to 2q33.3. Hum.
Genet. 71: 37-40, 1985.

20. Nekrutenko, A.; Hillis, D. M.; Patton, J. C.; Bradley, R. D.;
Baker, R. J.: Cytosolic isocitrate dehydrogenase in humans, mice,
and voles and phylogenetic analysis of the enzyme family. Molec.
Biol. Evol. 15: 1674-1684, 1998.

21. Parsons, D. W.; Jones, S.; Zhang, X.; Lin, J. C.-H.; Leary, R.
J.; Angenendt, P.; Mankoo, P.; Carter, H.; Siu, I.-M.; Gallia, G.
L.; Olivi, A.; McLendon, R.; and 21 others: An integrated genomic
analysis of human glioblastoma multiforme. Science 321: 1807-1812,
2008.

22. Ronnebaum, S. M.; Ilkayeva, O.; Burgess, S. C.; Joseph, J. W.;
Lu, D.; Stevens, R. D.; Becker, T. C.; Sherry, A. D.; Newgard, C.
B.; Jensen, M. V.: A pyruvate cycling pathway involving cytosolic
NADP-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase regulates glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 30593-30602, 2006.

23. Ruddle, F. H.: Linkage analysis in man by somatic cell genetics. Nature 242:
165-169, 1973.

24. Sasaki, M.; Knobbe, C. B.; Munger, J. C.; Lind, E. F.; Brenner,
D.; Brustle, A.; Harris, I. S.; Holmes, R.; Wakeham, A.; Haight, J.;
You-Ten, A.; Li, W. Y.; and 10 others: IDH1(R132H) mutation increases
murine haematopoietic progenitors and alters epigenetics. Nature 488:
656-659, 2012.

25. Schnittger, S.; Haferlach, C.; Ulke, M.; Alpermann, T.; Kern,
W.; Haferlach, T.: IDH1 mutations are detected in 6.6% of 1414 AML
patients and are associated with intermediate risk karyotype and unfavorable
prognosis in adults younger than 60 years and unmutated NPM1 status. Blood 116:
5486-5496, 2010.

26. Shechter, I.; Dai, P.; Huo, L.; Guan, G.: IDH1 gene transcription
is sterol regulated and activated by SREBP-1a and SREBP-2 in human
hepatoma HepG2 cells: evidence that IDH1 may regulate lipogenesis
in hepatic cells. J. Lipid Res. 44: 2169-2180, 2003.

27. Shows, T. B.: Genetics of human-mouse somatic cell hybrids: linkage
of human genes for isocitrate dehydrogenase and malate dehydrogenase. Biochem.
Genet. 7: 193-204, 1972.

28. Turcan, S.; Rohle, D.; Goenka, A.; Walsh, L. A.; Fang, F.; Yilmaz,
E.; Campos, C.; Fabius, A. W. M.; Lu, C.; Ward, P. S.; Thompson, C.
B.; Kaufman, A.; Guryanova, O.; Levine, R.; Heguy, A.; Viale, A.;
Morris, L. G. T.; Huse, J. T.; Mellinghoff, I. K.; Chan, T. A.: IDH1
mutation is sufficient to establish the glioma hypermethylator phenotype. Nature 483:
479-483, 2012.

29. Turner, B. M.; Fisher, R. A.; Garthwaite, E.; Whale, R. J.; Harris,
H.: An account of two new ICD-S variants not detectable in red blood
cells. Ann. Hum. Genet. 37: 469-476, 1974.

30. Van Cong, N.: Personal Communication. Paris, France  1976.

31. Weil, D.; Van Cong, N.; Finaz, C.; Rebourcet, R.; Cochet, C.;
de Grouchy, J.; Frezal, J.: Localisation regionale des genes humains
IDH-S, MDH-S, PGK, alpha-GAL, G6PD par l'hybridation cellulaire interspecifique. Hum.
Genet. 36: 205-211, 1977.

32. Xu, X.; Zhao, J.; Xu, Z.; Peng, B.; Huang, Q.; Arnold, E.; Ding,
J.: Structures of human cytosolic NADP-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase
reveal a novel self-regulatory mechanism of activity. J. Biol. Chem. 279:
33946-33957, 2004.

33. Yan, H.; Parsons, D. W.; Jin, G.; McLendon, R.; Rasheed, B. A.;
Yuan, W.; Kos, I.; Batinic-Haberle, I.; Jones, S.; Riggins, G. J.;
Friedman, H.; Friedman, A.; Reardon, D.; Herndon, J.; Kinzler, K.
W.; Velculescu, V. E.; Vogelstein, B.; Bigner, D. D.: IDH1 and IDH2
mutations in gliomas. New Eng. J. Med. 360: 765-773, 2009.

34. Zhao, S.; Lin, Y.; Xu, W.; Jiang, W.; Zha, Z.; Wang, P.; Yu, W.;
Li, Z.; Gong, L.; Peng, Y.; Ding, J.; Lei, Q.; Guan, K.-L.; Xiong,
Y.: Glioma-derived mutations in IDH1 dominantly inhibit IDH1 catalytic
activity and induce HIF-1-alpha. Science 324: 261-265, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/12/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/4/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/18/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/17/2012
Nara Sobreira - updated: 5/25/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/8/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/2/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/24/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/1/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/15/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/12/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/20/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/12/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED alopez: 07/09/2013
alopez: 7/9/2013
alopez: 4/12/2013
carol: 3/7/2013
ckniffin: 3/4/2013
alopez: 9/19/2012
terry: 9/18/2012
alopez: 7/19/2012
terry: 7/17/2012
carol: 5/25/2012
alopez: 2/13/2012
terry: 2/8/2012
wwang: 8/10/2011
ckniffin: 8/2/2011
carol: 6/17/2011
wwang: 2/17/2011
ckniffin: 1/24/2011
terry: 7/1/2010
alopez: 1/11/2010
terry: 1/8/2010
alopez: 9/16/2009
terry: 9/15/2009
alopez: 6/23/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
alopez: 3/18/2009
terry: 3/12/2009
alopez: 10/23/2008
alopez: 10/22/2008
terry: 10/20/2008
mgross: 9/19/2008
mgross: 9/18/2008
terry: 9/12/2008
psherman: 2/9/2000
alopez: 9/5/1997
mark: 3/25/1996
mimadm: 4/14/1994
warfield: 4/12/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/31/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
supermim: 3/6/1990

603422	TITLE *603422 PDZ AND LIM DOMAIN PROTEIN 4; PDLIM4
;;LIM DOMAIN PROTEIN RIL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kiess et al. (1995) identified the rat ril gene based on its
downregulation in Hras-transformed cells. The gene contains a LIM/double
zinc finger domain but lacks a homeodomain. Northern blot analysis
revealed expression in a wide variety of mouse tissues.

Searching for novel genes in the human 5q31.1 region by cDNA selection,
Bashirova et al. (1998) isolated a human RIL cDNA. The human RIL gene
encodes a 328-amino acid polypeptide. PCR of human fetal brain
identified an alternatively spliced mRNA that lacks the sixth exon,
leading to the loss of the LIM domain.

Using RT-PCR, Boumber et al. (2007) found that RIL was expressed in all
15 normal human tissues tested.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bashirova et al. (1998) determined that the human RIL gene contains 7
exons distributed over 14.5 kb of genomic DNA. Exons 6 and 7 encode the
LIM domain.

MAPPING

Bashirova et al. (1998) characterized the 5q31.1 genomic region. They
ordered the genes in this region
cen--IL4(147780)--IL13(147683)--RAD50(604040)--IL5(147850)--IRF1(147575)--RIL--CSF2
(138960)--IL3(147740)--tel.

GENE FUNCTION

Boumber et al. (2007) found that the RIL gene was methylated in a high
proportion of cancers, with highest methylation in acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML; 601626) and colon cancer (114500). Methylation was
associated with loss of RIL expression, and RIL could be reactivated by
the hypomethylating agent 5-aza-2-prime-deoxycytidine. Restoration of
RIL expression in colon cancer cells by stable transfection resulted in
reduced cell growth and clonogenicity and an approximately 2-fold
increase in apoptosis following ultraviolet exposure.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The expression of RIL mRNA in human bone marrow stromal cells suggests a
possible involvement in osteoblast development/function. Omasu et al.
(2003) carried out a correlation study between genetic variations in RIL
and bone mineral density (BMD). A significant association was identified
between a -3333T-C polymorphism in the 5-prime flanking region of the
RIL gene with radial BMD in adult Japanese women. The radial BMD
represented the quality of both cortical bone thickness and cancellous
bone volume when the distal part of the radial bone near the wrist joint
was measured. Omasu et al. (2003) concluded that the RIL locus may be an
important determinant of osteoporosis. Homozygous T-allele carriers had
the lowest adjusted BMD, heterozygous individuals have an intermediate
adjusted BMD, and homozygous C-allele carriers had the highest adjusted
BMD, implying an allelic dosage effect of this variation on BMD. In the
370 individuals studied, the frequency of the C allele was 0.81 and that
of the T allele was 0.19.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OSTEOPOROSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
RIL, -3333T-C

In adult Japanese women, Omasu et al. (2003) found an association
between the T allele in the -3333T-C polymorphism in the 5-prime
flanking region of the RIL gene to low bone mineral density (BMD) in an
allele-dosage-related manner. They hypothesized that the variation may
be an important determinant of osteoporosis (166710).

REFERENCE 1. Bashirova, A. A.; Markelov, M. L.; Shlykova, T. V.; Levshenkova,
E. V.; Alibaeva, R. A.; Frolova, E. I.: The human RIL gene: mapping
to human chromosome 5q31.1, genomic organization and alternative transcripts. Gene 210:
239-245, 1998.

2. Boumber, Y. A.; Kondo, Y.; Chen, X.; Shen, L.; Gharibyan, V.; Konishi,
K.; Estey, E.; Kantarjian, H.; Garcia-Manero, G.; Issa, J.-P. J.:
RIL, a LIM gene on 5q31, is silenced by methylation in cancer and
sensitizes cancer cells to apoptosis. Cancer Res. 67: 1997-2005,
2007.

3. Kiess, M.; Scharm, B.; Aguzzi, A.; Hajnal, A.; Klemenz, R.; Schwarte-Waldhoff,
I.; Schafer, R.: Expression of ril, a novel LIM domain gene, is down-regulated
in Hras-transformed cells and restored in phenotypic revertants. Oncogene 10:
61-68, 1995.

4. Omasu, F.; Ezura, Y.; Kajita, M.; Ishida, R.; Kodaira, M.; Yoshida,
H.; Suzuki, T.; Hosoi, T.; Inoue, S.; Shiraki, M.; Orimo, H.; Emi,
M.: Association of genetic variation of the RIL gene, encoding a
PDZ-LIM domain protein and localized in 5q31.1, with low bone mineral
density in adult Japanese women. J. Hum. Genet. 48: 342-345, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/31/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/27/2003

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 1/12/1999

EDITED carol: 02/26/2013
mgross: 1/5/2009
terry: 12/31/2008
carol: 3/18/2004
cwells: 8/29/2003
terry: 8/27/2003
mgross: 7/22/1999
alopez: 1/12/1999

611194	TITLE *611194 RUN AND FYVE DOMAINS-CONTAINING PROTEIN 3; RUFY3
;;SINGLE AXON-RELATED 1; SINGAR1;;
RAP2-INTERACTING PROTEIN X; RIPX
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By randomly sequencing clones from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1998) obtained a cDNA encoding RUFY3, which they
called KIAA0871, encoding a deduced 469-amino acid protein.

Using 2-dimensional electrophoresis analysis of proteins in stage 2 and
stage 3 hippocampal neurons, Mori et al. (2007) identified RUFY3, which
they called single axon-related-1 (singar1), in human, mouse, and rat.
The deduced proteins in all 3 species have 469 amino acids and contain a
RUN domain. The mouse and rat proteins contain a splice variant,
designated singar2, of 487 amino acids. Expression of singar1 in rat
brain was relatively low on embryonic day 15, peaked around postnatal
day 4, and decreased in the adult brain. Immunocytochemical analysis
showed that rat singar1 and singar2 accumulate in growth cones of minor
processes and axons.

GENE FUNCTION

Mori et al. (2007) found that rat singar1 became upregulated during
polarization of cultured hippocampal neurons and remained at high levels
thereafter. Reduction of singar1 expression by RNAi led to an increase
in the population of neurons bearing surplus axons. Overexpression of
singar1 suppressed the formation of surplus axons induced by excess
amounts of shootin1 (611171), without affecting normal polarization
processes.

MAPPING

Scott (2007) mapped the RUFY3 gene to chromosome 4q13.3 based on an
alignment of the RUFY3 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB020678) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.2).

REFERENCE 1. Mori, T.; Wada, T.; Suzuki, T.; Kubota, Y.; Inagaki, N.: Singar1,
a novel RUN domain-containing protein, suppresses formation of surplus
axons for neuronal polarity. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 19884-19893, 2007.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 355-364, 1998.

3. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/29/2007.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 7/10/2007

EDITED carol: 07/13/2007
carol: 7/10/2007

601205	TITLE *601205 SINE OCULIS HOMEOBOX, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 1; SIX1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The vertebrate SIX genes are homologs of the Drosophila 'sine oculis'
(so) gene, which is expressed primarily in the developing visual system
of the fly. Members of the SIX gene family encode proteins that are
characterized by a divergent DNA-binding homeodomain and an upstream SIX
domain, which may be involved both in determining DNA-binding
specificity and in mediating protein-protein interactions. Genes in the
SIX family have been shown to play roles in vertebrate and insect
development or have been implicated in maintenance of the differentiated
state of tissues.

CLONING

Boucher et al. (1996) cloned and sequenced a human SIX1 cDNA and showed
by Northern blotting that it is expressed in adult skeletal muscle. The
cDNA sequence and predicted protein sequence of the human and mouse
genes are highly homologous, with 98% similarity over the entire
predicted amino acid sequence. During mouse limb development at
embryonic day 11.5, Six1 and Six2 are expressed distally over the
posterior and anterior limb regions, respectively. However, by E14.5,
expression of Six1 and Six2 is detected flanking the phalanges in
domains corresponding to the anterior-posterior and dorsoventral axes,
respectively. Six1 is also weakly expressed in skeletal muscles of the
head and body during late development.

Ford et al. (1998) cloned the human SIX1 homeobox gene from late S phase
mammary carcinoma cells and demonstrated that overexpression of SIX1
leads to an abrogation of the DNA damage-induced G2 cell cycle
checkpoint. In addition, they found that overexpression of SIX1 occurs
in a large percentage of mammary carcinomas and correlates strongly with
metastatic breast disease. It appeared that studies of several cancer
cell lines suggested that SIX1 may be overexpressed in multiple types of
tumors. Thus, the studies linked SIX1 to the cell cycle as well as to
tumor progression and provided further evidence that 'master regulators'
involved in development may contribute to tumorigenicity.

GENE FUNCTION

Ridgeway and Skerjanc (2001) induced myogenesis in a mouse pluripotent
stem cell line. Myogenesis was associated with increased expression of
Pax3 (606597), followed by expression of the transcription factor Six1,
its cofactor Eya2 (601654), and the transcription factor Mox1 (600147),
prior to the induction of MyoD (159970) and myogenin (Myog; 159980)
expression.

Yu et al. (2004) established highly and poorly metastatic
rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines derived from a transgenic mouse model
overexpressing Hgf/Sf (142409) and deficient for Ink4a/Arf (600160), in
which skeletal muscle tumors reminiscent of those in embryonic
rhabdomyosarcoma (268210) arise with very high penetrance and short
latency (Sharp et al., 2002). Yu et al. (2004) then used cDNA microarray
analysis of these cell lines to identify a set of genes whose expression
was significantly different between highly and poorly metastatic cells.
Subsequent in vivo functional studies revealed that ezrin, encoded by
Vil2 (123900), and Six1 have essential roles in determining the
metastatic fate of rhabdomyosarcoma cells. VIL2 and SIX1 expression was
enhanced in human rhabdomyosarcoma tissue, significantly correlating
with clinical stage.

Buller et al. (2001) analyzed the functional importance of Eya (EYA1;
601653) domain missense mutations with respect to protein complex
formation and cellular localization. Previously described point
mutations did not alter protein localization; however, 3 mutations
(glu330 to lys, 601653.0009; ser454 to pro, 601653.0012; and leu472 to
arg, 601653.0013) disrupted interactions between Eya and Six1 in both
yeast and mammalian cells. Binding to Six2 (604994) was not impeded.

Grifone et al. (2004) found that among the Six and Eya gene products
expressed in mouse skeletal muscle, Six1 and Eya1 accumulated
preferentially in the nuclei of fast-twitch muscles. Forced coexpression
of Six1 and Eya1 in the slow-twitch soleus muscle induced a transition
to a fast-twitch fiber type, with activation of fast-twitch
fiber-specific genes and a switch toward glycolytic metabolism.

SALL1 (602218) is a transcription factor that has a critical role in
kidney development. Using gel retardation assays, reporter gene assays,
and mutation analysis, Chai et al. (2006) showed that SIX1 directly
bound the SALL1 promoter and induced SALL1 expression in a
dose-dependent manner.

McCoy et al. (2009) found that misexpression of human SIX1 in adult
mouse mammary gland epithelium induced tumors of multiple histologic
subtypes in a dose-dependent manner. Most SIX1-induced tumors underwent
an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and expressed multiple
targets of activated Wnt (see 164820) signaling, including cyclin D1
(CCND1; 168461). SIX1 promoted a stem/progenitor cell phenotype in mouse
mammary gland and in SIX1-dependent mammary tumors. Coexpression of SIX1
and cyclin D1 was detected in several human breast cancers and was
predictive of poor prognosis.

Independently, Micalizzi et al. (2009) showed that SIX1 overexpression
in human and mouse mammary epithelial cells induced EMT and metastasis,
both of which were dependent on the ability of SIX1 to activate TGF-beta
(TGFB1; 190180) signaling. Breast cancer patients whose tumors
overexpressed SIX1 had a shortened time to relapse and metastasis and an
overall decrease in survival. Similarly, overexpression of SIX1
correlated with adverse outcomes in a number of other cancers, including
brain, cervical, prostate, colon, kidney, and liver. Micalizzi et al.
(2009) concluded that SIX1, acting through TGF-beta signaling and EMT,
is a powerful and global promoter of cancer metastasis.

Delgado-Olguin et al. (2012) found that conditional deletion of Ezh2
(601573) in mouse anterior heart field resulted in right cardiac
hypertrophy and fibrosis after birth. Gene expression profiling of
Ezh2-knockout hearts revealed derepression of Six1, with concomitant
activation of Six1-dependent skeletal muscle-specific genes.
Overexpression of Six1 in cultured neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes
resulted in hypertrophy comparable to that induced by the hypertrophic
agonist endothelin-1 (EDN1; 131240). Knockdown of Six1 in Ezh2-knockout
hearts completely rescued the cardiac phenotype.

EVOLUTION

Gallardo et al. (1999) performed phylogenetic analysis of SIX gene
family members and presented a model for the origin and evolution of SIX
gene clusters.

MAPPING

Using a rodent/human somatic cell hybrid panel, Boucher et al. (1996)
mapped the human SIX1 gene to chromosome 14.

Ruf et al. (2004) located the SIX1, SIX4 (606342), and SIX6 (606326)
genes, which play a role in the EYA-SIX-PAX (see 167411) hierarchy of
regulatory genes for the embryonic development of ear, kidney, and other
organs, within a 33-Mb critical interval on chromosome 14q23.

Oliver et al. (1995) mapped the mouse Six1 gene to the central region of
chromosome 12.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Branchiootorenal syndrome (see 113650) is an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by hearing loss, branchial cleft fistulas or cysts, and
renal dysplasia. Branchiootic syndrome (see 602588) is a related
disorder without renal anomalies. Ruf et al. (2003) mapped a locus for
the BOR/BO syndrome (BOS3; 608389) to chromosome 14q23. By direct
sequencing of SIX1 exons, they identified 2 different mutations in the
SIX1 gene in 3 kindreds with BOS3: tyr129 to cys (Y129C; 601205.0001)
and arg110 to trp (R110W; 601205.0002). Both mutations are crucial for
EYA1-SIX1 interaction, and the Y129C mutation, which is within the
homeodomain region, is essential for specific SIX1-DNA binding. In a
member of a fourth family, previously reported by Salam et al. (2000)
with DFNA23 (605192), Ruf et al. (2004) identified a 3-bp deletion in
the SIX1 gene (601205.0003). In addition to deafness, the patient had a
solitary left hypodysplastic kidney with vesicoureteral reflux and
progressive renal failure, suggesting that this family may have BOR/BO
syndrome.

In 7 affected individuals from a large 5-generation Danish family with
branchiootic syndrome, Sanggaard et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity
for a missense mutation in the SIX1 gene (601205.0004).

ANIMAL MODEL

Li et al. (2003) reported that Six1 is required for the development of
murine kidney, muscle, and inner ear and that it exhibits synergistic
genetic interactions with Eya factors. Li et al. (2003) demonstrated
that the Eya family has a protein phosphatase function, and that its
enzymatic activity is required for regulating genes encoding growth
control and signaling molecules, modulating precursor cell
proliferation. The phosphatase function of Eya switches the function of
Six1-Dach (603803) from repression to activation, causing
transcriptional activation through recruitment of coactivators. The
gene-specific recruitment of a coactivator with intrinsic phosphatase
activity provides a molecular mechanism for activation of specific gene
targets, including those regulating precursor cell proliferation and
survival in mammalian organogenesis. Eya1 +/- Six1 +/- double
heterozygous mice had a defect in kidney development, which was not
observed in single heterozygotes for either gene deletion, suggesting
that Six1 and Eya1 act in the same genetic pathway. Notably, there was a
complete absence of all hypaxial muscle in Six1 -/- Eya1 -/- double
knockout mice and severe reduction of epaxial muscle, a phenotype
resembling that seen in mice homozygous for deletion of Myog and in
double knockouts for MyoD/Myf5 (159990) and Pax3/Myf5. Interestingly,
although mutation of Six1 or Eya1 has minimal or no effect on pituitary
development, mice with both genes deleted have a pituitary that is
approximately 5- to 10-fold smaller by volume than the wildtype gland.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BRANCHIOOTIC SYNDROME 3
SIX1, TYR129CYS

In affected members of the kindred in which Ruf et al. (2003) mapped
branchiootic syndrome-3 (608389) to 14q, Ruf et al. (2004) identified
heterozygosity for a 386A-G transition in exon 1 of the SIX1 gene,
resulting in a tyr129-to-cys (Y129C) mutation.

.0002
BRANCHIOOTIC SYNDROME 3
SIX1, ARG110TRP

In affected members of 2 families with branchiootic syndrome-3 (608389),
Ruf et al. (2004) identified heterozygosity for a 328C-T transition in
exon 1 of the SIX1 gene, resulting in an arg110-to-trp (R110W) mutation.
Branchial and otic defects were present in affected members of both
families.

.0003
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 23
SIX1, 3-BP DEL, 397GGA

In a member of a family previously reported by Salam et al. (2000) with
DFNA23 (605192), Ruf et al. (2004) identified heterozygosity for a 3-bp
deletion (397delGGA) in the SIX1 gene (601205.0003), resulting in the
deletion of glutamic acid at position 133. In addition to deafness, the
patient had a solitary left hypodysplastic kidney with vesicoureteral
reflux and progressive renal failure, suggesting that this family may
have BOR/BO syndrome.

.0004
BRANCHIOOTIC SYNDROME 3
SIX1, TRP122ARG

In 7 affected individuals from a large 5-generation Danish family with
branchiootic syndrome-3 (608389), Sanggaard et al. (2007) identified
heterozygosity for a 364T-A transversion in exon 1 of the SIX1 gene,
resulting in a trp122-to-arg (W122R) substitution at a conserved
residue. The mutation was not found in unaffected family members or in
140 control chromosomes.

REFERENCE 1. Boucher, C. A.; Carey, N.; Edwards, Y. H.; Siciliano, M. J.; Johnson,
K. J.: Cloning of the human SIX1 gene and its assignment to chromosome
14. Genomics 33: 140-142, 1996.

2. Buller, C.; Xu, X.; Marquis, V.; Schwanke, R.; Xu, P.-X.: Molecular
effects of Eya1 domain mutations causing organ defects in BOR syndrome. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 2775-2781, 2001.

3. Chai, L.; Yang, J.; Di, C.; Cui, W.; Kawakami, K.; Lai, R.; Ma,
Y.: Transcriptional activation of the SALL1 by the human SIX1 homeodomain
during kidney development. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 18918-18926, 2006.

4. Delgado-Olguin, P.; Huang, Y.; Li, X.; Christodoulou, D.; Seidman,
C. E.; Seidman, J. G.; Tarakhovsky, A.; Bruneau, B. G.: Epigenetic
repression of cardiac progenitor gene expression by Ezh2 is required
for postnatal cardiac homeostasis. Nature Genet. 44: 343-347, 2012.

5. Ford, H. L.; Kabingu, E. N.; Bump, E. A.; Mutter, G. L.; Pardee,
A. B.: Abrogation of the G2 cell cycle checkpoint associated with
overexpression of HSIX1: a possible mechanism of breast carcinogenesis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 12608-12613, 1998.

6. Gallardo, M. E.; Lopez-Rios, J.; Fernaud-Espinosa, I.; Granadino,
B.; Sanz, R.; Ramos, C.; Ayuso, C.; Seller, M. J.; Brunner, H. G.;
Bovolenta, P.; Rodriguez de Cordoba, S.: Genomic cloning and characterization
of the human homeobox gene SIX6 reveals a cluster of SIX genes in
chromosome 14 and associates SIX6 hemizygosity with bilateral anophthalmia
and pituitary anomalies. Genomics 61: 82-91, 1999.

7. Grifone, R.; Laclef, C.; Spitz, F.; Lopez, S.; Demignon, J.; Guidotti,
J.-E.; Kawakami, K.; Xu, P.-X.; Kelly, R.; Petrof, B. J.; Daegelen,
D.; Concordet, J.-P.; Maire, P.: Six1 and Eya1 expression can reprogram
adult muscle from the slow-twitch phenotype into the fast-twitch phenotype. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 24: 6253-6267, 2004.

8. Li, X.; Ohgi, K. A.; Zhang, J.; Krones, A.; Bush, K. T.; Glass,
C. K.; Nigam, S. K.; Aggarwal, A. K.; Maas, R.; Rose, D. W.; Rosenfeld,
M. G.: Eya protein phosphatase activity regulates Six1-Dach-Eya transcriptional
effects in mammalian organogenesis. Nature 426: 247-254, 2003. Note:
Erratum: Nature 427: 265 only, 2004.

9. McCoy, E. L.; Iwanaga, R.; Jedlicka, P.; Abbey, N.-S.; Chodosh,
L. A.; Heichman, K. A.; Welm, A. L.; Ford, H. L.: Six1 expands the
mouse mammary epithelial stem/progenitor cell pool and induces mammary
tumors that undergo epithelial-mesenchymal transition. J. Clin. Invest. 119:
2663-2677, 2009.

10. Micalizzi, D. S.; Christensen, K. L.; Jedlicka, P.; Coletta, R.
D.; Baron, A. E.; Harrell, J. C.; Horwitz, K. B.; Billheimer, D.;
Heichman, K. A.; Welm, A. L.; Schiemann, W. P.; Ford, H. L.: The
Six1 homeoprotein induces human mammary carcinoma cells to undergo
epithelial-mesenchymal transition and metastasis in mice through increasing
TGF-beta signaling. J. Clin. Invest. 119: 2678-2690, 2009.

11. Oliver, G.; Wehr, R.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.; Cheyette,
B. N. R.; Hartenstein, V.; Zipursky, S. L.; Gruss, P.: Homeobox genes
and connective tissue patterning. Development 121: 693-705, 1995.

12. Ridgeway, A. G.; Skerjanc, I. S.: Pax3 is essential for skeletal
myogenesis and the expression of Six1 and Eya2. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
19033-19039, 2001.

13. Ruf, R. G.; Berkman, J.; Wolf, M. T. F.; Nurnberg, P.; Gattas,
M.; Ruf, E.-M.; Hyland, V.; Kromberg, J.; Glass, I.; Macmillan, J.;
Otto, E.; Nurnberg, G.; Lucke, B.; Hennies, H. C.; Hildebrandt, F.
: A gene locus for branchio-otic syndrome maps to chromosome 14q21.3-q24.3. J.
Med. Genet. 40: 515-519, 2003.

14. Ruf, R. G.; Xu, P.-X.; Silvius, D.; Otto, E. A.; Beekmann, F.;
Muerb, U. T.; Kumar, S.; Neuhaus, T. J.; Kemper, M. J.; Raymond, R.
M., Jr.; Brophy, P. D.; Berkman, J.; and 10 others: SIX1 mutations
cause branchio-oto-renal syndrome by disruption of EYA1-SIX1-DNA complexes. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 8090-8095, 2004.

15. Salam, A. A.; Hafner, F. M.; Linder, T. E.; Spillmann, T.; Schinzel,
A.  A.; Leal, S. M.: A novel locus (DFNA23) for prelingual autosomal
dominant nonsyndromic hearing loss maps to 14q21-q22 in a Swiss German
kindred. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66: 1984-1988, 2000.

16. Sanggaard, K. M.; Rendtorff, N. D.; Kjaer, K. W.; Eiberg, H.;
Johnsen, T.; Gimsing, S.; Dyrmose, J.; Nielsen, K. O.; Lage, K.; Tranebjaerg,
L.: Branchio-oto-renal syndrome: detection of EYA1 and SIX1 mutations
in five out of six Danish families by combining linkage, MLPA and
sequencing analyses. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 15: 1121-1131, 2007.

17. Sharp, R.; Recio, J. A.; Jhappan, C.; Otsuka, T.; Liu, S.; Yu,
Y.; Liu, W.; Anver, M.; Navid, F.; Helman, L. J.; DePinho, R. A.;
Merlino, G.: Synergism between INK4a/ARF inactivation and aberrant
HGF/SF signaling in rhabdomyosarcomagenesis. Nature Med. 8: 1276-1280,
2002. Note: Erratum: Nature Med. 9: 146 only, 2003.

18. Yu, Y.; Khan, J.; Khanna, C.; Helman, L.; Meltzer, P. S.; Merlino,
G.: Expression profiling identifies the cytoskeletal organizer ezrin
and the developmental homeoprotein Six-1 as key metastatic regulators. Nature
Med. 10: 175-181, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/19/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/6/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/18/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/5/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/8/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/30/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/31/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/1/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/7/2002
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 5/23/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/3/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/16/1996

EDITED alopez: 12/11/2012
terry: 11/28/2012
mgross: 3/19/2012
terry: 3/19/2012
mgross: 1/12/2011
terry: 1/6/2011
wwang: 7/18/2008
terry: 7/18/2008
mgross: 12/5/2006
carol: 8/1/2006
tkritzer: 7/15/2004
terry: 7/8/2004
terry: 3/18/2004
alopez: 2/17/2004
alopez: 1/30/2004
alopez: 1/8/2004
terry: 12/31/2003
mgross: 4/7/2003
terry: 4/1/2003
cwells: 6/12/2002
cwells: 6/7/2002
carol: 10/1/2001
psherman: 5/23/2000
carol: 11/9/1998
terry: 11/3/1998
mark: 9/26/1997
mark: 4/17/1996

613667	TITLE *613667 SINE OCULIS-BINDING PROTEIN, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; SOBP
;;JACKSON CIRCLER PROTEIN 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; JXC1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Birk et al. (2010) identified SOBP within a region of chromosome 6
associated with syndromic and nonsyndromic intellectual disability
(613671). The deduced 873-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal
nuclear localization signal (NLS), followed by 2 FCS-type zinc finger
motifs, a proline-rich region (PR1), a putative RNA-binding motif
region, and a C-terminal NLS embedded in a second proline-rich motif
(PR2). Birk et al. (2010) also identified a variant encoding a deduced
232-amino acid protein. SOBP was expressed in various human tissues. In
situ hybridization detected Sobp expression throughout developing mouse
brain at embryonic day 14, with intense staining in the cortical plate.
In postnatal and adult mouse brain, Sobp was expressed in all neurons,
with intense staining in the limbic system. Highest expression was in
layer V cortical neurons, hippocampus, pyriform cortex, dorsomedial
nucleus of thalamus, amygdala, and hypothalamus. Postnatal expression of
Sobp in the limbic system corresponded to a time of active
synaptogenesis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Birk et al. (2010) determined that the SOBP gene spans about 171 kb and
contains 7 exons, the last of which is untranslated. CpG islands are
associated with the upstream promoter and a second putative promoter
within exon 6.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Birk et al. (2010) mapped the SOBP gene to
chromosome 6q21.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 7 affected sibs from a consanguineous Israeli Arab family with mental
retardation, anterior maxillary protrusion, and strabismus (MRAMS;
613671) reported by Basel-Vanagaite et al. (2007), Birk et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous mutation in the SOBP gene (R661X; 613667.0001).

ANIMAL MODEL

Jackson circler (jc) mutant mice carry a mutation in the Sobp gene and
exhibit circling behavior associated with abnormalities in the organ of
Corti and lack of vestibular evoked potentials. Using proteomic
analysis, Birk et al. (2010) identified 24 proteins that were abnormally
expressed in jc/jc brain compared with +/jc brain, including 2
interacting proteins, dynamin (see 602377) and Pacsin1 (606512).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, ANTERIOR MAXILLARY PROTRUSION, AND STRABISMUS
SOBP, ARG661TER

In 7 affected sibs from a consanguineous Israeli Arab family with mental
retardation, anterior maxillary protrusion, and strabismus (MRAMS;
613671) reported by Basel-Vanagaite et al. (2007), Birk et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous 1981C-T transition in exon 6 of the SOBP gene,
resulting in an arg661-to-ter (R661X) substitution. The mutation was
predicted to result in the truncation of 212 residues of the protein,
which would cause elimination of the second proline-rich domain (PR2) as
well as the C-terminal NLS and an RNA-binding region that may be
important for the functioning of the protein. The mutation was not
observed in 300 control chromosomes from Israeli Arab individuals. Birk
et al. (2010) suggested that disruption of the SOBP gene in the limbic
system during synaptogenesis resulted in abnormal cognition in these
patients.

REFERENCE 1. Basel-Vanagaite, L.; Rainshtein, L.; Inbar, D.; Gothelf, D.; Hennekam,
R.; Straussberg, R.: Autosomal recessive mental retardation syndrome
with anterior maxillary protrusion and strabismus: MRAMS syndrome. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 143A: 1687-1691, 2007.

2. Birk, E.; Har-Zahav, A.; Manzini, C. M.; Pasmanik-Chor, M.; Kornreich,
L.; Walsh, C. A.; Noben-Trauth, K.; Albin, A.; Simon, A. J.; Colleaux,
L.; Morad, Y.; Rainshtein, L.; and 10 others: SOBP is mutated in
syndromic and nonsyndromic intellectual disability and is highly expressed
in the brain limbic system. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 87: 694-700, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/20/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/15/2010

EDITED carol: 01/05/2011
wwang: 12/21/2010
ckniffin: 12/20/2010
mgross: 12/15/2010

605902	TITLE *605902 UROCORTIN II; UCN2
;;STRESSCOPIN-RELATED PEPTIDE;;
SRP;;
UROCORTIN-RELATED PEPTIDE; URP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The stresscopin (SCP; 605901) and stresscopin-related peptide (SRP)
genes encode specific ligands for the type-2 corticotropin-releasing
hormone receptor (CRHR2; 602034), which mediates stress coping responses
during the recovery phase of stress (Hsu and Hsueh, 2001).

CLONING

Hsu and Hsueh (2001) identified human SCP and SRP as CRH/urocortin
(600945) family members. The 112-amino acid human SRP open reading frame
contains a signal peptide for secretion, and the region containing the
43-amino acid mature peptide is flanked by potential proteolytic
cleavage sites and an alpha-amidation donor residue. A stretch of 30
residues at the respective C termini of human and pufferfish SRP has an
extended alpha-helical structure shared by all CRH family peptides. SRP
is expressed in diverse peripheral tissues as well as in the central
nervous system.

Reyes et al. (2001) cloned mouse urocortin II, a homolog of human SRP,
and a partial cDNA encoding human SRP, which they termed
urocortin-related peptide (URP). The mouse and human proteins share 76%
amino acid identity. Hybridization histochemistry showed expression in
cell groups involved in stress-related physiologic and behavioral
functions.

GENE FUNCTION

Hsu and Hsueh (2001) found that treatment with SCP or SRP suppressed
food intake and delayed gastric emptying in mice and decreased
heat-induced edema in rats. They concluded that SCP and SRP might
represent endogenous ligands for maintaining homeostasis after stress,
and could allow the design of drugs to ameliorate stress-related
diseases.

Hao et al. (2008) stated that genetic deletion of the Ucn2 receptor
Crfr2 (CRHR2) in mice results in profound postnatal hypervascularization
characterized by both increased total vessel number and increased vessel
diameter. They found that viral-mediated expression of Ucn2 inhibited
growth and vascularization of mouse Lewis lung carcinoma cell (LLCC)
tumors in vivo, independent of whether exposure to Ucn2 occurred before
or after establishment of measurable tumors. In vitro, Ucn2 directly
inhibited proliferation of LLCCs, suggesting that the tumor-suppressing
effects of Crfr2 activation involve both direct inhibition of tumor cell
cycling and suppression of tumor vascularization.

MAPPING

By analysis of a BAC clone, Reyes et al. (2001) mapped the SRP gene to
chromosome 3p21.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using glucose-tolerance and insulin-tolerance tests and hyperinsulinemic
euglycemic glucose clamp studies, Chen et al. (2006) demonstrated that
mice lacking Ucn2 exhibited increased insulin sensitivity and were
protected against fat-induced insulin resistance. Administration of
synthetic Ucn2 to mutant mice restored blood glucose to wildtype levels.
Administration of a Crfr2-selective antagonist to wildtype mice resulted
in a glucose-tolerance test profile that mirrored that of Ucn2-null
mice. Ucn2-null mice fed a high fat diet had less fat and more lean
tissue compared with wildtype mice. In primary mouse skeletal muscle
cells and a mouse myoblast cell line, Ucn2 inhibited insulin-induced Akt
(164730) and Erk1 (MAPK3; 601795)/Erk2 (MAPK1; 176948) phosphorylation.
Chen et al. (2006) concluded that UCN2 negatively regulates glucose
uptake in skeletal muscle by inhibiting insulin signaling.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, A.; Brar, B.; Choi, C. S.; Rousso, D.; Vaughan, J.; Kuperman,
Y.; Kim, S. N.; Donaldson, C.; Smith, S. M.; Jamieson, P.; Li, C.;
Nagy, T. R.; Shulman, G. I.; Lee, K.-F.; Vale, W.: Urocortin 2 modulates
glucose utilization and insulin sensitivity in skeletal muscle. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 16580-16585, 2006.

2. Hao, Z.; Huang, Y.; Cleman, J.; Jovin, I. S.; Vale, W. W.; Bale,
T. L.; Giordano, F. J.: Urocortin2 inhibits tumor growth via effects
on vascularization and cell proliferation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105:
3939-3944, 2008.

3. Hsu, S. Y.; Hsueh, A. J. W.: Human stresscopin and stresscopin-related
peptide are selective ligands for the type 2 corticotropin-releasing
hormone receptor. Nature Med. 7: 605-611, 2001.

4. Reyes, T. M.; Lewis, K.; Perrin, M. H.; Kunitake, K. S.; Vaughan,
J.; Arias, C. A.; Hogenesch, J. B.; Gulyas, J.; Rivier, J.; Vale,
W. W.; Sawchenko, P. E.: Urocortin II: a member of the corticotropin-releasing
factor (CRF) neuropeptide family that is selectively bound by type
2 CRF receptors. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 2843-2848, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/29/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/19/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/11/2001

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 5/3/2001

EDITED mgross: 06/09/2008
terry: 5/29/2008
mgross: 1/19/2007
alopez: 12/5/2005
mgross: 1/9/2002
mgross: 12/11/2001
alopez: 5/3/2001

300089	TITLE *300089 ISOCITRATE DEHYDROGENASE 3, GAMMA SUBUNIT; IDH3G
;;ISOCITRATE DEHYDROGENASE, NAD(+)-SPECIFIC, MITOCHONDRIAL, GAMMA SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION Brenner et al. (1997) presented the entire genomic sequence, as well as
the cDNA sequence, of the human gene encoding the gamma subunit of the
NAD(+)-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH-gamma). The gene,
symbolized IDH3G, is located in the region Xq28, approximately 70 kb
telomeric to the ABCD1 gene (300371) and adjacent to the TRAP-delta gene
(300090), which they also cloned. The sequences of the transcripts of
IDH-gamma and TRAP-delta were obtained by searching the EST database
with genomic data. Identified ESTs were completely sequenced and
assembled to cDNAs comprising the entire coding region. For IDH-gamma,
several EST clones indicated differential splicing. The 2 genes are
arranged in a compact head-to-head manner. The nontranscribed intergenic
region comprises only 133 bp and is embedded in a CpG island. Brenner et
al. (1997) concluded that the CpG island functions as a bidirectional
promoter to initiate the transcription of both functionally unrelated
genes with quite distinct expression patterns. Brenner et al. (1997)
showed that in both rat and mouse, this region of the genome is
similarly compact and comprises less than 249 bp in rat and not more
than 164 bp in mouse. In both cases this intergenic region is embedded
in a CpG island and is highly conserved, with nucleotide identity values
ranging from 70.1% between human and rat to 92.6% between mouse and rat.

In a male patient with periventricular heterotopia (300049) and a large
duplication of Xq28 reported by Fink et al. (1997), Fox et al. (1998)
found that the centromeric boundary of the duplicated segment of Xq28
was base 3377 of the 3,395 bases of intron 1 of the IDH3G gene,
approximately 600 kb distal to DXS15.

REFERENCE 1. Brenner, V.; Nyakatura, G.; Rosenthal, A.; Platzer, M.: Genomic
organization of two novel genes on human Xq28: compact head to head
arrangement of IDH-gamma and TRAP-delta is conserved in rat and mouse. Genomics 44:
8-14, 1997.

2. Fink, J. M.; Dobyns, W. B.; Guerrini, R.; Hirsch, B. A.: Identification
of a duplication of Xq28 associated with bilateral periventricular
nodular heterotopia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61: 379-387, 1997.

3. Fox, J. W.; Lamperti, E. D.; Eksioglu, Y. Z.; Hong, S. E.; Feng,
Y.; Graham, D. A.; Scheffer, I. E.; Dobyns, W. B.; Hirsch, B. A.;
Radtke, R. A.; Berkovic, S. F.; Huttenlocher, P. R.; Walsh, C. A.
: Mutations in filamin 1 prevent migration of cerebral cortical neurons
in human periventricular heterotopia. Neuron 21: 1315-1325, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/13/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/26/1997

EDITED carol: 01/13/2003
psherman: 2/9/2000
terry: 4/14/1999
terry: 4/13/1999
mark: 9/26/1997

142290	TITLE *142290 HEMOPEXIN; HPX
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Hemopexin is a plasma beta-glycoprotein that specifically binds one heme
with high affinity and transports it to hepatocytes for salvage of iron
(summary by Takahashi et al., 1985).

CLONING

Takahashi et al. (1985) determined that human hemopexin consists of a
single polypeptide chain of 439 amino acids and has a molecular mass of
approximately 63 kD. Altruda et al. (1985) also determined the protein
sequence of human hemopexin. Both groups noted that hemopexin is low in
patients with hemolysis.

Naylor et al. (1987) found that hemopexin mRNA was present at a low
level in fetal liver, increased dramatically in adult liver, and was not
detectable in other tissues.

GENE STRUCTURE

Altruda et al. (1988) demonstrated that the HPX gene spans approximately
12 kb and is interrupted by 9 exons. A direct correspondence between
exons and the 10 repeating units in the protein was shown. The introns
were not randomly placed; they fell in the middle of the region of amino
acid sequence homology in strikingly similar locations in 6 of the 10
units and in a symmetric position in each half of the coding sequence.
From these findings, Altruda et al. (1988) concluded that the gene
evolved through intron-mediated duplications of a primordial sequence to
a 5-exon cluster. A more recent gene duplication led to the present-day
gene organization.

MAPPING

Cai and Law (1986) prepared a cDNA clone for hemopexin and, by Southern
blot analysis of human/hamster hybrids containing different combinations
of human chromosomes, assigned the hemopexin gene to human chromosome
11. Naylor et al. (1987) used a hemopexin cDNA clone to map the HPX gene
to 11pter-p11 by somatic cell hybrid analysis. By means of in situ
hybridization, Law et al. (1988) assigned the hemopexin gene to
11p15.5-p15.4, the same location as that of the beta-globin gene
complex.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Hemopexin has been found in the serum of all mammals studied and it is
polymorphic in rabbits. Stewart and Lovrien (1971) found no
electrophoretic polymorphism in humans. Polymorphism of hemopexin is
known in the pig (Lush, 1966). By isoelectric focusing, Kamboh and
Ferrell (1987) demonstrated polymorphism of HPX in US blacks but not in
US whites.

Data on gene frequencies of allelic variants were tabulated by
Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

REFERENCE 1. Altruda, F.; Poli, V.; Restagno, G.; Argos, P.; Cortese, R.; Silengo,
L.: The primary structure of human hemopexin deduced from cDNA sequence:
evidence for internal, repeating homology. Nucleic Acids Res. 13:
3841-3859, 1985.

2. Altruda, F.; Poli, V.; Restagno, G.; Silengo, L.: Structure of
the human hemopexin gene and evidence for intron-mediated evolution. J.
Molec. Evol. 27: 102-108, 1988.

3. Cai, G.-Y.; Law, M. L.: Cloning and characterization of a human
gene coding for hemopexin. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 39: A191
only, 1986.

4. Kamboh, M. I.; Ferrell, R. E.: Genetic studies of low-abundance
human plasma proteins. VI. Polymorphism of hemopexin. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 41: 645-653, 1987.

5. Law, M. L.; Cai, G.-Y.; Hartz, J. A.; Jones, C.; Kao, F.-T.: The
hemopexin gene maps to the same location as the beta-globin gene cluster
on human chromosome 11. Genomics 3: 48-52, 1988.

6. Lush, I. E.: The Biochemical Genetics of Vertebrates Except Man.
Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders (pub.)  1966.

7. Naylor, S. L.; Altruda, F.; Marshall, A.; Silengo, L.; Bowman,
B. H.: Hemopexin is localized to human chromosome 11. Somat. Cell
Molec. Genet. 13: 355-358, 1987.

8. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World Distribution.
New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

9. Stewart, R. E.; Lovrien, E. W.: Haemopexin in human serum: a search
for genetic polymorphism. Ann. Hum. Genet. 35: 19-24, 1971.

10. Takahashi, N.; Takahashi, Y.; Putnam, F. W.: Complete amino acid
sequence of human hemopexin, the heme-binding protein of serum. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 73-77, 1985.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 07/07/2011
pfoster: 2/22/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 3/19/1991
carol: 1/28/1991
carol: 12/4/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990

611679	TITLE *611679 F-BOX AND WD40 DOMAIN PROTEIN 10; FBXW10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the F-box protein family, such as FBXW10, are characterized
by an approximately 40-amino acid F-box motif. SCF complexes, formed by
SKP1 (601434), cullin (see CUL1; 603134), and F-box proteins, act as
protein-ubiquitin ligases. F-box proteins interact with SKP1 through the
F box, and they interact with ubiquitination targets through other
protein interaction domains (Jin et al., 2004).

CLONING

Jin et al. (2004) reported that the FBXW10 protein contains an F box in
its N-terminal half, followed by 5 central WD40 repeats.

MAPPING

Jin et al. (2004) stated that the FBXW10 gene maps to chromosome 17p12
in human and to chromosome 11B2 in mouse.

REFERENCE 1. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/14/2007

EDITED mgross: 12/14/2007

104752	TITLE *104752 SERUM AMYLOID A4; SAA4
;;AMYLOID A, SERUM, 4;;
SERUM AMYLOID A4, CONSTITUTIVE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The acute phase reactant serum amyloid A (SAA) is a polymorphic
apolipoprotein encoded by a family of highly homologous and closely
linked genes (summary by Steel et al., 1993). For background information
on SAA, see SAA1 (104750).

CLONING

Studying protein and cDNA, Whitehead et al. (1992) identified a member
of the serum amyloid A protein superfamily, designated SAA4, as
constitutive apolipoprotein of high density lipoprotein.

Watson et al. (1992) analyzed the derived protein structure of SAA4.

GENE STRUCTURE

Watson et al. (1992) analyzed the structure of the SAA4 gene.

Steel et al. (1993) determined that the SAA4 gene shares the same
5-prime to 3-prime orientation and has the characteristic 4-exon
structure of the other members of the SAA superfamily.

MAPPING

Steel et al. (1993) demonstrated that the SAA4 gene is located 9 kb
downstream of the SAA2 gene (104751) on chromosome 11.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization using a cosmid probe carrying the
SAA2 and SAA4 genes, Sellar et al. (1994) localized these genes to
11p15.1.

De Beer et al. (1996) found that in the mouse the Saa4 gene is linked to
the serum amyloid A gene family on chromosome 7.

REFERENCE 1. de Beer, M. C.; de Beer, F. C.; Gerardot, C. J.; Cecil, D. R.;
Webb, N. R.; Goodson M. L.; Kindy, M. S.: Structure of the mouse
Saa4 gene and its linkage to the serum amyloid A gene family. Genomics 34:
139-142, 1996.

2. Sellar, G. C.; Jordon, S. A.; Bickmore, W. A.; Fantes, J. A.; van
Heyningen, V.; Whitehead, A. S.: The human serum amyloid A protein
(SAA) superfamily gene cluster: mapping to chromosome 11p15.1 by physical
and genetic linkage analysis. Genomics 19: 221-227, 1994.

3. Steel, D. M.; Sellar, G. C.; Uhlar, C. M.; Simon, S.; DeBeer, F.
C.; Whitehead, A. S.: A constitutively expressed serum amyloid A
protein gene (SAA4) is closely linked to, and shares structural similarities
with, an acute-phase serum amyloid A protein gene (SAA1). Genomics 16:
447-454, 1993.

4. Watson, G.; Coade, S.; Woo, P.: Analysis of the genomic and derived
protein structure of a novel human serum amyloid A gene, SAA4. Scand.
J. Immun. 36: 703-712, 1992.

5. Whitehead, A. S.; DeBeer, M. C.; Steel, D. M.; Rits, M.; Lelias,
J. M.; Lane, W. S.; DeBeer, F. C.: Identification of novel members
of the serum amyloid A protein superfamily as constitutive apolipoproteins
of high density lipoprotein. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 3862-3867, 1992.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/9/1993

EDITED alopez: 07/16/2012
alopez: 7/16/2012
alopez: 12/9/1998
terry: 6/5/1996
terry: 6/3/1996
mark: 8/8/1995
carol: 4/12/1994
carol: 5/21/1993
carol: 3/23/1993
carol: 3/9/1993

614780	TITLE *614780 SORTING NEXIN 10; SNX10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SNX10 belongs to a large family of sorting nexins that regulate
vesicle-mediated protein trafficking (Chen et al., 2012).

CLONING

By searching human databases for sequences similar to yeast SNX1
(601272), Teasdale et al. (2001) identified SNX10. The deduced protein
has a central 122-amino acid SNX-type Phox (see NCF1, 608512) homology
(PX) domain characterized by conserved arg-arg-tyr-X-asp/glu and
pro-pro-X-pro-X-lys motifs.

Qin et al. (2006) reported that full-length SNX10 is 201 amino acids
long and has an N-terminal PX domain. Upon overexpression, SNX10
localized to early endosomes.

Chen et al. (2012) found that a fraction of epitope-tagged SNX10
localized to centrioles and to the base of cilia in RCC10/VHL human
renal carcinoma cells.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the SNX10 gene to chromosome 7p15.2 based on an
alignment of the SNX10 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF121860) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Qin et al. (2006) found that overexpression of SNX10, but not any other
SNX examined, induced the formation of giant vacuoles in all transfected
cell lines examined. Electron microscopy, immunohistochemical analysis,
and brefeldin A treatment showed that the vesicles originated from early
endosomes and that SNX10-induced vacuolization was a Golgi-dependent
process. Mutation analysis revealed that SNX10 bound to
phosphatidylinositol-3-phosphate via arg53 in the PX domain, but both
the PX and C-terminal domains were required for vacuole formation.

Using loss-of-function assays in human cell lines and in zebrafish, Chen
et al. (2012) showed that SNX10 was required for ciliogenesis in vitro
and in vivo. SNX10 bound to the V1D subunit of the vacuolar H+ ATPase
(ATP6V1D; 609398) and was essential for the trafficking of RAB8A
(165040)-positive vesicles to ciliary membranes. The PX domain of SNX10
was required for the interaction with ATP6V1D. Both SNX10 and ATP6V1D
localized to the base of cilia and were required for ciliary trafficking
of RAB8A and formation of cilia.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected children from 3 unrelated consanguineous Palestinian
families segregating autosomal recessive osteopetrosis mapping to
chromosome 7p15 (OPTB8; 615085), Aker et al. (2012) sequenced 5
candidate genes and identified homozygosity for a missense mutation in
the SNX10 gene (R51Q; 614780.0001) that segregated with disease in each
family. Screening of 211 ethnically matched controls revealed 1
heterozygous carrier of the R51Q mutation. In the patients' osteoclasts,
which were fewer and smaller than control cells, mutant SNX10 was
abnormally abundant and its distribution altered; in addition,
resorptive capacity of patient osteoclasts was markedly deranged, and
the endosomal pathway was perturbed as evidenced by the distribution of
internalized dextran.

ANIMAL MODEL

Chen et al. (2012) found that zebrafish Snx10a, but not Snx10b,
represented the physiologic ortholog of human SNX10. Morpholino-mediated
knockdown of Snx10a resulted in larva that appeared mostly normal, but
heart looping was randomized and morphants developed pronephric cysts.
Cilia number, but not length, was reduced in Kupffer vesicles. Knockdown
of V-ATPase V1d in zebrafish resulted in a similar phenotype.
Cotreatment of embryos with anti-Snx10 and anti-V1d morpholinos at
dosages that did not disrupt heart looping individually, effectively
induced a heart-looping defect. Chen et al. (2012) concluded that both
Snx10 and V1d are required for cilia formation and left-right patterning
in zebrafish.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OSTEOPETROSIS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 8
SNX10, ARG51GLN

In affected children from 3 unrelated consanguineous Palestinian
families with autosomal recessive osteopetrosis mapping to chromosome
7p15 (OPTB8; 615085), Aker et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for a
152G-A transition in exon 3 of the SNX10 gene, resulting in an
arg51-to-gln (R51Q) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
mutation, which segregated with disease in each family, was found in
heterozygosity in 1 of 211 ethnically matched controls. Patient
osteoclasts displayed extensive cytoplasmic vacuolation, which was
nearly absent from age-matched control cells. Examination of fluorescent
dextran-loaded cells revealed that 25% of patient cells contained large
endosomal vacuoles, compared to only 2% of control cells. Immunostaining
demonstrated a notable increase in mutant protein in patient cells, with
a distribution pattern strikingly different from that of controls,
including prominent SNX10-positive punctae that were clustered
throughout the cytoplasm. Functional analysis showed that the patients'
cells resorbed far less substrate compared to control cells.

REFERENCE 1. Aker, M.; Rouvinski, A.; Hashavia, S.; Ta-Shma, A.; Shaag, A.;
Zenvirt, S.; Israel, S.; Weintraub, M.; Taraboulos, A.; Bar-Shavit,
Z.; Elpeleg, O.: An SNX10 mutation causes malignant osteopetrosis
of infancy. J. Med. Genet. 49: 221-226, 2012.

2. Chen, Y.; Wu, B.; Xu, L.; Li, H.; Xia, J.; Yin, W.; Li, Z.; Shi,
D.; Li, S.; Lin, S.; Shu, X.; Pei, D.: A SNX10/V-ATPase pathway regulates
ciliogenesis in vitro and in vivo. Cell Res. 22: 333-345, 2012.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/20/2012.

4. Qin, B.; He, M.; Chen, X.; Pei, D.: Sorting nexin 10 induces giant
vacuoles in mammalian cells. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 36891-36896, 2006.

5. Teasdale, R. D.; Loci, D.; Houghton, F.; Karlsson, L.; Gleeson,
P. A.: A large family of endosome-localized proteins related to sorting
nexin 1. Biochem. J. 358: 7-16, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/14/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/20/2012

EDITED alopez: 02/19/2013
terry: 2/14/2013
carol: 8/31/2012
carol: 8/20/2012

615086	TITLE *615086 HARBINGER TRANSPOSASE-DERIVED GENE 1; HARBI1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

HARBI1 is predicted to be a DNA nuclease (Kapitonov and Jurka, 2004).

CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to Harbinger DNA transposons,
Kapitonov and Jurka (2004) identified HARBI1. The deduced 349-amino acid
human protein contains a DNA nuclease catalytic triad (DDE). EST
database analysis predicted expression of HARBI1 in adult human brain,
eye, kidney, lung, and reproductive organs and in fetal human tissues.
Orthologs of HARBI1 were detected in several vertebrate species.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kapitonov and Jurka (2004) determined that the HARBI1 gene contains 3
exons. Intron 2 is about 14 kb long.

MAPPING

By database analysis, Kapitonov and Jurka (2004) mapped the HARBI1 gene
to the paracentromeric region of chromosome 11. Hartz (2013) mapped the
HARBI1 gene to chromosome 11p11.2 based on an alignment of the HARBI1
sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK057237) with the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

EVOLUTION

Kapitonov and Jurka (2004) stated that Harbinger DNA transposons have
been identified in protists, plants, insects, worms, and vertebrates.
However, Kapitonov and Jurka (2004) found that Harbingers were not
present in mammals. They determined that all autonomous Harbingers from
different species encode 2 proteins: a Harbinger transposase and a
DNA-binding protein. The HARBI1 gene appeared to evolve from a Harbinger
transposase in a common ancestor of bony vertebrates about 450 million
years ago.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/19/2013.

2. Kapitonov, V. V.; Jurka, J.: Harbinger transposons and an ancient
HARBI1 gene derived from a transposase. DNA Cell Biol. 23: 311-324,
2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/19/2013

EDITED mgross: 02/19/2013

604661	TITLE *604661 POTASSIUM CHANNEL-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2; KCNIP2
;;KCHIP2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the brain and heart, rapidly inactivating (A-type) voltage-gated
potassium (Kv) currents operate at subthreshold membrane potentials to
control the excitability of neurons and cardiac myocytes. An et al.
(2000) described 3 Kv channel-interacting proteins called KCHIPs that
bind to the cytoplasmic amino termini of Kv4-alpha subunits. See KCHIP1
(604660). The KCHIP2 cDNA encodes a 252-amino acid protein that has a
distinct amino terminus but shares approximately 70% amino acid identity
with KCHIP1 and KCHIP3 throughout a carboxy-terminal 185-amino acid core
domain containing 4 EF-hand-like motifs. Expression of KCHIP2 and Kv4
together reconstituted several features of native A-type currents by
modulating the density, inactivation kinetics, and rate of recovery from
inactivation of Kv4 channels in heterologous cells. The KCHIPs
colocalized and coimmunoprecipitated with brain Kv4-alpha subunits and
are thus integral components of native Kv4 channel complexes.

GENE FUNCTION

Jeyaraj et al. (2012) provided molecular evidence that links circadian
rhythms to vulnerability in ventricular arrhythmias in mice.
Specifically, they showed that cardiac ion channel expression and QT
interval duration (an index of myocardial repolarization) exhibit
endogenous circadian rhythmicity under the control of a clock-dependent
oscillator, Kruppel-like factor-15 (KLF15; 606465). Klf15
transcriptionally controls rhythmic expression of KChIP2, a critical
subunit required for generating the transient outward potassium current.
Deficiency or excess of Klf15 causes loss of rhythmic QT variation,
abnormal repolarization, and enhanced susceptibility to ventricular
arrhythmias. Jeyaraj et al. (2012) concluded that their findings
identified circadian transcription of ion channels as a mechanism for
cardiac arrhythmogenesis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kuo et al. (2001) found that knockout mice deficient for Kchip2
exhibited normal cardiac structure and function but displayed a
prolonged elevation in the ST segment on the electrocardiogram. The
Kchip2 -/- mice were highly susceptible to the induction of cardiac
arrhythmias. Single-cell analysis revealed a substrate for
arrhythmogenesis, including a complete absence of transient outward
potassium current (I-to) and a marked increase in action potential
duration. These studies demonstrated that a defect in KCHIP2 is
sufficient to confer a marked genetic susceptibility to arrhythmias,
establishing a novel genetic pathway for ventricular tachycardia via a
loss of the transmural gradient of I-to.

REFERENCE 1. An, W. F.; Bowlby, M. R.; Betty, M.; Cao, J.; Ling, H.-P.; Mendoza,
G.; Hinson, J. W.; Mattsson, K. I.; Strassle, B. W.; Trimmer, J. S.;
Rhodes, K. J.: Modulation of A-type potassium channels by a family
of calcium sensors. Nature 403: 553-556, 2000.

2. Jeyaraj, D.; Haldar, S. M.; Wan, X.; McCauley, M. D.; Ripperger,
J. A.; Hu, K.; Lu, Y.; Eapen, B. L.; Sharma, N.; Ficker, E.; Cutler,
M. J.; Gulick, J.; and 9 others: Circadian rhythms govern cardiac
repolarization and arrhythmogenesis. Nature 483: 96-99, 2012.

3. Kuo, H.-C.; Cheng, C.-F.; Clark, R. B.; Lin, J. J.-C.; Lin, J.
L.-C.; Hoshijima, M.; Nguyen-Tran, V. T. B.; Gu, Y.; Ikeda, Y.; Chu,
P.-H.; Ross, J., Jr.; Giles, W. R.; Chien, K. R.: A defect in the
Kv channel-interacting protein 2 (KChIP2) gene leads to a complete
loss of I-to, and confers susceptibility to ventricular tachycardia. Cell 107:
801-813, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2012
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/7/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 3/7/2000

EDITED alopez: 09/05/2012
alopez: 9/5/2012
terry: 8/29/2012
mgross: 10/20/2003
mgross: 1/7/2002
alopez: 6/30/2000
alopez: 3/8/2000
alopez: 3/7/2000

604784	TITLE *604784 TRANSCRIPTION ELONGATION FACTOR A, 2; TCEA2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Transcription elongation factors in the SII class (TFIIS), such as
TCEA2, release RNA polymerase II (see 180660) from transcriptional
arrest. For background information on transcription elongation factors,
see TCEA1 (601425).

CLONING

Using the yeast 2-hybrid system with general transcription factor TFIIB
(189963) as bait, Umehara et al. (1995) isolated a human TFIIS cDNA
encoding a 299-amino acid protein. Northern blot analysis showed that
expression of the TFIIS transcript was primarily restricted to testis
and ovary. By screening a human fetal brain genomic library with a probe
corresponding to the 3-prime end of this TFIIS cDNA, Weaver and Kane
(1997) recovered a genomic clone, which they designated TCEA2. The
nucleotide sequence of the 5-prime flanking region contains several
potential regulatory factor-binding sites. The amino acid sequences of
TCEA1 and TCEA2 are 78% identical over the C-terminal region necessary
and sufficient for known in vitro activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Weaver and Kane (1997) found that the TCEA2 gene contains 7 exons and 6
introns and spans approximately 7 kb.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Wang et al. (2009) reported the crystal structure of RNA polymerase II
in the third state, the reverse translocated or 'backtracked' state. The
defining feature of the backtracked structure is a binding site for the
first backtracked nucleotide. This binding site is occupied in case of
nucleotide misincorporation in the RNA or damage to the DNA, and is
termed the 'P' site because it supports proofreading. The predominant
mechanism of proofreading is the excision of a dinucleotide in the
presence of the TFIIS elongation factor. Structure determination of a
cocrystal with TFIIS revealed a rearrangement whereby cleavage of the
RNA may take place.

REFERENCE 1. Umehara, T.; Kida, S.; Yamamoto, T.; Horikoshi, M.: Isolation
and characterization of cDNA encoding a new type of human transcription
elongation factor S-II. Gene 167: 297-302, 1995.

2. Wang, D.; Bushnell, D. A.; Huang, X.; Westover, K. D.; Levitt,
M.; Kornberg, R. D.: Structural basis of transcription: backtracked
RNA polymerase II at 3.4 angstrom resolution. Science 324: 1203-1206,
2009.

3. Weaver, Z. A.; Kane, C. M.: Genomic characterization of a testis-specific
TFIIS (TCEA2) gene. Genomics 46: 516-519, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009

CREATED Wilson H. Y. Lo: 4/4/2000

EDITED alopez: 06/22/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
carol: 4/4/2000

120570	TITLE *120570 COMPLEMENT COMPONENT 1, q SUBCOMPONENT, B CHAIN; C1QB
;;COMPLEMENT COMPONENT 1, q SUBCOMPONENT, BETA POLYPEPTIDE;;
COMPLEMENT COMPONENT C1q, B CHAIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

C1q, the first subcomponent of C1, has a complicated 18-chain structure:
6 A, 6 B, and 6 C chains. Each chain has a stretch of about 80 amino
acids with the collagenous triplet Gly-X-Y where X and Y can include
hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine. The A (120550), B, and C (120575)
chains combine to form 6 heteromeric triple helices in the collagenous
regions of the chains (Sellar et al., 1991).

MAPPING

Using a cDNA probe to the B chain of C1q, Solomon et al. (1985) assigned
the gene to chromosome 1 in somatic cell hybrids. A hybrid containing
1p, but no 1q, allowed them to localize the gene to 1p.

The genes for the A, B, and C chains of C1q are tandemly arranged
5-prime to 3-prime in the order A-C-B on a 24-kb stretch of DNA (Sellar
et al., 1991). A and C are separated by 4 kb and B and C are separated
by 11 kb. Hybridization of cDNA probes to a hybrid cell line containing
the derived X chromosome from an X;1(q21.2;p34) translocation described
in a female patient with Duchenne muscular dystrophy (Lindenbaum et al.,
1979; Boyd et al., 1988) showed that the A and B genes are located in
the region 1p36.3-p34.1 (Sellar et al., 1992).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The first molecular lesion in C1q deficiency (613652) was reported by
McAdam et al. (1988). A homozygous G-to-A transition at nucleotide 150
in the B-chain (120570.0001) resulted in a premature stop codon. The
patient had no antigenetically detectable C1q.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
C1Q DEFICIENCY
C1QB, 150G-A

The first molecular lesion in C1q deficiency (613652) was reported by
McAdam et al. (1988). A homozygous G-to-A transition at nucleotide 150
in the B-chain resulted in a premature stop codon. The patient had no
antigenetically detectable C1q.

REFERENCE 1. Boyd, Y.; Cockburn, D.; Holt, S.; Munro, E.; van Ommen, G. J.;
Gillard, B.; Affara, N.; Ferguson-Smith, M.; Craig, I.: Mapping of
12 translocation breakpoints in the Xp21 region with respect to the
locus for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 48:
28-34, 1988.

2. Lindenbaum, R. H.; Clarke, G.; Patel, C.; Moncrieff, M.; Hughes,
J. T.: Muscular dystrophy in an X;1 translocation female suggests
that Duchenne locus is on X chromosome short arm. J. Med. Genet. 16:
389-392, 1979.

3. McAdam, R. A.; Goundis, D.; Reid, K. B. M.: A homozygous point
mutation results in a stop codon in the C1q B-chain of a C1q-deficient
individual. Immunogenetics 27: 259-264, 1988.

4. Sellar, G. C.; Blake, D. J.; Reid, K. B.: Characterization and
organization of the genes encoding the A-, B-, and C-chains of human
complement subcomponent C1q: the complete derived amino acid sequence
of human C1q. Biochem. J. 274: 481-490, 1991.

5. Sellar, G. C.; Cockburn, D.; Reid, K. B. M.: Localization of the
gene cluster encoding the A, B, and C chains of human C1q to 1p34.1-1p36.3. Immunogenetics 35:
214-216, 1992.

6. Solomon, E.; Skok, J.; Griffin, J.; Reid, K. B. M.: Human C1q
B chain (C1QB) is on chromosome 1p. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 40:
749 only, 1985.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED terry: 02/18/2011
carol: 2/17/2011
mgross: 3/14/2008
mgross: 3/17/2004
carol: 4/21/1999
terry: 11/14/1996
terry: 11/11/1996
jason: 6/29/1994
carol: 10/13/1992
carol: 5/12/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 9/9/1991
carol: 3/14/1991

609714	TITLE *609714 TRIGGERING RECEPTOR EXPRESSED ON MYELOID CELLS-LIKE PROTEIN 1; TREML1
;;TREM-LIKE PROTEIN 1;;
TREM-LIKE TRANSCRIPT 1; TLT1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TREML1 is located in a gene cluster on chromosome 6 with the single Ig
variable (IgV) domain activating receptors TREM1 (605085) and TREM2
(605086), but it has distinct structural and functional properties.
TREML1 enhances calcium signaling in an SHP2 (PTPN11; 176876)-dependent
manner (Allcock et al., 2003; Barrow et al., 2004).

CLONING

Washington et al. (2002) cloned and characterized mouse Treml1, which
they called Tlt1. By sequence analysis they identified human TLT1, which
encodes a 312-amino acid protein. TLT1 has an N-terminal leader
sequence, followed by an IgV domain, a transmembrane domain, a
polyproline-rich region, and an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory
motif (ITIM).

Allcock et al. (2003) constructed overlapping BAC/PAC clones from the
TREM gene cluster on chromosome 6 and identified 3 complete Ig
superfamily genes that they called TLT1, TLT2 (TREML2; 609715), and TLT3
(TREML3; 609716). They obtained a full-length TLT1 cDNA by PCR of
monocyte cell line mRNA and 5-prime RACE. TLT1 has a calculated
molecular mass of 33 kD. Unlike other TREM proteins, the IgV domain of
TLT1 has no potential N-glycosylation sites. The transmembrane domain of
TLT1 lacks charged residues, and the 127-amino acid cytoplasmic region
has 2 tyr residues (Y245 and Y281), each in an ITIM. Allcock et al.
(2003) also cloned a TLT1 splice variant lacking exon 5. They predicted
that the truncation results in a membrane-bound form of TLT1 lacking the
ITIMs. RT-PCR analysis detected weak expression of TLT1 in monocyte,
B-cell, and T-cell lines. TLT1 expression could be upregulated by
mitogen stimulation.

Barrow et al. (2004) noted that the short TLT1 splice variant encodes a
199-amino acid protein that differs from the full-length isoform in its
cytoplasmic domain, which contains only 14 residues. Western blot
analysis detected full-length TLT1 as a 35-kD protein and the short TLT1
isoform as a 20-kD protein in peripheral blood lymphocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

Using flow cytometry and confocal microscopy, Barrow et al. (2004) found
that both TLT1 isoforms colocalized with CD62P (SELP; 173610) in alpha
granules of resting platelets and, after platelet activation, were
expressed with CD62P on the cell surface. Immunoprecipitation analysis
of transfected cells showed interaction of TLT1 with SHP2 only in cells
expressing the C-terminal classical ITIM of TLT1, Y281; no interaction
occurred in cells expressing the nonclassical ITIM, Y245. The SHP2-Y281
ITIM interaction in turn led to enhanced FCER1 (see 147140)-mediated
calcium signaling.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Allcock et al. (2003) determined that all
genes in the TREM cluster have an exon encoding the 5-prime UTR and
leader peptide, a second exon encoding the IgV domain, and a variable
number of downstream exons encoding the stalk, transmembrane, and
cytoplasmic regions. TLT1 contains 6 exons. Exon 5 is subject to
alternative splicing.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Washington et al. (2002) and Allcock et
al. (2003) mapped the TREML1 gene to chromosome 6p21.1, telomeric to the
TREM2 gene within the TREM gene cluster. The mouse Treml1 gene maps to
chromosome 17 in a region that shows homology of synteny to human
chromosome 6.

REFERENCE 1. Allcock, R. J. N.; Barrow, A. D.; Forbes, S.; Beck, S.; Trowsdale,
J.: The human TREM gene cluster at 6p21.1 encodes both activating
and inhibitory single IgV domain receptors and includes NKp44. Europ.
J. Immun. 33: 567-577, 2003.

2. Barrow, A. D.; Astoul, E.; Floto, A.; Brooke, G.; Relou, I. A.
M.; Jennings, N. S.; Smith, K. G. C.; Ouwehand, W.; Farndale, R. W.;
Alexander, D. R.; Trowsdale, J.: Cutting edge: TREM-like transcript-1,
a platelet immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motif encoding
costimulatory immunoreceptor that enhances, rather than inhibits,
calcium signaling via SHP-2. J. Immun. 172: 5838-5842, 2004.

3. Washington, A. V.; Quigley, L.; McVicar, D. W.: Initial characterization
of TREM-like transcript (TLT)-1: a putative inhibitory receptor within
the TREM cluster. Blood 100: 3822-3824, 2002.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/15/2005

EDITED mgross: 11/15/2005

611104	TITLE *611104 FYVE, RhoGEF, AND PH DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 4; FGD4
;;FGD1-RELATED F-ACTIN-BINDING PROTEIN; FRABIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

FGD4, or frabin, is a GDP/GTP exchange protein for CDC42 (116952) and
shows actin filament (F-actin)-binding activity (Ikeda et al., 2001).

CLONING

Obaishi et al. (1998) cloned rat frabin, and Ikeda et al. (2001) cloned
mouse frabin. Both rodent proteins contain 766 amino acids and contain
an N-terminal F-actin-binding domain followed by a Dbl (MCF2; 311030)
homology domain, a pleckstrin homology (PH) domain, a FYVE finger
domain, and a second PH domain.

Ikeda et al. (2001) identified 3 splice variants of mouse frabin. They
called the variant encoding the full-length protein frabin-alpha, and
those encoding C-terminally truncated proteins frabin-beta and -gamma.
RT-PCR of several mouse tissues revealed strongest expression of all 3
variants in brain, heart, small intestine, kidney, and testis. Other
tissues showed weaker expression of the 3 variants.

GENE STRUCTURE

The FGD4 gene contains 17 exons; the coding sequence includes exons 3 to
17 (Delague et al., 2007).

GENE FUNCTION

Obaishi et al. (1998) showed that rat frabin bound along the sides of
F-actin and showed F-actin-crosslinking activity. Overexpression of
frabin in mouse fibroblasts and monkey kidney cells induced cell shape
change and JNK (MAPK8; 601158) activation, respectively.

Ikeda et al. (2001) found that all 3 mouse frabin isoforms induced the
formation of filopodia in fibroblasts through direct activation of Cdc42
(116952). Only full-length frabin-alpha formed lamellipodia in mouse
fibroblasts, through indirect activation of the small G protein Rac
(602048). In canine kidney epithelial cells, only frabin-alpha formed
microspikes. By mutation analysis, Ikeda et al. (2001) showed that both
the Cdc42-activating and F-actin-binding activities of frabin were
necessary to induce microspike formation.

Cryptosporidium parvum, one of the most commonly reported enteric
pathogens worldwide, invades target epithelial via a mechanism that
involves host cell actin reorganization. Chen et al. (2004) found that
C. parvum infection of cultured human biliary epithelial cells induced
the accumulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) (see PIK3CG,
301232) at the host cell-parasite interface and resulted in the
activation of PI3K in infected cells. Endogenous frabin was also
recruited to the host cell-parasite interface in a process that was
inhibited by PI3K inhibitors. The cellular expression of either a
dominant-negative PI3K mutant or functionally deficient frabin mutants
inhibited C. parvum-induced CDC42 accumulation at the host cell-parasite
interface. Inhibition of either PI3K or frabin decreased C.
parvum-induced actin accumulation and inhibited C. parvum cellular
invasion.

Delague et al. (2007) found expression of Fgd4 in all mouse nerve
tissues examined in embryonic, postnatal, and adult stages. Levels of
expression were lower in postnatal and adult tissues, suggesting that
FGD4 may have a role in early stages of myelination.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 2 families with Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type
4H (CMT4H; 609311) originally reported by De Sandre-Giovannoli et al.
(2005), Delague et al. (2007) identified 2 different homozygous
mutations in the FGD4 gene (611104.0002; 611104.0005). In 4 families
with CMT4H, Stendel et al. (2007) found homozygous mutations in the FDG4
gene, 2 of them nonsense mutations, 1 a missense mutation, and 1 a
frameshift mutation. These data, together with the ability of frabin to
induce CDC42-mediated cell-shape changes in transfected Schwann cells,
suggested that Rho GTPase signaling is essential for proper myelination
of the peripheral nervous system.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the FGD4
gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP RH4479). Demonstration of mutations in the
FGD4 gene in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 4H, which had been mapped
by linkage to 12p11.21-q13.11, indicated that this is the location of
the FGD4 gene.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, TYPE 4H
FGD4, ARG224TER

In a daughter of first-cousin Turkish parents, Stendel et al. (2007)
found that Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 4H (609311) was caused by
homozygosity for a nonsense mutation, 670C-T (arg224 to stop; R224X), in
the FGD4 gene.

.0002
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, TYPE 4H
FGD4, 893T-G

In affected members of a large consanguineous Lebanese family with CMT4H
(609311) originally reported by De Sandre-Giovannoli et al. (2005),
Delague et al. (2007) identified a homozygous 893T-G transversion in
exon 7 of the FGD4 gene. Although the 893T-G transversion was initially
predicted to result in a met298-to-arg (M298R) substitution, RT-PCR from
patient cells detected an abnormal mRNA transcript lacking the last 100
bp of exon 7, resulting from the use of an upstream donor splice site
created by the mutation. The splice site mutation was predicted to
result in a truncated 305-residue protein instead of the normal
766-residue protein. Several additional variant transcripts were also
detected in the patient's cells, presumably resulting from different
mechanisms. Further studies of patient cells showed complete lack of
full-length protein expression in the patient's peripheral nerve, and a
60% reduction in mutant FGD4 mRNA levels, suggesting nonsense-mediated
decay of the truncated transcript. Functional expression studies in rat
primary motoneurons and Schwann cells showed that the mutant protein
induced significantly fewer filopodia-like microspikes compared to
wildtype frabin. Another pathogenic mutation at the same nucleotide
(M298T; 611104.0005) was identified in another affected family.

Stendel et al. (2007) identified a homozygous 893T-G mutation in a girl
with CMT4H who was born of consanguineous Lebanese parents.

.0003
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, TYPE 4H
FGD4, 2-BP DEL, 1626AG

In a son of a consanguineous Turkish couple, Stendel et al. (2007) found
that Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 4H (609311) was caused by
homozygosity for a 2-bp deletion in the FGD4 gene, 1626_1627delAG, that
resulted in frameshift (E543fs).

.0004
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, TYPE 4H
FGD4, GLY586TER

In a son of nonconsanguineous Tamil parents, Stendel et al. (2007) found
that Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 4H (609311) was caused by
homozygosity for a 1756G-T transversion in the FGD4 gene that resulted
in premature termination of the protein (gly586 to ter; Y586X).

.0005
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, TYPE 4H
FGD4, MET298THR

In 4 affected members of an Algerian family with CMT4H (609311)
originally reported by De Sandre-Giovannoli et al. (2005), Delague et
al. (2007) identified a homozygous 893T-C transition in exon 7 of the
FGD4 gene, resulting in a met298-to-thr (M298T) substitution in the DH
domain, which is responsible for Cdc42 (116952) activation. Another
pathogenic mutation at the same nucleotide (893T-G; 611104.0002) was
identified in another affected family.

.0006
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, TYPE 4H
FGD4, ARG275TER

In 2 sibs with CMT4H (609311) from a family in Northern Ireland, Houlden
et al. (2009) identified a homozygous 723C-T transition in the FGD4
gene, resulting in an arg275-to-ter (R275X) substitution in a highly
conserved residue. Analysis of lymphoblasts from 1 patient showed that
the mutant truncated mRNA was present and not subject to
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Although both patients had onset of
walking difficulties in childhood, there was slow progression of the
disorder, and both remained ambulatory into middle age. At age 58, the
proband had pes cavus, distal muscle weakness and atrophy, areflexia,
stocking and glove sensory loss, and pupil size asymmetry. Her brother
had a similar phenotype. Nerve conduction velocities were significantly
decreased. Houlden et al. (2009) noted that the phenotype was relatively
mild compared to patients with other FGD4 mutations. The mutation was
not identified in 190 control chromosomes.

.0007
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, TYPE 4H
FGD4, IVS14AS, A-G, -2

In a 20-year-old woman, born of consanguineous parents, with CMT4H
(609311), Fabrizi et al. (2009) identified a homozygous A-to-G
transition in the splice acceptor site of intron 14 of the FGD4 gene,
predicted to result in premature termination. The patient was from a
small mountain village in northeast Italy. She had a clumsy gait since
childhood, steppage gait, pes equinovarus, lower limb areflexia, and
mild distal sensory loss. She also had scoliosis and hypotrophy of
thenar and hypothenar muscles. Pathologic and electrophysiologic studies
showed a demyelinating neuropathy. There was slow disease progression.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, X.-M.; Splinter, P. L.; Tietz, P. S.; Huang, B. Q.; Billadeau,
D. D.; LaRusso, N. F.: Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and frabin mediate
cryptosporidium parvum cellular invasion via activation of Cdc42. J.
Biol. Chem. 279: 31671-31678, 2004.

2. Delague, V.; Jacquier, A.; Hamadouche, T.; Poitelon, Y.; Baudot,
C.; Boccaccio, I.; Chouery, E.; Chaouch, M.; Kassouri, N.; Jabbour,
R.; Grid, D.; Megarbane, A.; Haase, G.; Levy, N.: Mutations in FGD4
encoding the Rho GDP/GTP exchange factor frabin cause autosomal recessive
Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 4H. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81: 1-16, 2007.

3. De Sandre-Giovannoli, A.; Delague, V.; Hamadouche, T.; Chaouch,
M.; Krahn, M.; Boccaccio, I.; Maisonobe, T.; Chouery, E.; Jabbour,
R.; Atweh, S.; Grid, D.; Megarbane, A.; Levy, N.: Homozygosity mapping
of autosomal recessive demyelinating Charcot-Marie-Tooth neuropathy
(CMT4H) to a novel locus on chromosome 12p11.21-q13.11. (Letter) J.
Med. Genet. 42: 260-265, 2005.

4. Fabrizi, G. M.; Taioli, F.; Cavallaro, T.; Ferrari, S.; Bertolasi,
L.; Casarotto, M.; Rizzuto, N.; Deconinck, T.; Timmerman, V.; De Jonghe,
P.: Further evidence that mutations in FGD4/frabin cause Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease type 4H. Neurology 72: 1160-1164, 2009.

5. Houlden, H.; Hammans, S.; Katifi, H.; Reilly, M. M.: A novel frabin
(FGD4) nonsense mutation p.R275X associated with phenotypic variability
in CMT4H. Neurology 72: 617-620, 2009.

6. Ikeda, W.; Nakanishi, H.; Takekuni, K.; Itoh, S.; Takai, Y.: Identification
of slicing variants of frabin with partly different functions and
tissue distribution. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 286: 1066-1072,
2001.

7. Ikeda, W.; Nakanishi, H.; Tanaka, Y.; Tachibana, K.; Takai, Y.
: Cooperation of Cdc42 small G protein-activating and actin filament-binding
activities of frabin in microspike formation. Oncogene 20: 3457-3463,
2001.

8. Obaishi, H.; Nakanishi, H.; Mandai, K.; Satoh, K.; Satoh, A.; Takahashi,
K.; Miyahara, M.; Nishioka, H.; Takaishi, K.; Takai, Y.: Frabin,
a novel FGD1-related actin filament-binding protein capable of changing
cell shape and activating c-Jun N-terminal kinase. J. Biol. Chem. 273:
18697-18700, 1998.

9. Stendel, C.; Roos, A.; Deconinck, T.; Pereira, J.; Castagner, F.;
Niemann, A.; Kirschner, J.; Korinthenberg, R.; Ketelsen, U.-P.; Battaloglu,
E.; Parman, Y.; Nicholson, G.; and 12 others: Peripheral nerve
demyelination caused by a mutant Rho GTPase guanine nucleotide exchange
factor, Frabin/FGD4. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81: 158-164, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/29/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/16/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/22/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/8/2007

EDITED carol: 09/13/2013
wwang: 7/28/2009
ckniffin: 6/29/2009
wwang: 3/26/2009
ckniffin: 3/16/2009
alopez: 8/24/2007
ckniffin: 8/22/2007
alopez: 7/3/2007
alopez: 6/20/2007
terry: 6/19/2007
alopez: 6/10/2007

611778	TITLE *611778 GLYCEROL-3-PHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE 1-LIKE; GPD1L
;;KIAA0089
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a myeloid leukemia cell line cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1995) cloned GPD1L, which they designated
KIAA0089. The deduced 411-amino acid protein contains an NAD-dependent
glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GPD1; 138420) motif, and it shares
71.8% identity with GPD1. Northern blot analysis detected a single GPD1L
transcript in all tissues examined except liver. Highest expression was
in heart and skeletal muscle.

London et al. (2007) determined that the deduced 351-amino acid GPD1L
protein contains an N-terminal NAD+ consensus binding site, followed by
a site homologous to the cardiac sodium channel SCN5A (600163), and a
C-terminal lys206 residue. Northern blot analysis detected highest
expression of an approximately 4-kb transcript in heart, with lower
levels in skeletal muscle, kidney, lung, and other organs. Western blot
analysis of mouse, rabbit, and human heart lysates detected the protein
at an apparent molecular mass of about 40 kD, with concentration in
membrane fractions.

GENE STRUCTURE

London et al. (2007) determined that the GPD1L gene contains 8 exons and
spans 62.2 kb.

MAPPING

By PCR of human-rodent hybrid cell lines, Nagase et al. (1995), mapped
the GPD1L gene to chromosome 3. By linkage with Brugada syndrome-2
(BRGDA2; 611777) and by database analysis, London et al. (2007) mapped
the GPD1L gene to chromosome 3p24-p22.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a large family with Brugada syndrome-2 (611777), previously studied
by Weiss et al. (2002) with linkage analysis that excluded the SCN5A
gene (600163), London et al. (2007) performed fine mapping and narrowed
the critical region to approximately 1,000 kb on chromosome 3p24.
Candidate genes in the area were analyzed by SSCP and direct sequencing,
and a mutation in the GPD1L gene (A280V; 611778.0001) was identified in
16 phenotypically affected individuals and 27 others (37% penetrance).
The mutation was not found in more than 1,000 reference alleles; no
mutations in the GPD1L gene were identified in the probands of 19
smaller families with Brugada syndrome. Studies in HEK cells
demonstrated that the A280V mutation reduced the inward sodium current
by about 50% and decreased SCN5A surface expression by about 30%.

Van Norstrand et al. (2007) analyzed the GPD1L gene in necropsy tissue
from 83 unrelated cases of sudden unexplained death (see SIDS; 272120)
and identified a mutation (E83K; 611778.0002) in a boy who died at 3
months of age. Mutation analysis was then performed on genomic DNA
derived from 221 cases of SIDS, revealing 2 additional mutations, in a
girl who died at 5 weeks (I124K; 611778.0003) and a boy who died at 1
month of age (R273C; 611778.0004), respectively. They found that
cotransfection of wildtype GPD1L with SCN5A into human embryonic kidney
cells or mouse neonatal cardiomyocytes resulted in robust
SCN5A-dependent sodium current density. However, GPD1L containing the
E83K, I124V, R273C mutations reduced peak SCN5A-dependent sodium current
density. The mutations did not affect the kinetics of channel activation
or inactivation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BRUGADA SYNDROME 2
GPD1L, ALA280VAL

In a large multigenerational family with Brudada syndrome-2 (611777),
previously studied by Weiss et al. (2002), London et al. (2007)
identified heterozygosity for an 899C-T transition in exon 6 of the
GPD1L gene, resulting in an ala280-to-val (A280V) substitution. The
mutation was found in all 16 phenotypically affected individuals and 27
others (37% penetrance); it was not found in more than 1,000 reference
alleles. Studies in HEK cells demonstrated that A280V reduced the inward
sodium current by about 50% and decreased SCN5A surface expression by
about 30%, but did not affect the kinetics of channel activation or
deactivation; these effects were specific to the cardiac sodium channel.

.0002
BRUGADA SYNDROME 2
GPD1L, GLU83LYS

In a 3-month-old white boy who died of SIDS (272120; see also Brugada
syndrome-2, 611777), Van Norstrand et al. (2007) identified a 307G-A
transition in the GPD1L gene, resulting in a glu83-to-lys (E83K)
substitution at a highly conserved residue in the N-terminal NAD binding
domain. The E83K mutation, which significantly reduced the sodium
current in HEK cells and neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes, was not found in
600 reference alleles. The child had a family history of poorly
documented cardiac arrhythmias, but his parents declined participation.

.0003
BRUGADA SYNDROME 2
GPD1L, ILE124VAL

In a 5-week-old white girl who died of SIDS (272120; see also Brugada
syndrome-2, 611777), Van Norstrand et al. (2007) identified a 430A-G
transition in the GPD1L gene, resulting in an ile124-to-val (I124V)
substitution at a highly conserved residue in the N-terminal NAD binding
domain. The I124V mutation, which significantly reduced the sodium
current in HEK cells and neonatal mouse cardiomyocytes, was not found in
600 reference alleles.

.0004
BRUGADA SYNDROME 2
GPD1L, ARG273CYS

In a 1-month-old white boy who died of SIDS (272120; see also Brugada
syndrome-2, 611777), Van Norstrand et al. (2007) identified an 877C-T
transition in the GPD1L gene, resulting in an arg273-to-cys (R273C)
substitution at a highly conserved residue in the C-terminal
substrate-binding domain. The R273C mutation, which significantly
reduced the sodium current in HEK cells and neonatal mouse
cardiomyocytes, was not found in 600 reference alleles.

REFERENCE 1. London, B.; Michalec, M.; Mehdi, H.; Zhu, X.; Kerchner, L.; Sanyal,
S.; Viswanathan, P. C.; Pfahnl, A. E.; Shang, L. L.; Madhusudanan,
M.; Baty, C. J.; Lagana, S.; Aleong, R.; Gutmann, R.; Ackerman, M.
J.; McNamara, D. M.; Weiss, R.; Dudley, S. C., Jr.: Mutation in glycerol-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase 1-like gene (GPD1-L) decreases cardiac Na+ current and
causes inherited arrhythmias. Circulation 116: 2260-2268, 2007.

2. Nagase, T; Miyajima, N; Tanaka, A.; Sazuka, T.; Seki, N.; Sato,
S.; Tabata, S.; Ishikawa, K.; Kawarabayashi, Y.; Kotani, H.; Nomura,
N.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
III. The coding sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0081-KIAA0120) deduced
by analysis of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 2:
37-43, 1995.

3. Van Norstrand, D. W.; Valdivia, C. R.; Tester, D. J.; Ueda, K.;
London, B.; Makielski, J. C.; Ackerman, M. J.: Molecular and functional
characterization of novel glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase 1-like
gene (GPD1-L) mutations in sudden infant death syndrome. Circulation 116:
2253-2259, 2007.

4. Weiss, R.; Barmada, M. M.; Nguyen, T.; Seibel, J. S.; Cavlovich,
D.; Kornblit, C. A.; Angelilli, A.; Villanueva, F.; McNamara, D. M.;
London, B.: Clinical and molecular heterogeneity in the Brugada syndrome:
a novel gene locus on chromosome 3. Circulation 105: 707-713, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/11/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/11/2008

EDITED carol: 12/15/2011
terry: 5/20/2010
wwang: 5/20/2008
wwang: 2/11/2008

604844	TITLE *604844 HEPARAN SULFATE 2-O-SULFOTRANSFERASE 1; HS2ST1
DESCRIPTION Seki et al. (1997) noted that an HS2ST1 cDNA, which they called
KIAA0448, had been randomly selected from a human brain cDNA library.
Seki et al. (1997) found that the deduced HS2ST1 protein has 356 amino
acids. In vitro transcribed/translated HS2ST1 protein had an apparent
molecular mass of approximately 40 kD by SDS-PAGE.

Seki et al. (1997) noted that the HS2ST1 gene had been mapped to
chromosome 1 by radiation hybrid mapping.

REFERENCE 1. Seki, N.; Ohira, M.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Nakajima,
D.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Characterization of cDNA clones in size-fractionated
cDNA libraries from human brain. DNA Res. 4: 345-349, 1997.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 4/17/2000

EDITED mcapotos: 05/01/2000
psherman: 4/17/2000

605650	TITLE *605650 POLYMERASE, DNA, KAPPA; POLK
;;DINB1;;
POLQ
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

External and internal DNA-damaging agents continually threaten the
integrity of genetic material in cells. Although a variety of repair
mechanisms exist to remove the resulting lesions, some lesions escape
repair and block the replication machinery. Members of the Y family of
DNA polymerases, such as POLK, permit the continuity of the replication
fork by allowing replication through such DNA lesions. Each Y family
polymerase has a unique DNA-damage bypass and fidelity profile. POLK is
specialized for the extension step of lesion bypass (summary by Lone et
al., 2007).

CLONING

The E. coli DinB protein, which is homologous to the S. cerevisiae Rev1
and Rad30 (POLH; 603968) proteins and the E. coli UmuC protein, is
involved in DNA damage-induced mutagenesis. By PCR of mouse fibroblast
cDNA with degenerate primers based on the E. coli DinB sequence,
followed by screening of a HeLa cell cDNA library with the mouse probe,
Gerlach et al. (1999) obtained a cDNA encoding POLK, which they termed
DINB1. The deduced 870-amino acid POLK protein contains an N-terminal
conserved nucleotidyl transferase domain, 2 tandem helix-hairpin-helix
domains implicated in DNA binding, and a nonconserved C terminus
containing 2 zinc clusters. Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous
expression of a 5.0-kb transcript at low but varying levels in all
tissues tested. Highest expression was found in testis, which also had
abundant 3.2- and 4.4-kb transcripts.

By EST database searching and screening of a human testis cDNA library,
Ogi et al. (1999) independently isolated a POLK cDNA.

By EST database searching for homologs of yeast Rad30 and screening of a
fetal brain cDNA library, Johnson et al. (2000) also cloned POLK, which
they termed POL-theta (POLQ) because it encodes the eighth known
eukaryotic polymerase.

GENE FUNCTION

Ogi et al. (1999) showed that transient expression of mouse Dinb1 cDNA
in cultured cells subjected to 6-thioguanine selection resulted in a
10-fold increase in the incidence of point mutations, 30% of which were
frameshift mutations.

Using functional analysis, Johnson et al. (2000) showed that purified
POLK can incorporate all 4 nucleotides almost to the end of the
template. In contrast to POLH, POLK, which lacks a proofreading
exonuclease function, is unable to bypass DNA lesions, namely cis-syn
T-T dimers, T-T photoproducts, or an abasic site. Assays of fidelity of
replication indicated that POLK misincorporated deoxynucleotides with a
frequency of 1/1000 to 1/10,000, a rate 10-fold lower than that of POLH.

Ohashi et al. (2000) also found that POLK is unable to bypass T-T
dimers. Unlike Johnson et al. (2000), however, they did observe
bypassing of abasic sites, the most common lesions in DNA within cells
which are generated by spontaneous hydrolysis of the N glycoside bond
during the course of repairing base-damage generated by carcinogenic
agents and ionizing radiation. Ohashi et al. (2000) noted that their
finding was heavily dependent on sequence context and enzyme
concentration.

In order to understand how DNA mismatching impacts the DNA-binding step,
the nucleotide-binding step, and the nucleotide-incorporation step,
Carlson et al. (2006) performed pre-steady-state kinetic studies with an
active recombinant N-terminal fragment of human POLK. When DNA contained
matched primer-terminal basepairs, they found that most of the POLK-DNA
complexes were nonproductive and that the concentration of active POLK
was low; however, when POLK was bound to DNA with mismatched
primer-terminal basepairs, they found that nonproductive complexes were
not formed and that the concentration of active POLK was high. Carlson
et al. (2006) concluded that POLK evolved to specifically function on
DNA substrates with aberrant primer-terminal basepairs.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay, Ohashi et al. (2009) showed that the
C-terminal domain of REV1 (REV1L; 606134) interacted with POLK, and they
identified 2 consecutive phenylalanines in POLK that were required for
the interaction. A POLK mutant lacking REV1-binding activity did not
complement the genotoxic sensitivity of Polk -/- mouse embryonic
fibroblasts, demonstrating that interaction with REV1 is essential for
POLK function in vivo.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Lone et al. (2007) stated that POLK has a Y family polymerase
architecture with palm, fingers, and thumb domains in the shape of the
right hand and a polymerase-associated domain (PAD) or 'little finger.'
They presented the crystal structure of the POLK catalytic core (amino
acids 19 to 526) bound to a template-primer and an incoming nucleotide.
POLK almost completely encircles the DNA and has a constrained active
site cleft that can accommodate only a single Watson-Crick basepair.

MAPPING

Using somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, Gerlach et al. (1999)
mapped the POLK gene to chromosome 5q13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Carlson, K. D.; Johnson, R. E.; Prakash, L.; Prakash, S.; Washington,
M. T.: Human DNA polymerase kappa forms nonproductive complexes with
matched primer termini but not with mismatched primer termini. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 15776-15781, 2006.

2. Gerlach, V. L.; Aravind, L.; Gotway, G.; Schultz, R. A.; Koonin,
E. V.; Friedberg, E. C.: Human and mouse homologs of Escherichia
coli DinB (DNA polymerase IV), members of the UmuC/DinB superfamily. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 11922-11927, 1999.

3. Johnson, R. E.; Prakash, S.; Prakash, L.: The human DINB1 gene
encodes the DNA polymerase Pol-theta. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97:
3838-3843, 2000.

4. Lone, S.; Townson, S. A.; Uljon, S. N.; Johnson, R. E.; Brahma,
A.; Nair, D. T.; Prakash, S.; Prakash, L.; Aggarwal, A. K.: Human
DNA polymerase kappa encircles DNA: implications for mismatch extension
and lesion bypass. Molec. Cell 25: 601-614, 2007.

5. Ogi, T.; Kato, T., Jr.; Kato, T.; Ohmori, H.: Mutation enhancement
by DINB1, a mammalian homologue of the Escherichia coli mutagenesis
protein dinB. Genes Cells 4: 607-618, 1999.

6. Ohashi, E.; Hanafusa, T.; Kamei, K.; Song, I.; Tomida, J.; Hashimoto,
H.; Vaziri, C.; Ohmori, H.: Identification of a novel REV1-interacting
motif necessary for DNA polymerase kappa function. Genes Cells 14:
101-111, 2009.

7. Ohashi, E.; Ogi, T.; Kusumoto, R.; Iwai, S.; Masutani, C.; Hanaoka,
F.; Ohmori, H.: Error-prone bypass of certain DNA lesions by the
human DNA polymerase kappa. Genes Dev. 14: 1589-1594, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/26/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/3/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/17/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/15/2001

EDITED mgross: 01/27/2010
terry: 1/26/2010
wwang: 5/3/2007
wwang: 11/20/2006
terry: 11/17/2006
carol: 2/15/2001

600241	TITLE *600241 G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 3; GPR3
;;ADENYLATE CYCLASE CONSTITUTIVE ACTIVATOR; ACCA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In a search for genes responsible for the mediation of brain reward that
may have a role in drug addiction, Marchese et al. (1994) cloned a gene
designated GPR3 that showed 56% identity in the transmembrane regions
with a previously characterized cDNA clone from rat.

Independently, Iismaa et al. (1994) used degenerate oligonucleotide
primers designed against known G protein-coupled receptors and PCR
amplification to isolate a novel receptor sequence from a rat insulinoma
cell line and its human homolog, GPR3, from a human neuroblastoma cDNA
library. The novel human receptor sequence was expressed in low
abundance predominantly in the central nervous system and at low levels
in lung and kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

By expressing GPR3 in a large variety of cell lines, Eggerickx et al.
(1995) demonstrated that GPR3 activates adenylate cyclase to a level
similar to that obtained with other Gs-coupled receptors that are fully
stimulated by their ligands.

Mehlmann et al. (2004) demonstrated that GPR3 maintained meiotic arrest
in mammalian oocytes. Oocytes from Gpr3 knockout mice resumed meiosis
within antral follicles, independently of an increase in luteinizing
hormone; this phenotype could be reversed by injection of Gpr3 RNA into
the oocytes. Mehlmann et al. (2004) concluded that the GPR3 receptor is
a link in communication between somatic cells and oocyte of the ovarian
follicle and is crucial for the regulation of meiosis.

Using a high-throughput functional genomic screen, Thathiah et al.
(2009) identified GPR3, a constitutively active G protein-coupled
receptor, as a modulator of amyloid-beta (see 104760) production.
Overexpression of GPR3 stimulated amyloid-beta production, whereas
genetic ablation of GPR3 prevented accumulation of the amyloid-beta
peptide in vitro and in an Alzheimer disease (see 104300) mouse model.
GPR3 expression led to increased formation and cell surface localization
of the mature gamma-secretase complex in the absence of an effect on
Notch (see 190198) processing. GPR3 is highly expressed in areas of the
normal human brain implicated in Alzheimer disease (Iismaa et al., 1994)
and is elevated in the sporadic Alzheimer disease brain (Thathiah et
al., 2009), which provides support for the involvement of GPR3 in
Alzheimer disease.

GENE STRUCTURE

Iismaa et al. (1994) showed that the GPR3 gene is intronless within the
coding region, containing at least 1 intron in the 5-prime untranslated
region.

Song et al. (1995) found that this receptor protein of 330 amino acids
is encoded by a single exon.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Marchese et al. (1994) localized the GPR3 gene to chromosome
1p36.1-p35. Iismaa et al. (1994) mapped the GPR3 gene to chromosome
1p34.3 by FISH. Using FISH, Song et al. (1995) assigned the GPR3 gene to
chromosome 1p36.1-p34.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

In Gpr3-null mice, Ledent et al. (2005) observed progressive reduction
in litter size despite a stable, age-independent alteration of the
meiotic pause, characterized by premature resumption of meiosis in about
one-third of antral follicles in Gpr3 -/- females regardless of age.
Aging Gpr3-null mice had severe reduction of fertility, manifested by an
increasing number of nondeveloping early embryos upon spontaneous
ovulation and massive amounts of fragmented oocytes after
superovulation. Ledent et al. (2005) concluded that GPR3 plays a role in
the protection or rescue of oocytes from aging.

REFERENCE 1. Eggerickx, D.; Denef, J.-F.; Labbe, O.; Hayashi, Y.; Refetoff,
S.; Vassart, G.; Parmentier, M.; Libert, F.: Molecular cloning of
an orphan G-protein-coupled receptor that constitutively activates
adenylate cyclase. Biochem. J. 309: 837-843, 1995.

2. Iismaa, T. P.; Kiefer, J.; Liu, M. L.; Baker, E.; Sutherland, G.
R.; Shine, J.: Isolation and chromosomal localization of a novel
human G-protein-coupled receptor (GPR3) expressed predominantly in
the central nervous system. Genomics 24: 391-394, 1994.

3. Ledent, C.; Demeestere, I.; Blum, D.; Petermans, J.; Hamalainen,
T.; Smits, G.; Vassart, G.: Premature ovarian aging in mice deficient
for Gpr3. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 8922-8926, 2005.

4. Marchese, A.; Docherty, J. M.; Nguyen, T.; Heiber, M.; Cheng, R.;
Heng, H. H. Q.; Tsui, L.-C.; Shi, X.; George, S. R.; O'Dowd, B. F.
: Cloning of human genes encoding novel G protein-coupled receptors. Genomics 23:
609-618, 1994.

5. Mehlmann, L. M.; Saeki, Y.; Tanaka, S.; Brennan, T. J.; Evsikov,
A. V.; Pendola, F. L.; Knowles, B. B.; Eppig, J. J.; Jaffe, L. A.
: The G(S)-linked receptor GPR3 maintains meiotic arrest in mammalian
oocytes. Science 306: 1947-1950, 2004.

6. Song, Z.-H.; Modi, W.; Bonner, T. I.: Molecular cloning and chromosomal
localization of human genes encoding three closely related G protein-coupled
receptors. Genomics 28: 347-349, 1995.

7. Thathiah, A.; Spittaels, K.; Hoffmann, M.; Staes, M.; Cohen, A.;
Horre, K.; Vanbrabant, M.; Coun, F.; Baekelandt, V.; Delacourte, A.;
Fischer, D. F.; Pollet, D.; De Strooper, B.; Merchiers, P.: The orphan
G protein-coupled receptor 3 modulates amyloid-beta peptide generation
in neurons. Science 323: 946-951, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/23/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/11/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/28/2004
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 2/20/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/13/1994

EDITED alopez: 02/25/2009
terry: 2/23/2009
wwang: 7/19/2005
terry: 7/11/2005
tkritzer: 1/3/2005
terry: 12/28/2004
dholmes: 2/20/1998
mark: 8/25/1995
carol: 1/9/1995
carol: 12/13/1994

602981	TITLE *602981 AE-BINDING PROTEIN 1; AEBP1
;;AORTIC CARBOXYPEPTIDASE-LIKE PROTEIN; ACLP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Vascular smooth muscle cells originate from diverse cell types during
embryonic development and acquire different phenotypes in disease
states. The interactions of these cells with the extracellular matrix
(ECM) are important in governing these processes. By screening a human
aortic smooth muscle cell expression library for proteins that interact
with the E47 product of E2A (TCF3; 147141), Layne et al. (1998) isolated
a full-length cDNA encoding ACLP. The deduced 1,158-amino acid ACLP
protein contains a putative signal peptide; an 11-residue lys/pro-rich
motif repeated 4 times in the N terminus; a domain with 30% identity to
the slime mold adhesion protein discoidin I; and a C-terminal 500-amino
acid domain with 39% identity to carboxypeptidase E (CPE; 114855).
Northern blot analysis detected a 4.0-kb ACLP transcript. Immunoblot
analysis showed expression of a 175-kD ACLP protein. Western blot
analysis and in situ hybridization established that expression of ACLP
is largely restricted to aorta, particularly to smooth muscle cells.
Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated perinuclear staining in mouse
aortic smooth muscle cells.

GENE FUNCTION

By purification of aortic smooth muscle cells from day-18.5 mouse
embryos, followed by immunoblot analysis, Layne et al. (2001) showed
that Aclp is a secreted protein that associates with the ECM, as
predicted from its primary structure. Immunohistochemistry of day-15.5
mouse embryos revealed wide expression of Aclp in vascular smooth muscle
cells, in bony and cartilaginous skeleton (skull, vertebrae, and ribs),
in the basement membrane of lung airways, and in the dermis.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Layne et al. (2001) determined that the
mouse Aclp gene contains 21 exons.

ANIMAL MODEL

By homologous recombination, Layne et al. (2001) generated Aclp -/-
mice. Although heterozygotes were phenotypically normal, most Aclp -/-
mice succumbed around the time of birth with gastroschisis, an extrusion
of the abdominal viscera through the ventral body wall. Gastoschisis
appeared as early as day 13.5. Many dead neonates were pale and had
missing abdominal organs, such as liver and intestine. Aclp -/- mice
that survived to adulthood had large, nonhealing skin lesions, deficient
wound repair, and poor fibroblast proliferation. Layne et al. (2001)
concluded that ACLP has important roles in both embryonic development
and adult tissue repair.

HISTORY

Layne et al. (1998) found that the C terminus of ACLP is highly
homologous to AEBP1, which was originally identified in mouse by He et
al. (1995) as a factor that specifically binds AE1 and acts as a
repressor of aP2 gene (600434) expression. Aebp1 contains a region that
is 40% identical to the regulatory carboxypeptidases CPH/E, CPN
(212070), and CPM (114860). He et al. (1995) found that CP activity was
important for the transcriptional repression activity of Aebp1 and
suggested that Aebp1 regulates transcription by cleavage of factors
involved in transcription. Ohno et al. (1996) identified human AEBP1 as
a gene whose cDNAs were found exclusively in osteoblast and adipose
tissue libraries. The predicted 845-amino acid human AEBP1 protein is
95% identical to mouse Aebp1 except for an additional 105 amino acids in
the N terminus of the human protein. This N-terminal extension contains
a nuclear targeting signal. Northern blot analysis of various human
tissues detected a 3-kb AEBP1 mRNA only in osteoblasts and adipose
tissues.

Song and Fricker (1997), however, reported that AEBP1 has no
carboxypeptidase activity; in contrast, CPZ (603105), CPE, and CPD
(603102) were found to have modest or abundant activity. Layne et al.
(1998) determined that the Aebp1 sequence described by He et al. (1995)
lacks a G residue 11 bases 5-prime of the proposed start codon and is
likely an incomplete clone of mouse Aclp. Northern blot analysis, even
with Aepb1-derived probes, detected a single 4.0-kb transcript, which is
consistent with the size of the human and mouse ACLP cDNAs. Furthermore,
Layne (2001) stated that they have never detected nuclear localization
of ACLP, nor have they detected any ACLP splice variants that might
account for the discrepant data, suggesting that the human sequence
reported by Ohno et al. (1996) is also a truncated clone.

REFERENCE 1. He, G.-P.; Muise, A.; Li, A. W.; Ro, H.-S.: A eukaryotic transcriptional
repressor with carboxypeptidase activity. Nature 378: 92-96, 1995.

2. Layne, M.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/6/2001.

3. Layne, M. D.; Endege, W. O.; Jain, M. K.; Yet, S.-F.; Hsieh, C.-M.;
Chin, M. T.; Perrella, M. A.; Blanar, M. A.; Haber, E.; Lee, M.-E.
: Aortic carboxypeptidase-like protein, a novel protein with discoidin
and carboxypeptidase-like domains, is up-regulated during vascular
smooth muscle cell differentiation. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 15654-15660,
1998.

4. Layne, M. D.; Yet, S.-F.; Maemura, K.; Hsieh, C.-M.; Bernfield,
M.; Perrella, M. A.; Lee, M.-E.: Impaired abdominal wall development
and deficient wound healing in mice lacking aortic carboxypeptidase-like
protein. Molec. Cell. Biol. 21: 5256-5261, 2001.

5. Ohno, I.; Hashimoto, J.; Shimizu, K.; Takaoka, K.; Ochi, T.; Matsubara,
K.; Okubo, K.: A cDNA cloning of human AEBP1 from primary cultured
osteoblasts and its expression in a differentiating osteoblastic cell
line. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 228: 411-414, 1996.

6. Song, L.; Fricker, L. D.: Cloning and expression of human carboxypeptidase
Z, a novel metallocarboxypeptidase. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 10543-10550,
1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/26/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/18/1998

EDITED mgross: 07/26/2001
mgross: 7/26/2001
alopez: 8/18/1998

602525	TITLE *602525 PYRUVATE DEHYDROGENASE KINASE, ISOENZYME 2; PDK2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PDK2 belongs to the family of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) kinases (EC
2.7.11.2), which reversibly inactivate the mitochondrial PDH complex by
ATP-dependent serine phosphorylation of the alpha subunit of the
complex's E1 component (see 300502) (summary by Korotchkina and Patel,
2001).

CLONING

By screening a human liver cDNA library with rat Pdk2, Gudi et al.
(1995) cloned PDK2. The deduced 407-amino acid protein, with a
calculated molecular mass of 46.2 kD, has a putative mitochondrial
protein kinase catalytic domain with 5 characteristic subdomains. The
human and rat proteins share 96% identity. Northern blot analysis
detected variable expression of a 2.4-kb PDK2 transcript in all 8 human
tissues examined, with highest expression in heart, followed by skeletal
muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Gudi et al. (1995) noted that the products of the PDH reaction stimulate
the kinase activity of PDKs, whereas the substrates are inhibitory. ADP
also acts synergistically with pyruvate to inhibit PDK kinase activity.
Using kinase-depleted PDH complexes isolated from rat heart as
substrate, Gudi et al. (1995) found that recombinant human PDK1
(602524), PDK2, and PDK3 (602526) inactivated PDH in an ATP-dependent
manner. PDK3 showed the highest kinase activity, and PDK2 the lowest.
However, the products of the PDH reaction, NADH and acetyl-CoA,
increased the ability of PDK2 to inhibit PDH.

Baker et al. (2000) found that the E2 subunit of PDH (DLAT; 608770), and
the isolated second N-terminal lipoyl (L2) domain of E2, differentially
enhanced the rates at which recombinant human PDK2 and PDK3
phosphorylated E1. There was little direct activation of PDK2 by the
free L2 domain, but the E2 60mer, which forms the core structure of the
PDH complex, enhanced PDK2 activity by 10-fold. PDK3 was activated
17-fold by E2; the majority of this activation was facilitated by the
free L2 domain. PDK2 and PDK3 also differed in their inhibition by
pyruvate, ADP, dichloroacetic acid, and acetylated lipoyl groups,
activation by NADH and acetyl-CoA, and combined effect of mixed
inhibitors and activators.

Each of the 2 E1 alpha subunits of PDH contains 3 serines that are
phosphorylated by PDKs. Using recombinant enzymes expressed in E. coli
and double site mutants of human E1, Korotchkina and Patel (2001) found
that rat Pdk1, Pdk2, and Pdk4 (602527), and human PDK3, showed unique
specificity and activity toward each of these serines. Only Pdk1 had
detectable activity with site 3, which the authors called ser203. Each
kinase also showed unique activity in the presence or absence of E2 in
complex with its binding partner E3BP (PDHX; 608769), and unique
sensitivity to the redox and/or acetylation state of the lipoyl moieties
of E2, and the buffer system employed.

Boulatnikov and Popov (2003) found that rat Pdk1 and Pdk2 could form
homodimers when expressed singly, or heterodimers when expressed
together, in E. coli. The heterodimeric kinase was catalytically active,
with kinetic parameters, site specificity, and regulation clearly
distinct from those of homodimeric Pdk1 or Pdk2. The Pdk1-Pdk2
heterodimers catalyzed phosphorylation of E1 site 3 serine, in addition
to sites 1 and 2 serines. Homodimers of Pdk1 or Pdk2 and the Pdk1-Pdk2
heterodimer also readily bound the isolated E2 component of PDH as well
as the E2-E3BP subcomplex. Interactions were strengthened by the
presence of the lipoate prosthetic groups in E2.

The nuclear peroxisome proliferator-activator receptors (PPARs; see
PPARA, 170990) are critical regulators of fatty acid oxidation. Using
quantitative real-time PCR, Degenhardt et al. (2007) found that
expression of PDK2, PDK3, and PDK4, but not PDK1, was induced by
PPAR-beta/delta (PPARD; 600409) agonists. In mice, induction of
PPAR-beta/delta increased renal expression of Pdk2 and Pdk4, but not
Pdk1 or Pdk3. In both human and mouse cells, PDK4 showed strongest
induction by PPAR-beta/delta ligands. Ligands for other PPAR subtypes
showed weaker regulation of PDK gene expression. In silico analysis,
chromatin immunoprecipitation, and Western blot analysis revealed that
PPAR-beta/delta bound regulatory elements in the PDK2, PDK3, and PDK4
genes, but not the PDK1 gene, and activated transcription in association
with its regulatory partners RXR-alpha (RXRA; 180245), PGC1-alpha
(PPARGC1A; 604517), and TRAP220 (MED1; 604311), and phosphorylated RNA
polymerase II (see POLR2A, 180660). Degenhardt et al. (2007) also found
that fibroblasts from Ppard-null mice showed reduced expression of Pdk2,
Pdk3, and Pdk4 compared with wildtype fibroblasts. Expression of Pdk4
was reduced 1200-fold. Degenhardt et al. (2007) concluded that PDK2,
PDK3, and PDK4 genes are primary PPAR targets and that PPAR-beta/delta
is a major regulator of PDK4 expression.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the PDK2 gene to chromosome 17q21.33 based on an
alignment of the PDK2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK055119) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Baker, J. C.; Yan, X.; Peng, T.; Kasten, S.; Roche, T. E.: Marked
differences between two isoforms of human pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase. J.
Biol. Chem. 275: 15773-15781, 2000.

2. Boulatnikov, I.; Popov, K. M.: Formation of functional heterodimers
by isozymes 1 and 2 of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1645: 183-192, 2003.

3. Degenhardt, T.; Saramaki, A.; Malinen, M.; Rieck, M.; Vaisanen,
S.; Huotari, A.; Herzig, K.-H.; Muller, R.; Carlberg, C.: Three members
of the human pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase gene family are direct
targets of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor beta/delta. J.
Molec. Biol. 372: 341-355, 2007.

4. Gudi, R.; Bowker-Kinley, M. M.; Kedishvili, N. Y.; Zhao, Y.; Popov,
K. M.: Diversity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase gene family
in humans. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 28989-28994, 1995. Note: Erratum:
J. Biol. Chem. 271: 1250 only, 1996.

5. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/9/2013.

6. Korotchkina, L. G.; Patel, M. S.: Site specificity of four pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase isoenzymes toward the three phosphorylation sites
of human pyruvate dehydrogenase. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 37223-37229,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 08/20/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2013

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 4/16/1998

EDITED alopez: 08/20/2013
mgross: 8/9/2013
terry: 3/28/2013
alopez: 4/16/1998

300292	TITLE *300292 FORKHEAD BOX P3; FOXP3
;;SCURFIN;;
JM2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

FOXP3, a member of the fork-winged helix family of transcription
factors, plays an important role in the development and function of
naturally occurring CD4 (186940)-positive/CD25 (IL2RA; 147730)-positive
T regulatory cells (Tregs). Tregs are involved in active suppression of
inappropriate immune responses (summary by Ricciardelli et al., 2008).

CLONING

By combining high-resolution genetic and physical mapping with
large-scale sequence analysis, Brunkow et al. (2001) identified the gene
defective in 'scurfy' (sf) mice (see ANIMAL MODEL). The protein encoded
by this gene, designated Foxp3, is a member of the forkhead/winged-helix
family of transcriptional regulators and is highly conserved in humans.
In sf mice, a frameshift mutation results in a product lacking the
forkhead domain. Genetic complementation demonstrated that the protein
product of Foxp3, scurfin, is essential for normal immune homeostasis.

Brunkow et al. (2001) compared the amino acid sequences of mouse and
human scurfin with other members of the forkhead/winged-helix/HNF3
family of proteins and found the strongest similarity to the sequence of
glutamine-rich factor-1 (FOXP1; 605515).

Chatila et al. (2000) stated that the human FOXP3 open reading frame of
1,146 bp encodes a deduced 381-amino acid protein. By PCR of a human
peripheral blood mononuclear cell cDNA library, Smith et al. (2006)
cloned full-length FOXP3 and splice variants lacking exon 2 and both
exons 2 and 7. The full-length protein contains 431 amino acids. The
variant lacking exon 2 encodes a 396-amino acid protein lacking part of
the proline-rich domain, and the variant lacking exons 2 and 7 encodes a
369-amino acid protein that also lacks a large part of the putative
leucine zipper. Smith et al. (2006) noted that mice appear to lack Foxp3
variants.

GENE STRUCTURE

Brunkow et al. (2001) determined that the mouse and human FOXP3 genes
contain 11 coding exons. Exon-intron boundaries are identical across the
coding regions of the mouse and human genes.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Chatila et al. (2000) mapped the FOXP3
gene to chromosome Xp11.23.

GENE FUNCTION

Due to similarities between the autoimmunity and inflammation produced
by manipulation of CD25-positive/CD4-positive regulatory T (Tr, or Treg)
cells and those induced by genetic defects in the FOXP3 gene, Hori et
al. (2003) investigated the contribution of Foxp3 to the development
and/or function of Tr cells in mice. RT-PCR analysis of normal mice
showed stable, constitutive expression of Foxp3 that was high in Tr
cells, low in CD4-positive/CD25-negative cells, and absent in
CD4-negative/CD8 (see CD8A; 186910)-positive T cells. Transduced
expression of Foxp3 in CD4-positive/CD25-negative cells imparted a Tr
phenotype in these cells, with low levels of cytokine expression,
compared with nontransduced or vector-only transduced cells, and high
levels of CD103 (604682), GITR (TNFRSF18; 603905), and CTLA4 (123890).
Transduced cells also showed cell-cell contact suppressive activity in
vitro, as well as suppression of autoimmunity and inflammation in vivo.
Hori et al. (2003) proposed that FOXP3 may be a master regulatory gene
and a more specific marker of Tr cells than other cell surface
molecules. They also suggested that FOXP3 transduction could be a
therapeutic mode for the treatment of inflammatory diseases.

Stock et al. (2004) described a type of antigen-specific Tr cell that
developed in vivo from naive CD4-positive/CD25-negative T cells during a
Th1 polarized immune response. These Tr cells were induced by
CD8A-positive dendritic cells, produced both IFNG (147570) and IL10
(124092), and expressed the Th1 'master transcription factor' TBET
(TBX21; 604895), as well as ICOS (604558) and FOXP3. The cells inhibited
allergen-induced airway hyperreactivity in an IL10-dependent manner in
mice. Stock et al. (2004) concluded that these adaptive Tr cells are
related to, but distinct from, Th1 cells. They proposed that a spectrum
of adaptive Tr cell types exists, comprising Th1-like cells and the
previously reported Th2-like cells that are induced by CD8A-negative
dendritic cells and express the Th2 'master transcription factor' GATA3
(131320) and FOXP3.

Using a bicistronic reporter expressing red fluorescent protein knocked
in to the endogenous mouse Foxp3 locus, Wan and Flavell (2005)
demonstrated that Foxp3 was expressed predominantly in
CD4-positive/CD25-positive T cells, but also in some other CD4-positive
T-cell subsets. Stimulation of activated CD4 T cells with TGFB induced
both Foxp3 expression and suppressor T-cell function.

FOXP1, FOXP2 (605317), and FOXP3 all bind the FOX-binding site within
the IL2 (147680) promoter, and all but FOXP2 suppress IL2 promoter
activity. However, Bettelli et al. (2005) found that forced expression
of FOXP3, but not FOXP1 or FOXP2, in naive T cells suppressed not only
IL2, but also IL4 (147780) and IFNG due to its ability to physically
associate with and inhibit the cytokine gene transactivators NFKB (see
164011) and NFAT (see 600490). T cells derived from Foxp3-deficient
scurfy mice had significantly increased Nfat and Nfkb expression, which
could be lowered to physiologic levels by FOXP3 gene complementation.
Transduction of myelin proteolipid protein (PLP1; 300401)-specific
autoreactive mouse T cells with FOXP3 eliminated their ability to
mediate experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Bettelli et al.
(2005) concluded that, in addition to being associated with generation
of CD4-positive/CD25-positive regulatory T cells, FOXP3 acts on mature T
cells by repressing NFAT and NFKB.

Allan et al. (2005) found that, in contrast with results in mouse,
overexpression of human FOXP3 alone or together with a splice variant
lacking exon 2 in CD4-positive/CD25-positive regulatory T cells resulted
in lower proliferation and IL2 production, but no increase in
suppressive activity. Allan et al. (2005) suggested that factors in
addition to FOXP3 are required for development of regulatory T cells.

Copolymer I (COP-I) is a random polymer of 4 amino acids (glu, lys, ala,
and tyr) enriched in myelin basic protein (MBP; 159430) that is used to
treat multiple sclerosis (MS; see 126200). Hong et al. (2005) found that
COP-I increased expression of FOXP3 in peripheral blood CD4-positive T
cells of MS patients and induced conversion of
CD4-positive/CD25-negative cells to CD4-positive/CD25-positive
regulatory T cells. Induction of FOXP3 in CD4-positive T cells was
mediated by IFNG. Mice lacking Ifng exhibited an increase in
Cd4-positive/Cd25-positive cells after COP-I treatment, but these cells
did not express Foxp3. Hong et al. (2005) concluded that COP-I-mediated
activation of FOXP3 expression and conversion of
CD4-positive/CD25-negative cells to CD4-positive/CD25-positive
regulatory T cells requires IFNG.

Smith et al. (2006) found that overexpression of full-length FOXP3 or of
the FOXP3 variants lacking exon 2 or both exons 2 and 7 reduced
CD4-positive T-cell proliferation and cytokine secretion.

Pennington et al. (2006) showed that without any obvious effect on T
cell receptor-mediated selection, the normal differentiation of mouse
gamma-delta T cells into potent cytolytic and interferon-gamma-secreting
effector cells is switched towards an aggregate regulatory phenotype by
limiting the capacity of CD4+/CD8+ T cell progenitors to influence in
trans early gamma-delta cell progenitors. Unexpectedly, Pennington et
al. (2006) found that the propensity of early T cell receptor
alpha-beta(+) progenitors to differentiate into Foxp3+ regulatory T
cells is also regulated in trans by CD4+/CD8+ T-cell progenitor cells,
before agonist selection.

Ono et al. (2007) demonstrated that the transcription factor AML1/RUNX1
(151385), which is crucially required for normal hematopoiesis including
thymic T cell development, activates IL2 and IFN-gamma gene expression
in conventional CD4+ T cells through binding to their respective
promoters. In natural Treg cells, FOXP3 interacts physically with AML1.
Several lines of evidence supported a model in which the interaction
suppresses IL2 and IFN-gamma production, upregulates Treg
cell-associated molecules, and exerts suppressive activity. Ono et al.
(2007) concluded that this transcriptional control of Treg cell function
by an interaction between FOXP3 and AML1 can be exploited to control
physiologic and pathologic T cell-mediated immune responses.

Marson et al. (2007) identified FOXP3 target genes and reported that
many of these are key modulators of T cell activation and function.
Remarkably, the predominant, although not exclusive, effect of FOXP3
occupancy is to suppress the activation of target genes on T cell
stimulation. FOXP3 suppression of its targets appears to be crucial for
the normal function of regulatory T cells, because overactive variants
of some target genes are known to be associated with autoimmune disease.

Zheng et al. (2007) used genomewide analysis combining chromatin
immunoprecipitation with mouse genome tiling array profiling to identify
Foxp3 binding regions for approximately 700 genes and for an
intergenically encoded microRNA. The authors found that a large number
of Foxp3-bound genes are up- or downregulated in Foxp3+ T cells,
suggesting that Foxp3 acts as both a transcriptional activator and
repressor. Foxp3-mediated regulation unique to the thymus affects, among
others, genes encoding nuclear factors that control gene expression and
chromatin remodeling. In contrast, Foxp3 target genes shared by the
thymic and peripheral regulatory T cells encode primarily plasma
membrane proteins, as well as cell signaling proteins. Zheng et al.
(2007) concluded that distinct transcriptional subprograms implemented
by Foxp3 establish regulatory T cell lineage during differentiation and
its proliferative and functional competence in the periphery.

Zuo et al. (2007) observed that female mice heterozygous for the scurfin
mutation developed cancer at a high rate. The majority of cancers were
mammary carcinomas in which the wildtype Foxp3 allele was inactivated
and Erbb2 (164870) was overexpressed. Zuo et al. (2007) found that Foxp3
repressed transcription of the Erbb2 gene via interaction with forkhead
DNA-binding motifs in the Erbb2 promoter. FOXP3 expression was reduced
in 10 human tumor cell lines compared with normal mammary epithelial
cells and a nonmalignant cell line, and none of the tumor cell lines
expressed full-length FOXP3 transcripts.

Zuo et al. (2007) found that mouse mammary carcinomas heterozygous for a
Foxp3 mutation exhibited increased Skp2 (601436) expression.
Downregulation of FOXP3 by small interfering RNA in human mammary
epithelial cells led to increased SKP2 expression. Reporter gene assays
revealed that mouse Foxp3 directly interacted with and repressed the
Skp2 promoter. Analysis of more than 200 primary breast cancer samples
revealed an inverse correlation between FOXP3 and SKP2 levels. Zuo et
al. (2007) concluded that FOXP3 is an SKP2 transcriptional repressor.

Using immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence microscopy, and RT-PCR,
Ricciardelli et al. (2008) showed that children with Crohn disease
(266600) treated with infliximab, an anti-TNF (191160) antibody, had
increased FOXP3-positive Tregs in their mucosa after treatment. Before
treatment, FOXP3-positive T cells were reduced compared with controls.
Ricciardelli et al. (2008) concluded that infliximab not only
neutralizes soluble TNF, but also affects the activation and possibly
the expansion of mucosal Tregs.

Zheng et al. (2009) showed that in mouse T regulatory cells, high
amounts of interferon regulatory factor-4 (IRF4; 601900), a
transcription factor essential for TH2 effector cell differentiation, is
dependent on Foxp3 expression. They proposed that IRF4 expression endows
T regulatory cells with the ability to suppress TH2 responses. Indeed,
ablation of a conditional Irf4 allele in T regulatory cells resulted in
selective dysregulation of TH2 responses, IL4-dependent immunoglobulin
isotype production, and tissue lesions with pronounced plasma cell
infiltration, in contrast to the mononuclear cell-dominated pathology
typical of mice lacking T regulatory cells. Zheng et al. (2009)
concluded that T regulatory cells use components of the transcriptional
machinery, promoting a particular type of effector CD4+ T cell
differentiation, to efficiently restrain the corresponding type of the
immune response.

Tsuji et al. (2009) demonstrated that suppressive Foxp3+CD4+ T cells can
differentiate into follicular B helper T cells (T-FH) in mouse Peyer
patches. The conversion of Foxp3+ T cells into T-FH cells requires the
loss of Foxp3 expression and subsequent interaction with B cells. Thus,
Tsuji et al. (2009) concluded that environmental cues present in gut
Peyer patches promote the selective differentiation of distinct helper T
cell subsets, such as T-FH cells.

Feuerer et al. (2009) examined Treg cells in mouse abdominal adipose
tissue and found that more than half of the CD4(+) T cells expressed
Foxp3, a much higher fraction than normally seen even in subcutaneous
fat; and there was progressive accumulation of CD4(+)/Foxp3(+) Treg
cells over time in the visceral, but not the subcutaneous, depot.
Comparison of the documented Treg cell signature with that of Treg cells
from abdominal fat revealed that many of the signature Treg cell genes
were not significantly up- or downregulated in the corresponding
population from visceral fat. This unique population of Treg cells was
specifically reduced in abdominal fat in insulin-resistant mouse models
of obesity, and loss- and gain-of-function experiments revealed that
these Treg cells influenced the inflammatory state of adipose tissue
and, therefore, insulin resistance. Cytokines differentially synthesized
by fat-resident Treg and conventional T cells directly affected the
synthesis of inflammatory mediators and glucose uptake by cultured
adipocytes. Analysis of paired frozen omental and subcutaneous fat
tissues from individuals with body mass indices (BMIs) in the obese to
morbidly obese range showed a correlation between BMI and the drop in
Treg cells in omental versus subcutaneous fat. Feuerer et al. (2009)
concluded that CD4(+)/FOXP3(+) Treg cells play a role in metabolic
homeostasis and in its dysregulation in obesity.

Pan et al. (2009) identified Eos (606239), a zinc finger transcription
factor of the Ikaros family, as a critical mediator of FOXP3-dependent
gene silencing in Tregs. Eos interacted directly with FOXP3 and induced
chromatin modifications that resulted in gene silencing in Tregs. Pan et
al. (2009) found that silencing of Eos in Tregs abrogated their ability
to suppress immune responses and endowed them with partial effector
function, thus demonstrating the critical role that Eos plays in Treg
programming.

FOXP3-positive Treg cells occasionally lose their suppressive phenotype
to perform a helper-like role without losing expression of FOXP3. Sharma
et al. (2013) showed that reprogramming of mouse Treg cells was
controlled by Il6 (147620)-dependent downregulation of Eos. Treatment of
Foxp3-positive Treg cells with cycloheximide showed that most retained
Eos expression (i.e., they were Eos-stable), whereas a Cd38
(107270)-positive subset rapidly lost Eos expression (i.e., they were
Eos-labile) with no change in Foxp3 expression. Thymic Treg cells from
Il6 -/- mice did not express Cd38 and did not have an Eos-labile subset.
Successful vaccination of naive mice required the
Cd38-positive/Eos-labile subset of Treg cells. However, immunodeficient
mice were fully protected from colitis by both Eos-stable and Eos-labile
Treg cells. Epigenetic analysis of spleen and thymus Treg cells revealed
significant differences in methylation between Eos-labile and Eos-stable
cells. Eos downregulation was prevented by tumor-induced Ido (147435).
Sharma et al. (2013) concluded that the Eos corepressor defines 2 sets
of FOXP3-positive Treg cells, one that is stably suppressive and the
other a labile one that is available in certain circumstances to provide
helper activity.

Using flow cytometric analysis, Casetti et al. (2009) demonstrated that,
like alpha-beta T cells, gamma-delta cells can also function as Tregs
that express FOXP3 when stimulated with phosphoantigen in the presence
of TGFB1 (190180) and IL15 (600554).

Zheng et al. (2010) described the function of 3 Foxp3 conserved
noncoding DNA sequence (CNS) elements termed CNS1-3 in T regulatory cell
fate determination in mice. The pioneer element CNS3, which acts to
potently increase the frequency of T regulatory cells generated in the
thymus and the periphery, binds c-Rel (164910) in in vitro assays. In
contrast, CNS1, which contains a TGF-beta (190180)-NFAT (see 600489)
response element, is superfluous for thymic T regulatory cell
differentiation, but has a prominent role in periphery T regulatory cell
generation in gut-associated lymphoid tissues. CNS2, although
dispensable for Foxp3 induction, is required for Foxp3 expression in the
progeny of dividing T regulatory cells. Foxp3 binds to CNS2 in a
Cbf-beta (121360)-Runx1 (151385) and CpG DNA demethylation-dependent
manner, suggesting that FOXP3 recruitment to this cellular memory module
facilitates the heritable maintenance of the active state of the FOXP3
locus and, therefore, T regulatory lineage stability. Zheng et al.
(2010) concluded that their studies demonstrated that the composition,
size, and maintenance of the T regulatory cell population are controlled
by Foxp3 CNS elements engaged in response to distinct cell-extrinsic or
-intrinsic cues.

Human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV)-1 is a persistent retrovirus estimated
to infect 10 to 20 million people. The majority of infected individuals
are asymptomatic carriers, but 1 to 3% of infected individuals develop
progressive inflammation of the central nervous system (see 159580), and
about 4% of seropositive individuals develop a malignant
lymphoproliferative disorder called adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma
(ATLL). Toulza et al. (2010) found that there was a high concentration
of plasma CCL22 (602957) in HTLV-1-infected individuals and that the
concentration was strongly correlated with the frequency of
FOXP3-positive cells, which express the CCL22 receptor CCR4 (604836).
CCL22 was produced by cells that expressed the HTLV-1 transactivator
protein Tax, and the increased CCL22 enhanced the migration and survival
of FOXP3-positive cells in vitro. Toulza et al. (2010) concluded that
HTLV-1-induced CCL22 causes the high frequency of FOXP3-positive cells
observed in HTLV-1 infection and that FOXP3-positive cells may both
retard the progression of ATLL and HTLV-1-associated inflammatory
diseases and contribute to the immune suppression seen in HTLV-1
infection.

Using RT-PCR and flow cytometric analysis, Miura et al. (2004) showed
that the cytokine storm associated with graft-versus-host disease (GVHD;
see 614395) correlated with decreased FOXP3 expression in mononuclear
cells of bone marrow transplant patients. FOXP3 expression was higher in
patients without GVHD. FOXP3 expression positively correlated with the
presence of recent thymic emigrants. Miura et al. (2004) suggested that
defective thymic function contributes to the impaired reconstitution of
immune regulatory mechanisms after transplantation, and that decreased
regulatory mechanisms provide an environment that permits development of
GVHD.

Using flow cytometric analysis to identify Treg frequencies in 32 blood
donors with acute West Nile virus (WNV; see 610379) infection, Lanteri
et al. (2009) demonstrated that CD4-positive/FOXP3-positive Treg
frequencies increased in all individuals in the 3 months after the index
donation that revealed WNV RNA in plasma. However, symptomatic donors
exhibited lower Treg frequencies up to 1 year after index donation
without showing systemic T-cell or generalized inflammatory responses.
Studies in WNV-infected mice showed that symptomatic mice displayed
lower Treg frequencies than asymptomatic mice. Moreover, mice lacking
Foxp3-positive Tregs experienced increased lethality following WNV
infection compared with controls. Lanteri et al. (2009) concluded that
higher levels of peripheral Tregs after infection protect against severe
WNV disease in immunocompetent animals and humans.

Liu et al. (2010) reported that the SUMO E3 ligase PIAS1 (603566)
restricts the differentiation of natural T regulatory cells by
maintaining a repressive chromatin state of the FOXP3 promoter. PIAS1
acts by binding to the FOXP3 promoter to recruit DNA methyltransferases
and heterochromatin protein-1 (CBX5; 604478) for epigenetic
modifications. PIAS1 deletion caused promoter demethylation, reduced
histone H3 methylation (see 602810) at lys9, and enhanced promoter
accessibility. Consistently, Pias1-null mice displayed an increased
natural T regulatory cell population and were resistant to the
development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Liu et al.
(2010) concluded that their studies identified an epigenetic mechanism
that negatively regulates the differentiation of natural T regulatory
cells.

Although the mammalian immune system is generally thought to develop in
a linear fashion, findings in avian and murine species argued instead
for the developmentally ordered appearance (or 'layering') of distinct
HSCs that give rise to distinct lymphocyte lineages at different stages
of development. Mold et al. (2010) provided evidence of an analogous
layered immune system in humans. Mold et al. (2010) investigated whether
fetal and adult HSPCs might differ in their capacity to generate Tregs
in the thymus, because fetal T cells appear to be predisposed to
generating Foxp3+ Tregs upon stimulation in vitro, and there is an
abundance of Tregs in the peripheral tissues of midgestation fetuses.
Both fetal liver- and fetal bone marrow-derived HSPCs were found to
generate populations of CD25+Foxp3+ SP4 thymocytes. Thus it appeared
that fetal HSPCs display a heightened capacity to generate Tregs during
thymic maturation. Mold et al. (2010) provided evidence that the fetal T
cell lineage is biased toward immune tolerance. They concluded that
their observations offered a mechanistic explanation for the tolerogenic
properties of the developing fetus and for variable degrees of immune
responsiveness at birth.

Using predominantly wildtype and Hif1a (603348)-/- mouse T cells, Dang
et al. (2011) showed that Hif1a was specifically required for
differentiation of naive T cells into interleukin-17 (IL17;
603149)-expressing helper T (Th) cells. Hif1a interacted directly with
Ror-gamma-t (RORC; 602943) and acetyltransferase p300 (EP300; 602700) at
the Il17 promoter, and all 3 factors were required for optimum Il17
expression. Simultaneously, Hif1a downregulated differentiation of naive
T cells into Treg cells by directing proteasomal degradation of Foxp3 by
a mechanism that was independent of Hif1a transcriptional activity.
Differentiation of Th17 cells and loss of Treg cells was enhanced in
cultures subjected to hypoxic conditions. Knockout of Hif1a in mouse T
cells rendered mice highly resistant to Mog (159465)-induced
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a mouse model of multiple
sclerosis. Dang et al. (2011) concluded that HIF1A has a role in immune
responses by controlling the balance between Th17 and Treg cells.

Pregnancy is an intricately orchestrated process where immune effector
cells with fetal specificity are selectively silenced. This requires the
sustained expansion of immune-suppressive maternal FOXP3+ regulatory T
cells (Treg cells), because even transient partial ablation triggers
fetal-specific effector T-cell activation and pregnancy loss. Rowe et
al. (2012) showed that pregnancy selectively stimulates the accumulation
of maternal FOXP3+ CD4 cells with fetal specificity using tetramer-based
enrichment that allows the identification of rare endogenous T cells.
Interestingly, after delivery, fetal-specific Treg cells persist at
elevated levels, maintain tolerance to preexisting fetal antigen, and
rapidly reaccumulate during subsequent pregnancy. The accelerated
expansion of Treg cells during secondary pregnancy was driven almost
exclusively by proliferation of fetal-specific FOXP3+ cells retained
from prior pregnancy, whereas induced FOXP3 expression and proliferation
of preexisting FOXP3+ cells each contribute to Treg expansion during
primary pregnancy. Furthermore, fetal resorption in secondary compared
with primary pregnancy becomes more resilient to partial maternal FOXP3+
cell ablation. Thus, Rowe et al. (2012) concluded that pregnancy
imprints FOXP3+ CD4 cells that sustain protective regulatory memory to
fetal antigen.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Chatila et al. (2000), who referred to the FOXP3 gene as JM2, identified
it by the positional-candidate approach as the likely site of mutations
in the disorder they referred to as X-linked autoimmunity-allergic
dysregulation syndrome (XLAAD) and known by others as IPEX (304790).
Chatila et al. (2000) detected a mutation in the FOXP3 gene in 2
unrelated kindreds.

Wildin et al. (2001) sequenced the human FOXP3 gene to determine whether
the X-linked syndrome of immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, and
enteropathy (IPEX) is the human equivalent of the scurfy mouse. They
identified a novel mutation in each proband from 4 families with IPEX.
Each mutation affected the forkhead/winged-helix domain of the scurfin
protein, indicating that the mutations may disrupt critical DNA
interactions. In a fifth family studied by Wildin et al. (2001) in which
a variant form of IPEX mapped to the pericentromeric region of the X
chromosome, no mutation in the FOXP3 gene was found. A later age of
onset, waxing and waning clinical course, and occasional compatibility
with prolonged survival had been reported in this family (Powell et al.,
1982). This contrasted with the early, unrelenting course of the
disorder seen in the other families. Wildin et al. (2001) suggested that
this fifth family may harbor a noncoding FOXP3 mutation that affects
transcriptional regulation or RNA splicing, resulting in a milder,
environmentally dependent phenotype.

Bennett et al. (2001) also identified mutations in the FOXP3 gene in
IPEX patients. They compared the mutations in FOXP3 with those in FOXE1
(602617) which result in a thyroid agenesis syndrome, and with those in
FOXC1 (601090) which cause malformation of the anterior segment of the
eye (Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly).

Bassuny et al. (2003) investigated the FOXP3 gene as a candidate for the
type I diabetes susceptibility locus IDDMX (300136). They screened the
FOXP3 gene for microsatellite and single nucleotide polymorphisms and
performed an association study between the gene and type I diabetes in
the Japanese population. One microsatellite polymorphism, (GT)n, was
identified in intron 0, and a (GT)15 allele showed a significantly
higher frequency in patients with type I diabetes than in controls
(43.1% vs 32.6%, P = 0.0027). The evaluation of promoter/enhancer
activity of the (GT)n polymorphism was performed by dual luciferase
reporter assay. A significant difference in the enhancer activity
between (GT)15 and (GT)16 dinucleotide repeats was detected.

Owen et al. (2003) studied 2 kindreds (21 subjects total) with 4 male
infants (3 deceased) and 1 girl affected by IPEX. In 1 of the families
they found a novel frameshift mutation in the FOXP3 gene (300292.0008).
In the second family, the FOXP3 locus was excluded by recombination, and
no FOXP3 mutations were found. They concluded that their data provided
evidence for a nonlinked autosomal locus, suggesting genetic
heterogeneity.

Bacchetta et al. (2006) studied the phenotype and in vitro function of
CD4-positive T cells and CD4-positive/CD25(high) Treg cells in 4
children with IPEX. Flow cytometric analysis demonstrated that
distribution and expression of various T-cell markers was comparable
between patients and normal donor controls. Patient Treg cells showed
different degrees of suppressive activity depending on the FOXP3
mutation, but none of the patients cells could suppress autologous
responder cells. The defect was overcome after in vitro expansion of
Treg cells. Of the 4 IPEX patients, only 1, who had a mutation in codon
1 (300292.0012) that resulted in no protein expression, had impaired
transcription or translation of FOXP3. All patients had normal
proliferative responses after T-cell receptor (TCR) stimulation, but
they were unable to produce IL2 or IFNG. Bacchetta et al. (2006)
concluded that Treg cells can be present in normal numbers in IPEX
patients, but their capacity to suppress is impaired depending on the
type of mutation, the strength of TCR stimuli, and the genotype of the
effector T cells.

ANIMAL MODEL

'Scurfy' (sf) is an X-linked recessive mouse mutant that results in
lethality in hemizygous males 16 to 25 days after birth, and is
characterized by overproliferation of CD4+/CD8- T lymphocytes, extensive
multiorgan infiltration, and elevation of numerous cytokines (Lyon et
al., 1990; Clark et al., 1999). Similar to animals that lack expression
of either Ctla4 (123890) or Tgf-beta (TGFB1; 190180), the pathology
observed in sf mice seems to result from an inability to regulate
properly CD4+/CD8- T-cell activity. Brunkow et al. (2001) determined
that the Foxp3 gene is mutant in sf mice. A frameshift mutation results
in a product lacking the forkhead domain. Genetic complementation
demonstrated that the protein product of Foxp3, scurfin, is essential
for normal immune homeostasis.

In mice overexpressing the Foxp3 gene, Khattri et al. (2001) observed
fewer T cells. These remaining T cells had poor proliferative and
cytolytic responses and poor IL2 production, although thymic development
appeared normal. Histologic analysis showed that peripheral lymphoid
organs, particularly lymph nodes, were relatively acellular. Khattri et
al. (2001) concluded that excessive scurfin activity leads to a
hypoactive immune state, suggesting that scurfin acts as a central
regulator of T-cell activity.

By generating mice deficient in Foxp3, Fontenot et al. (2003) showed
that Foxp3 is required for the development of CD4-positive/CD25-positive
regulatory T cells. In addition, the IPEX-like lymphoproliferative
autoimmune syndrome observed in Foxp3 -/- mice resulted from a
deficiency in these regulatory T cells. The authors found that ectopic
expression of Foxp3 activated a suppressor function in
CD4-positive/CD25-negative T cells. Independently, Khattri et al. (2003)
and Hori et al. (2003) reached similar conclusions.

Wan and Flavell (2007) noted that individuals with graft-versus-host
disease, myasthenia gravis (see 254200), and multiple sclerosis have
decreased FOXP3 expression. They generated a mouse model in which
endogenous Foxp3 expression was attenuated in Tr cells. These mice were
born at a mendelian ratio. Heterozygous females were fertile and
phenotypically normal, but hemizygous males were barren and runted. Most
males developed scaly skin, and nearly all developed a blepharitis-like
condition. All mutant males died by 3 months of age due to an aggressive
lymphoproliferative autoimmune syndrome, including drastically increased
serum autoantibodies; however, thymic development was not affected. The
immune-suppressive activities of T cells with attenuated Foxp3
expression were nearly abolished in vitro and in vivo, whereas their in
vitro anergy was maintained, including preferential development into
Th2-type effector cells even in a Th1-polarizing environment. Wan and
Flavell (2007) concluded that decreased FOXP3 expression causes immune
disease by subverting the suppressive function of Tr cells and
converting Tr cells into effector cells.

Gavin et al. (2007) studied mouse T cells that actively transcribed a
Foxp3-null allele, but lacked Foxp3 protein. Using flow cytometric and
microarray analyses, they found that, although Foxp3 function was
required for Tr suppressor cell activity, Foxp3 largely amplified and
fixed preexisting molecular features of Tr cells. Furthermore, Foxp3
solidified Tr-cell lineage stability by modifying cell surface and
signaling molecules, including Foxp3-dependent repression of
phosphodiesterase-3b (PDE3B; 602047). Introduction of Pde3b into Tr
cells and transfer of these cells to T-cell-deficient mice substantially
reduced the number of Tr cells. Gavin et al. (2007) proposed that
reduced PDE3B expression may be a unique marker of Tr cells.

To determine whether dysfunction or a lack of Treg cells is
etiologically involved in pathogenesis of mouse scurfy and its human
correlate, IPEX, Lahl et al. (2007) generated BAC-transgenic mice termed
'depletion of regulatory T cell' (DEREG) mice expressing a diphtheria
toxin (DT) receptor-enhanced green fluorescent fusion protein under
control of Foxp3. Injection of DT allowed selective and efficient
detection and inducible depletion of Foxp3-positive Treg cells without
affecting Cd25-positive effector T cells. Histopathologic analysis
showed that DT injection in newborn DEREG mice ablated Treg cells and
led to development of scurfy-like symptoms with splenomegaly,
lymphadenopathy, insulitis, and severe skin inflammation. Lahl et al.
(2007) concluded that absence of Foxp3-positive Treg cells is sufficient
to induce a scurfy-like phenotype.

Lund et al. (2008) examined a role for regulatory T cells (Tregs) in
mucosal herpes simplex virus infection using Foxp3 knockin mice
harboring Treg subsets tagged with either green fluorescent protein
(GFP) or human diphtheria toxin receptor. They observed an accelerated
fatal infection with increase in viral load in the mucosa and central
nervous system after ablation of Tregs. Although augmented interferon
production was detected in the draining lymph nodes in Treg-deprived
mice, it was profoundly reduced at the infection site. This was
associated with a delay in the arrival of natural killer cells,
dendritic cells, and T cells to the site of infection and a sharp
increase in proinflammatory chemokine levels in the draining lymph
nodes. Lund et al. (2008) concluded that Tregs facilitate early
protective responses to local viral infection by allowing a timely entry
of immune cells into infected tissue.

Rowe et al. (2011) showed that expansion of Foxp3-positive Tregs during
pregnancy in mice conferred enhanced susceptibility to Listeria and
Salmonella bacterial infection. Treg ablation reduced susceptibility,
but it broke maternal tolerance to fetal antigen and triggered fetal
resorption. However, mice with Foxp3-positive cells and defective Il10
had reduced infection susceptibility without affecting pregnancy
outcome.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, ARG397TRP

Wildin et al. (2001) identified an arg397-to-trp mutation in the FOXP3
gene (due to 1189C-T) as the cause of IPEX (304790) in one of the
patients previously reported by Levy-Lahad and Wildin (2001). The infant
died at age 5 weeks with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus,
enteropathy, hypothyroidism, thrombocytopenia, and peritonitis.

.0002
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, 20-BP DEL, 3-BP INS, NT1290

In an infant with IPEX (304790) reported by Peake et al. (1996), Wildin
et al. (2001) identified a deletion-insertion mutation (1290-1309del,
TGG ins) in the FOXP3 gene. The infant died at age 10 months with IDDM,
enteropathy, anemia, lymphadenopathy, eczema, and sepsis.

.0003
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, PHE371CYS

In a child with IPEX (304790), Wildin et al. (2001) identified a
phe371-to-cys mutation in the FOXP3 gene. The patient had IDDM,
enteropathy, anemia, and exfoliated dermatitis, and was surviving after
bone marrow transplant.

.0004
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, ALA384THR

Wildin et al. (2001) identified an ala384-to-thr (A384T) mutation in the
FOXP3 gene in an infant with IPEX (304790) who died at age 4 months with
IDDM, enteropathy, hypothyroidism, thrombocytopenia, exfoliated
dermatitis, and sepsis.

In a large family with cases of IPEX in multiple sibships through 4
generations, previously reported by Ferguson et al. (2000), Bennett et
al. (2001) identified an A384T mutation in the FOXP3 gene.

.0005
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, 2-BP DEL, 1481CT

In a family of Japanese extraction, Bennett et al. (2001) found that the
single male with IPEX (304790) had a CT dinucleotide deletion at
positions 1481-1482 within the FOXP3 termination codon, predicting a
frameshift and addition of 25 amino acids.

.0006
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, IVS9DS, A-G, +4

In affected members of a kindred with IPEX (304790), Chatila et al.
(2000) found an A-to-G substitution at position +4 of the 5-prime donor
splice junction of intron 9 of the FOXP3 gene. The substitution was not
present in 2 sibs and the parents, including the mother, indicating that
it arose de novo. Sequence analysis of RT-PCR-amplified JM2 mRNA
transcripts revealed skipping of JM2 exon 9 in transcripts of the index
case. Exon 9 skipping resulted in a frameshift at codon 273 that gave
rise to a premature stop signal at codon 286. This led to the generation
of a truncated JM2 protein that lacked the forkhead homology domain.

.0007
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, GLU203DEL

In a kindred with IPEX (304790), Chatila et al. (2000) found that
affected males were hemizygous for a deletion of 3 bp in exon 7 of the
FOXP3 gene, resulting in loss of the glutamic acid-201 residue.

.0008
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, 1-BP DEL

In the proband of a family with IPEX (304790), Owen et al. (2003)
identified a single-base deletion of adenine at the second position of
codon 76 in exon 2 of the FOXP3 gene. The mutation resulted in
frameshift leading to a truncated protein product (108 residues vs 431
in wildtype). The mother and the proband's 2 healthy sisters were
carriers of the mutation. The brother of the proband had died at 6 weeks
of age and was found to have a lymphoid cell infiltration of the
pancreas.

.0009
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, PHE373ALA

In a patient with severe IPEX (304790) who presented with IDDM at age 2
weeks, Bacchetta et al. (2006) identified a double substitution (TT to
GC) at nucleotide 1305 in exon 10 of the FOXP3 gene, resulting in a
phe373-to-ala (F373A) substitution in the forkhead domain. The mutation
was present in the patient's mother, but not in a healthy brother who
served as the source of an HLA-identical bone marrow transplant that
resolved all IPEX symptoms except the IDDM.

.0010
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, PHE324LYS

Bacchetta et al. (2006) reported a patient with a mild form of IPEX
(304790) who presented at age 4 months with severe enteritis and eczema
and high serum IgE that resolved spontaneously. The patient had a T-to-C
transition at nucleotide 970 in exon 9 of the FOXP3 gene, resulting in a
phe324-to-leu (F324L) substitution in the forkhead domain, and a
splice-site mutation, a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 543, affecting
the 5-prime end of exon 5. The patient's healthy mother and an older
brother who showed no symptoms of IPEX had the same mutations.

.0011
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, 543C-T

See 300292.0010 and Bacchetta et al. (2006).

.0012
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, MET1ILE

In a patient with severe IPEX (304790) who presented with neonatal IDDM,
enteritis, recurrent skin infections, and hyper-IgE, Bacchetta et al.
(2006) identified a G-to-A transition in the first codon of the FOXP3
gene, resulting in a met1-to-ile (M1I) substitution and no protein
expression. The mutation was not present in the patient's mother. An
HLA-identical bone marrow transplant from an unrelated donor appeared to
resolve symptoms of autoimmune disease.

.0013
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, PRO367LEU

In a Japanese patient with IPEX (304790), Suzuki et al. (2007)
identified a pro367-to-leu (P367L) mutation in the FOX3P gene. The
mutation occurred in the FKH domain, which is essential for DNA binding.
The patient was born with severe SGA at 38 weeks' gestation. He
presented with failure to thrive and was diagnosed with diabetes
mellitus. He manifested intractable diarrhea and eczema, liver
dysfunction with hyperammonemia, thrombocytopenia, and sepsis. At 14
weeks of age he suffered from acute renal failure resulting in
congestive heart failure and pulmonary edema. He died at age 16 weeks.

REFERENCE 1. Allan, S. E.; Passerini, L.; Bacchetta, R.; Crellin, N.; Dai, M.;
Orban, P. C.; Ziegler, S. F.; Roncarolo, M. G.; Levings, M. K.: The
role of 2 FOXP3 isoforms in the generation of human CD4+ Tregs. J.
Clin. Invest. 115: 3276-3284, 2005.

2. Bacchetta, R.; Passerini, L.; Gambineri, E.; Dai, M.; Allan, S.
E.; Perroni, L.; Dagna-Bricarelli, F.; Sartirana, C.; Matthes-Martin,
S.; Lawitschka, A.; Azzari, C.; Ziegler, S. F.; Levings, M. K.; Roncarolo,
M. G.: Defective regulatory and effector T cell functions in patients
with FOXP3 mutations. J. Clin. Invest. 1713-1722, 2006.

3. Bassuny, W. M.; Ihara, K.; Sasaki, Y.; Kuromaru, R.; Kohno, H.;
Matsuura, N.; Hara, T.: A functional polymorphism in the promoter/enhancer
region of the FOXP3/Scurfin gene associated with type 1 diabetes. Immunogenetics 55:
149-156, 2003.

4. Bennett, C. L.; Christie, J.; Ramsdell, F.; Brunkow, M. E.; Ferguson,
P. J.; Whitesell, L.; Kelly, T. E.; Saulsbury, F. T.; Chance, P. F.;
Ochs, H. D.: The immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy,
X-linked syndrome (IPEX) is caused by mutations of FOXP3. Nature
Genet. 27: 20-21, 2001.

5. Bettelli, E.; Dastrange, M.; Oukka, M.: Foxp3 interacts with nuclear
factor of activated T cells and NF-kappa-B to repress cytokine gene
expression and effector functions of T helper cells. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 102: 5138-5143, 2005.

6. Brunkow, M. E.; Jeffery, E. W.; Hjerrild, K. A.; Paeper, B.; Clark,
L. B.; Yasayko, S.-A.; Wilkinson, J. E.; Galas, D.; Ziegler, S. F.;
Ramsdell, F.: Disruption of a new forkhead/winged-helix protein,
scurfin, results in the fatal lymphoproliferative disorder of the
scurfy mouse. Nature Genet. 27: 68-73, 2001.

7. Casetti, R.; Agrati, C.; Wallace, M.; Sacchi, A.; Martini, F.;
Martino, A.; Rinaldi, A.; Malkovsky, M.: Cutting edge: TGF-beta-1
and IL-15 induce FOXP3(+) gamma-delta regulatory T cells in the presence
of antigen stimulation. J. Immun. 183: 3574-3577, 2009.

8. Chatila, T. A.; Blaeser, F.; Ho, N.; Lederman, H. M.; Voulgaropoulos,
C.; Helms, C.; Bowcock, A. M.: JM2, encoding a fork head-related
protein, is mutated in X-linked autoimmunity-allergic disregulation
(sic) syndrome. J. Clin. Invest. 106: R75-R81, 2000.

9. Clark, L. B.; Appleby, M. W.; Brunkow, M. E.; Wilkinson, J. E.;
Ziegler, S. F.; Ramsdell, F.: Cellular and molecular characterization
of the scurfy mouse mutant. J. Immun. 162: 2546-2554, 1999.

10. Dang, E. V.; Barbi, J.; Yang, H.-Y.; Jinasena, D.; Yu, H.; Zheng,
Y.; Bordman, Z.; Fu, J.; Kim, Y.; Yen, H.-R.; Luo, W.; Zeller, K.;
Shimoda, L.; Topalian, S. L.; Semenza, G. L.; Dang, C. V.; Pardoll,
D. M.; Pan, F.: Control of TH17/T-reg balance by hypoxia-inducible
factor 1. Cell 146: 772-784, 2011.

11. Ferguson, P. J.; Blanton, S. H.; Saulsbury, F. T.; McDuffie, M.
J.; Lemahieu, V.; Gastier, J. M.; Francke, U.; Borowitz, S. M.; Sutphen,
J. L.; Kelly, T. E.: Manifestations and linkage analysis in X-Linked
autoimmunity-immunodeficiency syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 90: 390-397,
2000.

12. Feuerer, M.; Herrero, L.; Cipolletta, D.; Naaz, A.; Wong, J.;
Nayer, A.; Lee, J.; Goldfine, A. B.; Benoist, C.; Shoelson, S.; Mathis,
D.: Lean, but not obese, fat is enriched for a unique population
of regulatory T cells that affect metabolic parameters. Nature Med. 15:
930-939, 2009.

13. Fontenot, J. D.; Gavin, M. A.; Rudensky, A. Y.: Foxp3 programs
the development and function of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells. Nature
Immun. 4: 330-336, 2003.

14. Gavin, M. A.; Rasmussen, J. P.; Fontenot, J. D.; Vasta, V.; Manganiello,
V. C.; Beavo, J. A.; Rudensky, A. Y.: Foxp3-dependent programme of
regulatory T-cell differentiation. Nature 445: 771-775, 2007.

15. Hong, J.; Li, N.; Zhang, X.; Zheng, B.; Zhang, J. Z.: Induction
of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells by copolymer-I through activation
of transcription factor Foxp3. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 6449-6454,
2005.

16. Hori, S.; Nomura, T.; Sakaguchi, S.: Control of regulatory T
cell development by the transcription factor Foxp3. Science 299:
1057-1061, 2003.

17. Khattri, R.; Cox, T.; Yasayko, S.-A.; Ramsdell, F.: An essential
role for Scurfin in CD4+CD25+ T regulatory cells. Nature Immun. 4:
337-342, 2003.

18. Khattri, R.; Kasprowicz, D.; Cox, T.; Mortrud, M.; Appleby, M.
W.; Brunkow, M. E.; Ziegler, S. F.; Ramsdell, F.: The amount of scurfin
protein determines peripheral T cell number and responsiveness. J.
Immun. 167: 6312-6320, 2001.

19. Lahl, K.; Loddenkemper, C.; Drouin, C.; Freyer, J.; Arnason, J.;
Eberl, G.; Hamann, A.; Wagner, H.; Huehn, J.; Sparwasser, T.: Selective
depletion of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells induces a scurfy-like disease. J.
Exp. Med. 204: 57-63, 2007.

20. Lanteri, M. C.; O'Brien, K. M.; Purtha, W. E.; Cameron, M. J.;
Lund, J. M.; Owen, R. E.; Heitman, J. W.; Custer, B.; Hirschkorn,
D. F.; Tobler, L. H.; Kiely, N.; Prince, H. E.; Ndhlovu, L. C.; Nixon,
D. F.; Kamel, H. T.; Kelvin, D. J.; Busch, M. P.; Rudensky, A. Y.;
Diamond, M. S.; Norris, P. J.: Tregs control the development of symptomatic
West Nile virus infection in humans and mice. J. Clin. Invest. 119:
3266-3277, 2009.

21. Levy-Lahad, E.; Wildin, R. S.: Neonatal diabetes mellitus, enteropathy,
thrombocytopenia, and endocrinopathy: further evidence for an X-linked
lethal syndrome. J. Pediat. 138: 577-580, 2001.

22. Liu, B.; Tahk, S.; Yee, K. M.; Fan, G.; Shuai, K.: The ligase
PIAS1 restricts natural regulatory T cell differentiation by epigenetic
repression. Science 330: 521-525, 2010.

23. Lund, J. M.; Hsing, L.; Pham, T. T.; Rudensky, A. Y.: Coordination
of early protective immunity to viral infection by regulatory T cells. Science 320:
1220-1224, 2008.

24. Lyon, M. F.; Peters, J.; Glenister, P. H.; Ball, S.; Wright, E.
: The scurfy mouse mutant has previously unrecognized hematological
abnormalities and resembles Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 87: 2433-2437, 1990.

25. Marson, A.; Kretschmer, K.; Frampton, G. M.; Jacobsen, E. S.;
Polansky, J. K.; Maclsaac, K. D.; Levine, S. S.; Fraenkel, E.; von
Boehmer, H.; Young, R. A.: Foxp3 occupancy and regulation of key
target genes during T-cell stimulation. Nature 445: 931-935, 2007.

26. Miura, Y.; Thoburn, C. J.; Bright, E. C.; Phelps, M. L.; Shin,
T.; Matsui, E. C.; Matsui, W. H.; Arai, S.; Fuchs, E. J.; Vogelsang,
G. B.; Jones, R. J.; Hess, A. D.: Association of Foxp3 regulatory
gene expression with graft-versus-host disease. Blood 104: 2187-2193,
2004.

27. Mold, J. E.; Venkatasubrahmanyam, S.; Burt, T. D.; Michaelsson,
J.; Rivera, J. M.; Galkina, S. A.; Weinberg, K.; Stoddart, C. A.;
McCune, J. M.: Fetal and adult hematopoietic stem cells give rise
to distinct T cell lineages in humans. Science 330: 1695-1699, 2010.
Note: Erratum: Science 331: 534 only, 2011.

28. Ono, M.; Yaguchi, H.; Ohkura, N.; Kitabayashi, I.; Nagamura, Y.;
Nomura, T.; Miyachi, Y.; Tsukada, T.; Sakaguchi, S.: Foxp3 controls
regulatory T-cell function by interacting with AML1/Runx1. Nature 446:
685-689, 2007.

29. Owen, C. J.; Jennings, C. E.; Imrie, H.; Lachaux, A.; Bridges,
N. A.; Cheetham, T. D.; Pearce, S. H. S.: Mutational analysis of
the FOXP3 gene and evidence for genetic heterogeneity in the immunodysregulation,
polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy syndrome. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
6034-6039, 2003.

30. Pan, F.; Yu, H.; Dang, E. V.; Barbi, J.; Pan, X.; Grosso, J. F.;
Jinasena, D.; Sharma, S. M.; McCadden, E. M.; Getnet, D.; Drake, C.
G.; Liu, J. O.; Ostrowski, M. C.; Pardoll, D. M.: Eos mediates Foxp3-dependent
gene silencing in CD4+ regulatory T cells. Science 325: 1142-1146,
2009.

31. Peake, J. E.; McCrossin, R. B.; Byrne, G.; Shepard, R.: X-linked
immune dysregulation, neonatal insulin dependent diabetes, and intractable
diarrhoea. Arch. Dis. Child. 74: F195-199, 1996.

32. Pennington, D. J.; Silva-Santos, B.; Silberzahn, T.; Escorcio-Correia,
M.; Woodward, M. J.; Roberts, S. J.; Smith, A. L.; Dyson, P. J.; Hayday,
A. C.: Early events in the thymus affect the balance of effector
and regulatory T cells. Nature 444: 1073-1077, 2006.

33. Powell, B. R.; Buist, N. R. M.; Stenzel, P.: An X-linked syndrome
of diarrhea, polyendocrinopathy, and fatal infection in infancy. J.
Pediat. 100: 731-737, 1982.

34. Ricciardelli, I.; Lindley, K. J.; Londei, M.; Quaratino, S.:
Anti tumour necrosis-alpha therapy increases the number of FOXP3(+)
regulatory T cells in children affected by Crohn's disease. Immunology 125:
178-183, 2008.

35. Rowe, J. H.; Ertelt, J. M.; Aguilera, M. N.; Farrar, M. A.; Way,
S. S.: Foxp3+ regulatory T cell expansion required for sustaining
pregnancy compromises host defense against prenatal bacterial pathogens. Cell
Host Microbe 10: 54-64, 2011.

36. Rowe, J. H.; Ertelt, J. M.; Xin, L.; Way, S. S.: Pregnancy imprints
regulatory memory that sustains anergy to fetal antigen. Nature 490:
102-106, 2012.

37. Sharma, M. D.; Huang, L.; Choi, J.-H.; Lee, E.-J.; Wilson, J.
M.; Lemos, H.; Pan, F.; Blazar, B. R.; Pardoll, D. M.; Mellor, A.
L.; Shi, H.; Munn, D. H.: An inherently bifunctional subset of Foxp3+
T helper cells is controlled by the transcription factor Eos. Immunity 38:
998-1012, 2013.

38. Smith, E. L.; Finney, H. M.; Nesbitt, A. M.; Ramsdell, F.; Robinson,
M. K.: Splice variants of human FOXP3 are functional inhibitors of
human CD4+ T-cell activation. Immunology 119: 203-211, 2006.

39. Stock, P.; Akbari, O.; Berry, G.; Freeman, G. J.; DeKruyff, R.
H.; Umetsu, D. T.: Induction of T helper type 1-like regulatory cells
that express Foxp3 and protect against airway hyper-reactivity. Nature
Immun. 5: 1149-1156, 2004.

40. Suzuki, S.; Makita, Y.; Mukai, T.; Matsuo, K.; Ueda, O.; Fujieda,
K.: Molecular basis of neonatal diabetes in Japanese patients. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 3979-3985, 2007. Note: Erratum: J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 93: 153 only, 2008.

41. Toulza, F.; Nosaka, K.; Tanaka, Y.; Schioppa, T.; Balkwill, F.;
Taylor, G. P.; Bangham, C. R. M.: Human T-lymphotropic virus type
1-induced CC chemokine ligand 22 maintains a high frequency of functional
FoxP3+ regulatory T cells. J. Immun. 185: 183-189, 2010.

42. Tsuji, M.; Komatsu, N.; Kawamoto, S.; Suzuki, K.; Kanagawa, O.;
Honjo, T.; Hori, S.; Fagarasan, S.: Preferential generation of follicular
B helper T cells from Foxp3+ T cells in gut Peyer's patches. Science 323:
1488-1492, 2009.

43. Wan, Y. Y.; Flavell, R. A.: Regulatory T-cell functions are subverted
and converted owing to attenuated Foxp3 expression. Nature 445:
766-770, 2007.

44. Wan, Y. Y.; Flavell, R. A.: Identifying Foxp3-expressing suppressor
T cells with a bicistronic reporter. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102:
5126-5131, 2005.

45. Wildin, R. S.; Ramsdell, F.; Peake, J.; Faravelli, F.; Casanova,
J.-L.; Buist, N.; Levy-Lahad, E.; Mazzella, M.; Goulet, O.; Perroni,
L.; Dagna Bricarelli, F.; Byrne, G.; McEuen, M.; Proll, S.; Appleby,
M.; Brunkow, M. E.: X-linked neonatal diabetes mellitus, enteropathy
and endocrinopathy syndrome is the human equivalent of mouse scurfy. Nature
Genet. 27: 18-20, 2001.

46. Zheng, Y.; Chaudhry, A.; Kas, A.; deRoos, P.; Kim, J. M.; Chu,
T.-T.; Corcoran, L.; Treuting, P.; Klein, U.; Rudensky, A. Y.: Regulatory
T-cell suppressor program co-opts transcription factor IRF4 to control
TH2 responses. Nature 458: 351-356, 2009.

47. Zheng, Y.; Josefowicz, S.; Chaudhry, A.; Peng, X. P.; Forbush,
K.; Rudensky, A. Y.: Role of conserved non-coding DNA elements in
the Foxp3 gene in regulatory T-cell fate. Nature 463: 808-812, 2010.

48. Zheng, Y.; Josefowicz, S. Z.; Kas, A.; Chu, T.-T.; Gavin, M. A.;
Rudensky, A. Y.: Genome-wide analysis of Foxp3 target genes in developing
and mature regulatory T cells. Nature 445: 936-940, 2007.

49. Zuo, T.; Liu, R.; Zhang, H.; Chang, X.; Liu, Y.; Wang, L.; Zheng,
P.; Liu, Y.: FOXP3 is a novel transcriptional repressor for the breast
cancer oncogene SKP2. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 3765-3773, 2007.

50. Zuo, T.; Wang, L.; Morrison, C.; Chang, X.; Zhang, H.; Li, W.;
Liu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Liu, X.; Chan, M. W. Y.; Liu, J.-Q.; Love, R.;
and 9 others: FOXP3 is an X-linked breast cancer suppressor gene
and an important repressor of the HER-2/ErbB2 oncogene. Cell 129:
1275-1286, 2007. Note: Erratum: Cell 134: 546 only, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/13/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/24/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/21/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/15/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/19/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/7/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/28/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/14/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/3/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/5/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/27/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/20/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/15/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/10/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/7/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/21/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/28/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/22/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/23/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/7/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/29/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/22/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/27/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/20/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/14/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/15/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/20/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/13/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/9/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/23/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/1/2005
Natalie E. Krasikov - updated: 2/10/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/22/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/26/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/26/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/15/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/5/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/2/2001

EDITED mgross: 09/13/2013
mgross: 9/13/2013
terry: 3/28/2013
terry: 3/15/2013
mgross: 2/5/2013
alopez: 10/26/2012
terry: 10/24/2012
mgross: 9/26/2012
terry: 9/21/2012
terry: 6/7/2012
mgross: 3/20/2012
terry: 3/16/2012
terry: 3/15/2012
mgross: 12/16/2011
alopez: 5/19/2011
mgross: 2/4/2011
terry: 1/7/2011
alopez: 1/4/2011
terry: 12/28/2010
mgross: 11/4/2010
terry: 11/3/2010
terry: 10/29/2010
mgross: 10/28/2010
terry: 10/26/2010
mgross: 9/14/2010
alopez: 8/6/2010
terry: 8/3/2010
alopez: 3/8/2010
terry: 3/5/2010
mgross: 10/27/2009
terry: 10/20/2009
alopez: 9/15/2009
terry: 9/15/2009
wwang: 9/14/2009
terry: 9/10/2009
alopez: 4/8/2009
terry: 4/7/2009
alopez: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/2/2009
mgross: 11/10/2008
terry: 11/7/2008
alopez: 7/21/2008
mgross: 6/17/2008
terry: 5/28/2008
carol: 5/22/2008
mgross: 8/30/2007
terry: 8/23/2007
mgross: 8/23/2007
terry: 8/7/2007
alopez: 7/3/2007
terry: 6/29/2007
mgross: 5/22/2007
alopez: 5/11/2007
terry: 4/27/2007
alopez: 4/24/2007
terry: 4/20/2007
mgross: 3/14/2007
terry: 3/14/2007
mgross: 2/15/2007
mgross: 8/3/2006
terry: 7/20/2006
mgross: 2/13/2006
mgross: 11/9/2005
mgross: 6/23/2005
alopez: 4/1/2005
carol: 2/10/2004
carol: 9/25/2003
tkritzer: 9/23/2003
tkritzer: 9/22/2003
alopez: 4/1/2003
mgross: 3/26/2003
mgross: 2/26/2003
carol: 9/18/2002
mgross: 2/15/2002
alopez: 12/13/2001
alopez: 12/7/2001
terry: 12/5/2001
carol: 7/3/2001
carol: 1/3/2001
carol: 1/2/2001

609685	TITLE *609685 CELL DIVISION CYCLE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 7-LIKE; CDCA7L
;;CDCA7-LIKE;;
R1;;
JPO2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using 3 SP1 (189906)-binding sites in the MAOA (309850) core promoter to
screen a human cDNA library, Chen et al. (2005) cloned CDCA7L, which
they called R1. The deduced 454-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 56 kD. The N-terminal half of CDCA7L has an acidic
domain followed by a PEST sequence, and the C-terminal half has a
nuclear targeting sequence and a DNA-binding domain. The DNA-binding
domain contains 12 conserved cysteines, 8 of which form 4 CxxC zinc
finger motifs. CDCA7L also has several putative phosphorylation sites.
Northern blot analysis detected a 3.0-kb CDCA7L transcript in whole
human brain and in all peripheral tissues and human cell lines examined.
Immunohistochemical analysis localized CDCA7L to both nucleus and
cytosol.

Using the N-terminal domain of MYC (190080) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid
screen, followed by PCR of a human myeloid leukemia cell line cDNA
library, Huang et al. (2005) cloned CDCA7L, which they called JPO2.
Huang et al. (2005) identified a central leucine zipper domain in the
CDCA7L protein. CDCA7L associated with chromatin, nuclear, and
cytoplasmic fractions prepared from human embryonic kidney cells during
log-phase growth. Northern blot analysis of murine tissues detected
highest Cdca7l expression in prostate, thyroid, thymus, and salivary
gland; no expression was detected in total brain. Semiquantitative
RT-PCR of human tissues produced similar results. CDCA7L appeared to be
differentially expressed in medulloblastomas.

GENE FUNCTION

By transfecting CDCA7L and a reporter gene into a human neuroblastoma
cell line, Chen et al. (2005) found that CDCA7L inhibited the MAOA
promoter and MAOA enzymatic activity, and the degree of inhibition
correlated with the level of CDCA7L protein expression. Gel-shift assays
confirmed that endogenous CDCA7L interacted with SP1 sites of the MAOA
promoter, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicated that CDCA7L
bound the MAOA promoter in vivo.

Ou et al. (2006) found that serum starvation-induced apoptosis in
cultured human neuronal cell lines increased expression of MAOA, p38
kinase (MAPK14; 600289), and caspase-3 (CASP3; 600636) and reduced
expression of BCL2 (151430) and the MAOA transcriptional repressor R1.
They determined that MAOA and R1 were downstream of p38 kinase and BCL2,
but upstream of CASP3, in the apoptotic signaling pathway. Inhibition of
MAOA prevented apoptosis, and serum starvation of cortical brain cells
from Maoa-deficient mice resulted in reduced apoptosis compared with
wildtype mice. Ou et al. (2006) also found that MAOA and R1 were
involved in the MYC-induced proliferative signaling pathway in the
presence of serum. Using R1 overexpression, R1 small interfering RNA,
and a MAOA inhibitor, they showed that R1 and MAOA acted upstream of
cyclin D1 (168461) and E2F1 (189971) in the cell proliferation pathway.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Huang et al. (2005) mapped the CDCA7L gene
to chromosome 7p15.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, K.; Ou, X.-M.; Chen, G.; Choi, S. H.; Shih, J. C.: R1, a
novel repressor of the human monoamine oxidase A. J. Biol. Chem. 280:
11552-11559, 2005.

2. Huang, A.; Ho, C. S. W.; Ponzielli, R.; Barsyte-Lovejoy, D.; Bouffet,
E.; Picard, D.; Hawkins, C. E.; Penn, L. Z.: Identification of a
novel c-Myc protein interactor, JPO2, with transforming activity in
medulloblastoma cells. Cancer Res. 65: 5607-5619, 2005.

3. Ou, X.-M.; Chen, K.; Shih, J. C.: Monoamine oxidase A and repressor
R1 are involved in apoptotic signaling pathway. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 103: 10923-10928, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/05/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/27/2005

EDITED mgross: 10/05/2006
mgross: 10/27/2005

615472	TITLE *615472 COATOMER PROTEIN COMPLEX, SUBUNIT ZETA-1; COPZ1
;;COPZ
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Intracellular cargo transport is mediated by vesicles decorated with
protein complexes, such as coat protein complex I (COPI). COPI consists
of a 7-subunit coatomer subcomplex plus the small G protein ARF1
(103180). COPZ1 and COPZ2 are paralogous isoforms of the zeta subunit of
the coatomer subcomplex (Moelleken et al., 2007).

CLONING

Zhang et al. (2000) cloned COPZ1, which they designated HSPC181, from
CD34 (142230)-positive hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. The deduced
177-amino acid protein contains a clathrin adaptor complex small chain
(see 603531) signature. Low to moderate COPZ1 expression was present in
all cell lines examined. Orthologs of COPZ1 were detected in mammals,
bacteria, nematode, fly, and yeast, but not in plants.

GENE FUNCTION

Kuge et al. (1993) found that antibodies directed against bovine
zeta-COP blocked coatomer binding to Chinese hamster ovary Golgi
membranes and prevented assembly of COP-coated vesicles on Golgi
cisternae. They concluded that zeta-COP has a dual role in coat assembly
in budding and in coupling fusion to budding.

By immunoprecipitation and immunoelectron microscopy of mouse and rat
cells, Moelleken et al. (2007) found a preference for COP-gamma-1
(COPG1)/Copz1- and Copg1/Copz2-containing coatomer complexes in the
early Golgi apparatus and Copg2 (COPG2; 604355)/Copz1-containing
coatomer complexes in the late Golgi apparatus. They concluded that
different coatomer isoforms may serve different intracellular transport
routes.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the COPZ1 gene to chromosome 12q13.13 based on an
alignment of the COPZ1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF086911) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/9/2013.

2. Kuge, O.; Hara-Kuge, S.; Orci, L.; Ravazzola, M.; Amherdt, M.;
Tanigawa, G.; Wieland, F. T.; Rothman, J. E.: Zeta-COP, a subunit
of coatomer, is required for COP-coated vesicle assembly. J. Cell
Biol. 123: 1727-1734, 1993.

3. Moelleken, J.; Malsam, J.; Betts, M. F.; Movafeghi, A.; Reckmann,
I.; Meissner, I.; Hellwig, A.; Russell, R. B.; Sollner, T.; Brugger,
B.; Wieland, F. T.: Differential localization of coatomer complex
isoforms within the Golgi apparatus. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104:
4425-4430, 2007.

4. Zhang, Q.-H.; Ye, M.; Wu, X.-Y.; Ren, S.-X.; Zhao, M.; Zhao, C.-J.;
Fu, G.; Shen, Y.; Fan, H.-Y.; Lu, G.; Zhong, M.; Xu, X.-R.; and 9
others: Cloning and functional analysis of cDNAs with open reading
frames for 300 previously undefined genes expressed in CD34+ hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells. Genome Res. 10: 1546-1560, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/10/2013

EDITED mgross: 10/21/2013
tpirozzi: 10/10/2013

606140	TITLE *606140 EXPORTIN 7; XPO7
;;RAN-BINDING PROTEIN 16; RANBP16
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The transport of protein and large RNAs through the nuclear pore
complexes (NPC) is an energy-dependent and regulated process. The import
of proteins with a nuclear localization signal (NLS) is accomplished by
recognition of one or more clusters of basic amino acids by the
importin-alpha/beta complex; see 600685 and 602738. The small GTPase RAN
(601179) plays a key role in NLS-dependent protein import. RAN-binding
protein-16 is a member of the importin-beta superfamily of nuclear
transport receptors.

CLONING

By screening human brain cDNAs for those encoding proteins larger than
50 kD, Nagase et al. (1998) identified KIAA0745, a cDNA encoding a
deduced 909-amino acid RANBP16 protein. RT-PCR ELISA demonstrated very
high expression of RANBP16 in brain, moderate expression in heart, lung,
and ovary, and low expression in liver, skeletal muscle, pancreas,
testis, and spleen.

In the course of cloning genes at the breakpoint of
t(5;14)(q33-q34;q11), a recurring translocation in acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, Koch et al. (2000) isolated and characterized 2 novel members
of the importin-beta superfamily of nuclear transport receptors: RANBP16
and RANBP17 (606141). They also cloned the mouse Ranbp16 and Ranbp17
homologs. The human RANBP16 and RANBP17 proteins share 66% sequence
identity. Human and mouse RANBP16 cDNAs encode 1,087-amino acid proteins
containing an importin-beta N-terminal domain which is important for the
binding of Ran protein. Northern blot analysis demonstrated restricted
expression of RANBP17, but ubiquitous expression RANBP16. A major,
approximately 4.8-kb RANBP16 transcript was strongly expressed in
testis, thyroid, and bone marrow, moderately expressed in many other
tissues, and weakly expressed in lung, liver, and small intestine, but
not expressed in thymus. Two other transcripts of approximately 3.5 and
2.5 kb were strongly expressed in bone marrow and the 3.5-kb transcript
was also strongly expressed in testis. The mouse Ranbp16 gene was also
ubiquitously expressed. Both RANBP16 and RANBP17 were found to be
predominantly nuclear proteins.

Kutay et al. (2000) independently cloned RANBP16 and RANBP17. They
identified RANBP16 by use of affinity chromatography on immobilized
RanGTP. Based on the RANBP16 sequence, they identified RANBP17 by
database searches. Kutay et al. (2000) determined that RANBP16 binds
RanGTP directly. It can interact directly with the nuclear pore complex
and is able to enter the nucleus independent of energy and additional
nuclear transport receptors.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the RANBP16
gene to chromosome 8.

REFERENCE 1. Koch, P.; Bohlmann, I.; Schafer, M.; Hansen-Hagge, T. E.; Kiyoi,
H.; Wilda, M.; Hameister, H.; Bartram, C. R.; Janssen, J. W. G.:
Identification of a novel putative Ran-binding protein and its close
homologue. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 278: 241-249, 2000.

2. Kutay, U.; Hartmann, E.; Treichel, N.; Calado, A.; Carmo-Fonseca,
M.; Prehn, S.; Kraft, R.; Gorlich, D.; Bischoff, F. R.: Identification
of two novel RanGTP-binding proteins belonging to the importin-beta
superfamily. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 40163-40168, 2000.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XI. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 5: 277-286, 1998.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 7/23/2001

EDITED carol: 03/13/2003
mcapotos: 7/23/2001

