610225	TITLE *610225 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S19 BINDING PROTEIN 1; RPS19BP1
;;S19BP;;
ACTIVE REGULATOR OF SIRT1; AROS;;
MGC52010
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis to screen a mouse embryonic cDNA library
with rat ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19; 603474) as bait, Maeda et al.
(2006) isolated 3 cDNA clones. Using in vitro binding assays, they
demonstrated that the product of the mouse cDNAs interacted with
ribosomal protein S19 but not with other ribosomal proteins tested,
including RPS3A (180478), RPL5 (603634), and RPL7A (185640). The mouse
Rps19bp1 cDNA, which the authors called S19bp, encodes a deduced
142-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of approximately
16 kD. The protein contains 2 basic amino acid clusters, one of which
has a variable polylysine tract embedded in a putative nucleolar
localization signal. By dot-blot hybridization analysis, Maeda et al.
(2006) detected expression of Rps19bp1 in all mouse tissues examined,
with highest expression in submaxillary gland and epididymis.
Immunofluorescence localization experiments in Cos-7 cells demonstrated
colocalization of Rps19bp1 and Rps19 in the nucleolus, with partial
diffusion of Rps19bp1 into the nucleoplasm.

Using SIRT1 (604479) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a HeLa cell
cDNA library, Kim et al. (2007) cloned full-length RPS19BP1, which they
called AROS. The deduced protein contains 142 amino acids. Northern blot
analysis detected AROS expression in heart, liver, small intestine, and
lung. Endogenous AROS showed nuclear localization in a human lung cancer
cell line. Fluorescence-tagged AROS was dispersed in the nucleoplasm in
half of transfected cells and showed distinct nuclear foci in the other
half.

GENE FUNCTION

Using several in vitro binding assays and analysis of deletion mutants,
Maeda et al. (2006) demonstrated that mouse Rps19bp1 specifically binds
ribosomal protein S19 and that binding activity is contained within
amino acids 81-142 of Rps19bp1.

Using protein pull-down and immunoprecipitation assays, Kim et al.
(2007) confirmed that human AROS interacted with SIRT1, and mutation
analysis identified an N-terminal domain in SIRT1 that was required for
the interaction. AROS enhanced SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of p53
(TP53; 191170) in vitro in a dose-dependent manner. AROS also enhanced
SIRT1 activity in vivo, which inhibited p53-mediated transcriptional
activity; both SIRT1 and AROS were required for p53 inactivation. AROS
also regulated p53-induced cell growth in response to DNA damage. Kim et
al. (2007) concluded that AROS is a key regulator of SIRT1, with
suppressive effects on p53.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Maeda et al. (2006) mapped the human
RPS19BP1 gene to chromosome 22p and the mouse homolog to chromosome 15.

REFERENCE 1. Kim, E.-J.; Kho, J.-H.; Kang, M.-R.; Um, S.-J.: Active regulator
of SIRT1 cooperates with SIRT1 and facilitates suppression of p53
activity. Molec. Cell 28: 277-290, 2007. Note: Erratum: Molec. Cell
28: 513 only, 2007.

2. Maeda, N.; Toku, S.; Kenmochi, N.; Tanaka, T.: A novel nucleolar
protein interacts with ribosomal protein S19. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 339: 41-46, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/29/2007

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 6/29/2006

EDITED mgross: 11/29/2007
carol: 6/29/2006

