600848	TITLE *600848 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR COREPRESSOR 2; NCOR2
;;SILENCING MEDIATOR FOR RETINOID AND THYROID HORMONE RECEPTORS; SMRT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NCOR2 is a transcriptional corepressor that maintains the 'off state' of
nonliganded nuclear receptors. Its interaction with nuclear receptors is
mediated by 2 C-terminal receptor-interacting domains (RIDs). NCOR2
facilitates transcriptional repression by serving as a scaffold protein
to recruit histone deacetylase complexes and chromatin-remodeling
factors (summary by Pei et al., 2011).

CLONING

Transcriptional silencing mediated by nuclear receptors is important in
development, differentiation, and oncogenesis. Chen and Evans (1995)
identified a receptor-interacting factor, NCOR2, which they designated
SMRT, as a silencing mediator (corepressor) for retinoid receptors (see
180240) and thyroid hormone receptors (see 190120). They cloned SMRT
from a HeLa cell cDNA library. The deduced 1,495-amino acid protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 168 kD. It has a proline-rich N-terminal
domain, followed by ERDR and SG regions and a C-terminal domain that
shares significant similarity with mouse Rip13 (NCOR1; 600849). Chen and
Evans (1995) also identified a splice variant of SMRT that encodes a
protein lacking a 46-amino acid sequence in the C-terminal domain.
Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous SMRT expression.
Immunofluorescence analysis indicated that SMRT is a nuclear protein.
Horlein et al. (1995) proposed that SMRT and NCOR (NCOR1; 600849) belong
to a family of corepressors that they termed TRACs (thyroid hormone- and
retinoic acid receptor-associated corepressors).

Using mouse Smrt and successive 5-prime proximal probes, Ordentlich et
al. (1999) cloned full-length human SMRT from a pituitary cDNA library.
The deduced protein contains 2,517 amino acid. The N terminus contains 2
repression domains separated by a SANT domain and is highly homologous
to the N terminus of NCOR1. Northern blot analysis detected a SMRT
transcript of about 10 kb in all mouse tissues examined, with highest
expression in brain, lung, and spleen. A minor transcript of 8.5 kb was
also detected in most tissues. Ordentlich et al. (1999) also cloned a
splice variant of Smrt from mouse brain that encodes a protein lacking
amino acids 36 through 254 of full-length Ncor2.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Binding of ligand to nuclear hormone receptors induces a conformation
that attracts coactivator proteins containing a leu-x-x-leu-leu motif,
the so-called NR box. Hu and Lazar (1999) showed that NCOR1 and SMRT
contain sequences that are similar to the NR box and are repeated in
each of 2 nuclear hormone receptor interaction domains. Hu and Lazar
(1999) called this box (L/I-x-x-I/V-I) the CoRNR (corepressor/nuclear
receptor; 'corner') box. The corner box is required for nuclear hormone
receptor interaction, and corner box peptides specifically block
corepressor interaction in vitro and repression in vivo. Sequences
flanking the corner box determine nuclear hormone receptor specificity.
Thus, Hu and Lazar (1999) concluded that the key feature of hormone
action, differential recognition of unliganded and liganded nuclear
hormone receptors by coactivators and corepressors, is due to very
subtle differences between CoRNR and NR boxes.

- Crystal Structure

Watson et al. (2012) reported the structure of a complex between an HDAC
(HDAC3; 605166) and a corepressor, NCOR2. The structure revealed 2
remarkable features. First, the SMRT-deacetylase activation domain (DAD)
undergoes a large structural rearrangement on forming the complex.
Second, there is an essential inositol tetraphosphate molecule,
D-myo-inositol-(1,4,5,6)-tetrakisphosphate (Ins(1,4,5,6)P4), acting as
an 'intermolecular glue' between the 2 proteins. Assembly of the complex
is clearly dependent on the Ins(1,4,5,6)P4, which may act as a
regulator, potentially explaining why inositol phosphates and their
kinases have been found to act as transcriptional regulators. This
mechanism for the activation of HDAC3 appears to be conserved in class I
HDACs from yeast to humans, and the authors suggested it opens the way
to novel therapeutic opportunities.

GENE FUNCTION

Chen and Evans (1995) found that association of SMRT with receptors,
both in solution and bound to DNA response elements, was destabilized by
ligand. The interaction with mutant receptors correlated with their
transcriptional silencing activities. The repressor function of thyroid
hormone receptor and retinoic acid receptor appeared to involve direct
interaction with SMRT, possibly in a way that stabilized or promoted
their interaction with the transcription factor TFIIB (189963). Chen and
Evans (1995) showed that ligand caused dissociation of SMRT from the
receptor, triggering the activation process.

Fischle et al. (2002) showed that the catalytic domain of HDAC4 (605314)
interacts with HDAC3 (605166) via the transcriptional corepressor NCOR2.
All experimental conditions leading to the suppression of HDAC4 binding
to NCOR2 and to HDAC3 resulted in loss of enzymatic activity associated
with HDAC4. These observations indicated that class II HDACs regulate
transcription by bridging the enzymatically active NCOR2-HDAC3 complex
and select transcription factors.

Hoberg et al. (2004) presented evidence that IKK-alpha (CHUK; 600664)
phosphorylates chromatin-bound SMRT, stimulating its removal from
chromatin and allowing recruitment of NFKB (see 164011) to promoters and
transcription of NFKB-dependent genes.

Jepsen et al. (2007) reported a critical role for SMRT in forebrain
development and in maintenance of the neural stem cell state. Analysis
of a series of markers in SMRT gene-deleted mice revealed the functional
requirement of SMRT in the actions of both retinoic acid-dependent and
Notch (see 190198)-dependent forebrain development. In isolated cortical
progenitor cells, SMRT was critical for preventing retinoic acid
receptor (see 180220)-dependent induction of differentiation along a
neuronal pathway in the absence of any ligand. Jepsen et al. (2007)
demonstrated that SMRT represses expression of the jumonji
domain-containing gene JMJD3 (611577), a direct retinoic acid receptor
target that functions as a histone H3 trimethyl K27 demethylase and
which is capable of activating specific components of the neurogenic
program.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jiang et al. (2001) determined that the NCOR2 gene contains 45 exons.

MAPPING

By FISH, Ordentlich et al. (1999) mapped the NCOR2 gene to chromosome
12q24.

ANIMAL MODEL

Pei et al. (2011) generated knockin mice expressing point mutations in
both RIDs of Smrt, which disrupted its interaction with nuclear
receptors. On a pure C57BL/6J background, these mice, which Pei et al.
(2011) called Smrt(mRID) mice, died shortly after birth from acute
respiratory distress syndrome due to abnormal terminal differentiation
of type I pneumocytes. Maternal delivery of antithyroid drugs, but not
antagonists of other nuclear receptors, rescued lethality in Smrt(mRID)
pups. Mice treated with antithyroid drugs during the time of terminal
lung differentiation were born alive, showed no evidence of respiratory
distress, and survived to adulthood. Microarray analysis revealed that
Klf2 (602016) expression was downregulated in Smrt(mRID) mice. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis of MLE-12 mouse lung carcinoma cells showed
that both Smrt and thyroid hormone receptor bound a conserved enhancer
region downstream of the mouse Klf2 gene. Overexpression of Klf2 in
MLE-12 cells upregulated expression of type I pneumocyte markers, and
targeted disruption of Klf2 in mouse lung recapitulated the phenotype of
Smrt(mRID) mice. Pei et al. (2011) concluded that regulation of KLF2
expression by SMRT is required for terminal lung development.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, J. D.; Evans, R. M.: A transcriptional co-repressor that
interacts with nuclear hormone receptors. Nature 377: 454-457, 1995.

2. Fischle, W.; Dequiedt, F.; Hendzel, M. J.; Guenther, M. G.; Lazar,
M. A.; Voelter, W.; Verdin, E.: Enzymatic activity associated with
class II HDACs is dependent on a multiprotein complex containing HDAC3
and SMRT/N-CoR. Molec. Cell 9: 45-57, 2002.

3. Hoberg, J. E.; Yeung, F.; Mayo, M. W.: SMRT derepression by the
I-kappa-B kinase alpha: a prerequisite to NF-kappa-B transcription
and survival. Molec. Cell 16: 245-255, 2004.

4. Horlein, A. J.; Naar, A. M.; Heinzel, T.; Torchia, J.; Gloss, B.;
Kurokawa, R.; Ryan, A.; Kamel, Y.; Soderstrom, M.; Glass, C. K.; Rosenfeld,
M. G.: Ligand-independent repression by the thyroid hormone receptor
mediated by a nuclear receptor co-repressor. Nature 377: 397-403,
1995.

5. Hu, X.; Lazar, M. A.: The CoRNR motif controls the recruitment
of corepressors by nuclear hormone receptors. Nature 402: 93-96,
1999.

6. Jepsen, K.; Solum, D.; Zhou, T.; McEvilly, R. J.; Kim, H.-J.; Glass,
C. K.; Hermanson, O.; Rosenfeld, M. G.: SMRT-mediated repression
of an H3K27 demethylase in progression from neural stem to neuron. Nature 450:
415-419, 2007.

7. Jiang, Q.; Galiegue-Zouitina, S.; Roumier, C.; Hildebrand, M. P.;
Thomas, S.; Coignet, L. J.: Genomic organization and refined mapping
of the human nuclear corepressor 2 (NCOR2)/ silencing mediator of
retinoid and thyroid hormone receptor (SMRT) gene on chromosome 12q24.3. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 92: 217-220, 2001.

8. Ordentlich, P.; Downes, M.; Xie, W.; Genin, A.; Spinner, N. B.;
Evans, R. M.: Unique forms of human and mouse nuclear receptor corepressor
SMRT. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 2639-2644, 1999.

9. Pei, L.; Leblanc, M.; Barish, G.; Atkins, A.; Nofsinger, R.; Whyte,
J.; Gold, D.; He, M.; Kawamura, K.; Li, H.-R.; Downes, M.; Yu, R.
T.; Powell, H. C.; Lingrel, J. B.; Evans, R. M.: Thyroid hormone
receptor repression is linked to type I pneumocyte-associated respiratory
distress syndrome. Nature Med. 17: 1466-1472, 2011.

10. Watson, P. J.; Fairall, L.; Santos, G. M.; Schwabe, J. W. R.:
Structure of HDAC3 bound to co-repressor and inositol tetraphosphate. Nature 481:
335-340, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/8/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/21/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/3/2006
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 5/15/2002
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 8/7/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/10/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/20/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/6/1995

EDITED alopez: 02/13/2012
terry: 2/8/2012
carol: 1/20/2012
mgross: 12/22/2011
terry: 12/21/2011
alopez: 5/9/2008
terry: 4/22/2008
mgross: 6/8/2006
terry: 5/3/2006
mgross: 5/15/2002
mcapotos: 8/7/2001
alopez: 2/10/2000
mgross: 12/20/1999
mgross: 4/27/1999
mgross: 4/21/1999
terry: 4/20/1999
mark: 10/6/1995

300810	TITLE *300810 MICRO RNA 98; MIR98
;;miRNA98;;
MIRN98
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), such as MIR98, are endogenous noncoding RNAs of
about 22 nucleotides that bind complementary sequences within the
3-prime UTRs of target mRNAs, leading to translational repression and/or
mRNA cleavage (Hu et al., 2009).

CLONING

Mourelatos et al. (2002) identified MIR98 as 1 of at least 40 miRNAs
present in a large 15S RNP complex containing EIF2C2 (606229), GEMIN3
(606168), and GEMIN4 (606969). The MIR98 sequence is
UGAGGUAGUAAGUUGUAUUGUU.

GENE FUNCTION

Hu et al. (2009) noted that miRNAs have been implicated in the fine
tuning of the Toll-like receptor (TLR; see 603030)-mediated inflammatory
response. Using Northern and Western blot analyses and PCR with human
cholangiocytes, which express multiple TLRs, Hu et al. (2009) showed
that MIR98 and LET7 (see MIRNLET7A1; 605386) regulated CIS (CISH;
602441) protein expression via translational suppression. CIS expression
was upregulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or Cryptosporidium parvum
exposure, and this upregulation involved downregulation of MIR98 and
LET7, which relieved MIR98- and LET7-mediated translational repression
of CIS. Gain- and loss-of-function studies showed that CIS accelerated
degradation of IKBA (NFKBIA; 164008) and enhanced NFKB (see 164011)
activation in cholangiocytes in response to LPS stimulation or C. parvum
exposure.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Mourelatos et al. (2002) mapped the MIR98
gene to chromosome X.

REFERENCE 1. Hu, G.; Zhou, R.; Liu, J.; Gong, A.-Y.; Eischeid, A. N.; Dittman,
J. W.; Chen, X.-M.: MicroRNA-98 and let-7 confer cholangiocyte expression
of cytokine-inducible Src homology 2-containing protein in response
to microbial challenge. J. Immun. 183: 1617-1624, 2009.

2. Mourelatos, Z.; Dostie, J.; Paushkin, S.; Sharma, A.; Charroux,
B.; Abel, L.; Rappsilber, J.; Mann, M.; Dreyfuss, G.: miRNPs: a novel
class of ribonucleoproteins containing numerous microRNAs. Genes
Dev. 16: 720-728, 2002.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/11/2009

EDITED mgross: 12/11/2009

150330	TITLE *150330 LAMIN A/C; LMNA
;;LAMIN A;;
LAMIN C; LMNC
PRELAMIN A, INCLUDED;;
PROGERIN, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The LMNA gene encodes lamin A and lamin C. Lamins are structural protein
components of the nuclear lamina, a protein network underlying the inner
nuclear membrane that determines nuclear shape and size. The lamins
constitute a class of intermediate filaments. Three types of lamins, A,
B (see LMNB1; 150340), and C, have been described in mammalian cells
(Fisher et al., 1986).

CLONING

By screening human fibroblast and hepatoma cDNA libraries, Fisher et al.
(1986) isolated cDNAs corresponding to lamin A and lamin C. The lamin A
and C proteins are predicted to have molecular masses of 74 kD and 65
kD, respectively. Fisher et al. (1986) and McKeon et al. (1986) found
that the deduced amino acid sequences from cDNA clones of human lamin A
and C are identical for the first 566 amino acids, but that lamin A
contains an extra 98 amino acids (corresponding to approximately 9 kD)
at the C terminus. Lamin C has 6 unique C-terminal amino acids. Both
lamins A and C contain a 360-residue alpha-helical domain with homology
to a corresponding alpha-helical rod domain that is the structural
hallmark of all intermediate filament proteins. Fisher et al. (1986) and
McKeon et al. (1986) concluded that lamin A and lamin C arise by
alternative splicing from the same gene.

Guilly et al. (1987) detected a 3-kb lamin A mRNA and a 2.1-kb lamin C
mRNA in epithelial HeLa cells, but not in T lymphoblasts. Lamin B was
the only lamin present in T lymphoblasts. Guilly et al. (1987) noted
that the transport of newly synthesized proteins from the cytoplasm into
the nucleus differs from the transport of proteins into other
organelles, such as mitochondria, in that sequences are not cleaved and
remain a permanent feature of the mature polypeptide. Lamin A appears to
be an exception to this rule.

Weber et al. (1989) showed that lamin A is synthesized as a precursor
molecule called prelamin A. Maturation of lamin A involves the removal
of 18 residues from the C terminus, which is accomplished by
isoprenylation and farnesylation involving a C-terminal CAAX
(cysteine-aliphatic-aliphatic-any amino acid) box (Sinensky et al.,
1994).

GENE STRUCTURE

Lin and Worman (1993) demonstrated that the coding region of the lamin
A/C gene spans approximately 24 kb and contains 12 exons. Alternative
splicing within exon 10 gives rise to 2 different mRNAs that code for
prelamin A and lamin C.

MAPPING

Wydner et al. (1996) mapped the LMNA gene to chromosome 1q21.2-q21.3 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Gross (2013) mapped the LMNA gene to chromosome 1q22 based on an
alignment of the LMNA sequence (GenBank GENBANK AY847595) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Lloyd et al. (2002) identified proteins interacting with the C-terminal
domain of lamin A by screening a mouse 3T3-L1 adipocyte library in a
yeast 2-hybrid interaction screen. Using this approach, the adipocyte
differentiation factor SREBP1 (184756) was identified as a novel lamin A
interactor. In vitro glutathione S-transferase pull-down and in vivo
coimmunoprecipitation studies confirmed an interaction between lamin A
and both SREBP1a and 1c. A binding site for lamin A was identified in
the N-terminal transcription factor domain of SREBP1, between residues
227 and 487. The binding of lamin A to SREBP1 was noticeably reduced by
FPLD mutations. The authors speculated that fat loss seen in
laminopathies may be caused in part by reduced binding of the adipocyte
differentiation factor SREBP1 to lamin A.

Favreau et al. (2004) analyzed myoblast-to-myotube differentiation in a
mouse myogenic cell line overexpressing wildtype or mutant human lamin
A. In contrast to clones overexpressing wildtype lamin A, those
expressing lamin A with the R453W mutation (150330.0002) differentiated
poorly or not at all, did not exit the cell cycle properly, and were
extensively committed to apoptosis. Clones expressing the R482W mutation
(150330.0011) differentiated normally. Favreau et al. (2004) concluded
that lamin A mutated at arginine-453 fails to build a functional
scaffold and/or fails to maintain the chromatin compartmentation
required for differentiation of myoblasts into myocytes.

Using a novel technique to measure nuclear deformation in response to
biaxial strain applied to cells, Lammerding et al. (2004) found that
Lmna -/- cells showed increased nuclear deformation, defective
mechanotransduction, and impaired viability under mechanical strain
compared to wildtype cells. In addition, activity of nuclear
factor-kappa-B (NFKB; 164011), a mechanical stress-responsive
transcription factor that can act as an antiapoptotic signal, was
impaired in the Lmna -/- cells. The findings suggested that lamin A/C
deficiency is associated with both defective nuclear mechanics and
impaired transcriptional activation.

Broers et al. (2004) used a cell compression device to compare wildtype
and Lmna-knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts, and found that Lmna-null
cells showed significantly decreased mechanical stiffness and
significantly lower bursting force. Partial rescue of the phenotype by
transfection with either lamin A or lamin C prevented gross nuclear
disruption, but was unable to fully restore mechanical stiffness.
Confocal microscopy revealed that the nuclei of Lmna-null cells
exhibited an isotropic deformation upon indentation, despite an
anisotropic deformation of the cell as a whole. This nuclear behavior
suggested a loss of interaction of the disturbed nucleus with the
surrounding cytoskeleton. Actin-(102610), vimentin-(193060), and
tubulin-(191110) based filaments showed disturbed interaction in
Lmna-null cells. Broers et al. (2004) suggested that in addition to the
loss of nuclear stiffness, the loss of a physical interaction between
nuclear structures (i.e., lamins) and the cytoskeleton may cause more
general cellular weakness; they proposed a potential key function for
lamins in maintaining cellular tensegrity.

Van Berlo et al. (2005) showed that A-type lamins were essential for the
inhibition of fibroblast proliferation by TGF-beta-1 (190180).
TGF-beta-1 dephosphorylated RB1 (614041) through protein phosphatase 2A
(PPP2CA; 176915), both of which were associated with lamin A/C. In
addition, lamin A/C modulated the effect of TGF-beta-1 on collagen
production, a marker of mesenchymal differentiation. Van Berlo et al.
(2005) proposed a role for lamin A/C in control of gene activity
downstream of TGF-beta-1, via nuclear phosphatases such as PPP2CA.

Capanni et al. (2005) showed that the lamin A precursor was specifically
accumulated in lipodystrophy cells. Pre-lamin A was located at the
nuclear envelope and colocalized with SREBP1 Binding of SREBP1 to the
lamin A precursor was detected in patient fibroblasts, as well as in
control fibroblasts, forced to accumulate pre-lamin A by farnesylation
inhibitors. In contrast, SREBP1 did not interact in vivo with mature
lamin A or C in cultured fibroblasts. Inhibition of lamin A precursor
processing in 3T3-L1 preadipocytes resulted in sequestration of SREBP1
at the nuclear rim, thus decreasing the pool of active SREBP1 that
normally activates PPAR-gamma (601487) and causing impairment of
preadipocyte differentiation. This defect could be rescued by treatment
with troglitazone, a known PPAR-gamma ligand activating the adipogenic
program.

Scaffidi and Misteli (2006) showed that the same molecular mechanism
responsible for Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS; 176670) is
active in healthy cells. Cell nuclei from old individuals acquire
defects similar to those of HGPS patient cells, including changes in
histone modifications and increased DNA damage. Age-related nuclear
defects are caused by sporadic use, in healthy individuals, of the same
cryptic splice site in lamin A whose constitutive activation causes
HGPS. Inhibition of this splice site reverses the nuclear defects
associated with aging. Scaffidi and Misteli (2006) concluded that their
observations implicate lamin A in physiologic aging.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 (see 609423) protease inhibitors
(PIs) targeting the viral aspartyl protease are a cornerstone of
treatment for HIV infection and disease, but they are associated with
lipodystrophy and other side effects. Coffinier et al. (2007) found that
treatment of human and mouse fibroblasts with HIV-PIs caused an
accumulation of prelamin A. The prelamin A in HIV-PI-treated fibroblasts
migrated more rapidly than nonfarnesylated prelamin A, comigrating with
the farnesylated form found in ZMPSTE24 (606480)-deficient fibroblasts.
HIV-PI-treated heterozygous ZMPSTE24 fibroblasts exhibited an
exaggerated accumulation of farnesyl-prelamin A. Western blot and
enzymatic analysis showed that HIV-PIs inhibited ZMPSTE24 activity and
endoproteolytic processing of a GFP-prelamin A fusion protein, but they
did not affect farnesylation of HDJ2 (DNAJA1; 602837) or activity of
farnesyltransferase (see 134635), ICMT (605851), and RCE1 (605385) in
vitro. Coffinier et al. (2007) concluded that HIV-PIs inhibit ZMPSTE24,
leading to an accumulation of farnesyl-prelamin A, possibly explaining
HIV-PI side effects.

The nuclear envelope LINC (links the nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton)
complex, which is formed by SUN (e.g., SUN1, 607723) and nesprin (e.g.,
SYNE1, 608441) proteins, provides a direct connection between the
nuclear lamina and the cytoskeleton. Haque et al. (2010) stated that
SUN1 and SUN2 interact with LMNA and that LMNA is required for the
nuclear envelope localization of SUN2, but not SUN1. They found that
LMNA mutations associated with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD2;
181350) and HGPS disrupted interaction of LMNA with mouse Sun1 and human
SUN2. Nuclear localization of SUN1 and SUN2 was not impaired in EDMD2 or
HGPS cell lines. Expression of SUN1, but not SUN2, at the nuclear
envelope was enhanced in some HGPS cells, likely due to increased
interaction of SUN1 with accumulated prelamin A. Haque et al. (2010)
proposed that different perturbations in LMNA-SUN protein interactions
may underlie the opposing effects of EDMD and HGPS mutations on nuclear
and cellular mechanics.

Liu et al. (2011) reported the generation of induced pluripotent stem
cells (iPSCs) from fibroblasts obtained from patients with HGPS. HGPS
iPSCs showed absence of progerin, and more importantly, lacked the
nuclear envelope and epigenetic alterations normally associated with
premature aging. Upon differentiation of HGPS iPSCs, progerin and its
aging-associated phenotypic consequences were restored. Specifically,
directed differentiation of HGPS iPSCs to vascular smooth muscle cells
led to the appearance of premature senescence phenotypes associated with
vascular aging. Additionally, their studies identified DNA-dependent
protein kinase catalytic subunit (PRKDC; 600899) as a downstream target
of progerin. The absence of nuclear PRKDC holoenzyme correlated with
premature as well as physiologic aging. Because progerin also
accumulates during physiologic aging, Liu et al. (2011) argued that
their results provided an in vitro iPSC-based model to study the
pathogenesis of human premature and physiologic vascular aging.

Chen et al. (2012) showed that cells from Lmna -/- mice, which represent
EDMD2, cells from Lmna(L530P/L530P) mice, which represent HGPS, and
cells from HGPS patients all had overaccumulation of the inner nuclear
envelope SUN1 protein. In wildtype cells, Lmna and Sun1 colocalized at
the nuclear envelope. In Lmna -/- cells, larger amounts of Sun1 were
found at the nuclear envelope and also in the Golgi. The larger amounts
of Sun1 appeared to result from reduced protein turnover. Transfection
of increasing amounts of mouse Sun1 into Lmna-null/Sun1-null murine
cells resulted in increased prevalence of nuclear herniations and
apoptosis, and the herniations appeared to result from Sun1 accumulation
in the Golgi. Loss of the Sun1 gene in both mouse models extensively
rescued cellular, tissue, organ, and lifespan abnormalities. Similarly,
knockdown of overaccumulated SUN1 protein in primary human HGPS cells
corrected nuclear defects and cellular senescence. The findings
indicated that accumulation of SUN1 is a common pathogenetic event in
these disorders.

In mice, Ho et al. (2013) found that lamin A/C-deficient (Lmna-null) and
Lmna(N195K/N195K) (see 150330.0007) mutant cells have impaired nuclear
translocation and downstream signaling of the mechanosensitive
transcription factor megakaryoblastic leukemia-1 (MKL1; 606078), a
myocardin family member that is pivotal in cardiac development and
function. Altered nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of MKL1 was caused by
altered actin dynamics in Lmna-null and Lmna(N195K/N195K) mutant cells.
Ectopic expression of the nuclear envelope protein emerin (300384),
which is mislocalized in Lmna mutant cells and also linked to
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (310300) and dilated cardiomyopathy,
restored MKL1 nuclear translocation and rescued actin dynamics in mutant
cells. Ho et al. (2013) concluded that their findings presented a novel
mechanism that could provide insight into the disease etiology for the
cardiac phenotype in many laminopathies, whereby lamin A/C and emerin
regulate gene expression through modulation of nuclear and cytoskeletal
actin polymerization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mutations in the LMNA gene cause a wide range of human diseases. Since
more than 10 different clinical syndromes have been attributed to LMNA
mutations, many of which show overlapping features, attempts at broad
classification have been proposed. Worman and Bonne (2007) suggested
that the disorders may be classified into 4 major types: diseases of
striated and cardiac muscle; lipodystrophy syndromes; peripheral
neuropathy; and premature aging. Benedetti et al. (2007) suggested 2
main groups: (1) neuromuscular and cardiac disorders, and (2)
lipodystrophy and premature aging disorders. The phenotypic
heterogeneity of diseases resulting from a mutation in a single gene can
be explained by the numerous roles of the nuclear lamina, including
maintenance of nuclear shape and structure, as well as functional roles
in transcriptional regulation and heterochromatin organization (review
by Capell and Collins, 2006).

Genschel and Schmidt (2000) compiled a list of 41 known mutations,
predominantly missense, in the LMNA gene. Twenty-three different
mutations had been shown to cause autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss
muscular dystrophy (EDMD2; 181350). Three mutations had been reported to
cause autosomal dominant limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD1B;
159001), 8 mutations were known to result in dilated cardiomyopathy
(CMD1A; 115200), and 7 mutations were reported to cause familial partial
lipodystrophy (FPLD2; 151660). In addition, 1 mutation in LMNA (H222Y;
150330.0014) appeared to be responsible for an autosomal recessive,
atypical form of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD3; see 181350).

- Muscular Dystrophies

In 5 families with autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
(EDMD2; 181350), Bonne et al. (1999) identified 4 mutations in the LMNA
gene (150330.0001-150330.0004) that cosegregated with the disease
phenotype. These findings represented the first identification of
mutations in a component of the nuclear lamina as a cause of an
inherited muscle disorder. The authors noted that lamins interact with
integral proteins of the inner nuclear membrane, including emerin
(300384), which is mutated in the X-linked form of Emery-Dreifuss
muscular dystrophy (EDMD1; 310300).

Raffaele di Barletta et al. (2000) showed that heterozygous mutations in
LMNA may cause diverse phenotypes ranging from typical EDMD to no
phenotypic effect. LMNA mutations in patients with autosomal dominant
EDMD occur in the tail and in the 2A rod domain of the protein,
suggesting that unique interactions between lamin A/C and other nuclear
components have an important role in cardiac and skeletal muscle
function. They identified a homozygous LMNA mutation (H222Y;
150330.0014) in 1 patient born of consanguineous unaffected parents,
consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance and a severe atypical
phenotype lacking cardiac features.

Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 1B (LGMD1B; 159001) is an autosomal
dominant, slowly progressive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy with
age-related atrioventricular cardiac conduction disturbances and the
absence of early contractures. Muchir et al. (2000) found mutations in
the LMNA gene in 3 LGMD1B families: a missense mutation (150330.0017), a
deletion of a codon (150330.0018), and a splice donor site mutation
(150330.0019). The 3 mutations were identified in all affected members
of the corresponding families and were absent in 100 unrelated control
subjects.

Quijano-Roy et al. (2008) described a form of congenital muscular
dystrophy (MDC) with onset in the first year of life in 15 children
resulting from de novo heterozygous mutations in the LMNA gene (see,
e.g., 150330.0047-150330.0049). Three patients had severe early-onset
disease, with decreased fetal movements in utero, no motor development,
severe hypotonia, diffuse limb and axial muscle weakness and atrophy,
and talipes foot deformities. The remaining 12 children initially
acquired head and trunk control and independent ambulation, but most
lost head control due to neck extensor weakness, a phenotype consistent
with 'dropped head syndrome.' Ten children required ventilatory support.
Cardiac arrhythmias were observed in 4 of the oldest patients, but were
symptomatic only in 1. Quijano-Roy et al. (2008) concluded that the
identified LMNA mutations appeared to correlate with a relatively severe
phenotype, broadening the spectrum of laminopathies. The authors
suggested that this group of patients may define a new disease entity,
which they designated LMNA-related congenital muscular dystrophy
(613205).

Benedetti et al. (2007) reported 27 individuals with mutations in the
LMNA gene resulting in a wide range of neuromuscular disorders.
Phenotypic analysis yielded 2 broad groups of patients. One group
included patients with childhood onset who had skeletal muscle
involvement with predominant scapuloperoneal and facial weakness,
consistent with EDMD or congenital muscular dystrophy. The second group
included patients with later or adult onset who had cardiac disorders or
a limb-girdle myopathy, consistent with LGMD1B. Those in the group with
early onset tended to have missense mutations, whereas those in the
group with adult onset tended to have truncating mutations. Analysis of
the variants showed that those associated with early-onset phenotypes
were primarily found in the Ig-like domain and in coil 2A, which may
interfere with binding to specific ligands. Those associated with later
onset were mostly located in the rod domain and in coil 2B, which was
predicted to affect the surface of lamin A/C dimers and lead to impaired
filament assembly. Benedetti et al. (2007) speculated that there may be
2 different pathogenetic mechanisms associated with neuromuscular
LMNA-related disorders: late-onset phenotypes may arise through loss of
LMNA function secondary to haploinsufficiency, whereas dominant-negative
or toxic gain-of-function mechanisms may underlie the more severe early
phenotypes.

- Dilated Cardiomyopathy and Cardiac Conduction Defects

Fatkin et al. (1999) studied the LMNA gene in 11 families with autosomal
dominant dilated cardiomyopathy and conduction system disease (CMD1A;
115200) linked to a region on chromosome 1 overlapping that of the LMNA
gene. They identified 5 novel missense mutations
(150330.0004-150330.0009): 4 in the alpha-helical rod domain of lamin A,
and 1 in the tail domain of lamin C. No family members with mutations
had joint contractures or skeletal myopathy characteristic of autosomal
dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. Furthermore, serum creatine
kinase levels were normal in family members with mutations of the lamin
A rod domain, but mildly elevated in some family members with a defect
in the lamin C tail domain. The authors noted that mutations in the rod
domain of the protein led to dilated cardiomyopathy, whereas mutations
in the head or tail domain caused Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.

Van der Kooi et al. (2002) reported a sporadic patient and 2 unrelated
families with mutations in the LMNA gene who presented with varying
degrees and combinations of muscular dystrophy, partial lipodystrophy,
and cardiomyopathy with conduction defects, presumably due to single
mutations (see 150330.0003 and 150330.0005).

Sebillon et al. (2003) screened the coding sequence of LMNA in DNA
samples from 66 index cases of dilated cardiomyopathy with or without
associated features. They identified a glu161-to-lys mutation (E161K;
150330.0028) in a family with early-onset atrial fibrillation preceding
or coexisting with dilated cardiomyopathy, the previously described
R377H mutation (150330.0017) in the family with quadriceps myopathy
associated with dilated cardiomyopathy previously reported by Charniot
et al. (2003), and a 28insA mutation (150330.0029) leading to a
premature stop codon in a third family with dilated cardiomyopathy with
conduction defects. No mutation in LMNA was found in cases with isolated
dilated cardiomyopathy.

Meune et al. (2006) investigated the efficacy of implantable
cardioverter-defibrillators (ICDs) in the primary prevention of sudden
death in patients with cardiomyopathy due to lamin A/C gene mutations.
Patients referred for permanent cardiac pacing were systematically
offered the implantation of an ICD. The patients were enrolled solely on
the basis of the presence of lamin A/C mutations associated with cardiac
conduction defects. Indications for pacemaker implantation were
progressive conduction block and sinus block. In all, 19 patients were
treated. Meune et al. (2006) concluded that ICD implantation in patients
with lamin A/C mutations who are in need of a pacemaker is effective in
treating possibly lethal tachyarrhythmias, and that implantation of an
ICD, rather than a pacemaker, should be considered for such patients.

Taylor et al. (2003) screened the LMNA gene in 40 families and 9
sporadic patients with CMD with or without muscular dystrophy and
identified mutations in 3 families (see, e.g., 150330.0017) and 1
sporadic patient (S573L; 150330.0041). All mutations involved a
conserved residue, cosegregated with the disease within the families,
and were not found in 300 control chromosomes. LMNA mutation carriers
had a severe and progressive form of CMD with significantly poorer
cumulative survival compared to noncarrier CMD patients.

- Dilated Cardiomyopathy and Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism

In a 17-year-old Caucasian female with premature ovarian failure and
dilated cardiomyopathy, who had features consistent with atypical Werner
syndrome (see 277700) but who was negative for mutation in the RECQL2
gene (604611), Nguyen et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a
missense mutation in the LMNA gene (L59R; 150330.0052). The authors
suggested the diagnosis of a laminopathy, most likely an atypical form
of mandibuloacral dysplasia (see 248370).

In a 15-year-old Caucasian girl with premature ovarian failure and
dilated cardiomyopathy, McPherson et al. (2009) identified
heterozygosity for the L59R mutation in the LMNA gene. McPherson et al.
(2009) noted phenotypic similarities between this patient and the
patient previously reported by Nguyen et al. (2007), who carried the
same mutation, as well as a patient originally described by Chen et al.
(2003) with an adjacent A57P mutation in LMNA (150330.0030). Features
common to these 3 patients included premature ovarian failure, dilated
cardiomyopathy, lipodystrophy, and progressive facial and skeletal
changes involving micrognathia and sloping shoulders, but not
acroosteolysis. Although the appearance of these patients was somewhat
progeroid, none had severe growth failure, alopecia, or rapidly
progressive atherosclerosis, and McPherson et al. (2009) suggested that
the phenotype represents a distinct laminopathy involving dilated
cardiomyopathy and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (212112).

- Lipodystrophy Disorders

Patients with Dunnigan-type familial partial lipodystrophy, or partial
lipodystrophy type 2 (FPLD2; 151660), are born with normal fat
distribution, but after puberty experience regional and progressive
adipocyte degeneration, often associated with profound insulin
resistance and diabetes. Cao and Hegele (2000) hypothesized that the
analogy between the regional muscle wasting in autosomal dominant
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and the regional adipocyte
degeneration in FPLD, in addition to the chromosomal localization of the
FPLD2 locus on 1q21-q22, made LMNA a good candidate gene for FPLD2.
Studies of 5 Canadian probands with familial partial lipodystrophy of
Dunnigan type indicated that each had a novel missense mutation (R482Q;
150330.0010) that cosegregated with the lipodystrophy phenotype and was
absent from 2,000 normal alleles.

Shackleton et al. (2000) identified 5 different missense mutations in
the LMNA gene (see, e.g., 150330.0010-150330.0012) among 10 kindreds and
3 individuals with partial lipodystrophy. All of the mutations occurred
in exon 8, which the authors noted is within the C-terminal globular
domain of lamin A/C. Flier (2000) commented on the significance of LMNA
mutations in partial lipodystrophy.

Vantyghem et al. (2004) characterized the neuromuscular and cardiac
phenotypes of FPLD patients bearing the heterozygous R482W mutation.
Fourteen patients from 2 unrelated families, including 10 affected
subjects, were studied. Clinical and histologic examination showed an
incapacitating, progressive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy in a
42-year-old woman that had been present since childhood, associated with
a typical postpubertal FPLD phenotype. Six of 8 adults presented the
association of calf hypertrophy, perihumeral muscular atrophy, and a
rolling gait due to proximal lower limb weakness. Muscular histology was
compatible with muscular dystrophy in one of them and/or showed a
nonspecific excess of lipid droplets (in 3 cases). Cardiac septal
hypertrophy and atherosclerosis were frequent in FPLD patients. In
addition, a 24-year-old FPLD patient had a symptomatic second-degree
atrioventricular block. Vantyghem et al. (2004) concluded that most
lipodystrophic patients affected by the FPLD-linked R482W mutation show
muscular and cardiac abnormalities.

Mandibuloacral dysplasia (see 248370) is a rare autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by postnatal growth retardation, craniofacial
anomalies, skeletal malformations, and mottled cutaneous pigmentation.
Patients with MAD frequently have partial lipodystrophy and insulin
resistance, which are features seen in FPLD. In all affected members of
5 consanguineous Italian families with MAD, Novelli et al. (2002)
identified a homozygous missense mutation (R527H; 150330.0021) in the
LMNA gene. Patient skin fibroblasts showed nuclei that presented
abnormal lamin A/C distribution and a dysmorphic envelope, demonstrating
the pathogenic effect of the mutation.

In affected members of a consanguineous family from north India,
Plasilova et al. (2004) identified a homozygous missense mutation in the
LMNA gene (150330.0033). The extent of skeletal lesions in this family
were consistent with MAD, but affected individuals also had classic
features of progeria. Plasilova et al. (2004) suggested that autosomal
recessive HGPS and mandibuloacral dysplasia may represent a single
disorder with varying degrees of disease severity.

Decaudain et al. (2007) identified changes in codon 482 of the LMNA gene
(see, e.g., R482Q 150330.0010 and R482W; 150330.0011) in 17 of 277
unrelated adults investigated for lipodystrophy and/or insulin
resistance. All 17 had classic features of FPLD2. Ten additional
patients who fulfilled the International Diabetes Federation diagnostic
criteria for metabolic syndrome were found to have heterozygous LMNA
mutations that were not in codon 482, but affected all 3 domains of the
protein, the N terminal, central rod domain, and C terminal globulin
domain (see, e.g., R399C; 150330.0043). Because the phenotype of these
patients was not typical of FPLD2, the diagnosis of laminopathy was
delayed. Although lipodystrophy was less severe than in typical FPLD2,
common features included calf hypertrophy, myalgia, and muscle cramps or
weakness. Two patients had cardiac conduction disturbances. Metabolic
alterations were prominent, especially insulin resistance and
hypertriglyceridemia.

- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease Type 2B1

In affected members of inbred Algerian families with an axonal form of
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease linked to chromosome 1q21.2-q21.3 (CMT2B1;
605588), De Sandre-Giovannoli et al. (2002) found a shared common
homozygous ancestral haplotype that was suggestive of a founder mutation
and identified a unique mutation in the LMNA rod domain (R298C;
150330.0020). Ultrastructural studies of sciatic nerves of Lmna-null
mice showed a strong reduction of axon density, axonal enlargement, and
the presence of nonmyelinated axons, all of which were highly similar to
the phenotypes of human peripheral axonopathies.

- Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome and Other Premature
Aging Syndromes

Eriksson et al. (2003) identified de novo heterozygous point mutations
in lamin A that cause Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS;
176670). Eighteen of 20 classic cases of HGPS harbored the identical de
novo single-base substitution resulting in a silent gly-to-gly change at
codon 608 within exon 11 (150330.0022). This change creates an exonic
consensus splice site and activates cryptic splicing, leading to
deletion of 50 codons at the end of prelamin A. This prelamin A still
retains the CAAX box but lacks the site for endoproteolytic cleavage.
Eriksson et al. (2003) suggested that there is at least 1 site for
phosphorylation, ser625, that is deleted in the abnormal lamin A
protein. De Sandre-Giovannoli et al. (2003) independently identified the
heterozygous exon 11 cryptic splice site activation mutation
(1824C-T+1819-1968del; 150330.0022) in 2 HGPS patients. Later cellular
studies (Capell et al., 2005; Glynn and Glover, 2005; Toth et al., 2005)
indicated that Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome results from the
production of a truncated prelamin A, called progerin, which is
farnesylated at its C terminus and accumulates at the nuclear envelope,
causing misshapen nuclei (Yang et al., 2006).

Werner syndrome (277700) is an autosomal recessive progeroid syndrome
caused by mutation in the RECQL2 gene (WRN; 604611). Chen et al. (2003)
reported that of 129 index patients referred to their international
registry for molecular diagnosis of Werner syndrome, 26 (20%) had
wildtype RECQL2 coding regions and were categorized as having 'atypical
Werner syndrome' or 'non-WRN' on the basis of molecular criteria.
Because of some phenotypic similarities between Werner syndrome and
laminopathies including Hutchinson-Gilford progeria, Chen et al. (2003)
sequenced all exons of the LMNA gene in these 26 individuals and found
heterozygosity for novel missense mutations in LMNA in 4 (15%): A57P
(150330.0030), R133L (150330.0027) in 2 persons, and L140R
(150330.0031). Hegele (2003) stated that the clinical designation of
Werner syndrome for each of the 4 patients of Chen et al. (2003), in
whom mutations in the LMNA gene were found, appeared somewhat insecure.
He noted that the comparatively young ages of onset in the patients with
mutant LMNA would be just as consistent with late-onset
Hutchinson-Gilford syndrome as with early-onset Werner syndrome.
Patients with so-called atypical Werner syndrome and mutant LMNA also
expressed components of nonprogeroid laminopathies. Hegele (2003)
suggested that genomic DNA analysis can help draw a diagnostic line that
clarifies potential overlap between older patients with
Hutchinson-Gilford syndrome and younger patients with Werner syndrome,
and that therapies may depend on precise molecular classification.

McPherson et al. (2009) suggested that the patient in whom Chen et al.
(2003) identified an A57P LMNA mutation had a distinct phenotype
involving dilated cardiomyopathy and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism
(212112).

Csoka et al. (2004) screened 13 cell lines from atypical progeroid
patients for mutation in the LMNA gene. They identified 3 novel
heterozygous missense mutations in the LMNA gene in 3 patients: a
13-year-old female with a progeroid syndrome, a 15-year-old male with a
lipodystrophy, and a 20-year-old male with 'atypical progeria.' The
mutations identified in the last 2 patients were the most 5-prime and
3-prime missense mutations, respectively, in LMNA identified to that
time.

Reddel and Weiss (2004) reported that transcription efficiencies of the
mutant and wildtype LMNA alleles were equivalent in HGPS. The mutant
allele gave 2 types of transcripts that encoded truncated and normal
lamin A. Abnormally spliced progerin transcript constituted the majority
(84.5%) of the total steady-state mRNA derived from the mutant allele.
The abnormally spliced progerin transcript was a minority (40%) of all
lamin A transcripts obtained from both alleles. Reddel and Weiss (2004)
concluded that the mutated progerin functions as a dominant negative by
interfering with the structure of the nuclear lamina, intranuclear
architecture, and macromolecular interactions, which collectively would
have a major impact on nuclear function.

Fibroblasts from individuals with HGPS have severe morphologic
abnormalities in nuclear envelope structure. Scaffidi and Misteli (2005)
showed that the cellular disease phenotype is reversible in cells from
individuals with HGPS. Introduction of wildtype lamin A protein did not
rescue the cellular disease manifestations. The mutant LMNA mRNA and
lamin A protein could be efficiently eliminated by correction of the
aberrant splicing event using a modified oligonucleotide targeted to the
activated cryptic splice site. Upon splicing correction, HGPS
fibroblasts assumed normal nuclear morphology, the aberrant nuclear
distribution and cellular levels of lamina-associated proteins were
rescued, defects in heterochromatin-specific histone modifications were
corrected, and proper expression of several misregulated genes was
reestablished. The results established proof of principle for the
correction of the premature aging phenotype in individuals with HGPS.

Huang et al. (2005) designed short hairpin RNAs (shRNA) targeting
mutated pre-spliced or mature LMNA mRNAs and expressed them in HGPS
fibroblasts carrying the 1824C-T mutation (150330.0022). One of the
shRNAs reduced the expression levels of mutant lamin A (so-called LA
delta-50) to 26% or lower. The reduced expression was associated with
amelioration of abnormal nuclear morphology, improvement of
proliferative potential, and reduction in the numbers of senescent
cells.

Moulson et al. (2007) reported 2 unrelated patients with extremely
severe forms of HGPS associated with unusual mutations in the LMNA gene
(150330.0036 and 150330.0040, respectively). Both mutations resulted in
increased use of the cryptic exon 11 donor splice site that is also
observed with the common 1824C-T mutation (150330.0022). As a
consequence, the ratios of mutant progerin mRNA and protein to wildtype
were higher than in typical HGPS patients. The findings indicated that
the level of progerin expression correlates with severity of disease.

Scaffidi and Misteli (2008) found that progerin (150330.0022) expression
in immortalized human skin fibroblasts produced several defects typical
of HGPS. Progerin also caused the spontaneous differentiation of human
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into endothelial cells, and reduced their
differentiation along the adipogenic lineage. Abnormal differentiation
of MSCs appeared to be due to progerin-induced activation of major
downstream effectors of the Notch signaling pathway, including HES1
(139605), HES5 (607348), and HEY1 (602953). Scaffidi and Misteli (2008)
noted that the progerin splice variant of LMNA is present at low levels
in cells from healthy individuals and has been implicated in the normal
aging process. They suggested that progerin-induced defects in Notch
signaling are involved in normal aging and similarly affect adult MSCs
and their differentiation.

- Restrictive Dermopathy

In 2 of 9 fetuses with restrictive dermopathy (275210), a lethal
genodermatosis in which tautness of the skin causes fetal akinesia or
hypokinesia deformation sequence, Navarro et al. (2004) identified
heterozygous splicing mutations in the LMNA gene, resulting in the
complete or partial loss of exon 11 (150330.0036 and 150330.0022,
respectively). In the other 7 patients, they identified a heterozygous
1-bp insertion resulting in a premature stop codon in the zinc
metalloproteinase STE24 gene (ZMPSTE24; 606480). This gene encodes a
metalloproteinase specifically involved in the posttranslational
processing of lamin A precursor. In all patients carrying a ZMPSTE24
mutation, loss of expression of lamin A as well as abnormal patterns of
nuclear sizes and shapes and mislocalization of lamin-associated
proteins was seen. Navarro et al. (2004) concluded that a common
pathogenetic pathway, involving defects of the nuclear lamina and
matrix, is involved in restrictive dermopathy.

Navarro et al. (2005) described 7 previously reported patients and 3 new
patients with restrictive dermopathy who were homozygous or compound
heterozygous for ZMPSTE24 mutations. In all cases there was complete
absence of both ZMPSTE24 and mature lamin A, associated with prelamin A
accumulation. The authors concluded that restrictive dermopathy is
either a primary or a secondary laminopathy, caused by dominant de novo
LMNA mutations or, more frequently, recessive null ZMPSTE24 mutations.
The accumulation of truncated or normal length prelamin A is, therefore,
a shared pathophysiologic feature in recessive and dominant restrictive
dermopathy.

- Heart-Hand Syndrome, Slovenian Type

In a Slovenian family with heart-hand syndrome (610140), originally
reported by Sinkovec et al. (2005), Renou et al. (2008) identified a
splice site mutation in the LMNA gene (150330.0045) that segregated with
disease and was not found in 100 healthy controls. Analysis of
fibroblasts from 2 affected members of the family revealed truncated
lamin A/C protein and nuclear envelope abnormalities, confirming the
pathogenicity of the mutation.

- Other Associations

Hegele et al. (2000) identified a common single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) in LMNA, 1908C/T, which was associated with obesity-related traits
in Canadian Oji-Cree. Hegele et al. (2001) reported association of this
LMNA SNP with anthropometric indices in 186 nondiabetic Canadian Inuit.
They found that physical indices of obesity, such as body mass index,
waist circumference, waist-to-hip circumference ratio, subscapular
skinfold thickness, and subscapular-to-triceps skinfold thickness ratio
were each significantly higher among Inuit subjects with the LMNA 1908T
allele than in subjects with the 1908C/1908C genotype. For each
significantly associated obesity-related trait, the LMNA 1908C/T SNP
genotype accounted for approximately 10 to 100% of the attributable
variation. The results indicated that common genetic variation in LMNA
is an important determinant of obesity-related quantitative traits.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

In 14 of 15 families with familial partial lipodystrophy, Speckman et
al. (2000) identified mutations in exon 8 of the LMNA gene: 5 families
had an R482Q mutation (150330.0010); 7 families had an R482W alteration
(150330.0011), and 1 family had a G465D alteration (150330.0015). The
R482Q and R482W mutations occurred on different haplotypes, indicating
that they probably had arisen more than once. One family with an
atypical form of familial partial lipodystrophy had an R582H mutation
(150330.0016) in exon 11 of the LMNA gene, which the authors noted can
affect the lamin A protein only. Speckman et al. (2000) noted that all
mutations in Dunnigan lipodystrophy affect the globular C-terminal
domain of the lamin A/C protein, whereas mutations responsible for
dilated cardiomyopathy and conduction-system disease are usually
clustered in the rod domain of the protein (Fatkin et al., 1999).
Speckman et al. (2000) could not detect mutations in the LMNA gene in 1
FPLD family that showed linkage to 1q21-q23.

Hegele (2005) used hierarchical cluster analysis to assemble 16
laminopathy phenotypes into 2 classes based on organ system involvement,
and then classified 91 reported causative LMNA mutations according to
their position upstream or downstream of the nuclear localization signal
(NLS) sequence. Contingency analysis revealed that laminopathy class and
LMNA mutation position were strongly correlated (p less than 0.0001),
suggesting that laminopathy phenotype and LMNA genotype are nonrandomly
associated.

Lanktree et al. (2007) analyzed the LMNA gene in 3 unrelated patients
with FPLD2 and identified heterozygosity for 3 different missense
mutations, all affecting only the lamin A isoform and each changing a
conserved residue. Two of the mutations, D230N (150330.0042) and R399C
(150330.0043), were 5-prime to the NLS, which is not typical of LMNA
mutations in FPLD2. The third mutation, S573L (150330.0041), had
previously been identified in heterozygosity in a patient with dilated
cardiomyopathy and conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200) and in
homozygosity in a patient with arthropathy, tendinous calcinosis, and
progeroid features (see 248370). None of the mutations were found in 200
controls of multiple ethnicities. Because heterozygosity for an S573L
mutation can cause cardiomyopathy without lipodystrophy or lipodystrophy
without cardiomyopathy, Lanktree et al. (2007) suggested that additional
factors, genetic or environmental, may contribute to the precise tissue
involvement.

ANIMAL MODEL

Mounkes et al. (2003) attempted to create a mouse model for autosomal
dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (181350) by introducing a
L530P (150330.0004) mutation in the LMNA gene. Although mice
heterozygous for L530P did not show signs of muscular dystrophy and
remained overtly normal up to 6 months of age, mice homozygous for the
mutation showed phenotypes markedly reminiscent of symptoms observed in
progeria patients. Homozygous Lmna L530P/L530P mice were
indistinguishable from their littermates at birth, but by 4 to 6 days
developed severe growth retardation, dying within 4 to 5 weeks.
Homozygous mutant mice showed a slight waddling gait, suggesting
immobility of joints. Other progeria features of these mutant mice
included micrognathia and abnormal dentition--in approximately half of
the mutants a gap was observed between the lower 2 incisors, which also
appeared yellowed. Mutant mice also had loss of subcutaneous fat,
reduced numbers of eccrine and sebaceous glands, increased collagen
deposition in skin, and decreased hair follicle density. Mounkes et al.
(2003) concluded that Lmna L530P/L530P mice have significant phenotypic
overlap with Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome, including nuclear
envelope abnormalities and decreased doublet capacity and life span of
fibroblasts.

Mounkes et al. (2005) generated mice expressing the human N195K
(150330.0007) mutation and observed characteristics consistent with
CMD1A. Continuous electrocardiographic monitoring of cardiac activity
demonstrated that N195K-homozygous mice died at an early age due to
arrhythmia. Immunofluorescence and Western blot analysis showed that
Hf1b/Sp4 (600540), connexin-40 (GJA5; 121013), and connexin-43 (GJA1;
121014) were misexpressed and/or mislocalized in N195K-homozygous mouse
hearts. Desmin staining revealed a loss of organization at sarcomeres
and intercalated disks. Mounkes et al. (2005) hypothesized that
mutations within the LMNA gene may cause cardiomyopathy by disrupting
the internal organization of the cardiomyocyte and/or altering the
expression of transcription factors essential to normal cardiac
development, aging, or function.

Arimura et al. (2005) created a mouse model of autosomal dominant
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy expressing an H222P mutation in Lmna.
At adulthood, male homozygous mice displayed reduced locomotion activity
with abnormal stiff walking posture, and all died by 9 months of age.
They also developed dilated cardiomyopathy with hypokinesia and
conduction defects. These skeletal and cardiac muscle features were also
observed in the female homozygous mice, but with a later onset than in
males. Histopathologic analysis of the mice revealed muscle degeneration
with fibrosis associated with dislocation of heterochromatin and
activation of Smad signaling in heart and skeletal muscles.

Varga et al. (2006) created transgenic mice carrying the G608G
(150330.0022)-mutated human LMNA gene and observed the development of a
dramatic defect of the large arteries, consisting of progressive medial
vascular smooth muscle cell loss and replacement with proteoglycan and
collagen followed by vascular remodeling with calcification and
adventitial thickening. In vivo, these arterial abnormalities were
reflected by a blunted initial response to the vasodilator sodium
nitroprusside, consistent with impaired vascular relaxation, and
attenuated blood pressure recovery after infusion. Varga et al. (2006)
noted that although G608G transgenic mice lacked the external phenotype
seen in human progeria, they demonstrated a progressive vascular
abnormality that closely resembled the most lethal aspect of the human
phenotype.

Frock et al. (2006) found that most cultured muscle cells from Lmna
knockout mice exhibited impaired differentiation kinetics and reduced
differentiation potential. Similarly, knockdown of Lmna or emerin (EMD;
300384) expression by RNA interference in normal muscle cells impaired
differentiation potential and reduced expression of muscle-specific
genes, Myod (159970) and desmin (125660). To determine whether impaired
myogenesis was linked to reduced Myod or desmin levels, Frock et al.
(2006) individually expressed these proteins in Lmna-null myoblasts and
found that both increased the differentiation potential of mutant
myoblasts. Frock et al. (2006) concluded that LMNA and emerin are
required for myogenic differentiation, at least in part, through an
effect on expression of critical myoblast proteins.

Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is caused by the production
of a truncated prelamin A, called progerin, which is farnesylated at its
C terminus and accumulates at the nuclear envelope, causing misshapen
nuclei (Yang et al., 2006). Farnesyltransferase inhibitors (FTIs) have
been shown to reverse this cellular abnormality (Yang et al., 2005; Toth
et al., 2005; Capell et al., 2005; Mallampalli et al., 2005). Yang et
al. (2006) generated mice with a targeted HGPS mutation (Lmna HG/+) and
observed phenotypes similar to those in human HGPS patients, including
retarded growth, reduced amounts of adipose tissue, micrognathia,
osteoporosis, and osteolytic lesions in bone, which caused spontaneous
rib fractures in the mutant mice. Treatment with an FTI increased
adipose tissue mass, improved body weight curves, reduced the number of
rib fractures, and improved bone mineralization and bone cortical
thickness.

Yang et al. (2008) created knockin mice expressing a nonfarnesylatable
form of progerin. Knockin mice developed the same disease phenotype as
mice expressing farnesylated progerin, although the phenotype was
milder, and embryonic fibroblasts derived from these mice contained
fewer misshapen nuclei. The steady-state level of nonfarnesylated
progerin, but not mRNA, was lower in cultured fibroblasts and whole
tissues, suggesting that the absence of farnesylation may accelerate
progerin turnover.

In a mouse model of EDMD carrying an H222P mutation in the Lmna gene
(Arimura et al., 2005), Muchir et al. (2007) found that activation of
MAPK (see 176948) pathways preceded clinical signs or detectable
molecular markers of cardiomyopathy. Expression of H222P-mutant Lmna in
heart tissue and isolated cardiomyocytes resulted in tissue-specific
activation of MAPKs and downstream target genes. The results suggested
that activation of MAPK pathways plays a role in the pathogenesis of
cardiac disease in EDMD.

Muchir et al. (2009) demonstrated abnormal activation of the
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) branch of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling cascade in hearts of
Lmna H222P knockin mice, a model of autosomal Emery-Dreifuss muscular
dystrophy. Systemic treatment of Lmna H222P/H222P mice that developed
cardiomyopathy with PD98059, an inhibitor of ERK activation, inhibited
ERK phosphorylation and blocked the activation of downstream genes in
heart. It also blocked increased expression of RNAs encoding natriuretic
peptide precursors and proteins involved in sarcomere organization that
occurred in placebo-treated mice. Histologic analysis and
echocardiography demonstrated that treatment with PD98059 delayed the
development of left ventricular dilatation. PD98059-treated Lmna
H222P/H222P mice had normal cardiac ejection fractions assessed by
echocardiography, whereas placebo-treated mice had a 30% decrease. The
authors emphasized the role of ERK activation in the development of
cardiomyopathy caused by LMNA mutations, and provided further proof of
principle for ERK inhibition as a therapeutic option to prevent or delay
heart failure in humans with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and
related disorders caused by mutations in LMNA.

Davies et al. (2010) created knockin mice harboring a mutant Lmna allele
that yielded exclusively nonfarnesylated prelamin A. These mice had no
evidence of progeria but succumbed to cardiomyopathy. Most of the
nonfarnesylated prelamin A in the tissues of these mice was localized at
the nuclear rim, indistinguishable from the lamin A in wildtype mice.
The cardiomyopathy could not be ascribed to an absence of lamin C
because mice expressing an otherwise identical knockin allele yielding
only wildtype prelamin A appeared normal. The authors concluded that
lamin C synthesis is dispensable in mice and that failure to convert
prelamin A to mature lamin A causes cardiomyopathy in the absence of
lamin C.

Choi et al. (2012) found that ERK activation in H222P/H222P mice
specifically upregulated expression of dual-specificity phosphatase-4
(DUSP4; 602747) in cardiac muscle, with much lower Dusp4 induction in
quadriceps muscle, and no Dusp4 induction in tongue, kidney, and liver.
Dusp4 overexpression in cultured C2C12 muscle cells or targeted to mouse
heart resulted in activation of the Akt (see AKT1; 164730)-Mtor (FRAP1;
601231) metabolic signaling pathway, leading to impaired autophagy and
abnormal cardiac metabolism, similar to findings in H222P/H222P mice.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
LMNA, GLN6TER

In a family with autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
(181350), Bonne et al. (1999) identified a C-to-T transition in exon 1
of the LMNA gene that changed glutamine-6 (CAG) to a stop codon (TAG).

.0002
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
LMNA, ARG453TRP

In a family with autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
(181350), Bonne et al. (1999) demonstrated a C-to-T transition in exon 7
of the LMNA gene, resulting in an arg453-to-trp (R453W) substitution.

.0003
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2, INCLUDED
LMNA, ARG527PRO

In 2 families with autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
(181350), Bonne et al. (1999) found a G-to-C transversion in the LMNA
gene which, resulting in an arg527-to-pro (R527P) substitution. The
mutation, found in heterozygous state, was demonstrated to be de novo in
both families.

Van der Kooi et al. (2002) reported a woman with limb-girdle muscle
weakness, spinal rigidity, contractures, elevated creatine kinase,
cardiac conduction abnormalities (atrial fibrillation), partial
lipodystrophy (151660), and increased serum triglycerides who had the
R527P mutation. Van der Kooi et al. (2002) also reported a family with
the R527P mutation in which the proband, her father, and her son all
presented with varying degrees of EDMD, lipodystrophy, and cardiac
conduction abnormalities.

Makri et al. (2009) reported 2 sisters with early-onset autosomal
dominant muscular dystrophy most consistent with EDMD. Because the girls
were born of consanguineous Algerian parents, they were at first thought
to have an autosomal recessive congenital muscular dystrophy. However,
genetic analysis identified a heterozygous R527P mutation in the LMNA
gene in both patients that was not present in either unaffected parent.
The results were consistent with germline mosaicism or a recurrent de
novo event. The older sib had a difficult birth and showed congenital
hypotonia, diffuse weakness, and mild initial respiratory and feeding
difficulties. She sat unsupported at age 2 years and walked
independently from age 4 years with frequent falls and a waddling gait.
At 13 years she had a high-arched palate, moderate limb hypotonia, and
weakness of the pelvic muscles. There was proximal limb wasting,
moderate cervical, elbow, and ankle contractures, pes cavus, spinal
rigidity, and lordosis/scoliosis. Her sister had mild hypotonia in early
infancy, walked without support at 24 months, and showed proximal muscle
weakness. There were mild contractures of the elbow and ankles. At age 9
years, she showed adiposity of the neck, trunk and abdomen, consistent
with lipodystrophy. Brain MRI and cognition were normal in both sisters,
and neither had cardiac involvement. Muscle biopsies showed a dystrophic
pattern.

.0004
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
LMNA, LEU530PRO

In a family with autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
(181350), Bonne et al. (1999) detected a heterozygous T-to-C transition
in the LMNA gene, resulting in a leu530-to-pro (L530P) substitution.

.0005
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2, INCLUDED
LMNA, ARG60GLY

In a family with autosomal dominant dilated cardiomyopathy with
conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200), Fatkin et al. (1999) identified a
178C-G transversion in the LMNA gene, resulting in an arg60-to-gly
(R60G) substitution.

Van der Kooi et al. (2002) reported a woman with partial lipodystrophy
(151660), hypertriglyceridemia, and cardiomyopathy with conduction
defects who carried the R60G mutation. The patient's mother reportedly
had similar manifestations. The authors noted that lipodystrophy and
cardiac abnormalities were combined manifestations of the same mutation.

.0006
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LMNA, LEU85ARG

In a family with autosomal dominant dilated cardiomyopathy with
conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200), Fatkin et al. (1999) identified a
254T-G transversion in the LMNA gene, resulting in a leu85-to-arg (L85R)
substitution.

.0007
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LMNA, ASN195LYS

In a family with autosomal dominant dilated cardiomyopathy with
conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200), Fatkin et al. (1999) identified a
585C-G transversion in the LMNA gene, resulting in an asn195-to-lys
(N195K) substitution.

Using cells from the mouse model of Mounkes et al. (2005), Ho et al.
(2013) found that Lmna N195K embryonic fibroblasts and bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells had impaired nuclear localization
of the mechanosensitive transcription factor MKL1 (606078). Cardiac
sections from Lmna(N195K/N195K) mice had significantly reduced fractions
of cardiomyocytes with nuclear Mkl1, implicating altered Mkl1 signaling
in the development of cardiomyopathy in these animals. Nuclear
accumulation of Mkl1 was substantially lower in Lmna N195K cells than in
wildtype cells. Altered nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of Mkl1 was caused
by altered actin dynamics in Lmna(N195K/N195K) mutant cells. Ectopic
expression of the nuclear envelope protein emerin (300384) restored Mkl1
nuclear translocation and rescued actin dynamics in mutant cells.

.0008
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LMNA, GLU203GLY

In a family with autosomal dominant dilated cardiomyopathy with
conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200), Fatkin et al. (1999) identified a
608A-G transition in the LMNA gene, resulting in a glu203-to-gly (E203G)
substitution.

.0009
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LMNA, ARG571SER

In a family with autosomal dominant dilated cardiomyopathy and
conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200), Fatkin et al. (1999) identified a
1711C-A transversion in the LMNA gene, resulting in an arg571-to-ser
(R571S) substitution. In this family, the C-terminal of lamin C was
selectively affected by the mutation, and the cardiac phenotype was
relatively milder than that associated with mutations in the rod domain
of the LMNA gene. Furthermore, there was subclinical evidence of
involvement of skeletal muscle. Although affected members of this family
had no skeletal muscle symptoms, some had elevated serum creatine kinase
levels, including 1 asymptomatic family member with the genotype
associated with the disease. The arg571-to-ser mutation affected only
lamin C isoforms, whereas previously described defects causing
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (181350) perturbed both lamin A and
lamin C isoforms.

.0010
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, ARG482GLN

In 5 probands from 5 Canadian kindreds with familial partial
lipodystrophy of the Dunnigan type (151660), Cao and Hegele (2000)
demonstrated heterozygosity for a G-to-A transition in exon 8 of the
LMNA gene, predicted to result in an arg484-to-gln (R482Q) substitution.
There were no differences in age, gender, or body mass index in
Q482/R482 heterozygotes compared with R482/R482 homozygotes (normals)
from these families; however, there were significantly more Q482/R482
heterozygotes who had definite partial lipodystrophy and frank diabetes.
Also compared with the normal homozygotes, heterozygotes had
significantly higher serum insulin and C-peptide (see 176730) levels.
The LMNA heterozygotes with diabetes were significantly older than
heterozygotes without diabetes.

Shackleton et al. (2000) found the R482Q mutation in a family with
familial partial lipodystrophy. Hegele et al. (2000) analyzed the
relationship between plasma leptin (164160) and the rare LMNA R482Q
mutation in 23 adult familial partial lipodystrophy (FPLD) subjects
compared with 25 adult family controls with normal LMNA in an extended
Canadian FPLD kindred. They found that the LMNA Q482/R482 genotype was a
significant determinant of plasma leptin, the ratio of plasma leptin to
body mass index (BMI), plasma insulin, and plasma C peptide, but not
BMI. Family members who were Q482/R482 heterozygotes had significantly
lower plasma leptin and leptin:BMI ratio than unaffected R482/R482
homozygotes. Fasting plasma concentrations of insulin and C peptide were
both significantly higher in LMNA Q482/R482 heterozygotes than in
R482/R482 homozygotes. Multivariate regression analysis revealed that
the LMNA R482Q genotype accounted for 40.9%, 48.2%, 86.9%, and 81.0%,
respectively, of the attributable variation in log leptin, leptin:BMI
ratio, log insulin, and log C peptide. The authors concluded that a rare
FPLD mutation in LMNA determines the plasma leptin concentration.

Boguslavsky et al. (2006) found that overexpression of wildtype LMNA or
mutant R482Q or R482W (150330.0011) in mouse 3T3-L1 preadipocytes
prevented cellular lipid accumulation, inhibited triglyceride synthesis,
and prevented normal differentiation into adipocytes. In contrast,
embryonic fibroblasts from Lmna-null mice had increased levels of basal
triglyceride synthesis and differentiated into fat-containing cells more
readily that wildtype mouse cells. Mutations at residue 482 are not
predicted to affect the structure of the nuclear lamina, but may change
interactions with other proteins. The findings of this study suggested
that mutations responsible for FPLD are gain-of-function mutations.
Boguslavsky et al. (2006) postulated that mutations that result in gain
of function may cause higher binding affinity to a proadipogenic
transcription factor, thus preventing it from activating target genes;
overexpression of the wildtype protein may result in increased numbers
of molecules with a normal binding affinity. Overexpression of Lmna was
associated with decreased levels of PPARG2 (601487), a nuclear hormone
receptor transcription factor putatively involved in adipogenic
conversion. Lmna-null cells had increased basal phosphorylation of AKT1
(164730), a mediator of insulin signaling.

.0011
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, ARG482TRP

In 6 families and 3 isolated cases of partial lipodystrophy (151660),
Shackleton et al. (2000) found heterozygosity for C-to-T transition in
the LMNA gene, resulting in an arg482-to-trp (R482W) substitution. This
is the same codon as that affected in the R482Q mutation (150330.0010).
R482L (150330.0012) is a third mutation in the same codon causing
partial lipodystrophy.

Schmidt et al. (2001) identified a family with partial lipodystrophy
carrying the R482W mutation in the LMNA gene. Clinically, the loss of
subcutaneous fat and muscular hypertrophy, especially of the lower
extremities, started as early as in childhood. Acanthosis and severe
hypertriglyceridemia developed later in life, followed by diabetes.
Characterization of the lipoprotein subfractions revealed that affected
children present with hyperlipidemia. The presence and severity of
hyperlipidemia seem to be influenced by age, apolipoprotein E genotype,
and the coexistence of diabetes mellitus. In conclusion, dyslipidemia is
an early and prominent feature in the presented lipodystrophic family
carrying the R482W mutation.

.0012
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, ARG482LEU

In a family with partial lipodystrophy (151660), Shackleton et al.
(2000) found that the affected individuals were heterozygous for a
G-to-T transversion in the LMNA gene, resulting in an arg482-to-leu
(R482L) substitution.

.0013
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, INCLUDED
LMNA, 1-BP DEL, 959T

In a large family with a severe autosomal dominant dilated
cardiomyopathy with conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200) in which the
majority of affected family members showed signs of mild skeletal muscle
involvement, Brodsky et al. (2000) demonstrated heterozygosity in
affected members for a 1-bp deletion (del959T) deletion in exon 6 of the
LMNA gene. One individual had a pattern of skeletal muscle involvement
that the authors considered consistent with mild Emery-Dreifuss muscular
dystrophy (181350).

.0014
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, ATYPICAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
LMNA, HIS222TYR

In a 40-year-old man with a severe, atypical form of EDMD (see 181350),
Raffaele di Barletta et al. (2000) found a homozygous 664C-T transition
in the LMNA gene, resulting in a his222-to-tyr (H222Y) amino acid
substitution. Both parents, who were first cousins, were heterozygous
for the mutation and were unaffected. The mutation was not found among
200 control chromosomes. The patient was the only one with a homozygous
LMNA mutation among a larger study of individuals with autosomal
dominant Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.

.0015
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, GLY465ASP

Speckman et al. (2000) found that 1 of 15 families with familial partial
lipodystrophy of the Dunnigan variety (151660) harbored a gly465-to-asp
(G465D) mutation in exon 8 of the LMNA gene.

.0016
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, ARG582HIS

In a family with an atypical form of familial partial lipodystrophy
(151660), Speckman et al. (2000) identified an arg582-to-his (R582H)
mutation in exon 11 of the LMNA gene. In a follow-up of this same
family, Garg et al. (2001) reported that 2 affected sisters showed less
severe loss of subcutaneous fat from the trunk and extremities with some
retention of fat in the gluteal region and medial parts of the proximal
thighs compared to women with typical FPLD2. Noting that the R582H
mutation interrupts only the lamin A protein, Garg et al. (2001)
suggested that in typical FPLD2, interruption of both lamins A and C
causes a more severe phenotype than that seen in atypical FPLD2, in
which only lamin A is altered.

.0017
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE, TYPE 1B
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A, INCLUDED
LMNA, ARG377HIS

In a family with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 1B (159001), Muchir
et al. (2000) found a G-to-A transition in exon 6 of the LMNA gene,
resulting in a substitution of histidine for arginine-377 (R377H).

Taylor et al. (2003) identified heterozygosity for the R377H mutation in
an American family of British descent with autosomal dominant dilated
cardiomyopathy and mild limb-girdle muscular disease.

Charniot et al. (2003) described a French family with autosomal dominant
severe dilated cardiomyopathy with conduction defects or
atrial/ventricular arrhythmias and a skeletal muscular dystrophy of the
quadriceps muscles. Affected members were found to carry the R377H
mutation, which was shown by transfection experiments in both muscular
and nonmuscular cells to lead to mislocalization of both lamin and
emerin (300384). Unlike previously reported cases of LMNA mutations
causing dilated cardiomyopathy with neuromuscular involvement, cardiac
involvement preceded neuromuscular disease in all affected members.
Charniot et al. (2003) suggested that factors other than the R377H
mutation influenced phenotypic expression in this family. Sebillon et
al. (2003) also reported on this family.

In a German woman with LGMD1B, Rudnik-Schoneborn et al. (2007)
identified a heterozygous R377H mutation in the LMNA gene. Family
history revealed that the patient's paternal grandmother had proximal
muscle weakness and died from heart disease at age 52, and a paternal
aunt had 'walking difficulties' since youth. The patient's father and 4
cousins all had cardiac disease without muscle weakness ranging from
nonspecific 'heart attacks' to dilated cardiomyopathy and arrhythmia.
The only living affected cousin also carried the mutation.

.0018
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE, TYPE 1B
LMNA, 3-BP DEL, EXON 3

In a family with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 1B (159001), Muchir
et al. (2000) found a 3-bp deletion (AAG) in exon 3 of the LMNA gene,
resulting in loss of the codon for lysine-208 (delK208).

.0019
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE, TYPE 1B
LMNA, IVS9, G-C, +5

In a family with limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 1B (159001), Muchir
et al. (2000) found a G-to-C transversion in the splice donor site of
intron 9, leading to retention of intron 9 and a frameshift at position
536. This potentially results in a truncated protein lacking half of the
globular tail domain of lamins A/C.

.0020
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, AXONAL, TYPE 2B1
LMNA, ARG298CYS

De Sandre-Giovannoli et al. (2002) found a homozygous arg298-to-cys
(R298C) mutation in the LMNA gene in affected members of Algerian
families with CMT2B1 (605588).

Ben Yaou et al. (2007) identified a homozygous R298C mutation in a
female and 2 male affected members of an Algerian family with CMT2B1.
The 2 males also had X-linked Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (310300)
and a hemizygous mutation in the EMD gene (300384).

.0021
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY, ATYPICAL, INCLUDED
LMNA, ARG527HIS

In 5 consanguineous Italian families, Novelli et al. (2002) demonstrated
that individuals with mandibuloacral dysplasia (248370) were homozygous
for an arg527-to-his (R527H) mutation.

In affected members from 2 pedigrees with MADA, Simha et al. (2003)
identified the homozygous R527H mutation.

In a Mexican American boy with MADA born of related parents, Shen et al.
(2003) identified homozygosity for the R527H mutation. The authors noted
that all the patients reported by Novelli et al. (2002) shared a common
disease haplotype, but that the patients reported by Simha et al. (2003)
and their Mexican American patient had different haplotypes, indicating
independent origins of the mutation. The mutation is located within the
C-terminal immunoglobulin-like domain in the center of a beta sheet on
the domain surface of the protein.

Lombardi et al. (2007) identified this mutation in compound
heterozygosity with another missense mutation (150330.0044) in a patient
with an apparent MADA phenotype associated with muscular hyposthenia and
generalized hypotonia.

Garavelli et al. (2009) reported 2 unrelated patients with early
childhood onset of MADA features associated with a homozygous R527H
mutation. One presented at age 5 years, 3 months with bulbous distal
phalanges of fingers and was observed to have dysmorphic craniofacial
features, lipodystrophy type A, and acroosteolysis. The second child,
born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, presented at age 4 years, 2
months with a round face, chubby cheeks, thin nose, lipodystrophy type
A, and short, broad distal phalanges. Garavelli et al. (2009) emphasized
that features of this disorder may become apparent as early as preschool
age and that bulbous fingertips may be a clue to the diagnosis.

.0022
HUTCHINSON-GILFORD PROGERIA SYNDROME
RESTRICTIVE DERMOPATHY, LETHAL, INCLUDED
LMNA, GLY608GLY

In 18 of 20 patients with classic Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome
(176670), Eriksson et al. (2003) found an identical de novo 1824C-T
transition, resulting in a silent gly-to-gly mutation at codon 608
(G608G) within exon 11 of the LMNA gene. This substitution created an
exonic consensus splice donor sequence and results in activation of a
cryptic splice site and deletion of 50 codons of prelamin A. This
mutation was not identified in any of the 16 parents available for
testing.

De Sandre-Giovannoli et al. (2003) identified the exon 11 cryptic splice
site activation mutation (1824C-T+1819-1968del) in 2 HGPS patients.
Immunocytochemical analyses of lymphocytes from 1 patient using specific
antibodies directed against lamin A/C, lamin A, and lamin B1 showed that
most cells had strikingly altered nuclear sizes and shapes, with
envelope interruptions accompanied by chromatin extrusion. Lamin A was
detected in 10 to 20% of HGPS lymphocytes. Only lamin C was present in
most cells, and lamin B1 was found in the nucleoplasm, suggesting that
it had dissociated from the nuclear envelope due to the loss of lamin A.
Western blot analysis showed 25% of normal lamin A levels, and no
truncated form was detected.

Cao and Hegele (2003) confirmed the observations of Eriksson et al.
(2003) using the same cell lines. They referred to this mutation as
2036C-T.

D'Apice et al. (2004) confirmed paternal age effect and demonstrated a
paternal origin of the 2036C-T mutation in 3 families with isolated
cases of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria.

By light and electron microscopy of fibroblasts from HGPS patients
carrying the 1824C-T mutation, Goldman et al. (2004) found significant
changes in nuclear shape, including lobulation of the nuclear envelope,
thickening of the nuclear lamina, loss of peripheral heterochromatin,
and clustering of nuclear pores. These structural defects worsened as
the HGPS cells aged in culture, and their severity correlated with an
apparent accumulation of mutant protein, which Goldman et al. (2004)
designated LA delta-50. Introduction of LA delta-50 into normal cells by
transfection or protein injection induced the same changes. Goldman et
al. (2004) hypothesized that the alterations in nuclear structure are
due to a concentration-dependent dominant-negative effect of LA
delta-50, leading to the disruption of lamin-related functions ranging
from the maintenance of nuclear shape to regulation of gene expression
and DNA replication.

In an infant with restrictive dermopathy (275210), Navarro et al. (2004)
identified the 1824C-T transition in heterozygous state.

In a patient with Hutchinson-Gilford progeria, Wuyts et al. (2005)
identified the G608G mutation. In lymphocyte DNA from the parents,
normal wildtype alleles were observed in the father, but a low signal
corresponding to the mutant allele was detected in the mother's DNA. A
segregation study confirmed that the patient's mutation was transmitted
from the mother, who showed germline and somatic mosaicism without
manifestations of HGPS.

Glynn and Glover (2005) studied the effects of farnesylation inhibition
on nuclear phenotypes in cells expressing normal and G608G-mutant lamin
A. Expression of a GFP-progerin fusion protein in normal fibroblasts
caused a high incidence of nuclear abnormalities (as seen in HGPS
fibroblasts), and resulted in abnormal nuclear localization of
GFP-progerin in comparison with the localization pattern of GFP-lamin A.
Expression of a GFP-lamin A fusion containing a mutation preventing the
final cleavage step, which caused the protein to remain farnesylated,
displayed identical localization patterns and nuclear abnormalities as
in HGPS cells and in cells expressing GFP-progerin. Exposure to a
farnesyltransferase inhibitor (FTI), PD169541, caused a significant
improvement in the nuclear morphology of cells expressing GFP-progerin
and in HGPS cells. Glynn and Glover (2005) proposed that abnormal
farnesylation of progerin may play a role in the cellular phenotype in
HGPS cells, and suggested that FTIs may represent a therapeutic option
for patients with HGPS.

In cells from a female patient with HGPS due to the 1824C-T mutation,
Shumaker et al. (2006) found that the inactive X chromosome showed loss
of histone H3 trimethylation of lys27 (H3K27me3), a marker for
facultative heterochromatin, as well as loss of histone H3
trimethylation of lys9 (H3K9me3), a marker of pericentric constitutive
heterochromatin. Other alterations in epigenetic control included
downregulation of the EZH2 methyltransferase (601573), upregulation of
pericentric satellite III repeat transcripts, and increase in the
trimethylation of H4K20. The epigenetic alterations were observed before
the pathogenic changes in nuclear shape. The findings indicated that the
mutant LMNA protein alters sites of histone methylation known to
regulate heterochromatin and provided evidence that the rapid aging
phenotype of HGPS reflects aspects of normal aging at the molecular
level.

Moulson et al. (2007) demonstrated that HGPS cells with the common
1824C-T LMNA mutation produced about 37.5% of wildtype full-length
transcript, which was higher than previous estimates (Reddel and Weiss,
2004).

Using real-time RT-PCR, Rodriguez et al. (2009) found that progerin
transcripts were expressed in dermal fibroblasts cultured from normal
controls, but at a level more than 160-fold lower than that detected in
dermal fibroblasts cultured from HGPS patients. The level of progerin
transcripts, but not of lamin A or lamin C transcripts, increased in
late-passage cells from both normal controls and HGPS patients.

.0023
HUTCHINSON-GILFORD PROGERIA SYNDROME
LMNA, GLY608SER

In a patient with Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (176670),
Eriksson et al. (2003) identified a G-to-A transition in the LMNA gene
resulting in a gly-to-ser substitution at codon 608 (G608S). This
mutation was not identified in either parent.

Cao and Hegele (2003) confirmed the observation of Eriksson et al.
(2003) using the same cell line.

.0024
HUTCHINSON-GILFORD PROGERIA SYNDROME, ATYPICAL
LMNA, GLU145LYS

In a patient with somewhat atypical features of progeria (176670),
Eriksson et al. (2003) identified a glu-to-lys substitution at codon 145
(E145K) in exon 2 of the LMNA gene. This mutation was not identified in
either parent. Atypical clinical features, including persistence of
coarse hair over the head, ample subcutaneous tissue over the arms and
legs, and severe strokes beginning at age 4, may subtly distinguish this
phenotype from classic HGPS.

.0025
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY, ATYPICAL
LMNA, ARG471CYS

In a patient with an apparently typical progeria phenotype (176670) who
was 28 years old at the time that DNA was obtained, Cao and Hegele
(2003) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 missense mutations in
the LMNA gene. One mutation, arg471 to cys (R471C), resulted from a
1623C-T transition. An arg527-to-cys (R527C) substitution (150330.0026),
resulting from a 1791C-T transition, was found on the other allele.
These mutations were not identified in any of 100 control chromosomes.
Parental DNA for this patient and a clinical description of the parents
were not available. Brown (2004) reported that both he and the patient's
physician, Francis Collins, concluded that the patient had
mandibuloacral dysplasia (248370).

Zirn et al. (2008) reported a 7-year-old Turkish girl, born of
consanguineous parents, who was homozygous for the R471C mutation. She
had a phenotype most consistent with an atypical form of MADA, including
lipodystrophy, a progeroid appearance, and congenital muscular dystrophy
with rigid spine syndrome. These latter features were reminiscent of
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (181350), although there was no
cardiac involvement. She presented at age 10 months with proximal muscle
weakness, contractures, spinal rigidity, and a dystrophic skeletal
muscle biopsy. Characteristic progeroid features and features of
lipodystrophy and mandibuloacral dysplasia were noted at age 3 years and
became more apparent with age. Zirn et al. (2008) commented on the
severity of the phenotype and emphasized the phenotypic variability in
patients with LMNA mutations.

.0026
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY
LMNA, ARG527CYS

See 150330.0025, Cao and Hegele (2003), and Brown (2004).

.0027
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
HUTCHINSON-GILFORD PROGERIA SYNDROME, CHILDHOOD-ONSET, INCLUDED
LMNA, ARG133LEU

In a male patient whose phenotype associated generalized acquired
lipoatrophy with insulin-resistant diabetes, hypertriglyceridemia, and
hepatic steatosis (151660), Caux et al. (2003) found a heterozygous
398G-T transversion in exon 2 of the LMNA gene that resulted in an
arg-to-leu change at codon 133 (R133L) in the dimerization rod domain of
lamins A and C. The patient also had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with
valvular involvement and disseminated whitish papules.
Immunofluorescence microscopic analysis of the patient's cultured skin
fibroblasts revealed nuclear disorganization and abnormal distribution
of A-type lamins, similar to that observed in patients harboring other
LMNA mutations. This observation broadened the clinical spectrum of
laminopathies, pointing out the clinical variability of lipodystrophy
and the possibility of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and skin involvement.

In 2 unrelated persons with a progeroid syndrome (see 176670), Chen et
al. (2003) found heterozygosity for the R1333L mutation in the LMNA
gene. One was a white Portuguese female who presented at the age of 9
years with short stature. She showed scleroderma-like skin changes and
graying/thinning of hair. Type 2 diabetes developed at the age of 23
years. Hypogonadism, osteoporosis, and voice changes were also present.
The other patient was an African American female in whom the diagnosis
of a progeroid syndrome was made at the age of 18 years.
Scleroderma-like skin, short stature, graying/thinning of hair, and type
2 diabetes at the age of 18 years were features. The deceased father,
paternal aunt, and paternal grandmother of this patient were also
diagnosed with severe insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus, suggesting
that the R133L mutation might have been paternally inherited. It is
noteworthy that a substitution in the same codon, R133P (150330.0032),
was reported in a 40-year-old patient with Emery-Dreifuss muscular
dystrophy who had disease onset at age 7 years and atrial fibrillation
at age 32 years (Brown et al., 2001). Although Chen et al. (2003)
designated these patients as having 'atypical Werner syndrome' (277700),
Hegele (2003) suggested that the patients more likely had late-onset
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome.

Vigouroux et al. (2003) emphasized that a striking feature in the
patient reported by Caux et al. (2003) was muscular hypertrophy of the
limbs, which contrasts with the muscular atrophy usually present in
Werner syndrome. Muscular hypertrophy, along with insulin-resistant
diabetes and hypertriglyceridemia, is more often associated with
LMNA-linked Dunnigan lipodystrophy. Fibroblasts from their patient
showed nuclear abnormalities identical to those described in Dunnigan
lipodystrophy (Vigouroux et al., 2001).

Jacob et al. (2005) studied the pattern of body fat distribution and
metabolic abnormalities in the 2 patients with atypical Werner syndrome
described by Chen et al. (2003). Patient 1, an African American female,
had normal body fat (27%) by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA).
However, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed relative paucity of
subcutaneous fat in the distal extremities, with preservation of
subcutaneous truncal fat. She had impaired glucose tolerance and
elevated postprandial serum insulin levels. In contrast, patient 2, a
Caucasian female, had only 11.6% body fat as determined by DEXA and had
generalized loss of subcutaneous and intraabdominal fat on MRI. She had
hypertriglyceridemia and severe insulin-resistant diabetes requiring
more than 200 U of insulin daily. Skin fibroblasts showed markedly
abnormal nuclear morphology compared with those from patient 1. Despite
the deranged nuclear morphology, the lamin A/C remained localized to the
nuclear envelope, and the nuclear DNA remained within the nucleus. Jacob
et al. (2005) concluded that atypical Werner syndrome associated with an
R133L mutation in the LMNA gene is phenotypically heterogeneous.
Furthermore, the severity of metabolic complications seemed to correlate
with the extent of lipodystrophy.

.0028
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LMNA, GLU161LYS

Sebillon et al. (2003) described a family with a history of sudden
cardiac death, congestive heart failure, and dilated cardiomyopathy
(CMD1A; 115200). Five affected members had a heterozygous 481G-A
transition in exon 2 of the LMNA gene, resulting in a glu161-to-lys
(E161K) mutation. Dilated cardiomyopathy was present in only 2 patients,
in whom onset of the disease was characterized by congestive heart
failure and atrial fibrillation (at 29 and 44 years, respectively);
heart transplantation was performed in both patients (at 34 and 51 years
of age). In the 3 other affected members, the onset of disease was also
characterized by atrial fibrillation at 22, 49, and 63 years, but
without dilated cardiomyopathy. A 16-year-old male and 12-year-old
female were also heterozygous for the mutation, but had no signs or
symptoms of heart disease. The 5 affected members were a mother and 2
daughters in 1 branch of the family and 2 brothers in another branch.
Two cardiac deaths were reported in the family history: sudden death at
38 years and congestive heart failure at 68 years. No significant
atrioventricular block was observed in the family, except in 1 patient
for whom cardiac pacing was necessary at 67 years of age because of
sinoatrial block coexisting with atrial fibrillation. Sebillon et al.
(2003) concluded that the phenotype in this family was characterized by
early atrial fibrillation preceding or coexisting with dilated
cardiomyopathy, without significant atrioventricular block, and without
neuromuscular abnormalities.

.0029
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LMNA, 1-BP INS, 28A

Sebillon et al. (2003) described a family in which 5 patients with
dilated cardiomyopathy with conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200) were
heterozygous for a 1-bp insertion, 28insA, in exon 1 of the LMNA gene.
Three additional patients were considered as phenotypically affected
with documented dilated cardiomyopathy but were not available for DNA
analysis. In the family history, there were 3 cardiac sudden deaths
before 55 years of age. In the patients with dilated cardiomyopathy, 3
had associated atrioventricular block requiring pacemaker implantation,
1 had premature ventricular beats leading to a cardioverter
defibrillator implantation, and 1 had a mild form of skeletal muscular
dystrophy (mild weakness and wasting of quadriceps muscles, as well as
myogenic abnormalities on electromyogram).

.0030
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, WITH HYPERGONADOTRIPIC HYPOGONADISM
LMNA, ALA57PRO

In an Iranian female with short stature and a progeroid syndrome (see
176670), Chen et al. (2003) found a heterozygous de novo ala57-to-pro
substitution (A57P) resulting from a 584G-C transversion in the LMNA
gene. Onset occurred in her early teens, and she was 23 years old at
diagnosis. Hypogonadism, osteoporosis, osteosclerosis of digits, and
dilated cardiomyopathy were described. Although Chen et al. (2003)
designated this patient as having 'atypical Werner syndrome' (277700),
Hegele (2003) suggested that the patient more likely had late-onset
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome.

McPherson et al. (2009) suggested that the patient in whom Chen et al.
(2003) identified an A57P LMNA mutation had a distinct phenotype
involving dilated cardiomyopathy and hypergonadotropic hypogonadism
(212112).

.0031
HUTCHINSON-GILFORD PROGERIA SYNDROME, CHILDHOOD-ONSET
LMNA, LEU140ARG

In a white Norwegian male with a progeroid syndrome (see 176670), Chen
et al. (2003) found a leu140-to-arg (L140R) substitution resulting from
an 834T-G transversion in the LMNA gene. The patient had onset at age 14
of cataracts, scleroderma-like skin, and graying/thinning of hair, as
well as hypogonadism, osteoporosis, soft tissue calcification, and
premature atherosclerosis. Aortic stenosis and insufficiency were also
present. The patient died at the age of 36 years. Although Chen et al.
(2003) designated this patient as having 'atypical Werner syndrome'
(277700), Hegele (2003) suggested that the patient more likely had
late-onset Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome.

.0032
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
LMNA, ARG133PRO

In a 40-year-old patient with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (181350)
who had disease onset at age 7 years and atrial fibrillation at age 32
years, Brown et al. (2001) found an arg133-to-pro (R133P) mutation in
the LMNA gene. Chen et al. (2003) noted that the same codon is involved
in the arg133-to-leu (150330.0027) mutation in atypical Werner syndrome.

.0033
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY
LMNA, LYS542ASN

In 4 affected members of a consanguineous family from north India with
features of MADA (248370). Plasilova et al. (2004) identified a
homozygous 1626G-C transversion in exon 10 of the LMNA gene, resulting
in a lys542-to-asn (K542N) substitution. The parents and 1 unaffected
daughter were heterozygous for the mutation. Patients in this family
showed uniform skeletal malformations such as acroosteolysis of the
digits, micrognathia, and clavicular aplasia/hypoplasia, characteristic
of mandibuloacral dysplasia. However, the patients also had classic
features of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (176670). Plasilova et
al. (2004) suggested that autosomal recessive HGPS and MADA may
represent a single disorder with varying degrees of severity.

.0034
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, CONGENITAL, LMNA-RELATED
LMNA, SER143PHE

In a young girl with congenital muscular dystrophy and progeroid
features (see 613205), Kirschner et al. (2005) identified a 1824C-T
transition in the LMNA gene, resulting in a de novo heterozygous
missense mutation, ser143 to phe (S143F). The child presented during the
first year of life with myopathy with marked axial weakness, feeding
difficulties, poor head control and axial weakness. Progeroid features,
including growth failure, sclerodermatous skin changes, and osteolytic
lesions, developed later. At routine examination at age 8 years, she was
found to have a mediolateral myocardial infarction.

In cultured skin fibroblasts derived from the patient reported by
Kirschner et al. (2005), Kandert et al. (2007) found dysmorphic nuclei
with blebs and lobulations that accumulated progressively with cell
passage. Immunofluorescent staining showed altered lamin A/C
organization and aggregate formation. There was aberrant localization of
lamin-associated proteins, particularly emerin (EMD; 300384) and
nesprin-2 (SYNE2; 608442), which was reduced or absent from the nuclear
envelope. However, a subset of mutant cells expressing the giant 800-kD
isoform of SYNE2 showed a milder phenotype, suggesting that this isoform
exerts a protective effect. Proliferating cells were observed to express
the 800-kD SYNE2 isoform, whereas nonproliferating cells did not. In
addition, mutant cells showed defects in the intranuclear organization
of acetylated histones and RNA polymerase II compared to control cells.
The findings indicated that the S143F mutant protein affects nuclear
envelope architecture and composition, chromatin organization, gene
expression, and transcription. The findings also implicated nesprin-2 as
a structural reinforcer at the nuclear envelope.

.0035
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE, TYPE 1B
LMNA, TYR259TER

In 9 affected members of Dutch family with limb-girdle muscular
dystrophy type 1B (159001), van Engelen et al. (2005) identified a
777T-A transversion in the LMNA gene, resulting in a tyr259-to-ter
substitution (Y259X). The heterozygous Y259X mutation led to a classic
LGMD1B phenotype. One infant homozygous for the mutation was born of
consanguineous parents who were both affected, and delivered at 30
weeks' gestational age by cesarean section because of decreasing cardiac
rhythm. The infant died at birth from very severe generalized muscular
dystrophy. Cultured skin fibroblasts from the infant showed complete
absence of A-type lamins leading to disorganization of the lamina,
alterations in the protein composition of the inner nuclear membrane,
and decreased life span. Van Engelen et al. (2005) noted that the
fibroblasts from this child showed remarkable similarity, in nuclear
architectural defects and in decreased life span, to the fibroblasts of
homozygous LMNA (L530P/L530P) mice (Mounkes et al., 2003).

.0036
RESTRICTIVE DERMOPATHY, LETHAL
HUTCHINSON-GILFORD PROGERIA SYNDROME, INCLUDED
LMNA, IVS11, G-A, +1

In a premature infant who died at 6 months of age due to restrictive
dermopathy (275210), Navarro et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous
G-to-A transition at position 1 in the intron 11 donor site of the LMNA
gene (IVS11+1G-A), resulting in loss of exon 11 from the transcript. The
patient expressed lamins A and C and a truncated prelamin A.

In a patient with an extremely severe form of HGPS (176670), Moulson et
al. (2007) identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition at the +1
position of the donor splice site of intron 11 in the LMNA gene
(1968+1G-A). RT-PCR studies showed a truncated protein product identical
to that observed in HGPS cell lines with the common 1824C-T mutation
(150330.0022), indicating that the new mutation resulted in the abnormal
use of the same cryptic exon 11 splice site. The findings were in
contrast to those reported by Navarro et al. (2004), who observed
skipping of exon 11 with 1968+1G-A. Further quantitative studies of the
patient's cells by Moulson et al. (2007) found a 4.5-fold increase in
the relative ratio of mutant mRNA and protein to wildtype prelamin A
compared to typical HGPS cells. The findings were confirmed by Western
blot analysis and provided an explanation for the severe phenotype
observed in this patient. He had had abnormally thick and tight skin
observed at 11 weeks of age, and developed more typical but severe
progeroid features over time. He died of infection at age 3.5 years.

.0037
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY
LMNA, ALA529VAL

In 2 unrelated Turkish patients with mandibuloacral dysplasia with type
A lipodystrophy (248370), a 21-year-old woman previously described by
Cogulu et al. (2003) and an 18-year-old man, Garg et al. (2005)
identified homozygosity for a 1586C-T transition in the LMNA gene,
resulting in an ala529-to-val (A529V) substitution. Intragenic SNPs
revealed a common haplotype spanning 2.5 kb around the mutated
nucleotide in the parents of both patients, suggesting ancestral origin
of the mutation. The female patient had no breast development despite
normal menstruation, a phenotype different from that seen in women with
the R527H mutation (150330.0021).

.0038
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE, TYPE 1B
LMNA, GLN493TER

In a German woman with LGMD1B (159001), Rudnik-Schoneborn et al. (2007)
identified a heterozygous 1477C-T transition in exon 8 of the LMNA gene,
resulting in a gln493-to-ter (Q493X) substitution. She presented with
slowly progressive proximal muscle weakness beginning in the lower
extremities and later involving the upper extremities. EMG showed both
neurogenic and myopathic defects in the quadriceps muscle. At age 53
years, she was diagnosed with atrioventricular conduction block and
arrhythmia requiring pacemaker implantation. Family history showed that
her mother had walking difficulties from age 40 years and died of a
heart attack at age 54. Six other deceased family members had suspected
cardiomyopathy without muscle involvement.

.0039
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, IVS8, G-C, +5

Morel et al. (2006) reported 2 sisters, the children of
nonconsanguineous Punjabi parents, with familial partial lipodystrophy
type 2 (FPLD2; 151660). The first presented with acanthosis nigricans at
age 5 years, diabetes with insulin resistance, hypertension, and
hypertriglyceridemia at age 13 years, and partial lipodystrophy starting
at puberty. Her sister and their mother had a similar metabolic profile
and physical features, and their mother died of vascular disease at age
32 years. LMNA sequencing showed that the sisters were each heterozygous
for a novel G-to-C mutation at the intron 8 consensus splice donor site,
which was absent from the genomes of 300 healthy individuals. The
retention of intron 8 in mRNA predicted a prematurely truncated lamin A
isoform (516 instead of 664 amino acids) with 20 nonsense 3-prime
terminal residues. The authors concluded that this was the first LMNA
splicing mutation to be associated with FPLD2, and that it causes a
severe clinical and metabolic phenotype.

.0040
HUTCHINSON-GILFORD PROGERIA SYNDROME
LMNA, VAL607VAL

In a patient with a severe form of HGPS (176670), Moulson et al. (2007)
identified a de novo heterozygous 1821G-A transition in exon 11 of the
LMNA gene, resulting in a val607-to-val (V607V) substitution. The
1821G-A mutation favored the use of the same cryptic splice site as the
common 1824C-T mutation (150330.0022) and produced the same resultant
progerin product. However, the ratio of mutant to wildtype mRNA and
protein was increased in the patient compared to typical HGPS cells. The
patient had flexion contractures, thick and tight skin, and other severe
progeroid features. He died of infection at 26 days of age.

.0041
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY, ATYPICAL, INCLUDED;;
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2, INCLUDED
LMNA, SER573LEU

In a 50-year-old Italian woman with sporadic dilated cardiomyopathy with
conduction defects (CMD1A; 115200), Taylor et al. (2003) identified
heterozygosity for a 1718C-T transition in exon 11 of the LMNA gene,
resulting in a ser573-to-leu substitution at a highly conserved residue,
predicted to affect the carboxyl tail of the lamin A isoform. The
mutation was not found in the proband's 2 unaffected offspring or in 300
control chromosomes, but her unaffected 60-year-old sister also carried
the mutation.

Van Esch et al. (2006) analyzed the LMNA gene in a 44-year-old male of
European descent with arthropathy, tendinous calcifications, and a
progeroid appearance (see 248370) and identified homozygosity for the
S573L mutation. Progeroid features included a small pinched nose, small
lips, micrognathia with crowded teeth, cataract, and alopecia. He also
had generalized lipodystrophy, and sclerodermatous skin. The arthropathy
affected predominantly the distal femora and proximal tibia in the knee
with tendinous calcifications. However, he had normal clavicles and no
evidence of acroosteolysis. The authors concluded that he had a novel
phenotype. The patient's unaffected 15-year-old son was heterozygous for
the mutation, which was not found in 450 control chromosomes. The
authors noted that the patient had no evidence of cardiomyopathy and his
70-year-old mother, an obligate heterozygote, had no known cardiac
problems.

In a 75-year-old European male with partial lipodystrophy (151660),
Lanktree et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for the S573L mutation
in the LMNA gene.

.0042
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, ASP230ASN

In a 46-year-old South Asian female with partial lipodystrophy (151660),
Lanktree et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a 688G-A transition
in exon 4 of the LMNA gene, resulting in an asp230-to-asn (D230N)
substitution at a conserved residue located 5-prime to the nuclear
localization signal. The mutation, predicted to affect only the lamin A
isoform, was not found in 200 controls of multiple ethnic backgrounds.

.0043
LIPODYSTROPHY, FAMILIAL PARTIAL, TYPE 2
LMNA, ARG399CYS

In a 50-year-old European female with partial lipodystrophy (151660),
Lanktree et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a 1195C-T
transition in exon 7 of the LMNA gene, resulting in an arg399-to-cys
(R399C) substitution at a conserved residue located 5-prime to the
nuclear localization signal. The mutation, predicted to affect only the
lamin A isoform, was not found in 200 controls of multiple ethnic
backgrounds.

Decaudain et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous R399 mutation in a
woman with severe metabolic syndrome. She was diagnosed with
insulin-resistant diabetes at age 32. Chronic hyperglycemia led to
retinopathy, peripheral neuropathy, and renal failure. She had severe
hypertriglyceridemia and diffuse atherosclerosis, requiring coronary
artery bypass at age 49. Physical examination revealed android fat
distribution with lipoatrophy of lower limbs and calves hypertrophy
without any muscle weakness. Her mother and a brother had diabetes and
died several years earlier.

.0044
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY, ATYPICAL
LMNA, VAL440MET

In a 27-year-old Italian woman with a mandibuloacral dysplasia type A
(MADA; 248370)-like phenotype, Lombardi et al. (2007) found compound
heterozygosity for missense mutations in the LMNA cDNA: a G-to-A
transition at position 1318 in exon 7 that gave rise to a val-to-met
substitution at codon 440 (V440M), and an R527H substitution
(150330.0021). Each healthy parent was a simple heterozygote for one or
the other mutation. The apparent MADA phenotype was associated with
muscular hyposthenia and generalized hypotonia. Clavicular hypoplasia
and metabolic imbalances were absent. Lombardi et al. (2007)
hypothesized that lack of homozygosity for the R527H mutation attenuated
the MADA phenotype, while the V440M mutation may have contributed to
both the muscle phenotype and the pathogenic effect of the single R527H
mutation.

.0045
HEART-HAND SYNDROME, SLOVENIAN TYPE
LMNA, IVS9AS, T-G, -12

In affected members of a Slovenian family with heart-hand syndrome
(610140), originally reported by Sinkovec et al. (2005), Renou et al.
(2008) identified heterozygosity for a T-G transversion in intron 9 of
the LMNA gene (IVS9-12T-G), predicted to cause a frameshift and
premature termination in exon 10, with the addition of 14 new amino
acids at the C terminus. The mutation was not found in unaffected family
members or in 100 healthy controls. Analysis of fibroblasts from 2
affected individuals confirmed the presence of truncated protein and
revealed aberrant localization of lamin A/C accumulated in intranuclear
foci as well as dysmorphic nuclei with nuclear envelope herniations.

.0046
MANDIBULOACRAL DYSPLASIA WITH TYPE A LIPODYSTROPHY
LMNA, ALA529THR

In a 56-year-old Japanese woman, born of consanguineous parents, with
mandibuloacral dysplasia and type A lipodystrophy (248370), Kosho et al.
(2007) identified a homozygous 1585G-A transition in exon 9 of the LMNA
gene, resulting in an ala529-to-thr (A529T) substitution. The authors
stated that she was the oldest reported patient with the disorder. In
addition to classic MAD with lipodystrophy type A phenotype, including
progeroid appearance, acroosteolysis of the distal phalanges, and loss
of subcutaneous fat in the limbs, she had severe progressive destructive
skeletal and osteoporotic changes. Vertebral collapse led to paralysis.
However, Kosho et al. (2007) also noted that other factors may have
contributed to the severe osteoporosis observed in this patient. Another
mutation in this codon, A529V (150330.0037), results in a similar
phenotype.

.0047
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, CONGENITAL, LMNA-RELATED
LMNA, LEU380SER

In a 7-year-old boy with a LNMA-related congenital muscular dystrophy
(613205), Quijano-Roy et al. (2008) identified a de novo heterozygous
mutation in exon 6 of the LMNA gene, resulting in a leu380-to-ser
(L380S) substitution. He showed decreased movements in utero, hypotonia,
talipes foot deformities, no head or trunk control, distal joint
contractures, respiratory insufficiency, and paroxysmal atrial
tachycardia. Serum creatine kinase was increased, and muscle biopsy
showed dystrophic changes.

.0048
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, CONGENITAL, LMNA-RELATED
LMNA, ARG249TRP

In a 9-year-old girl with congenital muscular dystrophy (613205),
Quijano-Roy et al. (2008) identified a de novo heterozygous mutation in
exon 4 of the LMNA gene, resulting in an arg249-to-trp (R249W)
substitution. She presented at age 3 to 6 months with axial weakness and
talipes foot deformities. She lost head support at 9 months, had
respiratory insufficiency, joint contractures, and axial and limb muscle
weakness. A de novo heterozygous R249W mutation was also identified in
an unrelated 3-year-old boy with congenital LGMD1B who showed decreased
movements in utero, hypotonia, distal contractures, no head or trunk
control, and respiratory insufficiency. Both patients had increased
serum creatine kinase and showed myopathic changes on EMG studies.

.0049
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, CONGENITAL, LMNA-RELATED, INCLUDED;;
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, LIMB-GIRDLE, TYPE 1B, INCLUDED
LMNA, GLU358LYS

Mercuri et al. (2004) identified a de novo heterozygous 1072G-A
transition in exon 5 of the LMNA gene, resulting in a glu358-to-lys
(E358K) substitution in 5 unrelated patients with muscular dystrophy.
Three patients had the common phenotype of autosomal dominant
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (181350), 1 had early-onset LGMD1B
(159001), and the last had had a more severe disorder consistent with
congenital muscular dystrophy (613205). The mutation was not identified
in 150 controls. The patient with LGMD1B also had cardiac conduction
abnormalities, respiratory failure, and features of lipodystrophy
(151660). Mercuri et al. (2004) commented on the extreme phenotypic
variability associated with this mutation.

In 4 unrelated patients with LMNA-related congenital muscular dystrophy,
Quijano-Roy et al. (2008) identified a de novo heterozygous mutation in
exon 6 of the LMNA gene, resulting in a glu358-to-lys (E358K)
substitution. Three patients presented before 1 year of age with
hypotonia and later developed head drop with neck muscle weakness. There
was delayed motor development with early loss of ambulation, distal limb
contractures, axial and limb muscle weakness, respiratory insufficiency
requiring mechanical ventilation, increased serum creatine kinase, and
dystrophic changes on muscle biopsy. One patient developed ventricular
tachycardia at age 20 years. The fourth patient with congenital LGMD1B
had decreased fetal movements and presented at age 3 to 6 months with
hypotonia, loss of head control, and delayed motor development.

.0050
MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, CONGENITAL, LMNA-RELATED
LMNA, 3-BP DEL, 94AAG

In an 18-month-old boy with LMNA-related congenital muscular dystrophy
(613205), D'Amico et al. (2005) identified a de novo heterozygous 3-bp
deletion (94delAAG) in exon 1 of the LMNA gene, resulting in the
deletion of lys32. Although he had normal early motor development, he
showed prominent neck extensor weakness resulting in a 'dropped head'
phenotype at age 1 year. He was able to stand independently but had some
difficulty walking.

.0051
VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
LMNA, ARG644CYS

This variant is classified as a variant of unknown significance because
its contribution to various phenotypes has not been confirmed.

An arg644-to-cys (R644C) mutation in the LMNA gene has been found in
several different phenotypic presentations (Genschel et al., 2001;
Mercuri et al., 2005; Rankin et al., 2008); however, the pathogenicity
of the mutation has not been confirmed (Moller et al., 2009).

In a German patient with dilated cardiomyopathy with no history history
of conduction system disease (see 152000), Genschel et al. (2001)
identified heterozygosity for a 1930C-T transition in exon 11 of the
LMNA gene resulting in an R644C substitution in the C-terminal domain of
lamin A. The authors noted that the mutation is solely within lamin A,
but not lamin C, whereas previously reported mutations causing dilated
cardiomyopathy are located more in the rod domain of the protein.

Mercuri et al. (2005) identified heterozygosity for the R644C mutation
in 4 patients with skeletal and cardiac muscle involvement of varying
severity. In 1 patient, the mutation was found in the affected brother
and the unaffected father, and was not found in the affected mother. The
mutation was not found in 100 unrelated control subjects.

Rankin et al. (2008) described 9 patients in 8 families with the same
mutation. Patients 1 and 2 presented with lipodystrophy and insulin
resistance; patient 1 also had focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.
Patient 3 presented with motor neuropathy, patient 4 with arthrogryposis
and dilated cardiomyopathy with left ventricular noncompaction, patient
5 with severe scoliosis and contractures, patient 6 with limb-girdle
weakness, and patient 7 with hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance.
Patients 8 and 9 were brothers who had proximal weakness and
contractures. The same LMNA was identified in 9 unaffected individuals
in these 9 families, but was not detected in 200 German and 300 British
controls. Rankin et al. (2008) suggested that extreme phenotypic
diversity and low penetrance are associated with the R644C mutation.

.0052
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, WITH HYPERGONADOTRIPIC HYPOGONADISM
LMNA, LEU59ARG

In a 17-year-old Caucasian female with dilated cardiomyopathy and
ovarian failure (212112), Nguyen et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity
for a de novo 176T-C transition in exon 1 of the LMNA gene, predicted to
result in a leu59-to-arg (L59R) substitution. Analysis of nuclear
morphology in patient fibroblasts showed more irregularity and variation
than that of control fibroblasts, with denting, blebbing, and irregular
margins. The mutation was not found in the unaffected parents or in 116
population-based controls.

In a 15-year-old Caucasian girl with dilated cardiomyopathy and ovarian
failure who died from an arrhythmia while awaiting cardiac
transplantation, McPherson et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for
the L59R mutation in the LMNA gene. The mutation was presumed to be de
novo, although the unaffected parents declined DNA testing. The patient
also had a healthy older sister, and there was no family history of
cardiomyopathy or hypogonadism.

.0053
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1A
LMNA, ARG541GLY

In 2 sibs with dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD1A; 115200), Malek et al.
(2011) identified a heterozygous 1621C-G transversion in exon 10 of the
LMNA gene, resulting in an arg541-to-gly (R541G) substitution in the
C-terminal tail region. The 23-year-old male proband had a history of
paroxysmal atrioventricular nodal reentrant tachycardia and was found by
echocardiogram to have dilation of the left ventricle and global
hypokinesis. Cardiac MRI showed discrete regional areas of akinesis with
muscle thinning in the left ventricle and marked hypertrabeculation in
dysfunctional regions, as well as evidence of fibrosis. The proband's
sister had sinus bradycardia and supraventricular and ventricular
arrhythmias, but normal echocardiogram and cardiac MRI. The sibs' father
and paternal aunt had both died of dilated cardiomyopathy. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that the R541G mutant resulted in
the formation of abnormal lamin aggregates, most of which were
sickle-shaped, suggesting aberrant formation of the inner nuclear lamina
from misassembled lamin dimers.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Krohne and Benavente (1986); Lebel and Raymond (1987)
REFERENCE 1. Arimura, T.; Helbling-Leclerc, A.; Massart, C.; Varnous, S.; Niel,
F.; Lacene, E.; Fromes, Y.; Toussaint, M.; Mura, A.-M.; Keller, D.
I.; Amthor, H.; Isnard, R.; Malissen, M.; Schwartz, K.; Bonne, G.
: Mouse model carrying H222P-Lmna mutation develops muscular dystrophy
and dilated cardiomyopathy similar to human striated muscle laminopathies. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 155-169, 2005.

2. Benedetti, S.; Menditto, I.; Degano, M.; Rodolico, C.; Merlini,
L.; D'Amico, A.; Palmucci, L.; Berardinelli, A.; Pegoraro, E.; Trevisan,
C. P.; Morandi, L.; Moroni, I.; and 15 others: Phenotypic clustering
of lamin A/C mutations in neuromuscular patients. Neurology 69:
1285-1292, 2007.

3. Ben Yaou, R.; Toutain, A.; Arimura, T.; Demay, L.; Massart, C.;
Peccate, C.; Muchir, A.; Llense, S.; Deburgreave, N.; Leturcq, F.;
Litim, K. E.; Rahmoun-Chiali, N.; Richard, P.; Babuty, D.; Recan-Budiartha,
D.; Bonne, G.: Multitissular involvement in a family with LMNA and
EMD mutations: role of digenic mechanism? Neurology 68: 1883-1894,
2007.

4. Boguslavsky, R. L.; Stewart, C. L.; Worman, H. J.: Nuclear lamin
A inhibits adipocyte differentiation: implications for Dunnigan-type
familial partial lipodystrophy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15: 653-663,
2006.

5. Bonne, G.; Di Barletta, M. R.; Varnous, S.; Becane, H.-M.; Hammouda,
E.-H.; Merlini, L.; Muntoni, F.; Greenberg, C. R.; Gary, F.; Urtizberea,
J.-A.; Duboc, D.; Fardeau, M.; Toniolo, D.; Schwartz, K.: Mutations
in the gene encoding lamin A/C cause autosomal dominant Emery-Dreifuss
muscular dystrophy. Nature Genet. 21: 285-288, 1999.

6. Brodsky, G. L.; Muntoni, F.; Miocic, S.; Sinagra, G.; Sewry, C.;
Mestroni, L.: Lamin A/C gene mutation associated with dilated cardiomyopathy
with variable skeletal muscle involvement. Circulation 101: 473-476,
2000.

7. Broers, J. L. V.; Peeters, E. A. G.; Kuijpers, H. J. H.; Endert,
J.; Bouten, C. V. C.; Oomens, C. W. J.; Baaijens, F. P. T.; Ramaekers,
F. C. S.: Decreased mechanical stiffness in LMNA-/- cells is caused
by defective nucleo-cytoskeletal integrity: implications for the development
of laminopathies. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 2567-2580, 2004.

8. Brown, C. A.; Lanning, R. W.; McKinney, K. Q.; Salvino, A. R.;
Cherniske, E.; Crowe, C. A.; Darras, B. T.; Gominak, S.; Greenberg,
C. R.; Grosmann, C.; Heydemann, P.; Mendell, J. R.; Pober, B. R.;
Sasaki, T.; Shapiro, F.; Simpson, D. A.; Suchowersky, O.; Spence,
J. E.: Novel and recurrent mutations in lamin A/C in patients with
Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. Am. J. Med. Genet. 102: 359-367,
2001.

9. Brown, W. T.: Personal Communication. Staten Island, N.Y.  1/12/2004.

10. Cao, H.; Hegele, R. A.: LMNA is mutated in Hutchinson-Gilford
progeria (MIM 176670) but not in Wiedemann-Rautenstrauch progeroid
syndrome (MIM 264090). J. Hum. Genet. 48: 271-274, 2003.

11. Cao, H.; Hegele, R. A.: Nuclear lamin A/C R482Q mutation in Canadian
kindreds with Dunnigan-type familial partial lipodystrophy. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 109-112, 2000.

12. Capanni, C.; Mattioli, E.; Columbaro, M.; Lucarelli, E.; Parnaik,
V. K.; Novelli, G.; Wehnert, M.; Cenni, V.; Maraldi, N. M.; Squarzoni,
S.; Lattanzi, G.: Altered pre-lamin A processing is a common mechanism
leading to lipodystrophy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 1489-1502, 2005.

13. Capell, B. C.; Collins, F. S.: Human laminopathies: nuclei gone
genetically awry. Nature Rev. Genet. 7: 940-952, 2006.

14. Capell, B. C.; Erdos, M. R.; Madigan, J. P.; Fiordalisi, J. J.;
Varga, R.; Conneely, K. N.; Gordon, L. B.; Der, C. J.; Cox, A. D.;
Collins, F. S.: Inhibiting farnesylation of progerin prevents the
characteristic nuclear blebbing of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 12879-12884, 2005.

15. Caux, F.; Dubosclard, E.; Lascols, O.; Buendia, B.; Chazouilleres,
O.; Cohen, A.; Courvalin, J.-C.; Laroche, L.; Capeau, J.; Vigouroux,
C.; Christin-Maitre, S.: A new clinical condition linked to a novel
mutation in lamins A and C with generalized lipoatrophy, insulin-resistant
diabetes, disseminated leukomelanodermic papules, liver steatosis,
and cardiomyopathy. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 1006-1013, 2003.

16. Charniot, J.-C.; Pascal, C.; Bouchier, C.; Sebillon, P.; Salama,
J.; Duboscq-Bidot, L.; Peuchmaurd, M.; Desnos, M.; Artigou, J.-Y.;
Komajda, M.: Functional consequences of an LMNA mutation associated
with a new cardiac and non-cardiac phenotype. Hum. Mutat. 21: 473-481,
2003.

17. Chen, C.-Y.; Chi, Y.-H.; Mutalif, R. A.; Starost, M. F.; Myers,
T. G.; Anderson, S. A.; Stewart, C. L.; Jeang, K.-T.: Accumulation
of the inner nuclear envelope protein Sun1 is pathogenic in progeric
and dystrophic laminopathies. Cell 149: 565-577, 2012.

18. Chen, L.; Lee, L.; Kudlow, B. A.; Dos Santos, H. G.; Sletvold,
O.; Shafeghati, Y.; Botha, E. G.; Garg, E.; Hanson, N. B.; Martin,
G. M.; Mian, I. S.; Kennedy, B. K.; Oshima, J.: LMNA mutations in
atypical Werner's syndrome. Lancet 362: 440-445, 2003.

19. Choi, J. C.; Wu, W.; Muchir, A.; Iwata, S.; Homma, S.; Worman,
H. J.: Dual specificity phosphatase 4 mediates cardiomyopathy caused
by lamin A/C (LMNA) gene mutation. J. Biol. Chem. 287: 40513-40524,
2012.

20. Coffinier, C.; Hudon, S. E.; Farber, E. A.; Chang, S. Y.; Hrycyna,
C. A.; Young, S. G.; Fong, L. G.: HIV protease inhibitors block the
zinc metalloproteinase ZMPSTE24 and lead to an accumulation of prelamin
A in cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 13432-13437, 2007.

21. Cogulu, O.; Gunduz, C.; Darcan, S.; Kadioglu, B.; Ozkinay, F.;
Ozkinay, C.: Mandibuloacral dysplasia with absent breast development.
(Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 119A: 391-392, 2003.

22. Csoka, A. B.; Cao, H.; Sammak, P. J.; Constantinescu, D.; Schatten,
G. P.; Hegele, R. A.: Novel lamin A/C gene (LMNA) mutations in atypical
progeroid syndromes. J. Med. Genet. 41: 304-308, 2004.

23. D'Amico, A.; Haliloglu, G.; Richard, P.; Talim, B.; Maugenre,
S.; Ferreiro, A.; Guicheney, P.; Menditto, I.; Benedetti, S.; Bertini,
E.; Bonne, G.; Topaloglu, H.: Two patients with 'dropped head syndrome'
due to mutations in LMNA or SEPN1 genes. Neuromusc. Disord. 15:
521-524, 2005.

24. D'Apice, M. R.; Tenconi, R.; Mammi, I.; van den Ende, J.; Novelli,
G.: Paternal origin of LMNA mutations in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria.
(Letter) Clin. Genet. 65: 52-54, 2004.

25. Davies, B. S. J.; Barnes, R. H., II; Tu, Y.; Ren, S.; Andres,
D. A.; Spielmann, H. P.; Lammerding, J.; Wang, Y.; Young, S. G.; Fong,
L. G.: An accumulation of non-farnesylated prelamin A causes cardiomyopathy
but not progeria. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 2682-2694, 2010.

26. Decaudain, A.; Vantyghem, M.-C.; Guerci, B.; Hecart, A.-C.; Auclair,
M.; Reznik, Y.; Narbonne, H.; Ducluzeau, P.-H.; Donadille, B.; Lebbe,
C.; Bereziat, V.; Capeau, J.; Lascols, O.; Vigouroux, C.: New metabolic
phenotypes in laminopathies: LMNA mutations in patients with severe
metabolic syndrome. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 4835-4844, 2007.

27. De Sandre-Giovannoli, A.; Bernard, R.; Cau, P.; Navarro, C.; Amiel,
J.; Boccaccio, I.; Lyonnet, S.; Stewart, C. L.; Munnich, A.; Le Merrer,
M.; Levy, N.: Lamin A truncation in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria. Science 300:
2055 only, 2003.

28. De Sandre-Giovannoli, A.; Chaouch, M.; Kozlov, S.; Vallat, J.-M.;
Tazir, M.; Kassouri, N.; Szepetowski, P.; Hammadouche, T.; Vandenberghe,
A.; Stewart, C. L.; Grid, D.; Levy, N.: Homozygous defects in LMNA,
encoding lamin A/C nuclear-envelope proteins, cause autosomal recessive
axonal neuropathy in human (Charcot-Marie-Tooth disorder type 2) and
mouse. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 70: 726-736, 2002. Note: Erratum: Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 70: 1075 only, 2002.

29. Eriksson, M.; Brown, W. T.; Gordon, L. B.; Glynn, M. W.; Singer,
J.; Scott, L.; Erdos, M. R.; Robbins, C. M.; Moses, T. Y.; Berglund,
P.; Dutra, A.; Pak, E.; Durkin, S.; Csoka, A. B.; Boehnke, M.; Glover,
T. W.; Collins, F. S.: Recurrent de novo point mutations in lamin
A cause Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Nature 423: 293-298,
2003.

30. Fatkin, D.; MacRae, C.; Sasaki, T.; Wolff, M. R.; Porcu, M.; Frenneaux,
M.; Atherton, J.; Vidaillet, H. J., Jr.; Spudich, S.; De Girolami,
U.; Seidman, J. G.; Seidman, C. E.: Missense mutations in the rod
domain of the lamin A/C gene as causes of dilated cardiomyopathy and
conduction-system disease. New Eng. J. Med. 341: 1715-1724, 1999.

31. Favreau, C.; Higuet, D.; Courvalin, J.-C.; Buendia, B.: Expression
of a mutant lamin A that causes Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
inhibits in vitro differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 24: 1481-1492, 2004.

32. Fisher, D. Z.; Chaudhary, N.; Blobel, G.: cDNA sequencing of
nuclear lamins A and C reveals primary and secondary structural homology
to intermediate filament proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 6450-6454,
1986.

33. Flier, J. S.: Pushing the envelope on lipodystrophy. Nature
Genet. 24: 103-104, 2000.

34. Frock, R. L.; Kudlow, B. A.; Evans, A. M.; Jameson, S. A.; Hauschka,
S. D.; Kennedy, B. K.: Lamin A/C and emerin are critical for skeletal
muscle satellite cell differentiation. Genes Dev. 20: 486-500, 2006.

35. Garavelli, L.; D'Apice, M. R.; Rivieri, F.; Bertoli, M.; Wischmeijer,
A.; Gelmini, C.; De Nigris, V.; Albertini, E.; Rosato, S.; Virdis,
R.; Bacchini, E.; Dal Zotto, R.; Banchini, G.; Iughetti, L.; Bernasconi,
S.; Superti-Furga, A.; Novelli, G.: Mandibuloacral dysplasia type
A in childhood. Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A: 2258-2264, 2009.

36. Garg, A.; Cogulu, O.; Ozkinay, F.; Onay, H.; Agarwal, A. K.:
A novel homozygous ala529val LMNA mutation in Turkish patients with
mandibuloacral dysplasia. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 5259-5264,
2005.

37. Garg, A.; Vinaitheerthan, M.; Weatherall, P. T.; Bowcock, A. M.
: Phenotypic heterogeneity in patients with familial partial lipodystrophy
(Dunnigan variety) related to the site of missense mutations in lamin
A/C gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 59-65, 2001.

38. Genschel, J.; Bochow, B.; Kuepferling, S.; Ewert, R.; Hetzer,
R.; Lochs, H.; Schmidt, H. H.-J.: A R644C mutation within lamin A
extends the mutations causing dilated cardiomyopathy. Hum. Genet. 17:
154 only, 2001. Note: Full article online.

39. Genschel, J.; Schmidt, H. H.-J.: Mutations in the LMNA gene encoding
lamin A/C. Hum. Mutat. 16: 451-459, 2000.

40. Glynn, M. W.; Glover, T. W.: Incomplete processing of mutant
lamin A in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria leads to nuclear abnormalities,
which are reversed by farnesyltransferase inhibition. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 14: 2959-2969, 2005.

41. Goldman, R. D.; Shumaker, D. K.; Erdos, M. R.; Eriksson, M.; Goldman,
A. E.; Gordon, L. B.; Gruenbaum, Y.; Khuon, S.; Mendez, M.; Varga,
R.; Collins, F. S.: Accumulation of mutant lamin A causes progressive
changes in nuclear architecture in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 8963-8968, 2004.

42. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/26/2013.

43. Guilly, M. N.; Bensussan, A.; Bourge, J. F.; Bornens, M.; Courvalin,
J. C.: A human T lymphoblastic cell line lacks lamins A and C. EMBO
J. 6: 3795-3799, 1987.

44. Haque, F.; Mazzeo, D.; Patel, J. T.; Smallwood, D. T.; Ellis,
J. A.; Shanahan, C. M.; Shackleton, S.: Mammalian SUN protein interaction
networks at the inner nuclear membrane and their role in laminopathy
disease processes. J. Biol. Chem. 285: 3487-3498, 2010.

45. Hegele, R. A.: LMNA mutation position predicts organ system involvement
in laminopathies. Clin. Genet. 68: 31-34, 2005.

46. Hegele, R. A.: Drawing the line in progeria syndromes. Lancet 362:
416-417, 2003.

47. Hegele, R. A.; Cao, H.; Harris, S. B.; Zinman, B.; Hanley, A.
J.; Anderson, C. M.: Genetic variation in LMNA modulates plasma leptin
and indices of obesity in aboriginal Canadians. Physiol. Genomics 3:
39-44, 2000.

48. Hegele, R. A.; Cao, H.; Huff, M. W.; Anderson, C. M.: LMNA R482Q
mutation in partial lipodystrophy associated with reduced plasma leptin
concentration. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 3089-3093, 2000.

49. Hegele, R. A.; Huff, M. W.; Young, T. K.: Common genomic variation
in LMNA modulates indexes of obesity in Inuit. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86:
2747-2751, 2001.

50. Ho, C. Y.; Jaalouk, D. E.; Vartiainen, M. K.; Lammerding, J.:
Lamin A/C and emerin regulate MKL1-SRF activity by modulating actin
dynamics. Nature 497: 507-511, 2013.

51. Huang, S.; Chen, L.; Libina, N.; Janes, J.; Martin, G. M.; Campisi,
J.; Oshima, J.: Correction of cellular phenotypes of Hutchinson-Gilford
progeria cells by RNA interference. Hum. Genet. 118: 444-450, 2005.

52. Jacob, K. N.; Baptista, F.; dos Santos, H. G.; Oshima, J.; Agarwal,
A. K.; Garg, A.: Phenotypic heterogeneity in body fat distribution
in patients with atypical Werner's syndrome due to heterozygous arg133leu
lamin A/C mutation. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 6699-6706, 2005.

53. Kandert, S.; Luke, Y.; Kleinhenz, T.; Neumann, S.; Lu, W.; Jaeger,
V. M.; Munck, M.; Wehnert, M.; Muller, C. R.; Zhou, Z.; Noegel, A.
A.; Dabauvalle, M.-C.; Karakesisoglou, I.: Nesprin-2 giant safeguards
nuclear envelope architecture in LMNA S143F progeria cells. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 16: 2944-2959, 2007. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet.
17: 468 only, 2008.

54. Kirschner, J.; Brune, T.; Wehnert, M.; Denecke, J.; Wasner, C.;
Feuer, A.; Marquardt, T.; Ketelsen, U.-P.; Wieacker, P.; Bonnemann,
C. G.; Korinthenberg, R.: p.S143F mutation in lamin A/C: a new phenotype
combining myopathy and progeria. Ann. Neurol. 57: 148-151, 2005.

55. Kosho, T.; Takahashi, J.; Momose, T.; Nakamura, A.; Sakurai, A.;
Wada, T.; Yoshida, K.; Wakui, K.; Suzuki, T.; Kasuga, K.; Nishimura,
G.; Kato, H.; Fukushima, Y.: Mandibuloacral dysplasia and a novel
LMNA mutation in a woman with severe progressive skeletal changes. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 143A: 2598-2603, 2007.

56. Krohne, G.; Benavente, R.: The nuclear lamins: a multigene family
of proteins in evolution and differentiation. Exp. Cell Res. 162:
1-10, 1986.

57. Lammerding, J.; Schulze, P. C.; Takahashi, T.; Kozlov, S.; Sullivan,
T.; Kamm, R. D.; Stewart, C. L.; Lee, R. T.: Lamin A/C deficiency
causes defective nuclear mechanics and mechanotransduction. J. Clin.
Invest. 113: 370-378, 2004.

58. Lanktree, M.; Cao, H.; Rabkin, S. W.; Hanna, A.; Hegele, R. A.
: Novel LMNA mutations seen in patients with familial partial lipodystrophy
subtype 2 (FPLD2; MIM 151660). (Letter) Clin. Genet. 71: 183-186,
2007.

59. Lebel, S.; Raymond, Y.: Lamin A is not synthesized as a larger
precursor polypeptide. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 149: 417-423,
1987.

60. Lin, F.; Worman, H. J.: Structural organization of the human
gene encoding nuclear lamin A and nuclear lamin C. J. Biol. Chem. 268:
16321-16326, 1993.

61. Liu, G.-H.; Barkho, B. Z.; Ruiz, S.; Diep, D.; Qu, J.; Yang, S.-L.;
Panopoulos, A. D.; Suzuki, K.; Kurian, L.; Walsh, C.; Thompson, J.;
Boue, S.; Fung, H. L.; Sancho-Martinez, I.; Zhang, K.; Yates, J.,
III; Belmonte, J. C. I.: Recapitulation of premature ageing with
iPSCs from Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Nature 472: 221-225,
2011.

62. Lloyd, D. J.; Trembath, R. C.; Shackleton, S.: A novel interaction
between lamin A and SREBP1: implications for partial lipodystrophy
and other laminopathies. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 769-777, 2002.

63. Lombardi, F.; Gullotta, F.; Columbaro, M.; Filareto, A.; D'Adamo,
M.; Vielle, A.; Guglielmi, V.; Nardone, A. M.; Azzolini, V.; Grosso,
E.; Lattanzi, G.; D'Apice, M. R.; Masala, S.; Maraldi, N. M.; Sbraccia,
P.; Novelli, G.: Compound heterozygosity for mutations in LMNA in
a patient with a myopathic and lipodystrophic mandibuloacral dysplasia
type A phenotype. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 4467-4471, 2007.

64. Makri, S.; Clarke, N. F.; Richard, P.; Maugenre, S.; Demay, L.;
Bonne, G.; Guicheney, P.: Germinal mosaicism for LMNA mimics autosomal
recessive congenital muscular dystrophy. Neuromusc. Disord. 19:
26-28, 2009.

65. Malek, L. A.; Labib, S.; Mazurkiewicz, L.; Saj, M.; Ploski, R.;
Tesson, F.; Bilinska, Z. T.: A new c.1621 C-G, p.R541G lamin A/C
mutation in a family with DCM and regional wall motion abnormalities
(akinesis/dyskinesis): genotype-phenotype correlation. J. Hum. Genet. 56:
83-86, 2011.

66. Mallampalli, M. P.; Huyer, G.; Bendale, P.; Gelb, M. H.; Michaelis,
S.: Inhibiting farnesylation reverses the nuclear morphology defect
in a HeLa cell model for Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 14416-14421, 2005.

67. McKeon, F. D.; Kirschner, M. W.; Caput, D.: Homologies in both
primary and secondary structure between nuclear envelope and intermediate
filament proteins. Nature 319: 463-468, 1986.

68. McPherson, E.; Turner, L.; Zador, I.; Reynolds, K.; Macgregor,
D.; Giampietro, P. F.: Ovarian failure and dilated cardiomyopathy
due to a novel lamin mutation. Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A: 567-572,
2009.

69. Mercuri, E.; Brown, S. C.; Nihoyannopoulos, P.; Poulton, J.; Kinali,
M.; Richard, P.; Piercy, R. J.; Messina, S.; Sewry, C.; Burke, M.
M.; McKenna, W.; Bonne, G.; Muntoni, F.: Extreme variability of skeletal
and cardiac muscle involvement in patients with mutations in exon
11 of the lamin A/C gene. Muscle Nerve 31: 602-609, 2005.

70. Mercuri, E.; Poppe, M.; Quinlivan, R.; Messina, S.; Kinali, M.;
Demay, L.; Bourke, J.; Richard, P.; Sewry, C.; Pike, M.; Bonne, G.;
Muntoni, F.; Bushby, K.: Extreme variability of phenotype in patients
with an identical missense mutation in the lamin A/C gene: from congenital
onset with severe phenotype to milder classic Emery-Dreifuss variant. Arch.
Neurol. 61: 690-694, 2004.

71. Meune, C.; Van Berlo, J. H.; Anselme, F.; Bonne, G.; Pinto, Y.
M.; Duboc, D.: Primary prevention of sudden death in patients with
lamin A/C gene mutations. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 354: 209-210,
2006.

72. Moller, D. V.; Pham, T. T.; Gustafsson, F.; Hedley, P.; Ersboll,
M. K.; Bundgaard, H.; Andersen, C. B.; Torp-Pedersen, C.; Kober, L.;
Christiansen, M.: The role of lamin A/C mutations in Danish patients
with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. Europ. J. Heart Fail. 11:
1031-1035, 2009.

73. Morel, C. F.; Thomas, M. A.; Cao, H.; O'Neil, C. H.; Pickering,
J. G.; Foulkes, W. D.; Hegele, R. A.: A LMNA splicing mutation in
two sisters with severe Dunnigan-type familial partial lipodystrophy
type 2. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 2689-2695, 2006.

74. Moulson, C. L.; Fong, L. G.; Gardner, J. M.; Farber, E. A.; Go,
G.; Passariello, A.; Grange, D. K.; Young, S. G.; Miner, J. H.: Increased
progerin expression associated with unusual LMNA mutations causes
severe progeroid syndromes. Hum. Mutat. 28: 882-889, 2007.

75. Mounkes, L. C.; Kozlov, S.; Hernandez, L.; Sullivan, T.; Stewart,
C. L.: A progeroid syndrome in mice is caused by defects in A-type
lamins. Nature 423: 298-301, 2003.

76. Mounkes, L. C.; Kozlov, S. V.; Rottman, J. N.; Stewart, C. L.
: Expression of an LMNA-N195K variant of A-type lamins results in
cardiac conduction defects and death in mice. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14:
2167-2180, 2005.

77. Muchir, A.; Bonne, G.; van der Kooi, A. J.; van Meegen, M.; Baas,
F.; Bolhuis, P. A.; de Visser, M.; Schwartz, K.: Identification of
mutations in the gene encoding lamins A/C in autosomal dominant limb
girdle muscular dystrophy with atrioventricular conduction disturbances
(LGMD1B). Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1453-1459, 2000.

78. Muchir, A.; Pavlidis,. P.; Decostre, V.; Herron, A. J.; Arimura,
T.; Bonne, G.; Worman, H. J.: Activation of MAPK pathways links LMNA
mutations to cardiomyopathy in Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. J.
Clin. Invest. 117: 1282-1293, 2007.

79. Muchir, A.; Shan, J.; Bonne, G.; Lehnart, S. E.; Worman, H. J.
: Inhibition of extracellular signal-regulated kinase signaling to
prevent cardiomyopathy caused by mutation in the gene encoding A-type
lamins. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 241-247, 2009.

80. Navarro, C. L.; Cadinanos, J.; De Sandre-Giovannoli, A.; Bernard,
R.; Courrier, S.; Boccaccio, I.; Boyer, A.; Kleijer, W. J.; Wagner,
A.; Giuliano, F.; Beemer, F. A.; Freije, J. M.; Cau, P.; Hennekam,
R. C. M.; Lopez-Otin, C.; Badens, C.; Levy, N.: Loss of ZMPSTE24
(FACE-1) causes autosomal recessive restrictive dermopathy and accumulation
of lamin A precursors. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 1503-1513, 2005.

81. Navarro, C. L.; De Sandre-Giovannoli, A.; Bernard, R.; Boccaccio,
I.; Boyer, A.; Genevieve, D.; Hadj-Rabia, S.; Gaudy-Marqueste, C.;
Smitt, H. S.; Vabres, P.; Faivre, L.; Verloes, A.; Van Essen, T.;
Flori, E.; Hennekam, R.; Beemer, F. A.; Laurent, N.; Le Merrer, M.;
Cau, P.; Levy, N.: Lamin A and ZMPSTE24 (FACE-1) defects cause nuclear
disorganization and identity restrictive dermopathy as a lethal neonatal
laminopathy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 2493-2503, 2004.

82. Nguyen, D.; Leistritz, D. F.; Turner, L.; MacGregor, D.; Ohson,
K.; Dancey, P.; Martin, G. M.; Oshima, J.: Collagen expression in
fibroblasts with a novel LMNA mutation. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 352:
603-608, 2007.

83. Novelli, G.; Muchir, A.; Sangiuolo, F.; Helbling-Leclerc, A.;
D'Apice, M. R.; Massart, C.; Capon, F.; Sbraccia, P.; Federici, M.;
Lauro, R.; Tudisco, C.; Pallotta, R.; Scarano, G.; Dallapiccola, B.;
Merlini, L.; Bonne, G.: Mandibuloacral dysplasia is caused by a mutation
in LMNA-encoding lamin A/C. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71: 426-431, 2002.

84. Plasilova, M.; Chattopadhyay, C.; Pal, P.; Schaub, N. A.; Buechner,
S. A.; Mueller, H.; Miny, P.; Ghosh, A.; Heinimann, K.: Homozygous
missense mutation in the lamin A/C gene causes autosomal recessive
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 41: 609-614,
2004.

85. Quijano-Roy, S.; Mbieleu, B.; Bonnemann, C. G.; Jeannet, P.-Y.;
Colomer, J.; Clarke, N. F.; Cuisset, J.-M.; Roper, H.; De Meirleir,
L.; D'Amico, A.; Yaou, R. B.; Nascimento, A.; and 12 others: De
novo LMNA mutations cause a new form of congenital muscular dystrophy. Ann.
Neurol. 64: 177-186, 2008.

86. Raffaele di Barletta, M.; Ricci, E.; Galluzzi, G.; Tonali, P.;
Mora, M.; Morandi, L.; Romorini, A.; Voit, T.; Orstavik, K. H.; Merlini,
L.; Trevisan, C.; Biancalana, V.; Housmanowa-Petrusewicz, I.; Bione,
S.; Ricotti, R.; Schwartz, K.; Bonne, G.; Toniolo, D.: Different
mutations in the LMNA gene cause autosomal dominant and autosomal
recessive Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66:
1407-1412, 2000.

87. Rankin, J.; Auer-Grumbach, M.; Bagg, W.; Colclough, K.; Duong,
N. T.; Fenton-May, J.; Hattersley, A.; Hudson, J.; Jardine, P.; Josifova,
D.; Longman, C.; McWilliam, R.; Owen, K.; Walker, M.; Wehnert, M.;
Ellard, S.: Extreme phenotypic diversity and nonpenetrance in families
with the LMNA gene mutation R644C. Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A: 1530-1542,
2008.

88. Reddel, C. J.; Weiss, A. S.: Lamin A expression levels are unperturbed
at the normal and mutant alleles but display partial splice site selection
in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 41: 715-717,
2004.

89. Renou, L.; Stora, S.; Yaou, R. B.; Volk, M.; Sinkovec, M.; Demay,
L.; Richard, P.; Peterlin, B.; Bonne, G.: Heart-hand syndrome of
Slovenian type: a new kind of laminopathy. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 45:
666-671, 2008.

90. Rodriguez, S.; Coppede, F.; Sagelius, H.; Eriksson, M.: Increased
expression of the Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome truncated lamin
A transcript during cell aging. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 17: 928-937,
2009.

91. Rudnik-Schoneborn, S.; Botzenhart, E.; Eggermann, T.; Senderek,
J.; Schoser, B. G. H.; Schroder, R.; Wehnert, M.; Wirth, B.; Zerres,
K.: Mutations of the LMNA gene can mimic autosomal dominant proximal
spinal muscular atrophy. Neurogenetics 8: 137-142, 2007.

92. Scaffidi, P.; Misteli, T.: Lamin A-dependent nuclear defects
in human aging. Science 312: 1059-1063, 2006.

93. Scaffidi, P.; Misteli, T.: Lamin A-dependent misregulation of
adult stem cells associated with accelerated ageing. Nature Cell
Biol. 10: 452-459, 2008.

94. Scaffidi, P.; Misteli, T.: Reversal of the cellular phenotype
in the premature aging disease Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Nature
Med. 11: 440-445, 2005.

95. Schmidt, H. H.-J.; Genschel, J.; Baier, P.; Schmidt, M.; Ockenga,
J.; Tietge, U. J. F.; Propsting, M.; Buttner, C.; Manns, M. P.; Lochs,
H.; Brabant, G.: Dyslipemia in familial partial lipodystrophy caused
by an R482W mutation in the LMNA gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86:
2289-2295, 2001.

96. Sebillon, P.; Bouchier, C.; Bidot, L. D.; Bonne, G.; Ahamed, K.;
Charron, P.; Drouin-Garraud, V.; Millaire, A.; Desrumeaux, G.; Benaiche,
A.; Charniot, J.-C.; Schwartz, K.; Villard, E.; Komajda, M.: Expanding
the phenotype of LMNA mutations in dilated cardiomyopathy and functional
consequences of these mutations. J. Med. Genet. 40: 560-567, 2003.

97. Shackleton, S.; Lloyd, D. J.; Jackson, S. N. J.; Evans, R.; Niermeijer,
M. F.; Singh, B. M.; Schmidt, H.; Brabant, G.; Kumar, S.; Durrington,
P. N.; Gregory, S.; O'Rahilly, S.; Trembath, R. C.: LMNA, encoding
lamin A/C, is mutated in partial lipodystrophy. Nature Genet. 24:
153-156, 2000.

98. Shen, J. J.; Brown, C. A.; Lupski, J. R.; Potocki, L.: Mandibuloacral
dysplasia caused by homozygosity for the R527H mutation in lamin A/C. J.
Med. Genet. 40: 854-857, 2003.

99. Shumaker, D. K.; Dechat, T.; Kohlmaier, A.; Adam, S. A.; Bozovsky,
M. R.; Erdos, M. R.; Eriksson, M.; Goldman, A. E.; Khuon, S.; Collins,
F. S.; Jenuwein, T.; Goldman, R. D.: Mutant nuclear lamin A leads
to progressive alterations of epigenetic control in premature aging. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 8703-8708, 2006.

100. Simha, V.; Agarwal, A. K.; Oral, E. A.; Fryns, J.-P.; Garg, A.
: Genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity in patients with mandibuloacral
dysplasia-associated lipodystrophy. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
2821-2824, 2003.

101. Sinensky, M.; Fantle, K.; Trujillo, M.; McLain, T.; Kupfer, A.;
Dalton, M.: The processing pathway of prelamin A. J. Cell Sci. 107:
61-67, 1994.

102. Sinkovec, M.; Petrovic, D.; Volk, M.; Peterlin, B.: Familial
progressive sinoatrial and atrioventricular conduction disease of
adult onset with sudden death, dilated cardiomyopathy, and brachydactyly:
a new type of heart-hand syndrome? Clin. Genet. 68: 155-160, 2005.

103. Speckman, R. A.; Garg, A.; Du, F.; Bennett, L.; Veile, R.; Arioglu,
E.; Taylor, S. I.; Lovett, M.; Bowcock, A. M.: Mutational and haplotype
analyses of families with familial partial lipodystrophy (Dunnigan
variety) reveal recurrent missense mutations in the globular C-terminal
domain of lamin A/C. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66: 1192-1198, 2000. Note:
Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 775 only, 2000.

104. Taylor, M. R. G.; Fain, P. R.; Sinagra, G.; Robinson, M. L.;
Robertson, A. D.; Carniel, E.; Di Lenarda, A.; Bohlmeyer, T. J.; Ferguson,
D. A.; Brodsky, G. L.; Boucek, M. M.; Lascor, J.; Moss, A. C.; Li,
W.-L. P.; Stetler, G. L.; Muntoni, F.; Bristow, M. R.; Mestroni, L.;
Familial Dilated Cardiomyopathy Registry Research Group: Natural
history of dilated cardiomyopathy due to lamin A/C gene mutations. J.
Am. Coll. Cardiol. 41: 771-780, 2003. Note: Erratum: J. Am. Coll.
Cardiol. 42: 590 only, 2003.

105. Toth, J. I.; Yang, S. H.; Qiao, X.; Beigneux, A. P.; Gelb, M.
H.; Moulson, C. L.; Miner, J. H.; Young, S. G.; Fong, L. G.: Blocking
protein farnesyltransferase improves nuclear shape in fibroblasts
from humans with progeroid syndromes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102:
12873-12878, 2005.

106. Van Berlo, J. H.; Voncken, J. W.; Kubben, N.; Broers, J. L. V.;
Duisters, R.; van Leeuwen, R. E. W.; Crijns, H. J. G. M.; Ramaekers,
F. C. S.; Hutchison, C. J.; Pinto, Y. M.: A-type lamins are essential
for TGF-beta-1 induced PP2A to dephosphorylate transcription factors. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 2839-2849, 2005.

107. van der Kooi, A. J.; Bonne, G.; Eymard, B.; Duboc, D.; Talim,
B.; Van der Valk, M.; Reiss, P.; Richard, P.; Demay, L.; Merlini,
L.; Schwartz, K.; Busch, H. F. M.; de Visser, M.: Lamin A/C mutations
with lipodystrophy, cardiac abnormalities, and muscular dystrophy. Neurology 59:
620-623, 2002.

108. van Engelen, B. G. M.; Muchir, A.; Hutchison, C. J.; van der
Kooi, A. J.; Bonne, G.; Lammens, M.: The lethal phenotype of a homozygous
nonsense mutation in the lamin A/C gene. Neurology 64: 374-376,
2005.

109. Van Esch, H.; Agarwal, A. K.; Debeer, P.; Fryns, J.-P.; Garg,
A.: A homozygous mutation in the lamin A/C gene associated with a
novel syndrome of arthropathy, tendinous calcinosis, and progeroid
features. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 517-521, 2006.

110. Vantyghem, M. C.; Pigny, P.; Maurage, C. A.; Rouaix-Emery, N.;
Stojkovic, T.; Cuisset, J. M.; Millaire, A.; Lascols, O.; Vermersch,
P.; Wemeau, J. L.; Capeau, J.; Vigouroux, C.: Patients with familial
partial lipodystrophy of the Dunnigan type due to a LMNA R482W mutation
show muscular and cardiac abnormalities. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89:
5337-5346, 2004.

111. Varga, R.; Eriksson, M.; Erdos, M. R.; Olive, M.; Harten, I.;
Kolodgie, F.; Capell, B. C.; Cheng, J.; Faddah, D.; Perkins, S.; Avallone,
H.; San, H.; Qu, X.; Ganesh, S.; Gordon, L. B.; Virmani, R.; Wight,
T. N.; Nabel, E. G.; Collins, F. S.: Progressive vascular smooth
muscle cell defects in a mouse model of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria
syndrome. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 3250-3255, 2006.

112. Vigouroux, C.; Auclair, M.; Dubosclard, E.; Pouchelet, M.; Capeau,
J.; Courvalin, J.-C.; Buendia, B.: Nuclear envelope disorganization
in fibroblasts from lipodystrophic patients with heterozygous R482Q/W
mutations in the lamin A/C gene. J. Cell Sci. 114: 4459-4468, 2001.

113. Vigouroux, C.; Caux, F. Capeau, J.; Christin-Maitre, S.; Cohen,
A.: LMNA mutations in atypical Werner's syndrome. (Letter) Lancet 362:
1585 only, 2003.

114. Weber, K.; Plessmann, U.; Traub, P.: Maturation of nuclear lamin
A involves a specific carboxy-terminal trimming, which removes the
polyisoprenylation site from the precursor; implications for the structure
of the nuclear lamina. FEBS Lett. 257: 411-414, 1989.

115. Worman, H. J.; Bonne, G.: 'Laminopathies': a wide spectrum of
human diseases. Exp. Cell Res. 313: 2121-2133, 2007.

116. Wuyts, W.; Biervliet, M.; Reyniers, E.; D'Apice, M. R.; Novelli,
G.; Storm, K.: Somatic and gonadal mosaicism in Hutchinson-Gilford
progeria. Am. J. Med. Genet. 135A: 66-68, 2005.

117. Wydner, K. L.; McNeil, J. A.; Lin, F.; Worman, H. J.; Lawrence,
J. B.: Chromosomal assignment of human nuclear envelope protein genes
LMNA, LMNB1, and LBR by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 32:
474-478, 1996.

118. Yang, S. H.; Andres, D. A.; Spielmann, H. P.; Young, S. G.; Fong,
L. G.: Progerin elicits disease phenotypes of progeria in mice whether
or not it is farnesylated. J. Clin. Invest. 118: 3291-3300, 2008.

119. Yang, S. H.; Bergo, M. O.; Toth, J. I.; Qiao, X.; Hu, Y.; Sandoval,
S.; Meta, M.; Bendale, P.; Gelb, M. H.; Young, S. G.; Fong, L. G.
: Blocking protein farnesyltransferase improves nuclear blebbing in
mouse fibroblasts with a targeted Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome
mutation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 10291-10296, 2005.

120. Yang, S. H.; Meta, M.; Qiao, X.; Frost, D.; Bauch, J.; Coffinier,
C.; Majumdar, S.; Bergo, M. O.; Young, S. G.; Fong, L. G.: A farnesyltransferase
inhibitor improves disease phenotypes in mice with a Hutchinson-Gilford
progeria syndrome mutation. J. Clin. Invest. 116: 2115-2121, 2006.

121. Zirn, B.; Kress, W.; Grimm, T.; Berthold, L. D.; Neubauer, B.;
Kuchelmeister, K.; Muller, U.; Hahn, A.: Association of homozygous
LMNA mutation R471C with new phenotype: mandibuloacral dysplasia,
progeria, and rigid spine muscular dystrophy. Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A:
1049-1054, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 9/10/2013
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/23/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/11/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/10/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 3/26/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/3/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/7/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/14/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/19/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/13/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/20/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/10/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/27/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/7/2010
Nara Sobreira - updated: 1/8/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/5/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/2/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/3/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/9/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/30/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/13/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/22/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/16/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/5/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/19/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/19/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/27/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 9/23/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/5/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/30/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/21/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/7/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/31/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/16/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/17/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/13/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/2/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/9/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/22/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/8/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/1/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/26/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/28/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/22/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/15/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/1/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/5/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/1/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/19/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/11/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/13/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/15/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/22/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/17/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/3/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/27/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/12/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 5/3/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/15/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/25/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/17/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/9/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/20/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/6/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/22/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/1/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/25/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/11/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/28/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/29/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/23/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/16/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/28/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/16/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/21/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/6/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/4/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/16/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/16/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/2/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/16/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/20/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/13/2000
Paul Brennan - updated: 4/10/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/28/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/14/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/3/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/23/1999
Alan F. Scott - updated: 4/22/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/5/1988

EDITED carol: 09/18/2013
tpirozzi: 9/10/2013
tpirozzi: 8/23/2013
alopez: 7/11/2013
mgross: 6/10/2013
alopez: 6/10/2013
mgross: 3/26/2013
carol: 10/17/2012
carol: 10/16/2012
ckniffin: 10/3/2012
carol: 6/5/2012
alopez: 4/12/2012
alopez: 10/11/2011
terry: 10/4/2011
carol: 6/17/2011
alopez: 6/9/2011
terry: 6/7/2011
terry: 3/9/2011
wwang: 3/2/2011
ckniffin: 2/14/2011
carol: 12/7/2010
carol: 10/19/2010
wwang: 10/19/2010
ckniffin: 10/13/2010
mgross: 9/20/2010
mgross: 8/16/2010
terry: 8/10/2010
mgross: 8/6/2010
terry: 7/27/2010
wwang: 4/13/2010
ckniffin: 4/7/2010
ckniffin: 2/24/2010
carol: 1/15/2010
ckniffin: 1/11/2010
carol: 1/8/2010
carol: 1/6/2010
ckniffin: 1/5/2010
wwang: 11/5/2009
ckniffin: 11/2/2009
wwang: 8/3/2009
ckniffin: 7/9/2009
alopez: 7/7/2009
terry: 6/30/2009
wwang: 6/25/2009
terry: 6/3/2009
terry: 5/13/2009
wwang: 5/7/2009
terry: 4/22/2009
alopez: 4/16/2009
wwang: 3/11/2009
ckniffin: 3/5/2009
carol: 2/24/2009
wwang: 2/23/2009
terry: 2/19/2009
wwang: 11/19/2008
mgross: 10/27/2008
alopez: 9/23/2008
wwang: 6/11/2008
terry: 6/5/2008
wwang: 2/1/2008
ckniffin: 1/30/2008
carol: 11/26/2007
terry: 11/21/2007
wwang: 11/20/2007
ckniffin: 11/7/2007
alopez: 11/6/2007
terry: 10/31/2007
wwang: 10/25/2007
ckniffin: 10/16/2007
terry: 9/20/2007
alopez: 7/17/2007
wwang: 6/14/2007
terry: 6/13/2007
wwang: 6/8/2007
wwang: 5/11/2007
ckniffin: 5/2/2007
carol: 4/9/2007
alopez: 3/22/2007
wwang: 3/12/2007
terry: 3/8/2007
wwang: 8/9/2006
alopez: 8/3/2006
terry: 8/1/2006
wwang: 7/5/2006
ckniffin: 6/26/2006
wwang: 3/29/2006
terry: 3/28/2006
wwang: 3/22/2006
wwang: 2/23/2006
terry: 2/15/2006
alopez: 2/15/2006
terry: 2/3/2006
terry: 2/1/2006
terry: 10/12/2005
wwang: 7/8/2005
terry: 7/5/2005
alopez: 6/13/2005
wwang: 6/8/2005
wwang: 6/1/2005
tkritzer: 5/25/2005
terry: 5/19/2005
wwang: 5/18/2005
wwang: 5/11/2005
wwang: 4/13/2005
wwang: 3/22/2005
wwang: 3/18/2005
terry: 3/16/2005
terry: 3/15/2005
carol: 3/8/2005
wwang: 3/7/2005
terry: 2/22/2005
terry: 2/21/2005
terry: 2/17/2005
joanna: 2/9/2005
carol: 12/8/2004
tkritzer: 12/7/2004
tkritzer: 11/4/2004
terry: 11/3/2004
mgross: 10/27/2004
tkritzer: 10/15/2004
terry: 10/12/2004
terry: 6/28/2004
tkritzer: 5/10/2004
carol: 5/4/2004
carol: 5/3/2004
ckniffin: 4/29/2004
ckniffin: 4/28/2004
ckniffin: 4/27/2004
ckniffin: 4/15/2004
cwells: 3/4/2004
tkritzer: 2/26/2004
terry: 2/25/2004
cwells: 2/23/2004
terry: 2/17/2004
cwells: 2/16/2004
terry: 2/9/2004
carol: 1/21/2004
terry: 1/20/2004
tkritzer: 1/13/2004
ckniffin: 1/6/2004
terry: 11/11/2003
tkritzer: 10/24/2003
alopez: 10/22/2003
tkritzer: 10/22/2003
tkritzer: 10/7/2003
tkritzer: 10/1/2003
alopez: 8/25/2003
alopez: 7/7/2003
tkritzer: 6/25/2003
tkritzer: 6/24/2003
terry: 6/11/2003
alopez: 5/28/2003
terry: 5/28/2003
alopez: 5/9/2003
alopez: 4/30/2003
terry: 4/29/2003
alopez: 4/25/2003
alopez: 4/23/2003
joanna: 4/23/2003
alopez: 4/16/2003
terry: 4/16/2003
ckniffin: 4/10/2003
tkritzer: 2/28/2003
carol: 1/3/2003
tkritzer: 12/23/2002
ckniffin: 12/16/2002
cwells: 11/19/2002
terry: 11/15/2002
cwells: 10/28/2002
tkritzer: 8/23/2002
tkritzer: 8/22/2002
terry: 8/16/2002
alopez: 4/19/2002
carol: 4/2/2002
alopez: 3/27/2002
terry: 3/21/2002
mcapotos: 12/21/2001
alopez: 11/6/2001
cwells: 10/8/2001
cwells: 10/4/2001
cwells: 7/20/2001
cwells: 7/16/2001
alopez: 3/16/2001
cwells: 1/11/2001
terry: 1/2/2001
alopez: 8/16/2000
mcapotos: 7/24/2000
mcapotos: 7/20/2000
mcapotos: 6/30/2000
carol: 5/9/2000
alopez: 5/8/2000
terry: 4/13/2000
alopez: 4/10/2000
alopez: 2/1/2000
terry: 1/28/2000
alopez: 12/14/1999
carol: 12/14/1999
mgross: 12/3/1999
terry: 12/3/1999
alopez: 3/1/1999
alopez: 2/26/1999
terry: 2/23/1999
terry: 4/22/1996
mark: 4/22/1996
mark: 12/7/1995
carol: 10/1/1993
carol: 8/14/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
supermim: 2/3/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989

604753	TITLE *604753 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 268; ZNF268
;;HZF3
DESCRIPTION Zinc finger proteins have been shown to interact with nucleic acids and
to have diverse functions. The zinc finger domain is a conserved amino
acid sequence motif containing 2 specifically positioned cysteines and 2
histidines that are involved in coordinating zinc. Kruppel-related
proteins form 1 family of zinc finger proteins. See ZFP93 (604749) for
additional information on zinc finger proteins.

By screening a human monoblast cell line (U-937) cDNA library with a
degenerate oligonucleotide based on a conserved region of
Kruppel-related zinc finger proteins that encompasses the H/C link,
Abrink et al. (1995) isolated cDNAs encoding 42 distinct Kruppel-related
zinc finger proteins, including ZNF268, which they called HZF3. Northern
blot analysis detected a major 5.0-kb ZNF268 transcript in HeLa cells,
U-937 cells, and PMA-induced U-937 cells.

Using a differential hybridization strategy, Gou et al. (2001) isolated
a cDNA corresponding to a novel zinc finger gene, designated ZNF268,
from a 3-week-old human embryo cDNA library. The full-length cDNA
encodes a 947-amino acid protein with an N-terminal Kruppel-associated
box (KRAB) domain and 24 C-terminal zinc fingers. Northern blot analysis
detected high expression of a ZNF268 transcript in 3- to 5-week-old
human embryos and lower expression in colon, heart, and 2-month-old
fetuses. No signal was detected in other tissues tested.

Gou et al. (2001) determined that the ZNF268 gene contains 6 exons
spanning about 22 kb of genomic DNA. They identified the ZNF268 sequence
within a cosmid that maps to chromosome 5 (GenBank GENBANK AC026786).

REFERENCE 1. Abrink, M.; Aveskogh, M.; Hellman, L.: Isolation of cDNA clones
for 42 different Kruppel-related zinc finger proteins expressed in
the human monoblast cell line U-937. DNA Cell Biol. 14: 125-136,
1995.

2. Gou, D. M.; Sun, Y.; Gao, L.; Chow, L. M. C.; Huang, J.; Feng,
Y. D.; Jiang, D. H.; Li, W. X.: Cloning and characterization of a
novel Kruppel-like zinc finger gene, ZNF268, expressed in early human
embryo. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1518: 306-310, 2001.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/28/2000

EDITED carol: 03/24/2004
terry: 3/24/2004
mcapotos: 4/11/2000
mcapotos: 4/10/2000
psherman: 3/29/2000

601769	TITLE *601769 VITAMIN D RECEPTOR; VDR
;;1,25-@DIHYDROXYVITAMIN D3 RECEPTOR;;
VITAMIN D HORMONE RECEPTOR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol), which is synthesized in the epidermis in
response to ultraviolet radiation, and dietary vitamin D2
(ergocalciferol), which is synthesized in plants, are devoid of any
biologic activity. Vitamin D hormonal activity is due primarily to the
hydroxylated metabolite of vitamin D3, 1-alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3
(1,25(OH)2D3, or calcitriol). Vitamin D receptor (VDR) is an
intracellular hormone receptor that specifically binds 1,25(OH)2D3 and
mediates its effects (summary by Baker et al. (1988), Liberman and Marx
(2001), and Koren (2006)).

CLONING

Baker et al. (1988) isolated a cDNA corresponding to the human vitamin D
receptor from a human intestinal cDNA library. The deduced 427-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 48.3 kD and belongs to
the superfamily of trans-acting transcriptional regulatory factors,
including the steroid and thyroid hormone receptors. The VDR protein
contains a zinc-finger DNA-binding and transcriptional activation domain
and a ligand-binding domain. VDR is closely related to the thyroid
hormone receptors. RNA blot hybridization indicated a single RNA species
of about 4.6 kb.

GENE STRUCTURE

Miyamoto et al. (1997) determined that the VDR gene contains 11 exons
and spans approximately 75 kb. The noncoding 5-prime end of the VDR gene
includes exons 1A, 1B, and 1C, while its translated product is encoded
by 8 additional exons (2-9). Three unique mRNA isoforms are produced as
a result of the differential splicing of exons 1B and 1C. The DNA
sequence upstream to exon 1A is GC-rich and does not contain an apparent
TATA box. Several potential binding sites for the transcription factor
SP1 (189906) and other activators were noted. An intron fragment 3-prime
of exon 1C conferred retinoic acid responsivity when fused to a reporter
gene plasmid.

Exons 2 and 3 of the VDR gene are involved in DNA binding, and exons 7,
8, and 9 are involved in binding to vitamin D (Hughes et al., 1988).

MAPPING

Faraco et al. (1989), who identified an ApaI dimorphism at the VDR
locus, assigned the VDR gene to chromosome 12 by somatic cell hybrid
studies. By study of rat/human somatic cell hybrids, Szpirer et al.
(1991) showed that the VDR gene is located on 12q in the human and
chromosome 7 in the rat. Labuda et al. (1991) assigned the VDR gene to
12q12-q14 by in situ hybridization. No recombination was found between
VDR and COL2A1 (120140; lod = 1.94) or ELA1 (130120; lod = 0.98) on
12q13. The COL2A1 and VDR loci are separated by less than 740 kb, with
VDR distal to COL2A1 (Pedeutour et al., 1994).

GENE FUNCTION

Using mutation analysis, Jurutka et al. (2000) characterized
arg18/arg22, VDR residues immediately N-terminal of the first
DNA-binding zinc finger, as vital for contact with the general
transcription factor IIB (TFIIB; 189963). A natural polymorphic variant
of VDR, termed F/M4 (missing a FokI restriction site), which lacks only
the first 3 amino acids (including glu2), interacted more efficiently
with TFIIB and also possessed elevated transcriptional activity compared
with the full-length (f/M1) receptor. The authors concluded that the
functioning of positively charged arg18/arg22 as part of a VDR docking
site for TFIIB is influenced by the composition of the adjacent
polymorphic N terminus. Increased transactivation by the F/M4 neomorphic
VDR was hypothesized to result from its demonstrated enhanced
association with TFIIB.

Makishima et al. (2002) demonstrated that the vitamin D receptor also
functions as a receptor for the secondary bile acid lithocholic acid,
which is hepatotoxic and a potential enteric carcinogen. The vitamin D
receptor is an order of magnitude more sensitive to lithocholic acid and
its metabolites than are other nuclear receptors. Activation of the
vitamin D receptor by lithocholic acid or vitamin D induced expression
in vivo of CYP3A (124010), a cytochrome P450 enzyme that detoxifies
lithocholic acid in the liver and intestine. Makishima et al. (2002)
suggested a mechanism that may explain the proposed protective effect of
vitamin D and its receptor against colon cancer.

Using retroviral transduction, Palmer et al. (2004) generated human
SW480-ADH colon cancer cells that ectopically express mouse
hemagglutinin-tagged Snai1 (604238) protein (SNAIL-HA). Overexpression
of Snai1 in these cells resulted in lower vitamin D receptor mRNA and
protein expression and inhibited induction of E-cadherin (192090) and
VDR by 1,25(OH)2D3. A 1,25(OH)2D3 analog inhibited tumor growth in
immunodeficient mice injected with mock cells, but not in those injected
with SNAIL-HA cells. In 32 paired samples of normal colon and tumor
tissue from patients undergoing colorectal surgery, Palmer et al. (2004)
found that high SNAI1 expression in tumor tissue correlated with
downregulation of VDR and E-cadherin (p = 0.007 and 0.0073,
respectively). Palmer et al. (2004) concluded that the balance between
VDR and SNAI1 expression is critical for E-cadherin expression, which
influences cell fate during colon cancer progression.

Healy et al. (2005) administered human PTH (168450) over 48 hours to
wildtype mice and observed a 15% reduction in renal VDR levels (p less
than 0.03). When the authors similarly administered PTH to CYP27B1
(609506)-null mice, which are incapable of endogenously producing
vitamin D hormone, they observed a 29% reduction in VDR levels (p less
than 0.001). Healy et al. (2005) concluded that PTH is a potent
downregulator of VDR expression in vivo.

Shah et al. (2006) stated that the signaling and oncogenic activity of
beta-catenin (CTNNB1; 116806) can be repressed by activation of VDR.
Conversely, high levels of beta-catenin can potentiate the
transcriptional activity of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3. Shah et al. (2006)
showed that the effects of beta-catenin on VDR activity are due
interaction between the activator function-2 domain of VDR and the C
terminus of beta-catenin.

Pena et al. (2005) studied the expression and functional correlation of
the SNAI1, E-cadherin (CDH1; 192090), VDR, and ZEB1 (189909) genes and
examined their possible involvement in colon cancer. Their expression
was measured by real-time PCR in 114 patients with colorectal cancer,
and tumor characteristics were analyzed in each patient. SNAI1
expression was associated with downregulation of CDH1 (P = less than
0.001) and VDR (P = less than 0.001) gene products. There was a positive
correlation between CDH1 and VDR expressions, but the association
between SNAI1 and CDH1 was not found in patients with high expression of
ZEB1. There was a correlation between downregulation of: (a) ZEB1 and
presence of polyps in surgical resections; (b) VDR and poor
differentiation; and (c) CDH1 and poor differentiation, vascular
invasion, presence of lymph node metastases, and advanced stages; as
well as a trend toward a correlation between SNAI1 expression in tumors
and vascular invasion. Pena et al. (2005) suggested analyzing these
genes in colon cancer patients for prognostic purposes and for
predicting response to possible therapies with vitamin D or its analogs.

Using DNA microarray and quantitative PCR analyses, Liu et al. (2006)
found that activation of TLR2 (603028) and TLR1 (601194) by a
mycobacterial ligand upregulated expression of VDR and CYP27B1, the
vitamin D 1-hydroxylase that catalyzes the conversion of vitamin D to
its active form, in monocytes and macrophages, but not dendritic cells.
Intracellular flow cytometric and quantitative PCR analyses showed that
treatment of monocytes with vitamin D upregulated expression of CYP24
(CYP24A1; 126065), the vitamin D 24-hydroxylase, and cathelicidin (CAMP;
600474), an antimicrobial peptide, but not DEFB4 (602215). Confocal
microscopy demonstrated colocalization of CAMP with bacteria-containing
vacuoles of vitamin D-treated monocytes, and vitamin D treatment of M.
tuberculosis-infected macrophages reduced the number of viable bacilli.
Ligand stimulation of TLR2 and TLR1 upregulated CYP24 and CAMP in the
presence of human serum, but not bovine serum, and CAMP upregulation was
more efficient in Caucasian than in African American serum, in which
vitamin D levels were significantly lower. Vitamin D supplementation of
African American serum reversed the CAMP induction defect. Liu et al.
(2006) proposed that vitamin D supplementation in African and Asian
populations, which may have a reduced ability to synthesize vitamin D
from ultraviolet light in sunlight, might be an effective and
inexpensive intervention to enhance innate immunity against microbial
infection and neoplastic disease.

In a patient with a form of vitamin D-dependent rickets in which the
vitamin D receptor is intact (VDDR2B; 600785), Chen et al. (2003) found
overexpression of a nuclear response element-binding protein (REBiP)
that interacted with retinoid X receptor (RXR)-VDR heterodimers. Chen et
al. (2006) identified the nuclear protein in that patient as hnRNPC1/C2
(164020), and demonstrated that overexpression of hnRNP C1 and C2 in
vitamin D-responsive cells inhibited VDR-VDRE (vitamin D response
element)-directed transactivation by 23% and 42%, respectively (p less
than 0.005 for both). In contrast, transient expression of an hnRNP
C1/C2 small interfering RNA (siRNA) increased VDR transactivation by 39%
(p less than 0.005). Chromatin immunoprecipitation studies revealed the
presence of REBiP in vitamin D-responsive human cells and indicated that
the normal pattern of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D-initiated cyclical
movement of the VDR on and off the VDRE is legislated by competitive,
reciprocal occupancy of the VDRE by hnRNP C1/C2. The temporal and
reciprocal pattern of VDR and hnRNP C1/C2 interaction with the VDRE was
lost in VDDR2B cells overexpressing the hnRNP C1/C2 REBiP. Chen et al.
(2006) suggested that hnRNP C1/C2 may be a key determinant of the
temporal patterns of VDRE occupancy.

Using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, Zhang et al. (2003) showed
that endogenous Skip (SKIIP; 603055), a putative VDR coactivator,
colocalized with Vdr on VDREs in rat osteosarcoma cells. Crosslinking
and immunoprecipitation experiments showed that endogenous Vdr, Src1
(NCOA1; 602691), and Skip associated with VDREs in the rat Cyp24a1
promoter following treatment with 1,25(OH)2D3. Protein pull-down assays,
followed by SDS-PAGE and mass spectrometry, revealed that human SKIP
interacted with several components of the spliceosome in HeLa cell
nuclear extracts. Expression of a dominant-negative SKIP in COS-7 cells
interfered with proper splicing of transcripts derived from a growth
hormone (GH1; 139250) minigene in response to 1,25(OH)2D3 treatment.
Zhang et al. (2003) concluded that SKIP couples VDR-mediated
transcription to RNA splicing.

In kidney, the level of 1,25(OH)2D3 is controlled by product inhibition,
in which 1,25(OH)2D3 itself, acting through VDR, represses the
1,25(OH)2D3-synthesizing enzyme CYP27B1. Turunen et al. (2007) confirmed
that CYP27B1 was downregulated by 1,25(OH)2D3 via VDR in kidney-derived
HEK293 cells. They showed that inhibition of CYP27B1 by 1,25(OH)2D3 in
HEK293 cells involved interaction of liganded VDR with a negative VDRE
(nVDRE) in the proximal promoter near the CYP27B1 transcriptional start
site and with 2 classical VDREs far upstream of the transcriptional
start site. Both upstream VDREs bound VDR-RXR heterodimers in a
ligand-dependent manner, whereas the nVDRE in the proximal promoter did
not bind VDR-RXR heterodimers directly, but rather bound VDR-interacting
repressor (VDIR, or TCF3; 147141). Turunen et al. (2007) also found that
regulation of CYP27B1 expression in HEK293 cells involved chromatin
looping between the upstream and proximal VDREs.

Chun et al. (2008) reviewed the cellular and molecular mechanisms
associated with vitamin D, including a role for vitamin D in modulating
innate and adaptive immunities. Citing evidence that nonclassic vitamin
D physiology involves localized intracrine modes of action, they
suggested that established models for vitamin D signal transduction
based on endocrine mechanisms are incomplete.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Uitterlinden et al. (2004) reviewed the genetics of vitamin D receptor
polymorphisms and their associated biologic effects.

- Vitamin D-Dependent Rickets Type 2A

In 2 patients with vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2A (VDDR2A; 277440),
Hughes et al. (1988) identified 2 different mutations in the VDR gene
(601769.0001 and 601769.0002). Hughes et al. (1988) suggested that this
was the first molecular identification of a disease-producing mutation
in a steroid hormone receptor gene. (Mutations were found at about the
same time in the androgen receptor; see 313700.)

Saijo et al. (1991) noted that different mutations in the VDR gene have
been specific for particular ethnic groups: Arabian (601769.0002 and
601769.0003), Haitian (601769.0001), North African (601769.0004), and
Japanese (601769.0005).

Miller et al. (2001) reported a patient with type 2A vitamin D-resistant
rickets who was compound heterozygous for 2 mutations in the VDR gene
(601769.0013, 601769.0014). Similar to patients with mutations in HR
(602302), follicular remnants in this patient's skin appeared to possess
hair follicle stem cells, some of which generated cutaneous cysts. These
and other findings suggested that VDR and HR, which are both zinc finger
proteins, may be in the same genetic pathway that controls postnatal
cycling of the hair follicle.

In the proband of a consanguineous Bedouin family with alopecia and skin
papules, vitamin D-dependent rickets, and deafness, Arita et al. (2008)
identified homozygosity for a missense mutation in the VDR gene
(601769.0015). The mutation was also present in homozygosity in 2
similarly affected sibs from whom DNA was available; the unaffected
parents and 3 unaffected sibs were heterozygous for the change, which
was not found in 100 ethnically matched control chromosomes. Arita et
al. (2008) stated that this was the first reported case of VDDR with
deafness.

- Role in Bone Mineral Density (BMD) and Osteoporosis

Studies on the role of polymorphisms in the VDR gene in the
determination of bone mineral density have been conflicting. Most of the
studies (see below) identified the restriction fragment length
polymorphisms (RFLPs) Bb, Tt, Aa, and Ff, as defined by the
endonucleases BsmI, TaqI, and ApaI, FokI, respectively. The lowercase
allele contains the restriction site, whereas the uppercase allele does
not.

Calcitriol, the active hormonal form of vitamin D, acts through the
vitamin D receptor and a specific vitamin D-responsive element to induce
the synthesis of osteocalcin (BGLAP; 112260), the most abundant
noncollagenous protein in bone. In studies of twins, variation in serum
osteocalcin levels was shown to have a major genetic component (Kelly et
al., 1991) and to be closely correlated with the genetic diversity in
bone density (Pocock et al., 1987). Morrison et al. (1992) presented
evidence suggesting that VDR polymorphisms may influence serum levels of
osteocalcin.

Among 311 healthy women from Sydney, 207 of whom were postmenopausal,
Morrison et al. (1994) found an association between the BB VDR genotype
and lower bone mineral density. However, Hustmyer et al. (1994) found no
relationship between several VDR polymorphisms and bone mineral density
at spine, femur, and forearm among 86 monozygotic and 39 dizygotic adult
female twin pairs. In Korea, Lim et al. (1995) found that no patients
with osteoporosis had the BB genotype. In a study in the northeast of
Scotland, Houston et al. (1996) found that individuals with the BB
genotype had a higher femoral neck bone density than individuals with
the bb genotype, the opposite of the finding in the study of Morrison et
al. (1994). Among 44 patients with severe osteoporosis with vertebral
compression fractures, Houston et al. (1996) found no association with
the VDR genotype.

Garnero et al. (1996) found no relationship between VDR genotype and
bone mass, bone turnover, or bone loss among 268 untreated
postmenopausal women. Ensrud et al. (1999) found no association between
VDR genotype and fracture risk among 9,704 women aged 65 years or older.

Among a group of prepubertal American girls of Mexican descent, Sainz et
al. (1997) found that girls with the aa and bb genotypes had 2 to 3%
higher femoral bone density and an 8 to 10% higher vertebral bone
density than girls with AA and BB genotypes. However, there was no
association between the cross-sectional area of the vertebrae or the
cross-sectional or cortical area of the femur and the vitamin D receptor
genotype. Riggs (1997) quoted a remark by Charles Dent of University
College, London, that 'senile osteoporosis is a pediatric disease.'

Among healthy prepubertal white Australian children aged 7 years, Tao et
al. (1998) found that females homozygous for the t Taq1 allele had lower
BMD than TT homozygotes in certain bone regions; tt homozygotes were
also significantly shorter and lighter. These effects were not observed
in males. The authors suggested that the VDR may play a more important
role in trabecular bone than in cortical bone, and that VDR allelic
variation might be responsible for some of the variation in BMD and
postnatal growth in prepubertal girls.

In a group of men, Ferrari et al. (1999) found that BB homozygotes had
significantly lower BMD only in subjects also carrying the f allele at
the VDR 5-prime polymorphic site (FokI). Serum PTH levels were
significantly higher in the BB genotype at baseline and remained so
under either a low or a high calcium-phosphorus diet. Moreover, on the
low calcium-phosphorus diet, BB subjects had significantly decreased
tubular Pi reabsorptive capacity and plasma Pi levels. The authors
emphasized the importance of identifying multiple single-base mutation
polymorphisms, and suggested a role for environmental/dietary factor
interactions with VDR gene polymorphisms in peak bone mineral mass in
men.

Uitterlinden et al. (2001) found that a haplotype represented by
polymorphisms in the VDR gene and the presence of the COL1A1 gene
Sp1-binding site polymorphism 2046G-T (120150.0051) exhibited a combined
influence on osteoporotic fracture risk, independent of BMD.

Among 426 Italian postmenopausal women, Gennari et al. (1998) found an
association between certain VDR polymorphisms and lumbar spine BMD as
well as the development of osteoporosis. Colin et al. (2003) studied the
combined influence of polymorphisms in both the estrogen receptor gene
(ESR1; 133430) and the VDR gene on the susceptibility to osteoporotic
vertebral fractures in 634 women aged 55 years and older. Three VDR
haplotypes (1, 2, and 3) of the BsmI, ApaI, and TaqI RFLPs and 3 ESR1
haplotypes (1, 2, and 3) of the PvuII and XbaI RFLPs were identified.
ESR1 haplotype-1 was dose-dependently associated with increased
vertebral fracture risk corresponding to an odds ratio of 1.9 (95% CI,
0.9-4.1) per copy of the risk allele. VDR haplotype-1 was also
overrepresented in vertebral fracture cases. These associations were
independent of BMD.

Nejentsev et al. (2004) studied population differences in
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the VDR gene. Fang et al.
(2005) determined sequence variation across the major relevant parts of
VDR, including construction of linkage disequilibrium blocks and
identification of haplotype alleles. They analyzed 15 haplotype-tagging
SNPs in relation to 937 clinical fractures recorded in 6,148 elderly
whites over a follow-up period of 7.4 years. Haplotype alleles of the
promoter region and of the 3-prime untranslated region (UTR) was
strongly associated with increased fracture risk. For the 16% of
subjects who had risk genotypes at both regions, their risk increased
48% for clinical fractures (P = 0.0002), independent of age, sex,
height, weight, and bone mineral density. The population-attributable
risk varied between 1% and 12% for each block and was 4% for the
combined VDR risk genotypes. Fang et al. (2005) showed further a 30%
increased mRNA decay in an osteoblast cell line for a construct carrying
the 3-prime-UTR risk haplotype (P = 0.02). This comprehensive candidate
gene analysis demonstrated that the risk allele of multiple VDR
polymorphisms results in lower VDR mRNA levels. This could impact the
vitamin D signaling efficiency and might contribute to the increased
fracture risk observed for these risk haplotype alleles.

In a multicenter large-scale association study of over 26,000
individuals enrolled from 9 European teams, Uitterlinden et al. (2006)
found no association between bone mineral densities at the lumbar spine
and femoral neck or fracture risk and the FokI, BsmI, ApaI, or TaqI VDR
polymorphisms. There was a modest risk reduction (9%) for vertebral
fractures associated with the Cdx2 promoter A allele (dbSNP rs11568820).

Garnero et al. (2005) investigated the relationships between VDR
genotypes and fracture risk. A total of 589 postmenopausal women (mean
age, 62 years) were followed prospectively during a median
(interquartile) of 11 (1.1) years. VDR allele B was significantly and
dose dependently overrepresented in women who fractured, including 34
and 86 women with first incident vertebral and nonvertebral fragility
fractures, respectively. This corresponded to an odds ratio of 1.5 (95%
confidence interval, 0.95-2.40) for heterozygous carriers (bB, n = 286)
and 2.10 (95% confidence interval, 1.16-3.79) for homozygous carriers
(BB, n = 90) of the B allele, compared with women with the bb genotype
(n = 213). The authors concluded that VDR genotypes are associated with
the risk of fracture in postmenopausal women independently of BMD, rate
of postmenopausal forearm BMD loss, bone turnover, and endogenous
hormones.

- Role in Height and Overall Growth

Among 589 healthy 2-year-old infants, Suarez et al. (1997) found that
homozygous BB girls had higher length, weight, and body surface area,
and inversely, BB boys had lower weight, body mass index, and body
surface area, than their respective bb counterparts. As a result,
gender-related differences were observed in Bb and bb, but not in BB
populations. These associations with VDR genotype were also observed at
birth and at 10 months of age in the longitudinal analysis of 145
selected full-term babies homozygous for the BsmI polymorphism. The
authors concluded that the VDR genotype may influence intrauterine and
early postnatal growth.

Among 90 healthy Caucasian males, Lorentzon et al. (2000) found that
boys with the BB VDR genotype were shorter at birth and grew less from
birth until after puberty than their Bb and bb counterparts. The BB boys
had lower bone area of the humerus, femur, and total body (p less than
0.05) than the Bb and bb boys; however, the VDR polymorphisms were not
related to BMD at any site. The authors concluded that a prediction
model including parental height, birth height, birth weight, and VDR
alleles could predict up to 39% of the total variation in adult height
in their study population. The VDR allelic variants alone contributed to
8% of the total variation. See STQTL3 (606257).

In a study of 1,873 white subjects from 406 nuclear families, Xiong et
al. (2005) found within-family associations with height at BsmI and TaqI
loci (p = 0.048 and 0.039, respectively). Analyses based on BsmI/TaqI
haplotypes showed linkage (p = 0.05) and association (p = 0.001) with
height. The bT haplotype had the most significant and consistent total
and within-family associations (p = 0.0006 and 0.033, respectively), and
subjects with the bT haplotype were an average of 1% (1.6 cm) taller
than those without it (p = 0.003). The authors noted that this
association might be female-specific and influenced by menstrual status.
Xiong et al. (2005) suggested that VDR may be linked to and associated
with adult height variation in white populations.

D'Alesio et al. (2005) studied the -1521G-C and -1012A-G polymorphisms
located in the VDR promoter region upstream of the transcriptional start
site. A nucleotide change at either SNP led to a dramatic change in
protein-DNA complex formation in nuclear extracts from various cell
lines. Genetic analysis of 185 healthy adolescent girls yielded 3 main
genotypes: homozygous for 1521G/1012A (21.1%), homozygous for
1521C/1012G (17.3%), and heterozygous 1521CG/1012GA (57.3%). Clinical
and biological association studies in the adolescent cohort showed that
girls with a CC/GG genotype had lower circulating levels of
25-dihydroxyvitamin D, with no detectable consequence on calcium
metabolism, lower serum IGF1 (147440) levels, and lower height from 11
years of age to adulthood.

- Role in Hyperparathyroidism

Among 206 Caucasian patients with sporadic primary hyperparathyroidism
(see 145000), Carling et al. (1997) found that the VDR b, a, and T
alleles were overrepresented in 100 menopausal females with sporadic
hyperparathyroidism equivalent. Hyperparathyroidism appeared to be
unrelated to the VDR polymorphisms in patients with hyperparathyroidism
of multiple endocrine neoplasia type I (MEN1; 131100) and patients with
hyperparathyroidism of uremia. By in vitro studies of parathyroid
adenomas, Carling et al. (1997) found an association between
calcium-mediated PTH secretion and inhibition suppression and VDR
genotype. Carling et al. (1998) found that parathyroid tumors from
patients homozygous for the VDR b, a, or T alleles showed significantly
lower VDR and higher PTH mRNA levels than those from patients with BB,
AA, or tt genotypes (p less than 0.0001-0.02), whereas those from
heterozygotes had intermediate values. A similar discrepancy was found
when comparing the baT and non-baT haplotypes (0.042 +/- 0.005 vs 0.064
+/- 0.004 for VDR; 34.4 +/- 3.7 vs 21.6 +/- 2.2 for PTH; both p less
than 0.005). The authors concluded that the lower VDR mRNA levels
associated with the b, a, and T alleles may affect the
calcitriol-mediated control of parathyroid function and thereby
contribute to the development of sporadic primary hyperparathyroidism.

Correa et al. (1999) found no association between the VDR FokI
polymorphism and the development of sporadic primary hyperparathyroidism
among 182 postmenopausal women compared to controls. There were no
significant associations with age, serum calcium, serum PTH, BMD, or
parathyroid tumor weight. The authors concluded that the FokI
polymorphism has at most a minor pathogenic importance in the
development of the disorder.

- Other Disease Associations

Uitterlinden et al. (1997) found overrepresentation of 1 VDR haplotype
and radiographic osteoarthritis and osteophytes at the knee. Adjustment
for bone density at the femoral neck did not change these results,
indicating that the association was not mediated by bone density. The
authors raised the possibility of linkage disequilibrium with the
closely situated COL2A1 gene, which encodes cartilage collagen.

Among 104 Korean patients with psoriasis (177900), Park et al. (1999)
found a significant increase in the frequency of the VDR A polymorphism
compared to controls. This tendency was more marked in early-onset
psoriasis. Derived allele frequencies on the basis of Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium for A and a were 0.317 and 0.683 in the psoriasis group and
0.168 and 0.832 in the control group, respectively, while in the
early-onset group, A increased to 0.354.

Ban et al. (2000) presented evidence suggesting an association between
the VDR B polymorphism and Japanese patients with Graves disease
(275000).

Motohashi et al. (2003) found a significantly higher frequency of the
VDR B allele among 203 patients with acute onset of type I diabetes
(222100) compared with 222 controls (p = 0.0010).

Selvaraj et al. (2004) presented evidence suggesting that polymorphisms
in the VDR gene may predispose to spinal tuberculosis (TB; see 607948).

Bornman et al. (2004) genotyped the VDR SNPs FokI, BsmI, ApaI, and TaqI
in TB patients, controls, and families in the Gambia, Guinea, and
Guinea-Bissau. By transmission-disequilibrium analysis of family data,
they found a significant global association of TB with the SNP
combinations FokI-BsmI-ApaI-TaqI and FokI-ApaI driven by increased
transmission of the F and A alleles in combination to affected
offspring. Case-control analysis showed no significant association
between TB and VDR variants. Bornman et al. (2004) concluded that there
is a haplotype, rather than a genotype, association between VDR variants
and susceptibility to TB.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yoshizawa et al. (1997) found that VDR-null mice displayed no defect in
development and growth before weaning, irrespective of reduced
expression of vitamin D target genes. After weaning, however, mutants
failed to thrive, with appearance of alopecia, hypocalcemia, and
infertility, and bone formation was severely impaired as a typical
feature of vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2. Unlike humans with this
disease, most of the VDR-null mice died within 15 weeks after birth, and
uterine hypoplasia with impaired folliculogenesis was found in female
reproductive organs. These defects, such as alopecia and uterine
hypoplasia, were not observed in vitamin D-deficient animals. Uterine
hypoplasia was shown to be due to lack of estrogen synthesis in the
mutant ovaries; the uterus in these animals responded normally to
administration of estrogen. Male reproductive organs appeared normal in
VDR-null mice. Uterine hypoplasia, infertility, and early lethality are
not pronounced in patients with vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2,
possibly because of therapy with calcium supplements. The higher content
of calcium in murine milk than in human milk may keep serum calcium
levels normal, thereby ensuring normal growth of VDR-null mice before
weaning. The findings of Yoshizawa et al. (1997) established a critical
role for VDR in growth, bone formation, and female reproduction in the
postweaning stage.

The active metabolite of vitamin D, 1,25(OH)2D3, modulates the immune
response in Th1-related diseases. Using an experimental allergic asthma
model, Wittke et al. (2004) found that, apart from upregulation of 2
Th2-related genes, 1,25(OH)2D3 had no affect on asthma severity in
wildtype mice. Asthma-induced Vdr-deficient mice, however, failed to
develop airway inflammation, airway hyperresponsiveness, or
eosinophilia, despite high IgE concentrations and elevated Th2
cytokines. Wittke et al. (2004) suggested that the vitamin D endocrine
system has an important role in the development of Th2-driven
inflammation in the lung.

During development and postnatal growth of the endochondral skeleton,
proliferative chondrocytes differentiate into hypertrophic chondrocytes,
which subsequently undergo apoptosis and are replaced by bone. Donohue
and Demay (2002) found that Vdr-null mice who developed rickets had
expansion of hypertrophic chondrocytes due to impaired apoptosis of
these cells. Sabbagh et al. (2005) showed that institution of a rescue
diet that restored mineral ion homeostasis in Vdr-null mice prevented
the development of rachitic changes, indicating that mineral ion
abnormalities, not ablation of the Vdr gene, were the cause of impaired
chondrocyte apoptosis. Similarly, 'Hyp' mice with rickets due to
mutation in the Phex gene (300550) also showed impaired apoptosis of
hypertrophic chondrocytes, and the decreased apoptosis was correlated
with hypophosphatemia. Wildtype mice rendered hypercalcemic and
hypophosphatemic by dietary means also developed rickets. In vitro
studies showed that the apoptosis was mediated by caspase-9 (CASP9;
602234). Sabbagh et al. (2005) concluded that hypophosphatemia was the
common mediator of rickets in these mice. The findings indicated that
normal phosphorus levels are required for growth plate maturation and
that circulating phosphate is a key regulator of hypertrophic
chondrocyte apoptosis.

Masuyama et al. (2006) generated mice with conditional inactivation of
Vdr in chondrocytes. Growth-plate chondrocyte development was not
affected by lack of Vdr, but vascular invasion was impaired, and
osteoclast number was reduced in juvenile mice, resulting in increased
trabecular bone mass. Vdr signaling in chondrocytes directly regulated
osteoclastogenesis by inducing Rankl (TNFSF11; 602642) expression.
Mineral homeostasis was also affected in mutant mice. In vivo and in
vitro analysis indicated that Vdr inactivation in chondrocytes reduced
expression of Fgf23 (605380) by osteoblasts and consequently led to
increased renal expression of 1-alpha-hydroxylase (CYP27B1) and
sodium/phosphate cotransporter type IIA (SLC34A1; 182309). Masuyama et
al. (2006) concluded that VDR signaling in chondrocytes is required for
timely osteoclast formation during bone development and for endocrine
action of bone in phosphate homeostasis.

Froicu et al. (2006) compared mice lacking Il10 (124092), which develop
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD; see 266600), with double-knockout (DKO)
mice lacking Il10 and Vdr. They observed normal thymic development and
peripheral T-cell numbers in DKO mice up to 3 weeks of age. However,
following onset of IBD, the thymus became dysplastic with reduced
cellularity and increased apoptosis. Spleen weight increased due to red
blood cell accumulation, but there was a 50% reduction in lymphocytes.
In contrast, mesenteric lymph nodes of DKO mice were enlarged and had
increased lymphocyte numbers. DKO T cells were hyporesponsive. RT-PCR
detected overexpression of inflammatory cytokines (e.g., IL1B; 147720)
in DKO colon. Froicu et al. (2006) concluded that Vdr expression is
required for T-cell control of inflammation in Il10-deficient mice.

Yu and Cantorna (2008) showed that mice lacking Vdr have intrinsically
defective and reduced numbers of invariant natural killer T (iNKT) cells
with diminished responses to alpha-galactosylceramide presented in the
context of CD1d (188410). These iNKT cells also show defective
maturation and reduced thymic expression of CD1d, and lack Tbet
(604895), but not CD122 (IL2RB; 146710), expression.

Quigley et al. (2009) integrated germline polymorphisms with gene
expression in normal skin from a M. musculus x M. spretus backcross to
generate a network view of the gene expression architecture of mouse
skin. They identified expression motifs that contribute to tissue
organization and biologic functions related to inflammation,
hematopoiesis, cell cycle control, and tumor susceptibility. Motifs
associated with inflammation, epidermal barrier function, and
proliferation were differentially regulated in backcross mice
susceptible or resistant to tumor development. The vitamin D receptor
(VDR) was linked to coordinated control of epidermal barrier function,
inflammation, and tumor susceptibility.

HISTORY

Kitagawa et al. (2003) identified a human multiprotein complex that
directly interacts with VDR through WSTF (605681). They designated the
complex WINAC (WSTF-including nucleosome assembly complex) and
determined that it contains as least 13 components. Due to errors
resulting in the failure of several figure panels to report the original
data, the paper of Kitagawa et al. (2003) was retracted (Kitagawa et
al., 2012).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, GLY33ASP

In 2 affected sisters from a black Haitian family with vitamin
D-dependent rickets type 2A (277440), Hughes et al. (1988) identified a
G-to-A transition in exon 2 of the VDR gene, resulting in a gly30-to-asp
(GLY30ASP) substitution near the tip of the first zinc finger. Based on
corrected sequencing, the mutation is gly33 to asp.

.0002
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, ARG73GLN

In 2 affected brothers from an Arab family living in the Middle East
with vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2A (277440), Hughes et al. (1988)
identified a mutation in the VDR gene, resulting in an arg70-to-gly
(ARG70GLY) substitution at the tip of the second zinc finger of the
vitamin D receptor. Based on corrected sequencing, the mutation is arg73
to gln.

.0003
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, TYR292TER

In 4 affected children from 3 related Middle Eastern Arabic families
with a classic form of vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2A (277440) and
absence of detectable binding of vitamin D to the vitamin D receptor in
cultured fibroblasts or lymphoblasts, Ritchie et al. (1989) identified a
970C-A transversion in exon 7 of the VDR gene, resulting in a
tyr292-to-ter (Y292X) substitution. The Y292X mutation caused a
truncation of the VDR protein, thereby deleting a large portion of the
steroid hormone-binding domain (amino acids 292-424). The 4 parents
tested showed both wildtype and mutant alleles. Also see Malloy et al.
(1990).

.0004
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, ARG77GLN

In 2 unrelated patients with vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2A
(277440), Sone et al. (1990) identified a homozygous 327G-A transition
in exon 3 of the VDR gene, resulting in an arg77-to-gln (R77Q)
substitution at a highly conserved residue. In vitro functional
expression studies showed that the R77Q mutant receptor bound
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 with normal affinity, but displayed weak
affinity for the nuclear fraction and for heterologous DNA.
Significantly, the protein was inactive in promoting transcription in a
cotransfection assay using a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene
reporter fused downstream of the VDR-inducible osteocalcin gene
promoter-enhancer. The patients were of North African ancestry.

.0005
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, ARG47GLN

Takeda et al. (1989) described 2 sibs, children of first-cousin parents,
with vitamin D-dependent rickets with alopecia (277440). In these 2 sibs
and in another patient with VDDR2A, Saijo et al. (1991) identified a
140G-A transition in exon 3 of the VDR gene, resulting in an
arg47-to-gln (R47Q) substitution between 2 zinc fingers. The affected
residue is conserved in all steroid hormone receptors. Single-strand
conformation polymorphism analysis of amplified DNA confirmed that all 3
patients were homozygous and that parents from 1 family were
heterozygous carriers.

.0006
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, GLN149TER

In a child of Middle Eastern origin with vitamin D-dependent rickets
type 2A (277440), Kristjansson et al. (1993) identified a C-to-T
transition in the VDR gene, resulting in a gln149-to-ter (Q149X)
substitution in the hinge region of the protein. The child was born of
consanguineous parents. Functional expression analyses showed that the
Q149X mutant receptor was unable to induce transcription of the
osteocalcin hormone gene response element at low levels of vitamin D.

.0007
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, ARG271LEU

In a boy of Middle Eastern origin with vitamin D-dependent rickets type
2A (277440) but with normal hair growth, who was originally reported by
Fraher et al. (1986), Kristjansson et al. (1993) identified a G-to-T
transversion in the VDR gene, resulting in an arg271-to-leu (R271L)
substitution in the steroid-binding domain of the receptor. Functional
expression studies showed that although the R271L mutation was unable to
induce transcription of the osteocalcin hormone gene response element at
low levels of vitamin D, it showed normal transcription responses in the
presence of 1,000-fold higher vitamin D concentrations than needed for
the wildtype receptor. This showed that arginine-271 directly affects
the affinity of VDR for its ligand, and its conversion to leucine
decreases its affinity for vitamin D by a factor of 1,000. Arginine-271
is located immediately 3-prime to a 30-amino acid segment that is
conserved among members of the steroid/thyroid/retinoid hormone receptor
superfamily.

.0008
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, GLY46ASP

In a Saudi Arabian child with vitamin D-resistant rickets type 2A
(277440) with consanguineous parents, Lin et al. (1996) identified a
G-to-A transition in exon 2 of the VDR gene, resulting in a gly46-to-asp
(G46D) substitution. Functional expression studies showed that the
mutant receptor displayed normal binding affinity for 1,25-(OH)2D3, but
had reduced affinity for DNA binding. The mutant VDR was unable to
activate gene transcription in cells treated with up to 100 nmol/L of
1,25-(OH)2D3. Thus this mutation, which occurs in the first zinc finger
of the DNA-binding domain of the receptor, blocks 1,25-(OH)2D3 action.

.0009
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, HIS305GLN

Van Maldergem et al. (1996) reported an 8.5-year-old Turkish boy, born
of first-cousin parents, who had 3 different disorders: congenital
lipoatrophic diabetes (269700), persistent mullerian ducts (261550), and
vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2A (277440). In this boy, Malloy et al.
(1997) identified a homozygous mutation in the VDR gene, resulting in a
his305-to-gln (H305Q) substitution in the ligand-binding domain of the
vitamin D receptor. The mutation caused hereditary vitamin D-resistant
rickets due to decreased affinity for 1,25(OH)2D3. The disorder could be
effectively treated with extremely high doses of hormone. As pictured by
Van Maldergem et al. (1996) in their Figure 2, the patient did not have
alopecia but was hirsute, with hypertrichosis of the face and acanthosis
nigricans and pachydermia in the axillae. The hands suggested acrogeria,
and in general the patient had a prematurely aged appearance.

.0010
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, ILE314SER

In a patient with vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2A (277440),
Whitfield et al. (1996) identified a mutation in the VDR gene, resulting
in an ile314-to-ser (I314S) substitution in the hormone-binding domain
of the protein. The mutation caused decreased 1,25-(OH)2D3-dependent
transactivation of the VDR and impaired heterodimeric interaction with
the retinoid X receptor (RXR; see 180247). However, the transactivation
ability of the I314S mutant receptor could be partially restored by
providing excess 1,25-(OH)2D3; clinically, the patient had a nearly
complete response to pharmacologic doses of a vitamin D derivative.

.0011
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, ARG391CYS

In a patient with vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2A (277440),
Whitfield et al. (1996) identified a mutation in the VDR gene, resulting
in an arg391-to-cys (R391C) substitution in the hormone-binding domain
of the protein. The mutation caused decreased 1,25-(OH)2D3-dependent
transactivation of the VDR and impaired heterodimeric interaction with
the retinoid X receptor (RXR; see 180247). The patient responded only
partially to pharmacologic doses of a vitamin D derivative.

.0012
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, ARG30TER

In affected patients from a Brazilian family with vitamin D-dependent
rickets type 2A with alopecia (277440), Mechica et al. (1997) identified
a homozygous 88C-T transition in exon 2 of the VDR gene, resulting in an
arg30-to-ter (R30X) substitution in the first zinc finger of the
DNA-binding domain, truncating the VDR by 397 residues. The mutation
occurred at a CpG dinucleotide. The propositus, a 12-year-old boy born
to first-cousin parents, had early-onset rickets, total alopecia,
convulsions, hypocalcemia, secondary hyperparathyroidism, and elevated
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 serum levels. His younger sister also developed
clinical and biochemical features of the disorder at 1 month of age but
died at 4 years of age.

Zhu et al. (1998) described a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 218 (as
opposed to nucleotide 88 cited by Mechica et al., 1997) of the VDR cDNA
of a French Canadian boy with vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2A born
to nonconsanguineous parents. The single-base substitution changed the
codon for arginine (CGA) to an opal stop codon (TGA), resulting in the
truncation of the VDR protein at amino acid 30. The result was
truncation of 398 amino acids including most of the zinc fingers as well
as the entire ligand-binding domain. Both parents were heterozygous for
the mutant allele. The child showed early-onset rickets, hypocalcemia,
secondary hyperparathyroidism, and elevated 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D
levels as well as total alopecia. (The other stop codons are referred to
as amber (TAG) and ochre (TAA). See 141900.0312 for an account of the
history of this colorful system of designation.)

.0013
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, 1-BP DEL, 366C

In a patient with vitamin D-dependent rickets type 2A with alopecia
(277440), Miller et al. (2001) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the VDR gene: a 1-bp deletion (366delC) in exon 4,
resulting in premature termination, and a 985G-A transition in exon 8,
resulting in a glu329-to-lys (E329K; 601769.0014) substitution. Miller
et al. (2001) characterized the alopecia associated with the disorder as
clinically and pathologically indistinguishable from that seen in
generalized atrichia with papular lesions (209500).

.0014
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, GLU329LYS

See 601769.0013 and Miller et al. (2001).

.0015
VITAMIN D-DEPENDENT RICKETS, TYPE 2A
VDR, VAL346MET

In a 6-year-old boy with alopecia and skin papules, vitamin D-dependent
rickets, and deafness (277440), Arita et al. (2008) identified
homozygosity for a 1036G-A transition in exon 11 of the VDR gene,
resulting in a val346-to-met (V346M) substitution at a conserved residue
in the ligand-binding domain. The mutation was also present in
homozygosity in 2 similarly affected sibs from whom DNA was available;
the unaffected parents and 3 unaffected sibs were heterozygous for the
change, which was not found in 100 ethnically matched control
chromosomes.

REFERENCE 1. Arita, K.; Nanda, A.; Wessagowit, V.; Akiyama, M.; Alsaleh, Q.
A.; McGrath, J. A.: A novel mutation in the VDR gene in hereditary
vitamin D-resistant rickets. Brit. J. Derm. 158: 168-171, 2008.

2. Baker, A. R.; McDonnell, D. P.; Hughes, M.; Crisp, T. M.; Mangelsdorf,
D. J.; Haussler, M. R.; Pike, J. W.; Shine, J.; O'Malley, B. W.:
Cloning and expression of full-length cDNA encoding human vitamin
D receptor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 3294-3298, 1988.

3. Ban, Y.; Taniyama, M.; Ban, Y.: Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism
is associated with Graves' disease in the Japanese population. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 4639-4643, 2000.

4. Bornman, L.; Campbell, S. J.; Fielding K.; Bah, B.; Sillah, J.;
Gustafson, P.; Manneh, K.; Lisse, I.; Allen, A.; Sirugo, G.; Sylla,
A.; Aaby, P.; McAdam, K. P. W. J.; Bah-Sow, O.; Bennett, S.; Lienhardt,
C.; Hill, A. V. S.: Vitamin D receptor polymorphisms and susceptibility
to tuberculosis in West Africa: a case-control and family study. J.
Infect. Dis. 190: 1631-1641, 2004.

5. Carling, T.; Kindmark, A.; Hellman, P.; Holmberg, L.; Akerstrom,
G.; Rastad, J.: Vitamin D receptor alleles b, a, and T: risk factors
for sporadic primary hyperparathyroidism (HPT) but not HPT of uremia
or MEN1. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 231: 329-332, 1997.

6. Carling, T.; Rastad, J.; Akerstrom, G.; Westin, G.: Vitamin D
receptor (VDR) and parathyroid hormone messenger ribonucleic acid
levels correspond to polymorphic VDR alleles in human parathyroid
tumors. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 2255-2259, 1998.

7. Carling, T.; Ridefelt, P.; Hellman, P.; Rastad, J.; Akerstrom,
G.: Vitamin D receptor polymorphisms correlate to parathyroid cell
function in primary hyperparathyroidism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 82:
1772-1775, 1997.

8. Chen, H.; Hewison, M.; Adams, J. S.: Functional characterization
of heterogeneous nuclear ribonuclear protein C1/C2 in vitamin D resistance:
a novel response element-binding protein. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 39114-39120,
2006.

9. Chen, H.; Hewison, M.; Hu, B.; Adams, J. S.: Heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein (hnRNP) binding to hormone response elements: a
cause of vitamin D resistance. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 6109-6114,
2003.

10. Chun, R. F.; Adams, J. S.; Hewison, M.: Back to the future: a
new look at 'old' vitamin D. J. Endocr. 198: 261-269, 2008.

11. Colin, E. M.; Uitterlinden, A. G.; Meurs, J. B. J.; Bergink, A.
P.; van de Klift, M.; Fang, Y.; Arp, P. P., Hofman, A.; van Leeuwen,
J. P. T. M.; Pols, H. A. P.: Interaction between vitamin D receptor
genotype and estrogen receptor alpha genotype influences vertebral
fracture risk. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 3777-3784, 2003.

12. Correa, P.; Rastad, J.; Schwarz, P.; Westin, G.; Kindmark, A.;
Lundgren, E.; Akerstrom, G.; Carling, T.: The vitamin D receptor
(VDR) start codon polymorphism in primary hyperparathyroidism and
parathyroid VDR messenger ribonucleic acid levels. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 84: 1690-1694, 1999.

13. d'Alesio, A.; Garabedian, M.; Sabatier, J. P.; Guaydier-Souquieres,
G.; Marcelli, C.; Lemacon, A.; Walrant-Debray, O.; Jehan, F.: Two
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the human vitamin D receptor promoter
change protein-DNA complex formation and are associated with height
and vitamin D status in adolescent girls. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14:
3539-3548, 2005.

14. Donohue, M. M.; Demay, M. B.: Rickets in VDR null mice is secondary
to decreased apoptosis of hypertrophic chondrocytes. Endocrinology 143:
3691-3694, 2002.

15. Ensrud, K. E.; Stone, K.; Cauley, J. A.; White, C.; Zmuda, J.
M.; Nguyen, T. V.; Eisman, J. A.; Cummings, S. R.: Vitamin D receptor
gene polymorphisms and the risk of fractures in older women. J. Bone
Miner. Res. 14: 1637-1645, 1999.

16. Fang, Y.; van Meurs, J. B. J.; d'Alesio, A.; Jhamai, M.; Zhao,
H.; Rivadeneira, F.; Hofman, A.; van Leeuwen, J. P. T.; Jehan, F.;
Pols, H. A. P.; Uitterlinden, A. G.: Promoter and 3-prime-untranslated-region
haplotypes in the vitamin D receptor gene predispose to osteoporotic
fracture: the Rotterdam Study. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 77: 807-823, 2005.

17. Faraco, J. H.; Morrison, N. A.; Baker, A.; Shine, J.; Frossard,
P. M.: ApaI dimorphism at the human vitamin D receptor gene locus. Nucleic
Acids Res. 17: 2150, 1989.

18. Ferrari, S.; Manen, D.; Bonjour, J.-P.; Slosman, D.; Rizzoli,
R.: Bone mineral mass and calcium and phosphate metabolism in young
men: relationships with vitamin D receptor allelic polymorphisms. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 2043-2048, 1999.

19. Fraher, L. J.; Karmali, R.; Hinde, F. R. J.; Hendy, G. N.; Jani,
H.; Nicholson, L.; Grant, D.; O'Riordan, J. L. H.: Vitamin D-dependent
rickets type II: extreme end organ resistance to 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin
D(3) in a patient without alopecia. Europ. J. Pediat. 145: 389-395,
1986.

20. Froicu, M.; Zhu, Y.; Cantorna, M. T.: Vitamin D receptor is required
to control gastrointestinal immunity in IL-10 knockout mice. Immunology 117:
310-318, 2006.

21. Garnero, P.; Borel, O.; Sornay-Rendu, E.; Arlot, M. E.; Delmas,
P. D.: Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms are not related to bone
turnover, rate of bone loss, and bone mass in postmenopausal women:
the OFELY study. J. Bone Miner. Res. 11: 827-834, 1996.

22. Garnero, P.; Munoz, F.; Borel, O.; Sornay-Rendu, E.; Delmas, P.
D.: Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms are associated with the
risk of fractures in postmenopausal women, independently of bone mineral
density. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 4829-4835, 2005.

23. Gennari, L.; Becherini, L.; Masi, L.; Mansani, R.; Gonnelli, S.;
Cepollaro, C.; Martini, S.; Montagnani, A.; Lentini, G.; Becorpi,
A. M.; Brandi, M. L.: Vitamin D and estrogen receptor allelic variants
in Italian postmenopausal women: evidence of multiple gene contribution
to bone mineral density. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 939-944, 1998.

24. Healy, K. D.; Vanhooke, J. L.; Prahl, J. M.; DeLuca, H. F.: Parathyroid
hormone decreases renal vitamin D receptor expression in vivo. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 4724-4728, 2005.

25. Houston, L. A.; Grant, S. F. A.; Reid, D. M.; Ralston, S. H.:
Vitamin D receptor polymorphism, bone mineral density, and osteoporotic
vertebral fracture: studies in a UK population. Bone 18: 249-252,
1996.

26. Hughes, M. R.; Malloy, P. J.; Kieback, D. G.; Kesterson, R. A.;
Pike, J. W.; Feldman, D.; O'Malley, B. W.: Point mutations in the
human vitamin D receptor gene associated with hypocalcemic rickets. Science 242:
1702-1705, 1988.

27. Hustmyer, F. G.; Peacock, M.; Hui, S.; Johnston, C. C.; Christian,
J.: Bone mineral density in relation to polymorphism at the vitamin
D receptor gene locus. J. Clin. Invest. 94: 2130-2134, 1994.

28. Jurutka, P. W.; Remus, L. S.; Whitfield, G. K.; Thompson, P. D.;
Hsieh, J.-C.; Zitzer, H.; Tavakkoli, P.; Galligan, M. A.; Dang, H.
T. L.; Haussler, C. A.; Haussler, M. R.: The polymorphic N terminus
in human vitamin D receptor isoforms influences transcriptional activity
by modulating interaction with transcription factor IIB. Molec. Endocr. 14:
401-420, 2000.

29. Kelly, P. J.; Hopper, J. L.; Macaskill, G. T.; Pocock, N. A.;
Sambrook, P. N.; Eisman, J. A.: Genetic factors in bone turnover. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 72: 808-813, 1991.

30. Kitagawa, H.; Fujiki, R.; Yoshimura, K.; Mezaki, Y.; Uematsu,
Y.; Matsui, D.; Ogawa, S.; Unno, K.; Okubo, M.; Tokita, A.; Nakagawa,
T.; Ito, T.; Ishimi, Y.; Nagasawa, H.; Matsumoto, T.; Yanagisawa,
J.; Kato, S.: The chromatin-remodeling complex WINAC targets a nuclear
receptor to promoters and is impaired in Williams syndrome. Cell 113:
905-917, 2003. Note: Retraction: Cell 149: 245 only, 2012.

31. Kitagawa, H.; Fujiki, R.; Yoshimura, K.; Mezaki, Y.; Uematsu,
Y.; Matsui, D.; Ogawa, S.; Unno, K.; Okubo, M.; Tokita, A.; Nakagawa,
T.; Ito, T.; Ishimi, Y.; Nagasawa, H.; Matsumoto, T.; Yanagisawa,
J.; Kato, S.: Retraction notice to: the chromatin-remodeling complex
WINAC targets a nuclear receptor to promoters and is impaired in Williams
syndrome. Cell 149: 245 only, 2012.

32. Koren, R.: Vitamin D receptor defects: the story of hereditary
resistance to vitamin D. Pediat. Endocr. Rev. Suppl. 3: 470-475,
2006.

33. Kristjansson, K.; Rut, A. R.; Hewison, M.; O'Riordan, J. L. H.;
Hughes, M. R.: Two mutations in the hormone binding domain of the
vitamin D receptor cause tissue resistance to 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin
D(3). J. Clin. Invest. 92: 12-16, 1993.

34. Labuda, M.; Ross, M. V.; Fujiwara, T. M.; Morgan, K.; Ledbetter,
D.; Hughes, M. R.; Glorieux, F. H.: Two hereditary defects related
to vitamin D metabolism map to the same region of human chromosome
12q.II(Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58: 1978, 1991.

35. Liberman, U. A.; Marx, S. J.: Vitamin D and other calciferols.In:
Scriver, C. R.; Beaudet, A. L.; Sly, W. S.; Valle, D. (eds.): The
Metabolic and Molecular Bases of Inherited Disease. Vol. II.  New
York: McGraw-Hill  (8th ed.): 2001. Pp. 4223-4240.

36. Lim, S. K.; Park, Y. S.; Park, J. M.; Song, Y. D.; Lee, E. J.;
Kim, K. R.; Lee, H. C.; Huh, K. B.: Lack of association between vitamin
D receptor genotypes and osteoporosis in Koreans. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 80: 3677-3681, 1995.

37. Lin, U.-T.; Malloy, P. J.; Sakati, N.; Al-Ashwal, A.; Feldman,
D.: A novel mutation in the deoxyribonucleic acid-binding domain
of the vitamin D receptor causes hereditary 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D-resistant rickets. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 81: 2564-2569, 1996.

38. Liu, P. T.; Stenger, S.; Li, H.; Wenzel, L.; Tan, B. H.; Krutzik,
S. R.; Ochoa, M. T.; Schauber, J.; Wu, K.; Meinken, C.; Kamen, D.
L.; Wagner, M.; and 10 others: Toll-like receptor triggering of
a vitamin D-mediated human antimicrobial response. Science 311:
1770-1773, 2006.

39. Lorentzon, M.; Lorentzon, R.; Nordstrom, P.: Vitamin D receptor
gene polymorphism is associated with birth height, growth to adolescence,
and adult stature in healthy Caucasian men: a cross-sectional and
longitudinal study. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 1666-1671, 2000.

40. Makishima, M.; Lu, T. T.; Xie, W.; Whitfield, G. K.; Domoto, H.;
Evans, R. M.; Haussler, M. R.; Mangelsdorf, D. J.: Vitamin D receptor
as an intestinal bile acid sensor. Science 296: 1313-1316, 2002.

41. Malloy, P. J.; Eccleshall, T. R.; Gross, C.; Van Maldergem, L.;
Bouillon, R.; Feldman, D.: Hereditary vitamin D resistant rickets
caused by a novel mutation in the vitamin D receptor that results
in decreased affinity for hormone and cellular hyporesponsiveness. J.
Clin. Invest. 99: 297-304, 1997.

42. Malloy, P. J.; Hochberg, Z.; Tiosano, D.; Pike, J. W.; Hughes,
M. R.; Feldman, D.: The molecular basis of hereditary 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D3 resistant rickets in seven related families. J. Clin. Invest. 86:
2071-2079, 1990.

43. Masuyama, R.; Stockmans, I.; Torrekens, S.; Van Looveren, R.;
Maes, C.; Carmeliet, P.; Bouillon, R.; Carmeliet, G.: Vitamin D receptor
in chondrocytes promotes osteoclastogenesis and regulates FGF23 production
in osteoblasts. J. Clin. Invest. 116: 3150-3159, 2006.

44. Mechica, J. B.; Leite, M. O. R.; Mendonca, B. B.; Frazzatto, E.
S. T.; Borelli, A.; Latronico, A. C.: A novel nonsense mutation in
the first zinc finger of the vitamin D receptor causing hereditary
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3)-resistant rickets. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 82:
3892-3894, 1997.

45. Miller, J.; Djabali, K.; Chen, T.; Liu, Y.; Ioffreda, M.; Lyle,
S.; Christiano, A. M.; Holick, M.; Cotsarelis, G.: Atrichia caused
by mutations in the vitamin D receptor gene is a phenocopy of generalized
atrichia caused by mutations in the hairless gene. J. Invest. Derm. 117:
612-617, 2001.

46. Miyamoto, K.; Kesterson, R. A.; Yamamoto, H.; Taketani, Y.; Nishiwaki,
E.; Tatsumi, S.; Inoue, Y.; Morita, K.; Takeda, E.; Pike, J. W.:
Structural organization of the human vitamin D receptor chromosomal
gene and its promoter. Molec. Endocr. 11: 1165-1179, 1997.

47. Morrison, N. A.; Qi, J. C.; Tokita, A.; Kelly, P. J.; Crofts,
L.; Nguyen, T. V.; Sambrook, P. N.; Elsman, J. A.: Prediction of
bone density from vitamin D receptor alleles. Nature 367: 284-287,
1994. Note: Erratum: Nature 387: 106 only, 1997.

48. Morrison, N. A.; Yeoman, R.; Kelly, P. J.; Eisman, J. A.: Contribution
of trans-acting factor alleles to normal physiological variability:
vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms and circulating osteocalcin. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 6665-6669, 1992.

49. Motohashi, Y.; Yamada, S.; Yanagawa, T.; Maruyama, T.; Suzuki,
R.; Niino, M.; Fukazawa, T.; Kasuga, A.; Hirose, H.; Matsubara, K.;
Shimada, A.; Saruta, T.: Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism affects
onset pattern of type 1 diabetes. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 3137-3140,
2003.

50. Nejentsev, S.; Godfrey, L.; Snook, H.; Rance, H.; Nutland, S.;
Walker, N. M.; Lam, A. C.; Guja, C.; Ionescu-Tirgoviste, C.; Undlien,
D. E.; Ronningen, K. S.; Tuomilehto-Wolf, E.; Tuomeilehto, J.; Newport,
M. J.; Clayton, D. G.; Todd, J. A.: Comparative high-resolution analysis
of linkage disequilibrium and tag single nucleotide polymorphisms
between populations in the vitamin D receptor gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
1633-1639, 2004.

51. Palmer, H. G.; Larriba, M. J.; Garcia, J. M.; Ordonez-Moran, P.;
Pena, C.; Peiro, S.; Puig, I.; Rodriguez, R.; de la Fuente, R.; Bernad,
A.; Pollan, M.; Bonilla, F.; Gamallo, C.; Garcia de Herreros, A.;
Munoz, A.: The transcription factor SNAIL represses vitamin D receptor
expression and responsiveness in human colon cancer. Nature Med. 10:
917-919, 2004.

52. Park, B.-S.; Park, J.-S.; Lee, D. Y.; Youn, J. I.; Kim, I. G.
: Vitamin D receptor polymorphism is associated with psoriasis. J.
Invest. Derm. 112: 113-116, 1999.

53. Pedeutour, F.; Merscher, S.; Durieux, E.; Montgomery, K.; Krauter,
K.; Clevy, J.-P.; Barcelo, G.; Kucherlapati, R.; Gaudray, P.; Turc-Carel,
C.: Mapping of the 12q12-q22 region with respect to tumor translocation
breakpoints. Genomics 22: 512-518, 1994.

54. Pena, C.; Garcia, J. M.; Silva, J.; Garcia, V.; Rodriguez, R.;
Alonso, I.; Millan, I.; Salas, C.; Garcia de Herreros, A.; Munoz,
A.; Bonilla, F.: E-cadherin and vitamin D receptor regulation by
SNAIL and ZEB1 in colon cancer: clinicopathological correlations. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 3361-3370, 2005.

55. Pocock, N. A.; Eisman, J. A.; Hopper, J. L.; Yeates, M. G.; Sambrook,
P. N.; Eberl, S.: Genetic determinants of bone mass in adults: a
twin study. J. Clin. Invest. 80: 706-710, 1987.

56. Quigley, D. A.; To, M. D.; Perez-Losada, J.; Pelorosso, F. G.;
Mao, J.-H.; Nagase, H.; Ginzinger, D. G.; Balmain, A.: Genetic architecture
of mouse skin inflammation and tumour susceptibility. Nature 458:
505-508, 2009.

57. Riggs, B. L.: Vitamin D-receptor genotypes and bone density.
(Editorial) New Eng. J. Med. 337: 125-126, 1997.

58. Ritchie, H. H.; Hughes, M. R.; Thompson, E. T.; Malloy, P. J.;
Hochberg, Z.; Feldman, D.; Pike, J. W.; O'Malley, B. W.: An ochre
mutation in the vitamin D receptor gene causes hereditary 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D3-resistant rickets in three families. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 86:
9783-9787, 1989.

59. Sabbagh, Y.; Carpenter, T. O.; Demay, M. B.: Hypophosphatemia
leads to rickets by impairing caspase-mediated apoptosis of hypertrophic
chondrocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 9637-9642, 2005.

60. Saijo, T.; Ito, M.; Takeda, E.; Mahbubul Huq, A. H. M.; Naito,
E.; Yokota, I.; Sone, T.; Pike, J. W.; Kuroda, Y.: A unique mutation
in the vitamin D receptor gene in three Japanese patients with vitamin
D-dependent rickets type II: utility of single-strand conformation
polymorphism analysis for heterozygous carrier detection. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 49: 668-673, 1991.

61. Sainz, J.; Van Tornout, J. M.; Loro, L.; Sayre, J.; Roe, T. F.;
Gilsanz, V.: Vitamin D-receptor gene polymorphisms and bone density
in prepubertal American girls of Mexican descent. New Eng. J. Med. 337:
77-82, 1997.

62. Selvaraj, P.; Kurian, S. M.; Chandra, G.; Reetha, A. M.; Charles,
N.; Narayanan, P. R.: Vitamin D receptor gene variants of BsmI, ApaI,
TaqI, and FokI polymorphisms in spinal tuberculosis. (Letter) Clin.
Genet. 65: 73-76, 2004.

63. Shah, S.; Islam, M. N.; Dakshanamurthy, S.; Rizvi, I.; Rao, M.;
Herrell, R.; Zinser, G.; Valrance, M.; Aranda, A.; Moras, D.; Norman,
A.; Welsh, J.; Byers, S. W.: The molecular basis of vitamin D receptor
and beta-catenin crossregulation. Molec. Cell 21: 799-809, 2006.
Note: Erratum: Molec. Cell 21: 148 only, 2006.

64. Sone, T.; Marx, S. J.; Liberman, U. A.; Pike, J. W.: A unique
point mutation in the human vitamin D receptor chromosomal gene confers
hereditary resistance to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3). Molec. Endocr. 4:
623-631, 1990.

65. Suarez, F.; Zeghoud, F.; Rossignol, C.; Walrant, O.; Garabedian,
M.: Association between vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism and
sex-dependent growth during the first two years of life. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 82: 2966-2970, 1997.

66. Szpirer, J.; Szpirer, C.; Riviere, M.; Levan, G.; Marynen, P.;
Cassiman, J.-J.; Wiese, R.; DeLuca, H. F.: The Sp1 transcription
factor gene (SP1) and the 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3) receptor gene
(VDR) are colocalized on human chromosome arm 12q and rat chromosome
7. Genomics 11: 168-173, 1991.

67. Takeda, E.; Yokota, I.; Kawakami, I.; Hashimoto, T.; Kuroda, Y.;
Arase, S.: Two siblings with vitamin-D-dependent rickets type II:
no recurrence of rickets for 14 years after cessation of therapy. Europ.
J. Pediat. 149: 54-57, 1989.

68. Tao, C.; Yu, T.; Garnett, S.; Briody, J.; Knight, J.; Woodhead,
H.; Cowell, C. T.: Vitamin D receptor alleles predict growth and
bone density in girls. Arch. Dis. Child. 79: 488-494, 1998.

69. Turunen, M. M.; Dunlop, T. W.; Carlberg, C.; Vaisanen, S.: Selective
use of multiple vitamin D response elements underlies the 1-alpha,25-dihydroxyvitamin
D3-mediated negative regulation of the human CYP27B1 gene. Nucleic
Acids Res. 35: 2734-2747, 2007.

70. Uitterlinden, A. G.; Burger, H.; Huang, Q.; Odding, E.; van Duijn,
C. M.; Hofman, A.; Birkenhager, J. C.; van Leeuwen, J. P. T. M.; Pols,
H. A. P.: Vitamin D receptor genotype is associated with radiographic
osteoarthritis at the knee. J. Clin. Invest. 100: 259-263, 1997.

71. Uitterlinden, A. G.; Fang, Y.; van Meurs, J. B. J.; Pols, H. A.
P.; van Leeuwen, J. P. T. M.: Genetics and biology of vitamin D receptor
polymorphisms. Gene 338: 143-156, 2004.

72. Uitterlinden, A. G.; Ralston, S. H.; Brandi, M. L.; Carey, A.
H.; Grinberg, D.; Langdahl, B. L.; Lips, P.; Lorenc, R.; Obermayer-Pietsch,
B.; Reeve, J.; Reid, D. M.; Amedei, A.; and 23 others: The association
between common vitamin D receptor gene variations and osteoporosis:
a participant-level meta-analysis. Ann. Intern. Med. 145: 255-264,
2006. Note: Erratum: Ann. Intern. Med. 145: 936 only, 2006.

73. Uitterlinden, A. G.; Weel, A. E. A. M.; Burger, H.; Fang, Y.;
Van Duijn, C. M.; Hofman, A.; Van Leeuwen, J. P. T. M.; Pols, H. A.
P.: Interaction between the vitamin D receptor gene and collagen
type I-alpha-1 gene in susceptibility for fracture. J. Bone Miner.
Res. 16: 379-385, 2001.

74. Van Maldergem, L.; Bachy, A.; Feldman, D.; Bouillon, R.; Maassen,
J.; Dreyer, M.; Rey, R.; Holm, C.; Gillerot, Y.: Syndrome of lipoatrophic
diabetes, vitamin D resistant rickets, and persistent mullerian ducts
in a Turkish boy born to consanguineous parents. Am. J. Med. Genet. 64:
506-513, 1996.

75. Whitfield, G. K.; Selznick, S. H.; Haussler, C. A.; Hsieh, J.-C.;
Galligan, M. A.; Jurutka, P. W.; Thompson, P. D.; Lee, S. M.; Zerwekh,
J. E.; Haussler, M. R.: Vitamin D receptors from patients with resistance
to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3): point mutations confer reduced transactivation
in response to ligand and impaired interaction with the retinoid X
receptor heterodimeric partner. Molec. Endocr. 10: 1617-1631, 1996.

76. Wittke, A.; Weaver, V.; Mahon, B. D.; August, A.; Cantorna, M.
T.: Vitamin D receptor-deficient mice fail to develop experimental
allergic asthma. J. Immun. 173: 3432-3436, 2004.

77. Xiong, D.-H.; Xu, F.-H.; Liu, P.-Y.; Shen, H.; Long, J.-R.; Elze,
L.; Recker, R. R.; Deng, H.-W.: Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphisms
are linked to and associated with adult height. J. Med. Genet. 42:
228-234, 2005.

78. Yoshizawa, T.; Handa, Y.; Uematsu, Y.; Takeda, S.; Sekine, K.;
Yoshihara, Y.; Kawakami, T.; Arioka, K.; Sato, H.; Uchiyama, Y.; Masushige,
S.; Fukamizu, A.; Matsumoto, T.; Kato, S.: Mice lacking the vitamin
D receptor exhibit impaired bone formation, uterine hypoplasia and
growth retardation after weaning. Nature Genet. 16: 391-396, 1997.

79. Yu, S.; Cantorna, M. T.: The vitamin D receptor is required for
iNKT cell development. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 5207-5212, 2008.

80. Zhang, C.; Dowd, D. R.; Staal, A.; Gu, C.; Lian, J. B.; van Wijnen,
A. J.; Stein, G. S.; MacDonald, P. N.: Nuclear coactivator-62 kDa/Ski-interacting
protein is a nuclear matrix-associated coactivator that may couple
vitamin D receptor-mediated transcription and RNA splicing. J. Biol.
Chem. 278: 35325-35336, 2003.

81. Zhu, W.; Malloy, P. J.; Delvin, E.; Chabot, G.; Feldman, D.:
Hereditary 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D-resistant rickets due to an opal
mutation causing premature termination of the vitamin D receptor. J.
Bone Miner. Res. 13: 259-264, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/27/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/7/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/23/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/22/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/3/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/12/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/24/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/25/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/19/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/17/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/28/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/1/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/12/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/10/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/6/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/14/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/7/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 8/23/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/15/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/16/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/24/2004
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/14/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/1/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/26/2004
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 5/12/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/9/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/28/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/11/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/2/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/16/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/20/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 2/10/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 6/16/1999
Paul Brennan - updated: 2/18/1999
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/8/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/7/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 6/24/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/18/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/6/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/19/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/2/1997
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/26/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/31/1997
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/8/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/21/1997

EDITED alopez: 08/06/2012
terry: 6/7/2012
carol: 4/27/2010
mgross: 4/9/2010
terry: 4/7/2010
carol: 3/23/2010
carol: 3/22/2010
wwang: 9/16/2009
terry: 9/3/2009
alopez: 5/4/2009
terry: 4/28/2009
mgross: 12/12/2008
terry: 12/12/2008
terry: 9/26/2008
alopez: 6/26/2008
terry: 6/24/2008
mgross: 1/25/2007
alopez: 10/19/2006
wwang: 10/18/2006
terry: 10/17/2006
wwang: 10/2/2006
ckniffin: 9/28/2006
mgross: 9/27/2006
terry: 9/1/2006
carol: 5/23/2006
wwang: 5/12/2006
mgross: 4/12/2006
terry: 4/10/2006
mgross: 1/6/2006
alopez: 10/17/2005
terry: 10/14/2005
wwang: 9/23/2005
wwang: 9/19/2005
ckniffin: 9/7/2005
carol: 8/23/2005
ckniffin: 8/15/2005
alopez: 7/15/2005
wwang: 5/18/2005
terry: 5/16/2005
carol: 1/25/2005
mgross: 11/24/2004
alopez: 10/14/2004
carol: 10/1/2004
tkritzer: 2/26/2004
alopez: 5/16/2003
alopez: 5/12/2003
tkritzer: 8/15/2002
tkritzer: 8/13/2002
terry: 8/9/2002
alopez: 5/29/2002
terry: 5/28/2002
alopez: 7/11/2001
cwells: 7/3/2001
cwells: 7/2/2001
alopez: 1/25/2001
terry: 11/16/2000
mgross: 4/19/2000
terry: 3/20/2000
carol: 2/14/2000
yemi: 2/11/2000
yemi: 2/10/2000
carol: 12/6/1999
carol: 6/16/1999
alopez: 5/26/1999
alopez: 2/18/1999
alopez: 1/8/1999
dkim: 12/10/1998
terry: 7/14/1998
carol: 7/10/1998
terry: 7/7/1998
dholmes: 6/29/1998
dholmes: 6/24/1998
psherman: 3/19/1998
psherman: 3/18/1998
jenny: 11/26/1997
jenny: 11/17/1997
jenny: 10/22/1997
terry: 9/19/1997
mark: 9/9/1997
terry: 9/2/1997
terry: 8/5/1997
terry: 7/31/1997
alopez: 7/10/1997
joanna: 6/5/1997
jenny: 6/3/1997
jenny: 5/28/1997
jenny: 5/27/1997
mark: 5/2/1997
mark: 4/21/1997
jenny: 4/21/1997

300595	TITLE *300595 G ANTIGEN 2C; GAGE2C
;;GAGE2
DESCRIPTION See GAGE1 (300594) for more information about the GAGE gene cluster.

CLONING

Human melanoma cells express several distinct antigens that are
recognized by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes (CTLs). One class of
these antigens is encoded by genes, such as MAGE1 (MAGEA1; 300016),
MAGE3 (MAGEA3; 300174), and BAGE (605167), that are expressed in a large
fraction of tumors of various histologic types but are silent in normal
adult tissues, except for testis. Van den Eynde et al. (1995) identified
GAGE1 as a gene encoding an antigen that is present on melanoma MZ2-MEL
cells and is recognized by autologous CTLs. By screening a melanoma
MZ2-MEL cDNA library with a GAGE1 cDNA, they isolated cDNAs representing
5 genes with sequence similarity to GAGE1. They named the genes GAGE2,
GAGE3 (300596), GAGE4 (300597), GAGE5 (300598), and GAGE6 (300599). The
GAGE2 to -6 cDNAs differ mainly by single nucleotide substitutions that
are scattered throughout the sequence. The deduced GAGE2 protein has 116
amino acids. The authors defined the antigenic peptide encoded by GAGE1
and found that GAGE2 also encodes it. RT-PCR using primers common to
GAGE1 to -6 found no expression of these genes in any normal adult
tissue tested except testis. RT-PCR using primers specific to both GAGE1
and GAGE2 found that at least 1 of these genes was expressed in 25% of
sarcomas, 24% of melanomas, 19% of nonsmall cell lung carcinomas, 19% of
head and neck tumors, and 12% of bladder tumors; GAGE1 and GAGE2 were
not expressed in colorectal carcinomas and renal cell carcinomas.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gjerstorff and Ditzel (2008) stated that the GAGE2C gene is contained
within a 9.5-kb GAGE repeat. It contains 5 exons that span about 6.3 kb,
and it has a LINE insertion that disrupts 1 exon compared with GAGE1.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, De Backer et al. (1999) mapped
the GAGE2C gene to chromosome Xp11.4-p11.2.

By genomic sequence analysis, Gjerstorff and Ditzel (2008) mapped the
GAGE2C gene to a GAGE gene cluster on chromosome Xp11.23.

REFERENCE 1. De Backer, O.; Arden, K. C.; Boretti, M.; Vantomme, V.; De Smet,
C.; Czekav, S.; Viars, C. S.; De Plaen, E.; Brasseur, F.; Chomez,
P.; Van den Eynde, B.; Bood, T. van der Bruggen, P.: Characterization
of the GAGE genes that are expressed in various human cancers and
in normal testis. Cancer Res. 59: 3157-3165, 1999.

2. Gjerstorff, M. F.; Ditzel, H. J.: An overview of the GAGE cancer/testis
antigen family with the inclusion of newly identified members. Tissue
Antigens 71: 187-192, 2008.

3. Van den Eynde, B.; Peeters, O.; De Backer, O.; Gaugler, B.; Lucas,
S.; Boon, T.: A new family of genes coding for an antigen recognized
by autologous cytolytic T lymphocytes on a human melanoma. J. Exp.
Med. 182: 689-698, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 08/06/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/18/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/18/2006

EDITED wwang: 08/06/2008
mgross: 5/18/2006

