601783	TITLE *601783 MICROTUBULE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 6; MAP6
;;MTAP6;;
STABLE TUBULE-ONLY POLYPEPTIDE; STOP;;
KIAA1878
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mammalian cells often contain abundant subpopulations of microtubules
that are stable to both drug- and cold temperature-induced disassembly.
Such microtubules are apparently universal in the neurite extensions of
neuronal cells. Bosc et al. (1996) cloned and characterized the gene
encoding a rat protein that reconstitutes microtubule cold stability in
vitro. The protein, called stable tubule-only polypeptide (STOP) by
them, is a 100.5-kD polypeptide. The central region of the predicted
952-amino acid polypeptide contains 5 tandem repeats of 46 amino acids.
STOP also contains a putative SH3-binding motif near its N terminus.

Denarier et al. (1998) determined that the deduced mouse Map6 protein
contains 906 amino acids and has a calculated molecular mass of about
96.4 kD.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult hippocampus
cDNA library, Nagase et al. (2001) cloned MAP6, which they designated
KIAA1878. The transcript contains a repetitive element in the 3-prime
UTR. RT-PCR ELISA detected highest MAP6 expression in fetal brain,
followed by spinal cord, adult brain, testis, kidney, lung, heart, and
ovary. Lower expression was detected in pancreas, spleen, and skeletal
muscle, and little to no expression was detected in adult and fetal
liver. All specific brain regions showed intermediate to high
expression, with highest expression in caudate nucleus, hippocampus, and
cerebellum.

GENE FUNCTION

Bosc et al. (1996) found that in vitro-translated STOP bound to
microtubules and calmodulin (114180). When STOP cDNA was expressed in
HeLa cells, which lack cold-stable microtubules, the protein product
associated with microtubules at 37 degrees C and stabilized microtubule
networks, which induced cold stability, nocodazole resistance, and
tubulin detyrosination.

GENE STRUCTURE

Denarier et al. (1998) determined that the mouse Map6 gene contains 4
exons and spans about 40 kb. The 5-prime flanking region lacks a TATA
box or an initiator element.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2001) mapped the MAP6 gene
to chromosome 11. Jolly et al. (1999) reported a conflicting assignment
of the human MAP6 gene to chromosome 6p12-p11 by FISH. However, Andrieux
et al. (2002) confirmed that the human MAP6 gene maps to chromosome
11q14.

Using FISH, Denarier et al. (1998) mapped the mouse Map6 gene to region
E2-F1 of chromosome 7, which shows homology of synteny to human
chromosome 11.

ANIMAL MODEL

Andrieux et al. (2002) found that Stop-null mice had no detectable
defects in brain anatomy, but they showed synaptic defects, with
depleted synaptic vesicle pools and impaired synaptic plasticity,
associated with severe behavioral disorders. A survey of the effects of
psychotropic drugs on the behavior of Stop-null mice showed a specific
effect of long-term administration of neuroleptics in alleviating these
disorders.

REFERENCE 1. Andrieux, A.; Salin, P. A.; Vernet, M.; Kujala, P.; Baratier, J.;
Gory-Faure, S.; Bosc, C.; Pointu, H.; Proietto, D.; Schweitzer, A.;
Denarier, E.; Klumperman, J.; Job, D.: The suppression of brain cold-stable
microtubules in mice induces synaptic defects associated with neuroleptic-sensitive
behavioral disorders. Genes Dev. 16: 2350-2364, 2002.

2. Bosc, C.; Cronk, J. D.; Pirollet, F.; Watterson, D. M.; Haiech,
J.; Job, D.; Margolis, R. L.: Cloning, expression, and properties
of the microtubule-stabilizing protein STOP. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93:
2125-2130, 1996.

3. Denarier, E.; Aguezzoul, M.; Jolly, C.; Vourc'h, C.; Roure, A.;
Andrieux, A.; Bosc, C.; Job, D.: Genomic structure and chromosomal
mapping of the mouse STOP gene (Mtap6). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 243:
791-796, 1998.

4. Jolly, C.; Denarier, E.; Mongelard, F.; Robert-Nicoud, M.; Vourc'h,
C.; Bosc, C.; Job, D.: Assignment of the STOP gene (MAP6) to human
chromosome bands 6p12-p11 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 86: 25 only, 1999.

5. Nagase, T.; Nakayama, M.; Nakajima, D.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XX.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 8: 85-95, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/18/2004

CREATED Mark H. Paalman: 4/29/1997

EDITED terry: 01/20/2010
terry: 4/5/2005
mgross: 11/18/2004
mark: 9/19/1997
alopez: 6/24/1997
mark: 5/1/1997
mark: 4/30/1997
jenny: 4/29/1997

614177	TITLE *614177 EF-HAND CALCIUM-BINDING DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 4A; EFCAB4A
;;CALCIUM RELEASE-ACTIVATED CALCIUM CHANNEL REGULATOR 2B; CRACR2B
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching a human database for sequences similar to CRACR2A (EFCAB4B;
614178), followed by RT-PCR of Jurkat human T cells, Srikanth et al.
(2010) cloned EFCAB4A, which they called CRACR2B. The deduced 399-amino
acid protein contains 2 N-terminal EF hand motifs and a C-terminal
coiled-coil domain. Mouse and human EFCAB4A share 36% overall identity,
with highest similarity in the EF-hand motifs and coiled-coil domain.
Quantitative RT-PCR revealed variable EFCAB4A expression in all human
tissues and cell lines examined, with highest expression in lung and
lower expression in HEK293 cells, Jurkat cells, spleen, placenta, and
kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

ORAI1 (610277) and STIM1 (605921) are critical components of calcium
release-activated calcium (CRAC) channels involved in store-operated
calcium entry into cells. Srikanth et al. (2010) found that EFCAB4B was
a calcium-binding protein that regulated CRAC channel activity.
Depletion of EFCAB4B from Jurkat T cells, more so than from HEK293
cells, decreased store-operated calcium entry. In contrast, depletion of
EFCAB4A had a stronger effect on store-operated calcium entry in HEK293
cells than in Jurkat T cells. These effects correlated with relatively
higher EFCAB4B expression in Jurkat cells and higher EFCAB4A expression
in HEK293 cells. Depletion and restoration studies revealed functional
redundancy between EFCAB4B and EFCAB4A.

GENE STRUCTURE

Srikanth et al. (2010) determined that the EFCAB4A gene contains at
least 9 exons.

MAPPING

Hartz (2011) mapped the EFCAB4A gene to chromosome 11p15.5 based on an
alignment of the EFCAB4B sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC033196) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/13/2011.

2. Srikanth, S.; Jung, H.-J.; Kim, K.-D.; Souda, P.; Whitelegge, J.;
Gwack, Y.: A novel EF-hand protein, CRACR2A, is a cytosolic Ca(2+)
sensor that stabilizes CRAC channels in T cells. Nature Cell Biol. 12:
436-446, 2010.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/18/2011

EDITED wwang: 08/19/2011

605501	TITLE *605501 M-PHASE PHOSPHOPROTEIN 9; MPHOSPH9
;;MPP9
DESCRIPTION Progression of cells from interphase to mitosis involves alterations in
cell structures and activities. The transition from G2 to M phase is
induced by M phase-promoting factor, or MPF (see CCNB1; 123836). In M
phase, many proteins are phosphorylated directly by MPF or indirectly by
kinases activated by MPF. These M-phase phosphoproteins (MPPs, or
MPHOSPHs) permit disassembly of interphase structures and generation of
M-phase enzymatic activities and structures.

By treating bacterial expression libraries with M-phase cytosol
containing the relevant kinases in the presence of a phosphatase
inhibitor, followed by immunoscreening with MPM2 antibody,
Matsumoto-Taniura et al. (1996) isolated cDNAs for a number of MPHOSPHs,
including MPHOSPH9, which they called MPP9. Immunoblot analysis showed
that when phosphorylated, MPHOSPH9 is expressed as 150- and 160-kD
proteins in M-phase cells. Immunofluorescence microscopy localized
MPHOSPH9 to the Golgi complex in interphase, strongly overlapping with
the localization of N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase I (NAGT1; see
160995). However, in mitotic cells, MPHOSPH9 was dispersed throughout
the cell and did not localize to the Golgi fragments containing NGAT1.

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the
MPHOSPH9 gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP sts-N23129).

REFERENCE 1. Matsumoto-Taniura, N.; Pirollet, F.; Monroe, R.; Gerace, L.; Westendorf,
J. M.: Identification of novel M phase phosphoproteins by expression
cloning. Molec. Biol. Cell 7: 1455-1469, 1996.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/27/2000

EDITED mgross: 12/27/2000

603277	TITLE *603277 CHROMODOMAIN HELICASE DNA-BINDING PROTEIN 4; CHD4
;;Mi2-BETA
DESCRIPTION See CHD1 (602118) for a description of this gene family.

CLONING

Approximately 20% of patients with dermatomyositis develop antibodies
against nuclear antigens that are termed Mi2. Sera containing anti-Mi2
antibodies precipitate several proteins, with 1 of the most abundant
migrating as a 220- to 260-kD polypeptide on SDS-polyacrylamide gels. By
immunoscreening a HeLa cell cDNA expression library with sera from a
patient with dermatomyositis, Seelig et al. (1995) isolated a
full-length cDNA encoding CHD4, which they called Mi2-beta. Northern
blot analysis of Hep-2 cell RNA detected an approximately 6.8-kb
Mi2-beta transcript. The deduced 1,912-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 218 kD. Native Mi2-beta from Hep-2 cells
has a molecular mass of 235 kD by SDS-PAGE. Searches of sequence
databases indicated that Mi2-beta belongs to the SNF2/RAD54 family of
nuclear helicases. The central portion of Mi2-beta contains the 7
motifs, including a DEAD/H box, that are characteristic of helicases.
Mi2-beta also contains a putative chromatin-binding region and multiple
potential nuclear targeting signals, N-glycosylation sites,
N-myristoylation sites, and phosphorylation sites. Immunofluorescence
studies localized the Mi2-beta protein to the nucleus. The authors
concluded that Mi2-beta is a major antigen recognized by anti-Mi2 sera
from patients with dermatomyositis. Studies with sera from
dermatomyositis, systemic lupus erythematosus (152700), and rheumatoid
arthritis (180300) patients showed that anti-Mi2-beta antibodies are
predominantly found in dermatomyositis patients.

Seelig et al. (1996) noted that the Mi2-alpha (CHD3; 602120) and
Mi2-beta proteins react with most or all dermatomyositis patient
anti-Mi2 sera. While these proteins are distinct, they have stretches of
identical sequences that could result in shared epitopes. The authors
stated that Mi2-alpha and Mi2-beta contain a PHD motif, which is a zinc
finger-like motif with a cys4-his-cys3 pattern and which is thought to
be a DNA- or RNA-binding domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhang et al. (1998) reported the isolation of a protein complex that
contains both histone deacetylation and ATP-dependent nucleosome
remodeling activities. The complex contained the histone deacetylases
HDAC1/2, histone-binding proteins, the dermatomyositis-specific
autoantigen Mi2-beta, a polypeptide related to the metastasis-associated
protein-1, and a novel polypeptide of 32 kD. Patients with
dermatomyositis have a high rate of malignancy. The finding that
Mi2-beta exists in a complex containing histone deacetylase and
nucleosome remodeling activities suggests a role for chromatin
reorganization in cancer metastasis.

Zhang et al. (1999) showed that MTA2 (MTA1L1; 603947) and the 32-kD MBD3
(603573) protein are subunits of the NURD (nucleosome remodeling and
histone deacetylase) complex (see MTA1; 603526). Immunoprecipitation
analysis showed that MBD3 interacts with HDAC1 (601241), RBBP4 (602923),
and RBBP7 (300825), but not with MI2, suggesting that MBD3 is embedded
within the NURD complex. The authors found that MTA2 directs the
assembly of an active histone deacetylase complex and that the
association of MTA2 with the complex requires MBD3. Gel mobility shift
analysis determined that both NURD and MBD3 are unable to bind to
methylated DNA in the absence of MBD2 (603547). Zhang et al. (1999)
proposed that NURD is involved in the transcriptional repression of
methylated DNA. Wade et al. (1999) also identified MTA1, MTA1L, and MBD3
as components of the NURD complex, which they referred to as the MI2
complex.

By immunoprecipitation analysis, Shimono et al. (2005) found that MCRS1
(609504) interacted with MI2-beta, RFP (TRIM27; 602165), and UBF (UBTF;
600673). Yeast 2-hybrid screening showed that the central region of
MCRS1 interacted with the ATPase/helicase region of MI2-beta and the
coiled-coil region of RFP. Confocal microscopy demonstrated
colocalization of MCRS1, MI2-beta, RFP, and UBF in nucleoli. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that MCRS1, MI2-beta, and RFP
associated with rDNA and were involved in transactivation of ribosomal
gene transcription, which could be downregulated by small interfering
RNA-mediated downregulation of MCRS1, MI2-beta, and RFP. Shimono et al.
(2005) concluded that MI2-beta and RFP, which are involved in
transcriptional repression in the nucleus, associate with MCRS1 in the
nucleolus and are involved in activation of rRNA transcription.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Seelig et al. (1995) mapped the
CHD4 gene to 12p13.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Le Gallo et al. (2012) used whole-exome sequencing to comprehensively
search for somatic mutations in 13 primary serous endometrial tumors
(see 608089), and subsequently resequenced 18 genes that were mutated in
more than 1 tumor and/or were components of an enriched functional
grouping from 40 additional serous tumors. Le Gallo et al. (2012)
identified a high frequency of somatic mutation in the CHD4 gene (17%).

REFERENCE 1. Le Gallo, M.; O'Hara, A. J.; Rudd, M. L.; Urick, M. E.; Hansen,
N. F.; O'Neil, N. J.; Price, J. C.; Zhang, S.; England, B. M.; Godwin,
A. K.; Sgroi, D. C.; NIH Intramural Sequencing Center (NISC) Comparative
Sequencing Program; Hieter, P.; Mullikan, J. C.; Merino, M. J.; Bell,
D. W.: Exome sequencing of serous endometrial tumors identifies recurrent
somatic mutations in chromatin-remodeling and ubiquitin ligase complex
genes. Nature Genet. 44: 1310-1315, 2012.

2. Seelig, H. P.; Moosbrugger, I.; Ehrfeld, H.; Fink, T.; Renz, M.;
Genth, E.: The major dermatomyositis-specific Mi-2 autoantigen is
a presumed helicase involved in transcriptional activation. Arthritis
Rheum. 38: 1389-1399, 1995.

3. Seelig, H. P.; Renz, M.; Targoff, I. N.; Ge, Q.; Frank, M. B.:
Two forms of the major antigenic protein of the dermatomyositis-specific
Mi-2 autoantigen. (Letter) Arthritis Rheum. 39: 1769-1771, 1996.

4. Shimono, K.; Shimono, Y.; Shimokata, K.; Ishiguro, N.; Takahashi,
M.: Microspherule protein 1, Mi-2-beta, and RET finger protein associate
in the nucleolus and up-regulate ribosomal gene transcription. J.
Biol. Chem. 280: 39436-39447, 2005.

5. Wade, P. A.; Gegonne, A.; Jones, P. L.; Ballestar, E.; Aubry, F.;
Wolffe, A. P.: Mi-2 complex couples DNA methylation to chromatin
remodelling and histone deacetylation. Nature Genet. 23: 62-66,
1999.

6. Zhang, Y.; LeRoy, G.; Seelig, H.-P.; Lane, W. S.; Reinberg, D.
: The dermatomyositis-specific autoantigen Mi2 is a component of a
complex containing histone deacetylase and nucleosome remodeling activities. Cell 95:
279-289, 1998.

7. Zhang, Y.; Ng, H.-H.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Tempst, P.; Bird,
A.; Reinberg, D.: Analysis of the NuRD subunits reveals a histone
deacetylase core complex and a connection with DNA methylation. Genes
Dev. 13: 1924-1935, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 02/07/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/6/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/11/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/25/1998

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 11/11/1998

EDITED alopez: 02/07/2013
mgross: 11/3/2010
mgross: 11/6/2006
mgross: 1/11/2002
carol: 11/25/1998

610501	TITLE *610501 NEUROBLASTOMA BREAKPOINT FAMILY, MEMBER 1; NBPF1
;;KIAA1693
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The NBPF gene family, of which NBPF1 is the founding member, consists of
22 genes and pseudogenes that arose by gene duplication. NBPF genes
contain numerous low-copy repetitive elements and show high intergenic
and intragenic sequence identity in coding and noncoding regions
(Vandepoele et al., 2005).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned NBPF1, which they designated
KIAA1693. The transcript contains repetitive elements in its 3-prime
UTR, and the deduced protein contains 901 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA
detected high expression in all tissues examined except for low
expression in kidney.

By analyzing the breakpoints of a t(1;17)(p36.2;q11.2) constitutional
translocation in a neuroblastoma (see 256700) patient, followed by PCR
of a mammary gland cDNA library, Vandepoele et al. (2005) cloned NBPF1,
which encodes a deduced 1,213-amino acid protein with a calculated
molecular mass of 139 kD. Vandepoele et al. (2005) also identified an
NBPF1 variant that lacks exon 1. In silico and RT-PCR analysis indicated
ubiquitous expression of a group of NBPF genes, including NBPF1.
Fluorescence- or epitope-tagged NBPF1 expressed in breast carcinoma
cells showed reticulate cytoplasmic staining.

GENE FAMILY

By genomic database analysis, Vandepoele et al. (2005) identified a
total of 22 NBPF genes and pseudogenes, located primarily in regions of
segmental duplication, including 1p36, 1p12, and 1q21.

GENE STRUCTURE

Vandepoele et al. (2005) determined that the NBPF1 gene contains 25
coding exons, several of which are internally duplicated.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the NBPF1 gene
to chromosome 1.

By genomic sequence analysis and FISH, Vandepoele et al. (2005) mapped
the NBPF1 gene to an NBPF gene cluster on chromosome 1p36. Genomic
sequence analysis predicted the presence of NBPF1 pseudogenes on
chromosomes 3p and 5q.

POPULATION GENETICS

By analyzing short-read mapping depth for 159 human genomes, Sudmant et
al. (2010) demonstrated accurate estimation of absolute copy number for
duplications as small as 1.9 kb pairs, ranging from 0 to 48 copies.
Sudmant et al. (2010) identified 4.1 million 'singly unique nucleotide'
positions informative in distinguishing specific copies and used them to
genotype the copy and content of specific paralogs within highly
duplicated gene families. These data identified human-specific
expansions in genes associated with brain development, such as GPRIN2
(611240) and SRGAP2 (606524), which have been implicated in neurite
outgrowth and branching. Also included were the brain-specific HYDIN2
gene (610813), associated with micro- and macrocephaly; DRD5 (126453), a
dopamine D5 receptor; and the GTF2I (601679) transcription factors,
whose deletion has been associated with visual-spatial and sociability
deficits among Williams-Beuren syndrome (194050) patients, among others.
The data of Sudmant et al. (2010) also revealed extensive population
genetic diversity, especially among the genes NPEPPS (606793), UGT2B17
(601903), and NBPF1, as well as LILRA3 (604818), which is the most
highly stratified gene by copy number in the human genome. In addition,
Sudmant et al. (2010) detected signatures consistent with gene
conversion in the human species.

EVOLUTION

Vandepoele et al. (2005) detected orthologs of NBPF family genes in
canine and bovine genomes but not in the genomes of fruit fly, nematode,
mouse, or rat. Duplication of the NBPF genes was found only in primates
and resulted in species-specific arrays of NBPF homologous sequences.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Hattori, A.; Kondo, Y.; Okumura, K.; Ohara,
O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
XIX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which
code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 347-355, 2000.

2. Sudmant, P. H.; Kitzman, J. O.; Antonacci, F.; Alkan, C.; Malig,
M.; Tsalenko, A.; Sampas, N.; Bruhn, L.; Shendure, J.; 1000 Genomes
Project; Eichler, E. E.: Diversity of human copy number variation
and multicopy genes. Science 330: 641-646, 2010.

3. Vandepoele, K.; Van Roy, N.; Staes, K.; Speleman, F.; van Roy,
F.: A novel gene family NBPF: intricate structure generated by gene
duplications during primate evolution. Molec. Biol. Evol. 22: 2265-2274,
2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/23/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/17/2006

EDITED alopez: 11/24/2010
terry: 11/23/2010
carol: 9/22/2009
wwang: 1/31/2007
wwang: 10/20/2006

164014	TITLE *164014 V-REL AVIAN RETICULOENDOTHELIOSIS VIRAL ONCOGENE HOMOLOG A; RELA
;;NUCLEAR FACTOR KAPPA-B, SUBUNIT 3; NFKB3;;
TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR NFKB3;;
NFKB, p65 SUBUNIT;;
NUCLEAR FACTOR OF KAPPA LIGHT CHAIN GENE ENHANCER IN B CELLS 3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NFKB1 (164011) or NFKB2 (164012) is bound to REL (164910), RELA, or RELB
(604758) to form the NFKB complex. The p50 (NFKB1)/p65 (RELA)
heterodimer is the most abundant form of NFKB. The NFKB complex is
inhibited by I-kappa-B proteins (NFKBIA, 164008 or NFKBIB, 604495),
which inactivate NFKB by trapping it in the cytoplasm. Phosphorylation
of serine residues on the I-kappa-B proteins by kinases (IKBKA, 600664,
or IKBKB, 603258) marks them for destruction via the ubiquitination
pathway, thereby allowing activation of the NFKB complex. Activated NFKB
complex translocates into the nucleus and binds DNA at kappa-B-binding
motifs such as 5-prime GGGRNNYYCC 3-prime or 5-prime HGGARNYYCC 3-prime
(where H is A, C, or T; R is an A or G purine; and Y is a C or T
pyrimidine).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Zhong et al. (1998) reported that the transcriptional activity of
NF-kappa-B is stimulated upon phosphorylation of its p65 subunit on
serine-276 by protein kinase A (PKA). The transcriptional coactivator
CBP (600140)/p300 (602700) associates with NF-kappa-B p65 through 2
sites, an N-terminal domain that interacts with the C-terminal region of
unphosphorylated p65, and a second domain that only interacts with p65
phosphorylated on serine-276. Phosphorylation by PKA both weakens the
interaction between the N- and C-terminal regions of p65 and creates an
additional site for interaction with CBP/p300. Therefore, PKA regulates
the transcriptional activity of NF-kappa-B by modulating its interaction
with CBP/p300.

Jacobs and Harrison (1998) and Huxford et al. (1998) determined the
structure of the NFKBIA ankyrin repeat domain, bound to a partially
truncated NFKB heterodimer (p50/p65), by x-ray crystallography at 2.7-
and 2.3-angstrom resolution, respectively. It shows a stack of 6 NFKBIA
ankyrin repeats facing the C-terminal domains of the NFKB rel homology
regions. Contacts occur in discontinuous patches, suggesting a
combinatorial quality for ankyrin repeat specificity. The first 2
repeats cover an alpha helically ordered segment containing the p65
nuclear localization signal. The position of the sixth ankyrin repeat
shows that full-length NFKBIA will occlude the NFKB DNA-binding cleft.
The orientation of NFKBIA in the complex places its N- and C-terminal
regions in appropriate locations for their known regulatory functions.
Baeuerle (1998) discussed the model of interactions between NFKBIA and
NFKB.

GENE FUNCTION

Chen et al. (2001) noted that the events involved in the release of NFKB
from IKBA are relatively well understood, but the regulation of nuclear
forms of NFKB that ensure transient transcriptional responses are less
well delineated. Luciferase reporter analysis showed that treatment with
trichostatin A (TSA), an inhibitor of multiple histone deacetylases
(e.g., HDAC1; 601241), results in prolonged intranuclear expression of
RELA after TNFA (191160) stimulation. Expression of HDAC3 (605166), but
not other HDACs, was found to inhibit kappa-B luciferase activity and
abolish the acetylation of RELA, which is mediated by p300 or CBP but
not PCAF (602303), in the absence of TSA. Coimmunoprecipitation and
mammalian 2-hybrid analyses indicated that RELA and HDAC3 associate
through their N termini. Fluorescence microscopy demonstrated that
coexpression of RELA with HDAC3, but not with HDAC1, results in
cytoplasmic instead of nuclear localization of RELA, and this is
dependent on the expression of exportin-1 (XPO1; 602559). Coexpression
of HDAC3 in the presence of p300 allowed binding of RELA to IKBA,
suggesting that deacetylation of RELA stimulates IKBA binding and the
termination of the NFKB transcriptional response. Fluorescence
microscopy showed that in the presence of HDAC3, RELA expression shifts
to the cytoplasm in wildtype murine embryo fibroblasts but not in
fibroblasts obtained from Ikba -/- mice, indicating that IKBA is
required for the nuclear export of deacetylated RELA. Chen et al. (2001)
concluded that RELA is a nonhistone substrate of HDAC3 and that
IKBA-dependent nuclear export of the HDAC3-deacetylated RELA replenishes
the depleted cytoplasmic pool of latent NFKB-IKBA complexes for
subsequent NFKB responses.

Zhong et al. (2002) demonstrated that transcriptionally inactive nuclear
NFKB in resting cells consists of homodimers of either p65 or p50
complexed with the histone deacetylase HDAC1. Only the p50-HDAC1
complexes bound to DNA and suppressed NFKB-dependent gene expression in
unstimulated cells. Appropriate stimulation caused nuclear localization
of NFKB complexes containing phosphorylated p65 that associated with CBP
and displaced the p50-HDAC1 complexes. These results demonstrated that
phosphorylation of p65 determines whether it associates with either CBP
or HDAC1, ensuring that only p65 entering the nucleus from cytoplasmic
NFKB-IKB complexes can activate transcription.

Because therapeutics inhibiting RAS and NFKB pathways are used to treat
human cancer, experiments assessing the effects of altering these
regulators have been performed in mice. The medical relevance of murine
studies is limited, however, by differences between mouse and human
skin, and by the greater ease of transforming murine cells. To study RAS
and NFKB in a setting more relevant to human tumorigenesis, Dajee et al.
(2003) expressed the active HRAS gly12-to-val mutation (190020.0001),
NFKB p65, and a stable NFKB repressor mutant of IKBA (164008) in human
skin tissue. Although implicated in promoting features of neoplasia in
other settings, coexpression of oncogenic RAS with NFKB subunits failed
to support proliferation. Coexpression of RAS and IKBA produced large
neoplasms with deep invasion through fat into underlying muscle and
fascia, similar to human squamous cell carcinomas (SCC), in 3 weeks.
Dajee et al. (2003) demonstrated that growth arrest triggered by
oncogenic RAS can be bypassed by IKBA-mediated blockade of NFKB and that
RAS opposed the increased susceptibility to apoptosis caused by NFKB
blockade, generating malignant human epidermal tissue resembling SCC.

Smahi et al. (2002) reviewed the NFKB signaling pathway, with emphasis
on its dysregulation in the genetic disorders incontinentia pigmenti
(308300), hypohidrotic/anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (see 305100),
anhidrotic ectodermal dysplasia with immunodeficiency (EDA-ID; 300291),
and EDA-ID with osteopetrosis and lymphoedema (300301).

In rat sciatic nerves, Nickols et al. (2003) found that expression of
the activated p65 subunit of NFKB was high in the nuclei of
premyelinating Schwann cells and then progressively declined until it
was nearly absent in adults. NFKB expression preceded and was necessary
for the upregulation of the transcription factor Oct6 (POU3F1; 602479),
which has been shown to play a role in the differentiation of promyelin
cells to myelinating cells. The authors concluded that NFKB is upstream
of Oct6 induction and is also required for the formation of peripheral
myelin.

Using cDNA microarray and in vitro analyses, Kelly et al. (2004) found
that the commensal bacterium Bacteroides thetaioatomicron attenuated
inflammatory responses, notably IL8 (146930) production, in intestinal
cell lines exposed to pathogenic Salmonella enteritidis and a number of
other inflammatory mediators. The commensal organism induced CRM1
(XPO1)-independent nuclear export, rather than import only, of the NFKB
subunit RELA, with an eventual predominance of RELA cytoplasmic
distribution after the peak of RELA induction by IL1A (147760) and IL1B
(147720). RELA nucleocytoplasmic redistribution coincided with export of
PPARG (601487), and immunoprecipitation analysis indicated that
PPARG-RELA association was dependent on the PPARG C-terminal
ligand-binding domain. Kelly et al. (2004) concluded that at least some
commensal bacteria contribute to immune homeostasis through an
antiinflammatory mechanism involving PPARG and NFKB.

Mazzeo et al. (2004) found positive immunostaining for activated p65
NFKB in nerve biopsies from 5 patients with chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP; see 139393), 5 with familial
amyloidotic polyneuropathy (FAP; see 176300), and 3 with vasculitis.
Mild to moderate staining was detected in 2 to 15% of epineurial and
endoneurial vessel walls, 5 to 10% of outer layers of myelin sheaths,
and in amyloid deposits of FAP. There was an association between NFKB
staining and localization of the terminal membrane attack complex (MAC)
of the complement system. No staining was seen in 3 control specimens.
Mazzeo et al. (2004) suggested a role for NFKB in inflammatory
conditions of the peripheral nervous system.

Signaling by the transcription factor NFKB involves its release from IKB
in the cytosol, followed by translocation into the nucleus. NFKB
regulation of I-kappa-B-alpha transcription represents a delayed
negative feedback loop that drives oscillations in NFKB translocation.
Nelson et al. (2004) reported that single-cell time-lapse imaging and
computational modeling of NFKB localization showed asynchronous
oscillations following cell stimulation that decreased in frequency with
increased I-kappa-B-alpha transcription. Transcription of target genes
depended on oscillation persistence, involving cycles of NFKB
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. Nelson et al. (2004) concluded
that the functional consequences of NFKB signaling may thus depend on
number, period, and amplitude of oscillations.

Barken et al. (2005) commented on the paper by Nelson et al. (2004),
suggesting that altering expression levels of fluorescently-tagged
signal proteins can severely affect the dynamic behavior of the
signaling pathway under study and cautioning against equating the
signaling behavior of genetically engineered cells with that of normal
cells. In response to the comment by Barken et al. (2005), Nelson et al.
(2005) stated that their experimental data showed no correlation between
NF-kappa-B (RelA) expression level and oscillation dynamics. Nelson et
al. (2005) showed that a small change to the computational model used by
Barken et al. (2005) to generate their theoretical data reduced the
apparent discrepancies. Cell system differences and possible
compensatory changes to normal signaling in their genetically knockout
cells may explain differences between the 2 studies.

Liu et al. (2006) showed that preexisting nuclear RELA positively
regulates ultraviolet (UV) irradiation-induced activation of JNK (MAPK8;
601158). In UV-irradiated mouse fibroblasts, they found that Pkc-delta
(176977) was required for Rela to activate Jnk, thereby contributing to
UV-induced apoptosis.

By genomewide mapping of RELA-bound loci in lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-stimulated monocytes, together with global gene expression
profiling, Lim et al. (2007) identified an overrepresentation of the
E2F1 (189971)-binding motif among RELA-bound loci associated with NFKB
target genes. Knockdown of endogenous E2F1 impaired the LPS inducibility
of the proinflammatory cytokines CCL3 (182283), IL23A (605580), TNF, and
IL1B. Sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation and coimmunoprecipitation
analysis showed that E2F1 existed as a complex with p50/RELA in
LPS-stimulated monocytes. Lim et al. (2007) concluded that NFKB recruits
E2F1 to positively regulate a spectrum of NFKB target genes.

Using knockdown, transfection, and protein interaction experiments with
human cell lines and mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Mao et al. (2009)
showed that a complex of COMMD1 (607238), GCN5 (KAT2A; 602301), and CUL2
(603135) mediated ubiquitination of RELA, an event required for proper
termination of RELA-promoter interactions. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments showed that COMMD1 or GCN5 deficiency prolonged promoter
occupancy by RELA. IKK-dependent phosphorylation of RELA on ser468
enhanced binding of GCN5 to RELA and RELA ubiquitination.

GENE STRUCTURE

Deloukas and van Loon (1993) determined the complete genomic structure
of the human gene and a partial structure of the mouse gene encoding
p65. The human gene consists of 10 exons and spans about 8.1 kb of DNA.
A surprisingly high degree of conservation of intronic sequences was
observed between the species. Variants generated by alternative splicing
of intron 6 were observed in both species and the existence of another
as yet unknown splice variant of p65 was predicted.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), Mathew et al. (1993)
demonstrated that the NFKB3 gene is located on 11q13. Using a YAC
containing the entire NFKB3 gene and FISH, Deloukas et al. (1994) found
2 sites of hybridization, 11q12 and Xp11.4, for sequences present in the
YAC. The NFKB3 gene was assigned to 11q12 by PCR analysis of a panel of
relevant hybrid cell lines.

ANIMAL MODEL

Beg et al. (1995) made a transgenic knockout mouse line for RelA and
showed that loss of the protein led to embryonic lethality at 15-16 days
of gestation as a result of massive degeneration of the liver due to
apoptosis.

Neurath et al. (1996) reported direct evidence for the involvement of
p65 in chronic intestinal inflammation induced in mice and suggested a
potential molecular therapeutic approach to the treatment of patients
with Crohn disease (see 266600) using p65 antisense oligonucleotides.

In order to study the effect of Rela deficiency on mouse skin, Zhang et
al. (2004) harvested Rela -/- embryo skin prior to embryonic lethality
around embryonic day 15.5 and grafted it onto immune-deficient mice.
Histologic examination revealed that Rela deficiency led to epidermal
hyperplasia and moderately increased cell size. The granular and
cornified layers appeared normal, and there was no inflammatory cell
infiltration. Rela -/- keratinocytes exhibited enhanced proliferation in
culture. Tnfr1 (191190)-dependent Jnk (601158) activation occurred in
Rela -/- epidermis, and Jnk inhibition abolished hyperproliferation due
to Rela deficiency. Furthermore, the hyperproliferation of
Rela-deficient skin was completely reversed in Rela-Tnfr1
double-knockout skin. Zhang et al. (2004) concluded that RELA
antagonizes TNFR1-JNK proliferative signals in epidermis and plays a
nonredundant role in restraining epidermal growth.

Gugasyan et al. (2004) found that mutant mice lacking both c-rel and
RelA displayed multiple epidermal defects, including thin epidermis and
failure to form tylotrich hair. Although mutant keratinocytes underwent
terminal differentiation, mutant basal keratinocytes were abnormally
small, showed growth delay, and failed to form colonies in culture. The
findings indicated that c-rel and RelA regulate skin development in a
redundant manner and that both are required for normal epidermal
development in mice.

REFERENCE 1. Baeuerle, P. A.: I-kappa-B--NF-kappa-B structures: at the interface
of inflammation control. Cell 95: 729-731, 1998.

2. Barken, D.; Wang, C. J.; Kearns, J.; Cheong, R.; Hoffmann, A.;
Levchencko, A.: Comment on 'Oscillations in NF-kappa-B signaling
control the dynamics of gene expression.' (Commentary) Science 308:
52 only, 2005.

3. Beg, A. A.; Sha, W. C.; Bronson, R. T.; Ghosh, S.; Baltimore, D.
: Embryonic lethality and liver degeneration in mice lacking the RelA
component of NF-kappa B. Nature 376: 167-170, 1995.

4. Chen, L.; Fischle, W.; Verdin, E.; Greene, W. C.: Duration of
nuclear NF-kappa-B action regulated by reversible acetylation. Science 293:
1653-1657, 2001.

5. Dajee, M.; Lazarov, M.; Zhang, J. Y.; Cai, T.; Green, C. L.; Russell,
A. J.; Marinkovich, M. P.; Tao, S.; Lin, Q.; Kubo, Y.; Khavari, P.
A.: NF-kappa-B blockade and oncogenic Ras trigger invasive human
epidermal neoplasia. Nature 421: 639-643, 2003.

6. Deloukas, P.; Dauwerse, J. G.; van Ommen, G. J. B.; van Loon, A.
P. G. M.: The human NFKB3 gene encoding the p65 subunit of transcription
factor NF-kappa-B is located on chromosome 11q12. Genomics 19: 592-594,
1994.

7. Deloukas, P.; van Loon, A. P. G. M.: Genomic organization of the
gene encoding the p65 subunit of NF-kappa-B: multiple variants of
the p65 protein may be generated by alternative splicing. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 2: 1895-1900, 1993.

8. Gugasyan, R.; Voss, A.; Varigos, G.; Thomas, T.; Grumont, R. J.;
Kaur, P.; Grigoriadis, G.; Gerondakis, S.: The transcription factors
c-rel and RelA control epidermal development and homeostasis in embryonic
and adult skin via distinct mechanisms. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24: 5733-5745,
2004.

9. Huxford, T.; Huang, D.-B.; Malek, S.; Ghosh, G.: The crystal structure
of the I-kappa-B-alpha/NF-kappa-B complex reveals mechanisms of NF-kappa-B
inactivation. Cell 95: 759-770, 1998.

10. Jacobs, M. D.; Harrison, S. C.: Structure of an I-kappa-B-alpha/NF-kappa-B
complex. Cell 95: 749-758, 1998.

11. Kelly, D.; Campbell, J. I.; King, T. P.; Grant, G.; Jansson, E.
A.; Coutts, A. G. P.; Pettersson, S.; Conway, S.: Commensal anaerobic
gut bacteria attenuate inflammation by regulating nuclear-cytoplasmic
shuttling of PPAR-gamma and RelA. Nature Immun. 5: 104-112, 2004.

12. Lim, C.-A.; Yao, F.; Wong, J. J.-Y.; George, J.; Xu, H.; Chiu,
K. P.; Sung, W.-K.; Lipovich, L.; Vega, V. B.; Chen, J.; Shahab, A.;
Zhao, X. D.; Hibberd, M.; Wei, C.-L.; Lim, B.; Ng, H.-H.; Ruan, Y.;
Chin, K.-C.: Genome-wide mapping of RELA(p65) binding identifies
E2F1 as a transcriptional activator recruited by NF-kappa-B upon TLR4
activation. Molec. Cell 27: 622-635, 2007.

13. Liu, J.; Yang, D.; Minemoto, Y.; Leitges, M.; Rosner, M. R.; Lin,
A.: NF-kappa-B is required for UV-induced JNK activation via induction
of PKC-delta. Molec. Cell 21: 467-480, 2006.

14. Mao, X.; Gluck, N.; Li, D.; Maine, G. N.; Li, H.; Zaidi, I. W.;
Repaka, A.; Mayo, M. W.; Burstein, E.: GCN5 is a required cofactor
for a ubiquitin ligase that targets NF-kappa-B/RelA. Genes Dev. 23:
849-861, 2009.

15. Mathew, S.; Murty, V. V. V. S.; Dalla-Favera, R.; Chaganti, R.
S. K.: Chromosomal localization of genes encoding the transcription
factors, c-rel, NF-kappa-Bp50, NF-kappa-Bp65, and lyt-10 by fluorescence
in situ hybridization. Oncogene 8: 191-193, 1993.

16. Mazzeo, A.; Aguennouz, M.; Messina, C.; Vita, G.: Immunolocalization
and activation of transcription factor nuclear factor kappa-B in dysimmune
neuropathies and familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy. Arch. Neurol. 61:
1097-1102, 2004.

17. Nelson, D. E.; Horton, C. A.; See, V.; Johnson, J. R.; Nelson,
G.; Spiller, D. G.; Bell, D. B.; White, M. R. H.: Response to comment
on 'Oscillations in NF-kappa-B signaling control the dynamics of gene
expression.' (Commentary) Science 308: 52 only, 2005.

18. Nelson, D. E.; Ihekwaba, A. E. C.; Elliott, M.; Johnson, J. R.;
Gibney, C. A.; Foreman, B. E.; Nelson, G.; See, V.; Horton, C. A.;
Spiller, D. G.; Edwards, S. W.; McDowell, H. P.; Unitt, J. F.; Sullivan,
E.; Grimley, R.; Benson, N.; Broomhead, D.; Kell, D. B.; White, M.
R. H.: Oscillations in NF-kappa-B signaling control the dynamics
of gene expression. Science 306: 704-708, 2004.

19. Neurath, M. F.; Pettersson, S.; Myer zum Buschenfelde, K.-H.;
Strober, W.: Local administration of antisense phosphorothioate oligonucleotides
to the p65 subunit of NF-kappa-B abrogates established experimental
colitis in mice. Nature Med. 2: 998-1004, 1996.

20. Nickols, J. C.; Valentine, W.; Kanwal, S.; Carter, B. D.: Activation
of the transcription factor NF-kappa-B in Schwann cells is required
for peripheral myelin formation. Nature Neurosci. 6: 161-167, 2003.

21. Smahi, A.; Courtois, G.; Rabia, S. H.; Doffinger, R.; Bodemer,
C.; Munnich, A.; Casanova, J.-L.; Israel, A.: The NF-kappa-B signalling
pathway in human diseases: from incontinentia pigmenti to ectodermal
dysplasias and immune-deficiency syndromes. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11:
2371-2375, 2002.

22. Zhang, J. Y.; Green, C. L.; Tao, S.; Khavari, P. A.: NF-kappa-B
RelA opposes epidermal proliferation driven by TNFR1 and JNK. Genes
Dev. 18: 17-22, 2004. Note: Erratum: Genes Dev. 18: 461 only, 2004.

23. Zhong, H.; May, M. J.; Jimi, E.; Ghosh, S.: The phosphorylation
status of nuclear NF-kappa-B determines its association with CBP/p300
or HDAC-1. Molec. Cell 9: 625-636, 2002.

24. Zhong, H.; Voll, R. E.; Ghosh, S.: Phosphorylation of NF-kappa
B by PKA stimulates transcriptional activity by promoting a novel
bivalent interaction with the coactivator CBP/p300. Molec. Cell 1:
661-671, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/28/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/13/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/2/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/30/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/16/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/2/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/5/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/4/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/3/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/5/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/4/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/23/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/6/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/15/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 12/22/1998
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/21/1998
Alan F. Scott - updated: 8/5/1997
Moyra Smith - updated: 8/30/1996
Alan F. Scott - updated: 1/5/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/27/1993

EDITED terry: 08/17/2012
carol: 2/9/2011
mgross: 9/16/2009
terry: 8/28/2009
carol: 10/24/2008
wwang: 5/16/2008
ckniffin: 3/13/2008
mgross: 10/2/2007
wwang: 12/20/2006
wwang: 3/30/2006
alopez: 9/19/2005
terry: 9/16/2005
tkritzer: 6/3/2005
terry: 6/2/2005
ckniffin: 12/15/2004
mgross: 5/5/2004
mgross: 3/11/2004
terry: 3/4/2004
mgross: 12/3/2003
carol: 3/10/2003
ckniffin: 3/5/2003
alopez: 2/5/2003
terry: 2/4/2003
mgross: 9/23/2002
mgross: 9/6/2001
alopez: 4/14/2000
carol: 2/15/2000
alopez: 2/8/2000
carol: 12/22/1998
alopez: 11/5/1998
carol: 9/21/1998
terry: 8/5/1997
mark: 3/11/1997
terry: 9/4/1996
mark: 8/30/1996
mark: 4/22/1996
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 1/5/1996
terry: 12/13/1995
carol: 3/31/1994
carol: 12/10/1993
carol: 4/27/1993

610447	TITLE *610447 SHADOW OF PRION PROTEIN; SPRN
;;SHADOO;;
SHO
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By EST database searching for zebrafish prion protein (PrP; 176640)
homologs, Premzl et al. (2003) identified, and subsequently cloned, a
novel zebrafish cDNA, SPRN (shadow of PrP), encoding a protein
designated shadoo (Sho). Further database searches revealed
well-conserved orthologs in other fish (Fugu and tetraodon) and in
mammals (human, mouse, and rat) (Premzl et al., 2003, 2004). The deduced
human protein contains 151 amino acids (Premzl et al., 2003). The
mammalian proteins share 81 to 95% sequence identity. Alignment of all
fish and mammalian Sho proteins showed that all have an N-terminal
peptide sequence with an endoplasmic reticulum targeting signal for
extracellular transport, a basic RG-rich region, a hydrophobic stretch
in the middle of the protein that contains the same unusual composition
of small aliphatic residues (GAV) as PrP and PrP-like proteins, and a
C-terminal region with a putative N-glycosylation site and a possible
GPI anchor site (Premzl et al., 2003, 2004). Database searches revealed
that SPRN is expressed in mouse and rat embryo, brain, and retina, in
human hippocampus, and in zebrafish embryo and retina. Using RT-PCR,
Premzl et al. (2003) confirmed SPRN expression in human, rat, and mouse
brain. RT-PCR of rat cDNA from multiple tissues indicated that SPRN is
almost exclusively expressed in brain, with faint expression in lung and
stomach. Phylogenetic footprinting on aligned human, mouse, and Fugu
SPRN genes detected 16 conserved motifs, 3 of which are known
transcription factor-binding sites for a receptor and transcription
factors specific to or associated with expression in the brain (Premzl
et al., 2004), suggesting an important function in this tissue.

EVOLUTION

Premzl et al. (2003, 2004) found that conservation of the SPRN-coding
exon between mammals and fish satisfied the criteria for gene orthology.
They noted that the gene order and orientation of SPRN and 2 proximal
genes, an amine oxidase and a GTP-binding protein (MTG1), indicated that
no rearrangement occurred in this genomic fragment after the
evolutionary divergence of mammals and fish 450 million years ago.

Premzl et al. (2004) found that the gene density and GC content are much
higher in the SPRN genomic environment than in the PRNP (PrP)
environment. In addition, in contrast to genes encoding members of the
PrP family, SPRN contains no transposable elements. Premzl et al. (2004)
suggested that this may be the result of functional selection.

GENE STRUCTURE

Premzl et al. (2003) determined that the zebrafish, mouse, and human
SPRN genes all contain 2 exons, with the ORF contained entirely within
exon 2.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Premzl et al. (2003) mapped the human SPRN gene to
chromosome 10q26.3 and the mouse gene to chromosome 7. Premzl et al.
(2004) found an apparent duplication of the human SPRN gene about 140 kb
downstream of SPRN.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Beck et al. (2008) presented evidence that variation in the SPRN gene
may be associated with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD; 123400). Two of
107 patients with variant CJD were found to have a 1-bp insertion in the
SPRN gene, which was not identified in 861 controls (p = 0.01). The 1-bp
insertion in codon 46 was predicted to result in frameshift and a
putative 294-amino acid protein if translation occurred; however, the
authors were unable to show whether the transcript exists. In addition,
2 linked SNPs, -11A-G and 20T-C, in the SPRN gene were associated with
risk of sporadic CJD (p = 0.009). The findings supported the hypothesis
that SPRN variants may be involved in prion disease.

REFERENCE 1. Beck, J. A.; Campbell, T. A.; Adamson, G.; Poulter, M.; Uphill,
J. B.; Molou, E.; Collinge, J.; Mead, S.: Association of a null allele
of SPRN with variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. J. Med. Genet. 45:
813-817, 2008.

2. Premzl, M.; Gready, J. E.; Jermiin, L. S.; Simonic, T.; Marshall
Graves, J. A.: Evolution of vertebrate genes related to prion and
Shadoo proteins--clues from comparative genomic analysis. Molec.
Biol. Evol. 21: 2210-2231, 2004.

3. Premzl, M.; Sangiorgio, L.; Strumbo, B.; Marshall Graves, J. A.;
Simonic, T.; Gready, J. E.: Shadoo, a new protein highly conserved
from fish to mammals and with similarity to prion protein. Gene 314:
89-102, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/11/2009

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 9/27/2006

EDITED wwang: 04/06/2009
ckniffin: 2/11/2009
carol: 9/27/2006

602204	TITLE *602204 BICAUDAL D, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 1; BICD1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

From the early part of the 20th century, embryologists recognized that
the cytoplasmic asymmetry established in the egg during oogenesis
directs the proper spatial development of the embryo. Development of
this polarity in the Drosophila oocyte depends also on the correct
sorting of maternal RNAs. Bicaudal D is a Drosophila protein that is
involved in establishing the asymmetric cytoplasm in the developing
oocyte. The gene encodes a cytoskeleton-like coiled-coil polypeptide,
with a leucine zipper and 5 alpha-helix domains or heptad repeats
showing sequence similarity to the tail domains of myosin heavy chains
(e.g., 160730), the microtubule motor kinesin (see 600025), and
intermediate filament proteins. Baens et al. (1995) isolated a cDNA
fragment homologous to bicaudal D using a hybridization selection
procedure with cosmids derived from 12p. A PCR-mediated cDNA cloning
strategy was applied by Baens and Marynen (1997) to obtain the coding
sequence of the human homolog (BICD1) and to generate a partial mouse
gene cDNA. They found that predicted amino acid sequence similarity of
the BICD1 cDNA was limited essentially to the amphipatic helices and the
leucine zipper, but the conserved order of these domains suggested a
function of the protein in mammals similar to that in Drosophila. A
database search further indicated the existence of a second human
homolog on 9q and a Caenorhabditis elegans homolog. Northern blot
analysis indicated that both the human and the murine homologs produce
an mRNA species of approximately 9.5 kb expressed in brain, heart, and
skeletal muscle, as well as during mouse embryonic development. The
conserved structural characteristics of BICD1 protein and its expression
in muscle and especially brain suggested to Baens and Marynen (1997)
that BICD1 is a component of a cytoskeleton-based mRNA sorting mechanism
conserved during evolution.

GENE FUNCTION

Bullock and Ish-Horowicz (2001) demonstrated in Drosophila that the same
machinery and RNA signals drive specific accumulation of maternal RNAs
in the early oocyte and apical transcript localization in blastoderm
embryos. They demonstrated in vivo that Egalitarian (Egl) and bicaudal D
(BicD), maternal proteins required for oocyte determination, are
selectively recruited by, and cotransported with, localizing transcripts
in blastoderm embryos, and that interfering with the activities of Egl
and BICD blocks apical localization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of a possible association between genetic variation in
the BICD1 gene and leukocyte telomere length in humans, see 609113.

REFERENCE 1. Baens, M.; Aerssens, J.; van Zand, K.; Van den Berghe, H.; Marynen,
P.: Isolation and regional assignment of human chromosome 12p cDNAs. Genomics 29:
44-52, 1995.

2. Baens, M.; Marynen, P.: A human homologue (BICD1) of the Drosophila
bicaudal-D gene. Genomics 45: 601-606, 1997.

3. Bullock, S. L.; Ish-Horowicz, D.: Conserved signals and machinery
for RNA transport in Drosophila oogenesis and embryogenesis. Nature 414:
611-616, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/9/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/18/1997

EDITED wwang: 10/30/2009
ckniffin: 8/27/2009
wwang: 7/29/2009
mgross: 12/15/2005
alopez: 1/10/2002
terry: 1/9/2002
dholmes: 1/12/1998
terry: 12/29/1997
mark: 12/18/1997

120580	TITLE *120580 COMPLEMENT COMPONENT 1, s SUBCOMPONENT; C1S
;;COMPLEMENT COMPONENT C1s
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

MacKinnon et al. (1987) derived the complete amino acid sequence of C1s
from molecular cloning of cDNA. Tosi et al. (1987) presented the
complete cDNA sequence of C1s. Kusumoto et al. (1988) found that the
amino acid sequence of C1s was 40.5% identical to that of C1r (216950),
with excellent matches of tentative disulfide bond locations conserving
the overall domain structure of C1r.

MAPPING

By means of a cDNA in somatic cell hybrids, Cohen-Haguenauer et al.
(1986) assigned the C1S and C1R (216950) genes to chromosome 12.

Leppert et al. (1987) found a maximum lod score of 5.99 at theta = 0.038
for linkage between C1S and one of the PRP loci (see 168710); the
maximum lod score between C1R and another PRP locus was 4.21 at theta =
0.001. Although C1r and C1s are structurally and functionally similar,
with a significant degree of sequence homology suggesting origin by gene
duplication, cDNA probes for human C1r and C1s do not cross-hybridize
even at mild stringency conditions and are therefore gene-specific.

Using a panel of human-rodent cell hybrids, Van Cong et al. (1988)
independently assigned the C1r and C1s genes to chromosome 12. In situ
hybridization confirmed these assignments and localized the genes to
12p13.

By hybridization of C1r and C1s probes to restriction endonuclease
fragments of genomic DNA, Tosi et al. (1987) demonstrated close physical
linkage of the genes. This finding was consistent with their evolution
through tandem gene duplication and was also consistent with the
previously observed combined hereditary deficiencies of C1r and C1s (see
216950). Their coordinate expression may depend on the close linkage.
The 2 genes lie in a DNA stretch not longer than 50 kb.

By DNA blotting and sequencing analyses of genomic DNA and of an
isolated genomic DNA clone, Kusumoto et al. (1988) showed that the C1r
and C1s genes are closely located in a 'tail-to-tail' arrangement at a
distance of about 9.5 kb.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Inoue et al. (1998) reported a patient with selective C1s deficiency
(613783) resulting from a homozygous mutation in the C1S gene
(120580.0001).

In a 27-month-old girl with multiple autoimmune diseases, Dragon-Durey
et al. (2001) detected selective C1S deficiency (613783) resulting from
a homozygous nonsense mutation in exon 12 of the C1S gene (120580.0002).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
C1s DEFICIENCY
C1S, 4-BP DEL, NT1087

In a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus-like syndrome and chronic
glomerulonephritis, Inoue et al. (1998) reported the molecular basis of
selective C1s deficiency (613783). No C1s protein was detectable by
immunoblot. By Northern blot and RT-PCR analysis, C1s mRNA was of
appropriate size, but only 10% of the level detected in HCS2/8, a human
chondrosarcoma cell line. Levels of beta-actin and C1r mRNA were similar
to levels detected in HCS2/8. The patient was homozygous for a 4-bp
deletion in exon 10 of the C1S gene, 1087-1090delTTTG. This deletion
resulted in a premature termination codon 94 bp downstream.

.0002
C1s DEFICIENCY
C1S, ARG534TER

In a 27-month-old girl with multiple autoimmune diseases, Dragon-Durey
et al. (2001) determined that an absence of plasma C1s (613783)
accounted for a lack of classic complement (CH50) pathway activity.
Microsatellite and sequence analyses revealed a C-to-T transition in
codon 534 in exon 12 of the C1S gene, resulting in an arg-to-ter
substitution and premature termination. DNA analysis indicated that both
parents were heterozygous for the mutation. Restriction enzyme analysis
showed that the propositus was homozygous for the mutation, while a
paternal grandmother, maternal grandfather, and aunts on both sides of
the family were heterozygous. The mutation was not detected in systemic
lupus erythematosus (152700) patients or unrelated Caucasian controls,
including some from the same geographic region. At age 5, the child was
alive and well while receiving immunosuppressive drugs daily and
penicillin.

REFERENCE 1. Cohen-Haguenauer, O.; Serero, S.; Tosi, M.; Van Cong, N.; Stubnicer,
A.-C.; de Tand, M.-F.; Meo, T.; Frezal, J.: Chromosomal assignment
of human C1R, C1S genes on chromosome 12 and C1 inhibitor gene on
chromosome 11. (Abstract) 7th Int. Cong. Hum. Genet., Berlin 617
only, 1986.

2. Dragon-Durey, M.-A.; Quartier, P.; Fremeaux-Bacchi, V.; Blouin,
J.; de Barace, C.; Prieur, A.-M.; Weiss, L.; Fridman, W.-H.: Molecular
basis of a selective C1s deficiency associated with early onset multiple
autoimmune diseases. J. Immun. 166: 7612-7616, 2001.

3. Inoue, N.; Saito, T.; Masuda, R.; Suzuki, Y.; Ohtomi, M.; Sakiyama,
H.: Selective complement C1s deficiency caused by homozygous four-base
deletion in the C1s gene. Hum. Genet. 103: 415-418, 1998.

4. Kusumoto, H.; Hirosawa, S.; Salier, J. P.; Hagen, F. S.; Kurachi,
K.: Human genes for complement components C1r and C1s in a close
tail-to-tail arrangement. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 7307-7311, 1988.

5. Leppert, M.; Ferrell, R.; Kamboh, M. I.; Beasley, J.; O'Connell,
P.; Lathrop, M.; Lalouel, J. M.; White, R.: Linkage of the polymorphic
protein markers F13B, C1S, C1R, and blood group antigen Kidd in CEPH
reference families. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46: 647 only,
1987.

6. MacKinnon, C. M.; Carter, P. E.; Smyth, S. J.; Dunbar, B.; Fothergill,
J. E.: Molecular cloning of cDNA for human complement component C1s:
the complete amino acid sequence. Europ. J. Biochem. 169: 547-553,
1987.

7. Tosi, M.; Duponchel, C.; Meo, T.; Julier, C.: Complete cDNA sequence
of human complement C1s and close physical linkage of the homologous
genes C1s and C1r. Biochemistry 26: 8516-8524, 1987.

8. Van Cong, N.; Tosi, M.; Gross, M. S.; Cohen-Haguenauer, O.; Jegou-Foubert,
C.; de Tand, M. F.; Meo, T.; Frezal, J.: Assignment of the complement
serine protease genes C1r and C1s to chromosome 12 region 12p13. Hum.
Genet. 78: 363-368, 1988.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/17/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/9/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/16/1986

EDITED carol: 03/03/2011
carol: 3/2/2011
carol: 3/1/2011
joanna: 3/17/2004
mgross: 10/17/2001
alopez: 3/12/1999
alopez: 3/9/1999
dkim: 6/30/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989
root: 10/17/1988
root: 10/12/1988
root: 4/29/1988

604641	TITLE *604641 MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE 8-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; MAPK8IP1
;;JNK-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; JIP1;;
ISLET-BRAIN 1; IB1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Islet-brain-1 (IB1), a regulator of pancreatic beta-cell function in
rat, is homologous to Jip1, a murine inhibitor of c-Jun N-terminal
kinase (JNK; 601158). Mooser et al. (1999) reported the sequence of the
2,133-bp human IB1 cDNA, the expression, structure, and fine mapping of
the human IB1 gene, and the characterization of an IB1 pseudogene. The
human IB1 amino acid sequence is 94% identical to that of rat Ib1. The
tissue-specific expression of IB1 in human is similar to that observed
in rodent.

By mRNA dot blot analysis, Yasuda et al. (1999) found that JIP1 was
ubiquitously expressed, with highest levels in whole brain and in all
individual brain regions examined.

Whitmarsh et al. (2001) noted that there is a splice variant of mouse
Jip1 that encodes a protein lacking 47 amino acids in the C-terminal
region compared with full-length Jip1. Using immunofluorescence analysis
of primary mouse cortical neural cultures, Whitmarsh et al. (2001) found
high Jip1 expression at the tips of extended neurites, with diffuse
staining in the cytoplasm, including soma and extended neurites.

GENE FUNCTION

Using coimmunoprecipitation assays, Yasuda et al. (1999) showed that the
mammalian scaffold proteins JIP1 and JIP2 (607755) interacted to form
oligomeric complexes, and they both coimmunoprecipitated with DLK
(600447), MLK2 (600137), MLK3 (600050), MKK7 (603014), and JNK. The
C-terminal portions of JIP1 and JIP2 were sufficient for interaction
with MLK3 and MKK7, and the N-terminal portions interacted with JNK. Ten
different JNK isoforms bound both JIP proteins, although binding
affinities differed between them. Double-label immunofluorescence
analysis indicated that endogenous rat Jip1 and Jip2 colocalized in
peripheral cytoplasmic projections extended at the cell surface of rat
insulinoma cells. Yasuda et al. (1999) concluded that the JIP proteins
function by aggregating components of a MAP kinase module, including
MLK, MKK7, and JNK, and facilitate signal transmission by the protein
kinase cascade.

Human islet-brain-1, a DNA-binding transactivator of the glucose
transporter GLUT2 (SLC2A2; 138160), is encoded by the MAPK8IP1 gene.
Waeber et al. (2000) evaluated the role of IB1 in beta cells by
expression of an MAPK8IP1 antisense RNA in a stable insulinoma beta-cell
line. A 38% decrease in IB1 protein content resulted in a 49% and a 41%
reduction in SLC2A2 and insulin (INS; 176730) mRNA expression,
respectively. In addition, they detected MAPK8IP1 transcripts and IB1
protein in human pancreatic islets.

Bonny et al. (2000) found high expression of Ib1 in insulin-secreting
cell lines of mouse and rat origin. Activation of Jnk, by
interleukin-1-beta (IL1B; 147720) or through an upstream Jnk activator,
reduced Ib1 content by 50 to 60%. Reduced Ib1 levels led to reduced
c-Jun (165160) phosphorylation and increased the apoptotic response to
Il1b. Overexpression of Ib1 protected pancreatic B-cell lines against
Jnk-mediated proapoptotic stimuli.

Abderrahmani et al. (2001) identified a neuron-restrictive silencer
element (NRSE) in the promoter region of MAPK8IP1 and demonstrated that
it was bound by REST (600571), a zinc finger transcriptional repressor
widely expressed in all tissues except pancreas and neuronal tissues. By
analysis of cell lines of varied tissue origin, they determined that IB1
transcript was expressed by insulin-secreting and neuron-like cell
lines, but not by cell lines that expressed the REST transcript.
Transfection and expression of REST in a B-cell line repressed IB1
transcription, and, conversely, introduction of a mutated NRSE into the
IB1 promoter allowed IB1 expression in non-B-cell and nonneuronal cell
lines. Abderrahmani et al. (2001) also found that REST-mediated
repression was dependent on histone deacetylase (see 601241) activity.

Using immunoprecipitation analysis, Whitmarsh et al. (2001) found that
Jip1 interacted with endogenous kinesin light chain (see 600025) in
mouse brain extracts. In cultured hippocampal neurons, Jip1 localized in
a punctate pattern to neurites. However, following stress induced by
oxygen and glucose deprivation, Jip1 accumulated in the perinuclear
region with activated Jnk and phosphorylated Jun.

Taru et al. (2002) reported that the C-terminal phosphotyrosine
interaction domain of JIP1 interacted with the GYENPTY motif within the
cytoplasmic domain of APP (104760). They found that a specific splice
variant of JIP1, designated JIP1B, modulated the processing of APP in an
interaction-dependent manner following coexpression in mouse
neuroblastoma cells. JIP1B expression stabilized immature APP and
suppressed secretion of the large extracellular N-terminal domain of
APP, release of the intracellular C-terminal fragment, and secretion of
beta amyloid peptides 40 and 42. These effects required the
phosphotyrosine interaction domain of JIP1B, but not the JNK-binding
domain, indicating that modulation of APP metabolism was independent of
the JNK signaling cascade.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mooser et al. (1999) determined that the IB1 gene contains 12 exons.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization and radiation hybrid analysis,
Mooser et al. (1999) mapped the MAPK8IP1 gene to 11p12-p11.2, a region
that is deleted in the Potocki-Shaffer syndrome (601224), a rare
contiguous gene syndrome caused by microdeletion.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Waeber et al. (2000) investigated MAPK8IP1 as a candidate gene for human
diabetes. Although sib-pair analyses performed on 149 multiplex French
families with type II diabetes excluded MAPK8IP1 as a major diabetogenic
locus, 1 family was found to have a missense mutation (ser59 to asn;
604641.0001) that segregated with diabetes. The mutation was associated
in vitro with an inability of IB1 to prevent apoptosis induced by
MAP/ERK kinase kinase-1 (MEKK1; 600982) and a reduced ability to
counteract the inhibitory action of the activated JNK pathway on insulin
transcriptional activity. Identification of this novel
non-maturity-onset diabetes of the young (non-MODY) form of diabetes
demonstrated that IB1 is a key regulator of beta-cell function.

ANIMAL MODEL

Thompson et al. (2001) found that targeted disruption of the Mapk8ip1
gene in mice resulted in embryonic death prior to blastocyst
implantation. In culture, no null embryos were identified, indicating
that cell death occurred during the first cell cycle. Analysis of
protein and mRNA expression in wildtype gametes and embryos revealed
Mapk8ip1 expression in oocytes, spermatozoa, and 2-cell embryos and
blastocysts. In spermatozoa, immunolocalization showed expression
restricted to the tail. No reduction in fertility of the heterozygote
was indicated. From these findings, Thompson et al. (2001) concluded
that continued Mapk8ip1 expression is required for the survival of the
fertilized oocyte.

Whitmarsh et al. (2001) found that Jip1 -/- mice were viable and fertile
and had a normal life span. In wildtype mice, excitotoxic stress caused
marked lesions with apoptotic cells in the CA3 subfield of the
hippocampus. In contrast, Jip1 -/- animals were resistant to this
excitotoxic damage. A similar protective effect of Jip1 deletion was
detected in cultured neurons, where disruption of Jip1 prevented Jnk
activation caused by exposure to excitotoxic stress and anoxic stress
and reduced the apoptotic effects of oxygen and glucose deprivation.

Using mice of a different genetic background than those used by Thompson
et al. (2001), Jaeschke et al. (2004) developed Jip1-null mice that were
viable and fertile. Mutant mice were resistant to diet-induced obesity
and showed reduced diet-induced insulin resistance. Jip1 was required
for obesity-induced Jnk activation in adipose tissue and obesity-induced
phosphorylation if Irs1 (147545) on ser307.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DIABETES MELLITUS, NONINSULIN-DEPENDENT
MAPK8IP1, SER59ASN

In a family with type II diabetes (125853) in individuals in 4
successive generations, Waeber et al. (2000) observed a change of codon
59 in exon 2 of the MAPK8IP1 gene from AGC (ser) to AAC (asn). This
serine and the surrounding amino acids are conserved in mouse, rat, and
human. The missense mutation was absent from 119 healthy subjects and
436 unrelated subjects with type 2 diabetes. The mutation segregated
with diabetes, with all 6 affected members of the family available for
study being heterozygous for this mutation. They found 2 nondiabetic
subjects, aged 41 and 44 years, who carried the S59N mutation in this
pedigree, suggesting that the S59N mutation was not fully penetrant.
They also found in some diabetic individuals as well as nondiabetic
members of the family a mutation (gln59 to leu) in the IPF1 gene,
encoding insulin promoter factor-1 (600733.0003). They suggested that
the additional variant in IPF1 may be a genetic modifier for the
diabetic phenotype.

REFERENCE 1. Abderrahmani, A.; Steinmann, M.; Plaisance, V.; Niederhauser, G.;
Haefliger, J.-A.; Mooser, V.; Bonny, C.; Nicod, P.; Waeber, G.: The
transcriptional repressor REST determines the cell-specific expression
of the human MAPK8IP1 gene encoding IB1 (JIP-1). Molec. Cell. Biol. 21:
7256-7627, 2001.

2. Bonny, C.; Oberson, A.; Steinmann, M.; Schorderet, D. F.; Nicod,
P.; Waeber, G.: IB1 reduces cytokine-induced apoptosis of insulin-secreting
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 16466-16472, 2000.

3. Jaeschke, A.; Czech, M. P.; Davis, R. J.: An essential role of
the JIP1 scaffold protein for JNK activation in adipose tissue. Genes
Dev. 18: 1976-1980, 2004.

4. Mooser, V.; Maillard, A.; Bonny, C.; Steinmann, M.; Shaw, P.; Yarnall,
D. P.; Burns, D. K.; Schorderet, D. F.; Nicod, P.; Waeber, G.: Genomic
organization, fine-mapping, and expression of the human islet-brain
1 (IB1)/c-Jun-amino-terminal kinase interacting protein-1 (JIP-1)
gene. Genomics 55: 202-208, 1999.

5. Taru, H.; Kirino, Y.; Suzuki, T.: Differential roles of JIP scaffold
proteins in the modulation of amyloid precursor protein metabolism. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 27567-27574, 2002.

6. Thompson, N. A.; Haefliger, J.-A.; Senn, A.; Tawadros, T.; Magara,
F.; Ledermann, B.; Nicod, P.; Waeber, G.: Islet-brain1/JNK-interacting
protein-1 is required for early embryogenesis in mice. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
27745-27748, 2001.

7. Waeber, G.; Delplanque, J.; Bonny, C.; Mooser, V.; Steinmann, M.;
Widmann, C.; Maillard, A.; Miklossy, J.; Dina, C.; Hani, E. H.; Vionnet,
N.; Nicod, P.; Boutin, P.; Froguel, P.: The gene MAPK8IP1, encoding
islet-brain-1, is a candidate for type 2 diabetes. Nature Genet. 24:
291-295, 2000.

8. Whitmarsh, A. J.; Kuan, C.-Y.; Kennedy, N. J.; Kelkar, N.; Haydar,
T. F.; Mordes, J. P.; Appel, M.; Rossini, A. A.; Jones, S. N.; Flavell,
R. A.; Rakic, P.; Davis, R. J.: Requirement of the JIP1 scaffold
protein for stress-induced JNK activation. Genes Dev. 15: 2421-2432,
2001.

9. Yasuda, J.; Whitmarsh, A. J.; Cavanagh, J.; Sharma, M.; Davis,
R. J.: The JIP group of mitogen-activated protein kinase scaffold
proteins. Molec. Cell. Biol. 19: 7245-7254, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/29/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/10/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/6/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/13/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/1/2000

EDITED mgross: 11/04/2009
terry: 10/29/2009
mgross: 9/10/2004
mgross: 5/6/2003
carol: 6/20/2002
terry: 6/13/2002
carol: 7/10/2000
alopez: 4/3/2000
alopez: 3/1/2000
terry: 3/1/2000
alopez: 3/1/2000

601365	TITLE *601365 DISHEVELLED 1; DVL1
;;DSH, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 1; DVL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The Drosophila dishevelled gene (dsh) encodes a cytoplasmic
phosphoprotein (Klingensmith et al., 1994) that regulates cell
proliferation, acting as a transducer molecule for developmental
processes, including segmentation and neuroblast specification. Pizzuti
et al. (1996) noted that dsh is required for the function of the
wingless gene product wg, a segment polarity gene homologous to the
mammalian protooncogene WNT1 (164820). Pizzuti et al. (1996) used
oligonucleotides corresponding to the mouse dishevelled homolog (Dvl1)
to isolate cDNA clones from a human fetal brain cDNA library and human
adult caudate cDNA library. One human cDNA clone, designated DVL1 by
them, encodes a 670-amino acid polypeptide that had 92% overall identity
to the mouse Dvl1 protein (99% homology in the N-terminal half and 84%
identity in the C-terminal half). By Northern blot analysis of poly(A)
mRNA Pizzuti et al. (1996) observed a transcription product of
approximately 2.9 kb with maximal expression in adult skeletal muscle
and pancreas and abundant expression in heart muscle relative to a
control transcript. Detectable levels were also found in adult brain,
placenta, lung, liver, and kidney. The same expression patterns were
found in fetal tissues. DVL1 expression was detected in the human neural
tube (particularly in the dorsal portions) by in situ hybridization.
DVL1 shares approximately 64% amino acid identity with DVL3 (601368).
Pizzuti et al. (1996) concluded that the high level of homology in the
N-terminal regions of these proteins indicates that the N-terminal
regions encode essential domains for the whole class of dishevelled
proteins, while the sequence divergence in the C-terminal half suggests
that these regions contain domains which are responsible for specific
single-molecule (i.e., DVL1 or DVL3) activity. They noted that 1 domain
of DVL1 shows homology to the Drosophila discs large tumor suppressor
gene dgl1 (601014).

Semenov and Snyder (1997) cloned and characterized 3 human homologs of
dishevelled, thereby showing that these genes form a multigene family in
humans. The cDNA sequence of DVL1 reported by Semenov and Snyder (1997)
differs from that previously reported by Pizzuti et al. (1996). They
also demonstrated that one of the human dishevelled homologs, DVL2
(602151), is a phosphoprotein, raising the possibility that the
mechanisms of dishevelled function in Wnt signaling are likely to be
conserved among metazoans.

GENE FUNCTION

Wallingford et al. (2000) used time-lapse confocal microscopy to
demonstrate that the failure of cells lacking Xenopus dishevelled
function to undergo convergent extension results from defects in cell
polarity. Furthermore, Xenopus dishevelled mutations that inhibit
convergent extension correspond to mutations in Drosophila dishevelled
that selectively perturb planar cell polarity. Wallingford et al. (2000)
concluded that polarized cell behavior is essential for convergent
extension and is controlled by vertebrate dishevelled. Thus, a
vertebrate equivalent of the Drosophila planar cell polarity signaling
cascade may be required for normal gastrulation.

Luo et al. (2002) found that Dvl1 interacted with Musk (601296) in a
mouse muscle cell line and in HEK293 cells transfected with mouse
constructs. They determined that Dvl1 was expressed at a high level
during development of embryonic mouse skeletal muscle, in a pattern that
was similar to that of Musk, but expression decreased as development
progressed. They further demonstrated that the Musk-Dvl1 interaction
regulated acetylcholine receptor (see 100690) clustering stimulated by
agrin (103320), and a mutant form of Dvl that did not interact with Musk
inhibited the ability of agrin to induce receptor clustering.

From results of coimmunoprecipitation experiments, confocal microscopy
analysis, and study of deletion mutants, Park and Moon (2002) concluded
that the Dsh protein interacts with stbm, the zebrafish and Xenopus
homolog of VANGL2 (600533).

Rosso et al. (2005) examined expression of endogenous Dvl1 in mouse
hippocampal neurons and found Dvl1 localized in dendrites and axons,
where it was associated with microtubules, and accumulated in actin-rich
regions. Overexpression of Dvl1 increased dendritic branching in
cultured hippocampal neurons, similar to the effect of Wnt7b (601967)
overexpression, and branching was blocked by Sfrp1 (604156), a secreted
Wnt antagonist. Conversely, hippocampal neurons from mice lacking Dvl1
showed reduced dendritic arborization. Analysis of downstream events
showed that Wnt7b and Dvl1 regulate dendritic development through a
noncanonical Wnt pathway by activating Rac (see 602048) and JNK (see
601158).

Dollar et al. (2005) demonstrated that a vertebrate homolog of Lgl
(600966) associates with dishevelled, an essential mediator of Wnt
signaling, and that dishevelled regulates the localization of Lgl in
Xenopus ectoderm and Drosophila follicular epithelium. Dollar et al.
(2005) showed that both Lgl and Dsh are required for normal apical-basal
polarity of Xenopus ectodermal cells. In addition, Dollar et al. (2005)
showed that the Wnt receptor frizzled-8 (606146), but not frizzled-7
(603410), causes Lgl to dissociate from the cortex with the concomitant
loss of its activity in vivo. Dollar et al. (2005) concluded that their
findings suggest a molecular basis for the regulation of cell polarity
by frizzled and dishevelled.

Park et al. (2006) identified Dsh and Frodo (DACT1; 607861) as upstream
regulators of the p120-catenin (CTNND1; 601045)/Kaiso (300329) signaling
pathway in Xenopus.

Using live imaging of vertebrate cells, Bilic et al. (2007) demonstrated
that the scaffold protein dishevelled (DVL) is required for LRP6
(603507) phosphorylation and aggregation following WNT treatment. Bilic
et al. (2007) proposed that WNTs induce coclustering of receptors and
DVL in LRP6 signalosomes, which in turn triggers LRP6 phosphorylation to
promote Axin (603816) recruitment and beta-catenin (see 116806)
stabilization.

Zhang et al. (2007) found that downregulation of Dvl abrogated axon
differentiation in cultured embryonic rat hippocampal neurons, whereas
overexpression of Dvl resulted in multiple axon formation. A complex of
PAR3 (PARD3; 606745), PAR6 (PARD6A; 607484), and an atypical protein
kinase C (aPKC), such as PKC-zeta (PRKCZ; 176982), is required for
axon-dendrite differentiation, and Zhang et al. (2007) found that Dvl
associated with Pkc-zeta in rat brain and transfected human embryonic
kidney cells. The interaction of Dvl with Pkc-zeta resulted in
stabilization and activation of Pkc-zeta. Expression of
dominant-negative Pkc-zeta attenuated multiple axon formation due to Dvl
overexpression in neurons, and overexpression of Pkc-zeta prevented axon
loss due to Dvl downregulation. Wnt5a (164975), a noncanonical Wnt,
activated Pkc-zeta and promoted axon differentiation, and downregulation
of Dvl or inhibition of Pkc-zeta attenuated the Wnt5a effect on axon
differentiation. Zhang et al. (2007) concluded that WNT5A and DVL
promote axon differentiation mediated by the PAR3-PAR6-aPKC complex.

Mutations in the LRRK2 gene (609007) are the most common known cause of
Parkinson disease (see PARK8; 607060). Sancho et al. (2009) reported
interaction of LRRK2 with the dishevelled family of phosphoproteins
DVL1, DVL2 (602151), and DVL3 (601368). The LRRK2 Roc-COR domain and the
DVL1 DEP domain were necessary and sufficient for LRRK2-DVL1
interaction. Coexpression of DVL1 increased LRRK2 steady-state protein
levels, an effect that was dependent on the DEP domain. LRRK2-DVL1-3
interactions were disrupted by the familial LRRK2 Y1699C mutation
(609007.0002), whereas pathogenic mutations at residues arg1441 (see,
e.g., 609007.0001) and arg1728 strengthened LRRK2-DVL1 interactions.
Coexpression of DVL1 with LRRK2 in mammalian cells resulted in the
redistribution of LRRK2 to typical cytoplasmic DVL1 aggregates in HEK293
and SH-SY5Y cells and colocalization in neurites and growth cones of
differentiated dopaminergic SH-SY5Y cells. Since the DVL1 DEP domain is
known to be involved in the regulation of small GTPases, Sancho et al.
(2009) proposed that DVLs may influence LRRK2 GTPase activity, and that
Roc-COR domain mutations modulating LRRK2-DVL interactions indirectly
influence kinase activity.

MAPPING

By analysis of a panel of rodent-human somatic cell hybrids by PCR with
primers for the DVL1 3-prime untranslated region, Pizzuti et al. (1996)
mapped the DVL1 gene to human chromosome 1. They used fluorescence in
situ hybridization with cloned cDNAs to map the DVL1 gene to chromosome
1p36. Pizzuti et al. (1996) noted that the region of DVL1 that shows
homology to the Drosophila tumor suppressor gene dgl1, as well as its
possible role as a neural differentiation factor, would make it a
candidate gene for neuroblastomatous transformation (see also 256700,
the 1p36-linked neuroblastoma locus). The Schwartz-Jampel syndrome
(255800) has been mapped to chromosome 1p36-p34 and Pizzuti et al.
(1996) suggested that the phenotype of this disease is consistent with
defects which might be expected from aberrant expression of a DVL gene
during development. They noted also that Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
type 2A (118210) has been mapped to 1p36-1p35 and that the main
pathologic feature of this disorder is a motor neuron axonal
degeneration. See also the dishevelled-like locus that maps to the
DiGeorge critical region on chromosome 22q11 (601225).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Bedell et al. (1996) characterized the region of deletion in a patient
with the 1p36 deletion syndrome (607872) whose karyotype was 46,XY,
del(1)(p36.3). They identified the dishevelled gene within the deleted
region. The authors speculated that this gene may play a role in the
pathogenesis of the observed syndrome through haploinsufficiency or
through genomic imprinting, which had been reported previously for this
region of chromosome 1 by Caron et al. (1995).

EVOLUTION

Human evolution is characterized by a dramatic increase in brain size
and complexity. To probe its genetic basis, Dorus et al. (2004) examined
the evolution of genes involved in diverse aspects of nervous system
biology. These genes, including DVL1, displayed significantly higher
rates of protein evolution in primates than in rodents. This trend was
most pronounced for the subset of genes implicated in nervous system
development. Moreover, within primates, the acceleration of protein
evolution was most prominent in the lineage leading from ancestral
primates to humans. Dorus et al. (2004) concluded that the phenotypic
evolution of the human nervous system has a salient molecular correlate,
i.e., accelerated evolution of the underlying genes, particularly those
linked to nervous system development.

ANIMAL MODEL

Lijam et al. (1997) created Dvl1-null mice by gene targeting.
Dvl1-deficient mice are viable, fertile, and structurally normal.
However, these mice exhibited reduced social interaction, manifested as
decreased whisker trimming, deficits in nest building, less huddling
contact during sleep, and subordinate responses in a social dominance
test. Sensorimotor gating was abnormal, as measured by deficits in
prepulse inhibition of acoustic and tactile startle. Since reduced
social interaction and abnormal sensorimotor gating are features of
several human neuropsychiatric disorders, including schizophrenia, Lijam
et al. (1997) suggested that Dvl1-deficient mice may provide a model for
aspects of these disorders. Lijam et al. (1997) concluded that these
results were consistent with an interpretation that common genetic
mechanisms underlie abnormal social behavior and implicated Dvl1 in
processes underlying complex behaviors.

REFERENCE 1. Bedell, J. A.; Wagner-McPherson, C. B.; Bengtsson, U.; Handa, K.;
Dumars, K. W.; Marsh, J. L.; Smith, M.; McPherson, J. D.: A 1p deletion
syndrome patient is hemizygous for a human homologue of the Drosophila
dishevelled gene. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59: A298 only, 1996.

2. Bilic, J.; Huang, Y.-L.; Davidson, G.; Zimmermann, T.; Cruciat,
C.-M.; Bienz, M.; Niehrs, C.: Wnt induces LRP6 signalosomes and promotes
dishevelled-dependent LRP6 phosphorylation. Science 316: 1619-1622,
2007.

3. Caron, H.; Peter, M.; van Sluis, P.; Speleman, F.; de Kraker, J.;
Laureys, G.; Michon, J.; Brugieres, L.; Voute, P. A.; Westerveld,
A.; Slater, R.; Delattre, O.; Versteeg, R.: Evidence for two tumour
suppressor loci on chromosomal bands 1p35-36 involved in neuroblastoma:
one probably imprinted, another associated with N-myc amplification. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 4: 535-539, 1995.

4. Dollar, G. L.; Weber, U.; Mlodzik, M.; Sokol, S. Y.: Regulation
of lethal giant larvae by Dishevelled. Nature 437: 1376-1380, 2005.

5. Dorus, S.; Vallender, E. J.; Evans, P. D.; Anderson, J. R.; Gilbert,
S. L.; Mahowald, M.; Wyckoff, G. J.; Malcom, C. M.; Lahn, B. T.:
Accelerated evolution of nervous system genes in the origin of Homo
sapiens. Cell 119: 1027-1040, 2004.

6. Klingensmith, J.; Nusse, R.; Perrimon, N.: The Drosophila segment
polarity gene dishevelled encodes a novel protein required for response
to the wingless signal. Genes Dev. 8: 118-130, 1994.

7. Lijam, N.; Paylor, R.; McDonald, M. P.; Crawley, J. N.; Deng, C.-X.;
Herrup, K.; Stevens, K. E.; Maccaferri, G.; McBain, C. J.; Sussman,
D. J.; Wynshaw-Boris, A.: Social interaction and sensorimotor gating
abnormalities in mice lacking Dvl1. Cell 90: 895-905, 1997.

8. Luo, Z. G.; Wang, Q.; Zhou, J. Z.; Wang, J.; Lou, Z.; Liu, M.;
He, X.; Wynshaw-Boris, A.; Xiong, W. C.; Lu, B.; Mei, L.: Regulation
of AChR clustering by Dishevelled interacting with MuSK and PAK1. Neuron 35:
489-505, 2002.

9. Park, J.; Ji, H.; Jun, S.; Gu, D.; Hikasa, H.; Li, L.; Sokol, S.
Y.; McCrea, P. D.: Frodo links Dishevelled to the p120-catenin/Kaiso
pathway: distinct catenin subfamilies promote Wnt signals. Dev. Cell 11:
683-695, 2006.

10. Park, M.; Moon, R. T.: The planar cell-polarity gene stbm regulates
cell behaviour and cell fate in vertebrate embryos. Nature Cell Biol. 4:
20-25, 2002. Note: Erratum: Nature Cell Biol. 4: 467 only, 2002.

11. Pizzuti, A.; Amati, F.; Calabrese, G.; Mari, A.; Colosimo, A;
Silani, V.; Giardino, L.; Ratti, A.; Penso, D.; Calza, L.; Palka,
G.; Scarlato, G.; Novelli, G.; Dallapicolla, B.: cDNA characterization
and chromosomal mapping of two human homologs of the Drosophila dishevelled
polarity gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 953-958, 1996.

12. Rosso, S. B.; Sussman, D.; Wynshaw-Boris, A.; Salinas, P. C.:
Wnt signaling through Dishevelled, Rac and JNK regulates dendritic
development. Nature Neurosci. 8: 34-42, 2005.

13. Sancho, R. M.; Law, B. M. H.; Harvey, K.: Mutations in the LRRK2
Roc-COR tandem domain link Parkinson's disease to Wnt signalling pathways. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 18: 3955-3968, 2009.

14. Semenov, M. V.; Snyder, M.: Human dishevelled genes constitute
a DHR-containing multigene family. Genomics 42: 302-310, 1997.

15. Wallingford, J. B.; Rowning, B. A.; Vogeli, K. M.; Rothbacher,
U.; Fraser, S. E.; Harland, R. M.: Dishevelled controls cell polarity
during Xenopus gastrulation. Nature 405: 81-85, 2000.

16. Zhang, X.; Zhu, J.; Yang, G.-Y.; Wang, Q.-J.; Qian, L.; Chen,
Y.-M.; Chen, F.; Tao, Y.; Hu, H.-S.; Wang, T.; Luo, Z.-G.: Dishevelled
promotes axon differentiation by regulating atypical protein kinase
C. Nature Cell Biol. 9: 743-754, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 8/6/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/23/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/26/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/3/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/8/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/17/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/10/2005
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 10/31/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/8/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/22/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/16/1998
Ethylin Wang Jabs - updated: 1/5/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/14/1997
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 12/3/1996

CREATED Moyra Smith: 8/8/1996

EDITED carol: 03/19/2013
wwang: 8/11/2010
terry: 8/6/2010
terry: 9/4/2009
mgross: 6/25/2008
terry: 6/23/2008
alopez: 6/29/2007
terry: 6/26/2007
mgross: 1/3/2007
alopez: 11/8/2005
terry: 11/8/2005
ckniffin: 7/1/2005
terry: 4/5/2005
mgross: 2/17/2005
mgross: 1/10/2005
carol: 11/4/2002
tkritzer: 11/1/2002
tkritzer: 10/31/2002
mgross: 10/8/2002
joanna: 10/1/2002
alopez: 5/31/2000
terry: 5/22/2000
terry: 12/1/1999
carol: 11/4/1999
carol: 11/1/1999
carol: 9/3/1999
carol: 6/16/1998
alopez: 1/21/1998
mark: 1/19/1998
alopez: 1/16/1998
mark: 12/5/1997
terry: 11/14/1997
mark: 6/10/1997
mark: 3/26/1997
mark: 1/2/1997
terry: 12/5/1996
mark: 12/3/1996
mark: 8/10/1996
mark: 8/9/1996

603890	TITLE *603890 UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME E2L 6; UBE2L6
;;UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME UBCH8; UBCH8
DESCRIPTION Ubiquitination of a protein substrate requires the concerted action of 3
classes of enzymes: E1 ubiquitin-activating enzymes, E2
ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes, and E3 ubiquitin protein ligases. See
600012. E2 enzymes may transfer ubiquitin either directly to a substrate
or to an E3 protein. Class I E2s are unable to transfer ubiquitin to
proteins in vitro, suggesting that this class of E2s may require an E3
enzyme for substrate recognition. Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay with the
E3 enzyme E6AP (601623) as bait, Kumar et al. (1997) identified cDNAs
encoding a novel class I E2 that they named UBCH8. The predicted
152-amino acid UBCH8 protein is 46% identical to UBCH7 (603721). In
vitro, recombinant Ubch8 formed thiol ester complexes with ubiquitin and
was able to transfer ubiquitin to E6AP. Both UBCH7 and UBCH8
specifically associated with E6AP in yeast 2-hybrid assays, while UBCH5
(602961) and UBCH6 (602916) interacted selectively with an S. cerevisiae
E3, RSP5 (see 602278). In vitro, the E6AP-interacting E2s were also able
to function with E6AP in the ubiquitination of a substrate, whereas
noninteracting E2s were unable to do so. The authors suggested that
selective physical interaction between E2 and E3 enzymes forms the basis
of specificity for functionally distinct E2-E3 combinations.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Ardley et al. (2000) mapped the
UBE2L6 gene to chromosome 11q12.

REFERENCE 1. Ardley, H. C.; Rose, S. A.; Tan, N.; Leek, J. P.; Markham, A. F.;
Robinson, P. A.: Genomic organization of the human ubiquitin-conjugating
enzyme gene, UBE2L6 on chromosome 11q12. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 89:
137-140, 2000.

2. Kumar, S.; Kao, W. H.; Howley, P. M.: Physical interaction between
specific E2 and Hect E3 enzymes determines functional cooperativity. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 13548-13554, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 1/8/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/8/1999

EDITED cwells: 01/09/2001
cwells: 1/9/2001
carol: 1/8/2001
alopez: 6/8/1999

607781	TITLE *607781 PROGESTIN AND ADIPOQ RECEPTOR FAMILY, MEMBER 5; PAQR5
;;MEMBRANE PROGESTIN RECEPTOR, GAMMA; MPRG
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using homology with the sequence of seatrout membrane progestin
receptor, Zhu et al. (2003) identified ESTs containing MPRG, and they
cloned full-length human, mouse, and pufferfish MPRG cDNAs. The deduced
proteins contain about 330 amino acids, consisting of an extracellular N
terminus, an intracellular C terminus, and 7 transmembrane domains.
Northern blot analysis detected a 5.8-kb transcript expressed at high
levels only in kidney. RNA dot blot analysis detected highest expression
in adult and fetal kidney, colon, lung carcinoma, and HeLa cells, and
showed possible expression in adrenal gland and normal lung.

Tang et al. (2005) stated that the 7-transmembrane domain of the
full-length 330-amino acid PAQR5 protein shares significant similarity
with those of ADIPOR1 (607945) and ADIPOR2 (607946). The mouse ortholog
shares 91% amino acid identity with human PAQR5. RT-PCR detected highest
PAQR5 expression in human lung, colon, and small intestine. Weaker
expression was detected in pancreas, lymph node, kidney, brain, testis,
bladder, skin, and adult bone marrow, and little to none was detected in
adrenal gland, stomach, skeletal muscle, adipose, liver, prostate,
breast, heart, and thymus.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhu et al. (2003) determined that recombinant MPRG, expressed by E.
coli, showed high-affinity progesterone binding. Steroid competition
studies showed specific binding to progesterone and several of its
hydroxylated derivatives, whereas estrogen, androgen, and corticosteroid
had low or no affinity for the receptor. Association and dissociation
kinetics were rapid.

GENE STRUCTURE

Tang et al. (2005) determined that the PAQR5 gene contains 7 coding
exons.

MAPPING

Zhu (2003) stated that the human MPRG gene maps to chromosome 15. By
genomic sequence analysis, Tang et al. (2005) mapped the PAQR5 gene to
chromosome 15q23.

REFERENCE 1. Tang, Y. T.; Hu, T.; Arterburn, M.; Boyle, B.; Bright, J. M.; Emtage,
P. C.; Funk, W. D.: PAQR proteins: a novel membrane receptor family
defined by an ancient 7-transmembrane pass motif. J. Molec. Evol. 61:
372-380, 2005.

2. Zhu, Y.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/25/2003.

3. Zhu, Y.; Bond, J.; Thomas, P.: Identification, classification,
and partial characterization of genes in humans and other vertebrates
homologous to a fish membrane progestin receptor. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 100: 2237-2242, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/1/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/12/2003

EDITED mgross: 04/19/2012
mgross: 4/19/2012
terry: 3/1/2012
mgross: 5/12/2003

612268	TITLE *612268 TUBULIN TYROSINE LIGASE-LIKE FAMILY, MEMBER 5; TTLL5
;;SRC1- AND TIF2-ASSOCIATED BINDING PROTEIN; STAMP;;
KIAA0998
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TTLL5 is a glucocorticoid receptor (GCCR; 138040) coregulator that
interacts with coactivators TIF2 (NCOA2; 601993) and SRC1 (NCOA1;
602691) (He and Simons, 2007).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned TTLL5, which they designated
KIAA0998. The deduced 1,226-amino acid protein shares 84% amino acid
identity with its rat homolog. RT-PCR ELISA detected low expression in
spleen, testis, and ovary.

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a human fetal brain library using TIF2 as
bait, followed by RT-PCR of human testis mRNA, He and Simons (2007)
cloned TTLL5, which they called STAMP. The deduced 1,277-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 143 kD and the C-terminal 705
amino acids share 83.3% identity to the putative mouse ortholog. TTLL5
contains an N-terminal TTL domain, a C-terminal coactivator interaction
domain, and 3 C-terminal receptor interaction domains. Northern blot
analysis of human tissues detected a 4.6-kb transcript with high
expression in heart and skeletal muscle and low expression in placenta,
lung, small intestine, kidney, brain, liver, spleen, thymus, and
peripheral blood leukocytes. TTLL5 localized to the cytoplasm and
nucleus.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, He and Simons (2007) demonstrated that TTLL5
interacted with TIF2 and the C-terminal 303-amino acid fragment of SRC1.
Coimmunoprecipitation assay in transfected COS-7 cells showed that TTLL5
interacted with both TIF2 and GCCR and the latter interaction was not
altered by dexamethasone induction and was mediated by the C-terminal
TTLL5 coactivator domain. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
showed that TTLL5 and GCCR were specifically recruited to the promoters
of both GCCR-induced and -repressed genes. Small interfering RNA (siRNA)
knockdown of TTLL5 reduced the relative induction of GCCR-induced genes
LAD1 (602314), IGFBP1 (146730), IRF8 (601565), and GILZ (TSC22D3;
300506) in human osteosarcoma cells. TTLL5 interacted with agonist-bound
progesterone receptor (PGR; 607311) and androgen receptor (AR; 313700)
but did not interact with other steroid/nuclear receptor family members
tested. He and Simons (2007) suggested that TTLL5 acts with TIF2 to play
a role in glucocorticoid-mediated induction and repression.

GENE STRUCTURE

He and Simons (2007) determined that the TTLL5 gene contains 32 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, He and Simons (2007) mapped the TTLL5 gene
to chromosome 14q24.3.

REFERENCE 1. He, Y.; Simons, S. S., Jr.: STAMP, a novel predicted factor assisting
TIF2 actions in glucocorticoid receptor-mediated induction and repression. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 27: 1467-1485, 2007.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 9/4/2008

EDITED wwang: 08/17/2009
wwang: 9/4/2008

603436	TITLE *603436 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 205; ZNF205
;;ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 210; ZNF210
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The largest family of zinc finger proteins is the C2H2, or Kruppel,
type. See 165220. Some members of the Kruppel family contain a conserved
KRAB region that can be divided into 2 subregions, the A box and the B
box. See 601742. While constructing a transcript map of the critical
region of familial Mediterranean fever (see MEFV; 608107), Deng et al.
(1998) isolated cDNAs encoding ZNF205, which they designated ZNF210.
Sequence analysis indicated that the predicted 504-amino acid protein is
a Kruppel-type zinc finger protein that contains a KRAB A box N-terminal
to 8 zinc finger motifs. Northern blot analysis revealed that the 2.2-kb
ZNF210 mRNA was expressed in all tissues tested. An additional
transcript was detected in a number of tissues.

MAPPING

By analysis of clones from the MEFV region, Deng et al. (1998)
determined that the ZNF205 gene is located approximately 120 kb from the
MEFV gene on 16p13.3. They reported that 4 other zinc finger genes are
located in the MEFV region, including ZNF200 (603231), ZNF174, and
FPM315.

REFERENCE 1. Deng, Z.; Centola, M.; Chen, X.; Sood, R.; Vedula, A.; Fischel-Ghodsian,
N.; Kastner, D. L.: Identification of two Kruppel-related zinc finger
genes (ZNF200 and ZNF210) from human chromosome 16p13.3. Genomics 53:
97-103, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/15/1999

EDITED alopez: 07/06/2010
ckniffin: 9/30/2003
alopez: 1/15/1999

600041	TITLE *600041 PURINERGIC RECEPTOR P2Y, G PROTEIN-COUPLED, 2; P2RY2
;;PURINOCEPTOR P2Y2; P2Y2; P2Y2R;;
P2U NUCLEOTIDE RECEPTOR; P2UR
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Parr et al. (1994) reported the sequence and functional expression of a
cDNA cloned from human airway epithelial cells that encodes P2RY2, a
protein with properties of a P2U nucleotide receptor. They also isolated
an identical cDNA from human colonic epithelial cells, indicating that
this is the same P2U receptor that had been functionally identified in
other human tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

The chloride ion secretory pathway that is defective in cystic fibrosis
(219700) can be bypassed by an alternative pathway for chloride ion
transport that is activated by extracellular nucleotides. Accordingly,
the P2 receptor that mediates this effect is a therapeutic target for
improving chloride secretion in CF patients. Using a retrovirus system,
Parr et al. (1994) stably expressed a human airway P2RY2 clone in 1321N1
astrocytoma cells, a human cell line unresponsive to extracellular
nucleotides. Studies of inositol phosphate accumulation and
intracellular Ca(2+) mobilization induced by extracellular nucleotides
in 1321N1 cells expressing the receptor identified this clone as the
target receptor in human airway epithelia. Expression of P2RY2 in 1321N1
cells revealed evidence for autocrine ATP release and stimulation of
transduced receptors. Thus, P2RY2 expression in the cell line was
proposed as a useful system for studying autocrine regulatory mechanisms
and for screening potential therapeutic drugs.

Katzur et al. (1999) reported that in single endometrial carcinoma
HEC-1A and Ishikawa cells, ATP induced a rapid and extracellular
Ca(2+)-independent rise in cytosolic Ca(2+) concentration in a
dose-dependent manner, with an ED50 of about 10 microg. This
ligand-selective profile indicated the expression of the P2RY2 subtype
in endometrial cells. Accordingly, RT-PCR using P2RY2 primers amplified
the expected transcript from both cell lines. The coupling of these
receptors to phospholipase C was confirmed. The authors concluded that
P2RY2 may participate in control of the cell cycle of endometrial
carcinoma cells.

Tai et al. (2000) studied the expression and regulation of the P2UR gene
in human granulosa-luteal cells (GLCs) by RT-PCR and Northern blot
analysis. Expression of P2UR mRNA was downregulated by human chorionic
gonadotropin (CG) in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Treatment with
8-bromo-cAMP and forskolin also attenuated P2UR mRNA levels. The authors
concluded that the P2UR mRNA is expressed in human GLCs and that P2UR
mRNA is regulated by human CG, cAMP, and forskolin. These findings
further supported a potential role of this neurotransmitter receptor in
the human ovary.

Adrian et al. (2000) analyzed the expression of several purinergic
receptors during differentiation in a promyelocytic leukemia cell line.
Granulocytic differentiation was induced by dimethylsulfoxide, and a
monocytic/macrophage phenotype was induced by phorbol esters. Basal
expression of P2Y2 was relatively high in undifferentiated cells, and
expression declined during granulocytic differentiation. P2Y2 expression
also decreased during monocytic differentiation and was nearly
undetectable after 48 hours.

Arthur et al. (2005) found that activation of P2ry2 by ATP-gamma-S, a
nonhydrolyzable ATP analog, in the presence of NGF (162030) led to
colocalization and association of Trka (NTRK1; 191315) and P2ry2 and was
required for enhanced neuronal differentiation in a rat neuronal
precursor cell line. Depletion of P2ry2 by genetic means or by small
interfering RNA abolished the ATP-gamma-S-mediated increase in neuronal
differentiation. Moreover, in vivo injection of ATP-gamma-S into the
sciatic nerve of wildtype mice, but not P2ry2-null mice, increased
expression of Gap43 (162060), a marker for axonal growth. Arthur et al.
(2005) concluded that P2RY2 is a morphogen receptor that potentiates
neurotrophin signaling in neuronal development and regeneration.

Chen et al. (2006) found that human neutrophils release ATP from the
leading edge of the cell surface to amplify chemotactic signals and
direct cell orientation by feedback through the P2Y2 nucleotide
receptors. Neutrophils rapidly hydrolyze released ATP to adenosine that
then acts via A3-type adenosine receptors, which are recruited to the
leading edge to promote cell migration. Thus, Chen et al. (2006) found
that ATP release and autocrine feedback through P2Y2 and A3 receptors
provide signal amplification, controlling gradient sensing and migration
of neutrophils.

Through several lines of evidence, Elliott et al. (2009) identified
extracellular nucleotides as a critical apoptotic cell 'find-me' signal.
Elliott et al. (2009) demonstrated the caspase (see 147678)-dependent
release of ATP and UTP in equimolar quantities during the early stages
of apoptosis by primary thymocytes and cell lines. Purified nucleotides
at these concentrations were sufficient to induce monocyte recruitment
comparable to that of apoptotic cell supernatants. Enzymatic removal of
ATP and UTP (by apyrase or the expression of ectopic CD39, 601752)
abrogated the ability of apoptotic cell supernatants to recruit
monocytes in vitro and in vivo. Elliott et al. (2009) then identified
the ATP/UTP receptor P2Y2 as a critical sensor of nucleotides released
by apoptotic cells using RNA interference-mediated depletion studies in
monocytes, and macrophages from P2Y2-null mice. The relevance of
nucleotides in apoptotic cell clearance in vivo was revealed by 2
approaches. First, in a murine air-pouch model, apoptotic cell
supernatants induced a 3-fold greater recruitment of monocytes and
macrophages than supernatants from healthy cells did; this recruitment
was abolished by depletion of nucleotides and was significantly
decreased in P2Y2-null mice. Second, clearance of apoptotic thymocytes
was significantly impaired by either depletion of nucleotides or
interference with P2Y receptor function (by pharmacologic inhibition or
in P2Y2-null mice). Elliott et al. (2009) concluded that their results
identified nucleotides as a critical find-me cue released by apoptotic
cells to promote P2Y2-dependent recruitment of phagocytes, and provided
evidence for a clear relationship between a find-me signal and efficient
corpse clearance in vivo.

MAPPING

Using PCR analysis of human-rodent hybrid cell line DNAs, Dasari et al.
(1996) mapped the human P2RY2 gene to chromosome 11q13.5-q14.1. The
authors noted that several G protein-coupled receptor genes, namely the
beta adrenergic receptor, the angiotensin receptor-like-1, and the
muscarinic cholinergic receptor-1, have been localized to the same
region of chromosome 11. By sequence tagged site (STS) mapping using the
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database, Somers et
al. (1997) demonstrated that the P2RY2 gene maps within less than 4 cM
of the P2RY6 gene (602451), which they had mapped to 11q13.5 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization and STS mapping. This was the first
chromosomal clustering of this gene family to be described.

REFERENCE 1. Adrian, K.; Bernhard, M. K.; Breitinger, H.-G.; Ogilvie, A.: Expression
of purinergic receptors (ionotropic P2X1-7 and metabotropic P2Y1-11)
during myeloid differentiation of HL60 cells. Biochim. Biophys. Res.
Acta 1492: 127-138, 2000.

2. Arthur, D. B.; Akassoglou, K.; Insel, P. A.: P2Y2 receptor activates
nerve growth factor/TrkA signaling to enhance neuronal differentiation. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 19138-19143, 2005.

3. Chen, Y.; Corriden, R.; Inoue, Y.; Yip, L.; Hashiguchi, N.; Zinkernagel,
A.; Nizet, V.; Insel, P. A.; Junger, W. G.: ATP release guides neutrophil
chemotaxis via P2Y2 and A3 receptors. Science 314: 1792-1795, 2006.

4. Dasari, V. R.; Sandhu, A. K.; Mills, D. C. B.; Athwal, R. S.; Kunapuli,
S. P.: Mapping of the P2U purinergic receptor gene to human chromosome
11q13.5-14.1. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 22: 75-79, 1996.

5. Elliott, M. R.; Chekeni, F. B.; Trampont, P. C.; Lazarowski, E.
R.; Kadl, A.; Walk, S. F.; Park, D.; Woodson, R. I.; Ostankovich,
M.; Sharma, P.; Lysiak, J. J.; Harden, T. K.; Leitinger, N.; Ravichandran,
K. S.: Nucleotides released by apoptotic cells act as a find-me signal
to promote phagocytic clearance. Nature 461: 282-286, 2009.

6. Katzur, A. C.; Koshimizu, T.-A.; Tomic, M.; Schultze-Mosgau, A.;
Ortmann, O.; Stojilkovic, S. S.: Expression and responsiveness of
P2Y2 receptors in human endometrial cancer cell lines. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 84: 4085-4091, 1999.

7. Parr, C. E.; Sullivan, D. M.; Paradiso, A. M.; Lazarowski, E. R.;
Burch, L. H.; Olsen, J. C.; Erb, L.; Weisman, G. A.; Boucher, R. C.;
Turner, J. T.: Cloning and expression of a human P(2U) nucleotide
receptor, a target for cystic fibrosis pharmacotherapy. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 91: 3275-3279, 1994. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.
91: 13067 only, 1994.

8. Somers, G. R.; Hammet, F.; Woollatt, E.; Richards, R. I.; Southey,
M. C.; Venter, D. J.: Chromosomal localization of the human P2Y(6)
purinoceptor gene and phylogenetic analysis of the P2y purinoceptor
family. Genomics 44: 127-130, 1997.

9. Tai, C.-J.; Kang, S. K.; Cheng, K. W.; Choi, K.-C.; Nathwani, P.
S.; Leung, P. C. K.: Expression and regulation of P2U-purinergic
receptor in human granulosa-luteal cells. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85:
1591-1597, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/13/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/23/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/30/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/7/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/13/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/2/2000
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 10/30/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/18/1994

EDITED terry: 08/03/2012
alopez: 10/22/2009
terry: 10/13/2009
alopez: 1/25/2007
terry: 1/23/2007
mgross: 1/30/2006
mgross: 3/7/2005
mgross: 12/7/2000
terry: 11/13/2000
mgross: 10/3/2000
terry: 10/2/2000
mgross: 4/8/1999
alopez: 3/18/1998
terry: 9/30/1997
jamie: 11/15/1996
jamie: 11/6/1996
jamie: 10/30/1996
mark: 3/31/1996
mark: 12/4/1995
mimadm: 7/30/1994
jason: 7/18/1994

164009	TITLE *164009 NUCLEAR MITOTIC APPARATUS PROTEIN 1; NUMA1
NUMA1/RARA FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The NUMA protein was one of the first to be described as a cell
cycle-related protein based on a distinct immunofluorescent staining
pattern: in interphase, NUMA is present throughout the nucleus, and in
mitosis, it localizes to the spindle apparatus (Lydersen and Pettijohn,
1980). Some patients with autoimmune disease have antibodies directed
against the NUMA protein. The full-length NUMA cDNA (Compton et al.,
1992; Yang et al., 1992) predicts a protein with a calculated molecular
mass of about 237 kD, containing 2 globular domains separated by a
coiled-coil domain of 1,485 amino acids. Wong et al. (2006) stated that
the coiled-coil region of NUMA can form parallel coiled-coil dimers.

GENE FUNCTION

Using double-immunofluorescence experiments, Yang et al. (1992) found
that NUMA dissociated from condensing chromosomes during early prophase,
before the complete disintegration of the nuclear lamina. As mitosis
progressed, NUMA reassociated with telophase chromosomes. Compton et al.
(1992) found that NUMA associated with the spindle immediately upon
nuclear envelope breakdown and progressed down the spindle microtubules
to concentrate at the pericentrosomal region. At the completion of
anaphase, NUMA dissociated from spindle microtubules and was imported
into the regenerating nuclei through nuclear pores.

The guanosine triphosphatase Ran (601179) stimulates assembly of
microtubule asters and spindles in mitotic Xenopus egg extracts. A
carboxy-terminal region of NUMA, a nuclear protein required for
organizing mitotic spindle poles, mimics Ran's ability to induce asters
(Merdes et al., 1996). This NUMA fragment also specifically interacts
with the nuclear transport factor, importin-beta (602738). Wiese et al.
(2001) showed that importin-beta is an inhibitor of microtubule aster
assembly in Xenopus egg extracts and that Ran regulates the interaction
between importin-beta and NUMA. Importin-beta therefore links NUMA to
regulation by Ran. Wiese et al. (2001) concluded that this suggests that
similar mechanisms regulate nuclear import during interphase and spindle
assembly during mitosis.

Quintyne et al. (2005) described a process of centrosomal clustering
that prevented the formation of multipolar spindles in noncancer cells.
Noncancer cells needed to overcome this clustering mechanism to allow
multipolar spindles to form at a high frequency. The microtubule motor
cytoplasmic dynein (see 600112) was a critical part of this coalescing
machinery, and in some tumor cells overexpression of the spindle protein
NUMA interfered with dynein localization, promoting multipolarity.

Wong et al. (2006) stated that RAE1 (603343) also binds to microtubules
and that either lowering RAE1 levels or increasing NUMA levels results
in spindle abnormalities. They found that either simultaneous depletion
of RAE1 and NUMA levels or simultaneous overexpression of RAE1 and NUMA
levels rescued spindle bipolarity. RAE1 and NUMA formed a transient
complex during mitosis in HeLa cells, and the binding of RAE1 to NUMA
converted the NUMA dimer to a tetravalent crosslinker of microtubules.
RAE1 interacted with a GLEBS-like motif at the N-terminal end of the
coiled-coil domain of NUMA. Wong et al. (2006) concluded that a balance
of these 2 proteins is required for bipolar spindle formation.

Using in vivo skin-specific lentiviral RNA interference, Williams et al.
(2011) investigated spindle orientation regulation and provided direct
evidence that LGN (609245), NuMA, and dynactin (DCTN1; 601143) are
involved. In compromising asymmetric cell divisions, Williams et al.
(2011) uncovered profound defects in stratification, differentiation,
and barrier formation, and implicated Notch (190198) signaling as an
important effector. Williams et al. (2011) concluded that asymmetric
cell division components act by reorientating mitotic spindles to
achieve perpendicular divisions, which in turn promote stratification
and differentiation. Furthermore, the resemblance between their
knockdown phenotypes and Rbpj (147183) loss-of-function mutants provided
important clues that suprabasal Notch signaling is impaired when
asymmetric cell divisions do not occur.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Sparks et al. (1993) demonstrated
that the NUMA1 gene is present in single copy and located on chromosome
11q13.

CYTOGENETICS

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL; 612376) is uniquely associated with
chromosomal translocations that disrupt the gene encoding the retinoic
acid receptor, RARA (180240). In more than 99% of cases, this disruption
results in the formation of a fusion of the RARA gene with the PML gene
(102578). In rare variants of APL, the RARA gene has been found to be
fused to 1 of 2 other genes, PLZF (176797) and NPM (164040). Although
RARA dysregulation is evidently important in APL, the role of the
various fusion partners is unclear. Wells et al. (1997) characterized a
fourth APL gene fusion, which linked exons encoding the retinoic acid
and DNA-binding domains of RARA to 5-prime exons of NUMA1. The NUMA/RARA
fusion protein existed in sheet-like nuclear aggregates with which
normal NUMA partly colocalized. In contrast to t(15;17) APL (the usual
variety) the intracellular distribution of PML was normal in these
cells. Wells et al. (1997) suggested that interference with retinoid
signaling, and not disruption of PML organization, is essential to the
APL phenotype. Their work implicated for the first time an element of
the mitotic apparatus in the molecular pathogenesis of human malignancy.
The proband of their study was a Caucasian male first seen at 6 months
of age for investigation of multiple cutaneous lesions. Despite this
unusual clinical presentation, peripheral blood morphology and
cell-surface immunophenotype were typical of APL. Routine analysis of
diagnostic bone marrow revealed a clonal cytogenetic abnormality,
t(11;17)(q13;q21). The patient was treated with all-trans retinoic acid
and achieved complete remission; he remained in morphologic remission 38
months after autologous bone marrow transplantation.

REFERENCE 1. Compton, D. A.; Szilak, I.; Cleveland, D. W.: Primary structure
of NuMA, an intranuclear protein that defines a novel pathway for
segregation of proteins at mitosis. J. Cell Biol. 116: 1395-1408,
1992.

2. Lydersen, B. K.; Pettijohn, D. E.: Human-specific nuclear protein
that associates with the polar region of the mitotic apparatus: distribution
in a human/hamster hybrid cell. Cell 22: 489-499, 1980.

3. Merdes, A.; Ramyar, K.; Vechio, J. D.; Cleveland, D. W.: A complex
of NuMA and cytoplasmic dynein is essential for mitotic spindle assembly. Cell 87:
447-458, 1996.

4. Quintyne, N. J.; Reing, J. E.; Hoffelder, D. R.; Gollin, S. M.;
Saunders, W. S.: Spindle multipolarity is prevented by centrosomal
clustering. Science 307: 127-129, 2005.

5. Sparks, C. A.; Bangs, P. L.; McNeil, G. P.; Lawrence, J. B.; Fey,
E. G.: Assignment of the nuclear mitotic apparatus protein NuMA gene
to human chromosome 11q13. Genomics 17: 222-224, 1993.

6. Wells, R. A.; Catzavelos, C.; Kamel-Reid, S.: Fusion of retinoic
acid receptor alpha to NuMA, the nuclear mitotic apparatus protein,
by a variant translocation in acute promyelocytic leukaemia. Nature
Genet. 17: 109-113, 1997.

7. Wiese, C.; Wilde, A.; Moore, M. S.; Adam, S. A.; Merdes, A.; Zheng,
Y.: Role of importin-beta in coupling Ran to downstream targets in
microtubule assembly. Science 291: 653-656, 2001.

8. Williams, S. E.; Beronja, S.; Pasolli, H. A.; Fuchs, E.: Asymmetric
cell divisions promote Notch-dependent epidermal differentiation. Nature 470:
353-358, 2011.

9. Wong, R. W.; Blobel, G.; Coutavas, E.: Rae1 interaction with NuMA
is required for bipolar spindle formation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
19783-19787, 2006.

10. Yang, C. H.; Lambie, E. J.; Snyder, M.: NuMA: an unusually long
coiled-coil related protein in the mammalian nucleus. J. Cell Biol. 116:
1303-1317, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/29/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/23/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/19/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/5/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/28/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/19/1993

EDITED alopez: 04/13/2012
alopez: 7/5/2011
terry: 6/29/2011
mgross: 10/28/2008
wwang: 4/23/2007
alopez: 2/4/2005
wwang: 2/1/2005
wwang: 1/27/2005
terry: 1/19/2005
alopez: 4/6/2001
terry: 4/5/2001
jenny: 9/1/1997
terry: 8/28/1997
carol: 11/12/1993
carol: 8/9/1993
carol: 7/19/1993

602409	TITLE *602409 MYELOID/LYMPHOID OR MIXED LINEAGE LEUKEMIA, TRANSLOCATED TO, 10; MLLT10
;;ALL1-FUSED GENE FROM CHROMOSOME 10; AF10
AF10/MLL FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
AF10/HEAB FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Translocations affecting chromosome 11q23 involve many partner
chromosome regions and occur in various leukemias (see 600328). The
11q23 gene involved in the translocations is MLL (159555). Using RACE to
identify MLL fusion transcripts in RNA from 2 leukemia patients, Chaplin
et al. (1995) identified the partner gene involved in t(10;11)(p12;q23)
translocations. In both patients, the translocation fused MLL to a gene
that the authors designated AF10. The AF10 gene encodes a predicted
1,027-amino acid protein containing an N-terminal zinc finger and a
C-terminal leucine zipper domain that are highly homologous to similar
domains in AF17 (600328) and BR140 (602410). Northern blot analysis
showed that AF10 is expressed as a 5.5-kb mRNA in many tissues with
highest expression in testis, and has an alternatively spliced exon.

GENE FUNCTION

The AF10 gene is one of the few MLL partner genes to be independently
rearranged with a third gene in leukemia, the CALM gene (603025) in the
t(10;11)(p12;q14) translocation (Dreyling et al., 1996). Chimeric fusion
proteins MLL/AF10 and CALM/AF10 consistently retain the leucine zipper
motif of AF10. Debernardi et al. (2002) used this part of the C-terminal
region as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screening of a testis cDNA library.
They found that the leucine zipper interacted with GAS41 (602116), a
protein previously identified as the product of an amplified gene in a
glioblastoma. GAS41 shows significant homology to the human MLL fusion
partners AF9 (159558) and ENL (159556). The study also showed that GAS41
interacts with integrase interactor-1 (INI1; 601607) and that INI1 is a
component of the SWI/SNF complex (see 604958), which acts to remodel
chromatin and to modulate transcription. Retention of the leucine zipper
in the MLL and CALM fusions suggested that a key feature of these
chimeric proteins may be their ability to interfere in normal gene
regulation through interaction with the adenosine triphosphate-dependent
chromatin remodeling complexes.

MAPPING

Chaplin et al. (1995) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to map the
AF10 gene to 10p12.

CYTOGENETICS

- AF10/MLL Fusion Gene

Chaplin et al. (1995) found that all known translocations involving MLL
and AF10 or AF17 have involved breakpoints between the zinc finger and
leucine zipper domains, and have yielded fusion proteins in which the
MLL zinc fingers were replaced with leucine zipper regions. Chaplin et
al. (1995) speculated that the fusion proteins may participate in
abnormal heterodimers.

- AF10/HEAB Fusion Gene

Tanabe et al. (1996) identified an invins(10;11)(p12;q23q12) and other
complex chromosomal rearrangements in a 2-year old boy with acute
monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5). Cloning of the proximal 10p breakpoint
showed that the MLL gene at chromosome 11q23 was fused to the 3-prime
portion of AF10 at chromosome 10p12. Cloning of the telomeric 10p
junction revealed that the 5-prime portion of AF10 was fused with the
HEAB gene (608757). The 5-prime AF10/HEAB fusion transcript was out of
frame, while the MLL/3-prime AF10 transcript was in frame.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the
MLLT10 gene and susceptibility to meningioma, see 607174.

REFERENCE 1. Chaplin, T.; Ayton, P.; Bernard, O. A.; Saha, V.; Della Valle,
V.; Hillion, J.; Gregorini, A.; Lillington, D.; Berger, R.; Young,
B. D.: A novel class of zinc finger/leucine zipper genes identified
from the molecular cloning of the t(10;11) translocation in acute
leukemia. Blood 85: 1435-1441, 1995.

2. Debernardi, S.; Bassini, A.; Jones, L. K.; Chaplin, T.; Linder,
B.; de Bruijn, D. R. H.; Meese, E.; Young, B. D.: The MLL fusion
partner AF10 binds GAS41, a protein that interacts with the human
SWI/SNF complex. Blood 99: 275-281, 2002.

3. Dreyling, M. H.; Martinez-Climent, J. A.; Zheng, M.; Mao, J.; Rowley,
J.  D.; Bohlander, S. K.: The t(10;11)(p13;q14) in the U937 cell
line results in the fusion of the AF10 gene and CALM, encoding a new
member of the AP-3 clathrin assembly protein family. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 93: 4804-4809, 1996.

4. Tanabe, S.; Bohlander, S. K.; Vignon, C. V.; Espinosa, R., III;
Zhao, N.; Strissel, P. L.; Zeleznik-Le, N. J.; Rowley, J. D.: AF10
is split by MLL and HEAB, a human homolog to a putative Caenorhabditis
elegans ATP/GTP-binding protein in an invins(10;11)(p12;q23q12). Blood 88:
3535-3545, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/26/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/22/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 3/2/1998

EDITED alopez: 10/13/2011
alopez: 11/16/2010
carol: 6/25/2009
mgross: 8/26/2004
cwells: 3/13/2002
cwells: 3/8/2002
terry: 2/22/2002
alopez: 3/4/1998
alopez: 3/2/1998

