614107	TITLE *614107 KARYOPHERIN ALPHA-7; KPNA7
;;IMPORTIN ALPHA-8
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Karyopherins, such as KPNA7, mediate transport of proteins between the
nucleus and cytoplasm. KPNA7 belongs to the importin-alpha family of
karyopherins. These proteins bind to the nuclear localization signals
(NLSs) of cargo proteins and to importin-beta subunits (see KPNB1;
602738), which mediate nuclear import of cargo protein/importin
complexes (summary by Kelley et al., 2010).

CLONING

By searching a database for sequences similar to KPNA2 (600685),
followed by RT-PCR of LNCaP prostate cancer cell RNA, Kelley et al.
(2010) cloned human KPNA7. The deduced 516-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 57 kD. It has an N-terminal
importin-beta-binding (IBB) domain, followed by 10 armadillo repeats.
KPNA7 is highly divergent from other importin-alpha family members, and
it shares only 54.7% amino acid identity with KPNA2, its closest
relative. Immunohistochemical analysis of HeLa cells revealed that KPNA7
was predominantly a nuclear protein, whereas KPNA2 was largely
cytoplasmic. Western blot analysis detected KPNA7 at an apparent
molecular mass of 54 kD. Database analysis identified orthologs of KPNA7
only in vertebrates.

Hu et al. (2010) cloned 2 splice variants of mouse Kpna7 from oocytes
and zygotes. The deduced full-length 520-amino acid protein contains a
flexible N-terminal IBB domain and a highly structured C-terminal domain
containing 10 tandem armadillo repeats. The armadillo repeats form a
long groove that can bind either 2 monopartite nuclear localization
signals or a single bipartite nuclear localization signal. The other
variant encodes a deduced 499-amino acid protein that is truncated
compared with full-length Kpna7. Sequencing of 20 Kpna7 clones showed
that the transcript encoding the shorter isoform predominated. RT-PCR of
8 mouse tissues detected Kpn7a expression only in oocytes. Kpna7 was
also expressed in germinal vesicle stage oocytes, metaphase II stage
oocytes, and zygotes, with reduced expression in 2-cell stage embryos.
Kpna7 was not expressed in later stage embryos. Immunohistochemical
analysis detected Kpna7 in the nucleus of germinal vesicle stage oocytes
and near the spindle in metaphase II stage oocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

Kelley et al. (2010) found that KPNA7 formed a more stable interaction
with immobilized importin-beta than with all other importin-alpha family
members. Deletion of the N-terminal IBB of KPNA7 resulted in complete
loss of its binding activity. Addition of RAN (601179)-GTP dissociated
the interaction of importin-beta with the IBB domains of either KPNA2 or
KPNA7, mimicking RAN-dependent disassembly of import complexes. However,
only 3% of preformed importin-beta-KPNA7 complexes were dissociated by
RAN-GTP, suggesting that they formed a highly stable complex. KPNA7
weakly bound the NLS of RB protein (RB1; 614041), but it failed to bind
the NLSs of SV40 and nucleoplasmin (see 164040), which were bound by
KPNA2.

Using immunoprecipitation and Western blot analyses, Hu et al. (2010)
showed that mouse Kpna7 interacted with Kpnb1.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Kelley et al. (2010) mapped the KPNA7 gene
to chromosome 7q22.1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hu et al. (2010) found that Kpna7 -/- male mice showed normal fertility.
However, both Kpna7 +/- and Kpna7 -/- females showed reduced fertility,
with reduced litter size due to embryonic lethality. Lethality affected
predominantly female embryos and embryos of older Kpna7 -/- females.
Analysis of parthenogenic embryos revealed acceleration of the first and
second cell cycle in the absence of Kpna7, with associated
downregulation of pluripotency- and/or chromatin-associated genes,
predominantly Dppa2 (614445), Dppa4 (614125), and Piwil2 (610312), and
reduced histone methylation.

REFERENCE 1. Hu, J.; Wang, F.; Yuan, Y.; Zhu, X.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Kou,
Z.; Wang, S.; Gao, S.: Novel importin-alpha family member Kpna7 is
required for normal fertility and fecundity in the mouse. J. Biol.
Chem. 285: 33113-33122, 2010.

2. Kelley, J. B.; Talley, A. M.; Spencer, A.; Gioeli, D.; Paschal,
B. M.: Karyopherin alpha-7 (KPNA7), a divergent member of the importin-alpha
family of nuclear import receptors. BMC Cell Biol. 11: 63, 2010.
Note: Electronic Article.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/3/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/21/2011

EDITED mgross: 01/25/2012
mgross: 11/7/2011
terry: 11/3/2011
mgross: 7/21/2011

590075	TITLE *590075 TRANSFER RNA, MITOCHONDRIAL, PROLINE; MTTP
;;tRNA-PRO, MITOCHONDRIAL
DESCRIPTION The mitochondrial tRNA for proline is encoded by nucleotides 15955-16023
of the L-strand.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MYOPATHY
MTTP, UGG-TO-UGA ANTICODON MUTATION

In a 7-year-old girl with pure myopathy, Moraes et al. (1993) found a
G-to-A transition at mtDNA position 15990 changing the anticodon
normally found in proline tRNAs (UGG) to the one found in serine tRNAs
(UGA). This was the first example of a pathogenic anticodon alteration
described in a higher eukaryote. The mutant mtDNA was heteroplasmic (85%
mutant) in muscle but was undetectable in white blood cells from the
patient and her mother. Analysis of single muscle fibers indicated that
mutant mtDNAs severely impaired mitochondrial protein synthesis and
respiratory chain activity, but only when present at greater than 90%.
The 'recessive' behavior of this mtDNA alteration was thought to explain
the patient's relatively mild clinical phenotype.

.0002
PARKINSON DISEASE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
MTTP, 15965T-C

Grasbon-Frodl et al. (1999) performed a complete sequence analysis of
all 22 mitochondrially encoded tRNA genes in 20 cases of histologically
proven idiopathic Parkinson disease (556500). Genomic DNA extracted from
the substantia nigra of frozen or formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded
brains was used for amplification by PCR followed by automated
sequencing. Two new homoplasmic point mutations were detected: one in
the gene encoding tRNA(Thr) (MTTT; 590090.0001) and the other a 15965T-C
transition in the MTTP gene. Restriction enzyme digestion failed to
demonstrate the 15965T-C mutation in 100 control subjects and 47
Alzheimer cases.

.0003
MERFF SYNDROME
MTTP, 15967G-A

In a woman with MERRF (545000), Blakely et al. (2009) identified a
heteroplasmic 15967G-A transition in the MTTP gene. Skeletal muscle had
a 69% mutant load, and the mutation segregated with cytochrome c oxidase
activity in single muscle fibers. The patient had long-standing
myoclonic epilepsy as well as other features, including proximal
myopathy, sensorineural deafness, cerebellar ataxia, and pigmentary
retinopathy. The mutation was not observed in the patient's unaffected
mother or sibs, suggesting a de novo event.

REFERENCE 1. Blakely, E. L.; Trip, S. A.; Swalwell, H.; He, L.; Wren, D. R.;
Rich, P.; Turnbull, D. M.; Omer, S. E.; Taylor, R. W.: A new mitochondrial
transfer RNA(pro) gene mutation associated with myoclonic epilepsy
with ragged-red fibers and other neurological features. Arch. Neurol. 66:
399-402, 2009.

2. Grasbon-Frodl, E. M.; Kosel, S.; Sprinzl, M.; von Eitzen, U.; Mehraein,
P.; Graeber, M. B.: Two novel point mutations of mitochondrial tRNA
genes in histologically confirmed Parkinson disease. Neurogenetics 2:
121-127, 1999.

3. Moraes, C. T.; Ciacci, F.; Bonilla, E.; Ionasescu, V.; Schon, E.
A.; DiMauro, S.: A mitochondrial tRNA anticodon swap associated with
a muscle disease. Nature Genet. 4: 284-288, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/10/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/6/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/2/1993

EDITED wwang: 08/31/2009
ckniffin: 8/10/2009
jlewis: 7/15/1999
terry: 7/6/1999
carol: 9/23/1993
carol: 5/26/1993
carol: 5/17/1993
carol: 3/2/1993

602752	TITLE *602752 RANBP2-LIKE AND GRIP DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 8; RGPD8
;;RGP8;;
RANBP2-ALPHA;;
RANBP2-LIKE 1; RANBP2L1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

RANBP2 (601181) appears to be the major Ran-GTP binding site at the
cytoplasmic face of the nuclear pore complex. Nothwang et al. (1998)
isolated genomic clones and a partial cDNA of RGPD8, which they called
RANBP2-alpha. The 5-prime 1,894 nucleotides of the partial RANBP2-alpha
cDNA are 98% identical to a region of RANBP2, while the 3-prime region
is distinct. The sequence similarity between RANBP2 and RANBP2-alpha
precisely ends at an exon-intron boundary of RANBP2. The partial
RANBP2-alpha cDNA is 99% identical to a cDNA encoding BS63 (RGPD5;
612708) over 1913 nucleotides. The deduced RANBP2-alpha protein contains
755 amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected an 8-kb mRNA in a
variety of tissues, and an additional 14-kb transcript was seen in
pancreas and placenta.

By searching databases for intrachromosomal duplications of genes in
primates but not in other metazoans, Ciccarelli et al. (2005) identified
8 RGPD genes, including RGPD8, which they called RGP8. The RGPD genes
resulted from duplications of a region of human chromosome 2 containing
the RANBP2 and GCC2 (612711) genes. Like other RGPD proteins, the
deduced RGPD8 protein exceeds 1,700 amino acids. Most of the sequence is
homologous to regions of RANBP2, except for the C terminus, which
includes the GRIP domain from GCC2. PCR analysis detected RGPD8
expression in testis and HeLa cell cDNA libraries.

MAPPING

By FISH, physical mapping, and analysis of a PAC contig, Nothwang et al.
(1998) mapped the RANBP2-alpha gene to chromosome 2q11-q12, within 3 Mb
distal to RANBP2. Their findings suggested the presence of a RANBP2 gene
cluster in this region of chromosome 2.

By genomic sequence analysis, Ciccarelli et al. (2005) mapped the 8 RGPD
genes to chromosome 2p11.2-q13, and they named the genes according to
their physical order. RGPD8 is the most telomeric of the 6 RGPD genes on
chromosome 2q12.3-q13.

EVOLUTION

See RGPD1 (612704) for information on the evolution of the RGPD genes.

REFERENCE 1. Ciccarelli, F. D.; von Mering, C.; Suyama, M.; Harrington, E. D.;
Izaurralde E.; Bork, P.: Complex genomic rearrangements lead to novel
primate gene function. Genome Res. 15: 343-351, 2005.

2. Nothwang, H. G.; Rensing, C.; Kubler, M.; Denich, D.; Brandl, B;
Stubanus, M.; Haaf, T.; Kurnit, D.; Hildebrandt, F.: Identification
of a novel Ran binding protein 2 related gene (RANBP2L1) and detection
of a gene cluster on human chromosome 2q11-q12. Genomics 47: 383-392,
1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/13/2009

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/24/1998

EDITED mgross: 04/03/2009
terry: 3/13/2009
alopez: 6/24/1998

606430	TITLE *606430 UDP-GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 1 FAMILY, POLYPEPTIDE A5; UGT1A5
;;UGT1E
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Enzymes of the UDP glycosyltransferase (UGT; EC 2.4.1.17) superfamily
covalently link glycosyl groups to lipophilic substrates. UGT1A enzymes,
such as UGT1A5, efficiently use UDP-glucuronic acid as the glycosyl
donor and are invaluable in detoxifying both endogenous and foreign
chemicals, because the glycosylated chemical is more water soluble and
therefore more readily excreted. Several UGT1A enzymes, including
UGT1A5, are encoded by the UGT1A gene complex on chromosome 2q37. Within
this complex, 9 viable first exons are independently spliced to 4 common
exons to generate 9 UGT1A transcripts with unique 5-prime ends and
identical 3-prime ends. UGT1A5, like each first exon within the UGT1A
gene complex, is considered a unique gene linked to the 4 common exons
(Gong et al., 2001; Mackenzie et al., 2005). See 191740 for further
information on the UGT1A gene complex.

CLONING

By screening a genomic cosmid library for sequences similar to UGT1A1
(191740) and UGT1A4 (606429), Ritter et al. (1992) identified an exon
that was 90% similar to exon 1 of UGT1A4; this exon encodes the unique
region of UGT1A5, which they termed UGT1E. Exon 1 is predicted to be
differentially spliced to the common exons 2 through 5 of the UGT1A
genes.

MAPPING

By Southern blot analysis, Ritter et al. (1992) determined that all of
the UGT1A genes map to the same locus on chromosome 2.

REFERENCE 1. Gong, Q.-H.; Cho, J. W.; Huang, T.; Potter, C.; Gholami, N.; Basu,
N. K.; Kubota, S.; Carvalho, S.; Pennington, M. W.; Owens, I. S.;
Popescu, N. C.: Thirteen UDP-glucuronosyltransferase genes are encoded
at the human UGT1 gene complex locus. Pharmacogenetics 11: 357-368,
2001.

2. Mackenzie, P. I.; Bock, K. W.; Burchell, B.; Guillemette, C.; Ikushiro,
S.; Iyanagi, T.; Miners, J. O.; Owens, I. S.; Nebert, D. W.: Nomenclature
update for the mammalian UDP glycosyltransferase (UGT) gene superfamily. Pharmacogenet.
Genomics 15: 677-685, 2005.

3. Ritter, J. K.; Chen, F.; Sheen, Y. Y.; Tran, H. M.; Kimura, S.;
Yeatman, M. T.; Owens, I. S.: A novel complex locus UGT1 encodes
human bilirubin, phenol, and other UDP-glucuronosyltransferase isozymes
with identical carboxyl termini. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 3257-3261,
1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 04/04/2008

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/31/2001

EDITED mgross: 04/04/2008
carol: 11/1/2001
terry: 10/31/2001
carol: 10/31/2001

300841	TITLE *300841 COAGULATION FACTOR VIII; F8
;;FACTOR VIII;;
COAGULATION FACTOR VIIIC, PROCOAGULANT COMPONENT; F8C
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The F8 gene encodes coagulation factor VIII, a large plasma glycoprotein
that functions in the blood coagulation cascade as a cofactor for the
factor IXa (300746)-dependent activation of factor X (F10; 613872).
Factor VIII is activated proteolytically by a variety of coagulation
enzymes, including thrombin (F2; 176930). Factor VIII is tightly
associated in the blood with von Willebrand factor (VWF; 613160), which
serves as a protective carrier protein for factor VIII (summary by Toole
et al., 1984; review by Hoyer, 1994).

CLONING

Fay et al. (1982) isolated a highly purified human factor VIII that
consisted of a single high molecular weight polypeptide chain having the
highest specific activity.

Toole et al. (1984) isolated clones corresponding to the F8 gene from a
human cDNA library. Independently and simultaneously, Gitschier et al.
(1984) and Wood et al. (1984) also cloned and expressed the F8 gene. The
deduced precursor protein has 2,351 amino acids and a molecular mass of
267 kD. The leader sequence of the proprotein contains 19 amino acids,
yielding a mature protein of 2,332 amino acids. The protein has an
obvious domain structure, contains sequence repeats, and is structurally
related to factor V (F5; 612309) and ceruloplasmin (CP; 117700). F8 has
3 copies of an A domain of 330 to 380 amino acids, a B domain of about
925 amino acids, and 2 C domains of about 160 amino acids. The domains
are arranged A1-A2-B-A3-C1-C2. Both A and C repeats show conservation of
cysteines, and the B region contains most potential N-glycosylation
sites. Northern blot analysis detected a 9-kb F8 transcript.

The F8 gene is expressed in human liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and a
variety of other tissues, but not in bone marrow, peripheral blood
lymphocytes, or endothelial cells (Wion et al., 1985).

GENE STRUCTURE

The F8 gene contains 26 exons and spans 186 kb (Gitschier et al., 1984).

Levinson et al. (1990) found a curious example of a gene within a gene.
In looking for transcripts from the Xq28 region, they found one referred
to as the A gene that hybridized to a region in exon 22 of the F8 gene.
The A or F8A gene (305423) was in reverse orientation to F8 and was
contained entirely in intron 22. Computer analysis of the sequence
suggested that the A gene encodes a protein, with the complication that
codon usage analysis suggested a frameshift halfway through the gene.
The A gene cDNA also bound to mouse, monkey, and rat genomic DNA in a
'zoo blot.' The mouse A gene was also found to be on the X chromosome
but not within the mouse F8 gene as it is in the human.

Freije and Schlessinger (1992) demonstrated that the X chromosome
contains 3 copies of F8A and its adjacent regions, 1 in intron 22 and 2
telomeric and upstream to the F8 gene transcription start site. Gene
F8A, which is transcribed in the opposite direction to F8, is intronless
and completely nested within intron 22. Approximately 500 kb upstream of
the F8 gene, there are 2 additional transcribed copies of the F8A gene.
Lakich et al. (1993) pointed out that intron 22 is unusual in many
respects. At 32 kb, it is the largest intron in the F8 gene. It also
contains a CpG island, located about 10 kb downstream of exon 22. This
island appears to serve as a bidirectional promoter for the F8A and F8B
(305424) genes. The F8B gene is also located in intron 22 and is
transcribed in the opposite direction from F8A; its first exon lies
within intron 22 and is spliced to exons 23-26. The F8A and B genes are
both expressed ubiquitously.

Having previously reported the existence of 5 CpG islands close to the
F8 gene, 4 of which they cloned by genomic walking, Gitschier's group
(Kenwrick et al., 1992) reported the isolation of the remaining island,
located approximately 70 kb telomeric of the 5-prime end of the F8 gene.
They identified cDNA clones corresponding to 2 transcribed sequences,
C6.1A (BRCC3; 300617) and C6.1B (MTCP1; 300116), that originate from
this CpG island. The C6.1A gene was highly conserved between species and
expressed abundantly in many human and mouse tissues. No striking
homologies to existing genes could be found for either sequence.
Kenwrick et al. (1992) found that both genes were deleted in 2 brothers
who suffered from mental handicap and dysmorphism as well as hemophilia
A (306700).

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Tantravahi et al. (1986) concluded that the F8
gene is located in the proximal part of chromosome Xq28 with probes DX13
and St14 distally located. Using a hybrid cell line that contains only a
terminal Xq28 fragment, Tantravahi et al. (1986) found that F8 probes
did not hybridize but the DX13 and St14 did hybridize to the DNA of that
cell line.

Patterson et al. (1987) showed that the G6PD (305900) and F8 genes lie
within 500 kb of each other. Arveiler et al. (1989) showed that G6PD and
F8 are in the same 290-kb pulsed field gel electrophoresis fragment, but
did not establish which of the genes is more proximal.

Kenwrick and Gitschier (1989) established the order:
cen--R/GCP--GDX--G6PD--F8--DXS15--tel. The direction of transcription of
the GDX, G6PD, and F8 genes is toward the centromere, i.e., the R/GCP
end of the region. Patterson et al. (1989) showed that the genomic
sequences recognized by the anonymous probe 767 (DXS115) are localized
to 2 sites within Xq28. One site lies within intron 22 of the F8 gene.
The second site, which contains the RFLPs detected by 767, is located
within 1.2 megabases of the F8 gene. Genetic data indicate tight linkage
of F8 and DXS115; maximum lod = 8.30 at theta = 0.04.

G6PD (305900) is one of the 5 rather tightly linked loci located on
Xq28, the others being CBD (303800), CBP (303900), HEMA, and ALD
(300371). In a physical map of the most distal 12 Mb of Xq, Poustka et
al. (1991) found that the F8 gene lies about 1.1 Mb from the telomere,
with G6PD proximal to it, and about 1.5 Mb from the telomere. This
contradicted the earlier impression that the gene is located in the
proximal part of Xq28.

In a 9-year-old Malaysian female with de novo hemophilia A (306700) as
well as a complex de novo translocation involving one X chromosome and
one chromosome 17 (Muneer et al., 1986), Migeon et al. (1993) identified
a breakpoint within Xq28 with deletion of the 5-prime end of the factor
VIII gene, leaving the more proximal G6PD locus intact on the derivative
chromosome 17. As the deleted segment included the 5-prime half of F8C
as well as the subtelomeric DXYS64 locus, they concluded that F8 is
oriented on the chromosome with its 5-prime region closest to the
telomere.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Factor VII is a complex of a large inert carrier protein (VWF; 613160)
and a noncovalently bound small fragment which contains the procoagulant
active site. Zacharski et al. (1968) showed that leukocytes synthesize
some factor VIII in vitro; however, it is synthesized primarily in the
liver.

Cooper and Wagner (1974) presented evidence that the carrier molecule is
normally present in the plasma of hemophilia A patients and

Fay et al. (1982) isolated a highly purified human factor VIII that
consisted of a single high molecular weight polypeptide chain having the
highest specific activity.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Ratnoff and Bennett (1973) reviewed the genetics of hereditary disorders
of blood coagulation.

Gitschier et al. (1985) identified truncating mutations in the F8 gene
(see, e.g., 300841.0001-300841.0003) as the basis for hemophilia A
(306700). A severe hemophiliac with no detectable factor VIIIC activity
had an R2307X mutation (300841.0001). Gitschier et al. (1986) found that
the same codon was converted to glutamine (R2307Q; 300841.0042) in a
mild hemophiliac with 10% of normal activity. A diminished level of
factor VIII Ag in the latter patient coincided with the level of
clotting activity, suggesting that the abnormal factor VIII was
relatively unstable.

In a study of 83 patients with hemophilia A, Youssoufian et al. (1986)
identified 2 different point mutations, one in exon 18 and one in exon
22, that recurred independently in unrelated families. Each mutation
produced a nonsense codon by a change of CG to TG. In the opinion of
Youssoufian et al. (1986), these observations indicated that CpG
dinucleotides are mutation hotspots. It had been postulated that
methylated cytosines may be mutation hotspots because 5-methylcytosine
can spontaneously deaminate to thymine, resulting in a C-to-T transition
in DNA.

Youssoufian et al. (1987) characterized 5 different partial deletions of
the F8 gene in 83 patients with hemophilia. None had developed
circulating inhibitors. One of the deletions occurred de novo in a germ
cell of the maternal grandmother, while a second deletion occurred in a
germ cell of a maternal grandfather. The findings indicated that de novo
deletions of X-linked genes can occur in either male or female gametes.
Youssoufian et al. (1988) reported 6 other partial F8 gene deletions in
severe hemophilia A, bringing to 12 the number of deletions among 240
patients. No association was observed between the size or location of
deletions and the presence of inhibitors to factor VIII. Furthermore, no
'hotspots' for deletion breakpoints were identified.

Youssoufian et al. (1988) screened 240 patients with hemophilia A and
found CG to TG transitions in an exon in 9. They identified novel
missense mutations leading to severe hemophilia A and estimated that the
extent of hypermutability of CpG dinucleotides is 10 to 20 times greater
than the average mutation rate for hemophilia A.

Cooper and Youssoufian (1988) collated reports of single basepair
mutations within gene coding regions causing human genetic disease. They
found that 35% of mutations occurred within CpG dinucleotides. Over 90%
of these mutations were C-to-T or G-to-A transitions, which thus occur
within coding regions at a frequency 42-times higher than that predicted
from random mutation. Cooper and Youssoufian (1988) believed these
findings were consistent with methylation-induced deamination of
5-methylcytosine and suggested that methylation of DNA within coding
regions may contribute significantly to the incidence of human genetic
disease.

Higuchi et al. (1988) found deletion of about 2,000 bases spanning exon
3 and part of IVS3 of the F8 gene in a patient with severe hemophilia A.
The mother was judged to be a somatic mosaic because the defective gene
could be identified in only a portion of the leukocytes and cultured
fibroblasts.

By use of a cDNA probe corresponding to exons 14-26 of F8, Bardoni et
al. (1988) studied 49 Italian patients with severe hemophilia A. They
found no TaqI site mutations, but did find a partial deletion,
eliminating exons 15-18 and spanning about 13 kb (300841.0046), in a
patient with anti-factor VIII antibodies.

In a case of hemophilia A, Kazazian et al. (1988) described the first
instance of insertional mutagenesis in man caused by a long inserted
element (LINE) in the F8 gene. L1 (LINE-1) sequences are a
human-specific family of long, interspersed, repetitive elements,
present in about 100,000 copies dispersed throughout the genome. The
full-length L1 sequence is 6.1 kilobases, but most L1 elements are
truncated at the 5-prime end, resulting in a 5-fold higher copy number
of 3-prime sequences. Kazazian et al. (1988) found insertions of L1
elements into exon 14 of the F8 gene in 2 of 240 unrelated patients with
hemophilia A. Both of these insertions (3.8 and 2.3 kb, respectively)
contained 3-prime portions of the L1 sequence. They interpreted these
results as indicating that certain L1 sequences in man can be dispersed,
presumably by an RNA intermediate, and cause disease by insertional
mutation. Both of the above insertions were de novo events, appearing
either during embryogenesis in the patient or in the mother's germ
cells. The L1 element transposed into one of these patients was
demonstrated by Dombroski et al. (1991) to have come from a
retrotransposable element located on chromosome 22 (see 151626).

Woods-Samuels et al. (1989) characterized a third L1 insertion in intron
10 of the F8 gene of a hemophilia A patient. This L1 insertion was not a
cause of hemophilia in the patient because it was also present in the
maternal grandfather, who did not have the disease. Altogether the L1
insertion was present in 4 generations of the family. All 3 of the L1
insertions discovered by Dombroski et al. (1991) have open reading
frames (ORFs), and the 3 derived amino acid sequences are 98 to 99%
identical. They show similarity in the sequence of the L1 3-prime ORFs,
and the polymerase domain of reverse transcriptase was observed in all 3
L1 insertions. The presence of ORFs and the close sequence similarity of
these recently inserted L1 elements provide indirect evidence for the
existence of a set of functional L1 elements that encodes 1 or more
proteins necessary for their retrotransposition.

In studies of 83 unrelated Finnish patients with hemophilia A, Levinson
et al. (1990) identified specific mutations, falling into 3 classes, in
10 patients: 5 mutations caused loss of TaqI restriction sites; 1 point
mutation resulted in a new TaqI site; and 4 represented partial gene
deletions. Although exons 5 and 6 were involved in 3 of the 4 partial
gene deletions, the extent of the DNA loss differed in each. The fourth
deletion was located entirely within intron 1. There was no history of
hemophilia in 8 of the 10 families. The origin of the mutation was
determined in 6 of these pedigrees, 2 of which showed evidence for
maternal mosaicism.

Brocker-Vriends et al. (1990) described a case of hemophilia A due to
partial deletion of the F8 gene of about 2 kb, spanning exon 5 and part
of introns 4 and 5; the mother was a somatic and presumably gonadal
mosaic for the mutation although coagulation assays and RFLP analysis in
the family did not suggest a carrier status.

McGinniss et al. (1993) reported that half of hemophilia A patients have
no detectable factor VIII; about 5% have normal levels of dysfunctional
factor VIII as protein and are termed CRM-+, whereas the rest ( 45%)
have plasma factor VIII Ag protein reduced to an extent roughly
comparable to the level of factor VIIIC activity and are designated
CRM-reduced. They found in an analysis of mutations that almost all
CRM-positive/reduced mutations (24/26) were missense, and many (12/26)
occurred at CpG dinucleotides. They showed that 18 of 19 amino acid
residues altered by mutation in these patients were conserved in the
porcine and murine sequences. Almost half of the mutations (11/26) were
clustered in the A2 domain.

In a review, Antonarakis et al. (1995) collected the findings of more
than 1,000 hemophilia subjects examined for F8 gene mutations. These
include point mutations, inversions, deletions, and unidentified
mutations which constitute 46%, 42%, 8%, 4%, and 91%, 0%, 0%, and 9%,
respectively, of those with severe versus mild to moderate disease,
respectively, in selected studies. The 266 point mutations described as
of April, 1994 comprised missense (53%), CpG-to-TpG (16%), small
deletions (12%), nonsense (9%), small inversions and splicing (3% each),
and missense polymorphisms and silent mutations in exons (2% each). In
addition to these point mutations 100 different larger deletions and 9
insertion mutations had been reported.

In a study of 147 sporadic cases of severe hemophilia A, Becker et al.
(1996) were able to identify the causative defect in the F8 gene in 126
patients (85.7%). An inversion of the gene was found in 55 patients
(37.4%), a point mutation in 47 (32%), a small deletion in 14 (9.5%), a
large deletion in 8 (5.4%), and a small insertion in 2 (1.4%). In 4
(2.7%), mutations were localized but not yet sequenced. No mutation was
identified in 17 patients (11.6%). The identified mutations occurred in
the B domain in 16 (10.9%); 4 of these were located in an adenosine
nucleotide stretch at codon 1192, indicating a mutation hotspot. Somatic
mosaicism was detected in 3 (3.9%) of 76 patients' mothers, comprising 3
of 16 de novo mutations in the patients' mothers. Investigation of
family relatives allowed detection of a de novo mutation in 16 of 76
2-generation and 28 of 34 3-generation families. On the basis of these
data, Becker et al. (1996) estimated the male:female ratio of mutation
frequencies (k) to be 3.6. By use of the quotients of mutation origin in
maternal grandfather to patients' mother or to maternal grandmother, k
values were directly estimated as 15 and 7.5, respectively. Considering
each mutation type separately, they found a mutation type-specific sex
ratio of mutation frequencies. Point mutations showed a
5-to-10-fold-higher and inversions a more than 10-fold-higher mutation
rate in male germ cells, whereas deletions showed a more than
5-fold-higher mutation rate in female germ cells. Consequently, and in
accordance with the data of other disorders such as Duchenne muscular
dystrophy, the results indicated to Becker et al. (1996) that at least
for X-chromosomal disorders the male:female mutation rate is determined
by its proportion of the different mutation types.

The molecular diagnosis of hemophilia A is challenging because of the
high number of different causative mutations that are distributed
through the large F8 gene. The putative role of the novel mutations,
especially missense mutations, may be difficult to interpret as causing
hemophilia A. Guillet et al. (2006) identified 95 novel mutations out of
180 different mutations found among 515 patients with hemophilia A from
406 unrelated families followed up at a single hemophilia treatment
center in a Paris hospital. The 95 novel mutations comprised 55 missense
mutations, 12 nonsense mutations, 11 splice site mutations, and 17 small
insertions/deletions. They used a strategy in interpreting the causality
of novel F8 mutations based on a combination of the familial segregation
of the mutation, the resulting biologic and clinical hemophilia A
phenotype, and the molecular consequences of the amino acid
substitution. For the latter, they studied the putative biochemical
modifications: its conservation status with cross-species factor VIII
and homologous proteins, its putative location in known factor VIII
functional regions, and its spatial position in the available factor
VIII 3D structures.

Among 1,410 Italian patients with hemophilia A, Santacroce et al. (2008)
identified 382 different mutations in the F8 gene, 217 (57%) of which
had not previously been reported. Mutations leading to a null allele
accounted for 82%, 15%, and less than 1% of severe, moderate, or mild
hemophilia, respectively. Missense mutations were identified in 16%,
68%, and 81% of severe, moderate, or mild hemophilia, respectively,
yielding a good genotype/phenotype correlation useful for treatment and
genetic counseling.

In order to establish a national database of F8 mutations, Green et al.
(2008) identified and cataloged multiple mutations in approximately
one-third of the U.K. hemophilia A population. The risk of developing
inhibitors for patients with nonsense mutations was greater when the
stop codon was in the 3-prime half of the mRNA. The most common change
was the intron 22 inversion (300841.0067), which accounted for 16.6% of
all mutations and for 38% of those causing severe disease.

- Inversion Mutations in Intron 22 of the F8 Gene

Intron 22 of the human F8 gene is hypomethylated on the active X and
methylated on the inactive X. Inaba et al. (1990) described an MspI RFLP
in intron 22 of the F8 gene. Japanese showed 45% heterozygosity and
Asian Indians showed 13%; polymorphism was not found in American blacks
or Caucasians.

Naylor et al. (1992) found an unusual cluster of mutations involving
regions of intron 22 not examined earlier and leading to defective
joining of exons 22 and 23 in the mRNA (300841.0067) as the cause of
hemophilia A in 10 of 24 severely affected UK patients. These results
confirmed predictions about the efficacy of the mRNA-based method
suggested by Naylor et al. (1991), and also excluded hypotheses
proposing that mutations outside the F8 gene are responsible for a large
proportion of severe hemophilia A.

Of the 28 patients reported by Naylor et al. (1993), 5 had mild or
moderate disease and all had a missense mutation. The other 23 patients
were severely affected; unexpectedly, intron 22 seemed to be the target
of approximately 40% of the mutations causing severe hemophilia A.
Naylor et al. (1993) found that the basis of the unique F8 mRNA defect
that prevented PCR amplification across the boundary between exons 22
and 23 was an abnormality in the internal regions of intron 22. They
showed that exons 1-22 of the F8 mRNA had become part of a hybrid
message containing new multi-exonic sequences expressed in normal cells.
The novel sequences were not located in a YAC containing the whole F8
gene. Southern blots from patients probed by novel sequences and clones
covering intron 22 showed no obvious abnormalities. Naylor et al. (1993)
also suggested that inversions involving intron 22 repeated sequences
are the basis of the mRNA defect. These mutations in severely affected
patients occur at the surprising rate of approximately 4 x 10(-6) per
gene per gamete per generation. Furthermore, it has been shown that
these de novo inversions occur more frequently in males than females
with a ratio of 302:1 estimated in male:female germ cells.

The F8A gene (305423) is contained entirely within intron 22 of the F8
gene and is transcript in the reverse orientation from the F8 gene
(Levinson et al., 1990). Lakich et al. (1993) proposed that many of the
previously unidentified mutations resulting in severe hemophilia A are
based on recombination between the homologous F8A sequences within
intron 22 and upstream of the F8 gene. Such a recombination would lead
to an inversion of all intervening DNA and a disruption of the gene.
Lakich et al. (1993) presented evidence to support this model and
described a Southern blot assay that detects the inversion. They
suggested that this assay should permit genetic prediction of hemophilia
A in approximately 45% of families with severe disease.

Rossiter et al. (1994) hypothesized that pairing of Xq with its homolog
inhibits the intrachromosomal inversion that is responsible for nearly
half of all cases of severe hemophilia A. This would predict that the
event originates predominantly in male germ cells. They presented
findings supporting the hypothesis: in all 20 informative cases in which
the inversion originated in a maternal grandparent, DNA polymorphism
analysis determined that it occurred in the male germline. In addition,
all but 1 of 50 mothers of sporadic cases due to an inversion were
carriers.

Inversion mutations resulting from recombinations between DNA sequences
in the A gene in intron 22 of the F8 gene and 1 of 2 other A genes
upstream to F8 have been shown to cause a large portion of cases. From
data on more than 2,000 samples, Antonarakis et al. (1995) concluded
that the common inversion mutations are found in 42% of all severe
hemophilia A subjects. Whereas 98% of the mothers of those with
inversions were carriers of the inversion, only about 1 de novo
inversion was found in maternal cells for every 25 mothers of sporadic
cases. When the maternal grandparental origin of inversions was examined
the ratio of de novo occurrences in male:female germ cells was 69:1.

Brinke et al. (1996) reported the presence of a novel inversion in 2
hemophilic monozygotic twins. These patients showed an inversion that
affects the first intron of the F8 gene, displacing the most telomeric
exon (exon 1) of F8 further towards the telomere and close to the C6.1A
gene (BRCC3; 300617). Brinke et al. (1996) noted that this novel
inversion creates 2 hybrid transcription units. One of these is formed
by the promoter and first exon of F8 and widely expressed sequences that
map telomeric to the C6.1A sequence. The other hybrid transcription unit
contains the CpG island and all of the known sequence of C6.1A and the
3-prime section of most of the F8 gene.

It is hypothesized that the inversion mutations occur almost exclusively
in germ cells during meiotic cell division by an intrachromosomal
recombination between a 9.6-kb sequence within intron 22 and 1 of 2
almost identical copies located about 300 kb distal to the F8 gene at
the telomeric end of the X chromosome. Most inversion mutations
originate in male germ cells, where the lack of bivalent formation may
facilitate flipping of the telomeric end of the single X chromosome.
Oldenburg et al. (2000) reported the first instance of intron 22
inversion presenting as somatic mosaicism in a female, affecting only
about 50% of lymphocyte and fibroblast cells of the proposita. Supposing
a postzygotic de novo mutation as the usual cause of somatic mosaicism,
the finding implies that the intron 22 inversion mutation is not
restricted to meiotic cell divisions but can also occur during mitotic
cell divisions, either in germ cell precursors or in somatic cells.

- Hemophilia A with Inhibitors

Approximately 10 to 20% of patients with severe hemophilia A develop
antibodies, known as inhibitors, to factor VIII following treatment with
with exogenous factor VIII. Most of these patients have nonsense
mutations or deletions in the F8 gene (Antonarakis et al., 1995).

Antonarakis et al. (1985) identified several molecular defects in
families with hemophilia A. One family had a deletion of about 80 kb in
the F8 gene, whereas another had a single nucleotide change in the
coding region of the gene, resulting in a nonsense codon and premature
termination. In addition, they used 2 common polymorphic sites in the F8
gene to differentiate the normal gene from the defective gene in 4 of 6
obligate carriers from families with patients in whom inhibitors did not
develop. In both the family with a large deletion and the family with
premature termination, affected persons developed inhibitors.

A variety of F8 gene mutations have been found in patients with
hemophilia A due to inhibitors. Among 30 such cases, Antonarakis et al.
(1995) found that 87 and 13% had different nonsense and missense
mutations, respectively. F8 gene inversions do not seem to be a major
predisposing factor for the development of inhibitors. Among severe
hemophilia A cases, 16% of those without inversions and 20% of those
with inversions developed inhibitors.

Schwaab et al. (1995) found that the probability of developing factor
VIII inhibitors is greater in patients with large deletions in the F8
gene.

Viel et al. (2009) sequenced the F8 gene in 78 black patients with
hemophilia to identify the causative mutations and background
haplotypes, which the authors designated H1 to H5. They found that 24%
of the patients had an H3 or H4 haplotype, and that the prevalence of
inhibitors was higher among patients with either of those haplotypes
than among patients with haplotypes H1 or H2 (odds ratio, 3.6; p =
0.04), despite a similar spectrum of hemophilic mutations and degree of
severity of illness in the 2 subgroups. Noting that Caucasians carry
only the H1 or H2 haplotypes and that most blood donors are Caucasian,
Viel et al. (2009) suggested that mismatched factor VIII replacement
therapy might be a risk factor for the development of anti-factor VIII
alloantibodies.

- Mutation Detection Methods

Levinson et al. (1987) used RNAse A cleavage and DNA sequencing of the
altered region to identify a mutation in the F8 gene in a case of
hemophilia. The mutation identified by Levinson et al. (1987) was a
novel G-to-C transversion which resulted in a missense mutation, with
proline being substituted for arginine in one of the active domains of
the factor VIII molecule.

Since point mutations in the F8 gene are responsible for most cases of
hemophilia A and only a small proportion of these mutations could be
recognized by restriction endonuclease analysis, Traystman et al. (1990)
used PCR and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) to
characterize single nucleotide substitutions. A GC clamp was attached to
the 5-prime PCR primer to allow detection of most single base changes in
DNA fragments ranging in size from 249 to 356 bp. (A 'GC clamp' is a
sequence rich in G and C such that it is relatively resistant to melting
by heating; see Myers et al., 1985, 1985 and Abrams et al., 1990.) Ten
of 11 known point mutations were definitively separated. Traystman et
al. (1990) then used these methods, applied to exon 8, the 3-prime end
of exon 14, exon 17, exon 18, and exon 24, in a study of 52 patients
with unknown mutations. A 'new' disease-producing mutation was found in
2 of the patients: a missense mutation in exon 14 (tyr1709-to-cys and
asn1922-to-asp). A previously described mutation in exon 24
(arg2209-to-gln) In addition, a new polymorphic nucleotide substitution
was found in intron 7. Traystman et al. (1990) detected all of these
mutations when the GC-clamped products from all 5 regions were run in
the same denaturing gel.

Kogan and Gitschier (1990) likewise used DGGE to identify mutations and
found a DNA polymorphism, located in intron 7, which they thought might
be useful for genetic prediction in cases in which the BclI and XbaI
polymorphisms are uninformative.

Higuchi et al. (1991) pointed out that whereas nearly all mutations
resulting in mild to moderate hemophilia B could be detected by PCR and
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), these methods sufficed
in only 16 of 30 (53%) patients with severe hemophilia A. They
interpreted this to indicate that the mutations in DNA sequence lay
outside the regions studied and may include locus-controlling regions,
other sequences within introns or outside the gene that are important
for its expression, or perhaps another gene involved in factor VIII
expression that is very closely linked to the F8 gene. Higuchi et al.
(1991) designed a total of 45 primer sets to amplify 99% of the coding
region of the F8C gene and 41 of 50 splice junctions. After PCR
amplification they used denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE)
to identify successfully the point mutations in 26 DNAs with different
previously identified changes. Among 29 patients with unknown mutations,
they identified the disease-producing change in 25 (86%). Two
polymorphisms and 2 rare normal variants were also found.

Naylor et al. (1992) used an mRNA-based method to examine hemophilia A
mutations and were able to explain the report of Higuchi et al. (1991)
that mutations could not be identified in 14 of 30 severely affected
patients although mutations were found in all but 1 of 17 less severely
affected patients.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

In a Japanese family with mild to moderately severe hemophilia A, Young
et al. (1997) found a deletion of a single nucleotide T within an
A(8)TA(2) sequence of exon 14 of the F8 gene. The severity of the
clinical phenotype did not correspond to that expected of a frameshift
mutation. A small amount of functional factor VIII protein was detected
in the patient's plasma. Analysis of DNA and RNA molecules from normal
and affected individuals and in vitro transcription/translation
suggested a partial correction of the molecular defect, because of the
following: (i) DNA replication/RNA transcription errors resulted in
restoration of the reading frame and/or (ii) 'ribosomal frameshifting'
resulted in the production of normal factor VIII polypeptide and, thus,
in a milder-than-expected hemophilia A. All of these mechanisms probably
were promoted by the longer run of adenines, A(10) instead of A(8)TA(2),
after the deleted T. Young et al. (1997) concluded that errors in the
complex steps of gene expression therefore may partially correct a
severe frameshift defect and ameliorate an expected severe phenotype.

Cutler et al. (2002) identified 81 mutations in the F8C gene in 96
unrelated patients, all of whom had previously typed negative for the
common IVS22 inversion mutation (300841.0067). Forty-one of these
mutations were not recorded in F8C gene mutation databases. Analysis of
these 41 mutations with regard to location, possible cross-species
conservation, and type of substitution, in correlation with the clinical
severity of the disease, supported the view that the phenotypic result
of a mutation in the F8C gene correlates more with the position of the
amino acid change within the 3-dimensional structure of the protein than
with the actual nature of the alteration.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2307TER

Gitschier et al. (1985) identified this mutation due to a CGA-to-TGA
change in codon 2326 in exon 26 in a patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700). Nonsense mutations and a different missense (arg-to-gln)
mutation have previously been observed in the same codon. It was pointed
out that the G-to-T transversion is contrary to the rule of CG-to-TG
mutations at CG dinucleotides, which represent the overwhelming
majority.

.0002
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2209TER

In a severe case of hemophilia A (306700), Gitschier et al. (1985) found
change in codon 2228 in exon 24 from CGA to TGA to result in conversion
of arg2209 to stop. This mutation has also been found by others
(Youssoufian et al., 1986).

.0003
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX26DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Gitschier et al. (1985)
found deletion of about 22 kb including exon 26.

.0004
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2116TER

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH5), Youssoufian et al.
(1986) found change of codon 2135 from CGA to TGA, resulting in
conversion of amino acid 2116 to stop.

.0005
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX6DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH6), Youssoufian et al.
(1987) found deletion of exon 6.

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (patient 2213), Levinson et al.
(1990) found a deletion of exon 6 of the factor VIII gene. Schwaab et
al. (1993) identified 2 patients with this deletion. See also Lin et al.
(1993) and Antonarakis et al. (1995).

.0006
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX14DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH7), Youssoufian et al.
(1987) found deletion of exon 14.

In 3 patients with severe hemophilia A, Krepelova et al. (1992) found a
deletion of exon 14 of the factor VIII gene. See also 300841.0029,
300841.0047, and 300841.0049.

.0007
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX24-25DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH8), Youssoufian et al.
(1987) found deletion of exons 24 and 25.

.0008
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX23-25DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH9), Youssoufian et al.
(1987) found deletion of exons 23-25.

.0009
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX22DEL

In a case of moderately severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH10), Youssoufian
et al. (1987) found 'in-frame' deletion of exon 22.

.0010
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX26DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH12), Antonarakis et al.
(1995) found deletion of exon 26. The mother showed mosaicism for this
mutation.

.0011
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX1DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH13), Youssoufian et al.
(1988) found deletion of exon 1.

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (patient H309), Millar et al.
(1990) found a deletion of exon 1 of the factor VIII gene. See also
Wehnert et al. (1989), Higuchi et al. (1991), Schwaab et al. (1993), and
Antonarakis et al. (1995), who reported patients with deletion of exon
1.

.0012
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2147TER

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH14), Youssoufian et al.
(1988) found a CGA to TGA change in codon 2166, resulting in a change in
ARG2147 to a termination codon.

.0013
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, NEW SPLICE DONOR, IVS4

In a case of mild hemophilia A (306700) (JH17), Youssoufian et al.
(1988) found the creation of a new splice donor site created in intron 4
by a GAA to AAA change.

.0014
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2209GLN

In 2 cases of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH18, JH19), Youssoufian et
al. (1988) found a CGA-to-CAA change in codon 2228, resulting in
substitution of glutamine for arginine as amino acid 2209. This mutation
has also been found by others (Bernardi et al., 1989; Levinson et al.,
1990; Traystman et al., 1990).

.0015
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU272GLY

Youssoufian et al. (1988) demonstrated the usefulness of DNA
amplification followed by direct nucleotide sequencing in the search for
mutations in X-linked disorders because of the unambiguous sequencing
data obtained when the amplified DNA is from a male patient. In a
17-year-old Greek male with moderately severe hemophilia A (306700)
(JH20), they detected a mutation by analysis of genomic DNA with TaqI;
contrary to previous experience, the mutation was not a C-to-T or G-to-A
transition. (The unifying mechanism of these mutations is thought to be
methylation-induced C-to-T transitions at CpG dinucleotides involving
either the coding or the complementary strand of DNA; see Bird (1980).)
In this case the point mutation was in exon 7, where codon 291 for
glutamate (GAA) was changed to one for glycine (GGA), leading to a
change in amino acid 272 of the mature factor VIII protein. The mutation
had arisen de novo in a germ cell of the patient's mother. The patient
had 2% factor VIII activity, 3.5% factor VIII antigen, and moderate
hemophilia A.

.0016
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX2-3DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH21), Youssoufian et al.
(1988) found deletion of exons 2 and 3.

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (patient 656), Higuchi et al.
(1988) found a deletion of exons 2-3 of the factor VIII gene.

.0017
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX3-13DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH22), Youssoufian et al.
(1988) found deletion of exons 3-13.

.0018
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX4-25DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH23), Youssoufian et al.
(1988) found deletion of exons 4-25.

.0019
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX7-14DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH24), Youssoufian et al.
(1988) found deletion of exons 7-14.

.0020
FACTOR VIII POLYMORPHISM
F8, LINE INS, IVS10

In a normal individual (JH25), Woods-Samuels et al. (1989) found
insertion of 0.7 kb of LINE sequence in intron 10.

.0021
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX26DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH26), Youssoufian et
al. (1988) found deletion of exon 26. Also see Gitschier et al. (1985)
and Bernardi et al. (1989).

.0022
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LINE INS, EX14

In 2 brothers with severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH27, JH28), Kazazian
et al. (1988) found insertion of 3.8 kb of LINE sequence in exon 14.

.0023
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX15DEL

In a patient (JH29) with severe hemophilia A (306700) and a
translocation t(X;17), Antonarakis et al. (1995) found deletion of exon
15.

.0024
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, EX8

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH31), Higuchi et al.
(1990) found deletion of GA from codon 360 GAA in exon 8.

.0025
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2307LEU

In a Japanese patient with mild hemophilia A (306700) (JH32), Inaba et
al. (1989) found a CGA-to-CTA change in codon 2326 in exon 26, resulting
in substitution of leucine for arginine at amino acid 2307. PCR and
nucleotide sequencing were used to identify the defect, which caused an
alteration in a TaqI site.

.0026
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1941GLN

In a Japanese patient with mild hemophilia A (306700) (JH33),
Antonarakis (unpublished observations) found a CGA-to-CAA change in exon
1960 in exon 18, resulting in substitution of glutamine for arginine as
amino acid 1941. This mutation was also found in a Finnish patient by
Levinson et al. (1990).

.0027
FACTOR VIII (OKAYAMA)
F8, ARG372HIS

In a case of CRM-positive hemophilia A (306700) (JH35), Arai et al.
(1989) found a change of arginine-372 to histidine, resulting from a
CGC-to-CAC change in codon 391 in exon 8. The mutation was at the site
of thrombin cleavage. Shima et al. (1989) found the same change in what
they called factor VIII (Okayama).

.0028
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU1686TER

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH36), Higuchi et al.
(1990) found a CAG-to-TAG change in codon 1705, causing replacement of
glutamic acid 1686 by a stop signal.

.0029
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX14DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH37), Higuchi et al.
(1989) found deletion of exon 14.

.0030
HEMOPHILIA A
FACTOR VIII (EAST HARTFORD)
F8, ARG1689CYS

In a patient with moderately severe hemophilia A (306700) of a
CRM-positive type, Gitschier (1988) found a CGC-to-TGC change in codon
1708 in exon 14, resulting in a change of arginine-1689 to cysteine. The
mutation affects the thrombin cleavage site. The same mutation was
subsequently found in additional patients (JH38, JH39) by Arai et al.
(1990). Aly et al. (1992) found that cysteamine, which is known to
modify mutant proteins with an arg-to-cys substitution, enhances the
procoagulant activity of the mutant factor VIII, which they referred to
as factor VIII-East Hartford. Aly and Hoyer (1992) demonstrated that the
East Hartford mutant protein had procoagulant activity when separated
from von Willebrand factor; this was taken to indicate that the
dissociation of factor VIII from VWF is an essential effect of factor
VIII light chain cleavage at arginine-1689.

.0031
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR1680PHE

In a patient with mild hemophilia A (306700) (JH40), Higuchi et al.
(1990) found a TAT-to-TTT change in codon 1699, resulting in
substitution of phenylalanine for tyrosine at amino acid 1680. The
mutation affected the von Willebrand binding site.

.0032
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR1709CYS

In a patient with hemophilia A (306700) (JH41), Traystman et al. (1990)
found a TAT-to-TGT change in codon 1728 of exon 14, leading to
substitution of cysteine for tyrosine-1709.

.0033
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX11-18DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH1), Antonarakis et al.
(1985) found deletion of exons 11-18.

.0034
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1941TER

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH2), Antonarakis et al.
(1985) found change in codon 1960 in exon 18 from CGA to TGA which
converted arg1941 to stop. Youssoufian et al. (1986) found the same
mutation in another case of severe hemophilia A (JH3).

.0035
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX3DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1989)
found a deletion of exon 3 about 2 kb in length.

.0036
FACTOR VIII POLYMORPHISM
F8, 7-KB DEL, IVS1

Levinson et al. (1990) found a deletion of 7 kb from IVS1 as a presumed
normal variant of factor VIII.

.0037
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX1-5DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1989)
found a 35+ kb deletion removing exons 1 to 5.

.0038
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX1-22DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lillicrap et al. (1986)
found a 127+ kb deletion that removed exons 1 to 22.

.0039
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX26DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1989)
found deletion of exon 26.

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (patient HDX5), Bernardi et al.
(1989) found a deletion of exon 26 of the factor VIII gene. This
deletion was also reported by Nafa et al. (1990), Lavergne et al.
(1992), Schwaab et al. (1993), and Antonarakis et al. (1995).

.0040
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX1-26DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Casarino et al. (1986)
found a 178+ kb deletion that removed exons 1 to 26.

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (patient H1) and factor VIII
inhibitors, Casula et al. (1990) found a total deletion of the factor
VIII gene.

.0041
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG372CYS

This change was found in a case of moderately severe hemophilia A
(306700) by Shima et al. (1989). The mutation is in the thrombin
cleavage activator site. O'Brien et al. (1990) studied the relationship
between structure and dysfunction.

.0042
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2307GLN

Gitschier et al. (1986) found this mutation in a case of mild hemophilia
A (306700).

.0043
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU2166SER

Levinson et al. (1990) found this mutation in a patient with less than
1% factor VIII activity and clinically severe hemophilia A (306700). The
substitution was caused by a T-to-C transition at position 6555 in exon
23.

.0044
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2116PRO

Levinson et al. (1987) found this mutation in a severe case of
hemophilia A (306700).

.0045
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER170LEU

Chan et al. (1989) found this mutation in a moderately severe case of
hemophilia A (306700).

.0046
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX15-18DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Bardoni et al. (1988)
found deletion of exons 15 to 18.

.0047
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX14DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) with inhibitors, Higuchi
et al. (1989) found deletion of exon 14.

.0048
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX23-25DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Gitschier (1988) found
deletion of exons 23 to 25 as a result of a complex rearrangement with
deletion-duplication.

.0049
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX14DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) accompanied by
inhibitors, Mikami (1988) found deletion of exon 14.

.0050
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX7-9DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) with inhibitors, Higuchi
et al. (1989) found deletion of exons 7 to 9.

.0051
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX5DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Levinson et al. (1990)
found a 3- to 6-kb deletion removing exon 5.

.0052
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX5DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Levinson et al. (1990)
found a deletion of about 10 kb removing exon 5.

.0053
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX5DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Briet et al. (1989)
found a deletion of about 2 kb removing exon 5. Somatic and gonadal
mosaicism was demonstrated in the mother.

.0054
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX5-6 DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) with inhibitors, Levinson
et al. (1990) found a deletion of 3-10 kb removing exons 5 and 6.

.0055
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG336TER

Gitschier et al. (1986) found this mutation in a patient with severe
hemophilia A (306700).

.0057
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASN1922ASP

Traystman et al. (1990) demonstrated this mutation in patients with
hemophilia A (306700).

.0058
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, CYS329ARG

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Kogan and Gitschier
(1990) demonstrated a thymine-to-cytosine mutation that changed the
cysteine at codon 329 to an arginine. They used denaturing gel
electrophoresis for this purpose.

.0059
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, VAL326LEU

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Kogan and Gitschier
(1990) demonstrated a guanine-to-cytosine change within codon 326
resulting in a valine-to-leucine change.

Higuchi et al. (1990) found the same mutation in a patient with severe
hemophilia A (JH30).

.0060
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 4-BP DEL, FS

By means of denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, Kogan and Gitschier
(1990) demonstrated a deletion of 4 nucleotides within the region coding
for the first acidic domain. The mutation caused a frameshift and a
truncated protein product. The deletion occurred in a repetitive AAT and
AAG motif. Small deletions in repeat sequences are thought to occur by a
'slipped mispairing' mechanism during DNA replication.

.0061
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX13DUP

In a patient with mild hemophilia A (306700), Murru et al. (1990)
characterized a duplication in exon 13. The duplication was the result
of nonhomologous breakage and reunion of 2 misaligned wildtype
chromosomes. Sequence analysis of the breakpoint region showed AT-rich
sequences and possible topoisomerase I sites, whose involvement in cases
of illegitimate recombination has been postulated.

.0062
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG427TER

Berg et al. (1990) took advantage of the fact that extremely low
background levels of correctly spliced mRNA transcripts of
tissue-specific genes can be demonstrated in a number of supposedly
nonexpressing' cell types. This 'ectopic' or 'illegitimate'
transcription was used to demonstrate the diagnostic utility of such
transcripts in the construction of specific cDNAs derived from readily
accessible 'nonexpressing' tissue, e.g., lymphocytes in the case of
hemophilia A. Using PCR and direct sequencing, they demonstrated a novel
mutation: a CGA-to-TGA transition at arginine 427.

.0063
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU1704LYS

In a patient with sporadic severe hemophilia A (306700), Paynton et al.
(1991) identified a G-to-A transition resulting in substitution of
lysine for glutamate-1704 (E1704K). The origin of the mutation was shown
to be in the maternal grandfather who was 27 years old when his daughter
was conceived.

.0064
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PRO2300SER

In a sporadic case of mild hemophilia A (306700), Paynton et al. (1991)
demonstrated a C-to-T transition that resulted in mutation of serine for
proline-2300. Paynton et al. (1991) used PCR amplification of specific
alleles (PASA) to screen 96 unrelated hemophiliacs for the P2300S
mutation; none of these patients had the mutation.

.0065
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, MET1772THR

In a study of the molecular defects responsible for crossreacting
material-positive hemophilia A (306700), Aly et al. (1992) found 2
patients in whom the nonfunctional factor VIII-like protein had
abnormal, slower-moving heavy or light chains on SDS/PAGE. Both patients
had severe hemophilia A with less than 1% of normal factor VIII activity
but with normal plasma level of factor VIII antigen. By denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis screening of PCR-amplified products of the
factor VIII coding DNA sequence, followed by nucleotide sequencing of
the abnormal PCR products, they identified in 1 patient a met1772-to-thr
mutation that created a potential new N-glycosylation site at
asparagine-1770 in the factor VIII light chain. In the second patient,
an isoleucine-to-threonine substitution at position 566 created a
potential new N-glycosylation site at asparagine-564 in the A2 domain of
the factor VIII heavy chain.

Abnormal N-glycosylation, blocking factor VIII probe procoagulant
activity, represented a previously unrecognized mechanism for the
pathogenesis of severe hemophilia A.

.0066
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ILE566THR

See 300841.0065.

.0067
HEMOPHILIA A, SEVERE
F8, IVS22 INV

Lakich et al. (1993) concluded that many mutations in the F8C gene
result from recombination between homologous sequences within intron 22
of the F8C gene and those upstream of the gene. Such a recombination
would lead to an inversion of all intervening DNA and a disruption of
the gene. Among 23 patients with severe hemophilia A (306700), Naylor et
al. (1993) found that approximately 40% were on the basis of this
mutation involving intron 22.

It is hypothesized that the inversion mutations occur almost exclusively
in germ cells during meiotic cell division by an intrachromosomal
recombination between a 9.6-kb sequence within intron 22 and 1 of 2
almost identical copies located about 300 kb distal to the factor VIII
gene at the telomeric end of the X chromosome. Most inversion mutations
originate in male germ cells, where the lack of bivalent formation may
facilitate flipping of the telomeric end of the single X chromosome.
Oldenburg et al. (2000) reported the first instance of intron 22
inversion presenting as somatic mosaicism in a female, affecting only
about 50% of lymphocyte and fibroblast cells of the proposita. Supposing
a postzygotic de novo mutation as the usual cause of somatic mosaicism,
the finding implies that the intron 22 inversion mutation is not
restricted to meiotic cell divisions but can also occur during mitotic
cell divisions, either in germ cell precursors or in somatic cells.

Lozier et al. (2002) found that the defect in the Chapel Hill hemophilia
A dog colony started by Brinkhous and Graham (1950) replicates the F8
gene inversion commonly seen in humans with severe hemophilia A.

.0068
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS6DS, A-G, +3, 186-BP DEL, EX5-6 DEL

Bidichandani et al. (1994) studied 15 randomly selected hemophilia A
(306700) patients, 9 of whom were severely affected. They reported a new
mutation affecting the intron 6 splice donor site in the factor VIII
gene of 2 patients, that corresponds to an exon skipping event involving
exon 5 and 6. The mutation is an A-to-G substitution at position +3 in
the splice donor site of intron 6 in both the patients. This exon
skipping event left the translational frame intact, and the resultant
in-frame deletion of 186-bp in the mature mRNA is predicted to cause a
shortening of the mature factor VIII polypeptide by 62 amino acid
residues. Direct sequencing showed that exon 5 is consistently skipped
along with exon 6 in the mature factor VIII mRNA. Both patients have a
disease of moderate severity and residual factor VIII activity 3% of the
normal. Bidichandani et al. (1994) noted that a patient lacking exon 5
and 6 in the mature factor VIII mRNA due to gross DNA deletion has
previously been reported to have severe hemophilia A.

.0069
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG-5TER

In 2 patients with hemophilia A (306700), Pattinson et al. (1990)
identified mutation of CGA to TGA at codon -5 in exon 1, resulting in a
stop codon. The C-to-T transition follows the rule of CG-to-TG mutations
at CG dinucleotides. This mutation has also been found by others (Reiner
and Thompson, 1992).

.0070
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU7ARG

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a CTG-to-CGG transversion at codon 7 in exon 1 of
the A1 domain, resulting in arginine for leucine-7.

.0071
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU11VAL

Diamond et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The substitution is caused by a GAA-to-GTA
transversion at codon 11 in exon 1, resulting in valine for glutamic
acid-11. This mutation is found in the A1 domain.

.0072
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 89-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported in a patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 89 nucleotides from codon 14 to 29 in exon 1,
resulting in a frameshift.

.0073
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY22CYS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this substitution in 2 patients with
less than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a GGT-to-TGT transversion at codon 22 in exon 1 of
the A1 domain, resulting in cysteine for glycine-22.

.0074
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 10-BP INS, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the insertion of 10 nucleotides (TTCCATTCAA) resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codon 38 in exon 2.

.0075
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 2 nucleotides (AA) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 48 in exon 2.

.0076
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 4-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported in a patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 4 nucleotides (GTTT) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 50 in exon 2.

.0077
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et al.
(1995) reported the deletion of 2 nucleotides (GT) resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codon 102 or 3 in exon 3.

.0078
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 23-BP DEL, FS

Higuchi et al. (1991) identified in a patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 23 nucleotides resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 104 in exon 3.

.0079
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS4AS, A-G, -2

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported the substitution of A to G at the
second nucleotide of the acceptor splice site of intron 4, resulting in
abnormal splicing. The patient had 1.7% factor VIII activity, 1.3%
factor VIII antigen, and a severe hemophilia A (306700).

.0080
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY70ASP

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this gly70-to-asp mutation in a
patient with less than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a GGT-to-GAT transition at codon 70
in exon 3 of the A1 domain.

.0081
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY73VAL

Diamond et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GGT-to-GTT
transversion at codon 73 in exon 3 of the A1 domain, resulting in valine
for glycine-73.

.0082
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, VAL80ASP

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this val80-to-asp mutation in a
patient with less than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a GTT-to-GAT transversion at codon
80 in exon 3 of the A1 domain.

.0083
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, VAL85ASP

Diamond et al. (1992) found this val85-to-asp mutation in a patient with
mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GTC-to-GAC
transversion at codon 85 in exon 3 of the A1 domain.

.0084
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LYS89THR

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this lys89-to-thr mutation in a patient with
mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by an AAG-to-ACG
transversion at codon 89 in exon 3 of the A1 domain.

.0085
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, MET91VAL

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with moderate
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a ATG-to-GTG transition
at codon 91 in exon 3 of the A1 domain, resulting in valine for
methionine-91.

.0086
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU98ARG

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). It is
caused by a CTT-to-CGT transversion at codon 98 in exon 3 of the A1
domain, resulting in arginine for leucine-98.

.0087
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY111ARG

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is
caused by a GGA-to-CGA transversion at codon 111 in exon 3 of the A1
domain, resulting in arginine for glycine-111.

.0088
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU113ASP

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this glu113-to-asp mutation in a
patient with less than 1% factor VIII activity, severe hemophilia A
(306700) and inhibitors. It is caused by a GAA-to-GAC transversion at
codon 113 in exon 4 of the A1 domain of factor VIII.

.0089
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR114CYS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this tyr114-to-cys mutation in a
patient with 6.3% factor VIII activity, 10.7% factor VIII antigen, and
mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a TAT-to-TGT
transition at codon 114 in exon 4. This mutation is found in the A1
domain of factor VIII.

.0090
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASP116GLY

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a GAT-to-GGT transition at codon 116 in exon 4 of
the A1 domain, resulting in glycine for aspartic acid-116.

.0091
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR118ILE

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 2%
factor VIII activity, 10.7% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation is caused by a ACC-to-ATC transition at codon
118 in exon 4 of the A1 domain, resulting in isoleucine for
tyrosine-118.

.0092
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY145VAL

Diamond et al. (1992) found this gly145-to-val mutation in a patient
with mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GGT-to-GTT
transversion at codon 145 in exon 4 of the A1 domain.

.0093
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PRO146SER

Lin et al. (1993) found a pro146-to-ser mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a CCA-to-TCA transition at codon 146 in exon 4 of
the A1 domain.

.0094
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, VAL162MET

Diamond et al. (1992) found this mutation in 5 patients with 3.5-8.5%
factor VIII activity, 6-35.9% factor VIII antigen, and moderate to mild
hemophilia A (306700). A GTG-to-ATG transition at codon 162 in exon 4 of
the A1 domain resulted in a val162-to-met change.

.0095
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LYS166THR

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this lys166-to-thr mutation in a patient
with 19% factor VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by an AAA-to-ACA transversion at codon 166 in exon 4
of the A1 domain.

.0096
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASP203VAL

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 2%
factor VIII activity, 8.5% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GAT-to-GTT transversion at codon
203 in exon 5 of the A1 domain and resulted in valine for aspartic
acid-203.

.0097
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY205TRP

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 3.2% factor
VIII activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused
by a GGG-to-TGG transversion at codon 205 in exon 5 of the A1 domain,
resulting in tryptophan for glycine-205.

.0098
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 2 nucleotides (AG) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 210-211 in exon 6.

.0099
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS5AS, A-G, -2

In a patient with less than 1% factor VIII activity and severe
hemophilia A (306700), Naylor et al. (1991) identified an A-to-G
transition at the second nucleotide of the acceptor splice site of
intron 5, which resulted in abnormal splicing.

.0100
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS6DS, A-G, +3

In a patient with 3-4% factor VIII activity and moderate hemophilia A
(306700), Bidichandani et al. (1994) identified mutation of A to G at
the third nucleotide of the donor splice site of intron 6, which
resulted in abnormal splicing.

.0101
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS6AS, G-C, -1

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported that Antonarakis Kazazian identified
in a patient with less than 1% factor VIII activity and severe
hemophilia A (306700) a G-to-C transversion. The mutation is in the
first nucleotide of the acceptor splice site of intron 6 and resulted in
abnormal splicing.

.0102
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY247GLN

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a GGA-to-GAA transition at codon 247 in exon 7 of
the A1 domain, resulting in glutamine for glycine-247.

.0103
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TRP255TER

In a patient with hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et al. (1995)
reported mutation of TGG-to-TGA at codon 255 in exon 7, resulting in a
stop codon.

.0104
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY259ARG

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a GGA-to-AGA transition at codon 259 in exon 7 of
the A1 domain, resulting in arginine for glycine-259.

.0105
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et al.
(1995) reported the deletion of 1 nucleotide (T) resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codon 264 in exon 7.

.0106
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, VAL266GLY

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GTG-to-GGG
transversion at codon 266 in exon 7 of the A1 domain, resulting in
glycine for valine-266.

.0107
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, THR275ILE

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with
4-4.8% factor VIII activity, 20-40% factor VIII antigen, and moderate
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a ACA-to-ATA transition
at codon 275 in exon 7 of the A1 domain, resulting in isoleucine for
threonine-275.

.0108
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASN280ILE

Pieneman et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 8-12%
factor VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is
caused by a AAC-to-ATC transversion at codon 280 in exon 7 of the A1
domain, resulting in isoleucine for asparagine-280.

.0109
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG282HIS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity, 18% factor VIII antigen, and severe hemophilia A
(306700). A CGC-to-CAC transition at codon 282 in exon 7 of the A1
domain results in an arg282-to-his change. The G-to-A transition follows
the rule of CG-to-CA mutations at CG dinucleotides. This mutation has
also been found by others (McGinniss et al., 1993; Naylor et al., 1993).

.0110
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG282LEU

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in 2 patients with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). It is
caused by a CGC-to-CTC transversion at codon 282 in exon 7 of the A1
domain, resulting in leucine for arginine-282.

.0111
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et al.
(1995) reported the deletion of 1 nucleotide (G), resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codon 283 in exon 7.

.0112
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER289LEU

McGinniss et al. (1993) found this substitution in a patient with 37%
factor VIII activity, 106% factor VIII antigen and mild hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a TCG-to-TTG transition at codon 289
in exon 7 of the A1 domain, resulting in leucine for serine-289. The
C-to-T transition follows the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG
dinucleotides.

.0113
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PHE293SER

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 3 patients with 7-21.5%
factor VIII activity, 2-17.9% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A
(306700). An ACT-to-GCT transition at codon 295 in exon 7 of the A1
domain results in alanine for threonine-295.

.0114
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, THR295ALA

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 3 patients with 7-21.5%
factor VIII activity, 2-17.9% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a ACT-to-GCT transition at codon 295
in exon 7 of the A1 domain, resulting in alanine for threonine-295.

.0115
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

(Antonarakis et al. (1995)) reported in a patient with severe hemophilia
A (306700) the deletion of 1 nucleotide (G), resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 296 in exon 7.

.0116
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU308PRO

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a CTG-to-CCG transition at codon 308 in exon 7 of
the A1 domain, resulting in proline for leucine-308.

.0117
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TRP323TER

In 1 patient with hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993) identified a
TAT-to-TAA substitution at codon 323 in exon 8, resulting in a stop
codon.

.0118
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, CYS329TYR

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a TGT-to-TAT transition at codon 329 in exon 8 of
the A1 domain, resulting in tyrosine for cysteine-329.

.0119
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, CYS329SER

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 2.6%
factor VIII activity, 3.2% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation is caused by a TGT-to-TCT transversion at codon
329 in exon 8 of the A1 domain, resulting in serine for cysteine-329.

.0120
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1990)
identified the deletion of 2 nucleotides (GA) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 341 in exon 8.

.0121
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER373TER

In 1 patient with hemophilia A (306700), Acquila et al. (1993)
identified a TCA-to-TAA substitution at codon 373 in exon 8, resulting
in a stop codon.

.0122
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER373LEU

Acquila et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 8% factor
VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by
a TCA-to-TTA transition at codon 373 in exon 8, resulting in leucine for
serine-373. The mutation has been shown to abolish normal cleavage by
thrombin.

.0123
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER373PRO

Johnson et al. (1994) found this mutation in a patient with 10% factor
VIII activity, 100% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A (306700).
The mutation is caused by a TCA-to-CCA transition at codon 373 in exon
8, resulting in proline for serine-373. The mutation abolishes normal
cleavage by thrombin.

.0124
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et al.
(1995) reported the deletion of 2 nucleotides (AA), resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codon 381-382 in exon 8.

.0125
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ILE386SER

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is
caused by a ATT-to-AGT transversion at codon 386 in exon 8 of the A2
domain, resulting in serine for isoleucine-386.

.0126
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU390GLY

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in 2 patients with less
than 1-3.3% factor VIII activity and severe to moderate hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a GAG-to-GGG transition at codon 390
in exon 8 of the A2 domain, resulting in glycine for glutamic acid-390.

.0127
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU412PHE

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 2 patients with 5-10.5%
factor VIII activity and moderate to mild hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a TTG-to-TTT transversion at codon 412 in exon 9
of the A2 domain, resulting in phenylalanine for leucine-412.

.0128
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 1 nucleotide (G), resulting in a frameshift
downstream from leucine-412 in exon 9.

.0129
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LYS425ARG

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity, 5% factor VIII antigen, and severe hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a AAA-to-AGA transition at codon 425
in exon 9 of the A2 domain, resulting in arginine for lysine-425.

.0130
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR431ASN

Pieneman et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 4% factor
VIII activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused
by a TAC-to-AAC transversion at codon 431 in exon 9 of the A2 domain,
resulting in asparagine for tyrosine-431.

.0131
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR473HIS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a TAT-to-CAT transition
at codon 473 in exon 10 of the A2 domain, resulting in histidine for
tyrosine-473.

.0132
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR473CYS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 2 patients with 2.7-3.5%
factor VIII activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is
caused by a TAT-to-TGT transition at codon 473 in exon 10 of the A2
domain, resulting in cysteine for tyrosine-473.

.0133
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ILE475THR

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with
5-5.7% factor VIII activity, 6.9-8.8% factor VIII antigen, and mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a ATC-to-ACC transition
at codon 475 in exon 10 of the A2 domain, resulting in threonine for
isoleucine-475.

.0134
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY479ARG

Naylor et al. (1993) found this mutation in 3 patients with 2-17.8%
factor VIII activity, 31.6% factor VIII antigen, and moderate to mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GGA-to-AGA transition
at codon 479 in exon 10 of the A2 domain, resulting in arginine for
glycine-479. The G-to-A transition follows the rule of CG-to-CA
mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0135
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 11-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 11 nucleotides (CCGTCCTTTGT) between codon
483 and 487 in exon 10. The deletion results in a frameshift.

.0136
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS10AS, G-T, +1

In a patient with mild hemophilia A (306700), Economou et al. (1992)
identified a G-to-T transversion in codon 504. This mutation, which did
not result in amino acid substitution, occurs in the first nucleotide of
exon 11 and alters the sequence of the acceptor splice site of intron
10.

.0137
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP INS, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Economou et al. (1992)
identified the insertion of 1 nucleotide (G), resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 513 or 514 in exon 11.

.0138
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASP525ASN

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 6%
factor VIII activity, 61% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a GAT-to-AAT transition at codon 525
in exon 11 of the A2 domain, resulting in asparagine for aspartic
acid-525.

.0139
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG527TRP

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 9.5-38%
factor VIII activity, 43-245% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a CGG-to-TGG transition at codon 527
in exon 11 of the A2 domain, resulting in tryptophan for arginine-527.
The C-to-T transition follows the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG
dinucleotides. This mutation has also been found by others (McGinniss et
al., 1993; see also Antonarakis et al., 1995).

.0140
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG531CYS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 3 patients with 4.2-6.7%
factor VIII activity and moderate to mild hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a CGC-to-TGC transition at codon 531 in exon 11 of
the A2 domain, resulting in cysteine for arginine-531. The C-to-T
transition follows the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.
This mutation has also been found by others (Economou et al., 1992 and
Diamond et al., 1992).

.0141
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG531GLY

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 9.2% factor
VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by
a CGC-to-GGC transversion at codon 531 in exon 11 of the A2 domain,
resulting in glycine for arginine-531.

.0142
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG531HIS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with
23.5-32% factor VIII activity, 20-33.2% factor VIII antigen and mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a CGC-to-CAC transition
at codon 531 in exon 11 of the A2 domain, resulting in histidine for
arginine-531. The G-to-A transition follows the rule of CG-to-CA
mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0143
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER535GLY

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in 2 patients with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a AGT-to-GGT transition
at codon 535 in exon 11 of the A2 domain, resulting in glycine for
serine-535.

.0144
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASP542GLY

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity, 5% factor VIII antigen, and severe hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a GAT-to-GGT transition at codon 542
in exon 11 of the A2 domain, resulting in glycine for aspartic acid-542.

.0145
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU557TER

In a patient with hemophilia A (306700), Diamond et al. (1992)
identified a GAA-to-TAA substitution at codon 557 in exon 11, resulting
in a stop codon.

.0146
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER558PHE

McGinniss et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 21% factor
VIII activity, 175% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A (306700).
The mutation is caused by a TCT-to-TTT transition at codon 558 in exon
11 of the A2 domain, resulting in phenylalanine for serine-558.

.0147
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLN565LYS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 2 patients with 6.8% factor
VIII activity and moderate to mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation
is caused by a CAG-to-AAG transversion at codon 565 in exon 11 of the A2
domain, resulting in lysine for glutamine-565. This mutation has also
been found by others (Antonarakis et al., 1995).

.0148
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER577PRO

Reiner and Thompson (1992) found this mutation in 5 patients with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a TCT-to-CCT transition at codon 577 in exon 12 of
the A2 domain, resulting in proline for serine-577. The C-to-T
transition follows the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.
This mutation has also been found by others (Antonarakis et al., 1995).

.0149
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG583TER

In 5 patients with hemophilia A (306700), Pattinson et al. (1990)
identified a CGA-to-TGA substitution at codon 583 in exon 12, resulting
in a stop codon. The C-to-T transition follows the rule of CG-to-TG
mutations at CG dinucleotides. This mutation has also been found by
others (Reiner and Thompson, 1992; see also Antonarakis et al., 1995).

.0150
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER584ILE

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a AGC-to-ATC
transversion at codon 584 in exon 12 of the A2 domain, resulting in
isoleucine for serine-584.

.0151
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TRP585CYS

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is
caused by a TGG-to-TGC transversion at codon 585 in exon 12 of the A2
domain, resulting in cysteine for tryptophan-585.

.0152
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR586SER

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is
caused by a TAC-to-TCC transversion at codon 586 in exon 12 of the A2
domain, resulting in serine for tyrosine-586.

.0153
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG593CYS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with mild to
moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a CGC-to-TGC
transition at codon 593 in exon 12 of the A2 domain, resulting in
cysteine for arginine-593. The C-to-T transition follows the rule of
CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides. This mutation has also been
found by others (Naylor et al., 1993 and Diamond et al., 1992; see also
Antonarakis et al., 1995).

.0154
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASN612SER

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a AAC-to-AGC transition
at codon 612 in exon 12 of the A2 domain, resulting in serine for
asparagine-612.

.0155
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS12DS, G-A, +5

In a patient with mild hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et al. (1995)
reported a G-to-A transition. The mutation is at the fifth nucleotide of
the donor splice site of intron 12 and results in abnormal splicing.

.0156
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, VAL634ALA

McGinniss et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 5% factor
VIII activity, 138% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A (306700).
The mutation is caused by a GTG-to-GCG transition at codon 634 in exon
13 of the A2 domain, resulting in alanine for valine-634.

.0157
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, VAL634MET

McGinniss et al. (1993) found a val634-to-met mutation in 2 patients
with less than 1% factor VIII activity, 175% factor VIII antigen, and
severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GTG-to-ATG
transition at codon 634 in exon 13 of the A2 domain.

.0158
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR636TER

In 2 patients with hemophilia A (306700) (1 with inhibitors),
Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported the substitution of TAC-to-TAG at
codon 636 in exon 13, resulting in a stop codon.

.0159
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ALA644VAL

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 14% factor
VIII activity, 25% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A (306700).
The mutation is caused by a GCA-to-GTA transition at codon 644 in exon
13 of the A2 domain, resulting in valine for alanine-644.

.0160
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 3-BP DEL, PHE652DEL

In a patient with 1.4% factor VIII activity, 12% factor VIII antigen,
and severe hemophilia A (306700), McGinniss et al. (1993) identified an
in-frame deletion of 3 bp corresponding to codon 652 (TTC) in exon 13 of
the A2 domain, resulting in the deletion of phenylalanine-652.

.0161
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PHE658LEU

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 5.1%
factor VIII activity, 50.5% factor VIII antigen and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation is caused by a TTC-to-CTC transition at codon
658 in exon 13 of the A2 domain, resulting in leucine for
phenylalanine-658.

.0162
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG698TRP

Diamond et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a CGG-to-TGG transition
at codon 698 in exon 14 of the A2 domain, resulting in tryptophan for
arginine-698. The C-to-T transition follows the rule of CG-to-TG
mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0163
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ALA704THR

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 3 patients with a mild to
moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GCC-to-ACC
transition at codon 704 in exon 14 of the A2 domain, resulting in
threonine for alanine-704. The G-to-A transition follows the rule of
CG-to-CA mutations at CG dinucleotides. See also Antonarakis et al.
(1995).

.0164
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU720LYS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this glu720-to-lys mutation in 2
patients with 12.5-30% factor VIII activity, less than 20% factor VIII
antigen, and a mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a
GAG-to-AAG transition at codon 720 in exon 14 of the A2 domain. The
G-to-A transition follows the rule of CG-to-CA mutations at CG
dinucleotides.

.0165
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG795TER

In a patient with hemophilia A (306700), Pattinson et al. (1990)
identified the substitution of CGA-to-TGA at codon 795 in exon 14,
resulting in a stop codon. The C-to-T transition follows the rule of
CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0166
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP INS, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Naylor et al. (1993)
identified the insertion of 1 nucleotide (A) at codon 961-2 or 3 in exon
14. The mutation results in a frameshift.

.0167
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 2 nucleotides (AG) that results in a
frameshift downstream from codon 969 in exon 14.

.0168
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU1038LYS

Higuchi et al. (1991) and McGinniss et al. (1993) found this mutation in
a patient with 2.4% factor VIII activity, 15% factor VIII antigen, and
moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GAG-to-AAG
transition at codon 1038 in exon 14 of the B domain, resulting in lysine
for glutamic acid-1038.

.0169
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 2 nucleotides (AA) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1164 in exon 14.

.0170
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

In 2 patients with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 1 nucleotide (A) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1194 in exon 14.

.0171
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Naylor et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 1 nucleotide (C) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1212 in exon 14.

.0172
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP, INS, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the insertion of 2 nucleotides (AA) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1324 in exon 14.

.0173
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 4-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 4 nucleotides (TAGA) resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codons 1355-6 in exon 14.

.0174
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP INS, A, CODON 1414

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1991)
identified the insertion of 1 nucleotide (A) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1395 in exon 14.

.0175
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 5-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported in a patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 5 nucleotides (CTCTT) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codons 1412-4 in exon 14.

.0176
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 4-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Naylor et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 4 nucleotides (AAGA) resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codons 1422-5 in exon 14.

.0177
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP INS, A

Higuchi et al. (1991) identified in 2 patients with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the insertion of 1 nucleotide (A) between codons 1458 and 1460
in exon 14 resulting in a frameshift.

.0178
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

In 2 patients with severe hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1991)
and Naylor et al. (1993) identified the deletion of 1 nucleotide (A)
resulting in a frameshift downstream from codons 1439, 1440 or 1441 in
exon 14.

.0179
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, GA

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1991)
identified the deletion of 2 nucleotides (GA) between codons 1555 and
1556 in exon 14 resulting in a frameshift.

.0180
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP INS, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the insertion of 1 nucleotide (A) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1590 in exon 14.

.0181
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 1 nucleotide (C) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1601 in exon 14.

.0182
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU161TER

In a patient with hemophilia A (306700), Lavergne et al. (1992)
identified the substitution of GAG-to-TAG at codon 1615 in exon 14,
resulting in a stop codon.

.0183
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1689HIS

Schwaab et al. (1993) found this mutation in 3 patients with 7-11%
factor VIII activity, 130-165% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation is caused by a CGC-to-CAC transition at codon
1689 in exon 14 of the A3 domain, resulting in histidine for
arginine-1689. The G-to-A transition follows the rule of CG-to-CA
mutations at CG dinucleotides. The mutation has been shown to abolish
normal cleavage by thrombin at the light chain.

.0184
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1696TER

In 2 patients with hemophilia A (306700) and inhibitors, Pattinson et
al. (1990) identified the substitution of CGA to TGA at codon 1696 in
exon 14, resulting in a stop codon. The C-to-T transition follows the
rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides. This mutation has also
been found by others (Naylor et al., 1993).

.0185
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1696GLY

Reiner and Thompson (1992) found this mutation in a patient with 17%
factor VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a CGA-to-TGA transition at codon 1696 in exon 14 of the A3
domain, resulting in glycine for arginine-1696. The C-to-T transition
follows the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0186
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS14AS, A-G, -2

In a patient with less than 1% factor VIII activity, less than 2.5%
factor VIII antigen, and severe hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et
al. (1995) reported the substitution of A to G at the second nucleotide
of the acceptor splice site of intron 14, resulting in abnormal
splicing.

.0187
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY1750ARG

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in 4 patients with
21-26% factor VIII activity, 14.5-26% factor VIII antigen, and mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a GGA-to-AGA
transition at codon 1750 in exon 15 of the A3 domain, resulting in
arginine for glycine-1750.

.0188
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU1756VAL

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 5%
factor VIII activity, 1.5% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation was caused by a TTG-to-GTG transversion at
codon 1756 in exon 15 of the A3 domain, resulting in valine for
leucine-1756.

.0189
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU1756PHE

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 18.5%
factor VIII activity, and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a TTG-to-TTC transversion at codon 1756 in exon 15 of the A3
domain, resulting in phenylalanine for leucine-1756.

.0190
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY1760GLU

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a GGG-to-GAG transition at codon 1760 in exon 15 of the A3
domain, resulting in glutamic acid for glycine-1760.

.0191
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1781HIS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 4 patients with 2-2.5%
factor VIII activity, 4.7-5.4% factor VIII antigen, and moderate
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a CGT-to-CAT
transition at codon 1781 in exon 16 of the A3 domain, resulting in
histidine for arginine-1781. The G-to-A transition follows the rule of
CG-to-CA mutations at CG dinucleotides. See also Antonarakis et al.
(1995).

.0192
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1781CYS

Jonsdottir et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with 4-7%
factor VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a CGT-to-TGT transition at codon 1781 in exon 16 of the A3
domain, resulting in cysteine for arginine-1781. The C-to-T transition
follows the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0193
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1781GLY

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 6%
factor VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a CGT-to-GGT transversion at codon 1781 in exon 16 of the A3
domain, resulting in glycine for arginine-1781.

.0194
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER1784TYR

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity and clinically a severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation was caused by a TCC-to-TAC transversion at codon 1784 in exon
16 of the A3 domain, resulting in tyrosine for serine-1784.

.0195
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU1789PHE

Diamond et al. (1992) and Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in 3
patients with 7.2% factor VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700).
The mutation was caused by a CTT-to-TTT transition at codon 1789 in exon
16 of the A3 domain, resulting in phenylalanine for leucine-1789.

.0196
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLN1796TER

In a patient with hemophilia A (306700) and inhibitors, Lin et al.
(1993) identified the substitution of CAG-to-TAG at codon 1796 in exon
16, resulting in a stop codon.

.0197
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, MET1823ILE

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 4.6% factor VIII
activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a
ATG-to-ATA transition at codon 1823 in exon 16 of the A3 domain,
resulting in isoleucine for methionine-1823.

.0198
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PRO1825SER

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 15% factor
VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by
a CCC-to-TCC transition at codon 1825 in exon 16 of the A3 domain,
resulting in serine for proline-1825.

.0199
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, THR1826PRO

Economou et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a ACT-to-CCT
transversion at codon 1826 in exon 16 of the A3 domain, resulting in
proline for threonine-1826.

.0200
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LYS1827TER

In 2 patients with hemophilia A (306700) and inhibitors, Lin et al.
(1993) identified the mutation AAA to TAA at codon 1827 in exon 16,
resulting in a stop codon.

.0201
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ALA1834VAL

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 18% factor VIII
activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a
GCC-to-GTC transition at codon 1834 in exon 16 of the A3 domain,
resulting in valine for alanine-1834.

.0202
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS16DS, G-A, -1

In 2 patients with 9-18% factor VIII activity, 5.9% factor VIII antigen,
and mild hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1991) and Antonarakis et
al. (1995) reported a G-to-A substitution at the -1 nucleotide of the
donor splice site of intron 16, resulting in abnormal splicing.

.0203
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASP1846ASN

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation was caused by a GAT-to-AAT transition at codon 1846 in exon 17
of the A3 domain, resulting in asparagine for aspartic acid-1846.

.0204
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASP1846TYR

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation was caused by a GAT-to-TAT transversion at codon 1846 in exon
17 of the A3 domain, resulting in tyrosine for aspartic acid-1846.

.0205
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, HIS1848ARG

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 1-5% factor
VIII activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a CAC-to-CGC transition at codon 1848 in exon 17 of the A3
domain, resulting in arginine for histidine-1848.

.0206
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PRO1854ARG

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation was caused by a CCC-to-CGC transversion at codon 1854 in exon
17 of the A3 domain, resulting in arginine for proline-1854.

.0207
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP INS, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported in 1 patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the insertion of 1 nucleotide (T) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1855 in exon 17.

.0208
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLN1874TER

In 1 patient with hemophilia A (306700) and inhibitors, Naylor et al.
(1993) identified the substitution of CAG-to-TAG at codon 1874 in exon
17, resulting in a stop codon.

.0209
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU1885LYS

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a GAG-to-AAG transition at codon 1885 in exon 17 of the A3
domain, resulting in lysine for glutamic acid-1885.

.0210
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP INS, FS

Higuchi et al. (1991) identified in 1 patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the insertion of 1 nucleotide (A) at codon 1907 in exon
resulting in a frameshift.

.0211
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASN1922SER

Higuchi et al. (1991) and Diamond et al. (1992) identified this mutation
in 2 patients with less than 1% factor VIII activity and
severe-to-moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was an AAT-to-AGT
transition at codon 1922 in exon 18 of the F8 gene, resulting in an
asn1922-to-ser (N1922S) substitution in the A3 domain of the protein.

Summers et al. (2011) noted that N1922 lies at the interface of 2 A3
subdomains in F8 and that the A3 and adjacent C1 domains form an
extensive hydrophobic interface. By expression in baby hamster kidney
cells, they found that F8 with the N1922S mutation (F8-N1922S) was
weakly secreted compared with wildtype F8, although secreted F8-N1922S
showed normal or near-normal activity. Wildtype F8 followed the classic
secretory pathway; however, F8-N1922S was delayed in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), prior to processing and packaging in the Golgi. Use of
conformation-specific monoclonal antibodies revealed that the delay in
the ER was due to a defect in folding of the A3 domain and the adjacent
C1 domain. Summers et al. (2011) concluded that the N1922S substitution
results in poor secretion of a functional protein.

.0212
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1941LEU

Nafa et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with 7% factor VIII
activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by
a CGA-to-CTA transversion at codon 1941 in exon 18 of the A3 domain,
resulting in leucine for arginine-1941.

.0213
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TRP1942TER

In a patient with hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993) identified
the substitution of TGG-to-TAG at codon 1942 in exon 18, resulting in a
stop codon.

.0214
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY1948ASP

David et al. (1994) found this mutation in a patient with 7.4% factor
VIII activity, 46.7% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation was caused by a GGC-to-GAC transition at codon
1948 in exon 18 of the A3 domain, resulting in aspartic acid for
glycine-1948.

.0215
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY1960VAL

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 6%
factor VIII activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation
was caused by a GGA-to-GTA transversion at codon 1960 in exon 18 of the
A3 domain, resulting in valine for glycine-1960.

.0216
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, HIS1961TYR

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 15.5%
factor VIII activity, 7.8% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation was caused by a CAT-to-TAT transition at codon
1961 in exon 18 of the A3 domain, resulting in tyrosine for
histidine-1961.

.0217
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1966TER

In 7 patients with hemophilia A (306700) (3 with inhibitors), Reiner and
Thompson (1992) identified the mutation of CGA to TGA at codon 1966 in
exon 18, resulting in a stop codon. The C-to-T transition follows the
rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides. This mutation has also
been found by others (Lin et al., 1993; Naylor et al., 1993; Schwaab et
al., 1993; and David et al., 1994).

.0218
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) identified in 2 patients with severe
hemophilia A (306700) the deletion of 1 nucleotide (A) resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codon 1967-1968 in exon 19.

.0219
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported in 1 patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 1 nucleotide (G) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1998 in exon 19.

.0220
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU1987TER, EX19 DEL

In 1 patient with hemophilia A (306700), Naylor et al. (1993) identified
the mutation of GAA to TAA at codon 1987 in exon 19, resulting in a stop
codon and exon 19 skipping.

.0221
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1997TRP

Higuchi et al. (1991) and Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this
mutation in 3 patients with less than 1-3.4% factor VIII activity and
moderate to severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a
CGG-to-TGG transition at codon 1997 in exon 19 of the A3 domain,
resulting in tryptophan for arginine-1997. The C-to-T transition follows
the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0222
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASN2019SER

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 5%
factor VIII activity, 3.3% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation was caused by a AAT-to-AGT transition at codon
2019 in exon 19 of the A3 domain, resulting in serine for
asparagine-2019.

.0223
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TRP2046ARG

Diamond et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with moderate
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a TGG-to-CGG
transition at codon 2046 in exon 21 of the C1 domain, resulting in
arginine for tryptophan-2046.

.0224
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER2069PHE

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation was caused by a TCT-to-TTT transition at codon 2069 in exon 21
of the C1 domain, resulting in phenylalanine for serine-2069.

.0225
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASP2074GLY

Antonarakis et al. (1995) found this mutation in 2 patients with 4.5-9%
factor VIII activity, 1.7-15.2% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation was caused by a GAT-to-GGT transition at codon
2074 in exon 22 of the C1 domain, resulting in glycine for aspartic
acid-2074.

.0226
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PHE2101LEU

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in 2 patients with
7-11% factor VIII activity, 5.3% factor VIII antigen, and mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a TTT-to-TTG
transversion at codon 2101 in exon 22 of the C1 domain, resulting in
leucine for phenylalanine-2101.

.0227
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, CYS2105TYR

Naylor et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 14% factor
VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by
a TAT-to-TGT transition at codon 2105 in exon 22 of the C1 domain,
resulting in cysteine for tyrosine-2105.

.0228
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER2119TYR

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in 3 patients with 3-8%
factor VIII activity, 9.2-13.2% factor VIII antigen, and mild to
moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a TCC-to-TAC
transversion at codon 2119 in exon 22 of the C1 domain, resulting in
tyrosine for serine-2119.

.0229
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) identified in 1 patient with severe hemophilia
A (306700) the deletion of 2 nucleotides (TC) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from serine-2119 in exon 22.

.0230
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

Tuddenham et al. (1991) identified in 1 patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 2 nucleotides (AA) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 2136 in exon 23.

.0231
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2150HIS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 10 patients with less than
1-7% factor VIII activity and severe-to-mild hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation was caused by a CGT-to-CAT transition at codon 2150 in exon 23
of the C1 domain, resulting in histidine for arginine-2150. The G-to-A
transition follows the rule of CG-to-CA mutations at CG dinucleotides.
This mutation has also been reported by others (Naylor et al., 1993;
Diamond et al., 1992; Jonsdottir et al., 1992; and Antonarakis et al.,
1995).

.0232
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PRO2153GLN

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 3%
factor VIII activity, 5.6% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation was caused by a CCA-to-CAA transversion at
codon 2153 in exon 23 of the C1 domain, resulting in glutamine for
proline-2153.

.0233
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, THR2154ILE

Jonsdottir et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with 6% factor
VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by
a ACT-to-ATT transition at codon 2154 in exon 23 of the C1 domain,
resulting in isoleucine for threonine-2154.

.0234
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2159CYS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 12 patients with 6-26%
factor VIII activity, less than 5-15.7% factor VIII antigen, and mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a CGC-to-TGC
transition at codon 2159 in exon 23 of the C1 domain, resulting in
cysteine for arginine-2159. The C-to-T transition follows the rule of
CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides. This mutation has also been
reported by others (Naylor et al., 1993; McGinniss et al., 1993; Diamond
et al., 1992; Jonsdottir et al., 1992; and Antonarakis et al., 1995).

.0235
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2159LEU

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 12%
factor VIII activity, 4.8% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation was caused by a CGC-to-CTC transversion at codon
2159 in exon 23 of the C1 domain, resulting in leucine for
arginine-2159.

.0236
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2159HIS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 22%
factor VIII activity, 11.9% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation was caused by a CGC-to-CAC transition at codon
2159 in exon 23 of the C1 domain, resulting in histidine for
arginine-2159. The G-to-A transition follows the rule of CG-to-CA
mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0237
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2163HIS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in 2 patients with 5%
factor VIII antigen and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a CGC-to-CAC transition at codon 2163 in exon 23 of the C1
domain, resulting in histidine for arginine-2163.

.0238
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2163CYS

Reiner et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with 1% factor
VIII activity, less than 10% factor VIII antigen, and moderate
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a CGC-to-TGC
transition at codon 2163 in exon 23 of the C1 domain, resulting in
cysteine for arginine-2163. The C-to-T transition follows the rule of
CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0239
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ALA2192PRO

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 1% factor VIII
activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by
a GCT-to-CCT transversion at codon 2192 in exon 24 of the C2 domain,
resulting in proline for alanine-2192.

.0240
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 3-BP DEL, PRO220 DEL

In 3 patients with less than 1% factor VIII activity and
severe-to-moderate hemophilia A (306700), Economou et al. (1992) and Lin
et al. (1993) identified an in-frame deletion of 3-bp corresponding to
codon 2205 (TctcCT) in exon 24 of the C2 domain, resulting in the
deletion of proline-2205.

.0241
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2209LEU

Millar et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 3% factor
VIII activity, 2.5% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation was caused by a CGA-to-CTA transversion at codon
2209 in exon 24 of the C2 domain, resulting in leucine for
arginine-2209.

.0242
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2209GLY

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation was caused by a CGA-to-GGA transversion at codon 2209 in exon
24 of the C2 domain, resulting in glycine for arginine-2209.

.0243
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported in 1 patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 1 nucleotide (G) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 2214 in exon 24.

.0244
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TRP2229CYS

Naylor et al. (1991) and Diamond et al. (1992) found this mutation in 2
patients with 3% factor VIII activity, moderate hemophilia A (306700),
and inhibitors in 1 out of the 2. The mutation was caused by a
TGG-to-TGT transversion at codon 2229 in exon 25 of the C2 domain,
resulting in cysteine for tryptophan-2229.

.0245
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLN2246ARG

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 4.5%
factor VIII activity, 1.1% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation was caused by a CAG-to-CGG transition at codon
2246 in exon 25 of the C2 domain, resulting in arginine for
glutamine-2246.

.0246
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

Lin et al. (1993) identified in 1 patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 2 nucleotides (AG) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from glutamine-2246 in exon 25.

.0247
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLN2270TER

In 1 patient with hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et al. (1995)
reported the mutation of CAG-to-TAG at codon 2270 in exon 25, resulting
in a stop codon.

.0248
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 5-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported in 1 patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 5 nucleotides (AAATC) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 2285-86 or 87 in exon 26.

.0249
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PRO2300LEU

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 7.5% factor
VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by
a CCG-to-CTG transition at codon 2300 in exon 26 of the C2 domain,
resulting in leucine for proline-2300. The C-to-T transition follows the
rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0250
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2304CYS

Higuchi et al. (1991) and Reiner et al. (1992) found this mutation in 2
patients with less than 1% factor VIII activity, less than 10% factor
VIII antigen, and severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused
by a CGC-to-TGC transition at codon 2304 in exon 26 of the C2 domain,
resulting in cysteine for arginine-2304. The C-to-T transition follows
the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0251
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2304HIS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a CGC-to-CAC
transition at codon 2304 in exon 26 of the C2 domain, resulting in
histidine for arginine-2304. The G-to-A transition follows the rule of
CG-to-CA mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0252
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX1-6DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient H238) and factor
VIII inhibitors, Millar et al. (1990) found a deletion of exons 1-6 of
the factor VIII gene.

.0253
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX2-4DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient TWN11) and
factor VIII inhibitors, Lin et al. (1993) found a deletion of exons 2-4
of the factor VIII gene.

.0254
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX3-5DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient H151), Millar et
al. (1990) found a deletion of exons 3-5 of the factor VIII gene.

.0255
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX4-10DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient TWN27) and
factor VIII inhibitors, Lin et al. (1993) found a deletion of exons 4-10
of the factor VIII gene.

.0256
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX5-13DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient H571) and factor
VIII inhibitors, Millar et al. (1990) found a deletion of exons 5-13 of
the factor VIII gene.

.0257
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX10DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient 149), Krepelova
et al. (1992) found a deletion of exon 10 of the factor VIII gene.

.0258
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX14-21DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient H229) and factor
VIII inhibitors, Millar et al. (1990) found a deletion of exons 14-21 of
the factor VIII gene.

.0259
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX14-22DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient H20) and factor
VIII inhibitors, Nafa et al. (1990) found a deletion of exons 14-22 of
the factor VIII gene. See also Antonarakis et al. (1995).

.0260
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX15-22DEL

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported 3 patients with severe hemophilia A
(306700) who had a deletion of exons 15-22 of the factor VIII gene.

.0261
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX16-26DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient HDX3) and factor
VIII inhibitors, Figueiredo et al. (1992) found a deletion of exons
16-26 of the factor VIII gene.

.0262
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX18-19DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient 5b), Grover et
al. (1987) found a deletion of exons 18-19 of the factor VIII gene. This
deletion may extend to exon 22.

.0263
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX16DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient HD10), Schwaab
et al. (1993) found a deletion of exon 16 of the factor VIII gene.

.0264
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX19-21DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient H58) and factor
VIII inhibitors, Millar et al. (1990) found a deletion of exons 19-21 of
the factor VIII gene.

.0265
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX23-24DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient HA711), Lavergne
et al. (1992) found a deletion of exons 23-24 of the factor VIII gene.

.0266
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX23-26DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient HDX2) and factor
VIII inhibitors, Din et al. (1986) found a deletion of exons 23-26 of
the factor VIII gene. See also Lavergne et al. (1992).

.0267
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL

Favier et al. (2000) described a 14-month-old girl with severe
hemophilia A (306700). Both of her parents had normal values of factor
VIII activity, and von Willebrand disease was excluded. Karyotype
analysis demonstrated no obvious alteration, and no F8 gene inversions
were found. Direct sequencing of the F8 gene exons revealed a
frameshift-stop mutation (Q565delC/ter566) in the heterozygous state in
the proposita only. F8 gene polymorphism analysis indicated that the
mutation must have occurred de novo in the paternal germline.
Furthermore, analysis of the pattern of X chromosome methylation at the
human androgen receptor gene locus demonstrated a skewed inactivation of
the derived maternal X chromosome from the lymphocytes of the proband's
DNA. Thus, the severe hemophilia A in the proposita resulted from a de
novo F8 gene mutation on the paternally derived X chromosome, associated
with a nonrandom pattern of inactivation of the maternally derived X
chromosome.

.0268
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, CYS179GLY

In 2 brothers with severe hemophilia A (306700), Mazurier et al. (2002)
found a T-to-G transversion in exon 4 of the F8C gene, resulting in a
cys179-to-gly (C179G) mutation. This mutation affected a cysteine
residue in the F8A1 domain that is conserved in the sequences of the
murine, canine, and swine factor 8 genes. A maternal first cousin showed
factor VIII deficiency and bleeding, but was found instead to have von
Willebrand disease type 2N (see 613554) due to compound heterozygous
mutations in the VWF gene (613160.0035 and 613160.0036).

.0269
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR16CYS

Valleix et al. (2002) described an A-to-G transition in exon 1 of the F8
gene in monozygotic twin females that caused a tyr16-to-cys (Y16C)
mutation. Both twins were heterozygous for the mutation, which caused
severe hemophilia A (306700) in 1 and mild phenotype in the other. The
mutation was not present in the twins' healthy sister or parents,
suggesting that it had occurred de novo in the germline of 1 parent.

.0270
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ALU INS

Sukarova et al. (2001) described a family with a severe form of
hemophilia A (306700) in which they identified an Alu retrotransposition
event in a coding exon, which represented the first report of an Alu
insertion in the F8 gene. The propositus was an 18-year-old Bulgarian
boy in whom the diagnosis of severe hemophilia had been made at the age
of 1 year. His 12-year-old brother was also affected. There was no other
family history of the disorder. The 341-bp element incorporated into the
F8C gene interrupted the reading frame of the mature protein at met1224,
resulting in a stop codon within the inserted sequence. Sequence
analysis showed that the inserted fragment was a full Alu repeat
belonging to the Yb8 subfamily of Alu repetitive sequences, according to
the standardized nomenclature for Alu repeats (Batzer et al., 1996). The
mutation site was flanked by a 5-bp (AAGAA) direct repeat which Sukarova
et al. (2001) stated was the shortest direct repeat described at the
integration points of Alu insertions.

Ganguly et al. (2003) reported a second instance: a 6-year-old male in
whom an Alu element was inserted at position -19 of intron 18 of the F8C
gene, causing skipping of exon 19 and hemophilia A. The insertion, which
did not affect the natural splice donor site, was in the opposite
orientation with respect to the direction of transcription of the F8
gene. The size of intron 18 was predicted to be increased by
approximately 331 nucleotides because of the insertion.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Aly et al. (1992); Antonarakis et al. (1985); Barrow and Graham (1973);
Bloom and Peake (1977); Gitschier et al. (1985); Graham et al. (1985);
Gralnick and Coller (1976); Green et al. (1991); Hoyer  (1981); Jaffe
and Nachman (1975); Janco et al. (1987); Lawn  (1985); Marchesi et
al. (1972); Nilsson et al. (1966); Oberle et al. (1985); Peake et
al. (1985); Pratt et al. (1999); Ratnoff  (1978); Roberts  (1971);
Saiki et al. (1985); Tuddenham et al. (1981); Woolf  (1962); Youssoufian
et al. (1987); Youssoufian et al. (1988); Youssoufian et al. (1988)
REFERENCE 1. Abrams, E. S.; Murdaugh, S. E.; Lerman, L. S.: Comprehensive detection
of single base changes in human genomic DNA using denaturing gradient
gel electrophoresis and a GC clamp. Genomics 7: 463-475, 1990.

2. Acquila, M.; Caprino, D.; Pecorara, M.; Baudo, F.; Morfini, M.;
Mori, P. G.: Two novel mutations at 373 codon of FVIII gene detected
by DGGE. Thromb. Haemost. 69: 392-393, 1993.

3. Aly, A. M.; Arai, M.; Hoyer, L. W.: Cysteamine enhances the procoagulant
activity of factor VIII-East Hartford, a dysfunctional protein due
to a light chain thrombin cleavage site mutation (arginine-1689 to
cysteine). J. Clin. Invest. 89: 1375-1381, 1992.

4. Aly, A. M.; Higuchi, M.; Kasper, C. K.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis,
S. E.; Hoyer, L. W.: Hemophilia A due to mutations that create new
N-glycosylation sites. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4933-4937, 1992.

5. Aly, A. M.; Hoyer, L. W.: Factor VIII-East Hartford (arginine1689
to cysteine) has procoagulant activity when separated from von Willebrand
factor. J. Clin. Invest. 89: 1382-1387, 1992.

6. Antonarakis, S. E.; Copeland, K. L.; Carpenter, R. J., Jr.; Carta,
C. A.; Hoyer, L. W.; Caskey, C. T.; Toole, J. J.; Kazazian, H. H.,
Jr.: Prenatal diagnosis of haemophilia A by factor VIII gene analysis. Lancet 325:
1407-1409, 1985. Note: Originally Volume I.

7. Antonarakis, S. E.; Kazazian, H. H.; Tuddenham, G. D.: Molecular
etiology of factor VIII deficiency in hemophilia A. Hum. Mutat. 5:
1-22, 1995.

8. Antonarakis, S. E.; Rossiter, J. P.; Young, M.; Horst, J.; de Moerloose,
P.; Sommer, S. S.; Ketterling, R. P.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Negrier,
C.; Vinciguerra, C.; Gitschier, J.; Goossens, M.; and 54 others
: Factor VIII inversions in severe hemophilia A: results from an international
consortium. Blood 86: 2206-2212, 1995.

9. Antonarakis, S. E.; Waber, P. G.; Kittur, S. D.; Patel, A. S.;
Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Mellis, M. A.; Counts, R. B.; Stamatoyannopoulos,
G.; Bowie, E. J. W.; Fass, D. N.; Pittman, D. D.; Wozney, J. M.; Toole,
J. J.: Hemophilia A: detection of molecular defects and of carriers
by DNA analysis. New Eng. J. Med. 313: 842-848, 1985.

10. Arai, M.; Higuchi, M.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.;
Phillips, J. A., III; Janco, R. L.; Hoyer, L. W.: Characterization
of a thrombin cleavage site mutation (arg1689-to-cys) in the factor
VIII gene of two unrelated patients with cross-reacting material-positive
hemophilia A. Blood 75: 384-389, 1990.

11. Arai, M.; Inaba, H.; Higuchi, M.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Kazazian,
H. H., Jr.; Fujimaki, M.; Hoyer, L. W.: Direct characterization of
factor VIII in plasma: detection of a mutation altering a thrombin
cleavage site (arginine372-to-histidine). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 86:
4277-4281, 1989.

12. Arveiler, B.; Vincent, A.; Mandel, J.-L.: Toward a physical map
of the Xq28 region in man: linking color vision, G6PD, and coagulation
factor VIII genes to an X-Y homology region. Genomics 4: 460-471,
1989.

13. Bardoni, B.; Sampietro, M.; Romano, M.; Crapanzano, M.; Mannucci,
P. M.; Camerino, G.: Characterization of a partial deletion of the
factor VIII gene in a haemophiliac with inhibitor. Hum. Genet. 79:
86-88, 1988.

14. Barrow, E. M. S.; Graham, J. B.: Factor VIII. (Letter) Lancet 301:
1312-1313, 1973. Note: Originally Volume I.

15. Batzer, M. A.; Deininger, P. L.; Hellmann-Blumberg, U.; Jurka,
J.; Labuda, D.; Rubin, C. M.; Schmid, C. W.; Zietkiewicz, E.; Zuckerkandl,
E.: Standardized nomenclature for Alu repeats. J. Molec. Evol. 42:
3-6, 1996.

16. Becker, J.; Schwaab, R.; Moller-Taube, A.; Schwaab, U.; Schmidt,
W.; Brackmann, H. H.; Grimm, T.; Olek, K.; Oldenburg, J.: Characterization
of the factor VIII defect in 147 patients with sporadic hemophilia
A: family studies indicate a mutation type-dependent sex ratio of
mutation frequencies. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 58: 657-670, 1996.

17. Berg, L.-P.; Wieland, K.; Millar, D. S.; Schlosser, M.; Wagner,
M.; Kakkar, V. V.; Reiss, J.; Cooper, D. N.: Detection of a novel
point mutation causing haemophilia A by PCR/direct sequencing of ectopically-transcribed
factor VIII mRNA. Hum. Genet. 85: 655-658, 1990.

18. Bernardi, F.; Volinia, S.; Patracchini, P.; Gemmati, D.; Boninsegna,
S.; Schwienbacher, C.; Marchetti, G.: A recurrent missense mutation
(arg-to-gln) and a partial deletion in factor VIII gene causing severe
haemophilia A. Brit. J. Haemat. 71: 271-276, 1989.

19. Bidichandani, S. I.; Shiach, C. R.; Lanyon, W. G.; Connor, J.
M.: A novel splice donor mutation affecting position +3 in intron
6 of the factor VIII gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 651-653, 1994.

20. Bird, A. P.: DNA methylation and the frequency of CpG in animal
DNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 8: 1499-1504, 1980.

21. Bloom, A. L.; Peake, I. R.: Molecular genetics of factor VIII
and its disorders. Am. J. Path. 88: 319-340, 1977.

22. Briet, E.; Bakker, B.; Brocker-Vriends, A.: Somatic and germinal
mosaicism for a deletion in the factor VIII gene. (Abstract) Brit.
J. Haemat. 71 (suppl. 1): 1 only, 1989.

23. Brinke, A.; Tagliavacca, L.; Naylor, J.; Green, P.; Giangrande,
P.; Giannelli, F.: Two chimaeric transcription units result from
an inversion breaking intron 1 of the factor VIII gene and a region
reportedly affected by reciprocal translocations in T-cell leukaemia. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 5: 1945-1951, 1996.

24. Brinkhous, K. M.; Graham, J. B.: Hemophilia in the female dog. Science 111:
723-724, 1950.

25. Brocker-Vriends, A. H. J. T.; Briet, E.; Dreesen, J. C. F. M.;
Bakker, B.; Reitsma, P.; Pannekoek, H.; van de Kamp, J. J. P.; Pearson,
P. L.: Somatic origin of inherited haemophilia A. Hum. Genet. 85:
288-292, 1990.

26. Casarino, L.; Pecorara, M.; Mori, P. G.; Morfini, M.; Mancuso,
G.; Scrivano, L.; Molinari, A. C.; Lanza, T.; Giavarella, G.; Loi,
A.; Perseu, L.; Cao, A.; Pirastu, M.: Molecular basis of hemophilia
A in Italians. Ric. Clin. Lab. 16: 227, 1986.

27. Casula, L.; Murru, S.; Pecorara, M.; Ristaldi, M. S.; Restagno,
G.; Mancuso, G.; Morfini, M.; De Biasi, R.; Baudo, F.; Carbonara,
A.; Mori, P. G.; Cao, A.; Pirastu, M.: Recurrent mutations and three
novel rearrangements in the factor VIII gene of hemophilia A patients
of Italian descent. Blood 75: 662-670, 1990.

28. Chan, V.; Chan, T. K.; Tong, T. M.; Todd, D.: A novel missense
mutation in exon 4 of the factor VIII:C gene resulting in moderately
severe hemophilia A. Blood 74: 2688-2691, 1989.

29. Cooper, D. N.; Youssoufian, H.: The CpG dinucleotide and human
genetic disease. Hum. Genet. 78: 151-155, 1988.

30. Cooper, H. A.; Wagner, R. H.: The defect in hemophilic and von
Willebrand's disease. Plasmas studied by a recombination technique. J.
Clin. Invest. 54: 1093-1099, 1974.

31. Cutler, J. A.; Mitchell, M. J.; Smith, M. P.; Savidge, G. F.:
The identification and classification of 41 novel mutations in the
factor VIII gene (F8C). Hum. Mutat. 19: 274-278, 2002.

32. David, D.; Moreira, I.; Lalloz, M. R.; Rosa, H. A.; Schwaab, R.;
Morais, S.; Diniz, M. J.; de Deus, G.; Campos, M.; Lavinha, J.: Analysis
of the essential sequences of the factor VIII gene in twelve haemophilia
A patients by single-stranded conformation polymorphism. Blood Coagul.
Fibrinolysis 5: 257-264, 1994.

33. Diamond, C.; Kogan, S.; Levinson, B.; Gitschier, J.: Amino acid
substitutions in conserved domains of factor VIII and related proteins:
study of patients with mild and moderately severe hemophilia A. Hum.
Mutat. 1: 248-257, 1992.

34. Din, N.; Schwartz, M.; Kruse, T.; Vestertgaard, S. R.; Ahrens,
P.; Scheibel, E.; Nordfang, O.; Ezban, M.: Factor VIII gene-specific
probes used to study heritage and molecular defects in hemophilia
A. (Abstract) Ric. Clin. Lab. 16: 182 only, 1986.

35. Dombroski, B. A.; Mathias, S. L.; Nanthakumar, E.; Scott, A. F.;
Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: Isolation of an active human transposable element. Science 254:
1805-1808, 1991.

36. Economou, E. P.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Detection
of mutations in the factor VIII gene using single-stranded conformational
polymorphism (SSCP). Genomics 13: 909-911, 1992.

37. Favier, R.; Lavergne, J.-M.; Costa, J.-M.; Caron, C.; Mazurier,
C.; Viemont, M.; Delpech, M.; Valleix, S.: Unbalanced X-chromosome
inactivation with a novel FVIII gene mutation resulting in severe
hemophilia A in a female. Blood 96: 4373-4375, 2000.

38. Fay, P. J.; Chavin, S. I.; Schroeder, D.; Young, F. E.; Marder,
V. J.: Purification and characterization of a highly purified human
factor VIII consisting of a single type of polypeptide chain. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 79: 7200-7204, 1982.

39. Figueiredo, M. S.; Bernardi, F.; Zago, M. A.: A novel deletion
of FVIII gene associated with variable levels of FVIII inhibitor. Europ.
J. Haemat. 48: 152-154, 1992.

40. Freije, D.; Schlessinger, D.: A 1.6-Mb contig of yeast artificial
chromosomes around the human factor VIII gene reveals three regions
homologous to probes for the DXS115 locus and two for the DXYS64 locus. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 51: 66-80, 1992.

41. Ganguly, A.; Dunbar, T.; Chen, P.; Godmilow, L.; Ganguly, T.:
Exon skipping caused by an intronic insertion of a young Alu Yb9 element
leads to severe hemophilia A. Hum. Genet. 113: 348-352, 2003.

42. Gitschier, J.: Maternal duplication associated with gene deletion
in sporadic hemophilia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 43: 274-279, 1988.

43. Gitschier, J.; Drayna, D.; Tuddenham, E. G. D.; White, R. L.;
Lawn, R. M.: Genetic mapping and diagnosis of haemophilia A achieved
through a BclI polymorphism in the factor VIII gene. Nature 314:
738-740, 1985.

44. Gitschier, J.; Wood, W. I.; Goralka, T. M.; Wion, K. L.; Chen,
E. Y.; Eaton, D. H.; Vehar, G. A.; Capon, D. J.; Lawn, R. M.: Characterization
of the human factor VIII gene. Nature 312: 326-330, 1984.

45. Gitschier, J.; Wood, W. I.; Shuman, M. A.; Lawn, R. M.: Identification
of a missense mutation in the factor VIII gene of a mild hemophiliac. Science 232:
1415-1416, 1986.

46. Gitschier, J.; Wood, W. I.; Tuddenham, E. G. D.; Shuman, M. A.;
Goralka, T. M.; Chen, E. Y.; Lawn, R. M.: Detection and sequence
of mutations in the factor VIII gene of haemophiliacs. Nature 315:
427-430, 1985.

47. Graham, J. B.; Green, P. P.; McGraw, R. A.; Davis, L. M.: Application
of molecular genetics to prenatal diagnosis and carrier detection
in the hemophilias: some limitations. Blood 66: 759-764, 1985.

48. Gralnick, H. R.; Coller, B. S.: Molecular defects in haemophilia
A and von Willebrand's disease. Lancet 307: 837-838, 1976. Note:
Originally Volume I.

49. Green, P. M.; Bagnall, R. D.; Waseem, N. H.; Giannelli, F.: Haemophilia
A mutations in the UK: results of screening one-third of the population. Brit.
J. Haemat. 143: 115-128, 2008.

50. Green, P. M.; Montandon, A. J.; Bentley, D. R.; Giannelli, F.
: Genetics and molecular biology of haemophilias A and B. Blood Coagul.
Fibrinolysis 2: 539-565, 1991.

51. Grover, H.; Phillips, M. A.; Lillicrap, D. P.; Giles, A. R.; Garvey,
M. B.; Teitel, J.; Rivard, G.; Blanchette, V.; White, B. N.; Holden,
J. J. A.: Carrier deletion of haemophilia A using DNA markers in
families with an isolated affected male. Clin. Genet. 32: 10-19,
1987.

52. Guillet, B.; Lambert, T.; d'Oiron, R.; Proulle, V.; Plantier,
J.-L.; Rafowicz, A.; Peynet, J.; Costa, J.-M.; Bendelac, L.; Laurian,
Y.; Lavergne, J.-M.: Detection of 95 novel mutations in coagulation
factor VIII gene F8 responsible for hemophilia A: results from a single
institution. Hum. Mutat. 27: 676-685, 2006.

53. Higuchi, M.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Kasch, L.; Oldenburg, J.; Economou-Petersen,
E.; Olek, K.; Arai, M.; Inaba, H.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: Molecular
characterization of mild-to-moderate hemophilia A: detection of the
mutation in 25 of 29 patients by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 8307-8311, 1991.

54. Higuchi, M.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Kasch, L.; Warren, T. C.; McGinniss,
M. J.; Phillips, J. A., III; Kasper, C., III; Janco, R.; Antonarakis,
S. E.: Molecular characterization of severe hemophilia A suggests
that about half the mutations are not within the coding regions and
splice junctions of the factor VIII gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88:
7405-7409, 1991.

55. Higuchi, M.; Kochhan, L.; Olek, K.: A somatic mosaic for haemophilia
A detected at the DNA level. Molec. Biol. Med. 5: 23-27, 1988.

56. Higuchi, M.; Kochhan, L.; Schwaab, R.; Egli, H.; Brackmann, H.
H.; Horst, J.; Olek, K.: Molecular defects in hemophilia A: identification
and characterization of mutations in the factor VIII gene and family
analysis. Blood 74: 1045-1051, 1989.

57. Higuchi, M.; Wong, C.; Kochhan, L.; Olek, K.; Aronis, S.; Kasper,
C. K.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Characterization
of mutations in the factor VIII gene by direct sequencing of amplified
genomic DNA. Genomics 6: 65-71, 1990.

58. Hoyer, L. W.: Hemophilia A. New Eng. J. Med. 330: 38-45, 1994.

59. Hoyer, L. W.: The factor VIII complex: structure and function. Blood 58:
1-13, 1981.

60. Inaba, H.; Fujimaki, M.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S.
E.: MspI polymorphic site in intron 22 of the factor VIII gene in
the Japanese population. Hum. Genet. 84: 214-215, 1990.

61. Inaba, H.; Fujimaki, M.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S.
E.: Mild hemophilia A resulting from arg-to-leu substitution in exon
26 of the factor VIII gene. Hum. Genet. 81: 335-338, 1989.

62. Jaffe, E. A.; Nachman, R. L.: Subunit structure of factor VIII
antigen synthesized by cultured human endothelial cells. J. Clin.
Invest. 56: 698-702, 1975.

63. Janco, R. L.; Phillips, J. A., III; Orlando, P. J.; Woodard, M.
J.; Wion, K. L.; Lawn, R. M.: Detection of hemophilia A carriers
using intragenic factor VIII:C DNA polymorphisms. Blood 69: 1539-1541,
1987.

64. Johnson, D. J.; Pemberton, S.; Acquila, M.; Mori, P. G.; Tuddenham,
E. G.; O'Brien, D. P.: Factor VIII S373L: mutation at P1' site confers
thrombin cleavage resistance, causing mild haemophilia A. Thromb.
Haemost. 71: 428-433, 1994.

65. Jonsdottir, S.; Diamond, C.; Levinson, B.; Magnusson, S.; Jensson,
O.; Gitschier, J.: Missense mutations causing mild hemophilia A in
Iceland detected by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Hum.
Mutat. 1: 506-508, 1992.

66. Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Wong, C.; Youssoufian, H.; Scott, A. F.;
Phillips, D. G.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Haemophilia A resulting from
de novo insertion of L1 sequences represents a novel mechanism for
mutation in man. Nature 332: 164-166, 1988.

67. Kenwrick, S.; Gitschier, J.: A contiguous, 3-Mb physical map
of Xq28 extending from the colorblindness locus to DXS15. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 45: 873-882, 1989.

68. Kenwrick, S.; Levinson, B.; Taylor, S.; Shapiro, A.; Gitschier,
J.: Isolation and sequence of two genes associated with a CpG island
5-prime of the factor VIII gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1: 179-186,
1992.

69. Kogan, S.; Gitschier, J.: Mutations and a polymorphism in the
factor VIII gene discovered by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 2092-2096, 1990.

70. Krepelova, A.; Varlova, Z.; Zavadil, J.; Brdicka, R.: Factor
VIII gene deletions in haemophilia A patients in Czechoslovakia. Brit.
J. Haemat. 86: 271-276, 1992.

71. Lakich, D.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Gitschier,
J.: Inversions disrupting the factor VIII gene are a common cause
of severe haemophilia A. Nature Genet. 5: 236-241, 1993.

72. Lavergne, J. M.; Bahnak, B. R.; Vidaud, M.; Laurian, Y.; Meyer,
D.: A directed search for mutations in hemophilia A using restriction
enzyme analysis and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis: a study
of seven exons in the factor VIII gene of 170 cases. Nouv. Rev. Fr.
Hematol. 34: 85-91, 1992.

73. Lawn, R. M.: The molecular genetics of hemophilia: blood clotting
factors VIII and IX. Cell 42: 405-406, 1985.

74. Levinson, B.; Janco, R.; Phillips, J., III; Gitschier, J.: A
novel missense mutation in the factor VIII gene identified by analysis
of amplified hemophilia DNA sequences. Nucleic Acids Res. 15: 9797-9805,
1987.

75. Levinson, B.; Kenwrick, S.; Lakich, D.; Hammonds, G.; Gitschier,
J.: A transcribed gene in an intron of the human factor VIII gene. Genomics 7:
1-11, 1990.

76. Levinson, B.; Lehesjoki, A.-E.; de la Chapelle, A.; Gitschier,
J.: Molecular analysis of hemophilia A mutations in the Finnish population. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 46: 53-62, 1990.

77. Lillicrap, D. P.; Taylor, S. A. M.; Grover, H.; Teitel, J.; Giles,
A. R.; Holden, J. J. A.; White, B. N.: Genetic analysis in hemophilia
A: identification of a large F.VIII gene deletion in a patient with
high titre antibodies to human and porcine F.VIII. (Abstract) Blood 68:
337a only, 1986.

78. Lin, S.-W.; Lin, S.-R.; Shen, M.-C.: Characterization of genetic
defects of hemophilia A in patients of Chinese origin. Genomics 18:
496-504, 1993.

79. Lozier, J. N.; Dutra, A.; Pak, E.; Zhou, N.; Zheng, Z.; Nichols,
T. C.; Bellinger, D. A.; Read, M.; Morgan, R. A.: The Chapel Hill
hemophilia A dog colony exhibits a factor VIII gene inversion. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 12991-12996, 2002.

80. Marchesi, S. L.; Shulman, N. R.; Gralnick, H. R.: Studies on
the purification and characterization of human factor VIII. J. Clin.
Invest. 51: 2151-2161, 1972.

81. Mazurier, C.; Parquet-Gernez, A.; Gaucher, C.; Lavergne, J.-M.;
Goudemand, J.: Factor VIII deficiency not induced by FVIII gene mutation
in a female first cousin of two brothers with haemophilia A. Brit.
J. Haemat. 119: 390-392, 2002.

82. McGinniss, M. J.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Hoyer, L. W.; Bi, L.;
Inaba, H.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Spectrum of mutations in CRM-positive
and CRM-reduced hemophilia A. Genomics 15: 392-398, 1993.

83. Migeon, B. R.; McGinniss, M. J.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Axelman,
J.; Stasiowski, B. A.; Youssoufian, H.; Kearns, W. G.; Chung, A.;
Pearson, P. L.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Muneer, R. S.: Severe hemophilia
A in a female by cryptic translocation: order and orientation of factor
VIII within Xq28. Genomics 16: 20-25, 1993. Note: Erratum: Genomics
16: 792 only, 1993.

84. Mikami, S.: Gene analysis in haemophilia A--restriction fragment
length polymorphism and molecular defects in the factor VIII gene. Acta
Haemat. Jpn. 51: 1680-1688, 1988.

85. Millar, D. S.; Steinbrecher, R. A.; Wieland, K.; Grundy, C. B.;
Martinowitz, U.; Krawczak, M.; Zoll, B.; Whitmore, D.; Stephenson,
J.; Mibashan, R. S.; Kakkar, V. V.; Cooper, D. N.: The molecular
genetic analysis of haemophilia A: characterization of six partial
deletions in the factor VIII gene. Hum. Genet. 86: 219-227, 1990.

86. Millar, D. S.; Zoll, B.; Martinowitz, U.; Kakkar, V. V.; Cooper,
D. N.: The molecular genetics of haemophilia A: screening for point
mutations in the factor VIII gene using the restriction enzyme TaqI. Hum.
Genet. 87: 607-612, 1991.

87. Muneer, R. S.; Coffman, M. A.; Thompson, L. M.; Sexauer, C. L.;
Rennert, O. M.: Classic hemophilia in a female with X/17 complex
translocation and partial deletion of the long arm X chromosome (Xq11-13). Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 39: A126, 1986.

88. Murru, S.; Casula, L.; Pecorara, M.; Mori, P.; Cao, A.; Pirastu,
M.: Illegitimate recombination produced a duplication within the
FVIII gene in a patient with mild hemophilia A. Genomics 7: 115-118,
1990.

89. Myers, R. M.; Fischer, S. G.; Lerman, L. S.; Maniatis, T.: Nearly
all single base substitutions in DNA fragments joined to a GC-clamp
can be detected by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Nucleic
Acids Res. 13: 3131-3145, 1985.

90. Myers, R. M.; Fischer, S. G.; Maniatis, T.; Lerman, L. S.: Modification
of the melting properties of duplex DNA by attachment of a GC-rich
DNA sequence as determined by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Nucleic
Acids Res. 13: 3111-3129, 1985.

91. Nafa, K.; Bundis, M.; Deburgrave, N.; Bardin, J.-M.; Sultan, Y.;
Kaplan, J.-C.; Delpech, M.: A novel mutation (Arg-to-Leu in exon
18) in factor VIII gene responsible for moderate hemophilia A. Hum.
Mutat. 1: 77-78, 1992.

92. Nafa, K.; Meriane, F.; Reghis, A.; Benabadji, M.; Demenais, F.;
Guilloud-Bataille, M.; Sultan, Y.; Kaplan, J. C.; Delpech, M.: Investigation
of factor VIIIC gene restriction fragment length polymorphisms and
search for deletions in hemophiliac subjects in Algeria. Hum. Genet. 84:
401-405, 1990.

93. Naylor, J.; Brinke, A.; Hassock, S.; Green, P. M.; Giannelli,
F.: Characteristic mRNA abnormality found in half the patients with
severe haemophilia A is due to large DNA inversions. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 2: 1773-1778, 1993.

94. Naylor, J. A.; Green, P. M.; Montandon, A. J.; Rizza, C. R.; Giannelli,
F.: Detection of three novel mutations in two haemophilia A patients
by rapid screening of whole essential region of factor VIII gene. Lancet 337:
635-639, 1991.

95. Naylor, J. A.; Green, P. M.; Rizza, C. R.; Giannelli, F.: Factor
VIII gene explains all cases of haemophilia A. Lancet 340: 1066-1067,
1992.

96. Naylor, J. A.; Green, P. M.; Rizza, C. R.; Giannelli, F.: Analysis
of factor VIII mRNA reveals defects in everyone of 28 haemophilia
A patients. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 11-17, 1993.

97. Nilsson, I. M.; Blomback, M.; Ramgren, O.: Investigations on
hemophilia A and B carriers. Bibl. Haemat. 26: 26-29, 1966.

98. O'Brien, D. P.; Pattinson, J. K.; Tuddenham, E. G. D.: Purification
and characterization of factor VIII 372-cys: a hypofunctional cofactor
from a patient with moderately severe hemophilia A. Blood 75: 1664-1672,
1990.

99. Oberle, I.; Drayna, D.; Camerino, G.; White, R.; Mandel, J.-L.
: The telomeric region of the human X chromosome long arm: presence
of a highly polymorphic DNA marker and analysis of recombination frequency. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 2824-2828, 1985.

100. Oldenburg, J.; Rost, S.; El-Maarri, O.; Leuer, M.; Olek, K.;
Muller, C. R.; Schwaab, R.: De novo factor VIII gene intron 22 inversion
in a female carrier presents as a somatic mosaicism. Blood 96: 2905-2906,
2000.

101. Patterson, M.; Gitschier, J.; Bloomfield, J.; Bell, M.; Dorkins,
H.; Froster-Iskenius, U.; Sommer, S.; Sobell, J.; Schaid, D.; Thibodeau,
S.; Davies, K. E.: An intronic region within the human factor VIII
gene is duplicated within Xq28 and is homologous to the polymorphic
locus DXS115 (767). Am. J. Hum. Genet. 44: 679-685, 1989.

102. Patterson, M.; Schwartz, C.; Bell, M.; Sauer, S.; Hofker, M.;
Trask, B.; van den Engh, G.; Davies, K. E.: Physical mapping studies
on the human X chromosome in the region Xq27-Xqter. Genomics 1:
297-306, 1987.

103. Pattinson, J. K.; Millar, D. S.; McVey, J. H.; Grundy, C. B.;
Wieland, K.; Mibashan, R. S.; Martinowitz, U.; Tan-Un, K.; Vidaud,
M.; Goossens, M.; Sampietro, M.; Mannucci, P. M.; and 17 others
: The molecular genetic analysis of hemophilia A: a directed search
strategy for the detection of point mutations in the human factor
VIII gene. Blood 76: 2242-2248, 1990.

104. Paynton, C.; Sarkar, G.; Sommer, S. S.: Identification of mutations
in two families with sporadic hemophilia A. Hum. Genet. 87: 397-400,
1991.

105. Peake, I. R.; Lillicrap, D. P.; Liddell, M. B.; Matthews, R.
J.; Bloom, A. L.: Linked and intragenic probes for haemophilia A. Lancet 326:
1003-1004, 1985. Note: Originally Volume II.

106. Pieneman, W. C.; Reitsma, P. H.; Briet, E.: Double strand conformation
polymorphism (DSCP) detects two point mutations at codon 280 (AAC-ATC)
and at codon 431 (TAC-AAC) of the blood coagulation factor VIII gene. Thromb.
Haemost. 69: 473-475, 1993.

107. Poustka, A.; Dietrich, A.; Langenstein, G.; Toniolo, D.; Warren,
S. T.; Lehrach, H.: Physical map of human Xq27-qter: localizing the
region of the fragile X mutation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 8302-8306,
1991.

108. Pratt, K. P.; Shen, B. W.; Takeshima, K.; Davie, E. W.; Fujikawa,
K.; Stoddard, B. L.: Structure of the C2 domain of human factor VIII
at 1.5 angstrom resolution. Nature 402: 439-442, 1999.

109. Ratnoff, O. D.: Antihemophilic factor (factor VIII). Ann. Intern.
Med. 88: 403-409, 1978.

110. Ratnoff, O. D.; Bennett, B.: The genetics of hereditary disorders
of blood coagulation. Science 179: 1291-1298, 1973.

111. Reiner, A. P.; Stray, S. M.; Thompson, A. R.: Three missense
mutations in Arg codons of the factor VIII gene of mild to moderately
severe hemophilia A patients. Thromb. Res. 66: 93-99, 1992.

112. Reiner, A. P.; Thompson, A. R.: Screening for nonsense mutations
in patients with severe hemophilia A can provide rapid, direct carrier
detection. Hum. Genet. 89: 88-94, 1992.

113. Roberts, D. F.: The genetic basis of variation in factor VIII
levels among haemophiliacs. J. Med. Genet. 8: 136-139, 1971.

114. Rossiter, J. P.; Young, M.; Kimberland, M. L.; Hutter, P.; Ketterling,
R. P.; Gitschier, J.; Horst, J.; Morris, M. A.; Schaid, D. J.; de
Moerloose, P.; Sommer, S. S.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S.
E.: Factor VIII gene inversions causing severe hemophilia A originate
almost exclusively in male germ cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 1035-1039,
1994.

115. Saiki, R. K.; Scharf, S.; Faloona, F.; Mullis, K. B.; Horn, G.
T.; Erlich, H. A.; Arnheim, N.: Enzymatic amplification of beta-globin
genomic sequences and restriction site analysis for diagnosis of sickle
cell anemia. Science 230: 1350-1354, 1985.

116. Santacroce, R.; Acquila, M.; Belvini, D.; Castaldo, G.; Garagiola,
I.; Giacomelli, S. H.; Lombardi, A. M.; Minuti, B.; Riccardi, F.;
Salviato, R.; Tagliabue, L.; Grandone, E.; Margaglione, M.; the AICE-Genetics
Study Group: Identification of 217 unreported mutations in the F8
gene in a group of 1,410 unselected Italian patients with hemophilia
A. J. Hum. Genet. 53: 275-284, 2008.

117. Schwaab, R.; Brackmann, H.-H.; Meyer, C.; Seehafer, J.; Kirchgesser,
M.; Haack, A.; Olek, K.; Tuddenham, E. G. D.; Oldenburg, J.: Haemophilia
A: mutation type determines risk of inhibitor formation. Thromb.
Haemat. 74: 1402-1406, 1995.

118. Schwaab, R.; Oldenburg, J.; Tuddenham, E. G. D.; Brackmann, H.
H.; Olek, K.: Mutations in haemophilia A. Brit. J. Haemat. 83:
450-458, 1993.

119. Shima, M.; Ware, J.; Yoshioka, A.; Fukui, H.; Fulcher, C. A.
: An arginine to cysteine amino acid substitution at a critical thrombin
cleavage site in a dysfunctional factor VIII molecule. Blood 74:
1612-1617, 1989.

120. Sukarova, E.; Dimovski, A. J.; Tchacarova, P.; Petkov, G. H.;
Efremov, G. D.: An Alu insert as the cause of a severe form of hemophilia
A. Acta Haemat. 106: 126-129, 2001.

121. Summers, R. J.; Meeks, S. L.; Healey, J. F.; Brown, H. C.; Parker,
E. T.; Kempton, C. L.; Doering, C. B.; Lollar, P.: Factor VIII A3
domain substitution N1922S results in hemophilia A due to domain-specific
misfolding and hyposecretion of functional protein. Blood 117: 3190-3198,
2011.

122. Tantravahi, U.; Murty, V. V. V. S.; Jhanwar, S. C.; Toole, J.
J.; Woozney, J. M.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Latt, S. A.: Physical mapping
of the factor VIII gene proximal to two polymorphic DNA probes in
human chromosome band Xq28: implications for factor VIII gene segregation
analysis. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 42: 75-79, 1986.

123. Toole, J. J.; Knopf, J. L.; Wozney, J. M.; Sultzman, L. A.; Buecker,
J. L.; Pittman, D. D.; Kaufman, R. J.; Brown, E.; Shoemaker, C.; Orr,
E. C.; Amphlett, G. W.; Foster, W. B.; Coe, M. L.; Knutson, G. J.;
Fass, D. N.; Hewick, R. M.: Molecular cloning of a cDNA encoding
human antihaemophilic factor. Nature 312: 342-347, 1984.

124. Traystman, M. D.; Higuchi, M.; Kasper, C. K.; Antonarakis, S.
E.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: Use of denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis
to detect point mutations in the factor VIII gene. Genomics 6: 293-301,
1990.

125. Tuddenham, E. G. D.; Cooper, D. N.; Gitschier, J.; Higuchi, M.;
Hoyer, L. W.; Yoshioka, A.; Peake, I. R.; Schwaab, R.; Olek, K.; Kazazian,
H. H.; Lavergne, J.-M.; Giannelli, F.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Haemophilia
A: database of nucleotide substitutions, deletions, insertions and
rearrangements of the factor VIII gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 19: 4821-4833,
1991.

126. Tuddenham, E. G. D.; Lazarchick, J.; Hoyer, L. W.: Synthesis
and release of factor VIII by cultured human endothelial cells. Brit.
J. Haemat. 47: 617-626, 1981.

127. Valleix, S.; Vinciguerra, C.; Lavergne, J.-M.; Leuer, M.; Delpech,
M.; Negrier, C.: Skewed X-chromosome inactivation in monochorionic
diamniotic twin sisters results in severe and mild hemophilia A. Blood 100:
3034-3036, 2002.

128. Viel, K. R.; Ameri, A.; Abshire, T. C.; Iyer, R. V.; Watts, R.
G.; Lutcher, C.; Channell, C.; Cole, S. A.; Fernstrom, K. M.; Nakaya,
S.; Kasper, C. K.; Thompson, A. R.; Almasy, L.; Howard, T. E.: Inhibitors
of factor VIII in black patients with hemophilia. New Eng. J. Med. 360:
1618-1627, 2009. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 361: 544 only, 2009.

129. Wehnert, M.; Herrmann, F. H.; Wulff, K.: Partial deletions of
factor VIII gene as molecular diagnostic markers in hemophilia A. Dis.
Markers 7: 113-117, 1989.

130. Wion, K. L.; Kelly, D.; Summerfield, J. A.; Tuddenham, E. G.;
Lawn, R. M.: Distribution of factor VIII mRNA and antigen in human
liver and other tissues. Nature 317: 726-729, 1985.

131. Wood, W. I.; Capon, D. J.; Simonsen, C. C.; Eaton, D. L.; Gitschier,
J.; Keyt, B.; Seeburg, P. H.; Smith, D. H.; Hollingshead, P.; Wion,
K. L.; Delwart, E.; Tuddenham, E. G. D.; Vehar, G. A.; Lawn, R. M.
: Expression of active human factor VIII from recombinant DNA clones. Nature 312:
330-337, 1984.

132. Woods-Samuels, P.; Wong, C.; Mathias, S. L.; Scott, A. F.; Kazazian,
H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Characterization of a nondeleterious
L1 insertion in an intron of the human factor VIII gene and further
evidence of open reading frames in functional L1 elements. Genomics 4:
290-296, 1989.

133. Woolf, L. I.: Gene expression in heterozygotes. Nature 194:
609-610, 1962.

134. Young, M.; Inaba, H.; Hoyer, L. W.; Higuchi, M.; Kazazian, H.
H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Partial correction of a severe molecular
defect in hemophilia A, because of errors during expression of the
factor VIII gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 60: 565-573, 1997.

135. Youssoufian, H.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Aronis, S.; Tsiftis, G.;
Phillips, D. G.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: Characterization of five partial
deletions of the factor VIII gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 3772-3776,
1987.

136. Youssoufian, H.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Bell, W.; Griffin, A. M.;
Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: Nonsense and missense mutations in hemophilia
A: estimate of the relative mutation rate at CG dinucleotides. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 42: 718-725, 1988.

137. Youssoufian, H.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Kasper, C. K.; Phillips,
D. G.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: The spectrum and origin of mutations
in hemophilia A. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 41: A249 only, 1987.

138. Youssoufian, H.; Kasper, C. K.; Phillips, D. G.; Kazazian, H.
H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Restriction endonuclease mapping of
six novel deletions of the factor VIII gene in hemophilia A. Hum.
Genet. 80: 143-148, 1988.

139. Youssoufian, H.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Phillips, D. G.; Aronis,
S.; Tsiftis, G.; Brown, V. A.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Recurrent mutations
in haemophilia A give evidence for CpG mutation hotspots. Nature 324:
380-382, 1986.

140. Youssoufian, H.; Wong, C.; Aronis, S.; Platokoukis, H.; Kazazian,
H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Moderately severe hemophilia A resulting
from glu-to-gly substitution in exon 7 of the factor VIII gene. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 42: 867-871, 1988.

141. Zacharski, L. R.; Bowie, E. J. W.; Titus, J. L.; Owen, C. A.,
Jr.: Synthesis of antihemophilic factor (factor VIII) by leukocytes:
preliminary report. Mayo Clin. Proc. 43: 617-619, 1968.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/1/2011

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 4/5/2011

EDITED terry: 09/14/2012
carol: 5/30/2012
terry: 4/12/2012
mgross: 11/13/2011
terry: 11/1/2011
terry: 6/24/2011
terry: 6/23/2011
terry: 4/13/2011
carol: 4/8/2011
terry: 4/8/2011
carol: 4/7/2011
ckniffin: 4/6/2011

612207	TITLE *612207 GOLGI PHOSPHOPROTEIN 3; GOLPH3
;;GOLGI-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN, 34-KD; GPP34;;
MITOCHONDRIAL DNA ABSENCE-SENSITIVE FACTOR; MIDAS
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Following the purification and characterization of rat Golgi-associated
proteins, Bell et al. (2001) cloned rat Golph3, which they called Gpp34.
By EST database analysis, they identified human GOLPH3, which encodes a
deduced 298-amino acid protein. Immunogold electron microscopy localized
rat Golph3 at the periphery of Golgi stacks, on the cis and trans sides,
as well as at the lateral edges of stacked cisternae. Scanning confocal
microscopy of cultured rat hippocampal neurons and a rat fibroblast cell
line confirmed the Golgi localization and more diffuse cytosolic
labeling.

Nakashima-Kamimura et al. (2005) determined that GOLPH3, which they
called MIDAS, has an N-terminal acidic region and a C-terminal leucine
zipper motif. Immunohistochemical analysis and density gradient
fractionation, followed by Western blot analysis, showed that the
majority of GOLPH3 localized to mitochondria in HeLa cells and only a
small proportion distributed to the Golgi apparatus. Protease and
membrane permeability studies indicated that GOLPH3 localized to inner
mitochondria or was embedded in the outer membrane.

GENE FUNCTION

Nakashima-Kamimura et al. (2005) found that expression of MIDAS was
increased in muscle fibers of patients with mitochondrial diseases such
as CPEO (see KSS; 530000) and MELAS (540000). Upregulation of MIDAS in
HeLa cells caused an increase in mitochondria number, redistributed
mitochondria to the perinuclear region, and prevented cell growth. MIDAS
had no effect on mitochondria membrane potential, cytoskeletal
structure, or mitochondrial DNA, RNA or protein, but the amount of the
mitochondria-specific phospholipid cardiolipin was increased almost
2-fold following MIDAS overexpression. Nakashima-Kamimura et al. (2005)
concluded that MIDAS regulates mitochondrial lipids leading to increased
total mitochondrial mass in response to mitochondrial dysfunction.

Tu et al. (2008) found that yeast Vps74, a homolog of human GOLPH3 and
GOLPH3-like (612208), binds to a pentameric motif present in the
cytoplasmic tails of the majority of yeast Golgi-localized
glycosyltransferases, as well as to coat protein complex I (COPI). Tu et
al. (2008) proposed that Vps74p maintains a steady-state localization of
Golgi glycosyltransferases dynamically, by promoting their incorporation
into COPI-coated vesicles.

Genomewide copy number analyses of human cancers identified a frequent
5p13 amplification in several solid tumor types, including lung (56%),
ovarian (38%), breast (32%), prostate (37%), and melanoma (32%). Using
integrative analysis of a genomic profile of the region, Scott et al.
(2009) identified a Golgi protein, GOLPH3, as a candidate targeted for
amplification. Gain- and loss-of-function studies in vitro and in vivo
validated GOLPH3 as a potent oncogene. Physically, GOLPH3 localizes to
the trans-Golgi network and interacts with components of the retromer
complex, which in yeast has been linked to TOR signaling.
Mechanistically, GOLPH3 regulates cell size, enhances growth
factor-induced mTOR (601231) signaling in human cancer cells, and alters
the response of an mTOR inhibitor in vivo. Thus, Scott et al. (2009)
concluded that genomic and genetic, biologic, functional, and
biochemical data in yeast and humans establishes GOLPH3 as a novel
oncogene that is commonly targeted for amplification in human cancer,
and is capable of modulating the response to rapamycin, a cancer drug in
clinical use.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the GOLPH3
gene to chromosome 5 (TMAP RH102976).

REFERENCE 1. Bell, A. W.; Ward, M. A.; Blackstock, W. P.; Freeman, H. N. M.;
Choudhary, J. S.; Lewis, A. P.; Chotai, D.; Fazel, A.; Gushue, J.
N.; Paiement, J.; Palcy, S.; Chevet, E.; Lafreniere-Roula, M.; Solari,
R.; Thomas, D. Y.; Rowley, A.; Bergeron, J. J. M.: Proteomics characterization
of abundant Golgi membrane proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 5152-5165,
2001.

2. Nakashima-Kamimura, N.; Asoh, S.; Ishibashi, Y.; Mukai, Y.; Shidara,
Y.; Oda, H.; Munakata, K.; Goto, Y.; Ohta, S.: MIDAS/GPP34, a nuclear
gene product, regulates total mitochondrial mass in response to mitochondrial
dysfunction. J. Cell Sci. 118: 5357-5367, 2005.

3. Scott, K. L.; Kabbarah, O.; Liang, M.-C.; Ivanova, E.; Anagnostou,
V.; Wu, J.; Dhakal, S.; Wu, M.; Chen, S.; Feinberg, T.; Huang, J.;
Saci, A.; Widlund, H. R.; Fisher, D. E.; Xiao, Y.; Rimm, D. L.; Protopopov,
A.; Wong, K.-K.; Chin, L.: GOLPH3 modulates mTOR signalling and rapamycin
sensitivity in cancer. Nature 459: 1085-1090, 2009.

4. Tu, L.; Tai, W. C. S.; Chen, L.; Banfield, D. K.: Signal-mediated
dynamic retention of glycosyltransferases in the Golgi. Science 321:
404-407, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/9/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/13/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/30/2008

EDITED alopez: 07/15/2009
terry: 7/9/2009
alopez: 8/18/2008
terry: 8/13/2008
wwang: 7/30/2008

142460	TITLE *142460 SYNDECAN 2; SDC2
;;SYND2;;
HEPARAN SULFATE PROTEOGLYCAN; HSPG;;
HSPG1;;
FIBROGLYCAN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of cell surface-associated heparan
sulfate proteoglycans after heparitinase treatment, Lories et al. (1987)
demonstrated the presence of core proteins with an apparent molecular
weight of 125,000, 90,000, 64,000, 48,000 and 35,000. The 90-kD and the
48-kD core proteins share the epitope of the monoclonal antibody 6G12,
which Marynen et al. (1989) used in the isolation of the cDNA from a
human lung fibroblast expression library. Southern blot analysis
indicated the presence of 1 or a limited number of genes corresponding
to the 48/90-kD cDNA.

The transmembrane heparan sulfate proteoglycan for which cDNAs were
cloned from human lung fibroblasts by Marynen et al. (1989) is also
called fibroglycan or syndecan-2 (David et al., 1992). It is located in
the same region as the MYC gene. As pointed out by Spring et al. (1994),
4 members of the syndecan family show a remarkable physical relationship
with 4 members of the MYC gene family.

GENE FUNCTION

Bobardt et al. (2003) demonstrated that syndecans, including SDC2, can
function as in trans HIV receptors via binding of HIV-1 gp120 to the
syndecan heparan sulfate chains. Flow cytometric analysis demonstrated
SDC expression on endothelial cells. HIV bound to SDC on endothelial
cell lines maintained its infectivity for at least 1 week, compared with
less than 1 day for unbound virus. Bobardt et al. (2003) suggested that
SDC-rich endothelial cells lining the vasculature can provide a
microenvironment that boosts HIV replication in T cells.

Using yeast 2-hybrid experiments, coimmunoprecipitation assays, and in
vitro pull-down assays, Ethell et al. (2000) demonstrated that mouse
synbindin (TRAPPC4; 610971) interacted directly with rat syndecan-2.
Yeast 2-hybrid analysis also showed that synbindin interacted with rat
syndecan-4 (SDC4; 600017). Mutation analysis showed that the interaction
required the PDZ-like domain of synbindin and the EFYA motif in the
C-terminal domain of Sdc2. Primary rat hippocampal neurons transfected
with synbindin and Sdc2 expressed the proteins in clusters along
dendritic spines. Sdc2 lacking the EFYA motif formed clusters that
lacked synbindin, suggesting synbindin clustering was dependent on Sdc2.
Synbindin coimmunoprecipitated with Sdc2 from synaptic membrane
fractions. Ethell et al. (2000) suggested that SDC2 induces dendritic
spine formation by recruiting intracellular vesicles toward postsynaptic
sites through interaction with synbindin.

Coles et al. (2011) reported that RPTP-sigma, also known as PTPRS
(601576), acts bimodally in sensory neuron extension, mediating CSPG
(155760) inhibition and HSPG growth promotion. Crystallographic analyses
of a shared HSPG-CSPG binding site revealed a conformational plasticity
that can accommodate diverse glycosaminoglycans with comparable
affinities. Heparan sulfate and analogs induced RPTP-sigma ectodomain
oligomerization in solution, which was inhibited by chondroitin sulfate.
RPTP-sigma and HSPGs colocalize in puncta on sensory neurons in culture,
whereas CSPGs occupy the extracellular matrix. Coles et al. (2011)
concluded that their results lead to a model where proteoglycans can
exert opposing effects on neuronal extension by competing to control the
oligomerization of a common receptor.

MAPPING

By Southern hybridization to a panel of human-mouse somatic cell hybrid
DNA and by in situ hybridization, Marynen et al. (1989) showed that the
heparan sulfate proteoglycan core protein maps to 8q22-q24. (Heparan
sulfate proteoglycan of basement membrane appears to be encoded by a
gene on human chromosome 1; see 142461.)

CYTOGENETICS

Ishikawa-Brush et al. (1997) found that the 3-prime end of the SDC2 gene
was located approximately 30 kb proximal to the translocation breakpoint
in a 27-year-old female patient with a balanced translocation
46,X,t(X;8)(p22.13;q22.1) associated with multiple exostoses and autism
(Bolton et al., 1995). The breakpoint of the X chromosome was located in
the first intron of the gastrin-releasing peptide receptor gene (GRPR;
305670) and a possible causal relationship to autism (209850) was
posited. Since one of the biologic functions of the SDC2 gene product is
related to aggregating cells in the formation of bone, the authors
suggested interference with its function as a mechanism of the multiple
exostoses. There is precedence for a position effect; translocation
occurring in the 3-prime end of the PAX6 gene (607108) as far away as
approximately 100 kb appeared to be disruptive to the gene and was
associated with aniridia.

REFERENCE 1. Bobardt, M. D.; Saphire, A. C. S.; Hung, H.-C.; Yu, X.; Van der
Schueren, B.; Zhang, Z.; David, G.; Gallay, P. A.: Syndecan captures,
protects, and transmits HIV to T lymphocytes. Immunity 18: 27-39,
2003.

2. Bolton, P.; Powell, J.; Rutter, M.; Buckle, V.; Yates, J. R. W.;
Ishikawa-Brush, Y.; Monaco, A. P.: Autism, mental retardation, multiple
exostoses and short stature in a female with 46,X,t(X;8)(p22.13;q22.1). Psychiat.
Genet. 5: 51-55, 1995.

3. Coles, C. H.; Shen, Y.; Tenney, A. P.; Siebold, C.; Sutton, G.
C.; Lu, W.; Gallagher, J. T.; Jones, E. Y.; Flanagan, J. G.; Aricescu,
A. R.: Proteoglycan-specific molecular switch for RPTP-sigma clustering
and neuronal extension. Science 332: 484-488, 2011.

4. David, G.; van der Schueren, B.; Marynen, P.; Cassiman, J.-J.;
van den Berghe, H.: Molecular cloning of amphiglycan, a novel integral
membrane heparan sulfate proteoglycan expressed by epithelial and
fibroblastic cells. J. Cell Biol. 118: 961-969, 1992.

5. Ethell, I. M.; Hagihara, K.; Miura, Y.; Irie, F.; Yamaguchi, Y.
: Synbindin, a novel syndecan-2-binding protein in neuronal dendritic
spines. J. Cell Biol. 151: 53-67, 2000.

6. Ishikawa-Brush, Y.; Powell, J. F.; Bolton, P.; Miller, A. P.; Francis,
F.; Willard, H. F.; Lehrach, H.; Monaco, A. P.: Autism and multiple
exostoses associated with an X;8 translocation occurring within the
GRPR gene and 3-prime to the SDC2 gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 6: 1241-1250,
1997.

7. Lories, V.; De Broeck, H.; David, G.; Cassiman, J. J.; Van den
Berghe, H.: Heparan sulfate proteoglycans of human lung fibroblasts:
structural heterogeneity of the core proteins of the hydrophobic cell-associated
forms. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 854-859, 1987.

8. Marynen, P.; Zhang, J.; Cassiman, J.-J.; David, G.: The gene for
the 48kDa and the 90kDa core proteins of cell surface-associated heparan
sulphate proteoglycan of human lung fibroblast maps to chromosome
8q2. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51: 1040, 1989.

9. Marynen, P.; Zhang, J.; Cassiman, J.-J.; Van den Berghe, H.; David,
G.: Partial primary structure of the 48- and 90-kilodalton core proteins
of cell surface-associated heparan sulfate proteoglycans of lung fibroblasts:
prediction of an integral membrane domain and evidence for multiple
distinct core proteins at the cell surface of human lung fibroblasts. J.
Biol. Chem. 264: 7017-7024, 1989.

10. Spring, J.; Goldberger, O. A.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert, D. J.;
Copeland, N. G.; Bernfield, M.: Mapping of the syndecan genes in
the mouse: linkage with members of the Myc gene family. Genomics 21:
597-601, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/24/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/20/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/22/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/6/1989

EDITED alopez: 07/11/2011
terry: 7/8/2011
wwang: 4/24/2007
mgross: 6/17/2005
terry: 5/20/2005
ckniffin: 8/27/2002
dkim: 7/16/1998
terry: 8/25/1997
terry: 8/22/1997
mark: 4/1/1996
jason: 7/13/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/23/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 12/20/1989
ddp: 10/27/1989

608951	TITLE *608951 CCR4-NOT TRANSCRIPTION COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 6; CNOT6
;;CCR4, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; CCR4;;
KIAA1194
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned CNOT6, which they called KIAA1194.
The deduced protein contains 575 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA detected
variable expression in all fetal and adult tissues and specific brain
regions examined. Highest expression was in adult brain, testis, ovary,
spinal cord, and caudate nucleus, and lowest expression was in pancreas
and spleen. Expression in fetal brain was lower than that in adult
brain.

Chen et al. (2002) identified CNOT6 as 1 of 2 human homologs of the S.
cerevisiae Ccr4 protein, which is part of a general transcriptional
regulatory complex involved in several aspects of mRNA metabolism,
including transcription initiation and elongation and mRNA degradation.
They determined that the C-terminal half of CNOT6, which they called
CCR4, contains 5 highly conserved motifs critical for
apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease activity. See 608468 for information
on the other human Ccr4 homolog, CCRN4L.

GENE FUNCTION

Chen et al. (2002) characterized human CNOT6 following expression in a
yeast strain lacking the endogenous yeast Ccr4 gene. CNOT6 showed
poly(A) exonuclease activity against a substrate containing five 3-prime
adenines. CNOT6 also interacted with mouse or human CAF1 (604913)
following coexpression in yeast.

Chang et al. (2004) presented evidence that CNOT6 functions as a poly(A)
nuclease involved in mRNA decay mediated by the major-protein-coding
determinant of instability (mCRD) of the FOS gene (164810). They found
that CNOT6 associated with UNR (191510) in the mCRD complex.

Garapaty et al. (2008) determined that CNOT6 augments the
ligand-dependent transcriptional activation of a wide variety of nuclear
receptors, including RARA (180240), THRA (190120), RXRA (180245), ESR1
(133430), and GCCR (138040), through an NIF1 (610827) coactivator
complex. siRNA-mediated silencing of endogenous CNOT6 resulted in a
marked decrease in nuclear receptor activation as well as attenuated
stimulation of RARA target genes, including SOX9 (608160) and HOXA1
(142955). siRNA knockdown of NIF1, with which CNOT6 associates in vivo,
blocked the ligand-dependent potentiating effect of CNOT6.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the CNOT6
gene to chromosome 5 (TMAP SHGC-32852).

REFERENCE 1. Chang, T.-C.; Yamashita, A.; Chen, C.-Y. A.; Yamashita, Y.; Zhu,
W.; Durdan, S.; Kahvejian, A.; Sonenberg, N.; Shyu, A.-B.: UNR, a
new partner of poly(A)-binding protein, plays a key role in translationally
coupled mRNA turnover mediated by the c-fos major coding-region determinant. Genes
Dev. 18: 2010-2023, 2004.

2. Chen, J.; Chiang, Y.-C.; Denis, C. L.: CCR4, a 3-prime-to-5-prime
poly(A) RNA and ssDNA exonuclease, is the catalytic component of the
cytoplasmic deadenylase. EMBO J. 21: 1414-1426, 2002.

3. Garapaty, S.; Mahajan, M. A.; Samuels, H. H.: Components of the
CCR4-NOT complex function as nuclear hormone receptor coactivators
via association with the NRC-interacting factor NIF-1. J. Biol. Chem. 283:
6806-6816, 2008.

4. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.; Nomura, N.;
Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human
genes. XV. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain
which code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 337-345, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 7/16/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/28/2004

EDITED carol: 07/16/2008
carol: 7/15/2008
mgross: 9/28/2004

614145	TITLE *614145 COILED-COIL DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 8; CCDC8
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for genes in a potential 3M syndrome locus on chromosome
19q, Hanson et al. (2011) identified CCDC8. The deduced 538-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 59 kD. It has an N-terminal
domain that shares significant similarity with the N-terminal region of
PNMA (see 604010), and this is followed by an alanine-rich region that
contains a coiled-coil domain, and a second coiled-coil domain at the C
terminus. CCDC8 also contains potential sites for amidation,
glycosylation, phosphorylation, and myristoylation. RT-PCR analysis
detected variable CCDC8 expression in all tissues examined. Western blot
analysis detected endogenous CCDC8 at an apparent molecular mass of
about 90 kD, suggesting extensive posttranslational modification.
Database analysis revealed orthologs of CCDC8 in placental mammals only.

GENE FUNCTION

Hanson et al. (2011) observed a strong correlation between the tissue
distribution of CCDC8 and that of OBSL1 (610991) and CUL7 (609577),
which are also implicated in 3M syndromes (6122921 and 273750,
respectively). Immunoprecipitation analysis of cotransfected HEK293
cells revealed that OBSL1 interacted with both CCDC8 and CUL7, but CCDC8
did not interact with CUL7. Hanson et al. (2011) proposed that OBSL1 may
act as an adaptor protein linking CUL7 and CCDC8.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hanson et al. (2011) stated that CCDC8 is a single-exon gene.

MAPPING

By database analysis, Hanson et al. (2011) mapped the CCDC8 gene to
chromosome 19q13.2-q13.32.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By autozygosity mapping followed by exome sequencing of 3 Asian patients
with 3M syndrome-3 (3M3; 614205), Hanson et al. (2011) identified 2
different homozygous 1-bp duplications in the CCDC8 gene (614145.0001
and 614145.0002). Both mutations were predicted to result in truncation,
consistent with a loss of function. The phenotype was characterized by
poor growth and characteristic dysmorphic features, including fleshy
tipped nose, frontal bossing, triangular face, pointed chin, short
thorax, and prominent heels. The findings supported the hypothesis that
the 3M syndrome results from defects in a pathway controlling human
growth.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
THREE M SYNDROME 3
CCDC8, 1-BP DUP, 612G

In 4 unrelated patients with 3M syndrome-3 (3M3; 614205), Hanson et al.
(2011) identified a homozygous 1-bp duplication (612dupG) in the CCDC8
gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination, predicted to
lead to a loss of function. The mutation was not identified in 611
controls, and haplotype analysis indicated a founder effect for 2 of the
patients.

.0002
THREE M SYNDROME 3
CCDC8, 1-BP DUP, 84T

In a patient with 3M syndrome-3 (614205), Hanson et al. (2011)
identified a homozygous 1-bp duplication (84dupT) in the CCDC8 gene,
resulting in a truncation at lys29. The mutation was not found in 611
controls. Fibroblast cell lines derived from this patient showed no
detectable CCDC8 protein.

REFERENCE 1. Hanson, D.; Murray, P. G.; O'Sullivan, J.; Urquhart, J.; Daly,
S.; Bhaskar, S. S.; Biesecker, L. G.; Skae, M.; Smith, C.; Cole, T.;
Kirk, J.; Chandler, K.; Kingston, H.; Donnai, D.; Clayton, P. E.;
Black, G. C. M.: Exome sequencing identifies CCDC8 mutations in 3-M
syndrome, suggesting that CCDC8 contributes in a pathway with CUL7
and OBSL1 to control human growth. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89: 148-153,
2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/1/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/5/2011

EDITED carol: 09/11/2013
carol: 9/1/2011
ckniffin: 9/1/2011
wwang: 8/5/2011

611933	TITLE *611933 CDGSH IRON SULFUR DOMAIN PROTEIN 3; CISD3
;;MITONEET-RELATED 2; MINER2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CISD3 is a member of the CDGSH domain-containing family, which may play
a role in regulating electron transport and oxidative phosphorylation
(Wiley et al., 2007).

CLONING

By database analysis using CISD1 (611932) as query, Wiley et al., 2007
identified CISD3, which they called MINER2. The deduced 126-amino acid
protein contains 2 C-terminal CDGSH domains. Immunofluorescence
localized CISD3 to the mitochondria. They noted that purified
recombinant CISD3 was strikingly red in color. Wiley et al., 2007 showed
that the CDGSH domain of CISD1 harbors a redox-sensitive 2Fe-2S cluster
and suggested that the CDGSH domains of CISD3 likewise bind 2Fe-2S and
have similar biophysical properties.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the CISD3
gene to chromosome 17 (TMAP RH91451).

REFERENCE 1. Wiley, S. E.; Murphy, A. N.; Ross, S. A.; van der Geer, P.; Dixon,
J. E.: MitoNEET is an iron-containing outer mitochondrial membrane
protein that regulates oxidative capacity. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104:
5318-5323, 2007.

2. Wiley, S. E.; Paddock, M. L.; Abresch, E. C.; Gross, L.; van der
Geer, P.; Nechushtai, R.; Murphy, A. N.; Jennings, P. A.; Dixon, J.
E.: The outer mitochondrial membrane protein mitoNEET contains a
novel redox-active 2Fe-2S cluster. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 23745-23749,
2007.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 4/3/2008

EDITED wwang: 04/03/2008

611749	TITLE *611749 ZINC FINGER- AND RAN-BINDING DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; ZRANB1
;;TRAF-BINDING DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN; TRABID
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to A20 (TNFAIP3;
191163), followed by RACE PCR of human umbilical vein endothelial cell
cDNA, Evans et al. (2001) cloned ZRANB1, which they called TRABID. The
deduced protein contains 3 N-terminal nucleoporin (see NUP98;
601021)-type zinc fingers and a C-terminal TRAF (see TRAF1;
601711)-binding domain. Northern blot analysis detected major 3-kb and
minor 1-kb transcripts in human epithelial cells and fibroblasts and in
a liver carcinoma cell line. Fluorescence-tagged TRABID distributed
diffusely in the cytoplasm and nuclei of all cell lines tested and
accumulated in nuclei of most fibroblasts.

GENE FUNCTION

Evans et al. (2001) showed that exogenous A20, Cezanne (OTUD7B; 611748)
and TRABID coimmunoprecipitated with TRAF6 (602355) when they were
overexpressed in human embryonic kidney cells.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the ZRANB1
gene to chromosome 10 (TMAP SHGC-36286).

REFERENCE 1. Evans, P. C.; Taylor, E. R.; Coadwell, J.; Heyninck, K.; Beyaert,
R.; Kilshaw, P. J.: Isolation and characterization of two novel A20-like
proteins. Biochem. J. 357: 617-623, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/22/2008

EDITED mgross: 01/22/2008

608700	TITLE *608700 NICOTINAMIDE NUCLEOTIDE ADENYLYLTRANSFERASE 1; NMNAT1
;;NMNAT;;
PYRIDINE NUCLEOTIDE ADENYLYLTRANSFERASE 1; PNAT1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The coenzyme NAD and its derivatives are involved in hundreds of
metabolic redox reactions and are utilized in protein ADP-ribosylation,
histone deacetylation, and in some Ca(2+) signaling pathways. NMNAT (EC
2.7.7.1) is a central enzyme in NAD biosynthesis, catalyzing the
condensation of nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) or nicotinic acid
mononucleotide (NaMN) with the AMP moiety of ATP to form NAD or NaAD
(Zhang et al., 2003).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to peptide fragments
of NMNAT1 purified from placenta, followed by PCR of a placenta cDNA
library, Emanuelli et al. (2001) cloned NMNAT1. The deduced 279-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 31.9 kD. It contains a
conserved N-terminal adenylyltransferase motif, an N-terminal
N-glycosylation site, and several potential transmembrane regions.
Northern blot analysis detected 3.1- and 4.1-kb transcripts expressed at
variable levels in all tissues examined. The 3.1-kb transcript was more
abundant, and expression was highest in skeletal muscle, heart, liver,
and kidney; thymus and spleen showed a weak signal. Expression was
reduced in all tumor cell lines examined except in a lymphoma cell line
and a chronic myelogenous leukemia cell line. Purified recombinant
NMNAT1 migrated with an apparent molecular mass of 33 kD by SDS-PAGE.
Gel filtration analysis detected active recombinant enzyme at an
apparent molecular mass of 139 kD, suggesting that NMNAT1 forms a
homotetramer.

Schweiger et al. (2001) cloned NMNAT1 from a lymphoblastoid cell cDNA
library. The deduced protein contains an N-terminal nuclear localization
signal. Immunofluorescence microscopy localized endogenous NMNAT1 to the
nucleus in human fibroblasts and in a hepatoma cell line.

Fernando et al. (2002) determined that the human and mouse NMNAT1
proteins share 78.4% amino acid identity. Northern blot analysis
detected an abundant 3.1-kb transcript and a less abundant 4.1-kb
transcript in skeletal muscle, heart, and all brain regions examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Fernando et al. (2002) determined that the NMNAT1 gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

By FISH, Emanuelli et al. (2001) mapped the NMNAT1 gene to chromosome
1p35-p32. Southern blot analysis indicated that NMNAT1 is a single-copy
gene.

Using FISH, Fernando et al. (2002) mapped the NMNAT1 gene to chromosome
1p36.2 in a region that shows homology of synteny to distal mouse
chromosome 4. FISH and genomic sequence analyses identified several
NMNAT1 homologs on chromosomes 3, 4, 14, and 15.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Zhou et al. (2002) solved the crystal structures of NMNAT1 in complex
with NAD, deamido-NAD, and a nonhydrolyzable analog of the anticancer
drug tiazofurin. The structures suggested a mechanism for the broad
substrate specificity of the enzyme toward both NMN and NaMN and for
adenylation of tiazofurin nucleotide. The crystal structure also showed
that NMNAT1 forms a barrel-like hexamer with the predicted nuclear
localization signal sequence located on the outside surface of the
barrel, supporting its functional role in interacting with nuclear
transporting proteins. Analytic ultracentrifugation results were
consistent with the formation of a hexamer in solution under certain
conditions.

GENE FUNCTION

Emanuelli et al. (2001) confirmed that recombinant NMNAT1 exhibited
adenylyltransferase activity, converting NMN to NAD in the presence of
ATP. When deamido-NMN was used as the substrate, the rate of reaction
was comparable to that for NMN, but the K(m) was higher, suggesting that
the amido pathway is predominant. NMNAT1 had an absolute requirement for
divalent cations, with optimum activity with 12 mM Mg(2+), and activity
was depressed by several heavy metal ions. NMNAT1 also showed a broad pH
optimum, ranging from pH 6.0 to 8.0, similar to NMNAT purified from
other species.

Schweiger et al. (2001) demonstrated that NMNAT1 inhibited recombinant
human poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (ADPRT; 173870) by about 35%, and it
completely prevented the formation of branched ADP-ribose polymers.
NMNAT1 was not itself an acceptor protein for ADP-ribosylation.
Incubation with nuclear extracts resulted in phosphorylation of
recombinant NMNAT1.

In Wallerian degeneration slow (wld-s) mice, Wallerian degeneration in
response to axonal injury is delayed because of a mutation that results
in overexpression of a chimeric protein (Wld-s) composed of the
ubiquitin assembly protein Ufd2a (603753) and Nmnat1. Araki et al.
(2004) demonstrated that increased Nmnat activity is responsible for the
axon-sparing activity of the Wld-s protein. Furthermore, they
demonstrated that Sirt1 (604479) is the downstream effector of increased
Nmnat activity that leads to axonal protection. Araki et al. (2004)
concluded that novel therapeutic strategies directed at increasing the
supply of NAD and/or SIR2 activation may be effective for treatment of
diseases characterized by axonopathy and neurodegeneration.

Studies in Drosophila (see ANIMAL MODEL) have uncovered protective
effects of NAD synthase nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyltransferase
against activity-induced neurodegeneration and injury-induced axonal
degeneration (Zhai et al., 2006, MacDonald et al., 2006). Zhai et al.
(2008) showed that NMNAT overexpression can also protect against ataxin
(601556)-induced neurodegeneration, suggesting a general neuroprotective
function of NMNAT. It protects against neurodegeneration partly through
a proteasome-mediated pathway in a manner similar to heat-shock
protein-70 (HSP70; 140550). NMNAT displayed chaperone function both in
biochemical assays and cultured cells, and it shares significant
structural similarity with known chaperones. Furthermore, it is
upregulated in the brain upon overexpression of polyglutamine-expanded
protein and recruited with the chaperone Hsp70 into protein aggregates.
Zhai et al. (2008) concluded that their results implicated NMNAT as a
stress-response protein that acts as a chaperone for neuronal
maintenance and protection.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 8 families with severe Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA9; 608553),
Koenekoop et al. (2012) identified homozygosity or compound
heterozygosity for missense mutations in the NMNAT1 gene (see, e.g.,
608700.0001-608700.0007) that segregated with disease in each family.

In 11 probands with severe LCA, Chiang et al. (2012) identified compound
heterozygosity for missense and/or nonsense mutations in the NMNAT1 gene
(see, e.g., 608700.0002-608700.0004 and 608700.0006). The most common
variant, E257K (dbSNP rs150726175; 608700.0002), was present as 1 of 2
variant alleles in all 11 probands and was estimated to have an allele
frequency of 0.001.

In affected individuals from 14 families with severe LCA, Falk et al.
(2012) identified homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for missense
and/or frameshift mutations in the NMNAT1 gene (see, e.g., 608700.0009),
including 6 patients who carried the E257K mutation on 1 allele.

In 22 of 261 LCA probands without mutations in known LCA genes, Perrault
et al. (2012) identified homozygosity (608700.0006) or compound
heterozygosity for mutations in the NMNAT1 gene (see, e.g., 608700.0002
and 608700.0005). In 7 probands, only a single heterozygous NMNAT1
mutation was found, but because they presented an identical phenotype to
that of patients in whom 2 mutations were identified it was likely that
they harbored a second undetected NMNAT1 mutant allele. The most common
mutation detected was the E257K variant, which was present on 1 allele
in 23 of the 29 index cases with mutation in NMNAT1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Zhai et al. (2006) found that knockdown of Nmnat in Drosophila resulted
in retinal neurodegeneration that was exacerbated by neural activity.
Neurodegeneration was independent of apoptosis. Overexpression of an
inactive Nmnat mutant protected mutant retinas from activity-induced
neurodegeneration, suggesting a dual role for Nmnat in NAD synthesis and
in maintaining neuronal integrity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 9
NMNAT1, TER280GLN

In affected members of a large consanguineous Pakistani family with
Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA9; 608553), originally reported by Keen
et al. (2003), Koenekoop et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for an
838T-C transition in the NMNAT1 gene, resulting in a ter280-to-gln
(X280Q) substitution that was predicted to elongate the protein.

.0002
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 9
NMNAT1, GLU257LYS (dbSNP rs150726175)

In 5 probands with severe Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA9; 608553),
Koenekoop et al. (2012) identified a 769G-A transition in exon 5 of the
NMNAT1 gene, resulting in a glu257-to-lys (E257K) substitution at a
conserved residue in a protein-interaction domain interface, predicted
to interfere with hexamer formation. The mutation was found in
homozygosity in 1 proband, and was present in compound heterozygosity
with another missense mutation in the NMNAT1 gene in the other 4
probands (see, e.g., 608700.0003-608700.0005). All mutations segregated
with disease in each family and were not found in 200 controls. In red
blood cells (RBCs) from the patient homozygous for E257K there was a
significantly lower concentration of NAD compared with that in RBCs from
his heterozygous mother, suggesting reduced enzymatic function of the
mutant protein. Immunohistochemical studies in transfected HeLa cells
demonstrated that whereas wildtype NMNAT1 showed strong nuclear
staining, the E257K mutant stained strongly outside of the cell nucleus
in the cytoplasm; in addition, the mutant protein was positive for
ubiquitin staining, indicating that the mutation likely affects protein
folding. In vitro assay showed significantly reduced enzymatic activity
with the E257K mutant protein compared to wildtype.

In 11 probands with severe LCA, Chiang et al. (2012) identified compound
heterozygosity for the E257K mutation and another missense or nonsense
mutation in the NMNAT1 gene (see, e.g., N273D, 608700.0003; V151F,
608700.0004; and W169X, 608700.0006). Chiang et al. (2012) stated that
the allele frequency of E257K (dbSNP rs150726175) was estimated to be
0.001, whereas the remainder of the variants had not been reported in
any public database.

In 6 probands with LCA, Falk et al. (2012) identified compound
heterozygosity for the E257K mutation and another missense or frameshift
mutation in the NMNAT1 gene.

Perrault et al. (2012) identified the E257K variant on 1 allele in 23 of
29 probands with LCA in whom mutation in NMNAT1 was detected.

.0003
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 9
NMNAT1, ASN273ASP

In a 56-year-old French Canadian woman with severe Leber congenital
amaurosis (LCA9; 608553), Koenekoop et al. (2012) identified compound
heterozygosity for an 817A-G transition in exon 5 of the NMNAT1 gene,
resulting in an asn273-to-asp (N273D) substitution at a conserved
residue, and an E257K substitution (608700.0002). The mutations
segregated with disease in the family and were not found in 200
controls. In vitro assays demonstrated that both mutant proteins had
significantly reduced enzymatic activity compared to wildtype.

In an 8-year-old Canadian boy of western European ancestry who had
severe LCA, Chiang et al. (2012) identified compound heterozygosity for
the N273D and E257K mutations in the NMNAT1 gene. The E257K and N273D
mutations were inherited from his unaffected mother and father,
respectively, and a third mutation was detected on the paternal allele
as well: a 457C-G transversion in the NMNAT1 gene, resulting in a
leu153-to-val (L153V; 608700.0008) substitution near the site of ligand
binding, predicted to disturb local interactions and affect enzymatic
activity. At 7 years of age, ERG showed primarily cone dysfunction
rather than profound loss of all responses, and the patient's diagnosis
was revised from 'variant LCA' to 'cone-rod dystrophy.'

.0004
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 9
NMNAT1, VAL151PHE

In a European female with severe Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA9;
608553), Koenekoop et al. (2012) identified compound heterozygosity for
a 451G-A transition in exon 5 of the NMNAT1 gene, resulting in a
val151-to-phe (V151F) substitution at a conserved residue in the
adenylyltransferase domain, and an E257K substitution (608700.0002). The
mutations segregated with disease in the family and were not found in
200 controls. In vitro assays demonstrated that both mutant proteins had
significantly reduced enzymatic activity compared to wildtype.

In a 26-year-old Canadian man of Greek ancestry with severe LCA, Chiang
et al. (2012) identified compound heterozygosity for the V151F and E257K
mutations in the NMNAT1 gene. At 6 months of age, the patient was
diagnosed with retinitis pigmentosa (see 268000), but the diagnosis was
later changed to LCA. Major vision loss occurred around 18 years of age,
with colors and shapes still seen at age 20, at which time he began
using a guide dog. Colors and shapes were lost at 22 years and 24 years
of age, respectively, and by 26 years of age, the patient could only
distinguish between light and dark. Eye examination showed wandering eye
movements, macular atrophic lesions, attenuated vessels, and bone
spicule pigmentation.

.0005
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 9
NMNAT1, ARG207TRP

In a 13-year-old French Canadian boy with severe Leber congenital
amaurosis (LCA9; 608553), Koenekoop et al. (2012) identified compound
heterozygosity for a 619C-T transition in exon 5 of the NMNAT1 gene,
resulting in an arg207-to-trp (R207W) substitution in the
adenylyltransferase domain, and an E257K substitution (608700.0002). The
mutations segregated with disease in the family and were not found in
200 controls. In vitro assays demonstrated that both mutant proteins had
significantly reduced enzymatic activity compared to wildtype.

In 7 unrelated probands with LCA, Perrault et al. (2012) identified
compound heterozygosity for the R207W and E257K mutations in the NMNAT1
gene.

.0006
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 9
NMNAT1, TRP169TER

In a 33-year-old Irish woman with severe Leber congenital amaurosis
(LCA9; 608553), Koenekoop et al. (2012) identified compound
heterozygosity for a 507G-A transition in exon 5 of the NMNAT1 gene,
resulting in a trp169-to-ter (W169X) substitution, and a 710G-T
transversion in exon 5, resulting in an arg237-to-leu (R237L;
608700.0007) substitution, both at conserved residues in the
adenylyltransferase domain. Her unaffected parents were each
heterozygous for 1 of the mutations, neither of which was found in 200
controls.

In 4 probands with severe LCA, Chiang et al. (2012) identified compound
heterozygosity for the W169X and E257K (608700.0002) mutations in the
NMNAT1 gene. Chiang et al. (2012) noted that these patients who carried
the nonsense mutation W169X in combination with E257K were all blind at
birth and had only varying degrees of light perception still present,
whereas 5 patients who carried various missense mutations in combination
with E257K had vision that decreased within a few years after birth.

In a 16-year-old girl with LCA who was born of consanguineous Algerian
parents, Perrault et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for the W169X
mutation in the NMNAT1 gene. Her unaffected parents and sister were
heterozygous for the mutation, which was not found in 200 controls. The
patient had high hyperopia, night blindness, visual acuity at the level
of counting fingers since 4 years of age, and macular alteration.

.0007
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 9
NMNAT1, ARG237LEU

See 608700.0006 and Koenekoop et al. (2012).

.0008
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 9
NMNAT1, LEU153VAL

See 608700.0003 and Chiang et al. (2012).

.0009
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 9
NMNAT1, VAL9MET

In 3 sibs and 2 cousins from a consanguineous Pakistani pedigree with
Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA9; 608553), Falk et al. (2012) identified
homozygosity for a 25G-A transition in exon 2 of the NMNAT1 gene,
resulting in a val9-to-met (V9M) substitution at a highly conserved
residue. The mutation segregated with disease in the pedigree and was
not found in 501 controls or in any public databases. Only 1 of the
affected individuals had isolated LCA; 3 of the other LCA patients also
had congenital deafness, and in those patients as well as in 2 other
family members with congenital deafness, homozygosity for a nonsense
mutation in the GJB2 gene (W24X; 121011.0003) known to cause deafness
(see DFNB1A, 220290) was identified. Additional features in 4 of the LCA
patients included global developmental delay and autism; Falk et al.
(2012) stated that those presentations likely had a separate genetic
etiology from that of LCA and deafness in this pedigree.

REFERENCE 1. Araki, T.; Sasaki, Y.; Milbrandt, J.: Increased nuclear NAD biosynthesis
and SIRT1 activation prevent axonal degeneration. Science 305: 1010-1013,
2004.

2. Chiang, P.-W.; Wang, J.; Chen, Y.; Fu, Q.; Zhong, J.; Chen, Y.;
Yi, X.; Wu, R.; Gan, H.; Shi, Y.; Chen, Y.; Barnett, C.; and 11 others
: Exome sequencing identifies NMNAT1 mutations as a cause of Leber
congenital amaurosis. Nature Genet. 9: 972-974, 2012.

3. Emanuelli, M.; Carnevali, F.; Saccucci, F.; Pierella, F.; Amici,
A.; Raffaelli, N.; Magni, G.: Molecular cloning, chromosomal localization,
tissue mRNA levels, bacterial expression, and enzymatic properties
of human NMN adenylyltransferase. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 406-412, 2001.

4. Falk, M. J.; Zhang, Q.; Nakamaru-Ogiso, E.; Kannabiran, C.; Fonseca-Kelly,
Z.; Chakarova, C.; Audo, S.; Mackay, D. S.; Zeitz, C.; Borman, A.
D.; Staniszewska, M.; Shukla, R.; and 17 others: NMNAT1 mutations
cause Leber congenital amaurosis. Nature Genet. 44: 1040-1045, 2012.

5. Fernando, F. S.; Conforti, L.; Tosi, S.; Smith, A. D.; Coleman,
M. P.: Human homologue of a gene mutated in the slow Wallerian degeneration
(C57BL/Wld(S)) mouse. Gene 284: 23-29, 2002.

6. Keen, T. J.; Mohamed, M. D.; McKibbin, M.; Rashid, Y.; Jafri, H.;
Maumenee, I. H.; Inglehearn, C. F.: Identification of a locus (LCA9)
for Leber's congenital amaurosis on chromosome 1p36. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 11: 420-423, 2003.

7. Koenekoop, R. K.; Wang, H.; Majewski, J.; Wang, X.; Lopez, I.;
Ren, H.; Chen, Y.; Li, Y.; Fishman, G. A.; Genead, M.; Schwartzentruber,
J.; Solanki, N.; and 21 others: Mutations in NMNAT1 cause Leber
congenital amaurosis and identify a new disease pathway for retinal
degeneration. Nature Genet. 44: 1035-1039, 2012.

8. MacDonald, J. M.; Beach, M. G.; Porpiglia, E.; Sheehan, A. E.;
Watts, R. J.; Freeman, M. R.: The Drosophila cell corpse engulfment
receptor draper mediates glial clearance of severed axons. Neuron 50:
869-881, 2006.

9. Perrault, I.; Hanein, S.; Zanlonghi, X.; Serre, V.; Nicouleau,
M.; Defoort-Delhemmes, S.; Delphin, N.; Fares-Taie, L.; Gerber, S.;
Xerri, O.; Edelson, C.; Goldenberg, A.; and 11 others: Mutations
in NMNAT1 cause Leber congenital amaurosis with early-onset severe
macular and optic atrophy. Nature Genet. 44: 975-977, 2012.

10. Schweiger, M.; Hennig, K.; Lerner, F.; Niere, M.; Hirsch-Kauffmann,
M.; Specht, T.; Weise, C.; Oei, S. L.; Ziegler, M.: Characterization
of recombinant human nicotinamide mononucleotide adenylyl transferase
(NMNAT), a nuclear enzyme essential for NAD synthesis. FEBS Lett. 492:
95-100, 2001. Note: Erratum: FEBS Lett. 496: 68 only, 2001.

11. Zhai, R. G.; Cao, Y.; Hiesinger, P. R.; Zhou, Y.; Mehta, S. Q.;
Schulze, K. L.; Verstreken, P.; Bellen, H. J.: Drosophila NMNAT maintains
neural integrity independent of its NAD synthesis activity. PLoS
Biol. 4: e416, 2006. Note: Electronic Article.

12. Zhai, R. G.; Zhang, F.; Hiesinger, P. R.; Cao, Y.; Haueter, C.
M.; Bellen, H. J.: NAD synthase NMNAT acts as a chaperone to protect
against neurodegeneration. Nature 452: 887-891, 2008.

13. Zhang, X.; Kurnasov, O. V.; Karthikeyan, S.; Grishin, N. V.; Osterman,
A. L.; Zhang, H.: Structural characterization of a human cytosolic
NMN/NaMN adenylyltransferase and implication in human NAD biosynthesis. J.
Biol. Chem. 278: 13503-13511, 2003.

14. Zhou, T.; Kurnasov, O.; Tomchick, D. R.; Binns, D. D.; Grishin,
N. V.; Marquez, V. E.; Osterman, A. L.; Zhang, H.: Structure of human
nicotinamide/nicotinic acid mononucleotide adenylyltransferase: basis
for the dual substrate specificity and activation of the oncolytic
agent tiazofurin. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 13148-13154, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/23/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/19/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/12/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/30/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/28/2004

EDITED carol: 04/22/2013
mgross: 11/7/2012
terry: 10/23/2012
carol: 9/19/2012
terry: 9/19/2012
alopez: 8/26/2008
terry: 8/15/2008
terry: 8/12/2008
tkritzer: 12/1/2004
terry: 11/30/2004
mgross: 5/28/2004

602652	TITLE *602652 KALLIKREIN-RELATED PEPTIDASE 6; KLK6
;;KALLIKREIN 6;;
PROTEASE, SERINE, 9; PRSS9;;
PROTEASE M;;
ZYME;;
NEUROSIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Anisowicz et al. (1996) used differential display PCR to identify a
novel gene that was expressed in a primary breast cancer cell line, but
not in the corresponding metastatic cell lines from the same patient.
They cloned the full-length cDNA, which encoded a postulated protein of
244 amino acids that they termed 'protease M.' The protein sequence
contained a serine protease domain and had high homology to the
kallikreins (KLK1; 147910 and KLK2; 147960), trypsin-1 (PRSS1; 276000),
and prostate-specific antigen (PSA; 176820). Northern blot analysis
revealed that the PRSS9 mRNA was expressed in several primary tumors and
cell lines from mammary, prostate, and ovarian cancers, but was not
detected in any metastases of these cancers. Among normal tissues, a
1.7-kb message was detected in brain and kidney and a 1.2-kb message was
detected in pancreas.

Little et al. (1997) cloned the PRSS9 cDNA, which they termed 'zyme,'
using PCR of Alzheimer disease brain tissue. When zyme cDNA was
coexpressed with the Alzheimer amyloid precursor protein (APP; 104760),
amyloidogenic fragments were detected. Southern blot analysis failed to
show definitive PRSS9 homologs in several other mammalian species,
suggesting that zyme may have species specificity. Yamashiro et al.
(1997) cloned a cDNA encoding PRSS9, which they called 'neurosin,' from
a cDNA library prepared from a colon adenocarcinoma cell line.

Using RT-PCR, Gan et al. (2000) detected KLK6 expression in most of the
35 adult and fetal tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Accumulation of insoluble alpha-synuclein (163890) aggregates in the
brain is characteristic of Parkinson disease (PD; 168600), dementia with
Lewy bodies (DLB; 127750), and multiple system atrophy. Iwata et al.
(2003) found that the serine protease neurosin (kallikrein-6) degraded
alpha-synuclein and colocalized with pathologic inclusions such as Lewy
bodies and glial cytoplasmic inclusions. In cell lysates, neurosin
prevented alpha-synuclein polymerization by reducing the amount of
monomer and also by generating fragmented alpha-synucleins that
themselves inhibited the polymerization. Upon cellular stress, neurosin
was released from mitochondria to the cytosol, which resulted in the
increase of degraded alpha-synuclein species. Downregulation of neurosin
caused accumulation of alpha-synuclein within cultured cells. The
authors concluded that neurosin may play a significant role in
physiologic alpha-synuclein degradation and also in the pathogenesis of
synucleinopathies.

GENE STRUCTURE

Elliott et al. (2006) determined that the KLK6 gene contains 7 exons,
the first 2 of which are noncoding.

MAPPING

Anisowicz et al. (1996) used fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
to localize the PRSS9 gene to human chromosome 19q13.3 and noted that
the kallikreins and PSA are also localized to that region. Little et al.
(1997) determined the same localization using cell hybrid panels and
FISH. They pointed out that this region shows genetic linkage with late
onset familial Alzheimer's disease (AD2; 104310).

By genomic sequence analysis, Gan et al. (2000) localized the KLK6 gene
within the KLK gene cluster on chromosome 19q13. This cluster includes
13 KLK genes and 5 pseudogenes.

REFERENCE 1. Anisowicz, A.; Sotiropoulou, G.; Stenman, G.; Mok, S. C.; Sager,
R.: A novel protease homolog differentially expressed in breast and
ovarian cancer. Molec. Med. 2: 624-636, 1996.

2. Elliott, M. B.; Irwin, D. M.; Diamandis, E. P.: In silico identification
and Bayesian phylogenetic analysis of multiple new mammalian kallikrein
gene families. Genomics 88: 591-599, 2006.

3. Gan, L.; Lee, I.; Smith, R.; Argonza-Barrett, R.; Lei, H.; McCuaig,
J.; Moss, P.; Paeper, B.; Wang, K.: Sequencing and expression analysis
of the serine protease gene cluster located in chromosome 19q13 region. Gene 257:
119-130, 2000.

4. Iwata, A.; Maruyama, M.; Akagi, T.; Hashikawa, T.; Kanazawa, I.;
Tsuji, S.; Nukina, N.: Alpha-synuclein degradation by serine protease
neurosin: implication for pathogenesis of synucleinopathies. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12: 2625-2635, 2003.

5. Little, S. P.; Dixon, E. P.; Norris, F.; Buckley, W.; Becker, G.
W.; Johnson, M.; Dobbins, J. R.; Wyrick, T.; Miller, J. R.; MacKellar,
W.; Hepburn, D.; Corvalan, J.; McClure, D.; Liu, X.; Stephenson, D.;
Clemens, J.; Johnstone, E. M.: Zyme, a novel and potentially amyloidogenic
enzyme cDNA isolated from Alzheimer's disease brain. J. Biol. Chem. 272:
25135-25142, 1997.

6. Yamashiro, K.; Tsuruoka, N.; Kodama, S.; Tsujimoto, M.; Yamamura,
Y.; Tanaka, T.; Nakazato, H.; Yamaguchi, N.: Molecular cloning of
a novel trypsin-like serine protease (neurosin) preferentially expressed
in brain. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1350: 11-14, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/8/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/12/2005

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 5/22/1998

EDITED mgross: 11/27/2006
terry: 11/8/2006
alopez: 10/18/2005
terry: 9/12/2005
alopez: 9/30/2003
carol: 3/30/2000
alopez: 5/26/1998

300269	TITLE *300269 HISTONE DEACETYLASE 8; HDAC8
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Histone acetylation (see HAT1; 603053) and deacetylation (see HDAC1;
601241) alternately exposes and occludes DNA to transcription factors.
There are at least 2 classes of HDACs, class I consisting of proteins
homologous to yeast Rpd3 (e.g., HDAC1, HDAC2 (605164), and HDAC3
(605166)) and class II consisting of proteins homologous to yeast Hda1
(e.g., HDAC4; 605314).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to HDAC1, HDAC2, and
HDAC3, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, Hu et al. (2000) and Van
den Wyngaert et al. (2000) obtained cDNAs encoding HDAC8. Sequence
analysis predicted that the 377-amino acid HDAC8 protein contains the 9
conserved HDAC blocks that are presumably important for catalytic
function (Hu et al., 2000). Van den Wyngaert et al. (2000) noted that
the approximately 30 amino acids at the N and C termini of HDAC8 are
quite distinct from those of other HDACs. HDAC8 shares 54% sequence
similarity with HDAC1 and HDAC2 and 39% similarity with HDAC3, making it
a class I HDAC. Northern blot analysis detected HDAC8 transcripts of
approximately 2.0 and 2.4 kb in all normal tissues tested, with
strongest expression in brain, unlike other class I HDACs, and in cancer
cell lines. Immunofluorescence analysis indicated a nuclear localization
with possible exclusion from the nucleolus. By Western blot analysis, Hu
et al. (2000) confirmed the nuclear localization and showed that HDAC8
is expressed as a 49-kD protein.

Buggy et al. (2000) also cloned and characterized HDAC8.

GENE FUNCTION

Hu et al. (2000) demonstrated that HDAC8 expresses deacetylation
activity in nuclear extracts as well as with histones H3 and H4; this
activity could be inhibited by Zn(2+), Cu(+), Fe(2+), trichostatin, and
other inhibitors.

Mutation analysis by Buggy et al. (2000) showed that 2 adjacent
histidine residues in the predicted active site, his142 and his143, are
required for HDAC activity on H4 peptide substrates and core histones.

Vannini et al. (2004) found that knockdown of HDAC8 by RNA interference
inhibited the growth of human lung, colon, and cervical cancer cell
lines.

Deardorff et al. (2012) used RNAi-based screening of all known human
histone deacetylases and sirtuins to identify HDAC8 as the vertebrate
SMC3 (606062) deacetylase. Loss of HDAC8 activity using either HDAC8
RNAi or an HDAC8-specific inhibitor did not alter cell cycle
progression, but clearly increased acetylated SMC3 in both soluble and
chromatin fractions throughout the cell cycle. Deardorff et al. (2012)
then showed that reduction in HDAC8 led to decreased occupancy of
cohesin localization sites.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Vannini et al. (2004) determined the crystal structure of HDAC8
complexed with an HDAC inhibitor to 2.5-angstrom resolution. HDAC8 forms
a single compact alpha/beta domain composed of a central 8-stranded
parallel beta sheet and 11 alpha helices. The twisted beta sheet is
flanked by 5 helices on one side and 3 helices on the other. The active
site has a narrow pocket to accommodate the acetylated lysine during the
catalytic reaction, and at the bottom of this tunnel a pentacoordinated
active site Zn(2+) ion is found. Below the active site there is a
tube-like cavity filled with several water molecules that may shuttle
the reaction product acetate. HDAC8 also has 2 K+ ion-binding sites, one
of which interacts with key catalytic residues and is directly connected
to the zinc-binding site. The K+ ions are required for the structural
stability of HDAC8.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Van den Wyngaert et al. (2000) determined
that the HDAC8 gene contains 11 exons and spans 243 kb.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Van den Wyngaert et al. (2000) mapped the HDAC8 gene to
Xq13, in the proximity of the XIST gene (314670). XIST is involved in
the initiation of X chromosome inactivation, which correlates with
histone deacetylation and DNA hypermethylation of the inactive X. The
localization is also near Xq13 breakpoints associated with preleukemia.

By radiation hybrid analysis, Buggy et al. (2000) mapped the HDAC8 gene
to chromosome Xq21.2-q21.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Wilson-Turner X-linked Mental Retardation Syndrome

In affected members of a large family with Wilson-Turner X-linked mental
retardation syndrome (WTS; 309585), Harakalova et al. (2012) identified
a splice site mutation in the HDAC8 gene (300269.0001).

- Cornelia de Lange Syndrome 5

Deardorff et al. (2012) screened 154 individuals with Cornelia de Lange
syndrome negative for mutations in other implicated genes and identified
4 de novo missense mutations and 1 de novo nonsense mutation in HDAC8.
In addition, one familial mutation was identified in a boy, his mildly
affected sister, and his unaffected mother, in which the mutant allele
was inactivated in her blood. This mutation occurred de novo in an
unrelated girl. None of the mutations was seen in 290 ethnically matched
control chromosomes or in 629 individuals of the 1000 Genomes Project.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
WILSON-TURNER X-LINKED MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME
HDAC8, IVS1DS, G-A, +5

In affected members of a large family with Wilson-Turner X-linked mental
retardation syndrome (WTS; 309585), Harakalova et al. (2012) identified
a G-to-A transition in the donor splice site of exon 2 of the HDAC8 gene
(164+5G-A). Analysis of mRNA in lymphocytes derived from a male patient
showed that the mutation resulted in a transcript lacking exon 2 and
caused premature protein truncation (Ala38AspfsX3) at the beginning of
the histone deacetylase catalytic domain. However, a very small amount
of normal HDAC8 transcript was also identified. The mutation, which was
found by exome sequencing of the X chromosome, was not found in 96 Dutch
male controls or in about 5,000 control exomes. Affected males had
intellectual disability, gynecomastia, hypogonadism, and distinctive
facial features. Female carriers showed milder features, including
learning disabilities and facial dysmorphism; all female carriers showed
skewed X inactivation, with the mutated allele inactivated.

.0002
CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 5
HDAC8, ARG164TER

In a 6-year-old female with features consistent with Cornelia de Lange
syndrome (CDLS5; 300882), Deardorff et al. (2012) identified a
heterozygous de novo C-to-T transition at nucleotide 490 of the HDAC8
gene resulting in an arg-to-ter codon substitution at codon 164 (R164X).
The patient had growth delays, absent speech, and characteristic facial
features as well as asymmetric skull, limb length discrepancy, and
dysplastic kidneys. This mutation was not seen in 290 ethnically matched
control chromosomes or in 629 individuals of the 1000 Genomes Project.

.0003
CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 5
HDAC8, HIS180ARG

In a female patient with growth and facial features consistent with
severe Cornelia de Lange (CDLS5; 300882), Deardorff et al. (2012)
identified a de novo heterozygous mutation in the HDAC8 gene, an A-to-G
transition at nucleotide 539 resulting in a his-to-arg substitution at
codon 180 (H180R). At 3 years of age the patient had moderate to severe
cognitive impairment without limb abnormalities. She subsequently died
in her teens. This mutation was not seen in 290 ethnically matched
control chromosomes or in 629 individuals of the 1000 Genomes Project.

.0004
CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 5
HDAC8, THR311MET

In a 1-year-old female with severe growth and cognitive delays and
facial features of classic Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CDLS5; 300882),
Deardorff et al. (2012) identified a de novo C-to-T transition at
nucleotide 932 in the HDAC8 gene, resulting in a thr-to-met substitution
at codon 311 (T311M). The infant also had large fontanels, pulmonary
stenosis, and unilateral hearing loss. She had no limb anomalies. This
mutation was not seen in 290 ethnically matched control chromosomes or
in 629 individuals of the 1000 Genomes Project.

.0005
CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 5
HDAC8, GLY320ARG

In a 5-year-boy boy with severe cognitive and growth delays and facial
features consistent with Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CDLS5; 300882),
Deardorff et al. (2012) identified a hemizygous de novo G-to-A
transition at nucleotide 958 of the HDAC8 gene, resulting in a
gly-to-arg substitution at codon 320 (G320R). Additionally the boy had
large fontanels, atrial septum aneurysm, bilateral hearing loss, and a
happy personality. This mutation was not seen in 290 ethnically matched
control chromosomes or in 629 individuals of the 1000 Genomes Project.

.0006
CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 5
HDAC8, HIS334ARG

In a 7-year-old heterozygous female with severe cognitive and growth
delays and facial features suggestive of Cornelia de Lange syndrome
(CDLS5; 300882), Deardorff et al. (2012) identified an A-to-G transition
at nucleotide 1001 of the HDAC8 gene, resulting in a his-to-arg
substitution at codon 334 (H334R). The patient also had delayed fontanel
closure, limb length difference but no deficiencies, and a happy and
introverted demeanor. This mutation was heterozygous and de novo in this
female, but was identified in a second family. The proband was a
13-year-old hemizygous male with severe cognitive and growth delay and
facial features consistent with Cornelia de Lange syndrome. He had an
8-year-old heterozygous affected sister with mild cognitive and growth
delays and mildly affected facial features. The unaffected mother was
heterozygous with completely skewed X inactivation. This mutation was
not seen in 290 ethnically matched control chromosomes or in 629
individuals of the 1000 Genomes Project.

REFERENCE 1. Buggy, J. J.; Sideris, M. L.; Mak, P.; Lorimer, D. D.; McIntosh,
B.; Clark, J. M.: Cloning and characterization of a novel human histone
deacetylase, HDAC8. Biochem. J. 350: 199-205, 2000.

2. Deardorff, M. A.; Bando, M.; Nakato, R.; Watrin, E.; Itoh, T.;
Minamino, M.; Saitoh, K.; Komata, M.; Katou, Y.; Clark, D.; Cole,
K. E.; De Baere, E.; and 30 others: HDAC8 mutations in Cornelia
de Lange syndrome affect the cohesin acetylation cycle. Nature 489:
313-317, 2012.

3. Harakalova, M.; van den Boogaard, M.-J.; Sinke, R.; van Lieshout,
S.; van Tuil, M. C.; Duran, K.; Renkens, I.; Terhal, P. A.; de Kovel,
C.; Nijman, I. J.; van Haelst, M.; Knoers, N. V. A. M.; van Haaften,
G.; Kloosterman, W.; Hennekam, R. C. M.; Cuppen, E.; Ploos van Amstel,
H. K.: X-exome sequencing identifies a HDAC8 variant in a large pedigree
with X-linked intellectual disability, truncal obesity, gynaecomastia,
hypogonadism and unusual face. J. Med. Genet. 49: 539-543, 2012.

4. Hu, E.; Chen, Z.; Fredrickson, T.; Zhu, Y.; Kirkpatrick, R.; Zhang,
G.-F.; Johanson, K.; Sung, C.-M.; Liu, R.; Winkler, J.: Cloning and
characterization of a novel human class I histone deacetylase that
functions as a transcription repressor. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 15254-15264,
2000.

5. Van den Wyngaert, I.; de Vries, W.; Kremer, A.; Neefs, J.-M.; Verhasselt,
P.; Luyten, W. H. M. L.; Kass, S. U.: Cloning and characterization
of human histone deacetylase 8. FEBS Lett. 478: 77-83, 2000.

6. Vannini, A.; Volpari, C.; Filocamo, G.; Casavola, E. C.; Brunetti,
M.; Renzoni, D.; Chakravarty, P.; Paolini, C.; De Francesco, R.; Gallinari,
P.; Steinkuhler, C.; Di Marco, S.: Crystal structure of a eukaryotic
zinc-dependent histone deacetylase, human HDAC8, complexed with a
hydroxamic acid inhibitor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 15064-15069,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/10/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/3/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/12/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/1/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/3/2000

EDITED alopez: 10/23/2012
terry: 10/10/2012
carol: 10/3/2012
ckniffin: 10/3/2012
mgross: 9/19/2008
mgross: 11/12/2004
mgross: 3/1/2002
mgross: 10/5/2000
mgross: 10/3/2000

611840	TITLE *611840 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L34; MRPL34
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPL34 is 1 of more
than 70 protein components of mitochondrial ribosomes that are encoded
by the nuclear genome (Kenmochi et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching databases using bovine Mrpl34 as query, followed by PCR of
human genomic DNA, Kenmochi et al. (2001) cloned MRPL34.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis and analysis of an integrated BAC-STS map,
Kenmochi et al. (2001) mapped the MRPL34 gene to chromosome 19p13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Kenmochi, N.; Suzuki, T.; Uechi, T.; Magoori, M.; Kuniba, M.; Higa,
S.; Watanabe, K.; Tanaka, T.: The human mitochondrial ribosomal protein
genes: mapping of 54 genes to the chromosomes and implications for
human disorders. Genomics 77: 65-70, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/26/2008

EDITED mgross: 03/04/2008

611480	TITLE *611480 PIH1 DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; PIH1D1
;;NOP17, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; NOP17
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis, Gonzales et al. (2005) identified the human
homolog of yeast Nop17, PIH1D1.

GENE FUNCTION

Gonzales et al. (2005) found that deletion of Nop17 caused a
temperature-sensitive phenotype in yeast that could be partially rescued
by human NOP17. Analysis of Nop17-null yeast suggested that Nop17 is
involved in pre-rRNA processing and is required for box C/D small
nucleolar ribonucleoprotein assembly or nuclear localization.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PIH1D1
gene to chromosome 19 (TMAP RH16140).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Jeronimo et al. (2007)
REFERENCE 1. Gonzales, F. A.; Zanchin, N. I. T.; Luz, J. S.; Oliveira, C. C.
: Characterization of Saccharomyces cerevisiae Nop17p, a novel Nop58p-interacting
protein that is involved in pre-rRNA processing. J. Molec. Biol. 346:
437-455, 2005.

2. Jeronimo, C.; Forget, D.; Bouchard, A.; Li, Q.; Chua, G.; Poitras,
C.; Therien, C.; Bergeron, D.; Bourassa, S.; Greenblatt, J.; Chabot,
B.; Poirier, G. G.; Hughes, T. R.; Blanchette, M.; Price, D. H.; Coulombe,
B.: Systematic analysis of the protein interaction network for the
human transcription machinery reveals the identity of the 7SK capping
enzyme. Molec. Cell 27: 262-274, 2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/28/2007

EDITED mgross: 10/01/2007

602223	TITLE *602223 EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION INITIATION FACTOR 4E-BINDING PROTEIN 1; EIF4EBP1
;;4EBP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Pause et al. (1994) used interaction cloning to identify 2 novel
proteins that interacted with eIF4E (133440), and termed these binding
proteins 4EBP1 and 4EBP2 (602224). Pause et al. (1994) reported that the
4EBP1 gene encodes a 118-amino acid polypeptide that is 56% identical to
that of 4EBP2.

Rat PHAS-I was isolated as a protein phosphorylated in response to
insulin in rat adipose tissue. PHAS-I is phosphorylated in response to
growth factors and phorbol esters. Pause et al. (1994) noted that the
4EBP1 amino acid sequence was 93% identical to the rat protein PHAS-I,
thus representing the human homolog.

GENE FUNCTION

Pause et al. (1994) showed that insulin treatment of adipose cells
increased the phosphorylation of 4EBP1 and reduced the interaction of
4EBP1 with eIF4E. The authors speculated that the dissociation of the
eIF4E binding proteins may be responsible for the enhanced translational
activity in adipose tissue upon insulin treatment. Rousseau et al.
(1996) showed that 4EBP1 and 4EBP2 are negative regulators of cell
growth. They found that overexpression of either 4EBP1 or 4EBP2 could
partially reverse the phenotype of cells transformed by v-src (see
190090) or Ha-v-ras (see 190020). By Northern blot analysis,
Tsukiyama-Kohara et al. (1996) showed that 4EBP1 is expressed in most
tissues, with highest levels seen in adipose tissue, pancreas, and
skeletal muscle. The authors noted that 4EBP1 is more strongly
phosphorylated in response to insulin treatment than is 4EBP2,
suggesting that 4EBP1 may be more significantly involved in
insulin-mediated control pathways.

In mammals, MTOR (601231) cooperates with PI3K (see 171834)-dependent
effectors in a biochemical signaling pathway to regulate the size of
proliferating cells. Fingar et al. (2002) presented evidence that rat
S6k1 alpha-II (608938), Eif4e, and Eif4ebp1 mediate Mtor-dependent cell
size control.

Colina et al. (2008) showed that translational control is critical for
induction of type I interferon (see 147570) production. In mouse
embryonic fibroblasts lacking the translational repressors 4Ebp1 and
4Ebp2, the threshold for eliciting type I interferon production is
lowered. Consequently, replication of encephalomyocarditis virus,
vesicular stomatitis virus, influenza virus, and Sindbis virus is
markedly suppressed. Furthermore, Colina et al. (2008) showed that mice
with both 4Ebp1 and 4Ebp2 genes knocked out are resistant to vesicular
stomatitis virus infection, and this correlates with an enhanced type I
interferon production in plasmacytoid dendritic cells and the expression
of interferon-regulated genes in the lungs. The enhanced type I
interferon response of 4Ebp1 -/- 4Ebp2 -/- double knockout mouse
embryonic fibroblasts is caused by upregulation of interferon regulatory
factor-7 (Irf7; 605047) mRNA translation. Colina et al. (2008) found
that their findings highlighted the role of 4EBPs as negative regulators
of type I interferon production, via translational repression of IRF7
mRNA.

Dowling et al. (2010) inhibited the mTORC1 (601231) pathway in cells
lacking EIF4EBP1, EIF4EBP2 (602224), and EIF4EBP3 (603483) and analyzed
the effects on cell size, cell proliferation, and cell cycle
progression. Although the EIF4EBPs had no effect on cell size, they
inhibited cell proliferation by selectively inhibiting the translation
of mRNAs that encode proliferation-promoting proteins and proteins
involved in cell cycle progression. Thus, Dowling et al. (2010)
concluded that control of cell size and cell cycle progression appear to
be independent in mammalian cells, whereas in lower eukaryotes, EIF4E
binding proteins influence both cell growth and proliferation.

Demontis and Perrimon (2010) showed that signaling through the
transcription factor Foxo (see 136533) and its target Thor/4Ebp
regulated aging in Drosophila muscle. Increased activity of Foxo and
4Ebp delayed age-related muscle weakness and preserved muscle function,
at least in part, by promoting basal activity of the autophagy/lysosome
system for the elimination of deleterious protein aggregates. Foxo/4Ebp
signaling in muscle also decreased feeding behavior and the release of
insulin, which in turn delayed age-related accumulation of protein
aggregates in other tissues, increasing life span.

Thoreen et al. (2012) used high-resolution transcriptome-scale ribosome
profiling to monitor translation in mouse cells acutely treated with the
mTOR inhibitor Torin-1, which, unlike rapamycin, fully inhibits mTORC1.
Their data revealed a surprisingly simple model of the mRNA features and
mechanisms that confer mTORC1-dependent translation control. mTORC1
phosphorylates a myriad of translational regulators, but how it controls
5-prime terminal oligopyrimidine (TOP) mRNA translation was unknown.
Remarkably, loss of just the 4EBP family of translational repressors,
arguably the best characterized mTORC1 substrates, was sufficient to
render TOP and TOP-like mRNA translation resistant to Torin-1. The 4EBPs
inhibit translation initiation by interfering with the interaction
between the cap-binding protein eIF4E (133440) and eIF4G1 (600495). Loss
of this interaction diminishes the capacity of eIF4E to bind TOP and
TOP-like mRNAs much more than other mRNAs, explaining why mTOR
inhibition selectively suppresses their translation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Tsukiyama-Kohara et al. (1996) analyzed the genomic structure of the
mouse EIF4EBP1 gene and showed that it consists of 3 exons and spans 16
kb. The authors also noted that EIF4EBP1 has at least 2 pseudogenes in
the mouse genome.

MAPPING

Tsukiyama-Kohara et al. (1996) used fluorescence in situ hybridization
to map the 4EBP1 gene to human chromosome 8p12 and to mouse chromosome
8A4-B1. They noted that human tumor suppressor genes in this region have
implicated in several human cancers.

REFERENCE 1. Colina, R.; Costa-Mattioli, M.; Dowling, R. J. O.; Jaramillo, M.;
Tai, L.-H.; Breitbach, C. J.; Martineau, Y.; Larsson, O.; Rong, L.;
Svitkin, Y. V.; Makrigiannis, A. P.; Bell, J. C.; Sonenberg, N.:
Translational control of the innate immune response through IRF-7. Nature 452:
323-328, 2008.

2. Demontis, F.; Perrimon, N.: FOXO/4E-BP signaling in Drosophila
muscles regulates organism-wide proteostasis during aging. Cell 143:
813-825, 2010.

3. Dowling, R. J. O.; Topisirovic, I.; Alain, T.; Bidinosti, M.; Fonseca,
B. D.; Petroulakis, E.; Wang, X.; Larsson, O.; Selvaraj, A.; Liu,
Y.; Kozma, S. C.; Thomas, G.; Sonenberg, N.: mTORC1-mediated cell
proliferation, but not cell growth, controlled by the 4E-BPs. Science 328:
1172-1176, 2010.

4. Fingar, D. C.; Salama, S.; Tsou, C.; Harlow, E.; Blenis, J.: Mammalian
cell size is controlled by mTOR and its downstream targets S6K1 and
4EBP1/eIF4E. Genes Dev. 16: 1472-1487, 2002.

5. Pause, A.; Belsham, G. J.; Gingras, A.-C.; Donze, O.; Lin, T.-A.;
Lawrence, J. C., Jr.; Sonenberg, N.: Insulin-dependent stimulation
of protein synthesis by phosphorylation of a regulator of 5-prime-cap
function. Nature 371: 762-767, 1994.

6. Rousseau, D.; Gingras, A.-C.; Pause, A.; Sonenberg, N.: The eIF4E-binding
proteins 1 and 2 are negative regulators of cell growth. Oncogene 13:
2415-2420, 1996.

7. Thoreen, C. C.; Chantranupong, L.; Keys, H. R.; Wang, T.; Gray,
N. S.; Sabatini, D. M.: A unifying model for mTORC1-mediated regulation
of mRNA translation. Nature 485: 109-113, 2012.

8. Tsukiyama-Kohara, K.; Vidal, S. M.; Gingras, A.-C.; Glover, T.
W.; Hanash, S. M.; Heng, H.; Sonenberg, N.: Tissue distribution,
genomic structure, and chromosome mapping of mouse and human eukaryotic
initiation factor 4E-binding proteins 1 and 2. Genomics 38: 353-363,
1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/20/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/17/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/14/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/22/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/23/2004

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 1/6/1998

EDITED alopez: 09/24/2012
terry: 9/20/2012
mgross: 3/14/2011
terry: 2/17/2011
alopez: 6/18/2010
terry: 6/14/2010
alopez: 5/28/2008
terry: 5/22/2008
mgross: 9/23/2004
psherman: 12/1/1998
alopez: 1/16/1998
alopez: 1/6/1998

614542	TITLE *614542 FAMILY WITH SEQUENCE SIMILARITY 69, MEMBER A; FAM69A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Tennant-Eyles et al. (2011) cloned mouse Fam69a, Fam69b (614543), and
Fam69c (614544) from a brain cDNA library. By database analysis, they
identified orthologs of Fam69a, Fam69b, and Fam69c in most vertebrates,
including human. FAM69 proteins were predicted to have a short
N-terminal tail, followed by a transmembrane domain and a long
extracellular or luminal C-terminal domain. Qualitative RT-PCR detected
variable Fam69a expression in all 16 mouse tissues examined, with
highest levels in brain, skeletal muscle, kidney, and mammary gland.
Western blot analysis of transfected HEK293 cells detected Fam69a at an
apparent molecular mass of 50.5 kD.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the FAM69A gene to chromosome 1p22.1 based on an
alignment of the FAM69A sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK027146) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

EVOLUTION

Tennant-Eyles et al. (2011) determined that most invertebrates have a
single Fam69 family member and that vertebrate FAM69A and FAM69B arose
from a single common ancestral gene. No orthologs of Fam69 were found in
nonmetazoan organisms.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/20/2012.

2. Tennant-Eyles, A. J.; Moffitt, H.; Whitehouse, C. A.; Roberts,
R. G.: Characterisation of the FAM69 family of cysteine-rich endoplasmic
reticulum proteins. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 406: 471-477,
2011.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/20/2012

EDITED mgross: 03/20/2012

603420	TITLE *603420 CALUMENIN; CALU
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Many calcium-binding proteins are reported to be localized in the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and involved in such ER functions as protein
folding and sorting. Among these are RCN1 (602735), RCN2 (602584), and
calumenin (CALU), which form a novel family of calcium-binding proteins
in the ER and Golgi apparatus. By searching sequence databases with a
mouse Calu cDNA sequence (Yabe et al., 1997), Yabe et al. (1998)
identified a human CALU EST, which they used to clone a full-length CALU
cDNA. The cDNA encodes a deduced 315-amino acid protein containing 6
EF-hand motifs, 1 potential N-glycosylation site, and a C-terminal ER
retention signal. The human and mouse CALU proteins are 98% identical.
Northern blot analysis demonstrated that the 3.4-kb CALU mRNA is
ubiquitously expressed in human tissues. Southern blot analysis using a
human CALU cDNA probe detected bands in a variety of species.

MAPPING

Yabe et al. (1997) mapped the mouse Calu gene to the proximal portion of
chromosome 7. By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Yabe et al. (1998)
localized the human CALU gene to 7q32, which was an unexpected result
due to the homology of synteny between proximal mouse chromosome 7 and
human 19q13.2-q13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Yabe, D.; Nakamura, T.; Kanazawa, N.; Tashiro, K.; Honjo, T.:
Calumenin, a Ca(2+)-binding protein retained in the endoplasmic reticulum
with a novel carboxyl-terminal sequence, HDEF. J. Biol. Chem. 272:
18232-18239, 1997.

2. Yabe, D.; Taniwaki, M.; Nakamura, T.; Kanazawa, N.; Tashiro, K.;
Honjo, T.: Human calumenin gene (CALU): cDNA isolation and chromosomal
mapping to 7q32. Genomics 49: 331-333, 1998.

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 1/12/1999

EDITED carol: 06/22/2012
psherman: 1/12/1999

118508	TITLE *118508 CHOLINERGIC RECEPTOR, NEURONAL NICOTINIC, BETA POLYPEPTIDE 3; CHRNB3
;;ACETYLCHOLINE RECEPTOR, NEURONAL NICOTINIC, BETA-3 SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are members of a
superfamily of ligand-gated ion channels that mediate fast signal
transmission at synapses. The nAChRs are (hetero)pentamers composed of
homologous subunits. The subunits that make up the muscle and neuronal
forms of nAChRs are encoded by separate genes and have different primary
structure. There are several subtypes of neuronal nAChRs that vary based
on which homologous subunits are arranged around the central channel.
They are classified as alpha-subunits if, like muscle alpha-1 (100690),
they have a pair of adjacent cysteines as part of the presumed
acetylcholine binding site. Subunits lacking these cysteine residues are
classified as beta-subunits (Groot Kormelink and Luyten, 1997).

Elliott et al. (1996) stated that the proposed structure for each
subunit is a conserved N-terminal extracellular domain followed by 3
conserved transmembrane domains, a variable cytoplasmic loop, a fourth
conserved transmembrane domain, and a short C-terminal extracellular
region.

CLONING

By screening a human brainstem cDNA library with rat acetylcholine
receptor subunit probes, Willoughby et al. (1993) identified a partial
cDNA clone with 89% predicted amino acid homology to the rat beta-3
subunit. On Northern blots, a 1.7-kb beta-3 mRNA was detected in pons.
Willoughby et al. (1993) stated that rat beta-3 does not assemble into
functional nicotinic channels when coexpressed with alpha-subunits
alone, raising the possibility that subunits of the beta-3 type may
function in ion channels gated by ligands other than acetylcholine and
nicotine. The close sequence homology between the alpha-5 (118505) and
beta-3 subunits, combined with their inability to participate in
functional nicotinic channels, suggested to Willoughby et al. (1993)
that they may comprise a distinct subgroup of receptor subunits.

Elliott et al. (1996) isolated a complete beta-3 clone from a human
substantia nigra cDNA library. The predicted 458-amino acid protein has
a putative 18-amino acid signal peptide.

Groot Kormelink and Luyten (1997) also cloned human beta-3 cDNAs from a
neuroblastoma cell line and from pons.

MAPPING

By genomic Southern analysis of hamster/human somatic cell hybrid DNAs,
Anand and Lindstrom (1992) mapped the gene encoding the beta-3 subunit
of the human neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor to chromosome 8.
They indicated that the location of the corresponding gene in the mouse
genome was not known. Koyama et al. (1994) used an exon amplification
method to construct a transcriptional map of human chromosome 8. With
this method, transcribed sequences from defined regions of genomic DNA
could be efficiently isolated using cosmid clones mapped to chromosome
8. Sequence analysis revealed identity of a particular exon
amplification fragment to the CHRNB3 gene. This transcribed fragment was
isolated from a cosmid clone that had previously been mapped to 8p11.2
by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Anand, R.; Lindstrom, J.: Chromosomal localization of seven neuronal
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit genes in humans. Genomics 13:
962-967, 1992.

2. Elliott, K. J.; Ellis, S. B.; Berckhan, K. J.; Urrutia, A.; Chavez-Noriega,
L. E.; Johnson, E. C.; Velicelebi, G.; Harpold, M. M.: Comparative
structure of human neuronal alpha(2)-alpha(7) and beta(2)-beta(4)
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunits and functional expression
of the alpha(2), alpha(3), alpha(4), alpha(7), beta(2), and beta(4)
subunits. J.  Molec. Neurosci. 7: 217-228, 1996.

3. Groot Kormelink, P. J.; Luyten, W. H. M. L.: Cloning and sequence
of full-length cDNAs encoding the human neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor (nAChR) subunits beta-3 and beta-4 and expression of seven
nAChR subunits in the human neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y and/or
IMR-32. FEBS Lett. 400: 309-314, 1997.

4. Koyama, K.; Sudo, K.; Nakamura, Y.: Mapping of the human nicotinic
acetylcholine receptor beta-3 gene (CHRNB3) within chromosome 8p11.2. Genomics 21:
460-461, 1994.

5. Willoughby, J. J.; Ninkina, N. N.; Beech, M. M.; Latchman, D. S.;
Wood, J. N.: Molecular cloning of a human neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor beta-3-like subunit. Neurosci. Lett. 155: 136-139, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 4/25/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/14/1992

EDITED ckniffin: 04/09/2010
terry: 2/22/2005
terry: 6/3/1998
alopez: 4/25/1998
jason: 6/9/1994
carol: 8/14/1992

605555	TITLE *605555 ARYL HYDROCARBON RECEPTOR-INTERACTING PROTEIN; AIP
;;HEPATITIS B VIRUS X-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; XAP2;;
ARA9
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR; 600253) is found in a multiprotein
complex that includes the 90-kD heat shock protein (HSP90; see 140571).
The AHR is a ligand-activated transcription factor that is a member of
the basic helix-loop-helix PAS superfamily. In response to ligand
binding in the cytosol, the AHR-HSP90 complex translocates to the
nucleus where the molecular chaperone HSP90 dissociates and the
activated AHR heterodimerizes with ARNT (126110). The resulting complex
attains binding specificity for its cognate enhancer elements to
regulate transcription of a variety of xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes.

The AHR-interacting protein (AIP) was originally cloned and designated
XAP2 by Kuzhandaivelu et al. (1996) who used a yeast 2-hybrid system to
identify proteins that interact with the hepatitis B virus (HBV) X
protein. By use of a yeast 2-hybrid assay to detect proteins that
interact with AHR in a ligand-dependent manner, Carver and Bradfield
(1997) demonstrated interaction of AIP with AHR. They cloned an AIP
cDNA, which they called ARA9, from a B-lymphocyte cDNA library. AIP
encodes a deduced 330-amino acid protein with a molecular mass of
approximately 37 kD. It contains regions of homology to the
FK506-binding proteins FKBP4 (600611) and FKBP1A (186945). The predicted
protein contains 3 C-terminal consensus tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR)
domains similar to the TPR domains found in FKBP4 that may mediate
protein-protein interactions. AIP was also identified by Meyer et al.
(1998), who purified the AIP protein from the AHR cytosolic complex.
Meyer et al. (1998) cloned simian AIP cDNA from a COS-1 cDNA library and
found that it shares 98% amino acid sequence identity with human AIP.

GENE STRUCTURE

Igreja et al. (2010) stated that the AIP gene consists of 6 exons.

MAPPING

Using somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, Carver et al. (1998) mapped
the AIP gene to chromosome 11q13.3.

GENE FUNCTION

Using Northern blot analysis, Kuzhandaivelu et al. (1996) detected a
1.25-kb AIP transcript in all 16 adult tissues tested with the exception
of the liver. Expression was also detected in 3 cell lines, including
cervical carcinoma, hepatocellular carcinoma, and choriocarcinoma cells.
The lack of AIP expression in the liver led Kuzhandaivelu et al. (1996)
to hypothesize that this may partially allow for the X protein to
contribute to the hepatotropism of HBV. Using Northern blot analysis,
Carver and Bradfield (1997) also detected expression of AIP in 15 human
tissues examined, with highest levels of expression in heart, placenta,
and skeletal muscle. Meyer et al. (1998) detected Aip expression in 11
mouse tissues examined by Northern blot analysis and RT-PCR. Using in
situ hybridization in mouse embryos as early as embryonic day 9.5,
Carver et al. (1998) detected Aip expression that was widespread and
highest in the neuroepithelium, trigeminal ganglion, branchial arches,
hepatic primordia, and the primitive gut. The expression remained
widespread at embryonic day 13.5, with highest levels in the derivatives
of the branchial arches, and expression was seen in adult lymphoid
tissues.

Using indirect immunofluorescence, Kuzhandaivelu et al. (1996) localized
both the HBV X protein and AIP to the cytoplasm in cultured HeLa cells.
Subcellular fractionation confirmed the localization of AIP to the
cytoplasmic fraction.

Using a GST fusion protein, Kuzhandaivelu et al. (1996) demonstrated
that AIP binds to the HBV X protein. Using a series of X protein
deletion mutants in a 2-hybrid system, they identified a 14-amino acid
region (amino acids 13-26) important for binding AIP. This N-terminal
region of the X protein was highly conserved among mammalian
hepadnaviruses. Using cotransfection experiments, Kuzhandaivelu et al.
(1996) showed that AIP is a specific cellular inhibitor of the X protein
but not other viral transactivators.

Carver and Bradfield (1997) demonstrated that the interaction between
AIP and AHR is enhanced in the presence of the ligand
beta-naphthoflavone. Using a yeast expression system, Carver et al.
(1998) demonstrated that AIP is able to enhance the ligand
responsiveness of AHR. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the
interaction of AIP and AHR and suggested that AIP is present in
AHR-HSP90 complexes. However, Meyer et al. (1998) demonstrated that AIP
is not required for AHR-HSP90 complex formation in vitro. They also
found that AIP does not directly interact with HSP90, suggesting that
AIP becomes associated with the complex only in the presence of AHR.

Carver et al. (1998) attempted to define the domains required to form
the AIP-HSP90-AHR complex using deletion analyses of both AIP and AHR.
They demonstrated that the repressor domain of AHR, previously shown to
contain domains required for HSP90 and ligand binding, is also required
for interactions with AIP. The authors showed that the C-terminal TRP
domains of AIP are necessary and sufficient for interactions with HSP90
and AHR and that AIP specifically associates with AHR-HSP90 complexes,
but not with GR-HSP90 complexes. Also, AIP shows greater affinity for
AHR-HSP90 complexes than FKBP4. Despite homology to FKBP4 and FKBP1A,
Carver et al. (1998) were unable to detect AIP binding to FK506.

Leontiou et al. (2008) found that overexpression of wildtype AIP in
human fibroblast and pituitary cell lines dramatically reduced cell
proliferation, whereas mutant AIP lost this ability. Their functional
evaluation of AIP mutations was consistent with a tumor suppressor role
for AIP and its involvement in familial acromegaly. Leontiou et al.
(2008) concluded that the abnormal expression and subcellular
localization of AIP in sporadic pituitary adenomas (in cytoplasm rather
than secretory vesicles) indicated deranged regulation of this protein
during tumorigenesis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected individuals from a large Finnish kindred with pituitary
adenoma predisposition (PAP; see 102200), Vierimaa et al. (2006)
identified a mutation in the AIP gene (Q14X; 605555.0001). Five
individuals had prolactinomas (600634), 4 had somatotropinomas, and 2
had a mixed tumor comprising both cells. The Q14X mutation was also
identified in 6 of 45 Finnish patients with acromegaly from a
population-based cohort. A mutation (605555.0003) in the AIP gene was
also identified in Italian sibs with somatotropinomas. Vierimaa et al.
(2006) postulated that the phenotype represents a hereditary
predisposition to pituitary adenomas with very low penetrance.

In 9 of 460 patients from Europe and the U.S. with pituitary adenomas,
Georgitsi et al. (2007) identified 9 different mutations in the AIP gene
(see, e.g., 605555.0004-605555.0006; 605555.0008). Eight patients had
growth hormone (GH; 139250)-secreting adenomas and 1 had Cushing disease
due to an ACTH-secreting adenoma (219090).

Daly et al. (2007) studied the frequency of AIP gene mutations in a
large cohort of patients with familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA;
see 102200) from 9 different countries. Seventy-three FIPA families were
identified, with 156 patients with pituitary adenomas; the FIPA cohort
was evenly divided between families with homogeneous and heterogeneous
tumor expression. Eleven FIPA families had 10 AIP mutations; 9 of the
mutations were novel. Tumors were significantly larger (p = 0.0005) and
diagnosed at a younger age (p = 0.0006) in AIP mutation-positive versus
mutation-negative subjects. Although somatotropinomas predominated among
FIPA families with AIP mutations, mixed GH/prolactin-secreting tumors,
prolactinomas, and nonsecreting adenomas were also found. Approximately
85% of the FIPA cohort and 50% of those with familial somatotropinomas
were negative for AIP mutations.

Igreja et al. (2010) identified AIP mutations in 11 of 38 FIPA families,
including 3 with large deletions. The authors reviewed the clinical
characteristics of these 38 families and 26 previously reported families
(Leontiou et al., 2008), confirming that patients with AIP mutations had
a lower mean age at diagnosis. Igreja et al. (2010) analyzed the various
types of mutations that had been found in the AIP gene, and demonstrated
that a promoter mutation showed reduced in vitro activity corresponding
to lower expression in patient samples and that stimulation of the
protein kinase-A (see 601639) pathway positively regulates the AIP
promoter. Silent mutations led to abnormal splicing, resulting in
truncated protein or reduced AIP expression. A 2-hybrid assay of
protein-protein interactions of the 9 missense variants discovered to
that time in the AIP gene showed variable disruption of
AIP-phosphodiesterase-4A5 binding. Igreja et al. (2010) noted that
overall, AIP mutations were implicated in 20 (31%) of the 64 families in
their FIPA cohort.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PITUITARY ADENOMA, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING
PITUITARY ADENOMA, PROLACTIN-SECRETING, INCLUDED
AIP, GLN14TER

In affected individuals from a large Finnish kindred with pituitary
adenoma predisposition (PAP; see 102200), Vierimaa et al. (2006)
identified a gln14-to-ter (Q14X) substitution in exon 1 of the AIP gene.
Five individuals had prolactinomas (600634), 4 had somatotropinomas
(102200), and 2 had a mixed tumor comprising both cells. The Q14X
mutation was also identified in 6 of 45 Finnish patients with acromegaly
from a population-based cohort. Loss of heterozygosity at the AIP locus
was observed in all 8 tumor tissues studied.

.0002
PITUITARY ADENOMA, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING
AIP, IVS3, G-A, -1

In a Finnish patient with acromegaly and pituitary adenoma (102200),
Vierimaa et al. (2006) identified a G-to-A substitution in intron 3 of
the AIP gene, affecting the splice acceptor site of exon 4.

.0003
PITUITARY ADENOMA, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING
AIP, ARG304TER

In 2 Italian sibs with GH-secreting pituitary adenomas (102200),
Vierimaa et al. (2006) identified an arg304-to-stop (R304X) substitution
at codon 304 in the AIP gene. This mutation was not found in 203
Caucasian controls from the U.K. or CEPH or 52 local blood donors.

Daly et al. (2007) identified the R304X mutation in 3 affected members
of another Italian family with GH-secreting pituitary adenomas and
acromegaly.

Chahal et al. (2011) identified the same nonsense mutation in DNA
extracted from teeth of an Irish patient who lived from 1761 to 1783
(Charles Byrne, 'The Irish Giant'; Bergland, 1965), whose skull had been
noted by Harvey Cushing to possess an enlarged pituitary fossa. Four
contemporary northern Irish families who presented with gigantism,
acromegaly, or prolactinoma had the same mutation and haplotype
associated with the mutated gene. Using coalescent theory, Chahal et al.
(2011) inferred that these persons share a common ancestor who lived
about 57 to 66 generations earlier. In the 4 families, Chahal et al.
(2011) identified 51 carriers of the mutation but only 14 affected
subjects. The level of penetrance was difficult to establish since
information on genetic and clinical data were incomplete.

.0004
PITUITARY ADENOMA, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING
AIP, 6-BP DEL, NT66

In a 20-year-old German man with acromegaly secondary to a pituitary
adenoma (102200), Georgitsi et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 6-bp
deletion (66delAGGAGA) in exon 1 of the AIP gene. Tumor tissue showed
loss of the normal AIP allele. The patient had a family history of
acromegaly.

.0005
PITUITARY ADENOMA, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING
AIP, 1-BP INS, 824A

In an 8-year-old boy with a GH-secreting pituitary adenoma (102200),
Georgitsi et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 1-bp insertion
(824insA) in exon 6 of the AIP gene. Tumor tissue showed loss of the
normal AIP allele.

.0006
PITUITARY ADENOMA, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING
AIP, 1-BP DEL, 542T

In an 18-year-old man from Spain with acromegaly secondary to a
pituitary adenoma (102200), Georgitsi et al. (2007) identified a
heterozygous 1-bp deletion (542delT) in exon 4 of the AIP gene. He had a
family history of acromegaly.

.0007
PITUITARY ADENOMA PREDISPOSITION
AIP, TYR268TER

In 4 affected members of a Brazilian family with pituitary tumor
predisposition (see 102200), Toledo et al. (2007) identified
heterozygosity for an 804A-C transition in the AIP gene, resulting in a
tyr268-to-ter (Y268X) substitution predicted to generate a protein
lacking 2 conserved domains. The 4 affected members included 2 sibs with
early-onset acromegaly, a 41-year-old sib with a nonsecreting
microadenoma and no clinical features of disease, and his 3-year-old
son. No changes were found in 14 unaffected at-risk relatives or 92
healthy controls.

.0008
PITUITARY ADENOMA, ACTH-SECRETING
AIP, ARG304GLN

In a 26-year-old Polish patient with Cushing disease due to an
ACTH-secreting pituitary adenoma (219090), Georgitsi et al. (2007)
identified a heterozygous 911G-A transition in exon 6 of the AIP gene,
resulting in an arg304-to-gln (R304Q) substitution.

.0009
PITUITARY ADENOMA, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING
AIP, ARG22TER

In a 24-year-old man with acromegaly due to a GH-secreting adenoma
(102200), Barlier et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous C-to-T
transition in exon 1 of the AIP gene, resulting in an arg22-to-ter
(R22X) substitution. The tumor tissue showed loss of heterozygosity at
the AIP locus. The patient had an aggressive macroadenoma that was
resistant to somatostatin agonist therapy. He also required radiotherapy
postoperatively.

REFERENCE 1. Barlier, A.; Vanbellinghen, J.-F.; Daly, A. F.; Silvy, M.; Jaffrain-Rea,
M.-L.; Trouillas, J.; Tamagno, G.; Cazabat, L.; Bours, V.; Brue, T.;
Enjalbert, A.; Beckers, A.: Mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
interacting protein gene are not highly prevalent among subjects with
sporadic pituitary adenomas. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 1952-1955,
2007.

2. Bergland, Richard M.: New information concerning the Irish Giant. J.
Neurosurg. 23: 265-269, 1965.

3. Carver, L. A.; Bradfield, C. A.: Ligand-dependent interaction
of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor with a novel immunophilin homolog
in vivo. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 11452-11456, 1997.

4. Carver, L. A.; LaPres, J. J.; Jain, S.; Dunham, E. E.; Bradfield,
C. A.: Characterization of the Ah receptor-associated protein, ARA9. J.
Biol. Chem. 273: 33580-33587, 1998.

5. Chahal, H. S.; Stals, K.; Unterlander, M.; Balding, D. J.; Thomas,
M. G.; Kumar, A. V.; Besser, G. M.; Atkinson, A. B.; Morrison, P.
J.; Howlett, T. A.; Levy, M. J.; Orme, S. M.; Akker, S. A.; Abel,
R. L.; Grossman, A. B.; Burger, J.; Ellard, S.; Korbonits, M.: AIP
mutation in pituitary adenomas in the 18th century and today. New
Eng. J. Med. 364: 43-50, 2011.

6. Daly, A. F.; Vanbellinghen, J.-F.; Khoo, S. K.; Jaffrain-Rea, M.-L.;
Naves, L. A.; Guitelman, M. A.; Murat, A.; Emy, P.; Gimenez-Roqueplo,
A.-P.; Tamburrano, G.; Raverot, G.; Barlier, A.; and 32 others:
Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene mutations in familial
isolated pituitary adenomas: analysis in 73 families. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 92: 1891-1896, 2007.

7. Georgitsi, M.; Raitila, A.; Karhu, A.; Tuppurainen, K.; Makinen,
M. J.; Vierimaa, O.; Paschke, R.; Saeger, W.; van der Luijt, R. B.;
Sane, T.; Robledo, M.; De Menis, E.; Weil, R. J.; Wasik, A.; Zielinski,
G.; Lucewicz, O.; Lubinski, J.; Launonen, V.; Vahteristo, P.; Aaltonen,
L. A.: Molecular diagnosis of pituitary adenoma predisposition caused
by aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene mutations. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 4101-4105, 2007.

8. Igreja, S.; Chahal, H. S.; King, P.; Bolger, G. B.; Srirangalingam,
U.; Guasti, L.; Chapple, J. P.; Trivellin, G.; Gueorguiev, M.; Guegan,
K.; Stals, K.; Khoo, B.; Kumar, A. V.; Ellard, S.; Grossman, A. B.;
Korbonits, M.; International FIPA Consortium: Characterization
of aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting protein (AIP) mutations in
familial isolated pituitary adenoma families. Hum. Mutat. 31: 950-960,
2010.

9. Kuzhandaivelu, N.; Cong, Y.-S.; Inouye, C.; Yang, W.-M.; Seto,
E.: XAP2, a novel hepatitis B virus X-associated protein that inhibits
X transactivation. Nucleic Acids Res. 24: 4741-4750, 1996.

10. Leontiou, C. A.; Gueorguiev, M.; van der Spuy, J.; Quinton, R.;
Lolli, F.; Hassan, S.; Chahal, H. S.; Igreja, S. C.; Jordan, S.; Rowe,
J.; Stolbrink, M.; Christian, H. C.; and 23 others: The role of
the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein gene in familial
and sporadic pituitary adenomas. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 93: 2390-2401,
2008.

11. Meyer, B. K.; Pray-Grant, M. G.; Vanden Heuvel, J. P.; Perdew,
G. H.: Hepatitis B virus X-associated protein 2 is a subunit of the
unliganded aryl hydrocarbon receptor core complex and exhibits transcriptional
enhancer activity. Molec. Cell. Biol. 18: 978-988, 1998.

12. Toledo, R. A.; Lourenco, D. M., Jr.; Liberman, B.; Cunha-Neto,
M. B. C.; Cavalcanti, M. G.; Moyses, C. B.; Toledo, S. P. A.; Dahia,
P. L. M.: Germline mutation in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor interacting
protein gene in familial somatotropinoma. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92:
1934-1937, 2007.

13. Vierimaa, O.; Georgitsi, M.; Lehtonen, R.; Vahteristo, P.; Kokko,
A.; Raitila, A.; Tuppurainen, K.; Ebeling, T. M. L.; Salmela, P. I.;
Paschke, R.; Gundogdu, S.; De Menis, E.; Makinen, M. J.; Launonen,
V.; Karhu, A.; Aaltonen, L. A.: Pituitary adenoma predisposition
caused by germline mutations in the AIP gene. Science 312: 1228-1230,
2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/19/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/20/2010
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/13/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/19/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 2/14/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/26/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/21/2006

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 1/16/2001

EDITED alopez: 01/25/2011
terry: 1/19/2011
alopez: 12/20/2010
terry: 12/20/2010
carol: 2/24/2010
alopez: 1/13/2009
carol: 2/28/2008
ckniffin: 2/19/2008
carol: 2/14/2008
wwang: 4/12/2007
ckniffin: 3/26/2007
alopez: 7/25/2006
terry: 7/21/2006
carol: 1/17/2001

607347	TITLE *607347 ALPHA-KINASE 1; ALPK1
;;LYMPHOCYTE ALPHA KINASE; LAK;;
KIAA1527
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Unlike most eukaryotic kinases, alpha kinases, such as LAK, recognize
phosphorylation sites in which the surrounding peptides have an
alpha-helical conformation.

CLONING

By EST database searching for homologs of the alpha kinase EEF2K
(606968), Ryazanov et al. (1999) identified LAK, which they termed
'chromosome 4 kinase.'

By screening for cDNAs with the potential to encode large proteins
expressed in brain, Nagase et al. (2000) identified a partial cDNA
encoding LAK, which they called KIAA1527. Using RT-PCR analysis, they
detected moderate expression of LAK in all tissues tested except liver,
where expression was high.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Ryazanov et al. (1999) and Nagase et al.
(2000) mapped the ALPK1 gene to chromosome 4.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 143-150, 2000.

2. Ryazanov, A. G.; Pavur, K. S.; Dorovkov, M. V.: Alpha-kinases:
a new class of protein kinases with a novel catalytic domain. Curr.
Biol. 9: R43-R45, 1999.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/14/2002

EDITED alopez: 01/28/2008
mgross: 11/14/2002

601805	TITLE *601805 G PROTEIN-COUPLED ESTROGEN RECEPTOR; GPER
;;G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 30; GPR30;;
CHEMOKINE RECEPTOR-LIKE 2; CMKRL2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Owman et al. (1996) performed PCR of template DNA from human B-cell
lymphoblasts using degenerate primers to G protein-coupled receptors.
They identified a full-length cDNA encoding a 375-amino acid protein,
which they termed CMKRL2. CMKRL2 is expressed in the Burkitt lymphoma
cell lines Raji and Daudi but not in T-cell lymphoma Jurkat cells, T- or
B-cell leukemias, chronic myelogenous leukemia, or other cancer cell
lines (Owman et al., 1996). Northern blot analysis of normal tissue
showed expression of a 2.4-kb transcript in many tissues including the
brain; there was no detectable mRNA in placenta, bone marrow, or
peripheral blood leukocytes (Owman et al., 1996).

Using the technique of differential cDNA library screening to identify
genes overexpressed in estrogen receptor (ESR)-positive breast carcinoma
cell lines compared to ESR-negative cell lines, Carmeci et al. (1997)
isolated a CMKRL2 cDNA and designated it GPR30. Sequence analysis
determined that the clone shares significant homology to G
protein-coupled receptors. This receptor was abundantly expressed in 3
ESR-positive breast carcinoma cell lines. Expression was absent or
minimal in 3 ESR-negative breast carcinoma cell lines. It was
ubiquitously expressed in all human tissues examined, but was most
abundant in placenta. In 11 primary breast carcinomas, it was detected
in all 4 ESR-positive tumors and in only 1 of 7 ESR-negative tumors. The
pattern of expression of the gene indicated that the receptor may be
involved in physiologic responses specific to hormonally responsive
tissues.

Using PCR with degenerate primers to identify novel members of the G
protein-coupled receptor family, Feng and Gregor (1997) also cloned
GPR30. They designated the gene CEPR for 'constitutively/commonly
expressed peptide-like receptor' because the 3.3-kb mRNA was detected in
most human tissues on Northern blots. They found that CEPR is encoded by
an intronless gene. Similarly, Kvingedal and Smeland (1997) cloned GPR30
using RT-PCR of B-cell mRNA to identify G protein-coupled receptors
expressed in lymphocytes. They designated the gene LyGPR for
'lymphocyte-derived G protein-coupled receptor.' Takada et al. (1997)
cloned GPR30 from endothelial cells exposed to fluid shear stress. They
designated the gene FEG1 for 'flow-induced endothelial G protein-coupled
receptor gene-1.'

GENE FUNCTION

Revankar et al. (2005) found that unlike other known G protein-coupled
receptors, GPR30 localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum, where it
specifically binds estrogen and estrogen derivatives. Activating GPR30
by estrogen resulted in intracellular calcium mobilization and synthesis
of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate in the nucleus. Revankar et
al. (2005) concluded that GPR30 represents an intracellular
transmembrane estrogen receptor that may contribute to normal estrogen
physiology as well as pathophysiology. Pietras et al. (2005) questioned
the conclusions raised by Revankar et al. (2005); Prossnitz et al.
(2005) provided a response.

MAPPING

Owman et al. (1996) mapped the CMKRL2 gene to 7p22 by fluorescence in
situ hybridization. Based upon PCR analysis in somatic hybrid cell
lines, Carmeci et al. (1997) mapped the GPR30 gene to 7p22.

REFERENCE 1. Carmeci, C.; Thompson, D. A.; Ring, H. Z.; Francke, U.; Weigel,
R. J.: Identification of a gene (GPR30) with homology to the G-protein-coupled
receptor superfamily associated with estrogen receptor expression
in breast cancer. Genomics 45: 607-617, 1997.

2. Feng, Y.; Gregor, P.: Cloning of a novel member of the G protein-coupled
receptor family related to peptide receptors. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 231: 651-654, 1997.

3. Kvingedal, A. M.; Smeland, E. B.: A novel putative G-protein-coupled
receptor expressed in lung, heart and lymphoid tissue. FEBS Lett. 407:
59-62, 1997.

4. Owman, C.; Blay, P.; Nilsson, C.; Lolait, S. J.: Cloning of human
cDNA encoding a novel heptahelix receptor expressed in Burkitt's lymphoma
and widely distributed in brain and peripheral tissues. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 228: 285-292, 1996.

5. Pietras, R. J.; Levin, E. R.; Szego, C. M.: Estrogen receptors
and cell signaling. (Letter) Science 310: 51-52, 2005.

6. Prossnitz, E. R.; Revankar, C. M.; Arterburn, J. B.; Sklar, L.
A.: Response to Pietras et al. Science 310: 52-53, 2005.

7. Revankar, C. M.; Cimino, D. F.; Sklar, L. A.; Arterburn, J. B.;
Prossnitz, E. R.: A transmembrane intracellular estrogen receptor
mediates rapid cell signaling. Science 307: 1625-1630, 2005.

8. Takada, Y.; Kato, C.; Kondo, S.; Korenaga, R.; Ando, J.: Cloning
of cDNAs encoding G protein-coupled receptor expressed in human endothelial
cells exposed to fluid shear stress. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 240:
737-741, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/21/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/1/2005
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 5/4/1998

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 5/15/1997

EDITED mgross: 06/21/2010
terry: 2/2/2009
alopez: 11/28/2005
alopez: 11/22/2005
terry: 11/21/2005
wwang: 6/2/2005
terry: 6/1/2005
carol: 9/17/2003
carol: 8/25/1998
alopez: 7/23/1998
alopez: 5/4/1998
alopez: 4/8/1998
carol: 2/3/1998
dholmes: 8/28/1997
alopez: 6/4/1997
alopez: 5/30/1997

601585	TITLE *601585 PROTEIN-TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, TYPE 4A, 1; PTP4A1
;;PHOPHATASE OF REGENERATING LIVER 1; PRL1;;
PTP(CAAX1)
DESCRIPTION Cellular processes involving growth, differentiation, and metabolism are
often regulated in part by protein phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation. The protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs), which
hydrolyze the phosphate monoesters of tyrosine residues, all share a
common active site motif and are classified into 3 groups. These include
the receptor-like PTPs, the intracellular PTPs, and the dual-specificity
PTPs, which can dephosphorylate at serine and threonine residues as well
as at tyrosines. Diamond et al. (1994) described a PTP from regenerating
rat liver that is a member of a fourth class. The gene, which they
designated Prl1, was one of many immediate-early genes and expressed
mainly in the nucleus. Overexpression of Prl1 in stably transfected
cells resulted in a transformed phenotype, which suggested that it may
play some role in tumorigenesis. By using an in vitro prenylation
screen, Cates et al. (1996) isolated 2 human cDNAs encoding PRL1
homologs, designated PTP(CAAX1) and PTP(CAAX2) (PRL2; 601584), that are
farnesylated in vitro by mammalian farnesyl:protein transferase.
Overexpression of these PTPs in epithelial cells caused a transformed
phenotype in cultured cells and tumor growth in nude mice. The authors
concluded that PTP(CAAX1) and PTP(CAAX2) represent a novel class of
isoprenylated, oncogenic PTPs. Peng et al. (1998) reported that the
human PTP(CAAX1) gene, or PRL1, is composed of 6 exons and contains 2
promoters. The predicted mouse, rat, and human PRL1 proteins are
identical. Zeng et al. (1998) determined that the human PRL1 and PRL2
proteins share 87% amino acid sequence identity.

By FISH, Peng et al. (1998) mapped the PRL1 gene to 6q12.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Montagna et al. (1995)
REFERENCE 1. Cates, C. A.; Michael, R. L.; Stayrook, K. R.; Harvey, K. A.; Burke,
Y. D.; Randall, S. K.; Crowell, P. L.; Crowell, D. N.: Prenylation
of oncogenic human PTP(CAAX) protein tyrosine phosphatases. Cancer
Lett. 110: 49-55, 1996.

2. Diamond, R. H.; Cressman, D. E.; Laz, T. M.; Abrams, C. S.; Taub,
R.: PRL-1, a unique nuclear protein tyrosine phosphatase, affects
cell growth. Cell. Biol. 14: 3752-3762, 1994.

3. Montagna, M.; Serova, O.; Sylla, B. S.; Feunteun, J.; Lenoir, G.
M.: A 100-kb physical and transcriptional map around the EDH17B2
gene: identification of three novel genes and a pseudogene of a human
homologue of the rat PRL-1 tyrosine phosphatase. Hum. Genet. 96:
532-538, 1995.

4. Peng, Y.; Genin, A.; Spinner, N. B.; Diamond, R. H.; Taub, R.:
The gene encoding human nuclear protein tyrosine phosphatase, PRL-1:
cloning, chromosomal localization, and identification of an intron
enhancer. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 17286-17295, 1998.

5. Zeng, Q.; Hong, W.; Tan, Y. H.: Mouse PRL-2 and PRL-3, two potentially
prenylated protein tyrosine phosphatases homologous to PRL-1. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 244: 421-427, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 8/6/1999

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 12/18/1996

EDITED mgross: 08/06/1999
mgross: 8/6/1999
alopez: 12/2/1998
mark: 12/19/1996

609748	TITLE *609748 UBIQUITIN-LIKE 7; UBL7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

From large-scale screening of a bone marrow stromal cell (BMSC) cDNA
library, Liu et al. (2003) identified UBL7, a novel cDNA encoding a
deduced 380-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 40.6
kD. The protein, which they designated BMSC-UbP, contains a UBQ domain
at its N terminus and a ubiquitin-associated domain at its C terminus.
It shares moderate homology with several ubiquitin-like proteins
including UBQLN1 (605046) and UBQLN2 (300264). Northern blot analysis
revealed an approximately 1.3-kb UBL7 transcript in all human tissues
tested. RT-PCR detected expression of UBL7 in several tumor cell lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Liu et al. (2003) found that expression of UBL7 was significantly
down-regulated in PMA-stimulated BMSC but was not obviously changed in
LPS-stimulated BMSC. UBL7 expression was up-regulated in LPS-stimulated
acute promyelocytic HL60 cells but remained unchanged in PMA-stimulated
HL60 cells. Liu et al. (2003) suggested that UBL7 may play a role in the
regulation of BMSC function or cell differentiation through an evocator-
and cell-specific pattern.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Liu et al. (2003) mapped the UCL7 gene to
chromosome 15q22.3-q23.

REFERENCE 1. Liu, S.; Yu, Y.; An, H.; Li, N.; Lin, N.; Wang, W.; Zhang, W.;
Wan, T.; Cao, X.: Cloning and identification of a novel ubiquitin-like
protein, BMSC-UbP, from bone marrow stromal cells. Immun. Lett. 68:
169-175, 2003.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 12/1/2005

EDITED carol: 12/01/2005
carol: 12/1/2005

602976	TITLE *602976 MAX-LIKE PROTEIN X; MLX
;;TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR-LIKE 4; TCFL4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Members of the basic helix-loop-helix leucine zipper (bHLH-ZIP) family
are transcription factors with roles in proliferation, determination,
and differentiation (e.g., MAX, 154950). By searching sequence databases
with a mouse Tcfl4 cDNA, Bjerknes and Cheng (1996) identified several
TCFL4 expressed sequence tags derived from a variety of human tissues,
and a 46-kb cosmid clone (GenBank GENBANK U34879) containing the human
TCFL4 gene. The predicted TCFL4 protein contains a basic
helix-loop-helix domain and a leucine zipper domain. RT-PCR detected
mouse Tcfl4 expression in all tissues examined.

In a 2-hybrid screen to identify Mad1 (602686)-interacting proteins,
Billin et al. (1999) identified TCFL4 as MLX, a bHLH-ZIP protein that is
structurally and functionally related to MAX. The predicted amino acid
sequence of MLX is conserved at all positions that define the bHLH-ZIP
class of transcription factors and is most similar to that of MAX,
sharing approximately 50% identity in the bHLH-ZIP domains. The
244-amino acid human and mouse MLX proteins differ at only 4 amino acid
positions. Billin et al. (1999) showed that transcriptional repression
by Mad1:Mlx heterodimers is dependent on dimerization, DNA binding, and
recruitment of the Sin3A (607776)-histone deacetylase (see 601241)
corepressor complex. Their findings suggested that MLX may act to
diversify Mad family function by its restricted association with a
subset of the Mad family of transcriptional repressors.

GENE FUNCTION

Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS; 194050) is a developmental disorder
associated with haploinsufficiency of multiple genes at 7q11.23. Cairo
et al. (2001) reported that WBSCR14 (605678) formed heterodimers with
MLX to bind the DNA sequence CACGTG. Like MAX, MLX has no intrinsic
transcriptional activity, but its association with MAD1, MAD4, MNT
(603039), or WBSCR14 can repress E-box-dependent transcription. The
authors hypothesized that MLX may be a key element of a transcription
factor network, and that WBSCR14 may contribute to some aspects of the
WBS pathology.

Billin et al. (2000) identified mouse Mondoa (608090) by yeast 2-hybrid
analysis using human MLX as bait. Mouse Mondoa and Mlx associated in
vivo, and the dimer localized primarily to the cytoplasm of mouse
embryonic carcinoma cells. Treatment of cells with a nuclear export
inhibitor resulted in nuclear accumulation of Mondoa and Mlx,
demonstrating that the heterodimer shuttles between the cytoplasmic and
nuclear compartments. The Mondoa-Mlx complex bound to the CACGTG E box
in vitro and, when artificially targeted to the nucleus of mouse
fibroblasts, drove reporter gene expression from the E box. Coexpression
of MLX with truncation mutants of human MONDOA identified a
transcription activation domain within the central STP-rich region of
MONDOA. By mutation analysis, Billin et al. (2000) identified a
cytoplasmic localization signal within the N terminus of human MONDOA
that contributed to the cytoplasmic localization of the MONDOA-MLX
complex.

Eilers et al. (2002) determined that 2 regions within the MONDOA N
terminus contribute to the cytoplasmic localization of the MONDOA-MLX
complex by functioning as a CRM1 (602559)-dependent nuclear export
signal and as a binding site for 14-3-3 (see 601289) proteins,
respectively. The conserved C terminus of MONDOA and MLX contains a
cytoplasmic localization signal that directs cytoplasmic localization of
the monomers and a protein-protein interaction domain that mediates
interaction between MONDOA and MLX. Heterodimerization of MONDOA and
MLX, via either the leucine zipper or the C-terminal domain, inactivates
the C-terminal cytoplasmic localization signal. Inactivation of this
domain is necessary but not sufficient for nuclear accumulation of the
heterodimer.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bjerknes and Cheng (1996) found that the TCFL4 gene has 8 exons and
spans more than 5 kb.

MAPPING

Bjerknes and Cheng (1996) identified the TCFL4 gene in a human cosmid on
chromosome 17q21.1, which also contains the HSD17B1 gene (109684).

REFERENCE 1. Billin, A. N.; Eilers, A. L.; Coulter, K. L.; Logan, J. S.; Ayer,
D. E.: MondoA, a novel basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper transcriptional
activator that constitutes a positive branch of a Max-like network. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 20: 8845-8854, 2000.

2. Billin, A. N.; Eilers, A. L.; Queva, C.; Ayer, D. E.: Mlx, a novel
Max-like BHLHZip protein that interacts with the Max network of transcription
factors. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 36344-36350, 1999.

3. Bjerknes, M.; Cheng, H.: TCFL4: a gene at 17q21.1 encoding a putative
basic helix-loop-helix leucine-zipper transcription factor. Gene 181:
7-11, 1996.

4. Cairo, S.; Merla, G.; Urbinati, F.; Ballabio, A.; Reymond, A.:
WBSCR14, a gene mapping to the Williams-Beuren syndrome deleted region,
is a new member of the Mlx transcription factor network. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 10: 617-627, 2001.

5. Eilers, A. L.; Sundwall, E.; Lin, M.; Sullivan, A. A.; Ayer, D.
E.: A novel heterodimerization domain, CRM1, and 14-3-3 control subcellular
localization of the MondoA-Mlx heterocomplex. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22:
8514-8526, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/9/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/4/2001
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 6/4/2001

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 8/17/1998

EDITED carol: 06/13/2012
terry: 8/17/2004
mgross: 9/9/2003
mgross: 5/12/2003
carol: 6/5/2001
alopez: 6/4/2001
carol: 8/21/1998

602854	TITLE *602854 PROTEASOME SUBUNIT, ALPHA-TYPE, 1; PSMA1
;;PROTEASOME SUBUNIT NU;;
HC2;;
PROS30
DESCRIPTION DeMartino et al. (1991) cloned the PSMA1 gene, termed 'subunit nu' by
them. The cDNA encoded a 263-amino acid polypeptide. The calculated and
observed molecular masses are 29.5 kD and 35 kD, respectively. Northern
blot analysis revealed an 1.4-kb mRNA in human placenta and HeLa cells.
Coux et al. (1996) noted that 2 proteins, HC2 (29.5 kD) and Pros30 (30.2
kD), are encoded by the PSMA1 gene.

Coux et al. (1996) reviewed the structures and functions of the 20S
proteasome subunits. The alpha subunits comprise the outer rings of the
proteasome. Some alpha subunits contain a functional nuclear
localization signal; proteasomes are found in both the nuclear and
cytoplasmic compartments of the cell. Alpha subunits may constitute a
physical barrier that limits access of cytosolic proteins into the inner
proteolytic chamber.

Bey et al. (1993) mapped the PSMA1 gene to chromosome 11p15.1 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Bey, F.; Silva Pereira, I.; Coux, O.; Viegas-Pequignot, E.; Recillas
Targa, F.; Nothwang, H. G.; Dutrillaux, B.; Scherrer, K.: The prosomal
RNA-binding protein p27K is a member of the alpha-type human prosomal
gene family. Molec. Gen. Genet. 237: 193-205, 1993.

2. Coux, O.; Tanaka, K.; Goldberg, A. L.: Structure and functions
of the 20S and 26S proteasomes. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 65: 801-847,
1996.

3. DeMartino, G. N.; Orth, K.; McCullough, M. L.; Lee, L. W.; Munn,
T. Z.; Moomaw, C. R.; Dawson, P. A.; Slaughter, C. A.: The primary
structures of four subunits of the human, high molecular weight proteinase,
macropain (proteasome), are distinct but homologous. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1079: 29-38, 1991.

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 7/15/1998

EDITED kayiaros: 07/13/1999
alopez: 7/16/1998

124040	TITLE *124040 CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY IIE; CYP2E1
;;P450C2E;;
ETHANOL-INDUCIBLE P450
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The CYP2E1 gene encodes an enzyme (EC 1.14.13.-) involved in the
metabolism of drugs, hormones, and xenobiotic toxins (Wang et al.,
2009).

CLONING

Klingenberg (1958) and Garfinkel (1958) first discovered a hepatic
microsomal carbon monoxide-binding pigment with an absorption spectrum
of 450 nm. That the pigment was a cytochrome was shown by Omura and Sato
(1962), who designated it P-450.

The P450IIE subfamily is ethanol-inducible. It has at least 1 gene, and
a second is likely in rat and in man (Nebert et al., 1987).

Song et al. (1987) isolated cDNAs encoding ethanol-inducible forms of
rat and human P450s. On the basis of the sequence, it was concluded that
both the rat and human proteins contain 493 amino acids and calculated
molecular masses of 56.6 and 56.9 kD, respectively. They also described
a TaqI polymorphism of this gene.

Using the rabbit liver progesterone-21-hydroxylase P-450 1 cDNA as a
probe, Okino et al. (1987) identified a highly homologous (81% within
the coding region) human liver cDNA that encodes a 490-amino acid
protein. The protein shows 82% homology to the mephenytoin 4-hydroxylase
(CYP2C; 124020).

GENE STRUCTURE

Umeno et al. (1988) presented the complete gene sequence. The human gene
spans 11,413 basepairs and contains 9 exons and a typical TATA box. A
full-length cDNA, constructed with the first exon of the genomic clone
and a partial cDNA clone, was expressed in COS cells and found to code
for N-nitrosodimethylamine demethylase activity.

MAPPING

Using a panel of somatic cell hybrids, McBride et al. (1987) localized
the gene to chromosome 10.

By hybridization to a panel of human-rodent somatic cell hybrids, Okino
et al. (1987) mapped the CYP2E gene to chromosome 10.

Kolble (1993) used an intronic (GGAT)n-(CCTA)n repeat element as a
sequence tagged site for genomic amplification from somatic cell hybrids
to localize the CYP2E gene to chromosome 10q24.3-qter. The close synteny
of CYP2E, CYP2C, and CYP17 (609300), belonging to 2 different cytochrome
P450 families, was noteworthy. Kolble (1993) suggested that the linkage
group ancestral to human chromosome 10 may have contained the primordial
cytochrome P450 gene that has evolved in cycles of local duplication and
chromosomal dispersion.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Watanabe et al. (1991) described RFLPs at the CYP2E locus. CYP2E is
involved in the metabolism of nitrosamines. Due to the possible
correlation of both CYP2D (124030) and CYP2E genes with malignancy,
clinical studies of RFLP patterns of these genes in cancer may be
useful.

Hayashi et al. (1991) identified genetic polymorphisms in the 5-prime
flanking region of the human P450IIE1 gene (124040.0001) and
investigated the effect of these polymorphisms on the transcriptional
regulation of the gene. They found that the polymorphisms affected its
binding of transacting factor and changed its transcriptional
regulation. They suggested that this may lead to interindividual
differences of microsomal drug oxidation activity.

Alcohol dehydrogenase-2 (ADH2, or ADH1B; 103720), aldehyde
dehydrogenase-2 (ALDH2; 100650), and CYP2E1 are important enzymes for
the catalysis of the conversion of ethanol to acetaldehyde and to
acetate in humans. Genetic polymorphisms have been reported in ADH2 and
ALDH2, as well as in CYP2E1 (Hayashi et al., 1991). Acetaldehyde is
known to play a major role in producing unpleasant symptoms after
alcohol intake, such as facial flushing, palpitations, headache,
vomiting, and sweating, and in the development of alcohol liver disease.
The accumulation of acetaldehyde in liver and blood after drinking
alcohol must be determined by the relative rates of its formation and
removal, which are influenced by the interactive action of the 3
enzymes. It is well established that polymorphisms of ALDH2 have a
strong relationship with individual drinking behaviors in the Asian
population, because inactive ALDH2 produced by the ALDH2*2 allele
(100650.0001) delays the elimination of acetaldehyde and provides a
genetic protection against heavy drinking in Orientals, encoding about
half of the Japanese and Chinese populations. The effects of
polymorphisms of ADH2 and CYP2E1 had been studied but remained
controversial, even in the same ethnic group. The interaction of the 3
genetic effects is obviously of relevance. Tanaka et al. (1997) observed
that individuals with the c2/c2 (124040.0001) genotype at the CYP2E1
locus could consume more ethanol on average than those with the c1/c1
genotype in subjects homozygous for the ALDH2*1 homozygous genotype,
suggesting an interactive effect between ADLH2 and CYP2E1 on alcohol
consumption in healthy Japanese men. To evaluate the independent and
interactive effects of the genetic polymorphisms of ALDH2, ADH2, and
CYP2E1 in relation to alcohol consumption large enough to cause adverse
health effects, Sun et al. (1999) analyzed 643 healthy Japanese men for
genotype and drinking habits. They showed that Japanese men with the
ALDH2*1 homozygous genotype and the c2 allele of CYP2E1 are at a higher
risk of showing excessive alcohol consumption.

In a population-based study of 359 unrelated mainland Chinese,
consisting of 103 Han, 107 Kazakh, and 149 Uygur individuals, Wang et
al. (2009) found that the frequencies of 3 combined genotypes, 1 for
predicted CYP2C19 (124020) poor metabolizers (CYP2C19*2/CYP2C19*3) and 2
for predicted high levels of CYP2E1 (124040) (CYP2E1*5B and CYP2E1*6)
transcription, were significantly lower in the Chinese Kazakh (7.5%,
19.6%, and 28.0%, respectively) and Uygur (8.1%, 22.8%, and 33.6%)
populations compared to the Chinese Han population (16.5%, 35.9%, and
44.7%). The findings suggested that disease susceptibilities or drug
responses associated with enzyme activities of CYP2C19 and CYP2E1 may
differ between ethnic populations of mainland China.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CYP2E1*5B ALLELE
CYP2E1, -1293G-C AND -1053C-T (dbSNP rs3813867 AND dbSNP rs2031920)

This SNP, combining a -1293G-C transversion (dbSNP rs3813867) and a
-1053C-T transition (dbSNP rs2031920) in the 5-prime transcriptional
regulatory region of the CYP2E1 gene, is referred to as CYP2E1*5B (Wang
et al., 2009).

This allele is associated with increased transcription of CYP2E1 (Wang
et al., 2009).

Hayashi et al. (1991) described a polymorphism in the 5-prime flanking
region of CYP2E, and the alleles were designated c1 (RsaI+) and c2
(RsaI-). Sun et al. (1999) observed that Japanese men with the
homozygous ALDH2*1 genotype (see 100650) and the c2 allele of CYP2E were
at a higher risk of excessive alcohol consumption.

In a population-based study of 359 unrelated mainland Chinese,
consisting of 103 Han, 107 Kazakh, and 149 Uygur individuals, Wang et
al. (2009) found that the frequencies of the CYP2E1*5B polymorphism were
significantly lower in the Kazakh and Uygur populations (11.2% and
12.1%, respectively) compared to the Han population (19.4%).

.0002
CYP2E1*6 ALLELE
CYP2E1, IVS6, 7632T-A (dbSNP rs6413432)

This SNP, a 7643T-A transversion in intron 6 of the CYP2E1 gene (dbSNP
rs6413432), is referred to as CYP2E1*6 (Wang et al., 2009).

This allele is associated with increased transcription of CYP2E1 (Wang
et al., 2009). In a population-based study of 359 unrelated mainland
Chinese, consisting 103 Han, 107 Kazakh, and 149 Uygur individuals, Wang
et al. (2009) found that the frequencies of the CYP2E1*6 polymorphism
were significantly lower in the Kazakh and Uygur populations (14.5% and
18.8%, respectively) compared to the Han population (26.2%%).

Sarmanova et al. (2001) determined the frequency of polymorphisms in
several biotransformation enzymes in patients with morbus Hodgkin and
non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL; 605027) and age- and sex-matched healthy
individuals. The distribution of genotypes in CYP2E1-intron 6 was
significantly different between the control group and all lymphomas (P =
0.03), patients with NHL (P = 0.024), and especially aggressive diffuse
NHL (P = 0.007). The EPHX-exon 3 (132810.0001) genotype distribution was
significantly different between control males and males with all
lymphomas (P = 0.01) or with NHL (P = 0.019). The authors suggested that
genetic polymorphisms of biotransformation enzymes may play a
significant role in the development of lymphoid malignancies.

REFERENCE 1. Garfinkel, D.: Studies on pig liver microsomes. 1. Enzymic and
pigment composition of different microsomal fractions. Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 77: 493-509, 1958.

2. Hayashi, S.; Watanabe, J.; Kawajiri, K.: Genetic polymorphisms
in the 5-prime-flanking region change transcriptional regulation of
the human cytochrome P450IIE1 gene. J. Biochem. 110: 559-565, 1991.

3. Klingenberg, M.: Pigments of rat liver microsomes. Arch. Biochem.
Biophys. 75: 376-386, 1958.

4. Kolble, K.: Regional mapping of short tandem repeats on human
chromosome 10: cytochrome P450 gene CYP2E, D10S196, D10S220, and D10S225. Genomics 18:
702-704, 1993.

5. McBride, O. W.; Umeno, M.; Gelboin, H. V.; Gonzalez, F. J.: A
TaqI polymorphism in the human P450IIE1 gene on chromosome 10 (CYP2E). Nucleic
Acids Res. 15: 10071, 1987.

6. Nebert, D. W.; Adesnik, M.; Coon, M. J.; Estabrook, R. W.; Gonzalez,
F. J.; Guengerich, F. P.; Gunsalus, I. C.; Johnson, E. F.; Kemper,
B.; Levin, W.; Phillips, I. R.; Sato, R.; Waterman, M. R.: The P450
gene superfamily: recommended nomenclature. DNA 6: 1-11, 1987.

7. Okino, S. T.; Quattrochi, L. C.; Pendurthi, U. R.; McBride, O.
W.; Tukey, R. H.: Characterization of multiple human cytochrome P-450
1 cDNAs: the chromosomal localization of the gene and evidence for
alternate RNA splicing. J. Biol. Chem. 262: 16072-16079, 1987. Note:
Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 263: 2576 only, 1988.

8. Omura, T.; Sato, R.: A new cytochrome in liver microsomes. J.
Biol. Chem. 237: 1375-1376, 1962.

9. Sarmanova, J.; Benesova, K.; Gut, I.; Nedelcheva-Kristensen, V.;
Tynkova, L.; Soucek, P.: Genetic polymorphisms of biotransformation
enzymes in patients with Hodgkin's and non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 1265-1273, 2001.

10. Song, B.-J.; Gelboin, H. V.; Park, S.-S.; Yang, C. S.; Gonzalez,
F. J.: Complementary DNA and protein sequences of ethanol-inducible
rat and human cytochrome P-450s: transcriptional and post-transcriptional
regulation of the rat enzyme. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 16689-16697, 1987.

11. Sun, F.; Tsuritani, I.; Honda, R.; Ma, Z.-Y.; Yamada, Y.: Association
of genetic polymorphisms of alcohol-metabolizing enzymes with excessive
alcohol consumption in Japanese men. Hum. Genet. 105: 295-300, 1999.

12. Tanaka, F.; Shiratori, Y.; Yokosuka, O.; Imazeki, F.; Tsukada,
Y.; Omata, M.: Polymorphism of alcohol-metabolizing genes affects
drinking behavior and alcoholic liver disease in Japanese men. Alcohol.
Clin. Exp. Res. 21: 596-601, 1997.

13. Umeno, M.; McBride, O. W.; Yang, C. S.; Gelboin, H. V.; Gonzalez,
F. J.: Human ethanol-inducible P450IIE1: complete gene sequence,
promoter characterization, chromosome mapping, and cDNA-directed expression. Biochemistry 27:
9006-9013, 1988.

14. Wang, S.-M.; Zhu, A.-P.; Li, D.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, P.; Zhang, G.-L.
: Frequencies of genotypes and alleles of the functional SNPs in CYP2C19
and CYP2E1 in mainland Chinese Kazakh, Uygur and Han populations. J.
Hum. Genet. 54: 372-375, 2009.

15. Watanabe, J.; Hayashi, S.-I.; Nakachi, K.; Imai, K.; Suda, Y.;
Sekine, T.; Kawajiri, K.: PstI and RsaI RFLPs in complete linkage
disequilibrium at the CYP2E gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 18: 7194, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/15/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/7/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/4/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/12/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/16/1986

EDITED terry: 12/20/2012
alopez: 5/23/2012
carol: 7/15/2010
wwang: 6/17/2010
ckniffin: 6/15/2010
wwang: 11/20/2009
wwang: 6/22/2006
cwells: 11/20/2001
cwells: 11/7/2001
mcapotos: 2/13/2001
terry: 11/6/2000
mcapotos: 2/29/2000
mcapotos: 2/15/2000
terry: 2/4/2000
mgross: 2/2/2000
mgross: 2/1/2000
terry: 1/12/2000
mgross: 4/8/1999
terry: 6/18/1998
mark: 12/26/1996
terry: 12/16/1996
terry: 5/24/1996
terry: 4/27/1994
carol: 2/1/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/14/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989

611516	TITLE *611516 NICOLIN 1; NICN1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database analysis with canine Nicn1 sequence, Backofen et al. (2002)
identified NICN1. The deduced 213-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 24 kD and shares 89% amino acid identity with its
mouse ortholog. EST database analysis identified homologous sequences in
mammalian species only. Northern blot analysis of human tissues detected
a 2.5-kb transcript with high expression in brain, testis, liver, and
kidney, moderate expression in heart, skeletal muscle, placenta,
pancreas, and lung. Low expression was detected in peripheral blood
leukocytes, spleen, thymus, small intestine, and colon. RT-PCR studies
generally confirmed tissue-specific NICN1 expression and detected high
expression in liver. Confocal laser microscopy localized NICN1 to the
nucleus, although a nuclear localization signal was not identified in
the sequence.

GENE STRUCTURE

Backofen et al. (2002) determined that the NICN1 gene contains 6 exons
spanning about 6 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Backofen et al. (2002) mapped the NICN1
gene to chromosome 3p21 and noted that a processed pseudogene of the
NICN1 gene maps to Xp11.3-p11.22. They mapped the mouse Nicn1 gene to
mouse chromosome 9F.

REFERENCE 1. Backofen, B.; Jacob, R.; Serth, K.; Gossler, A.; Naim, H. Y.; Leeb,
T.: Cloning and characterization of the mammalian-specific nicolin
1 gene (NICN1) encoding a nuclear 24 kDa protein. Europ. J. Biochem. 269:
5240-5245, 2002.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 10/10/2007

EDITED wwang: 10/10/2007

147840	TITLE *147840 INTERCELLULAR ADHESION MOLECULE 1; ICAM1
;;CD54;;
SURFACE ANTIGEN OF ACTIVATED B CELLS, BB2; BB2;;
ANTIGEN IDENTIFIED BY MONOCLONAL ANTIBODY BB2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM1) is a ligand for lymphocyte
function-associated (LFA) antigens (see 600065). Simmons et al. (1988)
analyzed a cDNA clone of the ICAM1 gene and found that it showed
homology to the neural cell adhesion molecule NCAM (116930). Greve et
al. (1989) demonstrated that the ICAM1 protein is the major human
rhinovirus receptor. Bella et al. (1998) analyzed the structural
features of the ICAM1 molecule that underlie its function as a receptor
for the major group of human rhinoviruses and as a ligand for LFA-1.

MAPPING

By Southern analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Greve et al. (1989) mapped
the ICAM1 gene to human chromosome 19, which also contains the genes for
a number of other picornavirus receptors, e.g., poliovirus (173850),
echo 11 (129150), RD114 (109190), and coxsackievirus B3 (120050). Katz
et al. (1985) had mapped the gene (which they had referred to as BB2;
see 112203) to chromosome 19 by the use of a monoclonal antibody in the
study of somatic cell hybrids. By fluorescence in situ hybridization,
Trask et al. (1993) assigned the ICAM1 gene to 19p13.3-p13.2. Prieto et
al. (1989) studied MALA-2, the mouse protein homologous to human ICAM1.
Seldin et al. (1991) found that the homologous gene in the mouse, Icam1,
is located close to Ldlr (606945) on chromosome 9. By means of
mouse-hamster somatic cell hybrids and an interspecies backcross,
Ballantyne et al. (1991) assigned the Icam1 gene to the proximal portion
of mouse chromosome 9.

GENE FUNCTION

Expression of HLA-DR antigen (see 142860) and ICAM1 in human
conjunctival epithelium is upregulated in patients with dry eyes
associated with Sjogren syndrome (270150). Tsubota et al. (1999)
reported that this upregulation in Sjogren syndrome patients may be
controlled by interferon-gamma (147570) through the activation of
transcription factor NFKB (nuclear factor kappa-B; see 164011).

Pisella et al. (2000) reported that a significant increase of HLA-DR and
ICAM1 expression by epithelial cells was consistently found in patients
with keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Sjogren syndrome) compared with
expression in normal eyes. These 2 markers were well correlated with
each other and correlated inversely with tear break-up time and tear
production as measured by the Schirmer test. The percentage of
conjunctival goblet cells was significantly decreased in dry eye
patients with a significant negative correlation with both HLA-DR and
ICAM1 markers.

Lu and Cyster (2002) studied the mechanisms that control localization of
marginal zone B cells. They demonstrated that marginal zone B cells
express elevated levels of the integrins LFA-1 (see 153370) and
alpha-4-beta-1 (see 192975 and 135630), and that the marginal zone B
cells bind to the ligands ICAM1 and VCAM1 (192225). These ligands are
expressed within the marginal zone in a lymphotoxin-dependent manner.
Combined inhibition of LFA-1 and alpha-4-beta-1 causes a rapid and
selective release of B cells from the marginal zone. Furthermore,
lipopolysaccharide-triggered marginal zone B cell relocalization
involves downregulation of integrin-mediated adhesion. Lu and Cyster
(2002) concluded that their studies identified key requirements for
marginal zone B cell localization and established a role for integrins
in peripheral lymphoid tissue compartmentalization.

The human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) protein Nef is important for
viral replication and pathogenicity and may also protect cells from
apoptosis and recognition by cytotoxic T cells. In addition, Nef, like
CD40 (109535) stimulation, induces the release of the CC chemokines
MIP1A (CCL3; 182283) and MIP1B (CCL4; 182284) from macrophages in an
NFKB-dependent manner, possibly recruiting T lymphocytes to sites of
infection. Swingler et al. (2003) found that lymphotropic HIV-1 requires
the presence of macrophages infected with macrophage-tropic HIV-1 with
an intact Nef. They showed that either Nef-expressing or CD40LG
(300386)-stimulated macrophages render nonactivated T lymphocytes
permissive to HIV-1 infection, but only in the presence of B lymphocytes
expressing CD80 (112203). Swingler et al. (2003) determined that B-cell
expression of CD80 and T-cell permissivity to HIV-1 infection are
dependent on Nef-expressing or CD40LG-stimulated macrophages secreting
the soluble forms of ICAM1 and CD23 (151445), with soluble ICAM1 being
the strongest inducer of CD80 expression. Soluble CD23-stimulated B
cells induced noncycling, i.e., KI67 antigen (176741)-negative, T cells,
whereas soluble ICAM1-stimulated B cells induced both cycling and
noncycling T cells to be permissive to HIV-1 infection. Swingler et al.
(2003) concluded that while both soluble CD23 and ICAM1 promote resting
cell infection, productive infection of cycling cells requires soluble
ICAM1. They proposed that Nef intersects the CD40 signaling pathway in
macrophages to promote the release of soluble CD23 and ICAM1, which in
turn promote interactions of B and T cells, rendering the latter, even
in a noncycling state, permissive to HIV-1 infection. Swingler et al.
(2003) noted that these results may explain in part the existence of a
resting T-cell reservoir infected with HIV-1.

Zuccarello et al. (2002) described a distinct form of familial chronic
mucocutaneous candidiasis (CANDF3; 607644) characterized by early-onset
infections by different species of Candida, restricted to the nails of
the hands and feet and associated with low serum concentration of ICAM1.
They concluded that pedigree analysis favored autosomal dominant
inheritance with incomplete penetrance, even though a few consanguineous
marriages were present.

Using confocal microscopy, Barnett et al. (2012) showed that after
immunization, Bcl6 (109565), Il21r (605383), and Prkcz (176982)
colocalized with the microtubule-organizing center in a polarized manner
to 1 side of the plane of division in mouse germinal center B cells,
generating unequal inheritance of fate-altering molecules by daughter
cells. Germinal center B cells from mice lacking Icam1 failed to divide
asymmetrically. Barnett et al. (2012) proposed that motile cells lacking
constitutive attachment can receive provisional polarity cues from the
microenvironment to generate daughter cell diversity and self-renewal.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Chen et al. (2007) described the crystal structure at 2.7-angstrom
resolution of monomeric ICAM1 domains 3 to 5, stabilized by a specific
antibody to domain 5.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Fernandez-Reyes et al. (1997) identified a mutation (K29M; 147840.0001)
in the ICAM1 gene, which they designated 'ICAM1 Kilifi,' that was
associated with susceptibility to cerebral malaria (611162) with
relative risks of 2.23 and 1.39 for homozygotes and heterozygotes,
respectively.

Because ICAM1 plays a key role in lymphocyte infiltration into the
thyroid gland and the concentration of soluble ICAM1 correlates
significantly with the clinical activity and treatment status in Graves
disease (see 275000), Kretowski et al. (2003) evaluated the frequency of
the 721G-A (G241R) and the 1405A-G (K469E) polymorphisms of the ICAM1
gene in subjects with Graves disease compared with that in healthy
controls. In a group of 235 patients with Graves disease and 211 healthy
controls, Kretowski et al. (2003) found that the 721G-A polymorphism was
associated with an earlier age of Graves disease onset (before age 40)
and that the 1405A-G polymorphism could predispose to Graves
ophthalmopathy. Kretowski et al. (2003) concluded that G241R and K469E
amino acid substitutions in the ICAM1 molecule could influence the
intensity/duration of the autoimmunity process and the infiltration of
orbital tissues.

Vischer et al. (2008) transiently transfected monkey fibroblasts with
wildtype human ICAM1 and 5 ICAM1 missense variants and observed no
differences in mRNA and protein expression levels for any construct.
However, pulse-chase experiments showed that 2 variants, K469E and
arg478 to trp (R478W), had a prolonged half-life compared with wildtype
ICAM1, whereas 2 other variants, G241R and pro352 to leu (P352L), had a
decreased half-life, implying differences in protein degradation.

P-selectin (SELP; 173610) and ICAM1 participate in inflammatory
processes by promoting adhesion of leukocytes to vascular wall
endothelium. Their soluble levels have been associated with adverse
cardiovascular events. To identify loci affecting soluble levels of
P-selectin (sP-selectin) and ICAM1 (sICAM1), Barbalic et al. (2010)
performed a genomewide association study in a sample of 4,115
(sP-selectin) and 9,813 (sICAM1) individuals of European ancestry. The
most significant SNP association for sP-selectin was within SELP (dbSNP
rs6136) and for sICAM1 levels within ICAM1 (dbSNP rs3093030). Both
sP-selection and sICAM1 were associated with ABO (110300) gene variants
(dbSNP rs579459 and dbSNP rs649129, respectively), and in both cases the
observed associations could be accounted for by the A1 allele of the ABO
blood group.

ANIMAL MODEL

To test the role of Icam1 in intact animals, Sligh et al. (1993)
disrupted the gene in murine embryonic stem cells by gene targeting.
Homozygous deficient animals developed normally, were fertile, and had a
moderate granulocytosis. Studies were consistent with complete loss of
surface expression of the protein. Deficient mice exhibited prominent
abnormalities of inflammatory responses including impaired neutrophil
emigration in response to chemical peritonitis and decreased contact
hypersensitivity to 2,4-dinitrofluorobenzene. Mutant cells provided
negligible stimulation in the mixed lymphocyte reaction, although they
proliferated normally as responder cells.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MALARIA, CEREBRAL, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
ICAM1, LYS29MET

The malarial parasite Plasmodium falciparum has acted as a potent
selective force on the human genome. The particular virulence of this
organism was thought to be due to the adherence of parasitized red blood
cells to small vessel endothelium through several receptors, including
CD36 (173510), thrombospondin (THBS1; 188060), and ICAM1, and parasite
isolates differ in their ability to bind to each. Immunohistochemical
studies implicated ICAM1 as having potential importance in the
pathogenesis of cerebral malaria, leading Fernandez-Reyes et al. (1997)
to reason that if any single receptor were involved in the development
of cerebral malaria, then in view of the high mortality of that
complication, natural selection should have produced variants with
reduced binding capacity. Fernandez-Reyes et al. (1997) amplified and
sequenced the N-terminal immunoglobulin-like domain of the ICAM1 gene
from the genomic DNA of 24 asymptomatic children in Kilifi, Kenya. The
only mutation found was an A-to-T transversion at nucleotide 179,
causing a lys29-to-met substitution (K29M), which the authors called
'ICAM1 Kilifi.' In studies of the association of the K29M polymorphism
with cerebral malaria, they found, to their surprise, that the
homozygous ICAM1 Kilifi genotype was associated with susceptibility to
cerebral malaria (611162) with a relative risk of 2.23, and
heterozygotes with a relative risk of 1.39. The frequency of the K29
allele was 0.668 and the frequency of the M29 Kilifi allele was 0.332.
Fernandez-Reyes et al. (1997) noted that, while this association
strengthened the link between ICAM1 and cerebral malaria, a mutation
that confers susceptibility is unlikely to have arisen at such high
frequency in the absence of some counteractive selective advantage.
These counterintuitive results had implications for the mechanism of
malaria pathogenesis, resistance to other infectious agents, and
transplant immunology. The Kilifi allele was not identified in 99
unrelated Caucasians or in 40 multigeneration families from the CEPH
collection. Screening of 20 Gambian samples produced a similar frequency
of the Kilifi allele to that seen in Kenya.

Bellamy et al. (1998) found no association between the ICAM1 Kilifi
variant and cerebral malaria in a case-control study of West Africans.

Hill (1999) reviewed the genetic basis of susceptibility or resistance
to malaria, including the role of the Kilifi variant of ICAM1.

Craig et al. (2000) performed functional assays using both forms (Kilifi
and a reference form) of ICAM1 as soluble Fc chimeric fusion proteins.
ICAM1-Kilifi displayed reduced avidity for LFA-1 (the major leukocyte
beta-2 integrin; 600065) compared with ICAM1-ref, and binding to soluble
fibrinogen was completely abolished with the Kilifi variant. In P.
falciparum adhesion assays, binding of the ITO4-A4u strain to
ICAM1-Kilifi was reduced compared with binding to the reference form.
The authors speculated that although homozygotes for ICAM1-Kilifi are at
increased risk for cerebral malaria, there may be a beneficial
immunomodulatory effect to reduce leukocyte-mediated tissue damage in an
environment whose population is chronically exposed to infectious
agents.

By resequencing 6 kb of ICAM1 in 416 unrelated geographically and
ethnically diverse African and non-African individuals, Gomez et al.
(2013) showed that the ICAM1 Kilifi allele and SNPs in linkage
disequilibrium with it were correlated with malaria endemicity. They
concluded that this variant may be a candidate for protection against
malaria.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Le Beau et al. (1989)
REFERENCE 1. Ballantyne, C. M.; Kozak, C. A.; O'Brien, W. E.; Beaudet, A. L.
: Assignment of the gene for intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (Icam-1)
to proximal mouse chromosome 9. Genomics 9: 547-550, 1991.

2. Barbalic, M.; Dupuis, J.; Dehghan, A.; Bis, J. C.; Hoogeveen, R.
C.; Schnabel, R. B.; Nambi, V.; Bretler, M.; Smith, N. L.; Peters,
A.; Lu, C.; Tracy, R. P.; and 20 others: Large-scale genomic studies
reveal central role of ABO in sP-selectin and sICAM-1 levels. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 1863-1872, 2010.

3. Barnett, B. E.; Ciocca, M. L.; Goenka, R.; Barnett, L. G.; Wu,
J.; Laufer, T. M.; Burkhardt, J. K.; Cancro, M. P.; Reiner, S. L.
: Asymmetric B cell division in the germinal center reaction. Science 335:
342-344, 2012.

4. Bella, J.; Kolatkar, P. R.; Marlor, C. W.; Greve, J. M.; Rossmann,
M. G.: The structure of the two amino-terminal domains of human ICAM-1
suggests how it functions as a rhinovirus receptor and as an LFA-1
integrin ligand. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 4140-4145, 1998.

5. Bellamy, R.; Kwiatkowski, D.; Hill, A. V. S.: Absence of an association
between intercellular adhesion molecule 1, complement receptor 1 and
interleukin 1 receptor antagonist gene polymorphisms and severe malaria
in a West African population. Trans. R. Soc. Trop. Med. Hyg. 92:
312-316, 1998.

6. Chen, X.; Kim, T. D.; Carman, C. V.; Mi, L.-Z.; Song, G.; Springer,
T. A.: Structural plasticity in Ig superfamily domain 4 of ICAM-1
mediates cell surface dimerization. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 15358-15363,
2007.

7. Craig, A.; Fernandez-Reyes, D.; Mesri, M.; McDowall, A.; Altieri,
D. C.; Hogg, N.; Newbold, C.: A functional analysis of a natural
variant of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1-Kilifi). Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 525-530, 2000.

8. Fernandez-Reyes, D.; Craig, A. G.; Kyes, S. A.; Peshu, N.; Snow,
R. W.; Berendt, A. R.; Marsh, K.; Newbold, C. I.: A high frequency
African coding polymorphism in the N-terminal domain of ICAM-1 predisposing
to cerebral malaria in Kenya. Hum. Molec. Genet. 6: 1357-1360, 1997.

9. Gomez, F.; Tomas, G.; Ko, W.-Y.; Ranciaro, A.; Froment. A.; Ibrahim,
M.; Lema, G.; Nyambo, T. B.; Omar, S. A.; Wambebe, C.; Hirbo, J. B.;
Rocha, J.; Tishkoff, S. A.: Patterns of nucleotide and haplotype
diversity at ICAM-1 across global human populations with varying levels
of malaria exposure. Hum. Genet. 132: 987-999, 2013.

10. Greve, J. M.; Davis, G.; Meyer, A. M.; Forte, C. P.; Yost, S.
C.; Marlor, C. W.; Kamarck, M. E.; McClelland, A.: The major human
rhinovirus receptor is ICAM-1. Cell 56: 839-847, 1989.

11. Hill, A. V. S.: The immunogenetics of resistance to malaria. Proc.
Assoc. Am. Phys. 111: 272-277, 1999.

12. Katz, F. E.; Parkar, M.; Stanley, K.; Murray, L. J.; Clark, E.
A.; Greaves, M. F.: Chromosome mapping of cell membrane antigens
expressed on activated B cells. Europ. J. Immun. 15: 103-106, 1985.

13. Kretowski, A.; Wawrusiewicz, N.; Mironczuk, K.; Mysliwiec, J.;
Kretowska, M.; Kinalska, I.: Intercellular adhesion molecule 1 gene
polymorphisms in Graves' disease. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 4945-4949,
2003.

14. Le Beau, M. M.; Ryan, D., Jr.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.: Report of
the committee on the genetic constitution of chromosomes 18 and 19. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 51: 338-357, 1989.

15. Lu, T. T.; Cyster, J. G.: Integrin-mediated long-term B cell
retention in the splenic marginal zone. Science 297: 409-412, 2002.

16. Pisella, P.-J.; Brignole, F.; Debbasch, C.; Lozato, P.-A.; Creuzot-Garcher,
C.; Bara, J.; Saiag, P.; Warnet, J.-M.; Baudouin, C.: Flow cytometric
analysis of conjunctival epithelium in ocular rosacea and keratoconjunctivitis
sicca. Ophthalmology 107: 1841-1849, 2000.

17. Prieto, J.; Takei, F.; Gendelman, R.; Christenson, B.; Biberfeld,
P.; Patarroyo, M.: MALA-2, mouse homologue of human adhesion molecule
ICAM-1 (CD54). Europ. J. Immun. 19: 1551-1557, 1989.

18. Seldin, M. F.; Saunders, A. M.; Rochelle, J. M.; Howard, T. A.
: A proximal mouse chromosome 9 linkage map that further defines linkage
groups homologous with segments of human chromosomes 11, 15, and 19. Genomics 9:
678-685, 1991.

19. Simmons, D.; Makgoba, M. W.; Seed, B.: ICAM, an adhesion ligand
of LFA-1, is homologous to the neural cell adhesion molecule NCAM. Nature 331:
624-627, 1988.

20. Sligh, J. E., Jr.; Ballantyne, C. M.; Rich, S. S.; Hawkins, H.
K.; Smith, C. W.; Bradley, A.; Beaudet, A. L.: Inflammatory and immune
responses are impaired in mice deficient in intercellular adhesion
molecule 1. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 8529-8533, 1993.

21. Swingler, S.; Brichacek, B.; Jacque, J.-M.; Ulich, C.; Zhou, J.;
Stevenson, M.: HIV-1 Nef intersects the macrophage CD40L signalling
pathway to promote resting-cell infection. Nature 424: 213-219,
2003.

22. Trask, B.; Fertitta, A.; Christensen, M.; Youngblom, J.; Bergmann,
A.; Copeland, A.; de Jong, P.; Mohrenweiser, H.; Olsen, A.; Carrano,
A.; Tynan, K.: Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping of human
chromosome 19: cytogenetic band location of 540 cosmids and 70 genes
or DNA markers. Genomics 15: 133-145, 1993.

23. Tsubota, K.; Fukagawa, K.; Fujihara, T.; Shimmura, S.; Saito,
I.; Saito, K.; Takeuchi, T.: Regulation of human leukocyte antigen
expression in human conjunctival epithelium. Invest. Ophthal. Vis.
Sci. 40: 28-34, 1999.

24. Vischer, P.; Telgmann, R.; Schmitz, B.; Hasenkamp, S.; Schmidt-Petersen,
K.; Beining, K.; Huge, A.; Paul, M.; Amarenco, P.; Cambien, F.; Brand,
E.; Brand-Hermann, S.-M.: Molecular investigation of the functional
relevance of missense variants of ICAM-1. Pharmacogenet. Genomics 18:
1017-1019, 2008.

25. Zuccarello, D.; Salpietro, D. C.; Gangemi, S.; Toscano, V.; Merlino,
M. V.; Briuglia, S.; Bisignano, G.; Mangino, M.; Mingarelli, R.; Dallapiccola,
B.: Familial chronic nail candidiasis with ICAM-1 deficiency: a new
form of chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis. J. Med. Genet. 39: 671-675,
2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/11/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/14/2012
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/1/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/7/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/21/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/14/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/13/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/19/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/9/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/11/2002
Jane Kelly - updated: 1/19/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/14/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/7/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/25/2000
Jane Kelly - updated: 8/26/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/21/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/25/1988

EDITED mgross: 10/11/2013
mgross: 2/14/2012
terry: 2/14/2012
alopez: 12/6/2011
terry: 12/1/2011
carol: 1/8/2010
mgross: 7/8/2009
terry: 7/7/2009
wwang: 6/2/2009
terry: 5/21/2009
mgross: 11/15/2007
terry: 11/14/2007
mgross: 7/5/2007
carol: 5/15/2007
alopez: 11/13/2006
wwang: 10/27/2005
carol: 3/9/2005
tkritzer: 12/29/2003
tkritzer: 12/23/2003
terry: 12/19/2003
cwells: 11/5/2003
mgross: 7/9/2003
mgross: 3/21/2003
terry: 3/20/2003
alopez: 9/11/2002
tkritzer: 9/11/2002
ckniffin: 6/5/2002
carol: 4/6/2001
cwells: 1/25/2001
terry: 1/19/2001
terry: 4/14/2000
mgross: 4/7/2000
joanna: 4/7/2000
mgross: 3/15/2000
terry: 2/25/2000
carol: 8/26/1999
carol: 6/4/1998
terry: 6/4/1998
terry: 5/21/1998
terry: 5/13/1994
carol: 12/14/1993
carol: 10/20/1993
carol: 2/11/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/20/1992

611869	TITLE *611869 RAB GTPase-BINDING EFFECTOR PROTEIN 2; RABEP2
;;RABAPTIN 5-BETA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid system, Gournier et al. (1998) identified a novel
rat gene, which they called rabaptin-5-beta, encoding a 62-kD protein
that interacts with the GTP-bound form of RAB5 (179512), a small GTPase
involved in signal transduction and mitogenesis. The deduced protein,
RABEP2, shares 42% sequence identity with rat RABEP1 (603616). Both
proteins contain coiled-coil repeats and are recruited on the endosomal
membrane by RAB5 in the presence of GTP.

GENE FUNCTION

Gournier et al. (1998) found that RABEP2 does not form heterodimers with
RABEP1 but does complex with RAB guanine nucleotide exchange factor-1
(RABGEF1; 609700). Immunodepletion with an antibody against the RABEP2
complex resulted in partial inhibition of early endosome fusion.
Gournier et al. (1998) concluded that RAB5 binds to both RABEP1 and
RABEP2 for endocytic membrane docking and fusion.

MAPPING

Scott (2008) mapped the RABEP2 gene to chromosome 16p11.2 based on an
alignment of the RABEP2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AC109460) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.2).

REFERENCE 1. Gournier, H.; Stenmark, H.; Rybin, V.; Lippe, R.; Zerial, M.:
Two distinct effectors of the small GTPase Rab5 cooperate in endocytic
membrane fusion. EMBO J. 17: 1930-1940, 1998.

2. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/14/2008.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 2/29/2008

EDITED carol: 02/29/2008

300394	TITLE *300394 TAFAZZIN; TAZ
;;G4.5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cardiolipin is a complex glycerophospholipid with 4 acyl groups that
localizes to the mitochondrial inner membrane and has a role in
mitochondrial structure and function. TAZ is a mitochondrial
transacylase that catalyzes remodeling of immature cardiolipin to its
mature composition containing a predominance of tetralinoleoyl moieties
(Acehan et al., 2011).

CLONING

Bione et al. (1996) identified a gene that is located in the gene-rich
region Xq28 where Barth syndrome (302060) maps. The gene, which they
termed G4.5, was expressed at high levels in cardiac and skeletal
muscle. Different mRNAs were produced by alternative splicing of the
primary G4.5 transcript, encoding proteins that differed at their N
terminus and in the central region. These proteins, which Bione et al.
(1996) termed tafazzins, have no known similarities to other proteins.
The longest encoded protein contains 292 amino acids. Two regions of the
proteins may be functionally significant. The highly hydrophobic stretch
of 30 residues at the N terminus may serve as a membrane anchor. The
shortest forms of tafazzins (lacking the first 2 exons) do not have any
hydrophobic sequence at the N terminus and may be soluble cytoplasmic
proteins. The second variable region is the central portion between
amino acids 124 and 195. Removal of exons 5, 6, and 7 would
progressively shorten a hydrophilic domain of the protein, which may
serve as an exposed loop interacting with other proteins. Accordingly,
the 2 most abundant forms differ in the sequence encoded in exon 5,
which is also the longest and most hydrophilic. RT-PCR revealed
tissue-specific expression of several TAZ variants in leukocytes,
fibroblasts, heart, and skeletal muscle.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bione et al. (1996) determined that the TAZ gene contains 11 exons and
that its 5-prime end maps to a CpG island.

MAPPING

By positional cloning, Bione et al. (1996) identified the TAZ gene
within the critical Barth syndrome region on Xq28.

GENE FUNCTION

Claypool et al. (2006) showed that yeast Taz localized to both the inner
and outer mitochondrial membranes via an 18-amino acid integral
interfacial membrane anchor that integrated into, but not through, the
lipid bilayers. Several residues within this domain are either conserved
or identical in mouse and human TAZ. Mutation of conserved residues
within the interfacial membrane anchor of yeast Taz altered its membrane
association by either mistargeting the protein to the mitochondrial
matrix or altering its assembly within the mitochondrial membrane.

Sessions et al. (2009) identified insect host factors required for
dengue virus (see 614371) propagation by carrying out a genomewide RNA
interference screen in D. melanogaster cells using a well established
22,632 double-stranded RNA library. This screen identified 116 candidate
dengue virus host factors (DVHFs). Although some were previously
associated with flaviviruses, most of the DVHFs were newly implicated in
dengue virus propagation. The dipteran DVHFs had 82 readily recognizable
human homologs and, using a targeted short interfering RNA screen, they
showed that 42 of these are human DVHFs. These include NPR2 (108961),
SEC61B (609214), TMEM214, TAZ, EXDL2, and CNOT2 (604909). Sessions et
al. (2009) concluded that this overlap indicates notable conservation of
required factors between dipteran and human hosts.

Houtkooper et al. (2009) provided an overview of current knowledge on
the role of tafazzin in cardiolipin metabolism. In addition, they
performed quantitative PCR analysis of different tafazzin mRNA splice
variants in human tissues and correlated this with the tissue
cardiolipin profile. The data suggested that tafazzin lacking exon 5
most likely represents the active tafazzin variant, but the involvement
of other variants in cardiolipin remodeling was not excluded.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In patients with Barth syndrome (302060), Bione et al. (1996) identified
mutations in the tafazzin gene which introduced stop codons in the open
reading frame, aborting translation of most of the putative proteins.
Using mutation analysis on DNA samples from members of 4 families with
Barth syndrome, 2 large families used by Ades et al. (1993) and Bolhuis
et al. (1991) for linkage mapping of the gene and 2 smaller families
with the diagnostic features of the disease, Bione et al. (1996) found
unique mutations in all patients. In 1 case the mutation was in exon 7
(300394.0004), one of the alternative exons. The mutation was predicted
to cause truncation of most of the tafazzin proteins, but some minor
forms lacking exon 7 could still be synthesized. The other 3 mutations
(300394.0001, 300394.0002, and 300394.0003) were in the second exon and
in the 3-prime splice junction of intron 2.

D'Adamo et al. (1997) analyzed the G4.5 gene in 8 additional probands
with Barth syndrome and identified mutations in 6 of them (see, e.g.,
300394.0006). In addition, in affected individuals from 3 families who
had been diagnosed with X-linked infantile cardiomyopathy and/or
endocardial fibroelastosis, D'Adamo et al. (1997) identified a 1-bp
deletion and a missense mutation in the G4.5 gene (300394.0005 and
300394.0014, respectively). D'Adamo et al. (1997) noted that the
clinical data on these patients was limited and whether other features
of Barth syndrome were present could not be established; they suggested
that mutations in the G4.5 gene should be considered as a possible cause
of infantile CMD affecting males, even in the absence of typical Barth
syndrome signs.

Bleyl et al. (1997) screened the G4.5 gene for mutations in a family
with noncompaction of left ventricular myocardium (LVNCX, see 302060) by
SSCP and direct sequencing and found a novel glycine-to-arginine
substitution at position 197 of the tafazzin gene (300394.0006).

Johnston et al. (1997) evaluated 14 Barth syndrome pedigrees and found
mutations in the G4.5 gene in all, 5 missense mutations (see, e.g.,
300394.0006), 4 splice site mutations (see, e.g., 300394.0007), 3
deletions, 1 insertion, and 1 nonsense mutation. Nine of the 14
mutations were predicted to disrupt significantly the protein products
of G4.5. The occurrence of missense mutations in exons 3 and 8 suggested
that these exons encode essential portions of the G4.5 proteins.

In affected individuals and obligate carriers from 5 unrelated families
with Barth syndrome that presented to a hospital in Bristol, England,
over a 7-year period, Cantlay et al. (1999) identified mutations in the
G4.5 gene (see, e.g., 300394.0006). The authors suggested that Barth
syndrome may be more common than previously believed, and concluded that
all young male children with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy should be
investigated for underlying Barth syndrome.

Chen et al. (2002) analyzed the G4.5 gene in 27 Japanese patients with
left ventricular noncompaction, including 14 familial cases from 10
families and 13 sporadic cases, and identified a splice site mutation in
1 family (300394.0013). Review of the G4.5 mutations identified to date
in 38 reported cases of Barth syndrome and other cardiomyopathies
revealed no correlation between location or type of mutation and either
cardiac phenotype or disease severity.

ANIMAL MODEL

Xu et al. (2006) generated homozygous Drosophila mutants that were
unable to express full-length tafazzin and observed an 80% reduction of
cardiolipin with diversification of its molecular composition, similar
to the changes seen in Barth syndrome patients. Other phospholipids were
not affected. Flies with the tafazzin mutation showed reduced locomotor
activity, and their indirect flight muscles displayed frequent
mitochondrial abnormalities, mostly in the cristae membranes. Xu et al.
(2006) concluded that a lack of full-length tafazzin is responsible for
cardiolipin deficiency, which is integral to the disease mechanism and
leads to mitochondrial myopathy.

Using inducible short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs), Acehan et al. (2011)
targeted Taz knockdown in mice beginning in early embryos. Taz knockdown
induced a dramatic decrease in tetralinoleoyl cardiolipin content, with
a concomitant shift toward more saturated cardiolipin species and
accumulation of monolysocardiolipins. Ultrastructural abnormalities
became evident in skeletal muscle by 2 months of age and in cardiac
muscle by 8 months of age. No abnormalities were observed in other
tissues. Mitochondrial abnormalities included disruption of
mitochondrial architecture with proliferation, vacuolization, and signs
of mitophagy. Affected muscle also showed myofibrillar disarray and
dilation of mitochondrion- and endoplasmic reticulum-associated
vesicles. Taz knockdown led to impaired cardiac function, with dilation
and loss of muscle mass in left ventricle and reduced fractional
shortening and ejection fraction. Acehan et al. (2011) concluded that
continuous cardiolipin deficiency has a progressive and cumulative
effect on mitochondrial structures in sarcomeric tissues.

Independently, Soustek et al. (2011) knocked down Taz expression in mice
using inducible shRNAs and reported findings similar to those of Acehan
et al. (2011). Soustek et al. (2011) found reduced isometric contractile
strength in Taz-knockdown soleus muscle at 2 months of age.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BARTH SYNDROME
TAZ, IVS2, G-A, -1

In patient GW with Barth syndrome (302060), Bione et al. (1996)
demonstrated a G-to-A transition at position -1 at the 3-prime end of
intron 2 of the Barth syndrome gene (nucleotide position 527-1 of their
cDNA). As a G is the base immediately 3-prime to the mutation (in exon
3), the AG splice site was reconstituted, with a 1-bp shift.
Consequently, RT-PCR analysis showed a normal-sized band. Direct
sequencing of the gel-purified band, however, demonstrated a 1-base
deletion in cDNA, which introduced a stop codon 3 residues after the
splice junction. See also 302060.0003.

.0002
BARTH SYNDROME
TAZ, TYR51TER

In the family with Barth syndrome (302060) first reported by Barth et
al. (1983), Bolhuis et al. (1991) demonstrated linkage to Xq28. In
affected members of the family, Bione et al. (1996) identified a C-to-G
transversion at nucleotide position 441 of their cDNA, resulting in a
tyr51-to-ter (Y51X) substitution. The mutation was located in the second
exon. Barth et al. (2004) provided an update on the pedigree.

.0003
BARTH SYNDROME
TAZ, IVS2, G-C, -1

In patient K with Barth syndrome (302060), Bione et al. (1996)
demonstrated a G-to-C transversion in the last nucleotide of intron 2
(cDNA nucleotide 527-1). Thus, this mutation has, as in patient GW
(302060.0001), affected the 3-prime splice signal.

.0004
BARTH SYNDROME
TAZ, 1-BP INS

In patient OAT with Barth syndrome (302060), previously reported by Ades
et al. (1993), Bione et al. (1996) identified a 1-bp insertion in exon
7, after cDNA nucleotide 868, introducing a frameshift and stop codon
after 201 amino acids.

.0005
BARTH SYNDROME
TAZ, 1-BP DEL

In affected members of a large Australian family in which males died in
early infancy from congenital dilated cardiomyopathy (302060),
originally reported by Gedeon et al. (1995), D'Adamo et al. (1997)
identified a 1-bp deletion in exon 8 of the G4.5 gene, causing a
frameshift and resulting in a stop codon after 18 nucleotides. The
mutation caused knockout of all the putative tafazzins. The severe
clinical manifestations of the disorder (described in 6 affected males
and in 8 males suspected of being affected) could thus be related to the
severity of the mutation.

.0006
BARTH SYNDROME
TAZ, GLY197ARG

In a Utah family, Bleyl et al. (1997) observed 6 males with neonatal
onset of left ventricular failure and arrhythmias associated with the
pathognomonic echocardiographic findings of isolated left ventricular
noncompaction (LVNC). Neutropenia was seen in 2 patients, and another
patient had muscle weakness. Genetic linkage analysis localized the
causative gene to Xq28. Bleyl et al. (1997) screened the G4.5 gene with
SSCP and direct sequencing revealed a G-A transition in exon 8,
resulting in a gly197-to-arg (G197R) substitution at a highly conserved
residue. The mutation segregated with LVNC in the family and was not
found in 300 unrelated females.

In a male infant who died of Barth syndrome (BTHS; 302060) at 14 months
of age, D'Adamo et al. (1997) identified the G197R mutation in the G4.5
gene. The patient exhibited dilated cardiomyopathy, neutropenia, and
3-methylglutaconic aciduria.

In a boy with Barth syndrome, previously studied at 6.5 years of age by
Christodoulou et al. (1994), Johnston et al. (1997) identified the
877G-A transition exon 8 of the G4.5 gene, resulting in the G197R
substitution. The patient presented at 3 months of age with congestive
heart failure, and had recurrent episodes of neutropenia. At 6.5 years
of age, his height, weight, and head circumference were all below the
third centile, and he had a myopathic facial appearance and a nasal
quality to his speech. Echocardiography showed moderate cardiac
enlargement with left ventricular dilation but no outflow obstruction.
Muscle bulk, power, and tone were decreased and he had a waddling gait.

In 2 families with Barth syndrome, Cantlay et al. (1999) identified the
G197R mutation in the G4.5 gene. One family presented a history of 5
boys over 2 generations who died from cardiomyopathy between 4 to 6
months of age. The mutation was detected in the proband's unaffected
sister, mother, and a maternal aunt. In the other family, the proband
presented at 6 months of age with dilated cardiomyopathy and was found
to have failure to thrive, skeletal myopathy, intermittent neutropenia
and elevated urinary 3-methylglutaconic acid. He underwent cardiac
transplantation at 11 months of age, and died at age 7 years of T-cell
non-Hodgkin lymphoma. His mother and maternal grandmother also carried
the mutation. Steward et al. (2010) studied a distant branch of the
latter family, in which a known carrier of the G197R mutation gave birth
to a male infant who died at 1 week of age due to cardiac decompensation
triggered by ventricular arrhythmias. Disease expression in this family
was variable: a cousin with BTHS was well until he fell behind on motor
milestones at 1 year of age, developed feeding problems and lethargy at
2.5 years, was diagnosed with CMD at 3.5 years, and required cardiac
transplantation several months later. Another cousin was only diagnosed
with BTHS after the disease was identified in his younger brother, who
developed CMD at 3 months of age, without neutropenia; when diagnosed at
3.5 years of age, the older brother's only sign was proximal myopathy.

In 2 brothers with Barth syndrome and their affected cousin, and another
unrelated BTHS patient, Hastings et al. (2009) identified the G197R
mutation in the TAZ gene. The 4 patients exhibited a characteristic
facial appearance that was most evident in infancy and included a tall
and broad forehead, round face with prominent chin and full cheeks,
large ears, and deep-set eyes.

.0007
BARTH SYNDROME
TAZ, IVS1, G-C, +5

In the proband from pedigree 2 of Kelley et al. (1991) with Barth
syndrome (302060), Johnston et al. (1997) demonstrated a G-to-C
transversion at nucleotide 5 in intron 1 of the G4.5 gene. The mutation
disrupted proper processing of the transcript. The proband presented
with congestive heart failure at 4 months of age, and was found to have
biventricular dilated hypertrophy. Electromyography showed changes
consistent with myopathy, and metabolic studies showed mild lactic
acidosis and increased urinary levels of lactate, fumarate,
3-methylglutarate, and 3-methylglutaconate. At 2 years of age, he had a
low absolute neutrophil count, but had no unusual bacterial infections.
Cognitive development was normal, whereas growth was below the third
percentile, and proximal and distal muscle weakness persisted. The
proband had 2 maternal uncles who had died of 'massive cardiac
enlargement' at 8 months and 11 months of age, respectively, and a third
uncle had hypotonia, weakness, exercise intolerance, and impaired growth
during childhood and early adolescence.

.0008
BARTH SYNDROME
TAZ, IVS3, G-A, +110

Sakamoto et al. (2001) found an unusual intronic mutation of the TAZ
gene in a Japanese patient with Barth syndrome (302060). The patient's
development was delayed and at the age of 4 years cardiomyopathy was
diagnosed. At age 9 years, his neutrophil count was abnormally low.
Electrocardiographic changes consisted of ST-T wave depressions.
Increased urinary excretion of 3-methylglutaconic acid, 3-methylglutaric
acid, and ethylhydracrylic acid was found. Death occurred suddenly at
the age of 10 years. RT-PCR showed aberrant splicing and elongation of
exon 3 because of insertion of 106 bases between exons 3 and 4. Genomic
DNA showed an intronic mutation 4 bases downstream from the new cleavage
site. The mutation, IVS3+110G-A, created a novel 5-prime splice site
that showed GC but not GT, and the additional splice site was used
preferentially over the upstream authentic splice site.

.0009
BARTH SYNDROME
TAZ, CYS118ARG

In a 5-month-old male infant with ventricular noncompaction associated
with a dilated, mildly hypertrophic heart, with poor systolic function
on echocardiogram and clinical heart failure, who also had neutropenia
and 3-methylglutaconic aciduria (302060), Ichida et al. (2001)
identified a 352T-C transition in the TAZ gene, resulting in a
cys118-to-arg (C118R) substitution. The unaffected mother was
heterozygous for the same mutation.

.0010
BARTH SYNDROME
TAZ, IVS1, A-G, -2

Ichida et al. (2001) identified a splice acceptor site mutation in exon
2 of the TAZ gene (398-2A-G) resulting in phenotypes ranging from
classic Barth syndrome (302060) to fatal infantile dilated
cardiomyopathy to late-onset symptomatic and asymptomatic dilated
cardiomyopathy. Six males in 5 separate sibships related as first
cousins and connected through carrier females were affected in this
family.

.0011
BARTH SYNDROME
TAZ, ARG94SER

In a Japanese BTHS (302060) patient with cardiomyopathy associated with
abnormal mitochondria, cyclic neutropenia, and 3-methylglutaconic
aciduria, Sakamoto et al. (2002) identified a novel missense mutation,
arg94 to ser (R94S), in the TAZ gene.

.0012
BARTH SYNDROME
TAZ, 4-BP DEL, AGTG

In a 12-year-old boy with Barth syndrome (302060), Marziliano et al.
(2007) identified a 4-bp deletion in exon 8 of the TAZ gene inherited
from his unaffected mother. The boy had left ventricular noncompaction
and dilated cardiomyopathy, which was detected at 3 months, skeletal
myopathy, recurrent oral aphthous ulcers, and cyclic neutropenia. Left
ventricular function progressively improved since age 5 years and became
subclinical and normal; he presented at age 11 with recurrent ulcers and
signs of myopathy. A peripheral blood sample from the patient showed TAZ
expression that was not significantly lower compared to controls, but
myocardial TAZ expression in an endomyocardial biopsy performed on the
proband at 6 months of age was significantly lower compared to
age-matched controls. TAZ expression declined with age in controls as
well, suggesting that tafazzin is essential during fetal and early
postnatal life. The proband also carried a heterozygous mutation in the
LDB3 gene (605906), which is associated with left ventricular
noncompaction. The patient's father and brother also carried the LDB3
mutation and had evidence of left ventricular trabeculation without
dysfunction. The significance of the LDB3 mutation was unclear.

.0013
BARTH SYNDROME
TAZ, IVS8AS, G-C, -1

In a large Japanese family with a history of unexplained male infant
deaths over 4 generations, in which the proband and a distant male
relative presented at 2 months and 3 months of age, respectively, with
heart failure and left ventricular noncompaction (302060), Chen et al.
(2002) identified a -1G-C transversion in IVS8 of the TAZ gene. RT-PCR
analysis of RNA from a heterozygous carrier confirmed that the mutation
abolishes splicing at the intron 8 splice acceptor sequence, resulting
in skipping of exon 9. The mutation was not found in 100 Japanese or 100
Caucasian controls.

.0014
BARTH SYNDROME
TAZ, GLY240ARG

In 2 unrelated families in which multiple males had died in infancy with
dilated cardiomyopathy (302060), D'Adamo et al. (1997) identified a
1006G-A transition in exon 10 of the TAZ gene, resulting in a
gly240-to-arg (G240R) substitution. In 1 of the families, which had
originally been reported by Lindenbaum et al. (1973) as having
endocardial fibroelastosis, the G240R mutation was detected in 3
obligate carriers. In the other family, in which 3 affected males had
died of cardiac failure in infancy and were diagnosed with endocardial
fibroelastosis at autopsy, the mutation was detected in all affected
individuals and in the proband's mother. The mutation was not found in
100 normal chromosomes.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Barth et al. (1981)
REFERENCE 1. Acehan, D.; Vaz, F.; Houtkooper, R. H.; James, J.; Moore, V.; Tokunaga,
C.; Kulik, W.; Wansapura, J.; Toth, M. J.; Strauss, A.; Khuchua, Z.
: Cardiac and skeletal muscle defects in a mouse model of human Barth
syndrome. J. Biol. Chem. 286: 899-908, 2011.

2. Ades, L. C.; Gedeon, A. K.; Wilson, M. J.; Latham, M.; Partington,
M. W.; Mulley, J. C.; Nelson, J.; Lui, K.; Sillence, D. O.: Barth
syndrome: clinical features and confirmation of gene localisation
to distal Xq28. Am. J. Med. Genet. 45: 327-334, 1993.

3. Barth, P. G.; Scholte, J. A.; Berden, J. A.; Van der Klei-Van Moorsel,
J. M.; Luyt-Houwen, I. E. M.; Van't Veer-Korthof, E. T.; Van der Harten,
J. J.; Sobotka-Plojhar, M. A.: An X-linked mitochondrial disease
affecting cardiac muscle, skeletal muscle and neutrophil leucocytes. J.
Neurol. Sci. 62: 327-355, 1983.

4. Barth, P. G.; Valianpour, F.; Bowen, V. M.; Lam, J.; Duran, M.;
Vaz, F. M.; Wanders, R. J. A.: X-linked cardioskeletal myopathy and
neutropenia (Barth syndrome): an update. Am. J. Med. Genet. 126A:
349-354, 2004.

5. Barth, P. G.; Van't Veer-Korthof, E. T.; Van Delden, L.; Van Dam,
K.; Van der Harten, J. J.; Kuipers, J. R. G.: An X-linked mitochondrial
disease affecting cardiac muscle, skeletal muscle and neutrophil leukocytes.In:
Busch, H. F. M.; Jennekens, F. G. I.; Schotte, H. R.: Mitochondria
and Muscular Diseases.  Beetsterzwaag, The Netherlands: Mefar (pub.)
1981. Pp. 161-164.

6. Bione, S.; D'Adamo, P.; Maestrini, E.; Gedeon, A. K.; Bolhuis,
P. A.; Toniolo, D.: A novel X-linked gene, G4.5.(sic) is responsible
for Barth syndrome. Nature Genet. 12: 385-389, 1996.

7. Bleyl, S. B.; Mumford, B. R.; Brown-Harrison, M.-C.; Pagotto, L.
T.; Carey, J. C.; Pysher, T. J.; Ward, K.; Chin, T. K.: Xq28-linked
noncompaction of the left ventricular myocardium: prenatal diagnosis
and pathologic analysis of affected individuals. Am. J. Med. Genet. 72:
257-265, 1997.

8. Bleyl, S. B.; Mumford, B. R.; Thompson, V.; Carey, J. C.; Pysher,
T. J.; Chin, T. K.; Ward, K.: Neonatal, lethal noncompaction of the
left ventricular myocardium is allelic with Barth syndrome. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 61: 868-872, 1997.

9. Bolhuis, P. A.; Hensels, G. W.; Hulsebos, T. J. M.; Baas, F.; Barth,
P. G.: Mapping of the locus for X-linked cardioskeletal myopathy
with neutropenia and abnormal mitochondria (Barth syndrome) to Xq28. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 48: 481-485, 1991.

10. Cantlay, A. M.; Shokrollabi, K.; Allen, J. T.; Lunt, P. W.; Newbury-Ecob,
R. A.; Steward, C. G.: Genetic analysis of the G4.5 gene in families
with suspected Barth syndrome. J. Pediat. 135: 311-315, 1999. Note:
Erratum: J. Pediat. 136: 136 only, 2000.

11. Chen, R.; Tsuji, T.; Ichida, F.; Bowles, K. R.; Yu, X.; Watanabe,
S.; Hirono, K.; Tsubata, S.; Hamamichi, Y.; Ohta, J.; Imai, Y.; Bowles,
N. E.; Miyawaki, T.; Towbin, J. A.; Noncompaction Study Collaborators
: Mutation analysis of the G4.5 gene in patients with isolated left
ventricular noncompaction. Molec. Genet. Metab. 77: 319-325, 2002.

12. Christodoulou, J.; McInnes, R. R.; Jay, V.; Wilson, G.; Becker,
L. E.; Lehotay, D. C.; Platt, B.-A.; Bridge, P. J.; Robinson, B. H.;
Clarke, J. T.: Barth syndrome: clinical observations and genetic
linkage studies. Am. J. Med. Genet. 50: 255-264, 1994.

13. Claypool, S. M.; McCaffery, J. M.; Koehler, C. M.: Mitochondrial
mislocalization and altered assembly of a cluster of Barth syndrome
mutant tafazzins. J. Cell Biol. 174: 379-390, 2006.

14. D'Adamo, P.; Fassone, L.; Gedeon, A.; Janssen, E. A. M.; Bione,
S.; Bolhuis, P. A.; Barth, P. G.; Wilson, M.; Haan, E.; Orstavik,
K. H.; Patton, M. A.; Green, A. J.; Zammarchi, E.; Donati, M. A.;
Toniolo, D.: The X-linked gene G4.5 is responsible for different
infantile dilated cardiomyopathies. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61: 862-867,
1997.

15. Gedeon, A. K.; Wilson, M. J.; Colley, A. C.; Sillence, D. O.;
Mulley, J. C.: X linked fatal infantile cardiomyopathy maps to Xq28
and is possibly allelic to Barth syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 32: 383-388,
1995.

16. Hastings, R.; Steward, C.; Tsai-Goodman, B.; Newbury-Ecob, R.
: Dysmorphology of Barth syndrome. Clin. Dysmorph. 18: 185-187,
2009.

17. Houtkooper, R. H.; Turkenburg, M.; Poll-The, B. T.; Karall, D.;
Perez-Cerda, C.; Morrone, A.; Malvagia, S.; Wanders, R. J.; Kulik,
W.; Vaz, F. M.: The enigmatic role of tafazzin in cardiolipin metabolism. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1788: 2003-2014, 2009.

18. Ichida, F.; Tsubata, S.; Bowles, K. R.; Haneda, N.; Uese, K.;
Miyawaki, T.; Dreyer, W. J.; Messina, J.; Li, H.; Bowles, N. E.; Towbin,
J. A.: Novel gene mutations in patients with left ventricular noncompaction
or Barth syndrome. Circulation 103: 1256-1263, 2001.

19. Johnston, J.; Kelley, R. I.; Feigenbaum, A.; Cox, G. F.; Iyer,
G. S.; Funanage, V. L.; Proujansky, R.: Mutation characterization
and genotype-phenotype correlation in Barth syndrome. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 61: 1053-1058, 1997.

20. Kelley, R. I.; Cheatham, J. P.; Clark, B. J.; Nigro, M. A.; Powell,
B. R.; Sherwood, G. W.; Sladky, J. T.; Swisher, W. P.: X-linked dilated
cardiomyopathy with neutropenia, growth retardation, and 3-methylglutaconic
aciduria. J. Pediat. 119: 738-747, 1991.

21. Lindenbaum, R. H.; Andrews, P. S.; Khan, A. S. S. I.: Two cases
of endocardial fibroelastosis--possible X-linked determination. Brit.
Heart J. 35: 38-39, 1973.

22. Marziliano, N.; Mannarino, S.; Nespoli, L.; Diegoli, M.; Pasotti,
M.; Malattia, C.; Grasso, M.; Pilotto, A.; Porcu, E.; Raisaro, A.;
Raineri, C.; Dore, R.; Maggio, P. P.; Brega, A.; Arbustini, E.: Barth
syndrome associated with compound hemizygosity and heterozygosity
of the TAZ and LDB3 genes. Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A: 907-915, 2007.

23. Sakamoto, O.; Kitoh, T.; Ohura, T.; Ohya, N.; Iinuma, K.: Novel
missense mutation (R94S) in the TAZ (G4.5) gene in a Japanese patient
with Barth syndrome. J. Hum. Genet. 47: 229-231, 2002.

24. Sakamoto, O.; Ohura, T.; Katsushima, Y.; Fujiwara, I.; Ogawa,
E.; Miyabayashi, S.; Iinuma, K.: A novel intronic mutation of the
TAZ (G4.5) gene in a patient with Barth syndrome: creation of a 5-prime
splice donor site with variant GC consensus and elongation of the
upstream exon. Hum. Genet. 109: 559-563, 2001.

25. Sessions, O. M.; Barrows, N. J.; Souza-Neto, J. A.; Robinson,
T. J.; Hershey, C. L.; Rodgers, M. A.; Ramirez, J. L.; Dimopoulos,
G.; Yang, P. L.; Pearson, J. L.; Garcia-Blanco, M. A.: Discovery
of insect and human dengue virus host factors. Nature 458: 1047-1050,
2009.

26. Soustek, M. S.; Falk, D. J.; Mah, C. S.; Toth, M. J.; Schlame,
M.; Lewin, A. S.; Byrne, B. J.: Characterization of a transgenic
short hairpin RNA-induced murine model of tafazzin deficiency. Hum.
Gene Therapy 22: 865-871, 2011.

27. Steward, C. G.; Newbury-Ecob, R. A.; Hastings, R.; Smithson, S.
F.; Tsai-Goodman, B.; Quarrell, O. W.; Kulik, W.; Wanders, R.; Pennock,
M.; Williams, M.; Cresswell, J. L.; Gonzalez, I. L.; Brennan, P.:
Barth syndrome: an X-linked cause of fetal cardiomyopathy and stillbirth. Prenat.
Diag. 30: 970-976, 2010.

28. Xu, Y.; Condell, M.; Plesken, H.; Edelman-Novemsky, I.; Ma, J.;
Ren, M.; Schlame, M.: A Drosophila model of Barth syndrome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 11584-11588, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/17/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/23/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/7/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/14/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/11/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/29/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/17/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/11/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/11/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/12/2002

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 5/9/2002

EDITED alopez: 05/24/2013
terry: 7/30/2012
terry: 7/18/2012
carol: 7/17/2012
mgross: 6/6/2012
terry: 2/23/2012
mgross: 12/1/2011
carol: 6/7/2010
terry: 5/11/2010
alopez: 5/14/2009
terry: 5/11/2009
wwang: 5/8/2009
terry: 4/29/2009
wwang: 7/19/2007
ckniffin: 7/17/2007
wwang: 10/11/2006
terry: 4/21/2005
tkritzer: 6/2/2004
terry: 5/11/2004
cwells: 6/19/2002
terry: 6/12/2002
carol: 5/10/2002
ckniffin: 5/10/2002

603273	TITLE *603273 TUMOR PROTEIN p63; TP63
;;TUMOR PROTEIN p73-LIKE; TP73L;;
p53-RELATED PROTEIN p63; p63;;
KET
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Yang et al. (1998) described the cloning of tumor protein p63, which
shows strong homology to the tumor suppressor p53 (191170) and the
p53-related protein p73 (601990). p63 was detected in a variety of human
and mouse tissues, including proliferating basal cells of epithelial
layers in the epidermis, cervix, urothelium, and prostate. Unlike p53,
the p63 gene encodes multiple isotypes with remarkably divergent
abilities to transactivate p53 reporter genes and induce apoptosis. The
predominant p63 isoforms in many epithelial tissues lack an acidic N
terminus corresponding to the transactivation domain of p53. The
full-length p63 protein contains 448 amino acids. Isoforms of p63 are
due to alternative promoters in exons 1 or 3 and alternative splicing of
exons at the 3-prime end. These truncated p63 variants can act as
dominant-negative agents toward transactivation by p53 and p63. Yang et
al. (1998) suggested the possibility of physiologic interactions among
members of the p53 family.

Augustin et al. (1998) also cloned a cDNA, which they termed KET, that
is related to the tumor suppressor p53. They stated that the 4,846-bp
KET cDNA encodes a protein of 680 amino acids that shares 98% identity
with the rat homolog. The remarkable degree of conservation lent support
to the notion that KET proteins have important basic functions in
development and differentiation.

Di Iorio et al. (2005) stated that the p63 gene generates 6 isoforms.
The transactivating isoforms are generated by the activity of an
upstream promoter, and the N-terminally truncated (delta-N) isoforms,
which lack the transactivation domain, are produced from a downstream
intronic promoter. For both transcripts, alternative splicing gives rise
to 3 different C termini, designated alpha, beta, and gamma.

Deutsch et al. (2011) stated that full-length TAp63-alpha contains an
N-terminal transactivation domain, followed by a DNA-binding domain, an
oligomerization domain, a sterile-alpha motif (SAM) domain, and a
C-terminal transactivation inhibitory (TI) domain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yang et al. (1998) determined that the TP63 gene contains 15 exons.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Yang et al. (1998) localized the
human TP63 gene to chromosome 3q27-q29. Using linkage analysis, they
mapped the mouse gene to chromosome 16 in a region known to be syntenic
with human 3q27-q29.

By radiation hybrid analysis, Augustin et al. (1998) mapped the TP63
gene to human chromosome 3q27. KET (TP63) is located between the
somatostatin gene (SST; 182450) proximally and the apolipoprotein D gene
(APOD; 107740) distally. By means of an interspecific backcross panel,
Augustin et al. (1998) mapped the murine homolog, Ket, to chromosome 16
in a region that is deleted in early stages of tumorigenesis of mouse
islet cell carcinomas and contains the Loh2 gene, a putative suppressor
of angiogenesis. Augustin et al. (1998) inferred from mapping data that
KET may act as a tumor suppressor and should be considered a candidate
for Loh2.

GENE FUNCTION

Hibi et al. (2000) stated that p53 (191170) homologs known variously as
p40, p51, p63, and p73L (Trink et al., 1998, Yang et al., 1998, Osada et
al., 1998, Senoo et al., 1998) are isoforms of the same gene, which Hibi
et al. (2000) referred to as AIS for 'amplified in squamous cell
carcinoma.' The main difference between the various transcripts is the
presence or absence of the N-terminal transcriptional activation domain;
p40, delta-Np63, and p73L lack this domain. Though no evidence of a
tumor suppressor function was found, Hibi et al. (2000) observed
overexpression of this gene in head and neck cancer cell lines and
primary lung cancers associated with a low increase of its copy number.
Amplification of the AIS locus was accompanied by RNA and protein
overexpression of a variant p68(AIS) lacking the terminal
transactivation domain. Protein overexpression in primary lung tumors
was limited to squamous cell carcinoma and tumors known to harbor a high
frequency of p53 mutations. Overexpression of p40(AIS) in Rat 1a cells
led to an increase in soft agar growth and tumor size in mice. Results
were interpreted as indicating that AIS transcripts lacking the
N-terminal transcriptional activation domain play an oncogenic rather
than a suppressive role in certain cancers.

Flores et al. (2002) explored the role of p63 and p73 in DNA
damage-induced apoptosis. Mouse embryo fibroblasts deficient for 1 or a
combination of these p53 family members were sensitized to undergo
apoptosis through the expression of the adenovirus E1A oncogene. While
using the E1A system facilitated the performance of biochemical
analyses, the authors also examined the functions of p63 and p73 using
an in vivo system in which apoptosis had been shown to be dependent on
p53. Using both systems, Flores et al. (2002) demonstrated that the
combined loss of p63 and p73 results in the failure of cells containing
functional p53 to undergo apoptosis in response to DNA damage.

Benard et al. (2003) suggested that the 2 homologs of TP53, TP73 and
TP63, must not have a typical tumor suppressor gene role in human
cancers, given the lack of demonstrated mutations in either of these 2
genes. Nevertheless, TP73 and TP63 seem strongly involved in malignancy
acquisition and maintenance.

Using DNA microarray analysis with transfected human SAOS2 osteosarcoma
cells, Wu et al. (2003) found that both delta-Np63-alpha and TAp63-alpha
could activate gene transcription. A comparison of gene profiles
revealed that these p63 isoforms influenced a wide variety of partly
overlapping targets involved in cell cycle control, stress, and signal
transduction. Delta-Np63-alpha and TAp63-alpha often influenced
expression of specific genes in an opposite manner.

Di Iorio et al. (2005) found that, depending on the conditions, limbal
and corneal keratinocytes may contain all 3 delta-N isoforms of p63. In
the uninjured surface of the eye, delta-N p63-alpha was present in the
limbus but was absent from the corneal epithelium. Delta-N p63-beta and
delta-N p63-gamma appeared upon wounding, and their expression
correlated with limbal cell migration and corneal regeneration and
differentiation. Di Iorio et al. (2005) concluded that the alpha isoform
is necessary for maintenance of the proliferative potential of limbal
stem cells and their ability to migrate over the cornea. The beta and
gamma isoforms, being suprabasal and virtually absent from the resting
limbus, likely play a role in epithelial differentiation during corneal
regeneration.

Suh et al. (2006) showed that p63, and specifically the TAp63 isoform,
is constitutively expressed in female germ cells during meiotic arrest
and is essential in a process of DNA damage-induced oocyte death not
involving p53. They also showed that DNA damage induced both the
phosphorylation of p63 and its binding to p53 cognate DNA sites and that
these events are linked to oocyte death. Suh et al. (2006) concluded
that their data supported a model whereby p63 is the primordial member
of the p53 family and acts in a conserved process of monitoring the
integrity of the female germline, whereas the functions of p53 are
restricted to vertebrate somatic cells for tumor suppression.

Yi et al. (2008) showed that miR203 (611899) is induced in the skin
concomitantly with stratification and differentiation. By altering
miR203's spatiotemporal expression in vivo, they showed that miR203
promotes epidermal differentiation by restricting proliferative
potential and inducing cell cycle exit. Yi et al. (2008) identified p63
as one of the conserved targets of miR203 across vertebrates. Notably,
p63 is an essential regulator of stem cell maintenance in stratified
epithelial tissues. Yi et al. (2008) showed that miR203 directly
represses the expression of p63; it fails to switch off suprabasally
when either Dicer1 (606241) or miR203 is absent and it becomes repressed
basally when miR203 is prematurely expressed. The authors concluded that
miR203 defines a molecular boundary between proliferative basal
progenitors and terminally differentiating suprabasal cells, ensuring
proper identity of neighboring layers.

Su et al. (2010) showed that TAp63 suppresses tumorigenesis and
metastasis, and coordinately regulates Dicer (606241) and miR130b
(613682) to suppress metastasis. Metastatic mouse and human tumors
deficient in TAp63 express Dicer at very low levels, and Su et al.
(2010) found that modulation of expression of Dicer and miR130b markedly
affected the metastatic potential of cells lacking TAp63. TAp63 binds to
and transactivates the Dicer promoter, demonstrating direct
transcriptional regulation of Dicer by TAp63. Su et al. (2010) concluded
that their data provided a novel understanding of the roles of TAp63 in
tumor and metastasis suppression through the coordinate transcriptional
regulation of Dicer and miR130b, and may have implications for the many
processes regulated by miRNAs.

Deutsch et al. (2011) found that TAp63-alpha was maintained in a closed
dimeric and inactive conformation in nonstressed murine oocytes.
Phosphorylation opened the dimer and permitted formation of the active
tetramer from 2 activated dimers. Dephosphorylation did not affect the
oligomerization equilibrium. Mutation analysis showed that a helix
within the oligomerization domain of TAp63-alpha was crucial for
tetramer stabilization and essentially made the activation process
irreversible.

By Western blot analysis of transfected 5637 human bladder cancer cells,
Scheel et al. (2009) found that expression of a plasmid containing
tandem sequences of all 4 MIR302 family members (see MIR302A; 614596)
and MIR367 (614600) downregulated p63 expression. Mutation analysis
identified 2 functional MIR302 binding sites in the 3-prime UTR of the
p63 transcript. Western blot analysis showed that transfection of GH
testicular cancer cells with antagonizing oligonucleotides that blocked
all MIR302 subspecies resulted in elevated p63 protein levels. RT-PCR
confirmed that synthetic MIR302B (614597) downregulated p63 mRNA
expression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Ectrodactyly, Ectodermal Dysplasia, and Cleft Lip/Palate
Syndrome 3

Celli et al. (1999) mapped EEC3 (604292), an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by ectrodactyly, ectodermal dysplasia, and facial clefts,
to a region of 3q27 where an EEC-like disorder, limb-mammary syndrome
(LMS; 603543), had been mapped. Analysis of the p63 gene, which is
located in the critical LMS/EEC3 interval, revealed heterozygous
mutations in 9 unrelated EEC3 families. (see, e.g.,
603273.0001-603273.0004). Eight mutations resulted in amino acid
substitutions that were predicted to abolish the DNA binding capacity of
p63; the ninth was a frameshift mutation. Six of the 9 mutations were
C-to-T transversions at CpG dinucleotides. Transactivation studies with
these mutant p63 isotypes provided a molecular explanation for the
dominant character of p63 mutations in EEC3.

- Split-Hand/Foot Malformation 4

To assess the potential of p63 as a candidate gene for split-hand/foot
malformation (SHFM4; 605289), Ianakiev et al. (2000) analyzed the p63
gene in 2 multigenerational families with SHFM in which segregation
analysis had excluded linkage to all previously identified autosomal
regions. Two missense mutations, 724A-G in exon 5, which predicted a
lys194-to-glu substitution (603273.0005), and 982T-C in exon 7, which
predicted an arg280-to-cys substitution (603273.0006). Ianakiev et al.
(2000) also identified mutations in the TP63 gene in families with EEC3;
see 603273.0007 and 603273.0008.

- Ankyloblepharon-Ectodermal Defects-Clefting (AEC) Syndrome

Hay-Wells syndrome, also known as ankyloblepharon-ectodermal
dysplasia-clefting (AEC) syndrome (106260), is a rare autosomal dominant
disorder characterized by congenital ectodermal dysplasia, including
alopecia, scalp infections, dystrophic nails, hypodontia,
ankyloblepharon, and cleft lip and/or cleft palate. This constellation
of clinical signs is unique, but some overlap can be recognized with
other ectodermal dysplasia syndromes, including ectrodactyly-ectodermal
dysplasia-cleft lip/palate (EEC; 604292), limb-mammary syndrome (LMS;
603543), acro-dermato-ungual-lacrimal-tooth syndrome (ADULT; 103285),
and recessive cleft lip/palate-ectodermal dysplasia (CLPED1; 225060).
McGrath et al. (2001) analyzed the p63 gene in AEC syndrome patients and
identified missense mutations in 8 families (see, e.g.,
603273.0009-603273.0010).

In a patient who displayed an overlapping phenotype with features of
both AEC and Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome (RHS; 129400), Prontera et al. (2008)
identified heterozygosity for an 11-bp duplication in the TP63 gene
(603273.0027).

Rinne et al. (2009) analyzed the TP63 gene in 24 individuals from 12
different AEC families, and identified mutations in 21 of those tested;
the 3 individuals without an identified mutation included 2 unaffected
relatives and 1 patient with a phenotype slightly different than
AEC/RHS. Of the 11 different mutations identified, 8 were within the
coding region of the sterile alpha motif (SAM) domain, and 3 were
located in the exon 14 sequence encoding the transactivation inhibitory
(TI) domain.

Using luciferase reporter assays, Beaudry et al. (2009) demonstrated
compromise of PERP (609301) induction with some (see 603273.0009) but
not all AEC-patient derived TP63 mutants. Skin biopsy analysis of AEC
patients revealed a subset displaying aberrant PERP expression,
suggesting that PERP dysregulation might be involved in the pathogenesis
of this disease. Beaudry et al. (2009) concluded that distinct AEC TP63
mutants could differentially compromise expression of downstream
targets, providing a rationale for the variable spectra of symptoms seen
in AEC patients.

Using humanized mouse cDNAs expressed in regenerated human epidermal
tissue and keratinocytes in culture, Zarnegar et al. (2012) found that
AEC-related mutations within the SAM domain of Tp63 repressed expression
of transcriptional activators and markers of epidermal differentiation
compared with wildtype Tp63. AEC-mutant Tp63 did not induce apoptosis or
alter keratinocyte proliferation. ZNF750 (610226), KLF4 (602253), and
GRHL3 (608317) were among a group of epidermal genes significantly
downregulated by AEC-related mutations. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis and sequencing showed that both wildtype and AEC-mutant Tp63
bound 2 canonical TP63-binding sites near the ZNF750 transcriptional
start site. Expression of exogenous ZNF750 in AEC model tissue rescued
expression of the majority of TP63 target genes. Introduction of Tp63
variants lacking the SAM domain did not alter expression of epidermal
differentiation markers.

- ADULT Syndrome

Amiel et al. (2001) reported a missense mutation (603273.0011) in the
TP63 gene in an isolated case of acro-dermato-ungual-lacrimal-tooth
(ADULT) syndrome (103285), which maps to chromosome 3q27. The mutation
was inherited from the healthy father, in whom freckling of the back and
shoulders was the only feature of ADULT syndrome. Amiel et al. (2001)
considered incomplete penetrance as the most likely explanation.

In affected members of a 2-generation family with ADULT syndrome, Duijf
et al. (2002) identified a heterozygous mutation in the TP63 gene
(R298Q; 603273.0014). Rinne et al. (2006) identified the R298Q mutation
in affected members of 2 unrelated families with ADULT syndrome; 1 was
Italian, and the other was Dutch. A third family of Finnish origin had a
different mutation at the same codon (R298G; 603273.0022).

In a Dutch mother and daughter with minimal manifestations of ADULT
syndrome, including hypothelia and palmar hyperlinearity, van
Zelst-Stams and van Steensel (2009) identified heterozygosity for a
missense mutation in the C-terminal end of the proline-rich domain of
TP63 (P127L; 603273.0026). The authors stated that mutations in this
domain have primarily been reported to cause limb-mammary syndrome.

In a 17-year-old boy with ectodermal dysplasia and arrhythmogenic right
ventricular dysplasia, who did not have the skin and limb manifestations
of ADULT syndrome, Valenzise et al. (2008) identified the R298Q mutation
in the TP63 gene. The mutation was also found in his mother, who
displayed only hypodontia and athelia. Valenzise et al. (2008) noted
that their findings highlighted the clinical overlapping of TP63-related
ectodermal dysplasias and the difficulty of establishing unequivocal
genotype-phenotype correlations.

- Limb-Mammary Syndrome

In a patient with limb-mammary syndrome (603543), who had bilateral
split hand/foot malformation, isolated cleft palate, and normal hair,
skin, and teeth, but absent nipples, van Bokhoven et al. (2001)
identified a frameshift mutation in the TP63 gene (603273.0012), which
was predicted to truncate the p63-alpha protein within the SAM domain.

- Rapp-Hodgkin Syndrome

In a 14-year-old Thai boy with Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome (RHS; 129400),
Kantaputra et al. (2003) identified heterozygosity for a missense
mutation (S545P; 603273.0019) in the TP73L gene. Kantaputra et al.
(2003) stated that this was the first genetic abnormality to be
described in RHS, and noted that this provides molecular data to support
the clinically observed overlap between EEC, AEC, and RHS.

In a mother and daughter with RHS associated with corneal dystrophy and
premature menopause, Holder-Espinasse et al. (2007) identified
heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion in the TP73L gene (603273.0025).

In a patient who displayed an overlapping phenotype with features of
both AEC and RHS, Prontera et al. (2008) identified heterozygosity for
an 11-bp duplication in the TP63 gene (603273.0027).

- Orofacial Cleft 8

Because mutations in the TP63 gene underlie several monogenic
malformation syndromes manifesting cleft lip with or without cleft
palate, Leoyklang et al. (2006) performed mutation analysis of the 16
exons of the gene in 100 Thai patients with nonsyndromic CL/P (see
129400). In total, 21 single nucleotide changes were found, of which 6
were in the coding regions, including 3 novel nonsynonymous changes:
S90L, R313G, and D564H. The R313G change was concluded to be pathogenic
on the basis of its amino acid change, evolutionary conservation,
occurrence in a functionally important domain, predicted damaging
function, de novo occurrence, and its absence in 500 control
individuals. The finding highlighted further the wide phenotypic
spectrum of TP63 gene mutations.

- Split-Hand/Foot Malformation 6

In 12 of 13 affected members of a consanguineous Turkish family with a
recessive form of SHFM (SHFM6; 225300) caused by mutation in the WNT10B
gene (601906), Ugur and Tolun (2008) also detected homozygosity or
heterozygosity for a rare TP63 insertion polymorphism (dbSNP rs34201045)
at an alternate promoter used for transcription of an
N-terminal-truncated isotype.

- Lung Cancer Susceptibility

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the TP63
gene and lung cancer, see 614210.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Ianakiev et al. (2000) identified 4 TP63 mutations in patients with
SHFM4 and EEC3. All 4 mutations were found in exons that fall within the
DNA-binding domain of p63. The 2 amino acids mutated in the families
with SHFM appeared to be involved primarily in maintenance of the
overall structure of the domain, in contrast to the p63 mutations
responsible for EEC syndrome, which reside in amino acid residues that
directly interact with DNA.

McGrath et al. (2001) noted that p63 mutations resulting in the AEC
syndrome result in amino acid substitutions in the sterile alpha motif
(SAM) domain and are predicted to affect protein-protein interactions.
In contrast, the vast majority of the mutations found in EEC syndrome
are amino acid substitutions in the DNA-binding domain. The authors
suggested that a distinct genotype-phenotype correlation can be
recognized for EEC and AEC syndromes.

Van Bokhoven and Brunner (2002) reviewed the spectrum of p63 mutations
underlying 5 human malformation syndromes. Clustering of mutations
established a clear genotype-phenotype correlation: in the DNA binding
domain (DBD) for EEC syndrome and in the SAM domain for AEC syndrome.
Limb-mammary syndrome (LMS; 603543) differs from EEC syndrome in at
least 3 respects: (1) mammary gland and nipple hypoplasia are consistent
features of LMS but are only occasionally seen in EEC syndrome; (2)
patients with LMS do not have the hair and skin defects that are seen in
EEC syndrome; (3) whereas patients with LMS have cleft palate, those
with EEC syndrome have cleft lip/palate but never have cleft palate
only. Phenotypically, LMS is most similar to ADULT syndrome. Two
isolated patients with an LMS phenotype had, in exons 13 and 14,
frameshift mutations that resulted in truncation of the p63-alpha
protein. Therefore, the abundant p63 product in epithelial cells would
be missing the transactivation inhibitory domain (TID).

Brunner et al. (2002) reviewed p63 mutations causing developmental
syndromes. They stated that the pattern of heterozygous mutations is
distinct for each syndrome, and that consistent with this
syndrome-specific mutation pattern, the functional consequences of
mutations on the p63 proteins also vary, invoking dominant-negative and
gain-of-function mechanisms rather than a simple loss of function.

Rinne et al. (2006) reviewed the clinical features of 227 patients with
p63 mutations and detailed the variable phenotypic features associated
with 5 mutation hotspots, which are all C-T transitions at CpG islands
(see 603273.0001; 603273.0006-603273.0008; 603273.0024).

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with EEC syndrome, features
of LMS, and severe micturition difficulties, Maclean et al. (2007)
identified the R227Q mutation in the TP73L gene (603273.0024). The
authors stated that 4 of the 6 cases/families reported with EEC and the
R227Q mutation have manifested this distinct urologic abnormality (see
van Bokhoven et al., 2001), indicative of a genotype/phenotype
correlation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yang et al. (1999) generated mice deficient in p63 by targeted
disruption. p63 -/- mice have major defects in their limb, craniofacial,
and epithelial development. p63 is expressed in the ectodermal surfaces
of the limb buds, branchial arches, and epidermal appendages, which are
all sites of reciprocal signaling that direct morphogenetic patterning
of the underlying mesoderm. The limb truncations are due to a failure to
maintain the apical ectodermal ridge, which is essential for limb
development. The embryonic epidermis of p63 -/- mice undergoes an
unusual process of nonregenerative differentiation, culminating in a
striking absence of all squamous epithelia and their derivatives,
including mammary, lacrimal, and salivary glands. Yang et al. (1999)
concluded that p63 is critical for maintaining the progenitor-cell
populations that are necessary to sustain epithelial development and
morphogenesis.

Mills et al. (1999) independently generated mice deficient in p63. The
p63-deficient mice were born alive but had striking developmental
defects. Their limbs were absent or truncated, defects that were caused
by a failure of the apical ectodermal ridge to differentiate. The skin
of p63-deficient mice did not progress past an early developmental
stage: it lacked stratification and did not express differentiation
markers. Structures dependent upon epidermal-mesenchymal interactions
during embryonic development, such as hair follicles, teeth, and mammary
glands, were absent in p63-deficient mice.

Keyes et al. (2006) studied spontaneous tumorigenesis in p63 +/- mice in
both wildtype and p53-compromised backgrounds. p63 +/- mice were not
tumor prone, and mice heterozygous for both p63 and p53 had fewer tumors
than p53 +/- mice. The rare tumors that developed in mice with
compromised p63 were distinct from those of p53 +/- mice. Furthermore,
p63 +/- mice were not prone to chemically induced tumorigenesis, and p63
expression was maintained in carcinomas. Keyes et al. (2006) concluded
that p63 plays a markedly different role in tumor formation than p53.

Suzuki et al. (2008) showed that Dlx5 (600028), Dlx6 (600030), p63, and
Bmp7 (112267), a putative p63 target gene, were all expressed in
developing mouse urethral plate. Targeted inactivation of p63, Bmp7, or
both Dlx5 and Dlx6 resulted in abnormal urethra formation in mice.

Su et al. (2010) generated mice lacking TAp63. In 2.5 years of study,
both heterozygous and TAp63-null mice developed spontaneous carcinomas
and sarcomas and had a significantly shorter life span than the wildtype
cohort. Paradoxically, a larger proportion of TAp63-null mice (24%) were
tumor-free compared with TAp63 heterozygous mice (15%). Su et al. (2010)
concluded that their data suggested that TAp63 is a haploinsufficient
tumor suppressor gene. Consistent with this finding, sarcomas and
carcinomas from TAp63 heterozygous mice retained the wildtype allele of
TAp63. TAp63 heterozygous and null mice developed highly metastatic
tumors and 10% of these metastases were found in the brain, a rare
finding in spontaneous mouse tumor models.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ECTRODACTYLY, ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA, AND CLEFT LIP/PALATE SYNDROME
3
TP63, ARG204TRP

In 3 unrelated patients with EEC3 (604292), Celli et al. (1999)
identified a heterozygous arg204-to-trp (R204W) mutation in the DNA
binding domain of TP63. The mutation segregated with the disease in 2
families and was not found in normal controls. In the third family, the
mutation occurred de novo.

Kosaki et al. (2008) reported a Japanese male infant with EEC3 who was
found to be heterozygous for the R204W mutation. He had a classic
phenotype with split hand-foot malformation and cleft lip and palate.
His father, who was found to be somatic mosaic for the mutation, had
split hand-foot malformation, no cleft lip or palate, and whorl-like
streaky pigmentary patterns of the skin following Blashko lines. He had
gray hair on the right half of his scalp and brown thin hair on the left
side. He also had enamel hypoplasia and partial adontia. Extensive
genetic analysis demonstrated that the father was mosaic for the
mutation in peripheral blood and hair, although most of his sperm
carried the mutation. Kosaki et al. (2008) concluded that the mutation
was postzygotic in the father and resulted in gonosomal mosaicism.

.0002
ECTRODACTYLY, ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA, AND CLEFT LIP/PALATE SYNDROME
3
TP63, ARG204GLN

In a patient with EEC3 (604292), Celli et al. (1999) identified a
heterozygous arg204-to-gln mutation in the core element II of the DNA
binding domain of TP63. The mutation segregated with the disease and was
not found in normal controls.

.0003
ECTRODACTYLY, ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA, AND CLEFT LIP/PALATE SYNDROME
3
TP63, CYS306ARG

In a patient with EEC3 (604292), Celli et al. (1999) identified a
heterozygous cys306-to-arg mutation in the core element IV of the DNA
binding domain of TP63. The mutation was de novo and was not found in
normal controls. Transactivation assays using cell lysates containing
the cys306-to-arg mutation showed a total lack of transactivation
activity.

.0004
ECTRODACTYLY, ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA, AND CLEFT LIP/PALATE SYNDROME
3
TP63, 1-BP INS, 1572A

In a patient with EEC3 (604292), Celli et al. (1999) identified a 1-bp
insertion (A) at nucleotide 1572 in exon 13 of the TP63 gene, resulting
in a frameshift at codon 525 (tyr) and a premature stop codon in the
same exon. The mutation was de novo.

.0005
SPLIT-HAND/FOOT MALFORMATION 4
TP63, LYS194GLU

In a family with SHFM4 (605289) from South Africa, previously reported
by Spranger and Schapera (1988), Ianakiev et al. (2000) identified a
724A-G transition in exon 5 of the p63 gene, predicted to cause a
lys194-to-glu (K194E) amino acid substitution. This family, designated
R, was of mixed ancestry from Cape Province. The spectrum of clinical
manifestations was broad, ranging from the presence of a split hand in 1
individual to bilateral monodactyly and unilateral aplasia of the right
lower extremity with a split left foot in another individual. No family
members had any significant abnormalities other than those of the
extremities.

.0006
SPLIT-HAND/FOOT MALFORMATION 4
TP63, ARG280CYS

In a family of mixed ancestry from Cape Province, South Africa, with
SHFM4 (605289), Ianakiev et al. (2000) identified a 982T-C transition in
exon 7 of the TP63 gene, predicted to cause an arg280-to-cys (R280C)
amino acid substitution. The phenotype in this family, designated A,
ranged from severe 'lobster claw' malformations of the feet in 1
individual, to minor 3/4 syndactyly of the left foot appearing as the
only manifestation in another individual. The daughter of the latter
individual had distal duplications of her thumbs bilaterally with
absence of the second and third phalanges of the right hand and an
absent second phalanx with 3/4 syndactyly of the left hand. No members
of the family had significant abnormality of the face, palate, skin,
teeth, hair, or nails. No abnormalities of the mammary glands or nipples
were noted.

.0007
ECTRODACTYLY, ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA, AND CLEFT LIP/PALATE SYNDROME
3
RAPP-HODGKIN SYNDROME, INCLUDED
TP63, ARG279HIS

In a study of 4 European families with EEC3 (604292), Ianakiev et al.
(2000) identified heterozygosity for 2 missense mutations in the TP63
gene: a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 980 in exon 7 that predicts an
arg279-to-his (R279H) substitution, and a G-to-A transition at
nucleotide 1065 in exon 8 that predicts an arg304-to-gln (R304Q)
substitution (603273.0008).

In a 25-year-old female with features consistent with Rapp-Hodgkin
syndrome (129400), Bougeard et al. (2003) identified heterozygosity for
the R279H substitution. This residue corresponds to the R248 hotspot
mutation in TP53 (see 191170), and occurs within the DNA-binding domain
present within all of the TP63 isoforms. In vitro functional analysis
showed that this mutation did not decrease the transcriptional activity
of the TAp63-gamma isoform on a TP53 reporter system, but disrupted the
dominant-negative activity of the delta-N-p63-alpha and -gamma isoforms
on the transcriptional activity of TP53.

.0008
ECTRODACTYLY, ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA, AND CLEFT LIP/PALATE SYNDROME
3
TP63, ARG304GLN

See 603273.0007 and Ianakiev et al. (2000).

.0009
ANKYLOBLEPHARON-ECTODERMAL DEFECTS-CLEFT LIP/PALATE
TP63, LEU514PHE

In a 6-year-old patient with Hay-Wells syndrome (106260) who lacked any
limb defects, McGrath et al. (2001) identified an A-to-T transversion at
nucleotide 1542 of the TP63 gene, resulting in a leu518-to-phe
substitution in the sterile alpha motif (SAM) domain. Molecular modeling
suggested that the substitution would alter protein-protein
interactions. According the sequence reported by Yang et al. (1998),
this mutation is designated leu514 to phe.

In a transactivation assay, Beaudry et al. (2009) demonstrated that
TA-TP63-alpha-L514F was completely defective in activating the PERP
(609301) luciferase reporter compared to wildtype. The authors
hypothesized that specific protein-protein interactions needed for full
PERP transactivation by TP63 are abolished when the structure of the
sterile alpha motif (SAM) domain is compromised, as is the case with the
L514F mutation.

.0010
ANKYLOBLEPHARON-ECTODERMAL DEFECTS-CLEFT LIP/PALATE
TP63, CYS522GLY

In a 10-month-old infant with typical features of Hay-Wells syndrome
(106260), McGrath et al. (2001) identified a T-to-G transversion at
nucleotide 1564 of the TP63 gene, resulting in a cys526-to-gly
substitution in the sterile alpha motif (SAM) domain. Molecular modeling
suggested that the substitution would alter protein-protein
interactions. According the sequence reported by Yang et al. (1998),
this mutation is designated cys522 to gly.

.0011
ADULT SYNDROME
TP63, ASN6HIS

In a 10.5-year-old patient with features of
acro-dermato-ungual-lacrimal-tooth (ADULT) syndrome (103285), Amiel et
al. (2001) described a heterozygous A-to-C transversion at position 16
in exon 3-prime of the TP63 gene, resulting in an asn6-to-his (N6H)
substitution between the transactivation and DNA binding domains. The
mutation affected exon 3-prime present only in the isotypes lacking the
transactivation domain of the protein. The mutation was inherited from
the healthy father, in whom freckling of the back and shoulders was the
only feature of ADULT syndrome, and was absent from a panel of 250
control chromosomes. Amiel et al. (2001) considered incomplete
penetrance as the most likely explanation.

.0012
LIMB-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TP63, 2-BP DEL, 1576TT

In a patient with limb-mammary syndrome (603543), who had bilateral
split hand/foot malformation, isolated cleft palate, and normal hair,
skin, and teeth, but absent nipples, van Bokhoven et al. (2001)
identified a 2-bp deletion (1576delTT) in exon 13 of the TP63 gene,
resulting in a frameshift predicted to cause premature termination of
the p63-alpha protein within the SAM domain. The numbering of the
mutation is according to the sequence reported by Yang et al. (1998).
Guazzarotti et al. (2008) evaluated this patient at age 14 years for
primary amenorrhea and found that, although she had normal development
of external genitalia and pubic hair and normal morphology of the lower
vaginal tract, she had absent uterus and ovaries; hormonal evaluation
revealed hypergonadotropic hypogonadism with a very low plasma estrogen
level.

.0013
LIMB-MAMMARY SYNDROME
TP63, 2-BP DEL, 1743AA

In a patient with limb-mammary syndrome (603543), who had bilateral
split hand/foot malformation, absent lacrimal punctae, submucous cleft
palate, bilateral ear pits, somewhat dry skin on the trunk, absent
nipples, and anteriorly placed anus, van Bokhoven et al. (2001)
identified a de novo 2-bp deletion (1743delAA) in exon 14 of the TP63
gene, resulting in a frameshift predicted to cause premature termination
of the p63-alpha protein. The numbering of the mutation is according to
the sequence reported by Yang et al. (1998).

.0014
ADULT SYNDROME
TP63, ARG298GLN

Duijf et al. (2002) reported a 2-generation family with
acro-dermato-ungual-lacrimal-tooth (ADULT) syndrome (103285) whose
affected individuals were heterozygous for an arg298-to-gln (R298Q)
mutation. The mutation is located in the DNA binding domain of p63;
however, unlike mutations in EEC syndrome, the R298Q mutation does not
impair DNA binding. Rather, the mutation confers novel transcription
activation capacity on the delta-N-p63-gamma isoform, which normally
does not possess such activity. The authors concluded that p63 contains
a second transactivation domain which is normally repressed and can
become activated by mutations in the DNA binding domain of p63.

Rinne et al. (2006) reported 2 unrelated families with ADULT syndrome in
which affected members carried the R298Q mutation. The authors
identified another mutation in the same codon, R298G (603273.0022), in a
third family with ADULT syndrome.

In a 17-year-old boy with ectodermal dysplasia and arrhythmogenic right
ventricular cardiomyopathy, Valenzise et al. (2008) identified the R298Q
mutation in the TP63 gene. The patient presented with asthenia and
dyspnea and was found to have ectodermal signs including hypodontia,
lacrimal duct aplasia, dystrophic nails, sparse, fragile, and wiry hair,
decreased sweating, and absent right nipple. He had normal hands and
feet with no radiographic anomalies. Cardiologic findings were
consistent with the diagnosis of arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy by morphologic, functional, electrocardiographic, and
histologic features. A cardioverter defibrillator was implanted 1 year
after diagnosis. His mother, who had absent nipples and hypodontia but
no cardiac defects or arrhythmia, also carried the R298Q mutation.

.0015
ECTRODACTYLY, ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA, AND CLEFT LIP/PALATE SYNDROME
3
TP63, ASP312GLY

In a Japanese girl who had EEC3 (604292) and developed diffuse large
B-cell type non-Hodgkin lymphoma, Akahoshi et al. (2003) identified
heterozygosity for a 1079A-G transition in exon 8 of the TP63 gene,
resulting in a germline asp312-to-gly (D312G) mutation. They speculated
that p63 may exert a biologic function as a tumor suppressor and
suggested that malignant lymphoma should be considered an important
complication of EEC3, inasmuch as 2 previous reports had also documented
an association of EEC syndrome with malignant lymphoma (Gershoni-Baruch
et al., 1997; Ogutcen-Toller et al., 2000).

.0016
RAPP-HODGKIN SYNDROME
TP63, 1-BP DEL, 1709A

In a 32-year-old male with features consistent with Rapp-Hodgkin
syndrome (129400), Bougeard et al. (2003) identified heterozygosity for
a 1-bp deletion (1709delA) in exon 14 of the TP63 gene, resulting in a
stop codon 22 amino acids downstream of the normal stop codon. This
mutation is located in the post-SAM region and is predicted to affect
only the TP63-alpha isoforms.

.0017
RAPP-HODGKIN SYNDROME
TP63, 1-BP DEL, 1859A

In 2 sibs and their mother who had been diagnosed with Rapp-Hodgkin
syndrome (RHS; 129400), Dianzani et al. (2003) identified a 1-bp
deletion (1859delA) in exon 14 of the TP63 gene, causing a frameshift at
codon 620 affecting the alpha tail. The mutation was not found in an
unaffected sib. The mother's clinical history revealed that she had a
slight ankyloblepharon on the right eye at birth which was surgically
treated; Dianzani et al. (2003) suggested that
ankyloblepharon-ectodermal defects-clefting syndrome (AEC; 106260) and
RHS are the same clinical entity.

.0018
ANKYLOBLEPHARON-ECTODERMAL DEFECTS-CLEFT LIP/PALATE
RAPP-HODGKIN SYNDROME, INCLUDED
TP63, ILE510THR

In a patient with ankyloblepharon-ectodermal defects-clefting syndrome
(AEC; 106260) previously described by Bertola et al. (2000) and in a
patient with Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome (RHS; 129400), Bertola et al. (2004)
identified a 1529C-to-T transition in exon 12 of the TP63 gene,
predicting an ile510-to-thr (I510T) substitution. Both cases were
sporadic. Bertola et al. (2004) concluded that AEC and RHS represent
variable expression of a single genetic disorder.

.0019
RAPP-HODGKIN SYNDROME
TP63, ARG545PRO

In a 14-year-old Thai boy with Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome (RHS; 129400),
Kantaputra et al. (2003) identified heterozygosity for a 1633T-C
transition in exon 13 of the TP63 gene, resulting in a ser545-to-pro
(S545P) substitution in the fourth helix of the sterile alpha motif
(SAM) domain.

.0020
ADULT SYNDROME
TP63, VAL114MET

In a patient with ADULT syndrome (103285), Slavotinek et al. (2005)
identified a heterozygous 518G-A transition in exon 4 of the TP63 gene,
resulting in a val114-to-met (V114M) substitution. The patient had fifth
finger brachydactyly and camptodactyly, ulnar ray hypoplasia, and
imperforate anus, suggesting phenotypic overlap with ulnar-mammary
syndrome (181450).

.0021
OROFACIAL CLEFT 8
TP63, ARG313GLY

In a 4-year-old Thai girl with orofacial cleft (see 129400), Leoyklang
et al. (2006) found an apparently pathologic heterozygous 937A-G
transition in the TP63 gene, resulting in an arg313 to gly (R313G)
substitution. The patient had a surgically repaired bilateral complete
cleft lip. The mutation was not found in her parents.

.0022
ADULT SYNDROME
TP63, ARG298GLY

In affected members of a Finnish family with ADULT syndrome (103285),
Rinne et al. (2006) identified a heterozygous 892C-G transversion in the
TP63 gene, resulting in an arg298-to-gly (R298G) substitution. This
substitution occurs in the same codon as another variant reported in
ADULT syndrome (R298Q; 603273.0014). In vitro functional expression
studies showed that the R298G mutation resulted in increased
transcription activation, similar to the R298Q mutation.

.0023
SPLIT-HAND/FOOT MALFORMATION 4
TP63, ARG97CYS

In a Mexican child with isolated unilateral split-hand malformation
(605289), Zenteno et al. (2005) identified a heterozygous 289C-T
transition in exon 3 of the TP63 gene, resulting in an arg97-to-cys
(R97C) substitution in the transactivation domain. The child also had a
small scalp lesion, or aplasia cutis, which may or may not have been
related to the TP63 mutation.

.0024
ECTRODACTYLY, ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA, AND CLEFT LIP/PALATE SYNDROME
3
ADULT SYNDROME, INCLUDED
TP63, ARG227GLN

In affected individuals from 3 unrelated families with EEC3 (604292), 2
of which were previously reported by O'Quinn et al. (1998), van Bokhoven
et al. (2001) identified heterozygosity for a 797G-A transition in the
TP63 gene, resulting in an arg227-to-gln (R227Q) substitution.

Sripathomsawat et al. (2011) provided follow-up of a remotely
consanguineous Dutch family with EEC3, previously reported by Maas et
al. (1996) and O'Quinn et al. (1998), in which affected members were
heterozygous for the R227Q mutation. Twelve newly affected individuals
were identified, with marked phenotypic variability. Limb defects were
present in 12 of 26 affected members, including 6 with split hand/foot
and 1 with mesoaxial polydactyly. Two had cleft lip/palate, and 3 had
mild manifestations of this features, such as indentation of the upper
vermilion. One individual had features of the AEC syndrome (106260).
Features of ectodermal dysplasia were also variable. Most had blonde,
sparse hair with slow growth, thin nails, periorbital hyperpigmentation,
and dental caries. Four had hypodontia, and 8 were edentulous on
examination. Most notable, 12 of those affected had micturition
difficulties, which tended to improve with age, and 1 had defecation
difficulties. Sripathomsawat et al. (2011) emphasized that patients with
EEC3 should have systematic dental examinations.

In a mother and daughter with ADULT syndrome (103285), Reisler et al.
(2006) identified the R227Q mutation in exon 6 of the TP63 gene and
suggested that there may be considerable overlap between the EEC and
ADULT syndromes.

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with EEC syndrome, features
of limb-mammary syndrome (LMS; 603543), and severe micturition
difficulties, Maclean et al. (2007) identified the R227Q mutation in the
TP63 gene. Noting that 4 of the 6 cases/families reported with this
mutation had manifested similar urinary symptoms (see van Bokhoven et
al., 2001), the authors suggested that this represents a
genotype/phenotype correlation.

.0025
RAPP-HODGKIN SYNDROME
TP63, 1-BP DEL, 1783C

In a mother and daughter with Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome (RHS; 129400)
associated with corneal dystrophy and premature menopause,
Holder-Espinasse et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp
deletion (1783delC) in the TP63 gene, resulting in a frameshift and a
protein that is 22 amino acids longer than wildtype. The authors stated
that this was the first report of these associated age-related features
in RHS.

.0026
ADULT SYNDROME
TP63, PRO127LEU

In a Dutch mother and daughter with minimal manifestations of ADULT
syndrome (103285), van Zelst-Stams and van Steensel (2009) identified
heterozygosity for a 380C-T transition in the TP63 gene, resulting in a
pro127-to-leu (P127L) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the
C-terminal end of the proline-rich domain. The mutation was not found in
100 unrelated Dutch controls.

.0027
RAPP-HODGKIN SYNDROME
ANKYLOBLEPHARON-ECTODERMAL DEFECTS, CLEFT LIP/PALATE, INCLUDED
TP63, 11-BP DUP, NT1716

In an 11-year-old boy who displayed an overlapping phenotype with
features of both ankyloblepharon-ectodermal defects-clefting syndrome
(AEC; 106260) and Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome (RHS; 129400), Prontera et al.
(2008) identified heterozygosity for an 11-bp duplication
(1716dupCTCCCCTTCTC) in exon 14 of the TP63 gene, predicted to result in
a protein that is 26 amino acids longer than wildtype. The mutation is
located in the transcriptional inhibitory domain (TID) and is predicted
to affect only the TP63-alpha isoforms. The patient was born with
bilateral ankyloblepharon filiforme adnatum and submucous cleft palate
and was diagnosed with AEC syndrome; however, he had only slight
erythema of the scalp without infection or erosion or areas of
eczematous skin. Upon reevaluation at age 11 years, he showed facial
dysmorphism including high frontal hairline, hypoplastic alae nasi,
pinched and narrow nose, midface hypoplasia with relative prognathism,
and had hypohidrosis and syndactyly, features more suggestive of a
diagnosis of RHS.

.0028
ECTRODACTYLY, ECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA, AND CLEFT LIP/PALATE SYNDROME
3
TP63, ARG227PRO

In a Thai father and his daughter with EEC3 (604292), Sripathomsawat et
al. (2011) identified a heterozygous 680G-C transversion in exon 6 of
the TP63 gene, resulting in an arg227-to-pro (R227P) substitution in a
highly conserved residue. The mutation was not found in 100 Thai control
individuals. The 4-year-old daughter had dry and sparse dark hair, left
cleft lip and palate, depressed nasal bridge, slightly dry skin, and
thin nails. She had split hands and split right foot, as well as
syndactyly of the right fourth and fifth toes. Her father had normal
dark hair, dry skin, split right hand, bifid right thumb, and flexion
contracture of the distal phalanx of the left index finger. His second
toes were small and slender, and he had underdeveloped toenails. The
father had significant dental involvement, with enamel hypoplasia,
extensive dental caries, hypodontia of the mandibular canines,
generalized microdontia, prominent marginal ridges of permanent
maxillary incisors, round-shaped permanent molars, and barrel-shaped
permanent maxillary central incisors. Although the mutation affected the
same residue as a mutation found in a Dutch family with EEC3 and
significant micturition difficulties (R227Q; 603273.0024), neither of
the Thai patients had micturition problems. Sripathomsawat et al. (2011)
emphasized that patients with EEC3 should have systematic dental
examinations.

REFERENCE 1. Akahoshi, K.; Sakazume, S.; Kosaki, K.; Ohashi, H.; Fukushima,
Y.: EEC syndrome type 3 with a heterozygous germline mutation in
the P63 gene and B cell lymphoma. Am. J. Med. Genet. 120A: 370-373,
2003.

2. Amiel, J.; Bougeard, G.; Francannet, C.; Raclin, V.; Munnich, A.;
Lyonnet, S.; Frebourg, T.: TP63 gene mutation in ADULT syndrome. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 9: 642-645, 2001.

3. Augustin, M.; Bamberger, C.; Paul, D.; Schmale, H.: Cloning and
chromosomal mapping of the human p53-related KET gene to chromosome
3q27 and its murine homolog Ket to mouse chromosome 16. Mammalian
Genome 9: 899-902, 1998.

4. Beaudry, V. G.; Pathak, N.; Koster, M. I.; Attardi, L. D.: Differential
PERP regulation by TP63 mutants provides insight into AEC pathogenesis. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 149A: 1952-1957, 2009.

5. Benard, J.; Douc-Rasy, S.; Ahomadegbe, J.-C.: TP53 family members
and human cancers. Hum. Mutat. 21: 182-191, 2003.

6. Bertola, D. R.; Kim, C. A.; Albano, L. M. J.; Scheffer, H.; Meijer,
R.; van Bokhoven, H.: Molecular evidence that AEC syndrome and Rapp-Hodgkin
syndrome are variable expression of a single genetic disorder. (Letter) Clin.
Genet. 66: 79-80, 2004.

7. Bertola, D. R.; Kim, C. A.; Sugayama, S. M. M.; Albano, L. M. J.;
Utagawa, C. Y.; Gonzalez, C. H.: AEC syndrome and CHAND syndrome:
further evidence of clinical overlapping in the ectodermal dysplasias. Pediat.
Derm. 17: 218-221, 2000.

8. Bougeard, G.; Hadj-Rabia, S.; Faivre, L.; Sarafan-Vasseur, N.;
Frebourg, T.: The Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome results from mutations of
the TP63 gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 11: 700-704, 2003.

9. Brunner, H. G.; Hamel, B. C. J.; van Bokhoven, H.: P63 gene mutations
and human developmental syndromes. Am. J. Med. Genet. 112: 284-290,
2002.

10. Celli, J.; Duijf, P.; Hamel, B. C. J.; Bamshad, M.; Kramer, B.;
Smits, A. P. T.; Newbury-Ecob, R.; Hennekam, R. C. M.; Van Buggenhout,
G.; van Haeringen, A.; Woods, C. G.; van Essen, A. J.; de Waal, R.;
Vriend, G.; Haber, D. A.; Yang, A.; McKeon, F.; Brunner, H. G.; van
Bokhoven, H.: Heterozygous germline mutations in the p53 homolog
p63 are the cause of EEC syndrome. Cell 99: 143-153, 1999.

11. Deutsch, G. B.; Zielonka, E. M.; Coutandin, D.; Weber, T. A.;
Schafer, B.; Hannewald, J.; Luh, L. M.; Durst, F. G.; Ibrahim, M.;
Hoffmann, J.; Niesen, F. H.; Senturk, A.; Kunkel, H.; Brutschy, B.;
Schleiff, E.; Knapp, S.; Acker-Palmer, A.; Grez, M.; McKeon, F.; Dotsch,
V.: DNA damage in oocytes induces a switch of the quality control
factor TAp63-alpha from dimer to tetramer. Cell 144: 566-576, 2011.

12. Dianzani, I.; Garelli, E.; Gustavsson, P.; Carando, A.; Gustafsson,
B.; Dahl, N.; Anneren, G.: Rapp-Hodgkin and AEC syndromes due to
a new frameshift mutation in the TP63 gene. J. Med. Genet. 40: e133,
2003. Note: Electronic Article.

13. Di Iorio, E.; Barbaro, V.; Ruzza, A.; Ponzin, D.; Pellegrini,
G.; De Luca, M.: Isoforms of delta-N-p63 and the migration of ocular
limbal cells in human corneal regeneration. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102:
9523-9528, 2005.

14. Duijf, P. H. G.; Vanmolkot, K. R. J.; Propping, P.; Friedl, W.;
Krieger, E.; McKeon, F.; Dotsch, V.; Brunner, H. G.; van Bokhoven,
H.: Gain-of-function mutation in ADULT syndrome reveals the presence
of a second transactivation domain in p63. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11:
799-804, 2002.

15. Flores, E. R.; Tsai, K. Y.; Crowley, D.; Sengupta, S.; Yang, A.;
McKeon, F.; Jacks, T.: p63 and p73 are required for p53-dependent
apoptosis in response to DNA damage. Nature 416: 560-564, 2002.

16. Gershoni-Baruch, R.; Goldscher, D.; Hochberg, Z.: Ectrodactyly-ectodermal
dysplasia-clefting syndrome and hypothalamo-pituitary insufficiency. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 68: 168-172, 1997.

17. Guazzarotti, L.; Caprio, C.; Rinne, T. K.; Bosoni, M.; Pattarino,
G.; Mauri, S.; Tadini, G. L.; van Bokhoven, H.; Zuccotti, G. V.:
Limb-mammary syndrome (LMS) associated with internal female genitalia
dysgenesia: a new genotype/phenotype correlation? Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A:
2001-2004, 2008.

18. Hibi, K.; Trink, B.; Patturajan, M.; Westra, W. H.; Caballero,
O. L.; Hill, D. E.; Ratovitski, E. A.; Jen, J.; Sidransky, D.: AIS
is an oncogene amplified in squamous cell carcinoma. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 97: 5462-5467, 2000.

19. Holder-Espinasse, M.; Martin-Coignard, D.; Escande, F.; Manouvrier-Hanu,
S.: A new mutation in TP63 is associated with age-related pathology. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 15: 1115-1120, 2007.

20. Ianakiev, P.; Kilpatrick, M. W.; Toudjarska, I.; Basel, D.; Beighton,
P.; Tsipouras, P.: Split-hand/split-foot malformation is caused by
mutations in the p63 gene on 3q27. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 59-66,
2000.

21. Kantaputra, P. N.; Hamada, T.; Kumchai, T.; McGrath, J. A.: Heterozygous
mutation in the SAM domain of p63 underlies Rapp-Hodgkin ectodermal
dysplasia. J. Dent. Res. 82: 433-437, 2003.

22. Keyes, W. M.; Vogel, H.; Koster, M. I.; Guo, X.; Qi, Y.; Petherbridge,
K. M.; Roop, D. R.; Bradley, A.; Mills, A. A.: p63 heterozygous mutant
mice are not prone to spontaneous or chemically induced tumors. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 8435-8440, 2006.

23. Kosaki, R.; Naito, Y.; Torii, C.; Takahashi, T.; Nakajima, T.;
Kosaki, K.: Split hand foot malformation with whorl-like pigmentary
pattern: phenotypic expression of somatic mosaicism for the p63 mutation.
(Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A: 2574-2577, 2008.

24. Leoyklang, P.; Siriwan, P.; Shotelersuk, V.: A mutation of the
p63 gene in non-syndromic cleft lip. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 43:
e28, 2006. Note: Electronic Article.

25. Maas, S. M.; de Jong, T. P. V. M.; Buss, P.; Hennekam, R. C. M.
: EEC syndrome and genitourinary anomalies: an update. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 63: 472-478, 1996.

26. Maclean, K.; Holme, S. A.; Gilmour, E.; Taylor, M.; Scheffer,
H.; Graf, N.; Smith, G. H. H.; Onikul, E.; van Bokhoven, H.; Moss,
C.; Ades, L. C.: EEC syndrome, arg227-to-gln TP63 mutation and micturition
difficulties: is there a genotype-phenotype correlation? Am. J. Med.
Genet. 143A: 1114-1119, 2007.

27. McGrath, J. A.; Duijf, P. H. G.; Doetsch, V.; Irvine, A. D.; de
Waal, R.; Vanmolkot, K. R. J.; Wessagowit, V.; Kelly, A.; Atherton,
D. J.; Griffiths, W. A. D.; Orlow, S. J.; van Haeringen, A.; Ausems,
M. G. E. M.; Yang, A.; McKeon, F.; Bamshad, M. A.; Brunner, H. G.;
Hamel, B. C. J.; van Bokhoven, H.: Hay-Wells syndrome is caused by
heterozygous missense mutations in the SAM domain of p63. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 10: 221-229, 2001.

28. Mills, A. A.; Zheng, B.; Wang, X. J.; Vogel, H.; Roop, D. R.;
Bradley, A.: p63 is a p53 homologue required for limb and epidermal
morphogenesis. Nature 398: 708-713, 1999.

29. O'Quinn, J. R.; Hennekam, R. C. M.; Jorde, L. B.; Bamshad, M.
: Syndromic ectrodactyly with severe limb, ectodermal, urogenital,
and palatal defects maps to chromosome 19. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62:
130-135, 1998.

30. Ogutcen-Toller, M.; Gulen, O.; Okten, G.; Elbistan, M.: Non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma in a patient with ectrodactyly ectodermal dysplasia-clefting
syndrome. (Letter) Oral Surg. Oral Med. Oral Path. Oral Radiol. Endod. 90:
124-125, 2000.

31. Osada, M.; Ohba, M.; Kawahara, C.; Ishioka, C.; Kanamaru, R.;
Katoh, I.; Ikawa, Y.; Nimura, Y.; Nakagawara, A.; Obinata, M.; Ikawa,
S.: Cloning and functional analysis of human p51, which structurally
and functionally resembles p53. Nature Med. 4: 839-843, 1998. Note:
Erratum: Nature Med. 4: 982 only, 1998.

32. Prontera, P.; Escande, F.; Cocchi, G.; Donti, E.; Martini, A.;
Sensi, A.: An intermediate phenotype between Hays-Wells and Rapp-Hodgkin
syndromes in a patient with a novel p63 mutation: confirmation of
a variable phenotypic spectrum with a common aetiology. Genet. Counsel. 19:
397-402, 2008.

33. Reisler, T. T.; Patton, M. A.; Meagher, P. P. J.: Further phenotypic
and genetic variation in ADULT syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A:
2495-2500, 2006.

34. Rinne, T.; Bolat, E.; Meijer, R.; Scheffer, H.; van Bokhoven,
H.: Spectrum of p63 mutations in a selected patient cohort affected
with ankyloblepharon-ectodermal defects-cleft lip/palate syndrome
(AEC). Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A: 1948-1951, 2009.

35. Rinne, T.; Hamel, B.; van Bokhoven, H.; Brunner, H. G.: Pattern
of p63 mutations and their phenotypes--update. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A:
1396-1406, 2006.

36. Rinne, T.; Spadoni, E.; Kjaer, K. W.; Danesino, C.; Larizza, D.;
Kock, M.; Huoponen, K.; Savontaus, M.-L.; Aaltonen, M.; Duijf, P.;
Brunner, H. G.; Penttinen, M.; van Bokhoven, H.: Delineation of the
ADULT syndrome phenotype due to arginine 298 mutations of the p63
gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 14: 904-910, 2006.

37. Scheel, A. H. J.; Beyer, U.; Agami, R.; Dobbelstein, M.: Immunofluorescence-based
screening identifies germ cell associated microRNA 302 as an antagonist
to p63 expression. Cell Cycle 8: 1426-1432, 2009.

38. Senoo, M.; Seki, N.; Ohira, M.; Sugano, S.; Watanabe, M.; Inuzuka,
S.; Okamoto, T.; Tachibana, M.; Tanaka, T.; Shinkai, Y.; Kato, H.
: A second p53-related protein, p73L, with high homology to p73. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 248: 603-607, 1998. Note: Erratum: Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 250: 536 only, 1998.

39. Slavotinek, A. M.; Tanaka, J.; Winder, A.; Vargervik, K.; Haggstrom,
A.; Bamshad, M.: Acro-dermato-ungual-lacrimal-tooth (ADULT) syndrome:
report of a child with phenotypic overlap with ulnar-mammary syndrome
and a new mutation in TP63. Am. J. Med. Genet. 138A: 146-149, 2005.

40. Spranger, M.; Schapera, J.: Anomalous inheritance in a kindred
with split hand, split foot malformation. Europ. J. Pediat. 147:
202-205, 1988.

41. Sripathomsawat, W.; Tanpaiboon, P.; Heering, J.; Dotsch, V.; Hennekam,
R. C. M.; Kantaputra, P.: Phenotypic analysis of Arg227 mutations
of TP63 with emphasis on dental phenotype and micturition difficulties
in EEC syndrome. (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 155A: 228-232, 2011.

42. Su, X.; Chakravarti, D.; Cho, M. S.; Liu, L.; Gi, Y. J.; Lin,
Y.-L.; Leung, M. L.; El-Naggar, A.; Creighton, C. J.; Suraokar, M.
B.; Wistuba, I.; Flores, E. R.: TAp63 suppresses metastasis through
coordinate regulation of Dicer and miRNAs. Nature 467: 986-990,
2010.

43. Suh, E.-K.; Yang, A.; Kettenbach, A.; Bamberger, C.; Michaelis,
A. H.; Zhu, Z.; Elvin, J. A.; Bronson, R. T.; Crum, C. P.; McKeon,
F.: p63 protects the female germ line during meiotic arrest. Nature 444:
624-628, 2006.

44. Suzuki, K.; Haraguchi, R.; Ogata, T.; Barbieri, O.; Alegria, O.;
Vieux-Rochas, M.; Nakagata, N.; Ito, M.; Mills, A. A.; Kurita, T.;
Levi, G.; Yamada, G.: Abnormal urethra formation in mouse models
of split-hand/split-foot malformation type 1 and type 4. Europ. J.
Hum. Genet. 16: 36-44, 2008.

45. Trink, B.; Okami, K.; Wu, L.; Sriuranpong, V.; Jen, J.; Sidransky,
D.: A new human p53 homologue. (Letter) Nature Med. 4: 747-748,
1998. Note: Erratum: Nature Med. 4: 982 only, 1998.

46. Ugur, S. A.; Tolun, A.: Homozygous WNT10b mutation and complex
inheritance in split-hand/foot malformation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17:
2644-2653, 2008.

47. Valenzise, M.; Arrigo, T.; De Luca, F.; Privitera, A.; Frigiola,
A.; Carando, A.; Garelli, E.; Silengo, M.: R298Q mutation of p63
gene in autosomal dominant ectodermal dysplasia associated with arrhythmogenic
right ventricular cardiomyopathy. (Letter) Europ. J. Med. Genet. 51:
497-500, 2008.

48. van Bokhoven, H.; Brunner, H. G.: Splitting p63. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 71: 1-13, 2002. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72: 779
only, 2003.

49. van Bokhoven, H.; Hamel, B. C.; Bamshad, M.; Sangiorgi, E.; Gurrieri,
F.; Duijf, P. H. G.; Vanmolkot, K. R. J.; van Beusekom, E.; van Beersum,
S. E. C.; Celli, J.; Merkx, G. F. M.; Tenconi, R.; and 13 others
: p63 gene mutations in EEC syndrome, limb-mammary syndrome, and isolated
split hand-foot malformation suggest a genotype-phenotype correlation. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 69: 481-492, 2001.

50. van Zelst-Stams, W. A. G.; van Steensel, M. A. M.: A novel TP63
mutation in a family with ADULT syndrome presenting with eczema and
hypothelia. (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A: 1558-1560, 2009.

51. Wu, G.; Nomoto, S.; Hoque, M. O.; Dracheva, T.; Osada, M.; Lee,
C.-C. R.; Dong, S. M.; Guo, Z.; Benoit, N.; Cohen, Y.; Rechthand,
P.; Califano, J.; Moon, C.; Ratovitski, E.; Jen, J.; Sidransky, D.;
Trink, B.: Delta-Np63-alpha and TAp63-alpha regulate transcription
of genes with distinct biological functions in cancer and development. Cancer
Res. 63: 2351-2357, 2003.

52. Yang, A.; Kaghad, M.; Wang, Y.; Gillett, E.; Fleming, M. D.; Dotsch,
V.; Andrews, N. C.; Caput, D.; McKeon, F.: p63, a p53 homolog at
3q27-29, encodes multiple products with transactivating, death-inducing,
and dominant-negative activities. Molec. Cell 2: 305-316, 1998.

53. Yang, A.; Schweitzer, R.; Sun, D.; Kaghad, M.; Walker, N.; Bronson,
R. T.; Tabin, C.; Sharpe, A.; Caput, D.; Crum, C.; McKeon, F.: p63
is essential for regenerative proliferation in limb, craniofacial
and epithelial development. Nature 398: 714-718, 1999.

54. Yi, R.; Poy, M. N.; Stoffel, M.; Fuchs, E.: A skin microRNA promotes
differentiation by repressing 'stemness.' Nature 452: 225-229, 2008.

55. Zarnegar, B. J.; Webster, D. E.; Lopez-Pajares, V.; Hunt, B. V.
S.; Qu, K.; Yan, K. J.; Berk, D. R.; Sen, G. L.; Khavari, P. A.:
Genomic profiling of a human organotypic model of AEC syndrome reveals
ZNF750 as an essential downstream target of mutant TP63. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 91: 435-443, 2012.

56. Zenteno, J. C.; Berdon-Zapata, V.; Kofman-Alfaro, S.; Mutchinick,
O. M.: Isolated ectrodactyly caused by a heterozygous missense mutation
in the transactivation domain of TP63. Am. J. Med. Genet. 134A:
74-76, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/3/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/26/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/5/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/12/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/5/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/27/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/9/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/22/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/4/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/17/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/1/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/16/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/18/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/28/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/21/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/1/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/13/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/5/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/1/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/2/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/21/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/15/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/27/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/21/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/29/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/15/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/5/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/2/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/22/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/5/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/29/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/16/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/17/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/9/2002
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 11/29/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/18/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/8/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/14/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/25/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/11/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/8/1999

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 11/10/1998

EDITED carol: 09/26/2013
carol: 7/26/2013
alopez: 3/14/2013
terry: 11/29/2012
mgross: 10/4/2012
terry: 10/3/2012
mgross: 4/26/2012
carol: 1/11/2012
ckniffin: 1/5/2012
carol: 11/22/2011
alopez: 9/2/2011
wwang: 7/15/2011
terry: 7/12/2011
mgross: 6/8/2011
terry: 5/5/2011
alopez: 1/5/2011
terry: 12/27/2010
terry: 12/8/2010
wwang: 6/10/2010
terry: 6/9/2010
terry: 4/2/2010
wwang: 1/28/2010
terry: 1/22/2010
carol: 12/23/2009
terry: 12/4/2009
carol: 8/17/2009
wwang: 6/15/2009
terry: 6/1/2009
wwang: 5/7/2009
ckniffin: 4/16/2009
mgross: 9/19/2008
wwang: 7/18/2008
terry: 7/18/2008
mgross: 5/29/2008
terry: 5/28/2008
alopez: 5/27/2008
terry: 5/21/2008
wwang: 2/7/2008
terry: 2/1/2008
wwang: 4/20/2007
terry: 4/13/2007
wwang: 2/5/2007
alopez: 2/5/2007
terry: 2/1/2007
carol: 1/25/2007
wwang: 10/6/2006
ckniffin: 10/2/2006
wwang: 9/25/2006
ckniffin: 9/21/2006
mgross: 8/15/2006
carol: 7/11/2006
terry: 6/27/2006
alopez: 5/10/2006
wwang: 11/8/2005
ckniffin: 10/21/2005
wwang: 10/7/2005
terry: 9/29/2005
mgross: 8/15/2005
wwang: 8/5/2005
terry: 8/4/2005
carol: 8/3/2005
carol: 6/2/2005
terry: 5/27/2005
wwang: 5/9/2005
wwang: 5/5/2005
alopez: 3/2/2005
tkritzer: 1/22/2004
tkritzer: 10/6/2003
tkritzer: 8/7/2003
tkritzer: 8/5/2003
carol: 7/10/2003
carol: 1/30/2003
terry: 1/6/2003
tkritzer: 12/10/2002
cwells: 10/29/2002
carol: 10/25/2002
tkritzer: 10/23/2002
terry: 10/16/2002
tkritzer: 7/26/2002
terry: 7/17/2002
alopez: 4/11/2002
terry: 4/9/2002
mgross: 2/21/2002
cwells: 12/14/2001
cwells: 12/5/2001
cwells: 11/29/2001
alopez: 5/11/2001
cwells: 4/26/2001
cwells: 4/18/2001
terry: 3/20/2001
mcapotos: 9/26/2000
carol: 9/26/2000
mcapotos: 9/19/2000
terry: 9/8/2000
alopez: 8/18/2000
terry: 8/14/2000
alopez: 7/25/2000
mgross: 11/16/1999
mgross: 11/11/1999
carol: 4/8/1999
carol: 11/10/1998

608422	TITLE *608422 PANNEXIN 3; PANX3
;;PX3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Bruzzone et al. (2003) cloned Panx3 from a rat hippocampus cDNA library.
The deduced 45-kD protein contains 4 transmembrane domains and
cytoplasmic N and C termini. Northern blot analysis of several rat
tissues detected Panx3 expression only in skin.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PANX3
gene to chromosome 11 (TMAP RH99055).

REFERENCE 1. Bruzzone, R.; Hormuzdi, S. G.; Barbe, M. T.; Herb, A.; Monyer,
H.: Pannexins, a family of gap junction proteins expressed in brain. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 13644-13649, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/23/2004

EDITED mgross: 01/23/2004

602620	TITLE *602620 LEGUMAIN; LGMN
;;PROTEASE, CYSTEINE, 1; PRSC1;;
ASPARAGINYL ENDOPEPTIDASE; AEP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

LGMN, or AEP, is a lysosomal cysteine protease that cleaves after
asparagine residues. It contributes to the processing of antigenic
peptides and to the processing of cathepsins B (CTSB; 116810), H (CTSH;
116820), and L (CTSL1; 116880) from single-chain forms into active
2-chain forms (Liu et al., 2008).

CLONING

As part of a random cDNA sequencing project, Tanaka et al. (1996)
identified a novel human cysteine protease, which they designated PRSC1,
with 40% amino acid identity to hemoglobinase of the schistosome
parasite and 36% identity to a vacuolar processing enzyme of the
soybean. The predicted protein contains 433 amino acids with a
calculated mass of 49 kD. Northern blotting showed expression in most
human tissues, with highest levels in kidney, heart, and placenta.

Chen et al. (1997) purified and cloned the PRSC1 gene, which they termed
legumain. The observed size of the protein is approximately 34 kD. They
showed that the enzyme is glycosylated and acts as a cysteine peptidase
with specificity for asparaginyl bonds.

GENE FUNCTION

Ischemia and seizure cause excessive neuronal excitation that is
associated with brain acidosis and neuronal cell death. Liu et al.
(2008) found that the neurotoxin kainic acid activated Aep in mouse
brain and triggered degradation of Set (600960), a DNase inhibitor,
followed by DNA nicking and neuronal cell death. Pike-L (CENTG1; 605476)
strongly bound Set in the nucleus and protected Set from proteolytic
cleavage by Aep in vitro and in vivo, thereby diminishing DNA damage and
neuronal cell death. Kainic acid or stroke failed to provoke DNA nicking
and neuronal cell death in Aep-deficient mice.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Tanaka et al. (1996) mapped
the LGMN gene to chromosome 14q32.1.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, J.-M.; Dando, P. M.; Rawlings, N. D.; Brown, M. A.; Young,
N. E.; Stevens, R. A.; Hewitt, E.; Watts, C.; Barrett, A. J.: Cloning,
isolation, and characterization of mammalian legumain, an asparaginyl
endopeptidase. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 8090-8098, 1997.

2. Liu, Z.; Jang, S.-W.; Liu, X.; Cheng, D.; Peng, J.; Yepes, M.;
Li, X.; Matthews, S.; Watts, C.; Asano, M.; Hara-Nishimura, I.; Luo,
H. R.; Ye, K.: Neuroprotective actions of PIKE-L by inhibition of
SET proteolytic degradation by asparagine endopeptidase. Molec. Cell 29:
665-678, 2008.

3. Tanaka, T.; Inazawa, J.; Nakamura, Y.: Molecular cloning of a
human cDNA encoding putative cysteine protease (PRSC1) and it chromosome
assignment to 14q32.1 Cytogenet. Cell. Genet. 74: 120-123, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/30/2008

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 5/13/1998

EDITED mgross: 06/03/2008
terry: 5/30/2008
carol: 1/24/2002
dholmes: 5/26/1998

138972	TITLE 138972 CCAAT/ENHANCER-BINDING PROTEIN, GAMMA; CEBPG
;;C/EBP-GAMMA;;
GRANULOCYTE COLONY-STIMULATING FACTOR PROMOTER ELEMENT 1, BINDING
PROTEIN FOR; GPE1BP
DESCRIPTION Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (GCSF; 138970) is a glycoprotein
that regulates proliferation and differentiation of the progenitor cells
of neutrophilic granulocytes. GCSF is induced in macrophages in response
to bacterial endotoxin, i.e., lipopolysaccharide. The promoter region of
human and mouse GCSF genes is highly homologous up to 300 bp from the
transcription initiation site. E. coli chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
(CAT) assay of various mutants in the 300-bp promoter of the mouse GCSF
gene suggested that at least 3 cis-controlling elements are required for
gene expression: GCSF promoter elements (GPE) 1 through 3. Nishizawa et
al. (1991) isolated cDNAs encoding mouse GPE1-binding protein. A
150-amino acid protein deduced from the cDNA has a basic domain and a
leucine zipper motif and seems to be identical to the protein that binds
to the enhancer element of immunoglobulin (Roman et al., 1990). See
147141.

REFERENCE 1. Nishizawa, M.; Wakabayashi-Ito, N.; Nagata, S.: Molecular cloning
of cDNA and a chromosomal gene encoding GPE1-BP, a nuclear protein
which binds to granulocyte colony-stimulating factor promoter element
1. FEBS Lett. 282: 95-97, 1991.

2. Roman, C.; Platero, J. S.; Shuman, J.; Calame, K.: Ig/EBP-1: a
ubiquitously expressed immunoglobulin enhancer binding protein that
is similar to C/EBP and heterodimerizes with C/EBP. Genes Dev. 4:
1404-1415, 1990.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/26/1991

EDITED alopez: 09/29/1999
mimadm: 4/14/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/29/1992
carol: 6/26/1991

612054	TITLE *612054 REQUIRED FOR CELL DIFFERENTIATION 1, S. POMBE, HOMOLOG OF; RQCD1
;;RCD1;;
CCR4-NOT TRANSCRIPTION COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 9; CNOT9
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Okazaki et al. (1998) identified the S. pombe gene Rcd1 as a factor
essential for the commitment to nitrogen starvation-invoked
differentiation. By genomic sequence analysis, they found that the Rcd1
gene is highly conserved throughout eukaryotes, with deduced gene
products in different species showing over 70% sequence homology. They
stated that expression of the human RCD1 homolog is particularly high in
testis, ovary, and thymus, consistent with a role in differentiation.
Hiroi et al. (2002) found that Rcd1 was expressed in virtually all
tissues of early rat embryo, but was particularly abundant in brain,
liver, lung, intestine, and heart. Its level in these tissues decreased
during the later stages of embryogenesis.

GENE FUNCTION

Hiroi et al. (2002) demonstrated that Rcd1 is a transcriptional cofactor
that is critical for retinoic acid (RA)-induced differentiation of F9
mouse teratocarcinoma cells to visceral endoderm cells, at least in
part, by forming complexes with retinoic acid receptors (see 180240) and
activation transcription factor-2 (ATF2; 123811). Antisense
oligonucleotide treatment of embryonic mouse lung explants suggested
that Rcd1 also plays a role in RA-controlled lung development.

Garapaty et al. (2008) determined that both RCD1 and CNOT6 (608951)
enhance ligand-dependent transcriptional activation of nuclear receptors
through an NIF1 (610827) coactivator complex. Garapaty et al. (2008)
demonstrated that RCD1 interacts with NIF1 in vivo and in vitro.
Transient transfection experiments showed that RCD1 enhances the
activity of THRA (190120), RARA (180240), RXRA (180245), and to a lesser
degree, ESR1 (133430) and GCCR (138040). siRNA knockdown of endogenous
RCD1 resulted in a decrease in the ligand-dependent activation of these
receptors.

REFERENCE 1. Garapaty, S.; Mahajan, M. A.; Samuels, H. H.: Components of the
CCR4-NOT complex function as nuclear hormone receptor coactivators
via association with the NRC-interacting factor NIF-1. J. Biol. Chem. 283:
6806-6816, 2008.

2. Hiroi, N.; Ito, T.; Yamamoto, H.; Ochiya, T.; Jinno, S.; Okayama,
H.: Mammalian Rcd1 is a novel transcriptional cofactor that mediates
retinoic acid-induced cell differentiation. EMBO J. 21: 5235-5244,
2002.

3. Okazaki, N.; Okazaki, K.; Watanabe, Y.; Kato-Hayashi, M.; Yamamoto,
M.; Okayama, H.: Novel factor highly conserved among eukaryotes controls
sexual development in fission yeast. Molec. Cell. Biol. 18: 887-895,
1998.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 7/15/2008

EDITED carol: 07/16/2008
carol: 7/16/2008

610103	TITLE *610103 S100 CALCIUM-BINDING PROTEIN, ZETA; S100Z
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the S100 protein family contain 2 calcium-binding EF-hands
and exhibit cell-type specific expression patterns. For additional
background information on S100 proteins, see 114085.

CLONING

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis with the sequence of S100P (600614) as
bait, Gribenko et al. (2001) identified S100Z from a human prostate cDNA
library. S100Z encodes a 99-amino acid protein that shares 57% and 52%
sequence identity with S100A1 (176940) and S100P, respectively. The 2
EF-hand motifs of S100Z display conservation of amino acids known to be
involved in calcium binding. Using circular dichroism, fluorescence
spectroscopy, and equilibrium analytical centrifugation, Gribenko et al.
(2001) showed that S100Z is a dimeric, predominantly alpha-helical
protein that is capable of binding calcium at 2 binding sites with
differing affinities. RT-PCR analysis showed highest expression of S100Z
in spleen and leukocytes. Expression of S100Z was aberrant in some tumor
tissues.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Gribenko et al. (2001) mapped the S100Z
gene to chromosome 5.

REFERENCE 1. Gribenko, A. V.; Hopper, J. E.; Makhatadze, G. I.: Molecular characterization
and tissue distribution of a novel member of the S100 family of EF-hand
proteins. Biochemistry 40: 15538-15548, 2001.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 5/10/2006

EDITED carol: 05/11/2006
carol: 5/10/2006

605450	TITLE *605450 GLUTATHIONE S-TRANSFERASE, ALPHA-4; GSTA4
;;GLUTATHIONE S-TRANSFERASE A4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The glutathione S-transferases (GST; EC 2.5.1.18) catalyze the
conjugation of reduced glutathiones and a variety of electrophiles,
including many known carcinogens and mutagens. The cytosolic GSTs belong
to a large superfamily, with members located on different chromosomes.
For additional information on GSTs, see GSTA1 (138359).

CLONING

By EST database searching and sequencing, Board (1998) isolated a
full-length GSTA4 cDNA clone from a human adult brain cDNA library.
GSTA4 encodes a deduced 222-amino acid protein with a molecular mass of
25.7 kD. The GSTA4 protein shares 52% sequence identity with GSTA1
(138359).

Using partial sequences of mouse Gsta4 to screen a human adult brain
cDNA library, Hubatsch et al. (1998) independently isolated a GSTA4 cDNA
clone. By RT-PCR analysis, Desmots et al. (1998) found by Northern blot
analysis that GSTA4 was expressed at low levels in all tissues tested.

By RT-PCR using gene-specific probes, Morel et al. (2002) demonstrated
that GSTA1, GSTA2, and GSTA4 transcripts are widely expressed in human
tissues, whereas the GSTA3 (605449) transcript appears to be a rare
message subject to splicing defects. Although GSTA5 (607605) appears to
be a functional gene, expression of GSTA5 could not be detected in any
tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Board (1998) showed that recombinant GSTA4 shows very high activity with
reactive carbonyl compounds such as alk-2-enals. Hubatsch et al. (1998)
showed that GSTA4 is highly effective in catalyzing 4-hydroxynonenal, an
important product of peroxidative degradation of arachidonic acid and a
commonly used biomarker for oxidative damage in tissue.

GENE STRUCTURE

Desmots et al. (1998) determined that the GSTA4 gene spans 18 kb and
contains 7 exons.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Desmots et al. (1998) mapped the
GSTA4 gene to chromosome 6p12.

By searching a genomic sequence database with the GSTA1 and GSTA4
sequences, Morel et al. (2002) identified 1 BAC and 3 PAC clones
covering more than 400 kb and containing the entire GST-alpha gene
cluster. The cluster consists of 5 genes, GSTA1, GSTA2, GSTA3, GSTA4,
and GSTA5, as well as 7 pseudogenes.

REFERENCE 1. Board, P. G.: Identification of cDNAs encoding two human alpha
class glutathione transferases (GSTA3 and GSTA4) and the heterologous
expression of GSTA4-4. Biochem. J. 330: 827-831, 1998.

2. Desmots, F.; Rauch, C.; Henry, C.; Guillouzo, A.; Morel, F.: Genomic
organization, 5-prime-flanking region and chromosomal localization
of the human glutathione transferase A4 gene. Biochem. J. 336: 437-442,
1998.

3. Hubatsch, I.; Ridderstrom, M.; Mannervik, B.: Human glutathione
transferase A4-4: an alpha class enzyme with high catalytic efficiency
in the conjugation of 4-hydroxynonenal and other genotoxic products
of lipid peroxidation. Biochem. J. 330: 175-179, 1998.

4. Morel, F.; Rauch, C.; Coles, B.; Le Ferrec, E.; Guillouzo, A.:
The human glutathione transferase alpha locus: genomic organization
of the gene cluster and functional characterization of the genetic
polymorphism in the hGSTA1 promoter. Pharmacogenetics 12: 277-286,
2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/6/2003

CREATED Yen-Pei C. Chang: 12/1/2000

EDITED carol: 09/22/2008
mgross: 3/6/2003
carol: 12/5/2000

604037	TITLE *604037 RAS-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN RAB5C; RAB5C
;;RAB-LIKE, FORMERLY; RABL, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the Rab protein family are small GTPases of the Ras
superfamily that are thought to ensure fidelity in the process of
docking and/or fusion of vesicles with their correct acceptor
compartment (Han et al., 1996).

CLONING

Han et al. (1996) isolated fetal lung cDNAs encoding a RAB protein that
they designated RABL (RAB5-like). The predicted 216-amino acid RABL
protein shares 86% identity with RAB5A (179512) and RAB5B (179514) and
contains the conserved GTP-binding site characteristic of RAS proteins.
RT-PCR analysis revealed that RABL is expressed ubiquitously.

MAPPING

By analysis of cloned segments, Albertsen et al. (1994) determined that
the RAB5C gene, which they called BC1-16, is located in the BRCA1
(113705) gene region on chromosome 17q12-q21. Han et al. (1996) refined
the map position to 17q21.2 using FISH.

REFERENCE 1. Albertsen, H. M.; Smith, S. A.; Mazoyer, S.; Fujimoto, E.; Stevens,
J.; Williams, B.; Rodriguez, P.; Cropp, C. S.; Slijepcevic, P.; Carlson,
M.; Robertson, M.; Bradley, P.; and 9 others: A physical map and
candidate genes in the BRCA1 region on chromosome 17q12-21. Nature
Genet. 7: 472-479, 1994.

2. Han, H.-J.; Sudo, K.; Inazawa, J.; Nakamura, Y.: Isolation and
mapping of a human gene (RABL) encoding a small GTP-binding protein
homologous to the Ras-related RAB gene. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 73:
137-139, 1996.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/21/1999

EDITED wwang: 11/24/2010
mgross: 5/16/2000
jlewis: 7/22/1999

602301	TITLE *602301 K(LYSINE) ACETYLTRANSFERASE 2A; KAT2A
;;GCN5;;
GENERAL CONTROL OF AMINO ACID SYNTHESIS, YEAST, HOMOLOG-LIKE 2; GCN5L2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

KAT2A, or GCN5, is a histone acetyltransferase (HAT) that functions
primarily as a transcriptional activator. It also functions as a
repressor of NF-kappa-B (see 164011) by promoting ubiquitination of the
NF-kappa-B subunit RELA (164014) in a HAT-independent manner (Mao et
al., 2009).

CLONING

The ability of DNA-bound transcriptional activator proteins to enhance
the initiation rate of RNA polymerase II-mediated gene transcription
hinges on their potential to interact functionally with the general
transcription machinery bound at the basal promoter. Candau et al.
(1996) identified expressed sequence tags of possible human homologs of
the yeast transcriptional activator proteins ADA2 and GCN5. Full-length
cDNAs, designated TADA2L (602276) and GCN5L2, were isolated from testis.
The GCN5L2 predicted 427-amino acid protein is 43% identical to the
yeast protein. GCN5L2 was shown to function experimentally as an adaptor
in a human cell line. Yang et al. (1996) also cloned GCN5L2; their clone
had an additional 49 N-terminal amino acids. Yang et al. (1996) reported
that GCN5L2 has significant histone acetyltransferase activity with core
histones, but not with nucleosome core particles. By Northern blot
analysis, Carter et al. (1997) detected a 4.0-kb GCN5L2 message in all
tissues examined, with most abundant expression in ovary.

GENE FUNCTION

Georgakopoulos and Thireos (1992) found that the GCN5 protein, a
regulator of transcription activation in yeast, promotes maximal levels
of transcription by 2 transcriptional activators, GCN4 (see 165160 and
165360) and the HAP2-HAP3-HAP4 complex (see 189903). The GCN4 protein
activates transcription of a large number of amino acid biosynthetic
genes under limiting amino acid conditions and the HAP2-HAP3-HAP4
complex is thought to mediate transcription of genes involved in
respiratory functions.

Wang et al. (1997) showed that both human GCN5L2 and yeast gcn5 had HAT
activity. They demonstrated in vitro binding between human and yeast
GCN5 with human and yeast ADA2 (see 602276). Chimeras between yeast gcn5
and the HAT domain of human GCN5L2 complemented a yeast gcn5 null
mutant. These findings suggested that yeast and human GCN5 proteins are
functionally similar and that there is a link between histone
acetylation and transcriptional activation.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 7 (SCA7; 164500) is a neurodegenerative
disorder caused by a CAG repeat expansion in the SCA7 gene (607640),
leading to elongation of a polyglutamine tract in ataxin-7. A putative
ataxin-7 yeast ortholog, SGF73, is a component of the SAGA (Spt/Ada/Gcn5
acetylase) multisubunit complex, a coactivator required for
transcription of a subset of RNA polymerase II (see 180660)-dependent
genes (Gavin et al., 2002; Sanders et al., 2002). Helmlinger et al.
(2004) showed that ataxin-7 is an integral component of the mammalian
SAGA-like complexes TFTC (TATA-binding protein-free TAF-containing
complex) and STAGA (SPT3 (602947)/TAF9 (600822)/GCN5 acetyltransferase
complex). Immunopurified ataxin-7 complex retained histone
acetyltransferase (see 603053) activity, characteristic for TFTC-like
complexes. The authors identified a 71-amino acid domain in ataxin-7
that is required for interaction with TFTC/STAGA subunits and is
conserved highly through evolution, allowing the identification of a
SCA7 gene family. This domain contains a conserved cys3-his motif that
binds zinc, forming a new zinc-binding domain. Polyglutamine expansion
in ataxin-7 did not affect its incorporation into TFTC/STAGA complexes
purified from SCA7 patient cells. Helmlinger et al. (2004) concluded
that ataxin-7 is the human ortholog of the yeast SAGA SGF73 subunit and
is a bona fide subunit of the human TFTC-like transcriptional complexes.

Using mass spectrometry to identify subunits of the STAGA and ADA2A
(TADA2A; 602276)-containing (ATAC) histone acetyltransferase complexes
in HeLa cells, Wang et al. (2008) showed that both complexes could
incorporate either GCN5 or PCAF (KAT2B; 602303) as acetyltransferase.
Both complexes shared the common subunits ADA3 (TADA3; 602945) and
STAF36 (CCDC101; 613374), but differed by the inclusion of several
subunits, including ADA2B (TADA2B; 608790) in STAGA and ADA2A and the
scaffolding protein YEATS2 (613373) in ATAC. Human ATAC and STAGA
specifically acetylated nucleosomal histone H3 (see 602812), and ATAC
repressed transcription of a reporter gene in a dose-dependent manner.
Wang et al. (2008) concluded that STAGA and ATAC complexes link
extracellular signals to modification of chromatin structure and
regulation of the basal transcriptional machinery.

Using knockdown, transfection, and protein interaction experiments with
human cell lines and mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Mao et al. (2009)
showed that a complex of COMMD1 (607238), GCN5, and CUL2 (603135)
mediated ubiquitination of the NF-kappa-B subunit RELA (164014), an
event required for proper termination of RELA-promoter interactions.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments showed that COMMD1 or GCN5
deficiency prolonged promoter occupancy by RELA. IKK (see
600664)-dependent phosphorylation of RELA on ser468 enhanced binding of
GCN5 to RELA and RELA ubiquitination. The HAT activity of GNC5 was
dispensable for its role in RELA degradation.

Robert et al. (2011) showed that HDAC inhibition/ablation specifically
counteracts yeast Mec1 (ortholog of human ATR, 601215) activation,
double-strand break processing, and single-strand DNA-RFA nucleofilament
formation. Moreover, the recombination protein Sae2 (human CTIP; 604124)
is acetylated and degraded after HDAC inhibition. Two HDACs, Hda1 (see
HDAC4, 605314) and Rpd3 (HDAC1; 601241) and 1 HAT, Gcn5, have key roles
in these processes. Robert et al. (2011) also found that HDAC inhibition
triggers Sae2 degradation by promoting autophagy that affects the DNA
damage sensitivity of Hda1 and Rpd3 mutants. Rapamycin, which stimulates
autophagy by inhibiting Tor (MTOR; 601231), also causes Sae2
degradation. Robert et al. (2011) proposed that Rpd3, Hda1, and Gcn5
control chromosome stability by coordinating the ATR checkpoint and
double-strand break processing with autophagy.

MAPPING

Carter et al. (1997) mapped the GCN5L2 gene to 17q21 by fluorescence in
situ hybridization. By linkage analysis with an interspecific backcross
panel, Xu et al. (1998) mapped the mouse Gcn5 gene to the distal region
of chromosome 11.

ANIMAL MODEL

Histone acetyltransferases regulate transcription. Gcn5 (encoded by
Gcn5l2) and Pcaf (602303), histone acetyltransferases in the mouse,
share similar sequences and enzymatic activities. Both interact with
p300 and CBP, encoded by Ep300 (602700) and Crebbp (600140),
respectively, which are 2 other histone acetyltransferases that
integrate multiple signaling pathways. Xu et al. (2000) showed that the
gene Pcaf is dispensable in mice. In contrast, Gcn5l2-null embryos died
during embryogenesis. Growth was severely retarded by day 8.5
postcoitum, and embryos failed to form dorsal mesoderm lineages,
including chordamesoderm and paraxial mesoderm. Loss of dorsal mesoderm
lineages was due to a high incidence of apoptosis in the Gcn5l2 mutants
that began before the onset of morphologic abnormalities. Embryos null
for both Gcn5l2 and Pcaf showed even more severe defects, indicating
that these histone acetyltransferases have overlapping function during
embryogenesis.

REFERENCE 1. Candau, R.; Moore, P. A.; Wang, L.; Barlev, N.; Ying, C. Y.; Rosen,
C. A.; Berger, S. L.: Identification of human proteins functionally
conserved with the yeast putative adaptors ADA2 and GCN5. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 16: 593-602, 1996.

2. Carter, K. C.; Wang, L.; Shell, B. K.; Zamir, I.; Berger, S. L.;
Moore, P. A.: The human transcriptional adaptor genes TADA2L and
GCN5L2 colocalize to chromosome 17q12-q21 and display a similar tissue
expression pattern. Genomics 40: 497-500, 1997.

3. Gavin, A. C.; Bosche, M.; Krause, R.; Grandi, P.; Marzioch, M.;
Bauer, A.; Schultz, J.; Rick, J. M.; Michon, A. M.; Cruciat, C.-M.;
Remor, M.; Hofert, C.; and 26 others: Functional organization of
the yeast proteome by systematic analysis of protein complexes. Nature 415:
141-147, 2002.

4. Georgakopoulos, T.; Thireos, G.: Two distinct yeast transcriptional
activators require the function of the GCN5 protein to promote normal
levels of transcription. EMBO J. 11: 4145-4152, 1992.

5. Helmlinger, D.; Hardy, S.; Sasorith, S.; Klein, F.; Robert, F.;
Weber, C.; Miguet, L.; Potier, N.; Van-Dorsselaer, A.; Wurtz, J.-M.;
Mandel, J.-L.; Tora, L.; Devys, D.: Ataxin-7 is a subunit of GCN5
histone acetyltransferase-containing complexes. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
1257-1265, 2004.

6. Mao, X.; Gluck, N.; Li, D.; Maine, G. N.; Li, H.; Zaidi, I. W.;
Repaka, A.; Mayo, M. W.; Burstein, E.: GCN5 is a required cofactor
for a ubiquitin ligase that targets NF-kappa-B/RelA. Genes Dev. 23:
849-861, 2009.

7. Robert, T.; Vanoli, F.; Chiolo, I.; Shubassi, G.; Bernstein, K.
A.; Rothstein, R.; Botrugno, O. A.; Parazzoli, D.; Oldani, A.; Minucci,
S.; Foiani, M.: HDACs link the DNA damage response, processing of
double-strand breaks and autophagy. Nature 471: 74-79, 2011.

8. Sanders, S. L.; Jennings, J.; Canutescu, A.; Link, A. J.; Weil,
P. A.: Proteomics of the eukaryotic transcription machinery: identification
of proteins associated with components of yeast TFIID by multidimensional
mass spectrometry. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 4723-4738, 2002.

9. Wang, L.; Mizzen, C.; Ying, C.; Candau, R.; Barlev, N.; Brownell,
J.; Allis, C. D.; Berger, S. L.: Histone acetyltransferase activity
is conserved between yeast and human GCN5 and is required for complementation
of growth and transcriptional activation. Molec. Cell. Biol. 17:
519-527, 1997.

10. Wang, Y.-L.; Faiola, F.; Xu, M.; Pan, S.; Martinez, E.: Human
ATAC is a GCN5/PCAF-containing acetylase complex with a novel NC2-like
histone fold module that interacts with the TATA-binding protein. J.
Biol. Chem. 283: 33808-33815, 2008.

11. Xu, W.; Edmondson, D. G.; Evrard, Y. A.; Wakamiya, M.; Behringer,
R. R.; Roth, S. Y.: Loss of Gcn5l2 leads to increased apoptosis and
mesodermal defects during mouse development. Nature Genet. 26: 229-232,
2000.

12. Xu, W.; Edmondson, D. G.; Roth, S. Y.: Mammalian GCN5 and P/CAF
acetyltransferases have homologous amino-terminal domains important
for recognition of nucleosomal substrates. Molec. Cell. Biol. 18:
5659-5669, 1998.

13. Yang, X.-J.; Ogryzko, V. V.; Nishikawa, J.; Howard, B. H.; Nakatani,
Y.: A p300/CBP-associated factor that competes with the adenoviral
oncoprotein E1A. Nature 382: 319-324, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 06/20/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/21/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/16/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/28/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/21/2000
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 2/24/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/29/1998

EDITED alopez: 06/20/2011
terry: 9/7/2010
terry: 5/20/2010
mgross: 4/21/2010
mgross: 9/16/2009
terry: 8/28/2009
wwang: 4/27/2009
alopez: 9/26/2000
terry: 9/21/2000
terry: 2/25/1999
carol: 2/24/1999
dholmes: 4/15/1998
dholmes: 4/7/1998
alopez: 1/29/1998

602930	TITLE *602930 RNA EXONUCLEASE 4, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; REXO4
;;REX4, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; REX4;;
PREVENTS MITOTIC CATASTROPHE 2, XENOPUS, HOMOLOG OF; XPMC2H
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

XPMC2 is a Xenopus gene identified on the basis of its ability to
correct a mitotic defect in S. pombe. Using an exon trapping strategy,
Kwiatkowska et al. (1997) identified a human homolog of XPMC2 within a
BAC from chromosomal region 9q34. The gene, which they designated
XPMC2H, encodes a predicted 422-amino acid protein. Like the Xenopus
protein, XPMC2H is a basic protein, with a pI of 10.6, and contains a
nuclear localization signal and potential CDC2 kinase (116940) sites.
The 2 protein sequences are 52% identical.

GENE STRUCTURE

The XPMC2H gene contains 8 exons (Kwiatkowska et al., 1997).

MAPPING

Kwiatkowska et al. (1997) mapped the XPMC2H gene to chromosome 9q34.

REFERENCE 1. Kwiatkowska, J.; Slomski, R.; Jozwiak, S.; Short, M. P.; Kwiatkowski,
D. J.: Human XPMC2H: cDNA cloning, mapping to 9q34, genomic structure,
and evaluation as TSC1. Genomics 44: 350-354, 1997.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/4/1998

EDITED carol: 02/18/2010
wwang: 9/28/2005
alopez: 8/4/1998

148059	TITLE *148059 KERATIN 7; KRT7
;;K7;;
KERATIN, SIMPLE EPITHELIAL;;
KERATIN, TYPE II, CYTOSKELETAL, 7; K2C7;;
SARCOLECTIN; SCL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Keratins are proteins that compose the 8-nm intermediate filaments in
epithelial cells. KRT7 is a type II keratin of simple nonkeratinizing
epithelia (Glass et al., 1985).

CLONING

By cross-hybridization with a K6A (148041) cDNA probe, Glass et al.
(1985) cloned KRT7, which they designated K7, from a mesothelial cell
cDNA library. The deduced 489-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of about 54 kD. K7 contains 4 central alpha-helical
segments with heptad repeats of hydrophobic residues characteristic of a
coiled-coil region. Within this domain, K7 shares 73% homology with
epidermal K6B (148042). The nonhelical N and C termini of K7 are
substantially different in sequence and size from those of K6B and other
epidermal type II keratins. K7 has an isoelectric point of 5.8, which is
more acidic than those of other type II keratins. Northern blot analysis
detected a 1.7-kb transcript in epidermis, bronchus, and mesothelium,
but not in colon, exocervix, or liver.

By screening a genomic library using probes to the 5-prime and 3-prime
K7 cDNA reported by Glass et al. (1985), Glass and Fuchs (1988) isolated
overlapping genomic clones for K7. They identified a 1-bp insertion in
the K7 coding sequence that was inadvertently omitted by Glass et al.
(1985). The change results in a deduced 468-amino acid K7 protein with a
different N terminus than that reported by Glass et al. (1985).

Smith et al. (2002) cloned K7 from human, mouse, and rat kangaroo
libraries. The deduced human K7 protein contains 469 amino acids and has
a calculated molecular mass of 51.4 kD. K7 shares 82% amino acid
identity with mouse K7 and 76% identity with rat kangaroo K7. Western
blot analysis of mouse tissues detected K7 expression in bladder, but
not in epidermis. Smith et al. (2002) found K7 expression restricted to
ducts and specific glands of simple epithelial tissues; examples
included isolated cells in the acini of mammary gland, cells of lung
alveoli and bronchiolar epithelium, kidney collecting duct, and Brunner
glands of the duodenum.

GENE FUNCTION

Glass and Fuchs (1988) determined that expression of endogenous K7 in
rat kangaroo kidney cells was upregulated by retinoic acid, although
retinoic acid did not affect basal K7 expression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Glass and Fuchs (1988) determined that the KRT7 gene contains 8 exons.
The 5-prime upstream region contains a TATA-like sequence and a CCAAT
sequence. The promoter region contains binding sites for SP1 (189906),
AP1 (see 165160), and FOS (164810).

Smith et al. (2002) determined that the KRT7 gene contains 9 exons and
spans more than 15.6 kb. They identified 4 CpG islands conserved in the
human, mouse, and rat kangaroo KRT7 genes. The first island is located
upstream of exon 1, the second is within exon 1, the third, a short
island, is located toward the end of intron 4, and the fourth is
downstream of exon 9.

MAPPING

By Southern blot analysis, Glass et al. (1985) determined that KRT7 is a
single copy gene; however, Glass and Fuchs (1988) presented evidence
that there may be other copies.

Rosenberg et al. (1991) assigned the K7 gene to chromosome 12 using
Southern blot analysis of somatic cell hybrids. They sublocalized the
gene to chromosome 12q12-q14 by in situ hybridization of metaphase
chromosomes. By genomic sequence analysis, Smith et al. (2002)
determined that the human and mouse KRT7 genes map to the periphery of
the type II keratin gene cluster.

REFERENCE 1. Glass, C.; Fuchs, E.: Isolation, sequence, and differential expression
of a human K7 gene in simple epithelial cells. J. Cell. Biol. 107:
1337-1350, 1988.

2. Glass, C.; Kim, K. H.; Fuchs, E.: Sequence and expression of a
human type II mesothelial keratin. J. Cell Biol. 101: 2366-2373,
1985.

3. Rosenberg, M.; Fuchs, E.; Le Beau, M. M.; Eddy, R. L.; Shows, T.
B.: Three epidermal and one simple epithelial type II keratin genes
map to human chromosome 12. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 57: 33-38, 1991.

4. Smith, F. J. D.; Porter, R. M.; Corden, L. D.; Lunny, D. P.; Lane,
E. B.; McLean, W. H. I.: Cloning of human, murine, and marsupial
keratin 7 and a survey of K7 expression in the mouse. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 297: 818-827, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/10/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/9/1991

EDITED mgross: 11/12/2003
terry: 11/10/2003
alopez: 6/2/1997
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 10/9/1991

610969	TITLE *610969 TRAFFICKING PROTEIN PARTICLE COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 1; TRAPPC1
;;BET5, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
MELANOMA UBIQUITOUS MUTATED 2; MUM2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening a PAC library with a cDNA clone isolated from a melanoma
cell line, followed by 5-prime RACE, Chiari et al. (1999) obtained
TRAPPC1, which they called MUM2. The deduced 145-amino acid protein is
homologous to yeast Bet5. Northern blot analysis detected TRAPPC1 at 0.8
kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Chiari et al. (1999) noted that yeast Bet5 is implicated in vesicular
transport of proteins from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi. They
found that wildtype TRAPPC1 could complement Bet5 function in yeast with
a disrupted Bet5 gene. They concluded that the function of TRAPPC1 is
conserved in eukaryotic cells and that it is involved in vesicular
transport of proteins.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chiari et al. (1999) determined that the TRAPPC1 gene contains 5 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Chiari et al. (1999) mapped the TRAPPC1
gene to chromosome 17p13.

REFERENCE 1. Chiari, R.; Foury, F.; De Plaen, E.; Baurain, J.-F.; Thonnard,
J.; Coulie, P. G.: Two antigens recognized by autologous cytolytic
T lymphocytes on a melanoma result from a single point mutation in
an essential housekeeping gene. Cancer Res. 59: 5785-5792, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/24/2007

EDITED wwang: 05/29/2007
wwang: 4/27/2007
wwang: 4/25/2007
wwang: 4/24/2007

