613374	TITLE *613374 COILED-COIL DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 101; CCDC101
;;STAF36
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CCDC101 is a subunit of 2 histone acetyltransferase complexes: the ADA2A
(TADA2A; 602276)-containing (ATAC) complex and the SPT3 (SUPT3H;
602947)-TAF9 (600822)-GCN5 (KAT2A; 602301)/PCAF (KAT2B; 602303)
acetylase (STAGA) complex. Both of these complexes contain either GCN5
or PCAF, which are paralogous acetyltransferases (Wang et al., 2008).

CLONING

Using mass spectrometry to identify subunits of the ATAC and STAGA
complexes in HeLa cells, Wang et al. (2008) identified CCDC101, which
they called STAF36. STAF36 had an apparent molecular mass of 36 kD by
SDS-PAGE.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the CCDC101 gene to chromosome 16p11.2 based on an
alignment of the CCDC101 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK057008) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/20/2010.

2. Wang, Y.-L.; Faiola, F.; Xu, M.; Pan, S.; Martinez, E.: Human
ATAC is a GCN5/PCAF-containing acetylase complex with a novel NC2-like
histone fold module that interacts with the TATA-binding protein. J.
Biol. Chem. 283: 33808-33815, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/20/2010

EDITED mgross: 04/20/2010
mgross: 4/20/2010

604264	TITLE *604264 CADHERIN EGF LAG SEVEN-PASS G-TYPE RECEPTOR 3; CELSR3
;;EPIDERMAL GROWTH FACTOR-LIKE 1; EGFL1;;
MULTIPLE EPIDERMAL GROWTH FACTOR-LIKE DOMAINS 2; MEGF2;;
FLAMINGO, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 1; FMI1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The domain that characterizes epidermal growth factor (EGF; 131530)
consists of approximately 50 amino acids with 3 disulfide bonds.
EGF-like domains are believed to play a critical role in a number of
extracellular events, including cell adhesion and receptor-ligand
interactions. Proteins with EGF-like domains often consist of more than
1,000 amino acids, have multiple copies of the EGF-like domain, and
contain additional domains known to be involved in specific
protein-protein interactions. To identify proteins containing EGF-like
domains, Nakayama et al. (1998) searched a database of long cDNA
sequences randomly selected from a human brain cDNA library for those
that encode an EGF-like motif. They identified several partial cDNAs
encoding novel proteins with EGF-like domains, such as EGFL1, which they
named MEGF2. Nakayama et al. (1998) isolated a rat cDNA containing the
complete Megf2 coding sequence. The predicted Megf2 protein has a signal
sequence, 8 cadherin motifs (see 603006), 6 EGF-like domains, 2 laminin
G domains (see 601033), 7 transmembrane domains, and a cytoplasmic
proline-rich sequence. Megf2 appears to have a domain structure
identical to that of human MEGF3 (604265), whose partial cDNA was also
isolated by the authors. Northern blot analysis detected Megf2
expression in several regions of rat brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Photoreceptor neurons (R cells) in the Drosophila visual system
elaborate a precise map of visual space in the brain via modules called
ommatidia, each of which contains 8 photoreceptor cells (R1-R8). In a
screen for visual behavior mutants, Lee et al. (2003) identified alleles
of flamingo that disrupt the precise maps elaborated by these neurons.
They proposed that flamingo is directly involved in mediating
appropriate R-cell growth cone target selection in the brain.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Wu and Maniatis (2000) determined that the
FMI1 gene, like the FMI2 gene (CELSR1; 604523), contains 35 exons. All 9
protocadherin ectodomain repeats are encoded by the large first exon.
The FMI1 introns are smaller than those of FMI2.

MAPPING

Using a radiation hybrid mapping panel, Nakayama et al. (1998) mapped
the EGFL1 gene to 3p24.1-p21.2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Tissir et al. (2005) found that homozygous Celsr3-null mice were born in
mendelian proportions but died a few hours after birth of central
ventilation failure. Celsr3 inactivation resulted in marked malformation
in the forebrain, absence of anterior commissure and internal capsule,
and abnormalities in major axonal tracts. Celsr3 inactivation did not
alter neuronal maturation. The neural phenotype in Celsr3-null mice was
similar to that caused by inactivation of Fzd3 (606143). Tissir et al.
(2005) showed that Celsr3 and Fzd3 are expressed together in developing
mouse neurons and suggested that both proteins may be involved in a
signaling pathway essential in fiber tract formation.

Tracts such as the anterior commissure and internal capsule are
defective in mice with null mutation of Celsr3. Zhou et al. (2008)
generated a conditional Celsr3 allele, allowing regional inactivation.
Inactivation of telencephalon, ventral forebrain, or cortex demonstrated
essential roles for Celsr3 in neurons that project axons to the anterior
commissure and subcerebral targets, as well as in cells that guide axons
through the internal capsule. When Celsr3 was inactivated in cortex,
subcerebral projections failed to grow, yet corticothalamic axons
developed normally, indicating that besides guidepost cells, additional
Celsr3-independent cues can assist their progression. Zhou et al. (2008)
concluded that these observations provided in vivo evidence that
Celsr3-mediated interactions between axons and guidepost cells govern
axonal tract formation in mammals.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
CELSR3, MET2630ILE (dbSNP 149614835)

This variant is classified as a variant of unknown significance because
its contribution to early infantile epileptic encephalopathy has not
been confirmed.

In 3 sibs, born of consanguineous Arab-Palestinian parents, with early
infantile epileptic encephalopathy, global developmental delay, and
cerebellar atrophy, Edvardson et al. (2013) identified a homozygous
C-to-T transition in the CELSR3 gene, resulting in a met2630-to-ile
(M2630I; dbSNP rs149614835) substitution at a conserved residue. The 3
patients also carried a homozygous mutation in the CACNA2D2 gene
(L1040P; 607082.0001). In vitro expression studies in Xenopus oocytes
showed that the CACNA2D2 variant protein decreased currents of N- and
L-type calcium channels and caused slower inactivation in N-type
channels, suggestive of a pathogenic effect. Edvardson et al. (2013) did
not focus on the CELSR3 variant because the patients did not have as
severe brain malformations as noted in Celsr3-null mice (Tissir et al.,
2005); however, a role for the M2630I variant could not be excluded.

REFERENCE 1. Edvardson, S.; Oz, S.; Abulhijaa, F. A.; Taher, F. B.; Shaag, A.;
Zenvirt, S.; Dascal, N.; Elpeleg, O.: Early infantile epileptic encephalopathy
associated with a high voltage gated calcium channelopathy. J. Med.
Genet. 50: 118-123, 2013.

2. Lee, R. C.; Clandinin, T. R.; Lee, C.-H.; Chen, P.-L.; Meinertzhagen,
I. A.; Zipursky, S. L.: The protocadherin flamingo is required for
axon target selection in the Drosophila visual system. Nature Neurosci. 6:
557-563, 2003.

3. Nakayama, M.; Nakajima, D.; Nagase, T.; Nomura, N.; Seki, N.; Ohara,
O.: Identification of high-molecular-weight proteins with multiple
EGF-like motifs by motif-trap screening. Genomics 51: 27-34, 1998.

4. Tissir, F.; Bar, I.; Jossin, Y.; Goffinet, A. M.: Protocadherin
Celsr3 is crucial in axonal tract development. Nature Neurosci. 8:
451-457, 2005. Note: Erratum: Nature Neurosci. 9: 147 only, 2006.

5. Wu, Q.; Maniatis, T.: Large exons encoding multiple ectodomains
are a characteristic feature of protocadherin genes. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 97: 3124-3129, 2000.

6. Zhou, L.; Bar, I.; Achouri, Y.; Campbell, K.; De Backer, O.; Hebert,
J. M.; Jones, K.; Kessaris, N.; Lambert de Rouvroit, C.; O'Leary,
D.; Richardson, W. D.; Goffinet, A. M.; Tissir, F.: Early forebrain
wiring: genetic dissection using conditional Celsr3 mutant mice. Science 320:
946-949, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/5/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/11/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/27/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/20/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/2/2001

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 10/28/1999

EDITED terry: 04/04/2013
carol: 3/11/2013
ckniffin: 3/5/2013
alopez: 6/13/2008
terry: 6/11/2008
mgross: 2/3/2006
terry: 1/27/2006
alopez: 6/3/2003
carol: 5/20/2003
ckniffin: 5/20/2003
mgross: 10/2/2001
carol: 12/19/2000
mgross: 10/29/1999
psherman: 10/29/1999

164770	TITLE *164770 COLONY-STIMULATING FACTOR 1 RECEPTOR; CSF1R
;;MCSFR;;
ONCOGENE FMS; FMS;;
c-FMS;;
CD115 ANTIGEN; CD115;;
V-FMS MCDONOUGH FELINE SARCOMA VIRAL ONCOGENE HOMOLOG, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The CSF1R gene, also known as c-FMS, encodes a tyrosine kinase growth
factor receptor for colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF1; 120420), the
macrophage- and monocyte-specific growth factor (Ridge et al., 1990).

CLONING

How et al. (1996) determined the sequences of the homologs of the human
PDGFRB and CSF1R genes in the pufferfish (Fugu rubripes). Amino acid
sequences of the Fugu and human PGFRB and CSF1R genes showed an overall
homology of 45% and 39%, respectively.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hampe et al. (1989) demonstrated that the FMS gene consists of 21 small
exons interrupted by introns ranging in size from 6.3 kb to less than
0.1 kb.

Roberts et al. (1988) demonstrated that a 5-prime untranslated exon of
CSF1R is separated by a 26-kb intron from the 32-kb receptor coding
sequences. Furthermore, the 3-prime end of the PDGFRB gene is located
less than 0.5 kb upstream from this exon. The as-yet-unidentified CSF1R
promoter/enhancer sequences may be confined to the nucleotides
separating the 2 genes or could potentially lie within the PDGFR gene
itself. Similarities in chromosomal localization, organization, and
encoded amino acid sequences suggested that the CSF1R and PDGFR genes
arose through duplication. The human homolog of the murine Fim2 proviral
integration region corresponds to the 5-prime end of the FMS gene.

- Pseudogene

During sequence analysis of the first intron of the human FMS gene, Sapi
et al. (1994) identified an open reading frame encoding the ribosomal
protein L7 (RPL7; 604166). The sequence was identical to the full-length
RPL7 cDNA sequence but lacked any recognizable introns, had a 30-bp
poly(A) tail, and was bracketed by 2 perfect direct repeats of 14 bp.
Sapi et al. (1994) demonstrated that despite the fact that the 5-prime
flanking region of the RPL7 sequence contained a potential TATA box
upstream of an intact open reading frame, the pseudogene (RPL7P) was not
actively transcribed.

MAPPING

The FMS oncogene was assigned to chromosome 5 by study of mouse-man
somatic cell hybrids. The location was narrowed to 5q34 by the study of
hamster-human cell hybrids with well-defined deletions of 5q (Groffen et
al., 1984). The order on the long arm was found to be
centromere--leuS--HEXB--EMTB--FMS--CHR. By in situ hybridization, Le
Beau et al. (1986) assigned the FMS gene to chromosome 5q33.2 or 5q33.3
and the GMCSF (138960) gene to chromosome 5q23-q31.

Roberts et al. (1988) demonstrated that the CSF1R gene and the PDGFR1
(173410) gene are physically associated in a head-to-tail array, with
less than 500 bp between the polyadenylation signal of the PDGFRB gene
and the transcription start point of the CSF1R gene. By pulsed field gel
electrophoresis, Eccles (1991) demonstrated that the same is true in the
mouse where a 425-kb fragment hybridizes with the 3-prime end of PDGFR1
and the 5-prime end of CSF1R. In Fugu (pufferfish), How et al. (1996)
demonstrated that the 2 genes are closely linked in a head-to-tail array
with 2.2 kb of intergenic sequence.

Three mouse genomic domains, Fim1, Fim2, and Fim3, have been described
as proviral integration regions frequently involved in the early stages
of myeloblastic leukemogenesis induced in vivo or in vitro by the Friend
murine leukemia virus. Fim2 has been identified as the 5-prime end of
the Fms protooncogene. Van Cong et al. (1987, 1989) confirmed the
localization of human FIM2/FMS on chromosome 5q33. By Southern blot
analysis of DNA from human/rodent hybrids and by in situ hybridization,
they mapped FIM1 to human chromosome 6p23-p22.3 and FIM3 to human
chromosome 3q27.

Gross (2013) mapped the CSF1R gene to chromosome 5q32 based on an
alignment of the CSF1R sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC047521) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Kondo et al. (2000) showed that a clonogenic common lymphoid progenitor,
a bone marrow-resident cell that gives rise exclusively to lymphocytes
(T, B, and natural killer cells), can be redirected to the myeloid
lineage by stimulation through exogenously expressed interleukin-2
receptor (146710) and GMCSF receptor (138981, 306250). Analysis of
mutants of the beta-chain of the IL2 receptor revealed that the
granulocyte and monocyte differentiation signals are triggered by
different cytoplasmic domains, showing that the signaling pathways
responsible for these unique developmental outcomes are separable.
Finally, Kondo et al. (2000) showed that the endogenous myelomonocytic
cytokine receptors for GM-CSF and macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(CSF1R) are expressed at low to moderate levels on the more primitive
hematopoietic stem cells, are absent on common lymphoid progenitors, and
are upregulated after myeloid lineage induction by IL2 (147680). Kondo
et al. (2000) concluded that cytokine signaling can regulate cell fate
decisions and proposed that a critical step in lymphoid commitment is
downregulation of cytokine receptors that drive myeloid cell
development.

Faccio et al. (2003) retrovirally transduced beta-3 integrin (ITGB3;
173470) -/- osteoclast precursors with chimeric CSF1R constructs
containing various cytoplasmic domain mutations and found that CSF1R
tyr697 was required for normalization of osteoclastogenesis and ERK
activation (see 176948). Overexpression of FOS (164810) normalized the
number of ITGB3 -/- osteoclasts in vitro but not their ability to resorb
dentin. Faccio et al. (2003) concluded that whereas CSF1R and
alpha-V-beta-3 integrin collaborate in the osteoclastogenic process
through shared activation of the ERK/FOS signaling pathway, the integrin
is essential for matrix degradation.

Using fate mapping analysis, Ginhoux et al. (2010) showed that adult
microglia derive from primitive macrophages. They showed that microglia
develop in mice that lack colony-stimulating factor-1 (CSF1; 120420) but
are absent in Csf1 receptor-deficient mice. In vivo lineage tracing
studies established that adult microglia derive from primitive myeloid
progenitors expressing Runx1 (151385) that arise before embryonic day 8.
Ginhoux et al. (2010) concluded that their results identified microglia
as an ontogenically distinct population in the mononuclear phagocyte
system and have implications for the use of embryonically derived
microglial progenitors for the treatment of various brain disorders.

CYTOGENETICS

Le Beau et al. (1986) found that the FMS and GM-CSF genes were both
deleted from chromosome 5q- in bone marrow cells of 2 patients with
refractory anemia and del(5)(q15-q33.3) (see chromosome 5q deletion
syndrome; 153550).

Morgan et al. (1986) pointed out that a break at 5q35 has been found in
several cases of malignant histiocytosis, a neoplastic process
characterized by fever, progressive wasting, lymphadenopathy,
hepatosplenomegaly, and the proliferation of atypical histiocytes at all
stages of maturation with frequent phagocytic activity. They suggested
that at the molecular level the change in band 5q35 may affect the FMS
oncogene responsible for the receptor for mononuclear-phagocyte growth
factor and thereby have a role in causing malignant histiocytosis.
Benz-Lemoine et al. (1988) also suggested that a breakpoint in 5q35 may
be critical to the development of malignant histiocytosis.

Boultwood et al. (1991) found loss of both CSF1R alleles in 10 patients
with myelodysplasia and a 5q deletion; 6 were hemizygous and 4 were
homozygous for CSF1R loss. Boultwood et al. (1991) suggested that loss
of this hemopoietic growth factor receptor gene may also be important in
the pathogenesis of myeloid leukemia.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Somatic Mutations

Among 110 patients with myelodysplastic and leukemic disorders, Ridge et
al. (1990) found somatic mutations in codon 969 of the CSF1R gene in 14
(12.7%) and in codon 301 in 2 (1.8%). The tyrosine residue at codon 969
was shown to be involved in a negative regulatory activity, which is
disrupted by amino acid substitutions. Mutations at codon 301 lead to
neoplastic transformation by ligand independence and constitutive
tyrosine kinase activity of the receptor. Somatic mutations were most
prevalent in chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (20%) and type M4 acute
myeloblastic leukemia (23%), both of which are characterized by
monocytic differentiation. One of 50 hematologically normal individuals
had a 969C-T transition as a constitutional change, which may represent
a predisposition to these particular malignancies.

Lamprecht et al. (2010) found that Reed-Sternberg cells in Hodgkin
lymphoma (236000) demonstrated upregulation of CSF1R and CSF1 mRNA and
constitutive activation of CSF1R, which correlated with increased
proliferation of the Reed-Sternberg cells. Non-Hodgkin cell lines did
not express either gene, suggesting that the expression in
Reed-Sternberg cells was aberrant. Analysis of CSF1R transcripts in
Reed-Sternberg cells showed use of an alternative transcription start
site located about 6.2-kb upstream of the normal myeloid transcription
start site: this sequence corresponded to a long terminal repeat (LTR)
of the mammalian apparent LTR retrotransposon (MALR) THE1B family. LTRs
derived from ancient retroviral infections have accumulated in the
mammalian genome, and mammalian organisms have devised a number of
surveillance mechanisms to silence these elements early in development,
usually by DNA methylation. The LTR region was found to contain a number
of putative binding sites for transcription factors (i.e., NFKB; 164011)
that were expressed in the Reed-Sternberg cells. Further studies
indicated that the LTR is normally repressed by epigenetic methylation,
and that Reed-Sternberg cells had lost this methylation. In addition,
nearly all Reed-Sternberg cells studied had lost expression of the
transcriptional repressor CBFA2T3 (603870). LTR-driven CSF1R transcripts
were also found in anaplastic large cell lymphoma. Lamprecht et al.
(2010) suggested that inhibition of CSF1R signaling may be of
therapeutic value in Hodgkin lymphoma.

- Hereditary Diffuse Leukoencephalopathy With Spheroids

By linkage analysis followed by whole-exome sequencing of the family
with hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with spheroids (HDLS;
221820) reported by Swerdlow et al. (2009), Rademakers et al. (2012)
identified a heterozygous mutation in the CSF1R gene (164770.0001).
Sequencing of this gene in 13 additional probands with HDLS identified a
different heterozygous mutation in each (see, e.g.,
164770.0002-164770.0005). The mutations cosegregated with the disorder
in all families for which DNA from multiple affected individuals was
available, including the family reported by Baba et al. (2006). The
phenotype was characterized by adult-onset of a rapidly progressive
neurodegenerative disorder characterized by variable behavioral,
cognitive, and motor changes. Patients often died of dementia within 6
years of onset. Brain imaging showed patchy abnormalities in the
cerebral white matter, predominantly affecting the frontal and parietal
lobes. In vitro functional expression studies of some of the missense
mutations indicated that the mutant proteins did not show
autophosphorylation, suggesting a defect in kinase activity that likely
also affects downstream targets. The mutant proteins probably also act
in a dominant-negative manner, since CSF1R assembles into homodimers.
Overall, the findings indicated that a defect in microglial signaling
and function resulting from CSF1R mutations can cause central nervous
system degeneration.

ANIMAL MODEL

Aikawa et al. (2010) found that mouse MOZ/TIF2 (see 601408)-induced AML
stem cells with high expression of Csf1r had increased leukemia
initiating activity than AML stem cells with same amount of MOZ/TIF2
protein and low expression of Csf1r, when transplanted in irradiated
mice. The high Csf1r expressing cells had the phenotype of
granulocyte-macrophage progenitors and differentiated monocytes. In mice
with leukemia due to these cells, treatment with a drug-inducible
suicide gene targeting Csf1r-expressing cells resulted in curing of the
leukemia for up to 6 months compared to controls. Induction of AML was
suppressed in Csf1r-deficient mice, and Csf1r inhibitors slowed the
progression of MOZ/TIF2-induced AML. Increased Csf1r expression was due
mainly to the hematopoietic transcription factor PU.1 (165170), which
was required for the initiation and maintenance of MOZ/TIF2-induced AML
by increasing transcription of Csf1r. Aikawa et al. (2010) suggested
that CSF1R is crucial for leukemia induced by MOZ fusion and indicated
that targeting of PU.1 may be a therapeutic option.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY, DIFFUSE HEREDITARY, WITH SPHEROIDS
CSF1R, MET875THR

In affected members of a large family with hereditary diffuse
leukoencephalopathy with spheroids (HDLS; 221820) originally reported by
Swerdlow et al. (2009), Rademakers et al. (2012) identified a
heterozygous 2624T-C transition in exon 20 of the CSF1R gene, resulting
in a met875-to-thr (M875T) substitution in a highly conserved residue in
the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain. The mutation was not found in
1,436 controls. In vitro functional expression studies indicated that
the mutant protein did not show autophosphorylation, suggesting a defect
in kinase activity that likely also affects downstream targets. The
mutant protein probably also acts in a dominant-negative manner, since
CSF1R assembles into homodimers.

.0002
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY, DIFFUSE HEREDITARY, WITH SPHEROIDS
CSF1R, GLU633LYS

In affected members of a large family with HDLS (221820) originally
reported by Baba et al. (2006), Rademakers et al. (2012) identified a
heterozygous 1897G-A transition in exon 14 of the CSF1R gene, resulting
in a glu633-to-lys (E633K) substitution in a highly conserved residue in
the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain. The mutation was not found in
1,436 controls. In vitro functional expression studies indicated that
the mutant protein did not show autophosphorylation, suggesting a defect
in kinase activity that likely also affects downstream targets. The
mutant protein probably also acts in a dominant-negative manner, since
CSF1R assembles into homodimers.

.0003
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY, DIFFUSE HEREDITARY, WITH SPHEROIDS
CSF1R, IVS12AS, A-G, -2

In a pair of Norwegian monozygotic twins with HDLS (221820), Rademakers
et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous de novo A-to-G transition in
intron 12 of the CSF1R gene (1754-2A-G), resulting in the skipping of
exon 13, the in-frame loss of 34 consecutive amino acids, and the
insertion of an alanine residue. The mutation was predicted to result in
the loss of multiple amino acids in the intracellular tyrosine kinase
domain.

.0004
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY, DIFFUSE HEREDITARY, WITH SPHEROIDS
CSF1R, ILE794THR

In affected members of a family with HDLS (221820), Rademakers et al.
(2012) identified a heterozygous 2381T-C transition in exon 18 of the
CSF1R gene, resulting in an ile794-to-thr (I794T) substitution in a
highly conserved residue in the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain.
The mutation was not found in 1,436 controls.

.0005
LEUKOENCEPHALOPATHY, DIFFUSE HEREDITARY, WITH SPHEROIDS
CSF1R, ASP837TYR

In a woman with sporadic occurrence of HDLS (221820), Rademakers et al.
(2012) identified a heterozygous 2509G-T transversion in exon 19 of the
CSF1R gene, resulting in an asp837-to-tyr (D837Y) substitution in a
highly conserved residue in the intracellular tyrosine kinase domain.
The mutation was not found in 1,436 controls. The patient was diagnosed
clinically with a disorder resembling corticobasal syndrome, and was
identified from a cohort of 93 patients with various neurologic
symptoms. At age 43 years, she developed a gradual decline in expressing
herself, word-finding, and performing motor tasks with her right hand
and leg. About 2 years later, she had executive dysfunction,
bradykinesia, hyperreflexia, apraxia, rigidity in the upper limbs, and
spasticity in the lower limbs. There was rapid neurologic deterioration,
and she died at age 50. Brain MRI showed localized white matter
hyperintensities in the frontal and parietal white matter on T2-weighted
images.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES De Qi Xu et al. (1985); Gisselbrecht et al. (1987); Hampe et al. (1984);
Verbeek et al. (1985); Verbeek et al. (1985); Yarden and Ullrich (1988)
REFERENCE 1. Aikawa, Y.; Katsumoto, T.; Zhang, P.; Shima, H.; Shino, M.; Terui,
K.; Ito, E.; Ohno, H.; Stanley, E. R.; Singh, H.; Tenen, D. G.; Kitabayashi,
I.: PU.1-mediated upregulation of CSF1R is crucial for leukemia stem
cell potential induced by MOZ-TIF2. (Letter) Nature Med. 16: 580-585,
2010.

2. Baba, Y.; Ghetti, B.; Baker, M. C.; Uitti, R. J.; Hutton, M. L.;
Yamaguchi, K.; Bird, T.; Lin, W.; DeLucia, M. W.; Dickson, D. W.;
Wszolek, Z. K.: Hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with spheroids:
clinical, pathologic and genetic studies of a new kindred. Acta Neuropath. 111:
300-311, 2006.

3. Benz-Lemoine, E.; Brizard, A.; Huret, J.-L.; Babin, P.; Guilhot,
F.; Couet, D.; Tanzer, J.: Malignant histiocytosis: a specific t(2;5)(p23;q35)
translocation? Review of the literature. Blood 72: 1045-1047, 1988.

4. Boultwood, J.; Rack, K.; Kelly, S.; Madden, J.; Sakaguchi, A. Y.;
Wang, L.-M.; Oscier, D. G.; Buckle, V. J.; Wainscoat, J. S.: Loss
of both CSF1R (FMS) alleles in patients with myelodysplasia and a
chromosome 5 deletion. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 6176-6180, 1991.

5. De Qi Xu; Guilhot, S.; Galibert, F.: Restriction fragment length
polymorphism of the human c-fms gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 82:
2862-2865, 1985.

6. Eccles, M. R.: Genes encoding the platelet-derived growth factor
(PDGF) receptor and colony-stimulating factor 1 (CSF-1) receptor are
physically associated in mice as in humans. Gene 108: 285-288, 1991.

7. Faccio, R.; Takeshita, S.; Zallone, A.; Ross, F. P.; Teitelbaum,
S. L.: c-Fms and the alpha-V-beta-3 integrin collaborate during osteoclast
differentiation. J. Clin. Invest. 111: 749-758, 2003.

8. Ginhoux, F.; Greter, M.; Leboeuf, M.; Nandi, S.; See, P.; Gokhan,
S.; Mehler, M. F.; Conway, S. J.; Ng, L. G.; Stanley, E. R.; Samokhvalov,
I. M.; Merad, M.: Fate mapping analysis reveals that adult microglia
derive from primitive macrophages. Science 330: 841-845, 2010.

9. Gisselbrecht, S.; Fichelson, S.; Sola, B.; Bordereaux, D.; Hampe,
A.; Andre, C.; Galibert, F.; Tambourin, P. E.: Frequent c-fms activation
by proviral insertion in mouse myeloblastic leukaemias. Nature 329:
259-261, 1987.

10. Groffen, J.; Heisterkamp, N.; Spurr, N. K.; Dana, S. L.; Wasmuth,
J. J.; Stephenson, J. R.: Regional assignment of the human c-fms
oncogene to band q34 of chromosome 5. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 37: 484 only, 1984.

11. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/8/2013.

12. Hampe, A.; Gobet, M.; Sherr, C. J.; Galibert, F.: Nucleotide
sequence of the feline retroviral oncogene v-fms shows unexpected
homology with oncogenes encoding tyrosine-specific protein kinases. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 85-89, 1984.

13. Hampe, A.; Shamoon, B.-M.; Gobet, M.; Sherr, C. J.; Galibert,
F.: Nucleotide sequence and structural organization of the human
FMS proto-oncogene. Oncogene Res. 4: 9-17, 1989.

14. How, G.-F.; Venkatesh, B.; Brenner, S.: Conserved linkage between
the puffer fish (Fugu rubripes) and human genes for platelet-derived
growth factor receptor and macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor. Genome
Res. 6: 1185-1191, 1996.

15. Kondo, M.; Scherer, D. C.; Miyamoto, T.; King, A. G.; Akashi,
K.; Sugamura, K.; Weissman, I. L.: Cell-fate conversion of lymphoid-committed
progenitors by instructive actions of cytokines. Nature 407: 383-386,
2000.

16. Lamprecht, B.; Walter, K.; Kreher, S.; Kumar, R.; Hummel, M.;
Lenze, D.; Kochert, K.; Bouhlel, M. A.; Richter, J.; Soler, E.; Stadhouders,
R.; Johrens, K.; and 13 others: Derepression of an endogenous long
terminal repeat activates the CSF1R proto-oncogene in human lymphoma. Nature
Med. 16: 571-579, 2010.

17. Le Beau, M. M.; Westbrook, C. A.; Diaz, M. O.; Larson, R. A.;
Rowley, J. D.; Gasson, J. C.; Golde, D. W.; Sherr, C. J.: Evidence
for the involvement of GM-CSF and FMS in the deletion (5q) in myeloid
disorders. Science 231: 984-987, 1986.

18. Morgan, R.; Hecht, B. K.; Sandberg, A. A.; Hecht, F.; Smith, S.
D.: Chromosome 5q35 breakpoint in malignant histiocytosis. (Letter) New
Eng. J. Med. 314: 1322 only, 1986.

19. Rademakers, R.; Baker, M.; Nicholson, A. M.; Rutherford, N. J.;
Finch, N.; Soto-Ortolaza, A.; Lash, J.; Wider, C.; Wojtas, A.; DeJesus-Hernandez,
M.; Adamson, J.; Kouri, N.; and 26 others: Mutations in the colony
stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R) gene cause hereditary diffuse
leukoencephalopathy with spheroids. Nature Genet. 44: 200-205, 2012.

20. Ridge, S. A.; Worwood, M.; Oscier, D.; Jacobs, A.; Padua, R. A.
: FMS mutations in myelodysplastic, leukemic, and normal subjects. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 1377-1380, 1990.

21. Roberts, W. M.; Look, A. T.; Roussel, M. F.; Sherr, C. J.: Tandem
linkage of human CSF-1 receptor (c-fms) and PDGF receptor genes. Cell 55:
655-661, 1988.

22. Sapi, E.; Flick, M. B.; Kacinski, B. M.: The first intron of
human c-fms proto-oncogene contains a processed pseudogene (RPL7P)
for ribosomal protein L7. Genomics 22: 641-645, 1994.

23. Swerdlow, R. H.; Miller, B. B.; Lopes, M. B. S.; Mandell, J. W.;
Wooten, G. F.; Damgaard, P.; Manning, C.; Fowler, M.; Brashear, H.
R.: Autosomal dominant subcortical gliosis presenting as frontotemporal
dementia. Neurology 72: 260-267, 2009.

24. Van Cong, N.; Fichelson, S.; Gross, M. S.; Sola, B.; Bordereaux,
D.; de Tand, M. F.; Guilhot, S.; Gisselbrecht, S.; Frezal, J.; Tambourin,
P.: The human homologues of Fim1, Fim2/c-Fms, and Fim3, three retroviral
integration regions involved in mouse myeloblastic leukemias, are
respectively located on chromosomes 6p23, 5q33, and 3q27. Hum. Genet. 81:
257-263, 1989.

25. Van Cong, N.; Fichelson, S.; Sola, B.; Gross, M. S.; Jegou-Foubert,
C.; Bordereaux, D.; Gisselbrecht, S.; Tambourin, P. E.; Frezal, J.
: Assignment of Fim-2 (CSF1R) to chromosome 5q33 (in situ hybridization)
and Fim-3 to chromosome 3 (somatic cell analysis) region 3q27 (in
situ hybridization). (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46: 670 only,
1987.

26. Verbeek, J. S.; Roebroek, A. J. M.; van den Ouweland, A. M. W.;
Bloemers, H. P. J.; Van de Ven, W. J. M.: Human c-fms proto-oncogene:
comparative analysis with an abnormal allele. Molec. Cell. Biol. 5:
422-426, 1985.

27. Verbeek, J. S.; van Heerikhuizen, H.; de Pauw, B. E.; Haanen,
C.; Bloemers, H. P. J.; Van de Ven, W. J. M.: A hereditary abnormal
c-fms proto-oncogene in a patient with acute lymphocytic leukaemia
and congenital hypothyroidism. Brit. J. Haemat. 61: 135-138, 1985.

28. Yarden, Y.; Ullrich, A.: Growth factor receptor tyrosine kinases. Ann.
Rev. Biochem. 57: 443-478, 1988.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 1/8/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 3/14/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/6/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/28/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/27/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/17/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/20/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/4/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED carol: 01/08/2013
mgross: 1/8/2013
carol: 11/6/2012
mgross: 3/14/2012
carol: 2/7/2012
ckniffin: 2/6/2012
alopez: 1/3/2011
terry: 12/28/2010
wwang: 6/15/2010
ckniffin: 5/27/2010
wwang: 3/7/2005
terry: 2/17/2005
alopez: 9/20/2000
psherman: 9/10/1999
psherman: 11/23/1998
psherman: 11/21/1998
carol: 7/8/1998
dkim: 6/30/1998
jamie: 3/4/1997
jenny: 3/4/1997
terry: 2/24/1997
carol: 9/13/1994
carol: 1/8/1993
carol: 1/6/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/16/1992
carol: 12/4/1991

173511	TITLE *173511 GLYCOPROTEIN V, PLATELET; GP5
;;PLATELET GLYCOPROTEIN V;;
GP V
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Human platelet glycoprotein V (GP5) is a part of the Ib-V-IX system of
surface glycoproteins that constitute the receptor for von Willebrand
factor (VWF; 613160) and mediate the adhesion of platelets to injured
vascular surfaces in the arterial circulation, a critical initiating
event in hemostasis. The main portion of the receptor is a heterodimer
composed of 2 polypeptide chains, an alpha chain (GP1BA; 606672) and a
beta chain (GP1BB; 138720), that are linked by disulfide bonds. The
complete receptor complex includes noncovalent association of the alpha
and beta subunits with platelet glycoprotein IX (GP9; 173515) and GP5.
Mutations in GP1BA, GP1BB, and GP9 have been shown to cause
Bernard-Soulier syndrome (231200), a bleeding disorder (review by Lopez
et al., 1998).

CLONING

Using PCR techniques and platelet cDNA templates, Hickey et al. (1993)
obtained l.4 kb of GP V cDNA sequence encoding 469 amino acids of the
polypeptide. Northern blot analysis revealed 3 GP V platelet transcripts
of 3.8, 4.2, and 5.2 kb. A 16-amino acid signal peptide was present. The
mature GP V is a 544-amino acid transmembrane protein with a 504-amino
acid extracellular domain and a total molecular mass of 82 kD.

Lanza et al. (1993) cloned and sequenced the GP V gene. Northern blot
analysis identified a single transcript of 4.5 kb in human platelets.
The protein contains a single transmembrane domain, a short cytoplasmic
domain, and a large extracellular domain with 8 potential
N-glycosylation sites. Analysis of the extracellular domain of the
protein revealed the presence of 15 tandem leucine-rich repeats of 24
amino acids, similar to the other 3 proteins of the GP Ib receptor
complex. Lanza et al. (1993) also identified a cleavage site for
thrombin near the C terminus with similarity to the A alpha chain of
fibrinogen (134820). RT-PCR analysis on RNAs from cells of different
hematopoietic origins revealed that GP V was specifically transcribed
from platelets and from cells of the megakaryocytic lineage.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hickey et al. (1993) and Lanza et al. (1993) determined that the coding
sequence of the GP5 gene is contained within a single exon. Yagi et al.
(1995) stated that the GP5 gene contains 2 exons, the first consisting
of approximately 37 bases and the second of approximately 3,500 bases,
interrupted by a single 958-base intron.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Yagi et al. (1995) mapped the GP5
gene to chromosome 3q29.

GENE FUNCTION

Calverley et al. (1995) studied the role of the GP V subunit within the
GP Ib receptor complex by transfecting the GP5 gene into a hematopoietic
cell line that constitutively expresses the other 3 subunits. Using flow
cytometry, they found that transfected GP5 was expressed on the surface
of these human erythroleukemia (HEL) cells; this in turn led to
increased surface expression of the ligand-binding GP Ib-alpha and GP IX
subunits. Radioligand binding assays showed that GP5-transfected HEL
cells bound more VWF than their non- or mock-transfected counterparts.
With confocal microscopy of GP5-transfected HEL cells, they showed that
GP V colocalizes with GP Ib-alpha on the cell surface. These findings
suggested that the GP V subunit plays a role within the GP Ib receptor
complex by enhancing Ib-alpha surface expression.

By investigating 38 rheumatoid arthritis patients on gold therapy, 10
with profound thrombocytopenia and 28 nonthrombocytopenic controls,
Garner et al. (2002) showed that in all 10 patients with
thrombocytopenia, the platelet autoantibodies preferentially targeted GP
V, although the presence of gold was not required for their reactivity.
The authors showed the GP V specificity of the platelet-associated IgG,
which was elevated in 8 of the 10 patients. Thus, GP V seemed to be
targeted in gold-induced autoimmune thrombocytopenia.

ANIMAL MODEL

GP V is the major thrombin substrate on intact platelets cleaved during
thrombin-induced platelet aggregation, and promotes GP Ib-IX surface
expression in heterologous cells. In GP V null mice, Ramakrishnan et al.
(1999) tested the hypotheses that GP V is involved in thrombin-induced
platelet activation, in GP Ib-IX expression, and in other platelet
responses. Contrary to expectations, GP V -/- platelets were normal in
size and expressed normal amounts of GP Ib-IX that was functional in von
Willebrand factor binding, explaining why defects in GP V had not been
observed in Bernard-Soulier syndrome, a bleeding disorder caused by a
lack of functional GP Ib-IX-V. Moreover, in vitro analysis demonstrated
that GP V -/- platelets were hyperresponsive to thrombin, resulting in
increased fibrinogen binding and an increased aggregation response.
Consistent with these findings, GP V -/- mice had a shorter bleeding
time. These data supported a role for GP V as a negative modulator of
platelet activation. Furthermore, they suggested a new mechanism by
which thrombin enhances platelet responsiveness independent of
activation of the classic G protein-coupled thrombin receptors.

To address the role of GP V in vivo, Kahn et al. (1999) generated GP
V-deficient mice by gene targeting. GP V-null mice developed normally
and exhibited no spontaneous bleeding. GP V-null platelets were normal
in size and shape, responded normally to thrombin, and exhibited
wildtype adhesion to mouse VWF A1 domain under shear. The results
suggested that loss of function in the GP5 gene is unlikely to be a
cause of human BSS. Whether redundancy accounted for the lack of
phenotype of GP V deficiency, or whether GP V serves subtle or as yet
unprobed functions in platelets or other cells, remained to be
determined.

REFERENCE 1. Calverley, D. C.; Yagi, M.; Stray, S. M.; Roth, G. J.: Human platelet
glycoprotein V: its role in enhancing expression of the glycoprotein
Ib receptor. Blood 86: 1361-1367, 1995.

2. Garner, S. F.; Campbell, K.; Metcalfe, P.; Keidan, J.; Huiskes,
E.; Dong, J.-F.; Lopez, J. A.; Ouwehand, W. H.: Glycoprotein V: the
predominant target antigen in gold-induced autoimmune thrombocytopenia. Blood 100:
344-346, 2002.

3. Hickey, M. J.; Hagen, F. S.; Yagi, M.; Roth, G. J.: Human platelet
glycoprotein V: characterization of the polypeptide and the related
Ib-V-IX receptor system of adhesive, leucine-rich glycoproteins. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 8327-8331, 1993.

4. Kahn, M. L.; Diacovo, T. G.; Bainton, D. F.; Lanza, F.; Trejo,
J.; Coughlin, S. R.: Glycoprotein V-deficient platelets have undiminished
thrombin responsiveness and do not exhibit a Bernard-Soulier phenotype. Blood 94:
4112-4121, 1999.

5. Lanza, F.; Morales, M.; de La Salle, C.; Cazenave, J.-P.; Clemetson,
K. J.; Shimomura, T.; Phillips, D. R.: Cloning and characterization
of the gene encoding the human platelet glycoprotein V: a member of
the leucine-rich glycoprotein family cleaved during thrombin-induced
platelet activation. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 20801-20807, 1993.

6. Lopez, J. A.; Andrews, R. K.; Afshar-Kharghan, V.; Berndt, M. C.
: Bernard-Soulier syndrome. Blood 91: 4397-4418, 1998.

7. Ramakrishnan, V.; Reeves, P. S.; DeGuzman, F.; Deshpande, U.; Ministri-Madrid,
K.; DuBridge, R. B.; Phillips, D. R.: Increased thrombin responsiveness
in platelets from mice lacking glycoprotein V. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96:
13336-13341, 1999.

8. Yagi, M.; Edelhoff, S.; Disteche, C. M.; Roth, G. J.: Human platelet
glycoproteins V and IX: mapping of two leucine-rich glycoprotein genes
to chromosome 3 and analysis of structures. Biochemistry 34: 16132-16137,
1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 6/24/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/20/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/20/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/21/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/29/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/21/1993

EDITED carol: 10/04/2010
ckniffin: 8/31/2010
terry: 7/24/2003
carol: 6/24/2003
ckniffin: 6/20/2003
carol: 9/25/2002
tkritzer: 9/23/2002
carol: 9/20/2002
mcapotos: 4/26/2000
mcapotos: 4/25/2000
mcapotos: 4/20/2000
terry: 3/21/2000
mcapotos: 12/7/1999
terry: 11/29/1999
carol: 4/2/1999
mark: 10/19/1995
carol: 10/21/1993

602622	TITLE *602622 DEOXYRIBONUCLEASE I-LIKE 2; DNASE1L2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Germino et al. (1992) identified a DNASE1L2 exon while sequencing a
cosmid from the PKD1 (601313) region on 16p13.3. Using the sequence of
this exon for RT-PCR and searches of EST databases, Rodriguez et al.
(1997) cloned DNASE1L2 cDNAs. The predicted 299-amino acid DNASE1L2
protein contains a 21-amino acid signal peptide. The amino acid sequence
of DNASE1L2 is 56% identical to that of DNASE1 (125505). By RT-PCR, the
authors detected DNASE1L2 expression in fetal and adult brain.

Using RT-PCR, Shiokawa et al. (2004) detected DNASE1L2 expression in all
tissues examined except colon. Peripheral blood leukocytes showed a
second DNASE1L2 transcript, and by PCR of a leukocyte cDNA library,
Shiokawa et al. (2004) cloned this splice variant, which they called
DNASE1L2S. The deduced 278-amino acid protein lacks a proline-rich
domain found in the full-length protein, which the authors called
DNASE1L2L. DNASE1L2S also differs from the brain-specific DNASE1L2
splice variant identified by Rodriguez et al. (1997).

GENE FUNCTION

Shiokawa et al. (2004) characterized the DNase activities of full-length
DNASE1L2L and the DNASE1L2S variant following expression in human
embryonic kidney cells. Both isoforms showed identical enzymatic
properties, with strong endonuclease activity in the presence of both
Ca(2+) and Mg(2+). No activity was detected in the absence of either
cation, but either Co(2+) or Mn(2+) could replace the combination of
Ca(2+) and Mg(2+). Both enzymes showed a pH optimum of 5.6, and both
were inhibited by increasing NaCl concentration. Two inflammatory
cytokines, TNFA (191160) and IL1B (147720), induced endogenous DNAS1L2
expression in a keratinocyte cell line via the NFKB (see 164011)
pathway. However, several other interferons and interleukins, as well as
dibutyryl cAMP, had no effect on DNAS1L2 expression levels.

GENE STRUCTURE

Shiokawa et al. (2004) determined that the DNAS1L2 gene contains 7 exons
and spans about 2.0 kb. The 5-prime flanking region contains no TATA or
CAAT boxes, but it has 2 GC boxes. Using a reporter gene assay, Shiokawa
et al. (2004) identified an NFKB-responsive element in the 5-prime
flanking region.

MAPPING

Germino et al. (1992) identified the DNASE1L2 gene on chromosome
16p13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Germino, G. G.; Weinstat-Saslow, D.; Himmelbauer, H.; Gillespie,
G. A. J.; Somlo, S.; Wirth, B.; Barton, N.; Harris, K. L.; Frischauf,
A.-M.; Reeders, S. T.: The gene for autosomal dominant polycystic
kidney disease lies in a 750-kb CpG-rich region. Genomics 13: 144-151,
1992.

2. Rodriguez, A. M.; Rodin, D.; Nomura, H.; Morton, C. C.; Weremowicz,
S.; Schneider, M. C.: Identification, localization, and expression
of two novel human genes similar to deoxyribonuclease I. Genomics 42:
507-513, 1997.

3. Shiokawa, D.; Matsushita, T.; Kobayashi, T.; Matsumoto, Y.; Tanuma,
S.: Characterization of the human DNAS1L2 gene the molecular mechanism
for its transcriptional activation induced by inflammatory cytokines. Genomics 84:
95-105, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/11/2004

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/13/1998

EDITED mgross: 08/25/2004
terry: 8/11/2004
psherman: 5/13/1998

607295	TITLE *607295 MYOSIN XVIIIB; MYO18B
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nishioka et al. (2002) identified MYO18B within a region of chromosome
22q that shows frequent loss of heterozygosity in advanced nonsmall cell
lung carcinomas and small cell lung carcinomas. The full-length cDNA
encodes a deduced 2,567-amino acid protein with a calculated molecular
mass of about 285 kD. MYO18B has an N-terminal head (motor) domain, a
neck region containing an IQ motif, and a C-terminal tail containing a
short coiled-coil domain that allows dimerization to form a 2-headed
structure. The head region contains a consensus ATP-binding site, part
of an actin-binding region, and a GPA (gly-pro-ala) motif that is
believed to interact with F actin (see 102610). MYO18B shares 40%
identity with the human and mouse MYSPDZ (TIAF1) proteins. Northern blot
analysis revealed an 8-kb transcript expressed only in skeletal muscle
and heart. Quantitative PCR detected wider expression, including
expression in adult and fetal lung. Examination of several lung cell
lines indicated expression in both lung epithelial cells and
fibroblasts.

GENE FUNCTION

Nishioka et al. (2002) found that MYO18B was inactivated in
approximately half of the primary lung cancers and cell lines examined.
The causes of the reduced expression varied and included deletion,
mutation, promoter methylation, and histone deacetylation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nishioka et al. (2002) determined that the MYO18B gene contains 43 exons
and spans 286 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Nishioka et al. (2002) mapped the MYO18B
gene to chromosome 22q12.1, between the ADRBK2 gene (109636) and the
SEZ6L gene (607021), in a region that shows frequent loss of
heterozygosity in lung cancer.

REFERENCE 1. Nishioka, M.; Kohno, T.; Tani, M.; Yanaihara, N.; Tomizawa, Y.;
Otsuka, A.; Sasaki, S.; Kobayashi, K.; Niki, T.; Maeshima, A.; Sekido,
Y.; Minna, J. D.; Sone, S.; Yokota, J.: MYO18B, a candidate tumor
suppressor gene at chromosome 22q12.1, deleted, mutated, and methylated
in human lung cancer. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 12269-12274, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/14/2002

EDITED mgross: 10/14/2002

611140	TITLE *611140 TELOMERE MAINTENANCE 2, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; TELO2
;;TEL2, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; TEL2;;
CLK2, C. ELEGANS, HOMOLOG OF; CLK2;;
KIAA0683;;
HCLK2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Unlike yeast Tel2, human TELO2 does not function in telomere
maintenance, but has a critical role in checkpoint responses to cellular
stress (Takai et al., 2007; Collis et al., 2008).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a brain cDNA library, Ishikawa et al.
(1998) cloned TELO2, which they designated KIAA0683. Following in vitro
translation, the deduced 584-amino acid protein had an apparent
molecular mass of 74 kD by SDS-PAGE. RT-PCR detected variable TELO2
expression in all tissues examined, with highest levels in brain, lung,
liver, kidney, testis, and ovary.

By immunocytochemical analysis, subcellular fractionation, and Western
blot analysis of a human liver adenocarcinoma cell line, Jiang et al.
(2003) found that native and overexpressed TELO2, which they called
CLK2, was present in all cellular compartments at comparable levels. A
portion of CLK2 was tightly associated with membranes, and there was no
substantial difference in molecular mass between soluble and
membrane-associated CLK2.

GENE FUNCTION

Clk2 mutants of C. elegans display a pleiotropic phenotype that includes
slowing of numerous physiologic processes and an increased life span.
Jiang et al. (2003) found that small interfering RNA-mediated inhibition
of CLK2 expression in a human liver adenocarcinoma cell line slowed
cellular growth. Conversely, overexpression of CLK2 decreased cell cycle
length, rendered cells hypersensitive to apoptosis triggered by
oxidative stress or DNA replication block, and gradually increased
telomere length.

Takai et al. (2007) found that, unlike yeast Tel2, human TEL2 appeared
to have no function in telomere maintenance. Conditional deletion of
Tel2 from mouse embryonic fibroblasts compromised their response to
ionizing and ultraviolet radiation by diminishing activation of
checkpoint kinases and their downstream effectors. These effects
correlated with significantly reduced protein levels for the PI3
kinase-related protein kinases (PIKKs) Atm (607585), Atr (601215), and
Prkdc (600899). Tel2 deletion also elicited specific depletion of Mtor
(FRAP1; 601231), Smg1 (607032), and Trrap (603015) and curbed Mtor
signaling, indicating that TEL2 affects all 6 mammalian PIKKs. While
Tel2 deletion did not alter PIKK mRNA levels, in vivo pulse labeling
experiments showed that Tel2 controlled the stability of Atm and Mtor.
Each of the PIKK family members associated with mouse and human TEL2 in
vivo, and in vitro experiments showed that TEL2 bound to part of the
HEAT repeat segments of human ATM and rat Mtor. Takai et al. (2007)
concluded that TEL2 regulates PIKK stability.

By copurification of epitope-tagged proteins, Collis et al. (2008) found
that HCLK2 interacted strongly with the N-terminal region and weakly
with the C-terminal region of FANCM (609644), a component of the Fanconi
anemia (FA) core complex involved in DNA repair. The interaction
required the HEAT repeat structure of HCLK2. Immunoprecipitation
analysis of human cell lines showed that endogenous HCLK2, FANCM, and
FAAP24 (610884) formed a stable complex in the absence of other FA core
complex components. Knockdown of either FANCM, FAAP24, or HCLK2 via
small interfering RNA compromised ATR/CHK1 (603078)-mediated checkpoint
signaling, leading to increased endogenous DNA damage and failure to
efficiently invoke cell cycle checkpoint responses. Collis et al. (2008)
concluded that HCLK2 links ATR/CHK1 checkpoint proteins with DNA repair
via its interaction with FANCM and FAAP24.

By immunoprecipitation analysis of human U2OS osteosarcoma cells, Hurov
et al. (2010) found that TEL2 interacted with TTI1 (614425) and TTI2
(614426) in a complex of about 2 million daltons, which they called the
TTT complex. Cells depleted of TTI1 or TTI2 were unable to efficiently
arrest in G2 in response to ionizing radiation, showed defective DNA
damage response signaling, and were unable to maintain abundance of
PIKKs, notably ATM and MTOR. All 3 TTT complex components were required
for stabilization of PIKKs and resistance to DNA damage. Hurov et al.
(2010) proposed that the TTT complex may participate in proper folding
of newly synthesized PIKKs.

Takai et al. (2010) found that PIKKs depended on HSP90 (see 140571) and
the TEL2-TTI1-TTI2 complex for their maturation. In vivo labeling showed
that PIKKs bound TEL2 soon after their synthesis in a manner that
depended on HSP90. Knockout of Tel2 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs) or pharmacologic inhibition of HSP90 in human cells impaired
formation of 3 PIKK complexes: TORC1, which contains MTOR, GBL (MLST8;
612190), and RAPTOR (RPTOR; 607130); TORC2, which contains MTOR, GBL,
and RICTOR (609022); and ATM-ATRIP (606605). Once mature, the PIKK
complexes no longer associated with the TEL2-TTI1-TTI2 complex.
Tel2-mutants defective in binding Tti1 and Tti2 were impaired in their
ability to rescue the growth and checkpoint defects in Tel2-knockout
MEFs. Takai et al. (2010) concluded that the TEL2-TTI1-TTI2 complex is
required for assembly of MTOR and ATR with their respective partners.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Ishikawa et al. (1998) mapped the TELO2
gene to chromosome 16.

ANIMAL MODEL

Takai et al. (2007) found that heterozygous Tel2 +/- mice were viable,
fertile, and healthy, but homozygous Tel2 deletion was embryonic lethal.

REFERENCE 1. Collis, S. J.; Ciccia, A.; Deans, A. J.; Horejsi, Z.; Martin, J.
S.; Maslen, S. L.; Skehel, J. M.; Elledge, S. J.; West, S. C.; Boulton,
S. J.: FANCM and FAAP24 function in ATR-mediated checkpoint signaling
independently of the Fanconi anemia core complex. Molec. Cell 32:
313-324, 2008.

2. Hurov, K. E.; Cotta-Ramusino, C.; Elledge, S. J.: A genetic screen
identifies the Triple T complex required for DNA damage signaling
and ATM and ATR stability. Genes Dev. 24: 1939-1950, 2010.

3. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Suyama, M.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.;
Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. X. The complete sequences of 100 new
cDNA clones from brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA
Res. 5: 169-176, 1998.

4. Jiang, N.; Benard, C. Y.; Kebir, H.; Shoubridge, E. A.; Hekim,
S.: Human CLK2 links cell cycle progression, apoptosis, and telomere
length regulation. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 21678-21684, 2003.

5. Takai, H.; Wang, R. C.; Takai, K. K.; Yang, H.; de Lange, T.:
Tel2 regulates the stability of PI3K-related protein kinases. Cell 131:
1248-1259, 2007.

6. Takai, H.; Xie, Y.; de Lange, T.; Pavletich, N. P.: Tel2 structure
and function in the Hsp90-dependent maturation of mTOR and ATR complexes. Genes
Dev. 24: 2019-2030, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 01/12/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/25/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/6/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/26/2007

EDITED mgross: 01/12/2012
mgross: 2/25/2009
terry: 2/25/2009
mgross: 6/11/2008
terry: 6/6/2008
mgross: 6/26/2007

300841	TITLE *300841 COAGULATION FACTOR VIII; F8
;;FACTOR VIII;;
COAGULATION FACTOR VIIIC, PROCOAGULANT COMPONENT; F8C
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The F8 gene encodes coagulation factor VIII, a large plasma glycoprotein
that functions in the blood coagulation cascade as a cofactor for the
factor IXa (300746)-dependent activation of factor X (F10; 613872).
Factor VIII is activated proteolytically by a variety of coagulation
enzymes, including thrombin (F2; 176930). Factor VIII is tightly
associated in the blood with von Willebrand factor (VWF; 613160), which
serves as a protective carrier protein for factor VIII (summary by Toole
et al., 1984; review by Hoyer, 1994).

CLONING

Fay et al. (1982) isolated a highly purified human factor VIII that
consisted of a single high molecular weight polypeptide chain having the
highest specific activity.

Toole et al. (1984) isolated clones corresponding to the F8 gene from a
human cDNA library. Independently and simultaneously, Gitschier et al.
(1984) and Wood et al. (1984) also cloned and expressed the F8 gene. The
deduced precursor protein has 2,351 amino acids and a molecular mass of
267 kD. The leader sequence of the proprotein contains 19 amino acids,
yielding a mature protein of 2,332 amino acids. The protein has an
obvious domain structure, contains sequence repeats, and is structurally
related to factor V (F5; 612309) and ceruloplasmin (CP; 117700). F8 has
3 copies of an A domain of 330 to 380 amino acids, a B domain of about
925 amino acids, and 2 C domains of about 160 amino acids. The domains
are arranged A1-A2-B-A3-C1-C2. Both A and C repeats show conservation of
cysteines, and the B region contains most potential N-glycosylation
sites. Northern blot analysis detected a 9-kb F8 transcript.

The F8 gene is expressed in human liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and a
variety of other tissues, but not in bone marrow, peripheral blood
lymphocytes, or endothelial cells (Wion et al., 1985).

GENE STRUCTURE

The F8 gene contains 26 exons and spans 186 kb (Gitschier et al., 1984).

Levinson et al. (1990) found a curious example of a gene within a gene.
In looking for transcripts from the Xq28 region, they found one referred
to as the A gene that hybridized to a region in exon 22 of the F8 gene.
The A or F8A gene (305423) was in reverse orientation to F8 and was
contained entirely in intron 22. Computer analysis of the sequence
suggested that the A gene encodes a protein, with the complication that
codon usage analysis suggested a frameshift halfway through the gene.
The A gene cDNA also bound to mouse, monkey, and rat genomic DNA in a
'zoo blot.' The mouse A gene was also found to be on the X chromosome
but not within the mouse F8 gene as it is in the human.

Freije and Schlessinger (1992) demonstrated that the X chromosome
contains 3 copies of F8A and its adjacent regions, 1 in intron 22 and 2
telomeric and upstream to the F8 gene transcription start site. Gene
F8A, which is transcribed in the opposite direction to F8, is intronless
and completely nested within intron 22. Approximately 500 kb upstream of
the F8 gene, there are 2 additional transcribed copies of the F8A gene.
Lakich et al. (1993) pointed out that intron 22 is unusual in many
respects. At 32 kb, it is the largest intron in the F8 gene. It also
contains a CpG island, located about 10 kb downstream of exon 22. This
island appears to serve as a bidirectional promoter for the F8A and F8B
(305424) genes. The F8B gene is also located in intron 22 and is
transcribed in the opposite direction from F8A; its first exon lies
within intron 22 and is spliced to exons 23-26. The F8A and B genes are
both expressed ubiquitously.

Having previously reported the existence of 5 CpG islands close to the
F8 gene, 4 of which they cloned by genomic walking, Gitschier's group
(Kenwrick et al., 1992) reported the isolation of the remaining island,
located approximately 70 kb telomeric of the 5-prime end of the F8 gene.
They identified cDNA clones corresponding to 2 transcribed sequences,
C6.1A (BRCC3; 300617) and C6.1B (MTCP1; 300116), that originate from
this CpG island. The C6.1A gene was highly conserved between species and
expressed abundantly in many human and mouse tissues. No striking
homologies to existing genes could be found for either sequence.
Kenwrick et al. (1992) found that both genes were deleted in 2 brothers
who suffered from mental handicap and dysmorphism as well as hemophilia
A (306700).

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Tantravahi et al. (1986) concluded that the F8
gene is located in the proximal part of chromosome Xq28 with probes DX13
and St14 distally located. Using a hybrid cell line that contains only a
terminal Xq28 fragment, Tantravahi et al. (1986) found that F8 probes
did not hybridize but the DX13 and St14 did hybridize to the DNA of that
cell line.

Patterson et al. (1987) showed that the G6PD (305900) and F8 genes lie
within 500 kb of each other. Arveiler et al. (1989) showed that G6PD and
F8 are in the same 290-kb pulsed field gel electrophoresis fragment, but
did not establish which of the genes is more proximal.

Kenwrick and Gitschier (1989) established the order:
cen--R/GCP--GDX--G6PD--F8--DXS15--tel. The direction of transcription of
the GDX, G6PD, and F8 genes is toward the centromere, i.e., the R/GCP
end of the region. Patterson et al. (1989) showed that the genomic
sequences recognized by the anonymous probe 767 (DXS115) are localized
to 2 sites within Xq28. One site lies within intron 22 of the F8 gene.
The second site, which contains the RFLPs detected by 767, is located
within 1.2 megabases of the F8 gene. Genetic data indicate tight linkage
of F8 and DXS115; maximum lod = 8.30 at theta = 0.04.

G6PD (305900) is one of the 5 rather tightly linked loci located on
Xq28, the others being CBD (303800), CBP (303900), HEMA, and ALD
(300371). In a physical map of the most distal 12 Mb of Xq, Poustka et
al. (1991) found that the F8 gene lies about 1.1 Mb from the telomere,
with G6PD proximal to it, and about 1.5 Mb from the telomere. This
contradicted the earlier impression that the gene is located in the
proximal part of Xq28.

In a 9-year-old Malaysian female with de novo hemophilia A (306700) as
well as a complex de novo translocation involving one X chromosome and
one chromosome 17 (Muneer et al., 1986), Migeon et al. (1993) identified
a breakpoint within Xq28 with deletion of the 5-prime end of the factor
VIII gene, leaving the more proximal G6PD locus intact on the derivative
chromosome 17. As the deleted segment included the 5-prime half of F8C
as well as the subtelomeric DXYS64 locus, they concluded that F8 is
oriented on the chromosome with its 5-prime region closest to the
telomere.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Factor VII is a complex of a large inert carrier protein (VWF; 613160)
and a noncovalently bound small fragment which contains the procoagulant
active site. Zacharski et al. (1968) showed that leukocytes synthesize
some factor VIII in vitro; however, it is synthesized primarily in the
liver.

Cooper and Wagner (1974) presented evidence that the carrier molecule is
normally present in the plasma of hemophilia A patients and

Fay et al. (1982) isolated a highly purified human factor VIII that
consisted of a single high molecular weight polypeptide chain having the
highest specific activity.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Ratnoff and Bennett (1973) reviewed the genetics of hereditary disorders
of blood coagulation.

Gitschier et al. (1985) identified truncating mutations in the F8 gene
(see, e.g., 300841.0001-300841.0003) as the basis for hemophilia A
(306700). A severe hemophiliac with no detectable factor VIIIC activity
had an R2307X mutation (300841.0001). Gitschier et al. (1986) found that
the same codon was converted to glutamine (R2307Q; 300841.0042) in a
mild hemophiliac with 10% of normal activity. A diminished level of
factor VIII Ag in the latter patient coincided with the level of
clotting activity, suggesting that the abnormal factor VIII was
relatively unstable.

In a study of 83 patients with hemophilia A, Youssoufian et al. (1986)
identified 2 different point mutations, one in exon 18 and one in exon
22, that recurred independently in unrelated families. Each mutation
produced a nonsense codon by a change of CG to TG. In the opinion of
Youssoufian et al. (1986), these observations indicated that CpG
dinucleotides are mutation hotspots. It had been postulated that
methylated cytosines may be mutation hotspots because 5-methylcytosine
can spontaneously deaminate to thymine, resulting in a C-to-T transition
in DNA.

Youssoufian et al. (1987) characterized 5 different partial deletions of
the F8 gene in 83 patients with hemophilia. None had developed
circulating inhibitors. One of the deletions occurred de novo in a germ
cell of the maternal grandmother, while a second deletion occurred in a
germ cell of a maternal grandfather. The findings indicated that de novo
deletions of X-linked genes can occur in either male or female gametes.
Youssoufian et al. (1988) reported 6 other partial F8 gene deletions in
severe hemophilia A, bringing to 12 the number of deletions among 240
patients. No association was observed between the size or location of
deletions and the presence of inhibitors to factor VIII. Furthermore, no
'hotspots' for deletion breakpoints were identified.

Youssoufian et al. (1988) screened 240 patients with hemophilia A and
found CG to TG transitions in an exon in 9. They identified novel
missense mutations leading to severe hemophilia A and estimated that the
extent of hypermutability of CpG dinucleotides is 10 to 20 times greater
than the average mutation rate for hemophilia A.

Cooper and Youssoufian (1988) collated reports of single basepair
mutations within gene coding regions causing human genetic disease. They
found that 35% of mutations occurred within CpG dinucleotides. Over 90%
of these mutations were C-to-T or G-to-A transitions, which thus occur
within coding regions at a frequency 42-times higher than that predicted
from random mutation. Cooper and Youssoufian (1988) believed these
findings were consistent with methylation-induced deamination of
5-methylcytosine and suggested that methylation of DNA within coding
regions may contribute significantly to the incidence of human genetic
disease.

Higuchi et al. (1988) found deletion of about 2,000 bases spanning exon
3 and part of IVS3 of the F8 gene in a patient with severe hemophilia A.
The mother was judged to be a somatic mosaic because the defective gene
could be identified in only a portion of the leukocytes and cultured
fibroblasts.

By use of a cDNA probe corresponding to exons 14-26 of F8, Bardoni et
al. (1988) studied 49 Italian patients with severe hemophilia A. They
found no TaqI site mutations, but did find a partial deletion,
eliminating exons 15-18 and spanning about 13 kb (300841.0046), in a
patient with anti-factor VIII antibodies.

In a case of hemophilia A, Kazazian et al. (1988) described the first
instance of insertional mutagenesis in man caused by a long inserted
element (LINE) in the F8 gene. L1 (LINE-1) sequences are a
human-specific family of long, interspersed, repetitive elements,
present in about 100,000 copies dispersed throughout the genome. The
full-length L1 sequence is 6.1 kilobases, but most L1 elements are
truncated at the 5-prime end, resulting in a 5-fold higher copy number
of 3-prime sequences. Kazazian et al. (1988) found insertions of L1
elements into exon 14 of the F8 gene in 2 of 240 unrelated patients with
hemophilia A. Both of these insertions (3.8 and 2.3 kb, respectively)
contained 3-prime portions of the L1 sequence. They interpreted these
results as indicating that certain L1 sequences in man can be dispersed,
presumably by an RNA intermediate, and cause disease by insertional
mutation. Both of the above insertions were de novo events, appearing
either during embryogenesis in the patient or in the mother's germ
cells. The L1 element transposed into one of these patients was
demonstrated by Dombroski et al. (1991) to have come from a
retrotransposable element located on chromosome 22 (see 151626).

Woods-Samuels et al. (1989) characterized a third L1 insertion in intron
10 of the F8 gene of a hemophilia A patient. This L1 insertion was not a
cause of hemophilia in the patient because it was also present in the
maternal grandfather, who did not have the disease. Altogether the L1
insertion was present in 4 generations of the family. All 3 of the L1
insertions discovered by Dombroski et al. (1991) have open reading
frames (ORFs), and the 3 derived amino acid sequences are 98 to 99%
identical. They show similarity in the sequence of the L1 3-prime ORFs,
and the polymerase domain of reverse transcriptase was observed in all 3
L1 insertions. The presence of ORFs and the close sequence similarity of
these recently inserted L1 elements provide indirect evidence for the
existence of a set of functional L1 elements that encodes 1 or more
proteins necessary for their retrotransposition.

In studies of 83 unrelated Finnish patients with hemophilia A, Levinson
et al. (1990) identified specific mutations, falling into 3 classes, in
10 patients: 5 mutations caused loss of TaqI restriction sites; 1 point
mutation resulted in a new TaqI site; and 4 represented partial gene
deletions. Although exons 5 and 6 were involved in 3 of the 4 partial
gene deletions, the extent of the DNA loss differed in each. The fourth
deletion was located entirely within intron 1. There was no history of
hemophilia in 8 of the 10 families. The origin of the mutation was
determined in 6 of these pedigrees, 2 of which showed evidence for
maternal mosaicism.

Brocker-Vriends et al. (1990) described a case of hemophilia A due to
partial deletion of the F8 gene of about 2 kb, spanning exon 5 and part
of introns 4 and 5; the mother was a somatic and presumably gonadal
mosaic for the mutation although coagulation assays and RFLP analysis in
the family did not suggest a carrier status.

McGinniss et al. (1993) reported that half of hemophilia A patients have
no detectable factor VIII; about 5% have normal levels of dysfunctional
factor VIII as protein and are termed CRM-+, whereas the rest ( 45%)
have plasma factor VIII Ag protein reduced to an extent roughly
comparable to the level of factor VIIIC activity and are designated
CRM-reduced. They found in an analysis of mutations that almost all
CRM-positive/reduced mutations (24/26) were missense, and many (12/26)
occurred at CpG dinucleotides. They showed that 18 of 19 amino acid
residues altered by mutation in these patients were conserved in the
porcine and murine sequences. Almost half of the mutations (11/26) were
clustered in the A2 domain.

In a review, Antonarakis et al. (1995) collected the findings of more
than 1,000 hemophilia subjects examined for F8 gene mutations. These
include point mutations, inversions, deletions, and unidentified
mutations which constitute 46%, 42%, 8%, 4%, and 91%, 0%, 0%, and 9%,
respectively, of those with severe versus mild to moderate disease,
respectively, in selected studies. The 266 point mutations described as
of April, 1994 comprised missense (53%), CpG-to-TpG (16%), small
deletions (12%), nonsense (9%), small inversions and splicing (3% each),
and missense polymorphisms and silent mutations in exons (2% each). In
addition to these point mutations 100 different larger deletions and 9
insertion mutations had been reported.

In a study of 147 sporadic cases of severe hemophilia A, Becker et al.
(1996) were able to identify the causative defect in the F8 gene in 126
patients (85.7%). An inversion of the gene was found in 55 patients
(37.4%), a point mutation in 47 (32%), a small deletion in 14 (9.5%), a
large deletion in 8 (5.4%), and a small insertion in 2 (1.4%). In 4
(2.7%), mutations were localized but not yet sequenced. No mutation was
identified in 17 patients (11.6%). The identified mutations occurred in
the B domain in 16 (10.9%); 4 of these were located in an adenosine
nucleotide stretch at codon 1192, indicating a mutation hotspot. Somatic
mosaicism was detected in 3 (3.9%) of 76 patients' mothers, comprising 3
of 16 de novo mutations in the patients' mothers. Investigation of
family relatives allowed detection of a de novo mutation in 16 of 76
2-generation and 28 of 34 3-generation families. On the basis of these
data, Becker et al. (1996) estimated the male:female ratio of mutation
frequencies (k) to be 3.6. By use of the quotients of mutation origin in
maternal grandfather to patients' mother or to maternal grandmother, k
values were directly estimated as 15 and 7.5, respectively. Considering
each mutation type separately, they found a mutation type-specific sex
ratio of mutation frequencies. Point mutations showed a
5-to-10-fold-higher and inversions a more than 10-fold-higher mutation
rate in male germ cells, whereas deletions showed a more than
5-fold-higher mutation rate in female germ cells. Consequently, and in
accordance with the data of other disorders such as Duchenne muscular
dystrophy, the results indicated to Becker et al. (1996) that at least
for X-chromosomal disorders the male:female mutation rate is determined
by its proportion of the different mutation types.

The molecular diagnosis of hemophilia A is challenging because of the
high number of different causative mutations that are distributed
through the large F8 gene. The putative role of the novel mutations,
especially missense mutations, may be difficult to interpret as causing
hemophilia A. Guillet et al. (2006) identified 95 novel mutations out of
180 different mutations found among 515 patients with hemophilia A from
406 unrelated families followed up at a single hemophilia treatment
center in a Paris hospital. The 95 novel mutations comprised 55 missense
mutations, 12 nonsense mutations, 11 splice site mutations, and 17 small
insertions/deletions. They used a strategy in interpreting the causality
of novel F8 mutations based on a combination of the familial segregation
of the mutation, the resulting biologic and clinical hemophilia A
phenotype, and the molecular consequences of the amino acid
substitution. For the latter, they studied the putative biochemical
modifications: its conservation status with cross-species factor VIII
and homologous proteins, its putative location in known factor VIII
functional regions, and its spatial position in the available factor
VIII 3D structures.

Among 1,410 Italian patients with hemophilia A, Santacroce et al. (2008)
identified 382 different mutations in the F8 gene, 217 (57%) of which
had not previously been reported. Mutations leading to a null allele
accounted for 82%, 15%, and less than 1% of severe, moderate, or mild
hemophilia, respectively. Missense mutations were identified in 16%,
68%, and 81% of severe, moderate, or mild hemophilia, respectively,
yielding a good genotype/phenotype correlation useful for treatment and
genetic counseling.

In order to establish a national database of F8 mutations, Green et al.
(2008) identified and cataloged multiple mutations in approximately
one-third of the U.K. hemophilia A population. The risk of developing
inhibitors for patients with nonsense mutations was greater when the
stop codon was in the 3-prime half of the mRNA. The most common change
was the intron 22 inversion (300841.0067), which accounted for 16.6% of
all mutations and for 38% of those causing severe disease.

- Inversion Mutations in Intron 22 of the F8 Gene

Intron 22 of the human F8 gene is hypomethylated on the active X and
methylated on the inactive X. Inaba et al. (1990) described an MspI RFLP
in intron 22 of the F8 gene. Japanese showed 45% heterozygosity and
Asian Indians showed 13%; polymorphism was not found in American blacks
or Caucasians.

Naylor et al. (1992) found an unusual cluster of mutations involving
regions of intron 22 not examined earlier and leading to defective
joining of exons 22 and 23 in the mRNA (300841.0067) as the cause of
hemophilia A in 10 of 24 severely affected UK patients. These results
confirmed predictions about the efficacy of the mRNA-based method
suggested by Naylor et al. (1991), and also excluded hypotheses
proposing that mutations outside the F8 gene are responsible for a large
proportion of severe hemophilia A.

Of the 28 patients reported by Naylor et al. (1993), 5 had mild or
moderate disease and all had a missense mutation. The other 23 patients
were severely affected; unexpectedly, intron 22 seemed to be the target
of approximately 40% of the mutations causing severe hemophilia A.
Naylor et al. (1993) found that the basis of the unique F8 mRNA defect
that prevented PCR amplification across the boundary between exons 22
and 23 was an abnormality in the internal regions of intron 22. They
showed that exons 1-22 of the F8 mRNA had become part of a hybrid
message containing new multi-exonic sequences expressed in normal cells.
The novel sequences were not located in a YAC containing the whole F8
gene. Southern blots from patients probed by novel sequences and clones
covering intron 22 showed no obvious abnormalities. Naylor et al. (1993)
also suggested that inversions involving intron 22 repeated sequences
are the basis of the mRNA defect. These mutations in severely affected
patients occur at the surprising rate of approximately 4 x 10(-6) per
gene per gamete per generation. Furthermore, it has been shown that
these de novo inversions occur more frequently in males than females
with a ratio of 302:1 estimated in male:female germ cells.

The F8A gene (305423) is contained entirely within intron 22 of the F8
gene and is transcript in the reverse orientation from the F8 gene
(Levinson et al., 1990). Lakich et al. (1993) proposed that many of the
previously unidentified mutations resulting in severe hemophilia A are
based on recombination between the homologous F8A sequences within
intron 22 and upstream of the F8 gene. Such a recombination would lead
to an inversion of all intervening DNA and a disruption of the gene.
Lakich et al. (1993) presented evidence to support this model and
described a Southern blot assay that detects the inversion. They
suggested that this assay should permit genetic prediction of hemophilia
A in approximately 45% of families with severe disease.

Rossiter et al. (1994) hypothesized that pairing of Xq with its homolog
inhibits the intrachromosomal inversion that is responsible for nearly
half of all cases of severe hemophilia A. This would predict that the
event originates predominantly in male germ cells. They presented
findings supporting the hypothesis: in all 20 informative cases in which
the inversion originated in a maternal grandparent, DNA polymorphism
analysis determined that it occurred in the male germline. In addition,
all but 1 of 50 mothers of sporadic cases due to an inversion were
carriers.

Inversion mutations resulting from recombinations between DNA sequences
in the A gene in intron 22 of the F8 gene and 1 of 2 other A genes
upstream to F8 have been shown to cause a large portion of cases. From
data on more than 2,000 samples, Antonarakis et al. (1995) concluded
that the common inversion mutations are found in 42% of all severe
hemophilia A subjects. Whereas 98% of the mothers of those with
inversions were carriers of the inversion, only about 1 de novo
inversion was found in maternal cells for every 25 mothers of sporadic
cases. When the maternal grandparental origin of inversions was examined
the ratio of de novo occurrences in male:female germ cells was 69:1.

Brinke et al. (1996) reported the presence of a novel inversion in 2
hemophilic monozygotic twins. These patients showed an inversion that
affects the first intron of the F8 gene, displacing the most telomeric
exon (exon 1) of F8 further towards the telomere and close to the C6.1A
gene (BRCC3; 300617). Brinke et al. (1996) noted that this novel
inversion creates 2 hybrid transcription units. One of these is formed
by the promoter and first exon of F8 and widely expressed sequences that
map telomeric to the C6.1A sequence. The other hybrid transcription unit
contains the CpG island and all of the known sequence of C6.1A and the
3-prime section of most of the F8 gene.

It is hypothesized that the inversion mutations occur almost exclusively
in germ cells during meiotic cell division by an intrachromosomal
recombination between a 9.6-kb sequence within intron 22 and 1 of 2
almost identical copies located about 300 kb distal to the F8 gene at
the telomeric end of the X chromosome. Most inversion mutations
originate in male germ cells, where the lack of bivalent formation may
facilitate flipping of the telomeric end of the single X chromosome.
Oldenburg et al. (2000) reported the first instance of intron 22
inversion presenting as somatic mosaicism in a female, affecting only
about 50% of lymphocyte and fibroblast cells of the proposita. Supposing
a postzygotic de novo mutation as the usual cause of somatic mosaicism,
the finding implies that the intron 22 inversion mutation is not
restricted to meiotic cell divisions but can also occur during mitotic
cell divisions, either in germ cell precursors or in somatic cells.

- Hemophilia A with Inhibitors

Approximately 10 to 20% of patients with severe hemophilia A develop
antibodies, known as inhibitors, to factor VIII following treatment with
with exogenous factor VIII. Most of these patients have nonsense
mutations or deletions in the F8 gene (Antonarakis et al., 1995).

Antonarakis et al. (1985) identified several molecular defects in
families with hemophilia A. One family had a deletion of about 80 kb in
the F8 gene, whereas another had a single nucleotide change in the
coding region of the gene, resulting in a nonsense codon and premature
termination. In addition, they used 2 common polymorphic sites in the F8
gene to differentiate the normal gene from the defective gene in 4 of 6
obligate carriers from families with patients in whom inhibitors did not
develop. In both the family with a large deletion and the family with
premature termination, affected persons developed inhibitors.

A variety of F8 gene mutations have been found in patients with
hemophilia A due to inhibitors. Among 30 such cases, Antonarakis et al.
(1995) found that 87 and 13% had different nonsense and missense
mutations, respectively. F8 gene inversions do not seem to be a major
predisposing factor for the development of inhibitors. Among severe
hemophilia A cases, 16% of those without inversions and 20% of those
with inversions developed inhibitors.

Schwaab et al. (1995) found that the probability of developing factor
VIII inhibitors is greater in patients with large deletions in the F8
gene.

Viel et al. (2009) sequenced the F8 gene in 78 black patients with
hemophilia to identify the causative mutations and background
haplotypes, which the authors designated H1 to H5. They found that 24%
of the patients had an H3 or H4 haplotype, and that the prevalence of
inhibitors was higher among patients with either of those haplotypes
than among patients with haplotypes H1 or H2 (odds ratio, 3.6; p =
0.04), despite a similar spectrum of hemophilic mutations and degree of
severity of illness in the 2 subgroups. Noting that Caucasians carry
only the H1 or H2 haplotypes and that most blood donors are Caucasian,
Viel et al. (2009) suggested that mismatched factor VIII replacement
therapy might be a risk factor for the development of anti-factor VIII
alloantibodies.

- Mutation Detection Methods

Levinson et al. (1987) used RNAse A cleavage and DNA sequencing of the
altered region to identify a mutation in the F8 gene in a case of
hemophilia. The mutation identified by Levinson et al. (1987) was a
novel G-to-C transversion which resulted in a missense mutation, with
proline being substituted for arginine in one of the active domains of
the factor VIII molecule.

Since point mutations in the F8 gene are responsible for most cases of
hemophilia A and only a small proportion of these mutations could be
recognized by restriction endonuclease analysis, Traystman et al. (1990)
used PCR and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) to
characterize single nucleotide substitutions. A GC clamp was attached to
the 5-prime PCR primer to allow detection of most single base changes in
DNA fragments ranging in size from 249 to 356 bp. (A 'GC clamp' is a
sequence rich in G and C such that it is relatively resistant to melting
by heating; see Myers et al., 1985, 1985 and Abrams et al., 1990.) Ten
of 11 known point mutations were definitively separated. Traystman et
al. (1990) then used these methods, applied to exon 8, the 3-prime end
of exon 14, exon 17, exon 18, and exon 24, in a study of 52 patients
with unknown mutations. A 'new' disease-producing mutation was found in
2 of the patients: a missense mutation in exon 14 (tyr1709-to-cys and
asn1922-to-asp). A previously described mutation in exon 24
(arg2209-to-gln) In addition, a new polymorphic nucleotide substitution
was found in intron 7. Traystman et al. (1990) detected all of these
mutations when the GC-clamped products from all 5 regions were run in
the same denaturing gel.

Kogan and Gitschier (1990) likewise used DGGE to identify mutations and
found a DNA polymorphism, located in intron 7, which they thought might
be useful for genetic prediction in cases in which the BclI and XbaI
polymorphisms are uninformative.

Higuchi et al. (1991) pointed out that whereas nearly all mutations
resulting in mild to moderate hemophilia B could be detected by PCR and
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE), these methods sufficed
in only 16 of 30 (53%) patients with severe hemophilia A. They
interpreted this to indicate that the mutations in DNA sequence lay
outside the regions studied and may include locus-controlling regions,
other sequences within introns or outside the gene that are important
for its expression, or perhaps another gene involved in factor VIII
expression that is very closely linked to the F8 gene. Higuchi et al.
(1991) designed a total of 45 primer sets to amplify 99% of the coding
region of the F8C gene and 41 of 50 splice junctions. After PCR
amplification they used denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE)
to identify successfully the point mutations in 26 DNAs with different
previously identified changes. Among 29 patients with unknown mutations,
they identified the disease-producing change in 25 (86%). Two
polymorphisms and 2 rare normal variants were also found.

Naylor et al. (1992) used an mRNA-based method to examine hemophilia A
mutations and were able to explain the report of Higuchi et al. (1991)
that mutations could not be identified in 14 of 30 severely affected
patients although mutations were found in all but 1 of 17 less severely
affected patients.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

In a Japanese family with mild to moderately severe hemophilia A, Young
et al. (1997) found a deletion of a single nucleotide T within an
A(8)TA(2) sequence of exon 14 of the F8 gene. The severity of the
clinical phenotype did not correspond to that expected of a frameshift
mutation. A small amount of functional factor VIII protein was detected
in the patient's plasma. Analysis of DNA and RNA molecules from normal
and affected individuals and in vitro transcription/translation
suggested a partial correction of the molecular defect, because of the
following: (i) DNA replication/RNA transcription errors resulted in
restoration of the reading frame and/or (ii) 'ribosomal frameshifting'
resulted in the production of normal factor VIII polypeptide and, thus,
in a milder-than-expected hemophilia A. All of these mechanisms probably
were promoted by the longer run of adenines, A(10) instead of A(8)TA(2),
after the deleted T. Young et al. (1997) concluded that errors in the
complex steps of gene expression therefore may partially correct a
severe frameshift defect and ameliorate an expected severe phenotype.

Cutler et al. (2002) identified 81 mutations in the F8C gene in 96
unrelated patients, all of whom had previously typed negative for the
common IVS22 inversion mutation (300841.0067). Forty-one of these
mutations were not recorded in F8C gene mutation databases. Analysis of
these 41 mutations with regard to location, possible cross-species
conservation, and type of substitution, in correlation with the clinical
severity of the disease, supported the view that the phenotypic result
of a mutation in the F8C gene correlates more with the position of the
amino acid change within the 3-dimensional structure of the protein than
with the actual nature of the alteration.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2307TER

Gitschier et al. (1985) identified this mutation due to a CGA-to-TGA
change in codon 2326 in exon 26 in a patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700). Nonsense mutations and a different missense (arg-to-gln)
mutation have previously been observed in the same codon. It was pointed
out that the G-to-T transversion is contrary to the rule of CG-to-TG
mutations at CG dinucleotides, which represent the overwhelming
majority.

.0002
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2209TER

In a severe case of hemophilia A (306700), Gitschier et al. (1985) found
change in codon 2228 in exon 24 from CGA to TGA to result in conversion
of arg2209 to stop. This mutation has also been found by others
(Youssoufian et al., 1986).

.0003
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX26DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Gitschier et al. (1985)
found deletion of about 22 kb including exon 26.

.0004
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2116TER

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH5), Youssoufian et al.
(1986) found change of codon 2135 from CGA to TGA, resulting in
conversion of amino acid 2116 to stop.

.0005
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX6DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH6), Youssoufian et al.
(1987) found deletion of exon 6.

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (patient 2213), Levinson et al.
(1990) found a deletion of exon 6 of the factor VIII gene. Schwaab et
al. (1993) identified 2 patients with this deletion. See also Lin et al.
(1993) and Antonarakis et al. (1995).

.0006
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX14DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH7), Youssoufian et al.
(1987) found deletion of exon 14.

In 3 patients with severe hemophilia A, Krepelova et al. (1992) found a
deletion of exon 14 of the factor VIII gene. See also 300841.0029,
300841.0047, and 300841.0049.

.0007
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX24-25DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH8), Youssoufian et al.
(1987) found deletion of exons 24 and 25.

.0008
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX23-25DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH9), Youssoufian et al.
(1987) found deletion of exons 23-25.

.0009
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX22DEL

In a case of moderately severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH10), Youssoufian
et al. (1987) found 'in-frame' deletion of exon 22.

.0010
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX26DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH12), Antonarakis et al.
(1995) found deletion of exon 26. The mother showed mosaicism for this
mutation.

.0011
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX1DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH13), Youssoufian et al.
(1988) found deletion of exon 1.

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (patient H309), Millar et al.
(1990) found a deletion of exon 1 of the factor VIII gene. See also
Wehnert et al. (1989), Higuchi et al. (1991), Schwaab et al. (1993), and
Antonarakis et al. (1995), who reported patients with deletion of exon
1.

.0012
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2147TER

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH14), Youssoufian et al.
(1988) found a CGA to TGA change in codon 2166, resulting in a change in
ARG2147 to a termination codon.

.0013
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, NEW SPLICE DONOR, IVS4

In a case of mild hemophilia A (306700) (JH17), Youssoufian et al.
(1988) found the creation of a new splice donor site created in intron 4
by a GAA to AAA change.

.0014
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2209GLN

In 2 cases of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH18, JH19), Youssoufian et
al. (1988) found a CGA-to-CAA change in codon 2228, resulting in
substitution of glutamine for arginine as amino acid 2209. This mutation
has also been found by others (Bernardi et al., 1989; Levinson et al.,
1990; Traystman et al., 1990).

.0015
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU272GLY

Youssoufian et al. (1988) demonstrated the usefulness of DNA
amplification followed by direct nucleotide sequencing in the search for
mutations in X-linked disorders because of the unambiguous sequencing
data obtained when the amplified DNA is from a male patient. In a
17-year-old Greek male with moderately severe hemophilia A (306700)
(JH20), they detected a mutation by analysis of genomic DNA with TaqI;
contrary to previous experience, the mutation was not a C-to-T or G-to-A
transition. (The unifying mechanism of these mutations is thought to be
methylation-induced C-to-T transitions at CpG dinucleotides involving
either the coding or the complementary strand of DNA; see Bird (1980).)
In this case the point mutation was in exon 7, where codon 291 for
glutamate (GAA) was changed to one for glycine (GGA), leading to a
change in amino acid 272 of the mature factor VIII protein. The mutation
had arisen de novo in a germ cell of the patient's mother. The patient
had 2% factor VIII activity, 3.5% factor VIII antigen, and moderate
hemophilia A.

.0016
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX2-3DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH21), Youssoufian et al.
(1988) found deletion of exons 2 and 3.

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (patient 656), Higuchi et al.
(1988) found a deletion of exons 2-3 of the factor VIII gene.

.0017
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX3-13DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH22), Youssoufian et al.
(1988) found deletion of exons 3-13.

.0018
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX4-25DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH23), Youssoufian et al.
(1988) found deletion of exons 4-25.

.0019
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX7-14DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH24), Youssoufian et al.
(1988) found deletion of exons 7-14.

.0020
FACTOR VIII POLYMORPHISM
F8, LINE INS, IVS10

In a normal individual (JH25), Woods-Samuels et al. (1989) found
insertion of 0.7 kb of LINE sequence in intron 10.

.0021
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX26DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH26), Youssoufian et
al. (1988) found deletion of exon 26. Also see Gitschier et al. (1985)
and Bernardi et al. (1989).

.0022
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LINE INS, EX14

In 2 brothers with severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH27, JH28), Kazazian
et al. (1988) found insertion of 3.8 kb of LINE sequence in exon 14.

.0023
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX15DEL

In a patient (JH29) with severe hemophilia A (306700) and a
translocation t(X;17), Antonarakis et al. (1995) found deletion of exon
15.

.0024
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, EX8

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH31), Higuchi et al.
(1990) found deletion of GA from codon 360 GAA in exon 8.

.0025
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2307LEU

In a Japanese patient with mild hemophilia A (306700) (JH32), Inaba et
al. (1989) found a CGA-to-CTA change in codon 2326 in exon 26, resulting
in substitution of leucine for arginine at amino acid 2307. PCR and
nucleotide sequencing were used to identify the defect, which caused an
alteration in a TaqI site.

.0026
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1941GLN

In a Japanese patient with mild hemophilia A (306700) (JH33),
Antonarakis (unpublished observations) found a CGA-to-CAA change in exon
1960 in exon 18, resulting in substitution of glutamine for arginine as
amino acid 1941. This mutation was also found in a Finnish patient by
Levinson et al. (1990).

.0027
FACTOR VIII (OKAYAMA)
F8, ARG372HIS

In a case of CRM-positive hemophilia A (306700) (JH35), Arai et al.
(1989) found a change of arginine-372 to histidine, resulting from a
CGC-to-CAC change in codon 391 in exon 8. The mutation was at the site
of thrombin cleavage. Shima et al. (1989) found the same change in what
they called factor VIII (Okayama).

.0028
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU1686TER

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH36), Higuchi et al.
(1990) found a CAG-to-TAG change in codon 1705, causing replacement of
glutamic acid 1686 by a stop signal.

.0029
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX14DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH37), Higuchi et al.
(1989) found deletion of exon 14.

.0030
HEMOPHILIA A
FACTOR VIII (EAST HARTFORD)
F8, ARG1689CYS

In a patient with moderately severe hemophilia A (306700) of a
CRM-positive type, Gitschier (1988) found a CGC-to-TGC change in codon
1708 in exon 14, resulting in a change of arginine-1689 to cysteine. The
mutation affects the thrombin cleavage site. The same mutation was
subsequently found in additional patients (JH38, JH39) by Arai et al.
(1990). Aly et al. (1992) found that cysteamine, which is known to
modify mutant proteins with an arg-to-cys substitution, enhances the
procoagulant activity of the mutant factor VIII, which they referred to
as factor VIII-East Hartford. Aly and Hoyer (1992) demonstrated that the
East Hartford mutant protein had procoagulant activity when separated
from von Willebrand factor; this was taken to indicate that the
dissociation of factor VIII from VWF is an essential effect of factor
VIII light chain cleavage at arginine-1689.

.0031
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR1680PHE

In a patient with mild hemophilia A (306700) (JH40), Higuchi et al.
(1990) found a TAT-to-TTT change in codon 1699, resulting in
substitution of phenylalanine for tyrosine at amino acid 1680. The
mutation affected the von Willebrand binding site.

.0032
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR1709CYS

In a patient with hemophilia A (306700) (JH41), Traystman et al. (1990)
found a TAT-to-TGT change in codon 1728 of exon 14, leading to
substitution of cysteine for tyrosine-1709.

.0033
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX11-18DEL

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH1), Antonarakis et al.
(1985) found deletion of exons 11-18.

.0034
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1941TER

In a case of severe hemophilia A (306700) (JH2), Antonarakis et al.
(1985) found change in codon 1960 in exon 18 from CGA to TGA which
converted arg1941 to stop. Youssoufian et al. (1986) found the same
mutation in another case of severe hemophilia A (JH3).

.0035
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX3DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1989)
found a deletion of exon 3 about 2 kb in length.

.0036
FACTOR VIII POLYMORPHISM
F8, 7-KB DEL, IVS1

Levinson et al. (1990) found a deletion of 7 kb from IVS1 as a presumed
normal variant of factor VIII.

.0037
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX1-5DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1989)
found a 35+ kb deletion removing exons 1 to 5.

.0038
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX1-22DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lillicrap et al. (1986)
found a 127+ kb deletion that removed exons 1 to 22.

.0039
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX26DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1989)
found deletion of exon 26.

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (patient HDX5), Bernardi et al.
(1989) found a deletion of exon 26 of the factor VIII gene. This
deletion was also reported by Nafa et al. (1990), Lavergne et al.
(1992), Schwaab et al. (1993), and Antonarakis et al. (1995).

.0040
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX1-26DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Casarino et al. (1986)
found a 178+ kb deletion that removed exons 1 to 26.

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (patient H1) and factor VIII
inhibitors, Casula et al. (1990) found a total deletion of the factor
VIII gene.

.0041
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG372CYS

This change was found in a case of moderately severe hemophilia A
(306700) by Shima et al. (1989). The mutation is in the thrombin
cleavage activator site. O'Brien et al. (1990) studied the relationship
between structure and dysfunction.

.0042
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2307GLN

Gitschier et al. (1986) found this mutation in a case of mild hemophilia
A (306700).

.0043
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU2166SER

Levinson et al. (1990) found this mutation in a patient with less than
1% factor VIII activity and clinically severe hemophilia A (306700). The
substitution was caused by a T-to-C transition at position 6555 in exon
23.

.0044
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2116PRO

Levinson et al. (1987) found this mutation in a severe case of
hemophilia A (306700).

.0045
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER170LEU

Chan et al. (1989) found this mutation in a moderately severe case of
hemophilia A (306700).

.0046
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX15-18DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Bardoni et al. (1988)
found deletion of exons 15 to 18.

.0047
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX14DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) with inhibitors, Higuchi
et al. (1989) found deletion of exon 14.

.0048
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX23-25DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Gitschier (1988) found
deletion of exons 23 to 25 as a result of a complex rearrangement with
deletion-duplication.

.0049
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX14DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) accompanied by
inhibitors, Mikami (1988) found deletion of exon 14.

.0050
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX7-9DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) with inhibitors, Higuchi
et al. (1989) found deletion of exons 7 to 9.

.0051
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX5DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Levinson et al. (1990)
found a 3- to 6-kb deletion removing exon 5.

.0052
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX5DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Levinson et al. (1990)
found a deletion of about 10 kb removing exon 5.

.0053
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX5DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Briet et al. (1989)
found a deletion of about 2 kb removing exon 5. Somatic and gonadal
mosaicism was demonstrated in the mother.

.0054
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX5-6 DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) with inhibitors, Levinson
et al. (1990) found a deletion of 3-10 kb removing exons 5 and 6.

.0055
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG336TER

Gitschier et al. (1986) found this mutation in a patient with severe
hemophilia A (306700).

.0057
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASN1922ASP

Traystman et al. (1990) demonstrated this mutation in patients with
hemophilia A (306700).

.0058
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, CYS329ARG

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Kogan and Gitschier
(1990) demonstrated a thymine-to-cytosine mutation that changed the
cysteine at codon 329 to an arginine. They used denaturing gel
electrophoresis for this purpose.

.0059
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, VAL326LEU

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Kogan and Gitschier
(1990) demonstrated a guanine-to-cytosine change within codon 326
resulting in a valine-to-leucine change.

Higuchi et al. (1990) found the same mutation in a patient with severe
hemophilia A (JH30).

.0060
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 4-BP DEL, FS

By means of denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, Kogan and Gitschier
(1990) demonstrated a deletion of 4 nucleotides within the region coding
for the first acidic domain. The mutation caused a frameshift and a
truncated protein product. The deletion occurred in a repetitive AAT and
AAG motif. Small deletions in repeat sequences are thought to occur by a
'slipped mispairing' mechanism during DNA replication.

.0061
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX13DUP

In a patient with mild hemophilia A (306700), Murru et al. (1990)
characterized a duplication in exon 13. The duplication was the result
of nonhomologous breakage and reunion of 2 misaligned wildtype
chromosomes. Sequence analysis of the breakpoint region showed AT-rich
sequences and possible topoisomerase I sites, whose involvement in cases
of illegitimate recombination has been postulated.

.0062
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG427TER

Berg et al. (1990) took advantage of the fact that extremely low
background levels of correctly spliced mRNA transcripts of
tissue-specific genes can be demonstrated in a number of supposedly
nonexpressing' cell types. This 'ectopic' or 'illegitimate'
transcription was used to demonstrate the diagnostic utility of such
transcripts in the construction of specific cDNAs derived from readily
accessible 'nonexpressing' tissue, e.g., lymphocytes in the case of
hemophilia A. Using PCR and direct sequencing, they demonstrated a novel
mutation: a CGA-to-TGA transition at arginine 427.

.0063
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU1704LYS

In a patient with sporadic severe hemophilia A (306700), Paynton et al.
(1991) identified a G-to-A transition resulting in substitution of
lysine for glutamate-1704 (E1704K). The origin of the mutation was shown
to be in the maternal grandfather who was 27 years old when his daughter
was conceived.

.0064
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PRO2300SER

In a sporadic case of mild hemophilia A (306700), Paynton et al. (1991)
demonstrated a C-to-T transition that resulted in mutation of serine for
proline-2300. Paynton et al. (1991) used PCR amplification of specific
alleles (PASA) to screen 96 unrelated hemophiliacs for the P2300S
mutation; none of these patients had the mutation.

.0065
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, MET1772THR

In a study of the molecular defects responsible for crossreacting
material-positive hemophilia A (306700), Aly et al. (1992) found 2
patients in whom the nonfunctional factor VIII-like protein had
abnormal, slower-moving heavy or light chains on SDS/PAGE. Both patients
had severe hemophilia A with less than 1% of normal factor VIII activity
but with normal plasma level of factor VIII antigen. By denaturing
gradient gel electrophoresis screening of PCR-amplified products of the
factor VIII coding DNA sequence, followed by nucleotide sequencing of
the abnormal PCR products, they identified in 1 patient a met1772-to-thr
mutation that created a potential new N-glycosylation site at
asparagine-1770 in the factor VIII light chain. In the second patient,
an isoleucine-to-threonine substitution at position 566 created a
potential new N-glycosylation site at asparagine-564 in the A2 domain of
the factor VIII heavy chain.

Abnormal N-glycosylation, blocking factor VIII probe procoagulant
activity, represented a previously unrecognized mechanism for the
pathogenesis of severe hemophilia A.

.0066
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ILE566THR

See 300841.0065.

.0067
HEMOPHILIA A, SEVERE
F8, IVS22 INV

Lakich et al. (1993) concluded that many mutations in the F8C gene
result from recombination between homologous sequences within intron 22
of the F8C gene and those upstream of the gene. Such a recombination
would lead to an inversion of all intervening DNA and a disruption of
the gene. Among 23 patients with severe hemophilia A (306700), Naylor et
al. (1993) found that approximately 40% were on the basis of this
mutation involving intron 22.

It is hypothesized that the inversion mutations occur almost exclusively
in germ cells during meiotic cell division by an intrachromosomal
recombination between a 9.6-kb sequence within intron 22 and 1 of 2
almost identical copies located about 300 kb distal to the factor VIII
gene at the telomeric end of the X chromosome. Most inversion mutations
originate in male germ cells, where the lack of bivalent formation may
facilitate flipping of the telomeric end of the single X chromosome.
Oldenburg et al. (2000) reported the first instance of intron 22
inversion presenting as somatic mosaicism in a female, affecting only
about 50% of lymphocyte and fibroblast cells of the proposita. Supposing
a postzygotic de novo mutation as the usual cause of somatic mosaicism,
the finding implies that the intron 22 inversion mutation is not
restricted to meiotic cell divisions but can also occur during mitotic
cell divisions, either in germ cell precursors or in somatic cells.

Lozier et al. (2002) found that the defect in the Chapel Hill hemophilia
A dog colony started by Brinkhous and Graham (1950) replicates the F8
gene inversion commonly seen in humans with severe hemophilia A.

.0068
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS6DS, A-G, +3, 186-BP DEL, EX5-6 DEL

Bidichandani et al. (1994) studied 15 randomly selected hemophilia A
(306700) patients, 9 of whom were severely affected. They reported a new
mutation affecting the intron 6 splice donor site in the factor VIII
gene of 2 patients, that corresponds to an exon skipping event involving
exon 5 and 6. The mutation is an A-to-G substitution at position +3 in
the splice donor site of intron 6 in both the patients. This exon
skipping event left the translational frame intact, and the resultant
in-frame deletion of 186-bp in the mature mRNA is predicted to cause a
shortening of the mature factor VIII polypeptide by 62 amino acid
residues. Direct sequencing showed that exon 5 is consistently skipped
along with exon 6 in the mature factor VIII mRNA. Both patients have a
disease of moderate severity and residual factor VIII activity 3% of the
normal. Bidichandani et al. (1994) noted that a patient lacking exon 5
and 6 in the mature factor VIII mRNA due to gross DNA deletion has
previously been reported to have severe hemophilia A.

.0069
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG-5TER

In 2 patients with hemophilia A (306700), Pattinson et al. (1990)
identified mutation of CGA to TGA at codon -5 in exon 1, resulting in a
stop codon. The C-to-T transition follows the rule of CG-to-TG mutations
at CG dinucleotides. This mutation has also been found by others (Reiner
and Thompson, 1992).

.0070
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU7ARG

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a CTG-to-CGG transversion at codon 7 in exon 1 of
the A1 domain, resulting in arginine for leucine-7.

.0071
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU11VAL

Diamond et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The substitution is caused by a GAA-to-GTA
transversion at codon 11 in exon 1, resulting in valine for glutamic
acid-11. This mutation is found in the A1 domain.

.0072
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 89-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported in a patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 89 nucleotides from codon 14 to 29 in exon 1,
resulting in a frameshift.

.0073
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY22CYS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this substitution in 2 patients with
less than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a GGT-to-TGT transversion at codon 22 in exon 1 of
the A1 domain, resulting in cysteine for glycine-22.

.0074
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 10-BP INS, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the insertion of 10 nucleotides (TTCCATTCAA) resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codon 38 in exon 2.

.0075
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 2 nucleotides (AA) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 48 in exon 2.

.0076
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 4-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported in a patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 4 nucleotides (GTTT) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 50 in exon 2.

.0077
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et al.
(1995) reported the deletion of 2 nucleotides (GT) resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codon 102 or 3 in exon 3.

.0078
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 23-BP DEL, FS

Higuchi et al. (1991) identified in a patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 23 nucleotides resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 104 in exon 3.

.0079
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS4AS, A-G, -2

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported the substitution of A to G at the
second nucleotide of the acceptor splice site of intron 4, resulting in
abnormal splicing. The patient had 1.7% factor VIII activity, 1.3%
factor VIII antigen, and a severe hemophilia A (306700).

.0080
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY70ASP

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this gly70-to-asp mutation in a
patient with less than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a GGT-to-GAT transition at codon 70
in exon 3 of the A1 domain.

.0081
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY73VAL

Diamond et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GGT-to-GTT
transversion at codon 73 in exon 3 of the A1 domain, resulting in valine
for glycine-73.

.0082
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, VAL80ASP

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this val80-to-asp mutation in a
patient with less than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a GTT-to-GAT transversion at codon
80 in exon 3 of the A1 domain.

.0083
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, VAL85ASP

Diamond et al. (1992) found this val85-to-asp mutation in a patient with
mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GTC-to-GAC
transversion at codon 85 in exon 3 of the A1 domain.

.0084
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LYS89THR

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this lys89-to-thr mutation in a patient with
mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by an AAG-to-ACG
transversion at codon 89 in exon 3 of the A1 domain.

.0085
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, MET91VAL

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with moderate
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a ATG-to-GTG transition
at codon 91 in exon 3 of the A1 domain, resulting in valine for
methionine-91.

.0086
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU98ARG

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). It is
caused by a CTT-to-CGT transversion at codon 98 in exon 3 of the A1
domain, resulting in arginine for leucine-98.

.0087
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY111ARG

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is
caused by a GGA-to-CGA transversion at codon 111 in exon 3 of the A1
domain, resulting in arginine for glycine-111.

.0088
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU113ASP

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this glu113-to-asp mutation in a
patient with less than 1% factor VIII activity, severe hemophilia A
(306700) and inhibitors. It is caused by a GAA-to-GAC transversion at
codon 113 in exon 4 of the A1 domain of factor VIII.

.0089
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR114CYS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this tyr114-to-cys mutation in a
patient with 6.3% factor VIII activity, 10.7% factor VIII antigen, and
mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a TAT-to-TGT
transition at codon 114 in exon 4. This mutation is found in the A1
domain of factor VIII.

.0090
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASP116GLY

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a GAT-to-GGT transition at codon 116 in exon 4 of
the A1 domain, resulting in glycine for aspartic acid-116.

.0091
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR118ILE

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 2%
factor VIII activity, 10.7% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation is caused by a ACC-to-ATC transition at codon
118 in exon 4 of the A1 domain, resulting in isoleucine for
tyrosine-118.

.0092
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY145VAL

Diamond et al. (1992) found this gly145-to-val mutation in a patient
with mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GGT-to-GTT
transversion at codon 145 in exon 4 of the A1 domain.

.0093
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PRO146SER

Lin et al. (1993) found a pro146-to-ser mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a CCA-to-TCA transition at codon 146 in exon 4 of
the A1 domain.

.0094
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, VAL162MET

Diamond et al. (1992) found this mutation in 5 patients with 3.5-8.5%
factor VIII activity, 6-35.9% factor VIII antigen, and moderate to mild
hemophilia A (306700). A GTG-to-ATG transition at codon 162 in exon 4 of
the A1 domain resulted in a val162-to-met change.

.0095
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LYS166THR

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this lys166-to-thr mutation in a patient
with 19% factor VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by an AAA-to-ACA transversion at codon 166 in exon 4
of the A1 domain.

.0096
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASP203VAL

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 2%
factor VIII activity, 8.5% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GAT-to-GTT transversion at codon
203 in exon 5 of the A1 domain and resulted in valine for aspartic
acid-203.

.0097
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY205TRP

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 3.2% factor
VIII activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused
by a GGG-to-TGG transversion at codon 205 in exon 5 of the A1 domain,
resulting in tryptophan for glycine-205.

.0098
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 2 nucleotides (AG) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 210-211 in exon 6.

.0099
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS5AS, A-G, -2

In a patient with less than 1% factor VIII activity and severe
hemophilia A (306700), Naylor et al. (1991) identified an A-to-G
transition at the second nucleotide of the acceptor splice site of
intron 5, which resulted in abnormal splicing.

.0100
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS6DS, A-G, +3

In a patient with 3-4% factor VIII activity and moderate hemophilia A
(306700), Bidichandani et al. (1994) identified mutation of A to G at
the third nucleotide of the donor splice site of intron 6, which
resulted in abnormal splicing.

.0101
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS6AS, G-C, -1

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported that Antonarakis Kazazian identified
in a patient with less than 1% factor VIII activity and severe
hemophilia A (306700) a G-to-C transversion. The mutation is in the
first nucleotide of the acceptor splice site of intron 6 and resulted in
abnormal splicing.

.0102
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY247GLN

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a GGA-to-GAA transition at codon 247 in exon 7 of
the A1 domain, resulting in glutamine for glycine-247.

.0103
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TRP255TER

In a patient with hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et al. (1995)
reported mutation of TGG-to-TGA at codon 255 in exon 7, resulting in a
stop codon.

.0104
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY259ARG

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a GGA-to-AGA transition at codon 259 in exon 7 of
the A1 domain, resulting in arginine for glycine-259.

.0105
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et al.
(1995) reported the deletion of 1 nucleotide (T) resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codon 264 in exon 7.

.0106
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, VAL266GLY

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GTG-to-GGG
transversion at codon 266 in exon 7 of the A1 domain, resulting in
glycine for valine-266.

.0107
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, THR275ILE

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with
4-4.8% factor VIII activity, 20-40% factor VIII antigen, and moderate
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a ACA-to-ATA transition
at codon 275 in exon 7 of the A1 domain, resulting in isoleucine for
threonine-275.

.0108
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASN280ILE

Pieneman et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 8-12%
factor VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is
caused by a AAC-to-ATC transversion at codon 280 in exon 7 of the A1
domain, resulting in isoleucine for asparagine-280.

.0109
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG282HIS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity, 18% factor VIII antigen, and severe hemophilia A
(306700). A CGC-to-CAC transition at codon 282 in exon 7 of the A1
domain results in an arg282-to-his change. The G-to-A transition follows
the rule of CG-to-CA mutations at CG dinucleotides. This mutation has
also been found by others (McGinniss et al., 1993; Naylor et al., 1993).

.0110
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG282LEU

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in 2 patients with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). It is
caused by a CGC-to-CTC transversion at codon 282 in exon 7 of the A1
domain, resulting in leucine for arginine-282.

.0111
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et al.
(1995) reported the deletion of 1 nucleotide (G), resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codon 283 in exon 7.

.0112
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER289LEU

McGinniss et al. (1993) found this substitution in a patient with 37%
factor VIII activity, 106% factor VIII antigen and mild hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a TCG-to-TTG transition at codon 289
in exon 7 of the A1 domain, resulting in leucine for serine-289. The
C-to-T transition follows the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG
dinucleotides.

.0113
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PHE293SER

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 3 patients with 7-21.5%
factor VIII activity, 2-17.9% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A
(306700). An ACT-to-GCT transition at codon 295 in exon 7 of the A1
domain results in alanine for threonine-295.

.0114
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, THR295ALA

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 3 patients with 7-21.5%
factor VIII activity, 2-17.9% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a ACT-to-GCT transition at codon 295
in exon 7 of the A1 domain, resulting in alanine for threonine-295.

.0115
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

(Antonarakis et al. (1995)) reported in a patient with severe hemophilia
A (306700) the deletion of 1 nucleotide (G), resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 296 in exon 7.

.0116
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU308PRO

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a CTG-to-CCG transition at codon 308 in exon 7 of
the A1 domain, resulting in proline for leucine-308.

.0117
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TRP323TER

In 1 patient with hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993) identified a
TAT-to-TAA substitution at codon 323 in exon 8, resulting in a stop
codon.

.0118
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, CYS329TYR

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a TGT-to-TAT transition at codon 329 in exon 8 of
the A1 domain, resulting in tyrosine for cysteine-329.

.0119
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, CYS329SER

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 2.6%
factor VIII activity, 3.2% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation is caused by a TGT-to-TCT transversion at codon
329 in exon 8 of the A1 domain, resulting in serine for cysteine-329.

.0120
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1990)
identified the deletion of 2 nucleotides (GA) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 341 in exon 8.

.0121
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER373TER

In 1 patient with hemophilia A (306700), Acquila et al. (1993)
identified a TCA-to-TAA substitution at codon 373 in exon 8, resulting
in a stop codon.

.0122
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER373LEU

Acquila et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 8% factor
VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by
a TCA-to-TTA transition at codon 373 in exon 8, resulting in leucine for
serine-373. The mutation has been shown to abolish normal cleavage by
thrombin.

.0123
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER373PRO

Johnson et al. (1994) found this mutation in a patient with 10% factor
VIII activity, 100% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A (306700).
The mutation is caused by a TCA-to-CCA transition at codon 373 in exon
8, resulting in proline for serine-373. The mutation abolishes normal
cleavage by thrombin.

.0124
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et al.
(1995) reported the deletion of 2 nucleotides (AA), resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codon 381-382 in exon 8.

.0125
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ILE386SER

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is
caused by a ATT-to-AGT transversion at codon 386 in exon 8 of the A2
domain, resulting in serine for isoleucine-386.

.0126
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU390GLY

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in 2 patients with less
than 1-3.3% factor VIII activity and severe to moderate hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a GAG-to-GGG transition at codon 390
in exon 8 of the A2 domain, resulting in glycine for glutamic acid-390.

.0127
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU412PHE

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 2 patients with 5-10.5%
factor VIII activity and moderate to mild hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a TTG-to-TTT transversion at codon 412 in exon 9
of the A2 domain, resulting in phenylalanine for leucine-412.

.0128
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 1 nucleotide (G), resulting in a frameshift
downstream from leucine-412 in exon 9.

.0129
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LYS425ARG

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity, 5% factor VIII antigen, and severe hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a AAA-to-AGA transition at codon 425
in exon 9 of the A2 domain, resulting in arginine for lysine-425.

.0130
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR431ASN

Pieneman et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 4% factor
VIII activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused
by a TAC-to-AAC transversion at codon 431 in exon 9 of the A2 domain,
resulting in asparagine for tyrosine-431.

.0131
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR473HIS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a TAT-to-CAT transition
at codon 473 in exon 10 of the A2 domain, resulting in histidine for
tyrosine-473.

.0132
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR473CYS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 2 patients with 2.7-3.5%
factor VIII activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is
caused by a TAT-to-TGT transition at codon 473 in exon 10 of the A2
domain, resulting in cysteine for tyrosine-473.

.0133
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ILE475THR

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with
5-5.7% factor VIII activity, 6.9-8.8% factor VIII antigen, and mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a ATC-to-ACC transition
at codon 475 in exon 10 of the A2 domain, resulting in threonine for
isoleucine-475.

.0134
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY479ARG

Naylor et al. (1993) found this mutation in 3 patients with 2-17.8%
factor VIII activity, 31.6% factor VIII antigen, and moderate to mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GGA-to-AGA transition
at codon 479 in exon 10 of the A2 domain, resulting in arginine for
glycine-479. The G-to-A transition follows the rule of CG-to-CA
mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0135
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 11-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 11 nucleotides (CCGTCCTTTGT) between codon
483 and 487 in exon 10. The deletion results in a frameshift.

.0136
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS10AS, G-T, +1

In a patient with mild hemophilia A (306700), Economou et al. (1992)
identified a G-to-T transversion in codon 504. This mutation, which did
not result in amino acid substitution, occurs in the first nucleotide of
exon 11 and alters the sequence of the acceptor splice site of intron
10.

.0137
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP INS, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Economou et al. (1992)
identified the insertion of 1 nucleotide (G), resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 513 or 514 in exon 11.

.0138
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASP525ASN

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 6%
factor VIII activity, 61% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a GAT-to-AAT transition at codon 525
in exon 11 of the A2 domain, resulting in asparagine for aspartic
acid-525.

.0139
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG527TRP

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 9.5-38%
factor VIII activity, 43-245% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a CGG-to-TGG transition at codon 527
in exon 11 of the A2 domain, resulting in tryptophan for arginine-527.
The C-to-T transition follows the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG
dinucleotides. This mutation has also been found by others (McGinniss et
al., 1993; see also Antonarakis et al., 1995).

.0140
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG531CYS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 3 patients with 4.2-6.7%
factor VIII activity and moderate to mild hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a CGC-to-TGC transition at codon 531 in exon 11 of
the A2 domain, resulting in cysteine for arginine-531. The C-to-T
transition follows the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.
This mutation has also been found by others (Economou et al., 1992 and
Diamond et al., 1992).

.0141
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG531GLY

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 9.2% factor
VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by
a CGC-to-GGC transversion at codon 531 in exon 11 of the A2 domain,
resulting in glycine for arginine-531.

.0142
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG531HIS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with
23.5-32% factor VIII activity, 20-33.2% factor VIII antigen and mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a CGC-to-CAC transition
at codon 531 in exon 11 of the A2 domain, resulting in histidine for
arginine-531. The G-to-A transition follows the rule of CG-to-CA
mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0143
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER535GLY

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in 2 patients with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a AGT-to-GGT transition
at codon 535 in exon 11 of the A2 domain, resulting in glycine for
serine-535.

.0144
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASP542GLY

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity, 5% factor VIII antigen, and severe hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation is caused by a GAT-to-GGT transition at codon 542
in exon 11 of the A2 domain, resulting in glycine for aspartic acid-542.

.0145
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU557TER

In a patient with hemophilia A (306700), Diamond et al. (1992)
identified a GAA-to-TAA substitution at codon 557 in exon 11, resulting
in a stop codon.

.0146
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER558PHE

McGinniss et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 21% factor
VIII activity, 175% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A (306700).
The mutation is caused by a TCT-to-TTT transition at codon 558 in exon
11 of the A2 domain, resulting in phenylalanine for serine-558.

.0147
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLN565LYS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 2 patients with 6.8% factor
VIII activity and moderate to mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation
is caused by a CAG-to-AAG transversion at codon 565 in exon 11 of the A2
domain, resulting in lysine for glutamine-565. This mutation has also
been found by others (Antonarakis et al., 1995).

.0148
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER577PRO

Reiner and Thompson (1992) found this mutation in 5 patients with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation is caused by a TCT-to-CCT transition at codon 577 in exon 12 of
the A2 domain, resulting in proline for serine-577. The C-to-T
transition follows the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.
This mutation has also been found by others (Antonarakis et al., 1995).

.0149
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG583TER

In 5 patients with hemophilia A (306700), Pattinson et al. (1990)
identified a CGA-to-TGA substitution at codon 583 in exon 12, resulting
in a stop codon. The C-to-T transition follows the rule of CG-to-TG
mutations at CG dinucleotides. This mutation has also been found by
others (Reiner and Thompson, 1992; see also Antonarakis et al., 1995).

.0150
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER584ILE

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a AGC-to-ATC
transversion at codon 584 in exon 12 of the A2 domain, resulting in
isoleucine for serine-584.

.0151
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TRP585CYS

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is
caused by a TGG-to-TGC transversion at codon 585 in exon 12 of the A2
domain, resulting in cysteine for tryptophan-585.

.0152
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR586SER

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is
caused by a TAC-to-TCC transversion at codon 586 in exon 12 of the A2
domain, resulting in serine for tyrosine-586.

.0153
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG593CYS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with mild to
moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a CGC-to-TGC
transition at codon 593 in exon 12 of the A2 domain, resulting in
cysteine for arginine-593. The C-to-T transition follows the rule of
CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides. This mutation has also been
found by others (Naylor et al., 1993 and Diamond et al., 1992; see also
Antonarakis et al., 1995).

.0154
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASN612SER

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a AAC-to-AGC transition
at codon 612 in exon 12 of the A2 domain, resulting in serine for
asparagine-612.

.0155
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS12DS, G-A, +5

In a patient with mild hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et al. (1995)
reported a G-to-A transition. The mutation is at the fifth nucleotide of
the donor splice site of intron 12 and results in abnormal splicing.

.0156
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, VAL634ALA

McGinniss et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 5% factor
VIII activity, 138% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A (306700).
The mutation is caused by a GTG-to-GCG transition at codon 634 in exon
13 of the A2 domain, resulting in alanine for valine-634.

.0157
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, VAL634MET

McGinniss et al. (1993) found a val634-to-met mutation in 2 patients
with less than 1% factor VIII activity, 175% factor VIII antigen, and
severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GTG-to-ATG
transition at codon 634 in exon 13 of the A2 domain.

.0158
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR636TER

In 2 patients with hemophilia A (306700) (1 with inhibitors),
Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported the substitution of TAC-to-TAG at
codon 636 in exon 13, resulting in a stop codon.

.0159
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ALA644VAL

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 14% factor
VIII activity, 25% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A (306700).
The mutation is caused by a GCA-to-GTA transition at codon 644 in exon
13 of the A2 domain, resulting in valine for alanine-644.

.0160
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 3-BP DEL, PHE652DEL

In a patient with 1.4% factor VIII activity, 12% factor VIII antigen,
and severe hemophilia A (306700), McGinniss et al. (1993) identified an
in-frame deletion of 3 bp corresponding to codon 652 (TTC) in exon 13 of
the A2 domain, resulting in the deletion of phenylalanine-652.

.0161
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PHE658LEU

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 5.1%
factor VIII activity, 50.5% factor VIII antigen and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation is caused by a TTC-to-CTC transition at codon
658 in exon 13 of the A2 domain, resulting in leucine for
phenylalanine-658.

.0162
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG698TRP

Diamond et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a CGG-to-TGG transition
at codon 698 in exon 14 of the A2 domain, resulting in tryptophan for
arginine-698. The C-to-T transition follows the rule of CG-to-TG
mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0163
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ALA704THR

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 3 patients with a mild to
moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GCC-to-ACC
transition at codon 704 in exon 14 of the A2 domain, resulting in
threonine for alanine-704. The G-to-A transition follows the rule of
CG-to-CA mutations at CG dinucleotides. See also Antonarakis et al.
(1995).

.0164
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU720LYS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this glu720-to-lys mutation in 2
patients with 12.5-30% factor VIII activity, less than 20% factor VIII
antigen, and a mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a
GAG-to-AAG transition at codon 720 in exon 14 of the A2 domain. The
G-to-A transition follows the rule of CG-to-CA mutations at CG
dinucleotides.

.0165
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG795TER

In a patient with hemophilia A (306700), Pattinson et al. (1990)
identified the substitution of CGA-to-TGA at codon 795 in exon 14,
resulting in a stop codon. The C-to-T transition follows the rule of
CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0166
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP INS, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Naylor et al. (1993)
identified the insertion of 1 nucleotide (A) at codon 961-2 or 3 in exon
14. The mutation results in a frameshift.

.0167
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 2 nucleotides (AG) that results in a
frameshift downstream from codon 969 in exon 14.

.0168
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU1038LYS

Higuchi et al. (1991) and McGinniss et al. (1993) found this mutation in
a patient with 2.4% factor VIII activity, 15% factor VIII antigen, and
moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a GAG-to-AAG
transition at codon 1038 in exon 14 of the B domain, resulting in lysine
for glutamic acid-1038.

.0169
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 2 nucleotides (AA) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1164 in exon 14.

.0170
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

In 2 patients with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 1 nucleotide (A) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1194 in exon 14.

.0171
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Naylor et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 1 nucleotide (C) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1212 in exon 14.

.0172
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP, INS, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the insertion of 2 nucleotides (AA) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1324 in exon 14.

.0173
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 4-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 4 nucleotides (TAGA) resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codons 1355-6 in exon 14.

.0174
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP INS, A, CODON 1414

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1991)
identified the insertion of 1 nucleotide (A) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1395 in exon 14.

.0175
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 5-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported in a patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 5 nucleotides (CTCTT) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codons 1412-4 in exon 14.

.0176
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 4-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Naylor et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 4 nucleotides (AAGA) resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codons 1422-5 in exon 14.

.0177
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP INS, A

Higuchi et al. (1991) identified in 2 patients with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the insertion of 1 nucleotide (A) between codons 1458 and 1460
in exon 14 resulting in a frameshift.

.0178
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

In 2 patients with severe hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1991)
and Naylor et al. (1993) identified the deletion of 1 nucleotide (A)
resulting in a frameshift downstream from codons 1439, 1440 or 1441 in
exon 14.

.0179
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, GA

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1991)
identified the deletion of 2 nucleotides (GA) between codons 1555 and
1556 in exon 14 resulting in a frameshift.

.0180
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP INS, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the insertion of 1 nucleotide (A) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1590 in exon 14.

.0181
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993)
identified the deletion of 1 nucleotide (C) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1601 in exon 14.

.0182
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU161TER

In a patient with hemophilia A (306700), Lavergne et al. (1992)
identified the substitution of GAG-to-TAG at codon 1615 in exon 14,
resulting in a stop codon.

.0183
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1689HIS

Schwaab et al. (1993) found this mutation in 3 patients with 7-11%
factor VIII activity, 130-165% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation is caused by a CGC-to-CAC transition at codon
1689 in exon 14 of the A3 domain, resulting in histidine for
arginine-1689. The G-to-A transition follows the rule of CG-to-CA
mutations at CG dinucleotides. The mutation has been shown to abolish
normal cleavage by thrombin at the light chain.

.0184
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1696TER

In 2 patients with hemophilia A (306700) and inhibitors, Pattinson et
al. (1990) identified the substitution of CGA to TGA at codon 1696 in
exon 14, resulting in a stop codon. The C-to-T transition follows the
rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides. This mutation has also
been found by others (Naylor et al., 1993).

.0185
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1696GLY

Reiner and Thompson (1992) found this mutation in a patient with 17%
factor VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a CGA-to-TGA transition at codon 1696 in exon 14 of the A3
domain, resulting in glycine for arginine-1696. The C-to-T transition
follows the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0186
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS14AS, A-G, -2

In a patient with less than 1% factor VIII activity, less than 2.5%
factor VIII antigen, and severe hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et
al. (1995) reported the substitution of A to G at the second nucleotide
of the acceptor splice site of intron 14, resulting in abnormal
splicing.

.0187
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY1750ARG

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in 4 patients with
21-26% factor VIII activity, 14.5-26% factor VIII antigen, and mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a GGA-to-AGA
transition at codon 1750 in exon 15 of the A3 domain, resulting in
arginine for glycine-1750.

.0188
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU1756VAL

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 5%
factor VIII activity, 1.5% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation was caused by a TTG-to-GTG transversion at
codon 1756 in exon 15 of the A3 domain, resulting in valine for
leucine-1756.

.0189
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU1756PHE

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 18.5%
factor VIII activity, and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a TTG-to-TTC transversion at codon 1756 in exon 15 of the A3
domain, resulting in phenylalanine for leucine-1756.

.0190
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY1760GLU

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a GGG-to-GAG transition at codon 1760 in exon 15 of the A3
domain, resulting in glutamic acid for glycine-1760.

.0191
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1781HIS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 4 patients with 2-2.5%
factor VIII activity, 4.7-5.4% factor VIII antigen, and moderate
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a CGT-to-CAT
transition at codon 1781 in exon 16 of the A3 domain, resulting in
histidine for arginine-1781. The G-to-A transition follows the rule of
CG-to-CA mutations at CG dinucleotides. See also Antonarakis et al.
(1995).

.0192
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1781CYS

Jonsdottir et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with 4-7%
factor VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a CGT-to-TGT transition at codon 1781 in exon 16 of the A3
domain, resulting in cysteine for arginine-1781. The C-to-T transition
follows the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0193
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1781GLY

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 6%
factor VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a CGT-to-GGT transversion at codon 1781 in exon 16 of the A3
domain, resulting in glycine for arginine-1781.

.0194
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER1784TYR

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity and clinically a severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation was caused by a TCC-to-TAC transversion at codon 1784 in exon
16 of the A3 domain, resulting in tyrosine for serine-1784.

.0195
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LEU1789PHE

Diamond et al. (1992) and Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in 3
patients with 7.2% factor VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700).
The mutation was caused by a CTT-to-TTT transition at codon 1789 in exon
16 of the A3 domain, resulting in phenylalanine for leucine-1789.

.0196
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLN1796TER

In a patient with hemophilia A (306700) and inhibitors, Lin et al.
(1993) identified the substitution of CAG-to-TAG at codon 1796 in exon
16, resulting in a stop codon.

.0197
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, MET1823ILE

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 4.6% factor VIII
activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation is caused by a
ATG-to-ATA transition at codon 1823 in exon 16 of the A3 domain,
resulting in isoleucine for methionine-1823.

.0198
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PRO1825SER

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 15% factor
VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by
a CCC-to-TCC transition at codon 1825 in exon 16 of the A3 domain,
resulting in serine for proline-1825.

.0199
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, THR1826PRO

Economou et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a ACT-to-CCT
transversion at codon 1826 in exon 16 of the A3 domain, resulting in
proline for threonine-1826.

.0200
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, LYS1827TER

In 2 patients with hemophilia A (306700) and inhibitors, Lin et al.
(1993) identified the mutation AAA to TAA at codon 1827 in exon 16,
resulting in a stop codon.

.0201
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ALA1834VAL

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 18% factor VIII
activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a
GCC-to-GTC transition at codon 1834 in exon 16 of the A3 domain,
resulting in valine for alanine-1834.

.0202
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, IVS16DS, G-A, -1

In 2 patients with 9-18% factor VIII activity, 5.9% factor VIII antigen,
and mild hemophilia A (306700), Higuchi et al. (1991) and Antonarakis et
al. (1995) reported a G-to-A substitution at the -1 nucleotide of the
donor splice site of intron 16, resulting in abnormal splicing.

.0203
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASP1846ASN

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation was caused by a GAT-to-AAT transition at codon 1846 in exon 17
of the A3 domain, resulting in asparagine for aspartic acid-1846.

.0204
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASP1846TYR

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation was caused by a GAT-to-TAT transversion at codon 1846 in exon
17 of the A3 domain, resulting in tyrosine for aspartic acid-1846.

.0205
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, HIS1848ARG

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 1-5% factor
VIII activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a CAC-to-CGC transition at codon 1848 in exon 17 of the A3
domain, resulting in arginine for histidine-1848.

.0206
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PRO1854ARG

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation was caused by a CCC-to-CGC transversion at codon 1854 in exon
17 of the A3 domain, resulting in arginine for proline-1854.

.0207
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP INS, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported in 1 patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the insertion of 1 nucleotide (T) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1855 in exon 17.

.0208
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLN1874TER

In 1 patient with hemophilia A (306700) and inhibitors, Naylor et al.
(1993) identified the substitution of CAG-to-TAG at codon 1874 in exon
17, resulting in a stop codon.

.0209
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU1885LYS

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with less than 1%
factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a GAG-to-AAG transition at codon 1885 in exon 17 of the A3
domain, resulting in lysine for glutamic acid-1885.

.0210
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP INS, FS

Higuchi et al. (1991) identified in 1 patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the insertion of 1 nucleotide (A) at codon 1907 in exon
resulting in a frameshift.

.0211
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASN1922SER

Higuchi et al. (1991) and Diamond et al. (1992) identified this mutation
in 2 patients with less than 1% factor VIII activity and
severe-to-moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was an AAT-to-AGT
transition at codon 1922 in exon 18 of the F8 gene, resulting in an
asn1922-to-ser (N1922S) substitution in the A3 domain of the protein.

Summers et al. (2011) noted that N1922 lies at the interface of 2 A3
subdomains in F8 and that the A3 and adjacent C1 domains form an
extensive hydrophobic interface. By expression in baby hamster kidney
cells, they found that F8 with the N1922S mutation (F8-N1922S) was
weakly secreted compared with wildtype F8, although secreted F8-N1922S
showed normal or near-normal activity. Wildtype F8 followed the classic
secretory pathway; however, F8-N1922S was delayed in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER), prior to processing and packaging in the Golgi. Use of
conformation-specific monoclonal antibodies revealed that the delay in
the ER was due to a defect in folding of the A3 domain and the adjacent
C1 domain. Summers et al. (2011) concluded that the N1922S substitution
results in poor secretion of a functional protein.

.0212
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1941LEU

Nafa et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with 7% factor VIII
activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by
a CGA-to-CTA transversion at codon 1941 in exon 18 of the A3 domain,
resulting in leucine for arginine-1941.

.0213
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TRP1942TER

In a patient with hemophilia A (306700), Lin et al. (1993) identified
the substitution of TGG-to-TAG at codon 1942 in exon 18, resulting in a
stop codon.

.0214
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY1948ASP

David et al. (1994) found this mutation in a patient with 7.4% factor
VIII activity, 46.7% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation was caused by a GGC-to-GAC transition at codon
1948 in exon 18 of the A3 domain, resulting in aspartic acid for
glycine-1948.

.0215
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLY1960VAL

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 6%
factor VIII activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation
was caused by a GGA-to-GTA transversion at codon 1960 in exon 18 of the
A3 domain, resulting in valine for glycine-1960.

.0216
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, HIS1961TYR

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 15.5%
factor VIII activity, 7.8% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation was caused by a CAT-to-TAT transition at codon
1961 in exon 18 of the A3 domain, resulting in tyrosine for
histidine-1961.

.0217
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1966TER

In 7 patients with hemophilia A (306700) (3 with inhibitors), Reiner and
Thompson (1992) identified the mutation of CGA to TGA at codon 1966 in
exon 18, resulting in a stop codon. The C-to-T transition follows the
rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides. This mutation has also
been found by others (Lin et al., 1993; Naylor et al., 1993; Schwaab et
al., 1993; and David et al., 1994).

.0218
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) identified in 2 patients with severe
hemophilia A (306700) the deletion of 1 nucleotide (A) resulting in a
frameshift downstream from codon 1967-1968 in exon 19.

.0219
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported in 1 patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 1 nucleotide (G) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 1998 in exon 19.

.0220
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLU1987TER, EX19 DEL

In 1 patient with hemophilia A (306700), Naylor et al. (1993) identified
the mutation of GAA to TAA at codon 1987 in exon 19, resulting in a stop
codon and exon 19 skipping.

.0221
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG1997TRP

Higuchi et al. (1991) and Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this
mutation in 3 patients with less than 1-3.4% factor VIII activity and
moderate to severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a
CGG-to-TGG transition at codon 1997 in exon 19 of the A3 domain,
resulting in tryptophan for arginine-1997. The C-to-T transition follows
the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0222
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASN2019SER

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 5%
factor VIII activity, 3.3% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation was caused by a AAT-to-AGT transition at codon
2019 in exon 19 of the A3 domain, resulting in serine for
asparagine-2019.

.0223
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TRP2046ARG

Diamond et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with moderate
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a TGG-to-CGG
transition at codon 2046 in exon 21 of the C1 domain, resulting in
arginine for tryptophan-2046.

.0224
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER2069PHE

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation was caused by a TCT-to-TTT transition at codon 2069 in exon 21
of the C1 domain, resulting in phenylalanine for serine-2069.

.0225
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ASP2074GLY

Antonarakis et al. (1995) found this mutation in 2 patients with 4.5-9%
factor VIII activity, 1.7-15.2% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation was caused by a GAT-to-GGT transition at codon
2074 in exon 22 of the C1 domain, resulting in glycine for aspartic
acid-2074.

.0226
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PHE2101LEU

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in 2 patients with
7-11% factor VIII activity, 5.3% factor VIII antigen, and mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a TTT-to-TTG
transversion at codon 2101 in exon 22 of the C1 domain, resulting in
leucine for phenylalanine-2101.

.0227
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, CYS2105TYR

Naylor et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 14% factor
VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by
a TAT-to-TGT transition at codon 2105 in exon 22 of the C1 domain,
resulting in cysteine for tyrosine-2105.

.0228
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, SER2119TYR

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in 3 patients with 3-8%
factor VIII activity, 9.2-13.2% factor VIII antigen, and mild to
moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a TCC-to-TAC
transversion at codon 2119 in exon 22 of the C1 domain, resulting in
tyrosine for serine-2119.

.0229
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) identified in 1 patient with severe hemophilia
A (306700) the deletion of 2 nucleotides (TC) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from serine-2119 in exon 22.

.0230
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

Tuddenham et al. (1991) identified in 1 patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 2 nucleotides (AA) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 2136 in exon 23.

.0231
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2150HIS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 10 patients with less than
1-7% factor VIII activity and severe-to-mild hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation was caused by a CGT-to-CAT transition at codon 2150 in exon 23
of the C1 domain, resulting in histidine for arginine-2150. The G-to-A
transition follows the rule of CG-to-CA mutations at CG dinucleotides.
This mutation has also been reported by others (Naylor et al., 1993;
Diamond et al., 1992; Jonsdottir et al., 1992; and Antonarakis et al.,
1995).

.0232
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PRO2153GLN

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 3%
factor VIII activity, 5.6% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation was caused by a CCA-to-CAA transversion at
codon 2153 in exon 23 of the C1 domain, resulting in glutamine for
proline-2153.

.0233
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, THR2154ILE

Jonsdottir et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with 6% factor
VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by
a ACT-to-ATT transition at codon 2154 in exon 23 of the C1 domain,
resulting in isoleucine for threonine-2154.

.0234
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2159CYS

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in 12 patients with 6-26%
factor VIII activity, less than 5-15.7% factor VIII antigen, and mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a CGC-to-TGC
transition at codon 2159 in exon 23 of the C1 domain, resulting in
cysteine for arginine-2159. The C-to-T transition follows the rule of
CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides. This mutation has also been
reported by others (Naylor et al., 1993; McGinniss et al., 1993; Diamond
et al., 1992; Jonsdottir et al., 1992; and Antonarakis et al., 1995).

.0235
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2159LEU

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 12%
factor VIII activity, 4.8% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation was caused by a CGC-to-CTC transversion at codon
2159 in exon 23 of the C1 domain, resulting in leucine for
arginine-2159.

.0236
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2159HIS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 22%
factor VIII activity, 11.9% factor VIII antigen, and mild hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation was caused by a CGC-to-CAC transition at codon
2159 in exon 23 of the C1 domain, resulting in histidine for
arginine-2159. The G-to-A transition follows the rule of CG-to-CA
mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0237
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2163HIS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in 2 patients with 5%
factor VIII antigen and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was
caused by a CGC-to-CAC transition at codon 2163 in exon 23 of the C1
domain, resulting in histidine for arginine-2163.

.0238
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2163CYS

Reiner et al. (1992) found this mutation in a patient with 1% factor
VIII activity, less than 10% factor VIII antigen, and moderate
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a CGC-to-TGC
transition at codon 2163 in exon 23 of the C1 domain, resulting in
cysteine for arginine-2163. The C-to-T transition follows the rule of
CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0239
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ALA2192PRO

Lin et al. (1993) found this mutation in a patient with 1% factor VIII
activity and moderate hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by
a GCT-to-CCT transversion at codon 2192 in exon 24 of the C2 domain,
resulting in proline for alanine-2192.

.0240
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 3-BP DEL, PRO220 DEL

In 3 patients with less than 1% factor VIII activity and
severe-to-moderate hemophilia A (306700), Economou et al. (1992) and Lin
et al. (1993) identified an in-frame deletion of 3-bp corresponding to
codon 2205 (TctcCT) in exon 24 of the C2 domain, resulting in the
deletion of proline-2205.

.0241
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2209LEU

Millar et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 3% factor
VIII activity, 2.5% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia A
(306700). The mutation was caused by a CGA-to-CTA transversion at codon
2209 in exon 24 of the C2 domain, resulting in leucine for
arginine-2209.

.0242
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2209GLY

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with less
than 1% factor VIII activity and severe hemophilia A (306700). The
mutation was caused by a CGA-to-GGA transversion at codon 2209 in exon
24 of the C2 domain, resulting in glycine for arginine-2209.

.0243
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported in 1 patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 1 nucleotide (G) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 2214 in exon 24.

.0244
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TRP2229CYS

Naylor et al. (1991) and Diamond et al. (1992) found this mutation in 2
patients with 3% factor VIII activity, moderate hemophilia A (306700),
and inhibitors in 1 out of the 2. The mutation was caused by a
TGG-to-TGT transversion at codon 2229 in exon 25 of the C2 domain,
resulting in cysteine for tryptophan-2229.

.0245
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLN2246ARG

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with 4.5%
factor VIII activity, 1.1% factor VIII antigen, and moderate hemophilia
A (306700). The mutation was caused by a CAG-to-CGG transition at codon
2246 in exon 25 of the C2 domain, resulting in arginine for
glutamine-2246.

.0246
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 2-BP DEL, FS

Lin et al. (1993) identified in 1 patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 2 nucleotides (AG) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from glutamine-2246 in exon 25.

.0247
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, GLN2270TER

In 1 patient with hemophilia A (306700), Antonarakis et al. (1995)
reported the mutation of CAG-to-TAG at codon 2270 in exon 25, resulting
in a stop codon.

.0248
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 5-BP DEL, FS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported in 1 patient with severe hemophilia A
(306700) the deletion of 5 nucleotides (AAATC) resulting in a frameshift
downstream from codon 2285-86 or 87 in exon 26.

.0249
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, PRO2300LEU

Higuchi et al. (1991) found this mutation in a patient with 7.5% factor
VIII activity and mild hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by
a CCG-to-CTG transition at codon 2300 in exon 26 of the C2 domain,
resulting in leucine for proline-2300. The C-to-T transition follows the
rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0250
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2304CYS

Higuchi et al. (1991) and Reiner et al. (1992) found this mutation in 2
patients with less than 1% factor VIII activity, less than 10% factor
VIII antigen, and severe hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused
by a CGC-to-TGC transition at codon 2304 in exon 26 of the C2 domain,
resulting in cysteine for arginine-2304. The C-to-T transition follows
the rule of CG-to-TG mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0251
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ARG2304HIS

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported this mutation in a patient with mild
hemophilia A (306700). The mutation was caused by a CGC-to-CAC
transition at codon 2304 in exon 26 of the C2 domain, resulting in
histidine for arginine-2304. The G-to-A transition follows the rule of
CG-to-CA mutations at CG dinucleotides.

.0252
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX1-6DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient H238) and factor
VIII inhibitors, Millar et al. (1990) found a deletion of exons 1-6 of
the factor VIII gene.

.0253
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX2-4DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient TWN11) and
factor VIII inhibitors, Lin et al. (1993) found a deletion of exons 2-4
of the factor VIII gene.

.0254
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX3-5DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient H151), Millar et
al. (1990) found a deletion of exons 3-5 of the factor VIII gene.

.0255
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX4-10DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient TWN27) and
factor VIII inhibitors, Lin et al. (1993) found a deletion of exons 4-10
of the factor VIII gene.

.0256
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX5-13DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient H571) and factor
VIII inhibitors, Millar et al. (1990) found a deletion of exons 5-13 of
the factor VIII gene.

.0257
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX10DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient 149), Krepelova
et al. (1992) found a deletion of exon 10 of the factor VIII gene.

.0258
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX14-21DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient H229) and factor
VIII inhibitors, Millar et al. (1990) found a deletion of exons 14-21 of
the factor VIII gene.

.0259
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX14-22DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient H20) and factor
VIII inhibitors, Nafa et al. (1990) found a deletion of exons 14-22 of
the factor VIII gene. See also Antonarakis et al. (1995).

.0260
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX15-22DEL

Antonarakis et al. (1995) reported 3 patients with severe hemophilia A
(306700) who had a deletion of exons 15-22 of the factor VIII gene.

.0261
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX16-26DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient HDX3) and factor
VIII inhibitors, Figueiredo et al. (1992) found a deletion of exons
16-26 of the factor VIII gene.

.0262
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX18-19DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient 5b), Grover et
al. (1987) found a deletion of exons 18-19 of the factor VIII gene. This
deletion may extend to exon 22.

.0263
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX16DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient HD10), Schwaab
et al. (1993) found a deletion of exon 16 of the factor VIII gene.

.0264
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX19-21DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient H58) and factor
VIII inhibitors, Millar et al. (1990) found a deletion of exons 19-21 of
the factor VIII gene.

.0265
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX23-24DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient HA711), Lavergne
et al. (1992) found a deletion of exons 23-24 of the factor VIII gene.

.0266
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, EX23-26DEL

In a patient with severe hemophilia A (306700) (patient HDX2) and factor
VIII inhibitors, Din et al. (1986) found a deletion of exons 23-26 of
the factor VIII gene. See also Lavergne et al. (1992).

.0267
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, 1-BP DEL

Favier et al. (2000) described a 14-month-old girl with severe
hemophilia A (306700). Both of her parents had normal values of factor
VIII activity, and von Willebrand disease was excluded. Karyotype
analysis demonstrated no obvious alteration, and no F8 gene inversions
were found. Direct sequencing of the F8 gene exons revealed a
frameshift-stop mutation (Q565delC/ter566) in the heterozygous state in
the proposita only. F8 gene polymorphism analysis indicated that the
mutation must have occurred de novo in the paternal germline.
Furthermore, analysis of the pattern of X chromosome methylation at the
human androgen receptor gene locus demonstrated a skewed inactivation of
the derived maternal X chromosome from the lymphocytes of the proband's
DNA. Thus, the severe hemophilia A in the proposita resulted from a de
novo F8 gene mutation on the paternally derived X chromosome, associated
with a nonrandom pattern of inactivation of the maternally derived X
chromosome.

.0268
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, CYS179GLY

In 2 brothers with severe hemophilia A (306700), Mazurier et al. (2002)
found a T-to-G transversion in exon 4 of the F8C gene, resulting in a
cys179-to-gly (C179G) mutation. This mutation affected a cysteine
residue in the F8A1 domain that is conserved in the sequences of the
murine, canine, and swine factor 8 genes. A maternal first cousin showed
factor VIII deficiency and bleeding, but was found instead to have von
Willebrand disease type 2N (see 613554) due to compound heterozygous
mutations in the VWF gene (613160.0035 and 613160.0036).

.0269
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, TYR16CYS

Valleix et al. (2002) described an A-to-G transition in exon 1 of the F8
gene in monozygotic twin females that caused a tyr16-to-cys (Y16C)
mutation. Both twins were heterozygous for the mutation, which caused
severe hemophilia A (306700) in 1 and mild phenotype in the other. The
mutation was not present in the twins' healthy sister or parents,
suggesting that it had occurred de novo in the germline of 1 parent.

.0270
HEMOPHILIA A
F8, ALU INS

Sukarova et al. (2001) described a family with a severe form of
hemophilia A (306700) in which they identified an Alu retrotransposition
event in a coding exon, which represented the first report of an Alu
insertion in the F8 gene. The propositus was an 18-year-old Bulgarian
boy in whom the diagnosis of severe hemophilia had been made at the age
of 1 year. His 12-year-old brother was also affected. There was no other
family history of the disorder. The 341-bp element incorporated into the
F8C gene interrupted the reading frame of the mature protein at met1224,
resulting in a stop codon within the inserted sequence. Sequence
analysis showed that the inserted fragment was a full Alu repeat
belonging to the Yb8 subfamily of Alu repetitive sequences, according to
the standardized nomenclature for Alu repeats (Batzer et al., 1996). The
mutation site was flanked by a 5-bp (AAGAA) direct repeat which Sukarova
et al. (2001) stated was the shortest direct repeat described at the
integration points of Alu insertions.

Ganguly et al. (2003) reported a second instance: a 6-year-old male in
whom an Alu element was inserted at position -19 of intron 18 of the F8C
gene, causing skipping of exon 19 and hemophilia A. The insertion, which
did not affect the natural splice donor site, was in the opposite
orientation with respect to the direction of transcription of the F8
gene. The size of intron 18 was predicted to be increased by
approximately 331 nucleotides because of the insertion.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Aly et al. (1992); Antonarakis et al. (1985); Barrow and Graham (1973);
Bloom and Peake (1977); Gitschier et al. (1985); Graham et al. (1985);
Gralnick and Coller (1976); Green et al. (1991); Hoyer  (1981); Jaffe
and Nachman (1975); Janco et al. (1987); Lawn  (1985); Marchesi et
al. (1972); Nilsson et al. (1966); Oberle et al. (1985); Peake et
al. (1985); Pratt et al. (1999); Ratnoff  (1978); Roberts  (1971);
Saiki et al. (1985); Tuddenham et al. (1981); Woolf  (1962); Youssoufian
et al. (1987); Youssoufian et al. (1988); Youssoufian et al. (1988)
REFERENCE 1. Abrams, E. S.; Murdaugh, S. E.; Lerman, L. S.: Comprehensive detection
of single base changes in human genomic DNA using denaturing gradient
gel electrophoresis and a GC clamp. Genomics 7: 463-475, 1990.

2. Acquila, M.; Caprino, D.; Pecorara, M.; Baudo, F.; Morfini, M.;
Mori, P. G.: Two novel mutations at 373 codon of FVIII gene detected
by DGGE. Thromb. Haemost. 69: 392-393, 1993.

3. Aly, A. M.; Arai, M.; Hoyer, L. W.: Cysteamine enhances the procoagulant
activity of factor VIII-East Hartford, a dysfunctional protein due
to a light chain thrombin cleavage site mutation (arginine-1689 to
cysteine). J. Clin. Invest. 89: 1375-1381, 1992.

4. Aly, A. M.; Higuchi, M.; Kasper, C. K.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis,
S. E.; Hoyer, L. W.: Hemophilia A due to mutations that create new
N-glycosylation sites. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4933-4937, 1992.

5. Aly, A. M.; Hoyer, L. W.: Factor VIII-East Hartford (arginine1689
to cysteine) has procoagulant activity when separated from von Willebrand
factor. J. Clin. Invest. 89: 1382-1387, 1992.

6. Antonarakis, S. E.; Copeland, K. L.; Carpenter, R. J., Jr.; Carta,
C. A.; Hoyer, L. W.; Caskey, C. T.; Toole, J. J.; Kazazian, H. H.,
Jr.: Prenatal diagnosis of haemophilia A by factor VIII gene analysis. Lancet 325:
1407-1409, 1985. Note: Originally Volume I.

7. Antonarakis, S. E.; Kazazian, H. H.; Tuddenham, G. D.: Molecular
etiology of factor VIII deficiency in hemophilia A. Hum. Mutat. 5:
1-22, 1995.

8. Antonarakis, S. E.; Rossiter, J. P.; Young, M.; Horst, J.; de Moerloose,
P.; Sommer, S. S.; Ketterling, R. P.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Negrier,
C.; Vinciguerra, C.; Gitschier, J.; Goossens, M.; and 54 others
: Factor VIII inversions in severe hemophilia A: results from an international
consortium. Blood 86: 2206-2212, 1995.

9. Antonarakis, S. E.; Waber, P. G.; Kittur, S. D.; Patel, A. S.;
Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Mellis, M. A.; Counts, R. B.; Stamatoyannopoulos,
G.; Bowie, E. J. W.; Fass, D. N.; Pittman, D. D.; Wozney, J. M.; Toole,
J. J.: Hemophilia A: detection of molecular defects and of carriers
by DNA analysis. New Eng. J. Med. 313: 842-848, 1985.

10. Arai, M.; Higuchi, M.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.;
Phillips, J. A., III; Janco, R. L.; Hoyer, L. W.: Characterization
of a thrombin cleavage site mutation (arg1689-to-cys) in the factor
VIII gene of two unrelated patients with cross-reacting material-positive
hemophilia A. Blood 75: 384-389, 1990.

11. Arai, M.; Inaba, H.; Higuchi, M.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Kazazian,
H. H., Jr.; Fujimaki, M.; Hoyer, L. W.: Direct characterization of
factor VIII in plasma: detection of a mutation altering a thrombin
cleavage site (arginine372-to-histidine). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 86:
4277-4281, 1989.

12. Arveiler, B.; Vincent, A.; Mandel, J.-L.: Toward a physical map
of the Xq28 region in man: linking color vision, G6PD, and coagulation
factor VIII genes to an X-Y homology region. Genomics 4: 460-471,
1989.

13. Bardoni, B.; Sampietro, M.; Romano, M.; Crapanzano, M.; Mannucci,
P. M.; Camerino, G.: Characterization of a partial deletion of the
factor VIII gene in a haemophiliac with inhibitor. Hum. Genet. 79:
86-88, 1988.

14. Barrow, E. M. S.; Graham, J. B.: Factor VIII. (Letter) Lancet 301:
1312-1313, 1973. Note: Originally Volume I.

15. Batzer, M. A.; Deininger, P. L.; Hellmann-Blumberg, U.; Jurka,
J.; Labuda, D.; Rubin, C. M.; Schmid, C. W.; Zietkiewicz, E.; Zuckerkandl,
E.: Standardized nomenclature for Alu repeats. J. Molec. Evol. 42:
3-6, 1996.

16. Becker, J.; Schwaab, R.; Moller-Taube, A.; Schwaab, U.; Schmidt,
W.; Brackmann, H. H.; Grimm, T.; Olek, K.; Oldenburg, J.: Characterization
of the factor VIII defect in 147 patients with sporadic hemophilia
A: family studies indicate a mutation type-dependent sex ratio of
mutation frequencies. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 58: 657-670, 1996.

17. Berg, L.-P.; Wieland, K.; Millar, D. S.; Schlosser, M.; Wagner,
M.; Kakkar, V. V.; Reiss, J.; Cooper, D. N.: Detection of a novel
point mutation causing haemophilia A by PCR/direct sequencing of ectopically-transcribed
factor VIII mRNA. Hum. Genet. 85: 655-658, 1990.

18. Bernardi, F.; Volinia, S.; Patracchini, P.; Gemmati, D.; Boninsegna,
S.; Schwienbacher, C.; Marchetti, G.: A recurrent missense mutation
(arg-to-gln) and a partial deletion in factor VIII gene causing severe
haemophilia A. Brit. J. Haemat. 71: 271-276, 1989.

19. Bidichandani, S. I.; Shiach, C. R.; Lanyon, W. G.; Connor, J.
M.: A novel splice donor mutation affecting position +3 in intron
6 of the factor VIII gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 651-653, 1994.

20. Bird, A. P.: DNA methylation and the frequency of CpG in animal
DNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 8: 1499-1504, 1980.

21. Bloom, A. L.; Peake, I. R.: Molecular genetics of factor VIII
and its disorders. Am. J. Path. 88: 319-340, 1977.

22. Briet, E.; Bakker, B.; Brocker-Vriends, A.: Somatic and germinal
mosaicism for a deletion in the factor VIII gene. (Abstract) Brit.
J. Haemat. 71 (suppl. 1): 1 only, 1989.

23. Brinke, A.; Tagliavacca, L.; Naylor, J.; Green, P.; Giangrande,
P.; Giannelli, F.: Two chimaeric transcription units result from
an inversion breaking intron 1 of the factor VIII gene and a region
reportedly affected by reciprocal translocations in T-cell leukaemia. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 5: 1945-1951, 1996.

24. Brinkhous, K. M.; Graham, J. B.: Hemophilia in the female dog. Science 111:
723-724, 1950.

25. Brocker-Vriends, A. H. J. T.; Briet, E.; Dreesen, J. C. F. M.;
Bakker, B.; Reitsma, P.; Pannekoek, H.; van de Kamp, J. J. P.; Pearson,
P. L.: Somatic origin of inherited haemophilia A. Hum. Genet. 85:
288-292, 1990.

26. Casarino, L.; Pecorara, M.; Mori, P. G.; Morfini, M.; Mancuso,
G.; Scrivano, L.; Molinari, A. C.; Lanza, T.; Giavarella, G.; Loi,
A.; Perseu, L.; Cao, A.; Pirastu, M.: Molecular basis of hemophilia
A in Italians. Ric. Clin. Lab. 16: 227, 1986.

27. Casula, L.; Murru, S.; Pecorara, M.; Ristaldi, M. S.; Restagno,
G.; Mancuso, G.; Morfini, M.; De Biasi, R.; Baudo, F.; Carbonara,
A.; Mori, P. G.; Cao, A.; Pirastu, M.: Recurrent mutations and three
novel rearrangements in the factor VIII gene of hemophilia A patients
of Italian descent. Blood 75: 662-670, 1990.

28. Chan, V.; Chan, T. K.; Tong, T. M.; Todd, D.: A novel missense
mutation in exon 4 of the factor VIII:C gene resulting in moderately
severe hemophilia A. Blood 74: 2688-2691, 1989.

29. Cooper, D. N.; Youssoufian, H.: The CpG dinucleotide and human
genetic disease. Hum. Genet. 78: 151-155, 1988.

30. Cooper, H. A.; Wagner, R. H.: The defect in hemophilic and von
Willebrand's disease. Plasmas studied by a recombination technique. J.
Clin. Invest. 54: 1093-1099, 1974.

31. Cutler, J. A.; Mitchell, M. J.; Smith, M. P.; Savidge, G. F.:
The identification and classification of 41 novel mutations in the
factor VIII gene (F8C). Hum. Mutat. 19: 274-278, 2002.

32. David, D.; Moreira, I.; Lalloz, M. R.; Rosa, H. A.; Schwaab, R.;
Morais, S.; Diniz, M. J.; de Deus, G.; Campos, M.; Lavinha, J.: Analysis
of the essential sequences of the factor VIII gene in twelve haemophilia
A patients by single-stranded conformation polymorphism. Blood Coagul.
Fibrinolysis 5: 257-264, 1994.

33. Diamond, C.; Kogan, S.; Levinson, B.; Gitschier, J.: Amino acid
substitutions in conserved domains of factor VIII and related proteins:
study of patients with mild and moderately severe hemophilia A. Hum.
Mutat. 1: 248-257, 1992.

34. Din, N.; Schwartz, M.; Kruse, T.; Vestertgaard, S. R.; Ahrens,
P.; Scheibel, E.; Nordfang, O.; Ezban, M.: Factor VIII gene-specific
probes used to study heritage and molecular defects in hemophilia
A. (Abstract) Ric. Clin. Lab. 16: 182 only, 1986.

35. Dombroski, B. A.; Mathias, S. L.; Nanthakumar, E.; Scott, A. F.;
Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: Isolation of an active human transposable element. Science 254:
1805-1808, 1991.

36. Economou, E. P.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Detection
of mutations in the factor VIII gene using single-stranded conformational
polymorphism (SSCP). Genomics 13: 909-911, 1992.

37. Favier, R.; Lavergne, J.-M.; Costa, J.-M.; Caron, C.; Mazurier,
C.; Viemont, M.; Delpech, M.; Valleix, S.: Unbalanced X-chromosome
inactivation with a novel FVIII gene mutation resulting in severe
hemophilia A in a female. Blood 96: 4373-4375, 2000.

38. Fay, P. J.; Chavin, S. I.; Schroeder, D.; Young, F. E.; Marder,
V. J.: Purification and characterization of a highly purified human
factor VIII consisting of a single type of polypeptide chain. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 79: 7200-7204, 1982.

39. Figueiredo, M. S.; Bernardi, F.; Zago, M. A.: A novel deletion
of FVIII gene associated with variable levels of FVIII inhibitor. Europ.
J. Haemat. 48: 152-154, 1992.

40. Freije, D.; Schlessinger, D.: A 1.6-Mb contig of yeast artificial
chromosomes around the human factor VIII gene reveals three regions
homologous to probes for the DXS115 locus and two for the DXYS64 locus. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 51: 66-80, 1992.

41. Ganguly, A.; Dunbar, T.; Chen, P.; Godmilow, L.; Ganguly, T.:
Exon skipping caused by an intronic insertion of a young Alu Yb9 element
leads to severe hemophilia A. Hum. Genet. 113: 348-352, 2003.

42. Gitschier, J.: Maternal duplication associated with gene deletion
in sporadic hemophilia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 43: 274-279, 1988.

43. Gitschier, J.; Drayna, D.; Tuddenham, E. G. D.; White, R. L.;
Lawn, R. M.: Genetic mapping and diagnosis of haemophilia A achieved
through a BclI polymorphism in the factor VIII gene. Nature 314:
738-740, 1985.

44. Gitschier, J.; Wood, W. I.; Goralka, T. M.; Wion, K. L.; Chen,
E. Y.; Eaton, D. H.; Vehar, G. A.; Capon, D. J.; Lawn, R. M.: Characterization
of the human factor VIII gene. Nature 312: 326-330, 1984.

45. Gitschier, J.; Wood, W. I.; Shuman, M. A.; Lawn, R. M.: Identification
of a missense mutation in the factor VIII gene of a mild hemophiliac. Science 232:
1415-1416, 1986.

46. Gitschier, J.; Wood, W. I.; Tuddenham, E. G. D.; Shuman, M. A.;
Goralka, T. M.; Chen, E. Y.; Lawn, R. M.: Detection and sequence
of mutations in the factor VIII gene of haemophiliacs. Nature 315:
427-430, 1985.

47. Graham, J. B.; Green, P. P.; McGraw, R. A.; Davis, L. M.: Application
of molecular genetics to prenatal diagnosis and carrier detection
in the hemophilias: some limitations. Blood 66: 759-764, 1985.

48. Gralnick, H. R.; Coller, B. S.: Molecular defects in haemophilia
A and von Willebrand's disease. Lancet 307: 837-838, 1976. Note:
Originally Volume I.

49. Green, P. M.; Bagnall, R. D.; Waseem, N. H.; Giannelli, F.: Haemophilia
A mutations in the UK: results of screening one-third of the population. Brit.
J. Haemat. 143: 115-128, 2008.

50. Green, P. M.; Montandon, A. J.; Bentley, D. R.; Giannelli, F.
: Genetics and molecular biology of haemophilias A and B. Blood Coagul.
Fibrinolysis 2: 539-565, 1991.

51. Grover, H.; Phillips, M. A.; Lillicrap, D. P.; Giles, A. R.; Garvey,
M. B.; Teitel, J.; Rivard, G.; Blanchette, V.; White, B. N.; Holden,
J. J. A.: Carrier deletion of haemophilia A using DNA markers in
families with an isolated affected male. Clin. Genet. 32: 10-19,
1987.

52. Guillet, B.; Lambert, T.; d'Oiron, R.; Proulle, V.; Plantier,
J.-L.; Rafowicz, A.; Peynet, J.; Costa, J.-M.; Bendelac, L.; Laurian,
Y.; Lavergne, J.-M.: Detection of 95 novel mutations in coagulation
factor VIII gene F8 responsible for hemophilia A: results from a single
institution. Hum. Mutat. 27: 676-685, 2006.

53. Higuchi, M.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Kasch, L.; Oldenburg, J.; Economou-Petersen,
E.; Olek, K.; Arai, M.; Inaba, H.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: Molecular
characterization of mild-to-moderate hemophilia A: detection of the
mutation in 25 of 29 patients by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 8307-8311, 1991.

54. Higuchi, M.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Kasch, L.; Warren, T. C.; McGinniss,
M. J.; Phillips, J. A., III; Kasper, C., III; Janco, R.; Antonarakis,
S. E.: Molecular characterization of severe hemophilia A suggests
that about half the mutations are not within the coding regions and
splice junctions of the factor VIII gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88:
7405-7409, 1991.

55. Higuchi, M.; Kochhan, L.; Olek, K.: A somatic mosaic for haemophilia
A detected at the DNA level. Molec. Biol. Med. 5: 23-27, 1988.

56. Higuchi, M.; Kochhan, L.; Schwaab, R.; Egli, H.; Brackmann, H.
H.; Horst, J.; Olek, K.: Molecular defects in hemophilia A: identification
and characterization of mutations in the factor VIII gene and family
analysis. Blood 74: 1045-1051, 1989.

57. Higuchi, M.; Wong, C.; Kochhan, L.; Olek, K.; Aronis, S.; Kasper,
C. K.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Characterization
of mutations in the factor VIII gene by direct sequencing of amplified
genomic DNA. Genomics 6: 65-71, 1990.

58. Hoyer, L. W.: Hemophilia A. New Eng. J. Med. 330: 38-45, 1994.

59. Hoyer, L. W.: The factor VIII complex: structure and function. Blood 58:
1-13, 1981.

60. Inaba, H.; Fujimaki, M.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S.
E.: MspI polymorphic site in intron 22 of the factor VIII gene in
the Japanese population. Hum. Genet. 84: 214-215, 1990.

61. Inaba, H.; Fujimaki, M.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S.
E.: Mild hemophilia A resulting from arg-to-leu substitution in exon
26 of the factor VIII gene. Hum. Genet. 81: 335-338, 1989.

62. Jaffe, E. A.; Nachman, R. L.: Subunit structure of factor VIII
antigen synthesized by cultured human endothelial cells. J. Clin.
Invest. 56: 698-702, 1975.

63. Janco, R. L.; Phillips, J. A., III; Orlando, P. J.; Woodard, M.
J.; Wion, K. L.; Lawn, R. M.: Detection of hemophilia A carriers
using intragenic factor VIII:C DNA polymorphisms. Blood 69: 1539-1541,
1987.

64. Johnson, D. J.; Pemberton, S.; Acquila, M.; Mori, P. G.; Tuddenham,
E. G.; O'Brien, D. P.: Factor VIII S373L: mutation at P1' site confers
thrombin cleavage resistance, causing mild haemophilia A. Thromb.
Haemost. 71: 428-433, 1994.

65. Jonsdottir, S.; Diamond, C.; Levinson, B.; Magnusson, S.; Jensson,
O.; Gitschier, J.: Missense mutations causing mild hemophilia A in
Iceland detected by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Hum.
Mutat. 1: 506-508, 1992.

66. Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Wong, C.; Youssoufian, H.; Scott, A. F.;
Phillips, D. G.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Haemophilia A resulting from
de novo insertion of L1 sequences represents a novel mechanism for
mutation in man. Nature 332: 164-166, 1988.

67. Kenwrick, S.; Gitschier, J.: A contiguous, 3-Mb physical map
of Xq28 extending from the colorblindness locus to DXS15. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 45: 873-882, 1989.

68. Kenwrick, S.; Levinson, B.; Taylor, S.; Shapiro, A.; Gitschier,
J.: Isolation and sequence of two genes associated with a CpG island
5-prime of the factor VIII gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1: 179-186,
1992.

69. Kogan, S.; Gitschier, J.: Mutations and a polymorphism in the
factor VIII gene discovered by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 2092-2096, 1990.

70. Krepelova, A.; Varlova, Z.; Zavadil, J.; Brdicka, R.: Factor
VIII gene deletions in haemophilia A patients in Czechoslovakia. Brit.
J. Haemat. 86: 271-276, 1992.

71. Lakich, D.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Gitschier,
J.: Inversions disrupting the factor VIII gene are a common cause
of severe haemophilia A. Nature Genet. 5: 236-241, 1993.

72. Lavergne, J. M.; Bahnak, B. R.; Vidaud, M.; Laurian, Y.; Meyer,
D.: A directed search for mutations in hemophilia A using restriction
enzyme analysis and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis: a study
of seven exons in the factor VIII gene of 170 cases. Nouv. Rev. Fr.
Hematol. 34: 85-91, 1992.

73. Lawn, R. M.: The molecular genetics of hemophilia: blood clotting
factors VIII and IX. Cell 42: 405-406, 1985.

74. Levinson, B.; Janco, R.; Phillips, J., III; Gitschier, J.: A
novel missense mutation in the factor VIII gene identified by analysis
of amplified hemophilia DNA sequences. Nucleic Acids Res. 15: 9797-9805,
1987.

75. Levinson, B.; Kenwrick, S.; Lakich, D.; Hammonds, G.; Gitschier,
J.: A transcribed gene in an intron of the human factor VIII gene. Genomics 7:
1-11, 1990.

76. Levinson, B.; Lehesjoki, A.-E.; de la Chapelle, A.; Gitschier,
J.: Molecular analysis of hemophilia A mutations in the Finnish population. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 46: 53-62, 1990.

77. Lillicrap, D. P.; Taylor, S. A. M.; Grover, H.; Teitel, J.; Giles,
A. R.; Holden, J. J. A.; White, B. N.: Genetic analysis in hemophilia
A: identification of a large F.VIII gene deletion in a patient with
high titre antibodies to human and porcine F.VIII. (Abstract) Blood 68:
337a only, 1986.

78. Lin, S.-W.; Lin, S.-R.; Shen, M.-C.: Characterization of genetic
defects of hemophilia A in patients of Chinese origin. Genomics 18:
496-504, 1993.

79. Lozier, J. N.; Dutra, A.; Pak, E.; Zhou, N.; Zheng, Z.; Nichols,
T. C.; Bellinger, D. A.; Read, M.; Morgan, R. A.: The Chapel Hill
hemophilia A dog colony exhibits a factor VIII gene inversion. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 12991-12996, 2002.

80. Marchesi, S. L.; Shulman, N. R.; Gralnick, H. R.: Studies on
the purification and characterization of human factor VIII. J. Clin.
Invest. 51: 2151-2161, 1972.

81. Mazurier, C.; Parquet-Gernez, A.; Gaucher, C.; Lavergne, J.-M.;
Goudemand, J.: Factor VIII deficiency not induced by FVIII gene mutation
in a female first cousin of two brothers with haemophilia A. Brit.
J. Haemat. 119: 390-392, 2002.

82. McGinniss, M. J.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Hoyer, L. W.; Bi, L.;
Inaba, H.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Spectrum of mutations in CRM-positive
and CRM-reduced hemophilia A. Genomics 15: 392-398, 1993.

83. Migeon, B. R.; McGinniss, M. J.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Axelman,
J.; Stasiowski, B. A.; Youssoufian, H.; Kearns, W. G.; Chung, A.;
Pearson, P. L.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Muneer, R. S.: Severe hemophilia
A in a female by cryptic translocation: order and orientation of factor
VIII within Xq28. Genomics 16: 20-25, 1993. Note: Erratum: Genomics
16: 792 only, 1993.

84. Mikami, S.: Gene analysis in haemophilia A--restriction fragment
length polymorphism and molecular defects in the factor VIII gene. Acta
Haemat. Jpn. 51: 1680-1688, 1988.

85. Millar, D. S.; Steinbrecher, R. A.; Wieland, K.; Grundy, C. B.;
Martinowitz, U.; Krawczak, M.; Zoll, B.; Whitmore, D.; Stephenson,
J.; Mibashan, R. S.; Kakkar, V. V.; Cooper, D. N.: The molecular
genetic analysis of haemophilia A: characterization of six partial
deletions in the factor VIII gene. Hum. Genet. 86: 219-227, 1990.

86. Millar, D. S.; Zoll, B.; Martinowitz, U.; Kakkar, V. V.; Cooper,
D. N.: The molecular genetics of haemophilia A: screening for point
mutations in the factor VIII gene using the restriction enzyme TaqI. Hum.
Genet. 87: 607-612, 1991.

87. Muneer, R. S.; Coffman, M. A.; Thompson, L. M.; Sexauer, C. L.;
Rennert, O. M.: Classic hemophilia in a female with X/17 complex
translocation and partial deletion of the long arm X chromosome (Xq11-13). Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 39: A126, 1986.

88. Murru, S.; Casula, L.; Pecorara, M.; Mori, P.; Cao, A.; Pirastu,
M.: Illegitimate recombination produced a duplication within the
FVIII gene in a patient with mild hemophilia A. Genomics 7: 115-118,
1990.

89. Myers, R. M.; Fischer, S. G.; Lerman, L. S.; Maniatis, T.: Nearly
all single base substitutions in DNA fragments joined to a GC-clamp
can be detected by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Nucleic
Acids Res. 13: 3131-3145, 1985.

90. Myers, R. M.; Fischer, S. G.; Maniatis, T.; Lerman, L. S.: Modification
of the melting properties of duplex DNA by attachment of a GC-rich
DNA sequence as determined by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Nucleic
Acids Res. 13: 3111-3129, 1985.

91. Nafa, K.; Bundis, M.; Deburgrave, N.; Bardin, J.-M.; Sultan, Y.;
Kaplan, J.-C.; Delpech, M.: A novel mutation (Arg-to-Leu in exon
18) in factor VIII gene responsible for moderate hemophilia A. Hum.
Mutat. 1: 77-78, 1992.

92. Nafa, K.; Meriane, F.; Reghis, A.; Benabadji, M.; Demenais, F.;
Guilloud-Bataille, M.; Sultan, Y.; Kaplan, J. C.; Delpech, M.: Investigation
of factor VIIIC gene restriction fragment length polymorphisms and
search for deletions in hemophiliac subjects in Algeria. Hum. Genet. 84:
401-405, 1990.

93. Naylor, J.; Brinke, A.; Hassock, S.; Green, P. M.; Giannelli,
F.: Characteristic mRNA abnormality found in half the patients with
severe haemophilia A is due to large DNA inversions. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 2: 1773-1778, 1993.

94. Naylor, J. A.; Green, P. M.; Montandon, A. J.; Rizza, C. R.; Giannelli,
F.: Detection of three novel mutations in two haemophilia A patients
by rapid screening of whole essential region of factor VIII gene. Lancet 337:
635-639, 1991.

95. Naylor, J. A.; Green, P. M.; Rizza, C. R.; Giannelli, F.: Factor
VIII gene explains all cases of haemophilia A. Lancet 340: 1066-1067,
1992.

96. Naylor, J. A.; Green, P. M.; Rizza, C. R.; Giannelli, F.: Analysis
of factor VIII mRNA reveals defects in everyone of 28 haemophilia
A patients. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 11-17, 1993.

97. Nilsson, I. M.; Blomback, M.; Ramgren, O.: Investigations on
hemophilia A and B carriers. Bibl. Haemat. 26: 26-29, 1966.

98. O'Brien, D. P.; Pattinson, J. K.; Tuddenham, E. G. D.: Purification
and characterization of factor VIII 372-cys: a hypofunctional cofactor
from a patient with moderately severe hemophilia A. Blood 75: 1664-1672,
1990.

99. Oberle, I.; Drayna, D.; Camerino, G.; White, R.; Mandel, J.-L.
: The telomeric region of the human X chromosome long arm: presence
of a highly polymorphic DNA marker and analysis of recombination frequency. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 2824-2828, 1985.

100. Oldenburg, J.; Rost, S.; El-Maarri, O.; Leuer, M.; Olek, K.;
Muller, C. R.; Schwaab, R.: De novo factor VIII gene intron 22 inversion
in a female carrier presents as a somatic mosaicism. Blood 96: 2905-2906,
2000.

101. Patterson, M.; Gitschier, J.; Bloomfield, J.; Bell, M.; Dorkins,
H.; Froster-Iskenius, U.; Sommer, S.; Sobell, J.; Schaid, D.; Thibodeau,
S.; Davies, K. E.: An intronic region within the human factor VIII
gene is duplicated within Xq28 and is homologous to the polymorphic
locus DXS115 (767). Am. J. Hum. Genet. 44: 679-685, 1989.

102. Patterson, M.; Schwartz, C.; Bell, M.; Sauer, S.; Hofker, M.;
Trask, B.; van den Engh, G.; Davies, K. E.: Physical mapping studies
on the human X chromosome in the region Xq27-Xqter. Genomics 1:
297-306, 1987.

103. Pattinson, J. K.; Millar, D. S.; McVey, J. H.; Grundy, C. B.;
Wieland, K.; Mibashan, R. S.; Martinowitz, U.; Tan-Un, K.; Vidaud,
M.; Goossens, M.; Sampietro, M.; Mannucci, P. M.; and 17 others
: The molecular genetic analysis of hemophilia A: a directed search
strategy for the detection of point mutations in the human factor
VIII gene. Blood 76: 2242-2248, 1990.

104. Paynton, C.; Sarkar, G.; Sommer, S. S.: Identification of mutations
in two families with sporadic hemophilia A. Hum. Genet. 87: 397-400,
1991.

105. Peake, I. R.; Lillicrap, D. P.; Liddell, M. B.; Matthews, R.
J.; Bloom, A. L.: Linked and intragenic probes for haemophilia A. Lancet 326:
1003-1004, 1985. Note: Originally Volume II.

106. Pieneman, W. C.; Reitsma, P. H.; Briet, E.: Double strand conformation
polymorphism (DSCP) detects two point mutations at codon 280 (AAC-ATC)
and at codon 431 (TAC-AAC) of the blood coagulation factor VIII gene. Thromb.
Haemost. 69: 473-475, 1993.

107. Poustka, A.; Dietrich, A.; Langenstein, G.; Toniolo, D.; Warren,
S. T.; Lehrach, H.: Physical map of human Xq27-qter: localizing the
region of the fragile X mutation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 8302-8306,
1991.

108. Pratt, K. P.; Shen, B. W.; Takeshima, K.; Davie, E. W.; Fujikawa,
K.; Stoddard, B. L.: Structure of the C2 domain of human factor VIII
at 1.5 angstrom resolution. Nature 402: 439-442, 1999.

109. Ratnoff, O. D.: Antihemophilic factor (factor VIII). Ann. Intern.
Med. 88: 403-409, 1978.

110. Ratnoff, O. D.; Bennett, B.: The genetics of hereditary disorders
of blood coagulation. Science 179: 1291-1298, 1973.

111. Reiner, A. P.; Stray, S. M.; Thompson, A. R.: Three missense
mutations in Arg codons of the factor VIII gene of mild to moderately
severe hemophilia A patients. Thromb. Res. 66: 93-99, 1992.

112. Reiner, A. P.; Thompson, A. R.: Screening for nonsense mutations
in patients with severe hemophilia A can provide rapid, direct carrier
detection. Hum. Genet. 89: 88-94, 1992.

113. Roberts, D. F.: The genetic basis of variation in factor VIII
levels among haemophiliacs. J. Med. Genet. 8: 136-139, 1971.

114. Rossiter, J. P.; Young, M.; Kimberland, M. L.; Hutter, P.; Ketterling,
R. P.; Gitschier, J.; Horst, J.; Morris, M. A.; Schaid, D. J.; de
Moerloose, P.; Sommer, S. S.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S.
E.: Factor VIII gene inversions causing severe hemophilia A originate
almost exclusively in male germ cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 3: 1035-1039,
1994.

115. Saiki, R. K.; Scharf, S.; Faloona, F.; Mullis, K. B.; Horn, G.
T.; Erlich, H. A.; Arnheim, N.: Enzymatic amplification of beta-globin
genomic sequences and restriction site analysis for diagnosis of sickle
cell anemia. Science 230: 1350-1354, 1985.

116. Santacroce, R.; Acquila, M.; Belvini, D.; Castaldo, G.; Garagiola,
I.; Giacomelli, S. H.; Lombardi, A. M.; Minuti, B.; Riccardi, F.;
Salviato, R.; Tagliabue, L.; Grandone, E.; Margaglione, M.; the AICE-Genetics
Study Group: Identification of 217 unreported mutations in the F8
gene in a group of 1,410 unselected Italian patients with hemophilia
A. J. Hum. Genet. 53: 275-284, 2008.

117. Schwaab, R.; Brackmann, H.-H.; Meyer, C.; Seehafer, J.; Kirchgesser,
M.; Haack, A.; Olek, K.; Tuddenham, E. G. D.; Oldenburg, J.: Haemophilia
A: mutation type determines risk of inhibitor formation. Thromb.
Haemat. 74: 1402-1406, 1995.

118. Schwaab, R.; Oldenburg, J.; Tuddenham, E. G. D.; Brackmann, H.
H.; Olek, K.: Mutations in haemophilia A. Brit. J. Haemat. 83:
450-458, 1993.

119. Shima, M.; Ware, J.; Yoshioka, A.; Fukui, H.; Fulcher, C. A.
: An arginine to cysteine amino acid substitution at a critical thrombin
cleavage site in a dysfunctional factor VIII molecule. Blood 74:
1612-1617, 1989.

120. Sukarova, E.; Dimovski, A. J.; Tchacarova, P.; Petkov, G. H.;
Efremov, G. D.: An Alu insert as the cause of a severe form of hemophilia
A. Acta Haemat. 106: 126-129, 2001.

121. Summers, R. J.; Meeks, S. L.; Healey, J. F.; Brown, H. C.; Parker,
E. T.; Kempton, C. L.; Doering, C. B.; Lollar, P.: Factor VIII A3
domain substitution N1922S results in hemophilia A due to domain-specific
misfolding and hyposecretion of functional protein. Blood 117: 3190-3198,
2011.

122. Tantravahi, U.; Murty, V. V. V. S.; Jhanwar, S. C.; Toole, J.
J.; Woozney, J. M.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Latt, S. A.: Physical mapping
of the factor VIII gene proximal to two polymorphic DNA probes in
human chromosome band Xq28: implications for factor VIII gene segregation
analysis. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 42: 75-79, 1986.

123. Toole, J. J.; Knopf, J. L.; Wozney, J. M.; Sultzman, L. A.; Buecker,
J. L.; Pittman, D. D.; Kaufman, R. J.; Brown, E.; Shoemaker, C.; Orr,
E. C.; Amphlett, G. W.; Foster, W. B.; Coe, M. L.; Knutson, G. J.;
Fass, D. N.; Hewick, R. M.: Molecular cloning of a cDNA encoding
human antihaemophilic factor. Nature 312: 342-347, 1984.

124. Traystman, M. D.; Higuchi, M.; Kasper, C. K.; Antonarakis, S.
E.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: Use of denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis
to detect point mutations in the factor VIII gene. Genomics 6: 293-301,
1990.

125. Tuddenham, E. G. D.; Cooper, D. N.; Gitschier, J.; Higuchi, M.;
Hoyer, L. W.; Yoshioka, A.; Peake, I. R.; Schwaab, R.; Olek, K.; Kazazian,
H. H.; Lavergne, J.-M.; Giannelli, F.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Haemophilia
A: database of nucleotide substitutions, deletions, insertions and
rearrangements of the factor VIII gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 19: 4821-4833,
1991.

126. Tuddenham, E. G. D.; Lazarchick, J.; Hoyer, L. W.: Synthesis
and release of factor VIII by cultured human endothelial cells. Brit.
J. Haemat. 47: 617-626, 1981.

127. Valleix, S.; Vinciguerra, C.; Lavergne, J.-M.; Leuer, M.; Delpech,
M.; Negrier, C.: Skewed X-chromosome inactivation in monochorionic
diamniotic twin sisters results in severe and mild hemophilia A. Blood 100:
3034-3036, 2002.

128. Viel, K. R.; Ameri, A.; Abshire, T. C.; Iyer, R. V.; Watts, R.
G.; Lutcher, C.; Channell, C.; Cole, S. A.; Fernstrom, K. M.; Nakaya,
S.; Kasper, C. K.; Thompson, A. R.; Almasy, L.; Howard, T. E.: Inhibitors
of factor VIII in black patients with hemophilia. New Eng. J. Med. 360:
1618-1627, 2009. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 361: 544 only, 2009.

129. Wehnert, M.; Herrmann, F. H.; Wulff, K.: Partial deletions of
factor VIII gene as molecular diagnostic markers in hemophilia A. Dis.
Markers 7: 113-117, 1989.

130. Wion, K. L.; Kelly, D.; Summerfield, J. A.; Tuddenham, E. G.;
Lawn, R. M.: Distribution of factor VIII mRNA and antigen in human
liver and other tissues. Nature 317: 726-729, 1985.

131. Wood, W. I.; Capon, D. J.; Simonsen, C. C.; Eaton, D. L.; Gitschier,
J.; Keyt, B.; Seeburg, P. H.; Smith, D. H.; Hollingshead, P.; Wion,
K. L.; Delwart, E.; Tuddenham, E. G. D.; Vehar, G. A.; Lawn, R. M.
: Expression of active human factor VIII from recombinant DNA clones. Nature 312:
330-337, 1984.

132. Woods-Samuels, P.; Wong, C.; Mathias, S. L.; Scott, A. F.; Kazazian,
H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Characterization of a nondeleterious
L1 insertion in an intron of the human factor VIII gene and further
evidence of open reading frames in functional L1 elements. Genomics 4:
290-296, 1989.

133. Woolf, L. I.: Gene expression in heterozygotes. Nature 194:
609-610, 1962.

134. Young, M.; Inaba, H.; Hoyer, L. W.; Higuchi, M.; Kazazian, H.
H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Partial correction of a severe molecular
defect in hemophilia A, because of errors during expression of the
factor VIII gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 60: 565-573, 1997.

135. Youssoufian, H.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Aronis, S.; Tsiftis, G.;
Phillips, D. G.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: Characterization of five partial
deletions of the factor VIII gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 3772-3776,
1987.

136. Youssoufian, H.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Bell, W.; Griffin, A. M.;
Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: Nonsense and missense mutations in hemophilia
A: estimate of the relative mutation rate at CG dinucleotides. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 42: 718-725, 1988.

137. Youssoufian, H.; Antonarakis, S. E.; Kasper, C. K.; Phillips,
D. G.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: The spectrum and origin of mutations
in hemophilia A. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 41: A249 only, 1987.

138. Youssoufian, H.; Kasper, C. K.; Phillips, D. G.; Kazazian, H.
H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Restriction endonuclease mapping of
six novel deletions of the factor VIII gene in hemophilia A. Hum.
Genet. 80: 143-148, 1988.

139. Youssoufian, H.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Phillips, D. G.; Aronis,
S.; Tsiftis, G.; Brown, V. A.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Recurrent mutations
in haemophilia A give evidence for CpG mutation hotspots. Nature 324:
380-382, 1986.

140. Youssoufian, H.; Wong, C.; Aronis, S.; Platokoukis, H.; Kazazian,
H. H., Jr.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Moderately severe hemophilia A resulting
from glu-to-gly substitution in exon 7 of the factor VIII gene. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 42: 867-871, 1988.

141. Zacharski, L. R.; Bowie, E. J. W.; Titus, J. L.; Owen, C. A.,
Jr.: Synthesis of antihemophilic factor (factor VIII) by leukocytes:
preliminary report. Mayo Clin. Proc. 43: 617-619, 1968.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/1/2011

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 4/5/2011

EDITED terry: 09/14/2012
carol: 5/30/2012
terry: 4/12/2012
mgross: 11/13/2011
terry: 11/1/2011
terry: 6/24/2011
terry: 6/23/2011
terry: 4/13/2011
carol: 4/8/2011
terry: 4/8/2011
carol: 4/7/2011
ckniffin: 4/6/2011

606218	TITLE *606218 SELENOPHOSPHATE SYNTHETASE 2; SEPHS2
;;SPS2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening activated CD8 (see 186910)-positive T cells with mouse
Sps2, a homolog of E. coli selD, as the probe, Guimaraes et al. (1996)
isolated a cDNA encoding human SPS2. The deduced 448-amino acid SPS2
protein contains Walker A- and B-like motifs, which are characteristic
of alpha/beta nucleotide-binding folds. The SPS2 Walker A-like motif is
a gly-rich site that includes a selenocysteine (sec) residue. Northern
blot analysis revealed preferential expression of a 2.3-kb transcript in
mouse tissues that produce selenoproteins, with lower expression in
sites of blood cell development. Levels of Sps2 mRNA were upregulated
upon activation of CD4 (186940)-positive lymphocytes. Western blot
analysis showed that Sps2 levels were 20-fold higher when the 3-prime
UTR of Sps2 was included in the expression construct in transfected
cells. Southern blot analysis indicated that SPS2 is well-conserved in
mammals.

UGA (TGA) codons normally serve as translational stop signals. However,
in cDNAs with stem-loop secondary structures called selenocysteine
insertion sequence (SECIS) elements, a translational stop is avoided and
UGA directs the incorporation of the amino acid selenocysteine into the
active site of the selenoprotein enzyme. Using a computational pattern
search to identify sequences that can adopt a SECIS-like secondary
structure, Lescure et al. (1999) discovered a SECIS in the 3-prime UTR
of SPS2 cDNA.

GENE FUNCTION

A labile selenium donor compound monoselenophosphate is synthesized from
selenide and ATP by SPS. Tamura et al. (2004) cloned SPS1 (600902) and
SPS2 from a cDNA library prepared from human lung adenocarcinoma cells.
Human lung SPS1 was cloned as an open reading frame (ORF) of 1,179 bp,
identical in sequence to that of human liver SPS1. The in-frame TGA
codon of lung SPS2 was genetically altered to TGT (cys); the resulting
gene was designated SPS2cys. Expression of the recombinant plasmids
containing SPS1 or SPS2cys was highly toxic to E. coli host cells grown
aerobically. Accordingly, the human lung SPS homologs were characterized
by an in vivo complementation assay using a selD mutant strain of E.
coli. These studies suggested an apparent substrate specificity of the
SPS1 and SPS2 gene products, leading Tamura et al. (2004) to suggest
that the SPS1-encoded enzyme depends on a selenium salvage system that
recycles L-selenocysteine, whereas the SPS2 enzyme can function with a
selenite assimilation system.

MAPPING

Gross (2011) mapped the SEPHS2 gene to chromosome 16p11.2 based on an
alignment of the SEPHS2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC002381) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Guimaraes et al. (1996) mapped the mouse Sps2 gene to the distal region
of chromosome 7 by interspecific backcross analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/28/2011.

2. Guimaraes, M. J.; Peterson, D.; Vicari, A.; Cocks, B. G.; Copeland,
N. G.; Gilbert, D. J.; Jenkins, N. A.; Ferrick, D. A.; Kastelein,
R. A.; Bazan, J. F.; Zlotnik, A.: Identification of a novel selD
homolog from eukaryotes, bacteria, and archaea: is there an autoregulatory
mechanism in selenocysteine metabolism? Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93:
15086-15091, 1996.

3. Lescure, A.; Gautheret, D.; Carbon, P.; Krol, A.: Novel selenoproteins
identified in silico and in vivo by using a conserved RNA structural
motif. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 38147-38154, 1999.

4. Tamura, T.; Yamamoto, S.; Takahata, M.; Sakaguchi, H.; Tanaka,
H.; Stadtman, T. C.; Inagaki, K.: Selenophosphate synthetase genes
from lung adenocarcinoma cells: Sps1 for recycling L-selenocysteine
and Sps2 for selenite assimilation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 16162-16167,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 2/28/2011
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/21/2005

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 8/21/2001

EDITED mgross: 02/28/2011
mgross: 2/28/2011
tkritzer: 1/21/2005
mgross: 8/21/2001

300513	TITLE *300513 G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 119; GPR119
;;G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 2; GPCR2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GPR119 is a member of the rhodopsin family of G protein-coupled
receptors (GPRs) (Fredriksson et al., 2003).

CLONING

By searching databases for GPRs containing no introns in the coding
region, Takeda et al. (2002) identified GPR119, which they designated
GPCR2. The deduced protein shares 27% homology with dopamine receptor-1
(see 126449). RT-PCR detected ubiquitous GPR119 expression.

By searching databases for sequences similar to rhodopsin-like GPRs,
Fredriksson et al. (2003) identified mouse and human GPR119. The deduced
335-amino acid proteins assume a classic 7-transmembrane (TM) topology
and share 82% amino acid identity. They contain the characteristic DRY
motif in the intracellular side of TM3 and an NSxxNPxxY motif in TM7.

GENE STRUCTURE

Takeda et al. (2002) and Fredriksson et al. (2003) determined that the
coding regions of the mouse and human GPR119 genes are derived from a
single exon.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Fredriksson et al. (2003) mapped the
GPR119 gene to chromosome Xq26.1. They mapped the mouse Gpr119 gene to
the X chromosome.

REFERENCE 1. Fredriksson, R.; Hoglund, P. J.; Gloriam, D. E. I.; Lagerstrom,
M. C.; Schioth, H. B.: Seven evolutionarily conserved human rhodopsin
G protein-coupled receptors lacking close relatives. FEBS Lett. 554:
381-388, 2003.

2. Takeda, S.; Kadowaki, S.; Haga, T.; Takaesu, H.; Mitaku, S.: Identification
of G protein-coupled receptor genes from the human genome sequence. FEBS
Lett. 520: 97-101, 2002. Note: Erratum: FEBS Lett. 523: 257 only,
2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/23/2004

EDITED joanna: 05/27/2013
mgross: 11/23/2004

114170	TITLE *114170 CALPAIN, SMALL SUBUNIT 1; CAPNS1
;;CALPAIN 4; CAPN4;;
CANPS;;
CALCIUM-DEPENDENT PROTEASE, SMALL SUBUNIT; CDPS
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Calcium-dependent cysteine proteinases, or calpains (EC 3.4.22.17), are
widely distributed in mammalian cells. There are 2 distinct molecular
forms, calpains I and II, which differ in the quantity of calcium
required. Both calpains I and II are heterodimeric; each is composed of
1 heavy (about 80 kD), CAPN1 (114220) and CAPN2 (114230), respectively,
and 1 shared light (about 30 kD) subunit, CAPNS1. The heavy subunit has
a catalytic function, and the light subunit is regulatory.

CLONING

Ohno et al. (1986) gave the nucleotide sequence for a nearly full-length
cDNA coding for the small subunit of human calcium-dependent protease. A
human spleen cDNA library was the source. The human protein has 268
amino acids.

GENE FUNCTION

Using cell biologic, pharmacologic, and genetic methods,
Chandramohanadas et al. (2009) found that the apicomplexan parasites
Plasmodium falciparum and Toxoplasma gondii, the causative agents of
malaria and toxoplasmosis, respectively, used host cell calpains to
facilitate parasite egress. Immunodepletion and inhibition experiments
showed that calpain-1 was required for escape of P. falciparum from
human erythrocytes. Similarly, elimination of both calpain-1 and
calpain-2 via small interfering RNA against the common regulatory
subunit CAPNS1 in human osteosarcoma cells or deletion of Capns1 in
mouse embryonic fibroblasts blocked egress of T. gondii.
Chandramohanadas et al. (2009) concluded that P. falciparum and T.
gondii both exploit host cell calpains to facilitate escape from
intracellular parasitophorous vacuoles and/or the host plasma membrane,
a process required for parasite proliferation.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Blanchard et al. (1997) reported the crystal structure of the
Ca(2+)-binding domain (domain VI) of rat Capns1 at 2.3-angstrom
resolution, both with and without bound Ca(2+). Monomers of domain VI
formed dimers with or without Ca(2+). The domain VI monomer was compact,
predominantly alpha helical, and incorporated 5 EF-hand supersecondary
structural elements. Only EF1, EF2, and EF3 were able to bind Ca(2+) at
physiologic Ca(2+) concentrations, and EF1 showed a novel Ca(2+)
coordination pattern.

MAPPING

By a combination of spot blot hybridization with sorted chromosomes and
of Southern hybridization with human-mouse cell hybrid DNAs, using in
each case a cDNA probe, Ohno et al. (1990) assigned the CANPS gene to
chromosome 19.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using targeted disruption of the mouse Capn4 gene and casein zymography
analysis, Arthur et al. (2000) demonstrated that wildtype and
heterozygote embryonic stem cell lysates maintained mu- and m-calpain
(i.e., calpain I and II) activities, whereas mutant homozygote embryonic
stem cell lysates did not. Immunoblot analysis showed that the m-calpain
large subunit was lost in Capn4 -/- cells. Growth of fibroblasts from
day 9.5 Capn4 -/- embryos was indistinguishable from those of wildtype
and heterozygous mice. At day 10.5, Capn4 -/- mice had a normal
cardiovascular system except for apparent defects in the development of
heart chambers and the vessels leading to and from the heart. After day
11.5, the accumulation of nucleated erythroid cells correlated with the
death of all Capn4 -/- embryos. Although unable to determine a
physiologic function for calpain, Arthur et al. (2000) concluded that
calpain is essential for life.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Sakihama et al. (1985)
REFERENCE 1. Arthur, J. S. C.; Elce, J. S.; Hegadorn, C.; Williams, K.; Greer,
P. A.: Disruption of the murine calpain small subunit gene, Capn4:
calpain is essential for embryonic development but not for cell growth
and division. Molec. Cell. Biol. 20: 4474-4481, 2000.

2. Blanchard, H.; Grochulski, P.; Li, Y.; Arthur, J. S. C.; Davies,
P. L.; Elce, J. S.; Cygler, M.: Structure of a calpain Ca(2+)-binding
domain reveals a novel EF-hand and Ca(2+)-induced conformational changes. Nature
Struct. Biol. 4: 532-538, 1997.

3. Chandramohanadas, R.; Davis, P. H.; Beiting, D. P.; Harbut, M.
B.; Darling, C.; Velmourougane, G.; Lee, M. Y.; Greer, P. A.; Roos,
D. S.; Greenbaum, D. C.: Apicomplexan parasites co-opt host calpains
to facilitate their escape from infected cells. Science 324: 794-797,
2009.

4. Ohno, S.; Emori, Y.; Suzuki, K.: Nucleotide sequence of a cDNA
coding for the small subunit of human calcium-dependent protease. Nucleic
Acids Res. 14: 5559 only, 1986.

5. Ohno, S.; Minoshima, S.; Kudoh, J.; Fukuyama, R.; Shimizu, Y.;
Ohmi-Imajoh, S.; Shimizu, N.; Suzuki, K.: Four genes for the calpain
family locate on four distinct human chromosomes. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 53: 225-229, 1990.

6. Sakihama, T.; Kakidani, H.; Zenita, K.; Yumoto, N.; Kikuchi, T.;
Sasaki, T.; Kannagi, R.; Nakanishi, S.; Ohmori, M.; Takio, K.; Titani,
K.; Murachi, T.: A putative Ca(2+)-binding protein: structure of
the light subunit of porcine calpain elucidated by molecular cloning
and protein sequence analysis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 6075-6079,
1985.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 07/07/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/11/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/22/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/11/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/16/1986

EDITED mgross: 07/07/2009
alopez: 3/16/2009
terry: 3/11/2009
mgross: 12/2/2005
terry: 11/22/2005
carol: 8/21/2001
mgross: 9/11/2000
psherman: 4/10/2000
carol: 8/18/1998
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 4/29/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
carol: 12/19/1989
ddp: 10/27/1989

607179	TITLE *607179 RNA-BINDING MOTIF PROTEIN 12; RBM12
;;KIAA0765
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Stover et al. (2001) cloned a partial cDNA encoding a member of the
RNA-binding motif protein family, RBM12, from a human colon carcinoma
cell line cDNA library. They cloned the full-length cDNA from an acute
monocytic leukemia cell line cDNA library and found that it is identical
to a partial cDNA, KIAA0765, isolated from a brain cDNA library by
Nagase et al. (1998). The full-length cDNA encodes a deduced 932-amino
acid protein with a calculated molecular mass of 97 kD. It contains 5
RNA-binding motifs, several potential transmembrane domains, and 2
proline-rich regions that coincide with 2 of the transmembrane domains.
The RBM12 protein has a nuclear targeting sequence and a mitochondrial
targeting sequence, but no signal sequence. Northern blot analysis
detected abundant expression of a 3.5-kb transcript in all cell lines
tested.

GENE STRUCTURE

Stover et al. (2001) determined that the RBM12 gene contains 2 exons and
spans approximately 10 kb. The structure of the gene is unusual in that
its 1 intron is located in the 5-prime untranslated region and the
complete coding sequence is transcribed from a single exon. Southern
blot analysis indicated that RBM12 is present in single copy.

MAPPING

By FISH, Stover et al. (2001) mapped the RBM12 gene to chromosome
20q11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XI. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 5: 277-286, 1998.

2. Stover, C.; Gradl, G.; Jentsch, I.; Speicher, M. R.; Wieser, R.;
Schwaeble, W.: cDNA cloning, chromosome assignment, and genomic structure
of a human gene encoding a novel member of the RBM family. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 92: 225-230, 2001.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 8/28/2002

EDITED mgross: 08/30/2002
carol: 8/28/2002

606302	TITLE *606302 PROTOCADHERIN-GAMMA, SUBFAMILY B, MEMBER 5; PCDHGB5
;;PCDH-GAMMA-B5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cadherins are calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion molecules, and
protocadherins constitute a subfamily of nonclassic cadherins. PCDHGB5
is 1 of 22 tandemly arranged genes within the PCDHG gene cluster
(604968) on chromosome 5q31. The 22 PCDHG genes function as 'variable'
exons that are individually spliced to a downstream constant region to
form distinct PCDHG transcripts. The variable PCDHG exons encode the
extracellular and transmembrane domains of the protocadherin protein,
and the common region encodes the intracellular domain (Wu et al.,
2001). For further information on the PCDHG genes, see 604968.

CLONING

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Wu and Maniatis (1999) cloned
full-length PCDHGB5.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wu et al. (2001) mapped the PCDHGB5 gene
to chromosome 5q31, between the PCDHGA8 gene (606295) and the PCDHGA9
gene (606296). They localized the mouse PCDHG genes to chromosome 18c.

REFERENCE 1. Wu, Q.; Maniatis, T.: A striking organization of a large family
of human neural cadherin-like cell adhesion genes. Cell 97: 779-790,
1999.

2. Wu, Q.; Zhang, T.; Cheng, J.-F.; Kim, Y.; Grimwood, J.; Schmutz,
J.; Dickson, M.; Noonan, J. P.; Zhang, M. Q.; Myers, R. M.; Maniatis,
T.: Comparative DNA sequence analysis of mouse and human protocadherin
gene clusters. Genome Res. 11: 389-404, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/15/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/27/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/05/2012
alopez: 4/5/2012
mgross: 10/15/2007
mgross: 9/27/2001

108733	TITLE *108733 ATPase, Ca(2+)-TRANSPORTING, PLASMA MEMBRANE, 2; ATP2B2
;;PLASMA MEMBRANE Ca(2+)-ATPase, TYPE 2; PMCA2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The Ca(2+)-ATPases are a family of plasma membrane pumps encoded by at
least 4 genes: ATP2B1 (108731) on chromosome 12q21; ATP2B2; ATP2B3
(300014) on Xq28; and ATP2B4 (108732) on 1q25.

CLONING

Brandt et al. (1992) isolated and characterized a cDNA for the human
PMCA2 gene from a human fetal brain cDNA library. The 1,190-amino acid
protein showed greater than 98% sequence identity to the rat protein.

By PCR, Brandt et al. (1992) detected PMCA2 expression in brain, liver,
spinal cord, and adrenal gland. There were 2 PCR products in spinal
cord, suggesting the presence of PMCA2 splice variants.

By RT-PCR, Santiago-Garcia et al. (1996) found variable expression of
the PMCA and SERCA (see 108730) genes during development of human fetal
heart. PMCA2 was not detected in placenta or in fetal heart at the 3
stages tested, but 3 splice variants of PMCA2 were detected in adult
atrium.

Street et al. (1998) noted that the ATP2B2 gene undergoes alternative
splicing. All 4 ATP2B proteins are predicted to have 10
transmembrane-spanning domains with approximately 80% of the protein
mass located in the cytoplasm. The intracellular loop between T2 and T3
encodes the transducing domain that couples ATP hydrolysis with calcium
translocation. The largest intracellular loop, between T4 and T5,
includes the phosphoenzyme-forming residue and the nucleotide-binding
domain. The intracellular C terminus contains the calmodulin-binding,
protein kinase C, cAMP-dependent kinase and acidic phospholipid
regulatory domains.

GENE FUNCTION

Elwess et al. (1997) found that the alternative splice variants PMCA2a
and PMCA2b had much higher affinity for calmodulin than the
corresponding forms of PMCA4. At a high calmodulin concentration, PMCA2b
showed higher calcium affinity. The calcium affinity was localized to
the C terminus. Elwess et al. (1997) concluded that the PMCA2 variants
maintain a low free cytosolic calcium concentration.

Street et al. (1998) found Atp2b2 expression in mouse auditory and
vestibular hair cells, suggesting that the channel provides the means to
remove calcium from stereocilia.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a human brain cDNA expression library,
DeMarco et al. (2002) found that PCMA2b interacted with NHERF2
(SLC9A3R2; 606553). Coimmunoprecipitation analysis indicated that the
interaction was specific and selective, in that PCMA4b did not interact
with either NHERF2 or NHERF1 (SLC9A3R1; 604990), and PCMA2b preferred
NHERF2 over NHERF1. Fluorescence-tagged PCMA2b was expressed at the
apical membrane of canine kidney epithelial cells, where it colocalized
with apically targeted NHERF2. DeMarco et al. (2002) hypothesized that
the PCMA2b-NHERF2 interaction may allow the assembly of PMCA2b in a
multiprotein Ca(2+) signaling complex.

Chicka and Strehler (2003) found that PMCA2b localized to both the
apical and basolateral membranes of polarized epithelial cells.
Different splice variants of the protein showed differential membrane
targeting.

MAPPING

Using the PMCA2 cDNA to probe Southern blots of human-rodent somatic
cell hybrid DNAs, Brandt et al. (1992) mapped the PMCA2 gene to human
chromosome 3. By a combination of fluorescence in situ hybridization,
analysis of somatic cell hybrids, and genetic linkage analysis in CEPH
families, Wang et al. (1994) confirmed assignment of the ATP2B2 gene to
3p26-p25.

Richards et al. (1993) reported that the PMCA2 gene, which is located on
3p, is situated centromeric to the gene (VHL; 608537) for von
Hippel-Lindau disease (193300). They reported other results that
excluded PMCA2 as the site of the mutation in VHL.

ANIMAL MODEL

Street et al. (1998) demonstrated that the deafwaddler (dfw) mouse
mutant, which is deaf and displays vestibular/motor imbalance, has a
mutation in the Atp2b2 gene. An A-to-G nucleotide transition in dfw DNA
caused a glycine-to-serine substitution at a highly conserved amino acid
position, whereas a second mutant allele carried a 2-bp deletion that
caused a frameshift predicted to result in a truncated protein. In the
cochlea, the Atp2b2 protein was localized to stereocilia and the
basolateral wall of hair cells in wildtype mice, but was not detected in
deafwaddler mice. The findings indicated that mutation of Atp2b2 may
cause deafness and imbalance by affecting sensory transduction in
stereocilia as well as neurotransmitter release from the basolateral
membrane. These mutations affecting Atp2b2 were the first to be found in
a mammalian plasma membrane calcium pump and defined a new class of
deafness genes that directly affect hair-cell physiology.

PMCA2 exhibits a highly restricted tissue distribution, suggesting that
it serves more specialized physiologic functions than some of the other
PMCA isoforms. A unique role in hearing is suggested by the high levels
of PMCA2 expression in cochlear outer hair cells and spiral ganglion
cells. To analyze the physiologic role of PMCA2, Kozel et al. (1998)
produced PMCA2-deficient mice by gene targeting. Homozygous PMCA2-null
mice grew more slowly than heterozygous and wildtype mice and exhibited
an unsteady gait and difficulties in maintaining balance. Histologic
analysis of the cerebellum and inner ear of mutant and wildtype mice
showed that null mutants have slightly increased numbers of Purkinje
neurons (in which PMCA2 is highly expressed), a decreased thickness of
the molecular layer, an absence of otoconia in the vestibular system,
and a range of abnormalities of the organ of Corti. Analysis of
auditory-evoked brainstem responses showed that homozygous mutants were
deaf and that heterozygous mice had a significant hearing loss. These
data demonstrated that PMCA2 is required for both balance and hearing
and suggested that it may be a major source of the calcium used in the
formation and maintenance of otoconia.

Reinhardt et al. (2004) noted that the PMCA2bw isoform is expressed
approximately 100-fold during lactation, and that expression levels
correlate with milk production and calcium secretion. They found that
mice homozygous for the loss of Pmca2 produced milk with 60% less
calcium than that of heterozygous or wildtype mice. There was no
alteration in whole-body calcium metabolism in the null mice. The
findings indicated that the Pmca2bw isoform, which allows the enzyme to
function as a high affinity calcium extrusion system on the apical
membrane, is necessary to produce the high levels of calcium in milk,
and that it occurs by direct secretion by the calcium pump.

Bortolozzi et al. (2010) characterized Tommy (tmy) mutant mice, which
were generated in an N-ethyl-N-nitrosurea mutagenesis screen. Tmy/tmy
mice were profoundly deaf at birth and were smaller than their
littermates. They developed severe ataxia, with hesitant wobbly gait and
frequent hyperextension of the rear limbs. Tmy heterozygous mice
developed deafness by 12 weeks of age, with full penetrance by 30 weeks.
Bortolozzi et al. (2010) identified the tmy mutation as a
nonconservative G-to-A transition in exon 7 of the Atp2b2 gene,
resulting in a gln629-to-lys (E629K) substitution in Atp2b2 w/a, the
Atp2b2 isoform expressed in hair cells (the substitution corresponds to
E584K in the Atp2b2 z/b isoform, which lacks the 45-amino acid insertion
in Atp2b2 w/a). Expression of mutant Atp2b2 in Chinese hamster ovary
cells caused impaired calcium extrusion, with inhibition of long-term,
nonstimulated calcium export. Recordings of neonate organotypic cultures
of utricle sensory epithelium confirmed impaired calcium export in both
tmy/tmy and tmy/+ mice following rapid calcium release.
Immunofluorescence analysis of the organ of Corti in tmy/tmy mice showed
a progressive base to apex degeneration of hair cells after postnatal
day 40.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 12, MODIFIER OF
ATP2B2, VAL586MET

In 3 of 5 sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with autosomal recessive
deafness (DFNB12; 601386) caused by a homozygous phe1888-to-ser
substitution in the CDH23 gene (F1888S; 605516.0010), Schultz et al.
(2005) identified a heterozygous 2075G-A transition in exon 12 of the
ATP2B2 gene, resulting in a val586-to-met (V586M) substitution. The 3
sibs heterozygous for V586M had severe to profound hearing loss
affecting all frequencies, whereas the other 2 sibs had high-frequency
hearing loss. Schultz et al. (2005) suggested that V586M modifies the
severity of sensorineural hearing loss.

REFERENCE 1. Bortolozzi, M.; Brini, M.; Parkinson, N.; Crispino, G.; Scimemi,
P.; De Siati, R. D.; Di Leva, F.; Parker, A.; Ortolano, S.; Arslan,
E.; Brown, S. D.; Carafoli, E.; Mammano, F.: The novel PMCA2 pump
mutation Tommy impairs cytosolic calcium clearance in hair cells and
links to deafness in mice. J. Biol. Chem. 285: 37693-37703, 2010.

2. Brandt, P.; Ibrahim, E.; Bruns, G. A. P.; Neve, R. L.: Determination
of the nucleotide sequence and chromosomal localization of the ATP2B2
gene encoding human Ca(2+)-pumping ATPase isoform PMCA2. Genomics 14:
484-487, 1992.

3. Brandt, P.; Neve, R. L.; Kammesheidt, A.; Rhoads, R. E.; Vanaman,
T. C.: Analysis of the tissue-specific distribution of mRNAs encoding
the plasma membrane calcium-pumping ATPases and characterization of
an alternately spliced form of PMCA4 at the cDNA and genomic levels. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 4376-4385, 1992.

4. Chicka, M. C.; Strehler, E. E.: Alternative splicing of the first
intracellular loop of plasma membrane Ca2+-ATPase isoform 2 alters
its membrane targeting. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 18464-18470, 2003.

5. DeMarco, S. J.; Chicka, M. C.; Strehler, E. E.: Plasma membrane
Ca(2+) ATPase isoform 2b interacts preferentially with Na+/H+ exchanger
regulatory factor 2 in apical plasma membranes. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
10506-10511, 2002.

6. Elwess, N. L.; Filoteo, A. G.; Enyedi, A.; Penniston, J. T.: Plasma
membrane Ca2+ pump isoforms 2a and 2b are unusually responsive to
calmodulin and Ca2+. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 17981-17986, 1997.

7. Kozel, P. J.; Friedman, R. A.; Erway, L. C.; Yamoah, E. N.; Liu,
L. H.; Riddle, T.; Duffy, J. J.; Doetschman, T.; Miller, M. L.; Cardell,
E. L.; Shull, G. E.: Balance and hearing deficits in mice with a
null mutation in the gene encoding plasma membrane Ca(2+)-ATPase isoform
2. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 18693-18696, 1998.

8. Reinhardt, T. A.; Lippolis, J. D.; Shull, G. E.; Horst, R. L.:
Null mutation in the gene encoding plasma membrane Ca(2+)-ATPase isoform
2 impairs calcium transport into milk. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 42369-42373,
2004.

9. Richards, F. M.; Phipps, M. E.; Latif, F.; Yao, M.; Crossey, P.
A.; Foster, K.; Linehan, W. M.; Affara, N. A.; Lerman, M. I.; Zbar,
B.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.; Maher, E. R.: Mapping the von Hippel-Lindau
disease tumour suppressor gene: identification of germline deletions
by pulsed field gel electrophoresis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 879-882,
1993.

10. Santiago-Garcia, J.; Mas-Oliva, J.; Saavedra, D.; Zarain-Herzberg,
A.: Analysis of mRNA expression and cloning of a novel plasma membrane
Ca(2+)-ATPase splice variant in human heart. Molec. Cell. Biochem. 155:
173-182, 1996.

11. Schultz, J. M.; Yang, Y.; Caride, A. J.; Filoteo, A. G.; Penheiter,
A. R.; Lagziel, A.; Morell, R. J.; Mohiddin, S. A.; Fananapazir, L.;
Madeo, A. C.; Penniston, J. T.; Griffith, A. J.: Modification of
human hearing loss by plasma-membrane calcium pump PMCA2. New Eng.
J. Med. 352: 1557-1564, 2005.

12. Street, V. A.; McKee-Johnson, J. W.; Fonseca, R. C.; Tempel, B.
L.; Noben-Trauth, K.: Mutations in a plasma membrane Ca(2+)-ATPase
gene cause deafness in deafwaddler mice. Nature Genet. 19: 390-394,
1998.

13. Wang, M. G.; Yi, H.; Hilfiker, H.; Carafoli, E.; Strehler, E.
E.; McBride, O. W.: Localization of two genes encoding plasma membrane
Ca(2+)-ATPases isoforms 2 (ATP2B2) and 3 (ATP2B3) to human chromosomes
3p26-p25 and Xq28, respectively. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 67: 41-45,
1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/7/2011
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/21/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/8/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 11/29/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/22/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/18/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/28/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/15/1992

EDITED terry: 03/16/2011
mgross: 3/14/2011
terry: 3/7/2011
wwang: 5/5/2009
tkritzer: 4/28/2005
terry: 4/21/2005
terry: 2/22/2005
mgross: 2/8/2005
tkritzer: 11/29/2004
ckniffin: 11/22/2004
ckniffin: 3/23/2004
dkim: 11/13/1998
carol: 8/18/1998
terry: 8/18/1998
alopez: 7/31/1998
terry: 7/28/1998
terry: 10/10/1994
jason: 7/5/1994
carol: 8/17/1993
carol: 10/15/1992

142712	TITLE *142712 HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H1 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER T; HIST1H1T
;;HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H1 HISTONE FAMILY, TESTIS-SPECIFIC MEMBER;;
HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H1T;;
HIST1 CLUSTER, H1T;;
H1T;;
H1.T;;
H1 HISTONE, TESTIS-SPECIFIC;;
H1 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER T, FORMERLY; H1FT, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION For background information on histones, histone gene clusters, and the
H1 histone family, see HIST1H1A (142709).

CLONING

Drabent et al. (1991) studied the structure and expression of H1T, the
gene for testis-specific histone H1.

GENE FUNCTION

Deng et al. (1994) found that the rat H1t locus cosegregated with blood
pressure in an F2 population derived from a cross of the Dahl
salt-sensitive strain and the Lewis strain. Thus, H1t in rat is a
quantitative trait locus for blood pressure.

See HIST1H1A (142709) for additional functional information on H1
histones.

MAPPING

By study of somatic cell hybrids and by in situ hybridization, Albig et
al. (1993) demonstrated that the H1T gene is located in a cluster with 5
other H1 histone genes on chromosome 6p22.2-p21.1. By analysis of a YAC
contig, Albig et al. (1997) mapped the H1FT gene to chromosome 6p21.3
within a cluster of 35 histone genes, including H1.1 (HIST1H1A; 142709)
to H1.4 (HIST1H1E; 142220). The H1.5 gene (HIST1H1B; 142711) is part of
a separate subcluster within the same chromosomal region.

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) determined that the
histone gene cluster on chromosome 6p22-p21, which they called histone
gene cluster-1 (HIST1), contains 55 histone genes, including HIST1H1T.

Deng et al. (1994) reported that the rat testis-specific H1 histone gene
maps to chromosome 17,

REFERENCE 1. Albig, W.; Drabent, B.; Kunz, J.; Kalff-Suske, M.; Grzeschik, K.-H.;
Doenecke, D.: All known human H1 histone genes except the H1(0) gene
are clustered on chromosome 6. Genomics 16: 649-654, 1993.

2. Albig, W.; Kioschis, P.; Poustka, A.; Meergans, K.; Doenecke, D.
: Human histone gene organization: nonregular arrangement within a
large cluster. Genomics 40: 314-322, 1997.

3. Deng, A. Y.; Dene, H.; Pravenec, M.; Rapp, J. P.: Genetic mapping
of two new blood pressure quantitative trait loci in the rat by genotyping
endothelin system genes. J. Clin. Invest. 93: 2701-2709, 1994.

4. Drabent, B.; Kardalinou, E.; Doenecke, D.: Structure and expression
of the human gene encoding testicular H1 histone (H1t). Gene 103:
263-268, 1991.

5. Marzluff, W. F.; Gongidi, P.; Woods, K. R.; Jin, J.; Maltais, L.
J.: The human and mouse replication-dependent histone genes. Genomics 80:
487-498, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/24/2010
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 7/8/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/28/1993

EDITED mgross: 05/17/2011
mgross: 6/24/2010
mgross: 5/26/2010
alopez: 7/8/1998
alopez: 2/12/1998
jason: 7/12/1994
carol: 7/13/1993
carol: 6/28/1993

600912	TITLE *600912 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 19; TCF19
;;SC1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ku et al. (1991) cloned a growth-regulated cDNA by differential
screening of a mouse 3T3 cell line library to identify transcripts
induced by serum stimulation. Transcripts of the gene, designated SC1,
were detectable beginning at about 8 hours after stimulation. The mouse
cDNA was used to clone the human SC1 cDNA. The 2.6-kb cDNA encoded a
deduced 359-amino acid polypeptide with features characteristic of
transactivating factors. The gene was mapped by in situ hybridization to
chromosome 6p21-p22. The bacterially expressed protein had the predicted
size of 39 kD.

MAPPING

Krishnan et al. (1995) mapped TCF19 with POU5F1 (164177) to a 0.2-Mb
region between HLA-C (142840) and the so-called S gene (602593) at
6p21.3. POU5F1 and TCF19 are about 130 kb telomeric of HLAC and about
600 bp from each other.

REFERENCE 1. Krishnan, B. R.; Jamry, I.; Chaplin, D. D.: Feature mapping of
the HLA class I region: localization of the POU5F1 and TCF19 genes. Genomics 30:
53-58, 1995.

2. Ku, D.-H.; Chang, C..; Koniecki, J.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Boghosian-Sell,
L.; Alder, H.; Baserga, R.: A new growth-regulated complementary
DNA with the sequence of a putative trans-activating factor. Cell
Growth Differ. 2: 179-186, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Alan F. Scott - updated: 11/13/1995

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 11/2/1995

EDITED alopez: 06/05/2003
dkim: 10/28/1998
carol: 6/18/1998
psherman: 5/5/1998
mark: 4/7/1996
mark: 11/2/1995

607210	TITLE *607210 CASPASE RECRUITMENT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 11; CARD11
;;CARD-MAGUK PROTEIN 1; CARMA1;;
BCL10-INTERACTING MAGUK PROTEIN 3; BIMP3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The CARD11 gene encodes a protein that acts as a scaffold for nuclear
factor kappa-B (NFKB; 164011) activity in the adaptive immune response
controlling peripheral B-cell differentiation and a variety of critical
T-cell effector functions (summary by Stepensky et al., 2013).

The caspase recruitment domain (CARD) is a protein module that consists
of 6 or 7 antiparallel alpha helices. It participates in apoptosis
signaling through highly specific protein-protein homophilic
interactions. CARDs induce nuclear factor kappa-B (NFKB; 164011)
activity through the IKK (e.g., IKKB, or IKBKB; 603258) complex. CARD9
(607212), CARD10 (607209), CARD11, and CARD14 (607211) interact with
BCL10 (603517) and are involved in NFKB signaling complexes. Except for
CARD9, these CARD proteins are members of the membrane-associated
guanylate kinase (MAGUK) family.

CLONING

By database searching for CARD family members, Bertin et al. (2001)
identified CARD11. The deduced 1,147-amino acid protein contains an
N-terminal CARD domain that is 52% identical to that of CARD14, a
central coiled-coil domain, and a C-terminal tripartite structure
comprised of a PDZ domain, an SH3 domain, and a GUK domain. Northern
blot analysis revealed expression of a 4.4-kb transcript in thymus,
spleen, liver, and peripheral blood leukocytes. Expression was also
detected in hemopoietic cancer cell lines. In contrast, CARD14
expression was restricted to placenta.

By database searching for CARD proteins with high similarity to, and
therefore a greater likelihood of interacting with, BCL10, Gaide et al.
(2001) identified CARD11, CARD14, and CARD10, which they termed CARMA1,
CARMA2, and CARMA3, respectively. Confocal microscopy demonstrated that
CARD11 colocalizes with BCL10 in perinuclear structures.

GENE FUNCTION

Using luciferase reporter analysis, Bertin et al. (2001) showed that
CARD11 induces NFKB activity through IKKG (IKBKG; 300248) or IKKB and
that this induction requires the N terminus of CARD11. Deletion of the
C-terminal domains of CARD11 resulted in enhanced NFKB activity,
suggesting a negative regulatory function. Mammalian 2-hybrid and
coprecipitation analyses indicated that CARD domains of CARD11 and
CARD14 interact with the CARD of BCL10. Fluorescence microscopy
demonstrated a cytoplasmic colocalization of CARD11 with BCL10.
Functional analysis showed that CARD11 and CARD14 both phosphorylate
BCL10 in a CARD-dependent manner.

Gaide et al. (2002) showed that T-cell receptor (TCR; see 186880)
stimulation induces an association of CARMA1, which is constitutively
associated with lipid rafts, with BCL10, which is recruited from the
cytoplasm, and TCR. A CARD11 mutant unable to bind BCL10 inhibited
TCR-induced NFKB activation and interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680) production.

Using somatic mutagenesis, Wang et al. (2002) cloned a CARMA1-deficient
Jurkat T-cell line, which exhibited selectively impaired NFKB activation
and IL2 production. Addition of CARMA1 to the mutant line restored
function and appeared to recruit protein kinase C-theta (PRKCQ; 600448)
to phosphorylate BCL10, possibly at the cell membrane-cytoplasm
interface.

Using mouse Card11 lacking the CARD domain and RNA interference,
Pomerantz et al. (2002) demonstrated that Card11 mediated NFKB
activation by cross-linking of CD3 (see 186790) and CD28 (186760) and by
phorbol ester treatment. However, Card11 was not required for NFKB
activation mediated by TCR induction of NFAT (see 600489) or AP1
(165160) or by exposure to TNFA (191160) or double-stranded RNA. Western
blot analysis indicated that the CARD-deleted mutant blocked NFKB
induction upstream of IKK complex activation, IKBA (164008) degradation,
and nuclear localization of NFKB. Furthermore, CARD11 interacted with
BCL10 in a CARD domain-dependent manner.

Ngo et al. (2006) developed a loss-of-function RNA interference screen
for molecular targets in cancer. Using the newly developed screen in
diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL; see 605027), Ngo et al. (2006)
showed that in activated B cell-like (ABC) DLBCL cells, but not germinal
center B cell-like DLBCL cells, short hairpin RNAs targeting the
NF-kappa-B (see 164011) pathway were depleted, in keeping with the
essential role of this pathway in the survival of activated B cell-like
DLBCL. This screen uncovered CARD11 as a key upstream signaling
component responsible for constitutive I-kappa-B kinase (see 603258)
activity in activated B cell-like DLBCL.

Using biochemical and genetic approaches, Wegener et al. (2006)
demonstrated that IKKB is critical for regulation of the
CARMA1-BCL10-MALT1 (604860) (CBM) complex. They found that IKKB is
required not only for initial complex formation, but also for triggering
disengagement of BCL10 and MALT1 by phosphorylation of the C terminus of
BCL10, thereby negatively influencing T-cell receptor signaling. Wegener
et al. (2006) proposed a model in which IKKB is associated with
BCL10-MALT1 in resting T cells. Following T-cell activation, PRKCQ
phosphorylates CARMA1 and induces association of CARMA1 with
BCL10-MALT1. Formation of the BCM complex induces maximal activation of
IKK through activation of IKKG. IKKB phosphorylates BCL10 in its MALT1
interaction domain, causing BCL10 and MALT1 to disassociate, resulting
in attenuation of NFKB signaling and cytokine production.

Medeiros et al. (2007) presented evidence for a previously unrecognized
function for ADAP (602731) in regulating TCR-mediated activation of the
transcription factor NF-kappa-B. Stimulation of ADAP-deficient mouse T
cells with antibodies to CD3 and CD28 resulted in impaired nuclear
translocation of NF-kappa-B, a reduced DNA binding, and delayed
degradation and decreased phosphorylation of I-kappa-B. TCR-stimulated
assembly of the CARMA1-BCL10-MALT1 complex was substantially impaired in
the absence of ADAP. Medeiros et al. (2007) further identified a region
of ADAP that is required for association with the CARMA1 adaptor and
NF-kappa-B activation but is not required for ADAP-dependent regulation
of adhesion.

Bidere et al. (2009) conducted parallel screens involving a mass
spectrometry analysis of CARMA1 binding partners and an RNA interference
screen for growth inhibition of the CBM-dependent ABC subtype of DLBCL.
The authors reported that both screens identified casein kinase 1-alpha
(CK1-alpha; 600505) as a bifunctional regulator of NF-kappa-B. CK1-alpha
dynamically associates with the CBM complex on T-cell-receptor
engagement to participate in cytokine production and lymphocyte
proliferation. However, CK1-alpha kinase activity has a contrasting role
by subsequently promoting the phosphorylation and inactivation of
CARMA1. CK1-alpha has thus a dual 'gating' function which first promotes
and then terminates receptor-induced NF-kappa-B. ABC DLBCL cells
required CK1-alpha for constitutive NF-kappa-B activity, indicating that
CK1-alpha functions as a conditionally essential malignancy gene.

Compagno et al. (2009) showed that greater than 50% of activated B
cell-like (ABC) diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and a smaller
fraction of germinal center B cell-like (GCB) DLBCL carry somatic
mutations in multiple genes, including negative (TNFAIP3; 191163) and
positive (including CARD11 and TRAF2, 601895) regulators of NF-kappa-B
(see 164011). Of these, the TNFAIP3 gene, which encodes a
ubiquitin-modifying enzyme (A20) involved in termination of NF-kappa-B
responses, is most commonly affected, with approximately 30% of patients
displaying biallelic inactivation by mutations and/or deletions. Less
frequently, missense mutations of TRAF2 and CARD11 produce molecules
with significantly enhanced ability to activate NF-kappa-B. Compagno et
al. (2009) concluded that NF-kappa-B activation in DLBCL is caused by
genetic lesions affecting multiple genes, the loss or activation of
which may promote lymphomagenesis by leading to abnormally prolonged
NF-kappa-B responses.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the CARD11
gene to chromosome 7 (TMAP stSG31669).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Somatic Mutations

Lenz et al. (2008) sequenced the CARD11 gene in human diffuse large B
cell lymphoma (DLBCL) tumors, a subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (see
605027). They detected somatic missense mutations in 7 of 73 activated B
cell-like (ABC) DLBCL biopsies (9.6%), all within exons encoding the
coiled-coil domain. Experimental introduction of CARD11 coiled-coil
domain mutants into lymphoma cell lines resulted in constitutive
NF-kappa-B activation and enhanced NF-kappa-B activity upon antigen
receptor stimulation. Lenz et al. (2008) concluded that CARD11 is a bona
fide oncogene in DLBCL, providing a genetic rationale for the
development of pharmacologic inhibitors of the CARD11 pathway for DLBCL
therapy.

- Germline Mutations

In a man and his 2 daughters with persistent polyclonal B-cell
lymphocytosis (PPBL; 606445), Snow et al. (2012) identified a
heterozygous germline mutation in the CARD11 gene (E127G; 607210.0001).
The mutation was found by massively parallel mRNA sequencing and
searching for shared mutations in the B-cell transcriptome. The patients
presented in infancy with enlarged lymph nodes, splenomegaly, and B-cell
lymphocytosis associated with mild immune dysregulation, including some
defective antibody production and T-cell anergy. An unrelated child with
a similar condition and a heterozygous mutation in CARD11 was also
identified (G116S; 607210.0002); this mutation was previously found by
Lenz et al. (2008) as a somatic mutation in a B-cell lymphoma. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that both mutations resulted in
constitutive NFKB activation, consistent with a gain of function. The
mutant proteins spontaneously localized into large protein aggregates
that also stained with BCL10 and MALT1. The increase in numbers of B
cells appeared to result from increased B-cell output from the bone
marrow, rather than from increased survival or proliferation in the
periphery. The father in the first family developed B-cell chronic
lymphocytic leukemia associated with a 13q14 deletion (CLLS2; 109543) in
leukemic cells, which likely contributed to oncogenesis, but Snow et al.
(2012) also suggested that PPBL may predispose to the development of a
B-cell malignancy.

In a girl, born of consanguineous parents of central European descent,
with immunodeficiency-11 (IMD11; 615206), Greil et al. (2013) identified
a homozygous truncating mutation in the CARD11 gene (607210.0003).
Stepensky et al. (2013) reported another patient with immunodeficiency
who was homozygous for a truncating CARD11 mutation (607210.0004). Both
mutations were identified by exome sequencing. Both patients developed
pneumonia due to Pneumocystis jirovecii infection and underwent
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Laboratory studies showed
normal numbers of B and T cells, but increased numbers of transitional B
cells and decreased regulatory T cells, indicating a differentiation
defect. In vitro functional expression studies showed defective NFKB
signaling in lymphocytes upon activation. The reports indicated an
important role for the CARD11 scaffold protein in linking TCR and BCR
signaling with NFKB activation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hara et al. (2003) generated Card11 -/- mice, which were healthy and
fertile, by targeting exon 4 and part of exon 5. Flow cytometric
analysis showed that, apart from certain B-cell subpopulations and
natural killer (NK) cells, B-cell numbers were normal and T-cell
development proceeded normally in Card11 -/- mice. However, Card11 -/-
lymphocytes were defective in assays of T- and B-cell activation, and
Card11 -/- mice failed to produce specific antibody. FACS and EMSA
analyses demonstrated that Card11 was essential for antigen receptor-
and protein kinase C-mediated proliferation and cytokine production,
with loss of Card11 resulting in a selective defect in Jnk (601158) and
Nfkb activation. B-cell proliferation and Jnk activation were also
impaired after lipopolysaccharide stimulation of Tlr4 (603030),
suggesting that CARD11 is involved in both innate and adaptive immune
responses. Hara et al. (2003) concluded that MAGUK proteins are critical
regulators of neuronal synapses and immune receptor signaling.

Jun et al. (2003) treated male mice with the chemical mutagen
ethylnitrosourea and used their male progeny as founders of inbreeding
pedigrees. Several mice in one of these pedigrees exhibited high levels
of surface IgM on circulating IgD-positive B cells. Because surface IgM
is normally modulated to lower levels on many mature recirculating B
cells, relative to transitional B cells, the authors named the mutant
strain 'unmodulated.' Jun et al. (2003) identified a leu298-to-gln
substitution in Carma1, which was predicted to disrupt coiled-coil
domain structure and to interfere with protein pairing, as the
unmodulated mutation. Serum IgG3 levels were reduced in unmodulated
mice, suggesting an interference with Th1 rather than Th2 antibody
responses. Unmodulated mice had selective defects in B-cell activation,
with impairment of Nfkb and Jnk activation, and they gradually developed
atopic dermatitis with high levels of IgE. Jun et al. (2003) concluded
that CARMA1 is a key regulator of plasticity in antigen receptor
signaling.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PERSISTENT POLYCLONAL B-CELL LYMPHOCYTOSIS
CARD11, GLU127GLY

In a man and his 2 daughters with persistent polyclonal B-cell
lymphocytosis (PPBL; 606445), Snow et al. (2012) identified a
heterozygous germline c.735G-A transition in exon 5 of the CARD11 gene,
resulting in a glu127-to-gly (E127G) substitution at a highly conserved
residue in the N-terminal portion of the CC domain. The mutation, which
was found by massively parallel mRNA sequencing and searching for shared
mutations in the B-cell transcriptome, was not found in unaffected
family members or in 100 control individuals. Ectopic expression of
E127G CARD11 in B cells showed that it localized into large protein
aggregates, in contrast to dispersed cytoplasmic distribution of the
wildtype protein. The aggregates stained with BCL10 (603517) and MALT1
(604860), 2 signaling partners required for NFKB (164011) activation.
These findings suggested spontaneous multimerization of the mutant
protein. Transfection of E127G into CARD11-null T cells resulted in
constitutive NFKB activation, consistent with a gain of function. In
addition, patient B cells showed selective upregulation of
NFKB-dependent genes and showed impaired differentiation with decreased
antibody production. Patient T cells showed decreased proliferation and
activation upon stimulation, suggesting mild anergy of the T-cell line.
The increase in numbers of B cells appeared to result from increased
B-cell output from the bone marrow, rather than from increased survival
or proliferation in the periphery.

.0002
PERSISTENT POLYCLONAL B-CELL LYMPHOCYTOSIS
CARD11, GLY116SER

In a Chinese girl with polyclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (606445), Snow et
al. (2012) identified a heterozygous germline G-to-A transition in exon
4 of the CARD11 gene, resulting in a gly16-to-ser (G116S) substitution
at the N-terminal end of the CC domain. This mutation had previously
been described as a somatic gain-of-function mutation in a diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (Lenz et al., 2008). The mutant protein showed
spontaneous aggregation and colocalization with activating signaling
partners.

.0003
IMMUNODEFICIENCY 11
CARD11, GLN945TER

In a girl, born of consanguineous parents of central European descent,
with immunodeficiency-11 (IMD11; 615206), Greil et al. (2013) identified
a homozygous c.2833C-T transition in the CARD11 gene, resulting in a
gln945-to-ter (Q945X) substitution and a protein missing the guanylate
kinase-like domain. The mutation, which was identified by exome
sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing, segregated with the
disorder in the family and was not found in several large control
databases. Analysis of patient cells showed that the mutant transcript
was not subject to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. In vitro functional
expression studies showed that the mutant protein did not activate NFKB
(164011), consistent with a loss of function. The patient presented at 6
months of age with interstitial pneumonia due to P. jirovecii infection
and was found to be severely immunodeficient. Although laboratory
studies showed normal numbers of T and B cells, she had
agammaglobulinemia. Immunophenotyping of both T and B cells showed naive
or transitional populations and severely decreased numbers of regulatory
T cells. There was impaired proliferation in response to T-cell mitogens
and decreased expression of proinflammatory cytokines after LPS
stimulation. The findings suggested a severe impairment of TCR-mediated
T-lymphocyte function. The patient underwent successful hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation.

.0004
IMMUNODEFICIENCY 11
CARD11, 1,377-BP DEL

In a girl, born of consanguineous parents of Palestinian descent, with
immunodeficiency-11 (615206), Stepensky et al. (2013) identified a
homozygous 1,377-bp genomic deletion in the CARD11 gene, resulting in
the deletion of exon 21. The deletion was flanked by a stretch of 36
identical basepairs. The mutation, which was identified by exome
sequencing and Sanger sequencing, was present in heterozygosity in each
of the unaffected parents. No protein could be detected in patient
cells, indicating a complete loss of protein expression. The patient
presented in infancy with recurrent respiratory infections and later
developed P. jirovecii pneumonia. Two sibs had died in infancy with
recurrent infections. Laboratory studies of the proband showed
hypogammaglobulinemia with normal numbers of B and T cells. Flow
cytometric studies showed decreased numbers of regulatory T cells and
reduced numbers of differentiated T cells compared to naive cells. B
cells were predominantly transitional cells, with decreased numbers of
differentiated B cells. Patient lymphocytes showed defective NFKB
signaling upon activation. The abrogated activation of the canonical
NFKB pathway was associated with severely impaired upregulation of
inducible T-cell costimulator (604558), OX40 (600315), cytokine
production, T-cell proliferation, and B cell-activating factor receptor
expression on B cells. The patient underwent successful bone marrow
transplantation.

REFERENCE 1. Bertin, J.; Wang, L.; Guo, Y.; Jacobson, M. D.; Poyet, J.-L.; Srinivasula,
S. M.; Merriam, S.; DiStefano, P. S.; Alnemri, E. S.: CARD11 and
CARD14 are novel caspase recruitment domain (CARD)/membrane-associated
guanylate kinase (MAGUK) family members that interact with BCL10 and
activate NF-kappa-B. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 11877-11882, 2001.

2. Bidere, N.; Ngo, V. N.; Lee, J.; Collins, C.; Zheng, L.; Wan, F.;
Davis, R. E.; Lenz, G.; Anderson, D. E.; Arnoult, D.; Vazquez, A.;
Sakai, K.; Zhang, J.; Meng, Z.; Veenstra, T. D.; Staudt, L. M.; Lenardo,
M. J.: Casein kinase 1-alpha governs antigen-receptor-induced NF-kappa-B
activation and human lymphoma cell survival. Nature 458: 92-96,
2009.

3. Compagno, M.; Lim, W. K.; Grunn, A.; Nandula, S. V.; Brahmachary,
M.; Shen, Q.; Bertoni, F.; Ponzoni, M.; Scandurra, M.; Califano, A.;
Bhagat, G.; Chadburn, A.; Dalla-Favera, R.; Pasqualucci, L.: Mutations
of multiple genes cause deregulation of NF-kappaB in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma. Nature 459: 717-721, 2009.

4. Gaide, O.; Favier, B.; Legler, D. F.; Bonnet, D.; Brissoni, B.;
Valitutti, S.; Bron, C.; Tschopp, J.; Thome, M.: CARMA1 is a critical
lipid raft-associated regulator of TCR-induced NF-kappa-B activation. Nature
Immun. 3: 836-843, 2002.

5. Gaide, O.; Martinon, F.; Micheau, O.; Bonnet, D.; Thome, M.; Tschopp,
J.: Carma1, a CARD-containing binding partner of Bcl10, induces Bcl10
phosphorylation and NF-kappa-B activation. FEBS Lett. 496: 121-127,
2001.

6. Greil, J.; Rausch, T.; Giese, T.; Bandapalli, O. R.; Daniel, V.;
Bekeredjian-Ding, I.; Stutz, A. M.; Drees, C.; Roth, S.; Ruland, J.;
Korbel, J. O.; Kulozik, A. E.: Whole-exome sequencing links caspase
recruitment domain 11 (CARD11) inactivation to severe combined immunodeficiency. J.
Allergy Clin. Immun. 131: 1376-1383, 2013.

7. Hara, H.; Wada, T.; Bakal, C.; Kozieradzki, I.; Suzuki, S.; Suzuki,
N.; Nghiem, M.; Griffiths, E. K.; Krawczyk, C.; Bauer, B.; D'Acquisto,
F.; Ghosh, S.; Yeh, W.-C.; Baier, G.; Rottapel, R.; Penninger, J.
M.: The MAGUK family protein CARD11 is essential for lymphocyte activation. Immunity 18:
763-775, 2003.

8. Jun, J. E.; Wilson, L. E.; Vinuesa, C. G.; Lesage, S.; Blery, M.;
Miosge, L. A.; Cook, M. C.; Kucharska, E. M.; Hara, H.; Penninger,
J. M.; Domashenz, H.; Hong, N. A.; Glynne, R. J.; Nelms, K. A.; Goodnow,
C. C.: Identifying the MAGUK protein Carma-1 as a central regulator
of humoral immune responses and atopy by genome-wide mouse mutagenesis. Immunity 18:
751-762, 2003.

9. Lenz, G.; Davis, R. E.; Ngo, V. N.; Lam, L.; George, T. C.; Wright,
G. W.; Dave, S. S.; Zhao, H.; Xu, W.; Rosenwald, A.; Ott, G.; Muller-Hermelink,
H. K.; and 10 others: Oncogenic CARD11 mutations in human diffuse
large B cell lymphoma. Science 319: 1676-1679, 2008.

10. Medeiros, R. B.; Burbach, B. J.; Mueller, K. L.; Srivastava, R.;
Moon, J. J.; Highfill, S.; Peterson, E. J.; Shimizu, Y.: Regulation
of NF-kappa-B activation in T cells via association of the adapter
proteins ADAP and CARMA1. Science 316: 754-758, 2007.

11. Ngo, V. N.; Davis, R. E.; Lamy, L.; Yu, X.; Zhao, H.; Lenz, G.;
Lam, L. T.; Dave, S.; Yang, L.; Powell, J.; Staudt, L. M.: A loss-of-function
RNA interference screen for molecular targets in cancer. Nature 441:
106-110, 2006.

12. Pomerantz, J. L.; Denny, E. M.; Baltimore, D.: CARD11 mediates
factor-specific activation of NF-kappa-B by the T cell receptor complex. EMBO
J. 21: 5184-5194, 2002.

13. Snow, A. L.; Xiao, W.; Stinson, J. R.; Lu, W.; Chaigne-Delalande,
B.; Zheng, L.; Pittaluga, S.; Matthews, H. F.; Schmitz, R.; Jhavar,
S.; Kuchen, S.; Kardava, L.; and 9 others: Congenital B cell lymphocytosis
explained by novel germline CARD11 mutations. J. Exp. Med. 209:
2247-2261, 2012.

14. Stepensky, P.; Keller, B.; Buchta, M.; Kienzler, A.-K.; Elpeleg,
O.; Somech, R.; Cohen, S.; Shachar, I.; Miosge, L. A.; Schlesier,
M.; Fuchs, I.; Enders, A.; Eibel, H.; Grimbacher, B.; Warnatz, K.
: Deficiency of caspase recruitment domain family, member 11 (CARD11),
causes profound combined immunodeficiency in human subjects. J. Allergy
Clin. Immun. 131: 477-485, 2013.

15. Wang, D.; You, Y.; Case, S. M.; McAllister-Lucas, L. M.; Wang,
L.; DiStefano, P. S.; Nunez, G.; Bertin, J.; Lin, X.: A requirement
for CARMA1 in TCR-induced NF-kappa-B activation. Nature Immun. 3:
830-835, 2002.

16. Wegener, E.; Oeckinghaus, A.; Papadopoulou, N.; Lavitas, L.; Schmidt-Supprian,
M.; Ferch, U.; Mak, T. W.; Ruland, J.; Heissmeyer, V.; Krappmann,
D.: Essential role for I-kappa-B kinase beta in remodeling Carma1-Bcl10-Malt1
complexes upon T cell activation. Molec. Cell 23: 13-23, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/29/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/16/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/8/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/30/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/22/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/1/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/16/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/2/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/21/2004

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/12/2002

EDITED carol: 10/10/2013
ckniffin: 10/10/2013
carol: 7/8/2013
carol: 5/1/2013
ckniffin: 4/29/2013
ckniffin: 4/16/2013
alopez: 6/17/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
wwang: 4/20/2009
alopez: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/2/2009
alopez: 5/21/2008
terry: 5/8/2008
alopez: 5/30/2007
terry: 5/30/2007
mgross: 8/22/2006
alopez: 6/3/2006
terry: 6/1/2006
mgross: 5/31/2006
terry: 5/16/2006
mgross: 5/5/2006
terry: 5/2/2006
mgross: 1/21/2004
alopez: 9/20/2002
mgross: 9/12/2002

608167	TITLE *608167 POTASSIUM CHANNEL, SUBFAMILY T, MEMBER 1; KCNT1
;;KIAA1422;;
SLACK
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The KCNT1 gene encodes a sodium-activated potassium channel that is
widely expressed in the nervous system. Its activity contributes to the
slow hyperpolarization that follows repetitive firing. The C-terminal
cytoplasmic domain interacts with a protein network, including FMRP
(30955), suggesting additional functions (summary by Barcia et al.,
2012).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned KCNT1, which they designated
KIAA1422. The deduced 1,151-amino acid protein shares 94% identity with
the rat Slack potassium channel subunit. RT-PCR detected moderate to
high expression of KCNT1 in all tissues examined. Highest expression was
detected in adult and fetal liver and brain, in spinal cord, and in most
specific brain regions examined. Lowest expression was detected in
skeletal muscle.

Barcia et al. (2012) found expression of the Kcnt1 gene in murine
embryonic neurons in the hippocampus and cortex.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the KCNT1 gene
to chromosome 9.

GENE FUNCTION

Using biochemical and electrophysiologic studies in mice, Brown et al.
(2010) found that the mRNA-binding protein FMRP (309550) binds to the C
terminus of the Kcnt1 gene to activate the channel. The findings
suggested a link between patterns of neuronal firing and changes in
protein translation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Early Infantile Epileptic Encephalopathy 14/Malignant Migrating
Partial Seizures of Infancy

In 6 (50%) of 12 unrelated patients with sporadic occurrence of early
infantile epileptic encephalopathy-14 (EIEE14; 614959) clinically
manifest as malignant migrating partial seizures of infancy (MMPSI),
Barcia et al. (2012) identified 4 different de novo heterozygous
mutations in the KCNT1 gene (608167.0001-608167.0004). The first 2
mutations were identified by exome sequencing. Expression of 2 of the
corresponding rat mutations in Xenopus oocytes resulted in
Kcnt1-generated currents that resembled wildtype in terms of voltage
dependence and kinetic behavior but had 2- to 3-fold higher amplitude
compared to wildtype, consistent with a gain of function. The mutations
were shown to cause constitutive activation of the Kcnt1 channel,
mimicking the effects of phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain by
protein kinase C (see, e.g., PRKCA; 176960) activation. All patients had
onset of refractory focal seizures and arrest of psychomotor development
in the first 6 months of life. Brain MRI of some showed delayed
myelination. EEG showed characteristic multifocal, migrating discharges.
The findings suggested that KCNT1 is a major disease-associated gene for
the MMPSI phenotype.

- Autosomal Dominant Nocturnal Frontal Lobe Epilepsy 5

In affected members of 4 unrelated families with autosomal dominant
nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy-5 (ENFL5; 615005), Heron et al. (2012)
identified 4 different heterozygous mutations in the KCNT1 gene
(608167.0005-608167.0008). The initial mutation was found after linkage
analysis and whole-exome capture and sequencing in a large family
previously reported by Derry et al. (2008). Affected individuals had
childhood onset of partial motor seizures arising during sleep. Some
developed behavioral/psychiatric manifestations and showed varying
degrees of intellectual disability.

.
ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 14
KCNT1, ARG428GLN

In 3 unrelated patients of French origin with early infantile epileptic
encephalopathy-14 (EIEE14; 614959) manifest clinically as malignant
migrating partial seizures of infancy (MMPSI), Barcia et al. (2012)
identified a de novo heterozygous 1283G-A transition in exon 13 of the
KCNT1 gene, resulting in an arg428-to-gln (R428Q) substitution at a
highly conserved residue in the cytoplasmic C-terminal domain. The
mutation was initially identified by exome sequencing and confirmed by
Sanger sequencing in 1 patient; analysis of this gene in subsequent
patients identified the same mutation in 2 other individuals with the
same disorder. The mutation was not found in 200 controls or in several
large control databases. Expression of the corresponding rat mutation,
R409Q, in Xenopus oocytes resulted in Kcnt1-generated currents that
resembled wildtype in terms of voltage dependence and kinetic behavior
but had 2- to 3-fold higher amplitude compared to wildtype, consistent
with a gain of function. The mutation was shown to cause constitutive
activation of the Kcnt1 channel, mimicking the effects of
phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain by protein kinase C (see, e.g.,
PRKCA; 176960) activation.

.0002
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 14
KCNT1, ALA934THR

In a patient of French origin with EIEE14 (614959) manifest clinically
as MMPSI, Barcia et al. (2012) identified a de novo heterozygous 2800G-A
transition in exon 24 of the KCNT1 gene, resulting in an ala934-to-thr
(A934T) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the cytoplasmic
C-terminal domain. The mutation was identified by exome sequencing and
confirmed by Sanger sequencing; it was not found in 200 controls or in
several large control databases. Expression of the corresponding rat
mutation, A913T, in Xenopus oocytes resulted in Kcnt1-generated currents
that resembled wildtype in terms of voltage dependence and kinetic
behavior but had 2- to 3-fold higher amplitude compared to wildtype,
consistent with a gain of function. The mutation was shown to cause
constitutive activation of the Kcnt1 channel, mimicking the effects of
phosphorylation of the C-terminal domain by protein kinase C (see, e.g.,
PRKCA; 176960) activation.

.0003
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 14
KCNT1, ARG474HIS

In a patient of French origin with EIEE14 (614959) manifest clinically
as MMPSI, Barcia et al. (2012) identified a de novo heterozygous 1421G-A
transition in exon 15 of the KCNT1 gene, resulting in an arg474-to-his
(R474H) substitution at a highly conserved residue.

.0004
EPILEPTIC ENCEPHALOPATHY, EARLY INFANTILE, 14
KCNT1, ILE760MET

In a patient of Ukrainian origin with EIEE14 (614959) manifest
clinically as MMPSI, Barcia et al. (2012) identified a de novo
heterozygous 2280C-G transversion in exon 20 of the KCNT1 gene,
resulting in an ile760-to-met (I760M) substitution at a highly conserved
residue.

.0005
EPILEPSY, NOCTURNAL FRONTAL LOBE, 5
KCNT1, ARG928CYS

In 6 affected members of an Australian family of British descent with
autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy-5 (ENFL5; 615005)
(family B of Derry et al., 2008), Heron et al. (2012) identified a
heterozygous 2782C-T transition in the KCNT1 gene, resulting in an
arg928-to-cys (R928C) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the
intracellular C-terminal region adjacent to an NAD(+)-binding site. The
mutation, which was identified by whole-exome capture and sequencing and
confirmed by Sanger sequencing, segregated with the phenotype in this
family and was not identified in 111 control samples or in several large
control databases. No functional studies were performed. The mean age at
seizure onset was 4.6 years, and 5 of the 6 had refractory seizures and
behavioral or psychiatric problems. Three had intellectual disability.

.0006
EPILEPSY, NOCTURNAL FRONTAL LOBE, 5
KCNT1, TYR796HIS

In 4 individuals of a 3-generation Italian family with ENFL5 (615005),
Heron et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 2386T-C transition in the
KCNT1 gene, resulting in a tyr796-to-his (Y796H) substitution at a
highly conserved residue in the intracellular C-terminal region adjacent
to an NAD(+)-binding site. No functional studies were performed. The
mean age of seizure onset was 5.5 years. Three patients had intellectual
disability, and 2 had behavioral or psychiatric abnormalities.

.0007
EPILEPSY, NOCTURNAL FRONTAL LOBE, 5
KCNT1, ARG398GLN

In 4 affected individuals of an Israeli family with ENFL5 (615005),
Heron et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous 1193G-A transition in the
KCNT1 gene, resulting in an arg398-to-gln (R398Q) substitution. No
functional studies were performed. Two of the 4 patients had behavioral
or psychiatric abnormalities, but all were cognitively normal.

.0008
EPILEPSY, NOCTURNAL FRONTAL LOBE, 5
KCNT1, MET896ILE

In an Australian boy of British descent with ENFL5 (615005), Heron et
al. (2012) identified a de novo heterozygous 2688G-A transition in the
KCNT1 gene, resulting in a met896-to-ile (M896I) substitution at a
highly conserved residue within the NAD(+)-binding site. No functional
studies were performed. The patient had onset of refractory seizures at
age 9 years and showed a behavioral/psychiatric disorder, but had normal
intellectual function.

REFERENCE 1. Barcia, G.; Fleming, M. R.; Deligniere, A.; Gazula, V.-R.; Brown,
M. R.; Langouet, M.; Chen, H.; Kronengold, J.; Abhyankar, A.; Cilio,
R.; Nitschke, P.; Kaminska, A.; Boddaert, N.; Casanova, J.-L.; Desguerre,
I.; Munnich, A.; Dulac, O.; Kaczmarek, L. K.; Colleaux, L.; Nabbout,
R.: De novo gain-of-function KCNT1 channel mutations cause malignant
migrating partial seizures of infancy. Nature Genet. 44: 1255-1259,
2012.

2. Brown, M. R.; Kronengold, J.; Gazula, V.-R.; Chen, Y.; Strumbos,
J. G.; Sigworth, F. J.; Navaratnam, D.; Kaczmarek, L. K.: Fragile
X mental retardation protein controls gating of the sodium-activated
potassium channel Slack. Nature Neurosci. 13: 819-821, 2010.

3. Derry, C. P.; Heron, S. E.; Phillips, F.; Howell, S.; MacMahon,
J.; Phillips, H. A.; Duncan, J. S.; Mulley, J. C.; Berkovic, S. F.;
Scheffer, I.  E.: Severe autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe
epilepsy associated with psychiatric disorders and intellectual disability. Epilepsia 49:
2125-2129, 2008.

4. Heron, S. E.; Smith, K. R.; Bahlo, M.; Nobili, L.; Kahana, E.;
Licchetta, L.; Oliver, K. L.; Mazarib, A.; Afawi, Z.; Korczyn, A.;
Plazzi, G.; Petrou, S.; Berkovic, S. F.; Scheffer, I. E.; Dibbens,
L. M.: Missense mutations in the sodium-gated potassium channel gene
KCNT1 cause severe autosomal dominant nocturnal frontal lobe epilepsy. Nature
Genet. 44: 1188-1190, 2012.

5. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/7/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/3/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/14/2003

EDITED carol: 01/08/2013
ckniffin: 1/7/2013
terry: 12/5/2012
alopez: 12/4/2012
ckniffin: 12/3/2012
alopez: 4/18/2006
mgross: 10/14/2003

601843	TITLE *601843 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 5 (SODIUM IODIDE SYMPORTER), MEMBER 5; SLC5A5
;;SODIUM-IODIDE SYMPORTER; NIS
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The sodium-iodide symporter (NIS, or SLC5A5) is a key plasma membrane
protein that mediates active I- uptake in thyroid, lactating breast, and
other tissues with an electrogenic stoichiometry of 2 Na+ per I-. In
thyroid, NIS-mediated I- uptake is the first step in the biosynthesis of
iodine-containing thyroid hormones (Dohan et al., 2007).

CLONING

Dai et al. (1996) cloned the rat symporter and demonstrated its
biochemical function in microinjected Xenopus oocytes. Smanik et al.
(1996) cloned the human sodium-iodide symporter gene. The gene encodes a
643-amino acid protein with 84% homology to the rat gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Smanik et al. (1997) showed that the coding region of the NIS gene is
interrupted by 14 introns. Smanik et al. (1997) reported the nucleotide
sequence of each exon-intron junction and identified alternatively
spliced forms of the symporter.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Smanik et al. (1997) mapped the
SLC5A5 gene to 19p13.2-p12.

GENE FUNCTION

Smanik et al. (1997) demonstrated that the human sodium-iodide symporter
gene is expressed primarily in thyroid tissues, but also in breast,
colon, and ovary.

By transfecting NIS promoter-luciferase chimeric plasmids into FRTL-5
cells in the presence or absence of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH;
see 188540), Ohmori et al. (1998) identified a TSH-responsive element
(TRE) between -420 and -370 bp of the 5-prime-flanking region of the NIS
gene. Gel mobility shift assays using oligonucleotides specific for
thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF1; 600635), thyroid transcription
factor-2 (602617), Pax8 (167415), and the CREB/ATF family (see CREB1,
123810) showed an absence of competition for the TSH-responsive nuclear
factor interacting with the NIS TRE in FRTL-5 cells, indicating that it
is distinct from these factors. The TRE exists upstream of a
TTF1-binding site, -245 to -230 bp. Mutation of the TRE causing a loss
of TSH responsiveness also decreased TTF1-induced promoter activity in a
transfection experiment. Ohmori et al. (1998) concluded that
TSH/cAMP-induced upregulation of the NIS gene requires a novel thyroid
transcription factor, which also appears to be involved in
TTF-1-mediated thyroid-specific NIS gene expression.

Arturi et al. (1998) studied the expression of SLC5A5 by RT-PCR in a
series of 26 primary thyroid carcinomas (19 papillary, 5 follicular, and
2 anaplastic) and 15 follicular adenomas (11 'cold' and 4 'hot'). Five
of 19 papillary thyroid cancers did not express SLC5A5 mRNA. In all but
1 follicular cancer, SLC5A5 transcripts were detected. In anaplastic
tissue, SLC5A5 mRNA was only barely detected in 1 case. All of the
follicular thyroid adenomas except 1 expressed the SLC5A5 gene. In
contrast, all tumors studied excluding the anaplastic histotype fully
expressed thyroglobulin and thyroid peroxidase mRNA transcripts. The
authors concluded that early detection of the loss of SLC5A5 gene
expression in the primary cancer, may provide useful information for the
management of differentiated thyroid cancer patients.

Lazar et al. (1999) studied the expression of 4 thyroid-specific genes
(NIS, thyroid peroxidase (TPO; 606765), thyroglobulin (TG; 188450), and
thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR; 603372)) as well as the gene
encoding glucose transporter-1 (GLUT1, or SLC2A1; 138140) in 90 human
thyroid tissues. mRNAs were extracted from 43 thyroid carcinomas (38
papillary and 5 follicular), 24 cold adenomas, 5 Graves thyroid tissues,
8 toxic adenomas, and 5 hyperplastic thyroid tissues; 5 normal thyroid
tissues were used as reference. A kinetic quantitative PCR method, based
on the fluorescent TaqMan methodology and real-time measurement of
fluorescence, was used. NIS expression was decreased in 40 of 43 (93%)
thyroid carcinomas and in 20 of 24 (83%) cold adenomas; it was increased
in toxic adenomas and Graves thyroid tissues. TPO expression was
decreased in thyroid carcinomas but was normal in cold adenomas; it was
increased in toxic adenomas and Graves thyroid tissues. TG expression
was decreased in thyroid carcinomas but was normal in the other tissues.
TSHR expression was normal in most tissues studied and was decreased in
only some thyroid carcinomas. In thyroid cancer tissues, a positive
relationship was found between the individual levels of expression of
NIS, TPO, TG, and TSHR. No relationship was found with the age of the
patient. Higher tumor stages (stages greater than I vs stage I) were
associated with lower expression of NIS and TPO. Expression of the GLUT1
gene was increased in 1 of 24 (4%) adenomas and in 8 of 43 (19%) thyroid
carcinomas. In 6 thyroid carcinoma patients, 131-I uptake was studied in
vivo. NIS expression was low in all samples, and 3 patients with normal
GLUT1 expression had 131-I uptake in metastases, whereas the other 3
patients with increased GLUT1 gene expression had no detectable 131-I
uptake. The authors concluded that: (1) reduced NIS gene expression
occurs in most hypofunctioning benign and malignant thyroid tumors; (2)
there is differential regulation of the expression of thyroid-specific
genes; and (3) an increased expression of GLUT1 in some malignant tumors
may suggest a role for glucose-derivative tracers to detect in vivo
thyroid cancer metastases by positron-emission tomography scanning.

Venkataraman et al. (1999) hypothesized that SLC5A5 transcriptional
failure in thyroid carcinoma could be caused by methylation of DNA in
critical regulatory regions and could be reversed with chemical
demethylation treatment. In 7 human thyroid carcinoma cell lines lacking
SLC5A5 mRNA, treatment with 5-azacytidine or sodium butyrate was able to
restore SLC5A5 mRNA expression in 4 cell lines and iodide transport in 2
cell lines. Investigation of methylation patterns in these cell lines
revealed that successful restoration of SLC5A5 transcription was
associated with demethylation of SLC5A5 DNA in the untranslated region
within the first exon. This was also associated with restoration of
expression of TTF1. These results suggested a role for DNA methylation
in loss of SLC5A5 expression in thyroid carcinomas as well as a
potential application for chemical demethylation therapy in restoring
responsiveness to therapeutic radioiodide.

Interferon-gamma (IFNG; 147570) had been implicated with contradictory
results in the pathogenesis of autoimmune (Hashimoto) thyroiditis
(140300). To test whether the local production of IFN-gamma can lead to
thyroid dysfunction, Caturegli et al. (2000) generated transgenic mice
that express constitutive Ifng in thyroid follicular cells. This
expression resulted in severe hypothyroidism, with growth retardation
and disruption of the thyroid architecture. The hypothyroidism derived
from a profound inhibition of the expression of the sodium-iodide
symporter gene.

Cho et al. (2000) showed that both the sodium-iodide symporter (NIS)
expression level and radioiodide uptake (RAIU) activity in rat mammary
gland are maximal during active lactation compared to those in the
mammary glands of virgin and pregnant rats as well as those in the
involuting mammary gland. In the lactating mammary gland, NIS is
clustered on the basolateral membrane of alveolar cells as a lesser
glycosylated form than NIS in thyroid. The RAIU of lactating mammary
gland was partially inhibited by treatment with a selective oxytocin
antagonist or bromocriptine, an inhibitor of prolactin (PRL; 176760)
release. These findings suggested that RAIU and NIS expression in
mammary gland are at least in part modulated by oxytocin and PRL. The
authors concluded that NIS mRNA level was increased in a dose-dependent
manner by oxytocin and PRL in histocultured human breast tumors.

Spitzweg et al. (1999) used both monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies
directed against different portions of the SLC5A5 protein together with
a highly sensitive immunostaining technique to assess SLC5A5 protein
expression in tissue sections derived from normal human salivary and
lacrimal glands, pancreas, and gastric and colonic mucosa.
Immunohistochemical analysis of normal human salivary and lacrimal
glands revealed marked SLC5A5 immunoreactivity in ductal cells and less
intense staining of acinar cells. Further, immunostaining of gastric and
colonic mucosa showed marked SLC5A5 immunoreactivity confined to chief
and parietal cells in gastric mucosa and to epithelial cells lining
mucosal crypts in colonic mucosa. In normal human pancreas, SLC5A5
immunoreactivity was located in ductal cells, exocrine parenchymal
cells, and Langerhans islet cells. The authors concluded that iodide
transport in these glands is a specific property conferred by the
expression of SLC5A5 protein, which may serve important functions by
concentrating iodine in glandular secretions.

Fortunati et al. (2004) evaluated the action of valproic acid, a potent
anticonvulsant reported to inhibit histone deacetylase, on cultured
thyroid cancer cells. NPA (papillary or poorly differentiated; see
188550) and ARO (anaplastic) cells were treated with increasing valproic
acid concentrations. Expression of mRNA and cell localization pattern
for the sodium-iodide symporter (NIS), as well as iodine-125 uptake,
were evaluated before and after treatment. Valproic acid induced NIS
gene expression, NIS membrane localization, and iodide accumulation in
NPA cells, and it was effective at clinically safe doses in the
therapeutic range. In ARO cells, only induction of NIS mRNA was
observed, and was not followed by any change in iodide uptake. The
authors concluded that valproic acid is effective at restoring the
ability of NPA cells to accumulate iodide.

Perchlorate (ClO(4-)) occurs naturally in the environment and is
produced industrially in large quantities. Exposure to ClO(4-) is
widespread in the U.S. population, but the potential health impact is
unknown. Using canine kidney cells expressing human NIS, Dohan et al.
(2007) found that NIS actively transported ClO(4-). However, unlike
transport of Na+ and I- by NIS, transport of Na+ and ClO(4-) by NIS was
electroneutral, indicating that movement of different substrates by
transporters can show different stoichiometries. Nis transported and
concentrated radiolabeled ClO(4-) into the milk of lactating rats and
reduced uptake of I- in thyroids of both dams and pups. Dohan et al.
(2007) concluded that ClO(4-) exposure may be a significant health risk
due to its negative effect on thyroid I- levels.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a patient with an iodide transport defect (274400), Fujiwara et al.
(1997) found a homozygous missense mutation (T354P; 601843.0001) in the
NIS gene. The parents were consanguineous. The diagnosis of iodide
transport defect was based on a failure to concentrate radioiodide by
the salivary gland and the clinical and biologic response to potassium
iodide treatment. Treatment of the patient's physical findings and serum
thyrotropin T4 and T3 levels were maintained. However, mild goiter and
multiple mass lesions developed in the thyroid lobes. Histologically, a
tumor was found to be follicular adenoma.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
THYROID DYSHORMONOGENESIS 1
SLC5A5, THR354PRO

In a girl with congenital hypothyroidism and consanguineous parents, an
iodide transport defect (TDH1; 274400) was indicated by physiologic
studies and response to treatment with potassium iodide. Fujiwara et al.
(1997) demonstrated homozygosity for a missense mutation in the
sodium-iodide symporter gene: codon 354 was changed from ACA (thr) to
CCA (pro). Expressed in HEK293 cells, the mutant gene failed to elicit
any detectable iodide transport. According to the predicted protein
structure, the mutated thr354 residue lies in the midst of the putative
ninth transmembrane segment of the symporter protein. This transmembrane
segment is conserved in the sodium/solute symporter family from mammals
to bacteria and is a hotspot for the human sodium/glucose cotransporter
gene (SGLT1), also symbolized SLC5A1 (182380).

Fujiwara et al. (1998) studied DNA from 3 apparently unrelated families
with an iodide transport defect, 1 patient with low thyroid
(99m)Tc-pertechnetate uptake, and 52 healthy controls for this mutation.
All affected members of the families with the iodide transport defect
had the mutation, suggesting that T354P is a recurrent mutation and a
major cause of this disorder. The T354P mutation was not detected in the
52 unrelated, normal control samples. Because 2 patients homozygous for
the T354P mutation developed multinodular goiters in their second decade
of life despite being maintained in the euthyroid state, the authors
concluded that homozygosity for the T354P mutation and/or low
intrathyroid iodide and high serum thyroid-stimulating hormone levels in
early life may account for tumorigenesis.

Matsuda and Kosugi (1997) reported a second Japanese case with the T354P
mutation. They found that SLC5A5 mRNA was increased greater than
100-fold of that in the normal thyroid, suggesting possible compensation
by overexpression.

Kosugi et al. (1998) identified a homozygous T354P germline mutation in
the NIS gene in 7 Japanese patients, including 1 previously reported,
from 5 unrelated families. These results suggest a common prevalence of
the T354P mutation in Japanese patients. Although these 7 patients had
the identical NIS mutation, marked heterogeneity in clinical pictures,
especially concerning goiter and hypothyroidism, were noted among them.

Levy et al. (1998) reported that the lack of iodide transport activity
in NIS carrying the T354P mutation generated by site-directed
mutagenesis is not due to a structural change induced by proline, but
rather to the absence of a hydroxyl group at the beta-carbon of the
amino acid residue at position 354, indicating that this hydroxyl group
is essential for NIS function.

.0002
THYROID DYSHORMONOGENESIS 1
SLC5A5, CYS272TER

Pohlenz et al. (1997) described a Brazilian kindred with congenital
hypothyroidism due to a defect in iodide trapping (TDH1; 274400) caused
by a homozygous mutation in the sodium-iodide symporter gene. The
mutation was a C-to-A transversion of nucleotide 1163, resulting in a
change of codon 272 from TGC (cys) to TGA (stop) (C272X). This nonsense
mutation produced a truncated symporter protein with undetectable iodide
transport activity when expressed in COS-7 cells. The propositus was
homozygous; his unaffected mother, son, and paternal aunt were
heterozygous. The propositus was a 39-year-old man who presented with a
large goiter. Thyroid gland enlargement had been noted at 3 months of
age and treatment with L-thyroxine was begun. Physical and mental
development proceeded normally. His heterozygous relatives were
clinically euthyroid and had normal or minimally enlarged thyroid
glands.

.0003
THYROID DYSHORMONOGENESIS 1
SLC5A5, GLN267GLU

Pohlenz et al. (1998) described a nonsense mutation producing a
downstream cryptic 3-prime splice site in a 12-year-old girl with
congenital hypothyroidism due to an iodide transport defect (TDH1;
274400). She was diagnosed at birth as athyreotic because her thyroid
gland could not be visualized by isotope scanning. Goiter development
due to incomplete thyrotropin suppression, a thyroidal radioiodide
uptake of less than 1%, and a low saliva to plasma ratio of 2.5
suggested an iodide transport defect. Pohlenz et al. (1998) found that
the NIS cDNA contained a C-to-G transversion at nucleotide 1146 in exon
6, resulting in a gln267 (CAG)-to-glu (GAG) substitution (Q267E). This
missense mutation produced an NIS with undetectable iodide transport
activity when expressed in COS-7 cells. Although only this missense
mutation was identified in thyroid and lymphocyte cDNA, genotyping
revealed that the proposita and her unaffected brother and father were
heterozygous for this mutation. Amplification of cDNA with a primer
specific for the wildtype nucleotide 1146 yielded a sequence lacking 67
nucleotides. Genomic DNA showed a C-to-G transversion at nucleotide
1940, producing a stop codon as well as a new downstream cryptic 3-prime
splice acceptor site in exon 13, responsible for the 67-bp deletion,
frameshift, and premature stop predicting an NIS lacking 129 C-terminal
amino acids. This mutation was inherited from the mother and present in
the unaffected sister. Thus, although the proposita was a compound
heterozygote, because of the very low expression (less than 2.5%) of 1
mutant allele, she was functionally hemizygous for an NIS without
detectable bioactivity.

.0004
THYROID DYSHORMONOGENESIS 1
SLC5A5, TYR531TER

See 601843.0003. The proposita with congenital hypothyroidism due to an
iodide transport defect (TDH1; 274400) reported by Pohlenz et al. (1998)
was a compound heterozygote for a Q267E mutation inherited from the
father (601843.0003) and a tyr531-to-ter (Y531X) mutation inherited from
the mother. The nonsense mutation was created by a C-to-G transversion
at nucleotide 1940 in exon 13. This nucleotide substitution not only
produced a stop (TAG) at codon 531 but also created a new 3-prime splice
acceptor site (AC to AG) for intron 12, located downstream of the
authentic splice acceptor site. This new cryptic 3-prime splice acceptor
site with its corresponding branch site matched the mammalian consensus
sequences better and was therefore used preferentially.

.0005
THYROID DYSHORMONOGENESIS 1
SLC5A5, GLY93ARG

In a Japanese patient with iodide transport defect (TDH1; 274400),
Kosugi et al. (1998) identified germline mutations in the SLC5A5 gene.
The patient was a compound heterozygote for the T354P (601843.0001)
mutation and a novel gly93-to-arg (G93R) substitution, located in the
third transmembrane domain of the SLC5A5 gene which is encoded by exon
1. When expressed in COS-7 cells, the SLC5A5 constructs carrying these
mutations had minimal iodide uptake activity, confirming that the
identified mutations are the direct cause of the iodide transport defect
in this patient.

.0006
THYROID DYSHORMONOGENESIS 1
SLC5A5, GLY543GLU

In 2 Japanese sibs with iodide transport defect (TDH1; 274400), Kosugi
et al. (1998) identified a gly543-to-glu (G543E) substitution in the
SLC5A5 gene. The mutation was present in a homozygous state and was
located in the twelfth transmembrane domain, which is encoded by exon
13. When expressed in COS-7 cells, the SLC5A5 constructs carrying this
mutation had minimal iodide uptake activity, confirming that the
identified mutation is the direct cause of the iodide transport defect
in these patients.

.0007
THYROID DYSHORMONOGENESIS 1
SLC5A5, GLY395ARG

In a large Hutterite family with extensive consanguinity living in
central Canada, Couch et al. (1985) identified 9 children with an
autosomal recessive form of congenital hypothyroidism due to an iodide
transport defect (TDH1; 274400). By newborn thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH; see 188540) screening, Kosugi et al. (1999) diagnosed congenital
hypothyroidism in 9 additional children (18 total) in the same family.
They sequenced the PCR products of each SLC5A5 gene exon with flanking
introns amplified from genomic DNA extracted from peripheral blood cells
of the patients. In 10 patients, they identified a G-to-A transition at
nucleotide 1530 of the SLC5A5 gene, resulting in a gly395-to-arg
substitution (G395R). All of the parents tested were heterozygous for
the mutation, suggesting that the patients were homozygous. The mutation
was located in the tenth transmembrane helix. Expression experiments by
transfection of the mutant SLC5A5 cDNA into COS-7 cells showed no
perchlorate-sensitive iodide uptake, confirming that the mutation was
the direct cause of the iodide transport defect in these patients.

.0008
THYROID DYSHORMONOGENESIS 1
SLC5A5, EX3-7DEL

In 2 Spanish sibs with congenital hypothyroidism due to total failure of
iodide transport (TDH1; 274400) reported by Albero et al. (1987), Kosugi
et al. (2002) identified a homozygous deletion of 6,192 bp spanning from
exon 3 to intron 7 and an inverted insertion of a 431-bp fragment
spanning from exon 5 to intron 5 of the SLC5A5 gene. The mother was
heterozygous for the mutation. The deletion of exons 3-7 predicted an
in-frame 182-amino acid deletion from met142 in the fourth transmembrane
domain to gln323 in the fourth exoplasmic loop of the protein.
Transfection experiments confirmed that the mutation was the direct
cause of iodide transport defect in these patients.

REFERENCE 1. Albero, R.; Cerdan, A.; Sanchez Franco, F.: Congenital hypothyroidism
from complete iodide transport defect: long-term evolution with iodide
treatment. Postgrad. Med. J. 63: 1043-1047, 1987.

2. Arturi, F.; Russo, D.; Schlumberger, M.; du Villard, J.-A.; Caillou,
B.; Vigneri, P.; Wicker, R.; Chiefari, E.; Suarez, H. G.; Filetti,
S.: Iodide symporter gene expression in human thyroid tumors. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 2493-2496, 1998.

3. Caturegli, P.; Hejazi, M.; Suzuki, K.; Dohan, O.; Carrasco, N.;
Kohn, L. D.; Rose, N. R.: Hypothyroidism in transgenic mice expressing
IFN-gamma in the thyroid. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 1719-1724, 2000.

4. Cho, J.-Y.; Leveille, R.; Kao, R.; Rousset, B.; Parlow, A. F.;
Burak, W. E., Jr.; Mazzaferri, E. L.; Jhiang, S. M.: Hormonal regulation
of radioiodide uptake activity and Na+/I- symporter expression in
mammary glands. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 2936-2943, 2000.

5. Couch, R. M.; Dean, H. J.; Winter, J. S.: Congenital hypothyroidism
caused by defective iodide transport. J. Pediat. 106: 950-953, 1985.

6. Dai, G.; Levy, O.; Carrasco, N.: Cloning and characterization
of the thyroid iodide transporter. Nature 379: 458-460, 1996.

7. Dohan, O.; Portulano, C.; Basquin, C.; Reyna-Neyra, A.; Amzel,
L. M.; Carrasco, N.: The Na+/I- symporter (NIS) mediates electroneutral
active transport of the environmental pollutant perchlorate. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 20250-20255, 2007.

8. Fortunati, N.; Catalano, M. G.; Arena, K.; Brignardello, E.; Piovesan,
A.; Boccuzzi, G.: Valproic acid induces the expression of the Na+/I-
symporter and iodine uptake in poorly differentiated thyroid cancer
cells. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 1006-1009, 2004.

9. Fujiwara, H.; Tatsumi, K.; Miki, K.; Harada, T.; Miyai, K.; Takai,
S.; Amino, N.: Congenital hypothyroidism caused by a mutation in
the Na(+)/I(-) symporter. (Letter) Nature Genet. 16: 124-125, 1997.
Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 17: 122 only, 1997.

10. Fujiwara, H.; Tatsumi, K.-I.; Miki, K.; Harada, T.; Okada, S.;
Nose, O.; Kodama, S.; Amino, N.: Recurrent T354P mutation of the
Na+/I- symporter in patients with iodide transport defect. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 83: 2940-2943, 1998.

11. Kosugi, S.; Bhayana, S.; Dean, H. J.: A novel mutation in the
sodium/iodide symporter gene in the largest family with iodide transport
defect. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 3248-3253, 1999.

12. Kosugi, S.; Inoue, S.; Matsuda, A.; Jhiang, S. M.: Novel, missense
and loss-of-function mutations in the sodium/iodide symporter gene
causing iodide transport defect in three Japanese patients. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 83: 3373-3376, 1998.

13. Kosugi, S.; Okamoto, H.; Tamada, A.; Sanchez-Franco, F.: A novel
peculiar mutation in the sodium/iodide symporter gene in Spanish siblings
with iodide transport defect. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 3830-3836,
2002.

14. Kosugi, S.; Sato, Y.; Matsuda, A.; Ohyama, Y.; Fujieda, K.; Inomata,
H.; Kameya, T.; Isozaki, O.; Jhiang, S. M.: High prevalence of T354P
sodium/iodide symporter gene mutation in Japanese patients with iodide
transport defect who have heterogeneous clinical pictures. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 83: 4123-4129, 1998.

15. Lazar, V.; Bidart, J.-M.; Caillou, B.; Mahe, C.; Lacroix, L.;
Filetti, S.; Schlumberger, M.: Expression of the Na(+)/I(-) symporter
gene in human thyroid tumors: a comparison study with other thyroid-specific
genes. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 3228-3234, 1999.

16. Levy, O.; Ginter, C. S.; De la Vieja, A.; Levy, D.; Carrasco,
N.: Identification of a structural requirement for thyroid Na(+)/I(-)
symporter (NIS) function from analysis of a mutation that causes human
congenital hypothyroidism. FEBS Lett. 429: 36-40, 1998.

17. Matsuda, A.; Kosugi, S.: A homozygous missense mutation of the
sodium/iodide symporter gene causing iodide transport defect. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 82: 3966-3971, 1997.

18. Ohmori, M.; Endo, T.; Harii, N.; Onaya, T.: A novel thyroid transcription
factor is essential for thyrotropin-induced up-regulation of Na+/I-
symporter gene expression. Molec. Endocr. 12: 727-736, 1998.

19. Pohlenz, J.; Medeiros-Neto, G.; Gross, J. L.; Silveiro, S. P.;
Knobel, M.; Refetoff, S.: Hypothyroidism in a Brazilian kindred due
to iodide trapping defect caused by a homozygous mutation in the sodium/iodide
symporter gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 240: 488-491, 1997.

20. Pohlenz, J.; Rosenthal, I. M.; Weiss, R. E.; Jhiang, S. M.; Burant,
C.; Refetoff, S.: Congenital hypothyroidism due to mutations in the
sodium/iodide symporter: identification of a nonsense mutation producing
a downstream cryptic 3-prime splice site. J. Clin. Invest. 101:
1028-1035, 1998.

21. Smanik, P. A.; Liu, Q.; Furminger, T. L.; Ryu, K.; Xing, S.; Mazzaferri,
E. L.; Jhiang, S. M.: Cloning of the human sodium iodide symporter. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 226: 339-345, 1996.

22. Smanik, P. A.; Ryu, K.-Y.; Theil, K. S.; Mazzaferri, E. L.; Jhiang,
S. M.: Expression, exon-intron organization, and chromosome mapping
of the human sodium iodide symporter. Endocrinology 138: 3555-3558,
1997.

23. Spitzweg, C.; Joba, W.; Schriever, K.; Goellner, J. R.; Morris,
J. C.; Heufelder, A. E.: Analysis of human sodium iodide symporter
immunoreactivity in human exocrine glands. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84:
4178-4184, 1999.

24. Venkataraman, G. M.; Yatin, M.; Marcinek, R.; Ain, K. B.: Restoration
of iodide uptake in dedifferentiated thyroid carcinoma: relationship
to human Na(+)/I(-) symporter gene methylation status. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 84: 2449-2457, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/15/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/11/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/8/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 2/27/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/31/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/9/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/7/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/15/1999
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/19/1999
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/2/1999
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/8/1999
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/22/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/14/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/28/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/20/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1997

EDITED terry: 06/04/2012
alopez: 8/5/2009
wwang: 5/27/2009
mgross: 4/15/2008
carol: 2/16/2006
alopez: 1/11/2005
wwang: 1/11/2005
tkritzer: 12/30/2003
terry: 7/28/2003
tkritzer: 4/15/2003
tkritzer: 4/11/2003
terry: 4/8/2003
tkritzer: 3/3/2003
carol: 3/8/2002
terry: 3/8/2002
alopez: 8/24/2001
alopez: 2/27/2001
terry: 1/19/2001
carol: 1/4/2001
alopez: 9/5/2000
terry: 8/31/2000
mgross: 8/9/2000
carol: 7/21/2000
mcapotos: 3/29/2000
mcapotos: 3/27/2000
terry: 3/7/2000
mgross: 4/16/1999
mgross: 4/15/1999
mgross: 3/23/1999
mgross: 3/19/1999
mgross: 3/11/1999
mgross: 3/2/1999
alopez: 1/8/1999
alopez: 5/21/1998
alopez: 4/22/1998
carol: 4/14/1998
terry: 3/30/1998
mark: 1/28/1998
terry: 1/28/1998
mark: 1/22/1998
terry: 1/20/1998
mark: 12/2/1997
alopez: 6/26/1997
mark: 6/3/1997
mark: 6/2/1997

109770	TITLE *109770 CARCINOEMBRYONIC ANTIGEN-RELATED CELL ADHESION MOLECULE 1; CEACAM1
;;BILIARY GLYCOPROTEIN; BGP;;
BILIARY GLYCOPROTEIN 1; BGP1;;
CD66 ANTIGEN; CD66
CARCINOEMBRYONIC ANTIGEN-RELATED CELL ADHESION MOLECULE PSEUDOGENES,
INCLUDED;;
CEACAMPS, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
GENE FAMILY

The carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) gene family belongs to the
immunoglobulin superfamily of genes. Members of the CEA family consist
of a single N domain, with structural homology to the immunoglobulin
variable domains, followed by a variable number of immunoglobulin
constant-like A and/or B domains. Based on sequence similarity and
functional characteristics, the CEA family has been subdivided into the
CEA subgroup and the pregnancy-specific glycoprotein (PSG) subgroup (for
review see Thompson et al. (1991)). Members of the CEA subgroup are
anchored in the cell membrane, whereas all of the PSGs appear to be
secreted. Genes in the CEA and PSG subgroups have a similar gene
structure and organization. The first exon, denoted L, encodes the
5-prime untranslated region and part of the signal peptide. Exon 2,
denoted L/N, encodes the rest of the signal peptide and the N domain.
Depending on the gene, exon 2 is followed by zero to 6 exons, each
encoding an A or B domain. For more information on the PSG subgroup, see
PSG1 (176390).

CLONING

Biliary glycoprotein I (CEACAM1), an antigen cross-reactive with
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA; 114890), has a molecular weight of 85,000
and consists of a single polypeptide chain containing approximately 40%
carbohydrate by weight. Hinoda et al. (1988) isolated and sequenced 4
overlapping cDNA clones from a normal adult human colon library. BGP1 is
a member of the CEA subgroup.

- Review

Schlossman et al. (1994) provided a table of all known CD antigens, with
a list of the common names, the size in kilodaltons, and the nature of
the protein (adhesion, myeloid, platelet, B cell, T cell, etc.).

EVOLUTION

Thompson et al. (1987) suggested that the CEA gene family, which
includes CEA-related antigens such as nonspecific cross-reacting antigen
(NCA; 163980) and biliary glycoprotein, evolved from a common ancestor
shared with neural cell adhesion molecule (116930) and
alpha-1-B-glycoprotein (138670) and is perhaps a subfamily of the
immunoglobulin superfamily. A subfamily of about 10 genes appears to
exist (Thompson et al., 1987).

GENE FUNCTION

Biliary glycoprotein is the human homolog of a cell adhesion molecule
(CAM) of the rat designated Cell-CAM. BGP is expressed in cells of
epithelial and myeloid origin. In granulocytes, BGP is a main antigen of
the CD66 cluster of differentiation antigens that mediate the binding to
endothelial E-selectin. Neumaier et al. (1993) reported findings
suggesting that loss or reduced expression of the BGP adhesion molecule
is a major event in colorectal carcinogenesis.

Ergun et al. (2000) showed that CEACAM1 exhibits angiogenic properties
in in vitro and in vivo angiogenesis assays. CEACAM1 purified from
granulocytes and endothelial cell media as well as recombinant CEACAM1
expressed in HEK293 cells stimulated proliferation, chemotaxis, and
capillary-like tube formation of human microvascular endothelial cells.
They increased vascularization of chick chorioallantoic membrane and
potentiated the effects of VEGF165 (192240). VEGF165 increased CEACAM1
expression at both the mRNA and the protein level. VEGF165-induced
endothelial tube formation was blocked by a monoclonal CEACAM1 antibody.
These data suggested that CEACAM1 is a major effector of VEGF in the
early microvessel formation. Since CEACAM1 is expressed in tumor
microvessels but not in large blood vessels, CEACAM1 may be a target for
the inhibition of tumor angiogenesis.

Following infection with Neisseria gonorrhea, there is a transient
decline in circulating CD4 (186940)-positive T lymphocytes that resolves
after bacterial clearance. The gonococcus adheres to and is taken up by
host cells through opacity-associated (Opa) proteins. Some Opa variants
bind to heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPGs, e.g., SDC2; 142460), while
others are specific for members of the CEACAM1/CD66 receptor family.
CEACAM1 is the only member of this family that is expressed by
lymphocytes and that contains a cytoplasmic ITIM (immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based inhibitory motif). Using flow cytometry, Boulton and
Gray-Owen (2002) demonstrated that CEACAM1 expression is upregulated
after lymphocyte activation. Exposure to gonococci expressing the
HSPG-specific Opa50 protein increased and exposure to CEACAM1-specific
Opa52 gonococci or to anti-CEACAM1 antibody inhibited expression of the
CD69 (107273) activation marker on and proliferation by lymphocytes
stimulated in vitro. The reduction in lymphocyte proliferation was not
due to an increase in cell death. CEACAM1 associated with Opa52 also
interacted with SHP1 (176883) and SHP2 (176876), presumably through its
cytoplasmic ITIM. Boulton and Gray-Owen (2002) suggested that Opa52
engagement of the CEACAM1 coinhibitory receptor induces
immunosuppression and may explain the failure of the host to develop a
memory humoral response to N. gonorrhea infection due to a lack of
T-cell help for B-cell activation.

Zalzali et al. (2008) found that expression of epitope-tagged SOX9
(608160) in human colonic carcinoma cells upregulated the expression of
CEACAM1. Conversely, Sox9-deficient mice showed reduced Ceacam1
expression in colon. The promoter regions of mouse, rat, and human
CEACAM1 contain SOX9-binding motifs despite no other significant
sequence homology. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis confirmed that
SOX9 bound the human CEACAM1 promoter. In addition, the histone
acetyltransferase p300 (EP300; 602700) enhanced transactivation of
CEACAM1 by the rat and human CEACAM1 promoters. Zalzali et al. (2008)
concluded that SOX9 regulates CEACAM1 expression in colon epithelium.

Mouse neutrophils do not bind the human-restricted pathogen Neisseria
gonorrhoeae. Sarantis and Gray-Owen (2012) showed that introducing any
of the gonorrheal Opa-binding human neutrophil CEACAMs into a murine
neutrophil cell line allowed binding and entry of Neisseria. CEACAM1 and
CEACAM6 (163980) both bound and allowed entry of the bacterium, but they
mediated little neutrophil activation. In contrast, uptake via CEACAM3
(609142) induced an oxidative burst and intracellular granule release
comparable to that seen during human neutrophil infection. Coexpression
of CEACAM3 with either CEACAM1 or CEACAM6 potentiated CEACAM3-dependent
responses. Sarantis and Gray-Owen (2012) concluded that, although
CEACAMs have different functions in neutrophils, they cooperate during
gonorrheal infection. Their findings implicated CEACAM3 in the
neutrophil innate response to neisserial infection.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Robbins et al. (1991) mapped the
Bgp1 gene of the mouse to chromosome 7. They considered it likely that
the gene is located in the region of conservation of synteny in
chromosome 7 of the mouse and chromosome 19 of man. Location of the BPG1
gene in the CEA cluster of genes on 19q13.2 was established by Thompson
et al. (1992), who determined the order and orientation of the genes in
the cluster by hybridization with probes from the 5-prime and 3-prime
regions of the genes to large groups of ordered cosmid clones.

Studies by several groups resulted in the mapping of the CEA gene family
to 19q13.1-q13.2 (Thompson et al., 1990; Thompson et al., 1992; Tynan et
al., 1992; Trask et al., 1993). The CEA subgroup is located centromeric
of the PSG subgroup, and together they span approximately 1.1 to 1.2 Mb
(Brandriff et al., 1992; Tynan et al., 1992). Nine CEA subgroup genes
were mapped within 2 cosmid contigs of 270 and 160 kb (Tynan et al.,
1992). The order of these 9 CEA subgroup genes is cen--CGM7
(CEACAM4)--CGM2 (CEACAM7)--CEA (CEACAM5)--NCA (CEACAM6; 163980)--CGM1
(CEACAM3; 609142)--gap--BGP (CEACAM1)--CGM9 (CEACAMP2)--CGM6
(CEACAM8)--CGM8 (CEACAMP1)--tel (Thompson et al., 1992; Brandriff et
al., 1992). The CEA, NCA, CGM1, and CGM8 genes are oriented in a 5-prime
to 3-prime direction from centromere to telomere, whereas the CGM7,
CGM2, BGP, CGM9, and CGM6 genes are oriented in a 3-prime to 5-prime
direction from centromere to telomere.

- PSEUDOGENES

Using a high-resolution restriction fragment fingerprinting technique,
Olsen et al. (1994) assembled 256 cosmids spanning the PSG region on
19q13.2 into a single 700-kb contig. FISH to sperm pronuclei and cosmid
walking experiments indicated that this PSG contig is telomeric of CGM8.
Olsen et al. (1994) and Teglund et al. (1994) analyzed the PSG contig
and identified 7 novel members of the CEA gene family, which they named
CGM12 to CGM18 according to the proposal by Barnett and Zimmermann
(1990). CGM12 is a putative pseudogene belonging to the CEA subgroup.
CGM13 to CGM18 form a new subgroup within the CEA gene family. By
detailed restriction mapping and hybridization with gene-specific
probes, Olsen et al. (1994) determined that the CGM13 to CGM18 genes are
interspersed among the PSG genes. They found that the order of the genes
is cen--CGM8 (CEACAMP1)--CGM12 (CEACAMP5)--PSG3--PSG8 (176397)--CGM13
(CEACAMP6)--PSG12 (PSG10; 176399)--PSG1 (176390)--PSG6 (176395)--PSG7
(176396)--CGM14 (CEACAMP7)--PSG13 (PSG11; 176401)--CGM15
(CEACAMP8)--PSG2 (176391)--CGM16 (CEACAMP9)--PSG5 (176394)--PSG4
(176393)--CGM17 (CEACAMP10)--PSG11 (PSG9; 176398)--CGM18
(CEACAMP11)--CGM11 (CEACAMP4)--tel. From centromere to telomere, the
CGM12 gene is oriented in a 5-prime to 3-prime direction, and the CGM13
to CGM18 genes are oriented in a 3-prime to 5-prime direction.

Teglund et al. (1994) characterized the CEA family subgroup containing
CGM13 to CGM18; these were later stated to be pseudogenes (Beauchemin et
al., 1999).

NOMENCLATURE

Beauchemin et al. (1999) provided a revised nomenclature for the CEA
gene family. Based on this nomenclature, the CEA family is composed of
the PSG subfamily; the CEACAM subfamily, which includes CEACAM1 (BGP),
CEACAM3 (CGM1), CEACAM4 (CGM7), CEACAM5 (CEA), CEACAM6 (NCA), CEACAM7
(CGM2), and CEACAM8 (CGM6); and the CEACAM pseudogene (CEACAMP)
subfamily, CEACAMP1 through CEACAMP11, which had originally been named
CGM8 through CGM18. Because of its high degree of conservation across
species, the BGP gene was renamed CEACAM1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Poy et al. (2002) hypothesized that insulin stimulates phosphorylation
of CEACAM1, which in turn leads to upregulation of receptor-mediated
insulin endocytosis and degradation in the hepatocyte. To test the
hypothesis, they generated transgenic mice overexpressing in liver a
dominant-negative phosphorylation-defective CEACAM1 mutant, S503A.
Supporting their hypothesis, they found that S503A-CEACAM1 (L-SACC1)
transgenic mice developed hyperinsulinemia resulting from impaired
insulin clearance. The hyperinsulinemia caused secondary insulin
resistance with impaired glucose tolerance and random, but not fasting,
hyperglycemia. Transgenic mice developed visceral adiposity with
increased amounts of plasma free fatty acids and plasma and hepatic
triglycerides. These findings suggested a mechanism through which
insulin signaling regulates insulin sensitivity by modulating hepatic
insulin clearance.

Using S503A-CEACAM1 transgenic mice, Abou-Rjaily et al. (2004)
demonstrated that the effect of CEACAM1 on EGF-dependent cell
proliferation is mediated by its ability to bind to and sequester Shc
(600560), thus uncoupling EGFR (131550) signaling from the ras/MAPK
pathway. Impaired CEACAM1 phosphorylation led to a ligand-independent
increase of EGFR-mediated cell proliferation; this increase appeared to
be secondary to visceral obesity and the metabolic syndrome, with
increased levels of output of free fatty acids and heparin-binding
EGF-like growth factor from the adipose tissue of the mice. Abou-Rjaily
et al. (2004) concluded that S503A-CEACAM1 mice provide a model for the
mechanistic link between increased cell proliferation in states of
impaired metabolism and visceral obesity.

REFERENCE 1. Abou-Rjaily, G. A.; Lee, S. J.; May, D.; Al-Share, Q. Y.; DeAngelis,
A. M.; Ruch, R. J.; Neumaier, M.; Kalthoff, H.; Lin, S.-H.; Najjar,
S. M.: CEACAM1 modulates epidermal growth factor receptor-mediated
cell proliferation. J. Clin. Invest. 114: 944-952, 2004.

2. Barnett, T.; Zimmermann, W.: Workshop report: proposed nomenclature
for the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) gene family. Tumour Biol. 11:
59-63, 1990.

3. Beauchemin, N.; Draber, P.; Dveksler, G.; Gold, P.; Gray-Owen,
S.; Grunert, F.; Hammarstrom, S.; Holmes, K. V.; Karlsson, A.; Kuroki,
M.; Lin, S.-H.; Lucka, L.; and 13 others: Redefined nomenclature
for members of the carcinoembryonic antigen family. Exp. Cell Res. 252:
243-249, 1999.

4. Boulton, I. C.; Gray-Owen, S. D.: Neisserial binding to CEACAM1
arrests the activation and proliferation of CD4+ T lymphocytes. Nature
Immun. 3: 229-236, 2002.

5. Brandriff, B. F.; Gordon, L. A.; Tynan, K. T.; Olsen, A. S.; Mohrenweiser,
H. W.; Fertitta, A.; Carrano, A. V.; Trask, B. J.: Order and genomic
distances among members of the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) gene
family determined by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 12:
773-779, 1992.

6. Ergun, S.; Kilic, N.; Ziegeler, G.; Hansen, A.; Nollau, P.; Gotze,
J.; Wurmbach, J.-H.; Horst, A.; Weil, J.; Fernando, M.; Wagener, C.
: CEA-related cell adhesion molecule 1: a potent angiogenic factor
and a major effector of vascular endothelial growth factor. Molec.
Cell 5: 311-320, 2000.

7. Hinoda, Y.; Neumaier, M.; Hefta, S. A.; Drzeniek, Z.; Wagener,
C.; Shively, L.; Hefta, L. J. F.; Shively, J. E.; Paxton, R. J.:
Molecular cloning of a cDNA coding biliary glycoprotein I: primary
structure of a glycoprotein immunologically crossreactive with carcinoembryonic
antigen. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 6959-6963, 1988. Note: Erratum:
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 1668 only, 1989.

8. Neumaier, M.; Paululat, S.; Chan, A.; Matthaes, P.; Wagener, C.
: Biliary glycoprotein, a potential human cell adhesion molecule,
is down-regulated in colorectal carcinomas. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90:
10744-10748, 1993.

9. Olsen, A.; Teglund, S.; Nelson, D.; Gordon, L.; Copeland, A.; Georgescu,
A.; Carrano, A.; Hammarstrom, S.: Gene organization of the pregnancy-specific
glycoprotein region on human chromosome 19: assembly and analysis
of a 700-kb cosmid contig spanning the region. Genomics 23: 659-668,
1994.

10. Poy, M. N.; Yang, Y.; Rezaei, K.; Fernstrom, M. A.; Lee, A. D.;
Kido, Y.; Erickson, S. K.; Najjar, S. M.: CEACAM1 regulates insulin
clearance in liver. Nature Genet. 30: 270-276, 2002.

11. Robbins, J.; Robbins, P. F.; Kozak, C. A.; Callahan, R.: The
mouse biliary glycoprotein gene (Bgp): partial nucleotide sequence,
expression, and chromosomal assignment. Genomics 10: 583-587, 1991.

12. Sarantis, H.; Gray-Owen, S. D.: Defining the roles of human carcinoembryonic
antigen-related cellular adhesion molecules during neutrophil responses
to Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Infect. Immun. 80: 345-358, 2012.

13. Schlossman, S. F.; Boumsell, L.; Gilks, W.; Harlan, J. M.; Kishimoto,
T.; Morimoto, C.; Ritz, J.; Shaw, S.; Silverstein, R. L.; Springer,
T. A.; Tedder, T. F.; Todd, R. F.: CD antigens 1993. Immun. Today 15:
98-99, 1994.

14. Teglund, S.; Olsen, A.; Khan, W. N.; Frangsmyr, L.; Hammarstrom,
S.: The pregnancy-specific glycoprotein (PSG) gene cluster on human
chromosome 19: fine structure of the 11 PSG genes and identification
of 6 new genes forming a third subgroup within the carcinoembryonic
antigen (CEA) family. Genomics 23: 669-684, 1994.

15. Thompson, J.; Koumari, R.; Wagner, K.; Barnert, S.; Schleussner,
C.; Schrewe, H.; Zimmermann, W.; Muller, G.; Schempp, W.; Zaninetta,
D.; Ammaturo, D.; Hardman, N.: The human pregnancy-specific glycoprotein
genes are tightly linked on the long arm of chromosome 19 and are
coordinately expressed. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 167: 848-859,
1990. Note: Erratum: Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 168: 1325 only,
1990.

16. Thompson, J.; Zimmermann, W.; Osthus-Bugat, P.; Schleussner, C.;
Eades-Perner, A.-M.; Barnert, S.; Von Kleist, S.; Willcocks, T.; Craig,
I.; Tynan, K.; Olsen, A.; Mohrenweiser, H.: Long-range chromosomal
mapping of the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) gene family cluster. Genomics 12:
761-772, 1992.

17. Thompson, J. A.; Grunert, F.; Zimmermann, W.: Carcinoembryonic
antigen gene family: molecular biology and clinical perspectives. J.
Clin. Lab. Anal. 5: 344-366, 1991.

18. Thompson, J. A.; Pande, H.; Paxton, R. J.; Shively, L.; Padma,
A.; Simmer, R. L.; Todd, C. W.; Riggs, A. D.; Shively, J. E.: Molecular
cloning of a gene belonging to the carcinoembryonic antigen gene family
and discussion of a domain model. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 2965-2969,
1987.

19. Trask, B.; Fertitta, A.; Christensen, M.; Youngblom, J.; Bergmann,
A.; Copeland, A.; de Jong, P.; Mohrenweiser, H.; Olsen, A.; Carrano,
A.; Tynan, K.: Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping of human
chromosome 19: cytogenetic band location of 540 cosmids and 70 genes
or DNA markers. Genomics 15: 133-145, 1993.

20. Tynan, K.; Olsen, A.; Trask, B.; de Jong, P.; Thompson, J.; Zimmermann,
W.; Carrano, A.; Mohrenweiser, H.: Assembly and analysis of cosmid
contigs in the CEA-gene family region of human chromosome 19. Nucleic
Acids Res. 20: 1629-1636, 1992.

21. Zalzali, H.; Naudin, C.; Bastide, P.; Quittau-Prevostel, C.; Yaghi,
C.; Poulat, F.; Jay, P.; Blache, P.: CEACAM1, a SOX9 direct transcriptional
target identified in the colon epithelium. Oncogene 27: 7131-7138,
2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/1/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/21/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/2/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/18/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/19/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/30/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 2/17/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/10/1988

EDITED terry: 12/21/2012
terry: 8/31/2012
mgross: 5/3/2012
terry: 5/1/2012
terry: 4/21/2011
carol: 9/17/2010
carol: 10/29/2009
carol: 9/22/2009
terry: 9/21/2009
mgross: 1/5/2005
carol: 12/2/2004
mgross: 4/18/2002
alopez: 2/22/2002
terry: 2/19/2002
mgross: 2/16/2001
mgross: 3/30/2000
mgross: 2/21/2000
mgross: 2/18/2000
mgross: 2/17/2000
alopez: 12/4/1998
carol: 9/22/1994
jason: 6/28/1994
carol: 12/9/1993
carol: 6/9/1992
carol: 6/2/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

605519	TITLE *605519 LIPIN 2; LPIN2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mice carrying mutations in the fatty liver dystrophy (fld) gene have
features of human lipodystrophy (Reue et al., 2000). In the human,
lipodystrophy is a heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by
loss of body fat, fatty liver, hypertriglyceridemia, and insulin
resistance. Through positional cloning, Peterfy et al. (2001) isolated
the gene responsible for fatty liver dystrophy in mice and characterized
2 independent mutant alleles of the fld gene. They designated the gene
Lpin1 and named the novel nuclear protein which it encodes lipin.
Through database searches, Peterfy et al. (2001) identified several
mouse and human EST and genomic sequences with similarities to Lpin1.
These included 2 Lpin1-related mouse genes (Lpin2 and Lpin3) and 3 human
homologs (LPIN1 (605518), LPIN2, and LPIN3 (605520)). LPIN2 is identical
to the KIAA0249 gene identified by Nagase et al. (1996).

By PCR and Northern blot analysis, Ferguson et al. (2005) detected a
6-kb LPIN2 transcript in multiple human tissues including liver, lung,
kidney, and placenta.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ferguson et al. (2005) noted that the LPIN2 gene contains 20 exons
spanning 95 kb.

MAPPING

Using sequence databases, Peterfy et al. (2001) mapped the human LPIN2
gene to 18p. They mapped the mouse gene to chromosome 17.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 consanguineous Arab families with Majeed syndrome (609628),
previously reported by Majeed et al. (1989, 2000, 2001), Ferguson et al.
(2005) identified homozygosity for a missense mutation (S734L;
605519.0001) and a 2-bp deletion (605519.0002) in the LPIN2 gene,
respectively.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MAJEED SYNDROME
LPIN2, SER734LEU

In 4 affected members of 2 consanguineous sibships of a Jordanian Arab
family with Majeed syndrome (609628), previously reported by Majeed et
al. (1989, 2000), Ferguson et al. (2005) identified homozygosity for a
2201C-T transition in exon 17 of the LPIN2 gene, resulting in a
ser734-to-leu (S734L) substitution. The mutation was not found in 2,300
unrelated (CEPH) chromosomes, but it had a frequency of 0.005 (4
heterozygotes in 734 chromosomes) in 367 unrelated, ethnically matched
Jordanian controls.

.0002
MAJEED SYNDROME
LPIN2, 2-BP DEL, 540AT

In 2 affected sibs of a consanguineous Jordanian Arab family with Majeed
syndrome (609628), previously reported by Majeed et al. (2001), Ferguson
et al. (2005) identified homozygosity for a 2-bp deletion (540delAT) in
exon 4 of the LPIN2 gene, resulting in a stop codon at position 181. The
mutation was not found in 2,300 unrelated (CEPH) chromosomes, or in 367
unrelated, ethnically matched Jordanian controls.

REFERENCE 1. Ferguson, P. J.; Chen, S.; Tayeh, M. K.; Ochoa, L.; Leal, S. M.;
Pelet, A.; Munnich, A.; Lyonnet, S.; Majeed, H. A.; El-Shanti, H.
: Homozygous mutations in LPIN2 are responsible for the syndrome of
chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis and congenital dyserythropoietic
anaemia (Majeed syndrome). J. Med. Genet. 42: 551-557, 2005.

2. Majeed, H. A.; Al-Tarawna, M.; El-Shanti, H.; Kamel, B.; Al-Khalaileh,
F.: The syndrome of chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis and
congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia: report of a new family and a
review. Europ. J. Pediat. 160: 705-710, 2001.

3. Majeed, H. A.; El-Shanti, H.; Al-Rimawa, H.; Al-Masri, N.: On
mice and men: an autosomal recessive syndrome of chronic recurrent
multifocal osteomyelitis and congenital dyserythropoietic anemia.
(Letter) J. Pediat. 137: 441-442, 2000.

4. Majeed, H. A.; Kalaawi, M.; Mohanty, D.; Teebi, A. S.; Tunjekar,
M. F.; Al-Gharbawy, F.; Majeed, S. A.; Al-Gazzar, A. H.: Congenital
dyserythropoietic anemia and chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis
in three related children and the association with Sweet syndrome
in two siblings. J. Pediat. 115: 730-734, 1989.

5. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Ohira, M.; Kawarabayasi, Y.;
Ohara, O.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Miyajima, N.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VI. The coding
sequences of 80 new genes (KIAA0201-KIAA0280) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from cell line KG-1 and brain. DNA Res. 3: 321-329,
1996.

6. Peterfy, M.; Phan, J.; Xu, P.; Reue, K.: Lipodystrophy in the
fld mouse results from mutation of a new gene encoding a nuclear protein,
lipin. Nature Genet. 27: 121-124, 2001.

7. Reue, K.; Xu, P.; Wang, X.-P.; Slavin, B. G.: Adipose tissue deficiency,
glucose intolerance, and increased atherosclerosis result from mutation
in the mouse fatty liver dystrophy (fld) gene. J. Lipid Res. 41:
1067-1076, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/19/2005

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/2/2001

EDITED wwang: 10/05/2005
terry: 9/19/2005
mgross: 1/23/2001
mgross: 1/2/2001

608560	TITLE *608560 STABILIN 1; STAB1
;;MS-1 ANTIGEN;;
FASCICLIN EGF-LIKE, LAMININ-TYPE EGF-LIKE, AND LINK DOMAIN-CONTAINING
SCAVENGER RECEPTOR 1; FEEL1;;
KIAA0246
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Noncontinuous endothelial tissues and alternatively activated
macrophages express a high molecular mass protein uniquely recognized by
the monoclonal antibody MS-1. Politz et al. (2002) isolated this
protein, designated stabilin-1 (STAB1), and analyzed it using MALDI-TOF
mass spectrometry. Using RT-PCR and RACE, they obtained a full-length
STAB1 cDNA. The STAB1 gene encodes a protein with a 275-kD molecular
mass that contains 7 fasciclin-like adhesion domains, 16 EGF-like
domains, 2 laminin-type Egf-like domains, 1 X-link domain (common to
hyaluronan-binding proteins), and a predicted transmembrane domain.
STAB1 also contains motifs for sorting to the endosomal compartment and
shuttling between endosomes and the plasma membrane. Politz et al.
(2002) cloned murine Stab1 and showed that it was 82% identical to STAB1
at the amino acid level. Human STAB1 and STAB2 (608561) share 39% amino
acid identity. Northern blot analysis detected STAB1 expression in
spleen, liver, lymph node, placenta, and alternatively activated
macrophages. Immunofluorescence analysis of STAB1 demonstrated
localization to cytoplasmic granular structures of alternatively
activated macrophages, and to the sinusoidal endothelium of spleen.

Adachi and Tsujimoto (2002) observed uptake of DiI-labeled acetylated
low density lipoprotein (DiI-Ac-LDL) in human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs) when the scavenger receptor SREC (607873) was inhibited,
suggesting the presence of another scavenger receptor. By an expression
cloning strategy using HUVECs, they identified a cDNA that they named
FEEL1 (for fasciclin EGF-like, laminin-type EGF-like, and link
domain-containing scavenger receptor-1) that encoded a type I membrane
protein of 2,570 amino acids. They also identified a FEEL1 splice
variant lacking the transmembrane domain. FEEL1 expressed in CHO cells
bound to DiI-Ac-LDL with a ligand affinity of 6.9 microgram/ml, and this
binding was blocked by monoclonal FEEL1 antibodies. RT-PCR analysis
showed FEEL1 expression in spleen, lymph node, mononuclear cells (CD14+
cells), and endothelial cells from umbilical vein, coronary artery, and
microvasculature of the brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Adachi and Tsujimoto (2002) showed that FEEL1 expressed in CHO cells
binds to gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. Cell-cell
interactions of HUVECs were significantly reduced by anti-FEEL1
antibody, as measured by Matrigel tube formation assay.

Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) are generated by nonenzymatic
glycosylation of proteins or lipids after prolonged exposure to glucose,
and accumulate in vascular tissues in aging and diabetes. Tamura et al.
(2003) observed that (125)I-AGE-bovine serum albumin showed high
affinity binding to CHO cells overexpressing FEEL1, indicating that
FEEL1 is an endocytic receptor for AGEs.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Adachi and Tsujimoto (2002) mapped the
STAB1 gene to chromosome 3p21.

REFERENCE 1. Adachi, H.; Tsujimoto, M.: FEEL-1, a novel scavenger receptor
with in vitro bacteria-binding and angiogenesis-modulating activities. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 34264-34270, 2002.

2. Politz, O.; Gratchev, A.; McCourt, P. A. G.; Schledzewski, K.;
Guillot, P.; Johansson, S.; Svineng, G.; Franke, P.; Kannicht, C.;
Kzhyshkowska, J.; Longati, P.; Velten, F. W.; Johansson, S.; Goerdt,
S.: Stabilin-1 and -2 constitute a novel family of fasciclin-like
hyaluronan receptor homologues. Biochem. J. 362: 155-164, 2002.

3. Tamura, Y.; Adachi, H.; Osuga, J.; Ohashi, K.; Yahagi, N.; Sekiya,
M.; Okazaki, H.; Tomita, S.; Iizuka, Y.; Shimano, H.; Nagai, R.; Kimura,
S.; Tsujimoto, M.; Ishibashi, S.: FEEL-1 and FEEL-2 are endocytic
receptors for advanced glycation end products. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
12613-12617, 2003.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 3/31/2004

EDITED alopez: 04/01/2004

603865	TITLE *603865 GLUTAMINE:FRUCTOSE-6-PHOSPHATE AMIDOTRANSFERASE 2; GFPT2
;;GFAT2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Glutamine:fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase (GFAT) is the first and
rate-limiting enzyme of the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway. The enzyme
transfers the amide group from L-glutamine to fructose 6-phosphate to
form glucosamine 6-phosphate. See GFAT1 (GFPT1; 138292). By searching an
EST database for sequences related to GFAT1, Oki et al. (1999)
identified a cDNA encoding a new GFAT subtype that they called GFAT2.
The authors also cloned mouse GFAT2 cDNAs. The predicted 682-amino acid
human protein shares 76% and 97% similarity to human GFAT1 and mouse
Gfat2, respectively. Recombinant GFAT2 exhibited GFAT enzyme activity in
vitro. Northern blot analysis revealed that GFAT2 was expressed
predominantly as a 3-kb mRNA, although additional transcripts were
present in some tissues. The highest levels of expression were observed
in heart, placenta, and spinal cord.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang et al. (2004) stated that the GFAT2 gene comprises 19 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Oki et al. (1999) mapped the GFAT2 gene to
5q34-q35. These authors used an interspecific backcross to map the mouse
Gfat2 gene to chromosome 11, in a region sharing homology of synteny
with human 5q23-q35.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Zhang et al. (2004) tested the hypothesis that GFPT2 sequence variation
contributed to susceptibility to type II diabetes mellitus (NIDDM;
125853) and diabetic nephropathy (see 603933) in Caucasian and African
American individuals. They identified 11 SNPs, of which 7 were common. A
single variant in exon 14 altered the amino acid sequence, was conserved
between human and mouse genes, and was associated with NIDDM among
Caucasians (p = 0.05). Several variants in the 3-prime untranslated
region (UTR) and exon 18 were also associated with NIDDM in Caucasian
individuals (P less than 0.05), and the SNP in the 3-prime UTR was
associated with diabetic nephropathy in African American subjects (p =
0.047). GFPT2 mRNA levels in transformed lymphocytes from study subjects
were significantly increased among African American subjects compared
with Caucasian individuals, regardless of diagnosis. The authors
proposed that the 3-prime UTR variant results in increased GFPT2 mRNA
levels with resultant increased hexosamine flux. They suggested that the
missense variant may contribute to altered protein function or may
simply be in linkage disequilibrium with SNPs in the 3-prime UTR.

REFERENCE 1. Oki, T.; Yamazaki, K.; Kuromitsu, J.; Okada, M.; Tanaka, I.: cDNA
cloning and mapping of a novel subtype of glutamine:fructose-6-phosphate
amidotransferase (GFAT2) in human and mouse. Genomics 57: 227-234,
1999.

2. Zhang, H.; Jia, Y.; Cooper, J. J.; Hale, T.; Zhang, Z.; Elbein,
S. C.: Common variants in glutamine:fructose-6-phosphate amidotransferase
2 (GFPT2) gene are associated with type 2 diabetes, diabetic nephropathy,
and increased GFPT2 mRNA levels. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 748-755,
2004.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/2/1999

EDITED carol: 02/13/2009
carol: 6/13/2005
alopez: 4/29/2005
alopez: 6/2/1999

602453	TITLE *602453 INTEGRIN, ALPHA-D; ITGAD
;;CD11D
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Integrins (ITGs) are a large family of cell surface alpha-beta
heterodimers involved in cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix
interactions. Three ITGs that share the beta-2 (CD18) subunit are
restricted in expression to leukocytes and have homologous alpha
subunits: alpha-L (ITGAL; 153370), alpha-M (ITGAM; 120980), and alpha-X
(ITGAX; 151510). Based primarily on the known intron/exon structure of
the human ITGAX gene, Wong et al. (1996) designed degenerate PCR primers
to identify novel leukocyte integrin alpha subunits. In this way they
isolated a partial genomic clone encoding a new alpha subunit,
designated ITGAD. The ITGAD gene was found to be highly homologous to
the 3 previously known alpha subunit-encoding genes in deduced amino
acid sequence and intron/exon structure.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Wong et al. (1996) localized the
ITGAD gene to 16p11.2 in a cluster with ITGAL, ITGAM, and ITGAX.

REFERENCE 1. Wong, D. A.; Davis, E. M.; LeBeau, M.; Springer, T. A.: Cloning
and chromosomal localization of a novel gene-encoding a human beta-2-integrin
alpha subunit. Gene 171: 291-294, 1996.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/19/1998

EDITED carol: 10/11/2013
alopez: 3/19/1998

600530	TITLE *600530 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 9, MEMBER 2; SLC9A2
;;SODIUM/HYDROGEN EXCHANGER 2; NHE2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The Na+/H+ exchangers (NHE) are membrane proteins involved in the
regulation of pH and cell volume. Ghishan et al. (1995) noted that the
exchanger (which they called NHE2) is found in several tissues,
including intestine and kidney, and is highly expressed in villus and
distal convoluted tubules. Ghishan et al. (1995) reported the cloning of
a human isoform of NHE2. The predicted 698-amino acid protein is 99%
identical to the rat protein and contains 10 transmembrane domains.

MAPPING

Ghishan et al. (1995) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to map the
SLC9A2 gene to chromosome 2q11.2. Pathak et al. (1996) mapped the mouse
Slc9a2 gene to the proximal region of chromosome 1 where it cosegregated
with Slc9a4 (600531).

REFERENCE 1. Ghishan, F. K.; Knobel, S. M.; Summar, M.: Molecular cloning,
sequencing, chromosomal localization, and tissue distribution of the
human Na+/H+ exchanger (SLC9A2). Genomics 30: 25-30, 1995.

2. Pathak, B. G.; Shull, G. E.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.:
Mouse chromosomal location of four Na/H exchanger isoform genes. Genomics 31:
261-263, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Alan F. Scott - updated: 11/13/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/15/1995

EDITED wwang: 04/21/2009
joanna: 5/8/1998
alopez: 12/2/1997
mark: 3/11/1996
terry: 3/7/1996
mark: 11/13/1995
mark: 5/15/1995

130130	TITLE *130130 ELASTASE, NEUTROPHIL-EXPRESSED; ELANE
;;ELASTASE 2; ELA2;;
ELASTASE, NEUTROPHIL; NE;;
HNE;;
ELASTASE, LEUKOCYTE;;
HLE;;
MEDULLASIN;;
PROTEASE, SERINE, BONE MARROW
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Neutrophil elastase (EC 3.4.21.37) is a serine protease of neutrophil
and monocyte granules (Horwitz et al., 1999). Its key physiologic role
is in innate host defense, but it can also participate in tissue
remodeling and possesses secretagogue actions important to local
inflammatory responses (Chua and Laurent, 2006).

CLONING

Aoki (1978) purified a 31-kD serine protease from human bone marrow cell
mitochondria. Both granulocytes and erythroblasts were found to contain
the protease medullasin, but it was not detected in lymphocytes or
thrombocytes. It was shown to be located on the inner membrane of
mitochondria. Nakamura et al. (1987) reported the complete genomic
sequence and deduced the amino acid sequence of the medullasin
precursor. It contains 267 amino acids, including a possible leader
sequence of 29 amino acids.

Fletcher et al. (1987) cloned a cDNA encoding elastase-2 from a human
pancreatic cDNA library. Similarities to and differences from elastase-1
(130120) and the chymotrypsins (e.g., 118890) were described.

Kawashima et al. (1987) isolated cDNAs from a human pancreatic cDNA
library, which indicated that at least 2 elastase II messages are
expressed in pancreas. The 2 human elastases II have been designated IIA
and IIB. There is 90% overall homology between the amino acid sequences
of these 2 classes of elastase II, which is synthesized as a
preproenzyme of 269 amino acids.

Sinha et al. (1987) determined the complete amino acid sequence of human
neutrophil elastase. The protein consists of 218 amino acid residues,
contains 2 asparagine-linked carbohydrate side chains, and is joined
together by 2 disulfide bonds. There is only moderate homology with
porcine pancreatic elastase (43%). Okano et al. (1987) showed that the
218-amino acid sequence of human neutrophil elastase is identical to
that of medullasin.

GENE FUNCTION

Belaaouaj et al. (2000) determined the mechanism of neutrophil
elastase-mediated killing of E. coli. They found that neutrophil
elastase degraded outer membrane protein A (OmpA), localized on the
surface of gram-negative bacteria.

Weinrauch et al. (2002) identified human neutrophil elastase as a key
host defense protein in preventing the escape of Shigella from
phagocytic vacuoles in neutrophils. Neutrophil elastase degrades
Shigella virulence factors at a 1,000-fold lower concentration than that
needed to degrade other bacterial proteins. In neutrophils in which
neutrophil elastase is inactivated pharmacologically or genetically,
Shigella escapes from phagosomes, increasing bacterial survival.
Neutrophil elastase also preferentially cleaves virulence factors of
Salmonella and Yersinia. Weinrauch et al. (2002) concluded that their
findings established neutrophil elastase as the first neutrophil factor
that targets bacterial virulence proteins.

Increased leukocyte elastase activity in mice lacking secretory
leukocyte protease inhibitor (SLPI; 107285) leads to impaired wound
healing due to enhanced activity of transforming growth factor-beta
(190180) and perhaps additional mechanisms (Ashcroft et al., 2000).
Proepithelin (PEPI; 138945), also known as progranulin, an epithelial
growth factor, can be converted to epithelins (EPIs) in vivo. Zhu et al.
(2002) found that PEPI and EPIs exert opposing activities. EPIs
inhibited the growth of epithelial cells but induced them to secrete the
neutrophil attractant interleukin-8 (IL8; 146930), while PEPI blocked
neutrophil activation by tumor necrosis factor (TNF; 191160), preventing
release of oxidants and proteases. SLPI and PEPI formed complexes,
preventing elastase from converting PEPI to EPIs. Supplying PEPI
corrected the wound-healing defect in Slpi null mice. The authors
concluded that SLPI/elastase act via PEPI/EPIs to operate a switch at
the interface between innate immunity and wound healing.

The fusion protein PML (102578)-RARA (180240), which is generated by the
t(15;17)(q22;q11.2) translocation associated with acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL; 612376), initiates APL when expressed in the early
myeloid compartment of transgenic mice. Lane and Ley (2003) found that
PML-RARA was cleaved in several positions by a neutral serine protease
in a human myeloid cell line; purification revealed that the protease
was ELA2. Immunofluorescence localization studies suggested that
cleavage of PML-RARA must have occurred within the cell, perhaps within
the nucleus. The functional importance of ELA2 for APL development was
assessed in Ela2-deficient mice. More than 90% of bone marrow
PML-RARA-cleaving activity was lost in the absence of Ela2, and
Ela2-deficient animals, but not cathepsin G (CTSG; 116830)-deficient
animals, were protected from APL development. The authors determined
that primary mouse and human APL cells also contained ELA2-dependent
PML-RARA-cleaving activity. Lane and Ley (2003) concluded that, since
ELA2 is maximally produced in promyelocytes, it may play a role in APL
pathogenesis by facilitating the leukemogenic potential of PML-RARA.

Using the LSL-Kras-G12D (191170.0005) model of mouse lung adenocarcinoma
(211980), Houghton et al. (2010) found that mutant mice who were also
Elane -/- had markedly decreased tumor burden compared to Elane +/+
mice. All LSL-Kras/Elane +/+ mice died, whereas none of the Elane -/-
mice died in the study period. In vitro studies in human and mouse
adenocarcinoma cells showed that neutrophil elastase directly induced
tumor cell proliferation at physiologic levels by gaining access to an
endosomal compartment within tumor cells, where it degraded insulin
receptor substrate-1 (IRS1; 147545). Degradation of IRS1 was associated
with increased interaction between PI3K (see 171834) and the potent
mitogen PDGFR (173410), skewing the PI3K axis toward tumor cell
proliferation. The findings identified IRS1 as a key regulator of PI3K
within malignant cells.

- Role in Human Immunodeficiency Virus-1 Infection

Bristow et al. (1995) found that human, but not murine, epithelial and
leukocyte elastase bound the fusion domain of human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV)-1 gp160 and interacted with a pentapeptide representative of
the HIV-1 fusion domain. HIV-1 infectivity was blocked during, but not
after, the initial contact between virus and cells. Bristow et al.
(1995) suggested that the elastase present on T-cell membranes
participates in permissiveness of host cells to infection.

Bristow (2001) found that decreased HIV infectivity correlated
significantly with decreased cell surface expression of HLE on monocytes
but not lymphocytes. Decreased levels of alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT;
107400), also known as protease inhibitor (PI), correlated with
increased cell surface HLE expression and increased HIV infectivity.

Bristow et al. (2001) showed that decreased HIV viral load correlated
with decreased circulating PI. Furthermore, asymptomatic patients
manifested deficient levels of active PI. Bristow et al. (2001) noted
that deficient levels of PI lead to degenerative lung diseases and
suggested that preventing PI deficiency may prevent HIV-associated
pathophysiology.

Using subclones of monocytic cell lines, Bristow et al. (2003) showed
that HLE localized to the cell surface, but not granules, of
HIV-1-permissive clones, and to the granules, but not the cell surface,
of HIV-1-nonpermissive clones. Stimulation of nonpermissive clones with
lipopolysaccharide and LBP (151990), followed by exogenous PI, induced
cell surface HLE expression, resulting in susceptibility to HIV
infection. PI appeared to promote HIV coreceptor colocalization with
surface HLE, thus permitting HIV infectivity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zimmer et al. (1992) demonstrated that the genes encoding azurocidin
(NAZC; 162815), proteinase-3 (PRTN3; 177020), and neutrophil elastase
each have 5 exons. All 3 genes are expressed coordinately and their
protein products are packaged together at high levels into azurophil
granules during neutrophil differentiation. Belaaouaj et al. (1997)
demonstrated that the murine homolog of human ELA2 also contains 5
exons.

MAPPING

Zimmer et al. (1992) showed that the NAZC, PRTN3, and ELA2 genes are
within an approximately 50-kb cluster on chromosome 19pter.

By interphase studies with differentially labeled probes for
fluorescence in situ hybridization, Pilat et al. (1994) demonstrated
that ELA2 is in a gene cluster on 19p13.3 with azurocidin, proteinase-3,
and granzyme M (600311).

By interspecific backcross analysis, Belaaouaj et al. (1997) mapped the
mouse Ela2 gene to chromosome 10.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Cyclic neutropenia (162800), also known as cyclic hematopoiesis, is an
autosomal dominant disorder in which blood-cell production from the bone
marrow oscillates with 21-day periodicity. Circulating neutrophils vary
between almost normal numbers and zero. During intervals of neutropenia,
affected individuals are at risk for opportunistic infection. Monocytes,
platelets, lymphocytes, and reticulocytes also cycle with the same
frequency. Horwitz et al. (1999) used a genomewide screen and positional
cloning to map the locus to 19p13.3. They identified 7 different
single-basepair substitutions in the ELA2 gene, each on a unique
haplotype, in 13 of 13 families, as well as a new mutation in a sporadic
case (e.g., 130130.0001-130130.0005). Neutrophil elastase is a target
for protease inhibition by alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT; 107400), and its
unopposed release destroys tissue at sites of inflammation. Horwitz et
al. (1999) hypothesized that a perturbed interaction between neutrophil
elastase and serpins or other substrates may regulate mechanisms
governing the clock-like timing of hematopoiesis.

After mutations in the ELA2 gene were identified as the basis of
autosomal dominant cyclic neutropenia, Dale et al. (2000) hypothesized
that congenital neutropenia (202700) is also due to mutation in this
gene. In cyclic neutropenia, the mutations appeared to cluster near the
active site of the molecule, whereas the opposite face was predominantly
affected by the mutations found in congenital neutropenia. Their studies
revealed that 22 of 25 patients with congenital neutropenia had 18
different heterozygous mutations. All 4 patients with cyclic neutropenia
and none of 3 patients with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (260400) had
mutations of the ELA2 gene. In the congenital neutropenia patients, 5
different mutations were found in families with 2 or more affected
members. Three instances of father-daughter pairs, 1 mother-son pair,
and 1 mother with 2 affected sons by different fathers suggested
autosomal dominant inheritance.

Because all of the mutations in the ELA2 gene associated with severe
congenital neutropenia had been heterozygous, Ancliff et al. (2001)
conducted a study to determine whether mutations in ELA2 could account
for the disease phenotype in classic autosomal recessive severe
congenital neutropenia (Kostmann disease; 610738), as well as in the
sporadic and autosomal dominant types. They used direct automated
sequencing to study all 5 exons of ELA2 and their flanking introns in 18
patients (3 autosomal recessive, 5 autosomal dominant from 3 kindreds,
and 10 sporadic). No mutations were found in the autosomal recessive
families. A point mutation was identified in 1 of 3 autosomal dominant
families, and a base substitution was identified in 8 of 10 patients
with the sporadic form, although 1 of the 8 was shown to have a low
frequency polymorphism. These results suggested that mutations in ELA2
are not responsible for classic autosomal recessive Kostmann disease,
but provided further evidence for the role of ELA2 in the autosomal
dominant form of severe congenital neutropenia.

Ancliff et al. (2002) described the case of a healthy father of a
patient who was demonstrated to be mosaic for his daughter's
cys42-to-arg ELA2 mutation (130130.0009). Semiquantitative PCR showed
that approximately half of his T cells carried the mutation, in contrast
to less than 10% of neutrophils. Individual hematopoietic colonies grown
from peripheral blood were heterozygous for the mutation or were
homozygous wildtype. The results demonstrated that precursors containing
the mutation are selectively lost during myelopoiesis or fail to develop
into neutrophils. Ancliff et al. (2002) stated that this was the first
in vivo confirmation of the pathogenic nature of elastase mutations in
humans. The normal neutrophil count in the father suggested that the
mutant elastase does not have paracrine effects.

Thusberg and Vihinen (2006) reported detailed bioinformatic analyses of
32 different pathogenic missense mutations in the ELA2 gene. Using 31
different analytic methods, the authors found that different mutations
resulted in diverse deleterious effects on protein structure and
function, including changes in electrostatic surface potential, contacts
and stability, and aggregation, among other changes. There were no
obvious genotype/phenotype correlations to explain the phenotypic
expression of cyclic versus congenital neutropenia.

Salipante et al. (2007) reported 2 unrelated patients with cyclic
neutropenia and severe congenital neutropenia, respectively, who each
had 2 de novo mutations in cis in the ELA2 gene (see, e.g.,
130130.0010). In both patients, the 2 mutations were paternally derived
and likely arose during spermatogenesis. Functional expression studies
showed reduced proteolytic activity, evidence for induction of the
unfolded protein response, and disturbed subcellular localization
consistent with protein mistrafficking.

Ishikawa et al. (2008) identified heterozygous mutations in the ELA2
gene in 11 (61%) of 18 Japanese patients with severe congenital
neutropenia. Five (28%) patients had SCN3 (610738) due to mutation in
the HAX1 gene (605998).

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Grenda et al. (2007) demonstrated significant activation of the unfolded
protein response (UPR) and cellular apoptosis in cells derived from
patients with SCN1 and in human granulocyte precursors specifically
transfected with SCN1-associated ELA2 mutations, including V72M
(130130.0007), P110L (130130.0006), and G185R (130130.0011). The UPR
response was assessed by increased expression of XBP1 (194355) and HSPA5
(138120). Milder effects were observed with the cyclic
neutropenia-associated R191Q (130130.0001) mutation. There was no
evidence for protein mistrafficking within the cell. The findings
indicated that the magnitude of UPR activation and apoptosis induced by
ELA2 mutations correlated with the phenotypic severity. Grenda et al.
(2007) concluded that ELA2-related disorders result from accumulation of
misfolded mutant proteins, activation of the UPR, and cellular
apoptosis, consistent with a toxic dominant-negative cell intrinsic
effect.

Rosenberg et al. (2007) reported that 2 of 4 SCN1 patients with the
G185R mutation developed myelodysplastic syndrome/acute myeloid leukemia
(MDS/AML) by 15 years follow-up, whereas none of 7 patients with the
P110L mutation or 5 patients with the S97L (130130.0008) mutation had
developed MDS/AML.

Germeshausen et al. (2013) found 116 different ELANE mutations in 162
(41%) of 395 patients with congenital neutropenia and 26 mutations in 51
(55%) of 92 patients with cyclic neutropenia, including 69 novel
mutations. The mutations were spread throughout the gene sequence.
Cyclic neutropenia-associated mutations were predicted to be more benign
than congenital neutropenia-associated mutations, but the mutation
severity largely overlapped. The frequency of acquired CSF3R (138971)
mutations, malignant transformation, and the need for hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation were significantly higher in congenital neutropenia
patients with ELANE mutations than in ELANE mutation-negative patients.
Cellular elastase activity was reduced in neutrophils from all patients,
irrespective of the mutation status. In congenital neutropenia,
enzymatic activity was significantly lower in patients with ELANE
mutations compared with those with wildtype ELANE. Despite differences
in the spectrum of mutations, type or localization of mutation only
partially determines the clinical phenotype. Thus, there were no
apparent genotype/phenotype correlations. The report also indicated that
specific ELANE mutations have limited predictive value for
leukemogenesis; the risk for leukemia was correlated with disease
severity rather than with occurrence of an ELANE mutation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Bullous pemphigoid (BP) is an autoimmune skin disease characterized by
subepidermal blisters and autoantibodies against 2
hemidesmosome-associated proteins, BP180 (COL17A1; 113811) and BP240
(BPAG1; 113810). The immunopathologic features of BP can be reproduced
in mice by passive transfer of anti-BP180 antibodies. Lesion formation
in this animal model depends on complement activation and neutrophil
recruitment. Liu et al. (2000) investigated the role of neutrophil
elastase in antibody-induced blister formation in experimental BP.
Abnormally high levels of caseinolytic activity, consistent with NE,
were detected in extracts of lesional skin and blister fluid of mice
injected with anti-BP180 IgG. In NE-null (NE -/-) mutant mice, the
pathogenic anti-BP180 IgG failed to induce subepidermal blistering.
Wildtype mice given NE inhibitors, but not mice given cathepsin
G/chymase inhibitors, were resistant to the pathogenic activity of
anti-BP180 antibodies. Incubation of murine skin with NE induced BP-like
epidermal-dermal detachment. Finally, Liu et al. (2000) showed that NE
cleaved BP180 in vitro and in vivo. These results implicated NE directly
in the dermal-epidermal cleavage induced by anti-BP180 antibodies in the
experimental BP model.

Using mice deficient in Ctsg and/or Ela2, Reeves et al. (2002) confirmed
data originally generated by Tkalcevic et al. (2000) and Belaaouaj et
al. (1998) that Ctsg -/- mice resist Candida but not Staphylococcal
infection, whereas the reverse is true in Ela2 -/- mice. Both organisms
were more virulent in double-knockout mice. Purified neutrophils from
these mice mirrored these results in vitro in spite of exhibiting normal
phagocytosis, degranulation, oxidase activity, superoxide production,
and myeloperoxidase (MPO; 606989) activity. Reeves et al. (2002)
hypothesized that reactive oxygen species (ROS) and proteases act
together since deficiencies in either lead to comparable reductions in
killing efficiency. They determined that conditions in the phagocytic
vacuole after activation provoke the influx of enormous concentrations
of ROS compensated by a surge of K+ ions crossing the membrane in a
pH-dependent manner. The resulting rise in ionic strength induces the
release of cationic granule proteins, including Ctsg and Ela2, from the
highly charged anionic sulfated proteoglycan matrix within the granules.
Reeves et al. (2002) concluded that it is essential for the volume of
the vacuole to be restricted for the requisite hypertonicity to develop.
They proposed that disruption of the integrity of the cytoskeletal
network by microbial products could offer a mechanism of virulence by
inhibiting the activation of granule proteins.

Benson et al. (2003) stated that over 20 different mutations of
neutrophil elastase had been identified, but their consequences had been
elusive because they confer no consistent effects on enzymatic activity
(Li and Horwitz, 2001). The autosomal recessive disorder canine cyclic
hematopoiesis (Lothrop et al., 1987), also known as gray collie
syndrome, is not caused by mutations in neutrophil elastase. Benson et
al. (2003) showed that homozygous mutation of the gene encoding the dog
adaptor protein complex-3 (AP3) beta-subunit (AP3B1; 603401), directing
trans-Golgi export of transmembrane cargo proteins to lysosomes, causes
canine cyclic hematopoiesis. C-terminal processing of neutrophil
elastase exposes an AP3 interaction signal responsible for redirecting
neutrophil elastase trafficking from membranes to granules. Disruption
of either neutrophil elastase or AP3 perturbs the intracellular
trafficking of neutrophil elastase. Most mutations in ELA2 that cause
human cyclic hematopoiesis prevent membrane localization of neutrophil
elastase, whereas most mutations in ELA2 that cause severe congenital
neutropenia (SCN) lead to exclusive membrane localization.

HISTORY

The elastase secreted by leukocytes is a serine protease inhibitable by
alpha-1-protease inhibitor (107400), whereas the elastase secreted by
macrophages (MMP12; 601046) is a metalloprotease not inhibitable by
alpha-1-protease inhibitor (Rosenbloom, 1984).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CYCLIC NEUTROPENIA
ELANE, ARG191GLN

In 3 of 13 families with cyclic neutropenia (162800), Horwitz et al.
(1999) demonstrated a G-to-A transition in the ELA2 gene at the second
position in codon 191 (numbering from the first residue after the
presignal peptide had been cleaved), resulting in an arg191-to-gln amino
acid substitution.

.0002
CYCLIC NEUTROPENIA
ELANE, LEU177PHE

In 2 of 13 families with cyclic neutropenia (162800), Horwitz et al.
(1999) found a G-to-T transversion in the ELA2 gene at the wobble
position of codon 177, resulting in replacement of the normal leucine
with a phenylalanine.

.0003
CYCLIC NEUTROPENIA
ELANE, ALA32VAL

In 1 family, Horwitz et al. (1999) demonstrated that cyclic neutropenia
(162800) was due to a C-to-T transition in the ELA2 gene resulting in an
ala32-to-val amino acid substitution.

.0004
CYCLIC NEUTROPENIA
ELANE, IVS4DS, G-A, +1

In 2 of 13 families and in a sporadic new mutation case with cyclic
neutropenia (162800), Horwitz et al. (1999) found a splice donor
mutation of intron 4 of the ELA2 gene, a transition of the invariant
guanine to an adenine at the +1 position. The parents were not affected
and did not carry the mutation, and paternity was confirmed.

.0005
CYCLIC NEUTROPENIA
ELANE, IVS4DS, G-A, +5

In 3 families with cyclic neutropenia (162800), Horwitz et al. (1999)
noted a G-to-A transition at the +5 position of intron 4 of the ELA2
gene, where guanine is present in 84% of cases.

.0006
NEUTROPENIA, SEVERE CONGENITAL, 1, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ELANE, PRO110LEU

In 4 unrelated patients with congenital neutropenia (SCN1; 202700), Dale
et al. (2000) found heterozygosity for a 15862C-T transition in genomic
DNA causing a pro110-to-leu (P110L) amino acid substitution. One of the
families had an affected mother and 2 affected sons with different
fathers, supporting autosomal dominant inheritance. Another family with
the P110L mutation had an affected mother and son; another family had an
affected father and daughter.

Rosenberg et al. (2007) identified the P110L mutation in 7 of 82
unrelated patients with SCN1. None of the patients had developed MDS/AML
at 15 years follow-up.

.0007
NEUTROPENIA, SEVERE CONGENITAL, 1, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ELANE, VAL72MET

In 2 unrelated families, Dale et al. (2000) found that patients with
congenital neutropenia (SCN1; 202700) were heterozygous for the same
34371G-A substitution in exon 3 of the ELA2 gene, resulting in a
val72-to-met (V72M) mutation. In 1 of the families a father and daughter
were affected.

.0008
NEUTROPENIA, SEVERE CONGENITAL, 1, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ELANE, SER97LEU

Ancliff et al. (2001) commented on the variation in phenotype in
patients with the same ELA2 mutation. They reported 2 patients with a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide 4495 in exon 4 of the ELA2 gene,
resulting in a ser97-to-leu (S97L) substitution. One of the patients,
aged 5 years at the time of report, had severe neutropenia (SCN1;
202700) and remained on GCSF therapy with only a modest response. The
other patient, aged 13 years at the time of report, had severe
neutropenia and recurrent infections until he started GCSF at the age of
4 years. He responded well and needed only a small maintenance dose.
GCSF was discontinued when he was 8; he remained free of major
infections and had a neutrophil count of approximately 0.5 x 10(9)/L.
The authors stated that the difference may reflect the influence of
other inherited modifying factors.

Rosenberg et al. (2007) identified the S97L mutation in 5 of 82
unrelated patients with SCN1. None of the patients had developed MDS/AML
at 15 years follow-up.

.0009
NEUTROPENIA, SEVERE CONGENITAL, 1, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ELANE, CYS42ARG

In a child with severe congenital neutropenia (SCN1; 202700), Ancliff et
al. (2001) identified heterozygosity for a 1929T-C mutation in the ELA2
gene, resulting in a cys42-to-arg (C42R) substitution. They found
mosaicism for the mutation in her healthy father. Approximately half of
the father's T cells carried the mutation, in contrast to less than 10%
of neutrophils.

.0010
NEUTROPENIA, SEVERE CONGENITAL, 1, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ELANE, VAL69LEU AND VAL72LEU

In a patient with severe congenital neutropenia (SCN1; 202700),
Salipante et al. (2007) identified 2 de novo mutations in the ELA2 gene
in cis on the paternal allele. The father was unaffected, and the
mutations likely arose during spermatogenesis. The mutations, which were
9 nucleotides apart in exon 3, resulted in val69-to-leu (V69L) and
val72-to-leu (V72L) substitutions. Functional expression studies showed
that each mutation by itself reduced proteolytic enzyme activity by
slightly less than half, but together showed an additive effect with
minimal remaining enzyme activity. Nuclear localization studies showed
that the V72L mutant distributed to the cytoplasm, whereas the V69L
mutant accumulated at the cell surface. The 2 mutations together yielded
a compromise with moderate amounts in both the cytoplasm and at the cell
surface, as well as some expression in the nucleus. Salipante et al.
(2007) concluded that the mutations result in disturbed subcellular
protein trafficking. There was also some evidence for induction of the
unfolded protein response.

.0011
NEUTROPENIA, SEVERE CONGENITAL, 1, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ELANE, GLY185ARG

In patients with SCN1 (202700), Dale et al. (2000) and
Bellanne-Chantelot et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous 4924G-A
transition in exon 5 of the ELA2 gene, resulting in a gly185-to-arg
(G185R) substitution.

Rosenberg et al. (2007) identified the G185R mutation in 4 of 82
unrelated patients with SCN1. Patients with the G185R mutation had a
particularly severe disease course, and 2 developed MDS/AML at 10 and 15
years, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Ancliff, P. J.; Gale, R. E.; Liesner, R.; Hann, I. M.; Linch, D.
C.: Mutations in the ELA2 gene encoding neutrophil elastase are present
in most patients with sporadic severe congenital neutropenia but only
in some patients with the familial form of the disease. Blood 98:
2645-2650, 2001.

2. Ancliff, P. J.; Gale, R. E.; Watts, M. J.; Liesner, R.; Hann, I.
M.; Strobel, S.; Linch, D. C.: Paternal mosaicism proves the pathogenic
nature of mutations in neutrophil elastase in severe congenital neutropenia. Blood 100:
707-709, 2002.

3. Aoki, Y.: Crystallization and characterization of a new protease
in mitochondria of bone marrow cells. J. Biol. Chem. 253: 2026-2032,
1978.

4. Ashcroft, G. S.; Lei, K.; Jin, W.; Longenecker, G.; Kulkarni, A.
B.; Greenwell-Wild, T.; Hale-Donze, H.; McGrady, G.; Song, X.-Y.;
Wahl, S. M.: Secretory leukocyte protease inhibitor mediates non-redundant
functions necessary for normal wound healing. Nature Med. 6: 1147-1153,
2000.

5. Belaaouaj, A.; Kim, K. S.; Shapiro, S. D.: Degradation of outer
membrane protein A in Escherichia coli killing by neutrophil elastase. Science 289:
1185-1187, 2000.

6. Belaaouaj, A.; McCarthy, R.; Baumann, M.; Gao, Z.; Ley, T. J.;
Abraham, S. N.; Shapiro, S. D.: Mice lacking neutrophil elastase
reveal impaired host defense against gram negative bacterial sepsis. Nature
Med. 4: 615-618, 1998.

7. Belaaouaj, A.; Walsh, B. C.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.; Shapiro,
S. D.: Characterization of the mouse neutrophil elastase gene and
localization to chromosome 10. Mammalian Genome 8: 5-8, 1997.

8. Bellanne-Chantelot, C.; Clauin, S.; Leblanc, T.; Cassinat, B.;
Rodrigues-Lima, F.; Beaufils, S.; Vaury, C.; Barkaoui, M.; Fenneteau,
O.; Maier-Redelsperger, M.; Chomienne, C.; Donadieu, J.: Mutations
in the ELA2 gene correlate with more severe expression of neutropenia:
a study of 81 patients from the French Neutropenia Register. Blood 103:
4119-4125, 2004.

9. Benson, K. F.; Li, F.-Q.; Person, R. E.; Albani, D.; Duan, Z.;
Wechsler, J.; Meade-White, K.; Williams, K.; Acland, G. M.; Niemeyer,
G.; Lothrop, C. D.; Horwitz, M.: Mutations associated with neutropenia
in dogs and humans disrupt intracellular transport of neutrophil elastase. Nature
Genet. 35: 90-96, 2003.

10. Bristow, C. L.: Slow human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infectivity
correlated with low HIV coreceptor levels. Clin. Diag. Lab. Immun. 8:
932-936, 2001.

11. Bristow, C. L.; Fiscus, S. A.; Flood, P. M.; Arnold, R. R.: Inhibition
of HIV-1 by modification of a host membrane protease. Int. Immun. 7:
239-249, 1995.

12. Bristow, C. L.; Mercatante, D. R.; Kole, R.: HIV-1 preferentially
binds receptors copatched with cell-surface elastase. Blood 102:
4479-4486, 2003.

13. Bristow, C. L.; Patel, H.; Arnold, R. R.: Self antigen prognostic
for human immunodeficiency virus disease progression. Clin. Diag.
Lab. Immun. 8: 937-942, 2001.

14. Chua, F.; Laurent, G. J.: Neutrophil elastase: mediator of extracellular
matrix destruction and accumulation. Proc. Am. Thoracic Soc. 3:
424-427, 2006.

15. Dale, D. C.; Person, R. E.; Bolyard, A. A.; Aprikyan, A. G.; Bos,
C.; Bonilla, M. A.; Boxer, L. A.; Kannourakis, G.; Zeidler, C.; Welte,
K.; Benson, K. F.; Horwitz, M.: Mutations in the gene encoding neutrophil
elastase in congenital and cyclic neutropenia. Blood 96: 2317-2322,
2000.

16. Fletcher, T. S.; Shen, W.-F.; Largman, C.: Primary structure
of human pancreatic elastase 2 determined by sequence analysis of
the cloned mRNA. Biochemistry 26: 7256-7261, 1987.

17. Germeshausen, M.; Deerberg, S.; Peter, Y.; Reimer, C.; Kratz,
C. P.; Ballmaier, M.: The spectrum of ELANE mutations and their implications
in severe congenital and cyclic neutropenia. Hum. Mutat. 34: 905-914,
2013.

18. Grenda, D. S.; Murakami, M.; Ghatak, J.; Xia, J.; Boxer, L. A.;
Dale, D.; Dinauer, M. C.; Link, D. C.: Mutations of the ELA2 gene
found in patients with severe congenital neutropenia induce the unfolded
protein response and cellular apoptosis. Blood 110: 4179-4187, 2007.

19. Horwitz, M.; Benson, K. F.; Person, R. E.; Aprikyan, A. G.; Dale,
D. C.: Mutations in ELA2, encoding neutrophil elastase, define a
21-day biological clock in cyclic haematopoiesis. Nature Genet. 23:
433-436, 1999.

20. Houghton, A. M.; Rzymkiewicz, D. M.; Ji, H.; Gregory, A. D.; Egea,
E. E.; Metz, H. E.; Stolz, D. B.; Land, S. R.; Marconcini, L. A.;
Kliment, C. R.; Jenkins, K. M.; Beaulieu, K. A.; Mouded, M.; Frank,
S. J.; Wong, K. K.; Shapiro, S. D.: Neutrophil elastase-mediated
degradation of IRS-1 accelerates lung tumor growth. Nature Med. 16:
219-223, 2010.

21. Ishikawa, N.; Okada, S.; Miki, M.; Shirao, K.; Kihara, H.; Tsumura,
M.; Nakamura, K.; Kawaguchi, H.; Ohtsubo, M.; Yasunaga, S.; Matsubara,
K.; Sako, M.; Hara, J.; Shiohara, M.; Kojima, S.; Sato, T.; Takihara,
Y.; Kobayashi, M.: Neurodevelopmental abnormalities associated with
severe congenital neutropenia due to the R86X mutation in the HAX1
gene. J. Med. Genet. 45: 802-807, 2008.

22. Kawashima, I.; Tani, T.; Shimoda, K.; Takiguchi, Y.: Characterization
of pancreatic elastase II cDNAs: two elastase II mRNAs are expressed
in human pancreas. DNA 6: 163-172, 1987.

23. Lane, A. A.; Ley, T. J.: Neutrophil elastase cleaves PML-RAR-alpha
and is important for the development of acute promyelocytic leukemia
in mice. Cell 115: 305-318, 2003.

24. Li, F.-Q.; Horwitz, M.: Characterization of mutant neutrophil
elastase in severe congenital neutropenia. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 14230-14241,
2001.

25. Liu, Z.; Shapiro, S. D.; Zhou, X.; Twining, S. S.; Senior, R.
M.; Giudice, G. J.; Fairley, J. A.; Diaz, L. A.: A critical role
for neutrophil elastase in experimental bullous pemphigoid. J. Clin.
Invest. 105: 113-123, 2000.

26. Lothrop, C. D., Jr.; Coulson, P. A., Jr.; Nolan, H. L.; Cole,
B.; Jones, J. B.; Sanders, W. L.: Cyclic hormonogenesis in gray collie
dogs: interactions of hematopoietic and endocrine systems. Endocrinology 120:
1027-1032, 1987.

27. Nakamura, H.; Okano, K.; Aoki, Y.; Shimizu, H.; Naruto, M.: Nucleotide
sequence of human bone marrow serine protease (medullasin) gene. Nucleic
Acids Res. 15: 9601-9602, 1987.

28. Okano, K.; Aoki, Y.; Sakurai, T.; Kajitani, M.; Kanai, S.; Shimazu,
T.; Shimizu, H.; Naruto, M.: Molecular cloning of complementary DNA
for human medullasin: an inflammatory serine protease in bone marrow
cells. J. Biochem. 102: 13-16, 1987.

29. Pilat, D.; Fink, T.; Obermaier-Skrobanek, B.; Zimmer, M.; Wekerle,
H.; Lichter, P.; Jenne, D. E.: The human Met-ase gene (GZMM): structure,
sequence, and close physical linkage to the serine protease gene cluster
on 19p13.3. Genomics 24: 445-450, 1994.

30. Reeves, E. P.; Lu, H.; Jacobs, H. L.; Messina, C. G. M.; Bolsover,
S.; Gabella, G.; Potma, E. O.; Warley, A.; Roes, J.; Segal, A. W.
: Killing activity of neutrophils is mediated through activation of
proteases by K+ flux. Nature 416: 291-297, 2002.

31. Rosenberg, P. S.; Alter, B. P.; Link, D. C.; Stein, S.; Rodger,
E.; Bolyard, A. A.; Aprikyan, A. A.; Bonilla, M. A.; Dror, Y.; Kannourakis,
G.; Newburger, P. E.; Boxer, L. A.; Dale, D. C.: Neutrophil elastase
mutations and risk of leukaemia in severe congenital neutropenia. Brit.
J. Haemat. 140: 210-213, 2007.

32. Rosenbloom, J.: Elastin: relation of protein and gene structure
to disease. Lab. Invest. 51: 605-623, 1984.

33. Salipante, S. J.; Benson, K. F.; Luty, J.; Hadavi, V.; Kariminejad,
R.; Kariminejad, M. H.; Rezaei, N.; Horwitz, M. S.: Double de novo
mutations of ELA2 in cyclic and severe congenital neutropenia. Hum.
Mutat. 28: 874-881, 2007.

34. Sinha, S.; Watorek, W.; Karr, S.; Giles, J.; Bode, W.; Travis,
J.: Primary structure of human neutrophil elastase. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 84: 2228-2232, 1987.

35. Thusberg, J.; Vihinen, M.: Bioinformatic analysis of protein
structure-function relationships: case study of leukocyte elastase
(ELA2) missense mutations. Hum. Mutat. 27: 1230-1243, 2006.

36. Tkalcevic, J.; Novelli, M.; Phylactides, M.; Iredale, J. P.; Segal,
A. W.; Roes, J.: Impaired immunity and enhanced resistance to endotoxin
in the absence of neutrophil elastase and cathepsin G. Immunity 12:
201-210, 2000.

37. Weinrauch, Y.; Drujan, D.; Shapiro, S. D.; Weiss, J.; Zychlinsky,
Z.: Neutrophil elastase targets virulence factors of enterobacteria. Nature 417:
91-94, 2002.

38. Zhu, J.; Nathan, C.; Jin, W.; Sim, D.; Ashcroft, G. S.; Wahl,
S. M.; Lacomis, L.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Tempst, P.; Wright, C.
D.; Ding, A.: Conversion of proepithelin to epithelins: roles of
SLPI and elastase in host defense and wound repair. Cell 111: 867-878,
2002.

39. Zimmer, M.; Medcalf, R. L.; Fink, T. M.; Mattmann, C.; Lichter,
P.; Jenne, D. E.: Three human elastase-like genes coordinately expressed
in the myelomonocyte lineage are organized as a single genetic locus
on 19pter. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 8215-8219, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/6/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/9/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/11/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/21/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/18/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/29/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/14/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/19/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/21/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/16/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/28/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/13/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/15/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/24/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/30/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/12/1997
Mark H. Paalman - edited: 8/15/1996
Alan F. Scott - updated: 8/14/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/5/1988

EDITED carol: 08/14/2013
carol: 8/13/2013
tpirozzi: 8/12/2013
ckniffin: 8/6/2013
alopez: 8/9/2012
wwang: 6/8/2011
wwang: 6/7/2011
carol: 8/13/2010
wwang: 3/15/2010
ckniffin: 3/9/2010
carol: 12/10/2009
wwang: 4/6/2009
ckniffin: 2/11/2009
mgross: 10/28/2008
wwang: 5/27/2008
ckniffin: 5/21/2008
wwang: 10/26/2007
ckniffin: 10/18/2007
alopez: 2/1/2007
wwang: 1/22/2007
ckniffin: 12/29/2006
mgross: 3/14/2005
terry: 11/4/2004
mgross: 11/19/2003
alopez: 9/2/2003
alopez: 8/22/2003
terry: 8/21/2003
tkritzer: 2/11/2003
mgross: 1/16/2003
carol: 10/1/2002
tkritzer: 9/27/2002
ckniffin: 5/29/2002
terry: 5/28/2002
alopez: 4/9/2002
carol: 4/9/2002
mcapotos: 12/17/2001
terry: 12/13/2001
terry: 11/14/2001
mcapotos: 1/22/2001
mcapotos: 1/12/2001
terry: 1/9/2001
alopez: 8/17/2000
terry: 8/15/2000
mcapotos: 1/28/2000
mcapotos: 1/24/2000
terry: 1/24/2000
alopez: 12/1/1999
terry: 11/30/1999
dkim: 9/8/1998
alopez: 5/26/1998
mark: 4/3/1997
terry: 2/12/1997
terry: 2/7/1997
mark: 8/16/1996
mark: 8/15/1996
terry: 8/15/1996
terry: 1/18/1995
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989
root: 4/23/1988
marie: 3/25/1988

180380	TITLE *180380 RHODOPSIN; RHO
;;OPSIN 2; OPN2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Visual pigments are the light-absorbing molecules that mediate vision.
They consist of an apoprotein, opsin, covalently linked to
11-cis-retinal or, rarely, 11-cis-dehydroretinal. Visual pigments are
integral membrane proteins that reside in the plasma and disc membranes
of the photoreceptor outer segment. When a photon is absorbed by a
visual pigment, retinal is isomerized from the 11-cis to the all-trans
configuration, triggering conformational changes in the attached
apoprotein that create or unveil an enzymatic site on its cytosolic
face. An enzymatically active visual pigment catalyzes the conversion of
several hundred second messengers from the inert to the active state,
the first step in a cascade of enzymatic reactions that ultimately
produces a neural signal. Rhodopsin is the visual pigment of
photoreceptors with rod-shaped outer segments, or retinal rods.
Rhodopsin mediates vision in dim light and absorbs maximally at 495 nm
(summary by Nathans et al., 1986).

CLONING

Nathans and Hogness (1984) isolated and sequenced the gene encoding
human rhodopsin. The deduced 348-amino acid protein has 7 transmembrane
domains, with a luminal N terminus and a cytoplasmic C terminus. The
cytoplasmic face of rhodopsin, which is made up of 3 loops and the
C-terminal tail, contains the catalytic site that promotes GTP-GDP
exchange by transducin (see 139330) and several putative sites for
light-dependent phosphorylation by rhodopsin kinase (GRK1; 180381).
Rhodopsin also has 2 sites for N-glycosylation, and lys296 is the site
for 11-cis-retinal attachment. Nathans et al. (1986) found that the
deduced amino acid sequences of the 3 visual color pigments, OPN1SW
(613522), OPN1MW (300821), and OPN1LW (300822), share about 41% identity
with rhodopsin.

Using SDS-PAGE immunoblot analysis of detergent-soluble and -insoluble
extracts from transfected HEK293 cells, Illing et al. (2002) found that,
at low expression levels, human rhodopsin migrated predominantly as a
detergent-soluble, diffuse band at a molecular mass of 40 to 43 kD. This
species corresponded to monomeric, mature rhodopsin containing complex
N-linked glycans. At higher expression levels, additional high molecular
mass species of rhodopsin, suggestive of SDS-resistant multimers, were
also detected. All of the monomeric rhodopsin partitioned into the
detergent-soluble fraction, whereas the slower migrating forms
partitioned into both detergent-soluble and -insoluble fractions.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nathans and Hogness (1984) determined that the RHO gene contains 5 exons
and spans 5.0 kb. The promoter region contains TATA and CAAT boxes, and
the 3-prime end contains 2 possible polyadenylation sites.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid studies, Nathans et al. (1986) assigned the human
rhodopsin gene to chromosome 3q21-qter.

By Southern analysis of a set of mouse-hamster somatic hybrid cell lines
using a partial cDNA clone for mouse opsin, Elliott et al. (1990)
assigned the rhodopsin gene to mouse chromosome 6. This excludes it as a
candidate gene for a number of forms of retinal degeneration that map to
other mouse chromosomes. In interspecific backcrosses, the Rho locus was
found to be 4 map units distal to the locus for the protooncogene Raf1
(164760) and 18 map units proximal to the locus for the protooncogene
Kras2 (KRAS; 190070). In man, RAF1 and RHO are also syntenic but on
opposite arms of chromosome 3.

GENE FUNCTION

Khorana (1992) reviewed structure-function relations in rhodopsin.

Borhan et al. (2000) traced the movement of the ligand/receptor complex
in rhodopsin. Photoaffinity labeling of diazoketo-rhodopsin (Dk-Rh) and
various bleaching intermediates showed that the ionone ring crosslinks
to tryptophan-265 on helix F in Dk-Rh and batho-rhodopsin, and to
alanine-169 on helix D in lumi-, meta-I-, and meta-II-rhodopsin
intermediates. Borhan et al. (2000) suggested that it is likely that
these movements involving a flip-over of the chromophoric ring trigger
changes in cytoplasmic membrane loops, resulting in heterotrimeric G
protein activation.

In eye bank eyes with age-related macular degeneration (see 153800),
Ethen et al. (2005) demonstrated that a significant linear decline in
both arrestin and rhodopsin content correlated with progressive
worsening of ARMD in the macula. In contrast, the peripheral region
showed no significant correlation between degree of ARMD and the content
of either protein.

Using biochemical, physiologic, and genetic methods, Kennedy et al.
(2001) examined the molecular events that occurred during dark
adaptation and recovery in isolated and intact mouse retinas. They found
that rhodopsin was multiply phosphorylated following light flash.
Phosphorylation proceeded in an ordered fashion on 3 serines in the
rhodopsin C-terminal tail, and phosphates accumulated for 10 to 15
minutes, after which they were dephosphorylated. Dark adaptation was
associated with reduced rhodopsin transduction activity and rhodopsin
phosphorylation. Reduction of all-trans retinal coincided with a shift
from opsin phosphorylation to dephosphorylation.

Noorwez et al. (2004) showed that availability of 9- or 11-cis retinal
increased the amount of opsin synthesized by transfected HEK293 cells,
suggesting that retinal functions as a chaperone during opsin synthesis.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Palczewski et al. (2000) determined the structure of bovine rhodopsin
from diffraction data extending to 2.8-angstrom resolution. The highly
organized structure in the extracellular region, including a conserved
disulfide bridge, forms a basis for the arrangement of the 7-helix
transmembrane motif. The ground-state chromophore, 11-cis-retinal, holds
the transmembrane region of the protein in the inactive conformation.
Interactions of the chromophore with a cluster of key residues determine
the wavelength of the maximum absorption. Changes in these interactions
among rhodopsins facilitate color discrimination. Identification of a
set of residues that mediate interactions between the transmembrane
helices and the cytoplasmic surface, where G protein activation occurs,
also suggests a possible structural change upon photoactivation. Bourne
and Meng (2000) commented on the rhodopsin structure reported by
Palczewski et al. (2000) and on its implications for understanding the
structures and mechanisms of other G protein-coupled receptors.

Fotiadis et al. (2003) used infrared-laser atomic-force microscopy to
reveal the native arrangement of rhodopsin, which forms paracrystalline
arrays of dimers in mouse disc membranes.

Park et al. (2008) presented the crystal structure of ligand-free opsin
from bovine retinal rod cells at 2.9-angstrom resolution. Compared to
rhodopsin, opsin shows prominent structural changes in the conserved
E(D)RY and NPxxY(x)5,6F regions and in TM5 to TM7. At the cytoplasmic
side, TM6 is tilted outwards by 6 to 7 angstroms, whereas the helix
structure of TM5 is more elongated and close to TM6. These structural
changes, some of which were attributed to an active G protein-coupled
receptor (GPCR) state, reorganize the empty retinal-binding pocket to
disclose 2 openings that may serve the entry and exit of retinal.

Standfuss et al. (2011) presented the crystal structure at a resolution
of 3 angstroms of the constitutively active rhodopsin mutant glu113 to
gln in complex with a peptide derived from the carboxy terminus of the
alpha-subunit of the G protein transducin (139330). The protein is in an
active conformation that retains retinal in the binding pocket after
photoactivation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In patients with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa mapping to
chromosome 3q (RP4; 613731), Dryja et al. (1990) identified a
pro23-to-his mutation (P23H; 180380.0001) in the RHO gene. The proline
residue at position 23 in the NH2 portion of the rhodopsin gene is
highly conserved. Dryja et al. (1990) reported 3 additional missense
mutations (180380.0002-180380.0004) in the RHO gene in patients with
RP4. They found that these 4 mutations accounted for 27 of 150 unrelated
patients with ADRP (18%).

Franke et al. (1990) used induced mutations in rhodopsin to study the
functional significance of the several parts of the molecule.

Sung et al. (1991) investigated the functional significance of 13 mutant
rhodopsins responsible for autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa by
transfection of cloned cDNA into tissue culture cells. At least 2
classes of biochemical defects were demonstrated.

In the original family with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
linked to 3q (McWilliam et al., 1989), Farrar et al. (1992) demonstrated
an arg207-to-met mutation (180380.0030) in the RHO gene.

McInnes and Bascom (1992) presented a diagram of the molecular structure
of rhodopsin showing the site of the mutations identified in RP. Pro347
(with a CpG dinucleotide) is a mutation hotspot with 3 mutations: P347R
(180380.0020), P347L (180380.0002), and P347S (180380.0003). McInnes and
Bascom (1992) also presented a diagram of the rod photoreceptor outer
segment and adjacent retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cell. They
illustrated the localization of rhodopsin, peripherin/rds (179605), and
other photoreceptor candidate genes being examined in RP patients,
including the alpha, beta, and gamma subunits of cyclic GMP
phosphodiesterase (180071, 180072, 180073).

Using transfected HEK cells, Chuang et al. (2004) demonstrated that
arg135 mutant rhodopsins (R135L, 180380.0011; R135W, 180380.0012; and
R135G) are hyperphosphorylated and bind with high affinity to visual
arrestin (181031). Mutant rhodopsin recruited the cytosolic arrestin to
the plasma membrane, and the rhodopsin-arrestin complex was internalized
into the endocytic pathway. Furthermore, the rhodopsin-arrestin
complexes altered the morphology of endosomal compartments and severely
damaged receptor-mediated endocytic functions. Because the biochemical
and cellular defects of arg135 mutant rhodopsins are distinct from those
previously described for class I and class II RP mutations, Chuang et
al. (2004) proposed that they be named class III, and suggested that
impaired endocytic activity may underlie the pathogenesis of RP caused
by class III rhodopsin mutations.

In affected members of 2 Indonesian families segregating autosomal
recessive RP4 (613731), Kartasasmita et al. (2011) identified a
homozygous nonsense mutation in the RHO gene (180380.0045). Haplotype
analysis suggested that this is a founder mutation.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Sung et al. (1993) reviewed rhodopsin mutations responsible for
autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa and studied the functional
characteristics of many of them by introducing specific mutations into
human rhodopsin cDNA by site-directed mutagenesis and producing the
encoded proteins by transfection of a human embryonic kidney cell line.

Oh et al. (2000) reported the clinical characteristics of a family with
autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa caused by a pro23-to-ala
mutation (P23A; 180380.0043) in the rhodopsin gene, and compared this
phenotype with that associated with the more common pro23-to-his
mutation (P23H; 180380.0001). The rare P23A mutation caused a mild RP in
presentation and course, with greater preservation of ERG amplitudes
than that resulting from the more prevalent P23H mutation.

Jacobson et al. (1991) studied rod and cone function in 20 patients from
6 families with autosomal dominant RP due to 5 different point mutations
in the rhodopsin gene. In addition to traditional ocular examination
methods and electroretinography, they performed dark- and light-adapted
perimetry, dark adaptometry, and imaging fundus reflectometry. Jacobson
et al. (1991) observed discernible differences in the pattern of retinal
dysfunction between families with different mutations (see T58R,
180380.0004; T17M, 180380.0006; and Q344X, 180380.0015) and noted that 3
families with mutations at the same amino acid position, arg135 (see
R135W, 180380.0012, and R135L, 180380.0011), showed a similar functional
phenotype involving early, severe retinal dysfunction with no
intrafamilial variability.

Andreasson et al. (1992) reported a 6-generation Swedish family
segregating autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa in whom they
identified an R135L mutation (180380.0011). They noted that affected
members of this family had a history of night blindness from early
childhood and visual field losses were always noted before age 20.
Andreasson et al. (1992) concluded that the R135L mutation may cause a
more rapidly progressive form of RP than other mutations.

Pannarale et al. (1996) studied a large Sicilian pedigree with autosomal
dominant retinitis pigmentosa due to the R135W mutation (180380.0012) in
the rhodopsin molecule. The rate of progression of disease was unusually
high, with an average 50% loss per year of baseline ERG amplitude and
visual field area. Later in the course of the disease, macular function
was also severely compromised, leaving only residual central vision by
the fourth decade of life. Pannarale et al. (1996) concluded that the
phenotype associated with mutations in codon 135 of the rhodopsin
molecule appears to have an unusually high progression rate and to yield
an extremely poor prognosis.

Ponjavic et al. (1997) examined a 4-generation Swedish RP family with
the R135W mutation, in whom they documented a severe form of RP similar
to the phenotype observed by Andreasson et al. (1992) in a family with
the R135L mutation. Ponjavic et al. (1997) noted that both mutations
cause the substitution of hydrophobic amino acids at codon 135, and that
point mutations in this specific region of the rhodopsin molecule seem
to cause an aggressive form of retinitis pigmentosa.

Sandberg et al. (2007) measured the rates of visual acuity, visual
field, and electroretinogram (ERG) loss in 2 large cohorts, one of
patients with XLRP (RP3, see 302060) due to mutations in the RPGR gene
(312610) and the other of patients with autosomal dominant RP due to
mutations in the RHO gene. Patients with RPGR mutations lost Snellen
visual acuity at more than twice the mean rate of patients with RHO
mutations. The median age of legal blindness was 32 years younger in
patients with RPGR mutation than in patients with RHO mutations. Legal
blindness was due primarily to loss of visual acuity in RPGR patients
and to loss of visual field in RHO patients.

Using longitudinal data, Sakami et al. (2011) found that the earliest
expression of retinal disease in ADRP patients with the P23H opsin
mutation involved abnormal thinning of the outer nuclear layer and
shortening of the rod outer segment. These changes were followed by
shortening of the cone outer segment. With more extensive disease, there
was further abnormality of inner and outer segments, followed by loss of
all remaining photoreceptors.

ANIMAL MODEL

For investigating the mechanism by which the presence of both mutated
rhodopsin and normal rhodopsin leads to the slow degeneration of the
photoreceptor cells, Naash et al. (1993) established a transgenic mouse
line that carried a mutated mouse opsin gene in addition to the
endogenous opsin gene. The alterations consisted of 3 amino acid
substitutions near the N terminus of which 1 was the P23H mutation.
During early postnatal development, mice heterozygous for the mutated
opsin gene appeared to develop normal photoreceptors, but their
light-sensitive outer segments never reached normal length. With
advancing age, both rod and cone photoreceptors were reduced
progressively in number. The slow degeneration of the transgenic retina
was associated with a gradual decrease of light-evoked electroretinogram
responses.

Nie et al. (1996) generated transgenic mice containing a reporter gene
located downstream of a 100-bp sequence highly conserved in the DNA
upstream of the rhodopsin gene. They showed that the sequence behaves as
a tissue-specific enhancer of transcription but that it appears not to
be required for rhodopsin expression gradients across the retina.

Mendez et al. (2000) used transgenic and electrophysiologic methods to
dissect functionally the role of the multiple phosphorylation sites
during deactivation of rhodopsin in intact mouse rods. Mutant rhodopsins
bearing 0, 1 (S338), or 2 (S334/S338) phosphorylation sites generated
single-photon responses with greatly prolonged, exponentially
distributed durations. Responses from rods expressing mutant rhodopsins
bearing more than 2 phosphorylation sites declined along smooth,
reproducible time courses; the rate of recovery increased with
increasing numbers of phosphorylation sites. Mendez et al. (2000)
concluded that multiple phosphorylation of rhodopsin is necessary for
rapid and reproducible deactivation.

Lem et al. (1999) stated that mutations in the RHO gene account for
approximately 15% of all inherited human retinal degenerations.
Investigations into the pathophysiologic and molecular events underlying
these disease processes have included studies of transgenic mice
expressing opsin genes containing defined mutations. A caveat of this
approach is that even the overexpression of normal opsin levels leads to
photoreceptor cell degeneration (Olsson et al., 1992). To overcome this
problem, Lem et al. (1999) reduced or eliminated endogenous rhodopsin by
targeted gene disruption. Retinas in mice lacking both opsin alleles
initially developed normally, except that rod outer segments failed to
form. Within months of birth, photoreceptor cells degenerated
completely. Retinas from mice with a single copy of the opsin gene
developed normally, and rods elaborated outer segments of normal size
but with half the normal complement of rhodopsin. Photoreceptor cells in
these retinas also degenerated but did so over a much slower time
course. Physiologic and biochemical experiments showed that rods from
mice with a single opsin gene were approximately 50% less sensitive to
light, had accelerated flash-response kinetics, and contained
approximately 50% more phosducin (171490) than wildtype controls.

To understand better the functional and structural role of rhodopsin in
normal retina and the pathogenesis of retinal disease, Humphries et al.
(1997) generated mice carrying a targeted disruption of the Rho gene.
Rho -/- mice did not elaborate rod outer segments and lost their
photoreceptors over 3 months. There was no rod ERG response in
8-week-old animals. Heterozygous animals retained most of their
photoreceptors, although the inner and outer segments of these cells
displayed some structural disorganization, the outer segments becoming
shorter in older mice. Humphries et al. (1997) commented that these
animals should provide a useful genetic background on which to express
other mutant opsin transgenes, as well as a model to assess therapeutic
potential of reintroducing functional rhodopsin genes into degenerating
retinal tissues.

Mice with an inactivated Rpe65 (180069) or Rho gene lack the visual
pigment rhodopsin. Grimm et al. (2000) exposed both groups of mice to
bright light. They showed that photoreceptors lacking rhodopsin in these
mice are completely protected against light-induced apoptosis. The
transcription factor AP1, a central element in the apoptotic response to
light, is not activated in the absence of rhodopsin, indicating that
rhodopsin is essential for the generation or transduction of the
intracellular death signal induced by light. AP1 complexes in the retina
mainly consist of c-Fos (164810) and Jun (165160) heterodimers. The
level of Fos mRNA expressed in retinas Rpe65 -/- mice was 24% that of
wildtype controls. In contrast, both wildtype and Rpe65 -/- mice
expressed Jun mRNA at comparable levels.

Rhodopsin is essential for photoreceptor morphogenesis; photoreceptors
lacking rhodopsin degenerate in humans, mice, and Drosophila. Chang and
Ready (2000) reported that transgenic expression of a dominant-active
Drosophila Rho guanosine triphosphatase, Rac1 (602048), rescued
photoreceptor morphogenesis in rhodopsin null mutants. Expression of
dominant-negative Rac1 resulted in a phenotype similar to that seen in
rhodopsin null mutants. Rac1 was localized in a specialization of the
photoreceptor cortical actin cytoskeleton, which was lost in rhodopsin
null mutants. Thus, rhodopsin appears to organize the actin cytoskeleton
through RAC1, contributing a structural support essential for
photoreceptor morphogenesis.

Kijas et al. (2002) identified English Mastiff dogs with a naturally
occurring autosomal dominant retinal degeneration and determined the
cause to be a thr4-to-arg mutation in the Rho gene. Dogs with this
mutant allele manifested a retinal phenotype that closely mimicked that
in humans with RHO mutations. The phenotypic features shared by dog and
man included a dramatically slowed time course of recovery of rod
photoreceptor function after light exposure and a distinctive
topographic pattern of the retinal degeneration. The Rho mutant dog
should be useful in preclinical trials of therapies.

Excessive phototransduction signaling is thought to be involved in
light-induced and inherited retinal degeneration. Using knockout mice
with defects in rhodopsin shut-off and transducin signaling, Hao et al.
(2002) showed that 2 different pathways of photoreceptor-cell apoptosis
are induced by light. Bright light induces apoptosis that is independent
of transducin and accompanied by induction of the transcription factor
AP-1. By contrast, low light induces an apoptotic pathway that requires
transducin. Hao et al. (2002) also provided evidence that additional
genetic factors regulate sensitivity to light-induced damage.

Organisciak et al. (2003) found that light-induced retinal damage in
transgenic rats depended on the time of day of exposure to light, prior
light-or-dark-rearing environment, and the relative level of
rhodopsin-transgene expression. Retinal light damage led to apoptotic
photoreceptor cell loss and appeared to result from oxidative stress.
The authors concluded that reduced environmental lighting and/or
antioxidant treatment may delay retinal degenerations arising from
rhodopsin mutations.

Jacobson and McInnes (2002) commented on this demonstration of the
different pathways, a bright-light pathway and a low-light-dependent
pathway. Although both pathways are initiated by excessive activation of
the photopigment rhodopsin, they differ in that only the bright-light
pathway is AP-1-dependent and only the low-light pathway is dependent on
phototransduction.

White et al. (2007) found that expression of a human T17M mutant
rhodopsin transgene in mice was associated with photoreceptor apoptosis
in response to moderate exposure to light. This phenotype was not
observed in nontransgenic littermates or in mice expressing a human P28H
mutant rhodopsin transgene. White et al. (2007) noted that the T17M
mutation abolishes glycosylation at the asn15 site of rhodopsin. They
suggested that elimination of glycosylation at this site is associated
with increased sensitivity to light-induced damage.

Alloway et al. (2000) demonstrated the existence of stable, persistent
complexes between rhodopsin and its regulatory protein arrestin (181031)
in several different retinal degeneration mutants in Drosophila.
Elimination of these rhodopsin-arrestin complexes by removing either
rhodopsin or arrestin rescues the degeneration phenotype. Furthermore,
Alloway et al. (2000) showed that the accumulation of these complexes
triggers apoptotic cell death and that the observed retinal degeneration
requires the endocytic machinery. Thus, the endocytosis of
rhodopsin-arrestin complexes may be a molecular mechanism for the
initiation of retinal degeneration. Alloway et al. (2000) proposed that
an identical mechanism may be responsible for the pathology found in a
subset of human retinal degenerative disorders.

Kiselev et al. (2000) uncovered the pathway by which activation of
rhodopsin in Drosophila mediates apoptosis through a G
protein-independent mechanism. They found that the process involves the
formation of membrane complexes of phosphorylated, activated rhodopsin
and its inhibitory protein arrestin, and subsequent clathrin-dependent
endocytosis of these complexes into a cytoplasmic compartment.

Congenital night blindness affects retinal rod photoreceptor cells and
is expressed as an inability to see under dim light conditions. The
disease appears to be caused by inappropriate stimulation, and
consequent desensitization, of rod cells, and 2 models have been
proposed for the source of the stimulatory signal. Model I suggests that
the signal comes from constitutively active mutant apoprotein, or opsin,
generated by thermal dissociation of 11-cis-retinal. Model II suggests
that desensitization is caused by metarhodopsin II, an intermediate
formed from increased thermal isomerization of the 11-cis-retinal
chromophore in the mutant rhodopsins. Using a transgenic Xenopus model
with disease-causing mutations, Jin et al. (2003) showed that incubation
with exogenously added 11-cis-retinal resulted in recovery of wildtype
sensitivity, findings that argue against the thermal isomerization
theory of model II. The authors concluded that constitutively active
mutant opsin cause the desensitization of the congenital night blindness
photoreceptor cells, consistent with model I.

Galy et al. (2005) reported that P37H-transgenic flies, which correspond
to the human P23H mutation (180380.0001), exhibited dominant
photoreceptor degeneration, mimicking human age-, light-dependent and
progressive ADRP. Most of mutant protein accumulated in endoplasmic
reticulum, and expression of mislocalized mutant Rho led to cytotoxicity
via activation of 2 stress-specific MAPKs, p38 (MAPK14; 600289) and JNK
(MAPK8; 601158), which are known to control stress-induced apoptosis. In
P37H-mutant flies, visual loss and degeneration were accompanied by
apoptotic features and were prevented by expression of the baculovirus
p35 apoptosis inhibitor.

Sakami et al. (2011) found that transgenic mice expressing mouse opsin
with the P23H mutation developed retinal degeneration similar to the
human disease, with outer segment disorganization and progressive
functional deficits beginning in the rod photoreceptor system. P23H
protein was inadequately glycosylated and degraded. It did not
accumulate in the endoplasmic reticulum but disrupted the rod
photoreceptor disks and caused perpendicularly oriented elongated discs.
Retinal degeneration in adult transgenic mice appeared to be mainly due
to necrosis.

Fernandez-Sanchez et al. (2011) evaluated the preventive effect of
tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA) on photoreceptor degeneration,
synaptic connectivity, and functional activity of the retina in the
transgenic P23H rat. TUDCA treatment was capable of preserving cone and
rod structure and function, together with their contacts with their
postsynaptic neurons. The amplitude of the electroretinogram a- and
b-waves was significantly higher in TUDCA-treated animals under both
scotopic and photopic conditions than in controls. TUDCA-treated P23H
rats showed 3-fold more photoreceptors than control animals, and
photoreceptor morphology was preserved. Presynaptic and postsynaptic
elements, as well as the synaptic contacts between photoreceptors and
bipolar or horizontal cells, were preserved in TUDCA-treated P23H rats.
Fernandez-Sanchez et al. (2011) concluded that the neuroprotective
effects of TUDCA made the compound potentially useful for delaying
retinal degeneration in RP.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, PRO23HIS

In 17 of 148 unrelated patients with retinitis pigmentosa (RP4; 613731)
and none of 102 unaffected individuals, Dryja et al. (1990) found a
heterozygous C-to-A transversion in codon 23 (corresponding to a
proline-23-to-histidine substitution) in the RHO gene. This finding,
coupled with the fact that the proline normally present at position 23
is highly conserved among the opsins and related G-protein receptors,
indicates that the mutation is the cause of one form of autosomal
dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Judging from the pattern of polymorphisms
within the gene, i.e., haplotypes, the codon 23 mutation appears to have
been derived from a single ancestor. Whereas the pro23-to-his mutation
accounts for approximately 12% of American ADRP patients (Dryja et al.,
1990), Farrar et al. (1990) found it in none of the affected individuals
from 91 European pedigrees.

Berson et al. (1991) found that 17 unrelated ADRP patients (mean age, 37
years) with the P23H mutation had significantly better visual acuity and
larger electroretinographic amplitudes than 131 unrelated ADRP patients
(mean age, 32 years) without this mutation. They found that these 17
patients, as well as 12 affected relatives in 4 of the families, showed
interfamilial and intrafamilial variability with respect to the severity
of their ocular disease. This suggested the operation of other factors.
At least one other factor was indeed deduced by Heckenlively et al.
(1991). They found the P23H mutation in 2 males with sectoral retinitis
pigmentosa who had a striking history of light exposure. One was a
28-year-old man who had worked for 8 years as a lifeguard at a beach
during the summers and a ski instructor during the winters, skiing up to
150 days per year. The sectoral changes in the retina involved that part
with the most light exposure. In contrast, his 52-year-old mother and
his maternal grandfather had pigmentary retinopathy but were essentially
asymptomatic. The mother and grandfather had lived all their lives in
the Pacific Northwest where there is less direct sunlight. A second
patient was a 27-year-old man who had served 3 tours of duty at sea in
the Navy as well as fireguard duty in dry dock overseeing the welding
operations on the floor of the ship. Several relatives had very mild RP.
Heckenlively et al. (1991) suggested phototoxicity as a factor in RP due
to the P23H mutation.

Illing et al. (2002) studied the effect of the P23H mutation on the
structure and stability of rhodopsin transfected into HEK293 cells.
Wildtype rhodopsin was expressed as a monomeric protein containing
complex N-linked glycans. P23H rhodopsin was retained within the
endoplasmic reticulum, contained unmodified oligosaccharides, and formed
high molecular mass oligomeric species due to its nonnative
conformation. Using fluorescence resonance energy transfer, Illing et
al. (2002) observed that the misfolded P23H protein was degraded by the
ubiquitin proteasome system (see 602175) and that, unlike wildtype
rhodopsin, expression of P23H resulted in a generalized impairment of
the ubiquitin proteasome system, suggesting a mechanism for
photoreceptor degeneration. They noted that other aggregation-prone
proteins associated with degenerative diseases of the CNS also lead to
generalized impairment of the ubiquitin proteasome system.

Noorwez et al. (2004) found that little P23H opsin localized to the cell
surface of transfected HEK293 cells in the absence of added 9- or
11-cis-retinal. P23H retinal showed an 8-nm blue shift in the visible
absorption maximum with both 9- and 11-cis retinal, suggesting that the
structure of P23H rhodopsin is different from that of wildtype
rhodopsin. 9- and 11-cis P23H rhodopsins also showed reduced thermal
stability and increased hydroxylamine sensitivity compared with wildtype
rhodopsin.

Using fluorescence resonance energy transfer and coprecipitation
studies, Rajan and Kopito (2005) showed that P23H rhodopsin formed a
high molecular mass, detergent-insoluble complex with wildtype
rhodopsin, resulting in ubiquitination and degradation of the wildtype
protein as well as the P23H mutant. Rajan and Kopito (2005) hypothesize
that the effect of P23H on the wildtype protein may underlie the
dominant inheritance of ARDP.

.0002
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, PRO347LEU

In 8 of 28 unrelated patients with retinitis pigmentosa (613731), Dryja
et al. (1990) found 2 heterozygous mutations involving C-to-T
transitions at separate nucleotides of codon 347 in the RHO gene. One
was a change in the second position, from CCG to CTG, which resulted in
substitution of leucine for proline (P347L). Also see 180380.0003.

In a 5-generation Chinese Bai family segregating autosomal dominant RP,
mapping to chromosome 3q, Guo et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity
for the P347L mutation in the RHO gene.

.0003
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, PRO347SER

In 1 of 28 unrelated patients with RP (613731), Dryja et al. (1990)
identified a heterozygous transition from C-to-T involving the first
nucleotide of codon 347 in the RHO gene, a change from CCG to TCG, which
resulted in substitution of serine for proline.

To explore the pathogenic mechanism of dominant mutations that affect
the C-terminus of rhodopsin and cause retinitis pigmentosa, Li et al.
(1996) generated 5 lines of transgenic mice carrying the P347S mutation.
The severity of photoreceptor degeneration correlated with the levels of
transgene expression in these lines. Visual function as measured by the
electroretinogram (ERG) was approximately normal at an early stage when
there was little histologic evidence for photoreceptor degeneration, but
it deteriorated as photoreceptors degenerated. Immunocytochemical
staining showed the mutant rhodopsin residing predominantly in the outer
segments before histologically evident degeneration, a finding supported
by quantitation of signal intensities in different regions of the
photoreceptor cells by confocal microscopy. A distinct histopathologic
abnormality was the accumulation of submicrometer-sized vesicles
extracellularly near the junction between inner and outer segments. The
extracellular vesicles were bound by a single membrane that apparently
contained rhodopsin, as revealed by ultrastructural immunocytochemical
staining with anti-rhodopsin antibodies. The outer segments, although
shortened, contained well-packed discs. Proliferation of the endoplasmic
reticulum as reported in Drosophila expressing dominant rhodopsin
mutations was not observed. Li et al. (1996) speculated that the
accumulation of rhodopsin-laden vesicles probably represented aberrant
transport of rhodopsin from the inner segments to the nascent disc
membranes of the outer segments. They commented that photoreceptor
degeneration may occur because of failure to renew outer segments at a
normal rate, thereby leading to a progressive shortening of outer
segments, or because of the loss of cellular contents to the
extracellular space, or because of both.

.0004
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, THR58ARG

In 1 of 28 patients with RP (613731), Dryja et al. (1990) found a
heterozygous C-to-G transversion in the second nucleotide of codon 58 of
the RHO gene. This change, ACG to AGG, resulted in replacement of a
neutral threonine residue in the first transmembrane domain of the
rhodopsin molecule with the charged amino acid arginine (T48R). With
this base change, the DNA sequence could be cleaved with DdeI. Dryja et
al. (1990) screened 150 unrelated patients as well as 106 normal
subjects for the presence of a DdeI site at this location; only the
original patient had the novel site.

Fishman et al. (1991) suggested that a clinically recognizable phenotype
is associated with this specific gene defect: the features included a
regional predilection for pigmentary changes in the inferior and
inferonasal parts of the retina, as well as field impairment
predominantly in the superior hemisphere. Characteristic
electroretinographic recordings and psychophysical threshold profiles
also helped to identify this phenotype that, on a relative basis, causes
less severe photoreceptor cell functional impairment than occurs in many
other subtypes of RP.

In affected members of a family segregating autosomal dominant RP,
Jacobson et al. (1991) identified the T58R mutation in the RHO gene.
These patients as well as one with the T17M (180380.0006) mutation had
altitudinal visual field defects with less impaired rod and cone
function in the inferior than in the superior field, but rod adaptation
was much faster in the patients with the T58R mutation than in the
patient with the T17M mutation.

Inglehearn et al. (1993) indicated that family 20 of Olsson et al.
(1990), which had been thought to have an RHO-unlinked chromosome 3q
form of RP, in fact had an ACG (thr) to AGG (arg) mutation at codon 58
of the RHO gene.

.0005
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, 3-BP DEL

In affected members of a family segregating autosomal dominant RP
(613731), Inglehearn et al. (1991) identified a heterozygous in-frame
3-bp deletion in exon 4 of the RHO gene, which deleted 1 of the 2
isoleucine residues at codons 255 and 256. The mutation was not found in
30 other unrelated ADRP families. The deletion had occurred in a
sequence involving a run of three 3-bp repeats. The mechanism by which
the mutation arose may be the same as that which creates length
variation in so-called mini- and microsatellites. Inglehearn et al.
(1992) also observed this mutation.

.0006
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, THR17MET

See Sung et al. (1991). Also see Jacobson et al. (1991) and 180380.0004.

.0007
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, PHE45LEU

See Sung et al. (1991).

.0008
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, VAL87ASP

See Sung et al. (1991).

.0009
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, GLY89ASP

See Sung et al. (1991).

.0010
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, GLY106TRP

See Sung et al. (1991).

.0011
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, ARG135LEU

In 2 patients with autosomal dominant RP (613731), Sung et al. (1991)
identified an arg135-to-leu (R135L) mutation in the RHO gene. Also see
180380.0012 and Jacobson et al. (1991).

In a 6-generation Swedish family segregating autosomal dominant RP,
Andreasson et al. (1992) identified a 404G-T transversion in exon 2 of
the RHO gene, leading to an R135L substitution. All affected members of
this family had early-onset night blindness and substantial visual field
losses as teenagers. Even in the youngest patients, fundus pigmentation
was seen together with severe constriction of the retinal blood vessels
in all quadrants of the fundus. Andreasson et al. (1992) concluded that
the R135L mutation may cause a more rapidly progressive form of RP than
other mutations.

.0012
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RETINITIS PUNCTATA ALBESCENS, INCLUDED
RHO, ARG135TRP

In 2 patients with autosomal dominant RP (613731), Sung et al. (1991)
identified an arg135-to-trp (R135W) mutation in the RHO gene.

In 2 families with autosomal dominant RP, Jacobson et al. (1991)
identified the R135W mutation in the RHO gene. All members of these
families and of another family with an R135L mutation (180380.0011)
showed loss of rod function diffusely across the visual field with some
residual cone function on dark-adapted perimetry, and even at relatively
young ages had undetectable rod and cone electroretinograms.

In a large Sicilian pedigree with autosomal dominant RP, Pannarale et
al. (1996) identified a 403C-T transition in exon 2 of the rhodopsin
gene, producing an R135W mutation in the rhodopsin molecule. Patients
demonstrated measurable ERG activity until at least 18 years of age,
although it was reduced to 2 to 4% of normal. The rate of progression of
disease was unusually high, with an average 50% loss per year of
baseline ERG amplitude and visual field area. Later in the course of the
disease, macular function was also severely compromised, leaving only
residual central vision by the fourth decade of life. Pannarale et al.
(1996) concluded that the phenotype associated with mutations at codon
135 of rhodopsin appears to have an unusually high progression rate and
to yield an extremely poor prognosis.

In a 4-generation Swedish family segregating autosomal dominant
retinitis pigmentosa, Ponjavic et al. (1997) identified the R135W
mutation. Using full-field ERG, the authors documented a severe form of
RP in affected members, similar to the phenotype observed by Andreasson
et al. (1992) in a family with the R135L mutation (see 180380.0011).
Ponjavic et al. (1997) noted that both mutations cause the substitution
of hydrophobic amino acids at codon 135, and that point mutations in
this specific region of the rhodopsin molecule seem to cause an
aggressive form of retinitis pigmentosa.

Souied et al. (1996) screened for mutations in the rhodopsin,
peripherin/RDS (179605), and ROM1 (180721) genes in a family affected
with retinitis punctata albescens (136880). One member of the family
showed features typical of retinitis pigmentosa. Therefore, they
analyzed the apolipoprotein E (APOE; 107741) gene to elucidate the
unusual intrafamilial heterogeneity. The coding sequences of the first 3
genes were analyzed with a combination of SSCP1 and direct sequence
analysis. The arg135-to-trp (R135W) mutation in RHO was observed in all
affected members of the family and no mutation was detected in RDS or
ROM1. The epsilon-4 allele of the APOE gene appeared to cosegregate with
the albescens phenotype in this family. A mother and 2 daughters had
retinitis punctata albescens and the APOE4 allele. A brother of the
mother had retinitis pigmentosa alone. Souied et al. (1996) reported
that they had found the R135W RHO mutation in 3 (5%) of 58 subjects with
autosomal dominant RP.

.0013
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, TYR178CYS

See Sung et al. (1991). Farrar et al. (1991) found this mutation in 2
families of Celtic origin living in Ireland. The patients showed early
onset of autosomal dominant RP (613731). Night blindness and fundal
abnormalities were present in the first and second decades. By the
second and third decades, patients had extinguished rod and cone
responses.

.0014
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, ASP190GLY

See Sung et al. (1991).

.0015
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, GLN344TER

See Sung et al. (1991). In members of a family segregating autosomal
dominant RP (613731), Jacobson et al. (1991) identified heterozygosity
for the gln344-to-ter (Q344X) mutation in the RHO gene. The authors
noted an unusual phenotype in 3 younger members with the mutation who
were asymptomatic and clinically unaffected: visual acuity, cone
electroretinogram amplitude, and cone perimetry were normal at a time
when rod function was abnormal. Older patients in this family had a more
advanced stage of disease indistinguishable from other forms of severe
RP, but they reported that they had excellent night and day vision in
their youth.

This mutation is classified as a type 1 mutation by the criteria of Sung
et al. (1994) in that protein is produced at high levels, accumulates in
the plasma membrane, and binds efficiently to 11-cis retinal in vitro to
form photolabile pigments. As are most class 1 mutants, this mutation
maps very closely to the carboxy terminus. Sung et al. (1994) studied
the gln344-to-ter (Q344X) mutation in detail. In transfected tissue
culture cells, the mutant protein shows normal light-dependent
activation of the photoreceptor G protein (transducin) and is a normal
light-dependent substrate for rhodopsin kinase. Transgenic mice show
nearly normal light responses by suction electrode recordings. However,
the mutant rhodopsin abnormally accumulates in the plasma membrane of
the photoreceptor cell body, as well as in the rod outer segment in
which the wildtype protein is confined. Sung et al. (1994) suggested
that the C terminus of rhodopsin is required for transport or retention
in the outer segment. They further suggested that all class 1 rhodopsin
mutants cause retinitis pigmentosa by improper localization of the
rhodopsin, which otherwise functions normally.

.0016
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, LYS296GLU

In a family with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (613731), Keen
et al. (1991) observed change in codon 296 from AAG to GAG resulting in
substitution of glutamic acid for lysine. The disorder in this family
was distinguished by its particular severity, showing early onset of the
disease and development of cataracts by the third or fourth decade of
life. Two critical amino acids in rhodopsin are lys296, the site of
attachment of retinal to the protein through a protonated Schiff base
linkage, and glu113, the Schiff base counterion. Robinson et al. (1992)
demonstrated that mutation in lys296 or in glu113 results in
constitutive activation of opsin, as assayed by its ability to activate
the G protein transducin in the absence of added chromophore. They
concluded that opsin is constrained to an inactive conformation by a
salt bridge between lys296 and glu113. The lys296-to-glu (K296E)
mutation in the family reported by Keen et al. (1991) may represent
degeneration of the photoreceptor cells as a result of persistent
stimulation of the phototransduction pathway.

.0017
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, ASP190ASN

In a family with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (613731), Keen
et al. (1991) observed change in codon 190 from GAC to AAC resulting in
substitution of asparagine for aspartic acid.

.0018
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, HIS211PRO

In a family with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (613731), Keen
et al. (1991) observed a heterozygous change in codon 211 from CAC to
CCC, resulting in substitution of proline for histidine.

.0019
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, 12-BP DEL, EX1

In a family with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (613731), Keen
et al. (1991) observed deletion of codons 68 to 71 in exon 1. These
codons coded for leu--arg--thr--pro.

.0020
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, PRO347ARG

In a patient with autosomal dominant RP (613731), Gal et al. (1991)
demonstrated a CCG-to-CGG transversion in codon 347 predicting a
pro-to-arg substitution. Two previous mutations in this codon had been
reported: pro347-to-leu (180380.0002) and pro347-to-ser (180380.0003).
Further evidence that this codon is prone to mutation is indicated by
the fact that no linkage disequilibrium has been observed in patients
with the pro347-to-leu mutation (Dryja et al., 1990), making it likely
that this mutation arose independently more than one time.

.0021
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, GLY182SER

See Sheffield et al. (1991).

.0022
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, PRO267LEU

See Sheffield et al. (1991).

.0023
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
RHO, GLU249TER

Rosenfeld et al. (1992) hypothesized that null mutations of the
rhodopsin gene might result in an autosomal recessive form of retinitis
pigmentosa. Using single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP)
analysis, they demonstrated a glu249-to-ter (E249X) (GAG to TAG)
substitution in a 26-year-old French-Canadian female, the offspring of a
consanguineous mating. The patient was homozygous for this mutation,
predicted to result in absence of the fourth and fifth transmembrane
domains and the retinal attachment site. The mutation should result in a
functionally inactive protein. The proband had characteristic
bone-spicule pigment around the midperiphery, undetectable rod ERG
responses, and markedly reduced cone ERG responses. Rosenfeld et al.
(1992) stated that both parents and 2 of 3 sibs were heterozygous for
the mutation, and that all had normal ophthalmologic examinations and
special tests. However, in their full report, Rosenfeld et al. (1992)
stated that heterozygous carriers of the E249X mutation in fact had
abnormality in rod photoreceptor function revealed by
electroretinograms.

.0024
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, PRO53ARG

In a patient with autosomal dominant RP (613731), Inglehearn et al.
(1992) found a heterozygous CCC-to-CGC mutation, resulting in
substitution of arginine for proline at codon 53 (P53R).

.0025
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, GLY106ARG

In a family with autosomal dominant RP (613731), Inglehearn et al.
(1992) found a GGG-to-AGG mutation at codon 106, resulting in
substitution of arginine for glycine (G106R).

Fishman et al. (1992) found a gly106-to-arg mutation in the RHO gene in
3 members of one family and in 1 person of another family. All affected
persons had a distinctive phenotype that included a regional
predilection for pigmentary changes to occur in the inferior retina as
well as visual field impairment predominantly in the superior
hemisphere. Substantial residual electroretinographic amplitudes with
normal implicit times were also consistent with a form of 'sector'
retinitis pigmentosa. Thus the specific mutation appears to be
associated with a better visual prognosis.

.0026
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, IVS4, G-T, +1

In screening a group of 117 control persons without RP for the nonsense
mutation E249X (180380.0023), Rosenfeld et al. (1992) found a
28-year-old female who was heterozygous for a different potential null
mutation. After detection by SSCP analysis, direct sequencing of
polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-amplified DNA from this person revealed
a heterozygous G-to-T substitution at position 4335 within intron 4 of
the rhodopsin gene. Since it is located at the canonical GT of the first
2 nucleotides of the splice donor sequence, the mutation is expected to
interfere with normal processing of intron 4 and thus could alter the
carboxy-terminal 36 amino acids of the rhodopsin molecule. The woman was
found to have a reduction in rod sensitivity that was similar to the
decrease observed in the carriers of the E249X mutation.

.0027
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, ASP190TYR

In 2 members of a family with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
(613731), Fishman et al. (1992) demonstrated a G-to-T mutation in the
first nucleotide of codon 190 in the rhodopsin gene that resulted in an
aspartate-to-tyrosine change. This GAC-to-TAC change was in the same
nucleotide altered in the asp190-to-asn mutation (180380.0017). A family
with the asp190-to-asn mutation showed a regional predilection for
pigmentary retinal change and less severe functional impairment than did
the patients with the asp190-to-tyr mutation.

.0028
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, ARG207MET

In a family with retinitis pigmentosa (613731) in which Humphries et al.
(1992) had demonstrated linkage markers on 3q close to the gene encoding
rhodopsin, Farrar et al. (1992) identified a T-to-G transversion in
codon 207 resulting in the substitution of a methionine residue for an
arginine residue. The clinical presentation of the family was unusual
because of early onset of the disease. Affected members exhibited
changes within the first decade of life, diffuse funduscopic
disturbances, and extinguished rod photoreceptor cell responses as
assessed by ERGs. ERG cone responses were retained until the third
decade, although significantly reduced in amplitude and delayed in
latency. With 2-color dark adaptometry, a diffuse loss of rod and cone
photoreceptor sensitivity with a greater involvement of rods mirrored
the ERG findings.

.0029
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, ASN15SER

Kranich et al. (1993) used single-strand conformation polymorphism
(SSCP) to detect altered PCR products of rhodopsin coding sequences in a
large Australian pedigree with the 'sectorial' form of autosomal
dominant RP (613731). Direct sequencing demonstrated an A-to-G
transition at codon 15 that predicted a change from asparagine to
serine. Patients in this family demonstrated an asymmetric regional
distribution of pigmentary changes and visual field loss with a
relatively mild form of the disease and good central visual acuity into
the fourth decade. 'Sector' RP has been described in patients with the
following mutations: thr17-to-met (180380.0006), pro23-to-his
(180380.0001), thr58-to-arg (180380.0004), gly106-to-arg (180380.0025),
and gly182-to-ser (180380.0021).

Sullivan et al. (1993) described a 5-generation Australian family in
which retinitis pigmentosa was associated with an inferior distribution
of retinal pigmentary changes and predominantly superior visual field
loss with relative preservation of electroretinographic amplitudes and
good vision. The mutation was found to be in codon 15 of exon 1 where a
single bp transversion (AAT to AGT) led to a serine-for-asparagine
substitution. The mutation altered a glycosylation site in the
intradiscal portion of the rhodopsin molecule.

Inspection of the pedigrees published by Kranich et al. (1993) and
Sullivan et al. (1993) indicates identity; these reports do not
represent recurrent mutation.

.0030
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, MET207ARG

Farrar et al. (1992) demonstrated an ATG-to-AGG mutation in codon 207
leading to substitution of arg for met in the original family with
retinitis pigmentosa linked to 3q (613731) (McWilliam et al., 1989).

.0031
NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
RHO, ALA292GLU

Reasoning that cases of congenital stationary night blindness without a
rod a-wave might have a defect in the phototransduction pathway, Dryja
et al. (1993) screened leukocyte DNA from a 34-year-old male who had
reported night blindness since early life (CSNBAD1; 610445). He was
heterozygous for a missense mutation, ala292-to-glu (A292E) in the RHO
gene.

.0032
NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
RHO, GLY90ASP

In affected members of a large Michigan kindred with autosomal dominant
congenital stationary night blindness (CSNBAD1; 610445), Sieving et al.
(1992) found heterozygosity for a single base substitution in codon 90
of rhodopsin: gly90 to asp (G90D).

Rao et al. (1994) pointed out that the ala292-to-glu (180380.0031) and
gly90-to-asp mutations are located at sites in close proximity in the
3-dimensional structure of rhodopsin, suggesting that the constitutively
activating mutations operate by a common molecular mechanism, disrupting
a salt bridge between lys296 and the Schiff base counterion, glu113.

.0033
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
RHO, GLU150LYS

In an Indian family in which 5 of 9 sibs, the offspring of unaffected
first-cousin parents, had retinitis pigmentosa (613731),
Kumaramanickavel et al. (1994) found a G-to-A transition at codon 150,
predicted to lead to a change from glutamate (GAG) to lysine (AAG) in
the gene product. The 4 patients available for study were homozygous for
the E150K mutation and 2 of the unaffected 4 sibs were heterozygous. (In
the diagram of the pedigree, the order of the sibs was deliberately
scrambled to disguise the identity of the heterozygotes.) Glu150 forms
part of the second cytoplasmic loop of rhodopsin. Of the more than 60
RP-causing rhodopsin mutations identified, only one, cys140-to-ser, was
located in the cytoplasmic loop (Macke et al., 1993).

The E150K mutation in rhodopsin is located in its second cytoplasmic
loop and is positioned at the rhodopsin dimer interface. Zhu et al.
(2006) showed that neither global protein folding nor G-protein binding
and activation by rhodopsin were significantly affected by the E150K
mutation. However, E150K rhodopsin was aberrantly glycosylated and was
retained in the cis/medial Golgi compartment. E150K rhodopsin did not
alter plasma membrane targeting of wildtype rhodopsin in transfected
HEK293 cells, and in the presence of excess wildtype rhodopsin, E150K
rhodopsin was cotransported with wildtype rhodopsin through the
trans-Golgi and delivered to the plasma membrane.

.0034
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, GLY51ARG

In a study of 122 patients with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
(613731), Vaithinathan et al. (1994) identified a G-to-C substitution in
the RHO gene, leading to a change from glycine to arginine at position
51.

.0035
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, CYS110TYR

In a study of 122 patients with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
(613731), Vaithinathan et al. (1994) identified a C-to-A substitution in
the RHO gene, leading to a change from cysteine to tyrosine at position
110.

.0036
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, GLY114ASP

In a study of 122 patients with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
(613731), Vaithinathan et al. (1994) identified a G-to-A substitution in
the RHO gene, leading to a change from glycine to aspartic acid at
position 114.

.0037
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, ALA164GLU

In a study of 122 patients with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
(613731), Vaithinathan et al. (1994) identified a C-to-A substitution in
the RHO gene, leading to a change from alanine to glutamic acid at
position 164.

.0038
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, PRO171SER

In a study of 122 patients with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
(613731), Vaithinathan et al. (1994) identified a C-to-T substitution in
the RHO gene, leading to a change from proline to serine at position
171.

.0039
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, CYS264DEL

In a study of 122 patients with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
(613731), Vaithinathan et al. (1994) identified an in-frame deletion of
3 bp in the RHO gene, corresponding to a cysteine at position 264.

.0040
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, VAL345LEU

In a study of 122 patients with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
(613731), Vaithinathan et al. (1994) identified a G-to-C substitution in
the RHO gene, leading to a change from valine to leucine at position
345.

.0041
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, PRO347GLN

In a study of 122 patients with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
(613731), Vaithinathan et al. (1994) identified a C-to-A substitution in
the RHO gene, leading to a change from proline to glutamine at position
347.

Dikshit and Agarwal (2001) looked for the presence or absence of codon
345 and 347 mutations in exon 5 of the RHO gene in 100 Indian patients
with retinitis pigmentosa from 76 families, irrespective of the genetic
category of RP. Surprisingly, in their sample the very widely reported
highly frequent mutations at codon 347 (P-S/A/R/Q/L/T) were absent,
while the val345-to-met mutation (180380.0044) was found in 3 affected
members of 1 family with the autosomal dominant form of the disorder and
in 1 sporadic case.

.0042
NIGHT BLINDNESS, CONGENITAL STATIONARY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
RHO, THR94ILE

In an Irish family segregating an autosomal dominant form of CSNB
(CSNBAD1; 610445), al-Jandal et al. (1999) found a thr94-to-ile (T94I)
mutation in the RHO gene. Computer modeling suggested that constitutive
activation of transducin by the altered rhodopsin protein may be a
mechanism for disease causation in this family. Two other mutations
within the rhodopsin gene had previously been reported in patients with
CSNB; constitutive activation was proposed as a possible disease
mechanism in these instances.

.0043
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, PRO23ALA

In 6 members of a family with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
(613731), Oh et al. (2000) identified a C-to-G change at nucleotide 1 of
codon 23 of the rhodopsin gene, resulting in a pro23-to-ala
substitution. The phenotype in this family was characterized by onset of
symptoms in the second to fourth decades of life, loss of superior
visual field with relatively well-preserved inferior fields, and mild
nyctalopia.

.0044
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4
RHO, VAL345MET

Both val345-to-leu (180380.0040) and val345-to-met mutations in the RHO
gene have been described as the basis of autosomal dominant retinitis
pigmentosa (Dryja et al., 1991; Bunge et al., 1993). In a study of 100
patients from 76 Indian families with retinitis pigmentosa (613731),
Dikshit and Agarwal (2001) found the val345-to-met mutation in 3 cases
in 1 family and in 1 sporadic case. Codon 347 (which is involved in 6
different types of missense mutation, P-S/A/R/Q/L/T) and codon 345 are
located in the cytoplasmic domain of the protein. Theoretically, they
are not involved in maintaining the tertiary structure of the protein,
but mutations in them produce dysfunction and ultimately death of the
photoreceptor cell.

.0045
RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA 4, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
RHO, TYR161TER

In affected members of 2 Indonesian families segregating autosomal
recessive retinitis pigmentosa-4 (613731), Kartasasmita et al. (2011)
identified homozygosity for a 482G-A transition in exon 2 of the RHO
gene, resulting in tyr161-to-ter (W161X) substitution. Haplotype
analysis suggested that this is a founder mutation.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Dryja et al. (1990); Farrar et al. (1990); Fishman et al. (1992);
Humphries et al. (1990); Kumar-Singh et al. (1991); Sieving et al.
(1995); Weleber et al. (1989)
REFERENCE 1. al-Jandal, N.; Farrar, G. J.; Kiang, A.-S.; Humphries, M. M.; Bannon,
N.; Findlay, J. B. C.; Humphries, P.; Kenna, P. F.: A novel mutation
within the rhodopsin gene (thr94-to-ile) causing autosomal dominant
congenital stationary night blindness. Hum. Mutat. 13: 75-81, 1999.

2. Alloway, P. G.; Howard, L.; Dolph, P. J.: The formation of stable
rhodopsin-arrestin complexes induces apoptosis and photoreceptor cell
degeneration. Neuron 28: 129-138, 2000.

3. Andreasson, S.; Ehinger, B.; Abrahamson, M.; Fex, G.: A six-generation
family with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa and a rhodopsin
gene mutation (arginine-135-leucine). Ophthalmic Paediat. Genet. 13:
145-153, 1992.

4. Berson, E. L.; Rosner, B.; Sandberg, M. A.; Dryja, T. P.: Ocular
findings in patients with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
and a rhodopsin gene defect (pro23-to-his). Arch. Ophthal. 109:
92-101, 1991.

5. Borhan, B.; Souto, M. L.; Imai, H.; Shichida, Y.; Nakanishi, K.
: Movement of retinal along the visual transduction path. Science 288:
2209-2212, 2000.

6. Bourne, H. R.; Meng, E. C.: Rhodopsin sees the light. Science 289:
733-734, 2000.

7. Bunge, S.; Wedemann, H.; David, D.; Terwilliger, D. J.; van den
Born, L. I.; Aulehla-Scholz, C.; Samanns, C.; Horn, M.; Ott, J.; Schwinger,
E.; Schinzel, A.; Denton, M. J.; Gal, A.: Molecular analysis and
genetic mapping of the rhodopsin gene in families with autosomal dominant
retinitis pigmentosa. Genomics 17: 230-233, 1993.

8. Chang, H.-Y.; Ready, D. F.: Rescue of photoreceptor degeneration
in rhodopsin-null Drosophila mutants by activated Rac1. Science 290:
1978-1980, 2000.

9. Chuang, J.-Z.; Vega, C.; Jun, W.; Sung, C.-H.: Structural and
functional impairment of endocytic pathways by retinitis pigmentosa
mutant rhodopsin-arrestin complexes. J. Clin. Invest. 114: 131-140,
2004.

10. Dikshit, M.; Agarwal, R.: Mutation analysis of codons 345 and
347 of rhodopsin gene in Indian retinitis pigmentosa patients. J.
Genet. 80: 111-116, 2001.

11. Dryja, T. P.; Berson, E. L.; Rao, V. R.; Oprian, D. D.: Heterozygous
missense mutation in the rhodopsin gene as a cause of congenital stationary
night blindness. Nature Genet. 4: 280-283, 1993.

12. Dryja, T. P.; Hahn, L. B.; Cowley, G. S.; McGee, T. L.; Berson,
E. L.: Mutation spectrum of the rhodopsin gene among patients with
autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88:
9370-9374, 1991.

13. Dryja, T. P.; McGee, T. L.; Hahn, L. B.; Cowley, G. S.; Olsson,
J. E.; Reichel, E.; Sandberg, M. A.; Berson, E. L.: Missense mutations
within the rhodopsin gene in patients with autosomal dominant retinitis
pigmentosa. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 47 (suppl.): A54, 1990.

14. Dryja, T. P.; McGee, T. L.; Hahn, L. B.; Cowley, G. S.; Olsson,
J. E.; Reichel, E.; Sandberg, M. A.; Berson, E. L.: Mutations within
the rhodopsin gene in patients with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. New
Eng. J. Med. 323: 1302-1307, 1990.

15. Dryja, T. P.; McGee, T. L.; Reichel, E.; Hahn, L. B.; Cowley,
G. S.; Yandell, D. W.; Sandberg, M. A.; Berson, E. L.: A point mutation
of the rhodopsin gene in one form of retinitis pigmentosa. Nature 343:
364-366, 1990.

16. Elliott, R. W.; Sparkes, R. S.; Mohandas, T.; Grant, S. G.; McGinnis,
J. F.: Localization of the rhodopsin gene to the distal half of mouse
chromosome 6. Genomics 6: 635-644, 1990.

17. Ethen, C. M.; Feng, X.; Olsen, T. W.; Ferrington, D. A.: Declines
in arrestin and rhodopsin in the macula with progression of age-related
macular degeneration. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 46: 769-775, 2005.

18. Farrar, G. J.; Findlay, J. B. C.; Kumar-Singh, R.; Kenna, P.;
Humphries, M. M.; Sharpe, E.; Humphries, P.: Autosomal dominant retinitis
pigmentosa: a novel mutation in the rhodopsin gene in the original
3q linked family. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1: 769-771, 1992.

19. Farrar, G. J.; Kenna, P.; Redmond, R.; McWilliam, P.; Bradley,
D. G.; Humphries, M. M.; Sharp, E. M.; Inglehearn, C. F.; Bashir,
R.; Jay, M.; Watty, A.; Ludwig, M.; Schinzel, A.; Samanns, C.; Gal,
A.; Bhattacharya, S.; Humphries, P.: Autosomal dominant retinitis
pigmentosa: absence of the rhodopsin proline-to-histidine substitution
(codon 23) in pedigrees from Europe. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 47: 941-945,
1990.

20. Farrar, G. J.; Kenna, P.; Redmond, R.; Shiels, D.; McWilliam,
P.; Humphries, M. M.; Sharp, E. M.; Jordan, S.; Kumar-Singh, R.; Humphries,
P.: Autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa: a mutation in codon
178 of the rhodopsin gene in two families of Celtic origin. Genomics 11:
1170-1171, 1991.

21. Farrar, G. J.; McWilliam, P.; Bradley, D. G.; Kenna, P.; Lawler,
M.; Sharp, E. M.; Humphries, M. M.; Eiberg, H.; Conneally, P. M.;
Trofatter, J. A.; Humphries, P.: Autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa:
linkage to rhodopsin and evidence for genetic heterogeneity. Genomics 8:
35-40, 1990.

22. Fernandez-Sanchez, L.; Lax, P.; Pinilla, I.; Martin-Nieto, J.;
Cuenca, N.: Tauroursodeoxycholic acid prevents retinal degeneration
in transgenic P23H rats. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 52: 4998-5008,
2011.

23. Fishman, G. A.; Stone, E. M.; Gilbert, L. D.; Kenna, P.; Sheffield,
V. C.: Ocular findings associated with a rhodopsin gene codon 58
transversion mutation in autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Arch.
Ophthal. 109: 1387-1393, 1991.

24. Fishman, G. A.; Stone, E. M.; Gilbert, L. D.; Sheffield, V. C.
: Ocular findings associated with a rhodopsin gene codon 106 mutation:
glycine-to-arginine change in autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Arch.
Ophthal. 110: 646-653, 1992.

25. Fishman, G. A.; Vandenburgh, K.; Stone, E. M.; Gilbert, L. D.;
Alexander, K. R.; Sheffield, V. C.: Ocular findings associated with
rhodopsin gene codon 267 and codon 190 mutations in dominant retinitis
pigmentosa. Arch. Ophthal. 110: 1582-1588, 1992.

26. Fotiadis, D.; Liang, Y.; Filipek, S.; Saperstein, D. A.; Engel,
A.; Palczewski, K.: Rhodopsin dimers in native disc membranes: neat
rows of paired photon receptors are caught on camera in their natural
state. Nature 421: 127-128, 2003.

27. Franke, R. R.; Konig, B.; Sakmar, T. P.; Khorana, H. G.; Hofmann,
K. P.: Rhodopsin mutants that bind but fail to activate transducin. Science 250:
123-125, 1990.

28. Gal, A.; Artlich, A.; Ludwig, M.; Niemeyer, G.; Olek, K.; Schwinger,
E.; Schinzel, A.: Pro347-to-arg mutation of the rhodopsin gene in
autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Genomics 11: 468-470, 1991.

29. Galy, A.; Roux, M. J.; Sahel, J. A.; Leveillard, T.; Giangrande,
A.: Rhodopsin maturation defects induce photoreceptor death by apoptosis:
a fly model for rhodopsin(pro23his) human retinitis pigmentosa. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 2547-2557, 2005.

30. Grimm, C.; Wenzel, A.; Hafezi, F.; Yu, S.; Redmond, T. M.; Reme,
C. E.: Protection of Rpe65-deficient mice identifies rhodopsin as
a mediator of light-induced retinal degeneration. Nature Genet. 25:
63-66, 2000.

31. Guo, H.; Qin, Y.; Meng, Q.; Zhang, H.; Jin, H.; Chen, Y.: Linkage
analysis and mutation screening of the rhodopsin gene in a Chinese
Bai family with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. J. Hum.
Genet. 55: 571-576, 2010.

32. Hao, W.; Wenzel, A.; Obin, M. S.; Chen, C.-K.; Brill, E.; Krasnoperova,
N. V.; Eversole-Cire, P.; Kleyner, Y.; Taylor, A.; Simon, M. I.; Grimm,
C.; Reme, C. E.; Lem, J.: Evidence for two apoptotic pathways in
light-induced retinal degeneration. Nature Genet. 32: 254-260, 2002.

33. Heckenlively, J. R.; Rodriguez, J. A.; Daiger, S. P.: Autosomal
dominant sectoral retinitis pigmentosa: two families with transversion
mutation in codon 23 of rhodopsin. Arch. Ophthal. 109: 84-91, 1991.

34. Humphries, M. M.; Rancourt, D.; Farrar, G. J.; Kenna, P.; Hazel,
M.; Bush, R. A.; Sieving, P. A.; Sheils, D. M.; McNally, N.; Creighton,
P.; Erven, A.; Boros, A.; Gulya, K.; Capecchi, M. R.; Humphries, P.
: Retinopathy induced in mice by targeted disruption of the rhodopsin
gene. Nature Genet. 15: 216-219, 1997.

35. Humphries, P.; Farrar, G. J.; Kenna, P.; McWilliam, P.: Retinitis
pigmentosa: genetic mapping in X-linked and autosomal forms of the
disease. Clin. Genet. 38: 1-13, 1990.

36. Humphries, P.; Kenna, P.; Farrar, G. J.: On the molecular genetics
of retinitis pigmentosa. Science 256: 804-808, 1992.

37. Illing, M. E.; Rajan, R. S.; Bence, N. F.; Kopito, R. R.: A rhodopsin
mutant linked to autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa is prone
to aggregate and interacts with the ubiquitin proteasome system. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 34150-34160, 2002.

38. Inglehearn, C.; Farrar, J.; Denton, M.; Gal, A.; Humphries, P.;
Bhattacharya, S.: Evidence against a second autosomal dominant retinitis
pigmentosa locus close to rhodopsin on chromosome 3q. (Letter) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 53: 536-537, 1993.

39. Inglehearn, C. F.; Bashir, R.; Lester, D. H.; Jay, M.; Bird, A.
C.; Bhattacharya, S. S.: A 3-bp deletion in the rhodopsin gene in
a family with autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 48: 26-30, 1991.

40. Inglehearn, C. F.; Lester, D. H.; Bashir, R.; Atif, U.; Keen,
T. J.; Sertedaki, A.; Lindsey, J.; Jay, M.; Bird, A. C.; Farrar, G.
J.; Humphries, P.; Bhattacharya, S. S.: Recombination between rhodopsin
and locus D3S47 (C17) in rhodopsin retinitis pigmentosa families. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 50: 590-597, 1992.

41. Jacobson, S. G.; Kemp, C. M.; Sung, C.-H.; Nathans, J.: Retinal
function and rhodopsin levels in autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
with rhodopsin mutations. Am. J. Ophthal. 112: 256-271, 1991.

42. Jacobson, S. G.; McInnes, R. R.: Blinded by the light. Nature
Genet. 32: 215-216, 2002.

43. Jin, S.; Cornwall, M. C.; Oprian, D. D.: Opsin activation as
a cause of congenital night blindness. Nature Neurosci. 6: 731-735,
2003.

44. Kartasasmita, A.; Fujiki, K.; Iskandar, E.; Sovani, I.; Fujimaki,
T.; Murakami, A.: A novel nonsense mutation in rhodopsin gene in
two Indonesian families with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa. Ophthalmic
Genet. 32: 57-63, 2011.

45. Keen, T. J.; Inglehearn, C. F.; Lester, D. H.; Bashir, R.; Jay,
M.; Bird, A. C.; Jay, B.; Bhattacharya, S. S.: Autosomal dominant
retinitis pigmentosa: four new mutations in rhodopsin, one of them
in the retinal attachment site. Genomics 11: 199-205, 1991.

46. Kennedy, M. J.; Lee, K. A.; Niemi, G. A.; Craven, K. B.; Garwin,
G. G.; Saari, J. C.; Hurley, J. B.: Multiple phosphorylation of rhodopsin
and the in vivo chemistry underlying rod photoreceptor dark adaptation. Neuron 31:
87-101, 2001.

47. Khorana, H. G.: Rhodopsin, photoreceptor of the rod cell: an
emerging pattern for structure and function. J. Biol. Chem. 267:
1-4, 1992.

48. Kijas, J. W.; Cideciyan, A. V.; Aleman, T. S.; Pianta, M. J.;
Pearce-Kelling, S. E.; Miller, B. J.; Jacobson, S. G.; Aguirre, G.
D.; Acland, G. M.: Naturally occurring rhodopsin mutation in the
dog causes retinal dysfunction and degeneration mimicking human dominant
retinitis pigmentosa. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 6328-6333, 2002.

49. Kiselev, A.; Socolich, M.; Vinos, J.; Hardy, R. W.; Zuker, C.
S.; Ranganathan, R.: A molecular pathway for light-dependent photoreceptor
apoptosis in Drosophila. Neuron 28: 139-152, 2000.

50. Kranich, H.; Bartkowski, S.; Denton, M. J.; Krey, S.; Dickinson,
P.; Duvigneau, C.; Gal, A.: Autosomal dominant 'sector' retinitis
pigmentosa due to a point mutation predicting an asn15-to-ser substitution
of rhodopsin. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 813-814, 1993.

51. Kumar-Singh, R.; Bradley, D. G.; Farrar, G. J.; Lawler, M.; Jordan,
S. A.; Humphries, P.: Autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa: a
new multi-allelic marker (D3S621) genetically linked to the disease
locus (RP4). Hum. Genet. 86: 502-504, 1991. Note: Erratum: Hum.
Genet. 96: 502 only, 1995.

52. Kumaramanickavel, G.; Maw, M.; Denton, M. J.; John, S.; Srisailapathy
Srikumari, C. R.; Orth, U.; Oehlmann, R.; Gal, A.: Missense rhodopsin
mutation in a family with recessive RP. (Letter) Nature Genet. 8:
10-11, 1994.

53. Lem, J.; Krasnoperova, N. V.; Calvert, P. D.; Kosaras, B.; Cameron,
D. A.; Nicolo, M.; Makino, C. L.; Sidman, R. L.: Morphological, physiological,
and biochemical changes in rhodopsin knockout mice. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 96: 736-741, 1999.

54. Li, T.; Snyder, W. K.; Olsson, J. E.; Dryja, T. P.: Transgenic
mice carrying the dominant rhodopsin mutation P347S: evidence for
defective vectorial transport of rhodopsin to the outer segments. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 14176-14181, 1996.

55. Macke, J. P.; Davenport, C. M.; Jacobson, S. G.; Hennessey, J.
C.; Gonzalez-Fernandez, F.; Conway, B. P.; Heckenlively, J.; Palmer,
R.; Maumenee, I. H.; Sieving, P.; Gouras, P.; Good, W.; Nathans, J.
: Identification of novel rhodopsin mutations responsible for retinitis
pigmentosa: implications for the structure and function of rhodopsin. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 53: 80-89, 1993.

56. McInnes, R. R.; Bascom, R. A.: Retinal genetics: a nullifying
effect for rhodopsin. Nature Genet. 1: 155-157, 1992.

57. McWilliam, P.; Farrar, G. J.; Kenna, P.; Bradley, D. G.; Humphries,
M. M.; Sharp, E. M.; McConnell, D. J.; Lawler, M.; Sheils, D.; Ryan,
C.; Stevens, K.; Daiger, S. P.; Humphries, P.: Autosomal dominant
retinitis pigmentosa (ADRP): localization of an ADRP gene to the long
arm of chromosome 3. Genomics 5: 619-622, 1989.

58. Mendez, A.; Burns, M. E.; Roca, A.; Lem, J.; Wu, L.-W.; Simon,
M. I.; Baylor, D. A.; Chen, J.: Rapid and reproducible deactivation
of rhodopsin requires multiple phosphorylation sites. Neuron 28:
153-164, 2000.

59. Naash, M. I.; Hollyfield, J. G.; Al-Ubaidi, M. R.; Baehr, W.:
Simulation of human autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa in transgenic
mice expressing a mutated murine opsin gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90:
5499-5503, 1993.

60. Nathans, J.; Hogness, D. S.: Isolation and nucleotide sequence
of the gene encoding human rhodopsin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 81:
4851-4855, 1984.

61. Nathans, J.; Piantanida, T. P.; Eddy, R. L.; Shows, T. B.; Hogness,
D. S.: Molecular genetics of inherited variation in human color vision. Science 232:
203-210, 1986.

62. Nathans, J.; Thomas, D.; Hogness, D. S.: Molecular genetics of
human color vision: the genes encoding blue, green, and red pigments. Science 232:
193-202, 1986.

63. Nie, Z.; Chen, S.; Kumar, R.; Zack, D. J.: RER, an evolutionarily
conserved sequence upstream of the rhodopsin gene, has enhancer activity. J.
Biol. Chem. 271: 2667-2675, 1996.

64. Noorwez, S. M.; Malhotra, R.; McDowell, J. H.; Smith, K. A.; Krebs,
M. P.: Kaushal, S.: Retinoids assist the cellular folding of the
autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa opsin mutant P23H. J. Biol.
Chem. 279: 16278-16284, 2004.

65. Oh, K. T.; Weleber, R. G.; Lotery, A.; Oh, D. M.; Billingslea,
A. M.; Stone, E. M.: Description of a new mutation in rhodopsin,
pro23 to ala, and comparison with electroretinographic and clinical
characteristics of the pro23-to-his mutation. Arch. Ophthal. 118:
1269-1276, 2000.

66. Olsson, J. E.; Gordon, J. W.; Pawlyk, B. S.; Roof, D.; Hayes,
A.; Molday, R. S.; Mukai, S.; Cowley, G. S.; Berson, E. L.; Dryja,
T. P.: Transgenic mice with a rhodopsin mutation (Pro23His): a mouse
model of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Neuron 9: 815-830,
1992.

67. Olsson, J. E.; Samanns, C.; Jimenez, J.; Pongratz, J.; Chand,
A.; Watty, A.; Seuchter, S. A.; Denton, M.; Gal, A.: Gene of type
II autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa maps on the long arm of
chromosome 3. Am. J. Med. Genet. 35: 595-599, 1990.

68. Organisciak, D. T.; Darrow, R. M.; Barsalou, L.; Kutty, R. K.;
Wiggert, B.: Susceptibility to retinal light damage in transgenic
rats with rhodopsin mutations. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 44: 486-492,
2003.

69. Palczewski, K.; Kumasaka, T.; Hori, T.; Behnke, C. A.; Motoshima,
H.; Fox, B. A.; Le Trong, I.; Teller, D. C.; Okada, T.; Stenkamp,
R. E.; Yamamoto, M.; Miyano, M.: Crystal structure of rhodopsin:
a G protein-coupled receptor. Science 289: 739-745, 2000.

70. Pannarale, M. R.; Grammatico, B.; Iannaccone, A.; Forte, R.; De
Bernardo, C.; Flagiello, L.; Vingolo, E. M.; Del Porto, G.: Autosomal-dominant
retinitis pigmentosa associated with an arg-135-trp point mutation
of the rhodopsin gene: clinical features and longitudinal observations. Ophthalmology 103:
1443-1452, 1996.

71. Park, J. H.; Scheerer, P.; Hofmann, K. P.; Choe, H.-W.; Ernst,
O. P.: Crystal structure of the ligand-free G-protein-coupled receptor
opsin. Nature 454: 183-187, 2008.

72. Ponjavic, V.; Abrahamson, M.; Andreasson, S.; Ehinger, B.; Fex,
G.: Autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa with a rhodopsin mutation
(arg-135-trp): disease phenotype in a Swedish family. Acta Ophthal.
Scand. 75: 218-223, 1997.

73. Rajan, R. S.; Kopito, R. R.: Suppression of wild-type rhodopsin
maturation by mutants linked to autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. J.
Biol. Chem. 280: 1284-1291, 2005.

74. Rao, V. R.; Cohen, G. B.; Oprian, D. D.: Rhodopsin mutation G90D
and a molecular mechanism for congenital night blindness. Nature 367:
639-642, 1994.

75. Robinson, P. R.; Cohen, G. B.; Zhukovsky, E. A.; Oprian, D. D.
: Constitutively active mutants of rhodopsin. Neuron 9: 719-725,
1992.

76. Rosenfeld, P. J.; Cowley, G. S.; Hahn, L. B.; Sandberg, M. A.;
Berson, E. L.; Dryja, T. P.: A null mutation within the rhodopsin
gene in a family with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa. (Abstract) Invest.
Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 33: 1397, 1992.

77. Rosenfeld, P. J.; Cowley, G. S.; McGee, T. L.; Sandberg, M. A.;
Berson, E. L.; Dryja, T. P.: A null mutation in the rhodopsin gene
causes rod photoreceptor dysfunction and autosomal recessive retinitis
pigmentosa. Nature Genet. 1: 209-213, 1992.

78. Sakami, S.; Maeda, T.; Bereta, G.; Okano, K.; Golczak, M.; Sumaroka,
A.; Roman, A. J.; Cideciyan, A. V.; Jacobson, S. G.; Palczewski, K.
: Probing mechanisms of photoreceptor degeneration in a new mouse
model of the common form of autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
due to P23H opsin mutations. J. Biol. Chem. 286: 10551-10567, 2011.

79. Sandberg, M. A.; Rosner, B.; Weigel-DiFranco, C.; Dryja, T. P.;
Berson, E. L.: Disease course of patients with X-linked retinitis
pigmentosa due to RPGR gene mutations. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 48:
1298-1304, 2007.

80. Sheffield, V. C.; Fishman, G. A.; Beck, J. S.; Kimura, A. E.;
Stone, E. M.: Identification of novel rhodopsin mutations associated
with retinitis pigmentosa by GC-clamped denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 49: 699-706, 1991.

81. Sieving, P. A.; Richards, J. E.; Bingham, E. L.; Naarendorp, F.
: Dominant congenital complete nyctalopia and gly90-to-asp rhodopsin
mutation. (Abstract) Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 33: 1397, 1992.

82. Sieving, P. A.; Richards, J. E.; Naarendorp, F.; Bingham, E. L.;
Scott, K.; Alpern, M.: Dark-light: model for nightblindness from
the human rhodopsin gly90-to-asp mutation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92:
880-884, 1995.

83. Souied, E.; Soubrane, G.; Benlian, P.; Coscas, G. J.; Gerber,
S.; Munnich, A.; Kaplan, J.: Retinitis punctata albescens associated
with the arg135-to-trp mutation in the rhodopsin gene. Am. J. Ophthal. 121:
19-25, 1996.

84. Standfuss, J.; Edwards, P. C.; D'Antona, A.; Fransen, M.; Xie,
G.; Oprian, D. D.; Schertler, G. F. X.: The structural basis of agonist-induced
activation in constitutively active rhodopsin. Nature 471: 656-660,
2011.

85. Sullivan, L. J.; Makris, G. S.; Dickinson, P.; Mulhall, L. E.
M.; App, D.; Forrest, S.; Cotton, R. G. H.; Loughnan, M. S.: A new
codon 15 rhodopsin gene mutation in autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
is associated with sectorial disease. Arch. Ophthal. 111: 1512-1517,
1993.

86. Sung, C.-H.; Davenport, C. M.; Hennessey, J. C.; Maumenee, I.
H.; Jacobson, S. G.; Heckenlively, J. R.; Nowakowski, R.; Fishman,
G.; Gouras, P.; Nathans, J.: Rhodopsin mutations in autosomal dominant
retinitis pigmentosa. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 6481-6485, 1991.

87. Sung, C.-H.; Davenport, C. M.; Nathans, J.: Rhodopsin mutations
responsible for autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa: clustering
of functional classes along the polypeptide chain. J. Biol. Chem. 268:
26645-26649, 1993.

88. Sung, C.-H.; Makino, C.; Baylor, D.; Nathans, J.: A rhodopsin
gene mutation responsible for autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa
results in a protein that is defective in localization to the photoreceptor
outer segment. J. Neurosci. 14: 5818-5833, 1994.

89. Sung, C.-H.; Schneider, B. G.; Agarwal, N.; Papermaster, D. S.;
Nathans, J.: Functional heterogeneity of mutant rhodopsins responsible
for autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88:
8840-8844, 1991.

90. Vaithinathan, R.; Berson, E. L.; Dryja, T. P.: Further screening
of the rhodopsin gene in patients with autosomal dominant retinitis
pigmentosa. Genomics 21: 461-463, 1994.

91. Weleber, R. G.; Pillers, D. M.; Powell, B. R.; Hanna, C. E.; Magenis,
R. E.; Buist, N. R. M.: Aland Island disease (Forsius-Eriksson syndrome)
associated with contiguous gene syndrome at Xp21: similarity to incomplete
congenital stationary night blindness. Arch. Ophthal. 107: 1170-1179,
1989.

92. White, D. A.; Fritz, J. J.; Hauswirth, W. W.; Kaushal, S.; Lewin,
A. S.: Increased sensitivity to light-induced damage in a mouse model
of autosomal dominant retinal disease. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 48:
1942-1951, 2007. Note: Erratum: Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 48: 3436
only, 2007.

93. Zhu, L.; Imanishi, Y.; Filipek, S.; Alekseev, A.; Jastrzebska,
B.; Sun, W.; Saperstein, D. A.; Palczewski, K.: Autosomal recessive
retinitis pigmentosa and E150K mutation in the opsin gene. J. Biol.
Chem. 281: 22289-22298, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Jane Kelly - updated: 12/21/2011
Jane Kelly - updated: 8/16/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/6/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/21/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/15/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/14/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/7/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/23/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/8/2008
Jane Kelly - updated: 11/20/2007
Jane Kelly - updated: 11/8/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/18/2007
Jane Kelly - updated: 7/7/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/29/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/30/2003
Jane Kelly - updated: 3/13/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/17/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/6/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/7/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/23/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/6/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/10/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/25/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/18/2000
Jane Kelly - updated: 11/3/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 7/31/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/20/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/29/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/18/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/12/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/19/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/3/1997
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/13/1996
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 7/7/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/25/1986

EDITED terry: 10/02/2012
terry: 8/31/2012
terry: 7/30/2012
carol: 12/21/2011
terry: 12/21/2011
carol: 8/22/2011
terry: 8/16/2011
alopez: 7/6/2011
mgross: 6/30/2011
terry: 6/21/2011
wwang: 6/13/2011
wwang: 4/19/2011
terry: 4/15/2011
mgross: 4/14/2011
terry: 3/7/2011
terry: 2/9/2011
carol: 2/9/2011
carol: 2/4/2011
terry: 10/13/2010
carol: 10/4/2010
carol: 8/30/2010
carol: 8/13/2010
carol: 8/12/2010
alopez: 2/11/2009
wwang: 1/23/2009
alopez: 8/27/2008
terry: 8/8/2008
carol: 11/20/2007
carol: 11/8/2007
alopez: 6/19/2007
terry: 6/18/2007
alopez: 10/4/2006
alopez: 10/3/2006
alopez: 7/7/2005
carol: 9/29/2004
carol: 5/12/2004
carol: 3/17/2004
alopez: 7/28/2003
carol: 6/2/2003
ckniffin: 5/30/2003
cwells: 3/13/2003
alopez: 2/5/2003
terry: 1/17/2003
alopez: 1/6/2003
tkritzer: 11/14/2002
tkritzer: 11/8/2002
tkritzer: 11/7/2002
alopez: 9/25/2002
tkritzer: 9/23/2002
mgross: 6/11/2002
terry: 6/6/2002
terry: 3/6/2002
cwells: 1/25/2002
cwells: 1/14/2002
terry: 1/10/2002
alopez: 9/7/2001
carol: 2/20/2001
cwells: 1/29/2001
terry: 1/25/2001
cwells: 1/23/2001
cwells: 1/19/2001
mgross: 12/18/2000
carol: 11/21/2000
mcapotos: 11/20/2000
terry: 11/3/2000
alopez: 8/3/2000
psherman: 7/31/2000
alopez: 6/22/2000
carol: 6/20/2000
alopez: 4/29/2000
joanna: 6/18/1999
carol: 4/12/1999
mgross: 3/5/1999
mgross: 2/25/1999
terry: 2/18/1999
carol: 1/14/1999
terry: 1/12/1999
carol: 11/30/1998
terry: 11/18/1998
carol: 10/29/1998
terry: 10/19/1998
terry: 8/24/1998
carol: 7/10/1998
dkim: 7/7/1998
terry: 6/17/1998
terry: 6/3/1998
alopez: 5/14/1998
terry: 7/7/1997
joanna: 6/20/1997
mark: 2/3/1997
terry: 1/30/1997
terry: 1/23/1997
terry: 1/10/1997
carol: 7/13/1996
terry: 7/11/1996
mark: 7/7/1996
mark: 5/10/1996
terry: 5/10/1996
terry: 5/2/1996
mimadm: 3/25/1995
carol: 2/16/1995
terry: 10/25/1994
davew: 7/18/1994
warfield: 4/14/1994
carol: 9/23/1993

180246	TITLE *180246 RETINOID X RECEPTOR, BETA; RXRB
DESCRIPTION The retinoic acid receptors, alpha (RARA; 180240), beta (RARB; 180220),
and gamma (RARG; 180190), require coregulators to bind effectively to
response elements and target genes. By a strategy of sequential
screening of expression libraries with a retinoic acid response element
and RAR, Yu et al. (1991) identified a cDNA encoding a coregulator
highly related to RXR-alpha (180245). This protein, termed RXR-beta,
formed heterodimers with RAR, preferentially increasing its DNA binding
and transcriptional activity on promoters containing retinoic acid, but
not thyroid hormone or vitamin D, response elements. Remarkably,
RXR-beta also heterodimerized with thyroid hormone and vitamin D
receptors, increasing both DNA binding and transcriptional function on
their respective response elements. RXR-alpha also formed heterodimers
with these receptors. These observations suggested that retinoid X
receptors meet the criteria for biochemically characterized cellular
coregulators and serve to target selectively the high affinity binding
of retinoic acid, thyroid hormone, and vitamin D receptors to their
cognate DNA response elements.

RARB, RARG, RXRB, and RXRG (180247) are expressed in the striatum. To
study the effect of these genes on locomotion, Kreczel et al. (1998)
developed single and double knockout mice and analyzed their locomotor
skills by open field and rotarod testing. RARB-RXRB, RARB-RXRG, and
RXRB-RXRG double-null mutant mice, but not the corresponding single-null
mutants, exhibited reductions in forward locomotion when compared with
wildtype littermates. Forty percent of the RARB-RXRB-null mutants showed
backward locomotion. Rotarod test performance was impaired for RARB,
RARB-RXRB, RARB-RXRG, and RXRB-RXRG mice. In contrast, RARA, RARG,
RARA-RXRG, and RARG-RXRG-null mice showed no defects in locomotion, even
though both RARA and RARG are also expressed in the striatum. The
morphology, development, and function of skeletal muscle, peripheral
nerves, and spinal cord were normal in all single and double-null
mutants, as were balance reflexes. These results suggested to Kreczel et
al. (1998) that RARB, RXRB, and RXRG are involved specifically in the
control of locomotor behaviors, and that heterodimers of RARB with
either RXRB or RXRG are the functional receptor units, such that RXRB
and RXRG are functionally redundant. Kreczel et al. (1998) studied the
expression of D1 and D2 dopamine receptors (D1R; 126449 and D2R;
126450), the most abundant dopamine receptors in the striatum, in these
mutant mice. RARB-RXRB, RARB-RXRG, and RXRB-RXRG double-null mutants,
but not RARB or RXRG single mutants, exhibited 40% and 30% reduction in
whole-striatal D1R and D2R transcripts, respectively, when compared with
wildtype controls. The reduction was mostly in the medioventral regions
of the striatum, including the shell and core of the nucleus accumbens,
and the mediodorsal part of the caudate putamen. The reduction was not
due to loss of D2R-expressing neurons; no increase in apoptosis was
noted. The histology of the striatum was normal. The characterization of
a retinoic acid response element in the D2R promoter by Samad et al.
(1997) led Kreczel et al. (1998) to suggest that the reduction in D2R
and D2R expression occurs on a transcriptional level. The RARB-RXRB,
RARB-RXRG, and RXRB-RXRG double-null mutants did not exhibit the normal
increase in locomotion induced by cocaine, mimicking the phenotype of
D1R-null mice. Taken together, these results indicated to Kreczel et al.
(1998) that retinoids are involved in controlling the function of the
dopaminergic mesolimbic pathway and suggested that defects in retinoic
acid signaling may contribute to disorders such as Parkinson disease and
schizophrenia.

Using RFLVs in interspecific backcross mice, Hoopes et al. (1992) mapped
the Rxrb gene to the H-2 region of chromosome 17. By homology, it is
likely that the RXRB gene in the human is located on 6p. Fleischhauer et
al. (1993) demonstrated that this is indeed the case. They showed that
the RXRB gene is located in the 6pter-q13 region by Southern
hybridization of genomic DNA from human/rodent cell hybrids with the
mouse gene as a probe. In addition, a full-length cDNA clone encoding a
human RXRB was isolated by nucleic acid screening of a human cDNA
library with a fragment of the mouse gene as a probe. Comparison of
human and murine RXRB showed 97.6% identity on the amino acid level and
91.6% on the nucleotide level. With the relatively crude mapping methods
used, Fleischhauer et al. (1993) could not map RXRB more precisely than
to the short arm of chromosome 6 and/or the proximal part of the long
arm; however, the findings are at least consistent with location in the
HLA region, as suggested by homology. Fitzgibbon et al. (1993) mapped
the RXRB gene to 6p21.3-p21.1 by PCR amplification of 5-prime
untranslated sequence in panels of rodent-human somatic cell hybrids and
to 6p21.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. By pairwise
hybridization of an RXRB cosmid and reference markers in fluorescence in
situ hybridization, Almasan et al. (1994) likewise mapped the RXRB gene
to 6p21.3. Using cosmid clones that cover the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) region, Nagata et al. (1995) determined the precise
physical map positions of the RXRB gene relative to the MHC genes in
mouse and human. Conservation of gene organization was observed between
the 2 species at the HLA-DP (142880) region.

In an elegant series of experiments designed to understand the effect of
RXR activation on cholesterol balance, Repa et al. (2000) treated
animals with the rexinoid LG268. Animals treated with rexinoid exhibited
marked changes in cholesterol balance, including inhibition of
cholesterol absorption and repressed bile acid synthesis. Studies with
receptor-selective agonists revealed that oxysterol receptors (LXRs, see
602423 and 600380) and the bile acid receptor, FXR (603826), are the RXR
heterodimeric partners that mediate these effects by regulating
expression of the reverse-cholesterol transporter, ABC1 (600046), and
the rate-limiting enzyme of bile acid synthesis, CYP7A1 (118455),
respectively. These RXR heterodimers serve as key regulators in
cholesterol homeostasis by governing reverse cholesterol transport from
peripheral tissues, bile acid synthesis in liver, and cholesterol
absorption in intestine. Activation of RXR/LXR heterodimers inhibits
cholesterol absorption by upregulation of ABC1 expression in the small
intestine. Activation of RXR/FXR heterodimers represses CYP7A1
expression and bile acid production, leading to a failure to solubilize
and absorb cholesterol. Studies have shown that RXR/FXR-mediated
repression of CYP7A1 is dominant over RXR/LXR-mediated induction of
CYP7A1, which explains why the rexinoid represses rather than activates
CYP7A1 (Lu et al., 2000). Activation of the LXR signaling pathway
results in the upregulation of ABC1 in peripheral cells, including
macrophages, to efflux free cholesterol for transport back to the liver
through high density lipoprotein, where it is converted to bile acids by
the LXR-mediated increase in CYP7A1 expression. Secretion of biliary
cholesterol in the presence of increased bile acid pools normally
results in enhanced reabsorption of cholesterol; however, with the
increased expression of ABC1 and efflux of cholesterol back into the
lumen, there is a reduction in cholesterol absorption and net excretion
of cholesterol and bile acid. Rexinoids therefore offer a novel class of
agents for treating elevated cholesterol.

REFERENCE 1. Almasan, A.; Mangelsdorf, D. J.; Ong, E. S.; Wahl, G. M.; Evans,
R. M.: Chromosomal localization of the human retinoid X receptors. Genomics 20:
397-403, 1994.

2. Fitzgibbon, J.; Gillett, G. T.; Woodward, K. J.; Boyle, J. M.;
Wolfe, J.; Povey, S.: Mapping of RXRB to human chromosome 6p21.3. Ann.
Hum. Genet. 57: 203-209, 1993.

3. Fleischhauer, K.; McBride, O. W.; DiSanto, J. P.; Ozato, K.; Yang,
S. Y.: Cloning and chromosome mapping of human retinoid X receptor
beta: selective amino acid sequence conservation of a nuclear hormone
receptor in mammals. Hum. Genet. 90: 505-510, 1993.

4. Hoopes, C. W.; Taketo, M.; Ozato, K.; Liu, Q.; Howard, T. A.; Linney,
E.; Seldin, M. F.: Mapping the mouse Rxr loci encoding nuclear retinoid
X receptors Rxr-alpha, Rxr-beta, and Rxr-gamma. Genomics 14: 611-617,
1992.

5. Kreczel, W.; Ghyselinck, N.; Samad, T. A.; Dupe, V.; Kastner, P.;
Borrelli, E.; Chambon, P.: Impaired locomotion and dopamine signaling
in retinoid receptor mutant mice. Science 279: 863-867, 1998.

6. Lu, T. T.; Makishima, M.; Repa, J. J.; Schoonjans, K.; Kerr, T.
A.; Auwerx, J.; Mangelsdorf, D. J.: Molecular basis for feedback
regulation of bile acid synthesis by nuclear receptors. Molec. Cell 6:
507-515, 2000.

7. Nagata, T.; Weiss, E. H.; Abe, K.; Kitagawa, K.; Ando, A.; Yara-Kikuti,
Y.; Seldin, M. F.; Ozato, K.; Inoko, H.; Taketo, M.: Physical mapping
of the retinoid X receptor B gene in mouse and human. Immunogenetics 41:
83-90, 1995.

8. Repa, J. J.; Turley, S. D.; Lobaccaro, J.-M. A.; Medina, J.; Li,
L.; Lustig, K.; Shan, B.; Heyman, R. A.; Dletschy, J. M.; Mangelsdorf,
D. J.: Regulation of absorption and ABC1-mediated efflux of cholesterol
by RXR heterodimers. Science 289: 1524-1529, 2000.

9. Samad, A.; Kreczel, W.; Chambon, P.; Borrelli, E.: Regulation
of dopaminergic pathways by retinoids: activation of the D2 receptor
promoter by members of the retinoic acid receptor-retinoid X receptor
family. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 14349-14354, 1997.

10. Yu, V. C.; Delsert, C.; Andersen, B.; Holloway, J. M.; Devary,
O. V.; Naar, A. M.; Kim, S. Y.; Boutin, J.-M.; Glass, C. K.; Rosenfeld,
M. G.: RXR-beta: a coregulator that enhances binding of retinoic
acid, thyroid hormone, and vitamin D receptors to their cognate response
elements. Cell 67: 1251-1266, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/31/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/5/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/4/1992

EDITED terry: 03/16/2005
mgross: 10/1/2002
mgross: 10/10/2000
mgross: 8/31/2000
dkim: 10/12/1998
terry: 8/24/1998
alopez: 5/5/1998
carol: 3/7/1995
carol: 12/13/1993
carol: 4/2/1993
carol: 11/12/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/4/1992

300040	TITLE *300040 STRUCTURAL MAINTENANCE OF CHROMOSOMES 1A; SMC1A
;;SMC1-ALPHA;;
STRUCTURAL MAINTENANCE OF CHROMOSOMES 1-LIKE 1; SMC1L1;;
SMC1;;
DXS423E;;
KIAA0178
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Genetic marker SB1.8 (DXS423E) was originally identified as a
cross-reacting clone during the screening of a human lymphocyte cDNA
library with an oligonucleotide probe corresponding to the CYBB (300481)
gene, which maps to Xp21.1. Rocques et al. (1995) found that the DXS423E
gene encodes a protein of 1,233 amino acids that is 30% identical to the
essential yeast protein SMC1 (structural maintenance of chromosomes-1),
which is required for the segregation of chromosomes at mitosis. Both
the human protein, called SB1.8, and SMC1 contain an N-terminal
NTP-binding site, a central coiled-coil region, and a C-terminal
helix-loop-helix domain, and both have structural features in common
with the force-generating proteins myosin and kinesin. SB1.8 also
exhibits regions of homology and overall structural similarity to
protein 115p of the prokaryote Mycoplasma hyorhinis.

GENE FUNCTION

See SCC1 (606462) and Sumara et al. (2000) for information on the role
of SMC1 in cohesin association with and dissociation from chromosomes.

In yeast, the cohesin complex is essential for sister chromatid cohesion
during mitosis. The Smc1 and Smc3 (606062) subunits are rod-shaped
molecules with globular ABC-like ATPases at one end and dimerization
domains at the other, connected by long coiled coils. Smc1 and Smc3
associate to form V-shaped heterodimers. Their ATPase heads are thought
to be bridged by a third subunit, Scc1, creating a huge triangular ring
that can trap sister DNA molecules. Gruber et al. (2003) studied whether
cohesin forms such rings in vivo. Proteolytic cleavage of Scc1 by
separase at the onset of anaphase triggers its dissociation from
chromosomes. The authors showed that N- and C-terminal Scc1 cleavage
fragments remain connected due to their association with different heads
of a single Smc1/Smc3 heterodimer. Cleavage of the Smc3 coiled coil was
sufficient to trigger cohesin release from chromosomes and loss of
sister cohesion, consistent with a topologic association with chromatin.

Musio et al. (2005) demonstrated that RNA interference (RNAi) of SMC1
was sufficient to induce fragile site expression in normal human
fibroblasts. They showed that aphidicolin treatment led to an increase
in SMC1 synthesis, SMC1 phosphorylation via an ATR (601215)-dependent
pathway, and enhanced double-stranded break induction as visualized by
immunohistochemical studies with phosphorylated H2AX (601772). Discrete
nuclear foci were absent or very rare after 1 or 2 hours exposure to
aphidicolin and/or RNAi of SMC1 but became more numerous and distinct
after 6 hours. Musio et al. (2005) proposed that fragile sites might be
viewed as an in vitro phenomenon originating from double-strand breaks
formed because of stalled DNA replication that lasted too long to be
rescued via the ATR/SMC1 axis, whereas in vivo, following an extreme
replication block, rare cells could escape checkpoint mechanisms and
enter mitosis with a defect in genome assembly, eventually leading to
neoplastic transformation.

Cohesin's Scc1 (606462), Smc1, and Smc3 (606062) subunits form a
tripartite ring structure, and it had been proposed that cohesin holds
sister DNA molecules together by trapping them inside its ring. To test
this, Haering et al. (2008) used site-specific crosslinking to create
chemical connections at the 3 interfaces between the 3 constituent
polypeptides of the ring, thereby creating covalently closed cohesin
rings. As predicted by the ring entrapment model, this procedure
produced dimeric DNA-cohesin structures that are resistant to protein
denaturation. Haering et al. (2008) concluded that cohesin rings
concatenate individual sister minichromosome DNA molecules.

Kagey et al. (2010) reported that Mediator (see MED8, 607956) and
cohesin physically and functionally connect the enhancers and core
promoters of active genes in murine embryonic stem cells. Mediator, a
transcriptional coactivator, forms a complex with cohesin, which can
form rings that connect 2 DNA segments. The cohesin-loading factor NIPBL
(608667) is associated with Mediator-cohesin complexes, providing a
means to load cohesin at promoters. DNA looping is observed between the
enhancers and promoters occupied by Mediator and cohesin. Mediator and
cohesin co-occupy different promoters in different cells, thus
generating cell type-specific DNA loops linked to the gene expression
program of each cell.

MAPPING

Rocques et al. (1995) showed that the DXS423E gene maps to a cosmid
contig that lies centromeric to the OATL2 locus (see 258870) at Xp11.2.
Brown et al. (1995) showed that SMC1 escapes X-chromosome inactivation.
SMC1 and XE169 (314690) were thought to define a new region in the
proximal short arm of the X chromosome that escapes X inactivation. The
corresponding gene in the mouse, Sb1.8, is located at the distal end of
the X chromosome and is subject to X inactivation (Sultana et al.,
1995).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

A female with a Cornelia de Lange syndrome (122470) phenotype carrying
an apparently balanced X;8 translocation involving the Xp11.2 band, to
which the SMC1L1 gene maps, was described by Egemen et al. (2005). The
findings are consistent with the location of the SMC1L1 gene at Xp11.2
and the involvement of that gene in X-linked Cornelia de Lange syndrome
(300590).

Musio et al. (2006) recruited 53 unrelated and 4 related individuals
with a diagnosis of Cornelia de Lange syndrome, encompassing the entire
spectrum of phenotypes. They found pathogenic NIPBL (608667) mutations
in 24 of them, whereas the remaining 33 cases did not bear any NIPBL
mutation. Of these 33 individuals, there was only 1 instance of familial
occurrence, with 2 male sibs, their mother, and a first cousin affected.
Involvement of the NIPBL gene was excluded in this family, but the
affected individuals were found to carry a 3-bp deletion in the SMC1L1
gene (300040.0001). In addition, a sporadic case was found to have a de
novo missense mutation in the SMC1L1 gene (300040.0002).

Deardorff et al. (2007) identified 14 additional SMC1A mutations in
patients with a mild variant of Cornelia de Lange syndrome with
predominant mental retardation. Analysis of the mutant SMC1A proteins
indicated that they were likely to produce functional cohesin complexes;
however, Deardorff et al. (2007) posited that they mutations may alter
their chromosome binding dynamics. Ten of 14 SMC1A-mutation-positive
individuals with CDLS identified by Deardorff et al. (2007) were female.
Furthermore, their series included similarly affected male and female
probands, implying an X-linked dominant mode of expression. Several
males were rather mildly affected and no more severely affected than
many of the SMC1A mutation-positive females. Since the SMC1A gene
escapes X inactivation (Brown et al., 1995), it is likely that the
mechanism in affected females is due to a dominant-negative effect of
the altered protein and less likely that it is due to decreased protein
levels or skewed X inactivation. Consistent with this dominant-negative
effect on cohesin, Deardorff et al. (2007) described a single amino acid
deletion mutation in the SMC3 gene underlying a variant Cornelia de
Lange syndrome (606062.0001). The data indicated that SMC3 and SMC1A
mutations contribute to approximately 5% of cases of Cornelia de Lange
syndrome, result in a consistently mild phenotype with absence of major
structural anomalies typically associated with CDLS, such as those of
the limbs, and, in some instances, result in a phenotype that approaches
that of apparently nonsyndromic mental retardation. Deardorff et al.
(2007) suggested that it may be found that additional 'cohesinopathies'
result from perturbation of the more than 15 additional components of
this complex that had yet to be associated with human disorders.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 2
SMC1A, 3-BP DEL, 2493CCA

Musio et al. (2006) identified a 3-bp deletion in the SMC1L1 gene in
hemizygous state in 2 brothers and a maternal first cousin from a family
with X-linked Cornelia de Lange syndrome (300590). The mother of the 2
brothers was heterozygous for the mutation and mildly affected. The
deletion involved the third nucleotide of codon 831 and the first 2
nucleotides of codon 832, leading to deletion of gln832 and an
asp831-to-glu (D831E) substitution. The mutation was not identified in
over 600 control chromosomes.

.0002
CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 2
SMC1A, GLU493ALA

In a sporadic male patient with X-linked Cornelia de Lange syndrome
(300590), Musio et al. (2006) identified hemizygosity for a 1478A-C
transversion in the SMC1L1 gene, resulting in an glu493-to-ala (E493A)
substitution. The mutation was not identified in over 400 control
chromosomes.

Revenkova et al. (2009) showed that E493A-mutant SMC1A affected the
affinity of SMC hinge dimers for DNA. Mutated hinge dimers bound DNA
with higher affinity than wildtype proteins. SMC1A-mutated Cornelia de
Lange syndrome cell lines displayed genomic instability and sensitivity
to ionizing radiation and interstrand crosslinking agents.

.0003
CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 2
SMC1A, 15-BP DEL, NT173

In an individual with a milder variant of Cornelia de Lange syndrome
(CDLS2; 300590), Deardorff et al. (2007) identified a 15-bp deletion in
the SMC1A gene, resulting in deletion of 5 amino acids (V58_R62del).
Features of CDLS included arched eyebrows and synophrys, anteverted
nostrils, long and featureless philtrum, thin lips, downturned corners
of the mouth, hearing loss, cutis marmorata, small hands and feet,
proximally set thumbs, clinodactyly of fifth finger, and hirsutism. The
child had psychomotor delay but was in mainstream second grade
schooling. He had mild pulmonic stenosis and gastroesophageal reflux.

.0004
CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 2
SMC1A, ARG496HIS

In 2 sisters with a variant form of Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CDLS2;
300590), Deardorff et al. (2007) identified a 1487G-A transition in the
SMC1A gene that resulted in an arg496-to-his substitution (R496H). Both
had psychomotor delay and moderately severe mental retardation. One had
pulmonic stenosis. Both had gastroesophageal reflux.

Revenkova et al. (2009) showed that R496H-mutant SMC1A affected the
affinity of SMC hinge dimers for DNA. Mutated hinge dimers bound DNA
with higher affinity than wildtype proteins. SMC1A-mutated Cornelia de
Lange syndrome cell lines displayed genomic instability and sensitivity
to ionizing radiation and interstrand crosslinking agents.

.0005
CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 2
SMC1A, ILE784THR

In a 6-year-old girl with Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CDLS2; 300590),
Limongelli et al. (2010) identified a de novo heterozygous 2351T-C
transition in exon 15 of the SMC1A gene, resulting in an ile784-to-thr
(I784T) substitution in a highly conserved residue in the coiled-coil
domain. She had pre- and postnatal growth retardation, developmental
delay, characteristic facial features, and concentric left ventricular
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

.0006
CORNELIA DE LANGE SYNDROME 2
SMC1A, 8.152-KB DEL

In a girl with a severe form of CDLS2 (300590), Hoppman-Chaney et al.
(2012) identified a de novo heterozygous 8.152-kb deletion encompassing
exon 13 to intron 16 of the SMC1A gene, resulting in an in-frame
deletion of 126 amino acids and insertion of 3 novel amino acids. The
mutant mRNA was expressed, and Hoppman-Chaney et al. (2012) concluded
that the mutant protein lacking the coiled-coil domain would act in a
dominant-negative manner. The patient had dysmorphic facial features,
microcephaly, poor growth, profound psychomotor retardation, right
hemihypertrophy, and mild distal limb anomalies. The patient was also
mosaic for Turner syndrom, 45,X(7)/46,XX(23), which may have accounted
for some additional features.

REFERENCE 1. Brown, C. J.; Miller, A. P.; Carrel, L.; Rupert, J. L.; Davies,
K. E.; Willard, H. F.: The DXS423E gene in Xp11.21 escapes X chromosome
inactivation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 251-255, 1995.

2. Deardorff, M. A.; Kaur, M.; Yaeger, D.; Rampuria, A.; Korolev,
S.; Pie, J.; Gil-Rodriguez, C.; Arnedo, M.; Loeys, B.; Kline, A. D.;
Wilson, M.; Lillquist, K.; Siu, V.; Ramos, F. J.; Musio, A.; Jackson,
L. S.; Dorsett, D.; Krantz, I. D.: Mutations in cohesin complex members
SMC3 and SMC1A cause a mild variant of Cornelia de Lange syndrome
with predominant mental retardation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 80: 485-494,
2007.

3. Egemen, A.; Ulger, Z.; Ozkinay, F.; Gulen, F.; Cogulu, O.: A de
novo t(X;8)(p11.2;q24.3) demonstrating Cornelia de Lange syndrome
phenotype. Genet.  Counsel. 16: 27-30, 2005.

4. Gruber, S.; Haering, C. H.; Nasmyth, K.: Chromosomal cohesin forms
a ring. Cell 112: 765-777, 2003.

5. Haering, C. H.; Farcas, A.-M.; Arumugam, P.; Metson, J.; Nasmyth,
K.: The cohesin ring concatenates sister DNA molecules. Nature 454:
297-301, 2008.

6. Hoppman-Chaney, N.; Jang, J. S.; Jen, J.; Babovic-Vuksanovic, D.;
Hodge, J. C.: In-frame multi-exon deletion of SMC1A in a severely
affected female with Cornelia de Lange syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 158A:
193-198, 2012.

7. Kagey, M. H.; Newman, J. J.; Bilodeau, S.; Zhan, Y.; Orlando, D.
A.; van Berkum, N. L.; Ebmeier, C. C.; Goossens, J.; Rahl, P. B.;
Levine, S. S.; Taatjes, D. J.; Dekker, J.; Young, R. A.: Mediator
and cohesin connect gene expression and chromatin architecture. Nature 467:
430-435, 2010. Note: Erratum: Nature 472: 247 only, 2011.

8. Limongelli, G.; Russo, S.; Digilio, M. C.; Masciadri, M.; Pacileo,
G.; Fratta, F.; Martone, F.; Maddaloni, V.; D'Alessandro, R.; Calabro,
P.; Russo, M. G.; Calabro, R.; Larizza, L.: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
in a girl with Cornelia de Lange syndrome due to mutation in SMC1A.
(Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 2127-2129, 2010.

9. Musio, A.; Montagna, C.; Mariani, T.; Tilenni, M.; Focarelli, M.
L.; Brait, L.; Indino, E.; Benedetti, P. A.; Chessa, L.; Albertini,
A.; Ried, T.; Vezzoni, P.: SMC1 involvement in fragile site expression. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 525-533, 2005.

10. Musio, A.; Selicorni, A.; Focarelli, M. L.; Gervasini, C.; Milani,
D.; Russo, S.; Vezzoni, P.; Larizza, L.: X-linked Cornelia de Lange
syndrome owing to SMC1L1 mutations. Nature Genet. 38: 528-530, 2006.

11. Revenkova, E.; Focarelli, M. L.; Susani, L.; Paulis, M.; Bassi,
M. T.; Mannini, L.; Frattini, A.; Delia, D.; Krantz, I.; Vezzoni,
P.; Jessberger, R.; Musio, A.: Cornelia de Lange syndrome mutations
in SMC1A or SMC3 affect binding to DNA. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 418-427,
2009.

12. Rocques, P. J.; Clark, J.; Ball, S.; Crew, J.; Gill, S.; Christodoulou,
Z.; Borts, R. H.; Louis, E. J.; Davies, K. E.; Cooper, C. S.: The
human SB1.8 gene (DXS423E) encodes a putative chromosome segregation
protein conserved in lower eukaryotes and prokaryotes. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 4: 243-249, 1995.

13. Sultana, R.; Adler, D. A.; Edelhoff, S.; Carrel, L.; Lee, K.;
Chapman, V. C.; Willard, H. F.; Disteche, C. M.: The mouse Sb1.8
gene located at the distal end of the X chromosome is subject to X
inactivation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 257-263, 1995.

14. Sumara, I.; Vorlaufer, E.; Gieffers, C.; Peters, B. H.; Peters,
J.-M.: Characterization of vertebrate cohesin complexes and their
regulation in prophase. J. Cell Biol. 151: 749-761, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/16/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/11/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/7/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/31/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/12/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/3/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/8/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/26/2006
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/14/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/16/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/14/1996

EDITED carol: 02/21/2012
ckniffin: 2/16/2012
alopez: 6/10/2011
wwang: 2/1/2011
ckniffin: 1/11/2011
alopez: 10/8/2010
terry: 10/7/2010
wwang: 8/13/2009
terry: 7/31/2009
alopez: 8/25/2008
terry: 8/12/2008
alopez: 3/20/2008
terry: 3/7/2008
wwang: 1/14/2008
terry: 1/3/2008
carol: 12/5/2007
alopez: 2/13/2007
terry: 2/8/2007
carol: 8/8/2006
wwang: 5/4/2006
wwang: 4/27/2006
terry: 4/26/2006
alopez: 4/6/2005
mgross: 5/25/2004
ckniffin: 3/12/2004
mgross: 4/14/2003
mgross: 11/16/2001
alopez: 8/14/2000
mark: 3/14/1996

300634	TITLE *300634 PDZ DOMAIN-CONTAINING 4; PDZD4
;;PDZK4;;
PDZRN4L;;
KIAA1444;;
LU1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned PDZD4, which they designated
KIAA1444. RT-PCR ELISA detected high expression of PDZD in adult and
fetal brain.

By database searching with the sequence of PDZRN4 (609730) as query,
Katoh and Katoh (2004) identified human and murine PDZD4, which they
called PDZRN4L. The deduced 769-amino acid PDZD4 protein contains a
bipartite nuclear localization signal and a PDZ domain. The PDZD4
protein shares 93% sequence identity with the mouse ortholog and 49.9%
sequence identity with PDZRN4 alternative splice form PDZRN4S.

Using microarray analysis to identify genes that are upregulated in
synovial sarcoma (SS), followed by database analysis, Nagayama et al.
(2004) independently identified 3 alternative splice variants of PDZD4.
The deduced PDZD4 proteins encoded by the variants are 673 (Adult1),
769, and 660 amino acids long; however, in vitro translation studies and
expression in COS-7 cells showed translation of the 769- (Fetal1/SS) and
660-amino acid (Adult2/Fetal2) variants only. Both the deduced Fetal1/SS
and Adult2/Fetal2 PDZD4 variants have a predicted N-terminal PDZ domain
with an additional N-terminal PDZ domain predicted for the Fetal/SS
variant. Northern blot analysis detected 4.5- and 3.8-kb transcripts in
adult brain and 4.2- and 3.8-kb transcripts in fetal brain. No PDZD4
transcripts were detected in any of 15 additional adult tissues
examined. The SS cell lines and SS tissues expressed the 4.2-kb
transcript only, which corresponded to the Fetal1/SS variant. No
expression of the Fetal1/SS variant was detected in several other
carcinoma cells examined. Immunocytochemistry in COS-7 cells localized
both the Fetal1/SS and Adult2/Fetal2 PDZD4 variants to an area under the
plasma membrane.

GENE FUNCTION

Using small interfering RNA expression, Nagayama et al. (2004)
downregulated expression of the PDZD4 Fetal1/SS variant in synovial
sarcoma cell lines HS-SY-2 and YaFuSS and observed inhibition of cell
growth and a reduction of cell viability measured by MTT assay.
Overexpression of recombinant PDZD4 Fetal1/SS variant in glioblastoma
cell line and COS-7 cells, both lacking endogenous PDZD4, showed an
increase in cell growth assayed by number of colonies. Nagayama et al.
(2004) suggested that the PDZD4 Fetal1/SS variant acts as an oncogene
and may play a role in carcinogenesis of synovial sarcoma.

GENE STRUCTURE

Katoh and Katoh (2004) determined that the PDZD4 gene contains at least
8 exons. Nagayama et al. (2004) determined that the PDZD4 gene contains
9 exons that are transcribed in the Adult1 variant. The Fetal1/SS
transcript contains an alternative exon 2 and lacks exon 3, whereas the
Adult2/Fetal2 transcript lacks exons 2, 3, and 4.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the PDZD4 gene
to chromosome X. By genomic sequence analysis, Katoh and Katoh (2004)
mapped PDZD4 to Xq28 and the mouse homolog to chromosome X band A6.

REFERENCE 1. Katoh, M.; Katoh, M.: Identification and characterization of human
PDZRN4L gene and mouse Pdzrn4l gene in silico. Int. J. Molec. Med. 13:
923-927, 2004.

2. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 143-150, 2000.

3. Nagayama, S.; Iiizumi, M.; Katagiri, T.; Toguchida, J.; Nakamura,
Y.: Identification of PDZK4, a novel human gene with PDZ domains,
that is upregulated in synovial sarcomas. Oncogene 23: 5551-5557,
2004.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 1/11/2007

EDITED carol: 01/11/2007

609158	TITLE *609158 NODAL MODULATOR 2; NOMO2
;;PM5, CENTROMERIC COPY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing tryptic fragments of a protein that interacted with
nicalin (NCLN; 609156) in human embryonic kidney cells, followed by
database analysis, Haffner et al. (2004) identified NOMO2, which they
referred to as NOMO and PM5. The deduced protein is a type I
transmembrane protein. Northern blot analysis detected a 4.5-kb
transcript expressed at highest levels in pancreas and skeletal muscle.
Expression was somewhat lower in heart and was very low in all other
tissues examined. The expression pattern of NOMO2 was similar to that of
nicalin. Endogenous human embryonic kidney cell NOMO2 had an apparent
molecular mass of 130 kD by SDS-PAGE. NOMO2 was associated with a 500-
to 550-kD complex that also contained nicalin. NOMO2 and nicalin
cofractionated with endoplasmic reticulum membranes.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitation of cotransfected cells, Haffner et al. (2004)
confirmed a direct interaction between NOMO2 and nicalin. Ectopic
expression of both proteins in zebrafish embryos caused cyclopia, a
phenotype that can arise from a defect in mesendoderm patterning
mediated by the Nodal (601265) signaling pathway. Accordingly,
downregulation of Nomo resulted in an increase in anterior axial
mesendoderm and the development of an enlarged hatching gland.
Inhibition of Nodal signaling by ectopic expression of Lefty (see
603037) could be rescued by reducing Nomo levels. Furthermore, Nodal-
and activin (see 147290)-induced signaling were inhibited by nicalin and
NOMO2 in a cell-based reporter assay.

Using affinity purification and coimmunoprecipitation experiments,
Dettmer et al. (2010) showed that NOMO and nicalin interacted with
TMEM147 (613585). Knockdown of each of these components by RNA
interference showed that they stabilized one another. Knockdown and
overexpression studies suggested that nicalin is the key regulator of
the complex and that it binds to NOMO prior to inclusion of TMEM147 in
the complex. Mutation analysis revealed that the transmembrane domain of
nicalin was required for interaction with TMEM147, but not NOMO.
Coprecipitation studies with zebrafish embryos revealed conservation of
the nicalin-NOMO-TMEM147 complex.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Loftus et al. (1999) mapped the PM5 gene (see
NOMO1; 609157) to a region of chromosome 16p13.1-p11.2 that shows a high
degree of gene duplication. Scott (2004) mapped 3 copies of the PM5
gene, including NOMO2, within this region. The NOMO2 gene maps
centromeric to the ABCC6 gene (603234) and telomeric to the XYLT1 gene
(608124).

REFERENCE 1. Dettmer, U.; Kuhn, P.-H.; Abou-Ajram, C.; Lichtenthaler, S. F.;
Kruger, M.; Kremmer, E.; Haass, C.; Haffner, C.: Transmembrane protein
147 (TMEM147) is a novel component of the nicalin-NOMO protein complex. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 26174-26181, 2010.

2. Haffner, C.; Frauli, M.; Topp, S.; Irmler, M.; Hofmann, K.; Regula,
J. T.; Bally-Cuif, L.; Haass, C.: Nicalin and its binding partner
Nomo are novel Nodal signaling antagonists. EMBO J. 23: 3041-3050,
2004.

3. Loftus, B. J.; Kim, U.-J.; Sneddon, V. P.; Kalush, F.; Brandon,
R.; Fuhrmann, J.; Mason, T.; Crosby, M. L.; Barnstead, M.; Cronin,
L.; Mays, A. D.; Cao, Y.; Xu, R. X.; Kang, H.-L.; Mitchell, S.; Eichler,
E. E.; Harris, P. C.; Venter, J. C.; Adams, M. D.: Genome duplications
and other features in 12 Mb of DNA sequence from human chromosome
16p and 16q. Genomics 60: 295-308, 1999.

4. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/9/2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/07/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/11/2005

EDITED mgross: 10/07/2010
mgross: 1/11/2005

603458	TITLE *603458 EMBRYONIC LETHAL, ABNORMAL VISION, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG-LIKE 3; ELAVL3
;;HU-ANTIGEN C; HUC;;
PARANEOPLASTIC LIMBIC ENCEPHALITIS ANTIGEN 21; PLE21
DESCRIPTION Paraneoplastic neurologic disorders (PNDs) are a group of neurologic
syndromes that arise when an immune response to systemic tumors
expressing neuronal proteins develops into an autoimmune neuronal
degeneration. Sakai et al. (1994) determined that the serum of a patient
with paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis (PLE) contained autoantibodies
that recognized a 38-kD nuclear antigen in neural cells. By screening a
hippocampus expression library with this serum, they isolated cDNAs
encoding a protein that they called PLE21. The predicted 350-amino acid
protein contains 3 RNA recognition motifs (RRMs). PLE21 shares 82% and
54% protein sequence identity with the human neural autoantigen HuD
(168360) and Drosophila ELAV protein, respectively. Northern blot
analysis revealed that PLE21 is expressed as an approximately 2-kb mRNA
exclusively in brain. Liu et al. (1995) stated that PLE21, or HuC, is
one of several Hu antigens, neuronal-specific RNA-binding proteins
recognized by the anti-Hu serum antibody present in sera from patients
with paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis and sensory neuronopathy
(PEM/PSN). The Hu antigens HuD, HuC, and Hel-N1 (601673) each contain 2
tandemly arranged RRMs connected to a third RRM by a highly basic
segment.

Abe et al. (1996) cloned cDNAs encoding mouse HuC. The predicted mouse
and human proteins are 96% identical. These authors found that
alternative splicing generates 2 mouse HuC isoforms, both of which can
bind to AU-rich elements (AREs) within the 3-prime untranslated regions
of mRNAs. Functional domain mapping using mouse HuC deletion mutants
showed that the first RRM binds to ARE, that the second RRM has no
binding activity by itself but facilitates ARE binding by the first RRM,
and that the third RRM has specific binding activity for the poly(A)
sequence.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), Van Tine et al. (1998)
mapped the ELAVL3 gene to 19p13.2. Using FISH and radiation hybrid
analysis, they demonstrated that ELAVL3 is centromeric to the ELAVL1
(HuR; 603466) gene located in the same chromosomal region. By analysis
of an interspecific backcross, Fletcher et al. (1997) mapped the mouse
HuC gene to chromosome 9, in a region showing homology of synteny to
human chromosome 19p13.2.

REFERENCE 1. Abe, R.; Sakashita, E.; Yamamoto, K.; Sakamoto, H.: Two different
RNA binding activities for the AU-rich element and the poly(A) sequence
of the mouse neuronal protein mHuC. Nucleic Acids Res. 24: 4895-4901,
1996.

2. Fletcher, C. F.; Okano, H. J.; Gilbert, D. J.; Yang, Y.; Yang,
C.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Darnell, R. B.: Mouse chromosomal
locations of nine genes encoding homologs of human paraneoplastic
neurologic disorder antigens. Genomics 45: 313-319, 1997.

3. Liu, J.; Dalmau, J.; Szabo, A.; Rosenfeld, M.; Huber, J.; Furneaux,
H.: Paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis antigens bind to the AU-rich
elements of mRNA. Neurology 45: 544-550, 1995.

4. Sakai, K.; Gofuku, M.; Kitagawa, Y.; Ogasawara, T.; Hirose, G.;
Yamazaki, M.; Koh, C.-S.; Yanagisawa, N.; Steinman, L.: A hippocampal
protein associated with paraneoplastic neurologic syndrome and small
cell lung carcinoma. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 199: 1200-1208,
1994.

5. Van Tine, B. A.; Knops, J. F.; Butler, A.; Deloukas, P.; Shaw,
G. M.; King, P. H.: Localization of HuC (ELAVL3) to chromosome 19p13.2
by fluorescence in situ hybridization utilizing a novel tyramide labeling
technique. Genomics 53: 296-299, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/25/1999

EDITED carol: 11/24/2001
alopez: 1/26/1999
alopez: 1/25/1999

601639	TITLE *601639 PROTEIN KINASE, cAMP-DEPENDENT, CATALYTIC, ALPHA; PRKACA
DESCRIPTION Most of the effects of cAMP in the eukaryotic cell are mediated through
the phosphorylation of target proteins on serine or threonine residues
by the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (EC 2.7.1.37). The inactive
cAMP-dependent protein kinase is a tetramer composed of 2 regulatory and
2 catalytic subunits. The cooperative binding of 4 molecules of cAMP
dissociates the enzyme in a regulatory subunit dimer and 2 free active
catalytic subunits. In the human, 4 different regulatory subunits
(PRKAR1A, 188830; PRKAR1B, 176911; PRKAR2A, 176910; and PRKAR2B, 176912)
and 3 catalytic subunits (PRKACA; PRKACB, 176892; and PRKACG 176893)
have been identified.

MAPPING

Using PCR and Southern blot analysis, Tasken et al. (1996) assigned the
PRKACA gene to chromosome 19. By 2-color fluorescence in situ
hybridization, they regionalized the assignment to 19p13.1.

GENE FUNCTION

Studying hippocampal slices from rats of different ages, Yasuda et al.
(2003) found that protein kinase A is required for long-term
potentiation (LTP) in neonatal tissue (less than 9 postnatal days).
After that time, LTP requires calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase II (see CAMK2A, 114078). Yasuda et al. (2003) suggested that
developmental changes in synapse morphology, including a shift from
dendritic shafts to dendritic spines and compartmentalization of
calcium, may underlie the changes in kinase activity.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Kim et al. (2005) determined the crystal structure of the cAMP-dependent
protein kinase catalytic subunit bound to a deletion mutant of the
regulatory subunit (RI-alpha; PRKAR1A, 188830) at 2.0-angstrom
resolution. This structure defines a previously unidentified extended
interface in which the large lobe of the catalytic subunit is like a
stable scaffold where tyr247 in the G helix and trp196 in the
phosphorylated activation loop serve as anchor points for binding the
RI-alpha subunit. These residues compete with cAMP for the
phosphate-binding cassette in RI-alpha. In contrast to this catalytic
subunit, RI-alpha undergoes major conformational changes when the
complex is compared with cAMP-bound RI-alpha. Kim et al. (2005)
concluded that the complex provides a molecular mechanism for inhibition
of PKA and suggests how cAMP binding leads to activation.

Zhang et al. (2012) described the 2.3-angstrom structure of full-length
tetrameric RII-beta (PRKAR2B; 176912)(2):catalytic subunit-alpha(2)
holoenzyme. The structure showing a dimer of dimers provided a
mechanistic understanding of allosteric activation by cAMP. The
heterodimers are anchored together by an interface created by the
beta-4/beta-5 loop in the RII-beta subunit, which docks onto the
carboxyl-terminal tail of the adjacent C subunit, thereby forcing the C
subunit into a fully closed conformation in the absence of nucleotide.
Diffusion of magnesium ATP into these crystals trapped not ATP but the
reaction products adenosine diphosphate and the phosphorylated RII-beta
subunit. This complex has implications for the
dissociation-reassociation cycling of PKA. The quaternary structure of
the RII-beta tetramer differs appreciably from the model of the RI-alpha
tetramer, confirming the small-angle x-ray scattering prediction that
the structures of each PKA tetramer are different.

ANIMAL MODEL

The intracellular second messenger cAMP affects cell physiology by
directly interacting with effector molecules that include cyclic
nucleotide-gated ion channels, cAMP-regulated G protein exchange
factors, and cAMP-dependent protein kinases (PKA). Two catalytic
subunits, C-alpha (PRKACA) and C-beta (PRKACB), are expressed in the
mouse and mediate the effects of PKA. Skalhegg et al. (2002) generated a
null mutation in the major catalytic subunit of PKA, C-alpha, and
observed early postnatal lethality in the majority of C-alpha knockout
mice. Surprisingly, a small percentage of C-alpha knockout mice,
although runted, survived to adulthood. This growth retardation was not
due to decreased GH (139250) production but did correlate with a
reduction in IGF1 (147440) mRNA in the liver and diminished production
of the major urinary proteins in kidney. In these animals, compensatory
increases in C-beta levels occurred in brain whereas many tissues,
including skeletal muscle, heart, and sperm, contained less than 10% of
the normal PKA activity. Analysis of sperm in C-alpha knockout males
revealed that spermatogenesis progressed normally but that mature sperm
had defective forward motility.

REFERENCE 1. Kim, C.; Xuong, N.-H.; Taylor, S. S.: Crystal structure of a complex
between the catalytic and regulatory (RI-alpha) subunits of PKA. Science 307:
690-696, 2005.

2. Skalhegg, B. S.; Huang, Y.; Su, T.; Idzerda, R. L.; McKnight, G.
S.; Burton, K. A.: Mutation of the C-alpha subunit of PKA leads to
growth retardation and sperm dysfunction. Molec. Endocr. 16: 630-639,
2002.

3. Tasken, K.; Solberg, R.; Zhao, Y.; Hansson, V.; Jahnsen, T.; Siciliano,
M. J.: The gene encoding the catalytic subunit C-alpha of cAMP-dependent
protein kinase (locus PRKACA) localizes to human chromosome region
19p13.1. Genomics 36: 535-538, 1996.

4. Yasuda, H.; Barth, A. L.; Stellwagen, D.; Malenka, R. C.: A developmental
switch in the signaling cascades for LTP induction. Nature Neurosci. 6:
15-16, 2003.

5. Zhang, P.; Smith-Nguyen, E. V.; Keshwani, M. M.; Deal, M. S.; Kornev,
A. P.; Taylor, S. S.: Structure and allostery of the PKA RII-beta
tetrameric holoenzyme. Science 335: 712-716, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/27/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/25/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/3/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/10/2002

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 1/21/1997

EDITED alopez: 02/28/2012
alopez: 2/28/2012
terry: 2/27/2012
wwang: 3/3/2005
terry: 2/25/2005
alopez: 1/9/2003
alopez: 12/3/2002
ckniffin: 12/3/2002
alopez: 10/10/2002
jamie: 1/21/1997

600978	TITLE *600978 LYMPHOTOXIN-BETA; LTB
;;TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR C; TNFC
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Browning et al. (1993) pointed out that lymphotoxin-alpha, otherwise
known as tumor necrosis factor-beta (TNFB; 153440), is present on the
surface of activated T, B, and LAK cells as a complex with a 33-kD
glycoprotein. Browning et al. (1993) cloned the cDNA encoding the
associated protein, called lymphotoxin-beta, and showed that it is a
type II membrane protein with significant homology to TNF, LT-alpha, and
the ligand for the CD40 receptor (109535).

GENE FUNCTION

Nakamura et al. (1995) described lymphotoxin-alpha in a homotrimeric
form as a soluble protein secreted by activated lymphocytes and presumed
to act as a modulator in the immune response. The LT-alpha homotrimer
shares its receptor with tumor necrosis factor and binds to both TNF
receptor-1 (191190) and -2 (191191). Lymphotoxin-beta, also expressed by
active lymphocytes, forms a heterotrimer with LT-alpha on the cell
surface and anchors LT-alpha to the cell surface. This heterotrimer is
assumed to take part in immunologic reactions by cell-cell contact, but
it does not bind to either TNFR1 or TNFR2. A homotrimeric form of
LT-beta has not been identified. Crowe et al. (1994) identified the TNF
receptor-related protein as the human receptor for the LT-alpha/LT-beta
heterotrimer, i.e., the LT-beta receptor. The gene for the TNFC receptor
is symbolized TNFCR (600979).

Warzocha et al. (1997) isolated 2 LT-beta isoforms from mRNAs of a panel
of human lymphoid cell lines and tumor tissues obtained from patients
with non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The truncated LTB mRNA variant lacked 46
basepairs complementary to the complete sequence of exon 2, suggesting
that both isoforms are produced by an alternative splicing mechanism.
The predicted protein would be severely shortened and would lack the
majority of the extracellular domain of the native molecule, thus
impairing its normal complex assembly with LTA. These observations
provide new insights into the molecular heterogeneity and biologic
function of LTB within the tumor necrosis factor and LT ligand-receptor
system.

MAPPING

Browning et al. (1993) found that the lymphotoxin-beta gene is located
in the major histocompatibility complex region on chromosome 6p21.3 just
centromeric of TNFA (191160), which in turn is just centromeric of TNFB.
They found that the structures of the 3 genes are very similar; however,
TNFC is transcribed from centromere to telomere, whereas the other 2
genes are transcribed in the opposite direction. Nalabolu et al. (1996)
showed that LTB is flanked by B144 (LST1; 109170) and 1C7 (NCR3; 611550)
on one side and IKBL (601022) and BAT1 (142560) on the other.

ANIMAL MODEL

Cui et al. (2006) found that Ltb was an Eda (300451) target gene by
comparative transcription profiling of embryonic skin during hair
follicle development in wildtype mice and Tabby mice that have a defect
in the Eda gene. Ltb was enriched in developing hair follicles of
wildtype but not Tabby mice. In mice lacking Ltb, all 3 types of mouse
hairs were formed, but they were structurally abnormal. Cui et al.
(2006) concluded that Ltb regulates the form of hair in developing hair
follicles and failure of Ltb activation can account for part of the
Tabby phenotype.

REFERENCE 1. Browning, J. L.; Ngam-ek, A.; Lawton, P.; DeMarinis, J.; Tizard,
R.; Chow, E. P.; Hession, C.; O'Brine-Greco, B.; Foley, S. F.; Ware,
C. F.: Lymphotoxin beta, a novel member of the TNF family that forms
a heteromeric complex with lymphotoxin on the cell surface. Cell 72:
847-856, 1993.

2. Crowe, P. D.; VanArsdale, T. L.; Walter, B. N.; Ware, C. F.; Hession,
C.; Ehrenfels, B.; Browning, J. L.; Din, W. S.; Goodwin, R. G; Smith,
C. A.: A lymphotoxin-beta-specific receptor. Science 264: 707-710,
1994.

3. Cui, C.-Y.; Hashimoto, T.; Grivennikov, S. I.; Piao, Y.; Nedospasov,
S. A.; Schlessinger, D.: Ectodysplasin regulates the lymphotoxin-beta
pathway for hair differentiation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 9142-9147,
2006.

4. Nakamura, T.; Tashiro, K.; Nazarea, M.; Nakano, T.; Sasayama, S.;
Honjo, T.: The murine lymphotoxin-beta receptor cDNA: isolation by
the signal sequence trap and chromosomal mapping. Genomics 30: 312-319,
1995.

5. Nalabolu, S. R.; Shukla, H.; Nallur, G.; Parimoo, S.; Weissman,
S. M.: Genes in a 220-kb region spanning the TNF cluster in human
MHC. Genomics 31: 215-222, 1996.

6. Warzocha, K.; Renard, N.; Charlot, C.; Bienvenu, J.; Coiffier,
B.; Salles, G.: Identification of two lymphotoxin beta isoforms expressed
in human lymphoid cell lines and non-Hodgkin's lymphomas. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 238: 273-276, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/28/2006
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 5/29/2001
Alan F. Scott - updated: 4/9/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/11/1996

EDITED mgross: 10/24/2007
alopez: 6/18/2007
terry: 6/4/2007
wwang: 8/7/2006
terry: 7/28/2006
mcapotos: 5/29/2001
terry: 5/29/2001
mark: 7/8/1997
jenny: 4/8/1997
mark: 4/9/1996
terry: 4/9/1996
mark: 4/8/1996
terry: 3/26/1996
mark: 2/19/1996
terry: 2/16/1996
mark: 1/15/1996

610795	TITLE *610795 SORBIN AND SH3 DOMAINS-CONTAINING 3; SORBS3
;;SH3 DOMAIN-CONTAINING ADAPTOR MOLECULE 1; SCAM1;;
SH3D4
VINEXIN-ALPHA, INCLUDED;;
VINEXIN-BETA, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The SORBS3 gene encodes 2 isoforms vinexin-alpha and -beta that are
vinculin (VCL; 193065)-binding cytoskeletal proteins involved in focal
adhesion and cell-cell adhesion (Kioka et al., 1999).

CLONING

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis with chicken vinculin as bait to screen a
human placenta cDNA library, followed by screening a human HeLa cDNA
library with a vinculin-binding cDNA fragment, Kioka et al. (1999)
cloned a partial SORBS3 cDNA. They cloned full-length and partial mouse
Sorbs3 cDNAs that encode mouse vinexin-alpha and -beta. The 733-amino
acid mouse vinexin-alpha and the 328-amino acid mouse vinexin-beta have
deduced molecular masses of 87 kD and 37 kD, respectively. Sequence
analysis of the 5-prime UTRs of the human and mouse cDNAs, suggested
that 2 distinct alternative promoters give rise to the 2 mRNA species.
Vinexin-beta corresponds to the C-terminal half of vinexin-alpha, and
both species share a region containing 3 SH3 domains. Northern blot
analysis detected a 2.0-kb transcript in all human tissues examined with
highest expression in heart, placenta, and pancreas, moderate expression
in brain and liver, and low expression in lung, skeletal muscle, and
kidney. A 3.0-kb transcript was expressed in skeletal muscle, heart,
brain, placenta, and pancreas at lower levels than the 2.0-kb
transcript. Only the 2.0-kb transcript was detected in HeLa cells,
consistent with isolation of this cDNA from the HeLa cell cDNA library.
Both mouse vinexin isoforms localized primarily to focal adhesions in
NIH3T3 cells, with lower levels of vinexin-beta also found in the
cytoplasm and nucleus, and both isoforms also localized to cell-cell
adhesions in porcine epithelial cells.

GENE FUNCTION

By in vitro GST binding and in vivo yeast 2-hybrid assays, Kioka et al.
(1999) showed that the region between the first and second SH3 domains
mediated binding to vinculin. Vinexin-beta enhanced cell-spreading
activity when expressed in mouse myoblastic cells.

Using Western blot analysis and immune complex kinase assays, Suwa et
al. (2002) determined that expression of vinexin-beta allowed
anchorage-independent ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948) activation stimulated by EGF
(131530). In contrast, expression of vinexin-beta had no effect on ERK2
activation in adherent cells, suggesting that vinexin-beta regulates the
anchorage dependence of ERK2 activation. Deletion analysis showed that
the region between the second and third SH3 domains is required for this
function.

Using Western blot analysis with phosphospecific antibodies, Mitsushima
et al. (2006) found that vinexin-beta expressed in COS-7 cells enhanced
phosphorylation of EGFR (131550) tyrosine residues in a cell
type-specific manner. Vinexin-beta did not stimulate EGFR
phosphorylation but suppressed its dephosphorylation, resulting in
sustained phosphorylation. Deletion analysis showed that the first and
third SH3 domains of vinexin-beta were required for inducing sustained
EGFR phosphorylation. By subcellular distribution and
immunoprecipitation analysis, they demonstrated that vinexin-beta
increased phosphorylated EGFR on the cell surface in a c-Cbl (CBL;
165360)-dependent manner, without altering EGFR phosphorylation in the
cytosol. Knockdown of vinexin-beta with siRNA reduced phosphorylation of
EGFR on the plasma membrane. Mitsushima et al. (2006) proposed that
expression of vinexin-beta decreases the amount of CBL in the cytosol
and delays EGFR endocytosis, leading to sustained phosphorylation of
EGFR on the cell surface.

REFERENCE 1. Kioka, N.; Sakata, S.; Kawauchi, T.; Amachi, T.; Akiyama, S. K.;
Okazaki, K.; Yaen, C.; Yamada, K. M.; Aota, S.: Vinexin: a novel
vinculin-binding protein with multiple SH3 domains enhances actin
cytoskeletal organization. J. Cell Biol. 144: 59-69, 1999.

2. Mitsushima, M.; Ueda, K.; Kioka, N.: Vinexin-beta regulates the
phosphorylation of epidermal growth factor receptor on the cell surface. Genes
Cells 11: 971-982, 2006.

3. Suwa, A.; Mitsushima, M.; Ito, T.; Akamatsu, M.; Ueda, K.; Amachi,
T.; Kioka, N.: Vinexin-beta regulates the anchorage dependence of
ERK2 activation stimulated by epidermal growth factor. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
13053-13058, 2002.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 2/22/2007

EDITED wwang: 02/23/2007
wwang: 2/23/2007

137216	TITLE *137216 ATPase, H+,K+ EXCHANGING, ALPHA SUBUNIT; ATP4A
;;GASTRIC HYDROGEN-POTASSIUM ATPase, ALPHA;;
ATP6A, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION Hydrogen-potassium ATPase is responsible for acid secretion into the
stomach and catalyzes electroneutral exchange of cytoplasmic hydrogen
ions and external potassium ions coupled with ATP hydrolysis. The enzyme
is found in gastric parietal cells where it is located in cytoplasmic
vesicles or apical plasma membranes of the secretory canaliculus. Maeda
et al. (1990) cloned the human gastric hydrogen-potassium ATPase gene
and determined its nucleotide sequence. The gene is 15 kb long, contains
22 exons, and encodes a protein of 1,035 residues including the
initiator methionine. The position of introns is similar to that in
human sodium-potassium ATPase alpha-1 (ATP1A1; 182310) and alpha-3
(ATP1A3; 182350) subunits; however, the first introns of the 2 enzymes
are difficult to align, and unlike the finding in the sodium-potassium
ATPase gene, the sixth exon in the hydrogen-potassium ATPase gene is not
separated by an intron. By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Song et
al. (1992) mapped the ATP4A gene (formerly symbolized ATP6A) to 19q13.1
in the same region as the ATP1A3 gene, which shows about 70% cDNA
homology.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Canfield et al. (1990)
REFERENCE 1. Canfield, V. A.; Okamoto, C. T.; Chow, D.; Dorfman, J.; Gros, P.;
Forte, J. G.; Levenson, R.: Cloning of the H,K-ATPase beta subunit:
tissue-specific expression, chromosomal assignment, and relationship
to Na,K-ATPase beta subunits. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 19878-19884, 1990.

2. Maeda, M.; Oshiman, K.-I.; Tamura, S.; Futai, M.: Human gastric
(H(+) + K(+))-ATPase gene: similarity to (Na(+) + K(+))-ATPase genes
in exon/intron organization but difference in control region. J.
Biol. Chem. 265: 9027-9032, 1990.

3. Song, I.; Yamada, T.; Trent, J. M.: Mapping of the gene encoding
the alpha-subunit of the human H(+),K(+)-ATPase to chromosome 19q13.1
by fluorescent in situ hybridization. Genomics 14: 547-548, 1992.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/6/1990

EDITED psherman: 10/08/1998
carol: 8/20/1998
terry: 8/19/1998
alopez: 6/4/1997
carol: 4/5/1993
carol: 1/8/1993
carol: 12/2/1992
carol: 10/15/1992
carol: 8/25/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

