176847	TITLE *176847 PROTEASOME SUBUNIT, BETA-TYPE, 10; PSMB10
;;PROTEASOME SUBUNIT MECL1;;
PROTEASOME SUBUNIT BETA-2I
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

CpG islands are useful landmarks in the genome for identifying genes. By
database screening, Larsen et al. (1992) found that 57% of human genes
are associated with CpG islands. Sites for rare cutting restriction
enzymes are mainly found in CpG islands. Clustered sites for at least 2
such enzymes are good indicators of a CpG island, and an estimated 78%
of island-associated genes can be located in this way. Guided by
identification of an island in a 40-kb cosmid insert, Larsen et al.
(1993) identified a cluster of 5 unrelated human genes on chromosome
16q22.1. One of the genes encodes a putative subunit of the proteasome
complex, MECL1, an intracellular, multicatalytic proteinase (Goldberg
and Rock, 1992). The derived protein sequence shares about 50% identity
with a putative yeast proteasome subunit and is similar to the sequence
of a peptide fragment from a rat proteasome subunit.

Cruz et al. (1997) characterized a full-length mouse Lmp10 cDNA and
found that Lmp10 encodes a protein of 273 amino acids with a calculated
molecular mass of 29 kD. Northern blot analysis showed that mouse Lmp2
(PSMB9; 177045), Lmp7 (PSMB8; 177046), and Lmp10 were expressed in
heart, liver, thymus, lung, and spleen, but not in brain, kidney,
skeletal muscle, or testis.

GENE FUNCTION

Cruz et al. (1997) found that mouse Lmp2, Lmp7, and Lmp10 were induced
by gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570).

GENE STRUCTURE

Larsen et al. (1993) determined that the MECL1 gene has 8 exons, covers
2.3 kb, and is transcribed in the same direction as the LCAT gene
(606967), from which it is separated by 3.1 kb.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Larsen et al. (1993) mapped the PSMB10 gene to
chromosome 16q22.1. Cruz et al. (1997) found that in mice the Psmb10
gene is present in single copy localized on chromosome 8 in a region of
conserved synteny with human chromosome 16.

ANIMAL MODEL

Basler et al. (2006) generated fertile and viable Mecl1 -/- mice. Flow
cytometric analysis showed that these mice had reduced numbers of
splenic Cd8 (see 186910)-positive T cells. The cytotoxic T lymphocyte
(CTL) response to dominant epitopes of lymphocytic choriomeningitis
virus (LCMV) was impaired in Mecl1 -/- mice. The defect was not
attributable to alterations in antigen presentation, but Mecl1 -/- mice
had reduced numbers of CTLs expressing the V-beta-10 segment of the
T-cell receptor (see 186930), which was prominent in the wildtype
anti-LCMV response. Basler et al. (2006) concluded that MECL1 has a role
in determining the T-cell repertoire for an antiviral T-cell response.

REFERENCE 1. Basler, M.; Moebius, J.; Elenich, L.; Groettrup, M.; Monaco, J.
J.: An altered T cell repertoire in MECL-1-deficient mice. J. Immun. 176:
6665-6672, 2006.

2. Cruz, M.; Elenich, L. A.; Smolarek, T. A.; Menon, A. G.; Monaco,
J. J.: DNA sequence, chromosomal localization, and tissue expression
of the mouse proteasome subunit Lmp10 (Psmb10) gene. Genomics 45:
618-622, 1997.

3. Goldberg, A. L.; Rock, K. L.: Proteolysis, proteasomes and antigen
presentation. Nature 357: 375-379, 1992.

4. Larsen, F.; Gundersen, G.; Lopez, R.; Prydz, H.: CpG islands as
gene markers in the human genome. Genomics 13: 1095-1107, 1992.

5. Larsen, F.; Solheim, J.; Kristensen, T.; Kolsto, A.-B.; Prydz,
H.: A tight cluster of five unrelated human genes on chromosome 16q22.1. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 2: 1589-1595, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/4/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/10/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/18/1993

EDITED mgross: 06/25/2007
mgross: 4/10/2007
terry: 4/4/2007
ckniffin: 5/29/2002
dkim: 7/23/1998
mark: 12/18/1997
terry: 12/10/1997
carol: 10/20/1993
carol: 10/19/1993
carol: 10/18/1993

192225	TITLE *192225 VASCULAR CELL ADHESION MOLECULE 1; VCAM1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Vascular cell adhesion molecule-1, a cell surface glycoprotein expressed
by cytokine-activated endothelium, mediates the adhesion of monocytes
and lymphocytes (Cybulsky et al., 1991). In inflammatory conditions and
in cardiac allografts undergoing rejection, VCAM1 is upregulated in
endothelium of postcapillary venules. Arterial expression of VCAM1 is
also found in experimental models of atherosclerosis in the rabbit.

GENE STRUCTURE

Cybulsky et al. (1991) demonstrated that VCAM1 is present in single copy
in the human genome and contains 9 exons spanning about 25 kb of DNA. At
least 2 different VCAM1 precursors can be generated from the human gene
as a result of alternative mRNA splicing events, which include or
exclude exon 5.

MAPPING

Cybulsky et al. (1991) mapped the VCAM1 gene to chromosome 1 by Southern
analysis of somatic cell hybrids. A study of 2 hybrid lines carrying
translocations involving chromosome 1 permitted regionalization to
1p34-p21. Fluorescence in situ hybridization to metaphase chromosomes
further narrowed the localization to 1p32-p31. (Another endothelial
leukocyte adhesion molecule, ELAM1 (131210), is located on chromosome 1,
but on the long arm.)

Kumar et al. (1994) mapped the murine Vcam1 gene to chromosome 3 near
Amy1.

GENE FUNCTION

In a review of molecular pathways controlling heart development, Olson
and Srivastava (1996) cited studies indicating that deficiencies of the
cell adhesion molecules VCAM and alpha-4 integrin (192975) result in
epicardial dissolution and subsequent myocardial thinning.

Lu and Cyster (2002) studied the mechanisms that control localization of
marginal zone B cells. They demonstrated that marginal zone B cells
express elevated levels of the integrins LFA1 (see 153370/600065) and
alpha-4 (192975)-beta-1 (135630), and that the marginal zone B cells
bind to the ligands ICAM1 (147840) and VCAM1. These ligands are
expressed within the marginal zone in a lymphotoxin-dependent manner.
Combined inhibition of LFA1 and alpha-4-beta-1 causes a rapid and
selective release of B cells from the marginal zone. Furthermore,
lipopolysaccharide-triggered marginal zone B cell relocalization
involves downregulation of integrin-mediated adhesion. Lu and Cyster
(2002) concluded that their studies identified key requirements for
marginal zone B cell localization and established a role for integrins
in peripheral lymphoid tissue compartmentalization.

Garmy-Susini et al. (2005) demonstrated that integrin alpha-4-beta-1 and
VCAM1 are expressed by proliferating but not quiescent endothelial cells
and mural cells, respectively. Antagonists of this integrin-ligand pair
blocked the adhesion of mural cells to proliferating endothelia in vitro
and in vivo, thereby inducing apoptosis of endothelial cells and
pericytes and inhibiting neovascularization. Garmy-Susini et al. (2005)
concluded that integrin alpha-4-beta-1 and VCAM1 facilitate a critical
cell-cell adhesion event required for survival of endothelial and mural
cells during vascularization.

Garrison et al. (2005) described cotransin, a small molecule that
inhibits protein translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum. Cotransin
acts in a signal-sequence-discriminatory manner to prevent the stable
insertion of select nascent chains (specifically VCAM1, and P-selectin,
173610) into the Sec61 translocation channel. Garrison et al. (2005)
concluded that the range of substrates accommodated by the channel can
be specifically and reversibly modulated by a cell-permeable small
molecule that alters the interaction between signal sequences and the
Sec61 complex. This has various implications for drug development.

Besemer et al. (2005) developed a very similar VCAM1 depressing agent,
which they called CAM741. CAM741 works similar to cotransin in that it
represses the biosynthesis of VCAM1 cells by blocking the process of
cotranslational translocation, which is dependent on the signal peptide
of VCAM1. CAM741 does not inhibit targeting of the VCAM1 nascent chains
to the translocon channel but prevents translocation to the luminal side
of the endoplasmic reticulum through a process that involves the
translocon component Sec61-beta (609214). Consequently, the VCAM1
precursor protein is synthesized towards the cytosolic compartment of
the cells, where it is degraded.

By in vivo selection, transcriptomic analysis, functional verification,
and clinical validation, Minn et al. (2005) identified a set of genes
that marks and mediates breast cancer metastasis to the lungs. Some of
these genes serve dual functions, providing growth advantages both in
the primary tumor and in the lung microenvironment. Others contribute to
aggressive growth selectivity in the lung. Among the lung metastasis
signature genes identified, several, including VCAM1, were functionally
validated. Those subjects expressing the lung metastasis signature had a
significantly poorer lung metastasis-free survival, but not bone
metastasis-free survival, compared to subjects without the signature.

Campbell et al. (2006) found that increased serum levels of soluble
VCAM1 predicted recurrent ischemic stroke (601367) in a study of 252
patients. A smaller but similar trend was noted for serum levels of
N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NPPB; 600295). Patients in
the highest quarters for both sVCAM1 and NT-proBNP levels had 3.6 times
the risk of recurrent ischemic stroke compared to patients in the lowest
quarters for both biologic markers.

By database analysis, Harris et al. (2008) identified a potential target
sequence for miR126 (MIRN126; 611767), a microRNA selectively expressed
in endothelial cells, in the 3-prime UTR of VCAM1. Transfection of human
endothelial cells with antisense miR126 permitted an increase in
TNF-alpha (TNF; 191160)-stimulated VCAM1 expression. Conversely,
overexpression of the miR126 precursor increased miR126 levels and
decreased VCAM1 expression. Decreasing endogenous miR126 levels
increased leukocyte adherence to endothelial cells. Harris et al. (2008)
concluded that miR126 inhibits VCAM1 expression.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Taylor et al. (2002) identified 33 SNPs in the VCAM1 locus. They then
analyzed a subset of these SNPs in 51 cases of stroke in sickle cell
disease (603903) patients derived from a single institution in Jamaica
and in 51 matched controls. They found that the C variant allele of the
nonsynonymous SNP 1238G-C, which results in a gly413-to-ala amino acid
change (G413A), may be associated with protection from stroke (odds
ratio = 0.35). Dover (2002) stated that sickle cell disease is not a
single gene disorder and emphasized the need for further studies of the
relationship of VCAM1 to strokes in this disorder.

Idelman et al. (2007) stated that VCAM1 transcription induction is
highly dependent on cell and organ type and mode of stimulation by
various transcription factors. The authors identified 8 VCAM1 promoter
haplotypes comprising 13 SNPs previously identified by Taylor et al.
(2002) in African Americans. Functional cellular expression studies in T
cells stimulated by T-cell mitogens assessed the inducibility of
expression of the different haplotypes. A -540A-G SNP (dbSNP rs3783605)
was found to gain an ETS2 (164740)-binding site, which was postulated by
Idelman et al. (2007) to have functional importance.

REFERENCE 1. Besemer, J.; Harant, H.; Wang, S.; Oberhauser, B.; Marquardt, K.;
Foster, C. A.; Schreiner, E. P.; de Vries, J. E.; Dascher-Nadel, C.;
Lindley, I. J. D.: Selective inhibition of cotranslational translocation
of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1. (Letter) Nature 436: 290-293,
2005.

2. Campbell, D. J.; Woodward, M.; Chalmers, J. P.; Colman, S. A.;
Jenkins, A. J.; Kemp, B. E.; Neal, B. C.; Patel, A.; MacMahon, S.
W.: Soluble vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 and N-terminal pro-B-type
natriuretic peptide in predicting ischemic stroke in patients with
cerebrovascular disease. Arch. Neurol. 63: 60-65, 2006.

3. Cybulsky, M.; Fries, J. W.; Williams, A. J.; Sultan, P.; Eddy,
R. L.; Byers, M. G.; Shows, T. B.; Gimbrone, M. A., Jr.; Collins,
T.: The human VCAM1 gene is assigned to chromosome 1p31-p32. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 58: 1852, 1991.

4. Cybulsky, M. I.; Fries, J. W. U.; Williams, A. J.; Sultan, P.;
Eddy, R.; Byers, M.; Shows, T.; Gimbrone, M. A., Jr.; Collins, T.
: Gene structure, chromosomal location, and basis for alternative
mRNA splicing of the human VCAM1 gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88:
7859-7863, 1991.

5. Dover, G. J.: SS disease is not a single gene disorder. (Letter) Blood 100:
4255 only, 2002.

6. Garmy-Susini, B.; Jin, H.; Zhu, Y.; Sung, R.-J.; Hwang, R.; Varner,
J.: Integrin alpha-4-beta-1--VCAM-1--mediated adhesion between endothelial
and mural cells is required for blood vessel maturation. J. Clin.
Invest. 115: 1542-1551, 2005.

7. Garrison, J. L.; Kunkel, E. J.; Hedge, R. S.; Taunton, J.: A substrate-specific
inhibitor of protein translocation into the endoplasmic reticulum.
(Letter) Nature 436: 285-289, 2005.

8. Harris, T. A.; Yamakuchi, M.; Ferlito, M.; Mendell, J. T.; Lowenstein,
C. J.: MicroRNA-126 regulates endothelial expression of vascular
cell adhesion molecule 1. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 1516-1521,
2008.

9. Idelman, G.; Taylor, J. G.; Tongbai, R.; Chen, R. A.; Haggerty,
C. M.; Bilke, S.; Chanock, S. J.; Gardner, K.: Functional profiling
of uncommon VCAM1 promoter polymorphisms prevalent in African American
populations. Hum. Mutat. 28: 824-829, 2007.

10. Kumar, A. G.; Dai, X. Y.; Kozak, C. A.; Mims, M. P.; Gotto, A.
M.; Ballantyne, C. M.: Murine VCAM-1: molecular cloning, mapping,
and analysis of a truncated form. J. Immun. 153: 4088-4098, 1994.

11. Lu, T. T.; Cyster, J. G.: Integrin-mediated long-term B cell
retention in the splenic marginal zone. Science 297: 409-412, 2002.

12. Minn, A. J.; Gupta, G. P.; Siegel, P. M.; Bos, P. D.; Shu, W.;
Giri, D. D.; Viale, A.; Olshen, A. B.; Gerald, W. L.; Massague, J.
: Genes that mediate breast cancer metastasis to lung. Nature 436:
518-524, 2005.

13. Olson, E.; Srivastava, D.: Molecular pathways controlling heart
development. Science 272: 671-676, 1996.

14. Taylor, J. G., VI; Tang, D. C.; Savage, S. A.; Leitman, S. F.;
Heller, S. I.; Serjeant, G. R.; Rodgers, G. P.; Chanock, S. J.: Variants
in the VCAM1 gene and risk for symptomatic stroke in sickle cell disease. Blood 100:
4303-4309, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 04/15/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/10/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/14/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/17/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/15/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/8/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/12/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/11/2002
Moyra Smith - Updated: 5/18/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/8/1991

EDITED mgross: 04/15/2008
wwang: 10/18/2007
ckniffin: 10/10/2007
carol: 5/16/2007
carol: 7/19/2006
ckniffin: 7/14/2006
alopez: 8/23/2005
alopez: 8/18/2005
terry: 8/17/2005
terry: 8/15/2005
wwang: 7/19/2005
wwang: 7/13/2005
terry: 7/8/2005
carol: 2/27/2003
tkritzer: 2/24/2003
terry: 2/12/2003
alopez: 9/11/2002
tkritzer: 9/11/2002
dkim: 7/17/1998
carol: 5/18/1996
carol: 1/27/1995
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/23/1992
carol: 9/27/1991
carol: 8/30/1991
carol: 8/8/1991

602423	TITLE *602423 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR SUBFAMILY 1, GROUP H, MEMBER 3; NR1H3
;;LIVER X RECEPTOR, ALPHA;;
LX RECEPTOR, ALPHA; LXRA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The liver X receptors, LXRA and LXRB (NR1H2; 600380), form a subfamily
of the nuclear receptor superfamily and are key regulators of macrophage
function, controlling transcriptional programs involved in lipid
homeostasis and inflammation. The inducible LXRA is highly expressed in
liver, adrenal gland, intestine, adipose tissue, macrophages, lung, and
kidney, whereas LXRB is ubiquitously expressed. Ligand-activated LXRs
form obligate heterodimers with retinoid X receptors (RXRs; see 180245)
and regulate expression of target genes containing LXR response elements
(summary by Korf et al., 2009).

CLONING

Retinoic acid mediates tissue-specific expression of target genes
through its binding to nuclear hormone receptors (e.g., RARA; 180240).
To activate transcription, these receptors bind specific sites, called
hormone response elements, within the target gene's regulatory region.
By screening a human liver cDNA library with an RARA cDNA probe, Willy
et al. (1995) identified a cDNA encoding NR1H3, or LXRA, an orphan
member of the nuclear receptor superfamily. The predicted 447-amino acid
LXRA protein contains a DNA-binding domain and a putative ligand-binding
domain; the amino acid sequences of these domains are 77% identical to
those of NR1H2. Northern blot analysis showed strong expression of a
1.9-kb LXRA transcript in metabolic organs such as liver, kidney, and
intestine. In mouse, Northern blot analysis detected a low level of Lxra
expression at embryonic day 13.5 that continued to increase through
parturition.

GENE FUNCTION

Willy et al. (1995) identified a distinct retinoid response element for
LXRA/RXRA (180245) heterodimers, termed the LXR-responsive element
(LXRE), that consists of 2 degenerate copies of the consensus hexad
sequence spaced by 4 nucleotides. LXRA specifically interacted with RXRA
in vivo to form a functional heterodimer in which RXRA was the
ligand-binding subunit. Willy et al. (1995) found that LXRA-mediated
gene activation was only induced by certain retinoids, including 9-cis
retinoic acid (9cRA). They concluded that LXRA is a tissue-specific
cofactor that permits RXRA to function as a potent 9cRA receptor with a
distinct target gene specificity. Willy et al. (1995) stated that LXRA
defines a novel retinoid response system.

In an elegant series of experiments designed to understand the effect of
RXR activation on cholesterol balance, Repa et al. (2000) treated
animals with the rexinoid LG268. Animals treated with rexinoid exhibited
marked changes in cholesterol balance, including inhibition of
cholesterol absorption and repressed bile acid synthesis. Studies with
receptor-selective agonists revealed that oxysterol receptors (LXRs) and
the bile acid receptor, FXR (603826), are the RXR heterodimeric partners
that mediate these effects by regulating expression of the
reverse-cholesterol transporter, ABC1 (ABCA1; 600046), and the
rate-limiting enzyme of bile acid synthesis, CYP7A1, respectively. These
RXR heterodimers serve as key regulators in cholesterol homeostasis by
governing reverse cholesterol transport from peripheral tissues, bile
acid synthesis in liver, and cholesterol absorption in intestine.
Activation of RXR/LXR heterodimers inhibits cholesterol absorption by
upregulation of ABC1 expression in the small intestine. Activation of
RXR/FXR heterodimers represses CYP7A1 expression and bile acid
production, leading to a failure to solubilize and absorb cholesterol.
Studies have shown that RXR/FXR-mediated repression of CYP7A1 is
dominant over RXR/LXR-mediated induction of CYP7A1, which explains why
the rexinoid represses rather than activates CYP7A1 (Lu et al., 2000).
Activation of the LXR signaling pathway results in the upregulation of
ABC1 in peripheral cells, including macrophages, to efflux free
cholesterol for transport back to the liver through high density
lipoprotein, where it is converted to bile acids by the LXR-mediated
increase in CYP7A1 expression. Secretion of biliary cholesterol in the
presence of increased bile acid pools normally results in enhanced
reabsorption of cholesterol; however, with the increased expression of
ABC1 and efflux of cholesterol back into the lumen, there is a reduction
in cholesterol absorption and net excretion of cholesterol and bile
acid. Rexinoids therefore offer a novel class of agents for treating
elevated cholesterol.

LXR activity is critical for physiologic lipid metabolism and transport.
Tangirala et al. (2002) linked LXR signaling pathways to the
pathogenesis of cardiovascular disease. Bone marrow transplantations
were used to selectively eliminate macrophage LXR expression in the
context of murine models of atherosclerosis. The results demonstrated
that LXRs are endogenous inhibitors of atherogenesis. Additionally,
elimination of LXR activity in bone marrow-derived cells mimicked many
aspects of Tangier disease (205400), a human high density lipoprotein
deficiency, including aberrant regulation of cholesterol transporter
expression, lipid accumulation in macrophages, splenomegaly, and
increased atherosclerosis. These results identified LXRs as targets for
therapeutic intervention in cardiovascular disease.

Macrophages have important roles in both lipid metabolism and
inflammation and are central to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. The
liver X receptors (LXRs) are established mediators of lipid-inducible
gene expression. In studies in cultured cells and in mice, Joseph et al.
(2003) demonstrated that LXRs and their ligands are negative regulators
of macrophage inflammatory gene expression. Transcriptional profiling of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced macrophages revealed reciprocal
LXR-dependent regulation of genes involved in lipid metabolism and the
innate immune response. In vitro, LXR ligands inhibited the expression
of inflammatory mediators such as inducible nitric oxide synthase
(163730), cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 (600262), and interleukin-6 (IL6;
147620) in response to bacterial infection or LPS stimulation. In vivo,
LXR agonists reduced inflammation in a model of contact dermatitis and
inhibited inflammatory gene expression in the aortas of atherosclerotic
mice. These findings indicated that LXRs are lipid-dependent regulators
of inflammatory gene expression that may serve to link lipid metabolism
and immune functions in macrophages.

Mitro et al. (2007) showed that glucose binds and stimulates the
transcriptional activity of LXR, a nuclear receptor that coordinates
hepatic lipid metabolism. D-glucose and D-glucose-6-phosphate are direct
agonists of both LXR-alpha and LXR-beta. Glucose activated LXR at
physiologic concentrations expected in the liver and induced expression
of LXR target genes with efficacy similar to that of oxysterols, the
known LXR ligands. Cholesterol homeostasis genes that require LXR for
expression were upregulated in liver and intestine of fasted mice refed
with a glucose diet, indicating that glucose is an endogenous LXR
ligand. Mitro et al. (2007) concluded that their results identified LXR
as a transcriptional switch that integrates hepatic glucose metabolism
and fatty acid synthesis.

Zelcer et al. (2009) demonstrated that the sterol-responsive nuclear
liver X receptor (LXR) helps maintain cholesterol homeostasis, not only
through promotion of cholesterol efflux but also through suppression of
LDL uptake. LXR inhibits the LDL receptor (LDLR; 606945) pathway through
the transcriptional induction of IDOL (MYLIP; 610082), an E3 ubiquitin
ligase that triggers ubiquitination of the LDLR on its cytoplasmic
domain, thereby targeting it for degradation. LXR ligand reduced,
whereas LXR knockout increased, LDLR protein levels in vivo in a
tissue-selective manner. IDOL knockdown in hepatocytes increased LDLR
protein levels and promoted LDL uptake. Conversely, Zelcer et al. (2009)
found that adenovirus-mediated expression of IDOL in mouse liver
promoted LDLR degradation and elevated plasma LDL levels. Zelcer et al.
(2009) concluded that the LXR-IDOL-LDLR axis defines a complementary
pathway to sterol response element-binding proteins for sterol
regulation of cholesterol uptake.

ANIMAL MODEL

Peet et al. (1998) demonstrated that mice lacking the oxysterol receptor
LXRA lost their ability to respond normally to dietary cholesterol and
were unable to tolerate any amount of cholesterol in excess of that
which they synthesized de novo. When fed diets containing cholesterol,
Lxra -/- mice failed to induce transcription of the gene encoding
cholesterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1; 118455), the rate-limiting
enzyme in bile acid synthesis. This defect was associated with a rapid
accumulation of large amounts of cholesterol in the liver that
eventually led to impaired hepatic function. The regulation of several
other crucial lipid metabolizing genes was also altered in Lxra -/-
mice. The results of Peet et al. (1998) demonstrated the existence of a
physiologically significant feed-forward regulatory pathway for sterol
metabolism and established the role of LXRA as the major sensor of
dietary cholesterol.

Repa et al. (2002) presented evidence for the direct control of the
ATP-binding cassette sterol transporters Abca1 (600046), Abcg5 (605459),
and Abcg8 (605460) by the liver X receptors. The intensity of hepatic
and jejunal staining for Abcg5/g8 and Abca1 was increased in normal mice
fed cholesterol or other Lxr agonists. Cholesterol feeding resulted in
upregulation of Abcg5 and Abcg8 in the Lxrb-null mice, but not in the
Lxra-null or double knockout mice, suggesting that Lxra is required for
sterol upregulation of Abcg5/g8 in this model. In a rat hepatoma cell
line, Lxr-dependent transcription of the Abcg5/g8 genes was
cycloheximide-resistant, indicating that these genes are directly
regulated by the liver X receptors.

Joseph et al. (2002) demonstrated that the nonsteroidal Lxr agonist
GW3965 has potent antiatherogenic activity in 2 different murine models:
Ldlr -/- mice (606945) and ApoE -/- mice (107741).

Joseph et al. (2003) demonstrated that LXR agonists reduced inflammation
in a model of contact dermatitis and inhibited inflammatory gene
expression in the aortas of atherosclerotic mice; these and other
findings suggested that LXRs are lipid-dependent regulators of
inflammatory gene expression that may serve to link lipid metabolism and
immune functions in macrophages.

In Abcg5/Abcg8-deficient mice, Yang et al. (2004) demonstrated that
accumulation of plant sterols perturbed cholesterol homeostasis in the
adrenal gland, with a 91% reduction in its cholesterol content. Despite
very low cholesterol levels, there was no compensatory increase in
cholesterol synthesis or in lipoprotein receptor expression. Adrenal
cholesterol levels returned to near-normal levels in mice treated with
ezetimibe, which blocks phytosterol absorption. In cultured adrenal
cells, stigmasterol but not sitosterol inhibited SREBP2 (600481)
processing and reduced cholesterol synthesis; stigmasterol also
activated the liver X receptor in a cell-based reporter assay. Yang et
al. (2004) concluded that selected dietary plant sterols disrupt
cholesterol homeostasis by affecting 2 critical regulatory pathways of
lipid metabolism.

Macrophages play a direct role, through both innate and adaptive
immunity, in microbial killing, and they orchestrate inflammatory
responses through the release of immune modulators, such as chemokines
and cytokines. Joseph et al. (2004) found that mice lacking both Lxra
and Lxrb (Lxr-null) were highly susceptible to infection with Listeria
monocytogenes (LM) in a dose-dependent manner. In addition, they
determined that Lxra-deficient mice were more susceptible than
Lxrb-deficient mice. Compared with wildtype mice, bacterial burdens were
2 logs higher in Lxr-null and Lxra -/- mice, and neutrophilic abscesses
in liver were increased in Lxr-null mice. Analysis of plasma cytokine
and chemokine mediators indicated no significant change in inflammatory
mediators, except for Il6 and Il12p70 (see 161560). Microarray analysis
and real-time RT-PCR revealed that the most striking difference in
response to LM infection in the mutant mice was reduced expression of
the antiapoptotic factor Sp-alpha (CD5L; 602592) and, to a lesser
extent, Marco (604870), both of which are members of the scavenger
receptor cysteine-rich repeat family. Sp-alpha expression was severely
compromised in response to LXR ligands in Lxra -/- macrophages, but not
in Lxrb -/- macrophages, and the Sp-alpha promoter was preferentially
activated by Lxra. In contrast, expression of Cd14 (158120) and Cd68
(153634) increased in Lxr-null mice after LM infection. Infection of
macrophages with LM or Shigella, but not with extracellular bacteria,
strongly induced Lxra expression, but not Lxrb expression, via the NOD
(see CARD4; 605980) signaling pathway. Flow cytometric and TUNEL
analyses demonstrated increased apoptosis in Lxr-null macrophages
compared with wildtype macrophages. Joseph et al. (2004) concluded that
LXR activity and its regulation of Sp-alpha promotes macrophage survival
and antimicrobial function in the setting of LM and intracellular
pathogen infection.

In a mouse renin (179820)-expressing cell line, Morello et al. (2005)
demonstrated that both LXRA and LXRB could bind to the renin promoter
and regulate renin transcription; cAMP increased LXRA activity but
decreased that of LXRB. In the mouse kidney, in situ hybridization
studies showed colocalization of renin and LXRA in juxtaglomerular
cells, and in mouse models, renin-angiotensin (see 106150) activation
was associated with increased binding of LXRA to the renin promoter. In
Lxra-null mice, the elevation of renin triggered by adrenergic
stimulation was abolished; untreated Lxrb-null mice exhibited reduced
kidney renin mRNA levels compared with controls. Lxra/Lxrb-null mice
showed a combined phenotype of lower basal renin and blunted adrenergic
response. Morello et al. (2005) concluded that LXRA and LXRB regulate
renin expression in vivo by directly interacting with the renin promoter
and that the cAMP/LXRA signaling pathway is required for adrenergic
control of the renin-angiotensin system.

Cummins et al. (2006) demonstrated that under chronic dietary stress the
adrenal glands of Lxra/Lxrb double-null mice accumulated free
cholesterol, whereas wildtype mice maintained cholesterol homeostasis.
At baseline, Lxra/Lxrb double-null mice exhibited a marked decrease in
Abca1 and derepression of Star (600617) expression, causing a net
decrease in cholesterol efflux and an increase in steroidogenesis. In
Lxra/Lxrb double-null mice pretreated with dexamethasone to prevent the
acute stress response, the phenotype of hypercorticosteronemia,
cholesterol ester accumulation, and adrenomegaly was specific to loss of
Lxra and not Lxrb. Western blot analysis showed increased expression of
STAR in human and mouse adrenal cells treated with LXR and RXR agonists.
Stimulation of Star expression by Lxra activation was mediated by
binding of the Lxra/Rxra heterodimer to an LXR response element (LRE) in
the mouse Star promoter. Cummins et al. (2006) suggested that LXRA
provides a safety valve to limit free cholesterol levels as a basal
protective mechanism in the adrenal gland.

Bradley et al. (2007) generated Lxra-null/Apoe-null mice and observed
extreme cholesterol accumulation in peripheral tissues, a dramatic
increase in whole-body cholesterol burden, and accelerated
atherosclerosis, which suggested that the level of Lxr pathway
activation in macrophages achieved by Lxrb and endogenous ligand was
unable to maintain homeostasis in the setting of hypercholesterolemia.
Treatment of Lxra-null/Apoe-null mice with the highly efficacious
synthetic Lxr agonist GW3965, however, ameliorated the cholesterol
overload phenotype and reduced atherosclerosis. Bradley et al. (2007)
concluded that LXRA has an essential role in maintaining peripheral
cholesterol homeostasis in the context of hypercholesterolemia.

Using mice lacking Lxra or Lxrb, Bensinger et al. (2008) showed that
T-cell activation triggered induction of the oxysterol-metabolizing
enzyme Sult2b1 (604125), suppression of the Lxr pathway for cholesterol
transport, and promotion of the Srebp2 pathway for cholesterol
synthesis. Proliferation was inhibited by Lxr ligation during T-cell
activation by mitogen, but cells from mice lacking Lxrb had a
proliferative advantage. Lymphocytes lacking Abcg1 (603076) were not
inhibited in the presence of Lxr agonists, indicating that transport of
sterols by ABCG1 is required for LXR agonist-mediated inhibition. Mice
lacking Lxrb displayed lymphoid hyperplasia and enhanced responses to
antigenic challenge. Bensinger et al. (2008) concluded that cellular
cholesterol levels in dividing T cells are maintained, in part, through
reciprocal regulation of LXR and SREBP transcriptional programs, and
that LXR signaling is a metabolic checkpoint that modulates cell
proliferation and immunity.

Using RT-PCR analysis of Cd11c (ITGAX; 151510)-positive lung and
alveolar cells from mice infected intratracheally with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, Korf et al. (2009) detected increased expression of Lxra
and Lxrb and their target genes, Apoe and Abca1, as well as Pparg
(601487) and Srebp1 (SREBF1; 184756). Mice deficient in Lxra or both
Lxra and Lxrb, but not mice deficient in Lxrb only, were more
susceptible to infection than wildtype mice in terms of bacterial burden
and in size and number of granulomatous lesions. Double-knockout mice
failed to mount an early neutrophilic response and showed dysregulation
in the expression of inflammatory factors by Cd11c cells. Diminished Th1
and Th17 function, but not Th2 function, was also found in lungs of
infected mice. Treatment with Lxr agonists resulted in a 10-fold
decrease in bacterial burden and increased Th1 and Th17 function. Korf
et al. (2009) concluded that the neutrophil-IL17 (603149) axis depends
on LXR signaling and is important in resistance to M. tuberculosis
infection.

REFERENCE 1. Bensinger, S. J.; Bradley, M. N.; Joseph, S. B.; Zelcer, N.; Janssen,
E. M.; Hausner, M. A.; Shih, R.; Parks, J. S.; Edwards, P. A.; Jamieson,
B. D.; Tontonoz, P.: LXR signaling couples sterol metabolism to proliferation
in the acquired immune response. Cell 134: 97-111, 2008.

2. Bradley, M. N.; Hong, C.; Chen, M.; Joseph, S. B.; Wilpitz, D.
C.; Wang, X.; Lusis, A. J.; Collins, A.; Hseuh, W. A.; Collins, J.
L.; Tangirala, R. K.; Tontonoz, P.: Ligand activation of LXR-beta
reverses atherosclerosis and cellular cholesterol overload in mice
lacking LXR-alpha and apoE. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 2337-2346, 2007.

3. Cummins, C. L.; Volle, D. H.; Zhang, Y.; McDonald, J. G.; Sion,
B.; Lefrancois-Martinez, A.-M.; Caira, F.; Veyssiere, G.; Mangelsdorf,
D. J.; Lobaccaro, J.-M. A.: Liver X receptors regulate adrenal cholesterol
balance. J. Clin. Invest. 116: 1902-1912, 2006.

4. Joseph, S. B.; Bradley, M. N.; Castrillo, A.; Bruhn, K. W.; Mak,
P. A.; Pei, L.; Hogenesch, J.; O'Connell, R. M.; Cheng, G.; Saez,
E.; Miller, J. F.; Tontonoz, P.: LXR-dependent gene expression is
important for macrophage survival and the innate immune response. Cell 119:
299-309, 2004.

5. Joseph, S. B.; Castrillo, A.; Laffitte, B. A.; Mangelsdorf, D.
J.; Tontonoz, P.: Reciprocal regulation of inflammation and lipid
metabolism by liver X receptors. Nature Med. 9: 213-219, 2003.

6. Joseph, S. B.; McKilligin, E.; Pei, L.; Watson, M. A.; Collins,
A. R.; Laffitte, B. A.; Chen, M.; Noh, G.; Goodman, J.; Hagger, G.
N.; Tran, J.; Tippin, T. K.; Wang, X.; Lusis, A. J.; Hsueh, W. A.;
Law, R. E.; Collins, J. L.; Willson, T. M.; Tontonoz, P.: Synthetic
LXR ligand inhibits the development of atherosclerosis in mice. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 7604-7609, 2002.

7. Korf, H.; Vander Beken, S.; Romano, M.; Steffensen, K. R.; Stijlemans,
B.; Gustafsson, J.-A.; Grooten, J.; Huygen, K.: Liver X receptors
contribute to the protective immune response against Mycobacterium
tuberculosis in mice. J. Clin. Invest. 119: 1626-1637, 2009.

8. Lu, T. T.; Makishima, M.; Repa, J. J.; Schoonjans, K.; Kerr, T.
A.; Auwerx, J.; Mangelsdorf, D. J.: Molecular basis for feedback
regulation of bile acid synthesis by nuclear receptors. Molec. Cell 6:
507-515, 2000.

9. Mitro, N.; Mak, P. A.; Vargas, L.; Godio, C.; Hampton, E.; Molteni,
V.; Kreusch, A.; Saez, E.: The nuclear receptor LXR is a glucose
sensor. Nature 445: 219-223, 2007.

10. Morello, F.; de Boer, R. A.; Steffensen, K. R.; Gnecchi, M.; Chisholm,
J. W.; Boomsma, F.; Anderson, L. M.; Lawn, R. M.; Gustafsson, J.-A.;
Lopez-Ilasaca, M.; Pratt, R. E.; Dzau, V. J.: Liver X receptors alpha
and beta regulate renin expression in vivo. J. Clin. Invest. 115:
1913-1922, 2005.

11. Peet, D. J.; Turley, S. D.; Ma, W.; Janowski, B. A.; Lobaccaro,
J.-M. A.; Hammer, R. E.; Mangelsdorf, D. J.: Cholesterol and bile
acid metabolism are impaired in mice lacking the nuclear oxysterol
receptor LXR-alpha. Cell 93: 693-704, 1998.

12. Repa, J. J.; Berge, K. E.; Pomajzl, C.; Richardson, J. A.; Hobbs,
H.; Mangelsdorf, D. J.: Regulation of ATP-binding cassette sterol
transporters ABCG5 and ABCG8 by the liver X receptors alpha and beta. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 18793-18800, 2002.

13. Repa, J. J.; Turley, S. D.; Lobaccaro, J.-M. A.; Medina, J.; Li,
L.; Lustig, K.; Shan, B.; Heyman, R. A.; Dletschy, J. M.; Mangelsdorf,
D. J.: Regulation of absorption and ABC1-mediated efflux of cholesterol
by RXR heterodimers. Science 289: 1524-1529, 2000.

14. Tangirala, R. K.; Bischoff, E. D.; Joseph, S. B.; Wagner, B. L.;
Walczak, R.; Laffitte, B. A.; Daige, C. L.; Thomas, D.; Heyman, R.
A.; Mangelsdorf, D. J.; Wang, X.; Lusis, A. J.; Tontonoz, P.; Schulman,
I. G.: Identification of macrophage liver X receptors as inhibitors
of atherosclerosis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 11896-11901, 2002.

15. Willy, P. J.; Umesono, K.; Ong, E. S.; Evans, R. M.; Heyman, R.
A.; Mangelsdorf, D. J.: LXR, a nuclear receptor that defines a distinct
retinoid response pathway. Genes Dev. 9: 1033-1045, 1995.

16. Yang, C.; Yu, L.; Li, W.; Xu, F.; Cohen, J. C.; Hobbs, H. H.:
Disruption of cholesterol homeostasis by plant sterols. J. Clin.
Invest. 114: 813-822, 2004.

17. Zelcer, N.; Hong, C.; Boyadjian, R.; Tontonoz, P.: LXR regulates
cholesterol uptake through Idol-dependent ubiquitination of the LDL
receptor. Science 325: 100-104, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 1/4/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/11/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/14/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/5/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/21/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/20/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/16/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/28/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/12/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/14/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/28/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/17/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/11/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/31/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/24/1998

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 3/9/1998

EDITED mgross: 01/04/2010
mgross: 1/4/2010
terry: 12/11/2009
alopez: 8/17/2009
terry: 8/14/2009
mgross: 11/7/2008
terry: 11/5/2008
wwang: 10/14/2008
wwang: 1/9/2008
terry: 12/21/2007
wwang: 7/30/2007
alopez: 2/21/2007
terry: 2/20/2007
wwang: 11/17/2006
terry: 11/16/2006
carol: 8/26/2005
alopez: 8/10/2005
terry: 7/28/2005
terry: 4/5/2005
mgross: 1/12/2005
carol: 10/15/2004
terry: 10/14/2004
alopez: 2/28/2003
alopez: 1/15/2003
terry: 1/14/2003
tkritzer: 10/28/2002
mgross: 10/1/2002
cwells: 7/8/2002
terry: 6/17/2002
carol: 6/11/2002
carol: 3/29/2001
mgross: 10/10/2000
mgross: 8/31/2000
mgross: 9/21/1999
alopez: 5/21/1999
terry: 2/16/1999
carol: 6/24/1998
psherman: 6/15/1998
dholmes: 3/9/1998

608554	TITLE *608554 NEURONAL PAS DOMAIN PROTEIN 4; NPAS4
;;HLH-PAS TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR NXF; NXF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NXF is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix-PER (602260)-ARNT
(126110)-SIM (see SIM2; 600892) (bHLH-PAS) class of transcriptional
regulators, which are involved in a wide range of physiologic and
developmental events (Ooe et al., 2004).

CLONING

By searching a database for PAS domain sequences, followed by screening
a fetal brain cDNA library, Ooe et al. (2004) cloned NXF. The deduced
802-amino acid protein contains an N-terminal bHLH domain, followed by 2
PAS domains and a C-terminal activation domain. Northern blot analysis
of several adult tissues detected robust expression only in brain, with
faint expression in skeletal muscle and kidney. In developing mouse
brain, expression of Nxf was only detectable beginning at embryonic day
17 and was higher in the 4-week postnatal brain. In situ hybridization
of adult rat brain revealed punctate expression in the cerebral cortex
and striatum, with prominent expression in the neuronal cell layers of
the hippocampus. In the cerebellum, slight expression was found at the
Purkinje cell layer.

GENE FUNCTION

Ooe et al. (2004) determined that the C terminus of NXF could activate a
reporter gene following transfection in neuroblastoma, embryonic kidney,
and HeLa cells. Overexpression of a general transcriptional coactivator,
p300 (602700), enhanced the activity. By mammalian 2-hybrid assay, they
found that NXF could heterodimerize with ARNT, ARNT2 (606036), and BMAL1
(602550), but not with other bHLH-PAS factors, and NXF did not
homodimerize. DNA binding studies indicated that the NXF/ARNT2
heterodimers could bind to a DNA element recognized by the SIM2/ARNT
heterodimer and also to a related sequence; however, neither factor
could bind DNA independently. In addition, SIM2 competed with NXF for
DNA binding.

Lin et al. (2008) reported that the transcription factor NPAS4 plays a
role in the development of inhibitory synapses by regulating the
expression of activity-dependent genes, which in turn control the number
of GABA-releasing synapses that form on excitatory neurons. Lin et al.
(2008) concluded that their findings demonstrated that the
activity-dependent gene program regulates inhibitory synapse development
and suggested a new role for this program in controlling the homeostatic
balance between synaptic excitation and inhibition.

Ramamoorthi et al. (2011) found that the activity-dependent
transcription factor Npas4 regulates a transcriptional program in the
CA3 region of the hippocampus that is required for contextual memory
formation. Npas4 was specifically expressed in CA3 after contextual
learning. Global knockout or selective deletion of Npas4 in CA3 both
resulted in impaired contextual memory, and restoration of Npas4 in CA3
was sufficient to reverse the deficit in global knockout mice. By
recruiting RNA polymerase II (see 180660) to promoters and enhancers of
target genes, Npas4 regulates a learning-specific transcriptional
program in CA3 that includes many well-known activity-regulated genes,
which suggested that Npas4 is a master regulator of activity-regulated
gene programs and is central to memory formation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ooe et al. (2004) determined that the mouse Nxf gene contains 8 exons
and spans 5 kb. They stated that this gene composition appears to be
conserved in the human gene.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Ooe et al. (2004) mapped the NPAS4 gene to
chromosome 11q13.

REFERENCE 1. Lin, Y.; Bloodgood, B. L.; Hauser, J. L.; Lapan, A. D.; Koon, A.
C.; Kim, T.-K.; Hu, L. S.; Malik, A. N.; Greenberg, M. E.: Activity-dependent
regulation of inhibitory synapse development by Npas4. Nature 455:
1198-1204, 2008.

2. Ooe, N.; Saito, K.; Mikami, N.; Nakatuka, I.; Kaneko, H.: Identification
of a novel basic helix-loop-helix-PAS factor, NXF, reveals a Sim2
competitive, positive regulatory role in dendritic-cytoskeleton modulator
drebrin gene expression. Molec. Cell. Biol. 24: 608-616, 2004.

3. Ramamoorthi, K.; Fropf, R.; Belfort, G. M.; Fitzmaurice, H. L.;
McKinney, R. M.; Neve, R. L.; Otto, T.; Lin, Y.: Npas4 regulates
a transcriptional program in CA3 required for contextual memory formation. Science 334:
1669-1675, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/7/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/30/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/29/2004

EDITED alopez: 02/09/2012
terry: 2/7/2012
alopez: 12/31/2008
terry: 12/30/2008
alopez: 7/29/2008
mgross: 3/29/2004

606475	TITLE *606475 CD320 ANTIGEN; CD320
;;8D6 ANTIGEN; 8D6; 8D6A;;
TRANSCOBALAMIN RECEPTOR; TCBLR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The CD320 antigen gene encodes the transcobalamin receptor (TCBLR).
Cellular uptake of cobalamin (vitamin B12) is mediated by receptors
expressed on the cell surface. Transcobalamin II (TCN2; 613441), a
plasma protein secreted by endothelial cells, binds the cobalamin
absorbed in the distal ileum and carries 10 to 30% of total circulating
cobalamin. CD320 encodes a transcobalamin receptor that binds
TCN2-cobalamin at the plasma membrane and internalizes the complex by
endocytosis (Quadros et al., 2009).

CLONING

B cells undergo clonal expansion in germinal centers (GCs) dependent on
initial contact with follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) as well as T
cells expressing CD40L (300386). Using monoclonal antibodies against FDC
clusters from tonsils, Li et al. (2000) identified an antibody,
designated 8D6, that inhibited the GC reaction. By expression cloning
methods using an FDC cell line, Li et al. (2000) isolated a cDNA
encoding 8D6. The predicted 282-amino acid protein possesses a signal
sequence, a transmembrane region, and a short cytoplasmic tail. The
extracellular region of 8D6 has 2 type A cysteine-rich repeats
homologous to those of LDLR (606945) family members; the 2 repeats are
interrupted by 4 pro residues and an N-glycosylation site. Northern blot
analysis showed wide expression of 8D6 in different tissues.

By affinity chromatography, SDS-PAGE, and database analysis, Quadros et
al. (2009) isolated a 58-kD transcobalamin receptor identical to CD320,
which the authors called TCBLR. The 282-amino acid protein has an
N-terminal signal peptide, followed by a 199-residue extracellular
domain, a 21-residue transmembrane sequence, and a 32-amino acid
cytoplasmic domain. The extracellular domain contains 18 cys residues
that are part of 2 LDLR class A domains, and TCBLR contains 3 potential
N-glycosylation sites and numerous possible O-glycosylation sites. TCBLR
has a calculated molecular mass of 29 kD. The 58-kD size by SDS-PAGE
suggests extensive glycosylation of the membrane-anchored protein.

GENE STRUCTURE

Quadros et al. (2009) determined that the CD320 gene spans 6.2 kb and
contains 5 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Quadros et al. (2009) mapped the CD320
gene to chromosome 19p13.2. They mapped the mouse Cd320 gene to
chromosome 17B1.

GENE FUNCTION

Functional analysis by Li et al. (2000) indicated that expression of 8D6
enhanced B-cell proliferation and immunoglobulin secretion. Treatment of
the FDC cell line and a lymphoma cell line coculture with anti-8D6
resulted in at least partial inhibition of lymphoma growth. Li et al.
(2000) proposed that antagonists of the 8D6 signaling pathway may
counter the growth of follicular lymphomas or other tumors that
metastasize to lymphoid follicles.

Quadros et al. (2009) found that mouse embryonic stem cells lacking
Tcblr exhibited reduced binding of TCN2, whereas binding was increased
in HEK293 cells transfected with TCBLR cDNA. Quadros et al. (2009)
concluded that TCBLR is a specific receptor for uptake of TCN2-bound
cobalamin.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Quadros et al. (2010) identified a homozygous mutation in the CD320 gene
(606475.0001) in an infant with methylmalonic aciduria due to a defect
in the transcobalamin receptor (613646). The infant was asymptomatic and
identified by newborn screening. Treatment with intramuscular
administration of vitamin B12 restored serum MMA levels to normal, but
the long-term effects of the condition could not be ascertained.
Biochemical studies on patient fibroblasts were consistent with a defect
in the cobalamin receptor. Studies of 4 additional cell lines derived
from patients with similar features identified the same mutation; 2 of
these additional patients had increased serum homocysteine.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
METHYLMALONIC ACIDURIA DUE TO TRANSCOBALAMIN RECEPTOR DEFECT
CD320, 3-BP DEL, 262GAG

In an infant with methylmalonic aciduria (613646) detected by newborn
screening, Quadros et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 3-bp deletion
(262delGAG) in the CD320 gene, resulting in an in-frame deletion of
glu88 in the 3-prime end of the first LDLR type A domain. Newborn
screening identified increased blood C3-acylcarnitine levels, and
urinary analysis showed moderately elevated MMA. Plasma vitamin B12 and
total homocysteine levels were normal. Repeat screening on day 14 of
life showed normal C3-acylcarnitine levels and increased MMA; vitamin
B12 was administered intramuscularly, and MMA returned to normal. All
hematologic parameters were normal, and the mother had no laboratory
abnormalities. Studies of patient fibroblasts showed increased levels of
MMA and homocysteine compared to control cells, but these levels
decreased in the presence of high levels of cobalamin. Patient
fibroblasts showed low uptake of transcobalamin-bound cobalamin, but
normal conversion to adenosylcobalamin and methylcobalamin, suggesting a
defect in the receptor. Insertion of the missing codon by site-directed
mutagenesis fully restored TCBLR function. Studies of 4 additional cell
lines derived from patients with similar features identified the same
mutation; 2 of these additional patients had increased serum
homocysteine.

REFERENCE 1. Li, L.; Zhang, X.; Kovacic, S.; Long, A. J.; Bourque, K.; Wood,
C. R.; Choi, Y. S.: Identification of a human follicular dendritic
cell molecule that stimulates germinal center B cell growth. J. Exp.
Med. 191: 1077-1083, 2000.

2. Quadros, E. V.; Lai, S.-C.; Nakayama, Y.; Sequeira, J. M.; Hannibal,
L.; Wang, S.; Jacobsen, D. W.; Fedosov, S.; Wright, E.; Gallagher,
R. C.; Anastasio, N.; Watkins, D.; Rosenblatt, D. S.: Positive newborn
screen for methylmalonic aciduria identifies the first mutation in
TCblR/CD320, the gene for cellular uptake of transcobalamin-bound
vitamin B(12). Hum. Mutat. 31: 924-929, 2010.

3. Quadros, E. V.; Nakayama, Y.; Sequeira, J. M.: The protein and
the gene encoding the receptor for the cellular uptake of transcobalamin-bound
cobalamin. Blood 113: 186-192, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/18/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/1/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/21/2009

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/20/2001

EDITED alopez: 02/01/2011
wwang: 11/18/2010
ckniffin: 11/18/2010
carol: 6/15/2010
mgross: 10/1/2009
terry: 9/21/2009
ckniffin: 6/5/2002
cwells: 4/8/2002
mgross: 11/20/2001

601681	TITLE *601681 PROTEASOME 26S SUBUNIT, ATPase, 5; PSMC5
;;THYROID HORMONE RECEPTOR INTERACTOR 1; TRIP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PSMC5 is a member of the AAA (ATPases Associated with diverse cellular
Activities) gene family (Hoyle et al., 1997).

GENE FAMILY

Members of the AAA gene family are most similar throughout an
approximately 230-amino acid ATPase domain (the AAA domain), and related
genes have been described in organisms as distant as archaebacteria and
eubacteria. All the known AAA proteins contain either 1 or 2 AAA
domains, and the family can be subdivided into 2 groups on this basis.
It appears that 2-domain AAA proteins (e.g., NSF, 601633) are associated
with membrane functions. In eukaryotes, the 1-domain AAA proteins such
as PSMC5 appear to be involved largely in the regulatory subunit of the
26S protease (summary by Hoyle et al., 1997).

CLONING

Lee et al. (1995) used the yeast interaction trap, a version of the
yeast 2-hybrid system, to identify proteins that specifically interact
with the ligand-binding domain of rat thyroid hormone receptor-beta
(THRB; 190160). They isolated HeLa cell cDNAs encoding several different
thyroid hormone receptor (TR)-interacting proteins (TRIPs), including
TRIP1 (PSMC5). TRIP1 strongly interacted with rat Thrb only in the
presence of thyroid hormone. It also showed a ligand-dependent
interaction with retinoid X receptor-alpha (RXRA; 180245), but did not
interact with the glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1; 138040) under any
condition. The deduced 406-amino acid TRIP1 protein shares a high degree
of sequence similarity with the yeast transcriptional coactivator SUG1.
TRIP1 contains an AAA domain that is positioned toward the C terminus,
which is typical in the AAA family. Lee et al. (1995) found that TRIP1
is ubiquitously expressed as an approximately 1.4-kb transcript.

GENE FUNCTION

Lee et al. (1995) showed that TRIP1 can functionally substitute for Sug1
in yeast, and that both proteins interact in vitro with the TR and with
the transcriptional activation domains of yeast GAL4 and herpes virus
VP16.

MAPPING

By PCR amplification of a partial sequence of PSMC5 in a panel of human
monochromosomal cell hybrids, Hoyle et al. (1997) demonstrated that the
PSMC5 gene is located on chromosome 17. By fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH), they refined the localization to chromosome
17q24-q25. Tanahashi et al. (1998) mapped the PSMC5 gene to chromosome
17q23.1-q23.3 by FISH.

REFERENCE 1. Hoyle, J.; Tan, K. H.; Fisher, E. M. C.: Localization of genes
encoding two human one-domain members of the AAA family: PSMC5 (the
thyroid hormone receptor-interacting protein, TRIP1) and PSMC3 (the
Tat-binding protein, TBP1). Hum. Genet. 99: 285-288, 1997.

2. Lee, J. W.; Choi, H.-S.; Gyuris, J.; Brent, R.; Moore, D. D.:
Two classes of proteins dependent on either the presence or absence
of thyroid hormone for interaction with the thyroid hormone receptor. Molec.
Endocr. 9: 243-254, 1995.

3. Lee, J. W.; Ryan, F.; Swaffield, J. C.; Johnston, S. A.; Moore,
D. D.: Interaction of thyroid-hormone receptor with a conserved transcriptional
mediator. Nature 374: 91-94, 1995.

4. Tanahashi, N.; Suzuki, M.; Fujiwara, T.; Takahashi, E.; Shimbara,
N.; Chung, C. H.; Tanaka, K.: Chromosomal localization and immunological
analysis of a family of human 26S proteasomal ATPases. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 243: 229-232, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patti M. Sherman - updated: 8/31/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 2/7/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/10/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/1997

EDITED carol: 02/23/2011
alopez: 9/21/2010
mcapotos: 9/12/2000
psherman: 8/31/2000
mgross: 2/8/2000
psherman: 2/7/2000
alopez: 8/4/1998
psherman: 6/10/1998
jamie: 2/18/1997
mark: 2/13/1997

608197	TITLE *608197 PEPTIDOGLYCAN RECOGNITION PROTEIN 3; PGLYRP3
;;PEPTIDOGLYCAN RECOGNITION PROTEIN, INTERMEDIATE, ALPHA;;
PGRPI-ALPHA; PGRPIA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Peptidoglycan recognition proteins, such as PGRPI-alpha, are part of the
innate immune system and recognize peptidoglycan, a ubiquitous component
of bacterial cell walls.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for homologs of PGRPS (PGLYRP1; 604963),
followed by PCR of a pooled cDNA library, Liu et al. (2001) cloned
PGRPI-alpha. The deduced 341-amino acid precursor protein contains an
N-terminal signal peptide, followed by PGRP domain IV, a transmembrane
segment, PGRP domains III and II, a second transmembrane segment, and
PGRP domain I at the C terminus. PGRP domain IV at the N terminus and
PGRP domain I at the C terminus are extracellular. PGRPI-alpha shares
33%, 43%, and 68% amino acid identity with PGRPL (PGLYRP2; 608199),
PGRPS, and PGRPI-beta (PGLYRP4; 608198), respectively. PGRP domain IV in
PGRPI-alpha is 96% identical to PGRPI domain IV in PGRPI-beta. RNA dot
blot analysis detected strong PGRPI-alpha expression only in esophagus.
Northern blot analysis detected a 2.8-kb transcript in esophagus and
thymus, and PCR detected expression in esophagus, tonsils, and thymus,
with much lower expression in stomach, descending colon, rectum, and
brain. Transiently transfected COS-7 and human embryonic kidney cells
expressed PGRPI-alpha as a Triton X-100-soluble membrane protein with an
apparent molecular mass of 38 kD.

Sun et al. (2006) found relatively high expression of the PGLYRP3 and
PGLYRP4 genes in human skin, tongue, tonsil, and placenta. Both mRNAs
were found in primary keratinocytes. In the tonsil, immunohistochemical
analysis detected PGLYRP3 in squamous epithelium and follicular
dendritic cells in the germinal center.

GENE STRUCTURE

Liu et al. (2001) determined that the PGRPI-alpha gene contains 7 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Liu et al. (2001) mapped the PGRPI-alpha
gene to chromosome 1q21, close to the PGRPI-beta gene.

Sun et al. (2006) noted that the PGLYRP3 and PGLYRP4 genes are located
adjacent to one another within the approximately 2-Mb region on 1q21
known as the epidermal differentiation complex (EDC; see 152445). Many
of the genes in the EDC are expressed in epidermal cells, specifically
keratinocytes, and are known to encode structural components.

GENE FUNCTION

Liu et al. (2001) determined that recombinant PGRPI-alpha expressed by
COS-7 cells and human embryonic kidney cells bound to gram-positive
bacteria, B. subtilis and M. luteus, with high affinity.

Using purified PGLYRP1, PGLYRP3, PGLYRP4, and a PGLYRP3/PGLYRP4
heterodimer, Kashyap et al. (2011) showed that these PGRPs interacted
with the bacterial cell wall and activated bacterial 2-component
systems, resulting in membrane depolarization, cessation of
peptidoglycan, protein, DNA, and RNA synthesis, and production of
hydroxyl radicals to cause bacterial death. Fluorescence microscopy
demonstrated that, in B. subtilis, a gram-positive bacteria, PGRPs
entered the cell wall at the site of daughter cell separation during
cell division and activated the CssR-CssS 2-component system. In E.
coli, a gram-negative bacteria, PGRPs bound the outer membrane and
activated the CpxA-CpxR 2-component system. Kashyap et al. (2011)
excluded other bactericidal mechanisms, including inhibition of
peptidoglycan synthesis, peptidoglycan hydrolysis, and membrane
permeabilization. They concluded that PGRPs are innate immunity proteins
that bind the cell wall or outer membrane and exploit the bacterial
stress response to kill bacteria.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Sun et al. (2006) analyzed 13 SNPs in or near the PGLYRP3 and PGLYRP4
genes for association with psoriasis (PSORS4; 603935) in 2 independent
patient cohorts: a family-based patient set comprising 375 individuals
from 101 families and a case-control collection of 282 patients and 192
controls. Results were conflicting: there was evidence for association
with SNPs in both genes as well as transmission disequilibrium in the
family analysis, but there was no association with any of the SNPs in
the case-control analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Kashyap, D. R.; Wang, M.; Liu, L.-H.; Boons, G.-J.; Gupta, D.;
Dziarski, R.: Peptidoglycan recognition proteins kill bacteria by
activating protein-sensing two-component systems. Nature Med. 17:
676-683, 2011.

2. Liu, C.; Xu, Z.; Gupta, D.; Dziarski, R.: Peptidoglycan recognition
proteins: a novel family of four human innate immunity pattern recognition
molecules. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 34686-34694, 2001.

3. Sun, C.; Mathur, P.; Dupuis, J.; Tizard, R.; Ticho, B.; Crowell,
T.; Gardner, H.; Bowcock, A. M.; Carulli, J.: Peptidoglycan recognition
proteins Pglyrp3 and Pglyrp4 are encoded from the epidermal differentiation
complex and are candidate genes for the Psors4 locus on chromosome
1q21. Hum. Genet. 119: 113-125, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/14/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/17/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/23/2003

EDITED mgross: 09/15/2011
terry: 9/14/2011
mgross: 2/13/2009
wwang: 5/18/2006
ckniffin: 5/17/2006
mgross: 9/28/2004
mgross: 10/24/2003

611471	TITLE *611471 ACID PHOSPHATASE 6, LYSOPHOSPHATIDE; ACP6
;;LYSOPHOSPHATIDIC ACID-SPECIFIC PHOSPHATASE; LPAP;;
ACID PHOSPHATASE-LIKE 1; ACPL1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hiroyama and Takenawa (1998) purified Acp6 from bovine brain. By PCR of
a human brain cDNA library using degenerate primers for bovine Acp6 and
prostatic acid phosphatase (ACPP; 171790), Hiroyama and Takenawa (1999)
cloned ACP6, which they called LPAP. Two initiation codons were
identified, resulting in proteins of 428 and 421 amino acids,
respectively, and the authors reported that the second ATG was the
initiation codon in ACP6. The protein has a signal sequence and an
N-terminal consensus sequence shared by a group of acid phosphatases,
and it shares 28.5% amino acid identity with ACPP. Northern blot
analysis detected a 1.75-kb transcript in all tissues examined with
higher expression in kidney, heart, small intestine, muscle, and liver.
They showed that ACP6 was localized to mitochondria by signal peptides
and regulated the biosynthesis of mitochondrial lipids by hydrolyzing
lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) to monoacylglycerol.

Takayama et al. (2002) cloned mouse and human ACP6, which they called
ACPL1. The deduced 428-amino acid human protein shares 77% amino acid
identity with its mouse homolog. Northern blot analysis detected
expression in all human tissues analyzed, with higher expression in
prostate, testis, small intestine, and colon. In transfected COS-7
cells, tagged ACP6 was observed mainly in the cytoplasm. Interstitial
cells of Cajal (ICC) within the small intestines of wildtype mice
expressed mRNA for Acp6 and Kit (164920), and differential gene display
indicated that expression of Acp6 was significantly suppressed in W/Wv
mice, which have reduced Kit function and ICC populations, compared to
wildtype.

MAPPING

By FISH, Hiroyama and Takenawa (1999) mapped the ACP6 gene to chromosome
1q21.

REFERENCE 1. Hiroyama, M.; Takenawa, T.: Purification and characterization
of a lysophosphatidic acid-specific phosphatase. Biochem. J. 336:
483-489, 1998.

2. Hiroyama, M.; Takenawa, T.: Isolation of a cDNA encoding human
lysophosphatidic acid phosphatase that is involved in the regulation
of mitochondrial lipid biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 29172-29180,
1999.

3. Takayama, I.; Daigo, Y.; Ward, S. M.; Sanders, K. M.; Walker, R.
L.; Horowitz, B.; Yamanaka, T.; Fujino, M. A.: Novel human and mouse
genes encoding an acid phosphatase family member and its downregulation
in W/Wv mouse jejunum. Gut 50: 790-796, 2002.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 9/27/2007

EDITED wwang: 10/01/2007
wwang: 9/27/2007

612087	TITLE *612087 C-TYPE LECTIN DOMAIN FAMILY 2, MEMBER A; CLEC2A
;;PROLIFERATION-INDUCED LYMPHOCYTE-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR; PILAR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CLEC2A belongs to the CLEC2 family of activation-induced, natural killer
gene complex-encoded C-type lectin-like receptors (Spreu et al., 2007).

CLONING

By database analysis and PCR of a premonocytic leukemia cell line cDNA
library, Spreu et al. (2007) obtained cDNAs for 4 CLEC2A splice
variants. The principal variants, CLEC2A1 and CLEC2A2, contain distinct
terminal exons (exons 5A and 5B, respectively) and encode predicted 174-
and 160-amino acid proteins, respectively. Both contain an N-terminal
cytoplasmic tail, a transmembrane domain, a short stalk region, and a
C-terminal C-type lectin domain (CTLD) with 3 potential N-glycosylation
sites. The CTLD of CLEC2A1 shares 40 to 50% identity with the CTLDs of
other CLEC2 proteins, whereas the final 23 amino acids of the CLEC2A2
CTLD lack homology to other CLEC2 proteins. The 2 shorter CLEC2A
variants, sCLEC2A1 and sCLEC2A2, lack exon 2, which encodes the
transmembrane domain, suggesting they may encode soluble isoforms.
However, sCLEC2A1 and sCLEC2A2 were not detected in supernatants of
transfected 293T or COS-7 cells. RT-PCR analysis revealed CLEC2A
expression predominantly in myeloid cell lines, but not epithelial cell
lines, and in skin and bone marrow. FACS analysis showed surface
expression of CLEC2A1, but not CLEC2A2, on transfected 293T and COS-7
cells.

By sequence analysis of genes encoding C-type lectin domain-containing
proteins on chromosome 12p12-p13, followed by RACE-PCR of spleen cDNA,
Huarte et al. (2008) cloned CLEC2A, which they called PILAR. The deduced
174-amino acid protein contains a transmembrane domain and a truncated
C-type lectin domain in its extracellular region. RT-PCR analysis showed
PILAR expression in thymus, small intestine, uterus, testis, and ovary.
PILAR was expressed in B cells and T cells, particularly naive CD8 (see
186910) T cells, but not in natural killer cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using Western blot and immunoprecipitation analysis, Huarte et al.
(2008) showed that PILAR interacted with CD161 (KLRB1; 602890). RT-PCR
analysis showed that T-cell activation induced transient expression of
PILAR in CD8 T cells, and flow cytometric analysis demonstrated
expression of PILAR on activated CD4 (186940) T cells. Increased
expression of PILAR on antigen-presenting cells enhanced T-cell
proliferation by increasing survival through enhanced expression of
antiapoptotic proteins (e.g., BCLXL; 600039) in a CD161-dependent
manner. PILAR was expressed by 7 to 10% of CD4 T cells from 2 samples of
inflammatory synovial fluid, suggesting a role in joint inflammation
pathogenesis. Huarte et al. (2008) concluded that PILAR has a central
role in modulating the extent of T-cell expansion.

Martick et al. (2008) showed that highly active hammerhead ribozymes are
present in the 3-prime UTRs of rodent Clec2 genes. Using a hammerhead
RNA motif search with relaxed delimitation of the nonconserved regions,
Martick et al. (2008) detected ribozyme sequences in which the invariant
regions, in contrast to the previously identified continuous
hammerheads, occurred as 2 fragments separated by hundreds of
nucleotides. Notably, a fragment pair could assemble to form an active
hammerhead ribozyme structure between the translation termination and
the polyadenylation signals within the 3-prime UTR. Martick et al.
(2008) demonstrated that this hammerhead structure could self-cleave
both in vitro and in vivo, and it was able to reduce protein expression
in mouse cells. Martick et al. (2008) concluded that an unrecognized
mechanism of postranscriptional gene regulation involving association of
discontinuous ribozyme sequences within an mRNA may be modulating the
expression of several CLEC2 proteins that function in bone remodeling
and the immune response of several mammals.

GENE STRUCTURE

Spreu et al. (2007) determined that the CLEC2A gene contains 6 exons,
including 2 alternative terminal exons (exons 5A and 5B), and spans 33.7
kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Spreu et al. (2007) mapped the CLEC2A gene
to chromosome 12p13, between the CLEC2B (603242) and CLEC12A (612088)
genes. Huarte et al. (2008) mapped the CLEC2A gene to chromosome
12p13.31 by genomic sequence analysis.

REFERENCE 1. Huarte, E.; Cubillos-Ruiz, J. R.; Nesbeth, Y. C.; Scarlett, U.
K.; Martinez, D. G.; Engle, X. A.; Rigby, W. F.; Pioli, P. A.; Guyre,
P. M.; Conejo-Garcia, J. R.: PILAR is a novel modulator of human
T-cell expansion. Blood 112: 1259-1268, 2008.

2. Martick, M.; Horan, L. H.; Noller, H. F.; Scott, W. G.: A discontinuous
hammerhead ribozyme embedded in a mammalian messenger RNA. Nature 454:
899-902, 2008.

3. Spreu, J.; Kienle, E. C.; Schrage, B.; Steinle, A.: CLEC2A: a
novel, alternatively spliced and skin-associated member of the NKC-encoded
AICL-CD69-LLT1 family. Immunogenetics 59: 903-912, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/8/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/12/2008

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/29/2008

EDITED mgross: 01/09/2009
terry: 1/8/2009
alopez: 9/12/2008
mgross: 5/29/2008

612911	TITLE *612911 NADH DEHYDROGENASE 1 ALPHA SUBCOMPLEX, ASSEMBLY FACTOR 3; NDUFAF3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hartmann and Stamm (1997) cloned rat Ndufaf3, which they called E3-3,
and identified the human ortholog by EST database analysis. RT-PCR
detected E3-3 expression in all rat tissues examined, with highest
expression in testis.

Using human SOB1 (AKAP3; 604689) in a low-stringency screen of a mouse
germinal cell cDNA library, Hammami-Hamza et al. (2003) cloned mouse
Ndufaf3, which they called 2P1. Northern blot analysis detected
expression only in mouse testis. In situ hybridization detected 2P1 in
stage I pachytene spermatocytes, and expression persisted until stage
XII of the spermatogenic cycle. No expression was detected in
interstitial tissue.

Saada et al. (2009) stated that the NDUFAF3 gene encodes 2 isoforms, A
and B, which share a 'domain of unknown function' (DUF498). The longer A
isoform harbors a predicted N-terminal mitochondrial-targeting sequence
of about 35 amino acids.

GENE STRUCTURE

The NDUFAF3 gene contains 4 exons (Saada et al., 2009).

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the NDUFAF3 gene to chromosome 3p21.31 based on an
alignment of the NDUFAF3 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AL049955) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

GENE FUNCTION

Using subcellular fractionation experiments, Saada et al. (2009) showed
that NDUFAF3 was predominantly localized to mitochondria and remained in
the pellet after carbonate extraction, suggesting a strong interaction
with the mitochondrial membrane, although NDUFAF3 has no predicted
transmembrane helices. Localization appeared identical to that of
NDUFAF4 (611776). RNA interference studies indicated that the NDUFAF3
gene product is necessary for mitochondrial complex I assembly. The
activity of NDUFAF3 showed functional interdependence with NDUFAF4. Gene
conservation analysis linked NDUFAF3 to the bacterial-membrane-insertion
gene cluster SecF/SecD/YajC and C8ORF38 (612392), suggesting a
translation-dependent early assembly mechanism.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 5 patients with severe mitochondrial complex I deficiency (252010)
and lactic acidosis, Saada et al. (2009) identified homozygous or
compound heterozygous mutations in the NDUFAF3 gene
(612911.0001-612911.0003). All patients died before age 6 months.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFAF3, GLY77ARG

In 3 Muslim sibs with severe mitochondrial complex I deficiency (252010)
resulting in death by age 3 months, Saada et al. (2009) identified a
homozygous 229G-C transversion in the NDUFAF3 gene, resulting in a
gly77-to-arg (G77R) substitution. The parents were consanguineous.

.0002
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFAF3, ARG122PRO

In a male infant with severe mitochondrial complex I deficiency
(252010), Saada et al. (2009) identified a homozygous 365G-C
transversion in the NDUFAF3 gene, resulting in an arg122-to-pro (R122P)
substitution at the C-terminal end of the protein. The child was born of
consanguineous Arab Muslim parents. At 3 weeks of age, he became
hypoactive and sucked poorly. Physical examination revealed
macrocephaly, a weak cry, wide anterior fontanel, and axial hypotonia.
He had intermittent generalized tonic movements, and funduscopy showed
pallor of the optic discs. At 3 months of age, there was no eye contact
and marked axial hypotonia with brisk tendon reflexes. He died at age 4
months.

.0003
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFAF3, MET1THR

In a female infant with severe mitochondrial complex I deficiency
(252010), Saada et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity for
mutation in the NDUFAF3 gene: a 2T-C transition, resulting in a
met1-to-thr (M1T) substitution, and the R122P (612911.0002) mutation.
She was the daughter of unrelated parents of Jewish origin. At age 3
months, she developed myoclonic seizures, and brain MRI revealed diffuse
brain leukomalacia. She died at age 6 months of respiratory failure.
Complex I activity was markedly decreased.

REFERENCE 1. Hammami-Hamza, S.; Doussau, M.; Allemand, I.; Segretain, D.; Gasc,
J.-M.; Finaz, C.: 2P1, a novel male mouse cDNA specifically expressed
during meiosis. Int. J. Dev. Biol. 47: 71-76, 2003.

2. Hartmann, A. M.; Stamm, S.: Molecular cloning of a novel alternatively
spliced nuclear protein. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1353: 224-230, 1997.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/14/2009.

4. Saada, A.; Vogel, R. O.; Hoefs, S. J.; van den Brand, M. A.; Wessels,
H. J.; Willems, P. H.; Venselaar, H.; Shaag, A.; Barghuti, F.; Reish,
O.; Shohat, M.; Huynen, M. A.; Smeitink, J. A. M.; van den Heuvel,
L. P.; Nijtmans, L. G.: Mutations in NDUFAF3 (C3ORF60), encoding
an NDUFAF4 (C6ORF66)-interacting complex I assembly protein, cause
fatal neonatal mitochondrial disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 84: 718-727,
2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/22/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/14/2009

EDITED carol: 12/18/2009
wwang: 8/4/2009
ckniffin: 7/22/2009
mgross: 7/14/2009

601568	TITLE *601568 ADDUCIN 3; ADD3
;;ADDUCIN, GAMMA;;
ADDUCIN-LIKE; ADDL
ADD3/NUP98 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

From a human fetal-brain cDNA library, Katagiri et al. (1996) isolated a
novel human cDNA which they termed adducin-like 70. The predicted amino
acid sequence shows a high degree of homology to adducins alpha (102680)
and beta (102681). In human erythrocytes, adducin is a 200-kD
heterodimeric skeletal component of the cell membrane, where it promotes
the binding of spectrin to actin. This binding is regulated by
calcium/calmodulin (114180). Adducin also is phosphorylated by protein
kinase C. Adducin and its multiple isoforms represent a family of
proteins present in a variety of tissues and cultured cell lines,
including those from brain, kidney, and liver. The gene, symbolized here
ADDL, contains an open reading frame of 2,022 nucleotides encoding 674
amino acids. It shows 54%, 53%, and 59% identity in predicted amino acid
sequence with alpha and beta components of human adducin and rat adducin
63, respectively. Katagiri et al. (1996) stated that human adducin-like
70 is likely to play an important role in the skeletal organization of
the cell membrane. Northern blot analysis indicated ubiquitous
expression of this gene in adult human tissues.

In a comprehensive assay of gene expression, Gilligan et al. (1999)
showed the ubiquitous expression of alpha- and gamma-adducin, in
contrast to the restricted expression of beta-adducin. Beta-adducin was
expressed at high levels in brain and hematopoietic tissues (bone marrow
in humans, spleen in mice).

By RT-PCR of peripheral blood leukocyte RNA, Citterio et al. (1999)
identified a splice variant of ADD3 that includes exon 13. The deduced
706-amino acid protein contains 32 additional amino acids in its
C-terminal tail compared with the protein described by Katagiri et al.
(1996). RT-PCR detected both splice variants in kidney, brain, lung, and
heart.

GENE STRUCTURE

Citterio et al. (1999) determined that the ADD3 gene contains 14 coding
exons and spans over 20 kb.

MAPPING

Katagiri et al. (1996) localized the gene to chromosome 10q24.2-q24.3 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. By radiation hybrid analysis,
Citterio et al. (1999) mapped the ADD3 gene to chromosome 10q24.1-q24.2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Lanzani et al. (2005) analyzed the ADD3 gene in 40 unrelated individuals
and identified a +386A-G polymorphism (dbSNP rs3731366) in intron 11.
The authors then genotyped 512 newly discovered and never-treated
hypertensive patients (see 145500) for IVS11+386A-G, but found no
association between the polymorphism and ambulatory blood pressure or
plasma levels of renin activity and endogenous ouabain. However,
carriers of a 460W polymorphism in the ADD1 gene (102680.0001) who also
carried the ADD3 G allele had an approximately 8 mm Hg greater increase
in blood pressure than those who carried the ADD3 A allele (p = 0.020 to
0.006, depending on the genetic model applied). Lanzani et al. (2005)
suggested that there were epistatic effects between the ADD1 and ADD3
loci affecting variation in blood pressure.

CYTOGENETICS

- ADD3/NUP98 Fusion Gene

Lahortiga et al. (2003) described a translocation t(10;11)(q25;p15) that
resulted in fusion of the ADD3 gene to the NUP98 gene (601021) on
chromosome 11p15 and development of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

REFERENCE 1. Citterio, L.; Azzani, T.; Duga, S.; Bianchi, G.: Genomic organization
of the human gamma adducin gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 266:
110-114, 1999.

2. Gilligan, D. M.; Lozovatsky, L.; Gwynn, B.; Brugnara, C.; Mohandas,
N.; Peters, L. L.: Targeted disruption of the beta adducin gene (Add2)
causes red blood cell spherocytosis in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96:
10717-10722, 1999.

3. Katagiri, T.; Ozaki, K.; Fujiwara, T.; Shimizu, F.; Kawai, A.;
Okuno, S.; Suzuki, M.; Nakamura, Y.; Takahashi, E.; Hirai, Y.: Cloning,
expression and chromosome mapping of adducin-like 70 (ADDL), a human
cDNA highly homologous to human erythrocyte adducin. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 74: 90-95, 1996.

4. Lahortiga, I.; Vizmanos, J. L.; Agirre, X.; Vazquez, I.; Cigudosa,
J. C.; Larrayoz, M. J.; Sala, F.; Gorosquieta, A.; Perez-Equiza, K.;
Calasanz, M. J.; Odero, M. D.: NUP98 is fused to adducin 3 in a patient
with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia and myeloid markers, with
a new translocation t(10;11)(q25;p15). Cancer Res. 63: 3079-3083,
2003.

5. Lanzani, C.; Citterio, L.; Jankaricova, M.; Sciarrone, M. T.; Barlassina,
C.; Fattori, S.; Messaggio, E.; Di Serio, C.; Zagato, L.; Cusi, D.;
Hamlyn, J. M.; Stella, A.; Bianchi, G.; Manunta, P.: Role of the
adducin family genes in human essential hypertension. J. Hypertension 23:
543-549, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/10/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/2/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/4/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/8/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/13/1996

EDITED mgross: 04/13/2009
terry: 4/10/2009
carol: 12/2/2008
wwang: 3/2/2007
joanna: 3/17/2004
cwells: 9/8/2003
terry: 9/4/2003
mgross: 11/8/1999
carol: 2/18/1999
jenny: 12/17/1996
jenny: 12/16/1996
mark: 12/13/1996

193065	TITLE *193065 VINCULIN; VCL
METAVINCULIN, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Vinculin is a cytoskeletal protein associated with the cytoplasmic face
of both cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix adherens-type junctions,
where it is thought to function as one of several interacting proteins
involved in anchoring F-actin to the membrane (Weller et al., 1990).

CLONING

Weller et al. (1990) determined the complete sequence of the human
vinculin gene. They found that both human and chicken embryo sequences
of vinculin contain 1,066 amino acids and, furthermore, that the 2
proteins exhibit a high level of sequence identity (greater than 95%).
Southern blots of human genomic DNA hybridized with short vinculin cDNA
fragments indicated that there is a single vinculin gene.

Koteliansky et al. (1992) determined that metavinculin is the result of
alternative splicing of the VCL gene and contains an additional exon.
Across species, the deduced protein differs from vinculin in having an
additional insert of 68 to 79 amino acids in the C-terminal half of the
molecule. By comparison of metavinculin sequences from pig, man,
chicken, and frog, Strasser et al. (1993) found a division of the insert
into 2 parts: the first variable and the second highly conserved. The
longest insert, 79 amino acids, was found in Xenopus laevis. Three
different C-terminal constructs of vinculin and metavinculin
overexpressed in E. coli could be purified by column chromatography.
Using amino acid sequencing methods on the intact molecules and their
proteolytic subfragments, together with a polyclonal antibody specific
only for metavinculin from porcine stomach, Gimona et al. (1988)
identified and sequenced the insert in the porcine metavinculin
molecule. By alignment with the complete sequence of chick fibroblast
vinculin, they determined the exact location of the insert. In porcine
metavinculin, this insert lies between the 90-kD protease-resistant
N-terminal core and the C terminus of the molecule. It contains 68 amino
acids and is flanked by KWSSK sequences, one of which is present in
vinculin. The identity of the mapped vinculin and metavinculin sequences
outside this different peptide is consistent with 2 proteins arising via
alternative splicing at the mRNA level.

GENE STRUCTURE

Moiseyeva et al. (1993) determined that the VCL gene contains 22 exons
spanning greater than 75 kb. Alternative splicing of exon 19 results in
the cardiac- and smooth muscle-specific metavinculin isoform, containing
an additional 68 amino acids.

MAPPING

By use of a panel of human-rodent somatic cell hybrids, Weller et al.
(1990) mapped the VCL gene to chromosome 10q11.2-qter. By linkage
studies in a 3-generation family, Mulligan et al. (1992) mapped the VCL
gene to chromosome 10q22.1-q23, distal to D10S22. They confirmed the
assignment by hybridization of the vinculin cDNA to flow-sorted
translocation derivative chromosomes containing that portion of
chromosome 10.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Bakolitsa et al. (2004) described the crystal structure of the
full-length vinculin molecule (1,066 amino acids), which shows a
5-domain autoinhibited conformation in which the carboxy-terminal tail
domain is held pincer-like by the vinculin head, and ligand binding is
regulated both sterically and allosterically. Bakolitsa et al. (2004)
showed that the conformational changes in the head, tail, and
proline-rich domains are linked structurally and thermodynamically, and
proposed a combinatorial pathway to activation that ensures that
vinculin is activated only at sites of cell adhesion when 2 or more of
its binding partners are brought into apposition.

Using magnetic tweezers, total internal reflection fluorescence, and
atomic force microscopy, del Rio et al. (2009) investigated the effect
of force on the interaction between talin (186745), a protein that links
liganded membrane integrins to the cytoskeleton, and vinculin, a focal
adhesion protein that is activated by talin binding, leading to
reorganization of the cytoskeleton. Application of physiologically
relevant forces caused stretching of single talin rods that exposed
cryptic binding sites for vinculin. Thus in the talin-vinculin system,
molecular mechanotransduction can occur by protein binding after
exposure of buried binding sites in the talin-vinculin system.

GENE FUNCTION

Turner and Burridge (1989) reported experiments indicating that vinculin
is the major talin-binding protein in platelets. However, in addition, a
less abundant protein of approximately 150 kD also interacted strongly
with the talin fragment. Turner and Burridge (1989) confirmed that this
protein is metavinculin, a protein previously believed to be confined to
cardiac and smooth muscle tissue.

Hu et al. (2007) developed correlational fluorescent speckle microscopy
to measure the coupling of focal adhesion proteins to actin filaments
(see 102610). Different classes of focal adhesion structural and
regulatory molecules exhibited varying degrees of correlated motions
with actin filaments, indicating hierarchical transmission of actin
motion through focal adhesions. Interactions between vinculin, talin,
and actin filaments appear to constitute a slippage interface between
the cytoskeleton and integrins, generating a molecular clutch that is
regulated during the morphodynamic transitions of cell migration.

Using immunohistochemistry, Vasile et al. (2006) examined the pattern of
vinculin/metavinculin expression in the intercalated- and Z discs of
cardiomyocytes from patients with various cardiovascular conditions
associated with hypertrophy. Tissue specimens derived from patients with
obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH; see CMH15, 613255) and
aortic stenosis (see 109730) showed a universal defect of
vinculin/metavinculin expression in the intercalated disc but preserved
expression in the cardiac Z disc, whereas tissue specimens from patients
with dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD; see CMD1W, 611407), hypertensive heart
disease (see 145500), or pulmonary hypertension (see 178600) exhibited
normal expression of vinculin/metavinculin in both the Z and the
intercalated disc, despite being associated with hypertrophy. Vasile et
al. (2006) suggested that differential expression of
vinculin/metavinculin in cardiac hypertrophy might depend on the
underlying pathophysiology, with localization unaffected by hemodynamic
overload but expression in the intercalated disc substantially reduced
by obstructive disease.

Kanchanawong et al. (2010) used 3-dimensional super-resolution
fluorescence microscopy to map nanoscale protein organization in focal
adhesions. Their results revealed that integrins and actin are
vertically separated by an approximately 40-nm focal adhesion core
region consisting of multiple protein-specific strata: a
membrane-apposed integrin signaling layer containing integrin
cytoplasmic tails (see 193210), focal adhesion kinase (600758), and
paxillin (602505); an intermediate force-transduction layer containing
talin and vinculin; and an uppermost actin-regulatory layer containing
zyxin (602002), vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (601703), and
alpha-actinin (102575). By localizing amino- and carboxy-terminally
tagged talins, Kanchanawong et al. (2010) revealed talin's polarized
orientation, indicative of a role in organizing the focal adhesion
strata. Kanchanawong et al. (2010) concluded that their composite
multilaminar protein architecture provided a molecular blueprint for
understanding focal adhesion functions.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Olson et al. (2002) used SSCP to analyze the vinculin gene in 350
unrelated patients with sporadic or familial dilated cardiomyopathy
(611407) who were negative for mutations in the ACTC (102540) and TPM1
(191010) genes, and identified heterozygosity for a 3-bp in-frame
deletion (L954del; 193065.0001) and a missense mutation (R975W;
193065.0002) in 2 patients, respectively. Neither mutation was found in
500 controls. A potential risk-conferring polymorphism, A934V, was
identified in heterozygosity in a 30-year-old man with dilated
cardiomyopathy who died 2 years after diagnosis of progressive heart
failure; this variant was also found in 1 of 500 controls, a 67-year-old
woman in whom electrocardiography showed abnormal T waves but
echocardiogram was nondiagnostic for dilated cardiomyopathy. All
variants were located in exon 19, the metavinculin-specific exon of the
vinculin gene. Low-shear viscometry studies revealed variable reductions
in viscosity associated with the mutations, with greater reductions
caused by the L954del and R975W mutants. Fluorescence microscopy
confirmed the viscosity findings, with actin organization by the A934V
variant similar to wildtype, although the network appeared coarser; more
prominent bundles were observed for L954del, and R975W showed the
highest bundling activity. Electron microscopy of cardiac myocytes from
a patient with the R975W mutation showed irregular and fragmented
intercalated discs, with intact sarcomeric thin and thick filaments.

Vasile et al. (2006) analyzed the metavinculin-specific exon 19 of the
VCL gene in 389 unrelated patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
(CMH), who were negative for mutation in 8 known CMH-associated
sarcomere/myofilament-encoding genes, and identified heterozygosity for
the R975W mutation in a patient with CMH15 (613255).

In a cohort of 228 CMH patients who were negative for mutation in 12
known CMH-associated sarcomere/myofilament-encoding genes, Vasile et al.
(2006) performed comprehensive analysis of the 22 exons of the VCL gene
and identified a heterozygous mutation in 1 patient (L277M;
193065.0003). The authors noted that despite its ubiquitous expression,
the HCM-associated VCL mutation clinically yielded a cardiac-specific
phenotype.

ANIMAL MODEL

Xu et al. (1998) used a targeting vector to inactivate vinculin in
embryonic stem cells, which were then injected into mice. They found
that Vcl -/- embryos failed to develop beyond the tenth day of gestation
and at best were two-thirds of the normal size range. The most prominent
defect was lack of midline fusion of the rostral neural tube, producing
a cranial bilobular appearance and attenuation of cranial and spinal
nerve development. Heart development was curtailed at E9.5, with
severely reduced and akinetic myocardial and endocardial structures.
Somites and limbs were retarded, and ectodermal tissues were sparse and
fragile. Fibroblasts isolated from mutant embryos showed reduced
adhesion to fibronectin, vitronectin, laminin, and collagen compared to
wildtype. In addition, migration rates over these substrata were 2-fold
higher and the level of focal adhesion kinase (FAK; 600758) was 3-fold
higher. Xu et al. (1998) concluded that vinculin is necessary for normal
embryonic development, probably because of its role in the regulation of
cell adhesion and locomotion, although specific roles in neural and
cardiac development could not be ruled out.

Richards et al. (2005) analyzed hearts from Vcl +/- and wildtype mice
and found that although decreased vinculin expression enhanced
inducibility of ventricular arrhythmias, connexin-43 (GJA1; 121014)
content and distribution, and conduction velocities, were not
significantly different between mutant and wildtype mice. Richards et
al. (2005) suggested that other mechanisms, such as altered integrin
(see 192968) signaling, might contribute to arrhythmogenesis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1W
VCL, 3-BP DEL, 2862GTT

In a 39-year-old man with dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD1W; 611407), Olson
et al. (2002) identified heterozygosity for a 3-bp deletion (2862delGTT)
in exon 19 of the vinculin gene, resulting in the in-frame deletion of a
leucine residue (leu954del). The patient's father died of heart failure
at 59 years of age, and a 70-year-old paternal uncle had heart failure,
but the patient's relatives declined clinical and genetic evaluation.
The mutation was not found in 500 unrelated controls.

.0002
CARDIOMYOPATHY, DILATED, 1W
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 15
VCL, ARG975TRP

In a 57-year-old woman with dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD1W; 611407) who
had undergone cardiac transplantation, Olson et al. (2002) identified
heterozygosity for a 2923C-T transition in exon 19 of the vinculin gene,
resulting in an arg975-to-trp (R975W) substitution in the metavinculin
isoform. The mutation was also found in heterozygosity in 3 asymptomatic
relatives, 2 of whom were found to have disease on screening
echocardiogram: a 70-year-old maternal aunt had dilated cardiomyopathy,
and a 38-year-old daughter had mild left ventricular dilation. The
patient's 55-year-old sister carried the mutation but had normal left
ventricular dimensions and shortening/ejection fractions. The mutation
was not found in 500 unrelated controls.

In a 43-year-old woman with severe apical variant hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (CMH15; 613255), Vasile et al. (2006) identified
heterozygosity for the R975W substitution in the VCL gene, located in a
highly conserved residue in the tail region of metavinculin and
predicted to cause significant alterations in the secondary structure
and helical organization of the protein. The mutation was not found in
1,400 reference allele. Immunohistochemical analysis of the patient's
myocardium demonstrated a marked reduction of both vinculin and
metavinculin in the intercalated discs. Noting that the patient was
homozygous for wildtype vinculin and heterozygous for R975W
metavinculin, Vasile et al. (2006) suggested that the marked reduction
of proteins in the intercalated discs might be due to a
dominant-negative effect. However, after analyzing immunohistochemically
stained tissue specimens from patients with various cardiovascular
conditions associated with hypertrophy, Vasile et al. (2006) suggested
that differential expression of vinculin/metavinculin in cardiac
hypertrophy might depend on the underlying pathophysiology, with
localization unaffected by hemodynamic overload but expression in the
intercalated disc substantially reduced by obstructive disease (see GENE
FUNCTION).

.0003
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 15
VCL, LEU277MET

In a 76-year-old Caucasian woman with severely obstructive hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (CMH15; 613255), Vasile et al. (2006) identified a
heterozygous 829C-A transversion in exon 8 of the VCL gene, resulting in
a leu277-to-met (L277M) substitution at a conserved residue in a key
functional domain. The mutation was not detected in 400 reference
alleles. Immunostaining of myomectomy tissue from the patient showed
normal Z line staining but markedly reduced vinculin/metavinculin
staining in the intercalated discs.

REFERENCE 1. Bakolitsa, C.; Cohen, D. M.; Bankston, L. A.; Bobkov, A. A.; Cadwell,
G. W.; Jennings, L.; Critchley, D. R.; Craig, S. W.; Liddington, R.
C.: Structural basis for vinculin activation at sites of cell adhesion. Nature 430:
583-586, 2004.

2. del Rio, A.; Perez-Jimenez, R.; Liu, R.; Roca-Cusachs, P.; Fernandez,
J. M.; Sheetz, M. P.: Stretching single talin rod molecules activates
vinculin binding. Science 323: 638-641, 2009.

3. Gimona, M.; Small, J. V.; Moeremans, M.; Van Damme, J.; Puype,
M.; Vandekerckhove, J.: Porcine vinculin and metavinculin differ
by a 68-residue insert located close to the carboxy-terminal part
of the molecule. EMBO J. 7: 2329-2334, 1988.

4. Hu, K.; Ji, L.; Applegate, K. T.; Danuser, G.; Waterman-Storer,
C. M.: Differential transmission of actin motion within focal adhesions. Science 315:
111-115, 2007.

5. Kanchanawong, P.; Shtengel, G.; Pasapera, A. M.; Ramko, E. B.;
Davidson, M. W.; Hess, H. F.; Waterman, C. M.: Nanoscale architecture
of integrin-based cell adhesions. Nature 468: 580-584, 2010.

6. Koteliansky, V. E.; Ogryzko, E. P.; Zhidkova, N. I.; Weller, P.
A.; Critchley, D. R.; Vancompernolle, K.; Vandekerckhove, J.; Strasser,
P.; Way, M.; Gimona, M.; Small, J. V.: An additional exon in the
human vinculin gene specifically encodes meta-vinculin-specific difference
peptide: cross-species comparison reveals variable and conserved motifs
in the meta-vinculin insert. Europ. J. Biochem. 204: 767-772, 1992.
Note: Erratum: Europ. J. Biochem. 205: 1218 only, 1992.

7. Moiseyeva, E. P.; Weller, P. A.; Zhidkova, N. I.; Corben, E. B.;
Patel, B.; Jasinka, I.; Koteliansky, V. E.; Critchley, D. R.: Organization
of the human gene encoding the cytoskeletal protein vinculin and the
sequence of the vinculin promoter. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 4318-4325,
1993.

8. Mulligan, L. M.; Gardner, E.; Telenius, H.; Ponder, B. A. J.:
Complementary physical and genetic techniques map the vinculin (VCL)
gene on chromosome 10q. Genomics 13: 1347-1349, 1992.

9. Olson, T. M.; Illenberger, S.; Kishimoto, N. Y.; Huttelmaier, S.;
Keating, M. T.; Jockusch, B. M.: Metavinculin mutations alter actin
interaction in dilated cardiomyopathy. Circulation 105: 431-437,
2002.

10. Richards, M.; Nikolski, V. P.; Green, K. G.; Zemljic-Harpf, A.
E.; Efimov, I. E.; Ross, R. S.; Saffitz, J. E.: Ventricular arrhythmias
in a mouse model of vinculin-related cardiomyopathy. Heart Rhythm 2:
S178 only, 2005.

11. Strasser, P.; Gimona, M.; Herzog, M.; Geiger, B.; Small, J. V.
: Variable and constant regions in the C-terminus of vinculin and
metavinculin: cloning and expression of fragments in E. coli. FEBS
Lett. 317: 189-194, 1993.

12. Turner, C. E.; Burridge, K.: Detection of metavinculin in human
platelets using a modified talin overlay assay. Europ. J. Cell Biol. 49:
202-206, 1989.

13. Vasile, V. C.; Edwards, W. D.; Ommen, S. R.; Ackerman, M. J.:
Obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is associated with reduced
expression of vinculin in the intercalated disc. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 349: 709-715, 2006.

14. Vasile, V. C.; Ommen, S. R.; Edwards, W. D.; Ackerman, M. J.:
A missense mutation in a ubiquitously expressed protein, vinculin,
confers susceptibility to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 345: 998-1003, 2006.

15. Vasile, V. C.; Will, M. L.; Ommen, S. R.; Edwards, W. D.; Olson,
T. M.; Ackerman, M. J.: Identification of a metavinculin missense
mutation, R975W, associated with both hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy. Molec.
Genet. Metab. 87: 169-174, 2006.

16. Weller, P. A.; Ogryzko, E. P.; Corben, E. B.; Zhidkova, N. I.;
Patel, B.; Price, G. J.; Spurr, N. K.; Koteliansky, V. E.; Critchley,
D. R.: Complete sequence of human vinculin and assignment of the
gene to chromosome 10. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 5667-5671, 1990.

17. Xu, W.; Baribault, H.; Adamson, E. D.: Vinculin knockout results
in heart and brain defects during embryonic development. Development 125:
327-337, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/2/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/17/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/10/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/31/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/20/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/13/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/9/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/13/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/23/1990

EDITED carol: 04/17/2013
terry: 11/13/2012
carol: 2/15/2012
alopez: 2/3/2012
alopez: 2/7/2011
terry: 2/2/2011
wwang: 2/17/2010
alopez: 3/12/2009
terry: 3/10/2009
carol: 9/4/2007
terry: 8/31/2007
alopez: 2/21/2007
terry: 2/20/2007
alopez: 9/16/2004
terry: 9/13/2004
mcapotos: 4/11/2001
terry: 4/9/2001
mcapotos: 12/17/1999
mcapotos: 12/14/1999
terry: 12/13/1999
carol: 5/13/1993
carol: 8/17/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 8/23/1990

607314	TITLE *607314 CALCIUM-BINDING PROTEIN 2; CABP2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using primers designed from the bovine Cabp2 sequence, Haeseleer et al.
(2000) cloned human CABP2 by PCR with a retina cDNA library. The deduced
221-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 24.8 kD and
contains an N-terminal myristoylation signal and 3 EF-hands that
correspond to EF-hands 1, 3, and 4 of calmodulin (see 114180); EF-hand 2
is partially deleted in CABP2. They also cloned mouse Cabp2 and
identified a shorter variant that encodes a 160-amino acid protein with
a calculated molecular mass of about 18 kD. CABP2 shares 72% similarity
with CABP1 (605563) and 56% similarity with calmodulin. Human CABP2 also
shares 91 to 98% similarity with the bovine and mouse homologs. Northern
blot analysis detected weak expression of 1.5- and 1.3-kb transcripts
only in retina. RT-PCR of several mouse tissues detected expression only
in retina. Sokal et al. (2000) confirmed these results for CABP2
expression.

GENE STRUCTURE

Haeseleer et al. (2000) determined that the CABP2 gene contains 6 exons
and spans about 5 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH, Haeseleer et al. (2000) mapped the CABP2 gene to chromosome
11q13.1. Sokal et al. (2000) noted that the CABP4 gene (608965) also
maps to chromosome 11, but it is at least 40 kb from the CABP2 gene.

GENE FUNCTION

Haeseleer et al. (2000) determined that CABP2 is myristoylated in vitro.
They also found that the short form of CABP2, purified from bovine
retina, stimulated CAMK2 (see 114078) in the presence of Ca(2+). CABP2
also inhibited G protein-coupled receptor kinase-5 (GRK5;
600870)-mediated phosphorylation of rhodopsin (180380), although its
affinity for GRK5 was lower than that shown by CABP1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 3 unrelated consanguineous Iranian families segregating autosomal
recessive deafness (DFNB93; 614899), Schrauwen et al. (2012) identified
homozygosity for a splice site mutation in the CABP2 gene (607314.0001)
that segregated with disease in each family and was not found in
controls. The mutant protein was shown to have altered Ca(2+) binding in
isothermal titration calorimetry and less potent regulation of Ca(v)1.3
Ca(2+) channels.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 93
CABP2, IVS6DS, G-T, +1

In affected members of 3 unrelated consanguineous Iranian families
segregating autosomal recessive deafness (DFNB93; 614899), Schrauwen et
al. (2012) identified homozygosity for a 637+1G-T transversion at the
5-prime donor site of intron 6 of the CABP2 gene. The mutation
segregated with disease in each family and was not found in 100 Iranian
controls. Haplotype analysis indicated that it was likely a founder
mutation inherited from an ancient common ancestor; the small size of
the shared region suggested that the mutation might be hundreds or even
thousands of years old. Analysis of cDNA prepared from transfected COS-7
cells revealed only a 177-bp PCR product, consistent with complete
skipping of exon 6, which was predicted to result in a frameshift and
premature termination at codon F164 (Phe164Serfs*4). Isothermal
titration calorimetry of wildtype and F164X truncated CABP2 demonstrated
an endothermic Ca(2+)-binding reaction for wildtype CABP2 that was
weaker with the truncated protein, indicating altered Ca(2+) binding
that might interfere with its role as a Ca(2+) sensor. Transfection
studies in HEK293T cells showed that there was weaker suppression of the
negative feedback regulation of Ca(v)1.3 Ca(2+) channels with mutant
CABP2 than with wildtype; in addition, wildtype CABP2 significantly
inhibited current density, whereas the mutant had no effect.

REFERENCE 1. Haeseleer, F.; Sokal, I.; Verlinde, C. L. M. J.; Erdjument-Bromage,
H.; Tempst, P.; Pronin, A. N.; Benovic, J. L.; Fariss, R. N.; Palczewski,
K.: Five members of a novel Ca(2+)-binding protein (CABP) subfamily
with similarity to calmodulin. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 1247-1260, 2000.

2. Schrauwen, I.; Helfmann, S.; Inagaki, A.; Predoehl, F.; Tabatabaiefar,
M. A.; Picher, M. M.; Sommen, M.; Seco, C. Z.; Oostrik, J.; Kremer,
H.; Dheedene, A.; Claes, C.; Fransen, E.; Chaleshtori, M. H.; Coucke,
P.; Lee, A.; Moser, T.; Van Camp, G.: A mutation in CABP2, expressed
in cochlear hair cells, causes autosomal-recessive hearing impairment. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 91: 636-645, 2012.

3. Sokal, I.; Li, N.; Verlinde, C. L. M. J.; Haeseleer, F.; Baehr,
W.; Palczewski, K.: Ca(2+)-binding proteins in the retina: from discovery
to etiology of human disease. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1498: 233-251,
2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/26/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/22/2002

EDITED carol: 10/26/2012
terry: 10/26/2012
mgross: 10/11/2004
mgross: 10/22/2002

612647	TITLE *612647 RADIAL SPOKE HEAD 4, CHLAMYDOMONAS, HOMOLOG OF, A; RSPH4A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Radial spokes are regularly spaced along cilia, sperm, and flagella
axonemes and have a multisubunit 'stalk' and 'head' that form a signal
transduction scaffold between the central microtubule pair and dynein
(see 603297) arms. RSPH4A is predicted to be a component of the radial
spoke head based on homology with proteins in the biflagellate alga
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii and other ciliates (Castleman et al., 2009).

CLONING

By genomewide linkage analysis and positional candidate gene analysis in
5 families with primary ciliary dyskinesia linked to chromosome 6q22
(CILD11; 612649) and central microtubule pair abnormalities, Castleman
et al. (2009) identified the RSPH4A and RSPH9 genes (612648). The
deduced RSPH4A protein contains 716 amino acids and shares about 30%
identity with the Chlamydomonas radial spoke head proteins Rsp4 and
Rsp6.

GENE STRUCTURE

Castleman et al. (2009) determined that the RSPH4A gene contains 6
exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Castleman et al. (2009) mapped the RSPH4A
gene to chromosome 6q22.1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 4 Pakistani families with CILD11, Castleman et
al. (2009) identified a homozygous mutation in the RSPH4A gene
(612647.0001). In affected members of a family of northern European
descent with CILD11, they identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the RSPH4A gene (612647.0001; 612647.0002). The patients
had classic respiratory features of CILD, but no situs abnormalities.
Electron microscopic studies showed complete absence of the central
microtubule pair of the ciliary axoneme. These findings suggested that
radial spoke proteins are not essential for embryonic nodal ciliary
function, which is important in the determination of left-right axis
development.

Kott et al. (2013) identified pathogenic mutations in the RSPH4A gene
(see, e.g., 612647.0004-612647.0005) in 7 (14%) of 48 families with with
a specific CILD phenotype characterized by ciliary central complex and
radial spoke defects. None of the patients had situs inversus.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, GLN154TER

In all 10 affected members of 4 Pakistani families with primary ciliary
dyskinesia-11 (612649), Castleman et al. (2009) identified a homozygous
460C-T transition in exon 1 of the RSPH4A gene, resulting in a
gln154-to-ter (Q154X) substitution. The patients had classic respiratory
features of CILD, but no situs abnormalities. Electron microscopic
studies showed complete absence of the central microtubule pair of the
ciliary axoneme.

.0002
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, GLN109TER

In affected individuals in a family of northern European descent with
CILD11 (612649), Castleman et al. (2009) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the RSPH4A gene: a 325C-T transition
in exon 1 resulting in a gln109-to-ter (Q109X) substitution, and a
1468C-T transition in exon 3 resulting in an arg490-to-ter (R490X;
612647.0003) substitution. The patients had classic respiratory features
of CILD, but no situs abnormalities. Electron microscopic studies showed
complete absence of the central microtubule pair of the ciliary axoneme.

.0003
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, ARG490TER

See Castleman et al. (2009) and 612647.0002.

.0004
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, 1-BP DEL, 667A

In a family with primary CILD11 (612649) without situs inversus, Kott et
al. (2013) identified compound heterozygous mutations in the RSPH4A
gene: a 1-bp deletion (667delA), resulting in premature termination
(Ser223AlafsTer15), and a 1-bp deletion (c.1720delA; 612647.0005),
resulting premature termination (Thr424GlnfsTer19). Transmission
electron microscopy showed that a variable proportion of cilia on
respiratory epithelial cells had central complex defects. Radial spokes
were absent in cilia with no central microtubule complex.

.0005
CILIARY DYSKINESIA, PRIMARY, 11, WITHOUT SITUS INVERSUS
RSPH4A, 1-BP DEL, 1720A

See 612647.0004 and Kott et al. (2013).

REFERENCE 1. Castleman, V. H.; Romio, L.; Chodhari, R.; Hirst, R. A.; de Castro,
S. C. P.; Parker, K. A.; Ybot-Gonzalez, P.; Emes, R. D.; Wilson, S.
W.; Wallis, C.; Johnson, C. A.; Herrera, R. J.; and 12 others:
Mutations in radial spoke head protein genes RSPH9 and RSPH4A cause
primary ciliary dyskinesia with central-microtubular-pair abnormalities. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 84: 197-209, 2009.

2. Kott, E.; Legendre, M.; Copin, B.; Papon, J.-F.; Dastot-Le Moal,
F.; Montantin, G.; Duquesnoy, P.; Piterboth, W.; Amram, D.; Bassinet,
L.; Beucher, J.; Beydon, N.; and 18 others: Loss-of-function mutations
in RSPH1 cause primary ciliary dyskinesia with central-complex and
radial-spoke defects. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 93: 561-570, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/16/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/5/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/5/2009

EDITED carol: 11/05/2013
carol: 10/17/2013
ckniffin: 10/16/2013
carol: 3/9/2009
ckniffin: 3/5/2009
mgross: 3/5/2009

611874	TITLE *611874 NEURON-DERIVED NEUROTROPHIC FACTOR; NENF
;;NEUDESIN;;
CELL IMMORTALIZATION-RELATED PROTEIN 2; CIR2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using differential display to identify transcripts up-regulated in
immortalized cells, Ma et al. (1998) identified a transcript, which they
named CIR2, that was 2- to 3-fold elevated in human embryonic kidney
cells transformed with SV40. Kimura et al. (2005) identified and cloned
cDNA for the same protein in mouse, which they called neudesin. The
deduced 171-amino acid secreted protein contains a 24-amino acid signal
peptide. Kimura et al. (2005) also cloned the human cDNA for neudesin
from brain and found that it encodes a deduced 172-amino acid protein
with 90% sequence similarity to the mouse protein. In mice, in situ
hybridization showed abundant expression of neudesin in developing brain
and spinal cord, and RT-PCR of postnatal tissues demonstrated expression
in brain, heart, lung, and kidney. The protein was expressed in neurons
but not in glial cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Kimura et al. (2006) showed that neudesin was expressed in early
development in mouse embryonic cerebral cortex in neural precursor
cells. Studies in culture showed that neudesin promoted neuronal
differentiation and inhibited differentiation of astrocytes. Kimura et
al. (2008) observed that siRNA targeted against neudesin resulted in
decreased survival of Neuro2a cells.

Kimura et al. (2008) noted that neudesin has a predicted cytochrome
b5-like heme/steroid-binding domain, and determined that
Fe(III)-protoporphyrin IX is required for its neurotrophic activity. An
anti-neudesin antibody detected a 15.6-kD band in media from cultured
Neuro2a cells and was used in experiments to confirm that the protein
binds heme. Kimura et al. (2008) stated that neudesin was the first
extracellular heme-binding protein found to be involved in intercellular
signal transduction.

MAPPING

Kimura et al. (2005) stated that the NENF gene maps to chromosome 1p33;
however, Scott (2008) mapped the gene to 1q32.3 based on an alignment of
the NENF sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB126219) with the genomic sequence
(build 36.2).

REFERENCE 1. Kimura, I.; Konishi, M.; Miyake, A.; Fujimoto, M.; Itoh, N.: Neudesin,
a secreted factor, promotes neural cell proliferation and neuronal
differentiation in mouse neural precursor cells. J. Neurosci. Res. 83:
1415-1424, 2006.

2. Kimura, I.; Nakayama, Y.; Yamauchi, H.; Konishi, M.; Miyake, A.;
Mori, M.; Ohta, M.; Itoh, N.; Fujimoto, M.: Neurotrophic activity
of neudesin, a novel extracellular heme-binding protein, is dependent
on the binding of heme to its cytochrome b5-like heme/steroid-binding
domain. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 4323-4331, 2008.

3. Kimura, I.; Yoshioka, M.; Konishi, M.; Miyake, A.; Itoh, N.: Neudesin,
a novel secreted protein with a unique primary structure and neurotrophic
activity. J. Neurosci. Res. 79: 287-294, 2005.

4. Ma, L.; Broomfield, S.; Lavery, C.; Lin, S. L.; Xiao, W.; Bacchetti,
S.: Up-regulation of CIR1/CROC1 expression upon cell immortalization
and in tumor-derived human cell lines. Oncogene 17: 1321-1326, 1998.

5. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/16/2008.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 3/3/2008

EDITED carol: 03/03/2008
carol: 3/3/2008

604593	TITLE *604593 KINESIN FAMILY MEMBER 5C; KIF5C
;;KINESIN, HEAVY CHAIN, NEURON-SPECIFIC, 2; NKHC2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The KIF5C gene encodes a member of the kinesin superfamily of proteins,
most of which are ATP-dependent molecular motors involved in
intracellular transport along microtubules. KIF5C functions as a
tetramer consisting of 2 heavy chains and 2 light chains (summary by
Poirier et al., 2013).

See KIF5B (602809) for general information on kinesins.

CLONING

By screening human brain cDNAs for the potential to encode proteins
larger than 100 kD, Nagase et al. (1998) isolated a full-length KIF5C
cDNA, which they called KIAA0531. The deduced 957-amino acid KIF5C
protein shares 75.4% amino acid sequence identity with KIF5A (602821)
across 953 amino acids. By SDS-PAGE, in vitro transcribed/translated
KIF5C had an apparent molecular mass greater than 100 kD. RT-PCR
detected KIF5C expression in several human tissues, with the highest
expression in brain, prostate, and testis, and moderate expression in
kidney, small intestine, and ovary.

NOMENCLATURE

Lawrence et al. (2004) presented a standardized kinesin nomenclature
based on 14 family designations. Under this system, KIF5C belongs to the
kinesin-1 family.

GENE FUNCTION

Kinesins have N-terminal motor domains and C-terminal cargo-binding tail
domains separated by hinge regions. Kanai et al. (2004) found that the
hinge and C-terminal tail regions of Kif5a, Kif5b, and Kif5c bound a
large detergent-resistant RNase-sensitive granule from mouse brain. Mass
spectrometric analysis showed that the granule contained mRNAs for
Camk2-alpha (CAMK2A; 114078) and Arc (NOL3; 605235) and 42 proteins,
including those for RNA transport, protein synthesis, and translational
silencing. The granule localized to dendrites and underwent
bidirectional movement. Distally directed movement of the granule was
enhanced by Kif5 overexpression and reduced by Kif5 functional blockage.
Kanai et al. (2004) concluded that kinesins transport RNA in dendrites
via this large granule.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid mapping, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the KIF5C gene
to chromosome 2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 4 brothers with complex cortical dysplasia with other brain
malformations-2 (CDCBM2; 615282), Poirier et al. (2013) identified a
heterozygous mutation in the KIF5C gene (E237V; 604593.0001). The
mutation was identified by whole-exome sequencing and was not found in
several genomic databases, including dbSNP, 1000 Genomes, Exome Variant
Server, and a local Paris Descartes Bioinformatics platform database.
The unaffected mother was determined to be germline mosaic for the
mutation. In vitro functional expression studies in E. coli and COS-7
cells showed that the mutant protein was expressed, but had a complete
loss of ATP hydrolysis activity. In COS-7 cells, mutant KIF5C heavily
colocalized with microtubules throughout the cell, but did not appear as
puncta or accumulate in cortical clusters as did the wildtype protein.
Poirier et al. (2013) postulated a dominant-negative effect. Three of
the affected fetuses died in utero; the 1 surviving son had microcephaly
(-4 SD), arthrogryposis, and early-onset epilepsy, and he was bedridden
with spastic tetraplegia at age 1 month. Brain MRI showed frontal and
perisylvian polymicrogyria and thin corpus callosum. The findings
extended the association between microtubule-based cellular processes
and proper cortical development.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CORTICAL DYSPLASIA, COMPLEX, WITH OTHER BRAIN MALFORMATIONS 2 (1 family)
KIF5C, GLU237VAL

In 4 brothers with complex cortical dysplasia with other brain
malformations-2 (CDCBM2; 615282), Poirier et al. (2013) identified a
heterozygous c.710A-T transversion in the KIF5C gene, resulting in a
glu237-to-val (E237V) substitution at a conserved residue in the
microtubule-interacting domain. The mutation was identified by
whole-exome sequencing and was not found in several genomic databases,
including dbSNP, 1,000 Genomes, Exome Variant Server, and a local Paris
Descartes Bioinformatics platform database. The unaffected mother was
determined to be germline mosaic for the mutation. Three-dimensional
modeling showed the surface location of this residue within the motor
domain. In vitro functional expression studies in E. coli and COS-7
cells showed that the mutant protein had a complete loss of ATP
hydrolysis activity. In COS-7 cells, mutant KIF5C heavily colocalized
with microtubules throughout the cell, but did not appear as puncta or
accumulate in cortical clusters as did the wildtype protein. Poirier et
al. (2013) postulated a dominant-negative effect. Three of the affected
fetuses died in utero; the 1 surviving son had microcephaly (-4 SD),
arthrogryposis, and early-onset epilepsy, and he was bedridden with
spastic tetraplegia at age 1 month. Brain MRI showed frontal and
perisylvian polymicrogyria and thin corpus callosum.

REFERENCE 1. Kanai, Y.; Dohmae, N.; Hirokawa, N.: Kinesin transports RNA: isolation
and characterization of an RNA-transporting granule. Neuron 43:
513-525, 2004.

2. Lawrence, C. J.; Dawe, R. K.; Christie, K. R.; Cleveland, D. W.;
Dawson, S. C.; Endow, S. A.; Goldstein, L. S. B.; Goodson, H. V.;
Hirokawa, N.; Howard, J.; Malmberg, R. L.; McIntosh, J. R.; and 10
others: A standardized kinesin nomenclature. J. Cell Biol. 167:
19-22, 2004.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.;
Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified
human genes. IX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from
brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 31-39,
1998.

4. Poirier, K.; Lebrun, N.; Broix, L.; Tian, G.; Saillour, Y.; Boscheron,
C.; Parrini, E.; Valence, S.; Saint Pierre, B.; Oger, M.; Lacombe,
D.; Genevieve, D.; and 23 others: Mutations in TUBG1, DYNC1H1,
KIF5C and KIF2A cause malformations of cortical development and microcephaly. Nature
Genet. 45: 639-647, 2013. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 45: 962 only,
2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/16/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/21/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/4/2011

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 2/22/2000

EDITED carol: 09/17/2013
ckniffin: 9/16/2013
mgross: 6/21/2012
mgross: 5/20/2011
terry: 5/4/2011
mgross: 2/25/2000
psherman: 2/22/2000

606091	TITLE *606091 SIALIC ACID-BINDING IMMUNOGLOBULIN-LIKE LECTIN 10; SIGLEC10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SIGLECs are members of the immunoglobulin superfamily that are expressed
on the cell surface. Most SIGLECs have 1 or more cytoplasmic immune
receptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motifs, or ITIMs. SIGLECs are
typically expressed on cells of the innate immune system, with the
exception of the B-cell expressed SIGLEC6 (604405).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences resembling CD33 (SIGLEC3;
159590) and screening a spleen cDNA library, Munday et al. (2001)
isolated a cDNA encoding SIGLEC10. Sequence analysis predicted that the
697-amino acid SIGLEC10 protein contains a signal peptide, an N-terminal
V-set Ig-like domain and 4 C2-set Ig-like domains, 5 potential N-linked
glycosylation sites, a transmembrane region, and a 126-residue
cytoplasmic tail with 3 putative ITIMs. Northern blot analysis detected
a major 3.0-kb SIGLEC10 transcript, with highest levels in spleen, lymph
node, blood leukocytes, and appendix. Little or no expression was
observed in pancreas, thyroid, and testis. Flow cytometric analysis
demonstrated eosinophil-specific expression of SIGLEC10, but at a lower
level than that of SIGLEC8 (605639). Expression was also detected on
monocytes and a CD16 (146740)-positive/CD56-negative natural killer-like
lymphocyte population. After sialidase treatment, which is necessary for
unmasking the sialic acid-binding site on SIGLECs interacting with cell
surface sialic acids, cells expressing SIGLEC10 bound to red blood
cells. Immunoprecipitation analysis indicated expression of a 100- to
120-kD monomeric protein, higher than the predicted molecular mass,
suggesting that SIGLEC10 is glycosylated.

By random sequencing and by comparison with known SIGLEC sequences, Li
et al. (2001) independently cloned SIGLEC10 from a dendritic cell cDNA
library. The cDNA predicted a deduced 607-amino acid protein containing
3 C2-set domains and 3 putative N-glycosylation sites. Northern blot
analysis of multiple human tissues revealed a transcript of about 3.3 kb
in peripheral blood lymphocytes, ovary, and spleen, and a transcript of
about 1.8 kb in liver, spleen, thymus, and lung.

Using the positional candidate cloning approach, Yousef et al. (2001)
identified SIGLEC10 and found that it encodes 3 variants: a deduced
protein of 697 amino acids, a shorter variant missing exon 8, and a
variant with multiple combined exons including intronic sequences.
RT-PCR detected expression of SIGLEC10 primarily in bone marrow, spleen,
brain, small intestine, colon, and spinal cord.

GENE FUNCTION

With use of SIGLEC10-transfected COS-7 cells, Li et al. (2001) found
moderate red blood cell binding and rosette formation that was augmented
by sialidase pretreatment to eliminate sialylated (cis ligands) on the
COS-7 cell surface. With use of polyacrylamide glycoconjugates, they
determined that SIGLEC10 preferentially bound glycoconjugates carrying
sialic acid in either alpha-2,3 or alpha-2,6 linkages, similar to the
binding observed for SIGLEC5 (604200).

Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and danger (cell
injury)-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) both trigger activation of
the innate immune system. Chen et al. (2009) reported that Cd24
(600074)-deficient mice exhibit increased susceptibility to DAMPs but
not PAMPs. CD24 associates with high mobility group box-1 (HMGB1;
163905), heat shock protein-70 (HSP70; 140550), and heat shock
protein-90 (HSP90; 140571). CD24 negatively regulates their stimulatory
activity and inhibits nuclear factor kappa-B (see 164011) activation.
Chen et al. (2009) reported that this occurs at least in part through
CD24 association with SIGLEC10 in humans or SiglecG in mice. Chen et al.
(2009) concluded that the CD24-SiglecG pathway protects the host against
a lethal response to pathologic cell death and discriminates danger-
versus pathogen-associated molecular patterns.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yousef et al. (2001) determined that the SIGLEC10 gene contains 11 exons
and spans about 6.5 kb.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Munday et al. (2001) mapped the SIGLEC10 gene to 19q13.3,
where it is closely linked to other CD33-related SIGLECs. Yousef et al.
(2001) identified the SIGLEC10 gene on overlapping BAC clones localized
to chromosome 19q13.4. SIGLEC10 lies 278 kb telomeric to SIGLEC9
(605640) and 35 kb centromeric to SIGLEC8.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, G.-Y.; Tang, J.; Zheng, P.; Liu, Y.: CD24 and Siglec-10
selectively repress tissue damage-induced immune responses. Science 323:
1722-1725, 2009.

2. Li, N.; Zhang, W.; Wan, T.; Zhang, J.; Chen, T.; Yu, Y.; Wang,
J.; Cao, X.: Cloning and characterization of Siglec-10, a novel sialic
acid binding member of the Ig superfamily, from human dendritic cells. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 28106-28112, 2001.

3. Munday, J.; Kerr, S.; Ni, J.; Cornish, A. L.; Zhang, J. Q.; Nicoll,
G.; Floyd, H.; Mattei, M.-G.; Moore, P.; Liu, D.; Crocker, P. R.:
Identification, characterization and leucocyte expression of Siglec-10,
a novel human sialic acid-binding receptor. Biochem. J. 355: 489-497,
2001.

4. Yousef, G. M.; Ordon, M. H.; Foussias, G.; Diamandis, E. P.: Molecular
characterization, tissue expression, and mapping of a novel Siglec-like
gene (SLG2) with three splice variants. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 284:
900-910, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/18/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/11/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/9/2001

EDITED alopez: 06/23/2009
terry: 6/18/2009
carol: 6/12/2002
carol: 6/11/2002
mgross: 7/9/2001

613465	TITLE *613465 NONMETASTATIC CELLS 7, PROTEIN EXPRESSED IN; NME7
;;NM23H7;;
NUCLEOSIDE DIPHOSPHATE KINASE 7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In a review of human Nm23/nucleoside diphosphate kinases (EC 2.7.4.6),
Lacombe et al. (2000) stated that the NME7 gene encodes a deduced
376-amino acid protein containing 2 kinase-like domains, each of which
lacks 3 residues deemed crucial for catalysis. RT-PCR detected highest
NME7 expression in testis, and weaker expression in liver, heart, brain,
ovary, small intestine, and spleen.

GENE FUNCTION

Hutchins et al. (2010) showed that mouse Nme7 associated with the
centralspindlin complex (see KIF23, 605064) in transfected HeLa cells.
This complex is believed to have a role in spindle assembly and
cytokinesis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lacombe et al. (2000) determined that the NME7 gene contains 12 exons
spanning over 180 kb.

MAPPING

Lacombe et al. (2000) mapped the NME7 gene to chromosome 1q24. They
noted that NME7 and ATP1B1 (182330) lie on opposite strands, with
overlapping 3-prime UTRs.

REFERENCE 1. Hutchins, J. R. A.; Toyoda, Y.; Hegemann, B.; Poser, I.; Heriche,
J.-K.; Sykora, M. M.; Augsburg, M.; Hudecz, O.; Buschhorn, B. A.;
Bulkescher, J.; Conrad, C.; Comartin, D.; and 18 others: Systematic
analysis of human protein complexes identifies chromosome segregation
proteins. Science 328: 593-599, 2010.

2. Lacombe, M.-L.; Milon, L.; Munier, A.; Mehus, J. G.; Lambeth, D.
O.: The human Nm23/nucleoside diphosphate kinases. J. Bioenerg.
Biomembr. 32: 247-258, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/29/2010

EDITED carol: 06/29/2010
carol: 6/29/2010

