159555	TITLE +159555 MYELOID/LYMPHOID OR MIXED LINEAGE LEUKEMIA GENE; MLL
;;MLL1;;
TRITHORAX, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; TRX1;;
HRX;;
MYELOID/LYMPHOID LEUKEMIA GENE;;
MIXED LINEAGE LEUKEMIA GENE;;
ALL1 GENE; ALL1;;
CXXC FINGER PROTEIN 7; CXXC7
MIXED LINEAGE LEUKEMIA, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF4 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/ENL FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF9 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/GMPS FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/FBP17 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/LPP FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/GPH FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/PNUTL1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/CDK6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/LASP1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/GRAF FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/ABI1 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/LAF4 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/CBL FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/LARG FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF10 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF15q14 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/AF6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/CIP29 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/SEPT6 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/MAML2 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
MLL/KIAA1524 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The MLL gene encodes a DNA-binding protein that methylates histone H3
(see 602810) lys4 (H3K4) and positively regulates expression of target
genes, including multiple HOX genes (see 142980). MLL is a frequent
target for recurrent translocations in acute leukemias that may be
characterized as acute myeloid leukemia (AML; 601626), acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), or mixed lineage (biphenotypic) leukemia
(MLL). Leukemias with translocations involving MLL possess unique
clinical and biologic characteristics and are often associated with poor
prognosis. MLL rearrangements are found in more than 70% of infant
leukemias, whether the immunophenotype is more consistent with ALL or
AML6, but are less frequent in leukemias from older children. MLL
translocations are also found in approximately 10% of AMLs in adults, as
well as in therapy-related leukemias, most often characterized as AML,
that develop in patients previously treated with topoisomerase II
inhibitors for other malignancies. More than 50 different MLL fusion
partners have been identified. Leukemogenic MLL translocations encode
MLL fusion proteins that have lost H3K4 methyltransferase activity. A
key feature of MLL fusion proteins is their ability to efficiently
transform hematopoietic cells into leukemia stem cells (Krivtsov and
Armstrong, 2007).

CLONING

Recurring chromosomal translocations involving chromosome 11q23 have
been observed in both acute lymphoid leukemia and acute myeloid leukemia
(AML; 601626), especially acute monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5) and acute
myelomonocytic leukemia (AMML-M4). Rowley et al. (1990) demonstrated
that the breakpoints in four 11q23 translocations associated with
leukemia were contained within a yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) clone
bearing the CD3D (186790) and CD3G (186740) genes. Within this YAC,
Ziemin-van der Poel et al. (1991) identified a transcription unit
spanning the breakpoint junctions of 3 of these translocations, 4;11,
9;11, and 11;19. They described 2 other related transcripts that were
upregulated in a translocation cell line. Ziemin-van der Poel et al.
(1991) named the gene MLL for myeloid/lymphoid, or mixed lineage,
leukemia. Cimino et al. (1991) identified the same gene and called it
ALL1.

Gu et al. (1992) determined that the ALL1 gene encodes a protein of more
than 3,910 amino acids containing 3 regions with homology to sequences
within the Drosophila 'trithorax' gene, including cysteine-rich regions
that can be folded into 6 zinc finger-like domains. Tkachuk et al.
(1992) showed that the ALL1 gene, which they referred to as HRX (for
'homolog of trithorax'), codes for a 431-kD protein. Djabali et al.
(1992) also cloned an 11.5-kb transcript spanning the 11q23
translocation breakpoint.

Parry et al. (1993) showed that the sequence of a partial TRX1 cDNA
contained an open reading frame encoding 1,012 amino acids with
extensive homology to the Drosophila trithorax protein, particularly in
the zinc finger-like domains. The TRX1 gene appears to be unique in the
human genome and has been conserved during evolution.

Butler et al. (1997) analyzed the distribution and localization of HRX
proteins in cell lines and human tissues, using both polyclonal and
monoclonal antibodies. Immunocytochemical analysis showed a punctate
distribution of wildtype and chimeric HRX proteins within cell nuclei,
suggesting that HRX localizes to nuclear structures in cells with and
without 11q23 translocations. Nuclear staining was found in the majority
of tissues studied, with the strongest reactivity in cerebral cortex,
kidney, thyroid, and lymphoid tissues. Thus, Butler et al. (1997)
concluded that HRX is widely expressed in most cell types, including
hematopoietic cells, a finding that precludes an immunocytochemical
approach for diagnosis of leukemias bearing 11q23 structural
abnormalities.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gu et al. (1992) determined that the MLL gene spans approximately 100 kb
and contains at least 21 exons.

MAPPING

The MLL gene maps to chromosome 11q23 (Ziemin-van der Poel et al., 1991;
Cimino et al., 1991).

GENE FUNCTION

Milne et al. (2002) showed that MLL regulates target HOX gene expression
through direct binding to promoter sequences. They determined that the
MLL SET domain is a histone H3 (see 601128) lys4 (K4)-specific
methyltransferase whose activity is stimulated with acetylated H3
peptides. This methylase activity was found to be associated with HOX
gene activation and H3 K4 methylation at cis regulatory sequences in
vivo. A leukemogenic MLL fusion protein that activates HOX expression
had no effect on histone methylation, suggesting a distinct mechanism
for gene regulation by MLL and MLL fusion proteins.

Nakamura et al. (2002) found that ALL1 is present within a stable
multiprotein supercomplex composed of at least 29 proteins. The majority
of the complex proteins are components of transcription complexes,
including TFIID (see 604912). Other components are involved in RNA
processing or histone methylation. The authors found that the complex
remodels, acetylates, deacetylates, and methylates nucleosomes and/or
free histones, and that the H3 K4 methylation activity of the complex is
conferred by the ALL1 SET domain. Chromatin immunoprecipitations showed
that ALL1 and other complex components examined were bound at the
promoter of an active ALL1-dependent HOXA9 gene (142956). In parallel,
H3 K4 was methylated, and histones H3 and H4 were acetylated at this
promoter.

The MLL gene encodes a large nuclear protein that is required for the
maintenance of HOX gene expression. MLL is cleaved at 2 conserved sites
to generate an N-terminal 320-kD fragment (N320) and a C-terminal 180-kD
fragment (C180), which heterodimerize to stabilize the complex and
confer its subnuclear destination. Hsieh et al. (2003) purified and
cloned the protease responsible for cleaving MLL, which they entitled
taspase-1 (608270). They determined that taspase-1 initiates a class of
endopeptidases that utilize an N-terminal threonine as the active-site
nucleophile to proteolyze polypeptide substrates following aspartate.
RNA interference-mediated knockdown of taspase-1 in HeLa cells resulted
in the appearance of unprocessed MLL and the loss of proper HOX gene
expression.

Lim et al. (2009) showed that Mll1 is required for neurogenesis in the
mouse postnatal brain. Mll1-deficient subventricular zone neural stem
cells survive, proliferate, and efficiently differentiate into glial
lineages; however, neuronal differentiation is severely impaired. In
Mll1-deficient cells, early proneural Mash1 (100790) and gliogenic Olig2
(606386) expression are preserved, but Dlx2 (126255), a key downstream
regulator of subventricular zone neurogenesis, is not expressed.
Overexpression of Dlx2 can rescue neurogenesis in Mll1-deficient cells.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrates that Dlx2 is a direct target
of MLL in subventricular zone cells. In differentiating wildtype
subventricular zone cells, Mash1, Olig2, and Dlx2 loci have high levels
of histone-3 trimethylated at lys4 (H3K4me3), consistent with their
transcription. In contrast, in Mll1-deficient subventricular zone cells,
chromatin at Dlx2 is bivalently marked by both H3K4me3 and H3K27me3, and
the Dlx2 gene fails to properly activate. Lim et al. (2009) concluded
that their data supported a model in which Mll1 is required to resolve
key silenced bivalent loci in postnatal neural precursors to the
actively transcribed state for the induction of neurogenesis, but not
for gliogenesis.

Liu et al. (2010) assigned MLL as a novel effector in the mammalian
S-phase checkpoint network and identified checkpoint dysfunction as an
underlying mechanism of MLL leukemias. MLL is phosphorylated at ser516
by ATR (601215) in response to genotoxic stress in the S phase, which
disrupts its interaction with, and hence its degradation by, the
SCF(Skp2) E3 ligase (see 601436), leading to its accumulation.
Stabilized MLL protein accumulates on chromatin, methylates histone H3
lysine-4 at late replication origins, and inhibits the loading of CDC45
(603465) to delay DNA replication. Cells deficient in MLL showed
radioresistant DNA synthesis and chromatid-type genomic abnormalities,
indicative of S-phase checkpoint dysfunction. Reconstitution of Mll-null
mouse embryonic fibroblasts with wildtype but not S516A or delta-SET
mutant MLL rescued the S-phase checkpoint defects. Moreover, murine
myeloid progenitor cells carrying an Mll-CBP (600140) knockin allele
that mimics human t(11;16) leukemia showed a severe radioresistant DNA
synthesis phenotype. Liu et al. (2010) demonstrated that MLL fusions
function as dominant-negative mutants that abrogate the ATR-mediated
phosphorylation/stabilization of wildtype MLL on damage to DNA, and thus
compromise the S-phase checkpoint. Together, Liu et al. (2010) concluded
that their results identified MLL as a key constituent of the mammalian
DNA damage response pathway and showed that deregulation of the S-phase
checkpoint incurred by MLL translocations probably contributes to the
pathogenesis of human MLL leukemias.

- MLL Fusion Proteins

Human ML-2 leukemia cells lack a normal MLL gene and exclusively express
an MLL/AF6 (MLLT4; 159559) fusion protein. Yokoyama et al. (2005) showed
that MLL/AF6 associated with menin (MEN1; 613733) in ML-2 cells.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed both proteins present on
upstream sites of the HOXA7 (142950), HOXA9 (142956), and HOXA10
(142957) promoters. Deletions and point mutations performed in the MLL
portion of the MLL/ENL (MLLT1; 159556) fusion protein revealed a high
affinity menin-binding motif (RXRFP) near the N terminus. Interaction
between oncogenic MLL and menin was required for initiation of
MLL-mediated leukemogenesis in mouse stem/progenitor cells, and menin
was essential to maintain MLL-associated myeloid transformation. Acute
genetic ablation of menin in mice reversed aberrant Hox gene expression
mediated by MLL-menin promoter-associated complexes and specifically
abrogated differentiation arrest and oncogenic properties of
MLL-transformed leukemic blasts.

By gel filtration, mass spectrometry, and Western blot analysis of human
cell lines, Nie et al. (2003) identified unique low-abundance SWI/SWF
complexes that contained ENL, several common SWI/SNF subunits, and
either BAF250A (ARID1A; 603024) or BAF250B (ARID1B; 614556). Western
blot analysis of HB(11;19) leukemia cells, which express the oncogenic
MLL/ENL fusion protein, revealed that MLL/ENL also interacted with the
BAF250B-containing complex. MLL/ENL-containing SWI/SNF complexes
coactivated the HOXA7 promoter in a reporter gene assay.

CYTOGENETICS

- MLL Breakpoint Cluster Region

The ALL1 gene is rearranged in acute leukemias with interstitial
deletions or reciprocal translocations between chromosome 11q23 and
chromosomes 1, 4, 6, 9, 10, or 19. Gu et al. (1992) cloned translocation
fragments from leukemic cells from t(4;11) and showed clustering of the
breakpoints in areas of 7 to 8 kb on both chromosome 4 and 11.
Sequencing indicated heptamer and nonamer-like sequences, associated
with rearrangements of immunoglobulin and T-cell receptor genes, near
the breakpoints. This suggested a direct involvement of the VDJ
recombinase in the 11q23 translocations. Gu et al. (1992) determined
that the breakpoint cluster region within ALL1 spans 8 kb and
encompasses several small exons, most of which begin in the same phase
of the open reading frame.

McCabe et al. (1992) presented evidence that the breakpoints in all the
translocations involving 11q23 in leukemia cells, e.g., t(4;11) t(6;11),
t(9;11), and t(11;19), are clustered within a 9-kb BamHI genomic region
of the MLL gene. McCabe et al. (1992) detected rearrangements of DNA in
a fragment of the MLL gene by Southern blot hybridization. Djabali et
al. (1992) concluded that most of the breakpoints in infant leukemias
with t(4;11) and t(9;11) translocations lie within a 5-kb region.

Using a human TRX1 cDNA as a probe, Parry et al. (1993) demonstrated
that the gene is interrupted in both infant and adult acute myeloid
(AML) and lymphoid (ALL) leukemia patients with 11q23 translocations.
The structure of the TRX1 gene around the breakpoints show that this
part of the human gene is interrupted by 9 introns. As a result of the
rearrangement, zinc finger domains are translocated in both ALL and AML
patients.

Strout et al. (1998) analyzed the fusion sequences in genomic DNA from 9
patients with AML. Each had a partial tandem repeat spanning exons 2 to
6 of the ALL1 gene on 11q23. The breakpoint in intron 6 occurred in the
breakpoint cluster region and the other near the 3-prime end of intron
1. In 7 cases, a distinct point of fusion could not be identified;
instead, the sequence gradually diverged from an Alu element in intron 6
to an Alu element in intron 1 through heteroduplex fusion. The results
supported the hypothesis that a recombination event between homologous
Alu sequences is responsible for the partial tandem duplication of ALL1,
probably through an intrastrand slipped-mispairing mechanism, in the
majority of AML cases with this defect. This appeared to be the first
demonstration identifying Alu element-mediated recombination as a
consistent mechanism for gene rearrangement in somatic tissue.

- MLL/AF4 Fusion Gene

Gu et al. (1992) determined that the t(4;11) chromosome translocation in
leukemia results in 2 reciprocal fusion products coding for chimeric
proteins derived from ALL1 and from a gene on chromosome 4 that they
termed AF4 (MLLT2; 159557).

Translocations involving 11q23 in leukemia result in the translocation
of zinc finger domains with fusion to other genes on chromosome 4,
chromosome 9, or chromosome 19. The gene on chromosome 19 with which it
is fused is ENL (159556). Nakamura et al. (1993) showed that the genes
with which it is fused on chromosome 4 (AF4) and chromosome 9 (AF9;
159558) show high homology of sequence to ENL. The protein products of
the AF4, AF9, and ENL proteins contained nuclear targeting sequences as
well as serine-rich and proline-rich regions.

Independently, Domer et al. (1993) characterized the MLL/AF4 fusion
product generated by the t(4;11) translocation. The sequence of the
complete open reading frame for this fusion transcript revealed that the
MLL protein is homologous to DNA methyltransferase. In the fusion gene,
the 5-prime portion is derived from the MLL gene and the 3-prime portion
from the AF4 gene.

Gale et al. (1997) demonstrated that unique or clonotypic MLL-AF4
genomic fusion sequences were detectable in neonatal blood spots from
individuals who developed ALL at ages 5 months to 2 years, thus
providing unequivocal evidence for a prenatal initiation of acute
leukemia in young patients. They stated that common subtypes due to
other translocation fusion genes can be expected to have a similar
prenatal initiation.

In an infant diagnosed at the age of 3 weeks with ALL after presenting
with hepatosplenomegaly and marked leukocytosis, Raffini et al. (2002)
found a 3-way rearrangement of the MLL, AF4, and CDK6 (603368) genes. By
reverse-panhandle PCR, they identified a breakpoint junction of CDK6
from band 7q21-q22 and MLL intron 9. Thus, the patient had an in-frame
CDK6-MLL transcript along with an in-frame MLL-AF4 transcript.

Wang et al. (2010) studied leukemia stem cells in mouse models of acute
myelogenous leukemia induced by either coexpression of the Hoxa9
(142956) and Meis1a (601739) oncogenes or by the fusion oncoprotein
MLL-AF9. The authors showed that the Wnt (see 164820)/beta-catenin
(116806) signaling pathway is required for self-renewal of leukemia stem
cells that are derived from either hematopoietic stem cells or more
differentiated granulocyte-macrophage progenitors. Because the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is normally active in hematopoietic stem cells
but not in granulocyte-macrophage progenitors, Wang et al. (2010)
concluded that reactivation of beta-catenin signaling is required for
the transformation of progenitor cells by certain oncogenes.
Beta-catenin is not absolutely required for self-renewal of adult
hematopoietic stem cells; thus, targeting the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway
may represent a new therapeutic opportunity in acute myelogenous
leukemia.

- MLL/ENL Fusion Gene

In studies of a t(11;19)-carrying cell line, Tkachuk et al. (1992)
identified fusion transcripts expressed from both derivative
chromosomes. The more abundant derivative 11 transcript coded for a
chimeric protein containing the amino terminal 'AT-hook' motifs of the
HRX gene fused to the ENL gene (MLLT1; 159556) from chromosome 19. (ENL
was so named for '11-19 leukemia.') The HRX protein may have effects
mediated by DNA binding within the minor groove at AT-rich sites.
Tkachuk et al. (1992) referred to this type of leukemia as representing
the multilineage leukemias rather than mixed lineage leukemias. The cell
line carrying the t(11;19) was from a patient with T-cell precursor
acute lymphocytic leukemia (Smith et al., 1989).

Translocations involving 11q23 in leukemia result in the translocation
of zinc finger domains with fusion to other genes on chromosome 4,
chromosome 9, or chromosome 19. The gene on chromosome 19 with which it
is fused is ENL. Nakamura et al. (1993) showed that the genes with which
it is fused on chromosome 4 (AF4) and chromosome 9 (AF9; 159558) show
high homology of sequence to ENL. The protein products of the AF4, AF9,
and ENL proteins contained nuclear targeting sequences as well as
serine-rich and proline-rich regions.

- MLL/AF9 Fusion Gene

Translocations involving 11q23 in leukemia result in the translocation
of zinc finger domains with fusion to other genes on chromosome 4,
chromosome 9, or chromosome 19. The gene on chromosome 19 with which it
is fused is ENL. Nakamura et al. (1993) showed that the genes with which
it is fused on chromosome 4 (AF4) and chromosome 9 (AF9; 159558) show
high homology of sequence to ENL. The protein products of the AF4, AF9,
and ENL proteins contained nuclear targeting sequences as well as
serine-rich and proline-rich regions.

The human AF9 gene is one of the most common fusion partner genes with
MLL, resulting in the t(9;11)(p22;q23). Strissel et al. (2000)
identified several different structural elements in AF9, including a
colocalizing DNA topo II cleavage site and a DNase I hypersensitive
(DNase I HS) site. In addition, 2 scaffold-associated regions (SARs) are
located centromeric to the topo II and DNase I HS cleavage sites and
border breakpoint regions in 2 leukemic cell lines. The authors thus
demonstrated that the patient breakpoint regions of AF9 share the same
structural elements as the MLL BCR, and they proposed a DNA breakage and
repair model for nonhomologous recombination between MLL and its partner
genes, particularly AF9.

- MLL/AF6 Fusion Gene

Prasad et al. (1993) identified AF6 (MLLT4; 159559) as the fusion
partner of MLL in a common translocation, t(6;11)(q27;q23), associated
with leukemia. The t(6;11)(q27;q23) translocation results in a chimeric
MLL/AF6 protein with a calculated molecular mass of 325 kD. In the
chimeric protein, the N-terminal portion of MLL, including 3 AT hook
motifs, is fused to all of AF6 except the first 35 amino acids, leaving
the Ras-interacting domain and the DHR motif of AF6 intact. By Western
blot analysis of transfected COS cells and a human cell line with the
t(6;11)(q27;q23) translocation, Joh et al. (1997) found that the MLL/AF6
fusion protein had an apparent molecular mass of 360 kD.
Immunolocalization and cell fractionation followed by Western blot
analysis indicated that MLL/AF6 was targeted to the nucleus, whereas AF6
itself was cytoplasmic. Mutation analysis indicted that the region of
MLL containing AT hook motifs was responsible for the nuclear
localization of the chimeric protein.

- MLL/GPH Fusion Gene

Eguchi et al. (2001) found that the gephyrin gene (GPH; 603930) can
partner with MLL in leukemia associated with the translocation
t(11;14)(q23;q24). The child in whom this translocation was discovered
showed signs of acute undifferentiated leukemia 3 years after intensive
chemotherapy that included the topoisomerase II inhibitor VP16. The AT
hook motifs and a DNA methyltransferase homology domain of the MLL gene
were fused to the C-terminal half of GPH, including a presumed
tubulin-binding site and a domain homologous to the E. coli molybdenum
cofactor biosynthesis protein. Eguchi et al. (2001) suggested that
MLL-GPHN may have been generated by the chemotherapeutic agent, followed
by error-prone DNA repair via nonhomologous end-joining.

- MLL/GMPS Fusion Gene

In a patient with treatment-related acute myeloid leukemia and the
karyotype t(3;11)(q25;q23), Pegram et al. (2000) identified GMPS
(600358) to be the partner gene of MLL. The authors stated that GMPS was
the first partner gene of MLL to be identified on 3q and the first gene
of this type to be found in leukemia-associated translocations.

- MLL/FBP17 Fusion Gene

Fuchs et al. (2001) reported fusion of the gene encoding formin-binding
protein-17 (FBP17; 606191) to MLL in a child with acute myelogeneous
leukemia and a complex chromosome rearrangement,
ins(11;9)(q23;134)inv(11)(q13q23). The fused mRNA was represented by MLL
at the 5-prime end and FBP17 at the 3-prime end.

- MLL/LPP Fusion Gene

By FISH and Southern blot analyses, Daheron et al. (2001) identified a
rearrangement in the mixed lineage leukemia gene due to a novel
t(3;11)(q28;q23) translocation in a patient who developed acute myeloid
leukemia of the M5 type 3 years after treatment for a follicular
lymphoma. Through inverse PCR, they identified the LPP gene (600700) on
3q28 as the MLL fusion partner. The breakpoint occurred in intron 8 of
MLL and LPP. They found that the MLL/LPP and LPP/MLL predicted proteins
contain many of the features present in other MLL rearrangements.

- MLL/PNUTL1 Fusion Gene

Megonigal et al. (1998) examined the MLL genomic translocation
breakpoint in acute myeloid leukemia of infant twins. Southern blot
analysis showed 2 identical MLL gene rearrangements indicating
chromosomal translocation. The rearrangements were detected in the
second twin before signs of clinical disease and the intensity relative
to the normal fragment indicated that the translocation was not
constitutional. Fluorescence in situ hybridization with an MLL-specific
probe and karyotype analyses suggested that a t(11;22)(q23;q11.2)
disrupted MLL. Megonigal et al. (1998) used panhandle variant PCR to
clone the translocation breakpoint and identified a region of 22q11.2
involved in both leukemia and a constitutional disorder. By ligating a
single-stranded oligonucleotide that was homologous to known 5-prime MLL
genomic sequence to the 5-prime ends of BamHI-digested DNA through a
bridging oligonucleotide, they formed the stem-loop template for
panhandle variant PCR, which yielded products of 3.9 kb. The MLL genomic
breakpoint was in intron 7. The sequence of the partner DNA from 22q11.2
was identical to the human CDCrel (cell division cycle-related) gene
(PNUTL1; 602724) that maps to chromosome 22. Both MLL and PNUTL1
contained homologous CT, TTTGTG, and GAA sequences within a few
basepairs of their respective breakpoints, which may have been important
in uniting these 2 genes by translocation. RT-PCR amplified an in-frame
fusion of MLL exon 7 to PNUTL1 exon 3, indicating that a chimeric mRNA
had been transcribed.

- MLL/CDK6 Fusion Gene

In an infant diagnosed at the age of 3 weeks with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL; 613065) after presenting with hepatosplenomegaly and
marked leukocytosis, Raffini et al. (2002) found a 3-way rearrangement
of the MLL, AF4, and CDK6 (603368) genes. By reverse-panhandle PCR, they
identified a breakpoint junction of CDK6 from band 7q21-q22 and MLL
intron 9. Thus, the patient had an in-frame CDK6-MLL transcript along
with an in-frame MLL-AF4 transcript.

- MLL/LASP1 Fusion Gene

Strehl et al. (2003) identified a new MLL fusion partner on chromosome
17q in the case of an infant with AML-M4 and a t(11;17)(q23;q21)
translocation. FISH and RT-PCR analyses indicated a rearrangement of the
MLL gene, but no fusion with previously identified MLL fusion partners
at 17q, such as AF17 (600328) or MSF (604061). RACE revealed an in-frame
fusion of MLL to LASP1 (602920), a gene that is amplified and
overexpressed in breast cancer. The authors stated that retroviral
transduction of myeloid progenitors demonstrated that MLL/LASP1 was the
fourth known fusion of MLL with a cytoplasmic protein that has no in
vitro transformation capability, the others being GRAF (605370), ABI1
(603050), and FBP17.

- MLL/LAF4 Fusion Gene

Von Bergh et al. (2002) identified an MLL/LAF4 (601464) fusion gene in
an infant with ALL and a t(2;11)(p15;p14) translocation. Bruch et al.
(2003) also reported an infant with ALL and an MLL/LAF4 fusion caused by
an ins(11;2)(q23;q11.2q11.2) insertion.

- MLL/LARG Fusion Gene

In a patient with primary acute myeloid leukemia and a complex
karyotype, Kourlas et al. (2000) found that the 5-prime end of MLL at
exon 6 was fused in-frame with the 3-prime end of almost the entire open
reading frame of the LARG gene (604763), which lies on 11q23.
Transcriptional orientation of both genes at 11q23 was found to be from
centromere to telomere, consistent with other data that suggested that
the MLL/LARG fusion resulted from an interstitial deletion rather than a
balanced translocation.

- MLL/CBL Fusion Gene

Fu et al. (2003) found that the CBL gene (165360), which lies telomeric
to MLL on 11q23, was fused to MLL in an adult patient with de novo acute
myeloid leukemia (FAB M1). MLL exon 6 was fused in-frame with CBL exon
8. The genomic junction region involved the fusion of the 3-prime
portion of an Alu element in intron 6 of MLL with the 5-prime portion of
an Alu element in intron 7 of CBL. The absence of extensive sequence
similarity at both breakpoints of MLL and CBL indicated that the
recombination was not generated through homologous recombination. The
transcriptional orientation of both genes is from centromere to
telomere. The results of Southern blot analysis in conjunction with FISH
suggested that the MLL/CBL fusion was the result of an interstitial
deletion. CBL was the second MLL fusion partner identified on 11q23, the
first being the LARG gene. Fu et al. (2003) stated that at least 34
partner genes for MLL had been identified.

- MLL/AF10 Fusion Gene

Tanabe et al. (1996) identified an invins(10;11)(p12;q23q12) and other
complex chromosomal rearrangements in a 2-year old boy with acute
monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5). Cloning of the proximal 10p breakpoint
showed that the MLL gene at chromosome 11q23 was fused to the 3-prime
portion of AF10 (MLLT10; 602409) at chromosome 10p12. Cloning of the
telomeric 10p junction revealed that the 5-prime portion of AF10 was
fused with the HEAB gene (608757). The 5-prime AF10/HEAB fusion
transcript was out of frame, while the MLL/3-prime AF10 fusion was in
frame.

- MLL/AF15q14 Fusion Gene

Hayette et al. (2000) described a 48-year-old man with AML-M4 who was
cytogenetically characterized as 46,XY,-3,t(11;15)(q23;q1 4),+mar. The
bone marrow was hypercellular, with 80% blast cells. The patient was
treated by intensive chemotherapy and died 4 month after diagnosis. The
translocation resulted in a in-frame fusion between exon 8 of the MLL
gene and exon 10 of the AF15q14 gene (609173). The fusion transcript was
predicted to encode a 1,503-amino acid protein composed of 1,418
N-terminal amino acids of MLL and 85 C-terminal amino acids of AF15q14,
including the bipartite nuclear localization signal.

Kuefer et al. (2003) identified a similar t(11;15)(q23;q14) in a
3-year-old boy with de novo T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia. In this
translocation, exon 9 of the MLL gene was fused in-frame to exon 12 of
the AF15q14 gene. The deduced 1,886-amino acid fusion protein, which
contains the N terminus of MLL up to lys1362 fused to the entire C
terminus of AF15q14 starting from residue ile1819, has a calculated
molecular mass of 208 kD. It differs from the fusion protein described
by Hayette et al. (2000) in that it has a coiled-coil domain but no
nuclear localization signal.

- MLL/CIP29 Fusion Gene

In an infant with AML-M4, Hashii et al. (2004) identified a
translocation, t(11;12)(q23;q13), in which the coding region of the
CIP29 gene (610049) was fused in-frame to exon 9 of the MLL gene. The
fusion protein had the N-terminal AT hooks and central DNA
methyltransferase homology region of MLL fused to nearly all of the
CIP29 protein, including the N-terminal SAP domain and 2 C-terminal
nuclear localization signals. RT-PCR confirmed expression of the fusion
transcript in patient peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

- MLL/SEPT6 Fusion Gene

Kadkol et al. (2006) described an infant with AML who had a
rearrangement between chromosomes 11q23 and Xq24. FISH analysis showed a
break in MLL, and RT-PCR analysis confirmed expression of an MLL/SEPT6
(300683) fusion transcript.

- MLL/MAML2 Fusion Gene

Nemoto et al. (2007) isolated MLL/MAML2 (607537) fusion transcripts from
secondary AML and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) cells with
inv(11)(q21q23). RT-PCR revealed that exon 7 of MLL was fused to exon 2
of MAML2 in the AML and MDS cells. The inv(11)(q21q23) resulted in a
chimeric RNA encoding a putative fusion protein containing 1,408 amino
acids from the N-terminal part of MLL and 952 amino acids from the
C-terminal part of MAML2. The N-terminal part of MAML2, a basic domain
that includes a binding site for the NOTCH (see NOTCH1; 190198)
intracellular domain, was deleted in MLL/MAML2. The MLL/MAML2 fusion
protein in secondary AML and MDS and the MECT1/MAML2 fusion protein in
mucoepithelioid carcinoma, benign Warthin tumor, and clear cell
hidradenoma contained the same C-terminal part of MAML2. Reporter gene
assays revealed that MLL/MAML2 suppressed HES1 (139605) promoter
activation by the NOTCH1 intracellular domain.

- MLL/GRAF Fusion Gene

Borkhardt et al. (2000) found that the GRAF gene (605370) was fused with
MLL in a unique t(5;11)(q31;q23) that occurred in an infant with
juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia.

- MLL/ABI1 Fusion Gene

Taki et al. (1998) analyzed a patient with AML and t(10;11)(p11.2;q23)
and identified, as a fusion partner with MLL, the gene ABI1 (603050) on
10p11.2. The ABI1 gene bore no homology with partner genes of MLL
previously described, but the ABI1 protein exhibited sequence similarity
to protein of homeotic genes, contained several polyproline stretches,
and included a Src homology-3 (SH3) domain at the C terminus. The
MLL-ABI1 fusion transcript in this patient was formed by an
alternatively spliced ABI1. In-frame MLL-ABI1 fusion transcripts
combined the MLL AT-hook motifs and DNA methyltransferase homology
region with the homeodomain homologous region, polyproline stretches,
and SH3 domain of the alternatively spliced transcript of ABI1.

- MLL/KIAA1524 Fusion Gene

Coenen et al. (2011) identified the karyotype 46,XX,t(3;11)(q12-13;q23)
in bone marrow of a 4-month-old Caucasian girl who presented with the M5
subtype of AML and central nervous system involvement. The patient died
9 weeks after diagnosis. The translocation resulted in fusion of intron
10 of the MLL gene on chromosome 11 to intron 16 of the KIAA1524 gene
(610643) on chromosome 3. The 2 genes are transcribed in opposite
orientations, suggesting that the translocation also required a
microinversion. RT-PCR analysis confirmed expression of the fusion
transcript, which was predicted to encode a 1,673-amino acid protein
containing the N-terminal AT-hook domain, subnuclear localization sites,
and methyltransferase domain of MLL fused to the C-terminal coiled-coil
domain of KIAA1524.

- MLL Duplication

In a study of patients with acute leukemia but no microscopically
visible change at 11q23, Schichman et al. (1994) found molecular
evidence of partial duplication of the ALL1 gene. The direct tandem
duplication involved a region spanning exons 2 to 6, and a partially
duplicated protein gene product was demonstrated. Thus, the ALL1 gene is
leukemogenic when it fuses with itself as well as when it fuses with one
of the genes on other chromosomes.

In addition to the translocations involving fusion of the ALL1 gene with
genes on other chromosomes producing acute lymphoblastic and myelogenous
leukemia, the ALL1 gene undergoes self-fusion in acute myeloid leukemias
with normal karyotype or trisomy 11. In addition, Baffa et al. (1995)
reported rearrangement of the ALL1 gene in a gastric carcinoma cell
line. A complex, 3-way translocation involving chromosomes 1 and 11 and
resulting in partial duplication of the ALL1 gene was found. Sequencing
of RT-PCR products and Northern blot analysis show that only the
partially duplicated ALL1 gene was transcribed, producing an mRNA with
exon 8 fused to exon 2. Thus, ALL1 gene rearrangement may play a role in
the pathogenesis of some solid malignancies. The absence of the normal
transcript in this cell line, in association with loss of heterozygosity
on 11q23 seen in solid tumors, suggests that ALL1 is involved in
tumorigenesis by a loss-of-function mechanism.

Approximately 90% of adult patients with de novo AML and trisomy 11
(+11) as a sole abnormality and 11% of adult patients with de novo AML
and normal cytogenetics carry a molecular rearrangement of the ALL1
gene. The rearranged ALL1 gene results from the direct tandem
duplication of a portion of ALL1 itself. Caligiuri et al. (1997) showed
that in cytogenetically normal cases of AML and cases with +11 as the
sole cytogenetic abnormality, only 1 chromosome contains the mutated
ALL1 allele. Thus, a single mutated ALL1 allele with the partial tandem
duplication is sufficient for ALL1-associated leukemogenesis,
irrespective of the number of normal genes present. The frequently
occurring specific association of +11 and ALL1 gene mutation in the
leukemic clone remained unexplained.

- Detection of MLL Rearrangements

Thirman et al. (1993) demonstrated that MLL gene rearrangements can be
detected with a single probe and a single restriction-enzyme digest. The
ability to detect an MLL gene rearrangement rapidly and reliably,
especially in patients with limited material for cytogenetic analysis,
should make it possible to identify patients who have a poor prognosis
and therefore require aggressive chemotherapy or marrow transplantation.

PHENOTYPE

The MLL gene spans the breakpoint in translocations involving 11q23,
which are responsible for approximately 70% of AML and ALL in infants
and are also observed in treatment-related leukemias, especially in
patients previously treated with drugs inhibiting topoisomerase II
(Gibbons et al., 1990; Thirman et al., 1993).

In 15 of 26 AML cases in infants, Sorensen et al. (1994) found
rearrangement of the MLL gene at the molecular level. These
rearrangements were clustered within an 11-kb region containing 9 exons
of the gene. In 14 of the 15 cases with rearrangements, the leukemia was
associated with myelomonocytic or monocytic phenotypes (M4 or M5 FAB
subtypes, respectively), both of which are associated with a poor
prognosis in childhood AML. In contrast, only 1 of 11 nonrearranged
cases had an M4 or M5 phenotype. Rearrangement also correlated
significantly with hyperleukocytosis, another clinical parameter
associated with poor outcome.

Kobayashi et al. (1993) described a case of acute lymphoblastic leukemia
in a 44-year-old woman after adjuvant chemotherapy of breast cancer;
they demonstrated rearrangement of the HRX gene.

Acute lymphoblastic leukemias carrying a chromosomal translocation
involving the MLL gene have a particularly poor prognosis. Armstrong et
al. (2002) showed that they have a characteristic, highly distinct gene
expression profile that is consistent with an early hematopoietic
progenitor expressing select multilineage markers and individual HOX
genes. Clustering algorithms showed that lymphoblastic leukemias with
MLL translocations can clearly be separated from conventional acute
lymphoblastic and acute myelogenous leukemias. Armstrong et al. (2002)
proposed that they constitute a distinct disease, denoted as MLL, and
showed that the differences in gene expression are robust enough to
classify leukemias correctly as MLL versus acute lymphoblastic leukemia
or acute myelogenous leukemia. Establishing that MLL is a unique entity
is critical, as it mandates the examination of selectively expressed
genes for urgently needed molecular targets.

PATHOGENESIS

Chromosomal translocations involving the MLL gene occur in about 80% of
infant leukemias. Epidemiologic studies have suggested that maternal
exposure to various substances such as pesticides, marijuana, or an
excess of flavonoids (naturally occurring inhibitors of topoisomerase
II) might be associated with acute leukemia in infants (Ross et al.,
1994). In search of possible agents inducing infant leukemia, Strick et
al. (2000) investigated bioflavonoids, natural substances in food as
well as in dietary supplements, that cause site-specific DNA cleavage in
the MLL breakpoint cluster region (BCR) in vivo. The MLL BCR DNA
cleavage was shown in primary progenitor hematopoietic cells from
healthy newborns and adults as well as in cell lines; it colocalized
with the MLL BCR cleavage site induced by chemotherapeutic agents, such
as etoposide (VP16) and doxorubicin (Dox). Both in vivo and additional
in vitro experiments demonstrated topoisomerase II (TOP2A; 126430) as
the target of bioflavonoids similar to the 2 chemotherapeutic agents.
Based on 20 bioflavonoids tested, Strick et al. (2000) identified a
common structure essential for topoisomerase II cleavage. The authors'
observations supported a 2-stage model of cellular processing of
topoisomerase II inhibitors: the first and reversible stage of this
cleavage resulted in DNA repair, but also rarely in chromosome
translocations; whereas the second, nonreversible stage led to cell
death because of an accumulation of DNA damage. These results suggested
that maternal ingestion of bioflavonoids may induce MLL breaks and
potentially translocations in utero leading to infant and early
childhood leukemia. Strick et al. (2000) concluded that although
bioflavonoids may be beneficial in certain circumstances, a potential
counterbalancing disadvantage is their possible role in causing
chromosome translocations leading to leukemia in all age groups,
analogous to the translocation forms of AML and ALL after cancer
chemotherapy. Ross (2000) commented on the observations of Strick et al.
(2000) in the context of clinical and epidemiologic findings on
childhood leukemia.

Wang et al. (2008) reported pharmacologic, physiologic, and genetic
studies that demonstrated an oncogenic requirement for glycogen synthase
kinase-3 (GSK3; see 606784) in the maintenance of a specific subtype of
poor prognosis human leukemia, genetically defined by mutations of the
MLL protooncogene. In contrast to its previously characterized roles in
suppression of neoplasia-associated signaling pathways, GSK3
paradoxically supports MLL leukemia cell proliferation and
transformation by a mechanism that ultimately involves destabilization
of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(KIP1) (600778). Inhibition
of GSK3 in a preclinical murine model of MLL leukemia provided promising
evidence of efficacy and earmarked GSK3 as a candidate cancer drug
target.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Huang et al. (2012) reported the crystal structures of human menin
(613733) in its free form and in complexes with MLL1 or with JUND
(165162), or with an MLL1-LEDGF (603620) heterodimer. These structures
showed that menin contains a deep pocket that binds short peptides of
MLL1 or JUND in the same manner, but that it can have opposite effects
on transcription. The menin-JUND interaction blocks JUN N-terminal
kinase-mediated JUND phosphorylation and suppresses JUND-induced
transcription. In contrast, menin promotes gene transcription by binding
the transcription activator MLL1 through the peptide pocket while still
interacting with the chromatin-anchoring protein LEDGF at a distinct
surface formed by both menin and MLL1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yu et al. (1995) reported that Mll deletion in mice was embryonic
lethal. Mll +/- mice had retarded growth, hemopoietic abnormalities, and
bidirectional homeotic transformation of the axial skeleton, as well as
sternal malformations.

Yamashita et al. (2006) examined the role of MLL in the immune system
using Mll +/- mice. Mll +/- Cd4-positive T cells differentiated normally
into antigen-specific effector Th1 and Th2 cells in vitro, but the
ability of memory Th2 cells to produce Th2 cytokines was dramatically
decreased. Histone methylation and acetylation at Th2 cytokine gene loci
was not maintained in Mll +/- memory Th2 cells. Levels of Gata3 (131320)
mRNA were normal in Mll +/- effector Th2 cells, but they were
substantially decreased in Mll +/- memory Th2 cells; mRNA levels of
other transcription factors were not affected in Mll +/- memory Th2
cells. Histone modifications of Gata3 were also aberrant in Th2 cell
lines in which Mll expression had been knocked down by small interfering
RNA. Ovalbumin-induced allergic eosinophilic inflammation was reduced in
Mll +/- Th2 cell-transferred mice. Yamashita et al. (2006) concluded
that MLL plays a crucial role in control of memory Th2 cell responses by
maintaining expression of GATA3 and production of Th2 cytokines.

Barabe et al. (2007) demonstrated that upon transplantation into
immunodeficient mice, primitive human hematopoietic cells expressing a
mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion gene generated myeloid or lymphoid
acute leukemias, with features that recapitulated human diseases.
Analysis of serially transplanted mice revealed that the disease is
sustained by leukemia-initiating cells that have evolved over time from
a primitive cell type with a germline immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH)
gene configuration to a cell type containing rearranged IgH genes. The
leukemia-initiating cells retained both myeloid and lymphoid lineage
potential and remained responsive to microenvironmental cues. Barabe et
al. (2007) concluded that the properties of these cells provide a
biologic basis for several clinical hallmarks of MLL leukemias.

McMahon et al. (2007) found that fetal liver from Mll-knockout mouse
embryos showed defects in the hematopoietic stem and progenitor pool,
including reductions in long-term and short-term hematopoietic stem cell
numbers and a decrease in the quiescent hematopoietic stem cell
fraction. Adult mice with conditional Mll knockout had no apparent
abnormalities in mature hematopoietic cells in bone marrow, spleen, and
thymus. However, conditional Mll-knockout bone marrow cells produced
reduced numbers of colony-forming units and showed reduced ability to
compete in hematopoietic reconstitution assays. McMahon et al. (2007)
concluded that MLL has a critical role in regulating stem cell
self-renewal.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Jones et al. (2012) performed whole-exome sequencing in 4 patients with
hypertrichosis cubiti, short stature, a distinctive facial appearance,
and intellectual disability (Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome; 605130), and
identified 3 different heterozygous de novo truncating mutations, all
within exon 27 of the MLL gene (159555.0001-159555.0003) in 3 of the 4
patients. Analysis of MLL in 2 additional patients with a similar
phenotype revealed heterozygosity for 2 more de novo truncating
mutations (159555.0004 and 159555.0005). The variants were confirmed by
Sanger sequencing, and none were found in dbSNP, the 1000 Genomes
Project, 600 unrelated control exome profiles, or DNA from the
unaffected parents.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, 4-BP DEL, NT8806

In a 6-year-old boy with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and moderate developmental delay (Wiedemann-Steiner
syndrome; 605130), Jones et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a
de novo 4-bp deletion (8806_8809del) in exon 27 of the MLL gene,
predicted to cause a frameshift and premature termination (Val2936Ter).
The mutation was not found in the unaffected parents, dbSNP, the 1000
Genomes Project, or 600 unrelated control exome profiles.

.0002
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, 1-BP DEL, NT8267

In an 8-year-old girl with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and moderate developmental delay (605130), Jones et al.
(2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo 1-bp deletion (8267del)
in exon 27 of the MLL gene, predicted to cause a frameshift and
premature termination (Leu2756Ter). The mutation was not found in the
unaffected parents, dbSNP, the 1000 Genomes Project, or 600 unrelated
control exome profiles.

.0003
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, 1-BP DEL, NT6913

In a 12-year-old girl with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and moderate developmental delay (605130), Jones et al.
(2012) identified heterozygosity for a de novo 1-bp deletion (6913del)
in exon 27 of the MLL gene, predicted to cause a frameshift and
premature termination (Ser2305LeufsTer2). The mutation was not found in
the unaffected parents, dbSNP, the 1000 Genomes Project, or 600
unrelated control exome profiles. The level of MLL transcript in patient
skin fibroblasts was reduced in comparison to unrelated healthy
controls, indicating nonsense-mediated decay.

.0004
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, ARG2382TER

In an 8-year-old boy with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and mild developmental delay (605130), Jones et al. (2012)
identified heterozygosity for a de novo 7144C-T transition in exon 27 of
the MLL gene, resulting in an arg2382-to-ter (R2382X) substitution. The
mutation was not found in the unaffected parents, dbSNP, the 1000
Genomes Project, or 600 unrelated control exome profiles.

.0005
HAIRY ELBOWS, SHORT STATURE, FACIAL DYSMORPHISM, AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DELAY
MLL, 1-BP DUP, NT4599

In a 24-year-old woman with hairy elbows, short stature, facial
dysmorphism, and mild developmental delay (605130), Jones et al. (2012)
identified heterozygosity for a de novo 1-bp duplication (4599dup) in
the MLL gene, predicted to cause a frameshift and premature termination
(Lys1534Ter). The mutation was not found in the unaffected parents,
dbSNP, the 1000 Genomes Project, or 600 unrelated control exome
profiles.

REFERENCE 1. Armstrong, S. A.; Staunton, J. E.; Silverman, L. B.; Pieters, R.;
den Boer, M. L.; Minden, M. D.; Sallan, S. E.; Lander, E. S.; Golub,
T. R.; Korsmeyer, S. J.: MLL translocations specify a distinct gene
expression profile that distinguishes a unique leukemia. Nature Genet. 30:
41-47, 2002.

2. Baffa, R.; Negrini, M.; Schichman, S. A.; Huebner, K.; Croce, C.
M.: Involvement of the ALL-1 gene in a solid tumor. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 92: 4922-4926, 1995.

3. Barabe, F.; Kennedy, J. A.; Hope, K. J.; Dick, J. E.: Modeling
the initiation and progression of human acute leukemia in mice. Science 316:
600-604, 2007.

4. Borkhardt, A.; Bojesen, S.; Haas, O. A.; Fuchs, U.; Bartelheimer,
D.; Loncarevic, I. F.; Bohle, R. M.; Harbott, J.; Repp, R.; Jaeger,
U.; Viehmann, S.; Henn, T.; Korth, P.; Scharr, D.; Lampert, F.: The
human GRAF gene is fused to MLL in a unique t(5;11)(q31;q23) and both
alleles are disrupted in three cases of myelodysplastic syndrome/acute
myeloid leukemia with a deletion 5q. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 9168-9173,
2000.

5. Bruch, J.; Wilda, M.; Teigler-Schlegel, A.; Harbott, J.; Borkhardt,
A.; Metzler, M.: Occurrence of an MLL/LAF4 fusion gene caused by
the insertion ins(11;2)(q23;q11.2q11.2) in an infant with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. (Letter) Genes Chromosomes Cancer 37: 106-109, 2003.

6. Butler, L. H.; Slany, R.; Cui, X.; Cleary, M. L.; Mason, D. Y.
: The HRX proto-oncogene product is widely expressed in human tissues
and localizes to nuclear structures. Blood 89: 3361-3370, 1997.

7. Caligiuri, M. A.; Strout, M. P.; Oberkircher, A. R.; Yu, F.; de
la Chapelle, A.; Bloomfield, C. D.: The partial tandem duplication
of ALL1 in acute myeloid leukemia with normal cytogenetics or trisomy
11 is restricted to one chromosome. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 3899-3902,
1997.

8. Cimino, G.; Moir, D. T.; Canaani, O.; Williams, K.; Crist, W. M.;
Katzav, S.; Cannizzaro, L.; Lange, B.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C. M.;
Canaani, E.: Cloning of ALL-1, the locus involved in leukemias with
the t(4;11)(q21;q23), t(9;11)(p22;q23), and t(11;19)(q23;p13) chromosome
translocations. Cancer Res. 51: 6712-6714, 1991.

9. Coenen, E. A.; Zwaan, C. M.; Meyer, C.; Marschalek, R.; Pieters,
R.; van der Veken, L. T.; Beverloo, H. B.; van den Heuvel-Eibrink,
M. M.: KIAA1524: a novel MLL translocation partner in acute myeloid
leukemia. Leukemia Res. 35: 133-135, 2011.

10. Daheron, L.; Veinstein, A.; Brizard, F.; Drabkin, H.; Lacotte,
L.; Guilhot, F.; Larsen, C. J.; Brizard, A.; Roche, J.: Human LPP
gene is fused to MLL in a secondary acute leukemia with a t(3;11)(q28;q23). Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 31: 382-389, 2001.

11. Djabali, M.; Selleri, L.; Parry, P.; Bower, M.; Young, B. D.;
Evans, G. A.: A trithorax-like gene is interrupted by chromosome
11q23 translocations in acute leukaemias. Nature Genet. 2: 113-118,
1992. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 4: 431 only, 1993.

12. Domer, P. H.; Fakharzadeh, S. S.; Chen, C.-S.; Jockel, J.; Johansen,
L.; Silverman, G. A.; Kersey, J. H.; Korsmeyer, S. J.: Acute mixed-lineage
leukemia t(4;11)(q21;q23) generates an MLL-AF4 fusion product. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 7884-7888, 1993.

13. Eguchi, M.; Eguchi-Ishimae, M.; Seto, M.; Morishita, K.; Suzuki,
K.; Ueda, R.; Ueda, K.; Kamada, N.; Greaves, M.: GPHN, a novel partner
gene fused to MLL in a leukemia with t(11;14)(q23;q24). Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 32: 212-221, 2001.

14. Fu, J.-F.; Hsu, J.-J.; Tang, T.-C.; Shih, L.-Y.: Identification
of CBL, a proto-oncogene at 11q23.3, as a novel MLL fusion partner
in a patient with de novo acute myeloid leukemia. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 37: 214-219, 2003.

15. Fuchs, U.; Rehkamp, G.; Haas, O. A.; Slany, R.; Konig, M.; Bojesen,
S.; Bohle, R. M.; Damm-Welk, C.; Ludwig, W.-D.; Harbott, J.; Borkhardt,
A.: The human formin-binding protein 17 (FBP17) interacts with sorting
nexin, SNX2, and is an MLL-fusion partner in acute myelogeneous leukemia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 8756-8761, 2001.

16. Gale, K. B.; Ford, A. M.; Repp, R.; Borkhardt, A.; Keller, C.;
Eden, O. B.; Greaves, M. F.: Backtracking leukemia to birth: identification
of clonotypic gene fusion sequences in neonatal blood spots. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 13950-13954, 1997.

17. Gibbons, B.; Katz, F. E.; Ganly, P.; Chessells, J. M.: Infant
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia with t(11;19). Brit. J. Haemat. 74:
264-269, 1990.

18. Gu, Y.; Cimino, G.; Alder, H.; Nakamura, T.; Prasad, R.; Canaani,
O.; Moir, D. T.; Jones, C.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C. M.; Canaani,
E.: The (4;11)(q21;q23) chromosome translocations in acute leukemias
involve the VDJ recombinase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 10464-10468,
1992.

19. Gu, Y.; Nakamura, T.; Alder, H.; Prasad, R.; Canaani, O.; Cimino,
G.; Croce, C. M.; Canaani, E.: The t(4;11) chromosome translocation
of human acute leukemias fuses the ALL-1 gene, related to Drosophila
trithorax, to the AF-4 gene. Cell 71: 701-708, 1992.

20. Hashii, Y.; Kim, J. Y.; Sawada, A.; Tokimasa, S.; Hiroyuki, F.;
Ohta, H.; Makiko, K.; Takihara, Y.; Ozono, K.; Hara, J.: A novel
partner gene CIP29 containing a SAP domain with MLL identified in
infantile myelomonocytic leukemia. (Letter) Leukemia 18: 1546-1548,
2004.

21. Hayette, S.; Tigaud, I.; Vanier, A.; Martel, S.; Corbo, L.; Charrin,
C.; Beillard, E.; Deleage, G.; Magaud, J. P.; Rimokh, R.: AF15q14,
a novel partner gene fused to the MLL gene in an acute myeloid leukaemia
with a t(11;15)(q23;q14). Oncogene 19: 446-4450, 2000.

22. Hsieh, J. J.-D.; Cheng, E. H.-Y.; Korsmeyer, S. J.: Taspase1:
a threonine aspartase required for cleavage of MLL and proper HOX
gene expression. Cell 115: 293-303, 2003.

23. Huang, J.; Gurung, B.; Wan, B.; Matkar, S.; Veniaminova, N. A.;
Wan, K.; Merchant, J. L.; Hua, X.; Lei, M.: The same pocket in menin
binds both MLL and JUND but has opposite effects on transcription. Nature 482:
542-546, 2012.

24. Joh, T.; Yamamoto, K.; Kagami, Y.; Kakuda, H.; Sato, T.; Yamamoto,
T.; Takahashi, T.; Ueda, R.; Kaibuchi, K.; Seto, M.: Chimeric MLL
products with a Ras binding cytoplasmic protein AF6 involved in t(6;11)(q27;q23)
leukemia localize in the nucleus. Oncogene 15: 1681-1687, 1997.

25. Jones, W. D.; Dafou, D.; McEntagart, M.; Woollard, W. J.; Elmslie,
F. V.; Holder-Espinasse, M.; Irving, M.; Saggar, A. K.; Smithson,
S.; Trembath, R. C.; Deshpande, C.; Simpson, M. A.: De novo mutations
in MLL cause Wiedemann-Steiner syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 91:
358-364, 2012.

26. Kadkol, S. S.; Bruno, A.; Oh, S.; Schmidt, M. L.; Lindgren, V.
: MLL-SEPT6 fusion transcript with a novel sequence in an infant with
acute myeloid leukemia. Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 168: 162-167, 2006.

27. Kobayashi, Y.; Yang, J.; Shindo, E.; Tojo, A.; Tani, K.; Ozawa,
K.; Asano, S.: HRX gene rearrangement in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
after adjuvant chemotherapy of breast cancer. (Letter) Blood 82:
3220-3223, 1993.

28. Kourlas, P. J.; Strout, M. P.; Becknell, B.; Veronese, M. L.;
Croce, C. M.; Theil, K. S.; Krahe, R.; Ruutu, T.; Knuutila, S.; Bloomfield,
C. D.; Caligiuri, M. A.: Identification of a gene at 11q23 encoding
a guanine nucleotide exchange factor: evidence for its fusion with
MLL in acute myeloid leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 2145-2150,
2000.

29. Krivtsov, A. V.; Armstrong, S. A.: MLL translocations, histone
modifications and leukaemia stem-cell development. Nature Rev. Cancer 7:
823-833, 2007.

30. Kuefer, M. U.; Chinwalla, V.; Zeleznik-Le, N. J.; Behm, F. G.;
Naeve, C. W.; Rakestraw, K. M.; Mukatira, S. T.; Raimondi, S. C.;
Morris, S. W.: Characterization of the MLL partner gene AF15q14 involved
in t(11;15)(q23;q14). Oncogene 22: 1418-1424, 2003.

31. Lim, D. A.; Huang, Y.-C.; Swigut, T.; Mirick, A. L.; Garcia-Verdugo,
J. M.; Wysocka, J.; Ernst, P.; Alvarez-Buylla, A.: Chromatin remodelling
factor Mll1 is essential for neurogenesis from postnatal neural stem
cells. Nature 458: 529-533, 2009.

32. Liu, H.; Takeda, S.; Kumar, R.; Westergard, T. D.; Brown, E. J.;
Pandita, T. K.; Cheng, E. H.-Y.; Hsieh, J. J.-D.: Phosphorylation
of MLL by ATR is required for execution of mammalian S-phase checkpoint. Nature 467:
343-346, 2010.

33. McCabe, N. R.; Burnett, R. C.; Gill, H. J.; Thirman, M. J.; Mbangkollo,
D.; Kipiniak, M.; van Melle, E.; Ziemin-van der Poel, S.; Rowley,
J. D.; Diaz, M. O.: Cloning of cDNAs of the MLL gene that detect
DNA rearrangements and altered RNA transcripts in human leukemic cells
with 11q23 translocations. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 11794-11798,
1992.

34. McMahon, K. A.; Hiew, S. Y.-L.; Hadjur, S.; Veiga-Fernandes, H.;
Menzel, U.; Price, A. J.; Kioussis, D.; Williams, O.; Brady, H. J.
M.: Mll has a critical role in fetal and adult hematopoietic stem
cell self-renewal. Cell Stem Cell 1: 338-345, 2007.

35. Megonigal, M. D.; Rappaport, E. F.; Jones, D. H.; Williams, T.
M.; Lovett, B. D.; Kelly, K. M.; Lerou, P. H.; Moulton, T.; Budarf,
M. L.; Felix, C. A.: t(11;22)(q23;q11.2) in acute myeloid leukemia
of infant twins fuses MLL with hCDCrel, a cell division cycle gene
in the genomic region of deletion in DiGeorge and velocardiofacial
syndromes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 6413-6418, 1998. Note: Erratum:
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 10344 only, 1998.

36. Milne, T. A.; Briggs, S. D.; Brock, H. W.; Martin, M. E.; Gibbs,
D.; Allis, C. D.; Hess, J. L.: MLL targets SET domain methyltransferase
activity to Hox gene promoters. Molec. Cell 10: 1107-1117, 2002.

37. Nakamura, T.; Alder, H.; Gu, Y.; Prasad, R.; Canaani, O.; Kamada,
N.; Gale, R. P.; Lange, B.; Crist, W. M.; Nowell, P. C.; Croce, C.
M.; Canaani, E.: Genes on chromosomes 4, 9, and 19 involved in 11q23
abnormalities in acute leukemia share sequence homology and/or common
motifs. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 4631-4635, 1993.

38. Nakamura, T.; Mori, T.; Tada, S.; Krajewski, W.; Rozovskaia, T.;
Wassell, R.; Dubois, G.; Mazo, A.; Croce, C. M.; Canaani, E.: ALL-1
is a histone methyltransferase that assembles a supercomplex of proteins
involved in transcriptional regulation. Molec. Cell 10: 1119-1128,
2002.

39. Nemoto, N.; Suzukawa, K.; Shimizu, S.; Shinagawa, A.; Takei, N.;
Taki, T.; Hayashi, Y.; Kojima, H.; Kawakami, Y.; Nagasawa, T.: Identification
of a novel fusion gene MLL-MAML2 in secondary acute myelogenous leukemia
and myelodysplastic syndrome with inv(11)(q21q23). Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 46: 813-819, 2007.

40. Nie, Z.; Yan, Z.; Chen, E. H.; Sechi, S.; Ling, C.; Zhou, S.;
Xue, Y.; Yang, D.; Murray, D.; Kanakubo, E.; Cleary, M. L.; Wang,
W.: Novel SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complexes contain a mixed-lineage
leukemia chromosomal translocation partner. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23:
2942-2952, 2003.

41. Parry, P.; Djabali, M.; Bower, M.; Khristich, J.; Waterman, M.;
Gibbons, B.; Young, B. D.; Evans, G.: Structure and expression of
the human trithorax-like gene 1 involved in acute leukemias. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 4738-4742, 1993.

42. Pegram, L. D.; Megonigal, M. D.; Lange, B. J.; Nowell, P. C.;
Rowley, J. D.; Rappaport, E. F.; Felix, C. A.: t(3;11) translocation
in treatment-related acute myeloid leukemia fuses MLL with the GMPS
(guanosine 5-prime monophosphate synthetase) gene. Blood 96: 4360-4362,
2000.

43. Prasad, R.; Gu, Y.; Alder, H.; Nakamura, T.; Canaani, O.; Saito,
H.; Huebner, K.; Gale, R. P.; Nowell, P. C.; Kuriyama, K.; Miyazaki,
Y.; Croce, C. M.; Canaani, E.: Cloning of the ALL-1 fusion partner,
the AF-6 gene, involved in acute myeloid leukemias with the t(6;11)
chromosome translocation. Cancer Res. 53: 5624-5628, 1993.

44. Raffini, L. J.; Slater, D. J.; Rappaport, E. F.; Lo Nigro, L.;
Cheung, N.-K. V.; Biegel, J. A.; Nowell, P. C.; Lange, B. J.; Felix,
C. A.: Panhandle and reverse-panhandle PCR enable cloning of der(11)
and der(other) genomic breakpoint junctions of MLL translocations
and identify complex translocation of MLL, AF-4, and CDK6. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 4568-4573, 2002.

45. Ross, J. A.: Dietary flavonoids and the MLL gene: a pathway to
infant leukemia? (Commentary) Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 4411-4413,
2000.

46. Ross, J. A.; Davies, S. M.; Potter, J. D.; Robison, L. L.: Epidemiology
of childhood leukemia, with a focus on infants. Epidemiol. Rev. 16:
243-272, 1994.

47. Rowley, J. D.; Diaz, M. O.; Espinosa, R., III; Patel, Y. D.; van
Melle, E.; Ziemin, S.; Taillon-Miller, P.; Lichter, P.; Evans, G.
A.; Kersey, J. H.; Ward, D. C.; Domer, P. H.; Le Beau, M. M.: Mapping
chromosome band 11q23 in human acute leukemia with biotinylated probes:
identification of 11q23 translocation breakpoints with a yeast artificial
chromosome. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 9358-9362, 1990.

48. Schichman, S. A.; Caligiuri, M. A.; Gu, Y.; Strout, M. P.; Canaani,
E.; Bloomfield, C. D.; Croce, C. M.: ALL-1 partial duplication in
acute leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 6236-6239, 1994.

49. Smith, S. D.; McFall, P.; Morgan, R.; Link, M.; Hecht, F.; Cleary,
M.; Sklar, J.: Long-term growth of malignant thymocytes in vitro. Blood 73:
2182-2187, 1989.

50. Sorensen, P. H. B.; Chen, C.-S.; Smith, F. O.; Arthur, D. C.;
Domer, P. H.; Bernstein, I. D.; Korsmeyer, S. J.; Hammond, G. D.;
Kersey, J. H.: Molecular rearrangements of the MLL gene are present
in most cases of infant acute myeloid leukemia and are strongly correlated
with monocytic or myelomonocytic phenotypes. J. Clin. Invest. 93:
429-437, 1994.

51. Strehl, S.; Borkhardt, A.; Slany, R.; Fuchs, U. E.; Konig, M.;
Haas, O. A.: The human LASP1 gene is fused to MLL in an acute myeloid
leukemia with t(11;17)(q23;q21). Oncogene 22: 157-160, 2003.

52. Strick, R.; Strissel, P. L.; Borgers, S.; Smith, S. L.; Rowley,
J. D.: Dietary bioflavonoids induce cleavage in the MLL gene and
may contribute to infant leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 4790-4795,
2000.

53. Strissel, P. L.; Strick, R.; Tomek, R. J.; Roe, B. A.; Rowley,
J. D.; Zeleznik-Le, N. J.: DNA structural properties of AF9 are similar
to MLL and could act as recombination hot spots resulting in MLL/AF9
translocations and leukemogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1671-1679,
2000.

54. Strout, M. P.; Marcucci, G.; Bloomfield, C. D.; Caligiuri, M.
A.: The partial tandem duplication of ALL1 (MLL) is consistently
generated by Alu-mediated homologous recombination in acute myeloid
leukemia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 2390-2395, 1998.

55. Taki, T.; Shibuya, N.; Taniwaki, M.; Hanada, R.; Morishita, K.;
Bessho, F.; Yanagisawa, M.; Hayashi, Y.: ABI-1, a human homolog to
mouse Abl-interactor 1, fuses the MLL gene in acute myeloid leukemia
with t(10;11)(p11.2;q23). Blood 92: 1125-1130, 1998.

56. Tanabe, S.; Bohlander, S. K.; Vignon, C. V.; Espinosa, R., III;
Zhao, N.; Strissel, P. L.; Zeleznik-Le, N. J.; Rowley, J. D.: AF10
is split by MLL and HEAB, a human homolog to a putative Caenorhabditis
elegans ATP/GTP-binding protein in an invins(10;11)(p12;q23q12). Blood 88:
3535-3545, 1996.

57. Thirman, M. J.; Gill, H. J.; Burnett, R. C.; Mbangkollo, D.; McCabe,
N. R.; Kobayashi, H.; Ziemin-van der Poel, S.; Kaneko, Y.; Morgan,
R.; Sandberg, A. A.; Chaganti, R. S. K.; Larson, R. A.; Le Beau, M.
M.; Diaz, M. O.; Rowley, J. D.: Rearrangement of the MLL gene in
acute lymphoblastic and acute myeloid leukemias with 11q23 chromosomal
translocations. New Eng. J. Med. 329: 909-914, 1993.

58. Tkachuk, D. C.; Kohler, S.; Cleary, M. L.: Involvement of a homolog
of Drosophila trithorax by 11q23 chromosomal translocations in acute
leukemias. Cell 71: 691-700, 1992.

59. von Bergh, A. R. M.; Beverloo, H. B.; Rombout, P.; van Wering,
E. R.; van Weel, M. H.; Beverstock, G. C.; Kluin, P. M.; Slater, R.
M.; Schuuring, E.: LAF4, an AF4-related gene, is fused to MLL in
infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 35:
92-96, 2002.

60. Wang, Y.; Krivtsov, A. V.; Sinha, A. U.; North, T. E.; Goessling,
W.; Feng, Z.; Zon, L. I.; Armstrong, S. A.: The Wnt/beta-catenin
pathway is required for the development of leukemia stem cells in
AML. Science 327: 1650-1653, 2010.

61. Wang, Z.; Smith, K. S.; Murphy, M.; Piloto, O.; Somervaille, T.
C. P.; Cleary, M. L.: Glycogen synthase kinase 3 in MLL leukaemia
maintenance and targeted therapy. Nature 455: 1205-1209, 2008.

62. Yamashita, M.; Hirahara, K.; Shinnakasu, R.; Hosokawa, H.; Norikane,
S.; Kimura, M. Y.; Hasegawa, A.; Nakayama, T.: Crucial role of MLL
for the maintenance of memory T helper type 2 cell responses. Immunity 24:
611-622, 2006.

63. Yokoyama, A.; Somervaille, T. C. P.; Smith, K. S.; Rozenblatt-Rosen,
O.; Meyerson, M.; Cleary, M. L.: The menin tumor suppressor protein
is an essential oncogenic cofactor for MLL-associated leukemogenesis. Cell 123:
207-218, 2005.

64. Yu, B. D.; Hess, J. L.; Horning, S. E.; Brown, G. A. J.; Korsmeyer,
S. J.: Altered Hox expression and segmental identity in Mll-mutant
mice. Nature 378: 505-508, 1995.

65. Ziemin-van der Poel, S.; McCabe, N. R.; Gill, H. J.; Espinosa,
R., III; Patel, Y.; Harden, A.; Rubinelli, P.; Smith, S. D.; Le Beau,
M. M.; Rowley, J. D.; Diaz, M. O.: Identification of a gene, MLL,
that spans the breakpoint in 11q23 translocations associated with
human leukemias. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 10735-10739, 1991. Note:
Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4220 only, 1992.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS 
Heme:
Acute lymphoid leukemia;
Acute myeloid leukemia;
Myeloid/lymphoid leukemia;
Mixed-lineage leukemia;
Acute monoblastic leukemia (AML-M5);
Acute myelomonocytic leukemia (AMML-M4)

Misc:
Homology to sequences within Drosophila 'trithorax' gene;
MLL protein is homologous to DNA methyltransferase

Lab:
Recurring 11q23 chromosomal translocations

Inheritance:
Autosomal dominant (11q23)

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/11/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/23/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/13/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/31/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/15/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/28/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/30/2008
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/13/2008
Matthew B. Gross - reorganized: 10/13/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/2/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/19/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/30/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/10/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/4/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/8/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/13/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/8/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/28/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/26/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/19/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/29/2003
Jane Kelly - updated: 3/10/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/14/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/20/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/13/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/17/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/2/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/18/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/19/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 9/22/1999
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 7/23/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/3/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/18/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/27/1992

EDITED carol: 09/06/2013
mgross: 2/5/2013
alopez: 1/30/2013
carol: 10/9/2012
carol: 9/11/2012
carol: 8/17/2012
terry: 7/6/2012
mgross: 3/27/2012
terry: 3/23/2012
alopez: 3/14/2012
terry: 3/13/2012
joanna: 3/5/2012
mgross: 8/31/2011
carol: 4/7/2011
carol: 2/9/2011
terry: 11/3/2010
alopez: 10/5/2010
terry: 9/29/2010
terry: 9/8/2010
alopez: 4/21/2010
terry: 4/15/2010
wwang: 10/13/2009
alopez: 5/5/2009
terry: 4/28/2009
alopez: 12/31/2008
terry: 12/30/2008
carol: 12/4/2008
mgross: 10/13/2008
mgross: 5/2/2008
mgross: 3/19/2008
terry: 3/19/2008
mgross: 10/30/2007
terry: 9/14/2007
wwang: 8/17/2007
terry: 8/10/2007
alopez: 6/12/2007
terry: 6/4/2007
mgross: 1/8/2007
mgross: 4/13/2006
mgross: 2/8/2006
carol: 5/27/2005
alopez: 2/7/2005
mgross: 1/28/2005
mgross: 1/7/2005
mgross: 8/26/2004
joanna: 3/16/2004
terry: 2/20/2004
mgross: 11/19/2003
alopez: 11/13/2003
carol: 11/6/2003
carol: 8/14/2003
tkritzer: 8/12/2003
carol: 7/31/2003
tkritzer: 7/30/2003
mgross: 4/29/2003
tkritzer: 3/27/2003
tkritzer: 3/26/2003
carol: 3/10/2003
tkritzer: 10/17/2002
tkritzer: 10/14/2002
carol: 4/19/2002
carol: 4/18/2002
carol: 2/20/2002
alopez: 1/16/2002
terry: 1/14/2002
carol: 11/13/2001
carol: 8/17/2001
carol: 4/2/2001
alopez: 9/18/2000
mcapotos: 7/20/2000
mcapotos: 7/19/2000
mcapotos: 7/17/2000
mcapotos: 7/11/2000
terry: 6/15/2000
carol: 9/27/1999
carol: 9/22/1999
carol: 7/23/1999
carol: 2/22/1999
terry: 9/8/1997
terry: 9/3/1997
alopez: 6/18/1997
mark: 10/18/1996
mark: 6/19/1995
mimadm: 12/2/1994
carol: 10/20/1994
pfoster: 3/30/1994
carol: 10/4/1993
carol: 9/20/1993

603713	TITLE *603713 A DISINTEGRIN AND METALLOPROTEINASE DOMAIN 21; ADAM21
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the ADAM (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain) protein
family are type I integral membrane proteins containing a signal peptide
followed by proprotein, zinc metalloprotease, disintegrin,
transmembrane, and cytoplasmic regions (summary by Hooft van
Huijsduijnen, 1998).

CLONING

By screening a testis library with a partial ADAM20 (603712) cDNA, Hooft
van Huijsduijnen (1998) isolated cDNAs encoding ADAM21. Northern blot
analysis detected ADAM20 and ADAM21 expression as approximately 2.8-kb
mRNAS, with ADAM21 being slightly shorter, only in testis. Like ADAM20,
the predicted 542-amino acid ADAM21 protein contains putative
cell-fusion peptides required for sperm-egg fusion. Overall, the 2
proteins are 50% identical and share sequence similarity with ADAM9
(602713) and the fertilins. In mammals, ADAM1 and ADAM2 (601533), also
known as fertilin-alpha and -beta, respectively, are expressed as
heterodimers on the posterior head of spermatocytes and play a role in
oocyte adhesion and fusion. The human ADAM1 homolog, however, is
nonfunctional.

GENE FUNCTION

Hooft van Huijsduijnen (1998) noted that the exclusive expression of
ADAM20 and ADAM21 in human testis and their sequence similarity with the
fertilins suggest that they too are expressed on sperm cells and are
involved in sperm maturation and/or fertilization. The authors proposed
that ADAM20 and/or ADAM21 is the functional equivalent of sperm
fertilin-alpha (ADAM1), since that gene is nonfunctional in human.

MAPPING

By analysis of a radiation hybrid panel, Hooft van Huijsduijnen (1998)
mapped both the ADAM20 and the ADAM21 genes to 14q24.1, suggesting that
they arose by gene duplication.

REFERENCE 1. Hooft van Huijsduijnen, R.: ADAM 20 and 21; two novel human testis-specific
membrane metalloproteases with similarity to fertilin-alpha. Gene 206:
273-282, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 4/8/1999

EDITED carol: 01/25/2011
alopez: 5/7/2008
mgross: 4/20/1999
mgross: 4/13/1999

605129	TITLE *605129 PROTEASOME ACTIVATOR SUBUNIT 3; PSME3
;;PROTEASOME ACTIVATOR 28-GAMMA; PA28G;;
PA28-GAMMA;;
REG-GAMMA;;
KI ANTIGEN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PSME3 belongs to the proteasome activator subunit (PSME) gene family.
For background information on the PSME gene family, see PSME1 (600654).

CLONING

Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE; 152700) produce
autoantibodies against a number of nuclear antigens, including SNRP70
(180740), PCNA (176740), CDR1 (302650), and Ki. By screening a human
placenta cDNA library with a probe obtained by screening a bovine retina
cDNA library with anti-Ki sera from an SLE patient, Nikaido et al.
(1990) isolated a cDNA encoding PSME3, which they called Ki. Sequence
analysis predicted that the 254-amino acid, hydrophilic PSME3 protein
contains a nuclear localization signal and has a molecular mass of
approximately 30 kD, close to the 32 kD observed by Western blot
analysis. PSME3 shares over 99% amino acid identity with the bovine
sequence. RNA blot analysis of human placenta, bovine brain, and mouse
embryos detected 3.0- and 1.5-kb PSME3 transcripts.

GENE FUNCTION

Steroid receptor coactivator-3 (SRC3, or NCOA3; 601937) is an oncogene
frequently amplified and overexpressed in breast cancer. Using
immunoprecipitation analysis, Li et al. (2006) found that endogenous
SRC3 and REG-gamma interacted in HeLa cell nuclear extracts and MCF-7
breast cancer cells. Protein pull-down assays showed the REG-gamma
interacted specifically with the HAT domain of SRC3. Knockdown of
REG-gamma via RNA interference (RNAi) in breast cancer and human
embryonic kidney cell lines resulted in a 2- to 3-fold increase in SRC3
protein levels. Conversely, REG-gamma overexpression in HeLa cells
reduced SRC3 protein levels. In vitro proteasome assays using purified
proteins showed that REG-gamma promoted degradation of SRC3 by the 20S
proteasome in a ubiquitin- and ATP-independent manner. Knockdown of
REG-gamma via RNAi increased estrogen receptor (ER; see 133430) target
gene expression and enhanced estradiol-mediated cell growth in MCF-7
cells, and these effects were secondary to the effect of REG-gamma on
SRC3.

MAPPING

By analysis of overlapping YAC contigs and by FISH, Albertsen et al.
(1994) mapped the PSME3 gene to 17q12-q21. Kandil et al. (1997) mapped
the mouse Psme3 gene to chromosome 14 using interspecific backcross
analysis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Barton et al. (2004) found that mice lacking Psme3 had normal levels of
surface class I major histocompatibility complex (MHC) molecules,
slightly reduced Cd8 (see 186910)-positive T cells, and normal responses
to infection with influenza or SV40 virus. However, the ability of Psme3
-/- mice to clear the pulmonary fungal pathogen Histoplasma capsulatum
was slower than wildtype mice. Barton et al. (2004) proposed that PSME3
functions in the MHC class I antigen-processing pathway and that it
exerts an influence on proteasome cleavage specificity.

REFERENCE 1. Albertsen, H. M.; Smith, S. A.; Mazoyer, S.; Fujimoto, E.; Stevens,
J.; Williams, B.; Rodriguez, P.; Cropp, C. S.; Slijepcevic, P.; Carlson,
M.; Robertson, M.; Bradley, P.; Lawrence, E.; Harrington, T.; Mei
Sheng, Z.; Hoopes, R.; Sternberg, N.; Brothman, A.; Callahan, R.;
Ponder, B. A. J.; White, R.: A physical map and candidate genes in
the BRCA1 region on chromosome 17q12-21. Nature Genet. 7: 472-479,
1994.

2. Barton, L. F.; Runnels, H. A.; Schell, T. D.; Cho, Y.; Gibbons,
R.; Tevethia, S. S.; Deepe, G. S., Jr.; Monaco, J. J.: Immune defects
in 28-kDa proteasome activator gamma-deficient mice. J. Immun. 172:
3948-3954, 2004.

3. Kandil, E.; Kohda, K.; Ishibashi, T.; Tanaka, K.; Kasahara, M.
: PA28 subunits of the mouse proteasome: primary structures and chromosomal
localization of the genes. Immunogenetics 46: 337-344, 1997.

4. Li, X.; Lonard, D. M.; Jung, S. Y.; Malovannaya, A.; Feng, Q.;
Qin, J.; Tsai, S. Y.; Tsai, M.-J.; O'Malley, B. W.: The SRC-3/AIB1
coactivator is degraded in a ubiquitin- and ATP-independent manner
by the REG-gamma proteasome. Cell 124: 381-392, 2006.

5. Nikaido, T.; Shimada, K.; Shibata, M.; Hata, M.; Sakamoto, M.;
Takasaki, Y.; Sato, C.; Takahashi, T.; Nishida, Y.: Cloning and nucleotide
sequence of cDNA for Ki antigen, a highly conserved nuclear protein
detected with sera from patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. Clin.
Exp. Immun. 79: 209-214, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/20/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/11/2005

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/11/2000

EDITED carol: 07/12/2010
alopez: 9/30/2009
wwang: 5/28/2009
mgross: 5/20/2009
mgross: 11/14/2005
terry: 11/11/2005
joanna: 1/31/2001
mgross: 7/11/2000

602929	TITLE *602929 VON WILLEBRAND FACTOR A DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5A; VWA5A
;;LOSS OF HETEROZYGOSITY, CHROMOSOME 11, REGION 2, GENE A; LOH11CR2A;;
BREAST CANCER SUPPRESSOR CANDIDATE 1; BCSC1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chromosomal deletions in chromosomal segment 11q23 are associated with
various human tumors. In lung and breast carcinomas, 2 common regions of
loss of heterozygosity have been identified at 11q23, suggesting that
the same tumor susceptibility genes are altered in these malignancies.
Monaco et al. (1997) stated that the more distal of these 2 regions,
region 2, spans less than 1.7 Mb. They identified a cDNA from region 2
and designated it LOH11CR2A. The cDNA encodes a predicted 438-amino acid
protein. Northern blot analysis revealed that LOH11CR2A is expressed
ubiquitously as a 3.3-kb mRNA.

Martin et al. (2003) found that, unlike the human BCSC1 gene, mouse
Bcsc1 is expressed as a single mRNA transcript of approximately 4 kb and
encodes a 793-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 87
kD.

GENE STRUCTURE

Monaco et al. (1997) reported that the LOH11CR2A coding region is
composed of 10 exons and spans 30 to 40 kb. There are at least 2
additional exons encoding the 5-prime untranslated region.

Contrary to the original characterization of the LOH11CR2A gene (Monaco
et al., 1997), Martin et al. (2003) found that the gene, which they
called BCSC1, contains 20 exons instead of 10 and possesses a larger
open reading frame. The mouse gene was found to span a genomic region of
25 kb and to comprise 20 exons also.

MAPPING

Monaco et al. (1997) identified the LOH11CR2A gene within a region of
chromosome 11q23 associated with various human tumors.

GENE FUNCTION

Based on a mutation analysis of multiple human carcinomas and tumors,
Monaco et al. (1997) concluded that LOH11CR2A is unlikely to be involved
in the tumorigenic process.

By constructing a physical map of the LOH11CR2 minimal region of loss on
11q23-q24 associated with lung and breast carcinomas, Martin et al.
(2003) were able to clone a hereditary translocation, t(11;12)(q23;q24),
from a patient with early-onset breast cancer and family history of
cancer. The breakpoint was found within 6 kb of the BCSC1 candidate
tumor suppressor gene located in the LOH11CR2 region, whereas additional
LOH analysis in breast and ovarian tumors, including that of the patient
with the t(11;12)(q23;q24) translocation, implicated the BCSC1 locus as
the primary target of deletion. Northern analysis of the BCSC1 mRNA
revealed a lack of expression in 33 of 41 (80%) tumor cell lines, and
its ectopic expression led to the suppression of colony formation in
vitro and tumorigenicity in vivo. These data suggested that BCSC1 may
exert a tumor suppressor activity and is a likely target of the LOH
observed on 11q23-q24 in cancer. Martin et al. (2003) used tumor
biopsies available from breast and ovarian cancer patients used in the
LOH analysis to screen for mutations in the BCSC1 coding region by PCR
and direct sequencing. Several previously reported polymorphisms were
found, although no tumor-specific, somatic mutations were observed.
Other results indicated that the mechanism for BCSC1 gene inactivation
in tumor cells is the loss of gene expression of one allele and deletion
of the other.

REFERENCE 1. Martin, E. S.; Cesari, R.; Pentimalli, F.; Yoder, K.; Fishel, R.;
Himelstein, A. L.; Martin, S. E.; Godwin, A. K.; Negrini, M.; Croce,
C. M.: The BCSC-1 locus at chromosome 11q23-q24 is a candidate tumor
suppressor gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 11517-11522, 2003.

2. Monaco, C.; Negrini, M.; Sozzi, G.; Veronese, M. L.; Vorechovsky,
I.; Godwin, A. K.; Croce, C. M.: Molecular cloning and characterization
of LOH11CR2A, a new gene within a refined minimal region of LOH at
11q23. Genomics 46: 217-222, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/16/2004

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 8/4/1998

EDITED carol: 06/08/2012
carol: 6/8/2012
mgross: 10/12/2006
tkritzer: 7/21/2004
terry: 7/16/2004
alopez: 9/25/1998
alopez: 8/4/1998

602642	TITLE *602642 TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR LIGAND SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 11; TNFSF11
;;OSTEOPROTEGERIN LIGAND; OPGL;;
RECEPTOR ACTIVATOR OF NF-KAPPA-B LIGAND; RANKL;;
TNF-RELATED ACTIVATION-INDUCED CYTOKINE; TRANCE;;
OSTEOCLAST DIFFERENTIATION FACTOR; ODF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using expression cloning, Lacey et al. (1998) identified the ligand for
osteoprotegerin (OPG; 602643). The OPG ligand (OPGL) is a TNF-related
cytokine that replaces the requirement for stromal cells, vitamin D3,
and glucocorticoids in the coculture model of in vitro
osteoclastogenesis. The OPG ligand, which contains 317 amino acids,
binds to a unique hematopoietic progenitor cell that is committed to the
osteoclast lineage and stimulates the rapid induction of genes that
typify osteoclast development. The OPGL gene is mainly expressed in
lymph nodes and bone marrow stromal cells. In the skeleton, OPGL is
expressed in the primitive mesenchymal cells, in hypertrophying
chondrocytes, and in areas undergoing primary ossification and modeling.
OPGL directly activates isolated mature osteoclasts in vitro, and
short-term administration into normal adult mice results in osteoclast
activation associated with systemic hypercalcemia. These data suggested
to Lacey et al. (1998) that OPGL is an osteoclast differentiation and
activation factor. The effects of OPGL are blocked in vitro and in vivo
by OPG, suggesting that OPGL and OPG are key extracellular regulators of
osteoclast development.

Anderson et al. (1997), Wong et al. (1997), and Yasuda et al. (1998)
independently cloned OPGL cDNAs. Anderson et al. (1997) identified OPGL,
which they called RANKL for 'receptor activator of NF-kappa-B (164011)
ligand,' as a ligand for the TNF (191160) receptor RANK (603499). RANKL
augmented the ability of dendritic cells to stimulate naive T-cell
proliferation in a mixed lymphocyte reaction and increased the survival
of RANK+ T cells generated with IL4 (147780) and TGF-beta. The predicted
317-amino acid RANKL protein is a type II transmembrane protein. Human
and mouse RANKL share 85% protein sequence identity. Northern blot
analysis revealed that RANKL is expressed predominantly in lymph node.
Wong et al. (1997) reported that a soluble form of OPGL, or TRANCE
(TNF-related activation-induced cytokine), consisting only of the
extracellular domain, can activate JNK (see 602896) in T cells but not
in B cells or bone marrow-derived dendritic cells. They suggested that
TRANCE plays a specific role in regulating T-cell functions. Yasuda et
al. (1998) referred to OPGL as ODF, osteoclast differentiation factor.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell and radiation hybrids, Anderson et al.
(1997) mapped the RANKL gene to chromosome 13q14. Using an interspecific
backcross, Wong et al. (1997) mapped the Trance gene to mouse chromosome
14.

GENE FUNCTION

TRANCE, a TNF family member, and its receptor, RANK, are critical
regulators of dendritic cell and osteoclast function. Wong et al. (1999)
demonstrated that TRANCE activates the antiapoptotic serine/threonine
kinase PKB (AKT1; 164730) through a signaling complex involving SRC
(190090) and TRAF6 (602355). A deficiency in SRC or addition of SRC
family kinase inhibitors blocked TRANCE-mediated PKB activation in
osteoclasts. SRC and TRAF6 interacted with each other and with RANK upon
receptor engagement. TRAF6, in turn, enhanced the kinase activity of
SRC, leading to tyrosine phosphorylation of downstream signaling
molecules such as CBL (165360). These results defined a mechanism by
which TRANCE activates SRC family kinases and PKB, and provided evidence
of cross-talk between TRAF proteins and SRC family kinases.

Kong et al. (1999) reported that activated T cells can directly trigger
osteoclastogenesis through OPGL. Systemic activation of T cells in vivo
leads to an OPGL-mediated increase in osteoclastogenesis and bone loss.
In a T-cell-dependent model of rat adjuvant arthritis characterized by
severe joint inflammation, bone and cartilage destruction, and
crippling, blocking of OPGL through osteoprotegerin treatment at the
onset of disease prevents bone and cartilage destruction but not
inflammation. These results show that both systemic and local T-cell
activation can lead to OPGL production and subsequent bone loss, and
they provide a novel paradigm for T cells as regulators of bone
physiology.

Bone destruction, caused by aberrant production and activation of
osteoclasts, is a prominent feature of multiple myeloma (254500). Pearse
et al. (2001) demonstrated that myeloma stimulates osteoclastogenesis by
triggering a coordinated increase in TRANCE and decrease in its decoy
receptor osteoprotegerin (OPG; 602643). Immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization studies of bone marrow specimens indicated that, in vivo,
deregulation of the TRANCE-OPG cytokine axis occurred in myeloma, but
not in the limited plasma cell disorder monoclonal gammopathy of unknown
significance or in nonmyeloma hematologic malignancies. In coculture,
myeloma cell lines stimulated expression of TRANCE and inhibited
expression of OPG by stromal cells. In the murine model of human
myeloma, administration of a recombinant Trance inhibitor, Rank-Fc, both
prevented myeloma-induced bone destruction and interfered with myeloma
progression. These data identified TRANCE and OPG as key cytokines whose
deregulation promotes bone destruction and supports myeloma growth.

Croucher et al. (2001) demonstrated that myeloma cells express the
critical osteoclastogenic factor RANKL. Injection of myeloma cells into
a C57BL strain of mice resulted in development of bone disease
characterized by a significant decrease in cancellous bone volume in the
tibial and femoral metaphyses, an increase in osteoclast formation, and
radiologic evidence of osteolytic bone lesions. Treatment of mice with
established myeloma with recombinant OPG protein, the soluble decoy
receptor for RANKL, prevented the development of lytic bone lesions. OPG
treatment was associated with preservation of cancellous bone volume and
inhibition of osteoclast formation. OPG also promoted an increase in
femoral, tibial, and vertebral BMD. The data suggested that the
RANKL/RANK/OPG system may play a critical role in the development of
osteolytic bone disease in multiple myeloma and that targeting this
system may have therapeutic potential.

Sezer et al. (2003) reviewed the role of RANKL and OPG in myeloma bone
disease, the net effect of which is an increased RANKL-to-OPG ratio that
favors the formation and activation of osteoclasts. They noted that
patients with myeloma bone disease have inappropriately low serum and
bone marrow levels of OPG, and pointed out that specific blockade of
RANKL prevented the skeletal complications in various animal models of
myeloma and suppressed bone resorption in a preliminary study of
patients with myeloma bone disease.

Eghbali-Fatourechi et al. (2003) studied RANKL expression in bone marrow
mononuclear cells of 12 premenopausal women, 12 early-postmenopausal
women, and 12 age-matched estrogen-treated postmenopausal women, and
found that the surface concentration of RANKL per cell was 2- to 3-fold
higher in the untreated postmenopausal women compared to the other 2
groups. In the merged groups, increased RANKL expression per cell
correlated directly with increases in bone resorption markers and
inversely with serum 17-beta-estradiol levels.

Takayanagi et al. (2002) demonstrated that RANKL induces the IFN-beta
(147640) gene in osteoclast precursor cells, and that IFN-beta inhibits
the differentiation of osteoclasts by interfering with the RANKL-induced
expression of c-Fos (164810), an essential transcription factor for the
formation of osteoclasts. This IFN-beta gene induction mechanism is
distinct from that induced by virus, and is dependent on c-Fos itself.
Thus an autoregulatory mechanism operates--the RANKL-induced c-Fos
induces its own inhibitor. The importance of this regulatory mechanism
for bone homeostasis is emphasized by the observation that mice
deficient in IFN-beta signaling exhibit severe osteopenia accompanied by
enhanced osteoclastogenesis.

As explained by Glass et al. (2003), elevated serum levels of RANKL
occur in patients with myeloma, reflecting secretion by myeloma cells
with enhancement of osteoclast activity. The elevated serum levels of
DKK1 (605189) and RANKL in patients with myeloma may act systemically
and thus contribute to diffuse osteopenia and hypercalcemia that
frequently accompany this condition.

Koga et al. (2004) showed that mice lacking immunoreceptor
tyrosine-based activation motif (ITAM)-harboring adaptors Fc receptor
common gamma subunit (147139) and DNAX-activating protein-12 (DAP12;
604142) exhibit severe osteopetrosis owing to impaired osteoclast
differentiation. In osteoclast precursor cells, Fc receptor-gamma and
DAP12 associated with multiple immunoreceptors and activated calcium
signaling through phospholipase C-gamma (see 172420). Thus,
ITAM-dependent costimulatory signals activated by multiple
immunoreceptors are essential for the maintenance of bone homeostasis.
Koga et al. (2004) concluded that RANKL and macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (120420) are not sufficient to activate the
signals required for osteoclastogenesis.

The treatment of AIDS with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART),
which includes HIV protease inhibitors, has been associated with bone
demineralization. To determine if this complication reflects accelerated
resorptive activity, Wang et al. (2004) studied the impact of 2 common
HIV protease inhibitors, ritonavir and indinavir, on osteoclast
formation and function. They found that ritonavir, but not indinavir,
inhibited osteoclast differentiation in a reversible manner and also
abrogated bone resorption by disrupting the osteoclast cytoskeleton,
without affecting cell number. Given in vivo, ritonavir completely
blunted parathyroid hormone (168450)-induced osteoclastogenesis in mice,
which confirmed that the drug is bone sparing. Wang et al. (2004) showed
that ritonavir functions by impairing RANKL-induced signaling. They
suggested that ritonavir may represent a bone-sparing protease inhibitor
capable of preventing development of osteopenia in patients on HAART.

TNF-induced RANKL synthesis by bone marrow stromal cells is a
fundamental component of inflammatory osteolysis. Wei et al. (2005)
found that TNF-induced RANKL expression in murine stromal cells was
mediated by IL1 (IL1A; 147760) via enhanced expression of IL1R1 (147810)
. IL1 had the capacity to directly target mononuclear osteoclast
precursors and promote their differentiation in the presence of
sufficient RANKL. Wei et al. (2005) concluded that IL1 is a key
downstream effector molecule in optimal TNF-induced osteoclastogenesis,
participating in the stimulation of stromal cell RANKL expression and in
the stimulation of osteoclast precursor differentiation.

Ikeda et al. (2004) generated transgenic mice expressing
dominant-negative c-Jun (165160) specifically in the osteoclast lineage
and found that they developed severe osteopetrosis due to impaired
osteoclastogenesis. Blockade of c-Jun signaling also markedly inhibited
soluble RANKL-induced osteoclast differentiation in vitro.
Overexpression of nuclear factor of activated T cells 1 (NFATC2; 600490)
or NFATC1 (600489) promoted differentiation of osteoclast precursor
cells into tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase-positive (TRAP-positive)
multinucleated osteoclast-like cells even in the absence of RANKL. These
osteoclastogenic activities of NFAT were abrogated by overexpression of
dominant-negative c-Jun. Ikeda et al. (2004) concluded that c-Jun
signaling in cooperation with NFAT is crucial for RANKL-regulated
osteoclast differentiation.

Jones et al. (2006) demonstrated that the cytokine RANKL triggers
migration of human epithelial cancer cells and melanoma cells that
express the receptor RANK (603499). RANK is expressed on cancer cell
lines and breast cancer cells in patients. In a mouse model of melanoma
metastasis, in vivo neutralization of RANKL by osteoprotegerin (602643)
results in complete protection from paralysis and a marked reduction in
tumor burden in bones but not in other organs. Jones et al. (2006)
concluded that local differentiation factors such as RANKL have an
important role in cell migration and the tissue-specific metastatic
behavior of cancer cells.

Using immunofluorescence microscopy, Loser et al. (2006) found that skin
from individuals with psoriasis (see 177900), but not skin from healthy
individuals or individuals with cutaneous lupus erythematosus, strongly
expressed RANKL in keratinocytes of all epidermal layers. In mice,
ultraviolet (UV) exposure induced Rankl expression. Transgenic mice
overexpressing Rankl under transcriptional control of the K14 (KRT14;
148066) promoter had reduced contact hypersensitivity (CHS) responses,
but showed no increase in circulating soluble Rankl. FACS analysis
showed that these transgenic mice had increased numbers of systemic Cd4
(186940)-positive/Cd25 (IL2RA; 147730)-positive T cells, whereas mice
lacking Rankl had markedly reduced numbers of these cells in spleen.
Confocal microscopy demonstrated coexpression of langerin (CD207;
604862) and Rank in Langerhans cells (LCs). Exposure of LCs to epidermal
Rankl made LCs less susceptible to apoptosis. Cutaneous Rankl expression
also reduced systemic Cd40l (CD40LG; 300386)-driven autoimmunity and
local cutaneous hyperallergic responses. Injection of Rank into
UV-irradiated mice resulted in protection from UV-induced
immunosuppression. Mice transplanted with Rankl -/- skin, but not
wildtype skin, had normal CHS responses, indicating protection from
UV-induced immunosuppression. Loser et al. (2006) concluded that RANKL
expression is inducible on keratinocytes and that this molecular pathway
couples the epidermis to local and systemic immunosuppression.

Hanada et al. (2009) reported that RANKL and RANK have an essential role
in the brain. In both mice and rats, central RANKL injections trigger
severe fever. Using tissue-specific Nestin-Cre and GFAP-Cre rank(floxed)
deleter mice, Hanada et al. (2009) genetically mapped the function of
RANK in the fever response to astrocytes. Importantly, Nestin-Cre and
GFAP-Cre rank(floxed) deleter mice are resistant to
lipopolysaccharide-induced fever as well as fever in response to the key
inflammatory cytokines IL-1-beta (147720) and TNF-alpha (191160).
Mechanistically, RANKL activates brain regions involved in
thermoregulation and induces fever via the COX2-PGE2 (see 600262)/EP3R
(176806) pathway. Moreover, female Nestin (600915)-Cre and GFAP
(137780)-Cre rank(floxed) mice exhibit increased basal body
temperatures, suggesting that RANKL and RANK control thermoregulation
during normal female physiology. Hanada et al. (2009) also found that 2
children with RANK mutations (see 603499.0003) exhibited impaired fever
during pneumonia. Hanada et al. (2009) concluded that their data
identified an entirely novel and unexpected function for the key
osteoclast differentiation factors RANKL/RANK in female thermoregulation
and the central fever response in inflammation.

Asselin-Labat et al. (2010) showed that mouse mammary stem cells (MaSCs)
are highly responsive to steroid hormone signaling, despite lacking the
estrogen and progesterone receptors. Ovariectomy markedly diminished
MaSC number and outgrowth potential in vivo, whereas MaSC activity
increased in mice treated with estrogen plus progesterone. Notably, even
3 weeks of treatment with the aromatase inhibitor letrozole was
sufficient to reduce the MaSC pool. In contrast, pregnancy led to a
transient 11-fold increase in MaSC numbers, probably mediated through
paracrine signaling from the RANK ligand. The augmented MaSC pool
indicates a cellular basis for the short-term increase in breast cancer
incidence that accompanies pregnancy. Asselin-Labat et al. (2010)
concluded that their findings further indicated that breast cancer
chemoprevention may be achieved, in part, through suppression of MaSC
function.

Joshi et al. (2010) showed that the MaSC pool increases 14-fold during
maximal progesterone levels at the luteal diestrus phase of the mouse.
Stem cell-enriched CD49f(hi) cells amplify at diestrus, or with
exogenous progesterone, demonstrating a key role for progesterone in
propelling this expansion. In aged mice, CD49f(hi) cells display stasis
upon cessation of the reproductive cycle. Progesterone drives a series
of events where luminal cells probably provide Wnt4 (603490) and Rankl
signals to basal cells which in turn respond by upregulating their
cognate receptors, transcriptional targets, and cell cycle markers.
Joshi et al. (2010) concluded that their findings uncovered a dynamic
role for progesterone in activating adult MaSCs within the mammary stem
cell niche during the reproductive cycle, where MaSCs are putative
targets for cell transformation events leading to breast cancer.

Schramek et al. (2010) demonstrated that in vivo administration of
medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA), used in women for hormone replacement
therapy and contraceptives, triggers massive induction of the key
osteoclast differentiation factor RANKL in mammary gland epithelial
cells. Genetic inactivation of the RANKL receptor RANK in mammary gland
epithelial cells prevented MPA-induced epithelial proliferation,
impaired expansion of CD49f(hi) stem cell-enriched population, and
sensitized these cells to DNA damage-induced cell death. Deletion of
RANK from the mammary epithelium resulted in a markedly decreased
incidence and delayed onset of MPA-driven mammary cancer. Schramek et
al. (2010) concluded that the RANKL/RANK system controls the incidence
and onset of progestin-driven breast cancer.

Gonzalez-Suarez et al. (2010) showed that RANK and RANKL are expressed
within normal, premalignant, and neoplastic mammary epithelium, and,
using complementary gain-of-function and loss-of-function approaches,
defined a direct contribution of this pathway in mammary tumorigenesis.
Accelerated preneoplasias and increased mammary tumor formation were
observed in MMTV-RANK transgenic mice after multiparity or treatment
with carcinogen and hormone (progesterone). Reciprocally, selective
pharmacologic inhibition of RANKL attenuated mammary tumor development
not only in hormone- and carcinogen-treated MMTV-RANK and wildtype mice,
but also in the MMTV-neu transgenic spontaneous tumor model. The
reduction in tumorigenesis upon RANKL inhibition was preceded by a
reduction in preneoplasias as well as rapid and sustained reductions in
hormone- and carcinogen-induced mammary epithelial proliferation and
cyclin D1 (168461) levels. Gonzalez-Suarez et al. (2010) concluded that
RANKL inhibition is acting directly on hormone-induced mammary
epithelium at early stages in tumorigenesis, and the permissive
contribution of progesterone to increased mammary cancer incidence is
due to RANKL-dependent proliferative changes in the mammary epithelium.

Tan et al. (2011) examined whether RANKL, RANK (603499), and IKK-alpha
(600664) are involved in mammary/breast cancer metastasis. RANK
signaling in mammary carcinoma cells that overexpress the protooncogene
Erbb2 (also known as Neu; 164870), which is frequently amplified in
metastatic human breast cancers, was important for pulmonary metastasis.
Metastatic spread of Erbb2-transformed carcinoma cells also required
CD4(186940)+CD25(147730)+ T cells, whose major prometastatic function
was RANKL production. Most RANKL-producing T cells expressed FOXP3
(300292), a transcription factor produced by regulatory T cells, and
were located next to smooth muscle actin (see 102540)-positive stromal
cells in mouse and human breast cancers. The dependence of pulmonary
metastasis on T cells was replaceable by exogenous RANKL, which also
stimulated pulmonary metastasis of RANK-positive human breast cancer
cells. Tan et al. (2011) concluded that their results were consistent
with the adverse impact of tumor-infiltrating CD4+ or FOXP3+ T cells on
human breast cancer prognosis and suggested that the targeting of
RANKL-RANK can be used in conjunction with the therapeutic elimination
of primary breast tumors to prevent recurrent metastatic disease.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Luan et al. (2012) reported the 2.7-angstrom crystal structure of the
human RANKL trimer in complex with the N-terminal fragment of human OPG
containing 4 cys-rich TNFR homologous domains (OPG-CRD). Structure-based
mutagenesis and surface plasmon resonance analysis showed that the RANKL
trimer uses 3 equivalent grooves between 2 neighboring monomers to
interact with 3 OPG-CRD monomers symmetrically. The results revealed
that OPG exerts its decoy receptor function by directly blocking the
accessibility of important interacting residues of RANKL, including
arg223, tyr241, and lys257, for RANK recognition.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Sobacchi et al. (2007) analyzed the TNFSF11 gene in 6 patients from 4
unrelated families with an autosomal recessive osteoclast-poor form of
osteopetrosis (OPTB2; 259710) that was unresponsive to hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation and identified homozygosity for 3 different
mutations in all affected individuals: a 5-bp deletion (602642.0001) in
a consanguineous Tunisian family, a missense mutation (M199K;
602642.0002) in 2 Sikh families, and a 2-bp deletion (602642.0003) in a
consanguineous Kurdish family. Exogenous RANKL induced formation of
functional osteoclasts in vitro from peripheral blood monocytes obtained
from these patients.

In a genomewide association study to find common sequence variants that
influence bone mineral density and low-trauma fractures in 3 populations
of European descent, Styrkarsdottir et al. (2008) identified 2
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a linkage disequilibrium block
adjacent to the RANKL gene on chromosome 13q14 (see BMND9, 612110).

ANIMAL MODEL

Osteoprotegerin ligand (OPGL) is a key osteoclast
differentiation/activation factor essential for bone remodeling. Fata et
al. (2000) reported that mice lacking OPGL or its receptor RANK failed
to form lobulo-alveolar mammary structures during pregnancy, resulting
in death of newborns. Transplantation and OPGL-rescue experiments in
Opgl -/- and Rank -/- pregnant females showed that OPGL acts directly on
RANK-expressing mammary epithelial cells. The effects of OPGL were
autonomous to epithelial cells. The mammary gland defect in female Opgl
-/- mice was characterized by enhanced apoptosis and failures in
proliferation and PKB activation in lobulo-alveolar buds that could be
reversed by recombinant OPGL treatment.

Kim et al. (2000) reported the skeletal phenotype of TRANCE-deficient
mice and its rescue by the TRANCE transgene specifically expressed in
lymphocytes. TRANCE-deficient mice showed severe osteopetrosis, with no
osteoclasts, marrow spaces, or tooth eruption, and exhibited profound
growth retardation at several skeletal sites, including the limbs,
skull, and vertebrae. These mice had marked chondrodysplasia, with
thick, irregular growth plates and a relative increase in hypertrophic
chondrocytes. Transgenic overexpression of TRANCE in lymphocytes of
TRANCE-deficient mice rescued osteoclast development in 2 locations in
growing long bones: excavation of marrow cavities permitting
hematopoiesis in the marrow spaces, and remodeling of osteopetrotic
woven bone in the shafts of long bones into histologically normal
lamellar bone. However, osteoclasts in these mice were not present at
the chondroosseous junction and the metaphyseal periosteum of long
bones, or in tooth eruption pathways. These defects resulted in
sclerotic metaphyses with persistence of club-shaped long bones and
unerupted teeth, and the growth plate defects were largely unimproved by
the TRANCE transgene. Thus, TRANCE-mediated regulation of the skeleton
is complex, and impacts chondrocyte differentiation and osteoclast
formation in a manner that likely requires local delivery of TRANCE.

Nakashima et al. (2011) generated mice expressing green fluorescent
protein specifically in osteocytes and found that Rankl mRNA and protein
expression was more than 10-fold higher in osteocytes than in
osteoblasts. Furthermore, osteocytes had a more potent ability to
support osteoclastogenesis than osteoblasts. Mice lacking Rankl in
osteocytes had a severe osteopetrotic phenotype. Nakashima et al. (2011)
concluded that osteocytes are a crucial, if not exclusive, source of
RANKL required for osteoclastogenesis.

Using mice with conditional deletion of Rankl in genetically defined
cell populations, Xiong et al. (2011) identified hypertrophic
chondrocytes and osteocytes, both of which are embedded within
mineralized cartilage, as essential sources of the Rankl that controls
resorption of mineralized cartilage and bone remodeling, respectively.
Mice lacking Rankl in osteocytes were protected from bone loss owing to
unloading. Xiong et al. (2011) concluded that RANKL produced by
osteoblasts or their progenitors does not contribute to adult bone
remodeling and suggested that the rate-limiting step of matrix
resorption is controlled by cells embedded within the matrix itself.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OSTEOPETROSIS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 2
TNFSF11, 5-BP DEL, IVS7+4

In a 6-year-old boy with osteoclast-poor osteopetrosis (OPTB2; 259710),
born of consanguineous Tunisian parents, Sobacchi et al. (2007)
identified homozygosity for a 5-bp deletion in intron 7 (532+4_532+8del)
of the TNFSF11 gene, predicted to cause skipping of exon 7 and an
in-frame deletion. The parents and 1 healthy brother were heterozygous
for the mutation; exon skipping was confirmed in cells from the
heterozygous brother. The mutation was not found in another healthy
brother or 120 geographically-matched control chromosomes.

.0002
OSTEOPETROSIS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 2
TNFSF11, MET199LYS

In 2 sisters, aged 11 years and 6 years, and a 7-month-old boy with
osteoclast-poor osteopetrosis (259710), from 2 unrelated Sikh families
that were both apparently nonconsanguineous, Sobacchi et al. (2007)
identified homozygosity for a 596T-A transversion in exon 8 of the
TNFSF11 gene, resulting in a met199-to-lys (M199K) substitution at a
highly conserved residue. The parents were all heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 100 control chromosomes from an
unmatched population or in 120 control chromosomes from a Sikh
population.

.0003
OSTEOPETROSIS, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 2
TNFSF11, 2-BP DEL, 828CG

In 2 female cousins, aged 12 years and 3 months, respectively, with
osteoclast-poor osteopetrosis (259710), both born of consanguineous
Kurdish parents, Sobacchi et al. (2007) identified homozygosity for a
2-bp deletion (828delCG) in the last exon of the TNFSF11 gene. The
deletion results in a frameshift and a premature termination codon
predicted to cause loss of the beta-G, beta-H, and beta-F strands of
TNFSF11, which are important for its trimerization.

REFERENCE 1. Anderson, D. M.; Maraskovsky, E.; Billingsley, W. L.; Dougall,
W. C.; Tometsko, M. E.; Roux, E. R.; Teepe, M. C.; DuBose, R. F.;
Cosman, D.; Galibert, L.: A homologue of the TNF receptor and its
ligand enhance T-cell growth and dendritic-cell function. Nature 390:
175-179, 1997.

2. Asselin-Labat, M.-L.; Vaillant, F.; Sheridan, J. M.; Pal, B.; Wu,
D.; Simpson, E. R.: Yasuda, H.; Smyth, G. K.; Martin, T. J.; Lindeman,
G. J.; Visvader, J. E.: Control of mammary stem cell function by steroid
hormone signalling. Nature 465: 798-802, 2010.

3. Croucher, P. I.; Shipman, C. M.; Lippitt, J.; Perry, M.; Asosingh,
K.; Hijzen, A.; Brabbs, A. C.; van Beek, E. J. R.; Holen, I.; Skerry,
T. M.; Dunstan, C. R.; Russell, G. R.; Van Camp, B.; Vanderkerken,
K.: Osteoprotegerin inhibits the development of osteolytic bone disease
in multiple myeloma. Blood 98: 3534-3540, 2001.

4. Eghbali-Fatourechi, G.; Khosla, S.; Sanyal, A.; Boyle, W. J.; Lacey,
D. L.; Riggs, B. L.: Role of RANK ligand in mediating increased bone
resorption in early postmenopausal women. J. Clin. Invest. 111:
1221-1230, 2003.

5. Fata, J. E.; Kong, Y.-Y.; Li, J.; Sasaki, T.; Irie-Sasaki, J.;
Moorehead, R. A.; Elliott, R.; Scully, S.; Voura, E. B.; Lacey, D.
L.; Boyle, W. J.; Khokha, R.; Penninger, J. M.: The osteoclast differentiation
factor osteoprotegerin-ligand is essential for mammary gland development. Cell 103:
41-50, 2000.

6. Glass, D. A., II; Patel, M. S.; Karsenty, G.: A new insight into
the formation of osteolytic lesions in multiple myeloma. New Eng.
J. Med. 349: 2479-2480, 2003.

7. Gonzalez-Suarez, E.; Jacob, A. P.; Jones, J.; Miller, R.; Roudier-Meyer,
M. P.; Erwert, R.; Pinkas, J.; Branstetter, D.; Dougall, W. C.: RANK
ligand mediates progestin-induced mammary epithelial proliferation
and carcinogenesis. Nature 468: 103-107, 2010.

8. Hanada, R.; Leibbrandt, A.; Hanada, T.; Kitaoka, S.; Furuyashiki,
T.; Fujihara, H.; Trichereau, J.; Paolino, M.; Qadri, F.; Plehm, R.;
Klaere, S.; Komnenovic, V.; and 10 others: Central control of fever
and female body temperature by RANKL/RANK. Nature 462: 505-509,
2009.

9. Ikeda, F.; Nishimura, R.; Matsubara, T.; Tanaka, S.; Ioune, J.;
Reddy, S. V.; Hata, K.; Yamashita, K.; Hiraga, T.; Watanabe, T.; Kukita,
T.; Yoshioka, K.; Rao, A.; Yoneda, T.: Critical roles of c-Jun signaling
in regulation of NFAT family and RANKL-regulated osteoclast differentiation. J.
Clin. Invest. 114: 475-484, 2004.

10. Jones, D. H.; Nakashima, T.; Sanchez, O. H.; Kozieradzki, I.;
Komarova, S. V.; Sarosi, I; Morony, S.; Rubin, E.; Sarao, R.; Hojilla,
C. V.; Komnenovic, V.; Kong, Y.-Y.; Schreiber, M.; Dixon, S. J.; Sims,
S. M.; Khokha, R.; Wada, T.; Penninger, J. M.: Regulation of cancer
cell migration and bone metastasis by RANKL. Nature 440: 692-696,
2006.

11. Joshi, P. A.; Jackson, H. W.; Beristain, A. G.; Di Grappa, M.
A.; Mote, P. A.; Clarke, C. L.; Stingl, J.; Waterhouse, P. D.; Khokha,
R.: Progesterone induces adult mammary stem cell expansion. Nature 465:
803-807, 2010.

12. Kim, N.; Odgren, P. R.; Kim, D.-K.; Marks, S. C., Jr.; Choi, Y.
: Diverse roles of the tumor necrosis factor family member TRANCE
in skeletal physiology revealed by TRANCE deficiency and partial rescue
by a lymphocyte-expressed TRANCE transgene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97:
10905-10910, 2000.

13. Koga, T.; Inui, M.; Inoue, K.; Kim, S.; Suematsu, A.; Kobayashi,
E.; Iwata, T.; Ohnishi, H.; Matozaki, T.; Kodama, T.; Taniguchi, T.;
Takayanagi, H.; Takai, T.: Costimulatory signals mediated by the
ITAM motif cooperate with RANKL for bone homeostasis. Nature 428:
758-763, 2004.

14. Kong, Y.-Y.; Feige, U.; Sarosi, I.; Bolon, B.; Tafuri, A.; Morony,
S.; Capparelli, C.; Li, J.; Elliott, R.; McCabe, S.; Wong, T.; Campagnuolo,
G.; and 9 others: Activated T cells regulate bone loss and joint
destruction in adjuvant arthritis through osteoprotegerin ligand. Nature 402:
304-309, 1999.

15. Lacey, D. L.; Timms, E.; Tan, H.-L.; Kelley, M. J.; Dunstan, C.
R.; Burgess, T.; Elliott, R.; Colombero, A.; Elliott, G.; Scully,
S.; Hsu, H.; Sullivan, J.; Hawkins, N.; Davy, E.; Capparelli, C.;
Eli, A.; Qian, Y.-X.; Kaufman, S.; Sarosi, I.; Shalhoub, V.; Senaldi,
G.; Guo, J.; Delaney, J.; Boyle, W. J.: Osteoprotegerin ligand is
a cytokine that regulates osteoclast differentiation and activation. Cell 93:
165-176, 1998.

16. Loser, K.; Mehling, A.; Loeser, S.; Apelt, J.; Kuhn, A.; Grabbe,
S.; Schwarz, T.; Penninger, J. M.; Beissert, S.: Epidermal RANKL
controls regulatory T-cell numbers via activation of dendritic cells. Nature
Med. 12: 1372-1379, 2006.

17. Luan, X.; Lu, Q.; Jiang, Y.; Zhang, S.; Wang, Q.; Yuan, H.; Zhao,
W.; Wang, J.; Wang, X.: Crystal structure of human RANKL complexed
with its decoy receptor osteoprotegerin. J Immun. 189: 245-252,
2012.

18. Nakashima, T.; Hayashi, M.; Fukunaga, T.; Kurata, K.; Oh-hora,
M.; Feng, J. Q.; Bonewald, L. F.; Kodama, T.; Wutz, A.; Wagner, E.
F.; Penninger, J. M.; Takayanagi, H.: Evidence for osteocyte regulation
of bone homeostasis through RANKL expression. Nature Med. 17: 1231-1234,
2011.

19. Pearse, R. N.; Sordillo, E. M.; Yaccoby, S.; Wong, B. R.; Liau,
D. F.; Colman, N.; Michaeli, J.; Epstein, J.; Choi, Y.: Multiple
myeloma disrupts the TRANCE/osteoprotegerin cytokine axis to trigger
bone destruction and promote tumor progression. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 98: 11581-11586, 2001.

20. Schramek, D.; Leibbrandt, A.; Sigi, V.; Kenner, L.; Pospisilik,
J. A.; Lee, H. J.; Hanada, R.; Joshi, P. A.; Aliprantis, A.; Glimcher,
L.; Pasparakis, M.; Khokha, R.; Ormandy, C. J.; Widschwendter, M.;
Schett, G.; Penninger, J. M.: Osteoclast differentiation factor RANKL
controls development of progestin-driven mammary cancer. Nature 468:
98-102, 2010.

21. Sezer, O.; Heider, U.; Zavrski, I.; Kuhne, C. A.; Hofbauer, L.
C.: RANK ligand and osteoprotegerin in myeloma bone disease. Blood 101:
2094-2098, 2003.

22. Sobacchi, C.; Frattini, A.; Guerrini, M. M.; Abinun, M.; Pangrazio,
A.; Susani, L.; Bredius, R.; Mancini, G.; Cant, A.; Biship, N.; Grabowski,
P.; Del Fattore, A.; and 9 others: Osteoclast-poor human osteopetrosis
due to mutations in the gene encoding RANKL. Nature Genet. 39: 960-962,
2007.

23. Styrkarsdottir, U.; Halldorsson, B. V.; Gretarsdottir, S.; Gudbjartsson,
D. F.; Walters, G. B.; Ingvarsson, T.; Jonsdottir, T.; Saemundsdottir,
J.; Center, J. R.; Nguyen, T. V.; Bagger, Y.; Gulcher, J. R.; Eisman,
J. A.; Christiansen, C.; Sigurdsson, G.; Kong, A.; Thorsteinsdottir,
U.; Stefansson, K.: Multiple genetic loci for bone mineral density
and fractures. New Eng. J. Med. 358: 2355-2365, 2008.

24. Takayanagi, H.; Kim, S.; Matsuo, K.; Suzuki, H.; Suzuki, T.; Sato,
K.; Yokochi, T.; Oda, H.; Nakamura, K.; Ida, N.; Wagner, E. F.; Taniguchi,
T.: RANKL maintains bone homeostasis through c-Fos-dependent induction
of interferon-B. Nature 416: 744-749, 2002.

25. Tan, W.; Zhang, W.; Strasner, A.; Grivennikov, S.; Cheng, J. Q.;
Hoffman, R. M.; Karin, M.: Tumour-infiltrating regulatory T cells
stimulate mammary cancer metastasis through RANKL-RANK signalling. Nature 470:
548-553, 2011.

26. Wang, M. W.-H.; Wei, S.; Faccio, R.; Takeshita, S.; Tebas, P.;
Powderly, W. G.; Teitelbaum, S. L.; Ross, F. P.: The HIV protease
inhibitor ritonavir blocks osteoclastogenesis and function by impairing
RANKL-induced signaling. J. Clin. Invest. 114: 206-213, 2004.

27. Wei, S.; Kitaura, H.; Zhou, P.; Ross, F. P.; Teitelbaum, S. L.
: IL-1 mediates TNF-induced osteoclastogenesis. J. Clin. Invest. 115:
282-290, 2005.

28. Wong, B. R.; Besser, D.; Kim, N.; Arron, J. R.; Vologodskaia,
M.; Hanafusa, H.; Choi, Y.: TRANCE, a TNF family member, activates
Akt/PKB through a signaling complex involving TRAF6 and c-Src. Molec.
Cell 4: 1041-1049, 1999.

29. Wong, B. R.; Rho, J.; Arron, J.; Robinson, E.; Orlinick, J.; Chao,
M.; Kalachikov, S.; Cayani, E.; Bartlett, F. S., III; Frankel, W.
N.; Lee, S. Y.; Choi, Y.: TRANCE is a novel ligand of the tumor necrosis
factor receptor family that activates c-Jun N-terminal kinase in T
cells. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 25190-25194, 1997.

30. Xiong, J.; Onal, M.; Jilka, R. L.; Weinstein, R. S.; Manolagas,
S. C.; O'Brien, C. A.: Matrix-embedded cells control osteoclast formation. Nature
Med. 17: 1235-1241, 2011.

31. Yasuda, H.; Shima, N.; Nakagawa, N.; Yamaguchi, K.; Kinosaki,
M.; Mochizuki, S.; Tomoyasu, A.; Yano, K.; Goto, M.; Murakami, A.;
Tsuda, E.; Morinaga, T.; Higashio, K.; Udagawa, N.; Takahashi, N.;
Suda, T.: Osteoclast differentiation factor is a ligand for osteoprotegerin/osteoclastogenesis-inhibitory
factor and is identical to TRANCE/RANKL. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95:
3597-3602, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 05/07/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/20/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/7/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/4/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/20/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/22/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/10/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/20/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/3/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/17/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/26/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/18/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/6/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/16/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/9/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/18/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/30/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/26/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/1/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/26/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/19/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/9/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/7/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 12/15/1998

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 5/20/1998

EDITED mgross: 05/07/2013
mgross: 10/20/2011
terry: 10/20/2011
alopez: 6/9/2011
terry: 6/7/2011
alopez: 1/5/2011
terry: 1/4/2011
alopez: 8/30/2010
terry: 8/20/2010
alopez: 1/7/2010
terry: 12/22/2009
alopez: 6/16/2008
terry: 6/10/2008
wwang: 12/26/2007
terry: 12/20/2007
carol: 12/7/2007
terry: 10/3/2007
carol: 10/3/2007
mgross: 1/17/2007
alopez: 6/6/2006
terry: 5/26/2006
mgross: 4/18/2005
carol: 1/7/2005
terry: 1/6/2005
tkritzer: 9/16/2004
terry: 9/15/2004
alopez: 4/19/2004
terry: 4/16/2004
cwells: 1/9/2004
tkritzer: 7/29/2003
terry: 7/18/2003
alopez: 8/20/2002
terry: 4/30/2002
mgross: 3/6/2002
terry: 2/26/2002
mcapotos: 11/20/2001
mcapotos: 11/15/2001
terry: 11/1/2001
mcapotos: 11/8/2000
mcapotos: 10/31/2000
terry: 10/26/2000
mcapotos: 10/19/2000
terry: 10/19/2000
alopez: 2/9/2000
mgross: 1/7/2000
alopez: 2/9/1999
alopez: 2/8/1999
alopez: 12/15/1998
carol: 6/8/1998
dholmes: 6/8/1998

606523	TITLE *606523 SLIT-ROBO RHO GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN 1; SRGAP1
;;SLIT-ROBO GTPase-ACTIVATING PROTEIN, RHO, 1;;
SLIT-ROBO GAP1;;
KIAA1304;;
ARHGAP13
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By screening brain cDNA libraries for sequences with the potential to
encode large proteins, Nagase et al. (2000) identified a cDNA they
called KIAA1304. The 1,051-amino acid KIAA1304 protein is 48% identical
to C1 RHOGAP (300023) and 68% identical to KIAA0456 (606524). It was
predicted to be involved in cell signaling/communication. RT-PCR
analysis detected moderate expression of KIAA1304 in all tissues tested
except skeletal muscle, pancreas, and spleen, where expression was low.
KIAA1304 was expressed in all brain regions tested.

The SLIT proteins (e.g., SLIT1; 603742) guide neuronal and leukocyte
migration through the Roundabout transmembrane receptors (e.g., ROBO1;
602430). Using a yeast 2-hybrid system to search for proteins
interacting with a C-terminal region (amino acids 1455 to 1657) of rat
Robo1, Wong et al. (2001) isolated 20 positive clones from a mouse brain
cDNA library. Eight of these clones encode a novel family of Rho
GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) that the authors termed SRGAPs. The
mouse Srgap1, Srgap2, and Srgap3 proteins correspond to the human
KIAA1304, KIAA0456, and KIAA0411 (606525) proteins, respectively. The
SRGAPs contain an FCH domain, a RHOGAP domain, and an SH3 domain. The
FCH domain in SRGAP1 (amino acids 11 to 110) is similar to the FCH
domains of SRGAP2, SRGAP3, C1 RHOGAP, CDC15, and FER (176942). The
centrally located RHOGAP domain in SRGAP1 (amino acids 483 to 657) is
highly similar to the RHOGAP domains of SRGAP2, SRGAP3, and C1 RHOGAP.
The SH3 domain in SRGAP1 (amino acids 712 to 767) is similar to those in
SRGAP2, SRGAP3, C1 RHOGAP, and CSK (124095). Northern blot analysis
detected SRGAP1 transcripts of 8.0, 5.5, and 3.8 kb in all tissues
tested, with the 8.0-kb transcript being the most abundant. Western blot
analysis revealed a 130-kD SRGAP1 protein expressed at high levels in
brain, lung, and spleen. In situ hybridization of rodent tissues showed
that Srgap1 and Srgap2 are expressed in regions responsive to Slit.

GENE FUNCTION

Wong et al. (2001) found that SLIT increased SRGAP1-ROBO1 interaction
and inactivated CDC42 (116952). A dominant-negative SRGAP1 blocked SLIT
inactivation of CDC42 and SLIT repulsion of migratory cells from the
anterior subventricular zone of the forebrain. A constitutively active
CDC42 blocked the repulsive effect of SLIT. These results demonstrated
important roles for GAPs and CDC42 in neuronal migration.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the
KIAA1304 gene to chromosome 12 (TMAP stSG4553).

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

2. Wong, K.; Ren, X.-R.; Huang, Y.-Z.; Xie, Y.; Liu, G.; Saito, H.;
Tang, H.; Wen, L.; Brady-Kalnay, S. M.; Mei, L.; Wu, J. Y.; Xiong,
W.-C.; Rao, Y.: Signal transduction in neuronal migration: roles
of GTPase activating proteins and the small GTPase Cdc42 in the Slit-Robo
pathway. Cell 107: 209-221, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 12/4/2001

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 12/4/2001

EDITED carol: 10/16/2006
carol: 12/4/2001
mgross: 12/4/2001

188360	TITLE *188360 THYMOCYTE ANTIGEN CD1B; CD1B
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CD1B is a group-1 member of the CD1 family of major histocompatibility
(MHC)-like glycoproteins. See CD1A (188370) for background information
on CD1 molecules.

GENE FUNCTION

Beckman et al. (1994) and Sieling et al. (1995) showed that T cells can
recognize not only peptide antigens presented by classical MHC
molecules, but also virulence-associated mycobacterial lipid antigens
such as mycolic acids and lipoarabinomannan (LAM) derivatives,
respectively, presented to TCRA (see 186880)/TCRB+ (see 186930) CD4-CD8-
T cells by CD1B-bearing antigen-presenting cells (APCs). Sieling et al.
(1995) found that LAM recognition requires internalization and
acidification in the endosomal compartment before presentation on the
APC surface. Examining dermal leprosy (246300) lesions by
immunohistochemistry from patients with the tuberculoid form of the
disease, associated with high specific cell-mediated immunity (CMI),
Sieling et al. (1999) observed strong induction of CD1A, CD1B, and CD1C
(188340) expression. In contrast, lesions from patients with the
lepromatous form, associated with weak or absent M. leprae-specific CMI,
do not express CD1 antigens. Moreover, by 2-color immunofluorescence
analysis, Sieling et al. (1999) demonstrated that the cells expressing
CD1 antigens are CD83+ (604534) dendritic cells, which are also highly
efficient APCs for CD1B-restricted T cells in vitro.

In a review of CD1 lipid antigen presentation, Park and Bendelac (2000)
noted that lipid binding might occur in the secretory pathway, at the
cell surface, or only after internalization in an acidified compartment.
CD1B is located in the late endosome or lysosome. Access to the
endocytic pathway is regulated by a tyrosine-based motif in the
cytoplasmic tail of CD1 that differs among CD1B, CD1C, and CD1D
(188410).

Vincent et al. (2002) showed that group-1 (i.e., CD1A, CD1B, and CD1C)
foreign antigen-nonspecific CD1-restricted T-cell clones could promote
dendritic cell (DC) maturation in the presence of lipopolysaccharide and
gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570), whereas group-2 (i.e., CD1D)-restricted
T cells failed to induce interleukin-12 p70 (IL12; see 161561)
production and DC maturation except in the presence of CD40 ligand
(CD40LG; 300386). On the other hand, the CD1D-restricted T-cell clones
were more efficient producers of IL10 (124092).

Sugita et al. (2002) showed that CD1B, but not other CD1 isoforms, binds
the AP3 adaptor protein complex (see AP3B1; 603401). In AP3-deficient
cells from patients with Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome-2 (HPS2; 608233),
which is caused by mutations in the AP3B1 gene, CD1B fails to gain
access to lysosomes efficiently and is mislocalized to the plasma
membrane and early endosomes. The failure in CD1B trafficking results in
a profound failure to present microbial lipid antigens efficiently.
Since MHC class II traffics normally in AP3-deficient cells, Sugita et
al. (2002) proposed that defects in CD1B antigen presentation may
account for the recurrent bacterial infections in HPS2 patients. They
concluded that there is an AP3-dependent pathway for antigen
presentation by CD1B molecules.

Winau et al. (2004) transfected PSAP (176801)-deficient dermal
fibroblasts and normal fibroblasts with CD1B. PSAP-deficient fibroblasts
were characterized by a loss of spindle shape and accumulation of
intracellular vesicles typical of lysosomal storage disorders.
PSAP-deficient cells could only function as proficient
antigen-presenting cells for Mycobacterium tuberculosis lipid
antigen-specific T cells in the presence of exogenous SAPC and not in
the presence of SAPA, SAPB, or SAPD. Fluorescence microscopy
demonstrated that lipid antigen, SAPC, and CD1B colocalized in lysosomal
compartments of PSAP-deficient CD1B-transfected fibroblasts. SAPC, and
to a far lesser extent SAPA, were able to extract lipid antigen from
membranes. Immunoblot and immunoprecipitation analysis showed that SAPC,
but not other SAPs, specifically bound CD1B, but not CD1A, MHC class I,
or MHC class II. Winau et al. (2004) proposed that SAPC exposes lipid
antigens from intralysosomal membranes for loading onto CD1B.

REFERENCE 1. Beckman, E. M.; Porcelli, S. A.; Morita, C. T.; Behar, S. M.; Furlong,
S. T.; Brenner, M. B.: Recognition of a lipid antigen by CD1-restricted
alpha-beta(+) T cells. Nature 372: 691-694, 1994.

2. Park, S.-H.; Bendelac, A.: CD1-restricted T-cell responses and
microbial infection. Nature 406: 788-792, 2000.

3. Sieling, P. A.; Chatterjee, D.; Porcelli, S. A.; Prigozy, T. I.;
Mazzaccaro, R. J.; Soriano, T.; Bloom, B. R.; Brenner, M. B.; Kronenberg,
M.; Brennan, P. J.; Modlin, R. L.: CD1-restricted T cell recognition
of microbial lipoglycan antigens. Science 269: 227-230, 1995.

4. Sieling, P. A.; Jullien, D.; Dahlem, M.; Tedder, T. F.; Rea, T.
H.; Modlin, R. L.; Porcelli, S. A.: CD1 expression by dendritic cells
in human leprosy lesions: correlation with effective host immunity. J.
Immun. 162: 1851-1858, 1999.

5. Sugita, M.; Cao, X.; Watts, G. F. M.; Rogers, R. A.; Bonifacino,
J. S.; Brenner, M. B.: Failure of trafficking and antigen presentation
by CD1 in AP-3-deficient cells. Immunity 16: 697-706, 2002.

6. Vincent, M. S.; Leslie, D. S.; Gumperz, J. E.; Xiong, X.; Grant,
E. P.; Brenner, M. B.: CD1-dependent dendritic cell instruction. Nature
Immun. 3: 1163-1168, 2002.

7. Winau, F.; Schwierzeck, V.; Hurwitz, R.; Remmel, N.; Sieling, P.
A.; Modlin, R. L.; Porcelli, S. A.; Brinkmann, V.; Sugita, M.; Sandhoff,
K.; Kaufmann, S. H. E.; Schaible, U. E.: Saposin C is required for
lipid presentation by human CD1b. Nature Immun. 5: 169-174, 2004.
Note: Erratum: Nature Immun. 5: 344 only, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/19/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/6/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/5/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/16/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/2/1988

EDITED mgross: 10/04/2013
mgross: 11/18/2004
mgross: 2/19/2004
mgross: 11/10/2003
mgross: 11/7/2003
mgross: 11/6/2003
alopez: 12/3/2002
mgross: 11/5/2002
alopez: 4/3/2002
alopez: 2/13/2002
alopez: 8/17/2000
alopez: 8/16/2000
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 2/6/1989
marie: 3/25/1988
carol: 2/2/1988

