608277	TITLE *608277 CARBOHYDRATE SULFOTRANSFERASE 15; CHST15
;;B-CELL RAG-ASSOCIATED GENE; BRAG;;
N-ACETYLGALACTOSAMINE 4-SULFATE 6-O-SULFOTRANSFERASE;;
GalNAc4S-6ST;;
KIAA0598
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1998) cloned KIAA0598. The 3-prime untranslated
region of the transcript contains an Alu repeat. The deduced 561-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 72 kD. RT-PCR
detected high expression in all tissues examined.

By differential display of genes coexpressed with RAG1 (179615),
followed by screening a pre-B-cell cDNA library, Verkoczy et al. (1998)
cloned BRAG. The deduced protein contains 503 amino acids and has a
calculated molecular mass of 55 kD. In vitro translation resulted in a
doublet that migrated between 69 and 49 kD by SDS-PAGE. BRAG is a type
II transmembrane glycoprotein with an 81-amino acid cytoplasmic N
terminus, followed by a transmembrane domain, and a 405-amino acid
extracellular C terminus. The N terminus contains a putative
palmitoylation site and several phosphorylation sites, and the C
terminus contains 4 putative N-glycosylation sites. Verkoczy et al.
(1998) also identified a putative splice variant that contains an
in-frame 12-bp deletion. Northern blot analysis detected a 5.0-kb BRAG
transcript expressed in all B-cell lines that also expressed RAG1.
Little or no expression was detected in several nonlymphoid cell lines,
and no expression was detected in T-cell lines, irrespective of RAG1
expression. Northern blot analysis of whole tissues detected expression
in bone marrow and tonsil, but not in heart, thymus, or placenta. RNA
dot blot analysis detected high levels in fetal and adult spleen,
peripheral blood leukocytes, and lymph node, moderate levels in heart,
ovary, stomach, and brain putamen, and low levels in bone marrow and
several other tissues. Zoo blot analysis performed under low stringency
conditions indicated that the BRAG gene is conserved across eukaryotes.
High stringency conditions revealed predominant bands only in human and
baboon DNA.

Verkoczy et al. (2000) determined that BRAG is a membrane-integrated
glycoprotein that is expressed as a disulfide-linked dimer in B cells.
They found glycosylated and unglycosylated forms of BRAG, with apparent
molecular masses of about 63 and 52 kD, respectively, in the
intracellular fraction of tonsillar B cells and in transfected
erythroleukemia cells; only the glycosylated product associated with the
cell surface.

Ohtake et al. (2001) determined that the KIAA0589 protein (Nagase et
al., 1998) shares significant similarity with GalNAc4S-6ST purified from
squid cartilage. They also noted that the nucleotide sequence of
KIAA0598 is nearly identical to that of BRAG (Verkoczy et al., 1998),
but the deduced proteins are significantly different. However, the
KIAA0598 and BRAG proteins are both type II transmembrane proteins, and
both contain a 3-prime-phosphoadenosine 5-prime-phosphosulfate
(PAPS)-binding domain characteristic of most sulfotransferases.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yuki et al. (2000) determined that the BRAG gene contains 7 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Verkoczy et al. (1998) showed that BRAG induced RAG1 expression
following transfection into a B-cell line, but not following
transfection into a nonlymphoid cell line.

Verkoczy et al. (2000) found that BRAG associated with phosphorylated
proteins in unstimulated mature B cells, but not in B cells activated
through B-cell receptor cross-linking. They presented evidence that BRAG
functions as a cell surface receptor capable of cell signaling.

Ohtake et al. (2001) characterized the enzymatic activity of KIAA0598,
which they designated GalNAc4S-6ST, following transfection into COS-7
cells and confirmed that it displays sulfotransferase activity. They
found that GalNAc4S-6ST catalyzed the transfer of sulfate from PAPS to
position 6 of the nonreducing terminal and internal N-acetylgalatosamine
4-sulfate residues in chondroitin sulfate A and dermatan sulfate. Only
nonreducing terminal N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulfate residues were
sulfated when a trisaccharide and a pentasaccharide with sulfated groups
at position 4 of N-acetylgalactosamine residues were used as acceptors.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the KIAA0598
gene to chromosome 10.

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, Verkoczy et al. (1998) mapped
the CHST15 gene to chromosome 10q26. Using Southern blot analysis, they
determined that CHST15 is a single-copy gene that is not likely to be a
member of a multigene family.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.;
Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified
human genes. IX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from
brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 31-39,
1998.

2. Ohtake, S.; Ito, Y.; Fukuta, M.; Habuchi, O.: Human N-acetylgalactosamine
4-sulfate 6-O-sulfotransferase cDNA is related to human B cell recombination
activating gene-associated gene. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 43894-43900,
2001.

3. Verkoczy, L. K.; Guinn, B.; Berinstein, N. L.: Characterization
of the human B cell RAG-associated gene, hBRAG, as a B cell receptor
signal-enhancing glycoprotein dimer that associates with phosphorylated
proteins in resting B cells. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 20967-20979, 2000.

4. Verkoczy, L. K.; Marsden, P. A.; Berinstein, N. L.: hBRAG, a novel
B cell lineage cDNA encoding a type II transmembrane glycoprotein
potentially involved in the regulation of recombination activating
gene 1 (RAG1). Europ. J. Immun. 28: 2839-2853, 1998.

5. Yuki, M.; Yoshinaga, K.; Yamakawa, H.; Sakurada, K.; Sato, S.;
Yajima, A.; Horii, A.: Structure, expression and mutational analysis
of the hBRAG gene on 10q in the frequently deleted region in human
endometrial cancer. Oncol. Rep. 7: 1339-1342, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/8/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/21/2003

EDITED alopez: 06/17/2010
mgross: 3/9/2004
terry: 3/8/2004
mgross: 11/21/2003

604436	TITLE *604436 PROLINE SYNTHETASE COTRANSCRIBED, BACTERIA, HOMOLOG OF; PROSC
DESCRIPTION By sequencing a 1.8-Mb segment of human 8p11.2, coupled with
bioinformatics analyses, Ikegawa et al. (1999) identified a novel gene.
Since the P. aeruginosa homolog of this novel gene is located upstream
of and may be cotranscribed with a known proline biosynthetic gene, the
authors called the human gene PROSC, for 'proline synthetase
cotranscribed, bacterial homolog.' The PROSC gene spans 17.2 kb and
contains 8 exons. It is oriented in a 5-prime to 3-prime direction from
telomere to centromere. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.6-kb PROSC
transcript that was expressed in all human adult and fetal tissues
tested. Ikegawa et al. (1999) isolated cDNAs corresponding to the
full-length PROSC transcript. The deduced 275-amino acid PROSC protein
shares 86.5% sequence identity with mouse Prosc and 28% identity with
its P. aeruginosa homolog. PROSC is predicted to be a soluble,
cytoplasmic protein. It contains a putative N-linked glycosylation site
and a putative cAMP- and cGMP-dependent protein kinase phosphorylation
site.

Ikegawa et al. (1999) determined that the PROSC gene is located between
the proximal STS marker NIB1979 and the distal STS marker AFMA295ZD5 on
8p11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Ikegawa, S.; Isomura, M.; Koshizuka, Y.; Nakamura, Y.: Cloning
and characterization of human and mouse PROSC (proline synthetase
co-transcribed) genes. J. Hum. Genet. 44: 337-342, 1999.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 1/18/2000

EDITED mgross: 01/20/2000
psherman: 1/18/2000

604030	TITLE *604030 PROTEASOME SUBUNIT, BETA-TYPE, 7; PSMB7
;;PROTEASOME SUBUNIT Z;;
PROTEASOME SUBUNIT BETA-2
DESCRIPTION The 20S (700-kD) proteasome, which contains multiple peptidase
activities, is one component of the 26S (2000-kD) complex, which
degrades ubiquitinated proteins. The 20S proteasome is composed of alpha
and proteolytic beta subunits. See PSMB2 (602175). One important
function of the proteasome in higher vertebrates is to generate the
peptides presented on MHC-class 1 molecules to circulating lymphocytes.
The cytokine gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570), which stimulates antigen
presentation, alters proteasome subunit composition and functional
activity. Upon IFNG treatment, the beta subunits X (600306) and Y
(600307) are replaced by subunits LMP7 (177046) and LMP2 (177045),
respectively. The changes in peptidase activity are due to the
incorporation of the LMP subunits (Coux et al. (1996)).

Hisamatsu et al. (1996) determined that a third pair of proteasome
subunits, Z and MECL1 (176847), are expressed reciprocally in response
to IFNG treatment. Z is downregulated, while MECL1 is markedly induced,
suggesting that Z can be replaced by MECL1 in the proteasomal complex.
By screening a HepG2 cell line library with a probe based on the partial
amino acid sequence of the Z protein, the authors isolated cDNAs
encoding Z. Sequence analysis revealed that the predicted 277-amino acid
Z protein is a beta subunit. Z shares 58% and 55% protein sequence
identity with MECL1 and PUP1, a S. cerevisiae proteasomal subunit,
respectively. Both Z and MECL1 are proteolytically processed to generate
a mature protein with an N-terminal threonine residue that is required
for activity.

Coux et al. (1996) stated that the IFNG-induced beta subunits MECL1,
LMP7, and LMP2, likely alter peptidase activity because they contain
distinct active sites. Thus the proteasomes from IFNG-treated cells
should generate more peptides with hydrophobic or basic C termini, like
the vast majority of peptides presented on MHC class I molecules.
Hisamatsu et al. (1996) proposed that 20S particles containing MECL1,
LMP7, and LMP2 be designated immunoproteasomes to emphasize their role
in immunologic processing of endogenous antigens.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Hisamatsu et al. (1996) mapped
the Z gene to 9q34.11-q34.12.

REFERENCE 1. Coux, O.; Tanaka, K.; Goldberg, A. L.: Structure and functions
of the 20S and 26S proteasomes. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 65: 801-847,
1996.

2. Hisamatsu, H.; Shimbara, N.; Saito, Y.; Kristensen, P.; Hendil,
K. B.; Fujiwara, T.; Takahashi, E.; Tanahashi, N.; Tamura, T.; Ichihara,
A.; Tanaka, K.: Newly identified pair of proteasomal subunits regulated
reciprocally by interferon gamma. J. Exp. Med. 183: 1807-1816, 1996.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/19/1999

EDITED mgross: 06/25/2007
cwells: 7/25/2002
terry: 7/24/2002
alopez: 7/19/1999

602544	TITLE *602544 PARKIN; PARK2
;;PRKN
FRAGILE SITE FRA6E, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Parkin is a RING domain-containing E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in
proteasome-dependent degradation of proteins. Parkin is also important
for mitochondrial quality control by lysosome-dependent degradation of
damaged mitochondria through autophagy, or mitophagy (summary by Yoshii
et al., 2011).

CLONING

Autosomal recessive juvenile parkinson disease-2 (PARK2; 600116) maps to
chromosome 6q25.2-q27, as indicated by linkage to markers D6S305 and
D6S253. The former was deleted in 1 Japanese patient with PDJ (Matsumine
et al., 1997). By positional cloning within this microdeletion, Kitada
et al. (1998) isolated a cDNA clone of 2,960 bp with a 1,395-bp open
reading frame, encoding a protein of 465 amino acids with moderate
similarity to ubiquitin (191339) at the amino terminus and with a ring
finger motif at the carboxy terminus. A 4.5-kb transcript that is
expressed in many human tissues but is abundant in the brain, including
the substantia nigra, is shorter in brain tissue from 1 of the
exon-4-deleted patients. Mutations in the newly identified gene appeared
to be responsible for the pathogenesis of PDJ and, therefore, the
protein product was designated 'parkin.'

The parkin protein comprises an N-terminal ubiquitin-like (UBL) domain
and 2 C-terminal RING finger domains that are separated by an in-between
ring (IBR) domain. The RING-IBR-RING (RBR) structure is highly conserved
and found only in eukaryotes (Beasley et al., 2007).

Kitada et al. (2000) cloned mouse parkin, which encodes a deduced
464-amino acid protein that shares 83.2% identity with human parkin.
They also identified a splice variant of mouse parkin that encodes a
deduced 261-amino acid protein lacking the RING finger-like domain.
Northern blot analysis detected parkin expression in mouse brain, heart,
liver, skeletal muscle, kidney, and testis. Parkin expression was
evident in 15-day mouse embryos and increased in later stages of
development.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kitada et al. (1998) found that the PARK2 gene spans more than 500 kb
and has 12 exons.

Asakawa et al. (2001) determined that the parkin gene contains 12 exons
and spans 1,380 kb. The longest intron, intron 1, is 284 kb. The 5-prime
flanking region has no apparent TATA or CAAT box elements, but it has
GC- and CpG-rich regions, as do the first exon and first intron. Asakawa
et al. (2001) found that the PACRG gene (608427) lies in a head-to-head
orientation with parkin. The 198-bp interval between them contains
several putative regulatory elements, including SP1 (189906)-binding
sites. Reporter gene assays confirmed that the upstream region contains
positive regulatory elements.

West et al. (2003) reported that the parkin and PACRG genes are linked
in a head-to-head arrangement on opposite DNA strands and share a common
5-prime flanking promoter region. The putative region of bidirectional
transcription activation contains an AP4 (600743)-like site, a GC-rich
region, and a MYC (190080)-like site.

MAPPING

The PARK2 gene maps to 6q25.2-q27, the region to which autosomal
recessive juvenile parkinsonism maps (Kitada et al., 1998). By FISH,
Tomac and Hoffer (2001) mapped the mouse Park2 gene to chromosome 17.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Solution Structure

By NMR spectroscopy, Beasley et al. (2007) determined the 3-dimensional
structure of the isolated IBR domain of parkin and found that the IBR
domain has 2 zinc-binding sites. Zinc binding is required for the
correct folding of the IBR domain, which is necessary for proper protein
interactions and subsequent ubiquitination.

- Protein Structure

Hristova et al. (2009) used limited proteolysis experiments on
bacterially expressed and purified parkin to identify a domain, RING0,
within the unique parkin domain sequence. RING0 comprises 2 distinct,
conserved cysteine-rich clusters between cys150-cys169 and cys196-his215
consisting of CX(2-3)CX(11)CX(2)C and CX(4-6)CX(10-16)CX(2)(H/C) motifs.
The positions of the cysteine/histidine residues in this region bear
similarity to parkin RING1 and RING2 domains, as well as other E3 ligase
RING domains. However, in parkin a 26-residue linker region separates
the motifs, which is not typical of other RING domain structures.
Further, the RING0 domain includes all but 1 of the sites of mutations
resulting in autosomal recessive juvenile Parkinson disease known to
that time between the ubiquitin-like and RBR regions of parkin. Using
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry and inductively coupled
plasma-atomic emission spectrometry analysis, Hristova et al. (2009)
determined that the RING0, RING1, IBR, and RING2 domains each bind 2
Zn(2+) ions, the first observation of an E3 ligase with the ability to
bind 8 metal ions. Removal of the zinc from parkin causes near complete
unfolding of the protein, an observation that rationalizes
cysteine-based mutations found throughout parkin, including RING0 C212Y
(602544.0012), that form cellular inclusions and/or are defective for
ubiquitination likely because of poor zinc binding and misfolding.

- Crystal Structure

Trempe et al. (2013) described the crystal structure of full-length rat
parkin in an autoinhibited state. RING0 occludes the ubiquitin acceptor
site cys431 in RING2, whereas a repressor element of parkin binds RING1
and blocks its E2-binding site. Mutations that disrupted these
inhibitory interactions activated parkin both in vitro and in cells.

GENE FUNCTION

By Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry, Huynh et al. (2000)
showed that parkin is expressed in neuronal processes and cell bodies of
neurons, but not glial cells, in the midbrain, basal ganglia, cerebral
cortex, and cerebellum. Parkin assimilated with actin filaments (see
102560), suggesting that it is a cytoskeletal-associated protein. Parkin
did not localize to the Golgi apparatus or to Lewy bodies in brains of
Parkinson disease patients.

Cookson et al. (2003) found that wildtype parkin was homogeneously
distributed throughout the cytoplasm of transfected human embryonic
kidney cells, with a small amount of protein in the nucleus. Some mutant
isoforms (e.g., A82E; 602544.0011) were also normally distributed.
However, mutant isoforms (e.g., R275W; 602544.0017) within RING finger
domain-1 of the parkin protein (residues 238 to 293) produced an unusual
distribution of parkin, with large cytoplasmic and nuclear inclusions.
The observation was replicated in primary cultured neurons,
demonstrating by the accumulation/colocalization of cytoskeletal
vimentin (VIM; 193060) that the inclusion bodies were aggresomes, a
cellular response to misfolded protein.

By assaying for the activation of a dual-reporter plasmid transfected
into a neuroblastoma cell line, West et al. (2003) identified a 35-bp
site of bidirectional transcription activation within the overlapping
PACRG/parkin promoter region. Using a gel shift assay, they found that a
probe spanning the MYC consensus site within the activation region bound
protein contained in substantia nigra nuclear extracts. Probes spanning
the AP4 and GC-rich regions did not interact with nuclear protein in
this assay.

Rubio de la Torre et al. (2009) reported that compound phosphorylation
of parkin by both casein kinase I (CSNK1A1; 600505) and cyclin-dependent
kinase-5 (CDK5; 123831) decreased parkin solubility, leading to its
aggregation and inactivation. Combined kinase inhibition partially
reversed the aggregative properties of several pathogenic point mutants
in cultured cells. Enhanced parkin phosphorylation was detected in
distinct brain areas of individuals with sporadic PD and correlated with
increases in the levels of p25 (CDK5R1; 603460), the activator of CDK5.

Da Costa et al. (2009) identified parkin as a transcriptional repressor
of p53 (TP53; 191170) independent of its ubiquitin ligase function.
Studies in mouse neurons and fibroblasts showed that overexpression of
wildtype parkin protected cells from a variety of proapoptotic stimuli,
including caspase-3 (CASP3; 600636) activation, in a p53-dependent
manner. Overexpression of wildtype parkin induced marked reductions in
p53 expression, transcriptional activity, promoter transactivation, and
mRNA levels in a concentration-dependent manner. Studies of PD-related
parkin mutations in human neuroblastoma cells showed that neither
ligase-active nor ligase-dead mutants were able to reduce caspase-3
activity or p53 expression. Deletion and chromatin immunoprecipitation
studies revealed that the Ring1 domain of wildtype parkin bound to and
suppressed the p53 promoter. Pathologic studies of 2 PARK2 mutant brain
samples showed increased p53 mRNA levels.

Rothfuss et al. (2009) found that parkin was associated physically with
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) in proliferating as well as in differentiated
SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells. In vivo, the association of parkin with
mtDNA could be confirmed in brain tissue of mouse and human origin.
Replication and transcription of mtDNA were enhanced in SH-SY5Y cells
overexpressing the parkin gene. The ability of parkin to support mtDNA
metabolism was impaired by pathogenic parkin point mutations. Parkin
protected mtDNA from oxidative damage and stimulated mtDNA repair.
Higher susceptibility of mtDNA to reactive oxygen species and reduced
mtDNA repair capacity was observed in parkin-deleted fibroblasts from a
PD patient. Rothfuss et al. (2009) proposed a role for parkin in
directly supporting mitochondrial function and protecting mitochondrial
genomic integrity from oxidative stress.

Berger et al. (2009) isolated mitochondria from cells expressing either
excess levels of human parkin or shRNA directed against endogenous
parkin and then treated with peptides corresponding to the active Bcl2
homology-3 (BH3) domains of proapoptotic proteins. In both rodent and
human neuroblastoma cell lines, expression levels of parkin were
inversely correlated with cytochrome c release. Parkin was found
associated with isolated mitochondria, but its binding per se was not
sufficient to inhibit cytochrome c release. In addition, pathogenic
parkin mutants failed to influence cytochrome c release. PINK1 (608309)
expression had no effect on cytochrome c release, suggesting a divergent
function for this autosomal recessive Parkinson disease-linked gene.
Berger et al. (2009) proposed a specific autonomous effect of parkin on
mitochondrial mechanisms governing cytochrome c release and apoptosis,
which may be relevant to the selective vulnerability of certain neuronal
populations in Parkinson disease.

Using transfected mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Yoshii et al. (2011)
showed that parkin translocated to depolarized mitochondria and induced
mitochondrial perinuclear clustering and proteasome-dependent
degradation of the outer mitochondrial membrane proteins Tom70 (TOMM70A;
606081), Tom40 (TOMM40; 608061), and Omp25 (SYNJ2BP; 609411), resulting
in mitochondrial rupture. Parkin also appeared to induce autophagy of
damaged mitochondria, resulting in the lysosome-dependent degradation of
mitochondrial inner membrane and matrix proteins.

Chen and Dorn (2013) demonstrated that the mitochondrial outer membrane
guanosine triphosphatase mitofusin-2 (MFN2; 608507) mediates parkin
recruitment to damaged mitochondria. Parkin bound to MFN2 in a
PINK1-dependent manner; PINK1 phosphorylated MFN2 and promoted its
parkin-mediated ubiquitination. Ablation of Mfn2 in mouse cardiac
myocytes prevented depolarization-induced translocation of parkin to the
mitochondria and suppressed mitophagy. Accumulation of morphologically
and functionally abnormal mitochondria induced respiratory dysfunction
in Mfn2-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts and cardiomyocytes and in
parkin-deficient Drosophila heart tubes, causing dilated cardiomyopathy.
Thus, Chen and Dorn (2013) concluded that MFN2 functions as a
mitochondrial receptor for parkin and is required for quality control of
cardiac mitochondria.

- Parkin as a Ubiquitin-Protein Ligase

Kitada et al. (1998) suggested that parkin may function similarly to
ubiquitin family members, and its defect in PDJ may interfere with the
ubiquitin-mediated proteolytic pathway leading to the death of nigral
neurons.

Shimura et al. (2000) reported that parkin is involved in protein
degradation as a ubiquitin-protein ligase collaborating with the
ubiquitin-conjugating protein Ubch7 (UBE2L3; 603721), and that mutant
parkin from patients with autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism
shows loss of the ubiquitin-protein ligase activity. The findings
indicated that accumulation of proteins causes a selective neural cell
death without formation of Lewy bodies, which are absent in PDJ.

Zhang et al. (2000) showed that parkin binds to the E2
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme-8 (UBCH8; 603890) through its C-terminal
ring finger. Parkin has ubiquitin-protein ligase activity in the
presence of UBCH8. Parkin also ubiquitinates itself and promotes its own
degradation.

Imai et al. (2001) identified PAELR (GPR37; 602583) as a protein that
interacts with parkin. When overexpressed in cells, PAELR tends to
become unfolded, insoluble, and ubiquitinated in vivo. The insoluble
PAELR leads to unfolded protein-induced cell death. Parkin specifically
ubiquitinates PAELR in the presence of ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes
resident in the endoplasmic reticulum and promotes the degradation of
insoluble PAELR, resulting in suppression of the cell death induced by
PAELR overexpression. Moreover, the authors showed that the insoluble
form of PAELR accumulates in the brains of PDJ patients. They concluded
that unfolded PAELR is a substrate of parkin and that the accumulation
of PAELR may cause selective neuronal death in PDJ.

Accumulation of PAELR in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of dopaminergic
neurons induces ER stress leading to neurodegeneration. Imai et al.
(2002) showed that CHIP (607207), HSP70 (140550), parkin, and PAELR
formed a complex in vitro and in vivo. The amount of CHIP in the complex
increased during ER stress. CHIP promoted the dissociation of HSP70 from
parkin and PAELR, thus facilitating parkin-mediated PAELR
ubiquitination. Moreover, CHIP enhanced parkin-mediated in vitro
ubiquitination of PAELR in the absence of HSP70. CHIP also enhanced the
ability of parkin to inhibit cell death induced by PAELR. The authors
concluded that CHIP is therefore a mammalian E4-like molecule that
positively regulates parkin E3 activity.

Tsai et al. (2003) found that parkin colocalized with polyglutamine
(poly(Q))-expanded huntingtin (613004) in Huntington disease (HD;
143100) brains and in transgenic mouse models of HD. In cultured human
and mouse cells, parkin promoted ubiquitination and degradation of model
poly(Q) proteins, and it formed a complex with the poly(Q) protein,
HSP70, and the proteasome. HSP70 enhanced parkin binding and
ubiquitination of poly(Q) proteins in vitro, suggesting that HSP70 may
recruit misfolded proteins as substrates for parkin E3 ubiquitin ligase
activity. Tsai et al. (2003) hypothesized that parkin functions to
relieve ER stress by preserving proteasome activity in the presence of
misfolded proteins. Thus, loss of parkin function and the resulting
proteasomal impairment may contribute to the accumulation of toxic
aberrant proteins and neurodegeneration in Parkinson disease.

Shimura et al. (2001) hypothesized that alpha-synuclein (SNCA; 163890)
and parkin interact functionally, namely, that parkin ubiquitinates
alpha-synuclein normally and that this process is altered in PDJ.
Shimura et al. (2001) identified a protein complex in normal human brain
that includes parkin as the E3 ubiquitin ligase, UBCH7 as its associated
E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, and a novel 22-kD glycosylated form of
alpha-synuclein (alpha-Sp22) as its substrate. In contrast to normal
parkin, mutant parkin associated with autosomal recessive Parkinson
disease failed to bind alpha-Sp22. In an in vitro ubiquitination assay,
alpha-Sp22 was modified by normal, but not mutant, parkin into
polyubiquitinated, high molecular weight species. Accordingly,
alpha-Sp22 accumulated in a nonubiquitinated form in parkin-deficient
Parkinson disease brains. Shimura et al. (2001) concluded that
alpha-Sp22 is a substrate for parkin's ubiquitin ligase activity in
normal human brain and that loss of parkin function causes pathologic
accumulation of alpha-Sp22. These findings demonstrated a critical
biochemical reaction between the 2 Parkinson disease-linked gene
products and suggested that this reaction underlies the accumulation of
ubiquitinated alpha-synuclein in conventional Parkinson disease (PD;
168600).

Chung et al. (2001) showed that parkin interacts with and ubiquitinates
the alpha-synuclein-interacting protein synphilin-1 (603779).
Coexpression of alpha-synuclein, synphilin-1, and parkin resulted in the
formation of Lewy body-like ubiquitin-positive cytosolic inclusions.
They further showed that familial mutations in parkin disrupt the
ubiquitination of synphilin-1 and the formation of the
ubiquitin-positive inclusions. Chung et al. (2001) concluded that their
results provided a molecular basis for the ubiquitination of Lewy
body-associated proteins and linked parkin and alpha-synuclein in a
common pathogenic mechanism through their interaction with synphilin-1.

Hyun et al. (2002) transfected wildtype and mutant PARK2 into a human
neuroblastoma cell line and a teratocarcinoma cell line with cholinergic
characteristics. Increased expression of wildtype PARK2 in both lines
increased proteasome activity and decreased the level of modified
proteins that are usually degraded within proteasomes, including
carbonylated, nitrated, and ubiquitinated proteins. Overexpression of
PARK2 containing the exon 3-5 deletion, thr240-to-arg (T240R;
602544.0003), or gln311-to-ter (Q311X; 602544.0004) mutations increased
the activity of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (163731) and increased
the level of nitrated proteins and reactive nitrogen species.
Overexpression of the mutations increased oxidative stress as indicated
by decreased levels of reduced glutathione and elevated levels of
oxidative damage to proteins and lipids. However, the mutations did not
effect antioxidant enzyme activities. The degradation of mutant PARK2
proteins was slower than that of the wildtype protein, and both could be
blocked by the proteasome inhibitor lactacystin. Hyun et al. (2002) also
determined that whereas the T240R or Q311X mutations resulted in PARK2
with no ubiquitin-protein ligase activity, PARK2 with the exon 3-5
deletion was fully active. These findings suggested that the pathologic
effects of these mutations are independent of their effects on ligase
activity.

Mengesdorf et al. (2002) showed that, in mice, transient focal cerebral
ischemia of 1-hour duration induced marked depletion of parkin protein
levels after reperfusion, but that ischemia did not cause lower protein
levels of the E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes Ubc6, Ubc7, or Ubc9
(UBE2I; 601661). After 3 hours of reperfusion, when parkin protein
levels were already reduced to less than 40% of control, ATP levels were
almost completely recovered from ischemia and no DNA fragmentation was
observed, suggesting that parkin depletion preceded development of
neuronal cell death. Mengesdorf et al. (2002) interpreted the data as
suggesting that ischemia-induced depletion of parkin protein may
contribute to the pathologic process resulting in cell injury by
increasing the sensitivity of neurons to ER dysfunction and the
aggregation of ubiquitylated proteins during the reperfusion period.

Darios et al. (2003) induced overproduction of parkin in PC12 cells. In
this cell line, neuronally differentiated by nerve growth factor (see
162030), parkin overproduction protected against cell death mediated by
ceramide, but not by a variety of other cell death inducers. Protection
was abrogated by the proteasome inhibitor epoxomicin and disease-causing
variants, indicating that protection was mediated by the E3 ubiquitin
ligase activity of parkin. Parkin appeared to act by delaying
mitochondrial swelling, cytochrome c release, and caspase-3 (CASP3;
600636) activation observed in ceramide-mediated cell death. Subcellular
fractionation demonstrated enrichment of parkin in the mitochondrial
fraction and an association with the outer mitochondrial membrane. The
authors suggested that parkin may promote the degradation of substrates
localized in mitochondria and involved in the late mitochondrial phase
of ceramide-mediated cell death.

Staropoli et al. (2003) demonstrated that parkin associates with the
F-box proteins FBXW7 (606278) and cullin-1 (603134) in a distinct
ubiquitin ligase complex. FBXW7 serves to target the ligase activity to
cyclin E (123837), a protein previously implicated in the regulation of
neuronal apoptosis. In cells transfected with the parkin T240R mutation
(602544.0003), parkin deficiency potentiated the accumulation of cyclin
E in cultured postmitotic neurons exposed to the glutamatergic
excitotoxin kainate and promoted their apoptosis. Furthermore, parkin
overexpression attenuated cyclin E accumulation in toxin-treated neurons
and protected them from apoptosis.

Muqit et al. (2004) showed that endogenous parkin was present in
aggresomes of cultured human neuroblastoma cells stressed by dopamine,
proteasome inhibition, and a proapoptotic stimulus. Vimentin was
invariably collapsed around the aggresome, but detection of ubiquitin
(191339) was variable, depending on the stress. Cells that stably
overexpressed human wildtype parkin formed fewer aggresomes upon stress,
whereas overexpression of PDJ-causing PARK2 mutants had no effect on
stress-induced aggresome formation. Prevention of aggresome formation by
overexpression of wildtype parkin was not always associated with
beneficial effect on neuronal survival. Muqit et al. (2004) suggested
that parkin may be important for aggresome formation in human neuronal
cells.

Chung et al. (2004) demonstrated that parkin is S-nitrosylated in vitro
as well as in vivo in a mouse model of Parkinson disease and in brains
of patients with Parkinson disease and diffuse Lewy body disease.
Moreover, S-nitrosylation inhibits parkin's ubiquitin E3 ligase activity
and its protective function. Chung et al. (2004) concluded that the
inhibition of parkin's ubiquitin E3 ligase activity by S-nitrosylation
could contribute to the degenerative process in these disorders by
impairing the ubiquitination of parkin substrates.

Jiang et al. (2004) showed that overexpression of parkin protected a
human dopaminergic neuroblastoma cell line against apoptosis induced by
dopamine or 6-hydroxydopamine but not by hydrogen peroxide or rotenone.
Parkin significantly attenuated dopamine-induced activation of c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (MAPK8; 601158) and CASP3. It also decreased the level
of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and protein carbonyls in the cell.
Inhibiting dopamine uptake through dopamine transporter (126455) or
treating the cell with antioxidants significantly reduced oxidative
stress and dopamine toxicity. PD-linked mutations of parkin
significantly abrogated the protective effect of wildtype parkin, as
well as its ability to suppress ROS and protein carbonylation. As parkin
mutants used in the study exhibit either no significant E3 ligase
activity towards known substrates, or defective interaction with the 26S
proteasome (see 602706), it appeared to Jiang et al. (2004) that the
protective function of parkin against dopamine toxicity is dependent on
its E3 ligase activity or its interaction with proteasome. Jiang et al.
(2004) suggested that parkin may protect against dopamine toxicity by
decreasing oxidative stress and ensuing activation of apoptotic programs
such as the MAPK8/caspase pathway and that the protective function of
parkin may be important for the survival of dopaminergic neurons, which
are constantly threatened by oxyradicals produced during dopamine
oxidation.

In autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism, mutation in the PARK2 gene
is linked to death of dopaminergic neurons. Yao et al. (2004) showed
both in vitro and in vivo that nitrosative stress leads to
S-nitrosylation of wildtype parkin and, initially, to a dramatic
increase followed by a decrease in the E3 ligase-ubiquitin-proteasome
degradative pathway. The initial increase in the E3 ubiquitin ligase
activity of parkin leads to autoubiquitination of parkin and subsequent
inhibition of its activity, which would impair ubiquitination and
clearance of parkin substrates. Yao et al. (2004) concluded that these
findings may provide a molecular link between the free radical toxicity
and protein accumulation in sporadic Parkinson disease.

Moore et al. (2005) showed that pathogenic mutant forms of DJ1 (602533)
specifically but differentially associate with parkin. Chemical
crosslinking showed that pathogenic DJ1 mutants exhibited impairment in
homodimer formation, suggesting that parkin may bind to monomeric DJ1.
Parkin failed to specifically ubiquitinate and enhance the degradation
of L166P (602533.0002) and M26I (602533.0003) mutant DJ1, but instead
promoted their stability in cultured cells. Oxidative stress also
promoted an interaction between DJ1 and parkin, but this did not result
in the ubiquitination or degradation of DJ1. DJ1 levels were increased
in the insoluble fraction of sporadic PD/DLB brains, but were reduced in
the insoluble fraction of parkin-linked autosomal recessive
juvenile-onset PD brains. The authors proposed that DJ1 and parkin may
be linked in a common molecular pathway at multiple levels.

Lipton et al. (2005) found that S-nitrosylation of parkin was present at
detectable levels in brains of patients with Parkinson disease, but
found that S-nitrosylation increased, rather than decreased, the
ubiquitin E3 ligase activity of parkin. Lipton et al. (2005) suggested
that several technical differences may explain the apparent discrepancy
between their results (Yao et al., 2004) and those of Chung et al.
(2004). Within the first few hours of S-nitrosylation of parkin, Lipton
et al. (2005) observed increased ubiquitin E3 ligase activity for both
parkin itself and other substrates such as synphilin-1 (603779), which
can be a component of Lewy bodies. This increased E3 ligase activity was
followed by a gradual decrease in activity. Lipton et al. (2005)
suggested that their observations of an initial increase in parkin E3
ligase activity could be explained by their looking at earlier time
points after S-nitrosylation than did Chung et al. (2004). Chung et al.
(2005) responded to the comments of Lipton et al. (2005) and confirmed
that parkin S-nitrosylation enhances its E3 ligase activity at earlier
time points but inhibits its E3 ligase activity at later time points,
even when assays are performed at a more physiologic oxygen
concentration of 5%. Thus, Chung et al. (2005) concluded that the
enhancement of parkin's E3 ligase activity by S-nitrosylation appears to
be an important mechanism by which parkin's function is regulated.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid system and coimmunoprecipitation methods, Huynh
et al. (2003) determined that synaptotagmin XI (SYT11; 608741) interacts
with parkin. Parkin binds to the C2A and C2B domains of synaptotagmin
XI, resulting in the polyubiquitination of synaptotagmin XI. Truncated
and missense-mutated parkins reduced parkin-synaptotagmin XI binding
affinity and ubiquitination. Parkin-mediated ubiquitination also
enhanced the turnover of synaptotagmin XI. In sporadic Parkinson disease
brain sections, synaptotagmin XI was found in the core of Lewy bodies.
The interaction of synaptotagmin XI with parkin suggests a role for
parkin in the regulation of the synaptic vesicle pool and in vesicle
release. The authors hypothesized that functional loss of parkin could
affect multiple proteins controlling vesicle pools, docking, and
release, and possibly explain the deficits in dopaminergic function seen
in patients with parkin mutations.

Corti et al. (2003) demonstrated that parkin interacts with,
ubiquitylates, and promotes the degradation of p38 (JTV1; 600859), a key
structural component of the mammalian aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase complex.
Ubiquitylation of p38 was abrogated by truncated variants of parkin
lacking essential functional domains, but not by the pathogenic
lys161-to-asn point mutant (602544.0008). Expression of p38 in COS7
cells resulted in the formation of aggresome-like inclusions in which
parkin was systematically sequestered. In the human dopaminergic
neuroblastoma-derived SH-SY5Y cell line, parkin promoted the formation
of ubiquitylated p38-positive inclusions. Overexpression of p38 in
SH-SY5Y cells caused significant cell death against which parkin
provided protection. Analysis of p38 expression in the human adult
midbrain revealed strong immunoreactivity in normal dopaminergic neurons
and the labeling of Lewy bodies in idiopathic Parkinson disease. The
authors suggested that p38 may play a role in the pathogenesis of
Parkinson disease.

Kalia et al. (2004) demonstrated that rat Bag5 (603885) directly
interacts with Hsp70 and parkin. Bag5 inhibited both Hsp70-mediated
refolding of misfolded proteins and parkin E3 ubiquitin ligase activity,
and enhanced the sequestration of parkin in protein aggregates. In rats,
overexpression of Bag5 resulted in increased death of dopaminergic
neurons compared to controls, whereas overexpression of an inhibitory
mutant Bag5 resulted in increased dopaminergic survival. Kalia et al.
(2004) concluded that Bag5 is a negative regulator of both Hsp70 and
parkin function that sensitizes dopaminergic neurons to injury-induced
death and thus promotes neurodegeneration.

Dopamine is known to be a highly reactive molecule that possesses the
greatest propensity for oxidation among the catecholamines. Dopamine can
readily oxidize to form multiple reactive oxygen species as well as the
protein-modifying dopamine quinone. La Voie et al. (2005) found that
endogenous dopamine covalently modified parkin in rodent and human
dopaminergic cells, resulting in parkin insolubility and inactivation of
its E3 ubiquitin ligase function. Increased parkin aggregates were
identified in the caudate and cerebral cortex of patients with sporadic
Parkinson disease. Catechol-modified parkin was also identified in the
substantia nigra of normal human brains. La Voie et al. (2005) concluded
that parkin is vulnerable to modification by dopamine, and suggested
that dopamine-induced loss of parkin represents a possible mechanism
contributing to the selective degeneration of nigral neurons over time.

Smith et al. (2005) demonstrated that parkin interacts with LRRK2
(609007). LRRK2 interacted preferentially with the C-terminal R2 RING
finger domain of parkin, and parkin interacted with the COR domain of
LRRK2. Coexpression of LRRK2 and parkin increased cytoplasmic protein
aggregates that contained LRRK2 and enhanced the ubiquitination of these
aggregates. Expression of mutant LRRK2 induced apoptotic cell death in
human SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells and in mouse cortical neurons in
vitro.

Dachsel et al. (2005) identified PSMA7 (606607) as an interacting
partner of parkin. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that the
interaction occurred between residues 179 to 248 of PSMA7 and the C
terminus of PARKIN, including the IBR-RING2 motif. Biochemical studies
revealed that PSMA7 was not a substrate for parkin-dependent
ubiquitylation.

Pawlyk et al. (2003) demonstrated that parkin solubility in the human
brain becomes altered with age. Given that many parkin mutations
resulting in familial PD also alter its solubility, Wang et al. (2005)
demonstrated that several PD-linked stressors, including neurotoxins,
paraquat, nitric oxide, dopamine, and iron, induced alterations in
parkin solubility and resulted in its intracellular aggregation.
Furthermore, the depletion of soluble, functional forms of parkin was
associated with reduced proteasomal activities and increased cell death.
Wang et al. (2005) suggested that exogenously introduced stress (as well
as endogenous dopamine) could affect the native structure of parkin,
promote its misfolding, and concomitantly compromise its protective
functions. Wang et al. (2005) considered the preservation of proteasome
activity, dependent on its E3 ligase activity, as a plausible mechanism
for the protective effect of parkin.

Fallon et al. (2006) found that treatment of mammalian cells with human
EGF (131530) stimulated parkin binding to both Eps15 (600051) and Egfr
(131550) and promoted parkin-mediated ubiquitination of Eps15. Binding
of the parkin ubiquitin-like domain to the Eps15 ubiquitin-interacting
motifs (UIMs) was required for parkin-mediated Eps15 ubiquitination.
Egfr endocytosis and degradation were accelerated in parkin-deficient
cells, and Egfr signaling via the PI3K (see 171834)-Akt (164730) pathway
was reduced in parkin-knockout mouse brain. Fallon et al. (2006)
proposed that by ubiquitinating EPS15, parkin interferes with the
ability of the EPS15 UIMs to bind ubiquitinated EGFR, thereby delaying
EGFR internalization and degradation, and promoting PI3K-AKT signaling.

Um et al. (2006) showed that parkin interacted with and ubiquitinated
RANBP2 (601181), a SUMO-related E3 ligase localized in the cytoplasmic
filament of the nuclear pore complex. RANBP2 was degraded through the
proteasomal complex following its ubiquitination by parkin. Parkin also
controlled the intracellular levels of sumoylated HDAC4 (605314) as a
result of the ubiquitination and degradation of RANBP2.

Using a protein pull-down strategy, Trempe et al. (2009) found that the
UBL domain of parkin bound endophilins A1 (SH3GL2; 604465), A2 (SH3GL1;
601768), and A3 (SH3GL3; 603362) in mouse brain lysates. Binding was
mediated by the SH3 domain of endophilin A1 and a highly conserved
C-terminal motif (PxRK) of the parkin UBL domain. The parkin UBL domain
bound the SH3 domains of several other BAR domain-containing proteins
involved in vesicle trafficking, but it did not bind the SH3 domains of
proteins lacking a BAR domain. Biochemical analysis revealed that the
flexible C-terminal tail of the parkin UBL domain became structured upon
binding the SH3 domain of endophilin A1. Phosphorylation promoted the
interaction between endogenous parkin and endophilin A1 in mouse brain
synaptosomes, which in turn led to increased levels of ubiquitinated
synaptic proteins in wildtype mice, but not in parkin-knockout mice.
Trempe et al. (2009) concluded that BAR-SH3 proteins, like the
endophilins, are involved in parkin-mediated synaptic ubiquitination.

Burns et al. (2009) tested whether the ubiquitin ligase activity of
parkin could lead to reduction of the intracellular human A-beta-42
(APP; 104760) fragments that accumulate in Alzheimer disease (AD;
104300). Lentiviral constructs encoding either human parkin or human
A-beta-42 were used to infect human neuroblastoma M17 cells. Parkin
expression resulted in reduction of intracellular human A-beta-42 levels
and protected against its toxicity in M17 cells. Coinjection of
lentiviral constructs into control rat primary motor cortex demonstrated
that parkin coexpression reduced human A-beta-42 levels and
A-beta-42-induced neuronal degeneration in vivo. Parkin increased
proteasomal activity, and proteasomal inhibition blocked the effects of
parkin on reducing A-beta-42 levels. Incubation of A-beta-42 cell
lysates with ubiquitin, in the presence of parkin, demonstrated the
generation of A-beta/ubiquitin complexes. Burns et al. (2009) concluded
that parkin promotes ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of
intracellular A-beta-42 and demonstrated a protective effect in
neurodegenerative diseases with A-beta deposits.

Xiong et al. (2009) demonstrated that parkin, PINK1 (608309), and DJ1
(602533) interact and form an approximately 200-kD functional ubiquitin
E3 ligase complex in human primary neurons. PINK1 was shown to increase
the activity of parkin, which degrades itself via the
ubiquitin-proteasome system. Pathogenic PINK1 (G309D; 608309.0001) did
not promote ubiquitination and degradation of parkin or the parkin
substrate synphilin-1 (603779) in transfected cells. Expression of DJ1
increased PINK1 expression, perhaps acting as a stabilizer.
Overexpression of parkin substrates or heat shock treatment resulted in
parkin accumulation in Pink1- or Dj1-deficient murine cells, and
pathogenic parkin mutations resulted in a reduced ability to promote
degradation of parkin substrates, all suggesting a decrease in E3
ubiquitin activity. Xiong et al. (2009) suggested that this complex
promotes degradation of un- or misfolded proteins, including parkin, and
that disruption of the activity of this complex leads to accumulation of
abnormal proteins and increased susceptibility to oxidative stress,
which is toxic to neurons and may lead to Parkinson disease.

Narendra et al. (2010) found that the expression of PINK1 (608309) in
mitochondria is regulated by voltage-dependent proteolysis to maintain
low levels, and that depolarization results in rapid accumulation of
PINK1 on damaged mitochondria. In HeLa cells and mouse and human
neuronal cells, PINK1 accumulation was both necessary and sufficient to
recruit parkin to the mitochondria, where parkin induced autophagy of
damaged mitochondria. PD-associated mutations in both PARK2 and PINK1
disrupted parkin recruitment and parkin-induced mitophagy at distinct
steps. The findings indicated that PINK1 acts upstream of parkin in a
conserved pathway critical for the maintenance of mitochondrial
integrity and function.

In HeLa cells and human neuroblastoma cells, Geisler et al. (2010) found
that PD-associated parkin mutations disrupted the normal sequential
translocation of parkin to the mitochondria and/or clearing of
sequestered mitochondria in response to chemically-induced dissipation
of the mitochondrial membrane potential. Parkin and PINK1
coimmunoprecipitated in neuroblastoma cells, and functional PINK1 kinase
activity was required for proper translocation of parkin to damaged
mitochondria for mitophagy. Wildtype parkin formed polyubiquitin chains
linked through lys27 and lys63 of ubiquitin as a crucial step in
autophagy of mitochondria. The ubiquitination required the
ubiquitin-binding protein SQSTM1 (601530) and involved ubiquitination of
VDAC1 (604492) on the mitochondrial membrane. Importantly, PD-associated
parkin variants interrupted this mitophagy process at distinct steps.
The findings described a link between mitochondrial damage,
ubiquitination, and selective autophagy of mitochondria. Disruption of
the process by mutations resulted in failure of mitochondrial clearance,
which likely plays a role in the pathogenesis of PD.

Sha et al. (2010) reported that PINK1 regulated the E3 ubiquitin-protein
ligase function of parkin through direct phosphorylation.
Phosphorylation of parkin by PINK1 activated parkin E3 ligase function
for catalyzing K63-linked polyubiquitination and enhanced
parkin-mediated ubiquitin signaling through the I-kappa-B kinase/nuclear
factor kappa-B (NF-kappa-B) pathway. The ability of PINK1 to promote
parkin phosphorylation and activate parkin-mediated ubiquitin signaling
was impaired by PD-linked pathogenic PINK1 mutations. Sha et al. (2010)
proposed a direct link between PINK1-mediated phosphorylation and
parkin-mediated ubiquitin signaling and implicated the deregulation of
the PINK1/parkin/NF-kappa-B neuroprotective signaling pathway in the
pathogenesis of PD.

Choo et al. (2011) found that parkin was increased in the brains of
Pink1-null mice due to a decrease in parkin's E3 ligase activity. Levels
of another parkin substrate, JTV1 (AIMP2; 600859), were also increased
in Pink1-null mice. The findings supported a previous study (Xiong et
al., 2009) which found that the parkin/PINK1/DJ1 complex functions as an
E3 ligase to promote degradation of parkin substrates and that PINK1
plays a crucial role in regulating parkin E3 ligase activity.

Wenzel et al. (2011) showed that, unlike many ubiquitin-conjugating
enzymes (E2s) that transfer ubiquitin with RINGs, UBCH7 (603721) lacks
intrinsic ubiquitin ligase (E3)-independent reactivity with lysine,
explaining its preference for HECTs. Despite lacking lysine reactivity,
UBCH7 exhibits activity with the RING-in-between-RING (RBR) family of
E3s that includes parkin and human homolog of ariadne (HHARI; 605624).
Found in all eukaryotes, RBRs regulate processes such as translation and
immune signaling. RBRs contain a canonical C3HC4-type RING, followed by
2 conserved cys/his-rich zinc-binding domains, in-between-RING (IBR) and
RING2 domains, which together define this E3 family. Wenzel et al.
(2011) showed that RBRs function like RING/HECT hybrids: they bind E2s
via a RING domain, but transfer ubiquitin through an obligate
thioester-linked ubiquitin, requiring a conserved cysteine residue in
RING2. Wenzel et al. (2011) concluded that their results defined the
functional cadre of E3s for UBCH7, an E2 involved in cell proliferation
and immune function, and indicated a novel mechanism for an entire class
of E3s.

Parkin is S-nitrosylated by excessive nitric oxide (NO) in a reaction
that transfers an NO group to critical cysteine thiol(s) to regulate E3
ubiquitin ligase activity. This can trigger aberrant protein
accumulation and contribute to neuronal death in PD. In cellular
studies, Meng et al. (2011) found that oxidation induced by inhibition
of mitochondrial complex I or by H2O2 resulted in increased sulfonation
and aggregation of parkin. Most (73%) of the sulfinated/sulfonated
cysteines in parkin were in the RING and IBR domains, including 6
cysteines found to be mutated in Parkinson disease: cys212, cys253,
cys268, cys289, cys431 (602544.0023), and cys441. Oxidative stress
resulted in a cycle of increased autoubiquitination of parkin followed
by decreased E3 ligase activity and ultimately an increase in insoluble
parkin. Rats exposed to neurotoxins showed an increase in inclusion
body-like parkin immunoreactivity in the striatum compared to controls,
and a similar pattern of parkin immunoreactivity was observed in monkeys
exposed to the neurotoxin MPTP. Human neural stem cells transplanted
into these monkeys appeared to diminish parkin aggregation. Increased
insoluble and sulfonated parkin was also found in postmortem brains from
humans with Parkinson disease. The findings delineated a
posttranslational mechanism in which parkin is modified chemically in
response to exposure to oxidative stress, resulting in the accumulation
of Lewy body-like aggregates.

Sarraf et al. (2013) used quantitative diGly capture proteomics to
elucidate the ubiquitylation site specificity and topology of
PARKIN-dependent target modification in response to mitochondrial
depolarization. Hundreds of dynamically regulated ubiquitylation sites
in dozens of proteins were identified, with strong enrichment for
mitochondrial outer membrane proteins, indicating that PARKIN
dramatically alters the ubiquitylation status of the mitochondrial
proteome. Using complementary interaction proteomics, Sarraf et al.
(2013) found depolarization-dependent PARKIN association with numerous
mitochondrial outer membrane targets, autophagy receptors, and the
proteasome. Mutation of the PARKIN active site residue C431 (C431F;
602544.0023), which has been found in Parkinson disease patients,
largely disrupts these associations. Structural and topologic analysis
revealed extensive conservation of PARKIN-dependent ubiquitylation sites
on cytoplasmic domains in vertebrate and Drosophila mitochondrial outer
membrane proteins.

Manzanillo et al. (2013) noted that genetic polymorphisms in the PARK2
regulatory region are associated with increased susceptibility to
intracellular bacterial pathogens in humans, including Mycobacterium
leprae and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi. Manzanillo et al. (2013)
showed that parkin has a role in ubiquitin-mediated autophagy of M.
tuberculosis. Both parkin-deficient mice and flies are sensitive to
various intracellular bacterial infections, indicating that parkin has a
conserved role in metazoan innate defense. Manzanillo et al. (2013)
concluded that their work revealed an unexpected functional link between
mitophagy and infectious disease.

- Fragile Site FRA6E and Parkin as a Tumor Suppressor Gene

Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis of the long arm of chromosome 6
identified several regions of loss in cancers, including ovarian cancer
(167000) and breast cancer (114480). To identify tumor suppressor
gene(s) associated with the LOH observed on chromosome 6q25-q27, Cesari
et al. (2003) constructed a contig derived from the sequences of BAC/P1
clones defined by the genetic interval D6S1581 to D6S1008. Sequence
analysis of this contig found it to contain 8 known genes, including the
complete genomic structure of PARK2. LOH analysis of 40 malignant breast
and ovarian tumors identified a common minimal region of loss, including
the markers D6S305 (50%) and D6S1599 (32%). Both loci exhibited the
highest frequency of LOH in this study and each was located within the
PARK2 genomic structure. Whereas mutation analysis revealed no missense
substitutions, expression of the PARK2 gene appeared to be downregulated
or absent in the tumor biopsies and tumor cell lines examined. In
addition, the identification of 2 truncating deletions in 3 of 20
ovarian tumor samples, as well as homozygous deletion of exon 2 in 2
lung adenocarcinoma (608935) lines, supported the hypothesis that
hemizygous or homozygous deletions are responsible for the abnormal
expression of PARK2 in these samples. The data suggested that the LOH
observed at 6q25-q26 may contribute to the initiation and/or progression
of cancer by inactivating or reducing the expression of the PARK2 gene.
Because PARK2 maps to FRA6E, one of the most active common fragile sites
in the human genome (Smith et al., 1998), it may represent another
example of a large tumor suppressor gene, like FHIT (601153) and WWOX
(605131), located at a common fragile site.

Denison et al. (2003) pointed to the striking similarities among the
large genes in the common fragile site (CFS) loci: FHIT at 3p14.2, WWOX
at 16q23, and Parkin at 6q26. In a variety of cancer types, the presence
in both FHIT and WWOX of alternative transcripts with whole exon
deletions have been found. Various whole exon duplications and deletions
have been identified in PARK2 in juvenile and early-onset Parkinson
patients. The authors found that 4 (66.7%) ovarian cancer cell lines and
4 (18.2%) primary ovarian tumors were heterozygous for the duplication
or deletion of 1 or more parkin exons. Additionally, 3 of 23 (13%)
nonovarian tumor-derived cell lines were found to have a duplication or
deletion of 1 or more parkin exons. Diminished or absent parkin
expression was observed in most of the ovarian cancer cell lines when
studies with antibodies were performed. Denison et al. (2003) suggested
that parkin, like FHIT and WWOX, may represent a tumor suppressor gene.

Schlehe et al. (2008) found that misfolding of human parkin led to
either formation of detergent-insoluble parkin aggregates or to parkin
destabilization leading to accelerated proteasomal degradation.
Destabilization appeared to be dominant over formation of insoluble
aggregates. The proper folding of parkin was specifically dependent on
phe463 near the C terminus.

In a retrospective study of 431 individuals with early-onset Parkinson
disease, including 30 with homozygous parkin mutations, 114 with
heterozygous parkin mutations, and 287 noncarriers, Alcalay et al.
(2012) found no association between carrying a parkin mutation and
increased risk of cancer, as determined by self-reporting. In a review
of the literature on parkin as a tumor suppressor gene, Alcalay et al.
(2012) noted that the 6q26 region may be prone to instability and
deletion, even among those without cancer; evidence of point mutations
in cancer cell lines may be misleading; and the function of parkin as an
E3 ligase is not sufficient to confer tumor suppressor activity.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Parkinson Disease

In a Japanese patient with autosomal recessive juvenile Parkinson
disease (600116) (Matsumine et al., 1997), Kitada et al. (1998)
identified a deletion of 5 exons (exons 3-7) in the PARK2 gene
(602544.0001). Four other PDJ patients from 3 unrelated families had a
deletion affecting exon 4 alone (602544.0002).

Abbas et al. (1999) analyzed the 12 coding exons of the parkin gene in
35 mostly European families with early-onset autosomal recessive
parkinsonism. In 1 family, a homozygous deletion of exon 4 could be
detected. By direct sequencing of the exons in the index patients of the
remaining 34 families, 8 previously undescribed point mutations
(homozygous or heterozygous) (see, e.g., W453X, 602544.0007 and K161N,
602544.0008) were detected in 8 families that included 20 patients. The
mutations segregated with the disease and were not detected on control
chromosomes. Four mutations (3 frameshifts and 1 nonsense mutation)
caused truncation of the parkin protein; the other 4 were missense
mutations that probably affect amino acids that are important to the
function of the parkin protein, since they result in the same phenotype
as truncating mutations or homozygous exon deletions. Mean age at onset
was 38 +/- 12 years, but onset up to age 58 was observed. In many
patients, the phenotype was indistinguishable from that of idiopathic
Parkinson disease.

Autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism due to deletions and mutations
in the parkin gene is associated with degeneration of pigmented neurons
in the substantia nigra, similar to that seen in Parkinson disease, but
Lewy bodies are not observed. Farrer et al. (2001) reported studies of 2
American families with a novel mutation of the parkin gene and
multigenerational dystonia and parkinsonism. Although no genealogic link
between the 2 families was identified (one was of Irish and the other of
German descent), a common 6q25.2-q27 haplotype was found. A 40-bp
deletion in exon 3 of the parkin gene segregated with the disease on
this haplotype. One individual was a compound heterozygote for this
deletion and a 924C-T transition predicting an R275W amino acid
substitution (602544.0017). This patient, who had onset of symptoms at
age 41 years and died in a traffic accident at age 52, was found to have
Lewy bodies in the brain at autopsy. This led Farrer et al. (2001) to
suggest that parkin mutations may confer increased susceptibility to
typical idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD; 168600).

West et al. (2002) reported that a single-nucleotide polymorphism within
the parkin core promoter, -258T/G, is located in a region of DNA that
binds nuclear protein from human substantia nigra in vitro, and
functionally affects gene transcription. In a population-based series of
296 PD cases and 184 controls, the -258G allele was associated with
idiopathic PD (odds ratio 1.52, p less than 0.05).

In 270 unrelated patients of mixed ethnic background with
dopa-responsive parkinsonism, including 64 cases of early onset (age of
onset less than 50 years) with a family history, 174 cases of early
onset with no family history, and 32 cases of late onset with a family
history, Kock et al. (2002) found parkin mutations in 31 (18%) of 173
screened early-onset patients.

In 2 of 65 unrelated patients with early-onset parkinsonism, Klein et
al. (2005) identified the respective R275W and K211N (602544.0018)
mutations in the parkin gene.

In a case-control study involving 386 Chinese individuals with Parkinson
disease and 367 controls, Tan et al. (2005) found that the parkin
promoter -258G variant was associated with an increased risk of sporadic
PD in individuals over 65 years of age (OR, 1.83; p less than 0.004).
Tan et al. (2005) demonstrated that the transcriptional activity of
-258T was significantly higher than -258G, and the difference was
further increased under conditions of oxidative stress.

Sriram et al. (2005) investigated 12 missense and nonsense point
mutations (see, e.g., T240R, Q311X, W453X, K161N, and R275W) in parkin
for E3 ligase activity, localization, and ability to bind, ubiquitinate,
and affect the degradation of 2 substrates, synphilin-1 and tRNA
synthetase cofactor p38 (JTV1; 600859). Parkin mutants varied by
intracellular localization, binding to substrates and enzymatic
activity, yet they were ultimately deficient in the ability to degrade
substrate. Sriram et al. (2005) suggested that not all parkin mutations
may result in loss of parkin E3 ligase activity, but all mutations
appear to manifest as loss-of-function mutants due to defects in
solubility, aggregation, enzymatic activity, or targeting of proteins to
the proteasome for degradation.

Kay et al. (2007) found that heterozygous parkin mutations were as
common in 301 controls as in 302 PD patients, and they replicated the
finding in an independent set of 1,260 PD patients and 1,657 controls.
Thirty-four variants, including 21 novel variants, were identified. Kay
et al. (2007) concluded that heterozygous mutations in the parkin gene
are not likely to contribute to the development of Parkinson disease.
Quantitative gene dosage was not examined.

Lesage et al. (2008) identified homozygous or compound heterozygous
mutations in the PARK2 gene in 13 of 172 French patients with
early-onset PD. Five additional patients in the cohort had exon
deletions or duplications with unknown parental phase. Thirteen patients
had heterozygous PARK2 mutations, 4 of whom carried the R275W mutation.
Although those with heterozygous mutations had early disease onset at an
average of 38 years, this was still later compared to those with 2
mutations (24.2 years).

Choi et al. (2008) identified mutations in the PARK2 gene in 4 of 72
unrelated Korean patients with onset of PD before age 50. Two patients
had biallelic mutations, and 2 had heterozygous mutations.

Mortiboys et al. (2008) found that fibroblasts derived from PD patients
with biallelic mutations in the PARK2 gene had significantly decreased
mitochondrial complex I activity and ATP production compared to
controls. Patient fibroblasts also showed altered morphology, including
a greater degree of mitochondrial branching, as well as increased
susceptibility to mitochondrial toxins. Complete knockdown of parkin
using siRNA in control fibroblasts confirmed that the effects were due
to parkin deficiency. In contrast, 50% knockdown of parkin, mimicking
haploinsufficiency in humans, did not result in impaired mitochondrial
function or morphology. Treatment with experimental neuroprotective
glutathione replacement compounds resulted in restoration of the
mitochondrial membrane potential.

Using primary dermal fibroblasts originating from PD patients with
various PINK1 (608309) mutations, Rakovic et al. (2010) showed that
PINK1 regulates the stress-induced decrease of endogenous parkin
(PARK2); that mitochondrially localized PINK1 mediates the
stress-induced mitochondrial translocation of parkin; that endogenous
PINK1 is stabilized on depolarized mitochondria; and that mitochondrial
accumulation of full-length PINK1 is sufficient but not necessary for
the stress-induced loss of parkin and its mitochondrial translocation.
Depolarizing or nondepolarizing stressors led to the same effect on
detectable parkin levels and its mitochondrial targeting. Although this
effect on parkin was independent of the mitochondrial membrane
potential, Rakovic et al. (2010) demonstrated a differential effect of
depolarizing versus nondepolarizing stressors on endogenous levels of
PINK1. The study of Rakovic et al. (2010) demonstrated the effect of an
environmental factor, stress, on the interaction of PINK1 and parkin in
mutants versus controls.

- Gene Dosage and Parkinson Disease

Hedrich et al. (2001) found alterations of parkin gene dosage in 7 of 21
patients with Parkinson disease (average age of onset 40 years).
Mutations included heterozygous and compound heterozygous deletions of
exons 2, 3, 5, and 7; homozygous deletion of exon 7; and heterozygous
duplications of exon 4. Two patients carried more than 2 parkin
mutations. The authors suggested that gene dosage studies may afford a
higher yield of mutation detection than conventional mutational
screening. Hedrich et al. (2002) performed mutation analysis and gene
dosage studies of the parkin gene in 50 patients with onset of PD under
the age of 50 years and from various ethnic backgrounds. They identified
17 different parkin mutations, including 8 previously unreported
mutations, and 6 different gene dosage alterations. Among the 50
probands, they found compound heterozygous mutations in 14%,
heterozygous mutations in 12%, and no parkin mutation in 74%.

Oliveri et al. (2001) investigated the role of the parkin gene in 118
patients who had onset of PD after age 45 years: 23 patients with
familial autosomal recessive PD and 95 patients with sporadic PD. No
mutations in the parkin gene were detected in either group of patients
and there were no differences between patients and controls in the
allele and genotype frequencies of 4 exonic parkin polymorphisms.
Oliveri et al. (2001) concluded that the parkin gene is not involved in
the pathogenesis of classic late-onset PD. Kann et al. (2002) noted that
gene dosage alterations play an important role in parkin-related
parkinsonism, and commented that Oliveri et al. (2001) did not perform
quantitative PCR gene dosage experiments in their study of patients with
late-onset PD.

Kann et al. (2002) screened 111 community-based early-onset (age of
onset less than 50 years) parkinsonism patients from Germany for
mutations in the parkin gene. The overall mutation rate was 9.0%,
comprising 3.6% compound heterozygotes (2 or 3 mutations) and 5.4%
heterozygotes (single mutations). Thus, gene dosage alterations
accounted for 67% of all mutations. There was a tendency toward
decreased age at onset, increased prevalence of dystonia, and positive
family history with increased number of parkin mutations.

Wu et al. (2005) identified PARK2 mutations in 4 of 41 Taiwanese
probands with early-onset PD. Three patients had heterozygous mutations.

In both sporadic patients with Parkinson disease and healthy controls,
Tan et al. (2005) identified a variant of parkin with deletion of exon 4
(see 602544.0002), which the authors referred to as a 'splice variant.'
Expression analysis showed that PD patients had significantly increased
expression of the splice variant relative to wildtype parkin compared to
control individuals. In addition, the ratio of the splice variant to
wildtype parkin increased with age in PD patients, but not in controls.
Tan et al. (2005) postulated that increased expression of the PARK2
splice variant lacking exon 4 may predispose to disease development.

- Susceptibility to Leprosy

Using a positional cloning strategy in 197 Vietnamese leprosy simplex
families (i.e., families with 2 unaffected parents and 1 affected
child), Mira et al. (2004) found significant associations between
leprosy (see 607572) and 17 markers in the 5-prime regulatory region
shared by PARK2 and PACRG. Possession of 2 or more of the 17 risk
alleles was highly predictive of leprosy, particularly the SNP markers
denoted PARK2_e01(-2599) and dbSNP rs1040079, with P values calculated
using genomic controls (Devlin and Roeder, 1999). Mira et al. (2004)
confirmed these results in 587 Brazilian leprosy cases and 388
unaffected controls. RT-PCR analysis detected wide expression of both
PARK2 and PACRG in tissues, including immune tissues, and suggested
that, in addition to the common bidirectional promoter, gene-specific
transcriptional activators may be involved in regulating cell- and
tissue-specific gene expression. In addition, PARK2, and to a lesser
extent, PACRG, were found to be expressed in Schwann cells and
macrophages, the primary host cells of Mycobacterium leprae, the
causative agent of leprosy. Mira et al. (2004) noted that both genes are
linked to the ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis system, which heretofore
has received little attention in the study of leprosy pathogenesis and
the control of M. leprae in the human host.

Malhotra et al. (2006) studied an ethnically homogeneous population of
Indian leprosy patients and controls for associations with SNPs in the
common regulatory region of PARK2 and PACRG. After Bonferroni
corrections, they found no significant associations, in contrast with
the findings in Vietnamese and Brazilian populations reported by Mira et
al. (2004). Malhotra et al. (2006) concluded that risks associated with
these SNPs vary in different populations.

Using multivariate analysis, Alter et al. (2013) replicated the findings
of Mira et al. (2004) showing a susceptibility locus in the shared PARK2
and PACRG promoter region in a Vietnamese population. They also found
that 2 of the SNPs, dbSNP rs1333955 and dbSNP rs2023004, were associated
with susceptibility to leprosy in a northern Indian population. The
populations varied in terms of linkage disequilibrium, possibly
explaining differences in univariate analysis between the 2 populations.
There was also a stronger association in younger patients in the 2
populations.

- Susceptibility to Cancer

Cesari et al. (2003) found 2 somatic truncating deletions in the PARK2
gene (see, e.g., 602544.00016) in 3 of 20 ovarian cancers (167000).
Somatic homozygous deletions of exon 2 of the PARK2 gene (602544.0015)
were found in 2 lung adenocarcinoma (see 211980 and 608935) cell lines,
Calu-3 and H-1573. The findings suggested that PARK2 may act as a tumor
suppressor gene.

Veeriah et al. (2010) provided evidence that PARK2 acts as a tumor
suppressor gene in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM; see 137800), colon
cancer (114500), and lung cancer. Microarray analysis detected copy
number loss of PARK2 in 53 (24.5%) of 216 glioblastomas and in 24
(24.4%) of 98 colon cancers. Both homozygous and heterozygous loss was
observed; heterozygous loss was more common. Among 242 human cancers,
different somatic point mutations in the PARK2 gene were found in 7 GBM
specimens, 4 lung cancers, and 2 colon cancer cells lines. These somatic
mutations occurred in the same domains as germline PD mutations,
including the UBL domain, the RING finger domain, and the in-between
RING fingers domain (IBR). In vitro functional studies in tumor cell
lines showed that tumor growth was greater in cells with mutant PARK2,
that wildtype PARK2 decreased tumor growth in vivo, and that mutant
PARK2 caused decreased E3 ligase function and decreased interaction with
and regulation of cyclin E (123837). These changes can promote tumor
cell growth.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Among 73 families with early-onset Parkinson disease (before age 45
years), Lucking et al. (2000) found that 36 (49%) had PARK2 mutations.
Age at onset ranged from 7 to 58 years. Among 100 patients with isolated
early-onset Parkinson disease, mutations were detected in 10 of 13
patients (77%) with an age at onset of 20 years or younger, but in only
2 of 64 patients (3%) with an age at onset of more than 30 years.
Nineteen different exon rearrangements and 16 different point mutations
were identified. The mean age at onset in the patients with PARK2
mutations was younger than in those without mutations (32 +/- 11 vs 42
+/- 11 years; P less than 0.001), and they were more likely to have
symmetric involvement and dystonia at onset, hyperreflexia at onset or
later, a good response to levodopa therapy, and levodopa-induced
dyskinesias during treatment. Lucking et al. (2000) commented that
molecular studies are necessary to make an accurate diagnosis in many of
these cases; the diagnosis cannot be based only on the clinical
manifestations.

Foroud et al. (2003) identified 25 different parkin mutations in 103
affected individuals from 47 families with PD, including 41 individuals
with mutations in both alleles and 62 individuals with a single mutation
in only 1 allele. Individuals with 2 parkin mutations had an earlier age
at disease onset and longer disease duration than those with 1 mutation.
Thirty-five subjects (35%) with a parkin mutation had an age at onset of
60 years or above, with 30 of these 35 having only 1 mutant allele. The
authors concluded that mutations in the parkin gene occur among
individuals with PD with an older age at onset (greater than 60 years)
who have a positive family history of the disease.

In 16 of 307 (5%) families with PD, Oliveira et al. (2003) identified
mutations in the parkin gene, which included 18% of all early-onset and
2% of all late-onset families. Three families were homozygous, 3
families were compound heterozygous, and in 10 families, all the
patients had heterozygous mutations. The results showed that mutations
in exon 7 were observed primarily in heterozygous PD patients with a
later age at onset. Oliveira et al. (2003) concluded that mutations in
the parkin gene contribute to the common form of PD, and that
heterozygous mutations act as susceptibility alleles for the late-onset
form of PD.

Poorkaj et al. (2004) undertook a study to determine whether patients
with early-onset PD should be screened for parkin mutations as part of
their clinical workup. Patients with a diagnosis of PD and onset at or
before 40 years of age were selected for genotyping by sequence and
dosage analysis for all 12 exons. Mutations were found in 7 of 39
patients. Two of these were compound heterozygous; 5 were heterozygous.
Early-onset PD accounted for 10% of PD patients, and 18% of the
early-onset patients had parkin mutations. Assuming a strictly recessive
inheritance, only 5% of early-onset cases had a pathogenic parkin
genotype. The remaining 13% were heterozygous, and whether heterozygous
parkin mutations were the cause of early-onset PD in these patients was
unclear.

Pramstaller et al. (2005) provided detailed clinical and molecular
follow-up of a large kindred from a remote village in the Western Alps
of South Tyrol in northern Italy affected with adult-onset Parkinson
disease inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. The family was
originally reported by Klein et al. (2000). The clinical features were
indistinguishable from idiopathic Parkinson disease, and none of the
patients demonstrated typical features of PARK2. The mean age at onset
was 52.8 years, but ranged from 20 to 76 years. Five of 25 definitely
affected individuals were found to be compound heterozygous for 2
deletions in the PARK2 gene (602544.0010 and 602544.0019); 8 patients
had only 1 of these deletions; the mutational status of 5 deceased
patients was unknown; and 7 patients had no PARK2 mutations. Patients
who were compound heterozygous had earlier onset than those with
heterozygous mutations. Pramstaller et al. (2005) concluded that
heterozygous mutations in the PARK2 gene contribute to idiopathic PD.

Sun et al. (2006) identified PARK2 mutations in 23 (12.6%) of 183
unrelated probands from families with PD. The families were selected for
affected sibs sharing 2 alleles at the PARK2 locus or 1 or more family
members with onset before age 54 years. Sun et al. (2006) identified 18
different mutations in the PARK2 gene, including 4 novel mutations. Ten
(43%) families had compound heterozygous mutations, 3 (13%) had
homozygous mutations, and 10 (43%) had heterozygous mutations. Patients
with heterozygous mutations had disease onset 11.7 years earlier
compared to PD patients with no PARK2 mutations, whereas patients with 2
or more PARK2 mutations had disease onset 13.2 years earlier compared to
patients with 1 mutation. Sun et al. (2006) concluded that heterozygous
PARK2 mutations significantly influence the age at onset of PD.

Clark et al. (2006) identified pathogenic PARK2 mutations in 10 (9.9%)
of 101 patients with early-onset PD. One patient was homozygous, and 9
were heterozygous. Pathogenic heterozygous mutations were not identified
in 105 control individuals. The findings lent further evidence to the
hypothesis that heterozygous PARK2 mutations may increase susceptibility
to early-onset PD.

POPULATION GENETICS

Using 10 microsatellite markers covering a 4.7-cM region known to
contain the parkin gene, Periquet et al. (2001) performed haplotype
analysis in 48 families, mostly from European countries, with
early-onset autosomal recessive parkinsonism. The patients carried 14
distinct mutations, and each mutation was detected in more than 1
family. The results supported the hypothesis that exon rearrangements
occurred independently and recurrently, whereas some point mutations,
found in families from different geographic origins, may have been
transmitted from a common founder.

Lincoln et al. (2003) reported 6 probands with possible or probable
early-onset Parkinson disease (onset before 45 years) with a 40-bp
deletion in exon 3 of the PARK2 gene. Five patients reported a family
history of the disease. Haplotype analysis indicated that the deletion
was likely a founder mutation, most probably of Irish descent. The
authors commented on the phenotypic variability.

Bakija-Konsuo et al. (2011) found that the frequencies of 2 regulatory
polymorphisms in the PARK2 and PACRG promoter region, dbSNP rs1040079
and dbSNP rs9356058, differed in 2 isolated Croatian island populations,
Mljet and Rab. Mljet, near Dubrovnik, was the site of a medieval
leprosarium established under a quarantine policy, whereas Rab, in the
north, has no record of leprosy patients. There was a significantly
higher frequency of allele C of dbSNP rs9356058 and also an increase in
allele A of dbSNP rs1040079 in the Mljet population compared with the
Rab population. Bakija-Konsuo et al. (2011) proposed that the increased
frequency of the protective alleles in the Mljet population may be due
to positive selection as a result of exposure to leprosy.

ANIMAL MODEL

Itier et al. (2003) showed that inactivation of the parkin gene in mice
resulted in motor and cognitive deficits, inhibition of
amphetamine-induced dopamine release, and inhibition of glutamate
neurotransmission. The levels of dopamine were increased in the limbic
brain areas of parkin mutant mice, and there was a shift towards
increased metabolism of dopamine by monoamine oxidase. Although there
was no evidence for a reduction of nigrostriatal dopamine neurons in the
parkin mutant mice, the level of dopamine transporter protein was
reduced in these animals. Glutathione levels were increased in the
striatum and fetal mesencephalic neurons from parkin mutant mice,
suggesting that a compensatory mechanism may protect dopamine neurons
from neuronal death.

Lorenzetti et al. (2004) showed that the mouse mutant 'quaking (viable)'
(qkv) results from deletion of approximately 1 megabase on mouse
chromosome 17. The mouse homologs of the human parkin gene and the human
parkin coregulated gene (PACRG) are contained entirely within the
deletion breakpoints. The deletion results in complete lack of
expression of the parkin gene product. The authors found, however, that
the deletion of parkin in the brains of the mutant mice did not result
in the loss of dopaminergic neurons typical of patients with autosomal
recessive juvenile Parkinson disease. Also, alpha-synuclein (SNCA;
163890), a target of parkin-dependent ubiquitination, did not accumulate
in the mutant brains.

By targeted deletion of exon 7 of the Park2 gene, von Coelln et al.
(2004) generated parkin null mice. These mice showed a loss of
catecholaminergic neurons in the locus ceruleus and an accompanying loss
of norepinephrine in discrete regions of the central nervous system.
Moreover, there was a dramatic reduction of the norepinephrine-dependent
startle response. The nigrostriatal dopaminergic system did not show
impairment.

Springer et al. (2005) identified and characterized the C. elegans
parkin homolog pdr1. Pdr1 protein physically associated and cooperated
with a conserved degradation machinery to mediate ubiquitin conjugation.
In contrast to pdr1 loss-of-function mutants, an in-frame deletion
(lg103) variant with altered solubility and intracellular localization
properties was hypersensitive toward different proteotoxic stress
conditions. Both ER-derived folding stress and cytosolic stress
conferred by expression of mutant human alpha-synuclein resulted in
severe developmental defects and lethality in pdr1 lg103-mutant
background. The corresponding truncated protein aggregated in cell
culture but still interacted with its ubiquitylation coenzymes. In
contrast to other complete gene knockouts or RNAi models of parkin
function, this C. elegans model recapitulated parkin insolubility and
aggregation similar to several autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism
(600116)-linked parkin mutations.

Using 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry, Palacino
et al. (2004) identified 14 proteins that were altered in parkin -/-
mouse brain lysates compared with wildtype mouse brain lysates. Eight of
the 14 proteins were involved in either oxidative phosphorylation or
antioxidant activities. Consistent with this finding, parkin -/- mice
exhibited decreased oxidative phosphorylation, weight gain, and
antioxidant capacity, as well as increased reactive oxygen
species-mediated tissue damage. Palacino et al. (2004) concluded that
parkin has essential roles in regulating normal respiratory function in
mitochondria and in the protection of cells from oxidative stress.

Park et al. (2006) generated and characterized loss of function mutants
of Drosophila Pink1 (608309) and observed that Pink1 mutants share
marked phenotypic similarities with parkin mutants. They showed that
Pink1 mutants exhibit indirect flight muscle and dopaminergic neuronal
degeneration accompanied by locomotive defects. Furthermore,
transmission electron microscopy analysis and a rescue experiment with
Drosophila Bcl2 (151430) demonstrated that mitochondrial dysfunction
accounts for the degenerative changes in all phenotypes of Pink1
mutants. Transgenic expression of parkin markedly ameliorated all Pink1
loss of function phenotypes, but not vice versa, suggesting that parkin
functions downstream of PINK1. Taken together, Park et al. (2006)
concluded that their genetic evidence clearly establishes that parkin
and PINK1 act in a common pathway in maintaining mitochondrial integrity
and function in both muscles and dopaminergic neurons.

Clark et al. (2006) found that loss of Drosophila parkin results in
phenotypes similar to those caused by loss of Pink1 function. Removal of
Drosophila Pink1 function resulted in male sterility, apoptotic muscle
degeneration, defects in mitochondrial morphology, and increased
sensitivity to multiple stresses including oxidative stress. Pink1
localizes to mitochondria, and mitochondrial cristae are fragmented in
Pink1 mutants. Expression of human PINK1 in the Drosophila testes
restored male fertility and normal mitochondrial morphology in a portion
of Pink1 mutants, demonstrating functional conservation between human
and Drosophila Pink1. Overexpression of parkin rescued the male
sterility and mitochondrial morphology defects of Pink1 mutants, whereas
double mutants removing both Pink1 and parkin function showed muscle
phenotypes identical to those observed in either mutant alone. Clark et
al. (2006) concluded that Pink1 and parkin function, at least in part,
in the same pathway, with Pink1 functioning upstream of parkin. The role
of the Pink1-parkin pathway in regulating mitochondrial function
underscores the importance of mitochondrial dysfunction as a central
mechanism of Parkinson disease pathogenesis.

Yang et al. (2006) found that inactivation of Pink1 in Drosophila using
RNAi resulted in abnormal wing posture, energy depletion, selective
muscle degeneration, and shortened life span. The muscle degeneration
was preceded by mitochondrial enlargement and disintegration. In
addition, inactivation of Pink1 resulted in the degeneration of
dopaminergic neurons in the brain. The level of parkin was significantly
reduced in Pink1 RNAi flies compared to controls, and overexpression of
human parkin was able to rescue most of the defects caused by Pink1
inactivation. The findings suggested that parkin and Pink1 interact in a
common pathway that regulates mitochondrial physiology and cell survival
in Drosophila.

In Drosophila, Poole et al. (2008) provided evidence that parkin acts
downstream of Pink1 in a linear pathway. Overexpression of parkin was
able to rescue muscle defects of Pink1 mutants, but not vice versa.
Heterozygous mutations in Drp1 (DNM1L; 603850), a key component of
mitochondrial fission, enhanced Pink1 and parkin mutant phenotypes and
were largely lethal. In contrast, increased Drp1 gene dosage or
mutations affecting the mitochondrial fusion-promoting components Opa1
(605290) and Mfn2 (608507) suppressed the Pink1 and parkin mutant
phenotypes. The findings suggested that the Pink1/parkin pathway
promotes mitochondrial fission and that loss of activity of either gene
results in decreased fission and impaired tissue integrity.

Fujiwara et al. (2008) found that 48-week-old parkin-null mice had
reduced body weight and increased liver weight compared to wildtype, but
no obvious neurologic abnormalities. At 72 and 96 weeks, parkin-null
mouse liver showed enhanced hepatocyte proliferation and macroscopic
hepatic tumors with characteristics of hepatocellular carcinoma,
including expression of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP; 104150). Microarray
analysis of parkin-null mouse liver revealed altered gene expression
profiles, including endogenous follistatin (FST; 136470), which was
commonly upregulated in both nontumorous and tumorous liver tissue.
Parkin deficiency resulted in suppression of caspase activation and
rendered hepatocytes resistant to apoptosis in a follistatin-dependent
manner, suggesting that parkin deficiency results in follistatin
upregulation. The findings were consistent with the hypothesis that
parkin is a tumor suppressor gene.

Kim et al. (2012) found that overexpression of the Gsto1a isoform of
Drosophila Gsto1 (605482) partially reversed the phenotype of parkin
mutant flies. Gsto1a and mitochondrial ATPase synthase levels were
reduced in parkin mutant flies. Overexpression of Gsto1 restored
mitochondrial ATPase synthase assembly and activity via
glutathionylation of the ATPase beta subunit (ATP5B; 102910). Knockdown
of Atp5b in flies via RNA interference induced some of the parkin mutant
phenotype, including muscle degeneration and cellular accumulation of
tubulin (see 602529). Double mutation of parkin and Gsto1a accentuated
the phenotype of parkin mutant flies, with dramatically enhanced
degeneration of indirect flight muscles. Kim et al. (2012) concluded
that Drosophila Gsto1 plays a protective role in parkin mutants by
regulating mitochondrial ATP synthase activity.

Kubli et al. (2013) found that, although parkin -/- mouse hearts had
disorganized mitochondrial networks and significantly smaller
mitochondria, they showed normal cardiac and mitochondrial function.
However, parkin -/- mice were more sensitive to myocardial infarction
than wildtype mice. Parkin -/- mice developed larger infarcts and had
reduced survival, with reduced mitophagy accompanied by accumulation of
swollen, dysfunctional mitochondria after the infarction.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, EX3-7DEL

By positional cloning in a Japanese patient with a microdeletion
involving marker D6S305, which is closely linked to autosomal recessive
juvenile parkinsonism (600116), Kitada et al. (1998) isolated a gene
whose protein product they designated 'parkin.' By PCR amplification,
Kitada et al. (1998) demonstrated that the patient lacked exons 3-7 of
the parkin gene.

.0002
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, EX4DEL

In 4 patients with autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism (600116)
from 3 unrelated families, Kitada et al. (1998) demonstrated a deletion
affecting only exon 4 of the parkin gene.

In affected members of a family with juvenile-onset parkinsonism
originally reported by Ishikawa and Miyatake (1995), Hayashi et al.
(2000) identified a homozygous deletion of exon 4 of the PARK2 gene.
Some of the patients showed dystonia, including torticollis.

Jeon et al. (2001) identified homozygosity for the exon 4 mutation in
the PARK2 gene in a Korean woman with juvenile Parkinson disease. She
had bradykinesia, postural imbalance, and tremor since the age of 12,
striatal dopaminergic dysfunction as shown by PET scan, and favorable
response to L-dopa therapy. The patient's mother and brother were
healthy and did not have the mutation; her father, who had died at age
40 from injuries sustained in an automobile accident, was reportedly
healthy at the time of the accident.

In both sporadic patients with Parkinson disease and healthy controls,
Tan et al. (2005) identified a variant of parkin with deletion of exon
4, which the authors referred to as a 'splice variant.' Expression
analysis showed that PD patients had significantly increased expression
of the splice variant relative to wildtype parkin compared to control
individuals. In addition, the ratio of the splice variant to wildtype
parkin increased with age in PD patients, but not in controls. Tan et
al. (2005) postulated that increased expression of the PARK2 splice
variant lacking exon 4 may predispose to disease development.

.0003
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, THR240ARG

In a Turkish family, Hattori et al. (1998) found a thr240-to-arg (T240R)
mutation in the parkin gene in a 17-year-old girl with PDJ (600116). She
presented with bradykinesia, rigidity, and tremor at rest and in
posture. The age of onset was 13 years. Her parents were first-degree
relatives.

Sriram et al. (2005) showed that the T240R mutation results in complete
loss-of-function with completely abolished binding and ubiquitination
activity of parkin.

.0004
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, GLN311TER

In a 38-year-old Turkish woman with PDJ (600116), who presented with
tremor and bradykinesia on the right side at the age of 35 years,
Hattori et al. (1998) found a gln311-to-ter (Q311X) mutation in the
parkin gene. The patient had no sibs and her parents were first-degree
relatives. Marked sleep benefit (diurnal fluctuation) and hyperreflexia
in the lower limbs was found in this patient as well as in the other
Turkish patient reported by Hattori et al. (1998); see 602544.0003.

Sriram et al. (2005) showed that the Q311X mutation is 'ligase dead'
because of its inability to catalyze ubiquitination of self and
substrates (synphilin-1 and JTV1).

.0005
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, EX3DEL

To determine the frequency of deletions in the PARK2 gene, Lucking et
al. (1998) searched for homozygous deletions in the PARK2 gene in 12
PARK2-linked families with autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism
(600116) and known or suspected consanguinity (a total of 32 patients).
Five of the families originated from Italy, 4 from France, 1 from the
Netherlands, 1 from Portugal, and 1 from Algeria. Six of the families
had previously been reported by Tassin et al. (1998). They found 2 novel
homozygous deletions in 8 patients from 3 families. The Algerian family
carried a deletion of exons 8 and 9. Deletions of exon 3 were found in 1
French and 1 Portuguese family. Deletions in the PARK2 gene accounted,
therefore, for only a quarter of the PARK2-linked families with known or
suspected consanguinity, which suggested that point mutations may be
more prominent. Mean age at onset and clinical severity were similar in
the deleted and nondeleted families. The overall clinical features were
also similar, except that patients with exon 3 deletions had
significantly lower frequencies of tremor than the nondeleted patients,
a significantly later mean age at onset than those with exon 8-9
deletions, and a trend toward greater severity for similar disease
durations. Both deletions were expected to cause frameshifts introducing
a premature stop codon and resulting in truncated proteins with probable
loss of function. The exon 3 deletion might have more harmful effects,
leading to a shorter truncated protein, since these patients were more
severely affected. The exon 8-9 deletion was, however, associated with
earlier age at onset, as if the less truncated protein resulted in an
additional toxic effect.

.0006
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, EX8-9DEL

See 602544.0005 and Lucking et al. (1998).

.0007
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, TRP453TER

Of 8 novel mutations identified in the PARK2 gene in European families
with autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism (600116) by Abbas et al.
(1999), 1 was a nonsense mutation, trp453 to ter (W453X).

Sriram et al. (2005) showed that the W453X mutation retains the ability
to autoubiquitinate but not the ability to ubiquitinate substrate
(synphilin-1 and JTV1) and is largely defective in binding to substrate.

.0008
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, LYS161ASN

Of 8 novel mutations identified in the PARK2 gene in European families
with autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism (600116) by Abbas et al.
(1999), 1 of the 4 missense mutations was lys161 to asn (K161N).

Sriram et al. (2005) showed that the K161N mutation results in complete
loss-of-function with completely abolished binding and ubiquitination
activity of parkin.

.0009
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, 1-BP DEL, 202A

In 4 affected brothers from a sibship of 10 in an Arabic Muslim Israeli
family segregating Parkinson disease (600116), Nisipeanu et al. (2001)
found homozygosity for deletion of 1 adenine at nucleotide 202 in exon 2
of the PARK2 gene. The mutation led to a frameshift and premature
termination 8 amino acid residues downstream. Ages at onset were 35, 33,
37, and 30 years, and the disease duration 27, 22, 9, and 14 years. The
parkinsonian symptomatology was similar in all. Hand tremor was the
first symptom; later, bradykinesia and rigidity were observed. In
addition to the rest tremor, all presented postural hand tremor. None
had orthostatic hypotension, urinary dysfunction, constipation, sleep
benefit, or diurnal variation. Response to levodopa therapy was
excellent and the total daily dose remained low for a long period.

Inzelberg et al. (2003) identified another branch of the family reported
by Nisipeanu et al. (2001) in which 2 first cousins carried the same
homozygous 202delA mutation in the PARK2 gene. Both patients had
early-onset parkinsonism (onset at ages 19 and 23), with the additional
feature of truncal dystonia. One developed camptocormia with severe
trunk flexion (up to 90 degrees), and the other had axial dystonia and
scoliosis. The authors noted the phenotypic heterogeneity of the
mutation.

.0010
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, EX7DEL

In a man with onset of Parkinson disease (600116) at age 38 years,
Hedrich et al. (2001) found homozygosity for 2 mutations: deletion of
exon 7 as well as a C-to-A transversion at nucleotide 346 in exon 3,
resulting in an ala82-to-glu substitution (602544.0011).

In 4 male sibs with Parkinson disease, Klein et al. (2000) and
Pramstaller et al. (2005) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
deletions in the PARK2 gene: a deletion of exon 7 and a 1-bp deletion
(1072delT) in exon 9 (602544.0019). The family was a large 7-generation
kindred that originated from South Tyrol in northern Italy. Among a
total of 25 family members with PD, 4 were heterozygous for the exon 7
deletion, and 4 were heterozygous for 1072delT. Pramstaller et al.
(2005) concluded that heterozygous mutations in the PARK2 gene
contribute to late-onset PD.

.0011
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, ALA82GLU

See 602544.0010 and Hedrich et al. (2001).

.0012
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, CYS212TYR

In affected members of 2 Colombian families with juvenile Parkinson
disease (600116), Pineda-Trujillo et al. (2001) identified a homozygous
736G-A transition in exon 6 of the PARK2 gene, resulting in a
cys212-to-tyr (C212Y) substitution.

Hoenicka et al. (2002) described a Spanish family in which 3 brothers
who were compound heterozygotes for 2 mutations in the PARK2 gene, C212Y
and val56 to glu (V56E; 602544.0013), developed Parkinson disease at
ages 33, 33, and 27 years. The father, who was a heterozygous carrier of
only the C212Y mutation, developed clinical symptoms of Parkinson
disease at age 78 years.

.0013
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, VAL56GLU

See (602544.0012) and Hoenicka et al. (2002).

.0014
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, 1-BP DEL, 255A

In 2 Spanish families, Hoenicka et al. (2002) found deletion of 1
adenine at nucleotide 202 of the PARK2 gene in members with juvenile
Parkinson disease (600116). The mutation was homozygous in 1 family and
compound heterozygous with a deletion of exons 8 and 9 (602544.0006) in
the other. In the first family, there was 1 individual who was a
heterozygous carrier of only the 255delA mutation who developed
transient drug-induced parkinsonism at 45 years of age while being
treated with haloperidol.

The 255delA mutation in PARK2 was originally described by Abbas et al.
(1999).

.0015
ADENOCARCINOMA OF LUNG, SOMATIC
PARK2, EX2DEL

In 2 lung adenocarcinoma (see 211980 and 608935) cell lines, Calu-3 and
H-1573, Cesari et al. (2003) found homozygous deletion of exon 2 of the
PARK2 gene.

.0016
OVARIAN CANCER, SOMATIC
PARK2, DEL

In 3 of 20 ovarian adenocarcinomas (167000), Cesari et al. (2003) found
2 truncating deletions in the PARK2 gene. The findings suggested that
PARK2 may be a tumor suppressor gene.

.0017
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, ARG275TRP

In 2 of 65 unrelated Italian patients with autosomal recessive
early-onset parkinsonism (600116), Klein et al. (2005) identified a
924C-T transition in exon 7 of the PARK2 gene, resulting in an
arg275-to-trp (R275W) substitution. One patient was heterozygous for the
R275W mutation, and the other patient was compound heterozygous for
R275W and a 734A-T transversion in exon 6 of the PARK2 gene, resulting
in a lys211-to-asn (K211N; 602544.0018) substitution.

Cookson et al. (2003) found that R275W parkin was distributed in large
cytoplasmic and nuclear inclusions in transfected human embryonic kidney
cells and in primary cultured neurons. Accumulation/colocalization with
vimentin (VIM; 193060) indicated that the inclusion bodies were
aggresomes, a cellular response to misfolded protein.

Sriram et al. (2005) showed that the R275W mutation results in reduced
binding of substrate JTV1 (600859) but retained ubiquitination activity
for self and substrates. They suggested that the R275W mutation could
impair the ubiquitin-proteasome system through sequestration into
aggresome-like structures in the cell and away from their site of normal
function.

.0018
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, LYS211ASN

See 602544.0017 and Klein et al. (2005).

.0019
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, 1-BP DEL, 1072T

In 4 male sibs with Parkinson disease (600116), Klein et al. (2000) and
Pramstaller et al. (2005) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
deletions in the PARK2 gene: a 1-bp deletion (1072delT) in exon 9 and a
deletion of exon 7 (602544.0010). The family was a large 7-generation
kindred that originated from South Tyrol in northern Italy. The ages at
onset were 31, 48, 49, 55, and 64 years, later than that usually
observed for patients with PARK2 mutations. Among a total of 25 family
members with PD, 4 were heterozygous for the exon 7 deletion, and 4 were
heterozygous for 1072delT. Patients with heterozygous mutations showed
an age at onset and clinical symptoms similar to idiopathic PD.
Pramstaller et al. (2005) concluded that heterozygous mutations in the
PARK2 gene contribute to late-onset PD.

.0020
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, IVS1DS, G-T, +1

In 10 affected members of a consanguineous Brazilian family with PARK2
(600116), Chien et al. (2006) identified a homozygous splice site
mutation in intron 1 of the PARK2 gene. RT-PCR analysis showed absence
of PARK2 mRNA, consistent with a loss-of-function mutation. The family
was from an isolated region in northeastern Brazil, and their ancestors
had originated from Portugal. One individual who was heterozygous for
the splice site mutation developed neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism,
suggesting that haploinsufficiency was a predisposing factor.

.0021
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, THR240MET

In 4 sibs with early-onset Parkinson disease (600116), Deng et al.
(2006) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the PARK2
gene: a C-to-T transition in exon 6, resulting in a thr240-to-met
(T240M) substitution, and a deletion of exons 5 and 6 (602544.0022). The
T240M substitution is predicted to eliminate a phosphorylation site for
casein kinase II and occurs in the same codon as another reported PARK2
mutation T240R (602544.0003), indicating that this is an important
functional residue. Heterozygosity for the T240M and exon 5-6 deletion
was found in 5 and 10 unaffected family members, respectively,
suggesting that heterozygosity for these mutations does not lead to
disease. An unaffected 56-year-old sister of the affected sibs was also
compound heterozygous for both mutations, suggesting incomplete
penetrance.

.0022
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, EX5-6 DEL

See 602544.0021 and Deng et al. (2006).

.0023
PARKINSON DISEASE 2, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE JUVENILE
PARK2, CYS431PHE

In a Japanese patient with early-onset Parkinson disease (600116),
Maruyama et al. (2000) identified a heterozygous 1292G-T transversion in
the PARK2 gene, resulting in a cys431-to-phe (C431F) substitution in an
essential component of the RING finger motif at the C-terminal region.
The patient's other allele carried an exon 4 deletion (602544.0002).
This patient was a member of a large family originally reported by
Ishikawa and Miyatake (1995) as having juvenile dystonia-parkinsonism.
Seven other affected family members were homozygous for the exon 4
deletion. However, haplotype analysis indicated that the exon 4 deletion
occurred on 2 different background alleles. Transmission of the disorder
in this family suggested a pseudodominant pattern of inheritance. Two
sibs from an unrelated consanguineous Japanese family with the disorder
carried the C431F mutation in homozygosity.

REFERENCE 1. Abbas, N.; Lucking, C. B.; Ricard, S.; Durr, A.; Bonifati, V.;
De Michele, G.; Bouley, S.; Vaughan, J. R.; Gasser, T.; Marconi, R.;
Broussolle, E.; Brefel-Courbon, C.; and 13 others: A wide variety
of mutations in the parkin gene are responsible for autosomal recessive
parkinsonism in Europe. Hum. Molec. Genet. 8: 567-574, 1999.

2. Alcalay, R. N.; Clark, L. N.; Marder, K. S.; Bradley, W. E. C.
: Lack of association between cancer history and PARKIN genotype:
a family based study in PARKIN/Parkinson's families. Genes Chromosomes
Cancer 51: 1109-1113, 2012.

3. Alter, A.; Fava, V. M.; Huong, N. T.; Singh, M.; Orlova, M.; Thuc,
N. V.; Katoch, K.; Thai, V. H.; Ba, N. N.; Abel, L.; Mehra, N. Alcais,
A.; Schurr, E.: Linkage disequilibrium pattern and age-at-diagnosis
are critical for replicating genetic associations across ethnic groups
in leprosy. Hum. Genet. 132: 107-116, 2013.

4. Asakawa, S.; Tsunematsu, K.; Takayanagi, A.; Sasaki, T.; Shimizu,
A.; Shintani, A.; Kawasaki, K.; Mungall, A. J.; Beck, S.; Minoshima,
S.; Shimizu, N.: The genomic structure and promoter region of the
human Parkin gene. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 286: 863-868,
2001.

5. Bakija-Konsuo, A.; Mulic, R.; Boraska, V.; Pehlic, M.; Huffman,
J. E.; Hayward, C.; Marlais, M.; Zemunik, T.; Rudan, I.: Leprosy
epidemics during history increased protective allele frequency of
PARK2/PACRG genes in the population of the Mljet Island, Croatia. Europ.
J. Med. Genet. 54: e548-e552, 2011.

6. Beasley, S. A.; Hristova, V. A.; Shaw, G. S.: Structure of the
parkin in-between-ring domain provides insights for E3-ligase dysfunction
in autosomal recessive Parkinson's disease. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104:
3095-3100, 2007.

7. Berger, A. K.; Cortese, G. P.; Amodeo, K. D.; Weihofen, A.; Letai,
A.; LaVoie, M. J.: Parkin selectively alters the intrinsic threshold
for mitochondrial cytochrome c release. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 4317-4328,
2009.

8. Burns, M. P.; Zhang, L.; Rebeck, G. W.; Querfurth, H. W.; Moussa,
C. E.-H.: Parkin promotes intracellular A-beta-1-42 clearance. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 18: 3206-3216, 2009.

9. Cesari, R.; Martin, E. S.; Calin, G. A.; Pentimalli, F.; Bichi,
R.; McAdams, H.; Trapasso, F.; Drusco, A.; Shimizu, M.; Masciullo,
V.; d'Andrilli, G.; Scambia, G.; Picchio, M. C.; Alder, H.; Godwin,
A. K.; Croce, C. M.: Parkin, a gene implicated in autosomal recessive
juvenile parkinsonism, is a candidate tumor suppressor gene on chromosome
6q25-q27. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 5956-5961, 2003.

10. Chen, Y.; Dorn, G. W., II: PINK1-phosphorylated mitofusin 2 is
a parkin receptor for culling damaged mitochondria. Science 340:
471-475, 2013.

11. Chien, H. F.; Rohe, C. F.; Costa, M. D. L.; Breedveld, G. J.;
Oostra, B. A.; Barbosa, E. R.; Bonifati, V.: Early-onset Parkinson's
disease caused by a novel mutation in a genetic isolate from north-eastern
Brazil. Neurogenetics 7: 13-19, 2006.

12. Choi, J. M.; Woo, M. S.; Ma, H.-I.; Kang, S. Y.; Sung, Y.-H.;
Yong, S. W.; Chung, S. J.; Kim, J.-S.; Shin, H.; Lyoo, C. H.; Lee,
P. H.; Baik, J. S.; and 9 others: Analysis of PARK genes in a Korean
cohort of early-onset Parkinson disease. Neurogenetics 9: 263-269,
2008.

13. Choo, Y. S.; Tang, C.; Zhang, Z.: Critical role of PINK1 in regulating
parkin protein levels in vivo. (Letter) Arch. Neurol. 68: 684-685,
2011.

14. Chung, K. K. K.; Dawson, V. L.; Dawson, T. M.: Response to comment
on 'S-nitrosylation of parkin regulates ubiquitination and compromises
parkin's protective function.' Science 308: 1870c, 2005. Note: Electronic
Article.

15. Chung, K. K. K.; Thomas, B.; Li, X.; Pletnikova, O.; Troncoso,
J. C.; Marsh, L.; Dawson, V. L.; Dawson, T. M.: S-nitrosylation of
parkin regulates ubiquitination and compromises parkin's protective
function. Science 304: 1328-1331, 2004.

16. Chung, K. K. K.; Zhang, Y.; Lim, K. L.; Tanaka, Y.; Huang, H.;
Gao, J.; Ross, C. A.; Dawson, V. L.; Dawson, T. M.: Parkin ubiquitinates
the alpha-synuclein-interacting protein, synphilin-1: implications
for Lewy-body formation in Parkinson disease. Nature Med. 7: 1144-1150,
2001.

17. Clark, I. E.; Dodson, M. W.; Jiang, C.; Cao, J. H.; Huh, J. R.;
Seol, J. H.; Yoo, S. J.; Hay, B. A.; Guo, M.: Drosophila pink1 is
required for mitochondrial function and interacts genetically with
parkin. Nature 441: 1162-1166, 2006.

18. Clark, L. N.; Afridi, S.; Karlins, E.; Wang, Y.; Mejia-Santana,
H.; Harris, J.; Louis, E. D.; Cote, L. J.; Andrews, H.; Fahn, S.;
Waters, C.; Ford, B.; Frucht, S.; Ottman, R.; Marder, K.: Case-control
study of the parkin gene in early-onset Parkinson disease. Arch.
Neurol. 63: 548-552, 2006.

19. Cookson, M. R.; Lockhart, P. J.; McLendon, C.; O'Farrell, C.;
Schlossmacher, M.; Farrer, M. J.: RING finger 1 mutations in Parkin
produce altered localization of the protein. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12:
2957-2965, 2003.

20. Corti, O.; Hampe, C.; Koutnikova, H.; Darios, F.; Jacquier, S.;
Prigent, A.; Robinson, J.-C.; Pradier, L.; Ruberg, M.; Mirande, M.;
Hirsch, E.; Rooney, T.; Fournier, A.; Brice, A.: The p38 subunit
of the aminoacyl-tRNA synthetase complex is a Parkin substrate: linking
protein biosynthesis and neurodegeneration. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12:
1427-1437, 2003.

21. Dachsel, J. C.; Lucking, C. B.; Deeg, S.; Schultz, E.; Lalowski,
M.; Casademunt, E.; Corti, O.; Hampe, C.; Patenge, N.; Vaupel, K.;
Yamamoto, A.; Dichgans, M.; Brice, A.; Wanker, E. E.; Kahle, P. J.;
Gasser, T.: Parkin interacts with the proteasome subunit alpha-4. FEBS
Lett. 579: 3913-3919, 2005.

22. da Costa, C. A.; Sunyach, C.; Giaime, E.; West, A.; Corti, O.;
Brice, A.; Safe, S.; Abou-Sleiman, P. M.; Wood, N. W.; Takahashi,
H.; Goldberg, M. S.; Shen, J.; Checler, F.: Transcriptional repression
of p53 by parkin and impairment by mutations associated with autosomal
recessive juvenile Parkinson's disease. Nature Cell Biol. 11: 1370-1375,
2009.

23. Darios, F.; Corti, O.; Lucking, C. B.; Hampe, C.; Muriel, M.-P.;
Abbas, N.; Gu, W.-J.; Hirsch, E. C.; Rooney, T.; Ruberg, M.; Brice,
A.: Parkin prevents mitochondrial swelling and cytochrome c release
in mitochondria-dependent cell death. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 517-526,
2003.

24. Deng, H.; Le, W.-D.; Hunter, C. B.; Ondo, W. G.; Guo, Y.; Xie,
W.-J.; Jankovic, J.: Heterogeneous phenotype in a family with compound
heterozygous parkin gene mutations. Arch. Neurol. 63: 273-277, 2006.

25. Denison, S. R.; Wang, F.; Becker, N. A.; Schule, B.; Kock, N.;
Phillips, L. A.; Klein, C.; Smith, D. I.: Alterations in the common
fragile site gene Parkin in ovarian and other cancers. Oncogene 22:
8370-8378, 2003.

26. Devlin, B.; Roeder, K.: Genomic control for association studies. Biometrics 55:
997-1004, 1999.

27. Fallon, L.; Belanger, C. M. L.; Corera, A. T.; Kontogiannea, M.;
Regan-Klapisz, E.; Moreau, F.; Voortman, J.; Haber, M.; Rouleau, G.;
Thorarinsdottir, T.; Brice, A.; van Bergen en Henegouwen, P. M. P.;
Fon, E. A.: A regulated interaction with the UIM protein Eps15 implicates
parkin in EGF receptor trafficking and PI(3)K-Akt signalling. Nature
Cell Biol. 8: 834-842, 2006.

28. Farrer, M.; Chan, P.; Chen, R.; Tan, L.; Lincoln, S.; Hernandez,
D.; Forno, L.; Gwinn-Hardy, K.; Petrucelli, L.; Hussey, J.; Singleton,
A.; Tanner, C.; Hardy, J.; Langston, J. W.: Lewy bodies and parkinsonism
in families with parkin mutations. Ann. Neurol. 50: 293-300, 2001.

29. Foroud, T.; Uniacke, S. K.; Liu, L.; Pankratz, N.; Rudolph, A.;
Halter, C.; Shults, C.; Marder, K.; Conneally, P. M.; Nichols, W.
C.; Parkinson Study Group: Heterozygosity for a mutation in the
parkin gene leads to later onset Parkinson disease. Neurology 60:
796-801, 2003.

30. Fujiwara, M.; Marusawa, H.; Wang, H.-Q.; Iwai, A.; Ikeuchi, K.;
Imai, Y.; Kataoka, A.; Nukina, N.; Takahashi, R.; Chiba, T.: Parkin
as a tumor suppressor gene for hepatocellular carcinoma. Oncogene 27:
6001-6011, 2008.

31. Geisler, S.; Holmstrom, K. M.; Skujat, D.; Fiesel, F. C.; Rothfuss,
O. C.; Kahle, P. J.; Springer, W.: PINK1/Parkin-mediated mitophagy
is dependent on VDAC1 and p62/SQSTM1. Nature Cell Biol. 12: 119-131,
2010.

32. Hattori, N.; Matsumine, H.; Asakawa, S.; Kitada, T.; Yoshino,
H.; Elibol, B.; Brookes, A. J.; Yamamura, Y.; Kobayashi, T.; Wang,
M.; Yoritaka, A.; Minoshima, S.; Shimizu, N.; Mizuno, Y.: Point mutations
(thr240arg and gln311stop) in the parkin gene. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 249: 754-758, 1998. Note: Erratum: Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 251: 666 only, 1998.

33. Hayashi, S.; Wakabayashi, K.; Ishikawa, A.; Nagai, H.,; Saito,
M.; Maruyama, M.; Takahashi, T.; Ozawa, T.; Tsuji, S.; Takahashi,
H.: An autopsy case of autosomal-recessive juvenile parkinsonism
with a homozygous exon 4 deletion in the parkin gene. Mov. Disord. 15:
884-888, 2000.

34. Hedrich, K.; Kann, M.; Lanthaler, A. J.; Dalski, A.; Eskelson,
C.; Landt, O.; Schwinger, E.; Vieregge, P.; Lang, A. E.; Breakefield,
X. O.; Ozelius, L. J.; Pramstaller, P. P.; Klein, C.: The importance
of gene dosage studies: mutational analysis of the parkin gene in
early-onset parkinsonism. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1649-1656, 2001.

35. Hedrich, K.; Marder, K.; Harris, J.; Kann, M.; Lynch, T.; Meija-Santana,
H.; Pramstaller, P. P.; Schwinger, E.; Bressman, S. B.; Fahn, S.;
Klein, C.: Evaluation of 50 probands with early-onset Parkinson's
disease for parkin mutations. Neurology 58: 1239-1246, 2002.

36. Hoenicka, J.; Vidal, L.; Morales, B.; Ampuero, I.; Jimenez-Jimenez,
F. J.; Berciano, J.; del Ser, T.; Jimenez, A.; Ruiz, P. G.; de Yebenes,
J. G.: Molecular findings in familial Parkinson disease in Spain. Arch.
Neurol. 59: 966-970, 2002.

37. Hristova, V. A.; Beasley, S. A.; Rylett, R. J.; Shaw, G. S.:
Identification of a novel Zn(2+)-binding domain in the autosomal recessive
juvenile parkinson-related E3 ligase parkin. J. Biol. Chem. 284:
14978-14986, 2009.

38. Huynh, D. P.; Scoles, D. R.; Ho, T. H.; Del Bigio, M. R.; Pulst,
S.-M.: Parkin is associated with actin filaments in neuronal and
nonneural cells. Ann. Neurol. 48: 737-744, 2000.

39. Huynh, D. P.; Scoles, D. R.; Nguyen, D.; Pulst, S. M.: The autosomal
recessive juvenile Parkinson disease gene product, parkin, interacts
with and ubiquitinates synaptotagmin XI. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12:
2587-2597, 2003.

40. Hyun, D.-H.; Lee, M.; Hattori, N.; Kubo, S.-I.; Mizuno, Y.; Halliwell,
B.; Jenner, P.: Effect of wild-type or mutant parkin on oxidative
damage, nitric oxide, antioxidant defenses, and the proteasome. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 28572-28577, 2002.

41. Imai, Y.; Soda, M.; Hatakeyama, S.; Akagi, T.; Hashikawa, T.;
Nakayama, K.; Takahashi, R.: CHIP is associated with Parkin, a gene
responsible for familial Parkinson's disease, and enhances its ubiquitin
ligase activity. Molec. Cell 10: 55-67, 2002.

42. Imai, Y.; Soda, M.; Inoue, H.; Hattori, N.; Mizuno, Y.; Takahashi,
R.: An unfolded putative transmembrane polypeptide, which can lead
to endoplasmic reticulum stress, is a substrate of parkin. Cell 105:
891-902, 2001.

43. Inzelberg, R.; Hattori, N.; Nisipeanu, P.; Abo Mouch, S.; Blumen,
S. C.; Carasso, R. L.; Mizuno, Y.: Camptocormia, axial dystonia,
and parkinsonism: phenotypic heterogeneity of a parkin mutation. Neurology 60:
1393-1394, 2003.

44. Ishikawa, A.; Miyatake, T.: A family with hereditary juvenile
dystonia-parkinsonism. Mov. Disord. 10: 482-488, 1995.

45. Itier, J.-M.; Ibanez, P.; Mena, M. A.; Abbas, N.; Cohen-Salmon,
C.; Bohme, G. A.; Laville, M.; Pratt, J.; Corti, O.; Pradier, L.;
Ret, G.; Joubert, C.; and 15 others: Parkin gene inactivation alters
behaviour and dopamine neurotransmission in the mouse. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 12: 2277-2291, 2003.

46. Jeon, B. S.; Kim, J.-M.; Lee, D.-S.; Hattori, N.; Mizuno, Y.:
An apparently sporadic case with parkin gene mutation in a Korean
woman. Arch. Neurol. 58: 988-989, 2001.

47. Jiang, H.; Ren, Y.; Zhao, J.; Feng, J.: Parkin promotes human
dopaminergic neuroblastoma cells against dopamine-induced apoptosis. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 13: 1745-1754, 2004.

48. Kalia, S. K.; Lee, S.; Smith, P. D.; Liu, L.; Crocker, S. J.;
Thorarinsdottir, T. E.; Glover, J. R.; Fon, E. A.; Park, D. S.; Lozano,
A. M.: BAG5 inhibits parkin and enhances dopaminergic neuron degeneration. Neuron 44:
931-945, 2004.

49. Kann, M.; Hedrich, K.; Vieregge, P.; Jacobs, H.; Muller, B.; Kock,
N.; Schwinger, E.; Klein, C.; Marder, K.; Harris, J.; Meija-Santana,
H.; Bressman, S.; Ozelius, L. J.; Lang, A. E.; Pramstaller, P. P.
: The parkin gene is not involved in late-onset Parkinson's disease.
(Letter) Neurology 58: 835 only, 2002.

50. Kann, M.; Jacobs, H.; Mohrmann, K.; Schumacher, K.; Hedrich, K.;
Garrels, J.; Wiegers, K.; Schwinger, E.; Pramstaller, P. P.; Breakefield,
X. O.; Ozelius, L. J.; Vieregge, P.; Klein, C.: Role of parkin mutations
in 111 community-based patients with early-onset parkinsonism. Ann.
Neurol. 51: 621-625, 2002.

51. Kay, D. M.; Moran, D.; Moses, L.; Poorkaj, P.; Zabetian, C. P.;
Nutt, J.; Factor, S. A.; Yu, C.-E.; Montimurro, J. S.; Keefe, R. G.;
Schellenberg, G. D.; Payami, H.: Heterozygous parkin point mutations
are as common in control subjects as in Parkinson's patients. Ann.
Neurol. 61: 47-54, 2007.

52. Kim, K.; Kim, S.-H.; Kim, J.; Kim, H.; Yim, J.: Glutathione S-transferase
omega 1 activity is sufficient to suppress neurodegeneration in a
Drosophila model of Parkinson disease. J. Biol. Chem. 287: 6628-6641,
2012.

53. Kitada, T.; Asakawa, S.; Hattori, N.; Matsumine, H.; Yamamura,
Y.; Minoshima, S.; Yokochi, M.; Mizuno, Y.; Shimizu, N.: Mutations
in the parkin gene cause autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism. Nature 392:
605-608, 1998.

54. Kitada, T.; Asakawa, S.; Minoshima, S.; Mizuno, Y.; Shimizu, N.
: Molecular cloning, gene expression, and identification of a splicing
variant of the mouse parkin gene. Mammalian Genome 11: 417-421,
2000.

55. Klein, C.; Djarmati, A.; Hedrich, K.; Schafer, N.; Scaglione,
C.; Marchese, R.; Kock, N.; Schule, B.; Hiller, A.; Lohnau, T.; Winkler,
S.; Wiegers, K.; Hering, R.; Bauer, P.; Riess, O.; Abbruzzese, G.;
Martinelli, P.; Pramstaller, P. P.: PINK1, parkin, and DJ-1 mutations
in Italian patients with early-onset parkinsonism. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 13: 1086-1093, 2005.

56. Klein, C.; Pramstaller, P. P.; Kis, B.; Page, C. C.; Kann, M.;
Leung, J.; Woodward, H.; Castellan, C. C.; Scherer, M.; Vieregge,
P.; Breakefield, X. O.; Kramer, P. L.; Ozelius, L. J.: Parkin deletions
in a family with adult-onset, tremor-dominant parkinsonism: expanding
the phenotype. Ann. Neurol. 48: 65-71, 2000.

57. Kock, N.; Muller, B.; Vieregge, P.; Pramstaller, P. P.; Marder,
K.; Abbruzzese, G.; Martinelli, P.; Lang, A. E.; Jacobs, H.; Hagenah,
J.; Harris, J.; Meija-Santana, H.; and 9 others: Role of SCA2 mutations
in early- and late-onset dopa-responsive parkinsonism. (Letter) Ann.
Neurol. 52: 257-258, 2002.

58. Kubli, D. A.; Zhang, X.; Lee, Y.; Hanna, R. A.; Quinsay, M. N.;
Nguyen, C. K.; Jimenez, R.; Petrosyan, S.; Murphy, A. N.; Gustafsson,
A. B.: Parkin protein deficiency exacerbates cardiac injury and reduces
survival following myocardial infarction. J. Biol. Chem. 288: 915-926,
2013.

59. La Voie, M. J.; Ostaszewski, B. L.; Weihofen, A.; Schlossmacher,
M. G.; Selkoe, D. J.: Dopamine covalently modifies and functionally
inactivates parkin. Nature Med. 11: 1214-1221, 2005.

60. Lesage, S.; Lohmann, E.; Tison, F.; Durif, F.; Durr, A.; Brice,
A.: Rare heterozygous parkin variants in French early-onset Parkinson
disease patients and controls. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 45: 43-46,
2008.

61. Lincoln, S.; Wiley, J.; Lynch, T.; Langston, J. W.; Chen, R.;
Lang, A.; Rogaeva, E.; Sa, D. S.; Munhoz, R. P.; Harris, J.; Marder,
K.; Klein, C.; Bisceglio, G.; Hussey, J.; West, A.; Hulihan, M.; Hardy,
J.; Farrer, M.: Parkin-proven disease: common founders but divergent
phenotypes. Neurology 60: 1605-1610, 2003.

62. Lipton, S. A.; Nakamura, T.; Yao, D.; Shi, Z.-Q.; Uehara, T.;
Gu, Z.: Comment on 'S-nitrosylation of parkin regulates ubiquitination
and compromises parkin's protective function.' Science 308: 1870b,
2005. Note: Electronic Article.

63. Lorenzetti, D.; Antalffy, B.; Vogel, H.; Noveroske, J.; Armstrong,
D.; Justice, M.: The neurological mutant quaking(viable) is Parkin
deficient. Mammalian Genome 15: 210-217, 2004.

64. Lucking, C. B.; Abbas, N.; Durr, A.; Bonifati, V.; Bonnet, A.-M.;
de Broucker, T.; De Michele, G.; Wood, N. W.; Agid, Y.; Brice, A.
: Homozygous deletions in parkin gene in European and North African
families with autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism. Lancet 352:
1355-1356, 1998.

65. Lucking, C. B.; Durr, A.; Bonifati, V.; Vaughan, J.; De Michele,
G.; Gasser, T.; Harhangi, B. S.; Meco, G.; Denefle, P.; Wood, N. W.;
Agid, Y.; Brice, A.: Association between early-onset Parkinson's
disease and mutations in the parkin gene. New Eng. J. Med. 342:
1560-1567, 2000.

66. Malhotra, D.; Darvishi, K.; Lohra, M.; Kumar, H.; Grover, C.;
Sood, S.; Reddy, B. S. N.; Bamezai, R. N. K.: Association study of
major risk single nucleotide polymorphisms in the common regulatory
region of PARK2 and PACRG genes with leprosy in an Indian population. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 14: 438-442, 2006.

67. Manzanillo, P. S.; Ayres, J. S.; Watson, R. O.; Collins, A. C.;
Souza, G.; Rae, C. S.; Schneider, D. S.; Nakamura, K.; Shiloh, M.
U.; Cox, J. S.: The ubiquitin ligase parkin mediates resistance to
intracellular pathogens. Nature 501: 512-516, 2013.

68. Maruyama, M.; Ikeuchi, T.; Saito, M.; Ishikawa, A.; Yuasa, T.;
Tanaka, H.; Hayashi, S.; Wakabayashi, K.; Takahashi, H.; Tsuji, S.
: Novel mutations, pseudo-dominant inheritance, and possible familial
affects [sic] in patients with autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism. Ann.
Neurol. 48: 245-250, 2000.

69. Matsumine, H.; Saito, M.; Shimoda-Matsubayashi, S.; Tanaka, H.;
Ishikawa, A.; Nakagawa-Hattori, Y.; Yokochi, M.; Kobayashi, T.; Igarashi,
S.; Takano, H.; Sanpei, K.; Koike, R.; Mori, H.; Kondo, T.; Mizutani,
Y.; Schaffer, A. A.; Yamamura, Y.; Nakamura, S.; Kuzuhura, S.; Tsuji,
S.; Mizuno, Y.: Localization of a gene for an autosomal recessive
form of juvenile Parkinsonism to chromosome 6q25.2-27. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 60: 588-596, 1997.

70. Meng, F.; Yao, D.; Shi, Y.; Kabakoff, J.; Wu, W.; Reicher, J.;
Ma, Y.; Moosmann, B.; Masliah, E.; Lipton, S. A.; Gu, Z.: Oxidation
of the cysteine-rich regions of parkin perturbs its E3 ligase activity
and contributes to protein aggregation. Molec. Neurodegener. 6:
34, 2011. Note: Electronic Article.

71. Mengesdorf, T.; Jensen, P. H.; Mies, G.; Aufenberg, C.; Paschen,
W.: Down-regulation of parkin protein in transient focal cerebral
ischemia: a link between stroke and degenerative disease? Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 99: 15042-15047, 2002.

72. Mira, M. T.; Alcais, A.; Thuc, N. V.; Moraes, M. O.; Di Flumeri,
C.; Thai, V. H.; Phuong, M. C.; Huong, N. T.; Ba, N. N.; Khoa, P.
X.; Sarno, E. N.; Alter, A.; and 11 others: Susceptibility to leprosy
is associated with PARK2 and PACRG. Nature 427: 636-640, 2004.

73. Moore, D. J.; Zhang, L.; Troncoso, J.; Lee, M. K.; Hattori, N.;
Mizuno, Y.; Dawson, T. M.; Dawson, V. L.: Association of DJ-1 and
parkin mediated by pathogenic DJ-1 mutations and oxidative stress. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 71-84, 2005.

74. Mortiboys, H.; Thomas, K. J.; Koopman, W. J. H.; Klaffke, S.;
Abou-Sleiman, P.; Olpin, S.; Wood, N. W.; Willems, P. H. G. M.; Smeitink,
J. A. M.; Cookson, M. R.; Bandmann, O.: Mitochondrial function and
morphology are impaired in parkin-mutant fibroblasts. Ann. Neurol. 64:
555-565, 2008.

75. Muqit, M. M. K.; Davidson, S. M.; Smith, M. D. P.; MacCormac,
L. P.; Kahns, S.; Jensen, P. H.; Wood, N. W.; Latchman, D. S.: Parkin
is recruited into aggresomes in a stress-specific manner: over-expression
of parkin reduces aggresome formation but can be dissociated from
parkin's effect on neuronal survival. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 117-135,
2004.

76. Narendra, D. P.; Jin, S. M.; Tanaka, A.; Suen, D.-F.; Gautier,
C. A.; Shen, J.; Cookson, M. R.; Youle, R. J.: PINK1 is selectively
stabilized on impaired mitochondria to activate Parkin. PLoS Biol. 8:
e1000298, 2010. Note: Electronic Article.

77. Nisipeanu, P.; Inzelberg, R.; Mouch, S. A.; Carasso, R. L.; Blumen,
S. C.; Zhang, J.; Matsumine, H.; Hattori, N.; Mizuno, Y.: Parkin
gene causing benign autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism. Neurology 56:
1573-1575, 2001.

78. Oliveira, S. A.; Scott, W. K.; Martin, E. R.; Nance, M. A.; Watts,
R. L.; Hubble, J. P.; Koller, W. C.; Pahwa, R.; Stern, M. B.; Hiner,
B. C.; Ondo, W. G.; Allen, F. H., Jr.; and 12 others: Parkin mutations
and susceptibility alleles in late-onset Parkinson's disease. Ann.
Neurol. 53: 624-629, 2003.

79. Oliveri, R. L.; Zappia, M.; Annesi, G.; Bosco, D.; Annesi, F.;
Spadafora, P.; Pasqua, A. A.; Tomaino, C.; Nicoletti, G.; Pirritano,
D.; Labate, A.; Gambardella, A.; Logroscino, G.; Manobianca, G.; Epifanio,
A.; Morgante, L.; Savettieri, G.; Quattrone, A.: The parkin gene
is not involved in late-onset Parkinson's disease. Neurology 57:
359-362, 2001.

80. Palacino, J. J.; Sagi, D.; Goldberg, M. S.; Krauss, S.; Motz,
C.; Wacker, M.; Klose, J.; Shen, J.: Mitochondrial dysfunction and
oxidative damage in parkin-deficient mice. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 18614-18622,
2004.

81. Park, J.; Lee, S. B.; Lee, S.; Kim, Y.; Song, S.; Kim, S.; Bae,
E.; Kim, J.; Shong, M.; Kim, J.-M.; Chung, J.: Mitochondrial dysfunction
in Drosophila PINK1 mutants is complemented by parkin. Nature 441:
1157-1161, 2006.

82. Pawlyk, A. C.; Giasson, B. I.; Sampathu, D. M.; Perez, F. A.;
Lim, K. L.; Dawson, V. L.; Dawson, T. M.; Palmiter, R. D.; Trojanowski,
J. Q.; Lee, V. M.-Y.: Novel monoclonal antibodies demonstrate biochemical
variation of brain parkin with age. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 48120-48128,
2003.

83. Periquet, M.; Lucking, C. B.; Vaughan, J. R.; Bonifati, V.; Durr,
A.; De Michele, G.; Horstink, M. W.; Farrer, M.; Illarioshkin, S.
N.; Pollak, P.; Borg, M.; Brefel-Courbon, C.; Denefle, P.; Meco, G.;
Gasser, T.; Breteler, M. M. B.; Wood, N. W.; Agid, Y.; Brice, A.;
French Parkinson's Disease Genetics Study Group; European Consortium
on Genetic Susceptibility in Parkinson's Diseases: Origin of mutations
in the parkin gene in Europe: exon rearrangements are independent
recurrent events, whereas point mutations may result from founder
effects. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68: 617-626, 2001.

84. Pineda-Trujillo, N.; Carvajal-Carmona, L. G.; Buritica, O.; Moreno,
S.; Uribe, C.; Pineda, D.; Toro, M.; Garcia, F.; Arias, W.; Bedoya,
G.; Lopera, F.; Ruiz-Linares, A.: A novel cys212-to-tyr founder mutation
in parkin and allelic heterogeneity of juvenile parkinsonism in a
population from North West Colombia. Neurosci. Lett. 298: 87-90,
2001.

85. Poole, A. C.; Thomas, R. E.; Andrews, L. A.; McBride, H. M.; Whitworth,
A. J.; Pallanck, L. J.: The PINK1/Parkin pathway regulates mitochondrial
morphology. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 1638-1643, 2008.

86. Poorkaj, P.; Nutt, J. G.; James, D.; Gancher, S.; Bird, T. D.;
Steinbart, E.; Schellenberg, G. D.; Payami, H.: Parkin mutation analysis
in clinic patients with early-onset Parkinson disease. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 129A: 44-50, 2004. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Med. Genet. 139A:
56 only, 2005.

87. Pramstaller, P. P.; Schlossmacher, M. G.; Jacques, T. S.; Scaravilli,
F.; Eskelson, C.; Pepivani, I.; Hedrich, K.; Adel, S.; Gonzales-McNeal,
M.; Hilker, R.; Kramer, P. L.; Klein, C.: Lewy body Parkinson's disease
in a large pedigree with 77 parkin mutation carriers. Ann. Neurol. 58:
411-422, 2005.

88. Rakovic, A.; Grunewald, A.; Seibler, P.; Ramirez, A.; Kock, N.;
Orolicki, S.; Lohmann, K.; Klein, C.: Effect of endogenous mutant
and wild-type PINK1 on Parkin in fibroblasts from Parkinson disease
patients. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 3124-3137, 2010.

89. Rothfuss, O.; Fischer, H.; Hasegawa, T.; Maisel, M.; Leitner,
P.; Miesel, F.; Sharma, M.; Bornemann, A.; Berg, D.; Gasser, T.; Patenge,
N.: Parkin promotes mitochondrial genome integrity and supports mitochondrial
DNA repair. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 3832-3850, 2009.

90. Rubio de la Torre, E.; Luzon-Toro, B.; Forte-Lago, I.; Minguez-Castellanos,
A.; Ferrer, I.; Hilfiker, S.: Combined kinase inhibition modulates
parkin inactivation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 809-823, 2009.

91. Sarraf, S. A.; Raman, M.; Guarani-Pereira, V.; Sowa, M. E.; Huttlin,
E. L.; Gygi, S. P.; Harper, J. W.: Landscape of the PARKIN-dependent
ubiquitylome in response to mitochondrial depolarization. Nature 496:
372-376, 2013.

92. Schlehe, J. S.; Lutz, A. K.; Pilsl, A.; Lammermann, K.; Grgur,
K.; Henn, I. H.; Tatzelt, J.; Winklhofer, K. F.: Aberrant folding
of pathogenic Parkin mutants: aggregation versus degradation. J.
Biol. Chem. 283: 13771-13779, 2008.

93. Sha, D.; Chin, L.-S.; Li, L.: Phosphorylation of parkin by Parkinson
disease-linked kinase PINK1 activates parkin E3 ligase function and
NF-kappa-B signaling. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 352-363, 2010.

94. Shimura, H.; Hattori, N.; Kubo, S.; Mizuno, Y.; Asakawa, S.; Minoshima,
S.; Shimizu, N.; Iwai, K.; Chiba, T.; Tanaka, K.; Suzuki, T.: Familial
Parkinson disease gene product, parkin, is a ubiquitin-protein ligase. Nature
Genet. 25: 302-305, 2000.

95. Shimura, H.; Schlossmacher, M. G.; Hattori, N.; Frosch, M. P.;
Trockenbacher, A.; Schneider, R.; Mizuno, Y.; Kosik, K. S.; Selkoe,
D. J.: Ubiquitination of a new form of alpha-synuclein by parkin
from human brain: implications for Parkinson's disease. Science 293:
263-269, 2001.

96. Smith, D. I.; Huang, H.; Wang, L.: Common fragile sites and cancer
(review). Int. J. Oncol. 12: 187-196, 1998.

97. Smith, W. W.; Pei, Z.; Jiang, H.; Moore, D. J.; Liang, Y.; West,
A. B.; Dawson, V. L.; Dawson, T. M.; Ross, C. A.: Leucine-rich repeat
kinase 2 (LRRK2) interacts with parkin and mutant LRRK2 induces neuronal
degeneration. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 18676-18681, 2005.

98. Springer, W.; Hoppe, T.; Schmidt, E.; Baumeister, R.: A Caenorhabditis
elegans parkin mutant with altered solubility couples alpha-synuclein
aggregation to proteotoxic stress. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 3407-3423,
2005.

99. Sriram, S. R.; Li, X.; Ko, H. S.; Chung, K. K. K.; Wong, E.; Lim,
K. L.; Dawson, V. L.; Dawson, T. M.: Familial-associated mutations
differentially disrupt the solubility, localization, binding and ubiquitination
properties of parkin. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 2571-2586, 2005.

100. Staropoli, J. F.; McDermott, C.; Martinat, C.; Schulman, B.;
Demireva, E.; Abeliovich, A.: Parkin is a component of an SCF-like
ubiquitin ligase complex and protects postmitotic neurons from kainate
excitotoxicity. Neuron 37: 735-749, 2003.

101. Sun, M.; Latourelle, J. C.; Wooten, G. F.; Lew, M. F.; Klein,
C.; Shill, H. A.; Golbe, L. I.; Mark, M. H.; Racette, B. A.; Perlmutter,
J. S.; Parsian, A.; Guttman, M.; and 25 others: Influence of heterozygosity
for parkin mutation on onset age in familial Parkinson disease: the
GenePD study. Arch. Neurol. 63: 826-832, 2006.

102. Tan, E. K.; Puong, K. Y.; Chan, D. K. Y.; Yew, K.; Fook-Chong,
S.; Shen, H.; Ng, P. W.; Woo, J.; Yuen, Y.; Pavanni, R.; Wong, M.
C.; Puvan, K.; Zhao, Y.: Impaired transcriptional upregulation of
Parkin promoter variant under oxidative stress and proteasomal inhibition:
clinical association. Hum. Genet. 118: 484-488, 2005.

103. Tan, E. K.; Shen, H.; Tan, J. M. M.; Lim, K. L.; Fook-Chong,
S.; Hu, W. P.; Paterson, M. C.; Chandran, V. R.; Yew, K.; Tan, C.;
Yuen, Y.; Pavanni, R.; Wong, M. C.; Puvan, K.; Zhao, Y.: Differential
expression of splice variant and wild-type parkin in sporadic Parkinson's
disease. Neurogenetics 6: 179-184, 2005.

104. Tassin, J.; Durr, A.; de Broucker, T.; Abbas, N.; Bonifati, V.;
De Michele, G.; Bonnet, A.-M.; Broussolle, E.; Pollak, P.; Vidailhet,
M.; De Mari, M.; Marconi, R.; Medjbeur, S.; Filla, A.; Meco, G.; Agid,
Y.; Brice, A.; French Parkinson's Disease Genetics Study Group;
European Consortium on Genetic Susceptibility in Parkinson's Disease
: Chromosome 6-linked autosomal recessive early-onset parkinsonism:
linkage in European and Algerian families, extension of the clinical
spectrum, and evidence of a small homozygous deletion in one family. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 63: 88-94, 1998.

105. Tomac, A. C; Hoffer, B. J.: Assignment of the mouse Park2 (PARKIN),
the homologue to a new human Parkinson candidate gene, to the telomeric
region of mouse 17A3.2-3.3, by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 95: 120-121, 2001.

106. Trempe, J.-F.; Chen, C. X.-Q.; Grenier, K.; Camacho, E. M.; Kozlov,
G.; McPherson, P. S.; Gehring, K.; Fon, E. A.: SH3 domains from a
subset of BAR proteins define a Ubl-binding domain and implicate parkin
in synaptic ubiquitination. Molec. Cell 36: 1034-1047, 2009.

107. Trempe, J.-F.; Sauve, V.; Grenier, K.; Seirafi, M.; Tang, M.
Y.; Menade, M.; Al-Abdul-Wahid, S.; Krett, J.; Wong, K.; Kozlov, G.;
Nagar, B.; Fon, E. A.; Gehring, K.: Structure of parkin reveals mechanisms
for ubiquitin ligase activation. Science 340: 1451-1455, 2013.

108. Tsai, Y. C.; Fishman, P. S.; Thakor, N. V.; Oyler, G. A.: Parkin
facilitates the elimination of expanded polyglutamine proteins and
leads to preservation of proteasome function. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
22044-22055, 2003.

109. Um, J. W.; Min, D. S.; Rhim, H.; Kim, J.; Paik, S. R.; Chung,
K. C.: Parkin ubiquitinates and promotes the degradation of RanBP2. J.
Biol. Chem. 281: 3595-3603, 2006.

110. Veeriah, S.; Taylor, B. S.; Meng, S.; Fang, F.; Yilmaz, E.; Vivanco,
I.; Janakiraman, M.; Schultz, N.; Hanrahan, A. J.; Pao. W.; Ladanyi,
M.; Sander, C.; Heguy, A.; Holland, E. C.; Paty, P. B.; Mischel, P.
S.; Liau, L.; Cloughesy, T. F.; Mellinghoff, I. K.; Solit, D. B.;
Chan, T. A.: Somatic mutations of the Parkinson's disease-associated
gene PARK2 in glioblastoma and other human malignancies. Nat. Genet. 42:
77-82, 2010.

111. von Coelln, R.; Thomas, B.; Savitt, J. M.; Lim, K. L.; Sasaki,
M.; Hess, E. J.; Dawson, V. L.; Dawson, T. M.: Loss of locus coeruleus
neurons and reduced startle in parkin null mice. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 101: 10744-10749, 2004.

112. Wang, C.; Ko, H. S.; Thomas, B.; Tsang, F.; Chew, K. C. M.; Tay,
S.-P.; Ho, M. W. L.; Lim, T.-M.; Soong, T.-W.; Pletnikova, O.; Troncoso,
J.; Dawson, V. L.; Dawson, T. M.; Lim, K.-L.: Stress-induced alterations
in parkin solubility promote parkin aggregation and compromise parkin's
protective function. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 3885-3897, 2005.

113. Wenzel, D. M.; Lissounov, A.; Brzovic, P. S.; Klevit, R. E.:
UBCH7 reactivity profile reveals parkin and HHARI to be RING/HECT
hybrids. Nature 474: 105-108, 2011.

114. West, A. B.; Lockhart, P. J.; O'Farell, C.; Farrer, M. J.: Identification
of a novel gene linked to parkin via a bi-directional promoter. J.
Molec. Biol. 326: 11-19, 2003.

115. West, A. B.; Maraganore, D.; Crook, J.; Lesnick, T.; Lockhart,
P. J.; Wilkes, K. M.; Kapatos, G.; Hardy, J. A.; Farrer, M. J.: Functional
association of the parkin gene promoter with idiopathic Parkinson's
disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2787-2792, 2002.

116. Wu, R.-M.; Bounds, R.; Lincoln, S.; Hulihan, M.; Lin, C.-H.;
Hwu, W.-L.; Chen, J.; Gwinn-Hardy, K.; Farrer, M.: Parkin mutations
and early-onset parkinsonism in a Taiwanese cohort. Arch. Neurol. 62:
82-87, 2005.

117. Xiong, H.; Wang, D.; Chen, L.; Choo, Y. S.; Ma, H.; Tang, C.;
Xia, K.; Jiang, W.; Ronai, Z.; Zhuang, X.; Zhang, Z.: Parkin, PINK1,
and DJ-1 form a ubiquitin E3 ligase complex promoting unfolded protein
degradation. J. Clin. Invest. 119: 650-660, 2009.

118. Yang, Y.; Gehrke, S.; Imai, Y.; Huang, Z.; Ouyang, Y.; Wang,
J.-W.; Yang, L.; Beal, M. F.; Vogel, H.; Lu, B.: Mitochondrial pathology
and muscle and dopaminergic neuron degeneration caused by inactivation
of Drosophila Pink1 is rescued by parkin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
10793-10798, 2006.

119. Yao, D.; Gu, Z.; Nakamura, T.; Shi, Z.-Q.; Ma, Y.; Gaston, B.;
Palmer, L. A.; Rockenstein, E. M.; Zhang, Z.; Masliah, E.; Uehara,
T.; Lipton, S. A.: Nitrosative stress linked to sporadic Parkinson's
disease: S-nitrosylation of parkin regulates its E3 ubiquitin ligase
activity. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 10810-10814, 2004. Note: Erratum:
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 13969 only, 2004.

120. Yoshii, S. R.; Kishi, C.; Ishihara, N.; Mizushima, N.: Parkin
mediates proteasome-dependent protein degradation and rupture of the
outer mitochondrial membrane. J. Biol. Chem. 286: 19630-19640, 2011.

121. Zhang, Y.; Gao, J.; Chung, K. K. K.; Huang, H.; Dawson, V. L.;
Dawson, T. M.: Parkin functions as an E2-dependent ubiquitin-protein
ligase and promotes the degradation of the synaptic vesicle-associated
protein, CDCrel-1. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 13354-13359, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/1/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/29/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/28/2013
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/4/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/21/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/14/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/29/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/15/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/6/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/28/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/19/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/21/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/22/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/29/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/4/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/6/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/3/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/7/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/5/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/4/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/15/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/14/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/3/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/12/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/6/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/23/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/18/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/23/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/28/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/3/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/19/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/20/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/31/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/27/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/15/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/19/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/16/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/16/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/23/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/19/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/10/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/2/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/17/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/21/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/13/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/2/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/15/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/1/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/4/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/11/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/4/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/12/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/9/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/27/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/5/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/5/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/21/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/11/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/5/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/21/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/21/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/17/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/8/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/8/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/2/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/16/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/28/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/28/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/5/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/15/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 9/11/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/5/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/13/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/8/2002
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/14/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/17/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/11/2002
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/6/2002
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/15/2002
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/8/2002
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 6/10/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/21/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/7/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/2/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/13/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/3/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/3/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/19/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/3/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/21/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/23/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/7/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/6/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/20/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/5/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/22/1998

EDITED mgross: 11/05/2013
mcolton: 11/1/2013
alopez: 10/29/2013
alopez: 10/28/2013
tpirozzi: 9/4/2013
tpirozzi: 9/3/2013
carol: 8/28/2013
mgross: 8/21/2013
mgross: 8/14/2013
mgross: 8/7/2013
carol: 8/7/2013
alopez: 5/29/2013
carol: 5/20/2013
ckniffin: 5/15/2013
alopez: 5/14/2013
ckniffin: 5/6/2013
alopez: 5/1/2013
alopez: 2/5/2013
ckniffin: 1/28/2013
carol: 12/10/2012
mgross: 11/9/2012
terry: 10/19/2012
carol: 6/5/2012
mgross: 11/10/2011
terry: 10/21/2011
alopez: 6/23/2011
terry: 6/22/2011
wwang: 1/12/2011
terry: 12/29/2010
wwang: 10/22/2010
terry: 10/4/2010
wwang: 8/10/2010
terry: 8/6/2010
wwang: 8/4/2010
ckniffin: 8/3/2010
wwang: 7/19/2010
terry: 7/7/2010
wwang: 4/12/2010
ckniffin: 4/5/2010
mgross: 2/4/2010
alopez: 2/1/2010
ckniffin: 1/15/2010
wwang: 11/13/2009
ckniffin: 10/14/2009
wwang: 9/17/2009
wwang: 9/15/2009
terry: 9/3/2009
wwang: 8/24/2009
terry: 8/12/2009
alopez: 7/8/2009
terry: 7/6/2009
wwang: 2/27/2009
ckniffin: 2/23/2009
mgross: 2/18/2009
carol: 2/11/2009
ckniffin: 1/30/2009
wwang: 1/23/2009
wwang: 11/7/2008
ckniffin: 10/28/2008
mgross: 10/28/2008
mgross: 10/7/2008
terry: 10/3/2008
wwang: 3/31/2008
ckniffin: 3/19/2008
wwang: 3/6/2008
ckniffin: 2/20/2008
carol: 12/26/2007
alopez: 11/5/2007
terry: 10/31/2007
mgross: 7/27/2007
wwang: 6/6/2007
wwang: 3/30/2007
ckniffin: 3/15/2007
wwang: 2/22/2007
ckniffin: 2/19/2007
wwang: 1/23/2007
terry: 1/16/2007
wwang: 11/16/2006
wwang: 8/29/2006
ckniffin: 8/23/2006
wwang: 8/2/2006
ckniffin: 7/19/2006
alopez: 7/18/2006
terry: 7/10/2006
mgross: 6/2/2006
wwang: 5/24/2006
ckniffin: 5/17/2006
wwang: 4/26/2006
ckniffin: 4/21/2006
wwang: 3/13/2006
ckniffin: 3/13/2006
ckniffin: 3/2/2006
wwang: 2/23/2006
terry: 2/15/2006
wwang: 2/1/2006
ckniffin: 1/4/2006
joanna: 12/2/2005
ckniffin: 11/11/2005
wwang: 10/4/2005
alopez: 10/3/2005
terry: 9/12/2005
terry: 9/9/2005
alopez: 7/27/2005
terry: 7/27/2005
ckniffin: 7/5/2005
carol: 4/20/2005
wwang: 4/18/2005
ckniffin: 4/5/2005
alopez: 3/21/2005
wwang: 3/11/2005
alopez: 1/19/2005
wwang: 1/18/2005
wwang: 1/14/2005
wwang: 1/12/2005
terry: 1/11/2005
wwang: 1/5/2005
terry: 11/2/2004
tkritzer: 9/22/2004
terry: 9/21/2004
alopez: 6/25/2004
alopez: 6/21/2004
alopez: 6/17/2004
terry: 6/8/2004
carol: 6/8/2004
ckniffin: 6/8/2004
tkritzer: 6/8/2004
terry: 6/2/2004
carol: 5/12/2004
alopez: 2/18/2004
cwells: 2/16/2004
alopez: 1/29/2004
mgross: 1/28/2004
cwells: 1/22/2004
tkritzer: 1/22/2004
ckniffin: 1/5/2004
cwells: 11/7/2003
tkritzer: 11/4/2003
carol: 9/18/2003
ckniffin: 9/15/2003
carol: 9/11/2003
ckniffin: 9/5/2003
carol: 7/14/2003
ckniffin: 7/11/2003
alopez: 6/25/2003
terry: 6/19/2003
carol: 6/16/2003
ckniffin: 6/13/2003
carol: 12/10/2002
tkritzer: 12/9/2002
terry: 12/4/2002
tkritzer: 11/14/2002
carol: 11/13/2002
ckniffin: 11/8/2002
ckniffin: 10/24/2002
ckniffin: 10/14/2002
carol: 9/23/2002
tkritzer: 9/17/2002
mgross: 9/11/2002
carol: 9/10/2002
ckniffin: 9/6/2002
carol: 8/22/2002
ckniffin: 8/15/2002
tkritzer: 8/9/2002
ckniffin: 7/8/2002
alopez: 6/11/2002
joanna: 6/10/2002
cwells: 1/11/2002
cwells: 12/21/2001
carol: 11/28/2001
mcapotos: 11/19/2001
terry: 11/7/2001
carol: 11/7/2001
mcapotos: 11/2/2001
alopez: 9/28/2001
carol: 8/23/2001
alopez: 8/13/2001
terry: 8/13/2001
cwells: 8/13/2001
cwells: 8/8/2001
terry: 8/3/2001
mgross: 7/3/2001
cwells: 3/29/2001
terry: 3/19/2001
mcapotos: 1/10/2001
terry: 1/3/2001
carol: 9/1/2000
terry: 8/21/2000
alopez: 6/26/2000
carol: 6/23/2000
mcapotos: 6/22/2000
terry: 6/7/2000
carol: 7/13/1999
terry: 6/18/1999
carol: 5/6/1999
carol: 4/6/1999
carol: 1/29/1999
terry: 1/20/1999
carol: 1/6/1999
terry: 1/5/1999
alopez: 5/9/1998
alopez: 4/22/1998

606064	TITLE *606064 CD248 ANTIGEN; CD248
;;TUMOR ENDOTHELIAL MARKER 1; TEM1;;
ENDOSIALIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE), St Croix et al. (2000)
identified transcripts of pan endothelial markers (PEMs) and tumor
endothelial markers (TEMs), including TEM1. RT-PCR and in situ
hybridization analyses demonstrated that TEM1 expression was restricted
to neoplastic endothelial tissue and to metastatic lesions. The authors
identified TEM1 in other angiogenic tissues, namely corpus luteum and
the granulation tissue of healing wounds, supporting the concept that in
many cases tumors represent unhealed wounds.

Endosialin, an antigen recognized by monoclonal antibody FB5, is
expressed as a 165-kD cell surface glycoprotein on tumor blood vessel
endothelium in several cancers, but is not detectable in normal tissue.
By immunoaffinity and biochemical purification of endosialin from a
neuroblastoma cell line, followed by microsequence analysis and EST
database searching, Christian et al. (2001) isolated a full-length cDNA
encoding endosialin, which is identical to TEM1. Sequence analysis
predicted that the 757-amino acid type I membrane protein contains a
signal peptide; 5 globular extracellular domains, including a C-type
lectin (see 605306) domain, a Sushi/SCR/CCP (see 300187) domain, and 3
EGF (131530) repeats; a mucin (see 158340)-like region; a transmembrane
segment; and a short cytoplasmic tail. Carbohydrate analysis indicated
that the endosialin protein carries abundantly sialylated, O-linked
oligosaccharides and is reduced to 120 kD by sialidase treatment or to
95 kD with additional O-glycanase treatment. The N-terminal 360 residues
of endosialin are homologous to thrombomodulin (THBD; 188040) and
complement component 1q receptor (120577). Northern blot analysis
revealed expression of a single 2.6-kb transcript in
endosialin-expressing cell lines. Christian et al. (2001) noted that
mice and rats have close homologs of the TEM1 gene. Carson-Walter et al.
(2001) determined that TEM1 shares 77% amino acid identity with the
mouse protein.

Using in situ hybridization analysis of human colorectal cancer,
Carson-Walter et al. (2001) demonstrated that TEM1 was expressed clearly
in the endothelial cells of the tumor stroma but not in the endothelial
cells of normal colonic tissue. Mouse Tem1 was abundantly expressed in
vessels infiltrating both mouse melanoma and human colon carcinoma cells
implanted into mice. Using in situ hybridization to assay expression in
various normal adult mouse tissues, Carson-Walter et al. (2001) detected
only weak staining of endothelial cells in adrenal gland, brain, heart,
intestine, lung, skeletal muscle, and pancreas. In embryos, they
detected Tem1 in the vasculature of developing embryonic liver and
brain.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid and genomic sequence analyses, Christian et al.
(2001) mapped the CD248 gene to 11q13.

ANIMAL MODEL

Nanda et al. (2006) found that Tem1-null mice were healthy and fertile,
with no tissue abnormalities and normal wound healing. There were no
differences in the growth rates of the Lewis lung carcinoma tumor cell
line and a sarcoma cell line after subcutaneous injection into Tem1-null
or wildtype nude mice. However, when tumor fragments from a colorectal
carcinoma were implanted on the serosal surface of the large intestine,
tumor volume and the degree of metastases were reduced in the absence of
Tem1. Abdominal tumors in Tem1-null mice also showed a higher number of
smaller vessels and a decreased number of larger vessels compared with
those in wildtype mice.

REFERENCE 1. Carson-Walter, E. B.; Watkins, D. N.; Nanda, A.; Vogelstein, B.;
Kinzler, K. W.; St. Croix, B.: Cell surface tumor endothelial markers
are conserved in mice and humans. Cancer Res. 61: 6649-6655, 2001.

2. Christian, S.; Ahorn, H.; Koehler, A.; Eisenhaber, F.; Rodi, H.-P.;
Garin-Chesa, P.; Park, J. E.; Rettig, W. J.; Lenter, M. C.: Molecular
cloning and characterization of endosialin, a C-type lectin-like cell
surface receptor of tumor endothelium. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 7408-7414,
2001.

3. Nanda, A.; Karim, B.; Peng, Z.; Liu, G.; Qiu, W.; Gan, C.; Vogelstein,
B.; St. Croix, B.; Kinzler, K. W.; Huso, D. L.: Tumor endothelial
marker 1 (Tem1) functions in the growth and progression of abdominal
tumors. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 3351-3356, 2006.

4. St. Croix, B.; Rago, C.; Velculescu, V.; Traverso, G.; Romans,
K. E.; Montgomery, E.; Lal, A.; Riggins, G. J.; Lengauer, C.; Vogelstein,
B.; Kinzler, K. W.: Genes expressed in human tumor endothelium. Science 289:
1197-1202, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/23/2006
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 4/4/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/25/2001

EDITED alopez: 10/31/2007
mgross: 3/29/2006
terry: 3/23/2006
mgross: 4/4/2002
mgross: 6/25/2001

612056	TITLE *612056 GOLGI TO ER TRAFFIC PROTEIN 4, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; GET4
;;CHROMOSOME 7 OPEN READING FRAME 20; C7ORF20;;
CONSERVED EDGE-EXPRESSED PROTEIN; CEE;;
TRANSMEMBRANE DOMAIN RECOGNITION COMPLEX, 35-KD;;
TRC35
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases for homologs of pufferfish Cee, Fernandes et al.
(2008) identified human C7ORF20, which they called CEE. The deduced
protein is rich in leucine and serine. CEE is specific to eukaryotes and
is highly conserved, particularly among vertebrates. In Atlantic salmon,
Cee was expressed in the superficial layers of developing organs and
tissues.

GENE STRUCTURE

Fernandes et al. (2008) determined that the C7ORF20 gene contains 9
exons and spans 19.9 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Mariappan et al. (2010) identified a conserved 3-protein complex
composed of BAT3 (142590), TRC35, and UBL4A (312070) that facilitates
tail-anchored protein capture by TRC40 (601913). This BAT3 complex is
recruited to ribosomes synthesizing membrane proteins, interacts with
the transmembrane domains of newly released tail-anchored proteins, and
transfers them to TRC40 for targeting. Depletion of the BAT3 complex
allows non-TRC40 factors to compete for tail-anchored proteins,
explaining their mislocalization in the analogous yeast deletion
strains. Thus, the BAT3 complex acts as a transmembrane domain-selective
chaperone that effectively channels tail-anchored proteins to the TRC40
insertion pathway.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Fernandes et al. (2008) mapped the GET4
gene to chromosome 7p22.3.

REFERENCE 1. Fernandes, J. M. O.; Macqueen, D. J.; Lee, H.-T.; Johnston, I.
A.: Genomic, evolutionary, and expression analyses of cee, an ancient
gene involved in normal growth and development. Genomics 91: 315-325,
2008.

2. Mariappan, M.; Li, X.; Stefanovic, S.; Sharma, A.; Mateja, A.;
Keenan, R. J.; Hegde, R. S.: A ribosome-associating factor chaperones
tail-anchored membrane proteins. Nature 466: 1120-1124, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/14/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/15/2008

EDITED alopez: 09/15/2010
terry: 9/14/2010
carol: 9/8/2010
mgross: 5/15/2008

611833	TITLE *611833 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L20; MRPL20
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPL20 is 1 of more
than 70 protein components of mitochondrial ribosomes that are encoded
by the nuclear genome (Kenmochi et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching databases using bovine Mrpl20 as query, followed by PCR of
human genomic DNA, Kenmochi et al. (2001) cloned MRPL20.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis and analysis of an integrated BAC-STS map,
Kenmochi et al. (2001) mapped the MRPL20 gene to chromosome
1p36.3-p35.2.

REFERENCE 1. Kenmochi, N.; Suzuki, T.; Uechi, T.; Magoori, M.; Kuniba, M.; Higa,
S.; Watanabe, K.; Tanaka, T.: The human mitochondrial ribosomal protein
genes: mapping of 54 genes to the chromosomes and implications for
human disorders. Genomics 77: 65-70, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/26/2008

EDITED alopez: 02/20/2009
terry: 2/18/2009
mgross: 2/27/2008

133170	TITLE *133170 ERYTHROPOIETIN; EPO
;;EP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Human erythropoietin is an acidic glycoprotein hormone with a molecular
mass of 34 kD. As the prime regulator of red cell production, its major
functions are to promote erythroid differentiation and to initiate
hemoglobin synthesis.

CLONING

Lee-Huang (1984) cloned human erythropoietin cDNA in E. coli. McDonald
et al. (1986) and Shoemaker and Mitsock (1986) cloned the mouse gene and
the latter workers showed that coding DNA and amino acid sequence are
about 80% conserved between man and mouse. This is a much higher order
of conservation than for various interferons, interleukin-2, and GM-CSF.
Sherwood and Shouval (1986) described a human renal carcinoma cell line
that continuously produces erythropoietin.

Romanowski and Sytkowski (1994) reviewed the molecular structure of
human erythropoietin in historical perspective. The EPO gene encodes a
deduced 193-amino acid propolypeptide. A 27-amino acid leader sequence
is cleaved off the amino terminus of the propeptide, yielding the
functional 166-amino acid protein. However, recombinant human EPO
(rhEPO) expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells contains only 165 amino
acids, having lost arg166. The mechanism for this was undefined, and
whether EPO circulating in the plasma also lacked arg166 was not known.
Both the nucleotide and amino acid sequences of EPO are highly conserved
among mammals.

GENE STRUCTURE

Romanowski and Sytkowski (1994) stated that the EPO gene has 5 exons.

MAPPING

Law et al. (1986) assigned EPO to chromosome 7 by Southern blot analysis
of DNA from human/Chinese hamster cell hybrids with a cDNA clone for the
entire coding region of the gene. Further localization to 7q11-q22 was
achieved by in situ hybridization. They found a RFLP with a frequency of
about 20% in a Chinese population. By hybridization analysis (dot-blot)
of DNA from human chromosomes isolated by high resolution dual laser
sorting, Powell et al. (1986) also located EPO on chromosome 7. By
somatic cell hybrid analysis, Watkins et al. (1986) placed EPO on the
proximal half of 7q, closely linked to COL1A2 (120160) and to DNA
markers linked to CF (219700). Because of the close linkage of EPO to
COL1A2 and markers linked to CF, it is probably justified to narrow the
assignment of EPO to 7q21-q22.

By in situ hybridization and by genetic analysis using RFLPs in
interspecific mouse backcross DNAs, Lacombe et al. (1988) demonstrated
that EPO is located on chromosome 5 in the mouse.

GENE FUNCTION

Eschbach et al. (1987) demonstrated the effectiveness of recombinant
human erythropoietin in treating the anemia of end-stage renal disease.

In the central nervous system, neurons express EPO receptor (EPOR;
133171) and astrocytes produce EPO. EPO has been shown to protect
primary cultured neurons from NMDA receptor-mediated glutamate toxicity.
Sakanaka et al. (1998) reported in vivo evidence that EPO protects
neurons against ischemia-induced cell death. They presented findings
suggesting that EPO may exert its neuroprotective effect by reducing the
nitric oxide-mediated formation of free radicals or antagonizing their
toxicity. Siren et al. (2001) presented data suggesting that inhibition
of neuronal apoptosis underlies short latency protective effects of EPO
after cerebral ischemia and other brain injuries. They suggested that
evaluation of EPO, a compound established as clinically safe, as
neuroprotective therapy in acute brain injury is indicated.

Novel erythropoiesis-stimulating protein (NESP) stimulates
erythropoiesis in the same manner as human recombinant EPO. NESP is
distinct from EPO in that it has additional sialic acid which has been
shown to confer an increased terminal half-life in animal models,
patients with chronic renal failure, and cancer patients receiving
multiple cycles of chemotherapy (Macdougall et al., 1999). In studies of
89 patients with nonmyeloid malignancies, Smith et al. (2001) found that
NESP was well tolerated, with response rates ranging from 61 to 83%,
depending on dosage.

In addition to its role as a kidney cytokine regulating hematopoiesis,
EPO is also produced in the brain after oxidative or nitrosative stress.
The transcription factor HIF1 (603348) upregulates EPO following hypoxic
stimuli. Digicaylioglu and Lipton (2001) demonstrated that
preconditioning with EPO protects neurons in models of ischemic and
degenerative damage due to excitotoxins and consequent generation of
free radicals, including nitric oxide. Activation of neuronal EPO
receptors (133171) prevents apoptosis induced by NMDA or nitric oxide by
triggering crosstalk between the signaling pathways JAK2 (147796) and
NFKB (see 164011). Digicaylioglu and Lipton (2001) demonstrated that EPO
receptor-mediated activation of JAK2 leads to phosphorylation of the
inhibitor of NFKB (see I-kappa-B-alpha, 164008), subsequent nuclear
translocation of the transcription factor NFKB, and NFKB-dependent
transcription of neuroprotective genes. Transfection of cerebrocortical
neurons with a dominant interfering form of JAK2 or an I-kappa-B-alpha
superrepressor blocks EPO-mediated prevention of neuronal apoptosis.
Thus, neuronal EPO receptors activate a neuroprotective pathway that is
distinct from previously well characterized JAK and NFKB functions.
Moreover, this EPO effect may underlie neuroprotection mediated by
hypoxic-ischemic preconditioning.

Celik et al. (2002) undertook studies in a rabbit model to determine
whether exogenous EPO might have a protective effect in injuries to the
spinal cord. Immunocytochemistry performed using human spinal cord
sections showed abundant EPO receptor immunoreactivity of capillaries,
especially in white matter, and motor neurons within the ventral horn.
Spinal cord ischemia was produced in rabbits by occlusion of the
abdominal aorta. Recombinant human EPO was administered intravenously
immediately after the onset of reperfusion. The authors found both an
acute and a delayed beneficial action of recombinant human EPO in
ischemic spinal cord injury.

Erythropoietin is upregulated by hypoxia and provides protection against
apoptosis of erythroid progenitors in bone marrow and also apoptosis of
brain neurons (Siren et al., 2001). Grimm et al. (2002) showed in the
adult mouse retina that acute hypoxia dose-dependently stimulates
expression of Epo, fibroblast growth factor-2 (134920), and vascular
endothelial growth factor (192240) via HIF1 stabilization. Hypoxic
preconditioning protects retinal morphology and function against
light-induced apoptosis by interfering with caspase-1 (147678)
activation, a downstream event in the intracellular death cascade. In
contrast, induction of activator protein-1 (see 165160), an early event
in the light-stressed retina, is not affected by hypoxia. The
erythropoietin receptor (133171), required for EPO signaling, localizes
to photoreceptor cells. The protective effect of hypoxic preconditioning
is mimicked by systemically applied erythropoietin that crosses the
blood-retina barrier and prevents apoptosis even when given
therapeutically after light insult. Application of EPO may, through the
inhibition of apoptosis, be beneficial for the treatment of different
forms of retinal disease.

In rats, Junk et al. (2002) conducted parallel studies of recombinant
EPO in a model of transient global retinal ischemia induced by raising
intraocular pressure, which is a clinically relevant model for retinal
diseases. They observed abundant expression of EPOR throughout the
ischemic retina. Neutralization of endogenous EPO with soluble EPOR
exacerbated ischemic injury, which supports a crucial role for an
endogenous EPO/EPOR system in the survival and recovery of neurons after
an ischemic insult. Systemic administration of recombinant EPO before or
immediately after retinal ischemia not only reduced histopathologic
damage but also promoted functional recovery as assessed by
electroretinography. Exogenous EPO also significantly diminished
terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP end labeling of
neurons in the ischemic retina, implying an antiapoptotic mechanism of
action. These results further established EPO as a neuroprotective agent
in acute neuronal ischemic injury.

Becerra and Amaral (2002) reviewed the role of erythropoietin as an
endogenous retinal survival factor. It is a multifunctional protein that
has erythropoietic, neuroprotective, and angiogenic activities. Becerra
and Amaral (2002) hypothesized that identification and separation of the
structural determinants of those 3 activities within the erythropoietin
molecule could elucidate additional ways to minimize side effects
associated with local administration of erythropoietin to the eye, an
approach that offers advantages over systemic administration.

Although best known for its role in hematopoietic lineages, EPO also
affects other tissues, including those of the nervous system.
Erbayraktar et al. (2003) stated that enthusiasm for rhEPO as a
potential neuroprotective therapeutic needed to be tempered by the
knowledge that it also enlarges circulating red cell mass and increases
platelet aggregability. They examined whether erythropoietic and
tissue-protective activities of rhEPO are dissociated by a variation of
the molecule. They demonstrated that asialoerythropoietin (asialoEPO),
generated by total enzymatic desialylation of rhEPO, possesses a very
short plasma half-life and is fully neuroprotective. At doses and
frequencies at which rhEPO exhibited erythropoiesis, asialoEPO, in
marked contrast with rhEPO, did not increase the hematocrit of mice or
rats. AsialoEPO promptly appeared within the cerebrospinal fluid after
intravenous administration; intravenously administered
radioiodine-labeled asialoEPO bound to neurons within the hippocampus
and cortex in a pattern corresponding to the distribution of the EPO
receptor. Most importantly, asialoEPO exhibited a broad spectrum of
neuroprotective activities, as demonstrated in models of cerebral
ischemia, spinal cord compression, and sciatic nerve crush.

Because of the generalized neuroprotective and neurotrophic actions of
EPO, Bianchi et al. (2004) tested the efficacy of rhEPO in preventing
and reversing nerve dysfunction in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced diabetes
in rats. They found that EPO both protected from and reversed
experimental diabetic neuropathy (MVCD2, 612623). Although in acute
brain injury such as cerebral ischemia or brain trauma, a single
injection of rhEPO was sufficient to obtain a protective effect (Brines
et al., 2000), Bianchi et al. (2004) administered the agent over a long
period. With this schedule, a marked increase in the hematocrit was
observed. This could represent a potentially serious side effect and
increase the risk of cerebrovascular accidents. Therefore
nonerythropoietic analogs of EPO would be important for use in chronic
diseases.

Leist et al. (2004) found that carbamylated EPO did not bind to EPOR and
did not show any hematopoietic activity in human cell signaling assays
or upon chronic dosing in different animal species. Nevertheless,
carbamylated EPO and various nonhematopoietic mutants were
cytoprotective in vitro and conferred neuroprotection against stroke,
spinal cord compression, diabetic neuropathy, and experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis at a potency and efficacy comparable to
EPO.

Although vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF; 192240) is a primary
mediator of retinal angiogenesis, VEGF inhibition alone is insufficient
to prevent retinal neovascularization. Hence, it was postulated that
there are other potent ischemia-induced angiogenic factors.
Erythropoietin possesses angiogenic activity, but its potential role in
ocular angiogenesis had not been established. Watanabe et al. (2005)
measured both erythropoietin and VEGF levels in the vitreous fluid of
144 patients. Vitreous proliferative potential was measured according to
the growth of retinal endothelial cells in vitro and with soluble
erythropoietin receptor. In addition, a murine model of ischemia-induced
retinal neovascularization was used to evaluate erythropoietin
expression and regulation in vivo. They found that the median vitreous
erythropoietin level in 73 patients with proliferative diabetic
retinopathy (MVCD2, 612623) was significantly higher than that in 71
patients without diabetes. The median VEGF level in patients with
retinopathy was also significantly higher than that in patients without
diabetes. Multivariate logistic-regression analyses indicated that
erythropoietin and VEGF were independently associated with proliferative
diabetic retinopathy and that erythropoietin was more strongly
associated with the presence of proliferative diabetic retinopathy than
was VEGF. They concluded that their data suggested that erythropoietin
is a potent ischemia-induced angiogenic factor that acts independently
of VEGF during retinal angiogenesis in proliferative diabetic
retinopathy. Watanabe et al. (2005) suggested that erythropoietin
blockade might be beneficial in the treatment of proliferative diabetic
retinopathy, but cautioned that erythropoietin blockade may be hazardous
for retinal diseases that involve apoptosis of retinal photoreceptors
since erythropoietin is a survival factor for retinal photoreceptors and
acts as a neurologic protection factor in diabetic neuropathy.

Casals-Pascual et al. (2008) compared the levels of EPO, VEGF, and TNF
(191160) in paired samples of plasma and cerebrospinal fluid of Kenyan
children with cerebral malaria (see 611162) who died or who survived
with or without developing neurologic sequelae. They found that plasma
EPO of more than 200 units per liter was associated with a more than 80%
reduction in the risk of developing neurologic sequelae. Admission with
profound coma and convulsions after admission were independently
associated with neurologic sequelae. Casals-Pascual et al. (2008)
concluded that age-dependent EPO responses to anemia and age-dependent
protective effects may influence the clinical epidemiology of cerebral
malaria, suggesting that EPO may be useful in adjuvant therapy.

Becker et al. (2010) showed by mathematical modeling of quantitative
data and experimental validation that rapid ligand depletion and
replenishment of the cell surface receptor are characteristic features
of the EPO receptor (EPOR; 133171). The amount of EPO-EPOR complexes and
EPOR activation integrated over time corresponds linearly to ligand
input; this process is carried out over a broad range of ligand
concentrations. This relation depends solely on EPOR turnover
independent of ligand binding, which suggests an essential role of large
intracellular receptor pools. Becker et al. (2010) concluded that these
receptor properties enable the system to cope with basal and acute
demand in the hematopoietic system.

Minamishima and Kaelin (2010) showed that loss of all 3 PHDs (PHD1,
606424; PHD2, 606425; and PHD3, 606426) in the liver dramatically
increased EPO and hematocrit values to concentrations vastly in excess
of those achieved after renal PHD2 inactivation. Minamishima and Kaelin
(2010) found that PHD2 inactivation is sufficient to induce near maximal
renal EPO production, whereas inactivation of all 3 PHDs is needed to
reactivate hepatic EPO production.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Tong et al. (2008) found an association between the T allele of a SNP in
the promoter of the EPO gene (dbSNP rs1617640; 133170.0001) and
microvascular complications of diabetes, including proliferative
diabetic retinopathy and diabetic end-stage renal disease (MVCD2,
612623). They also observed a 7.5-fold higher EPO concentration in
vitreous samples from normal subjects with the TT risk genotype than in
those with the GG genotype, and studies in cultured HEK293 cells showed
that the T allele enhanced luciferase reporter expression by 25-fold
compared with that of the G allele (p = 4.7 x 10(-29)).

ANIMAL MODEL

Synthesis of erythropoietin in the kidney and liver in response to
hypoxia depends on both protein synthesis and heme synthesis. Goldberg
et al. (1988) proposed a model in which a ligand-dependent
conformational change in a heme protein accounts for the mechanism by
which hypoxia as well as cobalt and nickel stimulates the production of
erythropoietin. Semenza et al. (1989) generated transgenic mice
containing the human erythropoietin gene and found increased
erythropoietin mRNA expression not only in liver and kidney but in all
other transgenic tissues analyzed. The mice were polycythemic, with
increased erythroid precursors in hematopoietic tissues and increased
erythrocytic indices in peripheral blood. From further studies in these
transgenic mice, Semenza et al. (1989) concluded that different DNA
sequences flanking the EPO gene control liver versus kidney expression
of the gene and that some of these sequences are located 3-prime to the
gene.

Erythropoiesis occurs in 2 distinct waves during embryogenesis: the
primitive wave in the extraembryonic yolk sac followed by the definitive
wave in the fetal liver and spleen. Even though progenitors for both
cells types are present in the yolk sac blood islands, only primitive
cells are formed in the yolk sac during early embryogenesis. Lee et al.
(2001) presented results that led them to propose that erythropoietin
expression and the resultant erythropoietin receptor activation regulate
the timing of the definitive wave. They demonstrated that Epo and EpoR
gene expression are temporally and spatially segregated: though EPOR is
expressed early (embryonic days 8.0-9.5) in the yolk sac blood islands,
no EPO expression could be detected in this extraembryonic tissue. Only
at a later stage can EPO expression be detected intraembryonically, and
the onset of EPO expression correlates with the initiation of definitive
erythropoiesis. By 'knocking in' a constitutively active form of EpoR,
R129C, they demonstrated further that the activation of the EPOR
signaling pathway can lead to earlier onset of definitive erythropoiesis
in the yolk sac. The observations provided insight into the in vivo
mechanism by which 2 erythroid progenitor populations can coexist in the
yolk sac yet always differentiate successively during embryogenesis.

Naffakh et al. (1995) examined whether the secretion of erythropoietin
from genetically modified cells could represent an alternative to
repeated injections of the recombinant hormone for treating chronic
anemias responsive to EPO. Primary mouse skin fibroblasts were
transduced with a retroviral vector in which the murine cDNA was
expressed under the control of the murine phosphoglycerate kinase
promoter. 'Neo-organs' containing the genetically modified fibroblasts
embedded into collagen lattices were implanted into the peritoneal
cavity of mice. Increased hematocrit and elevated serum EPO
concentration were observed in recipient animals over a 10-month
observation period. The approach was considered applicable to the
treatment of human anemias.

Osborne et al. (1995) investigated in rats the expression and biologic
effects of transplanting autologous vascular smooth muscle cells
transduced with a retroviral vector encoding rat erythropoietin cDNA.
Vector-derived Epo secretion caused increases in reticulocytes followed
by clinically significant increases in hematocrit and hemoglobin for up
to 11 weeks. There were no significant differences between control and
treated animals in the number of white blood cells and platelets. Kidney
and to a lesser extent liver are specific organs that synthesize Epo in
response to tissue oxygenation. In the treated animals, endogenous Epo
mRNA was largely downregulated in kidney and absent from liver. These
results indicated to the authors that vascular smooth muscle cells can
be genetically modified to provide treatment of anemias due to Epo
deficiency and suggest that this cell type may be targeted in the
treatment of other diseases requiring systemic therapeutic protein
delivery.

Similar experiments were performed by Kessler et al. (1996), who
demonstrated that, following a single intramuscular administration of a
recombinant adeno-associated virus (rAAV) vector containing the
beta-galactosidase gene into adult mice, protein expression was detected
in myofibers for at least 32 weeks. Furthermore, a single intramuscular
administration of an AAV vector containing a gene for human
erythropoietin into mice resulted in dose-dependent secretion of
erythropoietin and corresponding increases in red blood cell production
that persisted for up to 40 weeks. Primary human myocytes transduced in
vitro with the AAV-Epo vector also showed dose-dependent production of
Epo.

To evaluate whether recombinant EPO improves functional outcome if
administered after spinal cord injury, Gorio et al. (2002) studied 2
rodent models. In the first model, a moderate compression was produced
by applying an aneurysm clip at level T3 and administering recombinant
EPO immediately after release of compression; partial recovery of motor
function began within 12 hours after injury and was nearly complete by
28 days. In contrast, saline-treated animals exhibited only poor
recovery. In the second model, recombinant EPO administration given 1
hour after injury also produced a superior recovery of function compared
with saline-treated controls after a contusion at level T9. In the
latter model of more severe spinal cord injury, secondary inflammation
was also markedly attenuated by recombinant EPO administration and
associated with reduced cavitation within the spinal cord. Gorio et al.
(2002) suggested that EPO provides early recovery of function,
especially after spinal cord compression, as well as longer-latency
neuroprotective, antiinflammatory, and antiapoptotic functions.

High (2005) diagrammed the details of a successful strategy, devised by
Takacs et al. (2004), to treat anemia in mice by stimulating production
of erythropoietin and its secretion into the bloodstream. Takacs et al.
(2004) used a genetically modified, antigen-specific B cell to supply
erythropoietin to a mouse deficient in erythropoietin. Transgenic mice
were engineered to express human erythropoietin under the control of a B
cell-specific element. The mouse was then immunized with a single
antigen, phycoerythrin, resulting in a pool of antigen-sensitive B
cells. Lymphocytes from the donor mouse were injected into an
erythropoietin-deficient mouse. Subsequent injection of antigen into the
erythropoietin-deficient mice stimulated the proliferation of B cells
expressing erythropoietin, with a resultant increase in serum
erythropoietin levels and hematocrit values.

Zhong et al. (2007) studied the efficacy of erythropoietin in providing
neuroprotection to retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) in the DBA/2J glaucoma
mouse model. EPO promoted RGC survival in these mice without affecting
intraocular pressure, suggesting that EPO is be a potential therapeutic
neuroprotectant in glaucoma.

With the use of formal backcross analysis, van Wijngaarden et al. (2007)
investigated the inheritance of susceptibility to oxygen-induced
retinopathy in the rat. Their results indicated that segregation of the
susceptibility trait to oxygen-induced retinopathy in the Dark Agouti
and Fisher 344 rat strains was associated with pigmentation and
erythropoietin expression and could be modeled using an autosomal
dominant pattern of inheritance.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MICROVASCULAR COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2
EPO, dbSNP rs1617640, G-T

In a cohort of 374 patients with type 2 diabetes (125853) and
microvascular complications of diabetes, including proliferative
diabetic retinopathy (PDR) and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) (MVCD2,
612623), and 239 age- and ethnicity-matched diabetic controls, Tong et
al. (2008) found significant association between the T allele of dbSNP
rs1617640, a SNP in the promoter of the EPO gene, and PDR and ESDR
(corrected p = 0.036). The association with diabetic microvascular
complications was confirmed in 365 patients with type 1 diabetes
(222100) with both PDR and ESRD, 500 with nephropathy and retinopathy
without progression to PDR and ESRD, and 574 type 1 diabetic control
patients without nephropathy or retinopathy (p = 2.66 x 10(-8)), as well
as in a third cohort involving 379 type 1 diabetics with both PDR and
nephropathy and 141 diabetic controls (p = 0.021). The EPO concentration
in vitreous samples was 7.5-fold higher in normal subjects with the TT
risk genotype than in those with the GG genotype, and studies in
cultured HEK293 cells showed that the T allele enhanced luciferase
reporter expression by 25-fold compared with that of the G allele (p =
4.7 x 10(-29)).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Jacobs et al. (1985); Lin et al. (1985); Semenza et al. (1989)
REFERENCE 1. Becerra, S. P.; Amaral, J.: Erythropoietin--an endogenous retinal
survival factor. New Eng. J. Med. 347: 1968-1970, 2002.

2. Becker, V.; Schilling, M.; Bachmann, J.; Baumann, U.; Raue, A.;
Maiwald, T.; Timmer, J.; Klingmuller, U.: Covering a broad dynamic
range: information processing at the erythropoietin receptor. Science 328:
1404-1408, 2010.

3. Bianchi, R.; Buyukakilli, B.; Brines, M.; Savino, C.; Cavaletti,
G.; Oggioni, N.; Lauria, G.; Borgna, M.; Lombardi, R.; Cimen, B.;
Comelekoglu, U.; Kanik, A.; Tataroglu, C.; Cerami, A.; Ghezzi, P.
: Erythropoietin both protects from and reverses experimental diabetic
neuropathy. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 823-828, 2004.

4. Brines, M. L.; Ghezzi, P.; Keenan, S.; Agnello, D.; de Lanerolle,
N. C.; Cerami, C.; Itri, L. M.; Cerami, A.: Erythropoietin crosses
the blood-brain barrier to protect against experimental brain injury. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 10526-10531, 2000.

5. Casals-Pascual, C.; Idro, R.; Gicheru, N.; Gwer, S.; Kitsao, B.;
Gitau, E.; Mwakesi, R.; Roberts, D. J.; Newton, C. R. J. C.: High
levels of erythropoietin are associated with protection against neurological
sequelae in African children with cerebral malaria. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 105: 2634-2639, 2008.

6. Celik, M.; Gokmen, N.; Erbayraktar, S.; Akhisaroglu, M.; Konakc,
S.; Ulukus, C.; Genc, S.; Genc, K.; Sagiroglu, E.; Cerami, A.; Brines,
M.: Erythropoietin prevents motor neuron apoptosis and neurologic
disability in experimental spinal cord ischemic injury. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 99: 2258-2263, 2002.

7. Digicaylioglu, M.; Lipton, S. A.: Erythropoietin-mediated neuroprotection
involves cross-talk between Jak2 and NF-kappa-B signalling cascades. Nature 412:
641-647, 2001.

8. Erbayraktar, S.; Grasso, G.; Sfacteria, A.; Xie, Q.; Coleman, T.;
Kreilgaard, M.; Torup, L.; Sager, T.; Erbayraktar, Z.; Gokmen, N.;
Yilmaz, O.; Ghezzi, P.; and 13 others: Asialoerythropoietin is
a nonerythropoietic cytokine with broad neuroprotective activity in
vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 6741-6746, 2003. Note: Erratum:
Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 9102 only, 2003.

9. Eschbach, J. W.; Egrie, J. C.; Downing, M. R.; Browne, J. K.; Adamson,
J. W.: Correction of the anemia of end-stage renal disease with recombinant
human erythropoietin: results of a combined phase I and II clinical
trial. New Eng. J. Med. 316: 73-78, 1987.

10. Goldberg, M. A.; Dunning, S. P.; Bunn, H. F.: Regulation of the
erythropoietin gene: evidence that the oxygen sensor is a heme protein. Science 242:
1412-1415, 1988.

11. Gorio, A.; Gokmen, N.; Erbayraktar, S.; Yilmaz, O.; Madaschi,
L.; Cichetti, C.; Di Giulio, A. M.; Vardar, E.; Cerami, A.; Brines,
M.: Recombinant human erythropoietin counteracts secondary injury
and markedly enhances neurological recovery from experimental spinal
cord trauma. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 9450-9455, 2002.

12. Grimm, C.; Wenzel, A.; Groszer, M.; Mayser, H.; Seeliger, M.;
Samardzija, M.; Bauer, C.; Gassmann, Z.; Reme, C. E.: HIF-1-induced
erythropoietin in the hypoxic retina protects against light-induced
retinal degeneration. Nature Med. 8: 718-724, 2002.

13. High, K.: Anemia and gene therapy--a matter of control. New
Eng. J. Med. 352: 1146-1147, 2005.

14. Jacobs, K.; Shoemaker, C.; Rudersdorf, R.; Neill, S. D.; Kaufman,
R. J.; Mufson, A.; Seehra, J.; Jones, S. S.; Hewick, R.; Fritsch,
E. F.; Kawakita, M.; Shimizu, T.; Miyake, T.: Isolation and characterization
of genomic and cDNA clones of human erythropoietin. Nature 313:
806-810, 1985.

15. Junk, A. K.; Mammis, A.; Savitz, S. I.; Singh, M.; Roth, S.; Malhotra,
S.; Rosenbaum, P. S.; Cerami, A.; Brines, M.; Rosenbaum, D. M.: Erythropoietin
administration protects retinal neurons from acute ischemia-reperfusion
injury. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 10659-10664, 2002.

16. Kessler, P. D.; Podsakoff, G. M.; Chen, X.; McQuiston, S. A.;
Colosi, P. C.; Matelis, L. A.; Kurtzman, G. J.; Byrne, B. J.: Gene
delivery to skeletal muscle results in sustained expression and systemic
delivery of a therapeutic protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 14082-14087,
1996.

17. Lacombe, C.; Tambourin, P.; Mattei, M. G.; Simon, D.; Guenet,
J. L.: The murine erythropoietin gene is localized on chromosome
5. (Letter) Blood 72: 1440-1442, 1988.

18. Law, M. L.; Cai, G.-Y.; Lin, F.-K.; Wei, Q.; Huang, S.-Z.; Hartz,
J. H.; Morse, H.; Lin, C.-H.; Jones, C.; Kao, F.-T.: Chromosomal
assignment of the human erythropoietin gene and its DNA polymorphism. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 6920-6924, 1986.

19. Lee, R.; Kertesz, N.; Joseph, S. B.; Jegalian, A.; Wu, H.: Erythropoietin
(Epo) and EpoR expression and 2 waves of erythropoiesis. Blood 98:
1408-1415, 2001.

20. Lee-Huang, S.: Cloning and expression of human erythropoietin
cDNA in Escherichia coli. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 2708-2712, 1984.

21. Leist, M.; Ghezzi, P.; Grasso, G.; Bianchi, R.; Villa, P.; Fratelli,
M.; Savino, C.; Bianchi, M.; Nielsen, J.; Gerwien, J.; Kallunki, P.;
Larsen, A. K.; and 16 others: Derivatives of erythropoietin that
are tissue protective but not erythropoietic. Science 305: 239-242,
2004.

22. Lin, F.-K.; Suggs, S.; Lin, C.-H.; Browne, J. K.; Smalling, R.;
Egrie, J. C.; Chen, K. K.; Fox, G. M.; Martin, F.; Stabinsky, Z.;
Badrawi, S. M.; Lai, P.-H.; Goldwasser, E.: Cloning and expression
of the human erythropoietin gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 7580-7584,
1985.

23. Macdougall, I. C.; Gray, S. J.; Elston, O.; Breen, C.; Jenkins,
B.; Browne, J.; Egrie, J.: Pharmacokinetics of novel erythropoiesis
stimulating protein compared with Epoetin alfa in dialysis patients. J.
Am. Soc. Nephrol. 10: 2392-2395, 1999.

24. McDonald, J. D.; Lin, F.-K.; Goldwasser, E.: Cloning, sequencing,
and evolutionary analysis of the mouse erythropoietin gene. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 6: 842-848, 1986.

25. Minamishima, Y. A.; Kaelin, W. G., Jr.: Reactivation of hepatic
EPO synthesis in mice after PHD loss. Science 329: 407 only, 2010.

26. Naffakh, N.; Henri, A.; Villeval, J. L.; Rouyer-Fessard, P.; Moullier,
P.; Blumenfeld, N.; Danos, O.; Vainchenker, W.; Heard, J. M.; Beuzard,
Y.: Sustained delivery of erythropoietin in mice by genetically modified
skin fibroblasts. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 3194-3198, 1995.

27. Osborne, W. R. A.; Ramesh, N.; Lau, S.; Clowes, M. M.; Dale, D.
C.; Clowes, A. W.: Gene therapy for long-term expression of erythropoietin
in rats. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 8055-8058, 1995.

28. Powell, J. S.; Berkner, K. L.; Lebo, R. V.; Adamson, J. W.: Human
erythropoietin gene: high level expression in stably transfected mammalian
cells and chromosome localization. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 6465-6469,
1986.

29. Romanowski, R. R.; Sytkowski, A. J.: The molecular structure
of human erythropoietin. Hemat. Oncol. Clin. North Am. 8: 885-894,
1994.

30. Sakanaka, M.; Wen, T.-C.; Matsuda, S.; Masuda, S.; Morishita,
E.; Nagao, M.; Sasaki, R.: In vivo evidence that erythropoietin protects
neurons from ischemic damage. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 4635-4640,
1998.

31. Semenza, G. L.; Dureza, R. C.; Traystman, M. D.; Gearhart, J.
D.; Antonarakis, S. E.: Different DNA sequences control liver versus
kidney expression of the human erythropoietin gene in transgenic mice.
(Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 45 (suppl.): A116 only, 1989.

32. Semenza, G. L.; Traystman, M. D.; Gearhart, J. D.; Antonarakis,
S. E.: Polycythemia in transgenic mice expressing the human erythropoietin
gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 2301-2305, 1989.

33. Sherwood, J. B.; Shouval, D.: Continuous production of erythropoietin
by an established human renal carcinoma cell line: development of
the cell line. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 165-169, 1986.

34. Shoemaker, C. B.; Mitsock, L. D.: Murine erythropoietin gene:
cloning, expression, and human gene homology. Molec. Cell. Biol. 6:
849-858, 1986.

35. Siren, A.-L.; Fratelli, M.; Brines, M.; Goemans, C.; Casagrande,
S.; Lewczuk, P.; Keenan, S.; Gleiter, C.; Pasquali, C.; Capobianco,
A.; Mennini, T.; Heumann, R.; Cerami, A.; Ehrenreich, H.; Ghezzi,
P.: Erythropoietin prevents neuronal apoptosis after cerebral ischemia
and metabolic stress. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 4044-4049, 2001.

36. Smith, R. E., Jr.; Jaiyesimi, I. A.; Meza, L. A.; Tchekmedyian,
N. S.; Chan, D.; Griffith, H.; Brosman, S.; Bukowski, R.; Murdock,
M.; Rarick, M.; Saven, A.; Colowick, A. B.; Fleishman, A.; Gayko,
U.; Glaspy, J.: Novel erythropoiesis stimulating protein (NESP) for
the treatment of anaemia of chronic disease associated with cancer. Brit.
J. Cancer 84: 24-30, 2001.

37. Takacs, K.; Du Roure, C.; Nabarro, S.; Dillon, N.; McVey, J. H.;
Webster, Z.; MacNeil, A.; Bartok, I.; Higgins, C.; Gray, D.; Merkenschlager,
M.; Fisher, A. G.: The regulated long-term delivery of therapeutic
proteins by using antigen-specific B lymphocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 101: 16298-16303, 2004.

38. Tong, Z.; Yang, Z.; Patel, S.; Chen, H.; Gibbs, D.; Yang, X.;
Hau, V. S.; Kaminoh, Y.; Harmon, J.; Pearson, E.; Buehler, J.; Chen,
Y.; and 25 others: Promoter polymorphism of the erythropoietin
gene in severe diabetic eye and kidney complications. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 105: 6998-7003, 2008.

39. van Wijngaarden, P.; Brereton, H. M.; Coster, D. J.; Williams,
K. A.: Genetic influences on susceptibility to oxygen-induced retinopathy. Invest.
Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 48: 1761-1766, 2007.

40. Watanabe, D.; Suzuma, K.; Matsui, S.; Kurimoto, M.; Kiryu, J.;
Kita, M.; Suzuma, I.; Ohashi, H.; Ojima, T.; Murakami, T.; Kobayashi,
T.; Masuda, S.; Nagao, M.; Yoshimura, N.; Takagi, H.: Erythropoietin
as a retinal angiogenic factor in proliferative diabetic retinopathy. New
Eng. J. Med. 353: 782-792, 2005.

41. Watkins, P. C.; Eddy, R.; Hoffman, N.; Stanislovitis, P.; Beck,
A. K.; Galli, J.; Vellucci, V.; Gusella, J. F.; Shows, T. B.: Regional
assignment of the erythropoietin gene to human chromosome region 7pter-q22. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 42: 214-218, 1986.

42. Zhong, L.; Bradley, J.; Schubert, W.; Ahmed, E.; Adamis, A. P.;
Shima, D. T.; Robinson, G. S.; Ng, Y.-S.: Erythropoietin promotes
survival of retinal ganglion cells in DBA/2J glaucoma mice. Invest.
Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 48: 1212-1218, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/1/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/30/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/12/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/1/2008
Jane Kelly - updated: 9/25/2007
Jane Kelly - updated: 8/13/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/17/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/23/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/9/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/17/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/3/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/18/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/5/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/9/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/15/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/26/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/17/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/21/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED terry: 12/21/2012
alopez: 9/1/2010
terry: 9/1/2010
alopez: 7/1/2010
terry: 6/30/2010
mgross: 8/26/2009
terry: 8/19/2009
alopez: 5/14/2009
carol: 2/19/2009
carol: 2/13/2009
carol: 2/12/2009
mgross: 4/1/2008
terry: 4/1/2008
carol: 9/25/2007
carol: 8/13/2007
alopez: 10/24/2005
terry: 10/17/2005
terry: 5/17/2005
carol: 3/28/2005
wwang: 3/24/2005
terry: 3/23/2005
tkritzer: 8/25/2004
terry: 8/25/2004
terry: 6/28/2004
tkritzer: 2/18/2004
terry: 2/9/2004
cwells: 11/7/2003
tkritzer: 6/27/2003
tkritzer: 6/24/2003
tkritzer: 12/20/2002
terry: 12/17/2002
cwells: 10/2/2002
carol: 9/27/2002
carol: 9/18/2002
tkritzer: 9/17/2002
terry: 9/3/2002
alopez: 7/25/2002
alopez: 6/20/2002
terry: 6/18/2002
mgross: 3/11/2002
terry: 3/5/2002
mcapotos: 12/27/2001
carol: 11/12/2001
terry: 11/9/2001
alopez: 8/17/2001
terry: 8/15/2001
mcapotos: 7/2/2001
mcapotos: 6/28/2001
terry: 6/26/2001
mcapotos: 5/9/2001
terry: 4/17/2001
terry: 6/4/1998
terry: 5/21/1998
terry: 1/23/1997
terry: 1/10/1997
terry: 11/20/1996
mark: 10/9/1995
carol: 1/24/1995
mimadm: 9/24/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990

606102	TITLE *606102 PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL 4-PHOSPHATE 5-KINASE, TYPE I, GAMMA; PIP5K1C
;;PIP5K1-GAMMA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Type I phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate 5-kinases (e.g., PIP5K1A;
603275) catalyze the synthesis of phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate,
an essential lipid molecule in various cellular processes.

CLONING

Nagase et al. (1998) isolated a cDNA encoding PIP5K1C, which they called
KIAA0589, during a large-scale effort to sequence cDNAs derived from a
size-fractionated brain cDNA library. They predicted that PIP5K1C
encodes a 687-amino acid protein with an apparent molecular mass of 80
kD, as estimated by SDS-PAGE analysis. RT-PCR analysis detected PIP5K1C
expression in all of 14 tissues tested.

Using degenerate PCR and cDNA library screening, Ishihara et al. (1998)
cloned mouse Pip5k1c. Pip5k1c has 2 alternative splice forms, consisting
of 635 and 661 amino acids, that migrated at 87 and 90 kD by SDS-PAGE,
respectively. The isoforms differ by the inclusion or exclusion of a
26-amino acid C-terminal tail. Northern blot analysis detected high
levels of Pip5k1c expression in mouse brain, lung, and kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

Using deletion mutant analysis, Ishihara et al. (1998) identified an
approximately 380-amino acid minimal core sequence of mouse Pip5k1c that
was sufficient for phosphatidylinositol 4-phosphate kinase activity.
Overexpression of mouse Pip5k1c in COS-7 cells induced an increase in
short actin fibers and a decrease in actin stress fibers. A
kinase-deficient substitution mutant induced similar abnormal actin
polymerization. Ishihara et al. (1998) concluded that structural
interactions are important in the functions of PIP5Ks.

DiPaolo et al. (2002) and Ling et al. (2002) determined that the 90-kD
PIP5K1C isoform containing the C-terminal tail is targeted to focal
adhesions through interactions between the tail and the FERM domain of
talin (see TLN1; 186745). DiPaolo et al. (2002) determined that the
90-kD isoform, and not the 87-kD isoform lacking the C-terminal tail, is
the predominant isoform of Pip5k1c in rat brain, and that talin-2 (TLN2;
607349) is the predominant talin with which it interacts. Both groups
showed that the activity of PIP5K1C increases upon targeting to focal
adhesions. DiPaolo et al. (2002) found that overexpression of PIP5K1C or
expression of its C-terminal tail alone disrupted focal adhesion plaques
and caused cell rounding, and that this was dependent upon interaction
with talin. Ling et al. (2002) concluded that, upon clustering of
integrins (see 147557), talin and PIP5K1C are recruited to focal
adhesions, inducing local synthesis of phosphoinositide, which
facilitates recruitment and regulation of focal adhesion and
cytoskeletal proteins.

Krauss et al. (2006) found that the AP2 complex was a regulator of type
I PIPK-mediated PtdIns(4,5)P2 synthesis in COS-7 and HeLa cells. AP2 via
its mu-2 subunit (AP2M1; 601024) directly interacted with the kinase
core domain of the PIPK gamma-subunit (PIP5K1C) in vitro and in native
protein extracts. Endocytic cargo protein binding to mu-2 stimulated
PIPK activity. Krauss et al. (2006) concluded that there is a positive
feedback loop consisting of endocytic cargo proteins, AP2M1, and PIPK
type I, which may provide a specific pool of PtdIns(4,5)P2.

MAPPING

Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the PIP5K1C gene to chromosome 19 using
radiation hybrid analysis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Narkis et al. (2007) described a novel form of lethal congenital
contracture syndrome (LCCS3; 611369) in an extended Israeli Bedouin
kindred that mapped to chromosome 19p13. Mutation screening of 30
candidate genes in the associated interval revealed a missense mutation
in the PIP5K1C gene (606102.0001) in affected individuals in the large
family and in an affected individual from an unrelated family. The
mutation caused substitution of aspartic acid by asparagine at amino
acid 253 (D253N), abrogating kinase activity of PIPKI-gamma. Thus, a
defect in the phosphatidylinositol pathway leading to a decrease in
synthesis of PIP2, a molecule active in endocytosis of synaptic vesicle
proteins, culminates in lethal congenital arthrogryposis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Di Paolo et al. (2004) generated mice deficient in
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate by targeted disruption of the
Pip5k1c gene. Mice were born at the expected mendelian distribution, but
all knockout animals died postnatally within 24 hours. They were
recognizable soon after birth by their impaired motility and by the lack
of milk in their stomachs, but no obvious anatomic anomalies were
observed. Di Paolo et al. (2004) showed that decreased levels of
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate in the brain and impairment of its
depolarization-dependent synthesis in nerve terminals led to the early
postnatal lethality and synaptic defects in these mice. These included
decreased frequency of miniature currents, enhanced synaptic depression,
a smaller readily releasable pool of vesicles, delayed endocytosis, and
slower recycling kinetics. Di Paolo et al. (2004) concluded that their
results demonstrated a critical role for
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate synthesis in the regulation of
multiple steps of the synaptic vesicle cycle.

Gong et al. (2005) examined the secretion of large dense-core vesicles
from chromaffin cells isolated from adrenal glands of Pip5k1c-deficient
mice. Absence of Pip5k1c caused a reduction of the readily releasable
vesicle pool and its refilling rate, with a small increase in docked
vesicles, indicating a defect in vesicle priming. There was also a delay
in fusion pore expansion. Gong et al. (2005) concluded that
PtdIns(4,5)P2 synthesized by PIP5K1C has a role in regulating large
dense-core vesicle fusion.

Wang et al. (2008) found that Pip5k1c -/- mouse megakaryocytes exhibited
plasma membrane blebbing accompanied by decreased association of the
membrane with the cytoskeleton. This membrane defect was rescued by
adding back wildtype Pip5k1c, but not by adding a catalytically inactive
mutant or a splice variant lacking the talin-binding motif.
Megakaryocytes lacking talin-1 mimicked the membrane-cytoskeleton defect
of Pip5k1c -/- cells. Wang et al. (2008) concluded that PIP5K1C has a
role in anchoring the cell membrane to the cytoskeleton in
megakaryocytes through a pathway involving talin.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LETHAL CONGENITAL CONTRACTURE SYNDROME 3
PIP5K1C, ASP253ASN

In multiple affected members of an Israeli-Bedouin kindred with lethal
congenital contracture syndrome type 3 (LCCS3; 611369) and in another
isolated case, Narkis et al. (2007) identified a homozygous 757G-A
transition in exon 7 of the PIP5K1C gene, resulting in substitution of
asparagine for aspartate-253 (D253N). Asp253, located in the PIPK domain
within a conserved DLKGS motif, is conserved among other PIPK proteins
and among species from human to S. cerevisiae. Kinase activity assays
showed that the mutation abrogates kinase activity regardless of varying
substrate concentrations.

REFERENCE 1. Di Paolo, G.; Moskowitz, H. S.; Gipson, K.; Wenk, M. R.; Voronov,
S.; Obayashi, M.; Flavell, R.; Fitzsimonds, R. M.; Ryan, T. A.; De
Camilli, P.: Impaired PtdIns(4,5)P(2) synthesis in nerve terminals
produces defects in synaptic vesicle trafficking. Nature 431: 415-422,
2004.

2. Di Paolo, G.; Pellegrini, L.; Letinic, K.; Cestra, G.; Zoncu, R.;
Voronov, S.; Chang, S.; Guo, J.; Wenk, M. R.; De Camill, P.: Recruitment
and regulation of phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase type I-gamma
by the FERM domain of talin. Nature 420: 85-89, 2002.

3. Gong, L.-W.; Di Paolo, G.; Diaz, E.; Cestra, G.; Diaz, M.-E.; Lindau,
M.; De Camilli, P.; Toomre, D.: Phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase
type I-gamma regulates dynamics of large dense-core vesicle fusion. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 5204-5209, 2005.

4. Ishihara, H.; Shibasaki, Y.; Kizuki, N.; Wada, T.; Yazaki, Y.;
Asano, T.; Oka, Y.: Type I phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 5-kinases:
cloning of the third isoform and deletion/substitution analysis of
members of this novel lipid kinase family. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 8741-8748,
1998.

5. Krauss, M.; Kukhtina, V.; Pechstein, A.; Haucke, V.: Stimulation
of phosphatidylinositol kinase type I-mediated phosphatidylinositol
(4,5)-bisphosphate synthesis by AP-2 mu-cargo complexes. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 103: 11934-11939, 2006.

6. Ling, K.; Doughman, R. L.; Firestone, A. J.; Bunce, M. W.; Anderson,
R. A.: Type I-gamma phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase targets
and regulates focal adhesions. Nature 420: 89-93, 2002.

7. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.;
Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified
human genes. IX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from
brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 31-39,
1998.

8. Narkis, G.; Ofir, R.; Landau, D.; Manor, E.; Volokita, M.; Hershkowitz,
R.; Elbedour, K.; Birk. O. S.: Lethal contractural syndrome type
3 (LCCS3) is caused by a mutation in PIP5K1C, which encodes PIPKI-gamma
of the phophatidylinsitol (sic) pathway. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81:
530-539, 2007.

9. Wang, Y.; Litvinov, R. I.; Chen, X.; Bach, T. L.; Lian, L.; Petrich,
B. G.; Monkley, S. J.; Kanaho, Y.; Critchley, D. R.; Sasaki, T.; Birnbaum,
M. J.; Weisel, J. W.; Hartwig, J.; Abrams, C. S.: Loss of PIP5Kl-gamma,
unlike other PIP5KI isoforms, impairs the integrity of the membrane
cytoskeleton in murine megakaryocytes. J. Clin. Invest. 118: 812-819,
2008. Note: Erratum: J. Clin. Invest. 119: 421 only, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/18/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/16/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/15/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/19/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/28/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/7/2002

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 7/11/2001

EDITED terry: 04/04/2013
terry: 4/4/2013
carol: 11/21/2012
terry: 8/22/2012
mgross: 4/25/2008
terry: 4/18/2008
alopez: 8/23/2007
terry: 8/16/2007
wwang: 9/20/2006
terry: 9/15/2006
mgross: 4/20/2005
terry: 4/19/2005
alopez: 10/1/2004
tkritzer: 9/28/2004
terry: 7/20/2004
mgross: 11/14/2002
mgross: 11/7/2002
mgross: 7/11/2001

606362	TITLE *606362 ACID PHOSPHATASE, TESTICULAR; ACPT
;;TESTICULAR ACID PHOSPHATASE
DESCRIPTION Acid phosphatases (ACPs) hydrolyze orthophosphoric esters in an acid
medium. ACP isoforms are present in erythrocytes, lysosomes, prostate,
and macrophages. Before the advent of assays for prostate specific
antigen (KLK3; 176820), prostatic acid phosphatase (ACPP; 171790) was a
major urologic tumor marker.

CLONING

By sequence analysis of a BAC clone, followed by probing of the BAC
clone, EST database searching, and PCR, Yousef et al. (2001) obtained a
cDNA encoding ACPT. The deduced 426-amino acid protein is 44% and 48%
identical to ACPP and lysosomal acidic phosphatase (ACP2; 171650),
respectively. ACPT possesses a signal peptide; a basic N-terminal
extracellular domain with 4 potential N-glycosylation sites; a
phosphohistidine domain; a histidine acid phosphatase active site
signature; a transmembrane domain; and a polar C-terminal cytoplasmic
region. RT-PCR analysis detected high expression of ACPT in testis, with
lower or undetectable levels in other tissues. Steroid hormones
upregulated expression of ACPT in a prostate carcinoma cell line.
Expression was low or undetectable in 12 of 14 testicular tumor tissues
but abundant in all normal counterpart tissues. PCR screening also
revealed the presence of up to 3 splice variants encoding ACPT proteins
of 92 and 333 amino acids. Yousef et al. (2001) concluded that ACPT is a
testicular phosphatase based on expression and structural features.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Yousef et al. (2001) determined that the
ACPT gene contains 11 exons and spans 5 kb.

MAPPING

By PCR screening of a BAC clone, Yousef et al. (2001) mapped the ACPT
gene to 19q13, centromeric to the KLK1 gene (147910) and the kallikrein
gene cluster.

REFERENCE 1. Yousef, G. M.; Diamandis, M.; Jung, K.; Diamandis, E. P.: Molecular
cloning of a novel human acid phosphatase gene (ACPT) that is highly
expressed in the testis. Genomics 74: 385-395, 2001.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/8/2001

EDITED cwells: 09/17/2003
mgross: 10/8/2001

614064	TITLE *614064 ZINC FINGER- AND BTB DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 24; ZBTB24
;;POZ-, AT HOOK-, AND ZINC FINGER-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; PATZ2;;
ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 450; ZNF450;;
KIAA0441
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ZBTB24 gene encodes a protein that belongs to a large family of
transcriptional repressors with prominent roles in hematopoietic
development and malignancy. ZBTB24 appears to be involved in DNA
methylation of juxtacentromeric DNA, particularly during B-cell
development (summary by de Greef et al., 2011).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Ishikawa et al. (1997) cloned ZBTB24, which they called
KIAA0441. KIAA441 contains repetitive elements in its 3-prime end. The
deduced 697-amino acid protein shares significant similarity with a
Xenopus zinc finger protein. RT-PCR detected variable KIAA0441
expression in all tissues examined. In vitro-translated KIAA0441 had an
apparent molecular mass of 67 kD by SDS-PAGE.

De Greef et al. (2011) found ubiquitous ZBTB24 expression in various
human tissues and cell lines, with highest expression in B cells, most
notably in naive B cells, suggesting a role in B-cell differentiation.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Ishikawa et al. (1997) mapped the ZBTB24
gene to chromosome 6.

Gross (2011) mapped the ZBTB24 gene to chromosome 6q21 based on an
alignment of the ZBTB24 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC036731) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By homozygosity mapping of 5 patients with immunodeficiency-centromeric
instability-facial anomalies syndrome-2 (ICF2; 614069), born of
consanguineous parents, followed by exome sequencing in 1 patient, de
Greef et al. (2011) identified a homozygous truncating mutation in the
ZBTB24 gene (R320X; 614064.0001). Homozygous ZBTB24 mutations were
subsequently identified in 3 of the 4 remaining consanguineous families,
as well as in an additional consanguineous family (see, e.g., S16X;
614064.0002 and R457X; 614064.0005). Two affected sibs of a
nonconsanguineous family were compound heterozygous for ZBTB24 mutations
(S278X; 614064.0003 and C408G; 614064.0004). Mutations in this gene were
not identified in 4 remaining patients with a similar phenotype,
indicating further genetic heterogeneity. All but 1 of the mutations
created a premature stop codon, indicating that ICF2 is caused by ZBTB24
loss of function.

Chouery et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 2-bp deletion in the
ZBTB24 gene (396delTA; 614064.0006) in 3 Lebanese brothers with ICF2.
The molecular studies indicated a loss-of-function effect.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
IMMUNODEFICIENCY-CENTROMERIC INSTABILITY-FACIAL ANOMALIES SYNDROME
2
ZBTB24, ARG320TER

In a Turkish girl, born of consanguineous parents, with
immunodeficiency-centromeric instability-facial anomalies syndrome-2
(ICF2; 614069), de Greef et al. (2011) identified a homozygous 958C-T
transition in exon 3 of the ZBTB24 gene, resulting in an arg320-to-ter
(R320X) substitution. The mutation was identified by homozygosity
mapping followed by exome sequencing. The patient had
agammaglobulinemia, delayed motor development, and mental retardation,
and died at age 11 years.

.0002
IMMUNODEFICIENCY-CENTROMERIC INSTABILITY-FACIAL ANOMALIES SYNDROME
2
ZBTB24, SER16TER

In a Scottish girl, born of consanguineous parents, with
immunodeficiency-centromeric instability-facial anomalies syndrome-2
(ICF2; 614069), de Greef et al. (2011) identified a homozygous 47C-G
transversion in exon 2 of the ZBTB24 gene, resulting in a ser16-to-ter
(S16X) substitution. She had agammaglobulinemia, delayed motor
development, and mental retardation, and died at age 13 years.

.0003
IMMUNODEFICIENCY-CENTROMERIC INSTABILITY-FACIAL ANOMALIES SYNDROME
2
ZBTB24, SER278TER

In 2 German sibs with ICF2 (614069), de Greef et al. (2011) identified
compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ZBTB24 gene: an 833C-G
transversion in exon 2, resulting in a ser278-to-ter (S278X)
substitution, and a 1222T-G transversion in exon 5, resulting in a
cys408-to-gly (C408G; 614064.0004) substitution in a conserved residue
in 1 of the 8 zinc fingers. One sib had agammaglobulinemia and mental
retardation and died at age 4 years, whereas the other had
hypogammaglobulinemia and motor and mental retardation and was alive at
age 9.

.0004
IMMUNODEFICIENCY-CENTROMERIC INSTABILITY-FACIAL ANOMALIES SYNDROME
2
ZBTB24, CYS408GLY

See 614064.0003 and de Greef et al. (2011).

.0005
IMMUNODEFICIENCY-CENTROMERIC INSTABILITY-FACIAL ANOMALIES SYNDROME
2
ZBTB24, ARG457TER

In an Italian man with ICF2 (614069), de Greef et al. (2011) identified
a homozygous 1369C-T transition in exon 6 of the ZBTB24 gene, resulting
in an arg457-to-ter (R457X) substitution.

.0006
IMMUNODEFICIENCY-CENTROMERIC INSTABILITY-FACIAL ANOMALIES SYNDROME
2
ZBTB24, 2-BP DEL, 396TA

In 3 Lebanese brothers with ICF2 (614069), Chouery et al. (2012)
identified a homozygous 2-bp deletion (396_397delTA) in exon 1 of the
ZBTB24 gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination
(His132GlnfsTer19). The unaffected parents were heterozygous for the
mutation, which presumably caused a loss of function.

REFERENCE 1. Chouery, E.; Abou-Ghoch, J.; Corbani, S.; El Ali, N.; Korban, R.;
Salem, N.; Castro, C.; Klayme, S.; Azoury-Abou Rjeily, M.; Khoury-Matar,
R.; Debo, G.; Germanos-Haddad, M.; Delague, V.; Lefranc, G.; Megarbane,
A.: A novel deletion in ZBTB24 in a Lebanese family with immunodeficiency,
centromeric instability, and facial anomalies syndrome type 2. Clin.
Genet. 82: 489-493, 2012.

2. de Greef, J. C.; Wang, J.; Balog, J.; den Dunnen, J. T.; Frants,
R. R.; Straasheijm, K. R.; Aytekin, C.; van der Burg, M.; Duprez,
L.; Ferster, A.; Gennery, A. R.; Gimelli, G.; and 13 others: Mutations
in ZBTB24 are associated with immunodeficiency, centromeric instability,
and facial anomalies syndrome type 2. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 88: 796-804,
2011.

3. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/28/2011.

4. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Nakajima, D.; Seki, N.; Ohira, M.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VIII. 78 new cDNA
clones from brain which code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4:
307-313, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/26/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/30/2011

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 6/28/2011

EDITED carol: 09/11/2013
carol: 3/4/2013
ckniffin: 2/26/2013
carol: 5/30/2012
wwang: 7/5/2011
ckniffin: 6/30/2011
mgross: 6/28/2011

607068	TITLE *607068 CYTOCHROME b561 DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; CYB561D2
;;101F6
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By physical cloning methodologies and bioinformatic computational
analyses, Lerman and Minna (2000) identified a number of genes,
including CYB561D2, which they called 101F6, in a region of chromosome
3p21.3 that is associated with a putative lung cancer tumor suppressor
gene. The deduced 222-amino acid integral protein is 95% identical to
the mouse protein and contains 6 transmembrane helices with both N and C
termini in the cytoplasm. Northern blot analysis revealed wide
expression of a 1.5-kb transcript that was strongest in liver, followed
by placenta and lung, with low amounts in heart, kidney, and pancreas
and only traces in skeletal muscle and brain. CYB561D2 was highly
expressed in most lung cancer cell lines tested. No mutations were
detected in any of the lung cancer cell lines. Lerman and Minna (2000)
concluded that CYB561D2 is an unlikely candidate tumor suppressor gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Lerman and Minna (2000) determined that
the CYB561D2 gene contains 4 exons and spans 3.2 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lerman and Minna (2000) determined that
the CYB561D2 gene resides in a 120-kb critical region for a lung cancer
tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 3p21.3.

REFERENCE 1. Lerman, M. I.; Minna, J. D.: The 630-kb lung cancer homozygous
deletion region on human chromosome 3p21.3: identification and evaluation
of the resident candidate tumor suppressor genes. Cancer Res. 60:
6116-6133, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/25/2002

EDITED carol: 05/01/2008
mgross: 6/27/2002
mgross: 6/25/2002

615013	TITLE *615013 HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H2A HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER H; HIST1H2AH
;;HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H2AH;;
HIST1 CLUSTER, H2AH;;
H2A/S
DESCRIPTION For background information on histones, histone gene clusters, and the
H2A histone family, see HIST1H2AA (613499).

CLONING

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) identified the
mouse and human HIST1H2AH genes.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) determined that the
histone gene cluster on chromosome 6p22-p21, which they called histone
gene cluster-1 (HIST1), contains 55 histone genes, including HIST1H2AH.

GENE FUNCTION

See HIST1H2AA (613499) for functional information on H2A histones.

REFERENCE 1. Marzluff, W. F.; Gongidi, P.; Woods, K. R.; Jin, J.; Maltais, L.
J.: The human and mouse replication-dependent histone genes. Genomics 80:
487-498, 2002.

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 1/11/2013

EDITED mgross: 01/11/2013

609771	TITLE *609771 UBINUCLEIN 1; UBN1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cellular senescence is an irreversible proliferation arrest often
characterized by formation of senescence-associated heterochromatin foci
(SAHF). SAHF result from condensation of individual chromosomes into
isolated heterochromatic domains and are involved in repression of
proliferation-promoting genes. UBN1 is a component of a complex required
for SAHF formation (Banumathy et al., 2009).

CLONING

By screening a HeLa cell cDNA expression library with EBV transcription
factor EB1, a member of the bZIP family, Aho et al. (2000) identified
and subsequently cloned a novel gene, which they designated UBN1. A
partial sequence of UBN1 had previously been identified during the
cloning of the periplakin (PPL; 602871) gene (Aho et al., 1998). The
UBN1 gene encodes a deduced 1,134-amino acid protein with a calculated
molecular mass of 121,529 Da and a pI of 9.34. Aho et al. (2000) also
identified mouse, rat, and pig UBN1 orthologs. RT-PCR detected UBN1
expression in all human normal and tumor tissues analyzed. Northern blot
analysis revealed a single, approximately 7-kb UBN1 transcript in all
human cancer cell lines tested.

By searching databases for sequences similar to yeast Hpc2, Banumathy et
al. (2009) identified human UBN1 and UBN2 (613841). The deduced UBN1
protein contains 1,134 amino acids. UBN1 and UBN2 share similarity with
yeast Hpc2 only in an N-terminal domain that the authors called the
Hpc2-related domain (HRD). However, UBN1 and UBN2 also share similarity
with one another in a central region and a C-terminal region. RT-PCR
analysis showed variable UBN1 expression in all primary cell cultures
and tumor cell lines examined. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that
UBN1 localized throughout the nucleoplasm in proliferating primary human
fibroblasts in a fine speckled pattern. In senescent cells, UBN1
colocalized with HIRA (600237) in PML (102578)-containing nuclear
bodies.

GENE FUNCTION

By immunofluorescence analysis of frozen sections of newborn human
foreskin sections, Aho et al. (2000) determined that ubinuclein resides
in the nucleus. Grainy or punctate nuclear staining was observed in
primary keratinocyte cultures. Overexpression of tagged UBN1 cDNA
constructs in keratinocytes revealed that the N terminus is essential
for the nuclear localization, and that the central domain is responsible
for the interaction with EB1 and for the phenotype of transfected
keratinocytes similar to terminal differentiation. Cotransfection and
overexpression of ubinuclein and EB1 revealed that the 2 proteins
colocalize to the nucleus. In cells that were flat and appeared spread
out on top of the basal cell layer, both proteins were also detected in
a punctate pattern in the cytoplasm. Using EB1 mutants, Aho et al.
(2000) found that basic residues within the bipartite basic domain of
EB1 are essential for binding ubinuclein. In vitro pull-down assays
showed that ubinuclein interacts with other members of the bZIP family,
including JUN (165160) and CEBP (116897). Using electrophoretic mobility
shift assays, Aho et al. (2000) found that ubinuclein impairs the
binding of EB1 to the AP1 consensus site.

Using coimmunoprecipitation analysis, Banumathy et al. (2009) showed
that UBN1 interacted with HIRA and ASF1A (609189), which form a complex
involved in SAHF formation. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of
HIRA or UBN1 revealed that each protein stabilized the other. Mutation
analysis showed that the N-terminal HRD of UBN1 and the WD repeat domain
of HIRA were required for the interaction. SAHF formation depends upon
prior localization of HIRA to PML nuclear bodies, and Banumathy et al.
(2009) showed that UBN1 colocalized with HIRA in PML nuclear bodies in
senescent cells and in cells entering senescence. UBN1 bound to the
proliferation-promoting cyclin A2 gene (CCNA2; 123835) and was
associated with histone methyltransferase activity directed toward lys9
of histone-3 (H3; see 602820), a histone mark predominantly associated
with transcriptional repression and chromatin condensation.
Overexpression of UBN1 reduced proliferation of primary human
fibroblasts, enhanced localization of HIRA to PML nuclear bodies, and
accelerated SAHF formation. Conversely, knockdown of UBN1 blocked SAHF
formation. Banumathy et al. (2009) concluded that UBN1 is required for
SAHF assembly and formation of transcriptionally silent chromatin.

GENE STRUCTURE

Aho et al. (2000) determined that the UBN1 gene contains 18 exons and
encompasses approximately 70 kb of genomic DNA. It has 2 alternative
5-prime exons preceded by putative promoter sequences.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Aho et al. (2000) mapped the human UBN1 gene to
chromosome 16p13.3 and the mouse Ubn1 gene to a region of syntenic
homology on chromosome 16. UBN1 is oriented tail-to-tail with the PPL
gene. The distance between the polyadenylation signals of the 2 genes is
194 bp.

REFERENCE 1. Aho, S.; Buisson, M.; Pajunen, T.; Ryoo, Y.W.; Giot, J.F.; Gruffat,
H.; Sergeant, A.; Uitto, J.: Ubinuclein, a novel nuclear protein
interacting with cellular and viral transcription factors. J. Cell
Biol. 148: 1165-1176, 2000.

2. Aho, S.; McLean, W. H. I.; Li, K.; Uitto, J.: cDNA cloning, mRNA
expression, and chromosomal mapping of human and mouse periplakin
gene. Genomics 48: 242-247, 1998.

3. Banumathy, G.; Somaiah, N.; Zhang, R.; Tang, Y.; Hoffmann, J.;
Andrake, M.; Ceulemans, H.; Schultz, D.; Marmorstein, R.; Adams, P.
D.: Human UBN1 is an ortholog of yeast Hpc2p and has an essential
role in the HIRA/ASF1a chromatin-remodeling pathway in senescent cells. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 29: 758-770, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/25/2011

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 12/11/2005

EDITED mgross: 03/25/2011
mgross: 3/25/2011
terry: 3/25/2011
carol: 12/11/2005

600547	TITLE *600547 CYSTEINE CONJUGATE BETA-LYASE 1; CCBL1
;;BETA-LYASE, KIDNEY;;
KYNURENINE AMINOTRANSFERASE I; KAT1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cysteine conjugate beta-lyase (glutamine transaminase K; kynurenine
aminotransferase; EC 2.6.1.64) metabolizes cysteine conjugates of
certain halogenated alkenes and alkanes to form reactive metabolites
that can produce nephrotoxicity and neurotoxicity in experimental
animals and man (Perry et al., 1995).

CLONING

Using a combination of hybridization screening and PCR techniques, Perry
et al. (1995) isolated a full-length cDNA for human kidney cysteine
conjugate beta-lyase, or CCBL1. Comparison of the deduced amino acid
sequence with that of the rat enzyme indicated an 82% overall
similarity, with 90% similarity around the pyridoxal phosphate-binding
site. Many of the changes were conservative in nature.

GENE FUNCTION

Perry et al. (1995) found that expression of CCBL1 cDNA in COS-1 cells
resulted in production of a cytosolic enzyme that showed both cysteine
conjugate beta-lyase and glutamine transaminase K activity.

Yu et al. (2006) noted that Kat2 -/- mice have lower hippocampal
kynurenic acid levels and are hyperactive compared with wildtype mice,
but these abnormalities occur early and are transitory. Yu et al. (2006)
found that Kat1 and Kat3 (CCBL2; 610656) expression, when measured
together, was higher in Kat2 -/- mice at postnatal day 60, but not at
postnatal days 7, 14, 21, or 28, compared with wildtype mice. The
increased Kat1 and Kat3 expression paralleled restoration of the normal
phenotype in Kat2 -/- mice. Yu et al. (2006) concluded that upregulation
of Kat1 and Kat3 compensates for loss of Kat2 in Kat2 -/- mice.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of genomic DNA from human/rodent hybrid cells, Perry et
al. (1995) mapped the CCBL1 gene to chromosome 9. By database analysis,
Yu et al. (2006) mapped the CCBL1 gene to chromosome 9q34.11.

REFERENCE 1. Perry, S.; Harries, H.; Scholfield, C.; Lock, T.; King, L.; Gibson,
G.; Goldfarb, P.: Molecular cloning and expression of a cDNA for
human kidney cysteine conjugate beta-lyase. FEBS Lett. 360: 277-280,
1995.

2. Yu, P.; Li, Z.; Zhang, L.; Tagle, D. A.; Cai, T.: Characterization
of kynurenine aminotransferase III, a novel member of a phylogenetically
conserved KAT family. Gene 365: 111-118, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/18/2006

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/22/1995

EDITED wwang: 01/24/2008
mgross: 12/18/2006
mgross: 12/15/2006
carol: 9/15/2000
mark: 5/22/1995

606651	TITLE *606651 GLUTAMATE RECEPTOR, IONOTROPIC, N-METHYL-D-ASPARTATE 3B; GRIN3B
;;NR3B
DESCRIPTION The GRIN3B gene encodes a subunit of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)
receptor, which belongs to the superfamily of glutamate-regulated ion
channels that are present in neurons throughout the central nervous
system (Andersson et al., 2001). When coassembled with NR1 (GRIN1;
138249) or NR2 (see GRIN2A; 138253), it acts as an inhibitory subunit
that decreases the current amplitude and calcium permeablility (Niemann
et al., 2008).

CLONING

By screening a human fetal brain cDNA library, Andersson et al. (2001)
isolated the GRIN3B cDNA. GRIN3B cDNA contains 2703 bp corresponding to
a protein, NR3B, of 901 amino acids. In situ hybridization showed
widespread distribution of Grin3b mRNA in the adult rat brain Andersson
et al. (2001).

GENE STRUCTURE

Analysis of exon/intron boundaries by Andersson et al. (2001) showed
that GRIN3B is encoded by 8 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Chatterton et al. (2002) found that NR3B is expressed predominantly in
motor neurons, whereas NR3A is more widely distributed. When coexpressed
in Xenopus oocytes, NR3A or NR3B coassembles with NR1 to form excitatory
glycine receptors that are unaffected by glutamate or NMDA, and
inhibited by D-serine, a coactivator of conventional NMDA receptors.
Moreover, Chatterton et al. (2002) found that NR1/NR3A or NR1/NR3B
receptors form relatively calcium-impermeable cation channels that are
resistant to the open-channel blockers magnesium, MK-801, and memantine,
and to competitive antagonists. In cerebrocortical neurons containing
NR3 family members, glycine triggers a burst of firing, and membrane
patches manifest glycine-responsive single channels that are
suppressible by D-serine. By itself, glycine is normally thought of as
an inhibitory neurotransmitter. In contrast, these NR1/NR3A or NR1/NR3B
NMDA receptors constitute a type of excitatory glycine receptor.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Andersson et al. (2001) mapped the GRIN3B gene to
human chromosome 19p13.3 and mouse chromosome 10.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Niemann et al. (2008) identified 35 sequence variants in the GRIN3B gene
in a large cohort of patients with ALS (105400) and controls. None of
the variants were predicted to have significant functional consequences
on GRIN3B function, excluding a role for GRIN3B variants in the
pathogenesis of motoneuron disease. One variant, a 4-bp insertion
(1396insCGTT; dbSNP rs10666583), was shown to result in premature
termination consistent with a null allele. Genotyping of 2,128 healthy
individuals from 42 different populations from around the world showed a
global distribution for 1396insCGTT (39 of 42 populations) with allele
frequencies between 0.24 and 0.29 in western European populations.
Complete GRIN3B deficiency was found in approximately 10% of normal
individuals, suggesting that its absence can be compensated for by other
proteins. Niemann et al. (2008) postulated that GRIN3B may be undergoing
evolutionary changes in humans, with degeneration and loss of function.

REFERENCE 1. Andersson, O.; Stenqvist, A.; Attersand, A.; von Euler, G.: Nucleotide
sequence, genomic organization, and chromosomal localization of genes
encoding the human NMDA receptor subunits NR3A and NR3B. Genomics 78:
178-184, 2001.

2. Chatterton, J. E.; Awobuluyi, M.; Premkumar, L. S.; Takahashi,
H.; Talantova, M.; Shin, Y.; Cui, J.; Tu, S.; Sevarino, K. A.; Nakanishi,
N.; Tong, G.; Lipton, S. A.; Zhang, D.: Excitatory glycine receptors
containing the NR3 family of NMDA receptor subunits. Nature 415:
793-798, 2002.

3. Niemann, S.; Landers, J. E.; Churchill, M. J.; Hosler, B.; Sapp,
P.; Speed, W. C.; Lahn, B. T.; Kidd, K. K.; Brown, R. H., Jr.; Hayashi,
Y.: Motoneuron-specific NR3B gene: no association with ALS and evidence
for a common null allele. Neurology 70: 666-676, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/14/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/7/2002

CREATED Joanna S. Amberger: 1/29/2002

EDITED carol: 09/20/2013
wwang: 1/16/2009
ckniffin: 1/14/2009
joanna: 1/5/2009
alopez: 2/25/2002
alopez: 2/7/2002
terry: 2/7/2002
joanna: 1/30/2002
joanna: 1/29/2002

600796	TITLE *600796 SPLICING FACTOR 3A, SUBUNIT 2; SF3A2
;;SF3A, 66-KD SUBUNIT; SF3A66;;
SPLICEOSOME-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN, 62-KD; SAP62
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Bennett and Reed (1993) used a generalizable strategy to isolate a cDNA
encoding a mammalian spliceosome-associated protein, which they
designated SAP62. The presence of a zinc finger of the C2H2 class led
them to predict that SAP62 is a nucleic acid-binding protein, consistent
with the observation that SAP62 can be crosslinked by ultraviolet light
to pre-mRNA in the spliceosome. Using the SAP62 cDNA as a probe for
Northern blot analysis of HeLa cell mRNA, they detected a transcript of
about 2 kb. They demonstrated that SAP62 is the likely functional
homolog of the yeast PRP11 protein. Both PRP11 and SAP62 associate
stably with the spliceosome, contain a single zinc finger, and display
significant amino acid sequence similarity. Unlike PRP11, SAP62 contains
22 proline-rich heptapeptide repeats in the C-terminal region.

GENE FUNCTION

During the investigation of the regulatory potential of a region 5-prime
of the mouse anti-mullerian gene Amh (600957), Dresser et al. (1995)
identified a region of homology with the known cDNA sequence of a human
spliceosome gene, SAP62. In the mouse, the termination codon (TGA) of
the Sap62 gene is only 434 bp 5-prime of the Amh start of translation
(ATG); in the human, the equivalent distance is 789 bp. RNase protection
analysis showed that the majority of Sap62 transcripts use an uncommon
polyadenylation signal (ATTAAA) lying in the intragenic region, 87 bp
3-prime of the TGA. This analysis also showed that Sap62 is transcribed
in all tissues examined, whereas specific Amh transcription initiating
10 bp 5-prime of the ATG is limited to the developing testis of the
fetus from 11.5 days postcoitum and in the ovary from 3 days postpartum.
However, in all tissues a significant number of Sap62 transcripts failed
to polyadenylate in the intragenic region and continue through the Amh
locus. This implied to Dresser et al. (1995) that the Amh locus is an
open chromatin state in all tissues despite a requirement for precise
regulation.

MAPPING

Because of its proximity to AMH, Dresser et al. (1995) speculated that
the human SAP62 gene could be mapped to chromosome 19p, specifically
19p13.3-p13.2, and mouse Sap62 to MMU10.

REFERENCE 1. Bennett, M.; Reed, R.: Correspondence between a mammalian spliceosome
component and an essential yeast splicing factor. Science 262: 105-108,
1993.

2. Dresser, D. W.; Hacker, A.; Lovell-Badge, R.; Guerrier, D.: The
genes for a spliceosome protein (SAP62) and the anti-mullerian hormone
(AMH) are contiguous. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1613-1618, 1995.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/23/1995

EDITED alopez: 03/28/2012
terry: 9/26/2008
mgross: 1/26/2001
carol: 3/30/2000
carol: 8/18/1998
mark: 7/31/1997
terry: 6/19/1997
mark: 7/2/1996
mark: 5/20/1996
mark: 12/15/1995
mark: 12/12/1995
terry: 12/6/1995
mark: 9/23/1995

612919	TITLE *612919 LanC-LIKE 2; LANCL2
;;TESTIS-SPECIFIC ADRIAMYCIN SENSITIVITY PROTEIN; TASP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for genes similar to LANCL1 (604155), followed by 3-prime
RACE of a human cerebral cortex cDNA library, Mayer et al. (2001) cloned
LANCL2. The deduced 450-amino acid protein contains a Walker A box and 7
repetitive hydrophobic regions that contain GxxG motifs. It shares 57.9%
amino acid identity with LANCL1. Northern blot analysis detected high
expression of 4.7- and 4.1-kb transcripts and weaker expression of 2.5-
and 1.8-kb transcripts in brain. The 1.8-kb transcript was highly
expressed in testis. All other tissues examined showed weak expression
of the 4.1- and 1.8-kb transcripts. RNA dot blot analysis confirmed
ubiquitous LANCL2 expression, with highest levels in amygdala, followed
by temporal lobe and testis. Database analysis revealed conservation of
LANCL proteins in bacteria, plant, and animal genomes.

Using Western blot and immunohistochemical analyses, Park and James
(2003) found that epitope-tagged LANCL2 distributed to the plasma
membrane, cytosol, and nucleus of a transfected human uterine sarcoma
cell line.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a human uterine sarcoma cell line and a multidrug-resistant
derivative, Park and James (2003) found that ectopic expression of
LANCL2 significantly reduced expression of the multidrug resistance gene
MDR1 (ABCB1; 171050) and increased cell sensitivity toward the
chemotherapeutic agent adriamycin. Reporter gene assays revealed that
LANCL2 repressed transcription of the MDR1 promoter.

Zhang et al. (2009) showed that LANCL2 exhibited Zn(2+)-dependent
glutathione binding. LANCL2 bound the SH3 domain of mouse Eps8 (600206),
but not other SH3-containing proteins. The interaction between LANCL2
and Eps8 did not require either of the PxxP motifs of LANCL2, but it was
inhibited by glutathione.

MAPPING

Park and James (2003) stated that the LANCL2 gene maps within 200 bp of
the EGFR gene (131550) on chromosome 7p11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Mayer, H.; Pongratz, M.; Prohaska, R.: Molecular cloning, characterization,
and tissue-specific expression of human LANCL2, a novel member of
the LanC-like protein family. DNA Seq. 12: 161-166, 2001.

2. Park, S.; James, C. D.: Lanthionine synthetase components C-like
2 increases cellular sensitivity to adriamycin by decreasing the expression
of P-glycoprotein through a transcription-mediated mechanism. Cancer
Res. 63: 723-727, 2003.

3. Zhang, W.; Wang, L.; Liu, Y.; Xu, J.; Zhu, G.; Cang, H.; Li, X.;
Bartlam, M.; Hensley, K.; Li, G.; Rao, Z.; Zhang, X. C.: Structure
of human lanthionine synthetase C-like protein 1 and its interaction
with Eps8 and glutathione. Genes Dev. 23: 1387-1392, 2009.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/17/2009

EDITED mgross: 07/17/2009

600021	TITLE *600021 MAX DIMERIZATION PROTEIN 1; MXD1
;;MAD1;;
BHLHC58
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The MXD1 and MXI1 (600020) genes encode proteins that belong to a
distinct subfamily of MAX (154950)-interacting proteins. The MAX protein
specifically interacts with the MYC protein family (190080) by forming
heterodimers mediated by their basic-helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper
(bHLHZ) interaction domains. Binding to MAX is essential for MYC
transcription and transforming activity; MYC homodimers are inactive.
Both MXD1 and MXI1 bind MAX in vitro, forming a sequence-specific
DNA-binding complex similar to the MYC-MAX heterodimer. MXD1 and MYC
compete for binding to MAX. In addition, MXD1 acts as a transcriptional
repressor, while MYC appears to function as an activator. MXI1 also
appears to lack a transcriptional activation domain. Therefore, MXI1 and
MXD1 might antagonize MYC function and are candidate tumor suppressor
genes (Nair and Burley, 2003).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Nair and Burley (2003) determined the x-ray structures of the bHLHZ
domains of MYC-MAX and MXD1-MAX heterodimers bound to their common DNA
target, the enhancer box (E-box) hexanucleotide
(5-prime-CACGTG-3-prime), at 1.9- and 2.0-angstrom resolution,
respectively. E-box recognition by these 2 structurally similar
transcription factor pairs determines whether a cell will divide and
proliferate (MYC-MAX) or differentiate and become quiescent (MXD1-MAX).
Deregulation of MYC has been implicated in the development of many human
cancers, including Burkitt lymphoma, neuroblastomas, and small cell lung
cancers. Both quasisymmetric heterodimers resemble the symmetric MAX
homodimer, albeit with marked structural differences in the coiled-coil
leucine zipper regions that explain preferential homo- and heteromeric
dimerization of these 3 evolutionarily related DNA-binding proteins. The
MYC-MAX heterodimer, but not its MXD1-MAX counterpart, dimerizes to form
a bivalent heterotetramer, explaining how MYC can upregulate expression
of genes with promoters bearing widely separated E-boxes.

MAPPING

Edelhoff et al. (1994) mapped the human MXD1 and MXI1 genes to
chromosomes 2p13 and 10q25, respectively, by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. The homologous gene in the mouse was mapped to chromosome
6 by interspecific backcross analysis.

Shapiro et al. (1994) confirmed the assignments of the MXD1 and MXI1
genes to chromosomes 2p13-p12 and 10q24-q25, respectively, by somatic
cell mapping and fluorescence in situ hybridization.

NOMENCLATURE

The designation MAD was derived from MAX dimerizer (Eisenman, 1994).

REFERENCE 1. Edelhoff, S.; Ayer, D. E.; Zervos, A. S.; Steingrimsson, E.; Jenkins,
N. A.; Copeland, N. G.; Eisenman, R. N.; Brent, R.; Disteche, C. M.
: Mapping of two genes encoding members of a distinct subfamily of
MAX interacting proteins: MAD to human chromosome 2 and mouse chromosome
6, and MXI1 to chromosome 10 and mouse chromosome 19. Oncogene 9:
665-668, 1994.

2. Eisenman, R. N.: Personal Communication. Seattle, Wash.  7/27/1994.

3. Nair, S. K.; Burley, S. K.: X-ray structures of Myc-Max and Mad-Max
recognizing DNA: molecular bases of regulation by proto-oncogenic
transcription factors. Cell 112: 193-205, 2003.

4. Shapiro, D. N.; Valentine, V.; Eagle, L.; Yin, X.; Morris, S. W.;
Prochownik, E. V.: Assignment of the human MAD and MXI1 genes to
chromosomes 2p12-p13 and 10q24-q25. Genomics 23: 282-285, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 2/4/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/1/1994

EDITED wwang: 08/15/2011
ckniffin: 8/8/2011
mgross: 2/4/2003
psherman: 9/18/1998
psherman: 9/16/1998
mark: 8/27/1996
terry: 11/7/1994
carol: 10/7/1994
mimadm: 7/30/1994

601624	TITLE *601624 FICOLIN 2; FCN2
;;COLLAGEN/FIBRINOGEN DOMAIN-CONTAINING LECTIN 2 P35;;
OPSONIN P35
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Matsushita et al. (1996) reported the cloning and characterization of
P35, a human lectin with collagen and fibrinogen domains. The P35 gene
encodes ficolin-2 (FCN2). Endo et al. (1996) isolated genomic clones for
P35 and a related gene shown to be identical to ficolin-1 (FCN1;
601252).

GENE STRUCTURE

Hummelshoj et al. (2005) noted that the FCN2 gene contains 8 exons.

MAPPING

Endo et al. (1996) mapped the FCN2 gene to chromosome 9q34 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Serum concentration of ficolin-2 varies considerably in healthy
individuals. Hummelshoj et al. (2005) sequenced the promoter region,
exons, and intron-exon boundaries of FCN2 in 157 Danish Caucasians, and
measured ficolin-2 concentrations in serum and N-acetylglucosamine
(GlcNAc) binding. FCN2 promoter polymorphisms were associated with
marked changes in the ficolin-2 serum concentration, whereas 2
nonsynonymous SNPs (dbSNP rs17549193 and dbSNP rs7851696) clustered in
exon 8 encoding the fibrinogen-like domain were associated with
decreased and increased GlcNAc binding, respectively. Hummelshoj et al.
(2005) suggested that functional polymorphic sites may regulate both the
expression and function of ficolin-2.

EVOLUTION

Endo et al. (2012) noted that human FCN1 is the ortholog of mouse Fcnb.
Human FCN2 is closely related to mouse Fcna, but the genes appear to
have evolved independently in each murine and primate lineage. The human
FCN3 gene (604973) is a pseudogene in mouse.

ANIMAL MODEL

Endo et al. (2012) noted that ficolins and mannose-binding lectin (MBL,
or MBL2; 154545) are complexed with MBL-associated serine proteases
(MASPs; see 600521). MBL is important in both autoimmune and infectious
diseases. Endo et al. (2012) found that Fcna -/- mice and Fcna -/- Fcnb
-/- mice lacked complement activation in sera due to the absence of
complexes of Fcna and MASPs. Transnasal challenge of mice with a
Streptococcus pneumoniae strain recognized by ficolins, but not by Mbl,
resulted in reduced mouse survival and higher bacterial loads in Fcna
-/-, Fcnb -/-, and Fcna -/- Fcnb -/- mice. Reconstitution of the
Fcna-mediated lectin pathway with an Fcna-encoding plasmid prior to
infection improved survival of Fcna -/- mice, but not Fcna -/- Fcnb -/-
mice, indicating that both Fcna and Fcnb are essential in defense
against S. pneumoniae. Endo et al. (2012) proposed that FCNA and FCNB
have a crucial role in defense against pneumococcal infection through
the lectin complement pathway.

REFERENCE 1. Endo, Y.; Sato, Y.; Matsushita, M.; Fujita, T.: Cloning and characterization
of the human lectin P35 gene and its related gene. Genomics 36:
515-521, 1996.

2. Endo, Y.; Takahashi, M.; Iwaki, D.; Ishida, Y.; Nakazawa, N.; Kodama,
T.; Matsuzaka, T.; Kanno, K.; Liu, Y.; Tsuchiya, K.; Kawamura, I.;
Ikawa, M.; Waguri, S.; Wada, I.; Matsushita, M.; Schwaeble, W. J.;
Fujita, T.: Mice deficient in ficolin, a lectin component pathway
recognition molecule, are susceptible to Streptococcus pneumoniae
infection. J. Immun. 189: 5860-5866, 2012.

3. Hummelshoj, T.; Munthe-Fog, L.; Madsen, H. O.; Fujita, T.; Matsushita,
M.; Garred, P.: Polymorphisms in the FCN2 gene determine serum variation
and function of ficolin-2. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 1651-1658, 2005.
Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet. 15: 163-165, 2006.

4. Matsushita, M.; Endo, Y.; Taira, S.; Sato, Y.; Fujita, T.; Ichikawa,
N.; Nakata, M.; Misuochi, T.: A novel human lectin with collagen-
and fibrinogen-like domains which functions as an opsonin. J. Biol.
Chem. 271: 2448-2454, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 06/20/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/20/2013
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/16/2008

CREATED Mark H. Paalman: 1/11/1997

EDITED mgross: 06/20/2013
mgross: 6/20/2013
wwang: 11/4/2009
ckniffin: 10/29/2009
carol: 7/9/2009
wwang: 6/19/2008
terry: 6/16/2008
mgross: 12/13/1999
mark: 1/11/1997

603032	TITLE *603032 STANNIN; SNN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Trimethyltin (TMT), a trialkyltin compound, is a potent neurotoxic agent
that selectively damages specific brain regions. Sensitive neurons are
found within the hippocampus and other areas; TMT-induced loss of these
neurons results in severe behavioral changes (Balaban et al., 1988).
Intoxicated rodents experienced disorientation, seizures, and
aggressiveness; humans who had been accidentally exposed to TMT
experienced comparable behavioral effects (Boyer, 1989; Dyer et al.,
1982). TMT also causes damage to the renal and immune systems, affecting
proximal tubular epithelial cells and lymphocytes, respectively. In the
study of the mechanism by which TMT renders its effects, Krady et al.
(1990) and Toggas et al. (1992) isolated a cDNA encoding the protein
stannin from TMT-sensitive cells, using avidin-biotin subtractive
hybridization. Stannin is an 88-amino acid protein that migrates in
SDS-PAGE gels as a peptide of approximately 14 kb. Homologs exist in
species as diverse as Drosophila and human. Northern blot analysis
indicated that stannin mRNA transcript is found in lymphatic, renal, and
neural tissues, with greatest expression in the spleen, followed by the
hippocampus, neocortex, cerebellum, striatum, midbrain, and kidney
(Dejneka et al., 1997). Dejneka et al. (1998) found that the human and
mouse protein sequences are 98% identical, with 2 amino acid
substitutions near the C-terminal end of the peptide.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dejneka et al. (1998) found that the mouse Snn gene spans approximately
19 kb and contains 2 exons.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Dejneka et al. (1998) localized
the Snn gene to mouse chromosome 16 at band A2. This region is
homologous to human 16p13 to which the SNN gene had been mapped by Berry
et al. (1995), using a gene-based, sequence tagged site (STS) approach.

GENE FUNCTION

Using differential display, Horrevoets et al. (1999) found that
cytokines induced expression of stannin in cultured human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Stannin was an early response gene, with expression
peaking between 1.5 and 3 hours. In situ hybridization detected stannin
in endothelial cells and in intimal macrophages of atherosclerotic
lesions but not in normal human vessels.

REFERENCE 1. Balaban, C. D.; O'Callaghan, J. P.; Billingsley, M. L.: Trimethyltin-induced
neuronal damage in the rat brain: comparative studies using silver
degeneration stains, immunocytochemistry and immunoassay for neuronotypic
and gliotypic proteins. Neuroscience 26: 337-361, 1988.

2. Berry, R.; Stevens, T. J.; Walter, N. A. R.; Wilcox, A. S.; Rubano,
T.; Hopkins, J. A.; Weber, J.; Goold, R.; Soares, M. B.; Sikela, J.
M.: Gene-based sequence-tagged-sites (STSs) as the basis for a human
gene map. Nature Genet. 10: 415-423, 1995.

3. Boyer, I. J.: Toxicity of dibutyltin, tributyltin and other organotin
compounds to humans and to experimental animals. Toxicology 55:
253-298, 1989.

4. Dejneka, N. S.; Patanow, C. M.; Polavarapu, R.; Toggas, S. M.;
Krady, J. K.; Billingsley, M. L.: Localization and characterization
of stannin: relationship to cellular sensitivity to organotin compounds. Neurochem.
Int. 31: 801-815, 1997.

5. Dejneka, N. S.; Polavarapu, R.; Deng, X.; Martin-DeLeon, P. A.;
Billingsley, M. L.: Chromosomal localization and characterization
of the stannin (Snn) gene. Mammalian Genome 9: 556-564, 1998.

6. Dyer, R. S.; Walsh, T. J.; Wonderlin, W. F.; Bercegeay, M.: The
trimethyltin syndrome in rats. Neurobehav. Toxicol. Teratol. 4:
127-133, 1982.

7. Horrevoets, A. J. G.; Fontijn, R. D.; van Zonneveld, A. J.; de
Vries, C. J. M.; ten Cate, J. W.; Pannekoek, H.: Vascular endothelial
genes that are responsive to tumor necrosis factor-alpha in vitro
are expressed in atherosclerotic lesions, including inhibitor of apoptosis
protein-1, stannin, and two novel genes. Blood 93: 3418-3431, 1999.

8. Krady, J. K.; Oyler, G. A.; Balaban, C. D.; Billingsley, M. L.
: Use of avidin-biotin subtractive hybridization to characterize mRNA
common to neurons destroyed by the selective neurotoxicant trimethyltin. Brain
Res. Molec. Brain Res. 7: 287-297, 1990.

9. Toggas, S. M.; Krady, J. K.; Billingsley, M. L.: Molecular neurotoxicology
of trimethyltin: identification of stannin, a novel protein expressed
in trimethyltin-sensitive cells. Molec. Pharm. 42: 44-56, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/6/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/14/1998

EDITED carol: 06/14/2012
wwang: 6/16/2008
terry: 6/6/2008
carol: 9/15/1998
dkim: 9/15/1998
carol: 9/14/1998

606387	TITLE *606387 TOPOISOMERASE I, MITOCHONDRIAL; TOP1MT
DESCRIPTION DNA topoisomerases are enzymes that modify DNA topology by introducing
reversible breaks in the DNA phosphodiester backbone. They are essential
for DNA strand separation, chromatin compaction, and DNA decatenation
during replication and recombination. Tension generated in the circular
mitochondrial genome during replication and transcription points to the
need for mitochondrial DNA topoisomerase activity (Zhang et al., 2001).

CLONING

By database searching, Zhang et al. (2001) identified the sequence of a
novel clone, which they designated TOP1MT, encoding a 601-amino acid
polypeptide that is highly homologous to nuclear topoisomerase I (TOP1;
126420). The N-terminal domain of TOP1MT contains a mitochondrial
localization sequence and lacks a nuclear localization signal. The
pattern of TOP1MT expression matches the requirement for high
mitochondrial activity in specific tissues. TOP1MT is a type IB
topoisomerase and requires divalent metal, Ca(2+) or Mg(2+), and
alkaline pH for optimal activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang et al. (2001) determined that the TOP1MT gene contains 14 exons.

MAPPING

By FISH, Zhang et al. (2001) mapped the TOP1MT gene to chromosome
8q24.3.

REFERENCE 1. Zhang, H.; Barcelo, J. M.; Lee, B.; Kohlhagen, G.; Zimonjic, D.
B.; Popescu, N. C.; Pommier, Y.: Human mitochondrial topoisomerase
I. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 10608-10613, 2001.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/15/2001

EDITED carol: 05/27/2005
carol: 10/15/2001

165180	TITLE *165180 MAS1 ONCOGENE; MAS1
;;MAS
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The MAS1 oncogene was isolated from DNA of a human epidermoid carcinoma
cell line using the cotransfection and tumorigenicity assay (Young et
al., 1984). Based on its deduced amino acid sequence, the MAS1 gene
product contains 7 potential transmembrane domains. The MAS1 protein is,
therefore, probably an integral membrane protein. Young et al. (1984)
suggested that the MAS1-encoded protein may be a receptor that, when
activated, modulates a critical component in a growth-regulating pathway
to bring about its oncogenic effects.

The structure of the MAS oncogene indicates that it belongs to the class
of receptors that are coupled to GTP-binding proteins and share a
conserved structural motif, which is described as a '7-transmembrane
segment' following the prediction that these hydrophobic segments form
membrane-spanning alpha-helices. Examples include the adrenergic
receptors (e.g., 104210, 104250, 109690). Jackson et al. (1988) found
that the MAS oncogene shows the greatest sequence similarity to the
substance-K receptor (162321). On this basis, they predicted that it
would encode a peptide receptor with mitogenic activity which would act
through the inositol lipid signaling pathways. Expression in Xenopus
oocytes and a transfected mammalian cell line demonstrated that the MAS
gene product is a functional angiotensin receptor.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lyle et al. (2000) determined the genomic sequence of mouse Mas1 and
determined that the gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Rabin et al. (1987) mapped the MAS1 gene to
6q24-q27. The ROS (165020) and MYB (189990) oncogenes are also located
on 6q. It is of note that the estrogen receptor gene (133430) maps to
the same region as MAS1. Al-Ubaidi et al. (1992) confirmed the
assignment of the human MAS1 gene to chromosome 6 by Southern blot
analysis of somatic cell hybrids. Riesewijk et al. (1996) mapped the
human MAS gene to 6q25.3-q26 by fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) in a region very close to the IGF2R gene (147280), which had been
mapped to 6q26. Moreover, FISH signals obtained with YACs carrying the
IGF2R gene and the MAS gene were partially overlapping on metaphase
chromosomes and in 91 of 100 interphase nuclei. Since for cosmid probes
the resolution of interphase FISH is approximately 50 kb, these findings
suggested to the authors that in humans the physical distance between
MAS and IGF2R is at most several hundred kb (it is less than 300 kb in
the mouse).

By 2 interspecific backcrosses, Cebra-Thomas et al. (1992) mapped the
mouse homolog to the proximal portion of chromosome 17. They further
demonstrated that Mas maps to a 1-Mb region which also contains Igf2r
(147280). Al-Ubaidi et al. (1992) also assigned the Mas1 gene to mouse
chromosome 17.

Villar and Pedersen (1994), who characterized the MAS gene product as a
mitogenic G protein-coupled cell surface receptor, investigated the
allele-specific expression pattern of the mouse Mas gene on the basis of
its proximity to the known imprinted gene for insulin growth factor type
II receptor. Their results demonstrated parental imprinting of Mas and
suggested that the maternally inherited allele is transcriptionally
repressed in a developmental and tissue-specific manner. Riesewijk et
al. (1996) demonstrated that the MAS gene, like the IGF2R gene, is not
imprinted in the human. Lyle et al. (2000) found that the last exon of
Mas1 overlaps an antisense Igf2r RNA (604893) that represents a
paternally expressed imprinted gene. The overlap of this last exon
explains the previous erroneous finding of Villar and Pedersen (1994)
that Mas1 was a paternally expressed imprinted gene.

ANIMAL MODEL

Walther et al. (1998) generated mice deficient in Mas by targeted
disruption. Mas -/- mice had increased durability of long-term
potentiation in the dentate gyrus, without affecting hippocampal
morphology, basal synaptic transmission, and presynaptic function. In
addition, Mas -/- mice showed alterations in the onset of
depotentiation. The permissive influence of Mas ablation on hippocampal
synaptic plasticity is paralleled by behavioral changes. While spatial
learning in the Morris water maze was not significantly influenced,
Mas-deficient mice displayed an increased anxiety, as assessed in the
elevated-plus maze. Walther et al. (1998) concluded that Mas is an
important modulating factor in the electrophysiology of the hippocampus
and is involved in behavioral pathways in the adult brain.

The renin-angiotensin system plays a critical role in blood pressure
control and body fluid and electrolyte homeostasis. The cardiovascular
and baroreflex actions of angiotensin 1-7 counteract those of
angiotensin II (see 106150). Santos et al. (2003) demonstrated that
genetic deletion of the G protein-coupled receptor encoded by the Mas
protooncogene abolished the binding of angiotensin 1-7 to mouse kidneys.
Accordingly, Mas-deficient mice completely lacked the entire
antidiuretic action of angiotensin 1-7 after an acute water load.
Angiotensin 1-7 binds to Mas-transfected cells and elicits arachidonic
acid release. Furthermore, Mas-deficient aortas lost their angiotensin
1-7-induced relaxation response. Collectively, these findings identified
Mas as a functional receptor for angiotensin 1-7 and provided a clear
molecular basis for the physiologic actions of this biologically active
peptide.

REFERENCE 1. Al-Ubaidi, M. R.; Brock, D.; Siciliano, M. J.: Assignment of the
homolog of the MAS1 oncogene to mouse chromosome 17. Genomics 13:
487 only, 1992.

2. Cebra-Thomas, J. A.; Tsai, J.-Y.; Pilder, S. H.; Copeland, N. G.;
Jenkins, N. A.; Silver, L. M.: Localization of the Mas proto-oncogene
to a densely marked region of mouse chromosome 17 associated with
genomic imprinting. Genomics 13: 444-446, 1992. Note: Erratum: Genomics
14: 208 only, 1992.

3. Jackson, T. R.; Blair, L. A. C.; Marshall, J.; Goedert, M.; Hanley,
M. R.: The mas oncogene encodes an angiotensin receptor. Nature 335:
437-440, 1988.

4. Lyle, R.; Watanabe, D.; te Vruchte, D.; Lerchner, W.; Smrzka, O.
W.; Wutz, A.; Schageman, J.; Hahner, L.; Davies, C.; Barlow, D. P.
: The imprinted antisense RNA at the Igf2r locus overlaps but does
not imprint Mas1. Nature Genet. 25: 19-21, 2000.

5. Rabin, M.; Birnbaum, D.; Young, D.; Birchmeier, C.; Wigler, M.;
Ruddle, F. H.: Human ROS1 and MAS1 oncogenes located in regions of
chromosome 6 associated with tumor-specific rearrangements. Oncogene
Res. 1: 169-178, 1987.

6. Riesewijk, A. M.; Schepens, M. T.; Mariman, E. M.; Ropers, H.-H.;
Kalscheuer, V. M.: The MAS proto-oncogene is not imprinted in humans. Genomics 35:
380-382, 1996.

7. Santos, R. A. S.; Simoes e Silva, A. C.; Maric, C.; Silva, D. M.
R.; Machado, R. P.; de Buhr, I.; Heringer-Walther, S.; Pinheiro, S.
V. B.; Lopes, M. T.; Bader, M.; Mendes, E. P.; Lemos, V. S.; Campagnole-Santos,
M. J.; Schultheiss, H.-P.; Speth, R.; Walther, T.: Angiotensin-(1-7)
is an endogenous ligand for the G protein-coupled receptor Mas. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 8258-8263, 2003.

8. Villar, A. J.; Pedersen, R. A.: Parental imprinting of the Mas
protooncogene in mouse. Nature Genet. 8: 373-379, 1994.

9. Walther, T.; Balschun, D.; Voigt, J.-P.; Fink, H.; Zuschratter,
W.; Birchmeier, C.; Ganten, D.; Bader, M.: Sustained long term potentiation
and anxiety in mice lacking the Mas protooncogene. J. Biol. Chem. 273:
11867-11873, 1998.

10. Young, D.; Waitches, G.; Birchmeier, C.; Fasano, O.; Wigler, M.
: Isolation and characterization of a new cellular oncogene encoding
a protein with multiple transmembrane domains. Cell 45: 711-719,
1984.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/15/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/18/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/27/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/26/1988

EDITED carol: 05/31/2012
wwang: 10/14/2008
tkritzer: 8/21/2003
terry: 8/15/2003
terry: 8/18/2000
alopez: 4/29/2000
terry: 4/27/2000
mark: 9/9/1996
terry: 9/6/1996
terry: 8/5/1996
carol: 12/22/1994
carol: 6/1/1992
carol: 3/26/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989

602768	TITLE *602768 DELTA-LIKE 3; DLL3
;;DELTA, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mutation in the mouse delta-like 3 gene (Dll3), which is homologous to
the Notch-ligand delta in Drosophila, results in the mouse 'pudgy'
phenotype (Kusumi et al., 1998). On the basis of the similarity of human
autosomal recessive spondylocostal dysostosis (SCDO1; 277300) and the
mouse 'pudgy' phenotype (see later) and the homologous regions of the 2
chromosomes, Bulman et al. (2000) hypothesized that a human Dll3
ortholog would be a candidate for the SCDO1 locus. They cloned the human
DLL3 gene and confirmed its localization to 19q13. Several cDNA clones
representing exons 2 through 10 of human DLL3 were identified. A
comparison of the predicted amino acid sequence showed 79% identity to
mouse Dll3 with EGF repeat 5 varying by only 1 residue.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bulman et al. (2000) demonstrated that the intron/exon junctions within
the predicted amino acid sequences were identical between human and
mouse Dll3, with the exception of the terminal exon, which corresponds
to a fusion of mouse exons 9 and 10. This difference would result in the
human protein having 32 additional amino acids.

MAPPING

The human DLL3 gene was identified within a critical interval, mapped in
2 consanguineous Arab-Israeli and Pakistani SCDO1 pedigrees, of 7.8 cM
at 19q13.1-q13.3 between D19S570 and D19S908 (Bulman et al., 2000). The
Dll3 gene is located on chromosome 7 of the mouse (Kusumi et al., 1998).

GENE FUNCTION

Bettenhausen et al. (1995) demonstrated transient and restricted
expression during mouse embryogenesis of Dll1, a murine gene closely
related to Drosophila 'delta.' Dunwoodie et al. (1997) presented results
suggesting that mouse Dll3 may complement the function of other delta
homologs during early pattern formation in the mouse embryo. Wong et al.
(1997) demonstrated that presenilin-1 (PS1; 104311) is required for
Notch1 (190198) and Dll1 expression in the paraxial mesoderm.

Pourquie and Kusumi (2001) discussed errors in body segmentation. They
cited work in fish, chick, and mouse embryos indicating that
segmentation of the embryonic body relies on a molecular oscillator,
called the segmentation clock, that requires Notch signaling for its
proper functioning. In humans, the fact that mutations in genes required
for oscillation, such as DLL3, result in abnormal segmentation of the
vertebral column suggests that the segmentation clock also acts during
human embryonic development. Disruption of the Notch pathway occurs in
Alagille syndrome (see 118450), a disorder that has vertebral
abnormalities, i.e., 'butterfly vertebrae,' as a feature in about
two-thirds of patients.

Gridley (2003) provided a brief review of human disorders due to defects
in the Notch signaling pathway: Alagille syndrome, spondylocostal
dysostosis, and cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with
subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL; 125310).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Bulman et al. (2000) sequenced the coding region and splice sites of
DLL3 in patients with SCDO1 and identified a unique mutation in DLL3 in
each of 3 pedigrees. In pedigree 1, there was a 5-bp insertion in exon 5
(602768.0001), predicted to truncate the protein in the
Delta-Serrate-Lag2 domain before EGF repeat 1. In pedigree 2, there was
a 2-bp deletion in the fourth EGF repeat domain that predicted a
truncation immediately after EGF repeat 3 (602768.0002). In pedigree 3,
there was a missense mutation in which aspartic acid replaced glycine in
EGF repeat 5 (602768.0003). This residue is highly conserved in Delta
proteins from Drosophila to humans, and the substitution of a charged
polar for a nonpolar residue may disrupt the conformation of the DLL3
protein. Testing of all available family members in each pedigree
confirmed that affected SCDO1 individuals were homozygous and obligate
carriers heterozygous for the mutation. Clinical examination did not
identify any neurologic abnormalities in SCDO1 individuals, and none had
mental retardation.

Gassner and Grabs (1982) reported a cluster of 8 individuals affected by
spondylocostal dysostosis in 4 nuclear families indigenous to a village
in eastern Switzerland. After the relationship of spondylocostal
dysostosis to the DLL3 gene was demonstrated, they tested the
presumption that the molecular basis of this cluster was segregation of
a single mutation in the DLL3 gene. Bonafe et al. (2003) showed that
marker haplotypes around the DLL3 locus contradicted this hypothesis, as
3 different haplotypes were seen in affected individuals and sequence
analysis showed that 3 previously unreported DLL3 mutations were
segregating: a duplication of 17 bp in exon 8 (1285-1301dup;
602768.0004), a single-nucleotide deletion in exon 5 (615delC;
602768.0005), and an R238X (602768.0006) nonsense mutation in exon 6.
Recessive mutations in the DLL3 gene were present in all affected
individuals. Homozygosity for 1285-1301dup, a presumed founder mutation,
was found in 2 of 4 families. In the other 2 families, this founder
mutation was present in compound heterozygous state with one or the
other of the 'new' mutations. Despite the mutation heterogeneity, the
phenotype was homogeneous with severe and characteristic vertebral
changes, but relatively little associated morbidity and mortality.
Affected individuals were recognized at birth by virtue of the
shortening of the neck and trunk. However, they did not have respiratory
insufficiency after birth, and did not have neurologic signs from
compression of the spinal cord or nerves. The vertebral and costal
defects were readily recognizable on 'babygrams,' and involved the whole
spine and usually multiple ribs.

Turnpenny et al. (2003) sequenced the DLL3 gene in a series of
spondylocostal dysostosis patients from 14 families and identified 12
mutations, 2 of which occurred twice. The patients represented diverse
ethnic backgrounds and 6 came from traditionally consanguineous
communities. In all affected individuals, the radiologic phenotype was
abnormal segmentation throughout the entire vertebral column with smooth
outlines to the vertebral bodies in childhood, for which Turnpenny et
al. (2003) suggested the term 'pebble beach sign.' This appeared to be a
very consistent phenotype-genotype correlation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Shen et al. (1997) found skeletal and CNS defects in mice homozygous for
disruption of the presenilin-1 gene.

'Pudgy' (pu) homozygous mice exhibit clear patterning defects at the
earlier stages of somitogenesis, resulting in adult mice with severe
vertebral and rib deformities. By positional cloning and
complementation, Kusumi et al. (1998) determined that the pu phenotype
is caused by mutation in the delta-like-3 gene (Dll3), which is
homologous to the Notch-ligand delta in Drosophila. Histologic and
molecular marker analyses showed that the pu mutation disrupts the
proper formation of morphologic borders in early somite formation and of
rostral-caudal compartment boundaries within somites. Viability analysis
also indicated an important role in early development. Overall, the
results pointed to a key role for the Notch-signaling pathway in the
initiation of patterning of vertebrate paraxial mesoderm.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPONDYLOCOSTAL DYSOSTOSIS 1, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DLL3, 5-BP INS, NT593

In a consanguineous Arab-Israeli family segregating autosomal recessive
spondylocostal dysostosis (277300), Bulman et al. (2000) identified a
5-bp insertion (GCGGT) resulting in a frameshift mutation in exon 5 of
the DLL3 gene. This mutation was found in homozygous state in all
affected individuals.

.0002
SPONDYLOCOSTAL DYSOSTOSIS 1, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DLL3, 2-BP DEL, 945AT

In a family from Rawalpindi, Pakistan segregating autosomal recessive
spondylocostal dysostosis (277300), Bulman et al. (2000) identified a
2-bp deletion (AT) resulting in a frameshift in exon 7 of the DLL3 gene.
As expected, this mutation was found in homozygous state in all affected
individuals.

.0003
SPONDYLOCOSTAL DYSOSTOSIS 1, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DLL3, GLY385ASP

In a consanguineous Kashmiri family segregating autosomal recessive
spondylocostal dysostosis (277300), Bulman et al. (2000) identified a
G-to-A transition at nucleotide 1154 resulting in a gly385-to-asp
(G385D) substitution in exon 8 of the DLL3 gene. As expected, all
affected individuals were homozygous. Glycine at position 5 is in the
fifth epidermal growth factor repeat and is highly conserved in delta
proteins from Drosophila to humans. In addition, the substitution
replaced a nonpolar residue with a charged polar residue.

.0004
SPONDYLOCOSTAL DYSOSTOSIS 1, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DLL3, 17-BP DEL, NT1285

Bonafe et al. (2003) identified a duplication of 17 bp (nucleotides
1285-1301) in exon 8 of the DLL3 gene as a founder mutation in a village
in eastern Switzerland in a founder population. The mutation causes
spondylocostal dysostosis (277300) when present in homozygous state or
present in compound heterozygous state with 615delC (602768.0005) or
R238X (602768.0006).

.0005
SPONDYLOCOSTAL DYSOSTOSIS 1, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DLL3, 1-BP DEL, 615C

See 602768.0004 and Bonafe et al. (2003).

.0006
SPONDYLOCOSTAL DYSOSTOSIS 1, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DLL3, ARG238TER

See 602768.0004 and Bonafe et al. (2003).

.0007
SPONDYLOCOSTAL DYSOSTOSIS 1, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DLL3, 1-BP DEL, 1440G

In 2 affected sibs of a family with spondylocostal dysostosis (277300)
originally reported by Floor et al. (1989), Whittock et al. (2004)
identified compound heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion (1440delG) and a
1511G-A transition, both in exon 8 of the DLL3 gene. The deletion is
predicted to result in a 68-amino acid C-terminal peptide and premature
termination at codon 547, with loss of the transmembrane domain; the
1511G-A transition results in a gly504-to-asp substitution (G504D,
602768.0008) within the predicted transmembrane domain. The family was
initially believed to represent autosomal dominant inheritance (see
Floor et al. (1989)), but haplotype analysis by Whittock et al. (2004)
suggested linkage to DLL3 in a pseudodominant manner with segregation of
2 distinct disease alleles. Direct sequencing revealed that the affected
father was homozygous and all 4 sibs were heterozygous for the 1440delG
mutation, whereas the unaffected mother and 2 affected sibs were
heterozygous for the G504D substitution.

.0008
SPONDYLOCOSTAL DYSOSTOSIS 1, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DLL3, GLY504ASP

See 602768.0007 and Whittock et al. (2004).

REFERENCE 1. Bettenhausen, B.; Hrabe de Angelis, M.; Simon, D.; Guenet, J. L.;
Gossler, A.: Transient and restricted expression during mouse embryogenesis
of Dll1, a murine gene closely related to Drosophila delta. Development 121:
2407-2418, 1995.

2. Bonafe, L.; Giunta, C.; Gassner, M.; Steinmann, B.; Superti-Furga,
A.: A cluster of autosomal recessive spondylocostal dysostosis caused
by three newly identified DLL3 mutations segregating in a small village. Clin.
Genet. 64: 28-35, 2003.

3. Bulman, M. P.; Kusumi, K.; Frayling, T. M.; McKeown, C.; Garrett,
C.; Lander, E. S.; Krumlauf, R.; Hattersley, A. T.; Ellard, S.; Turnpenny,
P. D.: Mutations in the human delta homologue, DLL3, cause axial
skeletal defects in spondylocostal dysostosis. Nature Genet. 24:
438-441, 2000.

4. Dunwoodie, S. L.; Henrique, D.; Harrison, S. M.; Beddington, R.
S. P.: Mouse Dll3: a novel divergent delta gene which may complement
the function of other delta homologues during early pattern formation
in the mouse embryo. Development 124: 3065-3076, 1997.

5. Floor, E.; De Jong, R. O.; Fryns, J. P.; Smulders, C.; Vles, J.
S. H.: Spondylocostal dysostosis: an example of autosomal dominant
transmission in a large family. Clin. Genet. 36: 236-241, 1989.

6. Gassner, M.; Grabs, S. G.: Kostovertebrale Dysplasie: ein Rezeptordefekt
der Sklerotomentwicklung? Schweiz. Med. Wschr. 112: 791-797, 1982.

7. Gridley, T.: Notch signaling and inherited disease syndromes. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 12(R1): R9-R13, 2003.

8. Kusumi, K.; Sun, E. S.; Kerrebrock, A. W.; Bronson, R. T.; Chi,
D.-C.; Bulotsky, M. S.; Spencer, J. B.; Birren, B. W.; Frankel, W.
N.; Lander, E. S.: The mouse pudgy mutation disrupts Delta homologue
Dll3 and initiation of early somite boundaries. Nature Genet. 19:
274-278, 1998.

9. Pourquie, O.; Kusumi, K.: When body segmentation goes wrong. Clin.
Genet. 60: 409-416, 2001.

10. Shen, J.; Bronson, R. T.; Chen, D. F.; Xia, W.; Selkoe, D. J.;
Tonegawa, S.: Skeletal and CNS defects in presenilin-1-deficient
mice. Cell 89: 629-639, 1997.

11. Turnpenny, P. D.; Whittock, N.; Duncan, J.; Dunwoodie, S.; Kusumi,
K.; Ellard, S.: Novel mutations in DLL3, a somitogenesis gene encoding
a ligand for the Notch signalling pathway, cause a consistent pattern
of abnormal vertebral segmentation in spondylocostal dysostosis. J.
Med. Genet. 40: 333-339, 2003.

12. Whittock, N. V.; Ellard, S.; Duncan, J.; de Die-Smulders, C. E.
M.; Vles, J. S. H.; Turnpenny, P. D.: Pseudodominant inheritance
of spondylocostal dysostosis type 1 caused by two familial delta-like
3 mutations. Clin. Genet. 66: 67-72, 2004.

13. Wong, P. C.; Zheng, H.; Chen, H.; Becher, M. W.; Sirinathsinghji,
D. J.; Trumbauer, M. E.; Chen, H. Y.; Price, D. L.; Van der Ploeg,
L. H.; Sisodia, S. S.: Presenilin 1 is required for Notch1 and Dll1
expression in the paraxial mesoderm. Nature 387: 288-292, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/4/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/2/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/6/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/18/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/12/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/29/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/1/1998

EDITED carol: 10/19/2009
carol: 8/16/2006
wwang: 8/5/2005
terry: 8/4/2005
alopez: 3/2/2005
tkritzer: 11/11/2003
tkritzer: 11/7/2003
terry: 11/6/2003
cwells: 7/31/2003
terry: 7/18/2003
alopez: 2/14/2002
terry: 2/12/2002
alopez: 5/3/2000
alopez: 3/30/2000
carol: 3/29/2000
dholmes: 7/22/1998
alopez: 7/2/1998
alopez: 7/1/1998

189908	TITLE *189908 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 7; TCF7
;;TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR, T CELL-SPECIFIC, 1;;
T CELL FACTOR 1; TCF1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Three of the genes determining subunits of the CD3 complex, CD3-gamma
(CD3G; 186740), CD3-delta (CD3D; 186790), and CD3-epsilon (CD3E;
186830), are tightly clustered in a stretch of 60 kb of DNA on human
chromosome 11q23. This tight clustering might suggest that the CD3 genes
are controlled by a single cis-acting element. Experiments with
transgenic mice, however, have shown that at least the CD3D and CD3E
genes carry a complete and independent set of regulatory elements. CD3E
gene expression appears to be controlled by a downstream T
lymphocyte-specific enhancer element. By screening for proteins in human
T cells that bound the T lymphocyte-specific enhancer element downstream
of CD3E, followed by screening human T-cell line cDNA libraries, van de
Wetering et al. (1991) cloned 3 splice variants of TCF7, which they
called TCF1A, TCF1B, and TCF1C. The deduced proteins contain 269, 269,
and 268 amino acids, respectively. Each has an N-terminal proline-rich
domain, followed by an HMG1 (HMGB1; 163905)-like DNA-binding domain and
a unique C-terminal end. Northern blot analysis detected a 3-kb
transcript in all human T-cell lines examined, but not in non-T cell
lines.

Van de Wetering et al. (1992) stated that the HMG box domain of TCF7 is
almost identical to the HMG box domain of TCF1-alpha (LEF1; 153245).

Van de Wetering et al. (1996) cloned several additional TCF7 splice
variants encoding at least 8 TCF7 isoforms. The isoforms differ
predominantly in the presence or absence of a long N-terminal domain,
the presence or absence of an insertion near the center of the molecule,
and the presence or absence of a long C-terminal domain. The 116-amino
acid long N-terminal domain shares significant similarity with LEF1.
Western blot analysis of human thymocytes and Jurkat T cells showed
proteins with apparent molecular masses of 25 to 55 kD.
Dephosphorylation did not alter the mobility of the proteins.

GENE STRUCTURE

Van de Wetering et al. (1992) found that the TCF7 gene contains at least
10 exons, the first of which is noncoding. The region immediately
upstream of exon 1 is CG rich (75%) and includes a CpG island. The CpG
island coincided with a functional promoter that was preferentially
active in T-cell lines.

Van de Wetering et al. (1996) determined that the TCF7 gene spans about
12 kb and contains 14 exons, 4 of which are alternatively spliced. It
has 2 promoter regions and 2 transcriptional start sites.

MAPPING

Van de Wetering et al. (1991) mapped the TCF7 gene to chromosome 5q31.1
by somatic cell hybrid analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Kingsmore et al. (1995) mapped the homologous gene to mouse chromosome
11.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a gel retardation assay, van de Wetering et al. (1991) showed that
all 3 recombinant isoforms of TCF7, which they called TCF1A, TCF1B, and
TCF1C, bound the same motif in the T lymphocyte-specific enhancer
element downstream of CD3E. Following expression in COS cells,
full-length TCF1A, but not TCF1A lacking part of its DNA-binding domain,
activated transcription of a reporter gene.

Van de Wetering et al. (1996) showed that all TCF7 isoforms with the
short N-terminal end moderately transactivated transcription through the
TCR-alpha (TCRA; see 186880) enhancer, a LEF1 target. In contrast, TCF7
isoforms with the long N-terminal end showed no transactivation
activity.

Roose et al. (1999) identified TCF7 mRNA by Northern blot analysis in 5
of 6 colorectal cell lines. Three of these were APC (611731) mutants,
and 2 others carried oncogenic mutations in beta-catenin (CTNNB1;
116806). The cell line that lacked TCF7 expression was wildtype for APC
and beta-catenin, suggesting that APC and beta-catenin may regulate TCF7
expression. Roose et al. (1999) also detected nuclear TCF7 protein in
normal human tissues: in proliferating intestinal epithelial cells and
in the basal epithelial cells of mammary gland epithelium. Roose et al.
(1999) noted that the most abundant TCF7 isoforms lack a beta-catenin
interaction domain and are likely to function as negative regulators of
Wnt signaling (see 164820). Roose et al. (1999) identified TCF7 as one
of the target genes of TCF4 (TCF7L2; 602228) in epithelial cells. They
found a putative enhancer upstream of promoter 1 of TCF7. Reporter
assays showed that a combination of TCF4 and beta-catenin transactivated
the enhancer, whereas a dominant-negative TCF4 inhibited enhancer
activity.

Gattinoni et al. (2009) reported that induction of Wnt/beta-catenin
signaling by inhibitors of Gsk3b (605004) or by Wnt3a (606359) arrested
mouse Cd8 (see 186910)-positive T-cell development into effector T cells
capable of cytotoxicity or Ifng (147570) production. Instead, Wnt
signaling promoted expression of Tcf7 and Lef1 (153245) and generation
of self-renewing multipotent Cd8-positive memory stem cells capable of
proliferation and antitumor activity. Gattinoni et al. (2009) concluded
that Wnt signaling has a key role in maintaining the self-renewing stem
cell-like properties of mature memory CD8-positive T cells.

Using RT-PCR and flow cytometric analysis, Zhao et al. (2010)
demonstrated that mouse Tcf7 and Lef1 were highly expressed in naive T
cells, downregulated in effector T cells, and upregulated in memory T
cells. Memory Cd8-positive T cells expressing the p45 Tcf7 isoform and
beta-catenin had enhanced Il2 (147680) production capacity and enhanced
effector capacity to clear Listeria monocytogenes. Zhao et al. (2010)
concluded that constitutive activation of the Wnt pathway favors memory
CD8 T-cell formation during immunization, resulting in enhanced immunity
upon a second encounter with the same pathogen.

Using a genetic approach, Driessens et al. (2010) found no evidence that
the beta-catenin pathway regulates T-cell memory phenotype, in contrast
with the findings of Gattinoni et al. (2009). The findings of Driessens
et al. (2010) suggested that the generation of Cd8-positive memory stem
cells observed by Gattinoni et al. (2009) with the use of Gsk3b
inhibitors was not a consequence of activation of the beta-catenin
pathway, but was rather due activation of another Gsk3b-dependent
pathway. In a reply, Gattinoni et al. (2010) noted that others,
including Zhao et al. (2010) and Jeannet et al. (2010), had also
identified Wnt and beta-catenin as crucial factors in postthymic
Cd8-positive T-cell differentiation and memory development. Using
Western blot analysis, Gattinoni et al. (2010) showed that addition of
Wnt3a or Gsk3b inhibitor stabilized beta-catenin in primed Cd8-positive
mouse T cells.

Weber et al. (2011) found that Tcf7 was highly expressed in mouse early
tymic progenitor cells and that its expression was upregulated in
response to Notch1 (190198) signals. Forcible expression of human TCF7
in mouse bone marrow progenitors drove development of T-lineage cells in
the absence of Notch1 signals. These Tcf7-induced cells expressed
T-cell-specific transcription factors, such as Gata3 (131320) and Bcl11b
(606558), as well as T-cell receptor components, such as Cd3e. Weber et
al. (2011) concluded that TCF7 is essential for normal T-cell
development and sufficient to establish many components of T-cell
identity.

ANIMAL MODEL

Verbeek et al. (1995) generated 2 independent germline mutations in Tcf7
by targeted disruption and found that thymocyte development in the
otherwise normal mutant mice was blocked at the transition from the
Cd8-positive immature single-positive to the Cd4
(186940)-positive/Cd8-positive double-positive stage. In contrast with
wildtype mice, most of the immature single-positive cells in the mutant
mice were not in the cell cycle, and the number of immunocompetent T
cells in the peripheral lymphoid organs was reduced. Verbeek et al.
(1995) concluded that TCF7 controls an essential step in thymocyte
differentiation.

Roose et al. (1999) found that Tcf7 -/- mice developed adenomas in the
gut and mammary glands. They hypothesized that one possible explanation
for the tumor phenotype in Tcf7 -/- mice is that Tcf7 acts as a feedback
transcriptional repressor of beta-catenin/Tcf4 target genes, and that
disruption of this negative-feedback loop allows the formation of
epithelial tumors, much like the loss of Apc. This notion predicts
synergy between the loss of Tcf7 and of Apc. To test this, Roose et al.
(1999) crossed the Apc allele Min into a Tcf7 -/- strain. Min/+ mice
developed multiple polyps, mostly in the small intestine. They
infrequently developed extraintestinal neoplasia, notably
adenoacanthomas in the mammary gland. Min/+ Tcf7 -/- mice displayed a
marked enhancement of the intestinal Min/+ phenotype. All intestinal
neoplasms expressed high levels of beta-catenin. In addition, all
females carried adenoacanthomas of the mammary gland by 8 weeks of age,
while substantial numbers of older male mice developed similar lesions.
Roose et al. (1999) concluded that TCF7 may act as a feedback repressor
of beta-catenin/TCF4 target genes and thus may cooperate with APC to
suppress malignant transformation of epithelial cells.

Jeannet et al. (2010) found that mice lacking Tcf7, a nuclear effector
of Wnt signaling, mounted normal effector and memory Cd8-positive T-cell
responses to viral infection. However, Tcf7-deficient mice were impaired
in their ability to expand upon secondary challenge and to protect from
recurrent virus infection due to a lack of Cd8 memory precursor T cells.
Establishment of memory cells was dependent on the Tcf7
beta-catenin-binding domain and required the Tcf7 coactivators and Wnt
signaling intermediates beta-catenin and gamma-catenin (JUP; 173325).
Jeannet et al. (2010) concluded that the Wnt signaling pathway plays an
essential role for CD8 central memory T-cell differentiation and
proposed that modulation of Wnt signaling may be exploited to improve
the generation of CD8 memory T cells during vaccination or
immunotherapy.

Zhou et al. (2010) showed that loss of Tcf7 in mice limited
proliferation of Cd8-positive effector T cells and impaired their
differentiation into memory cells. Tcf7 -/- memory Cd8-positive T cells
were progressively lost and exhibited reduced expression of Bcl2
(151430) and Il2rb (146710) and diminished Il15 (600554)-driven
proliferation. Transcriptome analysis of Tcf7 -/- memory Cd8-positive
cells showed strong downregulation of Eomes (604615). The Wnt-Tcf7
pathway was necessary and sufficient for inducing optimal expression of
Eomes, which positively regulated Il2rb expression and Il15
responsiveness. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed direct
and specific binding of Tcf7 and multiple conserved cis-regulatory
sequences of the Eomes gene. Zhou et al. (2010) concluded that TCF7 is a
critical player in a transcriptional program that regulates memory CD8
differentiation and longevity.

NOMENCLATURE

Although the symbol TCF1 (T cell-specific transcription factor-1) is
used in the literature for this gene, its official designation is TCF7.
It should not be confused with the HNF1A gene (142410), which has also
been referred to as TCF1 (transcription factor-1) in the literature.

REFERENCE 1. Driessens, G.; Zheng, Y.; Gajewski, T. F.: Beta-catenin does not
regulate memory T cell phenotype. (Letter) Nature Med. 16: 513-514,
2010.

2. Gattinoni, L.; Ji, Y.; Restifo, N. P.: Reply to Driessens et al.
(Letter) Nature Med. 16: 514-515, 2010.

3. Gattinoni, L.; Zhong, X.-S.; Palmer, D. C.; Ji, Y.; Hinrichs, C.
S.; Yu, Z.; Wrzesinski, C.; Boni, A.; Cassard, L.; Garvin, L. M.;
Paulos, C. M.; Muranski, P.; Restifo, N. P.: Wnt signaling arrests
effector T cell differentiation and generates CD8+ memory stem cells. Nature
Med. 15: 808-813, 2009.

4. Jeannet, G.; Boudousquie, C.; Gardiol, N.; Kang, J.; Huelsken,
J.; Held, W.: Essential role of the Wnt pathway effector Tcf-1 for
the establishment of functional CD8 T cell memory. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 107: 9777-9782, 2010.

5. Kingsmore, S. F.; Watson, M. L.; Seldin, M. F.: Genetic mapping
of the T lymphocyte-specific transcription factor 7 gene on mouse
chromosome 11. Mammalian Genome 6: 378 only, 1995.

6. Roose, J.; Huls, G.; van Beest, M.; Moerer, P.; van der Horn, K.;
Goldschmeding, R.; Logtenberg, T.; Clevers, H.: Synergy between tumor
suppressor APC and the beta-catenin-Tcf4 target Tcf1. Science 285:
1923-1926, 1999.

7. van de Wetering, M.; Castrop, J.; Korinek, V.; Clevers, H.: Extensive
alternative splicing and dual promoter usage generate Tcf-1 protein
isoforms with differential transcription control properties. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 16: 745-752, 1996.

8. van de Wetering, M.; Oosterwegel, M.; Dooijes, D.; Clevers, H.
: Identification and cloning of TCF-1, a T lymphocyte-specific transcription
factor containing a sequence-specific HMG box. EMBO J. 10: 123-132,
1991.

9. van de Wetering, M.; Oosterwegel, M.; Holstege, F.; Dooyes, D.;
Suijkerbuijk, R.; Geurts van Kessel, A.; Clevers, H.: The human T
cell transcription factor-1 gene: structure, localization, and promoter
characterization. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 8530-8536, 1992.

10. van de Wetering, M.; Suijkerbuijk, R.; Geurts van Kessel, A.;
Clevers, H.: Assignment of the human T lymphocyte-specific transcription
factor TCF-1 to chromosome 5, band q31.1. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 58: 1906 only, 1991.

11. Verbeek, S.; Izon, D.; Hofhuis, F.; Robanus-Maandag, E.; te Riele,
H.; van de Wetering, M.; Oosterwegel, M.; Wilson, A.; MacDonald, H.
R.; Clevers, H.: An HMG-box-containing T-cell factor required for
thymocyte differentiation. Nature 374: 70-74, 1995.

12. Weber, B. N.; Chi, A. W.-S.; Chavez, A.; Yashiro-Ohtani, Y.; Yang,
Q.; Shestova, O.; Bhandoola, A.: A critical role for TCF-1 in T-lineage
specification and differentiation. Nature 476: 63-68, 2011.

13. Zhao, D.-M.; Yu, S.; Zhou, X.; Haring, J. S.; Held, W.; Badovinac,
V. P.; Harty, J. T.; Xue, H.-H.: Constitutive activation of Wnt signaling
favors generation of memory CD8 T cells. J. Immun. 184: 1191-1199,
2010.

14. Zhou, X.; Yu, S.; Zhao, D.-M.; Harty, J. T.; Badovinac, V. P.;
Xue, H.-H.: Differentiation and persistence of memory CD8+ T cells
depend on T cell factor 1. Immunity 33: 229-240, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/25/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/4/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/25/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/24/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/11/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/8/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/15/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/4/1991

EDITED mgross: 10/04/2013
mgross: 11/10/2011
terry: 10/25/2011
mgross: 10/4/2011
mgross: 8/25/2011
terry: 8/25/2011
mgross: 1/25/2011
terry: 1/24/2011
carol: 6/30/2010
mgross: 6/11/2010
terry: 6/8/2010
ckniffin: 2/5/2008
psherman: 3/6/2000
alopez: 2/28/2000
psherman: 11/9/1999
carol: 9/17/1999
terry: 9/15/1999
dkim: 9/9/1998
mark: 6/15/1995
carol: 5/27/1993
carol: 4/7/1993
carol: 9/24/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/21/1992

605515	TITLE *605515 FORKHEAD BOX P1; FOXP1
;;GLUTAMINE-RICH FACTOR 1; QRF1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

FOXP1 is a transcriptional repressor that plays a critical role in
monocyte differentiation and macrophage function (Shi et al., 2008).

CLONING

Li and Tucker (1993) cloned a glutamine-rich factor, which they
designated QRF1, that was expressed preferentially at the terminal
differentiation stage of B cells and in skeletal muscle. The deduced
707-amino acid QRF1 protein contains an 84-amino acid segment that shows
significant sequence homology with the DNA-binding domains of the
hepatocyte nuclear factor-3/forkhead (see FOXA1; 602294) family of
proteins.

By expression cloning using blood and testis cDNA libraries to identify
the target of a monoclonal antibody (JC12), Banham et al. (2001)
obtained a full-length cDNA encoding FOXP1. The predicted 677-amino acid
protein contains coiled-coil, glutamine-rich, and serine/threonine-rich
domains in its N-terminal half; a central zinc finger domain; and
coiled-coil, serine/threonine/proline-rich, winged helix, and acidic
domains in its C-terminal half. FOXP1 also has numerous putative
phosphorylation sites, 2 nuclear localization signals (NLSs) in its
C-terminal half, and 2 PEST motif in its C-terminal acidic region.
Multiple-tissue array analysis showed ubiquitous expression of FOXP1 in
normal adult and fetal tissues, with highest expression in lymphoid and
gastrointestinal tissues. Immunohistochemistry showed that FOXP1 protein
was widely expressed, with a predominantly nuclear localization, in
normal tissues.

Wang et al. (2003) stated that there are 4 splice variants of mouse
Foxp1, designated Foxp1a through Foxp1d. They identified and cloned
Foxp1d, which encodes a Foxp1 isoform lacking the N-terminal
polyglutamine domain found in Foxp1a and Foxp1b. Northern blot analysis
and RNase protection assays showed tissue-specific expression of all 4
variants in mouse. Northern blot analysis of human tissues detected
tissue-specific expression of FOXP1 variants, with highest levels in
peripheral blood lymphocytes and in caudate nucleus of brain. Western
blot analysis detected variable expression of Foxp1a, Foxp1c, and Foxp1d
in mouse tissues, with high expression of all 3 isoforms in lung.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2003) found that mouse Foxp1a, Foxp1c, Foxp1d, and the
related Foxp2 (605317) protein bound a 7-nucleotide core sequence,
TATTT(G/A)T. These Foxp proteins repressed gene transcription via
binding to this consensus site, which was identified within the SV40 and
IL2 (147680) promoters. In some cases, the strength of Foxp1 repression
was mediated by the polyglutamine domain. Mouse Foxp1 proteins also
formed homodimers or heterodimers with subfamily members, and the
conserved C2H2 zinc finger and leucine zipper motifs mediated
dimerization.

Using genetic manipulations, Rousso et al. (2008) demonstrated that
Foxp1 established the pattern of LIM-homeodomain protein (see 601999)
expression in embryonic mice and, accordingly, organized motor axon
projections, their connectivity with peripheral targets, and the
establishment of motor pools. Hox proteins (see 142950) dictated the
pattern of Foxp1 expression in spinal cord, and both Foxp1 and Hox were
required for segment-appropriate generation of motor columns and pools
in mouse.

Shi et al. (2008) generated transgenic mice overexpressing human FOXP1
in monocyte/macrophage lineage cells. Circulating blood monocytes from
these mice had reduced expression of macrophage colony-stimulating
factor receptor (CSF1R; 164770), impaired migratory capacity, and
diminished accumulation as splenic macrophages. Macrophage functions
were globally impaired, and osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption were
attenuated. Forced overexpression of Csf1r reversed many of the
deficits, suggesting that repression of Csf1r is likely the dominant
mechanism responsible for FOXP1 effects on monocyte differentiation and
macrophage function.

- Association of FOXP1 With Cancer

By analysis of a tumor/normal tissue expression array, Banham et al.
(2001) found that expression of FOXP1 was lower in colon tumors and
higher in stomach and prostate tumors compared with matched normal
tissues. Immunohistochemical analysis showed frequent loss of
expression, increased expression, and cytoplasmic mislocalization of the
predominantly nuclear FOXP1 protein in solid tumors.

By immunohistochemical analysis of a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (BCL)
tissue microarray, Banham et al. (2005) found that untreated patients
with a high percentage of FOXP1-positive nuclei had significantly
reduced survival and earlier progression compared with FOXP1-negative
patients.

Of 275 BCLs, Haralambieva et al. (2005) found that only 5 (3
gastrointestinal, 1 thyroid, and 1 cervical lymph node) carried a
chromosomal breakpoint in the FOXP1 gene and strong nuclear FOXP1
expression. All were diffuse large BCLs rather than marginal zone BCLs.
Haralambieva et al. (2005) concluded that genetic alterations at 3p13
are associated with strong FOXP1 expression.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Banham et al. (2001) mapped the FOXP1 gene
to chromosome 3p14.1.

CYTOGENETICS

Streubel et al. (2005) noted that 3 chromosomal translocations,
t(11;18)(q21;q21), t(14;18)(q32;q21), and t(1;14)(p22;q32), are
associated with mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphomas. They
identified a t(3;14)(p14;q32) in a case of MALT lymphoma of the thyroid.
FISH studies showed that the IGH locus (147100) was rearranged, and
long-distance inverse PCR identified FOXP1 as the partner gene on
chromosome 3. Using FISH assays to screen 91 MALT lymphomas negative for
3 common translocations, Streubel et al. (2005) identified
t(3;14)(p14;q32) in 9 cases (3 thyroid, 4 ocular adnexa, and 2 skin).
Most t(3;14)(p14;q32)-positive MALT lymphomas also harbored additional
genetic abnormalities, such as trisomy 3. All 4 of the MALT-associated
translocations were mutually exclusive. Real-time RT-PCR analysis showed
upregulated expression of FOXP1 in MALT cases with t(3;14)(p14;q32) or
trisomy 3. Streubel et al. (2005) concluded that FOXP1 is a
translocation partner of IGH in a site-dependent subset of MALT
lymphomas.

Carr et al. (2010) reported a boy with severe speech delay and delayed
motor development (see 613670) who carried a de novo heterozygous 1.0-Mb
interstitial deletion of chromosome 3p14.1 that involved only the FOXP1
gene. The phenotype was confounded by a Chiari I malformation, which was
surgically corrected at age 30 months. The patient had delayed gross
motor skills and walked at 16 months. After surgery for the Chiari
malformation, he had some improvement in motor skills. The most
significant feature was speech delay with limited verbal output and
difficulty in articulating entire words and multisyllabic speech,
although he did not have a deficit in oromotor coordination. At age 4
years, he developed staring spells with motor arrest associated with
epileptiform discharges. He had mild dysmorphic facial features,
including broad forehead, hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral
fissures, ptosis, short nose, broad nasal tip, and smooth philtrum. Carr
et al. (2010) concluded that FOXP1 may play a role in the development of
verbal and motor skills.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Hamdan et al. (2010) identified 2 different de novo heterozygous
mutations in the FOXP1 gene (605515.0001 and 605515.0002, respectively)
in 2 unrelated children of French Canadian origin with moderate mental
retardation, expressive language deficits, and autistic features
(613670). The first mutation (605515.0001) was a small deletion found
using array-based comparative genomic hybridization of a cohort of 80
patients with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and 30 with intellectual
disability. The second mutation (R525X; 605515.0002) was found by direct
sequencing of the FOXP1 gene in a cohort of 110 patients with
intellectual disability, 84 with ASD, and 51 with both. Hamdan et al.
(2010) chose to examine the FOXP1 gene specifically because of the role
of the FOXP2 gene (605317) in a speech and language disorder (SPCH1;
602081); patients with intellectual disability and ASD often show
language impairment. The results indicated that disruption of FOXP1 has
a global impact on brain development.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hu et al. (2006) found that mice lacking Foxp1 died at embryonic day
14.5 due to heart valve and outflow tract abnormalities. Reconstitution
of Rag2 (179616)-deficient mice with Foxp1 -/- or Foxp1 +/- fetal liver
cells resulted in decreased mature B cells, but normal thymocytes, in
the recipients. Foxp1 -/- pro-B cells had reduced IgM, Rag1 (179615),
and Rag2 expression, and V(D)J rearrangement was also impaired in Foxp1
-/- B cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and EMSA analyses showed that
Foxp1 bound to Foxp site-2 (Fkh2) in the Erag enhancer, which is
upstream of Rag2, in a B-lineage specific way. Hu et al. (2006)
concluded that FOXP1 influences B-cell development at an early stage,
and that FOXP1 deficiency results in a phenotype that resembles double
haploinsufficiency of E2A (TCF3; 147141) and EBF (164343).

Feng et al. (2010) generated mice with a conditional deletion of Foxp1
in double-positive thymocytes and found that peripheral Cd4 (see 186940)
and Cd8 (see 186910) cells also lacked Foxp1 and that single-positive
thymocytes acquired an activated phenotype in thymus. Peripheral cells
also exhibited an activated phenotype and increased apoptosis and
readily produced cytokines upon T-cell receptor engagement. Feng et al.
(2010) concluded that FOXP1 is an essential transcriptional regulator
for thymocyte development and the generation of quiescent naive T cells.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION WITH LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT AND AUTISTIC FEATURES
FOXP1, 390-KB DEL

In a French Canadian girl who had mental retardation with language
impairment and autistic features (613670), Hamdan et al. (2010)
identified a de novo heterozygous 390-kb intragenic deletion in the
FOXP1 gene. The deletion encompassed exons 4 to 14 of the longest FOXP1
isoform, including the translation initiation site and leucine zipper
and zinc finger domains important for transcriptional activity.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION WITH LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT AND AUTISTIC FEATURES
FOXP1, ARG525TER

In a French Canadian boy who had mental retardation with language
impairment and autistic features (613670), Hamdan et al. (2010)
identified a de novo heterozygous 1573C-T transition in the FOXP1 gene,
resulting in an arg525-to-ter (R525X) substitution. The mutation was
predicted to abolish the last 152 residues of the protein, including
part of the forkhead DNA-binding (FHD) domain and a conserved nuclear
localization signal. The mutation was not found in 570 controls. In
vitro functional expression studies in HEK293 cells showed that the
R525X mutant impaired the transcriptional repression ability of FOXP1,
consistent with a loss of function.

REFERENCE 1. Banham, A. H.; Beasley, N.; Campo, E.; Fernandez, P. L.; Fidler,
C.; Gatter, K.; Jones, M.; Mason, D. Y.; Prime, J. E.; Trougouboff,
P.; Wood, K.; Cordell, J. L.: The FOXP1 winged helix transcription
factor is a novel candidate tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 3p. Cancer
Res. 61: 8820-8829, 2001.

2. Banham, A. H.; Connors, J. M.; Brown, P. J.; Cordell, J. L.; Ott,
G.; Sreenivasan, G.; Farinha, P.; Horsman, D. E.; Gascoyne, R. D.
: Expression of the FOXP1 transcription factor is strongly associated
with inferior survival in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Clin.
Cancer Res. 11: 1065-1072, 2005.

3. Carr, C. W.; Moreno-De-Luca, D.; Parker, C.; Zimmerman, H. H.;
Ledbetter, N.; Martin, C. L.; Dobyns, W. B.; Abdul-Rahman, O. A.:
Chiari I malformation, delayed gross motor skills, severe speech delay,
and epileptiform discharges in a child with FOXP1 haploinsufficiency. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 18: 1216-1220, 2010.

4. Feng, X.; Ippolito, G. C.; Tian, L.; Wiehagen, K.; Oh, S.; Sambandam,
A.; Willen, J.; Bunte, R. M.; Maika, S. D.; Harriss, J. V.; Caton,
A. J.; Bhandoola, A.; Tucker, P. W.; Hu, H.: Foxp1 is an essential
transcriptional regulator for the generation of quiescent naive T
cells during thymocyte development. Blood 115: 510-518, 2010.

5. Hamdan, F. F.; Daoud, H.; Rochefort, D.; Piton, A.; Gauthier, J.;
Langlois, M.; Foomani, G.; Dobrzeniecka, S.; Krebs, M.-O.; Joober,
R.; Lafreniere, R. G.; Lacaille, J.-C.; Mottron, L.; Drapeau, P.;
Beauchamp, M. H.; Phillips, M. S.; Fombonne, E.; Rouleau, G. A.; Michaud,
J. L.: De novo mutations in FOXP1 in cases with intellectual disability,
autism, and language impairment. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 87: 671-678,
2010.

6. Haralambieva, E.; Adam, P.; Ventura, R.; Katzenberger, T.; Kalla,
J.; Holler, S.; Hartmann, M.; Rosenwald, A.; Greiner, A.; Muller-Hermelink,
H. K.; Banham, A. H.; Ott, G.: Genetic rearrangement of FOXP1 is
predominantly detected in a subset of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas
with extranodal presentation. (Letter) Leukemia 20: 1300-1303, 2005.

7. Hu, H.; Wang, B.; Borde, M.; Nardone, J.; Maika, S.; Allred, L.;
Tucker, P. W.; Rao, A.: Foxp1 is an essential transcriptional regulator
of B cell development. Nature Immun. 7: 819-826, 2006.

8. Li, C.; Tucker, P. W.: DNA-binding properties and secondary structural
model of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork head domain. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 11583-11587, 1993.

9. Rousso, D. L.; Gaber, Z. B.; Wellik, D.; Morrisey, E. E.; Novitch,
B. G.: Coordinated actions of the forkhead protein Foxp1 and Hox
proteins in the columnar organization of spinal motor neurons. Neuron 59:
226-240, 2008.

10. Shi, C.; Sakuma, M.; Mooroka, T.; Liscoe, A.; Gao, H.; Croce,
K. J.; Sharma, A.; Kaplan, D.; Greaves, D. R.; Wang, Y.; Simon, D.
I.: Down-regulation of the forkhead transcription factor Foxp1 is
required for monocyte differentiation and macrophage function. Blood 112:
4699-4711, 2008.

11. Streubel, B.; Vinatzer, U.; Lamprecht, A.; Raderer, M.; Chott,
A.: T(3;14)(p14.1;q32) involving IGH and FOXP1 is a novel recurrent
chromosomal aberration in MALT lymphoma. Leukemia 19: 652-658, 2005.

12. Wang, B.; Lin, D.; Li, C.; Tucker, P.: Multiple domains define
the expression and regulatory properties of Foxp1 forkhead transcriptional
repressors. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 24259-24268, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/23/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/16/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/20/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/19/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/30/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/12/2006

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/2/2001

EDITED mgross: 01/19/2012
terry: 11/23/2011
alopez: 8/18/2011
ckniffin: 8/16/2011
wwang: 12/21/2010
ckniffin: 12/20/2010
mgross: 2/24/2010
terry: 2/19/2010
mgross: 1/30/2009
mgross: 12/21/2006
terry: 12/12/2006
carol: 1/2/2001

600722	TITLE *600722 PALMITOYL-PROTEIN THIOESTERASE 1; PPT1
;;PALMITOYL-PROTEIN THIOESTERASE; PPT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Palmitoyl-protein thioesterase (PPT; EC 3.1.2.22) is a small
glycoprotein that removes palmitate groups from cysteine residues in
lipid-modified proteins. PPT is thought to be involved in the catabolism
of lipid-modified proteins (Camp et al., 1994).

CLONING

Schriner et al. (1996) reported the sequence of the human PPT cDNA and
the structure of the human PPT gene. The cDNA predicted a 306-amino acid
polypeptide that contains a 25-amino acid signal peptide, 3 N-linked
glycosylation sites, and consensus motifs characteristic of
thioesterases. Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous expression of
a single 2.5-kb mRNA, with highest expression in lung, brain, and heart.

GENE STRUCTURE

Schriner et al. (1996) determined that the human PPT gene spans 27 kb
and contains 8 coding exons and a large ninth exon containing the entire
3-prime untranslated region of 1,388 bp. An Alu repeat and promoter
elements corresponding to putative binding sites for several general
transcription factors were identified in the 1,060 nucleotides upstream
of the transcription start site.

GENE FUNCTION

Heinonen et al. (2000) analyzed the intracellular processing and
localization of adenovirus-mediated Ppt in mouse primary neurons and in
nerve growth factor (see 162030)-induced PC12 cells. The neuronal
processing of Ppt was found to be similar to that observed in peripheral
cells, and a significant amount of the PPT enzyme was secreted in the
primary neurons. Immunofluorescence analysis of the neuronal cells
infected with wildtype Ppt showed a granular staining pattern in the
cell soma and neuronal shafts. Interestingly, Ppt was also found in the
synaptic ends of the neuronal cells, and the staining pattern of the
enzyme colocalized to a significant extent with the synaptic markers SV2
(185860) and synaptophysin (313475). Heinonen et al. (2000) found that
their in vitro data corresponded with the distribution of endogenous Ppt
in mouse brain and suggested that Ppt may not solely be a lysosomal
hydrolase. Heinonen et al. (2000) suggested that the specific targeting
of Ppt into the neuritic shafts and nerve terminals indicates that Ppt
may be associated with the maintenance of synaptic function, and
speculated that the enzyme could have an extracellular substrate as
well.

Lehtovirta et al. (2001) determined the neuronal localization of PPT by
confocal microscopy, cryoimmunoelectron microscopy, and cell
fractionation. In mouse primary neurons and brain tissue, PPT was
localized in synaptosomes and synaptic vesicles but not in lysosomes.
Furthermore, in polarized epithelial Caco-2 cells, PPT was localized
exclusively to the basolateral site, in contrast to the classic
lysosomal enzyme aspartylglucosaminidase (AGA; 613228), which is
localized in the apical site. The authors hypothesized that PPT has a
role outside the lysosomes in the brain and may be associated with
synaptic functioning.

The genes PPT1 and CLN2 (607998), which are mutant in neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis-1 (CLN1; 256730) and CLN2 (204500), respectively, encode
lysosomal enzymes; the CLN3 (607042) and CLN5 (608102) genes, which are
mutant in CLN3 (204200) and CLN5, respectively, encode membrane-spanning
proteins. Zhong et al. (2000) addressed the question of why deficiencies
of lysosomal enzymes and membrane-spanning proteins produce similar
clinical phenotypes and pathologic changes. They hypothesized that
CLN-encoded proteins may comprise a functional pathogenic pathway in
which protein associations play important roles. To test this
hypothesis, they studied protein-protein interactions among the PPT1-,
CLN2-, and CLN3-encoded proteins using a yeast 2-hybrid system. Results
provided no evidence that CLN-encoded proteins interact with each other.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Bellizzi et al. (2000) determined the crystal structure of PPT1 with and
without bound palmitate by using multiwavelength anomalous diffraction
phasing. The structure revealed an alpha/beta-hydrolase fold with a
catalytic triad composed of ser115-his289-asp233 and provided insight
into the structural basis for the phenotypes associated with PPT1
mutations.

MAPPING

Vesa et al. (1995) mapped the PPT1 gene to chromosome 1p32 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization and showed that it is located 70 kb
telomeric to the 5-prime end of a rearranged LMYC gene (164850). From
these results and findings of pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, the
authors assigned the PPT1 gene to the site of a CpG island identified in
the critical region to which the locus for neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis-1 had been mapped.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

By direct sequencing of PPT1 cDNA derived from brain RNA of 2 Finnish
patients with infantile-onset CLN1, Vesa et al. (1995) identified a
homozygous mutation in the PPT1 gene (R122W; 600722.0001). The
homozygous mutation was identified in all patients from 40 of 42 Finnish
families, consistent with a founder effect.

Mitchison et al. (1998) identified homozygous or compound heterozygous
mutations in the PPT1 gene (600722.0002-600722.0006) in 11 patients with
juvenile-onset CLN1 with the ultrastructural findings of granular
osmiophilic deposits. A T75P mutation (600722.0002) accounted for 9 of
the 22 disease chromosomes analyzed; R151X (600722.0006) accounted for
7.

Mole et al. (1999) tabulated the reported mutations in the PPT1 gene
associated with CLN1.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Das et al. (1998) identified mutations in the PPT1 gene in 29 of 32
unrelated U.S. and Canadian families with PPT1 deficiency. The R151X
substitution accounted for 40% of the alleles and was associated with
severe disease in the homozygous state. The T75P substitution accounted
for 13% of the alleles and was associated with a later onset and
protracted clinical course. A total of 19 different mutations were
found, resulting in a broader spectrum of clinical presentations than
previously seen in the Finnish population. Symptoms first appeared at
ages ranging from 3 months to 9 years, and about half of the subjects
survived into the second or even third decade of life.

Das et al. (2001) assessed the biochemical impact of PPT mutations
through the study of cells derived from patients and from the expression
of recombinant PPT enzymes in COS and Sf9 cells. All missense mutations
associated with infantile-onset CLN1 showed no residual enzyme activity,
whereas mutations associated with late-onset phenotypes showed up to 2%
residual activity. Two mutations increased the Km of the enzyme for
palmitoylated substrates and were located in positions that would
distort the palmitate-binding pocket. An initiator methionine mutation
in 2 late-onset patients was expressed at a significant level in COS
cells, suggesting that the mutant codon may be utilized to a clinically
important extent in vivo. The most common PPT nonsense mutation, R151X,
was associated with an absence of PPT mRNA. Mannose 6-phosphate
modification of wildtype and mutant PPT enzymes was grossly normal at
the level of the phosphotransferase reaction. However, mutant PPT
enzymes did not bind to mannose 6-phosphate receptors (see 154540) in a
blotting assay. This observation was related to the failure of the
mutant expressed enzymes to gain access to 'uncovering enzyme'
(N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphodiester alpha-N-acetyl glucosaminidase),
presumably due to a block in transit out of the endoplasmic reticulum,
where mutant enzymes are degraded.

ANIMAL MODEL

Gupta et al. (2001) engineered disruptions in the Ppt1 and Ppt2 (603298)
genes to create knockout mice that were deficient in either enzyme. Both
lines of mice were viable and fertile; however, both lines developed
spasticity (a 'clasping' phenotype) at a median age of 21 weeks and 29
weeks, respectively. Motor abnormalities progressed in the Ppt1 knockout
mice, leading to death by 10 months of age. In contrast, most Ppt2 mice
were alive at 12 months. Myoclonic jerking and seizures were prominent
in the Ppt1 mice. Autofluorescent storage material was striking
throughout the brains of both strains of mice. Neuronal loss and
apoptosis were particularly prominent in Ppt1-deficient brains. These
studies provided a mouse model for infantile neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis and further suggested that PPT2 serves a role in the
brain that is not carried out by PPT1.

Zhang et al. (2006) reported that the brains of Ppt1-null mice
accumulated autofluorescent material, abnormalities of the neuronal
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), and showed progressive apoptosis that
correlated with neurologic motor impairment. There was an abnormal
accumulation of palmitoylated GAP43 (162060) in the ER. Increased levels
of this and other S-acylated proteins coincided with activation of the
unfolded protein response, characterized by increased phosphorylation of
EIF2A (609234) and activation of caspases, which ultimately leads to
cellular apoptosis. Zhang et al. (2006) concluded that PPT1 deficiency
leads to neurodegeneration by activation of the unfolded protein
response as a result of abnormal accumulation of palmitoylated proteins.

Zhang et al. (2007) noted that the brains of Ppt1-null mice showed
increased recruitment of phagocytic cells to remove apoptotic cells.
These mice showed an age-dependent increased production of
lysophosphatidylcholine (LPC), which was catalyzed by the activation of
cytosolic phospholipase A2 (PLA2G4A; 600522). LPC acted as a lipid
signal for phagocyte recruitment. These findings elucidate a mechanism
for phagocyte infiltration that may contribute to neuropathology.

Neural communication relies on repeated cycles of exo- and endocytosis
of synaptic vesicles containing neurotransmitters at the plasma
membranes of nerve terminals. In the mouse brain, Kim et al. (2008)
found that Ppt1 localized in the synaptosomes and synaptic vesicles of
the presynaptic compartment under physiologic conditions. Ppt1
deficiency resulted in abnormal and persistent membrane retention of
palmitoylated synaptic vesicle-associated proteins, including VAMP2
(185881), SNAP25 (600322), syntaxin-1 (STX1A; 186590), SYTI (185605),
and GAD65 (138275) in brain tissue from both human patients with
neuronal lipofuscinosis and Ppt1-deficient mice. Since these S-acylated
proteins must undergo depalmitoylation to detach from the membrane,
which is required for recycling, Ppt1 deficiency may cause these
proteins to remain membrane bound. Kim et al. (2008) proposed a
mechanism by which PPT1 deficiency leads to the disruption of synaptic
vesicle recycling, prevents the regeneration of fresh vesicles, and
results in a progressive decline in the total pool size, which
ultimately impairs neurotransmission.

Kielar et al. (2009) reported a progressive breakdown of axons and
synapses in the brains of 2 different mouse models of NCL: the Ppt1-null
mouse model of infantile NCL and Cln6 (606725)-deficient mouse model
(nclf) of late infantile NCL (CLN6; 601780). Synaptic pathology was
evident in the thalamus and cortex of these mice, but occurred much
earlier within the thalamus. Quantitative comparisons of expression
levels for a subset of proteins previously implicated in regulation of
axonal and synaptic vulnerability revealed changes in proteins involved
with synaptic function/stability and cell-cycle regulation in both
strains of NCL mice. Protein expression changes were present at
pre/early-symptomatic stages, occurring in advance of morphologically
detectable synaptic or axonal pathology and again displayed regional
selectivity, occurring first within the thalamus and only later in the
cortex. Although significant differences in individual protein
expression profiles existed between the 2 NCL models studied, 2 of the
15 proteins examined Vdac1 (604492) and Pttg1 (604147) displayed robust
and significant changes at pre/early-symptomatic time-points in both
strains of NCL mice. Kielar et al. (2009) concluded that synapses and
axons are important early pathologic targets in the NCLs.

Sanders et al. (2010) reported a 9-month-old Miniature Dachshund that
presented with NCL-like signs, including disorientation, ataxia,
weakness, visual impairment, and behavioral changes. The dog was
euthanized at 14 months of age due to the severity of neurologic signs.
Microscopic analysis of neurons of retina, cerebellum, and cerebral
cortex revealed ultrastructural changes characteristic of classical
infantile NCL. Sequencing of the Ppt1 gene from the affected dog
revealed a homozygous 1-nucleotide insertion (C) after nucleotide 736 in
exon 8, upstream of the codon for the active site, his289. Brain tissue
from this dog lacked Ppt1 activity. The sire and dam of the propositus
were heterozygous for the mutation, whereas 127 unrelated Dachshunds
were homozygous for the wildtype allele.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 1
PPT1, ARG122TRP

In patients with classic infantile-onset CLN1 (256730) from 40 of 42
Finnish families, Vesa et al. (1995) identified a homozygous 364A-T
transversion in the PPT1 gene, resulting in an arg122-to-trp (R122W)
substitution. Unaffected parents were heterozygous for the mutation. The
arg122 residue is immediately adjacent to a lipase consensus sequence
that contains the putative active-site serine of the protein. A
heterozygous R122W substitution was identified in 3 of 200 control
Finnish individuals, yielding a carrier frequency of 1 in 70. The
findings were consistent with 1 major disease-causing mutation in the
Finnish population resulting from a founder effect. In the remaining 2
Finnish families, patients were compound heterozygous for R122W and an
uncharacterized null allele. Two of 17 non-Finnish patients, 1 German
and 1 Estonian, were also homozygous for R122W. In vitro functional
expression studies showed that the R122W mutant protein was retained in
the endoplasmic reticulum, was not secreted, and had undetectable enzyme
activity.

.0002
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 1
PPT1, THR75PRO

Mitchison et al. (1998) found that a thr75-to-pro (T75P) missense
mutation in the PPT1 gene accounted for 9 of 22 disease chromosomes in
11 patients with juvenile-onset CLN1 (256730). In 1 of the 11 patients
the T75P was homozygous; in 7 others it was present in compound
heterozygous state with a nonsense mutation, either arg151-to-ter
(R151X; 600722.0006) or leu10-to-ter (L10X; 600722.0005).

In 29 U.S. and Canadian families with PPT1 deficiency, Das et al. (1998)
found that the T75P mutation accounted for 13% of the alleles and was
associated with a late onset and protracted clinical course.

.0003
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 1
PPT1, ASP79GLY

In 1 of 22 disease chromosomes from 11 patients with juvenile-onset CLN1
(256730), Mitchison et al. (1998) identified an asp79-to-gly (D79G)
missense mutation in the PPT1 gene. It was present in compound
heterozygous state with the R151X mutation (600722.0006).

.0004
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 1
PPT1, LEU219GLN

In 1 of 22 disease chromosomes from 11 patients with juvenile-onset CLN1
(256730), Mitchison et al. (1998) found a leu219-to-gln (L219Q)
substitution of the PPT gene. It was found in compound heterozygous
state with the R151X mutation (600722.0006).

.0005
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 1
PPT1, LEU10TER

In 2 of 22 disease chromosomes from 11 patients with juvenile-onset CLN1
(256730), Mitchison et al. (1998) identified a leu10-to-ter (L10X)
nonsense mutation in the PPT1 gene. In each case it was present in
compound heterozygous state with a missense mutation.

.0006
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 1
PPT1, ARG151TER

In 7 of 22 disease chromosomes from 11 patients with juvenile-onset CLN1
(256730), Mitchison et al. (1998) found an arg151-to-ter (R151X)
nonsense mutation in the PPT1 gene. In each case it was found in
compound heterozygous state with a missense mutation.

In 29 U.S. and Canadian families with PPT1 deficiency, Das et al. (1998)
demonstrated that the R151X mutation accounted for 40% of the alleles
and was associated with severe disease in homozygous state.

See also 600722.0009 and van Diggelen et al. (2001), and 600722.0010 and
Ramadan et al. (2007).

.0007
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 1
PPT1, 1-BP INS, 169A

In a 4-year-old boy with infantile-onset CLN1 (256730), Santorelli et
al. (1998) identified a single adenine insertion at nucleotide position
169 (160insA) in the PPT gene. The mutation was homozygous in the
proband, heterozygous in his healthy parents, and not found in control
alleles. The mutation led to an early stop codon, resulting in an
abnormal and truncated PPT protein. The 4-year-old boy developed
normally until the age of 12 months. He could sit and crawl; however, he
never achieved independent walking. Psychomotor regression occurred over
the subsequent 2 months. At age 14 months, he had lost most of his motor
abilities and showed a progressive worsening of his clinical status. At
approximately 18 months of age, he was hypotonic and also presented
severe speech impairment, visual loss, and myoclonic seizures.
Electroretinogram and visual evoked potentials were altered. MRI showed
severe cerebral cortical atrophy with relative sparing of the
cerebellum. Ultrastructural studies showed recurrent granular
osmiophilic deposits in both endothelial cells and fibroblasts on skin
biopsy.

.0008
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 1
PPT1, 451C-T

De Vries et al. (1999) reported the first prenatal diagnosis of CLN1
(256730). The fetus was found to be homozygous for a 451C-T substitution
in the PPT1 gene, resulting in premature termination of the protein
after 150 amino acids. The mutation gives rise to loss of a TaqI
restriction site.

.0009
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 1
PPT1, GLY108ARG

In 2 sisters with adult-onset CLN1 (256730), van Diggelen et al. (2001)
identified compound heterozygosity for mutations in the PPT1 gene: R151X
(600722.0006) and a G-C change in exon 3, resulting in a gly108-to-arg
(G108R) substitution. Onset in both patients was in the thirties, with
symptoms of depression progressing to cognitive decline, cerebellar
ataxia, parkinsonism, and decreased verbal fluency in their fifties.
Both patients showed generalized brain atrophy on MRI. Enzyme analysis
showed severe PPT deficiency.

.0010
CEROID LIPOFUSCINOSIS, NEURONAL, 1
PPT1, CYS45TYR

In a 24-year-old woman with adult-onset CLN1 (256730), Ramadan et al.
(2007) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the PPT1
gene: a 134A-G transition, resulting in a cys45-to-tyr (C45Y)
substitution, and R151X (600722.0006). The patient presented with
psychiatric symptoms, including low mood, irritability, lack of
interest, bizarre behavior, and academic decline. She deteriorated over
the next 18 months, developing tunnel vision, retinitis pigmentosa,
visual hallucinations, and further cognitive decline. Brain MRI showed
marked generalized cerebral and cerebellar atrophy. Biochemical studies
showed decreased PPT1 activity.

REFERENCE 1. Bellizzi, J. J., III; Widom, J.; Kemp, C.; Lu, J.-Y.; Das, A. K.;
Hofmann, S. L.; Clardy, J.: The crystal structure of palmitoyl protein
thioesterase 1 and the molecular basis of infantile neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 4573-4578, 2000.

2. Camp, L. A.; Verkruyse, L. A.; Afendis, S. J.; Slaughter, C. A.;
Hofmann, S. L.: Molecular cloning and expression of palmitoyl-protein
thioesterase. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 23212-23219, 1994.

3. Das, A. K.; Becerra, C. H. R.; Yi, W.; Lu, J.-Y.; Siakotos, A.
N.; Wisniewski, K. E.; Hofmann, S. L.: Molecular genetics of palmitoyl-protein
thioesterase deficiency in the U.S. J. Clin. Invest. 102: 361-370,
1998.

4. Das, A. K.; Lu, J.-Y.; Hofmann, S. L.: Biochemical analysis of
mutations in palmitoyl-protein thioesterase causing infantile and
late-onset forms of neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10:
1431-1439, 2001.

5. de Vries, B. B. A.; Kleijer, W. J.; Keulemans, J. L. M.; Voznyi,
Y. V.; Franken, P. F.; Eurlings, M. C. M.; Galjaard, R. J.; Losekoot,
M.; Catsman-Berrevoets, C. E.; Breuning, M. H.; Taschner, P. E. M.;
van Diggelen, O. P.: First-trimester diagnosis of infantile neuronal
ceroid lipofuscinosis (INCL) using PPT enzyme assay and CLN1 mutation
analysis. Prenatal Diag. 19: 559-562, 1999.

6. Gupta, P.; Soyombo, A. A.; Atashband, A.; Wisniewski, K. E.; Shelton,
J. M.; Richardson, J. A.; Hammer, R. E.; Hofmann, S. L.: Disruption
of PPT1 or PPT2 causes neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis in knockout
mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 13566-13571, 2001.

7. Heinonen, O.; Kyttala, A.; Lehmus, E.; Paunio, T.; Peltonen, L.;
Jalanko, A.: Expression of palmitoyl protein thioesterase in neurons. Molec.
Genet. Metab. 69: 123-129, 2000.

8. Kielar, C.; Wishart, T. M.; Palmer, A.; Dihanich, S.; Wong, A.
M.; Macauley, S. L.; Chan, C.-H.; Sands, M. S.; Pearce, D. A.; Cooper,
J. D.; Gillingwater, T. H.: Molecular correlates of axonal and synaptic
pathology in mouse models of Batten disease. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18:
4066-4080, 2009.

9. Kim, S.-J.; Zhang, Z.; Sarkar, C.; Tsai, P.-C.; Lee, Y.-C.; Dye,
L.; Mukherjkee, A. B.: Palmitoyl protein thioesterase-1 deficiency
impairs synaptic vesicle recycling at nerve terminals, contributing
to neuropathology in humans and mice. J. Clin. Invest. 118: 3075-3086,
2008.

10. Lehtovirta, M.; Kyttala, A.; Eskelinen, E.-L.; Hess, M.; Heinonen,
O.; Jalanko, A.: Palmitoyl protein thioesterase (PPT) localizes into
synaptosomes and synaptic vesicles in neurons: implications for infantile
neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis (INCL). Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 69-75,
2001.

11. Mitchison, H. M.; Hofmann, S. L.; Becerra, C. H. R.; Munroe, P.
B.; Lake, B. D.; Crow, Y. J.; Stephenson, J. B. P.; Williams, R. E.;
Hofman, I. L.; Taschner, P. E. M.; Martin, J.-J.; Philippart, M.;
Andermann, E.; Andermann, F.; Mole, S. E.; Gardiner, R. M.; O'Rawe,
A. M.: Mutations in the palmitoyl-protein thioesterase gene (PPT;
CLN1) causing juvenile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis with granular
osmiophilic deposits. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 291-297, 1998. Note:
Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 765 only, 1998.

12. Mole, S. E.; Mitchison, H. M.; Munroe, P. B.: Molecular basis
of the neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses: mutations in CLN1, CLN2, CLN3,
and CLN5. Hum. Mutat. 14: 199-215, 1999.

13. Ramadan, H.; Al-Din, A. S.; Ismail, A.; Balen, F.; Varma, A.;
Twomey, A.; Watts, R.; Jackson, M.; Anderson, G.; Green, E.; Mole,
S. E.: Adult neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis caused by deficiency
in palmitoyl protein thioesterase 1. Neurology 68: 387-388, 2007.

14. Sanders, D. N.; Farias, F. H.; Johnson, G. S.; Chiang, V.; Cook,
J. R.; O'Brien, D. P.; Hofmann, S. L.; Lu, J.-Y.; Katz, M. L.: A
mutation in canine PPT1 causes early onset neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
in a Dachshund. Molec. Genet. Metab. 100: 349-356, 2010.

15. Santorelli, F. M.; Bertini, E.; Petruzzella, V.; Di Capua, M.;
Calvieri, S.; Gasparini, P.; Zeviani, M.: A novel insertion mutation
(A169i) in the CLN1 gene is associated with infantile neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis in an Italian patient. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 245:
519-522, 1998.

16. Schriner, J. E.; Yi, W.; Hofmann, S. L.: cDNA and genomic cloning
of human palmitoyl-protein thioesterase (PPT), the enzyme defective
in infantile neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis. Genomics 34: 317-322,
1996. Note: Erratum: Genomics 38: 458 only, 1996.

17. van Diggelen, O. P.; Thobois, S.; Tilikete, C.; Zabot, M.-T.;
Keulemans, J. L. M.; van Bunderen, P. A.; Taschner, P. E. M.; Losekoot,
M.; Voznyi, Y. V.: Adult neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis with palmitoyl-protein
thioesterase deficiency: first adult-onset patients of a childhood
disease. Ann. Neurol. 50: 269-272, 2001.

18. Vesa, J.; Hellsten, E.; Verkruyse, L. A.; Camp, L. A.; Rapola,
J.; Santavuori, P.; Hofmann, S. L.; Peltonen, L.: Mutations in the
palmitoyl protein thioesterase gene causing infantile neuronal ceroid
lipofuscinosis. Nature 376: 584-588, 1995.

19. Zhang, Z.; Lee, Y.-C.; Kim, S.-J.; Choi, M. S.; Tsai, P.-C.; Saha,
A.; Wei, H.; Xu, Y.; Xiao, Y.-J.; Zhang, P.; Heffer, A.; Mukherjee,
A. B.: Production of lysophosphatidylcholine by cPLA2 in the brain
of mice lacking PPT1 is a signal for phagocyte infiltration. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 16: 837-847, 2007.

20. Zhang, Z.; Lee, Y.-C.; Kim, S.-J.; Choi, M. S.; Tsai, P.-C.; Xu,
Y.; Xiao, Y.-J.; Zhang, P.; Heffer, A.; Mukherjee, A. B.: Palmitoyl-protein
thioesterase-1 deficiency mediates the activation of the unfolded
protein response and neuronal apoptosis in INCL. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15:
337-346, 2006.

21. Zhong, N. A.; Moroziewicz, D. N.; Ju, W.; Wisniewski, K. E.; Jurkiewicz,
A.; Brown, W. T.: CLN-encoded proteins do not interact with each
other. Neurogenetics 3: 41-44, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/20/2013
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/30/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/19/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/30/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/18/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/4/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/23/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/7/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/16/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/11/2001
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/16/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/19/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/22/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/29/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/14/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/30/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/7/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/24/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/17/1995

EDITED carol: 09/30/2013
mgross: 5/20/2013
carol: 7/3/2012
wwang: 10/13/2010
terry: 9/30/2010
wwang: 2/23/2010
ckniffin: 2/19/2010
carol: 1/28/2010
wwang: 11/5/2009
ckniffin: 10/30/2009
wwang: 11/24/2008
ckniffin: 11/18/2008
wwang: 2/19/2008
ckniffin: 2/4/2008
carol: 3/24/2006
ckniffin: 3/21/2006
ckniffin: 3/16/2006
ckniffin: 9/23/2003
carol: 7/31/2003
ckniffin: 7/30/2003
carol: 7/9/2003
ckniffin: 6/23/2003
ckniffin: 6/21/2002
carol: 1/20/2002
carol: 1/17/2002
mcapotos: 1/10/2002
terry: 1/7/2002
alopez: 11/21/2001
cwells: 11/20/2001
cwells: 11/16/2001
mcapotos: 5/23/2001
mcapotos: 5/22/2001
mcapotos: 5/17/2001
terry: 5/11/2001
cwells: 3/20/2001
cwells: 3/16/2001
cwells: 3/14/2001
mcapotos: 7/19/2000
mcapotos: 7/7/2000
alopez: 6/19/2000
terry: 6/14/2000
alopez: 5/31/2000
terry: 5/22/2000
mgross: 11/17/1999
terry: 10/29/1999
carol: 10/14/1999
dkim: 12/16/1998
psherman: 11/18/1998
alopez: 8/2/1998
terry: 7/30/1998
dkim: 7/23/1998
terry: 7/9/1998
terry: 7/7/1998
carol: 4/29/1998
carol: 4/15/1998
terry: 4/15/1998
alopez: 3/27/1998
terry: 3/24/1998
joanna: 6/2/1997
mark: 7/5/1996
terry: 6/25/1996
terry: 3/26/1996
mark: 12/6/1995
terry: 11/16/1995
mimadm: 11/3/1995
mark: 8/17/1995

610781	TITLE *610781 GUANOSINE MONOPHOSPHATE REDUCTASE 2; GMPR2
;;GMP REDUCTASE 2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database searching with the sequence of GMPR1 (GMPR; 139265) as
query, Deng et al. (2002) identified and subsequently cloned GMPR2 from
a human fetal brain cDNA library. The deduced 348-amino acid protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 37.9 kD and shares 90% sequence identity
with GMPR1 and 69% identity with E. coli GMPR. Northern blot analysis
detected relatively high levels of both GMPR1 and GMPR2 in heart,
skeletal muscle, and kidney, and relatively low levels of both in colon,
thymus, and peripheral blood leukocyte. Strong signals of GMPR2 were
detected in brain, liver, and placenta, whereas weak signals of GMPR1
were observed in these tissues. The apparent Km of GMPR2 for NADPH and
GMP are 26.6 and 17.4 microM, respectively.

Zhang et al. (2003) cloned GMPR2 from a human dendritic cell cDNA
library. Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of an
approximately 2.2-kb transcript, with high expression in testis, ovary,
prostate, heart, liver, spleen, skeletal muscle, and kidney. An
additional transcript of about 1.3 kb was detected in placenta.
Expression was also detected in most cancer cell lines studied.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhang et al. (2003) showed that recombinant GMPR2 protein was able to
reduce GMP. Transfection experiments demonstrated that overexpression of
GMPR2 promoted the monocytic differentiation of HL-60 leukemia cells.

EVOLUTION

Deng et al. (2002) presented evidence that the 2 types of GMP reductase
are derived from duplication of an ancient gene.

GENE STRUCTURE

Deng et al. (2002) determined that the GMPR2 gene contains 10 exons and
spans more than 6.6 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Deng et al. (2002) mapped the GMPR2 gene
to chromosome 14p11.2-p11.1. By the same method, Zhang et al. (2003)
mapped the gene to chromosome 14q11-q21.

REFERENCE 1. Deng, Y.; Wang, Z.; Ying, K.; Gu, S.; Ji, C.; Huang, Y.; Gu, X.;
Wang, Y.; Xu, Y.; Li, Y.; Xie, Y.; Mao, Y.: NADPH-dependent GMP reductase
isoenzyme of human (GMPR2): expression, purification, and kinetic
properties. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 34: 1035-1050, 2002.

2. Zhang, J.; Zhang, W.; Zou, D.; Chen, G.; Wan, T.; Zhang, M.; Cao,
X.: Cloning and functional characterization of GMPR2, a novel human
guanosine monophosphate reductase, which promotes the monocytic differentiation
of HL-60 leukemia cells. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 129: 76-83,
2003.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 2/21/2007

EDITED carol: 02/21/2007
carol: 2/21/2007

600813	TITLE *600813 SPLICING FACTOR, SERINE/ARGININE-RICH, 2; SRSF2
;;SERINE/ARGININE-RICH SPLICING FACTOR 2;;
SPLICING FACTOR SC35; SC35;;
SPLICING FACTOR, ARGININE/SERINE-RICH, 30-KD, B; SRp30b;;
SPLICING FACTOR, ARGININE/SERINE-RICH, 2; SFRS2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Fu and Maniatis (1992) isolated a human cDNA termed pre-mRNA splicing
factor SC35, or SFRS2, that is required for spliceosome assembly. The
predicted protein contains a ribonucleoprotein (RNP)-type RNA-binding
motif and a carboxyl-terminal serine/arginine-rich (SR) domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2001) reported that Cre-mediated conditional deletion of
the prototypic SR protein Sc35 in mouse thymus caused a defect in T-cell
maturation. Deletion of Sc35 altered alternative splicing of CD45
(151460), a receptor tyrosine phosphatase regulated by differential
splicing during thymocyte development and activation.

Lareau et al. (2007) reported that in every member of the human SR
family of splicing regulators, highly or ultraconserved elements are
alternatively spliced, either as alternative 'poison cassette exons'
containing early in-frame stop codons, or as alternative introns in the
3-prime untranslated region. These alternative splicing events target
the resulting mRNAs for degradation by means of an RNA surveillance
pathway called nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Mouse orthologs of the
human SR proteins exhibit the same unproductive splicing patterns. Three
SR proteins, SRp20 (603364), SC35, and 9G8 (SFRS7; 600572), had been
previously shown to direct splicing of their own transcripts, and SC35
autoregulates its expression by coupling alternative splicing with
decay. Lareau et al. (2007) concluded that unproductive splicing is
important for regulation of the entire SR family and found that
unproductive splicing associated with conserved regions has arisen
independently in different SR genes, suggesting that splicing factors
may readily acquire this form of regulation.

MAPPING

Bermingham et al. (1995) used recombinant inbred mapping to locate the
mouse homologs of the human SFRS1 (600812) and SFRS2 loci to mouse
chromosome 11 in a region that is homologous to human chromosome 17.
Mapping using F1 hybrid backcross mice confirmed the finding.
Kuhlenbaeumer et al. (1998) placed the SFRS2 gene within the hereditary
neuralgic amyotrophy (162100) locus on 17q25 and excluded it as a
candidate gene.

REFERENCE 1. Bermingham, J. R., Jr.; Arden, K. C.; Naumova, A. K.; Sapienza,
C.; Viars, C. S.; Fu, X.-D.; Khotz, J.; Manley, J. L.; Rosenfeld,
M. G.: Chromosomal localization of mouse and human genes encoding
the splicing factors ASF/SF2 (SFRS1) and SC-35 (SFRS2). Genomics 29:
70-79, 1995.

2. Fu, X.-D.; Maniatis, T.: Isolation of a complementary DNA that
encodes the mammalian splicing factor SC35. Science 256: 535-538,
1992.

3. Kuhlenbaeumer, G.; Meuleman, J.; Schirmacher, A.; Stoegbauer, F.;
Ringelstein, E. B.; Wehnert, M.; Hoeltzenbein, M.; Broeckhoven, C.
V.; Timmerman, V.: Mutation analysis of a putative sialyltransferase
gene, the SFRS2 splicing factor gene and the c-myb ET-locus in two
families with hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy (HNA). Ann. Hum. Genet. 62:
397-400, 1998.

4. Lareau, L. F.; Inada, M.; Green, R. E.; Wengrod, J. C.; Brenner,
S. E.: Unproductive splicing of SR genes associated with highly conserved
and ultraconserved DNA elements. Nature 446: 926-929, 2007.

5. Wang, H.-Y.; Xu, X.; Ding, J.-H.; Bermingham, J. R., Jr.; Fu, X.-D.
: SC35 plays a role in T cell development and alternative splicing
of CD45. Molec. Cell 7: 331-342, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/29/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/31/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 3/9/2001
Alan F. Scott - updated: 5/20/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/2/1995

EDITED mgross: 12/07/2011
wwang: 4/23/2008
alopez: 6/12/2007
terry: 5/29/2007
cwells: 6/12/2001
cwells: 6/6/2001
terry: 5/31/2001
mgross: 3/9/2001
alopez: 3/24/1999
alopez: 12/17/1998
psherman: 11/10/1998
mark: 5/20/1996
terry: 5/20/1996
mark: 10/2/1995

612041	TITLE *612041 RING FINGER PROTEIN 212; RNF212
;;ZHP3, C. ELEGANS, HOMOLOG OF; ZHP3;;
ZIP3-RELATED PROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Jantsch et al. (2004) identified the human ring finger protein RNF212 as
an expressed sequence tag, Q86W82. It has considerable sequence homology
to the Caenorhabditis elegans protein Zhp3, which was shown by Jantsch
et al. (2004) to play a role in meiotic recombination.

Reynolds et al. (2013) cloned full-length mouse Rnf212. The deduced
307-amino acid protein has an N-terminal ring finger domain, followed by
a coiled-coil domain and a C-terminal serine-rich domain. The ring
finger domain is characteristic of E3 ligase enzymes that catalyze
protein modification by ubiquitin (see 191339)-like molecules. The human
RNF212 protein shares significant identity with the full-length mouse
protein and has a similar domain structure. Reynolds et al. (2013) also
identified 2 splice variants of mouse Rnf212 that encode C-terminally
truncated proteins of 133 and 52 amino acids. Immunohistochemical
analysis of mouse spermatocyte and oocyte nuclei revealed dynamic
localization of Rnf212 to synaptonemal complexes, including
pseudoautosomal regions of X-Y chromosomes. Rnf212 localized more weakly
to DNA double-strand break sites.

MAPPING

Kong et al. (2008) identified the RNF212 gene within a linkage
disequilibrium block on chromosome 4p16.3 associated with recombination
rate.

GENE FUNCTION

Using mutant mouse spermatocytes, Reynolds et al. (2013) found that
mouse Rnf212 localized to synaptonemal complexes due to high binding
affinity for the synaptonemal complex central element. Absence of the
central element caused defective localization of Rnf212.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kong et al. (2008) found 2 SNPs within the RNF212 gene, dbSNP rs3796619
(612041.0001) and dbSNP rs1670533 (612041.0002), that are associated
with inverse recombination rates in males and females. Haplotype CT was
associated with high male recombination rate and low female
recombination; the opposite was true for haplotype TC. A phylogenetic
analysis of a 55-kb region containing the SNPs dbSNP rs3796619 and dbSNP
1670533 in the HapMap data revealed 3 well-differentiated clusters of
haplotypes showing notable differences in frequency between the Yoruban
Nigerians and CEU and East Asians. The CT and TC haplotypes that
associated most strongly with recombination rate had a combined
frequency of only 17% in the Yoruban sample, but reached a frequency of
91% and 98% in the CEU and East Asian samples, respectively. Several
SNPs in this region showed an unusual degree of divergence among the
HapMap groups, on the basis of rank percentile of their F(ST) values
(the Wright coefficient, a measure of variance in allele frequencies
among populations) among all autosomal SNPs with the same overall
frequency in the HapMap.

ANIMAL MODEL

Jantsch et al. (2004) showed that Zhp3 knockout worms showed normal
homolog pairing and synaptonemal complex formation. The timing of
appearance and the nuclear localization of the recombination protein
Rad51 (179617) seemed normal in these animals, suggesting proper
initiation of meiotic recombination by DNA double-strand breaks.
However, the occurrence of univalents during diplotene indicated that C.
elegans Zhp3 protein is essential for reciprocal recombination between
homologous chromosomes and thus chiasma formation. In the absence of
Zhp3, reciprocal recombination was abolished and double-strand breaks
seemed to be repaired via alternative pathways, leading to achiasmatic
chromosomes and the occurrence of univalents during meiosis I.

Reynolds et al. (2013) found that both male and female Rnf212 -/- mice
appeared normal but were sterile. Male Rnf212 -/- mice showed reduced
testis size and absence of post-anaphase I cells. Rnf212 -/- ovaries
were similar in size to those of wildtype animals, and high numbers of
oocytes were present in mature animals. Both Rnf212 -/- spermatocyte and
oocyte nuclei showed apparently normal pachytene nuclei and fully
synapsed autosomes. However, X-Y synapsis was destabilized and crossover
complexes were absent in Rnf212 -/- spermatocytes. Reynolds et al.
(2013) found that Rnf212 was required to stabilize the meiosis-specific
factors Msh4 (602105) and Tex11 (300311).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
RECOMBINATION RATE QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 1
RNF212, IVS, C/T

In a genomewide scan for variants associated with recombination rate
(612042), Kong et al. (2008) identified a SNP in the RNF212 gene, dbSNP
rs3796619, that was strongly associated. The SNP dbSNP rs3796619 was
strongly associated with male recombination rate (P = 3.2 x 10(-24)),
and each copy of allele T (compared with C) was estimated to decrease
recombination rate by 70.7 cM. This and another associated SNP in
RNF212, dbSNP rs1670533 (612041.0002), are in strong linkage
disequilibrium; for males, haplotype CT was associated with
significantly higher recombination rate than both TT and TC (P = 3.2 x
10(-7) and 7.0 x 10(-23), respectively). For females, haplotype TC was
associated with significantly higher recombination rate than both
haplotypes TT (P = 6.6 x 10(-7)) and CT (P = 5.4 x 10(-11)), although
there was not a significant difference between the latter 2 haplotypes.

.0002
RECOMBINATION RATE QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 1
RNF212, IVS, C/T

In a genomewide scan for variants associated with recombination rate
(612042), Kong et al. (2008) identified a SNP in the RNF212 gene, dbSNP
rs1670533, that was strongly associated. The SNP dbSNP rs1670533 was
strongly associated with female recombination rate (P = 1.9 x 10(-12))
and, relative to the TT homozygote, each copy of allele C was estimated
to increase recombination rate by 88.2 cM. See also 612041.0001.

REFERENCE 1. Jantsch, V.; Pasierbek, P.; Mueller, M. M.; Schweizer, D.; Jantsch,
M.; Loidl, J.: Targeted gene knockout reveals a role in meiotic recombination
for ZHP-3, a Zip3-related protein in Caenorhabditis elegans. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 24: 7998-8006, 2004.

2. Kong, A.; Thorleifsson, G.; Stefansson, H.; Masson, G.; Helgason,
A.; Gudbjartsson, D. F.; Jonsdottir, G. M.; Gudjonsson, S. A.; Sverrisson,
S.; Thorlacius, T.; Jonasdottir, A.; Hardarson, G. A.; Palsson, S.
T.; Frigge, M. L.; Gulcher, J. R.; Thorsteinsdottir, U.; Stefansson,
K.: Sequence variants in the RNF212 gene associate with genome-wide
recombination rate. Science 319: 1398-1401, 2008.

3. Reynolds, A.; Qiao, H.; Yang, Y.; Chen, J. K.; Jackson, N.; Biswas,
K.; Holloway, J. K.; Baudat, F.; de Massy, B.; Wang, J.; Hoog, C.;
Cohen, P. E.; Hunter, N.: RNF212 is a dosage-sensitive regulator
of crossing-over during mammalian meiosis. Nature Genet. 45: 269-278,
2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 07/22/2013

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 5/12/2008

EDITED mgross: 07/22/2013
alopez: 5/13/2008
alopez: 5/12/2008

613889	TITLE *613889 RAS HOMOLOG GENE FAMILY, MEMBER T2; RHOT2
;;MITOCHONDRIAL RHO 2; MIRO2;;
ARHT2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RHOT2 encodes a mitochondrial GTPase of the RHO family (see 165390)
(Fransson et al., 2003).

CLONING

By searching genomic, protein, and EST databases for novel RHO GTPases,
Fransson et al. (2003) identified RHOT1 (613888) and RHOT2, which they
called MIRO1 and MIRO2, respectively. The deduced MIRO1 and MIRO2
proteins both contain 618 amino acids and have calculated molecular
masses of 70 kD. They share 60% amino acid identity, and both have N-
and C-terminal GTPase domains separated by 2 EF-hand motifs. The
N-terminal GTPase domain, but not the C-terminal GTPase domain, is
related to the RHO GTPase domain. Northern blot analysis detected a
2.4-kb MIRO2 transcript in all tissues examined, with highest expression
in heart, liver, skeletal muscle, kidney, and pancreas. Epitope-tagged
MIRO1 and MIRO2 localized to the mitochondrial network in transfected
mouse NIH3T3 cells. Western blot analysis detected MIRO1 at an apparent
molecular mass of 70 kD in human HepG2 and HEK293T cells.

Shan et al. (2004) cloned mouse Rhot2, which they called Arht2. The
deduced 620-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 69 kD.
Both mouse and human ARHT2 have a C-terminal transmembrane domain.
Northern blot analysis of 8 human tissues not examined by Fransson et
al. (2003) revealed highest expression in prostate and testis, with
moderately high expression in spleen, thymus, small intestine, colon,
and peripheral blood leukocytes, and lower expression in ovary. In mouse
tissues, highest Arht2 expression was detected in heart, testis, and
thymus. Expression was moderately high in mouse brain, kidney, scrotum,
colon, small intestine, skeletal muscle, and prostate, and low in liver,
lung, spleen, bladder, and submandibular gland. In developing mouse
testis, low expression was detected at postnatal day 10, and adult
levels were reached by postnatal day 30. In situ hybridization of adult
mouse testis localized Arht2 to residual bodies, which contain excess
cytoplasm shed by late spermatids. Database analysis revealed orthologs
of Arht2 in mammals, fish, and invertebrates.

GENE STRUCTURE

Shan et al. (2004) determined that the RHOT2 gene contains 19 exons and
spans about 6 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Shan et al. (2004) mapped the RHOT2 gene
to chromosome 16p13.3. They mapped the mouse Rhot2 gene to a region of
chromosome 17A3.3 that shares homology of synteny with human chromosome
16p13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Fransson, A.; Ruusala, A.; Aspenstrom, P.: Atypical Rho GTPases
have roles in mitochondrial homeostasis and apoptosis. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
6495-6502, 2003.

2. Shan, Y.; Hexige, S.; Guo, Z.; Wan, B.; Chen, K.; Chen, X.; Ma,
L.; Huang, C.; Zhao, S.; Yu, L.: Cloning and characterization of
the mouse Arht2 gene which encodes a putative atypical GTPase. Cytogenet.
Genome Res. 106: 91-97, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/11/2011

EDITED mgross: 04/11/2011

613295	TITLE *613295 UBIQUITIN-LIKE MODIFIER-ACTIVATING ENZYME 2; UBA2
;;UBA2, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
SUMO1-ACTIVATING ENZYME, SUBUNIT 2; SAE2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Posttranslational modification of proteins by the addition of the small
protein SUMO (see SUMO1; 601912), or sumoylation, regulates protein
structure and intracellular localization. SAE1 (613294) and UBA2 form a
heterodimer that functions as a SUMO-activating enzyme for the
sumoylation of proteins (Okuma et al., 1999).

CLONING

By sequencing peptide fragments of the purified HeLa cell
SUMO1-activating enzyme (SAE), followed by EST database analysis and
RT-PCR, Desterro et al. (1999) cloned SAE1 and UBA2, which they called
SAE2. The deduced SAE1 and SAE2 proteins contain 347 and 640 amino
acids, respectively. SAE1 shares sequence similarity with the N terminus
of ubiquitin-activating E1 enzymes (see UBE1; 314370), and SAE2 share
sequence similarity with the C terminus of E1 enzymes. Both SAE subunits
contain a conserved nucleotide-binding motif, and SAE2 contains an
E1-like active-site cysteine. SAE2 has a calculated molecular mass of 72
kD. It had an apparent molecular mass of 90 kD by SDS-PAGE.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to the ATP-binding
region of UBE1, followed by RACE of a placenta cDNA library, Gong et al.
(1999) cloned UBA2. UBA2 contains 2 ATG translation initiation codons.
SDS-PAGE detected UBA2 at apparent molecular masses of 72 and 62 kD,
suggesting usage of both ATG codons.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to yeast Aos1 and
Uba2, followed by screening a HeLa cell cDNA library, Okuma et al.
(1999) cloned human SUA1 (SAE1) and UBA2, respectively.

Using Northern blot analysis, Azuma et al. (2001) detected both Aos1 and
Uba2 in all adult mouse tissues examined, as well as in mouse embryos.
Immunofluorescence analysis of HeLa cells showed AOS1 and UBA2
distributed throughout nuclei, but they were excluded from nucleoli.
AOS1 and UBA2 copurified through a number of chromatography steps,
suggesting they form a tight complex.

GENE FUNCTION

Desterro et al. (1999) showed that purified SAE from HeLa cells bound to
immobilized SUMO1 in the presence of ATP. Use of in vitro transcribed
and translated SAE1 and SAE2 showed that SUMO1 binding required both SAE
subunits and involved a direct thioester linkage between cys173 of SAE2
and SUMO1. Both SAE1 and SAE2 were required to transfer SUMO1 to the
SUMO1-conjugating enzyme UBC9 (UBE2I; 601661). In the presence of SAE1,
SAE2, UBC9, and ATP, SUMO1 was conjugated to recombinant I-kappa-B-alpha
(NFKBIA; 164008). Desterro et al. (1999) concluded that the SAE1/SAE2
dimer functions in SUMO1 activation in a manner analogous to the single
E1 ubiquitin-activating enzymes.

Gong et al. (1999) showed that in vitro-translated human UBA2 could
precipitate with epitope-tagged sentrin-1 (SUMO1), ubiquitin (see
191339), and NEDD8 (603171) in the presence or absence of ATP. However,
conjugation was only detected between UBA2 and sentrin-1, and this
occurred only in the presence of AOS1. Sentrin-2 (SUMO2; 603042) and
sentrin-3 (SUMO3; 602231) could also conjugate to UBA2 in the presence
of AOS1.

The sumoylated form of RANGAP1 (602362) associates with the nuclear pore
complex and is required for import of proteins into the nucleus. Okuma
et al. (1999) showed that SUA1, UBA2, and UBC9 catalyzed in vitro
sumoylation of RANGAP1. Faint RANGAP1 modification was observed in the
absence of UBC9. Okuma et al. (1999) concluded that, in contrast to the
3-step ubiquitination reaction, which requires an E1
ubiquitin-activating enzyme, an E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, and an
E3 ubiquitin ligase, sumoylation is a 2-step reaction in which the
SUA1/UBA2 dimer functions as an E1 enzyme and UBC9 functions as an E2
enzyme.

By screening for short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) that altered the fitness of
mammary epithelial cells only in the presence of aberrant MYC (190080)
signaling, Kessler et al. (2012) identified SAE1 and SAE2 as
MYC-synthetic lethal genes. Inactivation of SAE2 led to mitotic
catastrophe and cell death upon MYC hyperactivation. SAE2 inhibition
switched a MYC transcriptional subprogram from activated to repressed. A
subset of sumoylation-dependent MYC switchers (SMS genes), including
CASC5 (609173), BARD1 (601593), and CDC20 (603618), was required for
mitotic spindle function and to support the MYC oncogenic program. Sae2
was required for growth of Myc-dependent tumors in mice. Transduction of
MYC-dependent breast cancer cells with inducible SAE2 shRNA suggested
that SAE2 was required for growth and fitness of these cell lines. Gene
expression analysis of human breast cancers with hyperactive MYC
suggested that low expression of SAE1 and SAE2 resulted in better
metastasis-free survival. Kessler et al. (2012) proposed that altering
distinct subprograms of MYC transcription, such as by SAE2 inactivation,
may be a therapeutic strategy in MYC-driven cancers.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

E1 enzymes activate ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like proteins, such as SUMO,
in 2 steps by C-terminal adenylation and thioester bond formation to a
conserved catalytic cysteine in the E1. Olsen et al. (2010) reported the
crystal structures of the SUMO E1, a dimer of SAE2 and UBA2, in complex
with SUMO adenylate and tetrahedral intermediate analogs at 2.45- and
2.6-angstrom resolution, respectively. They found that the switch
between the 2 half-reactions was accompanied by a 130-degree rotation of
the cys domain of UBA2 and remodeling of key structural elements that
displaced side chains required for adenylation with side chains required
for thioester bond formation.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Gong et al. (1999) mapped the UBA2 gene to
chromosome 19q12.

REFERENCE 1. Azuma, Y.; Tan, S.-H.; Cavenagh, M. M.; Ainsztein, A. M.; Saitoh,
H.; Dasso, M.: Expression and regulation of the mammalian SUMO-1
E1 enzyme. FASEB J. 15: 1825-1827, 2001. Note: Full Article Published
Online June 18, 2001.

2. Desterro, J. M. P.; Rodriguez, M. S.; Kemp, G. D.; Hay, R. T.:
Identification of the enzyme required for activation of the small
ubiquitin-like protein SUMO-1. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 10618-10624,
1999.

3. Gong, L.; Li, B.; Millas, S.; Yeh, E. T. H.: Molecular cloning
and characterization of human AOS1 and UBA2, components of the sentrin-activating
enzyme complex. FEBS Lett. 448: 185-189, 1999.

4. Kessler, J. D.; Kahle, K. T.; Sun, T.; Meerbrey, K. L.; Schlabach,
M. R.; Schmitt, E. M.; Skinner, S. O.; Xu, Q.; Li, M. Z.; Hartman,
Z. C.; Rao, M.; Yu, P.; and 15 others: A SUMOylation-dependent
transcriptional subprogram is required for Myc-driven tumorigenesis. Science 335:
348-353, 2012.

5. Okuma, T.; Honda, R.; Ichikawa, G.; Tsumagari, N.; Yasuda, H.:
In vitro SUMO-1 modification requires two enzymatic steps, E1 and
E2. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 254: 693-698, 1999.

6. Olsen, S. K.; Capili, A. D.; Lu, X.; Tan, D. S.; Lima, C. D.:
Active site remodelling accompanies thioester bond formation in the
SUMO E1. Nature 463: 906-912, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/14/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/4/2010

EDITED mgross: 02/15/2012
terry: 2/14/2012
mgross: 3/4/2010

611047	TITLE *611047 RETINOIC ACID EARLY TRANSCRIPT 1L; RAET1L
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RAET1L belongs to the RAET1 family of major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class I-related genes, which are located within a 180-kb cluster
on chromosome 6q24.2-q25.3. The REAT1 genes encode glycoproteins that
contain extracellular alpha-1 and alpha-2 domains, but they lack the
membrane proximal Ig-like alpha-3 domain. Most RAET1 glycoproteins are
anchored to the membrane via glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) linkage
(Radosavljevic et al., 2002).

CLONING

By searching databases for homologs of MHC I glycoproteins, followed by
RT-PCR, Radosavljevic et al. (2002) cloned 6 RAET1 genes, including
RAET1L. The RAET1L protein has an N-terminal signal sequence, followed
by an alpha-1 domain, an alpha-2 domain, and a C-terminal GPI anchor
motif. It has several N-glycosylation sites within the alpha-1/alpha-2
superdomain. RAET1L shares 97% amino acid identity with ULBP2 (605698).
Northern blot analysis revealed wide expression of RAET1L in
nonhemopoietic and nonintestinal tissues. The predominant RAET1L
transcript was 1.5 kb. RAET1L was variably expressed in transformed cell
lines.

GENE STRUCTURE

Radosavljevic et al. (2002) determined that the RAET1L gene contains 4
exons and spans approximately 5.3 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Radosavljevic et al. (2002) mapped the
RAET1L gene to chromosome 6q24.2-q25.3, telomeric to the RAET1K
pseudogene and centromeric to the RAET1M pseudogene.

REFERENCE 1. Radosavljevic, M.; Cuillerier, B.; Wilson, M. J.; Clement, O.;
Wicker, S.; Gilfillan, S.; Beck, S.; Trowsdale, J.; Bahram, S.: A
cluster of ten novel MCH class I related genes on human chromosome
6q24.2-q25.3. Genomics 79: 114-123, 2002.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/21/2007

EDITED mgross: 05/21/2007

604205	TITLE *604205 COPINE I; CPNE1
;;CPN1
DESCRIPTION Molecular events at the interface of the cell membrane and cytoplasm may
be regulated by proteins that attach to and detach from the membrane
surface in response to signals. Calcium-dependent membrane-binding
proteins may play such a role. To identify proteins that may underlie
membrane trafficking processes in ciliates, Creutz et al. (1998)
isolated calcium-dependent phospholipid-binding proteins from
Paramecium. They named the major protein that they obtained 'copine'
(pronounced 'ko-peen'), the French feminine noun meaning 'friend,'
because it associates like a 'companion' with lipid membranes. The 55-kD
copine protein bound phosphatidylserine in a calcium- but not
magnesium-dependent manner, but it did not bind phosphatidylcholine.
Copine promoted calcium-dependent aggregation of lipid vesicles. The
authors cloned partial cDNAs representing 2 distinct Paramecium copine
genes. By searching sequence databases for genes with sequence
similarity to the Paramecium copine genes, Creutz et al. (1998)
identified human ESTs corresponding to 5 copine genes, named copine I to
V. Two overlapping ESTs contained the complete copine I (CPNE1) coding
sequence. The deduced 537-amino acid CPNE1 protein contains 2 type II C2
domains in its N-terminal half and a domain similar to the A domain,
which is present in a number of extracellular proteins or the
extracellular portions of membrane proteins, in its C-terminal half; it
does not have a predicted signal sequence or transmembrane domains. C2
domains mediate calcium-dependent interactions with phospholipids, and
the A domain of integrins appears to mediate the binding of the integrin
to extracellular ligands. CPNE1 has a broad tissue distribution.
Recombinant CPNE1 expressed in bacteria exhibited calcium-dependent
binding to phosphatidylserine vesicles. Antibody against CPNE1 reacted
with bovine chromobindin-17, which is a 55-kD calcium-dependent
chromaffin vesicle-binding protein, and the authors concluded that
chromobindin-17 is a copine. They suggested that copines function in
membrane trafficking.

REFERENCE 1. Creutz, C. E.; Tomsig, J. L.; Snyder, S. L.; Gautier, M.-C.; Skouri,
F.; Beisson, J.; Cohen, J.: The copines, a novel class of C2 domain-containing,
calcium-dependent, phospholipid-binding proteins conserved from Paramecium
to humans. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 1393-1402, 1998.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 9/29/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/01/1999
mgross: 9/30/1999
psherman: 9/30/1999

613322	TITLE *613322 GLUCOSIDE XYLOSYLTRANSFERASE 2; GXYLT2
;;GLYCOSYLTRANSFERASE 8 DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 4; GLT8D4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GXYLT2 is a xylosyltransferase (EC 2.4.2.-) that adds the first xylose
to O-glucose-modified residues in the epidermal growth factor (EGF;
131530) repeats of proteins such as NOTCH1 (190198) (Sethi et al.,
2010).

CLONING

By searching a database for sequences similar to the catalytic domain of
UGGT1 (605897), Sethi et al. (2010) identified human GXYLT1 (613321) and
GXYLT2. The deduced 443-amino acid GXYLT2 protein contains a short
N-terminal cytoplasmic domain, followed by a transmembrane domain, a
stem region, and a large glycosyltransferase domain containing the
conserved DxD motif. GXYLT1 and GXYLT2 share about 50% amino acid
identity, with most amino acid differences in the stem region, where
GXYLT2 has an arginine- and proline-rich insertion that is not found in
GXYLT1.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in vitro assays, Sethi et al. (2010) showed that engineered
soluble forms of GXYLT1 and GXYLT2 specifically used UDP-xylose as
substrate and transferred xylose to a synthetic acceptor containing an
O-glucose modification. HPLC analysis showed that the bond formed by
GXYLT1 involved an alpha-1,3 linkage. GXYLT1 and GXYLT2 functioned as
xylosyltransferases for the glucosylated peptide substrates EGF repeat 1
of factor VII (F7; 613878) and EGF repeats 1 through 5 of mouse Notch1.
Sethi et al. (2010) concluded that GXYLT1 and GXYLT2 are
UDP-D-xylose:beta-D-glucoside alpha-1,3-D-xylosyltransferases.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the GXYLT2 gene to chromosome 3p13 based on an
alignment of the GXYLT2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC127733) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/19/2010.

2. Sethi, M. K.; Buettner, F. F. R.; Krylov, V. B.; Takeuchi, H.;
Nifantiev, N. E.; Haltiwanger, R. S.; Gerardy-Schahn, R.; Bakker,
H.: Identification of glycosyltransferase 8 family members as xylosyltransferases
acting on O-glucosylated Notch epidermal growth factor repeats. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 1582-1586, 2010.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/23/2010

EDITED carol: 04/11/2011
mgross: 3/29/2010
mgross: 3/23/2010

300832	TITLE *300832 JUST PROXIMAL TO XIST; JPX
;;NONCODING RNA 183; NCRNA00183;;
ENOX
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

JPX is a nonprotein-coding RNA transcribed from a gene within the
X-inactivation center (XIC; 314670) that appears to participate in X
chromosome inactivation (Tian et al., 2010).

CLONING

By EST database analysis, Chow et al. (2003) found evidence for
alternative splicing of human ENOX.

GENE FUNCTION

Chow et al. (2003) noted that the ENOX gene maps about 90 kb upstream of
the XIST gene (314670), which encodes a regulatory RNA that coats the
inactive X chromosome and directs X inactivation in female cells. By PCR
of human/mouse somatic cell hybrids retaining human active or inactive X
chromosomes, they found evidence that ENOX escaped X inactivation.

Tian et al. (2010) found that Jpx expression increased during
differentiation of both male and female mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells
and remained elevated in somatic cells. Upregulation of Jpx in female
cells correlated with upregulation of Xist. Allele-specific RT-PCR
showed that Jpx escaped X chromosome inactivation. Deletion or knockdown
of Jpx in male ES cells had no effect on growth and differentiation of
ES cells into embryoid bodies. However, deletion or knockdown of Jpx in
female ES cells caused severe abnormalities during ES cell
differentiation, including reduced Xist expression, defects in cell
outgrowth and attachment, and massive cell death. Expression of Jpx from
an autosomal transgene rescued growth and differentiation in Jpx-deleted
female ES cells. Deletion of Tsix (300181), which inhibits Xist
expression on the active X chromosome, partially rescued Jpx deletion in
female ES cells. Tian et al. (2010) proposed that XIST is controlled by
2 parallel RNA switches: TSIX, which represses XIST on the active X
chromosome, and JPX, which activates XIST on the inactive X chromosome.

MAPPING

Hartz (2011) mapped the NCRNA00183 gene (JPX) to chromosome Xq13.2 based
on an alignment of the NCRNA00183 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK056172)
with the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Chow, J. C.; Hall, L. L.; Clemson, C. M.; Lawrence, J. B.; Brown,
C. J.: Characterization of expression at the human XIST locus in
somatic, embryonal carcinoma, and transgenic cell lines. Genomics 82:
309-322, 2003.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/4/2011.

3. Tian, D.; Sun, S.; Lee, J. T.: The long noncoding RNA, Jpx, is
a molecular switch for X chromosome inactivation. Cell 143: 390-403,
2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/16/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/8/2011

EDITED alopez: 06/11/2012
mgross: 6/7/2012
terry: 4/16/2012
mgross: 2/8/2011

