602443	TITLE *602443 X-PROLYL AMINOPEPTIDASE 1; XPNPEP1
;;X-PROLYL AMINOPEPTIDASE-LIKE; XPNPEPL;;
AMINOPEPTIDASE P-LIKE;;
AMINOPEPTIDASE P, SOLUBLE; SAMP;;
AMINOPEPTIDASE P, CYTOSOLIC;;
APP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

X-prolyl aminopeptidase (EC 3.4.11.9) is a proline-specific
metalloaminopeptidase that specifically catalyzes the removal of any
unsubstituted N-terminal amino acid that is adjacent to a penultimate
proline residue. Because of its specificity toward proline, it has been
suggested that X-prolyl aminopeptidase is important in the maturation
and degradation of peptide hormones, neuropeptides, and tachykinins, as
well as in the digestion of otherwise resistant dietary protein
fragments, thereby complementing the pancreatic peptidases. Deficiency
of X-prolyl aminopeptidase results in excretion of large amounts of
imino-oligopeptides in urine (Blau et al., 1988).

CLONING

X-prolyl aminopeptidase has been isolated from different tissues and
species. Vergas Romero et al. (1995) reported the complete amino acid
sequence of the pig kidney enzyme. The nucleotide sequences of the
X-prolyl aminopeptidase-encoding genes (pepP) from several
microorganisms have been reported. By RT-PCR of
phytohemagglutinin-stimulated lymphocyte mRNA, Vanhoof et al. (1997)
isolated a novel human cDNA, named XPNPEPL, that encodes a 623-amino
acid protein exhibiting 44% sequence identity and 62% sequence
similarity to pig kidney X-prolyl aminopeptidase and high sequence
homology to proteins in S. pombe and S. cerevisiae. Northern blot
analysis indicated ubiquitous expression of XPNPEPL as a 2.7-kb
transcript, with the highest expression in pancreas, followed by heart
and muscle.

Sprinkle et al. (2000) cloned XPNPEPL, which they termed soluble
aminopeptidase P (SAMP), or XPNPEP1. They noted the presence of 4 blocks
of sequences homologous to E. coli methionine aminopeptidase, which is
part of the 'pita-bread fold' family. Like the bacteria enzyme, XPNPEPL
contains a putative proton shuttle (residue 395) and 5 divalent metal
ligands (residues 415, 426, 485, 523, and 537). Sprinkle et al. (2000)
proposed that the enzyme inactivates bradykinin and is part of an
intracellular kallikrein-kinin system, possibly in secretory vesicles.

Cottrell et al. (2000) cloned and characterized XPNPEPL, which they
designated cytosolic APP. They identified an arg residue at position 332
instead of the pro residue reported by Vanhoof et al. (1997) and
determined that the cytosolic protein is 43% identical to membrane
aminopeptidase P (XPNPEP2; 300145). The cytosolic enzyme lacks the
hydrophobic signal sequences for an N-terminal signal peptide and a
C-terminal GPI anchor found in the membrane-bound enzyme. Immunoblot
analysis showed expression of a 71-kD homodimer protein capable of
hydrolyzing bradykinin in a divalent cation-dependent manner, similar to
XPNPEP2. The principal metal in the purified recombinant protein was
manganese, at an approximately 1:1 molar ratio.

Using RT-PCR, Ersahin et al. (2005) detected APP1 expression in all
human tissues examined with high expression in pancreas, liver, kidney,
and testis. There was fairly uniform expression in T cells, B cells, and
monocytes. APP1 functions as a soluble cytosolic homodimer of about 70
kD and exhibits broad substrate specificity.

GENE FUNCTION

Oh et al. (2004) described a hypothesis-driven, systems biology approach
to identifying a small subset of proteins induced at the tissue-blood
interface that are inherently accessible to antibodies injected
intravenously. They used subcellular fractionation, subtractive
proteomics, and bioinformatics to identify endothelial cell surface
proteins exhibiting restricted tissue distribution and apparent tissue
modulation. Expression profiling and gamma-scintigraphic imaging with
antibodies established 2 of these proteins, aminopeptidase-P and annexin
A1 (151690), as selective in vivo targets for antibodies in lung and
solid tumors, respectively. Radioimmunotherapy to annexin A1 destroyed
tumors and increased animal survival.

MAPPING

Using FISH and somatic hybrid analysis, Sprinkle et al. (2000) mapped
the XPNPEPL gene to chromosome 10q25.3, distinct from the Xq25
localization of XPNPEP2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Associations Pending Confirmation

To identify loci contributing to susceptibility to biliary atresia
(210500), characterized by the progressive fibrosclerosing obliteration
of the extrahepatic biliary system during the first few weeks of life,
Garcia-Barcelo et al. (2010) carried out a genomewide association study
(GWAS) using nearly 500,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
200 Chinese biliary atresia patients and 481 ethnically matched control
subjects. The 10 most associated SNPs from the GWAS were genotyped in an
independent set of 124 BA and 90 control subjects. The strongest overall
association was found for dbSNP rs17095355 on chromosome 10q24, 68 kb
downstream from XPNPEP1.

REFERENCE 1. Blau, N.; Niederwieser, A.; Shmerling, D. H.: Peptiduria presumably
caused by aminopeptidase-P deficiency: a new inborn error of metabolism. J.
Inherit. Metab. Dis. 11 (suppl): 240-242, 1988.

2. Cottrell, G. S.; Hooper, N. M.; Turner, A. J.: Cloning, expression,
and characterization of human cytosolic aminopeptidase P: a single
manganese(II)-dependent enzyme. Biochemistry 39: 15121-15128, 2000.

3. Ersahin, C.; Szpaderska, A. M.; Orawski, A. T.; Simmons, W. H.
: Aminopeptidase P isozyme expression in human tissues and peripheral
blood mononuclear cell fractions. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 435: 303-310,
2005.

4. Garcia-Barcelo, M.-M.; Yeung, M.-Y.; Miao, X.-P.; Tang, C. S.-M.;
Chen, G.; So, M.-T.; Ngan, E. S.-W.; Lui, V. C.-H.; Chen, Y.; Liu,
X.-L.; Hui, K.-J. W. S.; Li, L.; and 13 others: Genome-wide association
study identifies a susceptibility locus for biliary atresia on 10q24.2. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 2917-2925, 2010.

5. Oh, P.; Li, Y.; Yu, J.; Durr, E.; Krasinska, K. M.; Carver, L.
A.; Testa, J. E.; Schnitzer, J. E.: Subtractive proteomic mapping
of the endothelial surface in lung and solid tumours for tissue-specific
therapy. Nature 429: 629-635, 2004.

6. Sprinkle, T. J.; Caldwell, C.; Ryan, J. W.: Cloning, chromosomal
sublocalization of the human soluble aminopeptidase P gene (XPNPEP1)
to 10q25.3 and conservation of the putative proton shuttle and metal
ligand binding sites with XPNPEP2. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 378:
51-56, 2000.

7. Vanhoof, G.; Goossens, F.; Juliano, M. A.; Juliano, L.; Hendriks,
D.; Schatteman, K.; Lin, A. H.; Scharpe, S.: Isolation and sequence
analysis of a human cDNA clone (XPNPEPL) homologous to X-prolyl aminopeptidase
(aminopeptidase P). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 78: 275-280, 1997.

8. Vergas Romero, C.; Neudorfer, I.; Mann, K.; Schafer, W.: Purification
and amino acid sequence of aminopeptidase P from pig kidney. Europ.
J. Biochem. 229: 262-269, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 09/06/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/7/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/26/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/24/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/16/1998

EDITED alopez: 09/06/2013
wwang: 9/7/2010
alopez: 7/26/2004
terry: 7/26/2004
alopez: 11/3/2003
mgross: 6/24/2002
mgross: 6/21/2002
dholmes: 4/1/1998
psherman: 3/16/1998

603838	TITLE *603838 NADH-UBIQUINONE OXIDOREDUCTASE 1 BETA SUBCOMPLEX, 2; NDUFB2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The multisubunit NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase (complex I) is the first
enzyme complex in the electron transport chain of mitochondria. NDUFB2
is a nuclear encoded subunit located in the hydrophobic protein fraction
of complex I (Loeffen et al., 1998).

CLONING

By EST database searching and PCR, Loeffen et al. (1998) isolated human
cDNAs encoding NDUFB2 and 7 other complex I subunits. The predicted
105-amino acid human protein is 84% identical to Aggg, its bovine
homolog. Hydropathy analysis revealed that NDUFB2 and 4 other subunits
had an overall hydrophilic pattern, even though they were found within
the hydrophobic protein fraction of complex I.

REFERENCE 1. Loeffen, J. L. C. M.; Triepels, R. H.; van den Heuvel, L. P.; Schuelke,
M.; Buskens, C. A. F.; Smeets, R. J. P.; Trijbels, J. M. F.; Smeitink,
J. A. M.: cDNA of eight nuclear encoded subunits of NADH:ubiquinone
oxidoreductase: human complex I cDNA characterization completed. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 253: 415-422, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/25/1999

EDITED mgross: 02/08/2008
terry: 2/7/2008
alopez: 5/25/1999

600454	TITLE *600454 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S3; RPS3
DESCRIPTION The ribosomal protein S3 has 2 apparently distinct functions: (1) as a
ribosomal protein, RPS3 contributes to the domain of the ribosome where
translation is initiated, and (2) as an endonuclease, RPS3 apparently
participates in repair of UV damage. Moreover, the first intron of human
RPS3 transcripts is processed to generate U15A (600455), a small
nucleolar RNA ('snoRNA') (Tycowski et al., 1993). Thus, this is an
example of nested genes or a gene within a gene.

Zhang et al. (1990) isolated a human epithelial cDNA encoding RPS3. The
deduced RPS3 protein has 243 amino acids. Northern blot analysis
indicated that RPS3 is expressed as an approximately 900-bp transcript.

To search for genes whose level of expression changes during
tumorigenesis, Pogue-Geile et al. (1991) screened a cDNA library derived
from a colon adenocarcinoma with cDNAs prepared from the carcinoma and
from adjacent normal mucosa. They isolated cDNAs encoding RPS3. Northern
blot analysis detected a 1-kb RPS3 transcript which was more abundant in
8 of 8 colon adenocarcinomas and 7 of 10 adenomatous polyps relative to
adjacent normal colonic mucosa. The predicted RPS3 protein had no
obvious structural motifs. The human and rat RPS3 coding sequences are
90% identical, and the encoded proteins differ by only 1 amino acid.

By a combination of somatic cell hybrid analysis, fluorescence in situ
hybridization, and YAC/STS content mapping, Polakiewicz et al. (1995)
demonstrated that the RPS3/U15A genes map to the immediate vicinity of
D11S356 and D11S533 on 11q13.3-q13.5. Kenmochi et al. (1998) confirmed
the mapping assignment reported by Polakiewicz et al. (1995).

REFERENCE 1. Kenmochi, N.; Kawaguchi, T.; Rozen, S.; Davis, E.; Goodman, N.;
Hudson, T. J.; Tanaka, T.; Page, D. C.: A map of 75 human ribosomal
protein genes. Genome Res. 8: 509-523, 1998.

2. Pogue-Geile, K.; Geiser, J. R.; Shu, M.; Miller, C.; Wool, I. G.;
Meisler, A. I.; Pipas, J. M.: Ribosomal protein genes are overexpressed
in colorectal cancer: isolation of a cDNA clone encoding the human
S3 ribosomal protein. Molec. Cell. Biol. 11: 3842-3849, 1991.

3. Polakiewicz, R. D.; Munroe, D. J.; Jani Sait, S. N.; Tycowski,
K. T.; Nowak, N. J.; Shows, T. B.; Housman, D. E.; Page, D. C.: Mapping
of ribosomal protein S3 and internally nested snoRNA U15A gene to
human chromosome 11q13.3-q13.5. Genomics 25: 577-580, 1995.

4. Tycowski, K. T.; Shu, M. D.; Steitz, J. A.: A small nucleolar
RNA is processed from an intron of the human gene encoding ribosomal
protein S3. Genes Dev. 7: 1176-1190, 1993.

5. Zhang, X. T.; Tan, Y.-M.; Tan, Y. H.: Isolation of a cDNA encoding
human 40S ribosomal protein S3. Nucleic Acids Res. 18: 6689 only,
1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Patti M. Sherman - updated: 3/23/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/9/1995

EDITED carol: 04/01/1999
carol: 3/10/1995
carol: 3/9/1995

609575	TITLE *609575 ACYL-CoA DEHYDROGENASE, VERY LONG-CHAIN; ACADVL
;;VLCAD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The ACADVL gene encodes very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD)
(EC 1.3.99.13). VLCAD is unique among the acyl-CoA dehydrogenases in its
size, structure, and intramitochondrial distribution (Aoyama et al.,
1995).

CLONING

Izai et al. (1992) identified and purified a novel acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase, Acadvl, from rat liver mitochondria.

Aoyama et al. (1995) cloned and sequenced 2 overlapping cDNA clones
corresponding to human mitochondrial VLCAD. The cDNA encodes a 655-amino
acid protein with a 40-amino acid leader peptide, yielding a mature
615-residue protein.

Whereas the other acyl-CoA dehydrogenases are homotetramers of a 43- to
45-kD subunit, VLCAD purified from human liver was shown by Aoyama et
al. (1995) to be a 154-kD homodimer of a 70-kD subunit. VLCAD was
loosely bound to the mitochondrial inner membrane and required detergent
for stabilization. In contrast, the other 3 acyl-CoA dehydrogenases
others were readily extractable into the soluble fraction without
detergent, indicating that they are located in the mitochondrial matrix.

Andresen et al. (1996) isolated cDNA clones for human VLCAD by using rat
Vlcad cDNA sequences to identify an EST from human fetal brain in the
GenBank database, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime rapid amplification of
cDNA ends (RACE) to identify overlapping clones. Sequence analysis of
the coding region and the 5-prime noncoding region of the VLCAD cDNA
showed no differences with the sequence published by Aoyama et al.
(1995). Andresen et al. (1996) found 26 to 33% homology between VLCAD
and other human acyl-CoA dehydrogenases. Northern blot analysis detected
a 2.4-kb mRNA transcript in a variety of human tissues.

By real-time RT-PCR, Zhou and Blumberg (2003) detected VLCAD expression
in all tissues examined, with highest expression in heart and skeletal
muscle, followed by placenta and pancreas.

GENE FUNCTION

Izai et al. (1992) found that the properties of Acadvl purified from rat
liver mitochondria differed from those of the short (ACADS; 606885)-,
medium (ACADM; 607008)-, and long (ACADL; 609576)-chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenases. Acadvl was active toward very long-chain fatty acids.

Aoyama et al. (1995) found that human VLCAD had 10 times higher specific
activity toward palmitoyl-CoA than did LCAD. The enzyme was found to
catalyze the major part of mitochondrial palmitoyl-CoA dehydrogenation
in liver, heart, skeletal muscle, and skin fibroblasts.

GENE STRUCTURE

Strauss et al. (1995) determined that the ACADVL gene contains 20 exons.
The ACADVL gene is about 5.4 kb long (Zhou and Blumberg, 2003).

Zhang et al. (2003) noted that the VLCAD and the DLG4 (602887) genes are
located in a head-to-head orientation on chromosome 17p. The transcribed
regions of the 2 genes overlap by about 220 bp. Using serial promoter
partial deletion constructs in a reporter gene assay, they found that
the essential promoter activity of DLG4 is carried within a region of
about 400 bp and covers the entire VLCAD minimal promoter, which spans
about 270 bp. The results from di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate
(DEHP)-treated HepG2 cells revealed that the minimal VLCAD promoter can
upregulate VLCAD expression in response to DEHP treatment. Site-directed
mutagenesis experiments showed that a mutated AP2 (107580)-binding site
markedly reduced the transcriptional activity of both the VLCAD and DLG4
promoters and abolished the minimal VLCAD promoter's response to DEHP
treatment.

Independently, Zhou and Blumberg (2003) determined that the VLCAD and
DLG4 genes overlap. The 2 genes share 245 nucleotides at their 5-prime
ends, and the transcription start site for DLG4 extends into the coding
region of VLCAD exon 1. The upstream regions of the VLCAD and DLG4
genes, including the overlapping region, contain 2 potential TATA-less
promoters with potential binding sites for several common transcription
factors. RT-PCR detected unique patterns of expression for VLCAD and
DLG4, indicating that, although they share common regulatory elements,
VLCAD and DLG4 also have distinct tissue-specific elements. The mouse
Dlg4 and Vlcad genes are oriented in a head-to-head manner, but they do
not overlap and are separated by almost 3.5 kb.

MAPPING

Andresen et al. (1996) mapped the ACADVL gene to human chromosome
17p13.1-p11.2 by analysis of rodent-human hybrids.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Orii et al. (1997) mapped the
murine Acadvl gene to chromosome 11 in a region of synteny to human
17p13.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In cultured fibroblasts of 2 patients with VLCAD deficiency (201475),
Aoyama et al. (1995) identified a 105-bp deletion in the ACADVL gene
(609575.0001).

Andresen et al. (1996) identified 9 different mutations in the ACADVL
gene in 4 unrelated patients with VLCAD deficiency. Two patients carried
3 different mutations. Different mutations were observed in each of the
patients. Western blot analysis on fibroblasts from 3 of the patients
revealed severe quantitative reduction in VLCAD protein.

Mathur et al. (1999) identified 21 different mutations in the ACADVL
gene in 18 of 37 children with cardiomyopathy, nonketotic hypoglycemia
and hepatic dysfunction, skeletal myopathy, or sudden death in infancy
with hepatic steatosis. Sixty-seven percent of children had severe
dilated or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy at presentation. In 7 patients,
only 1 mutation was found despite direct sequencing of all exons.
Missense, frameshift, and splice consensus sequence mutations were seen,
as well as in-frame deletions. Eighty percent of these mutations were
associated with cardiomyopathy. The authors concluded that infantile
cardiomyopathy is the most common clinical phenotype for VLCAD
deficiency and highlighted the marked allelic heterogeneity in this
disorder.

Since VLCAD-deficient patients frequently harbor missense mutations with
unpredictable effects on enzyme activity, Gobin-Limballe et al. (2007)
investigated the response to bezafibrate as a function of genotype in 33
VLCAD-deficient fibroblast cell lines representing 45 different
mutations. Treatment with bezafibrate (400 microM for 48 hours) resulted
in a marked increase in FAO capacities, often leading to restoration of
normal values, for 21 genotypes that mainly corresponded to patients
with the myopathic phenotype. In contrast, bezafibrate induced no
changes in FAO for 11 genotypes corresponding to severe neonatal or
infantile phenotypes. This pattern of response was not due to
differential inductions of VLCAD mRNA, as shown by quantitative
real-time PCR, but reflected variable increases in measured VLCAD
residual enzyme activity in response to bezafibrate. Genotype
cross-analysis allowed the identification of alleles carrying missense
mutations, which could account for these different pharmacologic
profiles and, on this basis, led to the characterization of 9 mild and
11 severe missense mutations. The responses to bezafibrate reflected the
severity of the metabolic blockage in various genotypes, which appeared
to be correlated with the phenotype. This study emphasized the potential
of bezafibrate, a widely prescribed hypolipidemic drug, for the
correction of VLCAD deficiency and exemplified the integration of
molecular information in a therapeutic strategy.

ANIMAL MODEL

Cox et al. (2001) generated mice with VLCAD deficiency (Vlcad -/-) and
compared their pathologic and biochemical phenotypes to mice with Lcad
deficiency (Lcad -/-) and wildtype mice. Vlcad -/- mice had milder fatty
acid change in liver and heart. Dehydrogenation of various acyl-CoA
substrates by liver, heart, and skeletal muscle mitochondria differed
among the 3 genotypes. The results for liver were most informative as
Vlcad -/- mice had a reduction in activity toward palmitoyl-CoA and
oleoyl-CoA (58% and 64% of wildtype, respectively), whereas Lcad -/-
mice showed a more profoundly reduced activity toward these substrates
(35% and 32% of wildtype, respectively), with a significant reduction of
activity toward the branched chain substrate 2,6-dimethylheptanoyl-CoA.
C16 and C18 acylcarnitines were elevated in bile, blood, and serum of
fasted Vlcad -/- mice, whereas abnormally elevated C12 and C14
acylcarnitines were prominent in Lcad -/- mice. Progeny with the
combined Lcad +/+//Vlcad +/- genotype were overrepresented in offspring
from sires and dams heterozygous for both Lcad and Vlcad mutations. In
contrast, no live mice with a compound Lcad -/-/Vlcad -/- genotype were
detected, suggesting that this genotype may be lethal in utero or in the
periparturient period.

To define the onset and molecular mechanism of myocardial disease, Exil
et al. (2003) generated Vlcad-deficient mice by homologous
recombination. They found that Vlcad-deficient hearts had microvesicular
lipid accumulation and marked mitochondrial proliferation, and
demonstrated facilitated induction of polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia, without antecedent stress. The expression of acyl-CoA
synthetase-1 (ACS1; 152425), adipophilin, Ap2, cytochrome c, and the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1 (PPARGC1;
604517) were increased immediately after birth, preceding overt
histologic lipidosis, whereas Acs1 expression was markedly downregulated
in the adult heart. Exil et al. (2003) concluded that mice with Vlcad
deficiency have altered expression of a variety of genes in the fatty
acid metabolic pathway from birth, reflecting metabolic feedback
circuits, with progression to ultrastructural and physiologic correlates
of the associated human disease in the absence of stress.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, 105-BP DEL

In 2 patients with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Aoyama et al. (1995)
identified a 105-bp deletion encompassing bases 1078-1182 in the VLCAD
cDNA. The deletion was thought to result from exon skipping and was
predicted to result in the in-frame deletion of 35 amino acids,
beginning with val360 of the precursor VLCAD. Using the vaccinia viral
system, Aoyama et al. (1995) performed quantitative cDNA expression of
normal human VLCAD in the patients' fibroblasts and demonstrated that
raising VLCAD activity to approximately 20% of normal control fibroblast
activity raised palmitic acid beta-oxidation flux to the level found in
control fibroblasts. The mutation described in these patients has
consequences for enzyme folding and assembly that are similar to those
for the well-characterized A985G mutation (lys329-to-glu; 607008.0001)
found in approximately 90% of the mutant alleles in patients with MCAD
deficiency (201450).

.0002
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, IVS11, G-A, +1

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475) associated with infantile
cardiomyopathy and sudden death, Strauss et al. (1995) identified a
homozygous G-to-A transition in the consensus dinucleotide of the donor
splice site in intron 11 of the ACADVL gene, resulting in the skipping
of exon 11.

.0003
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, ARG613TRP

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Souri et al. (1996)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ACADVL gene: a
1837C-T transition, resulting in an arg613-to-trp (R613W) amino acid
substitution, and a 135-bp deletion of nucleotides 343-477, resulting in
the loss of 45 amino acids from the VLCAD protein (609575.0005).

.0004
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, IVS5, 1-BP DEL, G, -1

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475) associated with infantile
cardiomyopathy and sudden death, Strauss et al. (1995) identified
compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ACADVL gene: R613W
(609575.0003) and a 1-bp deletion of one of the 2 guanine nucleotides
forming the intron-exon 6 boundary. The normal sequence is ccccagGAA and
the mutant sequence was cccaGAA. The authors noted that the most likely
consequence of this deletion would be an alternation in splicing because
of loss of the conserved ag dinucleotide at the splice acceptor site.
Alternatively, splicing at this site might occur but this would result
in loss of a single nucleotide in exon 6, causing a shift in the mRNA
reading frame. In either event, this mutation would most likely result
in an unstable mRNA and lack of VLCAD protein expression from the mutant
allele.

.0005
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, 135-BP DEL

See 609575.0003 and Souri et al. (1996).

.0006
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, 3-BP DEL, GLU130DEL

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Souri et al. (1996)
identified a homozygous 3-bp deletion in the ACADVL gene, resulting in
deletion of glu130. In another patient, Souri et al. (1996) found the
3-bp deletion mutation in compound heterozygosity with the K382Q
mutation (609575.0008).

.0007
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, 3-BP DEL, LYS299DEL

In an infant with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Souri et al. (1996) found
deletion of nucleotides 895 and 897 in the ACADVL gene, resulting in
deletion of lys299 (K299X).

.0008
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, LYS382GLN

In an infant with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Souri et al. (1996)
identified a 1144A-C transversion in the ACADVL gene, resulting in a
lys382-to-gln (K382Q) amino acid substitution.

.0009
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, GLY401ASP

In a 42-year-old woman with late-onset VLCAD deficiency (201475), Smelt
et al. (1998) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the
ACADVL gene: a G-to-A transition in exon 13, resulting in a
gly401-to-asp (G401D) substitution, and a G-to-A transition in exon 14,
resulting in an arg410-to-his (R410H; 609575.0010) substitution. The
patient had recurrent rhabdomyolysis and markedly elevated levels of
tetradecadienoic acid and hexadecadienoic acid.

.0010
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, ARG410HIS

See 609575.0009 and Smelt et al. (1998).

.0011
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, PRO65LEU AND LYS247GLN

In an Israeli patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Watanabe et al.
(2000) found homozygosity for a complex mutant allele with pro65-to-leu
(P65L) and lys247-to-gln (K247Q) mutations in the ACADVL gene. The P65L
mutation resulted in the skipping of exon 3. The nucleotide substitution
causing the P65L amino acid change was a 194C-T transition located 11
bases upstream of the normal splice donor site of intron 3. This is an
example of an exonic mutation that affects exon splicing; a similar
situation had been described in the ACAT1 gene (see 203750.0009). RT-PCR
showed 2 cDNA fragments of different sizes. One had the expected size
and the other was shorter by 66 basepairs. In the case of P65L, the
amino acid change did not reduce enzyme activity, whereas the K247Q
mutation reduced it drastically.

.0012
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, PHE458LEU

In a patient with VLCAD deficiency (201475), Cox et al. (1998)
identified a 1372T-C transition in the ACADVL gene, resulting in a
phe458-to-leu (F458L) substitution.

.0013
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, ALA416THR

In a 14-year-old Japanese girl with very mild manifestations of VLCAD
deficiency (201475), Fukao et al. (2001) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ACADVL gene: 1 resulting in an
ala416-to-thr (A416T) substitution, and the other resulting in an
arg450-to-his (R450H; 609575.0014) substitution. In vitro functional
expression studies showed that both mutant proteins retained residual
activity at 30 degrees Celsius. Fukao et al. (2001) concluded that the
temperature-sensitive mild mutations resulted in the milder phenotype in
this patient.

.0014
VLCAD DEFICIENCY
ACADVL, ARG450HIS

See 609575.0013 and Fukao et al. (2001).

REFERENCE 1. Andresen, B. S.; Bross, P.; Vianey-Saban, C.; Divry, P.; Zabot,
M.-T.; Roe, C. R.; Nada, M. A.; Byskov, A.; Kruse, T. A.; Neve, S.;
Kristiansen, K.; Knudsen, I.; Corydon, M. J.; Gregersen, N.: Cloning
and characterization of human very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
cDNA, chromosomal assignment of the gene and identification in four
patients of nine different mutations within the VLCAD gene. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 5: 461-472, 1996. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet.
5: 1390 only, 1996.

2. Aoyama, T.; Souri, M.; Ueno, I.; Kamijo, T.; Yamaguchi, S.; Rhead,
W. J.; Tanaka, K.; Hashimoto, T.: Cloning of human very-long-chain
acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase and molecular characterization of its
deficiency in two patients. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 273-283, 1995.

3. Aoyama, T.; Souri, M.; Ushikubo, S.; Kamijo, T.; Yamaguchi, S.;
Kelley, R. I.; Rhead, W. J.; Uetake, K.; Tanaka, K.; Hashimoto, T.
: Purification of human very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase
and characterization of its deficiency in seven patients. J. Clin.
Invest. 95: 2465-2473, 1995.

4. Cox, G. F.; Souri, M.; Aoyama, T.; Rockenmacher, S.; Varvogli,
L.; Rohr, F.; Hashimoto, T.; Korson, M. S.: Reversal of severe hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and excellent neuropsychologic outcome in very-long-chain
acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency. J. Pediat. 133: 247-253,
1998.

5. Cox, K. B.; Hamm, D. A.; Millington, D. S.; Matern, D.; Vockley,
J.; Rinaldo, P.; Pinkert, C. A.; Rhead, W. J.; Lindsey, J. R.; Wood,
P. A.: Gestational, pathologic and biochemical differences between
very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency and long-chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency in the mouse. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 2069-2077,
2001.

6. Exil, V. J.; Roberts, R. L.; Sims, H.; McLaughlin, J. E.; Malkin,
R. A.; Gardner, C. D.; Ni, G.; Rottman, J. N.; Strauss, A. W.: Very-long-chain
acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency in mice. Circ. Res. 93:
448-455, 2003.

7. Fukao, T.; Watanabe, H.; Orii, K. E.; Takahashi, Y.; Hirano, A.;
Kondo, T.; Yamaguchi, S.; Aoyama, T.; Kondo, N.: Myopathic form of
very-long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency: evidence for temperature-sensitive
mild mutations in both mutant alleles in a Japanese girl. Pediat.
Res. 49: 227-231, 2001.

8. Gobin-Limballe, S.; Djouadi, F.; Aubey, F.; Olpin, S.; Andresen,
B. S.; Yamaguchi, S.; Mandel, H.; Fukao, T.; Ruiter, J. P. N.; Wanders,
R. J. A.; McAndrew, R.; Kim, J. J.; Bastin, J.: Genetic basis for
correction of very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency
by bezafibrate in patient fibroblasts: toward a genotype-based therapy. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 81: 1133-1143, 2007.

9. Izai, K.; Uchida, Y.; Orii, T.; Yamamoto, S.; Hashimoto, T.: Novel
fatty acid beta-oxidation enzymes in rat liver mitochondria. I. Purification
and properties of very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 1027-1033, 1992.

10. Mathur, A.; Sims, H. F.; Gopalakrishnan, D.; Gibson, B.; Rinaldo,
P.; Vockley, J.; Hug, G.; Strauss, A. W.: Molecular heterogeneity
in very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency causing pediatric
cardiomyopathy and sudden death. Circulation 99: 1337-1343, 1999.

11. Orii, K. O.; Saito-Ohara, F.; Ikeuchi, T.; Orii, T.; Kondo, N.;
Aoyama, T.; Hashimoto, T.: Assignment of the gene for very-long-chain
acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (Acadvl) to mouse chromosome band 11B2-B5 by
in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 78: 25-26, 1997.

12. Smelt, A. H. M.; Poorthuis, B. J. H. M.; Onkenhout, W.; Scholte,
H. R.; Andresen, B. S.; van Duinen, S. G.; Gregersen, N.; Wintzen,
A. R.: Very long chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase deficiency with
adult onset. Ann. Neurol. 43: 540-544, 1998.

13. Souri, M.; Aoyama, T.; Orii, K.; Yamaguchi, S.; Hashimoto, T.
: Mutation analysis of very-long-chain acyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase
(VLCAD) deficiency: identification and characterization of mutant
VLCAD cDNAs from four patients. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 58: 97-106, 1996.

14. Strauss, A. W.; Powell, C. K.; Hale, D. E.; Anderson, M. M.; Ahuja,
A.; Brackett, J. C.; Sims, H. F.: Molecular basis of human mitochondrial
very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency causing cardiomyopathy
and sudden death in childhood. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 10496-10500,
1995.

15. Watanabe, H.; Orii, K. E.; Fukao, T.; Song, X.-Q.; Aoyama, T.;
IJlst, L.; Ruiter, J.; Wanders, R. J. A.; Kondo, N.: Molecular basis
of very long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency in three Israeli
patients: identification of a complex mutant allele with P65L and
K247Q mutations, the former being an exonic mutation causing exon
3 skipping. Hum. Mutat. 15: 430-438, 2000.

16. Zhang, L.-F.; Ding, J.-H.; Yang, B.-Z.; He, G.-C.; Roe, C.: Characterization
of the bidirectional promoter region between the human genes encoding
VLCAD and PSD-95. Genomics 82: 660-668, 2003.

17. Zhou, C.; Blumberg, B.: Overlapping gene structure of human VLCAD
and DLG4. Gene 305: 161-166, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/8/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/28/2007

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 9/12/2005

EDITED carol: 02/13/2012
carol: 5/3/2011
terry: 5/2/2011
mgross: 10/12/2009
terry: 10/8/2009
terry: 6/6/2008
alopez: 11/29/2007
terry: 11/28/2007
carol: 9/22/2005
ckniffin: 9/14/2005

608112	TITLE *608112 TRAFFICKING PROTEIN, KINESIN-BINDING 1; TRAK1
;;OGT-INTERACTING PROTEIN, 106-KD; OIP106;;
KIAA1042;;
MILTON, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Kikuno et al. (1999) cloned KIAA1042. The deduced protein
contains 953 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA detected high expression of
OIP106 in spinal cord and moderate expression in all other tissues and
specific brain regions examined.

By searching a sequence database for homologs of rat Oip98 (ALS2CR3;
607334), Iyer et al. (2003) identified KIAA1042, which they designated
OIP106. OIP106 contains coiled-coil domains. Confocal and electron
microscopy showed that OIP106 colocalized with RNA polymerase II (see
180660) in nuclear puncta in HeLa cells. In vitro translation
synthesized a protein with an apparent molecular mass of about 115 kD by
SDS/PAGE. Western blot analysis detected a 115-kD OIP106 protein in HeLa
cell lysates. Further analysis revealed expression of OIP106 in all cell
lines examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Iyer et al. (2003) found that OIP106 interacted with the
tetratricopeptide repeats of OGT (300255) and was O-glycosylated by OGT.
However, unlike other O-glycosylation substrates, OIP106 formed stable
in vitro and in vivo associations with OGT. Coimmunoprecipitations
confirmed that OIP106 interacts with RNA polymerase II and with OGT in
vivo.

Numerous studies have shown that neuroreceptors, including
gamma-aminobutyric acid type A, or GABA(A), receptors, are not
stationary structures on the cell surface. Instead, they undergo a
constant flux whereby surface-bound receptors are endocytosed to form an
intracellular pool, and receptors in this pool are either recycled back
onto the cell surface or shunted toward lysosome-mediated degradation.
Several pieces of evidence suggest that TRAK1, and perhaps TRAK2
(ALS2CR3; 607334), is involved in this trafficking process. Both TRAK1
and TRAK2 are associated with the motor protein kinesin (see 602809)
(Brickley et al., 2005), and TRAK2 can bind to the beta-2 subunit of
GABA(A) receptors (Beck et al., 2002). Based on these observations,
Gilbert et al. (2006) hypothesized that TRAK1 has a crucial role in
regulating the endocytic trafficking of GABA(A) receptors. TRAK1 may
facilitate the targeting of endocytosed GABA(A) receptors back to the
cell surface or block them from degradation. TRAK1 may also be involved
in directing newly synthesized GABA(A) receptors to the cell surface.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the OIP106
gene to chromosome 3 (TMAP stSG4620). Gilbert et al. (2006) stated that
this gene, which they referred to as TRAK1, is located on 3p.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hypertonia, which results from motor pathway defects in the central
nervous system (CNS), is observed in numerous neurologic disorders,
including cerebral palsy, stroke, spinal cord injury, stiff-person
syndrome (184850), spastic paraplegia, dystonia, and Parkinson disease.
Mice with mutation in the 'hypertonic' gene (hyrt) exhibit severe
hypertonia as their primary symptom. Gilbert et al. (2006) showed that
Hyrt mutant mice have much lower levels of gamma-aminobutyric acid type
A, or GABA(A), receptors in their CNS, particularly the lower motor
neurons, than do wildtype mice, indicating that the hypertonicity of the
mutants is likely to be caused by deficits in GABA-mediated motor neuron
inhibition. By linkage analysis they localized the mutant gene
responsible for the hyrt phenotype to mouse chromosome 9 in a region
containing the KIAA1042 gene. Mouse KIAA1042 contains 16 exons and
predicts a protein of 939 amino acids. Sequencing of KIAA1042 in hyrt
homozygotes revealed a 20-bp deletion in the last exon of KIAA1042 that
results in a frameshift after amino acid position 824. Given that the
deletion disrupts only the final 12% of the protein, it may result in
partial loss of function.

NOMENCLATURE

Gilbert et al. (2006) noted that the TRAK1 gene was also referred to as
mammalian Milton (Stowers et al., 2002).

REFERENCE 1. Beck, M.; Brickley, K.; Wilkinson, H. L.; Sharma, S.; Smith, M.;
Chazot, P. L.; Pollard, S.; Stephenson, F. A.: Identification, molecular
cloning, and characterization of a novel GABA-A receptor-associated
protein, GRIF-1. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 30079-30090, 2002.

2. Brickley, K.; Smith, M. J.; Beck M.; Stephenson, F. A.: GRIF-1
and OIP106, members of a novel gene family of coiled-coil domain proteins:
association in vivo and in vitro with kinesin. J. Biol. Chem. 280:
14723-14732, 2005.

3. Gilbert, S. L.; Zhang, L.; Forster, M. L.; Iwase, T.; Soliven,
B.; Donahue, L. R.; Sweet, H. O.; Bronson, R. T.; Davisson, M. T.;
Wollmann, R. L.; Lahn, B. T.: Trak1 mutation disrupts GABA(A) receptor
homeostasis in hypertonic mice. Nature Genet. 38: 245-250, 2006.
Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 38: 389 only, 2006.

4. Iyer, S. P. N.; Akimoto, Y.; Hart, G. W.: Identification and cloning
of a novel family of coiled-coil domain proteins that interact with
O-GlcNAc transferase. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 5399-5409, 2003.

5. Kikuno, R.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIV. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 6: 197-205, 1999.

6. Stowers, R. S.; Megeath, L. J.; Gorska-Andrzejak, J.; Meinertzhagen,
I. A.; Schwarz, T. L.: Axonal transport of mitochondria to synapses
depends on milton, a novel Drosophila protein. Neuron 36: 1063-1077,
2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/7/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/4/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/24/2003

EDITED alopez: 06/12/2006
alopez: 2/10/2006
terry: 2/7/2006
alopez: 1/9/2006
terry: 1/4/2006
mgross: 9/24/2003

608724	TITLE *608724 PHOSPHATASE AND ACTIN REGULATOR 2; PHACTR2
;;KIAA0680
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Ishikawa et al. (1998) cloned PHACTR2, which they designated
KIAA0680. The deduced protein contains 634 amino acids. PHACTR2 had an
apparent molecular mass of 95 kD by SDS-PAGE. RT-PCR detected PHACTR2 in
all tissues examined. Expression was highest in heart, ovary, and
testis, intermediate in lung, liver, skeletal muscle, and kidney, and
low in brain, pancreas, and spleen.

By searching databases for sequences similar to rat Phactr1 (608723),
Allen et al. (2004) identified a family of 4 PHACTR genes in mouse and
human, including PHACTR2. The PHACTR proteins share highest similarity
in sequences surrounding the N- and C-terminal RPEL repeats and in the
C-terminal actin- and protein phosphatase-1 (PP1; see 176875)-binding
domains. In situ hybridization of rat brain showed Phactr2 highly
expressed in cerebellum, choroid plexus, and thalamus.

GENE FUNCTION

Allen et al. (2004) found that mouse Phactr2 coprecipitated with both
PP1 and actin following expression in human embryonic kidney cells.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Ishikawa et al. (1998) mapped the PHACTR2
gene to chromosome 6.

REFERENCE 1. Allen, P. B.; Greenfield, A. T.; Svenningsson, P.; Haspeslagh,
D. C.; Greengard, P.: Phactrs 1-4: a family of protein phosphatase
1 and actin regulatory proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 7187-7192,
2004.

2. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Suyama, M.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.;
Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. X. The complete sequences of 100 new
cDNA clones from brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA
Res. 5: 169-176, 1998.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/10/2004

EDITED mgross: 06/10/2004

609372	TITLE *609372 FAMILY WITH SEQUENCE SIMILARITY 53, MEMBER C; FAM53C
;;CHROMOSOME 5 OPEN READING FRAME 6; C5ORF6
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Lai et al. (2000) identified C5ORF6 within a region of chromosome 5q
frequently deleted in malignant myelomas. The deduced 392-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 43 kD. The N terminus
contains a proline-rich sequence that includes 3 potential SH3
domain-binding sites. Northern blot analysis detected a 4.3-kb
transcript in all lymphoid tissues examined. C5ORF6 was also expressed
in heart, brain, placenta, lung, liver, skeletal muscle, kidney, and
pancreas.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Lai et al. (2000) determined that the
C4ORF6 gene contains 5 exons and spans about 11 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lai et al. (2000) mapped the C5ORF6 gene
to chromosome 5q31.

REFERENCE 1. Lai, F.; Godley, L. A.; Fernald, A. A.; Orelli, B. J.; Pamintuan,
L.; Zhao, N.; Le Beau, M. M.: cDNA cloning and genomic structure
of three genes localized to human chromosome band 5q31 encoding potential
nuclear proteins. Genomics 70: 123-130, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/16/2005

EDITED mgross: 05/16/2005
mgross: 5/16/2005

613315	TITLE *613315 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L41; RPL41
;;HG12
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RPL41 encodes a protein component of the large ribosomal subunit (Sim et
al., 2010).

CLONING

By screening an ovarian granulosa cell cDNA library with antibodies
against glycoproteins in follicular fluid, followed by PCR, Klaudiny et
al. (1992) cloned human RPL41, which they designated HG12. The cDNA
encodes a highly basic 25-amino acid peptide with a calculated molecular
mass of 3.45 kD. RPL41 and the 25-amino acid yeast 60S ribosomal protein
Yl41 differ at only 3 residues. Northern blot analysis of human ovarian
granulosa cells and white blood cells showed a 600-bp RPL41 transcript.
Cell-free translation revealed that RPL41 had an apparent molecular mass
of 14.5 kD by SDS-PAGE. Southern blot analysis detected several
RPL41-related genes in humans and several other mammalian species.

Starkey et al. (1996) found only 2 nucleotide differences in the coding
regions of feline and human RPL41. The amino acid sequences are
identical.

GENE FUNCTION

By knocking out the 2 Rpl41-coding genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Yu
and Warner (2001) showed that Rpl41 is a nonessential gene in yeast.

Using RT-PCR, Sim et al. (2010) found that a subset of genes encoding
proteins of the large ribosomal subunit was differentially expressed in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (see 607107) cell lines compared with a normal
nasopharyngeal epithelial cell line. RPL41 was 1 of 3 genes
significantly downregulated in the carcinoma cell lines.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the RPL41 gene to chromosome 12q13.2 based on an
alignment of the RPL41 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF026844) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/19/2010.

2. Klaudiny, J.; von der Kammer, H.; Scheit, K. H.: Characterization
by cDNA cloning of the mRNA of a highly basic human protein homologous
to the yeast ribosomal protein YL41. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 187:
901-906, 1992.

3. Sim, E. U. H.; Ang, C. H.; Ng, C. C.; Lee, C. W.; Narayanan, K.
: Differential expression of a subset of ribosomal protein genes in
cell lines derived from human nasopharyngeal epithelium. J. Hum.
Genet. 55: 118-120, 2010.

4. Starkey, C. R.; Menon, R. P.; Prabhu, S.; Levy, L. S.: Primary
sequence and evolutionary conservation of ribosomal protein genes
from the domestic cat. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 220: 648-652,
1996.

5. Yu, X.; Warner, J. R.: Expression of a micro-protein. J. Biol.
Chem. 276: 33821-33825, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/22/2010

EDITED mgross: 03/23/2010
mgross: 3/22/2010

610396	TITLE *610396 TRAFFICKING PROTEIN PARTICLE COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 6A; TRAPPC6A
;;TRAPP COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 6A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TRAPPC6A is a subunit of the TRAPPI and TRAPPII complexes (Gwynn et al.,
2006).

CLONING

Gwynn et al. (2006) cloned mouse Trappc6a, and they identified human
TRAPPC6A by database analysis. Mouse and human TRAPPC6A encode deduced
159-amino acid proteins that share 83% identity and have calculated
molecular masses of 17.4 kD. Both proteins contain 2 motifs conserved in
TRAPPC6B (610397) and several yeast TRAPP subunits, including Trs33, the
putative homolog of TRAPPC6A and TRAPPC6B. Northern blot analysis
detected Trappc6a expression in all mouse tissues examined, with highest
expression in kidney, liver, and testis. Expression of mouse Trappc6a
was higher in cultured melanocytes than in kidney.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gwynn et al. (2006) determined that the mouse Trappc6a gene contains 6
exons.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the
TRAPPC6A gene to chromosome 19 (TMAP RH98840). Gwynn et al. (2006)
mapped the mouse Trappc6a gene to chromosome 7.

ANIMAL MODEL

Gwynn et al. (2006) identified a recessive mutation in mice, designated
'mosaic hypopigmentation' (Mhyp), that caused mosaic loss of coat
pigmentation and patchy loss of pigmentation with abnormal melanosomes
in the retinal pigmented epithelial layer of the eye. They determined
that Mhyp resulted from integration of an 8.4-kb retrovirus into intron
1 of the Trappc6a gene.

REFERENCE 1. Gwynn, B.; Smith, R. S.; Rowe, L. B.; Taylor, B. A.; Peters, L.
L.: A mouse TRAPP-related protein is involved in pigmentation. Genomics 88:
196-203, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/11/2006

EDITED alopez: 05/24/2011
mgross: 9/11/2006

612538	TITLE *612538 THAP DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 10; THAP10
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases, Roussigne et al. (2003) identified several
proteins containing an N-terminal THAP domain, including THAP10. The
THAP domain of the deduced 257-amino acid THAP10 protein includes a C2CH
signature, an AVPTIF box, and several other conserved amino acids.

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the THAP10 gene to chromosome 15q23 based on an
alignment of the THAP10 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AL360202) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/16/2009.

2. Roussigne, M.; Kossida, S.; Lavigne, A.-C.; Clouaire, T.; Ecochard,
V.; Glories, A.; Amalric, F.; Girard, J.-P.: The THAP domain: a novel
protein motif with similarity to the DNA-binding domain of P element
transposase. Trends Biochem. Sci. 28: 66-69, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/16/2009

EDITED mgross: 01/16/2009

611854	TITLE *611854 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN L50; MRPL50
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
inner membrane proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPL50
is a component of the large subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome that
is encoded by the nuclear genome (Koc et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching databases using bovine Mrpl50 as query, Koc et al. (2001)
identified human MRPL50. They also identified MRPL50 homologs in mouse,
Drosophila, and C. elegans, but not in yeast, E. coli, or Arabidopsis.
Mouse and human MRPL50 share 77.9% amino acid identity.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Zhang and Gerstein (2003) mapped the
MRPL50 gene to chromosome 9q31.1. They identified MRPL50 pseudogenes on
chromosomes 2, 5, and 10.

REFERENCE 1. Koc, E. C.; Burkhart, W.; Blackburn, K.; Moyer, M. B.; Schlatzer,
D. M.; Moseley, A.; Spremulli, L. L.: The large subunit of the mammalian
mitochondrial ribosome: analysis of the complement of ribosomal proteins
present. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 43958-43969, 2001.

2. Zhang, Z.; Gerstein, M.: Identification and characterization of
over 100 mitochondrial ribosomal protein pseudogenes in the human
genome. Genomics 81: 468-480, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/26/2008

EDITED mgross: 03/04/2008

611080	TITLE *611080 COBALAMIN SYNTHETASE W DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 3; CBWD3
;;COBW DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By examining genes arising from intra- and interchromosomal duplications
involving the ancestral chromosome 2 fusion site, Fan et al. (2002)
identified CBWD1 (611078), CBWD2 (611079), and CBWD3. No 2 of the 3 CBWD
paralogs are identical, but they all encode a deduced 395-amino acid
protein containing a cobalamin synthetase W domain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Fan et al. (2002) determined that the CBWD3 gene contains 15 coding
exons and spans 59 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Fan et al. (2002) mapped the CBWD3 gene to
chromosome 9q13.

REFERENCE 1. Fan, Y.; Newman, T.; Linardopoulou, E.; Trask, B. J.: Gene content
and function of the ancestral chromosome fusion site in human chromosome
2q13-2q14.1 and paralogous regions. Genome Res. 12: 1663-1672, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/5/2007

EDITED mgross: 06/05/2007

603894	TITLE *603894 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 6; RGS6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the RGS (regulator of G protein signaling) family, such as
RGS6, modulate G protein function by activating the intrinsic GTPase
activity of the alpha (guanine nucleotide-binding) subunits (Seki et
al., 1999).

CLONING

By EST database analysis and PCR of a brain cDNA library, Posner et al.
(1999) obtained a full-length cDNA encoding RGS6. The predicted
472-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 54.4 kD. It
contains an N-terminal dishevelled (see 601365)/egl10/pleckstrin
(173570) (DEP) domain, a central G protein gamma subunit (see GNG2;
606981)-like (GGL) domain, and an RGS domain near the C terminus.

Using RT-PCR, Seki et al. (1999) showed that RGS6 was expressed in
various tissues.

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Chatterjee et al. (2003) identified 36
RGS6 splice variants resulting from the use of 2 alternative
transcription sites and complex alternative splicing. The variants
encode proteins with long or short N-terminal domains, complete or
incomplete GGL domains, 7 distinct C-terminal domains, and a common
internal domain that includes the RGS domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Posner et al. (1999) expressed RGS6 in insect cells and found that it
formed a cytosolic heterodimer via its GGL domain with the G protein
beta-5 (GNB5; 604447) subunit, but not with other G protein beta
subunits tested. The RGS6/GNB5 complex acted as a GTPase-activating
protein, but it did not form heterotrimeric complexes with G-alpha-o
(GNAO1; 139311)-GDP or G-alpha-q (GNAQ; 600998)-GDP, it did not alter
activity of adenyl cyclase types I, II, or V, and it did not activate
phospholipase C-beta-1 (PLCB1; 607120) or PLCB2 (604114). However, the
RGS6/GNB5 complex inhibited GNB1/GNG2-mediated activation of PLCB2.

Chatterjee et al. (2003) found that RGS6 isoforms with complete GGL
domains interacted with GNB5, irrespective of their N-terminal domain,
following expression in COS-7 cells. In contrast, RGS6 isoforms lacking
a complete GGL domain did not interact with GNB5. Subcellular
distribution patterns for RGS6 isoforms ranged from exclusively
cytoplasmic to exclusively nuclear/nucleolar, and coexpression of GNB5
promoted nuclear localization of RGS6 isoforms.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sierra et al. (2002) determined that the RGS6 gene contains 17 exons.
Chatterjee et al. (2003) determined that the RGS6 gene contains 20 exons
and spans 630 kb.

MAPPING

By somatic cell and radiation hybrid analysis, Seki et al. (1999) mapped
the RGS6 gene to chromosome 14q24.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In an epidemiologic study of 477 bladder cancer patients and 446 matched
controls, Berman et al. (2004) identified 3 noncoding SNPs in RGS2
(600861) and RGS6 that were each associated with a significantly reduced
risk of bladder cancer. When analyzed separately, a C-to-T SNP in the
3-prime UTR of RGS6, dbSNP rs2074647, conferred the greatest overall
reduction in bladder cancer risk, with a significant odds ratio of 0.66.
The reduction of risk was more pronounced in those who had ever smoked.
Expression of dbSNP rs2074647 increased the activity of a luciferase-RGS
fusion protein nearly 3-fold. PCR analysis confirmed that RGS6 splice
variants were expressed in bladder cancer tissue and cell lines. Berman
et al. (2004) proposed that RGS proteins may be important modulators of
cancer risk.

REFERENCE 1. Berman, D. M.; Wang, Y.; Liu, Z.; Dong, Q.; Burke, L.-A.; Liotta,
L. A.; Fisher, R.; Wu, X.: A functional polymorphism in RGS6 modulates
the risk of bladder cancer. Cancer Res. 64: 6820-6826, 2004.

2. Chatterjee, T. K.; Liu, Z.; Fisher, R. A.: Human RGS6 gene structure,
complex alternative splicing, and role of N terminus and G protein
gamma-subunit-like (GGL) domain in subcellular localization of RGS6
splice variants. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 30261-30271, 2003.

3. Posner, B. A.; Gilman, A. G.; Harris, B. A.: Regulators of G protein
signaling 6 and 7: purification of complexes with G-beta-5 and assessment
of their effects on G protein-mediated signaling pathways. J. Biol.
Chem. 274: 31087-31093, 1999.

4. Seki, N.; Hattori, A.; Hayashi, A.; Kozuma, S.; Hori, T.; Saito,
T.: The human regulator of G-protein signaling protein 6 gene (RGS6)
maps between markers WI-5202 and D14S277 on chromosome 14q24.3. J.
Hum. Genet. 44: 138-140, 1999.

5. Sierra, D. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Householder, D.; Grishin, N. V.;
Yu, K.; Ukidwe, P.; Barker, S. A.; He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Otero, G.;
Brown, G.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Wilkie, T. M.: Evolution
of the regulators of G-protein signaling multigene family in mouse
and human. Genomics 79: 177-185, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/22/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/12/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 6/11/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/22/2008
mgross: 9/12/2002
jlewis: 6/14/1999
jlewis: 6/11/1999

186946	TITLE *186946 FK506-BINDING PROTEIN 2; FKBP2
;;FK506-BINDING PROTEIN, T-CELL, 13-KD; FKBP13
DESCRIPTION For background information on FK506-binding proteins (FKBPs), see FKBP1A
(186945).

CLONING

Jin et al. (1991) reported the cloning and subcellular localization of a
13-kD FK506-binding protein (FKBP13), which has a 21-amino acid signal
peptide and appears to be membrane-associated. The 120-amino acid mature
protein appears to lack a transmembrane domain but a potential
endoplasmic reticulum retention sequence (arg-thr-glu-leu) is found at
its C terminus. FKBP13 shares 51% nucleotide sequence identity and 43%
amino acid sequence identity with FKBP12 (FKBP1; 186945), the
predominant FK506- and rapamycin-binding protein in human T cells. Jin
et al. (1991) noted that conserved residues that comprise the drug
binding site and rotamase active site of FKBP12 are completely conserved
in FKBP13.

GENE STRUCTURE

DiLella et al. (1992) found that the FKBP2 gene is 3 kb long and
contains 6 exons.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, DiLella et al. (1992) mapped the
FKBP2 gene to 11q13.1-q13.3.

Courseaux et al. (1996) used a combination of methods to refine maps of
the approximately 5-Mb region of 11q13 that includes MEN1 (131100). They
proposed the following gene order:
cen--PGA--FTH1--UGB--AHNAK--ROM1--MDU1--CHRM1--COX8--EMK1--FKBP2--PLCB3--[PYGM,
ZFM1]--FAU--CAPN1--[MLK3, RELA]--FOSL1--SEA--CFL1--tel.

REFERENCE 1. Courseaux, A.; Grosgeorge, J.; Gaudray, P.; Pannett, A. A. J.;
Forbes, S. A.; Williamson, C.; Bassett, D.; Thakker, R. V.; Teh, B.
T.; Farnebo, F.; Shepherd, J.; Skogseid, B.; Larsson, C.; Giraud,
S.; Zhang, C. X.; Salandre, J.; Calender, A.: Definition of the minimal
MEN1 candidate area based on a 5-Mb integrated map of proximal 11q13. Genomics 37:
354-365, 1996.

2. DiLella, A. G.; Hawkins, A.; Craig, R. J.; Schreiber, S. L.; Griffin,
C. A.: Chromosomal band assignments of the genes encoding human FKBP12
and FKBP13. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 189: 819-823, 1992.

3. Jin, Y.-J.; Albers, M. W.; Lane, W. S.; Bierer, B. E.; Schreiber,
S. L.; Burakoff, S. J.: Molecular cloning of a membrane-associated
human FK506- and rapamycin-binding protein, FKBP-13. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 88: 6677-6681, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Alan F. Scott - updated: 8/5/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/19/1991

EDITED mgross: 03/03/2011
terry: 2/23/2011
carol: 2/22/2011
alopez: 9/3/1998
terry: 8/5/1997
alopez: 6/3/1997
carol: 2/23/1995
carol: 2/4/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 9/19/1991

609827	TITLE *609827 PELLINO, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 3; PELI3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Toll-like receptors (TLRs; see 603030) and IL1R (IL1R1; 147810) are part
of the innate immune response aimed at mobilizing defense mechanisms in
response in infection or injury. Pellino proteins, such as PELI3, are
intermediate components in the signaling cascades initiated by TLRs and
IL1R (Jensen and Whitehead, 2003).

CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to PELI1 (614797) and PELI2 (614798),
followed by 3-prime RACE, Jensen and Whitehead (2003) cloned 2 splice
variants of PELI3, which they called PELI3-alpha and PELI3-beta. The
deduced 469-amino acid PELI3-alpha protein contains 24 amino acids
encoded by exon 3 that are absent in the 445-amino acid PELI3-beta
protein. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.5-kb transcript expressed
at high levels in brain, heart, and testis, and at lower levels in
kidney, liver, lung, placenta, small intestine, spleen, and stomach.
RT-PCR, but not Northern blot analysis, also showed PELI3 expression in
muscle and colon.

GENE FUNCTION

Jensen and Whitehead (2003) found that PELI3 interacted directly with
IL1R-associated kinase-1 (IRAK1; 300283), TNF receptor-associated
factor-6 (TRAF6; 602355), TNF-beta-activated kinase-1 (TAK1, or MAP3K7;
602614), and NFKB-inducing kinase (NIK, or MAP3K14; 604655) in an IL1
(see IL1A; 147760)-dependent manner. In reporter gene assays, PELI3
activated JUN (165160) and ELK1 (311040), but not NFKB (see 164011).
Jensen and Whitehead (2003) concluded that PELI3 plays a role in the
innate immune response and may be a scaffolding protein.

Butler et al. (2005) found that both isoforms of PELI3 could induce
expression of a reporter gene dependent on p38 MAPK (MAPK14; 600289)
activation in human embryonic kidney cells. Activation of p38 MAPK by
PELI3 coincided with binding of PELI3 to IRAK1. TRAF6 and TAK1 were
identified as downstream mediators of p38 MAPK activation by PELI3.
PELI3 promoted translocation of the p38 MAPK substrate, MAPK-activated
protein kinase-2 (MAPKAPK2; 602006), from the nucleus to the cytoplasm
and activated the transcription factor CREB (123810) in a p38
MAPK-dependent manner.

GENE STRUCTURE

Jensen and Whitehead (2003) determined that the PELI3 gene contains 8
exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Jensen and Whitehead (2003) mapped the
PELI3 gene to chromosome 11.

REFERENCE 1. Butler, M. P.; Hanly, J. A.; Moynagh, P. N.: Pellino3 is a novel
upstream regulator of p38 MAPK and activates CREB in a p38-dependent
manner. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 27759-27768, 2005.

2. Jensen, L. E.; Whitehead, A. S.: Pellino3, a novel member of the
pellino protein family, promotes activation of c-Jun and Elk-1 and
may act as a scaffolding protein. J. Immun. 171: 1500-1506, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/18/2006

EDITED alopez: 08/31/2012
mgross: 1/18/2006

601445	TITLE *601445 NADH-UBIQUINONE OXIDOREDUCTASE 1 BETA SUBCOMPLEX, 9; NDUFB9
;;NADH-UBIQUINONE OXIDOREDUCTASE, SUBUNIT B22; UQOR22
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

To identify candidate genes for branchiootorenal (BOR) syndrome
(113650), Gu et al. (1996) used a set of cosmids that map to 8q13.3, the
region involved in that syndrome. Cosmids were used as genomic clones to
isolate corresponding cDNAs. One cDNA clone was found to have 89%
sequence similarity to the B22 subunit of bovine NADH-ubiquinone
oxidoreductase (GenBank X64836), a mitochondrial protein in the
respiratory electron transport chain. The human cDNA encodes a 179-amino
acid polypeptide sharing 90.5% similarity with the bovine sequence.
Because other mitochondrial enzyme mutations have been implicated in
hearing loss syndromes (e.g., 520000), Gu et al. (1996) suggested that
this is a strong candidate for involvement in BOR.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lin et al. (1999) described the genomic structure of the NDUFB9 gene,
including the nucleotide sequence, organization, and boundaries of the 4
coding exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Smeitink and van den Heuvel (1999) reviewed the available molecular data
regarding the human nuclear-encoding complex I subunits.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Emahazion et al. (1998) mapped the NDUFB9
gene to chromosome 8q24.21.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 brothers with mitochondrial complex I deficiency (252010), Haack et
al. (2012) identified a homozygous mutation in the NDUFB9 gene, (L64P;
601445.0001). The mutation, which was found by sequencing of 75
candidate genes in 152 patients with complex I deficiency, segregated
with the disorder in the family and was not found in the dbSNP or 1000
Genomes databases or in 200 control chromosomes. Patient fibroblasts
showed 39% residual complex I activity, which was restored upon
transfection with wildtype NDUFB9. Western blot analysis showed
decreased levels of NDUFB9 and complex I subunits, consistent with
reduced assembly of the overall complex. The proband had onset in
infancy of progressive hypotonia associated with increased serum
lactate.

- Exclusion Studies {4:Lin et al. (1999)} found no mutations
in the NDUFB9 gene in 9 BOR syndrome families that did not show
mutations in the EYA1 gene (601653).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFB9, LEU64PRO

In 2 brothers with mitochondrial complex I deficiency (252010), Haack et
al. (2012) identified a homozygous c.191T-C transition in the NDUFB9
gene, resulting in a leu64-to-pro (L64P) substitution at a highly
conserved residue. The mutation, which was found by sequencing of 75
candidate genes in 152 patients with complex I deficiency, segregated
with the disorder in the family and was not found in the dbSNP or 1000
Genomes databases or in 200 control chromosomes. Patient fibroblasts
showed 39% residual complex I activity, which was restored upon
transfection with wildtype NDUFB9. Western blot analysis showed
decreased levels of NDUFB9 and complex I subunits, consistent with
reduced assembly of the overall complex. The proband had onset in
infancy of progressive hypotonia associated with increased serum
lactate.

REFERENCE 1. Emahazion, T.; Beskow, A.; Gyllensten, U.; Brookes, A. J.: Intron
based radiation hybrid mapping of 15 complex I genes of the human
electron transport chain. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 115-119, 1998.

2. Gu, J. Z.; Lin, X.; Wells, D. E.: The human B22 subunit of the
NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase maps to the region of chromosome 8
involved in branchio-oto-renal syndrome. Genomics 35: 6-10, 1996.

3. Haack, T. B.; Madignier, F.; Herzer, M.; Lamantea, E.; Danhauser,
K.; Invernizzi, F.; Koch, J.; Freitag, M.; Drost, R.; Hillier, I.;
Haberberger, B.; Mayr, J. A.; and 14 others: Mutation screening
of 75 candidate genes in 152 complex I deficiency cases identifies
pathogenic variants in 16 genes including NDUFB9. J. Med. Genet. 49:
83-89, 2012.

4. Lin, X.; Wells, D. E.; Kimberling, W. J.; Kumar, S.: Human NDUFB9
gene: genomic organization and a possible candidate gene associated
with deafness disorder mapped to chromosome 8q13. Hum. Hered. 49:
75-80, 1999.

5. Smeitink, J.; van den Heuvel, L.: Human mitochondrial complex
I in health and disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 64: 1505-1510, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/17/2013
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/28/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/13/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/24/1996

EDITED carol: 09/24/2013
ckniffin: 9/17/2013
alopez: 10/3/2006
mgross: 6/14/1999
mgross: 6/7/1999
terry: 5/28/1999
mgross: 5/18/1999
terry: 5/13/1999
carol: 8/19/1998
terry: 2/12/1997
mark: 9/25/1996

602591	TITLE *602591 KINESIN HEAVY CHAIN MEMBER 2A; KIF2A
;;KIF2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

KIF2A, KIF2B (615142), and KIF2C (604538) comprise the kinesin-13 family
of microtubule motor proteins, which are characterized by the
localization of the kinesin motor domain in the middle of the
polypeptide. Kinesin-13 proteins are nonmotile and induce microtubule
depolymerization by disassembling tubulin subunits from the polymer end.
KIF2A is essential for both bipolar spindle assembly and chromosome
movement (summary by Manning et al., 2007).

For background information on kinesins, see 148760.

CLONING

By using cDNA differential display, Debernardi et al. (1997) isolated a
kinesin heavy chain gene (KIF2) as one regulated by the synthetic
retinoid HPR, a cancer chemopreventive agent and inducer of apoptotic
cell death. The KIF2 gene, which they called HK2 for 'human kinesin-2,'
was cloned from follicular B-cell lymphoma cells treated with HPR. Human
KIF2 is a predicted 679-amino acid protein that is 97% identical to
mouse KIF2 protein. On Northern blots, KIF2 was expressed as a 3.5-kb
mRNA in several tissues.

NOMENCLATURE

Lawrence et al. (2004) presented a standardized kinesin nomenclature
based on 14 family designations. Under this system, KIF2A belongs to the
kinesin-13 family.

MAPPING

Debernardi et al. (1997) mapped the KIF2 gene to chromosome 5q12-q13 by
PCR of a panel of radiation hybrid clones.

Gross (2013) mapped the KIF2A gene to chromosome 5q12.1 based on an
alignment of the KIF2A sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC031828) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Using RNA interference in human U2OS and RPE cells, Manning et al.
(2007) found that each of the kinesin-13 family members has a distinct
role during mitosis. MCAK (KIF2C) deficiency resulted in exaggerated
astral microtubule length. KIF2A and KIF2B deficiency resulted in
similar defects, with delayed progression through mitosis, appearance of
monopolar or disorganized spindles, and increased number of binucleated
or dead cells. However, knockdown of KIF2B, but not KIF2A, reduced the
poleward kinetochore force acting on chromosomes. Knockdown of KIF2B did
not disrupt the pole localization of KIF2A or the centromere and spindle
localization of MCAK.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 unrelated patients with complex cortical dysplasia with other brain
malformations-3 (CDCBM3; 615411), Poirier et al. (2013) identified 2
different de novo heterozygous mutations in the KIF2A gene (H321D,
602591.0001 and S317N, 602591.0002). The first mutation was found by
whole-exome sequencing and was not present in several genomic databases,
including dbSNP, 1000 Genomes, the Exome Variant Server, and a local
Paris Descartes Bioinformatics platform database. The second mutation
was found by screening 162 individuals with various malformations of
cortical development for variants in kinesin genes. The patients had
microcephaly, early-onset epilepsy, and various malformations of
cortical development, including agyria, posterior predominant
pachygyria, subcortical band heterotopia, and thin corpus callosum. One
patient had dysmorphic basal ganglia. Both had severe developmental
delay and were bedridden with spastic paraplegia at ages 1 and 4 years,
respectively. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
mutations caused abnormal protein folding, resulting in abnormal
cellular localization and a loss of protein function. Because KIF2A
functions as a dimer, Poirier et al. (2013) postulated a
dominant-negative effect. The findings extended the association between
microtubule-based cellular processes and proper cortical development.

ANIMAL MODEL

Homma et al. (2003) found that brains of Kif2a -/- mice showed multiple
phenotypes, including aberrant axonal branching due to overextension of
collateral branches. In Kif2a -/- growth cones,
microtubule-depolymerizing activity decreased. Moreover, many individual
microtubules showed abnormal behavior at the Kif2a -/- cell edge. The
authors concluded that KIF2A regulates microtubule dynamics at the
growth cone edge by depolymerizing microtubules and that it plays an
important role in the suppression of collateral branch extension.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CORTICAL DYSPLASIA, COMPLEX, WITH OTHER BRAIN MALFORMATIONS 3
KIF2A, HIS321ASP

In a 1-year-old child with complex cortical dysplasia with other brain
malformations-3 (CDCBM3; 615411), Poirier et al. (2013) identified a de
novo heterozygous c.961C-G transversion in the KIF2A gene, resulting in
a his321-to-asp (H321D) substitution at a conserved residue located
around the ATP nucleotide-binding pocket in the kinesin motor domain.
The mutation was found by whole-exome sequencing and was not found in
several genomic databases, including dbSNP, 1000 Genomes, the Exome
Variant Server, and a local Paris Descartes Bioinformatics platform
database. In vitro functional expression studies in E. coli showed
decreased levels of soluble mutant protein in the extract compared to
wildtype, suggesting that the mutation caused misfolding and retention
of the protein in the insoluble fraction, resulting in decreased levels
of functional protein. Overexpression of the mutant protein in COS-7
cells and human fibroblasts resulted in abnormal cellular localization
with predominant decoration of microtubules rather than diffuse
punctiform cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution as observed for wildtype
KIF2A. Because KIF2A functions as a dimer, Poirier et al. (2013)
postulated a dominant-negative effect.

.0002
CORTICAL DYSPLASIA, COMPLEX, WITH OTHER BRAIN MALFORMATIONS 3
KIF2A, SER317ASN

In a 4-year-old child with CDCBM3 (615411), Poirier et al. (2013)
identified a de novo heterozygous c.950G-A transition in the KIF2A gene,
resulting in a ser317-to-asn (S317N) substitution at a conserved residue
located around the ATP nucleotide-binding pocket in the kinesin motor
domain. In vitro functional expression studies in E. coli showed
decreased levels of soluble mutant protein in the extract compared to
wildtype, suggesting that the mutation caused misfolding and retention
of the protein in the insoluble fraction, resulting in decreased levels
of functional protein. Overexpression of the mutant protein in COS-7
cells and human fibroblasts resulted in abnormal cellular localization
with predominant decoration of microtubules rather than diffuse
punctiform cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution as observed for wildtype
KIF2A. Because KIF2A functions as a dimer, Poirier et al. (2013)
postulated a dominant-negative effect.

REFERENCE 1. Debernardi, S.; Fontanella, E.; De Gregorio, L.; Pierotti, M. A.;
Delia, D.: Identification of a novel human kinesin-related gene (HK2)
by the cDNA differential display technique. Genomics 42: 67-73,
1997.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/18/2013.

3. Homma, N.; Takei, Y.; Tanaka, Y.; Nakata, T.; Terada, S.; Kikkawa,
M.; Noda, Y.; Hirokawa, N.: Kinesin superfamily protein 2A (KIF2A)
functions in suppression of collateral branch extension. Cell 114:
229-239, 2003.

4. Lawrence, C. J.; Dawe, R. K.; Christie, K. R.; Cleveland, D. W.;
Dawson, S. C.; Endow, S. A.; Goldstein, L. S. B.; Goodson, H. V.;
Hirokawa, N.; Howard, J.; Malmberg, R. L.; McIntosh, J. R.; and 10
others: A standardized kinesin nomenclature. J. Cell Biol. 167:
19-22, 2004.

5. Manning, A. L.; Ganem, N. J.; Bakhoum, S. F.; Wagenbach, M.; Wordeman,
L.; Compton, D. A.: The kinesin-13 proteins, Kif2a, Kif2b, and Kif2c/MCAK
have distinct roles during mitosis in human cells. Molec. Biol. Cell 18:
2970-2979, 2007.

6. Poirier, K.; Lebrun, N.; Broix, L.; Tian, G.; Saillour, Y.; Boscheron,
C.; Parrini, E.; Valence, S.; Saint Pierre, B.; Oger, M.; Lacombe,
D.; Genevieve, D.; and 23 others: Mutations in TUBG1, DYNC1H1,
KIF5C and KIF2A cause malformations of cortical development and microcephaly. Nature
Genet. 45: 639-647, 2013. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 45: 962 only,
2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 09/18/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/16/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/22/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/21/2012
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 5/25/2004

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/4/1998

EDITED mgross: 09/18/2013
carol: 9/17/2013
ckniffin: 9/16/2013
alopez: 3/27/2013
terry: 3/22/2013
mgross: 6/21/2012
carol: 3/9/2009
mgross: 5/25/2004
alopez: 5/4/1998

602989	TITLE *602989 CDC-LIKE KINASE 2; CLK2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The protein kinases are a family of enzymes that catalyze the
phosphorylation of proteins and are classified according to the amino
acid that acts as the phosphate acceptor. Hanes et al. (1994) cloned
human ovarian follicle cDNAs encoding the novel serine/threonine kinase
CLK2 based on their high sequence identity to human and mouse protein
kinase CLK1 (CLK; 601951) cDNAs. The authors identified 2 alternative
CLK2 cDNAs of different lengths that represent differentially spliced
CLK2 transcripts; these mRNAs coexist at varying ratios in human
prostate, testis, leukocytes, and muscle. The longer CLK2 cDNA encodes a
predicted 499-amino acid protein that has a nonconserved N-terminal
domain, a highly conserved C-terminal kinase domain, and multiple
potential phosphorylation sites. This CLK2 isoform has 61% and 56%
sequence identity with the CLK3 (602990) and CLK1 proteins,
respectively. The shorter cDNA contains an internal deletion
corresponding to an 88-bp exon, resulting in a predicted 139-amino acid
protein that lacks the kinase domain. Southern blot analysis of human
genomic DNA suggested that CLK2 is a single-copy gene.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of a human-rodent somatic cell hybrid panel, Hanes et
al. (1994) mapped the human CLK2 gene to chromosome 1.

Tsujikawa et al. (1998) determined that CLK2 and the gene for
AMP-activated protein kinase, alpha-2 (PRKAA2; 600497) are located in
the same interval of approximately 2.6 cM between D1S2890 and D1S2801.
The PRKAA2 gene is located at 1p31.

Talmadge et al. (1998) mapped the CLK2 gene to chromosome 1q21 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

CYTOGENETICS

Nothwang et al. (2001) reported a translocation t(1;19)(q21.3;q13.2) in
a female with mental retardation, ataxia, and atrophy of the brain.
Sequence analysis of the breakpoints revealed an Alu repeat-mediated
mechanism of recombination that led to truncation of CLK2 and PAFAH1B3
(603074), the gene product of which interacts with LIS1 (601545) as part
of the heterotrimeric G protein complex PAFAH1B. One expressed fusion
gene encoded the first 136 amino acids of PAFAH1B3, followed by the
complete CLK2 protein. Truncated PAFAH1B3 protein lost its potential to
interact with LIS1, whereas CLK2 activity was conserved within the
fusion protein. These data emphasized the importance of PAFAH1B in brain
development and function.

REFERENCE 1. Hanes, J.; von der Kammer, H.; Klaudiny, J.; Scheit, K. H.: Characterization
by cDNA cloning of two new human protein kinases: evidence by sequence
comparison of a new family of mammalian protein kinases. J. Molec.
Biol. 244: 665-672, 1994.

2. Nothwang, H. G.; Kim, H. G.; Aoki, J.; Geisterfer, M.; Kubart,
S.; Wegner, R. D.; van Moers, A.; Ashworth, L. K.; Haaf, T.; Bell,
J.; Arai, H.; Tommerup, N.; Ropers, H. H.; Wirth, J.: Functional
hemizygosity of PAFAH1B3 due to a PAFAH1B3-CLK2 fusion gene in a female
with mental retardation, ataxia and atrophy of the brain. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 10: 797-806, 2001.

3. Talmadge, C. B.; Finkernagel, S.; Sumegi, J.; Sciorra, L.; Rabinow,
L.: Chromosomal mapping of three human LAMMER protein-kinase-encoding
genes. Hum. Genet. 103: 523-524, 1998.

4. Tsujikawa, M.; Kurahashi, H.; Tanaka, T.; Okada, M.; Yamamoto,
S.; Maeda, N.; Watanabe, H.; Inoue, Y.; Kiridoshi, A.; Matsumoto,
K.; Ohashi, Y.; Kinoshita, S.; Shimomura, Y.; Nakamura, Y.; Tano,
Y.: Homozygosity mapping of a gene responsible for gelatinous drop-like
corneal dystrophy to chromosome 1p. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63: 1073-1077,
1998.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 7/20/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/10/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/20/1998

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 8/19/1998

EDITED alopez: 05/03/2010
cwells: 7/27/2001
cwells: 7/20/2001
alopez: 3/11/1999
alopez: 3/10/1999
carol: 10/27/1998
terry: 10/20/1998
psherman: 8/19/1998

301300	TITLE *301300 DELTA-AMINOLEVULINATE SYNTHASE 2; ALAS2
;;ALAS, ERYTHROID; ALASE;;
5-@AMINOLEVULINATE SYNTHASE, ERYTHROID-SPECIFIC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Delta-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS; EC 2.3.1.27) catalyzes the first
committed step of heme biosynthesis, which is the synthesis of
5-aminolevulinic acid, the first common precursor of all tetrapyrroles,
from glycine and succinyl-coenzyme A (sCoA) in a pyridoxal 5-phosphate
(PLP)-dependent manner (Astner et al., 2005). Two forms of ALAS exist in
humans: a housekeeping form encoded by the ALAS1 gene (125290), and an
erythroid tissue-specific form encoded by the ALAS2 gene (Bishop et al.,
1990).

CLONING

Astrin and Bishop (1989) isolated the ALAS2 gene from an erythroid human
fetal liver library. ALAS2 appeared to be expressed only in erythroid
cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Surinya et al. (1998) determined that the ALAS2 gene spans about 35 kb
and contains 11 exons. An erythroid-specific enhancer in intron 8
contains GATA and CACCC boxes that are conserved in mouse and canine
Alas2.

MAPPING

Benoff and Skoultchi (1977) presented 3 lines of evidence that a locus
on the X chromosome in the mouse controls hemoglobin synthesis.
Following Ohno's law, one would expect the same locus to exist in man.

Benoff et al. (1978) identified in the mouse an X-linked locus that
inhibits hemoglobin production by inhibiting inducible heme
biosynthesis, probably at the step catalyzed by delta-aminolevulinic
acid synthetase. Close linkage to the Xg locus was excluded by Elves et
al. (1966).

Astrin et al. (1987) mapped the ALAS1 gene to chromosome 3, excluding it
as a candidate gene for X-linked hypochromic anemia. Later, however,
Astrin and Bishop (1989) isolated a second ALAS gene, ALAS2, and by
Southern blot analysis of DNAs from somatic cell hybrids, assigned it to
the X chromosome. Also see Bishop et al. (1990).

By Southern analysis of a mouse/human hybrid cell panel and by in situ
hybridization, Cox et al. (1990) mapped the ALAS2 gene to chromosome
Xp21-q21, with the most likely location being on band Xp11.2.

By analysis of DNA from hybrid clones containing translocations in the
region Xp11.21-q21.3, Cotter et al. (1992) achieved finer localization
of the ALAS2 gene with respect to other loci and breakpoints within this
region. They localized the ALAS2 gene to subregion Xp11.21. Cox et al.
(1992) identified a highly polymorphic marker, a compound dinucleotide
repeat, within intron 7 of the ALAS2 gene and used it to confirm the
localization of ALAS2 in the multipoint linkage map of the X chromosome.
No recombination was observed between ALAS2 and the centromere marker
DXZ1. No recombination was found with DXS14. Since Raskind et al. (1991)
excluded linkage of DXS14 and X-linked sideroblastic anemia with
spinocerebellar ataxia within 5 to 10 cM, one can probably conclude that
there are at least 2 loci on the X chromosome determining sideroblastic
anemia. One locus may be located on the proximal portion of Xq.

In the course of high-resolution comparative mapping of the proximal
region of the mouse X chromosome, Blair et al. (1995) demonstrated the
location of the Alas2 gene relative to others.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a reporter gene assay, Surinya et al. (1998) showed that intron 8
of the ALAS2 gene harbored strong orientation-dependent
erythroid-specific enhancer activity. In vitro assays showed that GATA1
(305371) and SP1 (189906) bound the GATA and CACCC boxes within this
region, respectively.

Han et al. (2006) showed that histone deacetylase (HDAC; see 601241)
inhibitors increased ALAS2 expression in a human erythroid cell line.
Increased ALAS2 expression was concurrent with increased acetylation of
histone H4 (see 602822) at the ALAS2 promoter. Histone acetyltransferase
p300 (EP300; 602700) bound the ALAS2 promoter, and overexpression of
p300 increased promoter reporter expression and endogenous ALAS2 mRNA
levels. The GATA1 and SP1 sites at the ALAS2 promoter synergistically
contributed to p300-mediated ALAS2 activation.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Astner et al. (2005) determined the crystal structure of homodimeric
Alas from Rhodobacter capsulatus, which shares 49% sequence identity
with human ALAS. Mutations in the ALAS gene resulting in X-linked
sideroblastic anemia were predicted to obstruct substrate binding,
disrupt the dimer interface, or hamper proper folding (see, e.g.,
301300.0002-301300.0005). The findings provided explanations for
potential responsiveness to pyridoxine treatment in some cases.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- X-Linked Sideroblastic Anemia

Aoki et al. (1973) found deficiency of delta-aminolevulinic acid
synthetase in the red cells of patients with sideroblastic anemia
(300751), some of whom were males with congenital anemia which in some
responded to treatment with vitamin B6.

In a 30-year-old Chinese male with a pyridoxine-responsive form of
X-linked sideroblastic anemia, Cotter et al. (1992) identified a
mutation in the ALAS2 gene (301300.0001).

Cotter et al. (1995) described a previously unaffected 81-year-old woman
in whom microcytic sideroblastic anemia developed. She was found to be
heterozygous for a point mutation of the ALAS2 gene (301300.0005). The
initial diagnosis was myelodysplastic syndrome, but the recognition of
the X-linked congenital sideroblastic anemia allowed successful
treatment with pyridoxine. There is evidence from other sources that
skewed lyonization can be an acquired pattern. In the study of
peripheral blood leukocytes by Busque et al. (1996), the incidence of
skewing was 1.9% in neonates, 4.5% in women who were 28 to 32 years old,
and 22.7% in women who were 60 years of age or older. Cazzola and
Bergamaschi (1998) estimated that in 30 to 40% of elderly women,
hematopoietic cells (erythroid cells, granulocytic cells, monocytes, and
megakaryocytes) have more than 90% expression of 1 parental X
chromosome. Puck and Willard (1998) reviewed mechanisms for a skewed
pattern with a diagram of 3 different mechanisms.

In each of 4 unrelated males with X-linked sideroblastic anemia, Cotter
et al. (1999) identified new mutations: 647T-C, 1283C-T, 1395G-A, and
1406C-T predicting amino acid substitutions tyr199 to his (Y199H;
301300.0017), arg411 to cys (R411C; 301300.0008), arg448 to gln (R448Q),
and arg452 to cys (R452C; 301300.0018), respectively. All probands were
clinically pyridoxine-responsive. The Y199H mutation was demonstrated to
be the first de novo XLSA mutation, having occurred in a gamete of the
proband's maternal grandfather. In 18 unrelated XLSA hemizygotes, Cotter
et al. (1999) found a significantly higher frequency of coinheritance of
the hereditary hemochromatosis HFE mutant allele C282Y (235200.0001)
than found in the normal population. One proband with the Y199H mutation
with severe and early iron loading was homozygous for C282Y.

In an 81-year-old man who developed sideroblastic anemia while
undergoing hemodialysis, Furuyama et al. (2003) identified
heterozygosity for an asp159-to-asn change in the ALAS2 gene (D159N;
301300.0012).

-  X-Linked Dominant Erythropoietic Protoporphyria

In 8 families with X-linked dominant erythropoietic protoporphyria
(XLEPP; 300752), Whatley et al. (2008) identified 2 deletion mutations
in exon 11 of the ALAS2 gene (301300.0015 and 301300.0016). The
mutations were not found in 129 unrelated patients with other forms of
erythropoietic protoporphyria or 100 normal chromosomes. The data of
Whatley et al. (2008) demonstrated that disruption of the C-terminal
region of ALAS2 leads to the production of protoporphyrin in excess of
the amount required for hemoglobinization and in quantities sufficient
to cause photosensitivity and liver damage, in spite of normal
ferrochelatase (FECH; 612386) activity.

In 4 unrelated girls with X-linked dominant erythropoietic
protoporphyria, Ducamp et al. (2013) identified 3 different heterozygous
mutations in the ALAS2 gene. One was recurrent (delAGTG; 301300.0015)
and the other 2 were novel (301300.0019 and 301300.0020). All occurred
in the last exon of the ALAS2 gene, and all were shown in vitro to
result in increased ALAS2 catalytic activity, consistent with a gain of
function. All 4 girls presented in early childhood with severe
photosensitivity associated with increased erythrocyte zinc- and
metal-free protoporphyrin. Two had elevated liver enzymes, 1 had
gallstones, and most had iron deficiency. The mother of 1 child was
mildly affected and was shown to be somatic and germline mosaic for the
mutation. By generating a series of ALAS2 variants, Ducamp et al. (2013)
found that the 'gain-of-function domain' contains a minimum of 33 amino
acids between residues 544 and 576 in the C terminus of the protein.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC
ALAS2, ILE471ASN

In a 30-year-old Chinese male with a pyridoxine-responsive form of
X-linked sideroblastic anemia (300751), Cotter et al. (1992) identified
a T-to-A transition in codon 471 in a highly conserved region of exon 9
of the ALAS gene, resulting in an ile-to-asn substitution. The mutation
interrupted contiguous hydrophobic residues and was predicted to
transform a region of beta-sheet structure to a random-coil structure.
Prokaryotic expression of the normal and mutant cDNAs showed that the
mutant construct expressed low levels of enzymatic activity that
required higher concentrations of pyridoxal 5-prime-phosphate to achieve
maximal activation than did the normal enzyme. The amino acid
substitution occurred in the exon containing the putative pyridoxal
5-prime-phosphate binding site. To identify the mutation, Cotter et al.
(1992) amplified and sequenced the 11 exonic coding regions of the ALAS
gene.

.0002
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC
ALAS2, THR388SER

In 2 affected males and 1 carrier female in a kindred with X-linked
pyridoxine-responsive sideroblastic anemia (300751), Cox et al. (1994)
demonstrated a cytosine-to-guanine change at nucleotide 1215 in exon 8.
This change resulted in the substitution of serine for threonine at
amino acid residue 388, near the lysine that binds the pyridoxal
phosphate cofactor. In expression studies, the activity of the mutant
enzyme was reduced relative to that of the wildtype. Although the
affinity of the mutant enzyme for pyridoxal phosphate was not altered,
the mutation appeared to introduce a conformational change at the active
site of the enzyme.

By crystal structure analysis of Alas2 from Rhodobacter capsulatus,
Astner et al. (2005) determined that thr388 is part of the PLP
recognition pattern. Substitution of threonine by serine would allow for
higher rotational freedom of serine, significantly reducing the affinity
of ALAS for PLP. Correspondingly, patients would respond favorably to
pyridoxine treatment.

.0003
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC
ALAS2, PHE165LEU

In the original family with X-linked sideroblastic anemia (300751)
described by Cooley (1945), Cotter et al. (1994) found that the ALAS2
gene harbored an A-to-C transversion in exon 5, predicted to result in
the substitution of leucine for phenylalanine at residue 165 (F165L).
The mutation occurred in the first highly conserved domain of the ALAS2
catalytic core shared by all species.

By crystal structure analysis of Alas2 from Rhodobacter capsulatus,
Astner et al. (2005) determined that phe165 structurally stabilizes the
neighboring arg163, required for sCoA carboxylate group recognition,
through hydrophobic interactions. Replacing phe165 by leucine
destabilizes arg163, reducing the specificity of sCoA binding. As PLP
binding is not affected by the mutation, response to pyridoxine
treatment was predicted to be marginal.

.0004
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC
ALAS2, GLY291SER

In a large kindred with a pyridoxine-sensitive form of X-linked
sideroblastic anemia (300751), Prades et al. (1995) found a G-to-A
transition at nucleotide 871 of the coding sequence (exon 7) of the
ALAS2 gene. This resulted in a gly291-to-ser amino acid substitution.
The glycine is conserved through evolution in ALAS proteins deduced from
DNA sequences of a large number of different organisms. With a PCR
assay, they demonstrated the mutation in 3 affected males and 2 female
carriers, whereas the carrier status was excluded in 8 females at risk.
Early detection of the mutant allele in family members may be important
for the prevention of anemia in males and of ion overload both in
affected males and carrier females.

By crystal structure analysis of Alas2 from Rhodobacter capsulatus,
Astner et al. (2005) determined that replacement of gly291 by ser would
decrease the affinity of ALAS for sCoA. Furthermore, gly291 is 1 helical
turn away from his285, which is involved in PLP binding. As a result,
this mutation may be counteracted by increasing levels of PLP.

.0005
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC, LATE-ONSET
ALAS2, LYS299GLN

Cotter et al. (1995) reported 2 unrelated cases of X-linked
sideroblastic anemia (300751) that were atypical in 2 respects: unlike
the usual form which is manifest in the first 3 decades of life and in
which the hematologic response to pyridoxine is variable and rarely
complete, the 2 patients were highly pyridoxine-responsive and were in
the geriatric age group. A previously unaffected 77-year-old male and an
81-year-old female, who were previously well, were found to have
developed severe hypochromic, microcytic anemia with ringed sideroblasts
in the bone marrow, which responded dramatically to pyridoxine with
normalization of hemoglobin values. Sequence analysis identified an
A-to-C transversion in exon 7 (K299Q) of the ALAS2 gene in the man as
well as his daughter, while the female proband showed a G-to-A
transition in exon 5 (A172T; 301300.0006). The latter mutation resulted
in decreased in vitro stability of bone marrow delta-aminolevulinate
synthase activity. The recombinant mutant ALAS2 enzyme of each patient
had marked thermal lability. Addition of pyridoxal 5-prime-phosphate in
vitro stabilized the mutant enzymes, consistent with the observed
dramatic response to pyridoxine in vivo. This late-onset form of
X-linked sideroblastic anemia could be distinguished from refractory
anemia and ringed sideroblasts by microcytosis,
pyridoxine-responsiveness, and, of course, ALAS2 mutations. Cotter et
al. (1995) suggested that all patients with acquired sideroblastic
anemia should be tested for pyridoxine responsiveness. Relatively modest
deficiencies of folate or vitamin B12 may explain late-onset anemia in
patients with previously compensated hemolytic states due to inherited
cytoskeletal defects, e.g., hereditary spherocytosis, or glycolytic
pathway enzyme deficiencies, e.g., pyruvate kinase deficiency. The
authors stated that age-associated nutritional deficiencies due to
subtle alterations in vitamin B6 availability or metabolism may unmask
an inherited disorder when a mutation is present in a gene that encodes
a protein highly dependent upon the normal availability of pyridoxal
phosphate.

By crystal structure analysis of Alas2 from Rhodobacter capsulatus,
Astner et al. (2005) determined that replacement of lys299 by glutamine
causes decreased binding affinity of ALAS for sCoA. Patients with this
mutation have been reported to respond to pyridoxine treatment; however,
as PLP binding in ALAS is not affected by the mutation, the effect of
pyridoxine supplementation may be indirect.

.0006
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC, LATE-ONSET
ALAS2, ALA172THR

See 301300.0005 and Cotter et al. (1995).

.0007
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC, PYRIDOXINE REFRACTORY
ALAS2, ASP190VAL

In a patient with X-linked sideroblastic anemia refractory to pyridoxine
(300751), Furuyama et al. (1997) identified a 621A-T transversion in the
ALAS2 gene that led to an asp190-to-val amino acid substitution.

.0008
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC
ALAS2, ARG411CYS

In a Japanese patient with pyridoxine-responsive X-linked sideroblastic
anemia (300751), Furuyama et al. (1998) identified an arg411-to-cys
missense mutation of the ALAS2 gene. The normal and mutant cDNAs were
expressed in E. coli, and mutant enzyme protein was found to have 12%
and 25% ALAS activity when incubated in the absence and presence of
pyridoxal 5-prime-phosphate, respectively, compared with that of the
wildtype enzyme.

.0009
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC
ALAS2, SER568GLY

In an 18-year-old Japanese male with sideroblastic anemia (300751),
Harigae et al. (1999) identified a 1754A-G missense mutation in exon 11
of the ALAS2 gene, resulting in a ser568-to-gly amino acid substitution.
ALAS activity in bone marrow cells of the patient was reduced to 53.3%
of the normal control. Consistent with this finding, activity of a
bacterially expressed ALAS2 mutant protein harboring this mutation was
19.5% compared with the normal control, but was increased up to 31.6% by
the addition of pyridoxal 5-prime-phosphate in vitro. RFLP analysis with
BspHI restriction revealed that the mother was a carrier of the
mutation. Harigae et al. (1999) stated that 23 different mutations
encompassing exons of the catalytic region of the ALAS2 gene had been
described. The 1754A-G mutation was the only one located in exon 11.

.0010
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC
ALAS2, CYS395TYR

Cazzola et al. (2000) identified a missense mutation in the ALAS2 gene
in a 72-year-old woman whose hemoglobin level had been normal at the age
of 36 years. She later presented at age 64 with breathlessness and
fatigue and was found to have severe microcytic anemia. Because of
microcytosis and pyridoxine responsiveness, the patient was thought to
have late-onset X-linked sideroblastic anemia (300751). She was found to
be heterozygous for a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 1236 in exon 9,
which resulted in a cys395-to-tyr amino acid substitution. She expressed
only the mutated gene in reticulocytes. Her 2 daughters and a
granddaughter were heterozygous for this mutation but had normal
hemoglobin levels and expressed the normal ALAS2 gene in reticulocytes.
A grandson with a previous diagnosis of thalassemia intermedia was found
to be hemizygous for the same ALAS2 mutation. Treatment with pyridoxine
completely corrected the anemia in the grandson as well as in the
proband.

By crystal structure analysis of Alas2 from Rhodobacter capsulatus,
Astner et al. (2005) determined that replacement of cys395 by the
significantly larger tyrosine would adversely affect PLP binding.
Correspondingly, the activity of this mutant enzyme could be rescued by
higher concentrations of PLP.

.0011
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC
ALAS2, ASP159TYR

In 2 affected males from a family with pyridoxine-responsive X-linked
sideroblastic anemia (300751), Hurford et al. (2002) identified an
asp159-to-tyr (D159Y) mutation in the ALAS2 gene. Another mutation at
codon 159 has also been reported (D159N; 301300.0012).

.0012
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC
ALAS2, ASP159ASN

In an 81-year-old man in whom X-linked sideroblastic anemia (300751) was
precipitated by maintenance hemodialysis therapy, Furuyama et al. (2003)
identified heterozygosity for a 527G-A transition in exon 5 of the ALAS2
gene, resulting in an asp159-to-asn (D159N) mutation. Other members of
the family could not be studied. The D159N mutation did not appear to be
a polymorphism, as it was not found in 44 ALAS2 control alleles from the
Japanese population.

.0013
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC
ALAS2, -206C-G

In a 32-year-old woman with sideroblastic anemia (300751) of mild
phenotype and moderately late onset, Bekri et al. (2003) found a
promoter mutation in the ALAS2 gene, a C-to-G transversion at nucleotide
-206 from the transcription start site, as defined by primer extension.
The same mutation was found in her affected son but not in any of her
unaffected relatives. Pyridoxine therapy had no effect in the proband,
but in her affected son engendered a modest increase in hemoglobin
concentration and a 4-fold reduction in ferritin iron.

.0014
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC
ALAS2, HIS524ASP

In a male with hereditary sideroblastic anemia (300751), Edgar and
Wickramasinghe (1998) identified a 1622C-G transversion in exon 10 of
the ALAS2 gene, resulting in a his524-to-asp (H524D) substitution. This
histidine is highly conserved. The proband's mother and sister were
heterozygous carriers of the mutation.

.0015
PROTOPORPHYRIA, ERYTHROPOIETIC, X-LINKED DOMINANT
ALAS2, 4-BP DEL, 1706AGTG

In 6 families with X-linked erythropoietic protoporphyria (XLEPP;
300752), Whatley et al. (2008) identified a 4-bp deletion in exon 11 of
the ALAS2 gene (1706_1709delAGTG). The mutation occurred on 5 different
haplotypes, suggesting that it had arisen on at least 5 separate
occasions. Expression studies in E. coli showed that this deletion
resulted in a marked increase in ALAS2 activity and that some of the
5-aminolevulinate (ALA) that is produced is further metabolized to
porphyrin. These findings of a gain of function strongly suggested that
protoporphyrin and its zinc chelate accumulate in XLEPP because the rate
of ALA formation is increased to such an extent that insertion of iron
into protoporphyrin by ferrochelatase (FECH; 612386) becomes rate
limiting for heme synthesis.

Ducamp et al. (2013) identified the c.1706delAGTG mutation in 2
unrelated girls, of Swiss and French origin, respectively, with XLEPP.
Both had severe photosensitivity by 3 years of age, iron deficiency, and
increased erythrocyte zinc-protoporphyrin. One patient had gallstones.
The mother of the French girl had a milder form of the disorder and was
found to be germline and somatic mosaic for the mutation. In vitro
functional expression assays in E. coli showed that the mutant enzyme
had increased ALAS2 catalytic activity consistent with a gain of
function. There was no evidence of a founder effect, suggesting that the
mutation may represent a hotspot.

.0016
PROTOPORPHYRIA, ERYTHROPOIETIC, X-LINKED DOMINANT
ALAS2, 2-BP DEL, 1699AT

In 2 families from southwest England with X-linked erythropoietic
protoporphyria (XLEPP; 300752), Whatley et al. (2008) identified a 2-bp
deletion in exon 11 of ALAS2 (1699_1700delAT). This deletion occurred on
the same haplotype in both families. This mutation when expressed in E.
coli resulted in a gain of function of ALAS2 activity.

.0017
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC
ALAS2, TYR199HIS

In a male proband with pyridoxine-responsive hereditary sideroblastic
anemia (300751), Cotter et al. (1999) identified a 647T-C transition in
exon 5 of the ALAS2 gene, resulting in a tyr199-to-his (Y199H)
substitution. The mother was heterozygous for the mutation, which was
not found in any other family member or in any of 100 normal alleles.
The proband had severe and early iron loading coinherited hereditary
hemochromatosis with a homozygous C232Y mutation in the HFE gene
(235200.0001). Reversal of the iron overload in this patient resulted in
higher hemoglobin concentrations during pyridoxine supplementation.

.0018
ANEMIA, HEREDITARY SIDEROBLASTIC
ALAS2, ARG452CYS

In a male proband with pyridoxine-responsive hereditary sideroblastic
anemia (300751), Cotter et al. (1999) identified a 1406C-T transition in
exon 9 of the ALAS2 gene, resulting in an arg452-to-cys (R452C)
substitution. The mutation was not found in any of 100 normal alleles.
Cotter et al. (1999) stated that the same mutation had been found in
another family with XLSA.

.0019
PROTOPORPHYRIA, ERYTHROPOIETIC, X-LINKED DOMINANT
ALAS2, GLN548TER

In an Australian girl with X-linked erythropoietic protoporphyria
(300752), Ducamp et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous c.1642C-T
transition in exon 11 of the ALAS2 gene, resulting in a gln548-to-ter
(Q548X) substitution. The mutation was not found in 100 control
chromosomes or a large control database. The patient had onset in
childhood of severe photosensitivity associated with increased liver
enzymes, iron deficiency, and increased erythrocyte zinc-protoporphyrin.
In vitro functional expression assays in E. coli showed that the mutant
enzyme had increased ALAS2 catalytic activity, consistent with a gain of
function.

.0020
PROTOPORPHYRIA, ERYTHROPOIETIC, X-LINKED DOMINANT
ALAS2, 26-BP DEL, NT1651

In a Dutch girl, whose parents originally came from Afghanistan, with
XLDPP (300752), Ducamp et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous 26-bp
deletion (c.1651_1677) in exon 11 of the ALAS2 gene, resulting in a
frameshift and premature termination (Ser551ProfsTer5). The mutation was
not found in 100 control chromosomes or in a large control database. The
patient had onset in infancy of severe photosensitivity associated with
elevated liver enzymes and increased erythrocyte zinc-protoporphyrin. In
vitro functional expression assays in E. coli showed that the mutant
enzyme had increased ALAS2 catalytic activity, consistent with a gain of
function.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Aoki et al. (1979)
REFERENCE 1. Aoki, Y.; Muranaka, S.; Nakabayashi, K.; Ueda, Y.: Delta-aminolevulinic
acid synthetase in erythroblasts of patients with pyridoxine-responsive
anemia: hypercatabolism caused by the increased susceptibility to
the controlling protease. J. Clin. Invest. 64: 1196-1203, 1979.

2. Aoki, Y.; Urata, G.; Takaku, F.: Delta-aminolevulinic acid synthetase
activity in erythroblasts of patients with primary sideroblastic anemia. Acta
Haemat. Jpn. 36: 74-77, 1973.

3. Astner, I.; Schulze, J. O.; van den Heuvel, J.; Jahn, D.; Schubert,
W.-D.; Heinz, D. W.: Crystal structure of 5-aminolevulinate synthase,
the first enzyme of heme biosynthesis, and its link to XLSA in humans. EMBO
J. 24: 3166-3177, 2005.

4. Astrin, K. H.; Bishop, D. F.: Assignment of human erythroid delta-aminolevulinate
synthase (ALAS2) to the X chromosome. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 51: 953-954, 1989.

5. Astrin, K. H.; Desnick, R. J.; Bishop, D. F.: Assignment of human
delta-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS) to chromosome 3. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 46: 573, 1987.

6. Bekri, S.; May, A.; Cotter, P. D.; Al-Sabah, A. I.; Guo, X.; Masters,
G. S.; Bishop, D. F.: A promoter mutation in the erythroid-specific
5-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS2) gene causes X-linked sideroblastic
anemia. Blood 102: 698-704, 2003.

7. Benoff, S.; Bruce, S. A.; Skoultchi, A. I.: Negative control of
hemoglobin production in somatic cell hybrids due to heme deficiency. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 75: 4354-4358, 1978.

8. Benoff, S.; Skoultchi, A. I.: X-linked control of hemoglobin production
in somatic hybrids of mouse erythroleukemic cells and mouse lymphoma
or bone marrow cells. Cell 12: 263-274, 1977.

9. Bishop, D. F.; Henderson, A. S.; Astrin, K. H.: Human delta-aminolevulinate
synthase: assignment of the housekeeping gene to 3p21 and the erythroid-specific
gene to the X chromosome. Genomics 7: 207-214, 1990.

10. Blair, H. J.; Ho, M.; Monaco, A. P.; Fisher, S.; Craig, I. W.;
Boyd, Y.: High-resolution comparative mapping of the proximal region
of the mouse X chromosome. Genomics 28: 305-310, 1995.

11. Busque, L.; Mio, R.; Mattioli, J.; Brais, E.; Blais, N.; Lalonde,
Y.; Maragh, M.; Gilliland, D. G.: Nonrandom X-inactivation patterns
in normal females: lyonization ratios vary with age. Blood 88: 59-65,
1996.

12. Cazzola, M.; Bergamaschi, G.: X-linked Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
in a girl. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 338: 1850 only, 1998.

13. Cazzola, M.; May, A.; Bergamaschi, G.; Cerani, P.; Rosti, V.;
Bishop, D. F.: Familial-skewed X-chromosome inactivation as a predisposing
factor for late-onset X-linked sideroblastic anemia in carrier females. Blood 96:
4363-4365, 2000.

14. Cooley, T. B.: A severe type of hereditary anemia with elliptocytosis:
interesting sequence of splenectomy. Am. J. Med. Sci. 209: 561-568,
1945.

15. Cotter, P. D.; Baumann, M.; Bishop, D. F.: Enzymatic defect in
'X-linked' sideroblastic anemia: molecular evidence for erythroid
delta-aminolevulinate synthase deficiency. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89:
4028-4032, 1992.

16. Cotter, P. D.; May, A.; Fitzsimons, E. J.; Houston, T.; Woodcock,
B. E.; Al-Sabah, A. I.; Wong, L.; Bishop, D. F.: Late-onset X-linked
sideroblastic anemia: missense mutations in the erythroid delta-aminolevulinate
synthase (ALAS2) gene in two pyridoxine-responsive patients initially
diagnosed with acquired refractory anemia and ringed sideroblasts. J.
Clin. Invest. 96: 2090-2096, 1995.

17. Cotter, P. D.; May, A.; Li, L.; Al-Sabah, A. I.; Fitzsimons, E.
J.; Cazzola, M.; Bishop, D. F.: Four new mutations in the erythroid-specific
5-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS2) gene causing X-linked sideroblastic
anemia: increased pyridoxine responsiveness after removal of iron
overload by phlebotomy and coinheritance of hereditary hemochromatosis. Blood 93:
1757-1769, 1999.

18. Cotter, P. D.; Rucknagel, D. L.; Bishop, D. F.: X-linked sideroblastic
anemia: identification of the mutation in the erythroid-specific delta-aminolevulinate
synthase gene (ALAS2) in the original family described by Cooley. Blood 84:
3915-3924, 1994.

19. Cotter, P. D.; Willard, H. F.; Gorski, J. L.; Bishop, D. F.:
Assignment of human erythroid delta-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS2)
to a distal subregion of band Xp11.21 by PCR analysis of somatic cell
hybrids containing X;autosome translocations. Genomics 13: 211-212,
1992.

20. Cox, T. C.; Bawden, M. J.; Abraham, N. G.; Bottomley, S. S.; May,
B. K.; Baker, E.; Chen, L. Z.; Sutherland, G. R.: Erythroid 5-aminolevulinate
synthase is located on the X chromosome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 46:
107-111, 1990.

21. Cox, T. C.; Bottomley, S. S.; Wiley, J. S.; Bawden, M. J.; Matthews,
C. S.; May, B. K.: X-linked pyridoxine-responsive sideroblastic anemia
due to a thr388-to-ser substitution in erythroid 5-aminolevulinate
synthase. New Eng. J. Med. 330: 675-679, 1994.

22. Cox, T. C.; Kozman, H. M.; Raskind, W. H.; May, B. K.; Mulley,
J. C.: Identification of a highly polymorphic marker within intron
7 of the ALAS2 gene and suggestion of at least two loci for X-linked
sideroblastic anemia. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1: 639-641, 1992.

23. Ducamp, S.; Schneider-Yin, X.; de Rooij, F.; Clayton, J.; Fratz,
E. J.; Rudd, A.; Ostapowicz, G.; Varigos, G.; Lefebvre, T.; Deybach,
J.-C.; Gouya, L.; Wilson, P.; Ferreira, G. C.; Minder, E. I.; Puy,
H.: Molecular and functional analysis of the C-terminal region of
human erythroid-specific 5-aminolevulinic synthase associated with
X-linked dominant protoporphyria (XLDPP). Hum. Molec. Genet. 22:
1280-1288, 2013.

24. Edgar, A. J.; Wickramasinghe, S. N.: Hereditary sideroblastic
anaemia due to a mutation in exon 10 of the erythroid 5-aminolaevulinate
synthase gene. Brit. J. Haemat. 100: 389-392, 1998.

25. Elves, M. W.; Bourne, M. S.; Israels, M. C. G.: Pyridoxine-responsive
anaemia determined by an X-linked gene. J. Med. Genet. 3: 1-4, 1966.

26. Furuyama, K.; Fujita, H.; Nagai, T.; Yomogida, K.; Munakata, H.;
Kondo, M.; Kimura, A.; Kuramoto, A.; Hayashi, N.; Yamamoto, M.: Pyridoxine
refractory X-linked sideroblastic anemia caused by a point mutation
in the erythroid 5-aminolevulinate synthase gene. Blood 90: 822-830,
1997.

27. Furuyama, K.; Harigae, H.; Kinoshita, C.; Shimada, T.; Miyaoka,
K.; Kanda, C.; Maruyama, Y.; Shibahara, S.; Sassa, S.: Late-onset
X-linked sideroblastic anemia following hemodialysis. Blood 101:
4623-4624, 2003.

28. Furuyama, K.; Uno, R.; Urabe, A.; Hayashi, N.; Fujita, H.; Kondo,
M.; Sassa, S.; Yamamoto, M.: R411C mutation of the ALAS2 gene encodes
a pyridoxine-responsive enzyme with low activity. Brit. J. Haemat. 103:
839-841, 1998.

29. Han, L.; Lu, J.; Pan, L.; Wang, X.; Shao, Y.; Han, S.; Huang,
B.: Histone acetyltransferase p300 regulates the transcription of
human erythroid-specific 5-aminolevulinate synthase gene. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 348: 799-806, 2006.

30. Harigae, H.; Furuyama, K.; Kimura, A.; Neriishi, K.; Tahara, N.;
Kondo, M.; Hayashi, N.; Yamamoto, M.; Sassa, S.; Sasaki, T.: A novel
mutation of the erythroid-specific delta-aminolaevulinate synthase
gene in a patient with X-linked sideroblastic anaemia. Brit. J. Haemat. 106:
175-177, 1999.

31. Hurford, M. T.; Marshall-Taylor, C.; Vicki, S. L.; Zhou, J. Z.;
Silverman, L. M.; Rezuke, W. N.; Altman, A.; Tsongalis, G. J.: A
novel mutation in exon 5 of the ALAS2 gene results in X-linked sideroblastic
anemia. Clin. Chim. Acta 321: 49-53, 2002.

32. Prades, E.; Chambon, C.; Dailey, T. A.; Dailey, H. A.; Briere,
J.; Grandchamp, B.: A new mutation of the ALAS2 gene in a large family
with X-linked sideroblastic anemia. Hum. Genet. 95: 424-428, 1995.

33. Puck, J. M.; Willard, H. F.: X inactivation in females with X-linked
disease. New Eng. J. Med. 338: 325-327, 1998.

34. Raskind, W. H.; Wijsman, E.; Pagon, R. A.; Cox, T. C.; Bawden,
M. J.; May, B. K.; Bird, T. D.: X-linked sideroblastic anemia and
ataxia: linkage to phosphoglycerate kinase at Xq13. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 48:
335-341, 1991.

35. Surinya, K. H.; Cox, T. C.; May, B. K.: Identification and characterization
of a conserved erythroid-specific enhancer located in intron 8 of
the human 5-aminolevulinate synthase 2 gene. J. Biol. Chem. 273:
16798-16809, 1998.

36. Whatley, S. D.; Ducamp, S.; Gouya, L.; Grandchamp, B.; Beaumont,
C.; Badminton, M. N.; Elder, G. H.; Holme, S. A.; Anstey, A. V.; Parker,
M.; Corrigall, A. V.; Meissner, P. N.; Hift, R. J.; Marsden, J. T.;
Ma, Y.; Mieli-Vergani, G.; Deybach, J.-C.; Puy, H.: C-terminal deletions
in the ALAS2 gene lead to gain of function and cause X-linked dominant
protoporphyria without anemia or iron overload. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 83:
408-414, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/8/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/8/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/3/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/5/2008
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 11/4/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/15/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/14/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/5/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/16/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/2/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/23/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/25/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/18/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/29/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 08/14/2013
ckniffin: 8/8/2013
mgross: 4/9/2009
terry: 4/8/2009
carol: 12/3/2008
ckniffin: 12/3/2008
alopez: 12/2/2008
terry: 11/5/2008
carol: 11/4/2008
carol: 3/17/2004
cwells: 10/15/2003
tkritzer: 9/23/2003
tkritzer: 9/17/2003
tkritzer: 9/15/2003
carol: 11/24/2001
cwells: 2/19/2001
terry: 2/14/2001
terry: 9/15/2000
carol: 10/13/1999
terry: 10/5/1999
carol: 4/19/1999
terry: 4/16/1999
carol: 4/2/1999
carol: 2/15/1999
terry: 2/2/1999
carol: 10/23/1998
alopez: 6/26/1998
terry: 6/25/1998
carol: 6/19/1998
terry: 6/18/1998
mark: 11/3/1997
terry: 10/29/1997
carol: 6/20/1997
mark: 1/25/1996
terry: 1/22/1996
terry: 10/27/1995
mark: 8/25/1995
carol: 2/17/1995
mimadm: 2/27/1994
carol: 11/30/1992
carol: 6/3/1992

182330	TITLE *182330 ATPase, Na+/K+ TRANSPORTING, BETA-1 POLYPEPTIDE; ATP1B1
;;Na,K-ATPase BETA-1 POLYPEPTIDE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The Na+/K+ ATPase is a plasma membrane pump with numerous physiologic
functions. It maintains ionic homeostasis that is critical for cell
survival, differentiation, and apoptosis. The Na+/K+ ATPase holoenzyme
consists of a catalytic alpha subunit (see 182310), a beta subunit, and
a modulatory gamma subunit (FXYD2; 601814). Beta subunits, such as
ATP1B1, are responsible for formation and structural integrity of the
Na+/K+ ATPase holoenzyme (summary by Li et al., 2011).

CLONING

From HeLa cells, Kawakami et al. (1986) isolated a cDNA clone that
covered the entire coding region of the beta subunit of Na,K-ATPase.
Remarkably, 61% homology to the amino acid sequence of the Torpedo
(electric ray) counterpart was demonstrated.

- Pseudogenes

Lane et al. (1989) isolated clones for a processed pseudogene designated
ATP1BL1. Whether this is the same as the ATP1BL1 gene mapped to
chromosome 4 by Yang-Feng et al. (1988) was not certain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lane et al. (1989) found that the ATP1B gene spans about 26.7 kb of
genomic DNA and includes 24 kb of intron sequence. The complete message
is encoded by 6 exons ranging in size from 81 to 1,427 bp.

MAPPING

Yang-Feng et al. (1988) assigned the ATP1B gene to 1q by Southern
analysis of DNA from rodent/human somatic cell hybrids.

In the course of construction of a physical map of human 1q23-q25, Oakey
et al. (1992) mapped ATP1B near the middle of this segment. The
corresponding gene in the mouse is located on chromosome 1 (Kent et al.,
1987). By linkage studies in interspecific backcrosses of Mus spretus
and Mus musculus domesticus, Seldin (1989) also demonstrated that the
homologous gene is located on mouse chromosome 1.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Morth et al. (2007) presented the x-ray crystal structure at
3.5-angstrom resolution of the pig renal sodium/potassium ATPase
(Na+,K(+)-ATPase) with 2 rubidium ions bound (as potassium congeners) in
an occluded state in the transmembrane part of the alpha subunit (see
ATP1A1, 182310). Several of the residues forming the cavity for
rubidium/potassium occlusion in the Na+,K(+)-ATPase are homologous to
those binding calcium in the calcium-ion ATPase of sarcoendoplasmic
reticulum (SERCA1; 108730). The beta and gamma (ATP1G1; 601814) subunits
specific to the Na+,K(+)-ATPase are associated with transmembrane
helices alpha-M7/alpha-M10, and alpha-M9, respectively. The gamma
subunit corresponds to a fragment of the V-type ATPase c subunit. The
carboxy terminus of the alpha subunit is contained within a pocket
between transmembrane helices and seems to be a novel regulatory element
controlling sodium affinity, possibly influenced by the membrane
potential.

Crystal structures of the potassium-bound form of the Na+/K(+)-ATPase
pump revealed an intimate docking of the alpha-subunit carboxy terminus
at the transmembrane domain (e.g., Morth et al., 2007). Poulsen et al.
(2010) showed that this element is a key regulator of a theretofore
unrecognized ion pathway. Models of P-type ATPases operated with a
single ion conduit through the pump, but the data of Poulsen et al.
(2010) suggested an additional pathway in the Na+/K(+)-ATPase between
the ion-binding sites and the cytoplasm. The C-terminal pathway allows a
cytoplasmic proton to enter and stabilize site III when empty in the
potassium-bound state, and when potassium is released the proton will
also return to the cytoplasm, thus allowing an overall asymmetric
stoichiometry of the transported ions. The C terminus controls the gate
to the pathway. Its structure is crucial for pump function, as
demonstrated by at least 8 mutations in the region that cause severe
neurologic diseases. This novel model for ion transport by the
Na+/K(+)-ATPase was established by electrophysiologic studies of
C-terminal mutations in familial hemiplegic migraine (602481) and was
further substantiated by molecular dynamics simulations. Poulsen et al.
(2010) considered a similar ion regulation likely to apply to the
H+/K(+)-ATPase and the Ca(2+)-ATPase.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Zatyka et al. (2008) found that the
C-terminal domain of WFS1 (606201) bound the C-terminal domain of
ATP1B1. The interaction was confirmed by reciprocal
coimmunoprecipitation analysis of proteins expressed in transfected
COS-7 cells and endogenous proteins in human and mouse cell lines.
Fibroblasts from Wolfram syndrome (222300) patients with 2 different
WFS1 mutations showed reduced ATP1B1 levels. Conversely, knockdown of
Atp1b1 expression in a mouse insulinoma cell line led to reduced Wfs1
expression. Zatyka et al. (2008) concluded that interaction with WFS1
may be important for ATP1B1 maturation in the endoplasmic reticulum and
that loss of this interaction may contribute to the pathology seen in
Wolfram syndrome.

The estrogen 17-beta-estradiol (E2) enhances the activity of the Na+/K+
ATPase in various tissues and cells. Li et al. (2011) found that NDRG2
(605272) had a role in E2-dependent upregulation of Na+/K+ ATPase in
human cell lines. Chromatin immunoprecipitation, EMSA, and mutation
analysis showed that E2 upregulated NDRG2 expression via binding of
liganded estrogen receptor (ER)-beta (ESRB2; 601663), but not ER-alpha
(ESR1; 133430), to an estrogen receptor element in the NDRG2 promoter.
Immunoprecipitation analysis and inhibitor studies indicated that
upregulated NDRG2 stabilized the Na+/K+ ATPase by directly binding to
ATP1B1, protecting it from ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated
degradation. Knockdown of either ESRB2 or NDRG2 attenuated the effects
of E2 on Na+/K+ ATPase stability and function.

Using various methods, Lanciotti et al. (2012) found that MLC1 (605908),
TRPV4 (605427), HEPACAM (611642), syntrophin (see 601017), caveolin-1
(CAV1; 601047), Kir4.1 (KCNJ10; 602208), and AQP4 (600308) assembled
into an Na,K-ATPase-associated multiprotein complex. In rat and human
astrocyte cell lines, this Na,K-ATPase complex mediated swelling-induced
cytosolic calcium increase and volume recovery in response to hyposmotic
stress. MLC1 associated directly with the Na,K-ATPase beta-1 subunit,
and plasma membrane expression of MLC1 was required for assembly of the
Na,K-ATPase complex. TRPV4 was required for calcium influx, and AQP4 was
recruited to the complex following hyposmotic stress.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Chang et al. (2007) reported genomewide linkage and candidate gene-based
association studies that demonstrated a replicated linkage peak for
blood pressure regulation on human chromosome 1q23-q32, homologous to
mouse and rat quantitative trait loci (QTLs) for blood pressure. The
region contained at least 3 genes associated with blood pressure level
in multiple samples: ATP1B1, RGS5 (603276), and SELE (131210).
Individual variants in these 3 genes accounted for 2- to 5-mm Hg
differences in mean systolic blood pressure, and the cumulative effect
reached 8 to 10 mm Hg. Because the associated alleles in these genes are
relatively common (frequency more than 5%), these 3 genes are important
contributors to elevated blood pressure in the population at large.
Chang et al. (2007) viewed the probable relationship between each of
these genes and blood pressure regulation.

REFERENCE 1. Chang, Y.-P. C.; Liu, X.; Kim, J. D. O.; Ikeda, M. A.; Layton,
M. R.; Weder, A. B.; Cooper, R. S.; Kardia, S. L. R.; Rao, D. C.;
Hunt, S. C.; Luke, A.; Boerwinkle, E.; Chakravarti, A.: Multiple
genes for essential-hypertension susceptibility on chromosome 1q. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 80: 253-264, 2007.

2. Kawakami, K.; Nojima, H.; Ohta, T.; Nagano, K.: Molecular cloning
and sequence analysis of human Na,K-ATPase beta-subunit. Nucleic
Acids Res. 14: 2833-2844, 1986.

3. Kent, R. B.; Fallows, D. A.; Geissler, E.; Glaser, T.; Emanuel,
J. R.; Lalley, P. A.; Levenson, R.; Housman, D. E.: Genes encoding
alpha and beta subunits of Na,K-ATPase are located on three different
chromosomes in the mouse. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 5369-5373, 1987.

4. Lanciotti, A.; Brignone, M. S.; Molinari, P.; Visentin, S.; De
Nuccio, C.; Macchia, G.; Aiello, C.; Bertini, E.; Aloisi, F.; Petrucci,
T. C.; Ambrosini, E.: Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical
cysts protein 1 functionally cooperates with the TRPV4 cation channel
to activate the response of astrocytes to osmotic stress: dysregulation
by pathological mutations. Hum. Molec. Genet. 21: 2166-2180, 2012.

5. Lane, L. K.; Shull, M. M.; Whitmer, K. R.; Lingrel, J. B.: Characterization
of two genes for the human Na,K-ATPase beta subunit. Genomics 5:
445-453, 1989.

6. Li, Y.; Yang, J.; Li, S.; Zhang, J.; Zheng, J.; Hou, W.; Zhao,
H.; Guo, Y.; Liu, X.; Dou, K.; Situ, Z.; Yao, L.: N-myc downstream-regulated
gene 2, a novel estrogen-targeted gene, is involved in the regulation
of Na+/K(+)-ATPase. J. Biol. Chem. 286: 32289-32299, 2011.

7. Morth, J. P.; Pedersen, B. P.; Toustrup-Jensen, M. S.; Sorensen,
T. L.-M.; Petersen, J.; Andersen, J. P.; Vilsen, B.; Nissen, P.:
Crystal structure of the sodium-potassium pump. Nature 450: 1043-1049,
2007.

8. Oakey, R. J.; Watson, M. L.; Seldin, M. F.: Construction of a
physical map on mouse and human chromosome 1: comparison of 13 Mb
of mouse and 11 Mb of human DNA. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1: 613-620,
1992.

9. Poulsen, H.; Khandelia, H.; Morth, J. P.; Bublitz, M.; Mouritsen,
O. G.; Egebjerg, J.; Nissen, P.: Neurological disease mutations compromise
a C-terminal ion pathway in the Na+/K+-ATPase. Nature 467: 99-102,
2010.

10. Seldin, M. F.: Personal Communication. Durham, N. C.  3/13/1989.

11. Yang-Feng, T. L.; Schneider, J. W.; Lindgren, V.; Shull, M. M.;
Benz, E. J., Jr.; Lingrel, J. B.; Francke, U.: Chromosomal localization
of human Na+,K+-ATPase alpha- and beta-subunit genes. Genomics 2:
128-138, 1988.

12. Zatyka, M.; Ricketts, C.; Xavier, G. S.; Minton, J.; Fenton, S.;
Hofmann-Thiel, S.; Rutter, G. A.; Barrett, T. G.: Sodium-potassium
ATPase beta-1 subunit is a molecular partner of Wolframin, an endoplasmic
reticulum protein involved in ER stress. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17:
190-200, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 07/08/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/5/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/2/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/27/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/4/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/18/2007

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/25/1986

EDITED mgross: 07/08/2013
mgross: 4/5/2012
terry: 4/2/2012
alopez: 9/28/2010
terry: 9/27/2010
mgross: 5/13/2009
terry: 5/4/2009
alopez: 5/15/2008
terry: 4/22/2008
alopez: 1/19/2007
terry: 1/18/2007
carol: 4/10/1998
alopez: 7/2/1997
carol: 2/9/1993
carol: 4/16/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/29/1992
carol: 7/11/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990

604745	TITLE *604745 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR-LIKE 5; TCFL5
DESCRIPTION Transcription factors containing basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) motifs
play important roles in the regulation of neurogenesis, myogenesis,
cardiogenesis, cell proliferation, and differentiation. By differential
display analysis of PCR products from mRNAs isolated from 9 different
human tissues, Maruyama et al. (1998) identified a testis-specific cDNA,
which they designated transcription factor-like-5 (TCFL5), encoding a
452-amino acid protein that contains a bHLH motif. Immunohistochemical
staining located the gene product exclusively in cell nuclei of primary
spermatocytes at the pachytene stage. The authors concluded that TCFL5
may function as a transcription factor in spermatogenesis through
binding to a specific DNA sequence.

Maruyama et al. (1998) determined that the TCFL5 gene consists of 6
exons and spans approximately 24 kb of genomic DNA.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Maruyama et al. (1998) mapped the
TCFL5 gene to chromosome 20q13.3-qter.

REFERENCE 1. Maruyama, O.; Nishimori, H.; Katagiri, T.; Miki, Y.; Ueno, A.;
Nakamura, Y.: Cloning of TCFL5 encoding a novel human basic helix-loop-helix
motif protein that is specifically expressed in primary spermatocytes
at the pachytene stage. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 41-45, 1998.

CREATED Wilson H. Y. Lo: 3/27/2000

EDITED carol: 03/27/2000

615291	TITLE *615291 UDP-GAL:BETA-GAL BETA-1,3-GALACTOSYLTRANSFERASE POLYPEPTIDE 6; B3GALT6
;;GALACTOSYLTRANSFERASE II; GALTII;;
BETA-1,3-GALACTOSYLTRANSFERASE 6;;
BETA-3-GALT6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Glycosaminoglycan biosynthesis initiates with the formation of a linkage
tetrasaccharide that serves as a primer, followed by sequential transfer
of monosaccharide residues from the corresponding nucleotide sugars
starting at the reducing end. B3GALNT6 (EC 2.4.1.134) forms a galactose
(Gal)-beta-1,3-Gal linkage via the transfer of Gal from UDP-Gal to a
terminal beta-linked Gal residue and functions in the synthesis of
heparan sulfate and chondroitin sulfate (Bai et al., 2001).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to mouse
beta-1,3-galactosyltransferases (see B3GALT1, 603093), followed by
screening a human fetal brain cDNA library and a newborn mouse brain
cDNA library, Bai et al. (2001) cloned human and mouse B3GALT6, which
they designated GALTII. The deduced human and mouse proteins contain 329
and 325 amino acids, respectively. GALTII is a typical type II
transmembrane protein, with a transmembrane domain near the N terminus
and a C-terminal galactosyltransferase domain containing a conserved
cysteine residue. Northern blot analysis detected variable expression of
transcripts of about 1.6, 2.4, and 3.3 kb in all 16 human tissues
examined. Fluorescence-tagged GALTII colocalized with alpha-mannosidase
II (MAN2A1; 154582), a marker of the medial Golgi. Bai et al. (2001)
noted that the sequence and expression pattern of B3GALT6 had
erroneously been reported as that of B3GNT2 (605581) in a previous
publication (Zhou et al., 1999) due to a clerical error. The correct
B3GNT2 sequence and expression pattern were provided in an erratum.

GENE FUNCTION

Bai et al. (2001) found that human GALTII expressed in insect cells
showed strict requirement for UDP-Gal as a Gal donor. For a substrate,
it reacted strongly with Gal-beta-1,4-xylosyl-beta-O-benzyl, which is
found in the linkage region of glycosaminoglycans. It also used simple
beta-galactosides and other glycans with terminal beta-linked Gal
residues. Knockdown of GALTII in HeLa cells inhibited synthesis of both
heparan sulfate and chondroitin sulfate.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bai et al. (2001) determined that B3GALT6 is a single-exon gene.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Bai et al. (2001) mapped the B3GALT6 gene
to chromosome 1p36.3. They mapped the mouse B3galt6 gene to a region of
chromosome 4E2 that shares homology of synteny with human chromosome
1p36.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Spondyloepimetaphyseal Dysplasia with Joint Laxity, Type
1, with or without Fractures

By next-generation sequencing in 7 individuals, including 2 sibs, with
spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia with joint laxity type 1 (SEMDJL1;
271640) from 5 unrelated Japanese families and a Singapore/Japanese
family, Nakajima et al. (2013) identified possible mutations in the
B3GALT6 gene. By direct sequencing of this gene in these 7 patients and
an additional patient with JEMDJL1 from a Vietnamese family, they
identified compound heterozygous missense mutations in all but 1 in whom
a second mutation was not found (615291.0001-615291.0006). One of the
mutations (M1?; 615291.0001) was found in 5 of the 7 families. None of
the mutations were found in 200 ethnically matched controls or in public
databases, including the 1000 Genomes Database. Immunocytochemical
studies of mutant proteins showed subcellular mislocalization of all but
2 (D156N, 615291.0003 and C300S, 615291.0004). Galt-II activities of all
mutant proteins were significantly decreased compared to wildtype,
indicating loss of function. There were no significant differences in
GALT-II activities between wildtype and a common B3GALT6 polymorphism
(dbSNP rs12085009). Biochemical studies using patient lymphoblastoid
cells showed a decrease of heparan sulfate and a paradoxical increase of
chondroitin sulfate and dermatan sulfate on the cell surface.

By homozygosity mapping and candidate gene sequence analysis in 3
unrelated Iranian families segregating SEMDJL1 with fractures, Malfait
et al. (2013) identified homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations
in the B3GALT6 gene (615291.0012-615291.0014), which segregated with the
disorder in each family. Patient fibroblasts exhibited a large decrease
in ability to prime glycosaminoglycan synthesis together with impaired
glycanation of the small chondroitin/dermatan sulfate proteoglycan
decorin, confirming B3GALT6 loss of function. Dermal electron microscopy
showed abnormalities in collagen fibril organization. A strong reduction
in heparan sulfate level was also observed, indicating that B3GALT6
deficiency alters synthesis of both main types of glycosaminoglycans. An
in vitro wound healing assay revealed a significant delay in fibroblasts
from 2 index individuals, pointing to a role for glycosaminoglycan
defect in impaired wound repair in vivo.

- Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome, Progeroid Type, 2

Because some of the patients with SEMDJL1 in whom they had identified
mutations in the B3GALT6 gene had some overlapping features with the
progeroid form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (615349), Nakajima et al.
(2013) performed Sanger sequencing of the B3GALT6 gene in 4 EDSP
patients from 3 families who did not have a mutation in the B4GALT7 gene
(604327). All 4 patients were found to be compound heterozygous for a
frameshift and a missense mutation in the B3GALT6 gene
(615291.0007-615291.0011). A missense mutation that was common in 2 EDSP
families (S309T; 615291.0008) was found to have significantly decreased
GalT-II activities compared to wildtype, indicating loss of function.
None of the mutations were found in 200 ethnically matched controls or
in public databases, including the 1000 Genomes Database.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH JOINT LAXITY, TYPE 1
B3GALT6, MET1?

In 5 affected individuals from 4 families with SEMDJL1 (271640),
Nakajima et al. (2013) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the B3GALT6 gene: a c.1A-G transition resulting in a met1?
substitution and another missense mutation. Four of the families were
Japanese and 1 was Singapore/Japanese. In another affected Japanese
patient, the mutation was found in heterozygous state. The Met1?
mutation resulted in a mutant B3GALT6 protein with a molecular weight
approximately 4 kD lower than the wildtype protein, suggesting that
translation initiation at the second ATG of the coding sequence, at
position c.124, would become the initiation codon, probably resulting in
an N-terminal deletion of 41 amino acids (Met1_Ala41del), in the same
open reading frame that contains the transmembrane domain.
Immunofluorescence studies showed that the mutant protein mislocalized
to the nucleus and cytoplasm, indicating that the protein was
functionally null. The mutation was not detected in more than 200
ethnicity matched controls or in public databases, including the 1000
Genomes Database.

.0002
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH JOINT LAXITY, TYPE 1
B3GALT6, ARG232CYS

In affected individuals from 3 Japanese families and 1 Vietnamese family
with SEMDJL1 (271640), Nakajima et al. (2013) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 missense mutations in the B3GALT6 gene, one of
which was a c.694C-T transition resulting in an arg232-to-cys (R232C)
substitution. The mutation was not detected in more than 200 ethnicity
matched controls or in public databases, including the 1000 Genomes
Database.

.0003
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH JOINT LAXITY, TYPE 1
B3GALT6, ASP156ASN

In a Japanese patient with SEMDJL1 (271640), Nakajima et al. (2013)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 missense mutations in the
B3GALT6 gene: a c.466G-A transition resulting in an asp156-to-asn
(D156N) substitution, and a Met1? substitution (615291.0001). Neither
mutation was detected in more than 200 ethnicity matched controls or in
public databases, including the 1000 Genomes Database.

.0004
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH JOINT LAXITY, TYPE 1
B3GALT6, CYS300SER

In a Japanese patient with SEMDJL1 (271640), Nakajima et al. (2013)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the B3GALT6 gene:
a c.899G-C transversion resulting in a cys300-to-ser (C300S)
substitution, and an R232C substitution (615291.0002). Neither mutation
was detected in more than 200 ethnicity matched controls or in public
databases, including the 1000 Genomes Database.

.0005
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH JOINT LAXITY, TYPE 1
B3GALT6, SER65GLY

In a patient with SEMDJL1 (271640) from a Singapore/Japanese family,
Nakajima et al. (2013) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the B3GALT6 gene: a c.193A-G transition resulting in a
ser65-to-gly (S65G) substitution, and a Met1? substitution
(615291.0001). Neither mutation was detected in more than 200 ethnicity
matched controls or in public databases, including the 1000 Genomes
Database.

.0006
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH JOINT LAXITY, TYPE 1
B3GALT6, PRO67LEU

In a Vietnamese patient with SEMDJL1 (271640), Nakajima et al. (2013)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the B3GALT6 gene:
a c.200C-T transition resulting in a pro67-to-leu substitution, and an
R232C substitution (615291.0002). Neither mutation was detected in more
than 200 ethnicity matched controls or in public databases, including
the 1000 Genomes Database.

.0007
EHLERS-DANLOS SYNDROME, PROGEROID TYPE, 2
B3GALT6, 1-BP DEL, 353A

In an Italian patient with progeroid-type Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDSP2;
615349), Nakajima et al. (2013) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the B3GALT6 gene: a 1-bp deletion (c.353delA) resulting in
a frameshift (Asp118AlafsTer160), and a ser309-to-thr (S309T;
615291.0008) substitution. Neither mutation was detected in more than
200 ethnicity matched controls or in public databases, including the
1000 Genomes Database.

.0008
EHLERS-DANLOS SYNDROME, PROGEROID TYPE, 2
B3GALT6, SER309THR

In 2 affected members of an Italian/Canadian family with progeroid-type
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDSP2; 615349), Nakajima et al. (2013)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the B3GALT6 gene:
a 925T-A transversion resulting in a ser309-to-thr (S309T) substitution,
and a 1-bp deletion (c.588delG; 615291.0009) resulting in a frameshift
(Arg197AlafsTer81). Neither mutation was detected in more than 200
ethnicity matched controls or in public databases, including the 1000
Genomes Database.

Nakajima et al. (2013) also detected this mutation in compound
heterozygosity with a c.353delA mutation (615291.0007) in an Italian
patient with EDSP2.

.0009
EHLERS-DANLOS SYNDROME, PROGEROID TYPE, 2
B3GALT6, 1-BP DEL, 588G

See 615291.0008 and Nakajima et al. (2013).

.0010
EHLERS-DANLOS SYNDROME, PROGEROID TYPE, 2
B3GALT6, ARG6TRP

In an Italian patient with progeroid-type Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDSP2;
615349), Nakajima et al. (2013) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the B3GALT6 gene: a c.16C-T transition resulting in an
arg6-to-trp (R6W) substitution, and a 9-bp deletion (c.415_423del)
resulting in a truncated protein (Met139Ala141del). Neither mutation was
detected in more than 200 ethnicity matched controls or in public
databases, including the 1000 Genomes Database.

.0011
EHLERS-DANLOS SYNDROME, PROGEROID TYPE, 2
B3GALT6, 9-BP DEL, NT415

See 615291.0010 and Nakajima et al. (2013).

.0012
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH JOINT LAXITY, TYPE 1, WITH FRACTURES
B3GALT6, ASP207HIS

In affected members of 2 unrelated Iranian families with SEMDJ1 with
fractures (274610), Malfait et al. (2013) identified a c.619G-C
transversion in the B3GALT6 gene, resulting in an asp207-to-his (D207H)
substitution at a highly conserved residue. In 1 family the mutation
occurred in 2 sibs in homozygous state; in the other family it occurred
in 2 sibs in compound heterozygous state with a 22-bp deletion in
B3GALT6 (c.323_344del; 615291.0014), resulting in a frameshift
(Ala108GlyfsTer163). Both mutations occurred within the predicted
catalytic galactosyltransferase domain. The D207H substitution was not
found in 106 control individuals or in the 1000 Genomes Project or NHLBI
Exome Variant Server (ESP65000) databases.

.0013
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH JOINT LAXITY, TYPE 1, WITH FRACTURES
B3GALT6, GLY217SER

In an Iranian patient with SEMDJL with fractures (271640), Malfait et
al. (2013) identified homozygosity for a 649G-A transition in the
BeGALT6 gene, resulting in a gly216-to-ser (G217S) substitution at a
highly conserved residue in the catalytic galactosyltransferase domain.
The mutation was not found in 106 control individuals or in the 1000
Genomes Project or NHLBI Exome Variant Server (ESP65000) databases.

.0014
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA WITH JOINT LAXITY, TYPE 1, WITH FRACTURES
B3GALT6, 22-BP DEL, NT323

See 615291.0012 and Malfait et al. (2013).

REFERENCE 1. Bai, X.; Zhou, D.; Brown, J. R.; Crawford, B. E.; Hennet, T.; Esko,
J. D.: Biosynthesis of the linkage region of glycosaminoglycans:
cloning and activity of galactosyltransferase II, the sixth member
of the beta-1,3-galactosyltransferase family (beta-3-GalT6). J. Biol.
Chem. 276: 48189-48195, 2001.

2. Malfait, F.; Kariminejad, A.; Van Damme, T.; Gauche, C.; Syx, D.;
Merhi-Soussi, F.; Gulberti, S.; Symoens, S.; Vanhauwaert, S.; Willaert,
A.; Bozorgmehr, B.; Kariminejad, M. H.; Ebrahimiadib, N.; Hausser,
I.; Huysseune, A.; Fournel-Gigleux, S.; De Paepe, A.: Defective initiation
of glycosaminoglycan synthesis due to B3GALT6 mutations causes a pleiotropic
Ehlers-Danlos-syndrome-like connective tissue disorder. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 92: 935-945, 2013.

3. Nakajima, M.; Mizumoto, S.; Miyake, N.; Kogawa, R.; Iida, A.; Ito,
H.; Kitoh, H.; Hirayama, A.; Mitsubuchi, H.; Miyazaki, O.; Kosaki,
R.; Horikawa, R.; and 19 others: Mutations in B3GALT6, which encodes
a glycosaminoglycan linker region enzyme, cause a spectrum of skeletal
and connective tissue disorders. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 92: 927-934,
2013.

4. Zhou, D.; Dinter, A.; Gallego, R. G.; Kamerling, J. P.; Vliegenthart,
J. F. G.; Berger, E. G.; Hennet, T.: A beta-1,3-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase
with poly-N-acetyllactosamine synthase activity is structurally related
to beta-1,3-galactosyltransferases. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 406-411,
1999. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 11673-11675, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Nara Sobreira - updated: 8/1/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/27/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/26/2013

EDITED carol: 08/02/2013
carol: 8/1/2013
mgross: 6/27/2013
joanna: 6/26/2013
mgross: 6/26/2013

606476	TITLE *606476 INOSITOL 1,4,5-TRISPHOSPHATE 3-KINASE C; ITPKC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 3-kinase (ITPK) catalyzes the
phosphorylation of Ins(1,4,5)P3 to Ins(1,3,4,5)P4, both of which are
modulators of calcium homeostasis. ITPK isoforms include ITPKA (147521),
ITPKB (147522), and ITPKC, all of which contain a conserved catalytic
unit in their C termini, but have unique N-terminal sequences and tissue
distributions.

CLONING

By screening a thyroid cDNA library for novel ITPK isoenzymes, followed
by EST database searching, Dewaste et al. (2000) isolated a cDNA
encoding ITPKC. Sequence analysis predicted that the 683-amino acid
protein contains an Ins(1,4,5)P3-binding site with a lys262 residue that
is conserved in ITPKA and ITPKB, a conserved ATP-binding site, and 6
potential protein kinase C (see 600448) phosphorylation sites. In
contrast to ITPKA and ITPKB, ITPKC has no calmodulin kinase II (see
602123) phosphorylation site. Functional analysis indicated that ITPKC
is relatively weakly activated by the calcium-calmodulin complex.
Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a 3.9-kb ITPKC transcript
in pancreas, skeletal muscle, liver, lung, and placenta, with lower
expression in kidney and brain. This expression pattern is broader than
that of ITPKA, which is restricted to brain and testis, but comparable
to that of ITPKB. Western blot analysis showed expression of a 105-kD
protein, considerably larger than the predicted 75 kD.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the ITPKC
gene to chromosome 19 (TMAP stSG2243).

Onouchi et al. (2008) identified the ITPKC gene within a region of
chromosome 19q13.2 associated with susceptibility to Kawasaki disease
(611775).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kawasaki disease is an acute, self-limited vasculitis of infants and
children characterized by prolonged fever unresponsive to antibiotics,
polymorphous skin rash, erythema of the oral mucosa, lips, and tongue,
erythema of the palms and soles, bilateral conjunctival injection, and
cervical lymphadenopathy (Kawasaki, 1967). Onouchi et al. (2007)
conducted affected sib pair analysis of Kawasaki disease that
demonstrated linkage to several chromosomal regions including chromosome
19. Onouchi et al. (2008) presented the results of linkage
disequilibrium (LD) mapping carried out on 19q13.2, through which they
identified a functional SNP in intron 1 of ITPKC (606476.0001) that was
significantly associated with risk of Kawasaki disease and with
formation of coronary artery aneurysms in both Japanese and U.S.
children. Transfection experiments showed that the C allele of the SNP
in intron 1 of ITPKC reduces splicing efficiency of the ITPKC mRNA.
ITPKC acts as a negative regulator of T-cell activation through the
Ca(2+)/NFAT signaling pathway, and the C allele may contribute to immune
hyperreactivity in Kawasaki disease.

Chi et al. (2010) performed an association study with a total of 385
unrelated Taiwanese children with Kawasaki disease, 140 of whom had
coronary artery lesions. The SNP dbSNP rs28493229 was genotyped in
children with Kawasaki disease and 1,158 ethnically matched healthy
controls. There were 184 parent/affected child trios that were assessed
by means of a transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT). No significant
differences in genotype, allele and carrier frequencies of the SNP were
found between healthy controls and children with Kawasaki disease or
those with coronary artery lesions. TDT in the 184 family trios and in
69 trios where the child had coronary artery lesions did not reveal
significant overtransmission of the C allele. The authors did not find a
statistically significant association between the ITPKC gene SNP dbSNP
rs28493229 and Kawasaki disease or coronary artery lesions in Taiwanese
children.

ANIMAL MODEL

Pouillon et al. (2003) found that Itpkc-deficient mice had no
T-lymphocyte defects and Itpkb/Itpkc double-knockout mice had no
additional alterations beyond those of Itpkb-deficient mice.
Itpkc-deficient mice did show reduced intestinal ITPK activity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
KAWASAKI DISEASE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
ITPKC, IVS1, G/C

Onouchi et al. (2008) found a significant association between
susceptibility to Kawasaki disease (611775) and a functional SNP, which
the authors designated itpkc_3 (dbSNP rs28493229), in the ITPKC gene. It
was associated also with increase in coronary artery lesions in both
Japanese and U.S. children. Among 78 affected Japanese sib pairs, 40
pairs shared more than one allele near itpkc_3; in this subset, the
itpkc_3 allele was overrepresented compared to controls (OR = 2.46, 95%
CI 1.63-3.73). The C allele of dbSNP rs28493229 was associated with the
increased risk.

In an association study involving 385 unrelated Taiwanese children with
Kawasaki disease, 140 with coronary artery lesions, and 1,158 ethnically
matched healthy controls, Chi et al. (2010) did not find a statistically
significant association between the ITPKC gene SNP dbSNP rs28493229 and
Kawasaki disease or coronary artery lesions in Taiwanese children.

REFERENCE 1. Chi, H.; Huang, F.-Y.; Chen, M.-R.; Chiu, N.-C.; Lee, H.-C.; Lin,
S.-P.; Chen, W.-F.; Lin, C.-L.; Chan, H.-W.; Liu, H.-F.; Huang, L.-M.;
Lee, Y.-J.: ITPKC gene SNP rs28493229 and Kawasaki disease in Taiwanese
children. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 1147-1151, 2010.

2. Dewaste, V.; Pouillon, V.; Moreau, C.; Shears, S.; Takazawa, K.;
Erneux, C.: Cloning and expression of a cDNA encoding human inositol
1,4,5-trisphosphate 3-kinase C. Biochem. J. 352: 343-351, 2000.

3. Kawasaki, T.: Acute febrile mucocutaneous syndrome with lymphoid
involvement with specific desquamation of the fingers and toes in
children. (Japanese) Arerugi 16: 178-222, 1967. Note: An English
translation was published in Pediat. Infect. Dis. J. 21: 1-38, 2002.

4. Onouchi, Y.; Gunji, T.; Burns, J. C.; Shimizu, C.; Newburger, J.
W.; Yashiro, M.; Nakamura, Y.; Yanagawa, H.; Wakui, K.; Fukushima,
Y.; Kishi, F.; Hamamoto, K.; and 18 others: ITPKC functional polymorphism
associated with Kawasaki disease susceptibility and formation of coronary
artery aneurysms. Nature Genet. 40: 35-42, 2008.

5. Onouchi, Y. Tamari, M.; Takahashi, A.; Tsunoda, T.; Yashiro, M.;
Nakamura, Y.; Yanagawa, H.; Wakui, K.; Fukushima, Y.; Kawasaki, T.;
Nakamura, Y.; Hata, A.: A genome-wide linkage analysis of Kawasaki
disease: evidence for linkage to chromosome 12. J. Hum. Genet. 52:
179-190, 2007.

6. Pouillon, V.; Hascakova-Bartova, R.; Pajak, B.; Adam, E.; Bex,
F.; Dewaste, V.; Van Lint, C.; Leo, O.; Erneux, C.; Schurmans, S.
: Inositol 1,3,4,5-tetrakisphosphate is essential for T lymphocyte
development. Nature Immun. 4: 1136-1143, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 11/10/2011
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/29/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/6/2003

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/21/2001

EDITED alopez: 11/21/2011
terry: 11/10/2011
alopez: 2/11/2008
alopez: 2/10/2008
terry: 1/29/2008
alopez: 10/31/2003
mgross: 10/6/2003
mgross: 11/21/2001

192130	TITLE *192130 ATPase, H+ TRANSPORTING, LYSOSOMAL, V0 SUBUNIT A1; ATP6V0A1
;;ATPase, H+ TRANSPORTING, LYSOSOMAL, NONCATALYTIC ACCESSORY PROTEIN
1A; ATP6N1A;;
ATP6N1;;
VACUOLAR PROTON PUMP, SUBUNIT 1; VPP1
DESCRIPTION ATP-driven proton pumps associated with the clathrin-coated vesicles and
synaptic vesicles are a group of polypeptides involved in basic cellular
processes through acidification of intracellular organelles. These
functions include intracellular targeting of enzymes to lysosomes and
secretory granules, and receptor-ligand dissociation in
receptor-mediated endocytosis. Eight or 9 polypeptides had been
identified from clathrin-coated vesicles. Using a rat cDNA clone for the
116-kD subunit of the vacuolar proton pump, Ozcelik et al. (1991) mapped
the gene to human chromosome 17 by study of rodent-human hybrid cell
lines and the homologous gene to mouse chromosome 11 by a study of
Chinese hamster or rat/mouse hybrid cell lines. In hybrid cell lines
with fragments of chromosome 17, the VPP1 gene was shown to be located
in region 17q21-qter.

In the course of constructing a transcription map of approximately 600
kb of genomic DNA surrounding the BRCA1 (113705) gene, Brody et al.
(1995) identified the VPP1 gene, thus regionalizing it to 17q21.

REFERENCE 1. Brody, L. C.; Abel, K. J.; Castilla, L. H.; Couch, F. J.; McKinley,
D. R.; Yin, G.-Y.; Ho, P. P.; Merajver, S.; Chandrasekharappa, S.
C.; Xu, J.; Cole, J. L.; Struewing, J. P.; Valdes, J. M.; Collins,
F. S.; Weber, B. L.: Construction of a transcription map surrounding
the BRCA1 locus of human chromosome 17. Genomics 25: 238-247, 1995.

2. Ozcelik, T.; Suedhof, T. C.; Francke, U.: Chromosomal assignments
of genes for vacuolar (endomembrane) proton pump subunits VPP1/Vpp-1
(116 kDa) and VPP3/Vpp-3 (58 kDa) in human and mouse. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 58: 2008-2009, 1991.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/6/1991

EDITED wwang: 01/07/2008
psherman: 3/31/2000
psherman: 10/8/1998
carol: 8/18/1998
terry: 2/10/1995
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/23/1992
carol: 8/6/1991

607515	TITLE *607515 PLACENTA-SPECIFIC GENE 8; PLAC8
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By subtractive hybridization, Rissoan et al. (2002) identified PLAC8,
which they designated C15, as 1 of several transcripts expressed at high
levels in plasmacytoid dendritic cells. The deduced 115-amino acid
protein contains a cleavable 23-amino acid signal peptide and no
transmembrane domain. PLAC8 shares 83% homology with mouse Plac8, which
contains 112 amino acids. The human sequence conserves 15 of the 16
cysteine residues found in the mouse protein. RT-PCR detected PLAC8
expression in all leukocyte populations tested, with weaker expression
in monocyte-derived dendritic cells. Northern blot analysis detected a
major transcript of 0.7 kb and minor transcripts of 4.4 and 7 kb in
organs of the immune system. High expression was found in spleen, lymph
nodes, peripheral blood leukocytes, and bone marrow, with lower
expression in thymus, appendix, and fetal liver.

By Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues, Galaviz-Hernandez et al.
(2003) detected strong expression of Plac8 in placenta at 9.5 days
postcoitum (dpc) through 18.5 dpc. In situ hybridization showed
expression limited to trophoblast giant cells at 6.5 and 8.5 dpc and to
the derived spongiotrophoblast layer at 10.5 and 18.5 dpc.

GENE FUNCTION

Rissoan et al. (2002) showed that PLAC8 expression was downregulated
upon activation, particularly in dendritic cells generated in vitro from
CD34 (142230) progenitor cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rissoan et al. (2002) determined that the PLAC8 gene contains 5 exons.

MAPPING

By homology to a BAC clone, Rissoan et al. (2002) mapped the PLAC8 gene
to chromosome 4q13-q21.

By database analysis, Galaviz-Hernandez et al. (2003) mapped the PLAC8
gene to chromosome 4q21 and the mouse Plac8 gene to chromosome 5E3.

REFERENCE 1. Galaviz-Hernandez, C.; Stagg, C.; de Ridder, G.; Tanaka, T. S.;
Ko, M. S. H.; Schlessinger, D.; Nagaraja, R.: Plac8 and Plac9, novel
placental-enriched genes identified through microarray analysis. Gene 309:
81-89, 2003.

2. Rissoan, M.-C.; Duhen, T.; Bridon, J.-M.; Bendriss-Vermare, N.;
Peronne, C.; Saint Vis, B.; Briere, F.; Bates, E. E. M.: Subtractive
hybridization reveals the expression of immunoglobulinlike transcript
7, Eph-B1, granzyme B, and 3 novel transcripts in human plasmacytoid
dendritic cells. Blood 100: 3295-3303, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Dorothy S. Reilly - updated: 6/11/2009

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/24/2003

EDITED wwang: 06/16/2009
wwang: 6/16/2009
terry: 6/11/2009
mgross: 1/24/2003

614777	TITLE *614777 MMS19 NUCLEOTIDE EXCISION REPAIR, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; MMS19
;;MMS19-LIKE PROTEIN; MMS19L
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MMS19 has a critical role in the biogenesis of multiple Fe-S proteins
that function in genomic stability, RNA polymerase II function, and
telomere length regulation (Stehling et al., 2012; Gari et al., 2012).

CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to S. cerevisiae Mms19,
followed by RT-PCR and screening of a HeLa cell cDNA library, Seroz et
al. (2000) cloned MMS19. The deduced 1,030-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 113 kD. MMS19 has an alanine- and
leucine-rich N terminus and several putative phosphorylation sites.
Northern blot analysis detected a 4-kb transcript in HeLa cells and in
all mouse tissues examined, with highest expression in testis.

By RT-PCR of HeLa cells and testis cDNA libraries, and 5-prime RACE,
Queimado et al. (2001) cloned 7 splice variants of MMS19. Two major
transcripts differ in their 5-prime UTRs and encode an identical
full-length protein of 1,030 amino acids. Other transcripts differ in
splicing of 5-prime exons and encode proteins that are 43, 158, or 201
amino acids shorter at their N-terminal ends. Full-length MMS19 contains
2 conserved globular domains. The N-terminal globular domain has a
highly conserved sequence of about 120 amino acids; a shorter globular
region at the C terminus contains 4 tightly spaced HEAT repeats that are
predicted to form tandem bihelical structures and function as scaffolds
for assembly of other protein subunits. Northern blot analysis detected
variable expression of major transcripts at 3.9 and 4.8 in all human
tissues examined. Each band appeared to be a heterogeneous collection of
alternatively spliced forms, and the difference in size appeared to be
due to use of alternate polyadenylation signals. Queimado et al. (2001)
also cloned Mms19 splice variants from mouse. The deduced full-length
mouse protein contains 1,031 amino acids and shares 90% sequence
identity with full-length human MMS19.

Wu et al. (2001) independently cloned MMS19 from a placenta cDNA
library. The deduced protein contains 1,030 amino acids. Northern blot
analysis detected a 4-kb MMS19 transcript in all cancer cell lines and
human tissues examined. Immunofluorescence analysis localized MMS19 to
the nucleus of HeLa cells.

Hatfield et al. (2006) identified 3 conserved domains in the full-length
MMS19 protein, which they called domains A, B, and C. The approximately
160-amino acid N-terminal A domain is followed immediately by the B
domain with 2 highly conserved motifs; the C domain constitutes the
C-terminal HEAT repeats. Alternative splicing deletes the A domain
and/or motif 1 of the B domain. Hatfield et al. (2006) also identified
MMS19 splice variants that lack exon 24, in addition to various other
5-prime exons, and these transcripts encode 3 different proteins lacking
domain C. RT-PCR detected transcripts lacking exon 24 in all normal
tissues examined; however, full-length MMS19 represented 80 to 90% of
all MMS19 transcripts.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitation of HeLa cell lysates, Seroz et al. (2000) found
that MMS19 interacted specifically with the transcription factor IIH
(TFIIH) helicase subunits XPB (ERCC3; 133510) and XPD (ERCC2; 126340).

Queimado et al. (2001) found that expression of MMS19 complemented
ultraviolet (UV) radiation sensitivity and thermosensitivity, but not
methionine auxotrophy, in Mms19 mutant yeast.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Wu et al. (2001) found that the basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-PAS domain of RAC3 (NCOA3; 601937) interacted
with the C-terminal domain of MMS19. Mutation analysis revealed that
MMS19 interacted with the PAS-A and PAS-B domains, but not the bHLH
domain, in a synergistic manner. Both the isolated C-terminal domain and
full-length MMS19 also interacted with estrogen receptors ESR-alpha
(ESR1; 133430) and ESR-beta (ESR2; 601663) in an estrogen-independent
manner, and activated an ESR reporter gene in an estrogen-dependent
manner. MMS19 also enhanced RAC3-dependent ESR activation. MMS19
specifically enhanced the activity of the N-terminal, but not the
C-terminal, transactivation domain of ESR-alpha. However, the isolated
C-terminal domain of MMS19 functioned in a dominant-negative manner,
which was reversed by coexpression of RAC3. Since the C-terminal domain
of MMS19 interacted with both ESR and RAC3, Wu et al. (2001) proposed
that the interactions may be mutually exclusive and regulatory.

Nucleotide excision repair (NER) and RNA polymerase II (see 180660)
transcription share TFIIH subunits, and yeast Mms19 has a role in both
processes. Using yeast complementation assays, Hatfield et al. (2006)
found that human MMS19 proteins lacking domain A functioned as
efficiently as full-length MMS19 in rescuing UV radiation-induced NER,
but not transcription, in yeast lacking Mms19. Conversely, MMS19
proteins lacking motif 1 of domain B were efficient in transcription,
but not in NER. MMS19 proteins lacking domain C (HEAT repeats) were
unable to fulfill either function. No human MMS19 construct complemented
the methionine auxotrophy in Mms19 mutant yeast, likely due to the
significant divergence between yeast and human cells in methionine
metabolism. Hatfield et al. (2006) proposed that the HEAT repeats
stabilize an MMS19-associated complex whereas domains A and B have
unique roles in NER and transcription.

Ito et al. (2010) showed that MSS19 coprecipitated with XPD, MIP18
(FAM96B; 614778), CIAO1 (604333) and ANT2 (SLC25A5; 300150) in a protein
complex that was required for chromosome segregation in human cell
lines.

Stehling et al. (2012) found that yeast Mms19 functioned late in
cytosolic Fe-S protein assembly in a complex with Cia1 (CIAO1) and Cia2,
which they called the cytosolic iron-sulfur protein assembly (CIA)
complex. Using RNA interference in HeLa cells, they found that MMS19 was
involved in biosynthesis of only a subset of human Fe-S proteins,
including DPYD (612779) and POLD1 (174761), but not IRP1 (ACO1; 100800)
or GPAT (PPAT; 172450). Using a proteomic approach, Stehling et al.
(2012) identified proteins that interacted with MMS19 in HEK293 cells,
including a number of known and putative Fe-S proteins such as CIAO1,
IOP1 (NARFL; 611118), and FAM96B, and they confirmed interaction between
MMS19, CIAO1, and FAM96B. Inactivation of MMS19, FAM96B, and IOP1
reduced HEK293 cell survival following UV irradiation or methyl
methanesulfonate treatment. Stehling et al. (2012) hypothesized that the
MMS19 complex acts late in Fe-S protein biogenesis to facilitate Fe-S
cluster transfer from the CIA scaffold complex CFD1 (NUBP2; 610779)-
NBP35 (NUBP1; 600280) to Fe-S target proteins. They proposed that the
apparent diverse functions of MMS19 could be understood by its central
role in Fe-S protein biogenesis.

Using coimmunoprecipitation and gel filtration studies, Gari et al.
(2012) independently found that human MMS19 formed a stable CIA complex
with CIAO1, IOP1, and FAM96B. Knockdown of MMS19 via small interfering
RNA reduced the stability of FAM96B. MMS19 knockdown also decreased
cellular content of XPD, reduced association of XPD with TFIIH, and
increased association of XPD with CIAO1, suggesting that the interaction
of MMS19 with Fe-S proteins may be transient and possibly involves the
apoform of proteins prior to Fe-S cluster incorporation. Consistent with
this, chelation of Fe increased the levels of Fe-S proteins that
coimmunoprecipitated with MMS19, with the effect on DNA polymerase delta
(see 174761) being the most pronounced.

GENE STRUCTURE

Queimado et al. (2001) determined that the MMS19 gene contains at least
32 exons and spans over 40 kb. Exon 1 is noncoding, and translation is
initiated in exons 2 and 7. The 3-prime UTR contains 2 polyadenylation
signal motifs and is rich in Alu elements.

MAPPING

Using FISH, Seroz et al. (2000) mapped the MMS19 gene to chromosome
10q24-q25. Queimado et al. (2001) mapped the gene to chromosome 10q24 by
FISH and radiation hybrid analysis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Gari et al. (2012) found that knockdown of Mms19 in mice was embryonic
lethal prior to the implantation stage.

REFERENCE 1. Gari, K.; Ortiz, A. M. L.; Borel, V.; Flynn, H.; Skehel, J. M.;
Boulton, S. J.: MMS19 links cytoplasmic iron-sulfur cluster assembly
to DNA metabolism. Science 337: 243-245, 2012.

2. Hatfield, M. D.; Reis, A. M. C.; Obeso, D.; Cook, J. R.; Thompson,
D. M.; Rao, M.; Friedberg, E. C.; Queimado, L.: Identification of
MMS19 domains with distinct functions in NER and transcription. DNA
Repair 5: 914-924, 2006.

3. Ito, S.; Tan, L. J.; Andoh, D.; Narita, T.; Seki, M.; Hirano, Y.;
Narita, K.; Kuraoka, I.; Hiraoka, Y.; Tanaka, K.: MMXD, a TFIIH-independent
XPD-MMS19 protein complex involved in chromosome segregation. Molec.
Cell 39: 632-640, 2010.

4. Queimado, L.; Rao, M.; Schultz, R. A.; Koonin, E. V.; Aravind,
L.; Nardo, T.; Stefanini, M.; Friedberg, E. C.: Cloning the human
and mouse MMS19 genes and functional complementation of a yeast mms19
deletion mutant. Nucleic Acids Res. 29: 1884-1891, 2001.

5. Seroz, T.; Winkler, G. S.; Auriol, J.; Verhage, R. A.; Vermeulen,
W.; Smit, B.; Brouwer, J.; Eker, A. P. M. Weeda, G.; Egly, J.-M.;
Hoeijmakers, J. H. J.: Cloning of a human homolog of the yeast nucleotide
excision repair gene MMS19 and interaction with transcription repair
factor TFIIH via the XPB and XPD helicases. Nucleic Acids Res. 28:
4506-4513, 2000.

6. Stehling, O.; Vashisht, A. A.; Mascarenhas, J.; Jonsson, Z. O.;
Sharma, T.; Netz, D. J. A.; Pierik, A. J.; Wohlschlegel, J. A.; Lill,
R.: MMS19 assembles iron-sulfur proteins required for DNA metabolism
and genomic integrity. Science 337: 195-199, 2012.

7. Wu, X.; Li, H.; Chen, J. D.: The human homologue of the yeast
DNA repair and TFIIH regulator MMS19 is an AF-1-specific coactivator
of estrogen receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 23962-23968, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/20/2012

EDITED carol: 08/20/2012
carol: 8/20/2012

604261	TITLE *604261 AUTOPHAGY 5, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; ATG5
;;APG5, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; APG5;;
APG5-LIKE; APG5L;;
APOPTOSIS-SPECIFIC PROTEIN; ASP
DESCRIPTION Mammalian cells undergoing apoptosis express high levels of APG5L (or
ASP) protein relatively late in the apoptotic process.

CLONING

By screening a human fetal liver cDNA expression library with an
antibody against c-jun (165160) that crossreacts with ASP (Grand et al.,
1995), Hammond et al. (1998) isolated an ASP cDNA. The cDNA sequence
encodes a deduced 276-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass
of 32 kD. ASP shares 26% amino acid sequence identity with the S.
cerevisiae APG5 gene product, which is involved in yeast autophagy. ASP
contains a high number of acidic residues, a potential glycosylation
site, and potential casein kinase II (see 115440), protein kinase C
(e.g., 176982), and tyrosine kinase sites. While the molecular mass of
recombinant ASP expressed in bacteria is 32 kD, Western blot analysis of
recombinant ASP expressed in mammalian cells detected 32- and 45-kD
polypeptides; the authors stated that the difference in molecular masses
between ASP expressed in bacteria and in mammalian cells is likely due
to posttranslational modifications. Northern blot analysis detected
approximately equal levels of ASP mRNA in all human tissues examined.
The ASP gene is expressed as major 3.3- and 1.8-kb transcripts.

GENE FUNCTION

Apoptosis is an active form of cell death and is of fundamental
importance in tissue development and homeostasis. Grand et al. (1995)
observed that human and rodent cells undergoing apoptosis expressed high
levels of a novel 45-kD protein, which they termed apoptosis-specific
protein (ASP). They also found ASP in Burkitt lymphoma (113970) cells
and in adenovirus-transformed human and rat embryo cells induced into
apoptosis by a variety of stimuli. The authors did not detect ASP in
viable cells or in cells dying passively by necrosis. Microscopy showed
high levels of ASP in the cytoplasm of cells displaying the chromatin
condensation and fragmentation patterns typical of apoptosis. The
authors observed retention of ASP even when DNA was no longer
detectable. Immunofluorescence staining indicated that ASP primarily
colocalizes with, but is clearly distinct from, nonmuscle actin (e.g.,
102560). Grand et al. (1995) concluded that ASP forms part of, or at
least strongly associates with, a modified cytoskeleton unique to cells
undergoing apoptosis.

Hammond et al. (1998) found that ASP mRNA is present at similar levels
in viable and apoptotic cells, whereas ASP protein levels are
dramatically higher in apoptotic cells. They concluded that this
increase in protein expression is due to increased translation of
preexisting ASP mRNA. ASP protein expression is a relatively late event
in the apoptotic process, occurring downstream of caspase activity.

By cotransfection in COS-1 cells, Mizushima et al. (1998) found that
ATG12 (609608) was conjugated to ATG5. Western blot analysis detected
the ATG12-ATG5 conjugate at an apparent molecular mass of 65 kD. The
C-terminal glycine of ATG12 was conjugated to a central lysine (lys130)
of ATG5. Mutation of either residue abrogated conjugation.

Tanida et al. (2002) found that overexpression of ATG3 (609606)
facilitated formation of the ATG12-ATG5 conjugate, suggesting that ATG3
cross-talks with the ATG12 conjugation system.

Nakagawa et al. (2004) found that the autophagic machinery could
effectively eliminate pathogenic group A Streptococcus within
nonphagocytic cells. After escaping from endosomes into the cytoplasm,
group A streptococcus became enveloped by autophagosome-like
compartments and were killed upon fusion of these compartments with
lysosomes. In autophagy-deficient Atg5-null cells, group A Streptococcus
survived, multiplied, and were released from the cells. Nakagawa et al.
(2004) concluded that the autophagic machinery can act as an innate
defense system against invading pathogens.

Sanjuan et al. (2007) demonstrated that a particle that engages
Toll-like receptors on a murine macrophage while it is phagocytosed
triggers the autophagosome marker LC3 (601242) to be rapidly recruited
to the phagosome in a manner that depends on the autophagy pathway
proteins ATG5 and ATG7; this process is preceded by recruitment of
beclin-1 (604378) and phosphoinositide-3-OH kinase activity.
Translocation of beclin-1 and LC3 to the phagosome was not associated
with observable double-membrane structures characteristic of
conventional autophagosomes, but was associated with phagosome fusion
with lysosomes, leading to rapid acidification and enhanced killing of
the ingested organism.

Lee et al. (2007) examined recognition of single-stranded RNA (ssRNA)
viruses by mouse plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDCs). ELISA showed that
live, but not ultraviolet-irradiated, Sendai virus (SV) or vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV) induced Ifna (147660) production by PDCs, whereas
irradiation had no effect on Ifna production induced by influenza virus.
Recognition of all 3 viruses depended on Tlr7 (300365) in PDCs. Analysis
of responses to a VSV mutant revealed that cytosolic viral replication
intermediates provided a major stimulus for Ifna production. Inhibition
of autophagosome formation blocked VSV recognition and Ifna production.
VSV infection of healthy chimeric mice lacking Atg5, a gene essential
for autophagosome formation, resulted in diminished Ifna and Il12 (see
161560) secretion. Lee et al. (2007) concluded that autophagy occurs
constitutively in PDCs and is required for recognition of the ssRNA VSV
virus, but not the double-stranded DNA virus herpes simplex virus-1, and
for production of type I IFN.

Singh et al. (2009) showed a theretofore unknown function for autophagy
in regulating intracellular lipid stores that they termed
macrolipophagy. Lipid droplets and autophagic components associated
during nutrient deprivation, and inhibition of autophagy in cultured
hepatocytes and mouse liver increased triglyceride storage in lipid
droplets. Singh et al. (2009) concluded that their study identified a
critical function for autophagy in lipid metabolism with important
implications for human diseases with lipid overaccumulation, such as
those that comprise the metabolic syndrome (see 605552). Singh et al.
(2009) showed that knockdown of ATG5 in hepatocytes increased
triglyceride levels with oleate or a second endogenous stimulus for
triglyceride formation. These hepatocytes with ATG5 knockdown also had
increased lipid droplet number and size.

Nishida et al. (2009) showed that mouse cells lacking Atg5 or Atg7
(608760) can still form autophagosomes/autolysosomes and perform
autophagy-mediated protein degradation when subjected to certain
stressors. Lipidation of the microtubule-associated protein light
chain-3 (MAP1LC3A; 601242) to form LC3-II, generally considered to be a
good indicator of macroautophagy, did not occur during the
Atg5/Atg7-independent alternative process of macroautophagy. Nishida et
al. (2009) also found that this alternative process of macroautophagy
was regulated by several autophagic proteins, including Unc51-like
kinase-1 (ULK1; 603168) and beclin-1 (604378). Unlike conventional
macroautophagy, autophagosomes seemed to be generated in a Rab9
(300284)-dependent manner by the fusion of isolation membranes with
vesicles derived from the trans-Golgi and late endosomes. In vivo,
Atg5-independent alternative macroautophagy was detected in several
embryonic tissues. It also had a function in clearing mitochondria
during erythroid maturation. Nishida et al. (2009) concluded that their
results indicate that mammalian macroautophagy can occur through at
least 2 different pathways: an Atg5/Atg7-dependent conventional pathway
and an Atg5/Atg7-independent alternative pathway.

Hamasaki et al. (2013) demonstrated that autophagosomes form at the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-mitochondria contact site in mammalian cells.
Imaging data revealed that the preautophagosome/autophagosome marker
ATG14 (613515) relocalizes to the ER-mitochondria contact site after
starvation, and the autophagosome-formation marker ATG5 also localizes
at the site until formation is complete. Subcellular fractionation
showed that ATG14 cofractionates in the mitochondria-associated ER
membrane fraction under starvation conditions. Disruption of the
ER-mitochondria contact site prevents the formation of ATG14 puncta. The
ER-resident SNARE protein syntaxin-17 (STX17; 604204) binds ATG14 and
recruits it to the ER-mitochondria contact site. Hamasaki et al. (2013)
concluded that their results provided insight into organelle biogenesis
by demonstrating that the ER-mitochondria contact site is important in
autophagosome formation.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Schmeiser et al. (1999) mapped
the APG5L gene to chromosome 6q21.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kuma et al. (2004) generated Atg5-null mice by targeted disruption.
Atg5-null mice were born at the expected mendelian frequency and they
appeared almost normal at birth, except for a very slightly smaller mean
body weight. All Atg5-null mice died within 1 day of delivery. The
survival time of starved Atg5-deficient neonates (approximately 12
hours) was much shorter than that of wildtype mice (approximately 21
hours) but could be prolonged by forced milk feeding. Atg5-deficient
neonates exhibited reduced amino acid concentrations in plasma and
tissues and displayed signs of energy depletion. Kuma et al. (2004)
showed that neonates adapt to immediate post-birth starvation by
inducing autophagy and concluded that the production of amino acids by
autophagic degradation of self proteins, which allows for the
maintenance of energy homeostasis, is important for survival during
neonatal starvation.

Hara et al. (2006) reported that the loss of autophagy causes
neurodegeneration even in the absence of any disease-associated mutant
proteins. Mice deficient for Atg5 specifically in neural cells develop
progressive deficits in motor function that are accompanied by the
accumulation of cytoplasmic inclusion bodies in neurons. In Atg5-null
cells, diffuse abnormal intracellular proteins accumulate, and then form
aggregates and inclusions. Hara et al. (2006) concluded that continuous
clearance of diffuse cytosolic proteins through basal autophagy is
important for preventing the accumulation of abnormal proteins, which
can disrupt neural function and ultimately lead to neurodegeneration.

Tsukamoto et al. (2008) found that autophagy, a process for the
degradation of cytoplasmic constituents in the lysosome, plays a
critical role in newly fertilized oocytes. Autophagy was triggered by
fertilization and upregulated in early mouse embryos.
Autophagy-defective oocytes derived from oocyte-specific Atg5 knockout
mice failed to develop beyond the 4- and 8-cell stages if they were
fertilized by Agt5-null sperm, but could develop if they were fertilized
by wildtype sperm. Protein synthesis rates were reduced in the
autophagy-null embryos. Thus, Tsukamoto et al. (2008) concluded that
autophagic degradation within early embryos is essential for
preimplantation development in mammals.

Lee et al. (2010) observed impaired Cd4 (186940)-positive T-cell priming
and rapid lethality following challenge with herpes simplex virus in
mice with a conditional deletion of Atg5 in dendritic cells. Innate
immune recognition, antigen capture, migration, maturation, and cytokine
production remained intact in Atg5-deficient dendritic cells. However,
Atg5-deficient dendritic cells had defective processing and presentation
of phagocytosed antigens containing Toll-like receptor stimuli for MHC
II, but not MHC I. Induction of metabolic autophagy did not enhance MHC
II presentation, but autophagic machinery was required for optimal
phagosome-to-lysosome fusion and processing of antigen for MHC II
loading. Lee et al. (2010) concluded that dendritic cells use autophagic
machinery to process and present extracellular microbial antigens for
MHC II presentation.

REFERENCE 1. Grand, R. J. A.; Milner, A. E.; Mustoe, T.; Johnson, G. D.; Owen,
D.; Grant, M. L.; Gregory, C. D.: A novel protein expressed in mammalian
cells undergoing apoptosis. Exp. Cell Res. 218: 439-451, 1995.

2. Hamasaki, M.; Furuta, N.; Matsuda, A.; Nezu, A.; Yamamoto, A.;
Fujita, N.; Oomori, H.; Noda, T.; Haraguchi, T.; Hiraoka, Y.; Amano,
A.; Yoshimori, T.: Autophagosomes form at ER-mitochondria contact
sites. Nature 495: 389-393, 2013.

3. Hammond, E. M.; Brunet, C. L.; Johnson, G. D.; Parkhill, J.; Milner,
A. E.; Brady, G.; Gregory, C. D.; Grand, R. J. A.: Homology between
a human apoptosis specific protein and the product of APG5, a gene
involved in autophagy in yeast. FEBS Lett. 425: 391-395, 1998.

4. Hara, T.; Nakamura, K.; Matsui, M.; Yamamoto, A.; Nakahara, Y.;
Suzuki-Migishima, R.; Yokoyama, M.; Mishima, K.; Saito, I.; Okano,
H.; Mizushima, N.: Suppression of basal autophagy in neural cells
causes neurodegenerative disease in mice. Nature 441: 885-889, 2006.

5. Kuma, A.; Hatano, M.; Matsui, M.; Yamamoto, A.; Nakaya, H.; Yoshimori,
T.; Ohsumi, Y.; Tokuhisa, T.; Mizushima, N.: The role of autophagy
during the early neonatal starvation period. Nature 432: 1032-1036,
2004.

6. Lee, H. K.; Lund, J. M.; Ramanathan, B.; Mizushima, N.; Iwasaki,
A.: Autophagy-dependent viral recognition by plasmacytoid dendritic
cells. Science 315: 1398-1401, 2007.

7. Lee, H. K.; Mattei, L. M.; Steinberg, B. E.; Alberts, P.; Lee,
Y. H.; Chervonsky, A.; Mizushima, N.; Grinstein, S.; Iwasaki, A.:
In vivo requirement for Atg5 in antigen presentation by dendritic
cells. Immunity 32: 227-239, 2010.

8. Mizushima, N.; Sugita, H.; Yoshimori, T.; Ohsumi, Y.: A new protein
conjugation system in human: the counterpart of the yeast Apg12p conjugation
system essential for autophagy. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 33889-33892,
1998.

9. Nakagawa, I.; Amano, A.; Mizushima, N.; Yamamoto, A.; Yamaguchi,
H.; Kamimoto, T.; Nara, A.; Funao, J.; Nakata, M.; Tsuda, K.; Hamada,
S.; Yoshimori, T.: Autophagy defend cells against invading group
A Streptococcus. Science 306: 1037-1040, 2004.

10. Nishida, Y.; Arakawa, S.; Fujitani, K.; Yamaguchi, H.; Mizuta,
T.; Kanaseki, T.; Komatsu, M.; Otsu, K.; Tsujimoto, Y.; Shimizu, S.
: Discovery of Atg5/Atg7-independent alternative macroautophagy. Nature 461:
654-658, 2009.

11. Sanjuan, M. A.; Dillon, C. P.; Tait, S. W. G.; Moshiach, S.; Dorsey,
F.; Connell, S.; Komatsu, M.; Tanaka, K.; Cleveland, J. L.; Withoff,
S.; Green, D. R.: Toll-like receptor signalling in macrophages links
the autophagy pathway to phagocytosis. Nature 450: 1253-1257, 2007.

12. Schmeiser, K.; Armstrong, S.; Hammond, E. M.; Grand, R. J. A.
: Assignment of the yeast APG5 human homologue APG5L to chromosome
band 6q21 by fluorescence in situ hybridisation. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 87: 213-214, 1999.

13. Singh, R.; Kaushik, S.; Wang, Y.; Xiang, Y.; Novak, I.; Komatsu,
M.; Tanaka, K.; Cuervo, A. M.; Czaja, M. J.: Autophagy regulates
lipid metabolism. Nature 458: 1131-1135, 2009.

14. Tanida, I.; Tanida-Miyake, E.; Komatsu, M.; Ueno, T.; Kominami,
E.: Human Apg3p/Aut1p homologue is an authentic E2 enzyme for multiple
substrates, GATE-16, GABARAP, and MAP-LC3, and facilitates the conjugation
of hApg12p to hApg5p. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 13739-13744, 2002.

15. Tsukamoto, S.; Kuma, A.; Murakami, M.; Kishi, C.; Yamamoto, A.;
Mizushima, N.: Autophagy is essential for preimplantation development
of mouse embryos. Science 321: 117-120, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 07/16/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/16/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/12/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/25/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/24/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/13/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/21/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/27/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/3/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/20/2001
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 10/13/2000

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 10/26/1999

EDITED alopez: 07/16/2013
mgross: 10/28/2010
terry: 10/26/2010
alopez: 11/18/2009
terry: 11/16/2009
alopez: 5/12/2009
terry: 5/12/2009
alopez: 7/25/2008
terry: 7/25/2008
alopez: 2/5/2008
terry: 1/24/2008
mgross: 4/13/2007
alopez: 7/26/2006
terry: 7/21/2006
mgross: 9/27/2005
mgross: 9/26/2005
carol: 4/1/2005
alopez: 3/3/2005
terry: 3/3/2005
alopez: 11/21/2001
alopez: 6/20/2001
terry: 10/16/2000
carol: 10/13/2000
mgross: 10/27/1999
psherman: 10/27/1999

153432	TITLE *153432 LYMPHOCYTE-SPECIFIC PROTEIN;  LSP1
;;pp52
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Signal transduction in B lymphocytes following antigen binding to a
membrane-associated immunoglobulin complex initiates a diverse array of
intracellular events. To define genes participating in these events, May
et al. (1993) and others used various cDNA cloning strategies to
identify genes preferentially expressed in B lymphocytes. One gene,
variously named LSP1 and pp52, exhibited a number of properties
supporting a possible role in B-cell signaling pathways. The gene codes
for a 52-kD phosphoprotein expressed only in transformed and
untransformed B cells, thymocytes, and untransformed T-cell lines.

Thompson et al. (1996) showed that tissue-specific alternative splicing
produced 2 different Lsp1 transcripts in mouse. In lymphocytes, exon 1L
is used, while exon 1S is used in stromal cells. Both the 5-prime
untranslated regions and amino acid sequences of the alternative exons
are distinct and are, apparently, transcribed using different
tissue-specific promoters.

MAPPING

May et al. (1993) mapped the LSP1 gene to 11p15.5 by fluorescence in
situ hybridization. They unexpectedly found that the human pp52 gene is
1 of 4 closely related loci. Two of the 4 loci harbored dysfunctional
frameshift mutations or premature translation stop sites. These
hybridized to 1q12 and 2p11.2. They were unable to map the fourth gene.
May et al. (1993) pointed out that 11p15.5 is a location associated with
karyotypic abnormalities in certain B-cell malignancies.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Easton et al. (2007) identified a T/C SNP (dbSNP rs3817198) in the LSP1
gene that was significantly (p = 3 x 10(-9)) associated with familial
breast cancer (114480) in a 3-stage genomewide association study of
22,848 cases from 22 studies. Easton et al. (2007) found that the allele
was common in the U.K. population and thus unlikely to confer increased
disease risk individually. However, in combination with other
susceptibility alleles, the SNP may become clinically significant.

In a study of 9,442 BRCA1 (113705) and 5,665 BRCA2 (600185) mutation
carriers from 33 study centers, Antoniou et al. (2009) found that the
minor allele (C) of the SNP dbSNP rs3817198 in LSP1 on chromosome
11p15.5 was associated with increased breast cancer risk only for BRCA2
mutation carriers (P trend = 2.8 x 10(-4)).

ANIMAL MODEL

Liu et al. (2005) noted that LSP1 is an intracellular Ca(2+)- and
F-actin (see 102610)-binding protein and a major substrate of MAPKAPK2
(602006) in the p38 MAPK (MAPK14; 600289) pathway. Using intravital
microscopy, they demonstrated that Lsp1 -/- mice had impaired neutrophil
extravasation in response to Tnf (191160), Il1b (147720), and Cxcl1
(155730), but no deficit in neutrophil rolling or adhesion.
Transplantation experiments showed that wildtype leukocytes had a
migration defect in Lsp1 -/- mice, whereas Lsp1 -/- neutrophils
extravasated normally in wildtype mice. Vascular permeability to
histamine was also reduced in Lsp1 -/- mice. Immunofluorescence
microscopy and Western blot analysis showed that Lsp1 was present in
wildtype but not Lsp1 -/- microvascular endothelial cells, and cultured
human endothelial cells also expressed LSP1. Liu et al. (2005) proposed
that LSP1 expressed in endothelium regulates neutrophil transendothelial
migration.

REFERENCE 1. Antoniou, A. C.; Sinilnikova, O. M.; McGuffog, L.; Healey, S.;
Nevanlinna, H.; Heikkinen, T.; Simard, J.; Spurdle, A. B.; Beesley,
J.; Chen, X.; Kathleen Cuningham Foundation Consortium for Research
into Familial Breast Cancer; Neuhausen, S. L.; and 131 others:
Common variants in LSP1, 2q35 and 8q24 and breast cancer risk for
BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 4442-4456,
2009.

2. Easton, D. F.; Pooley, K. A.; Dunning, A. M.; Pharoah, P. D. P.;
Thompson, D.; Ballinger, D. G.; Struewing, J. P.; Morrison, J.; Field,
H.; Luben, R.; Wareham, N.; Ahmed, S.; and 93 others: Genome-wide
association study identifies novel breast cancer susceptibility loci. Nature 447:
1087-1093, 2007.

3. Liu, L.; Cara, D. C.; Kaur, J.; Raharjo, E.; Mullaly, S. C.; Jongstra-Bilen,
J.; Jongstra, J.; Kubes, P.: LSP1 is an endothelial gatekeeper of
leukocyte transendothelial migration. J. Exp. Med. 201: 409-418,
2005.

4. May, W.; Korenberg, J. R.; Chen, X. N.; Lunsford, L.; Wood, W.
J.; Thompson, A.; Wall, R.; Denny, C. T.: Human lymphocyte-specific
pp52 gene is a member of a highly conserved dispersed family. Genomics 15:
515-520, 1993.

5. Thompson, A. A.; Omori, S. A.; Gilly, M. J.; May, W.; Gordon, M.
S.; Wood, W. J., Jr.; Miyoshi, E.; Malone, C. S.; Gimble, J.; Denny,
C. T.; Wall, R.: Alternatively spliced exons encode the tissue-specific
5-prime termini of leukocyte pp52 and stromal cell S37 mRNA isoforms. Genomics 32:
352-357, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 10/4/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/17/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/27/2006
Alan F. Scott - updated: 4/12/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/19/1993

EDITED alopez: 10/26/2010
terry: 10/4/2010
carol: 8/17/2007
ckniffin: 7/17/2007
carol: 6/20/2007
mgross: 10/27/2006
dkim: 9/11/1998
mark: 4/12/1996
terry: 4/12/1996
terry: 4/11/1996
mark: 4/10/1996
carol: 4/30/1993
carol: 3/19/1993

604904	TITLE *604904 TATA BOX-BINDING PROTEIN-ASSOCIATED FACTOR 1B; TAF1B
;;TBP-ASSOCIATED FACTOR, RNA POLYMERASE I, 63-KD; TAFI63;;
SL1, 63-KD SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION Eukaryotic RNA polymerases are unable to initiate RNA synthesis in the
absence of additional proteins called general transcription factors, or
GTFs. GTFs assemble in a complex on the DNA promoter and recruit the RNA
polymerase. The multisubunit complex SL1 is required for RNA polymerase
I to synthesize ribosomal RNA. SL1 consists of TATA box-binding protein
(TBP; 600075), which is a universal GTF for all 3 RNA polymerases, and 3
TBP-associated factors (TAFs).

CLONING

Using immunoaffinity chromatography with anti-TBP, followed by SDS-PAGE
analysis, Comai et al. (1994) isolated the purified 63-kD subunit of
SL1. By screening a teratocarcinoma cDNA library using degenerate PCR
primers corresponding to peptide sequences of the 63-kD subunit of SL1,
they obtained a nearly full-length cDNA encoding TAF1B, which they
called TAFI63. Comai et al. (1994) also obtained cDNAs encoding TAF1A
(604903) and TAF1C (604905). The TAF1B cDNA encodes a deduced 556-amino
acid protein, which the authors suggested is missing a few amino acids
at the N terminus. Western blot analysis confirmed that TAF1B is
expressed as a 63-kD protein. Analysis of SL1 subunit interactions
showed that all 3 TAF1 proteins bind to TBP and to each other. However,
binding of the SL1 complex to TBP excluded binding of the RNA polymerase
II transcription factor TFIID (see TAF2A; 313650) to TBP. Comai et al.
(1994) concluded that this mutually exclusive binding directs the
formation of promoter- and RNA polymerase-selective TBP-TAF complexes.

GENE FUNCTION

Knutson and Hahn (2011) showed that Rrn7, a subunit of the yeast Pol I
core factor, and its human ortholog TAF1B are TFIIB (see 189963)-like
factors. Although distantly related, Rrn7 shares many activities
associated with TFIIB-like factors. Domain swaps between TFIIB-related
factors showed that Rrn7 is most closely related to the Pol III general
factor Brf1 (604902). Knutson and Hahn (2011) concluded that their
results pointed to the conservation of initiation mechanisms among
multisubunit Pols and revealed a key function of yeast core factor/human
SL1 in Pol I transcription.

Naidu et al. (2011) showed that TAF1B, a subunit of human Pol I basal
transcription factor SL1, is structurally related to TFIIB/TFIIB-like
proteins, through predicted N-terminal zinc ribbon and cyclin-like fold
domains. SL1, essential for Pol I recruitment to the ribosomal RNA gene
promoter, also has an essential polymerase recruitment role, operating
through TAF1B. Therefore, Naidu et al. (2011) concluded that a
TAFIIB-related protein is implicated in preinitiation complex assembly
and postpolymerase recruitment events in Pol I transcription,
underscoring the parallels between eukaryotic Pol I, II, and III and
archaeal transcription machineries.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TAF1B
gene to 2p (TMAP stSG39145). Di Pietro et al. (2000) mapped the TAF1B
gene to chromosome 2p25 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Comai, L.; Zomerdijk, J. C. B. M.; Beckmann, H.; Zhou, S.; Admon,
A.; Tjian, R.: Reconstitution of transcription factor SL1: exclusive
binding of TBP by SL1 or TFIID subunits. Science 266: 1966-1972,
1994.

2. Di Pietro, C.; Rapisarda, A.; Amico, V.; Bonaiuto, C.; Viola, A.;
Scalia, M.; Motta, S.; Amato, A.; Engel, H.; Messina, A.; Sichel,
G.; Grzeschik, K.-H.; Purrello, M.: Genomic localization of the human
genes TAF1A, TAF1B and TAF1C, encoding TAFI48, TAFI63 and TAFI110
subunits of class I general transcription initiation factor SL1. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 89: 133-136, 2000.

3. Knutson, B. A.; Hahn, S.: Yeast Rrn7 and human TAF1B are TFIIB-related
RNA polymerase I general transcription factors. Science 333: 1637-1640,
2011.

4. Naidu, S.; Friedrich, J. K.; Russell, J.; Zomerdijk, J. C. B. M.
: TAF1B is a TFIIB-like component of the basal transcription machinery
for RNA polymerase I. Science 333: 1640-1642, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/7/2011
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 1/8/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/2/2000

EDITED alopez: 10/12/2011
terry: 10/7/2011
cwells: 1/9/2001
carol: 1/8/2001
mgross: 5/9/2000
mgross: 5/2/2000

142560	TITLE *142560 DEAD BOX POLYPEPTIDE 39B; DDX39B
;;HLA-B-ASSOCIATED TRANSCRIPT 1; BAT1;;
U2AF65-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN, 56-KD; UAP56;;
D6S81E
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

UAP56 (BAT1) is an essential splicing factor that is recruited to the
pre-mRNA dependent on U2AF65 (191318) and is required for the U2
snRNP-branchpoint interaction. UAP56 is a member of the DEAD box family
of RNA-dependent ATPases, which mediate ATP hydrolysis during several
steps of pre-mRNA splicing (Fleckner et al., 1997).

CLONING

By chromosome walking with overlapping cosmids, Spies et al. (1989)
isolated a 435-kb DNA segment that was centromeric to HLA-B (142830) in
the human major histocompatibility complex. The presence of additional
genes was suggested by a large cluster of CpG islands. With cosmid
probes, 5 distinct transcripts were detected in RNA samples from a
variety of cell lines, and the corresponding cDNA clones were isolated
and designated 'HLA-B-associated transcripts' (BAT1 through BAT5,
142620).

Peelman et al. (1995) sequenced both human and pig BAT1 and showed that
the genes are members of the DEAD-box family of ATP-dependent RNA
helicases, which are involved in a number of cellular functions
including initiation of translation, RNA splicing, and ribosome
assembly. Proteins of this family have 9 conserved amino acid motifs but
differ at their amino and carboxyl ends. From studies of other family
members, the first block is involved in ATP binding, the fifth block may
be an ATPase, the sixth block is needed for RNA helicase activity, and
the ninth block is involved with ATP hydrolysis-independent RNA
interactions during unwinding. The gene contains 10 exons spanning about
10 kb of genomic DNA and encodes a 428-amino acid protein. Peelman et
al. (1995) detected 3 different length mRNAs (4.1, 17, and 0.9 kb) in
all tissues analyzed, although at different relative levels. The protein
is highly conserved, with 98% identity to the p47 rat liver nuclear
protein and 99% identity to the pig BAT1 homolog. Peelman et al. (1995)
showed that a recombinant epitope-tagged BAT1 construct was expressed in
COS cells and showed localization of the protein to the nucleus.

Fleckner et al. (1997) cloned a human 56-kD U2AF65-associated protein
that they termed UAP56. Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay, Fleckner et al.
(1997) identified UAP56 as the splicing factor that interacts with
U2AF65 amino acids 138 to 183. UAP56 encodes a protein of 428 amino
acids containing the 7 consensus motifs characteristic of DEAD box RNA
helicases.

GENE FUNCTION

Spies et al. (1989) raised the question of whether variation at one of
the BAT genes, rather than at HLA-B itself, determines susceptibility to
ankylosing spondylitis (106300).

Allcock et al. (2001) used antisense DNA corresponding to exons 2
through 5 of the BAT1 gene and showed that after antigenic stimulation,
monocytic and T-cell lines produced higher levels of the acute phase
cytokines TNF, interleukin-1 (IL1; see 147760), and IL6 (147620) than
cells containing the transfecting vector alone. These results suggested
that BAT1 is a negative regulator of inflammation.

Fleckner et al. (1997) demonstrated that UAP56 is an essential splicing
factor that is required for U2 snRNP-branchpoint interaction. It is a
component of the spliceosome. Luo et al. (2001) demonstrated that UAP56
interacts directly and highly specifically with ALY (THOC4; 604171).
Moreover, UAP56 is present together with ALY in a spliced mRNA-protein
complex (mRNP). Excess UAP56 is a potent dominant-negative inhibitor of
mRNA export. Excess UAP56 also inhibits the recruitment of ALY to the
spliced mRNP. Furthermore, mutation in ALY that blocks its interaction
with UAP56 prevents recruitment of ALY to the spliced mRNP. Luo et al.
(2001) concluded that the splicing factor UAP56 functions in coupling
the splicing and export machineries by recruiting ALY to the spliced
mRNP.

Strasser et al. (2002) showed that UAP56 is part of the RNase-resistant
TREX (transcription/export) complex, which includes TEX1 (THOC3;
606929), HPR1 (THOC1; 606930), THO2 (THOC2; 300395), and ALY and is
conserved from yeast to humans. Functional studies in yeast led them to
conclude that the TREX complex is specifically recruited to the
transcribing gene and travels with the polymerase during transcriptional
elongation. Strasser et al. (2002) suggested that it physically links
proteins that function in mRNA export or transcription.

Using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometric analysis of HeLa cell
nuclear extracts, Masuda et al. (2005) found that the human TREX complex
contained THO2, FSAP79 (THOC5; 612733), HPR1, UAP56, TEX1, FSAP35
(THOC6; 615403), ALY, and FSAP24 (THOC7; 611965). Immunodepletion and
gel-filtration analyses revealed that THO2, HPR1, FSAP79, FSAP35, and
FSAP24 were tightly associated in the THO complex, whereas UAP56, ALY,
and TEX1 were more loosely associated. Immunoprecipitation of any TREX
component efficiently immunoprecipitated spliced mRNA and cDNA
transcripts, but not unspliced pre-mRNAs. Immunodepletion of any
component had no effect on spliceosome assembly, splicing, or RNA
stability. The TREX complex assembled on every mRNA examined. Mutation
analysis showed that the C terminus of ALY was required for binding of
both UAP56 and the THO complex. The C terminus of UAP56 was sufficient
for ALY binding. The N terminus of UAP56 interacted weakly with the THO
complex and TEX1, suggesting that other regions of UAP56 are required
for maximal binding. Masuda et al. (2005) concluded that recruitment of
the human TREX complex is not directly coupled to transcription, as in
yeast.

GENE STRUCTURE

Peelman et al. (1995) demonstrated that the BAT1 gene contains 10 exons
spanning about 10 kb of genomic DNA.

MAPPING

By chromosome walking with overlapping cosmids, Spies et al. (1989)
isolated a 435-kb DNA segment that is centromeric to HLA-B in the human
major histocompatibility complex on chromosome 6p21. Within the cloned
region, the genes for the tumor necrosis factors (TNFA, 191160; TNFB,
153440) and HLA-B (142830) were 210 kb apart. The human homolog of the
mouse gene B144 (LST1; 109170) is located near TNFA. The presence of
additional genes was suggested by a large cluster of CpG islands. With
cosmid probes, 5 distinct transcripts were detected in RNA samples from
a variety of cell lines and the corresponding cDNA clones were isolated.
These 'HLA-B-associated transcripts' (BAT1-BAT5) mapped to different
locations within a 160-kb region that included the TNFA and TNFB genes.

In the pig, BAT1 was shown to be about 30 kb upstream of TNF (Nunes et
al., 1994). The location of BAT1 at the telomeric end of the class III
region is conserved in both humans and pig (Peelman et al., 1995).

REFERENCE 1. Allcock, R. J. N.; Williams, J. H.; Price, P.: The central MHC
gene, BAT1, may encode a protein that down-regulates cytokine production. Genes
Cells 6: 487-494, 2001.

2. Fleckner, J.; Zhang, M.; Valcarcel, J.; Green, M. R.: U2AF(65)
recruits a novel human DEAD box protein required for the U2 snRNP-branchpoint
interaction. Genes Dev. 11: 1864-1872, 1997.

3. Luo, M.-J.; Zhou, Z.; Magni, K.; Christoforides, C.; Rappsilber,
J.; Mann, M.; Reed, R.: Pre-mRNA splicing and mRNA export linked
by direct interactions between UAP56 and Aly. Nature 413: 644-647,
2001.

4. Masuda, S.; Das, R.; Cheng, H.; Hurt, E.; Dorman, N.; Reed, R.
: Recruitment of the human TREX complex to mRNA during splicing. Genes
Dev. 19: 1512-1517, 2005.

5. Nunes, M.; Peelman, L.; Vaiman, M.; Bourgeaux, N.; Chardon, P.
: Characterization of six new loci within the swine major histocompatibility
complex class III region. Mammalian Genome 5: 616-622, 1994.

6. Peelman, L. J.; Chardon, P.; Nunes, M.; Renard, C.; Geffrotin,
C.; Vaiman, M.; Van Zeveren, A.; Coppieters, W.; van de Weghe, A.;
Bouquet, Y.; Choy, W. W.; Strominger, J. L.; Spies, T.: The BAT1
gene in the MHC encodes an evolutionarily conserved putative nuclear
RNA helicase of the DEAD family. Genomics 26: 210-218, 1995.

7. Spies, T.; Blanck, G.; Bresnahan, M.; Sands, J.; Strominger, J.
L.: A new cluster of genes within the human major histocompatibility
complex. Science 243: 214-217, 1989.

8. Strasser, K.; Masuda, S.; Mason, P.; Pfannstiel, J.; Oppizzi, M.;
Rodriguez-Navarro, S.; Rondon, A. G.; Aguilera, A.; Struhl, K.; Reed,
R.; Hurt, E.: TREX is a conserved complex coupling transcription
with messenger RNA export. Nature 417: 304-308, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/2/2011
Alan F. Scott - updated: 10/10/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/2/1989

EDITED mgross: 09/06/2013
mgross: 11/9/2011
terry: 11/2/2011
alopez: 8/15/2011
mgross: 10/24/2007
carol: 1/17/2006
mgross: 1/25/2002
carol: 7/18/2001
terry: 2/28/2000
carol: 2/22/1999
mark: 9/8/1997
alopez: 9/5/1997
mark: 10/10/1995
terry: 10/7/1994
carol: 4/14/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/25/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990

155541	TITLE *155541 MELANOCORTIN 4 RECEPTOR; MC4R
;;MCR RECEPTOR
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Gantz et al. (1993) cloned a fourth member of the melanocortin receptor
family of 7-transmembrane G-protein linked receptors. By Northern blot
analysis and in situ hybridization, the melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R)
was found to be expressed primarily in the brain; its expression was
notably absent in the adrenal cortex, melanocytes, and placenta. The
profile of responses of MC4R, transfected into COS-1 cells and L cells,
to different melanocortins distinguished it from the previously
described melanocortin receptors. (See 155555, 202200, and 155540.) MC4R
is a 333-amino acid protein encoded by a single exon (Yeo et al., 1998).

GENE FUNCTION

Nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) inhibits the accumulation of nonsense- or
frameshift-mutated mRNA and thus minimizes the synthesis of truncated
proteins with potential dominant-negative effects. Brocke et al. (2002)
investigated the NMD sensitivity of nonsense-mutated transcripts of
MC4R. Nonsense-mutated variants of MC4R transcripts were stable and
expressed truncated proteins that were detectable in the lysates of
transfected cells. The authors hypothesized that the lack of necessity
for splicing in the naturally intronless MC4R gene may allow it to
escape from NMD.

By using a combination of pharmacologic, molecular genetic,
electrophysiologic, and feeding studies, Mineur et al. (2011) found that
activation of hypothalamic alpha-3 (118503)-beta-4 (118509) nicotinic
acetylcholine receptors leads to activation of proopiomelanocortin
(POMC; 176830) neurons. POMC neurons and subsequent activation of
melanocortin-4 receptors were critical for nicotinic-induced decreases
in food intake in mice. The study of Mineur et al. (2011) demonstrated
that nicotine decreases food intake and body weight by influencing the
hypothalamic melanocortin system and identified critical molecular and
synaptic mechanisms involved in nicotine-induced decreases in appetite.

Lim et al. (2012) showed that chronic stress in mice decreases the
strength of excitatory synapses on D1 dopamine receptor (DRD1;
126449)-expressing nucleus accumbens medium spiny neurons owing to
activation of the melanocortin-4 receptor. Stress-elicited increases in
behavioral measurements of anhedonia, but not increases in measurements
of behavioral despair, are prevented by blocking these melanocortin-4
receptor-mediated synaptic changes in vivo. Lim et al. (2012) concluded
that stress-elicited anhedonia requires a neuropeptide-triggered, cell
type-specific synaptic adaptation in the nucleus accumbens and that
distinct circuit adaptations mediate other major symptoms of
stress-elicited depression.

MAPPING

By means of fluorescence chromosomal in situ hybridization, Gantz et al.
(1993) localized the MC4R gene to 18q21.3. By fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH), Magenis et al. (1994) mapped the MC4R gene to
18q22. Using FISH and radiation hybrid mapping, Sundaramurthy et al.
(1998) localized the MC4R gene to 18q22.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Yeo et al. (1998) and Vaisse et al. (1998) described a severely obese
child and adult, respectively, with a mutation in the MC4R gene. The
mutation was present in heterozygous state in each case, and other
members of the family were obese in a pattern consistent with autosomal
dominant inheritance. Molecular abnormalities have been identified in
autosomal recessive severe obesity involving the leptin gene
(164160.0001), the leptin receptor gene (601007.0002), the prohormone
convertase-1 gene (PC1; 162150.0001), and the proopiomelanocortin gene
(POMC; 176830.0001). Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism is found in
association with mutations in the leptin, leptin receptor, and PC1
genes, and hypoadrenalism is found with POMC and PC1 gene mutations;
short stature is associated with mutations in the leptin receptor gene.
There was no evidence of impaired adrenal function in the MC4R-deficient
subjects; sexual development and fertility were normal, and affected
subjects were tall, which was of interest given the increased linear
growth exhibited by heterozygous Mc4r-deficient mice.

By SSCP, Hinney et al. (1999) screened the coding region of the MC4R
gene in 306 extremely obese children and adolescents, 25 healthy
underweight students, 52 normal weight individuals, 51 inpatients with
anorexia nervosa (606788), and 27 patients with bulimia nervosa
(607499). Several mutations were identified, including a 4-bp deletion
(155541.0001) that resulted in a frameshift, yielding a truncated
protein. This mutation had been assumed to be associated with dominantly
inherited morbid obesity in humans. Both the index patient (body mass
index (BMI), 42.06 kg/m2; height, 171 cm; age, 19.6 years) and her
mother (BMI, 37.55 kg/m2; height, 164 cm; age, 42.5 years) were
heterozygous for this deletion. A tyr35-to-ter substitution
(155541.0003) was detected in 2 obese probands (BMI, 31.29 kg/m2 and
45.91 kg/m2, respectively); this mutation led to a truncated protein
that encompassed the N-terminal extracellular domain. Both carriers also
showed an asp37-to-val mutation (155541.0004). In both cases these
mutations were maternally transmitted, indicating they form a haplotype.
A male obese proband harbored 2 missense mutations, and 4 different
missense mutations were detected in 4 different male probands. All
mutations in the MC4R gene were only found in extremely obese
individuals whose BMIs were all greater than the 99th percentile. An
ile251-to-leu (I251L) polymorphism was found in similar frequencies in
all groups studied. The authors concluded that MC4R mutations are not
uncommon. While the data supported dominantly inherited obesity because
of the 3 obese probands with haploinsufficiency, the functional
significance of the missense mutations remained to be determined.

In a study of 306 index patients, Hinney et al. (1999) detected 3 obese
probands with haploinsufficiency mutations in the MC4R gene. Sina et al.
(1999) extended the mutation screen to another 186 extremely obese
children and adolescents and identified an additional haploinsufficiency
carrier, bringing the total number of mutation-carrying obese patients
identified to 4. They genotyped and phenotyped 43 family members of
these 4 index patients. A total of 19 mutation carriers were identified.
Extreme obesity was the predominating phenotype; however, moderate
obesity occurred in 3 of the carriers. No other specific phenotypic
abnormalities were detected. Female haploinsufficiency carriers were
heavier than male carriers in the respective families, a finding similar
to findings in Mc4r-knockout mice.

Farooqi et al. (2003) stated that MC4R deficiency is the most common
form of monogenic obesity. To define the clinical spectrum, mode of
inheritance, genotype-phenotype correlations, and pathophysiologic
mechanisms leading to obesity, they determined the nucleotide sequence
of the MC4R gene in 500 probands with severe childhood obesity. In 29
probands (5.8%), they found mutations in MC4R (155541.0010-155541.0019);
23 were heterozygotes and 6 were homozygotes. Mutation carriers had
severe obesity, increased lean mass, increased linear growth,
hyperphagia, and severe hyperinsulinemia; homozygotes were more severely
affected than heterozygotes. Subjects with mutations retaining residual
signaling capacity had a less severe phenotype. Thus, MC4R mutations are
inherited in a codominant manner. The correlation between the signaling
properties of these mutant receptors and energy intake emphasized the
key role of this receptor in the control of eating behavior.

Dubern et al. (2001) identified 4 dominantly inherited heterozygous
missense MC4R mutations in 4 of 63 unrelated children with severe
obesity. The same mutation was not found in any of the control subjects.
Expression of the obese phenotype was variable in mutation-positive
family members. Dubern et al. (2001) concluded that MC4R mutations may
be a nonnegligible cause of severe obesity in children with variable
expression and penetrance.

Jacobson et al. (2002) determined the prevalence of mutations in the
coding and flanking regions of the MC4R gene in severely obese and
normal-weight subjects from the Swedish Obese Subjects study, the
Health, Risk Factors, Exercise Training, and Genetics (HERITAGE) Family
study, and a Memphis cohort. A total of 433 white and 95 black subjects
(94% females) were screened for mutations by direct sequencing. Three
previously described missense variants and 9 novel (3 missense, 6
silent) variants were detected. None of them showed significant
association with obesity or related phenotypes. In addition, 2 novel
deletions were found in 2 heterozygous obese women which were predicted
to encode a truncated nonfunctional receptor. No pathogenic mutations
were found among obese blacks or nonobese controls. Furthermore, none of
the null mutations found in other populations was present in this
sample. The authors concluded that their results do not support the
prevailing notion that sequence variation in the MC4R gene is a frequent
cause of human obesity.

In a cohort of 172 patients presenting with severe childhood obesity and
a family history of obesity, Lubrano-Berthelier et al. (2003) screened
for mutations in the coding region of the MC4R gene and identified 3
heterozygous MC4R mutations in 3 patients. A functional analysis of 14
MC4R mutations, including the 3 identified in this study, indicated that
all mutations altered the activation of the receptor by the endogenous
agonist alpha-MSH (see 176830). Lubrano-Berthelier et al. (2003) further
demonstrated that greater than 80% of childhood obesity-associated
heterozygous MC4R mutations led to intracellular retention of the
receptor.

Branson et al. (2003) sequenced the complete MC4R coding region and the
leptin-binding domain of the leptin receptor (LEPR; 601007) in 469
severely obese white subjects (370 women and 99 men). Normal-weight
controls were 15 women and 10 men without a history of dieting or a
family history of obesity. MC4R mutations, including 5 novel variants,
were found in 24 obese subjects (5.1%) and 1 control (4%). Twenty of the
24 obese subjects with an MC4R mutation were matched for age, sex, and
BMI with 120 of the 445 obese subjects without an MC4R mutation. All
mutation carriers reported binge eating, as compared with 14.2% of obese
subjects without mutations and none of the normal-weight subjects
without mutations. The prevalence of binge eating was similar among
carriers of mutations in the leptin-binding domain of LEPR and
noncarriers. No mutations were found in the region of POMC encoding
alpha-MSH, the ligand of MC4R. List and Habener (2003) commented on the
possible importance of ethnic background in the frequency of mutations
in MC4R in obesity. They also suggested that the findings of Branson et
al. (2003) be interpreted with caution, as they differed from earlier
findings of a binge-eating disorder prevalence of 5% among carriers of
MC4R mutations (Sina et al., 1999).

Hebebrand et al. (2004) compared the eating behavior of 43 obese
probands with functionally relevant MC4R mutations to wildtype controls.
No significant differences in binge-eating episodes between carriers of
the MC4R variants and wildtype controls were detected, and Hebebrand et
al. (2004) concluded that binge-eating episodes are not a distinct
feature of MC4R mutation carriers. This analysis was different from the
study of Branson et al. (2003) because Hebebrand et al. (2004) studied
only carriers of mutations that had been shown to be of functional
relevance in vitro and did not include carriers of silent variants in
the open reading frame, variants in untranslated regions (UTRs), or the
val103-to-ile (V103I) or I251L polymorphisms.

In detailed pharmacologic studies of 11 different missense mutations in
the MC4R gene associated with obesity, Nijenhuis et al. (2003) found
that all the mutant receptors were poorly expressed at the cell surface
and showed a decreased maximal response to agonist, indicating that the
mutations impair receptor function. The findings supported the
hypothesis that loss of function of MC4R contributes to obesity.

Santini et al. (2004) screened a population of Italian obese subjects
for MC4R variants, demonstrating a 1.7% prevalence of potentially
pathogenic mutations. They reported a novel heterozygous missense
mutation that impaired MC4R functional activity in vitro.

By means of transient transfection in vitro, Yeo et al. (2003) examined
the functional properties of 12 different mutations in human MC4R that
result in severe, familial, early-onset obesity. Of the 9 missense
mutants studied, 4 (including 155541.0013, 155541.0014, and 155541.0018)
were completely unable to generate cAMP in response to ligand and 5 were
partially impaired. Four (including 155541.0014 and 155541.0017) showed
impaired cell surface expression and 6 showed reduced ligand binding.
The mutant protein I316S (155541.0016) showed reduced affinity for
alpha-MSH but retained normal affinity for the antagonist agouti-related
protein (AGRP; 602311). None of the mutations inhibited signaling
through cotransfected wildtype receptors.

Valli-Jaakola et al. (2004) screened 2 Finnish cohorts, comprising 56
children with severe early-onset obesity (relative weight for height
greater than or equal to 70% before age 10) and 252 morbidly obese
adults (body mass index greater than 40 kg/m2) for MC4R mutations. They
identified a pathogenic mutation (S127L; 155541.0021) in 1 child,
causing severe early-onset obesity. They also identified a novel
polymorphism in the coding region and 2 novel variations outside the
coding region.

Hinney et al. (2003) performed a mutation screen of the coding region of
the MC4R gene in 808 extremely obese children and adolescents and 327
underweight or normal-weight controls. A total of 16 different missense,
nonsense, and frameshift mutations were found in the obese study group;
5 of these were novel. In vitro assays revealed that 9 of the 16
mutations led to impaired cAMP responses, compared with wildtype
receptor constructs. The association test based on functionally relevant
mutations was positive (P = 0.006, Fisher's exact test, one-sided). They
also screened a total of 1,040 parents of 520 of the aforementioned
obese young index patients to perform transmission disequilibrium tests.
The 11 parental carriers of functionally relevant mutations transmitted
the mutation in 81.8% (P = 0.033). The authors concluded that their
results supported the hypothesis that these MC4R mutations represent
major gene effects for obesity.

Lubrano-Berthelier et al. (2006) determined the prevalence of MC4R
mutations in a cohort of severely obese adults and the clinical
phenotype and the phenotype-genotype relationships of adult MC4R
mutation carriers. The prevalence of obesity specific MC4R mutations was
2.6%, (95% CI = 1.5-3.7). The prevalence of MC4R mutations was similar
in patients developing obesity in childhood (2.83%) and in patients with
a later onset of the disease (2.35%). Adult obese MC4R mutation carriers
did not present with binge eating or with any specific clinical
phenotype. The authors concluded that the severity of the functional
alterations of the mutated MC4Rs and, in particular, the intracellular
retention of the receptor correlated both with the severity and the
onset of the obesity in the mutation carriers.

Hinney et al. (2006) investigated the prevalence and spectrum of MC4R
mutations in 4,068 individuals of a German population-based study group
(KORA-S4) and 1,003 German obese adults (BMI greater than 30 kg/m2).
Sixteen (6 novel) coding nonsynonymous mutations were detected in 27
heterozygous individuals of KORA-S4. Four of the mutation alleles led to
impaired receptor function in vitro; however, none of these 6
heterozygous mutation carriers was obese. In the obese adults, 6 coding
nonsynonymous and a nonsense mutation were detected in 13 individuals.
Only the nonsense mutation allele entailed impaired receptor function.
The authors concluded that individuals heterozygous for nonsynonymous
MC4R mutation alleles entailing impaired function were not obese and
that nonsynonymous MC4R mutations causing impaired receptor function
were rare in German obese adults (2 in 1,003 = 0.2%).

By direct sequencing of the coding region of the MC4R gene in a cohort
of 289 Czech children and adolescents with early-onset obesity,
Hainerova et al. (2007) found a prevalence of 2.4% of MC4R homozygous
and heterozygous mutations. One novel variant (C84R) showed a
significant reduction in cAMP signal properties of the MC4R. There was a
similar response of MC4R mutation carriers and noncarriers to diet
management.

In a genomewide association study of 318,237 SNPs for insulin resistance
and related phenotypes in 2,684 Indian Asians and 11,955 individuals of
Indian Asian or European ancestry, Chambers et al. (2008) found
association between dbSNP rs12970134, located near the MC4R gene, and
waist circumference (p = 1.7 x 10(-9)). Homozygotes for the risk allele
had an approximately 2 cm greater waist circumference compared to
wildtype. The authors concluded that genetic variation near MC4R is
associated with a risk of adiposity and insulin resistance.

Loos et al. (2008) performed a metaanalysis of data from 4 European
population-based studies and 3 disease-case series, involving a total of
16,876 individuals of European descent, and found a significant
association between dbSNP rs17782313, located 188 kb downstream of the
MC4R gene, and BMI in adults (p = 2.8 x 10(-15)) and children (p = 1.5 x
10(-8)). In case-control analyses, the odds for severe childhood obesity
reached 1.30 (p = 8.0 x 10(-11)), and overtransmission of the risk
allele to obese offspring was observed in 660 families. The authors
concluded that common variants near the MC4R gene influence fat mass,
weight, and obesity risk at the population level.

Willer et al. (2009) performed a metaanalysis of 15 genomewide
association studies for BMI comprising 32,387 participants and followed
up top signals in 14 additional cohorts comprising 59,082 participants.
They strongly confirmed association with MC4R at SNP dbSNP rs17782313
with a per-allele change in BMI of 0.20 and an overall P value of 1.1 x
10(-20).

Hardy et al. (2010) genotyped variants in FTO (610966; dbSNP rs9939609)
and near MC4R (dbSNP rs17782313) in 1,240 men and 1,239 women born in
1946 and participating in the MRC National Survey of Health and
Development. Birth weight was recorded and height and weight were
measured or self-reported repeatedly at 11 time-points between ages 2
and 53 years. Hierarchical mixed models were used to test whether
genetic associations with weight or BMI standard deviation scores (SDS)
changed with age during childhood and adolescence (2-20 years) or
adulthood (20-53 years). The association between FTO dbSNP rs9939609 and
BMI SDS strengthened during childhood and adolescence (rate of change:
0.007 SDS/A-allele/year; P less than 0.001), reached a peak strength at
age 20 years (0.13 SDS/A-allele), and then weakened during adulthood
(-0.003 SDS/A-allele/year, P = 0.001). MC4R dbSNP rs17782313 showed
stronger associations with weight than BMI; its association with weight
strengthened during childhood and adolescence (0.005 SDS/C-allele/year;
P = 0.006), peaked at age 20 years (0.13 SDS/C-allele), and weakened
during adulthood (-0.002 SDS/C-allele/year, P = 0.05). Hardy et al.
(2010) concluded that genetic variants in FTO and MC4R showed similar
biphasic changes in their associations with BMI and weight,
respectively, strengthening during childhood up to age 20 years and then
weakening with increasing adult age.

CYTOGENETICS

It has been hypothesized that MC4R mutations found in association with
obesity result in a loss of MC4R gene function due to
haploinsufficiency. Cody et al. (1999) studied the molecular basis of
the phenotype of individuals with large deletions of 18q. Because of its
location at 18q21.3, the MC4R gene was hemizygous in approximately
one-third of the individuals in this study. If hemizygosity of the MC4R
gene results in haploinsufficiency-induced obesity, then individuals
with deletion of 18q whose deletions included the MC4R gene should be
obese in comparison with those individuals whose deletion did not
include the gene. The data of Cody et al. (1999) indicated no difference
in obesity among those deleted and not deleted for the gene. Thus, the
MC4R gene product must be haplosufficient, and the involvement of MC4R
in obesity may reflect a dominant-negative effect.

Heisler et al. (2002) found that genetic or pharmacologic blockade of
MC4R and MC3R (155540) is sufficient to attenuate the anorectic efficacy
of threshold doses of d-FEN (D-fenfluramine), suggesting that drugs
targeting these downstream melanocortin pathways may act in part in a
manner similar to d-FEN to decrease food intake and body weight with
fewer side effects.

ANIMAL MODEL

Huszar et al. (1997) found that inactivation of the melanocortin-4
receptor by gene targeting in mice resulted in a maturity-onset obesity
syndrome associated with hyperphagia, hyperinsulinemia, and
hyperglycinemia. This syndrome recapitulated several of the
characteristic features of the 'agouti' syndrome, which results from
ectopic expression of agouti protein (600201), a pigmentation factor
normally expressed in the skin. The findings identified a novel
signaling pathway in the mouse for body weight regulation and supported
a model in which the primary mechanism by which agouti induces obesity
is chronic antagonism of the melanocortin-4 receptor.

Marsh et al. (1999) found that the leptin resistance of obese Mc4r -/-
mice does not prevent their response to the anorectic actions of ciliary
neurotrophic factor (CNTF; 118945), corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF;
122560), or urocortin (UCN; 600945); or the orexigenic
(appetite-stimulating) actions of neuropeptide Y (NPY; 162640) or
peptide YY (PYY; 600781), indicating that these neuromodulators act
independently or downstream of Mc4r signaling. Marsh et al. (1999)
showed that homozygous Mc4r-deficient mice do not respond to the
anorectic action of a melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH)-like agonist,
suggesting that alpha-MSH (see 176830) inhibits feeding primarily by
activating Mc4r.

Kim et al. (2000) studied MC4R as a candidate gene for the control of
economically important growth and performance traits in the pig. They
found a missense mutation in a region highly conserved among
melanocortin receptor genes: a G-to-A transition at a position
corresponding to human codon 298, changing GAU (asp) to AAU (asn). The
asp298 allele was associated with less backfat thickness, slower growth
rate, and lower feed intake. In an association study of this MC4R
polymorphism in a large number of individual animals from several
different pig lines, they found a significant association of MC4R
genotypes with backfat, growth rate, and feed intake in a number of
lines. The authors considered it likely that the variant amino acid
residue of the MC4R mutation (or a closely linked mutation) causes a
significant change of the MC4R function.

Chen et al. (2000) evaluated the potential role of MC3R in energy
homeostasis by studying Mc3r-deficient (Mc3r -/-) mice and compared the
functions of Mc3r and Mc4r in mice deficient for both genes. Mice
lacking both Mc3r and Mc4r became significantly heavier than Mc4r -/-
mice. Chen et al. (2000) concluded that Mc3r and Mc4r serve nonredundant
roles in the regulation of energy homeostasis. Cummings and Schwartz
(2000) showed that these studies demonstrated that the 2 melanocortin
receptor isoforms reduce body weight through distinct and complementary
mechanisms. Mc4r regulates food intake and possibly energy expenditure,
whereas Mc3r influences feed efficiency and the petitioning of fuel
stores into fat.

Ste. Marie et al. (2000) studied Mc4r-null mice to determine whether
aberrant metabolism contributes to their late-onset obesity. The
consumption of the null mice was restricted to (i.e., pair-fed with)
that of wildtype mice. The null females maintained body weights
intermediate to those of wildtype and nonpair-fed null females, whereas
pair-feeding normalized the body weights of null male mice. These and
other findings indicated that Mc4r deficiency enhances caloric
efficiency, similar to that seen in the agouti obesity syndrome and in
Mc3r-null mice.

By a combination of genetic, pharmacologic, and anatomic approaches, Van
der Ploeg et al. (2002) showed that MC4R, implicated in the control of
food intake and energy expenditure, also modulates erectile function and
sexual behavior. Evidence was based on several findings: a highly
selective nonpeptide MC4R agonist augmented erectile activity initiated
by electrical stimulation of the cavernous nerve in wildtype, but not
Mc4r-null, mice; copulatory behavior was enhanced by administration of a
selective MC4R agonist and was diminished in mice lacking Mc4r; RT-PCR-
and non-PCR-based methods demonstrated MC4R expression in rat and human
penis, and rat spinal cord, hypothalamus, brainstem, and pelvic ganglion
(major autonomic relay center to the penis), but not in rat primary
corpus smooth muscle cavernosum cells; and in situ hybridization of
glans tissue from the human and rat penis revealed MC4R expression in
nerve fibers and mechanoreceptors in the glans of the penis.
Collectively, these data implicated MC4R in the modulation of penile
erectile function and provided evidence that MC4R-mediated proerectile
responses may be activated through neuronal circuitry in spinal cord
erectile centers and somatosensory afferent nerve terminals of the
penis. The results supported the existence of MC4R-controlled neuronal
pathways that control sexual function.

Xu et al. (2003) found that, like MC4R mutants, mouse mutants that
express decreased amounts of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(BDNF; 113505) receptor TrkB (600456) showed hyperphagia and
maturity-onset obesity, suggesting a role for BDNF in energy balance.
The authors found that BDNF is an anorexigenic factor that is highly
expressed in murine ventromedial hypothalamic (VMH) nuclei and is
regulated by feeding status. Deficiency in MC4R signaling reduced
expression of BDNF in the VMH, indicating that BDNF and its receptor
TrkB are downstream components in the MC4R-mediated control of energy
balance.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OBESITY
MC4R, 4-BP DEL, NT631

Yeo et al. (1998) identified a cohort of severely obese (601665)
children in whom no evidence for a recognized clinical syndrome or a
structural hypothalamic cause for their obesity was found. In 1 of 63 of
these subjects screened for MC4R mutations, they identified
heterozygosity for a 4-bp deletion at codon 211 of the MC4R gene. The
deletion of CTCT resulted in a missing leucine and a frameshift that
introduced a stop codon 5 amino acids downstream of the deletion. This
disrupted the fifth transmembrane domain of the receptor and resulted in
a truncated protein of 215 residues. The index patient was 4 years old
and the only child of a nonconsanguineous union. Although his
birthweight was 3.8 kg (50th centile), progressive weight gain led to a
weight of 32 kg (more than 99th centile) at the age of 4 years. There
was a history of hyperphagia with constant food seeking and distress
when food was not provided. Fasting serum leptin concentration was
appropriate for the degree of obesity. The mother was not obese and had
a normal appetite. The father, aged 30 years, weighed 139 kg at a height
of 185 cm. He was also of normal birth weight, but his weight began to
deviate from predicted centiles at 6 months of age. He was found to be
heterozygous for the same mutation. He had no sibs and no further
information concerning his parents was available.

.0002
OBESITY
MC4R, 4-BP INS, NT732

Vaisse et al. (1998) used PCR-SSCP with 5 primer pairs covering the
entire single exon of MC4R to screen for mutations in 43 individuals
with morbid obesity (601665). A single patient was found to have
heterozygosity for a frameshift mutation, a 4-bp insertion at nucleotide
732 resulting in expression of a nonfunctional, truncated receptor
lacking the sixth and seventh transmembrane domains. The patient was a
35-year-old woman with obesity that developed in infancy. Her birth
weight was normal. Her weight was 45 kg with a height of 141 cm at age
10 years, and 80 kg with a height of 163 cm at age 20. Blood glucose and
plasmid lipid levels were normal; serum leptin levels were consistent
with her adiposity. She belonged to a large family of obese subjects:
her mother, sister, niece, and a younger brother were also obese.

.0003
OBESITY
MC4R, TYR35TER

In 2 obese (601665) probands (BMI, 31.29 kg/m2 and 45.91 kg/m2,
respectively), Hinney et al. (1999) identified a C-to-A transversion at
nucleotide 105 of the MC4R gene, resulting in a tyr35-to-ter
substitution. This mutation led to a truncated protein that encompassed
the N-terminal extracellular domain. Both carriers also showed an A-to-T
transversion at nucleotide 110, resulting in an asp37-to-val
substitution (155541.0004). In both cases these mutations were
maternally transmitted, indicating they form a haplotype.

.0004
OBESITY
MC4R, ASP37VAL

See 155541.0003 and Hinney et al. (1999).

.0005
OBESITY
MC4R, VAL50MET

In a severely obese (601665) child, Dubern et al. (2001) identified a
G-to-A transition at nucleotide 148 of the MC4R gene, resulting in a
valine-to-methionine substitution at codon 50 in the first transmembrane
domain of the melanocortin-4 receptor. This mutation was found in
heterozygosity in this patient and was not identified in any of the 283
nonobese adults.

.0006
OBESITY
MC4R, SER58CYS

In 1 of 63 obese (601665) children screened for mutations of MC4R,
Dubern et al. (2001) identified an A-to-T transversion at nucleotide 172
of the MC4R gene, resulting in a ser-to-cys substitution at codon 58 in
the first transmembrane domain of the melanocortin-4 receptor. This
mutation was not identified in any of 283 nonobese adults. Not all
mutation-carrying family members were obese.

.0007
OBESITY
MC4R, ILE102SER

In 1 of 63 obese (601665) children, Dubern et al. (2001) identified a
T-to-G transversion at nucleotide 305 of the MC4R gene, resulting in an
isoleucine-to-serine substitution at codon 102 in the second
transmembrane domain of the melanocortin-4 receptor.

Through detailed functional characterization of cell surface expression,
ligand binding, and signaling properties, Tao and Segaloff (2005)
determined that the I102T variant results in loss of function of the
MC4R protein.

.0008
OBESITY
MC4R, ILE170VAL

In 1 of 63 obese (601665) children, Dubern et al. (2001) identified an
A-to-G transition at nucleotide 508 of the MC4R gene, resulting in an
isoleucine-to-valine substitution at codon 170 in the fourth
transmembrane domain of the melanocortin-4 receptor.

.0009
OBESITY
MC4R, ASN274SER

Mergen et al. (2001) determined the nucleotide sequence of the entire
coding region of the MC4R gene in 40 morbidly obese (601665) subjects
from independent families. The authors reported a novel heterozygous
mutation, asn274 to ser (N274S), in an obese female (age, 52 years;
height, 158 cm; weight, 104 kg; BMI, 41.7 kg/m2). The sister of the
proband (age, 55 years; height, 160 cm; weight, 110 kg; BMI, 43 kg/m2)
carried the same mutation. Although both sisters were morbidly obese and
hypertensive, the proband had normal plasma insulin and fasting blood
glucose levels, whereas her sister had type II diabetes mellitus
(125853). No abnormalities of the reproductive function were present.
Despite marked hyperphagia in childhood, both sisters had a history of
relatively diminished intensity of appetite after the age of 20.

.0010
OBESITY
MC4R, 1-BP INS, 112A

In a proband and his mother and sister, all with early-onset obesity
(601665), Farooqi et al. (2003) identified heterozygosity for a
frameshift mutation in the MC4R gene, 112insA, which resulted in
complete loss of activity of the protein.

.0011
OBESITY
MC4R, 4-BP DEL, 211CTCT

In a father and son with early-onset obesity (601665), Farooqi et al.
(2003) identified heterozygosity for a frameshift mutation in the MC4R
gene, 211delCTCT, which resulted in complete loss of activity of the
protein.

.0012
OBESITY
MC4R, 2-BP INS, 279GT

In each of 2 presumably unrelated families, Farooqi et al. (2003) found
that the father and 1 child with early-onset obesity (601665) were
heterozygous for a frameshift mutation in the MC4R gene, 279insGT, which
resulted in complete loss of activity of the protein.

.0013
OBESITY
MC4R, ILE125LYS

In each of 2 presumably unrelated families, Farooqi et al. (2003) found
that a parent and 1 child with early-onset obesity (601665) were
heterozygous for an ile125-to-lys (I125K) mutation in the MC4R gene. The
protein showed no activity on in vitro assay.

Yeo et al. (2003) demonstrated that the I125K mutation was completely
unable to generate cAMP in response to ligand.

.0014
OBESITY
MC4R, CYS271TYR

In a family with early-onset obesity (601665) in 8 individuals in 3
successive generations, Farooqi et al. (2003) found that affected
individuals were heterozygous for a cys271-to-tyr (C271Y) mutation in
the MC4R gene. The protein showed no activity on in vitro assay.

Yeo et al. (2003) observed that the C271Y mutation was completely unable
to generate cAMP in response to ligand and showed impaired cell surface
expression.

.0015
OBESITY
MC4R, ALA175THR

In a mother and son with early-onset obesity (601665), Farooqi et al.
(2003) found heterozygosity for an ala175-to-thr (A175T) mutation in the
MC4R gene. The protein showed partial activity on in vitro assay.

.0016
OBESITY
MC4R, ILE316SER

In a family in which there was extensive consanguinity, Farooqi et al.
(2003) found that early-onset obesity (601665) in 6 individuals in 2
generations was associated with heterozygosity for an ile316-to-ser
(I316S) mutation in the MC4R gene. In a second, unrelated family, the
authors found that early-onset obesity in a mother and 3 daughters was
associated with this mutation. The protein showed partial activity on in
vitro assay in both families.

Yeo et al. (2003) observed that the I316S mutant protein showed reduced
affinity for alpha-MSH (see 176830), but retained normal affinity for
the antagonist agouti-related protein (AGRP; 602311).

.0017
OBESITY
MC4R, TYR287TER

In a proband with early-onset obesity (601665), Farooqi et al. (2003)
found homozygosity for a tyr287-to-ter (Y287X) mutation in the MC4R
gene; the mother and a sister were also obese but were heterozygous for
the mutation. On in vitro assay, the protein showed no activity.

Yeo et al. (2003) demonstrated that the Y287X mutation showed impaired
cell surface expression.

.0018
OBESITY
MC4R, ASN97ASP

In a proband with early-onset obesity (601665), Farooqi et al. (2003)
found homozygosity for an asn97-to-asp (N97D) mutation in the MC4R gene;
her consanguineous parents and a sister were also obese but were
heterozygous for the mutation. On in vitro assay, the protein showed no
activity.

Yeo et al. (2003) demonstrated that the N97D mutation was completely
unable to generate cAMP in response to ligand.

.0019
OBESITY
MC4R, ASN62SER

In an inbred family in which 10 individuals in 3 generations had
early-onset obesity (601665), Farooqi et al. (2003) found that the
proband and 4 of his cousins were homozygous for an asn62-to-ser (N62S)
mutation in the MC4R gene. The consanguineous parents in each case were
heterozygous for the mutation and showed obesity that was less severe.
On in vitro assay, the protein showed partial activity.

.0020
OBESITY
MC4R, 15-BP DEL

In a female patient with onset of obesity (601665) at less than 5 years
of age, Donohoue et al. (2003) detected an in-frame deletion in the MC4R
gene of codons 88 through 92 (delta88-92). These codons were predicted
to lie within the second transmembrane domain. Functional analysis
revealed that the mutant receptor was expressed well on the cell surface
but was completely devoid of ligand binding and cAMP generation in
response to agonist stimulation.

.0021
OBESITY
MC4R, SER127LEU

In a 14.8-year-old boy with severe early-onset obesity (601665),
Valli-Jaakola et al. (2004) identified a ser127-to-leu (S127L) mutation
in the melanocortin-4 receptor. Abnormal weight gain began in the second
year of life. The patient presented with acanthosis nigricans in the
neck and axillae and demonstrated marked hyperinsulinemia during an oral
glucose tolerance test despite normal glucose tolerance. Blood pressure
was normal for age. His father, in whom the same mutation was found,
suffered form severe obesity in childhood although the phenotype became
less apparent in adulthood. Functional studies in transiently
transfected 239T cells indicated that signaling properties of the
receptor in response to the MC4R agonists alpha-MSH, beta-MSH, and
gamma-1-MSH (see 176830) were impaired. Valli-Jaakola et al. (2004)
noted that this mutation had been reported by Lubrano-Berthelier et al.
(2003) and Hinney et al. (2003) in a total of 4 patients.

.0022
OBESITY
MC4R, 2-BP DEL, 750GA

In an obese (601665) child of first-cousin parents of North African
origin, Lubrano-Berthelier et al. (2004) detected a homozygous 2-bp
deletion in the MC4R gene (delta750-751GA). MC4R activity was completely
absent. The parents and all sibs of the proband were heterozygous for
the mutation. Lubrano-Berthelier et al. (2004) compared the clinical and
endocrine characteristics of this patient with those observed in leptin
receptor (601007)-deficient patients. They concluded that in humans, the
MC4R mediates most of the anorectic effects of leptin (164160) in early
childhood. In contrast, MC4R does not mediate the effect of leptin on
linear growth and other endocrine axes. In addition, complete MC4R
deficiency is not a cause of relative hyperinsulinemia.

.0023
OBESITY
MC4R, ALA219VAL

In a study of the MC4R gene in 750 Danish men with juvenile-onset
obesity (601665) and 706 control subjects, Larsen et al. (2005) detected
a novel missense mutation in 1 subject, ala219 to val (A219V), that
arose from a 656C-to-T transition. The A219V variant showed significant
impairment of cAMP-induced activity in response to melanotan II (MTII)
compared with the wildtype receptor (34%).

REFERENCE 1. Branson, R.; Potoczna, N.; Kral, J. G.; Lentes, K.-U.; Hoehe, M.
R.; Horber, F. F.: Binge eating as a major phenotype of melanocortin
4 receptor gene mutations. New Eng. J. Med. 348: 1096-1103, 2003.

2. Brocke, K. S.; Neu-Yilik, G.; Gehring, N. H.; Hentze, M. W.; Kulozik,
A. E.: The human intronless melanocortin 4-receptor gene is NMD insensitive. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 11: 331-335, 2002.

3. Chambers, J. C.; Elliott, P.; Zabaneh, D.; Zhang, W.; Li, Y.; Froguel,
P.; Balding, D.; Scott, J.; Kooner, J. S.: Common genetic variation
near MC4R is associated with waist circumference and insulin resistance. Nature
Genet. 40: 716-718, 2008.

4. Chen, A. S.; Marsh, D. J.; Trumbauer, M. E.; Frazier, E. G.; Guan,
X.-M.; Yu, H.; Rosenblum, C. I.; Vongs, A.; Feng, Y.; Cao, L.; Metzger,
J. M.; Strack, A. M.; and 9 others: Inactivation of the mouse melanocortin-3
receptor results in increased fat mass and reduced lean body mass. Nature
Genet. 26: 97-102, 2000.

5. Cody, J. D.; Reveles, X. T.; Hale, D. E.; Lehman, D.; Coon, H.;
Leach, R. J.: Haplosufficiency of the melanocortin-4 receptor gene
in individuals with deletions of 18q. Hum. Genet. 105: 424-427,
1999.

6. Cummings, D. E.; Schwartz, M. W.: Melanocortins and body weight:
a tale of two receptors. Nature Genet. 26: 8-9, 2000.

7. Donohoue, P. A.; Tao, Y.-X.; Collins, M.; Yeo, G. S. H.; O'Rahilly,
S.; Segaloff, D. L.: Deletion of codons 88-92 of the melanocortin-4
receptor gene: a novel deleterious mutation in an obese female. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 5841-5845, 2003.

8. Dubern, B.; Clement, K.; Pelloux, V.; Froguel, P.; Girardet, J.-P.;
Guy-Grand, B.; Tounian, P.: Mutational analysis of melanocortin-4
receptor, agouti-related protein, and alpha-melanocyte-stimulating
hormone genes in severely obese children. J. Pediat. 139: 204-209,
2001.

9. Farooqi, I. S.; Keogh, J. M.; Yeo, G. S. H.; Lank, E. J.; Cheetham,
T.; O'Rahilly, S.: Clinical spectrum of obesity and mutations in
the melanocortin 4 receptor gene. New Eng. J. Med. 348: 1085-1095,
2003.

10. Gantz, I.; Miwa, H.; Konda, Y.; Shimoto, Y.; Tashiro, T.; Watson,
S. J.; DelValle, J.; Yamada, T.: Molecular cloning, expression, and
gene localization of a fourth melanocortin receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 268:
15174-15179, 1993.

11. Hainerova, I.; Larsen, L. H.; Holst, B.; Finkova, M.; Hainer,
V.; Lebl, J.; Hansen, T. and Pedersen, O.: Melanocortin 4 receptor
mutations in obese Czech children: studies of prevalence, phenotype
development, weight reduction response, and functional analysis. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 3689-3696, 2007.

12. Hardy, R.; Wills, A. K.; Wong, A.; Elks, C. E.; Wareham, N. J.;
Loos, R. J. F.; Kuh, D.; Ong, K. K.: Life course variations in the
associations between FTO and MC4R gene variants and body size. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 19: 545-552, 2010.

13. Hebebrand, J.; Geller, F.; Dempfle, A.; Heinzel-Gutenbrunner,
M.; Raab, M.; Gerber, G.; Wermter, A.-K.; Horro, F. F.; Blundell,
J.; Schafer, H.; Remschmidt, H.; Herpertz, S.; Hinney, A.: Binge-eating
episodes are not characteristic of carriers of melanocortin-4 receptor
gene mutations. Molec. Psychiat. 9: 796-800, 2004.

14. Heisler, L. K.; Cowley, M. A.; Tecott, L. H.; Fan, W.; Low, M.
J.; Smart, J. L.; Rubinstein, M.; Tatro, J. B.; Marcus, J. N.; Holstege,
H.; Lee, C. E.; Cone, R. D.; Elmquist, J. K.: Activation of central
melanocortin pathways by fenfluramine. Science 297: 609-611, 2002.

15. Hinney, A.; Bettecken, T.; Tarnow, P.; Brumm, H.; Reichwald, K.;
Lichtner, P.; Scherag, A.; Nguyen, T. T.; Schlumberger, P.; Rief,
W.; Vollmert, C.; Illig, T.; Wichmann, H.-E.; Schafer, H.; Platzer,
M.; Biebermann, H.; Meitinger, T.; Hebebrand, J.: Prevalence, spectrum,
and functional characterization of melanocortin-4 receptor gene mutations
in a representative population-based sample and obese adults from
Germany. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 1761-1769, 2006.

16. Hinney, A.; Hohmann, S.; Geller, F.; Vogel, C.; Hess, C.; Wermter,
A.-K.; Brokamp, B.; Goldschmidt, H.; Siegfried, W.; Remschmidt, H.;
Schafer, H.; Gudermann, T.; Hebebrand, J.: Melanocortin-4 receptor
gene: case-control study and transmission disequilibrium test confirm
that functionally relevant mutations are compatible with a major gene
effect for extreme obesity. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 4258-4267,
2003.

17. Hinney, A.; Schmidt, A.; Nottebom, K.; Heibult, O.; Becker, I.;
Ziegler, A.; Gerber, G.; Sina, M.; Gorg, T.; Mayer, H.; Siegfried,
W.; Fichter, M.; Remschmidt, H.; Hebebrand, J.: Several mutations
in the melanocortin-4 receptor gene including a nonsense and a frameshift
mutation associated with dominantly inherited obesity in humans. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 1483-1486, 1999.

18. Huszar, D.; Lynch, C. A.; Fairchild-Huntress, V.; Dunmore, J.
H.; Fang, Q.; Berkemeier, L. R.; Gu, W.; Kesterson, R. A.; Boston,
B. A.; Cone, R. D.; Smith, F. J.; Campfield, L. A.; Burn, P.; Lee,
F.: Targeted disruption of the melanocortin-4 receptor results in
obesity in mice. Cell 88: 131-141, 1997.

19. Jacobson, P.; Ukkola, O.; Rankinen, T.; Snyder, E. E.; Leon, A.
S.; Rao, D. C.; Skinner, J. S.; Wilmore, J. H.; Lonn, L.; Cowan, G.
S., Jr.; Sjostrom, L.; Bouchard, C.: Melanocortin 4 receptor sequence
variations are seldom a cause of human obesity: the Swedish obese
subjects, the HERITAGE family study, and a Memphis cohort. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 87: 4442-4446, 2002.

20. Kim, K. S.; Larsen, N.; Short, T.; Plastow, G.; Rothschild, M.
F.: A missense variant of the porcine melanocortin-4 receptor (MC4R)
gene is associated with fatness, growth, and feed intake traits. Mammalian
Genome 11: 131-135, 2000.

21. Larsen, L. H.; Echwald, S. M.; Sorensen, T. I. A.; Andersen, T.;
Wulff, B. S.; Pedersen, O.: Prevalence of mutations and functional
analyses of melanocortin 4 receptor variants identified among 750
men with juvenile-onset obesity. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 219-224,
2005.

22. Lim, B. K.; Huang, K. W.; Grueter, B. A.; Rothwell, P. E.; Malenka,
R. C.: Anhedonia requires MC4R-mediated synaptic adaptations in nucleus
accumbens. Nature 487: 183-189, 2012.

23. List, J. F.; Habener, J. F.: Defective melanocortin 4 receptors
in hyperphagia and morbid obesity. (Editorial) New Eng. J. Med. 348:
1160-1163, 2003.

24. Loos, R. J. F.; Lindgren, C. M.; Li, S.; Wheeler, E.; Zhao, J.
H.; Prokopenko, I.; Inouye, M.; Freathy, R. M.; Attwood, A. P.; Beckmann,
J. S.; Berndt, S. I.; Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO)
Cancer Screening Trial; and 96 others: Common variants near MC4R
are associated with fat mass, weight and risk of obesity. Nature
Genet. 40: 768-775, 2008.

25. Lubrano-Berthelier, C.; Dubern, B.; Lacorte, J.-M.; Picard, F.;
Shapiro, A.; Zhang, S.; Bertrais, S.; Hercberg, S.; Basdevant, A.;
Clement, K.; Vaisse, C.: Melanocortin 4 receptor mutations in a large
cohort of severely obese adults: prevalence, functional classification,
genotype-phenotype relationship, and lack of association with binge
eating. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 91: 1811-1818, 2006.

26. Lubrano-Berthelier, C.; Durand, E.; Dubern, B.; Shapiro, A.; Dazin,
P.; Weill, J.; Ferron, C.; Froguel, P.; Vaisse, C.: Intracellular
retention is a common characteristic of childhood obesity-associated
MC4R mutations. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 145-153, 2003.

27. Lubrano-Berthelier, C.; Le Stunff, C.; Bougneres, P.; Vaisse,
C.: A homozygous null mutation delineates the role of the melanocortin-4
receptor in humans. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 2028-2032, 2004.

28. Magenis, R. E.; Smith, L.; Nadeau, J. H.; Johnson, K. R.; Mountjoy,
K. G.; Cone, R. D.: Mapping of the ACTH, MSH, and neural (MC3 and
MC4) melanocortin receptors in the mouse and human. Mammalian Genome 5:
503-508, 1994.

29. Marsh, D. J.; Hollopeter, G.; Huszar, D.; Laufer, R.; Yagaloff,
K. A.; Fisher, S. L.; Burn, P.; Palmiter, R. D.: Response of melanocortin-4
receptor-deficient mice to anorectic and orexigenic peptides. Nature
Genet. 21: 119-122, 1999.

30. Mergen, M.; Mergen, H.; Ozata, M.; Oner, R.; Oner, C.: A novel
melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) gene mutation associated with morbid
obesity. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 3448-3451, 2001.

31. Mineur, Y. S.; Abizaid, A.; Rao, Y.; Salas, R.; DiLeone, R. J.;
Gundisch, D.; Diano, S.; De Biasi, M.; Horvath, T. L.; Gao, X.-B.;
Picciotto, M. R.: Nicotine decreases food intake through activation
of POMC neurons. Science 332: 1330-1332, 2011.

32. Nijenhuis, W. A. J.; Garner, K. M.; van Rozen, R. J.; Adan, R.
A. H.: Poor cell surface expression of human melanocortin-4 receptor
mutations associated with obesity. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 22939-22945,
2003.

33. Santini, F.; Maffei, M.; Ceccarini, G.; Pelosini, C.; Scartabelli,
G.; Rosellini, V.; Chiellini, C.; Marsili, A.; Lisi, S.; Tonacchera,
M.; Agretti, P.; Chiovato, L.; Mammoli, C.; Vitti, P.; Pinchera, A.
: Genetic screening for melanocortin-4 receptor mutations in a cohort
of Italian obese patients: description and functional characterization
of a novel mutation. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 904-908, 2004.

34. Sina, M.; Hinney, A.; Ziegler, A.; Neupert, T.; Mayer, H.; Siegfried,
W.; Blum, W. F.; Remschmidt, H.; Hebebrand, J.: Phenotypes in three
pedigrees with autosomal dominant obesity caused by haploinsufficiency
mutations in the melanocortin-4 receptor gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65:
1501-1507, 1999.

35. Ste. Marie, L.; Miura, G. I.; Marsh, D. J.; Yagaloff, K.; Palmiter,
R. D.: A metabolic defect promotes obesity in mice lacking melanocortin-4
receptors. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 12339-12344, 2000.

36. Sundaramurthy, D.; Campbell, D. A.; Leek, J. P.; Markham, A. F.;
Pieri, L. F.: Assignment of the melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) gene
to human chromosome band 18q22 by in situ hybridisation and radiation
hybrid mapping. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 97-98, 1998.

37. Tao, Y.-X.; Segaloff, D. L.: Functional analyses of melanocortin-4
receptor mutations identified from patients with binge eating disorder
and nonobese or obese subjects. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 5632-5638,
2005.

38. Vaisse, C.; Clement, K.; Guy-Grand, B.; Froguel, P.: A frameshift
mutation in human MC4R is associated with a dominant form of obesity. Nature
Genet 20: 113-114, 1998.

39. Valli-Jaakola, K.; Lipsanen-Nyman, M.; Oksanen, L.; Hollenberg,
A. N.; Kontula, K.; Bjorbaek, C.; Schalin-Jantti, C.: Identification
and characterization of melanocortin-4 receptor gene mutations in
morbidly obese Finnish children and adults. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89:
940-945, 2004.

40. Van der Ploeg, L. H. T.; Martin, W. J.; Howard, A. D.; Nargund,
R. P.; Austin, C. P.; Guan, X.; Drisko, J.; Cashen, D.; Sebhat, I.;
Patchett, A. A.; Figueroa, D. J.; DiLella, A. G.; and 22 others
: A role for the melanocortin 4 receptor in sexual function. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 11381-11386, 2002.

41. Willer, C. J.; Speliotes, E. K.; Loos, R. J. F.; Li, S.; Lindgren,
C. M.; Heid, I. M.; Berndt, S. I.; Elliott, A. L.; Jackson, A. U.;
Lamina, C.; Lettre, G.; Lim, N.; and 134 others: Six new loci associated
with body mass index highlight a neuronal influence on body weight
regulation. Nature Genet. 41: 25-34, 2009.

42. Xu, B.; Goulding, E. H.; Zang, K.; Cepoi, D.; Cone, R. D.; Jones,
K. R.; Tecott, L. H.; Reichardt, L. F.: Brain-derived neurotrophic
factor regulates energy balance downstream of melanocortin-4 receptor. Nature
Neurosci. 6: 736-742, 2003.

43. Yeo, G. S. H.; Farooqi, I. S.; Aminian, S.; Halsall, D. J.; Stanhope,
R. G.; O'Rahilly, S.: A frameshift mutation in MC4R associated with
dominantly inherited human obesity. Nature Genet. 20: 111-112, 1998.

44. Yeo, G. S. H.; Lank, E. J.; Farooqi, I. S.; Keogh, J.; Challis,
B. G.; O'Rahilly, S.: Mutations in the human melanocortin-4 receptor
gene associated with severe familial obesity disrupts receptor function
through multiple molecular mechanisms. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 561-574,
2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/8/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/5/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/15/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/16/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/31/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/16/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/14/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/4/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/26/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/6/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/29/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/19/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/19/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/11/2005
John Logan Black, III - updated: 3/2/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/26/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/24/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/16/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/17/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/8/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/20/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/9/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/23/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/7/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/13/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/24/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/27/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/30/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/15/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/20/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/6/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/23/1998
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 11/17/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/23/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/7/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/1/1993

EDITED alopez: 09/04/2012
alopez: 9/4/2012
terry: 8/29/2012
alopez: 8/8/2011
wwang: 1/19/2011
terry: 1/5/2011
alopez: 1/19/2010
terry: 1/15/2010
alopez: 6/3/2009
alopez: 7/16/2008
carol: 3/31/2008
alopez: 7/16/2007
alopez: 5/14/2007
wwang: 8/1/2006
alopez: 4/4/2006
alopez: 8/9/2005
alopez: 7/26/2005
alopez: 7/6/2005
alopez: 4/29/2005
alopez: 4/19/2005
alopez: 4/11/2005
mgross: 4/5/2005
tkritzer: 3/2/2005
tkritzer: 11/2/2004
terry: 10/26/2004
alopez: 7/28/2003
carol: 7/9/2003
carol: 7/7/2003
ckniffin: 6/24/2003
carol: 6/17/2003
ckniffin: 6/16/2003
carol: 5/8/2003
tkritzer: 5/5/2003
tkritzer: 4/25/2003
terry: 4/17/2003
carol: 4/16/2003
terry: 4/8/2003
tkritzer: 3/20/2003
carol: 1/24/2003
tkritzer: 10/17/2002
tkritzer: 10/9/2002
cwells: 9/23/2002
alopez: 8/8/2002
terry: 8/7/2002
alopez: 3/13/2002
alopez: 9/25/2001
terry: 9/24/2001
mcapotos: 12/11/2000
mcapotos: 12/6/2000
terry: 11/27/2000
alopez: 8/30/2000
mcapotos: 4/6/2000
mcapotos: 4/5/2000
terry: 3/15/2000
mgross: 1/11/2000
terry: 12/20/1999
mgross: 12/9/1999
terry: 12/6/1999
mgross: 9/28/1999
alopez: 12/23/1998
terry: 12/23/1998
terry: 11/17/1998
carol: 11/16/1998
joanna: 9/28/1998
alopez: 9/24/1998
joanna: 9/23/1998
dkim: 7/2/1998
alopez: 6/2/1997
mark: 2/7/1997
terry: 2/4/1997
carol: 9/1/1994
carol: 10/7/1993
carol: 10/1/1993

