602819	TITLE *602819 HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H3 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER B; HIST1H3B
;;HISTONE GENE CLUSTER 1, H3B;;
HIST1 CLUSTER, H3B;;
H3 HISTONE FAMILY, MEMBER L; H3FL;;
H3/L
DESCRIPTION For background information on histones, histone gene clusters, and the
H3 histone family, see HIST1H3A (602810).

CLONING

Zhong et al. (1983) identified a gene encoding a member of the H3 class
of histones. Albig and Doenecke (1997) designated this gene H3/l.

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) identified the
mouse and human HIST1H3B genes. They noted that all H3 genes in histone
gene cluster-1 (HIST1), including HIST1H3B, encode the same protein,
designated H3.1. H3.1 differs from H3.2, which is encoded by HIST2H3C
(142780), at only 1 residue, and from histone H3.3, which is encoded by
both H3F3A (601128) and H3F3B (601058), at a few residues.

MAPPING

By analysis of a YAC contig, Albig et al. (1997) mapped the H3/l gene to
6p21.3, within a cluster of 35 histone genes.

By genomic sequence analysis, Marzluff et al. (2002) determined that the
histone gene cluster on chromosome 6p22-p21, which they called HIST1,
contains 55 histone genes, including HIST1H3B.

GENE FUNCTION

See HIST1H3A (602810) for functional information on H3.1 and the H3
histone family.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Wu et al. (2012) reported that a K27M mutation occurring in either H3F3A
or HIST1H3B was observed in 78% of diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas
(DIPGs) and 22% of non-brain-stem gliomas.

Lewis et al. (2013) reported that human (DIPGs) containing the K27M
mutation in either histone H3.3 (H3F3A) or H3.1 (HIST1H3B) display
significantly lower overall amounts of H3 with trimethylated lysine-27
(H3K27me3) and that histone H3K27M transgenes are sufficient to reduce
the amounts of H3K27me3 in vitro and in vivo. Lewis et al. (2013) found
that H3K27M inhibits the enzymatic activity of the Polycomb repressive
complex-2 (PRC2) through interaction with the EZH2 (601573) subunit. In
addition, transgenes containing lysine-to-methionine substitutions at
other known methylated lysines (H3K9 and H3K36) are sufficient to cause
specific reduction in methylation through inhibition of SET domain
enzymes. Lewis et al. (2013) proposed that K-to-M substitutions may
represent a mechanism to alter epigenetic states in a variety of
pathologies.

REFERENCE 1. Albig, W.; Doenecke, D.: The human histone gene cluster at the
D6S105 locus. Hum. Genet. 101: 284-294, 1997.

2. Albig, W.; Kioschis, P.; Poustka, A.; Meergans, K.; Doenecke, D.
: Human histone gene organization: nonregular arrangement within a
large cluster. Genomics 40: 314-322, 1997.

3. Lewis, P. W.; Muller, M. M.; Koletsky, M. S.; Cordero, F.; Lin,
S.; Banaszynski, L. A.; Garcia, B. A.; Muir, T. W.; Becher, O. J.;
Allis, C. D.: Inhibition of PRC2 activity by a gain-of-function H3
mutation found in pediatric glioblastoma. Science 340: 857-861,
2013.

4. Marzluff, W. F.; Gongidi, P.; Woods, K. R.; Jin, J.; Maltais, L.
J.: The human and mouse replication-dependent histone genes. Genomics 80:
487-498, 2002.

5. Wu, G.; Broniscer, A.; McEachron, T. A.; Lu, C.; Paugh, B. S.;
Becksfort, J.; Qu, C.; Ding, L.; Huether, R.; Parker, M.; Zhang, J.;
Gajjar, A.; and 9 others: Somatic histone H3 alterations in pediatric
diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas and non-brainstem glioblastomas. Nature
Genet 44: 251-253, 2012.

6. Zhong, R.; Roeder, R. G.; Heintz, N.: The primary structure and
expression of four cloned human histone genes. Nucleic Acids Res. 11:
7409-7425, 1983.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 06/24/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 2/4/2013

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/9/1998

EDITED alopez: 06/24/2013
mgross: 2/4/2013
mgross: 7/22/2010
tkritzer: 4/3/2003
alopez: 8/26/1998
alopez: 7/14/1998
alopez: 7/10/1998

605219	TITLE *605219 DIRECT IAP-BINDING PROTEIN WITH LOW pI; DIABLO
;;SECOND MITOCHONDRIA-DERIVED ACTIVATOR OF CASPASE; SMAC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Caspase activation is a key regulatory step for apoptosis. Cytochrome c
(123970) released from the mitochondrial intermembrane space triggers 1
major caspase activation cascade. Upon its release to the cytosol,
cytochrome c binds to APAF1 (602233) in the presence of dATP or ATP. The
cytochrome c/APAF1 complex then recruits procaspase-9 (CASP9; 602234),
inducing its autoactivation and leading to the activation of downstream
caspases. Proteins of the BCL2 (see 603167) and inhibitor-of-apoptosis,
or IAP (see API3; 300079), families are major regulators of the
cytochrome c/APAF1/CASP9 pathway. SMAC promotes caspase activation in
this pathway.

CLONING

Du et al. (2000) identified and purified a protein, which they termed
SMAC (second mitochondria-derived activator of caspase), that promotes
caspase activation in the cytochrome c/APAF1/CASP9 pathway. By
microsequence analysis, searching an EST database, and screening a HeLa
cell cDNA library, they isolated a cDNA encoding SMAC. The predicted
SMAC polypeptide contains 239 amino acids. Northern blot analysis
detected a 1.5-kb SMAC transcript in all tissues tested, with highest
expression in adult testis, high expression in heart, liver, kidney,
spleen, prostate, and ovary, and low expression in brain, lung, thymus,
and peripheral blood leukocytes.

Cheng et al. (2011) noted that the N-terminal 55 residues serve as a
mitochondrial-targeting sequence, which is removed after the Diablo
protein is imported into mitochondria intermembrane space. They found
broad expression of DIABLO in human embryonic tissue at 17 weeks'
gestation. The highest expression was in the testis, adrenal gland, and
ears, with moderate expression in the brain, eyes, liver, kidney, lung,
and spinal cord. Low expression was seen in the spleen. In the
developing mouse cochlea, Diablo was significantly upregulated in hair
cells from E18.5 to P0, but was subsequently downregulated. The extended
distribution of Diablo at different stages of development in the mouse
inner ear and the particular enrichment in hair cells suggested that
Diablo functions in the development and homeostasis of the inner ear and
in hair cells in particular.

GENE STRUCTURE

Cheng et al. (2011) noted that the DIABLO gene contains 7 exons.

MAPPING

Scott (2000) mapped the DIABLO gene to chromosome 12 based on sequence
similarity between the DIABLO sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF262240) and
the chromosome 12 clone RP11-512M8 (GenBank GENBANK AC048338).

Cheng et al. (2011) noted that the DIABLO gene maps to chromosome
12q24.31.

GENE FUNCTION

Du et al. (2000) showed that SMAC promotes CASP9 activation by binding
to IAPs and removing their inhibitory activity. SMAC is normally a
mitochondrial protein, but it is released into the cytosol when cells
undergo apoptosis. Mitochondrial import and cleavage of its signal
peptide are required for SMAC to gain its apoptotic activity.
Overexpression of SMAC increases cell sensitivity to apoptotic stimuli.
SMAC was the second mitochondrial protein identified (the first being
cytochrome c) that promotes apoptosis by activating caspases.

Verhagen et al. (2000) identified the murine homolog of SMAC, which they
called DIABLO (direct IAP-binding protein with low pI). They showed that
DIABLO can bind mammalian IAP homolog A (MIHA, or API3) and can also
interact with MIHB (API1; 601712), MIHC (API2; 601721), and OpIAP, the
baculoviral IAP. Immunoprecipitation and Western blot analysis indicated
that the N-terminally processed, IAP-interacting form of DIABLO is
concentrated in membrane fractions in healthy cells but is released into
the MIHA-containing cytosolic fractions upon ultraviolet (UV)
irradiation. Since transfection of cells with DIABLO was able to counter
the protection afforded by MIHA against UV irradiation, the authors
suggested that DIABLO may promote apoptosis by binding to IAPs and
preventing them from inhibiting caspases.

Chai et al. (2000) showed that SMAC/DIABLO promotes not only the
proteolytic activation of procaspase-3, but also the enzymatic activity
of mature caspase-3, both of which depend upon its ability to interact
physically with IAPs.

Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can prevent colonic tumor
progression in both experimental animals and humans. Kohli et al. (2004)
found that NSAID-induced apoptosis in a human colorectal cancer cell
line was accompanied by release of SMAC from mitochondria into the
cytosol. When SMAC was disrupted by homologous recombination and RNA
interference, the NSAID-induced apoptosis was abrogated. SMAC release
was dependent on BAX (600040), since SMAC release was not found in BAX
knockout cells.

Burri et al. (2005) identified mouse Imp1 (IMMP1L; 612323) and Imp2
(IMMP2L; 605977) as the catalytic subunits of the mitochondrial inner
membrane peptidase (IMP) complex. Imp1 and Imp2 activated Diablo by
removing its presequence, resulting in sequestration of Diablo in the
intermembrane space prior to activation by an apoptotic signal.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Chai et al. (2000) determined the crystal structure of SMAC/DIABLO at
2.2-angstrom resolution, which revealed that it homodimerizes through an
extensive hydrophobic interface. Missense mutations inactivating this
dimeric interface significantly compromised the function of SMAC/DIABLO.
The N-terminal amino acids of SMAC/DIABLO are indispensable for its
function, and a 7-residue peptide derived from the N terminus promotes
procaspase-3 activation in vitro.

To understand the structural basis of molecular recognition between SMAC
and the IAPs, Liu et al. (2000) determined the solution structure of the
BIR3 domain of XIAP (300079) complexed with a functionally active
9-residue peptide derived from the N terminus of SMAC. Wu et al. (2000)
performed the same experiment. They found that the N-terminal 4 residues
(ala-val-pro-ile) in SMAC/DIABLO recognize a surface groove on BIR3,
with the first residue ala binding a hydrophobic pocket and making 5
hydrogen bonds to neighboring residues on BIR3. These observations
provided a structural explanation for the roles of the SMAC N terminus
as well as for the conserved N-terminal sequences in the Drosophila
proteins Hid/Grim/Reaper. In conjunction with other observations, Wu et
al. (2000) concluded that their results reveal how SMAC may relieve IAP
inhibition of caspase-9 activity. In addition to explaining a number of
biologic observations, both Liu et al. (2000) and Wu et al. (2000)
suggested that their structural analyses identified potential targets
for drug screening that may be used for the treatment of cancers that
overexpress IAPs.

XIAP interacts with caspase-9 and inhibits its activity, whereas SMAC
(also known as DIABLO) relieves this inhibition through interaction with
XIAP. Srinivasula et al. (2001) demonstrated that XIAP associates with
the active caspase-9-APAF1 holoenzyme complex through binding to the
amino terminus of the linker peptide on the small subunit of caspase-9,
which becomes exposed after proteolytic processing of procaspase-9 at
asp315. Supporting this observation, point mutations that abrogate the
proteolytic processing but not the catalytic activity of caspase-9, or
deletion of the linker peptide, prevented caspase-9 association with
XIAP and its concomitant inhibition. Srinivasula et al. (2001) noted
that the N-terminal 4 residues of caspase-9 linker peptide share
significant homology with the N-terminal tetrapeptide in mature SMAC and
in the Drosophila proteins Hid/Grim/Reaper, defining a conserved class
of IAP-binding motifs. Consistent with this finding, binding of the
caspase-9 linker peptide and SMAC to the BIR3 domain of XIAP is mutually
exclusive, suggesting that SMAC potentiates caspase-9 activity by
disrupting the interaction of the linker peptide of caspase-9 with BIR3.
Srinivasula et al. (2001) concluded that their studies reveal a
mechanism in which binding to the BIR3 domain of XIAP by 2 conserved
peptides, one from SMAC and the other from caspase-9, has opposing
effects on caspase activity and apoptosis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of a large Chinese family with young-adult onset of
autosomal dominant nonsyndromic deafness-64 (DFNA64; 614152), Cheng et
al. (2011) identified a heterozygous mutation in the DIABLO gene (S126L;
605219.0001). In vitro functional expression studies in E. coli and HeLa
cells showed that the mutant protein did not increase apoptotic activity
compared to wildtype. However, transfection of HeLa cells with the
mutant protein enhanced the degradation of mutant and wildtype DIABLO
via heterodimerization. Cells expressing the mutant protein showed
increased susceptibility to calcium-induced loss of mitochondrial
potential compared to wildtype, indicating increased sensitivity to
mitochondrial stress and suggestive of mitochondrial dysfunction. A
decrease in wildtype protein did not yield similar findings, suggesting
that the existence of mutant DIABLO leads to activation of a degradation
machinery for constant clearance of aberrant proteins.

ANIMAL MODEL

Okada et al. (2002) generated Diablo-deficient mice by homologous
recombination. Western blot analysis confirmed the null mutation. The
mice were fertile and appeared grossly normal at more than 1 year of
age, and histologic analysis failed to detect any abnormalities. In
vitro analysis indicated an inhibition of procaspase-3 (CASP3; 600636)
cleavage in Diablo -/- cell lysates, but all types of Diablo -/- cells
tested responded normally to a number of apoptotic stimuli. Fas
(134637)-mediated apoptosis in liver was also normal in vivo in these
mice. The authors concluded that a redundant molecule, possibly Omi
(HTRA2; 606441), or molecules are capable of compensating for the loss
of Diablo function. Alternatively, they suggested that Diablo may only
regulate programmed cell death in specific situations or tissues not yet
identified.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DEAFNESS, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 64
DIABLO, SER126LEU

In affected members of a large Chinese family with young-adult onset of
autosomal dominant nonsyndromic deafness-64 (DFNA64; 614152), Cheng et
al. (2011) identified a heterozygous 377C-T transition in exon 5 of the
DIABLO gene, resulting in a ser126-to-leu (S126L) substitution in a
highly conserved residue. The S126L mutation corresponds to a
ser71-to-leu (S71L) mutation in the mature protein. The mutation was not
found in 1,000 Chinese control chromosomes. In vitro functional
expression studies in E. coli and HeLa cells showed that the mutant
protein did not increase apoptotic activity compared to wildtype.
However, transfection of HeLa cells with the mutant protein enhanced the
degradation of mutant and wildtype DIABLO via heterodimerization. Cells
expressing the mutant protein showed increased susceptibility to
calcium-induced loss of mitochondrial potential compared to wildtype,
indicating increased sensitivity to mitochondrial stress and suggestive
of mitochondrial dysfunction. A decrease in wildtype protein did not
yield similar findings, suggesting that the existence of mutant DIABLO
leads to activation of a degradation machinery for constant clearance of
aberrant proteins.

REFERENCE 1. Burri, L.; Strahm, Y.; Hawkins, C. J.; Gentle, I. E.; Puryer, M.
A.; Verhagen, A.; Callus, B.; Vaux, D.; Lithgow, T.: Mature DIABLO/Smac
is produced by the IMP protease complex on the mitochondrial inner
membrane. Molec. Biol. Cell 16: 2926-2933, 2005.

2. Chai, J.; Du, C.; Wu, J.-W.; Kyin, S.; Wang, X.; Shi, Y.: Structural
and biochemical basis of apoptotic activation by Smac/DIABLO. Nature 406:
855-862, 2000.

3. Cheng, J.; Zhu, Y.; He, S.; Lu, Y.; Chen, J.; Han, B.; Petrillo,
M.; Wrzeszczynski, K. O.; Yang, S.; Dai, P.; Zhai, S.; Han, D.; Zhang,
M. Q.; Li, W.; Liu, X.; Li, H.; Chen, Z. Y.; Yuan, H.: Functional
mutation of SMAC/DIABLO, encoding a mitochondrial proapoptotic protein,
causes human progressive hearing loss DFNA64. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89:
56-66, 2011.

4. Du, C.; Fang, M.; Li, Y.; Li, L.; Wang, X.: Smac, a mitochondrial
protein that promotes cytochrome c-dependent caspase activation by
eliminating IAP inhibition. Cell 102: 33-42, 2000.

5. Kohli, M.; Yu, J.; Seaman, C.; Bardelli, A.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein,
B.; Lengauer, C.; Zhang, L.: SMAC/Diablo-dependent apoptosis induced
by nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) in colon cancer cells. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 16897-16902, 2004.

6. Liu, Z.; Sun, C.; Olejniczak, E. T.; Meadows, R. P.; Betz, S. F.;
Oost, T.; Herrmann, J.; Wu, J. C.; Fesik, S. W.: Structural basis
for binding of Smac/DIABLO to the XIAP BIR3 domain. Nature 408:
1004-1008, 2000.

7. Okada, H.; Suh, W.-K.; Jin, J.; Woo, M.; Du, C.; Elia, A.; Duncan,
G. S.; Wakeham, A.; Itie, A.; Lowe, S. W.; Wang, X.; Mak, T. W.:
Generation and characterization of Smac/DIABLO-deficient mice. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 22: 3509-3517, 2002.

8. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/18/2000.

9. Srinivasula, S. M.; Hegde, R.; Saleh, A.; Datta, P.; Shiozaki,
E.; Chai, J.; Lee, R.-A.; Robbins, P. D.; Fernandes-Alnemri, T.; Shi,
Y.; Alnemri, E. S.: A conserved XIAP-interaction motif in caspase-9
and Smac/DIABLO regulates caspase activity and apoptosis. Nature 410:
112-116, 2001. Note: Erratum: Nature 114: 1081 only, 2001.

10. Verhagen, A. M.; Ekert, P. G.; Pakusch, M.; Silke, J.; Connolly,
L. M.; Reid, G. E.; Moritz, R. L.; Simpson, R. J.; Vaux, D. L.: Identification
of DIABLO, a mammalian protein that promotes apoptosis by binding
to and antagonizing IAP proteins. Cell 102: 43-53, 2000.

11. Wu, G.; Chai, J.; Suber, T. L.; Wu, J.-W.; Du, C.; Wang, X.; Shi,
Y.: Structural basis of IAP recognition by Smac/DIABLO. Nature 408:
1008-1012, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/8/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/18/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/16/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/29/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/23/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/31/2000
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 8/18/2000

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 8/18/2000

EDITED terry: 04/04/2013
wwang: 8/23/2011
ckniffin: 8/8/2011
mgross: 9/26/2008
terry: 9/18/2008
wwang: 2/22/2007
alopez: 1/16/2007
mgross: 2/16/2005
mgross: 5/29/2002
alopez: 2/28/2001
carol: 12/23/2000
mgross: 9/1/2000
terry: 8/31/2000
mgross: 8/21/2000
carol: 8/18/2000
mgross: 8/18/2000

121013	TITLE *121013 GAP JUNCTION PROTEIN, ALPHA-5; GJA5
;;GAP JUNCTION PROTEIN, 40-KD;;
CONNEXIN 40; CX40
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Connexin proteins oligomerize to form intercellular channels, called gap
junctions, through which ions and small molecules move between adjacent
cells. See 121011 for a general discussion of the connexin gene family.

CLONING

Kanter et al. (1992) demonstrated that canine ventricular myocytes
express 3 distinct gap junction proteins, Cx40, Cx43 (GJA1; 121013), and
Cx45. Kanter et al. (1994) used PCR with primers based on rat and dog
Cx40 to clone human CX40. The CX40 gene encodes a predicted 358-amino
acid protein whose sequence is 82% identical to that of the rat and
mouse CX40 protein. Northern blot analysis showed that CX40 mRNA is
expressed as an approximately 3.3-kb transcript in ventricular
myocardium. In immunofluorescence studies, CX40 localized to
intercalated disc regions of the left ventricle, which join cardiac
myocytes and contain gap junctions.

Kaba et al. (2001) noted that cardiac myocytes are electrically coupled
via gap junctions. Immunohistochemical staining of embryonic mouse and
human fetal hearts localized CX40 at the superficial zones of trabeculae
in developing ventricles. As development progressed, CX40 became largely
confined to the conduction system.

By searching EST databases, Dupays et al. (2003) identified 2 CX40
splice variants that differed only in the 5-prime untranslated region.
RT-PCR detected expression of the transcript utilizing exon 1A in
endothelial cells, and the transcript utilizing exon 1B in normal
placental cytotrophoblasts and in malignant cytotrophoblastic cell
lines. Both transcripts were expressed in right atrial appendages and in
all heart regions investigated, with higher levels in atrium.
Transcripts including exon 1A predominated.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dupays et al. (2003) determined that the CX40 gene contains 3 exons,
which they designated 1A, 1B, and 2. Exons 1A and 1B are alternate
5-prime untranslated regions that appear to induce cell type-specific
expression, and exon 2 is the coding exon. The entire gene spans about
25 kb. The DNA sequence upstream of exon 1A contains 7 SP1
(189906)-binding sites and potential binding sites for transcription
factors that control vascular gene expression, such as ETS1 (164720) and
GATA (see 305371), but no TATA or CAAT box. The region upstream of exon
1B is preceded by 3 CAAT boxes, 2 SP1-binding sites, and multiple
binding sites for the basal transcription factors AP1 (see Jun, 165160)
and AP4 (600743). Kanter et al. (1994) had noted 1 coding exon and a
5-prime untranslated exon, corresponding to exon 1A, in the CX40 genomic
sequence.

Seul et al. (1997) characterized the structure of the mouse Cx40 gene.

MAPPING

Willecke et al. (1990) used a mouse cDNA probe in Southern analysis of
mouse-human somatic cell hybrids to map the human CX40 and CX37 (GJA4)
genes to 1pter-q12.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Gelb et al. (1997) mapped the
GJA5 gene to chromosome 1q21.1 in a region that shows homology of
synteny with mouse chromosome 3, where the mouse Gja5 gene maps.

GENE FUNCTION

The migration of lymphocytes from the circulation into tissues involves
a number of adhesion molecules and the expression of new molecules. Gap
junctions facilitate cell-to-cell adhesion and provide pathways for
direct intercellular communication. Oviedo-Orta et al. (2000) noted that
GJA1 is expressed in a number of lymphoid organs. By RT-PCR, Western
blot, and flow cytometric analyses, they showed that lymphocytes express
GJA1 and GJA5, but not GJB2 (121011), GJB1 (304040), GJA4 (121012), or
GJA7 (608655); GJA5 expression was restricted to tonsillar T and B
lymphocytes. Flow cytometric analysis showed that GJA1 and GJA5
expression increases after mitogenic stimulation. Extracellular connexin
mimetic peptide blocked dye transfer between lymphocyte subpopulations,
and gap junction inhibitors decreased the production of IgM in
cocultured T and B lymphocytes. The results identified gap junction
proteins as important cell surface components that modulate immune
responses.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Atrial Standstill

Groenewegen et al. (2003) reported a family in which 1 deceased and 3
living members had atrial standstill (108770). They identified a
mutation (D1275N; 600163.0034) in the SCN5A gene in all 3 affected
living members and in 5 unaffected members; the deceased member was an
obligate carrier. Several family members were found to have 2 closely
linked polymorphisms within regulatory regions of the GJA5 gene: a
-44G-A transition and a 71A-G transition. Only the 3 affected living
members coinherited the SCN5A mutation and the 2 rare GJA5
polymorphisms. Functional analysis demonstrated a 65% reduction in
promoter activity with the rare -44A/+71G GJA5 haplotype compared to the
more common -44G/+71A haplotype. Groenewegen et al. (2003) proposed that
atrial standstill in this family resulted from coinheritance of the
SCN5A mutation and the rare GJA5 polymorphisms.

- Familial Atrial Fibrillation 11

Gollob et al. (2006) presented evidence that tissue-specific mutations
in the GJA5 gene may predispose the atria to fibrillation. They
sequenced the GJA5 gene from genomic DNA isolated from resected cardiac
tissue and peripheral lymphocytes from 15 patients with idiopathic
atrial fibrillation (ATFB11; new). Four novel heterozygous missense
mutations (see, e.g., 121013.0001-121013.0002) were identified in 4 of
the 15 patients. In 3 patients, the mutations were found in cardiac
tissue specimens but not in lymphocytes, indicating a somatic source of
the genetic defects. In the fourth patient, the sequence variant was
detected in both cardiac tissue and lymphocytes, suggesting a germline
origin. Analysis of the expression of mutant proteins revealed impaired
intracellular transport or reduced intercellular electrical coupling.

Yang et al. (2010) performed direct sequencing of the coding region of
the GJA5 gene in 126 unrelated Chinese probands with familial atrial
fibrillation (AF) and identified a heterozygous nonsense mutation in 1
proband (121013.0003) that segregated with disease in the family.

Yang et al. (2010) analyzed the GJA5 gene in 218 unrelated Chinese
probands with AF and identified 3 heterozygous missense mutations in 3
probands (121013.0004-121013.0006, respectively). The mutations, which
all occurred at evolutionarily conserved residues, segregated with
disease in each family and were not found in 200 ethnically matched
controls.

Wirka et al. (2011) tested 8 SNPs within the CX40 region for association
with CX40 levels measured in atrial tissue from 61 individuals who had
undergone cardiac surgery, 85.2% of whom had a history of AF and 49.2%
of whom had AF at the time of surgery. The previously described CX40
promoter 'A' SNP dbSNP rs35594137 (-44G-A), which was in perfect linkage
disequilibrium with the SNP dbSNP rs1152588 (71A-G) in exon 1A, was not
associated with CX40 mRNA levels. However, a common SNP dbSNP rs10465885
located within the TATA box of an alternative CX40 promoter (promoter
'B') in exon 1B was strongly associated with CX40 mRNA expression (p
less than 0.0001) and displayed strong and consistent allelic expression
imbalance in human atrial tissue. A promoter-luciferase assay in culture
mouse cardiomyocytes demonstrated reduced activity of the promoter
containing the minor allele of this SNP (p less than 0.0001). Testing of
both dbSNP rs35594137 and dbSNP rs10465885 for association with
early-onset lone AF (onset at less than 60 years of age) in 384 cases
and 3,010 controls revealed that the promoter B SNP dbSNP rs10465885 was
associated with early-onset lone AF (odds ratio, 1.18; p = 0.046), and
metaanalysis of 2 additional early-onset lone AF case-control cohorts
confirmed the association (odds ratio, 1.16; p = 0.022) with dbSNP
rs10465885. The promoter A SNP dbSNP rs35594137, however, was not
associated with the lone AF phenotype in any of the cohorts studied or
in a combined analysis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Gu et al. (2003) generated Cx40 +/- and -/- mice to study the role of
CX40 in cardiac morphogenesis. The overall incidence of cardiac
malformations was 18% in heterozygotes and 33% in homozygotes; the
malformations were more severe in homozygotes, and the incidence of
malformations was even higher (44%) in the offspring of -/- matings. The
most common malformations were of conotruncal origin, but endocardial
cushion defects and other malformations were also found. Gu et al.
(2003) concluded that CX40 is not essential for cardiogenesis, but its
absence or limited expression increases the probability of cardiac
malformations.

To study the role of gap junction communication in cardiac conduction,
Simon et al. (1998) generated Cx40 null mice. Using electrocardiographic
analysis, they showed that the null mice had cardiac conduction
abnormalities characteristic of first-degree atrioventricular block with
associated bundle branch block. Simon et al. (1998) concluded that gap
junctions are essential for the rapid conduction of impulses in the
His-Purkinje system.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ATRIAL FIBRILLATION, FAMILIAL, 11
GJA5, ALA96SER

In both atrial tissue and lymphocytes from a 41-year-old male with
atrial fibrillation (ATFB11; 614049), Gollob et al. (2006) identified a
286G-T transversion in the GJA5 gene, predicted to cause an ala96-to-ser
(A96S) substitution. The variant was absent in the patient's 3 sibs and
wife but was present in his 2 sons, who had no history of atrial
fibrillation; however, on surface electrocardiography, the carrier sons
had an abnormally prolonged P-wave duration (more than 120 ms), a known
predictor of atrial fibrillation (Dilaveris et al., 1998). The variant
was also identified in lymphocyte DNA from a 48-year-old control subject
(population frequency, 0.6%). Gollob et al. (2006) noted that long-term
follow-up of asymptomatic persons carrying the ser96 allele was needed
to determine the clinical significance of the variant.

.0002
ATRIAL FIBRILLATION, SOMATIC
GJA5, PRO88SER

In 2 unrelated subjects with atrial fibrillation (ATFB11; 614049),
Gollob et al. (2006) identified a 262C-T transition in the GJA5 gene,
predicted to cause a pro88-to-ser (P88S) substitution. The mutation was
detected in atrial tissue but not in lymphocytes, indicating a probable
somatic mutation. Gollob et al. (2006) noted that the pro88 residue,
located in the second transmembrane domain of connexin-40, is highly
conserved in mammalian and zebrafish connexins.

.0003
ATRIAL FIBRILLATION, FAMILIAL, 11
GJA5, GLN49TER

In 7 affected members of a Chinese family with paroxysmal or persistent
atrial fibrillation (ATFB11; 614049), Yang et al. (2010) identified
heterozygosity for a 145C-T transition in the GJA5 gene, resulting in a
gln49-to-ter (Q49X) substitution that was predicted to cause premature
termination and deletion of 3 transmembrane domains, 3 loop regions, and
the C terminus. The mutation was detected in 6 additional affected
family members, but was not found in 6 unaffected family members or in
200 ethnically matched controls.

.0004
ATRIAL FIBRILLATION, FAMILIAL, 11
GJA5, VAL85ILE

In affected members of a 3-generation Chinese family segregating
autosomal dominant atrial fibrillation (ATFB11; 614049), Yang et al.
(2010) identified heterozygosity for a 253G-A transition in the GJA5
gene, resulting in a val85-to-ile (V85I) substitution at a highly
conserved residue within the second transmembrane domain. The mutation
was not found in 4 unaffected relatives or in 200 ethnically matched
controls.

.0005
ATRIAL FIBRILLATION, FAMILIAL, 11
GJA5, LEU221ILE

In affected members of a 2-generation Chinese family segregating
autosomal dominant atrial fibrillation (ATFB11; 614049), Yang et al.
(2010) identified heterozygosity for a 661C-A transversion in the GJA5
gene, resulting in a leu221-to-ile (L221I) substitution at a highly
conserved residue within the fourth transmembrane domain. The mutation
was not found in 4 unaffected relatives or in 200 ethnically matched
controls.

.0006
ATRIAL FIBRILLATION, FAMILIAL, 11
GJA5, LEU229MET

In affected members of a 3-generation Chinese family segregating
autosomal dominant atrial fibrillation (ATFB11; 614049), Yang et al.
(2010) identified heterozygosity for a 685C-A transversion in the GJA5
gene, resulting in a leu229-to-met (L229M) substitution at a highly
conserved residue within the cytoplasmic region near the fourth
transmembrane domain. The mutation was not found in 4 unaffected
relatives or in 200 ethnically matched controls.

REFERENCE 1. Dilaveris, P. E.; Gialafos, E. J.; Sideris, S. K.; Theopistou,
A. M.; Andrikopoulos, G. K.; Kyriakidis, M.; Gialafos, J. E.; Toutouzas,
P. K.: Simple electrocardiographic markers for the prediction of
paroxysmal idiopathic atrial fibrillation. Am. Heart J. 135: 733-738,
1998.

2. Dupays, L.; Mazurais, D.; Rucker-Martin, C.; Calmels, T.; Bernot,
D.; Cronier, L.; Malassine, A.; Gros, D.; Theveniau-Ruissy, M.: Genomic
organization and alternative transcripts of the human connexin40 gene. Gene 305:
79-90, 2003.

3. Gelb, B. D.; Zhang, J.; Cotter, P. D.; Gershin, I. F.; Desnick,
R. J.: Physical mapping of the human connexin 40 (GJA5) flavin-containing
monooxygenase 5, and natriuretic peptide receptor A genes on 1q21. Genomics 39:
409-411, 1997.

4. Gollob, M. H.; Jones, D. L.; Krahn, A. D.; Danis, L.; Gong, X.-Q.;
Shao, Q.; Liu, X.; Veinot, J. P.; Tang, A. S. L.; Stewart, A. F. R.;
Tesson, F.; Klein, G. J.; Yee, R.; Skanes, A. C.; Guiraudon, G. M.;
Ebihara, L.; Bai, D.: Somatic mutations in the connexin 40 gene (GJA5)
in atrial fibrillation. New Eng. J. Med. 354: 2677-2688, 2006.

5. Groenewegen, W. A.; Firouzi, M.; Bezzina, C. R.; Vliex, S.; van
Langen, I. M.; Sandkuijl, L.; Smits, J. P.; Hulsbeek, M.; Rook, M.
B.; Jongsma, H. J.; Wilde, A. A.: A cardiac sodium channel mutation
cosegregates with a rare connexin40 genotype in familial atrial standstill. Circ.
Res. 92: 14-22, 2003.

6. Gu, H.; Smith, F. C.; Taffet, S. M.; Delmar, M.: High incidence
of cardiac malformations in connexin40-deficient mice. Circ. Res. 93:
201-206, 2003.

7. Kaba, R. A.; Coppen, S. R.; Dupont, E.; Skepper, J. N.; Elneil,
S.; Haw, M. P.; Pepper, J. R.; Yacoub, M. H.; Rothery, S.; Severs,
N. J.: Comparison of connexin 43, 40 and 45 expression patterns in
the developing human and mouse hearts. Cell Commun. Adhesion 8:
339-343, 2001.

8. Kanter, H. L.; Saffitz, J. E.; Beyer, E. C.: Cardiac myocytes
express multiple gap junction proteins. Circ. Res. 70: 438-444,
1992.

9. Kanter, H. L.; Saffitz, J. E.; Beyer, E. C.: Molecular cloning
of two human cardiac gap junction proteins, connexin40 and connexin45. J.
Molec. Cell. Cardiol. 26: 861-868, 1994.

10. Oviedo-Orta, E.; Hoy, T.; Evans, W. H.: Intercellular communication
in the immune system: differential expression of connexin40 and 43,
and perturbation of gap junction channel functions in peripheral blood
and tonsil human lymphocyte subpopulations. Immunology 99: 578-590,
2000.

11. Seul, K. H.; Tadros, P. N.; Beyer, E. C.: Mouse connexin40: gene
structure and promoter analysis. Genomics 46: 120-126, 1997.

12. Simon, A. M.; Goodenough, D. A.; Paul, D. L.: Mice lacking connexin40
have cardiac conduction abnormalities characteristic of atrioventricular
block and bundle branch block. Curr. Biol. 8: 295-298, 1998.

13. Willecke, K.; Jungbluth, S.; Dahl, E.; Hennemann, H.; Heynkes,
R.; Grzeschik, K.-H.: Six genes of the human connexin gene family
coding for gap junctional proteins are assigned to four different
human chromosomes. Europ. J. Cell Biol. 53: 275-280, 1990.

14. Wirka, R. C.; Gore, S.; Van Wagoner, D. R.; Arking, D. E.; Lubitz,
S. A.; Lunetta, K. L.; Benjamin, E. J.; Alonso, A.; Ellinor, P. T.;
Barnard, J.; Chung, M. K.; Smith, J. D.: A common connexin-40 gene
promoter variant affects connexin-40 expression in human atria and
is associated with atrial fibrillation. Circ. Arrhythm. Electrophysiol. 4:
87-93, 2011.

15. Yang, Y.-Q.; Liu, X.; Zhang, X.-L.; Wang, X.-H.; Tan, H.-W.; Shi,
H.-F.; Jiang, W.-F.; Fang, W.-Y.: Novel connexin40 missense mutations
in patients with familial atrial fibrillation. Europace 12: 1421-1427,
2010.

16. Yang, Y.-Q.; Zhang, X.-L.; Wang, X.-H.; Tan, H.-W.; Shi, H.-F.;
Jiang, W.-F.; Fang, W.-Y.; Liu, X.: Connexin40 nonsense mutation
in familial atrial fibrillation. Int. J. Molec. Med. 26: 605-610,
2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/10/2011
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/26/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/3/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/26/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/27/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 8/7/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/18/1991

EDITED carol: 09/18/2013
wwang: 6/20/2011
terry: 6/10/2011
carol: 7/30/2008
carol: 7/29/2008
alopez: 10/3/2007
carol: 6/30/2006
wwang: 6/28/2006
terry: 6/26/2006
mgross: 8/10/2004
terry: 8/9/2004
mgross: 5/13/2004
tkritzer: 3/9/2004
carol: 3/3/2004
alopez: 3/1/2004
terry: 2/26/2004
mgross: 6/27/2000
carol: 11/4/1999
carol: 8/31/1999
psherman: 8/31/1999
carol: 8/7/1998
mark: 1/5/1998
terry: 12/18/1997
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 8/19/1991
carol: 3/18/1991

607387	TITLE *607387 DYNACTIN 3; DCTN3
;;DYNACTIN COMPLEX, 22-KD SUBUNIT; DCTN22
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DCTN3 is a component of the dynactin macromolecular complex. Dynactin,
along with dynein (see 600112), is required for diverse cellular
functions, including intracellular vesicular transport, spindle
formation, chromosome movement, nuclear positioning, and axonogenesis.

CLONING

Karki et al. (1998) affinity purified DCTN3, which they called p22, from
brain using recombinant dynein intermediate chain (see 603331) as
ligand. They used the amino acid sequences of peptide fragments to clone
full-length DCTN3 from a neuron cDNA library. The deduced 185-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 21 kD and is primarily
an alpha-helical protein with no significant coiled-coil regions.
Northern blot analysis revealed expression of a 1-kb transcript in all
tissues examined, with highest expression in muscle and pancreas and
lower levels in brain. Western blot analysis of rat brain cytosol
revealed an apparent molecular mass of about 22 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

By affinity chromatography of rat brain cytosol, Karki et al. (1998)
found that Dctn3 binds directly to the p150 subunit of dynactin (DCTN1;
601143). Immunolocalization of Dctn3 in rat cell lines revealed that it
associates with punctate cytoplasmic structures. Dctn3 localized to the
centrosome during interphase and to kinetochores and to spindle poles
throughout mitosis. Cytoplasmic dynein and dynactin subunits, including
DCTN3, localized to the cleavage furrow and to the midbodies of dividing
cells.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Mills and Jackson (2001) mapped the DCTN3
gene to chromosome 9p13.

REFERENCE 1. Karki, S.; LaMonte, B.; Holzbaur, E. L. F.: Characterization of
the p22 subunit of dynactin reveals the localization of cytoplasmic
dynein and dynactin to the midbody of dividing cells. J. Cell Biol. 142:
1023-1034, 1998. Note: Erratum: J. Cell Biol. 143: page following
560 only, 1998.

2. Mills, D. R.; Jackson, C. L.: Assignment of p22 dynactin light
chain (DCTN3) to human chromosome region 9p13 by radiation hybrid
mapping. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 92: 166 only, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/26/2002

EDITED terry: 07/05/2012
mgross: 11/26/2002

601752	TITLE *601752 ECTONUCLEOSIDE TRIPHOSPHATE DIPHOSPHOHYDROLASE 1; ENTPD1
;;CD39 ANTIGEN; CD39;;
VASCULAR ATP DIPHOSPHOHYDROLASE; ATPDase;;
APYRASE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Endothelial cells have the ability to regulate platelet activation, in
part by the surface expression of ATP diphosphohydrolase (ATPDase; EC
3.6.1.5). ATPDase hydrolyzes extracellular ATP and ADP to AMP, which is
further converted to adenosine by another enzyme, 5-prime nucleotidase.
ADP is a powerful agonist for platelet recruitment and adhesion;
adenosine is an antagonist of these processes. Kaczmarek et al. (1996)
demonstrated that CD39, a B-cell activation marker previously
characterized by Maliszewski et al. (1994), encodes vascular ATPDase.
They isolated the cDNA of human ATPDase/CD39 by RT-PCR using RNA from
human umbilical endothelial cells. They expressed this cDNA in COS-7
cells and confirmed that it is expressed on the cell surface, hydrolyzes
both ATP and ADP, and inhibits platelet aggregation. CD39 was found to
have both immunologic identity to, and functional characteristics of,
vascular ATPDase. By Northern blot analysis, Chadwick and Frischauf
(1998) found that CD39 is expressed as a major 3.2- and a minor 3.6-kb
mRNA in several tissues. Additional bands were observed in a few
tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Adrian et al. (2000) analyzed the expression of several purinergic
receptors, as well as CD39 and CD73 (NT5E; 129190), during
differentiation in a promyelocytic leukemia cell line. Granulocytic
differentiation was induced by dimethylsulfoxide, and a
monocytic/macrophage phenotype was induced by phorbol esters. CD39
expression was nearly undetectable in undifferentiated cells, but
differentiation to either granulocytic or monocytic cells caused a
strong increase in CD39 transcript. CD39 was moderately expressed in
normal blood leukocytes.

MAPPING

Gray et al. (1997) mapped the CD39 gene to a YAC contig of 10q24 between
the genes for CYP2C (see 124020) and DNTT (187410).

ANIMAL MODEL

CD39 has been considered an important inhibitor of platelet activation.
Unexpectedly, Enjyoji et al. (1999) found that Cd39-deficient mice had
prolonged bleeding times with minimally perturbed coagulation
parameters. Platelet interactions with injured mesenteric vasculature
were considerably reduced in vivo, and purified mutant platelets failed
to aggregate to standard agonists in vitro. This platelet hypofunction
was reversible and associated with purinergic type P2y1 receptor
(601167) desensitization. In keeping with deficient vascular protective
mechanisms, fibrin deposition was found at multiple organ sites in
Cd39-deficient mice and in transplanted cardiac grafts. The data
indicated the dual role for CD39 in modulating hemostasis and thrombotic
reactions.

Langerhans cells (LC) are members of the dendritic cell (DC) family of
antigen-presenting cells residing in the skin. Wolff and Winkelmann
(1967) established that LC can be simply identified with light, rather
than electron, microscopy using surface ATPase staining. Mizumoto et al.
(2002) established that LC from CD39 -/- mice are not able to hydrolyze
both ATP and ADP and that CD39 +/- mice have a diminished ability to
effect ATP and ADP hydrolysis compared to wildtype mice. Histochemical,
Northern, and Western blot analyses showed that CD39 is expressed in
epidermal DC but not keratinocyte cell lines. CD39-deficient mice have
amplified inflammatory responses to irritant chemicals, while
heterozygous mice have intermediate responses compared to wildtype mice.
On the other hand, CD39 -/- mice have similar responses to ultraviolet
radiation and attenuated responses to contact allergens compared to
heterozygotes and wildtype mice. Using a fluorescent contact allergen,
Mizumoto et al. (2002) showed that the mutant mice LC are functional in
their homing and phenotypic maturation but are less able to stimulate T
cells, indicating that CD39 expression is required for optimal
stimulation of hapten-reactive T cells in mice. CD39-deficient DC are
unresponsive to ATP and are susceptible to cell death after prolonged
exposure to ADP. Mizumoto et al. (2002) and Granstein (2002) proposed
that if keratinocyte release of ATP and ADP occurs in response to all
chemical irritants and if the magnitude of release correlates with the
potency of the irritant, measurement of this release may be a useful in
vitro method to assess the risk of cosmetics and other topical agents
instead of animal testing.

REFERENCE 1. Adrian, K.; Bernhard, M. K.; Breitinger, H.-G.; Ogilvie, A.: Expression
of purinergic receptors (ionotropic P2X1-7 and metabotropic P2Y1-11)
during myeloid differentiation of HL60 cells. Biochim. Biophys. Res.
Acta 1492: 127-138, 2000.

2. Chadwick, B. P.; Frischauf, A.-M.: The CD39-like gene family:
identification of three new human members (CD39L2, CD39L3, and CD39L4),
their murine homologues, and a member of the gene family from Drosophila
melanogaster. Genomics 50: 357-367, 1998.

3. Enjyoji, K.; Sevigny, J.; Lin, Y.; Frenette, P. S.; Christie, P.
D.; am Esch, J. S., II; Imai, M.; Edelberg, J. M.; Rayburn, H.; Lech,
M.; Beeler, D. L.; Csizmadia, E.; Wagner, D. D.; Robson, S. C.; Rosenberg,
R. D.: Targeted disruption of cd39/ATP diphosphohydrolase results
in disordered hemostasis and thromboregulation. Nature Med. 5: 1010-1017,
1999.

4. Granstein, R. D.: The skinny on CD39 in immunity and inflammation. Nature
Med. 8: 336-338, 2002.

5. Gray, I. C.; Fallowfield, J.; Ford, S.; Nobile, C.; Volpi, E. V.;
Spurr, N. K.: An integrated physical and genetic map spanning chromosome
band 10q24. Genomics 43: 85-88, 1997.

6. Kaczmarek, E.; Koziak, K.; Sevigny, J.; Siegel, J. B.; Anrather,
J.; Beaudoin, A. R.; Bach, F. H.; Robson, S. C.: Identification and
characterization of CD39/vascular ATP diphosphohydrolase. J. Biol.
Chem. 271: 33116-33122, 1996.

7. Maliszewski, C. R.; Delespesse, G. L.; Schoenborn, M. A.; Armitage,
R. J.; Fanslow, W. C.; Nakajima, T.; Baker, E.; Sutherland, G. R.;
Poindexter, K.; Birks, C.; Alpert, A.; Friend, D.; Gimpel, S. D.;
Gayle, R. B., III: The CD39 lymphoid cell activation antigen. Molecular
cloning and structural characterization. J. Immun. 153: 3574-3583,
1994.

8. Mizumoto, N.; Kumamoto, T.; Robson, S. C.; Sevigny, J.; Matsue,
H.; Enjyoji, K.; Takashima, A.: CD39 is the dominant Langerhans cell-associated
ecto-NTPDase: modulatory roles in inflammation and immune responsiveness. Nature
Med. 8: 358-365, 2002.

9. Wolff, K,.; Winkelmann, R. K.: Ultrastructural localization of
nucleoside triphosphatase in Langerhans cells. J. Invest. Derm. 48:
50-54, 1967.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 03/07/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/6/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 10/19/1998
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 7/16/1997

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 4/11/1997

EDITED mgross: 03/07/2005
joanna: 6/20/2003
alopez: 4/9/2002
carol: 4/11/2001
mgross: 1/14/2000
terry: 1/6/2000
alopez: 10/19/1998
alopez: 11/7/1997
mark: 7/16/1997
alopez: 5/1/1997
alopez: 4/14/1997

606015	TITLE *606015 FAS APOPTOTIC INHIBITORY MOLECULE 3; FAIM3
;;TOSO;;
Fc FRAGMENT OF IgM, RECEPTOR FOR; FCMR
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Fc receptors specifically bind to the Fc region of immunoglobulins (Igs)
to mediate the unique functions of each Ig class. FAIM3 encodes an Fc
receptor for IgM (see 147020) (Kubagawa et al., 2009; Shima et al.,
2010).

CLONING

Using retroviral cDNA library-based functional cloning, Hitoshi et al.
(1998) isolated a cDNA encoding a potent inhibitor of FAS
(134637)-induced apoptotic signaling that they named TOSO after a
Japanese liquor drunk on New Year's day to celebrate long life and
eternal youth. The predicted 390-amino acid type I integral membrane
protein has a signal peptide; an extracellular region homologous to
immunoglobulin (Ig) variable domains, but with 2 additional cysteines;
and a cytoplasmic region containing a basic region, an acidic region,
and a proline-rich region. RNA dot blot analysis detected strong
expression of TOSO in lymph node, lung, and kidney. Northern blot
analysis detected a major 2.0-kb TOSO transcript, as well as minor
transcripts of 2.8, 3.5, and 4.3 kb, in lymph node, spleen, peripheral
blood leukocytes, and thymus. RT-PCR analysis detected TOSO expression
in lymphoid cell lines, but not in nonhemopoietic cell lines.

By retroviral expression and functional cloning using cDNA libraries
from a chronic lymphocytic leukemia line and from a pre-B cell line,
followed by screening for IgM (see 147020) binding and flow cytometric
enrichment, Kubagawa et al. (2009) obtained a cDNA encoding FAIM3, which
they called FCMR. SDS-PAGE, RT-PCR, and FACS analyses showed that FCMR
had an apparent molecular mass of 60 kD and was predominantly expressed
on B and T lymphocytes.

By searching EST databases for molecules containing Ig domains similar
to those of FCAMR (605484) and PIGR (173880), Shima et al. (2010)
identified FAIM3, which they called FCMR, as a possible Fc receptor for
IgM. Northern blot and RT-PCR analyses revealed FCMR expression
predominantly in lymphocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

FAS engagement by FAS ligand (FASL; 134638) activates cysteine
proteases, or caspases, through an association with FADD (602457),
resulting in cell death. Newly activated T cells, however, express both
FAS and FASL, but remain resistant to apoptosis. Using Northern blot
analysis, Hitoshi et al. (1998) demonstrated that expression of TOSO,
like that of FAS and FASL, increased after T-cell activation, followed
by a decline and susceptibility to apoptosis. Functional analysis showed
that hematopoietic cells expressing TOSO resisted anti-FAS-, FADD-, and
TNF-induced apoptosis without increasing expression of the inhibitors of
apoptosis BCL2 (151430) and BCLXL (600039). RT-PCR analysis indicated
that cells expressing TOSO and activated by FAS had reduced FLICE
(CASP8; 601763) and increased FLIP (CFLAR; 603599) expression, which
inhibited CASP8 processing. Mutational analysis established that the Ig
domain and transmembrane region of TOSO, but not the cytoplasmic domain,
were required for the inhibition of FAS-induced apoptosis. Hitoshi et
al. (1998) concluded that the transient increase in TOSO expression is
responsible for temporary FAS resistance in T cells.

Through functional analysis, Kubagawa et al. (2009) confirmed that FCMR
had binding specificity for IgM, but not other immunoglobulins, and that
only under some conditions did FCMR have antiapoptotic activity.
Kubagawa et al. (2009) concluded that FCMR per se has no inhibitory
activity in FAS-mediated apoptosis, and that such inhibition can only be
achieved with anti-FAS antibodies of IgM, but not IgG (see 147100),
isotype.

Shima et al. (2010) found that transfection of FCMR into HeLa cells
allowed IgM, but not IgG, binding. They concluded that FCMR is a
receptor for IgM that may serve as an uptake receptor for IgM-opsonized
antigens by B cells.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Hitoshi et al. (1998) mapped the FAIM3
gene to chromosome 1q31-q32, a region with frequent changes in
hemopoietic malignancies and solid tumors. Kubagawa et al. (2009) noted
that the FAIM3 gene is located on chromosome 1q32.2, adjacent to 2 other
genes encoding IgM-binding receptors, PIGR and FCAMR.

REFERENCE 1. Hitoshi, Y.; Lorens, J.; Kitada, S.-I.; Fisher, J.; LaBarge, M.;
Ring, H. Z.; Francke, U.; Reed, J. C.; Kinoshita, S.; Nolan, G. P.
: Toso, a cell surface, specific regulator of Fas-induced apoptosis
in T cells. Immunity 8: 461-471, 1998.

2. Kubagawa, H.; Oka, S.; Kubagawa, Y.; Torii, I.; Takayama, E.; Kang,
D.-W.; Gartland, G. L.; Bertoli, L. F.; Mori, H.; Takatsu, H.; Kitamura,
T.; Ohno, H.; Wang, J.-Y.: Identity of the elusive IgM Fc receptor
(Fc-mu-R) in humans. J. Exp. Med. 206: 2779-2793, 2009.

3. Shima, H.; Takatsu, H.; Fukuda, S.; Ohmae, M.; Hase, K.; Kubagawa,
H.; Wang, J.-Y.; Ohno, H.: Identification of TOSO/FAIM3 as an Fc
receptor for IgM. Int. Immun. 22: 149-156, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/11/2010

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/14/2001

EDITED mgross: 06/14/2010
terry: 6/11/2010
mgross: 6/14/2001

607465	TITLE *607465 CODANIN 1; CDAN1
;;DISCS LOST, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; DLT
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Congenital dyserythropoietic anemias (CDAs) constitute a rare group of
inherited red blood cell disorders associated with dysplastic changes in
late erythroid precursors. A cluster of 45 highly inbred Israeli Bedouin
permitted Tamary et al. (1998) to map the gene for CDA type I (224120)
to a 2-Mb interval on chromosome 15q15. Dgany et al. (2002) refined the
localization to a 1.2-Mb interval and identified CDAN1, the gene
responsible for CDA type I, through the identification of mutations in 9
families with the disorder. The CDAN1 gene product, codanin-1, is a
putative O-glycosylated protein of 1,226 amino acids with no obvious
transmembrane domains. Codanin-1 has a 150-residue N-terminal domain
with sequence similarity to collagens, as well as 2 shorter segments
that show weak similarities to the microtubule-associated proteins MAP1B
(157129) and synapsin (SYN1; 313440). Alternative splicing produces a
variant encoding a 1,103-amino acid isoform. Northern blot analysis
detected a 4.7-kb CDAN1 transcript in all 8 tissues tested. Based on
their findings and the cellular phenotype of CDA type I, Dgany et al.
(2002) suggested that codanin-1 may be involved in nuclear envelope
integrity, conceivably related to microtubule attachments.

GENE FUNCTION

Using several techniques, including sequencing clones that rescued the
discs lost (dlt) phenotype in Drosophila, Pielage et al. (2003)
determined that CDAN1 is the human homolog of dlt. They showed that dlt
is an evolutionarily conserved protein required for cell survival and
cell cycle progression in the fly.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dgany et al. (2002) determined that the CDAN1 gene contains 28 exons and
spans 15 kb.

MAPPING

Dgany et al. (2002) mapped the CDAN1 gene to chromosome 15q15.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Dgany et al. (2002) identified 12 different mutations in the CDAN1 gene
in 9 families with CDA type I.

In 1 French family in which a 56-year-old male and his 2 brothers
suffered from CDA type I, asthenoteratozoospermia, and nonsyndromic
deafness, Dgany et al. (2002) identified a point mutation within the
codanin gene (N598S; 607465.0003) as the cause of CDA type I. Avidan et
al. (2003) found that these 3 sibs were also homozygous for an
approximately 70-kb deletion in chromosome 15q15, which removed the
entire stereocilin gene (STRC; 606440) and truncated the CATSPER2 gene
(607249). Avidan et al. (2003) suggested that lack of functional
stereocilin, which is mutated in nonsyndromic sensorineural deafness
(DFNB16; 603720), and CATSPER2, a voltage-gated cation channel expressed
exclusively in spermatozoa, may explain the observed deafness and male
infertility phenotypes, respectively.

In studies of 8 unrelated patients with sporadic CDA type I, 3 of whom
had complex bone disease, Tamary et al. (2005) identified 6 different
mutations in the CDAN1 gene. In 2 patients, only 1 mutation was
identified, and in 1 patient, no CDAN1 mutation was identified. No
patient was homozygous for a null-type mutation. However, 1 patient with
complex bone disease was homozygous for a splice site mutation,
IVS12+5G-A (607465.0006). Western blotting revealed that codanin-1
synthesis was 65% less than the control in this patient. Although the
absence of codanin-1 is probably lethal, the presence of 35% of the
protein was compatible with life but was associated with severe clinical
manifestations. No correlation could be established between the expected
levels of codanin-1 or the nature of the mutation and the severity of
the clinical manifestations.

In 15 of 16 CDA I patients analyzed, Heimpel et al. (2006) identified 17
different mutations in at least 1 allele of the CDAN1 gene. All but 1 of
the mutations were located in exons 12 to 28; 1 mutation was found in
exon 6.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ANEMIA, CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC, TYPE I
CDAN1, ARG1040TRP

In Israeli Bedouin patients with type I congenital erythropoietic anemia
(224120), Dgany et al. (2002) identified a homozygous C-to-T transition
at nucleotide 3238 in the CDAN1 gene, causing an arg1040-to-trp
substitution.

.0002
ANEMIA, CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC, TYPE I
CDAN1, PRO1129LEU

In a French Polynesian family with type I congenital dyserythropoietic
anemia (224120), Dgany et al. (2002) identified a C-to-T transition at
nucleotide 3503 in the CDAN1 gene, resulting in a pro1129-to-leu
substitution.

.0003
ANEMIA, CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC, TYPE I
CDAN1, ASN598SER

In a French family with type I congenital dyserythropoietic anemia
(224120), Dgany et al. (2002) identified homozygosity for an A-to-G
transition at nucleotide 1910 in the CDAN1 gene, resulting in an
asn598-to-ser substitution. The 3 sibs who were affected also exhibited
sensorineural deafness and a lack of motile sperm cells. These symptoms
could be accounted for by a large 70-kb deletion 1 Mb distal to the
CDAN1 gene. Thus, it appeared to be a case of tightly linked independent
mutations on the same haplotype representing a contiguous gene syndrome.

Avidan et al. (2003) determined that the 70-kb deletion removed the
entire stereocilin gene (STRC; 606440) and truncated the CATSPER2 gene
(607249). They suggested that lack of functional stereocilin, which is
mutated in nonsyndromic sensorineural deafness (DFNB16; 603720), and
CATSPER2, a voltage-gated cation channel expressed exclusively in
spermatozoa, may explain the observed deafness and male infertility
phenotypes, respectively, in this family.

.0004
ANEMIA, CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC, TYPE I
CDAN1, PRO671LEU

In a European family, Dgany et al. (2002) identified individuals with
type I congenital dyserythropoietic anemia (224120) who were compound
heterozygotes for 2 missense mutations in the CDAN1 gene: a C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 2129, resulting an a pro671-to-leu
substitution, and a T-to-A transversion at nucleotide 2716, resulting in
a phe866-to-ile substitution (607465.0005). The mutations occurred in
exons 14 and 19, respectively.

.0005
ANEMIA, CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC, TYPE I
CDAN1, PHE866ILE

See 607465.0004 and Dgany et al. (2002).

.0006
ANEMIA, CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC, TYPE I
CDAN1, IVS12, G-A, +5

In an Israeli Arab patient with type I congenital dyserythropoietic
anemia (224120), Tamary et al. (2005) identified homozygosity for a
G-to-A transition at the +5 consensus site position in intron 12
(IVS12+5G-A) of the CDAN1 gene. Sequence analysis of exons 11 to 15
revealed an expected 659-bp transcript and an 898-bp transcript that
retained intron 12 (139 bp). A 65% decrease in codanin-1 synthesis was
estimated. The patient showed dysmorphism of the left foot.

.0007
ANEMIA, CONGENITAL DYSERYTHROPOIETIC, TYPE I
CDAN1, VAL372DEL

Ahmed et al. (2006) described a 3-bp in-frame deletion in the CDAN1
gene, resulting in deletion of valine-3721, as the basis of a sporadic
case of CDA I.

REFERENCE 1. Ahmed, M. R.; Chehal, A.; Zahed, L.; Taher, A.; Haidar, J.; Shamseddine,
A.; O'Hea, A.-M.; Bienz, N.; Dgany, O.; Avidan, N.; Beckmann, J. S.;
Tamary, H.; Higgs, D.; Vyas, P.; Wood, W. G.; Wickramasinghe, S. N.
: Linkage and mutational analysis of the CDAN1 gene reveals genetic
heterogeneity in congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type I. (Letter) Blood 15:
4968-4969, 2006.

2. Avidan, N.; Tamary, H.; Dgany, O.; Cattan, D.; Pariente, A.; Thulliez,
M.; Borot, N.; Moati, L.; Barthelme, A.; Shalmon, L.; Krasnov, T.;
Ben-Asher, E.; and 9 others: CATSPER2, a human autosomal nonsyndromic
male infertility gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 11: 497-502, 2003.

3. Dgany, O.; Avidan, N.; Delaunay, J.; Krasnov, T.; Shalmon, L.;
Shalev, H.; Eidelitz-Markus, T.; Kapelushnik, J.; Cattan, D.; Pariente,
A.; Tulliez, M.; Cretien, A.; and 13 others: Congenital dyserythropoietic
anemia type I is caused by mutations in codanin-1. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71:
1467-1474, 2002.

4. Heimpel, H.; Schwarz, K.; Ebnother, M.; Goede, J. S.; Heydrich,
D.; Kamp, T.; Plaumann, L.; Rath, B.; Roessler, J.; Schildknecht,
O.; Schmid, M.; Wuillemin, W.; Einsiedler, B.; Leichtle, R.; Tamary,
H.; Kohne, E.: Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia type I (CDA I):
molecular genetics, clinical appearance, and prognosis based on long-term
observation. Blood 107: 334-340, 2006.

5. Pielage, J.; Stork, T.; Bunse, I.; Klambt, C.: The Drosophila
cell survival gene discs lost encodes a cytoplasmic codanin-1-like
protein, not a homolog of tight junction PDZ protein Patj. Dev. Cell 5:
841-851, 2003.

6. Tamary, H.; Dgany, O.; Proust, A.; Krasnov, T.; Avidan, N.; Eidelitz-Markus,
T.; Tchernia, G.; Genevieve, D.; Cormier-Daire, V.; Bader-Meunier,
B.; Ferrero-Vacher, C.; Munzer, M.; Gruppo, R.; Fibach, E.; Konen,
O.; Yaniv, I.; Delaunay, J.: Clinical and molecular variability in
congenital dyserythropoietic anaemia type I. Brit. J. Haemat. 130:
628-634, 2005.

7. Tamary, H.; Shalmon, L.; Shalev, H.; Halil, A.; Dobrushin, D.;
Ashkenazi, N.; Zoldan, M.; Resnitzky, P.; Korostishevsky, M.; Bonne-Tamir,
B.; Zaizov, R.: Localization of the gene for congenital dyserythropoietic
anemia type I to a less than 1-cM interval on chromosome 15q15.1-15.3. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 62: 1062-1069, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/28/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/31/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/2/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/14/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/8/2003

EDITED carol: 10/03/2006
terry: 9/28/2006
wwang: 3/31/2006
wwang: 10/27/2005
wwang: 10/21/2005
terry: 10/11/2005
carol: 12/21/2004
mgross: 12/2/2004
mgross: 5/14/2004
terry: 5/14/2004
mgross: 1/8/2003

611449	TITLE *611449 EXPORTIN 4; XPO4
EXP4;;
KIAA1721
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

XPO4 belongs to a large family of karyopherins (see 602738) that mediate
the transport of proteins and other cargo between the nuclear and
cytoplasmic compartments (Lipowsky et al., 2000).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human adult
hippocampus cDNA library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned XPO4, which they
designated KIAA1721. The 3-prime UTR contains a repetitive sequence, and
the 1,150-amino acid protein shares 99% amino acid identity with mouse
Xpo4. RT-PCR ELISA detected high to moderate expression in all human
tissues and specific brain regions examined.

Using affinity chromatography on immobilized RanGTP (see RANGAP1;
602362) to identify novel RanGTP-binding proteins in HeLa cell extract,
followed by database analysis and 3-prime and 5-prime RACE, Lipowsky et
al. (2000) cloned mouse Xpo4, which they called Exp4. The deduced
1,170-amino acid mouse protein has a calculated molecular mass of 129.9
kD. Xpo4 shares similarity over the N-terminal RanGTP-binding motif with
importin-beta family members, with highest similarity to exportin-1
(XPO1; 602559) and tRNA export receptor exportin-t (XPOT; 603180).

GENE FUNCTION

Using recombinant Xpo4 expressed in E. coli and HeLa cell extract
components, Lipowsky et al. (2000) showed that RanGTP-bound Xpo4 bound
EIF5A (600187) and thymidylate synthase (TYMS; 188350). Immunoblotting
assay of recombinant EIF5A and bound Xpo4 showed that EIF5A forms a
EIF5A-Xpo4-RanGTP complex with Xpo4 specifically and that the Xpo4-EIF5A
interaction was enhanced in the presence of RanGTP. Nuclear export
assays in permeabilized cells demonstrated that Xpo4 mediates specific
nuclear export of EIF5A. By mutation and posttranslational modification
analyses, Lipowsky et al. (2000) concluded that Xpo4-EIF5A interaction
is complex and requires large parts of the EIF5A molecule and hypusine
modification of EIF5A.

Using a protein-protein interaction screen, Kurisaki et al. (2006)
showed that human XPO4 interacted with Smad3 (603109) via the Smad3 MH2
domain. RNAi knockdown of XPO4 blocked Smad3 export, as did addition of
competing short peptides representing the Smad3-XPO4 interaction domain.
In vivo and in vitro assays showed that XPO4 mediated nuclear export of
Smad3 in a RanGTPase-dependent manner.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the XPO4
gene to chromosome 13 (TMAP RH91537).

REFERENCE 1. Kurisaki, A.; Kurisaki, K.; Kowanetz, M.; Sugino, H.; Yoneda, Y.;
Heldin, C.-H.; Moustakas, A.: The mechanism of nuclear export of
Smad3 involves exportin 4 and Ran. Molec. Cell. Biol. 26: 1318-1332,
2006.

2. Lipowsky, G.; Bischoff, F. R.; Schwarzmaier, P.; Kraft, R.; Kostka,
S.; Hartmann, E.; Kutay, U.; Gorlich, D.: Exportin 4: a mediator
of a novel nuclear export pathway in higher eukaryotes. EMBO J. 19:
4362-4371, 2000.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Hattori, A.; Kondo, Y.; Okumura, K.; Ohara,
O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes.
XIX. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which
code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 347-355, 2000.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 9/19/2007

EDITED wwang: 09/19/2007

612793	TITLE *612793 PHOSPHATIDYLSERINE SYNTHASE 2; PTDSS2
;;PSS2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Phosphatidylserine (PS) accounts for 5 to 10% of cell membrane
phospholipids. In addition to its role as a structural component, PS is
involved in cell signaling, blood coagulation, and apoptosis. PS is
synthesized by a calcium-dependent base-exchange reaction catalyzed by
PS synthases (EC 2.7.8.8), like PTDSS2, that exchange L-serine for the
polar head group of phosphatidylcholine (PC) or phosphatidylethanolamine
(PE) (Sturbois-Balcerzak et al., 2001).

CLONING

By database analysis and PCR of a HeLa cell cDNA library, Tomohiro et
al. (2009) cloned PTDSS1 (612792) and PTDSS2, which they called PSS1 and
PSS2, respectively. SDS-PAGE showed that epitope-tagged PSS1 and PSS2
localized to membrane fractions of transfected HeLa cells.

By RT-PCR of mouse tissues, Sturbois-Balcerzak et al. (2001) detected
highest Pss2 expression in testis, followed by kidney and brain. Little
to no expression was detected in white adipose and spleen.

Bergo et al. (2002) stated that both PSS1 and PSS2 contain several
predicted transmembrane domains. They used Pss2 promoter-driven
beta-galactosidase staining in 20-day Pss2 -/- mouse embryos and adult
Pss -/- mice to characterize cell type-specific expression of Pss2. In
embryos, intense staining was present in brown adipose tissue over the
dorsal thoracic cage and in peripheral nerves. Staining was intense in
brain, uterus, and testis of adult mice. In brain, expression was
confined to neurons, particularly in Purkinje cells of cerebellum and
pyramidal neurons in the CA1 region of the hippocampus. In uterus,
highest expression was observed in myometrium. In testis, staining was
intense in Sertoli cells, with lighter punctate staining within Leydig
cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Stone and Vance (2000) found that Pss1 and Pss2 localized exclusively to
the mitochondrial-associated membrane (MAM) subcompartment of the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) in rodent cell lines and in mouse liver.
Mouse liver MAM used PC and PE as substrates for PS biosynthesis,
whereas ER membranes used only PE.

Using in vitro enzyme assays, Sturbois-Balcerzak et al. (2001) showed
that mouse Pss1 used choline, ethanolamine, and serine for base
exchange, whereas Pss2 used ethanolamine and serine, but not choline.

PS is normally localized on the cell membrane inner leaflet, but it
flips to the cell surface during apoptosis. Grandmaison et al. (2004)
showed that Chinese hamster ovary cells deficient in Pss1 and/or Pss2,
which resulted in reduction of in vitro serine-exchange activity by as
much as 97%, externalized normal amounts of PS during apoptosis. They
concluded that normal levels of PSS1 and/or PSS2 are not required to
generate the pool of PS externalized during apoptosis.

By assaying solubilized membranes prepared from transfected HeLa cells,
Tomohiro et al. (2009) showed that full-length human PSS1 and PSS2
increased serine base-exchange activity 2.9- and 3.5-fold, respectively.
Purified PSS1 catalyzed the conversion of both PC and PE into PS, but
PSS2 only catalyzed the conversion of PE into PS. In vitro, PSS1 also
catalyzed choline and ethanolamine base exchange for the formation of PC
and PE, respectively, but PSS2 only catalyzed ethanolamine and serine
base exchange. Serine base exchange by both enzymes occurred at a
neutral pH optimum and was dependent on Ca(2+). Furthermore, exogenous
PS inhibited serine base exchange by PSS1 and PSS2 in membrane fractions
of transfected HeLa cells in a dose-dependent manner. However, purified
epitope-tagged PSS1, but not PSS2, was activated by PS in the presence
of the detergent sucrose monolaurate, suggesting that the mechanism of
PS-mediated inhibition differs between PSS1 and PSS2.

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the PTDS2 gene to chromosome 11p15.5 based on an
alignment of the PTDSS2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC001210) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

ANIMAL MODEL

Bergo et al. (2002) found that Pss2 -/- mice developed normally,
appeared healthy, and grew at the same rate as littermate controls. All
female and most male Pss2 -/- mice were fertile, but about 10% of male
Pss2 -/- mice were infertile or subfertile due to testicular atrophy.
The ability of testis, brain, and liver extracts to catalyze serine
exchange was reduced by more than 90% in Pss2 -/- mice, but the
phospholipid content of these tissues remained normal. Expression of
Pss1 mRNA was not upregulated in Pss2 -/- tissues or cells. Bergo et al.
(2002) concluded that PSS2 is responsible for the majority of serine
exchange activity in in vitro assays, but that deficiency in PSS2 does
not cause perturbations in phospholipid content or severe developmental
abnormalities.

Arikketh et al. (2008) found that intercrosses of Pss1 -/- and Pss2 -/-
mice yielded viable mice with 3 disrupted Pss alleles, but no
double-knockout mice were born. In Pss1 +/- Pss2 -/- and Pss1 -/- Pss2
+/- mice, serine exchange activity was reduced by 65 to 91%, and the
tissue content of PS and PE was decreased.

REFERENCE 1. Arikketh, D.; Nelson, R.; Vance, J. E.: Defining the importance
of phosphatidylserine synthase-1 (PSS1): unexpected viability of PSS1-deficient
mice. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 12888-12897, 2008.

2. Bergo, M. O.; Gavino, B. J.; Steenbergen, R.; Sturbois, B.; Parlow,
A. F.; Sanan, D. A.; Skarnes, W. C.; Vance, J. E.; Young, S. G.:
Defining the importance of phosphatidylserine synthase 2 in mice. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 47701-47708, 2002.

3. Grandmaison, P. A.; Nanowski, T. S.; Vance, J. E.: Externalization
of phosphatidylserine during apoptosis does not specifically require
either isoform of phosphatidylserine synthase. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1636: 1-11, 2004.

4. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/19/2009.

5. Stone, S. J.; Vance, J. E.: Phosphatidylserine synthase-1 and
-2 are localized to mitochondria-associated membranes. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
34534-34540, 2000.

6. Sturbois-Balcerzak, B.; Stone, S. J.; Sreenivas, A.; Vance, J.
E.: Structure and expression of the murine phosphatidylserine synthase-1
gene. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 8205-8212, 2001.

7. Tomohiro, S.; Kawaguti, A.; Kawabe, Y.; Kitada, S.; Kuge, O.:
Purification and characterization of human phosphatidylserine synthases
1 and 2. Biochem. J. 418: 421-429, 2009.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/19/2009

EDITED mgross: 05/20/2009
mgross: 5/20/2009
mgross: 5/19/2009

104702	TITLE *104702 AMYLASE, SALIVARY, C; AMY1C
DESCRIPTION See 104701.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/21/1991
EDITED supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 10/21/1991
300292	TITLE *300292 FORKHEAD BOX P3; FOXP3
;;SCURFIN;;
JM2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

FOXP3, a member of the fork-winged helix family of transcription
factors, plays an important role in the development and function of
naturally occurring CD4 (186940)-positive/CD25 (IL2RA; 147730)-positive
T regulatory cells (Tregs). Tregs are involved in active suppression of
inappropriate immune responses (summary by Ricciardelli et al., 2008).

CLONING

By combining high-resolution genetic and physical mapping with
large-scale sequence analysis, Brunkow et al. (2001) identified the gene
defective in 'scurfy' (sf) mice (see ANIMAL MODEL). The protein encoded
by this gene, designated Foxp3, is a member of the forkhead/winged-helix
family of transcriptional regulators and is highly conserved in humans.
In sf mice, a frameshift mutation results in a product lacking the
forkhead domain. Genetic complementation demonstrated that the protein
product of Foxp3, scurfin, is essential for normal immune homeostasis.

Brunkow et al. (2001) compared the amino acid sequences of mouse and
human scurfin with other members of the forkhead/winged-helix/HNF3
family of proteins and found the strongest similarity to the sequence of
glutamine-rich factor-1 (FOXP1; 605515).

Chatila et al. (2000) stated that the human FOXP3 open reading frame of
1,146 bp encodes a deduced 381-amino acid protein. By PCR of a human
peripheral blood mononuclear cell cDNA library, Smith et al. (2006)
cloned full-length FOXP3 and splice variants lacking exon 2 and both
exons 2 and 7. The full-length protein contains 431 amino acids. The
variant lacking exon 2 encodes a 396-amino acid protein lacking part of
the proline-rich domain, and the variant lacking exons 2 and 7 encodes a
369-amino acid protein that also lacks a large part of the putative
leucine zipper. Smith et al. (2006) noted that mice appear to lack Foxp3
variants.

GENE STRUCTURE

Brunkow et al. (2001) determined that the mouse and human FOXP3 genes
contain 11 coding exons. Exon-intron boundaries are identical across the
coding regions of the mouse and human genes.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Chatila et al. (2000) mapped the FOXP3
gene to chromosome Xp11.23.

GENE FUNCTION

Due to similarities between the autoimmunity and inflammation produced
by manipulation of CD25-positive/CD4-positive regulatory T (Tr, or Treg)
cells and those induced by genetic defects in the FOXP3 gene, Hori et
al. (2003) investigated the contribution of Foxp3 to the development
and/or function of Tr cells in mice. RT-PCR analysis of normal mice
showed stable, constitutive expression of Foxp3 that was high in Tr
cells, low in CD4-positive/CD25-negative cells, and absent in
CD4-negative/CD8 (see CD8A; 186910)-positive T cells. Transduced
expression of Foxp3 in CD4-positive/CD25-negative cells imparted a Tr
phenotype in these cells, with low levels of cytokine expression,
compared with nontransduced or vector-only transduced cells, and high
levels of CD103 (604682), GITR (TNFRSF18; 603905), and CTLA4 (123890).
Transduced cells also showed cell-cell contact suppressive activity in
vitro, as well as suppression of autoimmunity and inflammation in vivo.
Hori et al. (2003) proposed that FOXP3 may be a master regulatory gene
and a more specific marker of Tr cells than other cell surface
molecules. They also suggested that FOXP3 transduction could be a
therapeutic mode for the treatment of inflammatory diseases.

Stock et al. (2004) described a type of antigen-specific Tr cell that
developed in vivo from naive CD4-positive/CD25-negative T cells during a
Th1 polarized immune response. These Tr cells were induced by
CD8A-positive dendritic cells, produced both IFNG (147570) and IL10
(124092), and expressed the Th1 'master transcription factor' TBET
(TBX21; 604895), as well as ICOS (604558) and FOXP3. The cells inhibited
allergen-induced airway hyperreactivity in an IL10-dependent manner in
mice. Stock et al. (2004) concluded that these adaptive Tr cells are
related to, but distinct from, Th1 cells. They proposed that a spectrum
of adaptive Tr cell types exists, comprising Th1-like cells and the
previously reported Th2-like cells that are induced by CD8A-negative
dendritic cells and express the Th2 'master transcription factor' GATA3
(131320) and FOXP3.

Using a bicistronic reporter expressing red fluorescent protein knocked
in to the endogenous mouse Foxp3 locus, Wan and Flavell (2005)
demonstrated that Foxp3 was expressed predominantly in
CD4-positive/CD25-positive T cells, but also in some other CD4-positive
T-cell subsets. Stimulation of activated CD4 T cells with TGFB induced
both Foxp3 expression and suppressor T-cell function.

FOXP1, FOXP2 (605317), and FOXP3 all bind the FOX-binding site within
the IL2 (147680) promoter, and all but FOXP2 suppress IL2 promoter
activity. However, Bettelli et al. (2005) found that forced expression
of FOXP3, but not FOXP1 or FOXP2, in naive T cells suppressed not only
IL2, but also IL4 (147780) and IFNG due to its ability to physically
associate with and inhibit the cytokine gene transactivators NFKB (see
164011) and NFAT (see 600490). T cells derived from Foxp3-deficient
scurfy mice had significantly increased Nfat and Nfkb expression, which
could be lowered to physiologic levels by FOXP3 gene complementation.
Transduction of myelin proteolipid protein (PLP1; 300401)-specific
autoreactive mouse T cells with FOXP3 eliminated their ability to
mediate experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Bettelli et al.
(2005) concluded that, in addition to being associated with generation
of CD4-positive/CD25-positive regulatory T cells, FOXP3 acts on mature T
cells by repressing NFAT and NFKB.

Allan et al. (2005) found that, in contrast with results in mouse,
overexpression of human FOXP3 alone or together with a splice variant
lacking exon 2 in CD4-positive/CD25-positive regulatory T cells resulted
in lower proliferation and IL2 production, but no increase in
suppressive activity. Allan et al. (2005) suggested that factors in
addition to FOXP3 are required for development of regulatory T cells.

Copolymer I (COP-I) is a random polymer of 4 amino acids (glu, lys, ala,
and tyr) enriched in myelin basic protein (MBP; 159430) that is used to
treat multiple sclerosis (MS; see 126200). Hong et al. (2005) found that
COP-I increased expression of FOXP3 in peripheral blood CD4-positive T
cells of MS patients and induced conversion of
CD4-positive/CD25-negative cells to CD4-positive/CD25-positive
regulatory T cells. Induction of FOXP3 in CD4-positive T cells was
mediated by IFNG. Mice lacking Ifng exhibited an increase in
Cd4-positive/Cd25-positive cells after COP-I treatment, but these cells
did not express Foxp3. Hong et al. (2005) concluded that COP-I-mediated
activation of FOXP3 expression and conversion of
CD4-positive/CD25-negative cells to CD4-positive/CD25-positive
regulatory T cells requires IFNG.

Smith et al. (2006) found that overexpression of full-length FOXP3 or of
the FOXP3 variants lacking exon 2 or both exons 2 and 7 reduced
CD4-positive T-cell proliferation and cytokine secretion.

Pennington et al. (2006) showed that without any obvious effect on T
cell receptor-mediated selection, the normal differentiation of mouse
gamma-delta T cells into potent cytolytic and interferon-gamma-secreting
effector cells is switched towards an aggregate regulatory phenotype by
limiting the capacity of CD4+/CD8+ T cell progenitors to influence in
trans early gamma-delta cell progenitors. Unexpectedly, Pennington et
al. (2006) found that the propensity of early T cell receptor
alpha-beta(+) progenitors to differentiate into Foxp3+ regulatory T
cells is also regulated in trans by CD4+/CD8+ T-cell progenitor cells,
before agonist selection.

Ono et al. (2007) demonstrated that the transcription factor AML1/RUNX1
(151385), which is crucially required for normal hematopoiesis including
thymic T cell development, activates IL2 and IFN-gamma gene expression
in conventional CD4+ T cells through binding to their respective
promoters. In natural Treg cells, FOXP3 interacts physically with AML1.
Several lines of evidence supported a model in which the interaction
suppresses IL2 and IFN-gamma production, upregulates Treg
cell-associated molecules, and exerts suppressive activity. Ono et al.
(2007) concluded that this transcriptional control of Treg cell function
by an interaction between FOXP3 and AML1 can be exploited to control
physiologic and pathologic T cell-mediated immune responses.

Marson et al. (2007) identified FOXP3 target genes and reported that
many of these are key modulators of T cell activation and function.
Remarkably, the predominant, although not exclusive, effect of FOXP3
occupancy is to suppress the activation of target genes on T cell
stimulation. FOXP3 suppression of its targets appears to be crucial for
the normal function of regulatory T cells, because overactive variants
of some target genes are known to be associated with autoimmune disease.

Zheng et al. (2007) used genomewide analysis combining chromatin
immunoprecipitation with mouse genome tiling array profiling to identify
Foxp3 binding regions for approximately 700 genes and for an
intergenically encoded microRNA. The authors found that a large number
of Foxp3-bound genes are up- or downregulated in Foxp3+ T cells,
suggesting that Foxp3 acts as both a transcriptional activator and
repressor. Foxp3-mediated regulation unique to the thymus affects, among
others, genes encoding nuclear factors that control gene expression and
chromatin remodeling. In contrast, Foxp3 target genes shared by the
thymic and peripheral regulatory T cells encode primarily plasma
membrane proteins, as well as cell signaling proteins. Zheng et al.
(2007) concluded that distinct transcriptional subprograms implemented
by Foxp3 establish regulatory T cell lineage during differentiation and
its proliferative and functional competence in the periphery.

Zuo et al. (2007) observed that female mice heterozygous for the scurfin
mutation developed cancer at a high rate. The majority of cancers were
mammary carcinomas in which the wildtype Foxp3 allele was inactivated
and Erbb2 (164870) was overexpressed. Zuo et al. (2007) found that Foxp3
repressed transcription of the Erbb2 gene via interaction with forkhead
DNA-binding motifs in the Erbb2 promoter. FOXP3 expression was reduced
in 10 human tumor cell lines compared with normal mammary epithelial
cells and a nonmalignant cell line, and none of the tumor cell lines
expressed full-length FOXP3 transcripts.

Zuo et al. (2007) found that mouse mammary carcinomas heterozygous for a
Foxp3 mutation exhibited increased Skp2 (601436) expression.
Downregulation of FOXP3 by small interfering RNA in human mammary
epithelial cells led to increased SKP2 expression. Reporter gene assays
revealed that mouse Foxp3 directly interacted with and repressed the
Skp2 promoter. Analysis of more than 200 primary breast cancer samples
revealed an inverse correlation between FOXP3 and SKP2 levels. Zuo et
al. (2007) concluded that FOXP3 is an SKP2 transcriptional repressor.

Using immunohistochemistry, immunofluorescence microscopy, and RT-PCR,
Ricciardelli et al. (2008) showed that children with Crohn disease
(266600) treated with infliximab, an anti-TNF (191160) antibody, had
increased FOXP3-positive Tregs in their mucosa after treatment. Before
treatment, FOXP3-positive T cells were reduced compared with controls.
Ricciardelli et al. (2008) concluded that infliximab not only
neutralizes soluble TNF, but also affects the activation and possibly
the expansion of mucosal Tregs.

Zheng et al. (2009) showed that in mouse T regulatory cells, high
amounts of interferon regulatory factor-4 (IRF4; 601900), a
transcription factor essential for TH2 effector cell differentiation, is
dependent on Foxp3 expression. They proposed that IRF4 expression endows
T regulatory cells with the ability to suppress TH2 responses. Indeed,
ablation of a conditional Irf4 allele in T regulatory cells resulted in
selective dysregulation of TH2 responses, IL4-dependent immunoglobulin
isotype production, and tissue lesions with pronounced plasma cell
infiltration, in contrast to the mononuclear cell-dominated pathology
typical of mice lacking T regulatory cells. Zheng et al. (2009)
concluded that T regulatory cells use components of the transcriptional
machinery, promoting a particular type of effector CD4+ T cell
differentiation, to efficiently restrain the corresponding type of the
immune response.

Tsuji et al. (2009) demonstrated that suppressive Foxp3+CD4+ T cells can
differentiate into follicular B helper T cells (T-FH) in mouse Peyer
patches. The conversion of Foxp3+ T cells into T-FH cells requires the
loss of Foxp3 expression and subsequent interaction with B cells. Thus,
Tsuji et al. (2009) concluded that environmental cues present in gut
Peyer patches promote the selective differentiation of distinct helper T
cell subsets, such as T-FH cells.

Feuerer et al. (2009) examined Treg cells in mouse abdominal adipose
tissue and found that more than half of the CD4(+) T cells expressed
Foxp3, a much higher fraction than normally seen even in subcutaneous
fat; and there was progressive accumulation of CD4(+)/Foxp3(+) Treg
cells over time in the visceral, but not the subcutaneous, depot.
Comparison of the documented Treg cell signature with that of Treg cells
from abdominal fat revealed that many of the signature Treg cell genes
were not significantly up- or downregulated in the corresponding
population from visceral fat. This unique population of Treg cells was
specifically reduced in abdominal fat in insulin-resistant mouse models
of obesity, and loss- and gain-of-function experiments revealed that
these Treg cells influenced the inflammatory state of adipose tissue
and, therefore, insulin resistance. Cytokines differentially synthesized
by fat-resident Treg and conventional T cells directly affected the
synthesis of inflammatory mediators and glucose uptake by cultured
adipocytes. Analysis of paired frozen omental and subcutaneous fat
tissues from individuals with body mass indices (BMIs) in the obese to
morbidly obese range showed a correlation between BMI and the drop in
Treg cells in omental versus subcutaneous fat. Feuerer et al. (2009)
concluded that CD4(+)/FOXP3(+) Treg cells play a role in metabolic
homeostasis and in its dysregulation in obesity.

Pan et al. (2009) identified Eos (606239), a zinc finger transcription
factor of the Ikaros family, as a critical mediator of FOXP3-dependent
gene silencing in Tregs. Eos interacted directly with FOXP3 and induced
chromatin modifications that resulted in gene silencing in Tregs. Pan et
al. (2009) found that silencing of Eos in Tregs abrogated their ability
to suppress immune responses and endowed them with partial effector
function, thus demonstrating the critical role that Eos plays in Treg
programming.

FOXP3-positive Treg cells occasionally lose their suppressive phenotype
to perform a helper-like role without losing expression of FOXP3. Sharma
et al. (2013) showed that reprogramming of mouse Treg cells was
controlled by Il6 (147620)-dependent downregulation of Eos. Treatment of
Foxp3-positive Treg cells with cycloheximide showed that most retained
Eos expression (i.e., they were Eos-stable), whereas a Cd38
(107270)-positive subset rapidly lost Eos expression (i.e., they were
Eos-labile) with no change in Foxp3 expression. Thymic Treg cells from
Il6 -/- mice did not express Cd38 and did not have an Eos-labile subset.
Successful vaccination of naive mice required the
Cd38-positive/Eos-labile subset of Treg cells. However, immunodeficient
mice were fully protected from colitis by both Eos-stable and Eos-labile
Treg cells. Epigenetic analysis of spleen and thymus Treg cells revealed
significant differences in methylation between Eos-labile and Eos-stable
cells. Eos downregulation was prevented by tumor-induced Ido (147435).
Sharma et al. (2013) concluded that the Eos corepressor defines 2 sets
of FOXP3-positive Treg cells, one that is stably suppressive and the
other a labile one that is available in certain circumstances to provide
helper activity.

Using flow cytometric analysis, Casetti et al. (2009) demonstrated that,
like alpha-beta T cells, gamma-delta cells can also function as Tregs
that express FOXP3 when stimulated with phosphoantigen in the presence
of TGFB1 (190180) and IL15 (600554).

Zheng et al. (2010) described the function of 3 Foxp3 conserved
noncoding DNA sequence (CNS) elements termed CNS1-3 in T regulatory cell
fate determination in mice. The pioneer element CNS3, which acts to
potently increase the frequency of T regulatory cells generated in the
thymus and the periphery, binds c-Rel (164910) in in vitro assays. In
contrast, CNS1, which contains a TGF-beta (190180)-NFAT (see 600489)
response element, is superfluous for thymic T regulatory cell
differentiation, but has a prominent role in periphery T regulatory cell
generation in gut-associated lymphoid tissues. CNS2, although
dispensable for Foxp3 induction, is required for Foxp3 expression in the
progeny of dividing T regulatory cells. Foxp3 binds to CNS2 in a
Cbf-beta (121360)-Runx1 (151385) and CpG DNA demethylation-dependent
manner, suggesting that FOXP3 recruitment to this cellular memory module
facilitates the heritable maintenance of the active state of the FOXP3
locus and, therefore, T regulatory lineage stability. Zheng et al.
(2010) concluded that their studies demonstrated that the composition,
size, and maintenance of the T regulatory cell population are controlled
by Foxp3 CNS elements engaged in response to distinct cell-extrinsic or
-intrinsic cues.

Human T-lymphotropic virus (HTLV)-1 is a persistent retrovirus estimated
to infect 10 to 20 million people. The majority of infected individuals
are asymptomatic carriers, but 1 to 3% of infected individuals develop
progressive inflammation of the central nervous system (see 159580), and
about 4% of seropositive individuals develop a malignant
lymphoproliferative disorder called adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma
(ATLL). Toulza et al. (2010) found that there was a high concentration
of plasma CCL22 (602957) in HTLV-1-infected individuals and that the
concentration was strongly correlated with the frequency of
FOXP3-positive cells, which express the CCL22 receptor CCR4 (604836).
CCL22 was produced by cells that expressed the HTLV-1 transactivator
protein Tax, and the increased CCL22 enhanced the migration and survival
of FOXP3-positive cells in vitro. Toulza et al. (2010) concluded that
HTLV-1-induced CCL22 causes the high frequency of FOXP3-positive cells
observed in HTLV-1 infection and that FOXP3-positive cells may both
retard the progression of ATLL and HTLV-1-associated inflammatory
diseases and contribute to the immune suppression seen in HTLV-1
infection.

Using RT-PCR and flow cytometric analysis, Miura et al. (2004) showed
that the cytokine storm associated with graft-versus-host disease (GVHD;
see 614395) correlated with decreased FOXP3 expression in mononuclear
cells of bone marrow transplant patients. FOXP3 expression was higher in
patients without GVHD. FOXP3 expression positively correlated with the
presence of recent thymic emigrants. Miura et al. (2004) suggested that
defective thymic function contributes to the impaired reconstitution of
immune regulatory mechanisms after transplantation, and that decreased
regulatory mechanisms provide an environment that permits development of
GVHD.

Using flow cytometric analysis to identify Treg frequencies in 32 blood
donors with acute West Nile virus (WNV; see 610379) infection, Lanteri
et al. (2009) demonstrated that CD4-positive/FOXP3-positive Treg
frequencies increased in all individuals in the 3 months after the index
donation that revealed WNV RNA in plasma. However, symptomatic donors
exhibited lower Treg frequencies up to 1 year after index donation
without showing systemic T-cell or generalized inflammatory responses.
Studies in WNV-infected mice showed that symptomatic mice displayed
lower Treg frequencies than asymptomatic mice. Moreover, mice lacking
Foxp3-positive Tregs experienced increased lethality following WNV
infection compared with controls. Lanteri et al. (2009) concluded that
higher levels of peripheral Tregs after infection protect against severe
WNV disease in immunocompetent animals and humans.

Liu et al. (2010) reported that the SUMO E3 ligase PIAS1 (603566)
restricts the differentiation of natural T regulatory cells by
maintaining a repressive chromatin state of the FOXP3 promoter. PIAS1
acts by binding to the FOXP3 promoter to recruit DNA methyltransferases
and heterochromatin protein-1 (CBX5; 604478) for epigenetic
modifications. PIAS1 deletion caused promoter demethylation, reduced
histone H3 methylation (see 602810) at lys9, and enhanced promoter
accessibility. Consistently, Pias1-null mice displayed an increased
natural T regulatory cell population and were resistant to the
development of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Liu et al.
(2010) concluded that their studies identified an epigenetic mechanism
that negatively regulates the differentiation of natural T regulatory
cells.

Although the mammalian immune system is generally thought to develop in
a linear fashion, findings in avian and murine species argued instead
for the developmentally ordered appearance (or 'layering') of distinct
HSCs that give rise to distinct lymphocyte lineages at different stages
of development. Mold et al. (2010) provided evidence of an analogous
layered immune system in humans. Mold et al. (2010) investigated whether
fetal and adult HSPCs might differ in their capacity to generate Tregs
in the thymus, because fetal T cells appear to be predisposed to
generating Foxp3+ Tregs upon stimulation in vitro, and there is an
abundance of Tregs in the peripheral tissues of midgestation fetuses.
Both fetal liver- and fetal bone marrow-derived HSPCs were found to
generate populations of CD25+Foxp3+ SP4 thymocytes. Thus it appeared
that fetal HSPCs display a heightened capacity to generate Tregs during
thymic maturation. Mold et al. (2010) provided evidence that the fetal T
cell lineage is biased toward immune tolerance. They concluded that
their observations offered a mechanistic explanation for the tolerogenic
properties of the developing fetus and for variable degrees of immune
responsiveness at birth.

Using predominantly wildtype and Hif1a (603348)-/- mouse T cells, Dang
et al. (2011) showed that Hif1a was specifically required for
differentiation of naive T cells into interleukin-17 (IL17;
603149)-expressing helper T (Th) cells. Hif1a interacted directly with
Ror-gamma-t (RORC; 602943) and acetyltransferase p300 (EP300; 602700) at
the Il17 promoter, and all 3 factors were required for optimum Il17
expression. Simultaneously, Hif1a downregulated differentiation of naive
T cells into Treg cells by directing proteasomal degradation of Foxp3 by
a mechanism that was independent of Hif1a transcriptional activity.
Differentiation of Th17 cells and loss of Treg cells was enhanced in
cultures subjected to hypoxic conditions. Knockout of Hif1a in mouse T
cells rendered mice highly resistant to Mog (159465)-induced
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, a mouse model of multiple
sclerosis. Dang et al. (2011) concluded that HIF1A has a role in immune
responses by controlling the balance between Th17 and Treg cells.

Pregnancy is an intricately orchestrated process where immune effector
cells with fetal specificity are selectively silenced. This requires the
sustained expansion of immune-suppressive maternal FOXP3+ regulatory T
cells (Treg cells), because even transient partial ablation triggers
fetal-specific effector T-cell activation and pregnancy loss. Rowe et
al. (2012) showed that pregnancy selectively stimulates the accumulation
of maternal FOXP3+ CD4 cells with fetal specificity using tetramer-based
enrichment that allows the identification of rare endogenous T cells.
Interestingly, after delivery, fetal-specific Treg cells persist at
elevated levels, maintain tolerance to preexisting fetal antigen, and
rapidly reaccumulate during subsequent pregnancy. The accelerated
expansion of Treg cells during secondary pregnancy was driven almost
exclusively by proliferation of fetal-specific FOXP3+ cells retained
from prior pregnancy, whereas induced FOXP3 expression and proliferation
of preexisting FOXP3+ cells each contribute to Treg expansion during
primary pregnancy. Furthermore, fetal resorption in secondary compared
with primary pregnancy becomes more resilient to partial maternal FOXP3+
cell ablation. Thus, Rowe et al. (2012) concluded that pregnancy
imprints FOXP3+ CD4 cells that sustain protective regulatory memory to
fetal antigen.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Chatila et al. (2000), who referred to the FOXP3 gene as JM2, identified
it by the positional-candidate approach as the likely site of mutations
in the disorder they referred to as X-linked autoimmunity-allergic
dysregulation syndrome (XLAAD) and known by others as IPEX (304790).
Chatila et al. (2000) detected a mutation in the FOXP3 gene in 2
unrelated kindreds.

Wildin et al. (2001) sequenced the human FOXP3 gene to determine whether
the X-linked syndrome of immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, and
enteropathy (IPEX) is the human equivalent of the scurfy mouse. They
identified a novel mutation in each proband from 4 families with IPEX.
Each mutation affected the forkhead/winged-helix domain of the scurfin
protein, indicating that the mutations may disrupt critical DNA
interactions. In a fifth family studied by Wildin et al. (2001) in which
a variant form of IPEX mapped to the pericentromeric region of the X
chromosome, no mutation in the FOXP3 gene was found. A later age of
onset, waxing and waning clinical course, and occasional compatibility
with prolonged survival had been reported in this family (Powell et al.,
1982). This contrasted with the early, unrelenting course of the
disorder seen in the other families. Wildin et al. (2001) suggested that
this fifth family may harbor a noncoding FOXP3 mutation that affects
transcriptional regulation or RNA splicing, resulting in a milder,
environmentally dependent phenotype.

Bennett et al. (2001) also identified mutations in the FOXP3 gene in
IPEX patients. They compared the mutations in FOXP3 with those in FOXE1
(602617) which result in a thyroid agenesis syndrome, and with those in
FOXC1 (601090) which cause malformation of the anterior segment of the
eye (Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly).

Bassuny et al. (2003) investigated the FOXP3 gene as a candidate for the
type I diabetes susceptibility locus IDDMX (300136). They screened the
FOXP3 gene for microsatellite and single nucleotide polymorphisms and
performed an association study between the gene and type I diabetes in
the Japanese population. One microsatellite polymorphism, (GT)n, was
identified in intron 0, and a (GT)15 allele showed a significantly
higher frequency in patients with type I diabetes than in controls
(43.1% vs 32.6%, P = 0.0027). The evaluation of promoter/enhancer
activity of the (GT)n polymorphism was performed by dual luciferase
reporter assay. A significant difference in the enhancer activity
between (GT)15 and (GT)16 dinucleotide repeats was detected.

Owen et al. (2003) studied 2 kindreds (21 subjects total) with 4 male
infants (3 deceased) and 1 girl affected by IPEX. In 1 of the families
they found a novel frameshift mutation in the FOXP3 gene (300292.0008).
In the second family, the FOXP3 locus was excluded by recombination, and
no FOXP3 mutations were found. They concluded that their data provided
evidence for a nonlinked autosomal locus, suggesting genetic
heterogeneity.

Bacchetta et al. (2006) studied the phenotype and in vitro function of
CD4-positive T cells and CD4-positive/CD25(high) Treg cells in 4
children with IPEX. Flow cytometric analysis demonstrated that
distribution and expression of various T-cell markers was comparable
between patients and normal donor controls. Patient Treg cells showed
different degrees of suppressive activity depending on the FOXP3
mutation, but none of the patients cells could suppress autologous
responder cells. The defect was overcome after in vitro expansion of
Treg cells. Of the 4 IPEX patients, only 1, who had a mutation in codon
1 (300292.0012) that resulted in no protein expression, had impaired
transcription or translation of FOXP3. All patients had normal
proliferative responses after T-cell receptor (TCR) stimulation, but
they were unable to produce IL2 or IFNG. Bacchetta et al. (2006)
concluded that Treg cells can be present in normal numbers in IPEX
patients, but their capacity to suppress is impaired depending on the
type of mutation, the strength of TCR stimuli, and the genotype of the
effector T cells.

ANIMAL MODEL

'Scurfy' (sf) is an X-linked recessive mouse mutant that results in
lethality in hemizygous males 16 to 25 days after birth, and is
characterized by overproliferation of CD4+/CD8- T lymphocytes, extensive
multiorgan infiltration, and elevation of numerous cytokines (Lyon et
al., 1990; Clark et al., 1999). Similar to animals that lack expression
of either Ctla4 (123890) or Tgf-beta (TGFB1; 190180), the pathology
observed in sf mice seems to result from an inability to regulate
properly CD4+/CD8- T-cell activity. Brunkow et al. (2001) determined
that the Foxp3 gene is mutant in sf mice. A frameshift mutation results
in a product lacking the forkhead domain. Genetic complementation
demonstrated that the protein product of Foxp3, scurfin, is essential
for normal immune homeostasis.

In mice overexpressing the Foxp3 gene, Khattri et al. (2001) observed
fewer T cells. These remaining T cells had poor proliferative and
cytolytic responses and poor IL2 production, although thymic development
appeared normal. Histologic analysis showed that peripheral lymphoid
organs, particularly lymph nodes, were relatively acellular. Khattri et
al. (2001) concluded that excessive scurfin activity leads to a
hypoactive immune state, suggesting that scurfin acts as a central
regulator of T-cell activity.

By generating mice deficient in Foxp3, Fontenot et al. (2003) showed
that Foxp3 is required for the development of CD4-positive/CD25-positive
regulatory T cells. In addition, the IPEX-like lymphoproliferative
autoimmune syndrome observed in Foxp3 -/- mice resulted from a
deficiency in these regulatory T cells. The authors found that ectopic
expression of Foxp3 activated a suppressor function in
CD4-positive/CD25-negative T cells. Independently, Khattri et al. (2003)
and Hori et al. (2003) reached similar conclusions.

Wan and Flavell (2007) noted that individuals with graft-versus-host
disease, myasthenia gravis (see 254200), and multiple sclerosis have
decreased FOXP3 expression. They generated a mouse model in which
endogenous Foxp3 expression was attenuated in Tr cells. These mice were
born at a mendelian ratio. Heterozygous females were fertile and
phenotypically normal, but hemizygous males were barren and runted. Most
males developed scaly skin, and nearly all developed a blepharitis-like
condition. All mutant males died by 3 months of age due to an aggressive
lymphoproliferative autoimmune syndrome, including drastically increased
serum autoantibodies; however, thymic development was not affected. The
immune-suppressive activities of T cells with attenuated Foxp3
expression were nearly abolished in vitro and in vivo, whereas their in
vitro anergy was maintained, including preferential development into
Th2-type effector cells even in a Th1-polarizing environment. Wan and
Flavell (2007) concluded that decreased FOXP3 expression causes immune
disease by subverting the suppressive function of Tr cells and
converting Tr cells into effector cells.

Gavin et al. (2007) studied mouse T cells that actively transcribed a
Foxp3-null allele, but lacked Foxp3 protein. Using flow cytometric and
microarray analyses, they found that, although Foxp3 function was
required for Tr suppressor cell activity, Foxp3 largely amplified and
fixed preexisting molecular features of Tr cells. Furthermore, Foxp3
solidified Tr-cell lineage stability by modifying cell surface and
signaling molecules, including Foxp3-dependent repression of
phosphodiesterase-3b (PDE3B; 602047). Introduction of Pde3b into Tr
cells and transfer of these cells to T-cell-deficient mice substantially
reduced the number of Tr cells. Gavin et al. (2007) proposed that
reduced PDE3B expression may be a unique marker of Tr cells.

To determine whether dysfunction or a lack of Treg cells is
etiologically involved in pathogenesis of mouse scurfy and its human
correlate, IPEX, Lahl et al. (2007) generated BAC-transgenic mice termed
'depletion of regulatory T cell' (DEREG) mice expressing a diphtheria
toxin (DT) receptor-enhanced green fluorescent fusion protein under
control of Foxp3. Injection of DT allowed selective and efficient
detection and inducible depletion of Foxp3-positive Treg cells without
affecting Cd25-positive effector T cells. Histopathologic analysis
showed that DT injection in newborn DEREG mice ablated Treg cells and
led to development of scurfy-like symptoms with splenomegaly,
lymphadenopathy, insulitis, and severe skin inflammation. Lahl et al.
(2007) concluded that absence of Foxp3-positive Treg cells is sufficient
to induce a scurfy-like phenotype.

Lund et al. (2008) examined a role for regulatory T cells (Tregs) in
mucosal herpes simplex virus infection using Foxp3 knockin mice
harboring Treg subsets tagged with either green fluorescent protein
(GFP) or human diphtheria toxin receptor. They observed an accelerated
fatal infection with increase in viral load in the mucosa and central
nervous system after ablation of Tregs. Although augmented interferon
production was detected in the draining lymph nodes in Treg-deprived
mice, it was profoundly reduced at the infection site. This was
associated with a delay in the arrival of natural killer cells,
dendritic cells, and T cells to the site of infection and a sharp
increase in proinflammatory chemokine levels in the draining lymph
nodes. Lund et al. (2008) concluded that Tregs facilitate early
protective responses to local viral infection by allowing a timely entry
of immune cells into infected tissue.

Rowe et al. (2011) showed that expansion of Foxp3-positive Tregs during
pregnancy in mice conferred enhanced susceptibility to Listeria and
Salmonella bacterial infection. Treg ablation reduced susceptibility,
but it broke maternal tolerance to fetal antigen and triggered fetal
resorption. However, mice with Foxp3-positive cells and defective Il10
had reduced infection susceptibility without affecting pregnancy
outcome.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, ARG397TRP

Wildin et al. (2001) identified an arg397-to-trp mutation in the FOXP3
gene (due to 1189C-T) as the cause of IPEX (304790) in one of the
patients previously reported by Levy-Lahad and Wildin (2001). The infant
died at age 5 weeks with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus,
enteropathy, hypothyroidism, thrombocytopenia, and peritonitis.

.0002
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, 20-BP DEL, 3-BP INS, NT1290

In an infant with IPEX (304790) reported by Peake et al. (1996), Wildin
et al. (2001) identified a deletion-insertion mutation (1290-1309del,
TGG ins) in the FOXP3 gene. The infant died at age 10 months with IDDM,
enteropathy, anemia, lymphadenopathy, eczema, and sepsis.

.0003
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, PHE371CYS

In a child with IPEX (304790), Wildin et al. (2001) identified a
phe371-to-cys mutation in the FOXP3 gene. The patient had IDDM,
enteropathy, anemia, and exfoliated dermatitis, and was surviving after
bone marrow transplant.

.0004
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, ALA384THR

Wildin et al. (2001) identified an ala384-to-thr (A384T) mutation in the
FOXP3 gene in an infant with IPEX (304790) who died at age 4 months with
IDDM, enteropathy, hypothyroidism, thrombocytopenia, exfoliated
dermatitis, and sepsis.

In a large family with cases of IPEX in multiple sibships through 4
generations, previously reported by Ferguson et al. (2000), Bennett et
al. (2001) identified an A384T mutation in the FOXP3 gene.

.0005
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, 2-BP DEL, 1481CT

In a family of Japanese extraction, Bennett et al. (2001) found that the
single male with IPEX (304790) had a CT dinucleotide deletion at
positions 1481-1482 within the FOXP3 termination codon, predicting a
frameshift and addition of 25 amino acids.

.0006
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, IVS9DS, A-G, +4

In affected members of a kindred with IPEX (304790), Chatila et al.
(2000) found an A-to-G substitution at position +4 of the 5-prime donor
splice junction of intron 9 of the FOXP3 gene. The substitution was not
present in 2 sibs and the parents, including the mother, indicating that
it arose de novo. Sequence analysis of RT-PCR-amplified JM2 mRNA
transcripts revealed skipping of JM2 exon 9 in transcripts of the index
case. Exon 9 skipping resulted in a frameshift at codon 273 that gave
rise to a premature stop signal at codon 286. This led to the generation
of a truncated JM2 protein that lacked the forkhead homology domain.

.0007
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, GLU203DEL

In a kindred with IPEX (304790), Chatila et al. (2000) found that
affected males were hemizygous for a deletion of 3 bp in exon 7 of the
FOXP3 gene, resulting in loss of the glutamic acid-201 residue.

.0008
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, 1-BP DEL

In the proband of a family with IPEX (304790), Owen et al. (2003)
identified a single-base deletion of adenine at the second position of
codon 76 in exon 2 of the FOXP3 gene. The mutation resulted in
frameshift leading to a truncated protein product (108 residues vs 431
in wildtype). The mother and the proband's 2 healthy sisters were
carriers of the mutation. The brother of the proband had died at 6 weeks
of age and was found to have a lymphoid cell infiltration of the
pancreas.

.0009
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, PHE373ALA

In a patient with severe IPEX (304790) who presented with IDDM at age 2
weeks, Bacchetta et al. (2006) identified a double substitution (TT to
GC) at nucleotide 1305 in exon 10 of the FOXP3 gene, resulting in a
phe373-to-ala (F373A) substitution in the forkhead domain. The mutation
was present in the patient's mother, but not in a healthy brother who
served as the source of an HLA-identical bone marrow transplant that
resolved all IPEX symptoms except the IDDM.

.0010
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, PHE324LYS

Bacchetta et al. (2006) reported a patient with a mild form of IPEX
(304790) who presented at age 4 months with severe enteritis and eczema
and high serum IgE that resolved spontaneously. The patient had a T-to-C
transition at nucleotide 970 in exon 9 of the FOXP3 gene, resulting in a
phe324-to-leu (F324L) substitution in the forkhead domain, and a
splice-site mutation, a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 543, affecting
the 5-prime end of exon 5. The patient's healthy mother and an older
brother who showed no symptoms of IPEX had the same mutations.

.0011
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, 543C-T

See 300292.0010 and Bacchetta et al. (2006).

.0012
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, MET1ILE

In a patient with severe IPEX (304790) who presented with neonatal IDDM,
enteritis, recurrent skin infections, and hyper-IgE, Bacchetta et al.
(2006) identified a G-to-A transition in the first codon of the FOXP3
gene, resulting in a met1-to-ile (M1I) substitution and no protein
expression. The mutation was not present in the patient's mother. An
HLA-identical bone marrow transplant from an unrelated donor appeared to
resolve symptoms of autoimmune disease.

.0013
IMMUNODYSREGULATION, POLYENDOCRINOPATHY, AND ENTEROPATHY, X-LINKED
FOXP3, PRO367LEU

In a Japanese patient with IPEX (304790), Suzuki et al. (2007)
identified a pro367-to-leu (P367L) mutation in the FOX3P gene. The
mutation occurred in the FKH domain, which is essential for DNA binding.
The patient was born with severe SGA at 38 weeks' gestation. He
presented with failure to thrive and was diagnosed with diabetes
mellitus. He manifested intractable diarrhea and eczema, liver
dysfunction with hyperammonemia, thrombocytopenia, and sepsis. At 14
weeks of age he suffered from acute renal failure resulting in
congestive heart failure and pulmonary edema. He died at age 16 weeks.

REFERENCE 1. Allan, S. E.; Passerini, L.; Bacchetta, R.; Crellin, N.; Dai, M.;
Orban, P. C.; Ziegler, S. F.; Roncarolo, M. G.; Levings, M. K.: The
role of 2 FOXP3 isoforms in the generation of human CD4+ Tregs. J.
Clin. Invest. 115: 3276-3284, 2005.

2. Bacchetta, R.; Passerini, L.; Gambineri, E.; Dai, M.; Allan, S.
E.; Perroni, L.; Dagna-Bricarelli, F.; Sartirana, C.; Matthes-Martin,
S.; Lawitschka, A.; Azzari, C.; Ziegler, S. F.; Levings, M. K.; Roncarolo,
M. G.: Defective regulatory and effector T cell functions in patients
with FOXP3 mutations. J. Clin. Invest. 1713-1722, 2006.

3. Bassuny, W. M.; Ihara, K.; Sasaki, Y.; Kuromaru, R.; Kohno, H.;
Matsuura, N.; Hara, T.: A functional polymorphism in the promoter/enhancer
region of the FOXP3/Scurfin gene associated with type 1 diabetes. Immunogenetics 55:
149-156, 2003.

4. Bennett, C. L.; Christie, J.; Ramsdell, F.; Brunkow, M. E.; Ferguson,
P. J.; Whitesell, L.; Kelly, T. E.; Saulsbury, F. T.; Chance, P. F.;
Ochs, H. D.: The immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy,
X-linked syndrome (IPEX) is caused by mutations of FOXP3. Nature
Genet. 27: 20-21, 2001.

5. Bettelli, E.; Dastrange, M.; Oukka, M.: Foxp3 interacts with nuclear
factor of activated T cells and NF-kappa-B to repress cytokine gene
expression and effector functions of T helper cells. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 102: 5138-5143, 2005.

6. Brunkow, M. E.; Jeffery, E. W.; Hjerrild, K. A.; Paeper, B.; Clark,
L. B.; Yasayko, S.-A.; Wilkinson, J. E.; Galas, D.; Ziegler, S. F.;
Ramsdell, F.: Disruption of a new forkhead/winged-helix protein,
scurfin, results in the fatal lymphoproliferative disorder of the
scurfy mouse. Nature Genet. 27: 68-73, 2001.

7. Casetti, R.; Agrati, C.; Wallace, M.; Sacchi, A.; Martini, F.;
Martino, A.; Rinaldi, A.; Malkovsky, M.: Cutting edge: TGF-beta-1
and IL-15 induce FOXP3(+) gamma-delta regulatory T cells in the presence
of antigen stimulation. J. Immun. 183: 3574-3577, 2009.

8. Chatila, T. A.; Blaeser, F.; Ho, N.; Lederman, H. M.; Voulgaropoulos,
C.; Helms, C.; Bowcock, A. M.: JM2, encoding a fork head-related
protein, is mutated in X-linked autoimmunity-allergic disregulation
(sic) syndrome. J. Clin. Invest. 106: R75-R81, 2000.

9. Clark, L. B.; Appleby, M. W.; Brunkow, M. E.; Wilkinson, J. E.;
Ziegler, S. F.; Ramsdell, F.: Cellular and molecular characterization
of the scurfy mouse mutant. J. Immun. 162: 2546-2554, 1999.

10. Dang, E. V.; Barbi, J.; Yang, H.-Y.; Jinasena, D.; Yu, H.; Zheng,
Y.; Bordman, Z.; Fu, J.; Kim, Y.; Yen, H.-R.; Luo, W.; Zeller, K.;
Shimoda, L.; Topalian, S. L.; Semenza, G. L.; Dang, C. V.; Pardoll,
D. M.; Pan, F.: Control of TH17/T-reg balance by hypoxia-inducible
factor 1. Cell 146: 772-784, 2011.

11. Ferguson, P. J.; Blanton, S. H.; Saulsbury, F. T.; McDuffie, M.
J.; Lemahieu, V.; Gastier, J. M.; Francke, U.; Borowitz, S. M.; Sutphen,
J. L.; Kelly, T. E.: Manifestations and linkage analysis in X-Linked
autoimmunity-immunodeficiency syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 90: 390-397,
2000.

12. Feuerer, M.; Herrero, L.; Cipolletta, D.; Naaz, A.; Wong, J.;
Nayer, A.; Lee, J.; Goldfine, A. B.; Benoist, C.; Shoelson, S.; Mathis,
D.: Lean, but not obese, fat is enriched for a unique population
of regulatory T cells that affect metabolic parameters. Nature Med. 15:
930-939, 2009.

13. Fontenot, J. D.; Gavin, M. A.; Rudensky, A. Y.: Foxp3 programs
the development and function of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells. Nature
Immun. 4: 330-336, 2003.

14. Gavin, M. A.; Rasmussen, J. P.; Fontenot, J. D.; Vasta, V.; Manganiello,
V. C.; Beavo, J. A.; Rudensky, A. Y.: Foxp3-dependent programme of
regulatory T-cell differentiation. Nature 445: 771-775, 2007.

15. Hong, J.; Li, N.; Zhang, X.; Zheng, B.; Zhang, J. Z.: Induction
of CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells by copolymer-I through activation
of transcription factor Foxp3. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 6449-6454,
2005.

16. Hori, S.; Nomura, T.; Sakaguchi, S.: Control of regulatory T
cell development by the transcription factor Foxp3. Science 299:
1057-1061, 2003.

17. Khattri, R.; Cox, T.; Yasayko, S.-A.; Ramsdell, F.: An essential
role for Scurfin in CD4+CD25+ T regulatory cells. Nature Immun. 4:
337-342, 2003.

18. Khattri, R.; Kasprowicz, D.; Cox, T.; Mortrud, M.; Appleby, M.
W.; Brunkow, M. E.; Ziegler, S. F.; Ramsdell, F.: The amount of scurfin
protein determines peripheral T cell number and responsiveness. J.
Immun. 167: 6312-6320, 2001.

19. Lahl, K.; Loddenkemper, C.; Drouin, C.; Freyer, J.; Arnason, J.;
Eberl, G.; Hamann, A.; Wagner, H.; Huehn, J.; Sparwasser, T.: Selective
depletion of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells induces a scurfy-like disease. J.
Exp. Med. 204: 57-63, 2007.

20. Lanteri, M. C.; O'Brien, K. M.; Purtha, W. E.; Cameron, M. J.;
Lund, J. M.; Owen, R. E.; Heitman, J. W.; Custer, B.; Hirschkorn,
D. F.; Tobler, L. H.; Kiely, N.; Prince, H. E.; Ndhlovu, L. C.; Nixon,
D. F.; Kamel, H. T.; Kelvin, D. J.; Busch, M. P.; Rudensky, A. Y.;
Diamond, M. S.; Norris, P. J.: Tregs control the development of symptomatic
West Nile virus infection in humans and mice. J. Clin. Invest. 119:
3266-3277, 2009.

21. Levy-Lahad, E.; Wildin, R. S.: Neonatal diabetes mellitus, enteropathy,
thrombocytopenia, and endocrinopathy: further evidence for an X-linked
lethal syndrome. J. Pediat. 138: 577-580, 2001.

22. Liu, B.; Tahk, S.; Yee, K. M.; Fan, G.; Shuai, K.: The ligase
PIAS1 restricts natural regulatory T cell differentiation by epigenetic
repression. Science 330: 521-525, 2010.

23. Lund, J. M.; Hsing, L.; Pham, T. T.; Rudensky, A. Y.: Coordination
of early protective immunity to viral infection by regulatory T cells. Science 320:
1220-1224, 2008.

24. Lyon, M. F.; Peters, J.; Glenister, P. H.; Ball, S.; Wright, E.
: The scurfy mouse mutant has previously unrecognized hematological
abnormalities and resembles Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 87: 2433-2437, 1990.

25. Marson, A.; Kretschmer, K.; Frampton, G. M.; Jacobsen, E. S.;
Polansky, J. K.; Maclsaac, K. D.; Levine, S. S.; Fraenkel, E.; von
Boehmer, H.; Young, R. A.: Foxp3 occupancy and regulation of key
target genes during T-cell stimulation. Nature 445: 931-935, 2007.

26. Miura, Y.; Thoburn, C. J.; Bright, E. C.; Phelps, M. L.; Shin,
T.; Matsui, E. C.; Matsui, W. H.; Arai, S.; Fuchs, E. J.; Vogelsang,
G. B.; Jones, R. J.; Hess, A. D.: Association of Foxp3 regulatory
gene expression with graft-versus-host disease. Blood 104: 2187-2193,
2004.

27. Mold, J. E.; Venkatasubrahmanyam, S.; Burt, T. D.; Michaelsson,
J.; Rivera, J. M.; Galkina, S. A.; Weinberg, K.; Stoddart, C. A.;
McCune, J. M.: Fetal and adult hematopoietic stem cells give rise
to distinct T cell lineages in humans. Science 330: 1695-1699, 2010.
Note: Erratum: Science 331: 534 only, 2011.

28. Ono, M.; Yaguchi, H.; Ohkura, N.; Kitabayashi, I.; Nagamura, Y.;
Nomura, T.; Miyachi, Y.; Tsukada, T.; Sakaguchi, S.: Foxp3 controls
regulatory T-cell function by interacting with AML1/Runx1. Nature 446:
685-689, 2007.

29. Owen, C. J.; Jennings, C. E.; Imrie, H.; Lachaux, A.; Bridges,
N. A.; Cheetham, T. D.; Pearce, S. H. S.: Mutational analysis of
the FOXP3 gene and evidence for genetic heterogeneity in the immunodysregulation,
polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy syndrome. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
6034-6039, 2003.

30. Pan, F.; Yu, H.; Dang, E. V.; Barbi, J.; Pan, X.; Grosso, J. F.;
Jinasena, D.; Sharma, S. M.; McCadden, E. M.; Getnet, D.; Drake, C.
G.; Liu, J. O.; Ostrowski, M. C.; Pardoll, D. M.: Eos mediates Foxp3-dependent
gene silencing in CD4+ regulatory T cells. Science 325: 1142-1146,
2009.

31. Peake, J. E.; McCrossin, R. B.; Byrne, G.; Shepard, R.: X-linked
immune dysregulation, neonatal insulin dependent diabetes, and intractable
diarrhoea. Arch. Dis. Child. 74: F195-199, 1996.

32. Pennington, D. J.; Silva-Santos, B.; Silberzahn, T.; Escorcio-Correia,
M.; Woodward, M. J.; Roberts, S. J.; Smith, A. L.; Dyson, P. J.; Hayday,
A. C.: Early events in the thymus affect the balance of effector
and regulatory T cells. Nature 444: 1073-1077, 2006.

33. Powell, B. R.; Buist, N. R. M.; Stenzel, P.: An X-linked syndrome
of diarrhea, polyendocrinopathy, and fatal infection in infancy. J.
Pediat. 100: 731-737, 1982.

34. Ricciardelli, I.; Lindley, K. J.; Londei, M.; Quaratino, S.:
Anti tumour necrosis-alpha therapy increases the number of FOXP3(+)
regulatory T cells in children affected by Crohn's disease. Immunology 125:
178-183, 2008.

35. Rowe, J. H.; Ertelt, J. M.; Aguilera, M. N.; Farrar, M. A.; Way,
S. S.: Foxp3+ regulatory T cell expansion required for sustaining
pregnancy compromises host defense against prenatal bacterial pathogens. Cell
Host Microbe 10: 54-64, 2011.

36. Rowe, J. H.; Ertelt, J. M.; Xin, L.; Way, S. S.: Pregnancy imprints
regulatory memory that sustains anergy to fetal antigen. Nature 490:
102-106, 2012.

37. Sharma, M. D.; Huang, L.; Choi, J.-H.; Lee, E.-J.; Wilson, J.
M.; Lemos, H.; Pan, F.; Blazar, B. R.; Pardoll, D. M.; Mellor, A.
L.; Shi, H.; Munn, D. H.: An inherently bifunctional subset of Foxp3+
T helper cells is controlled by the transcription factor Eos. Immunity 38:
998-1012, 2013.

38. Smith, E. L.; Finney, H. M.; Nesbitt, A. M.; Ramsdell, F.; Robinson,
M. K.: Splice variants of human FOXP3 are functional inhibitors of
human CD4+ T-cell activation. Immunology 119: 203-211, 2006.

39. Stock, P.; Akbari, O.; Berry, G.; Freeman, G. J.; DeKruyff, R.
H.; Umetsu, D. T.: Induction of T helper type 1-like regulatory cells
that express Foxp3 and protect against airway hyper-reactivity. Nature
Immun. 5: 1149-1156, 2004.

40. Suzuki, S.; Makita, Y.; Mukai, T.; Matsuo, K.; Ueda, O.; Fujieda,
K.: Molecular basis of neonatal diabetes in Japanese patients. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 3979-3985, 2007. Note: Erratum: J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 93: 153 only, 2008.

41. Toulza, F.; Nosaka, K.; Tanaka, Y.; Schioppa, T.; Balkwill, F.;
Taylor, G. P.; Bangham, C. R. M.: Human T-lymphotropic virus type
1-induced CC chemokine ligand 22 maintains a high frequency of functional
FoxP3+ regulatory T cells. J. Immun. 185: 183-189, 2010.

42. Tsuji, M.; Komatsu, N.; Kawamoto, S.; Suzuki, K.; Kanagawa, O.;
Honjo, T.; Hori, S.; Fagarasan, S.: Preferential generation of follicular
B helper T cells from Foxp3+ T cells in gut Peyer's patches. Science 323:
1488-1492, 2009.

43. Wan, Y. Y.; Flavell, R. A.: Regulatory T-cell functions are subverted
and converted owing to attenuated Foxp3 expression. Nature 445:
766-770, 2007.

44. Wan, Y. Y.; Flavell, R. A.: Identifying Foxp3-expressing suppressor
T cells with a bicistronic reporter. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102:
5126-5131, 2005.

45. Wildin, R. S.; Ramsdell, F.; Peake, J.; Faravelli, F.; Casanova,
J.-L.; Buist, N.; Levy-Lahad, E.; Mazzella, M.; Goulet, O.; Perroni,
L.; Dagna Bricarelli, F.; Byrne, G.; McEuen, M.; Proll, S.; Appleby,
M.; Brunkow, M. E.: X-linked neonatal diabetes mellitus, enteropathy
and endocrinopathy syndrome is the human equivalent of mouse scurfy. Nature
Genet. 27: 18-20, 2001.

46. Zheng, Y.; Chaudhry, A.; Kas, A.; deRoos, P.; Kim, J. M.; Chu,
T.-T.; Corcoran, L.; Treuting, P.; Klein, U.; Rudensky, A. Y.: Regulatory
T-cell suppressor program co-opts transcription factor IRF4 to control
TH2 responses. Nature 458: 351-356, 2009.

47. Zheng, Y.; Josefowicz, S.; Chaudhry, A.; Peng, X. P.; Forbush,
K.; Rudensky, A. Y.: Role of conserved non-coding DNA elements in
the Foxp3 gene in regulatory T-cell fate. Nature 463: 808-812, 2010.

48. Zheng, Y.; Josefowicz, S. Z.; Kas, A.; Chu, T.-T.; Gavin, M. A.;
Rudensky, A. Y.: Genome-wide analysis of Foxp3 target genes in developing
and mature regulatory T cells. Nature 445: 936-940, 2007.

49. Zuo, T.; Liu, R.; Zhang, H.; Chang, X.; Liu, Y.; Wang, L.; Zheng,
P.; Liu, Y.: FOXP3 is a novel transcriptional repressor for the breast
cancer oncogene SKP2. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 3765-3773, 2007.

50. Zuo, T.; Wang, L.; Morrison, C.; Chang, X.; Zhang, H.; Li, W.;
Liu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Liu, X.; Chan, M. W. Y.; Liu, J.-Q.; Love, R.;
and 9 others: FOXP3 is an X-linked breast cancer suppressor gene
and an important repressor of the HER-2/ErbB2 oncogene. Cell 129:
1275-1286, 2007. Note: Erratum: Cell 134: 546 only, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/13/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/24/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/21/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/15/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/19/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/7/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/28/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/26/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/14/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/3/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/5/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/27/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/20/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/15/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/10/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/7/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/21/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/28/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/22/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/23/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/7/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/29/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/22/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/27/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/20/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/14/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/15/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/20/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/13/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/9/2005
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/23/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/1/2005
Natalie E. Krasikov - updated: 2/10/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/22/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/26/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/26/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/15/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/5/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/2/2001

EDITED mgross: 09/13/2013
mgross: 9/13/2013
terry: 3/28/2013
terry: 3/15/2013
mgross: 2/5/2013
alopez: 10/26/2012
terry: 10/24/2012
mgross: 9/26/2012
terry: 9/21/2012
terry: 6/7/2012
mgross: 3/20/2012
terry: 3/16/2012
terry: 3/15/2012
mgross: 12/16/2011
alopez: 5/19/2011
mgross: 2/4/2011
terry: 1/7/2011
alopez: 1/4/2011
terry: 12/28/2010
mgross: 11/4/2010
terry: 11/3/2010
terry: 10/29/2010
mgross: 10/28/2010
terry: 10/26/2010
mgross: 9/14/2010
alopez: 8/6/2010
terry: 8/3/2010
alopez: 3/8/2010
terry: 3/5/2010
mgross: 10/27/2009
terry: 10/20/2009
alopez: 9/15/2009
terry: 9/15/2009
wwang: 9/14/2009
terry: 9/10/2009
alopez: 4/8/2009
terry: 4/7/2009
alopez: 4/3/2009
terry: 4/2/2009
mgross: 11/10/2008
terry: 11/7/2008
alopez: 7/21/2008
mgross: 6/17/2008
terry: 5/28/2008
carol: 5/22/2008
mgross: 8/30/2007
terry: 8/23/2007
mgross: 8/23/2007
terry: 8/7/2007
alopez: 7/3/2007
terry: 6/29/2007
mgross: 5/22/2007
alopez: 5/11/2007
terry: 4/27/2007
alopez: 4/24/2007
terry: 4/20/2007
mgross: 3/14/2007
terry: 3/14/2007
mgross: 2/15/2007
mgross: 8/3/2006
terry: 7/20/2006
mgross: 2/13/2006
mgross: 11/9/2005
mgross: 6/23/2005
alopez: 4/1/2005
carol: 2/10/2004
carol: 9/25/2003
tkritzer: 9/23/2003
tkritzer: 9/22/2003
alopez: 4/1/2003
mgross: 3/26/2003
mgross: 2/26/2003
carol: 9/18/2002
mgross: 2/15/2002
alopez: 12/13/2001
alopez: 12/7/2001
terry: 12/5/2001
carol: 7/3/2001
carol: 1/3/2001
carol: 1/2/2001

606599	TITLE *606599 THIOREDOXIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN; TXNIP
;;VITAMIN D3-UPREGULATED PROTEIN 1; VDUP1;;
THIOREDOXIN-BINDING PROTEIN 2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Exposure to vitamin D3 (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3) or phorbol ester
induces the bipotent HL-60 cell promyelocytic leukemia cell line to
differentiate into monocytes/macrophages, whereas retinoic acid and
dimethylsulfoxide induce differentiation towards granulocytes. The
differentiation is accompanied by regulation of MYC (190080), FOS
(164810), FMS (CSF1R; 164770), and myeloblastin (PRTN3; 177020). By
differential screening of HL60 cell lines, Chen and DeLuca (1994)
identified a cDNA encoding TXNIP, which they termed VDUP1. The deduced
TXNIP protein has 391 amino acids. Ribonuclease protection analysis
showed dramatically increased expression of TXNIP in response to vitamin
D3 but not to phorbol ester. Chen and DeLuca (1994) concluded that TXNIP
is not involved in the differentiation process.

Junn et al. (2000) cloned mouse Vdup1. The deduced 395-amino acid
protein shares 94% identity with human VDUP1. Northern blot analysis
detected expression of Vdup1 in all tissues examined. Expression was
relatively low in brain and liver. Transient transfected HeLa cells
expressed Vdup1 in the cytoplasm.

GENE FUNCTION

Junn et al. (2000) found that the C-terminal half of mouse Vdup1
interacted with the redox-active center of thioredoxin (TRX, or TXN;
187700). Mutation of 2 critical cysteines in the Trx active center
abrogated the interaction with Vdup1. Transfection of mouse Vdup1 into
human embryonic kidney cells reduced the endogenous reducing activity of
TRX or the activity of cotransfected TRX. Overexpression of Vdup1
inhibited interaction between Trx and a thiol-specific antioxidant, Pag
(PRDX1; 176763), and it inhibited interaction between Trx and Ask1.
Treatment of mouse fibroblasts and T-cell hybridoma cells with various
stress stimuli, such as hydrogen peroxide or heat shock, induced Vdup1
expression. Exposure of mouse fibroblasts overexpressing Vdup1 to stress
resulted in reduced cell proliferation and elevated apoptotic cell
death. Junn et al. (2000) concluded that VDUP1 functions as an oxidative
stress mediator by inhibiting TRX activity.

Wang et al. (2002) found that biomechanical strain or hydrogen peroxide
downregulated expression of Vdup1, but not Trx, in rat cardiomyocytes.
The rapid response occurred through transcriptional control and led to
increased Trx activity. Adenovirus-mediated overexpression of Vdup1
suppressed Trx activity and induced cardiomyocyte apoptosis.
Furthermore, Vdup1 overexpression sensitized cells to hydrogen
peroxide-induced apoptosis, whereas Trx overexpression protected cells
against injury. Wang et al. (2002) concluded that VDUP1 is a key
stress-responsive inhibitor of thioredoxin activity in cardiomyocytes.

Yoshioka et al. (2004) overexpressed TXN in rat cardiomyocytes and
observed the induction of protein synthesis; overexpression of TXNIP
reduced protein synthesis in response to mechanical strain,
phenylephrine, and angiotensin II (see 106150). In vivo, myocardial TXN
activity increased 3.5-fold compared to sham controls after transverse
aortic constriction; however, aortic constriction did not increase TXN
expression but reduced TXNIP expression by 40%. Gene transfer studies
revealed that cells overexpressing TXNIP developed less hypertrophy
after aortic constriction than control cells in the same animals.
Yoshioka et al. (2004) concluded that TXN has a dual function as both an
antioxidant and a signaling protein involved in the development of
pressure-overload cardiac hypertrophy, and suggested that TXNIP is a
critical regulator of biomechanical signaling.

Tissing et al. (2007) found that 8 hours of prednisolone treatment
altered expression of 51 genes in leukemic cells from children with
precursor-B- or T-acute lymphoblastic leukemia compared with nonexposed
cells. The 3 most highly upregulated genes were FKBP5 (602623), ZBTB16
(176797), and TXNIP, which were upregulated 35.4-, 8.8-, and 3.7-fold,
respectively.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ludwig et al. (2001) determined that the mouse Txnip gene contains 8
exons and spans 2.3 kb.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TXNIP
gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP WI-8000).

Using FISH, Ludwig et al. (2001) mapped the mouse Txnip gene to
chromosome 3 in a region showing homology of synteny to human chromosome
1q21.

ANIMAL MODEL

Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL; 144250) is a common,
multifactorial and heterogeneous dyslipidemia predisposing to premature
coronary artery disease and characterized by elevated plasma
triglycerides, cholesterol, or both. Castellani et al. (1998) identified
a mouse mutant strain, HcB-19, that shares features with FCHL, including
hypertriglyceridemia, hypercholesterolemia, elevated plasma
apolipoprotein B, and increased secretion of triglyceride-rich
lipoproteins. This disorder was shown to result from spontaneous
mutation at a locus, designated Hyplip1 (602491), on distal mouse
chromosome 3 in a region syntenic to 1q21-q23, where a locus for FCHL
was identified in Finnish, German, Chinese, and U.S. families. By
positional cloning, Bodnar et al. (2002) demonstrated that the mouse
Hyplip1 gene is Txnip, and they demonstrated a Txnip nonsense mutation
in the HcB-19 strain that was absent in its normolipidemic parental
strains. The causative mutation was found to be a T-to-A transversion at
position 337 in the 1,456-bp cDNA. This spontaneous mutation changed a
tyrosine (TAT) to a stop codon (TAA) at amino acid 97; the protein
normally consists of 395 amino acid residues. Txnip encodes a
cytoplasmic protein that binds and inhibits thioredoxin, a major
regulator of cellular redox state. The mutant mice had decreased CO(2)
production but increased ketone body synthesis, suggesting that altered
redox status downregulates the citric acid cycle, sparing fatty acids
for triglyceride and ketone body production. Castellani et al. (1998)
suggested further studies to elucidate the potential role of the human
homolog in FCHL and other metabolic disorders. Although hyperlipidemia
in mice is associated with mutation in the Txnip gene, the human
disorder is associated with the USF1 gene (191523).

Sheth et al. (2005) created Txnip-deficient mice on a variety of genetic
backgrounds. Homozygous mutant mice were similar in weight and activity
to wildtype or heterozygous littermates, and there were no differences
in food consumption. However, Txnip-deficient mice in the fed state
exhibited a metabolic profile similar to fasted mice, with increased
plasma ketone bodies and free fatty acids, decreased glucose, and
increased expression of metabolic enzymes in liver and other tissues.
Txnip-deficient mice also showed an altered redox status, with a
significantly increased ratio of NADH to NAD+. The fat-to-muscle ratio
of Txnip-deficient mice was increased by about 40%, primarily due to
decreased muscle mass. Txnip deficiency did not result in significantly
increased liver thioredoxin activity in either the fasted or fed states.
Some Txnip-deficient mice developed liver adenomas and carcinomas at
about 9 months of age.

By comparing Txnip-null mice with mice lacking Txnip specifically in
muscle or liver, Hui et al. (2008) determined that deficiency of Txnip
in skeletal muscle and heart is responsible for the inability of
Txnip-null mice to modify fuel metabolism in response to fasting. They
found that Txnip deficiency in skeletal muscle and heart impaired the
ability of thioredoxin NADPH-dependent disulfide reduction to maintain
Pten (601728) in a sufficiently active state to oppose Akt (see AKT1;
164730) signaling. Unopposed, Akt activation in Txnip-deficient skeletal
muscle and heart prevented switching of fuel away from glucose toward
3-hydroxybutyrate and fatty acids, resulting in an inappropriate
metabolic adaptation to food deprivation.

Lee et al. (2005) generated healthy and viable mice lacking Vdup1. Flow
cytometric and functional assays revealed only slight alterations in B-
and T-cell populations, but there was a severe defect in NK-cell
function and development. NK cells from Vdup1 -/- mice showed reduced
Cd122 (IL2RB; 146710) expression and reduced responsiveness to Il15
(600554) in the absence of vitamin D3, suggesting that CD122 expression
is dependent on VDUP1. Vdup1 -/- mice were less able to reject NK
cell-sensitive tumor cells compared with wildtype mice. Lee et al.
(2005) concluded that VDUP1 is necessary for NK-cell growth and
cytotoxic function, and that it is also involved in regulation of
intestinal intraepithelial and lamina propria lymphocytes.

REFERENCE 1. Bodnar, J. S.; Chatterjee, A.; Castellani, L. W.; Ross, D. A.;
Ohmen, J.; Cavalcoli, J.; Wu, C.; Dains, K. M.; Catanese, J.; Chu,
M.; Sheth, S. S.; Charugundla, K.; Demant, P.; West, D. B.; de Jong,
P.; Lusis, A. J.: Positional cloning of the combined hyperlipidemia
gene Hyplip1. Nature Genet. 30: 110-116, 2002.

2. Castellani, L. W.; Weinreb, A.; Bodnar, J.; Goto, A. M.; Doolittle,
M.; Mehrabian, M.; Demant, P.; Lusis, A. J.: Mapping a gene for combined
hyperlipidaemia in a mutant mouse strain. Nature Genet. 18: 374-377,
1998.

3. Chen, K.-S.; DeLuca, H. F.: Isolation and characterization of
a novel cDNA from HL-60 cells treated with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D-3. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1219: 26-32, 1994.

4. Hui, S. T. Y.; Andres, A. M.; Miller, A. K.; Spann, N. J.; Potter,
D. W.; Post, N. M.; Chen, A. Z.; Sachithanantham, S.; Jung, D. Y.;
Kim, J. K.; Davis, R. A.: Txnip balances metabolic and growth signaling
via PTEN disulfide reduction. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 3921-3926,
2008.

5. Junn, E.; Han, S. H.; Im, J. Y.; Yang, Y.; Cho, E. W.; Um, H. D.;
Kim, D. K.; Lee, K. W.; Han, P. L.; Rhee, S. G.; Choi, I.: Vitamin
D3 up-regulated protein 1 mediates oxidative stress via suppressing
the thioredoxin function. J. Immun. 164: 6287-6295, 2000.

6. Lee, K. N.; Kang, H.-S.; Jeon, J.-H.; Kim, E.-M.; Yoon, S.-R.;
Song, H.; Lyu, C.-Y.; Piao, Z.-H.; Kim, S.-U.; Han, Y.-H.; Song, S.-S.;
Lee, Y.-H.; Song, K.-S.; Kim, Y.-M.; Yu, D.-Y.; Choi, I.: VDUP1 is
required for the development of natural killer cells. Immunity 22:
195-208, 2005.

7. Ludwig, D. L.; Kotanides, H.; Le, T.; Chavkin, D.; Bohlen, P.;
Witte, L.: Cloning, genetic characterization, and chromosomal mapping
of the mouse VDUP1 gene. Gene 269: 103-112, 2001.

8. Sheth, S. S.; Castellani, L. W.; Chari, S.; Wagg, C.; Thipphavong,
C. K.; Bodnar, J. S.; Tontonoz, P.; Attie, A. D.; Lopaschuk, G. D.;
Lusis, A. J.: Thioredoxin-interacting protein deficiency disrupts
the fasting-feeding metabolic transition. J. Lipid Res. 46: 123-134,
2005.

9. Tissing, W. J. E.; den Boer, M. L.; Meijerink, J. P. P.; Menezes,
R. X.; Swagemakers, S.; van der Spek, P. J.; Sallan, S. E.; Armstrong,
S. A.; Pieters, R.: Genomewide identification of prednisolone-responsive
genes in acute lymphoblastic leukemia cells. Blood 109: 3929-3935,
2007.

10. Wang, Y.; De Keulenaer, G. W.; Lee, R. T.: Vitamin D3-up-regulated
protein-1 is a stress-responsive gene that regulates cardiomyocyte
viability through interaction with thioredoxin. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
26496-26500, 2002.

11. Yoshioka, J.; Schulze, P. C.; Cupesi, M.; Sylvan, J. D.; MacGillivray,
C.; Gannon, J.; Huang, H.; Lee, R. T.: Thioredoxin-interacting protein
controls cardiac hypertrophy through regulation of thioredoxin activity. Circulation 109:
2581-2586, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/29/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/1/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/2/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/23/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/7/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/18/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2002

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 1/7/2002

EDITED mgross: 06/09/2008
terry: 5/29/2008
mgross: 5/1/2008
mgross: 11/7/2006
terry: 11/2/2006
mgross: 3/6/2006
terry: 2/23/2006
wwang: 2/7/2006
tkritzer: 12/2/2004
terry: 12/1/2004
alopez: 3/18/2004
alopez: 3/17/2004
alopez: 3/16/2004
mgross: 10/7/2002
alopez: 1/16/2002
terry: 1/14/2002
mgross: 1/7/2002

607581	TITLE *607581 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 22 (ORGANIC ANION TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 8; SLC22A8
;;ORGANIC ANION TRANSPORTER 3; OAT3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using homology with rat Oat1 (SLC22A6; 607582), Race et al. (1999)
identified ESTs for SLC22A8, which they designated OAT3. They obtained
the full-length clone from a kidney cDNA library. The deduced 568-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 62.1 kD. SLC22A8
contains 12 transmembrane-spanning domains that are separated by 5
intracellular loops and 6 extracellular loops, and the N and C termini
are intracellular. It also has 3 motifs conserved in the amphiphilic
solute facilitator family of proteins. SLC22A8 shares 42 to 43% amino
acid similarity with human, mouse, and rat OAT1 and 25% similarity with
the organic cation transporters OCT1 (SLC22A1; 602607) and OCT2
(SLC22A2; 602608). Northern blot analysis revealed strong expression of
a 3.0-kb transcript in kidney, with weaker expression in brain.

By screening liver and kidney cDNA libraries for homology with rat Oat1,
Sun et al. (2001) cloned what they considered to be a splice variant of
the OAT3 sequence reported by Race et al. (1999). The deduced protein
contains 542 amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected expression of
a major 2.6-kb OAT3 transcript and a minor 4.5-kb OAT3 transcript only
in kidney.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SLC22A8
gene to chromosome 11 (TMAP WI-14966).

REFERENCE 1. Race, J. E.; Grassl, S. M.; Williams, W. J.; Holtzman, E. J.:
Molecular cloning and characterization of two novel human renal organic
anion transporters (hOAT1 and hOAT3). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 255:
508-514, 1999.

2. Sun, W.; Wu, R. R.; van Poelje, P. D.; Erion, M. D.: Isolation
of a family of organic anion transporters from human liver and kidney. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 283: 417-422, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/25/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/25/2003
mgross: 2/25/2003

136535	TITLE *136535 FORMIN 1; FMN1
;;FORMIN; FMN;;
LIMB DEFORMITY, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; LD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mutation at the mouse 'limb deformity' (ld) locus disrupts embryonic
pattern formation, resulting in a reduction and fusion of the distal
bones and digits of all limbs as well as variable incidence of renal
aplasia. Woychik et al. (1990) characterized the ld locus at the
molecular level and identified a complex gene which, because of its
presumed role in the formation of limbs and kidneys, was designated
formin.

Maas et al. (1991) described sequence and restriction-mapping data for a
human genomic clone that contained 2 major human-mouse homology regions.
They assigned the locus symbol LD to the human gene locus. They also
demonstrated 2 frequently occurring DNA polymorphisms at the LD locus
potentially useful for testing linkage to human syndromes that combine
limb and renal abnormalities.

Vogt et al. (1993) showed that the large and complex LD gene has the
capacity to generate a number of alternatively spliced mRNA transcripts
encoding nuclear protein isoforms called formins. They made polyclonal
antibodies to specific formin peptides and confirmed the authenticity of
the reactivity of the antibodies, using cell lines derived from mice
with molecularly defined mutations at the ld locus.

GENE FUNCTION

Zuniga et al. (1999) reported that the secreted bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) antagonist gremlin (GREM1; 603054) relays the Sonic
hedgehog (SHH; 600725) signal from the polarizing region to the apical
ectodermal ridge. Mesenchymal gremlin expression is lost in limb buds of
mouse embryos homozygous for the ld mutation, which disrupts
establishment of the Shh/Fgf4 (164980) feedback loop. Grafting
gremlin-expressing cells into ld mutant limb buds rescued Fgf4
expression and restored the Shh/Fgf4 feedback loop. Analysis of Shh-null
mutant embryos revealed that Shh signaling is required for maintenance
of gremlin and Fmn1, the gene disrupted by the ld mutations. In
contrast, Fmn1, gremlin, and Fgf4 activation were independent of Shh
signaling. Zuniga et al. (1999) concluded that the study uncovered the
cascade by which the SHH signal is relayed from the posterior mesenchyme
to the apical ectodermal ridge and established that formin-dependent
activation of the BMP antagonist gremlin is sufficient to induce FGF4
and establish the SHH/FGF4 feedback loop.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid system to analyze alpha-catenin (see 116805)
binding partners, Kobielak et al. (2004) found direct interaction
between alpha-catenin and formin in a mouse skin expression library. In
addition, they found that formin nucleated the polymerization of
unbranched actin (see 102610) filaments in vitro and functioned in vivo
in alpha-catenin-dependent, radial actin cable formation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wang et al. (1997) found that the mouse Fmn1 gene is very large,
spanning 400 kb and comprising at least 24 exons. Wang et al. (1997)
stated that some of the introns are very large, ranging more than 50 kb,
and may play a role in transcriptional regulation.

MAPPING

Maas et al. (1991) showed by a combination of mouse/human somatic cell
hybrid studies and in situ hybridization that the human LD gene is
located on 15q13-q14. Both this and the beta-2-microglobulin gene
(109700) are located on chromosome 2 in the mouse.

Richard et al. (1992) mapped the LD locus on chromosome 15, proximal to
the gene for cardiac muscle alpha-actin (ACTC; 102540).

Richard et al. (1994) mapped 149 chromosome 15 loci, including those for
18 genes, 60 cDNA-derived sequence-tagged sites (STS), and 69
microsatellites by PCR with respect to chromosome breakpoints in 3
somatic cell hybrids retaining all or part of chromosome 15 and to a
10-Mb YAC contig. Chromosome 15 was divided into 5 regions, yielding an
average resolution of more than 1 sequence tagged site per megabase.
They mapped the FMN gene to their region I: 15pter-q14.

ANIMAL MODEL

The murine 'limb deformity' (ld) locus is defined by several different
noncomplementing mutant alleles which share a characteristic limb
deformity and variably penetrant renal aplasia phenotype (Green, 1981;
Woychik et al., 1985; Woychik et al., 1990). The limb deformity is
marked by synostoses and syndactyly of all 4 limbs. The renal defect
consists of unilateral or bilateral renal aplasia.

The relationship between gremlin (GREM1; 603054) and Fmn1 is interesting
because of their proximity in the mouse genome. The Fmn1 transcript
comprises a large number of exons with the most 3-prime exon located
approximately 40 kb from the Grem1 open reading frame. Given the
apparently identical phenotype of ld mice to gremlin mutant mice and the
proximity of Fmn1 to Grem1, Khokha et al. (2003) tested whether gremlin
would complement ld. They found that gremlin fails to complement ld and
thus identified another ld allele. Although a complex interaction
between Fmn1 and gremlin is possible, Khokha et al. (2003) favored the
idea that the ld mutations affect gremlin expression directly and that
they lie in cis-regulatory elements for gremlin expression.

Zhou et al. (2009) generated Fmn1 pro/pro mice, which fail to produce
detectable Fmn1 proteins or any of the full-length Fmn1 splice variants.
They found that Fmn1 pro/pro exhibited only 4 digits per limb, a
deformed posterior metatarsal, phalangeal soft tissue fusion, and
absence of the fibula, with 100% penetrance on the FVB background and
66% penetrance on the 129/SvEv background. The Fmn1-mutant allele did
not genetically disrupt the characterized gremlin enhancer; indeed,
gremlin RNA expression was upregulated at the 35 somite stage of
development. The Fmn1 pro/pro mice demonstrated increased bone
morphogenetic protein (Bmp) activity, as evidenced by upregulation of
Msx1 (142983) and a decrease in Fgf4 (164980) within the apical
ectodermal ridge. Enhanced activity downstream of the Bmp receptor in
cells where Fmn1 was perturbed suggested a role for Fmn1 in repression
of Bmp signaling.

REFERENCE 1. Green, M. C.: Catalog of mutant genes and polymorphic loci.In:
Genetic Variants and Strains of the Laboratory Mouse. New York:
Gustav Fischer Verlag (pub.)  1981. P. 137.

2. Khokha, M. K.; Hsu, D.; Brunet, L. J.; Dionne, M. S.; Harland,
R. M.: Gremlin is the BMP antagonist required for maintenance of
Shh and Fgf signals during limb patterning. Nature Genet. 34: 303-307,
2003.

3. Kobielak, A.; Pasolli, H. A.; Fuchs, E.: Mammalian formin-1 participates
in adherens junctions and polymerization of linear actin cables. Nature
Cell Biol. 6: 21-30, 2004.

4. Maas, R. L.; Jepeal, L. I.; Elfering, S. L.; Holcombe, R. F.; Morton,
C. C.; Eddy, R. L.; Byers, M. G.; Shows, T. B.; Leder, P.: A human
gene homologous to the formin gene residing at the murine limb deformity
locus: chromosomal location and RFLPs. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 48: 687-695,
1991.

5. Richard, I.; Broux, O.; Chiannilkulchai, N.; Fougerousse, F.; Allamand,
V.; Bourg, N.; Brenguier, L.; Devaud, C.; Pasturaud, P.; Roudaut,
C.; Lorenzo, F.; Sebastiani-Kabatchis, C.; Schultz, R. A.; Polymeropoulos,
M. H.; Gyapay, G.; Auffray, C.; Beckmann, J. S.: Regional localization
of human chromosome 15 loci. Genomics 23: 619-627, 1994.

6. Richard, I.; Broux, O.; Hillaire, D.; Cherif, D.; Fougerousse,
F.; Cohen, D.; Beckmann, J. S.: Mapping of the formin gene and exclusion
as a candidate gene for the autosomal recessive form of limb-girdle
muscular dystrophy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1: 621-624, 1992.

7. Vogt, T. F.; Jackson-Grusby, L.; Rush, J.; Leder, P.: Formins:
phosphoprotein isoforms encoded by the mouse limb deformity locus. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 5554-5558, 1993.

8. Wang, C. C.; Chan, D. C.; Leder, P.: The mouse formin (Fmn) gene:
genomic structure, novel exons, and genetic mapping. Genomics 39:
303-311, 1997.

9. Woychik, R. P.; Generoso, W. M.; Russell, L. B.; Cain, K. T.; Cacheiro,
N. L. A.; Bultman, S. J.; Selby, P. B.; Dickinson, M. E.; Hogan, B.
L. M.; Rutledge, J. C.: Molecular and genetic characterization of
a radiation-induced structural rearrangement in mouse chromosome 2
causing mutations at the limb deformity and agouti loci. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 87: 2588-2592, 1990.

10. Woychik, R. P.; Maas, R. L.; Zeller, R.; Vogt, T. F.; Leder, P.
: 'Formins:' proteins deduced from the alternative transcripts of
the limb-deformity gene. Nature 346: 850-853, 1990.

11. Woychik, R. P.; Stewart, T. A.; Davis, L. G.; D'Eustachio, P.;
Leder, P.: An inherited limb deformity created by insertional mutagenesis
in a transgenic mouse. Nature 318: 36-40, 1985.

12. Zhou, F.; Leder, P.; Zuniga, A.; Dettenhofer, M.: Formin1 disruption
confers oligodactylism and alters Bmp signaling. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18:
2472-2482, 2009.

13. Zuniga, A.; Haramis, A.-P. G.; McMahon, A. P.; Zeller, R.: Signal
relay by BMP antagonism controls the SHH/FGF4 feedback loop in vertebrate
limb buds. Nature 401: 598-602, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 3/30/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/3/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/17/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/10/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 3/5/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/22/1991

EDITED ckniffin: 02/11/2011
terry: 4/8/2010
wwang: 4/2/2010
terry: 3/30/2010
terry: 12/16/2009
terry: 10/8/2008
mgross: 2/3/2004
cwells: 11/6/2003
alopez: 7/28/2003
alopez: 6/18/2003
terry: 6/17/2003
alopez: 5/9/2000
alopez: 2/10/2000
carol: 7/20/1998
alopez: 3/5/1998
mark: 2/3/1998
carol: 12/14/1994
mimadm: 4/15/1994
pfoster: 2/16/1994
carol: 7/2/1993
carol: 11/30/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

601896	TITLE *601896 TNF RECEPTOR-ASSOCIATED FACTOR 3; TRAF3
;;CD40-BINDING PROTEIN; CD40BP;;
LMP1-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; LAP1;;
CD40-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; CAP1;;
CD40 RECEPTOR-ASSOCIATED FACTOR 1; CRAF1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

CD40 (109535) is a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)
family. The short cytoplasmic domain of CD40 contains a region with
limited homology to the conserved cytosolic death domain of TNFR1
(191190) and FAS (134637). Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay with the
cytoplasmic domain of CD40 as bait, Hu et al. (1994) isolated B-cell
cDNAs encoding a protein that they called CD40-binding protein (CD40bp).
The predicted CD40bp protein contains a RING finger DNA-binding motif, a
cys/his-rich region, and a coiled-coil domain. Like TRAF1 (601711) and
TRAF2 (601895), both TNFR2 (75-kD TNFR; 191191)-binding proteins, CD40bp
contains a C-terminal TRAF domain. In vitro translated CD40bp has an
apparent molecular mass of 64 kD. Coimmunoprecipitation studies
indicated that CD40bp interacts with CD40 in human B cells. Hu et al.
(1994) suggested that CD40bp, along with TRAF1 and TRAF2, comprise a
family of proteins that associate with the cytoplasmic faces of the TNFR
family and have in common a TRAF domain.

Independently, Sato et al. (1995) and Cheng et al. (1995) identified
CD40bp, designating it CAP1 (CD40-associated protein-1) and CRAF1 (CD40
receptor-associated factor 1), respectively. Sato et al. (1995)
demonstrated that CAP1 binds specifically to the cytoplasmic domain of
CD40, but not to that of TNFR1, TNFR2, or FAS. The C-terminal TRAF
domain of CAP1 was sufficient to mediate binding to CD40 and
homodimerization. Cheng et al. (1995) isolated mouse and human CRAF1
cDNAs. The predicted 568-amino acid human protein is 96% identical to
mouse CRAF1. These authors divided the TRAF domain into 2 regions:
TRAF-N, the more N-terminal coiled-coil subdomain, and TRAF-C, which was
necessary and sufficient for CRAF1 to interact with CD40. Overexpression
of a truncated cDNA encoding the entire TRAF domain of CRAF1 inhibited
CD40-mediated upregulation of the CD23 (151445) gene, which suggested to
Cheng et al. (1995) that CRAF1 participates in CD40 signaling.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the TRAF3 gene to chromosome 14q32.32 based on an
alignment of the TRAF3 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC075086) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

The cytoplasmic C terminus of the Epstein-Barr virus latent infection
membrane protein-1 (LMP1) is essential for B lymphocyte growth
transformation. LMP1 is an integral membrane protein that has
transforming effects in nonlymphoid cells, and may act by constitutively
activating a common cellular growth factor receptor pathway. Mosialos et
al. (1995) found that CD40bp, which they called LAP1 (LMP1-associated
protein-1), interacted with the LMP1 C-terminal domain. Expression of
LMP1 caused LAP1 and TRAF1 (EBI6) to localize to LMP1 clusters in
lymphoblast plasma membranes, and LMP1 coimmunoprecipitated with these
proteins in cell extracts. LAP1 bound to the cytoplasmic domains of CD40
and LT-beta-R (600979) in vitro, and associated with p80 (TNFR2) in
vivo. Northern blot analysis revealed that LAP1 was expressed as a
full-length 2.8-kb mRNA and an alternatively spliced 1.8-kb mRNA in all
tissues tested. Mosialos et al. (1995) concluded that the interaction of
LAP1 with LMP1 and with the cytoplasmic domains of TNFR family members
is evidence for a central role of this protein as an effector of cell
growth or death signaling pathways.

Dadgostar et al. (2003) determined that the coiled-coil domain of mouse
T3jam (608255) interacted with the isoleucine zipper domain of Traf3.
T3jam did not associate with other Traf family members. Coexpression of
T3jam and Traf3 recruited Traf3 to the detergent-insoluble fraction, and
T3jam and Traf3 synergistically activated JNK (601158), but not nuclear
factor kappa-B (see 164011).

To dissect biochemically Toll-like receptor signaling, Hacker et al.
(2006) established a system for isolating signaling complexes assembled
by dimerized adaptors. Using MyD88 (602170) as a prototypic adaptor,
they identified TRAF3 as a new component of Toll/interleukin-1 receptor
signaling complexes that is recruited along with TRAF6 (602355). Using
myeloid cells from Traf3- and Traf6-deficient mice, Hacker et al. (2006)
demonstrated that TRAF3 is essential for the induction of type I
interferons and the antiinflammatory cytokine interleukin-10 (IL10;
124092), but is dispensable for expression of proinflammatory cytokines.
In fact, Traf3-deficient cells overproduced proinflammatory cytokines
owing to defective Il10 production. Despite their structural similarity,
the functions of TRAF3 and TRAF6 are largely distinct. TRAF3 is also
recruited to the adaptor TRIF (607601) and is required for marshalling
the protein kinase TBK1 (604834) into Toll/interleukin-1 receptor
signaling complexes, thereby explaining its unique role in activation of
the interferon response.

Oganesyan et al. (2006) demonstrated that cells lacking TRAF3 are
defective in type I interferon responses activated by several different
Toll-like receptors. Furthermore, they showed that TRAF3 associates with
the Toll-like receptor adaptors TRIF and IRAK1 (300283), as well as
downstream IRF3/7 kinases TBK1 and IKK-epsilon (605048), suggesting that
TRAF3 serves as a critical link between Toll-like receptor adaptors and
downstream regulatory kinases important for IRF activation. In addition
to TLR stimulation, Oganesyan et al. (2006) showed that TRAF3-deficient
fibroblasts are defective in their type I interferon response to direct
infection with vesicular stomatitis virus, indicating that TRAF3 is also
an important component of TLR-independent viral recognition pathways.
Oganesyan et al. (2006) concluded that TRAF3 is a major regulator of
type I interferon production and the innate antiviral response.

Production of type I interferon is a critical host defense triggered by
pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) of the innate immune system.
Kayagaki et al. (2007) demonstrated that reduction of DUBA (300713)
augmented the PRR-induced type I interferon response in transfected
HEK293 cells, whereas ectopic expression of DUBA had the converse
effect. DUBA bound TRAF3, an adaptor protein essential for type I
interferon response. TRAF3 is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that preferentially
assembled lys63-linked polyubiquitin chains in cotransfection assays.
DUBA selectively cleaved the lys63-linked polyubiquitin chains on TRAF3,
resulting in its dissociation from the downstream signaling complex
containing TBK1. A discrete ubiquitin interaction motif within DUBA was
required for efficient deubiquitination of TRAF3 and optimal suppression
of type I interferon. Kayagaki et al. (2007) concluded that their data
identified DUBA as a negative regulator of innate immune responses.

Cytokine signaling is thought to require assembly of multicomponent
signaling complexes at cytoplasmic segments of membrane-embedded
receptors, in which receptor-proximal protein kinases are activated.
Matsuzawa et al. (2008) reported that, upon ligation, CD40 formed a
complex containing adaptor molecules TRAF2 and TRAF3,
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme UBC13 (UBE2N; 603679), cellular inhibitor
of apoptosis protein-1 (CIAP1, or BIRC2; 601712) and -2 (CIAP2, or
BIRC3; 601721), IKK-gamma (IKBKG; 300248), and MEKK1 (MAP3K1; 600982).
TRAF2, UBC13, and IKK-gamma were required for complex assembly and
activation of MEKK1 and MAP kinase cascades. However, the kinases were
not activated unless the complex was translocated from the membrane to
the cytosol upon CIAP1/CIAP2-induced degradation of TRAF3. Matsuzawa et
al. (2008) proposed that this 2-stage signaling mechanism may apply to
other innate immune receptors and may account for spatial and temporal
separation of MAPK and IKK signaling.

Hu et al. (2013) identified the deubiquitinase OTUD7B (611748) as a
pivotal regulator of the noncanonical NF-kappa-B pathway. OTUD7B
deficiency in mice has no appreciable effect on canonical NF-kappa-B
activation but causes hyperactivation of noncanonical NF-kappa-B. In
response to noncanonical NF-kappa-B stimuli, OTUD7B binds and
deubiquitinates TRAF3, thereby inhibiting TRAF3 proteolysis and
preventing aberrant noncanonical NF-kappa-B activation. Consequently,
the OTUD7B deficiency results in B-cell hyperresponsiveness to antigens,
lymphoid follicular hyperplasia in the intestinal mucosa, and elevated
host-defense ability against an intestinal bacterial pathogen,
Citrobacter rodentium. Hu et al. (2013) concluded that their findings
established OTUD7B as a crucial regulator of signal-induced noncanonical
NF-kappa-B activation, and indicated a mechanism of immune regulation
that involves OTUD7B-mediated deubiquitination and stabilization of
TRAF3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Braggio et al. (2009) identified biallelic inactivation of TRAF3 in 3
(5.3%) of 57 Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia (WM; see 153600) samples.
TRAF3 inactivation was associated with transcriptional activation of
NF-kappa-B (NFKB1; 164011). In addition, 1 of 24 patients with a 6q
deletion had an inactivating somatic mutation in TNFAIP3 (191163),
another negative regulator of NF-kappa-B. Monoallelic deletions of
chromosome 6q23, including the TNFAIP3 gene, were identified in 38% of
patients, suggesting that haploinsufficiency can predispose to the
development of WM. The results indicated that mutational activation of
the NF-kappa-B pathway plays a role in the pathogenesis of WM.

Perez de Diego et al. (2010) investigated an 18-year-old French female
who had suffered from herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE; 614849) at age 4
years and who lacked mutations in either the UNC93B1 (608204) or TLR3
(603029) genes. They identified a heterozygous C-to-T substitution at
position 352 in exon 4 of the TRAF3 gene, resulting in a nonconservative
missense change, arg118 to trp (R118W; 601896.0001). The mutation was
not found in her parents or brothers, and none had a history of HSE.
RT-PCR analysis of the patient's cells detected normal levels of TRAF3
mRNA, but Western blot analysis showed severely reduced levels of TRAF3
protein. Responsiveness to TLR3 agonists was impaired, as indicated by
deficient NFKB activation and poor production of IFNB (147640), IFNL
(IL29; 607403), and IL6 (147620). Expression of wildtype and mutant
alleles in cell lines showed that the mutant was dominant-negative.
TRAF3-deficient fibroblasts had impaired type I and type III
IFN-dependent control of viruses and deficient responses through the
TNFR (e.g., TNFRSF5; 109535) pathways. Perez de Diego et al. (2010)
concluded that, whereas complete Traf3 deficiency is neonatal lethal in
mice, decreases in TRAF3 production and function result in
predisposition to HSE, a condition that is usually fatal if untreated.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HERPES SIMPLEX ENCEPHALITIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 3
TRAF3, ARG118TRP

Perez de Diego et al. (2010) reported a female French patient with
herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE; 614849) at age 4 years who was healthy
without prophylaxis and showed normal resistance to other infectious
diseases, including other herpesvirus family members, at age 18 years.
They identified a de novo heterozygous 352C-T transition in exon 4 of
the TRAF3 gene, resulting in an arg118-to-trp (R118W) substitution, in
this patient, whose HSE was successfully treated with acyclovir for 3
weeks.

REFERENCE 1. Braggio, E.; Keats, J. J.; Leleu, X.; Van Wier, S.; Jimenez-Zepeda,
V. H.; Valdez, R.; Schop, R. F. J.; Price-Troska, T.; Henderson, K.;
Sacco, A.; Azab, F.; Greipp, P.; and 11 others: Identification
of copy number abnormalities and inactivating mutations in two negative
regulators of nuclear factor-kappa-B signaling pathways in Waldenstrom's
macroglobulinemia. Cancer Res. 69: 3579-3588, 2009.

2. Cheng, G.; Cleary, A. M.; Ye, Z.; Hong, D. I.; Lederman, S.; Baltimore,
D.: Involvement of CRAF1, a relative of TRAF, in CD40 signaling. Science 267:
1494-1498, 1995.

3. Dadgostar, H.; Doyle, S. E.; Shahangian, A.; Garcia, D. E.; Cheng,
G.: T3JAM, a novel protein that specifically interacts with TRAF3
and promotes the activation of JNK. FEBS Lett. 553: 403-407, 2003.

4. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/5/2012.

5. Hacker, H.; Redecke, V.; Blagoev, B.; Kratchmarova, I.; Hsu, L.-C.;
Wang, G. G.; Kamps, M. P.; Raz, E.; Wagner, H.; Hacker, G.; Mann,
M.; Karin, M.: Specificity in Toll-like receptor signalling through
distinct effector functions of TRAF3 and TRAF6. Nature 439: 204-207,
2006.

6. Hu, H.; Brittain, G. C.; Chang, J.-H.; Puebla-Osorio, N.; Jin,
J.; Zal, Z.; Xiao, Y.; Cheng, X.; Chang, M.; Fu, Y.-X.; Zal, T.; Zhu,
C.; Sun, S.-C.: OTUD7B controls noncanonical NF-kappa-B activation
through deubiquitination of TRAF3. Nature 494: 371-374, 2013.

7. Hu, H. M.; O'Rourke, K.; Boguski, M. S.; Dixit, V. M.: A novel
RING finger protein interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of CD40. J.
Biol. Chem. 269: 30069-30072, 1994.

8. Kayagaki, N.; Phung, Q.; Chan, S.; Chaudhari, R.; Quan, C.; O'Rourke,
K. M.; Eby, M.; Pietras, E.; Cheng, G.; Bazan, J. F.; Zhang, Z.; Arnott,
D.; Dixit, V. M.: DUBA: a deubiquitinase that regulates type I interferon
production. Science 318: 1628-1632, 2007.

9. Matsuzawa, A.; Tseng, P.-H.; Vallabhapurapu, S.; Luo, J.-L.; Zhang,
W.; Wang, H.; Vignali, D. A. A.; Gallagher, E.; Karin, M.: Essential
cytoplasmic translocation of a cytokine receptor-assembled signaling
complex. Science 321: 663-668, 2008. Note: Erratum: Science 322:
375 only, 2008.

10. Mosialos, G.; Birkenbach, M.; Yalamanchili, R.; VanArsdale, T.;
Ware, C.; Kieff, E.: The Epstein-Barr virus transforming protein
LMP1 engages signaling proteins for the tumor necrosis factor receptor
family. Cell 80: 389-399, 1995.

11. Oganesyan, G.; Saha, S. K.; Guo, B.; He, J. Q.; Shahangian, A.;
Zarnegar, B.; Perry, A.; Cheng, G.: Critical role of TRAF3 in the
Toll-like receptor-dependent and -independent antiviral response. Nature 439:
208-211, 2006.

12. Perez de Diego, R.; Sancho-Shimizu, V.; Lorenzo, L.; Puel, A.;
Plancoulaine, S.; Picard, C.; Herman, M.; Cardon, A.; Durandy, A.;
Bustamante, J.; Vallabhapurapu, S.; Bravo, J.; and 12 others: Human
TRAF3 adaptor molecule deficiency leads to impaired Toll-like receptor
3 response and susceptibility to herpes simplex encephalitis. Immunity 33:
400-411, 2010.

13. Sato, T.; Irie, S.; Reed, J. C.: A novel member of the TRAF family
of putative signal transducing proteins binds to the cytoplasmic domain
of CD40. FEBS Lett. 358: 113-118, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/21/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/5/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/4/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/15/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/28/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/7/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/1/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/13/2003
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/11/1999

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 3/20/1997

EDITED alopez: 04/02/2013
terry: 3/21/2013
joanna: 12/7/2012
mgross: 10/5/2012
terry: 10/4/2012
wwang: 1/15/2010
ckniffin: 12/22/2009
alopez: 11/18/2008
mgross: 8/28/2008
terry: 8/28/2008
alopez: 5/7/2008
wwang: 4/23/2008
alopez: 5/3/2006
terry: 5/1/2006
mgross: 11/13/2003
alopez: 6/11/1999
carol: 6/18/1998
mark: 9/9/1997
alopez: 8/1/1997
alopez: 7/23/1997

604203	TITLE *604203 SYNTAXIN 8; STX8
DESCRIPTION Most membrane fusion events in eukaryotic cells are mediated by SNARE
proteins on the vesicle (v-SNAREs) and on the target membrane (t-SNAREs
or syntaxins). See alpha-SNAP (603215). By searching an EST database,
Steegmaier et al. (1998) identified mouse and human cDNAs encoding
syntaxin-8. The predicted 236-amino acid human protein shares 23%
identity with syntaxin-6 (603944). Like other syntaxins, syntaxin-8 is
anchored to membranes by a C-terminal hydrophobic domain and appears to
contain a helical domain involved in the formation of a SNARE complex
(see SNAP29, 604202). Northern blot analysis revealed that syntaxin-8
was expressed as a 1.3-kb mRNA in all human tissues tested, with the
highest levels in heart. When expressed in mammalian cells, syntaxin-8
colocalized with markers of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Steegmaier
et al. (1998) concluded that syntaxin-8 functions as a vesicle
trafficking protein in the early secretory pathway, possibly mediating
retrograde transport from cis-Golgi membranes to the ER. Independently,
Thoreau et al. (1999) isolated syntaxin-8 as a protein that interacted
with the regulatory (R) domain of the CFTR (602421) protein in a yeast
2-hybrid screen.

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Thoreau et al. (1999) mapped the syntaxin-8 gene to
17p12.

REFERENCE 1. Steegmaier, M.; Yang, B.; Yoo, J.-S.; Huang, B.; Shen, M.; Yu,
S.; Luo, Y.; Scheller, R. H.: Three novel proteins of the syntaxin/SNAP-25
family. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 34171-34179, 1998.

2. Thoreau, V.; Berges, T.; Callebaut, I.; Guillier-Gencik, Z.; Gressin,
L.; Bernheim, A.; Karst, F.; Mornon, J.-P.; Kitzis, A.; Chomel, J.-C.
: Molecular cloning, expression analysis, and chromosomal localization
of human syntaxin 8 (STX8). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 257:
577-583, 1999.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 9/29/1999

EDITED alopez: 09/29/1999

602587	TITLE *602587 ACYL-CoA THIOESTERASE 7; ACOT7
;;ACYL-CoA THIOESTERASE, LONG-CHAIN, CYTOSOLIC;;
CTE-II;;
ACYL-CoA THIOESTER HYDROLASE, LONG-CHAIN, 2;;
ACYL-CoA HYDROLASE, LONG-CHAIN, BRAIN; BACH;;
ACYL-CoA HYDROLASE, LONG-CHAIN, LIVER; LACH;;
ACYL-CoA THIOESTERASE 2, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Long-chain acyl-CoA thioesterases (EC 3.1.2.2), such as ACOT7, are found
in all organisms and cleave fatty acyl-CoAs into free fatty acids and
CoA.

CLONING

Engberg et al. (1997) purified a liver cytosolic isoform of long-chain
acyl-CoA thioesterase from peroxisome proliferator-treated rats and
named it CTE-II for 'cytosolic long-chain acyl-CoA thioesterase.'
Antibodies against CTE-II were used to screen an expression library of
peroxisome proliferator-induced rat liver cDNA. The predicted 338-amino
acid protein migrated at 40 kD on SDS-PAGE. Engberg et al. (1997)
observed many evenly distributed nucleotide differences and pronounced
differences in the C-terminal regions between CTE-II and the closely
related ACT (602586) and suggested that the 2 enzymes are encoded by
different genes. Engberg et al. (1997) noted that there are human ESTs
homologous to CTE-II.

Yamada et al. (1997) isolated cDNAs encoding long-chain acyl-CoA
hydrolases from rat brain and liver cDNA libraries and designated the
clones Bach and Lach, respectively. Since the nucleotide sequences of
the N-terminal regions were entirely different but the downstream
sequences were virtually identical, Yamada et al. (1997) suggested that
Bach and Lach are derived from the same gene by alternative splicing.

Using a rat Bach cDNA to screen a human brain cDNA library, Yamada et
al. (1999) cloned BACH. The deduced protein contains 338 amino acids and
shares 95% identity with rat Bach. Northern blot analysis detected a
1.9-kb BACH transcript in human brain RNA. Biochemical analysis of human
brain homogenates showed that BACH is a cytosolic enzyme. SDS-PAGE
detected BACH at 43 kD, but gel filtration detected BACH at about 100
kD, indicating that the protein forms multimers.

By 5-prime RACE and RT-PCR of human brain total RNA, Yamada et al.
(2002) identified 6 BACH splice variants. Four variants, designated
BACHa to BACHd, differ in their use of 1 of 4 alternate first exons
(exons 1a through 1d, respectively) and encode proteins of 329 to 380
amino acids. All 4 of these proteins contain the hydrolase domain and a
bipartite nuclear localization signal (NLS) in their C-terminal halves,
and BACHb and BACHc have N-terminal mitochondrial localization signals.
The 2 remaining variants contain exon X, an alternatively spliced exon
between exons 7 and 8 that causes a frameshift and introduces a
premature stop codon. These C-terminally truncated proteins of 246 and
283 amino acids lack the hydrolase domain and NLS. The BACH proteins
containing the mitochondrial localization signal were detected in
mitochondria of transfected mouse neuroblastoma cells, but those
containing only the NLS did not localize to nuclei, even though the
isolated NLS was functional when fused to a test protein.
Immunohistochemical analysis of human brain detected BACHa in the
cytosol of neurons such as pyramidal cells in the cerebral cortex and
Purkinje cells in the cerebellum. In mouse brain, Bacha was also
detected in nuclei as well as cytosol of certain large neurons in the
cerebellum, medulla oblongata, and spinal cord. Yamada et al. (2002)
suggested that the NLS of BACH may be masked by the full-length protein
as a regulatory mechanism.

GENE FUNCTION

Yamada et al. (1997) found that bacterial extracts of E. coli expressing
either rat Bach or Lach cDNAs had 100-fold higher acyl-CoA hydrolase
activity, demonstrating that both cDNAs encode long-chain acyl-CoA
hydrolases.

By analyzing the activity of purified BACH against several fatty
acyl-CoAs, Yamada et al. (1999) found that BACH showed a relatively
broad specificity, with acyl-CoAs with carbon chains of C8 to C18 being
good substrates. BACH activity was inhibited by a sulfhydryl blocking
agent. Recombinant BACH was also active against palmitoyl-CoA.

Yang et al. (2004) found significantly decreased levels of acyl-CoA
hydrolase in hippocampal tissue from 5 patients with mesial temporal
lobe epilepsy (608096) compared to controls.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yamada et al. (2002) determined that the ACOT7 gene contains 13 exons,
including 4 alternative first exons (exons 1a through 1d) and exon X, an
alternatively spliced exon between exons 7 and 8. The gene spans 129 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Yamada et al. (1999) mapped the ACOT7 gene
to chromosome 1p36.2. Hunt et al. (2005) stated that the human ACOT7
gene maps to chromosome 1p36.31-p36.11 and the mouse Acot7 gene maps to
chromosome 4E2.

NOMENCLATURE

Hunt et al. (2005) noted that acyl-CoA thioesterases are referred to in
the literature as acyl-CoA hydrolases, but the reaction catalyzed is the
cleavage of a thioester bond. They presented a revised nomenclature for
these enzymes using the name acyl-CoA thioesterase and the root gene
symbol ACOT.

REFERENCE 1. Engberg, S. T.; Aoyama, T.; Alexson, S. E. H.; Hashimoto, T.; Svensson,
L. T.: Peroxisome proliferator-induced acyl-CoA thioesterase from
rat liver cytosol: molecular cloning and functional expression in
Chinese hamster ovary cells. Biochem. J. 323: 525-531, 1997.

2. Hunt, M. C.; Yamada, J.; Maltais, L. J.; Wright, M. W.; Podesta,
E. J.; Alexson, S. E. H.: A revised nomenclature for mammalian acyl-CoA
thioesterases/hydrolases. J. Lipid Res. 46: 2029-2032, 2005.

3. Yamada, J.; Furihata, T.; Iida, N.; Watanabe, T.; Hosokawa, M.;
Satoh, T.; Someya, A.; Nagaoka, I.; Suga, T.: Molecular cloning and
expression of cDNAs encoding rat brain and liver cytosolic long-chain
acyl-CoA hydrolases. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 232: 198-203,
1997.

4. Yamada, J.; Kuramochi, Y.; Takagi, M.; Watanabe, T.; Suga, T.:
Human brain acyl-CoA hydrolase isoforms encoded by a single gene. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 299: 49-56, 2002.

5. Yamada, J.; Kurata, A.; Hirata, M.; Taniguchi, T.; Takama, H.;
Furihata, T.; Shiratori, K.; Iida, N.; Takagi-Sakuma, M.; Watanabe,
T.; Kurosaki, K.; Endo, T.; Suga, T.: Purification, molecular cloning,
and genomic organization of human brain long-chain acyl-CoA hydrolase. J.
Biochem. 126: 1013-1019, 1999.

6. Yang, J. W.; Czech, T.; Yamada, J.; Csaszar, E.; Baumgartner, C.;
Slavc, I.; Lubec, G.: Aberrant cytosolic acyl-CoA thioester hydrolase
in hippocampus of patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Amino
Acids 27: 269-275, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/6/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/21/2006

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 5/1/1998

EDITED wwang: 06/23/2006
ckniffin: 6/6/2006
mgross: 6/6/2006
terry: 4/21/2006
carol: 3/17/2006
alopez: 5/1/1998

614530	TITLE *614530 NADH-UBIQUINONE OXIDOREDUCTASE 1 ALPHA SUBCOMPLEX, 12; NDUFA12
;;B17.2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Complex I (EC 1.6.99.3) is the largest multiprotein complex of the
mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system. It transfers
electrons with a high redox potential from NADH to ubiquinone and
participates in the formation of a proton gradient across the inner
mitochondrial membrane, thereby providing part of the proton-motive
force for ATP production. NDUFA12 is a subunit of the hydrophobic
protein fraction of mitochondrial complex I (Triepels et al., 2000).

CLONING

Using PCR, Triepels et al. (2000) cloned NDUFA12, which encodes the
17.2-kD subunit of complex I, from a heart cDNA library. The deduced
full-length protein contains 145 amino acids.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the NDUFA12 gene to chromosome 12q22 based on an
alignment of the NDUFA12 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF112208) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a 10-year-old girl, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, with
Leigh syndrome (256000) due to mitochondrial complex I deficiency,
Ostergaard et al. (2011) identified a homozygous truncating mutation in
the NDUFA12 gene (R60X; 614530.0001). The mutation was identified by
homozygosity mapping followed by candidate gene sequencing. Despite a
complete absence of NDUFA12 protein in patient fibroblasts, there were
reduced amounts of fully assembled and enzymatically active complex I.
These findings suggested that NDUFA12 is required either at a late step
in the assembly of complex I or in the stability of complex I. NDUFA12
mutations were not found in 122 patients with complex I deficiency,
indicating that it is not a common cause of the disorder.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LEIGH SYNDROME DUE TO MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFA12, ARG60TER

In a 10-year-old girl, born of consanguineous Pakistani parents, with
Leigh syndrome (256000) due to mitochondrial complex I deficiency,
Ostergaard et al. (2011) identified a homozygous 178C-T transition in
the NDUFA12 gene, resulting in an arg60-to-ter (R60X) substitution. The
mutation was identified by homozygosity mapping followed by candidate
gene sequencing. Patient muscle and fibroblasts showed an isolated
defect of complex I activity, at 11% and 60% control values,
respectively. Patient fibroblasts showed a complete absence of the
NDUFA12 protein, although complex I was present at reduced levels.
Transduction with wildtype NDUFA12 restored protein expression, complex
I amount, and complex I activity. The patient had delayed motor
development, with walking at age 20 months. From age 2 years, she showed
progressive loss of motor abilities and developed scoliosis and
dystonia. At age 10 years, she had poor growth, used a wheelchair, and
had severe muscular atrophy and hypotonia. Hypertrichosis was noted.
Vision and hearing were normal, and she attended a special school where
she had learned to read and write.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/15/2012.

2. Ostergaard, E.; Rodenburg, R. J.; van den Brand, M.; Thomsen, L.
L.; Duno, M.; Batbayli, M.; Wibrand, F.; Nijtmans, L.: Respiratory
chain complex I deficiency due to NDUFA12 mutations as a new cause
of Leigh syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 48: 737-740, 2011.

3. Triepels, R.; Smeitink, J.; Loeffen, J.; Smeets, R.; Trijbels,
F.; van den Heuvel, L.: Characterization of the human complex I NDUFB7
and 17.2-kDa cDNAs and mutational analysis of 19 genes of the HP fraction
in complex I-deficient-patients. Hum. Genet. 106: 385-391, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/19/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/15/2012

EDITED alopez: 03/20/2012
ckniffin: 3/19/2012
mgross: 3/15/2012

601746	TITLE *601746 HYPOXIA UP-REGULATED 1; HYOU1
;;OXYGEN-REGULATED PROTEIN, 150-KD; ORP150
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Astrocytes retain cell viability, even in extreme ischemia, and
proliferate in damaged brain (Petito et al., 1990; Janeczko, 1991). Rat
astrocytes exposed to hypoxia followed by reoxygenation were reported to
release increased amounts of interleukin-6 (147620) that could promote
neuronal survival in ischemic brain (Maeda et al., 1994). Kuwabara et
al. (1996) observed a 150-kD protein, called oxygen-regulated protein
(ORP150) by them, in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of cultured
astrocytes that was induced specifically by hypoxia and not by other
stimuli.

Ikeda et al. (1997) reported the cloning of human and rat ORP150 cDNAs
from hypoxia-treated human astrocytoma U373 cells and rat astrocytes,
respectively. The full-length 4,503-bp human cDNA contains a 2,997-bp
open reading frame predicted to encode a polypeptide of 999 amino acids
with a calculated molecular mass of 111,330 Da. The deduced amino acid
sequences of human and rat ORP150 exhibit high similarity (over 90%
identity) to each other. The first 32 residues represent the signal
peptide necessary for secretion. The C-terminal KNDEL sequence resembles
KDEL, a motif found in ER-resident proteins, suggesting that ORP150
resides in the ER. The N-terminal half of ORP150 has a modest similarity
to the ATPase domain of numerous HSP70 family sequences (see 140550).
Northern blot analysis revealed a marked similarity of expression
between ORP150 and GRP78 (138120) in U373 cells during hypoxia stress.
(The GRP78 protein is produced in cultured rat astrocytes exposed to
hypoxia or hypoxia/reoxygenation.) They also found that ORP150 mRNA was
highly expressed in the liver and pancreas, whereas little expression
was observed in the kidney and brain, similarly to the expression
pattern of GRP78. Ikeda et al. (1997) proposed that ORP150 plays an
important role in protein folding and secretion in the ER, perhaps as a
molecular chaperone in concert with other GRPs, to cope with
environmental stress.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the HYOU1
gene to chromosome 11 (TMAP stSG31085).

GENE FUNCTION

Tamatani et al. (2001) found that although ORP150 was sparingly
upregulated in neurons from human brain undergoing ischemic stress,
there was robust induction in astrocytes. Cultured neurons
overexpressing ORP150 were resistant to hypoxemic stress, whereas
astrocytes with inhibited ORP150 expression were more vulnerable. Mice
with targeted neuronal overexpression of ORP150 had smaller strokes
compared with controls. Neurons with increased ORP150 demonstrated
suppressed caspase-3-like activity and enhanced brain-derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) (113505) under hypoxia signaling. Tamatani et
al. (2001) concluded that ORP150 is an integral participant in ischemic
cytoprotective pathways.

Ozawa et al. (2001) demonstrated coexpression, colocalization, and
coimmunoprecipitation of ORP150 and vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF; 192240) in the ER of macrophages within the neovasculature of
human wound granulation tissue. In vitro, inhibition of ORP150 resulted
in retention of VEGF within the ER, whereas overexpression of ORP150
promoted the secretion of VEGF into hypoxic culture supernatants,
indicating that ORP150 may participate in VEGF transport to the
cytoplasm. In wounds of diabetic mice, overexpression of ORP150 resulted
in accelerated repair and closure; suppression of ORP150 delayed repair.
Ozawa et al. (2001) concluded that ORP150 plays a role in the promotion
of angiogenesis, and more generally acts as a molecular chaperone under
hypoxic conditions to facilitate protein transport and processing in the
ER.

Two members of the HSP70 family are required for protein biogenesis in
the yeast endoplasmic reticulum: Lhs1 (homologous to HYOU1) and Kar2
(homologous to HSPA5, or BiP; 138120). Steel et al. (2004) found that
Lhs1 and Kar2 specifically interacted to couple, and coordinately
regulate, their respective activities. Lhs1 stimulated Kar2 by providing
a specific nucleotide exchange activity, whereas Kar2 reciprocally
activated the Lhs1 ATPase. In yeast, the 2 ATPase activities are
coupled, and their coordinated regulation is essential for normal
function in vivo.

Zhao et al. (2010) showed that overexpression of Hyou1 prevented ER
stress and rescued neurodegeneration of Purkinje cells in Sil1 (608005)
-/- mice, whereas decreasing expression of Hyou1 exacerbated these
phenotypes. Purkinje cells from the caudal lobules of the cerebellum
from Sil1 -/- mice typically do not show signs of ER stress; however,
decreased expression of Hyou1 in these cells resulted in signs of ER
stress, ubiquitin-positive inclusions, and death. Zhao et al. (2010)
suggested that HYOU1 and SIL1 have partially redundant functions as BiP
nucleotide exchange factors in Purkinje cells.

REFERENCE 1. Ikeda, J.; Kaneda, S.; Kuwabara, K.; Ogawa, S.; Kobayashi, T.;
Matsumoto, M.; Yura, T.; Yanagi, H.: Cloning and expression of cDNA
encoding the human 150 kDa oxygen-regulated protein, ORP150. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 230: 94-99, 1997.

2. Janeczko, K.: The proliferative response of S-100 protein-positive
glial cells to injury in the neonatal rat brain. Brain Res. 564:
86-90, 1991.

3. Kuwabara, K.; Matsumoto, M.; Ikeda, J.; Hori, O.; Ogawa, S.; Maeda,
Y.; Kitagawa, K.; Imuta, N.; Kinoshita, T.; Stern, D. M.; Yanagi,
H.; Kamada, T.: Purification and characterization of a novel stress
protein, the 150-kDa oxygen-regulated protein (ORP150), from cultured
rat astrocytes and its expression in ischemic mouse brain. J. Biol.
Chem. 271: 5025-5032, 1996.

4. Maeda, Y.; Matsumoto, M.; Hori, O.; Kuwabara, K.; Ogawa, S.; Yan,
S. D.; Ohtsuki, T.; Kinoshita, T.; Kamada, T.; Stern, D. M.: Hypoxia/reoxygenation-mediated
induction of astrocyte interleukin 6: a paracrine mechanism potentially
enhancing neuron survival. J. Exp. Med. 180: 2297-2308, 1994.

5. Ozawa, K.; Kondo, T.; Hori, O.; Kitao, Y.; Stern, D. M.; Eisenmenger,
W.; Ogawa, S.; Ohshima, T.: Expression of the oxygen-regulated protein
ORP150 accelerates wound healing by modulating intracellular VEGF
transport. J. Clin. Invest. 108: 41-50, 2001.

6. Petito, C. K.; Morgello, S.; Felix, J. C.; Lesser, M. L.: The
two patterns of reactive astrocytosis in post ischemic rat brain. J.
Cereb. Blood Flow Metab. l0: 850-859, 1990.

7. Steel, G. J.; Fullerton, D. M.; Tyson, J. R.; Stirling, C. J.:
Coordinated activation of Hsp70 chaperones. Science 303: 98-101,
2004.

8. Tamatani, M.; Matsuyama, T.; Yamaguchi, A.; Mitsuda, N.; Tsukamoto,
Y.; Taniguchi, M.; Che, Y. H.; Ozawa, K.; Hori, O.; Nishimura, H.;
Yamashita, A.; Okabe, M.; Yanagi, H.; Stern, D. M.; Ogawa, S.; Tohyama,
M.: ORP150 protects against hypoxia/ischemia-induced neuronal death. Nature
Med. 7: 317-323, 2001.

9. Zhao, L.; Rosales, C.; Seburn, K.; Ron, D.; Ackerman, S. L.: Alteration
of the unfolded protein response modifies neurodegeneration in a mouse
model of Marinesco-Sjogren syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 25-35,
2010.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 11/12/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/30/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2004
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 7/15/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/4/2001

CREATED Wilson H. Y. Lo: 2/26/1997

EDITED wwang: 11/18/2010
terry: 11/12/2010
tkritzer: 11/16/2004
ckniffin: 9/30/2004
tkritzer: 1/20/2004
terry: 1/8/2004
joanna: 7/15/2002
alopez: 4/5/2001
terry: 4/4/2001
dkim: 7/30/1998
alopez: 6/25/1997
jenny: 5/30/1997
jenny: 5/29/1997
jenny: 5/28/1997
mark: 4/10/1997

104700	TITLE *104700 AMYLASE, SALIVARY, A; AMY1A
;;AMYLASE, SALIVARY; AMY1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The alpha-amylases hydrolyze alpha-1,4-glucoside bonds in polymers of
glucose units. Kamaryt and Laxova (1965, 1966) found 2 amylase
isoenzymes in serum, one produced by the salivary gland and the second
by the pancreas (see 104650). In 11 of 120 children, a duplication of
pancreatic enzyme band was found on starch gel electrophoresis and in
each case 1 parent also showed the duplication. In the mouse the
salivary and pancreatic amylases are determined by genes at closely
linked loci (Sick and Nielsen, 1964). The separate loci in the human
were designated AMY1 (salivary) and AMY2 (pancreatic). Polymorphism of
both the salivary and the pancreatic serum amylases has been
demonstrated in man. Ward et al. (1971) studied amylase in saliva and
identified electrophoretic variants. Data on gene frequencies of allelic
variants were tabulated by Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

GENE STRUCTURE

Nishide et al. (1986) showed that the human salivary alpha-amylase gene
is about 10 kb long and has 10 introns.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization combined with high resolution cytogenetics,
Zabel et al. (1983) assigned the amylase gene to 1p21, the POMC gene
(176830) to 2p23, and the somatostatin gene (182450) to 3q28.

Using amylase DNA probes in somatic cell hybrids, Tricoli and Shows
(1984) mapped the amylase genes to the 1p22.1-p21 region.

Multipoint linkage analysis showed that the amylase gene cluster is
located distal to NGFB (162030) (Dracopoli and Meisler, 1990).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Pronk et al. (1982) presented evidence they interpreted as indicating
duplication of the salivary amylase locus.

Gumucio et al. (1988) isolated cosmid clones containing 250 kb of
genomic DNA from the human amylase gene cluster. These clones were found
to contain 7 distinct amylase genes: 2 pancreatic amylase genes, 3
salivary amylase genes, and 2 truncated pseudogenes. Intergenic
distances of 17 to 22 kb separated the amylase gene copies.

Dracopoli and Meisler (1990) used a (CA)n repeat sequence immediately
upstream from the gamma-actin pseudogene associated with the AMY2B gene
(104660) in a study of 40 CEPH families. By PCR amplification of genomic
DNA, they identified 6 alleles with (CA)n lengths of 16 to 21 repeats.
The average heterozygosity was 0.70.

Large-scale copy number variations (LCVs) involve gains or losses of
several kilobases to hundreds of kilobases of genomic DNA among
phenotypically normal individuals. To investigate LCVs in the human
genome, Iafrate et al. (2004) applied array-based comparative genomic
hybridization (array CGH) to the genomes of 55 unrelated individuals.
The most common LCV (identified in 49.1% of the individuals studied)
encompassed the AMY1A and AMY2A locus (Groot et al., 1991). Iafrate et
al. (2004) detected relative gains (in 23.6% of cases) and losses (in
25.5% of cases) at this locus and confirmed the array CGH results using
metaphase-interphase FISH, high-resolution fiber FISH, and quantitative
PCR. In all they described more than 200 LCVs in the human genome.
Twenty-four of these variants were present in more than 10% of the
individuals studied, and 6 of these variants were present at a frequency
of more than 20%. A chromosome map indicating the location of the LCVs
was provided. Carter (2004) commented on this work and the parallel work
of Sebat et al. (2004).

Starch consumption is a prominent characteristic of agricultural
societies and hunter-gatherers in arid environments. In contrast,
rainforest and circum-arctic hunter-gatherers and some pastoralists
consume much less starch. This behavioral variation raised the
possibility that different selective pressures have acted on amylase,
the enzyme responsible for starch hydrolysis. Perry et al. (2007) found
that copy number of the AMY1 gene is correlated positively with salivary
amylase protein level and that individuals from populations with high
starch diets have, on average, more AMY1 copies than those with
traditionally low starch diets. Comparisons with other loci in a subset
of these populations suggested that the extent of AMY1 copy number
differentiation is highly unusual. Higher AMY1 copy numbers and protein
levels probably improve the digestion of starchy foods and may buffer
against the fitness-reducing effects of intestinal disease.

EVOLUTION

Groot et al. (1990) presented structural analyses of the human amylase
gene cluster that allowed them to construct a model for the evolution of
this family of genes by a number of consecutive events involving inter-
and intrachromosomal crossovers.

In a study comparing human AMY1 copy number variation with that of
chimpanzees and bonobos, Perry et al. (2007) found that the average
human has 3 times more AMY1 copies than chimpanzees, and bonobos may not
have salivary amylase at all. Outgroup comparisons with other great apes
suggested that AMY1 copy number was probably gained in the human
lineage, rather than lost in chimpanzees. It is hypothesized that
starch-rich plant underground storage organs (USOs) such as bulbs,
corms, and tubers were a critical food resource for early hominins. The
example of amylase as representative of the importance of diet as a
widespread source of selective pressure in human evolution is comparable
to that of lactase persistence (223100), which has evolved independently
in multiple populations.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES de Soyza  (1978); Ishizaki et al. (1985); McGeachin  (1968); Muenke
et al. (1984); Pronk et al. (1984); Tricoli and Shows (1984); Wiebauer
et al. (1985)
REFERENCE 1. Carter, N. P.: As normal as normal can be? (Comment) Nature Genet. 36:
931-932, 2004.

2. de Soyza, K.: Polymorphism of human salivary amylase: a preliminary
communication. Hum. Genet. 45: 189-192, 1978.

3. Dracopoli, N. C.; Meisler, M. H.: Mapping the human amylase gene
cluster on the proximal short arm of chromosome 1 using a highly informative
(CA)n repeat. Genomics 7: 97-102, 1990.

4. Groot, P. C.; Mager, W. H.; Frants, R. R.: Interpretation of polymorphic
DNA patterns in the human alpha-amylase multigene family. Genomics 10:
779-785, 1991.

5. Groot, P. C.; Mager, W. H.; Henriquez, N. V.; Pronk, J. C.; Arwert,
F.; Planta, R. J.; Eriksson, A. W.; Frants, R. R.: Evolution of the
human alpha-amylase multigene family through unequal, homologous,
and inter- and intrachromosomal crossovers. Genomics 8: 97-105,
1990.

6. Gumucio, D. L.; Wiebauer, K.; Caldwell, R. M.; Samuelson, L. C.;
Meisler, M. H.: Concerted evolution of human amylase genes. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 8: 1197-1205, 1988.

7. Iafrate, A. J.; Feuk, L.; Rivera, M. N.; Listewnik, M. L.; Donahoe,
P. K.; Qi, Y.; Scherer, S. W.; Lee, C.: Detection of large-scale
variation in the human genome. Nature Genet. 36: 949-951, 2004.

8. Ishizaki, K.; Noda, A.; Ikenaga, M.; Ida, K.; Omoto, K.; Nakamura,
Y.; Matsubara, K.: Restriction fragment length polymorphism detected
by human salivary amylase cDNA. Hum. Genet. 71: 261-262, 1985.

9. Kamaryt, J.; Laxova, R.: Amylase heterogeneity variants in man. Humangenetik 3:
41-45, 1966.

10. Kamaryt, J.; Laxova, R.: Amylase heterogeneity: some genetic
and clinical aspects. Humangenetik 1: 579-586, 1965.

11. McGeachin, R. L.: Multiple molecular forms of amylase. Ann.
N.Y. Acad. Sci. 151: 208-212, 1968.

12. Muenke, M.; Lindgren, V.; de Martinville, B.; Francke, U.: Comparative
analysis of mouse-human hybrids with rearranged chromosomes 1 by in
situ hybridization and Southern blotting: high resolution mapping
of NRAS, NGFB, and AMY on chromosome 1. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 10:
589-599, 1984.

13. Nishide, T.; Nakamura, Y.; Emi, M.; Yamamoto, T.; Ogawa, M.; Mori,
T.; Matsubara, K.: Primary structure of human salivary alpha-amylase
gene. Gene 41: 299-304, 1986.

14. Perry, G. H.; Dominy, N. J.; Claw, K. G.; Lee, A. S.; Fiegler,
H.; Redon, R.; Werner, J.; Villanea, F. A.; Mountain, J. L.; Misra,
R.; Carter, N. P.; Lee, C.; Stone, A. C.: Diet and the evolution
of human amylase gene copy number variation. Nature Genet. 39: 1256-1260,
2007.

15. Pronk, J. C.; Frants, R. R.; Jansen, W.; Eriksson, A. W.; Tonino,
G. J. M.: Evidence for duplication of the human salivary amylase
gene. Hum. Genet. 60: 32-35, 1982.

16. Pronk, J. C.; Jansen, W. J.; Pronk, A.; Pol, C. F. A. M.; Frants,
R. R.; Eriksson, A. W.: Salivary protein polymorphism in Kenya: evidence
for a new AMY1 allele. Hum. Hered. 34: 212-216, 1984.

17. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World
Distribution.  New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

18. Sebat, J.; Lakshmi, B.; Troge, J.; Alexander, J.; Young, J.; Lundin,
P.; Maner, S.; Massa, H.; Walker, M.; Chi, M.; Navin, N.; Lucito,
R.; and 9 others: Large-scale copy number polymorphism in the human
genome. Science 305: 525-528, 2004.

19. Sick, K.; Nielsen, J. T.: Genetics of amylase isozymes in the
mouse. Hereditas 51: 291-296, 1964.

20. Tricoli, J. V.; Shows, T. B.: Regional assignment of human amylase
(AMY) to p22-p21 of chromosome 1. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 10:
205-210, 1984.

21. Tricoli, J. V.; Shows, T. B.: Assignment of alpha-amylase genes
to the p22.1-p21 region of chromosome 1. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 37: 597 only, 1984.

22. Ward, J. C.; Merritt, A. D.; Bixler, D.: Human salivary amylase:
genetics of electrophoretic variants. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 23: 403-409,
1971.

23. Wiebauer, K.; Gumucio, D. L.; Jones, J. M.; Caldwell, R. M.; Hartle,
H. T.; Meisler, M. H.: A 78-kilobase region of mouse chromosome 3
contains salivary and pancreatic amylase genes and a pseudogene. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 5446-5449, 1985.

24. Zabel, B. U.; Naylor, S. L.; Sakaguchi, A. Y.; Bell, G. I.; Shows,
T. B.: High-resolution chromosomal localization of human genes for
amylase, proopiomelanocortin, somatostatin, and a DNA fragment (D3S1)
by in situ hybridization. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 6932-6936, 1983.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/18/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED alopez: 10/24/2007
terry: 10/18/2007
terry: 11/2/2004
alopez: 9/30/2004
terry: 9/27/2004
mark: 11/27/1996
mimadm: 2/11/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/27/1992
carol: 10/21/1991
carol: 12/14/1990
carol: 12/6/1990

606562	TITLE *606562 TRANSMEMBRANE 6 SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 1; TM6SF1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching an EST database to identify genes on chromosome 15q24-q26,
followed by RACE on a fetal brain cDNA library, Carim-Todd et al. (2000)
obtained a cDNA encoding TM6SF1. They also identified a paralog, TM6SF2
(606563), on chromosome 19p12. The deduced 370-amino acid TM6SF1 protein
has 6 transmembrane domains. Northern blot analysis revealed expression
of a 1.4-kb TM6SF1 transcript in spleen, testis, and peripheral blood
leukocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Carim-Todd et al. (2000) determined that
the TM6SF1 gene contains 10 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Carim-Todd et al. (2000) mapped the TM6SF1
gene to chromosome 15q24-q26.

REFERENCE 1. Carim-Todd, L.; Escarceller, M.; Estivill, X.; Sumoy, L.: Cloning
of the novel gene TM6SF1 reveals conservation of clusters of paralogous
genes between human chromosomes 15q24-q26 and 19p13.3-p12. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 90: 255-260, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/14/2001

EDITED mgross: 12/17/2001

604661	TITLE *604661 POTASSIUM CHANNEL-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2; KCNIP2
;;KCHIP2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the brain and heart, rapidly inactivating (A-type) voltage-gated
potassium (Kv) currents operate at subthreshold membrane potentials to
control the excitability of neurons and cardiac myocytes. An et al.
(2000) described 3 Kv channel-interacting proteins called KCHIPs that
bind to the cytoplasmic amino termini of Kv4-alpha subunits. See KCHIP1
(604660). The KCHIP2 cDNA encodes a 252-amino acid protein that has a
distinct amino terminus but shares approximately 70% amino acid identity
with KCHIP1 and KCHIP3 throughout a carboxy-terminal 185-amino acid core
domain containing 4 EF-hand-like motifs. Expression of KCHIP2 and Kv4
together reconstituted several features of native A-type currents by
modulating the density, inactivation kinetics, and rate of recovery from
inactivation of Kv4 channels in heterologous cells. The KCHIPs
colocalized and coimmunoprecipitated with brain Kv4-alpha subunits and
are thus integral components of native Kv4 channel complexes.

GENE FUNCTION

Jeyaraj et al. (2012) provided molecular evidence that links circadian
rhythms to vulnerability in ventricular arrhythmias in mice.
Specifically, they showed that cardiac ion channel expression and QT
interval duration (an index of myocardial repolarization) exhibit
endogenous circadian rhythmicity under the control of a clock-dependent
oscillator, Kruppel-like factor-15 (KLF15; 606465). Klf15
transcriptionally controls rhythmic expression of KChIP2, a critical
subunit required for generating the transient outward potassium current.
Deficiency or excess of Klf15 causes loss of rhythmic QT variation,
abnormal repolarization, and enhanced susceptibility to ventricular
arrhythmias. Jeyaraj et al. (2012) concluded that their findings
identified circadian transcription of ion channels as a mechanism for
cardiac arrhythmogenesis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kuo et al. (2001) found that knockout mice deficient for Kchip2
exhibited normal cardiac structure and function but displayed a
prolonged elevation in the ST segment on the electrocardiogram. The
Kchip2 -/- mice were highly susceptible to the induction of cardiac
arrhythmias. Single-cell analysis revealed a substrate for
arrhythmogenesis, including a complete absence of transient outward
potassium current (I-to) and a marked increase in action potential
duration. These studies demonstrated that a defect in KCHIP2 is
sufficient to confer a marked genetic susceptibility to arrhythmias,
establishing a novel genetic pathway for ventricular tachycardia via a
loss of the transmural gradient of I-to.

REFERENCE 1. An, W. F.; Bowlby, M. R.; Betty, M.; Cao, J.; Ling, H.-P.; Mendoza,
G.; Hinson, J. W.; Mattsson, K. I.; Strassle, B. W.; Trimmer, J. S.;
Rhodes, K. J.: Modulation of A-type potassium channels by a family
of calcium sensors. Nature 403: 553-556, 2000.

2. Jeyaraj, D.; Haldar, S. M.; Wan, X.; McCauley, M. D.; Ripperger,
J. A.; Hu, K.; Lu, Y.; Eapen, B. L.; Sharma, N.; Ficker, E.; Cutler,
M. J.; Gulick, J.; and 9 others: Circadian rhythms govern cardiac
repolarization and arrhythmogenesis. Nature 483: 96-99, 2012.

3. Kuo, H.-C.; Cheng, C.-F.; Clark, R. B.; Lin, J. J.-C.; Lin, J.
L.-C.; Hoshijima, M.; Nguyen-Tran, V. T. B.; Gu, Y.; Ikeda, Y.; Chu,
P.-H.; Ross, J., Jr.; Giles, W. R.; Chien, K. R.: A defect in the
Kv channel-interacting protein 2 (KChIP2) gene leads to a complete
loss of I-to, and confers susceptibility to ventricular tachycardia. Cell 107:
801-813, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2012
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/7/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 3/7/2000

EDITED alopez: 09/05/2012
alopez: 9/5/2012
terry: 8/29/2012
mgross: 10/20/2003
mgross: 1/7/2002
alopez: 6/30/2000
alopez: 3/8/2000
alopez: 3/7/2000

300726	TITLE *300726 G ANTIGEN 2B; GAGE2B
DESCRIPTION See GAGE1 (300594) for more information about the GAGE gene cluster.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gjerstorff and Ditzel (2008) stated that the GAGE2B gene is contained
within a 9.5-kb GAGE repeat. The GAGE2B gene contains 5 exons spanning
about 6.3 kb and has a LINE insertion.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Gjerstorff and Ditzel (2008) mapped the
GAGE2B gene to a GAGE gene cluster on chromosome Xp11.23.

REFERENCE 1. Gjerstorff, M. F.; Ditzel, H. J.: An overview of the GAGE cancer/testis
antigen family with the inclusion of newly identified members. Tissue
Antigens 71: 187-192, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/5/2008

EDITED wwang: 08/18/2008
wwang: 8/6/2008

