609599	TITLE *609599 ANKYRIN REPEAT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; ANKRD1
;;CARDIAC ANKYRIN REPEAT PROTEIN; CARP;;
C193
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ANKRD1 belongs to the conserved muscle ankyrin repeat protein (MARP)
family. Expression of MARPs is induced in response to physiologic
stress, injury, and hypertrophy (Miller et al., 2003).

CLONING

By differential screening of an IL1A (147760)- and TNF
(191160)-stimulated human dermal microvascular endothelial cell cDNA
library, Chu et al. (1995) isolated a full-length cDNA encoding ANKRD1,
which they called C193. The deduced 319-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 36 kD. ANKRD1 contains a nuclear
localization signal, 4 tandem ankyrin-like repeats, multiple
phosphorylation sites, and a PEST-rich region, which is typically found
in rapidly degraded proteins. The 3-prime UTR of ANKRD1 has numerous
AT-rich mRNA decay elements. Northern blot analysis of multiple human
cell lines detected ANKRD1 expression in microvascular and large vessel
endothelial cell lines. Immunofluorescence of transfected COS cells and
immunoprecipitation of nuclear and cytoplasmic extracts of COS cells
showed that ANKRD1 was abundantly expressed in nucleus.

Using the N2A region of titin (TTN; 188840) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid
screen of a skeletal muscle cDNA library, Miller et al. (2003) cloned
ANKRD1, which they called CARP. Northern blot analysis detected
predominant CARP expression in cardiac muscle, and RT-PCR also showed
expression in skeletal muscle. Western blot analysis revealed a 40-kD
CARP protein in heart. Endogenous Carp colocalized with titin in rat
cardiac myocytes, and fluorescence-tagged CARP targeted to nuclei and
colocalized with titin within the I-band. In mouse myocardium, Carp was
detected in both the central I-band region and within the nucleolus.

GENE FUNCTION

By Northern blot analysis, Chu et al. (1995) showed that ANKRD1
expression was rapidly induced by TNF. In vitro translated ANKRD1
protein exhibited DNA-binding activity, as demonstrated by DNA cellulose
column binding.

Using RT-PCR, Kanai et al. (2001) detected Ankrd1 expression in rat
arterial tissue, and expression increased upon injury. Ankrd1 was also
expressed in C2/2 rabbit aortic smooth muscle cells (SMCs). mRNA
stability and reporter construct assays showed that TGFB1 (190180)
stimulation increased expression of ANKRD1 transcript, and deletion
mapping of the human ANKRD1 promoter identified a CAGA motif as the
TGFB1 response element. Cotransfection experiments in C2/2 cells showed
that ANKRD1 transcription activation was regulated by TGFB1 via SMAD
proteins. Gel shift assays revealed that SMAD3 (603109) and SMAD4
(600993) bound to the ANKRD1 promoter CAGA response element.
Overexpression of human ANKRD1 in C2/2 cells reduced DNA synthesis.
Western blot analysis of these cells showed increased expression of
Cdkn1a (116899), suggesting that ANKRD1 regulates SMC proliferation
through the CDKN1A pathway.

Using representational difference analysis, Zolk et al. (2002) showed
that canine Ankrd1 was upregulated in failing heart myocardium. Analysis
of 33 human patients with dilated or ischemic cardiomyopathy revealed a
1.8-fold increase in ANKRD1 expression in left ventricles, whereas
ANKRD1 expression was unchanged in atria.

Nakamura et al. (2002) found aberrant expression of CARP and ARRP
(ANKRD2; 610734) in atrophic muscles in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(ALS; see 105400). CARP expression was barely detected in control
skeletal muscle, but it was increased in ALS, with higher expression in
severely atrophic small muscle fibers. Although CARP localizes to
cytoplasm and nucleus in normal heart, it localized to cytoplasm only in
ALS muscle. CARP expression in ALS muscle was independent of muscle
fiber type.

By mutation analysis, Miller et al. (2003) determined that an N-terminal
sequence and part of ankyrin repeat-2 of mouse Carp bound the N2A region
of titin between immunoglobulin repeats 80 and 81. Expression of Carp
was upregulated in response to stretch on myofibrils and within nuclei
in cultured fetal rat cardiac myocytes.

Using in situ hybridization, de Waard et al. (2003) found that 15 of 16
human atherosclerotic lesions from aorta or iliac artery showed
ANKRD1-positive endothelial cells and/or SMCs. In addition, ANKRD1
colocalized with smooth muscle alpha-actin (ACTA2; 102620), but not with
PCNA (176740), indicating ANKRD1 expression in a subset of intimal SMCs
but not in proliferating SMCs. In situ hybridization analysis of Ankrd1
expression in cardiac tissue of 2 mouse models of murine atherosclerosis
showed similar expression patterns to those seen in humans. Northern
blot analysis of cultured SMCs showed that stimulation with activin A
(147290) increased steady-state ANKRD1 mRNA levels.

MAPPING

Using somatic cell hybrid analysis, Chu et al. (1995) localized the
ANKRD1 gene to chromosome 10.

REFERENCE 1. Chu, W.; Burns, D. K.; Swerlick, R. A.; Presky, D. H.: Identification
and characterization of a novel cytokine-inducible nuclear protein
from human endothelial cells. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 10236-10245, 1995.

2. de Waard, V.; van Achterberg, T. A. E.; Beauchamp, N. J.; Pannekoek,
H.; de Vries, C. J. M.: Cardiac ankyrin repeat protein (CARP) expression
in human and murine atherosclerotic lesions: activin induces Carp
in smooth muscle cells. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 23: 64-68,
2003.

3. Kanai, H.; Tanaka, T.; Aihara, Y.; Takeda, S.; Kawabata, M.; Miyazono,
K.; Nagai, R.; Kurabayashi, M.: Transforming growth factor-beta/Smads
signaling induces transcription of the cell type-restricted ankyrin
repeat protein CARP gene through CAGA motif in vascular smooth muscle
cells. Circ. Res. 88: 30-36, 2001.

4. Miller, M. K.; Bang, M.-L.; Witt, C. C.; Labeit, D.; Trombitas,
C.; Watanabe, K.; Granzier, H.; McElhinny, A. S.; Gregorio, C. C.;
Labeit, S.: The muscle ankyrin repeat proteins: CARP, ankrd2/Arpp
and DARP as a family of titin filament-based stress response molecules. J.
Molec. Biol. 333: 951-964, 2003.

5. Nakamura, K.; Nakada, C.; Takeuchi, K.; Osaki, M.; Shomori, K.;
Kato, S.; Ohama, E.; Sato, K.; Fukayama, M.; Mori, S.; Ito, H.; Moriyama,
M.: Altered expression of cardiac ankyrin repeat protein and its
homologue, ankyrin repeat protein with PEST and proline-rich region,
in atrophic muscles in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Pathobiology 70:
197-203, 2002.

6. Zolk, O.; Frohme, M.; Maurer, A.; Kluxen, F.-W.; Hentsch, B.; Zubakov,
D.; Hoheisel, J. D.; Zucker, I. H.; Pepe, S.; Eschenhagen, T.: Cardiac
ankyrin repeat protein, a negative regulator of cardiac gene expression,
is augmented in human heart failure. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 293:
1377-1382, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 01/31/2007

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 9/22/2005

EDITED mgross: 01/31/2007
mgross: 9/22/2005

601293	TITLE *601293 RAS HOMOLOG ENRICHED IN BRAIN; RHEB
;;RAS HOMOLOG ENRICHED IN BRAIN 2, FORMERLY; RHEB2, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MTOR (FRAP1; 601231) integrates protein translation with cellular
nutrient status and growth signals through its participation in 2
biochemically and functionally distinct protein complexes, MTORC1 and
MTORC2. MTORC1 is sensitive to rapamycin and signals downstream to
activate protein translation, whereas MTORC2 is resistant to rapamycin
and signals upstream to activate AKT (see 164730). The GTPase RHEB is a
proximal activator of MTORC1 and translation initiation. It has the
opposite effect on MTORC2, producing inhibition of the upstream AKT
pathway (Mavrakis et al., 2008).

CLONING

Mizuki et al. (1996) isolated a RAS-related GTP-binding protein cDNA
from a human skin fibroblast cDNA library using a genomic subclone
derived from a YAC clone as a probe. The deduced polypeptide consists of
184 amino acids and contains 5 repeats of the RAS-related GTP-binding
region. The gene is highly homologous to the rat RHEB (RAS homolog
enriched in brain) gene, which encodes a RAS-related growth factor- and
synaptic activity-regulated protein. The human and rat RHEB gene
products show 98.9% amino acid identity.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhang et al. (2003) determined that Drosophila Rheb is a direct target
of Tsc2 (191092) GTPase-activating protein (GAP) activity both in vivo
and in vitro. Point mutations in the GAP domain of Tsc2 disrupted its
ability to regulate Rheb without affecting the interaction between Tsc2
and Tsc1 (605284).

Stocker et al. (2003) found that point mutations in the Drosophila Rheb
gene inhibited cell growth and overexpression of Rheb promoted cell
growth. They found genetic and biochemical evidence that Rheb functions
downstream of Tsc1 and Tsc2 in the target of rapamycin (TOR; see 601231)
signaling pathway to control growth and that a major effector of Rheb
function is ribosomal S6 kinase (S6K; see 608938).

Hsu et al. (2007) demonstrated that a conserved protein, translationally
controlled tumor protein (TCTP; 600763), is an essential component of
the TSC-RHEB pathway. Reducing Drosophila Tctp levels reduced cell size,
cell number, and organ size, which mimics Drosophila Rheb mutant
phenotypes. Drosophila Tctp is genetically epistatic to Tsc1 and Rheb,
but acts upstream of S6K, a downstream target of Rheb. Drosophila Tctp
directly associated with Rheb and displayed guanine nucleotide exchange
activity with it in vivo and in vitro. Human TCTP showed similar
biochemical properties compared to Drosophila Tctp and could rescue
Drosophila Tctp mutant phenotypes, suggesting that the function of TCTP
in the TSC pathway is evolutionarily conserved. Hsu et al. (2007)
concluded that their studies identified TCTP as a direct regulator of
RHEB.

The mammalian target of rapamycin, mTOR (601231), is a central regulator
of cell growth. Its activity is regulated by RHEB, a Ras-like small
GTPase, in response to growth factor stimulation and nutrient
availability. Bai et al. (2007) showed that RHEB regulates mTOR through
FKBP38 (604840), a member of the FK506-binding protein (FKBP) family
that is structurally related to FKBP12 (186945). FKBP38 binds to mTOR
and inhibits its activity in a manner similar to that of the
FKBP12-rapamycin complex. RHEB interacts directly with FKBP38 and
prevents its association with mTOR in a GTP-dependent manner. Bai et al.
(2007) concluded that their findings suggested that FKBP38 is an
endogenous inhibitor of mTOR, whose inhibitory activity is antagonized
by RHEB in response to growth factor stimulation and nutrient
availability.

Using Western blot analysis, Nardella et al. (2008) found that RHEB was
overexpressed in 6 of 7 human prostate cancer cell lines compared with 2
nontumorigenic prostate epithelial lines. Transgenic mice with
prostate-specific overexpression of human RHEB showed hyperplasia in the
dorsolateral lobe as early as 6 months of age and low-grade prostatic
intraepithelial neoplasia by 10 months of age, but they did not progress
to a higher stage of malignancy by 17 months of age. Conversely, RHEB
overexpression was associated with senescence and reduced hyperplasia in
the ventral prostate of transgenic mice, suggesting an inverse
relationship between hyperplasia and senescence with RHEB
overexpression. In the context of Pten (601728) haploinsufficiency, RHEB
overexpression increased cell proliferation and promoted tumorigenesis.
Nardella et al. (2008) concluded that RHEB may function as a
protooncogene in the appropriate cellular context.

Mavrakis et al. (2008) found that mice receiving hematopoietic
progenitor cells expressing wildtype Rheb or a Rheb mutant with enhanced
activity toward MTORC1 developed tumors with high penetrance and short
latency. Consistent with the ability of Rheb to activate MTORC1 and not
MTORC2, the Rheb-expressing tumors showed extensive phosphorylation of
ribosomal S6 protein (RPS6; 180460) without detectable phosphorylation
of Akt. Examination of translation initiation factors downstream of Mtor
showed only Eif4e (133440)-enhanced lymphomagenesis. Rheb activity
toward Mtor depended on Rheb farnesylation and was blocked by a
pharmacologic inhibitor of farnesyltransferase (see FNTA; 134635). RHEB
was highly expressed in some human lymphomas, resulting in MTORC1
activation and increased sensitivity to rapamycin and
farnesyltransferase inhibition.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Ismail et al. (2011) stated that PDE-delta (PDE6D; 602676) binds to
farnesylated small G proteins. They presented the 1.7-angstrom structure
of human PDE-delta in complex with C-terminally farnesylated human RHEB.
PDE-delta assumed immunoglobulin-like beta-sandwich folds with a
flexible loop and a farnesyl-binding pocket. PDE-delta interacted almost
exclusively with the C-terminal farnesyl moiety of RHEB. The interaction
did not require guanine nucleotide, which bound RHEB on a surface nearly
opposite to the PDE-delta-binding site. Ismail et al. (2011) observed
that the limited contact of PDE-delta with RHEB provides PDE-delta with
relaxed specificity for farnesylated cargo proteins. PDE-delta also
interacted with a second small G protein, mouse Arl2 (601175). The
interaction of PDE-delta with Arl2 was dependent upon GTP and caused a
conformational change in PDE-delta that closed its farnesyl-binding
pocket. In solution, addition of Arl2-GTP dissociated the
PDE-delta-farnesylated RHEB complex. Addition of Arl3 (604695)-GTP also
caused release of farnesylated RHEB from PDE-delta. In transfected
canine kidney cells, fluorescence-labeled RHEB showed endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) and Golgi localization. Addition of PDE-delta relocalized
RHEB into a cytoplasmic and nuclear distribution, and subsequent
addition of Arl2-GTP restored RHEB localization to ER and Golgi
membranes. Ismail et al. (2011) concluded that PDE-delta functions as a
solubilization factor for farnesylated RHEB and that ARL2 and ARL3 act
in a GTP-dependent manner as allosteric release factors for farnesylated
RHEB.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Mizuki et al. (1996) localized
the RHEB gene to 7q36. They suggested that RHEB is a candidate gene for
holoprosencephaly type 3 (142945) or for sacral agenesis (176450), which
map to this region.

REFERENCE 1. Bai, X.; Ma, D.; Liu, A.; Shen, X.; Wang, Q. J.; Liu, Y.; Jiang,
Y.: Rheb activates mTOR by antagonizing its endogenous inhibitor,
FKBP38. Science 318: 977-980, 2007.

2. Hsu, Y.-C.; Chern, J. J.; Cai, Y.; Liu, M.; Choi, K.-W.: Drosophila
TCTP is essential for growth and proliferation through regulation
of dRheb GTPase. Nature 445: 785-788, 2007.

3. Ismail, S. A.; Chen, Y.-X.; Rusinova, A.; Chandra, A.; Bierbaum,
M.; Gremer, L.; Triola, G.; Waldmann, H.; Bastiaens, P. I. H.; Wittinghofer,
A.: Arl2-GTP and Arl3-GTP regulate a GDI-like transport system for
farnesylated cargo. Nature Chem. Biol. 7: 942-949, 2011.

4. Mavrakis, K. J.; Zhu, H.; Silva, R. L. A.; Mills, J. R.; Teruya-Feldstein,
J.; Lowe, S. W.; Tam, W.; Pelletier, J.; Wendel, H.-G.: Tumorigenic
activity and therapeutic inhibition of Rheb GTPase. Genes Dev. 22:
2178-2188, 2008.

5. Mizuki, N.; Kimura, M.; Ohno, S.; Miyata, S.; Sato, M.; Ando, H.;
Ishihara, M.; Goto, K.; Watanabe, S.; Yamazaki, M.; Ono, A.; Taguchi,
S.; Okumura, K.; Nogami, M.; Taguchi, H.; Ando, A.; Inoko, H.: Isolation
of cDNA and genomic clones of a human Ras-related GTP-binding protein
gene and its chromosomal localization to the long arm of chromosome
7, 7q36. Genomics 34: 114-118, 1996.

6. Nardella, C.; Chen, Z.; Salmena, L.; Carracedo, A.; Alimonti, A.;
Egia, A.; Carver, B.; Gerald, W.; Cordon-Cardo, C.; Pandolfi, P. P.
: Aberrant Rheb-mediated mTORC1 activation and Pten haploinsufficiency
are cooperative oncogenic events. Genes Dev. 22: 2172-2177, 2008.

7. Stocker, H.; Radimerski, T.; Schindelholz, B.; Wittwer, F.; Belawat,
P.; Daram, P.; Breuer, S.; Thomas, G.; Hafen, E.: Rheb is an essential
regulator of S6K in controlling cell growth in Drosophila. Nature
Cell Biol. 5: 559-565, 2003.

8. Zhang, Y.; Gao, X.; Saucedo, L. J.; Ru, B.; Edgar, B. A.; Pan,
D.: Rheb is a direct target of the tuberous sclerosis tumour suppressor
proteins. Nature Cell Biol. 5: 578-581, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/3/2013
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 8/5/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/5/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/26/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/26/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/7/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/5/1996

EDITED mgross: 10/23/2013
tpirozzi: 10/3/2013
mgross: 8/5/2009
terry: 8/5/2009
alopez: 11/29/2007
terry: 11/26/2007
alopez: 7/2/2007
terry: 6/26/2007
mgross: 9/23/2004
mgross: 11/7/2003
terry: 11/7/2003
mark: 5/14/1997
mark: 9/30/1996
terry: 6/5/1996
mark: 6/5/1996

610057	TITLE *610057 TRANS-2,3-ENOYL-CoA REDUCTASE; TECR
;;GLYCOPROTEIN, SYNAPTIC, 2; GPSN2;;
TER;;
SC2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Microsomal long and very long chain fatty acid elongation uses
malonyl-CoA as the 2-carbon donor and consists of 4 sequential
reactions. TECR catalyzes the final step, reducing trans-2,3-enoyl-CoA
to saturated acyl-CoA (Moon and Horton, 2003).

CLONING

By sequencing cDNAs obtained from umbilical cord blood CD34
(142230)-positive hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells, Mao et al. (1998)
identified TECR, which they called GPSN2.

By searching databases for homologs of yeast Tsc13, followed by PCR of a
human adipose tissue cDNA library, Moon and Horton (2003) cloned TECR,
which they called TER. The deduced 308-amino acid protein contains 5
transmembrane domains. It shares 95% amino acid identity with mouse Tecr
and 34% identity with yeast Tsc13. Northern blot analysis detected a
1.2-kb transcript in all human and mouse tissues examined.
Epitope-tagged TECR colocalized predominantly with long chain fatty acid
elongase (ELOVL6; 611546) in the endoplasmic reticulum of transfected
Chinese hamster ovary cells. A small amount colocalized with GM130
(GOLGA2; 602580) in the Golgi.

GENE FUNCTION

Moon and Horton (2003) found that cotransfection of TECR with ELOVL6 in
human embryonic kidney cells resulted in the disappearance of
trans-2,3-stearoyl-CoA, indicating that TECR is a trans-2,3-enoyl-CoA
reductase. They confirmed this finding by RNA interference experiments
in human hepatoma cells.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TECR
gene to chromosome 19 (TMAP RH70771).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In all affected members of a large Hutterite family in which autosomal
recessive nonsyndromic mental retardation was mapped by Nolan et al.
(2008) to chromosome 19p13, Caliskan et al. (2011) detected a homozygous
pro182-to-leu mutation in the TECR gene (610057.0001).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 14
TECR, PRO182LEU (dbSNP rs199469705)

In 5 sibs with nonsyndromic mental retardation (MRT14; 614020) from a
large Hutterite family originally reported by Ober et al. (2001),
Caliskan et al. (2011) detected homozygosity for a C-to-T transition in
exon 8 of the TECR gene that resulted in a pro182-to-leu (P182L)
substitution in trans-2,3-enoyl-CoA reductase. None of the 8 unaffected
sibs in the family was homozygous for the missense mutation, which
altered a highly conserved residue.

Among 1,496 Schmiedeleut (S-leut) Hutterites from the United States,
Chong et al. (2012) found 103 heterozygotes and 5 homozygotes for the
P182L mutation in the TECR gene, for a frequency of 0.069, or 1 in 14.5.
This is a private mutation in the Hutterite population.

REFERENCE 1. Caliskan, M.; Chong, J. X.; Uricchio, L.; Anderson, R.; Chen, P.;
Sougnez, C.; Garimella, K.; Gabriel, S. B.; DePristo, M. A.; Shakir,
K.; Matern, D.; Das, S.; Waggoner, D.; Nicolae, D. L.; Ober, C.:
Exome sequencing reveals a novel mutation for autosomal recessive
non-syndromic mental retardation in the TECR gene on chromosome 19p13. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 20: 1285-1289, 2011.

2. Chong, J. X.; Ouwenga, R.; Anderson, R. L.; Waggoner, D. J.; Ober,
C.: A population-based study of autosomal-recessive disease-causing
mutations in a founder population. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 91: 608-620,
2012.

3. Mao, M.; Fu, G.; Wu, J.-S.; Zhang, Q.-H.; Zhou, J.; Kan, L.-X.;
Huang, Q.-H.; He, K.-L.; Gu, B.-W.; Han, Z.-G.; Shen, Y.; Gu, J.;
Yu, Y.-P.; Xu, S.-H.; Wang, Y.-X.; Chen, S.-J.; Chen, Z.: Identification
of genes expressed in human CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
by expressed sequence tags and efficient full-length cDNA cloning. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8175-8180, 1998.

4. Moon, Y.-A.; Horton, J. D.: Identification of two mammalian reductases
involved in the two-carbon fatty acyl elongation cascade. J. Biol.
Chem. 278: 7335-7343, 2003.

5. Nolan, D. K.; Chen, P.; Das, S.; Ober, C.; Waggoner, D.: Fine
mapping of a locus for nonsyndromic mental retardation on chromosome
19p13. Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A: 1414-1422, 2008.

6. Ober, C.; Abney, M.; McPeek, M. S.: The genetic dissection of
complex traits in a founder population. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 1068-1079,
2001. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 70: 284 only, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/7/2013
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/1/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/17/2006

EDITED alopez: 02/13/2013
alopez: 2/13/2013
terry: 2/7/2013
carol: 10/23/2012
carol: 6/8/2011
alopez: 6/7/2011
alopez: 6/2/2011
carol: 5/17/2011
wwang: 9/10/2010
wwang: 10/23/2007
mgross: 4/17/2006

604630	TITLE *604630 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR SUBFAMILY 0, GROUP B, MEMBER 2; NR0B2
;;SMALL HETERODIMER PARTNER; SHP; SHP1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The nuclear receptor superfamily is a group of transcription factors
regulated by small hydrophobic hormones, such as retinoic acid, thyroid
hormone, and steroids. NR0B2 is an orphan member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily that contains the dimerization and ligand-binding domains
found in other family members, but lacks the conserved DNA-binding
domain. NR0B2 heterodimerizes with other nuclear receptor superfamily
members and inhibits transactivation by these receptors (Seol et al.,
1996).

CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid system with a mouse relative of human MB67
(NR1I3; 603881) as the bait, Seol et al. (1996) cloned mouse liver cDNAs
encoding Nr0b2, which they named Shp for 'small heterodimer partner.' By
screening a human liver cDNA library with a mouse Nr0b2 cDNA, they
isolated a human NR0B2 cDNA. Northern blot analysis of human tissues
detected an approximately 1.3-kb NR0B2 transcript in liver; lower levels
of expression were detected in heart and pancreas. The predicted
257-amino acid NR0B2 protein contains the ligand-binding and
dimerization domains found in other nuclear hormone receptor superfamily
members, but lacks the conserved DNA-binding domain. The closest
relative of NR0B2 among known family members is DAX1 (NR0B1; 300473).

Northern blot analysis of human tissues by Lee et al. (1998) detected
NR0B2 expression in adult small intestine, adult spleen, fetal liver,
and fetal adrenal gland.

Iyer et al. (2006) stated that the N-terminal half of SHP contains 2
LxxLL nuclear receptor boxes and that the C terminus contains an
activation factor (AF)-2 domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Seol et al. (1996) found that Nr0b2 interacted with several conventional
and orphan members of the receptor superfamily, including retinoid
receptors RAR (see 180240) and RXR (see 180245), thyroid hormone
receptor (see 190160), and the orphan receptor MB67, in vitro and in a
yeast 2-hybrid system. In mammalian cells, Nr0b2 specifically inhibited
transactivation by the superfamily members with which it interacted.
Seol et al. (1996) suggested that NR0B2 functions as a negative
regulator of receptor-dependent signaling pathways.

The catabolism of cholesterol into bile acids is regulated by oxysterols
and bile acids, which induce or repress transcription of the pathway's
rate-limiting enzyme, CYP7A1 (118455). The nuclear receptor LXR-alpha
(LXRA, or NR1H3; 602423) binds oxysterols and mediates feed-forward
induction. Lu et al. (2000) showed that repression is coordinately
regulated by a triumvirate of nuclear receptors, including the bile acid
receptor, FXR (NR1H4; 603826); the promoter-specific activator, LRH1
(NR5A2; 604453); and the promoter-specific repressor, SHP. Feedback
repression of CYP7A1 is accomplished by the binding of bile acids to
FXR, which leads to transcription of SHP. Elevated SHP protein then
inactivates LRH1 by forming a heterodimeric complex that leads to
promoter-specific repression of both CYP7A1 and SHP. These results
revealed an elaborate autoregulatory cascade mediated by nuclear
receptors for the maintenance of hepatic cholesterol catabolism.

Goodwin et al. (2000) used a potent, nonsteroidal FXR ligand to show
that FXR induced expression of SHP1. SHP1 repressed expression of CYP7A1
by inhibiting the activity of LRH1, an orphan nuclear receptor that
regulates CYP7A1 expression positively. This bile acid-activated
regulatory cascade provides a molecular basis for the coordinate
suppression of CYP7A1 and other genes involved in bile acid
biosynthesis.

Iyer et al. (2006) showed that epitope-tagged SHP formed homodimers in
the nucleus of transfected HEK293 cells. The homodimers dissociated upon
heterodimerization of SHP with ligand-activated ER-alpha (ESR1; 133430).
SHP also formed heterodimers in the nucleus with DAX1, and the LxxLL
motifs and AF2 domain of DAX1 contributed to SHP-DAX1
heterodimerization.

Iyer et al. (2007) showed that the LxxLL motifs and AF2 domain of
epitope-tagged SHP interacted to form antiparallel homodimers of SHP.
The LxxLL motifs and AF2 domain of SHP were also involved in
heterodimerization with DAX1.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lee et al. (1998) isolated the human NR0B2 genomic sequence. The NR0B2
gene contains 2 exons, which are interrupted by an approximately 1.8-kb
intron.

MAPPING

By analysis of a somatic cell hybrid mapping panel, Lee et al. (1998)
mapped the NR0B2 gene to chromosome 1. They localized the NR0B2 gene to
1p36.1 using FISH.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The ability of the SHP protein to modulate the transcriptional activity
of the protein that is abnormal in MODY1 (125850), namely hepatocyte
nuclear receptor HNF4-alpha (600281), suggested SHP as a candidate MODY
gene. Nishigori et al. (2001) screened 173 unrelated Japanese subjects
with early-onset diabetes for mutations in the SHP gene and found 5
different mutations in 6 subjects as well as 1 apparent polymorphism,
all present in heterozygous state. All of the subjects with the
mutations were mildly or moderately obese at onset of diabetes, and
analysis of the lineages of these individuals indicated that the SHP
mutations were associated with obesity rather than with diabetes.
Therefore, an additional group of 101 unrelated nondiabetic subjects
with early-onset obesity was screened for mutations in the SHP gene. Two
of the previously observed mutations (R34X 604630.0001 and A195S
604630.0002) and 2 additional mutations were identified in 6 subjects,
whereas no mutations were identified in 116 young nondiabetic lean
controls (P = 0.0094). Functional studies of the mutant proteins showed
that the mutations result in the loss of SHP activity. These results
suggested that genetic variation in the SHP gene contributes to
increased body weight and revealed a pathway leading to this common
metabolic disorder in Japanese.

Since variations of the NR0B2 gene had been found to be associated with
obesity among Japanese (Nishigori et al., 2001), Echwald et al. (2004)
evaluated the prevalence of NR0B2 variants among obese Danish men. They
concluded that in contrast to reported findings among obese Japanese,
functional variants are rare among Danish men.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kerr et al. (2002) and Wang et al. (2002) found that Shp-null mice
maintained on standard laboratory chow appeared normal, were fertile,
and had normal life spans. Loss of Shp caused abnormal accumulation and
increased synthesis of bile acids due to derepression of rate-limiting
Cyp7a1 and Cyp8b1 (602172) hydroxylase enzymes in the bile acid
synthetic pathway. However, Shp-null mice fed bile acids efficiently
repressed Cyp7a1, Cyp7b1 (603711), and Cyp8b1. Kerr et al. (2002) and
Wang et al. (2002) concluded that bile acid synthesis can be regulated
in the absence of Shp.

Using RT-PCR, Volle et al. (2007) found that mouse Shp was expressed at
low levels in whole testis, but its expression was significantly higher
in the interstitial compartment, including steroidogenic Leydig cells,
compared with tubular cells. Shp-knockout mice showed increased
testicular testosterone synthesis that was independent of the
hypothalamus-pituitary axis. Using both genetic and pharmacologic
studies in mice, Volle et al. (2007) showed that Shp inhibited
expression of steroidogenic genes in the interstitial compartment by
inhibiting expression of steroidogenic factor-1 (SF1, or NR5A1; 184757)
and Lrh1 and by directly repressing the transcriptional activity of
Lrh1. Independent of its action on androgen synthesis, Shp also
determined the timing of germ cell differentiation by controlling
testicular retinoic acid metabolism. By inhibiting the transcriptional
activity of retinoic acid receptors, Shp controlled expression of Stra8
(609987), which is indispensable for germ cell meiosis and
differentiation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
OBESITY, MILD, EARLY-ONSET
NR0B2, ARG34TER

In a screening of 173 unrelated Japanese subjects with early-onset
diabetes, Nishigori et al. (2001) identified 5 mutations in the NR0B2
gene, including an arg34-to-ter (R34X) mutation, in 6 moderately obese
(see 601665) subjects. All of the mutations were present in heterozygous
state and were found on further study to segregate with mild obesity
rather than with diabetes. The R34X nonsense mutation was found also in
6 of 101 unrelated nondiabetic subjects with early-onset obesity.

.0002
OBESITY, MILD, EARLY-ONSET
NR0B2, ALA195SER

Nishigori et al. (2001) found an ala195-to-ser (A195S) missense mutation
in the NR0B2 gene in mildly obese (see 601665) Japanese subjects with
early-onset diabetes. The authors showed that the mutation segregated
with early-onset mild obesity rather than with diabetes.

REFERENCE 1. Echwald, S. M.; Andersen, K. L.; Sorensen, T. I. A.; Larsen, L.
H.; Andersen, T.; Tonooka, N.; Tomura, H.; Takeda, J.; Pedersen, O.
: Mutation analysis of NR0B2 among 1545 Danish men identifies a novel
c.278G-A (p.G93D) variant with reduced functional activity. Hum.
Mutat. 24: 381-387, 2004.

2. Goodwin, B.; Jones, S. A.; Price, R. R.; Watson, M. A.; McKee,
D. D.; Moore, L. B.; Galardi, C.; Wilson, J. G.; Lewis, M. C.; Roth,
M. E.; Maloney, P. R.; Willson, T. M.; Kliewer, S. A.: A regulatory
cascade of the nuclear receptors FXR, SHP-1, and LRH-1 represses bile
acid biosynthesis. Molec. Cell 6: 517-526, 2000.

3. Iyer, A. K.; Zhang, Y.-H.; McCabe, E. R. B.: LXXLL motifs and
AF-2 domain mediate SHP (NR0B2) homodimerization and DAX1 (NR0B1)-DAX1A
heterodimerization. Molec. Genet. Metab. 92: 151-159, 2007.

4. Iyer, A. K.; Zhang, Y.-H.; McCabe, E. R. B.: Dosage-sensitive
sex reversal adrenal hypoplasia congenita critical region on the X
chromosome, gene 1 (DAX1) (NR0B1) and small heterodimer partner (SHP)
(NR0B2) form homodimers individually, as well as DAX1-SHP heterodimers. Molec.
Endocr. 20: 2326-2342, 2006.

5. Kerr, T. A.; Saeki, S.; Schneider, M.; Schaefer, K.; Berdy, S.;
Redder, T.; Shan, B.; Russell, D. W.; Schwarz, M.: Loss of nuclear
receptor SHP impairs but does not eliminate negative feedback regulation
of bile acid synthesis. Dev. Cell 2: 713-720, 2002.

6. Lee, H.-K.; Lee, Y.-K.; Park, S.-H.; Kim, Y.-S.; Park, S. H.; Lee,
J. W.; Kwon, H.-B.; Soh, J.; Moore, D. D.; Choi, H.-S.: Structure
and expression of the orphan nuclear receptor SHP gene. J. Biol.
Chem. 273: 14398-14402, 1998.

7. Lu, T. T.; Makishima, M.; Repa, J. J.; Schoonjans, K.; Kerr, T.
A.; Auwerx, J.; Mangelsdorf, D. J.: Molecular basis for feedback
regulation of bile acid synthesis by nuclear receptors. Molec. Cell 6:
507-515, 2000.

8. Nishigori, H.; Tomura, H.; Tonooka, N.; Kanamori, M.; Yamada, S.;
Sho, K.; Inoue, I.; Kikuchi, N.; Onigata, K.; Kojima, I.; Kohama,
T.; Yamagata, K.; and 9 others: Mutations in the small heterodimer
partner gene are associated with mild obesity in Japanese subjects. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 575-580, 2001.

9. Seol, W.; Choi, H.-S.; Moore, D. D.: An orphan nuclear hormone
receptor that lacks a DNA binding domain and heterodimerizes with
other receptors. Science 272: 1336-1339, 1996.

10. Volle, D. H.; Duggavathi, R.; Magnier, B. C.; Houten, S. M.; Cummins,
C. L.; Lobaccaro, J.-M. A.; Verhoeven, G.; Schoonjans, K.; Auwerx,
J.: The small heterodimer partner is a gonadal gatekeeper of sexual
maturation in male mice. Genes Dev. 21: 305-315, 2007.

11. Wang, L.; Lee, Y.-K.; Bundman, D.; Han, Y.; Thevananther, S.;
Kim, C.-S.; Chua, S. S.; Wei, P.; Heyman, R. A.; Karin, M.; Moore,
D. D.: Redundant pathways for negative feedback regulation of bile
acid production. Dev. Cell 2: 721-731, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/29/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/2/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/8/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/2/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/26/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/10/2000

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 2/28/2000

EDITED mgross: 11/04/2009
terry: 10/29/2009
mgross: 3/6/2007
terry: 3/2/2007
mgross: 9/8/2005
tkritzer: 12/3/2004
terry: 12/2/2004
carol: 2/23/2004
mcapotos: 3/2/2001
mcapotos: 2/28/2001
terry: 2/26/2001
mgross: 10/10/2000
mgross: 3/1/2000
psherman: 2/29/2000

612506	TITLE *612506 UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME E2R 2; UBE2R2
;;UBIQUITIN-CONJUGATING ENZYME UBC3B; UBC3B
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using the casein kinase II (CK2) catalytic subunits alpha (CSNK2A1;
115440) and alpha-prime (CSNK2A2; 115442) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid
screen of human and mouse cDNA libraries, Semplici et al. (2002) cloned
the full-length cDNAs corresponding to the UBE2R2 gene, which they
designated UBC3B, in both species. Both the human and mouse deduced
UBC3B proteins contain 238 amino acids. UBC3B is highly homologous to
UBC3 (CDC34; 116948), with only 47 amino acid differences, and has the
conserved cysteine and leucine residues that are part of the active site
in ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes (E2). The UBC3B protein shares 35%
sequence identity with S. cerevisiae cdc34.

GENE FUNCTION

Semplici et al. (2002) showed that human UBC3B complemented a yeast
cdc34 temperature-sensitive mutant. Deletion and site-directed
mutagenesis demonstrated that CK2 phosphorylated UBC3B in the C-terminal
domain at serine-233; mutagenesis of the corresponding serine residue at
position 231 of human CDC34/UBC3 showed that this was the major
CK2-phosphorylation site in this protein. In vitro binding experiments
demonstrated that phosphorylated UBC3B and CDC34 bound specifically to
the F-box protein beta-TRCP (BTRC; 603482), which resulted in enhanced
degradation of beta-catenin (116806), a substrate of BTRC. Semplici et
al. (2002) suggested that CK2-dependent phosphorylation of CDC34 and
UBC3B functions by regulating BTRC substrate recognition.

MAPPING

Semplici et al. (2002) stated that the UBC3B gene maps to chromosome
9p22.1.

REFERENCE 1. Semplici, F.; Meggio, F.; Pinna, L. A.; Oliviero, S.: CK2-dependent
phosphorylation of the E2 ubiquitin conjugating enzyme UBC3B induces
its interaction with beta-TrCP and enhances beta-catenin degradation. Oncogene 21:
3978-3987, 2002.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 12/23/2008

EDITED carol: 12/23/2008

180535	TITLE *180535 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S15; RPS15
;;RAT INSULINOMA GENE HOMOLOG; RIG
DESCRIPTION The gene called Rig (rat insulinoma gene) was first isolated from a cDNA
library of rat insulinomas. Its cognate gene has been found to be
activated in various human tumors such as insulinomas, esophageal
cancers, and colon cancers. Inoue et al. (1987) isolated a human
insulinoma cDNA encoding the human homolog of Rig. Structural analysis
indicated that the predicted 145-amino acid RIG protein may be a
DNA-binding protein. Shiga et al. (1990) isolated the genomic sequence
of human RIG from a genomic DNA library constructed from a human
esophageal carcinoma and determined its complete nucleotide sequence.
The gene is composed of about 3,000 nucleotides and divided into 4 exons
separated by 3 introns. The transcription initiation site was located
-46 bp upstream from the first ATG codon. Because of CpG islands in the
5-prime region and regions with a high GC content and because of the
wide expression of RIG in tissues and cells, Shiga et al. (1990)
suggested that RIG may belong to the class of 'housekeeping' genes,
whose products are necessary for the growth of all cell types. The human
genome contains at least 6 copies of RIG pseudogenes, 4 of which have
the characteristics of processed pseudogenes. Kitagawa et al. (1991)
demonstrated the normal function of Rig. They showed that the
immunoreactivity to a monoclonal antibody against the deduced Rig
protein and the translation product of Rig mRNA comigrated with
ribosomal protein S15. The amino acid sequence of ribosomal protein S15
purified from rat liver coincided with that deduced from the nucleotide
sequence of Rig mRNA, but there were indications that the initiator
methionine was removed and the succeeding alanyl residue was
monoacetylated. The authors concluded that the product of the Rig gene
is ribosomal protein S15.

By somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid mapping analyses, Kenmochi
et al. (1998) mapped the human RPS15 gene to 19p.

REFERENCE 1. Inoue, C.; Shiga, K.; Takasawa, S.; Kitagawa, M.; Yamamoto, H.;
Okamoto, H.: Evolutionary conservation of the insulinoma gene rig
and its possible function. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 6659-6662,
1987.

2. Kenmochi, N.; Kawaguchi, T.; Rozen, S.; Davis, E.; Goodman, N.;
Hudson, T. J.; Tanaka, T.; Page, D. C.: A map of 75 human ribosomal
protein genes. Genome Res. 8: 509-523, 1998.

3. Kitagawa, M.; Takasawa, S.; Kikuchi, N.; Itoh, T.; Teraoka, H.;
Yamamoto, H.; Okamoto, H.: Rig encodes ribosomal protein S15: the
primary structure of mammalian ribosomal protein S15. FEBS Lett. 283:
210-214, 1991.

4. Shiga, K.; Yamamoto, H.; Okamoto, H.: Isolation and characterization
of the human homologue of rig and its pseudogenes: the functional
gene has features characteristic of housekeeping genes. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 87: 3594-3598, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Patti M. Sherman - updated: 3/25/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/9/1992

EDITED carol: 04/01/1999
terry: 6/18/1998
carol: 10/9/1992

608222	TITLE *608222 ADENYLOSUCCINATE LYASE; ADSL
;;ADENYLOSUCCINASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Adenylosuccinate lyase (adenylosuccinase, ADSL; EC 4.3.2.2) is an enzyme
involved in 2 pathways of purine nucleotide metabolism. It catalyzes
cleavage of succinyl groups to yield fumarate: the conversion of
succinylaminoimidazole carboxamide ribotide (SAICAR) into aminoimidazole
carboxamide ribotide (AICAR) along the de novo pathway, and the
formation of adenylate (AMP) from adenylosuccinate (S-AMP) in the
conversion of inosine monophosphate (IMP) into adenine nucleotides in
the purine nucleotide cycle (summary by Jurecka et al., 2008).

CLONING

Using an avian liver ADSL cDNA as a probe to screen a human liver cDNA
library, Stone et al. (1992) isolated an ADSL cDNA encoding a 459-amino
acid protein with a molecular mass of 52 kD. The enzyme has a
homotetrameric structure.

Marie et al. (1999) found that the human ADSL cDNA contains an
additional segment at the 5-prime end, encoding a protein of 484 amino
acids, rather than 459 as previously reported. Kmoch et al. (2000)
reported the complete human ADSL cDNA sequence, which revealed the novel
52-bp sequence at the 5-prime end of the ADSL gene, containing an
alternate initiation codon. This longer sequence was termed 'M1,' and
the shorter one 'M2.' Expression studies showed that the M1 protein was
soluble, active, and stable, in contrast to M2, which was insoluble and
inactive. The authors noted that the native human protein is composed of
484 amino acids, the same as murine ADSL. In addition, Kmoch et al.
(2000) found 2 ADSL isoforms produced by alternative splicing of exon
12. Both transcripts were expressed in all tissues studied, with the
unspliced form being about 10-fold more abundant. The authors
hypothesized that the inactive isoform may be able to form tetramers
with the active isoform, forming an array of enzymes with different
activities depending on the composition of the tetramer.

Wong and O'Brien (1995) cloned the mouse ADSL gene, and found that the
human and mouse ADSL proteins share 94% identity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kmoch et al. (2000) determined that the human ADSL gene contains 13
exons.

Wong and O'Brien (1995) determined that the murine ADSL gene contains 13
exons. Comparison of the exon/intron structure of this gene with the
argininosuccinate lyase gene (ASL; 608310) did not suggest gene
duplication or exon shuffling as a mechanism of evolution in the
fumarate gene family.

MAPPING

To map the human gene responsible for adenylosuccinase deficiency
(103050), Van Keuren et al. (1986, 1987) used somatic cell hybridization
of human cells with Chinese hamster ovary (CHO-K1) mutants, designated
ade(-)I, deficient in specific steps of the purine biosynthesis pathway.
As ade(-)I cells require exogenous adenine for growth, cell hybrids were
selected for purine prototrophy in adenine-free medium. Human chromosome
22 was found to be required for growth without adenine. Assignment of
the gene for adenylosuccinase to chromosome 22 was confirmed by Southern
blot analysis with a DNA probe that had been isolated from a human fetal
brain library and previously mapped to chromosome 22. By Southern
blotting techniques using somatic cell hybrids, Budarf et al. (1991)
demonstrated that ADSL maps to 22q13.1, distal to the Ewing sarcoma
breakpoint (133450). Using both a somatic cell hybrid mapping panel and
fluorescence in situ hybridization, Fon et al. (1993) localized the ADSL
gene to 22q13.1-q13.2.

GENE FUNCTION

Adenylosuccinase carries out two independent but similar steps of purine
biosynthesis: the removal of a fumarate from succinylaminoimidazole
carboxamide (SAICA) ribotide to give aminoimidazole carboxamide
ribotide, and removal of fumarate from adenylosuccinate to give AMP.
These are the ninth and the thirteenth steps of adenylate biosynthesis
(Van Keuren et al., 1986, 1987).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 Moroccan sibs with adenylosuccinase deficiency (103050) reported by
Jaeken and Van den Berghe (1984), Stone et al. (1992) identified a point
mutation in the ADSL gene (608222.0001).

In an infant with adenylosuccinase deficiency, Maaswinkel-Mooij et al.
(1997) reported homozygosity for an arg401-to-his (R401H) mutation
(608222.0002) in the ADSL gene; this mutation was later designated
arg426-to-his (R426H) based on the finding of Marie et al. (1999) that
human ADSL encodes a protein of 484 rather than 459 amino acids. Marie
et al. (1999) found reports of 9 missense mutations in the ADSL gene in
6 apparently unrelated sibships with ADSL deficiency. In a study of 10
additional affected patients, they found 9 point mutations, among which
7 were previously unreported missense mutations and 1 was the first
splicing error reported in this disorder. With the exception of 3
mutations, R426H, which was found in 5 apparently unrelated patients,
R190Q (608222.0005), which had previously been reported, and K246E
(608222.0006), which was found in 2 unrelated patients, all other
mutations were found only in a single family.

Among 6 patients with ADSL deficiency, Kmoch et al. (2000) identified 8
mutations in the ADSL gene. Expression studies of the mutant proteins
showed that the level of residual enzyme activity correlated with the
severity of the clinical phenotype. However, all patients had at least 1
allele with residual ADSL activity, suggesting that complete loss of
activity is not compatible with life.

Among 7 unrelated Polish patients with ADSL deficiency, Jurecka et al.
(2008) identified 7 biallelic mutations in the ADSL gene, including 5
novel mutations. R426H (608222.0002) was the most common mutation. One
patient had a fatal neonatal course, 4 had a severe phenotype with
intractable seizures and psychomotor retardation since early infancy,
and 2 had a milder phenotype with later-onset, transient visual contact
disturbance, and mild to moderate psychomotor retardation. There was no
apparent genotype/phenotype correlation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ADENYLOSUCCINASE DEFICIENCY
ADSL, SER413PRO

In 2 Moroccan sibs with adenylosuccinase deficiency (103050) originally
reported by Jaeken and Van den Berghe (1984), Stone et al. (1992)
identified a mutation in the ADSL gene, resulting in a ser413-to-pro
(S413P) substitution that led to structural instability of the mutant
enzyme.

.0002
ADENYLOSUCCINASE DEFICIENCY
ADSL, ARG426HIS

In an infant in which epilepsy was the first manifestation of
adenylosuccinase deficiency (103050). Maaswinkel-Mooij et al. (1997)
reported homozygosity for an arg401-to-his (R401H) substitution in the
ADSL gene.

Marie et al. (1999) found 5 apparently unrelated patients with
adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency who had an arg426-to-his (R426H)
mutation, which had previously been identified as R401H by
Maaswinkel-Mooij et al. (1997). The discrepancy in the numbering system
was due to the finding by Marie et al. (1999) that the cDNA of human
ADSL encodes a protein of 484 rather than 459 amino acids. The authors
noted that 426H mutation was the most frequent one identified up to that
time, accounting for 12 of the 34 alleles investigated.

Kmoch et al. (2000) described an additional patient homozygous for the
R426H mutation.

Edery et al. (2003) observed an unusually variable combination of
clinical features and striking intrafamilial variability in the
phenotype. Among 3 sibs from a family originally from Portugal, the
proband had marked psychomotor regression and progressive cerebellar
vermis atrophy; the other 2 affected sibs presented mainly autistic
features. The sibs were homozygous for the R426H mutation. The authors
suggested that, in any patient with mental retardation of unexplained
origin, adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency should be considered and
assessed using a simple urinary screening method for the presence of
succinylpurines.

Jurecka et al. (2008) identified homozygosity for the R426H mutation in
2 unrelated Polish patients with ADSL deficiency. One had a severe form
of the disorder with severe psychomotor retardation, inability to walk,
and refractory seizures, and was bedridden by age 9.5. The other had a
relatively less severe phenotype and could sit and walk a few steps at
age 4.5 years. Two additional unrelated Polish patients were compound
heterozygous for the R426H allele and another pathogenic mutation in the
ADSL gene.

.0003
ADENYLOSUCCINASE DEFICIENCY
ADSL, PRO75ALA

In a 13-year-old female who showed a reduced ADSL enzymatic activity in
lymphocytes and red blood cells, and suffered from severe psychomotor
retardation (103050), Verginelli et al. (1998) found compound
heterozygosity for 2 missense mutations in the ADSL gene: a 300C-G
transversion, resulting in a pro75-to-ala (P75A) substitution, and a
1266G-T transversion, resulting in an asp397-to-tyr (D397Y)
substitution. The patient had previously been described by Salerno et
al. (1995, 1997). A few months after birth, motor restlessness,
hypertonicity, and frequent crying attacks were noticed. Eye contact was
difficult, and reaction to auditory stimuli was exaggerated. At age 9
months, absence attacks were noticed. At the age of 5 years, generalized
convulsions were observed for the first time. Growth, including head
circumference, muscle tone and reflexes were normal; gait was awkward.

.0004
ADENYLOSUCCINASE DEFICIENCY
ADSL, ASP397TYR

See 608222.0003 and Verginelli et al. (1998).

.0005
ADENYLOSUCCINASE DEFICIENCY
ADSL, ARG190GLN

In a Belgian patient with adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency (103050),
Marie et al. (1999) identified a 571G-A transition in the ADSL gene,
predicted to result in an arg190-to-gln (R190Q) amino acid substitution.
The mutation was present in compound heterozygous state with a 738A-G
(lys246-to-glu; K246E) mutation in the other allele (608222.0006). This
mutation had been reported in heterozygous state in 2 Czech sibs by
Kmoch et al. (1997).

.0006
ADENYLOSUCCINASE DEFICIENCY
ADSL, LYS246GLU

Marie et al. (1999) found a lys246-to-glu (K246E) mutation in compound
heterozygous state in 2 apparently unrelated Belgian patients with
adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency (103050). See also 608222.0005.

.0007
ADENYLOSUCCINASE DEFICIENCY
ADSL, -49T-C

In 3 unrelated patients with ADSL deficiency (103050), Marie et al.
(2002) identified a -49T-C mutation in the 5-prime untranslated region
of the ADSL allele that displayed a normal coding sequence. Measurements
of the amount of mRNA transcribed from the allele with the promoter
mutation showed that it was reduced to approximately 33% of that
transcribed from the alleles mutated in their coding sequence. Further
investigations showed that the -49T-C mutation provoked a reduction to
25% of wildtype control of promoter function, as evaluated by luciferase
activity and mRNA level in transfection experiments. The mutation also
affected the binding of nuclear respiratory factor-2 (NRF2; 600609), a
known activator of transcription, as assessed by gel-shift studies. The
findings in 3 unrelated patients indicated that a mutation of a
regulatory region of the ADSL gene may be an unusually frequent cause of
ADSL deficiency, and suggested a role for NRF2 in the gene regulation of
the purine of the biosynthetic pathway.

.0008
ADENYLOSUCCINASE DEFICIENCY
ADSL, MET225THR

In 2 sisters, born of consanguineous Moroccan parents, with ADSL
deficiency (103050), Gitiaux et al. (2009) identified a homozygous
674T-C transition in exon 6 of the ADSL gene, resulting in a
met225-to-thr (M225T) substitution. Both girls had an increased
succinyladenosine/SAICAr ratio of 1.6. The sisters, ages 11 and 12
years, presented with global developmental delay, motor apraxia, severe
speech deficits, and seizures. They also had unusual behavioral
features, including excessive laughter, very happy disposition,
hyperactivity, short attention span, mouthing of objects, tantrums, and
stereotyped movements, which were reminiscent of Angelman syndrome
(105830).

REFERENCE 1. Budarf, M. L.; Emanuel, B. S.; Collins, J.; Fibison, W.; Barshop,
B. A.: Isolation and regional localization of the human adenylosuccinate
lyase gene. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58: 2046 only, 1991.

2. Edery, P.; Chabrier, S.; Ceballos-Picot, I.; Marie, S.; Vincent,
M.-F.; Tardieu, M.: Intrafamilial variability in the phenotypic expression
of adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency: a report on three patients. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 120A: 185-190, 2003.

3. Fon, E. A.; Demczuk, S.; Delattre, O.; Thomas, G.; Rouleau, G.
A.: Mapping of the human adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL) gene to chromosome
22q13.1-q13.2. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 64: 201-203, 1993.

4. Gitiaux, C.; Ceballos-Picot, I.; Marie, S.; Valayannopoulos, V.;
Rio, M.; Verrieres, S.; Benoist, J. F.; Vincent, M. F.; Desguerre,
I.; Bahi-Buisson, N.: Misleading behavioural phenotype with adenylosuccinate
lyase deficiency. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 17: 133-136, 2009.

5. Jaeken, J.; Van den Berghe, G.: An infantile autistic syndrome
characterised by the presence of succinylpurines in body fluids. Lancet 324:
1058-1061, 1984. Note: Originally Volume II.

6. Jurecka, A.; Zikanova, M.; Tylki-Szymanska, A.; Krijt, J.; Bogdanska,
A.; Gradowska, W.; Mullerova, K.; Sykut-Cegielska, J.; Kmoch, S.;
Pronicka, E.: Clinical, biochemical and molecular findings in seven
Polish patients with adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency. Molec. Genet.
Metab. 94: 435-442, 2008.

7. Kmoch, S.; Hartmannova, H.; Krijt, J.; Valik, D.; Jones, J. D.;
Sebesta, L.: Genetic heterogeneity in adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency. Clin.
Biochem. 30: 264 only, 1997.

8. Kmoch, S.; Hartmannova, H.; Stiburkova, B.; Krijt, J.; Zikanova,
M.; Sebesta, I.: Human adenylosuccinate lyase (ADSL), cloning and
characterization of full-length cDNA and its isoform, gene structure
and molecular basis for ADSL deficiency in six patients. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 9: 1501-1513, 2000.

9. Maaswinkel-Mooij, P. D.; Laan, L. A. E. M.; Onkenhout, W.; Brouwer,
O. F.; Jaeken, J.; Poorthuis, B. J. H. M.: Adenylosuccinase deficiency
presenting with epilepsy in early infancy. J. Inherit. Metab. 20:
606-607, 1997.

10. Marie, S.; Cuppens, H.; Heuterspreute, M.; Jaspers, M.; Tola,
E. Z.; Gu, X. X.; Legius, E.; Vincent, M.-F.; Jaeken, J.; Cassiman,
J.-J.; Van den Berghe, G.: Mutation analysis in adenylosuccinate
lyase deficiency: eight novel mutations in the re-evaluated full ADSL
coding sequence. Hum. Mutat. 13: 197-202, 1999.

11. Marie, S.; Race, V.; Nassogne, M.-C.; Vincent, M.-F.; Van den
Berghe, G.: Mutation of a nuclear respiratory factor 2 binding site
in the 5-prime untranslated region of the ADSL gene in three patients
with adenylosuccinate lyase deficiency. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71: 14-21,
2002.

12. Salerno, C.; Crifo, C.; Giardini, O.: Adenylosuccinase deficiency:
a patient with impaired erythrocyte activity and anomalous response
to intravenous fructose. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 18: 602-608, 1995.

13. Salerno, C.; Iotti, S.; Lodi, R.; Crifo, C.; Barbiroli, B.: Failure
of muscle energy metabolism in a patient with adenylosuccinate lyase
deficiency: an in vivo study by phosphorus NMR spectroscopy. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1360: 271-276, 1997.

14. Stone, R. L.; Aimi, J.; Barshop, B. A.; Jaeken, J.; Van den Berghe,
G.; Zalkin, H.; Dixon, J. E.: A mutation in adenylosuccinate lyase
associated with mental retardation and autistic features. Nature
Genet. 1: 59-63, 1992.

15. Van Keuren, M. L.; Hart, I.; Kao, F.-T.; Neve, R. L.; Bruns, G.
A. P.; Kurnit, D. M.; Patterson, D.: Human chromosome 22 corrects
the defect in the CHO mutant (Ade-I) lacking adenylosuccinase activity.
(Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 39: A172 only, 1986.

16. Van Keuren, M. L.; Hart, I. M.; Kao, F.-T.; Neve, R. L.; Bruns,
G. A. P.; Kurnit, D. M.; Patterson, D.: A somatic cell hybrid with
a single human chromosome 22 corrects the defect in the CHO mutant
(Ade-I) lacking adenylosuccinase activity. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 44:
142-147, 1987.

17. Verginelli, D.; Luckow, B.; Crifo, C.; Salerno, C.; Gross, M.
: Identification of new mutations in the adenylosuccinate lyase gene
associated with impaired enzyme activity in lymphocytes and red blood
cells. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1406: 81-84, 1998.

18. Wong, L.-J. C.; O'Brien, W. E.: Characterization of the cDNA
and the gene encoding murine adenylosuccinate lyase. Genomics 28:
341-343, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/3/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/12/2005

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 10/31/2003

EDITED wwang: 02/07/2011
alopez: 11/19/2010
wwang: 4/17/2009
ckniffin: 4/9/2009
terry: 4/3/2009
ckniffin: 4/3/2009
alopez: 1/20/2005
wwang: 1/19/2005
wwang: 1/13/2005
terry: 1/12/2005
ckniffin: 12/4/2003
carol: 11/6/2003
ckniffin: 11/3/2003

611472	TITLE *611472 METHYL-CpG-BINDING DOMAIN PROTEIN 5; MBD5
;;KIAA1461
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned MBD5, which they designated
KIAA1461. The deduced protein contains 1,498 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA
detected moderate expression in whole adult brain, but no expression was
detected in peripheral tissues. Expression was moderate in cerebellum,
weak in all other specific brain regions examined, and very weak in
spinal cord and fetal brain.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wagenstaller et al. (2007) determined that the MBD5 gene contains 5
noncoding exons at its 5-prime end, followed by 10 coding exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the MBD5 gene
to chromosome 2. Wagenstaller et al. (2007) stated that the MBD5 gene
maps to chromosome 2q23.1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Wagenstaller et al. (2007) identified a 200-kb deletion that removed 1
noncoding exon and the first 7 coding exons of the MBD5 gene
(611572.0001) in a boy with mental retardation (156200). The deletion
was absent in parental DNA, and the remaining allele had a normal coding
region. Wagenstaller et al. (2007) screened 415 DNAs from children with
mental retardation and found 4 missense variants that were not present
in 660 controls. No parental DNA was available to determine the origin
of these mutations. Wagenstaller et al. (2007) stated that confirmation
of the pathogenicity of these variants awaited screening of a panel
enriched for epileptic seizures for which parental DNA was available.

From a large international multicenter collaboration, Talkowski et al.
(2011) ascertained 65 patients with heterozygous deletion (63 cases) or
translocation (2 cases) involving chromosome 2q23.1 (see 156200). The
deletions ranged in size from 38 kb to greater than 19 Mb. The smallest
region of overlap in all cases was confined to 1 gene, MBD5, and 14
(21.5%) of the 65 microdeletions and translocations were exclusively
localized to MBD5, including several deletions that were restricted to
noncoding regions and did not alter the protein sequence. The deletions
or translocations were associated with haploinsufficiency of the MBD5
gene (22.5 to 55.4% of controls), as determined by mRNA expression
analysis. Talkowski et al. (2011) also identified MBD5 deletions in
approximately 0.18% of patients with autism spectrum disorders (see
156200) from 2 large cohorts (1,786 and 2,275 patients, respectively),
whereas deletions at this locus were not found in 7,878 controls.
Moreover, there was a significant association between a gly79-to-glu
(G79E) missense variant in a highly conserved methyl-CpG-binding domain
in 747 patients with autism spectrum disorder compared with 2,043
controls (odds ratio of 5.47, p = 0.012). Talkowski et al. (2011) noted
that the MBD5 gene belongs to a family of genes involved in DNA
methylation and/or chromatin remodeling, like MECP2 (300005), which is
mutant or deleted in Rett syndrome (RTT; 312750), intellectual
disabilities, and autism, providing further evidence that alterations of
MBD5 may predispose to the risk of these neurodevelopmental disorders.

Carvill et al. (2013) identified a de novo heterozygous truncating
mutation in the MBD5 gene (611472.0002) in a 20-year-old woman with
severe mental retardation and epileptic encephalopathy.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
MBD5, 200-KB DEL

In a boy with severe mental retardation (MRD1; 156200), Wagenstaller et
al. (2007) identified a 200-kb deletion that removed 1 noncoding exon
and the first 7 coding exons of the MBD5 gene. The deletion region was
present in parental DNA but provided no information with regard to the
origin of the deletion. In addition to mental retardation, the boy had a
sandal gap between the first and second toe, but no facial dysmorphic
features. He showed retarded motor development and had febrile seizures
at age 8 months and seizures without fever starting at age 16 months.
The boy was hypoactive, and social interactions were limited.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
MBD5, THR157GLNFSTER4

In a 20-year-old woman with severe mental retardation (156200), Carvill
et al. (2013) identified a de novo heterozygous frameshift mutation in
the MBD5 gene, resulting in premature termination (Thr157GlnfsTer4). The
patient had delayed development and onset of tonic-clonic seizures at
age 6 months. She later developed absence seizures, focal dyscognitive
seizures, focal seizures, and tonic seizures associated with multiple
EEG abnormalities, consistent with epileptic encephalopathy. The patient
was part of a larger cohort of 500 patients with epileptic
encephalopathies who underwent targeted sequencing of candidate genes.

REFERENCE 1. Carvill, G. L.; Heavin, S. B.; Yendle, S. C.; McMahon, J. M.; O'Roak,
B. J.; Cook, J.; Khan, A.; Dorschner, M. O.; Weaver, M.; Calvert,
S.; Malone, S.; Wallace, G.; and 22 others: Targeted resequencing
in epileptic encephalopathies identifies de novo mutations in CHD2
and SYNGAP1. Nature Genet. 45: 825-830, 2013.

2. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 143-150, 2000.

3. Talkowski, M. E.; Mullegama, S. V.; Rosenfeld, J. A.; van Bon,
B. W. M.; Shen, Y.; Repnikova, E. A.; Gastier-Foster, J.; Thrush,
D. L.; Kathiresan, S.; Ruderfer, D. M.; Chiang, C.; Hanscom, C.; and
23 others: Assessment of 2q23.1 microdeletion syndrome implicates
MBD5 as a single causal locus of intellectual disability, epilepsy,
and autism spectrum disorder. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 89: 551-563, 2011.

4. Wagenstaller, J.; Spranger, S.; Lorenz-Depiereux, B.; Kazmierczak,
B.; Nathrath, M.; Wahl, D.; Heye, B.; Glaser, D.; Liebscher, V.; Meitinger,
T.; Strom, T. M.: Copy-number variations measured by single-nucleotide-polymorphism
oligonucleotide arrays in patients with mental retardation. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 81: 768-779, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/15/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/24/2011
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/3/2007

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/27/2007

EDITED carol: 08/19/2013
ckniffin: 8/15/2013
carol: 10/24/2011
ckniffin: 10/24/2011
alopez: 10/12/2007
alopez: 10/8/2007
terry: 10/3/2007
mgross: 9/27/2007

606672	TITLE *606672 GLYCOPROTEIN Ib, PLATELET, ALPHA POLYPEPTIDE; GP1BA
;;GP Ib, ALPHA SUBUNIT;;
PLATELET GLYCOPROTEIN Ib, ALPHA POLYPEPTIDE
GLYCOCALICIN, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Glycoprotein Ib (GP Ib) is a platelet surface membrane glycoprotein that
functions as a receptor for von Willebrand factor (VWF; 613160). The
main portion of the receptor is a heterodimer composed of 2 polypeptide
chains, an alpha chain and a beta chain (GP1BB; 138720), that are linked
by disulfide bonds. The GP1BA gene encodes the alpha subunit. The
complete receptor complex includes noncovalent association of the alpha
and beta subunits with platelet glycoprotein IX (GP9; 173515) and
platelet glycoprotein V (GP5; 173511) (review by Lopez et al., 1998).

CLONING

The alpha subunit of GP Ib is susceptible to cleavage by trypsin or by
the calcium-dependent protease calpain, giving rise to a soluble heavily
glycosylated N-terminal fragment known as 'glycocalicin.' By screening a
human cDNA library with an antibody to glycocalicin, Lopez et al. (1987)
isolated a potential alpha subunit cDNA encoding a 610-amino acid
protein with a molecular mass of approximately 145 kD. The predicted
protein has an extracytoplasmic leucine-rich domain composed of a
24-amino acid motif that contains 7 conserved leucine positions. The
extracytoplasmic domain is followed by a 29-amino acid transmembrane
domain and a 100-amino acid intracellular domain at the carboxyl end of
the molecule. The GP1B beta subunit, GP9, and GP5 have similar
leucine-rich domains.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization using a genomic clone, Wenger et al. (1989)
demonstrated that the GP1BA gene is located on chromosome 17pter-p12.

GENE FUNCTION

The binding of platelet GP Ib to von Willebrand factor facilitates
initial platelet adhesion to vascular subendothelium after vascular
injury. The binding of VWF to the GP Ib complex also initiates signaling
events within the platelet that lead to enhanced platelet activation,
thrombosis, and hemostasis (Lopez et al., 1998). Michelson et al. (1986)
presented evidence that a portion of the oligosaccharide chains on
glycocalicin contributes to the VWF binding activity of GP Ib. Harmon
and Jamieson (1986) found that GP Ib was a receptor for thrombin
(176930), and that glycocalicin was the site of thrombin binding.
Michelson et al. (1988) showed that there is a large intraplatelet pool
of GP Ib.

Andrews and Fox (1992) noted that the GP Ib complex is a major site of
attachment of the platelet membrane skeleton to the plasma membrane,
mediated by the interaction of actin-binding protein with the receptor
complex. They showed that a region between thr536 and phe568 of the
cytoplasmic domain of the alpha subunit participates in the interaction.

Steinberg et al. (1987) measured plasma concentration of glycocalicin,
as an aid to classification of thrombocytopenia; values were low in
situations of bone marrow suppression and normal or elevated when there
was accelerated platelet turnover. Beer et al. (1994) also suggested
that glycocalicin is a useful platelet marker in certain diseases.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Huizinga et al. (2002) presented the crystal structure of the GP1BA
amino-terminal domain and its complex with the VWF (613160) domain A1.
In the complex, GP1BA wraps around one side of A1, providing 2 contact
areas bridged by an area of solvated charge interaction. The structures
explain the effects of gain-of-function mutations related to bleeding
disorders and provide a model for shear-induced activation.

Celikel et al. (2003) determined that the structure of platelet GP1BA
bound to thrombin at 2.3 angstrom resolution and defined 2 sites that
bind to exosite II and exosite I of 2 distinct alpha-thrombin molecules,
respectively. GP1BA occupancy may be sequential, as the site binding to
alpha-thrombin exosite I appears to be cryptic in the unoccupied
receptor but exposed when a first thrombin molecule is bound through
exosite II. Celikel et al. (2003) suggested that these interactions may
modulate alpha-thrombin function by mediating GP1BA clustering and
cleavage of protease-activator receptors, which promote platelet
activation, while limiting fibrinogen clotting through blockade of
exosite I.

Dumas et al. (2003) independently determined the crystal structure of
the GP1BA-thrombin complex at 2.6 angstrom resolution. They found that
in the crystal lattice, the periodic arrangement of GP1BA-thrombin
complexes mirrors a scaffold that could serve as a driving force for
tight platelet adhesion.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Polymorphisms

By SDS-PAGE, Moroi et al. (1984) studied GP Ib from 131 Japanese
subjects and identified 4 slightly different species of GP Ib
corresponding to different molecular masses (see also 606672.0002). On
the assumption of a 4-allele system, the gene frequencies calculated
were: A, 0.073; B, 0.011; C, 0.561; and D, 0.355. Platelets of different
GP Ib phenotypes showed the same functional properties. Furthermore, no
individual had more than 2 types; the relative amounts of the 2 bands on
SDS-PAGE were about equal in each person; the phenotype was constant on
multiple testings and the phenotypes of children were consistent with
those of their parents: e.g., the parents of a person with the rare
phenotype BC were CC and BD.

Polymorphisms described in the GP1BA gene include the Kozak T/C
polymorphism at position -5, the variable number of tandem repeats
(VNTR; 606672.0002), and the thr145-to-met polymorphism.

The platelet-specific alloantigen Sib(a), located within the GP Ib alpha
subunit, is involved in the pathogenesis of platelet transfusion
refractoriness. Murata et al. (1992) identified a threonine/methionine
dimorphism at position 145 of the GP Ib-alpha sequence and determined
that the Sib(a) antigen corresponds to the molecule containing
methionine-145. The diallelic codons were detected by restriction enzyme
analysis of amplified genomic DNA fragments from the GP1BA gene. Among
61 healthy blood donors, the allele frequencies were 89% and 11% for the
threonine-145 and methionine-145 codons, respectively. A positive
correlation existed between platelet reactivity with the anti-Sib(a)
antibody and the presence of a methionine-145 encoding allele. The
findings provide methods useful in transfusion medicine to match donor
and recipient platelets. Baker et al. (2001) referred to the thr145
polymorphism as human platelet antigen-2a (HPA-2a) and met145 as HPA-2b.

T/C polymorphism at the -5 position from the initiator ATG codon of the
GP1BA gene was first reported by Kaski et al. (1996) and is located
within the 'Kozak' consensus nucleotide sequence. The presence of a
cytosine (C) at this position significantly increases the surface
expression of the GP Ib/V/IX complex (Afshar-Kharghan et al., 1999).
This result prompted Ishida et al. (2000) to examine the presence of
Kozak sequence polymorphism of GP1BA in Asian populations and to
determine whether this polymorphism has a role in coronary artery
disease. The frequency of cytosine was 0.283 and 0.219 in Japanese and
Korean populations, respectively. The C allele is linked with human
platelet antigen-2a and smaller types of variable number of tandem
repeats (VNTR). No association was observed between these alleles and
coronary artery disease in a case-control study.

Baker et al. (2001) noted that platelets are pivotal to the process of
arterial thrombosis resulting in ischemic stroke and that thrombosis is
initiated by the interaction of VWF and GP Ib. They studied whether
GP1BA polymorphisms are candidate genes for first-ever ischemic stroke.
The frequency (22.8%) of T/C heterozygotes in the Caucasian Australian
population studied was similar to that in other populations. The
heterozygous genotype was elevated in the stroke group (32.2%) and the
increased relative risk was still apparent after adjusting for
conventional cardiovascular risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes,
hyperlipidemia, smoking, and previous vascular events. CC homozygotes
were uncommon and the study was not powered to examine the role of the
CC genotype alone. The authors hypothesized that the Kozak polymorphism
influences the pathogenesis of ischemic stroke because the C allele
increases the level of platelet glycoprotein GP Ib-alpha on the platelet
surface.

- Disease-causing Mutations

In a patient with autosomal recessive Bernard-Soulier syndrome (BSSA1;
231200), Ware et al. (1990) identified a homozygous nonsense mutation in
the GP1BA gene (606672.0001).

In a Caucasian family in which 5 members over 2 generations were
affected with an autosomal dominant form of Bernard-Soulier syndrome
(BSSA2; 153670), Miller et al. (1992) identified a heterozygous mutation
in the GP1BA gene (606672.0004).

Platelet-type von Willebrand disease (177820), also known as pseudo-von
Willebrand disease, is an autosomal dominant bleeding disorder
characterized by abnormally enhanced binding of von Willebrand factor by
patients' platelets. In 7 affected members of a family with pseudo-VWD,
Miller et al. (1991) identified a heterozygous mutation in the GP1BA
gene (606672.0003).

ANIMAL MODEL

Bergmeier et al. (2006) generated mice expressing Gp1ba in which the
extracellular domain was replaced by that of the human IL4 receptor
(IL4R; 147781). Platelet adhesion to ferric chloride-treated mesenteric
arteries was virtually absent in transgenic mice compared to avid
adhesion in wildtype mice, and resulted in complete inhibition of
arterial thrombus formation. When infused into wildtype mice, transgenic
IL4R/Gp1ba platelets or wildtype platelets lacking the 45-kD N-terminal
domain of Gp1ba failed to incorporate into growing arterial thrombi,
even if the platelets were activated before infusion. Bergmeier et al.
(2006) concluded that GP1BA is required for recruitment of platelets to
both exposed subendothelium and thrombi under arterial flow conditions
and that it contributes to arterial thrombosis by adhesion mechanisms
independent of binding to VWF.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BERNARD-SOULIER SYNDROME, TYPE A1
GP1BA, TRP343TER

In a patient with Bernard-Soulier syndrome (231200), Ware et al. (1990)
identified a nonsense mutation in the GP1BA gene (W343X). Immunoblotting
of the patient's solubilized platelets demonstrated absence of normal GP
Ib-alpha but presence of a smaller immunoreactive species. The authors
hypothesized that the truncated polypeptide could not be properly
inserted into the platelet membrane. The truncated polypeptide was also
present, along with normal protein, in platelets from the patient's
mother and 2 of his 4 children.

.0002
PLATELET GLYCOPROTEIN Ib POLYMORPHISM
NONARTERITIC ANTERIOR ISCHEMIC OPTIC NEUROPATHY, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO,
INCLUDED
GP1BA, 92-BP DUP, SER399-THR411 DUP, VARIABLE REPEATS

Moroi et al. (1984) described 4 polymorphic variants of platelet von
Willebrand factor receptor. Meyer and Schellenberg (1990) showed that
the polymorphism is due to size differences in the heavily glycosylated
macroglycopeptide region of the alpha chain of GP Ib. Because this
region of the alpha subunit contains tandemly repeated sequences (Lopez
et al., 1987), Lopez and Ludwig (1991) amplified genomic DNA
corresponding to this region from 120 persons of diverse ethnic origins.
They found in the group 3 alleles of different sizes which varied in the
number of repeats of a 39-bp sequence that led to perfect duplication of
the 13-amino acid sequence, ser399 to thr411 (numbering based on
published sequence). The smallest isoform contained 1 such sequence, the
next larger 2 repeats, and the largest 3 repeats. The repeat sequence
contains 5 sites for potential O-glycosylation, which together with the
repeated amino acids would result in incremental differences in
molecular weight of approximately 6,000 between the different isoforms.
Differences in the number of repeats were predicted to change the length
of the elongated glycosylated region and to change the distance between
the amino-terminal ligand-binding domain and the plasma membrane, an
effect that might have a subtle bearing on the binding of VWF or on the
sensitivity of this interaction to shear forces.

Salomon et al. (2004) reported that the presence of the VNTR B allele of
GP1BA confers a significant risk for nonarteritic anterior ischemic
optic neuropathy (NAION; 258660), with an odds ratio of 4.25 (95% CI
1.67-10.82, P = 0.013). Nine of 16 patients who bore the VNTR B allele
(56.3%) had second eye involvement, whereas only 17 of 72 patients
(23.6%) without the allele had second eye involvement (P = 0.009),
indicating that the presence of the VNTR B allele may predispose
affected patients to second eye involvement.

.0003
VON WILLEBRAND DISEASE, PLATELET-TYPE
GP1BA, GLY233VAL

Platelet-type von Willebrand disease (177820), also known as pseudo-von
Willebrand disease, is an autosomal dominant bleeding disorder
characterized by abnormally enhanced binding of von Willebrand factor by
patients' platelets. In 7 affected members of a family with pseudo-VWD,
Miller et al. (1991) identified a heterozygous mutation in the GP1BA
gene resulting in the substitution of gly233-to-val (G233V). The
mutation was absent in 6 unaffected family members. To evaluate the
functional consequences of the G233V mutation, Murata et al. (1993)
constructed a recombinant analog of the alpha subunit of GP Ib
containing val233. The recombinant fragment with the val233 substitution
reproduced the functional abnormality of the GP Ib-IX complex in
platelet-type von Willebrand disease.

.0004
BERNARD-SOULIER SYNDROME, TYPE A2, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
GP1BA, LEU57PHE

In a Caucasian family in which 5 members over 2 generations were
affected with an autosomal dominant form of Bernard-Soulier syndrome
(153670), Miller et al. (1992) identified a heterozygous leu57-to-phe
(L57F) substitution within the highly conserved GP Ib-alpha leucine
tandem repeat that segregated with the disease. The proband was a
13-year-old male who was referred for evaluation of thrombocytopenia
which had been noted before dental extractions. He had frequent episodes
of epistaxis, one of which was severe enough to require hospitalization.
The mother had a long history of bleeding problems as did the other
affected family members except for one who had 'an essentially negative
bleeding history.' The affected individual showed increased mean
platelet volume.

.0005
VON WILLEBRAND DISEASE, PLATELET-TYPE
GP1BA, MET239VAL

In a father and 2 daughters with pseudo-von Willebrand disease (177820),
Russell and Roth (1993) demonstrated an A-to-G transition in codon 239
that resulted in substitution of valine for methionine (M239V). The
abnormal receptor displayed increased affinity for its ligand, von
Willebrand factor.

.0006
BERNARD-SOULIER SYNDROME, TYPE A1
BERNARD-SOULIER SYNDROME, TYPE A2, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, INCLUDED
GP1BA, ALA156VAL

In a patient with Bernard-Soulier syndrome (231200), Ware et al. (1993)
identified a homozygous ala156-to-val substitution (A156V) in the GP Ib
alpha protein. This mutation is situated in a leucine-rich repeat of the
protein and is associated with a loss of binding with the von Willebrand
factor.

In 6 Italian families with autosomal dominant inheritance of mild
bleeding symptoms, including petechiae, epistaxis, and mucosal bleeding,
Savoia et al. (2001) identified a heterozygous A156V substitution in the
GP1BA gene. The findings were consistent with autosomal dominant
Bernard-Soulier syndrome (153670). The 6 probands with the A156V
mutation and 2 others were found to have a reduction of platelet
membrane glycoproteins comparable to that found in a BSS heterozygous
condition.

.0007
BERNARD-SOULIER SYNDROME, TYPE A1
GP1BA, TRP498TER

In a 73-year-old male with Bernard-Soulier syndrome (231200) and
life-long bleeding problems, Holmberg et al. (1997) found a homozygous
trp498-to-ter mutation in the GP1BA gene, resulting in a truncated
polypeptide chain. In contrast to previously reported truncated forms,
this one contained a portion of the transmembranous domain as well as
the juxtamembranous cysteines engaged in a disulfide bond with the
beta-polypeptide. The patient had suffered subdural hematomas and severe
episodes of gastric hemorrhage. Thrombocytopenia had been diagnosed in
childhood. The patient's parents had common ancestors in the late
seventeenth century. The diagnosis of Bernard-Soulier syndrome was based
on thrombocytopenia with giant platelets, absent ristocetin aggregation,
and no detectable GP Ib on the platelets with an enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (Waldenstrom et al., 1991).

.0008
BERNARD-SOULIER SYNDROME, TYPE A1
GP1BA, TRP126TER

Noda et al. (1995) and Iwanaga et al. (1998) identified a trp126-to-ter
nonsense mutation in 3 unrelated Japanese patients with BSS (231200).
Although these seemingly unrelated patients lived in the same geographic
area in the vicinity of Kyushu, Japan, haplotype analysis suggested that
any founder effect must have been very ancient. The mutation was not
identified in 100 normal volunteers from the same area.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Lopez et al. (1988); Nurden and Caen (1975)
REFERENCE 1. Afshar-Kharghan, V.; Li, C. Q.; Khoshnevis-Asl, M.; Lopez, J. A.
: Kozak sequence polymorphism of the glycoprotein (GP) Ib-alpha gene
is a major determinant of the plasma membrane levels of the platelet
GP Ib-IX-V complex. Blood 94: 186-191, 1999.

2. Andrews, R. K.; Fox, J. E. B.: Identification of a region in the
cytoplasmic domain of the platelet membrane glycoprotein Ib-IX complex
that binds to purified actin-binding protein. J. Biol. Chem. 267:
18605-18611, 1992.

3. Baker, R. I.; Eikelboom, J.; Lofthouse, E.; Staples, N.; Afshar-Kharghan,
V.; Lopez, J. A.; Shen, Y.; Berndt, M. C.; Hankey, G.: Platelet glycoprotein
Ib-alpha Kozak polymorphism is associated with an increased risk of
ischemic stroke. Blood 98: 36-40, 2001.

4. Beer, J. H.; Buchi, L.; Steiner, B.: Glycocalicin: a new assay--the
normal plasma levels and its potential usefulness in selected diseases. Blood 83:
691-702, 1994.

5. Bergmeier, W.; Piffath, C. L.; Goerge, T.; Cifuni, S. M.; Ruggeri,
Z. M.; Ware, J.; Wagner, D. D.: The role of platelet adhesion receptor
GPIb-alpha far exceeds that of its main ligand, von Willebrand factor,
in arterial thrombosis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 16900-16905,
2006.

6. Celikel, R.; McClintock, R. A.; Roberts, J. R.; Mendolicchio, G.
L.; Ware, J.; Varughese, K. I.; Ruggeri, Z. M.: Modulation of alpha-thrombin
function by distinct interactions with platelet glycoprotein Ib-alpha. Science 301:
218-221, 2003.

7. Dumas, J. J.; Kumar, R.; Seehra, J.; Somers, W. S.; Mosyak, L.
: Crystal structure of the Gp1b-alpha-thrombin complex essential for
platelet aggregation. Science 301: 222-226, 2003.

8. Harmon, J. T.; Jamieson, G. A.: The glycocalicin portion of platelet
glycoprotein Ib expresses both high and moderate affinity receptor
sites for thrombin: a soluble radioreceptor assay for the interaction
of thrombin with platelets. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 13224-13229, 1986.

9. Holmberg, L.; Karpman, D.; Nilsson, I.; Olofsson, T.: Bernard-Soulier
syndrome Karlstad: trp498-to-stop mutation resulting in a truncated
glycoprotein Ib-alpha that contains part of the transmembranous domain. Brit.
J. Haemat. 98: 57-63, 1997.

10. Huizinga, E. G.; Tsuji, S.; Romijn, R. A. P.; Schiphorst, M. E.;
de Groot, P. G.; Sixma, J. J.; Gros, P.: Structures of glycoprotein
Ib-alpha and its complex with von Willebrand factor A1 domain. Science 297:
1176-1179, 2002.

11. Ishida, F.; Ito, T.; Takei, M.; Shimodaira, S.; Kitano, K.; Kiyosawa,
K.: Genetic linkage of Kozak sequence polymorphism of the platelet
glycoprotein Ib-alpha with human platelet antigen-2 and variable number
of tandem repeats polymorphism, and its relationship with coronary
artery disease. Brit. J. Haemat. 111: 1247-1249, 2000.

12. Iwanaga, M.; Kunichima, S.; Ikeda, S.; Tomonaga, M.; Naoe, T.
: Vulnerable mutation trp126-to-stop of glycoprotein IX in Japanese
Bernard-Soulier syndrome. (Letter) Europ. J. Haemat. 60: 264-266,
1998.

13. Kaski, S.; Kekomaki, R.; Partanen, J.: Systemic screening for
genetic polymorphism in human platelet glycoprotein Ib-alpha. Immunogenetics 44:
170-176, 1996.

14. Lopez, J. A.; Andrews, R. K.; Afshar-Kharghan, V.; Berndt, M.
C.: Bernard-Soulier syndrome. Blood 91: 4397-4418, 1998.

15. Lopez, J. A.; Chung, D. W.; Fujikawa, K.; Hagen, F. S.; Davie,
E. W.; Roth, G. J.: The alpha and beta chains of human platelet glycoprotein
Ib are both transmembrane proteins containing a leucine-rich amino
acid sequence. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 2135-2139, 1988.

16. Lopez, J. A.; Chung, D. W.; Fujikawa, K.; Hagen, F. S.; Papayannopoulou,
T.; Roth, G. J.: Cloning of the alpha chain of human platelet glycoprotein
Ib: a transmembrane protein with homology to leucine-rich alpha 2-glycoprotein. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 5615-5619, 1987.

17. Lopez, J. A.; Ludwig, E. H.: Molecular basis of platelet glycoprotein
Ib polymorphism. (Abstract) Clin. Res. 39: 327A only, 1991.

18. Meyer, M.; Schellenberg, I.: Platelet membrane glycoprotein Ib:
genetic polymorphism detected in the intact molecule and in proteolytic
fragments. Thromb. Res. 58: 233-242, 1990.

19. Michelson, A. D.; Adelman, B.; Barnard, M. R.; Carroll, E.; Handin,
R. I.: Platelet storage results in a redistribution of glycoprotein
Ib molecules: evidence for a large intraplatelet pool of glycoprotein
Ib. J. Clin. Invest. 81: 1734-1740, 1988.

20. Michelson, A. D.; Loscalzo, J.; Melnick, B.; Coller, B. S.; Handin,
R. I.: Partial characterization of a binding site for von Willebrand
factor on glycocalicin. Blood 67: 19-26, 1986.

21. Miller, J. L.; Cunningham, D.; Lyle, V. A.; Finch, C. N.: Mutation
in the gene encoding the alpha chain of platelet glycoprotein Ib in
platelet-type von Willebrand disease. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88:
4761-4765, 1991.

22. Miller, J. L.; Lyle, V. A.; Cunningham, D.: Mutation of leucine-57
to phenylalanine in a platelet glycoprotein Ib-alpha leucine tandem
repeat occurring in patients with an autosomal dominant variant of
Bernard-Soulier disease. Blood 79: 439-446, 1992.

23. Moroi, M.; Jung, S. M.; Yoshida, N.: Genetic polymorphism of
platelet glycoprotein Ib. Blood 64: 622-629, 1984.

24. Murata, M.; Furihata, K.; Ishida, F.; Russell, S. R.; Ware, J.;
Ruggeri, Z. M.: Genetic and structural characterization of an amino
acid dimorphism in glycoprotein Ib-alpha involved in platelet transfusion
refractoriness. Blood 79: 3086-3090, 1992.

25. Murata, M.; Russell, S. R.; Ruggeri, Z. M.; Ware, J.: Expression
of the phenotypic abnormality of platelet-type von Willebrand disease
in a recombinant glycoprotein Ib-alpha fragment. J. Clin. Invest. 91:
2133-2137, 1993.

26. Noda, M.; Fujimura, K.; Takafuta, T.; Shimomura, T.; Fujimoto,
T.; Yamamoto, N.; Tanoue, K.; Arai, M.; Suehiro, A.; Kakishita, E.;
Shimsaki, A.; Kuramoto, A.: Heterogeneous expression of glycoprotein
Ib, IX and V in platelets from two patients with Bernard-Soulier syndrome
caused by different genetic abnormalities. Thromb. Haemost. 74:
1411-1415, 1995. Note: Erratum: Thromb. Haemost. 75: 700 only, 1996.

27. Nurden, A. T.; Caen, J. P.: Specific roles for platelet surface
glycoproteins in platelet function. Nature 255: 720-722, 1975.

28. Russell, S. D.; Roth, G. J.: Pseudo-von Willebrand disease: a
mutation in the platelet glycoprotein Ib-alpha gene associated with
a hyperactive surface receptor. Blood 81: 1787-1791, 1993.

29. Salomon, O.; Rosenberg, N.; Steinberg, D. M.; Huna-Baron, R.;
Moisseiev, J.; Dardik, R.; Goldan, O.; Kurtz, S.; Ifrah, A.; Seligsohn,
U.: Nonarteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy is associated
with a specific platelet polymorphism located on the glycoprotein
1B-alpha gene. Ophthalmology 111: 184-188, 2004.

30. Savoia, A.; Balduini, C. L.; Savino, M.; Noris, P.; Del Vecchio,
M.; Perrotta, S.; Belletti, S.; Poggi, V.; Iolascon, A.: Autosomal
dominant macrothrombocytopenia in Italy is most frequently a type
of heterozygous Bernard-Soulier syndrome. Blood 97: 1330-1335, 2001.

31. Steinberg, M. H.; Kelton, J. G.; Coller, B. S.: Plasma glycocalicin:
an aid in the classification of thrombocytopenic disorders. New Eng.
J. Med. 317: 1037-1042, 1987.

32. Waldenstrom, E.; Holmberg, L.; Axelsson, U.; Winqvist, I.; Nilsson,
I. M.: Bernard-Soulier syndrome in two Swedish families: effect of
dDAVP on bleeding time. Europ. J. Haemat. 46: 182-187, 1991.

33. Ware, J.; Russell, S. R.; Marchese, P.; Murata, M.; Mazzucato,
M.; De Marco, L.; Ruggeri, Z. M.: Point mutation in a leucine-rich
repeat of platelet glycoprotein Ib-alpha resulting in the Bernard-Soulier
syndrome. J. Clin. Invest. 92: 1213-1220, 1993.

34. Ware, J.; Russell, S. R.; Vicente, V.; Scharf, R. E.; Tomer, A.;
McMillan, R.; Ruggeri, Z. M.: Nonsense mutation in the glycoprotein
Ib-alpha coding sequence associated with Bernard-Soulier syndrome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 2026-2030, 1990.

35. Wenger, R. H.; Wicki, A. N.; Kieffer, N.; Adolph, S.; Hameister,
H.; Clemetson, K. J.: The 5-prime flanking region and chromosomal
localization of the gene encoding human platelet membrane glycoprotein
Ib-alpha. Gene 85: 517-524, 1989.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/26/2007
Jane Kelly - updated: 6/4/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/5/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/11/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/20/2003

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 6/17/2003

EDITED terry: 03/28/2013
carol: 7/27/2011
carol: 10/4/2010
ckniffin: 8/31/2010
ckniffin: 11/12/2009
wwang: 1/26/2007
alopez: 6/4/2004
cwells: 1/7/2004
terry: 1/5/2004
alopez: 12/11/2003
terry: 7/24/2003
carol: 6/24/2003
ckniffin: 6/24/2003
ckniffin: 6/20/2003
carol: 5/15/2003

300163	TITLE *300163 FOUR-AND-A-HALF LIM DOMAINS 1; FHL1
;;SLIM1;;
FHL1A;;
KYOT, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF
FHL1B, INCLUDED;;
SLIMMER, INCLUDED;;
FHL1C, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

LIM proteins, named for 'LIN11, ISL1, and MEC3,' are defined by the
possession of a highly conserved double zinc finger motif called the LIM
domain.

CLONING

Morgan et al. (1995) identified a partial human SLIM1 cDNA. They found
that SLIM1 is a developmentally regulated protein that is expressed in
human skeletal muscle but not in a variety of other tissues. By
searching sequence databases with the partial SLIM1 cDNA isolated by
Morgan et al. (1995), Morgan and Madgwick (1996) identified human cDNAs
encoding the complete SLIM1 amino acid sequence. The predicted 280-amino
acid protein contains 4 LIM domains and a novel single zinc finger
domain in the N-terminal region. By Northern blot analysis, SLIM1 is
expressed as a 2.3-kb mRNA in human masseter muscle.

By Northern blot analysis, Greene et al. (1999) found a 2.5-kb
transcript strongly expressed in skeletal muscle and to a lesser extent
in heart. Significantly lower expression was observed in prostate,
testis, ovary, small and large intestine, placenta, and lung, while
barely detectable expression was seen in spleen, thymus, and pancreas.
No expression was detected in leukocytes, brain, liver, and kidney. A
second transcript of about 1.3-kb was found at low levels in testis,
heart, and skeletal muscle.

Using a sequence derived from the 5-prime end of inositol polyphosphate
5-phosphatase (INPP5A; 600106) as a probe, Brown et al. (1999) cloned
FHL1, which they called SLIM1, from a bone marrow cDNA library. Sequence
analysis revealed that each LIM domain is separated by 8 intervening
amino acids. SLIM1 shares 47% sequence identity with SLIM3 (FHL2;
602633) and 45% identity with SLIM2 (FHL3; 602790). SLIM1 shares no
homology with INPP5A except for a 16-nucleotide stretch contained within
the probe used to screen the library.

Brown et al. (1999) also cloned an alternatively spliced isoform, which
they called SLIMMER (FHL1B), that differs from SLIM1 with a 200-bp
insertion that causes a frameshift. The deduced protein contains 323
amino acids and has a calculated molecular mass of 34 kD. It contains an
N-terminal zinc finger followed by 3 LIM domains identical to SLIM1, and
a novel 93-amino acid C terminus that contains 3 bipartite nuclear
localization signals (NLS) followed by a leucine-rich nuclear export
sequence (NES). Northern blot analysis revealed a 2.4-kb SLIMMER
transcript expressed at high levels in skeletal muscle and at lower
levels in heart, colon, prostate, and small intestine. A 4.4-kb
transcript was also observed in skeletal muscle and colon. Western blot
analysis of skeletal muscle using isoform-specific antibodies revealed
endogenous expression of both a 34-kD SLIMMER protein and a 32-kD SLIM1
protein. Fluorescence-tagged SLIM1 localized to the cytoplasm and
associated with focal adhesions and actin filaments in transfected COS-7
cells, while fluorescence-tagged SLIMMER was predominantly nuclear.
Truncation mutants revealed that the first NLS mediated SLIMMER nuclear
localization.

Brown et al. (1999) found that endogenous Slim1 showed diffuse
cytoplasmic staining and low nuclear staining in mouse myoblasts.
Following differentiation into multinucleated myotubes, Slim1 staining
became exclusively cytoplasmic. SLIMMER showed prominent nuclear
staining of myoblasts and exclusively cytoplasmic staining of myotubes.
The leucine-rich NES was required for the export of Slimmer from the
nucleus of mouse myoblasts to the cytoplasm of differentiated myotubes.
By Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues, Fimia et al. (2000)
determined that Fhl1 was the only Fhl transcript tested that was
expressed in a wide range of tissues. High levels were present in heart,
skeletal muscle, ovary, kidney, lung, and brain, and much lower levels
were found in spleen, liver, adrenal gland, testis, and pituitary.

Ng et al. (2001) identified a third alternatively spliced isoform of the
FHL1 gene, which they designated FHL1C. The deduced 195-residue FHL1C
isoform contains a single zinc finger and 2 tandem repeats of LIM
domains at the N terminus, followed by a putative RBPJ-binding region at
the C terminus. FHL1C lacks exon 4, resulting in a frameshift in the
3-prime coding region and absence of a putative nuclear export sequence
coded by exon 4b. Northern blot and RT-PCR analysis showed that FHL1C
was specifically expressed in testis, skeletal muscle, and heart at a
relatively low level compared with FHL1A. Low levels of FHL1C expression
were observed in aorta, left atrium, and left and right ventricles.
Western blot analysis detected a 20-kD corresponding to FHL1C in human
skeletal muscle and heart. Unlike FHL1B, which is located primarily in
the nucleus, FHL1C was localized both in the nucleus and cytoplasm of
mammalian cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Greene et al. (1999) determined that the FHL1 gene contains at least 5
exons and spans over 3.6 kb. All 4 introns disrupt the coding region at
regular intervals near the start of each complete LIM motif, implying
that exon duplication may be responsible for the tandem LIM domain
repeats.

The FHL1A isoform contains exons 1 through 5, FHL1B contains exons 1, 2,
3, 4, 4b, and 5, and FHL1C contains 1, 2, 3, and 5 (Ng et al., 2001).

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid mapping, FISH, and radiation hybrid mapping, Lee
et al. (1998) mapped the FHL1 gene to chromosome Xq27.2. By FISH, Greene
et al. (1999) mapped the FHL1 gene to Xq26. In connection with myopathy
caused by mutations in the FHL1 gene, Windpassinger et al. (2008)
indirectly mapped the FHL1 gene to Xq26.3.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- X-linked Scapuloperoneal Myopathy

Scapuloperoneal syndrome encompasses heterogeneous neuromuscular
disorders characterized by weakness in the shoulder girdle and peroneal
muscles. In a family originally described by Wilhelmsen et al. (1996)
with a myopathic form of scapuloperoneal syndrome (SPM; 300695), Quinzii
et al. (2008) performed a genomewide scan with microsatellite markers
and mapped the disorder to Xq26. All affected individuals carried a
mutation in the FHL1 gene (W122S; 300163.0001) affecting the second LIM
domain. Schessl et al. (2009) stated that muscle biopsies from patients
from the family reported by Quinzii et al. (2008) had been reexamined
and found to contain reducing bodies, suggesting that the phenotype in
this family may represent a mild form of X-linked reducing body myopathy
(300718).

- X-linked Myopathy with Postural Muscle Atrophy

In affected members of 2 families with an adult-onset
scapuloaxioperoneal myopathy with bent spine syndrome characterized by
specific atrophy of postural muscles and cardiac involvement (XMPMA;
300696), Windpassinger et al. (2008) identified 2 different mutations in
the FHL1 gene (300163.0002; 300163.0003). There was muscle hypertrophy
in the early stages of the disorder.

Schoser et al. (2009) identified mutations in the C terminus of the FHL1
gene in 7 additional families with XMPMA (see, e.g., 300163.0002;
300163.0013; 300163.0014). Muscle biopsies showed absence of the FHL1 A
isoform. No reducing bodies were identified.

- Emery-Dreifuss Muscular Dystrophy 6

In affected members of 6 unrelated families with Emery-Dreifuss muscular
dystrophy-6 (EDMD6; see 300696), Gueneau et al. (2009) identified 6
different mutations in the FHL1 gene (see, e.g.,
300163.0010-300163.0012). A patient with sporadic disease also had an
FHL1 mutation. The mutations were preferentially located in the most
distal exons 5 to 8 of FHL1 and impaired the 3 isoforms to various
degrees.

- X-Linked Reducing Body Myopathy

In 2 unrelated girls with severe, early-onset reducing body myopathy
(300717), Schessl et al. (2008) identified a de novo heterozygous
mutation in the FHL1 gene (300163.0004 and 300163.0005, respectively).
Two unrelated boys with childhood-onset reducing body myopathy (300718)
had hemizygous mutation in the FHL1 gene (300163.0006 and 300163.0007,
respectively). Schessl et al. (2008) used a proteomic technique to
identify FHL1 as the main protein component of the reducing bodies in
these patients.

Schessl et al. (2009) reported 5 unrelated patients with sporadic
early-onset severe X-linked reducing myopathy (300717) and reviewed
their previously reported patients (Schessl et al., 2008). All 5
patients had de novo mutations in the same residue of the second LIM
domain of the FHL1 gene, affecting all 3 isoforms (H123Y; 300163.0004,
H123L; 300163.0015, and H123Q; 300163.0016). Onset was in early
childhood, and the disorder was rapidly progressive, leading to proximal
muscle weakness and atrophy, loss of ambulation, contractures, and often
respiratory insufficiency. There were 4 girls and 1 boy: the boy was
more severely affected. Other features included scoliosis and spinal
rigidity. Muscle biopsies showed FHL1-positive aggregates and reducing
bodies. Schessl et al. (2009) concluded that mutations in the second LIM
domain of FHL1 result in reducing body myopathy.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SCAPULOPERONEAL MYOPATHY, X-LINKED DOMINANT
FHL1, TRP122SER

In an Italian-American family with scapuloperoneal myopathy (300695),
Quinzii et al. (2008) demonstrated that the disorder was X-linked
dominant and caused by a missense mutation in the FHL1 gene:a 365G-C
transversion in exon 3 that caused a trp122 to ser substitution (W122S)
in the second LIM domain of the protein.

Schessl et al. (2009) stated that muscle biopsies from patients from the
family reported by Quinzii et al. (2008) had been reexamined and found
to contain reducing bodies, suggesting that the phenotype in this family
may represent a mild form of X-linked reducing body myopathy (300718).

.0002
MYOPATHY, X-LINKED, WITH POSTURAL MUSCLE ATROPHY
FHL1, CYS224TRP

In an extensive Austrian family in which males in 5 generations had a
novel form of myopathy they referred to as X-linked myopathy with
postural muscle atrophy and generalized hypertrophy (XMPMA; 300696),
Windpassinger et al. (2008) detected a 672C-G transversion in the FHL1
gene that resulted in a cys224-to-trp (C224W) substitution in the fourth
LIM domain of isoform A and in the nuclear localization signal of
isoform B. Patients had muscle hypertrophy in the early stages, followed
by postural muscle weakness and atrophy, increased serum creatine
kinase, bent spine, and cardiomyopathy. The C224W mutation was predicted
to disrupt the zinc-binding properties of FHL1A and to impair shuttling
between nucleus and cytoplasm of FHL1B. Impairment of zinc binding may
have reduced protein stability and structure. Isoform C was not
affected, which the authors hypothesized may have resulted in the
relatively mild phenotype; no females were affected.

Schoser et al. (2009) reported 3 additional unrelated German families
with XMPMA associated with the C224W mutation in the FHL1 gene. A fourth
patient, later found to be distantly related to the Austrian family
reported by Windpassinger et al. (2008), was also identified. The
phenotype was similar to that reported by Windpassinger et al. (2008).
The mutation is predicted to disrupt the fourth LIM domain.

.0003
MYOPATHY, X-LINKED, WITH POSTURAL MUSCLE ATROPHY
SCAPULOPERONEAL MYOPATHY, X-LINKED DOMINANT, INCLUDED
FHL1, 3-BP INS, 381ATC

In a family of British origin with X-linked myopathy with postural
muscle atrophy and generalized hypertrophy (XMPMA; 300696),
Windpassinger et al. (2008) identified a 3-bp insertion after nucleotide
381 of the FHL1 gene (381_382insATC), leading to the insertion of an
isoleucine residue within the second LIM domain (phe127_thr128insile).
The mutation affected all 3 FHL1 isoforms.

Sarkozy et al. (2011) reported 2 additional British families with the
381delATC mutation. These 2 families and the family reported by
Windpassinger et al. (2008) shared the same haplotype, consistent with a
founder effect. The family reported by Windpassinger et al. (2008)
included 4 males who presented in their thirties with progressive
proximal muscle weakness causing walking difficulties and shoulder
weakness. The disorder was progressive with at least 2 patients becoming
wheelchair-bound. Other features included spinal rigidity, scapular
winging, increased serum creatine kinase, and decreased vital
respiratory capacity. One family reported by Sarkozy et al. (2011)
included 11 affected individuals (5 women) spanning 5 generations. Three
men had onset of symptoms in the second to third decade, with
predominant progressive limb girdle weakness, predominantly affecting
the upper limbs, and scapular winging. They also had spinal rigidity and
reduced lung function. An additional 3 deceased male family members were
reported as being wheelchair-bound from their thirties, and dying in
their late forties/early fifties of cardiorespiratory failure. Female
mutation carriers had a slightly later onset of milder symptoms. In the
other family reported by Sarkozy et al. (2011), 5 males spanning 4
generations were affected. One had onset in young adulthood of
progressive proximal upper and lower limb weakness, foot drop, and
restricted neck movements with increased serum creatine kinase. Other
family members reportedly had gait difficulties. Sarkozy et al. (2011)
noted the heterogeneous phenotypes in these 3 families, although they
all had an overall late presentation most consistent with XMPMA.
However, the involvement of women in the second family was reminiscent
of X-linked dominant scapuloperoneal myopathy (300695).

.0004
MYOPATHY, REDUCING BODY, X-LINKED, SEVERE EARLY-ONSET
FHL1, HIS123TYR

In a girl with severe, early-onset X-linked myopathy with reducing
bodies (300717), Schessl et al. (2008) identified a de novo heterozygous
367C-T transition in the third coding exon of the FHL1 gene, resulting
in a his123-to-tyr (H123Y) substitution in the second LIM domain
involved in coordinating zinc binding. The H123Y mutation was predicted
to result in complete disruption of the zinc-binding sites and collapse
of the LIM domain. In vitro functional expression studies showed that
the mutant protein initiated aggregation of the FHL1 protein, formed
reducing bodies and trapped wildtype FHL1 into the inclusion bodies,
consistent with a dominant-negative effect. The child lost ambulation by
at age 3 years and had respiratory insufficiency. Schessl et al. (2009)
reported follow-up on the patient reported by Schessl et al. (2008). She
had mildly delayed motor development, learning to walk at 18 months, but
was never able to run or stand up from a sitting position. The disease
progressed at age 2 years, with poor head control and neck weakness,
leading wheelchair dependency at age 3. She had proximal muscle
weakness, progressive spinal rigidity, and scoliosis. At age 8 years,
she is ventilated continuously, has a gastrostomy tube, and has lost all
antigravity strength except for her finger extensors. There is no
apparent cardiac involvement.

Schessl et al. (2009) reported another unrelated girl with a
heterozygous H123Y mutation. She had onset before age 1.5 years of
proximal muscle weakness and Gowers sign. Mutations affecting the same
FHL1 codon have also been reported in this phenotype (H123L,
300163.0015; H123Q, 300163.0016).

.0005
MYOPATHY, REDUCING BODY, X-LINKED, SEVERE EARLY-ONSET
FHL1, CYS132PHE

In a girl with severe, early-onset X-linked myopathy with reducing
bodies (300717), Schessl et al. (2008) identified a de novo heterozygous
395G-T transversion in exon 3 of the FHL1 gene, resulting in a
cys132-to-phe (C132F) substitution in the second LIM domain involved in
coordinating zinc binding. The C132F mutation was predicted to result in
complete disruption of the zinc-binding sites and collapse of the LIM
domain. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the mutant
protein initiated aggregation of the FHL1 protein, formed reducing
bodies and trapped wildtype FHL1 into the inclusion bodies, consistent
with a dominant-negative effect. The child lost ambulation by age 4.5
years and died of respiratory failure at age 6.5 years.

.0006
MYOPATHY, REDUCING BODY, X-LINKED, CHILDHOOD-ONSET
FHL1, CYS153ARG

In a boy with X-linked reducing body myopathy with childhood onset
(300718), Schessl et al. (2008) identified a 457T-C transition in the
FHL1 gene, resulting in a cys153-to-arg (C153R) substitution in the
second zinc finger of the LIM2 domain. The patient's mother, who was
heterozygous for the mutation, was less severely affected. The boy had
onset of weakness at age 5 years, became ventilator-dependent by age 11
years, and developed cardiomyopathy at 18 years. A mutation in the same
codon (C153Y; 300163.0007) was identified in an unrelated family with
the same disorder.

.0007
MYOPATHY, REDUCING BODY, X-LINKED, CHILDHOOD-ONSET
FHL1, CYS153TYR

In a boy with X-linked reducing myopathy with childhood onset (300718),
Schessl et al. (2008) identified a 458G-A transition in the FHL1 gene,
resulting in a cys153-to-tyr (C153Y) substitution in the second zinc
finger of the LIM2 domain. The patient's mother, who was heterozygous
for the mutation, was less severely affected. The boy had onset of
weakness and rigid spine symptoms at age 10 years, leading to loss of
ambulation at age 16. A mutation in the same codon (C153R; 300163.0006)
was identified in an unrelated family with the same disorder.

.0008
MYOPATHY, REDUCING BODY, X-LINKED, SEVERE EARLY-ONSET
FHL1, CYS150TYR

In a patient with fatal early-onset reducing body myopathy (300717),
Shalaby et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 449G-A transition in the
FHL1 gene, resulting in a cys150-to-tyr (C150Y) substitution in the
second LIM domain. The patient had previously been reported by Kiyomoto
et al. (1995).

.0009
MYOPATHY, REDUCING BODY, X-LINKED, CHILDHOOD-ONSET
FHL1, CYS104ARG

In a mother and son with adult- and childhood-onset reducing body
myopathy (300718), respectively, Shalaby et al. (2009) identified a
310T-C transition in the FHL1 gene, resulting in a cys104-to-arg (C104R)
substitution in the second LIM domain. The family had previously been
reported by Ohsawa et al. (2007).

.0010
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY 6
FHL1, TER281GLU

In 3 brothers from Saudi Arabia with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy-6
(EDMD6; see 300696), Gueneau et al. (2009) identified an 841T-G
transversion in exon 8 of the FHL1 gene, resulting in a ter281-to-glu
(X281E) substitution in the last codon. This change suppressed the
termination codon and predicted a larger protein with 52 additional
amino acids at the C terminus of the FHL1A isoform. The proband
presented at age 10 years with stiff neck, and later developed
scapular-peroneal weakness and atrophy, multiple joint contractures, and
scoliosis. He also had dysphonia due to vocal cord palsy. At age 18
years, he was found to have cardiac involvement characterized by septal
hypertrophy. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed dystrophic changes with no
reducing bodies and markedly decreased FHL1A protein expression. In
vitro studies of patient myoblasts showed a delay in myogenin (MYOG;
159980) activation and myoblast fusion, without major impacts on
sarcomere formation.

.0011
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY 6
FHL1, CYS209ARG

In affected members of a large family with Emery-Dreifuss muscular
dystrophy-6 (EDMD6; see 300696), Gueneau et al. (2009) identified a
625C-T transition in exon 6 of the FHL1 gene, resulting in a
cys209-to-arg (C209R) substitution affecting a highly conserved cys
residue of the LIM3 domain of the FHL1A and FHL1B isoforms. The proband
presented at age 11 years with stiff neck. He later developed scapular
and pelvic muscle weakness and atrophy, multiple joint contractures,
scoliosis, and increased serum creatine kinase. At age 39, he had
cardiac arrhythmias and cardiac hypertrophy; He died suddenly at age 51.
Most affected family members had both cardiac disease and myopathy,
although some had only isolated cardiac disease or myopathy. There were
several affected females who were heterozygous for the mutation.
Skeletal muscle biopsy of the proband showed a dystrophic pattern and
moderately decreased FHL1 protein expression.

Knoblauch et al. (2010) identified the C209R mutation in 9 affected male
members of a large 4-generation German family with EDMD6. Age at onset
was in the first or second decade, and all had contractures and rigid
spine. Five had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 2 had left ventricular
hypertrophy with fibrosis and hypertension, 1 had apical myocardial
thinning, and 1 had normal cardiac findings. Only 1 had conduction
abnormalities, and only 1 had clear muscle weakness; most appeared
muscular but not athletic. Two female carriers of the mutation had rigid
spine symptoms, and 1 had left ventricular hypertrophy with
hypertension. None of the patients was or became wheelchair-bound.
Skeletal muscle biopsy from 3 patients showed cytoplasmic bodies, but
not reducing bodies, and dystrophic features. Western blot analysis
showed decreased expression of FHL1.

.0012
EMERY-DREIFUSS MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY 6
FHL1, 1-BP INS, NT817

In a man with Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy-6 (EDMD6; see 300696),
Gueneau et al. (2009) identified a 1-bp insertion (817dup) in exon 8 of
the FHL1 gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination
affecting only the FHL1A isoform that lacks the last 2 cysteines of the
LIM4 domain. He presented at age 6 years with elbow and Achilles tendon
contractures, and later developed scapular and pelvic muscle weakness
and atrophy. Other features included muscle hypertrophy, dysphonia due
to vocal cord palsy, and increased serum creatine kinase. By age 30, he
had cardiac septal hypertrophy and respiratory insufficiency; he died
suddenly at age 31. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed myopathic changes and
no reducing bodies. The patient's mother, who was heterozygous for the
mutation, had isolated hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

.0013
MYOPATHY, X-LINKED, WITH POSTURAL MUSCLE ATROPHY
FHL1, VAL280MET

In 2 affected males from a German family with X-linked myopathy with
postural muscle atrophy (XMPMA; 300696), Schoser et al. (2009)
identified an 838G-A transition in exon 5 of the FHL1 gene, resulting in
a val280-to-met (V280M) substitution in isoform B. The mutation was not
found in 247 control chromosomes. Both boys had onset at age 8 years of
exercise-induced fatigue and Achilles tendon shortening, and later
developed proximal lower leg weakness. No overt cardiac involvement was
noted. A female carrier in the family was unaffected.

.0014
MYOPATHY, X-LINKED, WITH POSTURAL MUSCLE ATROPHY
FHL1, IVS4DS, G-A, +1

In 2 affected males from a German family with XMPMA (300696), Schoser et
al. (2009) identified a G-to-A transition in the donor splice site of
intron 4 of the FHL1 gene, resulting in the skipping of exon 4. The
splice site is located after the second LIM domain, and caused premature
termination of the protein, generation of isoform C only, and loss of
both isoforms A and B. The proband had progressive Achilles tendon
shortening since childhood, and developed a progressive aneurysm of the
sinus of Valsalva since age 18. He had exercise-induced weakness and
proximal muscle weakness. The other male patient presented with mild
rigid spine syndrome, kyphoscoliosis, and Achilles tendon contractures
since age 10 years. He was also noted to have a progressive aneurysm of
the sinus of Valsalva since age 12. One female mutation carrier was
noted with exercise-induced weakness and myalgia since age 40 years.

.0015
MYOPATHY, REDUCING BODY, X-LINKED, SEVERE EARLY-ONSET
FHL1, HIS123LEU

In a 7-year-old girl with severe early-onset reducing body myopathy
(300717), Schessl et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous de novo 368A-T
transversion in exon 4 of the FHL1 gene, resulting in a his123-to-leu
(H123L) substitution in the second LIM domain. She had onset at age 4
years of frequent falls, difficulty walking, progressive proximal muscle
weakness of the upper and lower limbs, and scoliosis. Mutations
affecting the same FHL1 codon have also been reported in this phenotype
(H123Y, 300163.0004; H123Q, 300163.0016).

.0016
MYOPATHY, REDUCING BODY, X-LINKED, SEVERE EARLY-ONSET
FHL1, HIS123GLN

In 3 unrelated patients, 2 girls and 1 boy, with severe early-onset
reducing body myopathy (300717), Schessl et al. (2009) identified a de
novo 369C-G transversion in exon 4 of the FHL1 gene, resulting in a
his123-to-gln (H123Q) substitution in the second LIM domain. Onset
ranged from 12 months to 4 years. Patients had frequent falls,
progressive loss of ambulation by age 10 years, proximal muscle weakness
in the upper and lower limbs, and contractures. Two patients had
respiratory insufficiency. One had mild mitral insufficiency, and
another had cardiac arrest at age 3 years. The boy had earlier onset and
a more severe phenotype. The girls were heterozygous for the mutation.
Mutations affecting the same FHL1 codon have also been reported in this
phenotype (H123Y, 300163.0004; H123L, 300163.0015).

.0017
MYOPATHY, REDUCING BODY, X-LINKED, CHILDHOOD-ONSET
FHL1, 9-BP DEL, NT451

In a 16-year-old boy with late childhood onset of X-linked reducing body
myopathy (300718), Shalaby et al. (2008) identified a hemizygous
in-frame 9-bp deletion (451delGTGACTTGC) in the FHL1 gene, resulting in
the deletion of val151, thr152, and cys153, which affected a cysteine
residue in the second LIM domain. The patient was a good runner during
childhood and was noted to have scoliosis at age 13 years. He then
developed progressive walking and running difficulties. By age 16, he
had difficulty in bending his body and in neck flexion, atrophy and
weakness of the proximal muscles, and joint contractures. He was
diagnosed with rigid spine syndrome. Skeletal muscle biopsy showed
intracytoplasmic inclusions, rimmed vacuoles, and decreased FHL1 protein
levels.

REFERENCE 1. Brown, S.; McGrath, M. J.; Ooms, L. M.; Gurung, R.; Maimone, M.
M.; Mitchell, C. A.: Characterization of two isoforms of the skeletal
muscle LIM protein 1, SLIM1: localization of SLIM1 at focal adhesions
and the isoform slimmer in the nucleus of myoblasts and cytoplasm
of myotubes suggests distinct roles in the cytoskeleton and in nuclear-cytoplasmic
communication. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 27083-27091, 1999.

2. Fimia, G. M.; De Cesare, D.; Sassone-Corsi, P.: A family of LIM-only
transcriptional coactivators: tissue-specific expression and selective
activation of CREB and CREM. Molec. Cell. Biol. 20: 8613-8622, 2000.

3. Greene, W. K.; Baker, E.; Rabbitts, T. H.; Kees, U. R.: Genomic
structure, tissue expression and chromosomal location of the LIM-only
gene, SLIM1. Gene 232: 203-207, 1999.

4. Gueneau, L.; Bertrand, A. T.; Jais, J.-P.; Salih, M. A.; Stojkovic,
T.; Wehnert, M.; Hoeltzenbein, M.; Spuler, S.; Saitoh, S.; Verschueren,
A.; Tranchant, C.; Beuvin, M.; Lacene, E.; Romero, N. B.; Heath, S.;
Zelenika, D.; Voit, T.; Eymard, B.; Yaou, R. B.; Bonne, G.: Mutations
of the FHL1 gene cause Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 85: 338-353, 2009.

5. Kiyomoto, B. H.; Murakami, N.; Kobayashi, Y.; Nihei, K.; Tanaka,
T.; Takeshita, K.; Nonaka, I.: Fatal reducing body myopathy: ultrastructural
and immnunohistochemical (sic) observations. J. Neurol. Sci. 128:
58-65, 1995.

6. Knoblauch, H.; Geier, C.; Adams, S.; Budde, B.; Rudolph, A.; Zacharias,
U.; Schulz-Menger, J.; Spuler, A.; Yaou, R. B.; Nurnberg, P.; Voit,
T.; Bonne, G.; Spuler, S.: Contractures and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
in a novel FHL1 mutation. Ann. Neurol. 67: 136-140, 2010.

7. Lee, S. M. Y.; Tsui, S. K. W.; Chan, K. K.; Garcia-Barcelo, M.;
Waye, M. M. Y.; Fung, K. P.; Liew, C. C.; Lee, C. Y.: Chromosomal
mapping, tissue distribution and cDNA sequence of four-and-a-half
LIM domain protein 1 (FHL1). Gene 216: 163-170, 1998.

8. Morgan, M. J.; Madgwick, A. J.; Charleston, B.; Pell, J. M.; Loughna,
P. T.: The developmental regulation of a novel muscle LIM-protein. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 212: 840-846, 1995.

9. Morgan, M. J.; Madgwick, A. J. A.: Slim defines a novel family
of LIM-proteins expressed in skeletal muscle. Biochem. Biophys. Res.
Commun. 225: 632-638, 1996.

10. Ng, E. K. O.; Lee, S. M. Y.; Li, H.-Y.; Ngai, S.-M.; Tsui, S.
K. W.; Waye, M. M. Y.; Lee, C.-Y.; Fung, K.-P.: Characterization
of tissue-specific LIM domain protein (FHL1C) which is an alternatively
spliced isoform of human LIM-only protein (FHL1). J. Cell. Biochem. 82:
1-10, 2001.

11. Ohsawa, M.; Leiwluck, T.; Ogata, K.; Iizuka, T.; Hayashi, Y.;
Nonaka, I.; Sasaki, M.; Nishino, I.: Familial reducing body myopathy. Brain
Dev. 29: 112-116, 2007.

12. Quinzii, C. M.; Vu, T. H.; Min, K. C.; Tanji, K.; Barral, S.;
Grewal, R. P.; Kattah, A.; Camano, P.; Otaegui, D.; Kunimatsu, T.;
Blake, D. M.; Wilhelmsen, K. C.; Rowland, L. P.; Hays, A. P.; Bonilla,
E.; Hirano, M.: X-linked dominant scapuloperoneal myopathy is due
to mutation in the gene encoding four-and-a-half-LIM protein 1. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 82: 208-213, 2008.

13. Sarkozy, A.; Windpassinger, C.; Hudson, J.; Dougan, C. F.; Lecky,
B.; Hilton-Jones, D.; Eagle, M.; Charlton, R.; Barresi, R.; Lochmuller,
H., Bushby, K.; Straub, V.: Phenotypic heterogeneity in British patients
with a founder mutation in the FHL1 gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 19:
1038-1044, 2011.

14. Schessl, J.; Taratuto, A. L.; Sewry, C.; Battini, R.; Chin, S.
S.; Maiti, B.; Dubrovsky, A. L.; Erro, M. G.; Espada, G.; Robertella,
M.; Saccoliti, M.; Olmos, P.; and 11 others: Clinical, histological
and genetic characterization of reducing body myopathy caused by mutations
in FHL1. Brain 132: 452-464, 2009.

15. Schessl, J.; Zou, Y.; McGrath, M. J.; Cowling, B. S.; Maiti, B.;
Chin, S. S.; Sewry, C.; Battini, R.; Hu, Y.; Cottle, D. L.; Rosenblatt,
M.; Spruce, L.; and 9 others: Proteomic identification of FHL1
as the protein mutated in human reducing body myopathy. J. Clin.
Invest. 118: 904-912, 2008.

16. Schoser, B.; Goebel, H. H.; Janisch, I.; Quasthoff, S.; Rother,
J.; Bergmann, M.; Muller-Felber, W.; Windpassinger, C.: Consequences
of mutations within the C terminus of the FHL1 gene. Neurology 73:
543-551, 2009.

17. Shalaby, S.; Hayashi, Y. K.; Goto, K.; Ogawa, M.; Nonaka, I.;
Noguchi, S.; Nishino, I.: Rigid spine syndrome caused by a novel
mutation in four-and-a-half LIM domain 1 gene (FHL1). Neuromusc.
Disord. 18: 959-961, 2008.

18. Shalaby, S.; Hayashi, Y. K.; Nonaka, I.; Noguchi, S.; Nishino,
I.: Novel FHL1 mutations in fatal and benign reducing body myopathy. Neurology 72:
375-376, 2009.

19. Wilhelmsen, K. C.; Blake, D. M.; Lynch, T.; Mabutas, J.; De Vera,
M.; Neystat, M.; Bernstein, M.; Hirano, M.; Gilliam, T. C.; Murphy,
P. L.; Sola, M. D.; Bonilla, E.; Schotland, D. L.; Hays, A. P.; Rowland,
L. P.: Chromosome 12-linked autosomal dominant scapuloperoneal muscular
dystrophy. Ann. Neurol. 39: 507-520, 1996.

20. Windpassinger, C.; Schoser, B.; Straub, V.; Hochmeister, S.; Noor,
A.; Lohberger, B.; Farra, N.; Petek, E.; Schwarzbraun, T.; Ofner,
L.; Loscher, W. N.; Wagner, K.; Lochmuller, H.; Vincent, J. B.; Quasthoff,
S.: An X-linked myopathy with postural muscle atrophy and generalized
hypertrophy, termed XMPMA, is caused by mutations in FHL1. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 82: 88-99, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/21/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/11/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/29/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/5/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/13/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/16/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/19/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/16/2003
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 12/1/1998

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 12/1/1998

EDITED carol: 09/11/2013
carol: 11/28/2012
carol: 3/21/2012
ckniffin: 3/21/2012
wwang: 5/13/2010
ckniffin: 5/11/2010
alopez: 3/4/2010
carol: 2/16/2010
wwang: 1/15/2010
ckniffin: 12/29/2009
wwang: 10/9/2009
ckniffin: 10/5/2009
wwang: 3/24/2009
ckniffin: 3/13/2009
wwang: 6/18/2008
ckniffin: 6/16/2008
alopez: 2/21/2008
terry: 2/19/2008
alopez: 12/17/2004
terry: 7/19/2004
cwells: 1/21/2003
terry: 1/16/2003
terry: 12/2/1998
carol: 12/1/1998

612730	TITLE *612730 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 9 (SODIUM/HYDROGEN EXCHANGER), MEMBER 8; SLC9A8
;;SODIUM/HYDROGEN EXCHANGER 8; NHE8;;
KIAA0939
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Sodium-hydrogen exchangers (NHEs), such as SLC9A8, are integral
transmembrane proteins that exchange extracellular Na+ for intracellular
H+. NHEs have multiple functions, including intracellular pH
homeostasis, cell volume regulation, and electroneutral NaCl absorption
in epithelia (Xu et al., 2008).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) obtained a partial SLC9A8 clone, which
they designated KIAA0939. RT-PCR ELISA detected low expression in most
adult tissues and specific brain regions examined. Little to no
expression was detected in adult lung and spleen and in fetal liver and
brain.

By searching databases using rabbit Nhe3 (SLC9A3; 182307) as query,
Goyal et al. (2003) identified human SLC9A8, which they called NHE8. The
full-length protein contains 581 amino acids and shares 96% identity
with mouse Nhe8. NHE8 has an N-terminal hydrophobic domain with 10 to 12
transmembrane segments and a short C-terminal hydrophilic tail. It also
has 4 potential N-glycosylation sites, a PKC-epsilon (PRKCE; 176975)
phosphorylation site, and putative SH2-, SH3-, ERK (see MAPK3; 601795)-,
and type III PDZ-binding domains. Northern blot analysis of mouse
tissues revealed ubiquitous expression, with highest levels in kidney,
testis, skeletal muscle, and liver. Western blot analysis detected Nhe8
in apical membranes purified from rat renal cortex. In situ
hybridization of rat kidney revealed high expression of Nhe8 in proximal
tubules in the outer stripe of the outer medulla, with lower expression
in cortical proximal tubules. No message was detected in glomeruli.

Using Northern blot analysis, Xu et al. (2008) detected 7- and 4-kb NHE8
transcripts in all sections of the human gastrointestinal tract, with
highest expression in stomach, duodenum, and ascending colon. Adult
mouse gastrointestinal tract showed a slightly different distribution of
Nhe8, and Nhe8 expression was much higher in stomach and jejunum of
young mice compared with adult mice.

By immunofluorescence analysis and immunogold electron microscopy of
HeLa cells, Lawrence et al. (2010) found that the majority of NHE8
localized to the trans-Golgi network, with a smaller proportion
localized with multivesicular bodies.

GENE FUNCTION

Xu et al. (2008) found that rat Nhe8 was a functional NHE with kinetics
and an inhibitor profile that differed from other apically expressed
NHEs.

Lawrence et al. (2010) found that knockdown of NHE8 in HeLa cells, but
not knockdown of any other NHE tested, resulted in endosomal clustering,
increased proportion of dense multivesicular bodies, and elevated EGF
(131530) degradation. Overexpression of an inactive NHE8 mutant resulted
in a similar endosomal phenotype. Depletion of NHE8 had no effect on
perinuclear localization of the trans-Golgi network, rate of protein
secretion, or endosomal pH.

MAPPING

Hartz (2009) mapped the SLC9A8 gene to chromosome 20q13.13 based on an
alignment of the SLC9A8 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB023156) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Goyal, S.; Vanden Heuvel, G.; Aronson, P. S.: Renal expression
of novel Na+/H+ exchanger isoform NHE8. Am. J. Physiol. Renal Physiol. 284:
F467-F473, 2003.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  4/14/2009.

3. Lawrence, S. P.; Bright, N. A.; Luzio, J. P.; Bowers, K.: The
sodium/proton exchanger NHE8 regulates late endosomal morphology and
function. Molec. Biol. Cell 21: 3540-3551, 2010.

4. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

5. Xu, H.; Chen, H.; Dong, J.; Lynch, R.; Ghishan, F. K.: Gastrointestinal
distribution and kinetic characterization of the sodium-hydrogen exchanger
isoform 8 (NHE8). Cell Physiol. Biochem. 21: 109-116, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/19/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/14/2009

EDITED mgross: 12/19/2011
terry: 12/19/2011
mgross: 4/14/2009

161015	TITLE *161015 NADH-UBIQUINONE OXIDOREDUCTASE FLAVOPROTEIN 1; NDUFV1
;;COMPLEX I, MITOCHONDRIAL RESPIRATORY CHAIN, 51-KD SUBUNIT;;
UQOR1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The NDUFV1 gene encodes the 51-kD subunit of complex I (NADH:ubiquinone
oxidoreductase) of the mitochondrial respiratory chain.

CLONING

Spencer et al. (1992) studied the '11q13 amplicon,' a DNA unit of
approximately 2,000 to 2,500 kb formed by several genes including GST3
(GSTP1; 134660) and oncogenes INT2 (164950), HSTF1 (164980), and PRAD1
(168461). In a cosmid clone containing a full-length GSTP1 gene, Spencer
et al. (1992) identified a novel gene which, from sequence data and its
high degree of sequence identity to a bovine sequence, they identified
as the 51-kD subunit of NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase. The 51-kD
subunit forms the NADH- and FMN-binding site of complex I, the first
enzyme of the mitochondrial electron transport chain. Of note is the
fact that subunit VIII of cytochrome c oxidase (123870) maps to
approximately the same chromosomal region.

MAPPING

By PCR, Ali et al. (1993) generated human cDNA fragments corresponding
to the 51-kD protein and used them to localize the human NDUFV1 gene to
11q13 by isotopic and fluorescence in situ hybridization. The 11q13
region has been implicated in several forms of cancer.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Disturbances of mitochondrial energy metabolism occur with an estimated
incidence of 1 in 10,000 live births and are often caused by isolated
mitochondrial complex I (NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase) deficiency
(252010). In 3 of 20 patients with isolated complex I deficiency,
Schuelke et al. (1999) detected homozygous or compound heterozygous
mutations in the NDUFV1 gene (161015.0001-161015.0003).

In a series of 36 patients with mitochondrial complex I deficiency Benit
et al. (2001) identified 3 patients carrying a total of 6 mutations in
the NDUFV1 gene (see, e.g., 161015.0004 and 161015.0005).

ANIMAL MODEL

Grad and Lemire (2004) generated transgenic strains of C. elegans that
expressed disease-causing mutations (see, e.g., 161015.0001 and
161015.0003) in the nuo-1 gene, the C. elegans homolog of the NDUFV1
gene. The transgenic strains demonstrated lactic acidosis and decreased
NADH-dependent mitochondrial respiration. They were also hypersensitive
to exogenous oxidative stress, suggesting that defense mechanisms
against reactive oxygen species were already taxed by an endogenous
stress. Lactic acidosis induced by the NDUFV1 mutations could be
partially corrected by riboflavin, thiamine, or sodium dichloroacetate
(an activator of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex), resulting in
significant increases in animal fitness. Cytochrome c oxidase activity
and protein levels were reduced, establishing a connection between
complexes I and IV. Grad and Lemire (2004) concluded that complex I
mutations exert their pathogenic effects in multiple ways: by impeding
the metabolism of NADH, by increasing the production of reactive oxygen
species, and by interfering with the function or assembly of other
mitochondrial respiratory chain components.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFV1, THR423MET

In 2 brothers with complex I deficiency (252010), Schuelke et al. (1999)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the NDUFV1 gene: a
1268C-T transition inherited from the mother, resulting in a
thr423-to-met substitution, and a 175C-T transition (161015.0002)
inherited from the father, resulting in a premature stop codon in exon 3
and truncation of 91% of the mature protein. Nonsense-mediated messenger
decay was demonstrated by the low abundance (3%) of the father's allelic
transcripts in both children, as shown by restriction analysis of
radioactive PCR fragments. The phenotype was a severe encephalopathy
with death at ages 14 and 17 months, respectively. Neither cranial MRIs
nor postmortem reports were available to confirm Leigh syndrome
(256000).

.0002
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFV1, 175C-T

See 161015.0001 and Schuelke et al. (1999).

.0003
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFV1, ALA341VAL

In a girl with isolated complex I deficiency (252010), Schuelke et al.
(1999) identified a homozygous 1022C-T transition in the NDUFV1 gene,
resulting in an ala341-to-val (A341V) substitution. Schuelke et al.
(1999) stated that the phenotype of this patient resembled Alexander
disease (203450), but a brain biopsy was not available for histologic
confirmation.

.0004
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFV1, GLU214LYS

In a patient with mitochondrial complex I deficiency (252010)
characterized by neurologic abnormalities, Benit et al. (2001)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the NDUFV1 gene: a
640G-A transition in exon 5, resulting in a glu214-to-lys (E214K)
substitution, and an A-to-C transversion in the donor splice site of
intron 8 (161015.0005) and an unstable RNA.

.0005
MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFV1, IVS8DS, A-C, +4

See 161015.0004 and Benit et al. (2001).

REFERENCE 1. Ali, S. T.; Duncan, A. M. V.; Schappert, K.; Heng, H. H. Q.; Tsui,
L. C.; Chow, W.; Robinson, B. H.: Chromosomal localization of the
human gene encoding the 51-kDa subunit of mitochondrial complex I
(NDUFV1) to 11q13. Genomics 18: 435-439, 1993.

2. Benit, P.; Chretien, D.; Kadhom, N.; de Lonlay-Debeney, P.; Cormier-Daire,
V.; Cabral, A.; Peudenier, S.; Rustin, P.; Munnich, A.; Rotig, A.
: Large-scale deletion and point mutations of the nuclear NDUFV1 and
NDUFS1 genes in mitochondrial complex I deficiency. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68:
1344-1352, 2001.

3. Grad, L. I.; Lemire, B. D.: Mitochondrial complex I mutations
in Caenorhabditis elegans produce cytochrome c oxidase deficiency,
oxidative stress and vitamin-responsive lactic acidosis. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 13: 303-314, 2004.

4. Schuelke, M.; Smeitink, J.; Mariman, E.; Loeffen, J.; Plecko, B.;
Trijbels, F.; Stockler-Ipsiroglu, S.; van den Heuvel, L.: Mutant
NDUFV1 subunit of mitochondrial complex I causes leukodystrophy and
myoclonic epilepsy. (Letter) Nature Genet. 21: 260-261, 1999.

5. Spencer, S. R.; Taylor, J. B.; Cowell, I. G.; Xia, C.-L.; Pemble,
S. E.; Ketterer, B.: The human mitochondrial NADH: ubiquinone oxidoreductase
51-kDa subunit maps adjacent to the glutathione S-transferase Pi-1
gene on chromosome 11q13. Genomics 14: 1116-1118, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 2/17/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/20/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/2/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/23/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/14/1993

EDITED ckniffin: 12/14/2011
carol: 3/21/2011
wwang: 3/10/2006
terry: 2/17/2006
carol: 9/21/2005
ckniffin: 8/29/2005
terry: 2/22/2005
alopez: 5/1/2003
mgross: 6/20/2001
terry: 6/20/2001
mgross: 1/2/2001
alopez: 3/12/1999
alopez: 3/1/1999
terry: 2/23/1999
carol: 8/19/1998
mark: 11/27/1996
mark: 9/22/1996
carol: 11/30/1993
carol: 1/14/1993

609045	TITLE *609045 G PROTEIN-COUPLED RECEPTOR 141; GPR141
;;PGR13
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GPR141 is a member of the rhodopsin family of G protein-coupled
receptors (GPRs) (Fredriksson et al., 2003).

CLONING

By searching databases for sequences similar to rhodopsin-like GPRs,
Fredriksson et al. (2003) identified GPR141. The deduced 299-amino acid
protein assumes a classic 7-transmembrane (TM) topology. Instead of the
DRY motif in the intracellular side of TM3, GPR141 has a TRY motif, and
it has no classic NSxxNPxxY motif in TM7. GPR141 shares 67% amino acid
identity with mouse Gpr141. EST database analysis indicated that GPR141
is expressed in bone marrow.

GENE STRUCTURE

Fredriksson et al. (2003) determined that the mouse and human GPR141
genes contain a single coding exon.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Fredriksson et al. (2003) mapped the
GPR141 gene to chromosome 7p14.1. They mapped the mouse Gpr141 gene to
chromosome 13.

REFERENCE 1. Fredriksson, R.; Hoglund, P. J.; Gloriam, D. E. I.; Lagerstrom,
M. C.; Schioth, H. B.: Seven evolutionarily conserved human rhodopsin
G protein-coupled receptors lacking close relatives. FEBS Lett. 554:
381-388, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/23/2004

EDITED mgross: 11/23/2004

607275	TITLE *607275 HOP HOMEOBOX; HOPX
;;HOMEODOMAIN-ONLY PROTEIN; HOP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching an EST database using the PAX3 (606597) homeodomain as
probe, Chen et al. (2002) identified mouse Hop. They identified human
HOP by further EST database searching. The human and mouse proteins
contain 73 amino acids, including a 60-amino acid motif homologous to
HOX proteins, and share 92% identity. They are most closely related to
the homeodomain proteins HOX6 and goosecoid (138890), with approximately
40% identity within the homeodomain-like domain. HOP lacks certain
conserved residues required for DNA binding. In mouse, Hop gene
expression initiates early in cardiogenesis and continues in
cardiomyocytes throughout embryonic and postnatal development. Northern
blot analysis of adult and embryonic mouse tissues detected a 1.2-kb
transcript in embryonic and adult heart and in adult brain, intestine,
and spleen. Immunohistochemistry confirmed that Hop is a nuclear
protein.

Shin et al. (2002) independently cloned mouse Hop and identified the
human homolog. They determined that Hop forms 3 alpha helices with a
helix-turn-helix motif characteristic of the homeodomain. Northern blot
analysis of mouse tissues detected a 1.3-kb transcript in heart, lung,
brain, and liver. Hop was highly expressed in developing heart, where
its expression was dependent on the cardiac-restricted homeodomain
protein Nkx2.5 (CSX; 600584).

GENE FUNCTION

Genetic and biochemical data indicated to Chen et al. (2002) that mouse
Hop functions directly downstream of Nkx2.5. They showed that Hop
physically interacts with serum response factor (SRF; 600589) and
inhibits activation of SRF-dependent transcription by inhibiting SRF
binding to DNA. Chen et al. (2002) concluded that HOP is an unusual
homeodomain protein that modulates SRF-dependent, cardiac-specific gene
expression and cardiac development.

Shin et al. (2002) confirmed that mouse Hop does not bind DNA and acts
as an antagonist of SRF, which regulates the opposing processes of
proliferation and myogenesis.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Kee et al. (2007) found that HOP interacted
with EPC1 (610999). Expression of Epc1 was upregulated during
differentiation of a rat myoblast cell line into skeletal myocytes.
Differentiation was induced by Epc1 overexpression and was severely
impaired in Epc1-knockdown cells. Cotransfection of Hop potentiated
Epc1-induced transactivation of myogenin (MYOG; 159980) and myotube
formation. Skeletal muscle of Hop-knockout mice showed decreased
expression of myosin heavy chain (see 160730) and myogenin, and
hamstring muscle of Hop-knockout mice showed delayed healing after
injury. Differentiation was impaired in skeletal myoblasts from
Hop-knockout mice. Kee et al. (2007) concluded that EPC1 plays a role in
initiation of skeletal muscle differentiation and that its interaction
with HOP is required for full activity.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the HOP
gene to chromosome 4 (TMAP WI-6363).

ANIMAL MODEL

Chen et al. (2002) found that inactivation of Hop in mice by homologous
recombination resulted in a partially penetrant embryonic lethal
phenotype with severe developmental cardiac defects involving the
myocardium. Inhibition of Hop activity in zebrafish embryos likewise
disrupted cardiac development and resulted in severely impaired cardiac
function.

Shin et al. (2002) showed that mice homozygous for a Hop null allele
segregated into 2 phenotypic classes characterized by an excess or
deficiency of cardiac myocytes. They proposed that Hop modulates SRF
activity during heart development and that its absence results in an
imbalance between cardiomyocyte proliferation and differentiation, with
consequent abnormalities in cardiac morphogenesis.

Using transgenic mice in which Hop was expressed in the heart under the
control of the alpha-MHC promoter, Kook et al. (2003) showed that Hop
can inhibit SRF-dependent transcriptional activation by recruiting
histone deacetylase (HDAC; see 601241) activity and can form a complex
that includes HDAC2 (605164). Transgenic mice overexpressing Hop
developed severe cardiac hypertrophy, cardiac fibrosis, and premature
death. A mutant form of Hop, which does not recruit HDAC activity, did
not induce hypertrophy. Treatment of Hop transgenic mice with
trichostatin A, an HDAC inhibitor, prevented hypertrophy. Kook et al.
(2003) concluded that chromatin remodeling and repression of otherwise
active transcriptional processes can result in hypertrophy and heart
failure, and that this process can be blocked with chemical HDAC
inhibitors.

REFERENCE 1. Chen, F.; Kook, H.; Milewski, R.; Gitler, A. D.; Milewski, R.;
Gitler, A. D.; Lu, M. M.; Li, J.; Nazarian, R.; Schnepp, R.; Jen,
K.; Biben, C.; Runke, G.; Mackay, J. P.; Novotny, J.; Schwartz, R.
J.; Harvey, R. P.; Mullins, M. C.; Epstein, J. A.: Hop is an unusual
homeobox gene that modulates cardiac development. Cell 110: 713-723,
2002.

2. Kee, H. J.; Kim, J.-R.; Nam, K.-I.; Park, H. Y.; Shin, S.; Kim,
J. C.; Shimono, Y.; Takahashi, M.; Jeong, M. H.; Kim, N.; Kim, K.
K.; Kook, H.: Enhancer of polycomb1, a novel homeodomain only protein-binding
partner, induces skeletal muscle differentiation. J. Biol. Chem. 282:
7700-7709, 2007.

3. Kook, H.; Lepore, J. J.; Gitler, A. D.; Lu, M. M.; Yung, W. W.-M.;
Mackay, J.; Zhou, R.; Ferrari, V.; Gruber, P.; Epstein, J. A.: Cardiac
hypertrophy and histone deacetylase-dependent transcriptional repression
mediated by the atypical homeodomain protein Hop. J. Clin. Invest. 112:
863-871, 2003.

4. Shin, C. H.; Liu, Z.-P.; Passier, R.; Zhang, C.-L.; Wang, D.-Z.;
Harris, T. M.; Yamagishi, H.; Richardson, J. A.; Childs, G.; Olson,
E. N.: Modulation of cardiac growth and development by HOP, an unusual
homeodomain protein. Cell 110: 725-735, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/26/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/7/2004

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 10/3/2002

EDITED mgross: 05/05/2011
terry: 5/5/2011
carol: 8/31/2009
mgross: 7/26/2007
carol: 5/12/2004
terry: 5/7/2004
mgross: 10/3/2002

147563	TITLE *147563 INTEGRIN-BINDING SIALOPROTEIN; IBSP
;;BONE SIALOPROTEIN II;;
BONE SIALOPROTEIN; BSP;;
SIALOPROTEIN, BONE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IBSP, or bone sialoprotein (BSP),is an acidic glycoprotein of
approximately 70 kD that undergoes extensive posttranslational
modifications. It constitutes approximately 12% of the noncollagenous
proteins in human bone and is synthesized by skeletal-associated cell
types, including hypertrophic chondrocytes, osteoblasts, osteocytes, and
osteoclasts. The only extraskeletal site of its synthesis reported is
the trophoblast, which, like osteoclasts, forms syncytia. IBSP belongs
to the small integrin-binding ligand N-linked glycoprotein (SIBLING)
family of secreted phosphoproteins, which are involved in bone
mineralization (summary by Kerr et al. (1993) and Ogbureke and Fisher
(2007)).

CLONING

Using rat bone sialoprotein cDNA as probe, Fisher et al. (1990) cloned
the human ortholog from a cultured bone cell cDNA library. The deduced
317-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 35 kD.
It has a putative N-terminal signal sequence, followed by a
tyrosine-rich repeat, 3 acidic clusters, and 2 C-terminal tyrosine-rich
repeats separated by an RGD motif. It also has 4 possible
N-glycosylation sites. Northern blot analysis detected a 2-kb transcript
expressed predominantly in human, cow, and rat bone tissues and cells,
with much lower expression in human decidua and cartilage, but not in
other tissues examined.

Kim et al. (1994) cloned genomic fragments corresponding to IBSP. The
deduced 317-amino acid protein has an N-terminal signal sequence,
followed by a tyr- and phe-rich segment, a polyglutamic acid segment, a
putative N-glycosylation site, a second polyglutamic acid segment, and a
tyrosine sulfate-rich C terminus containing an RGD cell attachment
motif.

Using RT-PCR, Ogbureke and Fisher (2005) found that IBSP was expressed
in normal adult human kidney. Immunohistochemical analysis and in situ
hybridization of monkey kidney revealed variable expression of Ibsp and
its partner, Mmp3 (185250), in most nephron segments.

By immunohistochemical analysis, Ogbureke and Fisher (2007) found that
BSP colocalized with MMP3 in cells of human secretory and excretory
eccrine sweat glands, with strongest staining in perinuclear regions.
Other members of the SIBLING family also colocalized with specific
metalloproteinase partners. Neither BSP nor MMP3 were detected in
connective tissue cells and stroma of human eccrine sweat gland or in
acini and ducts of monkey lacrimal gland.

GENE FUNCTION

Tagliabracci et al. (2012) determined that the SIBLING family of
secreted phosphoproteins are phosphorylated by FAM20C (611061), the
Golgi casein kinase that phosphorylates secretory pathway proteins with
S-x-E motifs. SIBLINGs are secretory calcium-binding phosphoproteins
encoded by 5 identically oriented tandem genes clustered within an
approximately 375-kb span of nucleotides on human chromosome 4. The
genes encode osteopontin (OPN), also known as secreted phosphoprotein-1
(SPP1; 166490); dentin matrix protein-1 (DMP1; 600980); bone
sialoprotein (IBSP); matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein (MEPE;
605912); and dentin sialophosphoprotein (DSPP; 125485). The SIBLINGs are
highly phosphorylated proteins (DSPP has approximately 200
phosphoserines) and contain multiple phosphorylated S-x-E/S motifs.
Abnormal phosphorylation of the SIBLINGs accounts for the
biomineralization phenotype of Raine syndrome (259775), caused by mutant
FAM20C.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kerr et al. (1993) determined that the IBSP gene is composed of 6 small
exons (51 to 159 bp) and 1 large exon (approximately 2.6 kb).

Kim et al. (1994) isolated and partially sequenced 2 overlapping genomic
fragments that spanned the complete human BSP gene and its promoter
region. The gene, of approximately 15 kb, comprised 7 exons separated by
6 introns. The first exon is noncoding. In addition to defining the
structure of the human BSP gene, Kim et al. (1994) identified novel
transcriptional elements in the promoter that may be involved in the
developmentally regulated, tissue-specific expression of the gene.

MAPPING

Fisher et al. (1990) assigned the IBSP gene to chromosome 4 by Southern
analysis of somatic cell hybrids. Kerr et al. (1993) sublocalized the
gene to 4q28-q31 by isotopic in situ hybridization. They found several
differences from the previously published cDNA sequence for bone
sialoprotein (Fisher et al., 1990); see 166490.

Young et al. (1994) assigned the mouse homolog to chromosome 5. Goold et
al. (1993) placed the IBSP locus in a more proximal region, 4q21-q25
(Aplin et al., 1995).

REFERENCE 1. Aplin, H. M.; Hirst, K. L.; Crosby, A. H.; Dixon, M. J.: Mapping
of the human dentin matrix acidic phosphoprotein gene (DMP1) to the
dentinogenesis imperfecta type II critical region at chromosome 4q21. Genomics 30:
347-349, 1995.

2. Fisher, L. W.; McBride, O. W.; Termine, J. D.; Young, M. F.: Human
bone sialoprotein: deduced protein sequence and chromosomal localization. J.
Biol. Chem. 265: 2347-2351, 1990.

3. Goold, R. D.; diSibio, G. L.; Xu, H.; Lang, D. B.; Dadgar, J.;
Magrane, G. G.; Dugaiczyk, A.; Smith, K. A.; Cox, D. R.; Masters,
S. B.; Myers, R. M.: The development of sequence-tagged sites for
human chromosome 4. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 1271-1288, 1993.

4. Kerr, J. M.; Fisher, L. W.; Termine, J. D.; Wang, M. G.; McBride,
O. W.; Young, M. F.: The human bone sialoprotein gene (IBSP): genomic
localization and characterization. Genomics 17: 408-415, 1993.

5. Kim, R. H.; Shapiro, H. S.; Li, J. J.; Wrana, J. L.; Sodek, J.
: Characterization of the human bone sialoprotein (BSP) gene and its
promoter sequence. Matrix Biol. 14: 31-40, 1994.

6. Ogbureke, K. U. E.; Fisher, L. W.: SIBLING expression patterns
in duct epithelia reflect the degree of metabolic activity. J. Histochem.
Cytochem. 55: 403-409, 2007.

7. Ogbureke, K. U. E.; Fisher, L. W.: Renal expression of SIBLING
proteins and their partner matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Kidney
Int. 68: 155-166, 2005.

8. Tagliabracci, V. S.; Engle, J. L.; Wen, J.; Wiley, S. E.; Worby,
C. A.; Kinch, L. N.; Xiao, J.; Grishin, N. V.; Dixon, J. E.: Secreted
kinase phosphorylates extracellular proteins that regulate biomineralization. Science 336:
1150-1153, 2012.

9. Young, M. F.; Ibaraki, K.; Kerr, J. M.; Lyu, M. S.; Kozak, C. A.
: Murine bone sialoprotein (BSP): cDNA cloning, mRNA expression, and
genetic mapping. Mammalian Genome 5: 108-111, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/13/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2012

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/23/1993

EDITED tpirozzi: 06/27/2013
mgross: 9/21/2012
terry: 9/13/2012
alopez: 7/24/2012
terry: 2/7/1996
mark: 1/11/1996
carol: 9/23/1994
carol: 8/23/1993

611552	TITLE *611552 NICOTINATE PHOSPHORIBOSYLTRANSFERASE DOMAIN-CONTAINING 1; NAPRT1
;;NICOTINIC ACID PHOSPHORIBOSYLTRANSFERASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Nicotinic acid (NA; niacin) is converted by nicotinic acid
phosphoribosyltransferase (NAPRT; EC 2.4.2.11) to NA mononucleotide
(NaMN), which is then converted to NA adenine dinucleotide (NaAD), and
finally to nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), which serves as a
coenzyme in cellular redox reactions and is an essential component of a
variety of processes in cellular metabolism including response to stress
(Hara et al., 2007).

CLONING

Using a candidate sequence of human NAPRT in GenBank (GENBANK AAH06284)
and 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, Hara et al. (2007) cloned a full-length
human NAPRT cDNA. NAPRT encodes a deduced 538-amino acid protein that is
highly conserved. Transfection experiments with recombinant NAPRT in
HepG2 cells, which normally lack NAPRT activity, localized the protein
in the cytosol at the expected enzymatic activity. Northern blot
analysis of mouse tissues showed that NAPRT mRNA is expressed at highest
levels in the small intestine, liver, and kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

Hara et al. (2007) found that expression of a tagged recombinant NAPRT
demonstrated a 54-kD protein by electrophoresis. The recombinant NAPRT
catalyzed the formation of NaMN in the presence of NA, Mg(2+), and PRPP
(5-phosphoribosyl 1-pyrophosphate). When NAPRT was purified from
nondenaturing gels, the molecular mass was about 110 kD, indicating that
the enzyme may exist as a homodimer. In cells expressing endogenous
NAPRT, the addition of NA but not nicotinamide (Nam) almost doubled
cellular NAD contents and decreased cytotoxicity by hydrogen peroxide.
Both effects were reversed by siRNA knockdown of NAPRT expression. The
results indicated that NAPRT is essential for NA to increase cellular
NAD levels and, thus, to prevent oxidative stress of the cells. Kinetic
analyses revealed that NAPRT but not nicotinamide
phosphoribosyltransferase (NAMPT; 608764) is insensitive to the
physiologic concentration of NAD.

Hara et al. (2007) speculated that loss or downregulation of NAPRT and
the ensuing inability to make NAD may contribute to some of the
clinically observed effects of NA and implies that the vitamin might be
used to treat diseases associated with depletion of NAD pools.

REFERENCE 1. Hara, N.; Yamada, K.; Shibata, T.; Osago, H.; Hashimoto, T.; Tsuchiya,
M.: Elevation of cellular NAD levels by nicotinic acid and involvement
of nicotinic acid phosphoribosyltransferase in human cells. J. Biol.
Chem. 282: 24575-24582, 2007.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 10/24/2007

EDITED carol: 04/08/2008
carol: 10/25/2007

611123	TITLE *611123 EPHRIN RECEPTOR EphA10; EPHA10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ephrin receptors, the largest subfamily of receptor tyrosine kinases
(RTKs), and their ephrin ligands are important mediators of cell-cell
communication regulating cell attachment, shape, and mobility in
neuronal and epithelial cells (Aasheim et al., 2005). See 179610 for
additional background on Eph receptors and ephrins.

CLONING

By database analysis, Robinson et al. (2000) identified EPHA10. By
further database analysis and PCR of a testis cDNA library, Aasheim et
al. (2005) cloned EPHA10 and identified 3 isoforms. A 295-amino acid
soluble secreted Eph receptor (EphA10s) contains the Eph receptor
ligand-binding domain but lacks fibronectin III repeats. Full-length
EphA10 is composed of 1008 predicted amino acids, the first 283 of which
are identical to EphA10s, and its sequence predicts the canonic Eph
receptor structure containing an Eph ligand-binding domain, 2
fibronectin III repeats, an intracellular conserved kinase domain, and a
SAM domain. The third isoform, EphA10*, lacks the SAM domain. EPHA10
shares 91% amino acid identity with its mouse ortholog. Northern blot
analysis of human tissues detected expression in testis only. Binding
studies with EphA10s showed strong binding to EFNA3 (601381), EFNA4
(601380) and EFNA5 (601535), but weak binding to EFNB1 (300035) and
EFNB2 (600527).

GENE STRUCTURE

Aasheim et al. (2005) determined that the EPHA10 gene contains 17 exons.
Alternative splicing of exons 3 and 15 results in a soluble isoform
EphA10s, which contains only the first 3 exons, and an isoform lacking
the SAM domain, which they called EphA10*.

MAPPING

Aasheim et al. (2005) noted that the EPHA10 gene maps to chromosome
1p34.3.

REFERENCE 1. Aasheim, H.-C.; Patzke, S.; Hjorthaug, H. S.; Finne, E. F.: Characterization
of a novel Eph receptor tyrosine kinase, EphA10, expressed in testis. Biochem.
Biophys. Acta 1723: 1-7, 2005.

2. Robinson, D. R.; Wu, Y.-M.; Lin, S.-F.: The protein tyrosine kinase
family of the human genome. Oncogene 19: 5548-5557, 2000.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 6/20/2007

EDITED terry: 09/20/2007
wwang: 6/20/2007

605515	TITLE *605515 FORKHEAD BOX P1; FOXP1
;;GLUTAMINE-RICH FACTOR 1; QRF1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

FOXP1 is a transcriptional repressor that plays a critical role in
monocyte differentiation and macrophage function (Shi et al., 2008).

CLONING

Li and Tucker (1993) cloned a glutamine-rich factor, which they
designated QRF1, that was expressed preferentially at the terminal
differentiation stage of B cells and in skeletal muscle. The deduced
707-amino acid QRF1 protein contains an 84-amino acid segment that shows
significant sequence homology with the DNA-binding domains of the
hepatocyte nuclear factor-3/forkhead (see FOXA1; 602294) family of
proteins.

By expression cloning using blood and testis cDNA libraries to identify
the target of a monoclonal antibody (JC12), Banham et al. (2001)
obtained a full-length cDNA encoding FOXP1. The predicted 677-amino acid
protein contains coiled-coil, glutamine-rich, and serine/threonine-rich
domains in its N-terminal half; a central zinc finger domain; and
coiled-coil, serine/threonine/proline-rich, winged helix, and acidic
domains in its C-terminal half. FOXP1 also has numerous putative
phosphorylation sites, 2 nuclear localization signals (NLSs) in its
C-terminal half, and 2 PEST motif in its C-terminal acidic region.
Multiple-tissue array analysis showed ubiquitous expression of FOXP1 in
normal adult and fetal tissues, with highest expression in lymphoid and
gastrointestinal tissues. Immunohistochemistry showed that FOXP1 protein
was widely expressed, with a predominantly nuclear localization, in
normal tissues.

Wang et al. (2003) stated that there are 4 splice variants of mouse
Foxp1, designated Foxp1a through Foxp1d. They identified and cloned
Foxp1d, which encodes a Foxp1 isoform lacking the N-terminal
polyglutamine domain found in Foxp1a and Foxp1b. Northern blot analysis
and RNase protection assays showed tissue-specific expression of all 4
variants in mouse. Northern blot analysis of human tissues detected
tissue-specific expression of FOXP1 variants, with highest levels in
peripheral blood lymphocytes and in caudate nucleus of brain. Western
blot analysis detected variable expression of Foxp1a, Foxp1c, and Foxp1d
in mouse tissues, with high expression of all 3 isoforms in lung.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2003) found that mouse Foxp1a, Foxp1c, Foxp1d, and the
related Foxp2 (605317) protein bound a 7-nucleotide core sequence,
TATTT(G/A)T. These Foxp proteins repressed gene transcription via
binding to this consensus site, which was identified within the SV40 and
IL2 (147680) promoters. In some cases, the strength of Foxp1 repression
was mediated by the polyglutamine domain. Mouse Foxp1 proteins also
formed homodimers or heterodimers with subfamily members, and the
conserved C2H2 zinc finger and leucine zipper motifs mediated
dimerization.

Using genetic manipulations, Rousso et al. (2008) demonstrated that
Foxp1 established the pattern of LIM-homeodomain protein (see 601999)
expression in embryonic mice and, accordingly, organized motor axon
projections, their connectivity with peripheral targets, and the
establishment of motor pools. Hox proteins (see 142950) dictated the
pattern of Foxp1 expression in spinal cord, and both Foxp1 and Hox were
required for segment-appropriate generation of motor columns and pools
in mouse.

Shi et al. (2008) generated transgenic mice overexpressing human FOXP1
in monocyte/macrophage lineage cells. Circulating blood monocytes from
these mice had reduced expression of macrophage colony-stimulating
factor receptor (CSF1R; 164770), impaired migratory capacity, and
diminished accumulation as splenic macrophages. Macrophage functions
were globally impaired, and osteoclastogenesis and bone resorption were
attenuated. Forced overexpression of Csf1r reversed many of the
deficits, suggesting that repression of Csf1r is likely the dominant
mechanism responsible for FOXP1 effects on monocyte differentiation and
macrophage function.

- Association of FOXP1 With Cancer

By analysis of a tumor/normal tissue expression array, Banham et al.
(2001) found that expression of FOXP1 was lower in colon tumors and
higher in stomach and prostate tumors compared with matched normal
tissues. Immunohistochemical analysis showed frequent loss of
expression, increased expression, and cytoplasmic mislocalization of the
predominantly nuclear FOXP1 protein in solid tumors.

By immunohistochemical analysis of a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (BCL)
tissue microarray, Banham et al. (2005) found that untreated patients
with a high percentage of FOXP1-positive nuclei had significantly
reduced survival and earlier progression compared with FOXP1-negative
patients.

Of 275 BCLs, Haralambieva et al. (2005) found that only 5 (3
gastrointestinal, 1 thyroid, and 1 cervical lymph node) carried a
chromosomal breakpoint in the FOXP1 gene and strong nuclear FOXP1
expression. All were diffuse large BCLs rather than marginal zone BCLs.
Haralambieva et al. (2005) concluded that genetic alterations at 3p13
are associated with strong FOXP1 expression.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Banham et al. (2001) mapped the FOXP1 gene
to chromosome 3p14.1.

CYTOGENETICS

Streubel et al. (2005) noted that 3 chromosomal translocations,
t(11;18)(q21;q21), t(14;18)(q32;q21), and t(1;14)(p22;q32), are
associated with mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphomas. They
identified a t(3;14)(p14;q32) in a case of MALT lymphoma of the thyroid.
FISH studies showed that the IGH locus (147100) was rearranged, and
long-distance inverse PCR identified FOXP1 as the partner gene on
chromosome 3. Using FISH assays to screen 91 MALT lymphomas negative for
3 common translocations, Streubel et al. (2005) identified
t(3;14)(p14;q32) in 9 cases (3 thyroid, 4 ocular adnexa, and 2 skin).
Most t(3;14)(p14;q32)-positive MALT lymphomas also harbored additional
genetic abnormalities, such as trisomy 3. All 4 of the MALT-associated
translocations were mutually exclusive. Real-time RT-PCR analysis showed
upregulated expression of FOXP1 in MALT cases with t(3;14)(p14;q32) or
trisomy 3. Streubel et al. (2005) concluded that FOXP1 is a
translocation partner of IGH in a site-dependent subset of MALT
lymphomas.

Carr et al. (2010) reported a boy with severe speech delay and delayed
motor development (see 613670) who carried a de novo heterozygous 1.0-Mb
interstitial deletion of chromosome 3p14.1 that involved only the FOXP1
gene. The phenotype was confounded by a Chiari I malformation, which was
surgically corrected at age 30 months. The patient had delayed gross
motor skills and walked at 16 months. After surgery for the Chiari
malformation, he had some improvement in motor skills. The most
significant feature was speech delay with limited verbal output and
difficulty in articulating entire words and multisyllabic speech,
although he did not have a deficit in oromotor coordination. At age 4
years, he developed staring spells with motor arrest associated with
epileptiform discharges. He had mild dysmorphic facial features,
including broad forehead, hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral
fissures, ptosis, short nose, broad nasal tip, and smooth philtrum. Carr
et al. (2010) concluded that FOXP1 may play a role in the development of
verbal and motor skills.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Hamdan et al. (2010) identified 2 different de novo heterozygous
mutations in the FOXP1 gene (605515.0001 and 605515.0002, respectively)
in 2 unrelated children of French Canadian origin with moderate mental
retardation, expressive language deficits, and autistic features
(613670). The first mutation (605515.0001) was a small deletion found
using array-based comparative genomic hybridization of a cohort of 80
patients with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and 30 with intellectual
disability. The second mutation (R525X; 605515.0002) was found by direct
sequencing of the FOXP1 gene in a cohort of 110 patients with
intellectual disability, 84 with ASD, and 51 with both. Hamdan et al.
(2010) chose to examine the FOXP1 gene specifically because of the role
of the FOXP2 gene (605317) in a speech and language disorder (SPCH1;
602081); patients with intellectual disability and ASD often show
language impairment. The results indicated that disruption of FOXP1 has
a global impact on brain development.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hu et al. (2006) found that mice lacking Foxp1 died at embryonic day
14.5 due to heart valve and outflow tract abnormalities. Reconstitution
of Rag2 (179616)-deficient mice with Foxp1 -/- or Foxp1 +/- fetal liver
cells resulted in decreased mature B cells, but normal thymocytes, in
the recipients. Foxp1 -/- pro-B cells had reduced IgM, Rag1 (179615),
and Rag2 expression, and V(D)J rearrangement was also impaired in Foxp1
-/- B cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation and EMSA analyses showed that
Foxp1 bound to Foxp site-2 (Fkh2) in the Erag enhancer, which is
upstream of Rag2, in a B-lineage specific way. Hu et al. (2006)
concluded that FOXP1 influences B-cell development at an early stage,
and that FOXP1 deficiency results in a phenotype that resembles double
haploinsufficiency of E2A (TCF3; 147141) and EBF (164343).

Feng et al. (2010) generated mice with a conditional deletion of Foxp1
in double-positive thymocytes and found that peripheral Cd4 (see 186940)
and Cd8 (see 186910) cells also lacked Foxp1 and that single-positive
thymocytes acquired an activated phenotype in thymus. Peripheral cells
also exhibited an activated phenotype and increased apoptosis and
readily produced cytokines upon T-cell receptor engagement. Feng et al.
(2010) concluded that FOXP1 is an essential transcriptional regulator
for thymocyte development and the generation of quiescent naive T cells.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION WITH LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT AND AUTISTIC FEATURES
FOXP1, 390-KB DEL

In a French Canadian girl who had mental retardation with language
impairment and autistic features (613670), Hamdan et al. (2010)
identified a de novo heterozygous 390-kb intragenic deletion in the
FOXP1 gene. The deletion encompassed exons 4 to 14 of the longest FOXP1
isoform, including the translation initiation site and leucine zipper
and zinc finger domains important for transcriptional activity.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION WITH LANGUAGE IMPAIRMENT AND AUTISTIC FEATURES
FOXP1, ARG525TER

In a French Canadian boy who had mental retardation with language
impairment and autistic features (613670), Hamdan et al. (2010)
identified a de novo heterozygous 1573C-T transition in the FOXP1 gene,
resulting in an arg525-to-ter (R525X) substitution. The mutation was
predicted to abolish the last 152 residues of the protein, including
part of the forkhead DNA-binding (FHD) domain and a conserved nuclear
localization signal. The mutation was not found in 570 controls. In
vitro functional expression studies in HEK293 cells showed that the
R525X mutant impaired the transcriptional repression ability of FOXP1,
consistent with a loss of function.

REFERENCE 1. Banham, A. H.; Beasley, N.; Campo, E.; Fernandez, P. L.; Fidler,
C.; Gatter, K.; Jones, M.; Mason, D. Y.; Prime, J. E.; Trougouboff,
P.; Wood, K.; Cordell, J. L.: The FOXP1 winged helix transcription
factor is a novel candidate tumor suppressor gene on chromosome 3p. Cancer
Res. 61: 8820-8829, 2001.

2. Banham, A. H.; Connors, J. M.; Brown, P. J.; Cordell, J. L.; Ott,
G.; Sreenivasan, G.; Farinha, P.; Horsman, D. E.; Gascoyne, R. D.
: Expression of the FOXP1 transcription factor is strongly associated
with inferior survival in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Clin.
Cancer Res. 11: 1065-1072, 2005.

3. Carr, C. W.; Moreno-De-Luca, D.; Parker, C.; Zimmerman, H. H.;
Ledbetter, N.; Martin, C. L.; Dobyns, W. B.; Abdul-Rahman, O. A.:
Chiari I malformation, delayed gross motor skills, severe speech delay,
and epileptiform discharges in a child with FOXP1 haploinsufficiency. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 18: 1216-1220, 2010.

4. Feng, X.; Ippolito, G. C.; Tian, L.; Wiehagen, K.; Oh, S.; Sambandam,
A.; Willen, J.; Bunte, R. M.; Maika, S. D.; Harriss, J. V.; Caton,
A. J.; Bhandoola, A.; Tucker, P. W.; Hu, H.: Foxp1 is an essential
transcriptional regulator for the generation of quiescent naive T
cells during thymocyte development. Blood 115: 510-518, 2010.

5. Hamdan, F. F.; Daoud, H.; Rochefort, D.; Piton, A.; Gauthier, J.;
Langlois, M.; Foomani, G.; Dobrzeniecka, S.; Krebs, M.-O.; Joober,
R.; Lafreniere, R. G.; Lacaille, J.-C.; Mottron, L.; Drapeau, P.;
Beauchamp, M. H.; Phillips, M. S.; Fombonne, E.; Rouleau, G. A.; Michaud,
J. L.: De novo mutations in FOXP1 in cases with intellectual disability,
autism, and language impairment. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 87: 671-678,
2010.

6. Haralambieva, E.; Adam, P.; Ventura, R.; Katzenberger, T.; Kalla,
J.; Holler, S.; Hartmann, M.; Rosenwald, A.; Greiner, A.; Muller-Hermelink,
H. K.; Banham, A. H.; Ott, G.: Genetic rearrangement of FOXP1 is
predominantly detected in a subset of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas
with extranodal presentation. (Letter) Leukemia 20: 1300-1303, 2005.

7. Hu, H.; Wang, B.; Borde, M.; Nardone, J.; Maika, S.; Allred, L.;
Tucker, P. W.; Rao, A.: Foxp1 is an essential transcriptional regulator
of B cell development. Nature Immun. 7: 819-826, 2006.

8. Li, C.; Tucker, P. W.: DNA-binding properties and secondary structural
model of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork head domain. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 11583-11587, 1993.

9. Rousso, D. L.; Gaber, Z. B.; Wellik, D.; Morrisey, E. E.; Novitch,
B. G.: Coordinated actions of the forkhead protein Foxp1 and Hox
proteins in the columnar organization of spinal motor neurons. Neuron 59:
226-240, 2008.

10. Shi, C.; Sakuma, M.; Mooroka, T.; Liscoe, A.; Gao, H.; Croce,
K. J.; Sharma, A.; Kaplan, D.; Greaves, D. R.; Wang, Y.; Simon, D.
I.: Down-regulation of the forkhead transcription factor Foxp1 is
required for monocyte differentiation and macrophage function. Blood 112:
4699-4711, 2008.

11. Streubel, B.; Vinatzer, U.; Lamprecht, A.; Raderer, M.; Chott,
A.: T(3;14)(p14.1;q32) involving IGH and FOXP1 is a novel recurrent
chromosomal aberration in MALT lymphoma. Leukemia 19: 652-658, 2005.

12. Wang, B.; Lin, D.; Li, C.; Tucker, P.: Multiple domains define
the expression and regulatory properties of Foxp1 forkhead transcriptional
repressors. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 24259-24268, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/23/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/16/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/20/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/19/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/30/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/12/2006

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/2/2001

EDITED mgross: 01/19/2012
terry: 11/23/2011
alopez: 8/18/2011
ckniffin: 8/16/2011
wwang: 12/21/2010
ckniffin: 12/20/2010
mgross: 2/24/2010
terry: 2/19/2010
mgross: 1/30/2009
mgross: 12/21/2006
terry: 12/12/2006
carol: 1/2/2001

610925	TITLE *610925 INTERLEUKIN 17 RECEPTOR C; IL17RC
;;INTERLEUKIN 17 RECEPTOR-LIKE PROTEIN; IL17RL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

IL17RC is widely expressed in nonleukocyte tissues and forms a
heteromeric receptor for IL17 (603149) with IL17R (IL17RA; 605461)
(Haudenschild et al., 2002; Toy et al., 2006).

CLONING

By searching databases for sequences with homology to IL17R,
Haudenschild et al. (2002) identified IL17RC, which they termed IL17RL.
The predicted full-length 720-amino acid protein has an N-terminal
signal peptide, followed by an acidic extracellular domain with 9
potential N-glycosylation sites, a single-pass transmembrane domain, and
a basic cytoplasmic region with multiple phosphorylation sites. It has a
calculated molecular mass of 76.4 kD and shares 22% amino acid identity
with IL17R. By database analysis, Haudenschild et al. (2002) identified
numerous IL17RL splice variants with the potential to produce at least
12 protein isoforms, including both transmembrane receptors and soluble
decoy receptors. Northern blot analysis detected strongest expression in
prostate, kidney, liver, heart, and muscle, with barely detectable
levels in thymus and peripheral blood leukocytes. The major transcript
was 2.5 kb, and diffuse bands between 2.1 and 3.1 kb were also detected.
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis demonstrated frequent absence of exon 7,
possibly in a tissue-specific manner. Immunoblot analysis showed
multiple bands of 33 to 60 kD, suggesting the presence of numerous
IL17RL isoforms. Immunohistochemical analysis indicated expression in
skeletal muscle, prostate, kidney, and placenta. Prostate cancers showed
decreased reactivity in epithelial cells and increased reactivity in
stromal regions relative to normal prostate.

GENE FUNCTION

Using flow cytometric, ELISA, immunoprecipitation, and Western blot
analyses, Toy et al. (2006) showed that expression of both human IL17RA
and IL17RC on Il17ra-deficient mouse fibroblasts was necessary for
either human IL17 or IL17F (606496) to fully bind cells and induce
secretion of CXCL1 (155730). Immunoprecipitation analysis revealed a
physical association between IL17RA and IL17RC. Toy et al. (2006)
concluded that the functional IL17R is a heteromeric complex consisting
of at least IL17RA and IL17RC.

GENE STRUCTURE

Haudenschild et al. (2002) determined that the IL17RC gene contains 19
exons and spans 16.6 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Haudenschild et al. (2002) mapped the
IL17RC gene to chromosome 3p25.3-p24.1.

REFERENCE 1. Haudenschild, D.; Moseley, T.; Rose, L.; Reddi, A. H.: Soluble
and transmembrane isoforms of novel interleukin-17 receptor-like protein
by RNA splicing and expression in prostate cancer. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
4309-4316, 2002.

2. Toy, D.; Kugler, D.; Wolfson, M.; Vanden Bos, T.; Gurgel, J.; Derry,
J.; Tocker, J.; Peschon, J.: Interleukin 17 signals through a heteromeric
receptor complex. J. Immun. 177: 36-39, 2006.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 4/11/2007

EDITED mgross: 04/11/2007

602842	TITLE *602842 GEMININ; GMNN
;;GEM
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

McGarry and Kirschner (1998) described a 25-kD protein, designated
geminin, which inhibits DNA replication and is degraded during the
mitotic phase of the cell cycle. Geminin contains 212 amino acids; it
has a destruction box sequence (RRTLKVIQP) and is ubiquitinated by the
anaphase-promoting complex in vitro.

GENE FUNCTION

In synchronized HeLa cells, McGarry and Kirschner (1998) demonstrated
that geminin is absent during G1 phase, accumulates during S, G2, and M
phases, and disappears at the time of the metaphase-anaphase transition.
Geminin inhibits DNA replication by preventing the incorporation of
minichromosome maintenance (MCM) complex into prereplication complex.
McGarry and Kirschner (1998) proposed that geminin inhibits DNA
replication during S, G2, and M phases and that geminin destruction at
the metaphase-anaphase transition permits replication in the succeeding
cell cycle.

Wohlschlegel et al. (2000) demonstrated that geminin interacts tightly
with CDT1 (605525), a replication initiation factor necessary for MCM
loading. Inhibition of DNA replication by geminin in cell-free cDNA
replication extracts could be reversed by the addition of excess CDT1.
In the normal cell cycle, CDT1 is present only in G1 and S phases,
whereas geminin is present in S and G2 phases. Wohlschlegel et al.
(2000) concluded that their results suggest that geminin inhibits
inappropriate origin firing by targeting CDT1.

In a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Del Bene et al. (2004) identified the DNA
replication-inhibitor geminin as a partner of Six3 (603714). Geminin
inhibits cell cycle progression by sequestering Cdt1, the key component
for the assembly of the prereplication complex. Del Bene et al. (2004)
showed that Six3 efficiently competes with Cdt1 directly to bind to
geminin, which reveals how Six3 can promote cell proliferation without
transcription. In common with Six3 inactivation, overexpression of the
geminin gene in medaka induces specific forebrain and eye defects that
are rescued by Six3. Conversely, loss of Gem (in common with gain of
Six3) promotes retinal precursor-cell proliferation and results in
expanded optic vesicles, markedly potentiating Six3 gain-of-function
phenotypes. Del Bene et al. (2004) concluded that the transcription
factor Six3 and the replication-initiation inhibitor geminin act
antagonistically to control the balance between proliferation and
differentiation during early vertebrate eye development.

Luo et al. (2004) showed that murine geminin associates transiently with
members of the Hox-repressing polycomb complex, with the chromatin of
Hox regulatory DNA elements, and with Hox proteins. Gain- and
loss-of-function experiments in the chick neural tube demonstrated that
geminin modulates the anterior boundary of Hoxb9 (142964) transcription,
which suggests a polycomb-like activity for geminin. The interaction
between geminin and Hox proteins prevents Hox proteins from binding to
DNA, inhibits HOX-dependent transcriptional activation of reporter and
endogenous downstream target genes, and displaces Cdt1 (605525) from its
complex with geminin. By establishing competitive regulation, geminin
functions as a coordinator of developmental and proliferative control.

Initiation of DNA replication requires the assembly of a prereplication
complex (pre-RC) in late mitosis and G1, with sequential loading of the
origin recognition complex (see ORC1; 601902), CDC6 (602627), CDT1, and
the MCM2-7 complex (see MCM2; 116945) onto replication origins. Upon
initiation of DNA replication, the pre-RC is disassembled, and CDT1 and
CDC6 are released from the origins to prevent rereplication. Using human
cell lines, Shen et al. (2012) showed that ORCA (LRWD1; 615167) was
required for pre-RC assembly and replication initiation. Knockdown of
ORCA via small interfering RNA reduced association of ORC and MCM2-7
with chromatin and caused failure of cell cycle progression through S
phase. ORCA associated dynamically with different pre-RC components
during the cell cycle: it associated with ORC and CDT1 at G1, with
ORC(2-5) and geminin in S phase, and with ORC(2-5), phosphorylated CDT1,
and phosphorylated geminin during mitosis. ORCA interacted directly with
ORC2 (601182), CDT1, and geminin, and ORC2 was required for ORCA
stability. Overexpression of geminin reduced the affinity of CDT1 for
ORCA, and loss of association between ORCA and CDT1 appeared to be a key
step in disassembling the pre-RC at the end of G1 phase.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Lee et al. (2004) described the crystal structure of the mouse
geminin-Cdt1 (605525) complex using a truncated geminin involving
residues 79-157 and a truncated Cdt1 including residues 172-368. The
N-terminal region of a coiled-coil dimer of truncated geminin interacted
with both N-terminal and C-terminal parts of truncated Cdt1. The primary
interface relied on the steric complementarity between the truncated
geminin dimer and hydrophobic face of the 2 short N-terminal helices of
truncated Cdt1 and, in particular, pro181, ala182, tyr183, phe186, and
leu189. Lee et al. (2004) concluded that the crystal structure, in
conjunction with their biochemical data, indicated that the N-terminal
region of truncated geminin might be required to anchor truncated Cdt1,
and the C-terminal region of truncated geminin prevents access of the
MCM complex to truncated Cdt1 through steric hindrance.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the GMNN
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP WI-12631).

ANIMAL MODEL

Gonzalez et al. (2006) did not find Gmnn-null mouse embryos at any
postimplantation stages of development. Ablation of Gmnn prevented
formation of the inner cell mass and caused premature endoreduplication
at 8 cells, rather than 32 cells. All cells in Gmnn-deficient embryos
committed to the trophoblast cell lineage and consisted of trophoblast
giant cells only. Gonzalez et al. (2006) concluded that degradation of
geminin during S and gap-like phases by proteasome-mediated degradation
is part of the mechanism regulating endoreduplication.

REFERENCE 1. Del Bene, F.; Tessmar-Raible, K.; Wittbrodt, J.: Direct interaction
of geminin and Six3 in eye development. Nature 427: 745-749, 2004.

2. Gonzalez, M. A.; Tachibana, K. K.; Adams, D. J.; van der Weyden,
L.; Hemberger, M.; Coleman, N.; Bradley, A.; Laskey, R. A.: Geminin
is essential to prevent endoreduplication and to form pluripotent
cells during mammalian development. Genes Dev. 20: 1880-1884, 2006.

3. Lee, C.; Hong, B.; Choi, J. M.; Kim, Y.; Watanabe, S.; Ishimi,
Y.; Enomoto, T.; Tada, S.; Kim, Y.; Cho, Y.: Structural basis for
inhibition of the replication licensing factor Cdt1 by geminin. Nature 430:
913-917, 2004.

4. Luo, L.; Yang, X.; Takihara, Y.; Knoetgen, H.; Kessel, M.: The
cell-cycle regulator geminin inhibits Hox function through direct
and polycomb-mediated interactions. Nature 427: 749-753, 2004.

5. McGarry, T. J.; Kirschner, M. W.: Geminin, an inhibitor of DNA
replication, is degraded during mitosis. Cell 93: 1043-1053, 1998.

6. Shen, Z.; Chakraborty, A.; Jain, A.; Giri, S.; Ha, T.; Prasanth,
K. V.; Prasanth, S. G.: Dynamic association of ORCA with prereplicative
complex components regulates DNA replication initiation. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 32: 3107-3120, 2012.

7. Wohlschlegel, J. A.; Dwyer, B. T.; Dhar, S. K.; Cvetic, C.; Walter,
J. C.; Dutta, A.: Inhibition of eukaryotic DNA replication by geminin
binding to Cdt1. Science 290: 2309-2312, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 04/08/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/15/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/31/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/22/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/10/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/4/2001

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 7/13/1998

EDITED mgross: 04/08/2013
wwang: 9/18/2006
terry: 9/15/2006
alopez: 9/2/2004
terry: 8/31/2004
alopez: 3/23/2004
terry: 3/22/2004
alopez: 3/12/2004
alopez: 3/11/2004
terry: 3/10/2004
mgross: 1/4/2001
terry: 1/4/2001
dholmes: 7/14/1998

601911	TITLE *601911 DISTAL-LESS HOMEOBOX 4; DLX4
DISTAL-LESS HOMEOBOX 7; DLX7, INCLUDED;;
BETA PROTEIN 1, INCLUDED; BP1, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using degenerate PCR, Nakamura et al. (1996) cloned the DLX4 gene, which
they called DLX7, from human and mouse. They isolated a human DLX7 cDNA
predicting a 167-amino acid protein. The homeodomains of human and mouse
DLX7 are highly similar to those of all other vertebrate DLX genes, but
there is divergence upstream of the homeodomain between human and mouse
DLX7 and between DLX7 and other DLX genes. Nakamura et al. (1996)
presented evidence that the mouse Dlx7 gene is alternatively spliced
upstream of the homeodomain and suggested that this may explain some of
the divergence. By Northern blot analysis, Nakamura et al. (1996) found
that DLX7 was expressed as a 2.3-kb transcript in several human cell
lines.

Quinn et al. (1997) undertook a DNA binding site screen of a 32-week
human placenta cDNA library using a consensus homeodomain binding site
as a probe. They claimed that this study represented the first library
screen carried out to isolate homeobox genes from the human placenta.
Quinn et al. (1997) found that 3 homeobox genes known to be expressed in
embryo, HB24 (142995), GAX (600535), and MSX2 (123101), are also
expressed in the placenta. They also identified the DLX4 gene, which
shows 85% sequence identity with the homeodomain encoded by the
Drosophila 'distal-less' gene.

BP1 represses beta-globin (141900) expression by binding to 2 silencer
regions upstream of the beta-globin gene. By screening an
erythroleukemia cell line cDNA expression library with an
oligonucleotide probe containing beta-globin silencer II sequence,
followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, Chase et al. (2002) cloned
full-length BP1. The deduced 240-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 26 kD and contains the 3 predicted alpha helices found
in homeodomains. Chase et al. (2002) determined that BP1, DLX4 (Quinn et
al., 1997), and DLX7 (Nakamura et al., 1996) are splice variants of the
DLX4 gene. All 3 isoforms are identical within the homeodomain, but the
region upstream of the homeodomain is significantly divergent. Chase et
al. (2002) noted that the mouse Dlx7 cDNA cloned by Nakamura et al.
(1996) shares 88% DNA homology with BP1 and only 46% identity with DLX7,
suggesting that it corresponds to BP1. Northern blot analysis detected a
2.1-kb BP1 transcript in the erythroleukemia cell line. RNA dot blot
analysis of 50 human tissues detected BP1 expression only in placenta
and kidney. RT-PCR detected BP1 in two 20-week human fetal liver
samples. Western blot analysis detected BP1 in erythroleukemia cells at
an apparent molecular mass of about 32 kD, indicating that the protein
may undergo posttranslational modification.

GENE FUNCTION

By electrophoretic mobility shift assay, Chase et al. (2002) confirmed
that BP1 bound silencer I and silencer II of the beta-globin gene. It
also bound Indian haplotype beta-globin sequences with high affinity.
Analysis of the effect of transient BP1 transfection on reporter gene
activity indicated that BP1 has repressor function toward the
beta-globin promoter, acting through the 2 silencer elements.
Furthermore, induction of erythroid differentiation in an erythroid
progenitor cell line by erythropoietin (133170) was associated with
increased expression of beta-globin and decreased expression of BP1.

MAPPING

By FISH, Nakamura et al. (1996) mapped the DLX4 gene to chromosome
17q21.3-q22. They stated that the human DLX4 and DLX3 (600525) genes are
10 kb apart and are arranged in a tail-to-tail tandem orientation,
similarly to that found in mouse. Using dual-color FISH, Nakamura et al.
(1996) determined that human DLX4 and HOX9B (142964) lie within 2 Mb of
one another.

Using FISH, Quinn et al. (1997) assigned the DLX4 gene to chromosome
17q21-q22, within the same region as DLX3 and the HOXB homeobox gene
cluster. DLX1 (600029) and DLX2 (126255) are closely linked on
chromosome 2, and DLX5 (600028) and DLX6 (600030) are closely linked on
chromosome 7. Thus, Quinn et al. (1997) predicted that DLX3 and DLX4 are
closely linked and that they arose through gene duplication and
divergence from a common ancestral precursor.

Using FISH, Morasso et al. (1997) localized the DLX4 gene, which they
designated DLX8, to 17q21.3-q22.

REFERENCE 1. Chase, M. B.; Fu, S.; Haga, S. B.; Davenport, G.; Stevenson, H.;
Do, K.; Morgan, D.; Mah, A. L.; Berg, P. E.: BP1, a homeodomain-containing
isoform of DLX4, represses the beta-globin gene. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22:
2505-2514, 2002.

2. Morasso, M. I.; Yonescu, R.; Griffin, C. A.; Sargent, T. D.: Localization
of human DLX8 to chromosome 17q21.3-q22 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Mammalian
Genome 8: 302-303, 1997.

3. Nakamura, S.; Stock, D. W.; Wydner, K. L.; Bollekens, J. A.; Takeshita,
K.; Nagai, B. M.; Chiba, S.; Kitamura, T.; Freeland, T. M.; Zhao,
Z.; Minowada, J.; Lawrence, J. B.; Weiss, K. M.; Ruddle, F. H.: Genomic
analysis of a new mammalian distal-less gene: Dlx7. Genomics 38:
314-324, 1996.

4. Quinn, L. M.; Johnson, B. V.; Nicholl, J.; Sutherland, G. R.; Kalionis,
B.: Isolation and identification of homeobox genes from the human
placenta including a novel member of the Distal-less family, DLX4. Gene 187:
55-61, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 03/04/2005
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 10/22/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/6/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/27/1997

EDITED mgross: 03/04/2005
terry: 3/18/2004
alopez: 1/12/1998
alopez: 1/6/1998
mark: 10/6/1997
mark: 8/22/1997
mark: 6/27/1997

177070	TITLE *177070 PROTEIN 4.2, ERYTHROCYTIC; EPB42
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Korsgren et al. (1990) cloned and sequenced protein band 4.2 from a
human reticulocyte cDNA library. The deduced 691-amino acid band 4.2
protein has homology with 2 closely related calcium-dependent
crosslinking proteins, guinea pig liver transglutaminase and the alpha
subunit of human coagulation factor XIII (F13A1; 134570). Within the 5
contiguous consensus residues of the transglutaminase active site, band
4.2 has an amino acid substitution which leads to loss of
transglutaminase activity. Sung et al. (1990) also cloned protein 4.2
and likewise found homology to the 2 transglutaminases, as well as the
lack of the critical residue required for enzymatic crosslinking of
substrates.

Korsgren and Cohen (1991) showed that reticulocytes contain 2 different
sized EPB42 messages; the major, smaller, message is produced by
alternative splicing. They found that the human and murine proteins
share 72% sequence identity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Korsgren and Cohen (1991) showed that the band 4.2 gene is about 20 kb
long and contains 13 exons. Alignment of the band 4.2 amino acid
sequence with that of F13A2 and division of the sequences into exons
showed a remarkable correspondence, and in most cases identity, in the
sizes of the paired exons.

Korsgren and Cohen (1994) found that the organization and size of the
human and mouse EPB42 genes are identical.

MAPPING

Sung et al. (1991) mapped the EPB42 gene to 15q15-q21 by fluorescence in
situ hybridization. Najfeld et al. (1992) assigned the gene to 15q15 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. White et al. (1992) mapped the Epb42
gene to mouse chromosome 2, which shares an extensive segment of
syntenic homology with human chromosome 15.

By long-range genomic PCR, Grenard et al. (2001) mapped the EPB42 gene
to a 100-kb region of 15q15.2, arranged in tandem with 2 other
transglutaminase genes, TGM5 (603805) and TGM7 (606776). By radiation
hybrid analysis, Grenard et al. (2001) mapped the mouse Epb42, Tgm5, and
Tgm7 genes in close proximity on chromosome 2.

GENE FUNCTION

In the red cell membrane skeleton, protein 4.2 may regulate the
association of protein 3 (109270) with ankyrin (612641) (Davies and Lux,
1989).

Azim et al. (1996) demonstrated that both protein 4.2 and dematin
(125305) are ATP-binding proteins.

Bruce et al. (2002) observed that protein 4.2 and CD47 interact in the
human red cell membrane, which provided further evidence for an
association between the band 3 complex (which includes protein 4.2) and
the Rh complex, and defined a point of attachment between the Rh complex
and the red cell cytoskeleton.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 4 unrelated Japanese patients with autosomal recessive hereditary
spherocytosis (612690), Bouhassira et al. (1991, 1992) identified
homozygosity for a mutation in the EPB42 gene (177070.0001).

In a Portuguese woman with recessively transmitted hemolytic anemia,
Hayette et al. (1995) identified a mutation in the EPB42 gene
(177070.0002).

In Tunisian sibs with autosomal recessive hemolytic anemia reported by
Ghanem et al. (1990), Hayette et al. (1995) identified homozygosity for
a mutation in the EPB42 gene (177070.0003).

ANIMAL MODEL

The mouse 'pallid' mutation (see 604310) produces defects in at least 3
subcellular organelles: platelet-dense granules, melanosomes, and kidney
lysosomes. White et al. (1992) noted that the mouse Epb42 gene mapped to
the same region as the pallid mutation in the mouse. Prompted to examine
the Epb42 gene in the pallid mouse, they found changes on Southern blot
analysis suggesting a mutation; Northern blot analysis demonstrated
smaller than normal Epb42 transcripts in affected pallid tissues, such
as kidney and skin. However, Gwynn et al. (1997) and White et al. (1997)
excluded Epb42 as a candidate for the mouse pallid mutation. On Northern
blot analysis of normal and pallid mouse kidney, Gwynn et al. (1997)
observed that the truncated Epb42 protein comigrated with normal Epb42
protein. As the pallid mutation originally arose in a wild M. domesticus
mouse, they concluded that the Epb42 protein characteristic of pallid is
a normal polymorphism and that Epb42 and pallid are distinct loci.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPHEROCYTOSIS, TYPE 5, DUE TO PROTEIN 4.2-NIPPON
EPB42, ALA142THR

In 4 unrelated Japanese patients with spherocytosis (612690), Bouhassira
et al. (1991, 1992) identified homozygosity for a G-to-A transition in
the EPB42 gene, resulting in an ala142-to-thr (A142T) substitution. The
abnormality in protein 4.2 results in abnormally shaped and osmotically
fragile RBCs. The mutation occurred in an alternatively spliced exon
that is present in 2 of 4 EPB42 mRNA splicing isoforms. Thus this is a
recessive form of spherocytosis causing hereditary hemolytic anemia.

Iwamoto et al. (1993) identified the same mutation in a 27-year-old
Japanese female with acute hemolytic crisis and in her sister.

Perrotta et al. (1999) described the 4.2-Nippon mutation in a
30-year-old female born in a small mountain village in central Italy.
There was no Japanese ancestry. Splenomegaly and moderate hemolytic
anemia were present from birth.

.0002
SPHEROCYTOSIS, TYPE 5, DUE TO PROTEIN 4.2-LISBOA
EPB42, 1-BP DEL, 264G

Hayette et al. (1995) identified a defect in the EPB42 gene in a
26-year-old Portuguese woman with recessively transmitted hereditary
hemolytic anemia (612690). Protein 4.2 was absent from red cell ghosts
by Western blotting. Nucleotide sequencing disclosed deletion of a
single nucleotide at position 264 (or 265): AAG GTG was changed to AAG
TG in codon 88 (or 89) in exon 2. This change, defining allele 4.2
Lisboa, placed in frame the nonsense TGA triplet that normally overlaps
codons 136 and 137 (GTG ACC). In effect, codon 89 was changed from GTG
(val) to TGA (stop). The mutation was present in homozygous state in the
proband and in heterozygous state in the parents and a brother. Apart
from anemia, the patient was free of clinical manifestations. Hayette et
al. (1995) noted that in this case there were only a few spherocytes and
only a limited decrease in the osmotic resistance.

.0003
SPHEROCYTOSIS, TYPE 5, DUE TO PROTEIN 4.2-TOZEUR
EPB42, ARG310GLN

Using high-sensitivity Western blot analysis, Hayette et al. (1995)
found that the Tunisian sibs with autosomal recessive hemolytic anemia
(612690) originally reported by Ghanem et al. (1990) had trace amounts
of the EPB42 protein. They found that the sibs were homozygous for a
G-to-A transition in exon 7 of the EPB42 gene, resulting in an
arg310-to-gln (R310Q) substitution. The parents were heterozygous for
the mutation, which was absent in 48 control chromosomes of Tunisian
individuals.

.0004
SPHEROCYTOSIS, TYPE 5, DUE TO PROTEIN 4.2-NOTAME
EPB42, IVS6DS, G-A, +1

Protein 4.2 (Notame) was found in a 56-year-old Japanese man being
investigated for chronic hyperbilirubinemia (Matsuda et al., 1995). He
had mild splenomegaly and mild anemia with reticulocytosis as well as
microspherocytosis (612690). Erythrocyte osmotic fragility was
remarkably increased. SDS-PAGE showed complete deficiency of protein
4.2. Direct sequencing and dot-blot hybridization with allele-specific
oligonucleotide probes indicated that the man was a compound
heterozygote for the A142T mutation (177070.0001) and a single
nucleotide substitution (G to A) in the first nucleotide of intron 6 of
the EPB42 gene. RT-PCR analysis using total RNA isolated from
reticulocytes of the proband showed that the intron 6 donor site
mutation caused exon 6 to be spliced out with intron 6. The abnormal
mRNA had a premature termination codon as a result of a frameshift,
which precipitated instability of the protein that led to its
degradation.

.0005
SPHEROCYTOSIS, TYPE 5, DUE TO PROTEIN 4.2-HAMMERSMITH
EPB42, 41-BP DEL, NT1709

Bruce et al. (2002) presented data on a patient of Pakistani origin with
recessive spherocytosis due to absence of protein 4.2 (612690). EPB42
cDNA sequence analysis showed the presence of a 41-bp frameshift
deletion in the 5-prime end of exon 11 of the EPB42 gene that produced a
truncated peptide designated protein 4.2 Hammersmith. Quantitative
RT-PCR indicated that the mutant mRNA was unstable. Sequencing of
genomic DNA showed that the deletion stemmed from aberrant splicing. The
proband was homozygous for a G-to-T substitution at position 1747 that
activated a cryptic acceptor splice site within exon 11 of the EPB42
gene. The proband's mother was heterozygous for this substitution.
Unlike protein 4.2-null mice, the proband's red cells showed no evidence
of abnormal cation permeability. Quantitation of red cell membrane
proteins showed that CD47 (601028) was markedly reduced to about 1% (in
the proband) and 65% (in the mother) of that found in healthy controls.

REFERENCE 1. Azim, A. C.; Marfatia, S. M.; Korsgren, C.; Dotimas, E.; Cohen,
C. M.; Chishti, A. H.: Human erythrocyte dematin and protein 4.2
(pallidin) are ATP binding proteins. Biochemistry 35: 3001-3006,
1996.

2. Bouhassira, E. E.; Schwartz, R. S.; Yawata, Y.; Ata, K.; Kanzaki,
A.; Qui, J. J.-H.; Nagel, R. L.; Rybicki, A. C.: An alanine-to-threonine
substitution in protein 4.2 cDNA is associated with a Japanese form
of hereditary hemolytic anemia (protein 4.2-Nippon). Blood 79: 1846-1854,
1992.

3. Bouhassira, E. E.; Schwartz, R. S.; Yawata, Y.; Ata, K.; Nagel,
R. L.; Rybicki, A. C.: An alanine to threonine substitution in protein
4.2 cDNA is associated with a Japanese form of hereditary hemolytic
anemia. (Abstract) Clin. Res. 39: 313A, 1991.

4. Bruce, L. J.; Ghosh, S.; King, M. J.; Layton, D. M.; Mawby, W.
J.; Stewart, G. W.; Oldenborg, P.-A.; Delaunay, J.; Tanner, M. J.
A.: Absence of CD47 in protein 4.2-deficient hereditary spherocytosis
in man: an interaction between the Rh complex and the band 3 complex. Blood 100:
1878-1885, 2002.

5. Davies, K. A.; Lux, S. E.: Hereditary disorders of the red cell
membrane skeleton. Trends Genet. 5: 222-227, 1989.

6. Ghanem, A.; Pothier, B.; Marechal, J.; Ducluzeau, M. T.; Morle,
L.; Alloisio, N.; Feo, C.; Ben Abdeladhim, A.; Fattoum, S.; Delaunay,
J.: A haemolytic syndrome associated with the complete absence of
red cell membrane protein 4.2 in two Tunisian siblings. Brit. J.
Haemat. 75: 414-420, 1990.

7. Grenard, P.; Bates, M. K.; Aeschlimann, D.: Evolution of transglutaminase
genes: identification of a transglutaminase gene cluster on human
chromosome 15q15: structure of the gene encoding transglutaminase
X and a novel gene family member, transglutaminase Z. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
33066-33078, 2001.

8. Gwynn, B.; Korsgren, C.; Cohen, C. M.; Ciciotte, S. L.; Peters,
L. L.: The gene encoding protein 4.2 is distinct from the mouse platelet
storage pool deficiency mutation pallid. Genomics 42: 532-535, 1997.

9. Hayette, S.; Dhermy, D.; dos Santos, M.-E.; Bozon, M.; Drenckhahn,
D.; Alloisio, N.; Texier, P.; Delaunay, J.; Morle, L.: A deletional
frameshift mutation in protein 4.2 gene (allele 4.2 Lisboa) associated
with hereditary hemolytic anemia. Blood 85: 250-256, 1995.

10. Hayette, S.; Morle, L.; Bozon, M.; Ghanem, A.; Risinger, M.; Korsgren,
C.; Tanner, M. J. A.; Fattoum, S.; Cohen, C. M.; Delaunay, J.: A
point mutation in the protein 4.2 gene (allele 4.2 Tozeur) associated
with hereditary haemolytic anaemia. Brit. J. Haemat. 89: 762-770,
1995.

11. Iwamoto, S.; Kajii, E.; Omi, T.; Kamesaki, T.; Akifuji, Y.; Ikemoto,
S.: Point mutation in the band 4.2 gene associated with autosomal
recessively inherited erythrocyte band 4.2 deficiency. Europ. J.
Haemat. 50: 286-291, 1993.

12. Korsgren, C.; Cohen, C. M.: Organization of the gene for human
erythrocyte membrane protein 4.2: structural similarities with the
gene for the A subunit of factor XIII. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88:
4840-4844, 1991.

13. Korsgren, C.; Cohen, C. M.: cDNA sequence, gene sequence, and
properties of murine pallidin (band 4.2), the protein implicated in
the murine pallid mutation. Genomics 21: 478-485, 1994.

14. Korsgren, C.; Lawler, J.; Lambert, S.; Speicher, D.; Cohen, C.
M.: Complete amino acid sequence and homologies of human erythrocyte
membrane protein band 4.2. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 613-617, 1990.

15. Matsuda, M.; Hatano, N.; Ideguchi, H.; Takahira, H.; Fukumaki,
Y.: A novel mutation causing an aberrant splicing in the protein
4.2 gene associated with hereditary spherocytosis (protein 4.2-Notame). Hum.
Molec. Genet. 4: 1187-1191, 1995.

16. Najfeld, V.; Ballard, S. G.; Menninger, J.; Ward, D. C.; Bouhassira,
E. E.; Schwartz, R. S.; Nagel, R. L.; Rybicki, A. C.: The gene for
human erythrocyte protein 4.2 maps to chromosome 15q15. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 50: 71-75, 1992.

17. Perrotta, S.; Iolascon, A.; Polito, R.; d'Urzo, G.; Conte, M.
L.; Miraglia del Giudice, E.: 4.2 Nippon mutation in a non-Japanese
patient with hereditary spherocytosis. (Letter) Haematologica 84:
660-662, 1999.

18. Sung, L. A.; Chien, S.; Chang, L.-S.; Lambert, K.; Bliss, S. A.;
Bouhassira, E. E.; Nagel, R. L.; Schwartz, R. S.; Rybicki, A. C.:
Molecular cloning of human protein 4.2: a major component of the erythrocyte
membrane. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 955-959, 1990.

19. Sung, L. A.; Fan, Y. S.; Lambert, K.; Chien, S.; Lin, C.: Mapping
of gene for human erythrocyte protein 4.2 to chromosomal region 15q15-q21.
(Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58: 1996, 1991.

20. White, R. A.; Dowler, L. L.; Hummel, G. S.; Adkison, L. R.: Exclusion
of Epb4.2 as a candidate for the mouse mutant pallid. Mouse Genome 95:
492-494, 1997.

21. White, R. A.; Peters, L. L.; Adkison, L. R.; Korsgren, C.; Cohen,
C. M.; Lux, S. E.: The murine pallid mutation is a platelet storage
pool disease associated with the protein 4.2 (pallidin) gene. Nature
Genet. 2: 80-83, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 3/24/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/16/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/25/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/26/2001
Anne M. Lopez - updated: 11/23/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/27/1989

EDITED carol: 03/25/2009
terry: 3/24/2009
carol: 3/24/2009
carol: 2/26/2009
carol: 9/9/2003
tkritzer: 11/1/2002
tkritzer: 10/22/2002
terry: 10/16/2002
carol: 3/25/2002
mcapotos: 3/6/2001
terry: 2/26/2001
carol: 11/23/1999
alopez: 11/23/1999
terry: 8/24/1998
mark: 9/1/1997
terry: 7/7/1997
carol: 10/4/1996
mark: 4/26/1996
terry: 4/24/1996
mark: 7/19/1995
mimadm: 2/25/1995
carol: 2/17/1995
jason: 7/1/1994
carol: 9/22/1993
carol: 3/2/1993

603769	TITLE *603769 T-CELL LYMPHOMA/LEUKEMIA 1B; TCL1B
;;TML1
DESCRIPTION The TCL1A oncogene (186960) on 14q32.1 is involved in the development of
T-cell leukemia. Its expression in these leukemias is activated by
chromosomal translocations and inversions at 14q32.1. By searching an
EST database for sequences homologous to TCL1A and MTCP1 (300116), a
member of the TCL1 gene family that is located on Xq28 and is activated
in rare cases of mature T-cell leukemia with a t(X;14) translocation,
Pekarsky et al. (1999) isolated TCL1B, a novel member of the TCL1 gene
family. The approximately 1.2-kb TCL1B cDNA encodes a 14-kD protein that
contains 128 amino acids and shows 60% sequence similarity to the TCL1A
protein. By PCR analysis of a radiation hybrid panel, they mapped the
TCL1B gene to chromosome 14q32.1. Pulse-field analysis of a positive BAC
clone revealed that the TCL1B gene is located approximately 16 kb
centromeric of the TCL1A gene. Expression profiles of the 2 genes are
very similar: both genes are expressed at very low levels in normal bone
marrow and peripheral lymphocytes but are activated in T-cell leukemia
by rearrangement of the 14q32.1 region. Thus, translocations and
inversions at 14q32.1 in T-cell malignancies involve 2 oncogenes.

Hallas et al. (1999) presented cloning, mapping, and expression analysis
of the human and murine TCL1/Tcl1 locus. In addition to TCL1A and TCL1B,
the human locus contains 2 additional genes, TNG1 (TCL1-neighboring
gene-1 and TNG2; 604412), encoding proteins of 141 and 110 amino acids,
respectively. Both genes showed no homology to any known genes, but
their expression profiles were very similar to those of TCL1A and TCL1B.
TNG1 and TNG2 also were activated in T cell leukemias with
rearrangements at 14q32.1. To aid in the development of the mouse model,
Hallas et al. (1999) characterized the murine Tcl1a locus and found 5
genes homologous to human TCL1B. The 5 Tcl1b proteins ranged in size
from 117 to 123 amino acids and were 65 to 80% similar, but they showed
only a 30 to 40% similarity to human TCL1B. All murine Tcl1b and Tcl1a
mRNAs were abundant in mouse oocytes and 2-cell embryos but rare in
various adult tissues and lymphoid cell lines. These data suggested a
similar or complementary function of these proteins in early
embryogenesis.

REFERENCE 1. Hallas, C.; Pekarsky, Y.; Itoyama, T.; Varnum, J.; Bichi, R.; Rothstein,
J. L.; Croce, C. M.: Genomic analysis of human and mouse TCL1 loci
reveals a complex of tightly clustered genes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96:
14418-14423, 1999.

2. Pekarsky, Y.; Hallas, C.; Isobe, M.; Russo, G.; Croce, C. M.:
Abnormalities at 14q32.1 in T cell malignancies involve two oncogenes. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 2949-2951, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/3/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/23/1999

EDITED terry: 09/07/2010
alopez: 1/10/2000
terry: 1/3/2000
mgross: 5/5/1999

610631	TITLE *610631 PROTEIN TYROSINE PHOSPHATASE, NONRECEPTOR-TYPE, 20B; PTPN20B
;;PTPN20, TELOMERIC COPY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PTPN20B is a nearly identical copy of the PTPN20A gene (610630).

MAPPING

Hartz (2006) determined that the PTPN20B gene is telomeric to the
PTPN20A gene on chromosome 10q11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  12/7/2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/7/2006

EDITED mgross: 12/07/2006

604964	TITLE *604964 SHP2-INTERACTING TRANSMEMBRANE ADAPTOR PROTEIN 1; SIT1
DESCRIPTION T-cell activation requires stimulation of the T-cell receptor (TCR; see
186880)-CD3 (see CD3Z; 186780) complex, followed by recruitment of an
array of intracellular signaling proteins (e.g., GRB2 (108355) and PLCG1
(172420)). Mediating the interaction between the extracellular receptors
and intracellular signaling pathways are adaptor proteins such as LAT
(602354) and TRIM (604962).

CLONING

By tryptic peptide sequence analysis of a 30/40-kD disulfide-linked
homodimeric glycoprotein that had been copurified with TRIM, followed by
searching an EST database, Marie-Cardine et al. (1999) identified a cDNA
encoding a deduced 196-amino acid protein that they designated SIT.
Sequence analysis predicted that SIT has a putative 22-amino acid
hydrophobic leader peptide, an 18-amino acid extracellular domain
containing a potential N-glycosylation site and a cys residue that may
be involved in an interchain disulfide bond, a 20-amino acid
transmembrane domain, and a 136-amino acid intracellular portion
containing several potential phosphorylation sites. SIT also contains 6
tyrosine residues, 5 of which may be involved in Src (190090) homology-2
(SH2) domain-mediated protein-protein interactions after
phosphorylation. The cytoplasmic portion of SIT possesses a potential
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibitory motif, or ITIM, suggesting the
potential for interactions with SHP1 (PTPN6; 176883) or SHP2 (PTPN11;
176876). Western blot analysis demonstrated that SIT is expressed as an
approximately 40-kD protein that is reduced to approximately 20 kD by
endoglycosidase treatment. Northern blot analysis detected strong
expression of an approximately 1.6-kb SIT transcript in thymus, with
lower expression detected in spleen and lymph nodes. Weak expression was
detected in peripheral blood leukocytes, bone marrow, and T cell lines,
but no expression was detected in monocytic cell lines.
Immunofluorescence microscopy and immunoprecipitation analysis localized
overexpressed SIT in cell membranes. Western blot analysis showed that
SIT is a substrate for the Src protein kinases FYN (137025) and LCK
(153390), as well as for ZAP70 (176947). Overexpressed SIT was shown to
act as a negative regulator for transcriptional activity of the nuclear
factor of activated T cells (NFAT; see 600489) via a mechanism upstream
of phospholipase C (see PLCG1; 172420), and SIT recruits SHP2 but not
SHP1 to the cell membrane via the ITIM.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hubener et al. (2001) determined that the SIT gene contains 5 exons and
spans 1.8 kb of genomic DNA. The SIT promoter demonstrated strong
transcriptional activity and potential binding sites for both ubiquitous
and lymphoid-specific transcription factors.

MAPPING

By FISH, Hubener et al. (2001) mapped the SIT1 gene to chromosome
9p13-p12.

REFERENCE 1. Hubener, C.; Mincheva, A.; Lichter, P.; Schraven, B.; Bruyns, E.
: Complete sequence, genomic organization, and chromosomal localization
of the human gene encoding the SHP2-interacting transmembrane adaptor
protein (SIT). Immunogenetics 53: 337-341, 2001.

2. Marie-Cardine, A.; Kirchgessner, H.; Bruyns, E.; Shevchenko, A.;
Mann, M.; Autschbach, F.; Ratnofsky, S.; Meuer, S.; Schraven, B.:
SHP2-interacting transmembrane adaptor protein (SIT), a novel disulfide-linked
dimer regulating human T cell activation. J. Exp. Med. 189: 1181-1194,
1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/13/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/15/2000

EDITED alopez: 12/20/2005
carol: 1/3/2002
mcapotos: 12/17/2001
terry: 12/13/2001
mgross: 5/15/2000

601947	TITLE *601947 SRY-BOX 12; SOX12
;;SRY-BOX 22; SOX22
DESCRIPTION DNA-binding proteins are typically involved in the developmental control
of gene expression. High mobility group (HMG) proteins contain a
DNA-binding motif called the HMG domain. They have been proposed to act
either as target-specific transcription factors or as chromatin
structure regulatory elements, or both. Jay et al. (1997) stated that
more than 100 HMG-box containing proteins have been reported and
classified into 2 distinct subgroups according to the sequence
specificity of the DNA binding, the number of HMG DNA-binding domains,
and phylogenetic considerations. The first subgroup comprises proteins
that are all potential transcription factors believed to control gene
expression during development. They contain only 1 DNA-binding domain
and they bind to DNA in a sequence-specific fashion. The second subgroup
consists of all other HMG box-containing proteins, most of which contain
more than 1 DNA-binding domain and can bind to DNA in a
non-sequence-specific manner. The testis-determining gene located on the
Y chromosome (SRY; 480000) belongs to the first subgroup. Its cloning
led to the discovery of a family of both autosomal and X-linked genes
called SOX (for 'SRY-box related) because of the strong homology of
their DNA-binding domain with the HMG box of SRY. Jay et al. (1997)
cloned SOX22, a new human member of the SOX family that had not yet been
identified in any other mammalian species. The predicted 315-amino acid
protein contains several domains that are also present in other
paralogous SOX proteins. They mapped the SOX22 gene to 20p13 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. It did not appear to be clustered
with any other SOX gene that had been mapped up to that time. SOX22 mRNA
was expressed in various fetal and adult organs and tissues, suggesting
that this gene plays roles in both differentiation and maintenance of
several cell types.

REFERENCE 1. Jay, P.; Sahly, I.; Goze, C.; Taviaux, S.; Poulat, F.; Couly, G.;
Abitbol, M.; Berta, P.: SOX22 is a new member of the SOX gene family,
mainly expressed in human nervous tissue. Hum. Molec. Genet. 6:
1069-1077, 1997.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/19/1997

EDITED carol: 09/09/2002
dkim: 12/4/1998
mark: 8/19/1997

605791	TITLE *605791 TESTIS-EXPRESSED GENE 12; TEX12
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In a systematic search for genes expressed in mouse spermatogonia but
not in somatic tissues, Wang et al. (2001) identified 25 genes, 19 of
which were novel, that are expressed in only male germ cells. One of
these genes, Tex12, maps to chromosome 9 and encodes a deduced 123-amino
acid protein with a coiled-coil domain. Tex12 shows testis-specific
expression. Wang et al. (2001) identified an orthologous, full-length
human TEX12 cDNA sequence.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Wang et al. (2001) mapped the human TEX12
gene to chromosome 11.

REFERENCE 1. Wang, P. J.; McCarrey, J. R.; Yang, F.; Page, D. C.: An abundance
of X-linked genes expressed in spermatogonia. Nature Genet. 27:
422-426, 2001.

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 3/28/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/30/2012
carol: 3/28/2001

