120140	TITLE +120140 COLLAGEN, TYPE II, ALPHA-1; COL2A1
;;COLLAGEN, TYPE II;;
COLLAGEN OF CARTILAGE
CHONDROCALCIN, INCLUDED;;
VITREORETINOPATHY WITH PHALANGEAL EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Collagens are major structural components of the extracellular matrix.
Type II collagen, also called cartilage collagen, is the major collagen
synthesized by chondrocytes. The same type of collagen occurs in the
vitreous. Type II collagen is comprised of 3 alpha-1(II) chains. These
are synthesized as larger procollagen chains, which contain N- and
C-terminal amino acid sequences called propeptides. After secretion into
the extracellular matrix, the propeptides are cleaved, forming the
mature type II collagen molecule (summary by Strom and Upholt, 1984 and
Cheah et al., 1985).

CLONING

Strom and Upholt (1984) isolated overlapping genomic DNA clones
containing most of the coding sequences for chicken type II procollagen.
They found that the chicken type II gene is 2 to 3 times more compact
than the chicken type I alpha-2 gene (COL1A2; 120160) due to smaller
introns. The coding sequence shows about 75% homology with type I
alpha-1 (COL1A1; 120150) and 63 to 67% homology with type I alpha-2 and
type III (COL3A1; 120180) sequences. Base composition and codon usage of
type II are very similar to alpha-1(I) and different from alpha-2(I) and
type III. The chicken type II gene appears to be present in single copy
per haploid genome. Using probes corresponding to the chicken COL2A1
procollagen gene to screen a recombinant human DNA library, Strom and
Upholt (1984) isolated a portion of the human COL2A1 gene.

Sangiorgi et al. (1984) isolated from a cartilage cDNA library a bovine
clone encoding the pro-alpha-1(II) collagen chain. Because of the close
homology of bovine and human collagens, the bovine clone could be used
to isolate the corresponding gene from a human genomic library.

By comparison of amino acid sequences, van der Rest et al. (1986) showed
that chondrocalcin is the C-propeptide of type II procollagen.
Chondrocalcin is a calcium-binding protein found in developing fetal
cartilage matrix and in growth plate cartilage when and where
mineralization occurs in the lower hypertrophic zone. It appears to play
a role in enchondral ossification. The new evidence on its identity to
C-propeptide indicates that it is also important in assembly of the
triple helix of type II collagen. See 156550 for evidence of abnormal
processing of the C-propeptide of type II collagen resulting in
imperfect fibril assembly and the clinical disorder called Kniest
dysplasia.

Studying the gerbil, Slepecky et al. (1992) demonstrated that types II
and IX (120210) collagen show colocalization in the inner ear.

Wu and Eyre (1995) provided evidence that what was formerly termed the
alpha-3 chain of type XI collagen (COL11A3) is actually transcribed from
the COL2A1 gene.

MAPPING

By analysis of DNA from human-mouse cell hybrids, Sangiorgi et al.
(1984) localized the COL2A1 gene to chromosome 12. The results were
confirmed by similar experiments with the bovine cDNA probe. Using a
cloned gene as a probe on Southern blots of DNA from a panel of
interspecies somatic cell hybrids, Solomon et al. (1985) also assigned
the COL2A1 locus to chromosome 12.

By somatic cell hybrid studies and in situ hybridization,
Huerre-Jeanpierre et al. (1986) assigned COL2A1 to 12q13.1-q13.2 and
COL3A1 to 2q31-q32.3. Law et al. (1986) used a cosmid clone of the
entire COL2A1 gene in Southern analysis of DNA from somatic cell hybrids
containing segments of chromosome 12. Two hybrids contained a similar
terminal deletion of 12q14.3-qter but 1 was positive for the gene and 1
negative. This led Law et al. (1986) to conclude that the gene is
located in 12q14.3.

Takahashi et al. (1990) described a 'new' nonisotopic method of in situ
hybridization. It involved replication of R-bands by incorporation of
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) into cells synchronized with thymidine.
Fluorescent signals could be detected on R-banded prometaphases stained
with propidium iodide. They illustrated the strength of the system by
refining the localization of the COL2A1 gene to 12q13.11-q13.12. By
nonisotopic in situ hybridization, Takahashi et al. (1990) showed that
the COL2A1 gene is immediately proximal to the fragile site
fra(12)(q13.1).

GENE FUNCTION

Lovell-Badge et al. (1987) introduced a cosmid containing the human type
II collagen gene, including 4.5 kb of 5-prime and 2.2 kb of 3-prime
flanking DNA, into mouse embryonic cells in vitro. Human type II
collagen mRNA was found only in tissues that showed transcription from
the endogenous (mouse) gene, and human type II collagen was found in
cartilage. The findings indicated that the cis-acting requirements for
correct temporal and spatial regulation of the gene were fulfilled by
the introduced DNA.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Several skeletal and ocular disorders have been found to be caused by
mutation in the COL2A1 gene. These are sometimes referred to as type II
collagenopathies.

- Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia Congenita

The first evidence for a defect in COL2A1 in SED congenita (183900) and
in Langer-Saldino achondrogenesis (200610) was the finding of abnormal
patterns of digestion of type II collagen by cyanogen bromide, as
demonstrated by Horton (1987). Confirmation of the defect in SED
congenita was provided by demonstration of mutation in COL2A1
(120140.0001 and 120140.0002).

- Achondrogenesis Type II

Godfrey and Hollister (1988) presented evidence that the patient they
studied with a lethal perinatal form of short-limbed dwarfism (200610)
was heterozygous for an abnormal pro-alpha-1(II) chain which impaired
the assembly and/or folding of type II collagen. Vissing et al. (1989)
demonstrated that the mutation in the type II procollagen gene was a
single base change that converted the codon for glycine (GGC) at amino
acid 943 to a codon for serine (AGC) (120140.0002).

- Stickler Syndrome, Type I

Francomano et al. (1987, 1987) demonstrated absolute linkage of COL2A1
and Stickler syndrome (108300); a total lod score of 3.96 at theta = 0.0
was obtained. In a family with Stickler syndrome, Ahmad et al. (1990,
1991) identified a mutation in the COL2A1 gene (120140.0005).

Mutation in the COL2A1 gene (120140.0014) has also been found in a
nonsyndromic ocular form of type I Stickler syndrome (609508).

- Osteoarthritis Associated with Chondrodysplasia

Knowlton et al. (1989) found tight linkage (no recombination) of the
COL2A1 gene with a precocious form of familial primary generalized
osteoarthritis (OA) associated with chondrodysplasia (604864). In the
full report of this family, Knowlton et al. (1990) stated that a
16-year-old male had osteoarthritis of the middle metacarpophalangeal
joints and hips as well as bilateral osteochondritis dissecans of the
capitellum. A 38-year-old female also had osteoarthritis of the spine,
wrists, proximal interphalangeal joints, and distal interphalangeal
joints. Vertebral bodies were flattened with Schmorl nodes. Linkage
analysis suggested that the mutation is in the COL2A1 locus with a
maximum lod score of 2.39 in multipoint analysis. Morphometrics
demonstrated a short trunk producing abnormally low upper segment to
lower segment ratio. A mutation in the COL2A1 gene (120140.0003) in
affected members of the kindred described by Knowlton et al. (1990) was
identified by Ala-Kokko et al. (1990).

Nelson et al. (1998) presented further evidence that the synthesis of
type II collagen is increased in osteoarthritis. Using an immunoassay,
they showed that the content of the C-propeptide of type II procollagen,
released extracellularly from the newly synthesized molecule, is
directly related to the synthesis of this molecule in healthy and
osteoarthritic articular cartilage. In OA cartilage, the content of the
type II procollagen is often markedly elevated (mean 7.6-fold). The
increase in type II procollagen in OA cartilage was not reflected in
serum, where a significant reduction was observed.

- Kniest Dysplasia

Wilkin et al. (1999) noted that 10 of 12 previously described dominant
mutations in the COL2A1 gene in patients with Kniest dysplasia caused
small deletions in the type II collagen molecule. They added 4 new
mutations, bringing the total to 16. All 4 new mutations were also small
deletions; a fifth patient was found to have a previously reported 28-bp
deletion (120140.0012).

COL2A1 has 10 in-frame CGA codons that can mutate to TGA stop codons by
a methylation-deamination mechanism. Wilkin et al. (2000) analyzed these
10 codons using restriction endonuclease analysis or allele-specific
amplification. Mutations at 5 COL2A1 CGA codons were identified in 8 of
40 patients with Stickler syndrome, suggesting that these are common
sites of mutation in this disorder.

Korkko et al. (2000) performed COL2A1 mutation analysis on 12 patients
with achondrogenesis type II/hypochondrogenesis, using conformation
sensitive gel electrophoresis, followed by sequencing. Mutations were
identified in all patients. Ten had single base substitutions, 1 had a
change in a consensus RNA splice site, and 1 was an 18-bp deletion of
coding sequences. Mutations were widely distributed across the gene.

In 2 sporadic cases of the Torrance type of platyspondylic skeletal
dysplasia (151210), Nishimura et al. (2004) identified de novo mutations
in the COL2A1 gene (120140.0039-120140.0040).

- Avascular Necrosis of the Femoral Head and Legg-Calve-Perthes
Disease

Avascular necrosis of the femoral head (ANFH; 608805) causes disability
that often requires surgical intervention. Most cases of ANFH are
sporadic, but Liu et al. (2005) identified 3 families in which there was
autosomal dominant inheritance of the disease with mapping of the
phenotype to 12q13. Liu et al. (2005) carried out haplotype analysis in
the families, selected candidate genes from the critical interval for an
ANFH on 12q13, and sequenced the promoter and exonic regions of the
COL2A1 gene from persons with inherited and sporadic forms of ANFH. In 2
of the families they identified the same gly1170-to-ser mutation
(120140.0043), on different haplotype backgrounds. The gly717-to-ser
mutation was detected in the third family (120140.0044).

Miyamoto et al. (2007) identified the gly1170-to-ser mutation
(120140.0043) in affected members of a Japanese family with an autosomal
dominant disorder manifesting as Legg-Calve-Perthes disease (LCPD;
150600), a form of ANFH in growing children.

In a 40-year-old man who was diagnosed with avascular necrosis of the
femoral head at 18 years of age and underwent bilateral hip replacement
at 33 years of age, Kannu et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous
missense mutation in the C-propeptide region of the COL2A1 gene
(120140.0054). The authors noted that mutations in the C-propeptide
region typically cause significant skeletal findings unlike those found
in this patient.

- Otospondylomegaepiphyseal Dysplasia

Otospondylomegaepiphyseal dysplasia (OSMED; 215150) is a skeletal
dysplasia characterized by severe sensorineural hearing loss, enlarged
epiphyses, and early onset of osteoarthritis. Miyamoto et al. (2005)
identified a novel COL2A1 mutation at a splice acceptor site within
intron 10 (709-2A-G; 120140.0048) in a patient with OSMED. This mutation
caused a skipping of exon 11, and of exons 11 and 13. These
exon-skipping events were presumed to cause an in-frame deletion of the
triple helical region of the COL2A1 product. Mutations in the COL11A2
gene (120290) had been reported as a cause for OSMED. The report
confirmed the overlap between type II and type XI collagenopathies.

- Other Disorders Caused by COL2A1 Mutations

Other disorders caused by mutation in the COL2A1 gene include
spondylometaphyseal dysplasia (SMD; 184252; see 120140.0013); Strudwick
type of spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (184250; see 120140.0017);
multiple epiphyseal dysplasia with myopia and conductive deafness
(132450; see 120140.0029); spondyloperipheral dysplasia (271700; see
120140.0030); platyspondylic skeletal dysplasia, Torrance type (151210;
see 120140.0039); Czech dysplasia (609162; see 120140.0018);
rhegmatogenous retinal detachment (see 609508; see 120140.0045); and
vitreoretinopathy with phalangeal epiphyseal dysplasia (120140.0037).

- Associations Pending Confirmation

Helfgott et al. (1991) suggested that collagen type II may not only be
involved in the sensorineural deafness that accompanies hereditary
disorders such as spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita and Stickler
syndrome but may also be the target of an autoimmune process in some
cases of acquired bilateral progressive sensorineural hearing loss.

For discussion of a possible association between variation in the COL2A1
gene and myopia, see MYP3 (603221).

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Liberfarb et al. (2003) performed genotype/phenotype correlations in 47
affected members from 10 families with 7 defined mutations in the COL2A1
gene based on review of medical records and clinical evaluation of 25
additional family members from 6 of the 10 families. The ages ranged
from 2 to 73 years with a mean age of 34.7 years. The classic Stickler
phenotype was expressed clinically in all 10 Stickler families with
COL2A1 mutations and all had evidence of vitreous degeneration type 1.
Myopia was present in 41 of 47 family members. There was considerable
interfamilial and intrafamilial variability in clinical expression. The
prevalence of certain clinical features was a function of age. Liberfarb
et al. (2003) concluded that it is difficult to predict the severity of
the phenotype based on the genotype of COL2A1 mutation.

Nishimura et al. (2005) searched for COL2A1 mutations in 56 families
suspected of having type II collagenopathies and found 38 mutations in
41 families. There were no radiologic differences between the cases with
and those without mutations. Phenotypes for all 22 missense mutations
and 1 in-frame deletion in the triple helical region fell along the SED
spectrum. Glycine-to-serine substitutions resulted in alternating zones
that produced more severe and milder phenotypes; glycine-to-nonserine
residue substitutions exclusively created more severe phenotypes. The
gradient of the SED spectrum did not necessarily correlate with the
occurrence of extraskeletal manifestations. All 9 truncation or splice
site mutations in the triple helical or N-propeptide region caused
either Stickler syndrome type I or Kniest dysplasia (156550), and
extraskeletal changes were consistently present in both phenotypes. All
6 C-propeptide mutations produced a range of atypical skeletal
phenotypes and created ocular, but not otolaryngologic, changes.

Hoornaert et al. (2006) noted that the majority of COL2A1 mutations are
substitutions of obligatory glycine residues in the triple helical
domain; of the few nonglycine missense mutations that have been
reported, arginine-to-cysteine substitutions predominate. Hoornaert et
al. (2006) investigated the clinical and radiologic phenotype in 11
patients in whom they had identified arg-to-cys mutations in the COL2A1
gene. Each mutation resulted in a rather constant and site-specific
phenotype, but a perinatally lethal disorder was never observed.
Spondyloarthropathy with normal stature and no ocular involvement were
features of patients with the R75C (120140.0018), R519C (120140.0003),
or R1076C mutation. Short third and fourth toes were a distinguishing
feature of the R75C mutation, and brachydactyly with enlarged finger
joints was a key feature of the R1076C substitution. Stickler dysplasia
with brachydactyly was observed in patients with the R704C (120140.0029)
mutation. The R365C (120140.0033) and R789C (120140.0016) mutations
resulted in classic Stickler dysplasia and spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
congenita, respectively.

- Reviews

Kuivaniemi et al. (1997) tabulated all reported disease-producing
mutations in the COL2A1 gene.

ANIMAL MODEL

Vandenberg et al. (1991) found that transgenic mice carrying a partially
deleted human COL2A1 gene developed the phenotype of a chondrodysplasia
with dwarfism, short and thick limbs, short snout, cranial bulge, cleft
palate, and delayed mineralization of bone. In cultured chondrocytes
from transgenic mice, the minigene was expressed as shortened
pro-alpha-1(II) chains that were disulfide-linked to normal mouse type
II collagen chains. Therefore, the phenotype was probably explained by
depletion of endogenous mouse type II procollagen through the phenomenon
of procollagen suicide. Garofalo et al. (1991) generated transgenic mice
harboring a glycine-to-cysteine mutation at residue 85 of the triple
helical domain of mouse type II collagen. Offspring displayed severe
chondrodysplasia with short limbs and trunk, craniofacial deformities,
and cleft palate. Affected pups died of acute respiratory distress
caused by inability to inflate the lungs at birth. Electron microscopic
analysis showed a pronounced decrease in the number of typical thin
cartilage collagen fibrils, distention of the rough endoplasmic
reticulum of chondrocytes, and the presence of abnormally large banded
collagen fibril bundles. Garofalo et al. (1991) postulated that the
abnormally thick collagen bundles were related to a defect in
crosslinking. They pointed out similarities to the chondrodysplasias of
the spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia group.

Li et al. (1995) used homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells
to prepare transgenic mice with an inactivated COL2A1 gene. Heterozygous
mice had minimal phenotypic changes. Homozygous mice were delivered
vaginally but died either just before or shortly after birth. In these
mice the cartilage consisted of highly disorganized chondrocytes with a
complete lack of extracellular fibrils discernible by electron
microscopy. There was no endochondral bone or epiphyseal growth plate in
long bones; however, many skeletal structures such as the cranium and
ribs were normally developed and mineralized. Li et al. (1995) concluded
that a well-organized cartilage matrix is required as a primary tissue
for development of some components of the skeleton but is not essential
for others.

Gaiser et al. (2002) constructed a transgenic mouse model of SED
congenita using a type II collagen transgene with an arg789-to-cys
change (R789C; 120140.0016) in combination with a murine Col2a1 promoter
directing the gene expression to cartilage. Mice carrying the transgene
were shorter overall, had shorter limbs with disorganized growth plates,
a short nose, cleft palate, and died at birth. Using cell culture
experiments and molecular modeling, Gaiser et al. (2002) suggested that
this Y-position mutation acts in a dominant-negative way, resulting in
destabilization of collagen molecules during assembly, reduction in the
number of fibrils formed, and abnormal cartilage template function.
Donahue et al. (2003) identified a naturally occurring arg1147-to-cys
mutation in the Col2a1 gene in the mouse which resulted in recessive SED
congenita with a less severe phenotype, as indicated by the fact that
the mice survived to adulthood and reproduced normally.

HISTORY

The following is an account of a temporarily confusing aspect of the
collagen II gene. Weiss et al. (1982) described a collagen gene isolated
in a 40-kb cosmid clone, cosHco11, which has some sequence homology to
the alpha-1(I) gene, but which is clearly a different gene. Using this
collagen alpha-1(I)-like probe on Southern blots of DNA from somatic
cell hybrids, Solomon et al. (1984) found that the gene segregated with
chromosome 12 and is not syntenic with the alpha-2(I) gene assigned to
chromosome 7 (120160) or the alpha-1(I) gene assigned to chromosome 17
(120150). This gene contains an RFLP with HindIII. A 300-basepair
deletion in the alpha-1(I)-like gene mapped by Solomon et al. (1984) was
demonstrated by Pope et al. (1984) in a father and son with one form of
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome II (EDS II; 130010). The deletion was found at or
near the 3-prime end of the gene and was not identified in other cases
of EDS II or in 400 normal controls. It was found, however, in 4 babies
with lethal osteogenesis imperfecta congenita. The father and son with
EDS II and the deletion showed altered collagen fibril size and shape.
Subsequently, the 'alpha-1(I)-like' gene was shown to encode the alpha
subunit of cartilage collagen and it was further shown that there is a
polymorphism in this gene that is frequent in Asiatic Indians (Sykes et
al., 1985). Of the 4 cases of Pope et al. (1984), 3 originated from
India or Sri Lanka. This experience illustrates the hazards of confusing
polymorphism with pathology.

Meulenbelt et al. (1996) determined the allele frequencies and pairwise
linkage disequilibria of RFLPs distributed over the COL2A1 gene in a
population of unrelated Dutch Caucasians. Their data indicated that
disease-related population studies should include a minimum of 4 RFLPs.

Strom (1984) purported to find abnormality of the type II collagen gene
in achondroplasia. If such a defect were present, one would expect
ocular abnormality in achondroplasia inasmuch as type II collagen is
present in vitreous. SED congenita is a more plausible candidate for a
structural defect of type II collagen because it is a dominant disorder
that combines skeletal dysplasia with vitreous degeneration and deafness
(experimental studies with antibodies to type II collagen indicate that
this collagen type is represented in the inner ear; Yoo et al., 1983).
The work of Strom (1984) may be technically flawed.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA CONGENITA
COL2A1, 390-BP DEL

In a patient with autosomal dominant spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
congenita (183900), Lee et al. (1989) demonstrated a heterozygous
in-frame deletion of exon 48 of the COL2A1 gene, which encodes amino
acid residues 964-999 of the triple helical of domain of the protein.

.0002
HYPOCHONDROGENESIS
COL2A1, GLY943SER

In a patient described by Godfrey and Hollister (1988) with 'a
relatively mild case of type II achondrogenesis-hypochondrogenesis' (see
200610), Vissing et al. (1989) demonstrated heterozygosity for a G-to-A
transition in exon 46 of the COL2A1 gene that converted glycine-943 to
serine (G943S). The substitution disrupted the invariant Gly-X-Y
structural motif necessary for perfect helix formation and led to an
excessive overmodification, intracellular retention, and reduced
secretion of type II collagen.

.0003
OSTEOARTHRITIS WITH MILD CHONDRODYSPLASIA
OSTEOARTHRITIS WITH MILD SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, INCLUDED
COL2A1, ARG519CYS

In the kindred described by Knowlton et al. (1990) with osteoarthritis
associated with mild chondrodysplasia (604864), Ala-Kokko et al. (1990)
found a change from arginine to cysteine at position 519 of the
alpha-1(II) chain. In an affected family member who underwent hip
surgery, Eyre et al. (1991) demonstrated that approximately one-fourth
of the alpha-1(II) chains present in the polymeric extracellular
collagen of the patient's cartilage contained the arg519-to-cys
substitution. The protein exhibited other abnormal properties including
disulfide-bonded alpha-1(II) dimers and signs of posttranslational
overmodification. Holderbaum et al. (1993) referred to 2 further
families with the arg519-to-cys mutation. They reported studies
suggesting that the mutation arose independently in at least 2 of the 3
known affected families. Williams et al. (1995) found the same mutation
in a fourth family with early-onset osteoarthritis and late-onset
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia.

Bleasel et al. (1998) reported that the arg519-to-cys mutation in COL2A1
had been identified in 5 families with mild spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia
(see 183900) and precocious osteoarthritis. Haplotype analysis
identified 3 distinct mutation-bearing haplotypes, with 3 families
sharing a common haplotype. For the 3 distinct haplotypes to have
derived from a single founder, 3 independent recombination events were
required. Thus, the arg519 codon appears to represent a possible site of
recurrent mutations in COL2A1, an uncommon phenomenon in collagen genes.

.0004
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA CONGENITA
COL2A1, 45-BP DUP, EX48

In a sporadic case of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (183900), Tiller et
al. (1990) found an internal tandem duplication of 45 basepairs within
exon 48 of COL2A1, resulting in the addition of 15 amino acids to the
triple-helical domain of the protein. The abnormal molecule showed
excessive posttranslational modification. The mutation was not carried
by either parent, indicating a new dominant mutation. DNA sequence
homology in the area of the duplication suggested that the mutation may
have arisen by unequal crossover between related sequences.

.0005
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, ARG732TER

In a family with Stickler syndrome (108300), Ahmad et al. (1990, 1991)
found a single base mutation altering the arginine at amino acid 732 of
the triple helical domain of COL2A1 to a stop codon. The mutation
altered a CG dinucleotide and converted the codon CGA to TGA. This
mutation was located in exon 40. Ahmad et al. (1991) noted that the
mutation produced marked changes in the eye, which contains only small
amounts of type II collagen, but had relatively mild effects on the many
cartilaginous structures of the body that are rich in the same protein.

.0006
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, NAMAQUALAND TYPE
COL2A1

Beighton et al. (1984) concluded that the skeletal disorder they
identified in 45 persons in 5 generations of a kindred of mixed ancestry
in Namaqualand, South Africa, represented a distinct entity. Discomfort
in the hips develops in childhood and the course is progressive, with
handicap in middle age. General health is good, height is not
significantly reduced, and no extraskeletal involvement has been
identified. The major changes are in the femoral capital epiphyses,
which are flattened and fragmented; secondary degenerative arthropathy
develops at a later stage. Platyspondyly of variable but mild degree is
present in about 60% of affected persons. Other minor changes, including
iliac exostoses, are present in some. The pedigree findings indicate
autosomal dominant inheritance. Learmonth et al. (1987) pointed out that
the maximal changes in the femoral capital epiphyses lead to severe
progressive degenerative osteoarthropathy of the hip joint that
frequently necessitates prosthetic joint replacement in adulthood. Sher
et al. (1991) showed by linkage studies that NSED and the COL2A1 gene
are closely linked with no recombination (lod = 7.98).

.0007
HYPOCHONDROGENESIS
COL2A1, GLY574SER

In a case of hypochondrogenesis (see 200610), Horton et al. (1992)
detected a subtle mutation in the COL2A1 gene by use of a chondrocyte
culture system and PCR-cDNA scanning analysis. Chondrocytes obtained
from cartilage biopsies were dedifferentiated and expanded in monolayer
culture and then redifferentiated by culture over agarose. Single-strand
conformation polymorphism and direct sequencing analysis identified a
G-to-A transition, resulting in substitution of glycine by serine at
amino acid 574 in the triple-helical domain of type II procollagen. The
morphologic assessment of cartilage-like structures produced in culture
and electrophoretic analysis of collagens synthesized by the cultured
chondrocytes suggested that the glycine substitution interfered with
conversion of type II procollagen to collagen, impaired intracellular
transport and secretion of the molecule, and disrupted collagen fibril
assembly.

.0008
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, 1-BP DEL, EX40

In a family with Stickler syndrome (108300), Brown et al. (1992) found
that 4 affected members had deletion of a single basepair resulting in a
translational frameshift in exon 40 of the COL2A1 gene. The mutation was
not found in any of 5 clinically unaffected family members or in any of
15 unrelated control patients. All affected members had abnormal
vitreous syneresis and all had retinal perivascular pigmentation.
Retinal detachments occurred in 3 of the 4 affected patients. Three of
the 4 had peripheral cortical 'wedge' cataracts, and the fourth had
extensive nuclear sclerosis. In all 4 affected patients, there were
abnormalities of the palate: bilateral torus palatini, linea alba with
submucous cleft palate, bifid uvula, and 'notched' hard palate. All
patients reported severe joint pains, and radiologic changes suggesting
epiphyseal dysplasia were found in all 4. One patient had had left total
hip replacement at a relatively young age. Palatal and ocular changes
were illustrated by photographs, and radiographs of the skeletal changes
were presented. The deletion was reported to involve a thymidine
nucleotide at position 18 of exon 40. This resulted in a translational
frameshift, with formation of a nonsense codon, TGA, downstream in exon
42, leading to premature termination of translation at that point. The
deletion also created a new MspI restriction site.

.0009
HYPOCHONDROGENESIS
COL2A1, GLY853GLU

In an infant with a severe form of skeletal dysplasia who required
continuous respiratory support until his death at 3 months of age,
Bogaert et al. (1992) demonstrated a gly853-to-glu mutation resulting
from a GGA-to-GAA transition in the COL2A1 gene. The patient was
heterozygous. The radiologic features were thought to be those of
hypochondrogenesis (see 200610). Unilateral polydactyly had been noted
at birth.

.0010
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, ARG9TER

In a family with Stickler syndrome (108300), Ahmad et al. (1993) found a
single-base mutation that converted codon 9 of the COL2A1 gene. (The
amino acids of the alpha-1 chain were numbered with the standard
convention in which the first amino acid in the triple-helical domain is
numbered as +1 (Baldwin et al., 1989).) The mutation changed a CGA codon
(arginine) to TGA (stop) codon. This mutation was located in exon 7. The
PCR products contained both C and T, indicating that the patient was
heterozygous for the mutation. The proband had been identified in a
cleft palate clinic at the age of 1 year. He had severe myopia and was
at the eighth percentile for height. Pelvic x-rays demonstrated small
femoral heads with dumbbell-shaped enlargements of both ends of the
femurs. Members in 3 generations and 4 sibships had severe myopia, often
with other ocular manifestations.

.0011
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA CONGENITA
COL2A1, GLY997SER

Cole et al. (1993) found that a child with SED congenita (183900) was
heterozygous for a G-to-A transition in exon 48 of the COL2A1 gene that
resulted in the substitution of glycine-997 by serine in the triple
helical domain of the type II collagen chain.

.0012
KNIEST DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, 28-BP DEL

Winterpacht et al. (1993) demonstrated a 28-bp deletion spanning the
3-prime exon/intron boundary of exon 12 in a 2-year-old girl with Kniest
dysplasia (156550). The mother presented with a milder phenotype
consistent with the Stickler syndrome. She was shown to have mosaicism
for the same deletion.

Wilkin et al. (1999) found this same mutation occurring at the junction
between exon 12 and intron 12 of the COL2A1 gene in a patient with
Kniest syndrome. The mutation deleted the splice donor site and was
predicted to result in exon skipping in the mRNA encoded from the mutant
allele. The female patient reported by Wilkin et al. (1999), their
patient 4, had previously been reported by Siggers (1974) and Siggers et
al. (1974), and by Maumenee and Traboulsi (1985). The diagnosis of
Kniest dysplasia had been made at the age of 10.5 years. At that time,
her height was 110.5 cm (height age 4 10/12 years). She had a flat and
round face, prominent eyes with high myopia, flat bridge of the nose,
with broad and prominent forehead, and a cleft uvula. Radiographs
demonstrated severe platyspondyly, with greatest involvement of the
dorsal spine. The superior and inferior endplates of the vertebral
bodies were quite irregular, with spotted mineralization. There was
considerable middorsal kyphosis and lumbar lordosis, as well as moderate
scoliosis. The anterior-posterior diameters of the vertebral bodies
appeared relatively wide, as did the interpedicular spaces. The limbs
and hands had short bones, with shafts of normal to slightly diminished
diameter, and greatly flared metaphyses and epiphyses. Ossification of
the epiphyses was irregular and spotty, with some of the cartilaginous
epiphyseal plates relatively wide, particularly at the distal radius and
ulna. Wilkin et al. (1999) pointed out that the deletion in this case
began with 7 nucleotides in exon 12 that duplicated 7 nucleotides (+3
through +9) of intron 12, creating the basis for homologous
recombination with unequal crossing-over leading to deletion.

.0013
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, STRUDWICK TYPE
COL2A1, GLY154ARG

In a 16-year-old Finnish boy with spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia
(184250), Vikkula et al. (1993) demonstrated a 1063G-A transition in
exon 14 of the COL1A2 gene, which resulted in the conversion of gly154
to arg (G154R). This was a heterozygous de novo mutation which was not
found in any other skeletal dysplasia patient studied in Finland.

Kaitila et al. (1996) found the same de novo heterozygous G154R mutation
in an unrelated 26-year-old Finnish woman with spondyloepimetaphyseal
dysplasia and provided follow-up on the patient reported by Vikkula et
al. (1993). Both patients had been followed since the newborn period at
Helsinki University Children's Hospital. The clinical phenotype was
disproportionate short stature with varus/valgus deformities of the
lower limbs requiring corrective osteotomies, and lumbar lordosis. The
skeletal radiographs showed an evolution from short tubular bones,
delayed epiphyseal development, and mild vertebral involvement to severe
metaphyseal dysplasia with dappling irregularities, and hip 'dysplasia.'
The metaphyseal abnormalities disappeared by adulthood.

.0014
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I, NONSYNDROMIC OCULAR
COL2A1, GLY67ASP

Korkko et al. (1993) identified a substitution of aspartate for glycine
at position 67 in the alpha-1 chain of type II collagen in a family in
which affected members had early-onset cataracts, lattice degeneration
of the retina, and retinal detachment without involvement of nonocular
tissues. Comparison with previously reported mutations suggested to
Korkko et al. (1993) that premature termination codons in the COL2A1
gene are a frequent cause of Stickler syndrome, but mutations in the
COL2A1 gene that replace glycine codons with codons for a bulkier amino
acid can produce a broad spectrum of disorders ranging from lethal
chondrodysplasia to a syndrome involving only ocular tissues. Korkko et
al. (1993) noted phenotypic similarity to the family described by Wagner
(1938) (see 143200). Richards et al. (2006) suggested that the disorder
in this family was more likely to be a predominantly ocular form of
Stickler syndrome type I (see 609508).

.0015
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, PRO846TER

In a family with Stickler syndrome (108300) in members of 4 successive
generations, Ritvaniemi et al. (1993) found a deletion of a T in the
third base position of the codon CCT for proline at position 846 of the
collagen II alpha-1 chain. The deletion of the T shifted the reading
frame and generated premature termination. Ritvaniemi et al. (1993)
stated that this was the fourth example of a premature termination codon
causing Stickler syndrome.

.0016
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA CONGENITA
COL2A1, ARG789CYS

In a 4-year-old girl with clinical and radiographic features typical of
SED congenita (183900), Chan et al. (1993) found heterozygosity for a
2913C-T transition in exon 14, resulting in an arg789-to-cys (R789C)
substitution. The mutation resulted in the loss of an MaeII cleavage
site that was used to confirm the fact that the proband was heterozygous
and that neither parent had the mutation. Type II collagen extracted
from cartilage and from cultured chondrocytes was approximately
one-third of the mutant type and secretion of molecules containing
mutant chains was impaired. The thermal stability of the collagen
extracted from cartilage was normal, however.

In a patient with SED congenita, Chan et al. (1995) identified the R789C
mutation. The substitution of a cysteine for an arginine in the Y
position of the gly-X-Y triplet is noteworthy because cysteine is not
normally found in the triple-helical domain of type II collagen in any
species (Kuivaniemi et al., 1997). A cysteine at this position provides
the opportunity for disulfide bonds to form, thus disrupting the
formation of collagen fibrils. Two other arg-to-cys mutations have been
described in the COL2A1 gene: R519C (120140.0003), resulting in
osteoarthritis with mild chondrodysplasia (604864), and R75C
(120140.0018), resulting in spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with precocious
osteoarthritis (609162).

.0017
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, STRUDWICK TYPE
COL2A1, GLY709CYS

Tiller et al. (1993, 1995) demonstrated that cartilage from 3 patients
with SEMD Strudwick (184250) contained both normal alpha-1(II) collagen
chains and chains that were posttranslationally overmodified. Cyanogen
bromide peptide analysis and protein microsequencing of type II collagen
from 1 patient demonstrated an amino acid substitution, gly709-to-cys,
in the abnormal alpha chains. Direct DNA sequencing showed
heterozygosity for a GGC-to-TGC transversion at the last glycine codon
of exon 39.

.0018
CZECH DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, ARG75CYS

This mutation has also been designated arg275-to-cys (R275C) based on a
different numbering system.

In a family living in the Chiloe Islands, Chile, Williams et al. (1993)
demonstrated a heterozygous arg75-to-cys (R75C) mutation in the COL2A1
gene as the basis of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with shortened
metacarpals and metatarsals, precocious osteoarthritis, and
periarticular apatite-like calcific deposits. Seven individuals were
involved in 3 generations of the family. Complete physical examination,
anthropometric measurements, and radiographic studies of the spine and
peripheral joints in 16 family members revealed that 7 had
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia tarda, brachydactyly, precocious
osteoarthritis, and periarticular calcification, while 2 others had the
same syndrome without brachydactyly (Reginato et al., 1994). The
relationship of this type of SEDT to familial calcium pyrophosphate
dihydrate deposition disease (118600) and idiopathic hip dysplasia, both
endemic in Chiloe Islanders, required further investigation.

Hoornaert et al. (2007) performed targeted sequencing of exon 13 of the
COL2A1 gene in patients with Czech dysplasia (609162) because of
phenotypic similarities between individuals with this dysplasia and
patients with the R75C mutation. They identified heterozygosity for the
R75C mutation in 5 patients with Czech dysplasia, including 2 of the 4
original patients described with this disorder. All affected individuals
had normal height, spondyloarthropathy, and short postaxial toes.

In an affected father, daughter, and son from a Japanese family with
Czech dysplasia, Matsui et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for the
R275C mutation in the COL2A1 gene. The mutation was not found in the
unaffected mother. The authors stated that this was the first reported
family with Czech dysplasia that was not of European ancestry, and
family history was consistent with de novo occurrence of the disease in
the father.

.0019
KNIEST DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, IVS20, A-G, -2

Winterpacht et al. (1994) investigated the molecular defect in a girl
with Kniest dysplasia (156550) whose father had a very mild form of
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita (SEDC) with premature
osteoarthrosis. The father was found to be a mosaic for a mutation that
was present in nonmosaic state in the child: an A-to-G transition at the
3-prime end of intron 20 affecting the highly conserved AG dinucleotide
of the acceptor splice site. The result was the utilization of a cryptic
AG splice site located 18-bp downstream and a resulting in-frame
deletion of 18 bp from the mRNA. This situation has similarities to that
described in 120140.0012.

.0020
KNIEST DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, GLY103ASP

Wilkin et al. (1994) used SSCP to analyze an amplified genomic DNA
fragment containing exon 12, under suspicion because of its deletion in
a previously reported patient (120140.0012), from 7 individuals with
Kniest dysplasia (156550). An abnormality was identified in 1 patient
who was found on DNA sequence analysis to be heterozygous for a G-to-A
transition that implied substitution of glycine-103 of the triple
helical domain by aspartate. The mutation was not observed in DNA from
either of the clinically unaffected parents. Protein microsequencing
demonstrated expression of the abnormal allele in cartilage.

.0021
ACHONDROGENESIS, TYPE II
COL2A1, GLY769SER

In a fetus with type II achondrogenesis (200610), Chan et al. (1995)
described heterozygosity for a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 2853 in
exon 441 of the COL2A1 gene, resulting in a gly769-to-ser substitution
within the triple helical domain of the type II collagen chain. The
result was complete absence of type II collagen in cartilage, which had
a gelatinous composition. Types I and III collagens were the main
species found in cartilage and synthesized by cultured chondrocytes
along with cartilage type XI collagen (120280). Cultured chondrocytes
produced a trace amount of type II collagen that was retained within the
cells and not secreted. In situ hybridization of cartilage sections
showed that the chondrocytes produced both type I and type II collagen
mRNA. Chan et al. (1995) noted that the gly769 substitution is situated
close to the mammalian collagenase cleavage site at gly775/leu776. The
abnormality was detected by ultrasonography at 19 weeks of gestation
when severe shortening of the limbs and trunk and marked edema around
the neck was noted. The pregnancy was terminated at 20 weeks of
gestation. External examination showed very short limbs, large head,
short trunk, bulging abdomen, and edema of the head and neck.
Radiographs, which were presented by Chan et al. (1995), showed very
short tubular bones with metaphyseal expansion and cupping, absent
ossification of the vertebrae and sacrum, small iliac wings with absent
ossification of the pubis and ischium, and short ribs, but relatively
normal ossification of the calvarium.

.0022
ACHONDROGENESIS, TYPE II
COL2A1, GLY691ARG

Mortier et al. (1995) examined a male fetus by ultrasound during the
third trimester and observed polyhydramnios and severe short-limb
dwarfism. The parents elected to induce delivery at 31 weeks of
gestation and the neonate, who had achondrogenesis type II (200610) died
soon after birth. There was severe shortening of the limbs and chest
with distention of the abdomen. The head was relatively large and the
neck appeared short. Radiographs showed absence of ossification of all
the vertebral bodies. The chest appeared bell-shaped with mild
shortening of the ribs. Anterior and posterior ends of the ribs were
flared and cupped. The width of the iliac wings was increased and the
greater sciatic notch was wide. The ischium and pubis were not ossified.
All the long bones were markedly shortened with flared and cupped
metaphyses. Electron microscopy showed inclusion bodies of dilated rough
endoplasmic reticulum in chondrocytes and the presence of sparse
collagen fibers in the cartilage matrix. Protein analysis of collagen
from cartilage indicated posttranslational overmodification of the major
cyanogen bromide peptides and suggested a mutation near the carboxyl
terminus of the type II collagen molecule. Mortier et al. (1995)
referred to reports of 3 other dominant mutations in the COL2A1 gene
resulting in substitutions for triple helical glycine residues near the
carboxy-terminal end of the alpha-1(II) chain and causing
hypochondrogenesis. Mortier et al. (1995) demonstrated a single base
change (G-to-C) that resulted in the substitution of glycine-691 by
arginine in the type II collagen triple helical domain.

.0023
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, 1-BP DEL, EX50

By direct sequencing of the COL2A1 gene, Ahmad et al. (1995)
demonstrated that affected members of a family with Stickler syndrome
(108300) had a single base deletion in exon 50, resulting in a premature
stop codon in exon 51 in the globular C-propeptide of the COL2A1 gene.
The deletion involved a cytosine at position 92 in exon 50. Three
generations were affected in the family. The proband was referred for
cataract and total retinal detachment in 1 eye at the age of 3 years.
Marked genu valgum, hyperextensibility of joints, cleft palate, and
flattened facies were noted. Mild hearing loss was also documented. The
father's left eye had been blind since the age of 8 years secondary to a
detached retina. Retinal detachment on the right occurred at the age of
39 years. He also showed hyperextensibility of joints and some spinal
changes. The proband's paternal uncle suffered detached left retina
after diving into a swimming pool at age 15 years. Hyperextensibility of
joints and loss of hearing in the left ear were noted at the age of 35
years. Hyperextensible joints were present in other relatives and Pierre
Robin syndrome was noted in some.

.0024
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, IVS17, A-G, -2

In the original Minnesota kindred on the basis of which Stickler et al.
(1965) defined the Stickler syndrome (108300), Williams et al. (1996)
identified a splice site mutation in the COL2A1 gene. They used
conformational sensitive gel electrophoresis (SSGE) to screen for
mutations in the entire gene. They noted a prominent heteroduplex in the
PCR product from a region of the gene including exons 17 to 20. Direct
sequencing of PCR-amplified genomic DNA identified an A-to-G transition
at the -2 position at the 3-prime acceptor splice site of IVS17.
Sequencing of DNA from affected and unaffected family members confirmed
that the mutation segregated with the disease phenotype. RT-PCR analysis
of poly(A)+ RNA demonstrated that the mutant allele utilized a cryptic
splice site in exon 18 of the gene, eliminating 16 bp at the start of
exon 18. This frameshift eventually resulted in a premature termination
codon. Williams et al. (1996) stated that this was the first report of a
splice site mutation in classical Stickler syndrome. They provided a
satisfying historical context in which to view COL2A1 mutations in this
disorder.

.0025
KNIEST DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, 1-BP DEL, IVS18, G, +1

Spranger et al. (1997) demonstrated that the original patient reported
by Kniest (1952) had a single base (G) deletion involving the GT
dinucleotide of the start of intron 18 of the COL2A1 gene. From a review
of the molecular defect found in other cases of this disorder, Spranger
et al. (1997) concluded that the condition is caused by small in-frame
deletions often due to exon skipping as a result of COL2A1 splice site
mutations. Spranger et al. (1997) provided a useful follow-up on the
original patient, then 50 years of age. She was severely handicapped
with short stature, restricted joint mobility, and blindness, but was
mentally alert and led an active life. Radiologic findings at the age of
4.5 years and 29 years were presented.

.0026
KNIEST DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, IVS24, G-A, +5

In a neonatal lethal form of Kniest dysplasia (156500), Weis et al.
(1998) found deletion of 18 residues corresponding to exon 24 of the
COL2A1 sequence. Sequence analysis of an amplified genomic DNA fragment
identified a G-to-A transition in the +5 position of the splice donor
consensus sequence of intron 24 in 1 allele. Cartilage matrix analysis
showed that the abnormally short alpha-1(II) chain was present in
collagen molecules that had become cross-linked into fibrils. It
appeared that the normal and the short alpha-chains had combined to form
heterotrimeric molecules in which the chains were in register in both
directions from the deletion site, accommodated effectively by a loop
out of the normal chain exon 24 domain. Such an accommodation, with
potential overall shortening of the helical domain and hence
misalignment of intermolecular relationships within fibrils, offers a
common molecular mechanism by which a group of different mutations might
act to produce the Kniest phenotype. The patient, an infant girl, was
the product of a 37-week gestation and died of respiratory distress at
10 days of age. She had short limbs, clubfeet, cleft palate, midface
hypoplasia, and narrow chest. X-rays showed flattened vertebral bodies
with coronal clefts, slight shortening of the ribs, and dumbbell-shaped
femurs.

.0027
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, STRUDWICK TYPE
COL2A1, GLY304CYS

See 120140.0017. In 2 unrelated patients with SEMD Strudwick (184250),
Tiller et al. (1995) found a gly304-to-cys mutation and a gly292-to-val
mutation in the COL2A1 gene.

.0028
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, STRUDWICK TYPE
COL2A1, GLY292VAL

See 120140.0027 and Tiller et al. (1995).

.0029
EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, MULTIPLE, WITH MYOPIA AND CONDUCTIVE DEAFNESS
COL2A1, ARG704CYS

In an Afrikaner South African family with multiple epiphyseal dysplasia
with myopia and conductive deafness (132450), Ballo et al. (1998)
detected a heterozygous C-to-T transversion at nucleotide 2503 in exon
39 of the COL2A1 gene. This resulted in an arg-to-cys substitution at
residue number 704, occurring at the X position of the Gly-X-Y motif of
the collagen triple helix. Myopia and deafness characteristic of
Stickler syndrome (108300) were present, with radiologic findings
consistent with multiple epiphyseal dysplasia (MED). COL2A1 mutations
causing Stickler syndrome have resulted in premature termination codons,
while mutations causing spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia were glycine
alterations or arg-to-cys substitutions at the Y position of the Gly-X-Y
unit. Ballo et al. (1998) stated that this mutation could represent the
first report of a nontermination COL2A1 mutation in Stickler syndrome
type 1, or the first report of a COL2A1 defect in an MED phenotype.

.0030
SPONDYLOPERIPHERAL DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, 5-BP DUP

Zabel et al. (1996) described a 5-bp duplication in exon 51 of the
COL2A1 gene, leading to a stop codon, in a patient with a distinct
phenotype labeled spondyloperipheral dysplasia (271700). The mutation
was present in heterozygous state and the patient was sporadic (new
mutation). The patient, a girl, was born to healthy, nonconsanguineous
parents and was 45 cm at birth. A skeletal dysplasia was suspected
because of rhizomelic shortening of the arms and legs. X-ray findings at
7 months of age suggested SED congenita. At the age of 14 years the
patient was 127.4 cm tall with short, broad fingers and very short toes
II-V. Additional findings were a slightly hypoplastic midface with
depressed nasal bridge, severe myopia, short neck and trunk, accentuated
lumbar lordosis, and limited extension of the elbow joints. Short
metacarpals were impressive in the hand x-rays, and very short toes II-V
were impressive in the photograph of the feet. The 5-bp duplication was
the first to be located at the C-terminal outside the helical domain of
COL2A1. It seemed to affect helix formation and produced changes of
chondrocyte morphology, collagen type II fibril structure, and cartilage
matrix composition.

.0031
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA CONGENITA
COL2A1, GLY973ARG

Sobetzko et al. (2000) described a newborn infant with an unusual
combination of syndactylies, macrocephaly, and severe skeletal
dysplasia. A history of digital anomalies in the father and grandfather
led to the diagnosis of dominantly inherited Greig cephalopolysyndactyly
syndrome (GCPS; 175700). Having explained the digital findings and
macrocephaly, the skeletal changes were thought to fit best congenital
SED (183900). Molecular analysis confirmed the presence of 2 dominant
mutations in the infant: a GLI3 mutation (E543X; 165240.0010), which was
present also in the father and grandfather, and a de novo COL2A1
mutation leading to an gly973-to-arg amino acid substitution. Thus, this
boy combined the Greig syndrome with a severe form of SED. The
diagnostic difficulties posed by the combination of 2 genetic disorders
and the usefulness of molecular diagnostics were well illustrated.

.0032
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, IVS25DS, G-A, +1

Freddi et al. (2000) described a novel strategy for screening families
with type I Stickler syndrome (108300) due to nonsense mutations in the
COL2A1 gene, using a modified RNA-based protein truncation test. To
overcome the problem of the unavailability of collagen II-producing
cartilage cells, they performed RT-PCR on the illegitimate transcripts
of accessible cells (lymphoblasts and fibroblasts), which were
preincubated with cycloheximide to prevent nonsense mutation-induced
mRNA decay. The 5 overlapping RT-PCR fragments covering the COL2A1
coding region were then transcribed and translated in vitro to identify
smaller truncated protein products resulting from a premature stop
codon. Using this method, Freddi et al. (2000) screened a 4-generation
family with Stickler syndrome and identified a protein-truncating
mutation that was present in all affected individuals. Targeted
sequencing identified the mutation as a G-to-A transition at the +1
position of the 5-prime splice donor site of intron 25. The mutation led
to the activation of a cryptic splice site 8 bp upstream, causing
aberrant mRNA splicing and a translational frameshift that introduced a
premature stop codon. Mutant mRNA was undetectable without cycloheximide
protection, demonstrating that the mutant mRNA was subjected to
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay.

.0033
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
COL2A1, ARG365CYS

Richards et al. (2000) observed a recurrent arg365-to-cys (R365C)
mutation of the COL2A1 gene in 2 unrelated sporadic cases of Stickler
syndrome (108300). The mutation was located in the X position of the
Gly-X-Y triple helical region and resulted in the membranous vitreous
anomaly associated with haploinsufficiency.

.0034
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I, NONSYNDROMIC OCULAR
COL2A1, LEU467PHE

Richards et al. (2000) observed a leu467-to-phe (L467F) mutation of the
COL2A1 gene in a family with Stickler syndrome (108300) which produced
an unusual 'afibrillar' vitreous gel devoid of all normal lamellar
structure. Systemic involvement was mild, with many family members
lacking joint laxity or radiologic abnormality, hearing loss, midface
hypoplasia, abnormal nasal development, and midline clefting. Richards
et al. (2005) referred to the phenotype in this family as an atypical
form of Stickler syndrome/dominant rhegmatogenous retinal detachment
(609508). They noted that the amino acid substitution arose from a
20996C-T transition.

.0035
SPONDYLOEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA CONGENITA
COL2A1, THR1370MET

Unger et al. (2001) reported a child with double heterozygosity for
pseudoachondroplasia (177170), resulting from a mutation in the COMP
gene (600310.0014) and spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita (183900),
resulting from a thr1370-to-met mutation in the COL2A1 gene. The child
inherited pseudoachondroplasia from his mother and spondyloepiphyseal
dysplasia congenita from his father. He had clinical and radiographic
findings that were more severe than those in either disorder alone.

.0036
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I, NONSYNDROMIC OCULAR
COL2A1, 2-BP DEL, 4274GT

Gupta et al. (2002) examined a large French-Canadian kindred originally
described by Alexander and Shea (1965) as representing Wagner disease
(143200). In affected individuals, they found a novel frameshift
mutation (4274del2bp) in exon 2 leading to early truncation of the
COL2A1 protein (cys57 to stop; C57X). The mutation arose in an exon that
is selectively present in vitreous collagen mRNAs, but absent in
cartilage mRNAs through tissue-specific alternate splicing. The authors
concluded that the selective absence of exon 2 in cartilage explained
why this family did not manifest the progressive spondyloarthropathy of
Stickler syndrome (108300) that is a more common result of mutations in
COL2A1.

Richards et al. (2006) suggested that the disorder in this family was
more likely to be a predominantly ocular form of Stickler syndrome type
I (see 609508).

.0037
VITREORETINOPATHY WITH PHALANGEAL EPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, GLY1105ASP

Richards et al. (2002) described a large family with dominantly
inherited rhegmatogenous retinal detachment, premature arthropathy, and
phalangeal epiphyseal dysplasia resulting in brachydactyly. Linkage to
the COL2A1 gene was demonstrated, and mutation analysis identified a
change at codon 1105 in exon 52 from GGC (gly) to GAC (asp) (G1105D) in
the C-propeptide region of the molecule. The gly-to-asp change occurred
in a region that is highly conserved in all fibrillar collagen
molecules. The resulting phenotype did not fit easily with preexisting
subgroups of the type II collagenopathies.

.0038
ACHONDROGENESIS, TYPE II
COL2A1, GLY316ASP

In 2 successive pregnancies of a healthy, nonconsanguineous young
couple, Faivre et al. (2004) observed lethal achondrogenesis type II
(200610). Heterozygosity for a 1340G-A transition in exon 22 of the
COL2A1 gene resulting in a gly316-to-asp (G316D) amino acid substitution
was identified in the second fetus. The mutation was not found in the
parents. Faivre et al. (2004) hypothesized germline mosaicism in 1 of
the parents as the explanation for the recurrence of this autosomal
dominant disorder.

.0039
PLATYSPONDYLIC SKELETAL DYSPLASIA, TORRANCE TYPE
SPONDYLOPERIPHERAL DYSPLASIA, INCLUDED
COL2A1, TYR1391CYS

In a sporadic case of the Torrance type of platyspondylic skeletal
dysplasia (151210) delivered stillborn at 34 weeks' gestation, Nishimura
et al. (2004) identified a de novo heterozygous 4172A-G transition in
exon 53 of the COL2A1 gene, resulting in a tyr1391-to-cys (Y1391C)
mutation affecting the C-propeptide region of the protein.

Hoornaert et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 4172A-G transition of
the COL2A1 gene in a girl originally diagnosed with Czech dysplasia
(case III of Kozlowski et al., 2004). The patient had significant
disproportionate short stature (-4.55 standard deviation at age 14) and
short toes. Hoornaert et al. (2007) suggested that this patient has
spondyloperipheral dysplasia (271700).

.0040
PLATYSPONDYLIC SKELETAL DYSPLASIA, TORRANCE TYPE
COL2A1, 4-BP DEL, 4413AGGG

In a sporadic case of the Torrance type of platyspondylic skeletal
dysplasia (151210), Nishimura et al. (2004) identified a de novo 4-bp
deletion in exon 54 of the COL2A1 gene, 4413delAGGG, resulting in a
frameshift with a premature stop at codon 1480. The phenotype, as
indicated by radiologic manifestations during the neonatal period,
evolved into that of Kniest-like dysplasia (see 156550) in childhood;
the patient, 5 years of age at the time of report, survived respiratory
problems in infancy.

.0041
SPONDYLOPERIPHERAL DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, 1-BP DEL, 4337G

In 2 patients with spondyloperipheral dysplasia (271700), Zankl et al.
(2004) identified mutations in the COL2A1 gene. The first patient had a
heterozygous 1-bp deletion at nucleotide 4337 in exon 52, resulting in a
frameshift at codon 1446 and a premature stop codon 25 amino acids
downstream. The second patient had a truncating mutation in exon 51 (see
120140.0042). Neither mutation was present in the patients' parents or
in 100 control chromosomes. Both patients had clubfeet, midface
hypoplasia, early-onset high grade myopia, platyspondyly, epiphyseal
dysplasia, and brachydactyly E-like changes developing in childhood. The
authors noted that the phenotype was remarkably similar to that
described by Zabel et al. (1996) (see 120140.0030).

.0042
SPONDYLOPERIPHERAL DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, CYS1438TER

In a patient with spondyloperipheral dysplasia (271700), Zankl et al.
(2004) identified a heterozygous 4314C-A transversion in exon 51 of the
COL2A1 gene, resulting in a cys1438-to-ter (C1438X) substitution. See
120140.0041.

.0043
AVASCULAR NECROSIS OF THE FEMORAL HEAD, PRIMARY
LEGG-CALVE-PERTHES DISEASE, INCLUDED
COL2A1, GLY1170SER

In 2 families with autosomal dominant avascular necrosis of the femoral
head (608805), Liu et al. (2005) identified a G-to-A transition in exon
50 of the COL2A1 gene, predicted to lead to the replacement of glycine
with serine at codon 1170 (G1170S) in a Gly-X-Y repeat of type II
collagen. The mutant allele occurred on a different haplotype background
in each of the 2 families.

Miyamoto et al. (2007) identified the same heterozygous 3508G-A mutation
in affected members of a Japanese family with an autosomal dominant
disorder manifesting as Legg-Calve-Perthes disease (150600).

.0044
AVASCULAR NECROSIS OF THE FEMORAL HEAD, PRIMARY
COL2A1, GLY717SER

In a family with autosomal dominant avascular necrosis of the femoral
head (608805), Liu et al. (2005) identified a G-to-A transition in exon
33 of the COL2A1 gene, causing a glycine-to-serine change at codon 717
(G717S).

.0045
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I
RHEGMATOGENOUS RETINAL DETACHMENT, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT, INCLUDED
COL2A1, ARG453TER

In a patient with sporadic Stickler syndrome (108300), Wilkin et al.
(2000) identified a C-to-T transition in the COL2A1 gene, resulting in
an arg453-to-ter (R453X) substitution. The patient had cleft palate,
sensorineural hearing loss, joint laxity, high myopia, vitreoretinal
degeneration, and retinal breaks and detachments.

In affected members of a family with no systemic characteristics of
Stickler syndrome but dominantly inherited rhegmatogenous retinal
detachment or retinal tears (609508), Go et al. (2003) identified the
R453X mutation, which they noted was in exon 30 (Wilkin et al. (2000)
had placed the mutation in exon 28). They noted that previously reported
predominantly ocular Stickler syndrome cases had been associated with
protein-truncating mutations in exon 2, an exon subject to alternative
splicing.

.0046
RHEGMATOGENOUS RETINAL DETACHMENT, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
COL2A1, GLY118ARG

In affected members of a family with dominantly inherited rhegmatogenous
retinal detachment (609508) and no systemic clinical signs (skeletal,
orofacial, or auditory) usually associated with Stickler syndrome
(108300), Richards et al. (2005) identified a 10838G-A transition in
exon 15 of the COL2A1 gene, resulting in a gly118-to-arg (G118R)
substitution.

.0047
SPONDYLOEPIMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, STRUDWICK TYPE
COL2A1, ARG792GLY

In monozygotic twin girls with SEMD Strudwick (184250), Sulko et al.
(2005) identified heterozygosity for a 79A-G transition in exon 41 of
the COL2A1 gene, resulting in an arg792-to-gly (R792G) substitution. The
mutation was not detected in the unaffected parents or in 90 controls.

.0048
OTOSPONDYLOMEGAEPIPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
COL2A1, IVS10AS, A-G, -2

In a 22-year-old Japanese female with otospondylomegaepiphyseal
dysplasia (OSMED; 215150), Miyamoto et al. (2005) identified a novel
COL2A1 mutation at a splice acceptor site within intron 10 (709-2A-G).
This mutation caused a skipping of exon 11, and of exons 11 and 13.
These exon-skipping events were presumed to cause an in-frame deletion
of the triple helical region of the COL2A1 product. Mutations in the
COL11A2 gene (120290) had been reported as a cause for OSMED. The report
confirmed the overlap between type II and type XI collagenopathies.

.0049
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I, NONSYNDROMIC OCULAR
COL2A1, IVS51DS, T-C, +2

In a family with the predominantly ocular form of type I Stickler
syndrome (609508), Richards et al. (2006) found that the donor splice
site of intron 51 showed a change from GT to GC. Using splicing reporter
constructs, they demonstrated that normal transcripts could be produced
from this mutant allele. Some GC donor splice sites exist naturally in
the human genome (Thanaraj and Clark, 2001). Whether there is a
difference in the efficiency of normal splicing from the mutant GC
allele between cartilage and ocular tissue was unknown. However,
Richards et al. (2006) observed that not all cells transfected with the
mutant minigene were capable of normal processing of the mutant mRNA, so
tissue-specific missplicing may be one explanation for the predominantly
ocular phenotype in this family. An alternative explanation is that
vitreous development (which is rapid, with the secondary vitreous
complete by 12 weeks' gestation) is more susceptible to a reduction in
the level of type II collagen than is cartilage development, in which
the extracellular matrix has longer to develop.

.0050
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I, NONSYNDROMIC OCULAR
COL2A1, TRP47TER

In a family with the predominantly ocular form of Stickler syndrome type
I (609508), Richards et al. (2006) found a nonsense mutation, trp47 to
ter (W47X), resulting from a 141G-A transition in exon 2 of the COL2A1
gene. They observed 2 other examples of predominantly ocular Stickler
syndrome due to mutations in the alternatively spliced exon 2. One other
mutation causing this phenotype was located at the donor splice site of
IVS51 (120140.0049).

.0051
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I, NONSYNDROMIC OCULAR
COL2A1, CYS64TER

In 2 unrelated patients with nonsyndromic ocular Stickler syndrome
(609508), McAlinden et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous 192C-A
transversion in exon 2 of the COL2A1 gene, resulting in a cys64-to-ter
(C64X) substitution. In vitro studies using a minigene construct
indicated that the C64X, C57Y (120140.0052), and W47X (120140.0050)
mutations resulted in a splicing pattern change and a decreased ratio of
IIA:IIB mRNA. The findings suggested that the mutations were present in
functional cis regulatory elements in exon 2 that are important in
regulating the mechanism of alternative splicing of this exon. McAlinden
et al. (2008) postulated that the mutations did not result in
nonsense-mediated decay and haploinsufficiency, but rather an altered
mRNA splice ratio with effects limited to the eye. Absence of an
extraocular phenotype in Stickler syndrome patients with mutations in
exon 2 of COL2A1 may be due to sufficient production of isoform IIB by
nonsense-mediated altered splicing. Since isoform IIA is expressed in
adult ocular vitreous, the ocular phenotype may be due to inadequate
amounts of isoform IIA in the mature eye.

.0052
STICKLER SYNDROME, TYPE I, NONSYNDROMIC OCULAR
COL2A1, CYS57TYR

In a patient with nonsyndromic ocular Stickler syndrome (609508),
McAlinden et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous 170G-A transition in
exon 2 of the COL2A1 gene, resulting in a cys57-to-tyr (C57Y)
substitution.

.0053
ACHONDROGENESIS, TYPE II
COL2A1, GLY346VAL

In 3 fetuses with lethal achondrogenesis type II (200610) born to a
healthy, nonconsanguineous young couple, Forzano et al. (2007)
identified heterozygosity for a 1037G-T transversion in exon 3 of the
COL2A1 gene resulting in a gly346-to-val (G346V) substitution. An
earlier born fetus had also had achondrogenesis type II. The father's
blood DNA harbored a low mutation signal consistent with mosaicism.
Additional DNA analyses of the father's fibroblasts, hair roots, buccal
smear, and urine revealed weak mosaicism in all tissues. Forzano et al.
(2007) stated that this was the first case of proven somatic mosaicism
for a COL2A1 mutation that led to a lethal skeletal dysplasia in 4
offspring.

.0054
AVASCULAR NECROSIS OF THE FEMORAL HEAD, PRIMARY
COL2A1, THR1383MET

In a 40-year-old man who was diagnosed with avascular necrosis of the
femoral head (608805) at 18 years of age, Kannu et al. (2011) identified
heterozygosity for a 4148C-T transition in exon 51 of the COL2A1 gene,
resulting in a thr1383-to-met (T1383M) substitution within the highly
conserved C-propeptide region. The mutation was not found in unaffected
family members or 150 age-, sex-, and ethnicity-matched controls. The
patient had a normal skeletal survey, other than bilateral hip
degeneration; he had no facial dysmorphism, and ophthalmologic and
audiologic examinations were normal.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Eng and Strom (1985); Huerre-Jeanpierre et al. (1985); Kelly et al.
(1977); Law et al. (1985); Nunez et al. (1985); Sangiorgi et al. (1985);
Sorge et al. (1995); Stoker et al. (1985); Strom et al. (1984); Sybert
et al. (1979); Sykes et al. (1985); Takahashi et al. (1990); Vanek
(1983); Yoo et al. (1983); Young et al. (1984)
REFERENCE 1. Ahmad, N. N.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Knowlton, R. G.; Jimenez, S. A.; Weaver,
E. J.; Maguire, J. I.; Tasman, W.; Prockop, D. J.: Stop codon in
the procollagen II gene (COL2A1) in a family with the Stickler syndrome
(arthro-ophthalmopathy). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 6624-6627, 1991.

2. Ahmad, N. N.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Knowlton, R. G.; Weaver, E. J.; Maguire,
J. I.; Tasman, W.; Prockop, D. J.: A stop codon in the gene for type
II procollagen (COL2A1) causes one variant of arthro-ophthalmopathy
(the Stickler syndrome). (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 47 (suppl.):
A206 only, 1990.

3. Ahmad, N. N.; Dimascio, J.; Knowlton, R. G.; Tasman, W. S.: Stickler
syndrome: a mutation in the nonhelical 3-prime end of type II procollagen
gene. Arch. Ophthal. 113: 1454-1457, 1995.

4. Ahmad, N. N.; McDonald-McGinn, D. M.; Zackai, E. H.; Knowlton,
R. G.; LaRossa, D.; DiMascio, J.; Prockop, D. J.: A second mutation
in the type II procollagen gene (COL2A1) causing Stickler syndrome
(arthro-ophthalmopathy) is also a premature termination codon. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 52: 39-45, 1993.

5. Ala-Kokko, L.; Baldwin, C. T.; Moskowitz, R. W.; Prockop, D. J.
: Single base mutation in the type II procollagen gene (COL2A1) as
a cause of primary osteoarthritis associated with a mild chondrodysplasia. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 6565-6568, 1990.

6. Alexander, R. L.; Shea, M.: Wagner's disease. Arch. Ophthal. 74:
310-318, 1965.

7. Baldwin, C. T.; Reginato, A. M.; Smith, C.; Jimenez, S. A.; Prockop,
D. J.: Structure of cDNA clones coding for human type II procollagen:
the alpha-1(II) chain is more similar to the alpha-1(I) chain than
two other alpha chains of fibrillar collagens. Biochem. J. 262:
521-528, 1989.

8. Ballo, R.; Beighton, P. H.; Ramesar, R. S.: Stickler-like syndrome
due to a dominant negative mutation in the COL2A1 gene. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 80: 6-11, 1998.

9. Beighton, P.; Christy, G.; Learmonth, I. D.: Namaqualand hip dysplasia:
an autosomal dominant entity. Am. J. Med. Genet. 19: 161-169, 1984.

10. Bleasel, J. F.; Holderbaum, D.; Brancolini, V.; Moskowitz, R.
W.; Considine, E. L.; Prockop, D. J.; Devoto, M.; Williams, C. J.
: Five families with arginine-519-to-cysteine mutation in COL2A1:
evidence for three distinct founders. Hum. Mutat. 12: 172-176, 1998.

11. Bogaert, R.; Tiller, G. E.; Weis, M. A.; Gruber, H. E.; Rimoin,
D. L.; Cohn, D. H.; Eyre, D. R.: An amino acid substitution (gly853-to-glu)
in the collagen alpha-1(II) chain produces hypochondrogenesis. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 22522-22526, 1992.

12. Brown, D. M.; Nichols, B. E.; Weingeist, T. A.; Sheffield, V.
C.; Kimura, A. E.; Stone, E. M.: Procollagen II gene mutation in
Stickler syndrome. Arch. Ophthal. 110: 1589-1593, 1992.

13. Chan, D.; Cole, W. G.; Chow, C. W.; Mundlos, S.; Bateman, J. F.
: A COL2A1 mutation in achondrogenesis type II results in the replacement
of type II collagen by type I and III collagens in cartilage. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 1747-1753, 1995.

14. Chan, D.; Rogers, J. F.; Bateman, J. F.; Cole, W. G.: Recurrent
substitutions of arginine 789 by cysteine in pro-alpha 1 (II) collagen
chains produce spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita. J. Rheum. 43
(Suppl.): 37-38, 1995.

15. Chan, D.; Taylor, T. K. F.; Cole, W. G.: Characterization of
an arginine 789 to cysteine substitution in alpha-1(II) collagen chains
of a patient with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. J. Biol. Chem. 268:
15238-15245, 1993.

16. Cheah, K. S. E.; Stoker, N. G.; Griffin, J. R.; Grosveld, F. G.;
Solomon, E.: Identification and characterization of the human type
II collagen gene (COL2A1). Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 2555-2559,
1985.

17. Cole, W. G.; Hall, R. K.; Rogers, J. G.: The clinical features
of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita resulting from the substitution
of glycine 997 by serine in the alpha-1(II) chain of type II collagen. J.
Med. Genet. 30: 27-35, 1993.

18. Donahue, L. R.; Chang, B.; Mohan, S.; Miyakoshi, N.; Wergedal,
J. E.; Baylink, D. J.; Hawes, N. L.; Rosen, C. J.; Ward-Bailey, P.;
Zheng, Q. Y.; Bronson, R. T.; Johnson, K. R.; Davisson, M. T.: A
missense mutation in the mouse Col2a1 gene causes spondyloepiphyseal
dysplasia congenita, hearing loss, and retinoschisis. J. Bone Miner.
Res. 18: 1612-1621, 2003. Note: Erratum: J. Bone Miner. Res. 22:
2011 only, 2007.

19. Eng, C. E. L.; Strom, C. M.: Analysis of three restriction fragment
length polymorphisms in the human type II procollagen gene. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 37: 719-732, 1985.

20. Eyre, D. R.; Weis, M. A.; Moskowitz, R. W.: Cartilage expression
of a type II collagen mutation in an inherited form of osteoarthritis
associated with a mild chondrodysplasia. J. Clin. Invest. 87: 357-361,
1991.

21. Faivre, L.; Le Merrer, M.; Douvier, S.; Laurent, N.; Thauvin-Robinet,
C.; Rousseau, T.; Vereecke, I.; Sagot, P.; Delezoide, A.-L.; Coucke,
P.; Mortier, G.: Recurrence of achondrogenesis type II within the
same family: evidence for germline mosaicism. Am. J. Med. Genet. 126A:
308-312, 2004.

22. Forzano, F.; Lituania, M.; Viassolo, V.; Superti-Furga, A.; Wildhardt,
G.; Zabel, B.; Faravelli, F.: A familial case of achondrogenesis
type II caused by a dominant COL2A1 mutation and 'patchy' expression
in the mosaic father. Am. J. Med. Genet. 143: 2815-2820, 2007.

23. Francomano, C. A.; Liberfarb, R. M.; Hirose, T.; Maumenee, I.
H.; Streeten, E. A.; Meyers, D. A.; Pyeritz, R. E.: The Stickler
syndrome: evidence for close linkage to the structural gene for type
II collagen. Genomics 1: 293-296, 1987.

24. Francomano, C. A.; Maumenee, I.; Liberfarb, R.; Pyeritz, R. E.
: Cosegregation of Stickler syndrome and type II collagen gene alleles.
(Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46: 615 only, 1987.

25. Freddi, S.; Savarirayan, R.; Bateman, J. F.: Molecular diagnosis
of Stickler syndrome: A COL2A1 stop codon mutation screening strategy
that is not compromised by mutant mRNA instability. Am. J. Med. Genet. 90:
398-406, 2000.

26. Gaiser, K. G.; Maddox, B. K.; Bann, J. G.; Boswell, B. A.; Keene,
D. R.; Garofalo, S.; Horton, W. A.: Y-position collagen II mutation
disrupts cartilage formation and skeletal development in a transgenic
mouse model of spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. J. Bone Miner. Res. 17:
39-47, 2002.

27. Garofalo, S.; Vuorio, E.; Metsaranta, M.; Rosati, R.; Toman, D.;
Vaughan, J.; Lozano, G.; Mayne, R.; Ellard, J.; Horton, W.; de Crombrugghe,
B.: Reduced amounts of cartilage collagen fibrils and growth plate
anomalies in transgenic mice harboring a glycine-to-cysteine mutation
in the mouse type II procollagen alpha-1-chain gene. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 88: 9648-9652, 1991.

28. Go, S. L.; Maugeri, A.; Mulder, J. J. S.; van Driel, M. A.; Cremers,
F. P. M.; Hoyng, C. B.: Autosomal dominant rhegmatogenous retinal
detachment associated with an arg453ter mutation in the COL2A1 gene. Invest.
Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 44: 4035-4043, 2003.

29. Godfrey, M.; Hollister, D. W.: Type II achondrogenesis-hypochondrogenesis:
identification of abnormal type II collagen. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 43:
904-913, 1988.

30. Gupta, S. K.; Leonard, B. C.; Damji, K. F.; Bulman, D. E.: A
frame shift mutation in a tissue-specific alternatively spliced exon
of collagen 2A1 in Wagner's vitreoretinal degeneration. Am. J. Ophthal. 133:
203-210, 2002.

31. Helfgott, S. M.; Mosciscki, R. A.; San Martin, J.; Lorenzo, C.;
Kieval, R.; McKenna, M.; Nadol, J.; Trentham, D. E.: Correlation
between antibodies to type II collagen and treatment outcome in bilateral
progressive sensorineural hearing loss. Lancet 337: 387-389, 1991.

32. Holderbaum, D.; Malemud, C. J.; Moskowitz, R. W.; Haqqi, T. M.
: Human cartilage from late stage familial osteoarthritis transcribes
type II collagen mRNA encoding a cysteine in position 519. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 192: 1169-1174, 1993.

33. Hoornaert, K. P.; Dewinter, C.; Vereecke, I.; Beemer, F. A.; Courtens,
W.; Fryer, A.; Fryssira, H.; Lees, M.; Mullner-Eidenbock, A.; Rimoin,
D. L.; Siderius, L.; Superti-Furga, A.; Temple, K.; Willems, P. J.;
Zankl, A.; Zweier, C.; De Paepe, A.; Coucke, P.; Mortier, G. R.:
The phenotypic spectrum in patients with arginine to cysteine mutations
in the COL2A1 gene. J. Med. Genet. 43: 406-413, 2006.

34. Hoornaert, K. P.; Marik, I.; Kozlowski, K.; Cole, T.; Le Merrer,
M.; Leroy, J. G.; Coucke, P. J.; Sillence, D.; Mortier, G. R.: Czech
dysplasia metatarsal type: another type II collagen disorder. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 15: 1269-1275, 2007.

35. Horton, W. A.: Personal Communication. Houston, Texas  1987.

36. Horton, W. A.; Machado, M. A.; Ellard, J.; Campbell, D.; Bartley,
J.; Ramirez, F.; Vitale, E.; Lee, B.: Characterization of a type
II collagen gene (COL2A1) mutation identified in cultured chondrocytes
from human hypochondrogenesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 4583-4587,
1992.

37. Huerre-Jeanpierre, C.; Mattei, M.-G.; Weil, D.; Grzeschik, K.
H.; Chu, M.-L.; Sangiorgi, F. O.; Sobel, M. E.; Ramirez, F.; Junien,
C.: Further evidence for the dispersion of the human fibrillar collagen
genes. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 38: 26-37, 1986.

38. Huerre-Jeanpierre, C.; Mattei, M. G.; Weil, D.; Grzeschik, K.
H.; Sangiorgi, F. O.; Ramirez, F.; Junien, C.: The gene for human
alpha-1 type II collagen (COL2A1) maps to band 12q131. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 40: 657-658, 1985.

39. Kaitila, I.; Korokko, J.; Marttinen, E.; Ala-Kokko, L.: Phenotypic
expressions of a gly154-to-arg mutation in type II collagen in two
unrelated patients with spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD). Am.
J. Med. Genet. 63: 111-122, 1996.

40. Kannu, P.; O'Reilly, D. D.; Hyland, J. C.; Ala Kokko, L.: Avascular
necrosis of the femoral head due to a novel C propeptide mutation
in COL2A1. Am. J. Med. Genet. 155A: 1759-1762, 2011.

41. Kelly, T. E.; Lichtenstein, J. R.; Dorst, J. P.: An unusual familial
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia: 'spondyloperipheral dysplasia'. Birth
Defects Orig. Art. Ser. 13: 149-165, 1977.

42. Kniest, W.: Zur Abgrenzung der Dysostosis enchondralis von der
Chondrodystrophie. Z. Kinderheilk. 43: 633-640, 1952.

43. Knowlton, R. G.; Katzenstein, P.; Moskowitz, R. W.; Weaver, E.
J.; Jimenez, S. A.; Pathria, M. N.; Malemud, C. J.; Prockop, D. J.
: Genetic linkage of the type II procollagen gene to primary generalized
osteoarthritis with chondrodysplasia. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 51: 1024 only, 1989.

44. Knowlton, R. G.; Katzenstein, P. L.; Moskowitz, R. W.; Weaver,
E. J.; Malemud, C. J.; Pathria, M. N.; Jimenez, S. A.; Prockop, D.
J.: Genetic linkage of a polymorphism in the type II procollagen
gene (COL2A1) to primary osteoarthritis associated with mild chondrodysplasia. New
Eng. J. Med. 322: 526-530, 1990.

45. Korkko, J.; Cohn, D. H.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Krakow, D.; Prockop, D.
J.: Widely distributed mutations in the COL2A1 gene produce achondrogenesis
type II/hypochondrogenesis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 92: 95-100, 2000.

46. Korkko, J.; Ritvaniemi, P.; Haataja, L.; Kaariainen, H.; Kivirikko,
K. I.; Prockop, D. J.; Ala-Kokko, L.: Mutation in type II procollagen
(COL2A1) that substitutes aspartate for glycine alpha-I-67 and that
causes cataracts and retinal detachment: evidence for molecular heterogeneity
in the Wagner syndrome and the Stickler syndrome (arthro-ophthalmopathy). Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 53: 55-61, 1993.

47. Kozlowski, K.; Marik, I.; Marikova, O.; Zemkova, D.; Kuklik, M.
: Czech dysplasia metatarsal type. Am. J. Med. Genet. 129A: 87-91,
2004.

48. Kuivaniemi, H.; Tromp, G.; Prockop, D. J.: Mutations in fibrillar
collagens (types I, II, III, and XI), fibril-associated collagen (type
IX), and network-forming collagen (type X) cause a spectrum of diseases
of bone, cartilage, and blood vessels. Hum. Mutat. 9: 300-315, 1997.

49. Law, M. L.; Tung, L.; Morse, H. G.; Berger, R.; Jones, C.; Cheah,
K. S. E.; Solomon, E.: The human type II collagen gene (COL2A1) assigned
to 12q14.3. Ann. Hum. Genet. 50: 131-137, 1986.

50. Law, M. L.; Tung, L.; Morse, H. G.; Berger, R.; Jones, C.; Cheah,
K. S. E.; Stoker, N. G.; Solomon, E.: Regional assignment of the
human type II collagen gene (COL2A1) on chromosome 12. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 40: 678 only, 1985.

51. Learmonth, I. D.; Christy, G.; Beighton, P.: Namaqualand hip
dysplasia: orthopaedic implications. Clin. Orthop. 218: 142-147,
1987.

52. Lee, B.; Vissing, H.; Ramirez, F.; Rogers, D.; Rimoin, D.: Identification
of the molecular defect in a family with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. Science 244:
978-980, 1989.

53. Li, S. W.; Prockop, D. J.; Helminen, H.; Fassler, R.; Lapvetelainen,
T.; Kiraly, K.; Peltarri, A.; Arokoski, J.; Lui, H.; Arita, M.; Khillan,
J. S.: Transgenic mice with targeted inactivation of the Col2a1 gene
for collagen II develop a skeleton with membranous and periosteal
bone but no endochondral bone. Genes Dev. 9: 2821-2830, 1995.

54. Liberfarb, R. M.; Levy, H. P.; Peter, S. R.; Wilkin, D. J.; Davis,
J.; Balog, J. Z.; Griffith, A. J.; Szymko-Bennett, Y. M.; Johnston,
J. J.; Rubin, B. I.; Francomano, C. A.: The Stickler syndrome: genotype/phenotype
correlation in 10 families with Stickler syndrome resulting from 7
mutations in the type II collagen gene locus COL2A1. Genet. Med. 5:
21-27, 2003. Note: Erratum: Genet. Med. 5: 478 only, 2003.

55. Liu, Y.-F.; Chen, W.-M.; Lin, Y.-F.; Yang, R.-C.; Lin, M.-W.;
Li, L.-H.; Chang, Y.-H.; Jou, Y.-S.; Lin, P.-Y.; Su, J.-S.; Huang,
S.-F.; Hsaio, K.-J.; Fann, C. S. J.; Hwang, H.-W.; Chen, Y.-T.; Tsai,
S.-F.: Type II collagen variants and inherited osteonecrosis of the
femoral head. New Eng. J. Med. 352: 2294-2301, 2005.

56. Lovell-Badge, R. H.; Bygrave, A.; Bradley, A.; Robertson, E.;
Tilly, R.; Cheah, K. S. E.: Tissue-specific expression of the human
type II collagen gene in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 2803-2807,
1987.

57. Matsui, Y.; Michigami, T.; Tachikawa, K.; Yamazaki, M.; Kawabata,
H.; Nishimura, G.: Czech dysplasia occurring in a Japanese family. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 149A: 2285-2289, 2009.

58. Maumenee, I. H.; Traboulsi, E. I.: The ocular findings in Kniest
dysplasia. Am. J. Ophthal. 100: 155-160, 1985.

59. McAlinden, A.; Majava, M.; Bishop, P. N.; Perveen, R.; Black,
G. C. M.; Pierpont, M. E.; Ala-Kokko, L.; Mannikko, M.: Missense
and nonsense mutations in the alternatively-spliced exon 2 of COL2A1
cause the ocular variant of Stickler syndrome. Hum. Mutat. 29: 83-90,
2008.

60. Meulenbelt, I.; Williams, C. J.; te Koppele, J. M.; van de Giessen,
G. C.; Slagboom, P. E.: Population haplotype analysis and evolutionary
relations of the COL2A1 gene. Ann. Hum. Genet. 60: 189-199, 1996.

61. Miyamoto, Y.; Matsuda, T.; Kitoh, H.; Haga, N.; Ohashi, H.; Nishimura,
G.; Ikegawa, S.: A recurrent mutation in type II collagen gene causes
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease in a Japanese family. Hum. Genet. 121:
625-629, 2007.

62. Miyamoto, Y.; Nakashima, E.; Hiraoka, H.; Ohashi, H.; Ikegawa,
S.: A type II collagen mutation also results in oto-spondylo-megaepiphyseal
dysplasia. Hum. Genet. 118: 175-178, 2005.

63. Mortier, G. R.; Wilkin, D. J.; Wilcox, W. R.; Rimoin, D. L.; Lachman,
R. S.; Eyre, D. R.; Cohn, D. H.: A radiographic, morphologic, biochemical
and molecular analysis of a case of achondrogenesis type II resulting
from substitution for a glycine residue (gly691-to-arg) in the type
II collagen trimer. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 285-288, 1995.

64. Nelson, F.; Dahlberg, L.; Laverty, S.; Reiner, A.; Pidoux, I.;
Ionescu, M.; Fraser, G. L.; Brooks, E.; Tanzer, M.; Rosenberg, L.
C.; Dieppe, P.; Poole, A. R.: Evidence for altered synthesis of type
II collagen in patients with osteoarthritis. J. Clin. Invest. 102:
2115-2125, 1998.

65. Nishimura, G.; Haga, N.; Kitoh, H.; Tanaka, Y.; Sonoda, T.; Kitamura,
M.; Shirahama, S.; Itoh, T.; Nakashima, E.; Ohashi, H.; Ikegawa, S.
: The phenotypic spectrum of COL2A1 mutations. Hum. Mutat. 26: 36-43,
2005.

66. Nishimura, G.; Nakashima, E.; Mabuchi, A.; Shimamoto, K.; Shimamoto,
T.; Shimao, Y.; Nagai, T.; Yamaguchi, T.; Kosaki, R.; Ohashi, H.;
Makita, Y.; Ikegawa, S.: Identification of COL2A1 mutations in platyspondylic
skeletal dysplasia, Torrance type. J. Med. Genet. 41: 75-79, 2004.

67. Nunez, A. M.; Francomano, C.; Young, M. F.; Martin, G. R.; Yamada,
Y.: Isolation and partial characterization of genomic clones coding
for a human pro-alpha-1(II) collagen chain and demonstration of restriction
fragment length polymorphism at the 3-prime end of the gene. Biochemistry 24:
6343-6348, 1985.

68. Pope, F. M.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Nicholls, A. C.; Price, A. B.; Grosveld,
F. G.: Lethal osteogenesis imperfecta congenita and a 300 base pair
gene deletion for alpha-1-like collagen. Brit. Med. J. 288: 431-434,
1984.

69. Reginato, A. J.; Passano, G. M.; Neumann, G.; Falasca, G. F.;
Diaz-Valdez, M.; Jimenez, S. A.; Williams, C. J.: Familial spondyloepiphyseal
dysplasia tarda, brachydactyly, and precocious osteoarthritis associated
with an arginine75-to-cysteine mutation in the procollagen type II
gene in a kindred of Chiloe Islanders. I. Clinical, radiographic,
and pathologic findings. Arthritis Rheum. 37: 1078-1086, 1994.

70. Richards, A. J.; Baguley, D. M.; Yates, J. R. W.; Lane, C.; Nicol,
M.; Harper, P. S.; Scott, J. D.; Snead, M. P.: Variation in the vitreous
phenotype of Stickler syndrome can be caused by different amino acid
substitutions in the X position of the type II collagen gly-X-Y triple
helix. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 1083-1094, 2000.

71. Richards, A. J.; Laidlaw, M.; Whittaker, J.; Breacy, B.; Rai,
H.; Bearcroft, P.; Baguley, D. M.; Poulson, A.; Ang, A.; Scott, J.
D.; Snead, M. P.: High efficiency of mutation detection in type 1
Stickler syndrome using a two-stage approach: vitreoretinal assessment
coupled with exon sequencing for screening COL2A1. Hum. Mutat. 27:
696-704, 2006. Note: Erratum: Hum. Mutat. 27: 1156 only, 2006.

72. Richards, A. J.; Meredith, S.; Poulson, A.; Bearcroft, P.; Crossland,
G.; Baguley, D. M.; Scott, J. D.; Snead, M. P.: A novel mutation
of COL2A1 resulting in dominantly inherited rhegmatogenous retinal
detachment. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 46: 663-668, 2005.

73. Richards, A. J.; Morgan, J.; Bearcroft, P. W. P.; Pickering, E.;
Owen, M. J.; Holmans, P.; Williams, N.; Tysoe, C.; Pope, F. M.; Snead,
M. P.; Hughes, H.: Vitreoretinopathy with phalangeal epiphyseal dysplasia,
a type II collagenopathy resulting from a novel mutation in the C-propeptide
region of the molecule. J. Med. Genet. 39: 661-665, 2002.

74. Ritvaniemi, P.; Hyland, J.; Ignatius, J.; Kivirikko, K. I.; Prockop,
D. J.; Ala-Kokko, L.: A fourth example suggests that premature termination
codons in the COL2A1 gene are a common cause of the Stickler syndrome:
analysis of the COL2A1 gene by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Genomics 17:
218-221, 1993.

75. Sangiorgi, F.; Huerre-Jeanpierre, C.; Weil, D.; Grzeschik, K.
H.; Junien, C.; Sobel, M.; Ramirez, F.: Chromosomal assignment of
the human type II collagen gene. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 36:
208S only, 1984.

76. Sangiorgi, F. O.; Benson-Chanda, V.; de Wet, W. J.; Sobel, M.
E.; Tsipouras, P.; Ramirez, F.: Isolation and partial characterization
of the entire human pro-alpha-1(II) collagen gene. Nucleic Acids
Res. 13: 2207-2225, 1985.

77. Sher, C.; Ramesar, R.; Martell, R.; Learmonth, I.; Tsipouras,
P.; Beighton, P.: Mild spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia (Namaqualand
type): genetic linkage to the type II collagen gene (COL2A1). Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 48: 518-524, 1991.

78. Siggers, D. C.: U. Kniest disease.:In: Bergsma, D. (ed.): Skeletal
Dysplasias.  New York: American Elsevier  1974. Pg. 432-442.

79. Siggers, D. C.; Rimoin, D. L.; Dorst, J. P.; Doty, S. B.; Williams,
B. R.; Hollister, D. W.; Silberberg, R.; Granley, R. E.; Kaufman,
R. L.; McKusick, V. A.: The Kniest syndrome. Birth Defects Orig.
Art. Ser. 10(9): 193-208, 1974.

80. Slepecky, N. B.; Savage, J. E.; Yoo, T. J.: Localization of type
II, IX and V collagen in the inner ear. Acta Otolaryng. 112: 611-617,
1992.

81. Sobetzko, D.; Eich, G.; Kalff-Suske, M.; Grzeschik, K.-H.; Superti-Furga,
A.: Boy with syndactylies, macrocephaly, and severe skeletal dysplasia:
not a new syndrome, but two dominant mutations (GLI3 E543X and COL2A1
G973R) in the same individual. Am. J. Med. Genet. 90: 239-242, 2000.

82. Solomon, E.; Hiorns, L. R.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Parkar, M.; Weiss,
E.; Flavell, R. A.: Assignment of a human alpha-1(I)-like collagen
gene to chromosome 12, by molecular hybridization. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 37: 588-589, 1984.

83. Solomon, E.; Hiorns, L. R.; Spurr, N.; Kurkinen, M.; Barlow, D.;
Hogan, B. L. M.; Dalgleish, R.: Chromosomal assignments of the genes
coding for human types II, III and IV collagen: a dispersed gene family. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 82: 3330-3334, 1985.

84. Sorge, G.; Ruggieri, M.; Lachman, R. S.: Spondyloperipheral dysplasia. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 59: 139-142, 1995.

85. Spranger, J.; Winterpacht, A.; Zabel, B.: Kniest dysplasia: Dr.
W. Kniest, his patient, the molecular defect. Am. J. Med. Genet. 69:
79-84, 1997.

86. Stickler, G. B.; Belau, P. G.; Farrell, F. J.; Jones, J. D.; Pugh,
D. G.; Steinberg, A. G.; Ward, L. E.: Hereditary progressive arthro-ophthalmopathy. Mayo
Clin. Proc. 40: 433-455, 1965.

87. Stoker, N. G.; Cheah, K. S. E.; Griffin, J. R.; Pope, F. M.; Solomon,
E.: A highly polymorphic region 3-prime to the human type II collagen
gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 13: 4613-4622, 1985.

88. Strom, C. M.: Achondroplasia due to DNA insertion into the type
II collagen gene. (Abstract) Pediat. Res. 18: 226A only, 1984.

89. Strom, C. M.; Eddy, R. L.; Shows, T. B.: Localization of human
type II procollagen gene (COL2A1) to chromosome 12. Somat. Cell Molec.
Genet. 10: 651-655, 1984.

90. Strom, C. M.; Upholt, W. B.: Isolation and characterization of
genomic clones corresponding to the human type II procollagen gene. Nucleic
Acids Res. 12: 1025-1038, 1984.

91. Sulko, J.; Czarny-Ratajczak, M.; Wozniak, A.; Latos-Bielenska,
A.; Kozlowski, K.: Novel amino acid substitution in the Y-position
of collagen type II causes spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia congenita. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 137A: 292-297, 2005.

92. Sybert, V. P.; Byers, P. H.; Hall, J. G.: Variable expression
in a dominantly inherited skeletal dysplasia with similarities to
brachydactyly E and spondyloepiphyseal-spondyloperipheral dysplasia. Clin.
Genet. 15: 160-166, 1979.

93. Sykes, B.; Smith, R.; Vipond, S.; Paterson, C.; Cheah, K.; Solomon,
E.: Exclusion of the alpha-1(II) cartilage collagen gene as the mutant
locus in type IA osteogenesis imperfecta. J. Med. Genet. 22: 187-191,
1985.

94. Sykes, B. C.; Ogilvie, D. J.; Wordsworth, B. P.: Lethal osteogenesis
imperfecta and a collagen gene deletion: length polymorphism provides
an alternative explanation. Hum. Genet. 70: 35-37, 1985.

95. Takahashi, E.; Hori, T.; O'Connell, P.; Leppert, M.; White, R.
: R-banding and nonisotopic in situ hybridization: precise localization
of the human type II collagen gene (COL2A1). Hum. Genet. 86: 14-16,
1990.

96. Takahashi, E.; Hori, T.; Sutherland, G. R.: Mapping of the human
type II collagen gene (COL2A1) proximal to fra(12)(q13.1) by nonisotopic
in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 54: 84-85, 1990.

97. Thanaraj, T. A.; Clark, F.: Human GC-AG alternative intron isoforms
with weak donor sites show enhanced consensus at acceptor exon positions. Nucleic
Acids Res. 29: 2581-2593, 2001.

98. Tiller, G. E.; Polumbo, P. A.; Weis, M. A.; Bogaert, R.; Lachman,
R. S.; Cohn, D. H.; Rimoin, D. L.; Eyre, D. R.: Dominant mutations
in the type II collagen gene, COL2A1, produce spondyloepimetaphyseal
dysplasia, Strudwick type. Nature Genet. 11: 87-89, 1995.

99. Tiller, G. E.; Rimoin, D. L.; Murray, L. W.; Cohn, D. H.: Tandem
duplication within a type II collagen gene (COL2A1) exon in an individual
with spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 3889-3893,
1990.

100. Tiller, G. E.; Weis, M. A.; Lachman, R. S.; Cohn, D. H.; Rimoin,
D. L.; Eyre, D. R.: A dominant mutation in the type II collagen gene
(COL2A1) produces spondyloepimetaphyseal dysplasia (SEMD), Strudwick
type. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 53 (suppl.): A209 only, 1993.

101. Unger, S.; Korkko, J.; Krakow, D.; Lachman, R. S.; Rimoin, D.
L.; Cohn, D. H.: Double heterozygosity for pseudoachondroplasia and
spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita. Am. J. Med. Genet. 104:
140-146, 2001.

102. Vandenberg, P.; Khillan, J. S.; Prockop, D. J.; Helminen, H.;
Kontusaari, S.; Ala-Kokko, L.: Expression of a partially deleted
gene of a human type II procollagen (COL2A1) in transgenic mice produces
a chondrodysplasia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 7640-7644, 1991.

103. van der Rest, M.; Rosenberg, L. C.; Olsen, B. R.; Poole, A. R.
: Chondrocalcin is identical with the C-propeptide of type II procollagen. Biochem.
J. 237: 923-925, 1986.

104. Vanek, J.: Spondyloperipheral dysplasia. J. Med. Genet. 20:
117-121, 1983.

105. Vikkula, M.; Ritvaniemi, P.; Vuorio, A. F.; Kaitila, I.; Ala-Kokko,
L.; Peltonen, L.: A mutation in the amino-terminal end of the triple
helix of type II collagen causing severe osteochondrodysplasia. Genomics 16:
282-285, 1993.

106. Vissing, H.; D'Alessio, M.; Lee, B.; Ramirez, F.; Godfrey, M.;
Hollister, D. W.: Glycine to serine substitution in the triple helical
domain of pro-alpha-1(II) collagen results in a lethal perinatal form
of short-limbed dwarfism. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 18265-18267, 1989.

107. Wagner, H.: Ein bisher unbeknantes Erbleiden des Auges (degeneratio
hyaloideo-retinalis hereditaria), beobachtet im Kanton, Zurich. Klin.
Monatsbl. Augenheilkd. 100: 840-857, 1938.

108. Weis, M. A.; Wilkin, D. J.; Kim, H. J.; Wilcox, W. R.; Lachman,
R. S.; Rimoin, D. L.; Cohn, D. H.; Eyre, D. R.: Structurally abnormal
type II collagen in a severe form of Kniest dysplasia caused by an
exon 24 skipping mutation. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 4761-4768, 1998.

109. Weiss, E. H.; Cheah, S. E.; Grosveld, F. G.; Dahl, H. H. M.;
Solomon, E.; Flavell, R. A.: Isolation and characterization of a
human collagen alpha1(I)-like gene from a cosmid library. Nucleic
Acids Res. 10: 1981-1992, 1982.

110. Wilkin, D. J.; Artz, A. S.; South, S.; Lachman, R. S.; Rimoin,
D. L.; Wilcox, W. R.; McKusick, V. A.; Stratakis, C. A.; Francomano,
C. A.; Cohn, D. H.: Small deletions in the type II collagen triple
helix produce Kniest dysplasia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 85: 105-112,
1999.

111. Wilkin, D. J.; Bogaert, R.; Lachman, R. S.; Rimoin, D. L.; Eyre,
D. R.; Cohn, D. H.: A single amino acid substitution (G103D) in the
type II collagen triple helix produces Kniest dysplasia. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 3: 1999-2003, 1994.

112. Wilkin, D. J.; Liberfarb, R.; Davis, J.; Levy, H. P.; Cole, W.
G.; Francomano, C. A.; Cohn, D. H.: Rapid determination of COL2A1
mutations in individuals with Stickler syndrome: analysis of potential
premature termination codons. Am. J. Med. Genet. 94: 141-148, 2000.

113. Williams, C. J.; Considine, E. L.; Knowlton, R. G.; Reginato,
A.; Neumann, G.; Harrison, D.; Buxton, P.; Jimenez, S.; Prockop, D.
J.: Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia and precocious osteoarthritis in
a family with an arg75-to-cys mutation in the procollagen type II
gene (COL2A1). Hum. Genet. 92: 499-505, 1993.

114. Williams, C. J.; Ganguly, A.; Considine, E.; McCarron, S.; Prockop,
D. J.; Walsh-Vockley, C.; Michels, V. V.: A(-2)-to-G transition at
the 3-prime acceptor splice site of IVS17 characterizes the COL2A1
gene mutation in the original Stickler syndrome kindred. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 63: 461-467, 1996.

115. Williams, C. J.; Rock, M.; Considine, E.; McCarron, S.; Gow,
P.; Ladda, R.; McLain, D.; Michels, V. M.; Murphy, W.; Prockop, D.
J.; Ganguly, A.: Three new point mutations in type II procollagen
(COL2A1) and identification of a fourth family with the COL2A1 arg519-to-cys
base substitution using conformation sensitive gel electrophoresis. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 4: 309-312, 1995.

116. Winterpacht, A.; Hilbert, M.; Schwarze, U.; Mundlos, S.; Spranger,
J.; Zabel, B. U.: Kniest and Stickler dysplasia phenotypes caused
by collagen type II gene (COL2A1) defect. Nature Genet. 3: 323-326,
1993.

117. Winterpacht, A.; Schwarze, U.; Mundlos, S.; Menger, H.; Spranger,
J.; Zabel, B.: Alternative splicing as the result of a type II procollagen
gene (COL2A1) mutation in a patient with Kniest dysplasia. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 3: 1891-1893, 1994.

118. Wu, J.-J.; Eyre, D. R.: Structural analysis of cross-linking
domains in cartilage type XI collagen: insights on polymeric assembly. J.
Biol. Chem. 270: 18865-18870, 1995.

119. Yoo, T. J.; Tomoda, K.; Stuart, J. M.; Cremer, M. A.; Townes,
A. S.; Kang, A. H.: Type II collagen-induced autoimmune sensorineural
hearing loss and vestibular dysfunction in rats. Ann. Otol. Rhinol.
Laryng. 92: 267-271, 1983.

120. Yoo, T. J.; Tomoda, K.; Stuart, J. M.; Kang, A. H.; Townes, A.
S.: Type II collagen-induced autoimmune otospongiosis: a preliminary
report. Ann. Otol. Rhinol. Laryng. 92: 103-108, 1983.

121. Young, M. F.; Vogeli, G.; Nunez, A. M.; Fernandez, M. P.; Sullivan,
M.; Sobel, M. E.: Isolation of cDNA and genomic DNA clones encoding
type II collagen. Nucleic Acids Res. 12: 4207-4228, 1984.

122. Zabel, B.; Hilbert, K.; Stoss, H.; Superti-Furga, A.; Spranger,
J.; Winterpacht, A.: A specific collagen type II gene (COL2A1) mutation
presenting as spondyloperipheral dysplasia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 63:
123-128, 1996.

123. Zankl, A.; Zabel, B.; Hilbert, K.; Wildhardt, G.; Cuenot, S.;
Xavier, B.; Ha-Vinh, R.; Bonafe, L.; Spranger, J.; Superti-Furga,
A.: Spondyloperipheral dysplasia is caused by truncating mutations
in the C-propeptide of COL2A1. Am. J. Med. Genet. 129A: 144-148,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/17/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/15/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/15/2011
Kelly A. Przylepa - updated: 4/17/2008
Kelly A. Przylepa - updated: 4/11/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/4/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/13/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/29/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/20/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/14/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/3/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/20/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/17/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/7/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/3/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/14/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/22/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/4/2003
Jane Kelly - updated: 9/10/2002
Sonja A. Rasmussen - updated: 7/10/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/21/2000
Sonja A. Rasmussen - updated: 10/11/2000
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 9/25/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/17/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/23/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/20/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/26/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/5/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/17/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/13/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/3/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/23/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/13/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/12/1997
Cynthia K. Ewing - updated: 10/14/1996
Lori M. Kelman - updated: 10/6/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 02/05/2013
joanna: 2/1/2013
terry: 10/3/2012
carol: 9/24/2012
carol: 9/6/2012
terry: 8/22/2012
carol: 8/9/2012
carol: 10/18/2011
terry: 10/17/2011
carol: 9/14/2011
carol: 8/22/2011
carol: 8/5/2011
terry: 7/21/2011
carol: 7/20/2011
wwang: 6/16/2011
terry: 6/15/2011
terry: 3/16/2011
carol: 3/15/2011
terry: 3/15/2011
terry: 3/10/2011
terry: 3/9/2011
carol: 3/7/2011
carol: 3/4/2011
terry: 11/16/2010
terry: 4/17/2008
carol: 4/11/2008
wwang: 3/19/2008
carol: 3/7/2008
ckniffin: 3/4/2008
carol: 6/15/2007
terry: 6/13/2007
alopez: 10/16/2006
terry: 9/29/2006
wwang: 9/7/2006
wwang: 6/21/2006
terry: 6/20/2006
terry: 3/23/2006
alopez: 2/27/2006
terry: 2/14/2006
wwang: 10/11/2005
terry: 10/3/2005
wwang: 9/26/2005
terry: 9/20/2005
alopez: 7/29/2005
alopez: 6/22/2005
terry: 6/17/2005
carol: 11/18/2004
carol: 10/11/2004
carol: 10/8/2004
terry: 10/7/2004
tkritzer: 6/23/2004
terry: 5/3/2004
alopez: 4/19/2004
terry: 4/14/2004
carol: 3/17/2004
tkritzer: 12/23/2003
terry: 12/22/2003
tkritzer: 12/18/2003
cwells: 3/4/2003
carol: 11/15/2002
alopez: 9/10/2002
carol: 7/10/2002
carol: 2/6/2002
alopez: 6/13/2001
terry: 3/21/2001
carol: 12/21/2000
carol: 12/13/2000
terry: 11/21/2000
mcapotos: 10/13/2000
mcapotos: 10/11/2000
carol: 9/25/2000
carol: 6/16/2000
carol: 4/21/2000
alopez: 4/12/2000
mgross: 3/17/2000
alopez: 2/25/2000
terry: 2/23/2000
terry: 12/1/1999
jlewis: 8/2/1999
terry: 7/20/1999
carol: 1/29/1999
terry: 1/26/1999
carol: 1/13/1999
terry: 1/5/1999
dkim: 12/9/1998
alopez: 11/18/1998
alopez: 11/17/1998
alopez: 9/29/1998
carol: 8/27/1998
carol: 8/14/1998
terry: 8/13/1998
terry: 6/18/1998
terry: 5/29/1998
alopez: 3/24/1998
alopez: 3/16/1998
terry: 3/3/1998
mark: 7/16/1997
mark: 7/15/1997
terry: 6/23/1997
terry: 6/20/1997
mark: 5/13/1997
terry: 5/12/1997
terry: 1/17/1997
terry: 12/17/1996
jamie: 11/13/1996
jamie: 10/23/1996
jamie: 10/16/1996
jamie: 10/14/1996
mark: 10/6/1996
mark: 6/25/1996
terry: 6/14/1996
mark: 3/15/1996
mark: 3/3/1996
terry: 2/23/1996
mark: 3/31/1995
davew: 6/27/1994
jason: 6/24/1994
terry: 5/13/1994
mimadm: 4/13/1994
warfield: 4/7/1994

