606829	TITLE *606829 FRATAXIN; FXN
;;FRDA GENE;;
X25
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Frataxin is a nuclear-encoded mitochondrial iron chaperone involved in
iron-sulfur biogenesis and heme biosynthesis. Some studies have also
suggested that frataxin functions as an iron storage molecule, an
antioxidant, and a tumor suppressor (summary by Schmucker et al.
(2008)).

CLONING

By searching the candidate region defined by analysis of recombination
events in families with Friedreich ataxia (229300), Montermini et al.
(1995) reported that they had located a 150-kb region in chromosome 9q13
that represented the FRDA locus. Campuzano et al. (1996) identified
potential exons in the region in chromosome 9q13 using cDNA selection
and sequence analysis. The FXN gene was isolated by this method and
called X25 by the authors. It encodes a 210-amino acid protein, termed
frataxin. It was shown to be expressed in a range of tissues, most
abundantly in heart. High levels of expression were also found in the
spinal cord; lower levels were detected in the cerebellum, and no
expression was demonstrated in the cerebral cortex.

Koutnikova et al. (1997) cloned the complete coding region of mouse
frataxin and studied its pattern of expression in developing and adult
tissues. Frataxin mRNA was predominantly expressed in tissues with a
high metabolic rate, including liver, kidney, brown fat, and heart. They
showed that mouse and yeast frataxin homologs contain a potential
mitochondrial targeting sequence in their N-terminal domains and that
disruption of the yeast gene results in mitochondrial dysfunction.

GENE STRUCTURE

Campuzano et al. (1996) found that the FXN gene contains 6 exons.

Baralle et al. (2008) stated that the FXN gene contains 7 exons and
spans about 80 kb. The GAA repeat, which when expanded is associated
with disease, is located in the middle of an Alu sequence in the
approximately 11-kb first intron.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Campuzano et al. (1996) mapped the FXN gene to
chromosome 9q13.

GENE FUNCTION

To study frataxin function, Campuzano et al. (1997) developed monoclonal
antibodies raised against different regions of the frataxin protein.
These antibodies detected a processed 18-kD protein in various human and
mouse tissues and cell lines that is severely reduced in Friedreich
ataxia patients. By immunocytofluorescence and immunocytoelectron
microscopy, Campuzano et al. (1997) demonstrated that frataxin is
located in mitochondria, associated with the mitochondrial membranes and
crests. Analysis of cellular localization of various truncated forms of
frataxin expressed in cultured cells and evidence of removal of an
N-terminal epitope during protein maturation demonstrated that the
mitochondrial targeting sequence is encoded by the first 20 amino acids.
Given the shared clinical features between Friedreich ataxia, vitamin E
deficiency, and some mitochondriopathies, Campuzano et al. (1997)
suggested that their data indicate that a reduction in frataxin results
in oxidative damage.

Using the yeast 2-hybrid assay (Fields and Song, 1989), Koutnikova et
al. (1998) identified mitochondrial processing peptidase-beta (MPPB;
603131) as a frataxin protein partner. In in vitro assays, MPPB bound
frataxin which is cleaved by the reconstituted MPP heterodimer. MPP
cleavage of frataxin results in an intermediate form (amino acids 41 to
210) that is processed further to the mature form. In vitro and in vivo
experiments suggested that 2 C-terminal missense mutations found in FRDA
patients, I151F (606829.0004) and G127V (606829.0005), modulate
interaction with MPP-beta, resulting in a slower maturation process at
the normal cleavage site. The slower processing rate of frataxin
carrying such missense mutations may therefore contribute to frataxin
deficiency, in addition to an impairment of its function. Similar
studies were reported by Gordon et al. (1999), with conflicting results.
They performed in vitro experiments with MPP, wildtype and I154F human
frataxin or its mutant yeast homolog, and purified mammalian or yeast
mitochondria. These authors concluded that MPP was capable of 1-step
processing of frataxin to the mature form, and that the I154F mutation
had no effect on mitochondrial import and/or maturation of frataxin.

Schmucker et al. (2008) found that the 210-amino acid FXN precursor
could be processed into several forms in vitro depending upon the assay
conditions. They determined that the physiologically relevant mature
peptide corresponds to amino acids 81 through 210, which is generated by
MPPB in 2 cleavage steps.

Ristow et al. (2000) demonstrated that overexpression of frataxin in
mammalian cells causes a Ca(2+)-induced upregulation of tricarboxylic
acid cycle flux and respiration, which, in turn, leads to an increased
mitochondrial membrane potential and results in an elevated cellular ATP
content. Thus, frataxin appears to be a key activator of mitochondrial
energy conversion and oxidative phosphorylation.

Santos et al. (2001) examined the role of frataxin in neuronal
differentiation by transfecting the P19 embryonic carcinoma cell line
with antisense or sense frataxin constructs. During retinoic
acid-induced neurogenesis of frataxin-deficient cells there was a
striking rise in cell death, while cell division remained unaffected.
However, frataxin deficiency did not affect cell survival in cells
induced to differentiate into cardiomyocytes. Frataxin deficiency
enhanced apoptosis of retinoic acid-stimulated cells, and the number of
neuronal-like cells expressing MAP2 (157130) was dramatically reduced in
these clones. In addition, antisense clones induced to differentiate
into neuroectoderm with retinoic acid had increased production of
reactive oxygen species, and only cells noncommitted to the neuronal
lineages could be rescued by the addition of the antioxidant
N-acetylcysteine (NAC). However, NAC treatment had no effect in
increasing the number of terminally differentiated neuronal-like cells
in frataxin-deficient clones. The authors suggested that frataxin
deficiency may render cells susceptible to apoptosis after exposure to
appropriate stimuli.

Adinolfi et al. (2002) compared the properties of 3 proteins from the
frataxin family (bacterial CyaY from Escherichia coli, yeast Yfh1, and
human frataxin) as representative of organisms of increasing complexity.
The 3 proteins have the same fold but different thermal stabilities and
iron-binding properties. While human frataxin has no tendency to bind
iron, CyaY forms iron-promoted aggregates with a behavior similar to
that of yeast frataxin. Mutants produced to identify the protein surface
involved in iron-promoted aggregation demonstrated that the process is
mediated by a negatively charged surface ridge. Mutation of 3 of these
residues was sufficient to convert CyaY into a protein with properties
similar to those of human frataxin. On the other hand, mutation of the
exposed surface of the beta sheet, which contains most of the conserved
residues, did not affect aggregation, suggesting to the authors that
iron binding is a nonconserved part of a more complex cellular function
of frataxins.

Cavadini et al. (2002) showed that the mature form of human frataxin,
when expressed in E. coli, assembles into a stable homopolymer that can
bind approximately 10 atoms of iron per molecule of frataxin. As
analyzed by gel filtration and electron microscopy, the homopolymer
consists of globular particles of approximately 1 megadalton and orders
rod-shaped polymers of these particles that accumulate small
electron-dense cores. When the human frataxin precursor was expressed in
S. cerevisiae, the mitochondrially-generated mature form was separated
by gel filtration into monomer and a high molecular weight pool of
approximately 600 kD, which was also present in mouse heart. In
radiolabeled yeast cells, human frataxin was recovered by
immunoprecipitation with approximately 5 atoms of iron bound per
molecule. The authors suggested that FRDA may result from decreased
mitochondrial iron storage due to frataxin deficiency, which may impair
iron metabolism, promote oxidative damage, and lead to progressive iron
accumulation.

Shoichet et al. (2002) demonstrated that transgenic overexpression of
human frataxin in murine 3T3-L1 cells increased cellular antioxidant
defense. Subsequent activation of glutathione peroxidase and elevation
of reduced thiols reduced the incidence of malignant transformation
induced by reactive oxygen species, as observed by tumor formation in
nude mice. The authors tentatively suggested a role for frataxin
mutations in the early induction of cancer.

Tan et al. (2003) analyzed gene expression in 3 human cell types using
microarrays and identified 48 transcripts whose expression was
significantly frataxin-dependent in at least 2 cell types. Significant
decreases in 7 transcripts occurred in the sulfur amino acid (SAA)
biosynthetic pathway and the iron-sulfur cluster (ISC) biosynthetic
pathway to which it is connected. Expression of ISC-S and rhodanese
(TST; 180370) transcripts was lower in mutants. Homocystine, cysteine,
cystathionine, and serine were significantly decreased in
frataxin-deficient cell extracts and mitochondria. Succinate
dehydrogenase and aconitase, whose activities require ISCs, were less
active. The ISC-U scaffold protein was specifically decreased in
frataxin-deficient cells, and sodium sulfide partially rescued the
oxidant sensitivity of the FRDA cells. Multiple transcripts involved in
the Fas (134637)/TNF (191160)/INF apoptosis pathway were upregulated in
frataxin-deficient cells, consistent with a multistep mechanism of
Friedreich ataxia pathophysiology and suggesting alternative
possibilities for therapeutic intervention.

By RNA interference (RNAi) of frataxin in HeLa cells, Stehling et al.
(2004) found that the enzyme activity of mitochondrial Fe/S proteins
aconitase (ACO1/IRP1; 100880) and succinate dehydrogenase (SDHA; 600857)
was decreased, while the activity of non-Fe/S proteins remained
constant. Fe/S cluster association with cytosolic IRP1 was diminished.
In contrast, no alterations in cellular iron uptake, iron content, and
heme formation were found, and no mitochondrial iron deposits were
observed upon frataxin depletion. Iron accumulation in FRDA mitochondria
appeared to be a late consequence of frataxin deficiency. Stehling et
al. (2004) concluded that frataxin is a component of the human Fe/S
cluster assembly machinery and that it plays a role in the maturation of
both mitochondrial and cytosolic Fe/S proteins.

Bulteau et al. (2004) found that aconitase (100850) activity can undergo
reversible citrate-dependent modulation in response to prooxidants.
Frataxin interacted with aconitase in a citrate-dependent fashion,
reduced the level of oxidant-induced inactivation, and converted the
inactive [3Fe-4S]1+ enzyme to the active [4Fe-4S]2+ form of the protein.
Bulteau et al. (2004) concluded that frataxin is an iron chaperone
protein that protects the aconitase [4Fe-4S]2+ cluster from disassembly
and promotes enzyme reactivation.

To further discern the role of oxidative stress in FRDA pathophysiology,
Seznec et al. (2005) tested the potential effect of increased
antioxidant defense using an MnSOD mimetic (SOD2; 147460) and Cu-Zn SOD
(SOD1; 147450) overexpression on murine FRDA cardiomyopathy. No positive
effect was observed, suggesting that increased superoxide production
could not solely explain the cardiac pathophysiology associated with
FRDA. Complete frataxin deficiency neither induced oxidative stress in
neuronal tissues nor altered MnSOD expression and induction in early
stages of neuronal and cardiac pathology. Cytosolic ISC aconitase
activity of IRP1 progressively decreased, whereas its apo-RNA binding
form increased despite the absence of oxidative stress, suggesting that
in a mammalian system the mitochondrial ISC assembly machinery is
essential for cytosolic ISC biogenesis. Seznec et al. (2005) concluded
that in FRDA, mitochondrial iron accumulation does not induce oxidative
stress, and FRDA is not associated with oxidative damage.

By immunoprecipitation analysis of mitochondria from human lymphoblasts
and transfected COS-7 cells, Shan et al. (2007) showed that FXN
interacted directly with several mitochondrial proteins, including the
iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis complex component ISD11 (LYRM4; 613311),
the mitochondrial chaperones HSPA9 (600548) and HSP60 (HSPD1; 118190),
the ATP synthase subunit ATP5L, the ATPase ATAD3A (612316), succinate
dehydrogenase subunit A (SDHA; 600857), AFG3L2 (604581), and FXN itself.
Reciprocal immunoprecipitation analysis confirmed the interactions of
FXN with ISD11 and HSPA9 in transfected HEK293 cells. The interaction
between FXN and ISD11 was reversed by EDTA and by several cations at
physiologic concentration, including Fe(3+). However, Ni(2+)
strengthened the interaction between FXN and ISD11. RT-PCR analysis of
lymphoblasts from Friedreich ataxia patients revealed that reduced FXN
mRNA was associated with reduced ISD11 mRNA. Shan et al. (2007) proposed
that FXN deficiency causes transcriptional corepression of genes
involved in iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis.

Using hybrid reporter minigenes with 100 GAA or TTC repeats transfected
into COS or HeLa cells, Baralle et al. (2008) found that both repeats
were efficiently transcribed and inserted into nascent pre-mRNAs that
bound multiple splicing factors. However, the GAA repeats, but not TTC
repeats, caused aberrant splicing of the pre-mRNA. The type of aberrant
splicing depended on the position used for insertion of the GAA repeat,
and the length of the repeat affected the severity of the splicing
abnormality. GAA repeats inserted in a frataxin minigene reduced
splicing efficiency without affecting the abundance of the nascent
transcript. The pathologic expansion induced a block in the processing
of 1 splicing intermediate that accumulated in the nucleus. Baralle et
al. (2008) proposed that the block caused by GAA expansion results from
interference from multiple splicing factors bound to the nascent GAA
repeat-containing transcript, resulting in degradation of the pre-RNA
and lower abundance of mature frataxin mRNA.

To address the physiologic function of human extramitochondrial
frataxin, Condo et al. (2010) searched for ISC-dependent interaction
partners. The authors demonstrated that the extramitochondrial form of
frataxin directly interacted with cytosolic aconitase/iron regulatory
protein-1 (ACO1/IRP1; 100880), a bifunctional protein alternating
between an enzymatic and an RNA-binding function through the
'iron-sulfur switch' mechanism. The cytosolic aconitase defect and
consequent IRP1 activation occurring in FRDA cells were reversed by the
action of extramitochondrial frataxin.

- Studies Using the Yeast Frataxin Homolog

Babcock et al. (1997) characterized a gene in Saccharomyces cerevisiae
whose predicted gene product had high sequence similarity to the human
frataxin protein. The yeast gene (yeast frataxin homolog, YFH1) encodes
a mitochondrial protein involved in iron homeostasis and respiratory
function. Human frataxin also was shown to be a mitochondrial protein.

Wilson and Roof (1997) showed that YFH1 localizes to mitochondria and is
required to maintain mitochondrial DNA. They showed that the
YFH1-homologous domain of frataxin functions in yeast and that a
disease-associated missense mutation of this domain, or the
corresponding domain in YFH1, reduces function.

Adamec et al. (2000) expressed a mature form of the YFH1 protein in E.
coli and analyzed its function in vitro. The isolated protein is a
soluble monomer that contains no iron and shows no significant tendency
to self-associate. Aerobic addition of ferrous iron to the protein
resulted in assembly of regular spherical multimers. Each multimer
consists of approximately 60 subunits and can sequester more than 3,000
atoms of iron. Titration of the yeast protein with increasing iron
concentrations supported a stepwise mechanism of multimer assembly.
Sequential addition of an iron chelator and a reducing agent resulted in
quantitative iron release with concomitant disassembly of the multimer,
indicating that the yeast frataxin protein sequesters iron in an
available form. Adamec et al. (2000) proposed that iron-dependent
self-assembly of recombinant yeast frataxin protein reflects a
physiologic role for frataxin in mitochondrial iron sequestration and
bioavailability.

Cavadini et al. (2000) showed that wildtype FRDA cDNA can complement the
YFH1 protein-deficient yeast (YFH1-delta) by preventing the
mitochondrial iron accumulation and oxidative damage associated with
loss of YFH1. The G130V mutation (606829.0005) affected protein
stability and resulted in low levels of mature frataxin, which were
nevertheless sufficient to rescue YFH1-delta yeast. The W173G
(606829.0007) mutation affected protein processing and stability and
resulted in severe mature frataxin deficiency. Expression of the FRDA
W173G cDNA in YFH1-delta yeast led to increased levels of mitochondrial
iron which were not as elevated as in YFH1-deficient cells but were
above the threshold for oxidative damage of mitochondrial DNA and
iron-sulfur centers, causing a typical YFH1-delta phenotype. The authors
concluded that frataxin functions like YFH1 protein, providing
additional experimental support for the hypothesis that FRDA is a
disorder of mitochondrial iron homeostasis.

Gordon et al. (2001) mapped the 2 cleavage sites of the YFH1 protein
precursor. Mutations blocking the first or the second cleavage of YFH1
protein did not interfere with its import from the cytoplasm or with its
ability to complement phenotypes of the YFH1-delta mutant yeast strain.
The first cleaved domain (domain I), consisting of 20 N-terminal amino
acids, was able to import a nonmitochondrial passenger fusion protein.
However, neither domain I nor other matrix-targeting signals alone could
support efficient import of mature YFH1 protein. The second cleaved
domain (domain II), consisting of an additional 31 N-terminal amino
acids, was required as a spacer between a targeting signal and mature
YFH1 protein. Likewise, when YFH1 protein constructs lacking domain I or
II were expressed in vivo, they failed to attain appreciable
steady-state amounts in mitochondria and could not complement phenotypes
of the YFH1-delta mutant.

Karthikeyan et al. (2002) found that the absence of frataxin in yeast
leads to nuclear damage, as evidenced by inducibility of a nuclear DNA
damage reporter, increased chromosomal instability including
recombination and mutation, and greater sensitivity to DNA-damaging
agents, as well as slow growth. Addition of a human frataxin mutant did
not prevent nuclear damage, although it partially complemented the YFH1
mutant in preventing mitochondrial DNA loss. The effects in YFH1 mutants
appeared to result from reactive oxygen species, since (1) YFH1 cells
produce more hydrogen peroxide, (2) the effects are alleviated by the
radical scavenger N-acetylcysteine, and (3) the glutathione peroxidase
gene (GPX1; 138320) prevents an increase in mutation rates. The authors
concluded that the frataxin protein has a protective role for the
nucleus as well as the mitochondria.

Muhlenhoff et al. (2002) constructed a yeast strain (Gal-YFH1) that
carried the YFH1 gene under the control of a galactose-regulated
promoter. Yfh1p-deficient Gal-YFH1 cells were far less sensitive to
oxidative stress than delta-yfh1 mutants, maintained mitochondrial DNA,
and synthesized heme at wildtype rates. Yfh1p depletion caused a strong
reduction in the assembly of mitochondrial Fe/S proteins, which may
explain the respiratory deficiency of Gal-YFH1 cells. Yfh1p-depleted
Gal-YFH1 cells show decreased maturation of cytosolic Fe/S proteins and
accumulation of mitochondrial iron, which may be seen secondary to
defects in cytosolic Fe/S protein assembly. The authors proposed a
specific role of frataxin in the biosynthesis of cellular Fe/S proteins
which excluded most of the previously suggested functions.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells lacking the Yfh1 gene showed very low
cytochrome content. Lesuisse et al. (2003) showed that in delta-yfh1
strains, the level of ferrochelatase (612386) was very low as a result
of transcriptional repression of HEM15. However, the low amount of
ferrochelatase was not the cause of heme deficiency in delta-yfh1 cells.
Ferrochelatase, a mitochondrial protein able to mediate insertion of
iron or zinc into the porphyrin precursor, made primarily the zinc
protoporphyrin product. Yfh1p and ferrochelatase were shown to interact
in vitro by BIAcore studies. Lesuisse et al. (2003) concluded that Yfh1
mediates iron use by ferrochelatase.

Karthikeyan et al. (2003) developed a highly regulatable promoter system
for expressing frataxin in yeast to address the consequences of
chronically reduced amounts of this protein. Shutting off the promoter
resulted in changes normally associated with loss of frataxin, including
iron accumulation within the mitochondria and the induction of
mitochondrial 'petite' phenotype mutants. While there was considerable
oxidative damage to mitochondrial proteins, the 'petites' were likely
due to accumulation of mitochondrial DNA lesions and subsequent DNA
loss. Chronically reduced frataxin levels resulted in similar response
patterns. Furthermore, nuclear DNA damage was detected in a rad52 (see
600392) mutant, deficient in double-strand break repair. Karthikeyan et
al. (2003) concluded that reduced frataxin levels, which may be more
representative of the disease state in Friedreich ataxia, resulted in
considerable oxidative damage in both mitochondrial and nuclear DNA.

Campanella et al. (2004) expressed human mitochondrial ferritin (FTMT;
608847) in frataxin-deficient yeast cells. The human FTMT precursor was
efficiently imported by yeast mitochondria and processed to functional
ferritin that actively sequestered iron in the organelle. FTMT
expression rescued the respiratory deficiency caused by the loss of
frataxin protecting the activity of iron-sulfur enzymes and enabling
frataxin-deficient cells to grow on nonfermentable carbon sources.
Furthermore, FTMT expression prevented the development of mitochondrial
iron overload, preserved mitochondrial DNA integrity, and increased cell
resistance to H2O2. Campanella et al. (2004) concluded that FTMT can
substitute for most frataxin functions in yeast, suggesting that
frataxin may be directly involved in mitochondrial iron-binding and
detoxification.

Gonzalez-Cabo et al. (2005) showed that Yfh1 interacted physically with
succinate dehydrogenase complex subunits Sdh1 (SDHA; 600857) and Sdh2
(SDHB; 185470) of the yeast mitochondrial electron transport chain and
also with electron transfer flavoprotein complex ETF-alpha (608053) and
ETF-beta (130410) subunits from the electron transfer flavoprotein
complex. Genetic synthetic interaction experiments confirmed a
functional relationship between Yfh1 and Sdh1/Sdh2, and
coimmunoprecipitation showed physical interaction between human frataxin
and SDH1/SDH2, suggesting also a key role of frataxin in the
mitochondrial electron transport chain in humans. Gonzalez-Cabo et al.
(2005) suggested a direct participation of the respiratory chain in the
pathogenesis of Friedreich ataxia, and proposed that it be considered as
an OXPHOS disease.

Yfh1 interacts functionally and physically with Isu1 (ISCU; 611911), the
scaffold protein on which the Fe/S clusters are assembled. Leidgens et
al. (2010) generated 12 yeast Yfh1 mutants in conserved residues of the
frataxin beta-sheet. The Q129A, I130A, W131A(F), and R141A mutations,
which reside in surface-exposed residues of beta-strands, resulted in
severe cell growth inhibition on high-iron media and low aconitase
activity, indicating that Fe/S cluster biosynthesis was impaired. In
contrast, gln129, trp131, and arg141 residues (which are spatially
closely clustered) defined a patch important for protein function.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that W131A, unlike W131F, was
the sole mutation that strongly decreased the interaction with Isu1.
Leidgens et al. (2010) concluded that trp131, which is the only strictly
conserved frataxin residue in all sequenced species, appears essential
for interaction with Isu1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Mutation in the FXN gene has been shown to cause one form of Friedreich
ataxia (229300). Most patients with Friedreich ataxia have a GAA-repeat
expansion in the FXN gene. Delatycki et al. (1999) stated that 2% of
cases of Friedreich ataxia are due to point mutations, the other 98%
being due to expansion of a GAA trinucleotide repeat in intron 1. They
indicated that 17 mutations had been described.

Campuzano et al. (1996) screened 184 patients with Friedreich ataxia for
point mutations by PCR amplification of exons. Three different point
mutations were found (606829.0002- 606829.0004). Seventy-nine unrelated
FRDA patients, including 5 with point mutations, were screened for the
GAA repeat expansion in the first intron (606829.0001). In the group of
74 patients without a point mutation, 71 were found to be homozygous for
expanded alleles, and 3 were heterozygous for the expanded repeat. The 5
patients shown to carry point mutations were all found to be
heterozygous for the repeat, and the repeat and the polymorphism had
different parental origin. Repeat expansions in the patients were
typically between 200 and 900 copies. In controls, the repeat expansion
varied from 7 to 22 copies.

Delatycki et al. (1998) studied FRDA mutations in 66 Australian
patients. One of 56 parents had a premutation with 1 normal allele and 1
allele of approximately 100 repeats in leukocyte DNA. His sperm showed
an expanded allele in a tight range centering on a size of approximately
320 repeats. His affected son had repeat sizes of 1,040 and 540. Of 33
other father-to-offspring transmissions, 17 showed a definite decrease
in allele size and 4 showed a decrease or no change; in 12 cases it was
not possible to say if the allele had expanded or contracted in size.
The authors stated that in all informative carrier father-to-affected
child transmissions, other than in the premutation carrier, the
expansion size decreased. Delatycki et al. (1998) concluded that
expansion of the FRDA gene occurs in 2 stages, the first during meiosis
followed by a second mitotic expansion.

Gacy et al. (1998) showed that the GAA instability in Friedreich ataxia
is a DNA-directed mutation caused by improper DNA structure at the
repeat region. Unlike CAG or CGG repeats, which form hairpins, GAA
repeats form a YRY triple helix containing non-Watson-Crick pairs. As
with hairpins, triplex mediates intergenerational instability in 96% of
transmissions. In families with Friedreich ataxia, GAA instability is
not a function of the number of long alleles, ruling out homologous
recombination or gene conversion as a major mechanism. The similarity of
mutation pattern among triple repeat-related diseases indicates that all
trinucleotide instability occurs by a common, intraallelic mechanism
that depends on DNA structure. Secondary structure mediates instability
by creating strong polymerase pause sites at or within the repeats,
facilitating slippage or sister chromatid exchange.

De Castro et al. (2000) analyzed DNA samples from a cohort of 241
patients with autosomal recessive or isolated spinocerebellar ataxia for
the GAA triplet expansion. They found 7 compound heterozygous patients.
In 4 patients, a point mutation that predicted a truncated frataxin was
detected. Three of them were associated with classic early-onset
Friedreich ataxia with an expanded GAA allele greater than 800 repeats.
The fourth patient had disease onset at the late age of 29 years with a
350-GAA repeat expansion. In 2 patients manifesting the classic
phenotype, no changes were observed by SSCP analysis. Linkage analysis
in a family with 2 affected children with an ataxic syndrome, one of
them showing heterozygosity for the GAA expansion, confirmed no linkage
to the FRDA locus. Most point mutations in compound heterozygous
Friedreich patients are null mutations. In their collection of compound
heterozygotes, clinical phenotypes seemed to be related to the GAA
repeat number in the expanded allele.

To investigate the genetic background of apparently idiopathic sporadic
cerebellar ataxia, Schols et al. (2000) tested for CAG/CTG trinucleotide
repeats causing spinocerebellar ataxia types 1, 2 (SCA2; 183090), 3
(SCA3; 109150), 6 (SCA6; 183086), 7 (SCA7; 164500), 8 (SCA8; 608768),
and 12 (SCA12; 604326), and the GAA repeat of the frataxin gene in 124
patients, including 20 patients with the clinical diagnosis of multiple
system atrophy. Patients with a positive family history, atypical
Friedreich phenotype, or symptomatic (secondary) ataxia were excluded.
Genetic analyses uncovered the most common Friedreich mutation in 10
patients with an age of onset between 13 and 36 years. The SCA6 mutation
was present in 9 patients with disease onset between 47 and 68 years of
age. The CTG repeat associated with SCA8 was expanded in 3 patients. One
patient had SCA2 attributable to a de novo mutation from a paternally
transmitted, intermediate allele. Schols et al. (2000) did not identify
the SCA1, SCA3, SCA7, or SCA12 mutations in this group of idiopathic
sporadic ataxia patients. No trinucleotide repeat expansion was detected
in the multiple system atrophy subgroup. This study revealed the genetic
basis in 19% of apparently idiopathic ataxia patients. SCA6 was the most
frequent mutation in late-onset cerebellar ataxia. The authors concluded
that the frataxin trinucleotide expansion should be investigated in all
sporadic ataxia patients with onset before age 40, even when the
phenotype is atypical for Friedreich ataxia.

Sharma et al. (2002) used small-pool PCR to analyze somatic variability
among 7,190 individual FRDA molecules from peripheral blood DNA of
subjects carrying 12 different expanded alleles. Expanded alleles showed
a length-dependent increase in somatic variability, with mutation loads
ranging from 47 to 78%. There was a strong contraction bias among long
alleles (more than 500 triplets), which showed a 4-fold higher frequency
of large contractions versus expansions. Of all somatic mutations
scored, 5% involved contractions of more than 50% of the original allele
length, and 0.29% involved complete reversion to the normal/premutation
length (60 triplets or fewer). These observations contrasted sharply
with the strong expansion bias seen in CTG triplet repeats in myotonic
dystrophy (DM1; 160900). No somatic variability was detected in more
than 6000 individual FRDA molecules analyzed from 15 normal alleles (8
to 25 triplets). A premutation allele with 44 uninterrupted GAA repeats
was found to be unstable, ranging in size from 6 to 113 triplets, thus
establishing the threshold for somatic instability between 26 and 44 GAA
triplets. The authors concluded that expanded GAA alleles in Friedreich
ataxia are highly mutable and have a natural tendency to contract in
vivo, and that these properties may depend on multiple factors,
including DNA sequence, triplet-repeat length, and unknown cell
type-specific factors.

Sharma et al. (2004) reported 2 unrelated patients with late-onset
Friedreich ataxia who were compound heterozygous for a large clearly
pathogenic GAA expansion and a smaller 'borderline' GAA expansion in the
FXN gene. The first patient, who had expansions of 700 and 44 GAA
repeats, developed ataxia symptoms in her early forties. The second
patient, who had expansions of 915 and 66 GAA repeats, developed
symptoms in his late twenties. Genomic analysis of several different
tissues, including hair, skin, buccal cells, peripheral leukocytes, and
fibroblasts, showed somatic instability of both the 44 and 66 repeat
alleles. Cells from both patients showed an increase in mutation load,
the proportion of individual FRDA molecules that differed in length from
the constitutional allele by greater than 5%. Fifteen percent of the
GAA-44 and 75% of the GAA-66 cells contained alleles with greater than
66 repeats. The 53-year-old asymptomatic brother of the first patient
had alleles of 730 and 37 GAA repeats; the GAA-37 allele was somatically
stable. Sharma et al. (2004) concluded that borderline expanded FRDA
alleles ranging from 44 to 65 uninterrupted triplet repeats show somatic
variability and may result in a disease phenotype if a large enough
proportion of cells bear disease-causing expansions in pathologically
affected tissues. Thus, persons who are compound heterozygous for a
large repeat expansion and a borderline expansion have an increased risk
of disease development.

In order to gain insight into GAA triplet repeat instability, Clark et
al. (2004) analyzed all triplet repeats in the human genome. They
determined that the GAA triplet repeat has a significant tendency to
expand compared with all other triplet repeats. Eighty-nine percent of
GAA repeats of 8 or more map to the G/A islands of Alu elements, and 58%
map to Alu element poly(A) tails. Clark et al. (2004) found that only 2
other GAA repeats of 8 or more share the central Alu location seen at
the FRDA locus. Clark et al. (2004) theorized that the GAA repeat
coevolved with Alu elements during primate genomic evolution.

Pathogenic GAA repeat expansions in the FXN gene cause decreased mRNA
expression of FXN by inhibiting transcription. In peripheral blood cells
of 67 FRDA patients, Castaldo et al. (2008) used pyrosequencing to
perform a quantitative analysis of the methylation status of 5 CpG sites
located within intron 1 of the FXN gene, upstream of expanded GAA
repeats. FRDA patients had increased methylation compared to controls.
Significant differences were found for each CpG site tested, but the
largest differences were found for CpG1 and CpG2 (84.45% and 76.80%
methylation in patients compared to 19.65% and 23.34% in controls).
There was a direct correlation between triplet expansion size and
methylation at CpG1 and CpG2. In addition, a significant inverse
correlation was observed between methylation at CpG1 and CpG2 and age of
disease onset. Castaldo et al. (2008) concluded that epigenetic changes
in the FXN gene may cause or contribute to gene silencing in FRDA.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Filla et al. (1996) studied the relationship between the trinucleotide
(GAA) repeat length and clinical features in Friedreich ataxia. The
length of the FA alleles ranged from 201 to 1,186 repeat units. There
was no overlap between the size of normal alleles and the size of
alleles found in FA. The lengths of both the larger and the smaller
alleles varied inversely with the age of onset of the disorder. Filla et
al. (1996) reported that the mean allele length was significantly higher
in FA patients with diabetes and in those with cardiomyopathy. They
noted that there was meiotic instability with a median variation of 150
repeats. Isnard et al. (1997) examined the correlation between the
severity of left ventricular hypertrophy in Friedreich ataxia and the
number of GAA repeats. Left ventricular wall thickness was measured in
44 patients using M-mode echocardiography and correlated with GAA
expansion size on the smaller allele (267 to 1200 repeats). A
significant correlation was found (r = 0.51, p less than 0.001),
highlighting an important role for frataxin in the regulation of cardiac
hypertrophy.

In a study of 187 patients with autosomal recessive ataxia, Durr et al.
(1996) found that 140, with ages at onset ranging from 2 to 51 years,
were homozygous for a GAA expansion that had 120 to 1,700 repeats of the
trinucleotides. About one-quarter of the patients, despite being
homozygous, had atypical Friedreich ataxia; they were older at
presentation and had intact tendon reflexes. Larger GAA expansions
correlated with earlier age at onset and shorter times to loss of
ambulation. The size of the GAA expansions (and particularly that of the
smaller of each pair of alleles) was associated with the frequency of
cardiomyopathy and loss of reflexes in the upper limbs. The GAA repeats
were unstable during transmission. Thus, the clinical spectrum of
Friedreich ataxia is broader than previously recognized, and the direct
molecular test for the GAA expansion is useful for the diagnosis,
prognosis, and genetic counseling.

Pianese et al. (1997) presented data suggesting that (1) the FRDA GAA
repeat is highly unstable during meiosis, (2) contractions outnumber
expansions, (3) both parental source and sequence length are important
factors in variability of FRDA expanded alleles, and (4) the tendency to
contract or expand does not seem to be associated with particular
haplotypes. Thus, they concluded that FRDA gene variability appears to
be different from that found with other triplet diseases.

Bidichandani et al. (1997) found an atypical FRDA phenotype associated
with a remarkably slow rate of disease progression in a Caucasian
family. It was caused by compound heterozygosity for a G130V missense
mutation (606829.0005) and the GAA expansion of the X25 gene. The
missense mutation G130V was the second mutation to be identified in the
X25 gene and the first to be associated with a variant FRDA phenotype.
This and the other reported missense mutation (I154F; 229300.0004)
mapped within the highly conserved sequence domain in the C terminus of
the frataxin gene. Since the G130V mutation was unlikely to affect the
ability of the first 16 exons of the neighboring STM7 gene to encode a
functional phosphatidylinositol phosphate kinase, Bidichandani et al.
(1997) questioned the role of STM7 in Friedreich ataxia.

Since Friedreich ataxia is an autosomal recessive disease, it does not
show typical features observed in other dynamic mutation disorders, such
as anticipation. Monros et al. (1997) analyzed the GAA repeat in 104 FA
patients and 163 carrier relatives previously defined by linkage
analysis. The GAA expansion was detected in all patients, most (94%) of
them being homozygous for the mutation. They demonstrated that clinical
variability in FA is related to the size of the expanded repeat: milder
forms of the disease (late-onset FA and FA with retained reflexes) were
associated with shorter expansions, especially with the smaller of the 2
expanded alleles. Absence of cardiomyopathy was also associated with
shorter alleles. Dynamics of the GAA repeat were investigated in 212
parent-offspring pairs. Meiotic instability showed a sex bias:
paternally transmitted alleles tended to decrease in a linear way that
depended on the paternal expansion size, whereas maternal alleles either
increased or decreased in size. All but 1 of the patients with
late-onset FA were homozygous for the GAA expansion; the exceptional
individual was heterozygous for the expansion and for another unknown
mutation. All but 1 of the FA patients with retained reflexes exhibited
an axonal sensory neuropathy. However, preservation of their tendon
reflexes suggested that the physiologic pathways of the reflex arch
remained functional. A close relationship was found between late-onset
disease and absence of heart muscle disease.

Delatycki et al. (1999) studied FRDA1 mutations in FA patients from
Eastern Australia. Of the 83 people studied, 78 were homozygous for an
expanded GAA repeat, while the other 5 had an expansion in one allele
and a point mutation in the other. The authors presented a detailed
study of 51 patients homozygous for an expanded GAA repeat. They
identified an association between the size of the smaller of the 2
expanded alleles and age at onset, age into wheelchair, scoliosis,
impaired vibration sense, and the presence of foot deformity. However,
no significant association was identified between the size of the
smaller allele and cardiomyopathy, diabetes mellitus, loss of
proprioception, or bladder symptoms. The larger allele size was
associated with bladder symptoms and the presence of foot deformity.

Gellera et al. (2007) reported 13 FA patients from 12 unrelated Italian
families who were compound heterozygous for the GAA expansion and a
small mutation in the FXN gene. Two missense and 5 frameshift or
truncating mutations were identified (see, e.g., 606829.0007;
606829.0008). In all 13 patients, there was a significant inverse
correlation between GAA size and age at onset. In 6 patients, age at
onset correlated with residual protein level, and GAA size inversely
correlated with residual protein level. Clinical data were consistent
with the hypothesis that FXN mutations are more severe than GAA
expansions. In patients with a null mutation and the GAA expansion, age
at onset was strongly dependent on the size of the expansion, indicating
that residual protein function derived from the expanded allele.

HISTORY

Duclos et al. (1993) identified a transcript containing the conserved
sequences around the D9S5 locus. The 7-kb transcript corresponded to a
gene designated X11 (APBA1; 602414) which extended at least 80 kb in a
direction opposite D9S15. The gene was expressed in the brain, including
the cerebellum, but was not detectable in several nonneuronal tissues
and cell lines. In situ hybridization of adult mouse brain sections
showed prominent expression in the granular layer of the cerebellum.
Expression was also found in the spinal cord. The cDNA contained an open
reading frame encoding a 708-amino acid sequence that showed no
significant similarity to other known proteins but contained a unique,
24-residue, putative transmembrane segment. On the basis of these
findings, Duclos et al. (1993) suggested that this 'pioneer' gene
represents the FRDA gene. Further studies by Rodius et al. (1994)
excluded X11 as a candidate for the Friedreich ataxia gene.

Carvajal et al. (1995) reported the isolation of a gene from the FRDA
critical region. Although no evidence of mutation was detected in the
transcript, the sequence, which they designated STM7 (602745),
represented only one of the shorter alternatively spliced species
identified by Northern analysis and direct sequencing. Carvajal et al.
(1995) still considered the gene a strong candidate for FRDA. Carvajal
et al. (1996) reported that the X25 gene (frataxin-encoding gene)
described by Campuzano et al. (1996) comprises part of STM7. They
reported that the transcription of both STM7 and X25 occurs from the
centromere toward the telomere, that the reported sequences of STM7 and
X25 did not represent a full-length transcript, that multiple
transcripts for each of these genes are present in Northern blots, and
that several of these transcripts are of similar size. Carvajal et al.
(1996) also reported that less than 10 kb separates the CpG island
identified in the X25/exon 1 from the 3-prime end of STM7/exon 16. They
further demonstrated that the recombinant protein corresponding to the
STM7.1 transcript has phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate 5-kinase
activity. They noted that the ataxia-telangiectasia gene (607585) has
C-terminal similarity to the catalytic domains of phosphatidylinositol
phosphate 3-kinases. This homology, and the observation by Matsumoto et
al. (1996) of an ataxia phenotype in mice lacking the type 1
inositol-1,4,5-triphosphate receptor (147265), provided support for a
defect in the phosphoinositide pathway constituting the pathogenetic
basis of Friedreich ataxia.

Cossee et al. (1997) concluded that there was no strong argument for a
role of STM7 in Friedreich ataxia, while the presence of mutations in
the frataxin gene fulfilled all criteria required of the FRDA gene. In
reply, Chamberlain et al. (1997) presented additional data and stated
the opinion that 'Cossee et al. have failed to present either a
plausible explanation for our original observations or a definitive
argument to contradict our interpretation of the data.' In rebuttal,
Pandolfo (1997) pointed out that no data have been presented showing the
existence of STM7/frataxin transcripts with methods other than RT-PCR,
the existence of a defect in PIP kinase activity in Friedreich patients,
or the existence of disease-causing mutations in STM7. In a review
article, Koenig and Mandel (1997) stated that there was strong evidence
negating the claim that the frataxin exons are alternative 3-prime STM7
exons, namely, the structure of frataxin cDNAs and mouse intronless
pseudogenes, the nature of point mutations found in some patients, and
the size of the endogenous frataxin protein.

ANIMAL MODEL

Koutnikova et al. (1997) cloned the complete coding region of mouse
frataxin and studied its pattern of expression in developing and adult
tissues. They found by in situ hybridization analyses that mouse
frataxin expression correlated well with the main site of
neurodegeneration in Friedreich ataxia, but the expression pattern was
broader than expected from the pathology of the disease. Frataxin mRNA
was predominantly expressed in tissues with a high metabolic rate,
including liver, kidney, brown fat, and heart. They showed that mouse
and yeast frataxin homologs contain a potential mitochondrial targeting
sequence in their N-terminal domains and that disruption of the yeast
gene results in mitochondrial dysfunction.

Cossee et al. (2000) generated a mouse model of Friedreich ataxia by
deletion of exon 4 of the Frda gene, leading to inactivation of the Frda
gene product. Homozygous deletions caused embryonic lethality a few days
after implantation; no iron accumulation was observed during embryonic
resorption, suggesting that cell death may be due to a mechanism
independent of iron accumulation. The authors suggested that the milder
phenotype in humans may be due to residual frataxin expression
associated with the expansion mutations.

Through a conditional gene targeting approach, Puccio et al. (2001)
generated in parallel a striated muscle frataxin-deficient mouse line
and a neuron/cardiac muscle frataxin-deficient line, which Seznec et al.
(2004) showed that in frataxin-deficient mice, Fe-S enzyme deficiency
occurred at 4 weeks of age, prior to cardiac dilatation and concomitant
development of left ventricular hypertrophy, while mitochondrial iron
accumulation occurred at a terminal stage. The antioxidant idebenone
delayed the cardiac disease onset, progression and death of
frataxin-deficient animals by 1 week, but did not correct the Fe-S
enzyme deficiency. The authors concluded that frataxin is a necessary,
albeit nonessential, component of the Fe-S cluster biogenesis, and that
idebenone acts downstream of the primary Fe-S enzyme deficit.

Thierbach et al. (2005) disrupted expression of frataxin specifically in
murine hepatocytes to generate mice with impaired mitochondrial function
and decreased oxidative phosphorylation. These animals had a reduced
life span and developed multiple hepatic tumors. Livers also showed
increased oxidative stress, impaired respiration, and reduced ATP levels
paralleled by reduced activity of iron-sulfur cluster (Fe/S)-containing
proteins, which all led to increased hepatocyte turnover by promoting
both apoptosis and proliferation. Accordingly, phosphorylation of the
stress-inducible p38 MAP kinase (600289) was specifically impaired
following disruption of frataxin. The authors hypothesized that frataxin
may act as a mitochondrial tumor suppressor protein in mammals.

Schoenfeld et al. (2005) microarrayed murine frataxin-deficient heart
tissue, liver tissue, and cardiocytes and observed a transcript
downregulation to upregulation ratio of nearly 2:1 with a mitochondrial
localization of transcriptional changes. Combining all mouse and human
microarray data for frataxin-deficient cells and tissues, the most
consistently decreased transcripts were mitochondrial coproporphyrinogen
oxidase (CPOX; 121300) of the heme pathway and mature T-cell
proliferation 1, a homolog of yeast COX23, which is thought to function
as a mitochondrial metallochaperone. Quantitative RT-PCR studies
confirmed the significant downregulation of Isu1 (ISCU; 611911), CPOX,
and ferrochelatase at 10 weeks in mouse hearts. Mutant cells were
resistant to aminolevulinate-dependent toxicity, and there was increased
cellular protoporphyrin IX levels, reduced mitochondrial heme a and heme
c levels, and reduced activity of cytochrome oxidase, suggesting a
defect between protoporphyrin IX and heme a. Fe-chelatase activities
were similar in mutants and controls, whereas Zn-chelatase activities
were slightly elevated in mutants, supporting the idea of an altered
metal-specificity of ferrochelatase. The authors suggested that frataxin
deficiency may cause defects late in the heme pathway. Since ataxic
symptoms occur in other diseases of heme deficiency, the authors
suggested that the heme defect observed in frataxin-deficient cells
could be primary to the pathophysiological process.

Anderson et al. (2005) used RNA interference (RNAi) to suppress the
Drosophila frataxin homolog (Dfh) and observed. distinct phenotypes in
larvae and adults, leading to giant long-lived larvae and to conditional
short-lived adults. Drosophila frataxin silencing differentially
dysregulated ferritin expression in adults but not in larvae, Silencing
of Dfh in the peripheral nervous system, a specific focus of Friedreich
pathology, permitted normal larval development but imposed a marked
reduction in adult life span. In contrast, Dfh silencing in motor
neurons had no deleterious effect in either larvae or adults. Finally,
overexpression of Sod1 (147450), Sod2 (147460), or Cat (115500) did not
suppress the failure of Dfh-deficient flies to successfully complete
eclosion, suggesting a minimal role of oxidative stress in this
phenotype.

Clark et al. (2007) found that transgenic mice carrying expanded human
FXN GAA repeats (190 or 82 triplets) showed tissue-specific and
age-dependent somatic instability specifically in the cerebellum and
dorsal root ganglia. The GAA(190) allele showed some instability by 2
months and significant expansion by 12 months, slightly greater than
that of GAA(82), suggesting that somatic instability was also repeat
length-dependent. There were lower levels of repeat expansion in
proliferating tissues, indicating that DNA replication per se was
unlikely to be a major cause of age-dependent expansion.

Anderson et al. (2008) showed that ectopic expression of H2O2 scavengers
suppressed the deleterious phenotypes associated with frataxin
deficiency in a Drosophila model of FRDA. In contrast, augmentation with
superoxide scavengers had no effect. Augmentation of endogenous catalase
(CAT; 115500) restored the activity of reactive oxygen species-sensitive
mitochondrial aconitase (ACO2; 100850) and enhanced resistance to H2O2
exposure, both of which were diminished by frataxin deficiency. Anderson
et al. (2008) concluded that H2O2 is an important pathologic substrate
underlying the phenotypes arising from frataxin deficiency in
Drosophila.

Coppola et al. (2009) performed microarray analysis of heart and
skeletal muscle in a mouse model of frataxin deficiency, and found
molecular evidence of increased lipogenesis in skeletal muscle, and
alteration of fiber-type composition in heart, consistent with insulin
resistance and cardiomyopathy, respectively. Since the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARG; 601487) pathway is known
to regulate both processes, the authors hypothesized that dysregulation
of this pathway could play a key role in frataxin deficiency. They
demonstrated a coordinate dysregulation of the PPARG coactivator Pgc1a
(PPARGC1A; 604517) and transcription factor Srebp1 (SREBF1; 184756) in
cellular and animal models of frataxin deficiency, and in cells from
FRDA patients, who have marked insulin resistance. Genetic modulation of
the PPAR-gamma pathway affected frataxin levels in vitro, supporting
PPAR-gamma as a potential therapeutic target in FRDA.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
FRIEDREICH ATAXIA
FRIEDREICH ATAXIA WITH RETAINED REFLEXES, INCLUDED
FXN, (GAA)n EXPANSION

GAA triplet repeat expansions between 200 and 900 copies in the first
intron of the frataxin gene occurred in 71 of 74 FRDA (229300) patients
studied by Campuzano et al. (1996). In unaffected individuals, the
triplet repeat expansion numbered between 7 and 20 units.

Among 101 FRDA patients homozygous for GAA expansion within the X25
gene, Coppola et al. (1999) found that 11 patients from 8 families had
FRDA with retained reflexes in the lower limbs (FARR; see 229300). The
mean size of the smaller allele was significantly less (408 +/- 252 vs
719 +/- 184 GAA triplets) in FARR patients.

.0002
FRIEDREICH ATAXIA
FXN, LEU106TER

In 2 affected members of a French family with Friedreich ataxia
(229300), Campuzano et al. (1996) identified compound heterozygosity for
the FRDA expansion repeat (606829.0001) and a T-to-G transversion in
exon 3 that changed a leucine (TTA) to a stop (TGA). The L106X mutation
came from the father; the other allele carrying the expansion was from
the mother.

.0003
FRIEDREICH ATAXIA
FXN, IVS3, A-G, -2

Campuzano et al. (1996) found compound heterozygosity in a member of a
Spanish family with Friedreich ataxia (229300) for the FRDA expansion
repeat (606829.0001) and an A-to-G transition which disrupted the
acceptor splice site at the end of the third intron.

.0004
FRIEDREICH ATAXIA
FXN, ILE154PHE

Campuzano et al. (1996) studied 5 patients with Friedreich ataxia
(229300) from 3 different Italian families and identified a change from
isoleucine-154 to phenylalanine in exon 4. These patients were
heterozygous for the FRDA expansion repeat (606829.0001). This I154F
mutation was found to occur in 1 out of 417 chromosomes examined from
the same Southern Italian population. Isoleucine at this position was
highly conserved across species. (Koutnikova et al. (1998) referred to
this mutation as ILE151PHE.)

Shan et al. (2007) showed that the I145F mutation did not affect FXN
protein expression following transfection of HEK293T cells. However,
I145F interfered with the interaction of FXN with ISD11 (LYRM4; 613311).

.0005
FRIEDREICH ATAXIA
FXN, GLY130VAL

Bidichandani et al. (1997) found compound heterozygosity for the GAA
triplet-repeat expansion (606829.0001) and a novel missense mutation,
G130V, in 3 sibs with variant Friedreich ataxia (229300). Three of 6
sibs were affected: a male age 42, a male age 39, and a female age 35.
Onset of disease was in the early teens, starting with weakness in the
lower limbs and followed by gradual progression over the ensuing 20
years. Two brothers were still ambulatory, using either a walking stick
or walker, and led fully productive working lives. Their upper limbs
were affected to a lesser extent than their legs and lacked several key
signs. They had sensory loss over the distal limbs, mild to moderate
motor weakness, impaired position and vibratory sense, and hypo- or
areflexia. Bilateral Babinski sign was also present in 1 brother. There
was no atrophy, and muscle tone was normal. Notably, there was no
dysarthria, and coordination was either very mildly affected or normal.
Nerve conduction studies revealed slowing of motor-conduction velocities
and absent sensory-evoked responses. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
revealed cervical spinal cord atrophy. No cardiac abnormalities were
detected. Blood glucose levels were borderline elevated, and mild
glucose intolerance was revealed in a 5-hour glucose-tolerance test. The
sister was somewhat more physically incapacitated than her older 2
brothers. (Koutnikova et al. (1998) referred to this mutation as
GLY127VAL.)

By haplotype analysis in the 4 families that had been described with the
G130V mutation, Delatycki et al. (1999) found results suggesting a
common founder.

Using transfected HEK293T cells, Shan et al. (2007) showed that the
G130V mutation interfered with FXN protein expression.

.0006
FRIEDREICH ATAXIA
FXN, MET1ILE

In 3 independent families, Zuhlke et al. (1998) found that affected
individuals with Friedreich ataxia (229300) were compound heterozygotes
for the repeat expansion (606829.0001) and an ATG-to-ATT (met1-to-ile;
M1I) mutation of the start codon of the FXN gene. Haplotype analysis
using 6 polymorphic chromosome 9 markers showed complete identity of
haplotype in 2 of the 3 chromosomes with the point mutation; the third
case showed partial conformity and may represent a single recombination
event. A common ancestor was suspected. An M1I start codon mutation has
been described in the HBB gene (141900.0430) as the cause of
beta-0-thalassemia, in the OAT gene (258870.0001) as the cause of gyrate
atrophy, in the PAH gene (261600.0048) as the cause of phenylketonuria,
and in the PLP gene (312080.0015) as the cause of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease, but in all of these instances the nucleotide change represented
an ATG-to-ATA transition.

.0007
FRIEDREICH ATAXIA
FXN, TRP173GLY

In 2 unrelated patients with Friedreich ataxia (229300), Cossee et al.
(1999) identified a TGG-to-GGG change in exon 5a of the FXN gene,
resulting in a trp173-to-gly (W173G) substitution.

Gellera et al. (2007) identified a 517T-G transversion, resulting in a
W173G substitution, in compound heterozygosity with the GAA expansion
(606829.0001) in FA patients from 3 unrelated families of Italian
origin. All patients had a severe form of the disorder with relatively
early onset and presence of cardiomyopathy.

Using transfected HEK293T cells, Shan et al. (2007) showed that the
W173G mutation interfered with FXN protein expression.

.0008
FRIEDREICH ATAXIA
FXN, 1-BP DEL, 157C

Gellera et al. (2007) identified a 1-bp deletion (157delC) in the FXN
gene in compound heterozygosity with the GAA expansion (606829.0001) in
patients with Friedreich ataxia (229300) from 4 unrelated families of
Italian origin. The 1-bp deletion resulted in a frameshift and premature
termination of the protein at codon 75. Three of the patients who had
greater than 700 repeat expansions had onset by age 10 years. The fourth
patient, with 170 repeats, had onset at age 32 years.

.0009
FRIEDREICH ATAXIA
FXN, 6-BP DEL/15-BP INS, NT371

In 2 sibs with a rapidly progressive and severe Friedreich ataxia
(229300), Evans-Galea et al. (2011) identified compound heterozygosity
for a GAA expansion of 1,010 repeats in the FXN gene (606829.0001) and a
deletion-insertion mutation in exon 3 (c.371_376del6ins15). The
deletion-insertion mutation was predicted to change amino acid positions
124 through 127 from DVSF to VHLEDT, increasing frataxin from 211 to 214
residues. The mutant protein, if expressed, would have an altered acidic
patch, impairing the interaction of FXN with iron and with the
iron-sulphur cluster assembly factor. One sib had onset at age 4 years
and was wheelchair-bound by age 8. The other had onset at age 5 years
and was wheelchair-bound by age 10. Both had hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, dysarthria, kyphoscoliosis, decreased joint range,
spasticity, and reduced hand function. Other features included diabetes
mellitus and abnormal ocular function. One patient died at age 20 years.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bidichandani et al. (1998); Gray and Johnson (1997); Montermini et
al. (1997); Ohshima et al. (1998); Puccio and Koenig (2000); Sakamoto
et al. (1999)
REFERENCE 1. Adamec, J.; Rusnak, F.; Owen, W. G.; Naylor, S.; Benson, L. M.;
Gacy, A. M.; Isaya, G.: Iron-dependent self-assembly of recombinant
yeast frataxin: implications for Friedreich ataxia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67:
549-562, 2000.

2. Adinolfi, S.; Trifuoggi, M.; Politou, A. S.; Martin, S.; Pastore,
A.: A structural approach to understanding the iron-binding properties
of phylogenetically different frataxins. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11:
1865-1877, 2002.

3. Anderson, P. A.; Kirby, K.; Orr, W. C.; Hilliker, A. J.; Phillips,
J. A.: Hydrogen peroxide scavenging rescues frataxin deficiency in
a Drosophila model of Friedreich's ataxia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105:
611-616, 2008.

4. Anderson, P. R.; Kirby, K.; Hilliker, A. J.; Phillips, J. P.:
RNAi-mediated suppression of the mitochondrial iron chaperone, frataxin,
in Drosophila. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 3397-3405, 2005.

5. Babcock, M.; de Silva, D.; Oaks, R.; Davis-Kaplan, S.; Jiralerspong,
S.; Montermini, L.; Pandolfo, M.; Kaplan, J.: Regulation of mitochondrial
iron accumulation by Yfh1p, a putative homolog of frataxin. Science 276:
1709-1712, 1997.

6. Baralle, M.; Pastor, T.; Bussani, E.; Pagani, F.: Influence of
Friedreich ataxia GAA noncoding repeat expansions on pre-mRNA processing. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 83: 77-88, 2008.

7. Bidichandani, S. I.; Ashizawa, T.; Patel, P. I.: The GAA triplet-repeat
expansion in Friedreich ataxia interferes with transcription and may
be associated with an unusual DNA structure. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62:
111-121, 1998.

8. Bidichandani, S. I.; Ashizawa, T.; Patel, P. I.: Atypical Friedreich
ataxia caused by compound heterozygosity for a novel missense mutation
and the GAA triplet-repeat expansion. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 60:
1251-1256, 1997.

9. Bulteau, A.-L.; O'Neill, H. A.; Kennedy, M. C.; Ikeda-Saito, M.;
Isaya, G.; Szweda, L. I.: Frataxin acts as an iron chaperone protein
to modulate mitochondrial aconitase activity. Science 305: 242-245,
2004.

10. Campanella,A.; Isaya, G.; O'Neill, H. A.; Santambrogio, P.; Cozzi,
A.; Arosio, P.; Levi, S.: The expression of human mitochondrial ferritin
rescues respiratory function in frataxin-deficient yeast. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 13: 2279-2288, 2004.

11. Campuzano, V.; Montermini, L.; Lutz, Y.; Cova, L.; Hindelang,
C.; Jiralerspong, S.; Trottier, Y.; Kish, S. J.; Faucheux, B.; Trouillas,
P.; Authier, F. J.; Durr, A.; Mandel, J.-L.; Vescovi, A.; Pandolfo,
M.; Koenig, M.: Frataxin is reduced in Friedreich ataxia patients
and is associated with mitochondrial membranes. Hum. Molec. Genet. 6:
1771-1780, 1997.

12. Campuzano, V.; Montermini, L.; Molto, M. D.; Pianese, L.; Cossee,
M.; Cavalcanti, F.; Monros, E.; Rodius, F.; Duclos, F.; Monticelli,
A.; Zara, F.; Canizares, J.; Koutnikova, H.; Bidichandani, S. I.;
Gellera, C.; Brice, A.; Trouillas, P.; De Michele, G.; Filla, A.;
De Frutos, R.; Palau, F.; Patel, P. I.; Di Donato, S.; Mandel, J.
-L.; Cocozza, S.; Koenig, M.; Pandolfo, M.: Friedreich's ataxia:
autosomal recessive disease caused by an intronic GAA triplet repeat
expansion. Science 271: 1423-1427, 1996.

13. Carvajal, J. J.; Pook, M. A.; dos Santos, M.; Doudney, K.; Hillermann,
R.; Minogue, S.; Williamson, R.; Hsuan, J. J.; Chamberlain, S.: The
Friedreich's ataxia gene encodes a novel phosphatidylinositol-4-phosphate
5-kinase. Nature Genet. 14: 157-162, 1996.

14. Carvajal, J. J.; Pook, M. A.; Doudney, K.; Hillermann, R.; Wilkes,
D.; Al-Mahdawi, S.; Williamson, R.; Chamberlain, S.: Friedreich's
ataxia: a defect in signal transduction? Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1411-1419,
1995.

15. Castaldo, I.; Pinelli, M.; Monticelli, A.; Acquaviva, F.; Giacchetti,
M.; Filla, A.; Sacchetti, S.; Keller, S.; Avvedimento, V. E.; Chiariotti,
L.; Cocozza, S.: DNA methylation in intron 1 of the frataxin gene
is related to GAA repeat length and age of onset in Friedreich ataxia
patients. J. Med. Genet. 45: 808-812, 2008.

16. Cavadini, P.; Gellera, C.; Patel, P. I.; Isaya, G.: Human frataxin
maintains mitochondrial iron homeostasis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 2523-2530, 2000.

17. Cavadini, P.; O'Neill, H. A.; Benada, O.; Isaya, G.: Assembly
and iron-binding properties of human frataxin, the protein deficient
in Friedreich ataxia. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 217-227, 2002.

18. Chamberlain, S.; Pook, M.; Carvajal, J.; Doudney, K.; Hillermann,
R.: Frataxin fracas. (Letter) Nature Genet. 15: 337-338, 1997.

19. Clark, R. M.; Dalgliesh, G. L.; Endres, D.; Gomez, M.; Taylor,
J.; Bidichandani, S. I.: Expansion of GAA triplet repeats in the
human genome: unique origin of the FRDA mutation at the center of
an Alu. Genomics 83: 373-383, 2004.

20. Clark, R. M.; De Biase, I. Malykhina, A. P.; Al-Mahdawi, S.; Pook,
M.; Bidichandani, S. I.: The GAA triplet-repeat is unstable in the
context of the human FXN locus and displays age-dependent expansions
in cerebellum and DRG in a transgenic mouse model. Hum. Genet. 120:
633-640, 2007.

21. Condo, I.; Malisan, F.; Guccini, I.; Serio, D.; Rufini, A.; Testi,
R.: Molecular control of the cytosolic aconitase/IRP1 switch by extramitochondrial
frataxin. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 1221-1229, 2010.

22. Coppola, G.; De Michele, G.; Cavalcanti, F.; Pianese, L.; Perretti,
A.; Santoro, L.; Vita, G.; Toscano, A.; Amboni, M.; Grimaldi, G.;
Salvatore, E.; Caruso, G.; Filla, A.: Why do some Friedreich's ataxia
patients retain tendon reflexes? A clinical, neurophysiological and
molecular study. J. Neurol. 246: 353-357, 1999.

23. Coppola, G.; Marmolino, D.; Lu, D.; Wang, Q.; Cnop, M.; Rai, M.;
Acquaviva, F.; Cocozza, S.; Pandolfo, M.; Geschwind, D. H.: Functional
genomic analysis of frataxin deficiency reveals tissue-specific alterations
and identifies the PPAR-gamma pathway as a therapeutic target in Friedreich's
ataxia. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 2452-2461, 2009.

24. Cossee, M.; Campuzano, V.; Koutnikova, H.; Fischbeck, K.; Mandel,
J.-L.; Koenig, M.; Bidichandani, S. I.; Patel, P. I.; Molte, M. D.;
Canizares, J.; De Frutos, R.; Pianese, L.; Cavalcanti, F.; Monticelli,
A.; Cocozza, S.; Montermini, L.; Pandolfo, M.: Frataxin fracas. (Letter) Nature
Genet. 15: 337-338, 1997.

25. Cossee, M.; Durr, A.; Schmitt, M.; Dahl, N.; Trouillas, P.; Allinson,
P.; Kostrzewa, M.; Nivelon-Chevallier, A.; Gustavson, K.-H.; Kohlschutter,
A.; Muller, U.; Mandel, J.-L.; and 11 others: Friedreich's ataxia:
point mutations and clinical presentation of compound heterozygotes. Ann.
Neurol. 45: 200-206, 1999.

26. Cossee, M.; Puccio, H.; Gansmuller, A.; Koutnikova, H.; Dierich,
A.; LeMeur, M.; Fischbeck, K.; Dolle, P.; Koenig, M.: Inactivation
of the Friedreich ataxia mouse gene leads to early embryonic lethality
without iron accumulation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 1219-1226, 2000.

27. De Castro, M.; Garcia-Planells, J.; Monros, E.; Canizares, J.;
Vazquez-Manrique, R.; Vilchez, J. J.; Urtasun, M.; Lucus, M.; Navarro,
G.; Izquierdo, G.; Molto, M. D.; Palau, F.: Genotype and phenotype
analysis of Friedreich's ataxia compound heterozygous patients. Hum.
Genet. 106: 86-92, 2000.

28. Delatycki, M. B.; Knight, M.; Koenig, M.; Cossee, M.; Williamson,
R.; Forrest, S. M.: G130V, a common FRDA point mutation, appears
to have arisen from a common founder. Hum. Genet. 105: 343-346,
1999.

29. Delatycki, M. B.; Paris, D.; Gardner, R. J. M.; Forshaw, K.; Nicholson,
G. A.; Nassif, N.; Williamson, R.; Forrest, S. M.: Sperm DNA analysis
in a Friedreich ataxia premutation carrier suggests both meiotic and
mitotic expansion in the FRDA gene. J. Med. Genet. 35: 713-716,
1998.

30. Delatycki, M. B.; Paris, D. B. B. P.; Gardner, R. J. M.; Nicholson,
G. A.; Nassif, N.; Storey, E.; MacMillan, J. C.; Collins, V.; Williamson,
R.; Forrest, S. M.: Clinical and genetic study of Friedreich ataxia
in an Australian population. Am. J. Med. Genet. 87: 168-174, 1999.

31. Duclos, F.; Boschert, U.; Sirugo, G.; Mandel, J.-L.; Hen, R.;
Koenig, M.: Gene in the region of the Friedreich ataxia locus encodes
a putative transmembrane protein expressed in the nervous system. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 109-113, 1993.

32. Durr, A.; Cossee, M.; Agid, Y.; Campuzano, V.; Mignard, C.; Penet,
C.; Mandel, J.-L.; Brice, A.; Koenig, M.: Clinical and genetic abnormalities
in patients with Friedreich's ataxia. New Eng. J. Med. 335: 1169-1175,
1996.

33. Evans-Galea, M. V.; Corben, L. A.; Hasell, J.; Galea, C. A.; Fahey,
M. C.; du Sart, D.; Delatycki, M. B.: A novel deletion-insertion
mutation identified in exon 3 of FXN in two siblings with a severe
Friedreich ataxia phenotype. Neurogenetics 12: 307-313, 2011.

34. Fields, S.; Song, O.: A novel genetic system to detect protein-protein
interactions. (Letter) Nature 340: 245-246, 1989.

35. Filla, A.; De Michele, G.; Cavalcanti, F.; Pianese, L.; Monticelli,
A.; Campanella, G.; Cocozza, S.: The relationship between trinucleotide
(GAA) repeat length and clinical features in Friedreich ataxia. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 59: 554-560, 1996.

36. Gacy, A. M.; Goellner, G. M.; Spiro, C.; Chen, X.; Gupta, G.;
Bradbury, E. M.; Dyer, R. B.; Mikesell, M. J.; Yao, J. Z.; Johnson,
A. J.; Richter, A.; Melancon, S. B.; McMurray, C. T.: GAA instability
in Friedreich's ataxia shares a common, DNA-directed and intraallelic
mechanism with other trinucleotide diseases. Molec. Cell 1: 583-593,
1998.

37. Gellera, C.; Castellotti, B.; Mariotti, C.; Mineri, R.; Seveso,
V.; DiDonato, S.; Taroni, F.: Frataxin gene point mutations in Italian
Friedreich ataxia patients. Neurogenetics 8: 289-299, 2007.

38. Gonzalez-Cabo, P.; Vazquez-Manrique, R. P.; Garcia-Gimeno, M.
A.; Sanz, P.; Palau, F.: Frataxin interacts functionally with mitochondrial
electron transport chain proteins. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 2091-2098,
2005.

39. Gordon, D. M.; Kogan, M.; Knight, S. A. B.; Dancis, A.; Pain,
D.: Distinct roles for two N-terminal cleaved domains in mitochondrial
import of the yeast frataxin homolog, Yfh1p. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10:
259-269, 2001.

40. Gordon, D. M.; Shi, Q.; Dancis, A.; Pain, D.: Maturation of frataxin
within mammalian and yeast mitochondria: one-step processing by matrix
processing peptidase. Hum. Molec. Genet. 8: 2255-2262, 1999.

41. Gray, J. V.; Johnson, K. J.: Waiting for frataxin. Nature Genet. 16:
323-325, 1997.

42. Isnard, R.; Kalotka, H.; Durr, A.; Cossee, M.; Schmitt, M.; Pousset,
F.; Thomas, D.; Brice, A.; Koenig, M.; Komajda, M.: Correlation between
left ventricular hypertrophy and GAA trinucleotide repeat length in
Friedreich's ataxia. Circulation 95: 2247-2249, 1997.

43. Karthikeyan, G.; Lewis, L. K.; Resnick, M. A.: The mitochondrial
protein frataxin prevents nuclear damage. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11:
1351-1362, 2002.

44. Karthikeyan, G.; Santos, J. H.; Graziewicz, M. A.; Copeland, W.
C.; Isaya, G.; Van Houten, B.; Resnick, M. A.: Reduction in frataxin
causes progressive accumulation of mitochondrial damage. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 12: 3331-3342, 2003.

45. Koenig, M.; Mandel, J.-L.: Deciphering the cause of Friedreich
ataxia. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 7: 689-694, 1997.

46. Koutnikova, H.; Campuzano, V.; Foury, F.; Dolle, P.; Cazzalini,
O.; Koenig, M.: Studies of human, mouse and yeast homologues indicate
a mitochondrial function for frataxin. Nature Genet. 16: 345-351,
1997.

47. Koutnikova, H.; Campuzano, V.; Koenig, M.: Maturation of wild-type
and mutated frataxin by the mitochondrial processing peptidase. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 7: 1485-1489, 1998.

48. Leidgens, S.; De Smet, S.; Foury, F.: Frataxin interacts with
Isu1 through a conserved tryptophan in its beta-sheet. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 19: 276-286, 2010.

49. Lesuisse, E.; Santos, R.; Matzanke, B. F.; Knight, S. A. B.; Camadro,
J.-M.; Dancis, A.: Iron use for haeme synthesis is under control
of the yeast frataxin homologue (Yfh1). Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 879-889,
2003.

50. Matsumoto, M.; Nakagawa, T.; Inoue, T.; Nagata, E.; Tanaka, K.;
Takano, H.; Minowa, O.; Kuno, J.; Sakakibara, S.; Yamada, M.; Yoneshima,
H.; Miyawaki, A; Fukuichi, T.; Furuichi, T.; Okano, H.; Mikoshiba,
K.; Noda, T.: Ataxia and epileptic seizures in mice lacking type
1 inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate receptor. Nature 379: 168-171, 1996.

51. Monros, E.; Molto, M. D.; Martinez, F.; Canizares, J.; Blanca,
J.; Vilchez, J. J.; Prieto, F.; de Frutos, R.; Palau, F.: Phenotype
correlation and intergenerational dynamics of the Friedreich ataxia
GAA trinucleotide repeat. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61: 101-110, 1997.

52. Montermini, L.; Andermann, E.; Labuda, M.; Richter, A.; Pandolfo,
M.; Cavalcanti, F.; Pianese, L.; Iodice, L.; Farina, G.; Monticelli,
A.; Turano, M.; Filla, A.; De Michele, G.; Cocozza, S.: The Friedreich
ataxia GAA triplet repeat: premutation and normal alleles. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 6: 1261-1266, 1997.

53. Montermini, L.; Rodius, F.; Pianese, L.; Molto, M. D.; Cossee,
M.; Campuzano, V.; Cavalcanti, F.; Monticelli, A.; Palau, F.; Gyapay,
G.; Wehnert, M.; Zara, F.; Patel, P. I.; Cocozza, S.; Koenig, M.;
Pandolfo, M.: The Friedreich ataxia critical region spans a 150-kb
interval on chromosome 9q13. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 1061-1067, 1995.
Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57: 1520 only, 1995.

54. Muhlenhoff, U.; Richhardt, N.; Ristow, M.; Kispal, G.; Lill, R.
: The yeast frataxin homolog Yfh1p plays a specific role in the maturation
of cellular Fe/S proteins. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2025-2036, 2002.

55. Ohshima, K.; Montermini, L.; Wells, R. D.; Pandolfo, M.: Inhibitory
effects of expanded GAA-TTC triplet repeats from intron I of the Friedreich
ataxia gene on transcription and replication in vivo. J. Biol. Chem. 273:
14588-14595, 1998.

56. Pandolfo, M.: Personal Communication. Montreal, Canada  4/28/1997.

57. Pianese, L.; Cavalcanti, F.; De Michele, G.; Filla, A.; Campanella,
G.; Calabrese, O.; Castaldo, I.; Monticelli, A.; Cocozza, S.: The
effect of parental gender on the GAA dynamic mutation in the FRDA
gene. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 60: 460-463, 1997.

58. Puccio, H.; Koenig, M.: Recent advances in the molecular pathogenesis
of Friedreich ataxia. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 887-892, 2000.

59. Puccio, H.; Simon, D.; Cossee, M.; Criqui-Filipe, P.; Tiziano,
F.; Melki, J.; Hindelang, C.; Matyas, R.; Rustin, P.; Koenig, M.:
Mouse models of Friedreich ataxia exhibit cardiomyopathy, sensory
nerve defect and Fe-S enzyme deficiency followed by intramitochondrial
iron deposits. Nature Genet. 27: 181-186, 2001.

60. Ristow, M.; Pfister, M. F.; Yee, A. J.; Schubert, M.; Michael,
L.; Zhang, C.-Y.; Ueki, K.; Michael, M. D., II; Lowell, B. B.; Kahn,
C. R.: Frataxin activates mitochondrial energy conversion and oxidative
phosphorylation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 12239-12243, 2000.

61. Rodius, F.; Duclos, F.; Wrogemann, K.; Le Paslier, D.; Ougen,
P.; Billault, A.; Belal, S.; Musenger, C.; Brice, A.; Durr, A.; Mignard,
C.; Sirugo, G.; Weissenbach, J.; Cohen, D.; Hentati, F.; Ben Hamida,
M.; Mandel, J.-L.; Koenig, M.: Recombinations in individuals homozygous
by descent localize the Friedreich ataxia locus in a cloned 450-kb
interval. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 54: 1050-1059, 1994.

62. Sakamoto, N.; Chastain, P. D.; Parniewski, P.; Ohshima, K.; Pandolfo,
M.; Griffith, J. D.; Wells, R. D.: Sticky DNA: self-association properties
of long GAA-TTC repeats in R-R-Y triplex structures from Friedreich's
ataxia. Molec. Cell 3: 465-475, 1999.

63. Santos, M. M.; Ohshima, K.; Pandolfo, M.: Frataxin deficiency
enhances apoptosis in cells differentiating into neuroectoderm. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 1935-1944, 2001.

64. Schmucker, S.; Argentini, M.; Carelle-Calmels, N.; Martelli, A.;
Puccio, H.: The in vivo mitochondrial two-step maturation of human
frataxin. Hum. Molec. Genet. 17: 3521-3531, 2008.

65. Schoenfeld, R. A.; Napoli, E.; Wong, A.; Zhan, S.; Reutenauer,
L.; Morin, D.; Buckpitt, A. R.; Taroni, F.; Lonnerdal, B.; Ristow,
M.; Puccio, H.; Cortopassi, G. A.: Frataxin deficiency alters heme
pathway transcripts and decreases mitochondrial heme metabolites in
mammalian cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 3787-3799, 2005.

66. Schols, L.; Szymanski, S.; Peters, S.; Przuntek, H.; Epplen, J.
T.; Hardt, C.; Riess, O.: Genetic background of apparently idiopathic
sporadic cerebellar ataxia. Hum. Genet. 107: 132-137, 2000.

67. Seznec, H.; Simon, D.; Bouton, C.; Reutenauer, L.; Hertzog, A.;
Golik, P.; Procaccio, V.; Patel, M.; Drapier, J.-C.; Koenig, M.; Puccio,
H.: Friedreich ataxia: the oxidative stress paradox. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 14: 463-474, 2005.

68. Seznec, H.; Simon, D.; Monassier, L.; Criqui-Filipe, P.; Gansmuller,
A.; Rustin, P.; Koenig, M.; Puccio, H.: Idebenone delays the onset
of cardiac functional alteration without correction of Fe-S enzymes
deficit in a mouse model for Friedreich ataxia. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
1017-1024, 2004.

69. Shan, Y.; Napoli, E.; Cortopassi, G.: Mitochondrial frataxin
interacts with ISD11 of the NFS1/ISCU complex and multiple mitochondrial
chaperones. Hum. Molec. Genet. 16: 929-941, 2007.

70. Sharma, R.; Bhatti, S.; Gomez, M.; Clark, R. M.; Murray, C.; Ashizawa,
T.; Bidichandani, S. I.: The GAA triplet-repeat sequence in Friedreich
ataxia shows a high level of somatic instability in vivo, with a significant
predilection for large contractions. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2175-2187,
2002.

71. Sharma, R.; De Biase, I.; Gomez, M.; Delatycki, M. B.; Ashizawa,
T.; Bidichandani, S. I.: Friedreich ataxia in carriers of unstable
borderline GAA triple-repeat alleles. Ann. Neurol. 56: 898-901,
2004.

72. Shoichet, S. A.; Baumer, A. T.; Stamenkovic, D.; Sauer, H.; Pfeiffer,
A. F. H.; Kahn, C. R.; Muller-Wieland, D.; Richter, C.; Ristow, M.
: Frataxin promotes antioxidant defense in a thiol-dependent manner
resulting in diminished malignant transformation in vitro. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 11: 815-821, 2002.

73. Stehling, O.; Elsasser, H.-P.; Bruckel, B.; Muhlenhoff, U.; Lill,
R.: Iron-sulfur protein maturation in human cells: evidence for a
function of frataxin. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 3007-3015, 2004.

74. Tan, G.; Napoli, E.; Taroni, F.; Cortopassi, G.: Decreased expression
of genes involved in sulfur amino acid metabolism in frataxin-deficient
cells. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 1699-1711, 2003.

75. Thierbach, R.; Schulz, T. J.; Isken, F.; Voigt, A.; Mietzner,
B.; Drewes, G.; von Kleist-Retzow, J.-C.; Wiesner, R. J.; Magnuson,
M. A.; Puccio, H.; Pfeiffer, A. F. H.; Steinberg, P.; Ristow, M.:
Targeted disruption of hepatic frataxin expression causes impaired
mitochondrial function, decreased life span and tumor growth in mice. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 14: 3857-3864, 2005. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet.
16: 2987 only, 2007.

76. Wilson, R. B.; Roof, D. M.: Respiratory deficiency due to loss
of mitochondrial DNA in yeast lacking the frataxin homologue. Nature
Genet. 16: 352-357, 1997.

77. Zuhlke, C.; Laccone, F.; Cossee, M.; Kohlschutter, A.; Koenig,
M.; Schwinger, E.: Mutation of the start codon in the FRDA1 gene:
linkage analysis of three pedigrees with the ATG to ATT transversion
points to a unique common ancestor. Hum. Genet. 103: 102-105, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/16/2012
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/14/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/29/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/30/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/18/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/3/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/3/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/6/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/19/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/21/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/4/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/3/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/27/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/21/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/5/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/10/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/23/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/29/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/21/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/25/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/11/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/23/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/10/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/8/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/24/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/29/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/18/2002

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 4/4/2002

EDITED carol: 09/20/2013
carol: 9/16/2013
terry: 9/14/2012
alopez: 7/18/2012
ckniffin: 7/16/2012
carol: 11/15/2011
terry: 11/14/2011
wwang: 1/11/2011
terry: 12/29/2010
wwang: 4/2/2010
terry: 3/30/2010
mgross: 3/18/2010
terry: 3/18/2010
wwang: 1/21/2010
mgross: 11/10/2009
terry: 11/3/2009
wwang: 9/17/2009
alopez: 9/16/2009
wwang: 9/10/2009
terry: 9/3/2009
alopez: 7/8/2009
terry: 7/6/2009
wwang: 4/6/2009
ckniffin: 2/11/2009
wwang: 11/19/2008
carol: 11/6/2008
mgross: 8/22/2008
terry: 8/21/2008
mgross: 3/4/2008
ckniffin: 3/4/2008
wwang: 1/9/2008
terry: 1/3/2008
wwang: 12/4/2007
ckniffin: 11/27/2007
wwang: 6/1/2007
terry: 5/21/2007
alopez: 4/13/2007
terry: 4/5/2007
wwang: 11/28/2006
ckniffin: 10/31/2006
wwang: 1/30/2006
terry: 1/10/2006
tkritzer: 5/23/2005
wwang: 5/18/2005
wwang: 5/13/2005
ckniffin: 4/29/2005
wwang: 3/9/2005
terry: 2/21/2005
tkritzer: 8/25/2004
terry: 8/25/2004
carol: 7/2/2004
mgross: 3/11/2004
terry: 3/11/2004
cwells: 9/23/2003
cwells: 7/10/2003
cwells: 7/8/2003
ckniffin: 3/11/2003
cwells: 2/24/2003
cwells: 10/29/2002
cwells: 9/18/2002
carol: 4/26/2002
ckniffin: 4/24/2002

152690	TITLE *152690 X-RAY REPAIR, COMPLEMENTING DEFECTIVE, IN CHINESE HAMSTER, 6; XRCC6
;;THYROID AUTOANTIGEN, 70-KD; G22P1;;
Ku ANTIGEN, 70-KD SUBUNIT; Ku70;;
LUPUS AUTOANTIGEN p70;;
THYROID-LUPUS AUTOANTIGEN; TLAA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The XRCC6 gene encodes subunit p70 of the p70/p80 autoantigen. The
p70/p80 autoantigen consists of 2 proteins of molecular mass of
approximately 70,000 and 80,000 daltons that dimerize to form a 10 S
DNA-binding complex. See 194364 for discussion of the gene encoding the
p80 subunit. Exchange of immunologic reagents showed that the p70/p80
autoantigen is identical to the Ku antigen, the Ki antigen, and the 86-
to 70-kD protein complex. The p70/p80 complex binds to the ends of
double-stranded DNA in a cell cycle-dependent manner, being associated
with chromosomes of interphase cells, followed by complete dissociation
from the condensing chromosomes in early prophase. Both p70 and p80
contain phosphoserine residues. A role for the antigen in DNA repair or
transposition has been proposed.

CLONING

Some patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (152700) produce very
large amounts of autoantibodies to p70 and p80. Reeves and Sthoeger
(1989) used autoantibodies from the serum of such a person to isolate
cDNA clones encoding p70, the protein that is thought to mediate binding
of the Ku complex to DNA. Analysis of the predicted amino acid sequence
of p70 suggested structural similarities with other DNA-binding
proteins. The information may be useful in examining the function of the
Ku complex, as well as the causes of autoimmunity to this antigen. The
presence of a 61-residue acidic region rich in serine raised the
possibility that its charge might be modulated by phosphorylation. The
predicted amino acid sequence also contains 2 regions with periodic
repeats of either leucine alone or leucine alternating with serine every
seventh position. The latter repeat showed structural similarities with
the 'leucine zipper' regions of the MYC oncogene product. The p70
antigen and the p80 antigen did not appear to have extensive sequence
homology, according to analysis of RNA blots and immunologic criteria.

The autoantibody that was thought to identify the TSH receptor and which
was used for isolating cDNA clones that were mapped to 22q11-q13 by
Southern analysis of somatic cell hybrid DNAs and by linkage of RFLPs to
CYP2D (124030) (McBride et al., 1987; Mitchell et al., 1989) was shown
not to represent TSHR (603372) but rather a separate, 70-kD thyroid
autoantigen (Chan et al., 1989). The autoantibody has been found in
patients with autoimmune thyroid disease (Graves disease) as well as in
those with lupus.

GENE STRUCTURE

Takiguchi et al. (1996) showed that the mouse Ku70 gene contains 13
exons (exon 1 is untranslated) spanning about 24 kb of genomic DNA and
encodes a predicted 608-amino acid polypeptide (compared to 609 residues
in humans).

MAPPING

Takiguchi et al. (1996) mapped the mouse Ku70 gene to chromosome 15E by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Koike et al. (1996) mapped the Ku70
gene to mouse chromosome 1 and rat chromosome 9. The human Ku70 gene
resides on chromosome 22q11-q13 (Chan et al., 1989).

GENE FUNCTION

Tuteja et al. (1994) purified from HeLa cells an enzyme they called DNA
helicase II, an ATP-dependent DNA unwinding enzyme. They showed that it
is a heterodimer of 72 and 87 kD polypeptides. Sequencing showed that it
is identical to the Ku autoantigen. The exclusively nuclear location of
this particular DNA helicase II/Ku antigen, its highly specific affinity
for double-stranded DNA, its abundance, and its exclusive DNA-duplex
unwinding activity pointed to additional roles for this molecule in DNA
metabolism. Hartley et al. (1995) noted that the Ku autoantigen is a
component of DNA-dependent protein kinase (see PRKDC; 600899).

Double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs) pose a major threat to living cells, and
several mechanisms for repairing these lesions have evolved. Eukaryotes
can process DSBs by homologous recombination (HR) or nonhomologous end
joining (NHEJ). NHEJ connects DNA ends irrespective of their sequence,
and it predominates in mitotic cells, particularly during G1 (Takata et
al., 1998). HR requires interaction of the broken DNA molecule with an
intact homologous copy, and allows restoration of the original DNA
sequence. HR is active during G2 of the mitotic cycle and predominates
during meiosis, when the cell creates DSBs, which must be repaired by HR
to ensure proper chromosome segregation. How the cell controls the
choice between the 2 repair pathways was investigated by Goedecke et al.
(1999). They demonstrated a physical interaction between the mammalian
Ku70, which is essential for NHEJ (Baumann and West, 1998), and MRE11
(600814), which functions both in NHEJ and meiotic HR. Moreover, they
showed that irradiated cells deficient for Ku70 are incapable of
targeting Mre11 to subnuclear foci that may represent DNA-repair
complexes. Nevertheless, Ku70 and Mre11 were differentially expressed
during meiosis. In the mouse testis, Mre11 and Ku70 colocalized in
nuclei of somatic cells and in the XY bivalent. In early meiotic
prophase, however, when meiotic recombination is most probably
initiated, Mre11 was abundant, whereas Ku70 was not detectable. Goedecke
et al. (1999) proposed that Ku70 acts as a switch between the 2 DSB
repair pathways. When present, Ku70 destines DSBs for NHEJ by binding to
DNA ends and attracting other factors for NHEJ, including Mre11; when
absent, it allows participation of DNA ends and Mre11 in the meiotic HR
pathway.

The Drosophila Dmblm locus is a homolog of the human Bloom syndrome gene
(604610). Kusano et al. (2001) demonstrated that mutant Dmblm phenotypes
were partially rescued by an extra copy of the DNA repair gene Ku70,
indicating that the 2 genes functionally interact in vivo.

Using human and hamster cells, Mari et al. (2006) showed that Ku
heterodimers on DNA ends were in dynamic equilibrium with Ku70/Ku80 in
solution, suggesting that formation of the NHEJ complex is reversible.
Accumulation of XRCC4 (194363) on DNA double-strand breaks depended on
the presence of Ku70/Ku80, but not PRKDC. Mari et al. (2006) found that
XRCC4 interacted directly with Ku70, and they hypothesized that XRCC4
serves as a flexible tether between Ku70/Ku80 and LIG4 (601837).

Pace et al. (2010) found a genetic interaction between the Fanconi
anemia gene FANCC (227645) and the NHEJ factor Ku70. Disruption of both
FANCC and Ku70 suppressed sensitivity to crosslinking agents, diminished
chromosome breaks, and reversed defective homologous recombination. Ku70
binds directly to free DNA ends, committing them to NHEJ repair. Pace et
al. (2010) showed that purified FANCD2 (227646), a downstream effector
of the Fanconi anemia pathway, might antagonize Ku70 activity by
modifying such DNA substrates. Pace et al. (2010) concluded that these
results reveal a function for the Fanconi anemia pathway in processing
DNA ends, thereby diverting double-strand break repair from abortive
NHEJ and toward homologous recombination.

Congenital muscular dystrophy type 1A (MDC1A; 607855) is caused by
mutations in the gene encoding laminin-alpha-2 (LAMA2; 156225). Bax
(600040)-mediated muscle cell death is a significant contributor to the
severe neuromuscular pathology seen in the Lama2-null mouse model of
MDC1A. Vishnudas and Miller (2009) analyzed molecular mechanisms of Bax
regulation in normal and LAMA2-deficient muscles and cells, including
myogenic cells from MDC1A patients. In mouse myogenic cells, Bax
coimmunoprecipitated with the multifunctional protein Ku70. In addition,
cell-permeable pentapeptides designed from Ku70, termed Bax-inhibiting
peptides (BIPs), inhibited staurosporine-induced Bax translocation and
cell death in mouse myogenic cells. Acetylation of Ku70, which can
inhibit binding to Bax and can be an indicator of increased
susceptibility to cell death, was more abundant in Lama2-null mouse
muscles than in normal mouse muscles. Myotubes formed in culture from
human LAMA2-deficient patient myoblasts produced high levels of
activated caspase-3 (CASP3; 600636) when grown on poly-L-lysine, but not
when grown on a LAMA2-containing substrate or when treated with BIPs.
Cytoplasmic Ku70 in human LAMA2-deficient myotubes was both reduced in
amount and more highly acetylated than in normal myotubes. Vishnudas and
Miller (2009) concluded that increased susceptibility to cell death
appears to be an intrinsic property of human LAMA2-deficient myotubes
and that Ku70 is a regulator of Bax-mediated pathogenesis.

By screening human cells transfected with foreign DNA, Zhang et al.
(2011) observed expression of IFNL1 (IL29; 607403), a type III
interferon (IFN), rather than type I IFN (e.g., IFNB1; 147640).
Pull-down analysis with cytosolic proteins identified Ku70 and Ku80 as
the DNA-binding proteins. Knockdown and reporter analyses revealed that
Ku70 functioned as a DNA sensor that induced IFNL1 activation. Analysis
of the IFNL1 promoter indicated that positive-regulatory domain I and
IFN-stimulated response element sites were predominantly involved in
DNA-mediated IFNL1 activation. Pull-down assays showed that IFNL1
induction was associated with activation of IRF1 (147575) and IRF7
(605047). Zhang et al. (2011) concluded that Ku70 mediates the induction
of type III IFN by DNA, as may occur in viral infections or DNA
vaccination.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Walker et al. (2001) determined the crystal structure of the human Ku
heterodimer both alone and bound to a 55-nucleotide DNA element at 2.7-
and 2.5-angstrom resolution, respectively. Ku70 and Ku80 share a common
topology and form a dyad-symmetrical molecule with a preformed ring that
encircles duplex DNA. The binding site can cradle 2 full turns of DNA
while encircling only the central 3-4 base pairs. Ku makes no contacts
with DNA bases and few with the sugar-phosphate backbone, but it fits
sterically to major and minor groove contours so as to position the DNA
helix in a defined path through the protein ring. Walker et al. (2001)
concluded that these features are well designed to structurally support
broken DNA ends and to bring the DNA helix into phase across the
junction during end processing and ligation.

ANIMAL MODEL

Li et al. (1998) presented evidence that inactivation of the Ku70 gene
by targeted disruption in mice and derived cell lines leads to a
propensity for malignant transformation both in vitro and in vivo. In
vitro, Ku70 -/- mouse fibroblasts displayed an increased rate of sister
chromatid exchange and a high frequency of spontaneous neoplastic
transformation. In vivo, Ku70 -/- mice, known to be defective in B- but
not T-lymphocyte maturation, developed thymic and disseminated T-cell
lymphomas at a mean age of 6 months with CD4+/CD8+ tumor cells. In
addition, many of the knockout mice showed segmental aganglionosis
affecting the small intestine and the colon. These findings demonstrated
that Ku70 deficiency facilitates neoplastic growth and suggested a role
of the Ku70 locus in tumor suppression.

HISTORY

An article by Sawada et al. (2003) discussing the function of Ku70 was
retracted because it contained 'a significant number of digital image
manipulations in the published figures.' The retraction superceded the
previously published erratum for this article.

REFERENCE 1. Baumann, P.; West, S. C.: DNA end-joining catalyzed by human cell-free
extracts. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 14066-14070, 1998.

2. Chan, J. Y. C.; Lerman, M. I.; Prabhakar, B. S.; Isozaki, O.; Santisteban,
P.; Kuppers, R. C.; Oates, E. L.; Notkins, A. L.; Kohn, L. D.: Cloning
and characterization of a cDNA that encodes a 70-kDa novel human thyroid
autoantigen. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 3651-3654, 1989.

3. Goedecke, W.; Eijpe, M.; Offenberg, H. H.; van Aalderen, M.; Heyting,
C.: Mre11 and Ku70 interact in somatic cells, but are differentially
expressed in early meiosis. Nature Genet. 23: 194-198, 1999.

4. Hartley, K. O.; Gell, D.; Smith, G. C. M.; Zhang, H.; Divecha,
N.; Connelly, M. A.; Admon, A.; Lees-Miller, S. P.; Anderson, C. W.;
Jackson, S. P.: DNA-dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit: a
relative of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and the ataxia telangiectasia
gene product. Cell 82: 849-856, 1995.

5. Koike, M.; Matsuda, Y.; Mimori, T.; Harada, Y.-N.; Shiomi, N.;
Shiomi, T.: Chromosomal localization of the mouse and rat DNA double-strand
break repair genes Ku p70 and Ku p80/XRCC5 and their mRNA expression
in various mouse tissues. Genomics 38: 38-44, 1996.

6. Kusano, K.; Johnson-Schlitz, D. M.; Engels, W. R.: Sterility of
Drosophila with mutations in the Bloom syndrome gene--complementation
by Ku70. Science 291: 2600-2602, 2001.

7. Li, G. C.; Ouyang, H.; Li, X.; Nagasawa, H.; Little, J. B.; Chen,
D. J.; Ling, C. C.; Fuks, Z.; Cordon-Cardo, C.: Ku70: a candidate
tumor suppressor gene for murine T cell lymphoma. Molec. Cell 2:
1-8, 1998.

8. Mari, P.-O.; Florea, B. I.; Persengiev, S. P.; Verkaik, N. S.;
Bruggenwirth, H. T.; Modesti, M.; Giglia-Mari, G.; Bezstarosti, K.;
Demmers, J. A. A.; Luider, T. M.; Houtsmuller, A. B.; van Gent, D.
C.: Dynamic assembly of end-joining complexes requires interaction
between Ku70/80 and XRCC4. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 18597-18602,
2006.

9. McBride, O. W.; Chan, J. Y. C.; Notkins, A. L.; Kohn, L. D.; Lerman,
M.: The TSH receptor gene is located on human chromosome 22 and homologous
sequences are present on chromosomes 1q, 8, 10, and Xq. (Abstract) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 41: A177, 1987.

10. Mitchell, A. L.; Bale, A. E.; Chan, J.; Kohn, L.; Gonzalez, F.;
McBride, O. W.: Localization of TSHR gene and cytochrome p450 IID
subfamily on chromosome 22 by linkage analysis. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 51: 1045, 1989.

11. Pace, P.; Mosedale, G.; Hodskinson, M. R.; Rosado, I. V. Sivasubramaniam,
M.; Patel, K. J.: Ku70 corrupts DNA repair in the absence of the
Fanconi anemia pathway. Science 329: 219-223, 2010.

12. Reeves, W. H.; Sthoeger, Z. M.: Molecular cloning of cDNA encoding
the p70 (Ku) lupus autoantigen. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 5047-5052, 1989.

13. Sawada, M.; Sun, W; Hayes, P.; Leskov, K.; Boothman, D. A.; Matsuyama,
S.: K70 suppresses the apoptotic translocation of Bax to mitochondria. Nature
Cell Biol. 5: 320-329, 2003. Note: Erratum: Nature Cell Biol. 6:
373 only, 2004; Retraction: Nature Cell Biol. 9: 480 only, 2007.

14. Takata, M.; Sasaki, M. S.; Sonoda, E.; Morrison, C.; Hashimoto,
M.; Utsumi, H.; Yamaguchi-Iwai, Y.; Shinohara, A.; Takeda, S.: Homologous
recombination and non-homologous end-joining pathways of DNA double-strand
break repair have overlapping roles in the maintenance of chromosomal
integrity in vertebrate cells. EMBO J. 17: 5497-5508, 1998.

15. Takiguchi, Y.; Kurimasa, A.; Chen, F.; Pardington, P. E.; Kuriyama,
T.; Okinaka, R. T.; Moyzis, R.; Chen, D. J.: Genomic structure and
chromosomal assignment of the mouse Ku70 gene. Genomics 35: 129-135,
1996.

16. Tuteja, N.; Tuteja, R.; Ochem, A.; Taneja, P.; Huang, N. W.; Simoncsits,
A.; Susic, S.; Rahman, K.; Marusic, L.; Chen, J.; Zhang, J.; Wang,
S.; Pongor, S.; Falaschi, A.: Human DNA helicase II: a novel DNA
unwinding enzyme identified as the Ku autoantigen. EMBO J. 13: 4991-5001,
1994.

17. Vishnudas, V. K.; Miller, J. B.: Ku70 regulates Bax-mediated
pathogenesis in laminin-alpha-2-deficient human muscle cells and mouse
models of congenital muscular dystrophy. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18:
4467-4477, 2009.

18. Walker, J. R.; Corpina, R. A.; Goldberg, J.: Structure of the
Ku heterodimer bound to DNA and its implications for double-strand
break repair. Nature 412: 607-614, 2001.

19. Zhang, X.; Brann, T. W.; Zhou, M.; Yang, J.; Oguariri, R. M.;
Lidie, K. B.; Imamichi, H.; Huang, D.-W.; Lempicki, R. A.; Baseler,
M. W.; Veenstra, T. D.; Young, H. A.; Lane, H. C.; Imamichi, T.:
Cutting edge: Ku70 is a novel cytosolic DNA sensor that induces type
III rather than type I IFN. J. Immun. 186: 4541-4545, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/30/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/28/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/17/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/1/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/4/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/15/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/5/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/28/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 2/2/1999
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/19/1996
Alan F. Scott - updated: 2/11/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/13/1989

EDITED carol: 05/10/2012
terry: 10/10/2011
mgross: 10/3/2011
terry: 9/30/2011
wwang: 11/5/2010
terry: 10/28/2010
alopez: 8/18/2010
terry: 8/17/2010
mgross: 9/17/2009
mgross: 5/1/2007
mgross: 12/3/2003
cwells: 11/4/2003
alopez: 8/17/2001
terry: 8/15/2001
alopez: 4/5/2001
terry: 12/1/1999
alopez: 9/30/1999
terry: 9/28/1999
carol: 2/2/1999
carol: 12/30/1998
terry: 6/17/1998
terry: 6/1/1998
mark: 12/13/1996
terry: 12/11/1996
mark: 9/19/1996
terry: 4/17/1996
mark: 3/4/1996
terry: 2/21/1996
mark: 2/11/1996
terry: 10/27/1995
mimadm: 11/6/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 9/9/1990
carol: 6/4/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990

157132	TITLE *157132 MICROTUBULE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 4; MAP4
DESCRIPTION Chapin and Bulinski (1991) used a polyclonal antiserum raised against a
HeLa cell microtubule-associated protein of M(r) 210,000 (210-kD MAP or
MAP4), an abundant nonneuronal MAP, to isolate cDNA clones from a human
fetal brain lambda gt11 cDNA expression library. They found that this,
the major human nonneuronal MAP, resembles 2 neuronal MAPs in its
microtubule-binding domain, while most of the molecule has sequences,
and presumably functions, distinct from those of the neuronal MAPs
(e.g., 157130).

West et al. (1991) reported the structure of MAP4 on the basis of
comparisons of the human, mouse, and bovine sequences.

Chapin et al. (1995) isolated clones encoding alternatively spliced
forms of MAP4. One isoform is similar to an isoform of tau (157140) in
structure. The authors mapped human MAP4 gene to 3p21 by fluorescence in
situ hybridization. Mangan and Olmsted (1996) demonstrated that the
murine homolog is located on mouse chromosome 9.

REFERENCE 1. Chapin, S. J.; Bulinski, J. C.: Non-neuronal 210 x 10(3) M(r)
microtubule-associated protein (MAP4) contains a domain homologous
to the microtubule-binding domains of neuronal MAP2 and tau. J. Cell
Sci. 98: 27-36, 1991.

2. Chapin, S. J.; Lue, C.-M.; Yu, M. T.; Bulinski, J. C.: Differential
expression of alternatively spliced forms of MAP4: a repertoire of
structurally different microtubule-binding domains. Biochemistry 34:
2289-2301, 1995.

3. Mangan, M. E.; Olmsted, J. B.: The gene for microtubule-associated
protein 4 (Mtap4) maps to the distal region of mouse chromosome 9. Mammalian
Genome 7: 918-925, 1996.

4. West, R. R.; Tenbarge, K. M.; Olmsted, J. B.: A model for microtubule-associated
protein 4 structure: domains defined by comparisons of human, mouse,
and bovine sequences. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 21886-21896, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 05/07/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/16/1992

EDITED mark: 05/07/1997
terry: 5/2/1997
carol: 5/16/1994
carol: 1/15/1993
carol: 7/16/1992

601126	TITLE *601126 TATA ELEMENT MODULATORY FACTOR 1; TMF1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The TATA element, or TATA box, is a critical cis-acting regulatory
element in many promoters transcribed by RNA polymerase II (see 180660).
The RNA polymerase II transcription factor D (see 313650) is a
biochemically defined HeLa cell nuclear fraction containing a
transcription factor activity that binds specifically to the TATA box.
The DNA-binding subunit of TFIID is the TATA box-binding protein
(600075). Garcia et al. (1992) reasoned that additional cellular factors
may also bind to the TATA element and influence the level of gene
expression. They used oligonucleotides corresponding to the TATA element
of human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) to screen a HeLa cell cDNA
library. Through this method, they identified a novel cellular protein
with a calculated molecular mass of 123 kD and designated it the TATA
element modulatory factor (TMF). They showed that TMF binds to the HIV-1
TATA element in gel-retardation assays and inhibits activation of the
HIV-1 long terminal repeat by TBP in in vitro transcription assays.
Sequence analysis of the TMF cDNA revealed leucine zipper motifs and
homology in its DNA-binding domain with the phage-encoded DNA binding
protein Ner. In cataloging sequences from a human adult testis
expression library, Affara et al. (1994) also identified a cDNA clone
for TMF.

MAPPING

Garcia et al. (1992) mapped the TMF gene to 3p21-p12 by radioactive in
situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Affara, N. A.; Bentley, E.; Davey, P.; Pelmear, A.; Jones, M. H.
: The identification of novel gene sequences of the human adult testis. Genomics 22:
205-210, 1994.

2. Garcia, J. A.; Ou, S.-H. I.; Wu, F.; Lusis, A. J.; Sparkes, R.
S.; Gaynor, R. B.: Cloning and chromosomal mapping of a human immunodeficiency
virus 1 'TATA' element modulatory factor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 89:
9372-9376, 1992.

CREATED Andre K. Cheng: 3/14/1996

EDITED carol: 12/26/2002
mark: 1/10/1998
mark: 3/14/1996

608844	TITLE *608844 ENDONUCLEASE VIII-LIKE 1; NEIL1
;;NEI1;;
FPG1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NEIL1 belongs to a class of DNA glycosylases homologous to the bacterial
Fpg/Nei family. These glycosylases initiate the first step in base
excision repair by cleaving bases damaged by reactive oxygen species and
introducing a DNA strand break via the associated lyase reaction
(Bandaru et al., 2002).

CLONING

Bandaru et al. (2002) obtained a full-length NEIL1 cDNA by searching for
sequences similar to the Arabidopsis DNA glycosylase Fpg. Bacterial
Fpg/Nei proteins contain 2 structural domains: an N-terminal 2-layered
beta sandwich and a C-terminal 4-helix bundle, which includes a
helix-2-turns-helix (H2TH) motif and a zinc finger. The deduced
390-amino acid human NEIL1 protein has conserved residues in 6 highly
conserved regions that span both structural domains of the bacterial
Fpg/Nei proteins, but it lacks the characteristic zinc finger motif.

By searching databases for sequences similar to E. coli Nei, Takao et
al. (2002) cloned NEIL1. Quantitative PCR of mouse tissues detected
Neil1 expression in all tissues examined, with highest expression in
spleen, heart, and lung, and lower expression in brain, liver, skeletal
muscle, kidney, and testis.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to E. coli Nei and
Fpg, Morland et al. (2002) identified NEIL1. The deduced protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 43.7 kD. Northern blot analysis detected
NEIL1 transcripts of 1.8, 4.0, and 7.5 kb expressed at variable levels
in nearly all tissues examined. Fluorescence-labeled NEIL1 localized to
the nuclei of transfected HeLa cells, with protein accumulation in
nucleoli.

GENE FUNCTION

Bandaru et al. (2002) characterized the substrate specificity of
recombinant NEIL1 toward oxidative pyrimidine DNA damages. NEIL1 showed
specificity similar to E. coli Nei in that it preferred thymine glycol,
5-hydroxycytosine, and dihydrothymine to dihydrouracil and
5-hydroxyuracil. It exhibited weak activity against 8-oxoguanine
(8-oxoG). NEIL1 showed a pH optimum of 9.5 at 100 to 150 mM salt, and
addition of EDTA was inhibitory. In E. coli Nei, pro2 is responsible for
Schiff base formation, and glu3 is required for glycosylase activity.
Site-directed mutagenesis at these sites in human NEIL1 greatly reduced
or eliminated activity on thymine glycol-containing substrates.

Takao et al. (2002) demonstrated that in vitro translated mouse or human
NEIL1 could remove thymine glycol and 5-hydroxyuracil in double- and
single-stranded DNA much more efficiently than 8-oxoG. Both enzymes also
nicked the strand by an associated beta-delta apurinic/apyrimidinic
lyase activity. Mouse Neil1 showed DNA glycosylase/lyase activity toward
mismatched uracil and thymine, especially U:C and T:C mismatches.

Morland et al. (2002) found that NEIL1 cleaved abasic sites by a
beta-delta elimination mechanism independent of the base in the
complementary strand. However, removal of 8-oxoG was opposite base
dependent, with 8-oxoG:C being the preferred substrate. There was
negligible activity toward 8-oxoG:A. In this regard, Morland et al.
(2002) concluded that NEIL1 has properties similar to mammalian OGG1
(601982) in preventing mutations arising from misincorporation of A
across 8-oxoG.

Dou et al. (2003) found that NEIL1 excised 5-hydroxyuracil from a DNA
bubble and from single-stranded DNA, but it did not have strong activity
toward 8-oxoG in the bubble. Both NEIL1 and NEIL2 (608933) showed higher
affinity for the bubble structures of both damaged and undamaged DNA
relative to duplex structures than did NTH1 (602656) or OGG1. Dou et al.
(2003) concluded that NEILs are functionally distinct from OGG1 and NTH1
in vivo and may preferentially be involved in the repair of lesions in
DNA bubbles generated during transcription and/or replication.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Doublie et al. (2004) noted that sequence alignments of NEIL1 with
related DNA glycosylases had predicted that NEIL1 lacks a zinc finger
and would be expected to use a different DNA-binding motif. They
determined the crystal structure of an enzymatically active deletion
construct of NEIL1 lacking 56 C-terminal residues. The structure
revealed a motif composed of 2 antiparallel beta-strands that mimics the
antiparallel beta-hairpin zinc finger found in other Fpg/Nei family
members, but lacks the loops containing the zinc-binding residues. This
'zincless finger' was required for NEIL1 activity, since mutating a
highly conserved arginine within it reduced the glycosylase activity of
the enzyme.

GENE STRUCTURE

Takao et al. (2002) determined that the mouse and human NEIL1 genes
contain 10 protein-coding exons. Morland et al. (2002) determined that
the NEIL1 gene spans about 8.0 kb. Exons 1 and 2 are located within CpG
islands.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Bandaru et al. (2002) mapped the NEIL1
gene to chromosome 15q22-q24. Morland et al. (2002) mapped the NEIL1
gene to chromosome 15q22.33 by genomic sequence analysis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Vartanian et al. (2006) found that Neil1 knockout mice were born at
expected mendelian ratios and the phenotype of Neil1 -/- pups was normal
through the first 4 to 6 months of life. At about 7 months, however,
male Neil1 -/- mice developed severe obesity, and female Neil1 -/- mice
were modestly overweight. Mutant mice also showed dyslipidemia, fatty
liver disease, and a tendency to develop hyperinsulinemia, similar to
metabolic syndrome (605552) in humans. Histologic studies showed
significant kidney vacuolization, and mitochondrial DNA from Neil1 -/-
mice showed increased levels of steady-state DNA damage and deletions,
compared to wildtype controls.

REFERENCE 1. Bandaru, V.; Sunkara, S.; Wallace, S. S.; Bond, J. P.: A novel
human DNA glycosylase that removes oxidative DNA damage and is homologous
to Escherichia coli endonuclease VIII. DNA Repair 1: 517-529, 2002.

2. Dou, H.; Mitra, S.; Hazra, T. K.: Repair of oxidized bases in
DNA bubble structures by human DNA glycosylases NEIL1 and NEIL2. J.
Biol. Chem. 278: 49679-49684, 2003.

3. Doublie, S.; Bandaru, V.; Bond, J. P.; Wallace, S. S.: The crystal
structure of human endonuclease VIII-like 1 (NEIL1) reveals a zincless
finger motif required for glycosylase activity. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 101: 10284-10289, 2004.

4. Morland, I.; Rolseth, V.; Luna, L.; Rognes, T.; Bjoras, M.; Seeberg,
E.: Human DNA glycosylases of the bacterial Fpg/MutM superfamily:
an alternative pathway for the repair of 8-oxoguanine and other oxidation
products in DNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 30: 4926-4936, 2002.

5. Takao, M.; Kanno, S.; Kobayashi, K.; Zhang, Q.-M.; Yonei, S.; van
der Horst, G. T. J.; Yasui, A.: A back-up glycosylase in Nth1 knock-out
mice is a functional Nei (endonuclease VIII) homologue. J. Biol.
Chem. 277: 42205-42213, 2002.

6. Vartanian, V.; Lowell, B.; Minko, I. G.; Wood, T. G.; Ceci, J.
D.; George, S.; Ballinger, S. W.; Corless, C. L.; McCullough, A. K.;
Lloyd, R. S.: The metabolic syndrome resulting from a knockout of
the NEIL1 DNA glycosylase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 1864-1869,
2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/24/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/17/2004

EDITED wwang: 03/28/2006
terry: 3/24/2006
mgross: 9/21/2004
mgross: 8/17/2004

600662	TITLE *600662 MADS BOX TRANSCRIPTION ENHANCER FACTOR 2, POLYPEPTIDE C; MEF2C
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MEF2C belongs to the myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2) family of
transcription factors. MEF2C plays a pivotal role in myogenesis,
development of the anterior heart field, neural crest and craniofacial
development, and neurogenesis, among others (summary by Zweier et al.,
2010).

See also MEF2A (600660).

CLONING

McDermott et al. (1993) cloned a member of the MEF2 family of proteins
from a human skeletal muscle cDNA library using a fragment of the MEF2A
cDNA as a probe. Transcripts of MEF2C were found in the skeletal muscle
and brain. Alternative splice variants were found, 1 of which was unique
to the brain.

Leifer et al. (1993) found that the brain form was expressed by neurons
in particular layers of the cerebral cortex and that expression declined
during postnatal development. The skeletal isoform of the cDNA encodes a
465-amino acid protein with conserved MADS and MEF2 domains. Like the
other MEF2 gene products, MEF2C has both DNA binding and
trans-activating activities indistinguishable from other members of the
family. MEF2C, however, is induced late during myogenic differentiation
and has a strict tissue-specific pattern of expression not seen in MEF2A
or MEF2B.

Zweier et al. (2010) found high expression of isoform 1 of the MEF2C
gene in fetal and adult human brain, whereas isoform 2 was widely
expressed with highest levels in skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Breitbart et al. (1993) suggested that, while MEF2A may be involved in
induction of muscle differentiation, MEF2C may be involved with
maintenance of the differentiated state.

CREB-binding protein (CBP; 600140)/p300 (602700) and p300/CBP-associated
factor (PCAF; 602203) are coactivators for MEF2C during differentiation.
Chen et al. (2000) showed that NCOA2 mediates the coactivation of
MEF2C-dependent transcription through interaction with the MADS box
domain of MEF2C. They proposed a model of cooperative interaction
between NCOA2, myogenin (MYOG; 159980), and MEF2C in the regulation of
muscle-specific gene expression.

During mammalian development, electrical activity promotes the
calcium-dependent survival of neurons that have made appropriate
synaptic connections. Mao et al. (1999) showed that calcium influx into
cerebellar neurons triggers the activation of the MKK6 (601254)-p38 MAP
kinase (600289) cascade and that the p38 MAP kinase then phosphorylates
and activates MEF2s. Once activated by this calcium-dependent p38 MAP
kinase signaling pathway, MEF2 can regulate the expression of genes that
are critical for survival of newly differentiated neurons. These
findings demonstrated that MEF2 is a calcium-regulated transcription
factor and defined a function for MEF2 during nervous system development
that is distinct from previously well-characterized functions of MEF2
during muscle differentiation.

Chen et al. (2002) demonstrated that Carm1 (603934) and Ncoa2
cooperatively stimulated the activity of Mef2c in mouse mesenchymal stem
cells and found that there was direct interaction among Mef2c, Grip1,
and Carm1.

By targeting human MEF2A or mouse Mef2c expression to mouse
cardiomyocytes, Xu et al. (2006) demonstrated that overexpressing these
transcription factors caused cardiomyopathy or predisposed transgenic
mice to more fulminant disease following pressure overload. In cultured
cardiomyocytes, MEF2A or Mef2c overexpression induced sarcomeric
disorganization and focal elongation. Both MEF2A and Mef2c programmed
similar profiles of gene expression in the heart that included genes
involved in extracellular matrix remodeling, ion handling, and
metabolism.

Potthoff et al. (2007) showed that class II histone deacetylases (e.g.,
HDAC5; 605315) were selectively degraded by the proteasome in mouse
slow, oxidative myofibers, enabling Mef2 to activate the slow myofiber
gene program. Forced expression of Hdac5 in skeletal muscle or genetic
deletion of Mef2c or Mef2d (600663) blocked activity-dependent fast to
slow fiber transformation, whereas expression of hyperactive Mef2c
promoted the slow fiber phenotype, enhancing endurance and enabling mice
to run almost twice the distance of wildtype littermates.

Using a loss-of-function allele in mice, Johnnidis et al. (2008)
reported that the myeloid-specific microRNA-223 (miR223; 300694)
negatively regulates progenitor proliferation and granulocyte
differentiation and activation. miR223 mutant mice had an expanded
granulocytic compartment resulting from a cell-autonomous increase in
the number of granulocyte progenitors. Johnnidis et al. (2008) showed
that Mef2c, a transcription factor that promotes myeloid progenitor
proliferation, is a target of miR223, and that genetic ablation of Mef2c
suppresses progenitor expansion and corrects the neutrophilic phenotype
in miR223-null mice. In addition, granulocytes lacking miR223 were
hypermature, hypersensitive to activating stimuli, and displayed
increased fungicidal activity. As a consequence of this neutrophil
hyperactivity, miR223 mutant mice spontaneously developed inflammatory
lung pathology and exhibited exaggerated tissue destruction after
endotoxin challenge. Johnnidis et al. (2008) concluded that their data
supported a model in which miR223 acts as a fine tuner of granulocyte
production and the inflammatory response.

Zweier et al. (2010) demonstrated that MEF2C increases promoter
activation of the MECP2 (300005) and CDKL5 (300203) genes.

MAPPING

Martin et al. (1994) mapped Mef2 to mouse chromosome 13. By fluorescence
in situ hybridization, Krainc et al. (1995) mapped human MEF2C to
chromosome 5q14, a region with homology of synteny to the mouse
location.

CYTOGENETICS

In 5 unrelated children with severe mental retardation, stereotypic
movements, epilepsy, and/or cerebral malformations (613443), Le Meur et
al. (2010) identified 5 different interstitial de novo deletions of
chromosome 5q14 ranging in size from 216 kb to 8.8 Mb. The minimal
common deleted region contained only the MEF2C gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a girl with severe mental retardation, stereotypic movements,
epilepsy, and cerebral malformation (MRD20; 613443), Le Meur et al.
(2010) identified a de novo heterozygous nonsense mutation in the MEF2C
gene (S228X; 600662.0001). Le Meur et al. (2010) noted that the role of
MEF2C in synaptic plasticity is consistent with a role in learning and
memory, and the authors referred to the mouse models of Li et al. (2008)
and Barbosa et al. (2008).

Zweier et al. (2010) identified 4 different de novo heterozygous
mutations in the MEF2C gene (see. e.g., 600662.0002-600662.0004) in 4 of
362 probands with mental retardation who were screened for mutations in
this gene. Two of the mutations were missense and 2 were truncating. Two
additional patients with a similar disorder had heterozygous deletions
involving the MEF2C gene. Analysis of blood-derived RNA showed
significantly decreased levels of MEF2C isoform 2 mRNA in all patients
with deletions in or including the MEF2C gene region, including the
patients reported by Engels et al. (2009), Cardoso et al. (2009), and Le
Meur et al. (2010), suggesting haploinsufficiency. Two patients with
missense mutations did not show decreased MEF2C mRNA levels. All
deletions and mutations caused significantly decreased MEF2C
transcriptional activity, which could be rescued by wildtype MEF2C.
Finally, all patients, including the 2 with missense mutations, showed
decreased levels of MECP2 mRNA, and all except 2 patients had decreased
levels of CDKL5 mRNA. These 2 genes are involved in Rett or Rett
syndrome-like phenotypes (312750 and 300672, respectively), which shares
some features with MRD20. Zweier et al. (2010) concluded that the
phenotype results from involvement of a common pathway involving these 3
genes.

ANIMAL MODEL

Members of the MEF2 family of MADs-box transcription factors bind to an
A-T-rich DNA sequence associated with muscle-specific genes. The murine
Mef2c gene is expressed in heart precursor cells before formation of the
linear heart tube. In mice homozygous for a known mutation of Mef2c, Lin
et al. (1997) found that the heart tube did not undergo looping
morphogenesis, the future right ventricle did not form, and a subset of
cardiac muscle genes was not expressed. The absence of the right
ventricular region of the mutant correlated with downregulation of the
dHAND gene, which encodes a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
required for cardiac morphogenesis. The authors concluded that MEF2C is
an essential regulator of cardiac morphogenesis and right ventricular
development.

Von Both et al. (2004) characterized the molecular basis for defective
heart formation in Foxh1 (603621)-null mice and determined that Mef2c is
a direct target of Foxh1. They identified a composite Foxh1-Nkx2.5
(600584)-binding site within the Mef2c gene that was regulated by
Tgf-beta (see 190180) signaling in a Smad-dependent manner. Von Both et
al. (2004) concluded that a TGF-beta-like SMAD signaling pathway
specifies the anterior heart field through a FOXH1-NKX2.5 complex that
regulates MEF2C expression.

Verzi et al. (2007) found that conditional inactivation of Mef2c in
mouse neural crest resulted in neonatal lethality due to severe
craniofacial defects. Mef2c was required for expression of Dlx5
(600028), Dlx6 (600030), and Hand2 (602407) transcription factors in the
branchial arches, and Verzi et al. (2007) identified a branchial
arch-specific enhancer in the Dlx5/Dlx6 locus that was activated
synergistically by Mef2c and Dlx5. Mef2c and Dlx5/Dlx6 also interacted
genetically, since mice heterozygous for either Dlx5/Dlx6 or Mef2c were
normal at birth and survived to weaning, whereas heterozygosity for both
Dlx5/Dlx6 and Mef2c resulted in defective palate development and
neonatal lethality.

Barbosa et al. (2008) found that mice with brain-specific deletion of
the Mef2c gene were viable to adulthood, were slightly smaller than
wildtype littermates, and showed impaired balance beam walking and an
abnormal hind/forelimb clasping reflex at a young age. In addition,
Mef2c-knockout mice showed impaired hippocampal-dependent learning and
memory. These behavioral changes were accompanied by a marked increase
in the number of excitatory synapses and potentiation of basal and
evoked synaptic transmission resulting from altered presynaptic
function. Conversely, neuronal expression of a superactivating form of
Mef2c in postsynaptic cells resulted in a reduction of excitatory
postsynaptic sites without affecting learning and memory performance. No
changes in synapse structure were observed. The findings suggested that
MEF2C activity per se does not directly determine learning, but somehow
facilitates learning-related plasticity by controlling excessive
synaptic input. Barbosa et al. (2008) concluded that refinement of
synaptic connectivity facilitates hippocampal-dependent learning and
memory.

Li et al. (2008) found that conditional knockout of Mef2c in nestin
(NES; 600915)-expressing neural stem/progenitor cells impaired neuronal
differentiation in mice, resulting in aberrant aggregation and
compaction of neurons migrating into the lower layers of the neocortex
during development. Neural stem cell proliferation and survival were not
affected. Conditional Mef2c-null mice surviving to adulthood manifested
smaller, less mature neurons and smaller brain size with more immature
electrophysiologic network properties. They also showed severe
behavioral deficits reminiscent of Rett syndrome (RTT; 312750), such as
anxiety, decreased cognitive function, and marked paw-clasping. Li et
al. (2008) concluded that MEF2C has a crucial role in programming early
neuronal differentiation and proper distribution within the layers of
the neocortex during development.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 20
MEF2C, SER228TER

In a girl with autosomal dominant mental retardation-20 (MRD20; 613443),
Le Meur et al. (2010) identified a de novo heterozygous 683C-G
transversion in exon 7 of the MEF2C gene, resulting in a ser228-to-ter
(S228X) substitution.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 20
MEF2C, LEU38GLN

In a 3-year-old girl with MRD20 (613443), Zweier et al. (2010)
identified a de novo heterozygous 113T-A transversion in exon 3 of the
MEF2C gene, resulting in a leu38-to-gln (L38Q) substitution in the MADS
domain. Homology modeling predicted that the mutation may alter
DNA-binding affinity. The patient had severe mental retardation with
absent speech and inability to walk, hypotonia, seizure onset at age 10
months, delayed myelination, and mildly dysmorphic facial features.

.0003
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 20
MEF2C, 1-BP DUP, 99T

In a 14-year-old boy with MRD20 (613443), Zweier et al. (2010)
identified a de novo heterozygous 1-bp duplication (99dupT) in exon 3 of
the MEF2C gene, resulting in a glu34-to-ter (E34X) substitution. The
patient had severe mental retardation with absent speech, hypertonia,
seizures onset at age 10 months, mildly enlarged ventricles, and mildly
dysmorphic facial features.

.0004
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 20
MEF2C, GLY27ALA

In a 10-year-old girl with MRD20 (613443), Zweier et al. (2010)
identified a de novo heterozygous 80G-C transversion in exon 3 of the
MEF2C gene, resulting in a gly27-to-ala (G27A) substitution in the MADS
domain. Homology modeling predicted that the mutation may alter
DNA-binding affinity. The patient had severe mental retardation with
absent speech and difficulty walking, hypotonia, seizure onset at 6
months, delayed myelination, and mildly dysmorphic facial features.

.0005
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 20
MEF2C, 1-BP DEL, 457A

In an 8-year-old girl with severe MRD20 (613443), Bienvenu et al. (2013)
identified a de novo heterozygous 1-bp deletion (457delA) in exon 5 of
the MEF2C gene, predicted to result in premature termination
(N153TfsX33) and loss of the functional transactivation domain. In
infancy, the patient had poor feeding due to marked hypotonia and poor
eye contact due to strabismus. Motor milestones were delayed, and she
walked at age 4 years. At age 18 months, she had a single episode of
myoclonic febrile seizures that were easily controlled. At age 7 years,
she had poor growth, microcephaly (-2.5 SD), lack of speech,
stereotypical movements, unstable wide-based gait, and happy demeanor.
There were mild dysmorphic features, including large eyebrows, open
mouth with thick everted lower lip, and anteverted nares. Brain MRI was
normal.

REFERENCE 1. Barbosa, A. C.; Kim. M.-S.; Ertunc, M.; Adachi, M.; Nelson, E.
D.; McAnally, J.; Richardson, J. A.; Kavalali, E. T.; Monteggia, L.
M.; Bassel-Duby, R.; Olson, E. N.: MEF2C, a transcription factor
that facilitates learning and memory by negative regulation of synapse
numbers and function. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 9391-9396, 2008.

2. Bienvenu, T.; Diebold, B.; Chelly, J.; Isidor, B.: Refining the
phenotype associated with MEF2C point mutations. Neurogenetics 14:
71-75, 2013.

3. Breitbart, R. E.; Liang, C.; Smoot, L. B.; Laheru, D. A.; Mahdavi,
V.; Nadal-Ginard, B.: A fourth human MEF2 transcription factor, hMEF2D,
is an early marker of the myogenic lineage. Development 118: 1095-1106,
1993.

4. Cardoso, C.; Boys, A.; Parrini, E.; Mignon-Ravix, C.; McMahon,
J. M.; Khantane, S.; Bertini, E.; Pallesi, E.; Missirian, C.; Zuffardi,
O.; Novara, F.; Villard, L.; Giglio, S.; Chabrol, B.; Slater, H. R.;
Moncla, A.; Scheffer, I. E.; Guerrini, R.: Periventricular heterotopia,
mental retardation, and epilepsy associated with 5q14.3-q15 deletion. Neurology 72:
784-792, 2009.

5. Chen, S. L.; Dowhan, D. H.; Hosking, B. M.; Muscat, G. E. O.:
The steroid receptor coactivator, GRIP-1, is necessary for MEF-2C-dependent
gene expression and skeletal muscle differentiation. Genes Dev. 14:
1209-1228, 2000.

6. Chen, S. L.; Loffler, K. A.; Chen, D.; Stallcup, M. R.; Muscat,
G. E. O.: The coactivator-associated arginine methyltransferase is
necessary for muscle differentiation: CARM1 coactivates myocyte enhancer
factor-2. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 4324-4333, 2002.

7. Engels, H.; Wohlleber, E.; Zink, A., Hoyer, J.; Ludwig, K. U.;
Brockschmidt, F. F.; Wieczorek, D.; Moog, U.; Hellmann-Mersch, B.;
Weber, R. G.; Willatt, L.; Kreiss-Nachtsheim, M.; Firth, H. V.; Rauch,
A.: A novel microdeletion syndrome involving 5q14.3-q15: clinical
and molecular cytogenetic characterization of three patients. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 17: 1592-1599, 2009.

8. Johnnidis, J. B.; Harris, M. H.; Wheeler, R. T.; Stehling-Sun,
S.; Lam, M. H.; Kirak, O.; Brummelkamp, T. R.; Fleming, M. D.; Camargo,
F. D.: Regulation of progenitor cell proliferation and granulocyte
function by microRNA-223. Nature 451: 1125-1129, 2008.

9. Krainc, D.; Haas, M.; Ward, D. C.; Lipton, S. A.; Bruns, G.; Leifer,
D.: Assignment of human myocyte-specific enhancer binding factor
2C (hMEF2C) to human chromosome 5q14 and evidence that MEF2C is evolutionarily
conserved. Genomics 29: 809-811, 1995.

10. Leifer, D.; Krainc, D.; Yu, Y.-T.; McDermott, J.; Breitbart, R.
E.; Heng, J.; Neve, R. L.; Kosofsky, B.; Nadal-Ginard, B.; Lipton,
S. A.: MEF2C, a MADS/MEF2-family transcription factor expressed in
a laminar distribution in cerebral cortex. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90:
1546-1550, 1993.

11. Le Meur, N.; Holder-Espinasse, M.; Jaillard, S.; Goldenberg, A.;
Joriot, S.; Amati-Bonneau, P.; Guichet, A.; Barth, M.; Charollais,
A.; Journel, H.; Auvin, S.; Boucher, C.; Kerckaert, J.-P.; David,
V.; Manouvrier-Hanu, S.; Saugier-Veber, P.; Frebourg, T.; Dubourg,
C.; Andrieux, J.; Bonneau, D.: MEF2C haploinsufficiency caused by
either microdeletion of the 5q14.3 region or mutation is responsible
for severe mental retardation with stereotypic movements, epilepsy
and/or cerebral malformations. J. Med. Genet. 47: 22-29, 2010.

12. Li, H.; Radford, J. C.; Ragusa, M. J.; Shea, K. L.; McKercher,
S. R.; Zaremba, J. D.; Soussou, W.; Nie, Z.; Kang, Y.-J.; Nakanishi,
N.; Okamoto, S.; Roberts, A. J.; Schwarz, J. J.; Lipton, S. A.: Transcription
factor MEF2C influences neural stem/progenitor cell differentiation
and maturation in vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 9397-9402, 2008.

13. Lin, Q.; Schwarz, J.; Bucana, C.; Olson, E. N.: Control of mouse
cardiac morphogenesis and myogenesis by transcription factor MEF2C. Science 276:
1404-1407, 1997.

14. Mao, Z.; Bonni, A.; Xia, F.; Nadal-Vicans, M.; Greenberg, M. E.
: Neuronal activity-dependent cell survival mediated by transcription
factor MEF2. Science 286: 785-790, 1999.

15. Martin, J. F.; Miano, J. M.; Hustad, C. M.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins,
N. A.; Olson, E. N.: A Mef2 gene that generates a muscle-specific
isoform via alternative mRNA splicing. Molec. Cell. Biol. 14: 1647-1656,
1994.

16. McDermott, J. C.; Cardoso, M. C.; Yu, Y.-T.; Andres, V.; Leifer,
D.; Krainc, D.; Lipton, S. A.; Nadal-Ginard, B.: hMEF2C gene encodes
skeletal muscle- and brain-specific transcription factors. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 13: 2564-2577, 1993.

17. Potthoff, M. J.; Wu, H.; Arnold, M. A.; Shelton, J. M.; Backs,
J.; McAnally, J.; Richardson, J. A.; Bassel-Duby, R.; Olson, E. N.
: Histone deacetylase degradation and MEF2 activation promote the
formation of slow-twitch myofibers. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 2459-2467,
2007.

18. Verzi, M. P.; Agarwal, P.; Brown, C.; McCulley, D. J.; Schwarz,
J. J.; Black, B. L.: The transcription factor MEF2C is required for
craniofacial development. Dev. Cell 12: 645-652, 2007.

19. von Both, I.; Silvestri, C.; Erdemir, T.; Lickert, H.; Walls,
J. R.; Henkelman, R. M.; Rossant, J.; Harvey, R. P.; Attisano, L.;
Wrana, J. L.: Foxh1 is essential for development of the anterior
heart field. Dev. Cell 7: 331-345, 2004.

20. Xu, J.; Gong, N. L.; Bodi, I.; Aronow, B. J.; Backx, P. H.; Molkentin,
J. D.: Myocyte enhancer factors 2A and 2C induce dilated cardiomyopathy
in transgenic mice. J. Biol. Chem. 281: 9152-9162, 2006.

21. Zweier, M.; Gregor, A.; Zweier, C.; Engels, H.; Sticht, H.; Wohlleber,
E.; Bijlsma, E. K.; Holder, S. E.; Zenker, M.; Rossier, E.; Grasshoff,
U.; Johnson, D. S.; Robertson, L.; Firth, H. V.; Kraus, C.; Ekici,
A. B.; Reis, A.; Rauch, A.: Mutations in MEF2C from the 5q14.3q15
microdeletion syndrome region are a frequent cause of severe mental
retardation and diminish MECP2 and CDKL5 expression. Hum. Mutat. 31:
722-733, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/5/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/15/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/29/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/18/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/6/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/4/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/14/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/7/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/11/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/22/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/20/1997
Alan F. Scott - updated: 11/8/1995

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 8/18/1995

EDITED carol: 09/16/2013
carol: 3/8/2013
ckniffin: 3/5/2013
wwang: 6/22/2010
ckniffin: 6/15/2010
wwang: 8/11/2009
ckniffin: 7/29/2009
wwang: 6/5/2008
terry: 5/30/2008
alopez: 3/26/2008
terry: 3/18/2008
mgross: 11/6/2007
terry: 11/6/2007
mgross: 5/23/2007
terry: 5/4/2007
wwang: 8/14/2006
wwang: 8/11/2006
terry: 8/9/2006
terry: 4/4/2005
mgross: 10/7/2004
mgross: 8/11/2000
alopez: 10/22/1999
alopez: 7/10/1997
terry: 6/23/1997
alopez: 6/20/1997
mark: 4/7/1996
mark: 8/18/1995

614685	TITLE *614685 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 597; ZNF597
DESCRIPTION 
GENE FUNCTION

Genomic imprinting is an epigenetic process mediated by DNA methylation
and repressive histone modifications in which 1 allele is repressed,
resulting in parent-of-origin specific monoallelic expression. Using
reciprocal genomewide uniparental disomy samples identified with
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS; 130650)- and Silver-Russell syndrome
(SRS; 180860)-like phenotypes, Nakabayashi et al. (2011) analyzed CpG
dinucleotides present in the human genome for imprinted differentially
methylated regions (DMRs) by methylation beadchip microarray analysis.
In addition to 15 imprinted DMRs associated with characterized imprinted
domains, Nakabayashi et al. (2011) identified 2 novel DMRs: a maternally
methylated region overlapping the FAM50B (614686) promoter CpG island,
resulting in paternal expression of this retrotransposon, and a
paternally methylated bidirectional repressor located between the
maternally expressed ZNF597 and NAT15 (NAA60; 614246) genes. In mice,
all 3 genes have unmethylated CpG islands and are biallelically
expressed. Nakabayashi et al. (2011) proposed that FAM50B, ZNF597, and
NAT15 became imprinted after the divergence of mice and humans.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the ZNF597 gene to chromosome 16p13.3 based on an
alignment of the ZNF597 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC029899) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/13/2012.

2. Nakabayashi, K.; Trujillo, A. M.; Tayama, C.; Camprubi, C.; Yoshida,
W.; Lapunzina, P.; Sanchez, A.; Soejima, H.; Aburatani, H.; Nagae,
G.; Ogata, T.; Hata, K.; Monk, D.: Methylation screening of reciprocal
genome-wide UDPs identifies novel human-specific imprinted genes. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 20: 3188-3197, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 06/13/2012

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/13/2012

EDITED mgross: 06/13/2012
mgross: 6/13/2012

600378	TITLE *600378 INNER MEMBRANE PROTEIN, MITOCHONDRIAL; IMMT
;;MITOFILIN;;
HEART MUSCLE PROTEIN; HMP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The heart muscle protein gene is expressed predominantly in the heart
and is proposed to be an ATP-driven motor protein that interacts with
cytoskeletal components. Icho et al. (1994) cloned a full-length 2.7-kb
cDNA coding for a 758-amino acid protein. The protein has a possible
ATP-binding domain at the N terminus and a long alpha-helical domain
that could form a coiled-coil structure. Proteins with similar
structures include myosin II (see 160730), an actin-based motor protein,
and kinesin (see 602809), a microtubule-based motor protein.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the IMMT
gene to chromosome 2p11.2 (TMAP G62066).

REFERENCE 1. Icho, T.; Ikeda, T.; Matsumoto, Y.; Hanaoka, F.; Kaji, K.; Tsuchida,
N.: A novel human gene that is preferentially transcribed in heart
muscle. Gene 144: 301-306, 1994.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/8/1995

EDITED mgross: 02/20/2009
alopez: 4/4/2000
alopez: 3/31/2000
carol: 3/30/2000
carol: 2/8/1995

604725	TITLE *604725 UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 2; USP2
;;UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE, 41-KD; UBP41
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ubiquitin (191339), a highly conserved protein involved in the
regulation of intracellular protein breakdown, cell cycle regulation,
and stress response, is released from degraded proteins by disassembly
of the polyubiquitin chains. The disassembly process is mediated by
ubiquitin-specific proteases (USPs). Also see USP1 (603478).

CLONING

Using a double-screening method of bacteria expressing chick skeletal
muscle cDNA, Baek et al. (1997) isolated a cDNA encoding a deduced
357-amino acid protein expressing deubiquitinating activity. Because
SDS-PAGE analysis indicated a 41-kD purified protein, the authors termed
the protein Ubp41.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the USP2
gene to chromosome 11 (TMAP SHGC-132662).

REFERENCE 1. Baek, S.; Choi, K. S.; Yoo, Y. J.; Cho, J. M.; Baker, R. T.; Tanaka,
K.; Chung, C. H.: Molecular cloning of a novel ubiquitin-specific
protease, UBP41, with isopeptidase activity in chick skeletal muscle. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 25560-25565, 1997.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/23/2000

EDITED carol: 05/12/2004
carol: 1/31/2003
mgross: 3/23/2000

300072	TITLE *300072 UBIQUITIN-SPECIFIC PROTEASE 9, X CHROMOSOME; USP9X
;;DROSOPHILA FAT FACETS-RELATED, X-LINKED; DFFRX;;
FAM
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Jones et al. (1996) reported that an expressed sequence tag (EST 221)
derived from human adult testis shares homology with the Drosophila fat
facets (faf) gene. They detected related sequences on both the human X
and Y chromosomes. They used EST 221 to derive clones covering the
complete open reading frame of the X-specific locus, which they termed
DFFRX. Y-specific cDNA clones were derived, and they termed that locus
DFFRY (400005). Over the 2 regions corresponding to nucleotides 6 to
1901 and nucleotides 5815 to 7907 of the DFFRX sequence, the X- and
Y-specific sequences share 91% and 88% identity, respectively. Both
putative gene products contain conserved cysteine and histidine domains
that have been described in ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolases (e.g.,
191342). Northern blot analysis of 16 different adult human tissues with
the EST 221 revealed expression in all tissues. They also detected both
DFFRX and DFFRY expression in developing human tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Jones et al. (1996) determined the X inactivation status of DFFRX
through use of quantitative RT-PCR with X-specific primers and found
that the level of DFFRX expression rises as the copy number of the X
chromosome increases, indicating that DFFRX escapes inactivation. In
Drosophila the faf gene has been shown to be important in eye function
and in oocyte development. The high degree of conservation between the
Drosophila faf gene and the DFFRX sequence led Jones et al. (1996) to
conclude that DFFRX has an important function in humans.

Proper chromosome segregation requires the attachment of sister
kinetochores to microtubules from opposite spindle poles to form
bioriented chromosomes on the metaphase spindle. The chromosome
passenger complex containing survivin (603352) and the kinase aurora B
(604970) regulates this process from the centromeres. Vong et al. (2005)
reported that a deubiquitinating enzyme, FAM, also known as USP9X,
regulates chromosome alignment and segregation by controlling both the
dynamic association of survivin with centromeres and the proper
targeting of survivin and aurora B to centromeres. Survivin is
ubiquitinated in mitosis through both lys48 and lys63 ubiquitin
linkages. Lys63 deubiquitination mediated by FAM is required for the
dissociation of survivin from centromeres, whereas lys63 ubiquitination
mediated by the ubiquitin-binding protein UFD1 (601754) is required for
the association of survivin with centromeres. Thus, ubiquitination
regulates dynamic protein-protein interactions and chromosome
segregation independently of protein degradation.

Schwickart et al. (2010) showed that the deubiquitinase USP9X binds to
and stabilizes MCL1 (159552) and removes the lys48-linked polyubiquitin
chains that normally mark MCL1 for proteasomal degradation. Increased
USP9X expression correlated with increased MCL1 protein in human
follicular lymphomas and diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Moreover,
patients with multiple myeloma overexpressing USP9X have a poor
prognosis. Knockdown of USP9X increased MCL1 polyubiquitination, which
enhances MCL1 turnover and cell killing by the BH3 mimetic ABT-737.
Schwickart et al. (2010) concluded that their results identified USP9X
as a prognostic and therapeutic target and showed that deubiquitinases
may stabilize labile oncoproteins in human malignancies.

MAPPING

Jones et al. (1996) mapped DFFRX to Xp11.4 by somatic cell hybrid
analysis and a YAC library screen. They noted that the map location
coincides with the region of the X chromosome defined by partial
deletions as being critical for the major stigmata associated with
Turner syndrome (163950). They raised the possibility that DFFRX plays a
role in the defects of oocyte proliferation and subsequent gonadal
degeneration found in Turner syndrome.

ANIMAL MODEL

Perez-Mancera et al. (2012) used 'Sleeping Beauty' transposon-mediated
insertional mutagenesis in a mouse model of pancreatic ductal
preneoplasia to identify genes that cooperate with oncogenic Kras(G12D)
(190070.0003) to accelerate tumorigenesis and promote progression. This
screen revealed novel candidate genes for pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDA) and confirmed the importance of many genes and
pathways previously implicated in human PDA. The most commonly mutated
gene was the X-linked deubiquitinase Usp9x, which was inactivated in
over 50% of the tumors. Although previous work had attributed a
presurvival role to USP9X in human neoplasia, Perez-Mancera et al.
(2012) found instead that loss of Usp9x enhances transformation and
protects pancreatic cancer cells from anoikis. Clinically, low USP9X
protein and mRNA expression in PDA correlates with poor survival after
surgery, and USP9X levels are inversely associated with metastatic
burden in advanced disease. Furthermore, chromatin modulation with
trichostatin A or 5-aza-2-prime-deoxycytidine elevates USP9X expression
in human PDA cell lines, indicating a clinical approach for certain
patients. The conditional deletion of Usp9x cooperated with Kras(G12D)
to accelerate pancreatic tumorigenesis in mice, validating their genetic
interaction. Perez-Mancera et al. (2012) proposed that USP9X is a major
tumor suppressor gene with prognostic and therapeutic relevance in PDA.

REFERENCE 1. Jones, M. H.; Furlong, R. A.; Burkin, H.; Chalmers, I. J.; Brown,
G. M.; Khwaja, O.; Affara, N. A.: The Drosophila developmental gene
fat facets has a human homologue in Xp11.4 which escapes X-inactivation
and has related sequences on Yq11.2. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 1695-1701,
1996. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet. 6: 334-335, 1997.

2. Perez-Mancera, P. A.; Rust, A. G.; van der Weyden, L.; Kristiansen,
G.; Li, A.; Sarver, A. L.; Silverstein, K. A. T.; Grutzmann, R.; Aust,
D.; Rummele, P.; Knosel, T.; Herd, C.; and 25 others: The deubiquitinase
USP9X suppresses pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. Nature 486: 266-270,
2012. Note: Erratum: Nature 494, 390 only, 2013.

3. Schwickart, M.; Huang, X.; Lill, J. R.; Liu, J.; Ferrando, R.;
French, D. M.; Maecker, H.; O'Rourke, K.; Bazan, F.; Eastham-Anderson,
J.; Yue, P.; Dornan, D.; Huang, D. C. S.; Dixit, V. M.: Deubiquitinase
USP9X stabilizes MCL1 and promotes tumour cell survival. Nature 463:
103-107, 2010.

4. Vong, Q. P.; Cao, K.; Li, H. Y.; Iglesias, P. A.; Zheng, Y.: Chromosome
alignment and segregation regulated by ubiquitination of survivin. Science 310:
1499-1504, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 03/21/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/27/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/2/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/11/2006

CREATED Moyra Smith: 1/24/1997

EDITED terry: 03/21/2013
terry: 8/9/2012
alopez: 7/10/2012
terry: 6/27/2012
alopez: 2/22/2010
terry: 2/2/2010
alopez: 1/12/2006
terry: 1/11/2006
alopez: 2/5/1999
mark: 7/8/1997
mark: 1/25/1997
terry: 1/24/1997
mark: 1/24/1997

607981	TITLE *607981 NEGATIVE REGULATOR OF UBIQUITIN-LIKE PROTEINS 1; NUB1
;;NEDD8 ULTIMATE BUSTER 1;;
NY-REN-18
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NUB1 interacts with and negatively regulates NEDD8 (603171), a
ubiquitin-like protein that covalently conjugates to cullin (see 603134)
family members.

CLONING

Using NEDD8 as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Kito et al. (2001)
cloned NUB1. The deduced 601-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of about 69 kD. The N-terminal half of NUB1 contains 2
coiled-coil domains, and the C-terminal half contains 2
ubiquitin-associated domains, which are separated by a bipartite nuclear
localization signal, followed by a PEST sequence. Northern blot analysis
detected strong expression of a 2.3-kb transcript in testis and weak
expression of a 3.5-kb transcript in testis, ovary, heart, and skeletal
muscle. Little to no expression was detected in other tissues. Western
blot analysis detected NUB1 at an apparent molecular mass of 69 kD
expressed in all cell lines tested, with variable expression between
cell lines. In situ hybridization of whole mouse embryos found strongest
expression in day 7 embryos and weaker expression at days 11, 15, and
17. In mouse embryos, a 3.0-kb transcript was predominant, followed by
2.5- and 2.0-kb transcripts.

GENE FUNCTION

Kito et al. (2001) found that interferon-beta (see 147640) induced NUB1
protein expression in HeLa and embryonic kidney cells, but not in an
osteosarcoma cell line. Induction in HeLa cells was dose and time
dependent. Northern blot analysis detected induction of NUB1 mRNA in
HeLa cells. By yeast 2-hybrid assay, Kito et al. (2001) confirmed direct
interaction between NUB1 and NEDD8, and coexpression in COS cells
resulted in reduced expression of NEDD8 monomer and its conjugates.
Overexpression of NUB1 did not affect the level of NEDD8 message,
suggesting that NUB1 inhibits NEDD8 expression posttranscriptionally.
Overexpression of NUB1 also had a profound growth-inhibitory effect on
an osteosarcoma cell line.

Mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting protein-like 1
(AIPL1; 604392) gene have been found in patients with Leber congenital
amaurosis (LCA1; 204000), a severe, early-onset form of retinal
degeneration. Akey et al. (2002) performed a yeast 2-hybrid screen to
identify AIPL1-interacting proteins in the retina. One of the identified
interacting proteins corresponded to NUB1. The AIPL1-NUB1 interaction
was verified by coimmunoprecipitation studies in retinoblastoma cells,
demonstrating that this interaction occurred within cells that share a
number of features with retinal progenitor cells. In situ hybridization
studies showed that both AIPL1 and NUB1 are expressed in the developing
and adult retina. The authors hypothesized that the early-onset form of
retinal degeneration seen in LCA patients with AIPL1 mutations may be
due to a defect in NUB1 regulation of cell cycle progression during
photoreceptor maturation.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the NUB1
gene to chromosome 7 (TMAP sts-F17912).

REFERENCE 1. Akey, D. T.; Zhu, X.; Dyer, M.; Li, A.; Sorensen, A.; Blackshaw,S.;
Fukuda-Kamitani, T.; Daiger, S. P.; Craft, C. M.; Kamitani, T.; Sohocki,
M. M.: The inherited blindness associated protein AIPL1 interacts
with the cell cycle regulator protein NUB1. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11:
2723-2733, 2002. Note: Erratum: Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 451 only, 2003.

2. Kito, K.; Yeh, E. T. H.; Kamitani, T.: NUB1, a NEDD8-interacting
protein, is induced by interferon and down-regulates the NEDD8 expression. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 20603-20609, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 2/12/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/24/2003

EDITED terry: 09/17/2012
alopez: 2/18/2009
cwells: 2/12/2004
mgross: 7/24/2003

600448	TITLE *600448 PROTEIN KINASE C, THETA; PRKCQ
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Members of the protein kinase C (PKC) family of serine/threonine kinases
play critical roles in the regulation of cellular differentiation and
proliferation of diverse cell types. In an attempt to find PKC isoforms
involved in growth control and/or activation of T lymphocytes, Baier et
al. (1993) used a human peripheral blood lymphocyte-derived cDNA library
to identify a novel PKC isoform, termed PKC-theta. The gene encodes a
protein of approximately 80 kD, expressed predominantly in lymphoid
tissues and hematopoietic cell lines, particularly T cells.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Erdel et al. (1995) assigned the
PRKCQ gene to chromosome 10p15. Blanco and Brown (1997) mapped the mouse
Prkcq homolog to chromosome 2 by analysis of an interspecific backcross.

GENE FUNCTION

In mouse mammary tumors, Belguise and Sonenshein (2007) identified Prkcq
as a positive regulator of c-Rel (REL; 164910) transcriptional activity,
as well as downstream target genes. In human breast cancer cell lines,
there was an inverse correlation between ESR1 (133430) and PRKCQ mRNA,
and PRKCQ was found to inhibit ESR1 expression via activation of AKT1
(164730). Belguise and Sonenshein (2007) concluded that PRKCQ plays a
pivotal role in mammary tumorigenesis by activating AKT1, which
ultimately leads to derepression of c-Rel through inhibition of ESR1.

Zanin-Zhorov et al. (2010) showed that PKC-theta recruitment to the
immunologic synapse is required for full effector T cell (T-eff)
activation. In contrast, PKC-theta was sequestered away from the
regulatory T cell (T-reg) immunologic synapse. Furthermore, PKC-theta
blockade enhanced T-reg function, demonstrating that PKC-theta inhibits
T-reg-mediated suppression. Inhibition of PKC-theta protected T-reg
cells from inactivation by TNF-alpha (191160), restored activity of
defective T-regs from rheumatoid arthritis (RA; 180300) patients, and
enhanced protection of mice from inflammatory colitis. Zanin-Zhorov et
al. (2010) concluded that T-reg cells freed of PKC-theta-mediated
inhibition can function in the presence of inflammatory cytokines.

ANIMAL MODEL

Sun et al. (2000) demonstrated that PKC-theta is essential for T-cell
antigen receptor (TCR)-mediated T-cell activation, but dispensable
during TCR-dependent thymocyte development. They generated mice
deficient in Pkc-theta by homologous recombination. Mutant mice were
normal and fertile. TCR-initiated NF-kappa-B (see 164011) activation was
absent from Pkc-theta -/- mature T lymphocytes, but was intact in
thymocytes. Activation of NF-kappa-B by tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(191160) and interleukin-1 (see 147760) was unaffected in the mutant
mice. Induction of Jnk (see 601158) was normal in T cells from mutant
mice. Sun et al. (2000) concluded that PKC-theta functions in a unique
pathway that links the TCR signaling complex to the activation of
NF-kappa-B in mature T lymphocytes.

Using hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamps, Kim et al. (2004) demonstrated
that skeletal muscle and hepatic insulin action did not differ between
wildtype and Pkc-theta-null mice. A 5-hour lipid infusion decreased
insulin-stimulated skeletal muscle glucose uptake in the wildtype mice
that was associated with 40 to 50% decreases in insulin-stimulated
tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor substrate-1 (IRS1; 147545)
and IRS1-associated PI3K (see 171834) activity. In contrast, Pkc-theta
inactivation prevented fat-induced defects in insulin signaling and
glucose transport in skeletal muscle. Kim et al. (2004) concluded that
PKC-theta is a crucial component mediating fat-induced insulin
resistance in skeletal muscle.

Tan et al. (2006) found that Pkc-theta -/- mice resisted development of
experimental allergic encephalomyelitis (EAE), a model of central
nervous system (CNS) autoimmune disease. Flow cytometric and
histopathologic analyses revealed a profound reduction in T-cell and
macrophage infiltration and demyelination. Stimulation of splenic T
cells from Pkc-theta -/- mice resulted in significantly reduced
production of Ifng (147570) and Il17 (603149), despite comparable levels
of Il2 (147680) and Il4 (147780) and no difference in
lymphoproliferation. After TCR activation, Pkc-theta -/- T cells failed
to upregulate the adhesion molecule Lfa1 (see ITGB2; 600065).
Immunohistochemical analysis showed reduced expression of Il17 in the
CNS of Pkc-theta -/- mice. Tan et al. (2006) concluded that PKC-theta is
important in the regulation of multiple T-cell functions necessary for
development of autoimmune disease.

REFERENCE 1. Baier, G.; Telford, D.; Giampa, L.; Coggeshall, K. M.; Baier-Bitterlich,
G.; Isakov, N.; Altman, A.: Molecular cloning and characterization
of PKC-theta, a novel member of the protein (PKC) gene family expressed
predominantly in hematopoietic cells. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 4997-5004,
1993.

2. Belguise, K.; Sonenshein, G. E.: PKC-theta promotes c-Rel-driven
mammary tumorigenesis in mice and humans by repressing estrogen receptor-alpha
synthesis. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 4009-4021, 2007.

3. Blanco, G.; Brown, S. D. M.: Genetic mapping of protein kinase
C theta (Pkcq) to mouse chromosome 2. Mammalian Genome 8: 70-71,
1997.

4. Erdel, M.; Baier-Bitterlich, G.; Duba, C.; Isakov, N.; Altman,
A.; Utermann, G.; Baier, G.: Mapping of the human protein kinase
C-theta (PRKCQ) gene locus to the short arm of chromosome 10 (10p15)
by FISH. Genomics 25: 595-597, 1995.

5. Kim, J. K.; Fillmore, J. J.; Sunshine, M. J.; Albrecht, B.; Higashimori,
T.; Kim, D.-W.; Liu, Z.-X.; Soos, T. J.; Cline, G. W.; O'Brien, W.
R.; Littman, D. R.; Shulman, G. I.: PKC-theta knockout mice are protected
from fat-induced insulin resistance. J. Clin. Invest. 114: 823-827,
2004.

6. Sun, Z.; Arendt, C. W.; Ellmeier, W.; Schaeffer, E. M.; Sunshine,
M. J.; Gandhi, L.; Annes, J.; Petrzilka, D.; Kupfer, A.; Schwartzberg,
P. L.; Littman, D. R.: PKC-theta is required for TCR-induced NF-kappa-B
activation in mature but not immature T lymphocytes. Nature 404:
402-407, 2000.

7. Tan, S.-L.; Zhao, J.; Bi, C.; Chen, X. C.; Hepburn, D. L.; Wang,
J.; Sedgwick, J. D.; Chintalacharuvu, S. R.; Na, S.: Resistance to
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis and impaired IL-17 production
in protein kinase C-theta-deficient mice. J. Immun. 176: 2872-2879,
2006.

8. Zanin-Zhorov, A.; Ding, Y.; Kumari, S.; Attur, M.; Hippen, K. L.;
Brown, M.; Blazar, B. R.; Abramson, S. B.; Lafaille, J. J.; Dustin,
M. L.: Protein kinase C-theta mediates negative feedback on regulatory
T cell function. Science 328: 372-376, 2010. Note: Erratum: Science
328: 974 only, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/10/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/13/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/3/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/14/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/4/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/7/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/9/1995

EDITED carol: 04/22/2013
alopez: 5/10/2010
wwang: 5/16/2008
ckniffin: 3/13/2008
mgross: 4/11/2007
terry: 4/3/2007
carol: 10/15/2004
terry: 10/14/2004
alopez: 4/7/2000
terry: 4/4/2000
terry: 2/7/1997
carol: 3/10/1995
carol: 3/9/1995

611148	TITLE *611148 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 30 (ZINC TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 6; SLC30A6
;;ZINC TRANSPORTER 6; ZNT6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Zinc functions as a cofactor for numerous enzymes, nuclear factors, and
hormones and as an intra- and intercellular signal ion. Members of the
zinc transporter (ZNT)/SLC30 subfamily of the cation diffusion
facilitator family, such as SLC30A6, permit cellular efflux of zinc
(Seve et al., 2004).

CLONING

Huang et al. (2002) identified mouse and human SLC30A6, which they
called ZNT6. The deduced mouse and human proteins contain 460 amino
acids and share 92% identity. Mouse Znt6 has 6 transmembrane domains, a
loop between transmembrane domains 4 and 5, and cytoplasmic N and C
termini. In contrast to other Znt proteins, the loop region of Znt6
lacks multiple histidines. Northern blot analysis detected 2 Znt6
transcripts expressed at variable levels in all mouse tissues examined,
with highest levels in liver and brain. Normal rat kidney cells
expressed Znt6 in a perinuclear location and in a punctate/tubular
pattern throughout the cytoplasm and under the plasma membrane.
Disruption of the Golgi compartment also disrupted Znt6 localization.

By EST database analysis, Seve et al. (2004) found evidence of high
SLC30A6 expression in B cells, colon, eye, and lung. Lower expression
was present in bone, brain, cervix, ear, heart, kidney, muscle, nerve,
pancreas, prostate, skin, stomach, and testis.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast mutants defective in zinc transport, Huang et al. (2002)
provided evidence that mouse Znt6 could export cytoplasmic zinc out of
the cell or transport it into an intracellular pool. The intracellular
localization of Znt6 in normal rat kidney cells was regulated by
extracellular zinc in a concentration-dependent manner, with zinc
causing Znt6 to diffuse from the perinuclear region toward cytoplasmic
structures and the cell periphery.

Using chicken B cells lacking Znt5 (607819), Znt6, and Znt7 (611149),
followed by reexpression of the human transgenes, Suzuki et al. (2005)
showed that ZNT5 and ZNT6 had to be coexpressed to transport zinc for
activation of tissue-nonspecific alkaline phosphatase (TNAP, or ALPL;
171760) in the Golgi lumen, whereas ZNT7 acted alone to perform the same
function. Coimmunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence analyses showed
that ZNT5 and ZNT6 formed heterooligomers and that ZNT7 formed
homooligomers.

GENE STRUCTURE

Huang et al. (2002) determined that the SLC30A6 gene contains 14 exons
and spans 56 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Huang et al. (2002) mapped the SLC30A6
gene to chromosome 2p22-p21. The mouse Slc30a6 gene maps to a region of
chromosome 17 that shares homology of synteny with human chromosome
2p22-p21.

REFERENCE 1. Huang, L.; Kirschke, C. P.; Gitschier, J.: Functional characterization
of a novel mammalian zinc transporter, ZnT6. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
26389-26395, 2002.

2. Seve, M.; Chimienti, F.; Devergnas, S.; Favier, A.: In silico
identification and expression of SLC30 family genes: an expressed
sequence tag data mining strategy for the characterization of zinc
transporters' tissue expression. BMC Genomics 5: 32, 2004. Note:
Electronic Article.

3. Suzuki, T.; Ishihara, K.; Migaki, H.; Ishihara, K.; Nagao, M.;
Yamaguchi-Iwai, Y.; Kambe, T.: Two different zinc transport complexes
of cation diffusion facilitator proteins localized in the secretory
pathway operate to activate alkaline phosphatases in vertebrate cells. J.
Biol. Chem. 280: 30956-30962, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/28/2007

EDITED mgross: 06/28/2007

607263	TITLE *607263 EPSIN 2; EPN2
;;KIAA1065
DESCRIPTION For background information on epsins, see EPN1 (607262).

CLONING

Rosenthal et al. (1999) obtained a full-length cDNA encoding EPN2 by
ligating overlapping cDNA fragments identified by screening cerebellum
and brain cDNA libraries using a fragment of EPN1 as the probe. The
deduced 431-amino acid EPN2 protein has a domain structure similar to
that of EPN1, consisting of an epsin N-terminal homology (ENTH) region,
a central region containing DPW repeats and an LLDL clathrin-binding
sequence, and a C-terminal EPS15 (600051) homology (EH) domain-binding
region containing 3 NPF repeats. However, unlike EPN1, EPN2 has no CDC2
(116940) phosphorylation site. The N-terminal region is well conserved
between EPN1 and EPN2, while the central and C-terminal domains are less
conserved. Rosenthal et al. (1999) also identified an EPN2 splice
variant that has a 58-amino acid deletion between the ENTH and DPW
domains. Western blot analysis revealed a doublet of 74 and 65 kD in
human brain, and a single band at 74 kD in rat brain and in transfected
CHO cells. Western blot analysis of several human and rat tissues
revealed a widespread tissue distribution, with highest levels in brain.

Kikuno et al. (1999) cloned EPN1, which they called KIAA1065, from a
size-fractionated brain cDNA library. The deduced protein contains 641
amino acids. RT-PCR and ELISA detected ubiquitous, moderate-to-high
expression of EPN2, with highest levels in several brain regions and
spinal cord.

GENE FUNCTION

Using EPN2 fragments to capture proteins contained within extracts of
rat brain, Rosenthal et al. (1999) determined that the NPF domain of
EPN2 bound specifically to EPS15, while the DPW domain bound AP2 (see
601026) and clathrin (see 118960). At low-to-moderate levels of
expression in CHO cells, fluorescence-tagged EPN2 appeared as fine
puncta throughout the cell, particularly in a central region where the
Golgi complex is localized; the distribution was similar to that of
clathrin. At high levels of expression, EPN2 showed intense continuous
labeling of the cell surface and 1 or more bright, compact masses in the
central region of the cell. In these cells, Rosenthal et al. (1999)
observed the redistribution and collapse of clathrin, EPS15, and AP2
into the same central mass(es), and these cells were deficient in
clathrin-mediated endocytosis.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Kikuno et al. (1999) mapped the EPN2 gene
to chromosome 17.

REFERENCE 1. Kikuno, R.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIV. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 6: 197-205, 1999.

2. Rosenthal, J. A.; Chen, H.; Slepnev, V. I.; Pellegrini, L.; Salcini,
A. E.; Di Fiore, P. P.; De Camilli, P.: The epsins define a family
of proteins that interact with components of the clathrin coat and
contain a new protein module. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 33959-33965, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/27/2002

EDITED mgross: 09/27/2002

602856	TITLE *602856 REGULATOR OF G PROTEIN SIGNALING 10; RGS10
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RGS proteins negatively regulate signaling pathways involving
7-transmembrane receptors and heterotrimeric G proteins. See 602189 for
background.

CLONING

Using a yeast 2-hybrid system with a mutationally activated form of rat
G-alpha(i3) as the bait, Hunt et al. (1996) isolated HeLa cell cDNAs
encoding RGS10. Like all members of the RGS family, the predicted
173-amino acid RGS10 contains a 120-amino acid core domain that is
strongly conserved with the yeast Sst2 protein. Northern blot analysis
detected an approximately 900-bp RGS10 transcript in HeLa cells, human
embryonic kidney 293 cells, and mouse brain.

By microarray analysis, Yang and Li (2007) found that RGS10 was highly
expressed in human osteoclastoma. Northern blot analysis confirmed high
RGS10 expression in osteoclastoma and detected weaker expression in
brain, liver, kidney, and the Hep2 cell line; no expression was detected
in other tissues and cell lines examined. Mouse Rgs10 was highly
expressed in preosteoclasts and osteoclasts derived from RANKL (TNFSF11;
602642)-stimulated bone marrow-derived monocytes, but it was not
expressed in osteoblasts or preosteoblasts.

GENE FUNCTION

Using coimmunoprecipitation studies, Hunt et al. (1996) demonstrated
that RGS10 associates specifically with the activated forms of the 2
related G protein subunits G-alpha(i3) and G-alpha(z) but fails to
interact with the structurally and functionally distinct G-alpha(s)
subunit. In vitro assays indicated that RGS10 potently and selectively
increases the GTP hydrolytic activity of several G-alpha(i) family
members.

Using human T cells silenced for or overexpressing RGS10, Garcia-Bernal
et al. (2011) showed that RGS10 inhibited G-alpha-dependent,
chemokine-upregulated T-cell adhesion mediated by alpha-4 (ITGA4;
192975)/beta-1 (ITGB1; 135630) and alpha-L (ITGAL; 153370)/beta-2
(ITGB2; 600065) integrins. The data suggested that RGS10 opposes
activation by chemokines of the VAV1 (164875)-RAC1 (602048) pathway in T
cells, leading to repression of adhesion strengthening mediated by
alpha-4/beta-1. RGS10 also limited adhesion-independent cell chemotaxis
and activation of CDC42 (116952).

GENE STRUCTURE

Sierra et al. (2002) determined that the RGS10 gene contains 5 exons and
spans 35 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Sierra et al. (2002) mapped the RGS10 gene
to chromosome 10q26.11. They mapped the mouse Rgs10 gene to chromosome 7
by interspecific backcross mapping.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yang and Li (2007) obtained Rgs10 -/- mice at the expected mendelian
ratio, but they were smaller and had shorter limbs than their wildtype
littermates. Growth retardation became apparent during the first or
second postnatal week. Histologically, Rgs10 -/- mice exhibited severe
osteopetrosis. Disruption of Rgs10 impaired osteoclast differentiation
due to the absence of calcium current oscillations and loss of Nfatc1
(600489) expression. Ectopic expression of Rgs10 markedly enhanced
Rankl-induced osteoclast differentiation. Rgs10 competitively bound
Ca(2+)/calmodulin (see CALM1; 114180) and phosphatidylinositol
3-phosphate in a Ca(2+)-dependent manner. Yang and Li (2007) concluded
that RGS10 is a key regulator of Ca(2+) current oscillations during
osteoclast differentiation.

REFERENCE 1. Garcia-Bernal, D.; Dios-Esponera, A.; Sotillo-Mallo, E.; Garcia-Verdugo,
R.; Arellano-Sanchez, N.; Teixido, J.: RGS10 restricts upregulation
by chemokines of T cell adhesion mediated by alpha-4-beta-1 and alpha-L-beta-2
integrins. J. Immun. 187: 1264-1272, 2011.

2. Hunt, T. W.; Fields, T. A.; Casey, P. J.; Peralta, E. G.: RGS10
is a selective activator of G-alpha(i) GTPase activity. Nature 383:
175-177, 1996.

3. Sierra, D. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Householder, D.; Grishin, N. V.;
Yu, K.; Ukidwe, P.; Barker, S. A.; He, W.; Wensel, T. G.; Otero, G.;
Brown, G.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Wilkie, T. M.: Evolution
of the regulators of G-protein signaling multigene family in mouse
and human. Genomics 79: 177-185, 2002.

4. Yang, S.; Li, Y.-P.: RGS10-null mutation impairs osteoclast differentiation
resulting from the loss of [Ca2+]i oscillation regulation. Genes
Dev. 21: 1803-1816, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/6/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/23/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/12/2002

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 7/16/1998

EDITED mgross: 01/19/2012
terry: 1/6/2012
mgross: 8/31/2007
terry: 8/23/2007
mgross: 9/12/2002
carol: 7/24/1998
dkim: 7/23/1998
carol: 7/16/1998

603751	TITLE *603751 SPHINGOSINE 1-PHOSPHATE RECEPTOR 4; S1PR4
;;ENDOTHELIAL DIFFERENTIATION GENE 6; EDG6;;
S1P RECEPTOR 4; S1P4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The lysolipid mediators lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) and sphingosine
1-phosphate (S1P) signal cells through a set of G protein-coupled
receptors (GPCRs) known as EDG receptors. Some EDG receptors (e.g.,
EDG1; 601974) are S1P receptors; others (e.g., EDG2; 602282) are LPA
receptors.

NOMENCLATURE

Chun et al. (2002) proposed a nomenclature scheme for the LPA and S1P
receptors that is consistent with the International Union of
Pharmacology (IUP) guidelines. According to these guidelines, a receptor
is to be named with the abbreviation of the natural agonist with the
highest potency, followed by a subscripted arabic number. Thus they
suggested that the designation EDG6 should be changed to S1P4.

CLONING

By PCR with degenerate oligonucleotides derived from regions conserved
among GPCRs, Graler et al. (1998) cloned differentiated dendritic cell
cDNAs encoding EDG6. The predicted 384-amino acid EDG6 protein has 7
transmembrane domains. The EDG6 protein shares 82% sequence identity
with mouse Edg6, 46% identity with human EDG3 (601965), 44% identity
with human EDG1, 39% identity with human EDG4 (605110), and 37% identity
with human EDG2. Northern blot analysis indicated that EDG6 is expressed
as a 1.7-kb transcript in fetal and adult lymphoid and hematopoietic
tissues, lung, and Burkitt lymphoma cell lines. By Northern blot
analysis, Contos et al. (2002) determined that mouse Gna15 (139314) and
Edg6, which they designated Slp4, were coexpressed at the same relative
levels in all tissues examined, with the highest expression in adult
spleen and lung. They hypothesized that, due to their tandem chromosomal
orientation as well as coexpression, the 2 genes may be under the
control of the same enhancer elements, and the proteins may couple in
vivo.

MAPPING

Graler et al. (1998) noted that the 3-prime end of their EDG6 cDNA is
identical to a short sequence encompassing the dinucleotide repeat
polymorphism D19S120 (GenBank GENBANK X65642), which was assigned to
19p13.3 by Jedlicka et al. (1994). By PCR of human genomic DNA using a
gene-specific primer to EDG6 and a primer to the D19S120 amplicon,
Graler et al. (1998) localized the EDG6 gene to 19p13.3.

GENE STRUCTURE

Contos et al. (2002) determined that the EDG6 gene is intronless. In the
mouse, the Edg6 gene contains 2 exons and the first exon is
untranslated. The promoters contain no TATA box elements. Contos et al.
(2002) determined that in both the mouse and human genomes, the GNA11
(139131), GNA15, and EDG6 genes are arranged in tandem. The human
cluster occupies 80 kb and the mouse cluster occupies 50 kb.

REFERENCE 1. Chun, J.; Goetzl, E. J.; Hla, T.; Igarashi, Y.; Lynch, K. R.; Moolenaar,
W.; Pyne, S.; Tigyi, G.: International Union of Pharmacology. XXXIV.
Lysophospholipid receptor nomenclature. Pharm. Rev. 54: 265-269,
2002.

2. Contos, J. J.; Ye, X.; Sah, V. P.; Chun, J.: Tandem genomic arrangement
of a G protein (Gna15) and G protein-coupled receptor (s1p(4)/lp(C1)/Edg6)
gene. FEBS Lett. 531: 99-102, 2002.

3. Graler, M. H.; Bernhardt, G.; Lipp, M.: EDG6, a novel G-protein-coupled
receptor related to receptors for bioactive lysophospholipids, is
specifically expressed in lymphoid tissue. Genomics 53: 164-169,
1998.

4. Jedlicka, A. E.; Taylor, E. W.; Meyers, D. A.; Liu, Z.; Levitt,
R. C.: Localization of the highly polymorphic locus D19S120 to 19p13.3
by linkage. Cytogenet. Cell. Genet. 65: 140 only, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/8/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/10/2000

CREATED Barbara J. Biery: 4/20/1999

EDITED wwang: 09/25/2008
carol: 2/29/2008
alopez: 1/21/2004
cwells: 8/8/2003
mgross: 7/10/2000
mgross: 7/6/2000
psherman: 4/20/1999

613609	TITLE *613609 HFE GENE; HFE
;;HLAH
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

El Kahloun et al. (1993) used a yeast artificial chromosome with a
320-kb insert of genomic DNA that included the major histocompatibility
complex class I HLA-A gene (142800) to screen a human duodenal mucosa
cDNA library. They isolated 7 cDNA clones that corresponded to 7 new
non-class I structural genes. Since these genes were located within the
hemochromatosis (HFE1; 235200) candidate gene region, they referred to
the genes as HCG (hemochromatosis candidate gene) I-VII. El Kahloun et
al. (1993) concluded that HCG I, III, V, and VI are probably single-copy
genes situated 180, 155, 140, and 230 kb, respectively, centromeric to
HLA-A. There were several copies of the other 3 genes. Each of the genes
was associated with a CpG/HTF island.

Using cDNA hybridization selection with a 320-kb YAC containing the
HLA-A gene to screen a human duodenal cDNA library, Goei et al. (1994)
isolated and characterized 10 novel gene fragments. Also in search of
the HFE gene, Yaouang et al. (1994) identified a zone of linkage
disequilibrium which suggested that the HFE gene may reside within a
400-kb expanse of DNA between the locus they referred to as i97 and
HLA-F (143110). Totaro et al. (1996) generated a detailed 1.2-Mb
physical and transcription map of 6p spanning the HLA class I region
from HLA-E to approximately 500 kb telomeric of HLA-F. The localization
of known genes was refined, and a new gene from the RNA helicase
superfamily was identified. Overall, 14 transcription units in addition
to the HLA genes were detected and integrated into the map. Thirteen
cDNA fragments showed no similarity with known sequences, and could be
candidates for hemochromatosis.

By linkage disequilibrium and full haplotype analysis of hereditary
hemochromotosis patients, Feder et al. (1996) identified a 250-kb region
more than 3 Mb telomeric of the MHC on chromosome 6 that is identical by
descent in 85% of patient chromosomes. Within this region, they
identified a gene, which they termed HLA-H, that encodes a predicted
343-amino acid protein related to the MHC class I gene family. The
protein comprises a signal sequence, peptide-binding regions (alpha-1
and alpha-2 domains), a transmembrane region, and a small cytoplasmic
portion. One of the most conserved structural features of MHC class I
molecules in HLA-H are the 4 cysteine residues that form disulfide
bridges in the alpha-2 and alpha-3 domains. Northern blot analysis
detected a 4-kb major mRNA transcript in all tissues tested, except
brain.

Searching for new human MHC class I related genes, Hashimoto et al.
(1995) identified MHC-related protein-1 (MR1; 600764) and a second gene,
MR2. The HLA-H gene (HFE) reported by Feder et al. (1996) as a candidate
gene for hereditary hemochromatosis turned out to be identical to the
MR2 gene of Hashimoto et al. (1995). Hashimoto et al. (1997) isolated
the murine homolog of this gene. It was found to be similar to its human
counterpart with an overall predicted amino acid sequence similarity of
approximately 66% and expression in various tissues as in human. An
extra 8 amino acid residues between the alpha-1 and the alpha-2 domains
in the mouse molecule compared to the human counterpart could be
explained by the creation of the additional coding sequence from the
intron.

Thenie et al. (2001) isolated an antisense transcript originating from
the HFE gene locus. The RNA spans exon 1, exon 2, part of intron 1 of
the HFE gene, and 1 kb upstream of it. The antisense transcript is
polyadenylated, but displays no open reading frame, and appears to be
expressed at low levels in all tissues and cell lines tested. In vitro
coupled transcription-translation experiments revealed that HFE
expression is decreased by this antisense RNA, suggesting that it may
play a role in the regulation of HFE gene expression.

NOMENCLATURE

Mercier et al. (1997) urged strongly that the symbol HFE be used for the
hemochromatosis gene rather than 'HLA-H' as used by Feder et al. (1996).
The designation HLA-H was used also for a presumed pseudogene in the HLA
class I region; see 142800. Similarly, Bodmer et al. (1997) argued that
'HLA-H' is an undesirable designation and pointed to the accepted
authority of the WHO Nomenclature Committee for Factors of the HLA
System in determining symbols of genes in this region.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Lebron et al. (1998) determined the 2.6-angstrom crystal structure of
the HFE protein.

GENE STRUCTURE

Feder et al. (1996) determined that the HFE gene contains 7 exons
spanning 12 kb.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis, Hashimoto et al. (1995)
mapped the HFE gene to chromosome 6p22.

The HFE gene maps within the MHC region on chromosome 6p21.3 (Feder et
al., 1996).

Hashimoto et al. (1997) showed that whereas the human gene is located
telomeric to the MHC region on 6p, the mouse homolog was translocated
from the site telomeric to MHC on chromosome 17 to chromosome 13 along
with other genes.

GENE FUNCTION

Parkkila et al. (1997) generated an antibody to a C-terminal peptide and
used it for immunolocalization of the HLA-H protein in the
gastrointestinal tract of Finnish and American subjects presumed not to
have hereditary hemochromatosis. Although staining for the HLA-H protein
was seen in some epithelial cells in every segment of the alimentary
canal, its cellular and subcellular expression in the small intestine
was distinct from that in other segments. In contrast to the stomach and
colon, where staining is polarized and restricted to the basal lateral
surfaces, and in contrast to the epithelial cells of the esophagus and
submucosal leukocytes, which showed nonpolarized staining around the
entire plasma membrane, the staining in the small intestine was mainly
intracellular and perinuclear, limited to cells in deep crypts. Parkkila
et al. (1997) concluded that the unique subcellular localization in the
crypts of the small intestine in proximity to the presumed sites of iron
absorption supported the implication of this protein in the molecular
basis of hemochromatosis.

By immunohistochemistry, Parkkila et al. (1997) demonstrated that the
HFE protein is expressed in human placenta in the apical plasma membrane
of the syncytiotrophoblasts, where the transferrin-bound iron is
normally transported to the fetus via receptor-mediated endocytosis.
Western blot analyses showed that the HFE protein is associated with
beta-2-microglobulin (B2M; 109700) in placental membranes. Unexpectedly,
the transferrin receptor (TFR; 190010) was also found to be associated
with the HFE protein/B2M complex. These studies placed the normal HFE
protein at the site of contact with the maternal circulation where its
association with transferrin receptor raised the possibility that the
HFE protein plays some role in determining maternal/fetal iron
homeostasis.

Feder et al. (1998) demonstrated that the HFE protein forms stable
complexes with the transferrin receptor. Studies on cell-associated
transferrin at 37 degrees C suggested that overexpression of HFE protein
decreases the affinity of TFR for transferrin. Feder et al. (1998)
demonstrated that the mutant H63D (613609.0002) HFE protein found in
patients with hemochromatosis formed stable complexes with TFR, but that
overexpression of H63D did not decrease the affinity of TFR for
transferrin. In contrast, the mutant C282Y (613609.0001) HFE protein
only associated with TFR to a small degree. The results established a
molecular link between the HFE protein and the transferrin receptor,
raising the possibility that alterations in this regulatory mechanism of
iron transport may play a role in the pathogenesis of hereditary
hemochromatosis.

By analyzing the crystal structure of the HFE protein, Lebron et al.
(1998) identified a patch of histidines that could be involved in
pH-dependent interactions. Soluble TFR and HFE bound tightly at the
basic pH of the cell surface, but not at the acidic pH of intracellular
vesicles. TFR:HFE stoichiometry (2:1) differed from TFR:transferrin
stoichiometry (2:2), implying a different mode of binding for HFE and
transferrin to TFR, consistent with the demonstration that HFE,
transferrin, and TFR form a ternary complex. Lebron et al. (1998) used
the crystal structure to reveal the locations of hemochromatosis
mutations.

At the cell surface, HFE complexes with TFRC, increasing the
dissociation constant of transferrin (TF) for its receptor 10-fold. HFE
does not remain at the cell surface, but traffics with TFRC to
transferrin-positive internal compartments. Using a HeLa cell line in
which the expression of HFE is controlled by tetracycline, Roy et al.
(1999) showed that the expression of HFE reduced uptake of radioactive
iron from TF by 33%, but did not affect the endocytic or exocytic rates
of TFRC cycling. Therefore, HFE appears to reduce cellular acquisition
of iron from TF within endocytic compartments. HFE specifically reduces
iron uptake from TF, as non-TF-mediated iron uptake from
Fe-nitrilotriacetic acid was not altered. These results explained the
decreased ferritin levels seen in the HeLa cell system, and demonstrated
the specific control of HFE over the TF-mediated pathway of iron uptake.
These results also have implications for the understanding of cellular
iron homeostasis in organs such as the liver, pancreas, heart, and
spleen that are iron loaded in persons with hereditary hemochromatosis
lacking functional HFE.

The HFE protein normally binds to TFR in competition with transferrin
and, in vitro, reduces cellular iron by reducing iron uptake. However,
in vivo, HFE is strongly expressed by liver macrophages and intestinal
crypt cells, which behave as though they are relatively iron-deficient
in HH. These observations suggest, paradoxically, that expression of
wildtype HFE may lead to iron accumulation in these specialized cell
types. Drakesmith et al. (2002) showed that wildtype HFE protein raises
cellular iron by inhibiting iron efflux from the monocyte/macrophage
cell line, and extended these results to macrophages derived from
healthy individuals and HH patients. They found that the HH-associated
mutant H63D (H41D of the mature protein) lost the ability to inhibit
iron release despite binding to TFR as well as wildtype HFE. They also
showed that the ability of HFE to block iron release is not
competitively inhibited by transferrin. They concluded that HFE has 2
mutually exclusive functions: binding to TFR in competition with
transferrin and inhibition of iron release.

Zoller et al. (2003) studied the mRNA and protein expression and
activity of cytochrome b reductase-1 (CYBRD1; 605745) in duodenal
biopsies of patients with iron deficiency anemia, hereditary
hemochromatosis, and controls. They found that CYBRD1 activity in iron
deficiency is stimulated via enhanced protein expression, whereas in
hemochromatosis due to mutations in the HFE gene it is upregulated
posttranslationally. Hemochromatosis patients with no mutations in HFE
did not have increased CYBRD1 activity. Zoller et al. (2003) concluded
that there are different kinetics of intestinal iron uptake between iron
deficiency and hemochromatosis due to mutations in HFE, and that
duodenal iron accumulation in hereditary hemochromatosis due to
mutations in HFE and hereditary hemochromatosis due to mutations in
other genes is pathophysiologically different.

Drakesmith et al. (2005) found that the Nef protein of human
immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) downregulated macrophage-expressed HFE.
Iron and ferritin accumulation were increased in HIV-1-infected ex vivo
macrophages expressing wildtype HFE. The effect was lost with
Nef-deleted HIV-1 or with infected macrophages from hemochromatosis
patients expressing mutant HFE. Iron accumulation in HIV-1-infected
wildtype macrophages was paralleled by increased cellular HIV-1 Gag
protein expression.

Like classic class Ia MHC molecules, HFE has a peptide-binding groove,
but the HFE groove has no ligand. Rohrlich et al. (2005) studied the
interactions of human and mouse HFE with T lymphocytes and found that
the mouse alpha/beta TCR recognized human HFE, leading to Zap70 (176947)
phosphorylation. Cytotoxic T lymphocytes from mice lacking Hfe were able
to recognize murine Hfe. Rohrlich et al. (2005) proposed that the immune
system may be involved in control of iron metabolism.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In patients with hereditary hemochromatosis (HFE1; 235200), Feder et al.
(1996) identified 2 mutations in the HFE gene (C282Y, 613609.0001 and
H63D, 613609.0002). The C282Y mutation was detected in 85% of all HFE
chromosomes, indicating that in their population 83% of hemochromatosis
cases are related to C282Y homozygosity.

By sequence analysis of exons 2, 3, 4, and 5, and portions of introns 2,
4, and 5 of the HFE gene, Barton et al. (1999) identified novel
mutations in 4 of 20 hemochromatosis probands who lacked C282Y
homozygosity, C282Y/H63D compound heterozygosity, or H63D homozygosity.
Probands 1 and 2 were heterozygous for the previously undescribed
mutations ile105-to-thr (I105T; 613609.0009) and gly93-to-arg (G93R;
613609.0010). Probands 3 and 4 were heterozygous for the previously
described but uncommon HFE mutation ser65-to-cys (S65C; 613609.0003).
Proband 3 was also heterozygous for C282Y and had porphyria cutanea
tarda (see 176100), and proband 4 had hereditary stomatocytosis
(185000). Each of these 4 probands had iron overload. In each proband
with an uncommon HFE coding region mutation, I105T, G93R, and S65C
occurred on separate chromosomes from those with the C282Y or H63D
mutations. Neither I105T, G93R, nor S65C occurred as spontaneous
mutations in these probands. In 176 normal control subjects, 2 were
heterozygous for S65C, but I105T and G93R were not detected.

ANIMAL MODEL

To test the hypothesis that the HFE gene is involved in regulation of
iron homeostasis, Zhou et al. (1998) studied the effects of a targeted
disruption of the murine homolog of the HFE gene. The HFE-deficient mice
showed profound differences in parameters of iron homeostasis. Even on a
standard diet, by 10 weeks of age, fasting transferrin saturation was
significantly elevated compared with normal littermates, and hepatic
iron concentration was 8-fold higher than that of wildtype littermates.
Stainable hepatic iron in the HFE mutant mice was predominantly in
hepatocytes in a periportal distribution. Iron concentrations in spleen,
heart, and kidney were not significantly different from that in
littermates. Erythroid parameters were normal, indicating that the
anemia did not contribute to the increased iron storage. The study
showed that HFE protein is involved in the regulation of iron
homeostasis and that mutations in the gene are responsible for
hereditary hemochromatosis. Beutler (1998) emphasized the pathologic and
clinical importance of the knockout mouse model for hemochromatosis.

The puzzling linkage between genetic hemochromatosis and the
histocompatibility loci became even more puzzling when the gene
involved, HFE, was identified. Indeed, within the well-defined, mainly
peptide-binding, MHC-class I family of molecules, HFE seems to perform
an unusual but essential function. Understanding of HFE function in iron
homeostasis was only partial; an even more open question was its
possible role in the immune system. To advance knowledge in both of
these areas, Bahram et al. (1999) studied deletion of the HFE alpha-1
and alpha-2 putative ligand-binding domains in vivo. HFE-deficient mice
were analyzed for a comprehensive set of metabolic and immune
parameters. Faithfully mimicking human hemochromatosis, mice homozygous
for this deletion developed iron overload, characterized by a higher
plasma iron content and a raised transferrin saturation as well as an
elevated hepatic iron load. The primary defect could, indeed, be traced
to an augmented duodenal iron absorption. In parallel, measurement of
the gut mucosal iron content as well as iron regulatory proteins allowed
a more informed evaluation of various hypotheses regarding the precise
role of HFE in iron homeostasis. However, extensive phenotyping of
primary and secondary lymphoid organs including the gut provided no
compelling evidence for an obvious immune-linked function for HFE.

Inflammation influences iron balance in the whole organism. A common
clinical manifestation of these changes is anemia of chronic disease
(ACD; also called anemia of inflammation). Inflammation reduces duodenal
iron absorption and increases macrophage iron retention, resulting in
low serum iron concentrations (hyposideremia). Despite the protection
hyposideremia provides against proliferating microorganisms, this 'iron
withholding' reduces the iron available to maturing red blood cells and
eventually contributes to the development of anemia. Hepcidin
antimicrobial peptide (HAMP; 606464) is a hepatic defensin-like peptide
hormone that inhibits duodenal iron absorption and macrophage iron
release. HAMP is part of the type II acute phase response and is thought
to have a crucial regulatory role in sequestering iron in the context of
ACD. Roy et al. (2004) reported that mice with deficiencies in the
hemochromatosis gene product, Hfe, mounted a general inflammatory
response after injection of lipopolysaccharide but lacked appropriate
Hamp expression and did not develop hyposideremia. These data suggested
a previously unidentified role for Hfe in innate immunity and ACD.

Nairz et al. (2009) found that mice lacking 1 or both Hfe alleles were
protected from Salmonella typhimurium septicemia, displaying reduced
bacterial replication and prolonged host survival. Increased resistance
was associated with enhanced production of the enterochelin-binding
protein Lcn2 (600181), which reduced iron availability for Salmonella.
Macrophages lacking both Hfe and Lcn2 were unable to efficiently control
S. typhimurium or to withhold iron from the bacterium. Salmonella
lacking enterochelin overcame protection in Hfe -/- mice, as did
wildtype bacteria in Hfe -/- Lcn2 -/- double-knockout mice. Nairz et al.
(2009) concluded that loss of HFE confers host resistance to systemic
Salmonella infection by inducing the iron-capturing peptide LCN2,
thereby providing an evolutionary advantage that may account for the
high prevalence of genetic hemochromatosis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 1
PORPHYRIA CUTANEA TARDA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
PORPHYRIA VARIEGATA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, JUVENILE, DIGENIC, INCLUDED;;
ALZHEIMER DISEASE, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
TRANSFERRIN SERUM LEVEL QUANTITATIVE TRAIT LOCUS 2, INCLUDED;;
MICROVASCULAR COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 7, INCLUDED
HFE, CYS282TYR

Drakesmith et al. (2002) used a numbering system beginning from the
first amino acid of the mature protein, omitting the 22 amino acids of
the signal sequence, so that C282 of the immature protein is C260 of the
mature protein.

Hemochromatosis, Type 1

In patients with hemochromatosis (HFE1; 235200), Feder et al. (1996)
identified an 845G-A transition in the HFE gene (which they referred to
as HLA-H or 'cDNA 24'), resulting in a cys282-to-tyr (C282Y)
substitution. This missense mutation occurs in a highly conserved
residue involved in the intramolecular disulfide bridging of MHC class I
proteins, and could therefore disrupt the structure and function of this
protein. Using an allele-specific oligonucleotide-ligation assay on
their group of 178 patients, they detected the C282Y mutation in 85% of
all HFE chromosomes. In contrast, only 10 of the 310 control chromosomes
(3.2%) carried the mutation, a carrier frequency of 10/155 = 6.4%. One
hundred forty-eight of 178 HH patients were homozygous for this
mutation, 9 were heterozygous, and 21 carried only the normal allele.
These numbers were extremely discrepant from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium.
The findings corroborated heterogeneity among the hemochromatosis
patients, with 83% of cases related to C282Y homozygosity.

Jazwinska et al. (1996) provided convincing evidence that the C282Y
mutation in homozygous form in the HFE gene is the cause of
hemochromatosis. In studies in Australia, patients properly
characterized at the genotypic and phenotypic level all showed
homozygosity for the C282Y substitution. Irrespective of haplotype, all
HH heterozygotes were cys/tyr heterozygotes, and all homozygous normal
controls were cys/cys homozygotes. The presence of a single mutation in
all patients contrasted with the data of Feder et al. (1996), who
reported a lower frequency of the mutation. Jazwinska et al. (1996)
suggested that different clinical criteria for the diagnosis of HH may
account for the difference, or that HH may not be as homogeneous as
previously believed. They noted that a key question is why there is a
variation in severity of iron loading in HH that is haplotype-related
when the mutation is identical in all haplotypes tested. Jazwinska et
al. (1996) hypothesized that the HFE locus is the primary HH locus, but
that there are likely to be other 6p-linked modifying genes that would
explain both the HLA-linked haplotype variation in expression of the
disorder and the large region of linkage disequilibrium present in all
populations and spanning at least 4.5 Mb distal of D6S265.

Jouanolle et al. (1996) commented on the significance of the C282Y
mutation on the basis of a group of 65 unrelated affected individuals
who had been under study in France for more than 10 years and identified
by stringent criteria. Homozygosity for the C282Y mutation was found in
59 of 65 patients (90.8%); 3 of the patients were compound heterozygotes
for the C282Y mutation and the H63D mutation (613609.0002); 1 was
homozygous for the H63D mutation; and 2 were heterozygous for H63D.
These results corresponded to an allelic frequency of 93.1% for the
C282Y and 5.4% for the H63D mutations, respectively. Of note, the C282Y
mutation was never observed in the family-based controls, whereas it was
present in 5.8% of the general Breton population. This corresponds to a
theoretical frequency of about 1 per 1,000 for the disease, which is
slightly lower than generally estimated. In contrast, the H63D allelic
frequency was nearly the same in both control groups (15% and 16.5% in
the family-based and general population controls, respectively). While
the experience of Jouanolle et al. (1996) appeared to indicate a close
relationship of C282Y to hemochromatosis, the implication of the H63D
variant was not clear.

Beutler et al. (1996) reported mutation analysis of 147 patients with
hereditary hemochromatosis and 193 controls; 121 (82.3%) HH patients
were homozygous for the C282Y mutation and 10 (6.8%) were heterozygous.
All of the C282Y homozygous patients were also homozygous for the
wildtype nucleotide 187C (see H63D; 613609.0002), and all C282Y
heterozygotes had at least 1 copy of 187C. Thus, the 2 nucleotides, 845
and 187, were in complete linkage disequilibrium; nucleotide 187 was a C
on all chromosomes with the 845A (C282Y) mutation. Eight of the 10
heterozygotes for 845A were heterozygous for 187G (H63D).

Among 132 unrelated hemochromatosis patients in Brittany, Jouanolle et
al. (1997) found that 92% were homozygous for the C282Y mutation and
that all 264 chromosomes except 5 carried either the C282Y mutation or
the H63D mutation. The UK Haemochromatosis Consortium (1997) genotyped
115 unrelated hereditary hemochromatosis patients and found that 105
(91%) were homozygous for the C282Y mutation. One of 101 controls was
also found to be homozygous but was subsequently found to have evidence
of iron overload. Compound heterozygosity for the C282Y and H63D
mutations was found in 3 patients who had mild disease and in 4 controls
who had no signs of iron overload. Five patients lacked either mutation,
2 of whom had atypical, early-onset disease.

Feder et al. (1997) confirmed the prediction that the C282Y mutation
would disrupt a critical disulfide bond in the alpha-3 loop of the HFE
protein and abrogate binding of the mutant HFE protein to
beta-2-microglobulin (B2M; 109700), as well as its transport to and
presentation on the cell surface. In vitro, the C282Y mutant HFE protein
failed to associate with endogenous B2M in human embryonic kidney cells
stably transfected with the mutant cDNA. Waheed et al. (1997) found that
whereas the wildtype and H63D HFE proteins associate with beta-2
microglobulin and are expressed on the cell surface of COS-7 cells,
these capabilities are lost by the C282Y HFE protein. They presented
biochemical and immunofluorescence data indicating that the C282Y mutant
protein is retained in the endoplasmic reticulum and middle Golgi
compartments, fails to undergo late Golgi processing, and is subject to
accelerated degradation. The block in intracellular transport,
accelerated turnover, and failure of the C282Y protein to be presented
normally on the cell surface provides a possible basis for impaired
function of this mutant protein in hereditary hemochromatosis.

In 478 hemochromatosis probands in Brittany selected from their iron
status markers, primarily serum iron, serum ferritin, and transferrin
saturation, Mura et al. (1997) investigated the relationships between
the hemochromatosis phenotype and genotypes at the HLA-H locus and
surrounding markers. They found that the C282Y substitution is
unambiguously associated with the hemochromatosis phenotype; 81.2% of
all patients were homozygous. The subgroup of heterozygous individuals
showed lower values for serum ferritin, transferrin saturation, and iron
removed by phlebotomy than did the subgroup of hemochromatosis patients
homozygous for C282Y. In the subgroup not homozygous for C282Y, no other
mutation in the HLA-H gene was found; hence, the genotype remained
unclear. The authors suggested additional nongenetic cause, other
mutations, or another gene as explanations for the results in these
patients.

Rhodes et al. (1997) reported haplotype and mutation analysis in a
3-generation family. Three sibs with overt hemochromatosis, 1 male and 2
females aged 50 to 53 years, showed homozygosity for the C282Y mutation.
However, homozygosity for the mutation was detected in an asymptomatic
and biochemically normal 50-year-old male sib of the affected
individuals. Rhodes et al. (1997) concluded that this finding caused
them to question the possibility of population and presymptomatic
screening by genetic testing for hemochromatosis.

Roth et al. (1997) found no instance of the C282Y substitution in the
HFE gene of individuals originating from Algeria, Ethiopia, or Senegal,
whereas it is highly prevalent in populations of European ancestry. The
geographic distribution supported the previously suggested Celtic origin
of hemochromatosis. In contrast, the H63D substitution is not restricted
to European populations. Although absent in the Senegalese, it was found
on about 9% of the chromosomes of the central Ethiopians and Algerians
genotyped for this study. Thus, the H63D substitution must have occurred
earlier than the C282Y substitution.

Merryweather-Clarke et al. (1997) reported the prevalence of the C282Y
and H63D mutations in 2,978 people from 42 different populations
worldwide. The authors found the highest frequency of C282Y in northern
European populations, consistent with the theory of a north European
origin for the mutation. In this report, C282Y was seen rarely in the
African, Asian, and Australasian chromosomes studied, while H63D was
more widely distributed.

Although hemochromatosis is common in Caucasians, affecting more than 1
in 300 individuals of northern European origin, the disorder has not
been recognized in other populations. Cullen et al. (1998) used PCR and
restriction-enzyme digestion to analyze the frequency of the C282Y and
H63D mutations in HLA-typed samples of non-Caucasian populations,
comprising Australian Aboriginal, Chinese, and Pacific Islanders. They
found that the C282Y mutation was present in these populations (allele
frequency 0.32%), and that it was always seen in conjunction with HLA
haplotypes common in Caucasians, suggesting that C282Y may have been
introduced into these populations by Caucasian admixture. They found the
H63D mutation at an allele frequency of 2.68% in the 2 populations
analyzed (Australian Aboriginal and Chinese). In the Australian
Aboriginal samples, H63D was found to be associated with HLA haplotypes
common in Caucasians, again suggesting that it was introduced by recent
admixture. In the Chinese samples analyzed, on the other hand, H63D was
present in association with a wide variety of HLA haplotypes, showing
that this mutation is widespread and likely to predate the more
genetically restricted C282Y mutation.

In European populations, Lucotte (1998) found the frequency of the C282Y
mutation to be 6.88% in Celtics, 6.46% in Nordics, 5.95% in
Anglo-Saxons, 2.53% in southern Europeans, and 1.76% in Russians. They
believed these findings supported the suggestion concerning the Celtic
origin of the mutation. Celtic origin of the mutation was also supported
by the finding of Ryan et al. (1998) of a 14% carrier frequency of the
C282Y allele in Ireland, the highest frequency reported to the time of
report.

Jeffrey et al. (1999) identified a single nucleotide polymorphism
(5569G-A; 613609.0004) in intron 4 of the HFE gene that caused
overestimation of C282Y homozygote prevalence in hemochromatosis.

Beutler et al. (2002) screened 41,038 individuals attending a health
appraisal clinic in the U.S. for the C282Y and H63D (613609.0002) HFE
mutations, and analyzed laboratory data on signs and symptoms of
hemochromatosis as elicited by questionnaire. The most common symptoms
of hemochromatosis were no more prevalent among the 152 identified
homozygotes than among the controls. The age distribution of homozygotes
and compound heterozygotes did not differ significantly from that of
controls; there was no measurable loss of such individuals from the
population during aging. However, there was a significantly increased
prevalence of a history of hepatitis or 'liver trouble' among
homozygotes and in the proportion of homozygotes with increased
concentrations of serum aspartate aminotransferase and collagen IV;
these changes were not related to iron burden or to age. Only 1 of the
152 homozygotes had signs and symptoms that would suggest a diagnosis of
hemochromatosis. Beutler et al. (2002) concluded that the penetrance of
hereditary hemochromatosis is much lower than generally thought. They
estimated that less than 1% of homozygotes develop frank clinical
hemochromatosis.

Poullis et al. (2002) concluded that Beutler et al. (2002)
underestimated the penetrance of the C282Y HFE mutation. The immigration
of Hispanic and Asian populations into southern California may have
influenced the frequency.

Within South Wales, McCune et al. (2002) performed a systematic review
of patients with HH over a 2-year period which revealed that only 1.2%
of adult C282Y homozygotes had been diagnosed with iron overload and
received treatment. In those in whom body iron load could be estimated,
only 51% had more than 4 grams of iron (the diagnostic threshold for
iron overload). McCune et al. (2002) stated that screening the general
UK population by genetic testing could identify thousands of individuals
homozygous for the C282Y mutation, but the majority would not express a
phenotype leading to a diagnosis of HH and would likely remain healthy.
They concluded that until the cofactors determining disease expression
were more fully understood, the benefits of such screening, both to the
individual and to the community, would likely be outweighed by the
costs.

Andersen et al. (2004) undertook to determine the progression rate of
iron overload in hereditary hemochromatosis in individuals in the
general population, and to answer the question of how frequently
asymptomatic C282Y homozygotes identified in the population need to be
screened for manifestations of hemochromatosis in later years. As a
function of biologic age, transferrin saturation and ferritin levels
increase slightly in male and female C282Y homozygotes. None of the
C282Y homozygotes developed clinically overt hemochromatosis. The
authors concluded that most such homozygotes need to be screened for
manifestation of hemochromatosis every 10 to 20 years.

Saric et al. (2006) estimated the frequency of the C282Y mutation to be
1.6% in the population of Serbia and Montenegro. The authors noted that
the frequency of C282Y decreases going from northwest to southeast
Europe, consistent with a Viking or Celtic origin.

Livesey et al. (2004) analyzed the presence of the common mtDNA 16189T-C
variant, which appears to be a risk factor for type 2 diabetes (125853),
in British, French, and Australian C282Y homozygotes and controls, with
known iron status, and in birth cohorts. The frequency of the 16189
variant was found to be elevated in individuals with hemochromatosis who
were homozygous for the C282Y allele, compared with population controls
and with C282Y homozygotes who were asymptomatic. They concluded that
iron loading in C282Y homozygotes with hemochromatosis was exacerbated
by the presence of the 16189 variant.

Allen et al. (2008) reported on a study of HFE mutations in 31,192
persons of northern European descent between ages 40 and 69 years who
participated in the Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study and were
followed for an average of 12 years. In a random sample of 1,438
subjects stratified according to HFE genotype, including all 203 C282Y
homozygotes (of whom 108 were women and 95 were men), they obtained
clinical and biochemical data, including 2 sets of iron measurements
performed 12 years apart. Disease related to iron overload was defined
as documented iron overload and one or more of the following conditions:
cirrhosis, liver fibrosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, elevated
aminotransferase levels, physician-diagnosed symptomatic
hemochromatosis, and arthropathy of the second and third
metacarpophalangeal joints. The proportion of C282Y homozygotes with
documented iron overload-related disease was 28.4% for men and 1.2% for
women. Only 1 non-C282Y homozygote (a compound heterozygote with his63
to asp) had documented iron overload-related disease. Male C282Y
homozygotes with a serum ferritin level of 1,000 micrograms per liter or
more were more likely to report fatigue, use of arthritis medicine, and
a history of liver disease than were men who had the wildtype gene.
Waalen and Beutler (2008) and Rienhoff (2008) commented that the study
by Allen et al. (2008) may have overestimated the clinical prevalence
and penetrance of iron-overload disease in C282Y homozygotes.

Levy et al. (1999) produced 2 mutations in the murine Hfe gene. The
first mutation deleted a large portion of the coding sequence,
generating a null allele. The second mutation introduced the C282Y
change into the Hfe gene but otherwise left the gene intact.
Homozygosity for either mutation resulted in postnatal iron loading. The
effects of the null mutation were more severe than the effects of the
C282Y mutation. The mice heterozygous for either mutation accumulated
more iron than normal controls. Although liver iron stores were greatly
increased, splenic iron was decreased. Levy et al. (1999) concluded that
the C282Y mutation does not result in a null allele.

Juvenile Hemochromatosis

Merryweather-Clarke et al. (2003) reported an individual with a juvenile
hemochromatosis (602390) phenotype who was heterozygous for the C282Y
mutation in the HFE gene as well as a 4-bp HAMP frameshift mutation
(606464.0003). In another family, they found the C282Y mutation in HFE
together with a G71D mutation in HAMP (606464.0004). There was a
correlation between severity of iron overload, heterozygosity for a G71D
HAMP mutation, and heterozygosity or homozygosity for the HFE C282Y
mutation.

Porphyria Cutanea Tarda

Roberts et al. (1997) analyzed 41 patients with sporadic porphyria
cutanea tarda and 101 controls for the presence of the C282Y and H63D
mutations. They identified the C282Y mutation in 18 (44%) patients
compared to 11 (11%) controls (relative risk = 6.2; p = 0.00003); 7
patients were homozygotes. In 12 patients, the C282Y mutation was
associated with markers of the HLA-A3-containing ancestral
hemochromatosis haplotype. There was no difference in the frequency of
the H63D mutation between the 2 groups. Roberts et al. (1997) concluded
that inheritance of one or more hemochromatosis genes is an important
susceptibility factor for sporadic porphyria cutanea tarda. They noted
that some C282Y homozygotes present late in life with porphyria cutanea
tarda, indicating that not all homozygotes present clinically with
hemochromatosis.

Among 8 patients with porphyria cutanea tarda, Mehrany et al. (2004)
found that 6 had mutations in the HFE gene: 3 were homozygous for C282Y,
1 was compound heterozygous for C282Y and H63D, and 2 were heterozygous
for C282Y. Mehrany et al. (2004) noted that early detection and
treatment of hereditary hemochromatosis limits progression of PCT and
improves life expectancy.

Porphyria Variegata

De Villiers et al. (1999) found that the mutant allele frequency of the
C282Y mutation was significantly lower in 73 apparently unrelated
variegate porphyria (176200) patients with the arg59-to-trp mutation in
the PPOX gene (600923.0003) than in 102 controls drawn from the same
population (P = 0.005). The authors concluded that the population
screening approach used in this study revealed considerable genotypic
variation in the HFE gene and supported previous data on involvement of
the HFE gene in the porphyria phenotype. Iron overload is a
well-established precipitating or aggravating factor in porphyria
variegata.

Susceptibility to Microvascular Complications of Diabetes 7

Walsh and Malins (1978) reported an association between diabetic
retinopathy (MVCD7; 603933) and idiopathic hemochromatosis. Peterlin et
al. (2003) searched for a relationship between the C282Y and H63D gene
mutations and the development of proliferative diabetic retinopathy in
Caucasians with type 2 diabetes (125853). A significantly higher
frequency of C282Y heterozygosity was found in patients with
proliferative diabetic retinopathy compared to subjects without it,
whereas no association was demonstrated with H63D. Logistic regression
analysis revealed that the C282Y mutation was a significant independent
risk factor for the development of PDR (odds ratio = 6.1; p = 0.027).

Oliva et al. (2004) analyzed the C282Y HFE polymorphism in 225 Spanish
patients with type 2 diabetes and detected a younger age of onset and
longer duration of disease in patients carrying at least 1 C282Y allele.
They also found an increased prevalence of retinopathy (p = 0.014) and
of nephropathy (p = 0.04) in individuals carrying at least 1 C282Y
allele; the increased prevalence of retinopathy, but not nephropathy, in
C282Y carriers was related to increased duration of disease.
Multivariate logistic regression analysis confirmed that the prevalence
of nephropathy was higher in the group of patients carrying at least 1 Y
allele.

Davis et al. (2008) analyzed H63D and C282Y HFE genotype data for 1,245
Australian patients with type 2 diabetes from the longitudinal
observational Fremantle Diabetes Study and found no independent positive
associations between HFE gene status and either microvascular or
macrovascular complications in cross-sectional and longitudinal
analyses.

Alzheimer Disease

Robson et al. (2004) noted that there is evidence that iron may play a
role in the pathology of Alzheimer disease (104300). Thus, genetic
factors that contribute to iron deposition resulting in tissue damage
might exacerbate AD. The authors examined the interaction between the C2
variant of the TF gene (19000.0004) and the C282Y allele of the HFE
gene, the most common basis of hemochromatosis, as risk factors for
developing AD. The results showed that each of the 2 variants was
associated with an increased risk of AD only in the presence of the
other. Neither allele alone had any effect. Carriers of both variants
were at 5 times greater risk of AD compared with all others.
Furthermore, carriers of these 2 alleles plus APOE4 (see 107741) were at
still higher risk of AD: of the 14 carriers of the 3 variants identified
in this study, 12 had AD and 2 had mild cognitive impairment. Robson et
al. (2004) concluded that their results indicated that the combination
of TF*C2 and HFE C282Y may lead to an excess of redoxactive iron and the
induction of oxidative stress in neurons, which is exacerbated in
carriers of APOE4. They noted that 4% of northern Europeans carry the 2
iron-related variants and that iron overload is a treatable condition.

Transferrin Serum Level Quantitative Trait Locus 2

In a genomewide association study of Australians of European descent,
Benyamin et al. (2009) found that the C282Y variant (dbSNP rs1800562)
was associated with serum iron (p = 3.5 x 10(-11)), serum transferrin
(see TFQTL2, 614193) (p = 1.1 x 10(-10)), transferrin saturation (p =
4.3 x 10(-15)), and serum ferritin (see FTH1, 134770) (p = 4.5 x
10(-5)). C282Y explained 9.5%, 9.1%, 13.2%, and 3.7% of the variation in
means of serum iron, serum transferrin, transferrin saturation, and
serum ferritin levels, respectively. Three SNPs in the TF gene plus the
HFE C282Y mutation explained about 40% of genetic variation in serum
transferrin (p = 7.8 x 10(-25)).

.0002
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 1
MICROVASCULAR COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 7, INCLUDED
HFE, HIS63ASP

Drakesmith et al. (2002) used a numbering system beginning with the
first amino acid of the mature HFE protein, omitting the 22 amino acids
of the signal sequence, so that H63 of the immature protein is H41 in
the mature protein.

Hemochromatosis, Type 1

In 9 patients with hemochromatosis (HFE1; 235200) who were heterozygous
for the C282Y mutation (613609.0001), Feder et al. (1996) identified a
C-to-G transversion in exon 2 of the HFE gene, resulting in a
his63-to-asp substitution (H63D). This variant was present in 8 of the 9
(89%) nonancestral chromosomes, representing a significant enrichment
over the 17% frequency observed in control chromosomes. One patient was
homozygous for the H63D variant.

An analysis of the H63D mutation in 13 families by Jouanolle et al.
(1996) did not support a relationship to HFE. The mutation was present
in 3 of 26 heterozygous parents of probands and in each case it was
present on the normal chromosome; the analysis of these individuals did
not support a compound heterozygous contribution to HFE.

In a study of 115 unrelated patients with hereditary hemochromatosis,
the UK Haemochromatosis Consortium (1997) found 1 patient who was
homozygous for the H63D mutation. However, 3 homozygotes with no
evidence of iron overloading were found among 101 control samples
derived from healthy blood donors. In addition, compound heterozygosity
for the H63D and C232Y mutations was found in 3 patients and 4 controls.

Beutler (1997), commenting on the conclusion of Carella et al. (1997)
that H63D is a polymorphic change, assembled evidence supporting the
likelihood that it is a hemochromatosis-causing mutation with reduced
penetrance. He suggested that most of the heterozygotes with mild
disease manifestations reported before discovery of the HFE gene will
prove, in fact, to be compound heterozygotes for C282Y (613609.0001) and
H63D.

Aguilar-Martinez et al. (2001) investigated the phenotypic consequences
of H63D homozygosity in 56 French homozygotes identified from a series
of blood samples submitted for HFE genotyping in response to a confirmed
(12) or suspected (38) clinical diagnosis of hemochromatosis or a family
history of hemochromatosis (6). Of these, 50 (89%) had evidence of iron
overload. In 16 individuals (32%) this appeared to be a phenomenon
secondary to dysmetabolic iron overload syndrome, porphyria cutanea
tarda, alcohol use, or hepatitis. In the remaining 34 (68%) individuals
a secondary cause of iron overload was not identified: 12 had a
phenotypic diagnosis of hemochromatosis and the remaining 22 had
ill-defined, variable degrees of iron overload with no apparent cause.
Extended genetic analysis failed to demonstrate any association between
phenotype and other HFE mutations/polymorphisms or the TFR2 Y250X
mutation (604720.0001)/TFR2 polymorphisms. The authors commented that,
in this selected population, H63D homozygosity was associated with
extremely variable phenotypes. They suggested that factors such as age
and sex may be important nongenetic phenotypic modifiers.

Cardoso et al. (2002) analyzed linkage disequilibrium between HLA
alleles and HFE mutations in a Portuguese population. The results
confirmed linkage disequilibrium of the HLA haplotype HLA-A3-B7 and the
HLA-A29 allele, respectively, with the HFE mutations C282Y and H63D.
Extensions of these studies showed significant linkage disequilibrium
between the H63D mutation and all HLA-A29-containing haplotypes,
favoring the hypothesis of a coselection of H63D and the HLA-A29 allele
itself. Insight into the biologic significance of this association was
given by the finding of significantly higher CD8+ T-lymphocyte counts in
subjects simultaneously carrying the H63D mutation and the HLA-A29
allele.

To examine whether the HFE H63D mutation is pathogenic, Tomatsu et al.
(2003) generated knockin mice homozygous for H67D (corresponding to
human H63D), mice homozygous for C294Y (corresponding to human C282Y),
and mice compound heterozygous for both mutations. The biochemical and
histopathologic severity of hepatic iron loading was significantly
increased in all 3 groups compared to control mice, but was less in H67D
homozygotes than in compound heterozygotes, and was highest in C294Y
homozygotes. Only the C294Y homozygous mice showed a significant
increase in transferrin saturation compared to controls. Tomatsu et al.
(2003) concluded that the H67D allele, when homozygous or combined with
a more severe mutation, leads to partial loss of Hfe function in mice
and to increased hepatic iron loading.

Susceptibility to Microvascular Complications of Diabetes 7

Moczulski et al. (2001) analyzed the H63D polymorphism in 563 Polish
patients with type 2 diabetes (125853) and 196 controls and observed an
increased frequency of the 63D allele (odds ratio, 1.8) among patients
with diabetic nephropathy (MVCD7; 612635).

In a study of 225 Spanish patients with type 2 diabetes, Oliva et al.
(2004) found that the prevalence of nephropathy was higher in the group
of patients carrying the homozygous D/D genotype compared to the group
carrying the wildtype or heterozygous D genotypes.

Davis et al. (2008) analyzed H63D and C282Y HFE genotype data for 1,245
Australian patients with type 2 diabetes from the longitudinal
observational Fremantle Diabetes Study and found no independent positive
associations between HFE gene status and either microvascular or
macrovascular complications in cross-sectional and longitudinal
analyses.

.0003
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 1
HFE, SER65CYS

Mura et al. (1999) reported on the analysis of the cys282-to-tyr (C282Y;
613609.0001), his63-to-asp (H63D; 613609.0002), and ser65-to-cys (S65C)
mutations of the HFE gene in a series of 711 probands with hereditary
hemochromatosis (235200) and 410 controls. The results confirmed that
the C282Y substitution is the main mutation involved in HH, accounting
for 85% of carrier chromosomes, whereas the H63D substitution
represented 39% of the HH chromosomes that did not carry the C282Y
mutation. In addition, the screening showed that the S65C substitution,
which results from a 193A-T transversion, was significantly enriched in
probands with at least 1 chromosome without an assigned mutation. This
substitution accounted for 7.8% of HH chromosomes that were neither
C282Y nor H63D. This enrichment of S65C among HH chromosomes suggested
that the S65C substitution is associated with a mild form of
hemochromatosis.

Barton et al. (1999) identified the S65C mutation in 2 patients. One was
also heterozygous for C282Y, i.e., was a compound heterozygote, and had
porphyria cutanea tarda (see 176100). The other patient had hereditary
stomatocytosis (185000). Iron overload due to the HFE mutations probably
precipitated or exacerbated the porphyria cutanea tarda in the first
patient. In the second patient, iron overload from the hereditary
stomatocytosis undoubtedly exacerbated the iron overload due to the HFE
mutation.

.0004
HFE INTRONIC POLYMORPHISM
HFE, 5569G-A

In a population screening study of 5,211 voluntary blood donors, Jeffrey
et al. (1999) identified 31 putative 5474A (613609.0001) homozygotes.
When they validated the assay by genomic DNA sequence analysis, only 16
individuals were confirmed to be 5474A homozygotes and the remaining 15
were heterozygous for this mutation. Each of the 5474A heterozygotes was
also heterozygous for a previously unrecognized 5569G-A single
nucleotide polymorphism located in the binding region of the antisense
primer. Jeffrey et al. (1999) developed a new antisense primer that
excluded the site of this newly found polymorphism and confirmed the 15
putative homozygotes to be 5474A heterozygotes using restriction
endonuclease digestion. Hill and Robertson's maximum likelihood estimate
of linkage disequilibrium D (Hill and Robertson, 1968) was 0.71 (P less
than 0.005), confirming the presence of moderate to strong linkage
disequilibrium between the 2 variant sites. It was considered unlikely
that the 5569A polymorphism has functional significance, because it is
within intron 4 and does not disrupt a splice site consensus sequence.
Moreover, all 5474A/5569A compound heterozygotes had a transferrin
saturation in the normal range. In their population survey, Jeffrey et
al. (1999) found that 21% of 113 normal patients, corresponding to an
allele frequency of 0.106, had the polymorphism. In their sample, the
prevalence of hemochromatosis was reduced from 1 in 168 to 1 in 327 by
the use of new primers. These results had major public health
implications regarding the use of population screening for
hemochromatosis. Individuals previously considered to be nonexpressing
5474A homozygotes on the basis of PCR-based restriction endonuclease
digestion assay using the original Feder et al. (1996) primers require
confirmatory testing.

The European Haemochromatosis Consortium (1999), representing 11
laboratories, retyped 944 samples for the C282Y mutation (613609.0001)
by a primer external to the 5569G-A polymorphism or by sequencing. Five
hundred seventy-five previously diagnosed C282Y homozygotes were
confirmed using the new primer, as well as 192 C282Y wildtype
homozygotes, including 10 carrying the polymorphism in homozygosity, and
177 heterozygotes. Of the heterozygotes, 28 were C282Y/5569G-A compound
heterozygotes which had been reported correctly using the original Feder
reverse primer. The European Haemochromatosis Consortium (1999) did not
observe nonamplification of the polymorphic allele, demonstrating that
the validity of their previous publications was not compromised by
findings reported by Jeffrey et al. (1999). Noll et al. (1999) confirmed
the observations of the European Haemochromatosis Consortium (1999).
Gomez et al. (1999) reevaluated 221 putative C282Y homozygotes; 219 were
confirmed and 2 were found to be 5569A/282Y compound heterozygotes
without clinical evidence of iron overload. There was a significantly
higher prevalence of the 5569A allele in a group of healthy controls (33
of 314, or 10.5%) than in the putative HFE C282Y homozygous group (2 of
442, or 0.45%), suggesting that the polymorphism is very common, but is
not found on the same founder chromosome as the C282Y mutation.

.0005
HFE POLYMORPHISM
HFE, VAL53MET

In a mutation analysis of the HFE gene using DNA samples from members of
4 different ethnic groups in South Africa, de Villiers et al. (1999)
identified a 157G-A transition in exon 2 of the HFE gene, resulting in a
val53-to-met (V53M) substitution. The mutation was detected only in
South African Black and Bushman (Khoisan) populations. The mutation
created a new NlaIII site and abolished an MaeII site.

.0006
HFE POLYMORPHISM
HFE, VAL59MET

In a mutation analysis of the HFE gene using DNA samples from members of
4 different ethnic groups in South Africa, de Villiers et al. (1999)
identified a 175G-A transition in exon 2 of the HFE gene, resulting in a
val59-to-met (V59M) substitution in a South African Caucasian. The
mutation created an NlaIII site.

.0007
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 1
HFE, GLN127HIS

In an 11-year-old girl with hemochromatosis (235200) and variegate
porphyria (176200), de Villiers et al. (1999) identified compound
heterozygosity for mutations in the HFE gene: a 381A-C transversion in
exon 3 resulting in a gln127-to-his (Q127H) substitution, and a
his63-to-asp (613609.0002) substitution. The severely affected patient
carried the R59W mutation (600923.0003) in the PPOX gene, which accounts
for dominantly inherited variegate porphyria in more than 80% of
affected South Africans. Iron overload is a well-established
precipitating or exacerbating factor in porphyria variegata.

.0008
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 1
HFE, ARG330MET

Among 13 Caucasian South African patients referred for a molecular
diagnosis of hereditary hemochromatosis (235200), de Villiers et al.
(1999) identified a 989G-T transversion in exon 5 of the HFE gene,
resulting in an arg330-to-met (R330M) substitution.

.0009
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 1
HFE, ILE105THR

In a patient with hemochromatosis (235200), Barton et al. (1999)
identified compound heterozygosity for a 314T-C transition in exon 2 of
the HFE gene, resulting in an ile105-to-thr (I105T) substitution, and
the H63D mutation (613609.0002).

.0010
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 1
HFE, GLY93ARG

In a patient with hemochromatosis (235200), Barton et al. (1999)
identified compound heterozygosity for a 277G-C transversion in exon 2
of the HFE gene, resulting in a gly93-to-arg (G93R) substitution, and
the C282Y mutation (613609.0001).

.0011
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 1
HFE, GLN283PRO

In affected members of a French family with hemochromatosis (235200), Le
Gac et al. (2003) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in
the HFE gene: an 848A-C transversion in exon 4, resulting in a
gln283-to-pro (Q283P) substitution within the alpha-3 domain, and a
C282Y (613609.0001) substitution. Molecular modeling studies predicted a
destabilizing effect for the Q283P substitution on the tertiary
structure of the protein.

By performing immunoprecipitation studies in HeLa cells, Ka et al.
(2005) found that the Q283P mutation prevented the normal interaction
between HFE protein and beta-2-microglobulin (B2M; 109700) and between
HFE protein and transferrin receptor (TFRC; 190010). Further studies
showed that the Q283P mutation decreased the capacity of HFE to reduce
transferrin-mediated iron uptake. Ka et al. (2005) noted that the Q283P
mutation is adjacent to the disulfide bridge formed by cys225 and
cys282, and concluded that the Q283P protein is retained in the
endoplasmic reticulum and middle Golgi compartments, similar to the
C282Y mutant protein. The results indicated that the Q283P mutation
leads to structural and functional consequences similar to those
described for the more common C282Y mutation.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Jeffrey et al. (1999); Zoller et al. (1999)
REFERENCE 1. Aguilar-Martinez, P.; Bismuth, M.; Picot, M. C.; Thelcide, C.;
Pageaux, G.-P.; Blanc, F.; Blanc, P.; Schved, J.-F.; Larrey, D.:
Variable phenotypic presentation of iron overload in H63D homozygotes:
are genetic modifiers the cause? Gut 48: 836-842, 2001.

2. Allen, K. J.; Gurrin, L. C.; Constantine, C. C.; Osborne, N. J.;
Delatycki, M. B.; Nicoll, A. J.; McLaren, C. E.; Bahlo, M.; Nisselle,
A. E.; Vulpe, C. D.; Anderson, G. J.; Southey, M. C.; Giles, G. G.;
English, D. R.; Hopper, J. L.; Olynyk, J. K.; Powell, L. W.; Gertig,
D. M.: Iron-overload-related disease in HFE hereditary hemochromatosis. New
Eng. J. Med. 358: 221-230, 2008.

3. Andersen, R. V.; Tybjaerg-Hansen, A.; Appleyard, M.; Birgens, H.;
Nordestgaard, B. G.: Hemochromatosis mutations in the general population:
iron overload progression rate. Blood 103: 2914-2919, 2004.

4. Bahram, S.; Gilfillan, S.; Kuhn, L. C.; Moret, R.; Schulze, J.
B.; Lebeau, A.; Schumann, K.: Experimental hemochromatosis due to
MHC class I HFE deficiency: immune status and iron metabolism. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 13312-13317, 1999.

5. Barton, J. C.; Rothenberg, B. E.; Bertoli, L. F.; Acton, R. T.
: Diagnosis of hemochromatosis in family members of probands: a comparison
of phenotyping and HFE genotyping. Genet. Med. 1: 89-93, 1999.

6. Barton, J. C.; Sawada-Hirai, R.; Rothenberg, B. E.; Acton, R. T.
: Two novel missense mutations of the HFE gene (I105T and G93R) and
identification of the S65C mutation in Alabama hemochromatosis probands. Blood
Cells Molec. Dis. 25: 146-154, 1999.

7. Benyamin, B.; McRae, A. F.; Zhu, G.; Gordon, S.; Henders, A. K.;
Palotie, A.; Peltonen, L.; Martin, N. G.; Montgomery, G. W.; Whitfield,
J. B.; Visscher, P. M.: Variants in TF and HFE explain about 40%
of genetic variation in serum-transferrin levels. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 84:
60-65, 2009.

8. Beutler, E.: The significance of the 187G (H63D) mutation in hemochromatosis.
(Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61: 762-764, 1997.

9. Beutler, E.: Targeted disruption of the HFE gene. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 95: 2033-2034, 1998.

10. Beutler, E.; Felitti, V. J.; Koziol, J. A.; Ho, N. J.; Gelbart,
T.: Penetrance of 845G-A (C282Y) HFE hereditary haemochromatosis
mutation in the USA. Lancet 359: 211-218, 2002.

11. Beutler, E.; Gelbart, T.; West, C.; Lee, P.; Adams, M.; Blackstone,
R.; Pockros, P.; Kosty, M.; Venditti, C. P.; Phatak, P. D.; Seese,
N. K.; Chorney, K. A.; Ten Elshof, A. E.; Gerhard, G. S.; Chorney,
M.: Mutation analysis in hereditary hemochromatosis. Blood Cells
Molec. Dis. 22: 187-194, 1996.

12. Bodmer, J. G.; Parham, P.; Albert, E. D.; Marsh, S. G. E.: Putting
a hold on 'HLA-H'. (Letter) Nature Genet. 15: 234-235, 1997.

13. Cardoso, C. S.; Alves, H.; Mascarenhas, M.; Goncalves, R.; Oliveira,
P.; Rodrigues, P.; Cruz, E.; de Sousa, M.; Porto, G.: Co-selection
of the H63D mutation and the HLA-A29 allele: a new paradigm of linkage
disequilibrium? Immunogenetics 53: 1002-1008, 2002.

14. Carella, M.; D'Ambrosio, L.; Totaro, A.; Grifa, A.; Valentino,
M. A.; Piperno, A.; Girelli, D.; Roetto, A.; Franco, B.; Gasparini,
P.; Camaschella, C.: Mutation analysis of the HLA-H gene in Italian
hemochromatosis patients. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 60: 828-832, 1997.

15. Cullen, L. M.; Gao, X.; Easteal, S.; Jazwinska, E. C.: The hemochromatosis
845 G-to-A and 187 C-to-G mutations: prevalence in non-Caucasian populations. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 62: 1403-1407, 1998.

16. Davis, T. M. E.; Beilby, J.; Davis, W. A.; Olynyk, J. K.; Jeffrey,
G. P.; Rossi, E.; Boyder, C.; Bruce, D. G.: Prevalence, characteristics,
and prognostic significance of HFE gene mutations in type 2 diabetes:
the Fremantle Diabetes Study. Diabetes Care 31: 1795-1801, 2008.

17. de Villiers, J. N. P.; Hillermann, R.; Loubser, L.; Kotze, M.
J.: Spectrum of mutations in the HFE gene implicated in haemochromatosis
and porphyria. Hum. Molec. Genet. 8: 1517-1522, 1999. Note: Erratum:
Hum. Molec. Genet. 8: 1817 only, 1999.

18. Drakesmith, H.; Chen, N.; Ledermann, H.; Screaton, G.; Townsend,
A.; Xu, X.-N.: HIV-1 Nef down-regulates the hemochromatosis protein
HFE, manipulating cellular iron homeostasis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102:
11017-11022, 2005.

19. Drakesmith, H.; Sweetland, E.; Schimanski, L.; Edwards, J.; Cowley,
D.; Ashraf, M.; Bastin, J.; Townsend, A. R. M.: The hemochromatosis
protein HFE inhibits iron export from macrophages. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 99: 15602-15607, 2002.

20. El Kahloun, A.; Chauvel, B.; Mauvieux, V.; Dorval, I.; Jouanolle,
A.-M.; Gicquel, I.; Le Gall, J.-Y.; David, V.: Localization of seven
new genes around the HLA-A locus. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 55-60, 1993.

21. European Haemochromatosis Consortium: Polymorphism in intron
4 of HFE does not compromise haemochromatosis mutation results. (Letter) Nature
Genet. 23: 271 only, 1999.

22. Feder, J. N.; Gnirke, A.; Thomas, W.; Tsuchihashi, Z.; Ruddy,
D. A.; Basava, A.; Dormishian, F.; Domingo, R., Jr.; Ellis, M. C.;
Fullan, A.; Hinton, L. M.; Jones, N. L.; and 21 others: A novel
MHC class I-like gene is mutated in patients with hereditary haemochromatosis. Nature
Genet. 13: 399-408, 1996.

23. Feder, J. N.; Penny, D. M.; Irrinki, A.; Lee, V. K.; Lebron, J.
A.; Watson, N.; Tsuchihashi, Z.; Sigal, E.; Bjorkman, P. J.; Schatzman,
R. C.: The hemochromatosis gene product complexes with the transferrin
receptor and lowers its affinity for ligand binding. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 95: 1472-1477, 1998.

24. Feder, J. N.; Tsuchihashi, Z.; Irrinki, A.; Lee, V. K.; Mapa,
F. A.; Morikang, E.; Prass, C. E.; Starnes, S. M.; Wolff, R. K.; Parkkila,
S.; Sly, W. S.; Schatzman, R. C.: The hemochromatosis founder mutation
in HLA-H disrupts beta-2-microglobulin interaction and cell surface
expression. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 14025-14028, 1997.

25. Goei, V. L.; Parimoo, S.; Capossela, A.; Chu, T. W.; Gruen, J.
R.: Isolation of novel non-HLA gene fragments from the hemochromatosis
region (6p21.3) by cDNA hybridization selection. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 54:
244-251, 1994.

26. Gomez, P. S.; Parks, S.; Ries, R.; Tran, T. C.; Gomez, P. F.;
Press, R. D.: Polymorphism in intron 4 of HFE does not compromise
haemochromatosis mutation results (Letter) Nature Genet. 23: 272
only, 1999.

27. Hashimoto, K.; Hirai, M.; Kurosawa, Y.: Identification of a mouse
homolog for the human hereditary haemochromatosis candidate gene. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 230: 35-39, 1997.

28. Hashimoto, K.; Hirai, M.; Kurosawa, Y.: A gene outside the human
MHC related to classical HLA class I genes. Science 269: 693-695,
1995.

29. Hill, W. G.; Robertson, A.: Linkage disequilibrium in finite
populations. Theor. Appl. Genet. 38: 226-231, 1968.

30. Jazwinska, E. C.; Cullen, L. M.; Busfield, F.; Pyper, W. R.; Webb,
S. I.; Powell, L. W.; Morris, C. P.; Walsh T. P.: Haemochromatosis
and HLA-H. (Letter) Nature Genet. 14: 249-251, 1996.

31. Jeffrey, G. P.; Chakrabarti, S.; Hegele, R. A.; Adams, P. C.:
Polymorphism in intron 4 of HFE may cause overestimation of C282Y
homozygote prevalence in haemochromatosis. (Letter) Nature Genet. 22:
325-326, 1999.

32. Jeffrey, G. P.; Chakrabarti, S.; Hegele, R. A.; Adams, P. C.:
Polymorphism in intron 4 of HFE may cause overestimation of C282Y
homozygote prevalence in haemochromatosis. (Letter) Nature Genet. 22:
325-326, 1999.

33. Jouanolle, A. M.; Fergelot, P.; Gandon, G.; Yaouanq, J.; Le Gall,
J. Y.; David, V.: A candidate gene for hemochromatosis: frequency
of the C282Y and H63D mutations. Hum. Genet. 100: 544-547, 1997.

34. Jouanolle, A. M.; Gandon, G.; Jezequel, P.; Blayau, M.; Campion,
M. L.; Yaouanq, J.; Mosser, J.; Fergelot, P.; Chauvel, B.; Bouric,
P.; Carn, G.; Andrieux, N.; Gicquel, I.; Le Gall, J.-Y.; David, V.
: Haemochromatosis and HLA-H. (Letter) Nature Genet. 14: 251-252,
1996.

35. Ka, C.; Le Gac, G.; Dupradeau, F.-Y.; Rochette, J.; Ferec, C.
: The Q283P amino-acid change in HFE leads to structural and functional
consequences similar to those described for the mutated 282Y HFE protein. Hum.
Genet. 117: 467-475, 2005.

36. Lebron, J. A.; Bennett, M. J.; Vaughn, D. E.; Chirino, A. J.;
Snow, P. M.; Mintier, G. A.; Feder, J. N.; Bjorkman, P. J.: Crystal
structure of the hemochromatosis protein HFE and characterization
of its interaction with transferrin receptor. Cell 93: 111-123,
1998.

37. Le Gac, G.; Dupradeau, F.-Y.; Mura, C.; Jacolot, S.; Scotet, V.;
Esnault, G.; Mercier, A.-Y.; Rochette, J.; Ferec, C.: Phenotypic
expression of the C282Y/Q283P compound heterozygosity in HFE and molecular
modeling of the Q283P mutation effect. Blood Cells Molec. Dis. 30:
231-237, 2003.

38. Levy, J. E.; Montross, L. K.; Cohen, D. E.; Fleming, M. D.; Andrews,
N. C.: The C282Y mutation causing hereditary hemochromatosis does
not produce a null allele. Blood 94: 9-11, 1999.

39. Livesey, K. J.; Wimhurst, V. L. C.; Carter, K.; Worwood, M.; Cadet,
E.; Rochette, J.; Roberts, A. G.; Pointon, J. J.; Merryweather-Clarke,
A. T.; Bassett, M. L.; Jouanolle, A.-M.; Mosser, A.; David, V.; Poulton,
J.; Robson, K. J. H.: The 16189 variant of mitochondrial DNA occurs
more frequently in C282Y homozygotes with haemochromatosis than those
without iron loading. J. Med. Genet. 41: 6-10, 2004.

40. Lucotte, G.: Celtic origin of the C282Y mutation of hemochromatosis. Blood
Cells Molec. Dis. 24: 433-438, 1998.

41. McCune, C. A.; Al-Jader, L. N.; May, A.; Hayes, S. L.; Jackson,
H. A.; Worwood, M.: Hereditary haemochromatosis: only 1% of adult
HFE C282Y homozygotes in South Wales have a clinical diagnosis of
iron overload. Hum. Genet. 111: 538-543, 2002.

42. Mehrany, K.; Drage, L. A.; Brandhagen, D. J.; Pittelkow, M. R.
: Association of porphyria cutanea tarda with hereditary hemochromatosis. J.
Am. Acad. Derm. 51: 205-211, 2004.

43. Mercier, B.; Mura, C.; Ferec, C.: Putting a hold on 'HLA-H'.
(Letter) Nature Genet. 15: 234 only, 1997.

44. Merryweather-Clarke, A. T.; Cadet, E.; Bomford, A.; Capron, D.;
Viprakasi, V.; Miller, A.; McHugh, P. J. Chapman, R. W.; Pointon,
J. J.; Wimhurst, V. L. C.; Livesey, K. J.; Tanphaichitr, V.; Rochette,
J.; Robson, K. J. H.: Digenic inheritance of mutations in HAMP and
HFE results in different types of haemochromatosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12:
2241-2247, 2003.

45. Merryweather-Clarke, A. T.; Pointon, J. J.; Shearman, J. D.; Robson,
K. J. H.: Global prevalence of putative haemochromatosis mutations. J.
Med. Genet. 34: 275-278, 1997.

46. Moczulski, D. K.; Grzeszczak, W.; Gawlik, B.: Role of hemochromatosis
C282Y and H63D mutations in HFE gene in development of type 2 diabetes
and diabetic nephropathy. Diabetes Care 24: 1187-1191, 2001.

47. Mura, C.; Nousbaum, J.-B.; Verger, P.; Moalic, M.-T.; Raguenes,
O.; Mercier, A.-Y.; Ferec, C.: Phenotype-genotype correlation in
haemochromatosis subjects. Hum. Genet. 101: 271-276, 1997.

48. Mura, C.; Raguenes, O.; Ferec, C.: HFE mutations analysis in
711 hemochromatosis probands: evidence for S65C implication in mild
form of hemochromatosis. Blood 93: 2502-2505, 1999.

49. Nairz, M.; Theurl, I.; Schroll, A.; Theurl, M.; Fritsche, G.;
Lindner, E.; Seifert, M.; Crouch, M.-L. V.; Hantke, K.; Akira, S.;
Fang, F. C.; Weiss, G.: Absence of functional Hfe protects mice from
invasive Salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium infection via induction
of lipocalin-2. Blood 114: 3642-3651, 2009.

50. Noll, W. W.; Belloni, D. R.; Stenzel, T. T.; Grody, W. W.: Polymorphism
in intron 4 of HFE does not compromise haemochromatosis mutation results
(Letter) Nature Genet. 23: 271-272, 1999.

51. Oliva, R.; Novials, A.; Sanchez, M.; Villa, M.; Ingelmo, M.; Recasens,
M.; Ascaso, C.; Bruguera, M.; Gomis, R.: The HFE gene is associated
to an earlier age of onset and to the presence of diabetic nephropathy
in diabetes mellitus type 2. Endocrine 24: 111-114, 2004.

52. Parkkila, S.; Waheed, A.; Britton, R. S.; Bacon, B. R.; Zhou,
X. Y.; Tomatsu, S.; Fleming, R. E.; Sly, W. S.: Association of the
transferrin receptor in human placenta with HFE, the protein defective
in hereditary hemochromatosis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 13198-13202,
1997.

53. Parkkila, S.; Waheed, A.; Britton, R. S.; Feder, J. N.; Tsuchihashi,
Z.; Schatzman, R. C.; Bacon, B. R.; Sly, W. S.: Immunohistochemistry
of HLA-H, the protein defective in patients with hereditary hemochromatosis,
reveals unique pattern of expression in gastrointestinal tract. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 2534-2539, 1997.

54. Peterlin, B.; Petrovic, M. G.; Makuc, J.; Hawlina, M.; Petrovic,
D.: A hemochromatosis-causing mutation C282Y is a risk factor for
proliferative diabetic retinopathy in Caucasians with type 2 diabetes. J.
Hum. Genet. 48: 646-649, 2003.

55. Poullis, A.; Moodie, S. J.; Maxwell, J. D.: Clinical haemochromatosis
in HFE mutation carriers. Lancet 360: 411-412, 2002.

56. Rhodes, D. A.; Raha-Chowdhury, R.; Cox, T. M.; Trowsdale, J.:
Homozygosity for the predominant Cys282Tyr mutation and absence of
disease expression in hereditary haemochromatosis. J. Med. Genet. 34:
761-764, 1997.

57. Rienhoff, H. Y., Jr.: Iron-overload-related disease in HFE hereditary
hemochromatosis. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 358: 2294 only, 2008.

58. Roberts, A. G.; Whatley, S. D.; Morgan, R. R.; Worwood, M.; Elder,
G. H.: Increased frequency of the haemochromatosis cys282tyr mutation
in sporadic porphyria cutanea tarda. Lancet 349: 321-323, 1997.

59. Robson, K. J. H.; Lehmann, D. J.; Wimhurst, V. L. C.; Livesey,
K. J.; Combrinck, M.; Merryweather-Clarke, A. T.; Warden, D. R.; Smith,
A. D.: Synergy between the C2 allele of transferrin and the C282Y
allele of the haemochromatosis gene (HFE) as risk factors for developing
Alzheimer's disease. J. Med. Genet. 41: 261-265, 2004.

60. Rohrlich, P. S.; Fazilleau, N.; Ginhoux, F.; Firat, H.; Michel,
F.; Cochet, M.; Laham, N.; Roth, M. P.; Pascolo, S.; Nato, F.; Coppin,
H.; Charneau, P.; Danos, O.; Acuto, O.; Ehrlich, R.; Kanellopoulos,
J.; Lemonnier, F. A.: Direct recognition by alpha-beta cytolytic
T cells of Hfe, a MHC class Ib molecule without antigen-presenting
function. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 12855-12860, 2005.

61. Roth, M.-P.; Giraldo, P.; Hariti, G.; Poloni, E. S.; Sanchez-Mazas,
A.; De Stefano, G. F.; Dugoujon, J.-M.; Coppin, H.: Absence of the
hemochromatosis gene Cys282Tyr mutation in three ethnic groups from
Algeria (Mzab), Ethiopia, and Senegal. Immunogenetics 46: 222-225,
1997.

62. Roy, C. N.; Custodio, A. O.; de Graaf, J.; Schneider, S.; Akpan,
I.; Montross, L. K.; Sanchez, M.; Gaudino, A.; Hentze, M. W.; Andrews,
N. C.; Muckenthaler, M. U.: An Hfe-dependent pathway mediates hyposideremia
in response to lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation in mice. Nature
Genet. 36: 481-485, 2004.

63. Roy, C. N.; Penny, D. M.; Feder, J. N.; Enns, C. A.: The hereditary
hemochromatosis protein, HFE, specifically regulates transferrin-mediated
iron uptake in HeLa cells. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 9022-9028, 1999.

64. Ryan, E.; O'Keane, C.; Crowe, J.: Hemochromatosis in Ireland
and HFE. Blood Cells Molecules Dis. 24: 428-432, 1998.

65. Saric, M.; Zamurovic, L.; Keckarevic-Markovic, M.; Keckarevic,
D.; Stevanovic, M.; Savic-Pavicevic, D.; Jovic, J.; Romac, S.: Frequency
of the hemochromatosis gene mutations in the population of Serbia
and Montenegro. (Letter) Clin. Genet. 70: 170-172, 2006.

66. Thenie, A. C.; Gicquel, I. M.; Hardy, S.; Ferran, H.; Fergelot,
P.; Le Gall, J.-Y.; Mosser, J.: Identification of an endogenous RNA
transcribed from the antisense strand of the HFE gene. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 10: 1859-1866, 2001.

67. The UK Haemochromatosis Consortium: A simple genetic test identifies
90% of UK patients with haemochromatosis. Gut 41: 841-844, 1997.

68. Tomatsu, S.; Orii, K. O.; Fleming, R. E.; Holden, C. C.; Waheed,
A.; Britton, R. S.; Gutierrez, M. A.; Velez-Castrillon, S.; Bacon,
B. R.; Sly, W. S.: Contribution of the H63D mutation in HFE to murine
hereditary hemochromatosis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 15788-15793,
2003.

69. Totaro, A.; Rommens, J. M.; Grifa, A.; Lunardi, C.; Carella, M.;
Huizenga, J. J.; Roetto, A.; Camaschella, C.; De Sandre, G.; Gasparini,
P.: Hereditary hemochromatosis: generation of a transcription map
within a refined and extended map of the HLA class I region. Genomics 31:
319-326, 1996.

70. Waalen, J.; Beutler, E.: Iron-overload-related disease in HFE
hereditary hemochromatosis. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 358: 2293-2294,
2008.

71. Waheed, A.; Parkkila, S.; Zhou, X. Y.; Tomatsu, S.; Tsuchihashi,
Z.; Feder, J. N.; Schatzman, R. C.; Britton, R. S.; Bacon, B. R.;
Sly, W. S.: Hereditary hemochromatosis: effects of C282Y and H63D
mutations on association with beta-2-microglobulin, intracellular
processing, and cell surface expression of the HFE protein in COS-7
cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 12384-12389, 1997.

72. Walsh, C. H.; Malins, J. M.: Proliferative retinopathy in a patient
with diabetes mellitus and idiopathic haemochromatosis. Brit. Med.
J. 2: 16-17, 1978.

73. Yaouang, J.; Perichon, M.; Chorney, M.; Pontarotti, P.; Le Treut,
A.; El Kahloun, A.; Mauvieux, V.; Blayau, M.; Jouanolle, A. M.; Chauvel,
B.; Moirand, R.; Nouel, O.; Le Gall, J. Y.; Feingold, J.; David, V.
: Anonymous marker loci within 400 kb of HLA-A generate haplotypes
in linkage disequilibrium with the hemochromatosis gene (HFE). Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 54: 252-263, 1994.

74. Zhou, X. Y.; Tomatsu, S.; Fleming, R. E.; Parkkila, S.; Waheed,
A.; Jiang, J.; Fei, Y.; Brunt, E. M.; Ruddy, D. A.; Prass, C. E.;
Schatzman, R. C.; O'Neill, R.; Britton, R. S.; Bacon, B. R.; Sly,
W. S.: HFE gene knockout produces mouse model of hereditary hemochromatosis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 2492-2497, 1998.

75. Zoller, H.; Pietrangelo, A.; Vogel, W.; Weiss, G.: Duodenal metal-transporter
(DMT-1, NRAMP-2) expression in patients with hereditary haemochromatosis. Lancet 353:
2120-2123, 1999.

76. Zoller, H.; Theurl, I.; Koch, R. O.; McKie, A. T.; Vogel, W.;
Weiss, G.: Duodenal cytochrome b and hephaestin expression in patients
with iron deficiency and hemochromatosis. Gastroenterology 125:
746-754, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/1/2011

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 10/19/2010

EDITED carol: 10/15/2013
carol: 4/12/2013
alopez: 9/1/2011
terry: 7/19/2011
mgross: 7/7/2011
terry: 7/1/2011
terry: 1/13/2011
carol: 10/21/2010

601155	TITLE *601155 MINOR HISTOCOMPATIBILITY ANTIGEN HA-1; HMHA1
;;HISTOCOMPATIBILITY (MINOR) HA-1;;
HLA-HA1;;
KIAA0223
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Cytotoxic T lymphocytes directed against minor histocompatibility
antigens of the host were demonstrated in blood from recipients of bone
marrow from donors who were genotypically HLA identical. Clones of such
cytotoxic T cells were isolated from lymphocyte populations in the blood
of patients with severe graft-versus-host disease (GVHD; see 614395).
These clones were used as reagents to identify 5 nonsex-linked minor
histocompatibility antigens, designated HA-1, -2 (600642) , -3, -4, and
-5 by van Els et al. (1992). Most of the cytotoxic-T-cell clones
isolated from various patients reacted against HA-1 (van Els et al.,
1992). Goulmy et al. (1996) stated that for immune recognition, the
HA-1, -2, -4, and -5 antigens must be presented to cytotoxic T cells by
the major histocompatibility antigen HLA-A2. In this way, they behave
like antigens recognized in an HLA-restricted fashion. The HA-1 antigen
is present in 69% of normal people who express HLA-A2, whereas the
frequencies of the 3 others in this set of HLA-A2-restricted minor
histocompatibility antigens are either high (95% for HA-2); or low (16%
of HA-4 and 7% for HA-5). The HLA-1-restricted minor histocompatibility
antigen HA-3 occurs in 88% of persons positive for HLA-A1. HA-1, -2, -4,
and -5 are inherited independently of the HLA genes; each of them is
encoded by a single gene, and none has a locus within the HLA region
(Schreuder et al., 1993).

GENE FUNCTION

To investigate whether mismatching of minor histocompatibility antigens
contributes to acute GVHD in recipients of genotypically HLA-identical
bone marrow, Goulmy et al. (1996) studied 148 bone marrow recipients and
their sib donors. Fifty pairs were positive for HLA-A1, 117 were
positive for HLA-A2, and 19 were positive for both. The pairs were typed
with cytotoxic-T-cell clones specific for HA-1, -2, -3, -4, and -5. A
mismatch of only HA-1 was significantly correlated with GVHD of grade II
or higher in adults.

Den Haan et al. (1998) identified HA-1 as a nonapeptide derived from a
partial cDNA sequence, designated KIAA0223, derived from the acute
myelogenous leukemia KG-1. HA-1 has the amino acid sequence VLHDDLLEA,
termed HA-1(H). A single amino acid substitution of arginine for
histidine leads to HA-1-negative status, termed HA-1(R). Den Haan et al.
(1998) found that HA-1(H) is presented by its recognizing antigen,
HLA-A*0201, while HA-1(R) is not. The binding affinity of the HA-1(R)
peptide for HLA-A*0201 is 1/12 that of HA-1(H). The authors concluded
that HA-1(R) is a null allele and that only bone marrow transplantation
from an HA-1(R/R) donor to an HA-1(H/H) or HA-1(H/R) recipient, and not
the reverse, would be significantly associated with GVHD. Den Haan et
al. (1998) suggested that HA-1 typing before bone marrow transplantation
of HLA-matched donor-recipient combinations would improve bone marrow
donor selection and prediction of HA-1-induced GVHD.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kaminski et al. (2000) determined that the HA-1 gene contains 23 exons
and spans 16 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1996) mapped the KIAA0223
gene to chromosome 19. Kaminski et al. (2000) mapped the HA-1 gene to
chromosome 19p13.3 based on sequence identity shared with a BAC clone
mapped to 19p13.3.

REFERENCE 1. den Haan, J. M. M.; Meadows, L. M.; Wang, W.; Pool, J.; Blokland,
E.; Bishop, T. L.; Reinhardus, C.; Shabanowitz, J.; Offringa, R.;
Hunt, D. F.; Engelhard, V. H.; Goulmy, E.: The minor histocompatibility
antigen HA-1: a diallelic gene with a single amino acid polymorphism. Science 279:
1054-1057, 1998.

2. Goulmy, E.; Schipper, R.; Pool, J.; Blokland, E.; Falkenburg, J.
H. F.; Vossen, J.; Gratwohl, A.; Vogelsang, G. B.; van Houwelingen,
H. C.; van Rood, J. J.: Mismatches of minor histocompatibility antigens
between HLA-identical donors and recipients and the development of
graft-versus-host disease after bone marrow transplantation. New
Eng. J. Med. 334: 281-285, 1996.

3. Kaminski, W. E.; Piehler, A.; Schmitz, G.: Genomic organization
of the human cholesterol-responsive ABC transporter ABCA7: tandem
linkage with the minor histocompatibility antigen HA-1 gene. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 278: 782-789, 2000.

4. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Ohira, M.; Kawarabayasi, Y.;
Ohara, O.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Miyajima, N.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VI. The coding
sequences of 80 new genes (KIAA0201-KIAA0280) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from cell line KG-1 and brain. DNA Res. 3: 321-329,
1996.

5. Schreuder, G. M. T.; Pool, J.; Blokland, E.; van Els, C.; Bakker,
A.; van Rood, J. J.; Goulmy, E.: A genetic analysis of human minor
histocompatibility antigens demonstrates Mendelian segregation independent
of HLA. Immunogenetics 38: 98-105, 1993.

6. van Els, C. A.; D'Amaro, J.; Pool, J.; Blokland, E.; Bakker, A.;
van Elsen, P. J.; van Rood, J. J.; Goulmy, E.: Immunogenetics of
human minor histocompatibility antigens: their polymorphism and immunodominance. Immunogenetics 35:
161-165, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/3/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/12/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/25/1996

EDITED mgross: 12/16/2011
carol: 3/20/2009
carol: 7/3/2002
carol: 10/26/1999
carol: 8/26/1999
alopez: 2/12/1998
terry: 5/24/1996
terry: 4/5/1996
mark: 3/25/1996

612768	TITLE *612768 FOLLICULIN-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2; FNIP2
;;FNIP1-LIKE PROTEIN; FNIPL;;
METHYLGUANINE-INDUCED APOPTOSIS 1; MAPO1;;
KIAA1450
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned FNIP2, which they designated
KIAA1450. The deduced protein contains 1,139 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA
detected low expression in adult and fetal liver, adult and fetal whole
brain, and most individual adult brain regions examined. Very low
expression was detected in all other adult tissues examined.

By searching databases for sequences similar to FNIP1 (610594), Hasumi
et al. (2008) identified FNIP2. The deduced 1,114-amino acid protein
shares 49% identity with FNIP1. Quantitative real-time PCR detected
variable FNIP2 expression in most tissues examined, with highest
expression in fat, liver, pancreas, and salivary gland. Epitope-tagged
FNIP2 localized in the cytoplasm in a reticular pattern.

Using Northern blot analysis, Takagi et al. (2008) detected FNIPL
transcripts of 7.5 and 6.5 kb. Expression was highest in heart, followed
by placenta and liver. Moderate expression was detected in lung, small
intestine, kidney, and brain.

Komori et al. (2009) cloned mouse Fnip2, which they called Mapo1. The
deduced mouse protein contains 1,138 amino acids. MAPO1 orthologs were
identified in multicellular organisms from humans to nematode, but not
in microorganisms, including budding and fission yeasts.
Fluorescence-tagged mouse and human MAPO1 proteins were expressed in the
cytoplasm of transfected mouse fibroblasts and HeLa cells, respectively.

GENE FUNCTION

By coimmunoprecipitating endogenous or epitope-tagged proteins from
HEK293 cells, Hasumi et al. (2008) showed that FNIP2 resided in a
complex with FNIP1, folliculin (FLCN; 607273), and AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK; see 602739). They also showed that FNIP1 and FNIP2 were
able to form homo- and heterodimers.

Takagi et al. (2008) showed that FNIP2 bound directly to FLCN and
appeared to bind more tightly to phosphorylated FLCN. Truncation
analysis revealed that FNIP2 and FLCN interacted via their C-terminal
regions. When expressed alone, FLCN localized to the nucleus, but when
coexpressed with FNIP1 or FNIP2, the coexpressed proteins localized to
the cytoplasm in a reticular pattern. Cytoplasmic retention of FLCN was
countered by C-terminal truncation of FNIP2. Downregulation of FLCN,
FNIP1, or FNIP2 via small interfering RNA resulted in decreased S6K1
(RPS6KB1; 608938) phosphorylation, suggesting that the FLCN complex
regulates S6K1 phosphorylation.

Using gene trap mutagenesis, Komori et al. (2009) showed that mutation
of the Mapo1 gene increased the tolerance of mouse fibroblasts to a
simple alkylating agent that produces O(6)-methylguanine. Mapo1 mutation
did not impair DNA mismatch damage detection and signaling, but caused a
defect in O(6)-methylguanine-induced apoptosis.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the FNIP2 gene
to chromosome 4. Takagi et al. (2008) stated that the FNIP2 gene maps to
chromosome 4q.

Komori et al. (2009) mapped the mouse Fnip2 gene to chromosome 3E3.

REFERENCE 1. Hasumi, H.; Baba, M.; Hong, S.-B.; Hasumi, Y.; Huang, Y.; Yao,
M.; Valera, V. A.; Linehan, W. M.; Schmidt, L. S.: Identification
and characterization of a novel folliculin-interacting protein FNIP2. Gene 415:
60-67, 2008.

2. Komori, K.; Takagi, Y.; Sanada, M.; Lim, T.-H.; Nakatsu, Y.; Tsuzuki,
T.; Sekiguchi, M.; Hidaka, M.: A novel protein, MAPO1, that functions
in apoptosis triggered by O(6)-methylguanine mispair in DNA. Oncogene 28:
1142-1150, 2009.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 143-150, 2000.

4. Takagi, Y.; Kobayashi, T.; Shiono, M.; Wang, L.; Piao, X.; Sun,
G.; Zhang, D.; Abe, M.; Hagiwara, Y.; Takahashi, K.; Hino, O.: Interaction
of folliculin (Birt-Hogg-Dube gene product) with a novel Fnip1-like
(FnipL/Fnip2) protein. Oncogene 27: 5339-5347, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/1/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/28/2009

EDITED mgross: 03/02/2010
terry: 3/1/2010
mgross: 4/28/2009

603053	TITLE *603053 HISTONE ACETYLTRANSFERASE 1; HAT1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The reversible acetylation of specific lysine residues within the
N-terminal tails of the core histones is correlated with gene activity.
Histone acetylation, particularly of histone H4, has also been proposed
to play an important role in replication-dependent nucleosome assembly
(summary by Dutnall et al., 1998). The S. cerevisiae Hat1 gene was the
first histone acetyltransferase gene to be identified, and its gene
product was found to be tightly associated with an accessory protein.

CLONING

By searching an expressed sequence tag database with the S. cerevisiae
Hat1 sequence, Verreault et al. (1998) isolated a cDNA (GenBank GENBANK
AF030424) encoding HAT1, the human ortholog of yeast Hat1. The sequences
of the human and yeast HAT1 proteins are 29% identical and 55% similar.
The deduced 419-amino acid human HAT1 contains D, A, and B motifs, which
are present in many N-acetyltransferases, including those that acetylate
substrates other than histones. HAT1 also contains a putative bipartite
nuclear localization signal; however, deletion of this signal had no
effect on the intranuclear localization of HAT1. The authors purified
the HAT1 holoenzyme from human 293 cells and found that it consists of 2
subunits: the catalytic 46-kD HAT1 and the accessory p46 (RBBP7;
300825). The p46 subunit stimulated the activity of HAT1 and bound to
core histones. The HAT1 holoenzyme acetylated newly synthesized but not
nucleosomal histone H4 at lys5 and lys12, and, to a lesser extent,
histone H2A at lys5. Verreault et al. (1998) showed that the HAT1 and
p46 polypeptides are located in the nucleus of S-phase cells.

MAPPING

In their GenBank submission, Verreault et al. (1998) indicated that the
HAT1 gene maps to 2q31.2-q33.1.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Dutnall et al. (1998) determined the crystal structure of the yeast
Hat1-acetyl CoA (AcCoA) complex at 2.3-angstrom resolution. Hat1 has an
elongated, curved structure, and the AcCoA molecule is bound in a cleft
on the concave surface of the protein, marking the active site of the
enzyme. A channel of variable width and depth that runs across the
protein is probably the binding site for the histone substrate. Dutnall
et al. (1998) discussed a model for histone H4 binding by Hat1 in terms
of possible sources of specific lysine recognition by the enzyme.

REFERENCE 1. Dutnall, R. N.; Tafrov, S. T.; Sternglanz, R.; Ramakrishnan, V.
: Structure of the histone acetyltransferase Hat1: a paradigm for
the GCN5-related N-acetyltransferase superfamily. Cell 94: 427-438,
1998.

2. Verreault, A.; Kaufman, P. D.; Kobayashi, R.; Stillman, B.: Nucleosomal
DNA regulates the core-histone-binding subunit of the human Hat1 acetyltransferase. Curr.
Biol. 8: 96-108, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/25/1998

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 9/23/1998

EDITED alopez: 12/02/2010
mgross: 11/3/2010
terry: 11/13/1998
carol: 11/9/1998
psherman: 10/13/1998
carol: 9/25/1998

603366	TITLE *603366 TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR RECEPTOR SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 25; TNFRSF25
;;TNFR25;;
APO3;;
DEATH RECEPTOR 3; DR3;;
LYMPHOCYTE-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR OF DEATH; LARD;;
TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR RECEPTOR SUPERFAMILY, MEMBER 12, FORMERLY; TNFRSF12,
FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Members of the mammalian tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) family
are cell-surface proteins that interact with a corresponding TNF-related
ligand family. The receptors share homology in the extracellular domain,
which contains 3 to 6 cysteine-rich pseudorepeats, but are generally not
related in their cytoplasmic regions. However, the intracellular domains
(ICDs) of TNFR family members TNFR1 (191190) and FAS/APO1/CD95 (134637),
which can activate apoptotic cell death, do have a region of homology in
an oligomerization interface known as the death domain. By screening
human fetal heart and lung libraries with oligonucleotides based on ESTs
that showed homology to the ICDs of TNFR1 and CD95, Marsters et al.
(1996) isolated cDNAs encoding a protein that they designated Apo3. The
predicted 417-amino acid Apo3 contains a signal sequence, an
extracellular domain with 4 cysteine-rich pseudorepeats, a transmembrane
domain, and an ICD. Like TNFR1 and CD95, the ICD of Apo3 contains a
death domain. Overall, Apo3 shares 29% and 23% protein sequence identity
with TNFR1 and CD95, respectively. The apparent molecular mass of Apo3
is 47 kD by SDS-PAGE. Northern blot analysis revealed that Apo3 was
expressed as an approximately 4-kb mRNA predominantly in spleen, thymus,
and peripheral blood lymphocytes. Lower levels of expression were
observed in small intestine, colon, fetal lung, and fetal kidney.
Additional larger transcripts were observed in some tissues.

Chinnaiyan et al. (1996), Kitson et al. (1996), and Screaton et al.
(1997) independently isolated APO3 cDNAs, designating the gene DR3
(death receptor-3), WSL1, and LARD (lymphocyte-associated receptor of
death), respectively. By Northern blot analysis, Chinnaiyan et al.
(1996) found that DR3 expression was restricted to tissues enriched in
lymphocytes, suggesting that DR3 plays a role in regulating lymphocyte
homeostasis.

Screaton et al. (1997) showed that alternative mRNA splicing yields
transcripts encoding at least 11 distinct LARD isoforms, most of which
are potentially secreted molecules. Naive B and T cells express very low
levels of the full-length, membrane-bound isoform, LARD1. Upon T-cell
activation, a programmed change in alternative splicing occurs so that
LARD1 predominates. LARD expression is downregulated in transformed
lymphocyte cell lines, leading Screaton et al. (1997) to speculate that
loss of LARD may be a key event in the development of lymphoid
malignancies, allowing the cells to escape from homeostatic processes
that limit lymphocyte proliferation.

GENE FUNCTION

Marsters et al. (1996) showed that ectopic expression of Apo3 in
mammalian cells triggered apoptosis and activated the transcription
factor NF-kappa-B (see 164011). They suggested that, like TNFR1, Apo3
may regulate distinct signaling pathways in different cellular contexts.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Kitson et al. (1996) determined that WSL1
formed homodimers and interacted with the TNFR1-associated molecule
TRADD (603500) and with the TNFR1 death domain.

Marsters et al. (1998) found that TNFSF12 (602695), which they called
APO3L, binds to DR3. However, using flow cytometry and binding analyses,
Kaptein et al. (2000) could not detect binding of, TNFSF12, which they
called TWEAK, or any other known TNF ligand to WSL1 (TNFRSF25). They
observed that cells devoid of WSL1 or cells from knockout mice lacking
Wsl1 were TWEAK responsive.

Using techniques similar to those of Marsters et al. (1998), Wiley et
al. (2001) could not reproduce their results showing a TWEAK-APO3
interaction. Wiley et al. (2001) identified TWEAKR (605914), a small
protein with a cysteine-rich motif and a TRAF (see TRAF5;
602356)-binding site, as the TWEAK receptor.

Using affinity chromatography, pull-down assays, and mass spectrometric
analysis on adenocarcinoma cell lines, Gout et al. (2006) showed that
E-selectin (SELE; 131210) bound DR3 on the cancer cells. Western blot
analysis revealed that the SELE-binding protein was recognized by
anti-DR3 antibodies. Anti-DR3 or knockdown of DR3 by small interfering
RNA decreased adhesion of colon cancer cells to SELE and to
SELE-expressing endothelial cells. Moreover, DR3 inhibition and
knockdown impaired transendothelial migration of adenocarcinoma cells
and blocked p38 (MAPK14; 600289) and ERK (see MAPK1; 176948) activation
by SELE. DR3 was expressed as high molecular mass isoforms in primary
human colon carcinomas, but not in normal colon tissue. SELE activation
of DR3 failed to induce apoptosis in colon cancer cells, except when ERK
was inhibited. Gout et al. (2006) concluded that SELE activation of DR3
on colon cancer cells triggers activation of p38 and ERK and confers
migration and survival advantages. They proposed that activation of DR3
by SELE acts as a switch that regulates metastasis by allowing colon
cancer cells to escape apoptosis.

Using T cells from Tradd -/- mice, Pobezinskaya et al. (2011)
demonstrated that the proliferative response of both Cd4 (186940) and
Cd8 (see 186910) T cells to Tl1a (TNFSF15; 604052) was dependent on
Tradd. Stimulation of MAP kinase signaling and activation of NF-kappa-B
in response to Tl1a were also dramatically reduced in Tradd -/- T cells.
Tradd was required for recruitment of Rip1 (RIPK1; 603453) and Traf2
(601895) to the Dr3 signaling complex and for ubiquitination of Rip1.
Pobezinskaya et al. (2011) concluded that TRADD is essential in TL1A-DR3
signaling.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Using comparative modeling in which the structural elements of the
primary sequence of DR3 were aligned with TNFs of known crystal
structure and amino acid substitutions were made, Borysenko et al.
(2005) showed that the DR3 extracellular domain contains 4 homologous
cysteine-rich domains (CRDs). They found that a DR3 mutation associated
with rheumatoid arthritis (180300), asp158 to gly (D158G), occurs in a
region critical for the integrity of ligand-receptor complexes at the
end of CRD3. Borysenko et al. (2005) proposed that this position in CRDs
may be a hotspot for mutations in TNFRSF family proteins.

GENE STRUCTURE

Screaton et al. (1997) reported that the LARD gene contains 10 exons.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Marsters et al. (1996) mapped the
Apo3 gene to 1p36.3. Grenet et al. (1998) reported that the DR3 locus is
tandemly duplicated, with the DR3L locus several megabases away on
1p36.3-p36.2. They noted that deletions and/or translocations of the
1p36 region have been associated with a number of human malignancies and
developmental defects, including neuroblastoma (256700). Using
fluorescence in situ hybridization, Grenet et al. (1998) found that both
DR3 and DR3L sequences were simultaneously deleted and/or translocated
in most neuroblastoma cell lines analyzed.

ANIMAL MODEL

By disrupting exon 1 of the Dr3 gene and replacing the entire coding
region, Wang et al. (2001) generated mice deficient in Dr3. The Dr3 -/-
mice had no developmental defects or early thymocyte developmental
defects. However, negative selection and anti-CD3-mediated cell death of
thymocytes were impaired in the Dr3-deficient mice. Positive selection
and superantigen-induced negative selection were normal. Wang et al.
(2001) concluded that DR3 has a nonredundant in vivo role in the removal
of self-reactive T cells in the thymus.

Using Dr3-deficient mice, Meylan et al. (2008) identified Dr3 as the
receptor responsible for Tl1a-induced T-cell costimulation and dendritic
cells as the likely source for Tl1a during T-cell activation. Dr3 was
not required for in vivo T-cell priming, for polarization into Th1, Th2,
or Th17 effector cell subtypes, or for effective control of Toxoplasma
gondii infection. However, it was required on T cells for
immunopathology, local T accumulation, and cytokine production in the
inflammatory disease models experimental autoimmune encepalomyelitis and
allergic lung inflammation. Meylan et al. (2008) proposed that DR3 may
be an attractive therapeutic target for T cell-mediated autoimmune and
allergic diseases.

Fang et al. (2008) found that antibody blockade of the Tnfr25 ligand
Tnf15 or expression of a Tnfr25 dominant-negative transgene inhibited
lung inflammation and the production of Th2 cytokines, such as Il13
(147683), in mice. The antibody was effective even when administered
days after airway antigen exposure. Mice deficient in natural killer T
(NKT) cells and resistant to allergic lung inflammation became
susceptible upon adoptive transfer of wildtype NKT cells, but not upon
transfer of dominant-negative Tnfr25 transgenic NKT cells. Fang et al.
(2008) concluded that the TNFR25/TNF15 pair provides an early signal for
Th2 cytokine production in lung and may be a drug target for attempts to
attenuate lung inflammation in asthmatics.

REFERENCE 1. Borysenko, C. W.; Furey, W. F.; Blair, H. C.: Comparative modeling
of TNFRSF25 (DR3) predicts receptor destabilization by a mutation
linked to rheumatoid arthritis. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 328:
794-799, 2005.

2. Chinnaiyan, A. M.; O'Rourke, K.; Yu, G.-L.; Lyons, R. H.; Garg,
M.; Duan, D. R.; Xing, L.; Gentz, R.; Ni, J.; Dixit, V. M.: Signal
transduction by DR3, a death domain-containing receptor related to
TNFR-1 and CD95. Science 274: 990-992, 1996.

3. Fang, L.; Adkins, B.; Deyev, V.; Podack, E. R.: Essential role
of TNF receptor superfamily 25 (TNFRSF25) in the development of allergic
lung inflammation. J. Exp. Med. 205: 1037-1048, 2008.

4. Gout, S.; Morin, C.; Houle, F.; Huot, J.: Death receptor-3, a
new E-selectin counter-receptor that confers migration and survival
advantages to colon carcinoma cells by triggering p38 and ERK MAPK
activation. Cancer Res. 66: 9117-9124, 2006.

5. Grenet, J.; Valentine, V.; Kitson, J.; Li, H.; Farrow, S. N.; Kidd,
V. J.: Duplication of the DR3 gene on human chromosome 1p36 and its
deletion in human neuroblastoma. Genomics 49: 385-393, 1998.

6. Kaptein, A.; Jansen, M.; Dilaver, G.; Kitson, J.; Dash, L.; Wang,
E.; Owen, M. J.; Bodmer, J.-L.; Tschopp, J.; Farrow, S. N.: Studies
on the interaction between TWEAK and the death receptor WSL-1/TRAMP
(DR3). FEBS Lett. 485: 135-141, 2000.

7. Kitson, J.; Raven, T.; Jiang, Y.-P.; Goeddel, D. V.; Giles, K.
M.; Pun, K.-T.; Grinham, C. J.; Brown, R.; Farrow, S. N.: A death-domain-containing
receptor that mediates apoptosis. Nature 384: 372-375, 1996.

8. Marsters, S. A.; Sheridan, J. P.; Donahue, C. J.; Pitti, R. M.;
Gray, C. L.; Goddard, A. D.; Bauer, K. D.; Ashkenazi, A.: Apo-3,
a new member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor family, contains
a death domain and activates apoptosis and NF-kappa-B. Curr. Biol. 6:
1669-1676, 1996.

9. Marsters, S. A.; Sheridan, J. P.; Pitti, R. M.; Brush, J.; Goddard,
A.; Ashkenazi, A.: Identification of a ligand for the death-domain-containing
receptor Apo3. Curr. Biol. 8: 525-528, 1998.

10. Meylan, F.; Davidson, T. S.; Kahle, E.; Kinder, M.; Acharya, K.;
Jankovic, D.; Bundoc, V.; Hodges, M.; Shevach, E. M.; Keane-Myers,
A.; Wang, E. C. Y.; Siegel, R. M.: The TNF-family receptor DR3 is
essential for diverse T cell-mediated inflammatory diseases. Immunity 29:
79-89, 2008.

11. Pobezinskaya, Y. L.; Choksi, S.; Morgan, M. J.; Cao, X.; Liu,
Z.: The adaptor protein TRADD is essential for TNF-like ligand 1A/death
receptor 3 signaling. J. Immun. 186: 5212-5216, 2011.

12. Screaton, G. R.; Xu, X.-N.; Olsen, A. L.; Cowper, A. E.; Tan,
R.; McMichael, A. J.; Bell, J. I.: LARD: a new lymphoid-specific
death domain containing receptor regulated by alternative pre-mRNA
splicing. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 4615-4619, 1997.

13. Wang, E. C. Y.; Thern, A.; Denzel, A.; Kitson, J.; Farrow, S.
N.; Owen, M. J.: DR3 regulates negative selection during thymocyte
development. Molec. Cell. Biol. 21: 3451-3461, 2001.

14. Wiley, S. R.; Cassiano, L.; Lofton, T.; Davis-Smith, T.; Winkles,
J. A.; Lindner, V.; Liu, H.; Daniel, T. O.; Smith, C. A.; Fanslow,
W. C.: A novel TNF receptor family member binds TWEAK and is implicated
in angiogenesis. Immunity 15: 837-846, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/17/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/22/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/20/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/4/2010
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/15/2001

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 12/17/1998

EDITED mgross: 09/18/2012
mgross: 9/18/2012
terry: 9/17/2012
mgross: 4/3/2012
terry: 3/22/2012
mgross: 1/26/2010
terry: 1/20/2010
mgross: 1/7/2010
terry: 1/4/2010
mgross: 1/2/2003
carol: 12/23/2002
mgross: 5/15/2001
alopez: 2/8/1999
alopez: 12/18/1998

614312	TITLE *614312 ZINC FINGER MYND-CONTAINING PROTEIN 15; ZMYND15
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ZMYND15 is predicted to be a histone deacetylase-dependent
transcriptional repressor that controls normal temporal expression of
haploid cell genes during spermiogenesis (Yan et al., 2010).

CLONING

Yan et al. (2010) cloned mouse Zmynd15, and they identified human
ZMYND15 by database analysis. The deduced 703-amino acid mouse protein
contains a zinc finger MYND motif and a nuclear localization signal.
Human, mouse, and rat ZMYND15 share more than 85% amino acid homology.
RT-PCR analysis revealed Zmynd15 expression in mouse testis, but not in
any other tissue examined, including ovary and uterus. Expression in
developing mouse testis began at postnatal day 17 and increased at
postnatal day 21 and thereafter. EST database analysis indicated that
human ZMYND15 is also exclusively expressed in testis. In situ and
immunohistochemical analysis of adult mouse testis revealed expression
in developing sperm cells, with lower expression in both pachytene
spermatocytes and mature sperm.

GENE FUNCTION

Yan et al. (2010) found that expression of mouse Zmynd15 in 10t1/2 cells
inhibited transcription of a reporter gene in a dose-dependent manner.
Coimmunoprecipitation analysis revealed that Zmynd15 interacted with the
class I histone deacetylases (HDACs) Hdac1 (601241) and Hdac3 (605166)
and the class II HDACs Hdac6 (300272) and Hdac7 (HDAC7A; 606542).

MAPPING

Hartz (2011) mapped the ZMYND15 gene to chromosome 17p13.2 based on an
alignment of the ZMYND15 gene (GenBank GENBANK AL136893) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Yan et al. (2010) mapped the mouse Zmynd15 and Cxcl16 (605398) genes to
chromosome 11. The genes are in opposite orientations with overlapping
5-prime UTRs.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yan et al. (2010) found that Zmynd15 -/- male mice were infertile,
whereas both Zmynd15 +/- males and Zmynd15 -/- females showed normal
fertility. Zmynd15 -/- testis were reduced in weight compared with
wildtype testis, with severe spermatid depletion. Late spermatids of
Zmynd15 -/- testis detached from the seminiferous epithelium and were
sloughed into the lumen of the seminiferous tubules. Semiquantitative
PCR and microarray analyses revealed misregulation of several genes
required for normal spermatogenesis in Zmynd15 -/- testis.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/11/2011.

2. Yan, W.; Si, Y.; Slaymaker, S.; Li, J.; Zheng, H.; Young, D. L.;
Aslanian, A.; Saunders, L.; Verdin, E.; Charo, I. F.: Zmynd15 encodes
a histone deacetylase-dependent transcriptional repressor essential
for spermiogenesis and male fertility. J. Biol. Chem. 285: 31418-31426,
2010.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/25/2011

EDITED terry: 10/27/2011
mgross: 10/25/2011

607873	TITLE *607873 SCAVENGER RECEPTOR CLASS F, MEMBER 1; SCARF1
;;SCAVENGER RECEPTOR EXPRESSED BY ENDOTHELIAL CELLS; SREC;;
SREC1;;
SREC I;;
KIAA0149
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Scavenger receptors mediate the endocytosis of chemically modified
lipoproteins. SCARF1 specifically mediates the selective uptake of
acetylated low density lipoprotein (Ac-LDL) into endothelial cells.

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a myeloid leukemia cell cDNA library,
Nagase et al. (1995) cloned SCARF1, which they designated KIAA0149. The
deduced 830-amino acid protein contains a putative transmembrane domain
and an EGF-like pattern of cysteine repeats. SCARF1 shares about 33%
identity over 147 amino acids with mouse Tie2 (600221), an epithelial
receptor tyrosine kinase. The 3-prime untranslated region contains an
Alu repeat. Northern blot analysis detected expression in most tissues
examined, with highest levels in lung and spleen. No expression was
detected in HeLa cells, pancreas, or colon.

Adachi et al. (1997) cloned SCARF1, which they designated SREC, using an
expression cloning strategy in which they assayed for uptake of
fluorescence-labeled Ac-LDL into CHO cells transfected with a human
umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC) cDNA library. The deduced
830-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 86 kD.
SCARF1 contains a hydrophobic signal sequence followed by 5 EGF-like
cysteine pattern signatures in its extracellular N-terminal half, a
transmembrane region, and an intracellular C-terminal half containing a
serine/proline-rich region followed by a glycine-rich region. It has 3
potential N-glycosylation sites and several putative sites for serine
and threonine phosphorylation. Northern blot analysis revealed a 3.5-kb
transcript expressed in HUVECs and in coronary artery endothelial cells,
but not in coronary artery smooth muscle cells.

Adachi and Tsujimoto (2002) identified several SCARF1 variants in a
peripheral blood leukocyte cDNA library. Alternative splicing introduces
a stop codon before the transmembrane region in 2 of the variants,
resulting in soluble forms of SCARF1.

GENE FUNCTION

Adachi et al. (1997) determined that CHO cells stably expressing SCARF1
bound radiolabeled Ac-LDL with high affinity and degraded it via an
endocytic pathway. The association between SCARF1 and Ac-LDL was
inhibited by oxidized LDL, malondialdehyde-modified LDL, dextran
sulfate, and polyinosinic acid, but not by natural LDL or heparin.

Adachi and Tsujimoto (2002) determined that all membrane-bound splice
variants of SCARF1 showed receptor activity toward Ac-LDL. They
identified a transcriptional activator of SCARF1, ZNF444 (607874).
Overexpression of ZNF444 in HUVECs increased SCARF1 promoter activity
nearly 2.5-fold. An intact SP1 (189906) motif and an intact inverted
repeat sequence with a triple-nucleotide spacer (IR3), which binds
ZNF444, were required for maximal SCARF1 expression. Several
inflammatory cytokines inhibited SCARF1 promoter activity in vitro and
decreased Ac-LDL uptake in vivo.

Means et al. (2009) showed that the scavenger receptors Scarf1 and Cd36
(173510) mediated mouse defense against 2 fungal pathogens, Cryptococcus
neoformans and Candida albicans, by enabling production of antimicrobial
peptides. Studies in C. elegans indicated that the homologous proteins
protected nematodes. Macrophage binding and cytokine production required
Cd36, but not Tlr2 (603028), and binding was dependent on recognition of
pathogen beta-glucans. Mice lacking Cd36, but expressing other
beta-glucan receptors (e.g., CLEC7A; 606264), had a higher fungal burden
and greater mortality after intravenous infection with C. neoformans
compared with wildtype mice. Means et al. (2009) concluded that SCARF1
and CD36 are beta-glucan-binding receptors and are involved in an
evolutionarily conserved pathway for the innate sensing of fungal
pathogens.

GENE STRUCTURE

Adachi and Tsujimoto (2002) determined that the SCARF1 gene contains 11
exons and spans 12 kb. The 5-prime flanking region lacks TATA and CCAAT
boxes, but it contains several putative motifs for DNA-binding elements,
including an SP1 motif and an IR3 sequence that binds ZNF444.

MAPPING

By PCR of a human/rodent hybrid panel, Nagase et al. (1995) mapped the
SCARF1 gene to chromosome 17.

REFERENCE 1. Adachi, H.; Tsujimoto, M.: Characterization of the human gene
encoding the scavenger receptor expressed by endothelial cell and
its regulation by a novel transcription factor, endothelial zinc finger
protein-2. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 24014-24021, 2002.

2. Adachi, H.; Tsujimoto, M.; Arai, H.; Inoue, K.: Expression cloning
of a novel scavenger receptor from human endothelial cells. J. Biol.
Chem. 272: 31217-31220, 1997.

3. Means, T. K.; Mylonakis, E.; Tampakakis, E.; Colvin, R. A.; Seung,
E.; Puckett, L.; Tai, M. F.; Stewart, C. R.; Pukkila-Worley, R.; Hickman,
S. E.; Moore, K. J.; Calderwood, S. B.; Hacohen, N.; Luster, A. D.;
El Khoury, J.: Evolutionarily conserved recognition and innate immunity
to fungal pathogens by the scavenger receptors SCARF1 and CD36. J.
Exp. Med. 206: 637-653, 2009.

4. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Tanaka, A.; Ishikawa, K.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. IV. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0121-KIAA0160) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 2: 167-174, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/30/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/11/2003

EDITED mgross: 12/02/2010
terry: 11/30/2010
mgross: 10/29/2010
mgross: 6/11/2003

612189	TITLE *612189 PHENAZINE BIOSYNTHESIS-LIKE PROTEIN DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN; PBLD
;;MAWD-BINDING PROTEIN; MAWBP;;
MAWDBP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a human liver cDNA library using the WD40
repeat region of MAWD (STRAP; 605986) as bait, Iriyama et al. (2001)
obtained a full-length cDNA encoding PBLD, which they called MAWBP. The
deduced protein contains 255 amino acids and is highly conserved from
single-cell to higher eukaryotes. It shares 37% amino acid identity with
the Arabidopsis enzyme Phzf, which catalyzes hydroxylation of
phenazine-1-carboxylic acid to 2-hydroxy-phenazine-1-carboxylic acid.
RT-PCR detected variable expression of MAWBP in all human tissues
examined except skeletal muscle.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid analyses, Iriyama et al.
(2001) mapped the PBLD gene to chromosome 10q21.1.

REFERENCE 1. Iriyama, C.; Matsuda, S.; Katsumata, R.; Hamaguchi, M.: Cloning
and sequencing of a novel human gene which encodes a putative hydroxylase. J.
Hum. Genet. 46: 289-292, 2001.

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 7/22/2008

EDITED wwang: 06/25/2009
wwang: 7/22/2008
mgross: 7/22/2008

615302	TITLE *615302 ADENOSINE DEAMINASE, tRNA-SPECIFIC, 3; ADAT3
;;TAD3, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; TAD3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ADAT3 belongs to a family of enzymes that form inosine by hydrolytic
deamination of genomically encoded adenosine on tRNAs (Gerber and
Keller, 1999). Inosine occurs at the wobble position of tRNA anticodons
and can translate codons ending in uracil, cytosine, or adenine.

CLONING

Gerber and Keller (1999) cloned S. Cerevisiae Tad3. The deduced
322-amino acid protein contains a central nuclear localization signal
followed by a deaminase domain with 3 conserved residues (histidine and
2 cytosines) involved in zinc coordination, and a proline in the
deaminase motif II that is expected to bind the ammonium group of
adenosine.

GENE FUNCTION

Gerber and Keller (1999) found that both Tad3 and Tad2 (ADAT2; 615388)
were required for viability in yeast. Tad3 and Tad2 formed a
heterodimer, which was required for conversion of adenosine-34 to
inosine-34 in synthetic tRNA(ala). Tad2 appeared to be the catalytic
subunit of the deaminase.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the ADAT3 gene to chromosome 19p13.3 based on an
alignment of the ADAT3 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC011824) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 8 consanguineous Arab families with autosomal
recessive mental retardation-36 (MRT36; 615286), Alazami et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous mutation in the ADAT3 gene (V128M; 615302.0001).
Molecular modeling indicated that the mutation occurs in a hook that
protrudes from the surface of the protein and would disrupt this
protrusion. The mutation, which was found by homozygosity mapping and
exome sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing, segregated with the
disorder in all families and was not found in several large control
exome databases or in 580 ethnically matched alleles. Haplotype analysis
indicated a founder effect, which was estimated to have occurred between
65 and 111 generations ago.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 36
ADAT3, VAL128MET

In affected members of 8 consanguineous Arab families with autosomal
recessive mental retardation-36 (MRT36; 615286), Alazami et al. (2013)
identified a homozygous c.382G-A transition in the ADAT3 gene, resulting
in a val128-to-met (V128M) substitution at a highly conserved residue.
Molecular modeling indicated that the mutation occurs in a hook that
protrudes from the surface of the protein and would disrupt this
protrusion. The mutation, which was found by homozygosity mapping and
exome sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing, segregated with the
disorder in all families and was not found in several large control
exome databases or in 580 ethnically matched alleles. Haplotype analysis
indicated a founder effect, which was estimated to have occurred between
65 and 111 generations ago. Most of the patients also had esotropia and
failure to thrive; some had microcephaly and mild brain malformations on
MRI.

REFERENCE 1. Alazami, A. M.; Hijazi, H.; Al-Dosari, M. S.; Shaheen, R.; Hashem,
A.; Aldahmesh, M. A.; Mohamed, J. Y.; Kentab, A.; Salih, M. A.; Awaji,
A.; Masoodi, T. A.; Alkuraya, F. S.: Mutation in ADAT3, encoding
adenosine deaminase acting on transfer RNA, causes intellectual disability
and strabismus. J. Med. Genet. 50: 425-430, 2013.

2. Gerber, A. P.; Keller, W.: An adenosine deaminase that generates
inosine at the wobble position of tRNAs. Science 286: 1146-1149,
1999.

3. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/15/2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/22/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 7/15/2013

EDITED carol: 08/29/2013
carol: 8/28/2013
alopez: 8/1/2013
carol: 7/24/2013
ckniffin: 7/23/2013
ckniffin: 7/22/2013
alopez: 7/17/2013
tpirozzi: 7/17/2013

602348	TITLE *602348 SMALL NUCLEAR RNA-ACTIVATING PROTEIN COMPLEX, POLYPEPTIDE 3; SNAPC3
;;SMALL NUCLEAR RNA-ACTIVATING PROTEIN COMPLEX, 50-KD SUBUNIT; SNAP50;;
PSE-BINDING TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR, BETA;;
PTF-BETA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SNAPC3 encodes a subunit of the snRNA-activating protein complex
(SNAPc), which is required for transcription of both RNA polymerase II
and III snRNA genes (see SNAPC1, 600591).

CLONING

Henry et al. (1996) identified the gene for the 50-kD subunit of SNAPc
based on partial sequence from the purified protein. The predicted
411-amino acid protein, designated SNAP50, is highly charged (pI = 4.9),
and has 2 potential zinc finger domains. Henry et al. (1996) used
anti-SNAP50 antibodies in immunoprecipitation and in vitro transcription
studies to demonstrate that SNAP50 is part of SNAPc and is required for
RNA polymerase II and III snRNA gene transcription. UV crosslinking
studies suggest that SNAP50 is in close proximity to the DNA when SNAPc
is bound to the proximal sequence element (PSE) of the promoter.

REFERENCE 1. Henry, R. W.; Ma, B.; Sadowski, C. L.; Kobayashi, R.; Hernandez,
N.: Cloning and characterization of SNAP50, a subunit of the snRNA-activating
protein complex SNAP(c). EMBO J. 15: 7129-7136, 1996.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/13/1998

EDITED alopez: 03/28/2012
alopez: 3/28/2012
mgross: 6/26/2000
carol: 5/25/2000
carol: 7/9/1998
alopez: 2/13/1998

602525	TITLE *602525 PYRUVATE DEHYDROGENASE KINASE, ISOENZYME 2; PDK2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PDK2 belongs to the family of pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) kinases (EC
2.7.11.2), which reversibly inactivate the mitochondrial PDH complex by
ATP-dependent serine phosphorylation of the alpha subunit of the
complex's E1 component (see 300502) (summary by Korotchkina and Patel,
2001).

CLONING

By screening a human liver cDNA library with rat Pdk2, Gudi et al.
(1995) cloned PDK2. The deduced 407-amino acid protein, with a
calculated molecular mass of 46.2 kD, has a putative mitochondrial
protein kinase catalytic domain with 5 characteristic subdomains. The
human and rat proteins share 96% identity. Northern blot analysis
detected variable expression of a 2.4-kb PDK2 transcript in all 8 human
tissues examined, with highest expression in heart, followed by skeletal
muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Gudi et al. (1995) noted that the products of the PDH reaction stimulate
the kinase activity of PDKs, whereas the substrates are inhibitory. ADP
also acts synergistically with pyruvate to inhibit PDK kinase activity.
Using kinase-depleted PDH complexes isolated from rat heart as
substrate, Gudi et al. (1995) found that recombinant human PDK1
(602524), PDK2, and PDK3 (602526) inactivated PDH in an ATP-dependent
manner. PDK3 showed the highest kinase activity, and PDK2 the lowest.
However, the products of the PDH reaction, NADH and acetyl-CoA,
increased the ability of PDK2 to inhibit PDH.

Baker et al. (2000) found that the E2 subunit of PDH (DLAT; 608770), and
the isolated second N-terminal lipoyl (L2) domain of E2, differentially
enhanced the rates at which recombinant human PDK2 and PDK3
phosphorylated E1. There was little direct activation of PDK2 by the
free L2 domain, but the E2 60mer, which forms the core structure of the
PDH complex, enhanced PDK2 activity by 10-fold. PDK3 was activated
17-fold by E2; the majority of this activation was facilitated by the
free L2 domain. PDK2 and PDK3 also differed in their inhibition by
pyruvate, ADP, dichloroacetic acid, and acetylated lipoyl groups,
activation by NADH and acetyl-CoA, and combined effect of mixed
inhibitors and activators.

Each of the 2 E1 alpha subunits of PDH contains 3 serines that are
phosphorylated by PDKs. Using recombinant enzymes expressed in E. coli
and double site mutants of human E1, Korotchkina and Patel (2001) found
that rat Pdk1, Pdk2, and Pdk4 (602527), and human PDK3, showed unique
specificity and activity toward each of these serines. Only Pdk1 had
detectable activity with site 3, which the authors called ser203. Each
kinase also showed unique activity in the presence or absence of E2 in
complex with its binding partner E3BP (PDHX; 608769), and unique
sensitivity to the redox and/or acetylation state of the lipoyl moieties
of E2, and the buffer system employed.

Boulatnikov and Popov (2003) found that rat Pdk1 and Pdk2 could form
homodimers when expressed singly, or heterodimers when expressed
together, in E. coli. The heterodimeric kinase was catalytically active,
with kinetic parameters, site specificity, and regulation clearly
distinct from those of homodimeric Pdk1 or Pdk2. The Pdk1-Pdk2
heterodimers catalyzed phosphorylation of E1 site 3 serine, in addition
to sites 1 and 2 serines. Homodimers of Pdk1 or Pdk2 and the Pdk1-Pdk2
heterodimer also readily bound the isolated E2 component of PDH as well
as the E2-E3BP subcomplex. Interactions were strengthened by the
presence of the lipoate prosthetic groups in E2.

The nuclear peroxisome proliferator-activator receptors (PPARs; see
PPARA, 170990) are critical regulators of fatty acid oxidation. Using
quantitative real-time PCR, Degenhardt et al. (2007) found that
expression of PDK2, PDK3, and PDK4, but not PDK1, was induced by
PPAR-beta/delta (PPARD; 600409) agonists. In mice, induction of
PPAR-beta/delta increased renal expression of Pdk2 and Pdk4, but not
Pdk1 or Pdk3. In both human and mouse cells, PDK4 showed strongest
induction by PPAR-beta/delta ligands. Ligands for other PPAR subtypes
showed weaker regulation of PDK gene expression. In silico analysis,
chromatin immunoprecipitation, and Western blot analysis revealed that
PPAR-beta/delta bound regulatory elements in the PDK2, PDK3, and PDK4
genes, but not the PDK1 gene, and activated transcription in association
with its regulatory partners RXR-alpha (RXRA; 180245), PGC1-alpha
(PPARGC1A; 604517), and TRAP220 (MED1; 604311), and phosphorylated RNA
polymerase II (see POLR2A, 180660). Degenhardt et al. (2007) also found
that fibroblasts from Ppard-null mice showed reduced expression of Pdk2,
Pdk3, and Pdk4 compared with wildtype fibroblasts. Expression of Pdk4
was reduced 1200-fold. Degenhardt et al. (2007) concluded that PDK2,
PDK3, and PDK4 genes are primary PPAR targets and that PPAR-beta/delta
is a major regulator of PDK4 expression.

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the PDK2 gene to chromosome 17q21.33 based on an
alignment of the PDK2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK055119) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Baker, J. C.; Yan, X.; Peng, T.; Kasten, S.; Roche, T. E.: Marked
differences between two isoforms of human pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase. J.
Biol. Chem. 275: 15773-15781, 2000.

2. Boulatnikov, I.; Popov, K. M.: Formation of functional heterodimers
by isozymes 1 and 2 of pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1645: 183-192, 2003.

3. Degenhardt, T.; Saramaki, A.; Malinen, M.; Rieck, M.; Vaisanen,
S.; Huotari, A.; Herzig, K.-H.; Muller, R.; Carlberg, C.: Three members
of the human pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase gene family are direct
targets of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor beta/delta. J.
Molec. Biol. 372: 341-355, 2007.

4. Gudi, R.; Bowker-Kinley, M. M.; Kedishvili, N. Y.; Zhao, Y.; Popov,
K. M.: Diversity of the pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase gene family
in humans. J. Biol. Chem. 270: 28989-28994, 1995. Note: Erratum:
J. Biol. Chem. 271: 1250 only, 1996.

5. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/9/2013.

6. Korotchkina, L. G.; Patel, M. S.: Site specificity of four pyruvate
dehydrogenase kinase isoenzymes toward the three phosphorylation sites
of human pyruvate dehydrogenase. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 37223-37229,
2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 08/20/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/9/2013

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 4/16/1998

EDITED alopez: 08/20/2013
mgross: 8/9/2013
terry: 3/28/2013
alopez: 4/16/1998

179550	TITLE *179550 V-RAL SIMIAN LEUKEMIA VIRAL ONCOGENE HOMOLOG A; RALA
;;RAS-LIKE PROTEIN; RAL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Rousseau-Merck et al. (1988) stated that human cDNAs coding for RAL, a
protein that shares about 50% homology with RAS proteins (see HRAS;
190020), had been isolated.

Using a simian Rala cDNA probe and moderate hybridization stringency,
Chardin and Tavitian (1989) cloned RALA and RALB (179551) from a human
pheochromocytoma cDNA library. The deduced 206-amino acid RALA protein
shares about 85% identity with RALB.

GENE FUNCTION

Sablina et al. (2007) found that suppression of PP2A A-beta (PPP2R1B;
603113) expression allowed immortalized human cell lines to achieve a
tumorigenic state. Cancer-associated A-beta mutants failed to reverse
this tumorigenic phenotype, indicating that the mutants functioned as
null alleles. Cancer-derived A-beta mutants failed to form a complex
with the small GTPase RALA, whereas wildtype A-beta-containing complexes
dephosphorylated RALA at ser183 and ser194, inactivating RALA and
abolishing its transforming function. Sablina et al. (2007) concluded
that PP2A A-beta is a tumor suppressor that transforms immortalized
cells by regulating RALA function.

The exocyst is an evolutionarily conserved octameric complex involved in
post-Golgi targeting of secretory vesicles. Moskalenko et al. (2003)
noted that RAL GTPases regulate exocyst-dependent trafficking and are
required for exocyst assembly. Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis of HEK293T
cells, they showed that human EXO84 (EXOC8; 615283) interacted with RALA
and RALB (179551), but not with any other small GTPase examined. RALA
and RALB interacted with EXO84 and with SEC5 (EXOC2; 615329), but not
with any other exocyst component examined. In vitro binding assays
revealed that EXO84 interacted with GTP-bound RALA, and truncation
analysis revealed that the pleckstrin (PLEK; 173570) homology (PH)
domain of EXO84 was required for the interaction. Membrane
depolarization resulted in recruitment of the isolated RAL-binding
domain of EXO84 to membranes, and this recruitment required
lipid-binding prenylated RALB. RAL-GTP competed with
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate for EXO84 binding. In rat PC12
cells, Exo84 appeared to fractionate with a subcomplex of vesicles that
included Sec10 (EXOC5; 604469), but not Sec5. Moskalenko et al. (2003)
proposed that RAL GTPases regulate assembly of the full exocyst complex
through interaction with EXO84 and SEC5.

Equal distribution of mitochondria to daughter cells during mitosis
requires fission, which depends on recruitment of the large GTPase DRP1
(DNM1L; 603850) to the outer mitochondrial membrane and phosphorylation
of DRP1 by cyclin B (CCNB1; 123836)-CDK1 (116940). Using M-phase HeLa
cells, Kashatus et al. (2011) found that the mitotic kinase Aurora A
(AURKA; 603072) phosphorylated RALA at ser194, resulting in
redistribution of RALA to mitochondria, where it recruited RALBP1
(605801) and DRP1. Subsequently, RALBP1 induced cyclin B-CDK1-dependent
phosphorylation of DRP1. Knockdown of RALBP1, but not RALA, decreased
the amount of phosphorylated DRP1. Knockdown of either RALA or RALBP1
blocked mitochondrial fission, causing unequal partitioning of
mitochondria between daughter cells, reduced cellular content of ATP,
and decreased numbers of metabolically active cells. Kashatus et al.
(2011) concluded that the mitotic kinases Aurora A and cyclin B-CDK1
converge on RALA and RALBP1 to promote mitochondrial fission and
appropriate distribution of mitochondria to daughter cells.

MAPPING

Rousseau-Merck et al. (1987, 1988) used cDNAs to map the RALA gene to
chromosome 7p22-p15 by molecular hybridization to sorted chromosomes and
by in situ hybridization. Justice et al. (1990) showed that the murine
homolog of RALA is on chromosome 13.

REFERENCE 1. Chardin, P.; Tavitian, R.: Coding sequences of human ralA and
ralB cDNAs. Nucl. Acids Res. 17: 4380, 1989.

2. Justice, M. J.; Silan, C. M.; Ceci, J. D.; Buchberg, A. M.; Copeland,
N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.: A molecular genetic linkage map of mouse chromosome
13 anchored by the beige (bg) and satin (sa) loci. Genomics 6: 341-351,
1990.

3. Kashatus, D. F.; Lim, K.-H.; Brady, D. C.; Pershing, N. L. K.;
Cox, A. D.; Counter, C. M.: RALA and RALBP1 regulate mitochondrial
fission at mitosis. Nature Cell Biol. 13: 1108-1115, 2011.

4. Moskalenko, S.; Tong, C.; Rosse, C.; Mirey, G.; Formstecher, E.;
Daviet, L.; Camonis, J.; White, M. A.: Ral GTPases regulate exocyst
assembly through dual subunit interactions. J. Biol. Chem. 278:
51743-51748, 2003.

5. Rousseau-Merck, M.-F.; Bernheim, A.; Chardin, P.; Miglierina, R.;
Tavitian, A.; Berger, R.: The ras-related ral gene maps to chromosome
7p15-22. Hum. Genet. 79: 132-136, 1988.

6. Rousseau-Merck, M. F.; Bernheim, A.; Chardin, P.; Miglierina, R.;
Tavitian, A.; Berger, R.: The Ral gene maps to chromosome 7p15-22.
(Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46: 685 only, 1987.

7. Sablina, A. A.; Chen, W.; Arroyo, J. D.; Corral, L.; Hector, M.;
Bulmer, S. E.; DeCaprio, J. A.; Hahn, W. C.: The tumor suppressor
PP2A A-beta regulates the RalA GTPase. Cell 129: 969-982, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/14/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/21/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/5/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/2/1987

EDITED mgross: 11/08/2013
tpirozzi: 10/15/2013
tpirozzi: 10/14/2013
alopez: 7/24/2013
mgross: 6/21/2013
mgross: 3/6/2009
terry: 3/5/2009
mark: 1/11/1997
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/2/1991
carol: 12/10/1990
supermim: 3/27/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990
supermim: 2/11/1990

604026	TITLE *604026 GOLGI SNAP RECEPTOR COMPLEX MEMBER 1; GOSR1
;;GOS28;;
GOLGI SNARE, 28-KD; GS28
DESCRIPTION The specificity of vesicular transport is thought to be determined by
correct pairing of vesicle-associated SNAREs (v-SNAREs) with those on
the target membrane (t-SNAREs). This complex then recruits soluble NSF
attachment proteins (SNAPs) and N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF;
601633) to form a 20S fusion (or SNARE) complex. See SNAPA (603215).
Nagahama et al. (1996) identified GOS28, a putative Golgi v-SNARE of 28
kD that localized primarily to transport vesicles at the terminal rims
of Golgi stacks. They demonstrated that GOS28 plays a role in
intra-Golgi transport. Subramaniam et al. (1996) isolated cDNAs encoding
rat GOS28, which they called p28 or GS28 (Golgi SNARE of 28 kD).
Sequence analysis revealed that the predicted protein contained a
central coiled-coil domain and a C-terminal membrane anchor. The authors
found that GS28 is a core component of the Golgi 20S SNARE complex that
participates in the docking or fusion stage of endoplasmic
reticulum-Golgi transport. Lowe et al. (1997) reported that GS28 plays a
role in transport from the endoplasmic reticulum to the cis- (inside
face) and medial-Golgi, while the GS27 (604027) Golgi SNARE participates
in protein movement from the medial-Golgi towards the trans- Golgi
(plasma-membrane face) and the trans-Golgi network.

By searching EST databases using the rat GS28 protein sequence, Bui et
al. (1999) identified human GS28 cDNAs. The deduced 250-amino acid human
protein is 97% identical to rat GS28. Independently, Mao et al. (1998)
identified a human GOS28 cDNA among a collection of cDNAs expressed in
hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells.

By analysis of radiation hybrids and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Bui et al. (1999) mapped the GS28 gene to 17q11.

REFERENCE 1. Bui, T. D.; Levy, E. R.; Subramaniam, V. N.; Lowe, S. L.; Hong,
W.: cDNA characterization and chromosomal mapping of human Golgi
SNARE GS27 and GS28 to chromosome 17. Genomics 57: 285-288, 1999.

2. Lowe, S. L.; Peter, F.; Subramaniam, V. N.; Wong, S. H.; Hong,
W.: A SNARE involved in protein transport through the Golgi apparatus. Nature 389:
881-884, 1997.

3. Mao, M.; Fu, G.; Wu, J.-S.; Zhang, Q.-H.; Zhou, J.; Kan, L.-X.;
Huang, Q.-H.; He, K.-L.; Gu, B.-W.; Han, Z.-G.; Shen, Y.; Gu, J.;
Yu, Y.-P.; Xu, S.-H.; Wang, Y.-X.; Chen, S.-J.; Chen, Z.: Identification
of genes expressed in human CD34+ hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells
by expressed sequence tags and efficient full-length cDNA cloning. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8175-8180, 1998.

4. Nagahama, M.; Orci, L.; Ravazzola, M.; Amherdt, M.; Lacomis, L.;
Tempst, P.; Rothman, J. E.; Sollner, T. H.: A v-SNARE implicated
in intra-Golgi transport. J. Cell Biol. 133: 507-516, 1996.

5. Subramaniam, V. N.; Peter, F.; Philp, R.; Wong, S. H.; Hong, W.
: GS28, a 28-kilodalton Golgi SNARE that participates in ER-Golgi
transport. Science 272: 1161-1163, 1996.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/19/1999

EDITED alopez: 07/19/1999

608718	TITLE *608718 KERATIN-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 13-1; KRTAP13-1
;;KAP13.1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Hair keratins and hair keratin-associated proteins (KAPs), such as
KRTAP13-1, are the main structural proteins of hair fibers (Rogers et
al., 2002).

CLONING

By searching databases using nonhuman KAP sequences as queries, followed
by screening a human scalp cDNA library, Rogers et al. (2002) cloned
KRTAP13-1, which they called KAP13.1. The deduced 172-amino acid protein
has a molecular mass of 18.3 kD. It has a high cysteine content (12.2
mol percent), classifying KAP13.1 as a high sulfur KAP. Both mouse and
human KAP13.1 contain C-terminal pentameric repeats. Mouse Kap13.1 also
contains a decameric repeat that is only partially conserved in human
KAP13.1. In situ hybridization detected KAP13.1 expression in the cortex
and dermal papillae of plucked beard follicles.

MAPPING

Rogers et al. (2002) mapped the KRTAP13-1 gene within a KAP gene cluster
on chromosome 21q22.1.

REFERENCE 1. Rogers, M. A.; Langbein, L.; Winter, H.; Ehmann, C.; Praetzel,
S.; Schweizer, J.: Characterization of a first domain of human high
glycine-tyrosine and high sulfur keratin-associated protein (KAP)
genes on chromosome 21q22.1. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 48993-49002, 2002.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/9/2004

EDITED mgross: 06/09/2004

611220	TITLE *611220 UNC45, C. ELEGANS, HOMOLOG OF, B; UNC45B
;;SMUNC45
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

UNC45B plays a role in myoblast fusion and sarcomere organization (Price
et al., 2002).

CLONING

By database analysis using C. elegans unc45 sequence as probe, followed
by PCR of a human heart cDNA library, Price et al. (2002) cloned UNC45B,
which they called SMUNC45. The deduced 931-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 103.4 kD and shares 95% and 56% amino acid
identity with mouse Unc45b and human UNC45A (611219), respectively.
UNC45B contains an N-terminal triple TPR motif, a unique central region,
and a C-terminal UNC45/Cro1/She4p (UCS) domain. EST database analysis
showed human UNC45B expression in cDNA libraries derived mostly from
heart and tissues containing heart and skeletal muscle. The authors also
cloned mouse Unc45b, and Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues
detected high expression in skeletal muscle, heart, and whole embryo,
with low levels detected in lung. In situ hybridization of mouse embryos
detected Unc45b expression in the heart at 8.75 days gestation. Unc45b
expression was not initially detected in proliferating mouse C2C12
skeletal muscle cells but appeared later during differentiation when
aligned myogenic cells were actively fusing.

GENE FUNCTION

Price et al. (2002) showed that antisense oligonucleotide inhibition of
mouse Unc45b mRNA expression reduced myoblast fusion and altered
sarcomere formation in C2C12 cells. The altered sarcomere organization
was not associated with any changes in skeletal myosin heavy chain
(MYH1; 160730) protein levels.

GENE STRUCTURE

Price et al. (2002) determined that the UNC45B gene contains 19 exons
spanning 38 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Price et al. (2002) mapped the UNC45B gene
to chromosome 17q11. They mapped the mouse Unc45b gene to the syntenic
region on mouse chromosome 11.

REFERENCE 1. Price, M. G.; Landsverk, M. L.; Barral, J. M.; Epstein, H. F.:
Two mammalian UNC-45 isoforms are related to distinct cytoskeletal
and muscle-specific functions. J. Cell Sci. 115: 4013-4023, 2002.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 7/17/2007

EDITED wwang: 07/18/2007
wwang: 7/17/2007

601416	TITLE *601416 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 39 (ZINC TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 7; SLC39A7
;;KE4, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; HKE4;;
D6S2244E
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Zinc is an essential cofactor for more than 50 classes of enzymes. It is
involved in protein, nucleic acid, carbohydrate, and lipid metabolism,
as well as in the control of gene transcription, growth, development,
and differentiation. Zinc cannot passively diffuse across cell membranes
and requires specific transporters, such as SLC39A7, to enter the
cytosol from both the extracellular environment and the intracellular
storage compartments (summary by Taylor et al., 2004).

CLONING

Among the many non-HLA genes that have been identified in the region of
the major histocompatibility complex (6p21.3) in mouse and human are the
genes symbolized Ke4 and Ke6 in the mouse. Ando et al. (1996) stated
that the function of these genes is unknown, although Ke6 may be
involved in the manifestation of polycystic kidney disease (PKD; 173900)
because of its aberrant expression in 2 different murine models of PKD
(Aziz et al., 1993; Aziz et al., 1994). Ando et al. (1996) isolated cDNA
clones corresponding to the human Ke4 and Ke6 (601417) genes (designated
HKE4 and HKE6 by them). The predicted amino acid sequences of HKE4 and
HKE6 exhibit 81.5 and 85.6% identity to the mouse homologs,
respectively. Ando et al. (1996) speculated that HKE4 may encode a
membrane protein with histidine-rich charge clusters.

Taylor et al. (2004) cloned HKE4. The deduced 469-amino acid protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 50 kD. It contains a cleavable signal
peptide, a long cytosolic N terminus, 8 transmembrane domains, and a
short C terminus. The N-terminal half contains several histidine-rich
repeats, and HKE4 has a central catalytic zinc-binding site and a
cytoplasmic dileucine motif that predicts retention in the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). Deglycosylation experiments and Western blot analysis
indicated that HKE4 is a protein of about 50 kD that contains no
N-linked glycans. Fluorescence microscopy of Chinese hamster ovary cells
transfected with HKE4 revealed staining of a perinuclear network and
colocalization with an ER marker protein. RNA dot blot analysis
indicated low but ubiquitous expression of HKE4, with highest levels in
placenta, liver, pituitary, pancreas, salivary gland, kidney, and
prostate.

GENE FUNCTION

By transient transfection in Chinese hamster ovary cells, Taylor et al.
(2004) showed that HKE4 increased intracellular free zinc in a time-,
temperature-, and concentration-dependent manner.

MAPPING

Ando et al. (1996) determined that the HKE4 and HKE6 genes are located
at the centromeric end of the HLA region on human 6p21.3.

Kikuti et al. (1997) examined YAC clone Y42, which contains the MHC
class II region of chromosome 6q21.3. This region has a relatively high
gene density. They identified the following human genes (in order from
centromere toward telomere): HSET
(603763)--HKE1.5--HKE2--HKE3--RING1--(602045)--HKE6 (601417)--HKE4--RXRB
(180246)--COL11A2 (120290)--DPB2.

REFERENCE 1. Ando, A.; Kikuti, Y. Y.; Shigenari, A.; Kawata, H.; Okamoto, N.;
Shiina, T.; Chen, L.; Ikemura, T.; Abe, K.; Kimura, M.; Inoko, H.
: cDNA cloning of the human homologues of the mouse Ke4 and Ke6 genes
at the centromeric end of the human MHC region. Genomics 35: 600-602,
1996.

2. Aziz, N.; Maxwell, M. M.; Brenner, B. M.: Coordinate regulation
of 11-beta-HSD and Ke6 gene in cpk mouse: implications for steroid
metabolic defect in PKD. Am. J. Physiol. 267: F791-F797, 1994.

3. Aziz, N.; Maxwell, M. M.; St.-Jacques, B.; Brenner, B. M.: Downregulation
of Ke 6, a novel gene encoded within the major histocompatibility
complex, in murine polycystic kidney disease. Molec. Cell. Biol. 13:
1847-1853, 1993. Note: Erratum: Molec. Cell. Biol. 13: 6614 only,
1993.

4. Kikuti, Y. Y.; Tamiya, G.; Ando, A.; Chen, L.; Kimura, M.; Ferreira,
E.; Tsuji, K.; Trowsdale, J.; Inoko, H.: Physical mapping 220 kb
centromeric of the human MHC and DNA sequence analysis of the 43-kb
segment including the RING1, HKE6, and HKE4 genes. Genomics 42:
422-435, 1997.

5. Taylor, K. M.; Morgan, H. E.; Johnson, A.; Nicholson, R. I.: Structure-function
analysis of HKE4, a member of the new LIV-1 subfamily of zinc transporters. Biochem.
J. 377: 131-139, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/18/2004
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 10/13/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/9/1996

EDITED carol: 04/12/2013
terry: 4/19/2011
alopez: 9/14/2007
mgross: 6/24/2004
terry: 6/18/2004
psherman: 7/21/2000
psherman: 6/19/2000
alopez: 4/22/1999
alopez: 10/27/1997
alopez: 10/13/1997
jamie: 10/23/1996
jamie: 10/16/1996
mark: 9/11/1996
terry: 9/10/1996
mark: 9/10/1996
mark: 9/9/1996

607427	TITLE *607427 ENOLASE SUPERFAMILY MEMBER 1; ENOSF1
;;THYMIDYLATE SYNTHASE, ANTISENSE; RTS
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By RT-PCR of KB cells (a human oral epidermoid carcinoma cell line),
Dolnick (1993) cloned a cDNA, which he designated 3-prime rTS, that is
antisense to thymidylate synthase (TS, or TYMS; 188350) mRNA. He cloned
the full-length cDNA by 5-prime RACE of a squamous cell carcinoma cell
line. The mRNA contains 4 possible open reading frames. Dolnick (1993)
determined that the 3-prime end of rTS shares 99.5% identity with the
antisense strand of the 3-prime untranslated region of TS and contains 2
discontinuities. All of TS exon 7 and part of intron 6 are overlapped by
3-prime rTS. Northern blot analysis of fractionated KB cells and other
carcinoma cell lines revealed rTS transcripts of 1.8 and 6.3 kb, as well
as several larger mRNA species. The presence and relative abundance of
the larger transcripts varied between cell lines, and in vitro
translation generated multiple translation products.

By screening a KB cell cDNA library for homology with rTS, Dolnick and
Black (1996) identified an alternatively spliced transcript, which they
called rTS-beta. The rTS-beta transcript has an insertion of 116
nucleotides in its 5-prime region and an altered 3-prime noncoding
region that is not complementary to TS mRNA. Dolnick and Black (1996)
determined that the original rTS transcript, which they renamed
rTS-alpha, encodes a protein with an apparent molecular mass of 41 kD
that shares homology with a superfamily of proteins that includes
mandelate racemase and muconate-lactonizing enzyme from Pseudomonas
putida. The rTS-beta protein was expressed by KB cells and by a colon
tumor cell line at an apparent molecular mass of 48 kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Dolnick and Black (1996) stated that rTS-alpha was overexpressed at both
the RNA and protein level in a leukemic cell line selected for
methotrexate resistance and that the overexpressing cell line lost its
ability to downregulate TS. Selection for 5-fluorouracil resistance in a
colon tumor cell line increased the expression of rTS-alpha and
rTS-beta, with highest expression of rTS-beta.

Chu and Dolnick (2002) found that rTS-alpha RNA and TS mRNA levels
varied inversely when the growth of HEp2 cells progressed from a
late-log phase to plateau phase. Transfection and expression of the
antisense region of rTS-alpha alone was sufficient to downregulate TS
mRNA. Downregulation was also associated with increased site-specific
cleavage of TS mRNA.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dolnick and Black (1996) determined that the ENOSF1 gene contains at
least 8 exons.

MAPPING

Dolnick (1993) identified the ENOSF1 gene on the complementary strand of
the TYMS gene, which maps to chromosome 18p11.32.

REFERENCE 1. Chu, J.; Dolnick, B. J.: Natural antisense (rTS-alpha) RNA induces
site-specific cleavage of thymidylate synthase mRNA. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1587: 183-193, 2002.

2. Dolnick, B. J.: Cloning and characterization of a naturally occurring
antisense RNA to human thymidylate synthase mRNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 21:
1747-1752, 1993.

3. Dolnick, B. J.; Black, A. R.: Alternate splicing of the rTS gene
product and its overexpression in a 5-fluorouracil-resistant cell
line. Cancer Res. 56: 3207-3210, 1996.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/17/2002

EDITED alopez: 07/21/2010
mgross: 12/17/2002

160782	TITLE *160782 MYOSIN, LIGHT CHAIN 5, REGULATORY; MYL5
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Myosin participates in various cellular functions ranging from
cytokinesis, receptor capping, and secretion to sarcomere contraction.
In the course of studying a region of 4p16.3 where the Huntington
disease (HD; 143100) locus is located, Collins et al. (1992) found a
gene that maps 7 kb proximal to, and in same transcriptional polarity
as, the gene for the beta subunit of rod cell photoreceptor cGMP
photodiesterase (PDEB; 180072). Analysis of both nucleotide and
predicted amino acid sequences suggested that this gene encodes a novel
myosin light chain isoprotein, MYL5. Identical cDNAs were isolated from
human adult retina and fetal muscle cDNA libraries. Expression of the
gene was detected in adult retina, cerebellum, basal ganglia, and fetal
skeletal muscle. MYL5 is a regulatory light chain of the MLC2 (160781)
type. (Myosin is a hexameric ATPase composed of 2 heavy chains (MHC), 2
nonphosphorylated alkali light chains (MLC-1/3), and 2 phosphorylatable
regulatory light chains (MLC2).)

MAPPING

The MYL5 gene maps 700 kb from the 4p telomere (Collins et al., 1992).

REFERENCE 1. Collins, C.; Schappert, K.; Hayden, M. R.: The genomic organization
of a novel regulatory myosin light chain gene (MYL5) that maps to
chromosome 4p16.3 and shows different patterns of expression between
primates. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1: 727-733, 1992.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/2/1993

EDITED alopez: 06/25/2009
alopez: 4/30/1999
carol: 2/2/1993

