610325	TITLE *610325 NUCLEAR DISTRIBUTION GENE C, A. NIDULANS, HOMOLOG OF; NUDC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

NudC was first identified as a regulator of nuclear movement in the
asexual reproductive cycle of the filamentous fungus Aspergillus
nidulans. Human NUDC is a nuclear movement protein that associates with
dynein (see DYNC1H1; 600112) (Aumais et al., 2003).

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to A. nidulans NudC,
followed by 5-prime and 3-prime RACE of a heart cDNA library, Miller et
al. (1999) cloned human NUDC. Northern blot analysis detected NUDC
expression in all tissues examined, with highest levels in heart and
skeletal muscle. However, Western blot analysis showed highest NUDC
protein expression in brain and erythroid cells, with lower expression
in other tissues examined. Immunohistochemical analysis of bone marrow
biopsies detected high NUDC levels in early erythroid and myeloid cells,
but little to none in most differentiated cells. Expression was
primarily cytoplasmic, although punctate nuclear staining was also
observed. In cultured human erythroid cells, NUDC mRNA and protein were
highly expressed in rapidly proliferating cells and declined upon
terminal differentiation.

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to mouse and rat NudC
Matsumoto and Ledbetter (1999) identified human NUDC. The deduced
331-amino acid protein contains a basic stretch from lys68 to arg76, an
acidic region from asp144 to asp155, and a 94-amino acid C terminus that
is highly homologous to A. nidulans NudC. Human NUDC shares 94% and 95%
amino acid identity with mouse and rat NudC, respectively. Northern blot
analysis detected a major 1.6-kb transcript and a minor 2.0-kb
transcript in all adult and fetal human tissues examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Miller et al. (1999) found that granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (CSF2; 138960) increased expression of NUDC
mRNA and protein in a human erythroleukemia cell line. NUDC expression
was also significantly enhanced in lysates of bone marrow aspirates from
patients with acute myelogenous and acute lymphoblastic leukemia
compared with normal controls.

Aumais et al. (2003) noted that, in rat T cells, NudC is an early
mitogen-responsive gene and, in synchronized cultures, NudC mRNA
increases during mid-G1 and protein levels double during G2/M. They
found that silencing of NUDC through small interfering RNA or
overexpression of rat NudC inhibited HeLa cell proliferation and led to
an increase in the proportion of multinucleated cells. Complementary
studies in C. elegans embryos demonstrated that cytokinetic furrows
regressed when Nud1, the C. elegans ortholog of NUDC, was silenced by
RNA-mediated interference, resulting in 1-celled embryos containing 2
nuclei. Loss of midzone microtubule organization was observed in both
HeLa cells and C. elegans embryos. Altering NUDC levels in HeLa cells
resulted in mislocalization of PLK1 (602098) from mitotic structures,
including the midbody during cytokinesis. Aumais et al. (2003) concluded
that NUDC is crucial for mitotic progression and completion of
cytokinesis.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, pull-down assays, and immunoprecipitation
analysis, Pan et al. (2005) demonstrated that the extracellular domain
of thrombopoietin receptor (MPL; 159530) bound amino acids 100 to 238 of
NUDC. Immunofluorescence staining of a human megakaryocyte cell line
showed colocalization of NUDC and MPL at all stages of megakaryocyte
development. Substantial colocalization of NUDC with microtubules was
detected around nuclei and elongated microtubular structures, especially
in proplatelet extensions. Pan et al. (2005) also found that NUDC was
secreted by human megakaryocyte cell lines and that Nudc was present in
mouse sera. Administration of human NUDC protein enhanced the number of
circulating platelets in mice.

By mass spectrometry analysis of HeLa cell proteins that
immunoprecipitated with NUDC, Zhu et al. (2010) found that NUDC
interacted with about 130 different proteins, including chaperones,
cytoskeletal proteins, and proteins involved in signal transduction,
trafficking, protein synthesis, nucleic acid management, metabolism, and
proteolysis. Some of these proteins were also HSP90-alpha (HSP90AA1;
140571)-interacting proteins. Zhu et al. (2010) found that NUDC and
HSP90-alpha interacted directly and formed an ATPase-dependent chaperone
complex with LIS1 (PAFAH1B1; 601545). An inactivating mutation in the
p23 (PTGES3; 607061) domain of NUDC or pharmacologic inhibition of
HSP90-alpha resulted in LIS1 destabilization. Zhu et al. (2010)
concluded that NUDC is a protein of diverse functions that acts as a
cochaperone for HSP90-alpha.

GENE STRUCTURE

Matsumoto and Ledbetter (1999) determined that the NUDC gene contains at
least 9 exons and spans about 8 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH, Matsumoto and Ledbetter (1999) mapped the NUDC gene to
chromosome 1p35-p34. They mapped 2 intronless NUDC pseudogenes, NUDCP1
and NUDCP2, to chromosomes 2q23-q24 and 2q31, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Aumais, J. P.; Williams, S. N.; Luo, W.; Nishino, M.; Caldwell,
K. A.; Caldwell, G. A.; Lin, S.-H.; Yu-Lee, L.: Role for NudC, a
dynein-associated nuclear movement protein, in mitosis and cytokinesis. J.
Cell Sci. 116: 1991-2003, 2003.

2. Matsumoto, N.; Ledbetter, D. H.: Molecular cloning and characterization
of the human NUDC gene. Hum. Genet. 104: 498-504, 1999.

3. Miller, B. A.; Zhang, M.-Y.; Gocke, C. D.; De Souza, C.; Osmani,
A. H.; Lynch, C.; Davies, J.; Bell, L.; Osmani, S. A.: A homolog
of the fungal nuclear migration gene nudC is involved in normal and
malignant human hematopoiesis. Exp. Hemat. 27: 742-750, 1999.

4. Pan, R.-M.; Yang, Y.; Wei, M.-X.; Yu, X.-B.; Ge, Y.-C.; Xu, P.
: A microtubule associated protein (hNUDC) binds to the extracellular
domain of thrombopoietin receptor (Mpl). J. Cell. Biochem. 96: 741-750,
2005.

5. Zhu, X.-J.; Liu, X.; Jin, Q.; Cai, Y.; Yang, Y.; Zhou, T.: The
L279P mutation of nuclear distribution gene C (NudC) influences its
chaperone activity and lissencephaly protein 1 (LIS1) stability. J.
Biol. Chem. 285: 29903-29910, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/9/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/16/2006

EDITED mgross: 02/22/2012
terry: 2/9/2012
mgross: 8/16/2006

614848	TITLE *614848 CENTROSOMAL PROTEIN, 164-KD; CEP164
;;KIAA1052
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CEP164 is a basal body protein required for assembly of the primary
cilium (Graser et al., 2007). CEP164 also has a critical role in DNA
damage response (Sivasubramaniam et al., 2008).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Kikuno et al. (1999) cloned CEP164, which they designated
KIAA1052. The deduced protein contains 1,455 amino acids. RT-PCR
detected low to moderate CEP164 expression in all adult and fetal
tissues and specific adult brain regions examined, except skeletal
muscle.

Andersen et al. (2003) identified CEP164 as a potential centrosomal
protein in human lymphoblastic KE37 cells. The deduced protein contains
7 coiled-coil domains and a WW motif. Epitope-tagged CEP164 localized to
centrosomes.

Graser et al. (2007) stated that the full-length 1,460-amino acid CEP164
protein contains an N-terminal WW domain followed by 3 coiled-coil
domains. It has a calculated molecular mass of 164 kD. Database analysis
suggested the presence of splice variants. Western blot analysis of
several human cell lines detected CEP164 at an apparent molecular mass
of about 200 kD. Immunofluorescence and immunogold electron microscopy
localized CEP164 to the very distally located appendage structure of a
single mature centriole at the base of the primary cilium. Quantitative
RT-PCR and Western blot analyses detected 2-fold elevated CEP164 mRNA
and protein during mitosis, consistent with duplication of centrioles.

Sivasubramaniam et al. (2008) stated that the 1,455- and 1,460-amino
acid isoforms of CEP164 result from differential splicing of exons 9 and
26, respectively. CEP164 contains an N-terminal WW domain, followed by a
long coiled-coil region, part of which shares homology with RAD26
(ERCC6; 609413). CEP164 also has 16 SQ/TQ motifs, which are potential
ATM (607585) and ATR (601215) phosphorylation sites, spread throughout
the molecule. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed localization of
CEP164 at nuclei and centrioles.

GENE FUNCTION

Using small interfering RNA, Graser et al. (2007) found that depletion
of pericentrin (PCNT; 605925), CEP290 (610142), or CEP164 in human
retinal pigment epithelial cells prevented serum starvation-induced
formation of a primary cilium. Knockdown of CEP164 had no effect on
expression of the centriole subappendage proteins ninein (NIN; 608684)
and CEP170 (613023), suggesting that CEP164 does not interact with these
proteins.

Sivasubramaniam et al. (2008) studied the 1,465-amino acid form of
CEP164 and found that it had a critical role in mediating genomic
stability. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis revealed that endogenous HeLa
cell CEP164 interacted with the DNA damage response proteins ATR, ATRIP
(606605), ATM, and MDC1 (607593). CEP164 was phosphorylated by ATR and
ATM and accumulated in nuclear foci during ionizing or ultraviolet (UV)
irradiation-induced replication stress in HeLa cells. Ser186 was the
preferred ATM/ATR phosphorylation site. Inactivation of ATM and ATR
reduced CEP164 foci formation upon radiation stress. Knockdown of CEP164
altered phosphorylation of H2AX (H2AFX; 601772), RPA (see 179835), CHK2
(CHEK2; 604373), and CHK1 (CHEK1; 603078) in the DNA damage-induced
checkpoint signaling cascade and abrogated the G2/M checkpoint.

XPA (611153) is an essential factor in the nucleotide excision repair
pathway for removing UV-induced aberrant DNA structures, including
cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis, Pan and Lee (2009) found that CEP164 localized to sites of UV
radiation-induced DNA damage in HeLa cells in an XPA-regulated manner.
CEP164 interacted directly with XPA and was recruited to sites of DNA
damage early in the DNA damage response. Interaction of CEP164 with XPA
was required for UV damage-induced CHK1 phosphorylation. Knockdown of
CEP164 sensitized cells to UV irradiation and hampered the removal of
UV-induced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers. Pan and Lee (2009)
hypothesized that, following UV-induced DNA damage, ATR phosphorylates
XPA and CEP164, which serve as critical signals for efficient DNA damage
repair.

Using confocal microscopy, Chaki et al. (2012) found that CEP164
colocalized with the mother centriole, mitotic spindle poles, and the
abscission structure in a cell cycle-dependent manner in immortalized
human retinal pigment epithelial (TERT-RPE) cells. Knockdown of Cep164
in mouse kidney IMCD3 cells permitted normal growth of spheroids in
3-dimensional culture. Cells showed overall normal architecture and
size, but they had markedly reduced frequency of cilia. CEP164
colocalized with the DNA damage response proteins TIP60 (KAT5; 601409)
and SC35 (SRSF2; 600813) and with ZNF423 (604557) and NPHP10 (SDCCAG8;
613524) at nuclear foci in TERT-RPE cells. Following UV
radiation-induced DNA damage in HeLa cells, CEP164 colocalized with
TIP60 and CHK1 in nuclear foci. Knockdown of Cep164 in IMCD3 cells
caused defects in DNA damage response, increased gamma-H2ax intensity,
and increased cell sensitivity to ionizing radiation. Yeast 2-hybrid,
pull-down, and coimmunoprecipitation analyses also showed that CEP164
interacted directly with CCDC92, TTBK2 (611695), NPHP3 (608002), NPHP2
(INVS; 243305), and DVL3 (601368).

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Kikuno et al. (1999) mapped the CEP164
gene to chromosome 11. Graser et al. (2007) mapped the CEP164 gene to
chromosome 11q23.3 by genomic sequence analysis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a Saudi child, born of consanguineous parents, with a variant of
nephronophthisis-15 (NPHP15; 614845) characterized by Leber congenital
amaurosis and retinal degeneration resulting in blindness by age 2
years, Chaki et al. (2012) identified a homozygous mutation in the
CEP164 gene (614848.0001). Sequencing of this gene in 856 patients with
different NPHP-related ciliopathies identified homozygous or compound
heterozygous mutations in the CEP164 gene in 3 additional families
(614848.0002-614848.0005). Most patients had NPHP and some form of
retinal degeneration, sometimes resulting in blindness. Although the
number of affected families was small, the findings supported a gradient
of genotype/phenotype correlations in which null mutations cause the
severe dysplastic phenotypes of Meckel syndrome and Joubert syndrome,
whereas hypomorphic alleles cause the milder degenerative phenotypes of
NPHP and Senior-Loken syndrome. Cellular studies showed that CEP164 is
involved in the DNA repair response, suggesting that defects in the DNA
repair response signaling pathway may contribute to the pathogenesis of
NPHP and related ciliopathies. Chaki et al. (2012) suggested that loss
of function of proteins that have a dual role in centrosome and DNA
repair signaling could cause a disturbance of cell-cycle checkpoint
controls, which is detrimental to progenitor cell survival both during
embryogenesis and later during tissue maintenance.

ANIMAL MODEL

Chaki et al. (2012) found that knockdown of Cep164 in zebrafish resulted
in a ciliopathy with ventral body axis curvature, cell death, abnormal
heart looping, pronephric tubule cysts, hydrocephalus, and retinal
dysplasia.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 15
CEP164, TER1460TRP

In a Saudi child, born of consanguineous parents, with a variant of
nephronophthisis-15 (NPHP15; 614845) characterized by Leber congenital
amaurosis and retinal degeneration resulting in blindness by age 2
years, Chaki et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 4383A-G transition in
exon 33 of the CEP164 gene, resulting in extension of the protein beyond
the normal termination signal with an addition of 57 residues
(X1460WextX57). The mutation was found by homozygosity mapping and
whole-exome sequencing, and was not found in more than 270 controls or
in the exome variant server database.

.0002
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 15
CEP164, GLN11PRO

In 2 patients, born of consanguineous Turkish parents, with NPHP15
(614845), Chaki et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 32A-C transversion
in exon 3 of the CEP164 gene, resulting in a gln11-to-pro (Q11P)
substitution at a highly conserved residue. The mutation was not found
in more than 270 controls or in the exome variant server database. Both
patients had NPHP at age 8 years, and 1 had retinal degeneration at age
11. Both were obese, and at least 1 had liver failure.

.0003
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 15
CEP164, ARG93TRP

In 3 affected members of a family with NPHP15 (614845), Chaki et al.
(2012) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the CEP164
gene: a 277C-T transition in exon 5 resulting in an arg93-to-trp (R93W)
substitution at a highly conserved residue, and a 1573C-T transition in
exon 13 resulting in a gln525-to-ter (Q525X; 614848.0004) substitution.
Two patients had NPHP at ages 8 and 9 years, respectively, and all had
some degree of retinal degeneration, with 1 child being legally blind at
age 5 months. One of the children also had seizures and developmental
delay. Neither mutation was found in more than 270 controls or in the
exome variant server database.

.0004
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 15
CEP164, GLN525TER

See 614848.0003 and Chaki et al. (2012).

.0005
NEPHRONOPHTHISIS 15
CEP164, ARG576TER

In a patient, born of consanguineous parents, with NPHP15 (614845),
Chaki et al. (2012) identified a homozygous 1726C-T transition in exon
15 of the CEP164 gene, resulting in an arg576-to-ter (R576X)
substitution. The patient had NPHP by age 8 years, retinal degeneration,
flat electroretinogram, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, facial
dysmorphism, polydactyly, abnormal liver function tests, bronchiectasis,
and obesity. The mutation was found in 1 of 7,019 European American
controls.

REFERENCE 1. Andersen, J. S.; Wilkinson, C. J.; Mayor, T.; Mortensen, P.; Nigg,
E. A.; Mann, M.: Proteomic characterization of the human centrosome
by protein correlation profiling. Nature 426: 570-574, 2003.

2. Chaki, M.; Airik, R.; Ghosh, A. K.; Giles, R. H.; Chen, R.; Slaats,
G. G.; Wang, H.; Hurd, T. W.; Zhou, W.; Cluckey, A.; Gee, H. Y.; Ramaswami,
G.; and 61 others: Exome capture reveals ZNF423 and CEP164 mutations,
linking renal ciliopathies to DNA damage response signaling. Cell 150:
533-548, 2012.

3. Graser, S.; Stierhof, Y.-D.; Lavoie, S. B.; Gassner, O. S.; Lamla,
S.; Le Clech, M.; Nigg, E. A.: Cep164, a novel centriole appendage
protein required for primary cilium formation. J. Cell Biol. 179:
321-330, 2007.

4. Kikuno, R.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIV. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 6: 197-205, 1999.

5. Pan, Y.-R.; Lee, E. Y.-H. P.: UV-dependent interaction between
Cep164 and XPA mediates localization of Cep164 at sites of DNA damage
and UV sensitivity. Cell Cycle 8: 655-664, 2009.

6. Sivasubramaniam, S.; Sun, X.; Pan, Y.-R.; Wang, S.; Lee, E. Y.-H.
P.: Cep164 is a mediator protein required for the maintenance of
genomic stability through modulation of MDC1, RPA, and CHK1. Genes
Dev. 22: 587-600, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/4/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/4/2012

EDITED joanna: 08/05/2013
terry: 10/8/2012
carol: 10/8/2012
terry: 10/5/2012
mgross: 10/5/2012
ckniffin: 10/4/2012
mgross: 10/4/2012

191191	TITLE *191191 TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR RECEPTOR SUBFAMILY, MEMBER 1B; TNFRSF1B
;;TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR RECEPTOR 2; TNFR2;;
TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR, BETA RECEPTOR; TNFBR;;
TNFR, 75-KD;;
TNFR, 80-KD
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Schall et al. (1990) isolated a cDNA corresponding to TNFR2 using
oligomer probes based on amino acid sequence from the purified protein.
The receptor encodes a predicted 415-amino acid polypeptide with a
single membrane-spanning domain and has an extracellular domain with
sequence similarity to nerve growth factor receptor (162010) and B-cell
activation protein Bp50 (164011). Recombinantly expressed receptor was
shown by Schall et al. (1990) to bind TNF-alpha (191160). Northern blots
showed expression in a variety of cell types.

GENE STRUCTURE

Beltinger et al. (1996) showed that TNFR2 contains 10 exons and spans
about 26 kb of genomic DNA. Most of the functional domains, including
the extracellular cysteine-rich motifs, occur in separate exons.
Overall, the gene structure is similar to that of TNFR1 (191190). On the
basis of a YAC contig for the region, they mapped TNFR2 to within 400 kb
of the marker D1S434 on 1p36.

Santee and Owen-Schaub (1996) characterized the complete gene structure
for human TNFR p75, which spans nearly 43 kb. The gene consists of 10
exons (ranging from 34 bp to 2.5 kb) and 9 introns (343 bp to 19 kb).
Consensus elements for transcription factors involved in T-cell
development and activation were noted in the putative promoter region.

GENE FUNCTION

TNFBR (TNFR75) is the larger of the 2 TNF receptors; see 191190. It is
present on many cell types, especially those of myeloid origin, and is
strongly expressed on stimulated T and B lymphocytes. Beltinger et al.
(1996) noted that TNFR2 is the main TNF receptor found on circulating T
cells and is the major mediator of autoregulatory apoptosis in CD8+
cells. TNFR2 may act with TNFR1 to kill nonlymphoid cells.

Preassembly or self-association of cytokine receptor dimers (e.g., IL1R,
see 147810; IL2R, 147730; and EPOR, 133171) occurs via the same amino
acid contacts that are critical for ligand binding. Chan et al. (2000)
found that, in contrast, the p60 (TNFRSF1A; 191190) and p80 (TNFRSF1B)
TNFA receptors self-assemble through a distinct functional domain in the
TNFR extracellular domain, termed the pre-ligand assembly domain (PLAD),
in the absence of ligand. Deletion of the PLAD results in monomeric
presentation of p60 or p80. Flow cytometric analysis showed that
efficient TNFA binding depends on receptor self-assembly. They also
found that other members of the TNF receptor superfamily, including the
extracellular domains of TRAIL (TNFRSF10A; 603611), CD40 (109535), and
FAS (TNFRSF6; 134637), all self-associate but do not interact with
heterologous receptors.

Using Jurkat T cells, which express TNFR1 but little TNFR2, and Jurkat
cells stably transfected with TNFR2, Li et al. (2002) confirmed that TNF
stimulation, or stimulation with a TNFR2, but not TNFR1, agonist, causes
a loss of TRAF2 (601895) in the TNFR2-expressing cells, but not the
parental cell line, through a ubiquitination- and proteasome-dependent
process. Binding analysis indicated that TRAF2 interacts with CIAP1
(601712) and CIAP2 (601721), which possess E3 ubiquitin ligase (e.g.
UBE3A, 601623) activity. Ubiquitination assays and SDS-PAGE analysis
showed that in the presence of an E2-conjugating enzyme (e.g., UBCH7,
603721), CIAP1, but not CIAP2, induces TRAF2 ubiquitination outside of
its RING domain. Both CIAPs bind but neither ubiquitinates TRAF1
(601711). CIAP1 expression fails to protect TNFR2-expressing cells from
TNF-induced apoptosis, whereas an E3-inactive CIAP1 mutant and wildtype
CIAP2 do protect cells from TRAF2 downregulation and cause a delay in
cell death. Li et al. (2002) concluded that TNFR2 stimulation causes the
ubiquitination of TRAF2 by CIAP1, which can play a proapoptotic role in
TNF signaling.

Tang et al. (2011) reported that PGRN (138945) bound directly to tumor
necrosis factor receptors (TNFR1 and TNRF2) and disturbed the TNFA-TNFR
interaction. Pgrn-deficient mice were susceptible to collagen-induced
arthritis, and administration of PGRN reversed inflammatory arthritis.
Atsttrin, an engineered protein composed of 3 PGRN fragments, exhibited
selective TNFR binding. PGRN and Atsttrin prevented inflammation in
multiple arthritis mouse models and inhibited TNFA-activated
intracellular signaling. Tang et al. (2011) concluded that PGRN is a
ligand of TNFR, an antagonist of TNFA signaling, and plays a critical
role in the pathogenesis of inflammatory arthritis in mice.

MAPPING

By Southern blot analysis of human/Chinese hamster somatic cell hybrid
DNA, Milatovich et al. (1991) mapped the TNFR2 gene to 1pter-p32. By in
situ hybridization and Southern blot analysis of a series of human/mouse
hybrid cell lines, Baker et al. (1991) refined the assignment of TNFR2
to 1p36. By nonradioactive in situ hybridization, Kemper et al. (1991)
assigned the gene to 1p36.3-p36.2. Using an SSCP polymorphism of the
TNFR2 gene, Kaufman et al. (1994) demonstrated that TNFR2 is very
closely linked to the pronatriodilatin gene (108780).

White et al. (1995) showed that TNFR2 maps outside the region of
1p36.3-p36.2 thought by loss of heterozygosity (LOH) studies to contain
the neuroblastoma tumor suppressor locus (256700).

By linkage analysis, Santee and Owen Schaub (1996) confirmed the mapping
of the TNFR2 gene to 1p36.3-p36.2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Glenn et al. (2000) tested markers in and near the TNFR2 gene for
linkage and association with hypertension (145500) as well as
hypercholesterolemia and plasma levels of the shed soluble receptor
(sTNF-R2). Using sib pair analysis, they reported a sharp, significant
linkage peak centered at TNFRSF1B (multipoint maximum lod score = 2.6
and 3.1 by weighted and unweighted MAPMAKER/SIBS, respectively). In a
case-control study, they demonstrated a possible association of TNFRSF1B
with hypertension by haplotype analysis. Plasma sTNF-R2 was
significantly elevated in hypertensives and showed a correlation with
systolic and diastolic blood pressure. A genotypic effect of TNFRSF1B on
plasma sTNF-R2, as well as total, low, and high density lipoprotein
cholesterol, and diastolic blood pressure was also observed. The authors
proposed a scheme for involvement of TNF and its receptors in
hypertension and hypercholesterolemia.

Geurts et al. (2000) conducted a genomic scan in 18 Dutch familial
combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL; 144250) families and identified several
loci with evidence for linkage. Linear regression analysis using 79
independent sib pairs showed linkage with a quantitative FCHL
discriminant function and the intron 4 (CA)n polymorphism of TNFRSF1B (P
= 0.032), and a case-control study demonstrated an association as well
(P = 0.029). Mutation analysis of exon 6 in 73 FCHL family members
delineated 2 TNFRSF1B alleles, coding for methionine (196M) and arginine
(196R). Complete linkage disequilibrium between CA267, CA271, and CA273
and this polymorphism was detected. In 85 hyperlipidemic FCHL subjects,
an association was demonstrated between soluble TNFRSF1B plasma
concentrations and the CA271-196M haplotype. The authors concluded that
TNFRSF1B is associated with susceptibility to FCHL.

In Japan, Sashio et al. (2002) examined polymorphisms of the tumor
necrosis factor gene (TNFA; 191160) and the TNFRSF1B gene in patients
with inflammatory bowel disease (see IBD1, 266600), including 124 with
Crohn disease and 106 with ulcerative colitis, and 111 unrelated healthy
controls. They studied 2 SNPs: 1466A-G and 1493C-T. They found a
significant difference in carrier frequency for haplotype AT (1466A,
1493T) of the TNFRSF1B gene between Crohn disease patients and the
controls (odds ratio = 2.13). Significance proved to be greater in Crohn
disease patients with both internal and external fistula, and in those
who were poor responders to treatment, which consisted of nutritional,
medical, and surgical therapy.

Peral et al. (2002) evaluated serum soluble TNF receptor-2 levels, and
several common polymorphisms in the TNFRSF1B gene, in women presenting
with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS; 184700) or hyperandrogenic
disorders. The 196R alleles of the M196R (676T-G) variant in exon 6 of
TNFRSF1B, which is in linkage disequilibrium with a CA repeat
microsatellite polymorphism in intron 4 of TNFRSF1B, tended to be more
frequent in hyperandrogenic patients than in controls (P = 0.056),
reaching statistical significance when the analysis was restricted to
include only PCOS patients (P less than 0.03). Extended analysis
including another 11 hyperandrogenic patients from Spain and 64 patients
and 29 controls from Italy confirmed the association between 196R
alleles of the M196R variant and hyperandrogenic disorders (P less than
0.05), which was maintained when restricting the analysis to PCOS
patients (P less than 0.02). On the contrary, the 3-prime-untranslated
region (exon 10) variants 1663G-A, 1668T-G, and 1690T-C were not
associated with hyperandrogenism. The authors concluded that the M196R
variant in exon 6 of TNFRSF1B is associated with hyperandrogenism and
PCOS, further suggesting a role for inflammatory cytokines in the
pathogenesis of these disorders.

One of the candidate loci for regulation of hip bone mineral density
(BMD) is on chromosome 1p36 (BMND3; 606928). Albagha et al. (2002)
studied several TNFRSF1B polymorphisms in a population-based cohort
study of 1,240 perimenopausal women from the UK. The authors found no
association between 676T-G (met196-to-arg) alleles and BMD at the spine
or hip. However, subjects homozygous for the A593-T598-C620 haplotype in
the 3-prime UTR region had femoral neck BMD values 5.7% lower than those
who did not carry the haplotype (P less than 0.0001). Regression
analysis showed that the ATC haplotype accounted for 1.2% of the
population variance in hip BMD and was the second strongest predictor
after body weight.

Xu et al. (2005) analyzed the (CA)n polymorphism in intron 4 of the
TNFRSF1B gene and BMD in 1,263 Chinese individuals from 402 nuclear
families composed of both parents and at least 1 daughter. Significant
within-family association was detected between the CA16 allele and BMD
at the lumbar spine (p = 0.005); about 3.14% of lumbar spine BMD
variation could be explained by the CA16 allele.

Fairfax et al. (2011) identified a haplotype marked by a SNP (dbSNP
rs522807) in the TNFR2 promoter that was strongly associated with
reduced tolerance to lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The haplotype was
associated with increased expression of TNFR2, and basal TNFR2
expression was associated with secondary TNF release. Fairfax et al.
(2011) reported that the tolerance-associated ancestral allele of dbSNP
rs522807 is present at a frequency of 8% in northern Europeans, is
absent in Asians, and is present at a frequency of approximately 50% in
equatorial Africans.

ANIMAL MODEL

Bruce et al. (1996) used targeted gene disruption to generate mice
lacking either the p55 (TNFR1) or the p75 (TNFR2) TNF receptor; mice
lacking both p55 and p75 were generated from crosses of the singly
deficient mice. The TNFR-deficient (TNFR-KO) mice exhibited no overt
phenotype under unchallenged conditions. Bruce et al. (1996) reported
that damage to neurons caused by focal cerebral ischemia and epileptic
seizures was exacerbated in the TNFR-KO mice, indicating that TNF serves
a neuroprotective function. Their studies indicated that TNF protects
neurons by stimulating antioxidative pathways. Injury-induced microglial
activation was suppressed in TNFR-KO mice. They concluded that drugs
which target TNF signaling pathways may prove beneficial in treating
stroke or traumatic brain injury.

Vielhauer et al. (2005) studied immune complex-mediated
glomerulonephritis in Tnfr1- and Tnfr2-deficient mice. Proteinuria and
renal pathology were initially milder in Tnfr1-deficient mice, but at
later time points were similar to those in wildtype controls, with
excessive renal T-cell accumulation and reduced T-cell apoptosis. In
contrast, Tnfr2-deficient mice were completely protected from
glomerulonephritis at all time points, despite an intact immune system
response. Tnfr2 expression on intrinsic renal cells, but not leukocytes,
was essential for glomerulonephritis and glomerular complement
deposition. Vielhauer et al. (2005) concluded that the proinflammatory
and immunosuppressive properties of TNF segregate at the level of its
receptors, with TNFR1 promoting systemic immune responses and renal
T-cell death and intrinsic renal cell TNFR2 playing a critical role in
complement-dependent tissue injury.

REFERENCE 1. Albagha, O. M. E.; Tasker, P. N.; McGuigan, F. E. A.; Reid, D.
M.; Ralston, S. H.: Linkage disequilibrium between polymorphisms
in the human TNFRSF1B gene and their association with bone mass in
perimenopausal women. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2289-2295, 2002.

2. Baker, E.; Chen, L. Z.; Smith, C. A.; Callen, D. F.; Goodwin, R.;
Sutherland, G. R.: Chromosomal location of the human tumor necrosis
factor receptor genes. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 57: 117-118, 1991.

3. Beltinger, C. P.; White, P. S.; Maris, J. M.; Sulman, E. P.; Jensen,
S. J.; LePaslier, D.; Stallard, B. J.; Goeddel, D. V.; de Sauvage,
F. J.; Brodeur, G. M.: Physical mapping and genomic structure of
the human TNFR2 gene. Genomics 35: 94-100, 1996.

4. Bruce, A. J.; Boling, W.; Kindy, M. S.; Peschon, J.; Kraemer, P.
J.; Carpenter, M. K.; Holtsberg, F. W.; Mattson, M. P.: Altered neuronal
and microglial responses to excitotoxic and ischemic brain injury
in mice lacking TNF receptors. Nature Med. 2: 788-794, 1996.

5. Chan, F. K.-M.; Chun, H. J.; Zheng, L.; Siegel, R. M.; Bui, K.
L.; Lenardo, M. J.: A domain in TNF receptors that mediates ligand-independent
receptor assembly and signaling. Science 288: 2351-2354, 2000.

6. Fairfax, B. P.; Davenport, E. E.; Makino, S.; Hill, A. V. S.; Vannberg,
F. O.; Knight, J. C.: A common haplotype of the TNF receptor 2 gene
modulates endotoxin tolerance. J. Immun. 186: 3058-3065, 2011.

7. Geurts, J. M. W.; Janssen, R. G. J. H.; van Greevenbroek, M. M.
J.; van der Kallen, C. J. H.; Cantor, R. M.; Bu, X.; Aouizerat, B.
E.; Allayee, H.; Rotter, J. I.; de Bruin, T. W. A.: Identification
of TNFRSF1B as a novel modifier gene in familial combined hyperlipidemia. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 2067-2074, 2000.

8. Glenn, C. L.; Wang, W. Y. S.; Benjafield, A. V.; Morris, B. J.
: Linkage and association of tumor necrosis factor receptor 2 locus
with hypertension, hypercholesterolemia and plasma shed receptor. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 1943-1949, 2000.

9. Kaufman, B. A.; White, P. S.; Steinbrueck, T.; Donis-Keller, H.;
Brodeur, G. M.: Linkage mapping of the tumor necrosis factor receptor
2 (TNFR2) gene to 1p36.2 using the single-strand conformation polymorphism
technique. Hum. Genet. 94: 418-422, 1994.

10. Kemper, O.; Derre, J.; Cherif, D.; Engelmann, H.; Wallach, D.;
Berger, R.: The gene for the type II (p75) tumor necrosis factor
receptor (TNF-RII) is localized on band 1p36.2-p36.3. Hum. Genet. 87:
623-624, 1991.

11. Li, X.; Yang, Y.; Ashwell, J. D.: TNF-RII and c-IAP1 mediate
ubiquitination and degradation of TRAF2. Nature 416: 345-349, 2002.

12. Milatovich, A.; Song, K.; Heller, R. A.; Francke, U.: Tumor necrosis
factor receptor genes, TNFR1 and TNFR2, on human chromosomes 12 and
1. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 17: 519-523, 1991.

13. Peral, B.; San Millan, J. L.; Castello, R.; Moghetti, P.; Escobar-Morreale,
H. F.: The methionine 196 arginine polymorphism in exon 6 of the
TNF receptor 2 gene (TNFRSF1B) is associated with the polycystic ovary
syndrome and hyperandrogenism. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 3977-3983,
2002.

14. Santee, S. M.; Owen-Schaub, L. B.: Human tumor necrosis factor
receptor p75/80 (CD120b) gene structure and promoter characterization. J.
Biol. Chem. 271: 21151-21159, 1996.

15. Sashio, H.; Tamura, K.; Ito, R.; Yamamoto, Y.; Bamba, H.; Kosaka,
T.; Fukui, S.; Sawada, K.; Fukuda, Y.; Tamura, K.; Satomi, M.; Shimoyama,
T.; Furuyama, J.: Polymorphisms of the TNF gene and the TNF receptor
superfamily member 1B gene are associated with susceptibility to ulcerative
colitis and Crohn's disease, respectively. Immunogenetics 53: 1020-1027,
2002.

16. Schall, T. J.; Lewis, M.; Koller, K. J.; Lee, A.; Rice, G. C.;
Wong, G. H. W.; Gatanaga, T.; Granger, G. A.; Lentz, R.; Raab, H.;
Kohr, W. J.; Goeddel, D. V.: Molecular cloning and expression of
a receptor for human tumor necrosis factor. Cell 61: 361-370, 1990.

17. Tang, W.; Lu, Y.; Tian, Q.-Y.; Zhang, Y.; Guo, F.-J.; Liu, G.-Y.;
Syed, N. M.; Lai, Y.; Lin, E. A.; Kong, L.; Su, J.; Yin, F.; and
10 others: The growth factor progranulin binds to TNF receptors
and is therapeutic against inflammatory arthritis in mice. Science 332:
478-484, 2011.

18. Vielhauer, V.; Stavrakis, G.; Mayadas, T. N.: Renal cell-expressed
TNF receptor 2, not receptor 1, is essential for the development of
glomerulonephritis. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 1199-1209, 2005.

19. White, P. S.; Maris, J. M.; Beltinger, C.; Sulman, E.; Marshall,
H. N.; Fujimori, M.; Kaufman, B. A.; Biegel, J. A.; Allen, C.; Hilliard,
C.; Valentine, M. B.; Look, A. T.; Enomoto, H.; Sakiyama, S.; Brodeur,
G. M.: A region of consistent deletion in neuroblastoma maps within
human chromosome 1p36.2-36.3. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 5520-5524,
1995.

20. Xu, H.; Zhao, L.-J.; Lei, S.-F.; Li, M.-X.; Sun, X.; Deng, F.-Y.;
Jiang, D.-K.; Deng, H.-W.: The (CA)n polymorphism of the TNFR2 gene
is associated with peak bone density in Chinese nuclear families. J.
Hum. Genet. 50: 301-304, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/8/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/21/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/30/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/20/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/24/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/28/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/23/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/20/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/17/2000
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/25/2000
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/29/2000
Lori M. Kelman - updated: 11/13/1996
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/19/1996
Moyra Smith - updated: 9/11/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/19/1991

EDITED alopez: 07/11/2011
terry: 7/8/2011
mgross: 5/5/2011
terry: 4/21/2011
carol: 9/21/2009
terry: 2/2/2009
carol: 10/29/2008
carol: 3/16/2007
wwang: 9/7/2006
terry: 8/30/2006
wwang: 10/27/2005
wwang: 5/23/2005
terry: 5/20/2005
cwells: 6/24/2003
alopez: 1/28/2003
cwells: 6/4/2002
terry: 5/23/2002
terry: 5/22/2002
alopez: 3/20/2002
mcapotos: 12/4/2000
mcapotos: 11/27/2000
terry: 11/17/2000
mcapotos: 11/1/2000
mcapotos: 10/25/2000
carol: 6/29/2000
carol: 12/21/1998
terry: 6/1/1998
terry: 7/10/1997
jamie: 2/5/1997
jamie: 11/13/1996
terry: 9/20/1996
mark: 9/19/1996
mark: 9/11/1996
mark: 8/27/1996
mark: 6/29/1995
terry: 12/19/1994
carol: 2/5/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/23/1992
carol: 2/18/1992

611432	TITLE *611432 DEDICATOR OF CYTOKINESIS 8; DOCK8
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DOCK8 is a member of the DOCK180-related (DOCK1; 601403) protein family
(Ruusala and Aspenstrom, 2004).

CLONING

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis using CDC42 (116952) as bait, followed by PCR
of a Daudi cell cDNA library, Ruusala and Aspenstrom (2004) cloned
DOCK8. They identified transcripts encoding a 1,701-amino acid protein
with a calculated molecular mass of 190 kD and a 2,031-amino acid
protein. DOCK8 contains the CZH1 and CZH2 domains characteristic of
DOCK180-related proteins and shares 58% amino acid identity with DOCK7.
Northern blot analysis detected an 8-kb transcript in placenta, lung,
kidney, and pancreas with low expression in heart, brain, and skeletal
muscle and a 9-kb transcript with very low expression in placenta, lung,
and kidney. Immunofluorescence localized transiently transfected and
endogenous DOCK8 to the cytoplasm at cell edges in areas undergoing
lamellipodia formation, which increased when cells were treated with
PDGF (see 190040) or fetal calf serum. Transient transfection of a
C-terminal fragment of DOCK8 resulted in formation of vesicular
structures, which also contained filamentous actin, suggesting that
DOCK8 may play a role in the organization of filamentous actin.

By Northern blot analysis of human adult and fetal tissues, Griggs et
al. (2008) detected expression of an 8.0-kb transcript in all tissues
examined, including adult and fetal brain with variable expression in
specific brain regions tested. RT-PCR analysis detected variable
expression of a splice variant containing exon 13a and 14a and a splice
variant containing exon 13b but lacking exon 16.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Ruusala and Aspenstrom (2004) showed that
DOCK8 interacted with GTP- and GDP-bound forms of CDC42, Rac1 (602048)
mutants L61 and N17, and RHOJ (607653) and RHOQ (605857). None of these
interactions was detected using GST pull-down assay, suggesting that the
interaction between DOCK and Rho GTPases may be too transient to allow
stable interaction in this assay.

By quantitative RT-PCR analysis, Zhang et al. (2009) identified DOCK8
expression in monocytes, B cells, and T cells from healthy blood donors.
High levels were found in activated, expanded primary T-cell cultures
and transformed lymphocyte lines.

GENE STRUCTURE

Griggs et al. (2008) determined that the DOCK8 gene contains 47 exons
spanning 190 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Griggs et al. (2008) mapped the DOCK8 gene
to chromosome 9p24.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Autosomal Dominant Mental Retardation 2

Griggs et al. (2008) reported 2 unrelated patients with mental
retardation and developmental disability (MRD2; 614113) associated with
heterozygous disruption of the DOCK8 gene by deletion and by a
translocation breakpoint, respectively. Mapping of the critical region
shared by the 2 patients showed truncation of the longest isoform of
DOCK8. One patient was a 55-year-old man with profound mental
retardation, no speech, mild dysmorphic features, a history of seizures,
and stooped posture. He had a genomic deletion of approximately 230 kb
in subtelomeric 9p. The second patient was a girl with anhidrotic
ectodermal dysplasia (ED1; 305100) previously reported by MacDermot and
Hulten (1990). She carried a de novo balanced translocation
t(X;9)(q13.1;p24), which also interrupted the EDA gene (300451). She was
reported to have delayed speech and psychomotor development, but
attended a special school.

- Autosomal Recessive Hyper-IgE Recurrent Infection Syndrome

In 11 affected individuals from 8 unrelated families with autosomal
recessive hyper-IgE syndrome with recurrent infections (243700), Zhang
et al. (2009) identified homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for
deletions or mutations in the DOCK8 gene (see, e.g.,
611432.0001-611432.0005). Patients had recurrent and severe bacterial,
viral, and fungal infections, atopic dermatitis, and food and
environmental allergies. Several developed viral-associated carcinomas.
Laboratory studies showed decreased levels of T cells, variable decrease
in B cells, and increased serum IgE. All the DOCK8 mutations resulted in
loss of protein function. DOCK8 protein was not detected in primary T
cell cultures or transformed lymphocyte lines from all 11 patients
tested. CD8 T cells showed impaired proliferation and activation, with
normal cytotoxic activity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HYPER-IgE RECURRENT INFECTION SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DOCK8, LYS405ARG

In 2 Mexican sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with autosomal
recessive hyper-IgE syndrome (243700), Zhang et al. (2009) identified a
homozygous 1214A-G transition in the DOCK8 gene, resulting in a
lys405-to-arg (K405R) substitution. The patients had atopic dermatitis,
recurrent bacterial, viral, and fungal infections, and multiple food and
environmental allergies. One died at age 18 years. Patient T-cell
cultures showed minimal amounts of a mutant protein, and CD8 T cells
showed poor expansion and activation. However, CD8 T cell cytotoxic
function appeared to be normal, and CD4 T cells showed normal
proliferation.

.0002
HYPER-IgE RECURRENT INFECTION SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DOCK8, EX10-23, DEL

In a 6-year-old Yemeni girl, born of consanguineous parents, with
autosomal recessive hyper-IgE syndrome (243700), Zhang et al. (2009)
identified a homozygous large deletion (921_2765del) in the DOCK8 gene,
resulting in the deletion of exons 10 through 23. She had atopic
dermatitis, recurrent bacterial, viral, and fungal infections, and food
and environmental allergies. Patient T-cell cultures showed minimal
amounts of a truncated mutant protein, and CD8 T cells showed poor
expansion and activation. However, CD8 T cell cytotoxic function
appeared to be normal, and CD4 T cells showed normal proliferation.

.0003
HYPER-IgE RECURRENT INFECTION SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DOCK8, EX5-24, DEL

In a Lebanese boy, born of consanguineous parents, with autosomal
recessive hyper-IgE syndrome (243700), Zhang et al. (2009) identified a
homozygous large deletion (426_3017del) in the DOCK8 gene, resulting in
the deletion of exons 5 through 24. He had atopic dermatitis, recurrent
bacterial and viral infections, and multiple food and environmental
allergies. He died of metastatic anal squamous cell carcinoma at age 21
years. The DOCK8 protein was not detected in primary T-cell cultures.

.0004
HYPER-IgE RECURRENT INFECTION SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DOCK8, 1-BP DEL, 3290C

In a 13-year-old Caucasian girl with autosomal recessive hyper-IgE
syndrome (243700), Zhang et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygous
frameshift mutations in the DOCK8 gene: a 1-bp deletion (c.3290delC) and
an 8-bp insertion (c.3303_3304insTGGCTGCT; 611432.0005).

.0005
HYPER-IgE RECURRENT INFECTION SYNDROME, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
DOCK8, 8-BP INS, NT3303

See 611432.0004 and Zhang et al. (2009).

REFERENCE 1. Griggs, B. L.; Ladd, S.; Saul, R. A.; DuPont, B. R.; Srivastava,
A. K.: Dedicator of cytokinesis 8 is disrupted in two patients with
mental retardation and developmental disabilities. Genomics 91:
195-202, 2008.

2. MacDermot, K. D.; Hulten, M.: Female with hypohidrotic ectodermal
dysplasia and de novo (X;9) translocation: clinical documentation
of the AnLy cell line case. Hum. Genet. 84: 577-579, 1990.

3. Ruusala, A.; Aspenstrom, P.: Isolation and characterisation of
DOCK8, a member of the DOCK180-related regulators of cell morphology. FEBS
Lett. 572: 159-166, 2004.

4. Zhang, Q.; Davis, J. C.; Lamborn, I. T.; Freeman, A. F.; Jing,
H.; Favreau, A. J.; Matthews, H. F.; Davis, J.; Turner, M. L.; Uzel,
G.; Holland, S. M.; Su, H. C.: Combined immunodeficiency associated
with DOCK8 mutations. New Eng. J. Med. 361: 2046-2055, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/24/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/23/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/8/2008

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 9/13/2007

EDITED carol: 08/09/2013
tpirozzi: 7/3/2013
ckniffin: 6/24/2013
carol: 7/22/2011
terry: 5/17/2011
wwang: 11/30/2009
ckniffin: 11/23/2009
wwang: 2/20/2008
ckniffin: 2/8/2008
wwang: 9/14/2007

120105	TITLE *120105 COLIPASE, PANCREATIC; CLPS
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Pancreatic colipase is a 12-kD polypeptide cofactor for pancreatic
lipase (EC 3.1.1.3; 246600), an enzyme essential for the absorption of
dietary long-chain triglyceride fatty acids. Colipase is thought to
anchor lipase noncovalently to the surface of lipid micelles,
counteracting the destabilizing influence of intestinal bile salts
(summary by Davis et al., 1991).

CLONING

Using primers derived from the known amino acid sequence, Davis et al.
(1991) employed the PCR to produce a cDNA clone corresponding to the
complete coding region of the human procolipase mRNA.

GENE STRUCTURE

Sims and Lowe (1992) found that the CLPS gene has 3 exons and that the
5-prime-flanking region contains a TATA box, a GC box, and a 28-bp
region with homology to the rat pancreatic-specific enhancer.

MAPPING

By the study of mouse/human somatic cell hybrids, Davis et al. (1991)
determined that the CLPS gene is located in the region 6pter-p21.1.

Sims and Lowe (1992) confirmed the assignment of the CLPS gene to
chromosome 6 by blots of hamster-human somatic cell hybrid DNA using the
entire colipase cDNA.

ANIMAL MODEL

Zhang et al. (2006) reported a mechanism by which constant darkness
regulates the gene expression of fat catabolic enzymes in mice. Genes
for murine procolipase (Clps) and pancreatic lipase-related protein-2
(Plrp2; 604423) are activated in a circadian manner in peripheral organs
during 12-hour dark:12-hour dark (DD) but not light-dark (LD) cycles.
This mechanism is deregulated in circadian-deficient Per1/Per2 double
mutant mice. Zhang et al. (2006) identified circadian-regulated
5-prime-AMP, which is elevated in the blood of DD mice, as a key
mediator of this response. Synthetic 5-prime-AMP induced torpor (a
hibernation-like state) and murine Clps expression in LD mice. Torpor
induced by metabolic stress was associated with elevated 5-prime-AMP
levels in DD mice. Levels of glucose and nonesterified fatty acid in the
blood were reversed in DD and LD mice. Induction of murine Clps
expression by 5-prime-AMP in LD mice was reciprocally linked to blood
glucose levels. Zhang et al. (2006) concluded that their findings
uncovered a circadian metabolic rhythm in mammals.

REFERENCE 1. Davis, R. C.; Xia, Y.; Mohandas, T.; Schotz, M. C.; Lusis, A. J.
: Assignment of the human pancreatic colipase gene to chromosome 6p21.1
to pter. Genomics 10: 262-265, 1991.

2. Sims, H. F.; Lowe, M. E.: The human colipase gene: isolation,
chromosomal location, and tissue-specific expression. Biochemistry 31:
7120-7125, 1992.

3. Zhang, J.; Kaasik, K.; Blackburn, M. R.; Lee, C. C.: Constant
darkness is a circadian metabolic signal in mammals. Nature 439:
340-343, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/26/2006

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/5/1991

EDITED carol: 11/15/2011
alopez: 6/7/2006
terry: 5/26/2006
mark: 11/27/1996
carol: 10/26/1993
carol: 10/1/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 8/7/1991
carol: 4/18/1991
carol: 2/7/1991

604661	TITLE *604661 POTASSIUM CHANNEL-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2; KCNIP2
;;KCHIP2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the brain and heart, rapidly inactivating (A-type) voltage-gated
potassium (Kv) currents operate at subthreshold membrane potentials to
control the excitability of neurons and cardiac myocytes. An et al.
(2000) described 3 Kv channel-interacting proteins called KCHIPs that
bind to the cytoplasmic amino termini of Kv4-alpha subunits. See KCHIP1
(604660). The KCHIP2 cDNA encodes a 252-amino acid protein that has a
distinct amino terminus but shares approximately 70% amino acid identity
with KCHIP1 and KCHIP3 throughout a carboxy-terminal 185-amino acid core
domain containing 4 EF-hand-like motifs. Expression of KCHIP2 and Kv4
together reconstituted several features of native A-type currents by
modulating the density, inactivation kinetics, and rate of recovery from
inactivation of Kv4 channels in heterologous cells. The KCHIPs
colocalized and coimmunoprecipitated with brain Kv4-alpha subunits and
are thus integral components of native Kv4 channel complexes.

GENE FUNCTION

Jeyaraj et al. (2012) provided molecular evidence that links circadian
rhythms to vulnerability in ventricular arrhythmias in mice.
Specifically, they showed that cardiac ion channel expression and QT
interval duration (an index of myocardial repolarization) exhibit
endogenous circadian rhythmicity under the control of a clock-dependent
oscillator, Kruppel-like factor-15 (KLF15; 606465). Klf15
transcriptionally controls rhythmic expression of KChIP2, a critical
subunit required for generating the transient outward potassium current.
Deficiency or excess of Klf15 causes loss of rhythmic QT variation,
abnormal repolarization, and enhanced susceptibility to ventricular
arrhythmias. Jeyaraj et al. (2012) concluded that their findings
identified circadian transcription of ion channels as a mechanism for
cardiac arrhythmogenesis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kuo et al. (2001) found that knockout mice deficient for Kchip2
exhibited normal cardiac structure and function but displayed a
prolonged elevation in the ST segment on the electrocardiogram. The
Kchip2 -/- mice were highly susceptible to the induction of cardiac
arrhythmias. Single-cell analysis revealed a substrate for
arrhythmogenesis, including a complete absence of transient outward
potassium current (I-to) and a marked increase in action potential
duration. These studies demonstrated that a defect in KCHIP2 is
sufficient to confer a marked genetic susceptibility to arrhythmias,
establishing a novel genetic pathway for ventricular tachycardia via a
loss of the transmural gradient of I-to.

REFERENCE 1. An, W. F.; Bowlby, M. R.; Betty, M.; Cao, J.; Ling, H.-P.; Mendoza,
G.; Hinson, J. W.; Mattsson, K. I.; Strassle, B. W.; Trimmer, J. S.;
Rhodes, K. J.: Modulation of A-type potassium channels by a family
of calcium sensors. Nature 403: 553-556, 2000.

2. Jeyaraj, D.; Haldar, S. M.; Wan, X.; McCauley, M. D.; Ripperger,
J. A.; Hu, K.; Lu, Y.; Eapen, B. L.; Sharma, N.; Ficker, E.; Cutler,
M. J.; Gulick, J.; and 9 others: Circadian rhythms govern cardiac
repolarization and arrhythmogenesis. Nature 483: 96-99, 2012.

3. Kuo, H.-C.; Cheng, C.-F.; Clark, R. B.; Lin, J. J.-C.; Lin, J.
L.-C.; Hoshijima, M.; Nguyen-Tran, V. T. B.; Gu, Y.; Ikeda, Y.; Chu,
P.-H.; Ross, J., Jr.; Giles, W. R.; Chien, K. R.: A defect in the
Kv channel-interacting protein 2 (KChIP2) gene leads to a complete
loss of I-to, and confers susceptibility to ventricular tachycardia. Cell 107:
801-813, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2012
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/7/2002

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 3/7/2000

EDITED alopez: 09/05/2012
alopez: 9/5/2012
terry: 8/29/2012
mgross: 10/20/2003
mgross: 1/7/2002
alopez: 6/30/2000
alopez: 3/8/2000
alopez: 3/7/2000

609959	TITLE *609959 MYELOID-ASSOCIATED DIFFERENTIATION MARKER; MYADM
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using differential display analysis, Pettersson et al. (2000) identified
mouse myeloid-associated differentiation marker (Myadm) based upon its
varied expression during differentiation of an Il3 (147740)-dependent
myeloid progenitor cell line established from mouse bone marrow. The
deduced protein contains 8 potential transmembrane domains and several
potential phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis on hematopoietic
cell lines revealed restricted expression of Myadm to cells belonging to
the myeloid lineage. Expression was also seen in mature granulocytes and
macrophages. Tissue analysis showed high expression of Myadm in lung and
more moderate expression in bone marrow and brain. RT-PCR experiments
demonstrated expression of Myadm in multipotent cells
(c-kit+Sca-1+Lin-), erythroid progenitors, and early lymphoid
progenitors.

By database searching with mouse Myadm as query, Cui et al. (2002)
identified human MYADM and cloned a full-length MYADM sequence from a
human bone marrow cDNA library. The deduced 298-amino acid protein has a
predicted molecular mass of 32 kD. It contains 7 predicted transmembrane
domains and shows sequence homology with the T-cell differentiation
protein MAL (188860) and plasmolipin (PLMP; 600340). MYADM shares 75.8%
overall sequence identity with mouse Myadm, with highest levels of
conservation seen in the predicted transmembrane regions. Northern blot
analysis detected 3.3- and 2.2-kb MYADM transcripts. Expression of the
longer transcript was seen in all tissues tested except thymus;
expression of the shorter transcript was seen in heart, placenta, lung,
pancreas, testis, and peripheral blood leukocytes and was undetectable
in all other tissues. Semiquantitative PCR assays showed that expression
of MYADM was not only significantly higher in peripheral blood
leukocytes than in bone marrow cells, but was also upregulated in NB4
cells (derived from a patient with acute promyelocytic leukemia) that
were treated with the differentiation inducer all-trans retinoic acid
(ATRA).

GENE FUNCTION

Using antisense Myadm oligonucleotides, Pettersson et al. (2000) showed
that downregulation of mouse Myadm expression in pluripotent
hematopoietic progenitor cells inhibited colony formation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Cui et al. (2002) determined that the MYADM gene contains 3 exons and
spans 7.1 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Cui et al. (2002) mapped the MYADM gene to
chromosome 19q13.33-q13.4.

REFERENCE 1. Cui, W.; Yu, L.; He, H.; Chu, Y.; Gao, J.; Wan, B.; Tang, L.; Zhao,
S.: Cloning of human myeloid-associated differentiation marker (MYADM)
gene whose expression was up-regulated in NB4 cells induced by all-trans
retinoic acid. Molec. Biol. Rep. 28: 123-138, 2002.

2. Pettersson, M.; Dannaeus, K.; Nilsson, K.; Jonsson, J.-I.: Isolation
of MYADM, a novel hematopoietic-associated marker gene expressed in
multipotent progenitor cells and up-regulated during myeloid differentiation. J.
Leuko. Biol. 67: 423-431, 2000.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 3/15/2006

EDITED carol: 03/15/2006

614984	TITLE *614984 DEHYDROGENASE E1 AND TRANSKETOLASE DOMAINS-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; DHTKD1
;;KIAA1630
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned DHTKD1, which they designated
KIAA1630. The transcript contains several repetitive elements in its
3-prime end. The deduced 901-amino acid DHTKD1 protein shares
significant similarity with Arabidopsis thaliana 2-oxoglutarate
dehydrogenase E1 subunit-like protein. RT-PCR ELISA detected variable
DHTKD1 expression in all adult and fetal tissues examined, with highest
expression in adult kidney, ovary, and brain and all specific adult
brain regions examined. Lowest expression was in adult skeletal muscle.

MAPPING

By PCR of a human-rodent hybrid panel, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the
DHTKD1 gene to chromosome 10.

Hartz (2012) mapped the DHTKD1 gene to chromosome 10p14 based on an
alignment of the DHTK1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AA009773) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- 2-Aminoadipic 2-Oxoadipic Aciduria

Danhauser et al. (2012) identified compound heterozygous mutations in
the DHTKD1 gene in patients with 2-aminoadipic 2-oxoadipic aciduria
(204750). Whole-exome sequencing in 1 individual detected compound
heterozygosity for an A-to-G transition altering the methionine at codon
1, which the authors suggested might cause out-of-frame usage of an AUG
triple 160 nucleotides downstream (614984.0001). The second mutation was
a missense mutation, gly729 to arg (G729R; 614984.0002), which affected
an amino acid residue evolutionarily conserved from Homo sapiens to C.
elegans and D. melanogaster. This mutation was found with a minor allele
frequency of 0.17%, corresponding to 19 heterozygous but no homozygous
carriers among 5,379 individuals. The methionine mutation was present in
the mother, but the missense mutation occurred as a de novo event.
Sanger sequencing in the second patient detected the same G729R mutation
as in the first patient, and a nonsense mutation, arg410 to ter (R410X;
614984.0003), on the other allele. Functional assays showed that reduced
DHTKD1 activity was responsible for the 2-aminoadipic and 2-oxoadipic
aciduria in the affected individuals. Because of the much milder
phenotype in patients with this disorder than in the disorder glutaric
acidemia I (231670), caused by mutation in the next enzyme in the
pathway, glutaryl CoA-dehydrogenase (608801), the authors suggested that
pharmacologic inhibition of DHTKD1 might be an interesting drug target
for glutaric aciduria type I.

- Charcot-Marie-Tooth Disease Type 2Q

Xu et al. (2012) identified a nonsense mutation in the DHTKD1 gene that
segregated with a Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 2 phenotype (615025)
in a large 5-generation Chinese family from Shandong. Affected
individuals ranged in age from 13 to 71 years of age at the time of
examination. The age of onset of symptomatology ranged from 13 to 25
years of age; all displayed pes cavus. Upper and lower extremity
symptoms appeared to be similar. The proband had distal upper and lower
limb muscle atrophy and some angulated muscle fibers with increased
connective tissue and fat around the muscle bundle and hematoxylin and
eosin staining. Mitochondrial vacuolization was evident on electron
microscopy analysis of muscle cells.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
2-@AMINOADIPIC 2-OXOADIPIC ACIDURIA
DHTKD1, 1A-G

In a patient with 2-aminoadipic 2-oxoadipic aciduria (204750), Danhauser
et al. (2012) identified compound heterozygosity for mutation in the
DHTKD1 gene, an A-to-G transition affecting the initiating methionine
codon and a nonsense mutation (614984.0002). The 1A-G mutation was
predicted to cause out-of-frame usage of the next AUG triplet 160
nucleotides downstream and thus result in a nonfunctional protein. This
mutation was also identified in the patient's mother.

.0002
2-@AMINOADIPIC 2-OXOADIPIC ACIDURIA
DHTKD1, GLY729ARG (dbSNP rs117225135)

In 2 patients with 2-aminoadipic 2-oxoadipic aciduria (204750),
Danhauser et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous G-to-A transition at
nucleotide 2185 of the DHTHD1 gene resulting in a gly-to-arg
substitution at codon 729 (G729R). In 1 patient the G729R mutation was
found in compound heterozygosity with a mutation involving the initiator
methionine (614984.0001), and in the other patient a premature
termination mutation was found (R410X; 614984.0003). In the first
patient the G729R mutation occurred de novo and in the second it was
maternally transmitted. Gly729 is evolutionarily conserved from Homo
sapiens to C. elegans and D. melanogaster. This mutation (dbSNP
rs117225135) was found in the NHLBI Exome Variant Server with a minor
allele frequency of 0.17%, corresponding to 19 heterozygous but no
homozygous carriers among 5,379 individuals.

.0003
2-@AMINOADIPIC 2-OXOADIPIC ACIDURIA
DHTKD1, ARG410TER

In a patient with 2-aminoadipic 2-oxoadipic aciduria (204750), Danhauser
et al. (2012) identified compound heterozygosity for a missense mutation
in the DHTKD1 gene (G729R; 614984.0002) and a C-to-T transition at
nucleotide 1228, resulting in an arg-to-ter substitution at codon 410
(R410X). The patient had mild psychomotor developmental delay but more
significant speech delay, IQ of 87, and muscular hypotonia. The father
was a carrier of the mutation.

.0004
CHARCOT-MARIE-TOOTH DISEASE, AXONAL, TYPE 2Q
DHTKD1, TYR485TER

Xu et al. (2012) reported a 5-generation Chinese family with 8 affected
individuals segregating CMT disease type 2 (CMT2Q; 615025). All 8
affected individuals but no unaffected individuals carried a
heterozygous T-to-G transversion at nucleotide 1455 in exon 8 of the
DHTKD1 gene, resulting in a tyr-to-ter substitution at codon 485
(Y485X). This mutation was not detected in 250 unrelated normal
individuals. The patients were found to have half-normal expression of
DHTKD1 mRNA, and Xu et al. (2012) found that DHTKD1 silencing led to
impaired energy production evidenced by decreased ATP, total NAD(+) and
NADH, and NADH levels in vitro.

REFERENCE 1. Danhauser, K.; Sauer, S. W.; Haack, T. B.; Wieland, T.; Staufner,
C.; Graf, E.; Zschocke, J.; Strom, T. M.; Traub, T.; Okun, J. G.;
Meitinger, T.; Hoffmann, G. F.; Prokisch, H.; Kolker, S.: DHTKD1
mutations cause 2-aminoadipic and 2-oxoadipic aciduria. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 91: 1082-1087, 2012.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  12/6/2012.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Nakayama, M.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVIII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 273-281, 2000.

4. Xu, W.; Gu, M.; Sun, L.; Guo, W.; Zhu, H.; Ma, J.; Yuan, W.; Kuang,
Y.; Ji, B.; Wu, X.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, H.; Sun, F.; Huang, W.; Huang,
L.; Chen, S.; Wang, Z.: A nonsense mutation in DHTKD1 causes Charcot-Marie-Tooth
disease type 2 in a large Chinese pedigree. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 91:
1088-1094, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2013

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/17/2012

EDITED carol: 10/25/2013
alopez: 1/17/2013
terry: 1/8/2013
mgross: 12/17/2012

607707	TITLE *607707 CALCIUM/CALMODULIN-DEPENDENT PROTEIN KINASE II-BETA; CAMK2B
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CAMK2B belongs to a family of type II multifunctional calcium- and
calmodulin (see 114180)-dependent protein kinases. There are at least 4
CAMK2 genes, and each yields several isoforms through alternative
splicing. CAMK2B is a prominent kinase in the central nervous system and
may function in long-term potentiation and neurotransmitter release.

CLONING

Tombes and Krystal (1997) cloned a number of CAMK2B variants from
several human tumor cell line and brain cDNA libraries. CAMK2B showed
wide tissue and cell distribution, but 1 variant predominated in adult
brain. The expression of other variants depended upon the tissue of
origin and whether the source was normal or tumor tissue.

By searching an EST database using rat Camk2 as query, followed by
screening a brain cDNA library, Li et al. (2001) obtained a full-length
cDNA encoding CAMK2B. The deduced protein contains 542 amino acids. A
comparison of CAMK2B and CAMK2A (114078) detected no amino acid changes
within the functional domains, including the ATP-binding site, the
calmodulin-binding domain, and autophosphorylation sites. Northern blot
analysis detected a major 3.9-kb transcript in adult and fetal brain;
expression was slightly lower in fetal brain. Using PCR primers designed
to identify alternatively spliced isoforms, Li et al. (2001) identified
3 CAMK2B isoforms in adult and fetal brain. Like other CAMK2 isoforms,
the CAMK2B isoforms have an insertion or deletion of 11 to 39 amino
acids within the central variable region.

Wang et al. (2000) identified and cloned CAMK2B by searching an EST
database using mouse Camk2b. They obtained a full-length cDNA by 5-prime
RACE of a brain cDNA library. Wang et al. (2000) also identified 5
splice variants resulting from alternative splicing within 7 central
variable domains, termed V1 to V7. The deduced proteins have calculated
molecular masses between 49 and 60 kD. Transient transfection of 3
CAMK2B variants in HEK293 cells revealed that all 3 were cytosolic
proteins.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2000) showed that full-length CAMK2B and a variant lacking
V1 displayed Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent kinase activity against a
peptide substrate. Another variant lacking V1 through V5 did not exhibit
significant kinase activity under the same conditions.

By Western blot analysis, Thiagarajan et al. (2002) found that the
protein levels of Camk2a and Camk2b were inversely related during
activity in cultured rat pup hippocampal neurons. The levels of Camk2a
increased with heightened activity, and the levels of Camk2b increased
with suppression of activity. Thiagarajan et al. (2002) hypothesized
that the change in the ratio may help tune the Camk2 holoenzyme to
changing intensities of Ca(2+) signaling.

Novak et al. (2000) determined that expression of CAMK2B mRNA was
elevated about 2-fold in postmortem frontal cortex of schizophrenia
(181500) patients relative to controls.

Konig et al. (2010) used an integrative systems approach, based on
genomewide RNA interference screening, to identify 295 cellular
cofactors required for early-stage influenza virus replication. Within
this group, those involved in kinase-regulated signaling,
ubiquitination, and phosphatase activity are the most highly enriched,
and 181 factors assemble into a highly significant host-pathogen
interaction network. Moreover, 219 of the 295 factors were confirmed to
be required for efficient wildtype influenza virus growth, and further
analysis of a subset of genes showed 23 factors essential for viral
entry, including members of the vacuolar ATPase (see 192132) and COPI
(see 601924) protein families, fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR)
proteins, and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3)-beta (605004).
Furthermore, 10 proteins were confirmed to be involved in post-entry
steps of influenza virus replication. These include nuclear import
components, proteases, and CAMK2B. Notably, growth of swine-origin HIN1
influenza virus is also dependent on the identified host factors, and
Konig et al. (2010) showed that small molecule inhibitors of several
factors, including vATPase and CAMK2B, antagonize influenza virus
replication.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wang et al. (2000) determined that the variable region of the CAMK2B
protein is encoded by at least 7 exons. Alternative splicing within this
region gives rise to CAMK2B variants.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wang et al. (2000) mapped the CAMK2B gene
to chromosome 7.

REFERENCE 1. Konig, R.; Stertz, S.; Zhou, Y.; Inoue, A.; Hoffmann, H.-H.; Bhattacharyya,
S.; Alamares, J. G.; Tscherne, D. M.; Ortigoza, M. B.; Liang, Y.;
Gao, Q.; Andrews, S. E.; and 14 others: Human host factors required
for influenza virus replication. Nature 463: 813-817, 2010.

2. Li, G.; Laabich, A.; Liu, L. O.; Xue, J.; Cooper, N. G. F.: Molecular
cloning and sequence analyses of calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase II from fetal and adult human brain: sequence analyses of human
brain calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II. Molec. Biol.
Rep. 28: 35-41, 2001.

3. Novak, G.; Seeman, P.; Tallerico, T.: Schizophrenia: elevated
mRNA for calcium-calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II-beta in frontal
cortex. Molec. Brain Res. 82: 95-100, 2000.

4. Thiagarajan, T. C.; Piedras-Renteria, E. S.; Tsien, R. W.: Alpha-
and beta-CaMKII: inverse regulation by neuronal activity and opposing
effects on synaptic strength. Neuron 36: 1103-1114, 2002.

5. Tombes, R. M.; Krystal, G. W.: Identification of novel human tumor
cell-specific CaMK-II variants. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1355: 281-292,
1997.

6. Wang, P.; Wu, Y.-L.; Zhou, T.-H.; Sun, Y.; Pei, G.: Identification
of alternative splicing variants of the beta subunit of human Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent
protein kinase II with different activities. FEBS Lett. 475: 107-110,
2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/1/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/5/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/23/2003

EDITED carol: 12/20/2012
terry: 7/19/2011
alopez: 7/7/2011
terry: 7/1/2011
alopez: 3/8/2010
terry: 3/5/2010
mgross: 4/23/2003

