164757	TITLE *164757 V-RAF MURINE SARCOMA VIRAL ONCOGENE HOMOLOG B1; BRAF
;;ONCOGENE BRAF;;
BRAF1;;
RAFB1
BRAF/AKAP9 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED;;
BRAF/KIAA1549 FUSION GENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using an oligomer unique to the BRAF kinase domain, Sithanandam et al.
(1990) cloned full-length BRAF from a testis cDNA library. The deduced
651-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 72.5 kD. It
contains all 3 conserved regions of RAF protein kinases: a putative zinc
finger region, a serine/threonine-rich region, and a C-terminal kinase
domain, which includes a putative ATP-binding site and a catalytic
lysine. In addition, the N terminus of BRAF is serine-rich, and it has a
consensus CDC2 (CDK1; 116940) phosphorylation motif. Northern blot
analysis detected transcripts of 10 and 13 kb in cerebrum, fetal brain,
and placenta and transcripts of 2.6 and 4.5 kb in testis. Testis also
showed lower expression of the 10- and 13-kb transcripts.

Eychene et al. (1992) stated that the BRAF gene is the human homolog of
the avian c-Rmil protooncogene encoding a 94-kD serine/threonine kinase
detected in avian cells. This protein contains amino-terminal sequences
not found in other proteins of the mil/raf gene family. These sequences
are encoded by 3 exons in the avian genome. Eychene et al. (1992)
reported that these 3 exons are conserved in the human BRAF gene and
that they encode an amino acid sequence similar to that of the avian
gene.

GENE FUNCTION

Fusion of PML (102578) and TIF1A (603406) to RARA (180240) and BRAF,
respectively, results in the production of PML-RAR-alpha and
TIF1-alpha-B-RAF (T18) oncoproteins. Zhong et al. (1999) showed that
PML, TIF1-alpha, and RXR-alpha (180245)/RAR-alpha function together in a
retinoic acid-dependent transcription complex. PML interacts with
TIF1-alpha and CREB-binding protein (CBP; 600140). T18, similar to
PML-RAR-alpha, disrupts the retinoic acid-dependent activity of this
complex in a dominant-negative manner, resulting in a growth advantage.

Using a genomewide RNA interference screen, Wajapeyee et al. (2008)
identified 17 factors required for oncogenic BRAF to induce senescence
in primary fibroblasts and melanocytes. One of these factors is an F-box
protein, FBXO31 (609102), a candidate tumor suppressor encoded in
16q24.3, a region in which there is loss of heterozygosity in breast,
ovarian, hepatocellular, and prostate cancers. Santra et al. (2009)
studied the cellular role of FBXO31, identified its target substrate,
and determined the basis for its growth inhibitory activity. They showed
that ectopic expression of FBXO31 acts through a proteasome-directed
pathway to mediate the degradation of cyclin D1 (168461), an important
regulator of progression from G1 to S phase, resulting in arrest in G1.
Cyclin D1 degradation results from a direct interaction with FBXO31 and
is dependent on the F-box motif of FBXO31 and phosphorylation of cyclin
D1 at thr286, which is required for cyclin D1 proteolysis. The
involvement of the DNA damage response in oncogene-induced senescence
prompted Santra et al. (2009) to investigate the role of FBXO31 in DNA
repair. They found that DNA damage induced by gamma-irradiation results
in increased FBXO31 levels, which requires phosphorylation of FBXO31 by
the DNA damage response-initiating kinase ATM (607585). RNAi-mediated
knockdown of FBXO31 prevents cells from undergoing efficient arrest in
G1 after gamma-irradiation and markedly increases sensitivity to DNA
damage. Finally, Santra et al. (2009) showed that a variety of DNA
damaging agents all result in a large increase in FBXO31 levels,
indicating that induction of FBXO31 is a general response to genotoxic
stress. Santra et al. (2009) concluded that their results reveal FBXO31
as a regulator of the G1/S transition that is specifically required for
DNA damage-induced growth arrest.

Using Drosophila Schneider S2 cells, Rajakulendran et al. (2009)
demonstrated that RAF catalytic function is regulated in response to a
specific mode of dimerization of its kinase domain, which they termed
the side-to-side dimer. Rajakulendran et al. (2009) also showed that RAF
side-to-side dimer formation is essential for aberrant signaling by
oncogenic BRAF mutants, and identified an oncogenic mutation (G558K,
Davies et al., 2002) that acts specifically by promoting side-to-side
dimerization. Rajakulendran et al. (2009) concluded that their data
identified the side-to-side dimer interface of RAF as a potential
therapeutic target for intervention in BRAF-dependent tumorigenesis.

- MEK Inhibition

Using small-molecule inhibitors of MAPK/ERK kinase (MEK; see 176872) and
an integrated genetic and pharmacologic analysis, Solit et al. (2006)
found that mutation of BRAF is associated with enhanced and selective
sensitivity to MEK inhibition when compared to either wildtype cells or
cells harboring a RAS mutation. This MEK dependency was observed in BRAF
mutant cells regardless of tissue lineage, and correlated with both
downregulation of cyclin D1 (168461) protein expression and the
induction of G1 arrest. Pharmacologic MEK inhibition completely
abrogated tumor growth in BRAF mutant xenografts, whereas RAS (see
190020) mutant tumors were only partially inhibited. Solit et al. (2006)
concluded that their data suggested an exquisite dependency on MEK
activity in BRAF mutant tumors.

Ball et al. (2007) examined MEK inhibition and cell growth in 4 BRAF
mutant (V600E; 164757.0001) and 2 BRAF wildtype thyroid cancer cell
lines and in xenografts from a BRAF mutant cell line after treatment
with the potent MEK1/2 inhibitor AZD6244. AZD6244 potently inhibited
MEK1/2 activity in thyroid cancer cell lines regardless of BRAF mutation
status. Ball et al. (2007) concluded that AZD6244 inhibits the MEK-ERK
pathway across a spectrum of thyroid cancer cells. MEK inhibition is
cytostatic in papillary thyroid cancer and anaplastic thyroid cancer
cells bearing a BRAF mutation and may have less impact on thyroid cancer
cells lacking this mutation.

Leboeuf et al. (2008) investigated whether sensitivity to MEK inhibition
was determined by oncogene status in 13 human thyroid cancer cell lines:
4 with mutation in BRAF, 4 with mutation in RAS, 1 carrying RET/PTC1
(see 601985), and 4 wildtype. Thyroid cancers with BRAF mutation were
preferentially sensitive to MEK inhibitors, whereas tumors with other
MEK-ERK effector pathway gene mutations had variable responses, either
because they were only partially dependent on ERK and/or because
feedback responses elicited partial refractoriness to MEK inhibition.

Poulikakos et al. (2010) used chemical genetic methods to show that
drug-mediated transactivation of RAF dimers is responsible for the
paradoxical activation of the enzyme by inhibitors. Induction of ERK
signaling requires direct binding of the drug to the ATP-binding site of
one kinase of the dimer and is dependent on RAS activity. Drug binding
to one member of RAF homodimers (CRAF-CRAF) or heterodimers (CRAF-BRAF)
inhibits one promoter, but results in transactivation of the drug-free
protomer. In BRAF(V600E) tumors, RAS is not activated, thus
transactivation is minimal and ERK signaling is inhibited in cells
exposed to RAF inhibitors. These results indicated that RAF inhibitors
will be effective in tumors in which BRAF is mutated. Furthermore,
because RAF inhibitors do not inhibit ERK signaling in other cells, the
model predicts that they would have a higher therapeutic index and
greater antitumor activity than MEK inhibitors, but could also cause
toxicity due to the MEK/ERK activation. Poulikakos et al. (2010) noted
that these predictions were borne out in a clinical trial of the RAF
inhibitor PLX4032, as reported by Chapman et al. (2009) and Flaherty et
al. (2009). The model indicated that promotion of RAF dimerization by
elevation of wildtype RAF expression or RAS activity could lead to drug
resistance in mutant BRAF tumors. In agreement with this prediction, RAF
inhibitors do not inhibit ERK signaling in cells that coexpress
BRAF(V600E) and mutant RAS.

Hatzivassiliou et al. (2010) demonstrated that ATP-competitive RAF
inhibitors have 2 opposing mechanisms of action depending on the
cellular context. In BRAF(V600E) tumors, RAF inhibitors effectively
block the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway and
decrease tumor growth. Notably, in KRAS mutant and RAS/RAF wildtype
tumors, RAF inhibitors activate the RAF-MEK-ERK pathway in a
RAS-dependent manner, thus enhancing tumor growth in some xenograft
models. Inhibitor binding activates wildtype RAF isoforms by inducing
dimerization, membrane localization, and interaction with RAS-GTP. These
events occur independently of kinase inhibition and are, instead, linked
to direct conformational effects of inhibitors on the RAF kinase domain.
On the basis of these findings, Hatzivassiliou et al. (2010)
demonstrated that ATP-competitive kinase inhibitors can have opposing
functions as inhibitors or activators of signaling pathways, depending
on the cellular context. The authors stated that their work provided new
insights into the therapeutic use of ATP-competitive RAF inhibitors.

MAPPING

Eychene et al. (1992) identified 2 human BRAF loci: BRAF1, which was
mapped to 7q34 by fluorescence in situ hybridization and shown to encode
the functional gene product, and BRAF2, an inactive processed pseudogene
located on Xq13. Sithanandam et al. (1992) mapped the BRAF gene to the
same region by Southern blot analysis of rodent/human somatic cell
hybrids and by in situ hybridization, but concluded that the pseudogene
is located near the active gene. Using a single interspecific backcross,
Justice et al. (1990) demonstrated that the mouse Braf gene is located
on chromosome 10.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Somatic Mutations in Various Cancers

Davies et al. (2002) identified BRAF somatic missense mutations in 66%
of malignant melanomas and at lower frequency in a wide range of human
cancers. All mutations were within the kinase domain, with a single
substitution, V600E (164757.0001), originally reported as V599E,
accounting for 80%. Mutated BRAF proteins have elevated kinase activity
and are transforming in NIH 3T3 cells. Furthermore, RAS function is not
required for the growth of cancer cell lines with the V600E mutation.
Davies et al. (2002) suggested that since BRAF is a serine/threonine
kinase that is commonly activated by somatic point mutation in human
cancer, it may provide new therapeutic opportunities in malignant
melanoma. Presumptive BRAF mutations were identified in 43 cancer cell
lines including 20 of 34 (59%) melanomas, 7 of 40 (18%) colorectal
cancers, 4 of 38 (11%) gliomas, 4 of 131 (3%) lung cancers, 5 of 59 (9%)
sarcomas, 1 of 26 (4%) ovarian carcinomas, 1 of 45 (2%) breast cancers,
and 1 of 7 (14%) liver cancers. Mutations were not found in cancer cell
lines derived from 29 neuroblastomas, 10 bladder cancers, 53
leukemia/lymphomas, 11 cervical carcinomas, 11 renal cell carcinomas, 3
pancreatic carcinomas, 3 prostate carcinomas, 6 gastric carcinomas, 7
testicular carcinomas, 3 uterine carcinomas, and 29 other cancers.

Rajagopalan et al. (2002) systematically evaluated mutation in BRAF and
KRAS (190070) in 330 colorectal tumors. There were 32 mutations in BRAF,
28 with a V600E mutation and 1 each with the R462I (164757.0002), I463S
(164757.0003), G464E (164757.0004), or K601E (164757.0005) mutations.
All but 2 mutations seemed to be heterozygous, and in all 20 cases for
which normal tissue was available, the mutations were shown to be
somatic. In the same set of tumors there were 169 mutations in KRAS. No
tumor exhibited mutations in both BRAF and KRAS. There was also a
striking difference in the frequency of BRAF mutations between cancers
with and without mismatch repair deficiency. The V600E mutation was
identified in all but 1 of the 15 mismatch repair deficient cases.
Rajagopalan et al. (2002) concluded their results provide strong support
for the hypothesis that BRAF and KRAS mutations are equivalent in their
tumorigenic effects. Both genes seem to be mutated at a similar phase of
tumorigenesis, after initiation but before malignant conversion.
Moreover, no tumor concurrently contained both BRAF and KRAS mutations.

Kim et al. (2003) stated that the most common BRAF mutation, V600E, had
not been identified in tumors with mutations in the KRAS gene. They
studied the incidence of BRAF mutations in gastric cancers and the
relationship between BRAF and KRAS mutations in these cancers. They
found 7 KRAS missense mutations in 66 gastric cancers and 16 gastric
cancer cell lines. No BRAF mutations were found.

Namba et al. (2003) determined the frequency of BRAF mutations in
thyroid cancer and their correlation with clinicopathologic parameters.
The V600E mutation was found in 4 of 6 cell lines and 51 of 207 thyroid
tumors (24.6%). Examination of 126 patients with papillary thyroid
cancer showed that BRAF mutation correlated significantly with distant
metastasis (P = 0.033) and clinical stage (P = 0.049). The authors
concluded that activating mutation in the BRAF gene could be a
potentially useful marker of prognosis of patients with advanced thyroid
cancers.

Giannini et al. (2007) examined the pattern of BRAF mutations in
noncontiguous tumor foci and node metastases from 69 patients affected
by multicentric PTC. Discordant patterns of BRAF mutation were found in
about 40% of the multifocal PTCs. In node metastases, BRAF mutations
were, in most but not all the cases, concordant with the dominant tumor.
A discordant pattern of BRAF mutation was also found in about 50% of the
cases in which multiple foci of different histopathologic variants were
present. Giannini et al. (2007) concluded that the heterogeneous
distribution of BRAF mutations suggests that discrete tumor foci in
multifocal PTC may occur as independent tumors.

Brose et al. (2002) identified BRAF mutations in 5 of 179 nonsmall cell
lung cancers (NSCLCs) and in 22 of 35 melanomas. Although more than 90%
of previously identified BRAF mutations in melanoma involved codon 599,
8 of 9 in NSCLC were non-V600, strongly suggesting that BRAF mutations
in NSCLC are qualitatively different from those in melanoma; thus, there
may be therapeutic differences between lung cancer and melanoma in
response to RAF inhibitors. Although uncommon, BRAF mutations in human
lung cancers may identify a subset of tumors sensitive to targeted
therapy.

The discovery of activating mutations in the BRAF gene in many cutaneous
melanomas prompted Edmunds et al. (2003) to screen the genomic sequence
of BRAF exons 11 and 15 in a series of 48 intraocular (uveal) melanomas
(155720), together with control samples from 3 cutaneous melanomas and a
melanoma cell line that has a BRAF mutation. The same mutation was
detected in two-thirds of the cutaneous samples, but was not present in
any uveal melanomas. The finding further underlined the distinction
between uveal and cutaneous melanomas, and suggested that BRAF
inhibitors are unlikely to benefit patients with uveal melanoma.

Using the very sensitive pyrophosphorolysis-activated polymerization
(PAP) assay to screen for mutations in exon 15 of the BRAF gene in 11
uveal melanoma cell lines and 45 primary uveal melanomas, Maat et al.
(2008) identified mutations in 2 cell lines (V600E; 164757.0001) and 6
primary tumors. Direct sequencing of the exon 15 PCR product did not
reveal the mutations found with the PAP assay, indicating a low
frequency of the mutant allele in primary samples. Maat et al. (2008)
concluded that the relative scarcity of the BRAF mutations excluded an
elemental role for them in uveal melanoma.

Wan et al. (2004) analyzed 22 BRAF mutants and found that 18 had
elevated kinase activity and signaled to ERK (see 601795) in vivo. Three
mutants had reduced kinase activity towards MEK (see 176872) in vitro
but, by activating CRAF (164760) in vivo, signaled to ERK in cells. The
structures of wildtype and oncogenic V600E mutant BRAF kinase domains in
complex with a RAF inhibitor showed that the activation segment is held
in an inactive conformation by association with the P loop. The authors
stated that the clustering of most mutations to these 2 regions suggests
that disruption of this interaction converts BRAF into its active
conformation. The high-activity mutants signaled to ERK by directly
phosphorylating MEK, whereas the impaired-activity mutants stimulated
MEK by activating endogenous CRAF.

Ciampi et al. (2005) reported a rearrangement of BRAF via paracentric
inversion of chromosome 7q, resulting in an in-frame fusion between
exons 1-8 of the AKAP9 gene (604001) and exons 9-18 of BRAF. The fusion
protein contained the protein kinase domain and lacked the
autoinhibitory N-terminal portion of BRAF. It had elevated kinase
activity and transformed NIH 3T3 cells. The AKAP9-BRAF fusion was
preferentially found in radiation-induced papillary carcinomas
developing after a short latency, whereas BRAF point mutations (see
164757.0001) were absent in this group. Ciampi et al. (2005) concluded
that in thyroid cancer, radiation activates components of the MAPK
pathway primarily through chromosomal paracentric inversions, whereas in
sporadic forms of the disease, effectors along the same pathway are
activated predominantly by point mutations.

Oncogenic mutations in the DNA sequence encoding the kinase domain of
BRAF are found in most primary cell lines derived from cutaneous
melanomas (Davies et al., 2002; Brose et al., 2002). Approximately 90%
of these mutations in melanomas are due to a recurrent 1799T-A
transversion in exon 15 of the BRAF gene, resulting in a V600E mutation
(164757.0001), suggesting that a specific environmental exposure
contributes to the genesis of this mutation; however, the common 1799T-A
BRAF mutation is not a characteristic ultraviolet signature mutation.
Edwards et al. (2004) studied the BRAF gene in melanomas arising in
sites protected from sun exposure. None of 13 mucosal melanomas had a
mutation in exon 15 of the BRAF gene, as compared to 54 of 165 (33%)
primary cutaneous melanomas in a compilation of all previously published
studies. The data suggested that UV exposure plays a role in the genesis
of BRAF mutations in cutaneous melanomas, despite the absence of the
characteristic C-to-T or CC-to-TT mutation signature associated with UV
exposure, and suggested mechanisms other than pyrimidine dimer formation
as important in UV-induced mutagenesis.

Landi et al. (2006) showed that MC1R (155555) variants are strongly
associated with BRAF mutations in nonchronic sun-induced damage
melanomas. In this tumor subtype, the risk for melanoma associated with
MC1R is due to an increase in risk of developing melanomas with BRAF
mutations. Landi et al. (2006) found that BRAF mutations were more
frequent in nonchronic sun-induced damage melanoma cases with germline
MC1R variants than in those with 2 wildtype MC1R alleles. When the
authors categorized patients into 2 groups, homozygous MC1R wildtype
versus all others, they found that BRAF mutations were 6 to 13 times as
frequent in those with at least 1 MC1R variant allele compared to those
with no MC1R variants. Four more tests for interaction between age and
MC1R were not significant. Comparison of nonchronic sun-damaged Italian
cases with 171 healthy Italian controls showed that the overall melanoma
risk was higher by a factor of 3.3 (95% CI 1.5-6.9) in individuals with
any MC1R variant allele compared to individuals with no variant alleles
and that the risk increased with the number of variant MC1R alleles.

Desmoplastic melanoma is an uncommon variant of cutaneous melanoma that
mimics soft tissue sarcoma both clinically and morphologically. An
activating point mutation in the BRAF oncogene has been identified in a
high proportion of conventional cutaneous melanomas, but Davison et al.
(2005) showed that the desmoplastic variant frequency does not harbor
such a mutation. Accordingly, patients with melanomas should not be
collectively regarded as a uniform group as new therapeutic strategies
are developed that target specific genetic alterations. They found the
V600E mutation in 23 of 57 conventional cutaneous melanoma specimens but
in none of 12 desmoplastic melanoma specimens.

Michaloglou et al. (2005) showed that sustained expression of BRAF
carrying the V600E mutation (164757.0001) in human melanocytes induced
cell cycle arrest, which was accompanied by the induction of both
p16(INK4A) (600160) and senescence-associated acidic beta-galactosidase
(SA-beta-Gal) activity, a commonly used senescence marker. Validating
these results in vivo, congenital nevi were invariably positive for
SA-beta-Gal expression, demonstrating the presence of this classical
senescence-associated marker in a largely growth-arrested, neoplastic
human lesion. In growth-arrested melanocytes, both in vitro and in situ,
Michaloglou et al. (2005) observed a marked mosaic induction of
p16(INK4a), suggesting that factors other than p16(INK4a) contribute to
protection against BRAF(V600E)-driven proliferation. Nevi did not appear
to suffer from telomere attrition, arguing in favor of an active
oncogene-driven senescence process rather than a loss of replicative
potential. Thus, both in vitro and in vivo, BRAF(V600E)-expressing
melanocytes display classical hallmarks of senescence, suggesting that
oncogene-induced senescence represents a genuine protective physiologic
process.

Sommerer et al. (2005) analyzed the BRAF gene in 30 seminomas and 32
nonseminomatous GCTs (see 273300) with a mixture of embryonal carcinoma,
yolk sac tumor, choriocarcinoma, and mature teratoma. The activating
BRAF missense mutation 1796T-A (V600E; 164757.0001) was identified in 3
(9%) of 32 nonseminomatous tumors, within the embryonic carcinoma
component; no BRAF mutations were found in the seminomas.

Curtin et al. (2005) demonstrated genetic diversity in melanomas related
to susceptibility to ultraviolet light. They compared genomewide
alternations in DNA copy number and mutation status of BRAF and NRAS
(164790) in 126 melanomas from 4 clinical groups in which the degree of
exposure to ultraviolet light differed: 30 melanomas from skin with
chronic sun-induced damage and 40 melanomas from skin without such
damage; 36 melanomas from arms, soles, and subungual (acral) sites; and
20 mucosal melanomas. They found significant differences in the
frequencies of regional changes in DNA copy number and the frequencies
of mutations in BRAF among the 4 groups of melanomas. These samples
could be correctly classified into the 4 groups with 70% accuracy on the
basis of changes in the number of copies of genomic DNA. In 2-way
comparisons, melanomas arising on skin with signs of chronic sun-induced
damage and skin without such signs could be correctly classified with
84% accuracy. Acral melanoma could be distinguished from mucosal
melanoma with 89% accuracy. In 81% of melanomas on skin without chronic
sun-induced damage, they found mutations in BRAF or NRAS; most melanomas
in the other groups had mutations in neither gene. Melanomas with
wildtype BRAF or NRAS frequently had increases in the number of copies
of genes for cyclin-dependent kinase-4 (CDK4; 123829) and cyclin-1
(CCND1; 168461), which are downstream components of the RAS-BRAF
pathway. In these studies, alterations in the number of copies of DNA
was determined by comparative genomic hybridization.

Meltzer (2005) commented that information of the type provided by Curtin
et al. (2005) will become increasingly important to the management of
melanoma, and that a strong case can be made for monitoring BRAF
mutation status in clinical trials of BRAF antagonists. Because BRAF
mutations are uncommon in certain subgroups of patients, these groups
may require uniquely tailored therapies. Clues from the gain of
oncogenes identified by array-based comparative genomic hybridization
may help identify new drug targets.

Aberrant DNA methylation of CpG islands has been extensively observed in
human colorectal tumors and is associated with gene silencing when it
occurs in promoter areas. A subset of colorectal tumors has an
exceptionally high frequency of methylation of some CpG islands, leading
to the suggestion of a distinct trait referred to as 'CpG island
methylator phenotype,' or 'CIMP' (Toyota et al., 1999; Issa, 2004).
However, the existence of CIMP has been challenged. To resolve this
controversy, Weisenberger et al. (2006) conducted a systematic, stepwise
screen of 195 CpG island methylation markers involving 295 primary human
colorectal tumors and 16,785 separate quantitative analyses. They found
that CIMP-positive tumors convincingly represented a distinct subset,
encompassing almost all cases of tumors with BRAF mutation (odds ratio =
203). Sporadic cases of mismatch repair deficiency occurred almost
exclusively as a consequence of CIMP-associated methylation of MLH1
(120436).

In a pilocytic astrocytoma (see 137800), Jones et al. (2009) identified
a somatic 3-bp insertion at either nucleotide 1795 or 1796 within codon
598 of the BRAF gene. The mutation resulted in the introduction of an
additional threonine near the mutational hotspot V600 and produced a
constitutively active BRAF that induced anchorage-independent growth in
mouse fibroblasts.

Yu et al. (2009) found that 42 (60%) of 70 sporadic pilocytic
astrocytomas had rearrangements of the BRAF gene. Two additional tumors
with no rearrangement carried a BRAF mutation. Twenty-two of 36 tumors
with BRAF rearrangements had corresponding amplification of the
neighboring HIPK2 gene (606868). However, 14 of 36 tumors with BRAF
rearrangement had no detectable HIPK2 gene amplification. Six of 20
tumors demonstrated HIPK2 amplification without apparent BRAF
rearrangement or mutation. Only 12 (17%) of the 70 tumors lacked
detectable BRAF or HIPK2 alterations. Yu et al. (2009) concluded that
BRAF rearrangement represents the most common genetic alteration in
sporadic pilocytic astrocytomas.

- Germline Mutations in Cardiofaciocutaneous Syndrome, Noonan
Syndrome 7, and LEOPARD Syndrome 3

Cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC) syndrome (see CFC1; 115150) is characterized
by a distinctive facial appearance, heart defects, and mental
retardation. Phenotypically, CFC overlaps Noonan syndrome (see 163950)
and Costello syndrome (218040). The finding of HRAS (190020) mutations
in individuals with Costello syndrome, and of PTPN11 (176876) mutations
in individuals with Noonan syndrome, suggested to Niihori et al. (2006)
that activation of the RAS-MAPK pathway is the common underlying
mechanism of Noonan syndrome and Costello syndrome, and, hence, possibly
of CFC syndrome. Niihori et al. (2006) sequenced the entire 18 coding
exons of BRAF, an isoform in the RAF protooncogene family, in 40
individuals with CFC syndrome and identified 8 different mutations
(e.g., 164757.0012) in 16 of the patients. They also found 2 mutations
in the KRAS gene (190070.0009, 190070.0010).

Niihori et al. (2006) compared manifestations between KRAS-positive
(CFC2; 615278) and BRAF-positive individuals with CFC and found similar
frequencies of growth and mental retardation, craniofacial appearance,
abnormal hair, and heart defects. However, there was a difference
between the 2 groups in manifestations of skin abnormalities, including
ichthyosis, hyperkeratosis, and hemangioma, which were observed in 13
BRAF-positive individuals but in no KRAS-positive individuals. Somatic
mutations in BRAF were identified in 60% of malignant melanoma or nevi
by Garnett and Marais (2004), suggesting that BRAF has an important role
in the skin.

Rodriguez-Viciana et al. (2006) screened 23 CFC patients for mutations
in BRAF. Eighteen of 23, or 78% of individuals, had mutations in BRAF;
11 distinct missense mutations clustered in 2 regions. Five individuals
had a gln257-to-arg missense mutation (164757.0013) in the cysteine-rich
domain of the conserved region 1 (CR1). The other cluster of mutations
was in the protein kinase domain and involved exons 11, 12, 14, and 15.
Five patients had heterogeneous missense mutations in exon 12. All
parents and controls, totaling 40 phenotypically unaffected individuals,
had none of these mutations, supporting the hypothesis that occurrence
of CFC is sporadic. Rodriguez-Viciana et al. (2006) suggested that
although the causative mutations in BRAF were heterogeneous, the
distribution of mutations was specific and nonrandom. No frameshift,
nonsense, or splice site mutations were detected in the cohort of
patients; thus, BRAF haploinsufficiency is not a likely causative
mechanism of CFC. Of the 5 individuals without BRAF mutation, 3 had
mutation in either MEK1 (176872) or MEK2 (601263); the disease-causing
mutation in the remaining 2 individuals was not identified.

In 2 patients originally diagnosed with Costello syndrome but with
features overlapping those of CFC, in whom no HRAS mutations were found
(Estep et al., 2006), Rauen (2006) identified missense mutations in the
BRAF gene (164757.0020 and 164757.0021, respectively). The author noted
that the mutations involved exons that were not previously described in
CFC patients with BRAF mutations. Rauen (2006) stated that Costello
syndrome and CFC can be distinguished by mutation analysis of genes in
the RAS/MAPK pathway.

Schulz et al. (2008) identified 12 different mutations in the BRAF gene
in 24 (47.0%) of 51 patients with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome.

Sarkozy et al. (2009) identified heterozygous de novo mutations in the
BRAF gene (see, e.g., 164757.0022, 164747.0023, 164747.0025, and
164757.0026) in 17 (52%) of 33 patients with CFC, 5 (1.9%) of 270
patients with Noonan syndrome (NS7; 613706), and 1 (17%) of 6 patients
with LEOPARD syndrome (613707). The mutations clustered in exon 6,
encoding the cysteine-rich domain, and in exons 11 to 17, encoding the
kinase domain, and did not overlap with cancer-causing BRAF mutations.
In vitro functional expression studies of selected variants showed
variable gain of function, but little or no transforming ability; all
mutations had less activating potential than the common V600E mutation
(163757.0001). However, the CFC-associated mutations tended to have a
slightly more activating ability compared to the NS7-and
LEOPARD-associated mutations. Sarkozy et al. (2009) noted that none of
the NS7-associated mutations were found in patients with CFC, suggesting
that the phenotypes resulting from germline BRAF mutations may be
allele-specific. Overall, the findings expanded the phenotypic spectrum
associated with germline BRAF mutations, suggesting a spectrum of
diseases.

CYTOGENETICS

Jones et al. (2008) identified tandem duplications of about 2 Mb at
chromosome 7q34 in 29 (66%) of 44 pilocytic astrocytomas (see 137800).
These rearrangements were not observed in 244 higher grade astrocytomas.
The duplications resulted in 3 different in-frame fusion genes
containing most 5-prime exons of the KIAA1549 gene (613344) and several
3-prime exons of the BRAF gene. The most common fusion was between
KIAA1549 exon 16 and BRAF exon 9, which occurred in 20 pilocytic
astrocytomas. All breakpoint variants were expected to encode
functionally similar proteins containing the C-terminal kinase domain of
BRAF without the N-terminal BRAF autoregulatory domain. Similar to
wildtype KIAA1549, which produces a short variant through the use of an
internal promoter, PCR analysis detected both long and short variants of
the KIAA1549/BRAF fusion transcript. COS-7 cells transfected with either
long or short KIAA1549/BRAF fusion transcripts showed constitutive BRAF
kinase activity, and NIH3T3 cells transfected with the short
KIAA1549/BRAF fusion transcript showed anchorage-independent growth.

ANIMAL MODEL

Wojnowski et al. (1997) showed that mice with a targeted disruption in
the Braf gene die of vascular defects during midgestation. Homozygous
deficient embryos, unlike those homozygous for deficiency of Araf
(311010) or Craf1, showed an increased number of endothelial precursor
cells, dramatically enlarged blood vessels, and apoptotic death of
differentiated endothelial cells. These results established Braf as a
critical signaling factor in the formation of the vascular system and
provided the first genetic evidence for an essential role of a Raf gene
in the regulation of programmed cell death.

To build a model of human melanoma, Dankort et al. (2009) generated mice
with conditional melanocyte-specific expression of Braf(V600E)
(164757.0001). Upon induction of Braf(V600E) expression, mice developed
benign melanocytic hyperplasias that failed to progress to melanoma over
15 to 20 months. By contrast, expression of Braf(V600E) combined with
Pten (601728) tumor suppressor gene silencing elicited development of
melanoma with 100% penetrance, short latency, and with metastases
observed in lymph nodes and lungs. Melanoma was prevented by inhibitors
of mTorc1 (see 601231) or MEK1/2 (176872, 601263) but, upon cessation of
drug administration, mice developed melanoma, indicating the presence of
long-lived melanoma-initiating cells in this system. Notably, combined
treatment with both drug inhibitors led to shrinkage of established
melanomas.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MELANOMA, MALIGNANT, SOMATIC
COLORECTAL CANCER, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
THYROID CARCINOMA, PAPILLARY, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
NONSEMINOMATOUS GERM CELL TUMORS, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
ASTROCYTOMA, LOW-GRADE, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
BRAF, VAL600GLU

The val600-to-glu (V600E) mutation caused by a 1799T-A transversion in
the BRAF gene was previously designated VAL599GLU (1796T-A). Kumar et
al. (2003) noted that an earlier version of the BRAF sequence showed a
discrepancy of 3 nucleotides in exon 1; based on the corrected sequence,
they proposed a change in nucleotide numbering after nucleotide 94 (the
ATG codon) by +3 and a corresponding codon change of +1.

Malignant Melanoma

Davies et al. (2002) identified a 1799T-A transversion in exon 15 of the
BRAF gene that leads to a val600-to-glu (V600E) substitution. This
mutation accounted for 92% of BRAF mutations in malignant melanoma (see
155600). The V600E mutation is an activating mutation resulting in
constitutive activation of BRAF and downstream signal transduction in
the MAP kinase pathway.

To evaluate the timing of mutations in BRAF during melanocyte neoplasia,
Pollock et al. (2003) carried out mutation analysis on microdissected
melanoma and nevi samples. They observed mutations resulting in the
V600E amino acid substitution in 41 (68%) of 60 melanoma metastases, 4
(80%) of 5 primary melanomas, and, unexpectedly, in 63 (82%) of 77 nevi.
The data suggested that mutational activation of the RAS/RAF/MAPK
pathway in nevi is a critical step in the initiation of melanocytic
neoplasia but alone is insufficient for melanoma tumorigenesis.

Lang et al. (2003) failed to find the V600E mutation as a germline
mutation in 42 cases of familial melanoma studied. Their collection of
families included 15 with and 24 without detected mutations in CDKN2A
(600160). They did, however, find the V600E mutation in 6 (27%) of 22
samples of secondary (metastatic) melanomas studied. Meyer et al. (2003)
found no V600E mutation in 172 melanoma patients comprising 46 familial
cases, 21 multiple melanoma patients, and 106 cases with at least 1
first-degree relative suffering from other cancers. They concluded,
therefore, that the common somatic BRAF mutation V600E does not
contribute to polygenic or familial melanoma predisposition.

Kim et al. (2003) stated that V600E, the most common of BRAF mutations,
had not been identified in tumors with mutations of the KRAS gene
(190070). This mutually exclusive relationship supports the hypothesis
that BRAF (V600E) and KRAS mutations exert equivalent effects in
tumorigenesis (Rajagopalan et al., 2002; Singer et al., 2003).

Flaherty et al. (2010) reported complete or partial regression of
V600E-associated metastatic melanoma in 81% of patients treated with an
inhibitor (PLX4032) specific to the V600E mutation. Among 16 patients in
a dose-escalation cohort, 10 had a partial response, and 1 had a
complete response. Among 32 patients in an extension cohort, 24 had a
partial response, and 2 had a complete response. The estimated median
progression-free survival among all patients was more than 7 months.
Responses were observed at all sites of disease, including bone, liver,
and small bowel. Tumor biopsy specimens from 7 patients showed markedly
reduced levels of phosphorylated ERK (600997), cyclin D1 (168461), and
Ki67 (MKI67; 176741) at day 15 compared to baseline, indicating
inhibition of the MAP kinase pathway. Three additional patients with
V600E-associated papillary thyroid also showed a partial or complete
response.

Bollag et al. (2010) described the structure-guided discovery of PLX4032
(RG7204), a potent inhibitor of oncogenic BRAF kinase activity. PLX4032
was cocrystallized with a protein construct that contained the kinase
domain of BRAF(V600E). In a clinical trial, patients exposed to higher
plasma levels of PLX4032 experienced tumor regression; in patients with
tumor regressions, pathway analysis typically showed greater than 80%
inhibition of cytoplasmic ERK phosphorylation. Bollag et al. (2010)
concluded that their data demonstrated that BRAF-mutant melanomas are
highly dependent on BRAF kinase activity.

Patients with BRAF(V600E)-positive melanomas exhibit an initial
antitumor response to the RAF kinase inhibitor PLX4032, but acquired
drug resistance almost invariably develops. Johannessen et al. (2010)
identified MAP3K8 (191195), encoding COT (cancer Osaka thyroid oncogene)
as a MAPK pathway agonist that drives resistance to RAF inhibition in
BRAF(V600E) cell lines. COT activates ERK primarily through MARK/ERK
(MEK)-dependent mechanisms that do not require RAF signaling. Moreover,
COT expression is associated with de novo resistance in BRAF(V600E)
cultured cell lines and acquired resistance in melanoma cells and tissue
obtained from relapsing patients following treatment with MEK or RAF
inhibitors. Johannessen et al. (2010) further identified combinatorial
MAPK pathway inhibition or targeting of COT kinase activity as possible
therapeutic strategies for reducing MAPK pathway activation in this
setting.

Nazarian et al. (2010) showed that acquired resistance to PLX4032, a
novel class I RAF-selective inhibitor, develops by mutually exclusive
PDGFRB (173410) upregulation or NRAS (164790) mutations but not through
secondary mutations in BRAF(V600E). Nazarian et al. (2010) used
PLX4032-resistant sublines artificially derived from BRAF
(V600E)-positive melanoma cell lines and validated key findings in
PLX4032-resistant tumors and tumor-matched, short-term cultures from
clinical trial patients. Induction of PDGFRB RNA, protein and tyrosine
phosphorylation emerged as a dominant feature of acquired PLX4032
resistance in a subset of melanoma sublines, patient-derived biopsies,
and short-term cultures. PDGFRB upregulated tumor cells have low
activated RAS levels and, when treated with PLX4032, do not reactivate
the MAPK pathway significantly. In another subset, high levels of
activated N-RAS resulting from mutations lead to significant MAPK
pathway reactivation upon PLX4032 treatment. Knockdown of PDGFRB or NRAS
reduced growth of the respective PLX4032-resistant subsets.
Overexpression of PDGFRB or NRAS(Q61K) conferred PLX4032 resistance to
PLX4032-sensitive parental cell lines. Importantly, Nazarian et al.
(2010) showed that MAPK reactivation predicts MEK inhibitor sensitivity.
Thus, Nazarian et al. (2010) concluded that melanomas escape BRAF(V600E)
targeting not through secondary BRAF(V600E) mutations but via receptor
tyrosine kinase (RTK)-mediated activation of alternative survival
pathway(s) or activated RAS-mediated reactivation of the MAPK pathway,
suggesting additional therapeutic strategies.

Poulikakos et al. (2011) identified a novel resistance mechanism for
melanomas with BRAF(V600E) treated with RAF inhibitors. The authors
found that a subset of cells resistant to vemurafenib (PLX4032, RG7204)
express a 61-kD variant form of BRAF(V600E), p61BRAF(V600E), that lacks
exons 4 through 8, a region that encompasses the RAS-binding domain.
p61BRAF(V600E) showed enhanced dimerization in cells with low levels of
RAS activation, as compared to full-length BRAF(V600E). In cells in
which p61BRAF(V600E) was expressed endogenously or ectopically, ERK
signaling was resistant to the RAF inhibitor. Moreover, a mutation that
abolished the dimerization of p61BRAF(V600E) restored its sensitivity to
vemurafenib. Finally, Poulikakos et al. (2011) identified BRAF(V600E)
splicing variants lacking the RAS-binding domain in the tumors of 6 of
19 patients with acquired resistance to vemurafenib. Poulikakos et al.
(2011) concluded that their data supported the model that inhibition of
ERK signaling by RAF inhibitors is dependent on levels of RAS-GTP too
low to support RAF dimerization and identified a novel mechanism of
acquired resistance in patients: expression of splicing isoforms of
BRAF(V600E) that dimerize in a RAS-independent manner.

Thakur et al. (2013) investigated the cause and consequences of
vemurafenib resistance using 2 independently-derived primary human
melanoma xenograft models in which drug resistance is selected by
continuous vemurafenib administration. In one of these models, resistant
tumors showed continued dependency on BRAF(V600E)-MEK-ERK signaling
owing to elevated BRAF(V600E) expression. Thakur et al. (2013) showed
that vemurafenib-resistant melanomas become drug-dependent for their
continued proliferation, such that cessation of drug administration
leads to regression of established drug-resistant tumors. Thakur et al.
(2013) further demonstrated that a discontinuous dosing strategy, which
exploits the fitness disadvantage displayed by drug-resistant cells in
the absence of the drug, forestalls the onset of lethal drug-resistant
disease. Thakur et al. (2013) concluded that their data highlighted the
concept that drug-resistant cells may also display drug dependency, such
that altered dosing may prevent the emergence of lethal drug resistance.
These observations may contribute to sustaining the durability of
vemurafenib response with the ultimate goal of curative therapy for the
subset of melanoma patients with BRAF mutations.

Using metabolic profiling and functional perturbations, Kaplon et al.
(2013) showed that the mitochondrial gatekeeper pyruvate dehydrogenase
(PDH; 300502) is a crucial mediator of senescence induced by
BRAF(V600E), an oncogene commonly mutated in melanoma and other cancers.
BRAF(V600E)-induced senescence is accompanied by simultaneous
suppression of the PDH-inhibitory enzyme pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase-1
(PDK1; 602524) and induction of the PDH-activating enzyme pyruvate
dehydrogenase phosphatase-2 (PDP2; 615499). The resulting combined
activation of PDH enhanced the use of pyruvate in the tricarboxylic acid
cycle, causing increased respiration and redox stress. Abrogation of
oncogene-induced senescence (OIS), a rate-limiting step towards
oncogenic transformation, coincided with reversion of these processes.
Further supporting a crucial role of PDH in OIS, enforced normalization
of either PDK1 or PDP2 expression levels inhibited PDH and abrogated
OIS, thereby licensing BRAF(V600E)-driven melanoma development. Finally,
depletion of PDK1 eradicated melanoma subpopulations resistant to
targeted BRAF inhibition, and caused regression of established
melanomas.

Colorectal Carcinoma

Rajagopalan et al. (2002) identified the V600E mutation in 28 of 330
colorectal tumors screened for BRAF mutations. In all cases the mutation
was heterozygous and occurred somatically.

Domingo et al. (2004) pointed out that the V600E hotspot mutation had
been found in colorectal tumors that showed inherited mutation in a DNA
mismatch repair (MMR) gene, such as MLH1 (120436) or MSH2 (609309).
These mutations had been shown to occur almost exclusively in tumors
located in the proximal colon and with hypermethylation of MLH1, the
gene involved in the initial steps of development of these tumors;
however, BRAF mutations were not detected in those cases with or
presumed to have germline mutation in either MLH1 or MSH2. Domingo et
al. (2004) studied mutation analysis of the BRAF hotspot as a possible
low-cost effective strategy for genetic testing for hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC; 120435). The V600E mutation was
found in 82 (40%) of 206 sporadic tumors with high microsatellite
instability (MSI-H) but in none of 111 tested HNPCC tumors or in 45
cases showing abnormal MSH2 immunostaining. Domingo et al. (2004)
concluded that detection of the V600E mutation in a colorectal MSI-H
tumor argues against the presence of germline mutation in either MLH1 or
MSH2, and that screening of these MMR genes can be avoided in cases
positive for V600E.

Lubomierski et al. (2005) analyzed 45 colorectal carcinomas with
microsatellite instability (MSI) and 37 colorectal tumors without MSI
but with similar clinical characteristics and found that BRAF was
mutated more often in tumors with MSI than without (27% vs 5%, p =
0.016). The most prevalent BRAF alteration, V600E, occurred only in
tumors with MSI and was associated with more frequent MLH1 promoter
methylation and loss of MLH1. The median age of patients with BRAF V600E
was older than that of those without V600E (78 vs 49 years, p = 0.001).
There were no BRAF alterations in patients with germline mutations of
mismatch repair genes. Lubomierski et al. (2005) concluded that tumors
with MSI caused by epigenetic MLH1 silencing have a mutational
background distinct from that of tumors with genetic loss of mismatch
repair, and suggested that there are 2 genetically distinct entities of
microsatellite-instable tumors.

Tol et al. (2009) detected a somatic V600E mutation in 45 (8.7%) of 519
metastatic colorectal tumors. Patients with BRAF-mutated tumors had
significantly shorter median progression-free and median overall
survival compared to patients with wildtype BRAF tumors, regardless of
the use of cetuximab. Tol et al. (2009) suggested that the BRAF mutation
may be a negative prognostic factor in these patients.

Inhibition of the BRAF(V600E) oncoprotein by the small-molecule drug
PLX4032 (vemurafenib) is highly effective in the treatment of melanoma.
However, colon cancer patients harboring the same BRAF(V600E) oncogenic
lesion have poor prognosis and show only a very limited response to this
drug. To investigate the cause of this limited therapeutic effect in
BRAF(V600E) mutant colon cancer, Prahallad et al. (2012) performed an
RNA interference-based genetic screen in human cells to search for
kinases whose knockdown synergizes with BRAF(V600E) inhibition. They
reported that blockade of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR;
131550) shows strong synergy with BRAF(V600E) inhibition. Prahallad et
al. (2012) found in multiple BRAF(V600E) mutant colon cancers that
inhibition of EGFR by the antibody drug cetuximab or the small-molecule
drugs gefitinib or erlotinib is strongly synergistic with BRAF(V600E)
inhibition, both in vitro and in vivo. Mechanistically, Prahallad et al.
(2012) found that BRAF(V600E) inhibition causes a rapid feedback
activation of EGFR, which supports continued proliferation in the
presence of BRAF(V600E) inhibition. Melanoma cells express low levels of
EGFR and are therefore not subject to this feedback activation.
Consistent with this, Prahallad et al. (2012) found that ectopic
expression of EGFR in melanoma cells is sufficient to cause resistance
to PLX4032. Prahallad et al. (2012) concluded that BRAF(V600E) mutant
colon cancers (approximately 8 to 10% of all colon cancers) might
benefit from combination therapy consisting of BRAF and EGFR inhibitors.

Papillary Thyroid Carcinoma

Kimura et al. (2003) identified the V600E mutation in 28 (35.8%) of 78
papillary thyroid cancers (PTC; 188550); it was not found in any of the
other types of differentiated follicular neoplasms arising from the same
cell type (0 of 46). RET (see 164761)/PTC mutations and RAS (see 190020)
mutations were each identified in 16.4% of PTCs, but there was no
overlap in the 3 mutations. Kimura et al. (2003) concluded that thyroid
cell transformation to papillary cancer takes place through constitutive
activation of effectors along the RET/PTC-RAS-BRAF signaling pathway.

Xing et al. (2004) studied various thyroid tumor types for the most
common BRAF mutation, 1799T-A, by DNA sequencing. They found a high and
similar frequency (45%) of the 1799T-A mutation in 2 geographically
distinct papillary thyroid cancer patient populations, 1 composed of
sporadic cases from North America, and the other from Kiev, Ukraine,
that included individuals who were exposed to the Chernobyl nuclear
accident. In contrast, Xing et al. (2004) found BRAF mutations in only
20% of anaplastic thyroid cancers and in no medullary thyroid cancers or
benign thyroid hyperplasia. They also confirmed previous reports that
the BRAF 1799T-A mutation did not occur in benign thyroid adenomas or
follicular thyroid cancers. They concluded that frequent occurrence of
BRAF mutation is associated with PTC, irrespective of geographic origin,
and is apparently not a radiation-susceptible mutation.

Nikiforova et al. (2003) analyzed 320 thyroid tumors and 6 anaplastic
carcinoma cell lines and detected BRAF mutations in 45 papillary
carcinomas (38%), 2 poorly differentiated carcinomas (13%), 3 (10%)
anaplastic carcinomas (10%), and 5 thyroid anaplastic carcinoma cell
lines (83%) but not in follicular, Hurthle cell, and medullary
carcinomas, follicular and Hurthle cell adenomas, or benign hyperplastic
nodules. All mutations involved a T-to-A transversion at nucleotide
1799. All BRAF-positive poorly differentiated and anaplastic carcinomas
contained areas of preexisting papillary carcinoma, and mutation was
present in both the well differentiated and dedifferentiated components.
The authors concluded that BRAF mutations are restricted to papillary
carcinomas and poorly differentiated and anaplastic carcinomas arising
from papillary carcinomas, and that they are associated with distinct
phenotypic and biologic properties of papillary carcinomas and may
participate in progression to poorly differentiated and anaplastic
carcinomas.

Hypothesizing that childhood thyroid carcinomas may be associated with a
different prevalence of the BRAF 1799T-A mutation compared with adult
cases, Kumagai et al. (2004) examined 31 cases of Japanese childhood
thyroid carcinoma and an additional 48 cases of PTC from Ukraine, all of
whom were less than 17 years of age at the time of the Chernobyl
accident. The BRAF 1799T-A mutation was found in only 1 of 31 Japanese
cases (3.4%) and in none of the 15 Ukrainian cases operated on before
the age of 15 years, although it was found in 8 of 33 Ukrainian young
adult cases (24.2%). Kumagai et al. (2004) concluded that the BRAF
1799T-A mutation is uncommon in childhood thyroid carcinomas.

Puxeddu et al. (2004) found the V600E substitution in 24 of 60 PTCs
(40%) but in none of 6 follicular adenomas, 5 follicular carcinomas, or
1 anaplastic carcinoma. Nine of the 60 PTCs (15%) presented expression
of a RET/PTC rearrangement. A genetico-clinical association analysis
showed a statistically significant correlation between BRAF mutation and
development of PTCs of the classic papillary histotype (P = 0.038). No
link could be detected between expression of BRAF V600E and age at
diagnosis, gender, dimension, local invasiveness of the primary cancer,
presence of lymph node metastases, tumor stage, or multifocality of the
disease. The authors concluded that these data clearly confirmed that
BRAF V600E was the most common genetic alteration found to that time in
adult sporadic PTCs, that it is unique for this thyroid cancer
histotype, and that it might drive the development of PTCs of the
classic papillary subtype.

Xing et al. (2004) demonstrated detection of the 1799T-A mutation on
thyroid cytologic specimens from fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB).
Prospective analysis showed that 50% of the nodules that proved to be
PTCs on surgical histopathology were correctly diagnosed by BRAF
mutation analysis on FNAB specimens; there were no false positive
findings.

Xing et al. (2005) studied the relationships between the BRAF V600E
mutation and clinicopathologic outcomes, including recurrence, in 219
PTC patients. The authors concluded that in patients with PTC, BRAF
mutation is associated with poorer clinicopathologic outcomes and
independently predicts recurrence. Therefore, BRAF mutation may be a
useful molecular marker to assist in risk stratification for patients
with PTC.

In a series of 52 classic PTCs, Porra et al. (2005) found that low
SLC5A8 (608044) expression was highly significantly associated with the
presence of the BRAF 1799T-A mutation. SLC5A8 expression was selectively
downregulated (40-fold) in PTCs of classical form; methylation-specific
PCR analyses showed that SLC5A8 was methylated in 90% of classic PTCs
and in about 20% of other PTCs. Porra et al. (2005) concluded that their
data identified a relationship between the methylation-associated
silencing of the tumor-suppressor gene SLC5A8 and the 1799T-A point
mutation of the BRAF gene in the classic PTC subtype of thyroid
carcinomas.

Vasko et al. (2005) studied the relationship between the BRAF 1799T-A
mutation and lymph node metastasis of PTC by examining the mutation in
both the primary tumors and their paired lymph node metastases. Their
findings indicated that the high prevalence of BRAF mutation in lymph
node-metastasized PTC tissues from BRAF mutation-positive primary tumors
and the possible de novo formation of BRAF mutation in lymph
node-metastasized PTC were consistent with a role of BRAF mutation in
facilitating the metastasis and progression of PTC in lymph nodes.

In a patient with congenital hypothyroidism and long-standing goiter due
to mutation in the thyroglobulin gene (see TG, 188540; and TDH3,
274700), who was also found to have multifocal follicular carcinoma of
the thyroid, Hishinuma et al. (2005) identified somatic heterozygosity
for the V600E mutation in the BRAF gene in the cancerous thyroid tissue.

Liu et al. (2007) used BRAF siRNA to transfect stably several BRAF
mutation-harboring PTC cell lines, isolated clones with stable
suppression of BRAF, and assessed their ability to proliferate,
transform, and grow xenograft tumors in nude mice. They found that the
V600E mutation not only initiates PTC but also maintains the
proliferation, transformation, and tumorigenicity of PTC cells harboring
the BRAF mutation, and that the growth of tumors derived from such cells
continues to depend on the V600E mutation.

Jo et al. (2006) found that of 161 PTC patients, 102 (63.4%) had the
BRAF V600E mutation and that these patients had significantly larger
tumor sizes and significantly higher expression of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF; 192240) compared to patients without this mutation.
The level of VEGF expression was closely correlated with tumor size,
extrathyroidal invasion, and stage. Jo et al. (2006) concluded that the
relatively high levels of VEGF expression may be related to poorer
clinical outcomes and recurrences in BRAF V600E(+) PTC.

Durante et al. (2007) found that the BRAF V600E mutation in PTCs is
associated with reduced expression of key genes involved in iodine
metabolism. They noted that this effect may alter the effectiveness of
diagnostic and/or therapeutic use of radioiodine in BRAF-mutation PTCs.

Lupi et al. (2007) found a BRAF mutation in 219 of 500 cases (43.8%) of
PTC. The most common BRAF mutation, V600E, was found in 214 cases
(42.8%). BRAF V600E was associated with extrathyroidal invasion (p less
than 0.0001), multicentricity (p = 0.0026), presence of nodal metastases
(p = 0.0009), class III versus classes I and II (p less than
0.00000006), and absence of tumor capsule (p less than 0.0001), in
particular, in follicular- and micro-PTC variants. By multivariate
analysis, the absence of tumor capsule remained the only parameter
associated (p = 0.0005) with the BRAF V600E mutation. The authors
concluded that the BRAF V600E mutation is associated with high-risk PTC
and, in particular, in follicular variant with invasive tumor growth.

Flaherty et al. (2010) reported complete or partial regression of
V600E-associated papillary thyroid cancer in 3 patients treated with an
inhibitor (PLX4032) specific to the V600E mutation.

Nonseminomatous Germ Cell Tumors

In 3 (9%) of 32 nonseminomatous germ cell tumors (see 273300) with a
mixture of embryonal carcinoma, yolk sac tumor, choriocarcinoma, and
mature teratoma, Sommerer et al. (2005) identified the activating
1796T-A mutation in the BRAF gene; the mutation was present within the
embryonic carcinoma component.

Astrocytoma

Pfister et al. (2008) identified a somatic V600E mutation in 4 (6%) of
66 pediatric low-grade astrocytomas (137800). Thirty (45%) of the 66
tumors had a copy number gain spanning the BRAF locus, indicating a
novel mechanism of MAPK (176948) pathway activation in these tumors.

.0002
COLON CANCER, SOMATIC
BRAF, ARG462ILE

In 1 case of colorectal cancer (114500), Rajagopalan et al. (2002)
observed a G-to-T transversion at nucleotide 1382 of the BRAF gene,
resulting in an arg-ile substitution at codon 461 (R461I), in
heterozygous state and as a somatic mutation. Based on the revised
numbering system of Kumar et al. (2003), the ARG461ILE (1382G-T)
mutation has been renumbered as ARG462ILE (1385G-T).

.0003
COLORECTAL CANCER, SOMATIC
BRAF, ILE463SER

In a colorectal tumor (114500), Rajagopalan et al. (2002) identified a
T-to-G transversion at nucleotide 1385 of the BRAF gene, resulting in an
ile-ser substitution at codon 462 (I462S). This mutation was found in
heterozygosity and was shown to be somatic. Based on the revised
numbering system of Kumar et al. (2003), the ILE462SER (1385T-G)
mutation has been renumbered as ILE463SER (1388T-G).

.0004
COLORECTAL CANCER, SOMATIC
BRAF, GLY464GLU

In a colorectal tumor (114500), Rajagopalan et al. (2002) identified a
G-to-A transition at nucleotide 1388 of the BRAF gene, resulting in a
gly-glu substitution at codon 463 (G463E). This mutation was
heterozygous and somatic. Based on the revised numbering system of Kumar
et al. (2003), the GLY463GLU (1388G-A) mutation has been renumbered as
GLY464GLU (1391G-A).

.0005
COLORECTAL CANCER, SOMATIC
THYROID CARCINOMA, FOLLICULAR, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
BRAF, LYS601GLU

In a colorectal tumor (114500), Rajagopalan et al. (2002) identified an
A-to-G transition at nucleotide 1798 of the BRAF gene, resulting in a
lys-glu at codon 600 (K600E). This mutation was heterozygous and
occurred somatically. Based on the revised numbering system of Kumar et
al. (2003), the LYS600GLU (1798A-G) mutation has been renumbered as
LYS601GLU (1801A-G).

In a patient with congenital hypothyroidism and long-standing goiter due
to mutation in the thyroglobulin gene (see TG, 188540; and TDH3,
274700), who was also found to have multifocal follicular carcinoma of
the thyroid, Hishinuma et al. (2005) identified somatic heterozygosity
for the K601E mutation in the BRAF gene in the cancerous thyroid tissue.

.0006
ADENOCARCINOMA OF LUNG, SOMATIC
BRAF, GLY466VAL

Naoki et al. (2002) identified a gly465-to-val (G465V) mutation in exon
11 of the BRAF gene in 1 of 127 primary human lung adenocarcinomas (see
211980) screened. Based on the revised numbering system of Kumar et al.
(2003), the GLY465VAL mutation has been renumbered as GLY466VAL.

.0007
ADENOCARCINOMA OF LUNG, SOMATIC
BRAF, LEU597ARG

Naoki et al. (2002) identified a leu596-to-arg (L596R) mutation in exon
15 of the BRAF gene in 1 of 127 primary human lung adenocarcinomas (see
211980) screened. Based on the revised numbering system of Kumar et al.
(2003), the LEU596ARG mutation has been renumbered as LEU597ARG.

.0008
NONSMALL CELL LUNG CANCER, SOMATIC
BRAF, LEU597VAL

In a nonsmall cell lung carcinoma, Brose et al. (2002) identified a
leu596-to-val (L596V) change in exon 15 of the BRAF gene. Based on the
revised numbering system of Kumar et al. (2003), the LEU596VAL mutation
has been renumbered as LEU597VAL.

.0009
LYMPHOMA, NON-HODGKIN, SOMATIC
BRAF, GLY469ARG

Lee et al. (2003) analyzed genomic DNA from 164 non-Hodgkin lymphomas
(NHLs; 605027) by PCR-based single-strand conformation polymorphism
(SSCP) for detection of somatic mutations of BRAF (exons 11 and 15).
BRAF mutations were detected in 4 NHLs (2.4%). Whereas most BRAF
mutations in human cancers involve val600, e.g., 164757.0001, all of the
4 BRAF mutations in the NHLs involved other amino acids: 1 G468A
(164757.0010), 2 G468R, and 1 D593G (164757.0011). Based on the revised
numbering system of Kumar et al. (2003), the GLY468ARG mutation has been
renumbered as GLY469ARG, the GLY468ALA mutation has been renumbered as
GLY469ALA, and the ASP593GLY mutation has been renumbered as ASP594GLY.

.0010
LYMPHOMA, NON-HODGKIN, SOMATIC
BRAF, GLY469ALA

See 164757.0009 and Lee et al. (2003).

.0011
LYMPHOMA, NON-HODGKIN, SOMATIC
BRAF, ASP594GLY

See 164757.0009 and Lee et al. (2003).

.0012
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 1
BRAF, ALA246PRO

In 2 unrelated patients with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome (CFC1;
115150), Niihori et al. (2006) found a heterozygous 736G-C transversion
in exon 6 of the BRAF gene, predicting an ala246-to-pro (A246P) amino
acid change.

.0013
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 1
BRAF, GLN257ARG

In 3 unrelated patients with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome (CFC1;
115150), Niihori et al. (2006) found a heterozygous 770A-G transition in
exon 6 of the BRAF gene, predicting a gln257-to-arg (Q257R) amino acid
change.

.0014
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 1
BRAF, GLY469GLU

In 4 presumably unrelated individuals with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome
(CFC1; 115150), Niihori et al. (2006) found a heterozygous 1406G-A
transition in exon 11 of the BRAF gene, predicting a gly469-to-glu
(G469E) amino acid change.

.0015
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 1
BRAF, LEU485PHE

In a patient with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome (CFC1; 115150), Niihori
et al. (2006) found a heterozygous 1455G-C transition in exon 12 of the
BRAF gene, predicting a leu485-to-phe (L485F) amino acid change.

.0016
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 1
BRAF, LYS499GLU

In a patient with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome (CFC1; 115150), Niihori
et al. (2006) found a heterozygous 1495A-G transition in exon 12 of the
BRAF gene, predicting a lys499-to-glu (K499E) amino acid change.

.0017
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 1
BRAF, GLU501LYS

In a patient with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome (CFC1; 115150), Niihori
et al. (2006) found a heterozygous 1501G-A transition in exon 12 of the
BRAF gene, predicting a glu501-to-lys (E501K) amino acid change. This
patient had been reported by Verloes et al. (1988).

.0018
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 1
BRAF, GLU501GLY

In 2 presumably unrelated patients with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome
(CFC1; 115150), Niihori et al. (2006) found a heterozygous 1502A-G
transition in exon 12 of the BRAF gene, predicting a glu501-to-gly
(E501G) amino acid change.

.0019
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 1
BRAF, ASN581ASP

In 2 presumably unrelated patients with cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome
(CFC1; 115150), Niihori et al. (2006) found a heterozygous 1741A-G
transition in exon 14 of the BRAF gene, predicting an asn581-to-asp
(N581D) amino acid change.

.0020
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 1
BRAF, GLY534ARG

In a 7-year-old boy with craniofacial features overlapping both
cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC1; 115150) and Costello (218040) syndromes, in
whom no HRAS (190020) mutation was found (Estep et al., 2006), Rauen
(2006) identified a 1600G-C transversion in exon 13 of the BRAF gene,
resulting in a gly534-to-arg (G534R) substitution, and noted that
CFC-causing BRAF mutations had not been previously described in exon 13.

.0021
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 1
BRAF, ASP638GLU

In a 13-year-old girl with phenotypic features overlapping
cardiofaciocutaneous (CFC1; 115150) and Costello (218040) syndromes, in
whom no HRAS (190020) mutation was found (Estep et al., 2006), Rauen
(2006) identified a 1914T-A transversion in exon 16 of the BRAF gene,
resulting in an asp638-to-glu (D638E) substitution, and noted that
CFC-causing BRAF mutations had not been previously described in exon 16.

.0022
NOONAN SYNDROME 7
BRAF, THR241MET

In a patient with Noonan syndrome-7 (613706), Sarkozy et al. (2009)
identified a heterozygous de novo 722C-T transition in exon 6 of the
BRAF gene, resulting in a thr241-to-met (T241M) substitution.

.0023
NOONAN SYNDROME 7
BRAF, THR241ARG

In a patient with Noonan syndrome-7 (613706), Sarkozy et al. (2009)
identified a heterozygous 722C-G transversion in exon 6 of the BRAF
gene, resulting in a thr241-to-arg (T241R) substitution. The mutation
was not identified in 150 controls.

.0024
CARDIOFACIOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME 1
LEOPARD SYNDROME 3, INCLUDED
BRAF, THR241PRO

In 2 unrelated patients with CFC1 (115150), Schulz et al. (2008)
identified a heterozygous 721A-C transversion in exon 6 of the BRAF
gene, resulting in a thr241-to-pro (T241P) substitution in a conserved
residue.

Sarkozy et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous de novo T241P mutation
in a patient with LEOPARD syndrome-3 (613707). The patient had poor
growth, craniofacial anomalies, short and webbed neck, mitral and aortic
valve dysplasia, cognitive deficits, neonatal hypotonia, sensorineural
deafness, and seizures. Other features included thorax defects, delayed
puberty, reduced bone density, and fibrous cystic lesions of the pelvis.
The skin showed hyperkeratosis, cafe-au-lait spots, multiple nevi, and
dark colored lentigines that were spread on the whole body including the
palms and soles. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
T241P mutant protein did not show transforming ability to cells in
vitro, although there was a slight increase in MEK phosphorylation,
suggesting activation of the downstream MAPK pathway.

.0025
NOONAN SYNDROME 7
BRAF, TRP531CYS

In 2 unrelated patients with Noonan syndrome-7 (613706), Sarkozy et al.
(2009) identified a heterozygous de novo 1593G-C transversion in exon 13
of the BRAF gene, resulting in a trp531-to-cys (W531C) substitution. In
vitro functional expression studies showed that the W531C mutant protein
did not show transforming ability to cells in vitro, although there was
a slight increase in MEK phosphorylation, suggesting activation of the
downstream MAPK pathway.

.0026
NOONAN SYNDROME 7
BRAF, LEU597VAL

In patient with Noonan syndrome-7 (613706), Sarkozy et al. (2009)
identified a heterozygous de novo 1789C-G transversion in exon 15 of the
BRAF gene, resulting in a leu597-to-val (L597V) substitution. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that the W531C mutant protein did
not show transforming ability to cells in vitro, although there was a
slight increase in MEK phosphorylation, suggesting activation of the
downstream MAPK pathway.

REFERENCE 1. Ball, D. W.; Jin, N.; Rosen, D. M.; Dackiw, A.; Sidransky, D.;
Xing, M.; Nelkin, B. D.: Selective growth inhibition in BRAF mutant
thyroid cancer by the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1/2
inhibitor AZD6244. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 4712-4718, 2007.

2. Bollag, G.; Hirth, P.; Tsai, J.; Zhang, J.; Ibrahim, P. N.; Cho,
H.; Spevak, W.; Zhang, C.; Zhang, Y.; Habets, G.; Burton, E. A.; Wong,
B.; and 28 others: Clinical efficacy of a RAF inhibitor needs broad
target blockade in BRAF-mutant melanoma. Nature 467: 596-599, 2010.

3. Brose, M. S.; Volpe, P.; Feldman, M.; Kumar, M.; Rishi, I.; Gerrero,
R.; Einhorn, E.; Herlyn, M.; Minna, J.; Nicholson, A.; Roth, J. A.;
Albelda, S. M.; Davies, H.; Cox, C.; Brignell, G.; Stephens, P.; Futreal,
P. A.; Wooster, R.; Stratton, M. R.; Weber, B. L.: BRAF and RAS mutations
in human lung cancer and melanoma. Cancer Res. 62: 6997-7000, 2002.

4. Chapman, P.; Puzanov, I.; sosman, J.; Kim, K.; Ribas, A.; McArthur,
G.; Lee, R.; Grippo, J.; Nolop, K.; Flaherty, K.: Early efficacy
signal demonstrated in advanced melanoma in a phase I trial of the
oncogenic BRAF-selective inhibitor PLX4032. (Abstract) Europ. J.
Cancer Suppl. 7: 5 only, 2009.

5. Ciampi, R.; Knauf, J. A.; Kerler, R.; Gandhi, M.; Zhu, Z.; Nikiforova,
M. N.; Rabes, H. M.; Fagin, J. A.; Nikiforov, Y. E.: Oncogenic AKAP9-BRAF
fusion is a novel mechanism of MAPK pathway activation in thyroid
cancer. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 94-101, 2005.

6. Curtin, J. A.; Fridlyand, J.; Kageshita, T.; Patel, H. N.; Busam,
K. J.; Kutzner, H.; Cho, K.-H.; Aiba, S.; Brocker, E.-B.; LeBoit,
P. E.; Pinkel, D.; Bastian, B. C.: Distinct sets of genetic alterations
in melanoma. New Eng. J. Med. 353: 2135-2147, 2005.

7. Dankort, D.; Curley, D. P.; Cartlidge, R. A.; Nelson, B.; Karnezis,
A. N.; Damsky, W. E., Jr.; You, M. J.; DePinho, R. A.; McMahon, M.;
Bosenberg, M.: Braf(V600E) cooperates with Pten loss to induce metastatic
melanoma. Nature Genet. 41: 544-552, 2009.

8. Davies, H.; Bignell, G. R.; Cox, C.; Stephens, P.; Edkins, S.;
Clegg, S.; Teague, J.; Woffendin, H.; Garnett, M. J.; Bottomley, W.;
Davis, N.; Dicks, E.; and 40 others: Mutations of the BRAF gene
in human cancer. Nature 417: 949-954, 2002.

9. Davison, J. M.; Rosenbaum, E.; Barrett, T. L.; Goldenberg, D.;
Hoque, M. O.; Sidransky, D.; Westra, W. H.: Absence of V599E BRAF
mutations in desmoplastic melanomas. Cancer 103: 788-792, 2005.

10. Domingo, E.; Laiho, P.; Ollikainen, M.; Pinto, M.; Wang, L.; French,
A. J.; Westra, J.; Frebourg, T.; Espin, E.; Armengol, M.; Hamelin,
R.; Yamamoto, H.; Hofstra, R. M. W.; Seruca, R.; Lindblom, A.; Peltomaki,
P.; Thibodeau, S. N.; Aaltonen, L. A.; Schwartz, S., Jr.: BRAF screening
as a low-cost effective strategy for simplifying HNPCC genetic testing. J.
Med. Genet. 41: 664-668, 2004.

11. Durante, C.; Puxeddu, E.; Ferretti, E.; Morisi, R.; Moretti, S.;
Bruno, R.; Barbi, F.; Avenia, N.; Scipioni, A.; Verrienti, A.; Tosi,
E.; Cavaliere, A.; Gulino, A.; Filetti, S.; Russo, D.: BRAF mutations
in papillary thyroid carcinomas inhibit genes involved in iodine metabolism. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 2840-2843, 2007.

12. Edmunds, S. C.; Cree, I. A.; Di Nicolantonio, F.; Hungerford,
J. L.; Hurren, J. S.; Kelsell, D. P.: Absence of BRAF gene mutations
in uveal melanomas in contrast to cutaneous melanomas. Brit. J. Cancer 88:
1403-1405, 2003.

13. Edwards, R. H.; Ward, M. R.; Wu, H.; Medina, C. A.; Brose, M.
S.; Volpe, P.; Nussen-Lee, S.; Haupt, H. M.; Martin, A. M.; Herlyn,
M.; Lessin, S. R.; Weber, B. L.: Absence of BRAF mutations in UV-protected
mucosal melanomas. J. Med. Genet. 41: 270-272, 2004.

14. Estep, A. L.; Tidyman, W. E.; Teitell, M. A.; Cotter, P. D.; Rauen,
K. A.: HRAS mutation in Costello syndrome: detection of constitutional
activating mutations in codon 12 and 13 and loss of wild-type allele
in malignancy. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A: 8-16, 2006.

15. Eychene, A.; Barnier, J. V.; Apiou, F.; Dutrillaux, B.; Calothy,
G.: Chromosomal assignment of two human B-raf(Rmil) proto-oncogene
loci: B-raf-1 encoding the p94(Braf/Rmil) and B-raf-2, a processed
pseudogene. Oncogene 7: 1657-1660, 1992.

16. Flaherty, K.; Puzanov, I.; Sosman, J.; Kim, K.; Ribas, A.; McArthur,
G.; Lee, R. J.; Grippo, J. F.; Nolop, K.; Chapman, P.: Phase I study
of PLX4032: proof of concept for V600E BRAF mutation as a therapeutic
target in human cancer. (Abstract-9000) J. Clin. Oncol. 27 (suppl.):
15s, 2009.

17. Flaherty, K. T.; Puzanov, I.; Kim, K. B.; Ribas, A.; McArthur,
G. A.; Sosman, J. A.; O'Dwyer, P. J.; Lee, R. J.; Grippo, J. F.; Nolop,
K.; Chapman, P. B.: Inhibition of mutated, activated BRAF in metastatic
melanoma. New Eng. J. Med. 363: 809-819, 2010.

18. Garnett, M. J.; Marais, R.: Guilty as charged: B-RAF is a human
oncogene. Cancer Cell 6: 313-319, 2004.

19. Giannini, R.; Ugolini, C.; Lupi, C.; Proietti, A.; Elisei, R.;
Salvatore, G.; Berti, P.; Materazzi, G.; Miccoli, P.; Santoro, M.;
Basolo, F.: The heterozygous distribution of BRAF mutation supports
the independent clonal origin of distinct tumor foci in multifocal
papillary thyroid carcinoma. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 3511-3516,
2007.

20. Hatzivassiliou, G.; Song, K.; Yen, I.; Brandhuber, B. J.; Anderson,
D. J.; Alvarado, R.; Ludlam, M. J. C.; Stokoe, D.; Gloor, S. L.; Vigers,
G.; Morales, T.; Aliagas, I.; and 9 others: RAF inhibitors prime
wild-type RAF to activate the MAPK pathway and enhance growth. Nature 464:
431-435, 2010.

21. Hishinuma, A.; Fukata, S.; Kakudo, K.; Murata, Y.; Ieiri, T.:
High incidence of thyroid cancer in long-standing goiters with thyroglobulin
mutations. Thyroid 15: 1079-1084, 2005.

22. Issa, J.-P.: CpG island methylator phenotype in cancer. Nature
Rev. Cancer 4: 988-993, 2004.

23. Jo, Y. S.; Li, S.; Song, J. H.; Kwon, K. H.; Lee, J. C.; Rha,
S. Y.; Lee, H. J.; Sul, J. Y.; Kweon, G. R.; Ro, H.; Kim, J.-M.; Shong,
M.: Influence of the BRAF V600E mutation on expression of vascular
endothelial growth factor in papillary thyroid cancer. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 91: 3667-3670, 2006.

24. Johannessen, C. M.; Boehm, J. S.; Kim, S. Y.; Thomas, S. R.; Wardwell,
L.; Johnson, L. A.; Emery, C. M.; Stransky, N.; Cogdill, A. P.; Barretina,
J.; Caponigro, G.; Hieronymus, H.; and 23 others: COT drives resistance
to RAF inhibition through MAP kinase pathway reactivation. Nature 468:
968-972, 2010.

25. Jones, D. T. W.; Kocialkowski, S.; Liu, L.; Pearson, D. M.; Backlund,
L. M.; Ichimura, K.; Collins, V. P.: Tandem duplication producing
a novel oncogenic BRAF fusion gene defines the majority of pilocytic
astrocytomas. Cancer Res. 68: 8673-8677, 2008.

26. Jones, D. T. W.; Kocialkowski, S.; Liu, L.; Pearson, D. M.; Ichimura,
K.; Collins, V. P.: Oncogenic RAF1 rearrangement and a novel BRAF
mutation as alternatives to KIAA1549:BRAF fusion in activating the
MAPK pathway in pilocytic astrocytoma. Oncogene 28: 2119-2123, 2009.

27. Justice, M. J.; Siracusa, L. D.; Gilbert, D. J.; Heisterkamp,
N.; Groffen, J.; Chada, K.; Silan, C. M.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins,
N. A.: A genetic linkage map of mouse chromosome 10: localization
of eighteen molecular markers using a single interspecific backcross. Genetics 125:
855-866, 1990.

28. Kaplon, J.; Zheng, L.; Meissl, K.; Chaneton, B.; Selivanov, V.
A.; Mackay, G.; van der Burg, S. H.; Verdegaal, E. M. E.; Cascante,
M.; Shlomi, T.; Gottlieb, E.; Peeper, D. S.: A key role for mitochondrial
gatekeeper pyruvate dehydrogenase in oncogene-induced senescence. Nature 498:
109-112, 2013.

29. Kim, I.-J.; Park, J.-H.; Kang, H. C.; Shin, Y.; Park, H.-W.; Park,
H.-R.; Ku, J.-L.; Lim, S.-B.; Park, J.-G.: Mutational analysis of
BRAF and K-ras in gastric cancers: absence of BRAF mutations in gastric
cancers. Hum. Genet. 114: 118-120, 2003.

30. Kimura, E. T.; Nikiforova, M. N.; Zhu, Z.; Knauf, J. A.; Nikiforov,
Y. E.; Fagin, J. A.: High prevalence of BRAF mutations in thyroid
cancer: genetic evidence for constitutive activation of the RET/PTC-RAS-BRAF
signaling pathway in papillary thyroid carcinoma. Cancer Res. 63:
1454-1457, 2003.

31. Kumagai, A.; Namba, H.; Saenko, V. A.; Ashizawa, K.; Ohtsuru,
A.; Ito, M.; Ishikawa, N.; Sugino, K.; Ito, K.; Jeremiah, S.; Thomas,
G. A.; Bogdanova, T. I.; Tronko, M. D.; Nagayasu, T.; Shibata, Y.;
Yamashita, S.: Low frequency of BRAF(T1796A) mutations in childhood
thyroid carcinomas. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 4280-4284, 2004.

32. Kumar, R.; Angelini, S.; Czene, K.; Sauroja, I.; Hahka-Kemppinen,
M.; Pyrhonen, S.; Hemminki, K.: BRAF mutations in metastatic melanoma:
a possible association with clinical outcome. Clin. Cancer. Res. 9:
3362-3368, 2003.

33. Landi, M. T.; Bauer, J.; Pfeiffer, R. M.; Elder, D. E.; Hulley,
B.; Minghetti, P.; Calista, D.; Kanetsky, P. A.; Pinkel, D.; Bastian,
B. C.: MC1R germline variants confer risk for BRAF-mutant melanoma. Science 313:
521-522, 2006.

34. Lang, J.; Boxer, M.; MacKie, R.: Absence of exon 15 BRAF germline
mutations in familial melanoma. Hum. Mutat. 21: 327-330, 2003.

35. Leboeuf, R.; Baumgartner, J. E.; Benezra, M.; Malaguarnera, R.;
Solit, D.; Pratilas, C. A.; Rosen, N.; Knauf, J. A.; Fagin, J. A.
: BRAF(V600E) mutation is associated with preferential sensitivity
to mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase inhibition in thyroid cancer
cell lines. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 93: 2194-2201, 2008.

36. Lee, J. W.; Yoo, N. J.; Soung, Y. H.; Kim, H. S.; Park, W. S.;
Kim, S. Y.; Lee, J. H.; Park, J. Y.; Cho, Y. G.; Kim, C. J.; Ko, Y.
H.; Kim, S. H.; Nam, S. W.; Lee, J. Y.; Lee, S. H.: BRAF mutations
in non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Brit. J. Cancer 89: 1958-1960, 2003.

37. Liu, D.; Liu, Z.; Condouris, S.; Xing, M.: BRAF V600E maintains
proliferation, transformation, and tumorigenicity of BRAF-mutant papillary
thyroid cancer cells. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 2264-2271, 2007.

38. Lubomierski, N.; Plotz, G.; Wormek, M.; Engels, K.; Kriener, S.;
Trojan, J.; Jungling, B.; Zeuzem, S.; Raedle, J.: BRAF mutations
in colorectal carcinoma suggest two entities of microsatellite-unstable
tumors. Cancer 104: 952-961, 2005.

39. Lupi, C.; Giannini, R.; Ugolini, C.; Proietti, A.; Berti, P.;
Minuto, M.; Materazzi, G.; Elisei, R.; Santoro, M.; Miccoli, P.; Basolo,
F.: Association of BRAF V600E mutation with poor clinicopathological
outcomes in 500 consecutive cases of papillary thyroid carcinoma. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 92: 4085-4090, 2007.

40. Maat, W.; Kilic, E.; Luyten, G. P. M.; de Klein, A.; Jager, M.
J.; Gruis, N. A.; Van der Velden, P. A.: Pyrophosphorolysis detects
B-RAF mutations in primary uveal melanoma. Invest. Ophthal. Vis.
Sci. 49: 23-27, 2008.

41. Meltzer, P. S.: Genetic diversity in melanoma. New Eng. J. Med. 353:
2104-2107, 2005.

42. Meyer, P.; Klaes, R.; Schmitt, C.; Boettger, M. B.; Garbe, C.
: Exclusion of BRAF(V599E) as a melanoma susceptibility mutation. Int.
J. Cancer 106: 78-80, 2003.

43. Michaloglou, C.; Vredeveld, L. C. W.; Soengas, M. S.; Denoyelle,
C.; Kuilman, T.; van der Horst, C. M. A. M.; Majoor, D. M.; Shay,
J. W.; Mooi, W. J.; Peeper, D. S.: BRAF(E600)-associated senescence-like
cell cycle arrest of human naevi. (Letter) Nature 436: 720-724,
2005.

44. Namba, H.; Nakashima, M.; Hayashi, T.; Hayashida, N.; Maeda, S.;
Rogounovitch, T. I.; Ohtsuru, A.; Saenko, V. A.; Kanematsu, T.; Yamashita,
S.: Clinical implication of hot spot BRAF mutation, V599E, in papillary
thyroid cancers. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 4393-4397, 2003.

45. Naoki, K.; Chen, T.-H.; Richards, W. G.; Sugarbaker, D. J.; Meyerson,
M.: Missense mutations of the BRAF gene in human lung adenocarcinoma. Cancer
Res. 62: 7001-7003, 2002.

46. Nazarian, R.; Shi, H.; Wang, Q.; Kong, X.; Koya, R. C.; Lee, H.;
Chen, Z.; Lee, M.-K.; Attar, N.; Sazegar, H.; Chodon, T.; Nelson,
S. F.; McArthur, G.; Sosman, J. A.; Ribas, A.; Lo, R. S.: Melanomas
acquire resistance to B-RAF(V600E) inhibition by RTK or N-RAS upregulation. Nature 468:
973-977, 2010.

47. Niihori, T.; Aoki, Y.; Narumi, Y.; Neri, G.; Cave, H.; Verloes,
A.; Okamoto, N.; Hennekam, R. C. M.; Gillessen-Kaesbach, G.; Wieczorek,
D.; Kavamura, M.I.; Kurosawa, K.; and 12 others: Germline KRAS
and BRAF mutations in cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome. Nature Genet. 38:
294-296, 2006.

48. Nikiforova, M. N.; Kimura, E. T.; Gandhi, M.; Biddinger, P. W;
Knauf, J. A.; Basolo, F.; Zhu, Z.; Giannini, R.; Salvatore, G.; Fusco,
A.; Santoro, M.; Fagin, J. A.; Nikiforov, Y. E.: BRAF mutations in
thyroid tumors are restricted to papillary carcinomas and anaplastic
or poorly differentiated carcinomas arising from papillary carcinomas. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 5399-5404, 2003.

49. Pfister, S.; Janzarik, W. G.; Remke, M.; Ernst, A.; Werft, W.;
Becker, N.; Toedt, G.; Wittmann, A.; Kratz, C.; Olbrich, H.; Ahmadi,
R.; Thieme, B.; and 11 others: BRAF gene duplication constitutes
a mechanism of MAPK activation in low-grade astrocytomas. J. Clin.
Invest. 118: 1739-1749, 2008.

50. Pollock, P. M.; Harper, U. L.; Hansen, K. S.; Yudt, L. M.; Stark,
M.; Robbins, C. M.; Moses, T. Y.; Hostetter, G.; Wagner, U.; Kakareka,
J.; Salem, G.; Pohida, T.; Heenan, P.; Duray, P.; Kallioniemi, O.;
Hayward, N. K.; Trent, J. M.; Meltzer, P. S.: High frequency of BRAF
mutations in nevi. Nature Genet. 33: 19-20, 2003.

51. Porra, V.; Ferraro-Peyret, C.; Durand, C.; Selmi-Ruby, S.; Giroud,
H.; Berger-Dutrieux, N.; Decaussin, M.; Peix, J.-L.; Bournaud, C.;
Orgiazzi, J.; Borson-Chazot, F.; Dante, R.; Rousset, B.: Silencing
of the tumor suppressor gene SLC5A8 is associated with BRAF mutations
in classical papillary thyroid carcinomas. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90:
3028-3035, 2005.

52. Poulikakos, P. I.; Persaud, Y.; Janakiraman, M.; Kong, X.; Ng,
C.; Moriceau, G.; Shi, H.; Atefi, M.; Titz, B.; Gabay, M. T.; Salton,
M.; Dahlman, K. B.; and 12 others: RAF inhibitor resistance is
mediated by dimerization of aberrantly spliced BRAF(V600E). Nature 480:
387-390, 2011.

53. Poulikakos, P. I.; Zhang, C.; Bollag, G.; Shokat, K. M.; Rosen,
N.: RAF inhibitors transactivate RAF dimers and ERK signalling in
cells with wild-type BRAF. Nature 464: 427-430, 2010.

54. Prahallad, A.; Sun, C.; Huang, S.; Di Nicolantonio, F.; Salazar,
R.; Zecchin, D.; Beijersbergen, R. L.; Bardelli, A.; Bernards, R.
: Unresponsiveness of colon cancer to BRAF(V600E) inhibition through
feedback activation of EGFR. Nature 483: 100-103, 2012.

55. Puxeddu, E.; Moretti, S.; Elisei, R.; Romei, C.; Pascucci, R.;
Martinelli, M.; Marino, C.; Avenia, N.; Rossi, E. D.; Fadda, G.; Cavaliere,
A.; Ribacchi, R.; Falorni, A.; Pontecorvi, A.; Pacini, F.; Pinchera,
A.; Santeusanio, F.: BRAFV599E mutation is the leading genetic event
in adult sporadic papillary thyroid carcinomas. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 89: 2414-2420, 2004.

56. Rajagopalan, H.; Bardelli, A.; Lengauer, C.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein,
B.; Velculescu, V. E.: RAF/RAS oncogenes and mismatch-repair status.
(Letter) Nature 418: 934 only, 2002.

57. Rajakulendran, T.; Sahmi, M.; Lefrancois, M.; Sicheri, F.; Therrien,
M.: A dimerization-dependent mechanism drives RAF catalytic activation. Nature 461:
542-545, 2009.

58. Rauen, K. A.: Distinguishing Costello versus cardio-facio-cutaneous
syndrome: BRAF mutations in patients with a Costello phenotype. (Letter) Am.
J. Med. Genet. 140A: 1681-1683, 2006.

59. Rodriguez-Viciana, P.; Tetsu, O.; Tidyman, W. E.; Estep, A. L.;
Conger, B. A.; Santa Cruz, M.; McCormick, F.; Rauen, K. A.: Germline
mutations in genes within the MAPK pathway cause cardio-facio-cutaneous
syndrome. Science 311: 1287-1290, 2006.

60. Santra, M. K.; Wajapeyee, N.; Green, M. R.: F-box protein FBXO31
mediates cyclin D1 degradation to induce G1 arrest after DNA damage. Nature 459:
722-725, 2009.

61. Sarkozy, A.; Carta, C.; Moretti, S.; Zampino, G.; Digilio, M.
C.; Pantaleoni, F.; Scioletti, A. P.; Esposito, G.; Cordeddu, V.;
Lepri, F.; Petrangeli, V.; Dentici, M. L.; and 15 others: Germline
BRAF mutations in Noonan, LEOPARD, and cardiofaciocutaneous syndromes:
molecular diversity and associated phenotypic spectrum. Hum. Mutat. 30:
695-702, 2009.

62. Schulz, A. L.; Albrecht, B.; Arici, C.; van der Burgt, I.; Buske,
A.; Gillessen-Kaesbach, G.; Heller, R.; Horn, D.; Hubner, C. A.; Korenke,
G. C.; Konig, R.; Kress, W.; and 15 others: Mutation and phenotypic
spectrum in patients with cardio-facio-cutaneous and Costello syndrome Clin.
Genet. 73: 62-70, 2008.

63. Singer, G.; Oldt, R., III; Cohen, Y.; Wang, B. G.; Sidransky,
D.; Kurman, R. J.; Shih, I. E. M.: Mutations in BRAF and KRAS characterize
the development of low-grade ovarian serous carcinoma. J. Nat. Cancer
Inst. 95: 484-486, 2003.

64. Sithanandam, G.; Druck, T.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Leuzzi, G.; Huebner,
K.; Rapp, U. R.: B-raf and a B-raf pseudogene are located on 7q in
man. Oncogene 7: 795-799, 1992.

65. Sithanandam, G.; Kolch. W.; Duh, F.-M.; Rapp, U. R.: Complete
coding sequence of a human B-raf cDNA and detection of B-raf protein
kinase with isozyme specific antibodies. Oncogene 5: 1775-1780,
1990.

66. Solit, D. B.; Garraway, L. A.; Pratilas, C. A.; Sawai, A.; Getz,
G.; Basso, A.; Ye, Q.; Lobo, J. M.; She, Y.; Osman, I.; Golub, T.
R.; Sebolt-Leopold, J.; Sellers, W. R.; Rosen, N.: BRAF mutation
predicts sensitivity to MEK inhibition. Nature 439: 358-362, 2006.

67. Sommerer, F.; Hengge, U. R.; Markwarth, A.; Vomschloss, S.; Stolzenburg,
J.-U.; Wittekind, C.; Tannapfel, A.: Mutations of BRAF and RAS are
rare events in germ cell tumours. Int. J. Cancer 113: 329-335, 2005.

68. Thakur, M. D.; Salangsang, F.; Landman, A. S.; Sellers, W. R.;
Pryer, N. K.; Levesque, M. P.; Dummer, R.; McMahon, M.; Stuart, D.
D.: Modelling vemurafenib resistance in melanoma reveals a strategy
to forestall drug resistance. Nature 494: 251-255, 2013.

69. Tol, J.; Nagtegaal, I. D.; Punt, C. J. A.: BRAF mutation in metastatic
colorectal cancer. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 361: 98-99, 2009. Note:
Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 365: 869 only, 2011.

70. Toyota, M.; Ahuja, N.; Ohe-Toyota, M.; Herman, J. G.; Baylin,
S. B.; Issa, J.-P. J.: CpG island methylator phenotype in colorectal
cancer. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 8681-8686, 1999.

71. Vasko, V.; Hu, S.; Wu, G.; Xing, J. C.; Larin, A.; Savchenko,
V.; Trink, B.; Xing, M.: High prevalence and possible de novo formation
of BRAF mutation in metastasized papillary thyroid cancer in lymph
nodes. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 90: 5265-5269, 2005.

72. Verloes, A.; Le Merrer, M.; Soyeur, D.; Kaplan, J.; Pangalos,
C.; Rigo, J.; Briard, M.-L.: CFC syndrome: a syndrome distinct from
Noonan syndrome. Ann. Genet. 31: 230-234, 1988.

73. Wajapeyee, N.; Serra, R. W.; Zhu, X.; Mahalingam, M.; Green, M.
R.: Oncogenic BRAF induces senescence and apoptosis through pathways
mediated by the secreted protein IGFBP7. Cell 132: 363-374, 2008.

74. Wan, P. T. C.; Garnett, M. J.; Roe, S. M.; Lee, S.; Niculescu-Duvaz,
D.; Good, V. M.; Cancer Genome Project; Jone, C. M.; Marshall, C.
J.; Springer, C. J.; Barford, D.; Marais, R.: Mechanism of activation
of the RAF-ERK signaling pathway by oncogenic mutations of B-RAF. Cell 116:
855-867, 2004.

75. Weisenberger, D. J.; Siegmund, K. D.; Campan, M.; Young, J.; Long,
T. I.; Faasse, M. A.; Kang, G. H.; Widschwendter, M.; Weener, D.;
Buchanan, D.; Koh, H.; Simms, L.; and 9 others: CpG island methylator
phenotype underlies sporadic microsatellite instability and is tightly
associated with BRAF mutation in colorectal cancer. Nature Genet. 38:
787-793, 2006.

76. Wojnowski, L.; Zimmer, A. M.; Beck, T. W.; Hahn, H.; Bernal, R.;
Rapp, U. R.; Zimmer, A.: Endothelial apoptosis in Braf-deficient
mice. Nature Genet. 16: 293-297, 1997.

77. Xing, M.; Tufano, R. P.; Tufaro, A. P.; Basaria, S.; Ewertz, M.;
Rosenbaum, E.; Byrne, P. J.; Wang, J.; Sidransky, D.; Ladenson, P.
W.: Detection of BRAF mutation on fine needle aspiration biopsy specimens:
a new diagnostic tool for papillary thyroid cancer. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 89: 2867-2872, 2004.

78. Xing, M.; Vasko, V.; Tallini, G.; Larin, A.; Wu, G.; Udelsman,
R.; Ringel, M. D.; Ladenson, P. W.; Sidransky, D.: BRAF T1796A transversion
mutation in various thyroid neoplasms. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89:
1365-1368, 2004.

79. Xing, M.; Westra, W. H.; Tufano, R. P.; Cohen, Y.; Rosenbaum,
E.; Rhoden, K. J.; Carson, K. A.; Vasko, V.; Larin, A.; Tallini, G.;
Tolaney, S.; Holt, E. H.; and 10 others: BRAF mutation predicts
a poorer clinical prognosis for papillary thyroid cancer. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 90: 6373-6379, 2005.

80. Yu, J.; Deshmukh, H.; Gutmann, R. J.; Emnett, R. J.; Rodriguez,
F. J.; Watson, M. A.; Nagarajan, R.; Gutmann, D. H.: Alterations
of BRAF and HIPK2 loci predominate in sporadic pilocytic astrocytoma. Neurology 73:
1526-1531, 2009.

81. Zhong, S.; Delva, L.; Rachez, C.; Cenciarelli, C.; Gandini, D.;
Zhang, H.; Kalantry, S.; Freedman, L. P.; Pandolfi, P. P.: A RA-dependent,
tumour-growth suppressive transcription complex is the target of the
PML-RAR-alpha and T18 oncoproteins. Nature Genet. 23: 287-295, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/27/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/26/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/27/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/29/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/14/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/9/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/21/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/12/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/5/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/19/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/11/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/15/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/7/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/19/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/2/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/10/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/8/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/9/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/14/2009
Jane Kelly - updated: 7/3/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/28/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/15/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/17/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 1/7/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/10/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/21/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/26/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/11/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/30/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/8/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/19/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/14/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/4/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/24/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/1/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/11/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/7/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/26/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/11/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/3/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/26/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/12/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/31/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/2/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/12/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/29/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/22/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/13/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/20/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/2/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/16/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/3/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/17/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/10/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/3/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/3/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/1/1992

EDITED mgross: 10/25/2013
alopez: 8/27/2013
alopez: 6/20/2013
alopez: 3/4/2013
terry: 2/26/2013
alopez: 9/5/2012
terry: 8/29/2012
alopez: 3/2/2012
terry: 2/27/2012
carol: 11/29/2011
carol: 9/13/2011
wwang: 4/25/2011
ckniffin: 4/14/2011
alopez: 2/9/2011
terry: 2/8/2011
wwang: 2/7/2011
ckniffin: 1/21/2011
alopez: 10/12/2010
terry: 10/12/2010
wwang: 10/5/2010
ckniffin: 10/5/2010
carol: 7/16/2010
mgross: 5/20/2010
terry: 5/19/2010
mgross: 5/11/2010
terry: 5/11/2010
alopez: 4/20/2010
terry: 4/15/2010
mgross: 4/7/2010
terry: 4/7/2010
wwang: 10/28/2009
alopez: 10/26/2009
terry: 10/19/2009
alopez: 10/7/2009
terry: 10/2/2009
wwang: 9/29/2009
terry: 9/10/2009
wwang: 8/3/2009
ckniffin: 7/8/2009
alopez: 6/17/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
alopez: 3/9/2009
alopez: 1/14/2009
carol: 12/4/2008
carol: 7/3/2008
carol: 5/28/2008
wwang: 5/19/2008
ckniffin: 5/15/2008
wwang: 3/19/2008
ckniffin: 3/17/2008
carol: 1/7/2008
wwang: 10/4/2007
carol: 9/6/2007
carol: 4/10/2007
carol: 3/22/2007
carol: 3/21/2007
terry: 11/3/2006
wwang: 9/27/2006
terry: 9/26/2006
terry: 8/25/2006
carol: 8/11/2006
terry: 8/11/2006
alopez: 7/5/2006
terry: 6/30/2006
alopez: 6/8/2006
terry: 4/19/2006
alopez: 4/14/2006
alopez: 4/4/2006
alopez: 3/3/2006
terry: 2/24/2006
alopez: 12/6/2005
terry: 12/1/2005
terry: 11/10/2005
wwang: 10/14/2005
terry: 10/11/2005
alopez: 9/14/2005
terry: 9/7/2005
alopez: 7/26/2005
alopez: 7/11/2005
terry: 6/28/2005
alopez: 6/14/2005
terry: 6/3/2005
alopez: 4/26/2005
mgross: 4/14/2005
alopez: 4/12/2005
alopez: 3/31/2005
tkritzer: 2/3/2005
terry: 2/2/2005
tkritzer: 10/14/2004
terry: 10/12/2004
tkritzer: 5/3/2004
terry: 4/29/2004
tkritzer: 4/22/2004
terry: 4/22/2004
mgross: 4/13/2004
cwells: 1/22/2004
terry: 1/20/2004
tkritzer: 12/16/2003
terry: 12/9/2003
cwells: 9/4/2003
terry: 9/2/2003
carol: 4/17/2003
terry: 4/16/2003
carol: 3/11/2003
tkritzer: 3/10/2003
terry: 3/3/2003
alopez: 1/2/2003
alopez: 12/9/2002
terry: 12/6/2002
alopez: 9/17/2002
alopez: 7/11/2002
terry: 7/10/2002
alopez: 11/3/1999
mark: 7/8/1997
terry: 7/3/1997
mark: 6/9/1996
terry: 5/11/1994
carol: 5/27/1993
carol: 4/7/1993
carol: 1/4/1993
carol: 12/23/1992
carol: 12/1/1992

603608	TITLE *603608 CARBONYL REDUCTASE 3; CBR3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Carbonyl reductase (CBR; EC 1.1.1.184) catalyzes the reduction of a
large number of biologically and pharmacologically active carbonyl
compounds to their corresponding alcohols.

CLONING

By analyzing sequences from the 21q22.2 chromosomal region, Watanabe et
al. (1998) identified genomic clones corresponding to CBR1 (114830) and
to CBR3, a novel carbonyl reductase gene. The deduced 277-amino acid
CBR3 protein is 84% similar to the CBR1 protein.

GENE STRUCTURE

The CBR3 gene contains 3 exons spanning 11.2 kb (Watanabe et al., 1998).

MAPPING

Watanabe et al. (1998) found that the CBR3 gene is located 62 kb
telomeric of CBR1 on chromosome 21q22.2.

REFERENCE 1. Watanabe, K.; Sugawara, C.; Ono, A.; Fukuzumi, Y.; Itakura, S.;
Yamazaki, M.; Tashiro, H.; Osoegawa, K.; Soeda, E.; Nomura, T.: Mapping
of a novel human carbonyl reductase, CBR3, and ribosomal pseudogenes
to human chromosome 21q22.2. Genomics 52: 95-100, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 3/4/1999

EDITED carol: 07/09/2009
mgross: 3/8/1999
mgross: 3/4/1999

609030	TITLE *609030 DIGEORGE SYNDROME CRITICAL REGION GENE 8; DGCR8
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for genes within the DiGeorge syndrome (188400) critical
region of chromosome 22, followed by PCR of a brain cDNA library and
screening a fetal heart cDNA library, Shiohama et al. (2003) cloned
DGCR8. The deduced 773-amino acid protein contains a WW motif in its
N-terminal half and 2 double-stranded RNA-binding motifs in its
C-terminal half. Northern blot analysis of human tissues detected a
major transcript of 4.5 kb that was ubiquitously expressed and minor
transcripts of 3.5 and 1.5 kb that were found only in testis. In situ
hybridization of mouse embryos revealed Dgcr8 expression in
neuroepithelium of primary brain, limb bud, vessels, thymus, and palate
during various developmental stages.

GENE FUNCTION

RNase III proteins play key roles in microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis. The
nuclear RNase III Drosha (608828) cleaves primary miRNAs (pri-miRNAs) to
release hairpin-shaped pre-miRNAs that are subsequently cut to generate
mature miRNAs. By immunoprecipitation of human embryonic kidney cell
nuclear extracts, Han et al. (2004) found that DGCR8 interacted directly
with Drosha, and the 2 proteins were present within a complex of about
650 kD. Both DGCR8 and Drosha could homodimerize in the absence of
single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) in addition to interacting with each other.
Depletion of DGCR8 from HeLa cells with small interfering RNA led to
accumulation of pri-miRNA and loss of pre-miRNA and mature miRNA. Han et
al. (2004) concluded that DGCR8 is critical for the processing of
pri-miRNA into pre-miRNA.

Gregory et al. (2004) demonstrated that human Drosha is a component of 2
multiprotein complexes. The larger complex contains multiple classes of
RNA-associated proteins including RNA helicases, proteins that bind
double-stranded RNA, novel heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins, and
the Ewing sarcoma family of proteins. The smaller complex is composed of
Drosha and the double-stranded-RNA-binding protein DGCR8, the product of
a gene deleted in DiGeorge syndrome. In vivo knockdown and in vitro
reconstitution studies revealed that both components of this smaller
complex, termed Microprocessor, are necessary and sufficient in
mediating the genesis of miRNAs from the primary miRNA transcript.

Han et al. (2006) used computational and biochemical analyses to
elucidate the molecular basis for pri-miRNA processing by Drosha-DGCR8.
A typical metazoan pri-miRNA consists of an approximately 33-bp stem,
with a terminal loop and basal ssRNA segments. Han et al. (2006) found
that the basal ssRNA segments were essential for processing, whereas the
terminal loop was dispensable. The cleavage site was determined mainly
by the distance (about 11 bp) from the stem-ssRNA junction. DGCR8, but
not Drosha, interacted with pri-miRNAs directly and specifically, and
the basal ssRNA segments were critical for this interaction. Han et al.
(2006) proposed that DGCR8 may function as the molecular anchor that
measures the distance from the stem-ssRNA junction.

Wang et al. (2007) studied the role of miRNAs in embryonic stem (ES)
cell differentiation by generating a Dgcr8 knockout model. Analysis of
mouse knockout ES cells showed that DGCR8 is essential for biogenesis of
miRNAs. Dgcr8-deficient mouse ES cells proliferated slowly and
accumulated in G1 phase of the cell cycle. On the induction of
differentiation, Dgcr8-deficient ES cells did not fully downregulate
pluripotency markers and retained the ability to produce ES cell
colonies; however, they did express some markers of differentiation.
This phenotype differed from that reported for Dicer1 (606241) knockout
cells, suggesting that Dicer has miRNA-independent roles in ES cell
function. Wang et al. (2007) concluded that miRNAs function in the
silencing of ES cell self-renewal that normally occurs with the
induction of differentiation.

By screening mouse miRNAs for those that could rescue the growth defect
in Dgcr8-knockout mouse ES cells, Wang et al. (2008) identified a group
of ES cell-specific miRNAs with a shared seed sequence (AAGUGC),
including several members of the miR290 cluster. Complementary target
sequences were found in the 3-prime UTR of the Cdkn1a (116899)
transcript. All 5 ES cell-specific miRNAs tested (miR291a-3p,
miR291b-3p, miR294, miR295, and miR302d) directly targeted the 3-prime
UTR of Cdkn1a and inhibited reporter gene expression. Target sites were
also identified in the 3-prime UTRs of other inhibitors of the cyclin E
(see CCNE1; 123837)-CDK2 (116953) pathway, including Rb1 (614041), Rbl1
(116957), Rbl2 (180203), and Lats2 (604861). Quantitative RT-PCR
confirmed increased expression of these genes in Dgcr8-knockout mouse ES
cells. Wang et al. (2008) concluded that ES cell-specific miRNAs have
central roles in expediting the G1-S transition and promoting cellular
proliferation.

In the absence of Dgcr8, a protein required for microRNA biogenesis,
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells are unable to suppress self-renewal.
Melton et al. (2010) showed that the introduction of let7 (605386)
microRNAs, a family of microRNAs highly expressed in somatic cells, can
suppress self-renewal in Dgcr8-null but not wildtype ES cells.
Introduction of ES cell cell-cycle-regulating (ESCC) microRNAs into the
Dgcr8-null ES cells blocked the capacity of let7 to suppress
self-renewal. Profiling and bioinformatic analyses showed that let7
inhibits, whereas ESCC microRNAs indirectly activate, numerous
self-renewal genes. Furthermore, inhibition of the let7 family promoted
dedifferentiation of somatic cells to induced pluripotent stem cells.
Melton et al. (2010) concluded that ESCC and LET7 microRNAs act through
common pathways to alternatively stabilize the self-renewing versus
differentiated cell fates.

GENE STRUCTURE

Shiohama et al. (2003) determined that the DGCR8 gene contains 14 exons
and spans more than 35 kb. The region just upstream of exon 1 shows a
high GC and CpG content. The mouse Dgcr8 gene has the same gene
structure and size as the human gene.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Shiohama et al. (2003) mapped the DGCR8
gene to chromosome 22q11.2. They mapped the mouse Dgcr8 gene to a region
of chromosome 16q that shows homology of synteny to human chromosome
22q11.2. However, the chromosomal segment is flipped in mouse as
compared with human, so that the orientation of the human and mouse
genes is opposite.

ANIMAL MODEL

Individuals with 22q11.2 microdeletions show behavioral and cognitive
deficits and are at high risk of developing schizophrenia. Stark et al.
(2008) engineered a mouse strain carrying a hemizygous 1.3-Mb
chromosomal deficiency spanning a segment syntenic to the human 22q11.2
locus. The hemizygous microdeletion, called Df(16)A +/-, encompassed 27
genes and represented most of the functional genes in the human segment.
Behaviorally, Df(16)A +/- mice were hyperactive compared to wildtype
littermates and showed deficits in the PPI task. Males, but not females,
appeared fearful of exploring their environment. Stark et al. (2008)
found that Df(16)A +/- mice had abnormal brain microarchitecture,
although no gross brain abnormalities were present. In the hippocampus,
Df(16)A +/- mice had reduced number and size of dendritic spines and
decreased dendritic complexity of CA1 pyramidal neurons. Analysis of
heterozygous Dgcr8-deficient mice revealed that altered miRNA
biogenesis, dendritic complexity, and PPI performance in Df(16)A +/-
mice was due to Dgcr8 haploinsufficiency. Stark et al. (2008) concluded
that abnormal miRNA processing contributes to the behavioral and
neuronal deficits associated with the human 22q11.2 deletion.

REFERENCE 1. Gregory, R. I.; Yan, K.; Amuthan, G.; Chendrimada, T.; Doratotaj,
B.; Cooch, N.; Shiekhattar, R.: The Microprocessor complex mediates
the genesis of microRNAs. Nature 432: 235-240, 2004.

2. Han, J.; Lee, Y.; Yeom, K.-H.; Kim, Y.-K.; Jin, H.; Kim, V. N.
: The Drosha-DGCR8 complex in primary microRNA processing. Genes
Dev. 18: 3016-3027, 2004.

3. Han, J.; Lee, Y.; Yeom, K.-H.; Nam, J.-W.; Heo, I.; Rhee, J.-K.;
Sohn, S. Y.; Cho, Y.; Zhang, B.-T.; Kim, V. N.: Molecular basis for
the recognition of primary microRNAs by the Drosha-DGCR8 complex. Cell 125:
887-901, 2006.

4. Melton, C.; Judson, R. L.; Blelloch, R.: Opposing microRNA families
regulate self-renewal in mouse embryonic stem cells. Nature 463:
621-626, 2010. Note: Erratum: Nature 464: 126 only, 2010.

5. Shiohama, A.; Sasaki, T.; Noda, S.; Minoshima, S.; Shimizu, N.
: Molecular cloning and expression analysis of a novel gene DGCR8
located in the DiGeorge syndrome chromosomal region. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 304: 184-190, 2003.

6. Stark, K. L.; Xu, B.; Bagchi, A.; Lai, W.-S.; Liu, H.; Hsu, R.;
Wan, X.; Pavlidis, P.; Mills, A. A.; Karayiorgou, M.; Gogos, J. A.
: Altered brain microRNA biogenesis contributes to phenotypic deficits
in a 22q11-deletion mouse model. Nature Genet. 40: 751-760, 2008.

7. Wang, Y.; Baskerville, S.; Shenoy, A.; Babiarz, J. E.; Baehner,
L.; Blelloch, R.: Embryonic stem cell-specific microRNAs regulate
the G1-S transition and promote rapid proliferation. Nature Genet. 40:
1478-1483, 2008.

8. Wang, Y.; Medvid, R.; Melton, C.; Jaenisch, R.; Blelloch, R.:
DGCR8 is essential for microRNA biogenesis and silencing of embryonic
stem cell self-renewal. Nature Genet. 39: 380-385, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/11/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 4/12/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/11/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/16/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/27/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/4/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/23/2005

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/18/2004

EDITED terry: 09/14/2012
alopez: 6/17/2011
alopez: 6/14/2010
terry: 6/11/2010
wwang: 4/16/2010
mgross: 4/12/2010
mgross: 2/16/2009
terry: 2/11/2009
carol: 12/1/2008
alopez: 7/16/2008
alopez: 7/5/2007
terry: 6/27/2007
alopez: 4/10/2007
terry: 4/4/2007
mgross: 3/23/2005
mgross: 11/18/2004

607718	TITLE *607718 SYNAPTOTAGMIN 6; SYT6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Synaptotagmins, such as SYT6, share a common domain structure that
includes a transmembrane domain and a cytoplasmic region composed of 2
C2 domains. Some synaptotagmins are involved in synaptic membrane
fusion, while others have a more general function in endocytosis. For
further information on synaptotagmins, see 185605.

CLONING

Li et al. (1995) cloned rat Syt6. RT-PCR detected expression of Syt6 in
all tissues examined. By in vitro assay of recombinant protein, Li et
al. (1995) showed that Syt6 bound adaptor protein-2 (see 601026) in a
Ca(2+)-independent manner. However, unlike several other synaptotagmins,
Syt6 did not bind phospholipids, and binding to syntaxin (see 186590)
was Ca(2+)-independent.

MAPPING

The International Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SYT6 gene to
chromosome 1 (TMAP stSG22846).

REFERENCE 1. Li, C.; Ullrich, B.; Zhang, J. Z.; Anderson, R. G. W.; Brose, N.;
Sudhof, T. C.: Ca(2+)-dependent and -independent activities of neural
and non-neural synaptotagmins. Nature 375: 594-599, 1995.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/25/2003

EDITED mgross: 04/25/2003

614638	TITLE *614638 DESUMOYLATING ISOPEPTIDASE 2; DESI2
;;PPPDE PEPTIDASE DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; PPPDE1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The modification of proteins by small ubiquitin-like modifier, or SUMO
(see SUMO1; 601912), is crucial for the regulation of diverse cellular
processes. DESI2 is predicted to have a papain-like fold and to function
as a cysteine protease that removes SUMO from SUMO-modified proteins
(Shin et al., 2012).

CLONING

Shin et al. (2012) cloned mouse Desi2, which encodes a deduced 194-amino
acid protein with a central isopeptidase domain. By database analysis,
they identified the human and rat orthologs. Western blot analysis
detected Desi2 in all mouse tissues examined. Epitope-tagged Desi2
localized mainly to the cytoplasm of transfected 293T cells.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the DESI2 gene to chromosome 1q44 based on an
alignment of the DESI2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF151904) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/26/2012.

2. Shin, E. J.; Shin, H. M.; Nam, E.; Kim, W. S.; Kim, J.-H.; Oh,
B.-H.; Yun, Y.: DeSUMOylating isopeptidase: a second class of SUMO
protease. EMBO Rep. 13: 339-346, 2012.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/26/2012

EDITED mgross: 06/26/2012

612317	TITLE *612317 ATPase FAMILY, AAA DOMAIN-CONTAINING, MEMBER 3B; ATAD3B
;;TOB3;;
AAA-TOB3;;
KIAA1273
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ATAD3A (612316) and ATAD3B are mitochondrial membrane proteins that
contribute to the stabilization of large mitochondrial DNA
(mtDNA)-protein complexes called nucleoids (He et al., 2007).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned ATAD3B, which they designated
KIAA1273. The deduced protein contains 606 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA
detected low ATAD3B expression in testis and ovary, with weaker
expression in liver. Little to no expression was detected in other adult
and fetal tissues examined. Within specific adult brain regions, weak
expression was detected in caudate nucleus, and little to no expression
was detected in other brain regions.

By database analysis and 5-prime RACE, Schaffrik et al. (2006) obtained
cDNAs encoding long and short isoforms of ATAD3B, which they called
AAA-TOB3. The variants arise from alternative transcription initiation
sites, and the short variant includes the 3-prime sequence of intron 2,
which contains an alternate, in-frame ATG start site. The deduced 606-
and 648-amino acid ATAD3B proteins have unique N-terminal ends
containing 52 and 94 amino acids, respectively, followed by a common
transmembrane region and a C-terminal AAA-ATPase domain. RT-PCR detected
both transcripts in head and neck carcinoma and cervix carcinoma cell
lines. Both fluorescence-tagged ATAD3B isoforms localized to
mitochondria in transfected HeLa cells and in GHD-1 cells established
from a hypopharynx carcinoma.

By searching for sequences similar to rat Atad3, He et al. (2007)
identified human ATAD3A and ATAD3B. The deduced 648-amino acid ATAD3B
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 72 kD. In its C-terminal
half, ATAD3B contains Walker A and B motifs, followed by ATP-binding
sensor-1 and sensor-2 motifs. An alpha helix is located N-terminal to
the Walker A motif, and an arginine finger separates the sensor motifs.
An antibody that did not differentiate between ATAD3A and ATAD3B
detected ATAD3 in a punctate pattern within mitochondria of human
osteosarcoma cells. The pattern frequently coincided with
mtDNA-containing nucleoids, but not all nucleoids contained ATAD3.

Bogenhagen et al. (2008) stated that ATAD3B contains a central
transmembrane domain. Using immunofluorescence and protease
susceptibility studies, they found that ATAD3B was embedded in the inner
membrane of HeLa cell mitochondria, with the C-terminal AAA domain
directed toward the matrix and the N terminus exposed to the cytoplasm.

GENE FUNCTION

Da Cruz et al. (2003) found that prolonged expression of epitope-tagged
mouse Atad3b, which they called Tob3, in HeLa cells resulted in
fragmentation of the mitochondrial network and cell death.

Using laser capture microdissection, Schaffrik et al. (2006) found that
ATAD3B was overexpressed in 3 of 4 head and neck carcinomas compared
with healthy oral mucosa. In situ hybridization confirmed ATAD3B
overexpression in 5 head and neck carcinomas compared with normal
tissue. Expression of both ATAD3B isoforms was induced by MYC (190080).
In contrast to the findings of Da Cruz et al. (2003), Schaffrik et al.
(2006) found that knockdown of both human ATAD3B variants via small
interfering RNA (siRNA), but not their overexpression, caused cell
line-specific apoptotic phenotypes. In GHD-1 cells, siRNA treatment
resulted in apoptosis associated with decreased proliferation, cell
enlargement and vacuolization, and generation of polynucleated cells due
to failure of cytokinesis. In HeLa cells, siRNA treatment induced
apoptosis rapidly, with no formation of polynucleated cells.

He et al. (2007) found that depletion of ATAD3 via siRNA in human
osteosarcoma cells led to increased negative supercoiling of mtDNA,
although mitochondria maintained essentially normal morphology. A
recombinant N-terminal fragment of ATAD3B containing residues 44 through
247 displayed sequence-independent binding of tightly supercoiled mtDNA
that included a short, triple-stranded noncoding region called a
displacement loop, or D loop. This ATAD3B fragment also bound duplex DNA
and single-stranded DNA, but with lower affinity. The N-terminal ATAD3B
fragment and RecA (RAD51; 179617) bound to a synthetic D loop, and the
pronounced mobility shift effected by the ATAD3B fragment suggested that
it accrues multiple mtDNA molecules or that each D loop is bound by a
large number of ATAD3B molecules.

Bogenhagen et al. (2008) found that, although both ATAD3A and ATAD3B
were present in native HeLa cell nucleoids, neither ATAD3 protein was
crosslinked with mtDNA in isolated formaldehyde crosslinked HeLa cell
nucleoids, indicating that they are unlikely to bind mtDNA. In addition,
protease susceptibility studies suggested that the putative N-terminal
DNA-binding regions of ATAD3A and ATAD3B reside outside the
mitochondrial inner membrane.

GENE STRUCTURE

Schaffrik et al. (2006) determined that the ATAD3B gene contains 16
exons. Intron 1 contains a canonical MYC-binding E-box sequence, and
intron 2 contains an alternate translation initiation site.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the ATAD3B
gene to chromosome 1. By genomic sequence analysis, Schaffrik et al.
(2006) mapped the ATAD3B gene to chromosome 1p36.33

REFERENCE 1. Bogenhagen, D. F.; Rousseau, D.; Burke, S.: The layered structure
of human mitochondrial DNA nucleoids. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 3665-3675,
2008.

2. Da Cruz, S.; Xenarios, I.; Langridge, J.; Vilbois, F.; Parone,
P. A.; Martinou, J.-C.: Proteomic analysis of the mouse liver mitochondrial
inner membrane. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 41566-41571, 2003.

3. He, J.; Mao, C.-C.; Reyes, A.; Sembongi, H.; Di Re, M.; Granycome,
C.; Clippingdale, A. B.; Fearnley, I. M.; Harbour, M.; Robinson, A.
J.; Reichelt, S.; Spelbrink, J. N.; Walker, J. E.; Holt, I. J.: The
AAA+ protein ATAD3 has displacement loop binding properties and is
involved in mitochondrial nucleoid organization. J. Cell Biol. 176:
141-146, 2007.

4. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.; Nomura, N.;
Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human
genes. XV. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain
which code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 337-345, 1999.

5. Schaffrik, M.; Mack, B.; Matthias, C.; Rauch, J.; Gires, O.: Molecular
characterization of the tumor-associated antigen AAA-TOB3. Cell.
Molec. Life Sci. 63: 2162-2174, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/24/2008

EDITED mgross: 09/25/2008

601406	TITLE *601406 B-CELL CLL/LYMPHOMA 7A; BCL7A
;;B-CELL CLL/LYMPHOMA 7; BCL7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chromosome 12q24.1 is the site of a recurrent breakpoint in high-grade
B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (BNHL). To identify the gene(s) in the
12q24.1 region, Zani et al. (1996) performed molecular cloning of a
3-way translocation t(8;14;12)(q24.1;q32.3;q24.1) in a Burkitt lymphoma
cell line; all translocation breakpoints were cloned and sequenced.
Analysis of the der(12)(12;14)(q24.1;q32.3) breakpoint showed a CpG
island from 12q24.1 juxtaposed in a tail-to-tail configuration with a
productively rearranged V-D-J heavy chain gene. A total of 4.5 kb of
genomic DNA was shown to contain a potential 92-bp exon within the
centromeric boundary of the CpG island. This was used as a probe to
identify an RNA transcript of 3.8 kb expressed at low levels in a wide
variety of normal tissues. The longest open reading frame predicted a
serine-rich protein of 231 amino acids. This protein, designated BCL7A
by the authors, showed homology with the actin-binding protein caldesmon
(114213).

Jadayel et al. (1998) identified 2 genes, BCL7B (605846) and BCL7C
(605847), encoding proteins that share 90% identity with the N-terminal
51 amino acids of BCL7A as well as 41% identity in the same region with
Drosophila and C. elegans sequences. They suggested that the 3 genes are
members of an evolutionarily conserved gene family.

CYTOGENETICS

In the Burkitt lymphoma cell line Wein 133 containing a 3-way
translocation, Zani et al. (1996) found that the BCL7A breakpoint
occurred within the first intron and resulted in a free-of-fusion
transcript between MYC (190080) and BCL7A, with exon 1 of BCL7A being
replaced by MYC exon 1. The normal, untranslocated allele of BCL7A was
also expressed without mutation. Another BNHLs with 12q24.1 cytogenetic
abnormalities showed biallelic rearrangement within the first intron of
BCL7A, which was adjacent to the breakpoint observed in Wein 133. Zani
et al. (1996) concluded that disruption of the N terminus of BCL7A
defined a new mechanism in the pathogenesis of a subset of high-grade
BNHL.

MAPPING

The BCL7A gene maps to chromosome 12q24.1 (Zani et al., 1996).

REFERENCE 1. Jadayel, D. M.; Osborne, L. R.; Coignet, L. J. A.; Zani, V. J.;
Tsui, L.-C.; Scherer, S. W.; Dyer, M. J. S.: The BCL7 gene family:
deletion of BCL7B in Williams syndrome. Gene 224: 35-44, 1998.

2. Zani, V. J.; Asou, N.; Jadayel, D.; Heward, J. M.; Shipley, J.;
Nacheva, E.; Takasuki, K.; Catovsky, D.; Dyer, M. J. S.: Molecular
cloning of complex chromosomal translocation t(8;14;12)(q24.1;q32.3;q24.1)
in a Burkitt lymphoma cell line defines a new gene (BCL7A) with homology
to caldesmon. Blood 87: 3124-3134, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 4/12/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/30/1996

EDITED carol: 10/19/2012
terry: 4/12/2001
carol: 4/12/2001
carol: 7/26/1999
dkim: 7/21/1998
mark: 8/30/1996

602015	TITLE *602015 OUTER DENSE FIBER OF SPERM TAILS 2; ODF2
;;OUTER DENSE FIBER OF SPERM TAILS, 84-KD; ODF84
CENEXIN 1, INCLUDED;;
CENEXIN 1 VARIANT 1, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ODF2 encodes multiple protein isoforms that have roles in the formation
of primary cilia and sperm flagella and in coordinating ciliary beating
(Kunimoto et al., 2012).

CLONING

See ODF1 (182878). Brohmann et al. (1997) used antibodies against Odf
proteins to screen a rat testis expression library and isolated the rat
Odf2 gene. Sequence analysis revealed that the protein has an overall
alpha-helical structure with 2 regions identical to the dimerization
region of a leucine zipper motif. Brohmann et al. (1997) documented Odf2
cDNAs with 3 different 5-prime end sequences, presumed to be the result
of alternative splicing. They found expression of the rat gene only in
testis.

The EST database contains several human cDNA sequences which are closely
related to rat Odf2, suggesting that a human homolog exists (Scott,
1997). These human cDNA sequences were derived from testis, epididymis,
and fetal brain libraries.

Shao et al. (1997) used a yeast 2-hybrid screening with the leucine
zipper region of ODF1 (ODF27; Shao and van der Hoorn, 1996) as bait to
isolate rat testis-specific proteins that could interact with ODF27.
They demonstrated that one of the novel genes isolated encoded the 84-kD
ODF protein ODF2.

Soung et al. (2006) stated that the deduced 638-amino acid ODF2 protein
has 2 leucine zipper motifs in its C-terminal half. Using an inactive
mutant of the mitotic kinase PLK1 (602098) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid
screen of a human testis cDNA library, followed by RT-PCR of HeLa cell
RNA, they identified 2 splice variants of ODF2 that they called
cenexin-1 and cenexin-1 variant-1. Cenexin-1 and cenexin-1 variant-1
encode proteins of 805 and 824 amino acids, respectively. Both isoforms
contain a C-terminal extension compared with ODF2, and cenexin-1
variant-1 also has a 19-amino acid insertion near its N-terminal end.
Northern blot analysis of synchronized HeLa cells detected a single
transcript of about 4.0 kb, representing cenexin-1. Cenexin-1 localized
at the microtubule-organizing center in interphase and at spindle poles
in mitosis, suggesting that cenexin-1 is a centrosomal protein.
Fluorescence-tagged cenexin-1 primarily localized to the mother
centrosome in interphase and to both mother and daughter centrosomes in
mitosis.

Using real-time RT-PCR with a probe for the 3-prime region of mouse
Odf2/cenexin, Kunimoto et al. (2012) detected highest expression in
mouse trachea and lung, with much lower expression in brain, and little
to no expression in heart, liver, and kidney. Western blot analysis
using an antibody against the N-terminal region of Odf2/cenexin detected
an apparent 75-kD protein in mouse testis and an apparent 90-kD protein
in mouse trachea, lung, kidney, brain, and oviduct.

GENE STRUCTURE

Soung et al. (2006) determined that the ODF2 gene contains 21 exons and
spans 44.8 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH, Shao et al. (1998) mapped the human ODF2 gene to chromosome
9q34. Soung et al. (2006) mapped the ODF2 gene to chromosome 9q34.11 by
genomic sequence analysis.

GENE FUNCTION

Using protein pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation analyses, Soung et al.
(2006) confirmed that cenexin-1 interacted directly with PLK1. Mutation
analysis revealed that the C-terminal domain of cenexin-1 interacted
with the polo-box domain of PLK1. The C-terminal domain of cenexin-1 was
also required to recruit PLK1 to centrosomes. Depletion of cenexin-1
from HeLa cells delocalized centrosomal PLK1, diminished gamma-tubulin
(see 191135) recruitment to centrosomes, and altered localization of a
subset of centrosomal proteins required for microtubule nucleation and
function. Depletion of cenexin-1 also resulted in severe mitotic
defects, including chromosome alignment and segregation defects. A
significant fraction of these cells also showed multipolar chromosomes
and apoptotic cell death.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kunimoto et al. (2012) developed a line of mice with deletion of exons 6
and 7 of Odf2, which they called Odf2(delta-ex6,7) mice. Homozygous
Odf2(delta-ex6,7) mice were born at the expected mendelian ratio, but
only 20% survived past weaning. Surviving mice were characterized by a
coughing/sneezing-like phenotype, sinusitis, otitis media, and a slight
tendency to hydrocephaly, suggesting primary ciliary dyskinesia. Unlike
Odf2 -/- F9 embryonic mouse carcinoma cells, homozygous
Odf2(delta-ex6,7) mice were born with primary cilia and expressed low
levels of N-terminally truncated Odf2/cenexin. Antibody raised against
the Odf2/cenexin C-terminal region detected slight immunofluorescence at
the base of cilia in homozygous Odf2(delta-ex6,7) tracheal cells, but
not in Odf2 -/- F9 cells. Cilium appeared to nucleate from the basal
body in Odf2(delta-ex6,7) cells, but the basal foot was completely lost,
and basal bodies failed to position apically in some cells. Basal feet
were also absent in oviduct epithelial cells and ependymal cells in
brains of homozygous Odf2(delta-ex6,7) mice. Live imaging of isolated
Odf2(delta-ex6,7) trachea preparations revealed uncoordinated ciliary
beating and inefficient fluid flow across the luminal surface.
Deficiency of full-length Odf2/cenexin also perturbed the polarized
distribution of planar cell polarity (PCP) proteins and PCP-dependent
apical organization of microtubules.

REFERENCE 1. Brohmann, H.; Pinnecke, S.; Hoyer-Fender, S.: Identification and
characterization of new cDNAs encoding outer dense fiber proteins
of rat sperm. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 10327-10332, 1997.

2. Kunimoto, K.; Yamazaki, Y.; Nishida, T.; Shinohrara, K.; Ishikawa,
H.; Hasegawa, T.; Okanoue, T.; Harnada, H.; Noda, T.; Tamura, A.;
Tsukita, S.; Tsukita, S.: Coordinated ciliary beating requires Odf2-mediated
polarization of basal bodies via basal feet. Cell 189-200, 2012.

3. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/10/1997.

4. Shao, X.; Murthy, S.; Demetrick, D. J.; van der Hoorn, F. A.:
Human outer dense fiber gene, ODF2, localizes to chromosome 9q34. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 83: 221-223, 1998.

5. Shao, X.; Tarnasky, H. A.; Schalles, U.; Oko, R.; van der Hoorn,
F. A.: Interactional cloning of the 84-kDa major outer dense fiber
protein Odf84: leucine zippers mediate associations of Odf84 and Odf27. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 6105-6113, 1997.

6. Shao, X.; van der Hoorn, F. A.: Self-interaction of the major
27-kilodalton outer dense fiber protein is in part mediated by a leucine
zipper domain in the rat. Biol. Reprod. 55: 1343-1350, 1996.

7. Soung, N.-K.; Kang, Y. H.; Kim, K.; Kamijo, K.; Yoon, H.; Seong,
Y.-S.; Kuo, Y.-L.; Miki, T.; Kim, S. R.; Kuriyama, R.; Giam, C.-Z.;
Ahn, C. H.; Lee, K. S.: Requirement of hCenexin for proper mitotic
functions of polo-like kinase 1 at the centrosomes. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 26: 8316-8335, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 06/07/2013
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 6/12/1999
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/10/1997

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 9/10/1997

EDITED mgross: 06/07/2013
alopez: 3/15/2010
terry: 6/14/1999
carol: 6/12/1999
dkim: 9/22/1998
dkim: 9/21/1998
alopez: 9/17/1998
alopez: 9/15/1998
terry: 9/14/1998
carol: 5/26/1998
alopez: 10/15/1997
alopez: 10/13/1997
alopez: 10/7/1997

602000	TITLE *602000 POLYMERASE I, RNA, SUBUNIT B; POLR1B
;;RPA2;;
RPA135;;
RPO1-2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Eukaryotic RNA polymerase I (pol I) is responsible for the transcription
of ribosomal RNA (rRNA) genes and production of rRNA, the primary
component of ribosomes. Pol I is a multisubunit enzyme composed of 6 to
14 polypeptides, depending on the species. Most of the mass of the pol I
complex derives from the 2 largest subunits, Rpa1 and Rpa2 in yeast.
POLR1B is homologous to Rpa2 (Seither and Grummt, 1996).

CLONING

Seither and Grummt (1996) cloned a mouse cDNA encoding Rpa2, the second
largest pol I subunit. The 3,978-bp open reading frame encodes a
1,136-amino acid polypeptide with a calculated molecular mass of 128 kD.
Sequence alignment with the corresponding Drosophila and yeast genes
revealed the same level of sequence similarity among Rpa2 genes as
exists for Rpa1 genes across diverse species.

REFERENCE 1. Seither, P.; Grummt, I.: Molecular cloning of RPA2, the gene encoding
the second largest subunit of mouse RNA polymerase I. Genomics 37:
135-139, 1996.

CREATED Mark H. Paalman: 9/15/1997

EDITED mgross: 06/23/2006
mark: 9/24/1997
mark: 9/23/1997

607272	TITLE *607272 NDC80, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; NDC80
;;KINETOCHORE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; KNTC2;;
HIGHLY EXPRESSED IN CANCER; HEC;;
HEC1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

HEC is one of several proteins involved in spindle checkpoint signaling.
This surveillance mechanism assures correct segregation of chromosomes
during cell division by detecting unaligned chromosomes and causing
prometaphase arrest until the proper bipolar attachment of chromosomes
is achieved.

CLONING

Durfee et al. (1993) cloned a fragment of HEC in a yeast 2-hybrid screen
of a human B-cell cDNA library using the C terminus of the
retinoblastoma protein (RB1; 614041) as bait. Chen et al. (1997)
screened a B-cell cDNA library using this fragment as probe and isolated
a full-length cDNA encoding HEC. The deduced 642-amino acid protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 72 kD. HEC has a series of typical
leucine heptad repeats that covers the last two-thirds of its sequence.
Northern blot analysis revealed a 2.3-kb mRNA in all cell lines tested.
Tumor cell lines expressed HEC more abundantly than did normal tissues
and untransformed cells. Northern blot analysis of synchronized CV1
monkey kidney cells showed highest expression during S and M phases.
Western blot analysis of several normal tissues indicated expression of
HEC in tissues with high mitotic indices, such as testis, spleen, and
thymus. Western blot analysis of human bladder carcinoma cells confirmed
expression of a 76-kD protein only in the late S to M phases.
Immunolocalization of HEC in bladder carcinoma cells showed a speckled
nuclear localization in G1-phase cells, and both perinuclear and nuclear
staining in S-phase cells. Staining of metaphase chromosome spreads
revealed colocalization with centromeric proteins (see 117140).

GENE FUNCTION

Chen et al. (1997) microinjected antibody directed against HEC to
inactivate endogenous HEC in synchronized human bladder carcinoma cells.
Microinjected cells contained multiple, fragmented nuclei. Chromosomes
condensed but failed to coalesce or segregate properly. No distinct
metaphase plates were observed, and spindles were disorganized in
relation to their centromeres. Cells injected with anti-HEC antibodies
were able to undergo cytokinesis, but chromosomes separated haphazardly
into grossly abnormal daughter cells that were ultimately nonviable.

Using gene silencing by small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfected into
HeLa S3 cells, Martin Lluesma et al. (2002) found that, in the absence
of HEC1, neither of the spindle assembly checkpoint components, MAD1
(602686) and MAD2 (601467), could be detected on kinetochores by
immunofluorescence microscopy. The kinetochore associations of MPS1 (see
604092) and BUB1 (602452) were also eliminated or reduced, respectively.
Further investigation revealed that HEC1 was required for the
kinetochore association of MPS1, and both HEC1 and MPS1 were required
for recruiting the MAD1-MAD2 complex.

Following overexpression of MIS12 (609178) in HeLa cells, Obuse et al.
(2004) immunoprecipitated HEC1 and several other proteins that
interacted with MIS12 in a kinetochore-associated complex. Liquid
chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry indicated that the interaction
between MIS12 and HEC1 was direct.

DeLuca et al. (2006) found that antibody directed to the N terminus of
Hec1 suppressed microtubule detachment and microtubule plus-end
polymerization and depolymerization at kinetochores in PtK potoroo
kidney cells. Centromeres became hyperstretched, kinetochore fibers
shortened from spindle poles, kinetochore microtubule attachment errors
increased, and chromosomes missegregated. The N terminus of Hec1 was
phosphorylated by Aurora B kinase (AURKB; 604970) in vitro, and cells
expressing N-terminal nonphosphorylatable Hec1 mutants exhibited
increased merotelic attachments, hyperstretching of centromeres, and
errors in chromosome segregation. DeLuca et al. (2006) concluded that
the HEC1 N terminus controls the dynamic behavior of kinetochore
microtubules.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Alushin et al. (2010) presented a subnanometer-resolution cryoelectron
microscopy reconstruction of the human NDC80 complex bound to
microtubules, sufficient for precise docking of crystal structures of
the component proteins. Alushin et al. (2010) found that the NDC80
complex binds the microtubule with a tubulin monomer repeat, recognizing
alpha- and beta-tubulin at both intra- and intertubulin dimer interfaces
in a manner that is sensitive to tubulin conformation. Furthermore,
NDC80 complexes self-associate along protofilaments through interactions
mediated by the N-terminal tail of the NDC80 protein, which is the site
of phosphoregulation by Aurora B kinase. Alushin et al. (2010) suggested
a mechanism by which Aurora B could regulate the stability of
load-bearing kinetochore-microtubule attachments.

MAPPING

Hartz (2005) mapped the KNTC2 gene to chromosome 18p11.32 based on an
alignment of the KNTC2 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF017790) with the
genomic sequence.

REFERENCE 1. Alushin, G. M.; Ramey, V. H.; Pasqualato, S.; Ball, D. A.; Grigorieff,
N.; Musacchio, A.; Nogales, E.: The Ndc80 kinetochore complex forms
oligomeric arrays along microtubules. Nature 467: 805-810, 2010.

2. Chen, Y.; Riley, D. J.; Chen, P.-L.; Lee, W.-H.: HEC, a novel
nuclear protein rich in leucine heptad repeats specifically involved
in mitosis. Molec. Cell. Biol. 17: 6049-6056, 1997.

3. DeLuca, J. G.; Gall, W. E.; Ciferri, C.; Cimini, D.; Musacchio,
A.; Salmon, E. D.: Kinetochore microtubule dynamics and attachment
stability are regulated by Hec1. Cell 127: 969-982, 2006.

4. Durfee, T.; Becherer, K.; Chen, P. L.; Yeh, S. H.; Yang, Y.; Kilburn,
A. E.; Lee, W. H.; Elledge, S. J.: The retinoblastoma protein associates
with the protein phosphatase type 1 catalytic subunit. Genes Dev. 7:
555-569, 1993.

5. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/28/2005.

6. Martin-Lluesma, S.; Stucke, V. M.; Nigg, E. A.: Role of Hec1 in
spindle checkpoint signaling and kinetochore recruitment of Mad1/Mad2. Science 297:
2267-2270, 2002.

7. Obuse, C.; Iwasaki, O.; Kiyomitsu, T.; Goshima, G.; Toyoda, Y.;
Yanagida, M.: A conserved Mis12 centromere complex is linked to heterochromatic
HP1 and outer kinetochore protein Zwint-1. Nature Cell Biol. 6:
1135-1141, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/11/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/30/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/28/2005

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/2/2002

EDITED alopez: 06/17/2011
alopez: 11/12/2010
terry: 11/11/2010
mgross: 5/4/2009
terry: 4/30/2009
carol: 2/6/2008
wwang: 10/8/2007
mgross: 1/28/2005
mgross: 10/2/2002

606299	TITLE *606299 PROTOCADHERIN-GAMMA, SUBFAMILY B, MEMBER 1; PCDHGB1
;;PCDH-GAMMA-B1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cadherins are calcium-dependent cell-cell adhesion molecules, and
protocadherins constitute a subfamily of nonclassic cadherins. PCDHGB1
is 1 of 22 tandemly arranged genes within the PCDHG gene cluster
(604968) on chromosome 5q31. The 22 PCDHG genes function as 'variable'
exons that are individually spliced to a downstream constant region to
form distinct PCDHG transcripts. The variable PCDHG exons encode the
extracellular and transmembrane domains of the protocadherin protein,
and the common region encodes the intracellular domain (Wu et al.,
2001). For further information on the PCDHG genes, see 604968.

CLONING

By PCR of a brain cDNA library, Wu and Maniatis (1999) cloned
full-length PCDHGB1.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wu et al. (2001) mapped the PCDHGB1 gene
to chromosome 5q31, between the PCDHGA3 gene (606290) and the PCDHGA4
gene (606291). They localized the mouse PCDHG genes to chromosome 18c.

REFERENCE 1. Wu, Q.; Maniatis, T.: A striking organization of a large family
of human neural cadherin-like cell adhesion genes. Cell 97: 779-790,
1999.

2. Wu, Q.; Zhang, T.; Cheng, J.-F.; Kim, Y.; Grimwood, J.; Schmutz,
J.; Dickson, M.; Noonan, J. P.; Zhang, M. Q.; Myers, R. M.; Maniatis,
T.: Comparative DNA sequence analysis of mouse and human protocadherin
gene clusters. Genome Res. 11: 389-404, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 10/15/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 9/27/2001

EDITED alopez: 04/05/2012
alopez: 4/5/2012
mgross: 10/15/2007
mgross: 9/27/2001

611194	TITLE *611194 RUN AND FYVE DOMAINS-CONTAINING PROTEIN 3; RUFY3
;;SINGLE AXON-RELATED 1; SINGAR1;;
RAP2-INTERACTING PROTEIN X; RIPX
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By randomly sequencing clones from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1998) obtained a cDNA encoding RUFY3, which they
called KIAA0871, encoding a deduced 469-amino acid protein.

Using 2-dimensional electrophoresis analysis of proteins in stage 2 and
stage 3 hippocampal neurons, Mori et al. (2007) identified RUFY3, which
they called single axon-related-1 (singar1), in human, mouse, and rat.
The deduced proteins in all 3 species have 469 amino acids and contain a
RUN domain. The mouse and rat proteins contain a splice variant,
designated singar2, of 487 amino acids. Expression of singar1 in rat
brain was relatively low on embryonic day 15, peaked around postnatal
day 4, and decreased in the adult brain. Immunocytochemical analysis
showed that rat singar1 and singar2 accumulate in growth cones of minor
processes and axons.

GENE FUNCTION

Mori et al. (2007) found that rat singar1 became upregulated during
polarization of cultured hippocampal neurons and remained at high levels
thereafter. Reduction of singar1 expression by RNAi led to an increase
in the population of neurons bearing surplus axons. Overexpression of
singar1 suppressed the formation of surplus axons induced by excess
amounts of shootin1 (611171), without affecting normal polarization
processes.

MAPPING

Scott (2007) mapped the RUFY3 gene to chromosome 4q13.3 based on an
alignment of the RUFY3 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB020678) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.2).

REFERENCE 1. Mori, T.; Wada, T.; Suzuki, T.; Kubota, Y.; Inagaki, N.: Singar1,
a novel RUN domain-containing protein, suppresses formation of surplus
axons for neuronal polarity. J. Biol. Chem. 282: 19884-19893, 2007.

2. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 5: 355-364, 1998.

3. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/29/2007.

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 7/10/2007

EDITED carol: 07/13/2007
carol: 7/10/2007

172470	TITLE *172470 PHOSPHORYLASE KINASE, MUSCLE, GAMMA-1; PHKG1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Phosphorylase kinase (EC 2.7.1.38) is a crucial glycogenolytic
regulatory enzyme. The holoenzymes are composed of 16 subunit proteins
containing equimolar ratios of 4 subunit types known as alpha, beta,
gamma, and delta. Skeletal muscle contains the highest amount of
phosphorylase kinase enzymatic activity, although activity is also
observed in liver, cardiac muscle, brain, and several other tissues.
Kinetic differences exist between the cardiac and adult skeletal muscle
enzymes, and the liver and skeletal muscle enzymes are known to be
separate isozymes.

CLONING

Chamberlain et al. (1987) isolated a mouse cDNA probe for the gamma
subunit of phosphorylase kinase of muscle. RNA gel blot analysis showed
that the muscle gamma-phosphorylase kinase probe hybridized to mRNA in
skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, and brain, but did not hybridize to
liver RNA.

Using a murine muscle phosphorylase kinase-gamma cDNA fragment to screen
a human muscle cDNA library, Wehner and Kilimann (1995) isolated the
human PHKG1 cDNA. The 387-amino acid protein shows 93 to 94% identity
with rabbit, mouse, and rat Phkg1 sequences. Northern blot analysis
revealed an approximately 3.0-kb transcript.

MAPPING

Chamberlain et al. (1987) demonstrated that the gamma subunit of
phosphorylase kinase maps to human chromosome 7, with a single band
hybridizing to chromosome 11.

Jones et al. (1990) used a rabbit skeletal muscle cDNA for the gamma
subunit of phosphorylase kinase to map the human gene to 7p12-q21
through analysis of somatic cell hybrids and in situ hybridization. They
interpreted the data as indicating that the gene is located just above
the centromere of chromosome 7, with further cross-hybridizing sequences
at 7q21 and 11p14-p11. The liver gamma subunit is distinct and its mRNA
did not cross-hybridize with the skeletal muscle gamma subunit cDNA. The
results indicated that the autosomal human phosphorylasse kinase
deficiency of both liver and mascle (261750) is caused by a defect in
the autosomally determined beta subunit (172490) rather than in the
gamma subunit.

Burwinkel et al. (2003) identified 2 PHKG1 pseudogene sequences on
chromosome 7q11.1 and 1 on chromosome 11p11.1-q11, which they designated
PHKG1P1-3, respectively.

Maichele and Chamberlain (1994) mapped the mouse Phkg1 gene to
chromosome 5 near the locus for beta-glucuronidase (611499).

GENE STRUCTURE

Burwinkel et al. (2003) determined that the PHKG1 gene contains 10 exons
spanning approximately 12 kb. Exon 1 is noncoding.

REFERENCE 1. Burwinkel, B.; Hu, B.; Schroers, A.; Clemens, P. R.; Moses, S.
W.; Shin, Y. S.; Pongratz, D.; Vorgerd, M.; Kilimann, M. W.: Muscle
glycogenosis with low phosphorylase kinase activity: mutations in
PHKA1, PHKG1 or six other candidate genes explain only a minority
of cases. Europ. J. Hum. Gen. 11: 516-526, 2003.

2. Chamberlain, J. S.; vanTuinen, P.; Reeves, A. A.; Philip, B. A.;
Caskey, C. T.: Isolation of cDNA clones for the catalytic gamma subunit
of mouse muscle phosphorylase kinase: expression of mRNA in normal
and mutant Phk mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 2886-2890, 1987.

3. Jones, T. A.; da Cruz e Silva, E. F.; Spurr, N. K.; Sheer, D.;
Cohen, P. T.: Localization of the gene encoding the catalytic gamma
subunit of phosphorylase kinase to human chromosome bands 7p12-q21. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1048: 24-29, 1990.

4. Maichele, A. J.; Chamberlain, J. S.: The gamma phosphorylase kinase
gene, Phkg, maps to mouse chromosome 5 near Gus. Mammalian Genome 5:
15-18, 1994.

5. Wehner, M.; Kilimann, M. W.: Human cDNA encoding the muscle isoform
of the phosphorylase kinase gamma subunit (PHKG1). Hum. Genet. 96:
616-618, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/3/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/19/1989

EDITED carol: 10/10/2007
carol: 11/4/2004
tkritzer: 11/3/2004
dkim: 7/7/1998
mark: 1/28/1996
terry: 1/24/1996
carol: 6/2/1994
warfield: 3/31/1994
carol: 10/20/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 9/8/1990
supermim: 5/1/1990

607758	TITLE *607758 CATENIN, BETA-INTERACTING PROTEIN 1; CTNNBIP1
;;INHIBITOR OF BETA-CATENIN AND TCF4; ICAT
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Tago et al. (2000) cloned mouse Ctnnbip1, which they designated Icat.
Western blot analysis showed that the deduced 81-amino acid protein has
an apparent molecular mass of 9.0 kD. Tago et al. (2000) also identified
an EST clone for human ICAT. The deduced mouse and human proteins are
identical except for 2 amino acid changes. Northern blot analysis of
mouse tissues detected a 2.6-kb transcript expressed at high levels in
heart, brain, liver, and skeletal muscle, at low levels in kidney,
testis, and lung, and at undetectable levels in spleen. Icat was also
expressed at fairly constant levels during embryonic mouse development.

GENE FUNCTION

Tago et al. (2000) determined that mouse Icat interacts with
beta-catenin (116806) in vitro and in vivo. By mutation analysis, they
determined that the central region of Icat, specifically glu37, glu38,
and glu39, interacts with armadillo repeats 10 through 12 of
beta-catenin. Icat inhibited the interaction of beta-catenin with Tcf4
(TCF7L2; 602228) and repressed beta-catenin-Tcf4-mediated
transactivation. Icat inhibited Xenopus axis formation by interfering
with Wnt (see 164820) signaling. Tago et al. (2000) concluded that Icat
negatively regulates Wnt signaling via inhibition of the interaction
between beta-catenin and Tcf, and that Icat is required for development
and cell proliferation.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Graham et al. (2002) determined the crystal structure at 2.5-angstrom
resolution of a complex between CTNNB1 and ICAT, a protein that prevents
interaction between CTNNB1 and TCF/LEF family transcription factors.
ICAT contains a 3-helix bundle that binds armadillo repeats 10 to 12 and
a C-terminal tail that, like TCF and E-cadherin (192090), binds in the
groove formed by armadillo repeats 5 to 9 of CTNNB1. Graham et al.
(2002) showed that ICAT selectively inhibits CTNNB1/TCF binding in vivo,
without disrupting CTNNB1/cadherin interactions. They concluded that it
should be possible to design cancer therapeutics that inhibit
CTNNB1-mediated transcriptional activation without interfering with cell
adhesion.

Daniels and Weis (2002) determined the crystal structure of ICAT bound
to the armadillo repeat domain of CTNNB1. ICAT contains an N-terminal
helical domain that binds to repeats 11 and 12 of CTNNB1, and an
extended C-terminal region that binds to repeats 5 to 10 in a manner
similar to that of TCFs and other CTNNB1 ligands.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the
CTNNBIP1 gene to chromosome 1 (TMAP stSG2532).

REFERENCE 1. Daniels, D. L.; Weis, W. I.: ICAT inhibits beta-catenin binding
to Tcf/Lef-family transcription factors and the general coactivator
p300 using independent structural modules. Molec. Cell 10: 573-584,
2002.

2. Graham, T. A.; Clements, W. K.; Kimelman, D.; Xu, W.: The crystal
structure of the beta-catenin/ICAT complex reveals the inhibitory
mechanism of ICAT. Molec. Cell 10: 563-571, 2002.

3. Tago, K.; Nakamura, T.; Nishita, M.; Hyodo, J.; Nagai, S.; Murata,
Y.; Adachi, S.; Ohwada, S.; Morishita, Y.; Shibuya, H.; Akiyama, T.
: Inhibition of Wnt signaling by ICAT, a novel beta-catenin-interacting
protein. Genes Dev. 14: 1741-1749, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 5/7/2003

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/7/2003

EDITED mgross: 11/14/2007
mgross: 5/7/2003

605446	TITLE *605446 RETINITIS PIGMENTOSA GTPase REGULATOR-INTERACTING PROTEIN; RPGRIP1
;;RPGR-INTERACTING PROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mutations in the retinitis pigmentosa GTPase regulator gene (RPGR;
312610) cause X-linked retinitis pigmentosa-3 (RP3), a severe,
progressive, and degenerative retinal dystrophy that eventually leads to
complete blindness. RPGR is ubiquitously expressed, yet mutations in the
RPGR gene lead to a retina-restricted phenotype. Using the yeast
2-hybrid system, Boylan and Wright (2000) screened a bovine retina cDNA
library for RPGR-interacting proteins and identified a novel protein,
which they called RPGRIP1. They confirmed the specificity of the
interaction between RPGR and RPGRIP1 by coimmunoprecipitation of in
vitro translated protein and use of RPGR mutants. By EST database
searching, Boylan and Wright (2000) identified a human homolog of the
bovine gene. By PCR and 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, they isolated 2 human
RPGRIP1 cDNAs, which appeared to be alternatively spliced orthologs of
the bovine gene, encoding deduced proteins of 586 and 902 amino acids
Dryja et al. (2001) found that the cDNA sequence in this report lacked
the 5-prime end of the gene and deduced protein contains 1,259 amino
acids. Boylan and Wright (2000) found that the RPGRIP1 proteins are
predicted to form 2 coiled-coil domains at the N terminus, which are
seen in some proteins involved in vesicular trafficking. Northern blot
analysis detected a strong 2.0-kb and a weak 3.1-kb transcript in testis
only. RT-PCR analysis detected strong expression of RPGRIP1 in retina,
with weaker expression in testis. Roepman et al. (2000) also cloned
RPGRIP1 cDNAs and identified several alternatively spliced gene
products, some with retina-restricted expression, that interact
specifically with RPGR in vivo and in vitro. They demonstrated that RPGR
and RPGRIP1 colocalize in the outer segment of rod photoreceptors, which
is in agreement with the retinitis pigmentosa phenotype observed in RP3
patients.

Hong et al. (2001) cloned the mouse ortholog of RPGRIP1. Northern blot
analysis detected a retina-specific Rpgrip1 transcript of approximately
10.0 kb in wildtype mice but not in rd mice with photoreceptor
degeneration (see 180072). Immunoblot analysis showed retina
photoreceptor-specific expression of a 210-kD protein.
Immunofluorescence and immunogold electron microscopy demonstrated
localization of Rpgrip1 at the junction between the inner and outer
segments, suggesting a localization in the connecting cilia. Rpgrip1
localization was the same in the absence of Rpgr, suggesting that Rpgr
is anchored to the connecting cilium through its interaction with
Rpgrip1. Because mouse photoreceptors are overwhelmingly rods, Hong et
al. (2001) extended their localization studies to the 13-lined ground
squirrel, whose photoreceptors are 95% cones. The localization of
Rpgrip1 was the same, indicating that it is localized in the connecting
cilia of both rod and cone photoreceptors. The authors concluded that
RPGRIP1 is a structural component of the ciliary axoneme.

Gerber et al. (2001) determined that the RPGRIP1 gene encodes a
predicted protein product of 1,287 amino acids.

Roepman et al. (2005) identified 2 central Ca(2+)-binding C2 domains,
one of which is truncated, in RPGRIP1. The C2 domains are encoded by
exons 14 to 16 and are absent from some RPGRIP1 isoforms.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dryja et al. (2001) determined that the RPGRIP1 gene contains 25 exons.

Gerber et al. (2001) characterized the complete exon-intron structure of
the RPGRIP1 gene. RPGRIP1 encompasses 24 coding exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Mavlyutov et al. (2002) used isoform-specific antibodies to demonstrate
that RPGR and RPGRIP isoforms are distributed and colocalized at
restricted foci throughout the outer segments of human and bovine (but
not murine) rod photoreceptors. In humans, these proteins are also
localized in cone outer segments, and RPGRIP is expressed in other
neurons such as amacrine cells. The authors proposed the existence of
species-specific subcellular processes governing the function and/or
organization of the photoreceptor outer segment as reflected by the
species-specific localization of RPGR and RPGRIP protein isoforms in
this compartment. They contended that this may provide a rationale for
the disparity of phenotypes among species and among various human
mutations.

Castagnet et al. (2003) demonstrated the existence of RPGRIP1 isoforms
with distinct cellular and subcellular localizations and biochemical
properties in the retina. High mass RPGRIP1 isoforms p175/p150 were
enriched in the outer segment compartment of photoreceptors. The
remaining isoforms were present across subcellular fractions, including
nuclei, and were soluble. The p175/p150 isoforms were predominantly
sequestered in the cytoskeleton-insoluble fraction of outer segment and
nuclei. In selective amacrine cells and in the transformed photoreceptor
line 661W, RPGRIP1 isoforms localized at restricted foci in or near
nuclear pore complexes. Among the nucleoporins, RPGRIP1 isoforms
selectively associated in vivo with RAN-binding protein-2 (RANBP2;
601181). RPGRIP1 isoforms also decorated microtubules in 661W cells and
occasionally formed coiled-like inclusion bodies in the perikarya. These
results supported distinct but complementary functions of RPGRIP1
isoforms in cytoskeletal-mediated processes in photoreceptors and
amacrine neurons. Castagnet et al. (2003) concluded that their data
implicated a role of RANBP2 in the pathogenesis of neuroretinopathies
and as a docking station to mediate the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of
RPGRIP1 isoforms and their interaction with other partners in amacrine
and 661W neurons.

Lu and Ferreira (2005) identified expression of a novel RPGRIP1
transcript in human retina generated by use of an alternative donor
splice site that leads to the skipping of 33 nucleotides from the
canonical exon 13. This novel transcript is of very low abundance in
retina compared with the counterpart transcript isoform expressing
constitutive exons 13 and 14. The authors suggested that screening of
only the constitutive exons of the RPGRIP1 gene in patients with LCA
could result in underreporting of mutations, and considered it likely
that translationally silent and other types of mutations, sometimes
considered to be neutral polymorphisms, in the genomic region
encompassing exons 12 through 14 could lead to aberrant transcripts.

In cultured mammalian cells, Shu et al. (2005) showed that both the
RPGR-ORF15 isoform (312610) and RPGRIP1 localized to centrioles
throughout the cell cycle, and RPGR-ORF15 and RGRIP1 colocalized at
basal bodies in cells with primary cilia.

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Roepman et al. (2005) determined that NPHP4
(607215) interacted with C2 domain-containing RPGRIP1 isoforms. Analysis
of the interaction in the presence of Ca(2+) chelators indicated that
the binding was Ca(2+) independent. NPHP1 colocalized with C2-containing
RPGRIP1 isoforms in bovine and mouse retina. Mutations in NPHP4
associated with Senior-Loken syndrome-4 (606996) and mutations in RPGRP1
associated with Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA6; 613826) disrupted the
interaction between the 2 proteins.

Lu et al. (2005) showed that the bovine isoforms Rpgrip1 and Rgrip1b
underwent limited proteolysis constitutively in vivo in the cytoplasm
compartment. This led to the relocation and accumulation of a 7-kD
N-terminal domain to the nucleus, whereas the cytosolic C-terminal
domain of Rpgrip1 was degraded and short-lived. Rpgrip1 mutations
(605446.0007 and 605446.0008) in the RPGR-interacting domain (RID)
exhibited strong cis-acting and antagonistic biologic effects on the
nuclear relocation, subcellular distribution and proteolytic cleavage of
Rpgrip1 and/or domains thereof. Lu et al. (2005) proposed distinct and
spatiotemporal subcellular-specific roles for RPGRIP1 and further
hypothesized a RPGRIP1-mediated nucleocytoplasmic crosstalk and
transport pathway regulated by RID, and hence by RPGR.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and radiation hybrid analysis, Boylan
and Wright (2000) and Roepman et al. (2000) mapped the RPGRIP1 gene to
chromosome 14q11. Roepman et al. (2000) suggested that the localization
of RPGRIP1 at 14q11 makes it a strong candidate gene for RP16.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Leber Congenital Amaurosis 6

Dryja et al. (2001) surveyed 57 unrelated patients who had Leber
congenital amaurosis for mutations in RPGRIP1 and found recessive
mutations involving both alleles in 3 (6%) patients (see LCA6, 613826).
All 4 mutations (605446.0001-605446.0004) created premature termination
codons and are likely to be null alleles.

Gerber et al. (2001) performed direct sequencing of the 24 coding exons
of the RPGRIP1 gene in 2 consanguineous families with Leber congenital
amaurosis in whom a genomewide screen had detected homozygosity at the
14q11 chromosomal region. A homozygous missense mutation and a
homozygous null mutation were identified in the 2 families,
respectively. Among 142 unrelated LCA patients, Gerber et al. (2001)
found RPGRIP1 mutations in 8 patients (5.6%). Among the 8 distinct
mutations (see, e.g., 605446.0007 and 605446.0008) detected, 5 were
truncating and 3 (2 missense and 1 in-frame deletion) concerned highly
conserved amino acids in bovine and murine sequences.

- Cone-Rod Dystrophy 13

In affected members of consanguineous Pakistani families with cone-rod
dystrophy-13 (CORD13; 608194), Hameed et al. (2003) identified
homozygosity for mutations in the RPGRIP1 gene
(605446.0005-605446.0006).

ANIMAL MODEL

Cone-rod dystrophy-1 (Cord1) is a recessive condition that occurs
naturally in miniature longhaired dachshunds. In affected dogs, Mellersh
et al. (2006) identified a 44-bp insertion in exon 2 of the Rpgrip1 gene
that altered the reading frame and introduced a premature stop codon.
All affected and carrier dogs within an extended inbred pedigree were
homozygous and heterozygous, respectively, for the mutation. Mellersh et
al. (2006) concluded that this canine disease is a model for human LCA.

Won et al. (2009) described a mouse model carrying a splice acceptor
site mutation (nmf247) in the Rpgrip1 gene that is phenotypically
distinct from Rpgrip1(tm1Tili) mice, which carry a null allele for the
long isoform. Photoreceptor degeneration in homozygous Rpgrip1(nmf247)
mice was earlier in onset and more severe than that of Rpgrip1(tm1Tili)
mice. Ultrastructural studies revealed that whereas Rpgrip1(nmf247)
mutants had a normal structure and number of connecting cilia, unlike
Rpgrip1(tm1Tili) mice, they did not elaborate rod outer segments. Won et
al. (2009) concluded that in addition to its role in outer segment disc
morphogenesis, RPGRIP1 may be essential for rod outer segment formation,
and that different isoforms may play different roles in photoreceptors.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 6
RPGRIP1, 1-BP DEL, ASP1176

Dryja et al. (2001) described a patient with Leber congenital
amaurosis-6 (613826) who was a compound heterozygote for a 1-bp deletion
(T) at codon asp1176 and a trp65-to-ter nonsense mutation (605446.0002).
Both mutations led to premature termination and were likely to be null
alleles.

.0002
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 6
RPGRIP1, TRP65TER

See 605446.0001 and Dryja et al. (2001).

.0003
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 6
RPGRIP1, 1-BP INS, GLN893

In a patient with Leber congenital amaurosis-6 (613826), Dryja et al.
(2001) identified homozygosity for a frameshift mutation, a 1-bp (T)
insertion at codon gln893.

.0004
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 6
RPGRIP1, 1-BP DEL, LYS342

In a patient with Leber congenital amaurosis-6 (613826), Dryja et al.
(2001) identified homozygosity for a frameshift mutation in the RPGRIP1
gene. The mutation consisted of a 1-bp deletion (A) at codon lys342.

.0005
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 13
RPGRIP1, ARG827LEU

In a consanguineous Pakistani family, Hameed et al. (2003) identified
homozygosity for a 2480G-T transversion in exon 16 of the RPGRIP1 gene,
which changed codon 827 from CGC (arg) to CTC (leu), in all affected
members with cone-rod dystrophy (608194).

.0006
CONE-ROD DYSTROPHY 13
RPGRIP1, ALA547SER

In 3 Pakistani families, Hameed et al. (2003) found that recessive
cone-rod dystrophy (608194) segregated with homozygosity for a 1639G-T
substitution in exon 13 of the RPGRIP1 gene, which changed codon 547
from GCT (ala) to TCT (ser).

.0007
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 6
RPGRIP1, ASP1114GLY

In a patient with Leber congenital amaurosis-6 (613826), born to
consanguineous parents of Moroccan origin, Gerber et al. (2001)
identified homozygosity for an 3341A-G transition in exon 21 of the
RPGRIP1 gene, resulting in an asp1114-to-gly (D1114G) substitution in
the RPGR-interacting domain (RID).

Lu et al. (2005) found that the D1114G mutation abolished the
interaction of RPGRIP1 in vivo with RPGR without affecting the stability
of the RID and that this interaction was not resistant to stress
stimuli. The D1114G mutation caused a redistribution of the processed
N-terminal domain fragment of RPGRIP1 between the nuclear and cytosolic
compartments.

.0008
LEBER CONGENITAL AMAUROSIS 6
RPGRIP1, 3-BP DEL, 3835GAG

In a French patient with Leber congenital amaurosis-6 (613826), Gerber
et al. (2001) identified heterozygosity for a 3-bp deletion, resulting
in loss of glu1279 (delE1279) located 8 residues upstream to the stop
codon. The deletion was inherited from the patient's healthy father and
was not identified in 252 control chromosomes. A second mutation was not
identified.

Lu et al. (2005) found that the delE1279 mutation enhanced the
interaction of RPGRIP1 in vivo with RPGR without affecting the stability
of the RID. The interaction of delE1279 with RPGR was resistant to
various stress treatments such as osmotic, pH, and heat-shock stimuli,
and the delE1279 mutation caused a significant increase of the
N-terminal fragment of RPGRIP1 in the cytosolic compartment.

REFERENCE 1. Boylan, J. P.; Wright, A. F.: Identification of a novel protein
interacting with RPGR. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 2085-2093, 2000.

2. Castagnet, P.; Mavlyutov, T.; Cai, Y.; Zhong, F.; Ferreira, P.
: RPGRIP1s with distinct neuronal localization and biochemical properties
associate selectively with RanBP2 in amacrine neurons. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 12: 1847-1863, 2003.

3. Dryja, T. P.; Adams, S. M.; Grimsby, J. L.; McGee, T. L.; Hong,
D.-H.; Li, T.; Andreasson, S.; Berson, E. L.: Null RPGRIP1 alleles
in patients with Leber congenital amaurosis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68:
1295-1298, 2001.

4. Gerber, S.; Perrault, I.; Hanein, S.; Barbet, F.; Ducroq, D.; Ghazi,
I.; Martin-Coignard, D.; Leowski, C.; Homfray, T.; Dufier, J.-L.;
Munnich, A.; Kaplan, J.; Rozet, J.-M.: Complete exon-intron structure
of the RPGR-interaction protein (RPGRIP1) gene allows the identification
of mutations underlying Leber congenital amaurosis. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 9: 561-571, 2001.

5. Hameed, A.; Abid, A.; Aziz, A.; Ismail, M.; Mehdi, S. Q.; Khaliq,
S.: Evidence of RPGRIP1 gene mutations associated with recessive
cone-rod dystrophy. J. Med. Genet. 40: 616-619, 2003.

6. Hong, D.-H.; Yue, G.; Adamian, M.; Li, T.: Retinitis pigmentosa
GTPase regulator (RPGR)-interacting protein is stably associated with
the photoreceptor ciliary axoneme and anchors RPGR to the connecting
cilium. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 12091-12099, 2001.

7. Lu, X.; Ferreira, P. A.: Identification of novel murine- and human-specific
RPGRIP1 splice variants with distinct expression profiles and subcellular
localization. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 46: 1882-1290, 2005.

8. Lu, X.; Guruju, M.; Oswald, J.; Ferreira, P. A.: Limited proteolysis
differentially modulates the stability and subcellular localization
of domains of RPGRIP1 that are distinctly affected by mutations in
Leber's congenital amaurosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 1327-1340,
2005.

9. Mavlyutov, T. A.; Zhao, H.; Ferreira, P. A.: Species-specific
subcellular localization of RPGR and RPGRIP isoforms: implications
for the phenotypic variability of congenital retinopathies among species. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 11: 1899-1907, 2002.

10. Mellersh, C. S.; Boursnell, M. E. G.; Pettitt, L.; Ryder, E. J.;
Holmes, N. G.; Grafham, D.; Forman, O. P.; Sampson, J.; Barnett, K.
C.; Blanton, S.; Binns, M. M.; Vaudin, M.: Canine RPGRIP1 mutation
establishes cone-rod dystrophy in miniature longhaired dachshunds
as a homologue of human Leber congenital amaurosis. Genomics 88:
293-301, 2006.

11. Roepman, R.; Bernoud-Hubac, N.; Schick, D. E.; Maugeri, A.; Berger,
W.; Ropers, H.-H.; Cremers, F. P. M.; Ferreira, P. A.: The retinitis
pigmentosa GTPase regulator (RPGR) interacts with novel transport-like
proteins in the outer segments of rod photoreceptors. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 9: 2095-2105, 2000.

12. Roepman, R.; Letteboer, S. J. F.; Arts, H. H.; van Beersum, S.
E. C.; Lu, X.; Krieger, E.; Ferreira, P. A.; Cremers, F. P. M.: Interaction
of nephrocystin-4 and RPGRIP1 is disrupted by nephronophthisis or
Leber congenital amaurosis-associated mutations. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 102: 18520-18525, 2005.

13. Shu, X.; Fry, A. M.; Tulloch, B.; Manson, F. D. C.; Crabb, J.
W.; Khanna, H.; Faragher, A. J.; Lennon, A.; He, S.; Trojan, P.; Giessl,
A.; Wolfrum, U.; Vervoort, R.; Swaroop, A.; Wright, A. F.: RPGR ORF15
isoform co-localizes with RPGRIP1 at centrioles and basal bodies and
interacts with nucleophosmin. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 1183-1197,
2005.

14. Won, J.; Gifford, E.; Smith, R. S.; Yi, H.; Ferreira, P. A.; Hicks,
W. L.; Li, T.; Naggert, J. K.; Nishina, P. M.: RPGRIP1 is essential
for normal rod photoreceptor outer segment elaboration and morphogenesis. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 18: 4329-4339, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 10/4/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/30/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/19/2008
Jane Kelly - updated: 8/13/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/3/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/24/2006
Jane Kelly - updated: 11/17/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/6/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/1/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 7/9/2003
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 2/8/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/13/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/15/2001

CREATED George E. Tiller: 11/30/2000

EDITED carol: 03/24/2011
wwang: 10/22/2010
terry: 10/4/2010
carol: 5/1/2009
carol: 4/3/2009
wwang: 6/5/2008
terry: 5/30/2008
wwang: 5/22/2008
terry: 5/19/2008
carol: 8/13/2007
mgross: 10/4/2006
terry: 10/3/2006
mgross: 1/26/2006
terry: 1/24/2006
alopez: 11/17/2005
tkritzer: 5/6/2005
carol: 3/29/2004
tkritzer: 10/24/2003
tkritzer: 10/6/2003
tkritzer: 10/1/2003
cwells: 7/9/2003
alopez: 2/8/2002
alopez: 9/6/2001
mgross: 8/13/2001
carol: 8/2/2001
cwells: 6/27/2001
cwells: 6/22/2001
terry: 6/15/2001
joanna: 12/22/2000
carol: 12/4/2000
carol: 11/30/2000

600233	TITLE *600233 GAMMA-AMINOBUTYRIC ACID RECEPTOR, GAMMA-3; GABRG3
;;GABA-A RECEPTOR, GAMMA-3 POLYPEPTIDE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors are a family of proteins
involved in the GABAergic neurotransmission of the mammalian central
nervous system. GABRG3 is a member of the GABA-A receptor gene family of
heteromeric pentameric ligand-gated ion channels through which GABA, the
major inhibitory neurotransmitter in the mammalian brain, acts. GABA-A
receptors are the site of action of a number of important pharmacologic
agents including barbiturates, benzodiazepines, and ethanol (summary by
Whiting et al., 1999).

For additional general information about the GABA-A receptor gene
family, see GABRA1 (137160).

CLONING

Greger et al. (1995) cloned the gene for the gamma-3 subunit.

MAPPING

Russek and Farb (1994) stated that the GABRG3 is located on 15q11-q13 in
a cluster with GABRA5 (137142) and GABRB3 (137192). Thus, there is an
alpha/beta/gamma cluster of GABA receptor subunit subtype genes on 3
chromosomes, 15, 5, and 3. Russek and Farb (1994) suggested that these
may have originated from chromosome 15 because the centromere of that
chromosome is associated with increased amounts of satellite DNA and
translocations occur more frequently around such centromeres. Thus, it
can be speculated that the ancestral GABA-A receptor gene cluster formed
on chromosome 15 and thereafter spawned the clusters on chromosomes 4
and 5.

Greger et al. (1995) showed that the GABRG3 gene is 35 kb from the
alpha-5 subunit gene which, in turn, is about 100 kb from the beta-3
subunit locus. The latter is located at the centromeric end of the
cluster and is transcribed in the opposite direction of GABRG3 and
GABRA5. This orientation of the cluster is opposite that reported by
Russek and Farb (1994). Greger et al. (1995) confirmed that the GABRG3
gene maps to 15q11-q13 and they verified the order of the genes by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

GENE FUNCTION

Using coding SNPs within the GABA receptor gene cluster on chromosome
15q11-q13, Hogart et al. (2007) demonstrated that the GABRG3, GABRB3,
and GABRA5 genes were biallelically expressed in the cerebral cortex of
21 postmortem human brain samples.

REFERENCE 1. Greger, V.; Knoll, J. H. M.; Woolf, E.; Glatt, K.; Tyndale, R.
F.; DeLorey, T. M.; Olsen, R. W.; Tobin, A. J.; Sikela, J. M.; Nakatsu,
Y.; Brilliant, M. H.; Whiting, P. J.; Lalande, M.: The gamma-aminobutyric
acid receptor gamma-3 subunit gene (GABRG3) is tightly linked to the
alpha-5 subunit gene (GABRA5) on human chromosome 15q11-q13 and is
transcribed in the same orientation. Genomics 26: 258-264, 1995.

2. Hogart, A.; Nagarajan, R. P.; Patzel, K. A.; Yasui, D. H.; Lasalle,
J. M.: 15q11-13 GABA(A) receptor genes are normally biallelically
expressed in brain yet are subject to epigenetic dysregulation in
autism-spectrum disorders. Hum. Molec. Genet. 16: 691-703, 2007.

3. Russek, S. J.; Farb, D. H.: Mapping of the beta-2 subunit gene
(GABRB2) to microdissected human chromosome 5q34-q35 defines a gene
cluster for the most abundant GABA-A receptor isoform. Genomics 23:
528-533, 1994.

4. Whiting, P. J.; Bonnert, T. P.; McKernan, R. M.; Farrar, S.; le
Bourdelles, B.; Heavens, R. P.; Smith, D. W.; Hewson, L.; Rigby, M.
R.; Sirinathsinghji, D. J. S.; Thompson, S. A.; Wafford, K. A.: Molecular
and functional diversity of the expanding GABA-A receptor gene family. Ann.
N.Y. Acad. Sci. 868: 645-653, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/13/2010
Alan F. Scott - updated: 11/10/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/13/1994

EDITED wwang: 07/14/2010
ckniffin: 7/13/2010
carol: 12/3/2009
mark: 4/10/1997
joanna: 1/16/1997
mark: 11/10/1995
carol: 12/13/1994

603085	TITLE *603085 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 31 (COPPER TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 1; SLC31A1
;;COPPER TRANSPORTER 1; COPT1; CTR1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Copper is an element essential for life, but excessive copper can be
toxic or even lethal to the cell. Therefore, cells have developed
sophisticated ways to maintain a critical copper balance, with the
intake, export, and intracellular compartmentalization or buffering of
copper strictly regulated. The 2 related genes ATP7A (300011) and ATP7B
(606882), responsible for the human diseases Menkes syndrome (309400)
and Wilson disease (277900), respectively, are involved in copper
export. In S. cerevisiae, the copper uptake genes CTR1, CTR2, and CTR3
have been identified, and in human the CTR1 and CTR2 (603088) genes have
been identified.

CLONING

Zhou and Gitschier (1997) isolated a human cDNA encoding COPT1, which
they called CTR1, by functional complementation of the yeast
high-affinity copper uptake mutant ctr1. The deduced 190-amino acid
human CTR1 protein is similar to yeast CTR1 and Arabidopsis COPT1, a
copper transporter also isolated by functional complementation of yeast
ctr1. All 3 predicted proteins have 3 transmembrane domains and an N
terminus that is rich in methionine and serine residues; the N terminus
of human CTR1 is also abundant in histidines. Northern blot analysis
detected 2 major CTR1 transcripts of approximately 2 kb and 5.5 kb and a
less abundant transcript of about 8.5 kb in all human organs and tissues
examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhou and Gitschier (1997) proposed that CTR1 is a high-affinity copper
uptake gene because it could complement the yeast ctr1 mutation, it
could rescue multiple defects in ctr1 yeast, its expression in ctr1
yeast increased the concentration of cellular copper, and its
overexpression in yeast led to a vulnerability to the toxicity of copper
overload.

Moller et al. (2000) found that cells expressing CTR1 but not those
expressing CTR2 showed a dramatic hyperaccumulation of radioactive
copper, comparable to that seen in fibroblasts from Menkes disease
patients. However, in contrast to the Menkes syndrome fibroblasts, the
CTR1-expressing fibroblasts had an efflux rate similar to normal
fibroblasts.

By cross-linking CTR1 transiently expressed in HEK293 cells, Lee et al.
(2002) demonstrated that CTR1 forms a homotrimer as part of a copper
transport channel. Functional assays revealed that it stimulates the
initial rate of radiolabeled copper uptake. CTR1 transports copper with
high affinity in a time-dependent and saturable manner and is
copper-specific. Transport is an energy-independent process and is
stimulated by extracellular acidic pH and high K+ concentrations.

Using pulse-chase labeling followed by immunoprecipitation, Klomp et al.
(2002) found that endogenous CTR1 is synthesized in HeLa cells as a
28-kD precursor containing N-linked oligosaccharides, and it is
processed into a 35-kD mature protein. Immunofluorescent microscopy
showed that the subcellular localization of CTR1 differed between cell
types. In some cells, including HeLa, lung, and hepatocellular carcinoma
cell lines, it predominantly localized in a vesicular perinuclear
compartment, while in other cells, including choriocarcinoma and colon
carcinoma cell lines, it localized predominantly at the plasma membrane.
The localization of CTR1 was not influenced by copper concentration, but
inhibition of endocytosis caused a partial redistribution of CTR1 to the
cell surface of HeLa cells.

Using accessibility of epitopes to antibody before or after cell
permeabilization, Eisses and Kaplan (2002) determined that CTR1,
expressed at the surface of transfected sf9 insect cells, has an
extracellular N terminus and an intracellular C terminus. Using
mutagenic analysis, they determined that neither of the 2 cys residues,
cys161 and cys189, play a role in copper uptake, and that glycosylation
of CTR1 is not required for function.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURE {1:Aller and Unger (2006)} reported the 6-angstrom

projection structure of human CTR1. The projection of CTR1 revealed a
symmetrical trimer less than 40 angstroms wide. The center 3-fold axis
of each trimer formed a region of very low electron density likely to be
involved in copper translocation. The structure of the putative pore was
more closely related to channel proteins than to typical primary and
secondary active transporters.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Moller et al. (2000) determined that the
CTR1 gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

Zhou and Gitschier (1997) found that the 3-prime untranslated region of
the human CTR1 gene contains a CA repeat marker (D9S262) that had
previously been mapped to 9q31-q32. By analysis of YAC clones, they
showed that CTR1 and CTR2, which is also located in 9q31-q32, are not
adjacent genes. Moller et al. (2000) identified an apparent CTR1
pseudogene (CTR1P) on 3q25-q27.

ANIMAL MODEL

To test the hypothesis that CTR1 is required for copper delivery to
mammalian cells, Kuo et al. (2001) inactivated the Ctr1 gene in mice by
targeted mutagenesis. They observed early embryonic lethality in
homozygous mutant embryos and a deficiency in copper uptake in the
brains of heterozygous animals. A study of the spatial and temporal
expression pattern of Ctr1 during mouse development and adulthood
further showed that Ctr1 is ubiquitously transcribed with highest
expression observed in the specialized epithelia of the choroid plexus
and renal tubules and in connective tissues of the eye, ovary, and
testis. Similarly, Lee et al. (2001) showed that the mouse Ctr1 gene
encodes a component of the copper transport machinery and that mice
heterozygous for Ctr1 exhibit tissue-specific defects in copper
accumulation and in the activities of copper-dependent enzymes. Mice
completely deficient for Ctr1 exhibited profound growth and
developmental defects and died in utero in midgestation.

REFERENCE 1. Aller, S. G.; Unger, V. M.: Projection structure of the human
copper transporter CTR1 at 6-angstrom resolution reveals a compact
trimer with a novel channel-like architecture. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
3627-3632, 2006.

2. Eisses, J. F.; Kaplan, J. H.: Molecular characterization of hCTR1,
the human copper uptake protein. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 29162-29171,
2002.

3. Klomp, A. E. M.; Tops, B. B. J.; van den Berg, I. E. T.; Berger,
R.; Klomp, L. W. J.: Biochemical characterization and subcellular
localization of human copper transporter 1 (hCTR1). Biochem. J. 364:
497-505, 2002.

4. Kuo, Y.-M.; Zhou, B.; Cosco, D.; Gitschier, J.: The copper transporter
CTR1 provides an essential function in mammalian embryonic development. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 6836-6841, 2001.

5. Lee, J.; Pena, M. M. O.; Nose, Y.; Thiele, D. J.: Biochemical
characterization of the human copper transporter Ctr1. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
4380-4387, 2002.

6. Lee, J.; Prohaska, J. R.; Thiele, D. J.: Essential role for mammalian
copper transporter Ctr1 in copper homeostasis and embryonic development. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 6842-6847, 2001.

7. Moller, L. B.; Petersen, C.; Lund, C.; Horn, N.: Characterization
of the hCTR1 gene: genomic organization, functional expression, and
identification of a highly homologous processed gene. Gene 257:
13-22, 2000.

8. Zhou, B.; Gitschier, J.: hCTR1: a human gene for copper uptake
identified by complementation in yeast. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94:
7481-7486, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/30/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/4/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/18/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/28/2001

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 10/2/1998

EDITED mgross: 07/30/2007
terry: 7/30/2007
tkritzer: 1/5/2004
mgross: 10/4/2002
carol: 4/29/2002
carol: 3/8/2002
terry: 3/8/2002
carol: 8/9/2001
mcapotos: 7/2/2001
mcapotos: 6/26/2001
terry: 6/18/2001
mgross: 2/28/2001
alopez: 3/1/1999
psherman: 10/5/1998

114180	TITLE *114180 CALMODULIN 1; CALM1
;;PHOSPHORYLASE KINASE, DELTA SUBUNIT; PHKD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Calmodulin is the archetype of the family of calcium-modulated proteins
of which nearly 20 members have been found. They are identified by their
occurrence in the cytosol or on membranes facing the cytosol and by a
high affinity for calcium. Calmodulin contains 149 amino acids and has 4
calcium-binding domains. Its functions include roles in growth and the
cell cycle as well as in signal transduction and the synthesis and
release of neurotransmitters.

CLONING

Until the studies of Sen Gupta et al. (1987), only 1 human calmodulin
cDNA had been reported. These authors found evidence of a second
actively transcribed calmodulin gene in man. Calmodulin is the delta
subunit of phosphorylase kinase, which has 3 other types of subunits.
Although only 1 form of calmodulin has been found in humans, 3 distinct
human cDNAs have been isolated that encode the identical polypeptide
(Koller et al., 1990; Pegues and Friedberg, 1990). The existence of 3
expressible genes for calmodulin may indicate that one is a housekeeping
gene and that the additional copies are differentially regulated to
modulate calmodulin function.

Rhyner et al. (1994) detected expression of CALM1 in all human tissues
tested, although at varying levels. They identified 2 different
CALM1-related pseudogenes.

Toutenhoofd et al. (1998) found that all 3 CALM genes were expressed in
human teratocarcinoma cells. CALM1 was expressed as a major 1.7-kb
transcript and a minor 4.1-kb transcript. CALM1 was at least 5-fold less
actively transcribed than CALM3 (114183).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

To determine how calcium/calmodulin activates
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase I (CAMK1; 604998), Chin et
al. (1997) characterized CAMK1 activation by calmodulin mutants with
substitutions at hydrophobic residues. They found that CAMK1 activity is
dependent on met124 within the C-terminal domain of calmodulin as well
as on N-terminal hydrophobic residues of calmodulin.

Kretsinger et al. (1986) described the crystal structure of calmodulin
to 3.6-angstrom resolution.

Schumacher et al. (2001) determined the crystal structure of calmodulin
bound to KCNN2 (605879). The calmodulin-binding domain forms an
elongated dimer with a calmodulin molecule bound at each end; each
calmodulin wraps around 3 alpha-helices, 2 from 1 calmodulin-binding
domain subunit and 1 from the other.

Edema factor, the exotoxin of the anthrax bacillus, is transported into
host cells by an anthrax-derived transporter, protective antigen.
Together with lethal factor (see 603060), edema factor contributes
significantly to both cutaneous and systemic anthrax and is an adenylyl
cyclase activated by CALM1. Drum et al. (2002) described the crystal
structures of edema factor alone and edema factor with CALM1 and
3-prime-deoxy-ATP. On calmodulin binding, an edema factor helical domain
of 15 kD undergoes a 15-angstrom translation and a 30-degree rotation
away from the edema factor catalytic core, which stabilizes a disordered
loop and leads to enzyme activation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Rhyner et al. (1994) found that the CALM1 gene contains 6 exons spread
over about 10 kb of genomic DNA. The exon-intron structure was identical
to that of CALM3. A cluster of transcription-start sites was identified
200 bp upstream of the ATG translation-start codon, and several putative
regulatory elements were found in the 5-prime flanking region, as well
as in intron 1. A short CAG trinucleotide repeat region was identified
in the 5-prime untranslated region of the gene.

Toutenhoofd et al. (1998) determined that of the 3 CALM genes, only
CALM1 contains a canonical TATA box. Like CALM3, the 5-prime region of
CALM1 is highly GC rich.

MAPPING

McPherson et al. (1991) used a panel of human/rodent somatic cell
hybrids to demonstrate that the cDNA probe for CALM1 was localized to
chromosome 14 with cross-hybridization evident on chromosome 7 and very
weak on the X chromosome. The assignments to chromosomes 14 and 7
confirmed an earlier report by Scambler et al. (1987). McPherson et al.
(1991) tentatively assigned the CALM2 (114182) gene to chromosome 10,
but the gene was subsequently shown to be on chromosome 2. They assigned
the cDNA probe for CALM3 unequivocally to chromosome 19. There was no
apparent cross-hybridization to other chromosomes. A calmodulin
pseudogene is located on chromosome 17 (Sen Gupta et al., 1989) and
there are probably more on several other chromosomes. Berchtold et al.
(1993) assigned the CALM1 gene to chromosome 14 by PCR-based
amplification of CALM1-specific sequences using DNA from human/hamster
cell hybrids as template. Regional sublocalization was performed by in
situ hybridization using CALM1-specific DNA probes of intronic or
flanking parts of the gene; the regional localization was found to be
14q24-q31.

GENE FUNCTION

To understand the relationship between the number of calmodulin
molecules regulating each L-type calcium channel (see 114205) and the
number of calmodulin molecules privy to the local calcium signal from
each channel, Mori et al. (2004) fused L-type calcium channels to single
calmodulin molecules. These chimeric molecules revealed that a single
calmodulin molecule directs L-type channel regulation. Similar fusion
molecules were used to estimate the local calmodulin concentration near
calcium channels. This estimate indicates marked enrichment of local
calmodulin, as if a school of nearby calmodulins were poised to enhance
the transduction of local calcium entry into diverse signaling pathways.

Junge et al. (2004) identified a conserved calmodulin-binding site in
Munc13s (see 605836), which are essential regulators of synaptic vesicle
priming and synaptic efficacy. They showed that Ca(2+) sensor/effector
complexes consisting of calmodulin and Munc13s regulate synaptic vesicle
priming and synaptic efficacy in response to a residual Ca(2+)
concentration signal and thus shape short-term plasticity
characteristics during periods of sustained synaptic activity.

Dick et al. (2008) showed that the spatial calcium ion selectivity of
N-lobe calmodulin regulation is not invariably global but can be
switched by a novel calcium ion/calmodulin binding site within the amino
terminus of channels (NSCaTE, for N-terminal spatial calcium ion
transforming element). Native Ca(v)2.2 channels lack this element and
show N-lobe regulation with a global selectivity. On the introduction of
NSCaTE into these channels, spatial calcium ion selectivity transforms
from a global to local profile. Given this effect, Dick et al. (2008)
examined Ca(v)1.2/Ca(v)1.3 channels, which naturally contain NSCaTE, and
found that their N-lobe selectivity is indeed local. Disruption of this
element produces a global selectivity, confirming the native function of
NSCaTE. Thus, Dick et al. (2008) concluded that differences in spatial
selectivity between advanced Ca(v)1 and Ca(v)2 channel isoforms are
explained by the presence or absence of NSCaTE. Beyond functional
effects, the position of NSCaTE on the channel's amino terminus
indicates that calmodulin can bridge the amino terminus and carboxy
terminus of channels. Finally, the modularity of NSCaTE offers practical
means for understanding the basis of global calcium ion selectivity.

Liu et al. (2010) combined electrophysiology to characterize channel
regulation with optical fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)
sensor determination of free-apoCaM concentration in live cells. This
approach translates quantitative calmodulin biochemistry from the
traditional test-tube context into the realm of functioning holochannels
within intact cells. From this perspective, Liu et al. (2010) found that
long splice forms of Ca(V)1.3 (CACNA1D; 114206) and Ca(V)1.4 (CACNA1F;
300110) channels include a distal carboxy tail that resembles an enzyme
competitive inhibitor that retunes channel affinity for apocalmodulin
such that natural calmodulin variations affect the strength of Ca(2+)
feedback modulation. Given the ubiquity of these channels, the
connection between ambient calmodulin levels and Ca(2+) entry through
channels is broadly significant for Ca(2+) homeostasis.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular Tachycardia 4

In a large 4-generation Swedish family with autosomal dominant
catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT4; 614916),
Nyegaard et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a missense mutation
in the CALM1 gene (N53I; 114180.0001) that segregated fully with disease
in the family and was not found in 1,200 controls. A de novo missense
mutation in CALM1 (N97S; 114180.0002) was subsequently identified in a
23-year-old Iraqi woman with a history of cardiac arrest at 4 years of
age due to ventricular fibrillation while running. Both substitutions
demonstrated compromised calcium binding.

- Association with Osteoarthritis

In 2 independent Japanese populations totaling 428 osteoarthritis (OA;
165720) patients and 1,008 controls, Mototani et al. (2005) identified
significant association between hip OA and a -16C-T promoter SNP (dbSNP
rs12885713) in the CALM1 gene. Functional analysis indicated that the
-16T allele decreased CALM1 transcription in vitro and in vivo. CALM1
was expressed in cultured chondrocytes and articular cartilage, and its
expression was increased in OA. Inhibition of CALM1 in chondrogenic
cells reduced expression of the major cartilage matrix genes COL2A1
(120140) and AGC1 (155760). Mototani et al. (2005) suggested that the
transcriptional level of CALM1 may be associated with susceptibility for
hip OA through modulation of chondrogenic activity.

ANIMAL MODEL

A classic textbook example of adaptive radiation under natural selection
is the evolution of 14 closely related species of Darwin's finches,
whose primary diversity lies in the size and shape of their beaks. The
precise dimensions (length, depth, and width) of each species' beak are
crucial to their lifestyle and survival, and fluctuations in the
environment lead to selection that changes the relative success of birds
with various beak shapes. These evolutionary processes are evident in
real time on the Galapagos Islands (Grant and Grant, 2006). Abzhanov et
al. (2004) showed that the BMP4 gene (112262), which plays a role in
skeletal and cartilaginous development in mice, is more broadly
expressed during the embryonic development of the deep and wide beaks of
ground finches than during the development of finches with narrower
beaks. Using a cDNA microarray analysis of the transcripts expressed in
the beak primordia to find previously unknown genes and pathways whose
expression correlates with specific beak morphologies, Abzhanov et al.
(2006) found that calmodulin is expressed at much higher levels in the
long and pointed beaks of cactus finch embryos than in the beaks of
other finch embryos. They showed further that when upregulation of the
calmodulin-dependent pathway is artificially replicated in the chick
frontonasal prominence, it causes an elongation of the upper beak,
recapitulating the beak morphology of the cactus finches. The results
indicated that local upregulation of the calmodulin-dependent pathway is
likely to have been a component in the evolution of Darwin's finch
species with elongated beak morphology and provide a mechanistic
explanation for the independence of beak evolution along different axes,
e.g., broad versus elongated. More generally, their results implicated
the calmodulin-dependent pathway in the developmental regulation of
craniofacial skeletal structures.

HISTORY

Scambler et al. (1987) identified a calmodulin-like locus, designated
CALML1, on chromosome 7pter-p13 by study of somatic cell hybrids. Based
on map and other indirect evidence, Scott (2007) concluded that this
locus is a pseudogene (CALM1P2).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA, CATECHOLAMINERGIC POLYMORPHIC, 4
CALM1, ASN53ILE

In 10 affected members of a large 4-generation Swedish family with
catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT4; 614916),
Nyegaard et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a 161A-T
transversion in exon 3 of the CALM1 gene, resulting in an asn53-to-ile
(N53I) substitution at a highly conserved residue within the first
alpha-helix of Ca(2+)-binding site II. The mutation was not found in
unaffected family members or in 1,200 controls. Functional analysis
demonstrated that the mutant had significantly reduced Ca(2+) affinity
compared to wildtype.

.0002
VENTRICULAR TACHYCARDIA, CATECHOLAMINERGIC POLYMORPHIC, 4
CALM1, ASN97SER

In a 23-year-old Iraqi woman with catecholaminergic polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia (CPVT4; 614916), Nyegaard et al. (2012)
identified heterozygosity for a de novo 293A-G transition in exon 5 of
the CALM1 gene, resulting in an asn97-to-ser (N97S) substitution at a
highly conserved Ca(2+)-binding residue within the high-affinity
binding-site III in the calmodulin C domain. The mutation was not found
in her unaffected parents or in 500 Danish controls, and the patient was
negative for mutation in 8 other arrhythmia-associated genes. At age 4
years, the patient underwent cardiac arrest due to ventricular
fibrillation while running; she was stabilized by treatment with a
beta-1 adrenergic receptor blocker. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed
prominent U-waves in anterior leads but no evidence for long QT or
Brugada syndromes. At 12 years of age, an off-medication exercise ECG
demonstrated ventricular ectopy with couplets and triplets of varying
morphology, which appeared to be bidirectional at times. At age 15, she
suffered a second cardiac arrest and underwent implantation of an
internal cardiac defibrillator (ICD). Functional analysis demonstrated
that the mutant had significantly reduced Ca(2+) affinity compared to
wildtype calmodulin. In addition, for the N97S mutant, calmodulin-RYR2
(180902) interaction was defective at low intracellular Ca(2+)
concentrations and restored at moderate to high Ca(2+) concentrations.

REFERENCE 1. Abzhanov, A.; Kuo, W. P.; Hartmann, C.; Grant, B. R.; Grant, P.
R.; Tabin, C. J.: The calmodulin pathway and evolution of elongated
beak morphology in Darwin's finches. Nature 442: 563-567, 2006.

2. Abzhanov, A.; Protas, M.; Grant, R. B.; Grant, P. R.; Tabin, C.
J.: Bmp4 and morphological variation of beaks in Darwin's finches. Science 305:
1462-1465, 2004.

3. Berchtold, M. W.; Egli, R.; Rhyner, J. A.; Hameister, H.; Strehler,
E. E.: Localization of the human bona fide calmodulin genes CALM1,
CALM2, and CALM3 to chromosomes 14q24-q31, 2p21.1-p21.3, and 19q13.2-q13.3. Genomics 16:
461-465, 1993.

4. Chin, D.; Winkler, K. E.; Means, A. R.: Characterization of substrate
phosphorylation and use of calmodulin mutants to address implications
from the enzyme crystal structure of calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase I. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 31235-31240, 1997.

5. Dick, I. E.; Tadross, M. R.; Liang, H.; Tay, L. H.; Yang, W.; Yue,
D. T.: A modular switch for spatial Ca(2+) selectivity in the calmodulin
regulation of Ca(v) channels. Nature 451: 830-834, 2008.

6. Drum, C. L.; Yan, S.-Z.; Bard, J.; Shen, Y.-Q.; Lu, D.; Soelaiman,
S.; Grabarek, Z.; Bohm, A.; Tang, W.-J.: Structural basis for the
activation of anthrax adenylyl cyclase exotoxin by calmodulin. Nature 415:
396-402, 2002.

7. Grant, P. R.; Grant, B. R.: Evolution of character displacement
in Darwin's finches. Science 313: 224-226, 2006.

8. Junge, H. J.; Rhee, J.-S.; Jahn, O.; Varoqueaux, F.; Spiess, J.;
Waxham, M. N.; Rosenmund, C.; Brose, N.: Calmodulin and Munc13 form
a Ca(2+) sensor/effector complex that controls short-term synaptic
plasticity. Cell 118: 389-401, 2004.

9. Koller, M.; Schnyder, B.; Strehler, E. E.: Structural organization
of the human CaMIII calmodulin gene. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1087:
180-189, 1990.

10. Kretsinger, R. H.; Rudnick, S. E.; Weissman, L. J.: Crystal structure
of calmodulin. J. Inorganic Biochem. 28: 289-302, 1986.

11. Liu, X.; Yang, P. S.; Yang, W.; Yue, D. T.: Enzyme-inhibitor-like
tuning of Ca(2+) channel connectivity with calmodulin. Nature 463:
968-972, 2010. Note: Erratum: Nature 464: 1390 only, 2010.

12. McPherson, J. D.; Hickie, R. A.; Wasmuth, J. J.; Meyskens, F.
L.; Perham, R. N.; Strehler, E. E.; Graham, M. T.: Chromosomal localization
of multiple genes encoding calmodulin. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 58: 1951 only, 1991.

13. Mori, M. X.; Erickson, M. G.; Yue, D. T.: Functional stoichiometry
and local enrichment of calmodulin interacting with Ca(2+) channels. Science 304:
432-435, 2004.

14. Mototani, H.; Mabuchi, A.; Saito, S.; Fujioka, M.; Iida, A.; Takatori,
Y.; Kotani, A.; Kubo, T.; Nakamura, K.; Sekine, A.; Murakami, Y.;
Tsunoda, T.; Notoya, K.; Nakamura, Y.; Ikegawa, S.: A functional
single nucleotide polymorphism in the core promoter region of CALM1
is associated with hip osteoarthritis in Japanese. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14:
1009-1017, 2005.

15. Nyegaard, M.; Overgaard, M. T.; Sondergaard, M. T.; Vranas, M.;
Behr, E. R.; Hildebrandt, L. L.; Lund, J.; Hedley, P. L.; Camm, A.
J.; Wettrell, G.; Fosdal, I.; Christiansen, M.; Borglum, A. D.: Mutations
in calmodulin cause ventricular tachycardia and sudden cardiac death. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 91: 703-712, 2012.

16. Pegues, J. C.; Friedberg, F.: Multiple mRNAs encoding human calmodulin. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 172: 1145-1149, 1990.

17. Rhyner, J. A.; Ottiger, M.; Wicki, R.; Greenwood, T. M.; Strehler,
E. E.: Structure of the human CALM1 calmodulin gene and identification
of two CALM1-related pseudogenes CALM1P1 and CALM1P2. Europ. J. Biochem. 225:
71-82, 1994.

18. Scambler, P. J.; McPherson, M. A.; Bates, G.; Bradbury, N. A.;
Dormer, R. L.; Williamson, R.: Biochemical and genetic exclusion
of calmodulin as the site of the basic defect in cystic fibrosis. Hum.
Genet. 76: 278-282, 1987.

19. Scambler, P. J.; McPherson, M. A.; Bates, G.; Bradbury, N. A.;
Dormer, R. L.; Williamson, R.: Biochemical and genetic exclusion
of calmodulin as the site of the basic defect in cystic fibrosis. Hum.
Genet. 76: 278-282, 1987.

20. Schumacher, M. A.; Rivard, A. F.; Bachinger, H. P.; Adelman, J.
P.: Structure of the gating domain of a Ca(2+)-activated K+ channel
complexed with Ca(2+)/calmodulin. Nature 410: 1120-1124, 2001.

21. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  2/8/2007.

22. Sen Gupta, B.; Detera-Wadleigh, S. D.; McBride, O. W.; Friedberg,
F.: A calmodulin pseudogene on human chromosome 17. Nucleic Acids
Res. 17: 2868 only, 1989.

23. Sen Gupta, B.; Friedberg, F.; Detera-Wadleigh, S. D.: Molecular
analysis of human and rat calmodulin complementary DNA clones: evidence
for additional active genes in these species. J. Biol. Chem. 262:
16663-16670, 1987.

24. Toutenhoofd, S. L.; Foletti, D.; Wicki, R.; Rhyner, J. A.; Garcia,
F.; Tolon, R.; Strehler, E. E.: Characterization of the human CALM2
calmodulin gene and comparison of the transcriptional activity of
CALM1, CALM2, and CALM3. Cell Calcium 23: 323-338, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/6/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/7/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/7/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/26/2006
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 2/15/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/29/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/18/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/23/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/23/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/24/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/9/1987

EDITED carol: 11/06/2012
terry: 11/6/2012
alopez: 6/17/2010
alopez: 4/26/2010
terry: 4/22/2010
alopez: 3/20/2008
terry: 3/7/2008
wwang: 2/14/2008
terry: 2/7/2008
terry: 9/17/2007
carol: 2/8/2007
carol: 10/13/2006
terry: 9/26/2006
mgross: 2/15/2005
alopez: 5/4/2004
terry: 4/29/2004
mgross: 11/18/2002
alopez: 1/23/2002
alopez: 4/25/2001
terry: 4/23/2001
mgross: 5/24/2000
terry: 11/13/1998
mark: 11/11/1997
mark: 12/29/1996
carol: 1/19/1995
carol: 12/23/1993
carol: 5/26/1993
carol: 8/14/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 3/9/1992

609672	TITLE *609672 EXOCYST COMPLEX COMPONENT 6; EXOC6
;;SEC15-LIKE 1; SEC15L1;;
SEC15L;;
SEC15, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; SEC15
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SEC15L1 is a subunit of the exocyst, a multisubunit complex first
discovered for its requirement in the yeast secretory pathway (Wang et
al., 2004).

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2004) noted that exocyst subunits have been found to
associate with a subset of Golgi-derived vesicles and plasma membrane
fractions in epithelial cell lines from several mammalian species. They
found that several endogenous exocyst subunits, including Sec15,
colocalized with microtubules and mitotic spindles in normal rat kidney
cells. Wang et al. (2004) determined that mammalian exocyst complexes
reconstituted from 8 recombinant subunits, including Sec15, inhibited
tubulin polymerization in vitro. Deletion of Sec15 diminished the
ability of the exocyst to inhibit tubulin polymerization.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SEC15L1
gene to chromosome 10 (TMAP A006W20).

ANIMAL MODEL

The mouse spontaneous mutation 'hemoglobin deficit' (hbd) impairs
erythroid iron assimilation but does not cause other defects. Normal
delivery of iron to developing erythroid precursors is highly dependent
on the transferrin cycle. Through genetic mapping and complementation
experiments, Lim et al. (2005) showed that the hbd mutation is an
in-frame deletion of a conserved exon of the mouse gene Sec15l1,
encoding 1 of 2 Sec15 proteins implicated in the mammalian exocyst
complex. Sec15l1 is linked to the transferrin cycle through its
interaction with Rab11 (see 605570), a GTPase involved in vesicular
trafficking. Lim et al. (2005) proposed that inactivation of Sec15l1
alters recycling of transferrin cycle endosomes and increases the
release of transferrin receptor exocytic vesicles. This in turn
decreases erythroid iron uptake. Determining the molecular basis of the
hbd phenotype provided new insight into the intricate mechanisms
necessary for normal erythroid iron uptake and the function of a
mammalian exocyst protein.

In lethal systemic anthrax, proliferating bacilli secrete large
quantities of the toxins lethal factor (LF) and edema factor (EF),
leading to widespread vascular leakage and shock. Host targets of LF
(mitogen-activated protein-kinase kinases) and EF (cAMP-dependent
processes) have been implicated in the initial phase of anthrax. In an
investigation of toxin action during the final stage of infection,
Guichard et al. (2010) used Drosophila melanogaster to identify the
Rab11 (605570)/Sec15 exocyst, which acts at the last step of endocytic
recycling, as a novel target of both EF and LF. EF reduces levels of
apically localized Rab11 and indirectly blocks vesicle formation by its
binding partner and effector Sec15 (Sec15-GFP), whereas LF acts more
directly to reduce Sec15-GFP vesicles. Convergent effects of EF and LF
on Rab11/Sec15 inhibited expression of and signaling by the Notch ligand
Delta and reduced DE-cadherin levels at adherens junctions. In human
endothelial cells, the 2 toxins acted in a conserved fashion to block
formation of Sec15 vesicles, inhibit Notch signaling through Delta
(DLL4; 605185), and reduce cadherin (CDH1; 192090) expression at
adherens junctions. Guichard et al. (2010) suggested that this
coordinated disruption of the Rab11/Sec15 exocyst by anthrax toxins may
contribute to toxin-dependent barrier disruption and vascular
dysfunction during Bacillus anthracis infection.

REFERENCE 1. Guichard, A.; McGillivray, S. M.; Cruz-Moreno, B.; van Sorge, N.
M.; Nizet, V.; Bier, E.: Anthrax toxins cooperatively inhibit endocytic
recycling by the Rab11/Sec15 exocyst. Nature 467: 854-858, 2010.

2. Lim, J. E.; Jin, O.; Bennett, C.; Morgan, K.; Wang, F.; Trenor,
C. C., III; Fleming, M. D.; Andrews, N. C.: A mutation in Sec15l1
causes anemia in hemoglobin deficit (hbd) mice. Nature Genet. 37:
1270-1273, 2005.

3. Wang, S.; Liu, Y.; Adamson, C. L.; Valdez, G.; Guo, W.; Hsu, S.
C.: The mammalian exocyst, a complex required for exocytosis, inhibits
tubulin polymerization. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 35958-35966, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/11/2010
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/5/2005

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/21/2005

EDITED alopez: 11/15/2010
terry: 11/11/2010
carol: 12/29/2008
mgross: 9/7/2006
alopez: 12/6/2005
terry: 12/5/2005
mgross: 10/24/2005
mgross: 10/21/2005

140750	TITLE *140750 SUPPRESSOR OF TUMORIGENICITY 5; ST5
;;HELA TUMOR SUPPRESSION; HTS1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The tumorigenicity of HeLa cells in nude mice can be suppressed by the
addition of a normal human chromosome 11 in somatic cell hybrids
(Stanbridge, 1976; Klinger, 1980); see 191181 for description of a
tumor-suppressor gene located on 11q. Lichy et al. (1992) isolated a
HeLa cell line that displayed morphologic features of the nontumorigenic
hybrids, demonstrated reduced tumorigenicity in nude mice, and showed an
85% reduction in alkaline phosphatase, a consistent marker of the
tumorigenic phenotype in these cells. This cell line, designated F2,
contained a single exogenous cDNA, which was recovered by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) and designated HTS1 because of its probable
association with 'HeLa tumor suppression.' In nontumorigenic hybrids,
RNA species of 2.8, 3.1, and 4.6 kb were identified. In 2 tumorigenic
hybrid lines, the 2.8-kb species was markedly reduced or absent. Whereas
3 nontumorigenic human keratinocyte lines expressed all 3 RNA species,
several tumorigenic cervical carcinoma cell lines lacked the 2.8-kb
species.

Gohring et al. (2010) noted that the ST5 gene encodes 3 isoforms with
all 3 isoforms containing a C-terminal DENN domain but only isoforms 1
and 3 containing an ABL1-interacting domain. Quantitative PCR analysis
detected a relatively uniform ST5 expression pattern in human fetal
tissue. Expression in most human adult tissue was lower than in
corresponding fetal tissues; however, adult expression was 2.5 to 3-fold
higher in adult brain, kidney, and skeletal muscle compared to fetal
tissue. In situ hybridization analysis of mouse embryos showed that St5
was expressed in neuroepithelium of the midbrain, telencephalon, and
hindbrain, and later in the ventricular and marginal zone of the frontal
cortex. Adult mice showed St5 expression in the cerebellum and
hippocampus. Expression was also found in the heart and tubular
structures of the kidney.

GENE STRUCTURE

Gohring et al. (2010) noted that the ST5 gene contains at least 23 exons
spanning 207.6 kb and that the first 4 exons are noncoding.

MAPPING

Lichy et al. (1992) localized the HTS1 gene to 11p15 by in situ
hybridization, confirming the assignment to chromosome 11 by somatic
cell hybrid analysis. They reviewed previous evidence indicating the
presence of a tumor suppressor gene in the 11p15 region; see 194071 and
185440.

By genomic sequence analysis, Amid et al. (2001) mapped the ST5 gene to
chromosome 11p15.3. They mapped the mouse St5 gene to distal chromosome
7 in a region that shows homology of synteny to human chromosome
11p15.3. In both genomes, ST5 lies telomeric to the CEGF1 gene and
centromeric to the LMO1 gene (186921).

CYTOGENETICS

Gohring et al. (2010) reported a boy, first seen at age 3.5-years, with
severe mental retardation, hypotonia, seizures, and sensorineural
hearing loss associated with a de novo t(11;20)(p15.4;q13.2)
translocation that interrupted the ST5 gene. Dysmorphic facial features
included high forehead, high-arched and laterally placed eyebrows,
narrow upslanting palpebral fissures, mild hypertelorism, broad
glabella, small mouth with thin upper lip, cleft palate, broad nasal
bridge, and hypoplastic nasal wings. Other features included persistent
ductus arteriosus, unilateral cystic kidney dysplasia, and frequent
infections. At age 7 years, he could walk with orthoses but had no
speech development. He was born of healthy, unrelated parents who did
not carry the translocation. Breakpoint analysis showed that the
chromosome 11 breakpoint was in intron 4 in the 5-prime untranslated
region of the ST5 gene, before the first coding exon 5. This was
predicted to separate the complete coding sequence of the gene from its
promoter region. The breakpoint on chromosome 20 did not occur in any
known genes. Screening of the ST5 gene in 220 additional patients with
mental retardation did not identify pathogenic mutations.

REFERENCE 1. Amid, C.; Bahr, A.; Mujica, A.; Sampson, N.; Bikar, S.-E.; Winterpacht,
A.; Zabel, B.; Hankeln, T.; Schmidt, E. R.: Comparative genomic sequencing
reveals a strikingly similar architecture of a conserved syntenic
region on human chromosome 11p15.3 (including gene ST5) and mouse
chromosome 7. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 93: 284-290, 2001.

2. Gohring, I.; Tagariello, A.; Endele, S.; Stolt, C. C.; Ghassibe,
M.; Fisher, M.; Thiel, C. T.; Trautmann, U.; Vikkula, M.; Winterpacht,
A.; FitzPatrick, D. R.; Rauch, A.: Disruption of ST5 is associated
with mental retardation and multiple congenital abnormalities. J.
Med. Genet. 47: 91-98, 2010.

3. Klinger, H. P.: Suppression of tumorigenicity in somatic cell
hybrids. I. Suppression and reexpression of tumorigenicity in diploid
human x D98/AH2 hybrids and independent segregation of tumorigenicity
from other cell phenotypes. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 27: 254-266,
1980.

4. Lichy, J. H.; Modi, W. S.; Seuanez, H. N.; Howley, P. M.: Identification
of a human chromosome 11 gene which is differentially regulated in
tumorigenic and nontumorigenic somatic cell hybrids of HeLa cells. Cell
Growth Differ. 3: 541-548, 1992.

5. Stanbridge, E. J.: Suppression of malignancy in human cells. Nature 260:
17-20, 1976.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/4/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/31/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/19/1992

EDITED terry: 01/13/2012
wwang: 6/9/2010
ckniffin: 6/4/2010
mgross: 3/31/2003
carol: 8/2/2000
alopez: 8/19/1999
dkim: 10/28/1998
mimadm: 4/14/1994
carol: 11/6/1992
carol: 10/19/1992

613904	TITLE *613904 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 569; ZNF569
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ZNF569 belongs to a large family of transcription factors characterized
by an N-terminal Kruppel-associated box (KRAB) domain and tandem
C-terminal C2H2-type zinc fingers (Huang et al., 2006).

CLONING

Using the KRAB domain consensus sequence to search EST databases,
followed by PCR of an early embryonic human heart cDNA library, Huang et
al. (2006) cloned ZNF569. The deduced 686-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 79.6 kD. It has a classical N-terminal
KRAB-A domain, followed by 18 tandem Kruppel C2H2-type zinc fingers
extending to the C terminus. Northern blot analysis detected high
expression of a 2.06-kb ZNF569 transcript in adult heart, skeletal
muscle, and liver and in fetal heart, skeletal muscle, and brain. It was
also expressed more weakly in adult and fetal pancreas and placenta,
with little to no expression detected in other tissues.
Fluorescence-tagged ZNF569 localized predominantly to nuclei of
transfected COS-7 cells.

GENE FUNCTION

By cotransfecting COS-7 cells with ZNF569 and a reporter gene system,
Huang et al. (2006) showed that ZNF569 suppressed the endogenous
transcriptional activities of the serum response element (SRE) and AP1
(165160). Domain analysis revealed that both the KRAB domain and the
zinc finger motifs of ZNF569 suppressed transcriptional activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Huang et al. (2006) determined that the ZNF569 gene contains 6 exons and
spans approximately 56.3 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Huang et al. (2006) mapped the ZNF569 gene
to chromosome 19q13.12.

REFERENCE 1. Huang, X.; Yuan, W.; Huang, W.; Bai, Y.; Deng, Y.; Zhu, C.; Liang,
P.; Li, Y.; Du, X.; Liu, M.; Wang, Y.; Wu, X.: ZNF569, a novel KRAB-containing
zinc finger protein, suppresses MAPK signaling pathway. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 346: 621-628, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/15/2011

EDITED mgross: 04/18/2011
mgross: 4/15/2011

610868	TITLE *610868 LEUCINE-RICH REPEAT TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN 2; LRRTM2
;;KIAA0416
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Ishikawa et al. (1997) cloned LRRTM2, which they designated
KIAA0416. The deduced 516-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular
mass of 55 kD and shares 35.2% identity with the mouse acid-labile
subunit (IGFALS; 601489). RT-PCR detected highest expression in kidney
and weaker expression in brain, placenta, lung, liver, thymus, testis
and ovary, and little to no expression in other tissues examined.

By database analysis using the leucine-rich repeats (LRRs) of the SLIT
(see SLIT1; 603742) proteins, followed by RT-PCR of brain RNA, Lauren et
al. (2003) cloned LRRTM2. The deduced 516-amino acid protein contains an
N-terminal signal sequence, followed by 10 extracellular LRRs flanked by
cysteine-rich domains, a transmembrane region, and an intracellular
tail. LRRTM2 has 5 N-glycosylation sites, several putative
phosphorylation sites, and a C terminus that ends in the sequence ECEV,
which is a characteristic of LRRTM family members. Lauren et al. (2003)
also identified mouse Lrrtm2, which shares 98% identity with human
LRRTM2. RT-PCR analysis detected prominent LRRTM2 expression in human
brain, including amygdala, caudate nucleus, cerebellum, corpus callosum,
hippocampus, and thalamus, and lower expression in all other human
tissues examined except bone marrow. In developing mice, Lrrtm2
expression began at embryonic day 15, increased at postnatal day 1, and
remained high into adulthood. In situ hybridization of adult mouse brain
detected widespread Lrrtm2 expression predominantly in neurons.

GENE FUNCTION

Ko et al. (2009) stated that LRRTMs are synaptic cell adhesion
molecules. Using an artificial synapse formation assay, they showed
that, similar to neuroligin-1 (NLGN1; 600568), rat Lrrtm2 induced
formation of presynaptic terminals on transfected COS-7 cells that were
contacted by cocultured rat hippocampal neurons. However, Lrrtm2 induced
only excitatory synapses, whereas neuroligin-1 induced both excitatory
and inhibitory synapses. Overexpression of Lrrtm2 in rat hippocampal
neurons increased the number of presynaptic excitatory synapses, but it
had no effect on postsynaptic structures. Affinity chromatography
revealed that Lrrtm2 bound the alpha and beta isoforms of all 3
neurexins (see NRXN1; 600565). Cell surface labeling and cell adhesion
assays showed that Lrrtm2 only interacted with neurexin-1 alpha and beta
isoforms lacking a short sequence in the membrane-proximal lamin G
domain encoded by an insert at splice site-4. Pull-down assays revealed
that Lrrtm2 and neuroligin-1 could not simultaneously bind to the
neurexin-1 beta isoform. Ko et al. (2009) concluded that LRRTM2 binds to
presynaptic neurexins in a tight interaction that is regulated by
alternative splicing of neurexins at splice site-4.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lauren et al. (2003) determined that the LRRTM2 gene contains 2 coding
exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Ishikawa et al. (1997) mapped the LRRTM2
gene to chromosome 5.

By genomic sequence analysis, Lauren et al. (2003) mapped the LRRTM2
gene to chromosome 5q31.2, where it lies on the opposite strand within
intron 6 of the CTNNA1 gene (116805). They mapped the mouse Lrrtm2 gene
to chromosome 18B3, which shares homology of synteny with human
chromosome 5q31.2.

REFERENCE 1. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Nakajima, D.; Seki, N.; Ohira, M.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VIII. 78 new cDNA
clones from brain which code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4:
307-313, 1997.

2. Ko, J.; Fuccillo, M. V.; Malenka, R. C.; Sudhof, T. C.: LRRTM2
functions as a neurexin ligand in promoting excitatory synapse formation. Neuron 64:
791-798, 2009.

3. Lauren, J.; Airaksinen, M. S.; Saarma, M.; Timmusk, T.: A novel
gene family encoding leucine-rich repeat transmembrane proteins differentially
expressed in the nervous system. Genomics 81: 411-421, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/24/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/21/2007

EDITED mgross: 09/08/2011
terry: 8/24/2011
wwang: 3/21/2007

613666	TITLE *613666 ALG11, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; ALG11
;;ASPARAGINE-LINKED GLYCOSYLATION 11, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF;;
KIAA0266
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ALG11 is a mannosyltransferase that uses GDP-mannose to sequentially add
the fourth and fifth mannose residues to growing dolichol-linked
oligosaccharide side chains at the outer leaflet of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER). Upon completion, the lipid-linked polyoligosaccharides
are translocated to the ER lumen for subsequent transfer to substrate
asparagine residues of newly synthesized glycoproteins (Rind et al.,
2010).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated KG-1 immature
myeloid cell line, Nagase et al. (1996) cloned ALG11, which they
designated KIAA0266. The transcript contains a repetitive element in its
3-prime end, and the deduced protein contains 766 amino acids. Northern
blot analysis revealed low and uniform expression of ALG11 in all human
tissues and cell lines examined.

Rind et al. (2010) predicted that human ALG11 contains 2 Rossmann-like
type B domains, which are separated by a catalytic flexible hinge
region, and a conserved C-terminal nucleotide sugar-binding region.
ALG11 also has 2 predicted transmembrane domains and 2 putative
N-glycosylation sites. Immunofluorescence analysis of human fibroblasts
revealed colocalization of ALG11 with an ER marker, calnexin (CANX;
114217).

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1996) mapped the ALG11 gene
to chromosome 13. Hartz (2010) mapped the ALG11 gene to chromosome
13q14.3 based on an alignment of the ALG11 sequence (GenBank GENBANK
AK025456) with the genomic sequence (GRCh37).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 Turkish sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with congenital
disorder of glycosylation type Ip (CDG1P; 613661), Rind et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous mutation (L86S; 613666.0001) in the ALG11 gene.
The phenotype was a multisystem metabolic disorder characterized by
hypotonia, seizures, developmental retardation, deafness, and death by
age 2 years. One affected child showed mild dysmorphic features.

In 3 unrelated patients with CDG1P, Thiel et al. (2012) identified
compound heterozygous or homozygous mutations in the ALG11 gene
(613666.0002-613666.0006). All mutations occurred in conserved residues,
and the cellular biochemical defects could be rescued by retroviral
complementation with wildtype ALG11. Glucose starvation prior to
metabolic labeling of patient-derived fibroblasts was a crucial step for
the correct biochemical diagnosis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ip
ALG11, LEU86SER

In 2 Turkish sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with congenital
disorder of glycosylation type Ip (CDG1P; 613661), Rind et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous 257T-C transition in exon 2 of the ALG11 gene,
resulting in a leu86-to-ser (L86S) substitution in a highly conserved
region in the N terminus between 2 hydrophobic helices at the end of a
glycine-rich motif. Each unaffected parent was heterozygous for the
mutation, which was not found in 100 control alleles. Introduction of
wildtype ALG11 in patient fibroblasts and yeast deficient in the enzyme
complemented the biochemical abnormality. Immunofluorescent studies
showed that the mutation did not affect protein localization and did not
appear to affect the stability of the mannosyltransferase complex.
However, studies in yeast showed that the mutant L86S protein had some
residual activity, but not as much as wildtype, suggesting that it is a
leaky mutation.

.0002
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ip
ALG11, 18-BP DEL, NT623

In a 7-year-old girl with CDG1P (613661), Thiel et al. (2012) identified
compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ALG11 gene: an 18-bp
deletion (623_642) resulting in a frameshift and premature truncation
after 210 amino acids, and an 836A-C transversion resulting in a
tyr279-to-ser (Y279S; 613666.0003) substitution. The patient had
developmental delay, mental retardation, axial hypotonia, slight
peripheral hypertonia, no communication and poor social interaction,
seizures, and strabismus. Neither mutation was found in 120 control
alleles. Biochemical analysis showed a CDG type I pattern. However, the
pathologic glycosylation phenotype was only apparent after glucose
starvation in patient fibroblasts; then, analysis of dolichol-linked
oligosaccharides led to the emergence of pathologic shortened
intermediate dolichol-linked oligosaccharides, indicating a defect in
biosynthesis which could be rescued by retroviral complementation with
wildtype ALG11.

.0003
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ip
ALG11, TYR279SER

See 613666.0002 and Thiel et al. (2012).

.0004
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ip
ALG11, LEU381SER

In a 4.5-year-old girl with CDG1P (613661), Thiel et al. (2012)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ALG11 gene: a
1142T-C transition resulting in a leu381-to-ser (L381S) substitution,
and a 1192G-A transition resulting in a glu398-to-lys (E398K;
613666.0005) substitution. The patient had developmental delay, mental
retardation, central hypotonia, peripheral hypertonia, no communication,
and seizures. Other anomalies included dystrophic facial features with
high forehead, long philtrum, and retrognathia, dry scaly skin,
oscillation of body temperature, inverted nipples, fat pads, and
scoliosis. Neither mutation was found in 120 control alleles.
Biochemical analysis showed a CDG type I pattern. However, the
pathologic glycosylation phenotype was only apparent after glucose
starvation in patient fibroblasts; then, analysis of dolichol-linked
oligosaccharides led to the emergence of pathologic shortened
intermediate dolichol-linked oligosaccharides, indicating a defect in
biosynthesis which could be rescued by retroviral complementation with
wildtype ALG11.

.0005
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ip
ALG11, GLU398LYS

See 613666.0004 and Thiel et al. (2012).

.0006
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ip
ALG11, GLN318PRO

In an 8.5-year-old boy with CDG1P (613661), Thiel et al. (2012)
identified a homozygous 953A-C transversion in the ALG11 gene, resulting
in a gln318-to-pro (Q318P) substitution. The patient had developmental
delay, mental retardation, no communication, seizures, and strabismus.
The mutation was not found in 120 control alleles. Biochemical analysis
showed a CDG type I pattern. However, the pathologic glycosylation
phenotype was only apparent after glucose starvation in patient
fibroblasts; then, analysis of dolichol-linked oligosaccharides led to
the emergence of pathologic shortened intermediate dolichol-linked
oligosaccharides, indicating a defect in biosynthesis which could be
rescued by retroviral complementation with wildtype ALG11.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  12/14/2010.

2. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Ishikawa, K.; Ohira, M.; Kawarabayasi, Y.;
Ohara, O.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Miyajima, N.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VI. The coding
sequences of 80 new genes (KIAA0201-KIAA0280) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from cell line KG-1 and brain. DNA Res. 3: 321-329,
1996.

3. Rind, N.; Schmeiser, V.; Thiel, C.; Absmanner, B.; Lubbehusen,
J.; Hocks, J.; Apeshiotis, N.; Wilichowski, E.; Lehle, L.; Korner,
C.: A severe human metabolic disease caused by deficiency of the
endoplasmatic mannosyltransferase hALG11 leads to congenital disorder
of glycosylation-Ip. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 1413-1424, 2010.

4. Thiel, C.; Rind, N.; Popovici, D.; Hoffmann, G. F.; Hanson, K.;
Conway, R. L.; Adamski, C. R.; Butler, E.; Scanlon, R.; Lambert, M.;
Apeshiotis, N.; Thiels, C.; Matthijs, G.; Korner, C.: Improved diagnostics
lead to identification of three new patients with congenital disorder
of glycosylation-Ip. Hum. Mutat. 33: 485-487, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/17/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2010

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/14/2010

EDITED terry: 06/04/2012
carol: 6/4/2012
ckniffin: 4/17/2012
carol: 5/24/2011
carol: 12/15/2010
ckniffin: 12/15/2010
mgross: 12/14/2010

607797	TITLE *607797 SMALL NUCLEAR RIBONUCLEOPROTEIN, 40-KD; SNRNP40
;;U5 snRNP-SPECIFIC PROTEIN, 40-KD;;
SPLICING FACTOR, 38-KD; SPF38;;
PRPF8-BINDING PROTEIN; PRPF8BP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SNRNP40 is a component of the U5 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (snRNP)
particle. The U5 snRNP is part of the spliceosome, a multiprotein
complex involved in the removal of introns from nuclear pre-mRNAs
(Achsel et al., 1998).

CLONING

By 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis of spliceosomes from HeLa cell
nuclear extracts, followed by nanoelectrospray mass spectrometry and
comparison with EST databases, Neubauer et al. (1998) cloned SPF38.
SPF38 has a calculated molecular mass of 38.4 kD and shows an apparent
molecular mass of 30 kD in 2-dimensional gels.

By microsequencing tryptic fragments and EST database searching, Achsel
et al. (1998) cloned SPF38. The deduced 357-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 39.3 kD. Except for 63 N-terminal amino
acids, the entire SPF38 protein is made up of 7 WD40 repeats. Highly
homologous protein sequences were found in rat, mouse, fruit fly, and
plant EST databases.

GENE FUNCTION

By sedimentation analysis, radioimmunoprecipitations, and Far Western
(overlay) analysis, Achsel et al. (1998) determined that SPF38 interacts
directly with PRPF8 (607300).

MAPPING

Gross (2011) mapped the SNRNP40 gene to chromosome 1p35.2 based on an
alignment of the SNRNP40 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF090988) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Achsel, T.; Ahrens, K.; Brahms, H.; Teigelkamp, S.; Luhrmann, R.
: The human U5-220kD protein (hPrp8) forms a stable RNA-free complex
with several U5-specific proteins, including an RNA unwindase, a homologue
of ribosomal elongation factor EF-2, and a novel WD-40 protein. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 18: 6756-6766, 1998.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/16/2011.

3. Neubauer, G.; King, A.; Rappsilber, J.; Calvio, C.; Watson, M.;
Ajuh, P.; Sleeman, J.; Lamond, A.; Mann, M.: Mass spectrometry and
EST-database searching allows characterisation of the multi-protein
spliceosome complex. Nature Genet. 20: 46-50, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 05/16/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 5/16/2003

EDITED mgross: 05/16/2011
wwang: 6/11/2008
mgross: 5/16/2003

611685	TITLE *611685 RING FINGER PROTEIN 8; RNF8
;;KIAA0646
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones from a size-fractionated brain cDNA library,
Ishikawa et al. (1998) cloned RNF8, which they designated KIAA0646. The
cDNA contains repetitive elements in its 3-prime end. The deduced
485-amino acid protein contains a C3HC4-type zinc finger signature,
suggesting that it is involved in nucleic acid management. RT-PCR
analysis detected moderate RNF8 expression in brain, testis, and ovary,
with little to no expression in all other tissues examined. In vitro
translation resulted in a protein with an apparent molecular mass of 62
kD by SDS-PAGE.

Using oligo capping, Seki et al. (1998) cloned RNF8 from a neuroblastoma
cDNA library. The deduced 485-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 56 kD. RT-PCR analysis detected variable expression in
all human tissues examined except spleen.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis and protein pull-down assays, Takano et
al. (2004) showed that RNF8 and retinoid X receptor-alpha (RXRA; 180245)
interacted via their N-terminal regions. Overexpression of RNF8 in COS-7
cells resulted in interaction and colocalization of RNF8 and RXRA in the
nucleus. A point mutation in RNF8 that disrupted the RING finger or
deletion of the N-terminal region of RNF8 prevented localization of RNF8
to the nucleus without affecting nuclear localization of RXRA. Transient
overexpression of RNF8 enhanced RXRA-mediated transactivation of an
RXR-responsive element (RXRE) in a dose-dependent and retinoic
acid-independent manner and upregulated expression of genes downstream
of RXRE. Enhancement of transactivation was not seen with RNF8 carrying
the RING finger-disrupting mutation or the N-terminal deletion. Takano
et al. (2004) concluded that RNF8 is a regulator of RXRA-mediated
transcriptional activity.

Kolas et al. (2007) determined that the ubiquitin ligase RNF8 mediates
ubiquitin conjugation and 53BP1 (605230) and BRCA1 (113705) focal
accumulation at sites of DNA lesions. Moreover, Kolas et al. (2007)
established that MDC1 recruits RNF8 through phosphodependent
interactions between the RNF8 forkhead-associated domain and motifs in
MDC1 that are phosphorylated by the DNA damage-activated protein kinase
ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM; 607585). They showed that depletion
of the E2 enzyme UBC13 (603679) impairs 53BP1 recruitment to sites of
damage, which suggests that it cooperates with RNF8. RNF8 was also shown
to promote the G(2)/M DNA damage checkpoint and resistance to ionizing
radiation. Kolas et al. (2007) concluded that their results demonstrated
how the DNA damage response is orchestrated by ATM-dependent
phosphorylation of MDC1 and RNF8-mediated ubiquitination.

Yan et al. (2012) noted that RNF8 works with UBC13 to catalyze
lys63-linked polyubiquitination of H2A (see 613499)-type histones at
sites of DNA damage. They found that depletion of RNF8 in HeLa cells
abrogated the recruitment of FAAP20 (C1OR86; 615183) to sites of DNA
damage. Knockdown of either RNF8 or FAAP20 abrogated the recruitment of
FANCA (607139) and FANCD2 (613984) to sites of DNA damage.

MAPPING

Using radiation hybrid analysis, Ishikawa et al. (1998) mapped the RNF8
gene to chromosome 6. Seki et al. (1998) mapped the RNF8 gene to
chromosome 6p21.3 by somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid analyses.

ANIMAL MODEL

Santos et al. (2010) reported that Rnf8 -/- mice were defective in class
switch recombination (CSR) and accumulated immunoglobulin heavy chain
(IgH; see 147100)-associated double-strand breaks (DSB). The CSR DSB
repair defect was milder than that in 53bp1 -/- mice, but similar to
that in H2ax (601772) -/- mice. Like H2ax -/- mice, Rnf8 -/- males were
sterile, and this was associated with defective XY chromatin
ubiquitylation. Mice lacking both H2ax and Rnf8 did not have further
impairment of CSR. Although 53bp1 foci formation is Rnf8 dependent,
53bp1 could bind to chromatin in the absence of Rnf8. Santos et al.
(2010) proposed that there is a 2-step mechanism for 53BP1 association
with chromatin in which constitutive loading is dependent on
interactions with methylated histones, whereas DNA damage-inducible
RNF8-dependent ubiquitylation allows its accumulation at damaged
chromatin.

Li et al. (2010) studied Rnf8 -/- mice and observed growth retardation,
reduced hematopoietic populations, impaired spermatogenesis, impaired
CSR, and increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation in vitro and in
vivo. Activated Rnf8 -/- B cells were able to recruit reduced amounts of
53bp1 via Rnf8-independent mechanisms. Rnf8 -/- mice also had a somewhat
increased cancer predisposition. Li et al. (2010) concluded that RNF8 is
a tumor suppressor whose loss also results in increased
non-cancer-related mortality, likely due to immunodeficiency.

REFERENCE 1. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Suyama, M.; Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.;
Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. X. The complete sequences of 100 new
cDNA clones from brain which can code for large proteins in vitro. DNA
Res. 5: 169-176, 1998.

2. Kolas, N. K.; Chapman, J. R.; Nakada, S.; Ylanko, J.; Chahwan,
R.; Sweeney, F. D.; Panier, S.; Mendez, M.; Wildenhain, J.; Thomson,
T. M.; Pelletier, L.; Jackson, S. P.; Durocher, D.: Orchestration
of the DNA-damage response by the RNF8 ubiquitin ligase. Science 318:
1637-1640, 2007.

3. Li, L.; Halaby, M.-J.; Hakem, A.; Cardoso, R.; El Ghamrasni, S.;
Harding S.; Chan, N.; Bristow, R.; Sanchez, O.; Durocher, D.; Hakem,
R.: Rnf8 deficiency impairs class switch recombination, spermatogenesis,
and genomic integrity and predisposes for cancer. J. Exp. Med. 207:
983-997, 2010.

4. Santos, M. A.; Huen, M. S. Y.; Jankovic, M.; Chen, H.-T.; Lopez-Contreras,
A. J.; Klein, I. A.; Wong, N.; Barbancho, J. L. R.; Fernandez-Capetillo,
O.; Nussenzweig, M. C.; Chen, J.; Nussenzweig, A.: Class switching
and meiotic defects in mice lacking the E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF8. J.
Exp. Med. 207: 973-981, 2010.

5. Seki, N.; Hattori, A.; Sugano, S.; Suzuki, Y.; Nakagawara, A.;
Ohhira, M.; Muramatsu, M.; Hori, T.; Saito, T.: Isolation, tissue
expression, and chromosomal assignment of a novel human gene which
encodes a protein with RING finger motif. J. Hum. Genet. 43: 272-274,
1998.

6. Takano, Y.; Adachi, S.; Okuno, M.; Muto, Y.; Yoshioka, T.; Matsushima-Nishiwaki,
R.; Tsurumi, H.; Ito, K.; Friedman, S. L.; Moriwaki, H.; Kojima, S.;
Okano, Y.: The RING finger protein, RNF8, interacts with retinoid
X receptor alpha and enhances its transcription-stimulating activity. J.
Biol. Chem. 279: 18926-18934, 2004.

7. Yan, Z.; Guo, R.; Paramasivam, M.; Shen, W.; Ling, C.; Fox, D.,
III; Wang, Y.; Oostra, A. B.; Kuehl, J.; Lee, D.-Y.; Takata, M; Hoatlin,
M. E.; Schindler, D.; Joenje, H.; de Winter, J. P.; Li, L.; Seidman,
M. M.; Wang, W.: A ubiquitin-binding protein, FAAP20, links RNF8-mediated
ubiquitination to the Fanconi anemia DNA repair network. Molec. Cell 47:
61-75, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 04/17/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/1/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/2/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/19/2007

EDITED mgross: 04/17/2013
mgross: 7/8/2010
terry: 7/1/2010
alopez: 5/7/2008
terry: 5/2/2008
mgross: 12/19/2007

610749	TITLE *610749 KELCH-LIKE 31; KLHL31
;;KLHL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Wu and Gong (2004) identified a novel kelch-like gene in zebrafish by a
whole-mount in situ hybridization screen for genes involved in
embryogenesis. By database analysis with the sequence of this gene,
designated klhl, they identified orthologs in human (KLHL31), mouse,
rat, and pufferfish. The deduced human KLHL31 protein contains 634 amino
acids, with a kelch repeat domain in the C terminus and a BTB/POX domain
in the N terminus. The human and zebrafish proteins share approximately
72% sequence identity. Northern blot analysis of human tissues detected
a single 6-kb KLHL31 transcript with strong expression in skeletal
muscle and weak expression in heart, consistent with the expression
pattern in zebrafish.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Wu and Gong (2004) mapped the zebrafish klhl gene
to linkage group (LG) 13, and the human KLHL31 gene to a region of
syntenic homology on chromosome 6p12. They also mapped the mouse and rat
klhl orthologs to regions of syntenic homology on chromosome 9 and
chromosome 8, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Wu, Y. L.; Gong, Z.: A novel zebrafish kelchlike gene klhl and
its human ortholog KLHL display conserved expression patterns in skeletal
and cardiac muscles. Gene 338: 75-83, 2004.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 2/7/2007

EDITED carol: 02/07/2007
carol: 2/7/2007

612774	TITLE *612774 TASTE RECEPTOR, TYPE 2, MEMBER 46; TAS2R46
;;T2R46;;
T2R54
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TAS2R46 belongs to the large TAS2R receptor family. TAS2Rs are expressed
on the surface of taste receptor cells and mediate the perception of
bitterness through a G protein-coupled second messenger pathway (Conte
et al., 2002). For further information on TAS2Rs, see 604791.

CLONING

By screening the human genome for sequences related to TAS2Rs, Conte et
al. (2002) cloned TAS2R46, which they called T2R54. The deduced
309-amino acid protein contains the 7-transmembrane structure and short
N- and C-terminal domains conserved in TAS2Rs. The intracellular domains
share significant conservation with other TAS2R family members. TAS2R46
shares highest sequence similarity with TAS2R43 (612668) and TAS2R44
(TAS2R31; 612669).

GENE FUNCTION

Shah et al. (2009) found that motile cilia emerging from human airway
epithelial cells express sensory bitter taste receptors, including T2R4
(604869), T2R43, T2R38 (607751), and T2R46. Only ciliated epithelial
cells expressed these receptors, and they specifically localized in
cilia. The receptors appeared to localize preferentially at different
places along the cilium. T2R46 appeared to reside proximally in cilia.
Bitter compounds increased the intracellular calcium ion concentration
and stimulated ciliary beat frequency. Shah et al. (2009) found that
alpha-gustducin (139395) and the enzyme phospholipase C-beta-2 (PLCB2;
604114) are also expressed in airway epithelia. Alpha-gustducin resides
in the cilia, and PLCB2 appears to sit below the cilia in the apical
portion of the cell. Shah et al. (2009) concluded that airway epithelia
contain a cell-autonomous system in which motile cilia both sense
noxious substances entering airways and initiate a defensive mechanism
to eliminate the offending compound. Hence, like primary cilia,
classical motile cilia also contain sensors to detect the external
environment.

Brockhoff et al. (2010) found that exchanging 2 residues within
C-terminal transmembrane domain-7 of the related human taste receptors
TAS2R46, which is activated by strychnine, and TAS2R31, which is
activated by aristolochic acid, was sufficient to invert their agonist
selectivity. Transfer of functionally relevant amino acids in TAS2R46 to
the corresponding positions of TAS2R43 and TAS2R31 resulted in
pharmacologic properties indistinguishable from parental TAS2R46.

MAPPING

By screening of a human-rodent somatic cell hybrid panel, Conte et al.
(2002) assigned the TAS2R46 gene to chromosome 12, within the cluster on
12p13.2 that also contains TAS2R43 and TAS2R44.

REFERENCE 1. Brockhoff, A.; Behrens, M.; Niv, M. Y.; Meyerhof, W.: Structural
requirements of bitter taste receptor activation. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 107: 11110-11115, 2010.

2. Conte, C.; Ebeling, M.; Marcuz, A.; Nef, P.; Andres-Barquin, P.
J.: Identification and characterization of human taste receptor genes
belonging to the TAS2R family. Cytogenet. Genome Res. 98: 45-53,
2002.

3. Shah, A. S.; Ben-Shahar, Y.; Moninger, T. O.; Kline, J. N.; Welsh,
M. J.: Motile cilia of human airway epithelia are chemosensory. Science 325:
1131-1134, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/2/2013

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 9/15/2009

EDITED mgross: 01/03/2013
terry: 1/2/2013
mgross: 12/14/2012
alopez: 9/15/2009

603054	TITLE *603054 GREMLIN 1 HOMOLOG, CYSTINE KNOT SUPERFAMILY; GREM1
;;GREMLIN;;
CYSTINE KNOT SUPERFAMILY 1, BMP ANTAGONIST 1; CKTSF1B1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a Xenopus expression-cloning screen, Hsu et al. (1998) isolated
GREM1, an antagonist of bone morphogenetic protein (BMP; see 112264)
signaling that is expressed in the neural crest. Gremlin-1 belongs to a
novel gene family that includes the head-inducing factor cerberus (CER1;
603777) and the tumor suppressor DAN (600613). Hsu et al. (1998) showed
that all family members are secreted proteins and that they act as BMP
antagonists in embryonic explants. They also provided support for the
model that gremlin, cerberus, and DAN block BMP signaling by binding
BMPs, preventing them from interacting with their receptors. They
proposed that gremlin, cerberus, and DAN control diverse processes in
growth and development by selectively antagonizing the activities of
different subsets of the transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta ligands.
By homology searches, Hsu et al. (1998) cloned the human homolog of
Xenopus gremlin. The human gremlin cDNA encodes a predicted 184-amino
acid protein.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid and radiation hybrid analyses, Topol et al.
(2000) mapped the GREM1 gene to human chromosome 15q13-q15.

GENE FUNCTION

Zuniga et al. (1999) reported that the secreted BMP antagonist gremlin
relays the Sonic hedgehog (SHH; 600725) signal from the polarizing
region to the apical ectodermal ridge. Mesenchymal gremlin expression is
lost in limb buds of mouse embryos homozygous for the 'limb deformity'
(ld) mutation, which disrupts establishment of the Shh/Fgf4 (164980)
feedback loop. Grafting gremlin-expressing cells into ld mutant limb
buds rescued Fgf4 expression and restored the Shh/Fgf4 feedback loop.
Analysis of Shh-null mutant embryos revealed that Shh signaling is
required for maintenance of gremlin and formin (FMN1; 136535), the gene
disrupted by the ld mutations. In contrast, formin, gremlin, and Fgf4
activation were independent of Shh signaling. Zuniga et al. (1999)
concluded that the study uncovered the cascade by which the SHH signal
is relayed from the posterior mesenchyme to the apical ectodermal ridge
and established that formin-dependent activation of the BMP antagonist
gremlin is sufficient to induce Fgf4 and establish the SHH/Fgf4 feedback
loop.

Vertebrate limb outgrowth is driven by a positive feedback loop
involving SHH, gremlin, and FGF4. By overexpressing individual
components of the loop at a time after these genes are normally
downregulated in chicken embryos, Scherz et al. (2004) found that Shh no
longer maintains gremlin in the posterior limb. Shh-expressing cells and
their descendants cannot express gremlin. The proliferation of these
descendants forms a barrier separating the Shh signal from
gremlin-expressing cells, which breaks down the Shh-Fgf4 loop and
thereby affects limb size and provides a mechanism explaining regulative
properties of the limb bud.

Developmentally regulated programmed cell death sculpts the limbs and
other embryonic organs in vertebrates. In chickens and mice, Bmps
trigger apoptosis of the interdigital mesenchyme, leading to freed
digits, whereas in ducks, Bmp antagonists inhibit the apoptotic program,
resulting in webbed feet. Weatherbee et al. (2006) found the bat C.
perspicillata utilizes a unique combination of high Fgf8 (600483) and
gremlin expression to maintain interdigit tissue in the forelimb,
resulting in simultaneously elevated Fgf signaling and inhibited Bmp
signaling.

Wordinger et al. (2007) studied the effects of altered BMP signaling on
intraocular pressure (IOP) in primary open angle glaucoma (POAG; see
137760). They found that the human trabecular meshwork (TM) synthesized
and secreted BMP4 (112262) as well as expressed the BMP receptor
subtypes BMPR1 (see 601299) and BMPR2 (600799). TM cells responded to
exogenous BMP4 by phosphorylating SMAD signaling proteins (see 601595).
Cultured human TM cells treated with TGFB2 (190220) significantly
increased fibronectin (FN; 135600) levels, and BMP4 blocked this FN
induction. There was significant elevation of mRNA and protein levels of
the BMP antagonist gremlin in glaucomatous TM cells. In addition,
gremlin was present in human aqueous humor. Gremlin blocked the negative
effect of BMP4 on TGFB2 induction of FN. Addition of recombinant gremlin
to the medium of ex vivo perfusion-cultured human eye anterior segments
caused the glaucoma phenotype of elevated IOP. Wordinger et al. (2007)
concluded that these results were consistent with the hypothesis that,
in POAG, elevated expression of gremlin by TM cells inhibited BMP4
antagonism of TGFB2 and led to increased extracellular matrix deposition
and elevated IOP.

Limb development is regulated by epithelial-mesenchymal feedback loops
between SHH and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling involving the
bone morphogenetic protein antagonist gremlin-1. By combining mouse
molecular genetics with mathematical modeling, Benazet et al. (2009)
showed that BMP4 first initiates and SHH then propagates
epithelial-mesenchymal feedback signaling through differential
transcriptional regulation of Grem1 to control digit specification. This
switch occurs by linking a fast BMP4/GREM1 module to the slower
SHH/GREM1/FGF epithelial-mesenchymal feedback loop. This self-regulatory
signaling network results in robust regulation of distal limb
development that is able to compensate for variations by
interconnectivity among the 3 signaling pathways.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of 8 Ashkenazi Jewish families segregating autosomal
dominant hereditary mixed polyposis syndrome mapping to chromosome
15q13.3 (HMPS1; 601228), Jaeger et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity
for an approximately 40-kb duplication centered on chr. 15:30.77 Mb that
was not found in 188 unselected Ashkenazi controls or in 935 controls
from the Colorectal Tumour Gene Identification (CORGI) study. PCR
amplification across the duplication breakpoints mapped it to chr.
15:30,752,231-30,792,051 (NCBI36), and the change was found to be a
simple tandem tail-head duplication with insertion of a 30-bp sequence
of unknown origin that had no homology to known sequences between the
duplicons. The duplication extended from intron 2 of the SCG5 gene to a
site just upstream of the GREM1 CpG island; however, only the normal
SCG5 mRNA species was found, and there were no significant differences
in SCG5 expression compared to controls. In contrast, markedly increased
GREM1 transcript levels were detected in the normal epithelium of HMPS
patients compared to controls, and allele-specific expression analysis
showed significantly increased expression of the duplicated allele in
HMPS crypts. In normal colorectal crypts of controls and unaffected
relatives, GREM1 expression was restricted to intestinal subepithelial
myofibroblasts (ISEMFs) at the crypt base, whereas in normal colorectal
crypts of HMPS patients, GREM1 was expressed not only in basal ISEMFs
but also at very high levels in epithelial cells, predominantly
colonocytes, with expression extending most of the way up the sides of
the crypts. Increased GREM1 expression was also seen in HMPS polyps, but
to a lesser extent than in normal epithelium. Jaeger et al. (2012)
demonstrated that a 3-kb region within the duplication (chr.
15:30,779,000-30,782,000, NCBI36) enhanced GREM1 expression 4-fold in
the SW948 CRC cell line and that the region interacts directly with the
GREM1 promoter. Increased GREM1 expression was predicted to cause
reduced BMP (see 112264) pathway activity, a mechanism that also
underlies tumorigenesis in juvenile polyposis of the large bowel
(174900).

ANIMAL MODEL

During limb outgrowth, signaling by BMPs must be moderated to maintain
the signaling loop between the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA) and the
apical ectodermal ridge (AER). Gremlin, an extracellular BMP antagonist,
has been proposed to fulfill this function and therefore be important in
limb patterning. Khokha et al. (2003) tested this model directly by
mutating the mouse gene encoding gremlin. In the mutant limb, the
feedback loop between the ZPA and the AER was interrupted, resulting in
abnormal skeletal pattern. The phenotype is apparently identical to that
of ld, which results from a mutation in the Fmn1 gene (136535). The
relationship between Grem1 and Fmn1 is interesting because of their
proximity in the mouse genome. The Fmn1 transcript comprises a large
number of exons with the most 3-prime exon located approximately 40 kb
from the gremlin open reading frame. Given the apparently identical
phenotype of ld mice to gremlin mutant mice and the proximity of Fmn1 to
Grem1, Khokha et al. (2003) tested whether gremlin would complement ld.
They found that gremlin fails to complement ld and thus identified
another ld allele. Although a complex interaction between Fmn1 and
gremlin is possible, Khokha et al. (2003) favored the idea that the ld
mutations affect gremlin expression directly and that they lie in
cis-regulatory elements for gremlin expression.

Limb bud outgrowth is driven by signals in a positive feedback loop
involving fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) genes, Sonic hedgehog (Shh;
600725), and Grem1. Precise termination of these signals is essential to
restrict limb bud size. That the sequence in mouse limb buds is
different from that in chick limb buds drove Verheyden and Sun (2008) to
explore alternative mechanisms. By analyzing compound mouse mutants
defective in genes comprising the positive loop, Verheyden and Sun
(2008) provided genetic evidence that Fgf signaling can repress Grem1
expression, revealing a novel Fgf/Grem1 inhibitory loop. The repression
occurs in both mouse and chick limb buds and is dependent on high Fgf
activity. These data supported a mechanism where the positive Fgf/Shh
loop drives outgrowth and an increase in Fgf signaling, which triggers
the Fgf/Grem1 inhibitory loop. The inhibitory loop then operates to
terminate outgrowth signals in the order observed in either mouse or
chick limb buds. Verheyden and Sun (2008) concluded that their study
unveils the concept of a self-promoting and self-terminating circuit
that may be used to attain proper tissue size in a broad spectrum of
developmental and regenerative settings. Verheyden and Sun (2008)
demonstrated that Fgf8 (600483) repression of Fgf4 (164980) expression
is dependent on Grem1 but not Shh.

REFERENCE 1. Benazet, J.-D.; Bischofberger, M.; Tiecke, E.; Goncalves, A.; Martin,
J. F.; Zuniga, A.; Naef, F.; Zeller, R.: A self-regulatory system
of interlinked signaling feedback loops controls mouse limb patterning. Science 323:
1050-1053, 2009.

2. Hsu, D. R.; Economides, A. N.; Wang, X,; Eimon, P. M.; Harland,
R. M.: The Xenopus dorsalizing factor gremlin identifies a novel
family of secreted proteins that antagonize BMP activities. Molec.
Cell 1: 673-683, 1998.

3. Jaeger, E.; Leedham, S.; Lewis, A.; Segditsas, S.; Becker, M.;
Cuadrado, P. R.; Davis, H.; Kaur, K.; Heinimann, K.; Howarth, K.;
East, J.; Taylor, J.; Thomas, H.; Tomlinson, I.: Hereditary mixed
polyposis syndrome is caused by a 40-kb upstream duplication that
leads to increased and ectopic expression of the BMP antagonist GREM1. Nature
Genet. 44: 699-703, 2012.

4. Khokha, M. K.; Hsu, D.; Brunet, L. J.; Dionne, M. S.; Harland,
R. M.: Gremlin is the BMP antagonist required for maintenance of
Shh and Fgf signals during limb patterning. Nature Genet. 34: 303-307,
2003.

5. Scherz, P. J.; Harfe, B. D.; McMahon, A. P.; Tabin, C. J.: The
limb bud Shh-Fgf feedback loop is terminated by expansion of former
ZPA cells. Science 305: 396-399, 2004.

6. Topol, L. Z.; Modi, W. S.; Koochekpour, S.; Blair, D. G.: DRM-Gremlin
(CKTSF1B1) maps to human chromosome 15 and is highly expressed in
adult and fetal brain. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 89: 79-84, 2000.

7. Verheyden, J. M.; Sun, X.: An Fgf/Gremlin inhibitory feedback
loop triggers termination of limb bud outgrowth. Nature 454: 638-641,
2008.

8. Weatherbee, S. D.; Behringer, R. R.; Rasweiler, J. J., IV; Niswander,
L. A.: Interdigital webbing retention in bat wings illustrates genetic
changes underlying amniote limb diversification. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 103: 15103-15107, 2006.

9. Wordinger, R. J.; Fleenor, D. L.; Hellberg, P. E.; Pang, I.-H.;
Tovar, T. O.; Zode, G. S.; Fuller, J. A.; Clark, A. F.: Effects of
TGF-beta-2, BMP-4, and gremlin in the trabecular meshwork: implications
for glaucoma. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 48: 1191-1200, 2007.

10. Zuniga, A.; Haramis, A.-P. G.; McMahon, A. P.; Zeller, R.: Signal
relay by BMP antagonism controls the SHH/FGF4 feedback loop in vertebrate
limb buds. Nature 401: 598-602, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 6/14/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/17/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/20/2008
Jane Kelly - updated: 11/28/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/1/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/30/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/17/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/10/2000

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 9/23/1998

EDITED alopez: 06/18/2012
alopez: 6/15/2012
terry: 6/14/2012
wwang: 4/2/2010
alopez: 3/23/2009
terry: 3/17/2009
alopez: 10/21/2008
terry: 10/20/2008
terry: 10/8/2008
carol: 11/28/2007
terry: 7/27/2007
wwang: 12/1/2006
alopez: 9/1/2004
terry: 8/30/2004
carol: 8/4/2004
alopez: 7/29/2003
alopez: 6/18/2003
terry: 6/17/2003
carol: 1/12/2001
alopez: 5/9/2000
carol: 3/30/2000
alopez: 2/10/2000
carol: 9/23/1998

601023	TITLE *601023 VALOSIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN; VCP
;;CDC48, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF;;
p97
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The VCP gene encodes valosin-containing protein, a ubiquitously
expressed multifunctional protein that is a member of the AAA+ (ATPase
associated with various activities) protein family. It has been
implicated in multiple cellular functions ranging from organelle
biogenesis to ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation (summary by Weihl
et al., 2009).

CLONING

Clathrin is a structural protein found in coated pits and vesicles,
organelles which are important in membrane trafficking functions such as
endocytosis and Golgi sorting. A 100-kD protein, designated
valosin-containing protein or VCP by early investigators, is a
structural protein complexed with clathrin (see 118960). VCP is the
homolog of yeast cdc48p, and is a member of a family that includes
putative ATP-binding proteins involved in vesicle transport and fusion,
26S proteasome function, and assembly of peroxisomes (Pleasure et al.,
1993). VCP was cloned from the pig (Koller and Brownstein, 1987) and
mouse (Egerton et al., 1992). Druck et al. (1995) cloned a portion of
the human cDNA.

Cloutier et al. (2013) stated that the deduced 806-amino acid VCP
protein contains an N-terminal domain, followed by a linker region, an
ATPase domain, a second linker region, a second ATPase domain, and a
C-terminal domain. The N-terminal domain consists of a double-psi-barrel
superfold and 4-stranded beta barrel, and each ATPase domain consists of
Walker A and B motifs and a 4-alpha-helix bundle. VCP is extensively
modified by phosphorylation and acetylation, as well as by lysine
methylation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Johnson et al. (2010) noted that the VCP gene contains 17 exons.

MAPPING

Druck et al. (1995) used a partial human VCP cDNA to probe a panel of
somatic cell hybrid DNAs and mapped the VCP gene to chromosome
9pter-q34.

By database analysis, Hoyle et al. (1997) identified a human expressed
sequence tag (EST) that shares 80% identity with the mouse 3-prime
untranslated region. They designed primers to this EST and amplified and
sequenced a 127-bp product from total human DNA. This product detected 1
fragment only in a HindIII digest of total human DNA, indicating there
is only 1 VCP sequence in the human genome. Using the 127-bp sequence to
screen a human PAC library, followed by FISH analysis, they mapped the
VCP gene to chromosome 9p13-p12. They mapped the mouse Vcp gene to mouse
chromosome 4 and found a probable pseudogene on the mouse X chromosome.

The VCP gene maps to chromosome 9p13.3 (Johnson et al., 2010).

GENE FUNCTION

Ye et al. (2001) demonstrated that VCP (CDC48 in yeast and p97 in
mammals) is required for the export of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) into
the cytosol. Whereas CDC48/p97 was known to function in a complex with
the cofactor p47 in membrane fusion, Ye et al. (2001) demonstrated that
its role in ER protein export requires the interacting partners UFD1
(601754) and NPL4 (606590). The AAA ATPase interacts with substrates at
the ER membrane and is needed to release them as polyubiquitinated
species into the cytosol.

Zhang et al. (1999) created a substrate-trapping mutant of PTPH1
(176877) that interacted primarily with VCP in vitro but not in cells. A
double mutant of PTPH1 had a marked reduction in phosphotyrosine
content, specifically trapped VCP in vivo, and recognized the C-terminal
tyrosines of VCP. Immunoblot analysis showed that wildtype PTPH1
specifically dephosphorylated VCP. Zhang et al. (1999) concluded that
PTPH1 exerts its effects on cell growth through dephosphorylation of VCP
and that tyrosine phosphorylation is an important regulator of VCP
function.

Watts et al. (2004) summarized that VCP has been associated with several
essential cell protein pathways including cell cycle, homotypic membrane
fusion, nuclear envelope reconstruction, postmitotic Golgi reassembly,
DNA damage response, suppressor of apoptosis, and ubiquitin-dependent
protein degradation. Higashiyama et al. (2002) identified a fruit fly
VCP loss-of-function mutant as a dominant suppressor of expanded
polyglutamine-induced neuronal degeneration. The suppressive effects of
the loss-of-function mutant did not seem to result from inhibition of
polyglutamine aggregate formation but rather from the degree of loss of
VCP function. This suggested that a gene dosage response for VCP
expression is essential to its function in expanded
polyglutamine-induced neuronal degeneration. In support of this idea,
transgenic fruit flies in which VCP levels were elevated experienced
severe apoptotic cell death, whereas homozygous VCP loss-of-function
mutants were embryonic lethal.

Ye et al. (2004) found that VIMP (607918) recruits the p97 ATPase (VCP)
and its cofactor, the UFD1/NPL4 complex, to the ER for
retrotranslocation of misfolded proteins into the cytosol. They noted
that all pathways of retrotranslocation appear to require the function
of the p97 ATPase complex, which may provide the general driving force
for the movement of proteins into the cytosol.

Using a library of endoribonuclease-prepared short interfering RNAs
(esiRNAs), Kittler et al. (2004) identified 37 genes required for cell
division, one of which was VCP. These 37 genes included several splicing
factors for which knockdown generates mitotic spindle defects. In
addition, a putative nuclear-export terminator was found to speed up
cell proliferation and mitotic progression after knockdown.

Uchiyama et al. (2006) found that rodent p37 (610686) formed a complex
with p97 in cytosol and localized to Golgi and ER. Small interfering RNA
experiments in HeLa cells revealed that p37 was required for Golgi and
ER biogenesis. Injection of anti-p37 antibodies into HeLa cells at
different stages of the cell cycle showed that p37 was involved in Golgi
and ER maintenance during interphase and in their reassembly at the end
of mitosis. In an in vitro Golgi reassembly assay, the p97/p37 complex
showed membrane fusion activity that required p115 (603344)-GM130
(GOLGA2; 602580) tethering and SNARE GS15 (BET1L; 615417). VCIP135
(VCPIP1) was also required, but its deubiquitinating activity was
unnecessary for p97/p37-mediated activities.

Ramadan et al. (2007) showed that p97 stimulates nucleus reformation by
inactivating the chromatin-associated kinase Aurora B (604970). During
mitosis, Aurora B inhibits nucleus reformation by preventing chromosome
decondensation and formation of the nuclear envelope membrane. During
exit from mitosis, p97 binds to Aurora B after its ubiquitylation and
extracts it from chromatin. This leads to inactivation of Aurora B on
chromatin, thus allowing chromatin decondensation and nuclear envelope
formation. Ramadan et al. (2007) concluded that their data revealed an
essential pathway that regulates reformation of the nucleus after
mitosis and defined ubiquitin-dependent protein extraction as a common
mechanism of Cdc48/p97 activity also during nucleus formation.

Using human cell lines, Mueller et al. (2008) identified several
components of a protein complex required for retrotranslocation or
dislocation of misfolded proteins from the ER lumen to the cytosol for
proteasome-dependent degradation. These included SEL1L (602329), HRD1
(SYVN1; 608046), derlin-2 (DERL2; 610304), the ATPase p97, PDI (P4HB;
176790), BIP (HSPA5; 138120), calnexin (CANX; 114217), AUP1 (602434),
UBXD8 (FAF2), UBC6E (UBE2J1), and OS9 (609677).

By affinity purification, SDS-PAGE, and mass spectrometry, Cloutier et
al. (2013) found that METTL21D (615260) expressed in HEK293 cells
interacted with endogenous VCP, ASPSCR1 (606236), and UBXN6 (611946). In
vitro methylation assays showed that recombinant METTL21D methylated
VCP, which was abrogated by mutation of lys315 in ATPase domain 1 of
VCP. Methylation reduced the activity of VCP ATPase domain 1, but it had
no effect on the activity of VCP ATPase domain 2. METTL21D did not
methylate ASPSRC1 or UBXN6, but the presence of ASPSRC1, but not UBXN6,
enhanced METTL21D-dependent VCP methylation.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Inclusion Body Myopathy With Paget Disease of Bone and Frontotemporal
Dementia

Watts et al. (2004) identified missense mutations in VCP as the cause of
inclusion body myopathy with Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal
dementia (IBMPFD; 167320). Ten of 13 families with this disorder had an
amino acid change at arginine-155, either to histidine, proline, or
cysteine. Arginine-155 of VCP was conserved in homologs through all
species examined except in 2 C. elegans homologs, which had glutamine at
that position. Arginine-191 was invariant in all species examined, and
arginine-95 was substituted by histidine in only 2 species.

Watts et al. (2004) suggested that since patients with IBMPFD are viable
with relatively late onset of disease, the mutations identified do not
disrupt the cell cycle or apoptosis pathways. They proposed that
mutations in VCP cause Paget disease of bone by compromising ubiquitin
binding and target similar cellular pathways or proteins. They suggested
that the progressive neuronal degeneration has to do with protein
quality control and ubiquitin protein degradation pathways. Finally,
Watts et al. (2004) concluded that because IBMPFD is a dominant
progressive syndrome, the mutations they identified are probably
relatively subtle and aging, oxidative stress, and endoplasmic reticulum
stress probably define a threshold at which the IBMPFD phenotype becomes
manifest.

In vitro functional expression studies by Weihl et al. (2006) showed
that cells transfected with the mutant R155H (601023.0001) and R95G
(601023.0004) proteins developed a prominent increase in diffuse and
aggregated ubiquitin conjugates and showed impaired function of
endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD), as well as a
distorted ER structure.

In human cells with IBMPFD-associated mutations, Ju et al. (2008) found
that treatment with a proteasome inhibitor resulted in increased cell
death and an increase in perinuclear ubiquitinated proteins, but no
clear aggresomes, compared to wildtype. Expression of an aggregate
protein in mutant cells did not result in proper formation of inclusion
bodies or aggresomes. A similar lack of inclusion body formation was
observed in mutant mouse muscle fibers in vivo. Further studies showed
that mutant VCP trapped aggregated proteins but failed to release them
to aggresomes or inclusion bodies. This was reversed upon coexpression
with HDAC6 (300272), a VCP-binding protein that facilitates formation of
aggresomes. Ju et al. (2008) concluded that mutations in the VCP gene
impaired the proper clearance of aggregated proteins.

- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 14, With or Without Frontotemporal
Dementia

Using exome sequencing, Johnson et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous
mutation in the VCP gene (R191Q; 601023.0006) in 4 affected members of
an Italian family with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-14 (ALS14; 613954)
with or without frontotemporal dementia. Screening of the VCP gene in
210 familial ALS cases and 78 autopsy-proven ALS cases identified 3
additional pathogenic VCP mutations (601023.0001; 601012.0008, and
601023.0009) in 4 patients. The findings expanded the phenotype
associated with VCP mutations to include classic ALS.

- Functional Effects of VCP Mutations

Cloutier et al. (2013) found that the R155H (601023.0001), R159G
(601023.0007), and R191Q (601023.0006) mutations in VCP did not alter in
vitro methylation of VCP by METTL21D. However, ASPSRC1 did not enhance
methylation of VCP containing these mutations, as it did with wildtype
VCP.

ANIMAL MODEL

Weihl et al. (2007) found that transgenic mice overexpressing the R155H
mutation became progressively weaker in a dose-dependent manner starting
at 6 months of age. There was abnormal muscle pathology, with coarse
internal architecture, vacuolation, and disorganized membrane morphology
with reduced caveolin-3 (CAV3; 601253) expression at the sarcolemma.
Even before animals displayed measurable weakness, there was an increase
in ubiquitin-containing protein inclusions and high molecular weight
ubiquitinated proteins. These findings suggested a dysregulation in
protein degradation.

Custer et al. (2010) developed and characterized transgenic mice with
ubiquitous expression of wildtype and disease-causing versions of human
VCP/p97. Mice expressing VCP/p97 harboring the mutations R155H
(601023.0001) or A232E (601023.0003) exhibited progressive muscle
weakness, and developed inclusion body myopathy including rimmed
vacuoles and TDP43 (605078) pathology. The brain showed widespread TDP43
pathology, and the skeleton exhibited severe osteopenia accompanied by
focal lytic and sclerotic lesions in vertebrae and femur. In vitro
studies indicated that mutant VCP caused inappropriate activation of the
NF-kappa-B (see 164011) signaling cascade, which could contribute to the
mechanism of pathogenesis in multiple tissues including muscle, bone,
and brain.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
INCLUSION BODY MYOPATHY WITH EARLY-ONSET PAGET DISEASE AND FRONTOTEMPORAL
DEMENTIA
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 14 WITHOUT FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA,
INCLUDED
VCP, ARG155HIS

In 7 of 13 families with autosomal dominant IBMPFD (167320), Watts et
al. (2004) identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 464 of the VCP
gene, resulting in an arg155-to-his substitution (R155H). This mutation
appears to have arisen independently on several haplotype backgrounds.

Viassolo et al. (2008) identified heterozygosity for the R155H mutation
in 3 affected members of an Italian family with IBMPFD. All 3 had
progressive inclusion body myopathy and rapidly progressive severe
dementia, but only 1 developed Paget disease.

In vitro functional expression studies by Weihl et al. (2006) showed
that R155H-mutant protein properly assembled into a hexameric structure
and showed normal ATPase activity. Cell transfected with the mutant
protein showed a prominent increase in diffuse and aggregated ubiquitin
conjugates and impaired function of endoplasmic reticulum-associated
degradation (ERAD), as well as a distorted ER structure.

Johnson et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity for the R155H mutation,
which they stated resulted from an 853G-A transition in exon 5, in a
member of the family reported by Watts et al. (2004). However, the
family member reported by Johnson et al. (2010) had classic ALS (ALS14;
613954) without evidence of Paget disease, myopathy, or frontotemporal
dementia. Postmortem examination of this patient showed loss of
brainstem and spinal cord motor neurons with Bunina bodies in surviving
neurons, TDP43 (TARDBP; 605078)-positive immunostaining, and mild pallor
of the lateral descending corticospinal tracts, all features consistent
with diagnosis of ALS. The findings expanded the phenotype associated
with VCP mutations, even within a single family.

.0002
INCLUSION BODY MYOPATHY WITH EARLY-ONSET PAGET DISEASE AND FRONTOTEMPORAL
DEMENTIA
VCP, ARG155CYS

In 2 of 13 families with autosomal dominant IBMPFD (167320), Watts et
al. (2004) identified a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 463 of the VCP
gene, resulting in an arg155-to-cys substitution (R155C).

Kim et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous R155C mutation in 3 Korean
sibs with IBMPFD. The proband developed progressive dementia presenting
as fluent aphasia and language difficulties with onset at age 47. She
never developed myopathy, but did develop asymptomatic Paget disease
with increased serum alkaline phosphatase and lytic bone lesions on
imaging. Her brother developed slowly progressive proximal muscle
weakness at age 50, followed by frontotemporal dementia characterized
initially by comprehension defects at age 54. He never had Paget
disease, although serum alkaline phosphatase was increased. A second
brother developed muscle weakness at age 47, followed by Paget disease
at age 53, and dementia at age 61. Brain MRI in all patients showed
asymmetric atrophy in the anterior inferior and lateral temporal lobes
and inferior parietal lobule with ventricular dilatation on the affected
side (2 on the left, 1 on the right). Two had glucose hypometabolism in
the lateral temporal and inferior parietal areas, with less involvement
of the anterior temporal and frontal lobes compared to those with
typical semantic dementia.

.0003
INCLUSION BODY MYOPATHY WITH EARLY-ONSET PAGET DISEASE AND FRONTOTEMPORAL
DEMENTIA
VCP, ALA232GLU

In 1 of 13 families with autosomal dominant IBMPFD (167320), Watts et
al. (2004) identified a C-to-A transversion at nucleotide 695 of the VCP
gene, resulting in an ala-to-glu change at codon 232 (A232E).

.0004
INCLUSION BODY MYOPATHY WITH EARLY-ONSET PAGET DISEASE AND FRONTOTEMPORAL
DEMENTIA
VCP, ARG95GLY

In 1 of 13 families with autosomal dominant IBMPFD (167320), Watts et
al. (2004) identified a C-to-G transversion at nucleotide 283 of the VCP
gene, resulting in an arg-to-gly substitution at codon 95 (R95G).

In vitro functional expression studies by Weihl et al. (2006) showed
that cells transfected with R95G-mutant protein developed a prominent
increased in diffuse and aggregated ubiquitin conjugates and impaired
function of endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation (ERAD), as well
as a distorted ER structure.

.0005
INCLUSION BODY MYOPATHY WITH EARLY-ONSET PAGET DISEASE AND FRONTOTEMPORAL
DEMENTIA
VCP, ARG155PRO

In 1 of 13 families with autosomal dominant IBMPFD (167320), Watts et
al. (2004) identified a G-to-C transversion at nucleotide 464 of the VCP
gene, resulting in an arg-to-pro substitution at codon 155 (R155P). This
family was originally reported by Tucker et al. (1982).

.0006
INCLUSION BODY MYOPATHY WITH EARLY-ONSET PAGET DISEASE AND FRONTOTEMPORAL
DEMENTIA
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 14 WITH OR WITHOUT FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA,
INCLUDED
VCP, ARG191GLN

In 1 of 13 families with autosomal dominant IBMPFD (167320), Watts et
al. (2004) identified a G-to-C transversion at nucleotide 572 of the VCP
gene, resulting in an arg-to-gln substitution at codon 191 (R191Q).

Using exome sequencing, Johnson et al. (2010) identified heterozygosity
for the R191Q mutation in the VCP gene, which they stated resulted from
a 961G-A transition in exon 5, in 4 affected members of an Italian
family with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-14 (ALS14; 613954). Affected
individuals presented in adulthood with limb-onset motor neuron symptoms
that rapidly progressed to involve all 4 limbs and the bulbar
musculature, consistent with a classical ALS phenotype. All patients had
unequivocal upper and lower motor signs, and none had evidence of Paget
disease. One patient showed mild frontotemporal dementia. Autopsy
material was not available. A parent of the proband had died at age 58
with dementia, parkinsonism, Paget disease, and upper limb weakness,
suggesting IBMPFD. The findings indicated an expanded phenotypic
spectrum for VCP mutations.

Sacconi et al. (2012) identified a heterozygous R191Q mutation in 2
unrelated men in their fifties who presented with a phenotype
reminiscent of FSHD1 (158900). One had scapuloperoneal weakness without
facial involvement and increased serum creatine kinase. The second
patient had facial weakness, shoulder and pelvic girdle weakness, and
anterior foreleg weakness. Creatine kinase was increased 4-fold. Muscle
biopsies of both patients showed mild dystrophic changes, but no
inclusion bodies. EMG showed myopathic patterns. One patient was later
found to have a mild dysexecutive syndrome, but neither had evidence of
Paget disease.

.0007
INCLUSION BODY MYOPATHY WITH EARLY-ONSET PAGET DISEASE AND FRONTOTEMPORAL
DEMENTIA
VCP, ARG159HIS

In 4 affected sibs of an Austrian family with autosomal dominant
inclusion body myopathy and Paget disease but without dementia (167320),
Haubenberger et al. (2005) identified a heterozygous 688G-A transition
in exon 5 of the VCP gene, resulting in an arg159-to-his (R159H)
substitution. The mutation occurred in a highly conserved region close
to the codon 155 hotspot described by Watts et al. (2004) and was not
present in 384 control chromosomes. None of the 4 affected sibs
demonstrated frontotemporal dementia even though all were over 60 years
of age. Haubenberger et al. (2005) noted that only approximately 30% of
patients with VCP mutations develop dementia, illustrating phenotypic
variability. In a follow-up of this family, van der Zee et al. (2009)
noted that 1 patient had developed dementia at age 64. Van der Zee et
al. (2009) also identified the R159H mutation in affected members of 2
unrelated Belgian families. In 1 family, patients presented with
frontotemporal lobar degeneration only, whereas in the other family,
patients developed frontotemporal lobar degeneration, Paget disease of
the bone, or both without signs of inclusion body myopathy for any of
the mutation carriers. Haplotype analysis showed that the 2 families and
the Austrian family reported by Haubenberger et al. (2005) were
unrelated. Autopsy data of 3 patients from the 2 Belgian families showed
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with numerous
ubiquitin-immunoreactive, intranuclear inclusions and dystrophic
neurites staining positive for TDP43 (TARDBP; 605078) protein. Van der
Zee et al. (2009) commented on the high degree of clinical heterogeneity
and incomplete penetrance of the disorder in different families carrying
the same mutation.

.0008
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 14 WITH OR WITHOUT FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA
VCP, ARG159GLY

In affected members of a family with ALS14 with or without
frontotemporal dementia (613954), Johnson et al. (2010) identified a
heterozygous 864C-G transversion in exon 5 of the VCP gene, resulting in
an arg159-to-gly (R159G) substitution in a conserved residue. The
mutation was not found in 3,138 control chromosomes, and a different
pathogenic mutation had previously been reported in this codon (R159H;
601023.0007). Two patients had classic ALS with frontotemporal dementia,
and a third obligate mutation carrier had Paget disease, followed by ALS
without cognitive impairment.

.0009
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS 14 WITHOUT FRONTOTEMPORAL DEMENTIA
VCP, ASP592ASN

In a patient with ALS14 without frontotemporal dementia (613954),
Johnson et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 2163G-A transition in
exon 14 of the VCP gene, resulting in an asp592-to-asn (D592N)
substitution in a residue directly adjacent to the central pore formed
by the VCP hexamer. The mutation was not found in 3,138 control
chromosomes. A maternal uncle had previously been diagnosed with ALS.

REFERENCE 1. Cloutier, P.; Lavallee-Adam, M.; Faubert, D.; Blanchette, M.; Coulombe,
B.: A newly uncovered group of distantly related lysine methyltransferases
preferentially interact with molecular chaperones to regulate their
activity. PLoS Genet. 9: e1003210, 2013. Note: Electronic Article.

2. Custer, S. K.; Neumann, M.; Lu, H.; Wright, A. C.; Taylor, J. P.
: Transgenic mice expressing mutant forms VCP/p97 recapitulate the
full spectrum of IBMPFD including degeneration in muscle, brain and
bone. Hum. Molec. Genet. 19: 1741-1755, 2010.

3. Druck, T.; Gu, Y.; Prabhala. G.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Park, S.-H.;
Huebner, K.; Keen, J. H.: Chromosome localization of human genes
for clathrin adaptor polypeptides AP2-beta and AP50 and the clathrin-binding
protein, VCP. Genomics 30: 94-97, 1995.

4. Egerton, M.; Ashe, O. R.; Chen, D.; Druker, B. J.; Burgess, W.
H.; Samelson, L. E.: VCP, the mammalian homolog of cdc48, is tyrosine
phosphorylated in response to T cell antigen receptor activation. EMBO
J. 11: 3533-3540, 1992.

5. Haubenberger, D.; Bittner, R. E.; Rauch-Shorny, S.; Zimprich, F.;
Mannhalter, C.; Wagner, L.; Mineva, I.; Vass, K.; Auff, E.; Zimprich,
A.: Inclusion body myopathy and Paget disease is linked to a novel
mutation in the VCP gene. Neurology 65: 1304-1305, 2005.

6. Higashiyama, H.; Hirose, F.; Yamaguchi, M.; Inoue, Y. H.; Fujikake,
N.; Matsukage, A.; Kakizuka, A.: Identification of ter94, Drosophila
VCP, as a modulator of polyglutamine-induced neurodegeneration. Cell
Death Differ. 9: 264-273, 2002.

7. Hoyle, J.; Tan, K. H.; Fisher, E. M. C.: Mapping the valosin-containing
protein (VCP) gene on human chromosome 9 and mouse chromosome 4, and
a likely pseudogene on the mouse X chromosome. Mammalian Genome 8:
778-780, 1997.

8. Johnson, J. O.; Mandrioli, J.; Benatar, M.; Abramzon, Y.; Van Deerlin,
V. M.; Trojanowski, J. Q.; Gibbs, J. R.; Brunetti, M.; Gronka, S.;
Wuu, J.; Ding, J.; McCluskey, L.; and 25 others: Exome sequencing
reveals VCP mutations as a cause of familial ALS. Neuron 68: 857-864,
2010. Note: Erratum: Neuron 69: 397 only, 2011.

9. Ju, J.-S.; Miller, S. E.; Hanson, P. I.; Weihl, C. C.: Impaired
protein aggregate handling and clearance underlie the pathogenesis
of p97/VCP-associated disease. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 30289-30299,
2008.

10. Kim, E.-J.; Park, Y.-E.; Kim, D.-S.; Ahn, B.-Y.; Kim, H.-S.; Chang,
Y. H.; Kim, S.-J,; Kim, H.-J.; Lee, H.-W.; Seeley, W. W.; Kim, S.
: Inclusion body myopathy with Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal
dementia linked to VCP p.Arg155Cys in a Korean family. Arch. Neurol. 68:
787-796, 2011.

11. Kittler, R.; Putz, G.; Pelletier, L.; Poser, I.; Heninger, A.-K.;
Drechsel, D.; Fischer, S.; Konstantinova, I.; Habermann, B.; Grabner,
H.; Yaspo, M.-L.; Himmelbauer, H.; Korn, B.; Neugebauer, K.; Pisabarro,
M. T.; Buchholz, F.: An endoribonuclease-prepared siRNA screen in
human cells identifies genes essential for cell division. Nature 432:
1036-1040, 2004.

12. Koller, K. J.; Brownstein, M. J.: Use of a cDNA clone to identify
a supposed precursor protein containing valosin. Nature 325: 542-545,
1987.

13. Mueller, B.; Klemm, E. J.; Spooner, E.; Claessen, J. H.; Ploegh,
H. L.: SEL1L nucleates a protein complex required for dislocation
of misfolded glycoproteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 12325-12330,
2008.

14. Pleasure, I. T.; Black, M. M.; Keen, J. H.: Valosin-containing
protein, VCP, is a ubiquitous clathrin-binding protein. Nature 365:
459-462, 1993.

15. Ramadan, K.; Bruderer, R.; Spiga, F. M.; Popp, O.; Baur, T.; Gotta,
M.; Meyer, H. H.: Cdc48/p97 promotes reformation of the nucleus by
extracting the kinase Aurora B from chromatin. Nature 450: 1258-1262,
2007.

16. Sacconi, S.; Camano, P.; de Greef, J. C.; Lemmers, R. J. L. F.;
Salviati, L.; Boileau, P.; Lopez de Munain Arregui, A.; van der Maarel,
S. M.; Desnuelle, C.: Patients with a phenotype consistent with facioscapulohumeral
muscular dystrophy display genetic and epigenetic heterogeneity. J.
Med. Genet. 49: 41-46, 2012.

17. Tucker, W. S., Jr.; Hubbard, W. H.; Stryker, T. D.; Morgan, S.
W.; Evans, O. B.; Freemon, F. R.; Theil, G. B.: A new familial disorder
of combined lower motor neuron degeneration and skeletal disorganization. Trans.
Assoc. Am. Phys. 95: 126-134, 1982.

18. Uchiyama, K.; Totsukawa, G.; Puhka, M.; Kaneko, Y.; Jokitalo,
E.; Dreveny, I.; Beuron, F.; Zhang, X.; Freemont, P.; Kondo, H.:
p37 is a p97 adaptor required for Golgi and ER biogenesis in interphase
and at the end of mitosis. Dev. Cell 11: 803-816, 2006.

19. van der Zee, J.; Pirici, D.; Van Langenhove, T.; Engelborghs,
S.; Vandenberghe, R.; Hoffmann, M.; Pusswald, G.; Van den Broeck,
M.; Peeters, K.; Mattheijssens, M.; Martin, J.-J.; De Deyn, P. P.;
Cruts, M.; Haubenberger, D.; Kumar-Singh, S.; Zimprich, A.; Van Broeckhoven,
C.: Clinical heterogeneity in 3 unrelated families linked to VCP
p.Arg159His. Neurology 73: 626-632, 2009.

20. Viassolo, V.; Previtali, S. C.; Schiatti, E.; Magnani, G.; Minetti,
C.; Zara, F.; Grasso, M.; Dagna-Bricarelli, F.; Di Maria, E.: Inclusion
body myopathy, Paget's disease of the bone and frontotemporal dementia:
recurrence of the VCP R155H mutation in an Italian family and implications
for genetic counselling. Clin. Genet. 74: 54-60, 2008.

21. Watts, G. D. J.; Wymer, J.; Kovach, M. J.; Mehta, S. G.; Mumm,
S.; Darvish, D.; Pestronk, A.; Whyte, M. P.; Kimonis, V. E.: Inclusion
body myopathy associated with Paget disease of bone and frontotemporal
dementia is caused by mutant valosin-containing protein. Nature Genet. 36:
377-381, 2004.

22. Weihl, C. C.; Dalal, S.; Pestronk, A.; Hanson, P. I.: Inclusion
body myopathy-associated mutations in p97/VCP impair endoplasmic reticulum-associated
degradation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 15: 189-199, 2006.

23. Weihl, C. C.; Miller, S. E.; Hanson, P. I.; Pestronk, A.: Transgenic
expression of inclusion body myopathy associated mutant p97/VCP causes
weakness and ubiquitinated protein inclusions in mice. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 16: 919-928, 2007.

24. Weihl, C. C.; Pestronk, A.; Kimonis, V. E.: Valosin-containing
protein disease: Inclusion body myopathy with Paget's disease of the
bone and fronto-temporal dementia. Neuromusc. Disord. 19: 308-315,
2009.

25. Ye, Y.; Meyer, H. H.; Rapoport, T. A.: The AAA ATPase Cdc48/p97
and its partners transport proteins from the ER into the cytosol. Nature 414:
652-656, 2001.

26. Ye, Y.; Shibata, Y.; Yun, C.; Ron, D.; Rapoport, T. A.: A membrane
protein complex mediates retro-translocation from the ER lumen into
the cytosol. Nature 429: 841-847, 2004.

27. Zhang, S.-H.; Liu, J.; Kobayashi, R.; Tonks, N. K.: Identification
of the cell cycle regulator VCP (p97/CDC48) as a substrate of the
band 4.1-related protein-tyrosine phosphatase PTPH1. J. Biol. Chem. 274:
17806-17812, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/31/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/25/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/8/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/1/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/5/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/21/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/10/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/29/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/23/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/23/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/24/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/5/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/4/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/8/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/22/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/28/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/2/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/14/1997

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 1/30/1996

EDITED mgross: 09/17/2013
carol: 7/26/2013
mgross: 5/31/2013
carol: 4/26/2012
ckniffin: 4/25/2012
carol: 12/16/2011
ckniffin: 12/8/2011
alopez: 12/5/2011
terry: 12/1/2011
carol: 7/6/2011
terry: 6/3/2011
carol: 6/1/2011
wwang: 5/18/2011
ckniffin: 5/5/2011
carol: 7/30/2010
wwang: 1/14/2010
ckniffin: 12/21/2009
terry: 12/1/2009
mgross: 11/10/2009
wwang: 11/5/2009
ckniffin: 10/29/2009
wwang: 5/13/2009
ckniffin: 4/23/2009
wwang: 4/7/2009
ckniffin: 3/23/2009
alopez: 2/5/2008
terry: 1/24/2008
carol: 5/10/2007
wwang: 2/9/2007
ckniffin: 2/5/2007
mgross: 1/4/2007
wwang: 8/9/2006
alopez: 3/8/2005
carol: 1/13/2005
terry: 11/3/2004
alopez: 7/23/2004
terry: 7/22/2004
alopez: 4/6/2004
terry: 4/2/2004
mgross: 1/28/2002
alopez: 1/8/2002
terry: 1/2/2002
mgross: 3/21/2000
mark: 10/17/1997
terry: 10/14/1997
terry: 7/28/1997
mark: 4/8/1997
terry: 3/26/1996
mark: 1/30/1996

120250	TITLE *120250 COLLAGEN, TYPE VI, ALPHA-3; COL6A3
DESCRIPTION The COL6A3 gene encodes the alpha-3 chain of type VI collagen. See also
COL6A1 (120220).

CLONING

Chu et al. (1990) isolated and sequenced human cDNA clones corresponding
to the COL6A3 gene.

Klewer et al. (1998) studied COL6A3 gene expression in the developing
mammalian heart. The pattern of expression was identical to that of
COL6A1.

By microarray analysis, Jun et al. (2001) demonstrated expression of the
COL6A3 gene in human donor corneas.

GENE STRUCTURE

Stokes et al. (1991) reported information on the exons for part of the
COL6A3 gene.

MAPPING

Weil et al. (1987, 1988) localized the COL6A3 gene to chromosome 2q37 by
Southern blot analysis of somatic cell hybrids and by in situ
hybridization. At least 3 other extracellular matrix genes are also
located on 2q: 2 collagen genes, COL3A1 (120180) and COL5A2 (120190),
and the fibronectin gene (135600).

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Speer et al. (1996) localized
the COL6A3 gene to chromosome 2q37 within a 17-cM region spanned by
D2S336 and D2S395. By linkage analysis, they mapped a candidate gene for
Bethlem myopathy (158810) to the same chromosomal region.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Pan et al. (1998) identified a mutation in the COL6A3 gene (120250.0001)
in affected members of a large American pedigree with Bethlem myopathy
(158810), a rare autosomal dominant proximal myopathy characterized by
early childhood onset and joint contractures.

Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (UCMD; 254090) is an autosomal
recessive disorder characterized by generalized muscular weakness,
contractures of multiple joints, and distal hyperextensibility. Demir et
al. (2002) demonstrated linkage of UCMD to 2q37 in 3 families, each of
which demonstrated homozygous mutation in the COL6A3 gene (see, e.g.,
120250.0002 and 120250.0003). One family had a phenotype of intermediate
severity, a second an unusually mild phenotype, and a third with a
severe phenotype as previously described in patients with UCMD. This was
the first description of mutations in COL6A3 in UCMD; previously
mutations had been described in COL6A2 (120240).

Lampe et al. (2005) developed a method for rapid direct sequence
analysis of all 107 coding exons of the COL6 genes (COL6A1, COL6A2,
COL6A3) using single condition amplification/internal primer (SCAIP)
sequencing. They sequenced all 3 COL6 genes from genomic DNA in 79
patients with UCMD or Bethlem myopathy, and found putative mutations in
1 of the COL6 genes in 62% of patients. Some patients showed changes in
more than one of the COL6 genes, and some UCMD patients appeared to have
dominant rather than recessive disease. Lampe et al. (2005) concluded
that these findings may explain some or all of the cases of UCMD that
are unlinked to the COL6 genes under a recessive model.

In 2 unrelated patients with Bethlem myopathy, Baker et al. (2007)
identified 2 different heterozygous mutations in the COL6A3 gene
(120250.0005; 120250.0006).

Nadeau et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous COL6A3 mutation
(120250.0004) in 2 unrelated individuals with autosomal dominant UCMD.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BETHLEM MYOPATHY
COL6A3, GLY1679GLU

In affected members of a large American kindred with Bethlem myopathy
(158810) linked to chromosome 2, Pan et al. (1998) identified a
heterozygous G-to-A transition in the COL6A3 gene, resulting in a
gly1679-to-glu (G1679E) substitution in the N-terminal globular domain
of the protein, rather than in the triple-helical domain where mutations
had been found in the COL6A1 (120220) and COL6A2 (120240) genes. The
mutation occurred in the N2 subdomain, 1 of the von Willebrand factor
type A domains of the COL6A3 gene.

.0002
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A3, IVS29, A-G, +5

In 3 sibs, a brother and 2 sisters, with consanguineous parents
originating from Morocco, Demir et al. (2002) identified homozygosity
for a splice donor site mutation in intron 29 (6930+5A-G) as the cause
of autosomal recessive Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (254090).
The phenotype was of intermediate severity. The mutation caused skipping
of exon 29 and partial reduction of collagen VI in muscle biopsy.
Neonatal hypotonia, severe in most cases, was found in all 5 cases in
the 3 families reported by Demir et al. (2002). In this family the 2
eldest sibs were never able to walk without support (calipers or walking
frame). Generalized muscle weakness, associated with predominantly
distal amyotrophy, became evident in the first years of life. Axial
muscles (mainly neck flexors), pelvic girdle muscles, and intrinsic
muscles in hands and feet were the most severely affected ones. Lower
limbs tended to be more severely affected than upper limbs; in most
cases, hip extensors and abductors were weaker than hip flexors, leading
to hip contractures that interfered with standing position. No
significant facial weakness was observed. CK levels were normal or
moderately raised (up to 4 times the normal values).

.0003
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
COL6A3, ARG465TER

In a girl of Italian extraction with unusually mild Ullrich congenital
muscular dystrophy (254090), Demir et al. (2002) found a homozygous
nonsense mutation in exon 5 of the COL6A3 gene: arg465 to ter (R465X).
Analysis of the patient's COL6A3 transcript showed the presence of
various mRNA species, one of which lacks several exons, including the
exon containing the nonsense mutation. The patient in this case was
still ambulant at age 18 and showed an unusual combination of
hyperlaxity and finger contractures (see Fig. 2). When the wrist was
extended, the retraction of finger flexor muscles impeded complete
finger extension, causing flexion contractures of fingers, which is
regarded as a characteristic 'Bethlem' sign. When the wrist was not
extended, the finger laxity became evident. The patient was able to
overlap, cross, or extend fingers beyond the normal range of motion
('Ullrich sign').

.0004
ULLRICH CONGENITAL MUSCULAR DYSTROPHY, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
COL6A3, IVS16DS, G-A, +1

In a patient with Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (254090), Baker
et al. (2005) identified heterozygosity for a de novo splice site
mutation (IVS16DS+1G-A) in intron 16 of the COL6A3 gene. The mutation
was predicted to result in loss of exon 16, which encodes amino acids 13
to 33 of the triple helical region of COL6A3.

Nadeau et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous IVS16DS+1G-A mutation in
2 unrelated patients with UCMD. The first patient was a 30-year-old
individual who had onset at birth with hypotonia, congenital hip
dislocation, delayed motor development, and feeding difficulties.
Independent walking was not achieved, and the patient became
wheelchair-bound at age 12 years. There was spinal rigidity, scoliosis,
and kyphosis, as well as follicular hyperkeratosis, keloid formation,
and need for nocturnal ventilation. The second patient had onset at age
1.5 years but never achieved independent walking and was
wheelchair-bound by age 3.5 years. This patient died at age 10 years
during a respiratory illness.

.0005
BETHLEM MYOPATHY
COL6A3, IVS15DS, GT-TC, +1

In a 40-year-old Australian man with Bethlem myopathy (158810), Baker et
al. (2007) identified a heterozygous 2-bp change (GT-to-TC) in intron 15
of the COL6A3 gene, resulting in the skipping of exon 16, which encodes
the cysteine-rich linker region and the most N-terminal 15 amino acids
of the triple helix. Further studies showed that the mutation also
resulted in a premature stop codon and nonsense-mediated decay. There
was decreased collagen VI in the extracellular matrix, indicating
impaired microfibril formation. The patient had delayed motor
development, diffuse muscle weakness, decreased motor capacity,
kyphosis, and dystrophic features on muscle biopsy.

.0006
BETHLEM MYOPATHY
COL6A3, LEU1726ARG

In a 20-year-old man with Bethlem myopathy (158810), Baker et al. (2007)
identified a heterozygous 5177T-G transversion in a highly conserved
residue in exon 11 of the COL6A3 gene, resulting in a leu1726-to-arg
(L1726R) substitution in the globular N2 A domain. The patient had
reduced motor capacity, proximal muscle weakness, joint contractures,
and dystrophic findings on muscle biopsy. Further studies showed normal
levels of collagen VI in the extracellular matrix, indicating that the
mutant protein was able to fold and incorporate into collagen VI.

REFERENCE 1. Baker, N. L.; Morgelin, M.; Pace, R. A.; Peat, R. A.; Adams, N.
E.; Gardner, R. J. M.; Rowland, L. P.; Miller, G.; De Jonghe, P.;
Ceulemans, B.; Hannibal, M. C.; Edwards, M.; Thompson, E. M.; Jacobson,
R.; Quinlivan, R. C. M.; Aftimos, S.; Kornberg, A. J.; North, K. N.;
Bateman, J. F.; Lamande, S. R.: Molecular consequences of dominant
Bethlem myopathy collagen VI mutations. Ann. Neurol. 62: 390-405,
2007.

2. Baker, N. L.; Morgelin, M.; Peat, R.; Goemans, N.; North, K. N.;
Bateman, J. F.; Lamande, S. R.: Dominant collagen VI mutations are
a common cause of Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 14: 279-293, 2005.

3. Chu, M.-L.; Zhang, R.-Z.; Pan, T.-C.; Stokes, D.; Conway, D.; Kuo,
H.-J.; Glanville, R.; Mayer, U.; Mann, K.; Deutzmann, R.; Timpl, R.
: Mosaic structure of globular domains in the human type VI collagen
alpha-3 chain: similarity to von Willebrand factor, fibronectin, actin,
salivary proteins and apotinin type protease inhibitors. EMBO J. 9:
385-393, 1990.

4. Demir, E.; Sabatelli, P.; Allamand, V.; Ferreiro, A.; Moghadaszadeh,
B.; Makrelouf, M.; Topaloglu, H.; Echenne, B.; Merlini, E.; Guicheney,
P.: Mutations in COL6A3 cause severe and mild phenotypes of Ullrich
congenital muscular dystrophy. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 70: 1446-1458,
2002.

5. Jun, A. S.; Liu, S. H.; Koo, E. H.; Do, D. V.; Stark, W. J.; Gottsch,
J. D.: Microarray analysis of gene expression in human donor corneas. Arch.
Ophthal. 119: 1629-1634, 2001.

6. Klewer, S. E.; Krob, S. L.; Kolker, S. J.; Kitten, G. T.: Expression
of type VI collagen in the developing mouse heart. :Dev. Dyn. 211:
248-255, 1998.

7. Lampe, A. K.; Dunn, D. M.; von Niederhausern, A. C.; Hamil, C.;
Aoyagi, A.; Laval, S. H.; Marie, S. K.; Chu, M.-L.; Swoboda, K.; Muntoni,
F.; Bonnemann, C. G.; Flanigan, K. M.; Bushby, K. M. D.; Weiss, R.
B.: Automated genomic sequence analysis of the three collagen VI
genes: applications to Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy and Bethlem
myopathy. J. Med. Genet. 42: 108-120, 2005.

8. Nadeau, A.; Kinali, M.; Main, M.; Jimenez-Mallebrera, C.; Aloysius,
A.; Clement, E.; North, B.; Manzur, A. Y.; Robb, S. A.; Mercuri, E.;
Muntoni, F.: Natural history of Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy. Neurology 73:
25-31, 2009.

9. Pan, T.-C.; Zhang, R.-Z.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.; Tandan, R.; Fries,
T.; Stajich, J. M.; Viles, K.; Vance, J. M.; Chu, M.-L.; Speer, M.
C.: Missense mutation in a von Willebrand factor type A domain of
the alpha-3(VI) collagen gene (COL6A3) in a family with Bethlem myopathy. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 7: 807-812, 1998.

10. Speer, M. C.; Tandan, R.; Rao, P. N.; Fries, T.; Stajich, J. M.;
Bolhuis, P. A.; Jobsis, G. J.; Vance, J. M.; Viles, K. D.; Sheffield,
K.; James, C.; Kahler, S. G.; Pettenati, M.; Gilbert, J. R.; Denton,
P. H.; Yamaoka, L. H.; Pericak-Vance, M. A.: Evidence for locus heterogeneity
in the Bethlem myopathy and linkage to 2q37. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5:
1043-1046, 1996.

11. Stokes, D. G.; Saitta, B.; Timpl, R.; Chu, M.-L.: Human alpha-3(VI)
collagen gene: characterization of exons coding for the amino-terminal
globular domain and alternative splicing in normal and tumor cells. J.
Biol. Chem. 266: 8626-8633, 1991.

12. Weil, D.; Mattei, M.-G.; Passage, E.; Van Cong, N.; Pribula-Conway,
D.; Mann, K.; Deutzmann, R.; Timpl, R.; Chu, M.-L.: Assignment of
the three genes coding for the different chains of type VI collagen
(COL6A1, COL6A2, COL6A3). (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46:
713 only, 1987.

13. Weil, D.; Mattei, M.-G.; Passage, E.; Van Cong, N.; Pribula-Conway,
D.; Mann, K.; Deutzmann, R.; Timpl, R.; Chu, M.-L.: Cloning and chromosomal
localization of human genes encoding the three chains of type VI collagen. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 42: 435-445, 1988.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/23/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/8/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/1/2005
Jane Kelly - updated: 12/6/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/11/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/22/1998
Paul Brennan - updated: 5/14/1998
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 8/15/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/9/1987

EDITED carol: 12/23/2009
ckniffin: 12/15/2009
wwang: 7/8/2008
ckniffin: 7/2/2008
ckniffin: 5/23/2008
wwang: 11/30/2007
terry: 11/8/2007
wwang: 3/14/2005
wwang: 3/8/2005
terry: 3/1/2005
carol: 12/6/2002
alopez: 6/13/2002
terry: 6/11/2002
dkim: 12/9/1998
terry: 6/3/1998
terry: 5/22/1998
carol: 5/14/1998
terry: 9/5/1996
terry: 9/3/1996
terry: 8/16/1996
mark: 8/15/1996
carol: 10/7/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 7/24/1991
carol: 7/12/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989

603684	TITLE *603684 LIPASE, ENDOTHELIAL; LIPG
;;EL;;
ENDOTHELIAL CELL-DERIVED LIPASE; EDL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Endothelial lipase regulates the circulating level of high density
lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C). It can also form a molecular bridge
between endothelial cells and lipoproteins or circulating macrophages
through interaction with heparan sulfate proteoglycans. This
nonenzymatic action can increase cellular lipoprotein uptake and
monocyte adhesion and contribute to atherosclerosis (summary by Ishida
et al., 2004).

CLONING

HDL-C levels are inversely associated with the risk of atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease. At least 50% of the variation in HDL cholesterol
levels is genetically determined. Lipoprotein lipase (LPL; 609708) and
hepatic lipase (HL, or LIPC; 151670), 2 members of the triacylglycerol
(TG) lipase family, both influence HDL metabolism, and the HL locus has
been associated with variation of HDL levels in humans. Jaye et al.
(1999) described the cloning and in vivo functional analysis of a novel
human TG lipase synthesized by endothelial cells in vitro, and thus
named endothelial lipase (EL). The EL protein sequence is 45%, 40%, and
27% identical to those of LPL, HL, and pancreatic lipase (PL),
respectively. Like other TG lipases, the EL protein commences with an
18-residue hydrophobic sequence characteristic of a secretory signal
peptide. The 482-amino acid sequence contains the characteristic GXSXG
lipase motif, a conserved catalytic triad, conserved heparin and
lipoprotein binding sites, and 5 potential N-linked glycosylation sites.
Cysteine residues, implicated in disulfide bonds necessary for enzymatic
activity of other TG lipases, are conserved. Unlike LPL and HL, EL has a
lid region of only 19 residues. The lid domain forms an amphipathic
helix covering the catalytic pocket of the enzyme and confers substrate
specificity to the enzymes of this family. Northern blot analysis
detected a 4.5-kb EL transcript in liver, lung, kidney, placenta, and
testis, but not in heart or skeletal muscle.

Using a PCR-based subtraction hybridization methodology, Hirata et al.
(1999) cloned human and mouse cDNA corresponding to the LIPG gene.
Northern blot analysis detected a 4.4-kb mRNA in placenta, liver, lung,
ovary, thyroid, and testis. Expression was also seen in human umbilical
vein and coronary endothelial cells and murine yolk sac cells.

By searching for genes upregulated in human umbilical vein endothelial
cells, Ishida et al. (2004) cloned 2 splice variants of LIPG, which they
designated EDL2a and EDL2b. Both variants encode truncated proteins that
lack the first 80 amino acids of full-length LIPG, which the authors
called EDL1a. In addition, EDL2b also lacks a 74-amino acid region that
encodes a portion of the lid domain. RT-PCR confirmed expression of the
truncated isoforms in several human tissues and cultured cells. Western
blot analysis and immunofluorescence studies of stably transfected cells
indicated that both truncated variants localized to the cytosol, while
full-length LIPG was secreted into the culture medium.

GENE FUNCTION

Jaye et al. (1999) showed that EL has substantial phospholipase
activity, but less triglyceride lipase activity. Overexpression of EL in
mice reduced plasma concentration of HDL cholesterol and its major
protein, apolipoprotein A-1 (107680). The endothelial expression,
enzymatic profile and in vivo effects of EL suggested to Jaye et al.
(1999) that it may have a role in lipoprotein metabolism and vascular
biology.

Ishida et al. (2003) and Jin et al. (2003) found that a decrease in
endothelial lipase expression and activity, by gene deletion and
antibody inhibition, respectively, resulted in significant increases in
plasma HDL cholesterol particles in mice. The findings of both studies
showed that endothelial lipase is an important enzyme in the physiologic
regulation of HDL metabolism.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ishida et al. (2004) determined that the LIPG gene contains 11 exons and
spans about 71.4 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Ishida et al. (2004) mapped the LIPG gene
to chromosome 18q21.1.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Yamakawa-Kobayashi et al. (2003) detected 2 common SNPs in the LIPG gene
associated with serum HDL-C levels in healthy school-aged children. The
data supported the hypothesis that variations in this gene are one of
the genetic determinants of HDL-C levels.

ANIMAL MODEL

Ishida et al. (2004) found that Lipg expression was increased in apoE
(107741) -/- mice, which were prone to the development of
atherosclerotic vascular disease compared with control mice.
Atherosclerotic lesions were markedly attenuated in apoE -/- Lipg -/-
double-knockout mice compared with apoE -/- single-knockout mice;
however, serum lipid profiling did not provide a clear mechanism for
this effect since both antiatherogenic HDL and atherogenic VLDL/LDL
levels were increased. Lipg was predominantly expressed by luminal
endothelial cells and by infiltrating monocytes/macrophages in
adventitia and atherosclerotic plaques. ApoE -/- Lipg -/- mice showed
reduced macrophage infiltration compared with apoE -/- animals. Ex vivo
adhesion assays revealed that monocyte/macrophage binding to apoE -/-
Lipg -/- aortic strips was significantly less than to strips from apoE
-/- mice. Heparin treatment significantly diminished the augmented cell
adhesion to aortic strips from apoE -/- mice, but not to those from apoE
-/- Lipg -/- mice, suggesting that upregulation of Lipg in aorta may
enhance cell adhesion to the vessel wall by interaction with heparan
sulfate proteoglycans.

REFERENCE 1. Hirata, K.; Dichek, H. L.; Cioffi, J. A.; Choi, S. Y.; Leeper,
N. J.; Quintana, L.; Kronmal, G. S.; Cooper, A. D.; Quertermous, T.
: Cloning of a unique lipase from endothelial cells extends the lipase
gene family. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 14170-14175, 1999.

2. Ishida, T.; Choi, S.; Kundu, R. K.; Hirata, K.; Rubin, E. M.; Cooper,
A. D.; Quertermous, T.: Endothelial lipase is a major determinant
of HDL level. J. Clin. Invest. 111: 347-355, 2003.

3. Ishida, T.; Choi, S. Y.; Kundu, R. K.; Spin, J.; Yamashita, T.;
Hirata, K.; Kojima, Y.; Yokoyama, M.; Cooper, A. D.; Quertermous,
T.: Endothelial lipase modulates susceptibility to atherosclerosis
in apolipoprotein-E-deficient mice. J. Biol. Chem. 279: 45085-45092,
2004.

4. Ishida, T.; Zheng, Z.; Dichek, H. L.; Wang, H.; Moreno, I.; Yang,
E.; Kundu, R. K.; Talbi, S.; Hirata, K.; Leung, L. L.; Quertermous,
T.: Molecular cloning of nonsecreted endothelial cell-derived lipase
isoforms. Genomics 83: 24-33, 2004.

5. Jaye, M.; Lynch, K. J.; Krawiec, J.; Marchadier, D.; Maugeais,
C.; Doan, K.; South, V.; Amin, D.; Perrone, M.; Rader, D. J.: A novel
endothelial-derived lipase that modulates HDL metabolism. Nature
Genet. 21: 424-428, 1999.

6. Jin, W.; Millar, J. S.; Broedl, U.; Glick, J. M.; Rader, D. J.
: Inhibition of endothelial lipase causes increased HDL cholesterol
levels in vivo. J. Clin. Invest. 111: 357-362, 2003.

7. Yamakawa-Kobayashi, K.; Yanagi, H.; Endo, K.; Arinami, T.; Hamaguchi,
H.: Relationship between serum HDL-C levels and common genetic variants
of the endothelial lipase gene in Japanese school-aged children. Hum.
Genet. 113: 311-315, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/15/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/7/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/26/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/5/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/28/2003

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 3/30/1999

EDITED mgross: 06/03/2011
terry: 4/15/2011
carol: 10/6/2005
wwang: 9/29/2005
wwang: 9/28/2005
ckniffin: 9/7/2005
tkritzer: 10/27/2004
ckniffin: 10/26/2004
mgross: 2/5/2004
tkritzer: 8/29/2003
tkritzer: 8/28/2003
alopez: 3/31/1999
alopez: 3/30/1999

103850	TITLE *103850 ALDOLASE A, FRUCTOSE-BISPHOSPHATE; ALDOA
;;FRUCTOSE-1,6-BISPHOSPHATE ALDOLASE A;;
ALDOLASE A; ALDA;;
ALDOLASE 1;;
FRUCTOALDOLASE A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Fructose-1,6-bisphosphate aldolase (EC 4.1.2.13) is a glycolytic enzyme
that catalyzes the reversible conversion of fructose-1,6-bisphosphate to
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate. The enzyme is
a tetramer of identical 40-kD subunits. Vertebrates have 3 aldolase
isozymes, aldolases A, B (ALDOB; 612724), and C (ALDOC; 103870), which
are distinguished by their electrophoretic and catalytic properties. The
sequence of the aldolases around the active-site lysine is highly
conserved in evolution. Mammalian tissues express aldolase isozymes in a
well-characterized pattern. Developing embryo produces aldolase A, which
continues to be expressed in many adult tissues, sometimes at much
higher levels than in embryo. In adult muscle, aldolase A can be as much
as 5% of total cellular protein. In adult liver, kidney, and intestine,
aldolase A expression is repressed and aldolase B is produced. In brain
and other nervous tissue, aldolase A and C are expressed about equally.
In transformed liver cells, aldolase A replaces aldolase B (Rottmann et
al., 1984).

CLONING

Electrophoretic variants of fructoaldolase were reported by Charlesworth
(1972).

Sakakibara et al. (1985) cloned aldolase A from a human liver cDNA
library. The deduced protein contains 363 amino acids. RNA blot analysis
revealed a 1.6-kb ALDOA mRNA in skeletal muscle and a 1.7-kb ALDOA mRNA
in liver and placenta.

Freemont et al. (1988) presented the complete amino acid sequence of
human skeletal muscle fructose-bisphosphate aldolase, comprising 363
residues.

GENE STRUCTURE

Izzo et al. (1988) found that the ALDOA gene spans 7.5 kb and contains
12 exons. It occurs as a single copy per haploid human genome. Eight
exons containing the coding sequence were common to all mRNAs extracted
from several mammalian sources. Four additional exons were identified in
the 5-prime UTR: the first was contained in the ubiquitous mRNA, the
second in the muscle-specific mRNA, and the third and fourth in a minor
mRNA in human liver. S(1)-nuclease-protection analysis of the 5-prime
end of mRNA from cultured fibroblasts, muscle, and hepatoma cell lines
revealed 4 different transcription initiation sites. The presence of
conventional sequences for 4 eukaryotic promoters was also demonstrated.
The nucleotide similarities in the coding region and the intron-exon
organization of aldolases A, B, and C confirmed that they arose from a
common ancestral gene, with aldolase B diverging first.

MAPPING

Harris (1974) concluded that 3 loci determine aldolase. Cohen-Haguenauer
et al. (1985) assigned aldolase A to chromosome 16, whereas Kukita et
al. (1985) assigned it to chromosome 22. However, Kukita et al. (1987)
mapped the ALDOA gene to chromosome 16 by 3 different methods: molecular
hybridization to hybrid cell DNA, molecular hybridization to DNA of
sorted metaphase chromosomes, and in situ hybridization. In situ
hybridization indicated that the gene is located on the chromosome
16q22-q24 band. Serero et al. (1988) also assigned the aldolase A gene
to chromosome 16 by Southern blot analysis of human genomic DNA with a
cDNA probe. Aldolase A pseudogenes were found on chromosomes 3 and 10.
The map location of the 3 aldolase genes and the aldolase pseudogene
(see 612724) is of considerable interest from the point of view of
chromosome evolution. The 4 genes are found on 2 pairs of
morphologically similar chromosomes, 9 and 10, and 16 and 17. These
homeologous (i.e., of similar origin) chromosome pairs may have arisen
from 1 or 2 tetraploidization events (Comings, 1972; Ohno, 1973). As
predicted by the chromosomal locations, the coding sequences of the
expressed aldolase A and C genes on chromosomes 16 and 17, respectively,
are more homologous to each other than either of them is to the
expressed aldolase B gene on chromosome 9.

Amberger (2008) mapped the ALDOA gene to chromosome 16p11.2 based on an
alignment of the ALDOA sequence (GenBank GENBANK M11560) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.2).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Kishi et al. (1987) studied a patient with red cell aldolase deficiency,
or glycogen storage disease XII (GSD12; 611881), and identified a
mutation in the ALDOA gene that resulted in an asp128-to-gly (D128G;
103850.0001) substitution in the protein. The patient's enzyme from red
cells and from cultured lymphoblastoid cells was highly thermolabile,
and the enzyme expressed in E. coli was likewise thermolabile. The
parents had intermediate levels of red cell aldolase A. Southern blot
analysis of genomic DNA showed that the patient was homozygous for a
mutation that was heterozygous in both parents.

In a boy with aldolase A deficiency, Kreuder et al. (1996) identified a
homozygous germline mutation in the ALDOA gene that resulted
substitution of a negatively charged glutamic acid with a positively
charged lysine at the highly conserved residue 206 (E206L; 103850.0002).
The affected residue is highly conserved within the subunit interface
region.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE XII
ALDOA, ASP128GLY

In a patient with red cell aldolase deficiency, or glycogen storage
disease XII (GSD12; 611881), Kishi et al. (1987) identified an A-G
transversion at nucleotide 386 in the codon for the 128th amino acid,
leading to a change from aspartic acid (GAU) to glycine (GGU) (D128G) in
the aldolase protein. The patient's enzyme from red cells and from
cultured lymphoblastoid cells was highly thermolabile, and the enzyme
expressed in E. coli was likewise thermolabile. Since asp128 is
conserved in aldolase A, B (612724), and C (103870) of eukaryotes,
including Drosophila, this residue likely has a crucial role in
maintaining the correct spatial structure or in performing the catalytic
function of the enzyme. The parents had intermediate levels of red cell
aldolase A. The change in the aspartic acid codon extinguished an Fok1
restriction site (GGATG to GGGTG). Southern blot analysis of genomic DNA
showed that the patient was homozygous for a mutation that was
heterozygous in both parents.

.0002
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE XII
ALDOA, GLU206LYS

Kreuder et al. (1996) described a 4 1/2-year-old boy with predominantly
myopathic symptoms of aldolase A deficiency (611881) due to substitution
of a single amino acid within the subunit interface most essential for
the tetrameric structure of the enzyme. The patient showed muscle
weakness and premature muscle fatigue. He was unable to walk for more
than 10 minutes or climb more than 20 steps at a time. Several
unexplained episodes of jaundice and anemia required blood transfusions
during the first year of life. The parents were healthy and
nonconsanguineous. The patient showed slight jaundice, diminished muscle
mass, reduced muscle tone, and proximal muscle weakness. The liver and
spleen were somewhat enlarged. Creatine kinase was markedly elevated in
the blood of this patient, and several muscle enzymes, as well as serum
bilirubin, were increased. Codon 206 of the ALDOA gene was found to have
a homozygous transition from GAG (glu) to AAG (lys) (E206K). The authors
noted that a glutamate is present in all human aldolases at position 206
of the enzyme. Both parents and a healthy brother were heterozygous for
the mutation.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Penhoet et al. (1966); Tolan et al. (1987)
REFERENCE 1. Amberger, J. S.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/6/2008.

2. Charlesworth, D.: Starch-gel electrophoresis of four enzymes from
human red blood cells: glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase, fructoaldolase,
glyoxalase II and sorbitol dehydrogenase. Ann. Hum. Genet. 35: 477-484,
1972.

3. Cohen-Haguenauer, O.; Van Cong, N.; Mennecier, F.; Kahn, A.; Frezal,
J.: The human aldolase A gene is on chromosome 16.(Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 40: 605, 1985.

4. Comings, D. E.: Evidence of ancient tetraploidy and conservation
of linkage groups in mammalian chromosomes. Nature 238: 455-457,
1972.

5. Freemont, P. S.; Dunbar, B.; Fothergill-Gilmore, L. A.: The complete
amino acid sequence of human skeletal-muscle fructose-bisphosphate
aldolase. Biochem. J. 249: 779-788, 1988.

6. Harris, H.: Personal Communication. London, England  1974.

7. Izzo, P.; Costanzo, P.; Lupo, A.; Rippa, E.; Paolella, G.; Salvatore,
F.: Human aldolase A gene: structural organization and tissue-specific
expression by multiple promoters and alternate mRNA processing. Europ.
J. Biochem. 174: 569-578, 1988.

8. Kishi, H.; Mukai, T.; Hirono, A.; Fujii, H.; Miwa, S.; Hori, K.
: Human aldolase A deficiency associated with a hemolytic anemia:
thermolabile aldolase due to a single base mutation. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 84: 8623-8627, 1987.

9. Kreuder, J.; Borkhardt, A.; Repp, R.; Pekrun, A.; Gottsche, B.;
Gottschalk, U.; Reichmann, H.; Schachenmayr, W.; Schlegel, K.; Lampert,
F.: Brief report: inherited metabolic myopathy and hemolysis due
to a mutation in aldolase A. New Eng. J. Med. 334: 1100-1104, 1996.

10. Kukita, A.; Yoshida, M. C.; Fukushige, S.; Sakakibara, M.; Joh,
K.; Mukai, T.; Hori, K.: Molecular gene mapping of human aldolase
A (ALDOA) gene to chromosome 16. Hum. Genet. 76: 20-26, 1987.

11. Kukita, A.; Yoshida, M. C.; Sakakibara, M.; Mukai, T.; Hori, K.
: Molecular gene mapping of the structural gene for human aldolase
A (ALDOA) to chromosome 22.(Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 40:
674, 1985.

12. Ohno, S.: Ancient linkage groups and frozen accidents. Nature 244:
259-262, 1973.

13. Penhoet, E.; Rajkumar, T.; Rutter, W. J.: Multiple forms of fructose
diphosphate aldolase in mammalian tissues. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 56:
1275-1282, 1966.

14. Rottmann, W. H.; Tolan, D. R.; Penhoet, E. E.: Complete amino
acid sequence for human aldolase B derived from cDNA and genomic clones. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 2738-2742, 1984.

15. Sakakibara, M.; Mukai, T.; Hori, K.: Nucleotide sequence of a
cDNA clone for human aldolase: a messenger RNA in the liver. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 131: 413-420, 1985.

16. Serero, S.; Maire, P.; Van Cong, N.; Cohen-Haguenauer, O.; Gross,
M. S.; Jegou-Foubert, C.; de Tand, M. F.; Kahn, A.; Frezal, J.: Localization
of the active gene of aldolase on chromosome 16, and two aldolase
A pseudogenes on chromosomes 3 and 10. Hum. Genet. 78: 167-174,
1988.

17. Tolan, D. R.; Niclas, J.; Bruce, B. D.; Lebo, R. V.: Evolutionary
implications of the human aldolase-A, -B, -C, and -pseudogene chromosome
locations. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 41: 907-924, 1987.

CONTRIBUTORS Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 3/6/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/1997
Moyra Smith - updated: 6/3/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 07/31/2009
ckniffin: 7/28/2009
carol: 4/14/2009
mgross: 3/6/2008
joanna: 3/6/2008
mgross: 3/17/2004
dkim: 7/17/1998
terry: 6/18/1998
alopez: 7/10/1997
jenny: 6/23/1997
mark: 6/19/1997
mark: 6/4/1996
carol: 6/3/1996
davew: 6/8/1994
warfield: 4/7/1994
carol: 4/6/1994
mimadm: 3/11/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/27/1992

602284	TITLE *602284 BONE MORPHOGENETIC PROTEIN 8B; BMP8B
;;BMP8;;
OSTEOGENIC PROTEIN 2; OP2
DESCRIPTION The bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are a family of secreted
signaling molecules that can induce ectopic bone growth. Many BMPs,
including BMP8B, are part of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGFB)
superfamily (see 190180) (Ozkaynak et al., 1992).

CLONING

Using a mouse Op2 probe, Ozkaynak et al. (1992) isolated a novel BMP
cDNA, which they designated OP2, from a human hippocampus library. The
predicted 402-amino acid OP2 protein is processed into a 139-amino acid
mature form. In the TGFB domain, OP2 shows 74% amino acid sequence
identity to OP1 (BMP7; 112267), and 55 to 74% identity to other BMPs. In
mice, Northern blot analysis revealed high levels of Op2 mRNA as 3- and
5-kb transcripts in early embryos, but no detectable levels in any
organs studied.

Using quantitative RT-PCR, Whittle et al. (2012) detected variable Bmp8b
expression in all mouse tissues examined, with high expression in testis
and brown adipose tissue, much lower expression in brain and
subcutaneous white adipose tissue, and very low expression in gonadal
white adipose tissue, liver, kidney, heart, and skeletal muscle.

MAPPING

By interspecific backcross analysis, DiLeone et al. (1997) mapped the
mouse Bmp8 gene to chromosome 4. Based on homology of synteny, they
mapped the human gene to 1p35-p32.

Hartz (2012) mapped the BMP8B gene to chromosome 1p34.2 based on an
alignment of the BMP8B sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC023526) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Whittle et al. (2012) found that expression of Bmp8b in mice was
upregulated by refeeding after fasting and by activation of thermogenic
responses. Reporter gene assays revealed that the Bmp8b promoter could
be induced by thermogenic thyroid hormone receptor beta-1 (THRB; 190160)
and by PPAR-alpha (PPARA; 170998) or PPAR-gamma (PPARG; 601487).
Treatment of mouse brown adipocytes with recombinant human BMP8B
increased Smad (see 601595) phosphorylation and activation of
hormone-sensitive lipase (LIPE; 151750) and AMPK (see 602739). BMP8B
increased the lipolytic response to norepinephrine, and inhibition of
Alk7 (ACVR1C; 608981) antagonized this effect.

ANIMAL MODEL

Whittle et al. (2012) reported that Bmp8b -/- mice were viable and
healthy but infertile due to defective primordial germ cell formation. A
significant number of Bmp8b -/- pups suffered early death, but survival
increased in a warm environment. Bmp8b -/- mice were prone to weight
gain, particularly on a high fat diet, and they showed reduced core body
temperature and impaired adrenergic-dependent thermogenic capacity.
Intracerebroventricular treatment of Bmp8b -/- mice with recombinant
human BMP8B resulted in marked weight loss and increased core body
temperature. The central thermogenic action of BMP8B was dependent upon
activation levels of hypothalamic Ampk. Whittle et al. (2012) concluded
that BMP8B has a fundamental role in energy balance regulation in both
the hypothalamus and brown adipose tissue.

REFERENCE 1. DiLeone, R. J.; King, J. A.; Storm, E. E.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins,
N. A.; Kingsley, D. M.: The Bmp8 gene is expressed in developing
skeletal tissue and maps near the achondroplasia locus on mouse chromosome
4. Genomics 40: 196-198, 1997.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/19/2012.

3. Ozkaynak, E.; Schnegelsberg, P. N. J.; Jin, D. F.; Clifford, G.
M.; Warren, F. D.; Drier, E. A.; Oppermann, H.: Osteogenic protein-2:
a new member of the transforming growth factor-beta superfamily expressed
in early embryogenesis. J. Biol. Chem. 267: 25220-25227, 1992.

4. Whittle, A. J.; Carobbio, S.; Martins, L.; Slawik, M.; Hondares,
E.; Vazquez, M. J.; Morgan, D.; Csikasz, R. I.; Gallego, R.; Rodriguez-Cuenca,
S.; Dale, M.; Virtue, S.; Villarroya, F.; Cannon, B.; Rahmouni, K.;
Lopez, M.; Vidal-Puig, A.: BMP8B increases brown adipose tissue thermogenesis
through both central and peripheral actions. Cell 149: 871-885,
2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/19/2012

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/27/1998

EDITED mgross: 11/13/2012
mgross: 11/8/2012
terry: 10/19/2012
alopez: 3/4/1998
carol: 1/30/1998
carol: 1/28/1998

610606	TITLE *610606 CYTOPLASMIC POLYADENYLATION ELEMENT-BINDING PROTEIN 3; CPEB3
;;KIAA0940
CPEB3 RIBOZYME, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned CPEB3, which they designated
KIAA0940. RT-PCR ELISA detected high expression in brain, intermediate
expression in kidney, heart, lung, liver, skeletal muscle, testis,
ovary, pancreas, and fetal liver, and low expression in spleen and fetal
brain. CPEB3 was expressed in all specific adult brain regions examined,
with highest levels in amygdala and substantia nigra.

Salehi-Ashtiani et al. (2006) stated that CPEB3 transcripts use 2
alternate untranslated first exons, one expressed in liver and testis,
and the other expressed in brain. The 698-amino acid CPEB3 protein has
an N-terminal glutamine-rich domain, followed by 2 RNA recognition
motifs and a C-terminal zinc finger domain. The glutamine-rich domain is
not present in other CPEBs.

- CPEB3 Ribozyme

Using an in vitro self-selection technique, Salehi-Ashtiani et al.
(2006) identified self-cleaving ribozymes associated with olfactory
receptor OR4K15, insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF1R; 147370),
a LINE-1 retrotransposon (see LRE1; 151626), and CPEB3. The CPEB3
ribozyme is located within intron 3 and is structurally related to
ribozymes from human hepatitis delta virus (HDV), a single-stranded RNA
satellite virus for hepatitis B infection (see 610424). EST database
analysis and RT-PCR of human and mouse total RNA extracts indicated that
the CPEB3 ribozyme is expressed and self-cleaves in vivo.
Salehi-Ashtiani et al. (2006) identified the CPEB3 ribozyme only in
mammalian vertebrates. They proposed that HDV ribozymes and the CPEB3
ribozyme are evolutionarily related, and that HDV arose from the human
transcriptome.

GENE FUNCTION

- CPEB3 Ribozyme

Salehi-Ashtiani et al. (2006) narrowed the active sequence of the CPEB3
ribozyme to 81 nucleotides. This 81-nucleotide construct cleaved to
produce a 9-nucleotide upstream fragment containing a 2-prime-to-3-prime
cyclic phosphate, and a 72-nucleotide downstream fragment containing a
5-prime terminal hydroxyl that could be phosphorylated with
polynucleotide kinase (PNKP; 605610). The ribozyme had a low Mg(2+)
requirement, and was also active in the presence of Mn(2+) and Ca(2+).
Ribozyme activity was almost constant between pH 5.5 and 8.5, suggesting
the presence of 2 functional groups.

GENE STRUCTURE

Salehi-Ashtiani et al. (2006) reported that the CPEB3 gene spans 242 kb
and contains 11 exons, including 2 alternatively spliced, untranslated
first exons. Intron 3 spans 46 kb and contains a ribozyme.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the CPEB3 gene
to chromosome 10.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.;
Miyajima, N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins
in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 63-70, 1999.

2. Salehi-Ashtiani, K.; Luptak, A.; Litovchick, A.; Szostak, J. W.
: A genomewide search for ribozymes reveals an HDV-like sequence in
the human CPEB3 gene. Science 313: 1788-1792, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/29/2006

EDITED mgross: 11/29/2006

602854	TITLE *602854 PROTEASOME SUBUNIT, ALPHA-TYPE, 1; PSMA1
;;PROTEASOME SUBUNIT NU;;
HC2;;
PROS30
DESCRIPTION DeMartino et al. (1991) cloned the PSMA1 gene, termed 'subunit nu' by
them. The cDNA encoded a 263-amino acid polypeptide. The calculated and
observed molecular masses are 29.5 kD and 35 kD, respectively. Northern
blot analysis revealed an 1.4-kb mRNA in human placenta and HeLa cells.
Coux et al. (1996) noted that 2 proteins, HC2 (29.5 kD) and Pros30 (30.2
kD), are encoded by the PSMA1 gene.

Coux et al. (1996) reviewed the structures and functions of the 20S
proteasome subunits. The alpha subunits comprise the outer rings of the
proteasome. Some alpha subunits contain a functional nuclear
localization signal; proteasomes are found in both the nuclear and
cytoplasmic compartments of the cell. Alpha subunits may constitute a
physical barrier that limits access of cytosolic proteins into the inner
proteolytic chamber.

Bey et al. (1993) mapped the PSMA1 gene to chromosome 11p15.1 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Bey, F.; Silva Pereira, I.; Coux, O.; Viegas-Pequignot, E.; Recillas
Targa, F.; Nothwang, H. G.; Dutrillaux, B.; Scherrer, K.: The prosomal
RNA-binding protein p27K is a member of the alpha-type human prosomal
gene family. Molec. Gen. Genet. 237: 193-205, 1993.

2. Coux, O.; Tanaka, K.; Goldberg, A. L.: Structure and functions
of the 20S and 26S proteasomes. Ann. Rev. Biochem. 65: 801-847,
1996.

3. DeMartino, G. N.; Orth, K.; McCullough, M. L.; Lee, L. W.; Munn,
T. Z.; Moomaw, C. R.; Dawson, P. A.; Slaughter, C. A.: The primary
structures of four subunits of the human, high molecular weight proteinase,
macropain (proteasome), are distinct but homologous. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1079: 29-38, 1991.

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 7/15/1998

EDITED kayiaros: 07/13/1999
alopez: 7/16/1998

608510	TITLE *608510 SH2 DOMAIN-CONTAINING 1B; SH2D1B
;;EWS/FLI1-ACTIVATED TRANSCRIPT 2; EAT2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

By binding phosphotyrosines through its free SRC (190090) homology-2
(SH2) domain, EAT2 regulates signal transduction through receptors
expressed on the surface of antigen-presenting cells (Morra et al.,
2001).

CLONING

By representational difference analysis of NIH 3T3 mouse fibroblasts
expressing the EWS (133450)/FLI1 (193067) fusion protein, an aberrant
transcription factor, Thompson et al. (1996) cloned mouse Eat2. The
deduced 132-amino acid Eat2 protein consists principally of an SH2
domain flanked by short N and C termini. Northern blot analysis detected
a major transcript of about 1.5 kb in mouse spleen and lung, and these
tissues also expressed larger transcripts at weaker levels. A band of
about 1.2 kb was expressed at low levels in liver, skeletal muscle, and
kidney. No expression was detected in heart, brain, and testis. RT-PCR
detected EAT2 transcripts in normal human peripheral blood lymphocytes
and thymus. Expression was also detected in Ewing sarcoma (612219) cell
lines containing either EWS/FLI1 or EWS/ERG (165080) fusion genes, as
well as in some tumor cell lines without the EWS/FLI1 fusion gene.

Morra et al. (2001) cloned human EAT2 by PCR of a splenocyte cDNA
library. The deduced protein contains 132 amino acids. RT-PCR detected
Eat2 in 2 mouse B-leukemia cell lines, purified B lymphocytes and
macrophages, and peritoneal exudate macrophages from mice lacking T and
B cells. Expression was not detected in thymus or a mouse T-leukemia
cell line. Human EAT2 was amplified in 5 of 6 B-lymphoma or
lymphoblastoid cell lines tested.

Tangye et al. (2002) cloned EAT2 from a spleen cDNA library. The EAT2
protein shares 64% and 45% identity with mouse Eat2 and human SAP
(300490), respectively, and it has a calculated molecular mass of 15.3
kD.

GENE FUNCTION

Thompson et al. (1996) created NIH 3T3 cells containing a
transformation-competent, inducible EWS/FLI1 transgene. Abundant
EWS/FLI1 transcripts were detected within 2 hours of induction, and
endogenous Eat2 expression was detected 4 hours after induction.
Expression of Eat2 also correlated with transformation of NIH 3T3 cells
by chimeric proteins related to EWS/FLI1, but not by unrelated genes. By
in vitro binding assays, Thompson et al. (1996) demonstrated that mouse
Eat2 bound phosphotyrosine in a manner dependent on the invariant
arginine in the FLVRES motif of the SH2 domain.

Using a variation of the yeast 2-hybrid assay, Morra et al. (2001)
determined that mouse Eat2 bound to the cytoplasmic tail of the
lymphocyte antigen CD150 (603492). Immunoprecipitation of cotransfected
COS-7 cells confirmed this interaction and indicated that Eat2 also
bound the related receptors CD84 (604513), CD229 (600684), and CD244
(605554). Eat2 binding blocked SHP2 (176876) recruitment to these
receptors. Eat2 did not bind CD150 and CD229 when the critical tyrosine
was mutated to phenylalanine. Overexpression of Eat2 induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of the CD150-related receptors.

Most CD2 family proteins interact with SAP via specific tyrosine-based
motifs, but B cells that express CD84 do not express SAP. Therefore,
Tangye et al. (2002) predicted that a functional SAP homolog exists in B
lymphocytes and suggested EAT2 as a candidate. Immunoprecipitation
analysis of CD84/SAP- and CD84/EAT2-transfected cells showed that
tyrosine-phosphorylated CD84 can associate with both SAP and EAT2.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Morra et al. (2001) analyzed crystals of mouse Eat2 grown with a
14-amino acid segment identical to the cytoplasmic tail of human CD150
with phosphorylated tyr281. The phosphotyrosine was coordinated in an
unusual 3-pronged fashion in which the conventional 2-pronged
interaction observed in other SH2 domain complexes was present with a
third interaction with amino acids N-terminal to tyr281.

GENE STRUCTURE

Morra et al. (2001) determined that the EAT2 gene contains 4 exons and
spans about 14.7 kb. It also has an alternative exon 3a. The 5-prime UTR
contains a canonical TATA box, and the 3-prime UTR contains 3 ARE
recognition sites.

MAPPING

By FISH, Thompson et al. (1996) mapped the EAT2 gene to chromosome 1q22.

REFERENCE 1. Morra, M.; Lu, J.; Poy, F.; Martin, M.; Sayos, J.; Calpe, S.; Gullo,
C.; Howie, D.; Rietdijk, S.; Thompson, A.; Coyle, A. J.; Denny, C.;
Yaffe, M. B.; Engel, P.; Eck, M. J.; Terhorst, C.: Structural basis
for the interaction of the free SH2 domain EAT-2 with SLAM receptors
in hematopoietic cells. EMBO J. 20: 5840-5852, 2001.

2. Tangye, S. G.; van de Weerdt, B. C. M.; Avery, D. T.; Hodgkin,
P. D.: CD84 is up-regulated on a major population of human memory
B cells and recruits the SH2 domain containing proteins SAP and EAT-2. Europ.
J. Immun. 32: 1640-1649, 2002.

3. Thompson, A. D.; Braun, B. S.; Arvand, A.; Stewart, S. D.; May,
W. A.; Chen, E.; Korenberg, J.; Denny, C.: EAT-2 is a novel SH2 domain
containing protein that is up regulated by Ewing's sarcoma EWS/FLI1
fusion gene. Oncogene 13: 2649-2658, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/5/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/5/2004

EDITED carol: 08/05/2008
terry: 6/28/2005
ckniffin: 5/26/2004
mgross: 3/5/2004

612326	TITLE *612326 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR 25; TCF25
;;NUCLEAR LOCALIZED PROTEIN 1; NULP1;;
KIAA1049
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TCF25 is a member of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of
transcription factors that are important in embryonic development (Steen
and Lindholm, 2008).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult human brain
cDNA library, Kikuno et al. (1999) cloned TCF25, which they designated
KIAA1049. The deduced protein contains 550 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA
detected ubiquitous expression in all tissues and specific brain regions
examined.

By RNA fingerprinting of mouse kidney at various developmental stages,
followed by RACE, Olsson et al. (2002) cloned mouse Tcf25, which they
called Nulp1. The deduced 625-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 70.9 kD. Northern blot analysis detected expression
during mouse embryonic stages that decreased in the corresponding adult
mouse tissues, with the exception of sustained levels in adult brain.

Cai et al. (2006) cloned human TCF25 by EST database screening using a
conserved bHLH sequence as probe, followed by 5- and 3-prime RACE. The
deduced 676-amino acids human protein has a calculated molecular mass of
76.7 kD and contains an N-terminal bHLH domain and C-terminal DUF654
region with polar and hydrophobic residues. TCF25 shares 89% identity
with its mouse ortholog. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.3-kb
transcript in all human embryonic tissues examined. Immunofluorescence
studies localized TCF25 to the nucleus.

Using RT-PCR and immunoblot assays, Steen and Lindholm (2008) detected
TCF25 mRNA and protein, respectively, in human, mouse, and rat tumor
lines.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a GAL4-luciferase assay and other studies, Cai et al. (2006)
showed that TCF25 inhibited transcription and that transcriptional
repressor activity was mediated by the DUF654 region, which acts by
increasing histone deacetylation at the promoter region of the serum
response factor (SRF; 600589).

Steen and Lindholm (2008) showed that TCF25 overexpression induced
increased cell death in human osteosarcoma Saos2 cells with increased
DNA fragmentation. Overexpression decreased cell viability by 20% in N2A
neuroblastoma cells, as measured by MTT assay. GST pull-down and
coimmunoprecipitation assays showed that TCF25 bound preferentially to
XIAP (300079) in cells undergoing cell death.

GENE STRUCTURE

Cai et al. (2006) determined that the TCF25 gene contains 18 exons
spanning 37.775 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Kikuno et al. (1999) mapped the TCF25 gene
to chromosome 16. By genomic sequence analysis, Cai et al. (2006) mapped
the TCF25 gene to chromosome 16q24.3.

REFERENCE 1. Cai, Z.; Wang, Y.; Yu, W.; Xiao, J.; Li, Y.; Liu, L.; Zhu, C.;
Tan, K.; Deng, Y.; Yuan, W.; Liu, M.; Wu, X.: hnulp1, a basic helix-loop-helix
protein with a novel transcriptional repressive domain, inhibits transcriptional
activity of serum response factor. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 343:
973-981, 2006.

2. Kikuno, R.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XIV. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 6: 197-205, 1999.

3. Olsson, M.; Durbeej, M.; Ekblom, P.; Hjalt, T.: Nulp1, a novel
basic helix-loop-helix protein expressed broadly during early embryonic
organogenesis and prominently in developing dorsal root ganglion. Cell
Tissue Res. 308: 361-370, 2002.

4. Steen, H.; Lindholm, D.: Nuclear localized protein-1 (Nulp1) increases
cell death of human osteosarcoma cells and binds X-linked inhibitor
of apoptosis protein. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 366: 432-437,
2008.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 9/29/2008

EDITED wwang: 01/05/2011
wwang: 9/29/2008

158380	TITLE *158380 ECOTROPIC VIRAL INTEGRATION SITE 2A; EVI2A
;;MURINE MYELOID LEUKEMIA-ASSOCIATED GENE EVI2A, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF;;
MURINE MYELOID LEUKEMIA-ASSOCIATED GENE EVI2, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; EVI2;;
EVDA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

O'Connell et al. (1989, 1990) demonstrated by genetic linkage and by
somatic cell hybrid and pulsed field gel electrophoresis that EVI2
(EVI2A), the human homolog of the mouse myeloid leukemia-associated gene
Evi2, maps between 2 breakpoints on the proximal part of 17q that define
the neurofibromatosis I region (162200).

Cawthon et al. (1990) isolated EVI2A cDNAs from human bone marrow and
frontal cortex cDNA libraries. The deduced 232-amino acid protein is
predicted to be a glycosylated protein with a single membrane-spanning
domain, a leucine zipper motif, and a cytoplasmic domain. There is a
high degree of conservation between the human and mouse EVI2A proteins.

MAPPING

Viskochil et al. (1991) reported that 3 genes, EVI2A, OMGP (164345), and
EVI2B, are embedded within an intron of NF1 on chromosome 17q11.2. All 3
genes had the same transcriptional orientation, which was opposite to
that of the NF1 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Cawthon, R. M.; O'Connell, P.; Buchberg, A. M.; Viskochil, D.;
Weiss, R. B.; Culver, M.; Stevens, J.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N.
G.; White, R.: Identification and characterization of transcripts
from the neurofibromatosis 1 region: the sequence and genomic structure
of EVI2 and mapping of other transcripts. Genomics 7: 555-565, 1990.

2. O'Connell, P.; Buchberg, A.; Cawthon, R. M.; Culver, M.; Stevens,
J.; Viskochil, D.; Carey, J. C.; Fountain, J.; Wallace, M.; Jenkins,
N.; Copeland, N.; Collins, F. S.; White, R.: The human homologue
of the murine Evi-2 oncogene lies between von Recklinghausen NF translocation
breakpoints. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 45 (suppl.): A210 only,
1989.

3. O'Connell, P.; Viskochil, D.; Buchberg, A. M.; Fountain, J.; Cawthon,
R. M.; Culver, M.; Stevens, J.; Rich, D. C.; Ledbetter, D. H.; Wallace,
M.; Carey, J. C.; Jenkins, N. A.; Copeland, N. G.; Collins, F. S.;
White, R.: The human homolog of murine Evi-2 lies between two von
Recklinghausen neurofibromatosis translocations. Genomics 7: 547-554,
1990.

4. Viskochil, D.; Cawthon, R.; O'Connell, P.; Xu, G. F.; Stevens,
J.; Culver, M.; Carey, J.; White, R.: The gene encoding the oligodendrocyte-myelin
glycoprotein is embedded within the neurofibromatosis type 1 gene. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 11: 906-912, 1991.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/6/1989

EDITED carol: 12/02/2009
psherman: 11/20/1998
warfield: 4/12/1994
carol: 11/24/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/28/1992
carol: 8/5/1991
carol: 8/22/1990

610301	TITLE *610301 TRANSMEMBRANE PROTEIN 57; TMEM57
;;MACOILIN;;
FLJ10747
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kumada et al. (2002) cloned a partial cDNA for mouse Tmem57. PCR
detected Tmem57 in all mouse tissues examined. Expression was high in
testis, lung, spleen, and pancreas, intermediate in brain, thymus, and
liver, and low in heart, kidney, small intestine, and muscle.
Fluorescence-tagged Tmem57 accumulated in nuclei of transfected HeLa
cells.

Kuvbachieva et al. (2004) cloned mouse Tmem57, which they called C61,
and identified human TMEM57 by database analysis. Both deduced proteins
contain 664 amino acids and share 99% identity. TMEM57 has 5 domains,
including an N-terminal LAG1 (606919) domain and a central ERM (see
123900)-myosin filament (see 601478) domain. The LAG1 domain contains 3
putative transmembrane domains. In situ hybridization of mouse embryos
showed that Tmem57 was brain specific. It was primarily associated with
postmigratory neurons and less so with neural proliferating cells, and
Tmem57 expression was progressively downregulated during brain
maturation. Fluorescence-tagged Tmem57 outlined the nuclear membrane
when expressed in nonneuronal cells. In primary hippocampal neurons,
Tmem57 was found in neurites and their terminals, and it partially
colocalized with synapsin-1 (SYN1; 313440), a presynaptic marker.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kuvbachieva et al. (2004) determined that the mouse and human TMEM57
genes contain 11 coding exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Kuvbachieva et al. (2004) mapped the
TMEM57 gene to chromosome 1p36.13-p35.1. Kumada et al. (2002) mapped the
mouse Tmem57 gene to a region of chromosome 4 that shares homology of
synteny with human chromosome 1p.

REFERENCE 1. Kumada, M.; Iwamoto, S.; Kamesaki, T.; Okuda, H.; Kajii, E.: Entire
sequence of a mouse chromosomal segment containing the gene Rhced
and a comparative analysis of the homologous human sequence. Gene 299:
165-172, 2002.

2. Kuvbachieva, A.; Bestel, A.-M.; Tissir, F.; Maloum, I.; Guimiot,
F.; Ramoz, N.; Bourgeois, F.; Moalic, J.-M.; Goffinet, A. M.; Simmoneau,
M.: Identification of a novel brain-specific and reelin-regulated
gene that encodes a protein colocalized with synapsin. Europ. J.
Neurosci. 20: 603-610, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/8/2006

EDITED mgross: 08/08/2006

614082	TITLE #614082 FANCONI ANEMIA, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP G; FANCG
DESCRIPTION A number sign (#) is used with this entry because Fanconi anemia of
complementation group G (FANCG) is caused by homozygous or compound
heterozygous mutation in the FANCG gene on chromosome 9p13.

DESCRIPTION

Fanconi anemia (FA) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous
disorder that causes genomic instability. Characteristic clinical
features include developmental abnormalities in major organ systems,
early-onset bone marrow failure, and a high predisposition to cancer.
The cellular hallmark of FA is hypersensitivity to DNA crosslinking
agents and high frequency of chromosomal aberrations pointing to a
defect in DNA repair (summary by Deakyne and Mazin, 2011).

For additional general information and a discussion of genetic
heterogeneity of Fanconi anemia, see 227650.

CLINICAL FEATURES

In 20 patients with FANCG, 4 of whom had been reported by de Winter et
al. (1998), Demuth et al. (2000) found that the phenotypic heterogeneity
characteristic of FA was clearly demonstrated, even within sib pairs
showing discordance for several symptoms. The average age of hematologic
onset in this group of patients was 6.1 years, not significantly
different from that found in other FA complementation groups.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In patients with Fanconi anemia of complementation group G, de Winter et
al. (1998) identified mutations in the XRCC9 (FANCG) gene
(602956.0001-602956.0002).

Demuth et al. (2000) identified 18 different mutations in the FANCG gene
in a panel of 20 FANCG patients, 4 of whom had been reported by de
Winter et al. (1998). By using SSCP analysis and sequencing, they
identified 39 of 40 mutant alleles. Most of the mutations (94%) were
expected to result in protein truncation, and only 1 missense mutation
was detected. The 18 mutations showed no obvious clustering within the
gene.

Auerbach et al. (2003) studied the distribution of FANCG mutations in
the populations covered by the International Fanconi Anemia Registry.
They found the most common FANCG mutations were IVS8-2A-G (602956.0005),
seen in 7 Portuguese-Brazilian probands; IVS11+1G-C (602956.0006), seen
in 7 French-Acadian probands; 1794-1803del10 (602956.0007), seen in 7
European probands; and IVS3+1G-C (602956.0003), seen in 5 Korean or
Japanese probands. Auerbach et al. (2003) suggested that the
Portuguese-Brazilian, French-Acadian, and Korean/Japanese mutations were
present in a founding member of each of these populations.

REFERENCE 1. Auerbach, A. D.; Greenbaum, J.; Pujara, K.; Batish, S. D.; Bitencourt,
M. A.; Kokemohr, I.; Schneider, H.; Lobitz, S.; Pasquini, R.; Giampietro,
P. F.; Hanenberg, H.; Levran, O.: Spectrum of sequence variation
in the FANCG gene: an International Fanconi Anemia Registry (IFAR)
study. Hum. Mutat. 21: 158-168, 2003. Note: Erratum: Hum. Mutat.
22: 255 only, 2003.

2. Deakyne, J. S.; Mazin, A. V.: Fanconi anemia: at the crossroads
of DNA repair. Biochemistry 76: 36-48, 2011.

3. Demuth, I.; Wlodarski, M.; Tipping, A. J.; Morgan, N. V.; de Winter,
J. P.; Thiel, M.; Grasl, S.; Schindler, D.; D'Andrea, A. D.; Altay,
C.; Kayserili, H.; Zatterdale, A.; Kunze, J.; Ebell, W.; Mathew, C.
G.; Joenje, H.; Sperling, K.; Digweed, M.: Spectrum of mutations
in the Fanconi anaemia group G gene, FANCG/XRCC9. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 8: 861-868, 2000.

4. de Winter, J. P.; Waisfisz, Q.; Rooimans, M. A.; van Berkel, C.
G. M.; Bosnoyan-Collins, L.; Alon, N.; Carreau, M.; Bender, O.; Demuth,
I.; Schindler, D.; Pronk, J. C.; Arwert, F.; Hoehn, H.; Digweed, M.;
Buchwald, M.; Joenje, H.: The Fanconi anaemia group G gene FANCG
is identical with XRCC9. Nature Genet. 20: 281-283, 1998.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 7/11/2011

EDITED carol: 03/20/2013
terry: 7/12/2011
carol: 7/11/2011

604720	TITLE *604720 TRANSFERRIN RECEPTOR 2; TFR2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

While attempting to isolate genes encoding new transcriptional factors
from a TF-1 (erythroid leukemia) cell cDNA library, Kawabata et al.
(1999) cloned an 831-bp human cDNA fragment that had significant amino
acid homology to the middle portion of the classic transferrin receptor
protein (TFRC; 190010). Using 5-prime/3-prime RACE, they cloned a
full-length, 2.9-kb cDNA, which they designated TFR2. They identified 2
transcripts: a 2.9-kb transcript, called alpha, and an approximately
2.5-kb transcript, called beta, which was cloned from an HL60 (myeloid
leukemia) cell cDNA library. The alpha form predicts an 801-amino acid
type II membrane protein that shares 45% identity and 66% similarity in
its extracellular domain with TFRC. The beta form, which may be an
alternative product of splicing or promoter usage, lacks the
amino-terminal portion of TFR2-alpha, including the putative
transmembrane domain. Northern blot analysis showed that the alpha form
is predominantly expressed in the liver and also in the K562
erythromegakaryocytic cell line; no expression of the beta form was
found. By RT-PCR analysis, TFR2-alpha was expressed in the liver,
spleen, lung, muscle, prostate, and peripheral blood mononuclear cells,
whereas expression of TFR-beta was found in all tissues tested.
Expression of human TFR2 conferred binding of holotransferrin and uptake
of transferrin-bound iron to a Chinese hamster ovary cell line lacking
endogenous TFRC. Kawabata et al. (1999) concluded that TFR2-alpha may be
a second transferrin receptor that can mediate cellular iron transport.

GENE FUNCTION

The majority of hepatic iron uptake under normal circumstances is
transferrin-mediated. However, expression of TFRC in hepatocytes, as in
other nonreticuloendothelial cell types, is downregulated in response to
increased intracellular iron. As a consequence, TFRC expression in liver
is undetectable in hereditary hemochromatosis (235200) patients with
hepatic iron loading. Nonetheless, hepatic iron loading in
hemochromatosis patients is progressive. Fleming et al. (2000) provided
support for a mechanism that involves the uptake of transferrin-bound
iron by TFR2. By screening a murine EST database for Tfrc sequences,
they identified a cDNA encoding a protein homologous to murine Tfrc.
They characterized the murine TFR2 ortholog and compared expression of
murine Tfrc and Tfr2 in normal mice, mice with iron deficiency, and mice
with iron overload. Unlike Tfrc, the Tfr2 transcript was highly
expressed in hepatocytes, was not regulated by tissue iron status, and
was not downregulated in a murine model of hereditary hemochromatosis.
From these observations, Fleming et al. (2000) proposed that TFR2
continues to mediate uptake of transferrin-bound iron by the liver after
TFRC is downregulated by iron overload, and thus may explain increased
susceptibility of the liver to iron loading in hereditary
hemochromatosis.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kawabata et al. (1999) determined the genomic structure of the TFR2
gene. The alpha transcript contains 18 exons. The beta transcript lacks
exons 1 through 3 and has an additional 142 bases at the 5-prime end of
exon 4.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Kawabata et al. (1999) mapped the TFR2
gene to chromosome 7q22.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Camaschella et al. (2000) identified a premature termination mutation at
codon 250 in the TFR2 gene in homozygosity in a Sicilian family
segregating hemochromatosis type 3 (HFE3; 604250). The Y250X mutation
(604720.0001) identified by Camaschella et al. (2000) is located in a
region shared by both the alpha and beta transcripts of TFR2. A
phenotype of iron overload associated with the absence of the functional
gene suggested TFR2 is more likely involved in iron regulation rather
than iron uptake. Although TFR2 is highly expressed in an erythroid cell
line, none of the HFE3 patients that they studied showed erythrocyte
abnormalities. Rather, the patients tolerated long-term phlebotomies
without developing anemia. Thus, Camaschella et al. (2000) concluded
that TFR2, in contrast to TFRC, is not essential during erythroid
maturation.

Feder et al. (1996) found that about 15% of heriditary hemochromatosis
patients of northern European descent do not carry the C282Y mutation of
the HFE gene (613609.0001). Mattman et al. (2002) studied a group of
non-C282Y hemochromatosis patients and identified several sequence
variants, including a homozygous missense mutation in exon 17 of the
TFR2 gene, which resulted in a gln690-to-pro amino acid change
(604720.0005).

Hofmann et al. (2002) performed mutation analysis of the TFR2 gene in
patients with atypical hemochromatosis. They also questioned whether
differences in penetrance of the HFE C282Y mutation (613609.0001) were
associated with mutations in the TFR2 gene. They studied sib pairs
homozygous for cys282-to-tyr with a discordant phenotype. The most
common discordance between homozygous sibs was in serum transferrin
concentration. Many of these patients, however, also exhibited
significant differences in liver fibrosis and liver enzyme levels. They
also studied individuals who were not homozygous for C282Y with evidence
of iron excess, and other atypical groups. In a pair of brothers
homozygous for the C282Y mutation, they found an arg455-to-gln mutation
in TFR2 (604720.0004) only in the brother with liver fibrosis,
suggesting that TFR2 functions as a modifier for penetrance of the
hemochromatosis phenotype when present with homozygosity for C282Y.
Unlike TFR1 expression, TFR2 expression is not downregulated in the
liver of iron-loaded mice (Fleming et al., 2000). The screening for
mutations in all 18 exons indicated that mutations of the TFR2 gene are
rare.

ANIMAL MODEL

To characterize the role of TFR2 in iron homeostasis, Fleming et al.
(2002) generated a premature stop codon (Y245X), which was introduced by
targeted mutagenesis in the murine Tfr2 coding sequence. Codon 245 is
the mouse ortholog of codon 250, which is involved in the C250Y mutation
(604720.0001) of TFR2 in human hemochromatosis, and is located in a
region that is conserved between the mouse and human genomes. Fleming et
al. (2002) observed that by 4 weeks of age, mice homozygous for the
Y245X mutation developed periportal hepatic iron loading, splenic iron
sparing, and elevated serum transferrin saturations. Thus, the mutant
mice seemed to provide a faithful model for the abnormalities in iron
homeostasis observed in patients with loss of TFR2. Heterozygous mice
did not differ in any measured parameter from wildtype mice.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 3
TFR2, TYR250TER

In 2 families from Sicily who met diagnostic criteria for
hemochromatosis (604250) but were not linked to HFE, one of which was
consanguineous, Camaschella et al. (2000) identified a C-to-G
transversion in exon 6 at position 750 of the TFR2 cDNA sequence,
resulting in a tyrosine (TAC)-to-stop (TAG) substitution at residue 250
(Y250X). This substitution created a MaeI site. All affected members of
the consanguineous family were homozygous for Y250X, whereas obligate
carriers were heterozygous. One patient in the nonconsanguineous family
was homozygous for this mutation. Camaschella et al. (2000) did not find
the Y250X mutation in 100 normal chromosomes or in 12 hemochromatosis
patients who did not have mutations in HFE.

.0002
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 3
TFR2, 1-BP INS, 84C

In all affected members of a large inbred family in Campania in southern
Italy segregating hemochromatosis (604250), Roetto et al. (2001) found a
1-bp insertion of a cytosine residue in homozygous state in exon 2 in a
polyC tract (84-88 insC). The mutation resulted in a frameshift followed
by a premature stop codon, a glu60-to-ter (E60X) substitution. Because
of consanguinity, a pseudodominant pedigree pattern was observed in an
affected father and his 3 affected children in one branch of the family.
Heterozygosity was not associated with iron overload, even in
individuals also heterozygous for H63D (613609.0002) at the HFE locus or
for the beta-thalassemia trait.

.0003
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 3
TFR2, MET172LYS

In a family in which the proband had severe hemochromatosis (604250),
Roetto et al. (2001) found homozygosity for a T-to-A transversion
(515T-A) in exon 4 of TFR2 cDNA, resulting in a met172-to-lys (M172K)
substitution of the protein. The proband had cirrhosis, hypogonadism,
and cardiac disease. He had inherited beta-thalassemia in heterozygous
state from his mother.

.0004
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 1, MODIFIER OF
TFR2, ARG455GLN

Hofmann et al. (2002) studied 2 brothers who were homozygous for the
common hemochromatosis-causing mutation of the HFE gene, cys282 to tyr
(613609.0001). Direct nucleotide sequencing found a G-to-A transversion
at nucleotide 1391, resulting in an arg455-to-gln (R455Q) amino acid
change in the TFR2 gene. The R455Q mutation was present in only 1 of the
brothers homozygous for C282Y; that brother had evidence of liver
fibrosis, whereas the other brother did not.

.0005
HEMOCHROMATOSIS, TYPE 3
TFR2, GLN690PRO

In a Portuguese man with severe hemochromatosis (604250) and in 2 family
members, Mattman et al. (2002) found a gln690-to-pro (Q690P) mutation in
the TFR2 gene. The patient presented at 29 years of age with fatigue,
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, hyperpigmentation, mild elevation of
liver transaminases, and idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura. He had
markedly elevated serum iron indices and had had more than 12 g of iron
removed via phlebotomy in the previous 4 years. Additional hematologic
abnormalities included mild normocytic anemia and lymphopenia. He was
heterozygous for the H63D mutation in the HFE gene (613609.0002).
Mattman et al. (2002) stated that this patient was the only one of 89
non-C282Y hereditary chromatosis patients of predominately mixed
European descent in whom mutation of the TFR2 gene had been found.

REFERENCE 1. Camaschella, C.; Roetto, A.; Cali, A.; De Gobbi, M.; Garozzo, G.;
Carella, M.; Majorano, N.; Totaro, A.; Gasparini, P.: The gene TFR2
is mutated in a new type of haemochromatosis mapping to 7q22. Nature
Genet. 25: 14-15, 2000.

2. Feder, J. N.; Gnirke, A.; Thomas, W.; Tsuchihashi, Z.; Ruddy, D.
A.; Basava, A.; Dormishian, F.; Domingo, R., Jr.; Ellis, M. C.; Fullan,
A.; Hinton, L. M.; Jones, N. L.; and 21 others: A novel MHC class
I-like gene is mutated in patients with hereditary haemochromatosis. Nature
Genet. 13: 399-408, 1996.

3. Fleming, R. E.; Ahmann, J. R.; Migas, M. C.; Waheed, A.; Koeffler,
H. P.; Kawabata, H.; Britton, R. S.; Bacon, B. R.; Sly, W. S.: Targeted
mutagenesis of the murine transferrin receptor-2 gene produces hemochromatosis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 10653-10658, 2002.

4. Fleming, R. E.; Migas, M. C.; Holden, C. C.; Waheed, A.; Britton,
R. S.; Tomatsu, S.; Bacon, B. R.; Sly, W. S.: Transferrin receptor
2: continued expression in mouse liver in the face of iron overload
and in hereditary hemochromatosis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 2214-2219,
2000.

5. Hofmann, W.-K.; Tong, X.-J.; Ajioka, R. S.; Kushner, J. P.; Koeffler,
H. P.: Mutation analysis of transferrin-receptor 2 in patients with
atypical hemochromatosis. (Letter) Blood 100: 1099-1100, 2002.

6. Kawabata, H.; Yang, R.; Hirama, T.; Vuong, P. T.; Kawano, S.; Gombart,
A. F.; Koeffler, H. P.: Molecular cloning of transferrin receptor
2: a new member of the transferrin receptor-like family. J. Biol.
Chem. 274: 20826-20832, 1999.

7. Mattman, A.; Huntsman, D.; Lockitch, G.; Langlois, S.; Buskard,
N.; Ralston, D.; Butterfield, Y.; Rodrigues, P.; Jones, S.; Porto,
G.; Marra, M.; De Sousa, M.; Vatcher, G.: Transferrin receptor 2
(TfR2) and HFE mutational analysis in non-C282Y iron overload: identification
of a novel TfR2 mutation. Blood 100: 1075-1077, 2002.

8. Roetto, A.; Totaro, A.; Piperno, A.; Piga, A.; Longo, F.; Garozzo,
G.; Cali, A.; De Gobbi, M.; Gasparini, P.; Camaschella, C.: New mutations
inactivating transferrin receptor 2 in hemochromatosis type 3. Blood 97:
2555-2560, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/6/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/4/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/27/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/17/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/27/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 4/4/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/23/2000

EDITED carol: 10/21/2010
carol: 3/17/2006
terry: 9/8/2003
cwells: 3/6/2003
terry: 3/4/2003
cwells: 10/1/2002
carol: 9/27/2002
mcapotos: 8/7/2001
mcapotos: 7/26/2001
terry: 7/17/2001
alopez: 7/9/2001
carol: 7/6/2000
alopez: 4/28/2000
terry: 4/27/2000
carol: 4/6/2000
carol: 4/4/2000
mgross: 3/24/2000
mgross: 3/23/2000

180465	TITLE *180465 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S25; RPS25
DESCRIPTION The mammalian ribosome is composed of 4 RNA species (see 180450) and
approximately 80 different proteins.

Li et al. (1991) isolated a full-length cDNA clone encoding human
ribosomal protein S25 (RPS25). The cDNA encoded a polypeptide of 125
amino acids with a deduced relative molecular weight of 13,750.

Through generation of sequence tagged sites for chromosome 11, Miwa et
al. (1993) found that 1 cosmid marker contained part of the RPS25 gene.
Imai et al. (1994) further validated its identity and, by direct
fluorescence in situ hybridization, mapped it to 11q23.3. Kenmochi et
al. (1998) confirmed the RPS25 mapping assignment reported by Imai et
al. (1994).

REFERENCE 1. Imai, T.; Sudo, K.; Miwa, T.: Assignment of the human ribosomal
protein S25 gene (RPS25) to chromosome 11q23.3 by sequence analysis
of the marker D11S456. Genomics 20: 142-143, 1994.

2. Kenmochi, N.; Kawaguchi, T.; Rozen, S.; Davis, E.; Goodman, N.;
Hudson, T. J.; Tanaka, T.; Page, D. C.: A map of 75 human ribosomal
protein genes. Genome Res. 8: 509-523, 1998.

3. Li, M.; Latoud, C.; Center, M. S.: Cloning and sequencing a cDNA
encoding human ribosomal protein S25. Gene 107: 329-333, 1991.

4. Miwa, T.; Sudo, K.; Nakamura, Y.; Imai, T.: Fifty sequenced-tagged
sites on human chromosome 11. Genomics 17: 211-214, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Patti M. Sherman - updated: 4/6/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/13/1992

EDITED carol: 04/16/1999
carol: 4/6/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/13/1992

