600303	TITLE *600303 RAP GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 1; RAPGEF1
;;GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE-RELEASING FACTOR 2; GRF2;;
CRK SH3-BINDING GNRP; C3G
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By Far Western screening of a human spleen lambda-gt11 expression
library using the SH3 domain of CRK (164762) as probe, Tanaka et al.
(1994) isolated a cDNA clone corresponding to RAPGEF1, which they called
C3G. Additional clones from human spleen and placenta cDNA libraries
were obtained by plaque hybridization with the (32)P-labeled spleen cDNA
clone. The deduced 1,077-amino acid protein has a predicted molecular
mass of 121 kD and contains a central proline-rich SH3-binding domain
and a C-terminal region homologous to guanine nucleotide-releasing
proteins (GNRP) for RAS, such as RASGRF1 (606600) and SOS1 (182530).
Northern blot analysis of human adult and fetal tissues detected a
7.5-kb transcript in all tissues examined with highest expression in
skeletal muscle, placenta, and fetal heart and brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Tanaka et al. (1994) showed that CRK and C3G coimmunoprecipitated in
transfected rabbit kidney cells. Deletion analysis showed that the CRK
SH3 domain interacted with a 50-amino acid proline-rich sequence in C3G.
The authors suggested that the complex of C3G and CRK or C3G and
GRB2/ASH (108355) transduces signals from tyrosine kinases to RAS in a
number of different tissues.

The RAS-CRK-RAP1 (179520) cellular signal transduction system is
regulated by guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). Transcription
of C3G is activated by the CRK adaptor protein. Hirata et al. (2004)
documented the amplification of C3G in 5 of 18 primary nonsmall cell
lung cancers examined and its increased expression in 18 of 28 tumors in
comparison to corresponding noncancerous lung tissues. The data were
interpreted as indicating that amplification and increased expression of
the C3G gene may play some role in human lung carcinogenesis through
derangement of the CRK-RAP1 signaling pathway.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Takai et al. (1994) mapped the
RAPGEF1 gene to chromosome 9q34.3, where chromosomal changes have been
reported in human hematopoietic malignancies.

REFERENCE 1. Hirata, T.; Nagai, H.; Koizumi, K.; Okino, K.; Harada, A.; Onda,
M.; Nagahata, T.; Mikami, I.; Hirai, K.; Haraguchi, S.; Jin, E.; Kawanami,
O.; Shimizu, K.; Emi, M.: Amplification, up-regulation and over-expression
of C3G (CRK SH3 domain-binding guanine nucleotide-releasing factor)
in non-small cell lung cancers. J. Hum. Genet. 49: 290-295, 2004.

2. Takai, S.; Tanaka, M.; Sugimura, H.; Yamada, K.; Naito, Y.; Kino,
I.; Matsuda, M.: Mapping of the human C3G gene coding a guanine nucleotide
releasing protein for Ras family to 9q34.3 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Hum. Genet. 94: 549-550, 1994.

3. Tanaka, S.; Morishita, T.; Hashimoto, Y.; Hattori, S.; Nakamura,
S.; Shibuya, M.; Matsuoka, K.; Takenawa, T.; Kurata, T.; Nagashima,
K.; Matsuda, M.: C3G, a guanine nucleotide-releasing protein expressed
ubiquitously, binds to the Src homology 3 domains of CRK and GRB2/ASH
proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 91: 3443-3447, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/9/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/11/1995

EDITED wwang: 08/17/2010
carol: 10/16/2006
tkritzer: 7/20/2004
terry: 7/9/2004
carol: 9/20/1999
mark: 9/15/1996
carol: 1/17/1995
carol: 1/11/1995

602137	TITLE *602137 NADH-UBIQUINONE OXIDOREDUCTASE 1 ALPHA SUBCOMPLEX, 2; NDUFA2
;;B8 PROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The NDUFA2 gene encodes one of the accessory subunits of complex I, the
first and largest complex of the mitochondrial respiratory chain (Hoefs
et al., 2008).

For a discussion of complex I, see 516000.

CLONING

Dunbar et al. (1997) reported the genomic cloning and fluorescence in
situ hybridization mapping of 5 nuclear-encoded human complex I genes.

Ton et al. (1997) isolated human heart cDNAs encoding the CI-B8, CI-SGDH
(603841), CI-B14 (602138), CI-B12 (603839), and CI-KFYI (603844)
subunits of the HP fraction. Human and bovine B8 protein shared 94%
sequence identity.

Loeffen et al. (1998) noted that complex I can be fragmented into 3
different fractions. The flavoprotein fraction contains the NDUFV1
(161015), NDUFV2 (600532), and NDUFV3 (602184) subunits and the
iron-sulfur protein (IP) fraction contains at least 7 subunits,
NDUFS1-NDUFS6 (see, e.g., 157655) and NDUFA5 (601677). The remaining
subunits, including NDUFA2, are part of the hydrophobic protein (HP)
fraction, which is involved in proton translocation. Loeffen et al.
(1998) reported cDNA sequences of 8 nuclear-encoded subunits located
within the hydrophobic protein fraction of NADH:ubiquinone
oxidoreductase.

MAPPING

Dunbar et al. (1997) mapped NDUFA2 to chromosome 5q31. Emahazion and
Brookes (1998) showed that of the 5 complex I genes mapped by Dunbar et
al. (1997), only the mapping of NDUFA2 was correct. (See NDUFA6
(602138), NDUFA7 (602139), NDUFB8 (602140), and NDUFS8 (602141).)

By intron-based radiation hybrid mapping, Emahazion and Brookes (1998)
mapped the NDUFA2 gene to chromosome 5q31.2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a boy with Leigh syndrome (256000) due to mitochondrial complex I
deficiency (252010), Hoefs et al. (2008) identified a homozygous splice
site mutation in the NDUFA2 gene (602137.0001).

NOMENCLATURE

Mammalian complex I has been studied extensively in Bos taurus. The
names of some the bovine complex I subunits designate the single-letter
code for the 4 N-terminal amino acids (e.g., SGDH). The names of
subunits B8-B22 designate their molecular weights (Walker et al., 1992).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LEIGH SYNDROME DUE TO MITOCHONDRIAL COMPLEX I DEFICIENCY
NDUFA2, IVS2DS, G-A, +5

In a Turkish boy with Leigh syndrome (256000) due to mitochondrial
complex I deficiency (252010), born of first-cousin parents, Hoefs et
al. (2008) identified a homozygous G-to-A transition in intron 2 of the
NDUFA2 gene, resulting in the skipping of exon 2 and generation of a
prematurely truncated protein, which was confirmed by PCR analysis. He
had hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and developmental delay from birth, and
brain MRI showed cerebral atrophy and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum.
After a varicella infection, he developed severe acidosis, seizures, and
coma, and died of cardiovascular arrest at age 11 months. MRI just
before death showed demyelinization of corticospinal tracts and subacute
necrotizing encephalomyelopathy consistent with Leigh syndrome. The
fibroblast and muscle complex I enzymatic activities were 36% and 20% of
control values, respectively. Further studies showed that the NDUFA2
mutation resulted in disturbed assembly and stability of complex I and
decreased complex I activity. In patient fibroblasts, the defect could
be corrected with a baculoviral vector.

REFERENCE 1. Dunbar, D. R.; Shibasaki, Y.; Dobbie, L.; Andersson, B.; Brookes,
A. J.: In situ hybridisation mapping of genomic clones for five human
respiratory chain complex I genes. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 78: 21-24,
1997.

2. Emahazion, T.; Brookes, A. J.: Mapping of the NDUFA2, NDUFA6,
NDUFA7, NDUFB8, and NDUFS8 electron transport chain genes by intron
based radiation hybrid mapping. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 82: 114 only,
1998.

3. Hoefs, S. J. G.; Dieteren, C. E. J.; Distelmaier, F.; Janssen,
R. J. R. J.; Epplen, A.; Swarts, H. G. P.; Forkink, M.; Rodenburg,
R. J.; Nijtmans, L. G.; Willems, P. H.; Smeitink, J. A. M.; van den
Heuvel, L. P.: NDUFA2 complex I mutation leads to Leigh disease. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 82: 1306-1315, 2008.

4. Loeffen, J. L. C. M.; Triepels, R. H.; van den Heuvel, L. P.; Schuelke,
M.; Buskens, C. A. F.; Smeets, R. J. P.; Trijbels, J. M. F.; Smeitink,
J. A. M.: cDNA of eight nuclear encoded subunits of NADH:ubiquinone
oxidoreductase: human complex I cDNA characterization completed. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 253: 415-422, 1998.

5. Ton, C.; Hwang, D. M.; Dempsey, A. A.; Liew, C.-C.: Identification
and primary structure of five human NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase
subunits. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 241: 589-594, 1997.

6. Walker, J. E.; Arizmendi, J. M.; Dupuis, A.; Fearnley, I. M.; Finel,
M.; Medd, S. M.; Pilkington, S. J.; Runswick, M. J.; Skehel, J. M.
: Sequences of 20 subunits of NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase from
bovine heart mitochondria. J. Molec. Biol. 226: 1051-1072, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/10/2008
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 5/25/1999
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 12/1/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/2/1997

EDITED wwang: 09/16/2008
wwang: 9/16/2008
ckniffin: 9/10/2008
terry: 3/6/2001
terry: 12/13/1999
alopez: 5/25/1999
carol: 12/3/1998
terry: 12/2/1998
carol: 12/1/1998
carol: 11/12/1998
carol: 8/19/1998
alopez: 12/15/1997
dholmes: 12/4/1997

102593	TITLE *102593 ACYLOXYACYL HYDROLASE; AOAH
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Acyloxyacyl hydrolase (AOAH) is a 2-subunit lipase present in phagocytic
cells. The enzyme specifically hydrolyzes the secondary acyl chains of
the lipopolysaccharide found in the walls of gram-negative bacteria
(summary by Whitmore et al., 1994).

CLONING

Hagen et al. (1991) cloned and characterized cDNA for human AOAH and
showed that its 2 subunits are translated from a single mRNA molecule
about 2.2 kb long.

GENE FUNCTION

Whitmore et al. (1994) stated the action of acyloxyacyl hydrolase on
lipopolysaccharide (or endotoxin) suggests that it modulates the host's
inflammatory response to gram-negative bacteria. This hypothesis was
supported by studies showing that the deacylation of lipopolysaccharide
by AOAH in vitro greatly reduces its toxicity and activity.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Whitmore et al. (1994) mapped the
AOAH gene to 7p14-p12.

REFERENCE 1. Hagen, F. S.; Grant, F. J.; Kuijper, J. L.; Slaughter, C. A.; Moomaw,
C. R.; Orth, K.; O'Hara, P. J.; Munford, R. S.: Expression and characterization
of recombinant human acyloxyacyl hydrolase, a leukocyte enzyme that
deacylates bacterial lipopolysaccharides. Biochemistry 30: 8415-8423,
1991.

2. Whitmore, T. E.; Mathewes, S. L.; O'Hara, P. J.; Durnam, D. M.
: Chromosomal localization of the acyloxyacyl hydrolase (AOAH) gene
to 7p14-p12 using fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 21:
457-458, 1994.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/17/1994

EDITED terry: 05/22/2012
jason: 6/17/1994

604205	TITLE *604205 COPINE I; CPNE1
;;CPN1
DESCRIPTION Molecular events at the interface of the cell membrane and cytoplasm may
be regulated by proteins that attach to and detach from the membrane
surface in response to signals. Calcium-dependent membrane-binding
proteins may play such a role. To identify proteins that may underlie
membrane trafficking processes in ciliates, Creutz et al. (1998)
isolated calcium-dependent phospholipid-binding proteins from
Paramecium. They named the major protein that they obtained 'copine'
(pronounced 'ko-peen'), the French feminine noun meaning 'friend,'
because it associates like a 'companion' with lipid membranes. The 55-kD
copine protein bound phosphatidylserine in a calcium- but not
magnesium-dependent manner, but it did not bind phosphatidylcholine.
Copine promoted calcium-dependent aggregation of lipid vesicles. The
authors cloned partial cDNAs representing 2 distinct Paramecium copine
genes. By searching sequence databases for genes with sequence
similarity to the Paramecium copine genes, Creutz et al. (1998)
identified human ESTs corresponding to 5 copine genes, named copine I to
V. Two overlapping ESTs contained the complete copine I (CPNE1) coding
sequence. The deduced 537-amino acid CPNE1 protein contains 2 type II C2
domains in its N-terminal half and a domain similar to the A domain,
which is present in a number of extracellular proteins or the
extracellular portions of membrane proteins, in its C-terminal half; it
does not have a predicted signal sequence or transmembrane domains. C2
domains mediate calcium-dependent interactions with phospholipids, and
the A domain of integrins appears to mediate the binding of the integrin
to extracellular ligands. CPNE1 has a broad tissue distribution.
Recombinant CPNE1 expressed in bacteria exhibited calcium-dependent
binding to phosphatidylserine vesicles. Antibody against CPNE1 reacted
with bovine chromobindin-17, which is a 55-kD calcium-dependent
chromaffin vesicle-binding protein, and the authors concluded that
chromobindin-17 is a copine. They suggested that copines function in
membrane trafficking.

REFERENCE 1. Creutz, C. E.; Tomsig, J. L.; Snyder, S. L.; Gautier, M.-C.; Skouri,
F.; Beisson, J.; Cohen, J.: The copines, a novel class of C2 domain-containing,
calcium-dependent, phospholipid-binding proteins conserved from Paramecium
to humans. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 1393-1402, 1998.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 9/29/1999

EDITED mgross: 10/01/1999
mgross: 9/30/1999
psherman: 9/30/1999

141800	TITLE +141800 HEMOGLOBIN--ALPHA LOCUS 1; HBA1
;;3-PRIME @ALPHA-GLOBIN GENE;;
MINOR ALPHA-GLOBIN LOCUS
METHEMOGLOBINEMIA, ALPHA-GLOBIN TYPE, INCLUDED;;
ERYTHREMIA, ALPHA-GLOBIN TYPE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The alpha and beta loci determine the structure of the 2 types of
polypeptide chains in the tetrameric adult hemoglobin, Hb A,
alpha-2/beta-2. The alpha locus also determines a polypeptide chain, the
alpha chain, in fetal hemoglobin (alpha-2/gamma-2), in hemoglobin
A2(alpha-2/delta-2), and in embryonic hemoglobin (alpha-2/epsilon-2).
The number of normal alpha genes (3, 2, 1 or none) in Asian cases of
alpha-thalassemia (604131) results in 4 different alpha-thalassemia
syndromes (Kan et al., 1976). Three normal alpha genes gives a silent
carrier state. Two normal alpha genes results in microcytosis (so-called
heterozygous alpha-thalassemia). One normal alpha gene results in
microcytosis and hemolysis (so-called Hb H disease, 613978). No normal
alpha gene results in 'homozygous alpha-thalassemia' manifested as fatal
hydrops fetalis.

MAPPING

By studies of somatic cell hybrids, Deisseroth et al. (1976) showed that
the alpha and beta loci are on different chromosomes.

Deisseroth et al. (1977) combined the methods of somatic cell
hybridization and DNA-cDNA hybridization to establish assignment of the
alpha-globin locus to chromosome 16. This represents an extension of the
cell hybridization method permitting mapping of genes that are not
functional in the cultured cell. Deisseroth and Hendrick (1978)
confirmed the assignment of the alpha locus to chromosome 16 by means of
cotransfer of this gene with the human APRT gene, known to be on 16 (see
102600), into mouse erythroleukemia cells. (The APRT gene is on the long
arm of chromosome 16.)

Weitkamp et al. (1977) presented data concerning linkage of the alpha
and beta loci to 34 marker loci. Data on alpha-thalassemia, combined
with those on the Hopkins-2 variant, excluded linkage of alpha and
haptoglobin (140100) at a recombination fraction less than 0.15.

On the basis of findings in a case of partial trisomy 16, Wainscoat et
al. (1981) concluded that the alpha-globin genes are on segment
16pter-p12. By combining somatic cell hybridization with a cDNA probe in
the study of a cell line with reciprocal translocation between 16q and
11q, Koeffler et al. (1981) showed that the alpha-globin genes are on
the short arm of 16. Gerhard et al. (1981) used an improved method of in
situ hybridization to confirm the assignment of the alpha-globin cluster
to chromosome 16p. The evidence on the precise location of HBAC was
conflicting, with assignments from 16p13.33 to 16p13.11 (Reeders, 1986).
The fact that adult polycystic kidney disease (APKD; 173900) is proximal
to HBAC and is on the 5-prime side of HBAC appeared to indicate that the
order is 16cen--APKD--5-prime HBZ1--HBA1--3-prime HVR--pter. (3-prime
HVR is the hypervariable region used in mapping APKD to 16p.)

On the basis of the findings in a fetus with an unbalanced translocation
involving 16p, Breuning et al. (1987) concluded that the HBA cluster is
distal to PGP (172280).

By a combination of in situ hybridization, Southern blot analysis, and
linkage analysis using the fragile site 16p12.3 and translocation
breakpoints within band 16p13.1, Simmers et al. (1987) mapped the
alpha-globin gene complex to 16pter-p13.2.

CYTOGENETICS

Buckle et al. (1988) described a child in whom cytogenetic analysis
indicated monosomy for 16pter-p13.3. DNA studies showed that the patient
had not inherited either maternal alpha-globin allele. The child had the
alpha-thalassemia trait as well as moderate mental retardation and
dysmorphic features. They determined that the gene is located in the
16pter-p13.3 segment. After reviewing earlier data placing the
alpha-globin cluster slightly more proximal, they concluded that the
findings in this child may be more reliable.

GENE STRUCTURE

Orkin (1978) identified alpha-globin gene fragments in restriction
endonuclease digests of total DNA after electrophoresis by hybridization
with P32-labeled cDNA probes. The data indicated that the alpha genes
occur in duplicate and that the 2 copies lie close together. Thus direct
physical evidence was provided for the duplication deduced from the
findings with mutant alpha chains and with the alpha-thalassemias and
the kinetics of hybridization in solution. The 2 alpha chains lie about
3.7 kilobases apart.

Leder et al. (1978) presented evidence that the alpha and beta genes of
all adult mammalian hemoglobins have 2 intervening sequences at
analogous positions.

GENE FUNCTION

Straub et al. (2012) reported a model for the regulation of nitric oxide
(NO) signaling by demonstrating that hemoglobin alpha, encoded by the
HBA1 and HBA2 (141850) genes, is expressed in human and mouse arterial
endothelial cells and enriched at the myoendothelial junction, where it
regulates the effects of NO on vascular reactivity. Notably, this
function is unique to hemoglobin alpha and is abrogated by its genetic
depletion. Mechanistically, endothelial hemoglobin alpha heme iron in
the Fe(3+) state permits NO signaling, and this signaling is shut off
when hemoglobin alpha is reduced to the Fe(2+) state by endothelial
cytochrome b5 reductase 3 (CYB5R3; 613213). Genetic and pharmacologic
inhibition of CYB5R3 increased NO bioactivity in small arteries. Straub
et al. (2012) concluded that their data revealed a mechanism by which
the regulation of the intracellular hemoglobin alpha oxidation state
controls nitric oxide synthase (NOS; see 163729) signaling in
nonerythroid cells. The authors suggested that this model may be
relevant to heme-containing globins in a broad range of NOS-containing
somatic cells.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Andersen et al. (2012) presented the crystal structure of the dimeric
porcine haptoglobin (140100)-hemoglobin complex determined at
2.9-angstrom resolution. This structure revealed that haptoglobin
molecules dimerize through an unexpected beta-strand swap between 2
complement control protein (CCP) domains, defining a new fusion CCP
domain structure. The haptoglobin serine protease domain forms extensive
interactions with both the alpha- and beta-subunits of hemoglobin,
explaining the tight binding between haptoglobin and hemoglobin. The
hemoglobin-interacting region in the alpha-beta dimer is highly
overlapping with the interface between the 2 alpha-beta dimers that
constitute the native hemoglobin tetramer. Several hemoglobin residues
prone to oxidative modification after exposure to heme-induced reactive
oxygen species are buried in the haptoglobin-hemoglobin interface, thus
showing a direct protective role of haptoglobin. The haptoglobin loop
previously shown to be essential for binding of haptoglobin-hemoglobin
to the macrophage scavenger receptor CD163 (605545) protrudes from the
surface of the distal end of the complex, adjacent to the associated
hemoglobin alpha-subunit. Small-angle x-ray scattering measurements of
human haptoglobin-hemoglobin bound to the ligand-binding fragment of
CD163 confirmed receptor binding in this area, and showed that the rigid
dimeric complex can bind 2 receptors.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Wilson et al. (1977) described a possible nucleotide polymorphism in the
untranslated 3-prime region of the alpha-globin gene and suggested that
the heterogeneity is related to the existence of 2 alpha gene loci.

Musumeci et al. (1978) pointed out that the combination of
alpha-thalassemia and beta-thalassemia leads to less severe clinical
expression of homozygous beta-thalassemia. The rarity of a chromosome 16
with both alpha loci deleted (as demonstrated by the restriction
endonuclease mapping technique of Southern) explains the rarity of
severe forms of alpha-thalassemia in Africans, e.g., Hb H disease, which
requires loss of 3 alpha loci and homozygous alpha-thalassemia which
requires loss of 4 alpha loci (Dozy et al., 1979).

By restriction endonuclease mapping, Goossens et al. (1980) identified
12 persons heterozygous for a chromosome carrying 3 alpha genes. There
were no hematologic abnormalities. The frequency was 0.0036 in American
Blacks and 0.05 in Greek Cypriots. They had previously shown a frequency
of 0.16 for the single alpha-globin locus in black Americans. The single
locus had a frequency of 0.18 in Sardinians, but none of 125 Sardinians
had a triple alpha locus, suggesting that the former had a selective
advantage. Greek Cypriots have a frequency of 0.07 for the single alpha
locus. Among 645 Japanese subjects studied, Nakashima et al. (1990)
found 10 persons heterozygous for a chromosome with the triplicated
alpha-globin locus. Thus, the frequency of the triplicate alpha locus
was 0.008 in this population, while that of the single alpha-locus,
i.e., the alpha-thalassemia-2 gene, may be lower than 0.0008. Analysis
of haplotypes suggested that the triple alpha loci may have had multiple
origins. Nakashima et al. (1990) commented on the fact that in Melanesia
the frequency of the triplicated genotype is about the same (Flint et
al., 1986) as in Japan, whereas the frequency of the single alpha gene
is much higher, compatible with a selective advantage vis-a-vis malaria.
Liebhaber et al. (1981) found identity of the alpha-1-globin genes from
an Asian and a Caucasian. Furthermore, the alpha-1 and alpha-2 genes
have a much higher degree of homology than would be predicted from the
timing of the duplication before the bird-mammal divergence (about 300
Myr ago). Liebhaber et al. (1981) presented this as evidence for the
existence of mechanisms for suppression of allelic polymorphisms and for
exchange of genetic information within the alpha-globin gene complex.
See 142200 for a discussion of gene conversion in relation to a
comparably surprising homology of the 2 gamma-globin genes.

Lehmann and Carrell (1984) suggested the use of the following
nomenclature for alpha-thalassemias based on the number of alpha-globin
genes that are missing or abnormal: 1-alpha-thalassemia (silent type);
2-alpha-thalassemia, trans or cis (thalassemia trait);
3-alpha-thalassemia (Hb H disease); and 4-alpha-thalassemia (Hb Bart's
hydrops fetalis). In this scheme, homozygous Hb Constant Spring is a
2-alpha-thalassemia which, if combined with a cis 2-alpha-thalassemia
heterozygous Hb Constant Spring, gives a 3-alpha-thalassemia and results
in Hb H disease. Lehmann and Carrell (1984) also proposed that the 2
alpha-globin genes be designated as 5-prime (now alpha-2) and 3-prime
(now alpha-1). Liebhaber and Cash (1985) described a method for
identifying whether the alpha-1 or alpha-2 locus is the site of
particular alpha-globin mutations. Rubin and Kan (1985) described a
sensitive method for determining how many alpha-globin genes are
present. It had the advantages of not requiring restriction enzyme
digestion and gel electrophoresis and using the much more stable isotope
(35)S rather than 32(P) for labeling. Only a small sample of DNA is
needed. Application of the approach to diagnosis of Down syndrome was
proposed. Assum et al. (1985) added a fourth restriction site
polymorphism in the alpha-globin gene cluster. Compared to the
beta-globin cluster, the alpha-globin cluster seemed to show a poverty
of DNA polymorphism; however, Higgs et al. (1986) demonstrated a
remarkable degree of DNA polymorphism in the alpha-globin gene cluster.
In addition, the RFLP haplotype is associated with hypervariable regions
of DNA.

Pseudo-alpha-1 (HBAP1), a pseudogene, is defective in several respects,
including splice junction mutations and premature termination codons.
Hardison et al. (1986) identified a previously undetected pseudogene in
the alpha-globin cluster. It was not detected by hybridization studies
but was found only on sequence analysis. Hardison et al. (1986)
suggested that 'divergent copies of a large number of genes may comprise
a substantial fraction of the slowly renaturing DNA of mammalian
genomes.' The newly detected pseudogene, which will be symbolized HBAP2,
is only 65 bp 3-prime to the polyadenylation site of zeta-1 (HBZP). The
sequence is: 5-prime--HBZ--HBZP--HBAP2--HBA2--HBA1--3-prime. (The
functional Hba gene of the mouse is on chromosome 11, but pseudogenes
are dispersed to other chromosomes (e.g., Hba-ps3 to mouse chromosome
15) (Popp et al., 1981; Leder et al., 1981; Eicher and Lee, 1991).)

Vandenplas et al. (1987) described a new form of alpha-0 thalassemia in
a South African family ascertained through a case of Hb H disease. A
novel deletion of 22.8-23.7 kb of DNA removed 3 pseudogenes as well as
the alpha-2 and alpha-1 genes. Since the alpha-2-globin gene encodes the
majority of alpha-globin, a thalassemic mutation of the alpha-1-globin
gene would be expected to result in a less severe loss of alpha-chain
synthesis.

Moi et al. (1987) described an initiation codon mutation, AUG-to-GUG, in
the alpha-1-globin gene. As predicted, the degree of interference with
alpha-globin synthesis was less in this mutation than in the mutation in
the initiation codon of the alpha-2-globin gene (see 141850).

Hill et al. (1987) described a unique nondeletion form of Hb H disease
in Papua New Guinea: all 4 alpha genes were intact. Hill et al. (1987)
commented on the striking difference in the hemoglobinopathies that
occur in Southeast Asia and in Melanesia. In the former area, Hb E, Hb
Constant Spring, and the Southeast Asian form of deletion
alpha-0-thalassemia are all common, whereas these forms have never been
found in Melanesians or Polynesians.

Jarman and Higgs (1988) identified a highly polymorphic region
approximately 100 kb upstream of the alpha-globin genes and referred to
it as 5-prime HVR. This is a valuable genetic marker for 16p. Higgs et
al. (1989) gave a comprehensive review of the molecular genetics of the
alpha-globin gene cluster, including its diseases.

Hatton et al. (1990) presented evidence for the existence of an
alpha-locus control region (LCRA; 152422). This would be comparable to
the beta-LCR which controls expression of the beta-like genes; see
152424. Liebhaber et al. (1990) identified an individual with
alpha-thalassemia in whom structurally normal alpha-globin genes were
inactivated in cis by a discrete de novo 35-kb deletion located about 30
kb 5-prime to the alpha-globin gene cluster. They concluded that the
deletion inactivates expression of the alpha-globin genes by removing
one or more of the previously identified upstream regulatory sequences
that are critical to expression of the alpha-globin genes.

Hemoglobinopathies of alpha-globin can result from missense mutations at
either of the 2 alpha-globin loci, HBA1 or HBA2. Since the normal HBA1
and HBA2 genes encode an identical alpha globin, these mutants cannot be
assigned to their specific loci on the basis of protein structural
analysis. A clue to the encoding locus, HBA1 versus HBA2, is provided by
the relative concentration of the alpha-globin mutant in the erythrocyte
based on the 2- to 3-fold higher level of expression of the HBA2 gene
(Liebhaber et al., 1986). However, since variables such as protein
stability, efficiency of hemoglobin tetramer formation, and other
factors can affect the steady-state levels of globin mutants, a
definitive locus assignment must be directly determined. Cash et al.
(1989) quantitated the expression of 2 alpha-globin structural mutants
found in the Caribbean basin, Fort de France and Spanish Town, and
showed that they are HBA1 and HBA2 mutants, respectively, on the basis
of low or high expression.

Wilkie et al. (1991) described major polymorphic length variation in the
terminal region of 16p (16p13.3) by physically linking the alpha-globin
locus with probes to telomere-associated repeats. They found 3 alleles
in which the alpha-globin genes lie 170 kb, 350 kb, or 430 kb from the
telomere. The 2 most common alleles were found to contain different
terminal segments, starting 145 kb distal to the alpha-globin genes.
Beyond this boundary these alleles are nonhomologous, yet each contains
sequences related to other, different chromosome termini. This
chromosome-size polymorphism probably arose by occasional exchanges
between the subtelomeric regions of nonhomologous chromosomes. Wilkie et
al. (1991) raised the possibility that the high frequency of trisomy 16
may be related to this nonhomology of the 2 common 16pter alleles in
their subtelomeric region.

Huisman et al. (1996) found that of the 141 codons of the alpha-globin
genes (there are no sequence differences between the coding regions of
the alpha-2 and alpha-1 genes), as many as 99 have been found to be
mutated; for several, 3 or 4 mutations have been discovered, while 5
mutations are known for codons 23, 75, and 94, and 6 for codon 141. The
mutations appear to occur at random; thus, either one of the 3 bases are
replaced in the 199 known alpha-globin gene mutants.

The suggestion that alpha(+)-thalassemia has achieved a high frequency
in some populations as a result of selection by malaria is based on a
number of epidemiologic studies. In the southwest Pacific region, there
is a striking geographic correlation between the frequency of
alpha(+)-thalassemia and the endemicity of Plasmodium falciparum. Allen
et al. (1997) undertook a prospective case-control study of children
with severe malaria on the north coast of Papua New Guinea, where
malaria transmission is intense and alpha(+)-thalassemia affects more
than 90% of the population (homozygotes comprise approximately 55% and
heterozygotes 37% of the population). Compared with normal children, the
risk of having severe malaria was 0.40 in alpha(+)-thalassemia
homozygotes and 0.66 in heterozygotes. Unexpectedly, the risk of
hospital admission with infections other than malaria also was reduced
to a similar degree in homozygotes (0.36) and heterozygotes (0.63). This
clinical study demonstrated that a malaria resistance gene protects
against disease caused by infections other than malaria. A reduction in
mortality greater than that attributable directly to malaria had been
observed after the prevention of malaria by insecticides,
chemoprophylaxis, and insecticide-impregnated bed nets. Previous
observations that direct malaria mortality cannot account for observed
hemoglobin S gene frequencies suggest that the findings of this study
may apply equally to other malaria resistance genes.

Fung et al. (1999) reported 3 cases of homozygous alpha-thalassemia who
survived beyond the newborn period, all with hypospadias. Review of the
literature identified 2 additional cases. Fung et al. (1999) suggested
that the hypospadias may have been secondary to the in utero edema
leading to failure of fusion of urogenital folds or due to defect or
deletion of another gene at 16p13.3.

For a review of hydrops fetalis caused by alpha-thalassemia, see Chui
and Waye (1998).

From work on the mouse model of alpha-thalassemia, Leder et al. (1999)
demonstrated that a normal beta-globin allele can act as a modifying
gene ameliorating the severity of alpha-thalassemia. They found that the
phenotype of alpha-thalassemia was strongly influenced by the genetic
background in which the mutation resided; when both mutant genes were on
a chromosome derived from strain 129, the phenotype was severe, whereas
it was mild when the gene was on a 129 chromosome and a C57BL/6
chromosome. Linkage mapping indicated that the modifying gene is very
tightly linked to the beta-globin locus (lod score = 13.3). Furthermore,
the severity of the phenotype correlated with the size of
beta-globin-containing inclusion bodies, which accumulate in red blood
cells and likely accelerate their destruction. The beta-major globin
chains encoded by the 2 strains differed by 3 amino acids, one of which
is a glycine-to-cysteine substitution at position 13. The cys13 should
be available for interchain disulfide bridging and consequent
aggregation between excess beta chains. This normal polymorphic
variation between murine beta-globin chains could account for the
modifying action of the unlinked beta-globin locus. Here, the variation
in severity of the phenotype would not depend on a change in the ratio
between alpha and beta chains but on the chemical nature of the normal
beta chain, which is in excess. This work also indicated that modifying
genes can be normal variants that, absent an apparent physiologic
rationale, may be difficult to identify on the basis of structure alone.

De Gobbi et al. (2006) identified a pathogenetic mechanism underlying a
variant form of the inherited blood disorder alpha-thalassemia.
Association studies of affected individuals from Melanesia localized the
disease trait to the telomeric region of human chromosome 16, which
includes the alpha-globin gene cluster, but no molecular defects were
detected by conventional approaches. After resequencing and using a
combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation and expression analysis on
a tiled oligonucleotide array, De Gobbi et al. (2006) identified a
gain-of-function regulatory single-nucleotide polymorphism (rSNP)
(141800.0218) in a nongenic region between the alpha-globin genes and
their upstream regulatory elements. The rSNP creates a new promoter-like
element that interferes with normal activation of all downstream
alpha-like globin genes. De Gobbi et al. (2006) concluded that their
work illustrates a strategy for distinguishing between neutral and
functionally important rSNPs, and it also identifies a pathogenetic
mechanism that could potentially underlie other genetic diseases.

Schoenfelder et al. (2010) found that mouse Hbb and Hba associated with
hundreds of active genes from nearly all chromosomes in nuclear foci
that they called 'transcription factories.' The 2 globin genes
preferentially associated with a specific and partially overlapping
subset of active genes. Schoenfelder et al. (2010) also noted that
expression of the Hbb locus is dependent upon Klf1 (600599), while
expression of the Hba locus is only partially dependent on Klf1.
Immunofluorescence analysis of mouse erythroid cells showed that most
Klf1 localized to the cytoplasm and that nuclear Klf1 was present in
discrete sites that overlapped with RNAII foci. Klf1 knockout in mouse
erythroid cells specifically disrupted the association of Klf1-regulated
genes within the Hbb-associated network. Klf1 knockout more weakly
disrupted interactions within the specific Hba network. Schoenfelder et
al. (2010) concluded that transcriptional regulation involves a complex
3-dimensional network rather than factors acting on single genes in
isolation.

N.B.: Alpha-globin variants for which it is unknown whether HBA1 or HBA2
is involved have arbitrarily been included in this entry. Carver and
Kutlar (1995) listed 191 alpha-globin variants as of January 1995. The
syllabus by Huisman et al. (1996) listed 199 alpha-chain hemoglobin
variants as of January 1996. These included single-base mutations in the
alpha-2 and alpha-1 genes as well as 2-base mutations. Not included in
their syllabus were deletions in mutations that result in
alpha-thalassemia, even if such a change (point mutation or frameshift)
occurred in one of the coding regions of the gene. Information about the
alpha-thalassemias was provided by Higgs et al. (1989).

HISTORY

Gandini et al. (1977) concluded, incorrectly as it turned out, that the
alpha loci are on the long arm of chromosome 4 (4q28-q34). The
conclusion was based on a finding of excessive synthesis of alpha chains
in patients with duplication of this region.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HEMOGLOBIN AICHI
HBA1, HIS50ARG

See Harano et al. (1984) and Baudin et al. (1987).

.0002
HEMOGLOBIN ALBANY-GEORGIA
HEMOGLOBIN ALBANY-SUMA
HBA1, LYS11ASN

This was found in a clinically normal black female in Albany, Georgia
(Webber et al., 1983). See also Shimasaki et al. (1983).

.0003
HEMOGLOBIN ANANTHARAJ
HBA1, LYS11GLU

See Pootrakul et al. (1975).

.0004
HEMOGLOBIN ANN ARBOR
HBA1, LEU80ARG

See Adams et al. (1972) and Adams (1974).

.0005
HEMOGLOBIN ARYA
HBA1, ASP47ASN

See Rahbar et al. (1975).

.0006
HEMOGLOBIN ATAGO
HBA1, ASP85TYR

See Fujiwara (1970) and Fujiwara et al. (1971).

.0007
HEMOGLOBIN ATTLEBORO
HBA1, SER138PRO

See McDonald et al. (1990).

.0008
HEMOGLOBIN AZTEC
HBA1, MET76THR

See Shelton et al. (1985).

.0009
HEMOGLOBIN BARI
HBA1, HIS45GLN

See Marinucci et al. (1980).

.0010
HEMOGLOBIN BEIJING
HBA1, LYS16ASN

See Liang et al. (1982).

.0011
HEMOGLOBIN BIBBA
HBA1, LEU136PRO

See Kleihauer et al. (1968). (This is actually an allelic variant of the
HBA2 gene; see 141850.0030.)

.0012
HEMOGLOBIN BOURMEDES
HBA1, PRO37ARG

See Dahmane-Arbane et al. (1987).

.0014
HEMOGLOBIN BROUSSAIS
HEMOGLOBIN J (BROUSSAIS);;
HEMOGLOBIN TAGAWA I
HBA1, LYS90ASN

See de Traverse et al. (1966), Yanase et al. (1968), Vella et al.
(1970), and Fleming et al. (1978).

.0015
HEMOGLOBIN CATONSVILLE
HBA1, INS GLU, PRO37/GLU/THR38

See Virshup et al. (1988). Moo-Penn et al. (1989) identified insertion
of a glutamic acid residue between proline-37 and threonine-38 in an
unstable hemoglobin variant. The PCR-amplified fragment of the variant
gene showed insertion of a GAA codon. In the normal alpha-globin gene
cluster, GAG is the codon for glutamic acid. Moo-Penn et al. (1989)
suggested that this mutation may have resulted from nonhomologous
nonallelic gene conversion.

.0016
HEMOGLOBIN CHAD
HBA1, GLU23LYS

See Boyer et al. (1968).

.0017
HEMOGLOBIN CHAPEL HILL
HBA1, ASP74GLY

See Orringer et al. (1976).

.0018
HEMOGLOBIN CHESAPEAKE
HBA1, ARG92LEU

See Clegg et al. (1966) and Harano et al. (1983). Polycythemia is the
only clinical feature. This was the first polycythemia-producing variant
to be described (Charache et al., 1966).

.0019
HEMOGLOBIN CHIAPAS
HBA1, PRO114ARG

See Jones et al. (1968).

.0020
HEMOGLOBIN CHICAGO
HBA1, LEU136MET

See Bowman et al. (1986).

.0021
HEMOGLOBIN CHONGQING
HBA1, LEU2ARG

See Zeng et al. (1984).

.0022
HEMOGLOBIN CONTALDO
HBA1, HIS103ARG

Unstable hemoglobin due to disruption of hydrogen bond between alpha 103
(his) and beta 108 (asn) (Sciarratta et al., 1984).

.0023
HEMOGLOBIN CORDELE
HBA1, ASP47ALA

See Nakatsuji et al. (1984).

.0024
HEMOGLOBIN DAGESTAN
HBA1, LYS60GLU

See Spivak et al. (1981) and Lacombe et al. (1987).

.0025
HEMOGLOBIN DALLAS
HBA1, ASN97LYS

See Dysert et al. (1982).

.0026
HEMOGLOBIN DANESHGAH-TEHRAN
HBA1, HIS72ARG

See Rahbar et al. (1973) and de Weinstein et al. (1985).

.0027
HEMOGLOBIN DENMARK HILL
HBA1, PRO95ALA

See Wiltshire et al. (1972).

.0028
HEMOGLOBIN DUAN
HBA1, ASP75ALA

See Liang et al. (1981, 1988).

.0029
HEMOGLOBIN DUNN
HBA1, ASP6ASN

See Jue et al. (1979) and Baklouti et al. (1988).

.0030
HEMOGLOBIN ETOBICOKE
HBA1, SER84ARG

See Crookston et al. (1969) and Headlee et al. (1983).

.0031
HEMOGLOBIN EVANSTON
HBA1, TRP14ARG

Honig et al. (1982) first described Hb Evanston in 2 black families. See
also Moo-Penn et al. (1983).

Harteveld et al. (2004) found this rare variant alone and in the
presence of common alpha-thalassemia deletions in 3 independent Asian
cases.

.0032
HEMOGLOBIN FERNDOWN
HBA1, ASP6VAL

See Lee-Potter et al. (1981).

.0033
HEMOGLOBIN FONTAINEBLEAU
HBA1, ALA21PRO

Wajcman et al. (1989) found this substitution in an Italian family. The
substitution produced no change in the stability or oxygen binding
properties of the hemoglobin molecule. The electrophoretic properties
were, furthermore, identical to those of Hb A, with the exception of
isoelectric focusing in which the variant migrated like Hb A1c. Hb
J(Nyanza), another substitution at position alpha-21, likewise causes no
hematologic disorder.

.0034
HEMOGLOBIN FORT DE FRANCE
HBA1, HIS45ARG

See Braconnier et al. (1977). Cash et al. (1989) confirmed that this is
a mutant of the HBA1 gene.

.0035
HEMOGLOBIN G (AUDHALI)
HBA1, GLU23VAL

See Marengo-Rowe et al. (1968).

.0037
HEMOGLOBIN G (FORT WORTH)
HEMOGLOBIN FORT WORTH
HBA1, GLU27GLY

This variant was described in 2 black families. Unusually low (5%)
concentration was found in heterozygotes, perhaps because of decreased
ability of the abnormal alpha chain to form dimers with beta chains. See
Schneider et al. (1971) and Carstairs et al. (1985).

.0038
HEMOGLOBIN G (GEORGIA)
HBA1, PRO95LEU

See Huisman et al. (1970).

.0039
MOVED TO 141850.0054
.0040
HEMOGLOBIN G (NORFOLK)
HBA1, ASP85ASN

See Cohen-Solal et al. (1975) and Lorkin et al. (1975).

.0041
HEMOGLOBIN G (PEST)
HBA1, ASP74ASN

Hb G (Pest) and Hb J (Buda) (141850.0008), both alpha-chain mutants,
occurred together in a Hungarian male with erythrocytosis. The
occurrence of some normal Hb A in this man showed the existence of at
least 2 alpha loci. See Brimhall et al. (1970, 1974) and Hollan et al.
(1972). Using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify selectively
alpha-1 and alpha-2-globin cDNAs, Mamalaki et al. (1990) then hybridized
the cDNAs to synthetic oligonucleotides specific for either the normal
or the mutated sequence. Using this approach, the alpha-globin
structural mutants J-Buda and G-Pest were found to be encoded by the
alpha-2 and the alpha-1-globin genes, respectively. The substitution in
G-Pest was a change from GAC to AAC at codon 74.

.0042
HEMOGLOBIN G (TAICHUNG)
HEMOGLOBIN Q;;
HEMOGLOBIN Q (THAILAND);;
HEMOGLOBIN MAHIDOL;;
HEMOGLOBIN ASABARA;;
HEMOGLOBIN KURASHIKI
HBA1, ASP74HIS

See Vella et al. (1958), Gammack et al. (1961), Lie-Injo et al. (1966,
1979); Blackwell and Liu (1970), Pootrakul and Dixon (1970), Lorkin et
al. (1970), Iuchi et al. (1978), and Higgs et al. (1980). Zeng et al.
(1992) demonstrated that the mutation is due to a GAC-to-CAC change in
codon 74 of the HBA1 gene. They developed a simple and accurate method
for diagnosis of the Hb Q (Thailand) variant based on restriction enzyme
analysis.

.0043
HEMOGLOBIN G (WAIMANALO)
HEMOGLOBIN AIDA
HBA1, ASP64ASN

See Blackwell et al. (1973) and Bunn et al. (1978). Schiliro et al.
(1991) found this variant in a Filipino mother and child living in
Sicily. They showed no hematologic abnormalities.

.0044
HEMOGLOBIN GARDEN STATE
HBA1, ALA82ASP

See Winter et al. (1978).

.0045
HEMOGLOBIN GRADY
HEMOGLOBIN DAKAR
HBA1, 3AA INS, 118THR-GLU-PHE119

At the time it was first studied by Huisman et al. (1974), hemoglobin
Grady was unique in having an insertion of threonine-glutamic
acid-phenylalanine between amino acids 118 and 119 of the alpha chain.
Several hemoglobins with deletions were then known (Leiden, Lyon,
Freiburg, Niteroi, Tochigi, St. Antoine, Tours and Gun Hill). Scott et
al. (1981) found no evidence of an extra (fifth) alpha gene. They
argued, therefore, that if, as supposed, Hb Grady arose by unequal
crossing over, the event occurred between alleles rather than between
the separate alpha-1 and alpha-2 loci. The glu-phe-thr insertion is a
repeat of normal residues 116, 117 and 118. See Cleek et al. (1983).
Substitution of glutamine for histidine at alpha 112 was thought to be
the change in hemoglobin Dakar; however, on restudy the hemoglobin was
found to be identical to Hb Grady (Garel et al., 1976).

.0046
HEMOGLOBIN GUANGZHOU
HEMOGLOBIN HANGZHOU
HBA1, ASP64GLY

See Jen and Liu (1987), Zhou et al. (1987), and Li et al. (1990).

.0047
HEMOGLOBIN GUIZHOU
HEMOGLOBIN UTSUNOMIYA
HBA1, PRO77ARG

See Hattori et al. (1985).

.0048
HEMOGLOBIN HANDA
HEMOGLOBIN MUNAKATA
HBA1, LYS90MET

See Harano et al. (1982) and Sugihara et al. (1983).

.0049
HEMOGLOBIN HANDSWORTH
HBA1, GLY18ARG

See Griffiths et al. (1977), Chih-chuan et al. (1981), and Al-Awamy et
al. (1985).

.0050
HEMOGLOBIN HARBIN
HBA1, LYS16MET

See Zeng et al. (1984).

.0051
HEMOGLOBIN HEKINAN
HBA1, GLU27ASP

See Harano et al. (1988). Using dot-blot analysis of amplified DNA with
(32)p-labeled probes, Zhao et al. (1990) located the mutation in codon
27 of the minor alpha-1 globin gene and showed that the change involved
a GAG (glutamic acid)-to-GAT (aspartic acid) mutation. Their patients
were 3 Chinese women from Macau.

In Thailand, Ngiwsara et al. (2004) described 2 unrelated cases of
compound heterozygosity for Hb Hekinan and alpha-thalassemia.

.0052
HEMOGLOBIN HIROSAKI
HBA1, PHE43LEU

See Ohba et al. (1975, 1978).

.0053
HEMOGLOBIN HOBART
HBA1, HIS20ARG

See Fleming et al. (1987).

.0054
HEMOGLOBIN HOPKINS 2
HBA1, HIS112ASP

Fast hemoglobin. See Smith and Torbert (1958), Itano and Robinson
(1960), Bradley et al. (1961), Ostertag et al. (1972), Clegg and
Charache (1978).

.0055
HEMOGLOBIN I
HEMOGLOBIN I (BURLINGTON);;
HEMOGLOBIN I (PHILADELPHIA);;
HEMOGLOBIN I (SKAMANIA);;
HEMOGLOBIN I (TEXAS)
HBA1, LYS16GLU

Fast hemoglobin. Substitution of aspartic acid for lysine at alpha 16
was first reported by Murayama (1962). However, Crick pointed out that
this substitution could not be accomplished by change in one base.
Restudy by Beale and Lehmann (1965) and by Schneider et al. (1966)
showed substitution of glutamic acid for lysine. Hemoglobin I was
thought to show sickling but this has been shown to be due to faulty
technique (Schneider et al., 1967). See Rucknagel et al. (1955),
Schwartz et al. (1957), Itano and Robinson (1959, 1960), Ranney et al.
(1962), O'Brien et al. (1964), Thompson et al. (1965), Schneider et al.
(1966), Bowman and Barnett (1967), Baur (1968), Labossiere and Vella
(1971), Fleming et al. (1978), and Liebhaber et al. (1984). The
hemoglobin I mutation is curious in that the mutation is present in HBA2
(141850.0011) as well as in HBA1.

.0057
HEMOGLOBIN IWATA
HBA1, HIS87ARG

See Shibata et al. (1980) and Liu et al. (1983).

.0058
HEMOGLOBIN J (ABIDJAN)
HBA1, GLY51ASP

See Cabannes et al. (1972).

.0059
HEMOGLOBIN J (ANATOLIA)
HBA1, LYS61THR

See Giordano et al. (1990).

.0060
HEMOGLOBIN J (BIRMINGHAM)
HEMOGLOBIN J (MEERUT)
HBA1, ALA120GLU

See Kamuzora and Lehmann (1974) and Blackwell et al. (1974).

.0062
HEMOGLOBIN J (CAMAGUEY)
HBA1, ARG141GLY

See Martinez et al. (1978). Romero et al. (1995) found this hemoglobin
variant in 3 Spanish families. The original description by Martinez et
al. (1978) was in a Cuban family of Spanish ancestry.

.0063
HEMOGLOBIN J (CAPE TOWN)
HBA1, ARG92GLN

See Botha et al. (1966), Harano et al. (1983), and Lambridis et al.
(1986).

.0064
HEMOGLOBIN J (CUBUJUQUI)
HBA1, ARG141SER

See Saenz et al. (1977) and Moo-Penn et al. (1981).

.0065
HEMOGLOBIN J (HABANA)
HBA1, ALA71GLU

See Colombo et al. (1974) and Ohba et al. (1983).

.0066
HEMOGLOBIN J (KUROSH)
HBA1, ALA19ASP

See Rahbar et al. (1976).

.0067
HEMOGLOBIN J (MEDELLIN)
HBA1, GLY22ASP

See Gottlieb et al. (1964).

.0068
HEMOGLOBIN J (NYANZA)
HBA1, ALA21ASP

See Kendall et al. (1973).

.0070
HEMOGLOBIN J (PARIS 1)
HEMOGLOBIN J (ALJEZUR)
HBA1, ALA12ASP

See Rosa et al. (1966), Trincao et al. (1968), and Marinucci et al.
(1979).

.0071
HEMOGLOBIN J (RAJAPPEN)
HBA1, LYS90THR

See Hyde et al. (1971).

.0072
HEMOGLOBIN J (ROVIGO)
HBA1, ALA53ASP

See Alberti et al. (1974) and Moo-Penn et al. (1978).

.0074
HEMOGLOBIN J (SINGA)
HBA1, ASN78ASP

See Wong et al. (1984).

.0075
HEMOGLOBIN J (SINGAPORE)
HBA1, ASN78ASP AND ALA79GLY

Since no simple frameshift mechanism could be imagined, the possibility
of 2 separate mutations was favored by Blackwell et al. (1972), who
suggested that 2 separate hemoglobins, appropriately called Hb J (Singa)
and Hb J (Pore), will be discovered eventually. Double mutation on the
same chromosome would seem more likely than crossing-over in a compound
heterozygote since the 2 codons involved are contiguous.

.0076
HEMOGLOBIN J (TASHIKUERGAN)
HBA1, ALA19GLU

See Houjun et al. (1984). Li et al. (1990) found this variant in
populations in the Silk Road region of China.

.0077
HEMOGLOBIN J (TONGARIKI)
HBA1, ALA115ASP

See Gajdusek et al. (1967) and Beaven et al. (1972). A homozygous
individual had only anomalous hemoglobin suggesting the existence of
only one alpha locus in Melanesians (Abramson et al., 1970).

.0078
HEMOGLOBIN J (TORONTO)
HBA1, ALA5ASP

See Crookston et al. (1965).

.0079
HEMOGLOBIN JACKSON
HBA1, LYS127ASN

See Moo-Penn et al. (1976).

.0080
HEMOGLOBIN KARACHI
HBA1, ALA5PRO

See Ahmad et al. (1986).

.0081
HEMOGLOBIN KARIYA
HBA1, LYS40GLU

See Harano et al. (1983) and Imai et al. (1989).

.0082
HEMOGLOBIN KAWACHI
HBA1, PRO44ARG

See Harano et al. (1982).

.0083
HEMOGLOBIN KOELLIKER
HEMOGLOBIN F (KOELLIKER)
HBA1, ARG141DEL

Not a genetic change. The C-terminal amino acid, 141, of the alpha chain
(arginine) is missing, probably from the action of a carboxypeptidase
present in normal plasma. This unusual fast hemoglobin is observed in
persons with hemolysis. The change can occur in fetal hemoglobin also
(Kohne et al., 1977). See Marti et al. (1967) and Schiliro et al.
(1982).

.0084
HEMOGLOBIN KOKURA
HEMOGLOBIN BEILINSON;;
HEMOGLOBIN MICHIGAN-I;;
HEMOGLOBIN MICHIGAN-II;;
HEMOGLOBIN L (GASLINI);;
HEMOGLOBIN TAGAWA II;;
HEMOGLOBIN UMI;;
HEMOGLOBIN MUGINO;;
HEMOGLOBIN YUKUHASHI-2
HBA1, ASP47GLY

See Yamaoka et al. (1960), Ooya et al. (1961), Sumida (1975), and Ohba
et al. (1982). The change is in TP IV (DeVries et al., 1963).

.0086
HEMOGLOBIN L (PERSIAN GULF)
HBA1, GLY57ARG

See Rahbar et al. (1969).

.0087
HEMOGLOBIN LEGNANO
HBA1, ARG141LEU

See Mavilio et al. (1978).

.0088
HEMOGLOBIN LE LAMENTIN
HBA1, HIS20GLN

See Sellaye et al. (1982), Harano et al. (1983), and Malcorra-Azpiazu et
al. (1988).

.0089
HEMOGLOBIN LILLE
HBA1, ASP74ALA

See Djoumessi et al. (1981) and Lu et al. (1984).

.0090
HEMOGLOBIN LOIRE
HBA1, ALA88SER

This variant was discovered in a 10-year-old Algerian boy born in Loire.
The child had erythrocytosis and microcytosis, the latter being due to
iron deficiency (Baklouti et al., 1988).

.0091
HEMOGLOBIN LUXEMBOURG
HBA1, TYR24HIS

Groff et al. (1989) found this substitution in association with mild
hemolytic anemia and increased indirect bilirubinemia in a family
originating from the Netherlands.

.0092
HEMOGLOBIN M (BOSTON)
HEMOGLOBIN GOTHENBURG;;
HEMOGLOBIN M (GOTHENBURG);;
HEMOGLOBIN M (OSAKA);;
HEMOGLOBIN M (KISKUNHALAS)
HBA1, HIS58TYR

The aberrant hemoglobins associated with methemoglobinemia are referred
to as hemoglobin M. Most of the hemoglobin M variants have substitutions
of histidine at alpha 58, alpha 87, beta 63, or beta 92. These 4 amino
acids are critical to the binding of the heme group. The exception is
hemoglobin M (Milwaukee-1). See Gerald et al. (1957), Hansen et al.
(1960), Gerald and Efron (1961), Betke (1962), Hayashi et al. (1964),
Shimizu et al. (1965), Suzuki et al. (1965), Hollan et al. (1967), and
Pulsinelli et al. (1973).

.0093
HEMOGLOBIN M (IWATE)
HEMOGLOBIN M (KANKAKEE);;
HEMOGLOBIN M (OLDENBURG);;
HEMOGLOBIN M (SENDAI)
HBA1, HIS87TYR

Hb Iwate was the first variant hemoglobin found in Japan (Shibata et
al., 1960). Familial cyanosis had been recognized for about 200 years in
the prefecture of Iwate in Honshu, where about 70 affected persons were
identified in the 1950s. It was called 'kuchikuro,' or 'blackmouth.' In
each form of methemoglobinemia, the heme iron is stabilized in the
ferric form. Patients with the Hb M alpha forms are cyanotic at birth;
those with the Hb M beta forms are usually not cyanotic until they are 3
months of age. Horst et al. (1987) showed that the Iwate mutation
involves the alpha-1 globin gene. Specifically, they demonstrated a
CAC-to-TAC mutation in codon 87 of that gene. They showed that the Iwate
mutation can be identified directly on RsaI digestion. See Meyering et
al. (1960), Shibata et al. (1961), Gerald and Efron (1961), Miyaji et
al. (1962), Heller (1962), Heller et al. (1962), Tonz et al. (1962),
Shibata (1964), Tamura (1964), Shimizu et al. (1965), Pik and Tonz
(1966), Maggio et al. (1981), and Mayne et al. (1986).

Ameri et al. (1999) likewise determined that the molecular defect in 2
patients with Hb M (Kankakee) was his87 to tyr in the HBA1 gene. The
proportion of Hb M (Kankakee) observed was higher than that predicted
for an alpha-1-globin variant. They presented evidence suggesting that
the greater-than-expected proportion of Hb M (Kankakee) results from
preferential association of the electronegative beta-globin chains with
the alpha-(M)-globin chains that are more electropositive than normal
alpha-globin chains.

.0094
MOVED TO 141850.0047
.0095
HEMOGLOBIN MATSUE-OKI
HBA1, ASP75ASN

See Ohba et al. (1977) and Yi-Tao et al. (1982).

.0096
HEMOGLOBIN MEMPHIS
HBA1, GLU23GLN

Substitution of glutamine for glutamic acid at alpha 23. A hemoglobin S
homozygote who also carries this abnormal hemoglobin has a mild form of
sickle cell anemia. See Kraus et al. (1965, 1967) and Cooper et al.
(1973).

.0097
HEMOGLOBIN MEXICO
HEMOGLOBIN J;;
HEMOGLOBIN J (MEXICO);;
HEMOGLOBIN J (PARIS 2);;
HEMOGLOBIN UPPSALA
HBA1, GLN54GLU

Fast hemoglobin. See Jones et al. (1963, 1968), Beckman et al. (1966),
Labie and Rosa (1966), Quattrin and Ventruto (1967), Fessas et al.
(1969), and Trabuchet et al. (1982).

.0098
HEMOGLOBIN MILLEDGEVILLE
HBA1, PRO44LEU

See Honig et al. (1980).

.0099
HEMOGLOBIN MIYANO
HBA1, THR41SER

See Ohba et al. (1989).

.0100
HEMOGLOBIN MIZUSHI
HBA1, ASP75GLY

No hematologic abnormality. See Iuchi et al. (1980).

.0101
HEMOGLOBIN MOABIT
HBA1, LEU86ARG

See Knuth et al. (1979).

.0104
HEMOGLOBIN NECKER ENFANTS-MALADES
HBA1, HIS20TYR

This variant was detected by chromatography in the course of screening
diabetics for Hb A1c (Wajcman et al., 1980).

.0105
HEMOGLOBIN NIGERIA
HBA1, SER81CYS

See Honig et al. (1978).

.0106
HEMOGLOBIN NOKO
HBA1, MET76LYS

See Shibata et al. (1981).

.0107
HEMOGLOBIN NORFOLK
HEMOGLOBIN J (NORFOLK);;
HEMOGLOBIN KAGOSHIMA;;
HEMOGLOBIN NISHIK
HBA1, GLY57ASP

Fast hemoglobin. See Ager et al. (1958), Baglioni (1962), Huntsman et
al. (1963), Hanada et al. (1964), Imamura (1966), and Lehmann and
Carrell (1969).

.0108
HEMOGLOBIN NOUAKCHOTT
HBA1, PRO114LEU

See Wajcman et al. (1989).

.0109
HEMOGLOBIN NUNOBIKI
HBA1, ARG141CYS

This hemoglobin showed an extremely high oxygen affinity. The patient,
who had 'marginal erythrocytosis,' was shown to have 13.1% Hb Nunobiki
(Shimasaki, 1985).

.0110
HEMOGLOBIN O (INDONESIA)
HEMOGLOBIN O (BUGINESE-X);;
HEMOGLOBIN BUGINESE-X;;
HEMOGLOBIN O (OLIVIERE);;
HEMOGLOBIN OLIVIERE
HBA1, GLU116LYS

See Lie-Injo and Sadono (1958), Baglioni and Lehmann (1962), and Sansone
et al. (1970).

Daud et al. (2001) investigated the occurrence of hemoglobin O
(Indonesia) in related ethnic populations of the Indonesian archipelago.
Nineteen individuals heterozygous for this variant were identified in 4
ethnic populations. The level of Hb O (Indonesia) in 17 of the
individuals was 11.6 +/- 1.0%, significantly lower than the expected 17
to 22%, indicating the instability of Hb O (Indonesia).

.0111
HEMOGLOBIN O (PADOVA)
HBA1, GLU30LYS

See Vettore et al. (1974), Kilinc et al. (1985), and Martin et al.
(1990). Schnedl et al. (1997) showed that the silent hemoglobin O Padova
mutation causes an additional peak on high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) and falsely low HbA(1c) values (glycated
hemoglobin) when measured by HPLC. HPLC is the gold standard for
evaluation of glycated hemoglobin in diabetes mellitus.

.0112
HEMOGLOBIN OGI
HEMOGLOBIN QUEENS
HBA1, LEU34ARG

See Sugihara et al. (1982), Moo-Penn et al. (1982), and Yongsuwan et al.
(1987). This has been shown to be a mutation of the HBA1 gene (Cash et
al., 1989).

.0113
HEMOGLOBIN OLEANDER
HBA1, GLU116GLN

See Schneider et al. (1980).

.0114
HEMOGLOBIN OTTAWA
HEMOGLOBIN SIAM
HBA1, GLY15ARG

See Vella et al. (1974) and Pootrakul et al. (1974).

Yodsowan et al. (2000) studied this variant in a 21-year-old Thai female
and her mother. Turbpaiboon et al. (2002) reported a fourth case of Hb
Siam in a healthy Thai female and concluded that there is no
alpha-thalassemic effect of the variant.

.0115
HEMOGLOBIN OWARI
HBA1, VAL121MET

This is a neutral-to-neutral change; it was detected in the course of
mass screening by isoelectric focusing (Harano et al., 1986).

.0116
HEMOGLOBIN PERSPOLIS
HBA1, ASP64TYR

See Rahbar et al. (1976).

.0117
HEMOGLOBIN PETAH TIKVA
HBA1, ALA110ASP

See Honig et al. (1981).

.0118
HEMOGLOBIN PONTOISE
HEMOGLOBIN J (PONTOISE)
HBA1, ALA63ASP

See Thillet et al. (1977) and Gonzalez-Redondo et al. (1987).

.0119
HEMOGLOBIN PORT PHILLIP
HBA1, LEU91PRO

See Brennan et al. (1977).

.0120
MOVED TO 141850.0055
.0121
HEMOGLOBIN Q (INDIA)
HBA1, ASP64HIS

See Sukumaran et al. (1972) and Schmidt et al. (1976).

.0122
HEMOGLOBIN Q (IRAN)
HBA1, ASP75HIS

See Lorkin et al. (1970), Lie-Injo et al. (1979), and Higgs et al.
(1980).

.0123
MOVED TO 141850.0052
.0124
HEMOGLOBIN REIMS
HBA1, GLU23GLY

See Bardakdjian-Michau et al. (1989).

.0125
HEMOGLOBIN RUSS
HBA1, GLY51ARG

See Huisman and Sydenstricker (1962) and Reynolds and Huisman (1966).
This has been shown to be a mutation of the HBA1 gene (Cash et al.,
1989).

.0126
HEMOGLOBIN SASSARI
HBA1, ASP126HIS

Masala et al. (1987) first described this variant as an
electrophoretically slow-moving hemoglobin in 2 brothers affected by
erythrocytosis with slight microcytosis. In a large screening program
involving 20,000 people in the city of Sassari and its surrounding area
in Sardinia, Masala (1992) found the variant in 3 other apparently
unrelated subjects. A male of German origin was identified by
Bardakdjian-Michau et al. (1990) as a carrier of the same mutation.
Sanna et al. (1994) demonstrated that the adult variant has increased
oxygen affinity, a dramatic reduction of homotropic interactions, and a
significant decrease of the effect of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (35% lower
than that observed for Hb A). The fetal variant also showed increased
oxygen affinity compared with normal Hb F and an almost abolished
heme-heme interaction.

Paglietti et al. (1998) demonstrated that Hb Sassari results from a GAC
(asp)-to-CAC (his) mutation in the HBA1 gene.

.0127
HEMOGLOBIN SAVARIA
HBA1, SER49ARG

See Szelenyi et al. (1980), Juricic et al. (1985), Ojwang et al. (1985),
and Suarez et al. (1985).

.0128
HEMOGLOBIN SAWARA
HBA1, ASP6ALA

No pathologic effects were observed (Sumida et al., 1973; Sumida, 1975).

.0130
HEMOGLOBIN SETIF
HBA1, ASP94TYR

See Wajcman et al. (1972), Nozari et al. (1977), Al-Awamy et al. (1985),
and Abdo (1989). Schiliro et al. (1991) found this hemoglobin variant in
Sicily.

Dincol et al. (2003) stated that Hb Setif was first described in an
Algerian family (Wajcman et al., 1972) and subsequently in Iranian,
African, Saudi Arabian, and Maltese populations. They identified the
variant in a Turkish family. Heterozygotes were asymptomatic.

.0131
HEMOGLOBIN SHAARE ZEDEK
HBA1, LYS56GLU

See Abramov et al. (1980).

.0132
HEMOGLOBIN SHENYANG
HBA1, ALA26GLU

See Zeng et al. (1982) and Yi et al. (1989).

.0133
HEMOGLOBIN SHIMONOSEKI
HEMOGLOBIN HIKOSHIMA
HBA1, GLN54ARG

See Yamaoka et al. (1960) and Hanada and Rucknagel (1964).

.0134
HEMOGLOBIN SHUANGFENG
HBA1, GLU27LYS

See Liang et al. (1981).

.0135
HEMOGLOBIN SINGAPORE
HBA1, ARG141PRO

See Clegg et al. (1969).

.0137
HEMOGLOBIN ST. CLAUDE
HBA1, LYS127THR

See Vella et al. (1974).

.0138
HEMOGLOBIN ST. LUKE'S
HBA1, PRO95ARG

See Bannister et al. (1972).

Felice (2003) cited evidence that Hb St. Luke's is a mutation of the
HBA1 gene.

.0139
HEMOGLOBIN STANLEYVILLE-II
HBA1, ASN78LYS

See Van Ros et al. (1968), North et al. (1980), and Rhoda et al. (1983).
Costa et al. (1991) described a family with 1 homozygote and 3
heterozygotes for Hb Stanleyville II. The pattern of restriction
fragments demonstrated an associated 3.7-kb alpha-globin gene deletion.

.0140
HEMOGLOBIN STRUMICA
HEMOGLOBIN SERBIA
HBA1, HIS112ARG

See Niazi et al. (1975) and Beksedic et al. (1975).

.0143
HEMOGLOBIN SUNSHINE SETH
HBA1, ASP94HIS

See Schroeder et al. (1979).

.0144
HEMOGLOBIN SURESNES
HBA1, ARG141HIS

See Poyart et al. (1976) and Saenz et al. (1978).

.0145
HEMOGLOBIN SWAN RIVER
HBA1, ASP6GLY

See Moo-Penn et al. (1987). Harano et al. (1996) observed this variant
in a Japanese man with mild polycythemia.

.0147
HEMOGLOBIN THAILAND
HBA1, LYS56THR

See Pootrakul et al. (1977).

.0148
HEMOGLOBIN TITUSVILLE
HBA1, ASP94ASN

See Schneider et al. (1975).

.0149
HEMOGLOBIN TOKONAME
HBA1, LYS139THR

See Harano et al. (1983).

.0150
HEMOGLOBIN TORINO
HBA1, PHE43VAL

See Beretta et al. (1968) and Prato et al. (1970).

.0151
HEMOGLOBIN TOTTORI
HBA1, GLY59VAL

See Nakatsuji et al. (1981).

.0152
HEMOGLOBIN TOYAMA
HEINZ BODY HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA
HBA1, LEU136ARG

This hemoglobin variant is associated with congenital Heinz body anemia
(Ohba et al., 1987).

.0153
HEMOGLOBIN TWIN PEAKS
HBA1, LEU113HIS

See Guis et al. (1985). This has been shown to be a mutation of the HBA1
gene (Cash et al., 1989).

.0154
HEMOGLOBIN UBE-2
HBA1, ASN68ASP

See Miyaji et al. (1967). In Turkey, Bilginer et al. (1984) found the
first instance of Hb Ube-2 outside Japan. It occurred in other members
of the family.

Cotton et al. (2000) found this rare variant during universal neonatal
screening. The patients had normal hematologic parameters. The variant
was found in twins and an older sister and in the father; both parents
were of Belgian ancestry.

Shin et al. (2002) described the disorder in a Taiwanese subject.

.0155
HEMOGLOBIN UBE-4
HBA1, GLU116ALA

See Ohba et al. (1978).

.0156
HEMOGLOBIN WESTMEAD
HBA1, HIS122GLN

This variant was found in a Chinese woman (Fleming et al., 1980). See
Liang et al. (1988).

.0157
HEMOGLOBIN WINNIPEG
HBA1, ASP75TYR

See Vella et al. (1973) and Nakatsuji et al. (1983). This has been shown
to be a mutation of the HBA1 gene (Cash et al., 1989).

.0158
HEMOGLOBIN WOODVILLE
HBA1, ASP6TYR

Since alpha-6 asp is involved in salt linkage with alpha-127 lys of the
same chain, the increased oxygen affinity of hemoglobin variants at this
position probably reflects loss of this salt bridge in the deoxy state.
Similar changes have been observed for Hb St. Claude which also cannot
form the salt bridge because of substitution of threonine for lysine at
alpha-127. See Como et al. (1986).

.0159
HEMOGLOBIN WUMING
HEMOGLOBIN J (WENCHANG-WUMING)
HBA1, LYS11GLN

See Zeng et al. (1981). Qualtieri et al. (1995) found this
fast-migrating hemoglobin variant in a pregnant woman living in Italy.

.0160
HEMOGLOBIN ZAMBIA
HBA1, LYS60ASN

See Barclay et al. (1969).

.0161
HEMOGLOBIN BELLIARD
HBA1, LYS56ASN

See Wajcman et al. (1990).

.0162
HEMOGLOBIN TONOSHO
HBA1, ALA110THR

In the course of measuring hemoglobin A1c by automated cation exchange
high performance liquid chromatography, Ohba et al. (1990) detected a
new alpha-chain variant: substitution of alanine by threonine at
position 110. The abnormal alpha chain comprised about 14% of the total
alpha chain.

.0163
HEMOGLOBIN FUKUTOMI
HBA1, ASP126VAL

This hemoglobin, which has a high affinity for oxygen, was detected in a
Japanese male during a screening survey. The proband was a 53-year-old
man with liver cirrhosis and hemorrhagic gastritis (Hidaka et al.,
1990).

.0164
HEMOGLOBIN PORT HURON
HBA1, LYS56ARG

Zwerdling et al. (1991) investigated the structural abnormality of a
putative Hb E detected in an African American family with no apparent
Asian ancestry. The tryptic peptide map formed by high performance
liquid chromatography showed that the electrophoretic variant was indeed
the beta glu26-to-lys mutation of Hb E. In addition, however, the
tryptic map showed an abnormal alpha peptide. The second mutation was a
substitution of arginine for lysine at residue 56 of the alpha chain.
The variant was clinically silent.

.0166
HEMOGLOBIN PAVIE
HBA1, VAL135GLU

See Wajcman et al. (1990).

.0167
HEMOGLOBIN QUESTEMBERT
HBA1, SER131PRO

See Wajcman et al. (1990, 1993).

.0168
HEMOGLOBIN THIONVILLE
HBA1, NH2 EXTENSION, VAL1GLU

See Vasseur et al. (1990). Substitution of glutamic acid for valine as
the first residue in the mature protein is accompanied by retention of
the initiator methionine residue. This may be the only known hemoglobin
variant with an NH2-extension in the alpha-globin chain. Hb Marseille
(141900.0171), Hb Doha (141900.0069), and Hb South Florida (141900.0266)
are examples of hemoglobin variants with an NH2-extension due to
retention of the initiator methionine in the beta-globin chain. Each is
due to mutation in the first or second residue of the mature protein.
Vasseur et al. (1992) found that elongation of the NH2-terminus of the
alpha-chain, due to inhibition of cleavage of the initiator methionine
which is then acetylated, modifies the 3-dimensional structure of
hemoglobin at a region that is known to have an important role in the
allosteric regulation of oxygen binding. Hb Thionville has a lowered
affinity for oxygen. In contrast, response to 2,3-diphosphoglycerate is
normal.

.0169
HEMOGLOBIN KANAGAWA
HBA1, LYS40MET

In the course of a high performance liquid chromatography survey of Hb
A1c, Miyashita et al. (1992) detected a new hemoglobin in a 70-year-old
Japanese male with cerebral infarction and erythremia. Further studies
revealed a lys40-to-met mutation. The variant showed increased oxygen
affinity, decreased heme-heme interaction, and a lowered
2,3-diphosphoglycerate effect.

(Erythemia, a now almost obsolete synonym for polycythemia and
erythrocytosis, means increased red blood cell mass.)

.0170
HEMOGLOBIN TURRIFF
HBA1, LYS99GLU

In a diabetic woman of Scottish ancestry, Langdown et al. (1992)
detected a new hemoglobin variant in the course of determining Hb A1c by
high performance liquid chromatography. The abnormal hemoglobin
chromatographed with the Hb A1c fraction. Family studies showed that a
lys99-to-glu mutation, which was not associated with any hematologic
disturbance, had occurred de novo. An AAG-to-GAG mutation was presumed
and was not assigned to either the alpha-2- or alpha-1-globin chain.

The Hb A(1c) level in the patient of Langdown et al. (1992) was found to
be very high. In a Japanese individual, Harano et al. (2003) likewise
found an unexpectedly high Hb A(1c) level as measured by an automatic Hb
A(1c) analyzer and found by DNA sequencing a change in the first
nucleotide of codon 99 (AAG-GAG) of the Hb A1 gene.

.0171
HEMOGLOBIN ZAIRE
HBA1, 15-BP TANDEM REPEAT

Hemoglobin Zaire was found in a 36-year-old patient from Zaire during a
systematic hemoglobin study. Wajcman et al. (1992) demonstrated that the
abnormality was the insertion of 5 amino acids--his, leu, pro, ala,
glu--between glu116 and phe117 of the alpha-globin chain. This sequence
represented a tandem repeat of the 5 amino acid residues from 112
through 116, located at the end of the GH corner of the molecule.
Hemoglobin Grady (141800.0045) involves the insertion of 3 amino acids
as repeats of residues 116, 117 and 118. Unequal crossing over between
alleles rather than between the separate alpha-1 and alpha-2 loci was
thought to be the mechanism in that case and possibly in the case of Hb
Zaire as well.

.0172
HEMOGLOBIN LUTON
HBA1, HIS89LEU

In a newborn infant and the father, a 35-year-old Pakistani man,
Williamson et al. (1992) described a new hemoglobin with high oxygen
affinity. The high affinity hemoglobin mutation was identified by HPLC
peptide mapping and amino acid sequencing; leucine was substituted for
histidine at amino acid position 89. The mutation occurred at the end of
the F helix (FG1), a part of the hemoglobin structure critical in
determining oxygen affinity since it is directly linked to the heme iron
through the proximal histidine residue F8. This was the first example of
a mutation at this position of the alpha chain of hemoglobin, although
there were 2 high affinity mutants that involved the structurally
equivalent amino acid (beta94 asp) of the beta chain: Hb Barcelona
(beta94 his; 141900.0016) and Hb Bunbury (beta94 asn; 141900.0035). The
new hemoglobin was called Hb Luton for the name of the hospital where
the proband was originally treated. The proband was a neonate in whom 2
abnormal hemoglobin bands were found, the 2 bands being the mutant forms
of fetal and adult hemoglobins containing the anomalous alpha globin.
The father had microcytosis as well as mild polycythemia and was shown
to have an accompanying alpha-thalassemia trait due to deletion of a
single alpha-globin gene.

.0173
HEMOGLOBIN OZIERI
HBA1, ALA71VAL

During a screening for hemoglobinopathies in Sardinia, Ferranti et al.
(1993) found a new 'silent' hemoglobin variant in 5 apparently unrelated
newborn babies. The variant was detected by means of isoelectric
focusing (IEF), and further study revealed a valine for alanine
substitution at position 71 of the alpha-globin chain. The substitution
indicated that a C-to-T transition had occurred in the GCG codon for
alanine which contains one of the 35 unmethylated CpG dinucleotides of
the HBA1 gene. This observation brought to 13 the number of variants due
to mutation in the CpGs of the HBA1 gene and raised the possibility that
unmethylated CpGs, like methylated ones, may be hotspots for mutations.

.0174
HEMOGLOBIN ADANA
HEMOGLOBIN H DISEASE, NONDELETIONAL, INCLUDED
HBA1, GLY59ASP

In 3 Turkish children with severe thalassemia, Curuk et al. (1992) found
a GGC-to-GAC mutation in codon 59 of the HBA1 gene resulting in a
replacement of glycine by aspartic acid. The combination of an
alpha-thal-1 deletion with the unstable Hb Adana resulted in a severe
type of Hb H disease (613978).

.0175
HEMOGLOBIN AL-AIN ABU DHABI
HBA1, GLY18ASP

During a routine program of hemoglobin screening performed in the United
Arab Emirates, Abbes et al. (1992) found an electrophoretically
fast-moving variant in a 9-month-old girl and in several members of her
family. Amino acid sequencing demonstrated that the new variant had a
gly18-to-asp substitution. Its functional properties were normal.

.0176
HEMOGLOBIN POITIERS
HBA1, HIS45ASP

Hb Poitiers was discovered by Bardakdjian et al. (1994) in a 9-year-old
French Caucasian boy who suffered from chronic anemia. The molecular
defect consists of a missense mutation at codon 45 of the HBA1 gene,
changing histidine to aspartate. Hb Poitiers displays a 2-fold increased
oxygen affinity, a slightly decreased heme-heme interaction, and a
slightly faster autooxidation rate. In adult hemoglobin (Hb A), the
histidine residue at position 45 of the alpha-globin gene is the only
polar contact between the heme group and globin. This position, however,
seems to allow for moderate variation without dramatic consequences on
the function of hemoglobin. His45 is replaced by glutamine in Hb Bari
(141800.0009) and by arginine in Hb Fort de France (141800.0034).

.0177
MOVED TO 141850.0062
.0178
HEMOGLOBIN CAEN
HBA1, VAL132GLY

Wajcman et al. (1993) discovered the Hb Caen variant in a 25-year-old
French Caucasian woman suffering from a mild chronic hemolytic anemia.
Trypsin degradation of the isolated hemoglobin alpha chain followed by
high performance liquid chromatography indicated that the valine residue
at position 132 was replaced by glycine.

.0179
HEMOGLOBIN YUDA
HBA1, ALA130ASP

Hb Yuda was discovered in a 65-year-old Japanese female with
noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (Fujisawa et al., 1992). Gas
phase Edman degradation indicated that the abnormal hemoglobin alpha
chain has a substitution of aspartic acid for alanine at residue 130. Hb
Yuda has a very low oxygen affinity and slightly decreased cooperative
subunit interaction.

.0180
HEMOGLOBIN CAPA
HBA1, ASP94GLY

Hb Capa was discovered in a 28-year-old female in Turkey who was being
treated for chronic iron deficiency anemia. The hemoglobin showed
abnormal electrophoretic mobility and was mildly unstable in a heat
denaturation test. The molecular change was a GAC-to-GGC transition in
codon 94, resulting in substitution of glycine for aspartic acid. Three
other substitutions of asp-94 are known: Hb Setif (141800.0130), Hb
Titusville (141800.0148), and Hb Sunshine Seth (141800.0143). All 4
variants exhibit mild instability.

.0181
HEMOGLOBIN MONTEFIORE
HBA1, ASP126TYR

Wajcman et al. (1992) demonstrated an asp126-to-tyr change in the HBA1
gene in an individual of Puerto Rican descent. At physiologic pH (7.4),
the oxygen binding of the patient's red blood cells revealed a 40%
reduction. Hb Montefiore appears to have lower cooperativity than other
characterized alpha-126 mutants: aspartic acid is replaced by asparagine
in Hb Tarrant (141800.0146), by histidine in Hb Sassari (141800.0126),
and by valine in Hb Fukutomi (141800.0163).

.0182
HEMOGLOBIN ROUEN
HEMOGLOBIN ETHIOPIA
HBA1, TYR140HIS

A tyr140-to-his mutation in the HBA1 gene was discovered and
characterized in a French patient with polycythemia vera by Wajcman et
al. (1992) and in a newborn baby of Ethiopian descent by Webber et al.
(1992). This mutation provides an example of an alteration of the
C-terminus of the alpha chain, a region involved in the mechanisms of
allosteric regulation. Hb Rouen has increased oxygen affinity and
decreased cooperativity. A complementary tyr145-to-his mutation (Hb
Bethesda; 141900.0022) in the hemoglobin beta chain has more dramatic
effects, suggesting that the alpha and beta chains play unequal roles in
the overall function of hemoglobin.

.0183
HEMOGLOBIN MELUSINE
HBA1, PRO114SER

Hb Melusine was found in an Algerian patient during a systematic
screening for hemoglobinopathies in Luxembourg. Using isoelectric
focusing and reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography
(RP-HPLC), Wajcman et al. (1993) determined that the molecular mutation
at amino acid position 114 of the HBA1 gene changed the residue from
proline to serine.

.0184
HEMOGLOBIN TAYBE
HBA1, THR38DEL OR THR39DEL

Girodon et al. (1992) reported the characterization of Hb Taybe, a
hemoglobin variant discovered in a young Arabic woman suffering since
birth from a severe and highly regenerative hemolytic anemia. DNA
amplification and sequencing of the HBA1 gene indicated a 3-bp deletion
(encoding threonine) at amino acid position 38 or 39. This variant
increases the hydrophobicity of the amino acid chain, and it is quite
unstable.

.0185
HEMOGLOBIN CEMENELUM
HBA1, ARG92TRP

Wajcman et al. (1994) described a missense mutation involving the same
codon as that involved in Hb Chesapeake (141800.0018), the first high
oxygen affinity hemoglobin variant to be described in association with
polycythemia (Charache et al., 1966). Hb Chesapeake has an arg92-to-leu
substitution; Hb Cemenelum has an arg92-to-trp substitution. Hb J (Cape
Town) (141800.0063) has a substitution (arg92-to-gln) in the same codon.
Hb Cemenelum was discovered in a French diabetic patient with no
hematologic abnormalities. The purified abnormal hemoglobin, like Hb J
(Cape Town), displayed only a 1.5- to 2-fold increased oxygen affinity.
The findings demonstrate that the degree to which the functional
properties are altered by changes in key residues at the alpha-beta
interface depends upon the specific residue occupying this position.

.0186
HEMOGLOBIN RAMONA
HBA1, TYR24CYS

Hb Ramona was accidentally detected by isoelectrofocusing in a pregnant
woman of part Spanish descent; its mobility was slightly faster than
that of Hb A. A TAT-to-TGT change was found at codon 24, corresponding
to a replacement of tyrosine by cysteine.

.0187
HEMOGLOBIN TATRAS
HBA1, LYS7ASN

In a 72-year-old woman born in Czechoslovakia, Wajcman et al. (1994)
found a lys7-to-asn mutation when investigating the basis for an
abnormal level of Hb A1c. No abnormal hematologic features were
observed.

.0188
HEMOGLOBIN LISBON
HBA1, GLU23ASP

In a 31-year-old man of Portuguese origin who had suffered from diabetes
mellitus since the age of 15 years, Wajcman et al. (1994) found an
abnormal hemoglobin during measurement of Hb A1c by an
isoelectrofocusing study. There were no abnormal hematologic features.

.0189
HEMOGLOBIN ROANNE
HBA1, ASP94GLU

Kister et al. (1995) described a new hemoglobin variant in a 73-year-old
woman from Roanne in central France. She suffered from mild chronic
hemolytic anemia. An asp94-to-glu substitution was found in the alpha-1
chain. Aspartate-94 is involved in several contacts, both in the deoxy-
and oxy-structures of the hemoglobin.

.0190
HEMOGLOBIN MALHACEN
HBA1, ALA123SER

Kazanetz et al. (1995) observed this variant hemoglobin in an adult male
in Granada, Spain, who was evaluated because of severe iron deficiency
anemia. Sequencing of the HBA1 gene showed 2 nucleotide changes. One was
a simple polymorphism, as both GCG and GCT code for alanine (at codon
120). The second mutation was a GCC-to-TCC change at codon 123 resulting
in replacement of alanine by serine. The replacement caused slight
differences in the IEF and reversed-phase HPLC experiments, but the
stability of the hemoglobin was normal. Family studies were not
performed; thus, whether the 2 mutations were in coupling or repulsion
was not known.

.0191
HEMOGLOBIN TUNIS-BIZERTE
HBA1, LEU129PRO

In 3 members of a Tunisian family, Darbellay et al. (1995) identified a
leu129-to-pro substitution in the HBA1 gene by sequencing the entirety
of the HBA2 and HBA1 genes. In the heterozygous state, the variant was
manifested by microcytosis, whereas the homozygous state showed moderate
anemia with marked microcytosis.

.0192
MOVED TO 141850.0068
.0193
HEMOGLOBIN BOIS GUILLAUME
HBA1, ALA65VAL

By tiny abnormalities observed during isoelectrofocusing, Wajcman et al.
(1995) identified this electrophoretically silent variant in 3 members
of a Caucasian-French family. This hemoglobin was the first alpha-chain
variant that involved position 64. In the beta chain, the corresponding
position, E14, is also occupied by an alanine residue; in Hb Seattle
(141900.0256), it is replaced by aspartic acid (ala70-to-asp).

.0194
HEMOGLOBIN MANTES-LA-JOLIE
HBA1, ALA79THR

Wajcman et al. (1995) found this variant hemoglobin during a systematic
study of the iron status in a 6-month-old baby and his mother who
originated from Chad in North Central Africa.

.0195
HEMOGLOBIN MOSELLA
HBA1, ALA111THR

Wajcman et al. (1995) found this variant in a 35-year-old pregnant woman
of Caucasian origin who lived in Luxembourg. The abnormal Hb was also
found in one of her daughters.

.0196
HEMOGLOBIN FUCHU-I
HBA1, HIS72TYR

At the Fuchu Municipal Medical Center in Tokyo, Harano et al. (1995)
identified 2 Hb variants in the course of assaying glycated hemoglobin,
Hb A(1c), of the peripheral blood by cation exchange HPLC. Structural
analyses demonstrated that 1 patient had a his72-to-tyr substitution and
the other an asn97-to-his substitution (141800.0197) of the alpha-globin
chain. These were named Hb Fuchu-I and Hb Fuchu-II, respectively. Both
were healthy adults.

.0197
HEMOGLOBIN FUCHU-II
HBA1, ASN97HIS

See 141800.0196.

.0198
HEMOGLOBIN GOUDA
HBA1, HIS72GLN

In a 54-year-old Dutch woman under treatment for diabetes mellitus,
Giordano et al. (1996) incidentally found a silent alpha-chain variant
on testing for glycated hemoglobin. A CAC-to-CAA transversion was
predicted to result in substitution of glutamine for histidine at
residue 72 in the HBA1 gene.

.0199
HEMOGLOBIN J (BISKRA)
HBA1, 24-BP DEL

Wajcman et al. (1998) described Hb J-Biskra, a variant hemoglobin
consisting of deletion of 24 nucleotides from the HBA1 gene and 8 amino
acid residues from the alpha-globin chain: residues 50-57, 51-58, or
52-59. This variant was mildly unstable in vitro only, and there was no
hematologic or biochemical evidence of hemolysis in affected family
members. Wajcman et al. (1998) stated that this was the largest deletion
reported to that time in a hemoglobin molecule that is expressed at an
almost normal level in the red blood cell.

.0200
HEMOGLOBIN GODAVARI
HBA1, PRO95THR

Hb Godavari is the fourth example of a substitution involving neutral
residues at position 95 of the alpha-1 chain. In all of these variants,
the electrophoretic pattern suggested that the structural modification
unmasks a charged residue in the alpha-1/beta-2 contact area. The other
examples are Hb Denmark Hill, pro95 to ala (141800.0027); Hb G
(Georgia), and pro95 to leu (141800.0038). Hb Godavari shared the same
electrophoretic properties as these variants, but displayed minimal
alterations of the oxygen-binding properties. Wajcman et al. (1998)
identified Hb Godavari in 2 families of different ethnic origin. The
first case, found in the Netherlands, involved an Indian patient. The
second case was identified a few months later in an African family from
Mali, living in France.

.0201
HEMOGLOBIN OITA
HBA1, HIS45PRO

Hamaguchi et al. (1998) reported a neutral (silent) hemoglobin variant,
designated Hb Oita, in which a change from CAC to CCC caused a
his45-to-pro substitution. In Hb Bari (141800.0009), his45 is replaced
by gln. In Hb Fort de France (141800.0034), his45 is replaced by arg. In
Hb Portiers (141800.0176), his45 is replaced by asp.

.0202
HEMOGLOBIN AGHIA SOPHIA
HEMOGLOBIN H DISEASE, NONDELETIONAL, INCLUDED
HBA1, VAL62DEL

In a Greek child with Hb H disease (613978), Traeger-Synodinos et al.
(1999) found deletion of codon 62 of the alpha-1 gene, leading to
alpha-plus-thalassemia. Codon 62 encodes a valine residue at the E11
alpha helix, which is located in the interior of the heme pocket.
Substitutions of this valine with other amino acid residues in the alpha
as well as beta polypeptide chains lead, in the heterozygous carrier,
either to Hb M disease or to congenital nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia.
Traeger-Synodinos et al. (1999) assumed that deletion of val at position
62 disrupted the conformation of the alpha chain to such an extent that
the mutated subunit was rapidly removed by proteolysis. The final result
was an alpha-thalassemia phenotype rather than an unstable hemoglobin
syndrome. This conclusion was supported by the apparent absence of an
abnormal alpha chain in the peripheral blood of the patient. Hb Evans
(141850.0006) is a val62-to-met mutation of the HBA2 gene and was found
in a patient with mild hemolytic anemia. Four amino acid substitutions
at position 67(E11)val of the beta chain lead to instability of the Hb
tetramer and an anemia of variable degrees in the heterozygotes. One of
these substitutions, val67 to glu (141900.0163), results in the stable
Hb M-Milwaukee-I.

.0203
HEMOGLOBIN CHAROLLES
HBA1, HIS103TYR

Lacan et al. (1999) detected Hb Charolles in a 46-year-old patient who
presented with microcytosis and hypochromia. It was easily detected by
isoelectrofocusing and high performance liquid chromatography. It
accounted for 11% of the total hemoglobin. The amino acid change
resulted from a CAC-to-TAC change in codon 103.

.0204
HEMOGLOBIN ROUBAIX
HBA1, VAL55LEU

In a French family from the north of France, Prehu et al. (1999) found a
new HBA1 variant in 5 members. The variant was initially detected during
measurement of glycated hemoglobin in a woman originating from Roubaix.
Codon 55 in exon 2 was found to have a heterozygous change from GTT
(val) to CTT (leu). This was a neutral variant.

.0205
HEMOGLOBIN DOUALA
HBA1, SER3PHE

In a woman from Cameroon, Prehu et al. (2001) identified a new
hemoglobin variant, designated Hb Douala, with a C-to-T transition
(TCT-TTT) in the HBA1 gene, resulting in a ser3-to-phe (S3F) amino acid
substitution. The patient was also heterozygous for Hb S (141900.0243)
and for a 3.7-kb deletional alpha-thalassemia.

.0206
THALASSEMIA, ALPHA-PLUS
HBA1, 21-BP INS-DUP

In a patient of Iranian descent with the hematologic profile of
alpha-plus-thalassemia characterized by mild microcytosis, Waye et al.
(2001) found a 21-bp insertion/duplication that gave rise to a predicted
alpha-globin chain containing a duplication of amino acid residues
93-99.

.0207
THALASSEMIA, ALPHA-PLUS
HBA1, 33-BP DEL

In a patient of Greek descent with the hematologic profile of
alpha-plus-thalassemia characterized by mild microcytosis, Waye et al.
(2001) found a 33-bp deletion in the HBA1 gene resulting in a predicted
alpha-globin chain missing amino acid residues 64-74.

.0208
HEMOGLOBIN DELFZICHT
HBA1, ASN9LYS

Harteveld et al. (2002) reported a 69-year-old Dutch woman monitored for
diabetes mellitus in whom Hb A(L1c) analysis revealed a clinically
silent hemoglobin variant, asn9 to lys (N9K), due to an AAC-to-AAG
transversion in heterozygous state. The mutation was identical to that
found at the same position in the HBA2 gene that leads to a variant
named Hb Park Ridge (141850.0048).

.0209
HEMOGLOBIN SARATOGA SPRINGS
HBA1, LYS40ASN

In a 34-year-old Caucasian male of Swedish ancestry who lived in
Saratoga Springs, New York, Hoyer et al. (2003) identified a hemoglobin
variant with abnormal oxygen affinity, designated Hb Saratoga Springs.
There was no family history of erythrocytosis. The patient had no
smoking history. A change of codon 40 of the HBA1 gene from AAG to AAC
resulted in a lys40-to-asn (K40N) change. Lys40 is replaced by glu in Hb
Kariya (141800.0081), and by met in Hb Kanagawa (141800.0169). Both of
these hemoglobins had been shown to have increased oxygen affinity, but
neither was associated with erythrocytosis.

.0210
HEMOGLOBIN DIE
HBA1, VAL93ALA

In a 7-year-old girl living near the town of Die in southeast France,
Lacan et al. (2004) identified a val93-to-ala (V93A) mutation in the
HBA1 gene. The family was of French Caucasian origin.

.0211
HEMOGLOBIN BEZIERS
HBA1, LYS99ASN

In a 72-year-old woman of French Caucasian origin living in the city of
Beziers in the south of France, Lacan et al. (2004) identified a
lys99-to-asn (K99N) mutation in the HBA1 gene. The variant was found
during the determination of Hb A(1c) by high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) in this diabetic patient. Hematologic data were
normal, without hepatomegaly or splenomegaly.

.0212
HEMOGLOBIN BUFFALO
HBA1, HIS89GLN

In a 32-year-old Somali male living in the Netherlands who was being
monitored for diabetes mellitus, Harteveld et al. (2004) identified Hb S
(141900.0243) in heterozygous state and a heterozygous C-to-G
transversion in the HBA1 gene, resulting in a his89-to-gln (H89Q)
substitution. The H89Q mutation had previously been described in a
Yemenite woman and 2 apparently unrelated Somali males (Hoyer et al.,
2002), and had been designated Hb Buffalo. No hematologic abnormality
had been associated with the allelic variant in this or other cases. In
addition to Hb Buffalo, 4 amino acid substitutions had been reported at
codon 89: Hb Luton (his89 to leu; 141800.0172), Hb Villeurbanne (his89
to tyr; 141800.0213), Hb Tokyo (his89 to pro; 141800.0214), and Hb
Tamano (his89 to arg; 141800.0215).

.0213
HEMOGLOBIN VILLEURBANNE
HBA1, HIS89TYR

Deon et al. (1997) identified a his89-to-tyr (H89Y) mutation in the HBA1
gene as the defect in Hb Villeurbanne.

.0214
HEMOGLOBIN TOKYO
HBA1, HIS89PRO

Harteveld et al. (2004) stated that Hb Tokyo carries a his89-to-pro
(H89P) mutation in the HBA1 gene.

.0215
HEMOGLOBIN TAMANO
HBA1, HIS89ARG

Harteveld et al. (2004) stated that Hb Tamano carries a his89-to-arg
(H89R) mutation in the HBA1 gene.

.0216
HEMOGLOBIN RICCARTON
HBA1, GLY51SER

In a 4-year-old Caucasian boy investigated for fatigue and microcytosis,
Brennan et al. (2005) found a GGC-to-AGC transition at codon 51 in the
HBA1 gene, resulting in a gly51-to-ser substitution (G51S). The mutation
was thought not to be the cause of the microcytosis as it was detected
also in the boy's father who had normal red cell indices.

.0217
HEMOGLOBIN OEGSTGEEST
HBA1, CYS104SER

In an 8-year-old black female of Surinamese origin with a mild
alpha-thalassemia phenotype, Harteveld et al. (2005) identified
homozygosity for a TGC-to-AGC transversion in the HBA1 gene, resulting
in a cys104-to-ser substitution. Cysteine-104 is involved in alpha/beta
globin contact and had been described as a critical amino acid of the
HBA2 chain when substituted by a tyrosine (cys104 to tyr) in Hb
Sallanches (141850.0031).

.0218
HEMOGLOBIN LAMEN ISLAND
HBA1, 149709T-C

De Gobbi et al. (2006) studied 148 individuals from Melanesia with
alpha-thalassemia, including 5 with HbH disease, in whom none of the
theretofore described molecular defects could be found. The pattern of
inheritance suggested that individuals with HbH disease were homozygous
for a codominant defect, referred to as (alpha-alpha)T, causing
alpha-thalassemia with a predicted genotype of
(alpha-alpha)T/(alpha-alpha)T. In situ RNA hybridization in erythroid
cells from an affected individual from Lamen Island (Vanuatu) detected
substantially fewer nuclear transcripts from the alpha-globin genes than
from the beta-globin genes. DNA FISH in 2 affected individuals showed
that the alpha-globin cluster was present at its normal location of
chromosome 16, and no deletions or chromosomal rearrangements were
detected in any of these individuals. Linkage analysis showed that the
disease phenotype in individuals was derived from telomeric chromosome
16 T. Only the C allele of SNP195 (C or T, located at coordinate 149709)
segregated with thalassemia in the affected families and showed complete
association with the (alpha-alpha)T haplotype. This allele was not found
in a separate analysis of 131 nonthalassemic Melanesian individuals.
SNP195 changes the sequence 5-prime-TAATAA-3-prime (T allele) to
5-prime-TGATAA-3-prime (C allele), potentially creating a new binding
site for the key erythroid transcription factor GATA1. GATA1 binds at
the C allele of SNP195 in vivo. SNP195 creates a new promoter-like
element between the upstream regulatory elements and their cognate
promoters. This element, when activated, causes significant
downregulation of the alpha-D, alpha-2, and alpha-1 genes that lie
downstream, thereby causing alpha-thalassemia.

.0219
ALPHA-THALASSEMIA
HBA1, 1-BP DEL, 354C

In a newborn of mixed black and Chinese descent who carried the
Southeast Asian alpha-0-thal deletion, Eng et al. (2006) also found a
1-bp deletion of cysteine from codon 78 in exon 2 of the HBA1 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination at codon 83.

.0220
HEMOGLOBIN AUCKLAND
HBA1, HIS87ASN

In a 27-year-old woman with mild compensated hemolytic anemia, Brennan
and Matthews (1997) identified Hb Auckland, a his87-to-asn substitution
in the HBA1 gene.

.9999
HEMOGLOBIN ALPHA VARIANTS, MOLECULAR DEFECT UNKNOWN

HEMOGLOBIN J (INDIA). See Raper (1957).

HEMOGLOBIN J (MALAYA). See Lehmann (1962).

HEMOGLOBIN K (CALCUTTA). Fast hemoglobin. See Lehmann (1962).

HEMOGLOBIN K (MADRAS). See Ager and Lehmann (1957).

HEMOGLOBIN KARAMOJO. See Allbrook et al. (1965).

HEMOGLOBIN L (BOMBAY). See Sukumaran and Pik (1965).

HEMOGLOBIN M (RESERVE). Reduced oxygen affinity and decreased reversible
oxygen-binding capacity (Overly et al., 1967).

HEMOGLOBIN N, ALPHA TYPE. An alpha chain anomaly was deduced from
molecular hybridization experiments with canine hemoglobin (Silvestroni
et al., 1963). Other hemoglobin N variants have a beta change.

HEMOGLOBIN NICOSIA. See Fessas et al. (1965).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Al-Awamy et al. (1985); Baklouti et al. (1988); Barg et al. (1982);
Barton et al. (1982); Brittenham et al. (1980); Davis et al. (1979);
Dincol et al. (1994); Dozy et al. (1979); Embury et al. (1979); Harano
et al. (1983); Harano et al. (1983); Harano et al. (1983); Harano
et al. (1984); Harano et al. (1982); Hess et al. (1983); Higgs et
al. (1981); Hill et al. (1985); Huisman and Miller (1976); Kan et
al. (1979); Kielman et al. (1993); Li et al. (1990); Liang et al.
(1981); Liebhaber et al. (1980); Marinucci et al. (1979); Meloni et
al. (1980); Ohba et al. (1978); Phillips et al. (1979); Phillips et
al. (1980); Pobedimskaya et al. (1994); Priest et al. (1989); Proudfoot
and Maniatis (1980); Romao et al. (1992); Schroeder and Jones (1965);
Shimizu et al. (1965); Southern  (1975); Vella et al. (1974); Wainscoat
et al. (1983); Wajcman et al. (1989); Wajcman et al. (1990); Wajcman
et al. (1992); Wajcman et al. (1992); Wajcman et al. (1993); Wajcman
et al. (1990); Weatherall and Clegg (1979); Zimmer et al. (1980)
REFERENCE 1. Abbes, S.; M'Rad, A.; Fitzgerald, P. A.; Dormer, P.; Blouquit,
Y.; Kister, J.; Galacteros, F.; Wajcman, H.: Hb Al-Ain Abu Dhabi
[alpha-18 (A16) gly-to-asp]: a new hemoglobin variant discovered in
an Emiratee family. Hemoglobin 16: 355-362, 1992.

2. Abdo, M. Z.: Hb Setif (alpha94(G1)asp-to-tyr) in a Saudi Arabian
family. Hemoglobin 13: 737-742, 1989.

3. Abramov, A.; Lehmann, H.; Robb, L.: Hb Shaare Zedek (alpha56 E5
lys-to-glu). FEBS Lett. 113: 235-237, 1980.

4. Abramson, R. K.; Rucknagel, D. L.; Shreffler, D. C.; Saave, J.
J.: Homozygous Hb J Tongariki: evidence for only one alpha chain
structural locus in Melanesians. Science 169: 194-196, 1970.

5. Adams, J. G., III: Hemoglobin Ann Arbor: disturbance in the coordinated
biosynthesis of globin chains? Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 241: 232-241,
1974.

6. Adams, J. G., III; Winter, W. P.; Rucknagel, D. L.; Spencer, H.
H.: Biosynthesis of hemoglobin Ann Arbor: evidence for catabolic
and feedback regulation. Science 176: 1427-1429, 1972.

7. Ager, J. A. M.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin K in an East Indian and
his family. Brit. Med. J. 1: 1449-1450, 1957.

8. Ager, J. A. M.; Lehmann, H.; Vella, F.: Haemoglobin 'Norfolk':
a new haemoglobin found in an English family. Brit. Med. J. 2: 539-541,
1958.

9. Ahmad, A.; Naqvi, S.; Ehsanullah, S.; Zaidi, Z. H.: Abnormal hemoglobins-11
= Hb (Karachi), an alpha chain abnormality at position 5 ala-to-pro. J.
Pakistan Med. Assoc. 36: 206-208, 1986.

10. Al-Awamy, B.; Niazi, G. A.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.:
Hb Setif or alpha94(G1)asp-to-tyr observed in a Saudi Arabian family. Hemoglobin 9:
87-90, 1985.

11. Al-Awamy, B. H.; Niazi, G. A.; Naeem, M. A.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hemoglobin Handsworth or alpha18(A16)gly-to-arg in a Saudi
newborn. Hemoglobin 9: 183-186, 1985.

12. Alberti, R.; Mariuzzi, G. M.; Artibani, L.; Bruni, E.; Tentori,
L.: A new haemoglobin variant: J-Rovigo alpha 53 (E-2) alanine to
aspartic acid. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 342: 1-4, 1974.

13. Allbrook, D.; Barnicot, N. A.; Dance, N.; Lawler, S. D.; Marshall,
R.; Mungai, J.: Blood groups, haemoglobin and serum factors of the
Karamojo. Hum. Biol. 37: 217-237, 1965.

14. Allen, S. J.; O'Donnell, A.; Alexander, N. D. E.; Alpers, M. P.;
Peto, T. E. A.; Clegg, J. B.; Weatherall, D. J.: Alpha(+)-thalassemia
protects children against disease caused by other infections as well
as malaria. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 14736-14741, 1997.

15. Ameri, A.; Fairbanks, V. F.; Yanik, G. A.; Mahdi, F.; Thibodeau,
S. N.; McCormick, D. J.; Boxer, L. A.; McDonagh, K. T.: Identification
of the molecular genetic defect of patients with methemoglobin M Kankakee
(M-Iwate), alpha-87 (F8) his-to-tyr: evidence for an electrostatic
model of alpha-M hemoglobin assembly. Blood 94: 1825-1826, 1999.

16. Andersen, C. B. F.; Torvund-Jensen, M.; Nielsen, M. J.; de Oliveira,
C. L. P.; Hersleth, H.-P.; Andersen, N. H.; Pedersen, J. S.; Andersen,
G. R.; Moestrup, S. K.: Structure of the haptoglobin-haemoglobin
complex. Nature 489: 456-459, 2012.

17. Assum, G.; Griese, E.-U.; Horst, J.: Detection of a restriction
site polymorphism within the human alpha-globin gene complex. Hum.
Genet. 69: 144-146, 1985.

18. Baglioni, C.: A chemical study of hemoglobin-Norfolk. J. Biol.
Chem. 237: 69-74, 1962.

19. Baglioni, C.; Lehmann, H.: Chemical heterogeneity of haemoglobin
O. Nature 196: 229-231, 1962.

20. Baklouti, F.; Baudin-Chich, V.; Kister, J.; Marden, M.; Teyssier,
G.; Poyart, C.; Delaunay, J.; Wajcman, H.: Increased oxygen affinity
with normal heterotropic effects in hemoglobin Loire (alpha88 (F9)
ala-to-ser). Europ. J. Biochem. 177: 307-312, 1988.

21. Baklouti, F.; Francina, A.; Dorleac, E.; Baudin-Chich, V.; Gombaud-Saintonge,
G.; Plauchu, H.; Wajcman, H.; Delaunay, J.; Godet, J.: Asymptomatic
association of hemoglobin Dunn (alpha-6(A4)asp-to-asn) and hemoglobin
O-Arab (beta-121[GH4]glu-to-lys) in a Moroccan man. Am. J. Hemat. 27:
253-256, 1988.

22. Bannister, W. H.; Grech, J. L.; Plese, C. F.; Smith, L. L.; Barton,
B. P.; Wilson, J. B.; Reynolds, C. A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin
St. Luke's or alpha 95 arg (G2). Europ. J. Biochem. 29: 301-307,
1972.

23. Barclay, G. P. T.; Charlesworth, D.; Lehmann, H.: Abnormal haemoglobins
in Zambia: a new hemoglobin Zambia alpha 60 (E9) lysine to asparagine. Brit.
Med. J. 2: 595-596, 1969.

24. Bardakdjian, J.; Kister, J.; Wajcman, H.; Boulard, P.; Bohn, B.;
Blouquit, Y.; Galacteros, F.: Hb Poitiers [alpha45 (CE3) his-to-asp]:
a new hemoglobin variant with a two-fold increase in oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 18:
1-9, 1994.

25. Bardakdjian-Michau, J.; Galacteros, F.; Craescu, C. T.: Functional
and NMR studies of Hb Sassari (asp126-alpha-to-his): role of the inter-subunit
contacts in the affinity control of human hemoglobin. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1041: 250-253, 1990.

26. Bardakdjian-Michau, J.; Rosa, J.; Galacteros, F.; Lancelot, M.;
Marquart, F. X.: Hb Reims (alpha23(B4)glu-to-gly): a new alpha chain
variant with slightly decreased stability. Hemoglobin 13: 733-735,
1989.

27. Barg, R.; Barton, P.; Caine, A.; Clements, R. L.; Ferguson-Smith,
M. A.; Malcolm, S.; Morrison, N.; Murphy, C. S.: Regional localization
of the human alpha-globin gene to the short arm of chromosome 16 (16p12-pter)
using both somatic cell hybrids and in situ hybridization. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 32: 252-253, 1982.

28. Barton, P.; Malcolm, S.; Murphy, C.; Ferguson-Smith, M. A.: Localization
of the human alpha-globin gene cluster to the short arm of chromosome
16 (16p12-16pter) by hybridization in situ. J. Molec. Biol. 156:
269-278, 1982.

29. Baudin, V.; Baklouti, F.; Wajcman, H.; Delaunay, J.: Hemoglobin
Aichi (alpha50 (CE8) his-to-arg) in a French Caucasian patient. Hemoglobin 11:
145-149, 1987.

30. Baur, E. W.: Hb alpha 2 glu beta 2(Hb I) in a Caucasian family:
independent mutation or common origin? Humangenetik 6: 368-372,
1968.

31. Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: Abnormal haemoglobins and the genetic
code. Nature 207: 259-261, 1965.

32. Beaven, G. H.; Hornabrook, R. W.; Fox, R. H.; Huehns, E. R.:
Occurrence of heterozygotes and homozygotes for the alpha-chain haemoglobin
variant Hb-J (Tongariki) in New Guinea. Nature 235: 46-47, 1972.

33. Beckman, L.; Christodoulou, C.; Fessas, P.; Loukopoulos, D.; Kaltsoya,
A.; Nilsson, L.-O.: A Swedish haemoglobin variant. Acta Genet. Statist.
Med. 16: 362-370, 1966.

34. Beksedic, D.; Rajevska, T.; Lorkin, P. A.; Lehmann, H.: Hb Serbia
(alpha112 his-to-arg), a new haemoglobin variant from Yugoslavia. FEBS
Lett. 58: 226-229, 1975.

35. Beretta, A.; Prato, V.; Gallo, E.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin Torino--alpha
43 (CD 1) phenylalanine replaced by valine. Nature 217: 1016-1018,
1968.

36. Betke, K.: Haemoglobin-M: Typen und ihre Differenzierung (Uebersicht).In:
Lehmann, H.; Betke, K.: Haemoglobin-Colloquium.  Stuttgart: Georg
Thieme Verlag (pub.)  1962. Pp. 39-47.

37. Bilginer, A.; Lehmann, H.; Arcasoy, A.: Hemoglobin Ube-2 (alpha68
asn-to-asp) observed in a Turkish family. Hemoglobin 8: 189-191,
1984.

38. Blackwell, R. Q.; Boon, W. H.; Liu, C. S.; Weng, M. I.: Hemoglobin
J Singapore: alpha-78 asn to asp; alpha-79 ala to gly. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 278: 482-490, 1972.

39. Blackwell, R. Q.; Jim, R. T. S.; Tan, T. G. H.; Weng, M. I.; Liu,
C. S.; Wang, C. L.: Hemoglobin G Waimanalo: alpha 64 asp-to-asn. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 322: 27-33, 1973.

40. Blackwell, R. Q.; Liu, C. S.: Hemoglobin G Taichung: alpha74
asp-to-his. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 200: 70-75, 1970.

41. Blackwell, R. Q.; Wong, H. B.; Wang, C.-L.; Weng, M. I.; Liu,
C.-S.: Hemoglobin J-Meerut: alpha 120 ala-to-glu. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 351: 7-12, 1974.

42. Botha, M. C.; Beale, D.; Issacs, W. A.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
J Cape Town. Nature 212: 792-794, 1966.

43. Bowman, B. H.; Barnett, D. R.: Amino-acid substitution in haemoglobin
I (Texas variant). Nature 214: 499, 1967.

44. Bowman, J. E.; Bloom, R.; Chen, S. S.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson,
J. B.; Kutlar, F.; Kutlar, A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Chicago or alpha136
(H19) leu-to-met and a G-gamma-G-gamma-globin gene arrangement in
a black family. Hemoglobin 10: 495-505, 1986.

45. Boyer, S. H.; Crosby, E. F.; Fuller, G. F.; Ulenurm, L.; Buck,
A. A.: A survey of hemoglobins in the Republic of Chad and characterization
of hemoglobin Chad: alpha 23 glu-to-lys. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 20:
570-578, 1968.

46. Braconnier, F.; Gacon, G.; Thillet, J.; Wajcman, H.; Soria, J.;
Maigret, P.; Labie, D.; Rosa, J.: Hemoglobin Fort de France (alpha
45(CD3) his-to-arg): a new variant with increased oxygen affinity. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 477: 223-234, 1977.

47. Bradley, T. B., Jr.; Boyer, S. H.; Allen, F. H., Jr.: Hopkins-2
hemoglobin: a revised pedigree with data on blood and serum groups. Bull.
Johns Hopkins Hosp. 108: 75-79, 1961.

48. Brennan, S. O.; Chan, T.; Obele, M.; George, P. M.: Hb Riccarton
(alpha-51(CE9)gly-to-ser): a variant arising from a novel mutation
in the alpha-1 gene. Hemoglobin 29: 61-64, 2005.

49. Brennan, S. O.; Matthews, J. R. D.: Hb Auckland (alpha87(F8)his-to-asn):
a new mutation of the proximal histidine identified by electrospray
mass spectrometry. Hemoglobin 21: 393-403, 1997.

50. Brennan, S. O.; Tauro, G. P.; Melrose, W.; Carrell, R. W.: Haemoglobin
Port Phillip: alpha 91 (FG3) leu-to-pro, a new unstable hemoglobin. FEBS
Lett. 81: 115-117, 1977.

51. Breuning, M. H.; Madan, K.; Verjaal, M.; Wijnen, J. T.; Meera
Khan, P.; Pearson, P. L.: Human alpha-globin maps to pter-p13.3 in
chromosome 16 distal to PGP. Hum. Genet. 76: 287-289, 1987.

52. Brimhall, B.; Duerst, M.; Hollan, S. R.; Stenzel, P.; Szelenyi,
J.; Jones, R. T.: Structural characterizations of hemoglobins J-Buda
(alpha 61 (E10) lys-to-asn) and G-Pest (alpha 74 (EF3) asp-to-asn). Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 336: 344-360, 1974.

53. Brimhall, B.; Hollan, S.; Jones, R. T.; Koler, R. D.; Stocklen,
Z.; Szelenyi, J. G.: Multiple alpha-chain loci for human hemoglobin.
(Abstract) Clin. Res. 18: 184, 1970.

54. Brittenham, G.; Lozoff, B.; Harris, J. W.; Kan, Y. W.; Dozy, A.
M.; Nayudu, N. V. S.: Alpha globin gene number: population and restriction
endonuclease studies. Blood 55: 706-708, 1980.

55. Buckle, V. J.; Higgs, D. R.; Wilkie, A. O. M.; Super, M.; Weatherall,
D. J.: Localisation of human alpha globin to 16p13.3-pter. J. Med.
Genet. 25: 847-849, 1988.

56. Bunn, H. F.; Altman, A. J.; Stangland, K.; Firshein, S. I.; Forget,
B.; Schmidt, G. J.; Jones, R. T.: Hemoglobins Aida (alpha 64 asp-to-asn)
and D-Los Angeles (beta 121 glu-to-gln) in an Asian-Indian family. Hemoglobin 2:
531-540, 1978.

57. Cabannes, R.; Renaud, R.; Mauran, A.; Pennors, H.; Charlesworth,
D.; Price, B. G.; Lehmann, H.: Two fast haemoglobins in Ivory-Coast:
Hb K Woolwich and a new haemoglobin Hb J Abidjan (alpha 51 gly-to-asp). Nouv.
Rev. Franc. Hemat. 12: 289-300, 1972.

58. Carstairs, K. C.; Raulfs, A.; Kutlar, A.; Chen, S. S.; Webber,
B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Fort Worth or alpha(2)27(B8)glu-to-gly
in a black family from Canada. Hemoglobin 9: 201-205, 1985.

59. Carver, M. F. H.; Kutlar, A.: International Hemoglobin Information
Center: variant list. Hemoglobin 19: 37-149, 1995.

60. Cash, F. E.; Monplaisir, N.; Goossens, M.; Liebhaber, S. A.:
Locus assignment of two alpha-globin structural mutants from the Caribbean
Basin: alpha Fort de France (alpha(45-arg)) and alpha Spanish Town
(alpha(27-val)). Blood 74: 833-835, 1989.

61. Charache, S.; Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg, J. B.: Polycythemia associated
with a hemoglobinopathy. J. Clin. Invest. 45: 813-822, 1966.

62. Chih-chuan, L.; Hai-nan, T.; Kuo-feng, C.: Hemoglobin Handsworth
(alpha 18 (A16) gly-to-arg) in a Chinese. Hemoglobin 5: 191-193,
1981.

63. Chui, D. H. K.; Waye, J. S.: Hydrops fetalis caused by alpha-thalassemia:
an emerging health care problem. Blood 91: 2213-2222, 1998.

64. Cleek, M. P.; Gardiner, M. B.; Reese, A. L.; Harris, H. F.; Felice,
A. E.; Huisman, T. H. J.: The Atlanta family with hemoglobin Grady
revisited. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 35: 1314-1316, 1983.

65. Clegg, J. B.; Charache, S.: The structure of hemoglobin Hopkins-2. Hemoglobin 2:
85-88, 1978.

66. Clegg, J. B.; Naughton, M. A.; Weatherall, D. J.: Abnormal human
haemoglobins: separation and characterization of the alpha and beta
chains by chromatography, and the determination of two new variants,
Hb Chesapeake and Hb J (Bangkok). J. Molec. Biol. 19: 91-108, 1966.

67. Clegg, J. B.; Weatherall, D. J.; Boon, W. H.; Mustafa, D.: Two
new haemoglobin variants involving proline substitutions. Nature 222:
379-380, 1969.

68. Cohen-Solal, M.; Manesse, B.; Thillet, J.; Rosa, J.: Haemoglobin
G Norfolk alpha-85 (F6) asp-to-asn: structural characterization by
sequenator analysis and functional properties of a new variant with
high oxygen affinity. FEBS Lett. 50: 163-167, 1975.

69. Colombo, B.; Vidal, H.; Kamuzora, H.; Lehmann, H.: A new haemoglobin
J-Habana--alpha 71 (E20) alanine-to-glutamic acid. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 351: 1-6, 1974.

70. Como, P. F.; Barber, S.; Sage, R. E.; Kronenberg, H.: Hemoglobin
Woodville: alpha6 (A4) aspartic acid-to-tyrosine. Hemoglobin 10:
135-141, 1986.

71. Cooper, M. R.; Kraus, A. P.; Felts, J. H.; Myers, R.; Kraus, L.
M.: A third case of hemoglobin Memphis: sickle cell disease. Am.
J. Med. 55: 535-541, 1973.

72. Costa, F. F.; Sonati, M. F.; Zago, M. A.: Hemoglobin Stanleyville
II (alpha-78 asn-to-lys) is associated with a 3.7-kb alpha-globin
gene deletion. Hum. Genet. 86: 319-320, 1991.

73. Cotton, F.; Hansen, V.; Lin, C.; Parma, J.; Cochaux, P.; Damis,
E.; Vertongen, F.; Gulbis, B.: Hb Ube-2 [alpha-68(E17)asn-asp] and
Hb Hafnia [beta-116(G18)his-gln] observed during neonatal screening
in Brussels. Hemoglobin 24: 65-69, 2000.

74. Crookston, J. H.; Beale, D.; Irvine, D.; Lehmann, H.: A new haemoglobin,
J Toronto (alpha-5 alanine to aspartic acid). Nature 208: 1059-1060,
1965.

75. Crookston, J. H.; Farquharson, H. A.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.:
Hemoglobin Etobicoke: alpha 84(F5) serine replaced by arginine. Canad.
J. Biochem. 47: 143-146, 1969.

76. Curuk, M. A.; Altay, C.; Fei, Y.-J.; Kutlar, F.; Baysal, E.; Gu,
L.-H.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Severe Hb H disease due to a combination
of the -(alpha)20 kb deletion and Hb Adana, an unstable alpha-1 variant
with gly-to-asp at alpha-59 (GGC-to-GAC). (Abstract) Blood 80: 81a,
1992.

77. Dahmane-Arbane, M.; Blouquit, Y.; Arous, N.; Bardakdjian, J.;
Benamani, M.; Riou, J.; Benabadji, M.; Rosa, J.; Galacteros, F.:
Hemoglobine Boumerdes alpha-37 (C2) pro-to-arg: un nouveau variant
de la chaine alpha associe a l'hemoglobine S dans une famille algerienne. Nouv.
Rev. Franc. Hemat. 29: 317-320, 1987.

78. Darbellay, R.; Mach-Pascual, S.; Rose, K.; Graf, J.; Beris, Ph.
: Haemoglobin Tunis-Bizerte: a new alpha-1 globin 129 leu-to-pro unstable
variant with thalassaemic phenotype. Brit. J. Haemat. 90: 71-76,
1995.

79. Daud, D.; Harahap, A.; Setianingsih, I.; Nainggolan, I.; Tranggana,
S.; Pakasi, R.; Marzuki, S.: The hemoglobin O mutation in Indonesia:
distribution and phenotypic expression. J. Hum. Genet. 46: 499-505,
2001.

80. Davis, J. R., Jr.; Dozy, A. M.; Lubin, B.; Koenig, H. M.; Pierce,
H. I.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Kan, Y. W.: Alpha-thalassemia in blacks
is due to gene deletion. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 31: 569-573, 1979.

81. De Gobbi, M.; Viprakasit, V.; Hughes, J. R.; Fisher, C.; Buckle,
V. J.; Ayyub, H.; Gibbons, R. J.; Vernimmen, D.; Yoshinaga, Y.; de
Jong, P.; Cheng, J.-F.; Rubin, E. M.; Wood, W. G.; Bowden, D.; Higgs,
D. R.: A regulatory SNP causes a human genetic disease by creating
a new transcriptional promoter. Science 312: 1215-1217, 2006.

82. Deisseroth, A.; Hendrick, D.: Human alpha-globin gene expression
following chromosomal dependent gene transfer into mouse erythroleukemia
cells. Cell 15: 55-63, 1978.

83. Deisseroth, A.; Nienhuis, A.; Turner, P.; Velez, R.; Anderson,
W. F.; Ruddle, F. H.; Lawrence, J.; Creagan, R. P.; Kucherlapati,
R. S.: Localization of the human alpha globin structural gene to
chromosome 16 in somatic cell hybrids by molecular hybridization assay. Cell 12:
205-218, 1977.

84. Deisseroth, A.; Velez, R.; Nienhuis, A. W.: Hemoglobin synthesis
in somatic cell hybrids: independent segregation of the human alpha-
and beta-globin genes. Science 191: 1262-1263, 1976.

85. Deon, C.; Prome, J. C.; Prome, D.; Francina, A.; Groff, P.; Kalmes,
G.; Galacteros, F.; Wajcman, H.: Combined mass spectrometric methods
for the characterization of human hemoglobin variants localized within
alpha-T9 peptide: identification of Hb Villeurbanne alpha-89 (FG1)
his-to-tyr. J. Mass Spectrom. 32: 880-887, 1997.

86. de Traverse, P. M.; Lehmann, H.; Coquelet, M. L.; Beale, D.; Isaacs,
W. A.: Etude d'une hemoglobine J-alpha non encore decrite, dans une
famille francaise. Comp. Rend. Soc. Biol. 160: 2270-2272, 1966.

87. DeVries, A.; Joshua, H.; Lehmann, H.; Hill, R. L.; Fellows, R.
E.: The first observation of an abnormal hemoglobin in a Jewish family:
hemoglobin Beilinson. Brit. J. Haemat. 9: 484-486, 1963.

88. de Weinstein, B. I.; Kutlar, A.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.;
Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin Daneshgah-Tehran or alpha72(EF1)his-to-arg
in an Argentinean family. Hemoglobin 9: 409-411, 1985.

89. Dincol, G.; Dincol, K.; Erdem, S.; Pobedimskaya, D. D.; Molchanova,
T. P.; Ye, Z.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb
Capa or alpha-94(G1)asp-to-gly, a mildly unstable variant with an
A-to-G (GAC-to-GGC) mutation in codon 94 of the alpha-1-globin gene. Hemoglobin 18:
57-60, 1994.

90. Dincol, G.; Elam, D.; Kutlar, A.; Kutlar, F.: Hb Setif [alpha-94(G1)asp-to-tyr
(alpha-2)] detected in a Turkish family. Hemoglobin 27: 249-252,
2003.

91. Djoumessi, S.; Rousseaux, J.; Descamps, J.; Goudemand, M.; Dautrevaux,
M.: Hemoglobin Lille, alpha-2(74(EF3) asp-to-ala)beta-2. Hemoglobin 5:
475-479, 1981.

92. Dozy, A. M.; Forman, E. N.; Abuelo, D. N.; Barsel-Bowers, G.;
Mahoney, M. J.; Forget, B. G.; Kan, Y. W.: Prenatal diagnosis of
hemizygous alpha-thalassemia. JAMA 241: 1610-1613, 1979.

93. Dozy, A. M.; Kan, Y. W.; Embury, S. H.; Mentzer, W. C.; Wang,
W. C.: Alpha-globin gene organisation in blacks precludes the severe
form of alpha-thalassaemia. Nature 280: 605-607, 1979.

94. Dysert, P. A., II; Head, C. G.; Shih, T. B.; Jones, R. T.; Schneider,
R. G.: Hb Dallas, alpha 97(G4) asn-to-lys: a new abnormal hemoglobin
with high oxygen affinity. (Abstract) Blood 60: 53a, 1982.

95. Eicher, E. M.; Lee, B. K.: Growth hormone receptor (Ghr) and
hemoglobin alpha-chain pseudogene 3 (Hba-ps3) map proximal to the
myelocytomatosis oncogene (Myc) on mouse chromosome 15. Mammalian
Genome 1: 57-58, 1991.

96. Embury, S. H.; Lebo, R. V.; Dozy, A. M.; Kan, Y. W.: Organization
of the alpha-globin genes in the Chinese alpha-thalassemia syndromes. J.
Clin. Invest. 63: 1307-1310, 1979.

97. Eng, B.; Patterson, M.; Walker, L.; Hoppe, C.; Azimi, M.; Lee,
H.; Giordano, P. C.; Waye, J. S.: Three new alpha-thalassemia point
mutations ascertained through newborn screening. Hemoglobin 30:
149-153, 2006.

98. Felice, A. E.: Hb St. Luke's (alpha-95(G2)pro-to-arg (alpha-1)).
(Letter) Hemoglobin 27: 137 only, 2003.

99. Ferranti, P.; Parlapiano, A.; Malorni, A.; Pucci, P.; Marino,
G.; Cossu, G.; Manca, L.; Masala, B.: Hemoglobin Ozieri: a new alpha-chain
variant (alpha-71(E20)ala-to-val): characterization using FAB- and
electrospray-mass spectrometric techniques. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1162:
203-208, 1993.

100. Fessas, C.; Karaklis, A.; Loukopoulos, D.; Stamatoyannopoulos,
G.; Fessas, P.: Hemoglobin Nicosia: an alpha-chain variant and its
combination with beta-thalassaemia. Brit. J. Haemat. 11: 323-330,
1965.

101. Fessas, P.; Kaltsoya, A.; Loukopoulos, D.; Nilsson, L.-O.: On
the chemical structure of haemoglobin Uppsala. Hum. Hered. 19: 152-158,
1969.

102. Fleming, P. J.; Arnold, B. J.; Thompson, E. O. P.; Hughes, W.
G.; Morgan, L.: Hb I alpha 16 lys-to-glu and Hb Broussais alpha 90
lys-to-asn in Australian families. Pathology 10: 317-327, 1978.

103. Fleming, P. J.; Hughes, W. G.; Farmilo, R. K.; Wyatt, K.; Cooper,
W. N.: Hemoglobin Westmead (alpha 122(H5) his-to-gln): a new hemoglobin
variant with the substitution in the alpha-beta contact area. Hemoglobin 4:
39-52, 1980.

104. Fleming, P. J.; Sumner, D. R.; Wyatt, K.; Hughes, W. G.; Melrose,
W. D.; Jupe, D. M. D.; Baikie, M. J.: Hemoglobin Hobart or alpha20
(B1) his-to-arg: a new alpha chain hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin 11:
211-220, 1987.

105. Flint, J.; Hill, A. V. S.; Bowden, D. K.; Oppenheimer, S. J.;
Sill, P. R.; Serjeantson, S. W.; Bonna-Kori, J.; Bhatia, K.; Alpers,
M. P.; Boyce, A. J.; Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg, J. B.: High frequencies
of alpha-thalassemia are the result of natural selection by malaria. Nature 321:
744-751, 1986.

106. Fujisawa, K.; Hattori, Y.; Ohba, Y.; Ando, S.: Hb Yuda or alpha130
(H13) ala-to-asp; a new alpha chain variant with low oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 16:
435-439, 1992.

107. Fujiwara, N.: An amino acid substitution in Hb Atago, an abnormal
human hemoglobin. J. Jpn. Biochem. Soc. 42: 341-349, 1970.

108. Fujiwara, N.; Maekawa, T.; Matsuda, G.: Hemoglobin Atago (alpha
85 tyr): a new abnormal human hemoglobin found in Nagasaki. Int.
J. Protein Res. 3: 35-39, 1971.

109. Fung, T. Y.; Kin, L. T.; Kong, L. C.; Keung, L. C.: Homozygous
alpha-thalassemia associated with hypospadias in three survivors. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 82: 225-227, 1999.

110. Gajdusek, D. C.; Guiart, J.; Kirk, R. L.; Carrell, R. W.; Irvine,
D.; Kynoch, P. A. M.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin J Tongariki (alpha
115 alanine to aspartic acid): the first new haemoglobin variant found
in a Pacific (Melanesian) population. J. Med. Genet. 4: 1-6, 1967.

111. Gammack, D. B.; Huehns, E. R.; Lehmann, H.; Shooter, E. M.:
The abnormal polypeptide chains in a number of haemoglobin variants. Acta
Genet. Statist. Med. 11: 1-16, 1961.

112. Gandini, E.; Dallapiccola, B.; Laurent, C.; Suerine, E. F.; Forabosco,
A.; Conconi, G.; Del Senno, L.: Evidence for localisation of genes
for human alpha-globin on the long arm of chromosome 4. Nature 265:
65-66, 1977.

113. Garel, M. C.; Goossens, M.; Oudart, J. L.; Blouquit, Y.; Thillet,
J.; Rosa, J.: Hemoglobin Dakar = Hb Grady: demonstration by a new
approach to the analysis of the tryptic core region of the alpha chain
and oxygen equilibrium properties. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 453: 459-471,
1976.

114. Gerald, P. S.; Cook, C. D.; Diamond, L. K.: Hemoglobin M. Science 126:
300-301, 1957.

115. Gerald, P. S.; Efron, M. L.: Chemical studies of several varieties
of Hb M. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 47: 1758-1767, 1961.

116. Gerhard, D. S.; Kawasaki, E. S.; Bancroft, F. C.; Szabo, P.:
Localization of a unique gene by direct hybridization in situ. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 78: 3755-3759, 1981.

117. Giordano, P. C.; Fodde, R.; Amons, R.; Ploem, J. E.; Bernini,
L. F.: Hb J-Anatolia (alpha61(E10)lys-to-thr): structural characterization
and gene localization of a new alpha chain variant. Hemoglobin 14:
119-128, 1990.

118. Giordano, P. C.; Harteveld, C. L.; Kok, P. J. M. J.; Geenen,
A.; Batelaan, D.; Amons, R.; Bernini, L. F.: Hb Gouda (alpha72(EF1)his-to-gln),
a new silent alpha-chain variant. Hemoglobin 20: 21-29, 1996.

119. Girodon, E.; M'Rad, A.; Martin, J.; Goossens, M.; Galacteros,
F.; Rosa, J.; Gisselbrecht, C.; Boiron, M.; Cohen, I. J.; Jaber, L.;
Tamari, H.; Goshen, J.; Zaizov, R.; Wajcman, H.: Hb Taybe (alpha
38 or 39 THR deleted): a new unstable alpha chain hemoglobin variant.
(Abstract) Blood 80 (suppl. 1): 388a, 1992.

120. Gonzalez Redondo, J. M.; Wilson, J. B.; Kutlar, A.; Huisman,
T. H. J.; Sicilia, A.; Romero, C.; Fernandes Fuertes, I.: Hb J-Pontoise
or alpha63(E12)ala-to-asp in four members of a Spanish family. Hemoglobin 11:
47-50, 1987.

121. Goossens, M.; Dozy, A. M.; Embury, S. H.; Zachariadis, Z.; Hadjiminas,
M. G.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Kan, Y. W.: Triplicated alpha-globin
loci in humans. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 77: 518-521, 1980.

122. Gottlieb, A. J.; Restrepo, A.; Itano, H. A.: Hb J (Medellin).
Chemical and genetic study. Fed. Proc. 23: 172, 1964.

123. Griffiths, K. D.; Lang, A.; Lehmann, H.; Mann, J. R.; Plowman,
D.; Raine, D. N.: Haemoglobin Handsworth alpha 18 glycine-to-arginine. FEBS
Lett. 75: 93-95, 1977.

124. Groff, P.; Galacteros, F.; Kalmes, G.; Blouquit, Y.; Wajcman,
H.: HB Luxembourg (alpha24(B5)tyr-to-his): a new unstable variant. Hemoglobin 13:
429-436, 1989.

125. Guis, M.; Mentzer, W. C.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; McGuffey,
J. E.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Hemoglobin Twin Peaks: alpha113(GH1) leu-to-his. Hemoglobin 9:
175-177, 1985.

126. Hamaguchi, K.; Harano, K.; Harano, T.; Sakata, T.: Hb Oita (alpha-45(CE3)his-to-pro):
a new silent hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin 22: 347-354, 1998. Note:
Erratum: Hemoglobin 22: 539-540, 1998.

127. Hanada, M.; Ohta, Y.; Imamura, T.; Fejimura, T.; Kawasaki, K.;
Kosaka, K.; Yamaoka, K.; Seita, M.: Studies of abnormal hemoglobins
in western Japan. (Abstract) Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 9: 253-254, 1964.

128. Hanada, M.; Rucknagel, D. L.: The characterization of hemoglobin
Shimonoseki. Blood 24: 624-635, 1964.

129. Hansen, H. A.; Jagenburg, O. R.; Johansson, B. G.: Studies on
an abnormal hemoglobin causing hereditary congenital cyanosis. Acta
Paediat. 49: 503-511, 1960.

130. Harano, K.; Harano, T.; Shibata, S.; Mori, H.; Ueda, S.; Imai,
K.; Ohba, Y.; Irimajiri, K.: Hb J Oxford (alpha15 (A13) gly-to-asp)
in Japan. Hemoglobin 8: 197-198, 1984.

131. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Hong, Y.-F.; Than, A. M.; Suetsugu, Y.;
Ohba, K.: The mutation of Hb Turriff (alpha-99(G6)lys-to-glu (AAG-GAG))
is carried by the alpha-1-globin gene in a Japanese (Hb Turriff-I). Hemoglobin 27:
123-127, 2003.

132. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Imai, K.; Terunuma, S.: Hb Swan River
(alpha6(A4)asp-to-gly) observed in a Japanese man. Hemoglobin 20:
75-78, 1996.

133. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Imai, N.; Ueda, S.; Seki, M.: An electrophoretically
silent hemoglobin variant, Hb Hekinan (alpha27 (B8) glu-to-asp) found
in a Japanese. Hemoglobin 12: 61-65, 1988.

134. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Imai, K.; Seki,
M.: Hb Handa (alpha90 (FG2) lys-to-met): structure and biosynthesis
of a new slightly higher oxygen affinity variant. Hemoglobin 6:
379-389, 1982.

135. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Imai, K.; Seki,
M.: Hemoglobin Tokoname (alpha139 (HC 1) lys-to-thr): a new hemoglobin
variant with a slightly increased oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 7:
85-90, 1983.

136. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Imai, K.; Tsuneshige,
A.; Uchida, E.; Horiuchi, K.: Hb Le Lamentin (alpha20 (B1) his-to-gln)
in Japan: structure, function and biosynthesis. Hemoglobin 7: 181-184,
1983.

137. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Imai, K.; Tsuneshige,
A.; Yamada, H.; Seki, M.; Fukui, H.: Hemoglobin Kariya (alpha40 (C5)
lys-to-glu) a new hemoglobin variant with an increased oxygen affinity. FEBS
Lett. 153: 332-334, 1983.

138. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Mori, H.; Imai,
K.: Hb Chesapeake (alpha92 (FG4) arg-to-leu) and Hb J Cape Town (alpha92
(FG4) arg-to-gln) first discovered in Japanese. Hemoglobin 7: 461-465,
1983.

139. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Mori, H.; Seki,
M.: Hemoglobin Aichi (alpha50 (CE8) his-to-arg): a new slightly unstable
hemoglobin variant discovered in Japan. FEBS Lett. 169: 297-299,
1984.

140. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Ueda, S.: Hb Owari (alpha121 (H4) val-to-met):
a new hemoglobin variant with a neutral-to-neutral amino acid substitution
detected by isoelectric focusing. Hemoglobin 10: 127-134, 1986.

141. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Ueda, S.; Shibata, S.; Imai, K.; Ohba,
Y.; Shinohara, T.; Horio, S.; Nishioka, K.; Shirotani, H.: Hemoglobin
Kawachi (alpha 44 (CE2) pro-to-arg): a new hemoglobin variant of high
oxygen affinity with amino acid substitution at alpha(1)-beta(2) contact. Hemoglobin 6:
43-49, 1982.

142. Harano, T.; Harano, K.; Uehara, S.; Matsushita, K.: Two new
alpha chain variants: Hb Fuchu-I (alpha-72(EF1)his-to-tyr) and Hb
Fuchu-II (alpha-97(G4)asn-to-his). Hemoglobin 19: 389-395, 1995.

143. Hardison, R. C.; Sawada, I.; Cheng, J.-F.; Shen, C.-K. J.; Schmid,
C. W.: A previously undetected pseudogene in the human alpha globin
gene cluster. Nucleic Acids Res. 14: 1903-1911, 1986.

144. Harteveld, C. L.; Rozendaal, L.; Blom, N. A.; Lo-A-Njoe, S.;
Akkerman, N.; Arkestijn, S.; Van Delft, P.; Giordano, P. C.: Hb Oegstgeest
(alpha-104(G11)cys-to-ser(alpha-1)): a new hemoglobin variant associated
with a mild alpha-thalassemia phenotype. Hemoglobin 29: 165-169,
2005.

145. Harteveld, C. L.; Van Delft, P.; Akkermans, N.; Arkesteijn, S.;
Van Rooijen-Nijdam, I. H.; Kok, P. J. M. J.; Versteegh, F. G. A.;
Giordano, P. C.: Hb Buffalo [alpha-89(FG1)his-to-gln (alpha-1)],
observed solely and in the presence of an Hb S [beta-6(A3)glu-to-val]
heterozygosity. Hemoglobin 28: 223-227, 2004.

146. Harteveld, C. L.; Van Delft, P.; Plug, R. J.; Erjavec, Z.; Wajcman,
H.; Giordano, P. C.: Hb Delfzicht [alpha-9(A7)asn-to-lys (alpha-1)]:
a new, clinically silent hemoglobin variant observed in a Dutch patient. Hemoglobin 26:
181-184, 2002.

147. Harteveld, C. L.; Wijermans, P. W.; de Ree, J. E. L. M.; Ter
Hal, P.; Van Delft, P.; Van Rooijen-Nijdam, I. H.; Rasp, E.; Kok,
P. J. M. J.; Souverijn, J. H. M.; Versteegh, F. G. A.; Giordano, P.
C.: A new Hb Evanston allele (alpha-14(A12)trp-to-arg) found solely,
and in the presence of common alpha-thalassemia deletions, in three
independent Asian cases. Hemoglobin 28: 1-5, 2004.

148. Hatton, C. S. R.; Wilkie, A. O. M.; Drysdale, H. C.; Wood, W.
G.; Vickers, M. A.; Sharpe, J.; Ayyub, H.; Pretorius, I. M.; Buckle,
V. J.; Higgs, D. R.: Alpha-thalassemia caused by a large (62 kb)
deletion upstream of the human alpha-globin gene cluster. Blood 76:
221-227, 1990.

149. Hattori, Y.; Ohba, Y.; Suda, T.; Miura, Y.; Yoshinaka, H.; Miyaji,
T.: Hemoglobin Guizhou in Japan. Hemoglobin 9: 187-192, 1985.

150. Hayashi, A.; Yamamura, Y.; Ogita, S.; Kikkawa, H.: Hemoglobin
M (Osaka), a new variant of hemoglobin M. Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 9:
87-94, 1964.

151. Headlee, M. G.; Nakatsuji, T.; Lam, H.; Wrightstone, R. N.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hb Etobicoke, alpha85(F5) ser-to-arg found in a newborn
of French-Indian-English descent. Hemoglobin 7: 285-287, 1983.

152. Heller, P.: Hemoglobin M (Chicago) and M (Kankakee).In: Lehmann,
H.; Betke, K.: Haemoglobin-Colloquium.  Stuttgart: Georg Thieme
Verlag (pub.)  1962. Pp. 47-49.

153. Heller, P.; Weinstein, H. G.; Yakulis, V. J.; Rosenthal, I. M.
: Hemoglobin M (Kankakee), a new variant of hemoglobin M. Blood 20:
287-301, 1962.

154. Hess, J. F.; Fox, M.; Schmid, C.; Shen, C.-K. J.: Molecular
evolution of the human adult alpha-globin-like gene region: insertion
and deletion of Alu family repeats and non-Alu DNA sequences. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 5970-5974, 1983.

155. Hidaka, K.; Iuchi, I.; Kobayashi, T.; Katoh, K.; Yaguchi, K.
: Hb Fukutomi (alpha126(H9)asp-to-val): a new hemoglobin variant with
high oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 14: 499-509, 1990.

156. Higgs, D. R.; Goodbourn, S. E. Y.; Wainscoat, J. S.; Clegg, J.
B.; Weatherall, D. J.: Highly variable regions of DNA flank the human
alpha-globin genes. Nucleic Acids Res. 9: 4213-4224, 1981.

157. Higgs, D. R.; Hunt, D. M.; Drysdale, H. C.; Clegg, J. B.; Pressley,
L.; Weatherall, D. J.: The genetic basis of Hb Q-H disease. Brit.
J. Haemat. 46: 387-400, 1980.

158. Higgs, D. R.; Vickers, M. A.; Wilkie, A. O. M.; Pretorius, I.-M.;
Jarman, A. P.; Weatherall, D. J.: A review of the molecular genetics
of the alpha-globin gene cluster. Blood 73: 1081-1104, 1989.

159. Higgs, D. R.; Wainscoat, J. S.; Flint, J.; Hill, A. V. S.; Thein,
S. L.; Nicholls, R. D.; Teal, H.; Ayyub, H.; Peto, T. E. A.; Falusi,
A. G.; Jarman, A. P.; Clegg, J. B.; Weatherall, D. J.: Analysis of
the human alpha-globin gene cluster reveals a highly informative genetic
locus. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 5165-5169, 1986.

160. Hill, A. V. S.; Bowden, D. K.; Trent, R. J.; Higgs, D. R.; Oppenheimer,
S. J.; Thein, S. L.; Mickleson, K. N. P.; Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg,
J. B.: Melanesians and Polynesians share a unique alpha-thalassemia
mutation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 37: 571-580, 1985.

161. Hill, A. V. S.; Thein, S. L.; Mavo, B.; Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg,
J. B.: Non-deletion haemoglobin H disease in Papua New Guinea. J.
Med. Genet. 24: 767-771, 1987.

162. Hollan, S. R.; Szelenyi, J. G.; Brimhall, B.; Duerst, M.; Jones,
R. T.; Koler, R. D.; Stocklen, Z.: Multiple alpha chain loci for
human haemoglobins: Hb J (Buda) and Hb G (Pest). Nature 235: 47-50,
1972.

163. Hollan, S. R.; Szelenyi, J. G.; Lehmann, H.; Beale, D.: A Boston-type
haemoglobin M in Hungary: haemoglobin M Kiskunhalas. Haematologica 1:
11-18, 1967.

164. Honig, G. R.; Shamsuddin, M.; Tremaine, L. M.; Mason, R. G.;
Vida, L. N.; Sarnwick, R.; Shahidi, N. T.: Hemoglobin Nigeria (alpha81
ser-to-cys), a new variant having an inhibitory effect on the gelation
of sickle hemoglobin. (Abstract) Blood 52 (suppl. 1): 113, 1978.

165. Honig, G. R.; Shamsuddin, M.; Vida, L. N.; Mompoint, M.; Bowie,
L.; Jones, E.; Weil, S.: Hb Evanston (alpha 14 trp-to-arg): a new
variant with thalassemia-like hematologic expression. (Abstract) Blood 60:
53a, 1982.

166. Honig, G. R.; Shamsuddin, M.; Zaizov, R.; Steinherz, M.; Solar,
I.; Kirschmann, C.: Hemoglobin Petah Tikva (alpha 110 ala-to-asp):
a new unstable variant with alpha-thalassemia-like expression. Blood 57:
705-711, 1981.

167. Honig, G. R.; Vida, L. N.; Shamsuddin, M.; Mason, R. G.; Schlumpf,
H. W.; Luke, R. A.: Hemoglobin Milledgeville (alpha44 (CD2) pro-to-leu):
a new variant with increased oxygen affinity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 626:
424-431, 1980.

168. Horst, J.; Assum, G.; Griese, E. U.; Eigel, A.; Hampl, W.; Kohne,
E.: Hemoglobin M Iwate is caused by a C-to-T transition in codon
87 of the human alpha-1-globin gene. Hum. Genet. 75: 53-55, 1987.

169. Houjun, L.; Dexiang, L.; Zhiguo, L.; Ping, L.; Ly, L.; Ji, C.;
Shaozhi, H.: A new fast-moving hemoglobin variant, Hb J-Tashikuergan
alpha19 (AB1) ala-to-glu. Hemoglobin 8: 391-395, 1984.

170. Hoyer, J. D.; McCormick, D. J.; Snow, K.; Lawler, J.; Jadick,
M.; Grageda, R.; Early, J. L.; Ball, C.; Skarda, P.; Kubik, K. S.;
Holmes, M. W.; Fairbanks, V. F.: Three new variants of the alpha-1-globin
gene without clinical or hematologic effects: Hb Hagerstown [alpha-44(CE2)pro-to-ala
(alpha-1)]; Hb Buffalo [alpha-89(FG1)his-to-gln (alpha-1)], a hemoglobin
variant from Somalia and Yemen; Hb Wichita [alpha-95(G2)pro-to-gln
(alpha-1)]; and a second, unrelated, case of Hb Roubaix [alpha-55(E4)val-to-leu
(alpha-1)]. Hemoglobin 26: 291-298, 2002.

171. Hoyer, J. D.; Weinhold, J.; Mailhot, E.; Alter, D.; McCormick,
D. J.; Snow, K.; Kubik, K. S.; Holmes, M. W.; Fairbanks, V. F.: Three
new hemoglobin variants with abnormal oxygen affinity: Hb Saratoga
Springs [alpha-40(C5)lys-to-asn (alpha-1)], Hb Santa Clara [beta-97(FG4)his-to-asn],
and Hb Sparta [beta-103(G5)phe-to-val]. Hemoglobin 27: 235-241,
2003.

172. Huisman, T. H. J.; Adams, H. R.; Wilson, J. B.; Efremov, G. D.;
Reynolds, C. A.; Wrightstone, R. N.: Hemoglobin G Georgia or alpha
95 leu (G-2) beta 2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 200: 578-580, 1970.

173. Huisman, T. H. J.; Carver, M. F. H.; Efremov, G. D.: A syllabus
of human hemoglobin variants (1996). Augusta, Ga.: The Sickle Cell
Anemia Foundation , 1996.

174. Huisman, T. H. J.; Miller, A.: Hb Grady and alpha-thalassemia:
a contribution to the problem of the number of Hb (alpha) structural
loci in man. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 28: 363-369, 1976.

175. Huisman, T. H. J.; Sydenstricker, V. P.: Difference in gross
structure of two electrophoretically identical 'minor' hemoglobin
components. Nature 193: 489-491, 1962.

176. Huisman, T. H. J.; Wilson, J. B.; Gravely, M.; Hubbard, M.:
Hemoglobin Grady: the first example of a variant with elongated chains
due to an insertion of residues. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 71: 3270-3273,
1974.

177. Huntsman, R. G.; Hall, M.; Lehmann, H.; Sukumaran, P. K.: A
second and a third abnormal haemoglobin in Norfolk. Hb G-Norfolk and
Hb D-Norfolk. Brit. Med. J. 1: 720-722, 1963.

178. Hyde, R. D.; Kinderlerer, J. L.; Lehmann, H.; Hall, M.: Hb J
Rajappen. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 243: 515-519, 1971.

179. Imai, K.; Tsuneshige, A.; Harano, T.; Harano, K.: Structure-function
relationships in hemoglobin Kariya, lys40(C5)alpha-to-glu, with high
oxygen affinity: functional role of the salt bridge between lys40alpha
and the beta-chain COOH terminus. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 11174-11180,
1989.

180. Imamura, T.: Hemoglobin Kagoshima: an example of hemoglobin
Norfolk in a Japanese family. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 18: 584-593, 1966.

181. Itano, H. A.; Robinson, E. A.: Genetic control of the alpha-
and beta-chains of hemoglobin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 46: 1492-1501,
1960.

182. Itano, H. A.; Robinson, E. A.: Formation of normal and double
abnormal haemoglobins by recombination of haemoglobin I with S and
C. Nature 183: 1799-1800, 1959.

183. Iuchi, I.; Hidaka, K.; Ueda, S.; Shibata, S.; Kusumoto, T.:
Hemoglobin G Taichung (alpha 74 asp-to-his) heterozygotes found in
two Japanese families. Hemoglobin 2: 79-84, 1978.

184. Iuchi, I.; Shimasaki, S.; Hidaka, K.; Harano, T.; Ueda, S.; Shibata,
S.; Mizushima, J.; Kubo, N.: Hemoglobin Mizushi (alpha75 EF4 asp-to-gly):
a new hemoglobin variant observed in a Japanese family. Hemoglobin 4:
209-214, 1980.

185. Jarman, A. P.; Higgs, D. R.: A new hypervariable marker for
the human alpha-globin gene cluster. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 43: 249-256,
1988.

186. Jen, P. C.; Liu, Y.: Hemoglobin Guangzhou, alpha64 (E3) asp-to-gly,
a new abnormal hemoglobin found in Guangzhou, China. Hemoglobin 11:
25-30, 1987.

187. Jones, R. T.; Brimhall, B.; Lisker, R.: Chemical characterization
of hemoglobin Mexico and hemoglobin Chiapas. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 154:
488-495, 1968.

188. Jones, R. T.; Koler, R. D.; Lisker, R.: The chemical structure
of hemoglobin Mexico determined by automatic peptide chromatography
and subunit hybridization. Clin. Res. 11: 105, 1963.

189. Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; Patchen, L. C.; Moo-Penn, W. F.:
Hemoglobin Dunn: alpha6 aspartic acid-to-asparagine. Hemoglobin 3:
137-143, 1979.

190. Juricic, D.; Efremov, G. D.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.
: Hb Savaria or alpha49(CE7)ser-to-arg in a Yugoslavian family. Hemoglobin 9:
631-633, 1985.

191. Kamuzora, H.; Lehmann, H.: A new hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin
J (Birmingham): alpha 120 (H3) ala-to-glu. Ann. Clin. Biochem. 11:
53-55, 1974.

192. Kan, Y. W.; Dozy, A. M.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Hadjiminas,
M. G.; Zachariadis, Z.; Furbetta, M.; Cao, A.: Molecular basis of
hemoglobin-H disease in the Mediterranean population. Blood 54:
1434-1438, 1979.

193. Kan, Y. W.; Golbus, M. S.; Dozy, A. M.: Prenatal diagnosis of
alpha-thalassemia: clinical application of molecular hybridization. New
Eng. J. Med. 295: 1165-1167, 1976.

194. Kazanetz, E. G.; Leonova, J. Y.; Wilson, J. B.; McMillan, S.
K.; Walbrecht, M.; de Pablos Gallego, J. M.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb
Anamosa or alpha(2)-111(G18)ala--val-beta2 (alpha2 mutation) and Hb
Mulhacen or alpha(2)-123(H6)ala--ser-beta2 (alpha1 mutation) are two
silent, stable variants detected by sequencing of amplified DNA. Hemoglobin 19:
1-6, 1995.

195. Kendall, A. G.; Barr, R. D.; Lang, A.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
J (Nyanza) alpha 21 (B2) ala-to-asp. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 310:
357-359, 1973.

196. Kielman, M. F.; Smits, R.; Devi, T. S.; Fodde, R.; Bernini, L.
F.: Homology of a 130-kb region enclosing the alpha-globin gene cluster,
the alpha-locus controlling region, and two non-globin genes in human
and mouse. Mammalian Genome 4: 314-323, 1993.

197. Kilinc, Y.; Kumi, M.; Gurgey, A.; Altay, C.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson,
J. B.; Kutlar, A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin O-Padova or alpha30(B11)glu-to-lys
observed in members of a Turkish family. Hemoglobin 9: 621-625,
1985.

198. Kister, J.; Kiger, L.; Francina, A.; Hanny, P.; Szymanowicz,
A.; Blouquit, Y.; Prome, D.; Galacteros, F.; Delaunay, J.; Wajcman,
H.: Hemoglobin Roanne (alpha94(G1)asp-to-glu): a variant of the alpha-1
beta-2 interface with an unexpected high oxygen affinity. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1246: 34-38, 1995.

199. Kleihauer, E. F.; Reynolds, C. A.; Dozy, A. M.; Wilson, J. B.;
Moores, R. R.; Berenson, M. P.; Wright, C. S.; Huisman, T. H. J.:
Hemoglobin Bibba or alpha(2)136 pro beta(2), an unstable alpha chain
abnormal hemoglobin. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 154: 220-221, 1968.

200. Knuth, A.; Pribilla, W.; Marti, H. R.; Winterhalter, K. H.:
Hemoglobin Moabit: alpha 86 (F7) leu-to-arg: a new unstable abnormal
hemoglobin. Acta Haemat. 61: 121-124, 1979.

201. Koeffler, H. P.; Sparkes, R. S.; Stang, H.; Mohandas, T.: Regional
assignment of genes for human alpha-globin and phosphoglycollate phosphatase
to the short arm of chromosome 16. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 78: 7015-7018,
1981.

202. Kohne, E.; Krause, M.; Leupold, D.; Kleihauer, E.: Hemoglobin
F Koelliker (alpha-2-minus 141 (HC3) arg-to-gamma-2): a modification
of fetal hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 1: 257-266, 1977.

203. Kraus, A. P.; Miyaji, T.; Iuchi, I.; Kraus, L. M.: Hemoglobin
Memphis, a new variant of sickle cell anemia. Trans. Assoc. Am. Phys. 80:
297-304, 1967.

204. Kraus, A. P.; Miyaji, T.; Iuchi, I.; Kraus, L. M.: Hemoglobin
Memphis: a new variety of sickle cell anemia with symptoms due to
an alpha-chain variant hemoglobin (alpha23 glu). J. Lab. Clin. Med. 66:
886-887, 1965.

205. Labie, D.; Rosa, J.: Sur une nouvelle hemoglobine anormale:
l'hemoglobine J (alpha-54 glutamine a glutamique). Nouv. Rev. Franc.
Hemat. 6: 426-430, 1966.

206. Labossiere, A.; Vella, F.: Hemoglobin I in a white family in
Saskatoon. Clin. Biochem. 4: 104-113, 1971.

207. Lacan, P.; Aubry, M.; Couprie, N.; Francina, A.: Two new alpha
chain variants: Hb Die (alpha-93(FG5)val-to-ala (alpha-1)) and Hb
Beziers [alpha-99(G6)lys-to-asn (alpha-1)]. Hemoglobin 28: 59-63,
2004.

208. Lacan, P.; Francina, A.; Souillet, G.; Aubry, M.; Couprie, N.;
Dementhon, L.; Becchi, M.: Two new alpha chain variants: Hb Boghe
(alpha-58(E7)his-to-gln, alpha-2), a variant on the distal histidine,
and Hb Charolles (alpha-103(G10)his-to-tyr, alpha-1). Hemoglobin 23:
345-352, 1999.

209. Lacombe, C.; Soria, J.; Arous, N.; Blouquit, Y.; Bardakdjian,
J.; Riou, J.; Galacteros, F.: A new case of Hb Dagestan (alpha60(E9)
lys-to-glu). Hemoglobin 11: 39-41, 1987.

210. Lambridis, A. J.; Ramsay, M.; Jenkins, T.: The haematological
puzzle of Hb J Cape Town is partly solved. Brit. J. Haemat. 63:
363-367, 1986.

211. Langdown, J. V.; Davidson, R. J. L.; Williamson, D.: A new alpha
chain variant, Hb Turriff (alpha-99(G6)lys-to-glu): the interference
of abnormal hemoglobins in Hb A(1c) determination. Hemoglobin 16:
11-17, 1992.

212. Leder, A.; Miller, H. I.; Hamer, D. H.; Seidman, J. G.; Norman,
B.; Sullivan, M.; Leder, P.: Comparison of cloned mouse alpha- and
beta-globin genes: conservation of intervening sequence locations
and extragenic homology. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 75: 6187-6191, 1978.

213. Leder, A.; Swan, D.; Ruddle, F.; D'Eustachio, P. D.; Leder, P.
: Dispersion of alpha-like globin genes of the mouse to three different
chromosomes. Nature 293: 196-200, 1981.

214. Leder, A.; Wiener, E.; Lee, M. J.; Wickramasinghe, S. N.; Leder,
P.: A normal beta-globin allele as a modifier gene ameliorating the
severity of alpha-thalassemia in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96:
6291-6295, 1999.

215. Lee-Potter, J. P.; Deacon-Smith, R. A.; Lehmann, H.; Robb, L.
: Haemoglobin Ferndown (alpha6 aspartic acid-to-valine). FEBS Lett. 126:
117-119, 1981.

216. Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobins and haemoglobinopathies.In: Lehmann,
H.; Betke, K.: Haemoglobin-Colloquium.  Stuttgart: Georg Thieme
Verlag (pub.)  1962. Pp. 1-14.

217. Lehmann, H.; Carrell, R. W.: Nomenclature of the alpha-thalassaemias. Lancet 323:
552-553, 1984. Note: Originally Volume I.

218. Lehmann, H.; Carrell, R. W.: Variations in the structure of
human haemoglobins: with particular reference to the unstable haemoglobins. Brit.
Med. Bull. 25: 14-23, 1969.

219. Li, H.; Zhao, X.; Qin, F.; Li, H.; Li, L.; He, X.; Chang, X.;
Li, Z.; Liang, K.; Xing, F.; Chang, W.; Wong, R.; Yang, I.; Li, F.;
Zhang, T.; Tian, R.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H.
J.: Abnormal hemoglobins in the Silk Road region of China. Hum.
Genet. 86: 231-235, 1990.

220. Li, H. J.; Liu, D. X.; Li, L.; Cha, S. C.; Wilson, J. B.; Webber,
B. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Guangzhou-Hangzhou or alpha64(E13)asp-to-gly
observed in members of a Chinese family living in Xinjiang. Hemoglobin 14:
441-444, 1990.

221. Liang, C.; Tao, H.; Lo, H.; Huang, S.; Li, R.; Wang, B.: Hemoglobin
Shuangfeng (alpha27 (B8) glu-to-lys): a new unstable hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin 5:
691-700, 1981.

222. Liang, C.-C.; Chen, S.; Yang, K.; Jia, P.; Ma, Y.; Li, T.; Ni,
X.; Wang, X.; Deng, Q.; Yao, S.: Hemoglobin Beijing (alpha16 (A14)
lys-to-asn): a new fast-moving hemoglobin variant. Hemoglobin 6:
629-633, 1982.

223. Liang, C.-C.; Chen, S.-S.; Jia, P.-C.; Wang, L.-F.; Luo, H.-Y.;
Liu, G.-Y.; Liang, S.; Lung, G.-F.; Yu, C.-M.; Zuang, L.-Z.; Liant,
B.-L.; Tang, Z.-N.: Hemoglobin Duan (alpha75(EF4) asp-to-ala), a
new variant found in China. Hemoglobin 5: 481-486, 1981.

224. Liang, S.; Tang, Z.; Su, C.; Lung, Q.; Liang, R.; Fei, Y. J.;
Kutlar, F.; Wilson, J. B.; Webber, B. B.; Hu, H.; Huisman, T. H. J.
: Hb Duan (alpha-75(EF4)asp-to-ala), Hb Westmead (alpha-122(H5)his-to-gln),
and alpha-thalassemia-2 (-4.2 kb deletion) in a Chinese family. Hemoglobin 12:
13-21, 1988.

225. Lie-Injo, L. E.; Dozy, A. M.; Kan, Y. W.; Lopes, M.; Todd, D.
: The alpha-globin gene adjacent to the gene for Hb Q (alpha 74 asp-to-his)
is deleted, but not that adjacent to the gene for Hb G (alpha 30 glu-to-gln);
three-fourths of the alpha-globin genes are deleted in Hb Q-alpha-thalassemia. Blood 54:
1407-1416, 1979.

226. Lie-Injo, L. E.; Pillay, R. P.; Thuraisingham, V.: Further cases
of haemoglobin Q-H disease (Hb Q-alpha thalassemia). Blood 28: 830-839,
1966.

227. Lie-Injo, L. E.; Sadono, (NI): Haemoglobin O (Buginese X) in
Sulawesi. Brit. Med. J. 1: 1461-1462, 1958.

228. Liebhaber, S. A.; Cash, F. E.: Locus assignment of alpha-globin
structural mutations by hybrid-selected translation. J. Clin. Invest. 75:
64-70, 1985.

229. Liebhaber, S. A.; Cash, F. E.; Ballas, S. K.: Human alpha-globin
gene expression: the dominant role of the alpha(2)-locus in mRNA and
protein synthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 261: 15327-15333, 1986.

230. Liebhaber, S. A.; Goossens, M.; Kan, Y. W.: Homology and concerted
evolution at the alpha-1 and alpha-2 loci of human alpha-globin. Nature 290:
26-29, 1981.

231. Liebhaber, S. A.; Goossens, M. J.; Kan, Y. W.: Cloning and complete
nucleotide sequence of human 5(prime)-alpha-globin gene. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 77: 7054-7058, 1980.

232. Liebhaber, S. A.; Griese, E.-U.; Weiss, I.; Cash, F. E.; Ayyub,
H.; Higgs, D. R.; Horst, J.: Inactivation of human alpha-globin gene
expression by a de novo deletion located upstream of the alpha-globin
gene cluster. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87: 9431-9435, 1990.

233. Liebhaber, S. A.; Rappaport, E. F.; Cash, F. E.; Ballas, S. K.;
Schwartz, E.; Surrey, S.: Hemoglobin I mutation encoded at both alpha-globin
loci on the same chromosome: concerted evolution in the human genome. Science 226:
1449-1451, 1984.

234. Liu, G.-Y.; Zhang, G.-X.; Nie, S.-Y.; Luo, H.-Y.; Teng, Y.-Q.;
Liu, S.-P.; Song, M.; Son, L.; Chen, S.-S.; Jia, P.-C.; Liang, C.-C.
: A case of hemoglobin Iwate (alpha87(F8)his-to-arg) in China. Hemoglobin 7:
279-282, 1983.

235. Lorkin, P. A.; Charlesworth, D.; Lehmann, H.; Rahbar, S.; Tuchinda,
S.; Lie-Injo, L. E.: Two haemoglobins Q, alpha 74 (EF3) and alpha
75 (EF4) aspartic acid to histidine. Brit. J. Haemat. 19: 117-125,
1970.

236. Lorkin, P. A.; Huntsman, R. G.; Ager, J. A. M.; Lehmann, H.;
Vella, F.; Dakbre, P. D.: Hemoglobin G (Norfolk): alpha 85 (F6) asp-to-asn. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 379: 22-27, 1975.

237. Lu, Y.-Q.; Liu, J.-F.; Huang, C.-H.; Huang, P.-Y.; Hu, H.-L.;
Peng, X.-H.; Chen, S.-S.; Jia, P.-C.; Yang, K.-G.; Liang, C.-C.; Zuo,
C.-R.: Hemoglobin Lille (alpha74 (EF3) asp-to-ala): the first instance
in China. Hemoglobin 8: 523-527, 1984.

238. Maggio, A.; Massa, A.; Giampaolo, A.; Mavilio, F.; Tentori, L.
: Occurrence of Hb M Iwate (alpha 87 his-to-tyr) in an Italian carrier. Hemoglobin 5:
205-208, 1981.

239. Malcorra-Azpiazu, J. J.; Balda-Aguirre, M. I.; Diaz-Chico, J.
C.; Kutlar, F.; Kutlar, A.; Wilson, J. B.; Hu, H.; Huisman, T. H.
J.: Hb Le Lamentin or alpha20 (B1) his-to-gln found in a Spanish
family. Hemoglobin 12: 201-205, 1988.

240. Mamalaki, A.; Horanyi, M.; Szelenyi, J.; Moschonas, N. K.: Locus
assignment of human alpha-globin structural mutants by selective enzymatic
amplification of alpha-1 and alpha-2-globin cDNAs. Hum. Genet. 85:
509-512, 1990.

241. Marengo-Rowe, A. J.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: New human hemoglobin
variant from southern Arabia: G-Audhali (alpha-23(b4) glutamic acid-valine)
and the variability of B4 in human haemoglobin. Nature 219: 1164-1166,
1968.

242. Marinucci, M.; Mavilio, F.; Massa, A.; Gabbianelli, M.; Fontanarosa,
P. P.; Camagna, A.; Ignesti, C.; Tentori, L.: A new abnormal human
hemoglobin: Hb Prato (alpha31 arg-to-ser). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 578:
534-540, 1979.

243. Marinucci, M.; Mavilio, F.; Tentori, L.; Bestetti, A.: Occurrence
of Hb J Paris in an Italian family and recombination studies on the
free abnormal alpha-chain. Hemoglobin 3: 465-469, 1979.

244. Marinucci, M.; Mavilio, F.; Tentori, L.; D'Erasmo, F.; Colapietro,
A.; De Stasio, G.; Di Fonzo, S.: A new human hemoglobin variant:
Hb Bari (alpha 45(CD3) his-to-gln). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 622:
315-319, 1980.

245. Marti, H. R.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin Koelliker:
a new acquired haemoglobin appearing after severe haemolysis: alpha-2
(minus 141 arg) beta-2. Acta Haemat. 37: 174-180, 1967.

246. Martin, G.; Villegas, A.; Calero, F.; del Palacio, S.; Lopez,
J. C.; Lopez, M.; Espinos, D.: Hb O Padova in a Spanish family. Acta
Haemat. 84: 1-4, 1990.

247. Martinez, G.; Lima, F.; Residenti, C.; Colombo, B.: Hb J Camaguey
alpha 141 (HC3) arg-to-gly: a new abnormal human hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 2:
47-52, 1978.

248. Masala, B.: Hemoglobinopathies in Sardinia. Hemoglobin 16:
331-351, 1992.

249. Masala, B.; Manca, L.; Stangoni, A.; Cuccuru, G. B.; Wilson,
J. B.; Webber, B. B.; Kutlar, A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Sassari or
alpha126 (H9) asp-to-his observed in a family from northern Sardinia. Hemoglobin 11:
373-378, 1987.

250. Mavilio, F.; Marinucci, M.; Tentori, L.; Fontanarosa, P. P.;
Rossi, U.; Biagiotti, S.: Hemoglobin Legnano (alpha 141 (HC3) arg-to-leu):
a new abnormal human hemoglobin with high oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 2:
249-259, 1978.

251. Mayne, E. E.; Elder, G. E.; Lappin, T. R. J.; Ferguson, L. A.
K.: Hb M Iwate (alpha87 his-to-tyr): de novo mutation in an Irish
family. Hemoglobin 10: 205-208, 1986.

252. McDonald, M. J.; Michalski, L. A.; Turci, S. M.; Guillette, R.
A.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Structural, functional,
and subunit assembly properties of Hb Attleboro [alpha138(H21)ser-to-pro],
a variant possessing a site mutation at a critical C-terminal residue. Biochemistry 29:
173-178, 1990.

253. Meloni, T.; Pilo, G.; Camardella, L.; Cancedda, F.; Lania, A.;
Pepe, G.; Luzzatto, L.: Coexistence of three hemoglobins with different
alpha-chains in two unrelated children (with family studies indicating
polymorphism in the number of alpha-globin genes in the Sardinian
population). Blood 55: 1025-1032, 1980.

254. Meyering, C. A.; Israels, A. L.; Sebens, T.; Huisman, T. H. J.
: Studies on the heterogeneity of hemoglobin. II. The heterogeneity
of different human hemoglobin types in carboxymethyl cellulose and
in amberlite irc-50 chromatography: quantitative aspects. Clin. Chim.
Acta 5: 208-222, 1960.

255. Miyaji, T.; Iuchi, I.; Yamamoto, K.; Ohba, Y.; Shibata, S.:
Amino acid substitution of hemoglobin Ube 2 (alpha 68 asp): an example
of successful application of partial hydrolysis of peptide with 5
percent acetic acid. Clin. Chim. Acta 16: 347-352, 1967.

256. Miyaji, T.; Ueda, S.; Shibata, S.; Tamura, A.; Sasaki, H.: Further
studies on the fingerprint of Hb M (Iwate). Acta Haemat. Jpn. 25:
169-175, 1962.

257. Miyashita, H.; Hashimoto, K.; Mohri, H.; Ohokubo, T.; Harano,
T.; Harano, K.; Imai, K.: Hb Kanagawa (alpha-40(C5)lys-to-met): a
new alpha chain variant with an increased oxygen affinity. Hemoglobin 16:
1-10, 1992.

258. Moi, P.; Cash, F. E.; Liebhaber, S. A.; Cao, A.; Pirastu, M.
: An initiation codon mutation (AUG-to-GUG) of the human alpha-1-globin
gene: structural characterization and evidence for a mild thalassemic
phenotype. J. Clin. Invest. 80: 1416-1421, 1987.

259. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Baine, R. M.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; McGuffey,
J. E.; Benson, J. M.: Hemoglobin Evanston: alpha14(A12) trp-to-arg--a
variant hemoglobin associated with alpha-thalassemia-2. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 747: 65-70, 1983.

260. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Bechtel, K. C.; Johnson, M. H.; Jue, D. L.;
Holland, S.; Huff, C.; Schmidt, R. M.: Hemoglobin (Jackson) alpha
127 (H10) lys-to-asn. Am. J. Clin. Path. 66: 453-456, 1976.

261. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Jue, D. L.; Baine, R. M.: Hemoglobin J Rovigo
(alpha 53 ala-to-asp) in association with beta thalassemia. Hemoglobin 2:
443-445, 1978.

262. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; McGuffey, J. E.;
Simpkins, H.; Katz, J.: Hemoglobin Queens: alpha34(B15) leu-to-arg
structural and functional properties and its association with Hb E. Am.
J. Hemat. 13: 323-327, 1982.

263. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M. H.; Therrell, B. L.
: Hemoglobin Swan River (alpha6(A4)asp-to-gly). Hemoglobin 11: 61-62,
1987.

264. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Swan, D. C.; Hine, T. K.; Baine, R. M.; Jue,
D. L.; Benson, J. M.; Johnson, M. H.; Virshup, D. M.; Zinkham, W.
H.: Hb Catonsville (glutamic acid inserted between pro-37 (C2) alpha
and thr-38 (C3) alpha). J. Biol. Chem. 264: 21454-21457, 1989.

265. Moo-Penn, W. F.; Therrell, B. L., Jr.; Jue, D. L.; Johnson, M.
H.: Hemoglobin Cubujuqui (alpha141 arg-to-ser): functional consequences
of the alteration of the C-terminus of the alpha chain of hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 5:
715-724, 1981.

266. Murayama, M.: Chemical difference between normal human haemoglobin
and haemoglobin-I. Nature 196: 276-277, 1962.

267. Musumeci, S.; Schiliro, G.; Pizzarelli, G.; Fischer, A.; Russo,
G.: Thalassemia of intermediate severity resulting from the interaction
between alpha- and beta-thalassemia. J. Med. Genet. 15: 448-451,
1978.

268. Nakashima, H.; Fujiyama, A.; Kagiyama, S.; Imamura, T.: Genetic
polymorphisms of gene conversion within the duplicated human alpha-globin
loci. Hum. Genet. 84: 568-570, 1990.

269. Nakatsuji, T.; Abraham, B. L.; Lam, H.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hb Winnipeg or alpha75 (EF4) asp-to-tyr in a large Caucasian
family living in Georgia, USA. Hemoglobin 7: 105-110, 1983.

270. Nakatsuji, T.; Miwa, S.; Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsumoto, N.;
Matsuoka, I.: Hemoglobin Tottori (alpha59 (E8) glycine-to-valine):
a new unstable hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 5: 427-439, 1981.

271. Nakatsuji, T.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Cordele
alpha47 (CE5) asp-to-ala, a mildly unstable variant observed in black
twins. Hemoglobin 8: 37-46, 1984.

272. Ngiwsara, L.; Srisomsap, C.; Winichagoon, P.; Fucharoen, S.;
Svasti, J.: Two cases of compound heterozygosity for Hb Hekinan [alpha27(B8)glu-to-asp
(alpha-1)] and alpha-thalassemia in Thailand. Hemoglobin 28: 145-150,
2004.

273. Niazi, G. A.; Efremov, G. D.; Nikolov, N.; Hunter, E., Jr.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hemoglobin Strumica or alpha 112(G19) his-to-arg. (with
an addendum: hemoglobin J-Paris-I, alpha 12(A10) ala-to-asp, in the
same population). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 412: 181-186, 1975.

274. North, M. L.; Hassan, W.; Thillet, J.; Schwartz, M.; Taubert,
C.; Ritter, J.; Gandar, R.; Rosa, J.: Etude clinique et biologique
d'un cas d'hemoglobine hybride S-Stanleyville II (alpha 78 asn-to-lys,
beta 6 glu-to-val). Nouv. Rev. Franc. Hemat. 22: 235-241, 1980.

275. Nozari, G.; Rahbar, S.; Darbre, P.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
Setif (alpha 94 (G1) asp-to-tyr) in Iran--a report of 9 cases. Hemoglobin 1:
289-291, 1977.

276. O'Brien, C.; Gray, M. J.; Jacobs, A. S.: A survey of cord bloods
for abnormal hemoglobin, with further observations on hemoglobin I
(Burlington). Am. J. Obstet. Gynec. 88: 816-822, 1964.

277. Ohba, Y.; Fujisawa, K.; Imai, K.; Leowattana, W.; Tani, Y.; Ami,
M.; Miyaji, T.: A new alpha chain variant Hb Tonosho [alpha110(G17)ala-to-thr]:
subunit dissociation during cation exchange chromatography for Hb
A1c assay. Hemoglobin 14: 413-422, 1990.

278. Ohba, Y.; Hattori, Y.; Matsuoka, M.; Miyaji, T.; Fuyuno, K.:
Hb Kokura (alpha 47 (CE5) asp-to-gly): a slightly unstable variant. Hemoglobin 6:
69-74, 1982.

279. Ohba, Y.; Imai, K.; Uenaka, R.; Ami, M.; Fujisawa, K.; Itoh,
K.; Hirakawa, K.; Miyaji, T.: Hb Miyano or alpha41(C6)thr-to-ser:
a new high oxygen affinity alpha chain variant found in an erythremic
blood donor. Hemoglobin 13: 637-647, 1989.

280. Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsuoka, M.; Morito, M.; Iuchi, I.: Characterization
of Hb Ube-4: alpha 116 (GH4) glu-to-ala. Hemoglobin 2: 181-186,
1978.

281. Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsuoka, M.; Takeda, I.; Fukuba, Y.; Shibata,
S.; Ohkura, K.: Hemoglobin Matsue-Oki: alpha 75 (EF4) aspartic acid-to-asparagine. Hemoglobin 1:
383-388, 1977.

282. Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsuoka, M.; Yokoyama, M.: Further studies
on hemoglobin Hirosaki: demonstration of its presence at low concentration. Hemoglobin 2:
281-286, 1978.

283. Ohba, Y.; Miyaji, T.; Matsuoka, M.; Yokoyama, M.; Numakura, H.;
Nagata, K.; Takebe, Y.; Izumi, Y.; Shibata, S.: Hemoglobin Hirosaki
(alpha 43(CE1) phe-to-leu), a new unstable variant. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 405: 155-160, 1975.

284. Ohba, Y.; Yamamoto, K.; Kawata, R.; Miyaji, T.: Hyperunstable
hemoglobin Toyama, alpha136 (H19) leu to arg detection and identification
by in vitro biosynthesis with radioactive amino acids. Hemoglobin 11:
539-556, 1987.

285. Ohba, Y.; Yoshinaka, H.; Hattori, Y.; Matsuoka, M.; Miyaji, T.
: Hemoglobin J Habana found in a cord blood of a Japanese. Hemoglobin 7:
327-329, 1983.

286. Ojwang, P. J.; Ogada, T.; Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman,
T. H. J.: Hb Savaria or alpha(2)49(CE7) ser-to-arg in an indigenous
female from Kenya. Hemoglobin 9: 197-200, 1985.

287. Ooya, I.; Kawamura, K.; Seita, M.; Hanada, M.; Hitsumoto, A.
: Hemoglobin Kokura which was discovered in Kokura. (Abstract) 23rd
Gen. Meeting Japan. Soc. Hemat., Kyoto , 1961.

288. Orkin, S. H.: The duplicated human alpha globin lie close together
in cellular DNA. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 75: 5950-5954, 1978.

289. Orringer, E. P.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin
Chapel Hill or alpha 74 asp-to-gly. FEBS Lett. 65: 297-300, 1976.

290. Ostertag, W.; Von Ehrenstein, G.; Charache, S.: Duplicated alpha-chain
genes in Hopkins-2 haemoglobin of man and evidence for unequal crossing
over between them. Nature N.B. 237: 90-94, 1972.

291. Overly, W. L.; Rosenberg, A.; Harris, J. W.: Hemoglobin M (Reserve):
studies on identification and characterization. J. Lab. Clin. Med. 69:
62-87, 1967.

292. Paglietti, E.; Barella, S.; Satta, S.; Perra, C.; Cao, A.; Galanello,
R.: Hb Sassari [alpha-126(H9)asp-to-his] results from a GAC-to-CAC
mutation in the alpha-1-globin gene. Hemoglobin 22: 65-67, 1998.

293. Phillips, J. A., III; Scott, A. F.; Smith, K. D.; Young, K. E.;
Lightbody, K. L.; Jiji, R. M.; Kazazian, H. H., Jr.: A molecular
basis for hemoglobin-H diseases in American blacks. Blood 54: 1439-1445,
1979.

294. Phillips, J. A., III; Vik, T. A.; Scott, A. F.; Young, K. E.;
Kazazian, H. H., Jr.; Smith, K. D.; Fairbanks, V. F.; Koenig, H. M.
: Unequal crossing-over: a common basis of single alpha-globin genes
in Asians and American blacks with hemoglobin-H disease. Blood 55:
1066-1069, 1980.

295. Pik, C.; Tonz, O.: Nature of haemoglobin M (Oldenburg). Nature 210:
1182, 1966.

296. Pobedimskaya, D. D.; Molchanova, T. P.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb
Ramona or alpha(2)24(B5)tyr-to-cys. Hemoglobin 18: 365-366, 1994.

297. Pootrakul, S.; Boonyarat, D.; Kematorn, B.; Suanpan, S.; Wasi,
P.: Hemoglobin Thailand (alpha 56 (E5) lys-to-thr): a new abnormal
human hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 1: 781-798, 1977.

298. Pootrakul, S.; Dixon, G. H.: Hemoglobin Mahidol: a new hemoglobin
alpha-chain mutant. Canad. J. Biochem. 48: 1066-1078, 1970.

299. Pootrakul, S.; Kematorn, B.; Na-Nakorn, S.; Suanpan, S.: A new
haemoglobin variant. Haemoglobin Anantharaj (alpha 11 (A9) lysine-to-glutamic
acid). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 405: 161-166, 1975.

300. Pootrakul, S.; Srichiyanont, S.; Wasi, P.; Suanpan, S.: Hemoglobin
Siam (alpha 15 arg): a new alpha-chain variant. Humangenetik 25:
199-204, 1974.

301. Popp, R. A.; Lalley, P. A.; Whitney, J. B., III; Anderson, W.
F.: Mouse alpha-like globin genes and alpha-globin-like pseudogenes
are not syntenic. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 78: 6362-6366, 1981.

302. Poyart, C.; Krishnamoorthy, R.; Bursaux, E.; Gacon, G.; Labie,
D.: Structural and functional studies of haemoglobin Suresnes or
alpha 141 (HC3) arg-to-his, a new high oxygen affinity mutant. FEBS
Lett. 69: 103-107, 1976.

303. Prato, V.; Gallo, E.; Ricco, G.; Mazza, U.; Bianco, G.; Lehmann,
H.: Haemolytic anaemia due to haemoglobin Torino. Brit. J. Haemat. 19:
105-115, 1970.

304. Prehu, C.; Bost, M.; Barro, C.; Prome, D.; Riou, J.; Godart,
C.; Kister, J.; Galacteros, F.; Wajcman, H.: Hb Roubaix (alpha-55(E4)val-to-leu):
a new neutral hemoglobin variant involving the alpha-1 gene. Hemoglobin 23:
361-365, 1999.

305. Prehu, C.; Hanichi, A.; Yapo, A. P.; Claparols, C.; Prome, D.;
Riou, J.; Wajcman, H.: Hb Douala [alpha-3(A1)ser-phe]: a new alpha-1
gene mutation in a Cameroonian woman heterozygous for Hb S and a 3.7
kb deletional alpha-thalassemia. Hemoglobin 25: 323-329, 2001.

306. Priest, J. R.; Watterson, J.; Jones, R. T.; Faassen, A. E.; Hedlund,
B. E.: Mutant fetal hemoglobin causing cyanosis in a newborn. Pediat. 83:
734-736, 1989.

307. Proudfoot, N. J.; Maniatis, T.: The structure of a human alpha-globin
pseudogene and its relationship to alpha-globin gene duplication. Cell 21:
537-544, 1980.

308. Pulsinelli, P. D.; Perutz, M. F.; Nagel, R. L.: Structure of
hemoglobin M (Boston), a variant with a five-coordinated ferric heme. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 70: 3870-3874, 1973.

309. Qualtieri, A.; De Marco, E. V.; Crescibene, L.; Andreoli, V.;
Bagala, A.; Scornaienchi, M.; Brancati, C.; Greco, C. M.: Hb J-Wenchang-Wuming
or alpha-11(A9)lys-to-gln in an Italian woman. Hemoglobin 19: 277-280,
1995.

310. Quattrin, N.; Ventruto, V.: Hemoglobin Mexico in a Sardinian
woman. Helv. Med. Acta 33: 388-394, 1967.

311. Rahbar, S.; Ala, F.; Akhavan, E.; Nowzari, G.; Shoa'i, I.; Zamanianpoor,
M. H.: Two new hemoglobins: hemoglobin Perspolis (alpha 64 (E13)
asp-to-tyr) and hemoglobin J Kurosh (alpha 19 (AB) ala-to-asp). Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 427: 119-125, 1976.

312. Rahbar, S.; Kinderlerer, J. L.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin L Persian
Gulf: alpha 57 (E6) glycine leads to arginine. Acta Haemat. 42:
169-175, 1969.

313. Rahbar, S.; Mahdavi, N.; Nowzari, G.; Mostafavi, I.: Hemoglobin
Arya: alpha 47, aspartic acid to asparagine. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 386:
525-529, 1975.

314. Rahbar, S.; Nowzari, G.; Daneshmand, P.: Hemoglobin Daneshgah-Tehran
alpha 72 (EF1) histidine-to-arginine. Nature N.B. 245: 268-269,
1973.

315. Ranney, H. M.; O'Brien, C.; Jacobs, A. S.: An abnormal human
foetal haemoglobin with an abnormal alpha-polypeptide chain. Nature 194:
743-745, 1962.

316. Raper, A. B.: Unusual haemoglobin variant in a Gujerati Indian. Brit.
Med. J. 1: 1285-1286, 1957.

317. Reeders, S. T.: Personal Communication. Oxford, England  9/26/1986.

318. Reynolds, C. A.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin Russ or alpha-2
(51 arg) beta-2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 130: 541-543, 1966.

319. Rhoda, M.-D.; Martin, J.; Blouquit, Y.; Garel, M.-C.; Edelstein,
S. J.; Rosa, J.: Sickle cell hemoglobin fiber formation strongly
inhibited by the Stanleyville II mutation (alpha78 asn-to-lys). Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 111: 8-13, 1983.

320. Romao, L.; Cash, F.; Weiss, I.; Liebhaber, S.; Pirastu, M.; Galanello,
R.; Loi, A.; Paglietti, E.; Ioannou, P.; Cao, A.: Human alpha-globin
gene expression is silenced by terminal truncation of chromosome 16p
beginning immediately 3-prime of the zeta-globin gene. Hum. Genet. 89:
323-328, 1992.

321. Romero, M. J.; Garrido, M. L.; Abril, E.; Garrido, F.; de Pablos,
J. Ma.: Detection of Hb J-Camaguey (alpha-141(HC3)arg-to-gly) in
three Spanish families. Hemoglobin 19: 287-289, 1995.

322. Rosa, J.; Maleknia, N.; Vergos, D.; Dunet, R.: Une nouvelle
hemoglobine anormale: l'hemoglobine J(alpha-Paris) 12 ala-a-asp. Nouv.
Rev. Franc. Hemat. 6: 423-426, 1966.

323. Rubin, E. M.; Kan, Y. W.: A simple sensitive prenatal test for
hydrops fetalis caused by alpha-thalassaemia. Lancet 325: 75-77,
1985. Note: Originally Volume I.

324. Rucknagel, D. L.; Page, E. B.; Jensen, W. N.: Hemoglobin I:
an inherited hemoglobin anomaly. Blood 10: 999-1009, 1955.

325. Saenz, G. F.; Alvarado, M.; Arroyo, G.; Alfaro, E.; Montero,
G.; Jimenez, J.; Martinez, G.; Lima, F.; Colombo, B.: Hemoglobin
Suresnes in a Costa-Rican woman of Spanish-Indian ancestry. Hemoglobin 2:
383-387, 1978.

326. Saenz, G. F.; Elizondo, J.; Alvarado, M. A.; Atmetlla, F.; Arroyo,
G.; Martinez, G.; Lima, F.; Colombo, B.: Chemical characterization
of a new haemoglobin variant Haemoglobin J (Cubujuqui) (alpha 141
(HC3) arg-to-ser). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 494: 48-50, 1977.

327. Sanna, M. T.; Giardina, B.; Scatena, R.; Pellegrini, M.; Olianas,
A.; Manca, L.; Masala, B.; Castagnola, M.; Corda, M.: Functional
alterations in adult and fetal hemoglobin Sassari asp-alpha-126(H9)-to-his:
the role of alpha-1-alpha-2 contact. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 18338-18342,
1994.

328. Sansone, G.; Centa, A.; Sciarratta, V.; Gallo, E.; Lehmann, H.
: Haemoglobin O Indonesia (alpha116 glu-to-lys) in an Italian family. Acta
Haemat. 43: 40-47, 1970.

329. Schiliro, G.; Russo, A.; Azzia, N.; Digiacomo, M. S.; Musumeci,
S.; Russo, G.: Hemoglobin Koelliker (alpha minus 141 arg) in favism. Acta
Haemat. 67: 229, 1982.

330. Schiliro, G.; Russo-Mancuso, G.; Dibenedetto, S. P.; Samperi,
P.; Di Cataldo, A.; Ragusa, R.; Testa, R.: Six rare hemoglobin variants
found in Sicily. Hemoglobin 15: 431-437, 1991.

331. Schmidt, R. M.; Bechtel, K. C.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Hemoglobin
Q(India), alpha 64 (E13) asp-to-his, and beta thalassemia in a Canadian
family. Am. J. Clin. Path. 66: 446-448, 1976.

332. Schnedl, W. J.; Reisinger, E. C.; Katzensteiner, S.; Lipp, R.
W.; Schreiber, F.; Hopmeier, P.; Krejs, G. J.: Haemoglobin O Padova
and falsely low haemoglobin A(1c) in a patient with type I diabetes. J.
Clin. Path. 50: 434-446, 1997.

333. Schneider, R. G.; Alperin, J. B.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
I in an American Negro family: structural and hematologic studies. J.
Lab. Clin. Med. 68: 940-946, 1966.

334. Schneider, R. G.; Alperin, J. B.; Lehmann, H.: Sickling tests.
Pitfalls in performance and interpretation. JAMA 202: 419-421, 1967.

335. Schneider, R. G.; Atkins, R. J.; Hosty, T. S.; Tomlin, G.; Casey,
R.; Lehmann, P. A.; Lorkin, P. A.; Nagai, K.: Haemoglobin Titusville
(alpha 94 asp-to-asn): a new haemoglobin with a lowered affinity for
oxygen. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 400: 365-373, 1975.

336. Schneider, R. G.; Brimhall, B.; Jones, R. T.; Bryant, R.; Mitchell,
C. B.; Goldberg, A. I.: Hb Ft. Worth: alpha27glu-to-gly--a variant
present in unusually low concentration. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 243:
164-169, 1971.

337. Schneider, R. G.; Hightower, B.; Carpentieri, U.; Duerst, M.
L.; Shih, T. B.; Jones, R. T.: Hemoglobin Oleander (alpha116 (GH4)
glu-to-gln): structural and functional characterization. Hemoglobin 6:
465-480, 1980.

338. Schoenfelder, S.; Sexton, T.; Chakalova, L.; Cope, N. F.; Horton,
A.; Andrews, S.; Kurukuti, S.; Mitchell, J. A.; Umlauf, D.; Dimitrova,
D. S.; Eskiw, C. H.; Luo, Y.; Wei, C.-L.; Ruan, Y.; Bieker, J. J.;
Fraser, P.: Preferential associations between co-regulated genes
reveal a transcription interactome in erythroid cells. Nature Genet. 42:
53-61, 2010.

339. Schroeder, W. A.; Jones, R. T.: Some aspects of the chemistry
and function of human and animal hemoglobins. Fortschr. Chem. Organ.
Naturst. 23: 113-194, 1965.

340. Schroeder, W. A.; Shelton, J. B.; Shelton, J. R.; Powars, D.
: Hemoglobin Sunshine Seth (alpha94 asp-to-his). Hemoglobin 3: 145-159,
1979.

341. Schwartz, I. R.; Atwater, J.; Repplinger, E.; Tocantins, L. M.
: Sickling of erythrocytes with I-A electrophoretic haemoglobin pattern. Fed.
Proc. 16: 115, 1957.

342. Sciarratta, G. V.; Ivaldi, G.; Molaro, G. L.; Sansone, G.; Salkie,
M. L.; Wilson, J. B.; Reese, A. L.; Huisman, T. H. J.: The characterization
of hemoglobin Manitoba or alpha(2)102(G9)ser-to-arg and hemoglobin
Contaldo or alpha(2)103(G10)his-to-arg by high performance liquid
chromatography. Hemoglobin 8: 169-181, 1984.

343. Scott, A. F.; Phillips, J. A., III; Young, K. E.; Kazazian, H.
H., Jr.; Smith, K. D.; Charache, S.; Clegg, J. B.: The molecular
basis of hemoglobin Grady. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 33: 129-133, 1981.

344. Sellaye, M.; Blouquit, Y.; Galacteros, F.; Arous, N.; Monplaisir,
N.; Rhoda, M. D.; Braconnier, F.; Rosa, J.: A new silent hemoglobin
variant in a black family from French West Indies: hemoglobin Le Lamentin
alpha20 his-to-gln. FEBS Lett. 145: 128-130, 1982.

345. Shelton, J. B.; Shelton, J. R.; Schroeder, W. A.; Powars, D.
R.: Hb Aztec or alpha76(EF5) met-to-thr: detection of a silent mutant
by high performance liquid chromatography. Hemoglobin 9: 325-332,
1985.

346. Shibata, S.: Hereditary nigremia (geneticobiochemical aspects). Jpn.
J. Hum. Genet. 9: 193-206, 1964.

347. Shibata, S.; Iuchi, I.; Miyaji, T.; Ueda, S.: Spectroscopic
characterization of hemoglobin M (Iwate) and hemoglobin M (Kurume),
the two variants of hemoglobin M found in Japan. Acta Haemat. Jpn. 24:
477-485 and 486-494, 1961.

348. Shibata, S.; Miyaji, T.; Ohba, Y.: Abnormal hemoglobins in Japan. Hemoglobin 4:
395-408, 1980.

349. Shibata, S.; Tamura, A.; Iuchi, I.; Takahashi, H.: Hemoglobin
M-1. Demonstration of a new abnormal hemoglobin in hereditary nigremia. Acta
Haemat. Jpn. 23: 96-104, 1960.

350. Shibata, S.; Ueda, S.; Miyaji, T.; Imamura, T.: Hemoglobinopathies
in Japan. Hemoglobin 5: 509-515, 1981.

351. Shimasaki, S.: A new hemoglobin variant, hemoglobin Nunobiki
(alpha141 (HC3) arg-to-cys): notable influence of the carboxy-terminal
cysteine upon various physico-chemical characteristics of hemoglobin. J.
Clin. Invest. 75: 695-701, 1985.

352. Shimasaki, S.; Iuchi, I.; Hidaka, K.; Mizuta, W.: The survey
of abnormal hemoglobin in Kobe district. Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 28:
127-128, 1983.

353. Shimizu, A.; Hayashi, A.; Yamamura, Y.; Tsugita, A.; Kitayama,
K.: The structural study on a new hemoglobin variant, Hb M (Osaka). Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 97: 472-482, 1965.

354. Shimizu, A.; Tsugita, A.; Hayashi, A.; Yamamura, Y.: The primary
structure of hemoglobin M (Iwate). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 107: 270-277,
1965.

355. Shin, M.-C.; Chen, C.-M.; Liu, S.-C.; Huang, C.-H.; Lee, T.-P.;
Chan, W.-L.; Chang, J.-G.: Hb UBE-2 in a Taiwanese subject: an A-to-G
substitution at codon 68 of the alpha-2-globin gene. Hemoglobin 26:
99-101, 2002.

356. Silvestroni, E.; Bianco, I.; Brancati, C.: Haemoglobins N and
P in Italian families. Nature 200: 658-659, 1963.

357. Simmers, R. N.; Mulley, J. C.; Hyland, V. J.; Callen, D. F.;
Sutherland, G. R.: Mapping the human alpha globin gene complex to
16p13.2-pter. J. Med. Genet. 24: 761-766, 1987.

358. Smith, E. W.; Torbert, J. V.: Study of two abnormal hemoglobins
with evidence for a new genetic locus for hemoglobin formation. Bull.
Johns Hopkins Hosp. 102: 38-45, 1958.

359. Southern, E. M.: Detection of specific sequences among DNA fragments
separated by gel electrophoresis. J. Molec. Biol. 98: 503-517, 1975.

360. Spivak, V. A.; Molchanova, T. P.; Ermakov, N. V.; Tokarev, Y.
N.; Martinez, G.; Szelenyi, J.; Horanyi, M.; Foldi, J.; Hollan, S.;
Kazieva, H.; Shamov, I. A.: A new hemoglobin variant: Hb Dagestan
alpha60(E9) lys-to-glu. Hemoglobin 5: 133-138, 1981.

361. Straub, A. C.; Lohman, A. W.; Billaud, M.; Johnstone, S. R.;
Dwyer, S. T.; Lee, M. Y.; Bortz, P. S.; Best, A. K.; Columbus, L.;
Gaston, B.; Isakson, B. E.: Endothelial cell expression of haemoglobin
alpha regulates nitric oxide signalling. Nature 491: 473-477, 2012.

362. Suarez, C. R.; Jue, D. L.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Hemoglobin Savaria--alpha49(CE7)ser-to-arg
in the United States. Hemoglobin 9: 627-629, 1985.

363. Sugihara, J.; Imamura, T.; Kagimoto, M.; Matsuo, T.; Yamada,
H.; Imoto, T.; Yanase, T.: A new electrophoretic variant of hemoglobin
(Munakata) in which a lysine residue is replaced by a methionine residue
at position 90 of the alpha-chain. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 744: 119-120,
1983.

364. Sugihara, J.; Imamura, T.; Yamada, H.; Imoto, T.; Matsuo, T.;
Sumida, I.; Yanase, T.: A new electrophoretic variant of hemoglobin
(Ogi) in which a leucine residue is replaced by an arginine residue
at position 34 of the alpha-chain. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 701: 45-48,
1982.

365. Sukumaran, P. K.; Merchant, S. M.; Desai, M. P.; Wiltshire, B.
G.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin Q India (alpha-64 (E13) aspartic acid
to histidine). Associated with beta-thalassemia observed in three
Sindhi families. J. Med. Genet. 9: 436-442, 1972.

366. Sukumaran, P. K.; Pik, C.: Some observations on haemoglobin
L(Bombay). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 104: 290-292, 1965.

367. Sumida, I.: Studies of abnormal hemoglobins in western Japan:
frequency of visible hemoglobin variants, and chemical characterization
of hemoglobin Sawara (alpha26ala-beta2) and hemoglobin Mugino (Hb
L Ferrara; alpha247gly-beta2). Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 19: 343-363,
1975.

368. Sumida, I.; Ohta, Y.; Imamura, T.; Yanase, T.: Hemoglobin Sawara:
alpha 6 (A4) aspartic acid to alanine. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 322:
23-26, 1973.

369. Suzuki, T.; Hayashi, A.; Yamamura, Y.; Enoki, Y.; Tyuma, I.:
Functional abnormality of hemoglobin M (Osaka). Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 19: 691-695, 1965.

370. Szelenyi, J. G.; Horanyi, M.; Foldi, J.; Hudacsek, J.; Istvan,
L.; Hollan, S. R.: A new hemoglobin variant in Hungary: Hb Savaria-alpha
49 (CE7) ser-to-arg. Hemoglobin 4: 27-38, 1980.

371. Tamura, A.: Black blood disease. Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 9: 183-192,
1964.

372. Thillet, J.; Blouquit, Y.; Perrone, F.; Rosa, J.: Hemoglobin
Pontoise: alpha 63 ala-to-asp (E12): a new fast moving variant. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 491: 16-22, 1977.

373. Thompson, R. B.; Rau, P. J.; Odom, J.; Bell, W. N.: The sickling
phenomenon in a white male without Hb-S. Acta Haemat. 34: 347-353,
1965.

374. Tonz, O.; Simon, H. A.; Hasselfeld, W.: Untersuchung einer grossen
Haemoglobin-M-Sippe. Entdeckung eines neuen Blutfarbstoffes: Hb M-Oldenburg. Schweiz.
Med. Wschr. 92: 1311-1313, 1962.

375. Trabuchet, G.; Morle, F.; Verdier, G.; Godet, J.; Benabadji,
M.; Nigon, V. M.: Mapping the alpha-globin genes in Hb J Mexico carriers. Hum.
Genet. 62: 164-166, 1982.

376. Traeger-Synodinos, J.; Harteveld, C. L.; Kanavakis, E.; Giordano,
P. C.; Kattamis, C.; Bernini, L. F.: Hb Aghia Sophia (alpha-62(E11)val-to-0
(alpha-1)), an 'in-frame' deletion causing alpha-thalassemia. Hemoglobin 23:
317-324, 1999.

377. Trincao, C.; Demelo, J. M.; Lorkin, P. A.; Lehmann, H.: Haemoglobin
J Paris in the south of Portugal (Algarve). Acta Haemat. 39: 291-298,
1968.

378. Turbpaiboon, C.; Svasti, S.; Sawangareetakul, P.; Winichagoon,
P.; Srisomsap, C.; Siritanaratkul, N.; Fucharoen, S.; Wilairat, P.;
Svasti, J.: Hb Siam (alpha-15(A13)gly-to-arg(alpha-1) (GGT-to-CGT))
is a typical alpha chain hemoglobinopathy without an alpha-thalassemic
effect. Hemoglobin 26: 77-81, 2002.

379. Vandenplas, S.; Higgs, D. R.; Nicholls, R. D.; Bester, A. J.;
Mathew, C. G. P.: Characterization of a new alpha(0) thalassemia
defect in the South African population. Brit. J. Haemat. 66: 539-542,
1987.

380. Van Ros, G.; Beale, D.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin Stanleyville-II
(alpha 78 asparagine to lysine). Brit. Med. J. 4: 92-93, 1968.

381. Vasseur, C.; Blouquit, Y.; Kister, J.; Prome, D.; Kavanaugh,
J. S.; Rogers, P. H.; Guillemin, C.; Arnone, A.; Galacteros, F.; Poyart,
C.; Rosa, J.; Wajcman, H.: Hemoglobin Thionville: an alpha-chain
variant with a substitution of a glutamate for valine at NA-1 and
having an acetylated methionine NH(2) terminus. J. Biol. Chem. 267:
12682-12691, 1992.

382. Vasseur, C.; Guillemin, C.; Galacteros, F.; Wajcman, H.: Hemoglobin
Thionville: an alpha chain variant with substitution of a glutamic
residue for valine NA-1 and having an extended N-terminus. (Abstract) Blood 76
(suppl. 1): 78a, 1990.

383. Vella, F.; Casey, R.; Lehmann, H.; Labossiere, A.; Jones, T.
G.: Haemoglobin Ottawa: alpha 15 gly-to-arg. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 336:
25-29, 1974.

384. Vella, F.; Charlesworth, D.; Lorkin, P. A.; Lehmann, H.: Hemoglobin
Broussais: alpha 90 lys replaced by asn. Canad. J. Biochem. 48:
408-410, 1970.

385. Vella, F.; Galbraith, P.; Wilson, J. B.; Wong, S. C.; Folger,
G. C.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hemoglobin St. Claude or alpha 127 (H10)
lys-to-thr. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 365: 318-323, 1974.

386. Vella, F.; Wells, R. H. C.; Ager, J. A. M.; Lehmann, H.: A haemoglobinopathy
involving haemoglobin H and a new (Q) haemoglobin. Brit. Med. J. 1:
752-755, 1958.

387. Vella, F.; Wiltshire, B.; Lehmann, H.; Galbraith, P.: Hemoglobin
Winnipeg. Clin. Biochem. 6: 66-70, 1973.

388. Vettore, L.; De Sandre, G.; Di Iorio, E. E.; Winterhalter, K.
H.; Lang, A.; Lehmann, H.: A new abnormal hemoglobin O Padova, alpha
30 (B11) glu-to-lys, and a dyserythropoietic anemia with erythroblastic
multinuclearity coexisting in the same patient. Blood 44: 869-878,
1974.

389. Virshup, D. M.; Zinkham, W. H.; Hine, T.; Baine, R. M.; Jue,
D. L.; Moo-Penn, W. F.: Hemoglobin Catonsville: an unstable, high
affinity variant with an insertion of glutamic acid between residues
37(pro) and 38 (thr) in the alpha chain. (Abstract) Blood 72 (suppl.):
75a, 1988.

390. Wainscoat, J. S.; Higgs, D. R.; Kanavakis, E.; Cao, A.; Georgiou,
D.; Clegg, J. B.; Weatherall, D. J.: Association of two DNA polymorphisms
in the alpha-globin gene cluster: implications for genetic analysis. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 35: 1086-1089, 1983.

391. Wainscoat, J. S.; Kanavakis, E.; Weatherall, D. J.; Walker, J.;
Holmes-Seidle, M.; Bobrow, M.; Donnison, A. B.: Regional localisation
of the human alpha-globin genes. (Letter) Lancet 318: 301-302, 1981.
Note: Originally Volume II.

392. Wajcman, H.; Beklhodja, O.; Labie, D.: Hb Setif: G1 (94) alpha--asp-to-tyr.
A new chain hemoglobin variant with substitution of the residue involved
in a hydrogen bond between unlike subunits. FEBS Lett. 27: 298-300,
1972.

393. Wajcman, H.; Blouquit, Y.; Gombaud-Saintonge, G.; Riou, J.; Galacteros,
F.: HB Fontainebleau (alpha21(B2)ala-to-pro), a new silent mutant
hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 13: 421-429, 1989.

394. Wajcman, H.; Blouquit, Y.; Lahary, A.; Soummer, A. M.; Groff,
P.; Bardakdjian, J.; Prehu, C.; Riou, J.; Godard, C.; Galacteros,
F.: Three new neutral alpha chain variants: Hb Bois Guillaume (alpha-65(E14)ala-to-val),
Hb Mantes-La-Jolie (alpha-79(EF8)ala-to-thr), and Hb Mosella (alpha-111(G18)ala-to-thr). Hemoglobin 19:
281-286, 1995.

395. Wajcman, H.; Blouquit, Y.; Riou, J.; Kister, J.; Poyart, C.;
Soria, J.; Galacteros, F.: A new hemoglobin variant found during
investigations of diabetes mellitus: Hb Pavie [alpha-135(H18)val-to-glu]. Clin.
Chim. Acta 188: 39-48, 1990.

396. Wajcman, H.; Blouquit, Y.; Vasseur, C.; Le Querrec, A.; Laniece,
M.; Melevendi, C.; Rasore, A.; Galacteros, F.: Two new human hemoglobin
variants caused by unusual mutational events: Hb Zaire contains a
five residue repetition within the alpha-chain and Hb Duino has two
residues substituted in the beta-chain. Hum. Genet. 89: 676-680,
1992.

397. Wajcman, H.; Bost, M.; Blouquit, Y.; Prehu, C.; Riou, J.; Galacteros,
F.: Two new alpha chain variants found during glycated hemoglobin
screening: Hb Tatras (alpha7(A5)lys-to-asn) and Hb Lisbon (alpha23(B4)glu-to-asp). Hemoglobin 18:
427-432, 1994.

398. Wajcman, H.; Dahmane, M.; Prehu, C.; Costes, B.; Prome, D.; Arous,
N.; Bardakdjian-Michau, J.; Riou, J.; Ayache, K. C.; Godart, C.; Galacteros,
F.: Haemoglobin J-Biskra: a new mildly unstable alpha-1 gene variant
with a deletion of eight residues (alpha-50-57, alpha-51-58 or alpha-52-59)
including the distal histidine. Brit. J. Haemat. 100: 401-406, 1998.

399. Wajcman, H.; Delaunay, J.; Francina, A.; Rosa, J.; Galacteros,
F.: Hemoglobin Nouakchott [alpha114(GH2)pro-to-leu]: a new hemoglobin
variant displaying an unusual increase in hydrophobicity. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 998: 25-31, 1989.

400. Wajcman, H.; Elion, J.; Boissel, J. P.; Labie, D.; Jos, J.; Girot,
R.: A silent hemoglobin variant: hemoglobin Necker Enfants-Malades
alpha 20 (B1) his-to-tyr. Hemoglobin 4: 177-184, 1980.

401. Wajcman, H.; Gombaud-Saintonge, G.; Galacteros, F.; Martha, M.;
Vertongen, F.: Hb Belliard (alpha56 (E5) lys-to-asn): a new fast-moving
alpha chain variant found in a subject of Spanish origin. Hemoglobin 13:
157-162, 1990.

402. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; Galacteros, F.; Josifovska, O.; Spielvogel,
A.; Nagel, R.L.: Hb Montefiore [alpha126 (H9) asp-to-tyr]: an abnormal
hemoglobin with high oxygen affinity and absence of cooperativity..
(Abstract) Blood 80 (suppl. 1): 82a, 1992.

403. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; M'Rad, A.; Marden, M. C.; Riou, J.;
Galacteros, F.: Hb Val de Marne [alpha133 (H16) ser-to-arg]: a new
hemoglobin variant with moderate increase in oxygen affinity.. Hemoglobin 17:
407-417, 1993.

404. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; M'Rad, A.; Soummer, A. M.; Galacteros,
F.: Hb Cemenelum [alpha92 (FG4) arg-to-trp]: a hemoglobin variant
of the alpha-1/beta-2 interface that displays a moderate increase
in oxygen affinity. Ann. Hemat. 68: 73-76, 1994.

405. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; Marden, M.; Lahary, A.; Monconduit,
M.; Galacteros, F.: Hemoglobin Rouen (alpha140(HC2)tyr-to-his): alteration
of the alpha chain C-terminal region and moderate increase in oxygen
affinity. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1180: 53-57, 1992.

406. Wajcman, H.; Kister, J.; Riou, J.; Galacteros, F.; Girot, R.;
Maier-Redelsperger, M.; Nayudu, N. V. S.; Giordano, P. C.: Hb Godavari
(alpha-95(G2)pro to thr): a neutral amino acid substitution in the
alpha-1/beta-2 interface that modifies the electrophoretic mobility
of hemoglobin. Hemoglobin 22: 11-22, 1998.

407. Wajcman, H.; Vasseur, C.; Blouquit, Y.; Rosa, J.; Labie, D.;
Najman, A.; Reman, O.; Leporrier, M.; Galacteros, F.: Unstable alpha-chain
hemoglobin variants with factitious beta-thalassemia biosynthetic
ratio: Hb Questembert (alpha131 [H14] ser-to-pro) and Hb Caen (alpha132
[H15] val-to-gly). Am. J. Hemat. 42: 367-374, 1993.

408. Wajcman, H.; Vasseur, C.; Galacteros, F.; Blouquit, Y.; Rosa,
J.; Labie, D.; Najman, A.: Hb Questembert [alpha-131(H14)ser-to-pro]:
a new highly unstable variant with unbalanced chain synthesis. (Abstract) Blood 76
(suppl. 1): 79a, 1990.

409. Waye, J. S.; Eng, B.; Patterson, M.; Carcao, M. D.; Chang, L.;
Olivieri, N. F.; Chui, D. H. K.: Identification of two new alpha-thalassemia
mutations in exon 2 of the alpha-1-globin gene. Hemoglobin 25: 391-396,
2001.

410. Weatherall, D. J.; Clegg, J. B.: Recent developments in the
molecular genetics of human hemoglobin. Cell 16: 467-479, 1979.

411. Webber, B. B.; Lam, H.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb
Albany-GA or alpha11(A9)lys-to-asn. Hemoglobin 7: 257-262, 1983.

412. Webber, B. B.; Wilson, J. B.; Gu, L.-H.; Huisman, T. H. J.:
Hb Ethiopia or alpha140(HC2)tyr-to-his. Hemoglobin 16: 441-443,
1992.

413. Weitkamp, L. R.; Stamatoyannopoulos, G.; Rowley, P. T.; Kirk,
R. L.: The linkage relationships of the haemoglobin beta, delta and
alpha loci with 34 genetic marker systems. Ann. Hum. Genet. 41:
61-75, 1977.

414. Wilkie, A. O. M.; Higgs, D. R.; Rack, K. A.; Buckle, V. J.; Spurr,
N. K.; Fischel-Ghodsian, N.; Ceccherini, I.; Brown, W. R. A.; Harris,
P. C.: Stable length polymorphism of up to 260 kb at the tip of the
short arm of human chromosome 16. Cell 64: 595-606, 1991.

415. Williamson, D.; Langdown, J. V.; Myles, T.; Mason, C.; Henthorn,
J. S.; Davies, S. C.: Polycythaemia and microcytosis arising from
the combination of a new high oxygen affinity haemoglobin (Hb Luton,
alpha-89 his-to-leu) and alpha-thalassaemia trait. Brit. J. Haemat. 82:
621-622, 1992.

416. Wilson, J. T.; deRiel, J. K.; Forget, B. G.; Marotta, C. A.;
Weissman, S. M.: Nucleotide sequence of 3-prime untranslated portion
of human alpha globin mRNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 4: 2353-2368, 1977.

417. Wiltshire, B. G.; Clark, K. G. A.; Lorkin, P. A.; Lehmann, H.
: Haemoglobin Denmark Hill (alpha 95 (G2) pro-to-ala), a variant with
unusual electrophoretic and oxygen-binding properties. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 278: 459-464, 1972.

418. Winter, W. P.; Rucknagel, D. L.; Fielding, J.: Identification
of several rare hemoglobin variants discovered in a population survey
including a new variant Hb Garden State alpha-82 ala-to-asp. (Abstract) Clin.
Res. 26: 122A, 1978.

419. Wong, S. C.; Ali, M. A. M.; Pond, J. R.; Rubin, S. M.; Johnson,
S. E. N.; Wilson, J. B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb J-Singa (alpha-78
asn-to-asp), a newly discovered hemoglobin variant with the same amino
acid substitution as one of the two present in Hb J-Singapore (alpha-78
asn-to-asp, alpha-79 ala-to-gly). Biochim. Biophys. Acta 784: 187-188,
1984.

420. Yamaoka, K.; Kawamura, K.; Hanada, M.; Seita, M.; Hitsumoto,
S.; Ooya, I.: Studies on abnormal haemoglobins. Jpn. J. Hum. Genet. 5:
99-111, 1960.

421. Yanase, T.; Hanada, M.; Seita, M.; Ohya, I.; Ohta, Y.; Imamura,
T.; Fujimura, T.; Kawasaki, K.; Yamaoka, K.: Molecular basis of morbidity
from a series of studies of hemoglobinopathies in western Japan. Jpn.
J. Hum. Genet. 13: 40-53, 1968.

422. Yi, C. H.; Li, H. J.; Li, H. W.; Zhang, X. S.; Zhao, X. N.; Zhang,
C. T.: Hemoglobin Shenyang found among Uygurs in P.R. China. Hemoglobin 13:
97-99, 1989.

423. Yi-Tao, Z.; Headlee, M. E.; Henson, J.; Lam, H.; Wilson, J. B.;
Huisman, T. H. J.: Identification of hemoglobin G-Philadelphia (alpha68
asn-to-lys) and hemoglobin Matsue-Oki (alpha75 asp-to-asn) in a black
infant. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 707: 206-212, 1982.

424. Yodsowan, B.; Svasti, J.; Srisomsap, C.; Winichagoon, P.; Fucharoen,
S.: Hb Siam [alpha-15(A13)gly-arg] is a GGT-CGT mutation in the alpha-1-globin
gene. Hemoglobin 24: 71-75, 2000.

425. Yongsuwan, S.; Svasti, J.; Fucharoen, S.: Decreased heat stability
found in purified hemoglobin Queens (alpha34(B15)leu-to-arg). Hemoglobin 11:
567-570, 1987.

426. Zeng, F.-Y.; Fucharoen, S.; Huang, S.-Z.; Rodgers, G. P.: Hb
Q-Thailand (alpha74 (EF3) asp-to-his): gene organization, molecular
structure, and DNA diagnosis. Hemoglobin 16: 481-491, 1992.

427. Zeng, Y.; Huang, S.; Liang, X.; Long, G.; Lam, H.; Wilson, J.
B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Wuming or alpha11 (A9) lys-to-gln. Hemoglobin 5:
679-687, 1981.

428. Zeng, Y.; Huang, S.; Qiu, X.; Cheng, G.; Ren, Z.; Jin, Q.; Chen,
C.; Jiao, C.; Tang, Z.; Liu, R.; Bao, X.; Zeng, L.; Duan, Y.; Zhang,
G.: Hemoglobin Chongqing (alpha2 (NA2) leu-to-arg) and hemoglobin
Harbin (alpha16 (A14) lys-to-met) found in China. Hemoglobin 8:
569-581, 1984.

429. Zeng, Y.; Huang, S.; Zhou, X.; Qiu, X.; Dong, Q.; Li, M.; Bai,
J.: Hb Shenyang (alpha26 (B7) ala-to-glu): a new unstable variant
found in China. Hemoglobin 6: 625-628, 1982.

430. Zhao, W.; Wilson, J. B.; Webber, B. B.; Kutlar, A.; Tamagnini,
G. P.; Kuam, B.; Huisman, T. H. J.: Hb Hekinan observed in three
Chinese from Macau: identification of the GAG-to-GAT mutation in the
alpha-1-globin gene. Hemoglobin 14: 627-635, 1990.

431. Zhou, Z.; Chen, L.; Chen, P.; Zhang, K.; Wang, Y.: Hemoglobin
Hangzhou alpha64 (E13) asp-to-gly: a new variant found in China. Hemoglobin 11:
31-33, 1987.

432. Zimmer, E. A.; Martin, S. L.; Beverley, S. M.; Kan, Y. W.; Wilson,
A. C.: Rapid duplication and loss of genes coding for the alpha chains
of hemoglobin. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 77: 2158-2162, 1980.

433. Zwerdling, T.; Williams, S.; Nasr, S. A.; Rucknagel, D. L.:
Hb Port Huron (alpha56(E5)lys-to-arg): a new alpha chain variant. Hemoglobin 15:
381-391, 1991.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS INHERITANCE:
Autosomal dominant

SKIN, NAILS, HAIR:
[Skin];
Jaundice;
Cyanosis

HEMATOLOGY:
Alpha polypeptide hemoglobin chain;
Alpha-thalassemia silent carrier (3 normal genes);
Alpha-thalassemia with microcytosis (2 normal genes);
Alpha-thalassemia with microcytosis and hemolysis, Hb H disease (1
normal gene);
Alpha-thalassemia with fatal Hb Bart's hydrops fetalis (No normal
gene);
Polycythemia (e.g. Hb Chesapeake 141800.0018);
Unstable hemoglobin (e.g. Hb Contaldo 141800.0022);
Hemolysis (e.g. Hb Koelliker 141800.0083);
Methemoglobinemia (e.g. Hb M Boston 141800.0092);
Amelioration of SS disease (e.g. Hb Memphis 141800.0096);
Congenital Heinz body anemia (e.g. Hb Toyama 141800.0152)

LABORATORY ABNORMALITIES:
Decreased heme-heme interaction (e.g. Hb Kanagawa 141800.0169);
Increased oxygen affinity (e.g. Hb Nunobiki 141800.0109);
Reduced oxygen affinity (e.g. Hb Thionville 141800.0168);
Decreased reversible oxygen-binding capacity (e.g. Hb L (Bombay) 141800.9999)

MISCELLANEOUS:
Two alpha-globin genes - 5-prime or alpha-2 and 3-prime or alpha-1

CREATED John F. Jackson: 6/15/1995

EDITED joanna: 05/18/2011

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/14/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/1/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/28/2010
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 5/22/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/19/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/21/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/29/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/11/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/11/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/6/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/6/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/2/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/20/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/15/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/2/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/5/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/2/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/3/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/23/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/27/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/1/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/1/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/19/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/14/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/21/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/24/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/9/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/12/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/30/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/6/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/27/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/23/1986

EDITED tpirozzi: 09/30/2013
alopez: 12/19/2012
terry: 12/14/2012
alopez: 11/2/2012
terry: 11/1/2012
alopez: 8/6/2012
alopez: 7/25/2011
carol: 6/9/2011
alopez: 5/13/2011
alopez: 1/28/2010
terry: 6/3/2009
carol: 5/22/2009
terry: 1/15/2009
terry: 1/14/2009
wwang: 10/4/2007
wwang: 10/3/2006
terry: 9/19/2006
alopez: 7/25/2006
terry: 7/21/2006
terry: 6/23/2006
terry: 3/29/2006
carol: 10/21/2005
wwang: 10/21/2005
terry: 10/11/2005
carol: 10/3/2005
terry: 8/11/2005
wwang: 6/7/2005
terry: 5/17/2005
wwang: 5/13/2005
terry: 5/11/2005
terry: 2/7/2005
tkritzer: 1/25/2005
terry: 12/6/2004
tkritzer: 8/10/2004
terry: 8/6/2004
tkritzer: 6/8/2004
terry: 6/2/2004
carol: 3/17/2004
tkritzer: 1/21/2004
terry: 1/20/2004
terry: 1/15/2004
cwells: 9/3/2003
terry: 9/2/2003
carol: 8/29/2003
carol: 8/25/2003
carol: 5/13/2003
terry: 4/17/2003
terry: 3/5/2003
terry: 3/3/2003
tkritzer: 12/10/2002
tkritzer: 10/7/2002
tkritzer: 10/3/2002
tkritzer: 10/2/2002
carol: 6/3/2002
terry: 6/3/2002
terry: 5/23/2002
cwells: 3/22/2002
cwells: 3/20/2002
terry: 2/27/2002
mcapotos: 11/1/2001
mcapotos: 10/26/2001
mcapotos: 10/11/2001
cwells: 5/31/2001
mcapotos: 2/19/2001
mcapotos: 2/15/2001
terry: 2/14/2001
mcapotos: 5/26/2000
mcapotos: 5/24/2000
terry: 5/1/2000
mcapotos: 2/7/2000
mcapotos: 2/4/2000
carol: 1/28/2000
mcapotos: 1/28/2000
mcapotos: 1/24/2000
terry: 1/19/2000
carol: 12/8/1999
mgross: 7/16/1999
terry: 7/14/1999
carol: 6/27/1999
terry: 4/30/1999
alopez: 4/21/1999
terry: 3/24/1999
carol: 3/9/1999
terry: 2/24/1999
mgross: 2/16/1999
mgross: 2/11/1999
terry: 2/9/1999
dkim: 7/21/1998
carol: 7/2/1998
alopez: 6/12/1998
terry: 6/5/1998
alopez: 5/14/1998
carol: 5/4/1998
terry: 4/30/1998
mark: 2/16/1998
terry: 2/6/1998
mark: 10/19/1997
jenny: 9/5/1997
terry: 8/27/1997
alopez: 7/31/1997
alopez: 7/29/1997
terry: 7/10/1997
mark: 7/10/1997
alopez: 7/10/1997
terry: 7/9/1997
terry: 7/7/1997
mark: 6/14/1997
terry: 11/15/1996
terry: 11/13/1996
mark: 4/12/1996
terry: 4/9/1996
mark: 2/13/1996
terry: 2/5/1996
mark: 11/17/1995
terry: 11/18/1994
jason: 7/29/1994
pfoster: 4/25/1994
mimadm: 4/17/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994

153370	TITLE *153370 INTEGRIN, ALPHA-L; ITGAL
;;LYMPHOCYTE FUNCTION-ASSOCIATED ANTIGEN, TYPE 1, ALPHA SUBUNIT; LFA1A;;
CD11A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Larson et al. (1989) isolated clones corresponding to the LFA1-alpha
subunit from a size-selected lambda-gt10 cDNA library constructed from
PMA-stimulated myeloid cells. The protein contains a 25-amino acid
hydrophobic signal sequence, a 1,063-amino acid extracellular domain, a
29-amino acid transmembrane domain, and a 53-amino acid cytoplasmic
tail. The extracellular region contains 7 repeats. The LFA1-alpha
protein shares 36% identity with the alpha subunits of MAC1 (ITGAM;
120980) and p150,95 (ITGAX; 151510); all 3 of these proteins contain an
approximately 200-amino acid insert in the N terminus relative to other
integrin alpha subunits. Northern blot analysis detected expression of a
5.5-kb transcript in lymphoid and myeloid cells but not in bladder
carcinoma.

GENE FUNCTION

Lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA1) is a dimer consisting of
CD11A (ITGAL) and a beta subunit (ITGB2; 600065). ITGB2 also associates
with other alpha chains, e.g., with ITGAM (120980) to form MAC1 and with
ITGAX (151510) to form p150,95. LFA1 is expressed on lymphocytes and
phagocytic cells. The LFA1 molecule is involved in the adhesion of
cytotoxic T cells to their target cells. Patients with LFA1
immunodeficiency disease (116920) have recurrent life-threatening
infections, show deficiency of the beta chain of all 3 molecules, LFA1,
Mac1 (macrophage antigen-1), and p150,95, and display profound defects
in adhesion-dependent granulocyte, monocyte, and B- and T-lymphocyte
functions. The alpha subunits were designated by Marlin et al. (1986) as
alpha-L for LFA1, alpha-M for Mac1, and alpha-X for p150,95.

Marlin et al. (1986) showed that the genetic defect in LFA1
immunodeficiency disease resides in the common beta subunit of these 3
molecules. Furthermore, they were able to demonstrate that the beta
subunit is coded by chromosome 21, whereas the unique alpha subunit of
LFA1 is coded by chromosome 16. These results were obtained by
human-mouse T-cell fusion studies. Human LFA1 alpha and mouse beta
subunits joined in the interspecies hybrid cells to form alpha-beta
complexes. Surface expression of the alpha, but not of the beta, subunit
of patient cells was restored by the formation of interspecies
complexes. These findings showed that the LFA1 alpha subunit in
genetically deficient cells is competent for surface expression in the
presence of an appropriate beta subunit.

In the serum of a multiply transfused patient with systemic lupus
erythematosus (152700), Pischel et al. (1987) identified an antibody
directed at determinants of the LFA1 alpha-chain. Since the serum did
not immunoprecipitate LFA1 from autologous cells, even though LFA1
molecules were present, the serum identified 2 serologic phenotypes of
LFA1. The serum reacted with cells from 95% of normal individuals.

Lu and Cyster (2002) studied the mechanisms that control localization of
marginal zone B cells. They demonstrated that marginal zone B cells
express elevated levels of the integrins LFA1 and alpha-4-beta-1 (see
192975 and 135630) and that the marginal zone B cells bind to the
ligands ICAM1 (147840) and VCAM1 (192225). These ligands are expressed
within the marginal zone in a lymphotoxin-dependent manner. Combined
inhibition of LFA1 and alpha-4-beta-1 causes a rapid and selective
release of B cells from the marginal zone. Furthermore,
lipopolysaccharide-triggered marginal zone B cell relocalization
involves downregulation of integrin-mediated adhesion. Lu and Cyster
(2002) concluded that their studies identified key requirements for
marginal zone B cell localization and established a role for integrins
in peripheral lymphoid tissue compartmentalization.

Anikeeva et al. (2005) found that LFA1 engagement could be replaced by
other adhesion mechanisms, such as CD2 (186990)-CD58 (LFA3; 153420)
interaction, in antigen-induced cytotoxic T-lymphocyte granule
polarization and degranulation, but that LFA1 engagement was
indispensable for effective target cell lysis by the released granules.
LFA1-mediated adhesion to glass-supported bilayers resulted in a much
larger junction area and formation of a peripheral supramolecular
activation cluster compared with CD2-mediated adhesion. Anikeeva et al.
(2005) concluded that LFA1 delivers a distinct signal essential for
directing released granules to antigen-bearing target cells to mediate
their destruction.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Corbi et al. (1988) demonstrated that the
genes encoding the alpha subunits of LFA1, Mac1, and p150,95, all of
which play a part in leukocyte adhesion, constitute a cluster located on
16p13.1-p11. Callen et al. (1991) narrowed the localization to 16p11.2.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Kim et al. (2003) investigated cytoplasmic conformational changes in the
integrin LFA1 (alpha-L; beta-2, 600065) in living cells by measuring
fluorescence resonance energy transfer between cyan fluorescent
protein-fused and yellow fluorescent protein-fused alpha-L and beta-2
cytoplasmic domains. In the resting state these domains were close to
each other, but underwent significant spatial separation upon either
intracellular activation of integrin adhesiveness (inside-out signaling)
or ligand binding (outside-in signaling). Thus, bidirectional integrin
signaling is accomplished by coupling extracellular conformational
changes to an unclasping and separation of the alpha and beta
cytoplasmic domains, which Kim et al. (2003) noted as a distinctive
mechanism for transmitting information across the plasma membrane.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

Interactions between LFA1 and intercellular adhesion molecules are
important in the pathogenesis of psoriasis (see 177900). Lebwohl et al.
(2003) studied the therapeutic effects of efalizumab, a humanized
monoclonal antibody that binds to the alpha subunit of LFA1 and inhibits
the activation of T cells, in subjects with psoriasis. A significant
improvement in plaque psoriasis was observed in subjects with moderate
to severe disease. Extending treatment from 12 to 24 weeks resulted in
both maintenance and improvement of responses.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Fischer et al. (1986); Sanchez-Madrid et al. (1983)
REFERENCE 1. Anikeeva, N.; Somersalo, K.; Sims, T. N.; Thomas, V. K.; Dustin,
M. L.; Sykulev, Y.: Distinct role of lymphocyte function-associated
antigen-1 in mediating effective cytolytic activity by cytotoxic T
lymphocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 6437-6442, 2005.

2. Callen, D. F.; Chen, L. Z.; Nancarrow, J.; Whitmore, S. A.; Apostolou,
S.; Thompson, A. D.; Lane, S. A.; Stallings, R. L.; Hildebrand, C.
E.; Harris, P. G.; Sutherland, G. R.: Current state of the physical
map of human chromosome 16. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58:
1998 only, 1991.

3. Corbi, A. L.; Larson, R. S.; Kishimoto, T. K.; Springer, T. A.;
Morton, C. C.: Chromosomal location of the genes encoding the leukocyte
adhesion receptors LFA-1, Mac-1 and p150,95: identification of a gene
cluster involved in cell adhesion. J. Exp. Med. 167: 1597-1607,
1988.

4. Fischer, A.; Durandy, A.; Sterkers, G.; Griscelli, C.: Role of
the LFA-1 molecule in cellular interactions required for antibody
production in humans. J. Immun. 136: 3198-3203, 1986.

5. Kim, M.; Carman, C. V.; Springer, T. A.: Bidirectional transmembrane
signaling by cytoplasmic domain separation in integrins. Science 301:
1720-1725, 2003.

6. Larson, R. S.; Corbi, A. L.; Berman, L.; Springer, T.: Primary
structure of the leukocyte function-associated molecule-1 alpha subunit:
an integrin with an embedded domain defining a protein superfamily. J.
Cell Biol. 108: 703-712, 1989.

7. Lebwohl, M.; Tyring, S. K.; Hamilton, T. K.; Toth, D.; Glazer,
S.; Tawfik, N. H.; Walicke, P.; Dummer, W.; Wang, X.; Garovoy, M.
R.; Pariser, D.: A novel targeted T-cell modulator, efalizumab, for
plaque psoriasis. New Eng. J. Med. 349: 2004-2013, 2003.

8. Lu, T. T.; Cyster, J. G.: Integrin-mediated long-term B cell retention
in the splenic marginal zone. Science 297: 409-412, 2002.

9. Marlin, S. D.; Morton, C. C.; Anderson, D. C.; Springer, T. A.
: LFA-1 immunodeficiency disease: definition of the genetic defect
and chromosomal mapping of alpha and beta subunits of the lymphocyte
function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1) by complementation in hybrid
cells. J. Exp. Med. 164: 855-867, 1986.

10. Pischel, K. D.; Marlin, S. D.; Springer, T. A.; Woods, V. L.,
Jr.; Bluestein, H. G.: Polymorphism of lymphocyte function-associated
antigen-1 demonstrated by a lupus patient's alloantiserum. J. Clin.
Invest. 79: 1607-1614, 1987.

11. Sanchez-Madrid, F.; Nagy, J.; Robbins, E.; Simon, P.; Springer,
T. A.: A human leukocyte differentiation antigen family with distinct
alpha subunits and a common beta subunit: the lymphocyte function-associated
antigen (LFA-1), the C3bi complement receptor (OKM1/Mac-1), and the
p150,95 molecule. J. Exp. Med. 158: 1785-1803, 1983.

CONTRIBUTORS Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 08/22/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/22/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/9/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/26/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/10/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/25/1986

EDITED alopez: 08/22/2008
mgross: 5/22/2007
carol: 5/16/2007
carol: 5/15/2007
tkritzer: 1/9/2004
terry: 1/9/2004
terry: 9/26/2003
alopez: 9/11/2002
tkritzer: 9/11/2002
tkritzer: 9/10/2002
mark: 6/12/1997
mimadm: 11/6/1994
carol: 5/4/1992
carol: 3/26/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989

602691	TITLE *602691 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR COACTIVATOR 1; NCOA1
;;STEROID RECEPTOR COACTIVATOR 1; SRC1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Onate et al. (1995) identified steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC1), a
coactivator that is required for full transcriptional activity of the
steroid receptor superfamily. They isolated a cDNA encoding SRC1 using
the yeast 2-hybrid system to identify proteins that interact with the
human progesterone receptor (PGR; 607311). The SRC1 protein has a
glutamine-rich region and a serine/threonine-rich region. SRC1 is
expressed as 2 mRNAs of approximately 5.5 and 7.5 kb in a variety of
human tissues and cell lines.

Using a Far Western-based approach to screen a HeLa cell cDNA expression
library with bacterially expressed rat thyroid hormone receptor (THRB;
190160), Takeshita et al. (1996) identified a partial SRC1 cDNA. They
isolated the remaining sequence by 5-prime RACE. The full-length cDNA
encodes a 1,440-amino acid protein with a mass of approximately 160 kD.

Hayashi et al. (1997) identified mRNA splicing variants encoding 3
isoforms: SRC1, SRC1E, and SRC1(-Q). SRC1(-Q) is identical to the
protein described by Takeshita et al. (1996). The C-terminal 56 amino
acids of SRC1 are replaced by 14 unique amino acids in SRC1E, while
SRC1(-Q) differs from SRC1 by deletion of a single glutamine residue.
RT-PCR analysis showed that SRC1E mRNA was more abundantly expressed
than SRC1 or SRC1(-Q) mRNAs in all the cell lines tested. SRC1E enhanced
thyroid hormone-dependent transactivation of reporter gene expression
more efficiently than SRC1 or SRC1(-Q).

GENE FUNCTION

Onate et al. (1995) showed that SRC1 enhances the transcriptional
activity of ligand-bound PGR but does not alter the basal activity of
the target promoter. SRC1 also enhances estrogen receptor (ESR; 133430),
glucocorticoid receptor (GRL; 138040), thyroid hormone receptor (e.g.,
190120), and retinoid X receptor (e.g., RXRA; 180245) transcriptional
activities through their cognate DNA response elements in the presence
of hormone. Studies of the effects of SRC1 on unrelated transactivators
showed that SRC1 can enhance the transcriptional activities of SP1
(189906) and the chimeric Gal4-VP16 protein, but not those of E2F (e.g.,
189971), E47 (147141), or CREB (123810). Coexpression of SRC1 with PGR
and ESR reversed the ability of ESR to squelch activation by PGR,
suggesting that SRC1 is a limiting factor necessary for efficient PGR
and ESR transactivation. A C-terminal form of SRC1 containing the
receptor-binding region acted as a dominant-negative repressor of
endogenous SRC1 function.

In vitro binding studies by Takeshita et al. (1996) showed that SRC1 can
bind to TBP (600075) and to TFIIB (189963), in addition to a variety of
nuclear hormone receptors in a ligand-dependent manner, suggesting that
SRC1 may play a role as a bridging molecule between nuclear hormone
receptors and general transcription factors. The conserved AF-2 region
of nuclear hormone receptors was not required for receptor-SRC1 binding.

To dissect the role of SRC1 in PGR transactivation, Liu et al. (1999)
used a cell-free transcription system with chromatin templates. They
reported the successful reconstitution of ligand-dependent and
PGR-dependent transcription using chromatin. They showed that,
consistent with their previously proposed hypothesis (Jenster et al.,
1997), the addition of liganded PGR to preassembled chromatin led to the
reconfiguration of nucleosome structure in the vicinity of its binding
site. This study suggested a dual role for SRC1 in PGR-mediated
transactivation: SRC1 is involved in both chromatin remodeling and the
process of recruitment/stabilization of general transcription factors.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Zhang et al. (2007) found that SIP
(KANK2; 614610) interacted with the N-terminal domain of SRC1. Western
blot analysis of MCF-7 human breast cancer cell immunoprecipitates
confirmed interaction between SIP and SRC1. Mutation analysis showed
that the ankyrin (612641) repeat domain of SIP was required for its
interaction with SRC1. Zhang et al. (2007) found that estrogen
stimulation of MCF-7 cells caused nuclear translocation of cytosolic
SRC1, while SIP remained cytosolic. Knockdown of SIP via RNA
interference resulted in SRC1 nuclear localization, independent of
estrogen treatment, and increased expression of an estrogen-dependent
reporter. Overexpression of SIP in MCF-7 cells reduced cell
proliferation and caused accumulation of cells in G0/G1 phase in
response to estrogen treatment. In contrast, knockdown of SIP led to an
increase of cells in S and G2/M phases following estrogen treatment.
Casein kinase II (see 115440) phosphorylated SIP in vitro, and
phosphorylated SIP no longer interacted with SRC1 in MCF-7 cells,
permitting SRC1 translocation to the nucleus. Zhang et al. (2007)
concluded that SIP sequesters SRC1 in the cytoplasm and thereby
regulates its transactivation activity.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Carapeti et al. (1998) mapped the
NCOA1 gene to human chromosome 2p23.

ANIMAL MODEL

Picard et al. (2002) found that Tif2 (601993) -/- mice were protected
against obesity and displayed enhanced adaptive thermogenesis, whereas
Src1 -/- mice were prone to obesity due to reduced energy expenditure.
In white adipose tissue, lack of Tif2 decreased Pparg (601487) activity
and reduced fat accumulation, whereas in brown adipose tissue, it
facilitated the interaction between Src1 and Pgc1-alpha (604517), which
induced the thermogenic activity of Pgc1-alpha. A high-fat diet
increased the Tif2/Src1 expression ratio, which may have contributed to
weight gain. These results revealed that the relative level of TIF2/SRC1
can modulate energy metabolism.

Ye et al. (2005) developed transgenic androgen receptor (AR;
313700)-reporter mice and crossed them with Src1 or Tif2 knockout mice
to analyze the contributions of Src1 and Tif2 to AR activity in testis.
In vivo imaging and reporter gene assays showed that testicular AR
activity was decreased significantly in mice with the Tif2 +/- mutation,
but not in those with an Src1 +/- background, suggesting that Tif2 is
the preferential coactivator for AR in testis. Immunohistologic analysis
confirmed that AR and Tif2 coexist in mouse testicular Sertoli cell
nuclei under normal conditions. Although Src1 concentrated in Sertoli
cell nuclei in the absence of Tif2, nuclear Src1 did not rescue AR
activity in the Tif2 mutant background. Src1 appeared to negatively
influence AR activity, whereas Tif2 stimulated AR activity.

REFERENCE 1. Carapeti, M.; Aguiar, R. C. T.; Chase, A.; Goldman, J. M.; Cross,
N. C. P.: Assignment of the steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1)
gene to human chromosome band 2p23. Genomics 52: 242-244, 1998.

2. Hayashi, Y.; Ohmori, S.; Ito, T.; Seo, H.: A splicing variant
of steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1E): the major isoform of SRC-1
to mediate thyroid hormone action. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 236:
83-87, 1997.

3. Jenster, G.; Spencer, T. E.; Burcin, M. M.; Tsai, S. Y.; Tsai,
M.-J.; O'Malley, B. W.: Steroid receptor induction of gene transcription:
a two-step model. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 7879-7884, 1997.

4. Liu, Z.; Wong, J.; Tsai, S. Y.; Tsai, M. J.; O'Malley, B. W.:
Steroid receptor coactivator-1 (SRC-1) enhances ligand-dependent and
receptor-dependent cell-free transcription of chromatin. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 96: 9485-9490, 1999.

5. Onate, S. A.; Tsai, S. Y.; Tsai, M.-J.; O'Malley, B. W.: Sequence
and characterization of a coactivator for the steroid hormone receptor
superfamily. Science 270: 1354-1357, 1995.

6. Picard, F.; Gehin, M.; Annicotte, J.-S.; Rocchi, S.; Champy, M.-F.;
O'Malley, B. W.; Chambon, P.; Auwerx, J.: SRC-1 and TIF2 control
energy balance between white and brown adipose tissues. Cell 111:
931-941, 2002.

7. Takeshita, A.; Yen, P. M.; Misiti, S.; Cardona, G. R.; Liu, Y.;
Chin, W. W.: Molecular cloning and properties of a full-length putative
thyroid hormone receptor coactivator. Endocrinology 137: 3594-3597,
1996.

8. Ye, X.; Han, S. J.; Tsai, S. Y.; DeMayo, F. J.; Xu, J.; Tsai, M.-J.;
O'Malley, B. W.: Roles of steroid receptor coactivator (SRC)-1 and
transcriptional intermediary factor (TIF) 2 in androgen receptor activity
in mice. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 9487-9492, 2005.

9. Zhang, Y.; Zhang, H.; Liang, J.; Yu, W.; Shang, Y.: SIP, a novel
ankyrin repeat containing protein, sequesters steroid receptor coactivators
in the cytoplasm. EMBO J. 26: 2645-2657, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/30/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/15/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/15/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/21/1999
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 11/19/1998

CREATED Ethylin Wang Jabs: 6/5/1998

EDITED alopez: 07/20/2012
terry: 7/19/2012
mgross: 4/30/2012
mgross: 8/15/2005
mgross: 1/15/2003
mgross: 10/18/2002
psherman: 12/17/1999
terry: 12/1/1999
carol: 10/21/1999
terry: 11/19/1998
carol: 11/19/1998
psherman: 6/8/1998
psherman: 6/5/1998

609676	TITLE *609676 MITOCHONDRIAL ANTIVIRAL SIGNALING PROTEIN; MAVS
;;VIRUS-INDUCED SIGNALING ADAPTOR; VISA;;
IFNB PROMOTER STIMULATOR 1; IPS1;;
CARD ADAPTOR INDUCING IFNB; CARDIF;;
KIAA1271
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Double-stranded RNA viruses are recognized in a cell type-dependent
manner by the transmembrane receptor TLR3 (603029) or by the cytoplasmic
RNA helicases MDA5 (606951) and RIGI (DDX58; 609631). These interactions
initiate signaling pathways that differ in their initial steps but
converge in the activation of the protein kinases IKKA (CHUK; 600664)
and IKKB (IKBKB; 603258), which activate NFKB (see 164011), or TBK1
(604834) and IKKE (IKBKE; 605048), which activate IRF3 (603734).
Activated IRF3 and NFKB induce transcription of IFNB (IFNB1; 147640).
For the TLR3 pathway, the intermediary molecule before the pathways
converge is the cytoplasmic protein TRIF (TICAM1; 607601). For RIGI, the
intermediary protein is mitochondria-bound IPS1 (Sen and Sarkar, 2005).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1999) cloned KIAA1271. The transcript contains
several repetitive elements in its 3-prime UTR, and the deduced protein
contains 542 amino acids. RT-PCR ELISA detected intermediate expression
in all tissues and specific brain regions examined except testis and
fetal brain, in which expression was low.

By screening for proteins that activated the NFKB and MAPK (see MAPK1;
176948) signaling pathways, followed by database analysis, Xu et al.
(2005) identified 2 VISA splice variants. Both transcripts encode a
deduced 540-amino acid protein with an N-terminal CARD module followed
by a TRAF2 (601895)-binding motif and 2 TRAF6 (602355)-binding motifs.
Northern blot analysis detected 9.5- and 3.4-kb VISA transcripts in all
tissues examined. Western blot analysis detected endogenous VISA at
about 62 kD in human cell lines.

Independently, Seth et al. (2005), Kawai et al. (2005), and Meylan et
al. (2005) also cloned and characterized VISA, which they called MAVS,
IPS1, and CARDIF, respectively. Seth et al. (2005) identified a
C-terminal transmembrane domain in MAVS that targets the protein to
mitochondria.

GENE FUNCTION

Xu et al. (2005) demonstrated that VISA is critical in the IFNB (147640)
signaling pathway and is required for both Sendai virus-triggered
TLR3-mediated and TLR3-independent signaling. In the TLR3-mediated
signaling pathway, VISA interacted with TRIF and TRAF6 and mediated
bifurcation of the NFKB and IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE)
activation pathways. In the TLR3-independent signaling pathway, VISA and
RIGI interacted via their respective CARD modules, and VISA functioned
as an adaptor to recruit downstream components, such as IRF3, to the
RIGI complex. Xu et al. (2005) concluded that VISA plays essential roles
in antiviral responses by participating in 2 virus-triggered IFN
signaling pathways.

Seth et al. (2005) showed that silencing of MAVS through RNA
interference abolished NFKB and IRF3 activation by viruses, leading to
increased viral replication. In contrast, MAVS overexpression induced
IFNB expression following NFKB and IRF3 activation. Additional
interference, knockdown, and mutation analyses indicated that MAVS
functions downstream of RIGI and that its CARD is essential for MAVS
signaling. Seth et al. (2005) confirmed by mutation analysis, confocal
microscopy, and subcellular fractionation that the C-terminal
transmembrane domain of MAVS is required for IFNB activation and for
localization to the outer mitochondrial membrane. When targeted to other
membrane locations, MAVS failed to activate IFNB. Seth et al. (2005)
concluded that MAVS function leads to stronger antiviral immunity and
proposed that mitochondria may have a role in innate immunity.

Kawai et al. (2005) also characterized IPS1 function and found that the
CARD of IPS1 interacted with the CARDs of RIGI and MDA5. Overexpression
of IPS1 resulted in activation of IFNB, IP10 (CXCL10; 147310), and
RANTES (CCL5; 187011). IPS1 overexpression also enhanced IFNA4 (147564)
and IFNA6 (147566) expression when coexpressed with IRF7 (605047).

In addition to the interactions documented by Seth et al. (2005) and
Kawai et al. (2005), Meylan et al. (2005) found that the NS3-4A serine
protease from hepatitis C virus (HCV; see 609532) targets and
inactivates CARDIF. They determined that NS3-4A cleaves CARDIF after
cys508, thereby blocking IRF3 activation and IFNB production.

Independently, Li et al. (2005) demonstrated that HCV NS3-4A cleaves
MAVS at cys508. Immunoprecipitation analysis and confocal microscopy
showed that NS3-4A bound to and colocalized with MAVS in mitochondria.
Li et al. (2005) proposed that sequence variation in MAVS might account
for the exposed individuals who mount a successful immune response
against HCV and other viruses that inhibit IFN production by attacking
MAVS or other mitochondrial proteins.

Moore et al. (2008) showed that NLRX1 (611947), a highly conserved
nucleotide-binding domain (NBD) and leucine-rich repeat (LRR)-containing
(NLR) family member, localizes to the mitochondrial outer membrane and
interacts with MAVS. Expression of NLRX1 resulted in the potent
inhibition of RIG (609631)-like helicase (RLH) family and MAVS-mediated
IFNB promoter activity and in the disruption of virus-induced RLH-MAVS
interactions. Depletion of NLRX1 with small interference RNA promoted
virus-induced type I interferon (see 147570) production and decreased
viral replication. Moore et al. (2008) concluded that their work
identified NLRX1 as a check against mitochondrial antiviral responses
and represented an intersection of 3 ancient cellular processes: NLR
signaling, intracellular virus detection, and the use of mitochondria as
a platform for antipathogen signaling. They also concluded that their
work represented a conceptual advance, in that NLRX1 is a modulator of
pathogen-associated molecular pattern receptors rather than a receptor,
and identified a key therapeutic target for enhancing antiviral
responses.

Using a cell-free system, Hou et al. (2011) showed that after viral
infection MAVS formed large aggregates that potently activated IRF3. The
aggregates formed self-perpetuating, fiber-like polymers that
efficiently converted endogenous MAVS into functional aggregates. These
properties closely resembled those of prions (see 176640), including
fibrous aggregates, detergent and protease resistance, and the ability
to 'infect' endogenous protein and convert the native conformation into
fibrous aggregates. The formation of MAVS aggregates resulted in a gain
of function, and the conformational change was tightly regulated by
viral infection. Incubation of endogenous MAVS with RIGI, mitochondria,
and lys63-linked polyubiquitin chains also converted MAVS into
functional aggregates. Hou et al. (2011) proposed that a prion-like
conformational switch of MAVS activates and propagates the antiviral
signaling cascade.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1999) mapped the KIAA1271
gene to chromosome 20.

ANIMAL MODEL

Sun et al. (2006) found that deletion of Mavs in mice abolished viral
induction of interferon and prevented activation of Nfkb and Irf3 in
multiple cell types, but not plasmacytoid dendritic cells. Interferon
expression in response to cytosolic DNA or Listeria monocytogenes was
not affected by Mavs deficiency, and viability and fertility were not
compromised. Mavs -/- mice challenged with vesicular stomatitis virus
had significantly higher viral titers than Mavs +/- or wildtype mice 12
to 48 hours after infection, but not 72 hours after infection. Mavs -/-
and Mavs +/- mice, but not most wildtype mice, succumbed to infection in
a dose- and Mavs-dependent manner. Sun et al. (2006) concluded that
cytosolic viral signaling through MAVS is required for innate immune
responses against viral infection.

Kumar et al. (2006) found that Ips1-deficient mice had defective
induction of type I Ifn and inflammatory cytokines after infection with
various RNA viruses and were susceptible to the RNA virus infection.
However, Ips1 was not essential for responses to DNA viruses. Kumar et
al. (2006) concluded that IPS1 is an essential component in RIGI- and
MDA5-dependent signaling that triggers the host response to infection
with various RNA viruses.

REFERENCE 1. Hou, F.; Sun, L.; Zheng, H.; Skaug, B.; Jiang, Q.-X.; Chen, Z.
J.: MAVS forms functional prion-like aggregates to activate and propagate
antiviral innate immune response. Cell 146: 448-461, 2011. Note:
Erratum: Cell 146: 841 only, 2011.

2. Kawai, T.; Takahashi, K.; Sato, S.; Coban, C.; Kumar, H.; Kato,
H.; Ishii, K. J.; Takeuchi, O.; Akira, S.: IPS-1, an adaptor triggering
RIG-I- and Mda5-mediated type I interferon induction. Nature Immun. 6:
981-988, 2005.

3. Kumar, H.; Kawai, T.; Kato, H.; Sato, S.; Takahashi, K.; Coban,
C.; Yamamoto, M.; Uematsu, S.; Ishii, K. J.; Takeuchi, O.; Akira,
S.: Essential role of IPS-1 in innate immune responses against RNA
viruses. J. Exp. Med. 1795-1803, 2006.

4. Li, X.-D.; Sun, L.; Seth, R. B.; Pineda, G.; Chen, Z. J.: Hepatitis
C virus protease NS3/4A cleaves mitochondrial antiviral signaling
protein off the mitochondria to evade innate immunity. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 102: 17717-17722, 2005.

5. Meylan, E.; Curran, J.; Hofmann, K.; Moradpour, D.; Binder, M.;
Bartenschlager, R.; Tschopp, J.: Cardif is an adaptor protein in
the RIG-I antiviral pathway and is targeted by hepatitis C virus. Nature 1167-1172,
2005.

6. Moore, C. B.; Bergstralh, D. T.; Duncan, J. A.; Lei, Y.; Morrison,
T. E.; Zimmerman, A. G.; Accavitti-Loper, M. A.; Madden, V. J.; Sun,
L.; Ye, Z.; Lich, J. D.; Heise, M. T.; Chen, Z.; Ting, J. P.-Y.:
NLRX1 is a regulator of mitochondrial antiviral immunity. Nature 451:
573-577, 2008.

7. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Kikuno, R.; Hirosawa, M.; Nomura, N.;
Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human
genes. XV. The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain
which code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 6: 337-345, 1999.

8. Sen, G. C.; Sarkar, S. N.: Hitching RIG to action. Nature Immun. 6:
1074-1076, 2005.

9. Seth, R. B.; Sun, L.; Ea, C.-K.; Chen, Z. J.: Identification and
characterization of MAVS, a mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein
that activates NF-kappa-B and IRF3. Cell 122: 669-682, 2005.

10. Sun, Q.; Sun, L.; Liu, H.-H.; Chen, X.; Seth, R. B.; Forman, J.;
Chen, Z. J.: The specific and essential role of MAVS in antiviral
innate immune responses. Immunity 24: 633-642, 2006.

11. Xu, L.-G.; Wang, Y.-Y.; Han, K.-J.; Li, L.-Y.; Zhai, Z.; Shu,
H.-B.: VISA is an adapter protein required for virus-triggered IFN-beta
signaling. Molec. Cell 19: 727-740, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/20/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/4/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/2/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/8/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/3/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/24/2005

EDITED carol: 04/01/2013
terry: 10/2/2012
mgross: 1/20/2012
terry: 1/20/2012
carol: 10/8/2009
alopez: 4/14/2008
terry: 4/4/2008
mgross: 2/2/2007
mgross: 1/8/2007
mgross: 1/3/2006
mgross: 10/24/2005

614953	TITLE *614953 SCHLAFEN FAMILY, MEMBER 11; SLFN11
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The Schlafen (SFLN) family contains 9 mouse and 6 human genes that
encode proteins with a conserved N terminus containing a putative AAA
ATPase domain. Longer SLFN proteins, such as SLFN11, have C-terminal
motifs resembling DNA/RNA helicase domains. Studies in mouse have
implicated SLFN proteins in regulation of cell growth and T-cell
development (summary by Geserick et al. (2004) and Li et al. (2012)).

CLONING

Geserick et al. (2004) identified mouse Slfn5 (614952), Slfn8, Slfn9,
and Slfn10, which encode proteins that share significant homology with
mouse Slfn1 through Slfn4 in their N-terminal halves, but contain unique
C-terminal extensions with motifs homologous to DNA/RNA helicases.
Slfn8, Slfn9, and Slfn10 share 85 to 87% amino acid identity with one
another, whereas Slfn5 is more distantly related to the former group,
sharing 40% identity.

Van Zuylen et al. (2011) noted that human SLFN11 and SLFN13 (614957) are
orthologous to mouse Slfn8, Slfn9, and Slfn10.

Li et al. (2012) stated that the 901-amino acid human SLFN11 protein has
an AAA domain in its N-terminal half and a putative helicase sequence in
its C-terminal half. Quantitative RT-PCR showed that SLFN5 and SLFN11
were the most prominently expressed SLFN family members in several human
cell lines.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the SLFN11 gene to chromosome 17q12 based on an
alignment of the SLFN11 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC052586) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Bustos et al. (2009) found that the SLFN genes are clustered within the
same orthologous region flanked by the UNC45 (UNC45B; 611220) and PEX12
(601758) genes in all mammalian genomes examined. The human and mouse
SLFN clusters are located on chromosomes 17 and 11, respectively.

GENE FUNCTION

Li et al. (2012) noted that levels of mouse SLFN proteins are elevated
after infection with Brucella or Listeria. Using quantitative RT-PCR,
they showed that lipopolysaccharide, poly-IC, or interferon (IFN)-alpha
(147660)/beta (147640) treatment of murine macrophages resulted in
induction of several SLFN genes. Treatment of human foreskin fibroblasts
with IFN-beta, poly-IC, or poly-dAdT revealed similar induction of SLFN
genes, including SLFN5 and SLFN11. Li et al. (2012) found that human
SLFN11, but not SLFN5, potently and specifically abrogated production of
retroviruses, such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 (see 609423),
and diminished the number of viral particles released from cells. The
inhibitory activity resided in the 579-residue N-terminal half of
SLFN11, which includes the AAA domain. Rather than affecting early steps
of the retroviral infection cycle, including reverse transcription,
integration, and transcription, SLFN11 selectively inhibited expression
of viral proteins in a codon-usage-dependent manner. SLFN11 bound tRNA
and counteracted changes in the tRNA pool elicited by HIV. Li et al.
(2012) concluded that SLFN11 is a potent, IFN-inducible restriction
factor against retroviruses that mediates its antiviral effects on the
basis of codon usage discrimination.

- Putative Mouse Orthologs of SLFN11

Using Northern blot analysis, Geserick et al. (2004) detected expression
of most mouse SLFN genes examined in Listeria monocytogenes-infected
mouse splenocytes, with little or no expression in uninfected mouse
cells. Ifngr (107470) was required for Slfn5, Slfn8, Slfn9, and Slfn10
upregulation. Further analysis showed that mouse SLFNs were
differentially regulated in developing thymocytes, in activated
peripheral T cells, in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)- or interferon-gamma
(IFNG; 147570)-activated macrophages, or during terminal myeloid
differentiation of M1 leukemia cells. Transgenic expression in mice
revealed that dysregulated expression of Slfn8 negatively influenced
thymocyte development and impaired the response of peripheral T cells to
T-cell receptor (see 186880)-mediated stimulation. Geserick et al.
(2004) concluded that SLFN genes are integrated into regulatory networks
that control T-cell development and activation.

EVOLUTION

Bustos et al. (2009) used genomic and phylogenetic studies to
investigate the evolution and role of the SLFN gene family. They found
that the SLFN family is widely distributed in mammals, with 4 major
clades that underwent lineage-specific expansions or contractions in
various orders, including primates and rodents. Bustos et al. (2009)
also identified SLFN family members in Chondrichthyes and Amphibia. They
found evidence that positive selection has acted on many SLFN genes. A
member of the SLFN family was horizontally transferred from mouse to
orthopoxviruses, where the authors hypothesized it plays a role in
allowing the virus to survive host defense mechanisms. The viral SLFN
sequences are evolving under purifying selection, indicating their
functional relevance.

Van Zuylen et al. (2011) noted that only 2 SLFN family members, SLFN5
and SLFN14 (614958), have direct orthologs in mouse and human,
consistent with rapid evolution of the SLFN family across mammalian
species. Human SLFN12 (614955) and SLFN12L (614956) have 4 orthologs in
mice (Slfn1, Slfn2, Slfn3, and Slfn4), and human SLFN11 and SLFN13 have
3 orthologs in mice (Slfn8, Slfn9, and Slfn10).

REFERENCE 1. Bustos, O.; Naik, S.; Ayers, G.; Casola, C.; Perez-Lamigueiro,
M. A.; Chippindale, P. T.; Pritham, E. J.; de la Casa-Esperon, E.
: Evolution of the Schlafen genes, a gene family associated with embryonic
lethality, meiotic drive, immune processes, and orthopoxvirus virulence. Gene 447:
1-11, 2009.

2. Geserick, P.; Kaiser, F.; Klemm, U.; Kaufmann, S. H. E.; Zerrahn,
J.: Modulation of T cell development and activation by novel members
of the Schlafen (slfn) gene family harbouring an RNA helicase-like
motif. Int. Immun. 16: 1535-1548, 2004.

3. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  11/29/2012.

4. Li, M.; Kao, E.; Gao, X.; Sandig, H.; Limmer, K.; Pavon-Eternod,
M.; Jones, T. E.; Landry, S.; Pan, T.; Weitzman, M. D.; David, M.
: Codon-usage-based inhibition of HIV protein synthesis by human Schlafen
11. Nature 491: 125-128, 2012.

5. van Zuylen, W. J.; Garceau, V.; Idris, A.; Schroder, K.; Irvine,
K. M.; Lattin, J. E.; Ovchinnikov, D. A.; Perkins, A. C.; Cook, A.
D.; Hamilton, J. A.; Hertzog, P. J.; Stacey, K. J.; Kellie, S.; Hume,
D. A.; Sweet, M. J.: Macrophage activation and differentiation signals
regulate Schlafen-4 gene expression: evidence for Schlafen-4 as a
modulator of myelopoiesis. PLoS One e15723, 2011. Note: Electronic
Article.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 11/29/2012

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/29/2012

EDITED mgross: 11/30/2012
mgross: 11/29/2012

600729	TITLE *600729 NUCLEAR FACTOR I/C; NFIC
;;TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR NFIC;;
CTF
DESCRIPTION For background information on nuclear factor I proteins, see NFIA
(600727).

GENE STRUCTURE

Grunder et al. (2003) determined that the NFIC gene contains 11 exons.
By ortholog comparisons using protein sequences from 7 vertebrate
species, they identified 11 NFIC variants that are produced by
alternative splicing.

MAPPING

Qian et al. (1995) localized the NFIC and NFIX (164005) genes to
chromosome 19p13.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. By FISH,
Grunder et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Nfic gene to the distal region of
chromosome 10C.

ANIMAL MODEL

Steele-Perkins et al. (2003) found that the Nfic gene was expressed in
many mouse organ systems, including the developing tooth. They disrupted
the Nfic gene in mice and found that, while heterozygous animals
appeared normal, Nfic-null mice had unique tooth pathologies, primarily
defects in tooth root development. Molar crown development was normal,
but molars lacked roots, mandibular incisors were thin and brittle, and
maxillary incisors were weakened and appeared abnormal. Feeding in
Nfic-null mice was severely impaired; however, mutants well nourished by
a soft-dough diet were fertile and had normal life spans.

REFERENCE 1. Grunder, A.; Qian, F.; Ebel, T. T.; Mincheva, A.; Lichter, P.;
Kruse, U.; Sippel, A. E.: Genomic organization, splice products and
mouse chromosomal localization of genes for transcription factor Nuclear
Factor One. Gene 304: 171-181, 2003.

2. Qian, F.; Kruse, U.; Lichter, P.; Sippel, A. E.: Chromosomal localization
of the four genes (NFIA, B, C, and X) for the human transcription
factor nuclear factor I by FISH. Genomics 28: 66-73, 1995.

3. Steele-Perkins, G.; Butz, K. G.; Lyons, G. E.; Zeichner-David,
M.; Kim, H.-J.; Cho, M.-I.; Gronostajski, R. M.: Essential role for
NFI-C/CTF transcription-replication factor in tooth root development. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 23: 1075-1084, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/1/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/16/1995

EDITED terry: 04/04/2005
mgross: 4/3/2003
terry: 4/1/2003
terry: 11/21/1997
mark: 10/16/1995

611550	TITLE *611550 NATURAL CYTOTOXICITY TRIGGERING RECEPTOR 3; NCR3
;;1C7;;
ACTIVATING NATURAL KILLER RECEPTOR p30; NKp30;;
CD337 ANTIGEN; CD337
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Natural cytotoxicity receptors (NCRs), such as NCR3, are activating
natural killer (NK) cell receptors that belong to the immunoglobulin
(Ig) superfamily. NCR3 is expressed in all resting and activated NK
cells and forms a complex with CD3-zeta (CD3Z, or CD247; 186780) (Sato
et al., 2001).

CLONING

Pende et al. (1999) generated monoclonal antibodies (mAb) and identified
one that reacted with a 30-kD integral membrane protein, NKp30, on NK
cells and cell lines. By screening an NK cell cDNA expression library,
they isolated a cDNA encoding NKp30. The deduced 190-amino acid protein
has a signal peptide followed by a 120-amino acid extracellular region
that forms a V-type Ig-like domain with 2 potential N-linked
glycosylation sites; a hydrophobic transmembrane region with a
positively charged arg residue; and a 33-amino acid cytoplasmic tail
lacking an immunoreceptor tyrosine-based activating motif (ITAM).
Northern blot analysis detected a 1.0-kb transcript only in NK cells.

Using Northern blot analysis, Sivakamasundari et al. (2000) detected a
1.35-kb 1C7 transcript in human spleen, lymph node, and blood
leukocytes, with lower expression in appendix. They noted that the 3
principal IC7 splice variants differ in exon 4, and RT-PCR showed that
all 3 were expressed in human tonsil and NKL cells. However, a unique
splicing pattern was observed in human liver, including differential
usage of exon 2. Fluorescence microscopy of transfected COS-7 cells
showed cytoplasmic and perinuclear expression of IC7.
Immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization revealed expression of
IC7 in tonsillar NK germinal center cells. Western blot analysis
detected IC7 protein in human tonsil, NKL cells, and brain.
Sivakamasundari et al. (2000) noted that Ic7 is a pseudogene in mouse,
but not rat.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Neville and Campbell (1999) mapped the NCR3 gene
centromeric to LST1 (LY117; 109170) and telomeric to AIF1 (601833) on
chromosome 6p21.3.

GENE FUNCTION

Pende et al. (1999) found that treatment of NK cells with anti-NKp30
inhibited natural cytotoxicity against normal target cells and most
tumor cells. Further analysis determined that NKp30 sometimes cooperated
with NKp44 (NCR2; 604531) and NKp46 (NCR1; 604530) in mediating
cytotoxicity. Western blot analysis showed that NKp30 associated with
CD3Z. Thus, NKp30 can transduce activating signals by its association
with ITAM-containing CD3Z polypeptides.

Using flow cytometric analysis, Arnon et al. (2005) showed that pp65,
the main tegument protein of human cytomegalovirus, inhibited NK cell
cytotoxicity by interacting directly and specifically with NKp30. The
interaction led to dissociation of CD3Z from NKp30 and, consequently,
reduced killing.

Using RT-PCR analysis, Mulcahy et al. (2006) detected significantly
increased expression of LST1 (109170) in blood of rheumatoid arthritis
(RA; 180300) patients and of NCR3 in blood and synovium of RA patients
compared with controls. The increased LST1 and NCR3 expression was
independent of any increase in inflammatory cells. Both genes were also
significantly upregulated in response to lipopolysaccharide, IFNG
(147570), and bacterial infection. Mulcahy et al. (2006) concluded that
LST1 and NCR3 are involved in infection, autoimmune-related
inflammation, and dendritic cell/NK cell-associated functions.

Mavoungou et al. (2007) found that NKp30- and NKp46-Ig fusion proteins
interacted with the Duffy binding-like-1-alpha (Dbl1a) domain of P.
falciparum erythrocyte membrane protein-1 on the surface of infected red
cells. The interaction was functional, leading NK cells to produce
perforin (PRF1; 170280) and granzyme B (GZMB; 123910) and to lyse
infected erythrocytes.

Using NKp30-Fc fusion proteins to screen for molecules binding NKp30 and
triggering NKp30-mediated cytolysis, followed by proteomic and mass
spectrometric analyses, Brandt et al. (2009) identified B7H6 (613714).
Using surface plasmon resonance experiments, they confirmed interaction
between B7H6 and NKp30, and interaction of the 2 proteins could be
blocked by anti-NKp30. Expression of B7H6 in a murine mastocytoma line
enabled cytotoxicity by an NKp30-expressing NK cell line and by IL2
(147680)-activated primary human NK cells.

In transfection studies of a human NK cell line, Delahaye et al. (2011)
observed functional differences between the 3 alternatively spliced exon
4 isoforms of NCR3. The 3 isoforms transmitted distinct signals: both
NCR3a and NCR3b stimulated Th1 cytokine release, including IL12 (see
161561) and gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570), whereas NCR3a was the only
isoform that triggered cytotoxicity. These functions were consistent
with an immunostimulatory effect. In contrast, NCR3c promoted IL10
(124092) production, relaying an immunosuppressive signal through rapid
phosphorylation of p38 MAP kinase (MAPK14; 600289).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Li et al. (2011) determined the structure of NKp30 in complex with B7H6.
NKp30 uses both front and back beta sheets of its Ig-like domain to bind
B7H6, in contrast to CTLA4 (123890) and PD1 (PDCD1; 600244), which only
use the front beta sheet to bind ligands. B7H6 contacts NKp30 through
the complementarity-determining region-like loops of its V-like domain
in an antibody-like interaction not seen for B7 (CD80; 112203) or PDL
(PDCD1LG1; 605402). Li et al. (2011) proposed that the NKp30-B7H6
structure may be useful in designing molecules to stimulate
NKp30-mediated cytolytic activity for tumor immunotherapy.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Sato et al. (2001) identified SNPs in the promoter region and in exon 2
of the NCR3 gene.

A susceptibility locus for mild malaria maps to the major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) region on chromosome 6 (MALS; 609148),
and polymorphisms in TNF (191160), which is 15 kb proximal to NCR3, are
associated with mild malaria. By genotyping 10 NCR3 SNPs in a
malaria-endemic Burkina Faso population, Delahaye et al. (2007)
identified an association between mild malaria and the -412G-C
(611550.0001; dbSNP rs2736191) SNP in the NCR3 promoter. Carriers with
the -412C variant had more frequent mild malaria attacks than -412GG
individuals. NCR3 -412C and a haplotype containing -412C were
significantly associated with increased risk of mild malaria, and the
association was independent of TNF. Delahaye et al. (2007) concluded
that at least 2 centrally located MHC region genes are involved in
genetic control of malaria. They proposed that genetic variation in
NK-cell receptors may account for the heterogeneity of NK-cell
reactivity to P. falciparum-infected erythrocytes.

Delahaye et al. (2011) found an association between alternatively
spliced exon 4 isoforms of NCR3 and prognosis in gastrointestinal
stromal tumors (GIST; 606764). In a study of 44 GIST tumors,
tumor-infiltrating NK cells showed downregulation of NCR3 compared to
circulating cells of healthy volunteers. The density of the NK cell
infiltrate was inversely correlated with the presence of metastasis at
diagnosis, suggesting an NK cell-mediated immunosurveillance mechanism
in these tumors. RT-PCR studies of peripheral blood from 80 patients
with GIST showed preferential expression of the immunosuppressive NCR3c
isoform in 53%, compared to healthy volunteers, of whom only 30%
expressed isoform NCR3c (p = 0.02). NK cells from GIST patients with the
NCR3c isoform showed a defect in NCR3-driven NK effector functions. A
retrospective analysis of 80 GIST patients treated with imatinib showed
decreased overall survival in those with the NRC3c isoform compared to
those with NRC3a and NRC3b isoforms (p = 0.001). Delahaye et al. (2011)
also found an association between a 3790T-C SNP (dbSNP rs986475) in the
promoter region of the NCR3 gene, as well as other SNPs, and expression
of the NCR3c isoform. The findings suggested that the genetically
determined NCR3 status may predict clinical outcome in patients with
GIST.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MALARIA, MILD, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
NCR3, -412G-C, 5-PRIME UTR

By genotyping 10 NCR3 SNPs in 34 families comprising 53 parents and 140
sibs in a P. falciparum malaria-endemic region of Burkina Faso, Delahaye
et al. (2007) identified a significant association between mild malaria
(609148) and a SNP in the NCR3 promoter, a G-to-C change at position
-412 (dbSNP rs2736191) relative to the transcription start site.
Carriers with the -412C variant had more frequent mild malaria attacks
than -412GG individuals, and -412C and a haplotype containing -412C were
significantly associated with increased risk of mild malaria.

REFERENCE 1. Arnon, T. I.; Achdout, H.; Levi, O.; Markel, G.; Saleh, N.; Katz,
G.; Gazit, R.; Gonen-Gross, T.; Hanna, J.; Nahari, E.; Porgador, A.;
Honigman, A.; Plachter, B.; Mevorach, D.; Wolf, D. G.; Mandelboim,
O.: Inhibition of the NKp30 activating receptor by pp65 of human
cytomegalovirus. Nature Immun. 6: 515-523, 2005.

2. Brandt, C. S.; Baratin, M.; Yi, E. C.; Kennedy, J.; Gao, Z.; Fox,
B.; Haldeman, B.; Ostrander, C. D.; Kaifu, T.; Chabannon, C.; Moretta,
A.; West, R.; Xu, W.; Vivier, E.; Levin, S. D.: The B7 family member
B7-H6 is a tumor cell ligand for the activating natural killer cell
receptor NKp30 in humans. J. Exp. Med. 206: 1495-1503, 2009.

3. Delahaye, N. F.; Barbier, M.; Fumoux, F.; Rihet, P.: Association
analyses of NCR3 polymorphisms with P. falciparum mild malaria. Microbes
Infect. 9: 160-166, 2007.

4. Delahaye, N. F.; Rusakiewicz, S.; Martins, I.; Menard, C.; Roux,
S.; Lyonnet, L.; Pascale, P.; Sarabi, M.; Chaput, N.; Semeraro, M.;
Minard-Colin, V.; Poirier-Colame, V.; and 29 others: Alternatively
spliced NKp30 isoforms affect the prognosis of gastrointestinal stromal
tumors. Nature Med. 17: 700-707, 2011.

5. Li, Y.; Wang, Q.; Mariuzza, R. A.: Structure of the human activating
natural cytotoxicity receptor NKp30 bound to its tumor cell ligand
B7-H6. J. Exp. Med. 208: 703-714, 2011.

6. Mavoungou, E.; Held, J.; Mewono, L.; Kremsner, P. G.: A Duffy
binding-like domain is involved in the NKp30-mediated recognition
of Plasmodium falciparum-parasitized erythrocytes by natural killer
cells. J. Infect. Dis. 195: 1521-1531, 2007.

7. Mulcahy, H.; O'Rourke, K. P.; Adams, C.; Molloy, M. G.; O'Gara,
F.: LST1 and NCR3 expression in autoimmune inflammation and in response
to IFN-gamma, LPS and microbial infection. Immunogenetics 57: 893-903,
2006.

8. Neville, M. J.; Campbell, R. D.: A new member of the Ig superfamily
and a V-ATPase G subunit are among the predicted products of novel
genes close to the TNF locus in the human MHC. J. Immun. 162: 4745-4754,
1999.

9. Pende, D.; Parolini, S.; Pessino, A.; Sivori, S.; Augugliaro, R.;
Morelli, L.; Marcenaro, E.; Accame, L.; Malaspina, A.; Biassoni, R.;
Bottino, C.; Moretta, L.; Moretta, A.: Identification and molecular
characterization of NKp30, a novel triggering receptor involved in
natural cytotoxicity mediated by human natural killer cells. J. Exp.
Med. 190: 1505-1516, 1999.

10. Sato, M.; Ohashi, J.; Tsuchiya, N.; Tadokoro, K.; Juji, T.; Hanaoka,
K.; Tokunaga, K.; Yabe, T.: Identification of novel single nucleotide
substitutions in the NKp30 gene expressed in human natural killer
cells. Tissue Antigens 58: 255-258, 2001.

11. Sivakamasundari, R.; Raghunathan, A.; Zhang, C. Y.; Chowdhury,
R.-R.; Weissman, S. M.: Expression and cellular localization of the
protein encoded by the 1C7 gene: a recently described component of
the MHC. Immunogenetics 51: 723-732, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/22/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/6/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/30/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/19/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/15/2007

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/24/2007

EDITED terry: 10/10/2011
mgross: 10/3/2011
terry: 9/22/2011
carol: 9/7/2011
ckniffin: 9/6/2011
mgross: 7/11/2008
terry: 4/30/2008
mgross: 3/20/2008
terry: 3/19/2008
mgross: 11/29/2007
terry: 11/15/2007
mgross: 10/24/2007

602209	TITLE *602209 RAS-RESPONSIVE ELEMENT BINDING PROTEIN 1; RREB1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In several neuroendocrine cell types, the RAS/RAF signal transduction
cascade results in cell differentiation (see HRAS; 190020). This signal
transduction cascade involves inactivation of several tiers of protein
kinases, including members of the RAF (e.g., RAF1; 164760), MAPKK, and
MAPK families (see 176872). Ultimately, activation of these protein
kinases results in the activation of transcription factors responsible
for changes in cell phenotype. In the human medullary thyroid carcinoma
cell line TT, an activated HRAS oncogene or activation of the RAF1 gene
induces a program of neuroendocrine differentiation (Carson et al.,
1995). One of the hallmarks of this differentiation process is an
increase in the expression of the calcitonin gene (114130). Thiagalingam
et al. (1996) reported the DNA affinity cloning of a RAS-responsive
element binding protein, RREB1, from the TT cell line. RREB1, a zinc
finger transcription factor, was shown to bind specifically to the
distal RAS-responsive element (RRE) in the calcitonin gene promoter and
to augment the RAS/RAF-mediated transcriptional response of that
promoter. Thus, they concluded that it may be involved in
RAS/RAF-mediated cell differentiation.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a promoter pull-down assay followed by mass spectrometry analysis,
Flajollet et al. (2009) identified RREB1 as a protein that bound the
HLA-G (142871) promoter. RREB1 exerted repressive activity on the
promoter in HLA-G-negative cells that was mediated by recruitment of
HDAC1 (601241) and CTBP1 (602618) and/or CTBP2 (602619). CTBP1 and CTBP2
are subunits of the C-terminal binding protein (CTBP) complex, a
corepressor involved in chromatin remodeling. The HLA-G promoter
contains 3 RREB1 target sites. Flajollet et al. (2009) proposed that the
repressive activity of RREB1 on the HLA-G promoter may be regulated by
posttranslational modifications governing its association with CTBP.

MAPPING

Thiagalingam et al. (1997) mapped the RREB1 gene to 6p25 by 3 mapping
methods: PCR analysis of a somatic cell hybrid panel, analysis of the
Stanford G3 radiation hybrid mapping panel, and fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Carson, E. B.; McMahon, M.; Baylin, S. B.; Nelkin, B. D.: Ret
gene silencing is associated with Raf-1-induced medullary thyroid
carcinoma cell differentiation. Cancer Res. 55: 2048-2052, 1995.

2. Flajollet, S.; Poras, I.; Carosella, E. D.; Moreau, P.: RREB-1
is a transcriptional repressor of HLA-G. J. Immun. 183: 6948-6959,
2009.

3. Thiagalingam, A.; De Bustros, A.; Borges, M.; Jasti, R.; Compton,
D.; Diamond, L.; Mabry, M.; Ball, D. W.; Baylin, S. B.; Nelkin, B.
D.: RREB-1, a novel zinc finger protein, is involved in the differentiation
response to Ras in human medullary thyroid carcinomas. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 16: 5335-5345, 1996.

4. Thiagalingam, A.; Lengauer, C.; Baylin, S. B.; Nelkin, B. D.:
RREB1, a Ras responsive element binding protein, maps to human chromosome
6p25. Genomics 45: 630-632, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/19/2012

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/19/1997

EDITED mgross: 11/26/2012
terry: 11/19/2012
alopez: 11/16/2010
dholmes: 1/23/1998
dholmes: 1/12/1998
mark: 12/19/1997

603458	TITLE *603458 EMBRYONIC LETHAL, ABNORMAL VISION, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG-LIKE 3; ELAVL3
;;HU-ANTIGEN C; HUC;;
PARANEOPLASTIC LIMBIC ENCEPHALITIS ANTIGEN 21; PLE21
DESCRIPTION Paraneoplastic neurologic disorders (PNDs) are a group of neurologic
syndromes that arise when an immune response to systemic tumors
expressing neuronal proteins develops into an autoimmune neuronal
degeneration. Sakai et al. (1994) determined that the serum of a patient
with paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis (PLE) contained autoantibodies
that recognized a 38-kD nuclear antigen in neural cells. By screening a
hippocampus expression library with this serum, they isolated cDNAs
encoding a protein that they called PLE21. The predicted 350-amino acid
protein contains 3 RNA recognition motifs (RRMs). PLE21 shares 82% and
54% protein sequence identity with the human neural autoantigen HuD
(168360) and Drosophila ELAV protein, respectively. Northern blot
analysis revealed that PLE21 is expressed as an approximately 2-kb mRNA
exclusively in brain. Liu et al. (1995) stated that PLE21, or HuC, is
one of several Hu antigens, neuronal-specific RNA-binding proteins
recognized by the anti-Hu serum antibody present in sera from patients
with paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis and sensory neuronopathy
(PEM/PSN). The Hu antigens HuD, HuC, and Hel-N1 (601673) each contain 2
tandemly arranged RRMs connected to a third RRM by a highly basic
segment.

Abe et al. (1996) cloned cDNAs encoding mouse HuC. The predicted mouse
and human proteins are 96% identical. These authors found that
alternative splicing generates 2 mouse HuC isoforms, both of which can
bind to AU-rich elements (AREs) within the 3-prime untranslated regions
of mRNAs. Functional domain mapping using mouse HuC deletion mutants
showed that the first RRM binds to ARE, that the second RRM has no
binding activity by itself but facilitates ARE binding by the first RRM,
and that the third RRM has specific binding activity for the poly(A)
sequence.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), Van Tine et al. (1998)
mapped the ELAVL3 gene to 19p13.2. Using FISH and radiation hybrid
analysis, they demonstrated that ELAVL3 is centromeric to the ELAVL1
(HuR; 603466) gene located in the same chromosomal region. By analysis
of an interspecific backcross, Fletcher et al. (1997) mapped the mouse
HuC gene to chromosome 9, in a region showing homology of synteny to
human chromosome 19p13.2.

REFERENCE 1. Abe, R.; Sakashita, E.; Yamamoto, K.; Sakamoto, H.: Two different
RNA binding activities for the AU-rich element and the poly(A) sequence
of the mouse neuronal protein mHuC. Nucleic Acids Res. 24: 4895-4901,
1996.

2. Fletcher, C. F.; Okano, H. J.; Gilbert, D. J.; Yang, Y.; Yang,
C.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Darnell, R. B.: Mouse chromosomal
locations of nine genes encoding homologs of human paraneoplastic
neurologic disorder antigens. Genomics 45: 313-319, 1997.

3. Liu, J.; Dalmau, J.; Szabo, A.; Rosenfeld, M.; Huber, J.; Furneaux,
H.: Paraneoplastic encephalomyelitis antigens bind to the AU-rich
elements of mRNA. Neurology 45: 544-550, 1995.

4. Sakai, K.; Gofuku, M.; Kitagawa, Y.; Ogasawara, T.; Hirose, G.;
Yamazaki, M.; Koh, C.-S.; Yanagisawa, N.; Steinman, L.: A hippocampal
protein associated with paraneoplastic neurologic syndrome and small
cell lung carcinoma. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 199: 1200-1208,
1994.

5. Van Tine, B. A.; Knops, J. F.; Butler, A.; Deloukas, P.; Shaw,
G. M.; King, P. H.: Localization of HuC (ELAVL3) to chromosome 19p13.2
by fluorescence in situ hybridization utilizing a novel tyramide labeling
technique. Genomics 53: 296-299, 1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 1/25/1999

EDITED carol: 11/24/2001
alopez: 1/26/1999
alopez: 1/25/1999

607389	TITLE *607389 SINGLE-STRANDED DNA-BINDING PROTEIN 2; SSBP2
;;SENSOR OF SINGLE-STRANDED DNA COMPLEX, SUBUNIT B2; SOSSB2;;
SOSS COMPLEX, SUBUNIT B2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SSBP2 is a subunit of a single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)-binding complex
involved in the maintenance of genome stability (Huang et al., 2009).

CLONING

By positional cloning, Castro et al. (2002) identified a novel gene,
which they designated SSBP2, that is disrupted at the 5q13 breakpoint in
the acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell line ML3. EST database searching
revealed that the transcript is similar to the chicken gene CSDP, which
encodes a protein that binds single-stranded pyrimidine-rich
mirror-repeat elements with high specificity. By further database
searching, they identified 2 additional cDNAs encoding single-stranded
DNA-binding proteins, SSBP3 (607390) and SSBP4 (607391). The deduced
362-amino acid SSBP2 protein shares 83% and 73% sequence identity with
SSBP3 and SSBP4, respectively, and 100% identity with the mouse Ssbp2
homolog. SSBP family members share a highly conserved N terminus
followed by a glycine- and proline-rich domain. Northern blot analysis
detected ubiquitous expression of a 1.9-kb SSBP2 transcript. Expression
was high in all hematopoietic tissues, including spleen, lymph node,
peripheral blood, bone marrow, thymus, and fetal liver, with highest
expression in thymus and fetal liver. Expression was also high in heart,
brain, kidney, and skeletal muscle. Of 5 leukemia cell lines tested,
expression was highest in pre-T lymphoblastic leukemia cell line CEM. No
gross inactivating mutations were found in leukemia cell lines or in
primary leukemic blasts from 4 patients.

GENE FUNCTION

Using HEK293 cells for tandem affinity purification, Huang et al. (2009)
identified SOSSA (INTS3; 611347) and SOSSC (613273) as common components
of 2 distinct and complementary ssDNA-binding heterotrimeric complexes
defined by their inclusion of either SOSSB1 (SSBP1; 600439) or SOSSB2
(SSBP2), but not both. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis confirmed that
SOSS complexes formed in HeLa cells independent of DNA damage.
Recombinant heterotrimeric SOSS complexes specifically bound ssDNA, but
not double-stranded DNA. SOSSA served as the central assembly factor,
and SOSSB and SOSSC bound overlapping regions on SOSSA, but they did not
interact directly with each other. Depletion of SOSSA by small
interfering RNA led to dramatic decreases in SOSSB1 and SOSSB2 protein
levels, abrogated targeting of SOSSB1 and SOSSB2 to chromatin, increased
ionizing radiation sensitivity, caused defective G2/M checkpoint, and
impaired homologous recombination repair. Huang et al. (2009)
demonstrated that both SOSS complexes and the CTIP (RBBP8; 604124)/RPA
(see RPA1; 179835) complex acted downstream of the MRE11 (600814)-RAD50
(604040)-NBS1 (NBN; 602667) complex and functioned in DNA damage repair.

GENE STRUCTURE

Castro et al. (2002) determined that the SSBP2, SSBP3, and SSBP4 genes
all contain 17 exons and have identical intron/exon boundaries,
suggesting duplication from a common ancestral gene. They also
identified alternative splicing and additional internal exons for all 3
genes, suggesting the existence of multiple isoforms for each protein.
The SSBP2 gene spans more than 200 kb.

MAPPING

Castro et al. (2002) mapped the SSBP2 gene to chromosome 5q13.3, within
the critical breakpoint region in the AML cell line ML3.

REFERENCE 1. Castro, P.; Liang, H.; Liang, J. C.; Nagarajan, L.: A novel, evolutionarily
conserved gene family with putative sequence-specific single-stranded
DNA-binding activity. Genomics 80: 78-85, 2002.

2. Huang, J.; Gong, Z.; Ghosal, G.; Chen, J.: SOSS complexes participate
in the maintenance of genomic stability. Molec. Cell 35: 384-393,
2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/19/2010

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 11/26/2002

EDITED mgross: 02/22/2010
terry: 2/19/2010
mgross: 12/3/2002
carol: 12/2/2002

139320	TITLE *139320 GNAS COMPLEX LOCUS; GNAS
;;GNAS1 GENE, FORMERLY; GNAS1, FORMERLY
GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE-BINDING PROTEIN, ALPHA-STIMULATING ACTIVITY POLYPEPTIDE
1, INCLUDED; GNAS1, INCLUDED;;
Gs, ALPHA SUBUNIT, INCLUDED;;
STIMULATORY G PROTEIN, INCLUDED;;
ADENYLATE CYCLASE STIMULATORY PROTEIN, ALPHA SUBUNIT, INCLUDED;;
SECRETOGRANIN VI, INCLUDED;;
NEUROENDOCRINE SECRETORY PROTEIN 55, INCLUDED; NESP55, INCLUDED;;
XL-ALPHA-S, INCLUDED; XLAS, INCLUDED;;
A/B TRANSCRIPT, INCLUDED;;
ALTERNATIVE GENE PRODUCT ENCODED BY THE XL EXON, INCLUDED; ALEX, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GNAS is a complex imprinted locus that produces multiple transcripts
through the use of alternative promoters and alternative splicing. The
most well-characterized transcript derived from GNAS, Gs-alpha, encodes
the alpha subunit of the stimulatory guanine nucleotide-binding protein
(G protein). Gs-alpha is expressed biallelically in nearly all tissues
and plays essential roles in a multitude of physiologic processes. Other
transcripts produced by GNAS are expressed exclusively from either the
paternal or the maternal GNAS allele (Bastepe and Juppner, 2005).

CLONING

- Overview of Transcripts Produced by GNAS

The GNAS locus is imprinted and encodes 4 main transcripts, Gs-alpha,
XLAS, NESP55, and the A/B transcript, as well as an antisense GNAS
transcript (GNASAS; 610540). The 4 main transcripts are produced through
the use of alternative promoters and splicing of 4 unique first exons
onto the shared exons 2 through 13. Gs-alpha is ubiquitously expressed
and encodes a protein that stimulates adenylyl cyclase when activated by
an agonist-occupied G protein-coupled receptor, thereby generating the
second messenger cAMP. Gs-alpha is biallelically expressed except in a
small number of tissues, including renal proximal tubules, thyroid,
gonads, and pituitary, where it is predominantly expressed from the
maternal GNAS allele. XLAS is a large variant of Gs-alpha that is
expressed exclusively from the paternal GNAS allele, primarily in
neuroendocrine tissues and the nervous system. The XLAS and Gs-alpha
proteins are identical over their C-terminal portions, but they have
distinct N termini. NESP55 is exclusively expressed from the maternal
GNAS allele and encodes a chromogranin (see 118910)-like neuroendocrine
secretory protein that, due to a stop codon in its unique first exon,
shares no amino acid sequence with Gs-alpha. The A/B transcript, which
uses the alternative first exon A/B (also referred to as exon 1A or
1-prime), and the antisense GNAS transcript, which consists of exons
that do not overlap with any other GNAS exons, are ubiquitously
expressed noncoding transcripts that are derived exclusively from the
paternal GNAS allele. Consistent with their parent-specific expression,
the promoters of the XLAS, NESP55, A/B, and antisense transcripts are
within differentially methylated regions (DMRs), and in each case the
nonmethylated promoter drives expression. In contrast, the promoter for
Gs-alpha lacks methylation and is biallelically active in most tissues
(Bastepe and Juppner, 2005).

- Gs-Alpha Transcript

Using oligonucleotide probes for recombinants that code for alpha
subunits of G signal transduction proteins, Bray et al. (1986) screened
human brain cDNA libraries and identified 11 clones corresponding to 4
species of Gs-alpha cDNA. One of the clones was predicted to encode a
384-amino acid protein with homology to the bovine and rat Gs-alpha
proteins. The 4 clones differed in nucleotide sequence in the region
that codes for amino acid residues 71 to 88. Two forms corresponded to
proteins with molecular masses of 52 and 45 kD. The authors suggested
alternative splicing of a single precursor mRNA.

- A/B Transcript

Ishikawa et al. (1990) reported a Gs-alpha mRNA that uses a different
promoter and exon, which they termed exon 1-prime (later termed exon 1A
or A/B) that is located 2.5 kb upstream of GNAS exon 1. Exon 1-prime
does not contribute an in-frame ATG, and thus its mRNA may encode a
truncated form of Gs-alpha.

- XLAS Transcript

By restriction landmark genomic scanning, Hayward et al. (1998)
identified a differentially methylated locus containing a previously
undescribed GNAS1 exon. This exon was included within transcripts
homologous to an mRNA encoding the large G protein XL-alpha (s) in the
rat (Kehlenbach et al., 1994). Two restriction sites flanking this exon
were methylated on a maternal allele and unmethylated on a paternal
allele. RT-PCR of human fetal tissues showed that in contrast to
Gs-encoding transcripts, which were biallelic, mRNAs encoding XLAS were
derived exclusively from the paternal allele. The paternally active
alternative promoter was located 35 kb upstream of exon 1.

In rat, the paternally expressed XLAS gene is a splice variant of GNAS,
consisting of exon 1 of XL and exons 2 to 13 of GNAS. A second open
reading frame in XL exon 1, which completely overlaps the XL domain ORF,
encodes ALEX (alternative gene product encoded by the XL exon), which is
translated from the XLAS mRNA and binds the XL domain of XLAS (Klemke et
al., 2001).

- NESP55 Transcript

Hayward et al. (1998) identified a second promoter upstream of the
Gs-alpha site in addition to that for XLAS. Both upstream promoters were
associated with a large coding exon and showed opposite patterns of
allele-specific methylation and monoallelic transcription. The more
5-prime of these exons encoded the neuroendocrine secretory protein-55
(NESP55), which was expressed exclusively from the maternal allele. The
NESP55 exon is 11 kb 5-prime to the paternally expressed XLAS exon. The
transcripts from these 2 promoters both splice onto GNAS1 exon 2, yet
share no coding sequences. Despite their structural unrelatedness, the
encoded proteins, of opposite allelic origin, have both been implicated
in regulated secretion in neuroendocrine tissues. Hayward et al. (1998)
concluded that maternally (NESP55), paternally (XLAS), and biallelically
(Gs-alpha)-derived proteins are produced by different patterns of
promoter use and alternative splicing of GNAS1, a gene showing
simultaneous imprinting in both the paternal and maternal directions.

By sequencing clones obtained from human pheochromocytoma and rat
pituitary cDNA libraries, Weiss et al. (2000) identified 2 main splice
variants that included NESP55 sequences. In the 2,400-bp variant, NESP55
exons were spliced onto GNAS exons 2 to 13, and in the shorter 1800-bp
variant, NESP55 exons were spliced onto GNAS exons 2, 3, and N1. Several
cDNA clones contained inverted repeats on either the 5-prime or 3-prime
terminus, and heterogeneity in the GNAS region, such as deletion of exon
3 or insertion of a CAG trinucleotide after exon 3, was also found. The
2,400-bp variant contains an open reading frame (ORF) encoding the
NESP55 protein and an ORF encoding a truncated form of GNAS lacking exon
1. The sequence TAATG encodes the stop codon (TAA) of the NESP55 ORF as
well as the initiating methionine (ATG) of the truncated GNAS. The human
NESP55 ORF encodes a protein of about 28 kD, which has high homology
with rat Nesp55, particularly in the first 70 amino acids. Northern blot
analysis and RT-PCR detected the longer transcript in rat adrenal
medulla, pituitary, and locus ceruleus, and the shorter transcript only
in pituitary. Biochemical analysis indicated that rat Nesp55 is a
keratan sulfate proteoglycan, and like other chromogranins, Nesp55 was
proteolytically processed into smaller peptides in several rat tissues,
including a predominant GPIPIRRH peptide that is also found in human
NESP55.

- GNAS Antisense Transcript

Hayward and Bonthron (2000) described a spliced polyadenylated antisense
transcript (GNASAS; 610540) arising from the maternally methylated
region upstream of the XL-alpha-s exon, which spans the upstream NESP55
region. The antisense transcript is imprinted, and expressed only from
the paternal allele, suggesting to the authors that it may have a
specific role in suppressing in cis the activity of the paternal NESP55
allele. For further information on the GNAS antisense transcript, see
610540,

GENE STRUCTURE

Rickard and Wilson (2003) provided a schematic representation of the
GNAS locus. Exons 1 through 13 of GNAS produce the Gs-alpha transcript.
Imprinted first exons specifically used for the NESP55, XLAS, and exon
1A transcripts are located approximately 35, 14, and 2.5 kb upstream of
GNAS exon 1, respectively. These exons are spliced to GNAS exons 2
through 13. The GNAS antisense transcript originates upstream of the
XLAS exon. An alternative 3-prime exon, located within GNAS intron 3,
includes an alternative stop codon and polyadenylation site.

Bastepe and Juppner (2005) noted that the promoter regions associated
with the imprinted NESP55, XLAS, exon A/B, and antisense transcripts are
located within differentially methylated regions. In each case, the
nonmethylated promoter drives expression of the transcript. In contrast,
the Gs-alpha promoter lacks methylation and is biallelically active in
most tissues.

MAPPING

Using a cDNA probe in connection with a mouse/human somatic cell hybrid
panel, Sparkes et al. (1987) mapped the gene encoding the
alpha-stimulating polypeptide of G protein to chromosome 20. (See also
Blatt et al. (1988).) Ashley et al. (1987) mapped the corresponding gene
in the mouse to chromosome 2 which, by the argument of homology of
synteny, supports the assignment of the human stimulatory G protein gene
to chromosome 20.

Gejman et al. (1991) mapped the GNAS1 gene to the distal long arm of
chromosome 20 by linkage studies using a polymorphism detected by
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). A maximum lod score of
9.31 was obtained at a theta of 0.042 with the locus D20S15, previously
reported to be on the long arm of chromosome 20 (Donis-Keller et al.,
1987).

By in situ hybridization, Gopal Rao et al. (1991) assigned the GNAS1
gene to chromosome 20q12-q13.2. Using the same method, Levine et al.
(1991) mapped the GNAS1 gene to chromosome 20q13.2-q13.3.

GENE FAMILY

- G Protein Family

G proteins transduce extracellular signals received by transmembrane
receptors to effector proteins. The activity of hormone-sensitive
adenylate cyclase is regulated by at least 2 G proteins, 1 stimulatory
(Gs) and 1 inhibitory (Gi; see 139310). A third G protein, Go (139311),
is abundant in brain. Each G protein is a heterotrimer composed of an
alpha, beta, and gamma subunit. The GNAS locus encodes Gs-alpha, the
alpha subunit of the G stimulatory protein. Each of the 3 G protein
subunits is encoded by a member of 1 of 3 corresponding gene families.
Hurowitz et al. (2000) counted 16 different members of the alpha subunit
family, 5 different members of the beta subunit family, and 11 different
members of the gamma subunit family, as described in mammals. Using
BACs, they determined the gene structure and chromosome location of each
gene. The G protein family includes transducin (189970).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Rasmussen et al. (2011) presented the crystal structure of the active
state ternary complex composed of agonist-occupied monomeric
beta-2-adrenergic receptor (AR) (ADRB2; 109690) and nucleotide-free Gs
heterotrimer. The principal interactions between the beta-2-AR and Gs
involve the amino- and carboxy-terminal alpha-helices of Gs, with
conformational changes propagating to the nucleotide-binding pocket. The
largest conformational changes in the beta-2-AR include a 14-angstrom
outward movement at the cytoplasmic end of transmembrane segment 6 and
an alpha-helical extension of the cytoplasmic end of transmembrane
segment 5. The most surprising observation is a major displacement of
the alpha-helical domain of G-alpha-s relative to the Ras-like GTPase
domain.

Chung et al. (2011) applied peptide amide hydrogen-deuterium exchange
mass spectrometry to probe changes in the structure of the
heterotrimeric bovine G protein, Gs, on formation of a complex with
agonist-bound human beta-2-AR, and reported structural links between the
receptor-binding surface and the nucleotide-binding pocket of Gs that
undergo higher levels of hydrogen-deuterium exchange than would be
predicted from the crystal structure of the beta-2-AR-Gs complex.
Together with x-ray crystallographic and electron microscopic data of
the beta-2-AR-Gs complex, Chung et al. (2011) provided a rationale for a
mechanism of nucleotide exchange, whereby the receptor perturbs the
structure of the amino-terminal region of the alpha-subunit of Gs and
consequently alters the 'P-loop' that binds the beta-phosphate in GDP.

GENE FUNCTION

- Function of Gs-Alpha Protein

Mehlmann et al. (2002) demonstrated that meiotic arrest of the oocyte
can be released in mice by microinjecting the oocyte within the follicle
with an antibody that inhibits Gs. This indicates that Gs activity in
the oocyte is required to maintain meiotic arrest within the ovarian
follicle and suggests that the follicle may keep the cell cycle arrested
by activating Gs.

Harrison et al. (2003) demonstrated that signaling via the erythrocyte
ADRB2 and heterotrimeric G-alpha-s regulated the entry of the human
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Agonists that stimulate cAMP
production led to an increase in malarial infection that could be
blocked by specific receptor antagonists. Moreover, peptides designed to
inhibit G-alpha-s protein function reduced parasitemia in P. falciparum
cultures in vitro, and beta-antagonists reduced parasitemia of P.
berghei infections in an in vivo mouse model. Harrison et al. (2003)
suggested that signaling via erythrocyte ADRB2 and G-alpha-s may
regulate malarial infection across parasite species.

Adams et al. (2009) demonstrated that hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cell (HSPC) engraftment of bone marrow in fetal development is dependent
on G-alpha-S. The authors observed that HSPCs from adult mice deficient
in G-alpha-S differentiated and underwent chemotaxis, but did not home
to or engraft in the bone marrow in adult mice, and demonstrated a
marked inability to engage the marrow microvasculature. Deletion of
G-alpha-S after engraftment did not lead to lack of retention in the
marrow; rather, cytokine-induced mobilization into the blood was
impaired. In tests of the effect of G-alpha-S activation on HSPCs,
pharmacologic activators enhanced homing and engraftment in vivo. Adams
et al. (2009) concluded that G-alpha-S governs specific aspects of HSPC
localization under physiologic conditions in vivo and may be
pharmacologically targeted to improve transplantation efficiency.

- Imprinting of GNAS

Hall (1990) noted that the region of chromosome 20 occupied by the
Gs-alpha gene is homologous to an area of mouse chromosome 2 involved in
both maternal and paternal imprinting.

Campbell et al. (1994) presented evidence suggesting that GNAS1 is
biallelically expressed in a wide range of human fetal tissues. Of 75
fetuses genotyped, 13 heterozygous for a FokI polymorphism in GNAS1 were
identified whose mothers were homozygous for one or another allele.
Analysis of GNAS1 RNA from each fetus showed expression from both
parental alleles. No tissue-specific pattern of expression was
discerned. Campbell et al. (1994) concluded that if genomic imprinting
regulates the expression of the GNAS1 gene, the effect must either be
subtle and quantitative or be confined to a small subset of specialized
hormone-responsive cells within the target tissues.

Hayward et al. (2001) investigated GNAS1 imprinting in the normal adult
pituitary and found that Gs-alpha was monoallelically expressed from the
maternal allele in this tissue. They found that this monoallelic
expression of Gs-alpha was frequently relaxed in somatotroph tumors
regardless of GNAS1 mutation status. These findings implied a possible
role for loss of Gs-alpha imprinting during pituitary somatotroph
tumorigenesis and also suggested that Gs-alpha imprinting is regulated
separately from that of the other GNAS1 products, NESP55 and XL-alpha-s,
which retain maternal and paternal imprinting, respectively, in these
tumors.

To establish if the GNAS1 gene is imprinted in human endocrine tissues,
Mantovani et al. (2002) selected 14 thyroid, 10 granulosa cell, 13
pituitary (3 normal glands, 7 GH-secreting adenomas, and 3
nonfunctioning adenomas), 3 adrenal, and 11 lymphocyte samples shown to
be heterozygous for a known polymorphism in exon 5. RNA from these
tissues was analyzed by RT-PCR, and expression from both parental
alleles was evaluated by enzymatic digestion and subsequent
quantification of the resulting fragments. Most thyroid, ovarian, and
pituitary samples showed an almost exclusive or significantly
predominant expression of the maternal allele over the paternal one,
whereas in lymphocyte and adrenal samples both alleles were equally
expressed. The authors concluded that their results provided evidence
for a predominant maternal origin of GNAS1 transcripts in different
human adult endocrine tissues, particularly thyroid, ovary, and
pituitary.

Using hot-stop PCR analysis on total RNA from 6 normal human thyroid
specimens, Liu et al. (2003) showed that the majority of the Gs-alpha
mRNA (72 +/- 3%) was derived from the maternal allele. This was
considered consistent with the presence of TSH (see 188540) resistance
in patients with maternal Gs-alpha-null mutations (PHP 1a; 103580) and
the absence of TSH resistance in patients with paternal Gs-alpha
mutations (pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism). Patients with PTH (168450)
resistance in the absence of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (PHP1B;
603233) have an imprinting defect of the Gs-alpha gene resulting in both
alleles having a paternal epigenotype, which would lead to a more
moderate level of thyroid-specific Gs-alpha deficiency. The authors
found evidence of borderline TSH resistance in 10 of 22 PHP Ib patients.
The authors concluded that their study provided further evidence for
tissue-specific imprinting of Gs-alpha in humans and provided a
potential mechanism for mild to moderate TSH resistance in PHP Ia and
borderline resistance in some patients with PHP Ib.

Liu et al. (2000) showed that the human GNAS exon 1A promoter region
(2.5 kb upstream from exon 1) is imprinted in a manner similar to that
in the mouse: the region is normally methylated on the maternal allele
and unmethylated on the paternal allele. In 13 patients with
pseudohypoparathyroidism Ib, the exon 1A region was unmethylated on both
alleles, and was thus biallelically expressed. Liu et al. (2000)
proposed that the exon 1A differentially methylated region (DMR) is
important for establishing or maintaining tissue-specific GNAS
imprinting and that loss of exon 1A imprinting is the cause of PHP Ib.
(See also Bastepe et al. (2001, 2001).)

Freson et al. (2002) described a PHP Ib patient with lack of methylation
of the exon XL and 1A promoters, and biallelic methylation of the NESP55
promoter. Platelets of this patient showed a functional Gs defect,
decreased cAMP formation upon Gs-receptor stimulation, and normal
Gs-alpha sequence, but reduced Gs-alpha protein levels. The authors
hypothesized that transcriptional deregulation between the biallelically
active promoters of both exon 1A and exon 1 of Gs-alpha could explain
the decreased Gs-alpha expression in platelets and presumably in the
proximal renal tubules. Platelets demonstrated decreased NESP55 and
increased XL-alpha-s protein levels, in agreement with the methylation
status of their corresponding first exons. In a megakaryocytic cell line
MEG-01, exon 1A is methylated on both alleles, in contrast to the
normally maternally methylated exon 1A in leukocytes. Experimental
demethylation of exon 1A in MEG-01 cells led to reduced Gs-alpha
expression, in agreement with the observations in the patient. The
authors proposed that platelet studies may allow more facile evaluation
of disturbances of the GNAS1 cluster in PHP Ib patients.

Genomic imprinting, by which maternal and paternal alleles of some genes
have different levels of activity, has profound effects on growth and
development of the mammalian fetus. Plagge et al. (2004) disrupted a
paternally expressed transcript at the Gnas locus, Gnasxl, which encodes
the unusual Gs-alpha isoform XL-alpha-s. Mice with mutations in Gnasxl
had poor postnatal growth and survival and a spectrum of phenotypic
effects indicating that XL-alpha-s controls a number of key postnatal
physiologic adaptations, including suckling, blood glucose, and energy
homeostasis. Increased cAMP levels in brown adipose tissue of Gnasxl
mutants and phenotypic comparison with Gnas mutants suggested that
XL-alpha-s can antagonize Gs-alpha-dependent signaling pathways. The
opposing effects of maternally and paternally expressed products of the
Gnas locus provided tangible molecular support for the parental conflict
hypothesis of imprinting.

Two candidate imprinting control regions (ICRs) have been identified at
the compact imprinted Gnas cluster on distal mouse chromosome 2: one at
exon 1A upstream of Gnas itself and one covering the promoters of Gnasxl
and the antisense Gnas transcript, also called Nespas (Coombes et al.,
2003). Gnas itself is mainly biallelically expressed but is weakly
paternally repressed in specific tissues. Williamson et al. (2004)
showed that a paternally-derived targeted deletion of the germline
differentially methylated region at exon 1A abolished tissue-specific
imprinting of Gnas, which rescued the abnormal phenotype of mice with a
maternally-derived Gnas mutation. Imprinting of alternative transcripts,
Nesp, Gnasxl, and Nespas in the cluster was unaffected. The results
established that the differentially methylated region in exon 1A
contains an imprinting control element that specifically regulates Gnas
and comprises a characterized ICR for a gene that is only weakly
imprinted in a minority of tissues. Williamson et al. (2004) concluded
that there must be a second ICR regulating the alternative transcripts.

Williamson et al. (2006) identified a second ICR at the mouse Gnas
cluster. They showed that a paternally-derived targeted deletion of the
germline DMR associated with the antisense Nespas transcript
unexpectedly affected both the expression of all transcripts in the
cluster and methylation of 2 DMRs. The results established that the
Nespas DMR is the principal ICR at the Gnas cluster and functions
bidirectionally as a switch for modulating expression of the
antagonistically acting genes Gnasxl and Gnas. Uniquely, the Nespas DMR
acts on the downstream ICR at exon 1A to regulate tissue-specific
imprinting of the Gnas gene.

Mantovani et al. (2004) investigated the presence of a parent
specificity of Gs-alpha mutations in 10 patients affected with
McCune-Albright syndrome (MAS; 174800) and 12 isolated tumors (10
GH-secreting adenomas, 1 toxic thyroid adenoma, and 1 hyperfunctioning
adrenal adenoma). The parental origin of Gs-alpha mutations was assessed
by evaluating NESP55 and exon 1A transcripts, which are monoallelically
expressed from the maternal and paternal alleles, respectively. By this
approach, Mantovani et al. (2004) demonstrated that in isolated
GH-secreting adenomas, as well as in MAS patients with acromegaly,
Gs-alpha mutations were on the maternal allele. By contrast, the
involvement of other endocrine organs in MAS patients was not associated
with a particular parent specificity, as precocious puberty and
hyperthyroidism were present in patients with mutations on either the
maternal or the paternal allele. Moreover, isolated hyperfunctioning
thyroid and adrenal adenomas displayed the mutation on the maternal and
paternal alleles, respectively. Mantovani et al. (2004) concluded that
their data confirmed the importance of Gs-alpha imprinting in the
pituitary gland and demonstrated the high degree of tissue specificity
of this phenomenon.

To establish whether Gs-alpha is imprinted also in tissues that are site
of alteration both in PHP Ia and PPHP, Mantovani et al. (2004) selected
20 bone and 10 adipose tissue samples that were heterozygous for a known
polymorphism in exon 5. Expression from both parental alleles was
evaluated by RT-PCR and enzymatic digestion of the resulting fragments.
By this approach, the great majority of the samples analyzed showed an
equal expression of the 2 alleles. The authors concluded that their
results provided evidence for the absence of Gs-alpha imprinting in
human bone and fat and suggested that the clinical finding of
osteodystrophy and obesity in PHP Ia and PPHP patients despite the
presence of a normal Gs-alpha allele is likely due to Gs-alpha
haploinsufficiency in these tissues.

By analyzing 30 polymorphic sites across the Gnas1 gene region in
C57BL/6J x Mus spretus F1 mice, Li et al. (2004) identified 2 allelic
switch regions (ASRs) that marked boundaries of epigenetic information.
Activating signals consisting of histone acetylation and methylation of
H3 lys4 (see 602810) and silencing signals consisting of histone
methylation of H3 lys9 and DNA methylation segregated independently
across the ASRs. The authors suggested that these ASRs may allow the
transcriptional elongation to proceed through the silenced domain of
nearby imprinted promoters.

Sakamoto et al. (2004) examined the chromatin state of each parental
allele within the exon 1A-Gs-alpha promoter region by chromatin
immunoprecipitation of samples derived from mice with heterozygous
deletions within the region using antibodies to covalently modified
histones. The exon 1A DMR had allele-specific differences in histone
acetylation and methylation, with histone acetylation and H3 lysine-4
(H3K4) methylation of the paternal allele, and H3 lysine-9 (H3K9)
methylation of the maternal allele. Both parental alleles had similar
levels of histone acetylation and H3K4 methylation within the Gs-alpha
promoter and first exon, with no H3K9 methylation. In liver, where
Gs-alpha is biallelically expressed, both parental alleles had similar
levels of tri- and dimethylated H3K4 within the Gs-alpha first exon. In
contrast, in renal proximal tubules there was a greater ratio of tri- to
dimethylated H3K4 of Gs-alpha exon 1 in the more transcriptionally
active maternal as compared with the paternal allele. The authors
concluded that allele-specific differences in Gs-alpha expression
correlate in a tissue-specific manner with allele-specific differences
in the extent of H3K4 methylation, and chronic transcriptional
activation in mammals is correlated with trimethylation of H3K4.

Morison et al. (2005) reported a census of known imprinted genes in
humans and mice. They listed 83 transcriptional units, of which 29 are
imprinted in both species. They noted that there is a high level of
discordance of imprinting status between the mouse and human and that a
high proportion of imprinted genes are noncoding RNAs or genes derived
by retrotransposition.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Inactivating Mutations in the GNAS Gene

Inactivating loss-of-function mutations in the GNAS1 gene result in
pseudohypoparathyroidism Ia (PHP1A; 103580),
pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP; 612463), and progressive osseous
heteroplasia (POH; 166350) (Aldred and Trembath, 2000).

In a patient with PHP Ia and his affected mother, Patten et al. (1989,
1990) identified a heterozygous mutation in the GNAS gene (139320.0001).

Ahmed et al. (1998) performed mutation analysis in 13 unrelated
families, 8 with PHP Ia and PPHP patients, and 5 with PPHP patients
only. GNAS1 mutations were detected in 4 of the 8 families with PHP Ia:
2 novel de novo missense mutations and an identical frameshift deletion
in 2 unrelated families (139320.0011). GNAS1 mutations were not detected
in any of the families with PPHP only.

Aldred and Trembath (2000) found that a recurring 4-bp deletion in exon
7 of the GNAS1 gene (139320.0011) was common among patients with PHP1A.
The authors noted that inactivating mutations are scattered throughout
the GNAS gene with some evidence of clustering.

In 4 unrelated Italian families with PHP Ia, Mantovani et al. (2000)
identified heterozygous mutations in GNAS: 2 families had 2 previously
reported deletions in exons 5 and 7, whereas the other 2 families had 2
novel frameshift deletions (139320.0025 and 139320.0026). No mutations
were detected in the families in which PPHP was the only clinical
manifestation.

Ahrens et al. (2001) investigated 29 unrelated patients with Albright
hereditary osteodystrophy and PHP Ia or pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism
and their affected family members. All patients showed a reduced GNAS1
protein activity (mean 59% compared with healthy controls). In 21 of 29
patients (72%), 15 different mutations in GNAS1, including 11 novel
mutations, were detected. There were 8 instances in which a mother had
PPHP and her offspring had PHP Ia with AHO due to the same mutation
(see, e.g., 139320.0028). They also reported 5 unrelated patients with a
previously described 4-bp deletion in exon 7 (139320.0011), confirming
the presence of a hotspot for loss-of-function mutations in GNAS1. In 8
patients, no molecular abnormality was found in the GNAS1 gene despite a
functional defect of Gs-alpha.

Shore et al. (2002) identified heterozygous inactivating GNAS1 mutations
in 13 of 18 probands with progressive osseous heteroplasia. The
defective allele in POH was inherited exclusively from fathers, a result
consistent with a model of imprinting for GNAS1. Direct evidence that
the same mutation can cause either POH or PPHP was observed in a single
family; in this family 5 sisters had POH due to a frameshift deletion of
4 nucleotides (139320.0011) inherited from the father in whom the
mutation was nonpenetrant. Three offspring of these sisters had PPHP,
including traces of subcutaneous ossification. Shore et al. (2002)
described a second family in which the unaffected father was
heterozygous for the same GNAS1 mutation associated with POH in his 3
affected daughters. Shore et al. (2002) noted that hormone resistance,
such as that in PHP Ia, is strongly correlated with GNAS1 mutations in
the maternally derived allele, indicating that the maternal allele is
critical in some tissues for cellular functions required for signal
transduction. In contrast, severe, progressive heterotopic ossification,
such as that found in POH, correlates with paternal inheritance of the
GNAS1 mutation, suggesting that the paternal allele specifically
influences progressive osteoblastic differentiation, proliferation of
cells in soft connective tissues, or both.

Linglart et al. (2002) conducted clinical and biologic studies including
screening for mutations in the GNAS1 gene in 30 patients from 21
families with PHP: 19 with PHP associated with decreased erythrocyte Gs
activity (PHP Ia); 10 with AHO associated with decreased erythrocyte Gs
activity (isolated AHO); and 1 with PHP, hormonal resistance, and AHO
but normal erythrocyte Gs activity (PHP Ic). A heterozygous GNAS1 gene
lesion was found in 14 of 17 (82%) of the PHP Ia index cases, including
11 new mutations and a mutation hotspot involving codons 189-190 (21%).
These lesions led to a truncated protein in all but 3 cases with
missense mutations. In the patient diagnosed with PHP Ic, Gs-alpha
protein was shortened by just 4 amino acids, a finding consistent with
the conservation of Gs activity in erythrocytes and the loss of receptor
contact. No GNAS1 lesions were found in the 5 individuals with isolated
AHO who were not related to the PHP Ia patients. Intrafamilial
segregation analyses of the mutated GNAS1 allele in 9 PHP Ia patients
established that the mutation had occurred de novo on the maternal
allele in 4 and had been transmitted by a mother with a mild phenotype
in the other 5. They concluded that imprinting of GNAS1 plays a role in
the clinical phenotype of loss-of-function mutations and that a
functional maternal GNAS1 allele has a predominant role in preventing
the hormonal resistance of PHP Ia.

Aldred et al. (2002) reported 2 patients with Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy and deletions of chromosome 20q, including complete
deletion of the GNAS1 gene. One boy had a paternally inherited deletion
of chromosome 20q13.13-q13.32 and a normal biochemical evaluation
consistent with pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism. The other patient had a
maternally derived deletion of chromosome 20q13.31-q13.33 and
pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia. Neither patient showed evidence of
soft tissue ossification.

In patients with AHO, Rickard and Wilson (2003) searched the 3
overlapping upstream exons, NESP55, XL-alpha-s, and exon 1A. Analysis of
the NESP55 transcripts revealed the creation of a novel splice site in 1
patient and an unusual intronic mutation that caused retention of the
intron in another patient, neither of which could be detected by
analysis of the cDNA of GNAS1.

In a brother and sister with a PHP-Ia phenotype, who also had neonatal
diarrhea and pancreatic insufficiency, Aldred et al. (2000) identified
heterozygosity for a 12-bp in-frame insertion in the GNAS1 gene
(139320.0035). The mutation was inherited from the unaffected mother,
who was found to have germline mosaicism. Makita et al. (2007) performed
biochemical and intact cell studies of the 12-bp insertion (AVDT) and
suggested that the PHP-Ia phenotype results from the instability of the
Gs-alpha-AVDT mutant and that the accompanying neonatal diarrhea may
result from its enhanced constitutive activity in the intestine.

Adegbite et al. (2008) reviewed the charts of 111 individuals with
cutaneous and subcutaneous ossification. While most individuals with
superficial or progressive ossification had inactivating mutations in
GNAS, there were no specific genotype-phenotype correlations that
distinguished the more progressive forms such as POH from the
nonprogressive forms such as PPHP and PHP Ia/c.

- Pseudohypoparathyroidism Type Ib

In 3 brothers with a clinical diagnosis of PHP Ib (603233), Wu et al.
(2001) identified heterozygosity for a 3-bp deletion in the GNAS gene
(139320.0033). The boys had decreased cAMP response to PTH infusion, but
normal erythrocyte Gs activity. When expressed in vitro, the mutant
Gs-alpha was unable to interact with PTHR1 (168468) but showed normal
coupling to other coexpressed heptahelical receptors. Wu et al. (2001)
noted that the absence of PTH resistance in the mother and maternal
grandfather who carried the same mutation was consistent with models of
paternal imprinting of the GNAS gene.

In affected members and obligate carriers of 12 unrelated families with
PHP Ib, Bastepe et al. (2003) identified a 3-kb heterozygous
microdeletion located approximately 220 kb centromeric of exon 1A, which
they called exon A/B, of the GNAS gene. Four of 16 apparently sporadic
PHP Ib patients also had the deletion. Affected individuals with the
microdeletion showed loss of exon 1A methylation, but no other
epigenetic abnormalities. In all examined cases, the deletion was
inherited from the mother, consistent with the observation of PHP Ib
developing only in offspring of female obligate carriers. The deletion
also removed 3 of 8 exons encoding syntaxin-16 (STX16; 603666.0001), but
Bastepe et al. (2003) considered the involvement of STX16 in the
molecular pathogenesis of PHP Ib unlikely. They postulated that the
microdeletion disrupts a putative cis-acting element required for
methylation at exon 1A and that this epigenetic defect underlies the
pathogenesis of PHP Ib.

In all affected individuals and obligate carriers in a large kindred
with PHP Ib, Linglart et al. (2005) identified a 4.4-kb microdeletion
overlapping with a region of the 3-kb deletion identified by Bastepe et
al. (2003). Affected individuals exhibited loss of methylation only at
GNAS exon A/B. Linglart et al. (2005) concluded that PHP Ib comprises at
least 2 distinct conditions sharing the same clinical phenotype: one
associated with the loss of exon A/B methylation alone and, in most
cases, with a heterozygous microdeletion in the STX16 region, and the
other associated with methylation abnormalities at all GNAS DMRs,
including the DMR at exon A/B.

In affected members of 2 unrelated kindreds with PHP Ib, Bastepe et al.
(2005) identified a 4.7-kb deletion (139320.0031) removing the entire
NESP55 DMR and exons 3 and 4 of the antisense transcript of the GNAS
gene (GNASAS; 610540.0001) . Maternal inheritance of the deletion caused
loss of imprinting in cis at the entire GNAS locus.

Liu et al. (2005) found that all of 20 PHP Ib probands studied had loss
of GNAS exon 1A imprinting (a paternal epigenotype on both alleles). All
5 probands with familial disease had a deletion mutation within the
closely linked STX16 gene and a GNAS imprinting defect involving only
the exon 1A region. In contrast, the STX16 mutation was absent in all
sporadic cases. The majority of these patients had abnormal imprinting
of the more upstream regions in addition to the exon 1A imprinting
defect, with 8 of 15 having a paternal epigenotype on both alleles
throughout the GNAS locus. In virtually all cases, the imprinting status
of the paternally methylated NESP55 and maternally methylated
NESPAS/XL-alpha-s promoters was concordant, suggesting that their
imprinting may be coregulated, whereas the imprinting of the
NESPAS/XL-alpha-s promoter region and XL-alpha-s first exon was not
always concordant, even though they are closely linked and lie within
the same DMR. The authors concluded that familial and sporadic forms of
PHP Ib have distinct GNAS imprinting patterns that occur through
different defects in the imprinting mechanism.

- Activating Mutations in the GNAS Gene

Activating gain-of-function mutations in the GNAS1 gene result in the
McCune-Albright syndrome (MAS; 174800), polyostotic fibrous dysplasia
(POFD; see 174800), and various endocrine tumors. These activating
mutations are present in the mosaic state, resulting from a postzygotic
somatic mutation appearing early in the course of development which
yields a monoclonal population of mutated cells within variously
affected tissues. The nonmosaic state for activating mutations is
presumably lethal to the embryo (Aldred and Trembath, 2000; Lumbroso et
al., 2004).

Weinstein et al. (1991) analyzed DNA from tissues of 4 patients with the
McCune-Albright syndrome for the presence of activating mutations in the
GNAS1 gene and identified 1 of 2 activating mutations, R201C
(139320.0008) and R201H (139320.0009) in tissues from all 4 patients.

Among 113 patients with McCune-Albright syndrome, including 98 girls and
15 boys, Lumbroso et al. (2004) found that 43% had a GNAS1 mutation
involving arg201, with a net preponderance of the R201H (n = 34)
compared to R201C (n = 15). No difference in severity or manifestations
of the disease was noted between the two mutations. In patients who had
several tissue samples analyzed, the same mutation was always found,
supporting the hypothesis of an early postzygotic somatic mutation.

Bianco et al. (2000) analyzed a series of 8 consecutive cases of
polyostotic fibrous dysplasia without other features of McCune-Albright
syndrome and identified arg201 mutations (see, e.g., 139320.0013) in the
GNAS1 gene in all of them.

In a review, Aldred and Trembath (2000) noted that mutations leading to
constitutive activation of the GNAS1 gene occur in 2 specific codons,
201 and 227.

Fragoso et al. (2003) identified somatic heterozygous mutations in the
GNAS1 gene (139320.0009; 139320.0013) in adrenal tissue from 3 unrelated
patients with ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (AIMAH;
219080). The mutations resulted in constitutive activation of the G
protein. The mutations were not present in peripheral blood, and none of
the patients had signs of McCune-Albright syndrome. Fragoso et al.
(2003) discussed whether the patients could be considered part of the
spectrum of McCune-Albright syndrome or whether they represent isolated
cases of AIMAH associated with somatic mutations.

- Somatic Mutations in Pituitary Adenomas

Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH; 139190) uses cAMP as a second
messenger to stimulate growth hormone (GH; 139250) secretion and
proliferation of normal pituitary somatotrophs (Billestrup et al.,
1986). Vallar et al. (1987) identified constitutive activation of Gs in
tissue from a subset of GH-secreting pituitary tumors (102200).

In a series of 32 corticotroph adenomas of the pituitary (219090),
Williamson et al. (1995) found 2 with somatic mutations in the GNAS1
gene at codon 227 (139320.0010; 139320.0012).

Hayward et al. (2001) noted that approximately 40% of growth
hormone-secreting pituitary adenomas contain somatic mutations in the
GNAS1 gene. These mutations, which occur at arg201 or glu227 (see, e.g.,
139320.0008 and 139320.0010, respectively), constitutively activate the
alpha subunit of GNAS1. Although transcripts encoding Gs-alpha are
biallelically derived in most human tissues, Hayward et al. (2001)
showed that the mutation had occurred on the maternal allele in 21 of 22
GNAS1-positive somatotroph adenomas. They also showed that Gs-alpha is
monoallelically expressed from the maternal allele in normal adult
pituitary tissue. This monoallelic expression of Gs-alpha was frequently
relaxed in somatotroph tumors regardless of GNAS1 mutation status. These
findings implied a possible role for loss of Gs-alpha imprinting during
pituitary somatotroph tumorigenesis.

- Other Disease Associations

Jia et al. (1999) identified a common silent polymorphism in the GNAS1
gene involving a change of codon 131 from ATT (ile) to ATC (ile). The
authors found a significant difference in the frequency of the alleles
between 268 white patients with essential hypertension (145500) (51% +)
and a matched group of 231 control subjects (58% +) (P = 0.02).

Genevieve et al. (2005) reported 2 unrelated girls who presented with
severe pre- and postnatal growth retardation and had de novo
interstitial deletions of chromosome 20q13.2-q13.3. Molecular studies
showed that the deletions were of paternal origin in both girls and were
approximately 4.5 Mb in size, encompassing the GNAS imprinted locus,
including paternally imprinted Gnasxl, and the TFAP2C gene (601602).
Both patients had intractable feeding difficulties, microcephaly, facial
dysmorphism with high forehead, broad nasal bridge, small chin and
malformed ears, mild psychomotor retardation, and hypotonia. Genevieve
et al. (2005) noted that a mouse model with disruption of the Gnasxl
gene had poor postnatal growth and survival (Plagge et al., 2004), and
that a patient reported by Aldred et al. (2002) with a paternal deletion
of the GNAS complex also showed pre- and postnatal growth retardation
and feeding difficulties. Moreover, disruption of the Tfap2c gene in
mice had been shown to affect embryonic development (Werling and
Schorle, 2002).

Using metaanalysis combining data from case control and family studies
in Gambia, Kenya, and Malawi and a case control study from Ghana, Auburn
et al. (2008) detected associations between intronic or conservative
SNPs of GNAS and severe malaria. SNPs with significant associations
clustered in the 5-prime end of GNAS. Auburn et al. (2008) proposed that
the impact of GNAS on malaria parasite invasion efficacy may alter
susceptibility to disease.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yu et al. (1998) generated mice with a mutation in exon 2 of the Gnas
gene, resulting in a null allele. Homozygous Gs deficiency was
embryonically lethal. Heterozygotes with maternal (m-/+) and paternal
(+/p-) inheritance of the Gnas null allele had distinct phenotypes,
suggesting that Gnas is an imprinted gene. Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
resistance is present in m-/+ but not +/p- mice. Expression of the alpha
subunit in the renal cortex (the site of PTH action) was markedly
reduced in m-/+ but not in +/p- mice, demonstrating that the Gnas
paternal allele is imprinted in this tissue. Gnas was also imprinted in
brown and white adipose tissue. The maximal physiologic response to
vasopressin (urinary concentrating ability) was normal in both m-/+ and
+/p- mice and Gnas was not imprinted in the renal inner medulla, the
site of vasopressin action. Tissue-specific imprinting of Gnas was
likely the mechanism for variable and tissue-specific hormone resistance
in the knockout mice and a similar mechanism might explain the variable
phenotype in AHO.

Exon 2 m-/+ mice are obese and hypometabolic, whereas exon 2 +/p- mice
are lean and hypermetabolic. To study the effect of Gs-alpha deficiency
without disrupting other Gnas gene products, Chen et al. (2005)
disrupted exon 1 of the Gnas gene in mice. They found that exon 1 +/p-
mice lacked the exon 2 +/p- phenotype and developed obesity and insulin
resistance. Exon 2 and exon 1 m-/+ mice both had subcutaneous edema at
birth, presumably due to loss of maternal Gs-alpha expression; however,
they differed in other respects, raising the possibility for the
presence of other maternal-specific gene products. Exon 1 m-/+ mice had
more severe obesity and insulin resistance and a lower metabolic rate
relative to exon 1 +/p- mice. Chen et al. (2005) concluded that the
lean, hypermetabolic, and insulin-sensitive exon 2 +/p- phenotype
appeared to result from XL-alpha-s deficiency, whereas loss of
paternal-specific Gs-alpha expression in exon 1 +/p- mice led to an
opposite metabolic phenotype. Thus, alternative GNAS gene products have
opposing effects on glucose and lipid metabolism. The differences
between exon 1 m-/+ and +/p- mice presumably resulted from differential
effects on Gs-alpha expression in tissues where Gs-alpha is normally
imprinted.

A suspicion of the existence of one or more imprinted genes on distal
mouse chromosome 2 had been raised by Cattanach and Kirk (1985) and
Peters et al. (1994): paternal uniparental disomy (UPD)/maternal
deletion and maternal UPD/paternal deletion of a region between
breakpoints T2Wa and T28H on distal mouse chromosome 2 resulted in
distinct phenotypes and early lethality. Neuronatin (NNAT; 603106) is an
imprinted gene on distal mouse chromosome 2 that maps outside the
T2Wa-T28H imprinted region (Kikyo et al., 1997). Given the large
distance and the presence of multiple nonimprinted genes between Gnas
and Nnat, it is likely that they lie within distinct imprinting domains.
The tissue-specific imprinting of Gnas observed by Yu et al. (1998) had
been demonstrated for other imprinted genes; e.g., DeChiara et al.
(1991) had demonstrated tissue-specific parental imprinting in the case
of the insulin-like growth factor II gene (147280) by study of targeted
disruption of the gene in mice.

Bastepe et al. (2004) studied chimeric mice containing wildtype
chondrocytes and chondrocytes with either homozygous or heterozygous
disruption of Gnas exon 2. Haploinsufficiency of Gnas signaling resulted
in chondrocytes that differentiated prematurely. The phenotype was
similar to that observed in Pthr1 (168468)-deficient mice. Bastepe et
al. (2004) determined that expression of Gnas in chondrocytes occurs
from both parental alleles. They concluded that GNAS is the primary
mediator of PTHR1 in chondrocytes and that haploinsufficiency of GNAS
signaling contributes to the skeletal phenotypes of AHO.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, MET1VAL

In a mother and son with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580),
Patten et al. (1989, 1990) identified a heterozygous A-to-G transition
in exon 1 of the GNAS1 gene, resulting in a met1-to-val (M1V)
substitution at the initiator codon. Initiation at the next AUG was
in-frame and predicted to result in deletion of 59 N-terminal amino
acids. Laboratory studies showed that the GNAS protein was reactive with
a C-terminal Gs-alpha antiserum, but not with 2 Gs-alpha peptide
antisera to amino acid residues 28-42 or 47-61. This was the first
molecular delineation of a mutation in a human G protein and a
conclusive demonstration that mutation at the GNAS1 locus results in
AHO.

.0002
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, IVS10DS, G-C, +1

In 4 sisters with PHP Ia (103580), Weinstein et al. (1990) identified a
heterozygous G-to-C transversion in intron 10 of the GNAS1 gene,
resulting in a splice site mutation. The authors used PCR to amplify
genomic fragments with an attached high-melting G+C-rich region ('GC
clamp') and DGGE to analyze the fragments. All 4 daughters had decreased
Gs-alpha mRNA and functional Gs-alpha deficiency. The mother, who had
PPHP (612463), also carried the heterozygous mutation. She had minor
stigmata of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, such as unilateral
brachyphalangy I, x-ray evidence of subcutaneous calcifications, and
short stature relative to other members of her family, but no hormonal
abnormalities. The kindred had previously been reported by Kinard et al.
(1979)l.

.0003
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED;;
OSSEOUS HETEROPLASIA, PROGRESSIVE, INCLUDED
GNAS, 1-BP DEL, 725C

In a mother with PPHP (612463) and her daughter with PHP1A (103580),
Weinstein et al. (1990) identified a heterozygous 1-bp deletion (G) in
exon 10 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a frameshift.

Adegbite et al. (2008) identified the same deletion (725delC) in an
unaffected carrier father and in 3 of his 5 children with progressive
osseous heteroplasia (POH; 166350). The 3 children exhibited varying
degrees of severity based on the extent of the heterotropic ossification
lesions and resultant functional impairment.

.0004
REMOVED FROM DATABASE
.0005
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, IVS3AS, A-G, -12

Levine and Deily (1990) identified a family in which members affected
with PHP1A (103580) had an A-to-G transition 12 bases from the 3-prime
terminus of intron 3 of the GNAS gene. The mutation was predicted to
result in a frameshift and a premature stop codon.

.0006
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, LEU99PRO

In affected members of a family with PHP Ia (103580), Levine and Deily
(1990) identified a heterozygous T-to-C transition in the GNAS gene,
resulting in a leu99-to-pro (L99P) substitution.

.0007
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, CYS165ARG

In affected members of a family with PHP1A (103580), Levine and Vechio
(1990) identified a heterozygous C-to-T transition in exon 6 of the GNAS
gene, resulting in a cys165-to-arg (C165R) substitution.

.0008
MCCUNE-ALBRIGHT SYNDROME, SOMATIC, MOSAIC
PITUITARY TUMOR, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
SEX CORD STROMAL TUMOR, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
GNAS, ARG201CYS

In various tissues from 4 patients with McCune-Albright syndrome
(174800), Weinstein et al. (1991) found 1 of 2 activating mutations
within codon 201 in exon 8 of the GNAS gene. Two patients carried an
arg201-to-cys substitution (R201C); the other 2 carried an R201H
substitution (139320.0009). Tissues analyzed included affected endocrine
organs, such as gonads, adrenal glands, thyroid, and pituitary, as well
as tissues not classically involved in the McCune-Albright syndrome. In
each patient the proportion of cells affected varied from tissue to
tissue. In 2 endocrine organs, the highest proportion of mutant alleles
was found in regions of abnormal cell proliferation. Weinstein et al.
(1991) concluded that somatic mutation of the GNAS gene early in
embryogenesis resulted in the mosaic population of normal and
mutant-bearing tissues that underlie the clinical manifestations of
McCune-Albright syndrome.

Candeliere et al. (1995) found the R201C mutation in a 14-year-old boy
who had previously been reported as a case of panostotic fibrous
dysplasia (see 174800).

Landis et al. (1989) identified somatic gain-of-function mutations in
the GNAS1 gene in 4 of 8 growth hormone (GH; 139250)-secreting pituitary
tumors (102200) surgically removed from patients with acromegaly. Two
tumors contained a C-to-T transition resulting in an R201C substitution.
The other 2 tumors had an R201H substitution (139320.0009) and a Q227R
substitution (139320.0010), respectively. All the mutations resulted in
constitutive activation of Gs by inhibiting its GTPase activity and
behaved like dominantly acting oncogenes.

Yang et al. (1996) identified somatic mutations at GNAS codon 201 in 9
of 21 pituitary adenomas derived from Korean patients with acromegaly.
Eight tumors had the R201C mutation and 1 had an R201S substitution
(139320.0013). Clinically, patients with the GNAS mutations were older
and responded better to octreotide-induced growth hormone suppression
than those without mutations.

Collins et al. (2003) identified an R201C mutation in thyroid carcinoma
derived from a patient with McCune-Albright syndrome.

Fragoso et al. (1998) identified a somatic R201C mutation in 4 (66.6%)
of 14 human sex cord stromal tumors, including ovarian and testicular
Leydig cell tumors. In contrast, no GIP2 (139360) mutations were found
in any of the sex cord stromal tumors studied.

Kalfa et al. (2006) detected the R201C mutation in 8 of 30 cases of
juvenile ovarian granulosa cell tumor, the most common sex cord stromal
tumor. Laser microdissection confirmed that the mutation was exclusively
localized in the tumoral granulosa cells and was absent in the ovarian
stroma. Patients with a hyperactivated G-alpha-s exhibited a
significantly more advanced tumor (p less than 0.05) because 7 of them
(77.7%) were staged as Ic or had had a recurrence.

.0009
MCCUNE-ALBRIGHT SYNDROME, SOMATIC, MOSAIC
PITUITARY TUMOR, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
ACTH-INDEPENDENT MACRONODULAR ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
SEX CORD STROMAL TUMOR, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
GNAS, ARG201HIS

In 2 patients with McCune-Albright syndrome (174800), Weinstein et al.
(1991) identified an arg201-to-his (R201H) mutation in exon 8 of the
GNAS gene in endocrine organs affected in this disorder, such as gonads,
adrenal glands, thyroid, and pituitary, as well as tissues not
classically involved. In 2 endocrine organs, ovary and adrenal, the
highest proportion of mutant alleles was found in regions of abnormal
cell proliferation. Weinstein et al. (1991) concluded that somatic
mutation of the GNAS gene early in embryogenesis resulted in the mosaic
population of normal and mutant-bearing tissues that underlie the
clinical manifestations of McCune-Albright syndrome. It remained an open
question whether GNAS1 mutations were causally related to the
nonendocrine abnormalities in 3 of the patients: chronic liver disease
in 1, thymic hyperplasia in 2, gastrointestinal adenomatous polyps in 1,
cardiopulmonary disease in 1, and sudden death in 2.

Schwindinger et al. (1992) found a G-to-A transition resulting in the
R201H substitution in a patient with McCune-Albright syndrome who had
severe bony involvement, characteristic skin lesions, and a history of
hyperthyroidism. The mutation was found in a higher proportion of skin
cells from affected areas than from unaffected areas. The findings
confirmed the Happle (1986) hypothesis that this disorder is due to
mosaicism for a postzygotic GNAS1 mutation. The authors noted that
arg201 is also the site of ADP-ribosylation by the cholera toxin.

Collins et al. (2003) identified the R201H mutation in thyroid carcinoma
from a patient with McCune-Albright syndrome.

In 2 growth hormone (GH; 139250)-secreting pituitary tumors (102200)
surgically removed from patients with acromegaly, Landis et al. (1989)
identified a somatic mutation in the GNAS1 gene, resulting in an R201H
substitution. The mutation resulted in constitutive activation of Gs by
inhibiting its GTPase activity and behaved like a dominantly acting
oncogene.

Fragoso et al. (2003) identified a heterozygous R201H mutation in
adrenal tissue from 2 unrelated patients with ACTH-independent
macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (219080).

In 1 of 30 cases of juvenile ovarian granulosa cell tumor, the most
common sex cord stromal tumor, Kalfa et al. (2006) detected the R201H
mutation of the GNAS gene. Laser microdissection confirmed that the
mutation was exclusively localized in the tumoral granulosa cells and
was absent in the ovarian stroma.

.0010
PITUITARY TUMOR, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING, SOMATIC
PITUITARY ADENOMA, ACTH-SECRETING, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
GNAS, GLN227ARG

In a growth hormone (GH; 139250)-secreting pituitary tumor (102200)
surgically removed from a patient with acromegaly, Landis et al. (1989)
identified a somatic mutation in the GNAS1 gene, resulting in a
gln227-to-arg (Q227R) substitution. The mutation resulted in
constitutive activation of Gs by inhibiting its GTPase activity and
behaved like a dominantly acting oncogene.

In a series of 32 corticotroph adenomas of the pituitary (219090),
Williamson et al. (1995) found 2 with somatic mutations in the GNAS1
gene at codon 227. One had the Q227R mutation and the second had a Q227H
mutation (139320.0012).

.0011
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
OSSEOUS HETEROPLASIA, PROGRESSIVE, INCLUDED;;
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, 4-BP DEL, 565CTGA

In a patient with PHP1A (103580), Weinstein et al. (1992) identified a
heterozygous 4-bp deletion (565delCTGA) in exon 7 of the GNAS1 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature stop codon. Analysis of
lymphocyte RNA by reverse transcription-PCR and direct sequencing showed
that the GNAS1 allele bearing the mutation was not expressed as mRNA.
Consistent with this, Northern blot analysis revealed an approximately
50% deficiency in steady state levels of GNAS1 mRNA.

Ahmed et al. (1998) identified this deletion mutation in 2 unrelated
families with PHP Ia.

Shore et al. (2002) provided direct evidence that the 4-bp deletion can
cause either progressive osseous heteroplasia (POH; 166350) or Albright
hereditary osteodystrophy without hormone resistance (PPHP; 612463) in
the same family. Five sisters with POH had inherited this mutation from
the father in whom the mutation was nonpenetrant. Three offspring of
these sisters had AHO, including traces of subcutaneous ossification.
Shore et al. (2002) suggested that POH requires paternal inheritance of
a GNAS1 mutation, whereas hormone resistance is more likely to occur
when the genetic defect is maternally inherited.

Ahmed et al. (2002) cautioned against a premature conclusion that POH
may require paternal inheritance. In a family reported by Ahmed et al.
(1998), the 4-bp deletion was found in a brother and sister and in their
mother but not in their father. Aside from brachymetacarpia and short
stature, the mother did not have features of AHO. The daughter had
typical features of AHO and hormone resistant PHP1A; in contrast, her
brother presented in the first year of life with ossification of
subcutaneous tissue that was followed by progressive, generalized
heterotopic ossification of skeletal muscle, without any clear evidence
of hormone resistance. These cases exemplified the wide phenotypic
heterogeneity in persons with mutations in GNAS1, even within 1 family.

Bastepe and Juppner (2002) suggested that, like some patients who have
either PHP type Ia or PHP type Ib, the son described by Ahmed et al.
(1998) may have developed resistance to parathyroid hormone later in
life or not at all. Given that the patient's sister and mother had PHP
type Ia and PPHP, respectively, POH resulting from maternally inherited
GNAS1 mutations may actually represent an incomplete form of PHP type
Ia. Bastepe and Juppner (2002) suggested that the underlying mechanism
for this form of POH may be distinct from that described by Shore et al.
(2002), which appears to result only from paternally inherited GNAS1
mutations.

Adegbite et al. (2008) identified heterozygosity for the 565delCTGA
mutation in the GNAS gene in 13 POH cases (10 familial cases among 3
different families, and 3 individual spontaneous cases). The mutation
resulted in variable severity and pleiotropy, both in family members and
in unrelated sporadic cases.

.0012
PITUITARY ADENOMA, ACTH-SECRETING, SOMATIC
GNAS, GLN227HIS

In a series of 32 corticotroph adenomas of the pituitary (219090),
Williamson et al. (1995) found 2 with somatic mutations in the GNAS1
gene at codon 227. One had a Q227R (139320.0010) substitution, and the
other had a mutation resulting in a gln227-to-his (Q227H) substitution.
The latter patient was a 35-year-old male who presented with severe
Cushing syndrome complicated by psychosis.

.0013
PITUITARY TUMOR, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING, SOMATIC
POLYOSTOTIC FIBROUS DYSPLASIA, SOMATIC, MOSAIC, INCLUDED;;
ACTH-INDEPENDENT MACRONODULAR ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
GNAS, ARG201SER

In a series of growth hormone-secreting pituitary tumors (102200)
derived from 21 Korean acromegalic patients, Yang et al. (1996) found
that 1 tumor had a somatic C-to-A transversion in the GNAS1 gene,
resulting in an arg201-to-ser (R201S) substitution.

Candeliere et al. (1997) reported a patient with polyostotic fibrous
dysplasia (see 174800) in whom the R201S mutation was identified in the
somatic mosaic state.

Fragoso et al. (2003) identified a heterozygous somatic R201S mutation
in adrenal tissue from a patient with ACTH-independent macronodular
adrenal hyperplasia (219080).

.0014
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, SER250ARG

In a patient with PHP Ia (103580), Warner et al. (1997) identified a
ser250-to-arg (S250R) mutation in the GNAS1 gene. Both GNAS1 activity
and expression were decreased by approximately 50% in erythrocyte
membranes from the affected patient. In vitro functional expression
studies suggested that substitution or deletion of residue 250 may alter
guanine nucleotide binding, which could lead to thermolability and
impaired function.

.0015
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA, INCLUDED
GNAS, 38-BP DEL, EX1/IVS1 BOUNDARY

In affected members of a large kindred in which 2 mothers had
pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP; 612463) and their 6 offspring had
PHP Ia (103580), Fischer et al. (1998) identified a 38-bp deletion at
the exon 1/intron 1 boundary of the GNAS gene. The deletion was
predicted to eliminate the splice donor site of exon 1. Some of the
patients had increased basal serum levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH; see 188540) and/or excessive TSH responses to
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH; 613879). The pseudo-PHP patients had
decreased Gs activity, but normal urinary cAMP responses to PTH, normal
TSH levels and responses to TRH, and normal serum levels of calcium and
PTH.

.0016
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
GNAS, ARG258TRP

In a 24-year-old man with PPHP (612463), Warner et al. (1998) identified
a de novo arg258-to-trp (R258W) mutation in the GNAS1 gene. Arg258 is a
nonconserved residue adjacent to a highly conserved glutamic acid
residue, glu259, that is important for contact between switch 2 and 3 in
the activated state. Warner et al. (1998) presented evidence that
substitution of arg258 led to defective GDP binding, resulting in
increased thermolability and decreased activation. Developmental delay,
brachycephaly, and decreased muscle tone were noted by age 10 months.
Throughout childhood he was small for his age and stocky in appearance.
By 6 years, he developed learning disabilities as well as impulsive and
aggressive behavior. Brachydactyly involved the distal phalanx of the
thumb and the fourth metacarpals bilaterally. He also had intracranial
calcifications in the globus pallidus. There was no evidence of
resistance to parathyroid hormone or thyrotropin.

.0017
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
GNAS, ARG258ALA

Warner et al. (1998) identified a heterozygous arg258-to-ala (R258A)
substitution in the GNAS gene as a cause of PPHP (612463). The
substitution led to increased GDP release and impaired receptor-mediated
activation. Based on the crystal structure of GNAS1, arg258 interacts
with residue gln170 within the helical domain. Loss of this interaction
was predicted to open the cleft between the GTPase and helical domain,
resulting in more rapid GDP release, as observed in the arg258 variants.
Warner et al. (1998) suggested that interactions between arg258 and the
helical domain are important for receptor-mediated activation. This same
codon was affected in another patient with AHO (R258W; 139320.0016).

Warner and Weinstein (1999) showed that a gln170-to-ala substitution
(Q170A; 139320.0018) also leads to increased GDP release but does not
affect receptor-mediated activation. Therefore, interactions between
arg258 and gln170 are important for maintaining guanine nucleotide
binding but are not important for activation by receptor. Warner and
Weinstein (1999) also showed that the R258A mutation, but not Q170A, was
associated with a markedly elevated intrinsic GTPase rate, resulting in
more rapid inactivation. Arg258, through mutual interactions with glu50,
may constrain arg201, a residue critical for catalyzing GTP hydrolysis.
Disruption of the interaction between arg258 and glu50 may relieve this
constraint and allow arg201 to interact more efficiently with the
gamma-phosphate of GTP in the transition state. This is an example of a
mutation in a heterotrimeric G protein that increases the intrinsic
GTPase activity and provides another mechanism by which receptor
signaling can be impaired by G protein mutations.

.0018
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
GNAS, GLN170ALA

See 139320.0017 and Warner and Weinstein (1999).

.0019
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA, WITH TESTOTOXICOSIS
GNAS, ALA366SER

Iiri et al. (1994) studied 2 unrelated boys who had a paradoxical
combination of PHP Ia (103580) and testotoxicosis (176410). Both boys
were found to have an ala366-to-ser (A366S) mutation in the GNAS1 gene.
PHP Ia is marked by resistance to hormones acting through cyclic AMP
(parathyroid hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone) as well as a 50%
decrease in erythrocyte Gs activity in this heterozygous disorder. In
contrast, testotoxicosis is a form of precocious puberty in which the
Leydig cells secrete testosterone in the absence of luteinizing hormone,
often due to constitutive activation of the luteinizing hormone receptor
and (indirectly) of Gs. Iiri et al. (1994) demonstrated that this A366S
mutation constitutively activated adenylyl cyclase in vitro, causing
hormone-independent cAMP accumulation when expressed in cultured cells,
and accounting for the testotoxicosis phenotype. Although the mutant
form was quite stable at testis temperature, it was rapidly degraded at
37 degrees centigrade, explaining the PHP Ia phenotype caused by loss of
Gs activity. In vitro experiments indicated that accelerated release of
GDP caused both the constitutive activity and the thermolability of the
A366S mutant form.

.0020
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, ARG231HIS

In patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580), Farfel et
al. (1996) identified an arg231-to-his (R231H) mutation in the GNAS1
gene which impaired the ability of the mutant protein to mediate
hormonal stimulation of cAMP accumulation in transiently transfected
cells.

Iiri et al. (1997) reported biochemical analyses showing that an
activation defect caused by the R231H mutation was paradoxically
intensified by hormonal and other stimuli. By substituting histidine for
a conserved arginine residue, the mutation removed an internal salt
bridge (to a conserved glutamate) that normally acts as an
intramolecular hasp to maintain tight binding of the gamma-phosphate of
GTP. The activation defect became prominent only under conditions that
destabilized binding of guanine nucleotide (receptor stimulation) or
impaired the ability of alpha-s to bind the gamma-phosphate of GTP
(e.g., cholera toxin). Although GDP release is usually the rate-limiting
step in nucleotide exchange, the biochemical phenotype of this mutant
GNAS indicated that efficient G protein activation by receptors and
other stimuli depends on the ability of the protein to clasp tightly the
GTP molecule that enters the binding site. The 3 affected patients in
the family carrying the R231H mutation of the GNAS1 gene showed classic
clinical features of PHP Ia, including Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy, but Gs activities in their erythrocytes were nearly
normal (ranging between 60% and 90% of normal). Erythrocyte membranes of
most PHP I patients contain only 50% of the normal complement of Gs
activity and these patients are classified as PHP Ia, indicating that
the affected patients carry inactivating mutations in the GNAS1 gene. In
contrast, the PHP Ib phenotype is found in a smaller number of PHP I
patients whose erythrocytes contain normal (or nearly normal) Gs
activity. The R231H patients showed that results of the erythrocyte Gs
assay can lead to an incorrect inference with respect to the genetic
basis of the disease. PHP I patients with apparently normal or nearly
normal erythrocyte Gs activities merit careful investigation, especially
when they display the classic clinical phenotype, including Albright
hereditary osteodystrophy. Although such patients may inherit mutations
in genes other than GNAS1, their GNAS1 gene may encode mutant proteins
with instructive qualitative defects, including impairment of
conformational change, subcellular localization, or interaction with
other proteins, including receptors, effectors, and regulators of G
protein signaling proteins.

Ishikawa et al. (2001) found the R231H mutation in exon 9 of the GNAS1
gene in a Japanese patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia.

.0021
MCCUNE-ALBRIGHT SYNDROME, SOMATIC, MOSAIC
GNAS, ARG201GLY

Riminucci et al. (1999) studied a patient who had been diagnosed with
McCune-Albright syndrome (174800) at the age of 8 years. In an affected
parietal bone sample, the authors identified a heterozygous C-to-G
transversion in the GNAS1 gene, resulting in an arg201-to-gly (R201G)
amino acid substitution. The boy presented with precocious puberty,
facial deformities, and typical cafe-au-lait spots with a 'coast of
Maine' profile. Extensive involvement of the cranial vault was apparent
on x-ray. At the age of 13, acromegalic bone changes and growth hormone
oversecretion were detected. With the exception of a single case of
polyostotic fibrous dysplasia in which an R201S mutation was found
(139320.0013), R201C (139320.0008) and R201H (139320.0009) had been the
mutations consistently found in McCune-Albright syndrome patients and in
non-MAS cases of fibrous dysplasia of bone. Thus, of the predicted
missense mutations of codon 201, only R201P and R201L remained
undetected (although R201L had been observed by Gorelov et al. (1995) in
isolated, non-MAS endocrine tumors).

.0022
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, 2-BP DEL, GA, EXON 8

In affected members of a kindred with either PHP1A (103580) or PPHP
(612463), Yu et al. (1999) identified a 2-bp deletion in exon 8 of the
GNAS gene, resulting in premature termination of the protein. Serial
measurements of thyroid function in members of kindred 1 indicated that
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH; see 188540) resistance progressed with
age and became more evident after the first year of life in those with
PHP1A.

.0023
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, 2-BP DEL, CT, EXON 4

In affected members of a kindred with either PHP1A (103580) or PPHP
(612463), Yu et al. (1999) identified a heterozygous 2-bp deletion (CT)
in exon 4 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination codon.

.0024
OSSEOUS HETEROPLASIA, PROGRESSIVE
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA, INCLUDED
GNAS, 1-BP DEL, 348C

In 2 patients with progressive osseous heteroplasia (166350) from
different families, Shore et al. (2002) identified a 1-bp deletion
(348delC) in exon 5 of the GNAS1 gene.

Shapira et al. (1995) had described the same mutation in a patient with
pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580).

.0025
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, 1-BP DEL, C, EXON 1

In an Italian patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580),
Mantovani et al. (2000) detected a heterozygous 1-bp deletion (C) within
codon 38 in exon 1 of the GNAS1 gene, resulting in a premature stop
codon at position 57. This mutation was also found in the patient's
mother, who had pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (612463).

.0026
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, 2-BP DEL, TG, EXON 11

In an Italian patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580),
Mantovani et al. (2000) detected a heterozygous 2-bp deletion (TG)
within codon 287 in exon 11 of the GNAS1 gene, resulting in a premature
stop codon at position 298. The mutation was also found in the patient's
mother, who presented the same clinical and biologic features.

.0027
OSSEOUS HETEROPLASIA, PROGRESSIVE
GNAS, 2-BP DEL, 860TG

In an unusual case of progressive osseous heteroplasia (166350)
involving the face in an 8-year-old Albanian girl, Faust et al. (2003)
identified a heterozygous 2-bp deletion in the GNAS1 gene, 860-861delTG,
resulting in a frameshift of 11 amino acids followed by a premature stop
codon.

.0029
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA, INCLUDED
GNAS1, PRO115LEU

In a woman with PPHP (612463), Ahrens et al. (2001) identified a C-to-T
transition in exon 5 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a pro115-to-leu
(P115L) substitution. Her son, who had the same mutation, had PHP Ia
(103580).

.0030
REMOVED FROM DATABASE
.0031
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IB
GNAS, 4.7-KB DEL

In 2 unrelated kindreds with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ib (603233),
Bastepe et al. (2005) identified a 4.7-kb deletion in the GNAS locus
that removed the differentially methylated region (DMR) of the GNAS gene
encompassing the NESP55 region and exons 3 and 4 of the GNAS antisense
transcript (GNASAS; 610540.0001). When inherited from a female, the
deletion abolished all maternal GNAS imprints and derepressed maternally
silenced transcripts, suggesting that the deleted region contains a
cis-acting element that controls imprinting of the maternal GNAS allele.

.0032
RECLASSIFIED - VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
GNAS, 36-BP DUP, ALA138ASP, PRO161ARG

This variant, formerly titled PROLONGED BLEEDING TIME, BRACHYDACTYLY,
AND MENTAL RETARDATION, has been reclassified because delineation of the
phenotype and the contribution of the variant to the phenotype are
unclear.

In 3 patients from 2 families with markedly prolonged bleeding time
accompanied by neurologic problems, brachydactyly, and a variable degree
of mental retardation, Freson et al. (2001) identified a paternally
inherited functional polymorphism in XL exon 1, consisting of a 36-bp
duplication and 2 nucleotide substitutions, resulting in changes of
codon 138 from alanine to aspartic acid (A138D) and of codon 161 from
proline to arginine (P161R), that was associated with Gs hyperfunction
in platelets, leading to an increased trauma-related bleeding tendency.

Freson et al. (2003) described 8 additional patients who inherited the
same XLAS polymorphism paternally and who showed Gs hyperfunction in
their platelets and fibroblasts. The clinical features were variable: 3
patients resembled those reported by Freson et al. (2001) and had
psychomotor retardation, disturbed behavior, facial dysmorphism, feeding
or gastrointestinal motility problems, and abnormal bleeding following
trauma, whereas 5 patients had growth deficiency and no clinical
bleeding abnormalities. All carriers also had an elongated ALEX protein
as a consequence of the paternally inherited insertion. The paternally
inherited double XLAS/ALEX functional polymorphism was also associated
with elevated platelet membrane Gs-alpha protein levels. The in vitro
interaction between the 2 elongated XLAS and ALEX proteins was markedly
reduced. Freson et al. (2003) suggested that in contrast to the strong
interaction between the 2 wildtype proteins, the defective association
may result in unimpeded receptor-stimulated activation of XLAS.

.0033
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IB
GNAS, 3-BP DEL, CAT, EXON 13

In 3 brothers with a clinical diagnosis of pseudohypoparathyroidism type
Ib (603233) and their clinically unaffected mother and maternal
grandfather, Wu et al. (2001) identified heterozygosity for a 3-bp
deletion (CAT) in exon 13 of the GNAS gene, resulting in the deletion of
ile382. Biochemical studies showed normal erythrocyte Gs activity, but
decreased cAMP response to PTH infusion. When expressed in vitro, mutant
Gs-alpha was unable to interact with PTHR1 (168468) but showed normal
coupling to other coexpressed heptahelical receptors. The mutation was
not found in the unaffected father and sister or in 30 unrelated
controls. Wu et al. (2001) noted that the absence of PTH resistance in
the mother and maternal grandfather who carried the same mutation was
consistent with models of paternal imprinting of the GNAS gene.

.0034
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, 1-BP INS, A, EXON 3

In a 10-year-old girl with brachymetacarpia, mental retardation,
normocalcemic pseudohypoparathyroidism, and hypothyroidism (103580),
Thiele et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous insertion of an adenosine
in exon 3 of the GNAS gene, altering codon 85 and leading to a
frameshift and a stop at codon 87 in exon 4. Molecular studies of cDNA
from blood RNA demonstrated normal, biallelic expression of Gs-alpha-S
transcripts, whereas expression of Gs-alpha-L transcripts from the
maternal allele was reduced. Both the reduced activity and the mutation
were also found in the mother and the affected younger brother. Thiele
et al. (2007) noted that this was the first reported pathogenic mutation
in exon 3 of the GNAS gene. The mutation is associated with
pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia due to selective deficiency of
Gs-alpha-L and a partial reduction of Gs-alpha activity.

.0035
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, 12-BP INS, NT1107

In a brother and sister with a PHP Ia phenotype (103580), who also had
neonatal diarrhea and pancreatic insufficiency, Aldred et al. (2000)
identified heterozygosity for a 12-bp insertion in exon 13 of the GNAS1
gene, resulting in an in-frame ala-val-asp-thr (AVDT) repeat at codon
366 within the beta-6/alpha-5 loop. The mutation was not found in 2
unaffected sibs and was also not detected in the lymphocyte DNA of
either of the clinically unaffected parents. Haplotype analysis
confirmed germline mosaicism and indicated that the mutation was
maternal in origin.

By biochemical and intact cell analysis of the mutant Gs-alpha
containing the AVDT repeat within its GDP/GTP binding site, Makita et
al. (2007) demonstrated that the mutant protein was unstable but
constitutively active as a result of rapid GDP release and reduced GTP
hydrolysis, suggesting that instability and paradoxical inactivation by
receptor stimulation results in a loss of function. Gs-alpha-AVDT was
located primarily in the cytosol except in rat and mouse small intestine
epithelial cells, where it was found predominantly in the membrane, with
adenylyl cyclase present and constitutive increases in cAMP accumulation
occurring in parallel. Makita et al. (2007) suggested that the PHP Ia
phenotype results from the instability of the Gs-alpha-AVDT mutant and
that the accompanying neonatal diarrhea may result from its enhanced
constitutive activity in the intestine.

.0036
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IC
GNAS, TYR391TER

In a girl with PHP type Ic (612462), Linglart et al. (2002) identified a
heterozygous mutation in exon 13 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a
tyr319-to-ter (Y391X) substitution only 4 amino acids before the
wildtype stop codon. She had hormone resistance with features of
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy and decreased cAMP response to PTH
infusion, but normal erythrocyte Gs activity. The findings suggested
that the mutation interfered somehow with receptor-mediated activation.
Linglart et al. (2002) noted that the C terminus is required for
receptor coupling, and postulated that the Y391X mutation in this
patient interrupted receptor coupling, leading to hormone resistance.
The findings showed the limits of the erythrocyte Gs bioassay used in
the study.

.0037
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IB
GNAS, METHYLATION CHANGES, PATERNAL EPIGENOTYPE

Mariot et al. (2008) studied a girl with obvious Albright osteodystrophy
features, PTH resistance, and normal G-alpha-s bioactivity in red blood
cells (PHP Ib, 603233), yet no loss-of-function mutation in the GNAS
coding sequence. Methylation analysis of the 4 GNAS differentially
methylated regions, i.e., NESP, AS, XL, and A/B, revealed broad
methylation changes at all of these regions, leading to a paternal
epigenotype on both alleles. There was a dramatic decrease of
methylation at exon A/B, XL, and AS promoter regions and therefore
likely biallelic expression of A/B, XL, and AS transcripts. The NESP
region appeared fully methylated in the patient, which was predicted to
result in a dramatic decrease in NESP-specific transcripts. The cause of
the imprinting defect was unknown. Mariot et al. (2008) concluded that:
(1) the decreased expression of G-alpha-s due to GNAS epimutations is
not restricted to the renal tubule but may affect nonimprinted tissues
like bone; and (2) PHP-1b is a heterogeneous disorder that should lead
to the study of GNAS epigenotype in patients with PHP and no mutation in
GNAS exons 1 through 13, regardless of their physical features. They
suggested that Albright osteodystrophy, or at least brachymetacarpia and
obesity, are not specific symptoms of PHP-1a (103580).

.0038
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IC
GNAS, LEU388ARG

In a 12-year-old boy with PHP IC (612462), Thiele et al. (2011)
identified a heterozygous 1163T-G transversion in exon 13 of the GNAS
gene, resulting in a leu388-to-arg (L388R) substitution in a conserved
residue in the alpha-5-helix in the C-terminal part of the protein
directly involved in the contact of Gs-alpha to the G protein-coupled
receptor. The patient had characteristic features of AHO, including
round face, brachymetacarpia, short stature, obesity, and mental
retardation. Serum PTH and TSH were increased and calcium was low. His
mother, who also carried the mutation, had short stature and
brachymetacarpia, but no evidence of hormone resistance. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that the L388R mutant protein
caused complete absence of receptor-mediated cAMP production, with
normal receptor-independent cAMP production. The findings indicated
normal Gs-alpha activity, but a selective defect in Gs-alpha-receptor
coupling functions.

.0039
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IC
GNAS, GLU392TER

In 13-year-old dizygotic twins and an unrelated 5-year-old girl with PHP
IC (612462), Thiele et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous 1174G-T
transversion in exon 13 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a glu392-to-ter
(E392X) substitution in the alpha-5-helix in the C terminus. The
patients had characteristic features of AHO, including round face,
brachymetacarpia, short stature, and obesity. Serum PTH and TSH were
increased and calcium was low. Both mothers, who also carried the
mutation, had short stature, round face, and/or brachymetacarpia, but no
evidence of hormone resistance. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that the mutant protein caused complete absence of
receptor-mediated cAMP production, with normal receptor-independent cAMP
production. The findings indicated normal Gs-alpha activity, but a
selective defect in Gs-alpha-receptor coupling functions.

.0040
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IC
GNAS, GLU392LYS

In an 11-month-old girl with PHP IC (612462), Thiele et al. (2011)
identified a heterozygous 1174G-A transition in exon 13 of the GNAS
gene, resulting in a glu392-to-lys (E392K) substitution in the
alpha-5-helix in the C terminus. The patient had characteristic features
of AHO, including round face, brachymetacarpia, and short stature. Serum
PTH and TSH were increased, but calcium was normal. Her mother, who also
carried the mutation, had short stature and brachymetacarpia, but no
evidence of hormone resistance. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that the mutant protein caused a decrease in receptor-mediated
cAMP production, with normal receptor-independent cAMP production. The
findings indicated normal Gs-alpha activity, but a selective defect in
Gs-alpha-receptor coupling functions.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Carter et al. (1987); Harris et al. (1985); Kozasa et al. (1988);
Lin et al. (1992); Mattera et al. (1989); Shenker et al. (1995); Shenker
et al. (1993)
REFERENCE 1. Adams, G. B.; Alley, I. R.; Chung, U.; Chabner, K. T.; Jeanson,
N. T.; Lo Celso, C.; Marsters, E. S.; Chen, M.; Weinstein, L. S.;
Lin, C. P.; Kronenberg, H. M.; Scadden, D. T.: Haematopoietic stem
cells depend on G-alphaS-mediated signalling to engraft bone marrow. Nature 459:
103-107, 2009.

2. Adegbite, N. S.; Xu, M.; Kaplan, F. S.; Shore, E. M.; Pignolo,
R. J.: Diagnostic and mutational spectrum of progressive osseous
heteroplasia (POH) and other forms of GNAS-based heterotopic ossification. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 146A: 1788-1796, 2008.

3. Ahmed, S. F.; Barr, D. G. D.; Bonthron, D. T.: GNAS1 mutations
and progressive osseous heteroplasia. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 346:
1669-1670, 2002.

4. Ahmed, S. F.; Dixon, P. H.; Bonthron, D. T.; Stirling, H. F.; Barr,
D. G. D.; Kelnar, C. J. H.; Thakker, R. V.: GNAS1 mutational analysis
in pseudohypoparathyroidism. Clin. Endocr. 49: 525-531, 1998.

5. Ahrens, W.; Hiort, O.; Staedt, P.; Kirschner, T.; Marschke, C.;
Kruse, K.: Analysis of the GNAS1 gene in Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 4630-4634, 2001.

6. Aldred, M. A.; Aftimos, S.; Hall, C.; Waters, K. S.; Thakker, R.
V.; Trembath, R. C.; Brueton, L.: Constitutional deletion of chromosome
20q in two patients affected with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 113: 167-172, 2002.

7. Aldred, M. A.; Bagshaw, R. J.; MacDermot, K.; Casson, D.; Murch,
S. H.; Walker-Smith, J. A.; Trembath, R. C.: Germline mosaicism for
a GNAS1 mutation and Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. (Letter) J.
Med. Genet. 37: e35, 2000. Note: Electronic Letter.

8. Aldred, M. A.; Trembath, R. C.: Activating and inactivating mutations
in the human GNAS1 gene. Hum. Mutat. 16: 183-189, 2000.

9. Ashley, P. L.; Ellison, J.; Sullivan, K. A.; Bourne, H. R.; Cox,
D. R.: Chromosomal assignment of the murine Gi and Gs genes. (Abstract) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 41: A155 only, 1987.

10. Auburn, S.; Diakite, M.; Fry, A. E.; Ghansah, A.; Campino, S.;
Richardson, A.; Jallow, M.; Sisay-Joof, F.; Pinder, M.; Griffiths,
M. J.; Peshu, N.; Williams, T. N.; and 9 others: Association of
the GNAS locus with severe malaria. Hum. Genet. 124: 499-506, 2008.

11. Bastepe, M; Pincus, J. E.; Sugimoto, T.; Tojo, K. Kanatani, M.;
Azuma, Y.; Kruse, K.; Rosenbloom, A. L.; Koshiyama, H.; Juppner, H.
: Positional dissociation between the genetic mutation responsible
for pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ib and the associated methylation
defect at exon A/B: evidence for a long-range regulatory element within
the imprinted GNAS1 locus. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1231-1241, 2001.

12. Bastepe, M.; Frohlich, L. F.; Hendy, G. N.; Indridason, O. S.;
Josse, R. G.; Koshiyama, H.; Korkko, J.; Nakamoto, J. M.; Rosenbloom,
A. L.; Slyper, A. H.; Sugimoto, T.; Tsatsoulis, A.; Crawford, J. D.;
Juppner, H.: Autosomal dominant pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ib
is associated with a heterozygous microdeletion that likely disrupts
a putative imprinting control element of GNAS. J. Clin. Invest. 112:
1255-1263, 2003.

13. Bastepe, M.; Frohlich, L. F.; Linglart, A.; Abu-Zahra, H. S.;
Tojo, K.; Ward, L. M.; Juppner, H.: Deletion of the NESP55 differentially
methylated region causes loss of maternal GNAS imprints and pseudohypoparathyroidism
type Ib. Nature Genet. 37: 25-27, 2005.

14. Bastepe, M.; Juppner, H.: GNAS locus and pseudohypoparathyroidism. Hormone
Res. 63: 65-74, 2005.

15. Bastepe, M.; Juppner, H.: GNAS1 mutations and progressive osseous
heteroplasia. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 346: 1671 only, 2002.

16. Bastepe, M.; Lane, A. H.; Juppner, H.: Parental uniparental isodisomy
of chromosome 20q--and the resulting changes in GNAS1 methylation--as
a plausible cause of pseudohypoparathyroidism. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68:
1283-1289, 2001.

17. Bastepe, M.; Weinstein, L. S.; Ogata, N.; Kawaguchi, H.; Juppner,
H.; Kronenberg, H. M.; Chung, U.: Stimulatory G protein directly
regulates hypertrophic differentiation of growth plate cartilage in
vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 14794-14799, 2004.

18. Bianco, P.; Riminucci, M.; Majolagbe, A.; Kuznetsov, S. A.; Collins,
M. T.; Mankani, M. H.; Corsi, A.; Bone, H. G.; Wientroub, S.; Spiegel,
A. M.; Fisher, L. W.; Robey, P. G.: Mutations of the GNAS1 gene,
stromal cell dysfunction, and osteomalacic changes in non-McCune-Albright
fibrous dysplasia of bone. J. Bone Miner. Res. 15: 120-128, 2000.

19. Billestrup, N.; Swanson, L. W.; Vale, W.: Growth hormone-releasing
factor stimulates proliferation of somatotrophs in vitro. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 83: 6854-6857, 1986.

20. Blatt, C.; Eversole-Cire, P.; Cohn, V. H.; Zollman, S.; Fournier,
R. E. K.; Mohandas, L. T.; Nesbitt, M.; Lugo, T.; Jones, D. T.; Reed,
R. R.; Weiner, L. P.; Sparkes, R. S.; Simon, M. I.: Chromosomal localization
of genes encoding guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunits in mouse
and human. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 7642-7646, 1988.

21. Bray, P.; Carter, A.; Simons, C.; Guo, V.; Puckett, C.; Kamholz,
J.; Spiegel, A.; Nirenberg, M.: Human cDNA clones for four species
of G-alpha-s signal transduction protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83:
8893-8897, 1986.

22. Campbell, R.; Gosden, C. M.; Bonthron, D. T.: Parental origin
of transcription from the human GNAS1 gene. J. Med. Genet. 31: 607-614,
1994.

23. Candeliere, G. A.; Glorieux, F. H.; Prud'Homme, J.; St.-Arnaud,
R.: Increased expression of the c-fos proto-oncogene in bone from
patients with fibrous dysplasia. New Eng. J. Med. 332: 1546-1551,
1995.

24. Candeliere, G. A.; Roughley, P. J.; Glorieux, F. H.: Polymerase
chain reaction-based technique for the selective enrichment and analysis
of mosaic arg201 mutations in G alpha s from patients with fibrous
dysplasia of bone. Bone 21: 201-206, 1997.

25. Carter, A.; Bardin, C.; Collins, R.; Simons, C.; Bray, P.; Spiegel,
A.: Reduced expression of multiple forms of the alpha subunit of
the stimulatory GTP-binding protein in pseudohypoparathyroidism type
Ia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 7266-7269, 1987.

26. Cattanach, B. M.; Kirk, M.: Differential activity of maternally
and paternally derived chromosome regions in mice. Nature 315: 496-498,
1985.

27. Chen, M.; Gavrilova, O.; Liu, J.; Xie, T.; Deng, C.; Nguyen, A.
T.; Nackers, L. M.; Lorenzo, J.; Shen, L.; Weinstein, L. S.: Alternative
Gnas gene products have opposite effects on glucose and lipid metabolism. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 7386-7391, 2005.

28. Chung, K. Y.; Rasmussen, S. G. F.; Liu, T.; Li, S.; DeVree, B.
T.; Chae, P. S.; Calinski, D.; Kobilka, B. K.; Woods, V. L., Jr.;
Sunahara, R. K.: Conformational changes in the G protein Gs induced
by the beta-2 adrenergic receptor. Nature 477: 611-615, 2011.

29. Collins, M. T.; Sarlis, N. J.; Merino, M. J.; Monroe, J.; Crawford,
S. E.; Krakoff, J. A.; Guthrie, L. C.; Bonat, S.; Robey, P. G.; Shenker,
A.: Thyroid carcinoma in the McCune-Albright syndrome: contributory
role of activating G(s)-alpha mutations. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
4413-4417, 2003.

30. Coombes, C.; Arnaud, P.; Gordon, E.; Dean, W.; Coar, E. A.; Williamson,
C. M.; Feil, R.; Peters, J.; Kelsey, G.: Epigenetic properties and
identification of an imprint mark in the Nesp-Gnasxl domain of the
mouse Gnas imprinted locus. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23: 5475-5488, 2003.

31. DeChiara, T.; Robertson, E. J.; Efstratiadis, A.: Parental imprinting
of the mouse insulin-like growth factor II gene. Cell 64: 849-859,
1991.

32. Donis-Keller, H.; Green, P.; Helms, C.; Cartinhour, S.; Weiffenbach,
B.; Stephens, K.; Keith, T. P.; Bowden, D. W.; Smith, D. R.; Lander,
E. S.; Botstein, D.; Akots, G.; and 21 others: A genetic linkage
map of the human genome. Cell 51: 319-337, 1987.

33. Farfel, Z.; Iiri, T.; Shapira, H.; Roitman, A.; Mouallem, M.;
Bourne, H. R.: Pseudohypoparathyroidism, a novel mutation in the
beta/gamma- contact region of Gs-alpha impairs receptor stimulation. J.
Biol. Chem. 271: 19653-19655, 1996.

34. Faust, R. A.; Shore, E. M.; Stevens, C. E.; Xu, M.; Shah, S.;
Phillips, C. D.; Kaplan, F. S.: Progressive osseous heteroplasia
in the face of a child. Am. J. Med. Genet. 118A: 71-75, 2003.

35. Fischer, J. A.; Egert, F.; Werder, E.; Born, W.: An inherited
mutation associated with functional deficiency of the alpha-subunit
of the guanine nucleotide-binding protein Gs in pseudo- and pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 935-938, 1998.

36. Fragoso, M. C. B. V.; Domenice, S.; Latronico, A. C.; Martin,
R. M.; Pereira, M. A. A.; Zerbini, M. C. N.; Lucon, A. M.; Mendonca,
B. B.: Cushing's syndrome secondary to adrenocorticotropin-independent
macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia due to activating mutations
of GNAS1 gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 2147-2151, 2003.

37. Fragoso, M. C. B. V.; Latronico, A. C.; Carvalho, F. M.; Zerbini,
M. C. N.; Marcondes, J. A. M.; Araujo, L. M. B.; Lando, V. S.; Frazzatto,
E. T.; Mendonca, B. B.; Villares, S. M. F.: Activating mutation of
the stimulatory G protein (gsp) as a putative cause of ovarian and
testicular human stromal Leydig cell tumors. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83:
2074-2078, 1998.

38. Freson, K.; Hoylaerts, M. F.; Jaeken, J.; Eyssen, M.; Arnout,
J.; Vermylen, J.; Van Geet, C.: Genetic variation of the extra-large
stimulatory G protein alpha-subunit leads to Gs hyperfunction in platelets
and is a risk factor for bleeding. Thromb. Haemost. 86: 733-738,
2001.

39. Freson, K.; Jaeken, J.; Van Helvoirt, M.; de Zegher, F.; Wittevrongel,
C.; Thys, C.; Hoylaerts, M. F.; Vermylen, J.; Van Geet, C.: Functional
polymorphisms in the paternally expressed XL-alpha-s and its cofactor
ALEX decrease their mutual interaction and enhance receptor-mediated
cAMP formation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 1121-1130, 2003.

40. Freson, K.; Thys, C.; Wittevrongel, C.; Proesmans, W.; Hoylaerts,
M. F.; Vermylen, J.; Van Geet, C.: Pseudohypoparathyroidism type
Ib with disturbed imprinting in the GNAS1 cluster and Gs-alpha deficiency
in platelets. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2741-2750, 2002.

41. Gejman, P. V.; Weinstein, L. S.; Martinez, M.; Spiegel, A. M.;
Cao, Q.; Hsieh, W.-T.; Hoehe, M. R.; Gershon, E. S.: Genetic mapping
of the Gs-alpha subunit gene (GNAS1) to the distal long arm of chromosome
20 using a polymorphism detected by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Genomics 9:
782-783, 1991.

42. Genevieve, D.; Sanlaville, D.; Faivre, L.; Kottler, M.-L.; Jambou,
M.; Gosset, P.; Boustani-Samara, D.; Pinto, G.; Ozilou, C.; Abeguile,
G.; Munnich, A.; Romana, S.; Raoul, O.; Cormier-Daire, V.; Vekemans,
M.: Paternal deletion of the GNAS imprinted locus (including Gnasxl)
in two girls presenting with severe pre- and post-natal growth retardation
and intractable feeding difficulties. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 13:
1033-1039, 2005.

43. Gopal Rao, V. V. N.; Schnittger, S.; Hansmann, I.: G protein
Gs-alpha (GNAS1), the probable candidate gene for Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy, is assigned to human chromosome 20q12-q13.2. Genomics 10:
257-261, 1991.

44. Gorelov, V. N.; Dumon, K.; Barteneva, N. S.; Palm, D.; Roher,
H.-D.; Goretzki, P. E.: Overexpression of Gs-alpha subunit in thyroid
tumors bearing a mutated Gs-alpha gene. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 121:
219-224, 1995.

45. Hall, J. G.: Genomic imprinting: review and relevance to human
diseases. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 46: 857-873, 1990.

46. Happle, R.: The McCune-Albright syndrome: a lethal gene surviving
by mosaicism. Clin. Genet. 29: 321-324, 1986.

47. Harris, B. A.; Robishaw, J. D.; Mumby, S. M.; Gilman, A. G.:
Molecular cloning of complementary DNA for the alpha subunit of the
G protein that stimulates adenylate cyclase. Science 229: 1274-1277,
1985.

48. Harrison, T.; Samuel, B. U.; Akompong, T.; Hamm, H.; Mohandas,
N.; Lomasney, J. W.; Haldar, K.: Erythrocyte G protein-coupled receptor
signaling in malarial infection. Science 301: 1734-1736, 2003.

49. Hayward, B. E.; Barlier, A.; Korbonits, M.; Grossman, A. B.; Jacquet,
P.; Enjalbert, A.; Bonthron, D. T.: Imprinting of the G(s)-alpha
gene GNAS1 in the pathogenesis of acromegaly. J. Clin. Invest. 107:
R31-R36, 2001.

50. Hayward, B. E.; Bonthron, D. T.: An imprinted antisense transcript
at the human GNAS1 locus. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 835-841, 2000.

51. Hayward, B. E.; Kamiya, M.; Strain, L.; Moran, V.; Campbell, R.;
Hayashizaki, Y.; Bonthron, D. T.: The human GNAS1 gene is imprinted
and encodes distinct paternally and biallelically expressed G proteins. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 10038-10043, 1998.

52. Hayward, B. E.; Moran, V.; Strain, L.; Bonthron, D. T.: Bidirectional
imprinting of a single gene: GNAS1 encodes maternally, paternally,
and biallelically derived proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 15475-15480,
1998.

53. Hurowitz, E. H.; Melnyk, J. M.; Chen, Y.-J.; Kouros-Mehr, H.;
Simon, M. I.; Shizuya, H.: Genomic characterization of the human
heterotrimeric G protein alpha, beta, and gamma subunit genes. DNA
Res. 7: 111-120, 2000.

54. Iiri, T.; Farfel, Z.; Bourne, H. R.: Conditional activation defect
of a human Gs-alpha mutant. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 5656-5661,
1997.

55. Iiri, T.; Herzmark, P.; Nakamoto, J. M.; Van Dop, C.; Bourne,
H. R.: Rapid GDP release from Gs-alpha in patients with gain and
loss of endocrine function. Nature 371: 164-168, 1994.

56. Ishikawa, Y.; Bianchi, C.; Nadal-Ginard, B.; Homcy, C. J.: Alternative
promoter and 5-prime exon generate a novel Gs-alpha mRNA. J. Biol.
Chem. 265: 8458-8462, 1990.

57. Ishikawa, Y.; Tajima, T.; Nakae, J.; Nagashima, T.; Satoh, K.;
Okuhara, K.; Fujieda, K.: Two mutations of the Gs-alpha gene in two
Japanese patients with sporadic pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia. J.
Hum. Genet. 46: 426-430, 2001.

58. Jia, H.; Hingorani, A. D.; Sharma, P.; Hopper, R.; Dickerson,
C.; Trutwein, D.; Lloyd, D. D.; Brown, M. J.: Association of the
G(s)-alpha gene with essential hypertension and response to beta-blockade. Hypertension 34:
8-14, 1999.

59. Kalfa, N.; Ecochard, A.; Patte, C.; Duvillard, P.; Audran, F.;
Pienkowski, C.; Thibaud, E.; Brauner, R.; Lecointre, C.; Plantaz,
D.; Guedj, A.-M.; Paris, F.; Baldet, P.; Lumbroso, S.; Sultan, C.
: Activating mutations of the stimulatory G protein in juvenile ovarian
granulosa cell tumors: a new prognostic factor? J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 91: 1842-1847, 2006.

60. Kehlenbach, R. H.; Matthey, J.; Huttner, W. B.: XL alpha S is
a new type of G protein. Nature 372: 804-809, 1994. Note: Erratum:
Nature 375: 253 only, 1995.

61. Kikyo, N.; Williamson, C. M.; John, R. M.; Barton, S. C.; Beechey,
C. V.; Ball, S. T.; Cattanach, B. M.; Surani, M. A.; Peters, J.:
Genetic and functional analysis of neuronatin in mice with maternal
or paternal duplication of distal chr. 2. Dev. Biol. 190: 66-77,
1997.

62. Kinard, R. E.; Walton, J. E.; Buckwalter, J. A.: Pseudohypoparathyroidism. Arch.
Intern. Med. 139: 204-207, 1979.

63. Klemke, M.; Kehlenbach, R. H.; Huttner, W. B.: Two overlapping
reading frames in a single exon encode interacting proteins--a novel
way of gene usage. EMBO J. 20: 3849-3860, 2001.

64. Kozasa, T.; Itoh, H.; Tsukamoto, T.; Kaziro, Y.: Isolation and
characterization of the human Gs-alpha gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85:
2081-2085, 1988.

65. Landis, C. A.; Masters, S. B.; Spada, A.; Pace, A. M.; Bourne,
H. R.; Vallar, L.: GTPase inhibiting mutations activate the alpha
chain of Gs and stimulate adenylyl cyclase in human pituitary tumours. Nature 340:
692-696, 1989.

66. Levine, M. A.; Deily, J. R.: Identification of multiple mutations
in the gene encoding the alpha subunit of Gs in patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism
type IA. (Abstract) J. Bone Miner. Res. 5: S142 only, 1990.

67. Levine, M. A.; Modi, W. S.; O'Brien, S. J.: Mapping of the gene
encoding the alpha subunit of the stimulatory G protein of adenylyl
cyclase (GNAS1) to 20q13.2-q13.3 in human by in situ hybridization. Genomics 11:
478-479, 1991.

68. Levine, M. A.; Vechio, J. D.: Personal Communication. Baltimore,
Md.  8/1/1990.

69. Li, T.; Vu, T. H.; Ulaner, G. A.; Yang, Y.; Hu, J.-F.; Hoffman,
A. R.: Activating and silencing histone modifications form independent
allelic switch regions in the imprinted Gnas gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
741-750, 2004.

70. Lin, C. K.; Hakakha, M. J.; Nakamoto, J. M.; Englund, A. T.; Brickman,
A. S.; Scott, M. L.; Van Dop, C.: Prevalence of three mutations in
the Gs-alpha gene among 24 families with pseudohypoparathyroidism
type Ia. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 189: 343-349, 1992.

71. Linglart, A.; Carel, J. C.; Garabedian, M.; Le, T.; Mallet, E.;
Kottler, M. L.: GNAS1 lesions in pseudohypoparathyroidism Ia and
Ic: genotype phenotype relationship and evidence of the maternal transmission
of the hormonal resistance. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 189-197,
2002.

72. Linglart, A.; Gensure, R. C.; Olney, R. C.; Juppner, H.; Bastepe,
M.: A novel STX16 deletion in autosomal dominant pseudohypoparathyroidism
type Ib redefines the boundaries of a cis-acting imprinting control
element of GNAS. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 76: 804-814, 2005. Note: Erratum:
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81: 196 only, 2007.

73. Liu, J.; Erlichman, B.; Weinstein, L. S.: The stimulatory G protein
alpha-subunit Gs-alpha is imprinted in human thyroid glands: implications
for thyroid function in pseudohypoparathyroidism types 1A and 1B. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 4336-4341, 2003.

74. Liu, J.; Litman, D.; Rosenberg, M. J.; Yu, S.; Biesecker, L. G.;
Weinstein, L. S.: A GNAS1 imprinting defect in pseudohypoparathyroidism
type IB. J. Clin. Invest. 106: 1167-1174, 2000.

75. Liu, J.; Nealon, J. G.; Weinstein, L. S.: Distinct patterns of
abnormal GNAS imprinting in familial and sporadic pseudohypoparathyroidism
type IB. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 95-102, 2005.

76. Lumbroso, S.; Paris, F.; Sultan, C.: Activating Gs-alpha mutations:
analysis of 113 patients with signs of McCune-Albright syndrome--a
European collaborative study. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 2107-2113,
2004.

77. Makita, N.; Sato, J.; Rondard, P.; Fukamachi, H.; Yuasa, Y.; Aldred,
M. A.; Hashimoto, M.; Fujita, T.; Iiri, T.: Human G(S-alpha) mutant
causes pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia/neonatal diarrhea, a potential
cell-specific role of the palmitoylation cycle. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 104: 17424-17429, 2007.

78. Mantovani, G.; Ballare, E.; Giammona, E.; Beck-Peccoz, P.; Spada,
A.: The Gs-alpha gene: predominant maternal origin of transcription
in human thyroid gland and gonads. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 4736-4740,
2002.

79. Mantovani, G.; Bondioni, S.; Lania, A. G.; Corbetta, S.; de Sanctis,
L.; Cappa, M.; Di Battista, E.; Chanson, P.; Beck-Peccoz, P.; Spada,
A.: Parental origin of Gs-alpha mutations in the McCune-Albright
syndrome and in isolated endocrine tumors. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89:
3007-3009, 2004.

80. Mantovani, G.; Bondioni, S.; Locatelli, M.; Pedroni, C.; Lania,
A. G.; Ferrante, E.; Filopanti, M.; Beck-Peccoz, P.; Spada, A.: Biallelic
expression of the Gs-alpha gene in human bone and adipose tissue. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 6316-6319, 2004.

81. Mantovani, G.; Romoli, R.; Weber, G.; Brunelli, V.; De Menis,
E.; Beccio, S.; Beck-Peccoz, P.; Spada, A.: Mutational analysis of
GNAS1 in patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism: identification of
two novel mutations. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 4243-4248, 2000.

82. Mariot, V.; Maupetit-Mehouas, S.; Sinding, C.; Kottler, M.-L.;
Linglart, A.: A maternal epimutation of GNAS leads to Albright osteodystrophy
and parathyroid hormone resistance. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 93:
661-665, 2008.

83. Mattera, R.; Graziano, M. P.; Yatani, A.; Zhou, Z.; Graf, R.;
Codina, J.; Birnbaumer, L.; Gilman, A. G.; Brown, A. M.: Splice variants
of the alpha subunit of the G protein G(8) activate both adenylyl
cyclase and calcium channels. Science 243: 804-807, 1989.

84. Mehlmann, L. M.; Jones, T. L. Z.; Jaffe, L. A.: Meiotic arrest
in the mouse follicle maintained by a GS protein in the oocyte. Science 297:
1343-1345, 2002.

85. Morison, I. M.; Ramsay, J. P.; Spencer, H. G.: A census of mammalian
imprinting. Trends Genet. 21: 457-465, 2005.

86. Patten, J. L.; Johns, D. R.; Valle, D.; Eil, C.; Gruppuso, P.
A.; Steele, G.; Smallwood, P. M.; Levine, M. A.: Mutation in the
gene encoding the stimulatory G protein of adenylate cyclase in Albright's
hereditary osteodystrophy. New Eng. J. Med. 322: 1412-1419, 1990.

87. Patten, J. L.; Smallwood, P. M.; Eil, C.; Johns, D. R.; Valle,
D.; Steel, G.; Levine, M. A.: An initiator codon mutation in the
gene encoding the alpha subunit of Gs in pseudohypoparathyroidism
type IA (PHP IA). (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 45 (suppl.): A212
only, 1989.

88. Peters, J.; Beechey, C. V.; Ball, S. T.; Evans, E. P.: Mapping
studies of the distal imprinting region of mouse chromosome 2. Genet.
Res. 63: 169-174, 1994.

89. Plagge, A.; Gordon, E.; Dean, W.; Boiani, R.; Cinti, S.; Peters,
J.; Kelsey, G.: The imprinted signaling protein XL-alpha-s is required
for postnatal adaptation to feeding. Nature Genet. 36: 818-826,
2004.

90. Rasmussen, S. G. F.; DeVree, B. T.; Zou, Y.; Kruse, A. C.; Chung,
K. Y.; Kobilka, T. S.; Thian, F. S.; Chae, P. S.; Pardon, E.; Calinski,
D.; Mathiesen, J. M.; Shah, S. T. A.; Lyons, J. A.; Caffrey, M.; Gellman,
S. H.; Steyaert, J.; Skiniotis, G.; Weis, W. I.; Sunahara, R. K.;
Kobilka, B. K.: Crystal structure of the beta-2 adrenergic receptor-Gs
protein complex. Nature 477: 549-555, 2011.

91. Rickard, S. J.; Wilson, L. C.: Analysis of GNAS1 and overlapping
transcripts identifies the parental origin of mutations in patients
with sporadic Albright hereditary osteodystrophy and reveals a model
system in which to observe the effects of splicing mutations on translated
and untranslated messenger RNA. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72: 961-974,
2003.

92. Riminucci, M.; Fisher, L. W.; Majolagbe, A.; Corsi, A.; Lala,
R.; de Sanctis, C.; Robey, P. G.; Bianco, P.: A novel GNAS1 mutation,
R201G, in McCune-Albright syndrome. J. Bone Miner. Res. 14: 1987-1989,
1999.

93. Sakamoto, A.; Liu, J.; Greene, A.; Chen, M.; Weinstein, L. S.
: Tissue-specific imprinting of the G protein Gs is associated with
tissue-specific differences in histone methylation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
819-828, 2004.

94. Schwindinger, W. F.; Francomano, C. A.; Levine, M. A.: Identification
of a mutation in the gene encoding the alpha subunit of the stimulatory
G-protein of adenylyl cyclase in McCune-Albright syndrome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 5152-5156, 1992.

95. Shapira, H.; Mouallem, M.; Shapiro, M. S.; Weisman, Y.; Farfel,
Z.: Pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia: two new heterozygous frameshift
mutations in exons 5 and 10 of the Gs alpha gene. Human Genet. 97:
73-75, 1995.

96. Shenker, A.; Chanson, P.; Weinstein, L. S.; Chi, P.; Spiegel,
A. M.; Lomri, A.; Marie, P. J.: Osteoblastic cells derived from isolated
lesions of fibrous dysplasia contain activating somatic mutations
of the G(s)-alpha gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1675-1676, 1995.

97. Shenker, A.; Weinstein, L. S.; Moran, A.; Pescovitz, O. H.; Charest,
N. J.; Boney, C. M.; Van Wyk, J. J.; Merino, M. J.; Feuillan, P. P.;
Spiegel, A. M.: Severe endocrine and nonendocrine manifestations
of the McCune-Albright syndrome associated with activating mutations
of stimulatory G protein Gs. J. Pediat. 123: 509-518, 1993.

98. Shore, E. M.; Ahn, J.; Jan de Beur, S.; Li, M.; Xu, M.; Gardiner,
R. J. M.; Zasloff, M. A.; Whyte, M. P.; Levine, M. A.; Kaplan, F.
S.: Paternally inherited inactivating mutations of the GNAS1 gene
in progressive osseous heteroplasia. New Eng. J. Med. 346: 99-106,
2002. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 346: 1678 only, 2002.

99. Shore, E. M.; Kaplan, F. S.; Levine, M. A.: GNAS1 mutations and
progressive osseous heteroplasia. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 346:
1670-1671, 2002.

100. Sparkes, R. S.; Cohn, V. H.; Mohandas, T.; Zollman, S.; Cire-Eversole,
P.; Amatruda, T. T.; Reed, R. R.; Lochrie, M. A.; Simon, M. I.: Mapping
of genes encoding the subunits of guanine nucleotide-binding protein
(G-proteins) in humans. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46: 696
only, 1987.

101. Thiele, S.; de Sanctis, L.; Werner, R.; Grotzinger, J.; Aydin,
C.; Juppner, H.; Bastepe, M.; Hiort, O.: Functional characterization
of GNAS mutations found in patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism
type Ic defines a new subgroup of pseudohypoparathyroidism affecting
selectively Gs-alpha-receptor interaction. Hum. Mutat. 32: 653-660,
2011.

102. Thiele, S.; Werner, R.; Ahrens, W.; Hoppe, U.; Marschke, C.;
Staedt, P.; Hiort, O.: A disruptive mutation in exon 3 of the GNAS
gene with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, normocalcemic pseudohypoparathyroidism,
and selective long transcript variant Gs-alpha-L deficiency. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 92: 1764-1768, 2007.

103. Vallar, L.; Spada, A.; Giannattasio, G.: Altered Gs and adenylate
cyclase activity in human GH-secreting pituitary adenomas. Nature 330:
566-568, 1987.

104. Warner, D. R.; Gejman, P. V.; Collins, R. M.; Weinstein, L. S.
: A novel mutation adjacent to the switch III domain of Gs-alpha in
a patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism. Molec. Endocr. 11: 1718-1727,
1997.

105. Warner, D. R.; Weinstein, L. S.: A mutation in the heterotrimeric
stimulatory guanine nucleotide binding protein alpha-subunit with
impaired receptor-mediated activation because of elevated GTPase activity. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 4268-4272, 1999.

106. Warner, D. R.; Weng, G.; Yu, S.; Matalon, R.; Weinstein, L. S.
: A novel mutation in the switch 3 region of Gs-alpha in a patient
with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy impairs GDP binding and receptor
activation. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 23976-23983, 1998.

107. Weinstein, L. S.; Gejman, P. V.; de Mazancourt, P.; American,
N.; Spiegel, A. M.: A heterozygous 4-bp deletion mutation in the
Gs-alpha gene (GNAS1) in a patient with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. Genomics 13:
1319-1321, 1992.

108. Weinstein, L. S.; Gejman, P. V.; Friedman, E.; Kadowaki, T.;
Collins, R. M.; Gershon, E. S.; Spiegel, A. M.: Mutations of the
Gs alpha-subunit gene in Albright hereditary osteodystrophy detected
by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87:
8287-8290, 1990.

109. Weinstein, L. S.; Shenker, A.; Gejman, P. V.; Merino, M. J.;
Friedman, E.; Spiegel, A. M.: Activating mutations of the stimulatory
G protein in the McCune-Albright syndrome. New Eng. J. Med. 325:
1688-1695, 1991.

110. Weiss, U.; Ischia, R.; Eder, S.; Lovisetti-Scamihorn, P.; Bauer,
R.; Fischer-Colbrie, R.: Neuroendocrine secretory protein 55 (NESP55):
alternative splicing onto transcripts of the GNAS gene and posttranslational
processing of a maternally expressed protein. Neuroendocrinology 71:
177-186, 2000.

111. Werling, U.; Schorle, H.: Transcription factor gene AP-2-gamma
essential for early murine development. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 3149-3156,
2002.

112. Williamson, C. M.; Ball, S. T.; Nottingham, W. T.; Skinner, J.
A.; Plagge, A.; Turner, M. D.; Powles, N.; Hough, T.; Papworth, D.;
Fraser, W. D.; Maconochie, M.; Peters, J.: A cis-acting control region
is required exclusively for the tissue-specific imprinting of Gnas. Nature
Genet. 36: 894-899, 2004.

113. Williamson, C. M.; Turner, M. D.; Ball, S. T.; Nottingham, W.
T.; Glenister, P.; Fray, M.; Tymowska-Lalanne, Z.; Plagge, A.; Powles-Glover,
N.; Kelsey, G.; Maconochie, M.; Peters, J.: Identification of an
imprinting control region affecting the expression of all transcripts
in the Gnas cluster. Nature Genet. 38: 350-355, 2006.

114. Williamson, E. A.; Ince, P. G.; Harrison, D.; Kendall-Taylor,
P.; Harris, P. E.: G-protein mutations in human pituitary adrenocorticotrophic
hormone-secreting adenomas. Europ. J. Clin. Invest. 25: 128-131,
1995.

115. Wu, W.-I.; Schwindinger, W. F.; Aparicio, L. F.; Levine, M. A.
: Selective resistance to parathyroid hormone caused by a novel uncoupling
mutation in the carboxyl terminus of G-alpha(s). J. Biol. Chem. 276:
165-171, 2001.

116. Yang, I.; Park, S.; Ryu, M.; Woo, J.; Kim, S.; Kim, J.; Kim,
Y.; Choi, Y.: Characteristics of gsp-positive growth hormone-secreting
pituitary tumors in Korean acromegalic patients. Europ. J. Endocr. 134:
720-726, 1996.

117. Yu, D.; Yu, S.; Schuster, V.; Kruse, K.; Clericuzio, C. L.; Weinstein,
L. S.: Identification of two novel deletion mutations within the
Gs-alpha gene (GNAS1) in Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 84: 3254-3259, 1999.

118. Yu, S.; Yu, D.; Lee, E.; Eckhaus, M.; Lee, R.; Corria, Z.; Accili,
D.; Westphal, H.; Weinstein, L. S.: Variable and tissue-specific
hormone resistance in heterotrimeric Gs protein alpha-subunit (Gs-alpha)
knockout mice is due to tissue-specific imprinting of the Gs-alpha
gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8715-8720, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/25/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/7/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/30/2011
Nara Sobreira - updated: 6/17/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/19/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/24/2009
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 1/13/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/6/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/8/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/6/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/26/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/19/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/31/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/17/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/4/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/8/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/17/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/6/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/5/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/21/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/6/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/27/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/20/2005
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 8/16/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/2/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/14/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/8/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/16/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/23/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/22/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/20/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/13/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/10/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/26/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 8/27/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/9/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/16/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/10/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/8/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/18/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/10/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/12/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/26/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/20/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/15/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/19/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/10/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/20/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/15/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/8/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/22/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/9/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/7/2000
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/16/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/20/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/15/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/29/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/16/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/4/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/26/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/1/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/3/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/19/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/13/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/1/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/30/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/8/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/11/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/17/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/13/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 6/24/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/8/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 09/30/2013
ckniffin: 9/25/2013
carol: 9/5/2013
terry: 3/14/2013
mgross: 2/5/2013
terry: 11/29/2012
alopez: 3/9/2012
terry: 3/7/2012
carol: 12/1/2011
ckniffin: 11/30/2011
carol: 4/20/2011
joanna: 10/12/2009
carol: 6/18/2009
terry: 6/17/2009
alopez: 6/4/2009
terry: 5/19/2009
alopez: 4/24/2009
wwang: 3/24/2009
mgross: 1/13/2009
mgross: 1/8/2009
terry: 1/6/2009
carol: 12/19/2008
ckniffin: 12/15/2008
wwang: 10/15/2008
terry: 10/8/2008
carol: 5/6/2008
carol: 3/26/2008
carol: 2/28/2008
ckniffin: 2/28/2008
ckniffin: 2/19/2008
alopez: 11/5/2007
terry: 10/31/2007
alopez: 7/17/2007
carol: 6/29/2007
wwang: 12/4/2006
wwang: 11/8/2006
mgross: 11/1/2006
carol: 10/18/2006
ckniffin: 10/17/2006
alopez: 10/6/2006
alopez: 10/5/2006
alopez: 8/21/2006
alopez: 3/9/2006
terry: 3/6/2006
alopez: 10/27/2005
carol: 10/5/2005
wwang: 10/3/2005
terry: 9/27/2005
ckniffin: 9/20/2005
wwang: 9/2/2005
carol: 8/16/2005
joanna: 8/16/2005
wwang: 8/11/2005
wwang: 8/2/2005
alopez: 7/14/2005
alopez: 7/8/2005
carol: 6/24/2005
joanna: 5/10/2005
tkritzer: 3/22/2005
tkritzer: 3/18/2005
carol: 3/18/2005
carol: 3/16/2005
tkritzer: 3/8/2005
terry: 2/23/2005
mgross: 11/23/2004
mgross: 11/22/2004
tkritzer: 8/23/2004
terry: 8/20/2004
terry: 2/20/2004
cwells: 2/13/2004
carol: 11/24/2003
carol: 11/17/2003
tkritzer: 11/14/2003
terry: 11/11/2003
ckniffin: 11/10/2003
alopez: 9/29/2003
terry: 9/26/2003
carol: 8/27/2003
ckniffin: 8/25/2003
tkritzer: 8/15/2003
terry: 8/11/2003
carol: 7/11/2003
tkritzer: 7/9/2003
carol: 7/9/2003
terry: 6/11/2003
tkritzer: 5/13/2003
terry: 5/9/2003
tkritzer: 5/5/2003
tkritzer: 4/25/2003
terry: 4/16/2003
carol: 4/16/2003
tkritzer: 4/15/2003
terry: 4/10/2003
terry: 4/8/2003
alopez: 10/23/2002
terry: 10/18/2002
alopez: 10/10/2002
cwells: 8/9/2002
cwells: 6/25/2002
terry: 6/12/2002
terry: 4/4/2002
alopez: 3/26/2002
alopez: 3/20/2002
terry: 3/6/2002
carol: 1/31/2002
mcapotos: 1/18/2002
terry: 1/15/2002
carol: 12/19/2001
cwells: 11/20/2001
cwells: 11/19/2001
joanna: 10/3/2001
mcapotos: 8/10/2001
cwells: 8/10/2001
cwells: 7/20/2001
cwells: 6/27/2001
terry: 6/15/2001
alopez: 3/22/2001
terry: 11/8/2000
terry: 10/6/2000
mcapotos: 10/3/2000
mcapotos: 9/22/2000
mgross: 8/9/2000
carol: 7/19/2000
mcapotos: 6/28/2000
mcapotos: 6/23/2000
terry: 6/7/2000
alopez: 5/16/2000
mcapotos: 5/11/2000
mcapotos: 5/4/2000
terry: 4/20/2000
carol: 4/7/2000
mcapotos: 4/6/2000
mcapotos: 4/5/2000
terry: 3/15/2000
carol: 2/8/2000
carol: 2/2/2000
mcapotos: 2/2/2000
carol: 2/1/2000
mcapotos: 1/31/2000
terry: 1/14/2000
alopez: 11/30/1999
alopez: 11/29/1999
alopez: 11/23/1999
mgross: 10/11/1999
carol: 9/30/1999
jlewis: 9/28/1999
terry: 9/15/1999
terry: 8/16/1999
mgross: 5/11/1999
mgross: 5/7/1999
terry: 5/4/1999
alopez: 3/26/1999
carol: 3/22/1999
terry: 3/1/1999
carol: 2/12/1999
terry: 2/3/1999
carol: 10/29/1998
terry: 10/19/1998
carol: 10/18/1998
terry: 10/13/1998
dkim: 10/12/1998
carol: 10/9/1998
carol: 10/1/1998
terry: 9/30/1998
carol: 9/14/1998
terry: 9/8/1998
terry: 8/21/1998
carol: 8/14/1998
terry: 8/11/1998
terry: 7/20/1998
terry: 7/17/1998
terry: 7/14/1998
terry: 7/13/1998
carol: 7/2/1998
dholmes: 6/29/1998
dholmes: 6/24/1998
alopez: 12/22/1997
alopez: 12/10/1997
alopez: 12/3/1997
mark: 9/3/1997
mark: 7/8/1997
mark: 6/14/1997
terry: 5/30/1997
mark: 12/17/1996
jenny: 12/13/1996
terry: 11/19/1996
mark: 9/22/1995
pfoster: 9/7/1994
davew: 6/28/1994
carol: 6/2/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994
carol: 12/13/1993

603429	TITLE *603429 ATP-BINDING CASSETTE, SUBFAMILY F, MEMBER 1; ABCF1
;;ATP-BINDING CASSETTE 50; ABC50
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The family of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) proteins (e.g., 601691) is
extensive and is responsible for the transport of a variety of molecules
across biologic membranes. Using differential display PCR to identify
genes that are modulated by TNF-alpha (191160) in synoviocytes, Richard
et al. (1998) isolated a cDNA encoding a novel member of the ABC family,
named ABC50. The deduced 807-amino acid ABC50 protein has 2 ABC
transporter family signature motifs, 2 ATP/GTP-binding site A motifs,
and 3 nuclear localization patterns. The authors found that ABC50 also
contains a signature sequence that is characteristic of yeast cluster IV
ABC proteins. Unlike most previously reported family members, ABC50 does
not contain a transmembrane domain. Northern blot analysis demonstrated
ubiquitous expression of a 3.7-kb ABC50 transcript in human tissues.
TNF-alpha stimulation increased the expression of the ABC50 mRNA in
cultured synoviocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Berezikov et al. (2007) determined that intron 13 of the ABCF1 gene
contains the microRNA MIRN877 (611619).

MAPPING

Richard et al. (1998) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to map the
human ABC50 gene to chromosome 6p21.33.

REFERENCE 1. Berezikov, E.; Chung, W.-J.; Willis, J.; Cuppen, E.; Lai, E. C.
: Mammalian mirtron genes. Molec. Cell 28: 328-336, 2007.

2. Richard, M.; Drouin, R.; Beaulieu, A. D.: ABC50, a novel human
ATP-binding cassette protein found in tumor necrosis factor-alpha-stimulated
synoviocytes. Genomics 53: 137-145, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/26/2007

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 1/13/1999

EDITED mgross: 11/26/2007
carol: 11/11/1999
psherman: 1/14/1999

610715	TITLE *610715 HEMOGEN; HEMGN
;;ERYTHROID DIFFERENTIATION-ASSOCIATED GENE; EDAG
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Yang et al. (2001) cloned mouse Hemgn and, by database analysis and
RT-PCR of a K562 myelogenous leukemia cell line cDNA library, they
cloned human HEMGN, or EDAG. The deduced mouse and human proteins
contain 503 and 484 amino acids, respectively, and share 43% identity. A
coiled-coil region and bipartite nuclear localization signal are
conserved in the N termini of both proteins. Northern blot analysis
detected a major 2.4-kb transcript and a minor 1.8-kb transcript in
adult human bone marrow and fetal liver. RT-PCR detected high HEMGN
expression in untreated and mitogen-treated K562 cells, adult bone
marrow, and CD34 (142230)-positive progenitor cells. Lower expression
was detected in a child thymus and in a histiocyte lymphoma cell line,
but no expression was detected in cultured T cells, monocytes, and
nonhematopoietic cell lines examined. Northern blot analysis of adult
mice detected Hemgn expression in bone marrow and spleen, but not in
thymus and nonhematopoietic tissues. In situ hybridization of adult
spleen revealed Hemgn in red, but not white, pulp. In situ hybridization
of day-8.5 mouse embryos showed Hemgn in blood islands of the yolk sac
and in circulating primitive blood cells. Hemgn was expressed in
developing hepatic primordia at day 10.5 and, from day 11.5, it was
expressed exclusively in fetal liver. FACS analysis showed Hemgn in
hematopoietic precursors of adult mice, but not in mature blood cells.
Transfected COS-7 cells expressed mouse Hemgn in nuclei, but not in
nucleoli or cytoplasm.

By database analysis, Yang et al. (2003) identified a testis-specific
HEMGN splice variant that they called HEMGN-t. HEMGN-t and the
hematopoietic variant, HEMGN-h, differ in their 5-prime and 3-prime
UTRs, but they have the same coding region. Northern blot analysis
detected a 1.9-kb HEMGN-t transcript in mouse and human testis. In situ
hybridization of adult mouse testis revealed Hemgn only in round
spermatids. Northern blot analysis showed that Hemgn expression in
prepubertal mouse testis correlated with the appearance of postmeiotic
cells, and Hemgn expression was weak in testis of mice lacking
postmeiotic germ cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Li et al. (2004) found that downregulation of EDAG in K562 cells
resulted in inhibition of growth and colony formation, as well as
enhancement of sensitivity to erythroid differentiation induced by
hemin. Overexpression of EDAG in a human myeloid leukemia cell line
significantly blocked expression of the monocyte/macrophage
differentiation marker CD11b (ITGAM; 120980) after mitogen exposure.
Moreover, overexpression of EDAG in a mouse pro-B cell line prolonged
survival and increased expression of Myc (190080), Bcl2 (151430), and
Bclxl (600039) in the absence of interleukin-3 (IL3; 147740). EDAG
enhanced the transcriptional activity of NF-kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011),
and high DNA-binding activity of Nfkb was sustained in EDAG-expressing
pre-B cells after IL3 withdrawal. In these cells, inhibition of Nfkb
activity promoted cell death. Li et al. (2004) concluded that EDAG
regulates proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic cells and
resists cell death through activation of NFKB.

By examining expression of a mouse Hemgn promoter-reporter plasmid in
transgenic mice, Yang et al. (2006) showed that the promoter was
transcriptionally active in embryonic yolk sac, fetal liver, and adult
spleen, bone marrow, brain, thymus, lung, and testis. Mutagenesis
analysis showed that 2 highly conserved GATA boxes were critical for
promoter activity. GATA1 (305371), but not GATA2 (137295), bound to the
GATA-binding sites and transactivated the Hemgn promoter in a
dose-dependent manner. Yang et al. (2006) also found that levels of
HEMGN and GATA1 transcripts closely correlated in human primary acute
myeloid leukemia specimens.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yang et al. (2001) determined that the HEMGN gene spans 18 kb and
contains 5 exons. The first exon is specific to the HEMGN-t variant and
encodes an alternative 5-prime UTR. The donor-acceptor sequence used for
this alternative first exon is GC-AC instead of the canonical GT-AG. The
last exon of HEMGN contains 2 alternative noncanonical polyadenylation
sequences used by the HEMGN-t and HEMGN-h variants. Two promoters in the
5-prime region direct transcription of HEMGN-t and HEMGN-h and are
separated by 6 kb.

Yang et al. (2006) found that the region upstream of the HEMGN coding
sequence contains several evolutionarily conserved sequences and that
the proximal promoter contains a TATA box and 2 conserved GATA boxes.

MAPPING

By FISH, Yang et al. (2003) mapped the HEMGN gene to chromosome 9q22.
They mapped the mouse Hemgn gene to chromosome 4A5-B2.

REFERENCE 1. Li, C. Y.; Zhan, Y. Q.; Xu, C. W.; Xu, W. X.; Wang, S. Y.; Lv,
J.; Zhou, Y.; Yue, P. B.; Chen, B.; Yang, X. M.: EDAG regulates the
proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic cells and resists
cell apoptosis through the activation of nuclear factor-kappa-B. Cell
Death Diff. 11: 1299-1308, 2004.

2. Yang, L. V.; Heng, H. H.; Wan, J.; Southwood, C. M.; Gow, A.; Li,
L.: Alternative promoters and polyadenylation regulate tissue-specific
expression of hemogen isoforms during hematopoiesis and spermatogenesis. Dev.
Dyn. 228: 606-616, 2003.

3. Yang, L. V.; Nicholson, R. H.; Kaplan, J.; Galy, A.; Li, L.: Hemogen
is a novel nuclear factor specifically expressed in mouse hematopoietic
development and its human homologue EDAG maps to chromosome 9q22,
a region containing breakpoints of hematological neoplasms. Mech.
Dev. 104: 105-111, 2001.

4. Yang, L. V.; Wan, J.; Ge, Y.; Fu, Z.; Kim, S. Y.; Fujiwara, Y.;
Taub, J. W.; Matherly, L. H.; Eliason, J.; Li, L.: The GATA site-dependent
hemogen promoter is transcriptionally regulated by GATA1 in hematopoietic
and leukemia cells. Leukemia 20: 417-425, 2006.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/23/2007

EDITED mgross: 01/23/2007

603234	TITLE *603234 ATP-BINDING CASSETTE, SUBFAMILY C, MEMBER 6; ABCC6
;;ANTHRACYCLINE RESISTANCE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; ARA;;
MULTIDRUG RESISTANCE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 6; MRP6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ABCC6 belongs to the multidrug resistance-associated protein (MRP)
subfamily of ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transmembrane transporters. MRPs
are involved in drug resistance, particularly in association with cancer
chemotherapy. Mutations in the ABCC6 gene cause pseudoxanthoma elasticum
(PXE; see 264800), a heritable connective tissue disorder characterized
by calcification of elastic fibers in skin, arteries, and retina (Bergen
et al., 2000; Le Saux et al., 2000; Ringpfeil et al., 2000).

CLONING

Multidrug resistance in cancer cells has been attributed to the
overexpression of certain membrane proteins, several of which are
members of the ATP-binding cassette (ABC) superfamily. Examples include
MRP (158343) and MDR1 (171050). Longhurst et al. (1996) screened an
E1000 leukemia cell cDNA library using an MRP probe. They cloned a novel
cDNA encoding a 453-amino acid polypeptide that was similar to the
C-terminal half of MRP. Whereas MRP contains 2 ABC domains and 12
transmembrane domains, the ARA protein contains 1 ABC domain and 5
transmembrane domains. Northern blot analysis showed that ARA was
expressed as a 2.2-kb mRNA in an E1000 leukemia cell line, but not in
the untransformed parental CEM cell line. Southern blot analysis
revealed that, like MRP, the ARA gene was amplified in the genomic DNA
of the E1000 cell line. The ABCC6 protein consists of 1,503 amino acids
with a molecular mass of 165 kD, is located in the plasma membrane, and
probably has 17 membrane-spanning helices grouped into 3 transmembrane
domains (Le Saux et al., 2000). The 4.5-kb ABCC6 mRNA is expressed in
several secretory tissues, but primarily in kidney and liver. By RT-PCR
analysis using RNA isolated from tissues frequently affected by PXE,
Bergen et al. (2000) detected expression of ABCC6 in retina, skin, and
vascular tissue, although the highest level of expression was in the
liver.

By Western blot analysis of transfected Chinese hamster ovary (CHO)
cells, Belinsky et al. (2002) found that MRP6 migrated at the predicted
molecular mass of about 152 kD and at 182 kD, which likely represents a
glycosylated form.

Sinko et al. (2003) found that human ABCC6, when expressed by retroviral
transduction in polarized mammalian cells (MDCKII), is exclusively
localized to the basolateral membrane. In contrast to the in vitro
translated protein, ABCC6 was glycosylated in MDCK cells. Limited
proteolysis of the fully glycosylated and underglycosylated forms,
followed by immunodetection with region-specific antibodies, indicated
that asn15, located in the extracellular N-terminal region of ABCC6, is
the only N-glycosylated site in the protein.

By in situ hybridization and immunohistochemical analysis, Beck et al.
(2005) detected ABCC6 mRNA and protein in a wide range of epithelial
cells of exocrine and endocrine tissues such as acinar cells in the
pancreas, mucosal cells of the intestine, and follicular epithelial
cells of the thyroid. Enteroendocrine G cells of the stomach showed
strong immunostaining. In addition, ABCC6 mRNA and protein were present
in most neurons of the brain, in alveolar macrophages in the lung, in
lymph node lymphocytes, in hepatocytes, and in keratinocytes and
epithelial cells of the ducts of sweat glands.

Using PCR, Matsuzaki et al. (2005) found that Abcc6 expression was
highest in mouse liver and lower in kidney and small intestine.
Second-round nested PCR revealed much weaker expression in brain,
tongue, stomach, and eye. Subcloning and sequencing of distinct PCR
products indicated that the 3-prime end is subject to aberrant splicing,
resulting in each case in a premature termination codon. PCR analysis of
cultured human cells revealed similar splice variations in the 3-prime
end resulting in the skipping of exons 24 and 30 in epidermal
keratinocytes, and exons 24, 26, and 28 in dermal fibroblasts. In
fibroblasts, a minor PCR product represented alternative splicing of
exon 7.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kool et al. (1999) determined that the human ABCC6 gene comprises 31
exons.

Ratajewski et al. (2008) found that the 5-prime upstream region of the
ABCC6 gene contains a major Alu element of over 4.5 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Belinsky and Kruh (1999) and Klein et al. (1999) suggested that ABCC6
function may be related to cellular detoxification rather than drug
resistance. Bergen et al. (2000) commented that the molecules presumably
transported by ABCC6 may be essential for extracellular matrix
deposition or turnover of connective tissue at specific sites in the
body. Given the high expression of ABCC6 in liver and kidney, ABCC6
substrates may be transported into the blood. A deficiency of specific
ABCC6 substrates may affect a range of connective tissue sites
throughout the body and specifically elastic fiber assembly.

By assaying membrane vesicles obtained from ABCC6-expressing insect
cells, Ilias et al. (2002) found ABCC6 specifically bound MgATP and
actively transported glutathione conjugates, including leukotriene-C4
and N-ethylmaleimide S-glutathione (NEM-GS), in an MgATP-dependent
manner. 17-Beta-estradiol-17-beta-D-glucuronide was a weak transport
substrate. The organic anions probenecid, benzbromarone, and
indomethacin specifically inhibited ABCC6-mediated NEM-GS transport, and
orthovanadate, a phosphotyrosine phosphatase inhibitor, completely
inhibited NEM-GS transport.

Using similar substrates, Belinsky et al. (2002) found that MRP6
expressed in CHO cell membranes could transport glutathione conjugates
but not glucuronate conjugates. Transfected cells also showed enhanced
resistance to several anticancer agents. The highest levels of
resistance were observed for the inhibitors of topoisomerase II (126430)
etoposide and teniposide, followed by the anthracyclines doxorubicin and
daunorubicin. MRP6-expressing CHO cells accumulated less etoposide
compared with control transfected cells, indicating that MRP6 functions
as a drug efflux pump.

Using a luciferase reporter gene construct, Jiang et al. (2006) examined
the 2.6-kb human ABCC6 promoter. An NF-kappa-B (see NFKB1, 164011)-like
sequence conferred strong expression in HepG2 hepatoma cells, but much
weaker expression in cell lines of other tissue origin. Injection of the
construct into mouse tail vein confirmed liver-specific expression.
Testing of selected cytokines revealed that TGF-beta (190180)
upregulated, while TNF-alpha (191160) and interferon-gamma (IFNG;
147570) downregulated, the promoter activity in HepG2 cells. The
responsiveness to TGF-beta resided primarily within an SP1 (189906)/SP3
(601804) binding site. The expression of the ABCC6 promoter was markedly
enhanced by SP1. Jiang et al. (2006) concluded that the expression of
ABCC6 can be modulated by proinflammatory cytokines.

Using the ABCC6 promoter region in reporter gene assays in the HepG2
hepatoma cell line, Ratajewski et al. (2006) showed that all-trans
retinoic acid caused significant induction of ABCC6 activity. They found
9-cis retinoic acid (9cRA), a specific RXR (see RXRA, 180245) receptor
agonist, induced the ABCC6 promoter in a concentration-dependent manner.
9cRA also induced the expression of endogenous ABCC6 in HepG2 cells. The
binding of RXR to the endogenous ABCC6 promoter was confirmed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments. Occupancy of the ABCC6
promoter by RXR was relatively high in unstimulated cells and increased
further in 9cRA-treated cells.

Using the ABCC6 reporter construct described by Ratajewski et al. (2006)
in a screen for ABCC6-regulating factors, Ratajewski et al. (2008) found
that GATA3 (131320) repressed ABCC6 activity, and that SP1, PLAG1
(603026), and PLAGL1 (603044) induced ABCC6 activity. They identified 2
putative PLAG-binding sites on the reverse strand of the ABCC6 proximal
promoter. Reporter gene assays, electrophoretic mobility shift assays,
and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that the more proximal
site was bound and activated by PLAG1 and PLAGL1. Furthermore,
overexpression of PLAG1 resulted in enhanced ABCC6 transcription in
transfected human embryonic kidney cells.

MAPPING

Kuss et al. (1998) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to map the
ARA gene to human chromosome 16p13.1. The gene order in this region is
telomere--MYH11(160745)--MRP--ARA--centromere. The MRP and ARA genes are
located within 9 kb of each other and are transcribed in opposite
directions. Both MRP and ARA are deleted in a subgroup of inv(16)
leukemias, and both are expressed in normal hematopoietic precursor
cells.

- Pseudogenes

Pulkkinen et al. (2001) identified 2 pseudogenes containing sequences
highly homologous to the 5-prime end of the ABCC6 gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum

Simultaneously and independently, Bergen et al. (2000), Le Saux et al.
(2000), and Ringpfeil et al. (2000) identified missense, nonsense, and
splice site mutations as well as deletions and insertions in the ABCC6
gene accounting for pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800). Mutations
appeared to represent autosomal recessive (Le Saux et al., 2000) and
autosomal dominant (177850) (Bergen et al., 2000) modes of inheritance,
and sporadic cases. By SSCP and heteroduplex analysis using genetic DNA
from a cohort of 17 unrelated PXE patients, Le Saux et al. (2000)
screened 109 exons within 5 PXE candidate genes in the chromosome
16p13.1 region for mutations. By screening the 31 exons of ABCC6 by
SSCP, Le Saux et al. (2000) identified 6 mutations that were responsible
for PXE in 10 of 17 patients. They identified a C-to-T substitution
within exon 24 at nucleotide 3421, resulting in an arg-to-stop
substitution at codon 1141 (R1141X; 603234.0001) in 6 unrelated families
with autosomal recessive PXE. Bergen et al. (2000) identified mutations
in ABCC6 causing autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive, and sporadic
PXE. Bergen et al. (2000) found the R114X mutation in 2 families with
autosomal dominant PXE. One patient had a large de novo deletion of
chromosome 16 (603234.0010). Ringpfeil et al. (2000) reported a total of
8 pathogenetic mutations in the ABCC6 gene in 8 kindreds with PXE. They
referred to the gene as MRP6 (multidrug resistance-associated
protein-6). Examination of clinically unaffected family members in 4
multiplex families identified heterozygous carriers, consistent with an
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern.

Le Saux et al. (2001) performed a mutation analysis of the ABCC6 gene in
122 unrelated patients with PXE, the largest cohort of patients studied
to that time. They characterized 36 mutations, 28 of which were novel.
Twenty-one were missense variants, 6 were small insertions or deletions,
5 were nonsense, 2 were alleles likely to result in aberrant mRNA
splicing, and 2 were large deletions involving ABCC6. Although most
mutations appeared to be unique variants, 2 disease-causing alleles
occurred frequently in apparently unrelated individuals. Arg1141 to ter
(R1141X; 603234.0001) was found in this patient cohort at a frequency of
18.8% and was preponderant in European patients. Deletion of nucleotides
23-29 (603234.0016) occurred at a frequency of 12.9% and was prevalent
in patients from the United States. Putative disease-causing mutations
were identified in approximately 64% of the 244 chromosomes studied, and
85.2% of the 122 patients were found to have at least 1 disease-causing
allele. The results suggested that a fraction of the undetected mutant
alleles could be either genomic rearrangements or mutations occurring in
noncoding regions of the ABCC6 gene. A cluster of disease-causing
variants was observed within exons encoding a large C-terminal
cytoplasmic loop and in the C-terminal nucleotide-binding domain.

While implementing a strategy to screen for PXE by complete mutation
analysis of the ABCC6 gene, Germain (2001) found evidence for the
existence of at least 1 pseudogene highly homologous to the 5-prime end
of ABCC6. Sequence variants in this ABCC6-like pseudogene could be
mistaken for mutations in the ABCC6 gene and consequently lead to
erroneous genotyping results in pedigrees affected with PXE.

Germain et al. (2001) identified a heterozygous missense mutation in
exon 7 of the ABCC6 gene in a female PXE patient whose parents were
second cousins. Despite complete scanning of the gene, no further
mutation was evident. A heterozygous profile was also found in the
proband's unaffected children. However, haplotype homozygosity was
confirmed at chromosome 16p13.1, using both extragenic microsatellites
and intragenic polymorphisms located 3-prime from the mutation, in
agreement with the known consanguinity in the family. Taken together,
the data indicated that PCR products of exon 7 of the ABCC6 gene were
amplified from more than 2 genomic copies. This supported the existence
of one or more ABCC6 pseudogenes highly homologous to the 5-prime end
(exons 1-9) of the ABCC6 gene.

Pulkkinen et al. (2001) identified 2 pseudogenes containing sequences
highly homologous to the 5-prime end of the ABCC6 gene. Nucleotide
differences in flanking introns between these 2 pseudogenes and ABCC6
allowed them to design allele-specific primers that eliminated the
amplification of both pseudogene sequences by PCR and provided reliable
amplification of ABCC6-specific sequences only. The use of
allele-specific PCR revealed 2 novel 5-prime-end PXE mutations.

In 59 unrelated Dutch patients with PXE, Hu et al. (2003) identified 17
different mutations, including 11 novel mutations, in the ABCC6 gene in
65 alleles. The R1141X mutation was by far the most common mutation,
identified in 19 (32.2%) patients; the second most common mutation,
which results in the deletion of exons 23-29 (603234.0014), was
identified in 11 (18.6%) patients. In 20 patients, only 1 mutation in 1
allele was detected. Combined with previous mutation data, Hu et al.
(2003) concluded that approximately 80% of the PXE mutations occur in
the cytoplasmic domains of the predicted ABCC6 protein, especially the 2
nucleotide-binding fold (NBF) domains (NBF1 and NBF2) and the eighth
cytoplasmic loop between the fifteenth and sixteenth transmembrane
regions.

Hu et al. (2004) described an efficient molecular diagnostic strategy
for ABCC6 in PXE. The 2 most frequent mutations, R1141X (603234.0001)
and deletion of exons 23 through 29 (603234.0016), as well as a core set
of mutations, were identified by restriction enzyme digestion and size
separation on agarose gels. In the remaining patient group in which only
1 or no mutant allele was found, the complete coding sequence was
analyzed using DHPLC. All variations found were confirmed by direct DNA
sequencing. Finally, Southern blot was used to investigate the potential
presence of small or large deletions. Twenty different mutations,
including 2 novel mutations in the ABCC6 gene, were identified in 80.3%
of the 76 patients, and 58.6% of the 152 ABCC6 alleles analyzed.

Chassaing et al. (2005) commented that mutations had been identified in
PXE in most of the 31 ABCC6 exons and that no correlation between the
nature or the location of the mutations and phenotype severity had been
established.

Trip et al. (2002), Van Soest et al. (1997), and Bacchelli et al. (1999)
emphasized the carriage of a sole ABCC6 mutation as a cardiovascular
risk factor. Sherer et al. (2001) described limited phenotypic
expression of PXE in parents of affected offspring.

Miksch et al. (2005) performed a mutation screen in ABCC6 using
haplotype analysis in conjunction with direct sequencing to achieve a
mutation detection rate of 97%. Their mutational analysis confirmed an
earlier haplotype-based analysis and conclusions regarding a
recessive-only mode of inheritance in PXE (Cai et al., 2000) through the
identification of 2 mutated alleles in all individuals with PXE who
appear in either consecutive or alternating generations of the same
family. Their study demonstrated that the full phenotypic expression of
the disorder requires 2 defective allelic copies of ABCC6 and that
pseudodominance is the mode of transmission in presumed autosomal
dominant families (i.e., the second parental disease allele 'marries
into' the family). The apparent frequency of this mechanism was
approximately 7.5% in their family cohort. Miksch et al. (2005) stated
that in their families no heterozygote for a large deletion showed any
apparent clinical sign of PXE according to category I diagnostic
criteria.

Chassaing et al. (2005) provided a comprehensive catalog of ABCC6
mutations identified in PXE.

Pfendner et al. (2007) collected mutation data on an international case
series of 270 patients with PXE (239 probands, 31 affected family
members). In 134 patients with a known phenotype and both mutations
identified, genotype-phenotype correlations were assessed. In total, 316
mutant alleles in ABCC6, including 39 novel mutations, were identified
in 239 probands. Mutations clustered in exons 24 and 28, corresponding
to the second nucleotide-binding fold and the last intracellular domain
of the protein. Together with the recurrent R1141X (603234.0001) and
del23-29 (603234.0016) mutations, these mutations accounted for 71.5% of
the total individual mutations identified. Genotype-phenotype analysis
failed to reveal a significant correlation between the type of mutations
identified or their predicted effect on the expression of the protein
and the age of onset and severity of the disease.

Using multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) to analyze
35 PXE patients with incomplete ABCC6 genotypes after exonic sequencing,
Costrop et al. (2010) identified 6 multiexon deletions and 4 single-exon
deletions and were thus able to characterized 25% of the unidentified
disease alleles. The findings illustrated the instability of the ABCC6
genomic region and stressed the importance of screening for deletions in
the molecular diagnosis of PXE.

- Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy 2

In a 28-year-old French man with PXE, who had a younger brother who died
of generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI1; 614473) at age
15 months, Le Boulanger et al. (2010) identified compound heterozygosity
for missense mutations in the ABCC6 gene (603234.0025 and 603234.0026),
which were also found in heterozygosity in each of his unaffected
parents, respectively. No disease-causing mutations were found in the
known GACI1 (208000)-related gene, ENPP1 (173335). Although no DNA
material was available from the deceased younger brother, his disease
was presumed to be related to the familial ABCC6 mutations. Le Boulanger
et al. (2010) concluded that GACI may represent an atypical and severe
end of the vascular phenotypic spectrum of PXE.

Nitschke et al. (2012) analyzed the ABCC6 gene in 28 GACI patients from
25 unrelated families who were negative for mutation in the ENNP1 gene,
as well as 2 unrelated GACI patients in whom only 1 ENNP1 mutation had
been detected. They identified homozygosity or compound heterozygosity
for mutations in ABCC6 in 8 unrelated GACI patients (see, e.g.,
603234.0001, 603234.0006, and 603234.0027-603234.0029). In 6 patients
from 5 unrelated families, only 1 mutation was detected in ABCC6; the
authors noted that there was no phenotypic difference between these
patients and those with biallelic mutations in ABCC6, and stated that
mutations in regulatory untranslated regions of ABCC6 might not have
been detected by their approach. No mutation in the ABCC6 gene was found
in 16 patients from 14 unrelated families, including the 2 patients who
were known to carry monoallelic mutations in ENNP1. Overall, 13
different ABCC6 mutations were identified in GACI patients, all but 2 of
which had been previously identified in typical PXE patients who had a
much milder phenotype than the GACI patients. Based on the considerable
overlap of phenotype and genotype of GACI and pseudoxanthoma elasticum,
Nitschke et al. (2012) suggested that GACI and PXE represent 2 ends of a
clinical spectrum of ectopic calcification and other organ pathologies
rather than 2 distinct disorders.

POPULATION GENETICS

The Afrikaner population of South Africa is of Dutch, German, and French
Huguenot descent and has its origin in the first European immigrant
settlements at the Cape of Good Hope during the 17th century. Torrington
and Viljoen (1991) proposed that the basis for the high prevalence of
PXE in the Afrikaner population is a founder effect. An initial
genealogic study traced the ancestry of 20 Afrikaner families with PXE
back to potentially only 4 individuals, suggesting that this disorder is
most likely derived from these original founders in South Africa. To
further study this possibility, Le Saux et al. (2002) performed
haplotype and mutation analyses in 17 of the 20 originally analyzed
Afrikaner families, and identified 3 common haplotypes and 6 different
disease-causing variants. Three of these mutant alleles were missense
variants, 2 were nonsense mutations, and 1 was a single-basepair
insertion. The most common variant, arg1339 to cys (R1339C;
603234.0017), accounted for 53% of the PXE alleles, whereas other mutant
alleles appeared at lower frequencies ranging from 3 to 12%. Haplotype
analysis of the Afrikaner families showed that the 3 most frequent
mutations were identical by descent, indicating a founder origin of PXE
in this population.

Chassaing et al. (2005) suggested that the proposed prevalence of PXE of
1 in 25,000 may be an underestimation. Consequently, the prevalence of
heterozygous carriers, and the prevalence of different organ involvement
in carriers of 1 or 2 ABCC6 mutations, are not precisely known.

PATHOGENESIS

Since the ABCC6 gene is expressed primarily, if not exclusively, in the
liver and kidneys, Ringpfeil et al. (2001) suggested that PXE is a
primary metabolic disorder with secondary involvement of elastic fibers,
a situation comparable to the secondary involvement of connective tissue
elements in homocystinuria (236200) and alkaptonuria (203500).

ABCC6 is a member of the large ATP-dependent transmembrane transporter
family. Chassaing et al. (2005) commented that the association of PXE to
ABCC6 efflux transport alterations raised a number of pathophysiology
hypotheses, among them, the idea that PXE is a systemic metabolic
disease resulting from lack or accumulation over time in the bloodstream
of molecules interacting with the synthesis, turnover, and/or
maintenance of extracellular matrix (ECM).

Since ABCC6 is expressed primarily in the liver, Jiang and Uitto (2006)
likewise supported the notion that PXE is a metabolic disease.

In an investigation of the functional relationship between ABCC6
deficiency and elastic fiber calcification, Le Saux et al. (2006)
speculated that ABCC6 deficiency in PXE patients induces a persistent
imbalance in circulating metabolite(s) which impairs the synthetic
abilities of normal elastoblasts or specifically alters elastic fiber
assembly. They found that PXE fibroblasts cultured with normal human
serum expressed and deposited increased amounts of proteins, but
structurally normal elastic fibers. Normal and PXE fibroblasts as well
as normal smooth muscle cells deposited abnormal aggregates of elastic
fibers when maintained in the presence of serum from PXE patients. The
expression of tropoelastin (see 130160) and other elastic
fiber-associated genes was not significantly modulated by the presence
of PXE serum. These results indicated that certain metabolites present
in PXE sera interfered with the normal assembly of elastic fibers in
vitro and suggested that PXE is a primary metabolic disorder with
secondary connective tissue manifestations.

ANIMAL MODEL

To elucidate the pathogenesis of PXE, Klement et al. (2005) generated a
transgenic mouse by targeted ablation of the mouse Abcc6 gene.
Abcc6-null mice were negative for expression of Mrp6 in the liver, and
necropsies revealed profound mineralization of several tissues including
skin, arterial blood vessels, and retina, while heterozygous animals
were indistinguishable from the wildtype mice. Particularly striking was
the mineralization of vibrissae, as confirmed by von Kossa and alizarin
red stains. Electron microscopy revealed mineralization affecting both
elastic structures and collagen fibers. Mineralization of vibrissae was
noted as early as 5 weeks of age and was progressive with age in Abcc6
-/- mice but was not observed in heterozygous or wildtype mice up to 2
years of age. Total body computerized tomography scan of Abcc6 -/- mice
showed mineralization in skin and subcutaneous tissue as well as in
kidneys. These data demonstrated aberrant mineralization of soft tissues
in PXE-affected organs, and consequently, these mice recapitulated
features of this complex disease.

Gorgels et al. (2005) generated Abcc6 -/- mice and showed by light and
electron microscopy that Abcc6 -/- mice spontaneously developed
calcification of elastic fibers in blood vessel walls and in Bruch
membrane in the eye. No clear abnormalities were seen in the dermal
extracellular matrix. Calcification of blood vessels was most prominent
in small arteries in the cortex of the kidney, but in old mice, it
occurred also in other organs and in the aorta and vena cava. Monoclonal
antibodies against mouse Abcc6 localized the protein to the basolateral
membranes of hepatocytes and the basal membrane in renal proximal
tubules, but failed to show the protein at the pathogenic sites. Abcc6
-/- mice developed a 25% reduction in plasma HDL cholesterol and an
increase in plasma creatinine levels, which may be due to impaired
kidney function. No changes in serum mineral balance were found. Gorgels
et al. (2005) concluded that the phenotype of the Abcc6 -/- mouse shares
calcification of elastic fibers with human PXE pathology, and supports
the hypothesis that PXE is a systemic disease.

To characterize the mineralization process in PXE, Jiang et al. (2007)
examined a PXE animal model, the Abcc6 -/- mouse, with respect to
specific proteins serving as inhibitors of mineralization. The levels of
calcium and phosphate in serum of these mice were normal, but the Abcc6
-/- serum had less ability to prevent the mineral deposition induced by
inorganic phosphate in a cell culture system. Addition of fetuin-A
(138680) to the culture system prevented the mineralization. The
calcium-phosphate product was markedly elevated in the mineralized
vibrissae of Abcc6 -/- mice, an early biomarker of the mineralization
process, consistent with histopathologic findings. Levels of fetuin-A
were slightly decreased in Abcc6 -/- serum, and positive immunostaining
for matrix-Gla-protein (MGP; 154870), fetuin-A, and ankylosis protein
(ANK; 605145) as well as alkaline phosphatase activity were strongly
associated with the mineralization process. In situ hybridization
demonstrated that the genes for MGP and Ank were expressed locally in
vibrissae, whereas fetuin-A was expressed highly in the liver. These
data suggested that the deposition of the bone-associated proteins
spatially coincides with mineralization and actively regulates this
process locally and systemically.

In the Dyscalc1 mouse model of dystrophic cardiac calcification (DCC),
Meng et al. (2007) studied 2 intercrosses and identified Abcc6 as the
causative gene, which was confirmed by transgenic complementation. The
authors noted that myocardial calcification has not been reported as a
phenotype associated with human PXE or mouse Abcc6-knockout models.

In all mouse strains positive for DCC, Aherrahrou et al. (2008)
identified a missense mutation at the 3-prime border of exon 14 of the
Abcc6 gene that created an additional donor splice site. The alternative
transcript lacked the last 5 nucleotides of exon 14, resulting in
premature termination at codon 684, and leading to Abcc6 protein
deficiency in DCC-susceptible mice.

Jiang et al. (2009) found that grafting of wildtype mouse muzzle skin
onto the back of Abcc6-knockout mice resulted in abnormal mineralization
of vibrissae consistent with PXE, whereas grafting of Abcc6-knockout
mouse muzzle skin onto wildtype mice did not. The data implied that PXE
does not result from localized defect based on resident cellular
abnormalities but from a change of metabolite(s) in serum. These
findings implicate circulatory factors as a critical component of the
mineralization process and supported the notion that PXE is a secondary
mineralization of connective tissues. In addition, the findings
suggested that the abnormal mineralization process could possibly be
countered or even reversed by changes in the homeostatic milieu.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2, INCLUDED
ABCC6, ARG1141TER

---Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum

In a large consanguineous Italian family segregating autosomal recessive
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800), Le Saux et al. (2000) identified a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide 3421 in exon 24 of the ABCC6 gene,
resulting in an arg-to-ter substitution at codon 1141 (R1141X). All
unaffected individuals but 1 were heterozygous carriers; affected
individuals were homozygous for this mutation. This variant was not
found in the control panel of 200 normal alleles and cosegregated in
homozygous or compound heterozygous state with the PXE phenotype in
families. This mutation was also identified in 5 unrelated pedigrees.
R1141X was found in homozygous state in unrelated patients with
autosomal recessive PXE from the United Kingdom and Belgium. Haplotype
analysis of the PXE locus in families with the R1141X mutation revealed
that this mutation was segregating with different haplotypes, suggesting
that R1141X may be a recurrent mutation in ABCC6. Testing of cultured
skin fibroblasts showed no ABCC6 mRNA in patients carrying the R1141X
mutation from the large Italian pedigree.

Bergen et al. (2000) identified this mutation in 2 families segregating
autosomal dominant PXE (177850).

In a family in which 2 brothers and a sister had PXE, Ringpfeil et al.
(2000) demonstrated that the affected individuals were compound
heterozygotes for the R1141X mutation and an R1268Q mutation
(603234.0011).

In a cohort of 101 unrelated patients with PXE, Le Saux et al. (2001)
found that the R1141X mutant allele was present in 28.4% of European
alleles and only 4.1% of U.S. alleles. Also, this nonsense mutation was
unequally distributed among European countries. The frequency of
homozygotes was in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the European
population.

Hu et al. (2003) demonstrated a founder effect for the R1141X mutation
in the Netherlands. They identified the mutation in 19 alleles in 16
Dutch patients with PXE, in heterozygous, homozygous, or compound
heterozygous form. Expression of the normal allele in heterozygotes was
predominant; no or very low expression was found in homozygotes. The
mutation induced instability of the aberrant mRNA. Hu et al. (2003)
suggested that the PXE phenotype of the R1141X mutation most likely
results from complete loss of function or functional haploinsufficiency
of ABCC6.

In the study of Trip et al. (2002), the presence of a single R1141X
mutation in ABCC6 appeared to be an independent risk factor for coronary
heart disease in young people.

---Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy 2

In 2 patients with generalized arterial calcification of infancy-2
(GACI2; 614473), Nitschke et al. (2012) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the ABCC6 gene. A French female infant
with GACI who died at 6 weeks of age, who had calcification of the
coronary arteries and other arteries, severe hypertension, and heart
failure, was compound heterozygous for R1141X and R1314W (603234.0006).
A 3-year-old Spanish boy with GACI who had calcification of the splenic
and pancreatic arteries, nephrocalcinosis, severe hypertension,
cardiomegaly, psychomotor retardation, and abdominal distention, was
compound heterozygous for R1141X and R518X (603234.0027).

---Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum, Forme Fruste, Digenic, ABCC6/GGCX

In a woman and her sister with biopsy-confirmed PXE, Li et al. (2009)
identified compound heterozygosity for the R1141X mutation and a
mutation in the GGCX gene (V255M; 137167.0012). Neither had evidence of
a coagulopathy and the skin phenotype was mild (see 177850), but skin
biopsies showed undercarboxylated matrix gla proteins (MGP; 154870) in
the areas of abnormal mineralization. Since R1141X in the heterozygous
state is usually not associated with clinical features, the findings
suggested that the women had digenic inheritance of PXE. In contrast, 2
other family members who were compound heterozygous for R1141X and
another mutation in the GGCX gene (S300F; 137167.0013) had no signs of
either disorder on clinical exam but refused further clinical testing.
Plasma levels of undercarboxylated total MGP of the 2 clinically
unaffected individuals were at the lower end of normal. Although the
reasons for the lack of clinical findings in the 2 unaffected family
members remained unclear, Li et al. (2009) concluded that
undercarboxylation of MGP plays a critical role in aberrant
mineralization of tissues in PXE.

.0002
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, IVS21, G-T, +1

In patients with autosomal recessive pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800)
from 2 families, Le Saux et al. (2000) found that affected individuals
carried a G-to-T transversion at the +1 position of intron 21 of the
ABCC6 gene, affecting the donor splice site. One of the families was
from the U.K., and the other was from the United States. The family from
the U.K. carried the R1141X mutation (603234.0001) on the other allele;
in the American family, the other mutation was R1138Q (603234.0003).

.0003
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ARG1138GLN

In a family with autosomal recessive pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800),
Le Saux et al. (2000) identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 3413
of the ABCC6 gene, resulting in an arginine-to-glutamine substitution at
codon 1138 (R1138Q). This mutation was found in compound heterozygosity
with the IVS21+1G-T mutation (603234.0002).

In a so-called sporadic case of PXE, Ringpfeil et al. (2000) identified
an R1138Q mutation in the ABCC6 gene in compound heterozygosity with the
R1268 mutation (603234.0011). Arginine-1138 is the same codon as that
affected in the R1138W mutation (603234.0012); in the latter mutation,
the nucleotide change is 3412C-T.

.0004
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ARG1114PRO

In a family with autosomal recessive pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800),
Le Saux et al. (2000) found affected individuals to be homozygous for a
G-to-C transversion at nucleotide 3341 of the ABCC6 gene, resulting in
an arg-to-pro substitution at codon 1114 (R1114P) in exon 24. This
mutation was found in homozygosity.

.0005
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, 1-BP DEL, 3775T

In a patient thought to represent an isolated case of autosomal dominant
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (177850), Le Saux et al. (2000) found a
deletion of a T at nucleotide 3775 of the ABCC6 gene. This was a de novo
mutation in the patient, and no mutations were found in the other allele
of ABCC6 by screening using SSCP.

Plomp et al. (2009) examined a group of 15 adults homozygous for the
3775delT mutation and 44 individuals heterozygous for this mutation from
a genetically isolated population in the Netherlands. All participants
filled out a questionnaire and underwent standardized dermatologic and
ophthalmologic examinations with photography of skin and fundus
abnormalities. Skin biopsies from affected skin or a predilection site
and/or a scar were examined and compared with biopsies from controls.
Plomp et al. (2009) found that skin abnormalities, ophthalmologic signs,
and cardiovascular problems varied greatly among the 15 homozygous
participants. There was no correlation among severity of skin, eyes, or
cardiovascular abnormalities. None of the 44 heterozygous participants
had any sign of pseudoxanthoma elasticum on dermatologic,
histopathologic, and/or ophthalmologic examination, but 32% had
cardiovascular disease.

.0006
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2, INCLUDED
ABCC6, ARG1314TRP

Pseudoxanthoma Elasticum

In a patient with autosomal recessive pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800),
Le Saux et al. (2000) identified a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 3940
of the ABCC6 gene, resulting in an arg-to-trp substitution at codon 1314
(R1314W). This mutation was found in homozygosity in one family.

Generalized Arterial Calcification of Infancy 2

In a 5-year-old boy with generalized arterial calcification of infancy
(GACI2; 614473), Nitschke et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for the
R1314W mutation. The boy was born as the first of dizygotic twins, and
his twin brother was unaffected. The patient had calcification of the
aorta and pulmonary, coronary, and renal arteries as well as other
arteries, and stippled calcifications of proximal epiphyses of humeri,
femora, pelvic cartilage, larynx, and mandible. He had severely
decreased biventricular systolic function, marked cardiomegaly, and
severe mitral insufficiency, as well as hypertension and respiratory
insufficiency. Cerebral MRI revealed diffuse white matter disease, with
cystic encephalomalacia, and laboratory analysis showed
hyperbilirubinemia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Nitschke et al. (2012)
also identified the R1314W mutation in compound heterozygosity in 2
unrelated GACI patients, a French female infant who died at 6 weeks of
age and also carried an R1141X mutation (603234.0001), and an
Afro-Caribbean male infant who died at 8 weeks of age with generalized
arterial stenosis, myocardial infarction, and hypertension and also
carried a 1-bp insertion (450insC; 603234.0028) in exon 4 of the ABCC6
gene, predicted to result in a premature stop codon and a truncated
protein. In addition, in a 3-year-old South African girl with GACI,
Nitschke et al. (2012) identified only a heterozygous R1314W mutation,
but noted that mutations in regulatory untranslated regions of ABCC6
might not have been detected by their technique. In the South African
child, onset of symptoms occurred at 2.5 years of age, and included
calcification of the aorta, spleen, and pancreas, nephrocalcinosis,
failure to thrive, hypertension, and heart failure.

.0007
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, 1-BP DEL, 3798T

In a large autosomal recessive pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800) family,
Bergen et al. (2000) identified the deletion of a T at nucleotide 3798
of the ABCC gene in homozygosity. This mutation results in a frameshift
and premature chain termination.

.0008
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, 4-BP INS, 4243AGAA

In 2 families segregating what was thought to be autosomal dominant
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (177850), Bergen et al. (2000) identified a
4-bp insertion, AGAA, at nucleotide 4243 in exon 30. This insertion
causes a frameshift resulting in the disruption of the Walker B motif
and a protein longer by 24 amino acids.

.0009
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, 22-BP DEL

In a patient with pseudoxanthoma elasticum (177850), Bergen et al.
(2000) identified a 22-basepair deletion from nucleotides 1967 through
1989 of the ABCC6 gene in heterozygosity. The other allele appeared to
be wildtype.

.0010
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, DEL

In a patient with pseudoxanthoma elasticum (177850), Bergen et al.
(2000) detected a large deletion encompassing the ABCC6 gene as well as
the MYH11 (160745) and ABCC1 (158343) genes. The other allele appeared
to be wildtype.

.0011
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ARG1268GLN

Ringpfeil et al. (2000) found an arg1268-to-gln (R1268Q) mutation in
compound heterozygous state in 3 presumably unrelated families with PXE
(264800). In 2 families, the mutation was combined with R1141X
(603234.0001); in 1 family, it was combined with R1138Q (603234.0003).

In one of the families with PXE in which the R1141X mutation had been
identified by Ringpfeil et al. (2000), Germain et al. (2000) identified
a 3803G-A transition in exon 27 of the ABCC6 cDNA, resulting in an
R1268Q mutation. To their surprise, the R1268Q variant was found in
homozygous state in the proband's unaffected husband. They investigated
the R1268Q mutation and found the Q1268 allele at a relatively high
frequency (0.19) in a control population of 62 Caucasians. Genotype
frequencies were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, and 3 healthy volunteers
were homozygous for the Q1268 allele. R1268Q is thus a harmless
polymorphism when present in homozygous state.

.0012
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ARG1138TRP

In a familial case of PXE (264800), Ringpfeil et al. (2000) found
homozygosity for an arg1138-to-trp (R1138W) mutation in the ABCC6 gene
due to a 3412C-T transition. The mutation was found in homozygous state
in the proband's mother and in heterozygous state in her father,
creating a pedigree pattern of pseudodominance. The same codon is
involved in the R1138Q mutation due to a 3413G-A transition
(603234.0003).

Ringpfeil et al. (2001) discussed the same pedigree, derived from a
consanguineous French-Canadian PXE family.

.0013
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ARG1164TER

Ringpfeil et al. (2001) studied the ABCC6 mutation in 4 multiplex
families with PXE (264800) inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern.
In each family, the proband was a compound heterozygote for a single-bp
substitution mutation (3490C-T; arg1164 to ter) and a novel deletion of
approximately 16.5 kb spanning the site of the single-bp substitution in
trans (i.e., on the homologous chromosome 16) (603234.0014). In 2 of the
families the single-nucleotide substitution was R1164X; in 1 it was
R1141X (603234.0001); and in another it was a splice site mutation,
3736-1G-A (603234.0015). In all 4 families the patients were thought
first to be homozygous for the nondeletion mutation. The deletion
mutation was shown to extend from intron 22 to intron 29, resulting in
out-of-frame deletion of 1,213 nucleotides from the corresponding mRNA
and causing elimination of 505 amino acids from the MRP6 polypeptide.
The deletion breakpoints were precisely the same in all 4 families,
which were of different ethnic backgrounds, and haplotype analysis by 13
microsatellite markers suggested that the deletion had occurred
independently. Deletion breakpoints within introns 22 and 29 were
embedded within AluSx repeat sequences, specifically in a 16-bp segment
of DNA, suggesting Alu-mediated homologous recombination as a mechanism.

.0014
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, 1,213-NT DEL

See 603234.0013 and Ringpfeil et al. (2001).

.0015
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2, INCLUDED
ABCC6, IVS26, G-A, -1

See 603234.0013 and Ringpfeil et al. (2001).

See 603234.0029 and Nitschke et al. (2012).

.0016
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, EX23-29DEL

In a cohort of 101 unrelated patients with PXE (264800), Le Saux et al.
(2001) identified a 16.4-kb deletion of the ABCC6 gene (deletion of
exons 23-29) in 12.9% of mutant alleles. The frequency was very
different in Europe and the United States, being 4.3% and 28.4%,
respectively. The frequency of individuals homozygous for this mutation
was observed to be in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the United States.

.0017
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ARG1339CYS

In 17 Afrikaner families in South Africa with autosomal recessive
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (264800), Le Saux et al. (2002) found that 53%
of the PXE-associated alleles of the ABCC6 gene had a 4015C-T
transition, which caused an arg1339-to-cys (R1339C) mutation. Haplotype
analysis showed that the mutation was identical by descent in these
families.

.0018
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ARG1459CYS

In a family in which PXE classified as 'definite' occurred in 2
generations, Plomp et al. (2004) detected an arg1459-to-cys substitution
(R1459C) in the ABCC protein on 1 allele only. The authors considered
the diagnosis of PXE definite if 2 of the following 3 criteria were
present: yellowish papules and/or plaques on the lateral side of the
neck and/or flexural areas of the body; typical histopathological
changes in a skin biopsy after von Kossa staining; and the presence of
peau d'orange, angioid streaks, or comet-like streaks in the retina. The
mother of this family and one of her sons fulfilled all 3 criteria.
Plomp et al. (2004) stated that the R1459C mutation might be one that
could cause PXE in the heterozygous state (177850). In their review of
families with putative autosomal dominant PXE, including this family and
2 others examined by them, the authors noted that they did not find a
single family with definite PXE in 3 or more generations.

Bergen (2006) stated that the family with the apparently heterozygous
R1459C mutation studied by Plomp et al. (2004) remained 'an interesting
puzzle and is perhaps the always existing 'exception to the rule'.'

.0019
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, VAL1298PHE

In a cohort of 122 unrelated patients with PXE (264800) from several
countries, Le Saux et al. (2001) found a 3892G-T transversion in exon 28
of the ABCC6 gene that resulted in a val1298-to-phe (V1298F)
substitution. The mutation was present in heterozygosity in 2 alleles
from patients from the United States, for an allele frequency among 74
United States alleles of 2.7%. The mutation was not found in the
European population.

Ilias et al. (2002) showed that the V1298F mutation, localized to the
C-terminal cytoplasmic domain of ABCC6, did not affect the expression of
the ABCC6 protein in infected insect cells, but that the protein was
essentially inactive in the MgATP-dependent transport of
N-ethylmaleimide S-glutathione (NEM-GS) or leukotriene-C4.

.0020
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, GLY1302ARG

In a cohort of 122 unrelated patients with PXE (264800) from several
countries, Le Saux et al. (2001) found a 3904G-A transition in exon 28
of the ABCC6 gene that resulted in a gly1302-to-arg (G1302R) amino acid
substitution in the second intracellular nucleotide-binding domain. The
mutation, present in homozygosity, occurred in a total of 4 alleles from
patients from the United States, giving an allele frequency of 5.4% in a
total of 74 United States alleles. It was not found in the European
population.

Ilias et al. (2002) showed that the G1302R mutation did not affect the
expression of the ABCC6 protein in infected insect cells, but that the
protein was essentially inactive in the MgATP-dependent transport of
N-ethylmaleimide S-glutathione (NEM-GS) or leukotriene-C4.

.0021
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, GLY1321SER

In a cohort of 122 unrelated patients with PXE (264800) from several
countries, Le Saux et al. (2001) found a 3961G-A transition in exon 28
of the ABCC6 gene that resulted in a gly1321-to-ser (G1321S)
substitution in the second intracellular nucleotide-binding domain. They
found the mutation in heterozygosity in 1 of 74 United States alleles,
for an allele frequency of 1.4%. It was not found in the European
population.

Ilias et al. (2002) showed that the G1321S mutation did not affect the
expression of the ABCC6 protein in infected insect cells, but that the
protein was essentially inactive in the MgATP-dependent transport of
N-ethylmaleimide S-glutathione (NEM-GS) or leukotriene-C4.

.0022
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, ASP1238HIS

Chassaing et al. (2004) described a pedigree of PXE (264800) with
pseudodominant inheritance. Two affected sibs carried 3 distinct
mutations of the ABCC6 gene. The brother carried a 3712G-C transversion
in exon 26 that resulted in an asp1238-to-his substitution (D1238H), and
a 3389C-T transition in exon 24 that resulted in a thr1130-to-met
substitution (T1130M; 603234.0024). His sister carried the T1130M
mutation and a 33-bp deletion (603234.0023). The mother, who had PXE
also, was deduced to a compound heterozygote for the deletion and
T1130M, whereas the father was assumed to be heterozygous for the D1238H
mutation which was shared by the sibs; however, DNA was not available
for study on either parent.

.0023
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, 33-BP DEL

In the Algerian pedigree studied by Chassaing et al. (2004), a female
patient with PXE (264800) carried a 33-bp deletion in exon 9 of the
ABCC6 gene (1088-1120del) in compound heterozygosity with a missense
mutation (603234.0024). The mutation led to the deletion of 11 amino
acids in the transmembrane and intracellular domains (Q363_R373del).

.0024
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ABCC6, THR1130MET

See 603234.0022 and Chassaing et al. (2004). The T1130M substitution
arose from a 3389C-T transition in exon 24.

.0025
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2, INCLUDED
ABCC6, ARG765GLN

In a 28-year-old French man with pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE; 264800),
who had a younger brother who died of generalized arterial calcification
of infancy (GACI2; 614473) at age 15 months, Le Boulanger et al. (2010)
identified compound heterozygosity for missense mutations in the ABCC6
gene, an arg765-to-gln (R765Q) substitution and a gln1406-to-lys
(Q1406K; 603234.0026) substitution. The mutations were found in
heterozygosity in each of his unaffected parents, respectively. Although
no DNA material was available from the deceased younger brother, his
disease was presumed to be related to the familial ABCC6 mutations. Le
Boulanger et al. (2010) concluded that GACI may represent an atypical
and severe end of the vascular phenotype spectrum of PXE. (The mutations
identified by Le Boulanger et al. (2010) were listed as R765Q and Q1406K
in their text, but as E765Q and E1406K in their Figure 3.)

The R765Q mutation in exon 18 of the ABCC6 gene has also been identified
in heterozygosity and in compound heterozygosity with another ABCC6
mutation in patients with PXE (see Le Saux et al., 2001 and Miksch et
al., 2005, respectively).

.0026
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2, INCLUDED
ABCC6, GLN1406LYS

See 603234.0025 and Le Boulanger et al. (2010).

.0027
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM, INCLUDED
ABCC6, ARG518TER

In a 3-year-old Spanish boy with generalized arterial calcification of
infancy (GACI2; 614473), who had calcification of the splenic and
pancreatic arteries, nephrocalcinosis, severe hypertension,
cardiomegaly, psychomotor retardation, and abdominal distention,
Nitschke et al. (2012) identified compound heterozygosity for 2
mutations in the ABCC6 gene: an R1141X substitution (603234.0001) and a
1552C-T transition in exon 12, resulting in an arg518-to-ter (R518X)
substitution.

The R518X mutation has also been identified in compound heterozygosity
with another ABCC6 mutation in patients with pseudoxanthoma elasticum
(PXE; 264800) (see, e.g., Meloni et al., 2001 and Miksch et al., 2005).

.0028
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2
ABCC6, 1-BP INS, 450C

See 603234.0006 and Nitschke et al. (2012).

.0029
ARTERIAL CALCIFICATION, GENERALIZED, OF INFANCY, 2
PSEUDOXANTHOMA ELASTICUM, INCLUDED
ABCC6, IVS21, G-T, +1

In a Canadian female infant with generalized arterial calcification of
infancy (GACI2; 614473), originally reported by Glatz et al. (2006), who
died at 6.5 weeks of age of myocardial infarction with calcification of
the aorta and coronary, pulmonary, and renal arteries and occlusion of
the right coronary artery, Nitschke et al. (2012) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 splice site mutations in the ABCC6 gene, a G-T
transversion in intron 21 (IVS21+1G-T) and a IVS26-1G-A (603234.0015),
both predicted to cause a frameshift resulting in a premature
termination codon. The latter mutation had previously been identified in
compound heterozygosity in a patient with pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE;
264800).

The IVS21+1G-T splice-site mutation has also been identified in compound
heterozygosity with another ABCC6 mutation in PXE patients (see, e.g.,
Le Saux et al., 2001 and Miksch et al., 2005).

REFERENCE 1. Aherrahrou, Z.; Doehring, D. C.; Ehlers, E.-M.; Liptau, H.; Depping,
R.; Linsel-Nitschke, P.; Kaczmarek, P. M.; Erdmann, J.; Schunkert,
H.: An alternative splice variant in Abcc6, the gene causing dystrophic
calcification, leads to protein deficiency in C3H/He mice. J. Biol.
Chem. 283: 7608-7615, 2008.

2. Bacchelli, B.; Quaglino, D.; Gheduzzi, D.; Taparelli, F.; Boraldi,
F.; Trolli, B.; Le Saux, O.; Boyd, C. D.; Ronchetti, I. P.: Identification
of heterozygote carriers in families with a recessive form of pseudoxanthoma
elasticum (PXE). Mod. Pathol. 12: 1112-1123, 1999.

3. Beck, K.; Hayashi, K.; Dang, K.; Hayashi, M.; Boyd, C. D.: Analysis
of ABCC6 (MRP6) in normal human tissues. Histochem. Cell Biol. 123:
517-528, 2005.

4. Belinsky, M. G.; Chen, Z.-S.; Shchaveleva, I.; Zeng, H.; Kruh,
G. D.: Characterization of the drug resistance and transport properties
of multidrug resistance protein 6 (MRP6, ABCC6). Cancer Res. 62:
6172-6177, 2002.

5. Belinsky, M. G.; Kruh, G. D.: MOAT-E (ARA) is a full-length MRP/cMOAT
subfamily transporter expressed in kidney and liver. Brit. J. Cancer 80:
1342-1349, 1999.

6. Bergen, A. A. B.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum: the end of the autosomal
dominant segregation myth. (Commentary) J. Invest. Derm. 126: 704-705,
2006.

7. Bergen, A. A. B.; Plomp, A. S.; Schuurman, E. J.; Terry, S.; Breuning,
M.; Dauwerse, H.; Swart, J.; Kool, M.; van Soest, S.; Baas, F.; ten
Brink, J. B.; de Jong, P. T. V. M.: Mutations in ABCC6 cause pseudoxanthoma
elasticum. Nature Genet. 25: 228-231, 2000.

8. Cai, L.; Struk, B.; Adams, M. D.; Ji, W.; Haaf, T.; Kang, H.-L.;
Dho, S. H.; Xu, X.; Ringpfeil, F.; Nancarrow, J.; Zach, S.; Schaen,
L.; and 19 others: A 500-kb region on chromosome 16p13.1 contains
the pseudoxanthoma elasticum locus: high resolution mapping and genomic
structure. J. Molec. Med. 78: 36-46, 2000.

9. Chassaing, N.; Martin, L.; Calvas, P.; Le Bert, M.; Hovnanian,
A.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum: a clinical, pathophysiological and
genetic update including 11 novel ABCC6 mutations. J. Med. Genet. 42:
881-892, 2005.

10. Chassaing, N.; Martin, L.; Mazereeuw, J.; Barrie, L.; Nizard,
S.; Bonafe, J.-L.; Calvas, P.; Hovnanian, A.: Novel ABCC6 mutations
in pseudoxanthomas elasticum. J. Invest. Derm. 122: 608-613, 2004.

11. Costrop, L. M. F.; Vanakker, O. O. M.; Van Laer, L.; Le Saux,
O.; Martin, L.; Chassaing, N.; Guerra, D.; Pasquali-Ronchetti, I.;
Coucke, P. J.; De Paepe, A.: Novel deletions causing pseudoxanthoma
elasticum underscore the genomic instability of the ABCC6 region. J.
Hum. Genet. 55: 112-117, 2010.

12. Germain, D. P.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum: evidence for the existence
of a pseudogene highly homologous to the ABCC6 gene. (Letter) J.
Med. Genet. 38: 457-460, 2001.

13. Germain, D. P.; Nau, V.; Esnault, C.; Jeunemaitre, X.; Bruneval,
P.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum: molecular investigations in a consanguineous
family further supports the existence of pseudogenes (psi-ABCC6) homologous
to the ABCC6 gene. Gene Funct. Dis. 2: 208-213, 2001.

14. Germain, D. P.; Perdu, J.; Remones, V.; Jeunemaitre, X.: Homozygosity
for the R1268Q mutation in MRP6, the pseudoxanthoma elasticum gene,
is not disease-causing. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 274: 297-301,
2000.

15. Glatz, A. C.; Pawel, B. R.; Hsu, D. T.; Weinberg, P.; Chrisant,
M. R. K.: Idiopathic infantile arterial calcification: two case reports,
a review of the literature and a role for cardiac transplantation. Pediat.
Transplant. 10: 225-233, 2006.

16. Gorgels, T. G. M. F.; Hu, X.; Scheffer, G. L.; van der Wal, A.
C.; Toonstra, J.; de Jong, P. T. V. M.; van Kuppevelt, T. H.; Levelt,
C. N.; de Wolf, A.; Loves, W. J. P.; Scheper, R. J.; Peek, R.; Bergen,
A. A. B.: Disruption of Abcc6 in the mouse: novel insight in the
pathogenesis of pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14:
1763-1773, 2005.

17. Hu, X.; Peek, R.; Plomp, A.; ten Brink, J.; Scheffer, G.; van
Soest, S.; Leys, A.; de Jong, P. T. V. M.; Bergen, A. A. B.: Analysis
of the frequent R1141X mutation in the ABCC6 gene in pseudoxanthoma
elasticum. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 44: 1824-1829, 2003.

18. Hu, X.; Plomp, A.; Gorgels, T.; Ten Brink, J.; Loves, W.; Mannens,
M.; De Jong, P. T. V. M.; Bergen, A. A. B.: Efficient molecular diagnostic
strategy for ABCC6 in pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Genet. Test. 8:
292-300, 2004.

19. Hu, X.; Plomp, A.; Wijnholds, J.; ten Brink, J.; van Soest, S.;
van den Born, L. I.; Leys, A.; Peek, R.; de Jong, P. T. V. M.; Bergen,
A. A. B.: ABCC6/MRP6 mutations: further insight into the molecular
pathology of pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 11:
215-224, 2003.

20. Ilias, A.; Urban, Z.; Seidl, T. L.; Le Saux, O.; Sinko, E.; Boyd,
C. D.; Sarkadi, B.; Varadi, A.: Loss of ATP-dependent transport activity
in pseudoxanthoma elasticum-associated mutants of human ABCC6 (MRP6). J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 16860-16867, 2002. Note: Erratum: J. Biol. Chem.
277: 24842 only, 2002.

21. Jiang, Q.; Endo, M.; Dibra, F.; Wang, K.; Uitto, J.: Pseudoxanthoma
elasticum is a metabolic disease. J. Invest. Derm. 129: 348-354,
2009.

22. Jiang, Q.; Li, Q.; Uitto, J.: Aberrant mineralization of connective
tissues in a mouse model of pseudoxanthoma elasticum: systemic and
local regulatory factors. J. Invest. Derm. 127: 1392-1402, 2007.

23. Jiang, Q.; Matsuzaki, Y.; Li, K.; Uitto, J.: Transcriptional
regulation and characterization of the promoter region of the human
ABCC6 gene. J. Invest. Derm. 126: 325-355, 2006.

24. Jiang, Q.; Uitto, J.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum: a metabolic disease?
(Commentary) J. Invest. Derm. 126: 1440-1441, 2006.

25. Klein, I.; Sarkadi, B.; Varadi, A.: An inventory of the human
ABC proteins. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1461: 237-262, 1999.

26. Klement, J. F.; Matsuzaki, Y.; Jiang, Q.-J.; Terlizzi, J.; Choi,
H. Y.; Fujimoto, N.; Li, K.; Pulkkinen, L.; Birk, D. E.; Sundberg,
J. P.; Uitto, J.: Targeted ablation of the Abcc6 gene results in
ectopic mineralization of connective tissues. Molec. Cell. Biol. 25:
8299-8310, 2005.

27. Kool, M.; van der Linden, M.; de Haas, M.; Baas, F.; Borst, P.
: Expression of human MRP6, a homologue of the multidrug resistance
protein gene MRP1, in tissues and cancer cells. Cancer Res. 59:
175-182, 1999.

28. Kuss, B. J.; O'Neill, G. M.; Eyre, H.; Doggett, N. A.; Callen,
D. F.; Davey, R. A.: ARA, a novel ABC transporter, is located at
16p13.1, is deleted in inv(16) leukemias, and is shown to be expressed
in primitive hematopoietic precursors. Genomics 51: 455-458, 1998.

29. Le Boulanger, G.; Labreze, C.; Croue, A.; Schurgers, L. J.; Chassaing,
N.; Wittkampf, T.; Rutsch, F.; Martin, L.: An unusual severe vascular
case of pseudoxanthoma elasticum presenting as generalized arterial
calcification of infancy. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 118-123, 2010.

30. Le Saux, O.; Beck, K.; Sachsinger, C.; Silvestri, C.; Treiber,
C.; Goring, H. H. H.; Johnson, E. W.; De Paepe, A.; Pope, F. M.; Pasquali-Ronchetti,
I.; Bercovitch, L.; Marais, A.-S.; Viljoen, D. L.; Terry, S. F.; Boyd,
C. D.: A spectrum of ABCC6 mutations is responsible for pseudoxanthoma
elasticum. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 749-764, 2001. Note: Erratum:
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 69: 1413 only, 2001; Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet.
71: 448 only, 2002.

31. Le Saux, O.; Beck, K.; Sachsinger, C.; Treiber, C.; Goring, H.
H. H.; Curry, K.; Johnson, E. W.; Bercovitch, L.; Marais, A.-S.; Terry,
S. F.; Viljoen, D. L.; Boyd, C. D.: Evidence for a founder effect
for pseudoxanthoma elasticum in the Afrikaner population of South
Africa. Hum. Genet. 111: 331-338, 2002.

32. Le Saux, O.; Bunda, S.; VanWart, C. M.; Douet, V.; Got, L.; Martin,
L.; Hinek, A.: Serum factors from pseudoxanthoma elasticum patients
alter elastic fiber formation in vitro. J. Invest. Derm. 126: 1497-1505,
2006.

33. Le Saux, O.; Urban, Z.; Tschuch, C.; Csiszar, K.; Bacchelli, B.;
Quaglino, D.; Pasquali-Ronchetti, I.; Pope, F. M.; Richards, A.; Terry,
S.; Bercovitch, L.; de Paepe, A.; Boyd, C. D.: Mutations in a gene
encoding an ABC transporter cause pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Nature
Genet. 25: 223-227, 2000.

34. Li, Q.; Grange, D. K.; Armstrong, N. L.; Whelan, A. J.; Hurley,
M. Y.; Rishavy, M. A.; Hallgren, K. W.; Berkner, K. L.; Schurgers,
L. J.; Jiang, Q.; Uitto, J.: Mutations in the GGCX and ABCC6 genes
in a family with pseudoxanthoma elasticum-like phenotypes. J. Invest.
Derm. 129: 553-563, 2009.

35. Longhurst, T. J.; O'Neill, G. M.; Harvie, R. M.; Davey, R. A.
: The anthracycline resistance-associated (ara) gene, a novel gene
associated with multidrug resistance in a human leukaemia cell line. Brit.
J. Cancer 74: 1331-1335, 1996.

36. Matsuzaki, Y.; Nakano, A.; Jiang, Q.-J.; Pulkkinen, L.; Uitto,
J.: Tissue-specific expression of the ABCC6 gene. J. Invest. Derm. 125:
900-905, 2005.

37. Meloni, I.; Rubegni, P.; De Aloe, G.; Bruttini, M.; Pianigiani,
E.; Cusano, R.; Seri, M.; Mondillo, S.; Federico, A.; Bardelli, A.
M.; Andreassi, L.; Fimiani, M.; Renieri, A.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum:
point mutations in the ABCC6 gene and a large deletion including also
ABCC1 and MYH11. (Abstract) Hum. Mutat. 18: 85 only, 2001. Note:
Full article online.

38. Meng, H.; Vera, I.; Che, N.; Wang, X.; Wang, S. S.; Ingram-Drake,
L.; Schadt, E. E.; Drake, T. A.; Lusis, A. J.: Identification of
Abcc6 as the major causal gene for dystrophic cardiac calcification
in mice through integrative genomics. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104:
4530-4535, 2007.

39. Miksch, S.; Lumsden, A.; Guenther, U. P.; Foernzler, D.; Christen-Zach,
S.; Daugherty, C.; Ramesar, R. S.; Lebwohl, M.; Hohl, D.; Neldner,
K. H.; Lindpaintner, K.; Richards, R. I.; Struk, B.: Molecular genetics
of pseudoxanthoma elasticum: type and frequency of mutations in ABCC6. Hum.
Mutat. 26: 235-248, 2005.

40. Nitschke, Y.; Baujat, G.; Botschen, U.; Wittkampf, T.; du Moulin,
M.; Stella, J.; Le Merrer, M.; Guest, G.; Lambot, K.; Tazarourte-Pinturier,
M.-F.; Chassaing, N.; Roche, O.; and 19 others: Generalized arterial
calcification of infancy and pseudoxanthoma elasticum can be caused
by mutations in either ENPP1 or ABCC6. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90: 25-39,
2012.

41. Pfendner, E. G.; Vanakker, O. M.; Terry, S. F.; Vourthis, S.;
McAndrew, P. E.; McClain, M. R.; Fratta, S.; Marais, A.-S.; Hariri,
S.; Coucke, P. J.; Ramsay, M.; Viljoen, D.; Terry, P. F.; De Paepe,
A.; Uitto, J.; Bercovitch, L. G.: Mutation detection in the ABCC6
gene and genotype-phenotype analysis in a large international case
series affected by pseudoxanthoma elasticum. J. Med. Genet. 44:
621-628, 2007.

42. Plomp, A. S.; Bergen, A. A. B.; Florijn, R. J.; Terry, S. F.;
Toonstra, J.; van Dijk, M. R.; de Jong, P. T. V. M.: Pseudoxanthoma
elasticum: wide phenotypic variation in homozygotes and no signs in
heterozygotes for the c.3775delT mutation in ABCC6. Genet. Med. 11:
852-858, 2009.

43. Plomp, A. S.; Hu, X.; de Jong, P. T. V. M.; Bergen, A. A. B.:
Does autosomal dominant pseudoxanthoma elasticum exist? Am. J. Med.
Genet. 126A: 403-412, 2004.

44. Pulkkinen, L.; Nakano, A.; Ringpfeil, F.; Uitto, J.: Identification
of ABCC6 pseudogenes on human chromosome 16p: implications for mutation
detection in pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Hum. Genet. 109: 356-365,
2001.

45. Ratajewski, M.; Bartosz, G.; Pulaski, L.: Expression of the human
ABCC6 gene is induced by retinoids through the retinoid X receptor. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 350: 1082-1087, 2006.

46. Ratajewski, M.; Van de Ven, W. J. M.; Bartosz, G.; Pulaski, L.
: The human pseudoxanthoma elasticum gene ABCC6 is transcriptionally
regulated by PLAG family transcription factors. Hum. Genet. 124:
451-463, 2008.

47. Ringpfeil, F.; Lebwohl, M.G.; Christiano, A. M.; Uitto, J.: Pseudoxanthoma
elasticum: mutations in the MRP6 gene encoding a transmembrane ATP-binding
cassette (ABC) transporter. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 6001-6006,
2000.

48. Ringpfeil, F.; Nakano, A.; Uitto, J.; Pulkkinen, L.: Compound
heterozygosity for a recurrent 16.5-kb Alu-mediated deletion mutation
and single-base-pair substitutions in the ABCC6 gene results in pseudoxanthoma
elasticum. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68: 642-652, 2001.

49. Ringpfeil, F.; Pulkkinen, L.; Uitto, J.: Molecular genetics of
pseudoxanthoma elasticum. Exp. Derm. 10: 221-228, 2001.

50. Sherer, D. W.; Bercovitch, L.; Lebwohl, M.: Pseudoxanthoma elasticum:
significance of limited phenotypic expression in parents of affected
offspring. J. Am. Acad. Derm. 44: 534-537, 2001.

51. Sinko, E.; Ilias, A.; Ujhelly, O.; Homolya, L.; Scheffer, G. L.;
Bergen, A. A. B.; Sarkadi, B.; Varadi, A.: Subcellular localization
and N-glycosylation of human ABCC6, expressed in MDCKII cells. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 308: 263-269, 2003.

52. Torrington, M.; Viljoen, D. L.: Founder effect in 20 Afrikaner
kindreds with pseudoxanthoma elasticum. S. Afr. Med. J. 79: 7-11,
1991.

53. Trip, M. D.; Smulders, Y. M.; Wegman, J. J.; Hu, X.; Boer, J.
M.; ten Brink, J. B.; Zwinderman, A. H.; Kastelein, J. J.; Feskens,
E. J.; Bergen, A. A.: Frequent mutation in the ABCC6 gene (R1141X)
is associated with a strong increase in the prevalence of coronary
artery disease. Circulation 106: 773-775, 2002.

54. van Soest, S.; Swart, J.; Tijmes, N.; Sandkuijl, L. A.; Rommers,
J.; Bergen, A. A. B.: A locus for autosomal recessive pseudoxanthoma
elasticum, with penetrance of vascular symptoms in carriers, maps
to chromosome 16p13.1. Genome Res. 7: 830-834, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/8/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/18/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/25/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/14/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/6/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/28/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/5/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/28/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/30/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/6/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/28/2007
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 11/29/2006
Victor A. McKusick - edited: 9/21/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/1/2004
Jane Kelly - updated: 8/22/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/10/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/13/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/17/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/19/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/30/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/22/2000
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 12/2/1998

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/29/1998

EDITED carol: 10/01/2013
alopez: 7/18/2012
carol: 2/8/2012
terry: 2/8/2012
carol: 2/8/2012
alopez: 6/29/2010
terry: 6/18/2010
wwang: 6/18/2010
ckniffin: 3/25/2010
ckniffin: 11/3/2009
wwang: 10/30/2009
ckniffin: 10/14/2009
alopez: 5/13/2009
mgross: 1/8/2009
terry: 1/6/2009
wwang: 10/28/2008
wwang: 8/5/2008
alopez: 1/24/2008
terry: 12/28/2007
wwang: 10/3/2007
wwang: 4/30/2007
alopez: 3/13/2007
alopez: 3/9/2007
terry: 3/6/2007
alopez: 2/28/2007
mgross: 11/29/2006
joanna: 12/20/2005
alopez: 10/12/2005
alopez: 9/21/2005
carol: 4/9/2004
ckniffin: 4/1/2004
ckniffin: 10/17/2003
carol: 8/22/2003
carol: 3/18/2003
tkritzer: 3/13/2003
terry: 3/10/2003
tkritzer: 11/22/2002
tkritzer: 11/15/2002
terry: 11/13/2002
carol: 8/9/2002
carol: 7/31/2002
carol: 1/3/2002
carol: 11/21/2001
mcapotos: 10/30/2001
mcapotos: 10/25/2001
terry: 10/17/2001
cwells: 3/29/2001
terry: 3/19/2001
mcapotos: 9/5/2000
carol: 6/14/2000
carol: 6/1/2000
carol: 5/30/2000
alopez: 5/22/2000
carol: 11/9/1999
alopez: 12/2/1998
alopez: 10/29/1998

607582	TITLE *607582 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 22 (ORGANIC ANION TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 6; SLC22A6
;;ORGANIC ANION TRANSPORTER 1; OAT1;;
PARA-AMINOHIPPURATE TRANSPORTER; PAHT;;
PAH TRANSPORTER
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SLC22A6 is a member of a family of organic anion transporters. Within
renal proximal tubules, these transporters mediate the secretion of
endogenous and exogenous metabolites, including many clinically
important drugs.

CLONING

Using the sequence of the rat PAH transporter as query, Lu et al. (1999)
identified fetal brain ESTs for SLC22A6, which they designated PAHT.
They obtained the full-length clone by RT-PCR of adult kidney mRNA. The
deduced 550-amino acid protein contains 12 transmembrane spans, 4
protein kinase C (see 176960) phosphorylation sites, 4 protein kinase A
(see 176911) phosphorylation sites, and 5 putative N-glycosylation
sites. SLC22A6 shares 87% identity with rat Oat1, 85% identity with
mouse Oat1, and 32% and 29% identity with the cation transporters OCT1
(SLC22A1; 602607) and OCTN2 (SLC22A5; 603377), respectively. Northern
blot analysis of several tissues detected a 2.4-kb transcript only in
kidney.

Race et al. (1999) cloned SLC22A6, which they designated OAT1, from a
kidney cDNA library. The deduced protein has a calculated molecular mass
of 60.3 kD. SLC22A6 has 12 transmembrane-spanning domains that are
separated by 5 intracellular loops and 6 extracellular loops; the N and
C termini are intracellular. SLC22A6 also contains 3 motifs conserved in
the amphiphilic solute facilitator family of proteins. Northern blot
analysis detected a 2.4-kb transcript expressed strongly in kidney and
weakly in brain.

Bahn et al. (2000) identified a splice variant of OAT1 that has a 132-bp
in-frame deletion, resulting in the loss of transmembrane domain 11 and
half of transmembrane domain 12.

GENE FUNCTION

By analyzing PAHT transiently expressed in HeLa cells, Lu et al. (1999)
demonstrated time-dependent and saturable radiolabeled PAH uptake.
Preincubation with unlabeled alpha-ketoglutaric or with glutaric acid
stimulated PAH uptake, and preincubation with unlabeled PAH stimulated
uptake of radiolabeled alpha-ketoglutarate, consistent with
PAH/alpha-ketoglutarate exchange. Transport of radiolabeled PAH was
inhibited by furosemide, indomethacin, probenecid, and
alpha-ketoglutarate. It was not inhibited by prostaglandins or
methotrexate, indicating substrate specificity that is different than
that of rat Oat1. PAH uptake was also inhibited by phorbol esters in a
dose- and time-dependent fashion, indicating inhibition of transport by
phosphorylation through protein kinase C.

Race et al. (1999) demonstrated PAH uptake in Xenopus oocytes injected
with OAT1 mRNA. PAH uptake was dependent on chloride. Inhibitor studies
gave results similar to those reported by Lu et al. (1999).

GENE STRUCTURE

Bahn et al. (2000) determined that the SLC22A6 gene contains 10 exons
and spans 8.2 kb. The promoter region contains TATA and CCAAT boxes, a
thyroid hormone-binding site, and putative binding sites for nuclear
factor kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011), AP2 (107580), C/EBP-alpha (116897),
and SP1 (189906).

MAPPING

Using somatic cell hybrid analysis, Lu et al. (1999) mapped the SLC22A6
gene to chromosome 11. By radiation hybrid analysis, Race et al. (1999)
mapped the SLC22A6 gene to chromosome 11. Bahn et al. (2000) mapped the
SLC22A6 gene to chromosome 11q13.1-q13.2 using FISH.

REFERENCE 1. Bahn, A.; Prawitt, D.; Buttler, D.; Reid, G.; Enklaar, T.; Wolff,
N. A.; Ebbinghaus, C.; Hillemann, A.; Schulten, H.-J.; Gunawan, B.;
Fuzesi, L.; Zabel, B.; Burckhardt, G.: Genomic structure and in vivo
expression of the human organic anion transporter 1 (hOAT1) gene. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 275: 623-630, 2000.

2. Lu, R.; Chan, B. S.; Schuster, V. L.: Cloning of the human kidney
PAH transporter: narrow substrate specificity and regulation by protein
kinase C. Am. J. Physiol. 276: F295-F303, 1999.

3. Race, J. E.; Grassl, S. M.; Williams, W. J.; Holtzman, E. J.:
Molecular cloning and characterization of two novel human renal organic
anion transporters (hOAT1 and hOAT3). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 255:
508-514, 1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/25/2003

EDITED mgross: 02/25/2003
mgross: 2/25/2003

300344	TITLE *300344 MELANOMA ANTIGEN, FAMILY A, 11; MAGEA11
;;MAGE11
DESCRIPTION The MAGEA family consists of 12 genes (MAGEA1 to MAGEA12), of which 6,
MAGEA1 (300016), MAGEA2 (300173), MAGEA3 (300174), MAGEA4 (300175),
MAGEA6 (300176), and MAGEA12 (300177), are expressed in melanomas and
other cancers. For further background information on the MAGEA family,
see 300016.

CLONING

De Plaen et al. (1994) identified the 12 MAGEA genes. MAGEA11 appeared
to be a weakly expressed member of the family.

MAPPING

By analysis of cell hybrids, ordered YACs, and cosmids, Rogner et al.
(1995) localized the MAGEA cluster to Xq28. They showed that the 12
genes are arranged in 3 clusters within 3.5 Mb.

See 300016 for a discussion of the high frequency of genes on the X
chromosome encoding proteins with the MAGE domain as well as other
cancer-testis antigen genes (Ross et al., 2005).

REFERENCE 1. De Plaen, E.; Arden, K.; Traversari, C.; Gaforio, J. J.; Szikora,
J.-P.; De Smet, C.; Brasseur, F.; van der Bruggen, P.; Lethe, B.;
Lurquin, C.; Brasseur, R.; Chomez, P.; De Backer, O.; Cavenee, W.;
Boon, T.: Structure, chromosomal localization, and expression of
12 genes of the MAGE family. Immunogenetics 40: 360-369, 1994.

2. Rogner, U. C.; Wilke, K.; Steck, E.; Korn, B.; Poustka, A.: The
melanoma antigen gene (MAGE) family is clustered in the chromosomal
band Xq28. Genomics 29: 725-731, 1995.

3. Ross, M. T.; Grafham, D. V.; Coffey, A. J.; Scherer, S.; McLay,
K.; Muzny, D.; Platzer, M.; Howell, G. R.; Burrows, C.; Bird, C. P.;
Frankish, A.; Lovell, F. L.; and 270 others: The DNA sequence of
the human X chromosome. Nature 434: 325-337, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/21/2005

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/7/2001

EDITED alopez: 03/24/2005
terry: 3/21/2005
mgross: 6/7/2001

174761	TITLE *174761 POLYMERASE (DNA-DIRECTED), DELTA 1, CATALYTIC SUBUNIT; POLD1
;;POLYMERASE, DNA, DELTA; POLD
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The POLD1 gene encodes the catalytic and proofreading subunit of DNA
polymerase-delta, which is responsible for DNA synthesis of the lagging
strand during DNA replication (summary by Palles et al., 2013 and Weedon
et al., 2013).

The DNA polymerase delta complex is involved in DNA replication and
repair, and it consists of the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA;
176740), the multisubunit replication factor C (see 102579), and the 4
subunit polymerase complex: POLD1, POLD2 (600815), POLD3 (611415), and
POLD4 (611525) (Liu and Warbrick, 2006).

CLONING

Syvaoja et al. (1990) purified DNA polymerases alpha (312040), delta,
and epsilon (174762) from the same HeLa cell extract. The results of
their studies supported the premise that the alpha, delta, and epsilon
polymerases are distinct enzymes. PCNA is the auxiliary protein
(cofactor) for DNA polymerase delta. Syvaoja and Linn (1989) identified
a form of DNA polymerase delta in HeLa cells that is insensitive to
PCNA. Lee and Toomey (1987) isolated DNA polymerase delta from human
placenta and presented evidence that both its polymerase and its
exonuclease activities are associated with a single protein. Lee (1988)
concluded that the multiple forms of placenta DNA polymerase delta are
the result of proteolysis during isolation and that all derive from one
protein.

Chung et al. (1991) cloned cDNA corresponding to the POLD gene and
showed that the 3,443-bp sequence encodes a polypeptide of 1,107 amino
acids. The enzyme is 94% identical to bovine DNA polymerase delta and
contains the numerous highly conserved regions previously observed in
the bovine and yeast enzymes. The human enzyme also contains 2 putative
zinc finger domains in the C-terminal region of the molecule as well as
a putative nuclear localization signal at the N-terminal end.

Yang et al. (1992) also cloned human POLD cDNA and demonstrated that it
is 3.5 kb long and encodes a protein of 1,107 amino acids with a
calculated molecular mass of 124 kD. Northern blot analysis demonstrated
that the mRNA is 3.4 kb.

Weedon et al. (2013) found expression of the POLD1 gene across a panel
of human tissues, with high levels of expression in heart and lung.

GENE FUNCTION

Nishida et al. (1988) showed that DNA repair synthesis in human
fibroblasts requires DNA polymerase delta. Dresler et al. (1988) showed
that repair synthesis late after ultraviolet irradiation, like repair
synthesis at earlier stages, is mediated by this enzyme.

Kamath-Loeb et al. (2000) showed that WRN functionally interacts with
DNA polymerase delta, which is required for DNA replication and DNA
repair.

Lydeard et al. (2007) showed that in haploid budding yeast, Rad51
(179617)-dependent break-induced replication (BIR) induced by HO
endonuclease requires the lagging strand DNA polymerase alpha-primase
complex as well as polymerase delta to initiate new DNA synthesis.
Polymerase epsilon is not required for the initial primer extension step
of BIR but is required to complete 30 kb of new DNA synthesis.
Initiation of BIR also requires the nonessential DNA polymerase delta
subunit polymerase-32 primarily through its interaction with another
polymerase delta subunit, polymerase-31. HO-induced gene conversion, in
which both ends of a double-strand break engage in homologous
recombination, does not require polymerase-32. Polymerase-32 is also
required for the recovery of both Rad51-dependent and Rad51-independent
survivors in yeast strains lacking telomerase. The results of Lydeard et
al. (2007) strongly suggested that both types of telomere maintenance
pathways occur by recombination-dependent DNA replication. Thus,
polymerase-32, dispensable for replication and for gene conversion, is
uniquely required for BIR; this finding provided an opening into
understanding how DNA replication restart mechanisms operate in
eukaryotes.

MAPPING

By PCR analysis of DNA from a panel of 24 human/hamster hybrid cells,
Chung et al. (1991) mapped the POLD gene to chromosome 19. Yang et al.
(1992) localized the POLD gene to chromosome 19 by Southern blotting of
EcoRI-digested DNA from a panel of rodent/human cell hybrids. By in situ
hybridization, Kemper et al. (1992) assigned the POLD1 gene to
19q13.3-q13.4.

Goldsby et al. (1998) mapped the Pold1 gene to mouse chromosome 7.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chang et al. (1995) showed that the human POLD1 gene contains 27 exons
spanning approximately 32 kb. The gene has a GC-rich promoter region and
multiple transcription start sites. Zhao and Chang (1997) found that the
core promoter of the POLD1 gene extends 328 bp upstream from the major
transcription start site. Multiple elements in this region, including
two 11-bp direct repeats, play an important role in POLD1 promoter
activity. Zhao and Chang (1997) showed that SP1 (189906) and SP3
(601804) can activate the POLD1 promoter through the direct repeat
sequences.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Susceptibility to Colorectal Cancer 10

In affected members of 2 large multigenerational families with
susceptibility to colorectal cancer-10 (CRCS10; 612591), Palles et al.
(2013) identified a heterozygous mutation in the POLD1 gene (S478N;
174761.0001) at a highly conserved residue in the exonuclease domain.
The S489N mutation was also identified in a third affected family in the
validation phase of the study. The phenotype was characterized by the
development of multiple colorectal adenomas and carcinomas early in
adult life. However, 7 mutation carriers also developed endometrial
carcinoma, and 1 patient had 2 primary brain tumors. Tumor tissue from 2
of 6 mutation carriers showed additional somatic mutations, most
commonly in the APC (611731), KRAS (190070), or FBXW7 (606278) genes.
All tumors showed microsatellite stability. In addition to germline
POLD1 mutations, Palles et al. (2013) identified somatic POLE mutations
in 5 colorectal cancers from a large database. All of these tumors had
additional somatic mutations. These findings suggested that the
mechanism of tumorigenesis in POLD1-mutated tumors is decreased fidelity
of replication-associated polymerase proofreading, leading to an
increased mutation rate.

- Mandibular Hypoplasia, Deafness, Progeroid Features, and
Lipodystrophy Syndrome

In 4 unrelated patients with mandibular hypoplasia, deafness, progeroid
features, and lipodystrophy syndrome (MDPL; 615381), Weedon et al.
(2013) identified a de novo heterozygous in-frame deletion of residue
ser605 (ser604del) in the polymerase active site of the POLD1 gene
(174761.0003). The mutation, which was initially found by exome
sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing in 2 of the patients, was
not found in any of the parents or in several large control databases.
The disorder was characterized by loss of subcutaneous fat in early
childhood, a characteristic facial appearance, and metabolic
abnormalities including insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus.
Sensorineural deafness occurred late in the first or second decades of
life. In vitro functional expression studies in E. coli showed that the
mutant enzyme had lost its DNA polymerase ability, whereas its
exonuclease activity, although decreased compared to wildtype, was still
present. The studies demonstrated decoupling of the mutant enzyme's
activities and suggested that the mutant protein could bind DNA, but was
unable to interact with and incorporate dNTPs. The mutations causing
colorectal cancer (174761.0001 and 174761.0002) affect the proofreading
domain and lead to increased base-substitution error rates, whereas the
ser605del mutant enzyme retains proofreading ability but cannot catalyze
polymerization, which likely leads to an increase in stalled replication
forks, cell senescence, and death. The findings implicated POLD1 in
adipose tissue homeostasis.

ANIMAL MODEL

Normal cells minimize spontaneous mutations through the combined actions
of polymerase base selectivity, 3-prime to 5-prime exonucleolytic
proofreading, mismatch correction, and DNA damage repair. To determine
the consequences of defective proofreading in mammals, Goldsby et al.
(2002) generated mice with a point mutation (asp400 to ala) in the
proofreading domain of DNA polymerase delta. They showed that this
mutation inactivates the 3-prime to 5-prime exonuclease of DNA
polymerase delta and causes a mutator and cancer phenotype in a
recessive manner. By 18 months of age, 94% of mice homozygous for the
mutation developed cancer and died (median survival, 10 months). In
contrast, only 3 to 4% of heterozygotes and wildtype homozygotes
developed cancer in this time frame. Of the 66 tumors arising in 49
homozygous mice, 40 were epithelial in origin (carcinomas), 24 were
mesenchymal (lymphomas and sarcomas), and 2 were composite (teratomas);
one-third of these animals developed tumors in more than 1 tissue. Skin
squamous cell carcinoma was the most common tumor type, occurring in 60%
of all homozygous mice and in 90% of those surviving beyond 8 months of
age. These data showed that DNA polymerase delta proofreading suppresses
spontaneous tumor development and strongly suggested that unrepaired DNA
polymerase errors contribute to carcinogenesis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COLORECTAL CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 10
POLD1, SER478ASN

In affected members of 2 large multigenerational families with
susceptibility to colorectal cancer-10 (CRCS10; 612591), Palles et al.
(2013) identified a heterozygous 1433G-A transition in the POLD1 gene,
resulting in a ser478-to-asn (S478N) substitution at a highly conserved
residue in the exonuclease domain. The mutant mRNA was stably expressed.
Microsatellite analysis of the 2 families suggested a common ancestor.
The S489N mutation was identified in a third affected family in the
validation phase of the study. The mutation, which was initially
identified by linkage analysis combined with whole-genome sequencing,
was not found in 6,721 controls or 10,755 control exomes. A yeast
construct carrying the analogous mutation showed a 12-fold higher
mutation rate compared to wildtype. Molecular modeling using yeast
structures indicated that the S478N mutation will distort the packing of
helices involved at the exonuclease active site, likely affecting
nuclear activity. The phenotype was characterized by the development of
multiple colorectal adenomas and carcinomas early in adult life.
However, 7 mutation carriers also developed endometrial carcinoma, and 1
patient had 2 primary brain tumors. Tumor tissue from 2 of 6 mutation
carriers showed additional somatic mutations, most commonly in the APC
(611731), KRAS (190070), or FBXW7 (606278) genes. All tumors showed
microsatellite stability.

.0002
COLORECTAL CANCER, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 10
POLD1, PRO327LEU

In a 70-year-old patient with multiple colorectal adenomas (612591),
Palles et al. (2013) identified a heterozygous 981C-G transversion in
the POLD1 gene, resulting in a pro327-to-leu (P327L) substitution at a
highly conserved residue in the exonuclease domain.

.0003
MANDIBULAR HYPOPLASIA, DEAFNESS, PROGEROID FEATURES, AND LIPODYSTROPHY
SYNDROME
POLD1, 3-BP DEL, 1812CTC

In 4 unrelated patients with mandibular hypoplasia, deafness, progeroid
features, and lipodystrophy syndrome (MDPL; 615381), Weedon et al.
(2013) identified a de novo heterozygous in-frame 3-bp deletion
(c.1812_1814delCTC) in the POLD1 gene, resulting in the deletion of
residue ser605 (ser605del) in motif A, a highly conserved region of the
polymerase active site. The mutation, which was initially found by exome
sequencing and confirmed by Sanger sequencing in 2 of the patients, was
not found in any of the parents or in several large control databases.
In vitro functional expression studies in E. coli showed that the mutant
enzyme had lost its DNA polymerase ability, whereas its exonuclease
activity, although decreased compared to wildtype, was still present.
These studies demonstrated decoupling of the mutant enzyme's activities
and suggested that the mutant protein could bind DNA, but was unable to
interact with and incorporate dNTPs. The findings implicated POLD1 in
adipose tissue homeostasis.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bertazzoni et al. (1977); Dresler et al. (1988); Lestienne  (1987)
REFERENCE 1. Bertazzoni, U.; Scovassi, A. I.; Brun, G. M.: Chick-embryo DNA
polymerase gamma: identity of gamma-polymerases purified from nuclei
and mitochondria. Europ. J. Biochem. 81: 237-248, 1977.

2. Chang, L.-S.; Zhao, L.; Zhu, L.; Chen, M.-L.; Lee, M. Y. W. T.
: Structure of the gene for the catalytic subunit of human DNA polymerase
delta (POLD1). Genomics 28: 411-419, 1995.

3. Chung, D. W.; Zhang, J.; Tan, C.-K.; Davie, E. W.; So, A. G.; Downey,
K. M.: Primary structure of the catalytic subunit of human DNA polymerase
delta and chromosomal location of the gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88:
11197-11201, 1991.

4. Dresler, S. L.; Gowans, B. J.; Robinson-Hill, R. M.; Hunting, D.
J.: Involvement of DNA polymerase delta in DNA repair synthesis in
human fibroblasts at late times after ultraviolet irradiation. Biochemistry 27:
6379-6383, 1988.

5. Goldsby, R. E.; Hays, L. E.; Chen, X.; Olmsted, E. A.; Slayton,
W. B.; Spangrude, G. J.; Preston, B. D.: High incidence of epithelial
cancers in mice deficient for DNA polymerase delta proofreading. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 15560-15565, 2002.

6. Goldsby, R. E.; Singh, M.; Preston, B. D.: Mouse DNA polymerase
delta gene (Pold1) maps to chromosome 7. Mammalian Genome 9: 92-93,
1998.

7. Kamath-Loeb, A. S.; Johansson, E.; Burgers, P. M. J.; Loeb, L.
A.: Functional interaction between the Werner syndrome protein and
DNA polymerase delta. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 4603-4608, 2000.

8. Kemper, R. R.; Ahn, E. R.; Zhang, P.; Lee, M. Y. W. T.; Rabin,
M.: Human DNA polymerase delta gene maps to region 19q13.3-q13.4
by in situ hybridization. Genomics 14: 205-206, 1992.

9. Lee, M. Y. W. T.: Isolation of multiple forms of DNA polymerase
delta: evidence of proteolytic modification during isolation. Biochemistry 27:
5188-5193, 1988.

10. Lee, M. Y. W. T.; Toomey, N. L.: Human placental DNA polymerase
delta: identification of a 170-kilodalton polypeptide by activity
staining and immunoblotting. Biochemistry 26: 1076-1085, 1987.

11. Lestienne, P.: Evidence for a direct role of the DNA polymerase
gamma in the replication of the human mitochondrial DNA in vitro. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 146: 1146-1153, 1987.

12. Liu, G.; Warbrick, E.: The p66 and p12 subunits of DNA polymerase
delta are modified by ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like proteins. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 349: 360-366, 2006.

13. Lydeard, J. R.; Jain, S.; Yamaguchi, M.; Haber, J. E.: Break-induced
replication and telomerase-independent telomere maintenance require
Pol32. Nature 448: 820-823, 2007.

14. Nishida, C.; Reinhard, P.; Linn, S.: DNA repair synthesis in
human fibroblasts requires DNA polymerase delta. J. Biol. Chem. 263:
501-510, 1988.

15. Palles, C.; Cazier, J.-B.; Howarth, K. M.; Domingo, E.; Jones,
A. M.; Broderick, P.; Kemp, Z.; Spain, S. L.; Almeida, E. G.; Salguero,
I.; Sherborne, A.; Chubb, D.; and 27 others: Germline mutations
affecting the proofreading domains of POLE and POLD1 predispose to
colorectal adenomas and carcinomas. Nature Genet. 45: 136-144, 2013.

16. Syvaoja, J.; Linn, S.: Characterization of a large form of DNA
polymerase delta from HeLa cells that is insensitive to proliferating
cell nuclear antigen. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 2489-2497, 1989.

17. Syvaoja, J.; Suomensaari, S.; Nishida, C.; Goldsmith, J. S.; Chui,
G. S. J.; Jain, S.; Linn, S.: DNA polymerases alpha, delta, and epsilon:
three distinct enzymes from HeLa cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87:
6664-6668, 1990.

18. Weedon, M. N.; Ellard, S.; Prindle, M. J.; Caswell, R.; Allen,
H. L.; Oram, R.; Godbole, K.; Yajnik, C. S.; Sbraccia, P.; Novelli,
G.; Turnpenny, P.; McCann, E.; and 10 others: An in-frame deletion
at the polymerase active site of POLD1 causes a multisystem disorder
with lipodystrophy. Nature Genet. 45: 947-950, 2013.

19. Yang, C.-L.; Chang, L.-S.; Zhang, P.; Hao, H.; Zhu, L.; Toomey,
N. L.; Lee, M. Y. W. T.: Molecular cloning of the cDNA for the catalytic
subunit of human DNA polymerase delta. Nucleic Acids Res. 20: 735-745,
1992.

20. Zhao, L.; Chang, L.-S.: The human POLD1 gene: identification
of an upstream activator sequence, activation by Sp1 and Sp3, and
cell cycle regulation. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 4869-4882, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/27/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/18/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/15/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/19/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 5/7/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/19/1998
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/27/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/8/1990

EDITED carol: 08/27/2013
ckniffin: 8/27/2013
carol: 2/19/2013
ckniffin: 2/18/2013
alopez: 10/26/2007
terry: 10/15/2007
wwang: 10/12/2007
wwang: 9/10/2007
carol: 1/22/2003
tkritzer: 1/17/2003
terry: 1/14/2003
mcapotos: 7/19/2000
mcapotos: 7/17/2000
terry: 12/2/1999
kayiaros: 7/12/1999
psherman: 5/7/1998
terry: 2/19/1998
mark: 3/18/1997
carol: 2/1/1995
warfield: 4/21/1994
carol: 9/21/1992
carol: 9/4/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

605722	TITLE *605722 POTASSIUM CHANNEL, INWARDLY RECTIFYING, SUBFAMILY J, MEMBER 16; KCNJ16
;;KIR5.1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Inwardly rectifying potassium (Kir) channels are important for
regulation of the resting membrane potential and control of cellular
electrical activity. KCNJ16, or Kir5.1, belongs to the Kir family, but
it does not produce functional potassium channels when expressed by
itself. Instead, Kir5.1 appears to coassemble selectively with either
Kir4.1 (KCNJ10; 602208) or Kir4.2 (KCNJ15; 602106) to form novel
heteromeric channels (summary by D'Adamo et al., 2011).

CLONING

By EST database searching for sequences showing homology to mouse
Kir5.1, Liu et al. (2000) identified a human EST with 98% sequence
identity to a segment on chromosome 17. Using the full-length Kir5.1
mouse clone, they derived the human ortholog, designated KCNJ16, from
genomic sequence. The KCNJ16 gene encodes a deduced 418-amino acid
protein with a calculated molecular mass of 48 kD. The protein shares
over 95% sequence identity with both mouse and rat Kir5.1. RT-PCR
analysis detected ubiquitous expression of KCNJ16, whereas Northern blot
analysis detected significant expression of a 4.0-kb transcript in
kidney, pancreas, and thyroid gland. In situ hybridization demonstrated
expression of KCNJ16 in convoluted tubule cells of the kidney and in
acinar and ductal cells of the pancreas. Liu et al. (2000) noted that
Kir1.1 (KCNJ1; 600359), Kir4.1, and Kir4.2 are all expressed in kidney.
They suggested that heteromultimers of these potassium channel proteins
in kidney and pancreas may play a role in ion transport, fluid
regulation, and pH balance.

By database searching with sequences from rat Kir5.1, Derst et al.
(2001) independently assembled a human KCNJ16 cDNA, which they called
Kir5.1. They predicted that Kir5.1 encodes a protein of 418 amino acids
that shares 91% amino acid identity with rat and mouse Kir5.1. They
noted that Kir5.1 shares 40 to 43% amino acid identity with members of
the Kir2 gene family, including Kir2.1 (KCNJ2; 600681), Kir2.2 (KCNJ12;
602323), Kir2.3, and Kir2.4 (KCNJ14; 603953).

Using in situ hybridization, Derst et al. (2001) detected Kir5.1
expression restricted to the hindbrain, midbrain, and diencephalon in
rat brain. Using RT-PCR, they detected KCNJ16 expression in human kidney
in the proximal tubule, the thick ascending limb, and the cortical
collecting duct. They noted that KCNJ16 expression overlaps with Kir2.1
expression in some regions of the brain and kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

Derst et al. (2001) found that when Kir5.1 was expressed in Xenopus
oocytes, it was targeted to the cell surface and formed electrically
silent channels together with Kir2.1, thus negatively controlling Kir2.1
channel activity in native cells.

By electrophysiologic recording of HEK293T cells transfected with rat
cDNAs, Tanemoto et al. (2000) showed that Kir4.1, but not Kir5.1, formed
functional homomeric K+ channels sensitive to intracellular, but not
extracellular, pH. Heteromeric Kir4.1/Kir5 channels were functional and
showed channel properties different than those of homomeric Kir4.1
channels. For both Kir4.1 and Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels, response to pH
disappeared at pH 5.5 and increased in a pH-dependent manner between pH
6.5 and pH 8.0. Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels had larger conductance, altered
kinetics, and greater sensitivity to pH than Kir4.1 channels.
Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels opened in bursts, and the closed period between
bursts was influenced by intracellular pH.

In cotransfection experiments, Tanemoto et al. (2002) showed that Kir5.1
assembles to form a functional homomeric potassium channel by
interacting with PSD95 (602887). Kir5.1 expressed alone was distributed
mostly in the cytoplasm, but Kir5.1 coexpressed with PSD95 was located
on the plasma membrane in a clustered manner. Using GST pull-down
studies, Tanemoto et al. (2002) identified domains responsible for
Kir5.1/PSD95 interaction. They found that protein kinase A
(PKA)-mediated phosphorylation of Kir5.1 disrupted the binding of Kir5.1
with PSD95. Tanemoto et al. (2002) hypothesized that Kir5.1/PSD95 forms
a functional brain potassium channel that may be a physiologic target of
PKA-mediated signaling.

GENE STRUCTURE

Derst et al. (2001) determined that the KCNJ16 gene is encoded by 5
exons spanning approximately 60 kb. They noted that KCNJ16 and KCNJ2 are
separated by only 34 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Liu et al. (2000) mapped the KCNJ16 gene
to chromosome 17q25. By the same method, Derst et al. (2001) assigned
KCNJ16 to chromosome 17q23.1-q24.2, near KCNJ2.

ANIMAL MODEL

D'Adamo et al. (2011) found that, despite widespread Kir5.1 expression,
Kir5.1 -/- mice were born at the expected mendelian ratio, were viable
and fertile, and showed no behavioral or physical abnormalities.
However, whole-cell patch clamp experiments showed that neurons cultured
from the locus ceruleus (LC) of Kir5.1 -/- mice exhibited reduced
response to intracellular pH compared with wildtype LC neurons. Both the
kinetics and amplitude of firing of Kir5.1 -/- LC neurons were altered
in response to NH4Cl application or elevated soluble CO2. D'Adamo et al.
(2011) concluded that Kir5.1/Kir4.1 channels of the LC respond to
hypercapnic acidosis.

REFERENCE 1. D'Adamo, M. C.; Shang, L.; Imbrici, P.; Brown, S. D. M.; Pessia,
M.; Tucker, S. J.: Genetic inactivation of Kcnj16 identifies Kir5.1
as an important determinant of neuronal PCO2/pH sensitivity. J. Biol.
Chem. 286: 192-198, 2011.

2. Derst, C.; Karschin, C.; Wischmeyer, E.; Hirsch, J. R.; Preisig-Muller,
R.; Rajan, S.; Engel, H.; Grzeschik, K.-H.; Daut, J.; Karschin, A.
: Genetic and functional linkage of Kir5.1 and Kir2.1 channel subunits. FEBS
Lett. 491: 305-311, 2001.

3. Liu, Y.; McKenna, E.; Figueroa, D. J.; Blevins, R.; Austin, C.
P.; Bennett, P. B.; Swanson, R.: The human inward rectifier K+ channel
subunit Kir5.1 (KCNJ16) maps to chromosome 17q25 and is expressed
in kidney and pancreas. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 90: 60-63, 2000.

4. Tanemoto, M.; Fujita, A.; Higashi, K.; Kurachi, Y.: PSD-95 mediates
formation of a functional homomeric Kir5.1 channel in the brain. Neuron 34:
387-397, 2002.

5. Tanemoto, M.; Kittaka, N.; Inanobe, A.; Kurachi, Y.: In vivo formation
of a proton-sensitive K+ channel by heteromeric subunit assembly of
Kir5.1 with Kir4.1. J. Physiol. 525: 587-592, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/9/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/1/2011
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 12/18/2002

CREATED Yen-Pei C. Chang: 3/8/2001

EDITED terry: 11/29/2012
mgross: 6/9/2011
terry: 6/1/2011
carol: 2/4/2003
tkritzer: 12/18/2002
carol: 3/8/2001

605754	TITLE *605754 PHOSPHATIDYLINOSITOL GLYCAN, CLASS Q; PIGQ
DESCRIPTION Many eukaryotic proteins are anchored to the membrane through the
hydrocarbon chains of a covalently bound glycosylphosphatidylinositol
(GPI) membrane anchor. GPI anchoring is important for regulation of cell
growth and activation. GPI biosynthesis in the endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) is initiated by transfer of N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc) from
UDP-GlcNAc to phosphatidylinositol (PI). This transfer is catalyzed by
GlcNAc transferase (GPI-GnT) and enzyme activity requires several genes
including PIGA (311770), PIGC (601730), and PIGH (600154) in mammals and
Gpi1, Gpi2 (PIGC homolog), and Gpi3 (PIGA homolog) in yeast. PIGQ is
involved in the first step of GPI biosynthesis (Tiede et al., 1998).

CLONING

In a database search for homologs of yeast Gpi1, Tiede et al. (1998) and
Watanabe et al. (1998) identified PIGQ, which they called hGPI1. The
full-length PIGQ cDNA encodes a deduced 581-amino acid protein that
shares 24% overall amino acid identity with yeast Gpi1. The C-terminal
half of PIGQ is better conserved than the N-terminal half. Watanabe et
al. (1998) predicted that PIGQ has several hydrophobic regions, some of
which may be transmembrane domains, and a potential tyrosine
phosphorylation site in the third cytoplasmic loop. Tiede et al. (1998)
predicted that most of the amino acids and conserved residues are on the
cytoplasmic face of the ER and that there are no significant domains in
the lumen of the ER. Tiede et al. (1998) and Hong et al. (1999)
independently cloned the mouse PIGQ homolog, which shares 85 to 89%
amino acid identity with human PIGQ.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunoprecipitation experiments, Watanabe et al. (1998)
demonstrated that PIGQ associates specifically with PIGA, PIGC, and PIGH
and that all 4 proteins form a complex that has GPI-GnT activity in
vitro. The authors concluded that these 4 proteins form part or all of
GPI-GnT.

By expressing the mouse and human PIGQ in Gpi1-deficient S. cerevisiae,
Tiede et al. (1998) demonstrated that PIGQ specifically rescues S.
cerevisiae Gpi1 mutants, indicating that mouse and human PIGQ are indeed
orthologs of yeast Gpi1 and that there is a high degree of evolutionary
conservation in GPI biosynthesis. Tiede et al. (1998) concluded that
PIGQ is involved in the first step of GPI biosynthesis and that the
specific function of PIGQ may be to stabilize the enzyme complex in the
ER rather than to participate in catalysis of GlcNAc transfer.

GENE STRUCTURE

By comparing cDNA and genomic sequence, Hong et al. (1999) predicted
that PIGQ is encoded by 11 exons.

MAPPING

Using fluorescence in situ hybridization, Hong et al. (1999) mapped the
PIGQ gene to chromosome 16p13.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hong et al. (1999) disrupted the mouse Gpi1 gene in F9 embryonal
carcinoma cells, which caused a severe but not complete defect in the
generation of GPI-anchored proteins. A complex of Piga, Pigh, and Pigc
decreased to a nearly undetectable level, whereas a complex of Piga and
Pigh was easily detected. A lack of Gpi1 also caused partial decreases
of Pigc and Pigh. Therefore, GPI1 stabilizes the enzyme by tying up Pigc
with a complex of Piga and Pigh.

REFERENCE 1. Hong, Y.; Ohishi, K.; Watanabe, R.; Endo, Y.; Maeda, Y.; Kinoshita,
T.: GPI1 stabilizes an enzyme essential in the first step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol
biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 18582-18588, 1999.

2. Tiede, A.; Schubert, J.; Nischan, C.; Jensen, I.; Westfall, B.;
Taron, C. H.; Orlean, P.; Schmidt, R. E.: Human and mouse Gpi1p homologues
restore glycosylphosphatidylinositol membrane anchor biosynthesis
in yeast mutants. Biochem. J. 334: 609-616, 1998.

3. Watanabe, R.; Inoue, N.; Westfall, B.; Taron, C. H.; Orlean, P.;
Takeda, J.; Kinoshita, T.: The first step of glycosylphosphatidylinositol
biosynthesis is mediated by a complex of PIG-A, PIG-H, PIG-C and GPI1. EMBO
J. 17: 877-885, 1998.

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 3/22/2001

EDITED alopez: 07/21/2009
carol: 3/22/2001

