156565	TITLE *156565 N-@METHYLPURINE DNA GLYCOSYLASE; MPG
;;METHYLADENINE DNA GLYCOSYLASE; MDG;;
3-@METHYLADENINE DNA GLYCOSYLASE;;
3@MeAde DNA GLYCOSYLASE;;
3-@ALKYLADENINE DNA GLYCOSYLASE; AAG;;
ALKYLPURINE DNA N-GLYCOSYLASE; APNG
DESCRIPTION The bacterial enzyme 3-methyladenine (3MeA) DNA glycosylase repairs the
lethal lesion 3MeA that blocks DNA replication in Escherichia coli. The
removal of 3MeA is mediated by two 3MeA DNA glycosylases in E. coli,
encoded by the alkA and tag genes. Using a human cDNA library cloned
into a bacterial expression vector, Boosalis et al. (1991) cloned a
1.15-kb cDNA that rescued alkA(-) tag(-) glycosylase-deficient E. coli
from alkylation-induced killing, and produced a 5-fold increase in 3MeA
DNA glycosylase activity in the E. coli strain. The cDNA hybridized to
human genomic DNA but did not hybridize to E. coli or yeast DNA. DNA
sequence analysis defined an open reading frame coding for a 33-kD
protein that showed extensive amino acid homology with rat 3MeA DNA
glycosylase. The gene (designated N-methylpurine DNA glycosylase, MPG)
was mapped to human chromosome 16 by analysis of a panel of DNAs from
mouse/human and hamster/human hybrid cell lines. Samson et al. (1991)
suggested that because of the 85% identity of 1 part of the human
glycosylase with the middle of the rat glycosylase polypeptide and,
hence, the likely common origin of the rat and human glycosylases, the
human gene should be called AAG for 3-alkyladenine DNA glycosylase.
Vickers et al. (1993) also isolated a cDNA corresponding to the human
MPG gene. They showed that the gene comprises 5 exons and lies within a
group of closely spaced genes in the terminal region of chromosome 16p.
The MPG gene was expressed in all cell lines and tissues examined, but
was found at particularly high levels in a colon adenocarcinoma cell
line (HT29). The completely characterized human MPG gene was found to
span 7 to 8 kb of genomic DNA and to be localized 75 kb upstream of the
embryonic zeta-globin gene (HBZ; 142310).

Kielman et al. (1995) described the genomic organization of the mouse
Mpg gene. Preliminary analyses by Kielman et al. (1993) and Kielman et
al. (1994) indicated that as in the human, the gene is upstream of the
alpha-globin gene cluster on mouse chromosome 11.

The human enzyme 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase removes a diverse group
of damaged bases from DNA, including cytotoxic and mutagenic alkylation
adducts of purines. Lau et al. (1998) reported the crystal structure of
human 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase complexed to a mechanism-based
pyrrolidine inhibitor. The enzyme had intercalated into the minor groove
of DNA, causing the abasic pyrrolidine nucleotide to flip into the
enzyme active site, where a bound water was poised for nucleophilic
attack.

ANIMAL MODEL

By targeted homologous recombination, Engelward et al. (1997) generated
mice deficient in the 3MeA DNA glycosylase encoded by the Aag gene. In
several mouse tissues, the Aag gene product appears to be the only DNA
glycosylase that is active against 3MeA, hypoxanthine, and
1,N6-ethenoadenine. Although the Aag protein has the capacity to remove
8-oxoguanine DNA lesions, it does not appear to be the major glycosylase
for 8-oxoguanine repair.

To assess the contribution of Apng to the repair of several mutagenic
lesions in vivo, Hang et al. (1997) biochemically analyzed cell-free
extracts of tissues from mice with a targeted deletion of the Apng gene.
They found that both 1,N6-ethenoadenine and hypoxanthine are substrates
for Apng, but 3,N4-ethenocytosine and 8-oxoguanine are not.

Elder et al. (1998) developed mice deficient in
alkylpurine-DNA-N-glycosylase by targeted disruption. Following
treatment with DNA-methylating agents, increased persistence of
7-methylguanine (meG) was found in liver sections of APNG knockout mice
in comparison with wildtype mice, demonstrating an in vivo phenotype for
the APNG-null animals. Unlike other null mutants of the basic excision
repair pathway, the APNG knockout mice exhibited a very mild phenotype,
showed no outward abnormalities, were fertile, and had an apparently
normal life span. Neither a difference in the number of leukocytes in
peripheral blood nor a difference in the number of bone marrow
polychromatic erythrocytes was found when knockout and wildtype mice
were exposed to methylating or chloroethylating agents. Treatment with
methyl methanesulfonate resulted in 3- to 4-fold more HPRT (308000)
mutations in splenic T lymphocytes from APNG knockout mice than in those
from wildtype mice. These mutations were predominantly single-basepair
changes that most likely were caused by 3-meA and 3- or 7-meG,
respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Boosalis, M.; Derfler, B.; Call, K.; Samson, L.: Cloning of a
human 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase cDNA whose gene maps to human
chromosome 16. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 49 (suppl.): 399 only,
1991.

2. Elder, R. H.; Jansen, J. G.; Weeks, R. J.; Willington, M. A.; Deans,
B.; Watson, A. J.; Mynett, K. J.; Bailey, J. A.; Cooper, D. P.; Rafferty,
J. A.; Heeran, M. C; Wijnhoven, S. W. P.; van Zeeland, A. A.; Margison,
G. P.: Alkylpurine-DNA-N-glycosylase knockout mice show increased
susceptibility to induction of mutations by methyl methanesulfonate. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 18: 5828-5837, 1998.

3. Engelward, B. P.; Weeda, G.; Wyatt, M. D.; Broekhof, J. L. M.;
de Wit, J.; Donker, I.; Allan, J. M.; Gold, B.; Hoeijmakers, J. H.
J.; Samson, L. D.: Base excision repair deficient mice lacking the
Aag alkyladenine DNA glycosylase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 13087-13092,
1997.

4. Hang, B.; Singer, B.; Margison, G. P.; Elder, R. H.: Targeted
deletion of alkylpurine-DNA-N-glycosylase in mice eliminates repair
of 1,N6-ethenoadenine and hypoxanthine but not of 3,N4-ethenocytosine
or 8-oxoguanine. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 12869-12874, 1997.

5. Kielman, M. F.; Smits, R.; Bernini, L. F.: Structure of the mouse
3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase gene and exact localization upstream
of the alpha-globin gene cluster on chromosome 11. Mammalian Genome 6:
499-504, 1995.

6. Kielman, M. F.; Smits, R.; Bernini, L. F.: Localization and characterization
of the mouse alpha-globin locus control region. Genomics 21: 431-433,
1994.

7. Kielman, M. F.; Smits, R.; Devi, T. S.; Fodde, R.; Bernini, L.
F.: Homology of a 130-kb region enclosing the alpha-globin gene cluster,
the alpha-locus controlling region, and two non-globin genes in human
and mouse. Mammalian Genome 4: 314-323, 1993.

8. Lau, A. Y.; Scharer, O. D.; Samson, L.; Verdine, G. L.; Ellenberger,
T.: Crystal structure of a human alkylbase-DNA repair enzyme complexed
to DNA: mechanisms for nucleotide flipping and base excision. Cell 95:
249-258, 1998.

9. Samson, L.; Derfler, B.; Boosalis, M.; Call, K.: Cloning and characterization
of a 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase cDNA from human cells whose gene
maps to chromosome 16. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 9127-9131, 1991.

10. Vickers, M. A.; Vyas, P.; Harris, P. C.; Simmons, D. L.; Higgs,
D. R.: Structure of the human 3-methyladenine DNA glycosylase gene
and localization close to the 16p telomere. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90:
3437-3441, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/28/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 11/11/1998
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/6/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/4/1991

EDITED joanna: 12/17/2009
terry: 10/12/2005
alopez: 8/1/2000
terry: 7/28/2000
carol: 11/13/1998
psherman: 11/6/1998
terry: 7/8/1997
mark: 10/18/1995
carol: 3/10/1994
carol: 5/21/1993
carol: 8/28/1992
carol: 6/19/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992

600025	TITLE *600025 KINESIN LIGHT CHAIN 1; KLC1
;;KINESIN 2; KNS2;;
KNS2A;;
KLC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Kinesins are tubulin (see 191130) molecular motors that transport
organelles within cells and move chromosomes along microtubules during
cell division. In sea urchin and mammalian cells, kinesins have been
characterized as tetrameric proteins containing 2 heavy (alpha) chains
of approximately 120 kD and 2 light (beta) chains of approximately 70
kD. The alpha chains provide the tubulin binding site and the ATPase
domains, whereas the beta chains are responsible for the specific
attachment of the organelle to be moved by the kinesin tetramer.
Kinesins transport their bound organelle to the plus end of the
microtubule (summary by Chernajovsky et al., 1996).

CLONING

Chernajovsky et al. (1996) noted that differential splicing occurs for
the kinesin beta (light chain) cDNA sequences at the 3-prime end of the
rat kinesin mRNA, producing kinesins having different C-terminal ends
that seem to confer the kinesin specificity for organelle binding.
Cabeza-Arvelaiz et al. (1993) isolated and sequenced a cDNA encoding the
human kinesin light chain protein (KLC). The cDNA encodes a deduced
polypeptide of 569 amino acids with a predicted molecular mass of 64,789
Da. The predicted secondary internal structure of the KLC molecule
consists of about 27 contiguous repeats, each of approximately 21 amino
acids, and could be divided into 3 domains.

Rahman et al. (1998) cloned mouse Klc1. The deduced 581-amino acid
protein has an N-terminal coiled-coil region of about 100 amino acids
and 6 imperfect tetratricopeptide repeats of about 34 amino acids each.
Northern and Western blot analyses detected Klc1 predominantly in mouse
central and peripheral neuronal tissues. Immunofluorescence analysis of
cultured rat hippocampal precursor cells showed that Klc1 levels
increased with differentiation. In situ hybridization of mouse brain
showed that both Klc1 and Klc2 (611729) were enriched in olfactory bulb,
hippocampus, dentate gyrus, and the granular layer of cerebellum. Klc1
was expressed in a subset of cells in the sciatic nerve and showed
diffuse axonal staining. Fractionation of whole mouse brain extracts
revealed Klc1 and Klc2 in the cytosolic fraction and Klc2 in the
microsomal fraction.

GENE FUNCTION

Chernajovsky et al. (1996) characterized the human KNS2 gene product of
a differentially spliced, T-cell-derived mRNA and cloned its promoter
region. The promoter region transcribes constitutively. In permanently
transfected human HeLa and NB100 neuroblastoma cells, a reporter gene
containing the promoter and part of the first exon of beta kinesin was
75-fold more active than the HSV-tk promoter. The first exon contains a
5-prime untranslated sequence capable of forming a stable double-hairpin
loop, which functions as a translational enhancer. Its deletion
decreases the efficiency of in vitro translation of beta kinesin mRNA.

Kamal et al. (2000) demonstrated that the axonal transport of APP
(104760) in neurons is mediated by the direct binding of APP to the
light chain subunit of kinesin-1.

Using anti-mouse Klc1 antibodies to immunoprecipitate proteins from
mouse brain lysates, Rahman et al. (1998) showed that Klc1 associated
with Nkhc (KIF5A; 602821) and Ukhc (KIF5B; 602809), but not with Klc2.
In the presence of a nonhydrolyzable ATP analog, both Klc1 and Klc2
cosedimented with taxol-stabilized mouse brain microtubules.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chernajovsky et al. (1996) determined that the entire KNS2 gene spans 90
kb and encodes a 70-kD protein.

MAPPING

Cabeza-Arvelaiz et al. (1993) assigned the KLC gene to chromosome 14 by
screening of a human/hamster somatic cell hybrid panel. Goedert et al.
(1996) mapped the KNS2 gene to 14q32.3 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Cabeza-Arvelaiz, Y.; Shih, L.-C. N.; Hardman, N.; Asselbergs, F.;
Bilbe, G.; Schmitz, A.; White, B.; Siciliano, M. J.; Lachman, L. B.
: Cloning and genetic organization of the human kinesin light-chain
(KLC) gene. DNA Cell Biol. 12: 881-892, 1993.

2. Chernajovsky, Y.; Brown, A.; Clark, J.: Human kinesin light (beta)
chain gene: DNA sequence and functional characterization of its promoter
and first exon. DNA Cell Biol. 15: 965-974, 1996.

3. Goedert, M.; Marsh, S.; Carter, N.: Localization of the human
kinesin light chain gene (KNS2) to chromosome 14q32.3 by fluorescence
in situ hybridization. Genomics 32: 173-175, 1996.

4. Kamal, A.; Stokin, G. B.; Yang, Z.; Xia, C.; Goldstein, L. S.:
Axonal transport of amyloid precursor protein is mediated by direct
binding to the kinesin light chain subunit of kinesin-I. Neuron 28:
449-459, 2000.

5. Rahman, A.; Friedman, D. S.; Goldstein, L. S. B.: Two kinesin
light chain genes in mice: identification and characterization of
the encoded proteins. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 15395-15403, 1998. Note:
Erratum: J. Biol. Chem. 273: 24280 only, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/12/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/8/2002
Ethylin Wang Jabs - updated: 8/29/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/12/1994

EDITED carol: 07/26/2013
terry: 4/4/2013
carol: 3/9/2009
mgross: 1/16/2008
terry: 12/12/2007
joanna: 3/9/2007
alopez: 1/8/2002
mark: 9/16/1997
mark: 7/8/1996
terry: 6/26/1996
mark: 3/13/1996
mark: 3/11/1996
terry: 3/7/1996
mimadm: 7/30/1994
jason: 7/12/1994

300017	TITLE *300017 FILAMIN A; FLNA
;;FILAMIN, ALPHA;;
FILAMIN 1; FLN1;;
FLN;;
ACTIN-BINDING PROTEIN 280; ABP280
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The FLNA gene encodes filamin A, a widely expressed 280-kD actin-binding
protein that regulates reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton by
interacting with integrins, transmembrane receptor complexes, and second
messengers. Filamins crosslink actin filaments into orthogonal networks
in the cytoplasm and participate in the anchoring of membrane proteins
to the actin cytoskeleton. Remodeling of the cytoskeleton is central to
the modulation of cell shape and migration (Maestrini et al., 1993; Fox
et al., 1998).

CLONING

By analysis of the native ABP280 protein and cloning of the human
endothelial ABP280 cDNA, Gorlin et al. (1990) demonstrated that ABP280
is a 2,647-amino acid protein with 3 functional domains: an N-terminal
filamentous actin-binding domain, a C-terminal self-association domain,
and a membrane glycoprotein-binding domain. The N-terminal actin-binding
domain of ABP280 displays strong structural and functional similarity to
the N-terminal domains of dystrophin (300377), alpha-actinin (102575),
and beta-spectrin (182870).

In a search for muscle- and heart-specific isoforms that might be
involved in Emery muscular dystrophy (EDMD; 310300), Maestrini et al.
(1993) identified several different ABP280 mRNAs. Two were X-linked and
were produced by alternative splicing of a small exon of 24 nucleotides.
Both of these were ubiquitous in distribution. At least 1 additional
gene encoding an RNA more than 70% identical to ABP280 was found and was
shown to map to chromosome 7 by study of human/hamster somatic cell
hybrids (FLNC; 102565).

GENE FUNCTION

Vadlamudi et al. (2002) identified FLNA as a binding partner of PAK1
(602590) in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a mammary gland cDNA library. By
mutation analysis, they localized the PAK1-binding region in FLNA to
tandem repeat 23 in the C terminus, and the FLNA-binding region in PAK1
between amino acids 52 and 132 in the conserved CDC42 (116952)/RAC
(602048)-interacting domain. Endogenous FLNA was phosphorylated by PAK1
on ser2152 following stimulation with physiologic signaling molecules.
Following stimulation, FLNA colocalized with PAK1 in membrane ruffles.
The ruffle-forming activity of PAK1 was found in FLNA-expressing cells,
but not in cells deficient in FLNA.

Androgen receptor (AR; 313700), a nuclear transcription factor, mediates
male sexual differentiation. Loy et al. (2003) characterized a negative
regulatory domain in the AR hinge region that interacts with filamin A.
Filamin A interferes with AR interdomain interactions and competes with
the coactivator transcriptional intermediary factor-2 (TIF2; 601993) to
downregulate AR function specifically. Although full-length filamin A is
predominantly cytoplasmic, a C-terminal 100-kD fragment colocalized with
AR to the nucleus. This naturally occurring filamin A fragment repressed
AR transactivation and disrupted AR interdomain interactions and
TIF2-activated AR function in a manner reminiscent of full-length
filamin A, raising the possibility that the inhibitory effects of
cytoplasmic filamin A may be transduced through this fragment, which can
localize to the nucleus and form part of the preinitiation complex. This
unanticipated role of filamin A added to the evidence for the
involvement of cytoskeletal proteins in transcription regulation.

Mutation in the X-linked FLNA gene can cause the neurologic disorder
periventricular heterotopia (300049). Although periventricular
heterotopia is characterized by a failure in neuronal migration into the
cerebral cortex with consequent formation of nodules in the ventricular
and subventricular zones, many neurons appear to migrate normally, even
in males, suggesting compensatory mechanisms. Sheen et al. (2002) showed
that, in mice, Flna mRNA was widely expressed in all brain cortical
layers, whereas a homolog, Flnb (603381), was most highly expressed in
the ventricular and subventricular zones during development. In
adulthood, widespread but reduced expression of Flna and Flnb persisted
throughout the cerebral cortex. Flna and Flnb proteins were highly
expressed in both the leading processes and somata of migratory neurons
during corticogenesis. Postnatally, Flna immunoreactivity was largely
localized to the cell body, whereas Flnb was localized to the soma and
neuropil during neuronal differentiation. The putative Flnb
homodimerization domain strongly interacted with itself or the
corresponding homologous region of Flna, as shown by yeast 2-hybrid
interaction. The 2 proteins colocalized within neuronal precursors by
immunocytochemistry, and the existence of Flna-Flnb heterodimers could
be detected by coimmunoprecipitation. Sheen et al. (2002) suggested that
FLNA and FLNB may form both homodimers and heterodimers, and that their
interaction could potentially compensate for the loss of FLNA function
during cortical development within patients with periventricular
heterotopia.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen, Grimbert et al. (2004) identified FLNA as
a binding partner for both CMIP (610112) and its truncated isoform,
TCMIP. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis confirmed the interactions.
Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated homogeneous colocalization of
CMIP and FLNA in the cytoplasm, but restriction of TCMIP/FLNA
colocalization to points of intercellular contact. Western blot analysis
showed increased FLNA expression in patients with relapse of minimal
change nephrotic syndrome, a glomerular disease thought to result from
abnormal T-cell activation. Grimbert et al. (2004) proposed that FLNA
and CMIP/TCMIP interact in a T-cell signaling pathway.

Using proteomic approaches, Thelin et al. (2007) showed that FLNA
associates with the extreme CFTR (602421) N terminus. Cell studies
revealed that filamin tethers plasma membrane CFTR to the underlying
actin network, stabilizing CFTR at the cell surface and regulating the
plasma membrane dynamics and confinement of the channel. In the absence
of filamin binding, CFTR is rapidly internalized from the cell surface,
where it accumulates prematurely in lysosomes and is ultimately
degraded.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis and protein pull-down assays,
Jimenez-Baranda et al. (2007) showed that the human immunodeficiency
virus (HIV)-1 (see 609423) receptor CD4 (186940) and the HIV-1
coreceptors CCR5 (601373) and CXCR4 (162643) interacted with FLNA, which
regulated clustering of the HIV-1 receptors on the cell surface. Binding
of HIV-1 gp120 to the receptors induced transient cofilin (see CFL1;
601442) phosphorylation inactivation through a RHOA (165390)-ROCK (see
601702)-dependent mechanism. Blockade of FLNA interaction with CD4
and/or the coreceptors inhibited gp120-induced RHOA activation and
cofilin inactivation. Jimenez-Baranda et al. (2007) concluded that FLNA
is an adaptor protein that links HIV-1 receptors to the actin skeleton
remodeling machinery, possibly facilitating virus infection.

Ehrlicher et al. (2011) identified the actin-binding protein filamin A
(FLNA) as a central mechanotransduction element of the cytoskeleton, and
reconstituted a minimal system consisting of actin filaments, FLNA, and
2 FLNA-binding partners: the cytoplasmic tail of beta-integrin (135630)
and FilGAP (610586). Integrins form an essential mechanical linkage
between extracellular and intracellular environments, with beta-integrin
tails connecting to the actin cytoskeleton by binding directly to
filamin. FilGAP is an FLNA-binding GTPase-activating protein specific
for RAC, which in vivo regulates cell spreading and bleb formation.
Using fluorescence loss after photoconversion, Ehrlicher et al. (2011)
demonstrated that both externally imposed bulk shear and
myosin-II-driven forces differentially regulate the binding of these
partners to FLNA. Consistent with structural predictions, strain
increases beta-integrin binding to FLNA, whereas it causes FilGAP to
dissociate from FLNA, providing a direct and specific molecular basis
for cellular mechanotransduction. Ehrlicher et al. (2011) concluded that
their results identified a molecular mechanotransduction element within
the actin cytoskeleton, revealing that mechanical strain of key proteins
regulates the binding of signaling molecules.

By yeast 2-hybrid and immunoprecipitation analyses, Adams et al. (2012)
found that the C-terminal cytoplasmic tail of meckelin (TMEM67; 609884)
interacted with filamin A. Loss of filamin A or meckelin in immortalized
fibroblasts from patients with null mutations in the genes or by small
interfering RNA in mouse IMCD3 cells resulted in similar cellular
phenotypes, including abnormal basal body positioning and ciliogenesis,
aberrant remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton, deregulation of RHOA
(165390) activity, and hyperactivation of canonical Wnt (see 606359)
signaling. Adams et al. (2012) concluded that the meckelin-filamin A
signaling axis is a key regulator of ciliogenesis and normal Wnt
signaling.

GENE STRUCTURE

Patrosso et al. (1994) found that the FLN1 gene is composed of 47 exons
spanning approximately 26 kb. The first and part of the second exon are
untranslated. The actin-binding domain at the N terminus is encoded by
exons 2 to 5. The 96-amino acid repeats corresponding to the elongated
backbone of the protein are encoded by the remaining 42 exons.

Fox et al. (1998) stated that FLN1 consists of 48 exons covering 26 kb
of genomic sequence, with a 7.9-kb open reading frame.

Chakarova et al. (2000) compared the genomic structure of the filamin
gene family. A previously unknown intron was found in FLNA. The
comparison of FLNA with the 2 paralogs, FLNB (603381) and FLNC,
demonstrated a highly conserved exon/intron structure with significant
differences in exon 32 of all paralogs encoding the hinge I region, as
well as the insertion of a novel exon 40A in FLNC only.

MAPPING

When sequences from CpG islands in the Xq28 region (Maestrini et al.,
1990) were compared to sequences in databases, the gene for ABP280 was
found. It is located in the distal part of Xq28, 50-60 kb downstream of
the colorblindness genes. A similar localization was reported by Kunst
et al. (1992).

Kunst et al. (1992) mapped the ABP280 cDNA to Xq28 by somatic hybrid
cell panel analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).

Gorlin et al. (1993) mapped the FLN gene to Xq28 by Southern blot
analysis of somatic cell hybrid lines, by FISH, and by identification of
portions of the FLN gene within cosmids and YACs mapped to Xq28.
Specifically, the FLN gene was located within a 200-kb region between
the G6PD locus at the telomeric end and the colorblindness loci and the
DXS52 marker at the proximal end. Because of its similarities to
dystrophin, Gorlin et al. (1993) suggested FLN as a candidate gene for 2
myopathies that map to Xq28: EDMD and Barth syndrome (302060).

Fox et al. (1998) stated that the FLN1 gene is adjacent to the emerin
gene (300384), which is mutant in EDMD, and the 2 genes are flanked by
inverted repeats, causing the genomic segment containing these 2 genes
to be present in 2 orientations in the population at large (Small et
al., 1997). Notably, all large-scale rearrangements of emerin associated
with EDMD failed to include FLN1, suggesting that loss of FLN1 function
might be embryonically lethal.

Gariboldi et al. (1994) mapped the mouse homolog to the X chromosome in
a region of syntenic homology with Xq28.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Clark et al. (2009) determined the crystal structures of wildtype and
E254K (300017.0010)-mutant FLNA actin-binding domains (ABDs) at
2.3-angstrom resolution, revealing that they adopt similar closed
conformations. The E254K mutation removes a conserved salt bridge but
does not disrupt the ABD structure. The solution structures are also
equivalent as determined by circular dichroism spectroscopy, but
differential scanning fluorimetry denaturation showed reduced thermal
stability for E254K.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a review of the disorders caused by mutations in the FLNA gene, see
Robertson (2005).

- X-Linked Dominant Periventricular Heterotopia

X-linked dominant periventricular heterotopia (300049) is a disorder in
which many neurons fail to migrate to the cerebral cortex and persist as
nodules lining the ventricular surface. Heterozygous females with the
disorder present with epilepsy and other signs, including patent ductus
arteriosus (see 607411) and coagulopathy, whereas hemizygous affected
males die embryonically. Fox et al. (1998) identified the cause as
mutations in the FLN1 gene (300017.0001-300017.0005), which is required
for locomotion of many cell types. They demonstrated a previously
unrecognized high level of expression of FLN1 in the developing cortex.
Their studies demonstrated that FLN1 is required for neuronal migration
to the cortex and is essential for embryogenesis.

In identifying filamin-1 as the gene mutant in periventricular
heterotopia, Fox et al. (1998) first narrowed the map location to an
interval approximately 1 cM between marker DXS15 and the pseudoautosomal
region of Xq28 by the study of additional markers. Subsequent analysis
of a large duplication of Xq28 in a male patient with periventricular
heterotopia (Fink et al., 1997) with a severe, albeit nonlethal,
phenotype allowed the candidate interval to be refined even further.
They defined the exact centromeric boundary of the duplicated segment of
Xq28 as base 3377 of 3,395 bases in intron 1 of the isocitrate
dehydrogenase gene (IDH3G; 300089), approximately 600 kb distal to
DXS15. However, none of the genes identified at the breakpoints or
insertion site of the duplication harbored independent mutations in
other patients with periventricular heterotopia. Therefore, Fox et al.
(1998) concluded that the duplication of FLN1 itself was responsible for
the disorder in this patient.

Fox et al. (1998) studied the pattern of X inactivation in females with
FLN1 mutations in nucleated peripheral blood cells. No evidence of
preferential lyonization in these cells was found, suggesting that FLN1
is not required in a cell-autonomous fashion for survival of mixed
peripheral white blood cells. However, an essential cell-autonomous role
for FLN1 in a subset of nucleated cells or nonnucleated cells (e.g.,
platelets) could not be excluded.

Sheen et al. (2001) performed SSCP analysis of FLN1 throughout its
entire coding region in 6 periventricular heterotopia pedigrees, 31
sporadic female patients, and 24 sporadic male periventricular
heterotopia patients. The authors detected FLN1 mutations in 83% of
periventricular heterotopia pedigrees and 19% of sporadic females with
periventricular heterotopia. Moreover, 0 of 7 females with
periventricular heterotopia with atypical radiographic features showed
FLN1 mutations, suggesting that other genes may cause atypical
periventricular heterotopia. Two of 24 males analyzed with
periventricular heterotopia (9%) also carried FLN1 mutations. Whereas
FLN1 mutations in periventricular heterotopia pedigrees caused severe
predicted loss of FLN1 protein function, both male FLN1 mutations were
consistent with partial loss of function of the protein. Moreover,
sporadic female FLN1 mutations associated with periventricular
heterotopia appear to cause either severe or partial loss of function.

Sheen et al. (2005) reported 2 familial cases and 9 sporadic cases of
the Ehlers-Danlos variant of periventricular heterotopia (300537), which
is characterized by nodular brain heterotopia, joint hypermobility, and
development of aortic dilatation in early adulthood. MRI typically
demonstrated bilateral nodular periventricular heterotopia,
indistinguishable from periventricular heterotopia due to FLNA
mutations. Mutations in the FLNA gene were identified in 3 affected
females (300017.0017-300017.0019); in another pedigree with no
detectable exonic mutation, positive linkage to the FLNA locus on Xq28
was demonstrated, and an affected individual in this family had no
detectable FLNA protein.

In 3 female patients from a 3-generation Spanish family with the
Ehlers-Danlos variant of periventricular heterotopia, Gomez-Garre et al.
(2006) identified heterozygosity for a missense mutation in the FLNA
gene (300017.0021).

- Multiple Malformation Syndromes

Loss-of-function mutations of FLNA are, as indicated, embryonic lethal
in males but are manifest in females as a localized neuronal migration
disorder, periventricular nodular heterotopia (PVNH). Robertson et al.
(2003) described localized mutations in FLNA that conserve the reading
frame and lead to a broad range of congenital malformations, affecting
craniofacial structures, skeleton, brain, viscera, and urogenital tract,
in 4 X-linked human disorders: otopalatodigital syndrome types I (OPD1;
311300) and II (OPD2; 304120), frontometaphyseal dysplasia (FMD;
305620), and Melnick-Needles syndrome (MNS; 309350). Several of the
mutations were recurrent, and all were clustered in 4 regions of the
gene: the actin-binding domain and rod domain repeats 3, 10, and 14/15.
The patterns of mutation, X-chromosome inactivation, and phenotypic
manifestations in this class of mutations indicated gain-of-function
effects, implicating filamin A in signaling pathways that mediate
organogenesis in multiple systems during embryonic development.

In a 26-year-old Mexican female with OPD1, Hidalgo-Bravo et al. (2005)
identified a heterozygous missense mutation in the FLNA gene
(300017.0020). The patient had prominent features of OPD1, including
cleft palate; an extremely skewed pattern of X inactivation toward the
maternal allele was noted.

In 6 affected females with cranial hyperostosis and various skeletal
abnormalities from a 4-generation pedigree, Stefanova et al. (2005)
identified heterozygosity for a deletion in the FLNA gene (300017.0016).
The disorder resulted in early lethality in male children in this
family. The phenotype of the females was variable, rather mild, and
bridged the phenotypes of various OPD spectrum disorders (see 311300).

Zenker et al. (2006) reported a gly1728-to-cys mutation (300017.0022) in
repeat 15 of the filamin A rod domain of the FLNA gene in a girl with
manifestations of frontometaphyseal dysplasia and otopalatodigital
syndrome 1. In a second family with FMD, they identified a
ser1186-to-leu mutation (300017.0015) in a mother and her son. In
contrast to most previous reports on manifesting females or carriers of
FLNA-related skeletal dysplasias, the affected females in these 2
families showed only mild to moderate skewing of X-inactivation against
the mutant allele. Zenker et al. (2006) suggested that the data may
indicate that in females, genotype-phenotype correlation between certain
FLNA mutations and OPD1 and FMD, respectively, is less strict than
previously assumed. They proposed that X-inactivation is an important
epigenetic modifier of the phenotype in females with the FLNA-related
skeletal dysplasias.

Hehr et al. (2006) described a male patient with periventricular nodular
heterotopia (PVNH), craniofacial features, and severe constipation. The
phenotype was associated with a splice mutation in exon 13 of the FLNA
gene (300017.0024). Hehr et al. (2006) suggested that the patient
retained enough FLNA function to avoid the usual lethality associated
with loss-of-function mutations in FLNA in males.

In an 18-month-old German boy with FG syndrome-2 (FGS2; 300321), Unger
et al. (2007) identified a hemizygous mutation in the FLNA gene (P1291L;
300017.0028). He had severe constipation, large rounded forehead,
prominent ears, frontal hair upsweep, and mild delay in language
acquisition. The parents declined brain MRI studies. Unger et al. (2007)
suggested that the patient reported by Hehr et al. (2006) actually had
FGS2, due to the presence of severe constipation and dysmorphic facial
features.

- Intestinal Pseudoobstruction/Congenital Short Bowel Syndrome

In an Italian family with an X-linked recessive form of chronic
idiopathic intestinal pseudoobstruction (CIIP) mapping to chromosome
Xq28 (CIIPX; 300048), Gargiulo et al. (2007) detected a 2-bp deletion in
exon 2 of the FLNA gene that was present in heterozygous state in the
carrier females of the family (300017.0025). The frameshift mutation was
located between 2 close methionines at the filamin N terminus and was
predicted to produce a protein truncated shortly after the first
predicted methionine. Because loss-of-function FLNA mutations have been
associated with X-linked dominant nodular ventricular heterotopia (PVNH;
300049), a central nervous system migration defect that presents with
seizures in females and lethality in males, it was notable that the male
bearing the FLNA mutation had signs of central nervous system (CNS)
involvement and possibly PVNH. To understand how the severe frameshift
mutation found by Gargiulo et al. (2007) explained the CIIPX phenotype
and its X-linked recessive inheritance, Gargiulo et al. (2007)
transiently expressed both the wildtype and the mutant filamin in cell
culture and found filamin translation to start from either of the 2
initial methionines in these conditions. Therefore, translation of a
normal, shorter filamin can occur in vitro from the second methionine
downstream of the 2-bp insertion. Gargiulo et al. (2007) confirmed this,
demonstrating that the filamin protein was present in the patient's
lymphoblastoid cell line that shows abnormal cytoskeletal actin
organization compared with normal lymphoblasts. The authors concluded
that the filamin N-terminal region between the initial 2 methionines is
crucial for proper enteric neuron development.

Clayton-Smith et al. (2009) identified a duplication of the FLNA gene in
affected members of 2 families with intestinal pseudoobstruction, patent
ductus arteriosus, and thrombocytopenia with giant platelets (300048).
One of the families had been reported by FitzPatrick et al. (1997).

Van der Werf et al. (2013) reported a 2-basepair deletion in exon 2 of
filamin A (300017.0035) in 1 family segregating X-linked congenital
short bowel syndrome (see 300048) and in an unrelated affected
individual. In the family, all obligate carriers were heterozygous for
the mutation; in the isolated male, the mutation had occurred as a de
novo event. Van der Werf et al. (2013) stated that they could not
exclude involvement of the central nervous system in these patients
because no magnetic resonance imaging brain scans were available.

- Terminal Osseous Dysplasia

In affected members of 3 families segregating terminal osseous dysplasia
(300244), 2 of which were previously described by Breuning et al. (2000)
and Baroncini et al. (2007), and in 3 sporadic case individuals, who
were previously described by Horii et al. (1998), Drut et al., (2005),
and Breuning et al. (2000), respectively, Sun et al. (2010) identified a
causative mutation in the FLNA gene: a 5217G-A transition activated a
cryptic splice site, removing the last 48 nucleotides from exon 31 and
resulting in a loss of 16 amino acids (300017.0029). In the families,
the variant segregated with the disease. Sun et al. (2010) showed that
because of nonrandom X chromosome inactivation, the mutant allele was
not expressed in the patient fibroblasts. RNA expression of the mutant
allele was detected only in cultured fibroma cells obtained from
15-year-old surgically removed material. The mutation was not found in
400 control X chromosomes, pilot data from 1000 Genomes Project, or the
FLNA gene variant database. Because the mutation was predicted to remove
a sequence at the surface of filamin repeat 15, Sun et al. (2010)
suggested that the missing region in the filamin A protein affects or
prevents the interaction of filamin A with other proteins.

- X-Linked Cardiac Valvular Dysplasia

In a large 5-generation French pedigree with X-linked cardiac valvular
disease (CVD1; 314400) mapping to Xq28, originally reported by Benichou
et al. (1997) and Kyndt et al. (1998), Kyndt et al. (2007) analyzed
candidate genes and identified a missense mutation in the FLNA gene that
segregated with disease (P637Q; 300017.0030). In 3 more families with
cardiac valvular disease, Kyndt et al. (2007) identified 2 different
missense mutations and an in-frame deletion (300017.0031-300017.0033,
respectively). No signs of periventricular heterotopia, otopalatodigital
syndrome, frontometaphyseal dysplasia, or Melnick-Needles or
Ehlers-Danlos syndromes were observed in these families. The missense
mutations all involve highly conserved residues within the first,
fourth, and fifth repeat consensus sequences of FLNA, respectively, and
the deletion results in a truncated protein lacking repeats 5 through 7.

HISTORY

Robert J. Gorlin (2003) was responsible for the initial description of 3
of the conditions that had been shown to be caused by mutations in the
FLNA gene: OPD1, OPD2, and frontometaphyseal dysplasia. Furthermore, he
correctly interpreted the genetics of Melnick-Needles syndrome as
X-linked recessive rather than autosomal recessive. His son, Jed Gorlin,
sequenced the FLNA gene (Gorlin et al., 1990) and mapped it to
chromosome Xq28 (Gorlin et al., 1993).

ANIMAL MODEL

Feng et al. (2006) noted that hemizygous human males with FLNA mutations
die prenatally or survive after birth with cardiac malformations, often
dying postnatally from blood vessel rupture. They found that Flna-null
mice died at midgestation with widespread hemorrhage from abnormal
vessels, persistent truncus arteriosus, and incomplete cardiac
septation. Conditional Flna knockout in the neural crest caused
abnormalities of the cardiac outflow tract despite apparently normal
migration of Flna-deficient neural crest cells. Flna-null vascular
endothelial cells displayed abnormal adherens junctions and defects in
cell-cell contacts. Feng et al. (2006) suggested that cell
motility-independent functions of FLNA at cell-cell contacts and
adherens junctions affect the development of organs.

Adams et al. (2012) found that knockdown of Mks3 or the Flna ortholog in
zebrafish resulted in similar phenotypes, including brain and body axis
defects, cardiac edema, and otic placode and eye defects. Combined low
doses of both Mks3 and Flna morpholinos increased both the incidence and
severity of developmental defects. An Flna-null mouse strain showed
similar defects. At embryonic day 13.5, male Flna hemizygous embryos
were highly dysmorphic, with extensive disruption of ventricular zone of
the neocortex and severe periventricular heterotopia. Basal body
position was disrupted and neuroepithelial layer showed impaired
ciliogenesis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR NODULAR, X-LINKED DOMINANT
FLNA, GLN182TER

In the largest reported pedigree with periventricular heterotopia
(300049) (Huttenlocher et al., 1994), Fox et al. (1998) found a C-to-T
substitution in exon 3 of the FLN1 gene, which converted a CAG (gln) to
a TAG (stop) codon and truncated the FLN1 protein at amino acid residue
182 of the 2,647 total amino acids in the normal protein.

.0002
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR NODULAR, X-LINKED DOMINANT
FLNA, IVS4DS, T-C, +2

In affected members of a family with periventricular heterotopia
(300049), Fox et al. (1998) found a T-to-C substitution at the second
base of intron 4 in the splice donor sequence of the FLN1 gene. The
mutation was predicted to cause either exon skipping or a read-through
of intron 4 which would introduce a stop codon after the translation of
30 additional amino acids. The mutation was present in both a mother and
daughter with periventricular heterotopia but not in the unaffected
maternal grandmother. Therefore, this mutation most likely arose de novo
in this pedigree in the germline of either the maternal grandmother or
grandfather, both of whom were clinically unaffected.

.0003
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR NODULAR, X-LINKED DOMINANT
FLNA, IVS3AS, C-G, -3

In a sporadic case of periventricular heterotopia (300049), Fox et al.
(1998) found that the consensus splice acceptor at the end of intron 3
(3 bases from exon 4) of the FLN1 gene was mutated by a C-to-G
substitution. The 'C' at position -3 is conserved among more than 70% of
vertebrate splice junctions, and the 'G' at this position is seen in
only 1% (Shapiro and Senapathy, 1987). The mutation appeared to have
arisen de novo in the germline of the patient's mother or father.

.0004
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR NODULAR, X-LINKED DOMINANT
FLNA, IVS2DS, G-A, +1

In a sporadic case of periventricular heterotopia (300049), Fox et al.
(1998) found a G-to-A mutation at the first base of intron 2 of the FLN1
gene. The 'G' at position +1 of the intron is conserved in 100% of
splice donor sequences of vertebrate genes (Shapiro and Senapathy,
1987).

.0005
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR NODULAR, X-LINKED DOMINANT
FLNA, 5-BP DEL, NT287

In a sporadic case of periventricular heterotopia (300049), Fox et al.
(1998) found deletion of 5 bases from the coding region of exon 2 of the
FLN1 gene. Bases 287-291 were removed, producing a frameshift and the
introduction of a premature stop codon after the addition of 8
inappropriate amino acids.

.0006
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR NODULAR, X-LINKED DOMINANT
FLNA, LEU656PHE

In a sporadic male patient with unilateral periventricular heterotopia
(300049), epilepsy, and normal intellect, Sheen et al. (2001) found a
C-to-T transition at position 1966, resulting in a leu656-to-phe (L656F)
amino acid substitution in the fifth Ig-like domain of the FLN1 gene.

.0007
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR NODULAR, X-LINKED DOMINANT
FLNA, 5915C-G

In a sporadic male patient with periventricular heterotopia (300049),
epilepsy, and normal intellect, Sheen et al. (2001) found a C-to-G
transversion at position 6915. This was predicted to result in
termination at residue 2305 and loss of the 344 C-terminal amino acids
of the FLN1 gene, which include the receptor-binding region.

.0008
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR NODULAR, X-LINKED DOMINANT
FLNA, GLU82VAL

In a family with periventricular heterotopia (300049), Moro et al.
(2002) identified a 245A-T mutation in exon 2 of the FLNA gene, leading
to a glu82-to-val substitution (E82V) in the N-terminal part of the
protein. The mutation likely modifies protein activity without complete
loss of function. Affected females with the mutation showed a mild
anatomic phenotype with few asymmetric, noncontiguous nodules on MRI,
and gave birth to 5 presumably affected boys who died within a few days
to several weeks or months of life.

.0009
OTOPALATODIGITAL SYNDROME, TYPE I
FLNA, PRO207LEU

In 2 presumably unrelated families, Robertson et al. (2003) found that
individuals with otopalatodigital syndrome type I (OPD1; 311300) had a
620C-T transition in exon 3 of the FLNA gene, predicted to result in a
pro207-to-leu (P207L) amino acid substitution. All affected members had
bowed bones and abnormal digits as well as cleft palate.

Robertson et al. (2006) identified the P207L mutation in 2 brothers with
OPD1. The mutation was not identified in leukocytes of the mother,
suggesting germline mosaicism. The authors emphasized the importance of
the finding for genetic counseling.

.0010
OTOPALATODIGITAL SYNDROME, TYPE II
FLNA, GLU254LYS

In 4 presumably unrelated families, each with at least 1 affected male,
Robertson et al. (2003) found that individuals with otopalatodigital
syndrome type II (OPD2; 304120) had a 760G-A transition in exon 5 of the
FLNA gene, predicted to cause a glu254-to-lys (E254K) amino acid
substitution. All 4 patients had omphalocele, perinatal death, bowed
bones, and abnormal digits; 1 also had cleft palate, and 2 had
hydrocephalus.

Clark et al. (2009) showed that OPD E254K fibroblast lysates had
equivalent concentrations of FLNA compared with controls, and that
recombinant FLNA E254K actin-binding domain (ABD) had increased in vitro
F-actin binding compared with wildtype. The FLNA ABD adopts a canonical
compact conformation that is not greatly disturbed by the E254K mutation
either in solution or in the crystal structure. Ex vivo characterization
of E254K OPD patient fibroblasts revealed that they have similar
motility and adhesion as control cells, implying that many core
functions mediated by FLNA are unaffected, consistent with OPD affecting
only specific tissues despite FLNA being widely expressed. The authors
proposed a gain-of-function mechanism for the OPD disorders, which
mechanistically distinguishes them from the loss-of-function phenotypes
that manifest as disorders of neuronal migration.

.0011
FRONTOMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
FLNA, ASP1159ALA

In 2 affected members of a family, Robertson et al. (2003) found that
frontometaphyseal dysplasia (305620) was related to a 3476A-C
transversion in exon 22 of the FLNA gene, predicted to result in an
asp1159-to-ala (D1159A) amino acid change.

.0012
MELNICK-NEEDLES SYNDROME
FLNA, ALA1188THR

In 5 presumably unrelated patients with Melnick-Needles syndrome
(309350), Robertson et al. (2003) found a 3562G-A transition in exon 22
of the FLNA gene, predicted to result in an ala1188-to-thr (A1188T)
amino acid change. All 5 patients had bowed bones and abnormal digits
and all but one had short stature.

.0013
MELNICK-NEEDLES SYNDROME
FLNA, SER1199LEU

In 6 presumably unrelated females with Melnick-Needles syndrome
(309350), Robertson et al. (2003) found a 3596C-T transition in exon 22
of the FLNA gene, predicted to cause an ser1199-to-leu (S1199L) amino
acid change. All 6 females were of short stature and had bowed bones and
abnormal digits.

Robertson et al. (2006) identified the S1199L mutation in a girl with
Melnick-Needles syndrome. The girl had an unaffected twin sister who did
not carry the mutation; the unaffected mother also did not carry the
mutation. The twins were born with separate amniotic sacs within a
single chorion, and zygosity analysis indicated a high probability that
the girls were monozygotic twins. Robertson et al. (2006) concluded that
the FLNA mutation occurred postzygotically in the affected twin and
emphasized the importance of the finding for genetic counseling.

.0014
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR NODULAR, X-LINKED, WITH FRONTOMETAPHYSEAL
DYSPLASIA
FLNA, 7315C-A

Periventricular nodular heterotopia (300049) and a group of skeletal
dysplasias belonging to the otopalatodigital (OPD) spectrum are caused
by mutation in the FLNA gene. They are considered mutually exclusive
because of the different presumed effects of the respective FLNA gene
mutations, leading to loss of function in PVNH and gain of function in
OPD. In a girl manifesting PVNH in combination with frontometaphyseal
dysplasia (305620), a skeletal dysplasia of the OPD spectrum, Zenker et
al. (2004) identified a de novo 7315C-A transversion in exon 45 of the
FLNA gene, resulting in 2 aberrant transcripts: 1 full-length transcript
with a point mutation causing a substitution of a highly conserved
leu2439 residue by met (L2439M) and a second shortened transcript
lacking 21 bp due to the creation of an ectopic splice donor site in
exon 45. Zenker et al. (2004) proposed that the dual phenotype was
caused by 2 functionally different, aberrant filamin A proteins and
therefore represented an exceptional case of allelic gain-of-function
and loss-of-function phenotypes due to a single mutation event.

.0015
FRONTOMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA
FLNA, SER1186LEU

In a male patient with frontometaphyseal dysplasia (305620), Robertson
et al. (2003) identified a 3557C-T transition in exon 22 of the FLNA
gene, resulting in a ser1186-to-leu (S1186L) amino acid change.

Giuliano et al. (2005) reported a 3-generation family with FMD and
identified the S1186L mutation in the proband and his mother.

The S1186L missense mutation in repeat 10 of the filamin A rod domain
was reported in patients with frontometaphyseal dysplasia by Zenker et
al. (2006). The proposita in the family reported by Zenker et al. (2006)
was a 68-year-old woman whose son had died with a diagnosis of FMD. She
had had scoliosis from childhood. Prominent supraorbital ridges,
hypertelorism, and a small pointed chin as well as moderate
thoracolumbar scoliosis were noted. The son developed massive frontal
hyperostosis from childhood leading to the diagnosis of FMD with
hypertelorism, micrognathia, oligodontia, progressive sensorineural
hearing loss, amblyopia, pectus excavatum, and scoliosis. During
adolescence, he developed sleep apnea and had been treated with
continuous positive airway pressure. Ehrenstein et al. (1997) reported
the radiologic findings. The patient died unexpectedly at the age of 25
years. In contrast to most previous reports on manifesting females or
carriers of the FLNA-related skeletal dysplasias, the proband showed
only mild to moderate skewing of X inactivation against the mutant
allele.

.0016
OTOPALATODIGITAL SPECTRUM DISORDER
FLNA, 9-BP DEL, NT4904

In 6 affected females with cranial hyperostosis and various skeletal
abnormalities from a 4-generation pedigree, Stefanova et al. (2005)
identified heterozygosity for a 9-bp deletion from position 4904 to 4912
in exon 29 of the FLNA gene, predicting the loss of 3 amino acid
residues (codons 1635-1637) in rod domain repeat 14. The mutation was
not found in 2 unaffected females. The phenotype of affected females
resembled frontometaphyseal dysplasia with some overlap to
otopalatodigital syndrome types 1 and 2, but no signs specific for
Melnick-Needles syndrome. However, males had severe extraskeletal
malformations and died early, thus constituting an overlap with OPD2 and
MNS. Stefanova et al. (2005) concluded that the disorder in this family
is best described as an intermediate OPD spectrum phenotype that bridges
the FMD and OPD2 phenotypes; see 311300.

.0017
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR, EHLERS-DANLOS VARIANT
FLNA, 1-BP DEL, 2762G

In a 13-year-old female with the Ehlers-Danlos variant of
periventricular heterotopia (300537), Sheen et al. (2005) found a 1-bp
deletion in exon 19 of the FLNA gene (2762delG). The patient showed
typical features of EDS including joint hypermobility as well as
myxomatous borders along the mitral and aortic valves.

.0018
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR, EHLERS-DANLOS VARIANT
FLNA, 1-BP DEL, 4147G

In a 16-year-old female with the Ehlers-Danlos variant of
periventricular heterotopia (300537), Sheen et al. (2005) found a 1-bp
deletion in exon 25 of the FLNA gene (4147delG). The patient had aortic
aneurysm and joint hypermobility.

.0019
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR, EHLERS-DANLOS VARIANT
FLNA, ALA39GLY

In a 15-year-old female with the Ehlers-Danlos variant of
periventricular heterotopia (300537), Sheen et al. (2005) identified a
116C-G transversion in exon 2 of the FLNA gene, resulting in an
ala39-to-gly (A39G) substitution. The patient had radiologic findings of
periventricular heterotopia, seizures, mild cognitive delay with
psychotic behavior, joint hypermobility, and aortic aneurysm.

.0020
OTOPALATODIGITAL SYNDROME, TYPE I
FLNA, ASP203TYR

In a 26-year-old Mexican female with OPD1 (311300), Hidalgo-Bravo et al.
(2005) identified heterozygosity for a 607G-T transversion in exon 3 of
the FLNA gene, resulting in an asp203-to-tyr (D203Y) substitution in the
actin binding domain. Her parents did not have the mutation. The patient
had prominent features of OPD1, including cleft palate; an extremely
skewed pattern of X inactivation toward the maternal allele was noted.

.0021
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR, EHLERS-DANLOS VARIANT
FLNA, ALA128VAL

In 3 female patients from a 3-generation Spanish family with the
Ehlers-Danlos variant of periventricular heterotopia (300537),
Gomez-Garre et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a 383C-T
transition in exon 3 of the FLNA gene, resulting in an ala128-to-val
(A128V) substitution. The mutation was not found in unaffected family
members or in 184 control chromosomes.

.0022
OTOPALATODIGITAL SPECTRUM DISORDER
FLNA, GLY1728CYS

Zenker et al. (2006) described a de novo mutation in the FLNA gene in a
girl with manifestations of frontometaphyseal dysplasia and
otopalatodigital syndrome type 1 (see 311300). The 5182G-T mutation in
exon 31 was predicted to lead to the exchange of a highly conserved
glycine residue at position 1728 by cysteine (G1728C) in repeat 15 of
the filamin A rod domain. A short neck and deep-set ears were noted at
birth. On the first day of life, presence of inspiratory stridor and
episodic cyanosis led to the diagnosis of laryngomalacia and a large
atrial septal defect with signs of persistent pulmonary hypertension
which resolved spontaneously within 24 hours. Echocardiography showed
dysplastic tricuspid valve and noncompaction of the right ventricular
myocardium. The latter disappeared during infancy. The atrial septal
defect was corrected at age 9 years. Conductive hearing deficit, first
diagnosed in childhood, was progressive, necessitating hearing aids by
the age of 12 years. At age 16 years, typical craniofacial findings of
FMD were impressive supraorbital hyperostosis, hypertelorism,
antimongoloid palpebral fissures, a deeply grooved philtrum, and a
pointed and slightly receding chin. The terminal phalanges of thumbs and
halluces were short and broad.

.0023
MOVED TO 300017.0015
.0024
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR NODULAR, X-LINKED DOMINANT
FLNA, 1923C-T

Hehr et al. (2006) described a male patient with periventricular nodular
heterotopia (300049) associated with a splice mutation in exon 13 of the
FLNA gene (1923C-T). In addition to PVNH, the patient also presented
with craniofacial features and severe constipation. Hehr et al. (2006)
postulated that the predominant expression of the full-length mRNA in
addition to a mutant shorter transcript lacking the 3-prime part of exon
13 had rescued a sufficient amount of FLNA protein function to result in
this novel phenotype.

Unger et al. (2007) suggested that the patient reported by Hehr et al.
(2006) actually had FGS2 (300321), especially given the presence of
craniofacial dysmorphic features and severe constipation. Unger et al.
(2007) identified a different mutation in the FLNA gene (300017.0028) in
a patient with FGS2.

.0025
INTESTINAL PSEUDOOBSTRUCTION, NEURONAL, CHRONIC IDIOPATHIC, X-LINKED
FLNA, 2-BP DEL, 65AC

In an affected male in the Italian family of X-linked chronic idiopathic
intestinal pseudoobstruction (300048) described originally be Auricchio
et al. (1996), Gargiulo et al. (2007) found a 2-bp deletion in exon 2 of
the FLNA gene: 65-66delAC. Segregation analysis of the FLNA mutation
confirmed that all obligate carriers, by pedigree or established by
linkage analysis, were heterozygous for the 2-bp deletion. The mutation
was absent in 164 control X chromosomes.

.0026
OTOPALATODIGITAL SYNDROME, TYPE I
OTOPALATODIGITAL SYNDROME, TYPE II, INCLUDED
FLNA, ARG196TRP

In a patient with OPD type I (311300), Robertson et al. (2003)
identified a 586C-T transition in exon 3 of the FLNA gene, resulting in
an arg196-to-trp (R196W) substitution.

Kondoh et al. (2007) identified the R196W mutation in a 12-year-old
Japanese boy with OPD type II (304120). The patient had some additional
unusual features, including congenital cataract, glaucoma, and
congenital heart defects. Kondoh et al. (2007) noted the different
phenotype caused by the same mutation and suggested that additional
factors play a role in the pathogenesis of OPD spectrum disorders.

.0027
OTOPALATODIGITAL SYNDROME, TYPE II
FLNA, CYS210PHE

In a male fetus with otopalatodigital syndrome type II (304120),
Marino-Enriquez et al. (2007) identified a 629G-T transversion in exon 3
of the FLNA gene, predicted to cause a cys210-to-phe (C210F)
substitution within the second calponin homology domain of the
actin-binding domain. Analysis of exon 3 in relatives revealed that the
mutation had arisen de novo in the mother; a previous pregnancy had
ended in stillbirth of a male diagnosed with OPD2.

.0028
FG SYNDROME 2
FLNA, PRO1291LEU

In an 18-month-old boy with FG syndrome-2 (FGS2; 300321), Unger et al.
(2007) identified a hemizygous 3872C-T transition in exon 23 of the FLNA
gene, resulting in a pro1291-to-leu (P1291L) substitution. His
asymptomatic mother also carried the mutation, which was absent in 100
control chromosomes. The patient had severe constipation, large rounded
forehead, prominent ears, frontal hair upsweep, and mild delay in
language acquisition. Although the authors noted that the mutation does
not affect a highly conserved residue, they referred to a patient
reported by Hehr et al. (2006) with periventricular nodular heterotopia
(300049) and a FLNA mutation (300017.0024), who also had craniofacial
dysmorphic features and severe constipation. Unger et al. (2007)
suggested that the patient reported by Hehr et al. (2006) actually had
FGS2.

.0029
TERMINAL OSSEOUS DYSPLASIA
FLNA, 5217G-A, 48-BP DEL

In affected members of 3 families segregating terminal osseous dysplasia
(300244), 2 of which were previously described by Breuning et al. (2000)
and Baroncini et al. (2007), and in 3 sporadic case individuals, who
were previously described by Horii et al. (1998), Drut et al., (2005),
and Breuning et al. (2000), respectively, Sun et al. (2010) identified a
causative mutation in the last nucleotide of exon 31 of the FLNA gene: a
5217G-A transition activated a cryptic splice site, removing the last 48
nucleotides from exon 31 and resulting in a loss of 16 amino acids
(val1724_thr1739del). Sun et al. (2010) showed that because of nonrandom
X chromosome inactivation, the mutant allele was not expressed in the
patient fibroblasts. RNA expression of the mutant allele was detected
only in cultured fibroma cells obtained from 15-year-old surgically
removed material. The mutation was not found in 400 control X
chromosomes, pilot data from 1000 Genomes Project, or the FLNA gene
variant database. Because the mutation was predicted to remove a
sequence at the surface of filamin repeat 15, Sun et al. (2010)
suggested that the missing region in the filamin A protein affects or
prevents the interaction of filamin A with other proteins.

.0030
CARDIAC VALVULAR DYSPLASIA, X-LINKED
FLNA, PRO637GLN

In a large 5-generation Caucasian French pedigree with X-linked cardiac
valvular dysplasia (314400), originally reported by Benichou et al.
(1997) and Kyndt et al. (1998), Kyndt et al. (2007) identified a 1910C-A
transversion in exon 13 of the FLNA gene, resulting in a pro637-to-gln
(P637Q) substitution at a highly conserved residue within the fourth
repeat consensus sequence. The mutation segregated with disease in the
family and was not found in 500 control chromosomes of white or African
origin.

.0031
CARDIAC VALVULAR DYSPLASIA, X-LINKED
FLNA, GLY288ARG

In a British family with X-linked cardiac valvular dysplasia (314400),
originally described by Newbury-Ecob et al. (1993), Kyndt et al. (2007)
identified an 862G-A transition in exon 5 of the FLNA gene, resulting in
a gly288-to-arg (G288R) substitution at a highly conserved residue
within the first repeat consensus sequence. The mutation segregated with
disease in the family and was not found in 500 control chromosomes of
white or African origin.

.0032
CARDIAC VALVULAR DYSPLASIA, X-LINKED
FLNA, VAL711ASP

In a 4-month-old boy with cardiac valvular dysplasia (314400), born of
black African parents, Kyndt et al. (2007) identified a 2132T-A
transversion in exon 14 of the FLNA gene, resulting in a val711-to-asp
(V711D) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the fifth repeat
consensus sequence. The patient was diagnosed prenatally with abnormally
thick cardiac valves by ultrasound and fetal echocardiography; postnatal
echocardiography confirmed that all valves were thickened and
dystrophic, with moderate tricuspid incompetence, trivial mitral and
pulmonary incompetence, and mild aortic incompetence. His carrier mother
showed no evidence of cardiac involvement on clinical examination. The
mutation was not found in 500 control chromosomes of white or African
origin.

.0033
CARDIAC VALVULAR DYSPLASIA, X-LINKED
FLNA, 1,944-BP DEL

In 2 brothers of Hong Kong Chinese origin with cardiac valvular
dysplasia (314400), Kyndt et al. (2007) identified a 1,944-bp genomic
deletion from intron 15 to intron 19 of the FLNA gene, predicting an
in-frame deletion of 182 residues from val761 to gln943 that results in
a truncated protein lacking repeat consensus sequences 5 to 7. The
deletion was not found in 200 control chromosomes, including 100 Asian
chromosomes. In the 12-year-old proband, a heart murmur was detected at
4 months of age, and echocardiography revealed myxomatous thickening of
the mitral, tricuspid, and aortic valves; he had significant mitral and
tricuspid regurgitation and mild aortic regurgitation. His 4-year-old
brother was found to have mitral incompetence and stenosis, tricuspid
regurgitation, and mild aortic regurgitation. Their 38-year-old
asymptomatic carrier mother had mild aortic and pulmonary incompetence
on echocardiography.

.0034
HETEROTOPIA, PERIVENTRICULAR NODULAR, X-LINKED DOMINANT
FLNA, TRP2632TER

In an 18-month-old girl with periventricular nodular heterotopia
(300049) and seizures, Jefferies et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous
7896G-A transition in the FLNA gene, resulting in a trp2632-to-ter
(W2632X) substitution. Echocardiogram showed a redundant and
unobstructed pulmonary valve, a cleft in the anterior leaflet of the
mitral valve with mitral regurgitation, and a patent foramen ovale with
mild left-to-right shunting. There was no evidence of a persistent
patent ductus arteriosus. Since there was no family history of the
disorder, the mutation was assumed to have occurred de novo. Jefferies
et al. (2010) noted that other cardiac defects, such as patent ductus
arteriosus, bicuspid aortic valve, and dilation of the sinuses of
Valsalva, had been reported in patients with X-linked periventricular
heterotopia, and that myxomatous valvular disease (XMVD; 314400) was
also associated with FLNA mutations, but emphasized that the findings in
this patient had not previously been reported.

.0035
CONGENITAL SHORT BOWEL SYNDROME, X-LINKED
FLNA, 2-BP DEL, 16TC

In affected members of an Italian family segregating isolated congenital
X-linked short bowel syndrome (see 300048) and in an unrelated singleton
with the disorder, van der Werf et al. (2013) identified a 2-bp deletion
in exon 2 of the FLNA gene (16_17delTC). The family had been reported by
Kern et al. (1990) and the single patient by Siva et al. (2002). In the
family, all obligate carriers were heterozygous for the deletion. The
mother of the isolated case did not carry the deletion, indicating that
it occurred as a de novo event. Van der Werf et al. (2013) stated that
they could not exclude involvement of the central nervous system in
these patients because no magnetic resonance imaging brain scans were
available. This mutation was absent in 92 controls and was not reported
in the Exome Variant Server database. The 16_17delTC mutation is located
between the first and second methionines and results in frameshift and
premature termination at amino acid 103. Based on its location, van der
Werf et al. (2013) predicted that the 16_17delTC mutation has a similar
effect to the 65delAC mutation (300017.0025) reported by Auricchio et
al. (1996) and Gargiulo et al. (2007), which results in loss of only the
long form of FLNA.

REFERENCE 1. Adams, M.; Simms, R. J.; Abdelhamed, Z.; Dawe, H. R.; Szymanska,
K.; Logan, C. V.; Wheway, G.; Pitt, E.; Gull, K.; Knowles, M. A.;
Blair, E.; Cross, S. H.; Sayer, J. A.; Johnson, C. A.: A meckelin-filamin
A interaction mediates ciliogenesis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 21: 1272-1286,
2012.

2. Auricchio, A.; Brancolini, V.; Casari, G.; Milla, P. J.; Smith,
V. V.; Devoto, M.; Ballabio, A.: The locus for a novel syndromic
form of neuronal intestinal pseudoobstruction maps to Xq28. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 58: 743-748, 1996.

3. Baroncini, A.; Castelluccio, P.; Morleo, M.; Soli, F.; Franco,
B.: Terminal osseous dysplasia with pigmentary defects: clinical
description of a new family. Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A: 51-57, 2007.

4. Benichou, B.; Kyndt, F.; Schott, J.-J.; Trochu, J.-N.; Baranger,
F.; Herbert, O.; Scott, V.; Fressinaud, E.; David, A.; Moisan, J.-P.;
Bouhour, J.-B.; Le Marec, H.: Mapping of X-linked valvular dysplasia
to chromosome Xq28. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61 (suppl.): A268
only, 1997.

5. Breuning, M. H.; Oranje, A. P.; Langemeijer, R. A. T. M.; Hovius,
S. E. R.; Diepstraten, A. F. M.; den Hollander, J. C.; Baumgartner,
N.; Dwek, J. R.; Sommer, A.; Toriello, H.: Recurrent digital fibroma,
focal dermal hypoplasia, and limb malformations. Am. J. Med. Genet. 94:
91-101, 2000.

6. Chakarova, C.; Wehnert, M. S.; Uhl, K.; Sakthivel, S.; Vosberg,
H.-P.; van der Ven, P. F. M.; Furst, D. O.: Genomic structure and
fine mapping of the two human filamin gene paralogues FLNB and FLNC
and comparative analysis of the filamin gene family. Hum. Genet. 107:
597-611, 2000.

7. Clark, A. R.; Sawyer, G. M.; Robertson, S. P.; Sutherland-Smith,
A. J.: Skeletal dysplasias due to filamin A mutations result from
a gain-of-function mechanism distinct from allelic neurological disorders. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 18: 4791-4800, 2009.

8. Clayton-Smith, J.; Walters, S.; Hobson, E.; Burkitt-Wright, E.;
Smith, R.; Toutain, A.; Amiel, J.; Lyonnet, S.; Mansour, S.; Fitzpatrick,
D.; Ciccone, R.; Ricca, I.; Zuffardi, O.; Donnai, D.: Xq28 duplication
presenting with intestinal and bladder dysfunction and a distinctive
facial appearance. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 17: 434-443, 2009.

9. Drut, R.; Pedemonte, L.; Rositto, A.: Noninclusion-body infantile
digital fibromatosis: a lesion heralding terminal osseous dysplasia
and pigmentary defects syndrome. Int. J. Surg. Path. 13: 181-184,
2005.

10. Ehrenstein, T.; Maurer, J.; Liokumowitsch, M.; Mack, M.; Felix,
R.; Bier, J.: CT and MR findings in frontometaphyseal dysplasia. J.
Comput. Assist. Tomogr. 21: 218-220, 1997.

11. Ehrlicher, A. J.; Nakamura, F.; Hartwig, J. H.; Weitz, D. A.;
Stossel, T. P.: Mechanical strain in actin networks regulates FilGAP
and integrin binding to filamin A. Nature 478: 260-263, 2011.

12. Feng, Y.; Chen, M. H.; Moskowitz, I. P.; Mendonza, A. M.; Vidali,
L.; Nakamura, F.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.; Walsh, C. A.: Filamin A (FLNA)
is required for cell-cell contact in vascular development and cardiac
morphogenesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 19836-19841, 2006.

13. Fink, J. M.; Dobyns, W. B.; Guerrini, R.; Hirsch, B. A.: Identification
of a duplication of Xq28 associated with bilateral periventricular
nodular heterotopia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61: 379-387, 1997.

14. FitzPatrick, D. R.; Strain, L.; Thomas, A. E.; Barr, D. G. D.;
Todd, A.; Smith, N. M.; Scobie, W. G.: Neurogenic chronic idiopathic
intestinal pseudo-obstruction, patent ductus arteriosus, and thrombocytopenia
segregating as an X linked recessive disorder. J. Med. Genet. 34:
666-669, 1997.

15. Fox, J. W.; Lamperti, E. D.; Eksioglu, Y. Z.; Hong, S. E.; Feng,
Y.; Graham, D. A.; Scheffer, I. E.; Dobyns, W. B.; Hirsch, B. A.;
Radtke, R. A.; Berkovic, S. F.; Huttenlocher, P. R.; Walsh, C. A.
: Mutations in filamin 1 prevent migration of cerebral cortical neurons
in human periventricular heterotopia. Neuron 21: 1315-1325, 1998.

16. Gargiulo, A.; Auricchio, R.; Barone, M. V.; Cotugno, G.; Reardon,
W.; Milla, P. J.; Ballabio, A.; Ciccodicola, A.; Auricchio, A.: Filamin
A is mutated in X-linked chronic idiopathic intestinal pseudo-obstruction
with central nervous system involvement. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 80:
751-758, 2007.

17. Gariboldi, M.; Maestrini, E.; Canzian, F.; Manenti, G.; De Gregorio,
L.; Rivella, S.; Chatterjee, A.; Herman, G. E.; Archidiacono, N.;
Antonacci, R.; Pierotti, M. A.; Dragani, T. A.; Toniolo, D.: Comparative
mapping of the actin-binding protein 280 genes in human and mouse. Genomics 21:
428-430, 1994.

18. Giuliano, F.; Paquis-Flucklinger, V.; Collignon, P.; Philip, N.;
Bardot, J.: A new three-generational family with frontometaphyseal
dysplasia, male-to-female transmission, and a previously reported
FLNA mutation. (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 132A: 222 only, 2005.

19. Gomez-Garre, P.; Seijo, M.; Gutierrez-Delicado, E.; Castro del
Rio, M.; de la Torre, C.; Gomez-Abad, C.; Morales-Corraliza, J.; Puig,
M.; Serratosa, J. M.: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and periventricular
nodular heterotopia in a Spanish family with a single FLNA mutation. J.
Med. Genet. 43: 232-237, 2006.

20. Gorlin, J. B.; Henske, E.; Warren, S. T.; Kunst, C. B.; D'Urso,
M.; Palmieri, G.; Hartwig, J. H.; Bruns, G.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.:
Actin-binding protein (ABP-280) filamin gene (FLN) maps telomeric
to the color vision locus (R/GCP) and centromeric to G6PD in Xq28. Genomics 17:
496-498, 1993.

21. Gorlin, J. B.; Yamin, R.; Egan, S.; Stewart, M.; Stossel, T. P.;
Kwiatkowski, D. J.; Hartwig, J. H.: Human endothelial actin-binding
protein (ABP-280, nonmuscle filamin): a molecular leaf spring. J.
Cell Biol. 111: 1089-1105, 1990.

22. Gorlin, R. J.: Personal Communication. Minneapolis, Minn.
4/15/2003.

23. Grimbert, P.; Valanciute, A.; Audard, V.; Lang, P.; Guellaen,
G.; Sahali, D.: The filamin-A is a partner of Tc-mip, a new adapter
protein involved in c-maf-dependent Th2 signaling pathway. Molec.
Immun. 40: 1257-1261, 2004.

24. Hehr, U.; Hehr, A.; Uyanik, G.; Phelan, E.; Winkler, J.; Reardon,
W.: A filamin A splice mutation resulting in a syndrome of facial
dysmorphism, periventricular nodular heterotopia, and severe constipation
reminiscent of cerebro-fronto-facial syndrome. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 43:
541-544, 2006.

25. Hidalgo-Bravo, A.; Pompa-Mera, E. N.; Kofman-Alfaro, S.; Gonzalez-Bonilla,
C. R.; Zenteno, J. C.: A novel filamin A D203Y mutation in a female
patient with otopalatodigital type 1 syndrome and extremely skewed
X chromosome inactivation. Am. J. Med. Genet. 136A: 190-193, 2005.

26. Horii, E.; Sugiura, Y.; Nakamura, R.: A syndrome of digital fibromas,
facial pigmentary dysplasia, and metacarpal and metatarsal disorganization. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 80: 1-5, 1998.

27. Huttenlocher, P. R.; Taravath, S.; Mojtahedi, S.: Periventricular
heterotopia and epilepsy. Neurology 44: 51-55, 1994.

28. Jefferies, J. L.; Taylor, M. D.; Rossano, J.; Belmont, J. W.;
Craigen, W. J.: Novel cardiac findings in periventricular nodular
heterotopia. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A: 165-168, 2010.

29. Jimenez-Baranda, S.; Gomez-Mouton, C.; Rojas, A.; Martinez-Prats,
L.; Mira, E.; Lacalle, R. A.; Valencia, A.; Dimitrov, D. S.; Viola,
A.; Delgado, R.; Martinez-A., C.; Manes, S.: Filamin-A regulates
actin-dependent clustering of HIV receptors. Nature Cell Biol. 9:
838-846, 2007.

30. Kern, I. B.; Leece, A.; Bohane, T.: Congenital short gut, malrotation,
and dysmotility of the small bowel. J. Pediat. Gastroent. Nutr. 11:
411-415, 1990.

31. Kondoh, T.; Okamoto, N.; Norimatsu, N.; Uetani, M.; Nishimura,
G.; Moriuchi, H.: A Japanese case of oto-palato-digital syndrome
type II: an apparent lack of phenotype-genotype correlation. J. Hum.
Genet. 52: 370-373, 2007.

32. Kunst, C. B.; Henske, E.; Hartwig, J. H.; Kwiatkowski, D. J.;
D'Urso, M.; Bruns, G.; Warren, S. T.; Gorlin, J. B.: The dystrophin-like
actin binding protein 280 gene maps between DXS52 and G6PD overlapping
the Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy locus. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 51: A21, 1992.

33. Kyndt, F.; Gueffet, J.-P.; Probst, V.; Jaafar, P.; Legendre, A.;
Le Bouffant, F.; Toquet, C.; Roy, E.; McGregor, L.; Lynch, S. A.;
Newbury-Ecob, R.; Tran, V.; Young, I.; Trochu, J.-N.; Le Marec, H.;
Schott, J.-J.: Mutations in the gene encoding filamin A as a cause
for familial cardiac valvular dystrophy. Circulation 115: 40-49,
2007.

34. Kyndt, F.; Schott, J.-J.; Trochu, J.-N.; Baranger, F.; Herbert,
O.; Scott, V.; Fressinaud, E.; David, A.; Moisan, J.-P.; Bouhour,
J.-B.; Le Marec, H.; Benichou, B.: Mapping of X-linked myxomatous
valvular dystrophy to chromosome Xq28. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 62: 627-632,
1998.

35. Loy, C. J.; Sim, K. S.; Yong, E. L.: Filamin-A fragment localizes
to the nucleus to regulate androgen receptor and coactivator functions. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 4562-4567, 2003.

36. Maestrini, E.; Patrosso, C.; Mancini, M.; Rivella, S.; Rocchi,
M.; Repetto, M.; Villa, A.; Frattini, A.; Zoppe, M.; Vezzoni, P.;
Toniolo, D.: Mapping of two genes encoding isoforms of the actin
binding protein ABP-280, a dystrophin like protein, to Xq28 and to
chromosome 7. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 761-766, 1993.

37. Maestrini, E.; Rivella, S.; Tribioli, C.; Purtilo, D.; Rocchi,
M.; Archidiacono, N.; Toniolo, D.: Probes for CpG islands on the
distal long arm of the human X chromosome are clustered in Xq24 and
Xq28. Genomics 8: 664-670, 1990.

38. Marino-Enriquez, A.; Lapunzina, P.; Robertson, S. P.; Rodriguez,
J. I.: Otopalatodigital syndrome type 2 in two siblings with a novel
filamin A 629G-T mutation: clinical, pathological, and molecular findings. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 143A: 1120-1125, 2007.

39. Moro, F.; Carrozzo, R.; Veggiotti, P.; Tortorella, G.; Toniolo,
D.; Volzone, A.; Guerrini, R.: Familial periventricular heterotopia:
missense and distal truncating mutations of the FLN1 gene. Neurology 58:
916-921, 2002.

40. Newbury-Ecob, R. A.; Zuccollo, J. M.; Rutter, N.; Young, I. D.
: Sex linked valvular dysplasia. J. Med. Genet. 30: 873-874, 1993.

41. Patrosso, M. C.; Repetto, M.; Villa, A.; Milanesi, L.; Frattini,
A.; Faranda, S.; Mancini, M.; Maestrini, E.; Toniolo, D.; Vezzoni,
P.: The exon-intron organization of the human X-linked gene (FLN1)
encoding actin-binding protein 280. Genomics 21: 71-76, 1994.

42. Robertson, S. P.: Filamin A: phenotypic diversity. Curr. Opin.
Genet. Dev. 15: 301-307, 2005.

43. Robertson, S. P.; Thompson, S.; Morgan, T.; Holder-Espinasse,
M.; Martinot-Duquenoy, V.; Wilkie, A. O. M.; Manouvrier-Hanu, S.:
Postzygotic mutation and germline mosaicism in the otopalatodigital
syndrome spectrum disorders. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 14: 549-554,
2006.

44. Robertson, S. P.; Twigg, S. R. F.; Sutherland-Smith, A. J.; Biancalana,
V.; Gorlin, R. J.; Horn, D.; Kenwrick, S. J.; Kim, C. A.; Morava,
E.; Newbury-Ecob, R.; Orstavik, K. H.; Quarrell, O. W. J.; Schwartz,
C. E.; Shears, D. J.; Suri, M.; Kendrick-Jones, J.; OPD-spectrum
Disorders Clinical Collaborative Group; Wilkie, A. O. M.: Localized
mutations in the gene encoding the cytoskeletal protein filamin A
cause diverse malformations in humans. Nature Genet. 33: 487-491,
2003.

45. Shapiro, M. B.; Senapathy, P.: RNA splice junctions of different
classes of eukaryotes: sequence statistics and functional implications
in gene expression. Nucleic Acids Res. 15: 7155-7174, 1987.

46. Sheen, V. L.; Dixon, P. H.; Fox, J. W.; Hong, S. E.; Kinton, L.;
Sisodiya, S. M.; Duncan, J. S.; Dubeau, F.; Scheffer, I. E.; Schachter,
S. C.; Wilner, A.; Henchy, R.; and 18 others: Mutations in the
X-linked filamin 1 gene cause periventricular nodular heterotopia
in males as well as in females. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1775-1783,
2001.

47. Sheen, V. L.; Feng, Y.; Graham, D.; Takafuta, T.; Shapiro, S.
S.; Walsh, C. A.: Filamin A and filamin B are co-expressed within
neurons during periods of neuronal migration and can physically interact. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 11: 2845-2854, 2002.

48. Sheen, V. L.; Jansen, A.; Chen, M. H.; Parrini, E.; Morgan, T.;
Ravenscroft, R.; Ganesh, V.; Underwood, T.; Wiley, J.; Leventer, R.;
Vaid, R. R.; Ruiz, D. E.; and 21 others: Filamin A mutations cause
periventricular heterotopia with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Neurology 64:
254-262, 2005.

49. Siva, C.; Brasington, R.; Totty, W.; Sotelo, A.; Atkinson, J.
: Synovial lipomatosis (lipoma arborescens) affecting multiple joints
in a patient with congenital short bowel syndrome. J. Rheum. 29:
1088-1092, 2002.

50. Small, K.; Wagener, M.; Warren, S. T.: Isolation and characterization
of the complete mouse emerin gene. Mammalian Genome 8: 337-341,
1997.

51. Stefanova, M.; Meinecke, P.; Gal, A.; Bolz, H.: A novel 9 bp
deletion in the filamin A gene causes an otopalatodigital-spectrum
disorder with a variable, intermediate phenotype. Am. J. Med. Genet. 132A:
386-390, 2005.

52. Sun, Y.; Almomani, R.; Aten, E.; Celli, J.; van der Heijden, J.;
Venselaar, H.; Robertson, S. P.; Baroncini, A.; Franco, B.; Basel-Vanagaite,
L.; Horii, E.; Drut, R.; Ariyurek, Y.; den Dunnen, J. T.; Breuning,
M. H.: Terminal osseous dysplasia is caused by a single recurrent
mutation in the FLNA gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 87: 146-153, 2010.

53. Thelin, W. R.; Chen, Y.; Gentzsch, M.; Kreda, S. M.; Sallee, J.
L.; Scarlett, C. O.; Borchers, C. H.; Jacobson, K.; Stutts, M. J.;
Milgram, S. L.: Direct interaction with filamins modulates the stability
and plasma membrane expression of CFTR. J. Clin. Invest. 117: 364-374,
2007.

54. Unger, S.; Mainberger, A.; Spitz, C.; Bahr, A.; Zeschnigk, C.;
Zabel, B.; Superti-Furga, A.; Morris-Rosendahl, D. J.: Filamin A
mutation is one cause of FG syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 143A: 1876-1879,
2007.

55. Vadlamudi, R. K.; Li, F.; Adam, L.; Nguyen, D.; Ohta, Y.; Stossel,
T. P.; Kumar, R.: Filamin is essential in actin cytoskeletal assembly
mediated by p21-activated kinase 1. Nature Cell Biol. 4: 681-690,
2002.

56. van der Werf, C. S.; Sribudiani, Y.; Verheij, J. B. G. M.; Carroll,
M.; O'Loughlin, E.; Chen, C.-H.; Brooks, A. S.; Liszewski, M. K.;
Atkinson, J. P.; Hofstra, R. M. W.: Congenital short bowel syndrome
as the presenting symptom in male patients with FLNA mutations. Genet.
Med. 15: 310-313, 2013.

57. Zenker, M.; Nahrlich, L.; Sticht, H.; Reis, A.; Horn, D.: Genotype-epigenotype-phenotype
correlations in females with frontometaphyseal dysplasia. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 140A: 1069-1073, 2006.

58. Zenker, M.; Rauch, A.; Winterpacht, A.; Tagariello, A.; Kraus,
C.; Rupprecht, T.; Sticht, H.; Reis, A.: A dual phenotype of periventricular
nodular heterotopia and frontometaphyseal dysplasia in one patient
caused by a single FLNA mutation leading to two functionally different
aberrant transcripts. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74: 731-737, 2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 07/12/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/2/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/21/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/5/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/1/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/28/2010
Nara Sobreira - updated: 10/22/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/19/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/17/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/24/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/1/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/15/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/23/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/27/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/15/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/5/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/9/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/2/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/11/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/4/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/28/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/10/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/1/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 1/28/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/8/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 3/31/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/5/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/16/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/19/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/8/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/28/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/24/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/13/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/8/1993

EDITED mgross: 07/12/2013
carol: 7/10/2013
alopez: 5/2/2013
carol: 7/17/2012
alopez: 11/28/2011
terry: 11/21/2011
wwang: 4/7/2011
carol: 1/28/2011
wwang: 1/24/2011
ckniffin: 1/5/2011
alopez: 11/5/2010
terry: 11/1/2010
wwang: 10/28/2010
terry: 10/28/2010
carol: 10/27/2010
terry: 10/22/2010
carol: 2/24/2010
carol: 7/28/2009
carol: 7/23/2009
wwang: 5/29/2009
ckniffin: 5/19/2009
wwang: 4/30/2009
ckniffin: 4/17/2009
carol: 1/21/2009
mgross: 8/15/2008
terry: 7/24/2008
carol: 6/10/2008
wwang: 2/7/2008
terry: 2/1/2008
terry: 9/18/2007
wwang: 5/17/2007
ckniffin: 5/15/2007
wwang: 4/23/2007
alopez: 3/28/2007
terry: 3/27/2007
wwang: 3/16/2007
terry: 3/15/2007
terry: 8/24/2006
alopez: 7/10/2006
terry: 7/5/2006
carol: 6/22/2006
alopez: 6/9/2006
wwang: 6/5/2006
ckniffin: 6/2/2006
wwang: 5/11/2006
mgross: 5/11/2006
terry: 4/4/2006
wwang: 12/29/2005
terry: 12/28/2005
wwang: 5/17/2005
wwang: 5/11/2005
terry: 5/10/2005
wwang: 3/7/2005
terry: 3/1/2005
carol: 2/3/2005
terry: 1/28/2005
ckniffin: 10/25/2004
tkritzer: 4/26/2004
tkritzer: 4/16/2004
terry: 4/8/2004
tkritzer: 3/31/2004
tkritzer: 6/19/2003
tkritzer: 6/13/2003
terry: 6/5/2003
tkritzer: 5/27/2003
terry: 5/16/2003
alopez: 4/2/2003
alopez: 3/21/2003
terry: 3/19/2003
mgross: 12/10/2002
carol: 11/13/2002
ckniffin: 11/8/2002
mgross: 10/28/2002
carol: 4/2/2002
cwells: 3/13/2002
cwells: 2/14/2002
cwells: 1/24/2002
mcapotos: 1/18/2001
mcapotos: 1/5/2001
terry: 12/18/2000
alopez: 9/5/2000
terry: 4/14/1999
terry: 4/13/1999
alopez: 12/4/1998
terry: 11/18/1998
dkim: 7/17/1998
mark: 4/10/1997
joanna: 1/31/1996
jason: 6/7/1994
mimadm: 2/27/1994
carol: 8/23/1993
carol: 8/16/1993
carol: 7/13/1993
carol: 7/8/1993

609262	TITLE *609262 CEREBLON; CRBN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Higgins et al. (2004) identified a transcript, designated LOC51185,
within a candidate region for a form of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic
mental retardation (MRT2; 607417) that was mapped to chromosome
3pter-p25 in a large American family of German ancestry. The
corresponding cDNA encodes a 442-amino acid protein with a 237-residue
ATP-dependent Lon protease domain and several phosphorylation sites. The
gene was named 'cereblon' based on its putative role in cerebral
development and the large, highly conserved Lon domain. RT-PCR
demonstrated abundant expression of CRBN in the human brain.

Jo et al. (2005) cloned rat Crbn from a rat brain cDNA library. The
deduced 445-amino acid proteins shows 98% sequence identity with its
mouse ortholog. Rat Crbn contains an N-terminal domain of the Lon
protease, a RGS-like domain, a leucine zipper motif, and 4 putative
phosphorylation sites. Northern blot analysis of rat tissues detected
strong Crbn expression in brain, liver, kidney, and testis, and in situ
hybridization of rat brain showed strong expression in hippocampus,
habenula, and cortex.

GENE STRUCTURE

Higgins et al. (2004) determined that the CRBN gene contains 11 exons.

GENE FUNCTION

Ito et al. (2010) identified CRBN as a thalidomide-binding protein. CRBN
forms an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex with damaged DNA-binding protein-1
(DDB1; 600045) and CUL4A (603137) that is important for limb outgrowth
and expression of the fibroblast growth factor receptor FGF8 (600483) in
zebrafish and chicks. Thalidomide initiates its teratogenic effects by
binding to CRBN and inhibiting the associated ubiquitin ligase activity.
Ito et al. (2010) concluded that their study revealed a basis for
thalidomide teratogenicity and may contribute to the development of
thalidomide derivatives without teratogenic activity.

MAPPING

Higgins et al. (2004) identified the CRBN gene on chromosome 3pter-p25.

Jo et al. (2005) mapped the rat Crbn gene to chromosome 4q41. A mouse
ortholog was mapped to mouse chromosome 6.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected members of a family with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic
mental retardation, Higgins et al. (2004) identified a homozygous
arg419-to-ter mutation in the CRBN gene (R419X; 609262.0001) that
segregated with the phenotype.

ANIMAL MODEL

In rat brain, Jo et al. (2005) observed direct interaction of rat Crbn
with the cytosolic C terminus of the large conductance calcium-activated
potassium BK channel alpha-subunit (KCNMA1; 600150). Direct association
of rat Crbn with Kcnma1 was confirmed by immunoprecipitation in brain
lysate, and the 2 proteins colocalized in cultured rat hippocampal
neurons. Rat Crbn suppressed ionic currents of the channel and decreased
formation of the tetrameric BK channel complex, thus reducing surface
expression of functional channels. Jo et al. (2005) concluded that CRBN
may play an important role in modulating BK channel activity by
affecting assembly and surface expression.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 2
CRBN, ARG419TER

In affected members of a large family with autosomal recessive
nonsyndromic mental retardation (607417) previously described by Higgins
et al. (2000), Higgins et al. (2004) identified a homozygous 1274C-T
transition in exon 11 of the CRBN gene, resulting in an arg419-to-ter
(R419X) substitution. The mutation was not detected in 400 control
chromosomes. The truncation spares the Lon domain, but disrupts an
N-myristoylation site and deletes a casein kinase-2 phosphorylation site
at the C terminus, which may prevent proper subcellular targeting. As
human Lon-containing proteins are localized to the mitochondria, where
they selectively degrade short-lived polypeptides, Higgins et al. (2004)
hypothesized that a defect in the CRBN gene may perturb nuclear
regulation of mitochondrial energy metabolism.

Using RT-PCR to examine CRBN expression in lymphoblastoid cells derived
from patients with the R419X mutation, Higgins et al. (2008) found that
R419X-mutant CRBN was expressed at levels similar to wildtype protein.
However, presence of the mutant CRBN resulted in significantly different
expression of different KCNMA1 (600150) channel isoforms. Mutant CRBN
protein was associated with persistent postnatal expression of the
KCNMA1 isoform containing a site 2 insert that is usually downregulated
in adult life. Persistence of protein isoforms with the site 2 insert
would result in BK channels with higher intracellular calcium
sensitivity, faster activation, and slower deactivation kinetics
compared to the mature isoform without the site 2 insert. Higgins et al.
(2008) postulated that such alterations could contribute to abnormal
cortical development and cognitive impairments in patients with the
mutation. The authors noted that R419X-mutant CRBN escapes
nonsense-mediated decay.

REFERENCE 1. Higgins, J. J.; Hao, J.; Kosofsky, B. E.; Rajadhyaksha, A. M.:
Dysregulation of large-conductance Ca(2+)-activated K(+) channel expression
in nonsyndromal mental retardation due to a cereblon p.R419X mutation. Neurogenetics 9:
219-223, 2008.

2. Higgins, J. J.; Pucilowska, J.; Lombardi, R. Q.; Rooney, J. P.
: A mutation in a novel ATP-dependent Lon protease gene in a kindred
with mild mental retardation. Neurology 63: 1927-1931, 2004.

3. Higgins, J. J.; Rosen, D. R.; Loveless, J. M.; Clyman, J. C.; Grau,
M. J.: A gene for nonsyndromic mental retardation maps to chromosome
3p25-pter. Neurology 55: 335-340, 2000.

4. Ito, T.; Ando, H.; Suzuki, T.; Ogura, T.; Hotta, K.; Imamura, Y.;
Yamaguchi, Y.; Handa, H.: Identification of a primary target of thalidomide
teratogenicity. Science 327: 1345-1350, 2010.

5. Jo, S.; Lee, K.-H.; Song, S.; Jung, Y.-K.; Park, C.-S.: Identification
and functional characterization of cereblon as a binding protein for
large-conductance calcium-activated potassium channel in rat brain. J.
Neurochem. 94: 1212-1224, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/13/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/31/2008

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 3/16/2005

EDITED alopez: 04/15/2010
alopez: 4/15/2010
terry: 4/13/2010
wwang: 11/11/2008
ckniffin: 10/31/2008
carol: 10/15/2008
tkritzer: 3/17/2005
ckniffin: 3/16/2005

602876	TITLE *602876 OCCLUDIN; OCLN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Occludin is an integral membrane protein that is located at tight
junctions (Ando-Akatsuka et al., 1996). It is a member of a family of
proteins containing the highly conserved Marvel domain, which contains 4
transmembrane-helix regions. The Marvel domain has functional importance
in proteins involved in epithelial membrane apposition (review by
Sanchez-Pulido et al., 2002).

CLONING

By screening a human intestinal cell line cDNA library with a PCR
product that was generated using oligonucleotides based on the chicken
occludin-like sequence near the human NAIP gene (600355), Ando-Akatsuka
et al. (1996) cloned cDNAs encoding OCLN. The predicted 522-amino acid
protein has 4 transmembrane domains in its N-terminal half. The first
extracellular loop, which may be involved in tight cell-cell coupling,
contains 63% tyrosine or glycine residues. The C-terminal 150 amino
acids, which may interact with TJP1 (601009), contains a predicted
alpha-helical coiled-coil structure. Immunofluorescence analysis of a
human intestinal epithelial cell line detected OCLN specifically at
tight junctions.

By RT-PCR of human HT-29/B6 intestinal cell, placenta, and colon RNA,
Mankertz et al. (2002) obtained a full-length occludin clone identical
to that reported by Ando-Akatsuka et al. (1996), which they called type
I, as well as 3 additional splice variants, which they called types II,
III, and IV. Occludin types II, III, and IV have different in-frame
deletions relative to occludin type I, and occludin types II and III
encode proteins lacking transmembrane domain 4. Mankertz et al. (2002)
also identified occludin transcripts containing an alternative noncoding
first exon, exon 1A. Confocal microscopy of transfected HT-29/B6 cells
revealed fluorescence-tagged occludin types I and IV localized to the
plasma membrane, with high accumulation in tight junctions. In contrast,
occludin types II and III distributed in intracellular compartments.

In wildtype adult mice, O'Driscoll et al. (2010) found prominent
occludin expression in layers 2/3 of the cerebral cortex and in Purkinje
cells of the cerebellum.

Using immunofluorescence analysis, Du et al. (2010) found that occludin
localized to the leading edge of migrating MCDK canine kidney cells, in
addition to tight junctions.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mankertz et al. (2002) determined that the OCLN gene contains 9 exons
plus an alternative first exon that they called exon 1A. Exons 1 and 1A
are noncoding and are associated with unique promoter regions. Exon 1A
contains potential binding sites for several transcription factors,
including AP2 (see 107580) and MYB (189990), as well as a GC box.

MAPPING

O'Driscoll et al. (2010) noted that the OCLN gene maps to chromosome
5q13.2.

- Pseudogene

O'Driscoll et al. (2010) noted that the full-length OCLN gene has a
pseudogene approximately 1.5 Mb away containing a copy of OCLN exons 6
to 9 within a 500-kb inverted duplication.

GENE FUNCTION

Using reporter gene analysis, Mankertz et al. (2002) showed that the
proinflammatory cytokine TNF-alpha (TNF; 191160) downregulated
expression mediated by the alternative promoter associated with occludin
exon 1A.

Barrios-Rodiles et al. (2005) developed LUMIER (luminescence-based
mammalian interactome mapping), an automated high-throughput technology,
to map protein-protein interaction networks systematically in mammalian
cells and applied it to the TGF-beta (see 190180) pathway. Analysis
using self-organizing maps and k-means clustering identified links of
the TGF-beta pathway to the p21-activated kinase (PAK1; see 602590)
network, to the polarity complex, and to occludin. Barrios-Rodiles et
al. (2005) showed the occludin regulates TGF-beta receptor type I
(190181) localization for efficient TGF-beta-dependent dissolution of
tight junctions during epithelial-mesenchymal transitions.

Using an iterative cDNA library screening approach, Ploss et al. (2009)
showed that human occludin is an essential hepatitis C virus (HCV) cell
entry factor that is able to render murine cells infectable with HCV
glycoproteins. Similarly, occludin is required for the HCV
susceptibility of human cells, because its overexpression in
uninfectable cells specifically enhanced HCV glycoprotein uptake,
whereas its silencing in permissive cells impaired infection both by HCV
glycoprotein and HCV produced in cell culture. In addition to occludin,
HCV glycoprotein infection of murine cells required expression of the
previously identified HCV entry factors CD81 (186845), scavenger
receptor class B type I (SCARB1; 601040) and claudin-1 (CLDN1; 603718).
Although the mouse versions of SCARB1 and CLDN1 function at least as
well as the human proteins in promoting HCV entry, both OCLN and CD81
must be of human origin to allow efficient infection. The
species-specific determinants of OCLN were mapped to its second
extracellular loop. Ploss et al. (2009) concluded that the
identification of OCLN as a new HCV entry factor further highlighted the
importance of the tight junction complex in the viral entry process, and
provided an important advance towards efforts to develop small animal
models for HCV.

Using RNA interference, Du et al. (2010) found that knockdown of
occludin impaired the localization of atypical PKC (aPKC; see 176982),
Par3 (PARD; 606745), and Patj (INADL; 603199) at the leading edge of
migrating MDCK cells and caused misorientation of the microtubule
organization center during wound repair. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis
revealed that occludin interacted directly with aPKC in the
occludin/aPKC/Par2/Patj complex. Occludin knockdown also impaired PI3
kinase (see 601232) activation and Rac1 (602048)-dependent lamellipodia
formation. Phosphorylated occludin interacted directly with the
p85-alpha regulatory subunit of PI3 kinase (PIK3R1; 171833). Du et al.
(2010) concluded that occludin is involved in cell migration and
functions to recruit active PI3 kinase to the leading edge, resulting in
RAC1 activation and formation of lamellipodia.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 9 individuals from 6 families with autosomal recessive band-like
calcification with simplified gyration and polymicrogyria (BLCPMG;
251290), O'Driscoll et al. (2010) identified homozygous or compound
heterozygous mutations in the OCLN gene (see, e.g.,
602876.0001-602876.0004). Microarray analysis identified homozygous
deletions of copy number probes within exons 3 and 4 in affected
individuals from 2 unrelated but consanguineous families from Egypt and
Turkey, respectively. Affected individuals had congenital microcephaly,
intracranial calcifications, and severe developmental delay. Five of 6
families had deletions or mutations affecting the Marvel domain,
suggesting that the mutations result in a protein product that fails to
locate to the cell membrane and hence to tight junctions. O'Driscoll et
al. (2010) postulated that patients lacking functional occludin may have
a compromised blood-brain barrier (BBB) and may be vulnerable to tissue
damage. In addition, the defect may interrupt signaling between cells.
None of the patients had extracerebral abnormalities, suggesting
redundancy in other tissues. The findings indicated that mutations in
the OCLN gene can result in malformations of cortical development.

ANIMAL MODEL

Saitou et al. (2000) found that Ocln-null mice had significant postnatal
growth retardation. Ocln-null males produced no litters with wildtype
females, whereas Ocln-null females produced litters normally when mated
with wildtype males, but did not suckle them. Tight junctions appeared
normal, and the barrier function of intestinal epithelium was normal.
However, histologic abnormalities were found in several tissues,
including chronic inflammation and hyperplasia of the gastric
epithelium, calcification in the brain, testicular atrophy, loss of
cytoplasmic granules in striated duct cells of the salivary gland, and
thinning of the compact bone. These phenotypes suggested a complex role
for occludin in the functioning of tight junctions.

In mice with experimental autoimmune encephalitis (EAE), a mouse model
of a central nervous system inflammatory disease, Argaw et al. (2009)
observed widespread breakdown of the blood-brain barrier (BBB)
associated with upregulation of astrocyte-derived Vegf (192240) and
decreased expression of Cldn5 (602101) and occludin in the microvascular
endothelium. VEGF was found to specifically downregulate CLDN5 and OCLN
mRNA and protein in cultured human brain microvessel endothelial cells.
Microinjection of VEGF in mouse cerebral cortex disrupted Cldn5 and Ocln
and induced loss of barrier function. Functional studies revealed that
expression of recombinant Cldn5 protected brain microvascular
endothelial cell cultures from a VEGF-induced increase in permeability,
whereas recombinant Ocln expressed under the same promoter was not
protective. The findings implicated VEGF-mediated disruption of
endothelial CLDN5 as a significant mechanism of BBB breakdown in the
inflamed central nervous system. The significance of the role for OCLN
was less clear.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
BAND-LIKE CALCIFICATION WITH SIMPLIFIED GYRATION AND POLYMICROGYRIA
OCLN, 22-BP DEL, NT171

In 2 Turkish sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with band-like
calcification with simplified gyration and polymicrogyria (BLCPMG;
251290), O'Driscoll et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 22-bp deletion
(171_193del22) in exon 3 of the OCLN gene, resulting in a frameshift and
deletion of the first 8 amino acids of the conserved Marvel domain. The
family was previously reported by Briggs et al. (2008). The mutation was
not found in 220 control chromosomes.

.0002
BAND-LIKE CALCIFICATION WITH SIMPLIFIED GYRATION AND POLYMICROGYRIA
OCLN, 1-BP DUP, 512A

In 2 British sibs with band-like calcification with simplified gyration
and polymicrogyria (BLCPMG; 251290), O'Driscoll et al. (2010) identified
compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in exon 3 of the OCLN gene: a
1-bp duplication (512dupA), resulting in a premature stop codon and
nonsense-mediated decay, and a 656T-C transition, resulting in a
phe219-to-ser (F219S; 602876.0003) substitution in a conserved amino
acid in the extracellular loop between the third and fourth
transmembrane domains. Neither mutation was found in 220 control
chromosomes.

.0003
BAND-LIKE CALCIFICATION WITH SIMPLIFIED GYRATION AND POLYMICROGYRIA
OCLN, PHE219SER

See 602876.0002 and O'Driscoll et al. (2010).

.0004
BAND-LIKE CALCIFICATION WITH SIMPLIFIED GYRATION AND POLYMICROGYRIA
OCLN, IVS5DS, G-A, +5

In a Saudi Arabian patient with band-like calcification with simplified
gyration and polymicrogyria (BLCPMG; 251290), O'Driscoll et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous G-to-A transition in the splice donor site of
intron 5 of the OCLN gene, predicted to result in a severe splicing
mutation and exon skipping. The mutation was not found in 220 control
chromosomes.

REFERENCE 1. Ando-Akatsuka, Y.; Saitou, M.; Hirase, T.; Kishi, M.; Sakakibara,
A.; Itoh, M.; Yonemura, S.; Furuse, M.; Tsukita, S.: Interspecies
diversity of the occludin sequence: cDNA cloning of human, mouse,
dog, and rat-kangaroo homologues. J. Cell Biol. 133: 43-47, 1996.

2. Argaw, A. T.; Gurfein, B. T.; Zhang, Y.; Zameer, A.; John, G. R.
: VEGF-mediated disruption of endothelial CLN-5 promotes blood-brain
barrier breakdown. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 106: 1977-1982, 2009.

3. Barrios-Rodiles, M.; Brown, K. R.; Ozdamar, B.; Bose, R.; Liu,
Z.; Donovan, R. S.; Shinjo, F.; Liu, Y.; Dembowy, J.; Taylor, I. W.;
Luga, V.; Przulj, N.; Robinson, M.; Suzuki, H.; Hayashizaki, Y.; Jurisica,
I.; Wrana, J. L.: High-throughput mapping of a dynamic signaling
network in mammalian cells. Science 307: 1621-1625, 2005.

4. Briggs, T. A.; Wolf, N. I.; D'Arrigo, S.; Ebinger, F.; Harting,
I.; Dobyns, W. B.; Livingston, J. H.; Rice, G. I.; Crooks, D.; Rowland-Hill,
C. A.; Squier, W.; Stoodley, N.; Pilz, D. T.; Crow, Y. J.: Band-like
intracranial calcification with simplified gyration and polymicrogyria:
a distinct 'pseudo-TORCH' phenotype. Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A: 3173-3180,
2008.

5. Du, D.; Xu, F.; Yu, L.; Zhang, C.; Lu, X.; Yuan, H.; Huang, Q.;
Zhang, F.; Bao, H.; Jia, L.; Wu, X.; Zhu, X.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, Z.;
Chen, Z.: The tight junction protein, occludin, regulates the directional
migration of epithelial cells. Dev. Cell 18: 52-63, 2010.

6. Mankertz, J.; Waller, J. S.; Hillenbrand, B.; Tavalali, S.; Florian,
P.; Schoneberg, T.; Fromm, M.; Schulzke, J. D.: Gene expression of
the tight junction protein occludin includes differential splicing
and alternative promoter usage. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 298:
657-666, 2002.

7. O'Driscoll, M. C.; Daly, S. B.; Urquhart, J. E.; Black, G. C. M.;
Pilz, D. T.; Brockmann, K.; McEntagart, M.; Abdel-Salam, G.; Zaki,
M.; Wolf, N. I.; Ladda, R. L.; Sell, S.; D'Arrigo, S.; Squier, W.;
Dobyns, W. B.; Livingston, J. H.; Crow, Y. J.: Recessive mutations
in the gene encoding the tight junction protein occludin cause band-like
calcification with simplified gyration and polymicrogyria. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 87: 354-364, 2010.

8. Ploss, A.; Evans, M. J.; Gaysinskaya, V. A.; Panis, M.; You, H.;
de Jong, Y. P.; Rice, C. M.: Human occludin is a hepatitis C virus
entry factor required for infection of mouse cells. Nature 457:
882-886, 2009.

9. Saitou, M.; Furuse, M.; Sasaki, H.; Schulzke, J.-D.; Fromm, M.;
Takano, H.; Noda, T.; Tsukita, S.: Complex phenotype of mice lacking
occludin, a component of tight junction strands. Molec. Biol. Cell 11:
4131-4142, 2000.

10. Sanchez-Pulido, L.; Martin-Belmonte, F.; Valencia, A.; Alonso,
M. A.: MARVEL: a conserved domain involved in membrane apposition
events. Trends Biochem. Sci. 27: 599-601, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/12/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/20/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/29/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/9/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/1/2005
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 10/23/2001

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 7/22/1998

EDITED carol: 11/29/2012
joanna: 1/28/2011
mgross: 1/19/2011
terry: 1/12/2011
terry: 11/24/2010
wwang: 10/25/2010
ckniffin: 10/20/2010
wwang: 6/3/2009
ckniffin: 5/29/2009
alopez: 3/10/2009
terry: 3/9/2009
wwang: 6/2/2005
wwang: 6/1/2005
terry: 6/1/2005
carol: 10/23/2001
carol: 7/27/1998
dkim: 7/24/1998
carol: 7/23/1998

606154	TITLE *606154 MUCIN 16; MUC16
;;OVARIAN CARCINOMA ANTIGEN CA125
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

CA125 is a tumor antigen widely used in monitoring ovarian cancer. Using
a rabbit polyclonal antibody produced to purified CA125 antigen to
screen cells from an ovarian cancer cell (OVCAR-3) cDNA library in E.
coli, Yin and Lloyd (2001) cloned a long partial cDNA, which they
designated MUC16, corresponding to the CA125 antigen. The deduced
1,890-amino acid protein contains characteristic features of a
mucin-type molecule, including a high serine, threonine, and proline
content in an N-terminal region of 9 partially conserved tandem repeats
and a C-terminal region nontandem repeat sequence containing a possible
transmembrane region and a potential tyrosine phosphorylation site.
MUC16 also has a high leucine content. Northern blot analysis showed
that the level of MUC16 mRNA correlated with the expression of CA125 in
a panel of cell lines.

Argueso et al. (2003) demonstrated that the membrane-associated mucin
MUC16 was expressed by the human ocular surface and that MUC16 carried
the H185 carbohydrate epitope. The authors proposed further studies on
the expression of MUC16 and the characterization of the molecular
structure of the H185 carbohydrate epitope to determine their biologic
significance on the healthy ocular surface and in dry eye syndrome.

MAPPING

By sequence analysis, Yin and Lloyd (2001) provisionally assigned the
MUC16 gene to chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Argueso, P.; Spurr-Michaud, S.; Russo, C. L.; Tisdale, A.; Gipson,
I. K.: MUC16 mucin is expressed by the human ocular surface epithelia
and carries the H185 carbohydrate epitope. Invest. Ophthal. Vis.
Sci. 44: 2487-2495, 2003.

2. Yin, B. W. T.; Lloyd, K. O.: Molecular cloning of the CA125 ovarian
cancer antigen: identification as a new mucin, MUC16. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
27371-27375, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Jane Kelly - updated: 10/27/2003

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 7/25/2001

EDITED cwells: 10/27/2003
mcapotos: 7/27/2001
carol: 7/25/2001

614610	TITLE *614610 KN MOTIF- AND ANKYRIN REPEAT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; KANK2
;;SRC-INTERACTING PROTEIN; SIP;;
ANKYRIN REPEAT DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 25; ANKRD25;;
KIAA1518
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the KANK family, such as KANK2, contain a KANK N-terminal
(KN) motif, at least 1 coiled-coil domain, and an ankyrin (see 612641)
repeat domain. KANK proteins appear to regulate formation of actin
stress fibers (Zhu et al., 2008). KANK2 also sequesters steroid receptor
coactivators, such as SRC1 (NCOA1; 602691), in the cytoplasm and thereby
regulates SRC transactivation activity (Zhang et al., 2007).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned KANK2, which they designated
KIAA1518. The deduced protein contains 876 amino acids. RT-PCR analysis
detected variable KANK2 expression in all adult and fetal tissues and
specific adult brain region examined. Highest expression was in adult
ovary, followed by heart and liver, and lowest expression was in fetal
brain.

Using the N-terminal region of SRC1 to screen a human mammary cDNA
library, Zhang et al. (2007) cloned KANK2, which they called SIP. The
deduced 859-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about
92.2 kD. KANK2 has 2 conserved N-terminal regions, followed by a PEST
domain and a C-terminal ankyrin repeat domain. The PEST domain contains
2 overlapping casein kinase (CK) II (see 115440) phosphorylation sites.
Northern blot analysis detected highest expression of a 5.0-kb
transcript in heart, followed by lung, liver, and skeletal muscle. Low
expression was detected in placenta, kidney, and pancreas, but
expression was absent in brain. Fluorescence analysis of transfected
MCF-7 cells revealed that KANK2 localized to cytosol. Western blot
analysis of MCF-7 breast carcinoma cells detected KANK2 at an apparent
molecular mass of about 92 kD.

By database analysis, Zhu et al. (2008) identified human KANK2, KANK3
(614611), and KANK4 (614612). They identified orthologs of all 3 KANK
genes in rat and mouse and at least 1 KANK ortholog in chicken, fish,
sea urchin, fly, and nematode. The deduced 851-amino acid human KANK2
protein contains a KN motif, followed by 2 coiled-coil motifs and 5
C-terminal ankyrin repeats. The KN motif contains leucine- and
arginine-rich regions and potential nuclear localization and export
signals. RT-PCR detected KANK2 expression in all tissues examined, with
highest expression in cervix, colon, heart, kidney, and lung. KANK2 was
also expressed in all cell lines examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Zhang et al. (2007) found that SIP
interacted with the N-terminal domains of SRC1, GRIP1 (NCOA2; 601993),
and AIB1 (NCOA3; 601937). Western blot analysis of MCF-7 cell
immunoprecipitates confirmed interaction between SIP and SRC1, GRIP1,
and AIB1. Mutation analysis showed that the ankyrin repeat domain of SIP
was required for its interaction with SRC1. Zhang et al. (2007) found
that estrogen stimulation of MCF-7 cells caused nuclear translocation of
cytosolic SRC1, AIB1, and GRIP1, while SIP remained cytosolic. Knockdown
of SIP via RNA interference resulted in SRC1 nuclear localization,
independent of estrogen treatment, and increased expression of an
estrogen-dependent reporter. Overexpression of SIP in MCF-7 cells
reduced cell proliferation and caused accumulation of cells in G0/G1
phase in response to estrogen treatment. In contrast, knockdown of SIP
led to an increase of cells in S and G2/M phases following estrogen
treatment. CK II phosphorylated SIP in vitro, and phosphorylated SIP no
longer interacted with SRC1 in MCF-7 cells, permitting SRC1
translocation to the nucleus. Zhang et al. (2007) concluded that SIP is
a negative regulator of estrogen-induced cell proliferation and that its
function is regulated by CK II-dependent phosphorylation.

Zhu et al. (2008) found that overexpression of human KANK2, KANK3, or
KANK4 in mouse fibroblasts reduced formation of actin stress fibers.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zhang et al. (2007) determined that the KANK2 gene contains 8 exons.

MAPPING

Zhang et al. (2007) stated that the KANK2 gene maps to chromosome
19p13.2.

REFERENCE 1. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 143-150, 2000.

2. Zhang, Y.; Zhang, H.; Liang, J.; Yu, W.; Shang, Y.: SIP, a novel
ankyrin repeat containing protein, sequesters steroid receptor coactivators
in the cytoplasm. EMBO J. 26: 2645-2657, 2007.

3. Zhu, Y.; Kakinuma, N.; Wang, Y.; Kiyama, R.: Kank proteins: a
new family of ankyrin-repeat domain-containing proteins. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1780: 128-133, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/30/2012

EDITED mgross: 05/01/2012
mgross: 4/30/2012

109636	TITLE *109636 BETA-ADRENERGIC RECEPTOR KINASE 2; ADRBK2
;;BARK2;;
GRK3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the rat and the mouse, Benovic et al. (1991) identified a second
beta-adrenergic receptor kinase (see ADRBK1, or BARK1; 109635). They
isolated the receptor by screening a bovine brain cDNA library with a
catalytic domain fragment of the beta-adrenergic receptor kinase. The
enzyme, which they termed Bark2, showed overall amino acid identity of
85% with Bark1, with the protein kinase catalytic domain having 95%
identity. In the rat, Bark2 mRNA was localized predominantly in neuronal
tissues, although low levels were also observed in various tissues.

By PCR using primers designed from the catalytic domain of bovine Bark1,
followed by cDNA library screening, Parruti et al. (1993) cloned BARK2
from a pituitary cDNA library. The deduced 688-amino acid protein shares
84% amino acid identity with BARK1 and 95% identity with bovine Bark2.
The highest conservation is within the first 47 amino acids and in the
catalytic domain, while the most variability is in the C-terminal G
protein beta/gamma subunit-binding domain. Northern blot analysis
detected a major doublet of about 8 and 7 kb in monocytes, granulocytes,
and a neuroblastoma cell line, but not in several other cell lines
examined. The 8-kb transcript was dominant in the neuroblastoma cell
line. Minor transcripts of about 3.5 and 2 kb were also detected in
cells expressing the longer variants. Parruti et al. (1993) found
moderate expression of BARK2 in lung, heart, and adipose tissue.

GENE FUNCTION

Parruti et al. (1993) expressed BARK2 and BARK1 in COS-7 cells and
assayed the in vitro phosphorylation of bovine rod outer segments (ROS).
BARK2 was about 40% as efficient as BARK1 in this assay, in agreement
with results obtained in a comparison of bovine Bark1 and Bark2.

MAPPING

The gene encoding Bark2 mapped to mouse chromosome 5, whereas that
encoding Bark1 was localized to mouse chromosome 19 (Benovic et al.,
1991). Calabrese et al. (1994) demonstrated by fluorescence in situ
hybridization that the human ADRBK2 gene is located on 22q11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Saccone et al. (2007) conducted a genomewide linkage screen of a simple
heavy smoking quantitative trait, the maximum number of cigarettes
smoked in a 24-hour period, using 2 independent samples: 289 Australians
and 155 Finnish nuclear multiplex families, all of which were of
European ancestry and were targeted for DNA analysis through probands
with a heavy smoking phenotype. Genetic linkage was detected on
chromosome 22q12 (SQTL2; 611004), and Saccone et al. (2007) found that
the linkage signal was driven mainly by the microsatellite marker
D22S315 that had a single-point lod score of 5.41 in the combined
sample. This marker is located within an intron of the ADRBK2 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Benovic, J. L.; Onorato, J. J.; Arriza, J. L.; Stone, W. C.; Lohse,
M.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert, D. J.; Copeland, N. G.; Caron, M. G.;
Lefkowitz, R. J.: Cloning, expression, and chromosomal localization
of beta-adrenergic receptor kinase 2: a new member of the receptor
kinase family. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 14939-14946, 1991.

2. Calabrese, G.; Sallese, M.; Stornaiuolo, A.; Stuppia, L.; Palka,
G.; De Blasi, A.: Chromosome mapping of the human arrestin (SAG),
beta-arrestin 2 (ARRB2), and beta-adrenergic receptor kinase 2 (ADRBK2)
genes. Genomics 23: 286-288, 1994.

3. Parruti, G.; Ambrosini, G.; Sallese, M.; De Blasi, A.: Molecular
cloning, functional expression and mRNA analysis of human beta-adrenergic
receptor kinase 2. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 190: 475-481,
1993.

4. Saccone, S. F.; Pergadia, M. L.; Loukola, A.; Broms, U.; Montgomery,
G. W.; Wang, J. C.; Agrawal, A.; Dick, D. M.; Heath, A. C.; Todorov,
A. A.; Maunu, H.; Heikkila, K.; Morley, K. I.; Rice, J. P.; Todd,
R. D.; Kaprio, J.; Peltonen, L.; Martin, N. G.; Goate, A. M.; Madden,
P. A. F.: Genetic linkage to chromosome 22q12 for a heavy-smoking
quantitative trait in two independent samples. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 80:
856-866, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/1/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/10/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/1/1993

EDITED alopez: 05/08/2007
terry: 5/1/2007
terry: 7/19/2004
mgross: 7/10/2003
carol: 6/18/2003
carol: 9/8/1998
terry: 11/7/1994
carol: 2/4/1993
carol: 2/1/1993

605963	TITLE *605963 SORTING NEXIN 17; SNX17
DESCRIPTION SNX17 is a member of the sorting nexin family of molecules that contain
a conserved, approximately 100-amino acid phox (PX) domain Florian et
al. (2001).

CLONING

Using the cytoplasmic tail of P-selectin (173610) as bait in a 2-hybrid
screen of a human placenta cDNA library, Florian et al. (2001) isolated
a cDNA, which they called SNX17, with sequence identity to a full-length
cDNA reported as KIAA0064 by Nomura et al. (1994). Northern blot
analysis detected ubiquitous expression of SNX17 (Nomura et al., 1994).
Florian et al. (2001) found that the deduced 470-amino acid SNX17
protein contains a PX domain that shares 28% sequence identity with the
PX domain of sorting nexin-1 (601272) as well as a B41 (FERM) domain.
Expression of a GFP-SNX17 fusion protein demonstrated localization of
SNX17 in the cytosol and on membranes.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the SNX17
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP WI-7933).

GENE FUNCTION

Florian et al. (2001) found that the FERM domain may be necessary for
interaction of SNX17 with the cytoplasmic tail of P-selectin.

REFERENCE 1. Florian, V.; Schluter, T.; Bohnensack, R.: A new member of the
sorting nexin family interacts with the C-terminus of P-selectin. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 281: 1045-1050, 2001.

2. Nomura, N.; Nagase, T.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Sato,
S.; Seki, N.; Kawarabayasi, Y.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. II. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0041-KIAA0080) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 223-229, 1994.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 5/23/2001

EDITED carol: 10/19/2009
carol: 5/24/2001
carol: 5/23/2001

602871	TITLE *602871 PERIPLAKIN; PPL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The intermediate filament cytoskeleton of keratinocytes, composed of
keratins (see 139350) that are expressed in specific expression pairs
according to tissue and differentiation state, are interconnected
through transmembrane protein complexes called desmosomes and connect
with the basement membrane via hemidesmosomes. The proteins thought to
make contact with the intermediate filaments of keratinocytes belong to
a family of proteins known as plakins, of which desmoplakin (125647),
envoplakin (601590), and periplakin are members. These proteins have a
similar overall domain structure that includes an N-terminal globular
domain, a central coiled-coil rod domain, and a C-terminal tail with
characteristic repeat sequences.

CLONING

Ruhrberg et al. (1997) cloned PPL from a keratinocyte expression library
using antibody to PPL as the probe. The deduced 1,666-amino acid protein
has a calculated molecular mass of about 205 kD. PPL shares extensive
sequence homology with other proteins of the plakin family, with highest
identities found in the N- and C-terminal domains. Immunoblots of
keratinocyte extracts revealed a protein with an apparent molecular mass
of 195 kD. Immunogold electron microscopy revealed association of PPL
with the desmosomal plaque and with keratin filaments in the
differentiated layers of the epidermis.

Aho et al. (1998) isolated PPL in a yeast 2-hybrid system by its
interactions with type XVII collagen, a component of hemidesmosomes. The
PPL clones from human keratinocyte and placenta libraries span
approximately 6.2 kb. The predicted 1,756-amino acid periplakin
polypeptide has a computed molecular mass of approximately 204 kD. PPL
shares 50.3% amino acid sequence similarity with envoplakin. Northern
blot analysis revealed that a 6.5-kb PPL message is expressed
predominantly in keratinocytes compared to fibroblasts; dot blot
analysis detected expression in tissues containing epithelial cells,
with the highest expression in trachea, and in nonepithelial tissues,
most notably in many areas of the brain.

By RT-PCR, Kazerounian et al. (2002) detected significant expression of
PPL in brain, heart, liver, pancreas, placenta, skeletal muscle, colon,
and small intestine.

GENE FUNCTION

Ruhrberg et al. (1997) noted that the influx of Ca(2+) that occurs
following treatment of confluent keratinocyte cultures with a detergent
or with a calcium ionophore stimulates the cross-linking of cornified
envelope precursors by transglutaminases (190195). PPL became
cross-linked following exposure of keratinocytes to these agents, and a
transglutaminase inhibitor blocked PPL cross-linking.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments revealed interaction between PPL and
envoplakin. Analysis of putative ionic interactions between the rod
domains suggested that both PPL and envoplakin could form homodimers and
heterodimers. Confocal immunofluorescent microscopy of cultured
epidermal keratinocytes suggested that envoplakin and PPL form a network
radiating from desmosomes.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay, Kazerounian et al. (2002) found that a
linker region within the C-terminal globular domain of periplakin
interacts with keratin-8 (K8; 148060) and vimentin (193060). In an in
vitro pull-down assay, K18 (148070) also coprecipitated with K8 with the
periplakin C-terminal tail, suggesting that periplakin can interact with
K8 within the K8/K18 heterodimer.

GENE STRUCTURE

Aho et al. (1999) determined that the PPL gene contains 22 exons and
spans 60 kb. The 5-prime flanking sequence is GC rich (80%) and contains
multiple AP2 (107580) and SP1 (189906) sites, but no canonical TATA or
CCAAT boxes. The gene also has multiple Alu repeats and numerous MIR and
L1 elements.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Aho et al. (1998) assigned the PPL gene to
chromosome 16p13. By use of an interspecific backcross panel, they
mapped the mouse periplakin gene to the proximal part of mouse
chromosome 16, a region syntenic with human chromosome 16. By somatic
cell hybrid analysis and FISH, Ruhrberg et al. (1998) mapped the PPL
gene to chromosome 16p13.3. They mapped the mouse Ppl gene to chromosome
16A-B1.

ANIMAL MODEL

Aho et al. (2004) found that Ppl -/- mice were born in the expected
mendelian frequency, developed normally, possessed grossly normal
epidermis and hair, and were healthy and fertile. The epidermal barrier
developed normally during embryonic days 15.5 to 16.5, and the cornified
envelope and desmosomes in the newborn mice were ultrastructurally
normal. No compensatory increase in the expression of other epithelial
proteins was detected in neonatal mouse epidermis lacking periplakin.
Aho et al. (2004) concluded that the primary role of periplakin may not
relate to the physiology of the cornified cell envelope in epidermal
keratinocytes.

REFERENCE 1. Aho, S.; Li, K.; Ryoo, Y.; McGee, C.; Ishida-Yamamoto, A.; Uitto,
J.; Klement, J. F.: Periplakin gene targeting reveals a constituent
of the cornified cell envelope dispensable for normal mouse development. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 24: 6410-6418, 2004.

2. Aho, S.; McLean, W. H. I.; Li, K.; Uitto, J.: cDNA cloning, mRNA
expression, and chromosomal mapping of human and mouse periplakin
genes. Genomics 48: 242-247, 1998.

3. Aho, S.; Rothenberger, K.; Tan, E. M. L.; Ryoo, Y. W.; Cho, B.
H.; McLean, W. H. I.; Uitto, J.: Human periplakin: genomic organization
in a clonally unstable region of chromosome 16p with an abundance
of repetitive sequence elements. Genomics 56: 160-168, 1999.

4. Kazerounian, S.; Uitto, J.; Aho, S.: Unique role for the periplakin
tail in intermediate filament association: specific binding to keratin
8 and vimentin. Exp. Derm. 11: 428-438, 2002.

5. Ruhrberg, C.; Hajibagheri, M. A. N.; Parry, D. A. D.; Watt, F.
A.: Periplakin, a novel component of cornified envelopes and desmosomes
that belongs to the plakin family and forms complexes with envoplakin. J.
Cell Biol. 139: 1835-1849, 1997.

6. Ruhrberg, C.; Williamson, J. A.; Maatta, A.; Watt, F. A.: The
periplakin gene maps to 16p13.3 in human and 16A-B1 in mouse. Genomics 49:
157-159, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/16/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/7/2003
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/21/2002

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 7/21/1998

EDITED mgross: 09/07/2004
terry: 8/16/2004
mgross: 10/7/2003
mgross: 11/21/2002
carol: 7/24/1998
carol: 7/23/1998
dholmes: 7/23/1998
dholmes: 7/22/1998

610499	TITLE *610499 RAP GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 6; RAPGEF6
;;RAS-ASSOCIATING GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 2; RAGEF2;;
PDZ DOMAIN-CONTAINING GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE FACTOR 2; PDZGEF2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching for sequences similar to RAGEF1 (RAPGEF2; 609530), followed
by screening a fetal brain cDNA library and 5-prime and 3-prime RACE,
Gao et al. (2001) cloned RAPGEF6, which they called RAGEF2. The deduced
1,509-amino acid protein contains several of the domains present in
RAPGEF2, including cNMP-binding, REM, PDZ, and RA domains as well as the
GEF catalytic domain. Northern blot analysis detected a RAPGEF6
transcript of about 8 kb which was abundantly expressed in heart, brain,
placenta, lung, and liver, but barely detectable in skeletal muscle,
kidney, and pancreas.

Kuiperij et al. (2003) cloned 2 splice variants of RAPGEF6, which they
called PDZGEF2A and PDZGEF2B, from human umbilical cord and Jurkat
T-cell cDNA libraries. The deduced proteins contain 1,601 and 1,391
amino acids, respectively, and they differ after amino acid 1,249. Like
RAPGEF2, PDZGEF2A contains a C-terminal proline-rich and a PDZ-binding
motif, whereas PDZGEF2B lacks these motifs. Unlike RAPGEF2, both PDZGEF2
isoforms contain a second, less conserved, N-terminal RCBD (related
cyclic nucleotide-binding domain) domain. Northern blot analysis
detected ubiquitous expression of an approximately 9.0-kb RAPGEF6
transcript.

GENE FUNCTION

Gao et al. (2001) found that human RAPGEF6 expressed in insect cells
showed GEF activity toward RAP1A (179520) and RAP2A (179540), but not
toward other RAS family members. RAPGEF6 colocalized with activated MRAS
(608435) in the plasma membrane of cotransfected COS-7 cells, leading to
an increase in the GTP-bound form of plasma membrane RAP1. Gao et al.
(2001) concluded that RAPGEF6 acts as the GEF for RAP1 and RAP2
downstream of MRAS in the plasma membrane. Kuiperij et al. (2003)
demonstrated that RAPGEF2 activated both RAP1 and RAP2.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Gao et al. (2001) and Kuiperij et al.
(2003) mapped the RAPGEF6 gene to chromosome 5.

REFERENCE 1. Gao, X.; Satoh, T.; Liao, Y.; Song, C.; Hu, C.-D.; Kariya, K.;
Kataoka, T.: Identification and characterization of RA-GEF-2, a Rap
guanine nucleotide exchange factor that serves as a downstream target
of M-Ras. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 42219-42225, 2001.

2. Kuiperij, H. B.; de Rooij, J.; Rehmann, H.; van Triest, M.; Wittinghofer,
A.; Bos, J. L.; Zwartkruis, F. J. T.: Characterisation of PDZ-GEFs,
a family of guanine nucleotide exchange factors specific for Rap1
and Rap2. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1593: 141-149, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/16/2006

EDITED carol: 10/25/2006
carol: 10/17/2006
carol: 10/16/2006

613742	TITLE *613742 GLUCOSE-6-PHOSPHATASE, CATALYTIC; G6PC
;;GLUCOSE-6-PHOSPHATASE, CATALYTIC, 1; G6PC1;;
G6PT, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Glucose-6-phosphatase (EC 3.1.3.9), the key enzyme in the homeostasis
regulation of blood glucose concentrations, catalyzes the terminal step
in gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis (summary by Lei et al., 1993).

CLONING

Lei et al. (1993) cloned human G6PC from a liver cDNA library. G6PC
encodes a predicted 357-amino acid protein with an endoplasmic reticulum
(ER) retention signal and 6 putative membrane-spanning segments. The
expressed protein is indistinguishable from human microsomal G6Pase. Lei
et al. (1993) stated that the gene had previously eluded molecular
characterization primarily because of its tight association with the ER
and nuclear membranes.

Shelly et al. (1993) isolated cDNAs encoding G6Pase by taking advantage
of an albino deletion mutant mouse that is known to express markedly
reduced levels of G6Pase activity. The primary defect of this mutant
mouse is a loss of the fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase gene (FAH; 613871)
located near the albino locus on chromosome 7. Fumarylacetoacetate
hydrolase (or fumarylacetoacetase) is the final enzyme in the tyrosine
degradation pathway, and a deficiency of this enzyme leads to the
accumulation of toxic tyrosine metabolites, resulting in reduced
expression of a group of liver-specific proteins, including G6Pase.
Newborn homozygous deletion mice develop hypoglycemia shortly after
birth, correlating with undetectable levels of G6Pase activity. Shelly
et al. (1993) isolated a full-length cDNA encoding murine liver
microsomal G6Pase by screening a normal mouse liver cDNA library
differentially with probes representing mRNA populations from the normal
and the albino deletion mutant mouse. They showed that the murine G6Pase
transcription unit spans approximately 10 kb and consists of 5 exons.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lei et al. (1993) determined that the G6PC gene contains 5 exons and
spans approximately 12.5 kb.

MAPPING

By analysis of somatic cell hybrids, Lei et al. (1994) mapped the G6PC
gene to chromosome 17.

In the course of constructing a transcription map of approximately 600
kb of genomic DNA surrounding the BRCA1 gene (113705), Brody et al.
(1995) identified the G6PC gene, thus regionalizing its assignment to
17q21.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 patients with glycogen storage disease Ia (GSD1a; 232200), Lei et
al. (1993) identified homozygous and compound heterozygous mutations,
respectively, in the G6PC gene (613742.0001-613742.0003).

Lei et al. (1995) used SSCP analysis and DNA sequencing to characterize
the G6PC gene of 70 unrelated patients with enzymatically confirmed
diagnosis of type Ia GSD and detected mutations in all except 17 alleles
(88%). They uncovered 16 mutations that were shown by expression to
abolish or greatly reduce G6Pase activity and that, therefore, were
responsible for the clinical disorder. R83C (613742.0002) and Q347X
(613742.0004) were the most prevalent mutations found in Caucasians;
130X (613742.0001) and R83C were most prevalent in Hispanics; R83H was
most prevalent in Chinese. The Q347X mutation was identified only in
Caucasians, and the 130X mutation was identified only in Hispanic
patients.

Kajihara et al. (1995) identified a splice mutation in exon 5 (727G-T)
of the G6PC cDNA from the liver of a Japanese patient with GSD type Ia
(613742.0005). Another 8 unrelated Japanese families with a total of 9
affected individuals were found to have the same mutation, thus
representing 91% of patients and carriers of GSD Ia in Japan.

Chevalier-Porst et al. (1996) sequenced both alleles of 24 French GSD
type Ia patients; 14 different mutations were found, allowing the
identification of complete genotypes for all the patients. These
included 9 new mutations. Five mutations, Q347X, R83C, D38V
(613742.0006), G188R (613742.0012), and 158Cdel, accounted for 75% of
the mutated alleles.

Parvari et al. (1997) reported the biochemical and clinical
characteristics as well as mutation analyses of 12 Israeli GSD Ia
patients of different families, who represent most of the GSD Ia
patients in Israel. All 9 Jewish patients, as well as a Muslim Arab
patient, were found to have the R83C mutation (613742.0002). Two Muslim
Arab patients had the val166-to-gly (V166G) mutation (613742.0014),
which had not been found in other populations.

Akanuma et al. (2000) identified G6PC mutations in all alleles from 51
unrelated Japanese patients with GSD Ia. A total of 7 mutations were
identified, including 3 novel mutations. The most prevalent mutation,
727G-T, accounting for 88 of 102 mutant alleles, creates an aberrant
3-prime splice site within exon 5. The authors demonstrated that
ectopically transcribed G6Pase mRNA can be detected in lymphoblastoid
cells and may be used for the characterization of mutations that affect
mRNA splicing. They concluded that noninvasive molecular diagnosis may
ultimately replace the conventional method of enzymatic diagnosis that
requires liver biopsy in Japanese patients.

Stroppiano et al. (1999) analyzed the G6Pase gene in 53 unrelated
Italian patients and identified 88 mutant alleles (82.6%) with 18
(17.4%) remaining unidentified. The most prevalent mutation was R83C
(46.2%), followed by Q347X (20.7%); 3 other mutations (R295C, D38V, and
G270V) accounted for 5.6% of disease alleles. The authors suggested that
noninvasive screening could be used in Italian patients clinically
suspected of having GSD Ia, particularly in those from Sicily, where the
R83C mutation was present in 80% of mutant alleles. In all of 13
unrelated Korean patients with GSD Ia, Ki et al. (2004) identified
mutant alleles of the G6PC gene. Three known mutations and 2 novel
mutations were identified. The most frequent mutant allele was 727G-T,
present in 21 of 26 alleles (81%), which was slightly lower than that in
Japanese, where it was present in 86 alleles (92%), but much higher than
that in Taiwan Chinese (present in 44.4% of alleles).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ia
G6PC, 2-BP INS, 459AT

In a patient with type Ia glycogen storage disease (232200), Lei et al.
(1993) found a 2-bp insertion at nucleotide 459 (ATins459) in exon 3 of
the G6PC gene. The insertion caused a frameshift with generation of a
stop codon at nucleotides 467-469. The predicted gene product was a
severely truncated protein of 129 amino acids. The patient was
homozygous for the TA insertion and the mother, the only parent
available, was heterozygous. Lei et al. (1995) referred to this mutation
as 130X referring to the number of the stop codon that was generated by
the frameshift. The 130X mutation had been identified only in Hispanic
patients.

.0002
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ia
G6PC, ARG83CYS

Lei et al. (1993) concluded that a patient with type Ia glycogen storage
disease (232200) was a compound heterozygote for 2 different G6PC
mutations: arg83-to-cys (R83C) and arg295-to-cys (R295C; 613742.0003),
located in exons 2 and 5, respectively. The exon 5 mutation came from
the father and the exon 2 mutation from the mother. Both mutations were
thought to involve a CpG doublet. Lei et al. (1994) demonstrated that
the R83C mutant has no detectable phosphohydrolase activity.

In a patient originally reported by Burchell and Waddell (1990) as
having a novel form of type 1 glycogen storage disease due to a defect
in the 21-kD stabilizing protein SP, Lei et al. (1995) demonstrated that
in fact there was an R83C mutation in exon 2 of the G6PC gene. They
found the same mutation in both homozygous and heterozygous form in
patients with standard GSD type Ia.

Qu et al. (1996) performed prenatal diagnosis by chorionic villus
sampling in an Ashkenazi Jewish family in which a previous child was
homoallelic and both parents were heterozygous for the R83C mutation.
Molecular analysis showed that the fetus was not affected.

Parvari et al. (1997) found that the R83C mutation was present in all
Ashkenazi Jewish patients studied in Israel, suggesting that DNA-based
diagnosis may be used as an initial diagnostic step in this population,
thus avoiding liver biopsy.

Ekstein et al. (2004) tested 20,719 Ashkenazi Jewish subjects for the
R83C mutation and identified 290 carriers, giving a carrier frequency of
0.014. The authors noted that this carrier frequency translates into a
predicted disease prevalence of 1 in 20,000, 5 times higher than that
for the general Caucasian population, confirming a founder effect and
elevated frequency of type Ia glycogen storage disease in the Ashkenazi
population. They also tested 4,290 Ashkenazi subjects for the Q347X
(613742.0004) mutation and found no carriers. Of 30 Ashkenazi Jewish
patients with type Ia glycogen storage disease, all were homozygous for
the R83C mutation. Ekstein et al. (2004) concluded that R83C is the only
prevalent mutation for this disease in the Ashkenazi population.

.0003
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ia
G6PC, ARG295CYS

See 613742.0002 and Lei et al. (1993).

.0004
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ia
G6PC, GLN347TER

In a patient with type Ia glycogen storage disease (232200), Lei et al.
(1994) demonstrated compound heterozygosity for an arg83-to-cys mutation
(613742.0002) in exon 2 and a gln347-to-ter mutation in exon 5. The
latter mutation was detected in homozygous form in 2 sibs of an
unrelated family. The predicted Q347X mutant G6Pase is a truncated
protein of 346 amino acids, 11 amino acids shorter than the wildtype
G6Pase. Site-directed mutagenesis and transient expression assays
demonstrated that the mutant protein is devoid of G6Pase activity.

.0005
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ia
G6PC, IVS4AS, G-T, +86

In a 26-year-old man with GSD Ia (232200) and in 9 other Japanese
patients from 8 unrelated families, Kajihara et al. (1995) identified a
splicing mutation in the G6PC gene. The first patient was the progeny of
first-cousin parents and had a history of hepatomegaly and hypoglycemia
since childhood. The diagnosis of GSD Ia was based on the findings of
hypoglycemia, hypertriglyceridemia, hyperuricemia and liver biopsy
abnormalities. Residual G6Pase activity in the liver was 18% of normal
in both fresh and previously frozen liver biopsy specimens. A younger
brother was also affected. The cDNA prepared from the patient's liver
had a deletion of 91 nucleotides with no normal-sized cDNA. The mutation
resulted in a G6Pase polypeptide 146 amino acids shorter at the
carboxy-terminal portion than the normal gene product of 357 residues.
It was thought that the 18% of normal activity reflected nonspecific
phosphatase activity since the G6Pase activity was low or not detectable
in several unrelated GSD Ia patients homozygous for this mutation.
Analysis of mutant genomic DNA demonstrated a G-to-T transversion at
nucleotide 727 of their G6PC sequence. Although the patient's splice
site in intron 4 and exon 5 had a normal consensus sequence, normal
splicing did not occur. It is thought that the single base substitution,
located far from the splice junction, altered the splice site. Kajihara
et al. (1995) cited data indicating that 11% of aberrant splice
mutations represent the creation of new splice sites with no alteration
in the authentic splice site sequences. Nakai and Sakamoto (1994) found
that new 5-prime and 3-prime sites were created only in the upstream
region of the authentic 5-prime and 3-prime splice sites. However, this
characteristically Japanese GSD Ia mutation is an exception; a new
3-prime site occurred in the downstream region of a normal splice site.

Akanuma et al. (2000) found that the most prevalent mutation in a study
of 51 unrelated Japanese patients with GSD Ia was 727G-T, accounting for
88 of 102 mutant alleles.

.0006
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ia
G6PC, ASP38VAL

In 4 unrelated French patients with GSD type Ia (232200),
Chevalier-Porst et al. (1996) found compound heterozygosity for a D38V
missense mutation in the G6PC gene. This resulted from an A-to-T
transversion of nucleotide 192 in exon 1. The mutation was predicted to
change an acidic amino acid (aspartic acid) to a nonpolar hydrophobic
amino acid (valine) in the middle of the first predicted transmembrane
spanning domain.

.0007
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ia
G6PC, TRP77ARG

In a French patient with GSD type Ia (232200), Chevalier-Porst et al.
(1996) found compound heterozygosity for a W77R missense mutation in the
G6PC gene. The mutation changed a nonpolar hydrophobic amino acid
(tryptophan) to a basic one (arginine). The amino acid substitution
resulted from a T-to-C transition of nucleotide 308 in exon 1.

.0008
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ia
G6PC, IVS1DS, A-G, +4

In a French patient with GSD Ia (232200), Chevalier-Porst et al. (1996)
found an A-to-G transition at position +4 of the 5-prime donor splice
site of intron 1 of the G6PC gene. The patient was a compound
heterozygote for this mutation and for the G188R mutation (613742.0012).

.0009
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ia
G6PC, GLU110LYS

In a French patient with GSD Ia (232200), Chevalier-Porst et al. (1996)
found a E110K missense mutation in the G6PC gene. The mutation changed
an acidic amino acid (glutamic acid) to a basic amino acid (lysine). It
was due to a G-to-A transition of nucleotide 407 in exon 2. The mutation
was present in compound heterozygous state.

.0010
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ia
G6PC, ALA124THR

In a French patient with GSD type Ia (232200), Chevalier-Porst et al.
(1996) identified a G-to-A transition of nucleotide 449 in exon 3 which
changed a nonpolar amino acid (alanine-124) to a polar one (threonine).
This mutation, inherited from the mother, was associated with the Q347X
mutation (613742.0004) in 2 sibs with GSD Ia.

.0011
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ia
G6PC, GLY184GLU

In a French patient with type Ia glycogen storage disease (232200),
Chevalier-Porst et al. (1996) found a G-to-A transition of nucleotide
630 changing a nonpolar hydrophobic amino acid (glycine-184) to an
acidic one (glutamic acid). The G184E mutation is located in the
putative cytoplasmic domain of the enzyme. The mutation was present in
homozygous state in a family with no known consanguinity.

.0012
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ia
G6PC, GLY188ARG

In 3 unrelated French patients with glycogen storage disease type Ia
(232200), Chevalier-Porst et al. (1996) found compound heterozygosity
for a G-to-C transversion of nucleotide 641, resulting in change of a
nonpolar hydrophobic amino acid (glycine-188) to a basic one (arginine).
This mutation, like G184E (613742.0011), is located in the putative
cytoplasmic domain of the enzyme.

Weston et al. (2000) identified a 5-month-old girl with hypoglycemia,
hepatomegaly, and lactic acidemia who was diagnosed with GSD Ia. She
also developed neutropenia, neutrophil dysfunction, and recurrent
infections characteristic of GSD Ib, but was found to be homozygous for
the G188R mutation of the G6PC gene. No mutations in the G6PC
translocase gene were identified. Weston et al. (2000) subsequently
identified a sib of this proband and 2 unrelated patients with similar
genotype-phenotype characteristics. They concluded that the unusual
association of neutrophil abnormalities in patients with homozygous
G188R mutations in the G6PC gene supports the modified
translocase/catalytic unit model.

.0013
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ia
G6PC, ILE341ASP

In 2 sibs with type Ia GSD (232200), Lee et al. (1996) found compound
heterozygosity for an R83C substitution in exon 2 (613742.0002) and an
ile341-to-asp substitution in exon 5 of the G6PC gene. The nucleotide
substitutions were a G-to-A transition at base position 327 in exon 2
and a T-to-A transversion at base position 1101 in exon 5. The father
was heterozygous for the exon 2 mutation, while the mother was
heterozygous for the exon 5 mutation.

.0014
GLYCOGEN STORAGE DISEASE Ia
G6PC, VAL166GLY

In 2 Muslim Arab patients in Israel with glycogen storage disease Ia
(232200), Parvari et al. (1997) identified a val166-to-gly (V166G)
missense mutation in the G6PC gene.

REFERENCE 1. Akanuma, J.; Nishigaki, T.; Fujii, K.; Matsubara, Y.; Inui, K.;
Takahashi, K.; Kure, S.; Suzuki, Y.; Ohura, T.; Miyabayashi, S.; Ogawa,
E.; Iinuma, K.; Okada, S.; Narisawa, K.: Glycogen storage disease
type Ia: molecular diagnosis of 51 Japanese patients and characterization
of splicing mutations by analysis of ectopically transcribed mRNA
from lymphoblastoid cells. Am. J. Med. Genet. 91: 107-112, 2000.

2. Brody, L. C.; Abel, K. J.; Castilla, L. H.; Couch, F. J.; McKinley,
D. R.; Yin, G.-Y.; Ho, P. P.; Merajver, S.; Chandrasekharappa, S.
C.; Xu, J.; Cole, J. L.; Struewing, J. P.; Valdes, J. M.; Collins,
F. S.; Weber, B. L.: Construction of a transcription map surrounding
the BRCA1 locus of human chromosome 17. Genomics 25: 238-247, 1995.

3. Burchell, A.; Waddell, I. D.: Diagnosis of a novel glycogen storage
disease: type 1aSP. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 13: 247-249, 1990.

4. Chevalier-Porst, F.; Bozon, D.; Bonardot, A.-M.; Bruni, N.; Mithieux,
G.; Mathieu, M.; Maire, I.: Mutation analysis in 24 French patients
with glycogen storage disease type 1a. J. Med. Genet. 33: 358-360,
1996.

5. Ekstein, J.; Rubin, B. Y.; Anderson, S. L.; Weinstein, D. A.; Bach,
G.; Abeliovich, D.; Webb, M.; Risch, N.: Mutation frequencies for
glycogen storage disease Ia in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 129A: 162-164, 2004.

6. Kajihara, S.; Matsuhashi, S.; Yamamoto, K.; Kido, K.; Tsuji, K.;
Tanae, A.; Fujiyama, S.; Itoh, T.; Tanigawa, K.; Uchida, M.; Setoguchi,
Y.; Motomura, M.; Mizuta, T.; Sakai, T.: Exon redefinition by a point
mutation within exon 5 of the glucose-6-phosphatase gene is the major
cause of glycogen storage disease type 1a in Japan. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 57:
549-555, 1995.

7. Ki, C.-S.; Han, S.-H.; Kim, H.-J.; Lee, S.-G.; Kim, E.-J.; Kim,
J.-W.; Choe, Y. H.; Seo, J. K.; Chang, Y. J.; Park, J. Y.: Mutation
spectrum of the glucose-6-phosphatase gene and its implication in
molecular diagnosis of Korean patients with glycogen storage disease
type Ia. Clin. Genet. 65: 487-489, 2004.

8. Lee, W.-J.; Lee, H.-M.; Chi, C.-S.; Shu, S.-G.; Lin, L.-Y.; Lin,
W.-H.: Genetic analysis of the glucose-6-phosphatase mutation of
type 1a glycogen storage disease in a Chinese family. Clin. Genet. 50:
206-211, 1996.

9. Lei, K.-J.; Chen, Y.-T.; Chen, H.; Wong, L.-J. C.; Liu, J.-L.;
McConkie-Rosell, A.; Van Hove, J. L. K.; Ou, H. C.-Y.; Yeh, N. J.;
Pan, L. Y.; Chou, J. Y.: Genetic basis of glycogen storage disease
type 1a: prevalent mutations at the glucose-6-phosphatase locus. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 57: 766-771, 1995.

10. Lei, K.-J.; Pan, C.-J.; Shelly, L. L.; Liu, J.-L.; Chou, J. Y.
: Identification of mutations in the gene for glucose-6-phosphatase,
the enzyme deficient in glycogen storage disease type 1A. J. Clin.
Invest. 93: 1994-1999, 1994.

11. Lei, K.-J.; Shelly, L. L.; Pan, C.-J.; Sidbury, J. B.; Chou, J.
Y.: Mutations in the glucose-6-phosphatase gene that cause glycogen
storage disease type 1a. Science 262: 580-583, 1993.

12. Nakai, K.; Sakamoto, H.: Construction of a novel database containing
aberrant splicing mutations of mammalian genes. Gene 141: 171-177,
1994.

13. Parvari, R.; Lei, K.-J.; Bashan, N.; Hershkovitz, E.; Korman,
S. H.; Barash, V.; Lerman-Sagie, T.; Mandel, H.; Chou, J. Y.; Moses,
S. W.: Glycogen storage disease type 1a in Israel: biochemical, clinical,
and mutational studies. Am. J. Med. Genet. 72: 286-290, 1997.

14. Qu, Y.; Abdenur, J. E.; Eng, C. M.; Desnick, R. J.: Molecular
prenatal diagnosis of glycogen storage disease type Ia. Prenatal
Diag. 15: 333-336, 1996.

15. Shelly, L. L.; Lei, K.-J.; Pan, C.-J.; Sakata, S. F.; Ruppert,
S.; Schutz, G.; Chou, J. Y.: Isolation of the gene for murine glucose-6-phosphatase,
the enzyme deficient in glycogen storage disease type 1A. J. Biol.
Chem. 268: 21482-21485, 1993.

16. Stroppiano, M.; Regis, S.; DiRocco, M.; Caroli, F.; Gandullia,
P.; Gatti, R.: Mutations in the glucose-6-phosphatase gene of 53
Italian patients with glycogen storage disease type Ia. J. Inherit.
Metab. Dis. 22: 43-49, 1999.

17. Weston, B. W.; Lin, J.-L.; Muenzer, J.; Cameron, H. S.; Arnold,
R. R.; Seydewitz, H. H.; Mayatepek, E.; Van Schaftingen, E.; Veiga-da-Cunha,
M.; Matern, D.; Chen, Y. T.: Glucose-6-phosphatase mutation G188R
confers an atypical glycogen storage disease type 1b phenotype. Pediat.
Res. 48: 329-334, 2000.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 2/14/2011

EDITED alopez: 04/07/2011
terry: 2/15/2011
carol: 2/15/2011

604993	TITLE *604993 PRECURSOR mRNA-PROCESSING FACTOR 18, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; PRPF18
;;PRP18
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Pre-mRNA splicing occurs in 2 sequential transesterification steps.
PRPF18 is a pre-mRNA splicing factor required for the second catalytic
step of splicing (Horowitz and Krainer, 1997).

CLONING

By PCR analysis of a HeLa cell cDNA library using degenerate PCR primers
based on yeast, rice, and nematode Prp18 sequences, Horowitz and Krainer
(1997) obtained a cDNA encoding human PRP18. The deduced 342-amino acid
human PRP18 protein is 91 amino acids longer than the yeast Prp18
protein, but they share 31% amino acid identity. Homology is strongest
in the C-terminal third of the proteins. Western blot analysis showed
that PRP18 is expressed as a 40-kD protein, and anti-PRP18 cross-reacted
with a 55-kD protein. The 55-kD protein did not appear to be either a
modified form or an alternatively spliced form of PRP18 and was shown to
be associated with RNU4 and RNU6.

GENE FUNCTION

Horowitz and Krainer (1997) found that immunodepletion of PRP18 from
cell extracts abolished the second step of pre-mRNA splicing, and
recombinant PRP18 restored the activity for several pre-mRNAs. Binding
analyses suggested that PRP18 binds transiently to the spliceosome just
before the second transesterification reaction and after other stages
within the second step. Functional analyses indicated that yeast Prp18
can substitute for human PRP18 in the splicing reaction but not vice
versa.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the PRP18
gene to chromosome 10 (TMAP U51990).

REFERENCE 1. Horowitz, D. S.; Krainer, A. R.: A human protein required for
the second step of pre-mRNA splicing is functionally related to a
yeast splicing factor. Genes Dev. 11: 139-151, 1997.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/23/2000

EDITED alopez: 03/27/2012
carol: 1/7/2010
mgross: 5/29/2002
mgross: 5/29/2001
mgross: 1/25/2001
mgross: 5/23/2000

613442	TITLE *613442 PENTRAXIN 4, LONG; PTX4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PTX4 belongs to the pentraxin (PTX) superfamily of multifunctional
conserved proteins. Pentraxins are characterized by a cyclic multimeric
structure and a conserved C-terminal pentraxin domain of approximately
200 amino acids. All pentraxins have a conserved 8-amino acid sequence,
HxCxS/TWxS, in which x is any amino acid, within their pentraxin domain.
Pentraxins are divided into short proteins, such as C-reactive protein
(CRP; 123260) and serum amyloid P protein (APCS; 104770), and long
proteins, such as PTX3 (602492) and PTX4. Some PTXs are part of the
humoral arm of innate immunity and behave as functional ancestors of
antibodies by mediating agglutination, complement activation, and
opsonization (summary by Martinez de la Torre et al., 2010).

CLONING

Using the sequence of guinea pig apexin to search databases for novel
pentraxins, followed by RT-PCR of mouse thymus and human small intestine
cDNA libraries, Martinez de la Torre et al. (2010) cloned mouse and
human PTX4. The deduced mouse and human proteins both contain 478 amino
acids, and they share 64% identity. They both have a putative signal
peptide, N-glycosylation sites, and a C-terminal pentraxin domain.
RT-PCR analysis revealed wide expression of PTX4 in human tissues, with
highest levels in small intestine, testis, and bone marrow, and lower
expression in brain and other tissues examined. In spleen and thymus,
expression was greater in stroma than in hematopoietic cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Martinez de la Torre et al. (2010) determined that the PTX4 gene
contains 3 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Martinez de la Torre et al. (2010) mapped
the PTX4 gene to chromosome 16p13.3. They mapped the mouse gene to
chromosome 17A3.3

REFERENCE 1. Martinez de la Torre, Y.; Fabbri, M.; Jaillon, S.; Bastone, A.;
Nebuloni, M.; Vecchi, A.; Mantovani, A.; Garlanda, C.: Evolution
of the pentraxin family: the new entry PTX4. J. Immun. 184: 5055-5064,
2010.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/14/2010

EDITED mgross: 06/14/2010

300697	TITLE *300697 HECT, UBA, AND WWE DOMAINS-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1; HUWE1
;;UPSTREAM REGULATORY ELEMENT-BINDING PROTEIN 1; UREB1;;
URE-BINDING PROTEIN 1;;
LASU1;;
KIAA0312
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The HUWE1 gene encodes an E3 ubiquitin ligase (summary by Froyen et al.,
2012).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1997) cloned HUWE1, which they designated
KIAA0312. RT-PCR analysis detected low HUWE1 expression in all tissues
examined.

By database analysis, Liu et al. (2005) identified full-length human
HUWE1, which they called LASU1. The deduced 4,374-amino acids protein
has a calculated molecular mass of 481.9 kD. It has 2 N-terminal domains
similar to domains found in an S. cerevisiae HECT domain ligase, Tom1,
followed by a ubiquitin (191339)-associated (UBA) domain, a
ubiquitin-interacting motif (UIM), a WWE domain, and a C-terminal HECT
domain. The deduced full-length mouse Lasu1 protein contains 4,377 amino
acids.

Froyen et al. (2012) found expression of the Huwe1 gene in several mouse
tissues, including cortex, hippocampus, tongue, eye, kidney, liver,
adrenal gland, and fibroblasts.

GENE FUNCTION

Gu et al. (1994) found that a recombinant 310-amino acid Ureb1 protein
from rat brain specifically bound to the upstream regulatory element
(URE) in the promoter region of the rat preprodynorphin (PDYN; 131340)
gene. Tyrosine phosphorylation of Ureb1 increased transcription of a
reporter gene containing the URE.

Liu et al. (2005) showed that Lasu1 from bovine testis was a Ubc4
(UBE2D2; 602962)-dependent E3 ligase that ubiquitinated histones H1 (see
142709), H2A (see 613499), H2B (see 609904), H3 (see 602810), and H4
(see 602822) in vitro. Ubc4 isoform-1 and a testis-specific Ubc4 isoform
were the preferred E2s. Mass spectrometry and size analysis suggested
that Lasu1 functions as a monomer.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1997) mapped the HUWE1 gene
to chromosome X. Liu et al. (2005) mapped the mouse Huwe1 gene to
chromosome X.

CYTOGENETICS

Using X chromosome-specific array comparative genomic hybridization
(array-CGH), Froyen et al. (2008) identified overlapping
microduplications of chromosome Xp11.22 in affected individuals from 6
unrelated families with nonsyndromic X-linked mental retardation (MRX17;
300705). Subsequent PCR analysis showed that the duplicated regions
varied from 0.4 to 0.8 Mb with a common minimal overlapping region that
contained 2 candidate genes, HSD17B10 (300256) and HUWE1, both of which
showed 2- to 5-fold overexpression in blood cells from affected
individuals.

Froyen et al. (2012) reported 6 additional families with nonsyndromic
X-linked mental retardation associated with duplications at Xp11.22
(300705). All patients had mild to moderate intellectual disability, but
some were able to attend school. Most patients had some additional
variable features, but these features were not consistent enough to form
a discernible pattern. All female carriers were phenotypically normal.
Microarray analysis identified 6 different but overlapping duplications
of chromosome Xp11.22 ranging in size from 0.4 to 1.0 Mb that segregated
with the phenotype. Combined with the cytogenetic data from the 6
families reported by Froyen et al. (2008), Froyen et al. (2012) found
that the common minimal region of overlap is 228 kb, which contains the
HUWE1 gene and excludes the HSD17B10 gene. Cell lines from patients
showed 2-fold increased expression of HUWE1, and studies in 4 female
carriers showed skewed X inactivation. The authors concluded that HUWE1
is the dosage-sensitive gene for which a 2-fold overexpression results
in cognitive impairment in males. All proximal and distal breakpoints
differed, excluding nonallelic homologous recombination (NAHR) as the
common mechanism. Junction and in silico analysis of breakpoint regions
showed that some contained repetitive sequences, palindromes, increased
GC content, or microhomology-mediated rearrangements suggestive of
replication-based duplication events. The duplication was shown to be
due to NAHR in only 1 family, whereas it was due to other mechanisms in
the other families; however, many breakpoints could not adequately be
studied. The findings indicated that the Xp11.22 region is prone to
recombination- and replication-based rearrangements.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In affected individuals from 3 unrelated families with X-linked
syndromic mental retardation, Turner type (300706), Froyen et al. (2008)
identified a mutation in the HUWE1 gene (300697.0001-300697.0003). There
was some phenotypic variability between the families: 1 had associated
macrocephaly, whereas the others had mild and profound mental
retardation, respectively.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED, SYNDROMIC, TURNER TYPE
HUWE1, ARG4013TRP

In affected members of an Australian family with X-linked syndromic
mental retardation, Turner type (300706) (Turner et al., 1994), Froyen
et al. (2008) identified a 12037C-T transition in the HUWE1 gene,
resulting in an arg4013-to-trp (R4013W) substitution. The mutation
segregated with the disorder and was not identified in 750 control
individuals. Affected individuals and carrier females also had
macrocephaly.

.0002
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED, SYNDROMIC, TURNER TYPE
HUWE1, ARG2981HIS

In affected members of a family with MRXS-Turner (300706), Froyen et al.
(2008) identified an 8942G-A transition in the HUWE1 gene, resulting in
an arg2981-to-his (R2981H) substitution. The mutation segregated with
the disorder and was not identified in 750 control individuals.

.0003
MENTAL RETARDATION, X-LINKED, SYNDROMIC, TURNER TYPE
HUWE1, ARG4187CYS

In affected members of a family with MRXS-Turner (300706), Froyen et al.
(2008) identified a 12559C-T transition in the HUWE1 gene, resulting in
an arg4187-to-cys (R4187C) substitution. The mutation segregated with
the disorder and was not identified in 750 control individuals. Affected
individuals were profoundly retarded and showed variable contractures.

REFERENCE 1. Froyen, G.; Belet, S.; Martinez, F.; Santos-Reboucas, C. B.; Declercq,
M.; Verbeeck, J.; Donckers, L.; Berland, S.; Mayo, S.; Rosello, M.;
Pimentel, M. M. G.; Fintelman-Rodrigues, N.; and 12 others: Copy-number
gains of HUWE1 due to replication- and recombination-based rearrangements. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 91: 252-264, 2012.

2. Froyen, G.; Corbett, M.; Vandewalle, J.; Jarvela, I.; Lawrence,
O.; Meldrum, C.; Bauters, M.; Govaerts, K.; Vandeleur, L.; Van Esch,
H.; Chelly, J.; Sanlaville, D.; and 22 others: Submicroscopic duplications
of the hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase HSD17B10 and the E3 ubiquitin
ligase HUWE1 are associated with mental retardation. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 82: 432-443, 2008.

3. Gu, J.; Ren, K.; Dubner, R.; Iadarola, M. J.: Cloning of a DNA
binding protein that is a tyrosine kinase substrate and recognizes
an upstream initiator-like sequence in the promoter of the preprodynorphin
gene. Molec. Brain Res. 24: 77-88, 1994.

4. Liu, Z.; Oughtred, R.; Wing, S. S.: Characterization of E3-Histone,
a novel testis ubiquitin protein ligase which ubiquitinates histones. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 25: 2819-2831, 2005.

5. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

6. Turner, F.; Gedeon, A.; Mulley, J.: X-linked mental retardation
with heterozygous expression and macrocephaly: pericentromeric gene
localization. Am. J. Med. Genet. 51: 575-580, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/12/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/5/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 2/26/2008

EDITED mgross: 02/04/2013
mgross: 1/29/2013
mgross: 1/11/2013
carol: 9/12/2012
ckniffin: 9/12/2012
carol: 5/6/2008
ckniffin: 5/5/2008
mgross: 2/26/2008

605675	TITLE *605675 RING FINGER PROTEIN 14; RNF14
;;ANDROGEN RECEPTOR-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 54; ARA54
DESCRIPTION The RING finger motif is a unique zinc-chelating domain involved in
mediating protein-DNA and protein-protein interactions. Using the
sequence of the partial cDNA clone HFB30 isolated by Ueki et al. (1998)
to screen a human fetal brain cDNA library, Ueki et al. (1999) cloned
the full-length cDNA, which encoded a novel ring finger protein, RNF14.
The deduced 474-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of
approximately 53 kD. RT-PCR analysis revealed ubiquitous expression of
RNF14 in a wide variety of human tissues.

Kang et al. (1999) independently cloned RNF14, which they called ARA54
(androgen receptor-associated protein-54), by a yeast 2-hybrid screen of
a prostate cDNA library. Northern blot analysis detected a major 3-kb
transcript, with highest expression in testis, followed by thymus,
spleen, colon, prostate, and uterus. Low expression was detected in
small intestine and blood leukocytes. The RNF14 transcript was also
strongly detected in 2 other prostate cell lines. A second transcript of
2 kb was detected in testis only. Kang et al. (1999) demonstrated that
RNF14 can function as a coactivator for androgen-dependent transcription
on both wildtype and mutant androgen receptor (313700). They also showed
that in the presence of a certain amount of 17-beta-estradiol or
hydroxyflutamide, the transcriptional activity of a specific AR mutant
was significantly enhanced, whereas that of wildtype and another AR
mutant was not. The authors suggested that both RNF14 and the positions
of the AR mutation might contribute to the specificity of AR-mediated
transactivation.

Ueki et al. (1999) determined that the RNF14 gene contains 9 exons and
spans approximately 20 kb of genomic DNA. By somatic cell hybrid and
radiation hybrid analyses, Ueki et al. (1999) mapped the RNF14 gene to
chromosome 5q23.3-q31.1.

REFERENCE 1. Kang, H.-Y.; Yeh, S.; Fujimoto, N.; Chang, C.: Cloning and characterization
of human prostate coactivator ARA54, a novel protein that associates
with the androgen receptor. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 8570-8576, 1999.

2. Ueki, N.; Oda, T.; Kondo, M.; Yano, K.; Noguchi, T.; Muramatsu,
M.: Selection system for genes encoding nuclear-targeted proteins. Nature
Biotech. 16: 1338-1342, 1998.

3. Ueki, N.; Seki, N.; Yano, K.; Masuho, Y.; Saito, T.; Muramatsu,
M.: Isolation and characterization of a novel human gene (HFB30)
which encodes a protein with a RING finger motif. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1445: 232-236, 1999.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 2/22/2001

EDITED terry: 10/13/2010
cwells: 9/17/2003
mcapotos: 3/13/2001
mcapotos: 2/22/2001
carol: 2/22/2001

605671	TITLE *605671 DMX-LIKE 1; DMXL1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By EST database searching for sequences showing homology to Drosophila
DmX and by use of primers designed for RT-PCR from human placental mRNA,
Kraemer et al. (2000) cloned a nearly full-length homolog, which they
designated DMX-like-1. The DMXL1 cDNA encodes a deduced 3,027-amino acid
protein with a calculated mass of approximately 338 kD. The protein
belongs to the superfamily of WD repeat proteins, most of which have
regulatory functions, and contains at least 28 WD repeat units. DMXL1
shows a high level of evolutionary conservation. By searching EST
databases with the complete cDNA sequence as query, Kraemer et al.
(2000) found that DMXL1 is expressed in a variety of tissues, including
bone, breast, eye, foreskin, heart, parathyroid, small intestine,
testis, tonsils, uterus, and whole embryo.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization and radiation hybrid analysis,
Kraemer et al. (2000) mapped the DMXL1 gene to chromosome 5q21-q22.

REFERENCE 1. Kraemer, C.; Enklaar, T.; Zabel, B.; Schmidt, E. R.: Mapping and
structure of DMXL1, a human homologue of the DmX gene from Drosophila
melanogaster coding for a WD repeat protein. Genomics 64: 97-101,
2000.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 2/20/2001

EDITED alopez: 07/17/2009
mcapotos: 2/22/2001
carol: 2/21/2001

608430	TITLE *608430 TRPC4-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; TRPC4AP
;;TRANSIENT RECEPTOR POTENTIAL CHANNEL 4-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN;;
TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR RECEPTOR 1-ASSOCIATED UBIQUITOUS SCAFFOLDING
AND SIGNALING PROTEIN;;
TNFR1-ASSOCIATED UBIQUITOUS SCAFFOLDING AND SIGNALING PROTEIN; TRUSS
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using the membrane-proximal region of mouse Tnfr1 (191190) as bait in a
yeast 2-hybrid screen, Soond et al. (2003) cloned mouse Trpc4ap, which
they called Truss. The deduced 797-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of about 90.7 kD. It contains 2 putative Traf2
(601895)-binding sites, several putative phosphorylation sites, and 10
C-terminal dilucine motifs. Northern blot analysis detected a 3.2-kb
transcript widely expressed in mouse tissues, with highest levels in
heart, brain, liver, and testis. Western blot analysis detected a
protein of about 82 kD expressed in several mouse cell lines and in a
human promonocytic cell line.

GENE FUNCTION

By deletion mutagenesis, Soond et al. (2003) determined that mouse Truss
interacted with both the membrane-proximal region and the death domain
of Tnfr1. In addition, the N-terminal region of Truss interacted with
the cytoplasmic domain of Tnfr1. Transient overexpression of Truss
activated nuclear factor kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011) and increased Nfkb
activation in response to ligation of Tnfr1. In contrast, a C-terminal
deletion mutant of Truss inhibited Nfkb activation. Coprecipitation and
coimmunoprecipitation assays revealed that Truss interacted with Tradd
(603500), Traf2, and components of the IKK complex (see 603258). Soond
et al. (2003) concluded that Truss may serve as a scaffolding protein
that interacts with Tnfr1 signaling proteins and may link Tnfr1 to the
activation of IKK.

GENE STRUCTURE

Soond et al. (2003) determined that the mouse Trpc4ap gene contains 20
exons.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TRPC4AP
gene to chromosome 20 (TMAP RH15946). By genomic sequence analysis,
Soond et al. (2003) mapped the mouse Trpc4ap gene to chromosome 2.

REFERENCE 1. Soond, S. M.; Terry, J. L.; Colbert, J. D.; Riches, D. W. H.:
TRUSS, a novel tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 scaffolding protein
that mediates activation of the transcription factor NF-kappa-B. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 23: 8334-8344, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/28/2004

EDITED mgross: 01/28/2004

179835	TITLE *179835 REPLICATION PROTEIN A1, 70-KD; RPA1
;;RPA70;;
REPA1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Replication protein A (RPA) is a heterotrimeric single-strand DNA
(ssDNA)-binding protein essential for DNA replication, repair, and
recombination. It is composed of 70-kD (RPA1), 32-kD (RPA2; 179836), and
14-kD (RPA3; 179837) subunits. The RPA1 subunit is responsible for
high-affinity ssDNA binding (summary by Haring et al., 2008).

CLONING

Erdile et al. (1991) reported the sequence of a cDNA encoding RPA1, the
70-kD RPA subunit. The human cDNA directed production in E. coli of a
70-kD protein that reacted with a monoclonal antibody directed against
the 70-kD subunit of human RPA.

Gomes and Wold (1996) stated that the human RPA1 protein contains 616
amino acids.

Haring et al. (2008) stated that human RPA1 is made up of 4
oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide-binding (OB)-fold domains, also known as
DNA-binding domains (DBDs). The N-terminal DBD-F domain is followed by
the central DBD-A and DBD-B domains and the C-terminal DBD-C domain.

MAPPING

Using PCR amplification of genomic DNA from rodent-human cell lines,
Umbricht et al. (1993) mapped the RPA1 gene to chromosome 17. By the
same method, they mapped the RPA2 and RPA3 genes to chromosomes 1 and 7,
respectively. Using a combination of PCR amplification of somatic cell
hybrids and radiation hybrids containing chromosome 17 fragments,
Umbricht et al. (1994) mapped the RPA1 gene to chromosome 17p13.3. Loss
of the 17p13.3 chromosomal region has repeatedly been implicated in
various malignancies including colorectal cancers, breast cancers,
lymphomas, and leukemias (Wang et al., 2005).

GENE FUNCTION

The RPA complex was originally isolated as a factor essential for in
vitro replication of the papovavirus SV40. Erdile et al. (1991) found
that recombinant human RPA1, purified from bacteria, exhibited
ssDNA-binding activity comparable to that of the complete RPA complex.
RPA1 could substitute for the complete complex in stimulating the
activity of DNA polymerase alpha-primase, but it could not substitute
for the complete complex in SV40 DNA replication in vitro, suggesting an
important functional role for the other subunits.

Gomes and Wold (1996) constructed a series of N-terminal deletions of
RPA70 to explore the function of the protein. Their data indicated that
RPA70 is composed of 3 functional domains: an N-terminal domain that is
not required for ssDNA binding or SV40 replication, a central
DNA-binding domain, and a C-terminal domain that is essential for
subunit interactions.

Nakayama et al. (1999) reported that a -786T-C mutation (163729.0002) in
the promoter region of the eNOS (NOS3; 163729) gene reduced
transcription of the gene and was strongly associated with coronary
spastic angina and myocardial infarction. To elucidate the molecular
mechanism for the reduced eNOS gene transcription, Miyamoto et al.
(2000) purified a protein that specifically bound the mutant allele in
nuclear extracts from HeLa cells. The purified protein was identical to
RPA1. In human umbilical vein endothelial cells, inhibition of RPA1
expression using antisense oligonucleotides restored transcription
driven by the mutated promoter sequence, whereas overexpression of RPA1
further reduced it. Serum nitrite/nitrate levels among individuals
carrying the -786T-C mutation were significantly lower than among those
without the mutation. The authors concluded that RPA1 apparently
functions as a repressor protein in the -786T-C mutation-related
reduction of eNOS gene transcription associated with the development of
coronary artery disease.

The function of the ATR (601215)-ATRIP (606605) protein kinase complex
is crucial for the cellular response to replication stress and DNA
damage. Zou and Elledge (2003) demonstrated that the RPA complex was
required for recruitment of ATR to sites of DNA damage and for
ATR-mediated CHK1 (603078) activation in human cells. In vitro, RPA
stimulated binding of ATRIP to ssDNA. Binding of ATRIP to RPA-coated
ssDNA enabled the ATR-ATRIP complex to associate with DNA and stimulate
phosphorylation of the RAD17 (603139) protein that was bound to DNA.
Furthermore, Ddc2, the budding yeast homolog of ATRIP, was specifically
recruited to double-stranded DNA breaks in an RPA-dependent manner. A
checkpoint-deficient mutant of RPA, rfa1-t11, was defective for
recruiting Ddc2 to ssDNA both in vivo and in vitro. Zou and Elledge
(2003) concluded that RPA-coated ssDNA is the critical structure at
sites of DNA damage that recruits the ATR-ATRIP complex and facilitates
its recognition of substrates for phosphorylation and the initiation of
checkpoint signaling.

Activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID; 605257) is an ssDNA
deaminase required for somatic hypermutation and class switch
recombination of immunoglobulin genes. Class switch recombination
involves transcription through switch regions, which generates ssDNA
within R loops. Chaudhuri et al. (2004) characterized the mechanism of
AID targeting to in vitro transcribed substrates harboring somatic
hypermutation motifs. They showed that the targeting activity of AID was
due to RPA. The 32-kD subunit of RPA interacted specifically with AID
from activated B cells in a manner that seemed to be dependent on
posttranslational AID modification. Chaudhuri et al. (2004) concluded
that RPA is implicated as a novel factor involved in immunoglobulin
diversification and proposed that B cell-specific AID-RPA complexes
preferentially bind to ssDNA of small transcription bubbles at somatic
hypermutation hotspots, leading to AID-mediated deamination and
RPA-mediated recruitment of DNA repair proteins.

Maga et al. (2007) analyzed the effects of human proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA; 176740) and RPA on 6 different human DNA
polymerases belonging to the B, Y, and X classes during in vitro bypass
of different lesions. The mutagenic lesion 8-oxo-guanine has high
miscoding potential. A major and specific effect was found for 8-oxo-G
bypass with DNA pol-lambda (606343) and -eta (603968). PCNA and RPA
allowed correct incorporation of dCTP opposite an 8-oxo-G template
1,200-fold more efficiently than the incorrect dATP by DNA pol-lambda,
and 68-fold by DNA pol-eta, respectively. Experiments with DNA pol-gamma
(174763)-null cell extracts suggested an important role for DNA
pol-lambda. On the other hand, DNA pol-iota (605252) together with DNA
pol-alpha (312040), -delta (174761), and -beta (174760), showed a much
lower correct bypass efficiency. Maga et al. (2007) concluded that their
findings showed the existence of an accurate mechanism to reduce the
deleterious consequences of oxidative damage and, in addition, pointed
to an important role for PCNA and RPA in determining a functional
hierarchy among different DNA pols in lesion bypass.

Gupta et al. (2007) found that FANCJ (BRIP1; 605882) immunoprecipitated
with RPA. FANCJ and RPA colocalized in nuclear foci after DNA damage or
replication stress. FANCJ and RPA bound with high affinity via the RPA70
subunit. Although FANCJ showed limited ability to unwind even a 47-bp
forked duplex, the presence of RPA enabled FANCJ to act as a much more
processive helicase.

Haring et al. (2008) stated that the N-terminal DBD-F domain of RPA1 is
involved in protein interactions, the central DBD-A and DBD-B domains
bind ssDNA, and the C-terminal DBD-C domain mediates interaction with
RPA2 and RPA3. They found that knockdown of RPA1 in HeLa cells caused
accumulation of cells in S and G2/M phases, followed by cell death. RPA1
was not required for stability of RPA2 or RPA3. Expression of various
mutant RPA1 proteins in RPA1-depleted HeLa cells revealed that amino
acids in DBD-A involved in polar interactions with ssDNA mediated DNA
binding. However, only RPA1 with mutations at all 6 polar-interacting
residues in DBD-A was defective in replication, foci formation at sites
of DNA damage, and G2/M checkpoint. RPA1 with mutations at aromatic
residues in DBD-A and DBD-B involved in nonpolar ssDNA interactions
exhibited weak DNA binding, and its expression caused arrest of cells in
G2/M. Expression of RPA1 with mutations in the N-terminal DBD-F domain
or deletion of the DBD-F domain and adjacent linker region completely
restored replication in RPA1-depleted cells, but these mutant RPA1
proteins exhibited defective responses to DNA damage. Deletion of the
C-terminal DBD-C domain produced monomeric RPA1 mutants that bound DNA
but were defective in replication.

Maintenance of telomeres requires both DNA replication and telomere
capping by shelterin. These 2 processes use 2 ssDNA-binding proteins,
RPA and protection of telomeres-1 (POT1; 606478). POT1 ablation leads to
activation of the ATR checkpoint kinase at telomeres, suggesting that
POT1 antagonizes RPA binding to telomeric ssDNA. Unexpectedly, Flynn et
al. (2011) found that purified POT1 and its functional partner TPP1
(609377) are unable to prevent RPA binding to telomeric ssDNA
efficiently. In cell extracts, they identified a novel activity that
specifically displaces RPA, but not POT1, from telomeric ssDNA. Using
purified protein, Flynn et al. (2011) showed that the heterogeneous
nuclear ribonucleoprotein A1 (hnRNPA1; 164017) recapitulates the RPA
displacing activity. The RPA displacing activity is inhibited by the
telomeric repeat-containing RNA (TERRA) in early S phase, but is then
unleashed in late S phase when TERRA levels decline at telomeres.
Interestingly, TERRA also promotes POT1 binding to telomeric ssDNA by
removing hnRNPA1, suggesting that the reaccumulation of TERRA after S
phase helps to complete the RPA-to-POT1 switch on telomeric ssDNA. Flynn
et al. (2011) concluded that hnRNPA1, TERRA, and POT1 act in concert to
displace RPA from telomeric ssDNA after DNA replication, and promote
telomere capping to preserve genomic integrity.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The folding of mRNA influences a diverse range of biologic events, such
as mRNA splicing and processing and translational control and
regulation. Because the structure of mRNA is determined by its
nucleotide sequence and its environment, Shen et al. (1999) examined
whether the folding of mRNA could be influenced by the presence of
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). They reported marked differences
in mRNA secondary structure associated with SNPs in the coding regions
of 2 human mRNAs: alanyl-tRNA synthetase (601065) and RPA70. Enzymatic
probing of SNP-containing fragments of the mRNAs revealed pronounced
allelic differences in cleavage pattern at sites 14 or 18 nucleotides
away from the SNP, suggesting that a single-nucleotide variation can
give rise to different mRNA folds. By using oligodeoxyribonucleotides
complementary to the region of different allelic structures in the RPA70
mRNA, but not extending to the SNP itself, they found that the SNP
exerted an allele-specific effect on the accessibility of its flanking
site in the endogenous human RPA70 mRNA. The results demonstrated the
contribution of common genetic variation through structural diversity of
mRNA and suggested a broader role than previously thought for the
effects of SNPs on mRNA structure and, ultimately, biologic function.

ANIMAL MODEL

Wang et al. (2005) demonstrated that mice heterozygous for a missense
mutation in one of the DNA-binding domains of Rpa1 develop lymphoid
tumors and that their homozygous littermates succumb to early embryonic
lethality. Array comparative genomic hybridization of the tumors
identified large-scale chromosomal changes as well as segmental gains
and losses. The Rpa1 mutation resulted in defects in DNA double-strand
break repair and precipitated chromosomal breaks as well as aneuploidy
in primary heterozygous mutant mouse embryonic fibroblasts. The
equivalent mutation in yeast is hypomorphic and semidominant and
enhanced the formation of gross chromosomal rearrangements in multiple
genetic backgrounds. Wang et al. (2005) concluded that Rpa1 functions in
DNA metabolism are essential for the maintenance of chromosomal
stability and tumor suppression.

REFERENCE 1. Chaudhuri, J.; Khuong, C.; Alt, F. W.: Replication protein A interacts
with AID to promote deamination of somatic hypermutation targets. Nature 430:
992-998, 2004.

2. Erdile, L. F.; Heyer, W.-D.; Kolodner, R.; Kelly, T. J.: Characterization
of a cDNA encoding the 70-kDa single-stranded DNA-binding subunit
of human replication protein A and the role of the protein in DNA
replication. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 12090-12098, 1991. Note: Erratum:
J. Biol. Chem. 268: 2268 only, 1993.

3. Flynn, R. L.; Centore, R. C.; O'Sullivan, R. J.; Rai, R.; Tse,
A.; Songyang, Z.; Chang, S.; Karlseder, J.; Zou, L.: TERRA and hnRNPA1
orchestrate an RPA-to-POT1 switch on telomeric single-stranded DNA. Nature 471:
532-536, 2011.

4. Gomes, X. V.; Wold, M. S.: Functional domains of the 70-kilodalton
subunit of human replication protein A. Biochemistry 35: 10558-10568,
1996.

5. Gupta, R.; Sharma, S.; Sommers, J. A.; Kenny, M. K.; Cantor, S.
B.; Brosh, R. M., Jr.: FANCJ (BACH1) helicase forms DNA damage inducible
foci with replication protein A and interacts physically and functionally
with the single-stranded DNA-binding protein. Blood 110: 2390-2398,
2007.

6. Haring, S. J.; Mason, A. C.; Binz, S. K.; Wold, M. S.: Cellular
functions of human RPA1: multiple roles of domains in replication,
repair, and checkpoints. J. Biol. Chem. 283: 19095-19111, 2008.

7. Maga, G.; Villani, G.; Crespan, E.; Wimmer, U.; Ferrari, E.; Bertocci,
B.; Hubscher, U.: 8-oxo-guanine bypass by human DNA polymerases in
the presence of auxiliary proteins. Nature 447: 606-608, 2007.

8. Miyamoto, Y.; Saito, Y.; Nakayama, M.; Shimasaki, Y.; Yoshimura,
T.; Yoshimura, M.; Harada, M.; Kajiyama, N.; Kishimoto, I.; Kuwahara,
K.; Hino, J.; Ogawa, E.; Hamanaka, I.; Kamitani, S.; Takahashi, N.;
Kawakami, R.; Kangawa, K.; Yasue, H.; Nakao, K.: Replication protein
A1 reduces transcription of the endothelial nitric oxide synthase
gene containing a -786T-C mutation associated with coronary spastic
angina. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 2629-2637, 2000.

9. Nakayama, M.; Yasue, H.; Yoshimura, M.; Shimasaki, Y.; Kugiyama,
K.; Ogawa, H.; Motoyama, T.; Saito, Y.; Ogawa, Y.; Miyamoto, Y.; Nakao,
K.: T(-786)-C mutation in the 5-prime-flanking region of the endothelial
nitric oxide synthase gene is associated with coronary spasm. Circulation 99:
2864-2870, 1999.

10. Shen, L. X.; Basilion, J. P.; Stanton, V. P., Jr.: Single-nucleotide
polymorphisms can cause different structural folds of mRNA. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 7871-7876, 1999.

11. Umbricht, C. B.; Erdile, L. F.; Jabs, E. W.; Kelly, T. J.: Cloning,
overexpression, and genomic mapping of the 14-kDa subunit of human
replication protein A. J. Biol. Chem. 268: 6131-6138, 1993.

12. Umbricht, C. B.; Griffin, C. A.; Hawkins, A. L.; Grzeschik, K.
H.; O'Connell, P.; Leach, R.; Green, E. D.; Kelly, T. J.: High-resolution
genomic mapping of the three human replication protein A genes (RPA1,
RPA2, and RPA3). Genomics 20: 249-257, 1994.

13. Wang, Y.; Putnam, C. D.; Kane, M. F.; Zhang, W.; Edelmann, L.;
Russell, R.; Carrion, D. V.; Chin, L.; Kucherlapati, R.; Kolodner,
R. D.; Edelmann, W.: Mutation in Rpa1 results in defective DNA double-strand
break repair, chromosomal instability and cancer in mice. Nature
Genet. 37: 750-755, 2005.

14. Zou, L.; Elledge, S. J.: Sensing DNA damage through ATRIP recognition
of RPA-ssDNA complexes. Science 300: 1542-1548, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 3/13/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/26/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/9/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/19/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/15/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/19/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/26/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/17/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/25/2001
Lori M. Kelman - updated: 11/13/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/4/1991

EDITED terry: 07/03/2012
mgross: 3/13/2012
terry: 1/26/2012
alopez: 5/12/2011
terry: 5/9/2011
carol: 3/17/2009
mgross: 6/19/2008
alopez: 6/21/2007
terry: 6/15/2007
wwang: 9/1/2005
wwang: 8/25/2005
terry: 8/19/2005
tkritzer: 8/27/2004
terry: 8/26/2004
alopez: 6/19/2003
terry: 6/17/2003
mcapotos: 2/1/2001
mcapotos: 1/25/2001
alopez: 8/23/1999
mark: 11/27/1996
jamie: 11/13/1996
mark: 10/21/1996
carol: 4/4/1994
carol: 9/24/1993
carol: 5/14/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 10/7/1991
carol: 9/4/1991

614694	TITLE *614694 REGULATION OF NUCLEAR PRE-mRNA DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 1B; RPRD1B
;;CELL CYCLE-RELATED AND EXPRESSION-ELEVATED PROTEIN IN TUMOR; CREPT
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ni et al. (2011) stated that the deduced 326-amino acid RPRD1B protein
contains an N-terminal domain predicted to interact with phosphoserines
in the C-terminal domain of the catalytic subunit of RNA polymerase II
(POLR2A; 180660). Database analysis detected RPRD1B expression in all
adult and fetal tissues and cells examined.

Using RT-PCR and Northern blot analyses, Lu et al. (2012) found that
Crept was highly expressed during the early stages of mouse embryonic
development and that it was expressed in most adult tissues examined.
Immunohistochemical analysis localized CREPT in the nucleus of human
tumor cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using affinity chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry with HEK293
cells to isolate RNA polymerase II-interacting proteins, Ni et al.
(2011) identified RPRD1A (610347), RPRD1B, and RPRD2 (614695), in
addition to RECQL5 (603781), GRINL1A (606485), and the putative RNA
polymerase II phosphatase RPAP2 (611476). RPRD1A and RPRD1B accompanied
RNA polymerase II from promoter regions to 3-prime UTRs during
transcription in vivo. RPRD1A and RPRD1B coprecipitated with the
C-terminal domain of POLR2A when it was serine phosphorylated, but not
when it was unphosphorylated. Overexpression of RPRD1A or RPRD1B reduced
the amount of serine-phosphorylated POLR2A associated with a target
gene.

Lu et al. (2012) found elevated expression of CREPT in several tumor
tissues compared with paired normal tissues. Overexpression of CREPT in
several human and mouse cell lines increased cell proliferation, colony
formation, and metastasis following injection into nude mice. Knockdown
of CREPT had the opposite effects. CREPT specifically increased
expression of several genes controlling the cell cycle and increased
expression of a cyclin D1 (CCND1; 168461) reporter. Immunoprecipitation
analysis of HEK293 cells revealed that CREPT interacted with RNA
polymerase II. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that CREPT
promoted RNA polymerase II binding to both the cyclin D1 promoter and to
a region prior to the poly(A) site. CREPT also promoted loop formation,
suggesting that it may enhance RNA polymerase II recycling from the
terminator to the promoter region during transcription of the cyclin D1
gene.

MAPPING

Hartz (2012) mapped the RPRD1B gene to chromosome 20q11.23 based on an
alignment of the RPRD1B sequence (GenBank GENBANK AL117521) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/22/2012.

2. Lu, D.; Wu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Ren, F.; Wang, D.; Su, F.; Zhang, Y.;
Yang, X.; Jin, G.; Hao, X.; He, D.; Zhai, Y.; Irwin, D. M.; Hu, J.;
Sung, J. J. Y.; Yu, J.; Jia, B.; Chang, Z.: CREPT accelerates tumorigenesis
by regulating the transcription of cell-cycle-related genes. Cancer
Cell 21: 92-104, 2012.

3. Ni, Z.; Olsen, J. B.; Guo, X.; Zhong, G.; Ruan, E. D.; Marcon,
E.; Young, P.; Guo, H.; Li, J.; Moffat, J.; Emili, A.; Greenblatt,
J. F.: Control of the RNA polymerase II phosphorylation state in
promoter regions by CTD interaction domain-containing proteins RPRD1A
and RPRD1B. Transcription 2: 237-242, 2011.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/27/2012

EDITED mgross: 06/27/2012
mgross: 6/27/2012

606323	TITLE *606323 CYTOPLASMIC FMRP-INTERACTING PROTEIN 2; CYFIP2
;;p53-INDUCIBLE PROTEIN; PIR121
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

To identify novel proteins that interact with the fragile X mental
retardation protein (FMRP), encoded by the FMR1 gene (309550), Schenck
et al. (2001) used yeast 2-hybrid screening with the FMRP N terminus as
bait. They identified 2 proteins as FMRP interactors, which they called
cytoplasmic FMRP-interacting protein-1 (CYFIP1; 606322) and -2 (CYFIP2).
CYFIP2 contains 1,252 amino acids and shares 88% sequence identity with
CYFIP1. CYFIP1/2 are members of a highly conserved protein family and
share approximately 99% sequence identity with their mouse orthologs.
CYFIP1 interacts exclusively with FMRP, whereas CYFIP2 also interacts
with the FMRP-related proteins FXR1P (600819) and FXR2P (605339). The
interaction of FMRP and CYFIP involves the domain of FMRP that also
mediates homo- and heteromerization, suggesting a competition between
interaction among the FXR proteins and interaction with CYFIP. Schenck
et al. (2001) determined that CYFIP1/2 are distributed in an identical
pattern in the cytoplasm, showing colocalization with FMRP and
ribosomes. Consistent with FMRP and RAC1 localization in dendritic fine
structures, CYFIP1/2 are present in synaptosomal extracts.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the CYFIP2
gene to chromosome 5 (TMAP stSG9917).

REFERENCE 1. Schenck, A.; Bardoni, B.; Moro, A.; Bagni, C.; Mandel, J. L.:
A highly conserved protein family interacting with the fragile X mental
retardation protein (FMRP) and displaying selective interactions with
FMRP-related proteins FXR1P and FXR2P. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98:
8844-8849, 2001.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/28/2001

EDITED wwang: 04/10/2009
alopez: 3/19/2004
joanna: 8/12/2002
carol: 9/28/2001

609333	TITLE *609333 TRACE AMINE-ASSOCIATED RECEPTOR 1; TAAR1
;;TAR1; TA1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TAAR1 is a G protein-coupled receptor activated by trace amines. Trace
amines are endogenous amine compounds that account for less than 1% of
the biogenic amines in most brain regions (Bunzow et al., 2001).

CLONING

Using rat Taar1 to probe a human placenta genomic library, followed by
5-prime and 3-prime RACE of a kidney and stomach cDNA library, Borowsky
et al. (2001) cloned TAAR1, which they designated TA1. The deduced
339-amino acid protein has a 7-transmembrane structure. TAAR1 shares 79%
and 76% amino acid identity with rat and mouse Taar1, respectively.
RT-PCR of human tissues and brain regions detected moderate expression
in stomach, lower expression in amygdala, kidney, lung, and small
intestine, and little to no expression in all other tissues and specific
brain regions examined. In situ hybridization and immunohistochemical
localization of Taar1 in mouse brain detected variable region-specific
expression. Taar1 localized to the cytoplasm of cells showing neuronal
profiles.

Using rat Taar1 to probe a human genomic DNA library, Bunzow et al.
(2001) cloned TAAR1. The deduced protein contains 340 amino acids. It
has 2 N-glycosylation sites at its N terminus and several potential
protein kinase sites at its C terminus, including 2 serines not present
in rat Taar1. Human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cells transfected with rat
cDNA for epitope-tagged Taar1 expressed the protein in a punctate
intracellular distribution, with exclusion from the nucleus.

Lindemann et al. (2005) found that the TAARs show several structural
features characteristic of the rhodopsin (180380)/beta-adrenergic
receptor (see 109630) superfamily, including the positions of the 7
transmembrane regions, which provide a common ligand-binding pocket, and
short N- and C-terminal domains. TAAR1 has 2 N-glycosylation sites in
the N-terminal domain and a single disulfide bridge.

GENE FUNCTION

Borowsky et al. (2001) found that Xenopus oocytes expressing human TAAR1
with CFTR (602421) produced inward currents in response to tyramine.
HEK293 cells transfected with TAAR1 increased intracellular cAMP
accumulation in response to beta-phenylethylamine (PEA) and tyramine.
TAAR1 was less responsive to tryptamine, histamine, serotonin, and
norepinephrine.

Bunzow et al. (2001) found that rat Taar1 was activated by a wide
variety of clinically and socially important drugs, including
amphetamines, ergot derivatives, and adrenergic agents. Rat Taar1 was
more potently activated by the catecholamine metabolites
3-methoxytyramine, normetanephrine, and metanephrine than by the
neurotransmitters dopamine, norepinephrine, and epinephrine.

Lindemann et al. (2005) found that TAAR1 expressed by transfected HEK293
cells was highly responsive to beta-PEA, p-tyramine, N-methyl-beta-PEA,
and N-methyl-p-tyramine. It showed lower cAMP accumulation in response
to octopamine, tryptamine, and dopamine. TAAR1 was unresponsive to the
classical biogenic amines norepinephrine, serotonin, and histamine.

Liberles and Buck (2006) reported that genes encoding trace
amine-associated receptors (TAARs) are present in human, mouse, and
fish. Like odorant receptors, individual mouse TAARs recognize volatile
amines found in urine: one detects a compound linked to stress, whereas
the other 2 detect compounds enriched in male versus female urine. The
evolutionary conservation of the TAAR family suggests a chemosensory
function distinct from odorant receptors. Ligands identified for TAARs
suggested a function associated with the detection of social cues.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lindemann et al. (2005) determined that the coding region of TAAR1 is
contained within a single exon.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Borowsky et al. (2001) mapped the TAAR1
gene to a TAAR gene cluster on chromosome 6q23.3. By FISH, Bunzow et al.
(2001) mapped the TAAR1 gene to chromosome 6q23.2.

Lindemann et al. (2005) determined that the TAAR genes map to a 109-kb
region on chromosome 6q23.1. They mapped the mouse genes to a 192-kb
region on chromosome 10A4 and identified a similar clustering of TAAR
genes in other mammalian species.

NOMENCLATURE

In an effort to resolve inconsistencies in the naming of the trace amine
receptor family, Lindemann et al. (2005) proposed a uniform nomenclature
using the designation 'trace amine-associated receptors' (TAARs). They
noted that this nomenclature acknowledges the observation that several
TAARs do not respond to trace amines, hence the term 'associated.'

REFERENCE 1. Borowsky, B.; Adham, N.; Jones, K. A.; Raddatz, R.; Artymyshyn,
R.; Ogozalek, K. L.; Durkin, M. M.; Lakhlani, P. P.; Bonini, J. A.;
Pathirana, S.; Boyle, N.; Pu, X.; Kouranova, E.; Lichtblau, H.; Ochoa,
F. Y.; Branchek, T. A.; Gerald, C.: Trace amines: identification
of a family of mammalian G protein-coupled receptors. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 98: 8966-8971, 2001.

2. Bunzow, J. R.; Sonders, M. S.; Arttamangkul, S.; Harrison, L. M.;
Zhang, G.; Quigley, D. I.; Darland, T.; Suchland, K. L.; Pasumamula,
S.; Kennedy, J. L.; Olson, S. B.; Magenis, R. E.; Amara, S. G.; Grandy,
D. K.: Amphetamine, 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine, lysergic acid
diethylamide, and metabolites of the catecholamine neurotransmitters
are agonists of a rat trace amine receptor. Molec. Pharm. 60: 1181-1188,
2001.

3. Liberles, S. D.; Buck, L. B.: A second class of chemosensory receptors
in the olfactory epithelium. Nature 442: 645-650, 2006.

4. Lindemann, L.; Ebeling, M.; Kratochwil, N. A.; Bunzow, J. R.; Grandy,
D. K.; Hoener, M. C.: Trace amine-associated receptors form structurally
and functionally distinct subfamilies of novel G protein-coupled receptors. Genomics 85:
372-385, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/8/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/26/2005

EDITED alopez: 09/19/2006
terry: 9/8/2006
mgross: 4/26/2005

