142560	TITLE *142560 DEAD BOX POLYPEPTIDE 39B; DDX39B
;;HLA-B-ASSOCIATED TRANSCRIPT 1; BAT1;;
U2AF65-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN, 56-KD; UAP56;;
D6S81E
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

UAP56 (BAT1) is an essential splicing factor that is recruited to the
pre-mRNA dependent on U2AF65 (191318) and is required for the U2
snRNP-branchpoint interaction. UAP56 is a member of the DEAD box family
of RNA-dependent ATPases, which mediate ATP hydrolysis during several
steps of pre-mRNA splicing (Fleckner et al., 1997).

CLONING

By chromosome walking with overlapping cosmids, Spies et al. (1989)
isolated a 435-kb DNA segment that was centromeric to HLA-B (142830) in
the human major histocompatibility complex. The presence of additional
genes was suggested by a large cluster of CpG islands. With cosmid
probes, 5 distinct transcripts were detected in RNA samples from a
variety of cell lines, and the corresponding cDNA clones were isolated
and designated 'HLA-B-associated transcripts' (BAT1 through BAT5,
142620).

Peelman et al. (1995) sequenced both human and pig BAT1 and showed that
the genes are members of the DEAD-box family of ATP-dependent RNA
helicases, which are involved in a number of cellular functions
including initiation of translation, RNA splicing, and ribosome
assembly. Proteins of this family have 9 conserved amino acid motifs but
differ at their amino and carboxyl ends. From studies of other family
members, the first block is involved in ATP binding, the fifth block may
be an ATPase, the sixth block is needed for RNA helicase activity, and
the ninth block is involved with ATP hydrolysis-independent RNA
interactions during unwinding. The gene contains 10 exons spanning about
10 kb of genomic DNA and encodes a 428-amino acid protein. Peelman et
al. (1995) detected 3 different length mRNAs (4.1, 17, and 0.9 kb) in
all tissues analyzed, although at different relative levels. The protein
is highly conserved, with 98% identity to the p47 rat liver nuclear
protein and 99% identity to the pig BAT1 homolog. Peelman et al. (1995)
showed that a recombinant epitope-tagged BAT1 construct was expressed in
COS cells and showed localization of the protein to the nucleus.

Fleckner et al. (1997) cloned a human 56-kD U2AF65-associated protein
that they termed UAP56. Using a yeast 2-hybrid assay, Fleckner et al.
(1997) identified UAP56 as the splicing factor that interacts with
U2AF65 amino acids 138 to 183. UAP56 encodes a protein of 428 amino
acids containing the 7 consensus motifs characteristic of DEAD box RNA
helicases.

GENE FUNCTION

Spies et al. (1989) raised the question of whether variation at one of
the BAT genes, rather than at HLA-B itself, determines susceptibility to
ankylosing spondylitis (106300).

Allcock et al. (2001) used antisense DNA corresponding to exons 2
through 5 of the BAT1 gene and showed that after antigenic stimulation,
monocytic and T-cell lines produced higher levels of the acute phase
cytokines TNF, interleukin-1 (IL1; see 147760), and IL6 (147620) than
cells containing the transfecting vector alone. These results suggested
that BAT1 is a negative regulator of inflammation.

Fleckner et al. (1997) demonstrated that UAP56 is an essential splicing
factor that is required for U2 snRNP-branchpoint interaction. It is a
component of the spliceosome. Luo et al. (2001) demonstrated that UAP56
interacts directly and highly specifically with ALY (THOC4; 604171).
Moreover, UAP56 is present together with ALY in a spliced mRNA-protein
complex (mRNP). Excess UAP56 is a potent dominant-negative inhibitor of
mRNA export. Excess UAP56 also inhibits the recruitment of ALY to the
spliced mRNP. Furthermore, mutation in ALY that blocks its interaction
with UAP56 prevents recruitment of ALY to the spliced mRNP. Luo et al.
(2001) concluded that the splicing factor UAP56 functions in coupling
the splicing and export machineries by recruiting ALY to the spliced
mRNP.

Strasser et al. (2002) showed that UAP56 is part of the RNase-resistant
TREX (transcription/export) complex, which includes TEX1 (THOC3;
606929), HPR1 (THOC1; 606930), THO2 (THOC2; 300395), and ALY and is
conserved from yeast to humans. Functional studies in yeast led them to
conclude that the TREX complex is specifically recruited to the
transcribing gene and travels with the polymerase during transcriptional
elongation. Strasser et al. (2002) suggested that it physically links
proteins that function in mRNA export or transcription.

Using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometric analysis of HeLa cell
nuclear extracts, Masuda et al. (2005) found that the human TREX complex
contained THO2, FSAP79 (THOC5; 612733), HPR1, UAP56, TEX1, FSAP35
(THOC6; 615403), ALY, and FSAP24 (THOC7; 611965). Immunodepletion and
gel-filtration analyses revealed that THO2, HPR1, FSAP79, FSAP35, and
FSAP24 were tightly associated in the THO complex, whereas UAP56, ALY,
and TEX1 were more loosely associated. Immunoprecipitation of any TREX
component efficiently immunoprecipitated spliced mRNA and cDNA
transcripts, but not unspliced pre-mRNAs. Immunodepletion of any
component had no effect on spliceosome assembly, splicing, or RNA
stability. The TREX complex assembled on every mRNA examined. Mutation
analysis showed that the C terminus of ALY was required for binding of
both UAP56 and the THO complex. The C terminus of UAP56 was sufficient
for ALY binding. The N terminus of UAP56 interacted weakly with the THO
complex and TEX1, suggesting that other regions of UAP56 are required
for maximal binding. Masuda et al. (2005) concluded that recruitment of
the human TREX complex is not directly coupled to transcription, as in
yeast.

GENE STRUCTURE

Peelman et al. (1995) demonstrated that the BAT1 gene contains 10 exons
spanning about 10 kb of genomic DNA.

MAPPING

By chromosome walking with overlapping cosmids, Spies et al. (1989)
isolated a 435-kb DNA segment that is centromeric to HLA-B in the human
major histocompatibility complex on chromosome 6p21. Within the cloned
region, the genes for the tumor necrosis factors (TNFA, 191160; TNFB,
153440) and HLA-B (142830) were 210 kb apart. The human homolog of the
mouse gene B144 (LST1; 109170) is located near TNFA. The presence of
additional genes was suggested by a large cluster of CpG islands. With
cosmid probes, 5 distinct transcripts were detected in RNA samples from
a variety of cell lines and the corresponding cDNA clones were isolated.
These 'HLA-B-associated transcripts' (BAT1-BAT5) mapped to different
locations within a 160-kb region that included the TNFA and TNFB genes.

In the pig, BAT1 was shown to be about 30 kb upstream of TNF (Nunes et
al., 1994). The location of BAT1 at the telomeric end of the class III
region is conserved in both humans and pig (Peelman et al., 1995).

REFERENCE 1. Allcock, R. J. N.; Williams, J. H.; Price, P.: The central MHC
gene, BAT1, may encode a protein that down-regulates cytokine production. Genes
Cells 6: 487-494, 2001.

2. Fleckner, J.; Zhang, M.; Valcarcel, J.; Green, M. R.: U2AF(65)
recruits a novel human DEAD box protein required for the U2 snRNP-branchpoint
interaction. Genes Dev. 11: 1864-1872, 1997.

3. Luo, M.-J.; Zhou, Z.; Magni, K.; Christoforides, C.; Rappsilber,
J.; Mann, M.; Reed, R.: Pre-mRNA splicing and mRNA export linked
by direct interactions between UAP56 and Aly. Nature 413: 644-647,
2001.

4. Masuda, S.; Das, R.; Cheng, H.; Hurt, E.; Dorman, N.; Reed, R.
: Recruitment of the human TREX complex to mRNA during splicing. Genes
Dev. 19: 1512-1517, 2005.

5. Nunes, M.; Peelman, L.; Vaiman, M.; Bourgeaux, N.; Chardon, P.
: Characterization of six new loci within the swine major histocompatibility
complex class III region. Mammalian Genome 5: 616-622, 1994.

6. Peelman, L. J.; Chardon, P.; Nunes, M.; Renard, C.; Geffrotin,
C.; Vaiman, M.; Van Zeveren, A.; Coppieters, W.; van de Weghe, A.;
Bouquet, Y.; Choy, W. W.; Strominger, J. L.; Spies, T.: The BAT1
gene in the MHC encodes an evolutionarily conserved putative nuclear
RNA helicase of the DEAD family. Genomics 26: 210-218, 1995.

7. Spies, T.; Blanck, G.; Bresnahan, M.; Sands, J.; Strominger, J.
L.: A new cluster of genes within the human major histocompatibility
complex. Science 243: 214-217, 1989.

8. Strasser, K.; Masuda, S.; Mason, P.; Pfannstiel, J.; Oppizzi, M.;
Rodriguez-Navarro, S.; Rondon, A. G.; Aguilera, A.; Struhl, K.; Reed,
R.; Hurt, E.: TREX is a conserved complex coupling transcription
with messenger RNA export. Nature 417: 304-308, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/2/2011
Alan F. Scott - updated: 10/10/1995

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/2/1989

EDITED mgross: 09/06/2013
mgross: 11/9/2011
terry: 11/2/2011
alopez: 8/15/2011
mgross: 10/24/2007
carol: 1/17/2006
mgross: 1/25/2002
carol: 7/18/2001
terry: 2/28/2000
carol: 2/22/1999
mark: 9/8/1997
alopez: 9/5/1997
mark: 10/10/1995
terry: 10/7/1994
carol: 4/14/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/25/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990

611371	TITLE *611371 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 653; ZNF653
;;ZIP67
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using the ligand-binding domain and hinge region of bovine orphan
nuclear receptor steroidogenic factor-1 (SF1, or NR5A2; 184757) as bait
in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human testis cDNA library, followed by
database analysis, Borud et al. (2003) cloned ZNF653, which they called
ZIP67. The deduced 615-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular
mass of 67.234 kD, which was confirmed experimentally. ZNF653 contains 2
predicted nuclear localization signals and 5 classic C2H2 zinc fingers.
It shares 90% sequence identity with the acid mouse homolog. Multiple
human tissue expression array hybridization detected ZNF653 mRNA
expression at high levels in testis, cerebellum, temporal lobe, and
hippocampus, followed by relatively high expression in adrenal gland,
moderate expression in spleen and uterus, and lower expression in
thymus, pancreas, kidney, stomach, and rectum.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in vitro and in vivo protein interaction assays, Borud et al.
(2003) showed that the AF-2 domain of SF1 is required for interaction
with ZNF653. Using in vitro transcription assays, they showed that
ZNF653 repressed SF1-dependent transcription. By in vitro competition
analysis, they determined that ZNF653 competed with GRIP1 (NCOA2;
601993) for binding to SF1. Borud et al. (2003) suggested that ZNF653
may act as a more general repressor of transcription by competition with
GRIP1 and other p160 coactivators (see SRC1/NCOA1; 602691) for binding
to SF1.

GENE STRUCTURE

Borud et al. (2003) determined that the ZNF653 gene contains 9 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Borud et al. (2003) mapped the ZNF653 gene
to chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Borud, B.; Mellgren, G.; Lund, J.; Bakke, M.: Cloning and characterization
of a novel zinc finger protein that modulates the transcriptional
activity of nuclear receptors. Molec. Endocr. 17: 2303-2319, 2003.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 8/23/2007

EDITED carol: 08/23/2007
carol: 8/23/2007

603109	TITLE *603109 MOTHERS AGAINST DECAPENTAPLEGIC, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 3; SMAD3
;;MADH3;;
SMA- AND MAD-RELATED PROTEIN 3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Drosophila Mad is required for signaling by the TGF-beta (e.g.,
190180)-related factor decapentaplegic. Zhang et al. (1996) cloned a
human cDNA encoding MADH3, a homolog of Drosophila Mad. The deduced
425-amino acid MADH3 protein (GenBank GENBANK 2522267) is 92% identical
to MADH2 (601366).

By searching an expressed sequence tag database with the protein
sequences of Mad and Mad homologs, Riggins et al. (1996) isolated human
cDNAs encoding MADH3, which they called JV15-2. The C terminus of MADH3
shows significant homology to that of Drosophila Mad.

GENE STRUCTURE

Arai et al. (1998) determined the genomic structure of SMAD3, which
contains 9 exons.

MAPPING

Riggins et al. (1996) mapped the MADH3 gene to 15q21-q22 by somatic cell
hybrid analysis and screening of YAC clones.

GENE FUNCTION

Zhang et al. (1996) showed that MADH3 and MADH4 (SMAD4; 600993)
synergized to induce strong ligand-independent TGF-beta-like responses.
MADH3 containing a C-terminal truncation acted as a dominant-negative
inhibitor of the normal TGF-beta response. The activity of MADH3 was
regulated by the TGF-beta receptors (e.g., 190181), and MADH3 was
phosphorylated and associated with the ligand-bound receptor complex.
Zhang et al. (1996) stated that these results define MADH3 as an
effector of the TGF-beta response.

Zawel et al. (1998) found that human SMAD3 and SMAD4 proteins could
specifically recognize an identical 8-bp palindromic sequence
(GTCTAGAC). Tandem repeats of this palindrome conferred striking
TGF-beta responsiveness to a minimal promoter. This responsiveness was
abrogated by targeted deletion of the cellular SMAD4 gene. These results
showed that SMAD proteins are involved in the biologic responses to
TGF-beta and related ligands.

Scleroderma is a chronic systemic disease that leads to fibrosis of the
skin and other affected organs. TGFB has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of scleroderma. SMAD proteins function as signaling
transducers downstream from TGFB receptors. Dong et al. (2002)
investigated the signaling components of the TGFB pathway and TGFB
activity in scleroderma lesions in vivo and in scleroderma fibroblasts
in vitro. Basal level and TGFB-inducible expression of SMAD7 (602932)
were selectively decreased, whereas SMAD3 expression was increased both
in scleroderma skin and in explanted scleroderma fibroblasts in culture.
TGFB signaling events were increased in scleroderma fibroblasts relative
to normal fibroblasts. In vitro adenoviral gene transfer with SMAD7
restored normal TGFB signaling in scleroderma fibroblasts. These results
suggested that alterations in the SMAD pathway, including marked SMAD7
deficiency and SMAD3 upregulation, may be responsible for TGFB
hyperresponsiveness observed in scleroderma.

You and Kruse (2002) studied corneal myofibroblast differentiation and
signal transduction induced by the TGFB family members activin A
(147290) and bone morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP7; 112267). They found
that activin A induced phosphorylation of SMAD2 (601366), and BMP7
induced SMAD1 (601595), both of which were inhibited by follistatin
(136470). Transfection with antisense SMAD2/SMAD3 prevented
activin-induced expression and accumulation of alpha-smooth muscle
actin. The authors concluded that TGFB proteins have different functions
in the cornea. Activin A and TGFB1, but not BMP7, are regulators of
keratocyte differentiation and might play a role during myofibroblast
transdifferentiation. SMAD2/SMAD3 signal transduction appeared to be
important in the regulation of muscle-specific genes.

SMAD3 is a direct mediator of transcriptional activation by the TGF-beta
receptor. Its target genes in epithelial cells include cyclin-dependent
kinase (CDK; see 116953) inhibitors that generate a cytostatic response.
Chen et al. (2002) defined how, in the same context, SMAD3 can mediate
transcriptional repression of the growth-promoting gene MYC (190080). A
complex containing SMAD3, the transcription factors E2F4 (600659), E2F5
(600967), and DP1 (189902), and the corepressor p107 (116957) preexists
in the cytoplasm. In response to TGF-beta, this complex moves into the
nucleus and associates with SMAD4, recognizing a composite SMAD-E2F site
on MYC for repression. Previously known as the ultimate recipients of
CDK regulatory signals, E2F4/E2F5 and p107 act here as transducers of
TGF-beta receptor signals upstream of CDK. SMAD proteins therefore
mediate transcriptional activation or repression depending on their
associated partners.

TGFB (190180) stimulation leads to phosphorylation and activation of
SMAD2 and SMAD3, which form complexes with SMAD4 that accumulate in the
nucleus and regulate transcription of target genes. Inman et al. (2002)
demonstrated that following TGFB stimulation of epithelial cells,
receptors remain active for at least 3 to 4 hours, and continuous
receptor activity is required to maintain active SMADs in the nucleus
and for TGFB-induced transcription. Continuous nucleocytoplasmic
shuttling of the SMADs during active TGFB signaling provides the
mechanism whereby the intracellular transducers of the signal
continuously monitor receptor activity. These data explain how, at all
times, the concentration of active SMADs in the nucleus is directly
dictated by the levels of activated receptors in the cytoplasm.

Based upon molecular allelotyping and comparative genomic hybridization
studies, chromosome 15q is the likely location of a tumor suppressor
gene important in the pathogeneses of sporadic enteropancreatic
endocrine tumors and parathyroid adenomas. To determine whether SMAD3
plays a primary role in the development of these tumors, Shattuck et al.
(2002) investigated 20 enteropancreatic tumors and 67 parathyroid
adenomas for LOH at DNA markers surrounding SMAD3. Twenty percent of
enteropancreatic tumors and 24% of parathyroid adenomas showed loss. All
9 coding exons and intron-exon boundaries of the SMAD3 gene were then
sequenced in genomic DNA from all 20 enteropancreatic and 25 parathyroid
tumors, including every case with LOH. No acquired clonal mutations,
insertions, or microdeletions in SMAD3 were detected in any tumors.
Because inactivating somatic mutation is the hallmark of an authentic
tumor suppressor, SMAD3 is unlikely to function as a classic tumor
suppressor gene in the pathogenesis of sporadic parathyroid or
enteropancreatic endocrine tumors.

Matsuura et al. (2004) showed that SMAD3 is a major physiologic
substrate of the G1 cyclin-dependent kinases CDK4 (123829) and CDK2
(116953). Except for the retinoblastoma protein family, SMAD3 was the
only CDK4 substrate demonstrated to that time. Matsuura et al. (2004)
mapped CDK4 and CDK2 phosphorylation sites to thr8, thr178, and ser212
in SMAD3. Mutation of the CDK phosphorylation sites increased Smad3
transcriptional activity, leading to higher expression of the CDK
inhibitor p15 (600431). Mutation of the CDK phosphorylation sites of
Smad3 also increased its ability to downregulate the expression of
c-myc. Using Smad3 knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts and other
epithelial cell lines, Matsuura et al. (2004) further showed that Smad3
inhibits cell cycle progression from G1 to S phase and that mutation of
the CDK phosphorylation sites in Smad3 increases this ability. They
concluded that CDK phosphorylation of SMAD3 inhibits its transcriptional
activity and antiproliferative function.

To determine the role of SMAD3 in the pathogenesis of lymphoid
neoplasia, Wolfraim et al. (2004) measured SMAD3 mRNA and protein in
leukemia cells obtained at diagnosis from 19 children with acute
leukemia: 10 with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), 7 with
pre-B-cell ALL, and 2 with acute nonlymphoblastic leukemia (ANLL). SMAD3
protein was absent in T-cell ALL but present in pre-B-cell ALL and ANLL.
No mutations in the SMAD3 gene were identified in T-cell ALL, and SMAD3
mRNA was present in T-cell ALL and normal T cells at similar levels.
Wolfraim et al. (2004) concluded that loss of SMAD3 protein is a
specific feature of pediatric T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia.

Gupta et al. (2006) retracted their paper describing the identification
of a microRNA in the latency-associated transcript (Lat) of herpes
simplex virus (HSV)-1 (miR-Lat) that targets TGFB and SMAD3 via
sequences in their 3-prime UTRs that show partial homology to miR-Lat.

In experiments using mouse muscle, Carlson et al. (2008) found that, in
addition to the loss of Notch (190198) activation, old muscle produces
excessive TGF-beta (but not myostatin, 601788), which induces unusually
high levels of Smad3 in resident satellite cells and interferes with the
regenerative capacity. Importantly, endogenous Notch and Smad3
antagonize each other in the control of satellite cell proliferation,
such that activation of Notch blocks the TGF-beta-dependent upregulation
of the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors p15, p16 (600160), p21
(116899), and p27 (600778), whereas inhibition of Notch induces them.
Furthermore, in muscle stem cells, Notch activity determined the binding
of Smad3 to the promoters of these negative regulators of cell cycle
progression. Attenuation of TGF-beta/Smad3 in old, injured muscle
restored regeneration to satellite cells in vivo. Thus, a balance
between endogenous Smad3 and active Notch controls the regenerative
competence of muscle stem cells, and deregulation of this balance in the
old muscle microniche interferes with regeneration.

Davis et al. (2008) demonstrated that induction of a contractile
phenotype in human vascular smooth muscle cells by TGF-beta (190180) and
BMPs (see 112264) is mediated by miR21 (611020). miR21 downregulates
PDCD4 (608610), which in turn acts as a negative regulator of smooth
muscle contractile genes. Surprisingly, TGF-beta and BMP signaling
promoted a rapid increase in expression of mature miR21 through a
posttranscriptional step, promoting the processing of primary
transcripts of miR21 (pri-miR21) into precursor miR21 (pre-miR21) by the
Drosha complex (see 608828). TGF-beta and BMP-specific SMAD signal
transducers SMAD1 (601595), SMAD2 (601366), SMAD3, and SMAD5 (603110)
are recruited to pri-miR21 in a complex with the RNA helicase p68 (DDX5;
180630), a component of the Drosha microprocessor complex. The shared
cofactor SMAD4 (600993) is not required for this process. Thus, Davis et
al. (2008) concluded that regulation of microRNA biogenesis by
ligand-specific SMAD proteins is critical for control of the vascular
smooth muscle cell phenotype and potentially for SMAD4-independent
responses mediated by the TGF-beta and BMP signaling pathways.

Chuderland et al. (2008) identified an SPS motif in ERK2 (MAPK1; 176948)
and SMAD3 and a similar TPT motif in MEK1 (MAP2K1; 176872) that directed
protein nuclear accumulation when phosphorylated.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using cDNA, Roth et al. (2000) conducted mutation analysis of the SMAD2,
SMAD3, and SMAD4 genes in 14 Finnish kindreds with hereditary
nonpolyposis colon cancer (see 120435). They found no mutations.

In a 4-generation Dutch family with arterial aneurysms and dissections
and early-onset osteoarthritis mapping to chromosome 15q22.2-q24.2, van
de Laar et al. (2011) analyzed the candidate gene SMAD3 and identified
heterozygosity for a missense mutation (R287W; 603109.0001) that
segregated with disease. The authors designated the disorder
aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome (AOS), but it is here incorporated
into the Loeys-Dietz phenotypic series as Loeys-Dietz syndrome type 3
(LDS3; 613795). Analysis of SMAD3 in 99 patients with thoracic aortic
aneurysms and dissections and Marfan-like features, who were known to be
negative for mutation in the FBN1 (134797), TGFBR1 (190181), and TGFBR2
(190182) genes, revealed 2 additional probands with heterozygous SMAD3
mutations (603109.0002; 603109.0003). All 3 mutations were located in
the MH2 domain, which mediates oligomerization of SMAD3 with SMAD4
(600993) and SMAD-dependent transcriptional activation.

Regalado et al. (2011) reported 4 new mutations in SMAD3. One mutation
(603109.0004) was a frameshift mutation in exon 5 segregating in a
family with LDS3 phenotype. The other 3 were missense mutations in
invariant codons.

Van de Laar et al. (2012) identified 5 novel SMAD3 mutations in 5
additional families with aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome (see, e.g.,
603109.0008-603109.0010).

ANIMAL MODEL

Zhu et al. (1998) reported the targeted disruption of the mouse Smad3
gene. Smad3 mutant mice were viable and fertile. Between 4 and 6 months
of age, the Smad3 mutant mice became moribund with colorectal
adenocarcinomas. The neoplasms penetrated through the intestinal wall
and metastasized to lymph nodes. Since TGF-beta transduces its signal to
the interior of the cell via Smad2, Smad3, and Smad4, these results
directly implicate TGF-beta signaling in the pathogenesis of colorectal
cancer and provide a compelling animal model for the study of human
colorectal cancer.

Yang et al. (1999) found that Smad3-null (ex8/ex8) mice died between 1
and 8 months due to a primary defect in immune function. The mice
exhibited inflammatory lesions in a number of organs, including the
nasal mucosa, stomach, pancreas, colon, and small intestine, as well as
enlarged lymph nodes, an involuted thymus, and the formation of
bacterial abscesses adjacent to mucosal surfaces. Immunostaining
revealed a significant increase in T-cell activation, suggesting that
Smad3 has a role in TGFB-mediated regulation of T-cell activation.

Renal tubulointerstitial fibrosis is a chronic inflammatory condition in
which renal fibrosis is associated with epithelial-mesenchymal
transition of the renal tubules and synthesis of extracellular matrix in
response to multiple entities, including ureteral obstruction. TGFB
plays a pivotal role in the disease process. Sato et al. (2003) found
that Smad3-null mice with ureteral obstruction were protected against
tubulointerstitial fibrosis, presumably by blocking the downstream
effects of TGFB. Levels of TGFB mRNA and mature protein were decreased
in the mutant animals compared to experimental controls, indicating that
the Smad3 pathway is also essential for autoinduction of TGFB.

Wolfraim et al. (2004) used mice in which 1 or both alleles of Smad3
were inactivated to evaluate the role of Smad3 in the response of normal
T cells to TGF-beta and in the susceptibility to spontaneous
leukemogenesis in mice in which both alleles of the tumor suppressor
p27(Kip1) (CDKN1B; 600778) were deleted. The loss of 1 allele for Smad3
impaired the inhibitory effect of TGF-beta on the proliferation of
normal T cells and worked in tandem with the homozygous inactivation of
p27(Kip1) to promote T-cell leukemogenesis. Wolfraim et al. (2004)
concluded that a reduction in Smad3 expression and the loss of p27(Kip1)
work synergistically to promote T-cell leukemogenesis in mice.

Ashcroft et al. (1999) generated Smad3-null mice and observed
accelerated cutaneous wound healing, with complete reepithelialization
by day 2 compared to day 5 in wildtype mice, and significantly reduced
local infiltration of monocytes. Smad3 -/- keratinocytes showed altered
patterns of growth and migration, and Smad3 -/- monocytes exhibited a
selectively blunted chemotactic response to TGF-beta (190180).

Arany et al. (2006) created excisional ear wounds in Smad3 -/- mice and
observed wound enlargement compared to wildtype controls. Levels of
elastin and glycosaminoglycans were increased, collagen fibers were more
compactly organized, and integrins, TGFB1, and matrix metalloproteinases
were altered both basally and after wounding in Smad3-knockout mice.
Mechanical testing revealed an increased modulus of elasticity,
suggesting an imbalance of tissue forces. Arany et al. (2006) proposed
that the altered mechanical elastic properties lead to a persistent
retractile force that is opposed by decreased wound contractile forces.

Kanamaru et al. (2005) found that bone marrow-derived mast cells (BMMCs)
from Smad3-null mice had an augmented capacity to produce
proinflammatory cytokines upon stimulation with lipopolysaccharide. Mast
cell-deficient mice reconstituted with Smad3-null BMMCs survived
significantly longer in an acute peritonitis model than mast
cell-deficient mice reconstituted with wildtype BMMCs. Kanamaru et al.
(2005) proposed that SMAD3 in mast cells inhibits mast cell-mediated
immune responses against gram-negative bacteria.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 3
SMAD3, ARG287TRP

In 20 affected members of a 4-generation Dutch family with arterial
aneurysms and dissections and early-onset osteoarthritis (LDS3; 613795),
van de Laar et al. (2011) identified heterozygosity for an 859C-T
transition in exon 6 of the SMAD3 gene, resulting in an arg287-to-trp
(R287W) substitution at a highly conserved residue within the MH2
domain. The mutation was not found in 7 unaffected family members or in
544 Dutch control chromosomes. Immunohistochemical analysis of aortic
wall tissue from 2 patients showed increased expression of key proteins
in the TGF-beta (see TGFB1, 190180) pathway.

.0002
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 3
SMAD3, 2-BP DEL, 741AT

In 3 Dutch sibs with arterial aneurysms and dissections and early-onset
osteoarthritis (LDS3; 613795), van de Laar et al. (2011) identified
heterozygosity for a 2-bp deletion (741delAT) in exon 6 of the SMAD3
gene, resulting in a frameshift and a premature termination sequence at
codon 309 in exon 7 that removes nearly the complete MH2 domain
(Thr247ProfsX61). The deletion, which was presumably present in their
affected deceased father, was not found in their unaffected mother or in
544 Dutch control chromosomes. Analysis of patient cDNA showed very weak
mutant signal compared to wildtype, and treatment of patient fibroblast
cultures with cycloheximide markedly increased the mutant signal,
indicating that most of the abnormal RNA was subjected to nonsense
messenger RNA decay and that a truncated SMAD3 protein was barely
formed.

.0003
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 3
SMAD3, THR261ILE

In a Dutch male patient with arterial aneurysm and early-onset
osteoarthritis (LDS3; 613795), van de Laar et al. (2011) identified
heterozygosity for a 783C-T transition in exon 6 of the SMAD3 gene,
resulting in a thr261-to-ile (T261I) substitution at a highly conserved
residue in the MH2 domain. The mutation was not found in 544 Dutch
control chromosomes.

.0004
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 3
SMAD3, 1-BP DEL, 652A

In a 3-generation pedigree segregating autosomal dominant thoracic
aortic aneurysms and dissections with intracranial and other arterial
aneurysms (LDS3; 613795), Regalado et al. (2011) identified a deletion
of an A at nucleotide 652 in exon 5 of the SMAD3 gene, resulting in
frameshift leading to premature termination following asparagine-218
(N218fs). This mutation was present in all individuals with vascular
disease in the family and segregated with a lod score of 2.52. The
pedigree had originally been reported by Regalado et al. (2011). The
mutation was absent from 2,300 control exomes.

.0005
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 3
SMAD3, ARG279LYS

In 2 unrelated families of European descent with autosomal dominant
thoracic aortic and other aneurysms (LDS3; 613795), Regalado et al.
(2011) identified a G-to-A transition at nucleotide 836 in exon 6 of the
SMAD3 gene, resulting in an arg-to-lys substitution at codon 279
(R279K). Arg279 is completely conserved from human to Drosophila, and
the R279K mutation was predicted to disrupt protein function. The
mutation was not identified in 2,300 control exomes. There was decreased
penetrance in younger family members.

.0006
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 3
SMAD3, GLU239LYS

In a small family with 3 sibs affected with thoracic aortic aneurysm and
dissection (LDS3; 613795), Regalado et al. (2011) identified a G-to-A
transition at nucleotide 715 in exon 6 of the SMAD3 gene, resulting in a
glutamine-to-lysine substitution at codon 239 (E239K). Exon 6 encodes
the MH2 protein-protein binding domain. Glu239 is completely conserved
from human to Drosophila, and the E239K mutation was predicted to
disrupt protein function. The mutation was not identified in 2,300
control exomes.

.0007
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 3
SMAD3, ALA112VAL

In a family segregating autosomal dominant thoracic aortic aneurysm with
dissection as well as other features of Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS3;
613795) including bifid uvula and scoliosis, and early-onset
osteoarthritis, Regalado et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous
alanine-to-valine substitution at codon 112 (A112V). The mutation
segregated with disease with reduced penetrance in this family and was
not identified in 2,300 control exomes. Guo (2012) stated that the
correct nucleotide change for the A112V mutation is 335C-T in exon 2
rather than 235C-T as cited in Regalado et al. (2011).

.0008
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 3
SMAD3, 1-BP DEL, 313G

In a patient with aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome (LCS3; 613795), van
de Laar et al. (2012) identified a 1-bp deletion at nucleotide 313 of
the SMAD3 gene (313delG), resulting in a frameshift (ala105profsX11).

.0009
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 3
SMAD3, PRO263LEU

In a patient with aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome (LCS3; 613795), van
de Laar et al. (2012) identified a 788C-T transition in the SMAD3 gene,
resulting in a pro263-to-leu (P263L) substitution.

.0010
LOEYS-DIETZ SYNDROME, TYPE 3
SMAD3, GLU361TER

In affected members of a family segregating aneurysms-osteoarthritis
syndrome (LCS3; 613795), van de Laar et al. (2012) identified a 1-bp
duplication at nucleotide 1080 in the SMAD3 gene (1080dupT), resulting
in a glu361-to-ter (E361X) substitution.

REFERENCE 1. Arai, T.; Akiyama, Y.; Okabe, S.; Ando, M.; Endo, M.; Yuasa, Y.
: Genomic structure of the human Smad3 gene and its infrequent alterations
in colorectal cancers. Cancer Lett. 122: 157-163, 1998.

2. Arany, P. R.; Flanders, K. C.; Kobayashi, T.; Kuo, C. K.; Stuelten,
C.; Desai, K. V.; Tuan, R.; Rennard, S. I.; Roberts, A. B.: Smad3
deficiency alters key structural elements of the extracellular matrix
and mechanotransduction of wound closure. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103:
9250-9255, 2006.

3. Ashcroft, G. S.; Yang, X.; Glick, A. B.; Weinstein, M.; Letterio,
J. L.; Mizel, D. E.; Anzano, M.; Greenwell-Wild, T.; Wahl, S. M.;
Deng, C.; Roberts, A. B.: Mice lacking Smad3 show accelerated wound
healing and an impaired local inflammatory response. Nature Cell
Biol. 1: 260-266, 1999.

4. Carlson, M. E.; Hsu, M.; Conboy, I. M.: Imbalance between pSmad3
and Notch induces CDK inhibitors in old muscle stem cells. Nature 454:
528-532, 2008.

5. Chen, C.-R.; Kang, Y.; Siegel, P. M.; Massague, J.: E2F4/5 and
p107 as Smad cofactors linking the TGF-beta receptor to c-myc repression. Cell 110:
19-32, 2002.

6. Chuderland, D.; Konson, A.; Seger, R.: Identification and characterization
of a general nuclear translocation signal in signaling proteins. Molec.
Cell 31: 850-861, 2008.

7. Davis, B. N.; Hilyard, A. C.; Lagna, G.; Hata, A.: SMAD proteins
control DROSHA-mediated microRNA maturation. Nature 454: 56-61,
2008.

8. Dong, C.; Zhu, S.; Wang, T.; Yoon, W.; Li, Z.; Alvarez, R. J.;
ten Dijke, P.; White, B.; Wigley, F. M.; Goldschmidt-Clermont, P.
J.: Deficient Smad7 expression: a putative molecular defect in scleroderma. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 3908-3913, 2002.

9. Guo, D.-C.: Personal Communication. Houston, Tx  2/7/2012.

10. Gupta, A.; Gartner, J. J.; Sethupathy, P.; Hatzigeorgiou, A. G.;
Fraser, N. W.: Anti-apoptotic function of a microRNA encoded by the
HSV-1 latency-associated transcript. Nature 442: 82-85, 2006. Note:
Retraction: Nature 451: 600 only, 2008.

11. Inman, G. J.; Nicolas, F. J.; Hill, C. S.: Nucleocytoplasmic
shuttling of Smads 2, 3, and 4 permits sensing of TGF-beta receptor
activity. Molec. Cell 10: 283-294, 2002.

12. Kanamaru, Y.; Sumiyoshi, K.; Ushio, H.; Ogawa, H.; Okumura, K.;
Nakao, A.: Smad3 deficiency in mast cells provides efficient host
protection against acute septic peritonitis. J. Immun. 174: 4193-4197,
2005.

13. Matsuura, I.; Denissova, N. G.; Wang, G.; He, D.; Long, J.; Liu,
F.: Cyclin-dependent kinases regulate the antiproliferative function
of Smads. Nature 430: 226-231, 2004.

14. Regalado, E.; Medrek, S.; Tran-Fadulu, V.; Guo, D.-C.; Pannu,
H.; Golabbakhsh, H.; Smart, S.; Chen, J. H.; Shete, S.; Kim, D. H.;
Stern, R.; Braverman, A. C.; Milewicz, D. M.: Autosomal dominant
inheritance of a predisposition to thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections
and intracranial saccular aneurysms. Am. J. Med. Genet. Am. J. Med.
Genet. 155A:-2125-2130, 2011.

15. Regalado, E. S.; Guo, D.; Villamizar, C.; Avidan, N.; Gilchrist,
D.; McGillivray, B.; Clarke, L.; Bernier, F.; Santos-Cortez, R. L.;
Leal, S. M.; Bertoli-Avella, A. M.; Shendure, J.; Rieder, M. J.; Nickerson,
D. A.; NHLBI GO Exome Sequencing Project; Milewicz, D. M.: Exome
sequencing identifies SMAD3 mutations as a cause of familial thoracic
aortic aneurysm and dissection with intracranial and other arterial
aneurysms. Circ. Res. 109: 680-686, 2011.

16. Riggins, G. J.; Thiagalingam, S.; Rozenblum, E.; Weinstein, C.
L.; Kern, S. E.; Hamilton, S. R.; Willson, J. K. V.; Markowitz, S.
D.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.: Mad-related genes in the human. Nature
Genet. 13: 347-349, 1996.

17. Roth, S.; Johansson, M.; Loukola, A.; Peltomaki, P.; Jarvinen,
H.; Mecklin, J.-P.; Aaltonen, L. A.: Mutation analysis of SMAD2,
SMAD3, and SMAD4 genes in hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. J.
Med. Genet. 37: 298-300, 2000.

18. Sato, M.; Muragaki, Y.; Saika, S.; Roberts, A. B.; Ooshima, A.
: Targeted disruption of TGF-beta-1/Smad3 signaling protects against
renal tubulointerstitial fibrosis induced by unilateral ureteral obstruction. J.
Clin. Invest. 112: 1486-1494, 2003.

19. Shattuck, T. M.; Costa, J.; Bernstein, M.; Jensen, R. T.; Chung,
D. C.; Arnold, A.: Mutational analysis of Smad3, a candidate tumor
suppressor implicated in TGF-beta and menin pathways, in parathyroid
adenomas and enteropancreatic endocrine tumors. J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 87: 3911-3914, 2002.

20. van de Laar, I. M. B. H.; Oldenburg, R. A.; Pals, G.; Roos-Hesselink,
J. W.; de Graaf, B. M.; Verhagen, J. M. A.; Hoedemaekers, Y. M.; Willemsen,
R.; Severijnen, L.-A.; Venselaar, H.; Vriend, G.; Pattynama, P. M.;
and 14 others: Mutations in SMAD3 cause a syndrome form of aortic
aneurysms and dissections with early-onset osteoarthritis. Nature
Genet. 43: 121-126, 2011.

21. van de Laar, I. M. B. H.; van der Linde, D.; Oei, E. H. G.; Bos,
P. K.; Bessems, J. H.; Bierma-Zeinstra, S. M.; van Meer, B. L.; Pals,
G.; Oldenburg, R. A.; Bekkers, J. A.; Moelker, A.; de Graaf, B. M.;
and 17 others: Phenotypic spectrum of the SMAD3-related aneurysms-osteoarthritis
syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 49: 47-57, 2012.

22. Wolfraim, L. A.; Fernandez, T. M.; Mamura, M.; Fuller, W. L.;
Kumar, R.; Cole, D. E.; Byfield, S.; Felici, A.; Flanders, K. C.;
Walz, T. M.; Roberts, A. B.; Aplan, P. D.; Balis, F. M.; Letterio,
J. J.: Loss of Smad3 in acute T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia. New
Eng. J. Med. 351: 552-559, 2004.

23. Yang, X.; Letterio, J. J.; Lechleider, R. J.; Chen, L.; Hayman,
R.; Gu, H.; Roberts, A. B.; Deng, C.: Targeted disruption of SMAD3
results in impaired mucosal immunity and diminished T cell responsiveness
to TGF-beta. EMBO J. 18: 1280-1291, 1999.

24. You, L.; Kruse, F. E.: Differential effect of activin A and BMP-7
on myofibroblast differentiation and the role of the Smad signaling
pathway. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 43: 72-81, 2002.

25. Zawel, L.; Dai, J. L.; Buckhaults, P.; Zhou, S.; Kinzler, K. W.;
Vogelstein, B.; Kern, S. E.: Human Smad3 and Smad4 are sequence-specific
transcription activators. Molec. Cell 1: 611-617, 1998.

26. Zhang, Y.; Feng, X.-H.; Wu, R.-Y.; Derynck, R.: Receptor-associated
Mad homologues synergize as effectors of the TGF-beta response. Nature 383:
168-172, 1996.

27. Zhu, Y.; Richardson, J. A.; Parada, L. F.; Graff, J. M.: Smad3
mutant mice develop metastatic colorectal cancer. Cell 94: 703-714,
1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/6/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/26/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/7/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/29/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/29/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/13/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/4/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/1/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/28/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/20/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/29/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/13/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/26/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/4/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/8/2003
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/11/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/26/2002
Jane Kelly - updated: 7/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/25/2002
Michael J. Wright - updated: 1/8/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/31/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 1/31/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/13/1998

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 10/9/1998

EDITED carol: 09/06/2012
carol: 2/27/2012
terry: 2/7/2012
carol: 2/7/2012
terry: 2/6/2012
alopez: 10/24/2011
alopez: 10/5/2011
terry: 9/26/2011
carol: 3/7/2011
terry: 3/7/2011
terry: 6/3/2009
mgross: 6/2/2009
terry: 5/29/2009
alopez: 9/11/2008
terry: 8/29/2008
alopez: 8/20/2008
terry: 8/13/2008
alopez: 4/14/2008
terry: 4/4/2008
wwang: 12/28/2007
terry: 12/11/2007
mgross: 11/7/2006
terry: 11/1/2006
wwang: 8/7/2006
terry: 7/28/2006
mgross: 7/20/2006
carol: 4/28/2005
mgross: 4/13/2005
terry: 9/29/2004
tkritzer: 9/14/2004
terry: 9/13/2004
tkritzer: 8/30/2004
terry: 8/26/2004
carol: 12/8/2003
ckniffin: 12/4/2003
cwells: 4/29/2003
terry: 4/8/2003
mgross: 9/11/2002
mgross: 7/26/2002
mgross: 7/8/2002
mgross: 4/25/2002
alopez: 1/8/2001
alopez: 9/5/2000
terry: 8/31/2000
carol: 1/31/1999
carol: 10/13/1998

607618	TITLE *607618 DEAD/H BOX 28; DDX28
;;MITOCHONDRIAL DEAD BOX POLYPEPTIDE 28; MDDX28
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DDX28 is an RNA helicase, which unwind double-stranded RNA using
nucleoside triphosphates as an energy source. RNA helicases participate
in essentially all cellular processes that involve RNA.

CLONING

By CpG island subcloning from chromosome 16q22.1 and by screening a
testis cDNA library, Valgardsdottir et al. (2001) cloned DDX28. The
deduced 540-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 59 kD.
DDX28 contains an N-terminal mitochondrial targeting signal, a putative
leucine-rich nuclear export signal, a nuclear localization signal, and
all of the well conserved DEAD box helicase motifs. It also has several
potential serine and threonine phosphorylation sites, but no tyrosine
phosphorylation sites. DDX28 shares only limited similarity with other
RNA helicases in a region of 300 to 400 amino acids containing all the
conserved DEAD box motifs. Northern blot analysis detected a 2-kb
transcript expressed in all tissues examined. Immunolocalization of
endogenous or transfected DDX28 showed mitochondrial and nuclear
subcellular distributions, with stronger staining in mitochondria.

GENE FUNCTION

By in vitro assay of recombinant protein, Valgardsdottir et al. (2001)
determined that DDX28 hydrolyzed ATP, and this activity was dependent
upon the presence of RNA and magnesium. DDX28 did not hydrolyze GTP.

GENE STRUCTURE

Valgardsdottir et al. (2001) determined that DDX28 is an intronless
gene. The 5-prime end of the MDDX28 gene lies within a CpG island.

MAPPING

Valgardsdottir et al. (2001) identified the DDX28 gene within a PAC
clone mapping to chromosome 16q22.1.

REFERENCE 1. Valgardsdottir, R.; Brede, G.; Eide, L. G.; Frengen, E.; Prydz,
H.: Cloning and characterization of MDDX28, a putative DEAD-box helicase
with mitochondrial and nuclear localization. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
32056-32063, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/7/2003

EDITED mgross: 03/07/2003

613447	TITLE *613447 SPINDLE- AND CENTRIOLE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; SPICE1
;;SPINDLE AND CENTRIOLE PROTEIN; SPICE;;
COILED-COIL DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 52, FORMERLY; CCDC52, FORMERLY
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using mass spectrometry, Archinti et al. (2010) identified SPICE as a
centriole-associated protein. The deduced 856-amino acid protein
contains central and C-terminal coiled-coil domains. Immunohistochemical
analysis of HeLa and U2OS cells revealed that endogenous SPICE localized
to centrioles throughout the cell cycle and to spindle microtubules
during mitosis. Fluorescence-tagged SPICE showed the same localization
pattern in transfected cells. SPICE colocalized with centrin (see
603187) in foci at the proximal part of centrioles. Database analysis
revealed orthologs of SPICE only in vertebrates.

GENE FUNCTION

Using gene tagging on BACs, protein localization, and tandem-affinity
purification-mass spectrometry, Hutchins et al. (2010) found that CCDC52
interacted with CEP120 (613446), a protein required for centriole
duplication.

By mutation analysis, Archinti et al. (2010) found that distinct regions
of SPICE mediated its targeting to spindles and centrioles and that the
central conserved coiled-coil region was required for centriole
localization. Depletion of SPICE expression in HeLa and U2OS cells via
RNA interference impaired centriole duplication and caused severe
mitotic defects. SPICE depletion compromised spindle architecture,
spindle pole integrity, and chromosome congression, even in cells in
which centriole duplication had occurred. Archinti et al. (2010)
concluded that SPICE is an important dual-function regulator required
for centriole duplication and for proper bipolar spindle formation and
chromosome congression in mitosis.

MAPPING

Hartz (2010) mapped the CCDC52 gene to chromosome 3q13.2 based on an
alignment of the CCDC52 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK057966) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Archinti, M.; Lacasa, C.; Teixido-Travesa, N.; Luders, J.: SPICE--a
previously uncharacterized protein required for centriole duplication
and mitotic chromosome congression. J. Cell Sci. 123: 3039-3046,
2010.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/11/2010.

3. Hutchins, J. R. A.; Toyoda, Y.; Hegemann, B.; Poser, I.; Heriche,
J.-K.; Sykora, M. M.; Augsburg, M.; Hudecz, O.; Buschhorn, B. A.;
Bulkescher, J.; Conrad, C.; Comartin, D.; and 18 others: Systematic
analysis of human protein complexes identifies chromosome segregation
proteins. Science 328: 593-599, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/21/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/15/2010

EDITED mgross: 11/02/2011
terry: 10/21/2011
mgross: 6/16/2010

602209	TITLE *602209 RAS-RESPONSIVE ELEMENT BINDING PROTEIN 1; RREB1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In several neuroendocrine cell types, the RAS/RAF signal transduction
cascade results in cell differentiation (see HRAS; 190020). This signal
transduction cascade involves inactivation of several tiers of protein
kinases, including members of the RAF (e.g., RAF1; 164760), MAPKK, and
MAPK families (see 176872). Ultimately, activation of these protein
kinases results in the activation of transcription factors responsible
for changes in cell phenotype. In the human medullary thyroid carcinoma
cell line TT, an activated HRAS oncogene or activation of the RAF1 gene
induces a program of neuroendocrine differentiation (Carson et al.,
1995). One of the hallmarks of this differentiation process is an
increase in the expression of the calcitonin gene (114130). Thiagalingam
et al. (1996) reported the DNA affinity cloning of a RAS-responsive
element binding protein, RREB1, from the TT cell line. RREB1, a zinc
finger transcription factor, was shown to bind specifically to the
distal RAS-responsive element (RRE) in the calcitonin gene promoter and
to augment the RAS/RAF-mediated transcriptional response of that
promoter. Thus, they concluded that it may be involved in
RAS/RAF-mediated cell differentiation.

GENE FUNCTION

Using a promoter pull-down assay followed by mass spectrometry analysis,
Flajollet et al. (2009) identified RREB1 as a protein that bound the
HLA-G (142871) promoter. RREB1 exerted repressive activity on the
promoter in HLA-G-negative cells that was mediated by recruitment of
HDAC1 (601241) and CTBP1 (602618) and/or CTBP2 (602619). CTBP1 and CTBP2
are subunits of the C-terminal binding protein (CTBP) complex, a
corepressor involved in chromatin remodeling. The HLA-G promoter
contains 3 RREB1 target sites. Flajollet et al. (2009) proposed that the
repressive activity of RREB1 on the HLA-G promoter may be regulated by
posttranslational modifications governing its association with CTBP.

MAPPING

Thiagalingam et al. (1997) mapped the RREB1 gene to 6p25 by 3 mapping
methods: PCR analysis of a somatic cell hybrid panel, analysis of the
Stanford G3 radiation hybrid mapping panel, and fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

REFERENCE 1. Carson, E. B.; McMahon, M.; Baylin, S. B.; Nelkin, B. D.: Ret
gene silencing is associated with Raf-1-induced medullary thyroid
carcinoma cell differentiation. Cancer Res. 55: 2048-2052, 1995.

2. Flajollet, S.; Poras, I.; Carosella, E. D.; Moreau, P.: RREB-1
is a transcriptional repressor of HLA-G. J. Immun. 183: 6948-6959,
2009.

3. Thiagalingam, A.; De Bustros, A.; Borges, M.; Jasti, R.; Compton,
D.; Diamond, L.; Mabry, M.; Ball, D. W.; Baylin, S. B.; Nelkin, B.
D.: RREB-1, a novel zinc finger protein, is involved in the differentiation
response to Ras in human medullary thyroid carcinomas. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 16: 5335-5345, 1996.

4. Thiagalingam, A.; Lengauer, C.; Baylin, S. B.; Nelkin, B. D.:
RREB1, a Ras responsive element binding protein, maps to human chromosome
6p25. Genomics 45: 630-632, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/19/2012

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/19/1997

EDITED mgross: 11/26/2012
terry: 11/19/2012
alopez: 11/16/2010
dholmes: 1/23/1998
dholmes: 1/12/1998
mark: 12/19/1997

612489	TITLE *612489 RING FINGER PROTEIN 24; RNF24
;;GOLIATH-LIKE PROTEIN (C3CH4 TYPE); G1L
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

RNF24 binds TRPC6 (603652) and other transient receptor potential cation
channel family members and is involved in regulation of the trafficking
and insertion of TRPCs into the plasma membrane (Lussier et al., 2008).

CLONING

By yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human fetal brain cDNA library with TRPC6
as bait, followed by RT-PCR of total RNA from HEK293 cells, Lussier et
al. (2008) cloned RNF24. The deduced 148-amino acid protein contains an
N-terminal transmembrane domain and a C-terminal RING-H2 domain. Sodium
carbonate treatment and immunofluorescence confocal microscopy,
determined that RNF24 is an integral membrane protein localized
primarily to the Golgi apparatus.

GENE FUNCTION

By GST pull-down assay using TRPC6 deletion mutants, Lussier et al.
(2008) showed that RNF24 interacted with the first and second
ankyrin-like repeats of TRPC6. They showed that RNF24 RING-H2 domain
interacted with the ankyrin-like repeats of TRPC1 (602343), TRPC3
(602345), TRPC4 (603651), TRPC5 (300334), and TRPC7 (TRPM2; 603749).
Biotinylation and confocal laser-scanning microscopy studies showed that
RNF24 plays a role in reduction of trafficking and insertion of TRPCs
into the plasma membrane. Pulsed-chase experiments and TRPC6 activation
assays showed that RNF24 was not involved in the maturation or
degradation of TRPC6 and did not regulate TRPC activity.

REFERENCE 1. Lussier, M. P.; Lepage, P. K.; Bousquet, S. M.; Boulay, G.: RNF24,
a new TRPC interacting protein, causes the intracellular retention
of TRPC. Cell Calcium 43: 432-443, 2008.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 12/19/2008

EDITED wwang: 12/19/2008

601143	TITLE *601143 DYNACTIN 1; DCTN1
;;p150(GLUED), DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cytoplasmic dynein is a microtubule-based biologic motor protein.
Holzbaur and Tokito (1996) noted that dyneins were initially discovered
as enzymes that couple ATP hydrolysis to provide a force for cellular
motility in eukaryotic cilia and flagella. A distinct cytoplasmic form
of dynein (600112) was subsequently characterized and thought to be
responsible for the intracellular retrograde motility of vesicles and
organelles along microtubules (Holzbaur and Vallee, 1994). A large
macromolecular complex, dynactin, is required for the cytoplasmic
dynein-driven movement of organelles along microtubules. Dynactin is
composed of 10 distinct polypeptides of 150, 135, 62, 50 (DCTN2;
607376), 45, 42, 37, 32, 27, and 24 kD, with a combined mass of 10
million daltons. The largest polypeptide of the dynactin complex,
p150(Glued), binds directly to microtubules and to cytoplasmic dynein.
The binding of dynactin to dynein is critical for neuronal function, as
antibodies that specifically disrupt this binding block vesicle motility
along microtubules in extruded squid axoplasm. Holzbaur and Tokito
(1996) stated that the dynein-dynactin interaction is probably a key
component of the mechanism of axonal transport of vesicles and
organelles. Further evidence for a critical role for dynactin in vivo
comes from the analysis of mutations in the homologous gene in
Drosophila. Mutant alleles of the 'glued' gene induced disruption of the
neurons of the optic lobe and compound eye in heterozygotes; null
mutations are lethal.

CLONING

Holzbaur and Tokito (1996) isolated and characterized cDNA clones
encoding human p150(Glued), as well as alternatively spliced isoforms.
Using these to isolate genomic clones, they found by genomic Southern
blots that there is a single gene in the human, as had previously been
observed in rat and chick.

Jang et al. (1997) cloned and characterized mouse Dctn1. The mouse
protein shares 95% amino acid identity with the human protein. The
authors found no abnormalities of the gene in mnd2 mice.

GENE FUNCTION

Eaton et al. (2002) disrupted the dynactin complex in Drosophila, using
3 separate perturbations: dsRNA interference with arp1 (homolog of
ACTR1A; 605143), mutation in p150/Glued, and a dominant-negative Glued
transgene. In all 3 cases, the disruption resulted in an increase in the
frequency and extent of synaptic retraction events at the neuromuscular
junction. Eaton et al. (2002) concluded that dynactin functions locally
within the presynaptic arbor to promote synapse stability at the
neuromuscular junction.

Kim et al. (2004) showed that BBS4 (600374) protein localizes to the
centriolar satellites of centrosomes and basal bodies of primary cilia,
where it functions as an adaptor of the p150(glued) subunit of the
dynein transport machinery to recruit pericentriolar material-1 protein
(PCM1; 600299) and its associated cargo to the satellites. Silencing of
BBS4 induces PCM1 mislocalization and concomitant deanchoring of
centrosomal microtubules, arrest in cell division, and apoptotic cell
death.

Gauthier et al. (2004) showed that huntingtin (613004) specifically
enhances vesicular transport of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF;
113505) along microtubules. They determined that huntingtin-mediated
transport involves huntingtin-associated protein-1 (HAP1; 600947) and
the p150(Glued) subunit of dynactin, an essential component of molecular
motors. BDNF transport was attenuated both in the disease context and by
reducing the levels of wildtype huntingtin. The alteration of the
huntingtin/HAP1/p150(Glued) complex correlated with reduced association
of motor proteins with microtubules. The
polyglutamine-huntingtin-induced transport deficit resulted in the loss
of neurotrophic support and neuronal toxicity. Gauthier et al. (2004)
concluded that a key role of huntingtin is to promote BDNF transport and
suggested that loss of this function might contribute to pathogenesis.

Using in vivo skin-specific lentiviral RNA interference, Williams et al.
(2011) investigated spindle orientation regulation and provided direct
evidence that LGN (609245), NuMA (164009), and dynactin are involved. In
compromising asymmetric cell divisions, Williams et al. (2011) uncovered
profound defects in stratification, differentiation, and barrier
formation, and implicated Notch (190198) signaling as an important
effector. Williams et al. (2011) concluded that asymmetric cell division
components act by reorientating mitotic spindles to achieve
perpendicular divisions, which in turn promote stratification and
differentiation. Furthermore, the resemblance between their knockdown
phenotypes and Rbpj (147183) loss-of-function mutants provided important
clues that suprabasal Notch signaling is impaired when asymmetric cell
divisions do not occur.

GENE STRUCTURE

Collin et al. (1998) found that the DCTN1 gene spans approximately 19.4
kb of genomic DNA and consists of at least 32 exons ranging in size from
15 to 499 bp.

Pushkin et al. (2001) showed by Southern blot and BAC analyses that the
DCTN1 and SLC4A5 (606757) proteins are encoded by a single locus. The
DCTN1-SLC4A5 locus spans approximately 230 kb and contains 66 exons.
Approximately 200 kb encode SLC4A5. DCTN1 is encoded by exons 1 through
alternative exon 32. The same locus therefore uniquely encodes both a
membrane protein (SLC4A5) and a cytoplasmic protein (DCTN1) with
distinct functions.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Holzbaur and Tokito (1996) mapped
the DCTN1 gene to 2p13. They noted that the location of the gene
corresponds to that of a form of recessive limb-girdle muscular
dystrophy (see LGMD2B; 253601). Also, this region of human chromosome 2
shows syntenic homology with a region of mouse chromosome 6 containing
the mnd2 mouse mutation, which exhibits symptoms resembling human motor
neuron disease.

Korthaus et al. (1997) presented evidence that the DCTN1 gene maps to
chromosome 2 between TGFA and D2S1394.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Puls et al. (2003) identified a gly59-to-ser mutation (601143.0001) in
the DCTN1 gene in a family with slowly progressive autosomal dominant
distal hereditary motor neuronopathy with vocal paresis (HMN7B; 607641).

Among 250 patients with a putative diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS; 105400), Munch et al. (2004) identified 3 mutations in
the DCTN1 gene (601143.0002-601143.0004) in 3 families. The authors
distinguished the phenotype in their patients from that reported by Puls
et al. (2003) by the presence of upper motor neuron signs, although
specific clinical details were lacking. Munch et al. (2004) suggested
that mutations in the DCTN1 gene may be a susceptibility factor for ALS.

In affected members of 8 families with Perry syndrome (168605), Farrer
et al. (2009) identified 5 different heterozygous mutations in the DCTN1
gene (see, e.g., 601143.0006-601143.0007). In vitro functional
expression studies indicated that the mutations resulted in decreased
microtubule binding and intracytoplasmic inclusions.

Vilarino-Guell et al. (2009) sequenced the DCTN1 gene in 286 individuals
with Parkinson disease (PD; 168600), frontotemporal lobar degeneration
(FTLD; 600274), or ALS. None of the 36 variants identified segregated
conclusively within families, suggesting that DCTN1 mutations are rare
and do not play a common role in these diseases. Further analysis of 440
patients with PD, 374 with FTLD, and 372 with ALS without a family
history also failed to find an association between DCTN1 variants and
disease. In fact, the previously reported pathogenic mutation T1249I
(601143.0002) was identified in 3 of 435 controls and did not segregate
in a large pedigree with Parkinson disease, thus weakening the evidence
for the pathogenicity of this variant.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NEURONOPATHY, DISTAL HEREDITARY MOTOR, TYPE VIIB
DCTN1, GLY59SER

In a North American family with a slowly progressive, autosomal dominant
form of lower motor neuron with vocal cord paresis but without sensory
symptoms (607641), Puls et al. (2003) found a single-basepair change in
the DCTN1 gene (957C-T) resulting in an amino acid substitution of
serine for glycine at position 59 in affected family members. The G59S
substitution occurred in the highly conserved CAP-Gly motif of the
p150(Glued) subunit of dynactin, a domain that binds directly to
microtubules. The transport protein dynactin is required for
dynein-mediated retrograde transport of vesicles and organelles along
microtubules. Overexpression of dynamitin (607376), the p50 subunit of
the dynactin complex, disrupts the complex and produces a late-onset,
progressive motor neuron disease in transgenic mice (LaMonte et al.,
2002).

Based on crystal structure, gly59 is embedded in a beta-sheet. In
budding yeast, Moore et al. (2009) generated a G59S-analogous mutation
that resulted in complete loss of the CAP-Gly domain. Functional
expression studies showed that the CAP-Gly domain has a critical role in
the initiation and persistence of dynein-dependent movement of the
mitotic spindle and nucleus, but was otherwise dispensable for
dynein-based movement. The function also appeared to be
context-dependent, such as during mitosis, indicating that CAP-Gly
activity may only be necessary when dynein needs to overcome high force
thresholds to produce movement. The CAP-Gly domain was not the primary
link between dynactin and microtubules, although it was involved in the
interaction.

.0002
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
DCTN1, THR1249ILE

In a woman with a disorder similar to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
(105400), Munch et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous 4546C-T
transition in exon 13 of the DCTN1 gene, resulting in a thr1249-to-ile
(T1249I) substitution. She had disease onset at age 56 years, with gait
disturbance and distal lower limb muscle weakness and atrophy. The
symptoms were slowly progressive over 4 years. There was no involvement
of the upper limbs or bulbar region. There was no family history. The
mutation was not identified in 150 control subjects. See also 607641.

Vilarino-Guell et al. (2009) identified the T1249I variant in 3 of 435
controls, 5 of 440 patients with Parkinson disease (168600), 1 of 374
with frontotemporal lobar degeneration (600274), and 5 of 372 patients
with ALS. Lack of segregation of the variant in a large pedigree with
Parkinson disease weakened the evidence for the pathogenicity of this
variant.

.0003
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
DCTN1, MET571THR

In a woman with probable ALS (105400), Munch et al. (2004) identified a
heterozygous 2512T-C transition in exon 15 of the DCTN1 gene, resulting
in a met571-to-thr (M571T) substitution. She had onset of upper limb
involvement at age 48 years and developed bulbar symptoms within 8
years. Her sister was similarly affected, although DNA was not
available. The mutation was not identified in 150 control subjects.

.0004
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
DCTN1, ARG785TRP

In 2 brothers with probable ALS (105400), Munch et al. (2004) identified
a heterozygous 3153C-T transition in exon 20 of the DCTN1 gene,
resulting in an arg785-to-trp (R785W) substitution. The proband had
upper limb onset at age 55 years, whereas his brother had bulbar onset
at age 64 years. The asymptomatic mother and sister carried the same
mutation, suggesting incomplete penetrance. The mutation was not
identified in 150 control subjects.

.0005
AMYOTROPHIC LATERAL SCLEROSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
DCTN1, ARG1101LYS

In a patient with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (105400), Munch et al.
(2005) identified a heterozygous 4102G-A transition in the DCTN1 gene,
resulting in an arg1101-to-lys (R1101K) substitution. The patient's
brother, who also carried the R1101K mutation, had frontotemporal
dementia without motor involvement. Family history revealed that 2
additional family members reportedly had motor neuron disease and
frontotemporal dementia, respectively, but their DNA was not available
for testing. The mutation was not identified in 500 control individuals.
Despite the molecular findings, Munch et al. (2005) suggested that the
R1101K variant may not be the primary gene defect in this family.

.0006
PERRY SYNDROME
DCTN1, GLY71ARG

In affected members of 2 unrelated families with Perry syndrome
(168605), Farrer et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 211G-A
transition in exon 2 of the DCTN1 gene, resulting in a gly71-to-arg
(G71R) substitution in a highly conserved residue within the GKNDG
binding motif of the CAP-Gly domain. The families were of Canadian and
Turkish ancestry, respectively, and haplotype analysis excluded a
founder effect. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
mutation decreased microtubule binding and resulted in intracytoplasmic
inclusions.

.0007
PERRY SYNDROME
DCTN1, GLN74PRO

In affected members of a Japanese family with Perry syndrome (168605),
Farrer et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 221A-C transversion in
exon 2 of the DCTN1 gene, resulting in a gln74-to-pro (Q74P)
substitution in a highly conserved residue adjacent to the GKNDG binding
motif of the CAP-Gly domain. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that the mutation decreased microtubule binding and resulted in
intracytoplasmic inclusions.

REFERENCE 1. Collin, G. B.; Nishina, P. M.; Marshall, J. D.; Naggert, J. K.
: Human DCTN1: genomic structure and evaluation as a candidate for
Alstrom syndrome. Genomics 53: 359-364, 1998.

2. Eaton, B. A.; Fetter, R. D.; Davis, G. W.: Dynactin is necessary
for synapse stabilization. Neuron 34: 729-741, 2002.

3. Farrer, M. J.; Hulihan, M. M.; Kachergus, J. M.; Dachsel, J. C.;
Stoessl, A. J.; Grantier, L. L.; Calne, S.; Calne, D. B.; Lechevalier,
B.; Chapon, F.; Tsuboi, Y.; Yamada, T.; and 10 others: DCTN1 mutations
in Perry syndrome. Nature Genet. 41: 163-165, 2009.

4. Gauthier, L. R.; Charrin, B. C.; Borrell-Pages, M.; Dompierre,
J. P.; Rangone, H.; Cordelieres, F. P.; De Mey, J.; MacDonald, M.
E.; Lebmann, V.; Humbert, S.; Saudou, F.: Huntingtin controls neurotrophic
support and survival of neurons by enhancing BDNF vesicular transport
along microtubules. Cell 118: 127-138, 2004.

5. Holzbaur, E. L. F.; Tokito, M. K.: Localization of the DCTN1 gene
encoding p150(Glued) to human chromosome 2p13 by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. Genomics 31: 398-399, 1996.

6. Holzbaur, E. L. F.; Vallee, R. B.: Dyneins: molecular structure
and cellular function. Ann. Rev. Cell Biol. 10: 339-372, 1994.

7. Jang, W.; Weber, J. S.; Tokito, M. K.; Holzbaur, E. L. F.; Meisler,
M. H.: Mouse p150(Glued) (dynactin 1) cDNA sequence and evaluation
as a candidate for the neuromuscular disease mutation mnd2. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 231: 344-347, 1997.

8. Kim, J. C.; Badano, J. L.; Sibold, S.; Esmail, M. A.; Hill, J.;
Hoskins, B. E.; Leitch, C. C.; Venner, K.; Ansley, S. J.; Ross, A.
J.; Leroux, M. R.; Katsanis, N.; Beales, P. L.: The Bardet-Biedl
protein BBS4 targets cargo to the pericentriolar region and is required
for microtubule anchoring and cell cycle progression. Nature Genet. 36:
462-470, 2004.

9. Korthaus, D.; Wedemeyer, N.; Lengeling, A.; Ronsiek, M.; Jockusch,
H.; Schmitt-John, T.: Integrated radiation hybrid map of human chromosome
2p13: possible involvement of dynactin in neuromuscular diseases. Genomics 43:
242-244, 1997.

10. LaMonte, B. H.; Wallace, K. E.; Holloway, B. A.; Shelly, S. S.;
Ascano, J.; Tokito, M.; Van Winkle, T.; Howland, D. S.; Holzbaur,
E. L. F.: Disruption of dynein/dynactin inhibits axonal transport
in motor neurons causing late-onset progressive degeneration. Neuron 34:
715-727, 2002.

11. Moore, J. K.; Sept, D.; Cooper, J. A.: Neurodegeneration mutations
in dynactin impair dynein-dependent nuclear migration. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 106: 5147-5152, 2009.

12. Munch, C.; Rosenbohm, A.; Sperfeld, A.-D.; Uttner, I.; Reske,
S.; Krause, B. J.; Sedlmeier, R.; Meyer, T.; Hanemann, C. O.; Stumm,
G.; Ludolph, A. C.: Heterozygous R1101K mutation of the DCTN1 gene
in a family with ALS and FTD. Ann. Neurol. 58: 777-780, 2005.

13. Munch, C.; Sedlmeier, R.; Meyer, T.; Homberg, V.; Sperfeld, A.
D.; Kurt, A.; Prudlo, J.; Peraus, G.; Hanemann, C. O.; Stumm, G.;
Ludolph, A. C.: Point mutations of the p150 subunit of dynactin (DCTN1)
gene in ALS. Neurology 63: 724-726, 2004.

14. Puls, I.; Jonnakuty, C.; LaMonte, B. H.; Holzbaur, E. L. F.; Tokito,
M.; Mann, E.; Floeter, M. K.; Bidus, K.; Drayna, D.; Oh, S. J.; Brown,
R. H., Jr.; Ludlow, C. L.; Fischbeck, K. H.: Mutant dynactin in motor
neuron disease. Nature Genet. 33: 455-456, 2003.

15. Pushkin, A.; Abuladze, N.; Newman, D.; Tatishchev, S.; Kurtz,
I.: Genomic organization of the DCTN1-SLC4A5 locus encoding both
NBC4 and p150(Glued). Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 95: 163-168, 2001.

16. Vilarino-Guell, C.; Wider, C.; Soto-Ortolaza, A. I.; Cobb, S.
A.; Kachergus, J. M.; Keeling, B. H.; Dachsel, J. C.; Hulihan, M.
M.; Dickson, D. W.; Wszolek, Z. K.; Uitti, R. J.; Graff-Radford, N.
R.; and 14 others: Characterization of DCTN1 genetic variability
in neurodegeneration. Neurology 72: 2024-2028, 2009.

17. Williams, S. E.; Beronja, S.; Pasolli, H. A.; Fuchs, E.: Asymmetric
cell divisions promote Notch-dependent epidermal differentiation. Nature 470:
353-358, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/29/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/14/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/10/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/6/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/4/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/3/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/27/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/19/2003
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 11/27/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/24/2002
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 2/24/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/4/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/20/1996

EDITED carol: 09/21/2012
alopez: 7/5/2011
terry: 6/29/2011
carol: 12/23/2009
ckniffin: 12/15/2009
wwang: 10/23/2009
ckniffin: 10/14/2009
carol: 9/15/2009
wwang: 2/24/2009
ckniffin: 2/10/2009
ckniffin: 3/16/2007
wwang: 3/10/2006
ckniffin: 3/6/2006
ckniffin: 4/4/2005
wwang: 3/17/2005
wwang: 3/16/2005
wwang: 3/11/2005
ckniffin: 3/4/2005
mgross: 8/3/2004
alopez: 5/3/2004
alopez: 4/27/2004
alopez: 4/2/2003
alopez: 3/20/2003
terry: 3/19/2003
carol: 12/6/2002
tkritzer: 11/27/2002
mgross: 11/22/2002
mgross: 6/24/2002
alopez: 5/11/2001
terry: 2/25/1999
carol: 2/24/1999
terry: 9/10/1997
terry: 9/4/1997
mark: 3/21/1996

605858	TITLE *605858 SCRATCH, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; SCRT1
;;SCRT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The Scratch (SCRT) gene encodes a mammalian Snail family member whose
expression is restricted to the nervous system.

CLONING

Nakakura et al. (2001) isolated human SCRT from an adult brain cDNA
library. The SCRT cDNA encodes a protein of 348 amino acids. Human SCRT
shares 81% and 69% identity to Drosophila Scrt and Caenorhabditis
elegans neuronal antiapoptotic protein, CES-1, respectively, across the
5-zinc finger domain, and 92% overall amino acid identity with mouse
Scrt. Northern blot analysis detected SCRT expression in adult brain,
but not in other tissues. In situ hybridization of mouse tissues
demonstrated expression of Scrt predominantly confined to the brain and
spinal cord, appearing in newly differentiating, postmitotic neurons and
persisting into postnatal life. Additional expression was seen in the
retina and, significantly, in neuroendocrine cells of the lung. In a
parallel fashion, Nakakura et al. (2001) detected SCRT expression by
RT-PCR in lung cancers with neuroendocrine features, especially small
cell lung cancer. SCRT shares the capacity of other Snail family members
to bind to E-box enhancer motifs, which are targets of basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors. Nakakura et al. (2001)
showed that SCRT directly antagonizes the function of heterodimers of
the proneural bHLH protein achaete-scute homolog-1 (ASCL1; 100790) and
E12 (see 147141), leading to active transcriptional repression at E-box
motifs. Nakakura et al. (2001) concluded that SCRT has the potential to
function in newly differentiating, postmitotic neurons and in cancers
with neuroendocrine features by modulating the action of bHLH
transcription factors critical for neuronal differentiation.

MAPPING

Scott (2001) mapped the SCRT1 gene (GenBank GENBANK AY014996) to
chromosome 8 based on sequence similarity to human genome draft
sequence.

REFERENCE 1. Nakakura, E. K.; Watkins, D. N.; Schuebel, K. E.; Sriuranpong,
V.; Borges, M. W.; Nelkin, B. D.; Ball, D. W.: Mammalian Scratch:
a neural-specific Snail family transcriptional repressor. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 98: 4010-4015, 2001.

2. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/21/2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Alan F. Scott - updated: 06/26/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/19/2001

EDITED joanna: 06/26/2001
alopez: 4/19/2001

608736	TITLE *608736 SOLUTE CARRIER FAMILY 39 (ZINC TRANSPORTER), MEMBER 14; SLC39A14
;;ZIP14;;
KIAA0062
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Zinc is an essential cofactor for hundreds of enzymes. It is involved in
protein, nucleic acid, carbohydrate, and lipid metabolism, as well as in
the control of gene transcription, growth, development, and
differentiation. SLC39A14 belongs to a subfamily of proteins that show
structural characteristics of zinc transporters (Taylor and Nicholson,
2003).

CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated immature myeloid
cell line cDNA library, Nomura et al. (1994) cloned SLC39A14, which they
designated KIAA0062. The deduced 531-amino acid protein contains
possible transmembrane domains. Northern blot analysis detected SLC39A14
expression in all tissues and cell lines examined. Highest expression
was in liver, and lowest expression was in spleen, thymus, and
peripheral blood leukocytes.

By searching databases for sequences similar to a unique motif within
LIV-1 (SLC39A6; 608731), Taylor and Nicholson (2003) identified
SLC39A14, which they designated LZT-Hs4. SLC39A14 contains a long N
terminus, followed by 8 putative transmembrane domains and a short C
terminus. It also has a motif similar to the catalytic zinc-binding site
of matrix metalloproteases. Expression of SLC39A14 in Chinese hamster
ovary cells showed an apparent molecular mass of 53 kD and suggested
SLC39A14 has up to 3 N-linked carbohydrate side chains. Under
nonreducing conditions, SLC39A14 migrated as a trimer, consistent with
the formation of an ion channel. SLC39A14 was expressed on the plasma
membrane, colocalized with F-actin, and concentrated on lamellipodiae in
a manner similar to membrane-type matrix metalloproteases.

GENE FUNCTION

Liuzzi et al. (2005) found that Zip14 was the most upregulated zinc
transporter in response to turpentine-induced inflammation or
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in mouse liver. Il6 (147620) -/- mice exhibited
neither hypozincemia nor Zip14 induction with turpentine-induced
inflammation, and the hypozincemic response was milder in Il6 -/- mice
exposed to LPS than in wildtype mice. Northern blot analysis revealed
liver-specific upregulation of a single Zip14 transcript.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed increased expression of Zip14 on the
plasma membrane of hepatocytes in response to both LPS and turpentine.
Il6 also produced increased expression of Zip14 in primary hepatocyte
cultures and localization of the Zip14 protein to the plasma membrane.
Transfection of mouse Zip14 cDNA into human embryonic kidney cells
increased zinc uptake. Liuzzi et al. (2005) concluded that ZIP14 is a
zinc importer upregulated by IL6 that plays a major role in the
hypozincemia accompanying the acute-phase response to inflammation and
infection.

Liuzzi et al. (2006) analyzed the capability of mouse Zip14 to mediate
uptake of non-transferrin (190000)-bound iron following expression in
human and insect cells. Zip14 localized to the plasma membrane, and its
overexpression increased uptake of both radiolabeled zinc and iron. Iron
was taken up as Fe(2+), and uptake was inhibited by zinc. Suppression of
endogenous Zip14 in mouse hepatocytes by small interfering RNA (siRNA)
reduced uptake of both iron and zinc. Zip14 siRNA also decreased
metallothionein (see 156350) mRNA levels, suggesting that compensatory
mechanisms were not sufficient to restore intracellular zinc.

MAPPING

By PCR of a human/rodent hybrid panel, Nomura et al. (1994) mapped the
SLC39A14 gene to chromosome 8.

REFERENCE 1. Liuzzi, J. P.; Aydemir, F.; Nam, H.; Knutson, M. D.; Cousins, R.
J.: Zip14 (Slc39a14) mediates non-transferrin-bound iron uptake into
cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 13612-13617, 2006.

2. Liuzzi, J. P.; Lichten, L. A.; Rivera, S.; Blanchard, R. K.; Aydemir,
T. B.; Knutson, M. D.; Ganz, T.; Cousins, R. J.: Interleukin-6 regulates
the zinc transporter Zip14 in liver and contributes to the hypozincemia
of the acute-phase response. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 6843-6848,
2005.

3. Nomura, N.; Nagase, T.; Miyajima, N.; Sazuka, T.; Tanaka, A.; Sato,
S.; Seki, N.; Kawarabayasi, Y.; Ishikawa, K.; Tabata, S.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. II. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0041-KIAA0080) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 1: 223-229, 1994.

4. Taylor, K. M.; Nicholson, R. I.: The LZT proteins; the LIV-1 subfamily
of zinc transporters. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1611: 16-30, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/4/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/18/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/14/2004

EDITED mgross: 02/04/2009
terry: 2/4/2009
mgross: 10/19/2006
terry: 10/18/2006
mgross: 6/15/2004

603021	TITLE *603021 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S12; MRPS12
;;RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN, MITOCHONDRIAL, S12; RPMS12;;
RPSM12
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ribosomal protein S12, a homolog of the E. coli rpsL gene product, is a
core component of the highly conserved ribosomal accuracy center. To
characterize human nuclear genes encoding components of the
mitochondrial gene expression machinery, Shah et al. (1998) searched an
expressed sequence tag (EST) database with the amino acid sequence of E.
coli rpsL. They isolated over 30 ESTs comprising a single contig in both
human and mouse, and they stated that this indicates RPMS12 is likely a
single-copy gene in the genomes of these mammals. The RPMS12 protein has
an N-terminal extension containing basic and hydroxyl-group amino acids,
consistent with a role for RPMS12 in mitochondrial targeting.

Johnson et al. (1998) cloned the gene encoding human mitochondrial
ribosomal protein S12 based on its homology to the Drosophila tko gene.
They found that the gene stretches over 1.7 kb of genomic DNA. The mRNA
showed 3 distinct patterns of splicing within the 5-prime untranslated
region, with 1 form predominant over the other 2, in all human tissues
examined. The coding region of the leader sequence is interrupted in
codon 17 by a second intron of 990 bp. The predicted protein is
translated as a prepeptide of 138 amino acids and processed to a peptide
of 112 amino acids with a molecular mass of 12.3 kD. The authors pointed
out that the functional role of RPMS12 makes it a candidate gene for
susceptibility to aminoglycoside ototoxicity (580000), which in some
cases is demonstrably due to mutation in the mitochondrial gene encoding
mitochondrial ribosomal RNA 12S, MTRNR1 (561000).

MAPPING

Using a radiation hybrid mapping panel, Johnson et al. (1998) localized
the RPMS12 gene to 19q13, near marker D19S881. They noted that the map
location of the gene made it a candidate for the autosomal dominant
deafness gene DFNA4 (600652).

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and radiation hybrid mapping, Shah et
al. (1998) mapped the human RPMS12 gene to 19q13.1.

REFERENCE 1. Johnson, D. F.; Hamon, M.; Fischel-Ghodsian, N.: Characterization
of the human mitochondrial ribosomal S12 gene. Genomics 52: 363-368,
1998.

2. Shah, Z. H.; Migliosi, V.; Miller, S. C. M.; Wang, A.; Friedman,
T. B.; Jacobs, H. T.: Chromosomal locations of three human nuclear
genes (RPSM12, TUFM, and AFG3L1) specifying putative components of
the mitochondrial gene expression apparatus. Genomics 48: 384-388,
1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/2/1999

CREATED Sheryl A. Jankowski: 9/9/1998

EDITED carol: 04/06/2012
carol: 1/23/2001
psherman: 3/4/1999
carol: 3/2/1999
psherman: 9/9/1998

613831	TITLE *613831 UBIQUITIN PROTEIN LIGASE E3 COMPONENT N-RECOGNIN 3; UBR3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Tasaki et al. (2007) cloned 2 splice variants of mouse Ubr3 that encode
deduced proteins of 1,889 and 1,893 amino acids. Ubr3 contains an
N-terminal UBR box, followed by a WxRNG domain, a RING-H2 finger, and a
potential C-terminal autoinhibitory domain. Ubr3 shares significant
similarity with mouse Ubr1 (605981) and Ubr2 (609134), which function as
N-recognin-type E3 ubiquitin ligases in the N-end rule pathway for
protein degradation. Northern blot analysis detected Ubr3 transcripts of
about 8 and 6.5 kb in all mouse tissues examined, with highest
expression in brain and skeletal muscle. RT-PCR analysis showed that
both Ubr3 variants were expressed at comparable levels in mouse liver
and skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Using protein pull-down assays, Tasaki et al. (2007) showed that, like
Ubr1 and Ubr2, mouse Ubr3 bound recombinant Hr6a (UBE2A; 312180) and
H46b (UBE2B; 179095). However, Ubr3 did not recognize destabilizing
N-terminal residues on protein substrates of Ubr1 or Ubr2.

GENE STRUCTURE

Tasaki et al. (2007) determined that the UBR3 gene spans about 260 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Tasaki et al. (2007) mapped the UBR3 gene
to chromosome 2. They also mapped the mouse Ubr3 gene to chromosome 2.

Hartz (2011) mapped the UBR3 gene to chromosome 2q31.1 based on an
alignment of the UBR3 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AB095944) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

ANIMAL MODEL

Tasaki et al. (2007) found that the phenotype of Ubr3 -/- mice depended
on genetic background. Ubr3 deletion was embryonic lethal in the
129SvImJ (129S) background, but it showed little effect on a mixed
129S/C57BL/6 (B6) background. In a B6-enriched strain, newborn Ubr3 -/-
mice showed impaired suckling, and many died neonatally due to
insufficient nutrition. Reduction of litter size rescued Ubr3 -/- pups,
suggesting that Ubr3 -/- pups suffered a defect in olfaction or tactile
sensation. Surviving adult female Ubr3 -/- mice, but not adult male Ubr3
-/- mice, exhibited anosmia in an odor-based behavioral test. Using a
lacZ reporter system, Tasaki et al. (2007) found that Ubr3 was expressed
in sensory epithelium or neurons of all major sensory systems.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/23/2011.

2. Tasaki, T.; Sohr, R.; Xia, Z.; Hellweg, R.; Hortnagl, H.; Varshavsky,
A.; Kwon, Y. T.: Biochemical and genetic studies of UBR3, a ubiquitin
ligase with a function in olfactory and other sensory systems. J.
Biol. Chem. 282: 18510-18520, 2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/24/2011

EDITED mgross: 03/25/2011
mgross: 3/24/2011

612733	TITLE *612733 THO COMPLEX, SUBUNIT 5; THOC5
;;FMS-INTERACTING PROTEIN; FMIP;;
PK1.3;;
FSAP79
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

In yeast, the TREX (transcription/export) complex contains the THO
transcription elongation complex, which functions in cotranscriptional
recruitment of mRNA export proteins to the nascent transcript. The human
TREX complex contains ALY (THOC4; 604171), UAP56 (DDX39B; 142560), and
the human counterpart of the THO complex, which includes THOC5. The
human TREX complex appears to be recruited to spliced mRNAs late in the
splicing reaction rather than by direct cotranscriptional recruitment,
as in yeast (Masuda et al., 2005).

CLONING

Using exon amplification to identify genes in a region of chromosome 22
associated with meningioma (607174), followed by screening a fetal brain
cDNA library, Xie et al. (1993) cloned THOC5, which they called PK1.3.
The deduced 683-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of
78.5 kD. Northern blot analysis detected variable expression of a 2.7-kb
transcript in all tissues examined, with highest expression in skeletal
muscle, followed by heart and pancreas. A 10-kb transcript was also
detected in brain, placenta, and skeletal muscle.

Tamura et al. (1999) cloned mouse Thoc5, which they called Fmip. Mouse
and human THOC5 share 95.6% amino acid identity. Both contain a central
WW domain-binding motif, followed by an acidic region with 3 potential
phosphorylation sites, and a leucine zipper with 4 heptad repeats. They
also have 2 clusters of basic residues that may act as nuclear
localization signals. Northern blot analysis detected Thoc5 in all mouse
tissues examined, with highest expression in testis, liver, and heart.
Among human fetal tissues, THOC5 was highly expressed in kidney and
liver, with lower expression in lung and brain.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis and in vitro protein interaction assays,
Tamura et al. (1999) showed that the N-terminal domain of mouse and
human FMIP interacted with the cytoplasmic domain of activated FMS
(CSF1R; 164770), a tyrosine kinase that functions as a receptor for
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (MCSF, or CSF1; 120420). Binding
induced rapid FMS-mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of FMIP within its
FMS-binding domain, which was followed by dissociation of the 2
molecules. FMIP did not interact with other receptor tyrosine kinases
examined. MCSF treatment induced a bipotential mouse myeloid progenitor
cell line to differentiate into macrophages, but MCSF stimulation in the
presence of overexpressed FMIP induced the same cells to differentiate
into granulocytes. Tamura et al. (1999) concluded that the level of FMIP
determines the differentiation of myeloid progenitor cells into either
macrophages or granulocytes.

Using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometric analysis of HeLa cell
nuclear extracts, Masuda et al. (2005) found that the human TREX complex
contained THO2 (THOC2; 300395), FSAP79 (THOC5), HPR1 (THOC1; 606930),
UAP56, TEX1 (THOC3; 606929), FSAP35 (THOC6; 615403), ALY, and FSAP24
(THOC7; 611965). Immunodepletion and gel-filtration analyses revealed
that THO2, HPR1, FSAP79, FSAP35, and FSAP24 were tightly associated in
the THO complex, whereas UAP56, ALY, and TEX1 were more loosely
associated. Immunoprecipitation of any TREX component efficiently
immunoprecipitated spliced mRNA and cDNA transcripts, but not unspliced
pre-mRNAs. Immunodepletion of any component had no effect on spliceosome
assembly, splicing, or RNA stability. The TREX complex assembled on
every mRNA examined. Mutation analysis showed that the C terminus of ALY
was required for binding of both UAP56 and the THO complex. The C
terminus of UAP56 was sufficient for ALY binding. The N terminus of
UAP56 interacted weakly with the THO complex and TEX1, suggesting that
other regions of UAP56 are required for maximal binding. Masuda et al.
(2005) concluded that recruitment of the human TREX complex is not
directly coupled to transcription, as in yeast.

Pierce et al. (2008) showed that expression of the human oncogenic
fusion protein TEL (ETV6; 600618)/PDGFRB (173410) in murine myeloid
FDCP-Mix cells increased the expression and phosphorylation of Thoc5.
Inhibition of TEL/PDGFRB with imatinib partially reversed Thoc5
upregulation. Elevated Thoc5 expression led to increased levels of
phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PtdInsP3), suggesting that the
elevated PtdInsP3 levels observed with TEL/PDGFRB expression were due,
at least in part, to Thoc5 upregulation. Thoc5 upregulation also
decreased apoptosis, whereas knockdown of Thoc5 via small interfering
RNA led to rapid cell death. TEL/PDGFRB and several other leukemogenic
tyrosine kinases phosphorylated Thoc5 on tyr225.

Carney et al. (2009) showed that MCSF-stimulated maturation of a mouse
myelogenous leukemia cell line was associated with enhanced Thoc5
expression and phosphorylation. Thoc5 also formed a complex with
Cebp-beta (CEBPB; 189965). Ectopic expression of human THOC5 mimicked
MCSF-mediated cell maturation and enhanced the expression of several
myeloid transcription factors, including CEBP-beta. Increased THOC5
expression also mimicked the MCSF-stimulated increase in PtdInsP3.
Inhibition of the THOC5-induced increase in PtdInsP3 abrogated the
effects of elevated Cebp-beta. Carney et al. (2009) concluded that THOC5
stabilizes transcription factors to potentiate monocytic cell line
development.

GENE STRUCTURE

Xie et al. (1993) estimated that the THOC5 gene spans 100 to 150 kb.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and analysis of a YAC and cosmid contig,
Xie et al. (1993) mapped the THOC5 gene to chromosome 22q12, adjacent
and centromeric to the NF2 gene (607379).

ANIMAL MODEL

Using Thoc5-knockout mice, Pierce et al. (2008) showed that Thoc5 was
required to maintain hematopoietic cells in vivo.

REFERENCE 1. Carney, L.; Pierce, A.; Rijnen, M.; Gonzalez Sanchez, M. B.; Hamzah,
H. G.; Zhang, L.; Tamura, T.; Whetton, A. D.: THOC5 couples M-CSF
receptor signaling to transcription factor expression. Cell. Signal. 21:
309-316, 2009.

2. Masuda, S.; Das, R.; Cheng, H.; Hurt, E.; Dorman, N.; Reed, R.
: Recruitment of the human TREX complex to mRNA during splicing. Genes
Dev. 19: 1512-1517, 2005.

3. Pierce, A.; Carney, L.; Hamza, H. G.; Griffiths, J. R.; Zhang,
L.; Whetton, B. A.; Gonzalez Sanchez, M. B.; Tamura, T.; Sternberg,
D.; Whetton, A. D.: THOC5 spliceosome protein: a target for leukaemogenic
tyrosine kinases that affects inositol lipid turnover. Brit. J. Haemat. 141:
641-650, 2008.

4. Tamura, T.; Mancini, A.; Joos, H.; Koch, A.; Hakim, C.; Dumanski,
J.; Weidner, K. M.; Niemann, H.: FMIP, a novel Fms-interacting protein,
affects granulocyte/macrophage differentiation. Oncogene 18: 6488-6495,
1999.

5. Xie, Y.-G.; Han, F.-Y.; Peyrad, M.; Ruttledge, M. H.; Fransson,
I.; DeJong, P.; Collins, J.; Dunham, I.; Nordenskjold, M.; Dumanski,
J. P.: Cloning of a novel, anonymous gene from a megabase-range YAC
and cosmid contig in the neurofibromatosis type 2/meningioma region
on human chromosome 22q12. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 1361-1368, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/2/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/16/2009

EDITED mgross: 09/06/2013
mgross: 11/9/2011
terry: 11/2/2011
mgross: 4/16/2009

608675	TITLE *608675 FUCOKINASE; FUK
;;L-FUCOSE KINASE
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The sugar fucose is present in glycoproteins and glycolipids and is
involved in blood group antigen recognition, inflammation, and
metastasis. Fucokinase participates in a salvage pathway for
reutilization of fucose from oligosaccharide degradation (Hinderlich et
al., 2002).

CLONING

By searching sequence databases using peptides from pig fucokinase as
probes, Hinderlich et al. (2002) identified 2 full-length cDNAs encoding
human FUK. The deduced 990-amino acid FUK protein has a predicted
molecular mass of 107 kD. It contains 5 C-terminal motifs characteristic
of the ATP-binding sites of hexokinases, as well as 31 potential
phosphorylation sites evenly distributed throughout its sequence.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in vitro assays, Hinderlich et al. (2002) showed that recombinant
FUK had fucokinase activity, with the active site located at the C
terminus.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the FUK
gene to chromosome 16 (TMAP RH44544).

REFERENCE 1. Hinderlich, S.; Berger, M.; Blume, A.; Chen, H.; Ghaderi, D.; Bauer,
C.: Identification of human L-fucose kinase amino acid sequence. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 294: 650-654, 2002.

CREATED Laura L. Baxter: 5/20/2004

EDITED mgross: 05/20/2004

606964	TITLE *606964 SERINE/THREONINE PROTEIN KINASE 38; STK38
;;NUCLEAR DBF2-RELATED PROTEIN; NDR
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using degenerate PCR primers corresponding to sequences of fly and worm
serine/threonine kinases to amplify human cDNAs, followed by screening
several cDNA libraries, Millward et al. (1995) isolated a cDNA encoding
STK38, which they called nuclear Dbf2 (yeast)-related protein, or NDR.
The deduced 465-amino acid protein, which is 68% identical to the fly
protein, contains 12 protein kinase catalytic subdomains and a potential
bipartite nuclear localization signal. Northern blot analysis revealed
expression of a 3.9-kb transcript in all tissues tested, with the
possible exception of adult brain. Highest expression was in peripheral
blood leukocytes. Immunoblot and immunofluorescence microscopy
demonstrated predominantly nuclear expression of a 55-kD protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Millward et al. (1995) showed that the kinase activity of STK38 appears
to be restricted to itself.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the STK38
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP WI-6620).

REFERENCE 1. Millward, T.; Cron, P.; Hemmings, B. A.: Molecular cloning and
characterization of a conserved nuclear serine(threonine) protein
kinase. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 5022-5026, 1995.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/22/2002

EDITED mgross: 05/22/2002

603217	TITLE *603217 SYNTAXIN 7; STX7
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

In the cell, the specificity of vesicle transport is thought to occur
through the interaction of vesicle proteins with receptors such as
syntaxins on a particular target membrane. See alpha-SNAP (603215).
Pep12p, or Vps6p, is a syntaxin identified in S. cerevisiae and in
Arabidopsis that is required for the sorting of soluble hydrolases from
the Golgi complex to the vacuole. By searching an EST database for human
homologs of Pep12p, Wang et al. (1997) identified partial syntaxin-7
(STX7) cDNAs. Using a partial cDNA as a probe, they isolated a fetal
brain cDNA corresponding to the entire coding region of syntaxin-7. The
deduced 261-amino acid STX7 protein contains a putative C-terminal
transmembrane domain and 3 coiled-coil domains. The human protein shares
34% and 25% sequence identity with Arabidopsis and yeast Pep12p,
respectively. In vitro, recombinant protein bound specifically to
alpha-SNAP, a key regulator of transport vesicle fusion at multiple
stages of the secretory pathway. Northern blot analysis revealed that
syntaxin-7 was expressed as 1.8- and 3.6-kb mRNAs in all tissues tested.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunocytochemistry, fluorescence, and confocal microscopy,
Collins et al. (2002) showed that STX7 and STX13 (STX12; 606892) are
involved in the ordered fusion of endosomes and lysosomes with the
phagosome, where phagocytic cells kill and degrade internalized foreign
particles. STX12 is localized to the recycling endosome compartment,
whereas STX7 is found in late endosomes and lysosomes and both are
recruited to the phagosome. However, STX12 is acquired earlier before
rapidly recycling off the phagosome, whereas STX7 is recruited later and
continues to accumulate throughout the phagosome maturation process.

MAPPING

By analysis of a human monochromosomal panel, Wang et al. (1997) mapped
the STX7 gene to chromosome 6.

REFERENCE 1. Collins, R. F.; Schreiber, A. D.; Grinstein, S.; Trimble, W. S.
: Syntaxins 13 and 7 function at distinct steps during phagocytosis. J.
Immun. 169: 3250-3256, 2002.

2. Wang, H.; Frelin, L.; Pevsner, J.: Human syntaxin 7: a Pep12p/Vps6p
homologue implicated in vesicle trafficking to lysosomes. Gene 199:
39-48, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/5/2003

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 10/27/1998

EDITED carol: 01/31/2007
cwells: 8/5/2003
alopez: 12/1/1998
alopez: 10/27/1998

601926	TITLE *601926 THYROID HORMONE-RESPONSIVE SPOT14, RAT, HOMOLOG OF; THRSP
;;S14
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Expression of the rat and mouse Spot14 (S14) gene has been extensively
studied in liver and adipose tissue in which its regulation is under the
intricate control of several nutritional and hormonal factors (Clarke et
al., 1990; Jump et al., 1994; Liu and Towle, 1994). S14 has been
implicated in lipogenesis. Moreover, its expression is altered in
streptozotocin-induced diabetes. Grillasca et al. (1997) cloned the
human gene (symbolized THRSP, for 'thyroid hormone-responsive Spot14
homolog') and found that it has the same organization as the rat gene
and predicts a highly conserved amino acid sequence (more than 80%). The
THRSP gene is expressed in human liver and adipocytes, particularly in
lipomatous nodules.

MAPPING

Taviaux et al. (1997) mapped the THRSP gene to chromosome 11q13.5-q14.1
by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Durkin et al. (1994) tentatively
mapped the 'Spot 14' gene to the human X chromosome. By fluorescence in
situ hybridization, however, Moncur et al. (1997) mapped the THRSP gene
to 11q13.5, thus confirming the assignment by Taviaux et al. (1997).

Enhanced long-chain fatty acid synthesis may occur in breast cancer,
where it is necessary for tumor growth and predicts a poor prognosis.
The S14 protein functions to activate genes encoding the enzymes of
fatty acid synthesis. Amplification of chromosome region 11q13, where
the THRSP gene resides, also predicts a poor prognosis in breast tumors.
Moncur et al. (1998) localized the THRSP gene between markers D11S906
and D11S937, at the telomeric end of the amplified region at 11q13, and
found that it was amplified and expressed in breast cancer-derived cell
lines. Other findings supported a role for the protein as a determinant
of tumor lipid metabolism. Expression of S14 provided a pathophysiologic
link between 2 prognostic indicators in breast cancer: enhanced
lipogenesis and 11q13 amplification.

GENE FUNCTION

Knobloch et al. (2013) demonstrated that fatty acid synthase (FASN;
600212), the key enzyme of de novo lipogenesis, is highly active in
adult neural stem and progenitor cells (NSPCs) and that conditional
deletion of Fasn in mouse NSPCs impairs adult neurogenesis. The rate of
de novo lipid synthesis and subsequent proliferation of NSPCs is
regulated by Spot14 (601926), a gene implicated in lipid metabolism,
that Knobloch et al. (2013) found to be selectively expressed in low
proliferating adult NSPCs. Spot14 reduces the availability of
malonyl-CoA, which is an essential substrate for Fasn to fuel
lipogenesis. Knobloch et al. (2013) concluded that they identified a
functional coupling between the regulation of lipid metabolism and adult
NSPC proliferation.

REFERENCE 1. Clarke, S. D.; Armstrong, M. K.; Jump, D. B.: Nutritional control
of rat liver fatty acid synthase and S14 mRNA abundance. J. Nutr. 120:
218-224, 1990.

2. Durkin, A. S.; Nierman, W. C.; Zoghbi, H.; Jones, C.; Kozak, C.
A.; Maglott, D. R.: Chromosome assignment of human brain expressed
sequence tags (ESTs) by analyzing fluorescently labeled PCR products
from hybrid cell panels. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 65: 86-91, 1994.

3. Grillasca, J. P.; Gastaldi, M.; Khiri, H.; Dace, A.; Peyrol, N.;
Reynier, P.; Torresani, J.; Planells, R.: Cloning and initial characterization
of human and mouse Spot 14 genes. FEBS Lett. 401: 38-42, 1997.

4. Jump, D. B.; Clarke, S. D.; Thelen, A.; Liimatta, M.: Coordinate
regulation of glycolytic and lipogenic gene expression by polyunsaturated
fatty acids. J. Lipid Res. 35: 1076-1084, 1994.

5. Knobloch, M.; Braun, S. M. G.; Zurkirchen, L.; von Schoultz, C.;
Zamboni, N.; Arauzo-Bravo, M. J; Kovacs, W. J.; Karalay, O.; Suter,
U.; Machado, R. A. C.; Roccio, M.; Lutolf, M. P.; Semenkovich, C.
F.; Jessberger, S.: Metabolic control of adult neural stem cell activity
by Fasn-dependent lipogenesis. Nature 493: 226-230, 2013.

6. Liu, H. C.; Towle, H. C.: Functional synergism between multiple
thyroid hormone response elements regulates hepatic expression of
the rat S14 gene. Molec. Endocr. 8: 1021-1037, 1994.

7. Moncur, J. T.; Park, J. P.; Maloney, M.; Mohandas, T. K.; Kinlaw,
W. B.: Assignment of the 'Spot 14' gene (THRSP) to human chromosome
band 11q13.5 by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 78:
131-132, 1997.

8. Moncur, J. T.; Park, J. P.; Memoli, V. A.; Mohandas, T. K.; Kinlaw,
W. B.: The 'Spot 14' gene resides in the telomeric end of the 11q13
amplicon and is expressed in lipogenic breast cancers: implications
for control of tumor metabolism. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 6989-6994,
1998.

9. Taviaux, S.; Planells, R.; Gastaldi, M.; Torresani, J.; Grillasca,
J. P.: Assignment of thyroid hormone responsive SPOT 14 homolog (THRSP)
to human chromosome 11 bands q13.5-q14.1 by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 76: 219-220, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 05/16/2013
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/30/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/2/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/25/1997

EDITED alopez: 05/16/2013
alopez: 11/29/2010
alopez: 7/6/1998
terry: 6/30/1998
dholmes: 12/30/1997
terry: 12/2/1997
alopez: 8/4/1997
terry: 7/25/1997

610322	TITLE *610322 TRANSCRIPTIONAL REGULATING FACTOR 1; TRERF1
;;TRANSCRIPTIONAL REGULATING PROTEIN, 132-KD; TREP132
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cytochrome P450scc (CYP11A1; 118485) is a mitochondrial enzyme that
catalyzes conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone, the first step in
the synthesis of all steroid hormones. TRERF1 is a zinc finger protein
that activates CYP11A1 expression in steroidal tissue and has a role in
cell cycle progression (Gizard et al., 2001, 2005).

CLONING

By screening a placenta cDNA library with multimerized copies of
nucleotides -155 to -131 of the CYP11A1 promoter, followed by screening
a second placenta cDNA library, Gizard et al. (2001) cloned TRERF1,
which they called TREP132. The deduced 1,200-amino acid protein contains
a glutamine-rich region, 2 proline-rich regions, an acidic region, and 3
C2H2-type zinc finger motifs. An alternatively spliced transcript with a
longer 3-prime UTR encodes the same protein. Northern blot analysis
detected transcripts of 4.4 and 7.5 kb abundantly expressed in thymus,
testis, adrenal cortex, and a human choriocarcinoma cell line. Weak
expression was detected in all other tissues examined except pancreas
and small intestine. In vitro transcription and translation resulted in
a protein with an apparent molecular mass of about 132 kD, in agreement
with the predicted size. Immunocytochemical analysis of transfected HeLa
cells revealed epitope-tagged TREP132 in the nucleus.

GENE FUNCTION

Using band-shift analysis, Gizard et al. (2001) confirmed that TREP132
interacted with nucleotides -155 to -131 of the CYP11A1 promoter.
Transfection of TREP132 cDNA in human placental and adrenal cell lines
increased expression of a reporter construct controlled by the CYP11A1
promoter in a dose-dependent manner. Coexpression of CBP (CREBBP;
600140)/p300 (EP300; 602700) with TREP132 had an additive effect on
promoter activity, and immunoprecipitation analysis demonstrated that
the proteins interacted in HeLa cells.

Gizard et al. (2002) found that overexpression of TREP132 in a human
adrenal carcinoma cell line increased production of pregnenolone.
Coexpression of SF1 (NR5A1; 184757) and TREP132 increased CYP11A1
promoter activity, and pull-down, 2-hybrid, and coimmunoprecipitation
analyses confirmed SF1-TREP132 interaction. Deletion and mutation
analysis showed that the proximal activation domain and AF2 hexamer
motif of SF1 interacted with the LxxLL motif in the N-terminal region of
TREP132. Coexpression of CBP/p300 with SF1 and TREP132 resulted in a
synergistic effect on CYP11A1 promoter activity.

Using small interfering RNA, Gizard et al. (2005) found that TREP132
knockdown in HeLa cells resulted in increased G1 to S cell cycle
progression. They showed that TREP132 acted as a cofactor for SP1
(189906) to increase expression of p21 (CDKN1A; 116899) and p27 (CDKN1B;
600778). As a consequence, TREP132 lowered kinase activities of G1
cyclin (CCNG1; 601578)/CDK (see CDC2; 116940) complexes, decreased
retinoblastoma protein (RB1; 614041) phosphorylation, and halted G1 to S
progression. Profiling of human breast tumor samples showed that
expression of TREP132 correlated with p21 and p27 levels and was
associated with lower tumor incidence and aggressiveness.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the TRERF1
gene to chromosome 6 (TMAP RH94356).

REFERENCE 1. Gizard, F.; Lavallee, B.; DeWitte, F.; Hum, D. W.: A novel zinc
finger protein TReP-132 interacts with CBP/p300 to regulate human
CYP11A1 gene expression. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 33881-33892, 2001.

2. Gizard, F.; Lavallee, B.; DeWitte, F.; Teissier, E.; Staels, B.;
Hum, D. W.: The transcriptional regulating protein of 132 kDa (TReP-132)
enhances P450scc gene transcription through interaction with steroidogenic
factor-1 in human adrenal cells. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 39144-39155,
2002.

3. Gizard, F.; Robillard, R.; Barbier, O.; Quatannens, B.; Faucompre,
A.; Revillion, F.; Peyrat, J.-P.; Staels, B.; Hum, D. W.: TReP-132
controls cell proliferation by regulating the expression of the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitors p21(WAF1/Cip1) and p27(Kip1). Molec. Cell. Biol. 25:
4335-4348, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/15/2006

EDITED alopez: 06/17/2011
mgross: 8/15/2006

602836	TITLE *602836 PURINERGIC RECEPTOR P2X, LIGAND-GATED ION CHANNEL, 5; P2RX5
;;P2X5R; P2X5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mammalian P2X receptors, such as P2RX5, belong to a multigene family of
nonselective cation channels activated by extracellular ATP.

CLONING

Le et al. (1997) identified a human fetal brain cDNA related to the rat
P2X5 gene. The predicted 422-amino acid human P2X5R protein shares 62%
identity with rat P2X5, but has only 1 of the 2 transmembrane domains
found in other P2X receptor subunits. In vitro translation of the human
P2X5R cDNA produced a protein that migrated at 49 kD by SDS-PAGE. Using
immunofluorescence, Le et al. (1997) showed that P2X5R localizes to the
plasma membrane when expressed in human embryonic kidney cells.
Quantitative dot blots revealed that P2X5R expression is highest in
brain and immune system and is developmentally regulated. Le et al.
(1997) identified a shorter cDNA in fetal and adult brain that resulted
from alternative splicing.

By RT-PCR Adrian et al. (2000) found that 2 splice variants of P2X5
differing by 72 bp were highly expressed in normal blood leukocytes and
more weakly expressed in a promyelocytic leukemia cell line.

GENE FUNCTION

Le et al. (1997) found that heterologous expression of P2X5 in Xenopus
oocytes did not yield functional channels. However, expression of a
chimera containing the human P2X5R N-terminal domain and rat P2X5
C-terminal domain led to formation of cationic ATP-gated ion channels.

Adrian et al. (2000) analyzed the expression of several purinergic
receptors during differentiation in a promyelocytic leukemia cell line.
Granulocytic differentiation was induced by dimethylsulfoxide, and a
monocytic/macrophage phenotype was induced by phorbol esters. Upon
granulocytic differentiation, P2X5 expression increased 2- to 5-fold.
During monocytic differentiation, expression was upregulated 10- to
14-fold.

Ischemic pain, such as that caused by a heart attack or a 30-second
sprint, occurs when muscle gets too little oxygen for its metabolic
need. By whole-cell patch-clamp recordings of rat dorsal root sensory
ganglia innervating thigh muscle, Birdsong et al. (2010) found that ATP
at micromolar concentrations potentiated Asic3 currents evoked at pH
values that occur during muscle ischemia. Coexpression and pharmacologic
profiling indicated that P2x5 potentiated the Asic3 (ACCN3; 611741)
current. Potentiation appeared to be due to physical proximity between
Asic3 and P2x5 and was independent of intracellular calcium, direction
of the P2x5 current, and ATP hydrolysis. Birdsong et al. (2010)
hypothesized that ATP released from ischemic muscle binds to quiescent
P2X5 receptors in a complex with ASIC3 and enhances ASIC3 sensitivity to
a drop in extracellular pH.

MAPPING

By shotgun sequencing, Touchman et al. (2000) identified the P2RX5 gene
within a BAC contig covering chromosome 17p13.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using cytotoxic T-lymphocyte (CTL) assays and genetic linkage and
real-time PCR analyses, de Rijke et al. (2005) identified a minor
histocompatibility antigen, which they termed lymphoid-restricted
histocompatibility antigen-1 (LHR1), that resulted from a homozygous
frameshift polymorphism in exon 3 of the P2X5 gene in a male donor of
HLA-identical bone marrow whose sister was being treated for chronic
myelogenous leukemia. An epitope of LRH1 was presented by HLA-B7 to
specific CD8 (see 186910)-positive CTLs. Real-time PCR and RT-PCR
analysis of normal tissues revealed significant P2X5 expression in
lymphoid lineage cells, with little or no expression in myeloid cells.
Low to moderate expression was detected in adult neuronal and muscular
tissues, and no expression was detected in organs targeted by
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD; see 614395) (skin, liver, colon, and
small intestine). De Rijke et al. (2005) concluded that LRH1-specific
CD8-positive cytotoxic T cells have a role in selective
graft-versus-leukemia reactivity in the absence of graft-versus-host
disease.

REFERENCE 1. Adrian, K.; Bernhard, M. K.; Breitinger, H.-G.; Ogilvie, A.: Expression
of purinergic receptors (ionotropic P2X1-7 and metabotropic P2Y1-11)
during myeloid differentiation of HL60 cells. Biochim. Biophys. Res.
Acta 1492: 127-138, 2000.

2. Birdsong, W. T.; Fierro, L.; Williams, F. G.; Spelta, V.; Naves,
L. A.; Knowles, M.; Marsh-Haffner, J.; Adelman, J. P.; Almers, W.;
Elde, R. P.; McCleskey, E. W.: Sensing muscle ischemia: coincident
detection of acid and ATP via interplay of two ion channels. Neuron 68:
739-749, 2010.

3. de Rijke, B.; van Horssen-Zoetbrood, A.; Beekman, J. M.; Otterud,
B.; Maas, F.; Woestenenk, R.; Kester, M.; Leppert, M.; Schattenberg,
A. V.; de Witte, T.; van de Wiel-van Kemenade, E.; Dolstra, H.: A
frameshift polymorphism in P2X5 elicits an allogenic cytotoxic T lymphocyte
response associated with remission of chronic myeloid leukemia. J.
Clin. Invest. 115: 3506-3516, 2005.

4. Le, K.-T.; Paquet, M.; Nouel, D.; Babinski, K.; Seguela, P.: Primary
structure and expression of a naturally truncated human P2X ATP receptor
subunit from brain and immune system. FEBS Lett. 418: 195-199, 1997.

5. Touchman, J. W.; Anikster, Y.; Dietrich, N. L.; Maduro, V. V. B.;
McDowell, G.; Shotelersuk, V.; Bouffard, G. G.; Beckstrom-Sternberg,
S. M.; Gahl, W. A.; Green, E. D.: The genomic region encompassing
the nephropathic cystinosis gene (CTNS): complete sequencing of a
200-kb segment and discovery of a novel gene within the common cystinosis-causing
deletion. Genome Res. 10: 165-173, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/31/2011
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/10/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/7/2005

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/13/1998

EDITED mgross: 12/16/2011
mgross: 9/13/2011
terry: 8/31/2011
joanna: 2/2/2009
mgross: 2/10/2006
mgross: 3/7/2005
alopez: 7/13/1998

608159	TITLE *608159 PROTEASE, SERINE, 21; PRSS21
;;EOSINOPHIL SERINE PROTEASE 1; ESP1;;
TESTISIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PRSS21 is a membrane-type serine protease that shows highest expression
in premeiotic testicular germ cells.

CLONING

By PCR of an eosinophil cDNA library using degenerate primers based on
the active site of serine proteases, followed by 5-prime and 3-prime
RACE, Inoue et al. (1998) cloned PRSS21, which they called ESP1. The
deduced 314-amino acid ESP1 precursor protein has a calculated molecular
mass of 33.1 kD, and the 273-amino acid active form has a calculated
molecular mass of 30.6 kD. ESP1 contains an N-terminal signal peptide, a
propeptide, an active site catalytic triad of conserved his, asp, and
ser residues, and a hydrophobic C terminus, which suggests that ESP1 is
a membrane-type serine protease. ESP1 shares about 41% amino acid
identity with prostasin (PRSS8; 600823). Northern blot analysis detected
a 1.2- to 1.4-kb transcript in HeLa cells. RT-PCR detected high
expression of ESP1 in testis and prostate, moderate expression in lung,
pancreas, and spleen, and low expression in thymus, colon, and
peripheral blood leukocytes. No expression was detected in kidney and
skeletal muscle. Western blot analysis of transfected human embryonic
kidney cells showed that ESP1 has an apparent molecular mass of 35 kD.

Using PCR, Hooper et al. (1999) cloned PRSS21, which they designated
testisin, from a HeLa cell cDNA library. They identified 3 putative
N-glycosylation sites and 10 conserved cysteine residues in the PRSS21
protein. By analogy to other serine proteases, Hooper et al. (1999)
concluded that 8 of these cysteines likely form disulfide bridges within
the catalytic region, while the remaining 2 probably link the propeptide
and catalytic regions. PRSS21 shares 26 to 38% amino acid identity with
hepsin (142440), acrosin (102480), chymotrypsin (see 118890), and PSA
(176820). Hooper et al. (1999) identified a PRSS21 splice variant that
encodes a 312-amino acid precursor lacking 2 residues near the catalytic
histidine. Northern blot analysis of several human tissues detected a
1.4-kb transcript only in testis. RNA dot blot analysis detected
abundant expression in testis and weak expression in salivary gland,
bone marrow, lung, and trachea. Immunostaining of normal testicular
tissue showed PRSS21 expression in the cytoplasm and on the plasma
membrane of premeiotic germ cells. No staining was detected in 8 germ
cell-derived testicular tumors.

GENE STRUCTURE

Inoue et al. (1999) and Hooper et al. (2000) determined that the PRSS21
gene contains 6 exons and spans 4.5 to 4.6 kb. Using a reporter plasmid,
Inoue et al. (1999) identified a GC-rich 5-prime flanking region
containing an AP1 (see 165160)/SP1 (189906)-binding site as the minimum
promoter for expression in HeLa cells. Hooper et al. (2000) determined
that the promoter region lacks a TATA consensus sequence but contains a
CCAAT box and a CpG island, as well as binding sites for several
testis-specific elements. They noted that the PRSS21 gene has a
structure similar to that of the PRSS8 gene, which maps to chromosome
16p11.2, near PRSS21, suggesting that the 2 genes may have evolved
through gene duplication.

MAPPING

By FISH, Hooper et al. (1999) mapped the PRSS21 gene to chromosome
16p13.3, a region associated with allelic imbalance and loss of
heterozygosity in sporadic testicular tumors. Inoue et al. (1999) mapped
the PRSS21 gene to chromosome 16p13.3 by radiation hybrid analysis and
FISH.

REFERENCE 1. Hooper, J. D.; Bowen, N.; Marshall, H.; Cullen, L. M.; Sood, R.;
Daniels, R.; Stuttgen, M. A.; Normyle, J. F.; Higgs, D. R.; Kastner,
D. L.; Ogbourne, S. M.; Pera, M. F.; Jazwinska, E. C.; Antalis, T.
M.: Localization, expression and genomic structure of the gene encoding
the human serine protease testisin. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1492:
63-71, 2000.

2. Hooper, J. D.; Nicol, D. L.; Dickinson, J. L.; Eyre, H. J.; Scarman,
A. L.; Normyle, J. F.; Stuttgen, M. A.; Douglas, M. L.; Loveland,
K. A. L.; Sutherland, G. R.; Antalis, T. M.: Testisin, a new human
serine proteinase expressed by premeiotic testicular germ cells and
lost in testicular germ cell tumors. Cancer Res. 59: 3199-3205,
1999.

3. Inoue, M.; Isobe, M.; Itoyama, T.; Kido, H.: Structural analysis
of esp-1 gene (PRSS 21). Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 266: 564-568,
1999.

4. Inoue, M.; Kanbe, N.; Kurosawa, M.; Kido, H.: Cloning and tissue
distribution of a novel serine protease esp-1 from human eosinophils. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 252: 307-312, 1998.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/9/2003

EDITED mgross: 10/09/2003

609631	TITLE *609631 DEAD BOX POLYPEPTIDE 58; DDX58
;;DEAD/H BOX 58;;
RETINOIC ACID-INDUCIBLE GENE I; RIGI
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

DDX58 is an RNA helicase that belongs to the DEAD/H box family. Members
of the DEAD/H box family have diverse roles in regulating gene
expression and cellular processes (Imaizumi et al., 2002).

CLONING

Using subtractive hybridization to identify lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-inducible genes in endothelial cells, followed by RACE, Imaizumi
et al. (2002) isolated a cDNA encoding DDX58, which they called RIGI.
Imaizumi et al. (2002) noted that RIGI had been identified in 1997 as a
retinoic acid-inducible gene in a promyelocytic leukemia cell line
(GenBank GENBANK AF038963). The predicted 925-amino acid protein has a
calculated molecular mass of 101 kD and belongs to the DEAD/H box
family. RIGI contains a GxGKT motif, suggesting it is an RNA helicase.
Northern blot analysis of endothelial cells detected a 3.0-kb transcript
only after LPS stimulation.

Yoneyama et al. (2004) noted that RIGI has 2 copies of a caspase
recruitment domain (CARD) at its N terminus in addition to its
C-terminal helicase domain.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the DDX58 gene to chromosome 9p21.1 based on an
alignment of the DDX58 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF038963) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

GENE FUNCTION

Using subtractive hybridization, Imaizumi et al. (2002) showed that
LPS-stimulated endothelial cells expressed RIGI and COX2 (PTSG2;
600262). Northern blot, Western blot, and RT-PCR analyses showed that
RIGI mRNA and protein were expressed in endothelial cells only after LPS
stimulation in a concentration-dependent manner. Overexpression of RIGI
selectively upregulated expression of COX2 mRNA and protein in
transfected bladder cancer cells and induced COX2 promoter activity in
endothelial cells.

By RT-PCR and Western blot analysis, Imaizumi et al. (2004) showed that
gamma-interferon (IFNG; 147570)-stimulated umbilical artery smooth
muscle cells (SMCs) expressed RIGI mRNA and protein. Immunohistochemical
and confocal microscopy analyses by Imaizumi et al. (2004) demonstrated
cytoplasmic expression of RIGI in SMCs in vivo. Further immunoblot and
microscopic analyses indicated that IFNG stimulated expression of RIGI
in umbilical vein. RIGI expression was also detected in normal human
pulmonary endothelial cells.

Cui et al. (2004) detected RIGI expression in an IFNG-stimulated breast
cancer cell line. Overexpression of RIGI upregulated expression of ISG15
(G1P2; 147571).

Yoneyama et al. (2004) showed that double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) induced
RIGI expression in an ATPase-dependent manner and augmented production
of type I interferon (e.g., IFNB; 147640). A truncated form of RIGI
lacking the helicase domain but containing the tandem CARD motifs
transduced signals leading to activation of IRF3 (603734) and NFKB (see
164011). Using RNA interference, Yoneyama et al. (2004) found that RIGI
was essential for virus-induced expression of IRF3. They concluded that
RIGI is essential for detection and eradication of replicating viral
genomes.

Using a hepatitis C virus (HCV; see 609532) replicon-expressing cell
line, Breiman et al. (2005) showed that the HCV NS3/4A protease impaired
IFNB production in both TRIF (TICAM1; 607601)-dependent and
TRIF-independent pathways. They demonstrated that impairment of the
TRIF-independent pathway resulted from inhibition of RIGI-mediated IFNB
promoter activation by NS3/4A. Breiman et al. (2005) proposed that RIGI
is a key factor in the TRIF-independent, NS3/4A-sensitive pathway of
IFNB activation.

Li et al. (2005) found that hepatoma cells did not show Toll-like
receptor-3 (TLR3; 603029)-dependent IFNB activation in response to a
dsRNA analog, poly(I-C), whereas nonneoplastic hepatocytes showed robust
TLR3-dependent IFNB expression in response to poly(I-C). In contrast to
poly(I-C), both hepatoma and normal hepatocyte cell lines produced IFNB
in response to Sendai virus in a TLR3-independent, RIGI-dependent
manner. Silencing of RIGI expression impaired the response to Sendai
virus, but not to poly(I-C). Li et al. (2005) concluded that hepatocytes
contain 2 distinct antiviral signaling pathways leading to type I
interferon expression, one dependent upon TLR3 and the other dependent
upon RIGI.

Hornung et al. (2006) demonstrated that the 5-prime-triphosphate end of
RNA generated by viral polymerases is responsible for RIGI-mediated
detection of RNA molecules. Detection of 5-prime-triphosphate RNA is
abrogated by capping of the 5-prime-triphosphate end or by nucleoside
modification of RNA, both occurring during posttranscriptional RNA
processing in eukaryotes. Genomic RNA prepared from a negative-strand
RNA virus and RNA prepared from virus-infected cells (but not from
noninfected cells) triggered a potent interferon-alpha (see IFNA;
147660) response in a phosphatase-sensitive manner.
Five-prime-triphosphate RNA directly binds to RIGI. Thus, uncapped
5-prime-triphosphate RNA (termed 3pRNA) present in viruses known to be
recognized by RIGI, but absent in viruses known to be detected by MDA5
(606951), such as the picornaviruses, serves as the molecular signature
for the detection of viral infection by RIGI.

Pichlmair et al. (2006) showed that influenza A virus infection does not
generate dsRNA and that RIGI is activated by viral genomic
single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) bearing 5-prime-phosphates. This is blocked
by the influenza protein nonstructured protein 1 (NS1), which is found
in a complex with RIGI in infected cells. Pichlmair et al. (2006)
concluded that these results identified RIGI as a ssRNA sensor and
potential target of viral immune evasion and suggested that its ability
to sense 5-prime-phosphorylated RNA evolved in the innate immune system
as a means of discriminating between self and nonself.

Gack et al. (2007) reported that the N-terminal caspase recruitment
domains (CARDs) of RIGI undergo robust ubiquitination induced by TRIM25
(600453) in mammalian cells. The C-terminal SPRY domain of TRIM25
interacts with the N-terminal CARDs of RIGI; this interaction
effectively delivers the lys63-linked ubiquitin moiety to the N-terminal
CARDs of RIGI, resulting in a marked increase in RIGI downstream
signaling activity. The lys172 residue of RIGI is critical for efficient
TRIM25-mediated ubiquitination and for MAVS (609676) binding, as well as
the ability of RIGI to induce antiviral signal transduction. Gene
targeting demonstrated that TRIM25 is essential not only for RIGI
ubiquitination but also for RIGI-mediated interferon-beta production and
antiviral activity in response to RNA virus infection. Thus, Gack et al.
(2007) demonstrated that TRIM25 E3 ubiquitin ligase induces the
lys63-linked ubiquitination of RIGI, which is crucial for the cytosolic
RIGI signaling pathway to elicit host antiviral innate immunity.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Arimoto et al. (2007) isolated RNF125
(610432) as a ubiquitin-like protein with E3-ligase activity that
interacted with the E2 enzyme UBCH8 (UBE2L6; 603890). In addition, they
found that RIGI interacted with UBCH8 and RNF125. Interaction of RIGI
with RNF125 required the CARD domain and C-terminal region of RIGI.
Downregulation of RNF125 by small interfering RNA reduced the levels of
RIGI and prevented RIGI polyubiquitination. Mutation of cys72 and cys75
of RNF125 to ala abolished its ability to mediate RIGI ubiquitination.
IFNA upregulated expression of RNF125, UBCH5 (UBE2D1; 602961), and RIGI.
Arimoto et al. (2007) concluded that RNF125 ubiquitination function
serves as a negative regulatory route for IFN production.

Saito et al. (2007) found that RIGI and LGP2 (608588), but not MDA5,
efficiently bound HCV RNA to confer IFNB expression. After HCV infection
and RNA binding, RIGI shifted from a monomer to a self-associating
protein that also interacted through its CARD domain with IPS1
(HISPPD2A; 610979) to signal IRF3- and NFKB-responsive genes. Mutation
analysis showed that a RIGI C-terminal repressor domain (RD) was
required for RIGI multimerization and IPS1 interaction. Deletion of the
RD resulted in constitutive signaling to the IFNB promoter, whereas
expression of the RD alone prevented signaling and increased cellular
permissiveness to HCV. Saito et al. (2007) identified an analogous RD in
LGP2 that interacted in trans with RIGI to ablate self-association and
signaling. They concluded that RIGI is a pathogen recognition receptor
for HCV and that its RD is a key modulator of host defenses controlling
HCV infection and production. Saito et al. (2007) proposed that
modulation of RIGI/LGP2 interaction dynamics may have therapeutic
implications for immune regulation.

By RT-PCR, Western blot, and fluorescence microscopy analyses, Zhang et
al. (2008) detected increased expression of RIGI in human and mouse
myeloid leukemia cells upon retinoic acid-induced terminal granulocytic
differentiation, suggesting that RIGI expression is developmentally
regulated along with myeloid differentiation. Mice lacking Rigi
developed progressive granulocytosis and chronic myeloid leukemia (see
CML; 608232). The progressive granulopoiesis was associated with reduced
expression of Icsbp1 (601565). Zhang et al. (2008) concluded that RIGI
has a critical regulatory role in modulating the generation and
differentiation of granulocytes.

RIGI is a cytosolic multidomain protein that detects viral RNA and
elicits an antiviral immune response. Two N-terminal CARD domains
transmit the signal, and the regulatory domain prevents signaling in the
absence of viral RNA. Five-prime-triphosphate and dsRNA are 2 molecular
patterns that enable RIGI to discriminate pathogenic from self-RNA.
Using single-molecule protein-induced fluorescence enhancement, Myong et
al. (2009) discovered a robust adenosine 5-prime triphosphate-powered
dsRNA translocation activity of RIGI. The CARDs dramatically suppress
translocation in the absence of 5-prime-triphosphate, and the activation
by 5-prime-triphosphate triggers RIGI to translocate preferentially on
dsRNA in cis. Myong et al. (2009) concluded that this functional
integration of 2 RNA molecular patterns may provide a means to
specifically sense and counteract replicating viruses.

Oshiumi et al. (2010) stated that RIPLET (RNF135; 611358) mediates
lys63-linked polyubiquitination of the RIGI C-terminal repressor domain
and N-terminal CARDs. They found that fibroblasts, macrophages, and
dendritic cells from Riplet -/- mice were defective for production of
IFN and other cytokines in response to infection with RNA viruses, but
not DNA viruses. The lack of Riplet abolished Rigi activation during RNA
virus infection, and Riplet -/- mice were more susceptible to vesicular
stomatitis virus infection. Oshiumi et al. (2010) concluded that RIPLET
is essential for regulating the RIGI-mediated innate immune response
against RNA virus infection in vivo.

Kok et al. (2011) noted that RIGI shares structural similarity with
DICER (606241), an RNase III-type nuclease that mediates RNA
interference and requires dsRNA-binding partners, such as PACT (PRKRA;
603424), for optimal activity. They showed that PACT physically bound to
the C-terminal repression domain of RIGI and stimulated RIGI-induced
type I IFN production. PACT potentiated RIGI activation by poly(I:C) and
helped sustain antiviral responses. Kok et al. (2011) concluded that
PACT has an important role in initiating and sustaining RIGI-dependent
antiviral responses.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

To understand the synergy between the helicase and the repressor domain
for RNA binding, and the contribution of ATP hydrolysis to RIGI
activation, Jiang et al. (2011) determined the structure of the human
RIGI helicase repressor domain in complex with dsRNA and an ATP analog.
The helicase repressor domain organizes into a ring around dsRNA,
capping one end, while contacting both strands using previously
uncharacterized motifs to recognize dsRNA. Small-angle x-ray scattering,
limited proteolysis, and differential scanning fluorimetry indicated
that RIGI is in an extended and flexible conformation that compacts upon
binding RNA. These results provided a detailed view of the role of
helicase in dsRNA recognition, the synergy between the repressor domain
and the helicase for RNA binding, and the organization of full-length
RIGI bound to dsRNA, and provided evidence of a conformational change
upon RNA binding. The RIGI helicase repressor domain structure is
consistent with dsRNA translocation without unwinding and cooperative
binding to RNA. The structure yielded unprecedented insight into innate
immunity and had a broader impact on other areas of biology, including
RNA interference and DNA repair, which utilize homologous helicase
domains with DICER (606241) and FANCM (609644).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Because of the 2 to 10% primary failure rate of measles vaccination and
the importance of innate immunity to prevent or reduce viral replication
and spread until the adaptive immune response to eliminate the virus,
Haralambieva et al. (2011) performed a comprehensive candidate gene
association study in a racially diverse cohort of 745 healthy
schoolchildren in Minnesota who had had 2 doses of measles vaccine.
Variants within DDX58 were associated with measles-specific antibody
variations in Caucasians. Four DDX58 polymorphisms in high linkage
disequilibrium were also associated with variations in measles-specific
IFNG and IL2 (147680) secretion in Caucasians. ADAR (146920) variants
also had a role in regulating measles-specific IFNG responses in
Caucasians. Two intronic OAS1 (164350) SNPs were associated with
increased neutralizing antibody levels in African Americans.
Haralambieva et al. (2011) concluded that multiple innate immunity genes
and genetic variants are likely involved in modulating the adaptive
immune response to live attenuated measles vaccine in Caucasians and
African Americans.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kato et al. (2005) generated Rigi-deficient mice and, using cells from
these mice, found that Rigi, and not the TLR system, played an essential
role in antiviral responses in fibroblasts and conventional dendritic
cells (DCs). In contrast, antiviral responses in plasmacytoid DCs, which
produce abundant IFNA (147660), used the TLR system, principally Tlr7
(300365) and Tlr9 (605474), rather than Rigi. The Rigi -/- mice rarely
survived until birth, and histologic examination of embryonic day-12.5
mice showed massive liver degeneration. Survivors had retarded growth
and died within 3 weeks after birth.

Using mice deficient in MDA5 (606951), Kato et al. (2006) showed that
MDA5 and RIG1 recognize different types of double-stranded RNAs: MDA5
recognizes polyinosine-polycytidylic acid and RIG1 detects in vitro
transcribed double-stranded RNAs. RNA viruses are also differentially
recognized by RIG1 and MDA5. Kato et al. (2006) found that RIG1 is
essential for the production of interferons in response to RNA viruses
including paramyxoviruses, influenza virus, and Japanese encephalitis
virus, whereas MDA5 is critical for picornavirus detection. Furthermore,
Rig1-null and Mda5-null mice are highly susceptible to infection with
these respective RNA viruses compared to control mice. Kato et al.
(2006) concluded that, taken together, their data show that RIG1 and
MDA5 distinguish different RNA viruses and are critical for host
antiviral responses.

REFERENCE 1. Arimoto, K.; Takahashi, H.; Hishiki, T.; Konishi, H.; Fujita, T.;
Shimotohno, K.: Negative regulation of the RIG-I signaling by the
ubiquitin ligase RNF125. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 7500-7505, 2007.

2. Breiman, A.; Grandvaux, N.; Lin, R.; Ottone, C.; Akira, S.; Yoneyama,
M.; Fujita, T.; Hiscott, J.; Meurs, E. F.: Inhibition of RIG-I-dependent
signaling to the interferon pathway during hepatitis C virus expression
and restoration of signaling by IKK-epsilon. J. Virol. 79: 3969-3978,
2005.

3. Cui, X.-F.; Imaizumi, T.; Yoshida, H.; Borden, E. C.; Satoh, K.
: Retinoic acid-inducible gene-I is induced by interferon-gamma and
regulates the expression of interferon-gamma stimulated gene 15 in
MCF-7 cells. Biochem. Cell Biol. 82: 401-405, 2004.

4. Gack, M. U.; Shin, Y. C.; Joo, C.-H.; Urano, T.; Liang, C.; Sun,
L.; Takeuchi, O.; Akira, S.; Chen, Z.; Inoue, S.; Jung, J. U.: TRIM25
RING-finger E3 ubiquitin ligase is essential for RIG-I-mediated antiviral
activity. Nature 446: 916-920, 2007.

5. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  7/20/2012.

6. Haralambieva, I. H.; Ovsyannikova, I. G.; Umlauf, B. J.; Vierkant,
R. A.; Pankratz, V. S.; Jacobson, R. M.; Poland, G. A.: Genetic polymorphisms
in host antiviral genes: associations with humoral and cellular immunity
to measles vaccine. Vaccine 29: 8988-8997, 2011.

7. Hornung, V.; Ellegast, J.; Kim, S.; Brzozka, K.; Jung, A.; Kato,
H.; Poeck, H.; Akira, S.; Conzelmann, K.-K.; Schlee, M.; Endres, S.;
Hartmann, G.: 5-prime-triphosphate RNA is the ligand for RIG-I. Science 314:
994-997, 2006.

8. Imaizumi, T.; Aratani, S.; Nakajima, T.; Carlson, M.; Matsumiya,
T.; Tanji, K.; Ookawa, K.; Yoshida, H.; Tsuchida, S.; McIntyre, T.
M.; Prescott, S. M.; Zimmerman, G. A.; Satoh, K.: Retinoic-acid inducible
gene-I is induced in endothelial cells by LPS and regulates expression
of COX-2. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 292: 274-279, 2002.

9. Imaizumi, T.; Hatakeyama, M.; Yamashita, K.; Yoshida, H.; Ishikawa,
A.; Taima, K.; Satoh, K.; Mori, F.; Wakabayashi, K.: Interferon-gamma
induces retinoic acid-inducible gene-I in endothelial cells. Endothelium 11:
169-173, 2004.

10. Imaizumi, T.; Yagihashi, N.; Hatakeyama, M.; Yamashita, K.; Ishikawa,
A.; Taima, K.; Yoshida, H.; Inoue, I.; Fujita, T.; Yagihashi, S.;
Satoh, K.: Expression of retinoic acid-inducible gene-I in vascular
smooth muscle cells stimulated with interferon-gamma. Life Sci. 75:
1171-1180, 2004.

11. Jiang, F.; Ramanathan, A.; Miller, M. T.; Tang, G.-Q.; Gale, M.,
Jr.; Patel, S. S.; Marcotrigiano, J.: Structural basis of RNA recognition
and activation by innate immune receptor RIG-I. Nature 479: 423-427,
2011.

12. Kato, H.; Sato, S.; Yoneyama, M.; Yamamoto, M.; Uematsu, S.; Matsui,
K.; Tsujimura, T.; Takeda, K.; Fujita, T.; Takeuchi, O.; Akira, S.
: Cell type-specific involvement of RIG-I in antiviral response. Immunity 23:
19-28, 2005.

13. Kato, H.; Takeuchi, O.; Sato, S.; Yoneyama, M.; Yamamoto, M.;
Matsui, K.; Uematsu, S.; Jung, A.; Kawai, T.; Ishii, K. J.; Yamaguchi,
O.; Otsu, K.; Tsujimura, T.; Koh, C.-S.; Sousa, C. R.; Matsuura, Y.;
Fujita, T.; Akira, S.: Differential roles of MDA5 and RIG-I helicases
in the recognition of RNA viruses. Nature 441: 101-105, 2006.

14. Kok, K.-H.; Lui, P.-Y.; Ng, M.-H. J.; Siu, K.-L.; Au, S. W. N.;
Jin, D.-Y.: The double-stranded RNA-binding protein PACT functions
as a cellular activator of RIG-I to facilitate innate antiviral response. Cell
Host Microbe 9: 299-309, 2011.

15. Li, K.; Chen, Z.; Kato, N.; Gale, M., Jr.; Lemon, S. M.: Distinct
poly(I-C) and virus-activated signaling pathways leading to interferon-beta
production in hepatocytes. J. Biol. Chem. 280: 16739-16747, 2005.

16. Myong, S.; Cui, S.; Cornish, P. V.; Kirchhofer, A.; Gack, M. U.;
Jung, J. U.; Hopfner, K.-P.; Ha, T.: Cytosolic viral sensor RIG-I
is a 5-prime-triphosphate-dependent translocase on double-stranded
RNA. Science 323: 1070-1074, 2009.

17. Oshiumi, H.; Miyashita, M.; Inoue, N.; Okabe, M.; Matsumoto, M.;
Seya, T.: The ubiquitin ligase Riplet is essential for RIG-I-dependent
innate immune responses to RNA virus infection. Cell Host Microbe 8:
496-509, 2010.

18. Pichlmair, A.; Schulz, O.; Tan, C. P.; Naslund, T. I.; Liljestrom,
P.; Weber, F.; Reis e Sousa, C.: RIG-I-mediated antiviral responses
to single-stranded RNA bearing 5-prime-phosphates. Science 314:
997-1001, 2006.

19. Saito, T.; Hirai, R.; Loo, Y.-M.; Owen, D.; Johnson, C. L.; Sinha,
S. C.; Akira, S.; Fujita, T.; Gale, M., Jr.: Regulation of innate
antiviral defenses through a shared repressor domain in RIG-I and
LGP2. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 582-587, 2007.

20. Yoneyama, M.; Kikuchi, M.; Natsukawa, T.; Shinobu, N.; Imaizumi,
T.; Miyagishi, M.; Taira, K.; Akira, S.; Fujita, T.: The RNA helicase
RIG-I has an essential function in double-stranded RNA-induced innate
antiviral responses. Nature Immun. 5: 730-737, 2004.

21. Zhang, N.-N.; Shen, S.-H.; Jiang, L.-J.; Zhang, W.; Zhang, H.-X.;
Sun, Y.-P.; Li, X.-Y.; Huang, Q.-H.; Ge, B.-X.; Chen, S.-J.; Wang,
Z.-G.; Chen, Z.; Zhu, J.: RIG-I plays a role in negatively regulating
granulocytic proliferation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 10553-10558,
2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 07/20/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/3/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/1/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/3/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/23/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/17/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/23/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/19/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/29/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/10/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/1/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 10/5/2005

EDITED mgross: 07/20/2012
mgross: 7/20/2012
terry: 7/3/2012
mgross: 5/8/2012
terry: 3/1/2012
alopez: 1/6/2012
terry: 1/3/2012
mgross: 4/30/2009
terry: 4/23/2009
alopez: 3/23/2009
terry: 3/17/2009
mgross: 8/23/2007
mgross: 6/20/2007
mgross: 6/19/2007
alopez: 6/12/2007
terry: 5/29/2007
alopez: 1/11/2007
terry: 1/10/2007
alopez: 6/3/2006
terry: 6/1/2006
mgross: 10/5/2005

611902	TITLE *611902 COILED-COIL DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 136; CCDC136
;;NAG6;;
KIAA1793
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a positional cloning strategy, Jiang et al. (2000) identified
CCDC136 (GenBank GENBANK AF156971), which they called NAG6, as a
potential tumor suppressor gene within the common deleted region on 7q32
associated with nasopharyngeal carcinoma (161550).

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2001) cloned CCDC136, which they designated
KIAA1793.

Zhang et al. (2004) stated that the predicted NAG6 protein contains 4
protein kinase C (PKC; see 176970) phosphorylation sites.

GENE FUNCTION

Jiang et al. (2000) found that NAG6 expression was downregulated in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells compared to normal nasopharyngeal cells.

Using RT-PCR, Zhang et al. (2004) compared the expression of NAG6
between gastric cancer (137215) and normal tissues in 42 different
patients, and found that its expression was downregulated in gastric
cancer tissues. There was no association between NAG6 expression level
and lymph node and/or distance metastasis. These results were confirmed
by dot-blot analysis. RFLP analysis, performed in 7 gastric cancer
cases, indicated that loss of genetic material might be responsible for
the downregulation of the NAG6 gene.

MAPPING

Jiang et al. (2000) identified the NAG6 gene on chromosome 7q31-q32, a
common deletion site in various human malignancies.

REFERENCE 1. Jiang, N.; Zhan, F.; Tan, G.; Deng, L.; Zhou, M.; Cao, L.; Qiu,
Y.; Xie, Y.; Li, G.: A cDNA located on chromosome 7q32 shows loss
of expression in epithelial cell line of nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Chinese
Med. J. 7: 650-653, 2000.

2. Nagase, T.; Nakayama, M.; Nakajima, D.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XX.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 8: 85-95, 2001.

3. Zhang, X.-M.; Sheng, S.-R.; Wang, X.-Y.; Bin, L.-H.; Wang, J.-R.;
Li, G.-Y.: Expression of tumor related gene NAG6 in gastric cancer
and restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. World J. Gastroent. 10:
1361-1364, 2004.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 3/18/2008

EDITED carol: 03/18/2008
carol: 3/18/2008

609097	TITLE *609097 F-BOX ONLY PROTEIN 24; FBXO24
;;FBX24
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the F-box protein family, such as FBXO24, are characterized
by an approximately 40-amino acid F-box motif. SCF complexes, formed by
SKP1 (601434), cullin (see CUL1; 603134), and F-box proteins, act as
protein-ubiquitin ligases. F-box proteins interact with SKP1 through the
F box, and they interact with ubiquitination targets through other
protein interaction domains (Jin et al., 2004).

CLONING

Jin et al. (2004) reported that the FBXO24 protein contains a central F
box and a C-terminal RCC1 (179710) fold.

MAPPING

Jin et al. (2004) stated that the FBXO24 gene maps to chromosome 7q22
and the mouse Fbxo24 gene maps to chromosome 5G2.

REFERENCE 1. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/14/2004

EDITED mgross: 12/15/2004

300401	TITLE *300401 PROTEOLIPID PROTEIN 1; PLP1
;;PROTEOLIPID PROTEIN, MYELIN; PLP;;
LIPOPHILIN
DM20, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Proteolipid protein, or lipophilin, is the primary constituent of myelin
in the central nervous system (CNS) (Diehl et al., 1986).

CLONING

Using a PLP-specific cDNA clone, Diehl et al. (1986) isolated the human
gene encoding PLP from a human genomic library. The gene encodes a
276-amino acid polypeptide with 5 strongly hydrophobic domains that
interact with the lipid bilayer as trans- and cis-membrane segments.

The 2 isoforms of the myelin proteolipid protein, PLP and DM20, are very
hydrophobic integral membrane proteins that account for about half of
the protein content of adult CNS myelin. The mRNAs encoding them are
synthesized through alternative splicing of the primary transcript of a
single gene. The nucleotide sequence of the protein-encoding regions of
the PLP gene is highly conserved among all species studied. There is,
for example, no amino acid difference between human, rat, and mouse PLP
(Yool et al., 2000).

Dhaunchak and Nave (2007) stated that both PLP and DM20 are tetraspanins
with intracellular N and C termini, 2 extracellular loops (EC1 and EC2),
and an intracellular loop, which is shorter in DM20 than in full-length
PLP. EC1 and EC2 interact in vivo with the opposing membrane in myelin,
and EC2 contains 2 disulfide bridges.

Using quantitative RT-PCR, Lauriat et al. (2008) found that expression
of both PLP and DM20 showed a linear increase with age from fetus to
adulthood (up to 46 years of age) in human prefrontal cortex. Expression
was also developmentally regulated in the hippocampus, with a large
increase between 1 to 2 months and 1 to 2 years of age, followed by
leveling off in older children and adults.

GENE STRUCTURE

Diehl et al. (1986) determined that the human PLP gene contains 7 exons
and spans approximately 17 kb. Wilkins et al. (1991) reported a
correction to the base sequence of the intronic region 5-prime to exon 6
of the PLP gene as published by Diehl et al. (1986); the site in
question contained 3 rather than 4 thymidines.

MAPPING

Using a bovine cDNA probe in Southern blot analysis of somatic cell
hybrid DNA, Willard and Riordan (1985) assigned the gene to human
Xq13-q22. They assigned the gene to the mouse X chromosome also.

Mattei et al. (1986) mapped PLP to Xq22 by in situ hybridization. With a
panel of hybrids segregating portions of the X chromosome defined by
radiation-induced breaks, Willard et al. (1987) found that PLP maps
distal to PGK1 (311800) and proximal to PRPS (311850); however, PLP
showed complete cosegregation with GLA (300644) to which it must be very
close.

GENE FUNCTION

Swanton et al. (2005) found that endogenous Plp from porcine brains
formed stable oligomers in myelin with molecular masses of approximately
40 and 60 kD, corresponding to dimers and trimers, respectively. In
vitro studies with mouse Plp showed that wildtype Plp leaves the
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as a monomer and forms stable oligomers, most
likely at the cell surface, after a period of over 24 hours. In
contrast, various forms of mutant Plp, including A242V (300401.0019),
rapidly assembled into stable oligomers resembling wildtype oligomers
while still in the ER. Most of the mutant oligomers were retained in the
ER. Swanton et al. (2005) postulated a gain-of-function effect of mutant
PLP in which the oligomers may overwhelm ER degradation machinery or may
be toxic to the cell.

Quaking (QKI; 609590) proteins bind RNA and regulate RNA splicing,
intracellular localization, stability, and translation. Using
quantitative RT-PCR, Lauriat et al. (2008) found that expression of Plp1
was reduced in brains of qk(e5) mice, which show decreased expression of
all 3 Qki isoforms. Lauriat et al. (2008) concluded that QKI may be
required for PLP1 expression.

Myelin rafts in oligodendrocytes are specialized membrane domains that
are enriched in cholesterol and galactosylceramide. PLP associates with
myelin rafts during biosynthesis and is transported with rafts to the
plasma membrane. Using baby hamster kidney (BHK) cells and primary mouse
oligodendrocytes, Simons et al. (2002) showed that overexpressed
wildtype Plp accumulated in the endosomal/lysosomal compartment and
sequestered cholesterol there, rather than accompanying myelin rafts to
the plasma membrane. Endosomal/lysosomal accumulation of Plp and
cholesterol led to an increase in the amount of detergent-insoluble
cholesterol and Plp and to missorting of myelin raft markers.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed 10-fold increased colocalization of
Plp and the lysosomal marker Lamp1 (153330) in sagittal brain sections
of transgenic mice overexpressing Plp compared with wildtype mice.
Simons et al. (2002) concluded that overexpression of PLP results in
endosomal/lysosomal accumulation of cholesterol and PLP and
mistrafficking of raft components, leading to perturbed myelination and
reduced viability of oligodendrocytes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Willard et al. (1987) investigated the structure of the PLP gene in 9
boys with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD; 312080), using a PLP cDNA
and genomic probes upstream from and within the PLP gene. One of the 9
samples showed an abnormal Southern blotting pattern consistent with a
defect in the PLP gene.

Cremers et al. (1987) found an insertional translocation into the
proximal long arm of the X chromosome in a boy who showed findings
typical of PMD at autopsy. Duplication of Xq21-q22 was identified using
a large number of X-specific and several X-Y-specific probes. There
appeared to be 2 intact copies of the PLP gene present. The duplication
was apparently due to a de novo mutation, because the mother had a
normal female karyotype. The duplication must have resulted from
interaction between the 2 maternal X chromosomes during the first
meiotic division, as evidenced by the presence of 2 distinguishable
alleles at 2 of the marker loci studied.

In a family in which 4 males had classic manifestations of PMD, Pratt et
al. (1992) found a C-to-G transversion at nucleotide 193 of exon 3. The
change should not result in an amino acid change in the protein but did
cause the loss of a HaeIII restriction site which was concordant with
the disease in the family. The change was not found in 110 unrelated X
chromosomes. No other sequence defect was found in the PLP exons of the
affected males, and the cause of disease in this family remained
unknown. Trofatter et al. (1991) reported a silent mutation in exon 4
that caused gain of an AhaII restriction site. Unlike the HaeIII
variant, the AhaII polymorphism was frequent (0.26) in the normal
population.

Hodes et al. (1993) provided an extensive review of the proteolipid
protein, which included a tabulation of 36 allelic variants found to be
associated with disease. These included point mutations in all 7 of the
exons, primarily within exons 3, 4, and 5. In addition, there was 1
mutation in the 3-prime untranslated region, 4 duplications, 1 complete
deletion, and a rearrangement. They found that about 30% of patients
with the diagnosis of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease had a mutation in the
coding portion of the proteolipid protein gene. Although the mutations
were generally recessive, some mutations were frequently expressed in
females.

Using the candidate gene approach, Saugier-Veber et al. (1994) showed
that the mutation in the form of X-linked spastic paraplegia that maps
to Xq22 (SPG2; 312920) is due to mutation in the PLP gene (see
300401.0012). The his139-to-tyr mutation found in SPG2 resulted in
mutant PLP but normal DM20.

Inoue et al. (1996) examined 5 families with PMD without exonic
mutations in the PLP gene, using comparative multiplex PCR as a
semiquantitative assay of gene dosage. PLP gene duplications were
identified in 4 families and confirmed in 3 families by densitometric
RFLP analysis. PMD may thus be caused by duplication or deletion of the
PLP gene (Raskind et al., 1991), as well as by point mutations. This
situation is similar to that in Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease type 1a
(CMT1A; 118220), which may be caused by duplication, deletion, or point
mutation in the PMP22 gene (601097). Inoue et al. (1996) suggested that
since the homologous myelin protein gene PMP22 is duplicated in the
majority of patients with CMT1A, PLP gene overdosage may be an important
genetic abnormality in PMD and affect myelin formation.

Duplication of the PLP1 gene is responsible for PMD in most patients,
whereas deletion of PLP1 is infrequent. Inoue et al. (2002) studied
genomic mechanisms for these submicroscopic chromosomal rearrangements.
They identified 3 families with PLP1 deletions (including 1 family
described by Raskind et al. (1991)) that arose by 3 distinct processes.
In 1 family, PLP1 deletion resulted from a maternal balanced
submicroscopic insertional translocation of the entire PLP1 gene to the
telomere of chromosome 19. PLP1 on the 19q telomere was probably
inactive by virtue of a position effect, because a healthy male sib
carried the same der(19) chromosome along with a normal X chromosome.
Genomic mapping of the deleted segments revealed that the deletions were
smaller than most of the PLP1 duplications and involved only 2 other
genes. Inoue et al. (2002) hypothesized that a deletion is infrequent
because only the smaller deletions can avoid causing either infertility
or lethality. Analyses of the DNA sequence flanking the deletion
breakpoints revealed Alu-Alu recombination in the family with
translocation. In the other 2 families, no homologous sequence flanking
the breakpoints was found, but distal breakpoints were embedded in novel
low-copy repeats, suggesting the potential involvement of genome
architecture in stimulating these rearrangements. In 1 family, junction
sequences revealed a complex recombination event. The data suggested
that PLP1 deletions are likely caused by nonhomologous end joining.

Hodes et al. (1999) pointed out that 4 codons of the PLP molecule are
known in which more than 1 amino acid substitution has been identified:
valine-165 to glutamate or glycine, leucine-45 to proline or arginine,
aspartate-202 to asparagine or histidine, and leucine-223 to isoleucine
or proline.

Mimault et al. (1999) investigated 82 strictly selected sporadic cases
of PMD and found PLP mutations in 77%. Complete PLP gene duplication was
the most frequent abnormality (62%), whereas point mutations in coding
or splice site regions of the gene were involved less frequently (38%).
In the case of the 22 point mutations, 68% of mothers were heterozygous
for the mutation, a value identical to the two-thirds of carrier mothers
that would be expected if there was an equal mutation rate in male and
female germ cells. In sharp contrast, among the 34 duplicated cases, 91%
of mothers were carriers, a value significantly in favor of a male bias,
with an estimation of the male/female mutation frequency (k) of 9.3.
Moreover, Mimault et al. (1999) observed de novo mutations between
parental and grandparental generations in 17 three-generation families,
which allowed a direct estimate of the k value (k of 11). Again, a
significant male mutation imbalance was observed only for the
duplications. The mechanism responsible for this strong male bias in the
duplications may involve an unequal sister chromatid exchange, since 2
deletion events, responsible for mild clinical manifestations, had been
reported in PLP-related disorders.

Hodes et al. (2000) described 2 families in which males affected with
PMD had a copy of the PLP gene on the short arm of the X chromosome, in
addition to a normal copy on Xq22. In the first family, the extra copy
was first detected by the presence of heterozygosity of the AhaII
dimorphism within the PLP gene. FISH analysis showed an additional copy
of PLP on Xp22.1, although no chromosomal rearrangements could be
detected by standard karyotype analysis. Another 3 affected males from
the family had similar findings. In a second unrelated family with signs
of PMD, cytogenetic analysis showed a pericentric inversion of the X
chromosome. In the inverted X chromosome carried by several affected
family members, FISH showed PLP signals at Xp11.4 and Xq22. The authors
noted that Woodward et al. (1998) had reported a family in which
affected members had an extra copy of the PLP gene detected at Xq26 in a
chromosome with an otherwise normal banding pattern. The identification
of 3 separate families in which PLP is duplicated at a noncontiguous
site suggested that such duplications could be a relatively common but
previously undetected cause of genetic disorders.

Hobson et al. (2000) identified 4 novel mutation in noncoding regions of
the PLP1 gene in 5 patients with PMD from 4 families. Three of the
mutations, 2 point mutations and 1 deletion (300401.0023-300401.0025),
involved the splice donor site of intron 3, which is involved in
alternative splicing of PLP and DM20. The fourth mutation (300401.0022)
resulted in skipping of exon 6. Female carriers of the mutations, who
were mildly symptomatic or asymptomatic, were detected in 3 of the 4
families.

Yool et al. (2000) reviewed the mechanisms of PLP mutations in human
disease and in animal models.

Lee et al. (2006) reported a patient with a mild form of SPG2. Although
there were no mutations, duplications, or deletions in the PLP1 gene,
detailed molecular analysis detected a small duplication of less than
150 kb approximately 136 kb downstream of the PLP1 gene in the patient
and his unaffected mother. Lee et al. (2006) suggested that the
duplication resulted in silencing of the PLP1 gene by position effect
since the patient's relatively mild phenotype resembled that seen with
PLP1-null mutations.

Dhaunchak and Nave (2007) found that most PMD-associated mutations
mapping to EC2 of PLP/DM20 interfered with formation of correct
intramolecular disulfide bridges in transfected oligodendrocytes,
leading to abnormal protein crosslinks, ER retention, and activation of
the unfolded protein response. Surface expression of mutant PLP/DM20 was
restored and the unfolded protein response was reverted by removal of 2
cysteines. Dhaunchak and Nave (2007) concluded that covalent protein
crosslinks are the cause, rather than the consequence, of ER retention.

Using array CGH and breakpoint sequence analysis of different sized
PMD-associated PLP1 nonrecurrent duplications, Lee et al. (2007) found
interspersed stretches of DNA of normal copy number, as well as
triplicated sequences contained within duplications and sequence
complexity at junctions. The findings were not consistent with a simple
recombination model. Lee et al. (2007) proposed a model of replication
fork stalling and template switching (FoSTeS) to explain the complex
duplication and deletion rearrangements associated with the disorder.

Carvalho et al. (2011) identified complex genomic rearrangements
consisting of intermixed duplications and triplications of genomic
segments at the MECP2 (300005) and the PLP1 loci. These complex
rearrangements were characterized by a triplicated segment embedded
within a duplication in 11 unrelated subjects. Notably, only 2
breakpoint junctions were generated during each rearrangement formation.
All the complex rearrangement products shared a common genomic
organization, duplication-inverted triplication-duplication
(DUP-TRP/INV-DUP), in which the triplicated segment is inverted and
located between directly oriented duplicated genomic segments. Carvalho
et al. (2011) provided evidence that the DUP-TRP/INV-DUP structures are
mediated by inverted repeats that can be separated by more than 300 kb,
a genomic architecture that apparently leads to susceptibility to such
complex rearrangements.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Cailloux et al. (2000) investigated 52 PMD and 28 SPG families without
large PLP duplications or deletions by PCR amplification and sequencing
of the 7 coding regions and splice sites of the PLP1 gene. Abnormalities
were identified in 29 (56%) of the PMD and 4 (14%) of the SPG cases. Of
the 33 mutations detected, 23 were missense mutations, 3 were
deletion/insertions with frameshifts, and 7 were splice site mutations.
Clinical severity was found to be correlated with the nature of the
mutation. The severe forms of PMD were most frequently associated with
missense mutations in exons 2 and 4, leading to amino acid changes at
positions highly conserved in other DM proteins. The mild forms of PMD
were frequently caused by mutations, resulting in the production of
truncated proteins or by missense mutations. The mutations mostly
affected exon 5, leading to the substitution of amino acids only partly
conserved in the extracytoplasmic C-D loop. SPG was associated with
splice site mutations or changes in the PLP-specific B-C loop.

Carrier females with the submicroscopic duplication in the PLP gene that
causes PMD are usually asymptomatic. Inoue et al. (2001) described 2
unrelated female patients who presented with mild PMD or spastic
paraplegia. In 1 patient, clinical features as well as cranial magnetic
resonance imaging and brainstem auditory evoked potential results
improved dramatically over a 10-year period. The other patient, who
presented with spastic diplegia and was initially diagnosed with
cerebral palsy, also showed clinical improvement. Interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses identified a PLP gene
duplication in both patients. The same analyses in family members
indicated that the duplication in both patients occurred as a de novo
event. Neither skewing of X inactivation in the peripheral lymphocytes
nor PLP gene coding alterations were identified in either patient. These
findings indicated that females with a PLP gene duplication can
occasionally manifest an early-onset neurologic phenotype. Inoue et al.
(2001) hypothesized that the remarkable clinical improvement was a
result of myelin compensation by oligodendrocytes expressing 1 copy of
the PLP gene secondary to selection for a favorable X-inactivation
pattern. These findings indicated plasticity of oligodendrocytes in the
formation of central nervous system myelin and suggested a potential
role for stem cell transplantation therapies.

In a detailed review, Inoue (2005) noted that genomic rearrangements
that result in PLP1 gene duplication are the most common cause of PMD
(60 to 70% of cases). Neither common PLP1 alleles nor founder effects
have been observed in PMD. Mutations in exon 3B, which is spliced out in
DM20, predominantly result in an SPG2 phenotype, as DM20 is putatively
intact. Similarly, truncating mutations result in a relatively mild
phenotype, most likely because of the degradation of mutant mRNAs by
nonsense-mediated decay. The fact that most point mutations result in
severe dysmyelinating disease suggests that the mutant proteins exert a
cytotoxic effect, presumably via accumulation of misfolded proteins.

Using clinical data compiled from a chart review at Wayne State
University comprising 40 pedigrees with PMD including 55 males and 56
carrier females, Hurst et al. (2006) investigated neurologic symptoms in
carrier females. They categorized patients according to disease severity
and type of genetic lesion within the PLP1 gene and then analyzed the
clinical data using nonparametric t tests and analyses of variance.
Hurst et al. (2006) concluded that their analyses formally demonstrated
the link between mild disease in males and symptoms in carrier female
relatives. Conversely, mutations causing severe disease in males rarely
cause clinical signs in carrier females. The greatest risk of disease in
females was found for nonsense/indel or null mutations. Missense
mutations carried moderate risk. The lowest risk, which represents the
bulk of families with PMD, is associated with PLP1 gene duplications.
Hurst et al. (2006) concluded that effective genetic counseling of PMD
and spastic paraplegia carrier females must include an assessment of
disease severity in affected male relatives.

CYTOGENETICS

Woodward et al. (2005) described genomic structures of 59 segmental
duplications of the X chromosome that included the PLP1 gene in patients
with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. They reported 13 junction sequences
that gave insight into underlying mechanisms. Although proximal
breakpoints were highly variable, distal breakpoints tended to cluster
around low-copy repeats (LCRs) (in 50% of cases), and each duplication
event appeared to be unique. They interpreted the data to indicate that
the tandem duplications are formed by a coupled homologous and
nonhomologous recombination mechanism. They suggested repair of a
double-stranded break by 1-sided homologous strand invasion of a sister
chromatid, followed by DNA synthesis and nonhomologous end joining with
the other end of the break. This is in contrast to other genomic
disorders.

ANIMAL MODEL

Readhead et al. (1994) generated normal mouse lines expressing autosomal
copies of the wildtype Plp gene and found that a 2-fold increase in Ppl
gene dosage resulted in hypomyelination, astrocytosis, seizures, and
premature death. They concluded that the myelination process is
exquisitely sensitive to the accurate level of PLP gene expression.

Jung et al. (1996) noted that 3 mutations in the mouse Plp gene are
associated with dysmyelination: 'jimpy,' a splicing mutation that leads
to loss of transmembrane domain-4 (TM4), 'jimpy(msd),' an ala242-to-val
mutation in TM4, and 'rumpshaker,' an ile186-to-thr mutation in TM2.
Using antibodies directed against a cell surface epitope and the C
terminus of Plp, Jung et al. (1996) showed that all 3 of these mouse Plp
mutations result in protein misfolding. They concluded that misfolding
of mutant PLP and DM20 proteins causes their intracellular retention and
interferes with oligodendrocyte differentiation and survival.

Edgar et al. (2004) found that axons of the optic nerve of Plp1-null
mice developed progressive focal accumulations of membranous organelles
in areas distal to nodal complexes. The axon proximal to the node was
either normal or was affected to a much lesser degree, suggesting a
defect in fast retrograde axonal transport. The axonal cytoskeleton was
disrupted within areas of swelling, and neurofilaments and microtubules
were replaced by a fine granular amorphous material. The absence of Plp1
from oligodendrocytes resulted in impaired transport in the underlying
axon, leading to multifocal accumulation of membranous organelles. Edgar
et al. (2004) concluded that oligodendrocytes play a role in the
regulation of certain axonal transport functions.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, PRO215SER

In a patient with the classic form (type I) of PMD (312080), Gencic et
al. (1989) described a missense mutation in exon 5 of the PLP gene, with
a C-to-T transition creating a serine substitution for proline at the
carboxy end of the protein. Abuelo et al. (1989) also demonstrated a
single nucleotide change in exon 5 of PLP that resulted in substitution
of serine for proline as residue 215. They found the mutation in the
carrier mother and in 2 sisters of 2 affected males.

.0002
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, TRP162ARG

In the family with classic PMD (312080) investigated by Koeppen et al.
(1987), Hudson et al. (1989) found a T-to-C transition resulting in the
substitution of a charged amino acid residue, arginine, for tryptophan
in 1 of the 4 hydrophobic domains of the PLP protein. A change of CGG to
TGG in exon 4 was responsible for the substitution of trp162.

.0003
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, PRO14LEU

By the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), Trofatter et al. (1989)
amplified, cloned and sequenced the exons of the PLP gene in a male with
PMD (312080) from an extensively affected Indiana family. They found a
basepair transition from C-to-T at the nucleotide 40 of the second exon.
In a second, unrelated PMD kindred with a milder form of disease, the
C-to-T transition was not found. They found perfect linkage between the
C-to-T transition and disease in this kindred; lod score = 4.27 at theta
= 0.0. The C-to-T mutation predicted a pro14-to-leu substitution.

.0004
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, THR155ILE

Pratt et al. (1991) identified a C-to-T transition in exon 4 of the PLP
gene in 2 affected males and 2 obligate carriers in a German family with
PMD (312080). The mutation, which alters amino acid 155 from threonine
to isoleucine and eliminates an HphI site, was absent in 108 normal
chromosomes. Linkage analysis in the family showed 5 concordant and 1
discordant result compared with those obtained by magnetic resonance
imaging.

.0005
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, VAL218PHE

Pham-Dinh et al. (1991) used DNA amplification by PCR to study the PLP
gene coding regions from 17 patients in 15 unrelated families with
similar Pelizaeus-Merzbacher (312080) phenotype. In 1 case amplification
of peripheral nerve PLP cDNA showed a silent T-to-C transition that was
unrelated to the disease. In 1 family a change of valine-218 to
phenylalanine was observed. Pham-Dinh et al. (1991) investigated the
inheritance of the mutant allele in 19 subjects in this 4-generation
family and found a strict cosegregation of the phe-218 substitution with
transmission and expression of the disease. A G-to-T transversion in
exon 5 was responsible for the amino acid substitution. Affected members
of this family presented in early infancy with hypotonia, spasticity,
and abnormal head and ocular movements. Two patients had died at ages 36
and 45 years. One patient was capable of walking autonomously, using the
telephone, and typewriting.

.0006
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, DEL

In a family with affected males in 4 generations, Raskind et al. (1991)
found that PMD (312080) was associated with complete absence of a band
in Southern analysis using PLP probes encompassing the promoter region,
the entire coding region, and the 3-prime untranslated region and
spanning at least 29 kb of genomic DNA. DNA from unaffected relatives
gave the expected band pattern.

.0007
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, THR181PRO

In 2 obligate female carriers of PMD (312080), Strautnieks et al. (1992)
used single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis to identify
an A-to-C transversion at nucleotide 541 resulting in a thr181-to-pro
substitution in the region of the protein presumed to represent a
transmembrane segment. The mutation was found in exon 4 of the PLP gene
and was used in prenatal diagnosis to predict an unaffected fetus.

.0008
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, LEU223PRO

In a second family with PMD (312080), Strautnieks et al. (1992) used
SSCP analysis to demonstrate a variant band pattern in exon 5 in the PLP
gene which was shown by sequencing to be due to a T-to-C transition at
nucleotide 668 resulting in a leu223-to-pro amino acid substitution.

.0009
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, ASP202HIS

By a combination of SSCP analysis and direct sequencing of PCR-amplified
DNA, Doll et al. (1992) identified an asp202-to-his substitution in exon
4 of the PLP gene in a patient with leukodystrophy of unknown etiology.

.0010
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, GLY73ARG

By a combination of SSCP analysis and direct sequencing of PCR-amplified
DNA, Doll et al. (1992) identified a gly73-to-arg substitution in exon 3
of the PLP gene in a patient with leukodystrophy of unknown etiology.

.0011
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE, CONNATAL
PLP1, GLY220CYS

In a Japanese family with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (312080), Iwaki
et al. (1993) found a G-to-T transition in exon 5 of the PLP gene, which
led to a glycine-to-cysteine substitution at residue 220. The disorder
in this family was present in 2 boys who showed similar clinical signs
from birth, with autopsy confirmation of the diagnosis in 1 of the
brothers. In the older patient, laryngeal stridor developed immediately
after birth and his muscles were flaccid. He had poor head control and a
coarse nystagmus. Spastic paraparesis was evident by age 4 years. He
could not walk or speak and died of pneumonia at age 13. Autopsy showed
almost complete deficiency of myelin within the central nervous system
except for patchy, slight preservations of myelin in the pons. In
studies of the postmortem brain, Iwaki et al. (1993) found a nearly
complete loss of mRNA expression of both PLP and myelin basic protein
(MBP; 159430), 2 major myelin proteins produced by oligodendrocytes, yet
mRNA levels of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP; 137780), an
astrocyte marker, appeared to be normal. The findings supported the
pathologic observation that oligodendrocytes are specifically lost in
the PMD brain.

.0012
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 2
PLP1, HIS139TYR

While narrowing the genetic interval containing the gene for X-linked
spastic paraplegia-2 (312920) in a large pedigree previously reported by
Bonneau et al. (1993), Saugier-Veber et al. (1994) found that PLP was
the closest marker to the disease locus, implicating PLP as a possible
candidate gene. They went on to find a his139-to-tyr mutation in exon 3B
of the PLP gene in an affected male. The mutation resulted in a mutant
form of PLP, but the other protein encoded by the PLP gene, DM20, was
normal. The his139-to-tyr mutation segregated with the disease; maximum
lod = 6.63 at theta = 0.00. Thus, SPG2 and PMD (312080) are allelic
disorders.

.0013
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 2
PLP1, ILE186THR

The family with spastic paraplegia (312920) reported by Johnston and
McKusick (1962) as one of the earliest examples of X-linked SPG showed a
disorder that began as 'pure' spastic paraparesis. The patients later
developed nystagmus, dysarthria, sensory disturbance or mental
retardation, with half the patients having optic atrophy. Later symptoms
included muscle wasting, joint contractures, and a requirement for
crutches or wheelchair by early adult life. Kobayashi et al. (1994)
demonstrated linkage to the Xq21.3-q24 region, which includes the PLP
locus and, furthermore, demonstrated an ile186-to-thr mutation in the
PLP gene. This mutation is identical to that previously identified in
the 'rumpshaker' mouse.

This same mutation, a 557T-C nucleotide transition, was identified by
Naidu et al. (1997) in a 3.5-year-old boy with onset of manifestations
at birth who was subsequently shown to be a member of the same family as
that reported by Johnston and McKusick (1962).

In the 'rumpshaker' mouse, Edgar et al. (2004) observed a late-onset
distal degeneration of the axons of the longest spinal tract, the
fasciculus gracilis. This was said to be the first report of Wallerian
type degeneration in mice with spontaneous mutation of the Plp gene.

.0014
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, THR42ILE

In a patient with PMD (312080), Pratt et al. (1995) described a
thr42-to-ile mutation which they could determine had originated de novo
in the X chromosome contributed by the maternal great-grandfather of the
propositus. This was determined from the pattern of inheritance of the
AhaII polymorphism and a series of microsatellite markers located near
PLP on Xq22. Pratt et al. (1995) commented on the fact that, with one
exception, each mutation that has been found is unique to the particular
family.

.0015
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE, MILD
PLP1, MET1ILE

In a Dutch family with a relatively mild form of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease (312080), Sistermans et al. (1996) described a G-to-A transition
in the initiation codon of the PLP gene. This mutation caused the total
absence of PLP and is therefore in agreement with the hypothesis that
absence of PLP leads to a mild form of PMD. Most mutations in PLP cause
either overexpression or expression of a truncated form of PLP resulting
in oligodendrocyte cell death because of accumulation of PLP in the
endoplasmic reticulum. Only 1 patient with complete deletion of the PLP
gene had been described to that time (300401.0007). This same mutation
is found in the beta-globin gene as a cause of beta-0-thalassemia
(141900.0456) and in the PAH gene resulting in phenylketonuria
(261600.0048).

The proband in the family reported by Sistermans et al. (1996) came to
the attention of the investigators at the age of 33 years because of
slowly progressive deterioration of his mental condition and progression
of his spastic tetraplegia. Neurologic examination revealed a spastic
atactic tetraplegia. Motor dysfunction had been first noted at the age
of 4 years and he was admitted to an institution for the mentally
disabled at age 14 with mental deficiency and spastic paraplegia. His
sister's son was observed to have spastic tetraplegia and poor balance
control by the age of 1 year. By the age of 6 years he was dependent on
help for activities of daily living and was wheelchair-bound, although
he was able to crawl.

.0016
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE, MILD
PLP1, -34C-T, 5-PRIME UTR

In a 7-year-old boy with clinical and neuroradiologic features
consistent with classic PMD (312080), Kawanishi et al. (1996) found a
C-to-T transition at nucleotide position -34 in the 5-prime flanking
region of exon 1 of the PLP gene. The mother was heterozygous for the
mutation which was not found in 117 X chromosomes from unrelated
Japanese. This was said to be the first report of a 5-prime UTR mutation
in the PLP gene.

.0017
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 2
PLP1, PHE236SER

Donnelly et al. (1996) described a phe236-to-ser mutation of the PLP
gene in males affected with SPG2 (312920) from a family in which 8
affected boys in 5 generations had suffered from a complicated form of
spastic paraplegia.

.0018
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE, ATYPICAL
PLP1, TRP144TER

In a family displaying atypical features of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease
(312080), Hodes et al. (1997) identified a G-to-A transition at
nucleotide 431 in exon 3, resulting in a stop codon (TAG) instead of
tryptophan (TGG) at amino acid 144. The clinical picture resembled
somewhat that of X-linked spastic paraplegia. It differed from that
condition and from both the classic and the connatal forms of PMD in
that it was relatively mild, onset was delayed beyond age 2 years,
nystagmus was absent, tremors were prominent, mental retardation was not
severe, and some patients showed dementia or personality disorders. The
disease was progressive rather than static in some, and several females
showed signs of disease. The nonsense mutation, which was in exon 3B,
was predicted to block synthesis of normal PLP but spared DM20, the
isoform whose persistence has been associated with mild forms of
PLP-associated disease in both humans and mice.

.0019
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE, CONNATAL
PLP1, ALA242VAL

The jimpy(msd) mouse carries an ala242-to-val (A242V) mutation in the
Plp gene. The phenotype has been used as a model of the human connatal
type of PMD (312080) in research (Gow and Lazzarini (1996)). Yamamoto et
al. (1998) described a Japanese male infant with prenatal PMD and the
same A242V substitution. The substitution resulted from a 725C-T
transition in exon 6. Pendular nystagmus and psychomotor developmental
delay had been noted at the age of 4 months. The infant died suddenly at
9 months, and demyelinated white matter of the brain was observed at
autopsy.

.0020
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 2
PLP1, SER169PHE

Hodes et al. (1998) described a boy with spastic paraplegia-2 (312920)
and a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 506 in exon 4 of the PLP gene,
resulting in substitution of phenylalanine for serine-169 in the third
transmembrane domain of the protein. His mother did not have the
mutation. The patient was first seen for evaluation of 'cerebral palsy'
at the age of 7 years. There was no nystagmus, but funduscopy showed
optic nerve pallor. There was more spasticity in the legs than in the
arms, deep tendon reflexes were 1+ in the arms and 3+ in the legs, and
there was prominent scissoring while he sat. MRI scan showed global lack
of myelination with sparing of only a few transverse fibers in the pons.

.0021
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, DUP

Although linkage analysis had shown homogeneity at the PLP1 gene in
patients with PMD (312080), exonic mutations in the PLP1 gene had been
identified in only 10 to 25% of all cases. Using comparative multiplex
PCR (CM-PCR) as a semiquantitative assay of gene dosage, Inoue et al.
(1996) examined 5 families with PMD who did not carry exonic mutations
in PLP1 gene. PLP1 gene duplications were identified in 4 families by
CM-PCR and confirmed in 3 families by densitometric RFLP analysis. The
authors suggested that PLP gene overdosage may be an important
abnormality in PMD and may affect myelin formation.

Sistermans et al. (1998) studied 2 groups of patients: one with 10
independent PMD families and one with 24 sporadic patients suspected of
PMD. Duplications of the PLP1 gene were identified in 50% of cases of
group 1 and in 21% of cases of group 2. The authors concluded that
duplications of the PLP1 gene are the major cause of PMD.

Woodward et al. (1998) showed that PLP1 gene duplication can be detected
by interphase FISH. The extent of the duplication was analyzed in 5
patients and their 4 asymptomatic mothers, and a large duplication (500
kb or more) was detected, with breakpoints that differed between
families, at the proximal end. The results of this study suggested that
intrachromosomal rearrangements may be a common mechanism by which
duplications arise in PMD.

Woodward et al. (2000) found that carriers of a duplication of the PLP1
gene showed skewed X inactivation, whereas carriers of point mutations
showed random X inactivation. The skewed pattern observed in most
duplication carriers suggested that there is selection against those
cells in which the duplicated X chromosome is active, and that other
expressed sequences within the duplicated region rather than mutant PLP
may be responsible.

Woodward et al. (2003) reported cytogenetic and molecular findings in a
family in which PMD had arisen by a submicroscopic duplication of the
PLP1 gene involving the insertion of approximately 600 kb from
chromosome Xq22 into Xq26.3.

.0022
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, IVS6DS, G-T, +3

In a family with severe Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (312080) originally
reported by Carango et al. (1995), Hobson et al. (2000) identified a
G-to-T transversion in the donor splice site of intron 6 of the PLP1
gene, which resulted in the skipping of exon 6. The 2 affected brothers
demonstrated hypotonia at birth, later developing nystagmus, slowly
progressive spastic paraplegia, and seizures. The mother, who was shown
to be a carrier of the mutation, had mild spastic paraplegia and walked
with a cane. Hobson et al. (2000) postulated that the mutation caused
misfolding and retention of the protein in the endoplasmic reticulum,
leading to oligodendrocyte apoptosis. Carango et al. (1995) had
demonstrated a 6-fold increase in mRNA for DM20 in skin fibroblasts from
these 2 brothers.

.0023
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, IVS3DS, T-C, +2

In a patient with classic PMD (312080), Hobson et al. (2000) identified
a T-to-C transition in the donor splice site of intron 3 of the PLP1
gene, in the area where alternative 5-prime splicing of the PLP gene
yields either PLP or DM20. This position is virtually invariant in
splice donor sites, strongly suggesting that it is the causative
mutation. The patient had onset of head titubations and nystagmus at
about 4 months of age. The mother and sister were found to be carriers
of the mutation.

.0024
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, IVS3DS, A-G, +4

In a patient with classic PMD (312080), Hobson et al. (2000) identified
a mutation in the donor splice site of intron 3 of the PLP1 gene. The
patient showed hypotonia at birth and later developed head titubations
and nystagmus. There was no family history of the disease.

.0025
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE, ATYPICAL
PLP1, IVS3, 19-BP DEL, +28

In a male patient with relatively late onset of nystagmus and rapidly
progressive ataxia, Hobson et al. (2000) identified a 19-bp deletion in
intron 3 near the splice donor site. The authors suggested that the
deletion may define a highly conserved intron enhancer sequence that
governs the alternative splicing of PLP and DM20. Three female family
members were carriers of the mutation. Hobson et al. (2002)
characterized the clinical phenotype of the previously reported male
patient who at age 6 years had onset of difficulty in walking, rendering
him wheelchair-bound by age 11 years with spastic paraparesis,
cerebellar findings, optic atrophy, nystagmus, dysarthria, and cognitive
decline. Sequential MRI studies showed delay in myelin formation and
diffuse abnormal white matter signals, while MRS studies showed findings
consistent with increased turnover of myelin and neuronal and axonal
loss. Studies of the deletion in cultured oligodendrocytes showed that
it contains a sequence that is critical for efficient PLP-specific
splicing. Hobson et al. (2002) concluded that deletion of this region in
PLP intron 3 causes a reduction in PLP message and protein, which
affects myelin stability and axonal integrity.

.0026
SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA 2
PLP1, ARG137TRP

In a boy with SPG2 (312920), Gorman et al. (2007) identified a
hemizygous 409C-T transition in exon 3B of the PLP1 gene, resulting in
an arg137-to-trp (R137W) substitution. He presented at age 10 years with
poor school performance, diplopia, and clumsiness after an upper
respiratory infection. MRI showed multifocal areas of T2 white matter
hyperintensities. Treatment with high-dose intravenous
methylprednisolone resulted in clinical improvement. Over the next few
years, he had episodes of neurologic deterioration characterized by
nystagmus, dysmetria, ataxia, tremor, and progressive cognitive decline.
These episodes responded temporarily to methylprednisolone treatment,
suggesting an inflammatory process. The patient even fulfilled the
criteria for relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (MS; 128200),
including the presence of oligoclonal bands in the CSF. His mother, who
carried the mutation, developed tremor and incoordination in her late
forties, although this was complicated by alcohol abuse. A grandfather
with the mutation was asymptomatic except for mild tremor.

.0027
PELIZAEUS-MERZBACHER DISEASE
PLP1, ASP57TYR

In affected members of a 2-generation African American family with
X-linked spastic paraplegia, originally reported by Arena et al. (1992),
Stevenson et al. (2009) identified a hemizygous mutation in the PLP1
gene, resulting in an asp57-to-tyr (D58Y) substitution in an
extracellular loop of the protein. The mutation segregated with the
disorder and was not identified in 300 male controls. The findings
indicated that the family in fact had Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease
(312080). Arena et al. (1992) reported that all had severe mental
retardation, lower limb spasticity and atrophy, absent or dysarthric
speech, and impaired ambulation requiring wheelchairs from childhood.
Other features included nystagmus, dystonic posturing, and ataxia. Brain
imaging studies showed macrogyria, lack of myelination, and increased
paramagnetic signal suggestive of iron deposition. Stevenson et al.
(2009) noted that, although altered signals in the basal ganglia and
thalamus are not specific for iron deposition, MRI findings suggestive
of iron deposition in the basal ganglia have been reported in other
patients with PMD.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Buckle et al. (1985)
REFERENCE 1. Abuelo, D. N.; Ambler, M.; Gencic, S.; Berndt, J.; Hudson, L.:
Heterozygote detection in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. (Abstract) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 45 (suppl.): A169, 1989.

2. Arena, J. F.; Schwartz, C.; Stevenson, R.; Lawrence, L.; Carpenter,
A.; Duara, R.; Ledbetter, D.; Huang, T.; Lehner, T.; Ott, J.; Lubs,
H. A.: Spastic paraplegia with iron deposits in the basal ganglia:
a new X-linked mental retardation syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 43:
479-490, 1992.

3. Bonneau, D.; Rozet, J.-M.; Bulteau, C.; Berthier, M.; Mettey, R.;
Gil, R.; Munnich, A.; Le Merrer, M.: X linked spastic paraplegia
(SPG2): clinical heterogeneity at a single gene locus. J. Med. Genet. 30:
381-384, 1993.

4. Buckle, V. J.; Edwards, J. H.; Evans, E. P.; Jonasson, J. A.; Lyon,
M. F.; Peters, J.; Searle, A. G.: Comparative maps of human and mouse
X chromosomes. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 40: 594-595, 1985.

5. Cailloux, F.; Gauthier-Barichard, F.; Mimault, C.; Isabelle, V.;
Courtois, V.; Giraud, G.; Dastugue, B.; Boespflug-Tanguy, O.; Clinical
European Network on Brain Dysmyelinating Disease: Genotype-phenotype
correlation in inherited brain myelination defects due to proteolipid
protein gene mutations. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 8: 837-845, 2000.

6. Carango, P.; Funanage, V. L.; Quiros, R. E.; Debruyn, C. S.; Marks,
H. G.: Overexpression of DM20 messenger RNA in two brothers with
Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. Ann. Neurol. 38: 610-617, 1995.

7. Carvalho, C. M. B.; Ramocki, M. B.; Pehlivan, D.; Franco, L. M.;
Gonzaga-Jauregui, C.; Fang, P.; McCall, A.; Pivnick, E. K.; Hines-Dowell,
S.; Seaver, L. H.; Friehling, L.; Lee, S.; and 9 others: Inverted
genomic segments and complex triplication rearrangements are mediated
by inverted repeats in the human genome. Nature Genet. 43: 1074-1081,
2011.

8. Cremers, F. P. M.; Pfeiffer, R. A.; van de Pol, T. J. R.; Hofker,
M. H.; Kruse, T. A.; Wieringa, B.; Ropers, H. H.: An interstitial
duplication of the X chromosome in a male allows physical fine mapping
of probes from the Xq13-q22 region. Hum. Genet. 77: 23-27, 1987.

9. Dhaunchak, A.-S.; Nave, K.-A.: A common mechanism of PLP/DM20
misfolding causes cysteine-mediated endoplasmic reticulum retention
in oligodendrocytes and Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 104: 17813-17818, 2007.

10. Diehl, H.-J.; Schaich, M.; Budzinski, R.-M.; Stoffel, W.: Individual
exons encode the integral membrane domains of human myelin proteolipid
protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83: 9807-9811, 1986.

11. Doll, R.; Natowicz, M. R.; Schiffmann, R.; Smith, F. I.: Molecular
diagnostics for myelin proteolipid protein gene mutations in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 161-169, 1992.

12. Donnelly, A.; Colley, A.; Crimmins, D.; Mulley, J.: A novel mutation
in exon 6 (F236S) of the proteolipid protein gene is associated with
spastic paraplegia. Hum. Mutat. 8: 384-385, 1996.

13. Edgar, J. M.; McLaughlin, M.; Barrie, J. A.; McCulloch, M. C.;
Garbern, J.; Griffiths, I. R.: Age-related axonal and myelin changes
in the rumpshaker mutation of the Plp gene. Acta Neuropath. 107:
331-335, 2004.

14. Edgar, J. M.; McLaughlin, M.; Yool, D.; Zhang, S.-C.; Fowler,
J. H.; Montague, P.; Barrie, J. A.; McCulloch, M. C.; Duncan, I. D.;
Garbern, J.; Nave, K. A.; Griffiths, I. R.: Oliogodendroglial modulation
of fast axonal transport in a mouse model of hereditary spastic paraplegia. J.
Cell Biol. 166: 121-131, 2004.

15. Gencic, S.; Abuelo, D.; Ambler, M.; Hudson, L. D.: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease: an X-linked neurologic disorder of myelin metabolism with
a novel mutation in the gene encoding proteolipid protein. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 45: 435-442, 1989.

16. Gorman, M. P.; Golomb, M. R.; Walsh, L. E.; Hobson, G. M.; Garbern,
J. Y.; Kinkel, R. P.; Darras, B. T.; Urion, D. K.; Eksioglu, Y. Z.
: Steroid-responsive neurologic relapses in a child with a proteolipid
protein-1 mutation. Neurology 68: 1305-1307, 2007.

17. Gow, A.; Lazzarini, R. A.: A cellular mechanism governing the
severity of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. Nature Genet. 13: 422-428,
1996.

18. Hobson, G. M.; Davis, A. P.; Stowell, N. C.; Kolodny, E. H.; Sistermans,
E. A.; de Coo, I. F. M.; Funanage, V. L.; Marks, H. G.: Mutations
in noncoding regions of the proteolipid protein gene in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease. Neurology 55: 1089-1096, 2000.

19. Hobson, G. M.; Huang, Z.; Sperle, K.; Stabley, D. L.; Marks, H.
G.; Cambi, F.: A PLP splicing abnormality is associated with an unusual
presentation of PMD. Ann. Neurol. 52: 477-488, 2002.

20. Hodes, M. E.; Blank, C. A.; Pratt, V. M.; Morales, J.; Napier,
J.; Dlouhy, S. R.: Nonsense mutation in exon 3 of the proteolipid
protein gene (PLP) in a family with an unusual form of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease. Am. J. Med. Genet. 69: 121-125, 1997.

21. Hodes, M. E.; Hadjisavvas, A.; Butler, I. J.; Aydanian, A.; Dlouhy,
S. R.: X-linked spastic paraplegia due to a mutation (C506T; ser169phe)
in exon 4 of the proteolipid protein gene (PLP). Am. J. Med. Genet. 75:
516-517, 1998.

22. Hodes, M. E.; Pratt, V. M.; Dlouhy, S. R.: Genetics of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease. Dev. Neurosci. 15: 383-394, 1993.

23. Hodes, M. E.; Woodward, K.; Spinner, N. B.; Emanuel, B. S.; Enrico-Simon,
A.; Kamholz, J.; Stambolian, D.; Zackai, E. H.; Pratt, V. M.; Thomas,
I. T.; Crandall, K.; Dlouhy, S. R.; Malcolm, S.: Additional copies
of the proteolipid protein gene causing Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease
arise by separate integration into the X chromosome. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 67: 14-22, 2000.

24. Hodes, M. E.; Zimmerman, A. W.; Aydanian, A.; Naidu, S.; Miller,
N. R.; Oller, J. L. G.; Barker, B.; Aleck, K.A.; Hurley, T. D.; Dlouhy,
S. R.: Different mutations in the same codon of the proteolipid protein
gene, PLP, may help in correlating genotype with phenotype in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease/X-linked spastic paraplegia (PMD/SPG2). Am. J. Med. Genet. 82:
132-139, 1999.

25. Hudson, L. D.; Puckett, C.; Berndt, J.; Chan, J.; Gencic, S.:
Mutation of the proteolipid protein gene PLP in a human X chromosome-linked
myelin disorder. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 8128-8131, 1989.

26. Hurst, S.; Garbern, J.; Trepanier, A.; Gow, A.: Quantifying the
carrier female phenotype in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. Genet.
Med. 8: 371-378, 2006.

27. Inoue, K.: PLP1-related inherited dysmyelinating disorders: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease and spastic paraplegia type 2. Neurogenetics 6: 1-16, 2005.

28. Inoue, K.; Osaka, H.; Sugiyama, N.; Kawanishi, C.; Onishi, H.;
Nezu, A.; Kimura, K.; Kimura, S.; Yamada, Y.; Kosaka, K.: A duplicated
PLP gene causing Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease detected by comparative
multiplex PCR. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59: 32-39, 1996.

29. Inoue, K.; Osaka, H.; Thurston, V. C.; Clarke, J. T. R.; Yoneyama,
A.; Rosenbarker, L.; Bird, T. D.; Hodes, M. E.; Shaffer, L. G.; Lupski,
J. R.: Genomic rearrangements resulting in PLP1 deletion occur by
nonhomologous end joining and cause different dysmyelinating phenotypes
in males and females. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71: 838-853, 2002.

30. Inoue, K.; Tanaka, H.; Scaglia, F.; Araki, A.; Shaffer, L. G.;
Lupski, J. R.: Compensating for central nervous system dysmyelination:
females with a proteolipid protein gene duplication and sustained
clinical improvement. Ann. Neurol. 50: 747-754, 2001.

31. Iwaki, A.; Muramoto, T.; Iwaki, T.; Furumi, H.; Dario-deLeon,
M. L.; Tateishi, J.; Fukumaki, Y.: A missense mutation in the proteolipid
protein gene responsible for Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease in a Japanese
family. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 19-22, 1993.

32. Johnston, A. W.; McKusick, V. A.: A sex-linked recessive form
of spastic paraplegia. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 14: 83-94, 1962.

33. Jung, M.; Sommer, I.; Schachner, M.; Nave, K.-A.: Monoclonal
antibody O10 defines a conformationally sensitive cell-surface epitope
of proteolipid protein (PLP): evidence that PLP misfolding underlies
dysmyelination in mutant mice. J. Neurosci. 16: 7920-7929, 1996.

34. Kawanishi, C.; Sugiyama, N.; Osaka, H.; Inoue, K.; Suzuki, K.;
Onishi, H.; Yamada, Y.; Nezu, A.; Kimura, S.; Kosaka, K.: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease: a novel mutation in the 5-prime untranslated region of the
proteolipid protein gene. Hum. Mutat. 7: 355-357, 1996.

35. Kobayashi, H.; Hoffman, E. P.; Marks, H. G.: The rumpshaker mutation
in spastic paraplegia. (Letter) Nature Genet. 7: 351-352, 1994.

36. Koeppen, A. H.; Ronca, N. A.; Greenfield, E. A.; Hans, M. B.:
Defective biosynthesis of proteolipid protein in Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease. Ann. Neurol. 21: 159-170, 1987.

37. Lauriat, T. L.; Shiue, L.; Haroutunian, V.; Verbitsky, M.; Ares,
M., Jr.; Ospina, L.; McInnes, L. A.: Developmental expression profile
of quaking, a candidate gene for schizophrenia, and its target genes
in human prefrontal cortex and hippocampus shows regional specificity. J.
Neurosci. Res. 86: 785-796, 2008.

38. Lee, J. A.; Carvalho, C. M. B.; Lupski, J. R.: A DNA replication
mechanism for generating nonrecurrent rearrangements associated with
genomic disorders. Cell 131: 1235-1247, 2007.

39. Lee, J. A.; Madrid, R. E.; Sperle, K.; Ritterson, C. M.; Hobson,
G. M.; Garbern, J.; Lupski, J. R.; Inoue, K.: Spastic paraplegia
type 2 associated with axonal neuropathy and apparent PLP1 position
effect. Ann. Neurol. 59: 398-403, 2006.

40. Mattei, M. G.; Alliel, P. M.; Dautigny, A.; Passage, E.; Pham-Dinh,
D.; Mattei, J. F.; Jolles, P.: The gene encoding for the major brain
proteolipid (PLP) maps on the q-22 band of the human X chromosome. Hum.
Genet. 72: 352-353, 1986.

41. Mimault, C.; Giraud, G.; Courtois, V.; Cailloux, F.; Boire, J.
Y.; Dastugue, B.; Boespflug-Tanguy, O.; Clinical European Network
on Brain Dysmyelinating Disease: Proteolipoprotein gene analysis
in 82 patients with sporadic Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease: duplications,
the major cause of the disease, originate more frequently in male
germ cells, but point mutations do not. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65: 360-369,
1999.

42. Naidu, S.; Dlouhy, S. R.; Geraghty, M. T.; Hodes, M. E.: A male
child with the rumpshaker mutation, X-linked spastic paraplegia/Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease and lysinuria. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 20: 811-816, 1997.

43. Pham-Dinh, D.; Popot, J.-L.; Boespflug-Tanguy, O.; Landrieu, P.;
Deleuze, J.-F.; Boue, J.; Jolles, P.; Dautigny, A.: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease: a valine to phenylalanine point mutation in a putative extracellular
loop of myelin proteolipid. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 7562-7566,
1991.

44. Pratt, V. M.; Boyadjiev, S.; Green, K.; Hodes, M. E.; Dlouhy,
S. R.: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease caused by a de novo mutation
that originated in exon 2 of the maternal great-grandfather of the
propositus. Am. J. Med. Genet. 58: 70-73, 1995.

45. Pratt, V. M.; Trofatter, J. A.; Larsen, M. B.; Hodes, M. E.; Dlouhy,
S. R.: New variant in exon 3 of the proteolipid protein (PLP) gene
in a family with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. Am. J. Med. Genet. 43:
642-646, 1992.

46. Pratt, V. M.; Trofatter, J. A.; Schinzel, A.; Dlouhy, S. R.; Conneally,
P. M.; Hodes, M. E.: A new mutation in the proteolipid protein (PLP)
gene in a German family with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 38: 136-139, 1991.

47. Raskind, W. H.; Williams, C. A.; Hudson, L. D.; Bird, T. D.:
Complete deletion of the proteolipid protein gene (PLP) in a family
with X-linked Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 49:
1355-1360, 1991.

48. Readhead, C.; Schneider, A.; Griffiths, I.; Nave, K.-A.: Premature
arrest of myelin formation in transgenic mice with increased proteolipid
protein gene dosage. Neuron 12: 583-595, 1994.

49. Saugier-Veber, P.; Munnich, A.; Bonneau, D.; Rozet, J.-M.; Le
Merrer, M.; Gil, R.; Boespflug-Tanguy, O.: X-linked spastic paraplegia
and Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease are allelic disorders at the proteolipid
protein locus. Nature Genet. 6: 257-262, 1994.

50. Simons, M.; Kramer, E.-M.; Macchi, P.; Rathke-Hartlieb, S.; Trotter,
J.; Nave, K.-A.; Schulz, J. B.: Overexpression of the myelin proteolipid
protein leads to accumulation of cholesterol and proteolipid protein
in endosomes/lysosomes: implications for Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. J.
Cell Biol. 157: 327-336, 2002.

51. Sistermans, E. A.; de Coo, R. F.; De Wijs, I. J.; Van Oost, B.
A.: Duplication of the proteolipid protein gene is the major cause
of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. Neurology 50: 1749-1754, 1998.

52. Sistermans, E. A.; de Wijs, I. J.; de Coo, R. F. M.; Smit, L.
M. E.; Menko, F. H.; van Oost, B. A.: A (G-to-A) mutation in the
initiation codon of the proteolipid protein gene causing a relatively
mild form of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease in a Dutch family. Hum.
Genet. 97: 337-339, 1996.

53. Stevenson, R. E.; Tarpey, P.; May, M. M.; Stratton, M. R.; Schwartz,
C. E.: Arena syndrome is caused by a missense mutation in PLP1. (Letter) Am.
J. Med. Genet. 149A: 1081 only, 2009.

54. Strautnieks, S.; Rutland, P.; Winter, R. M.; Baraitser, M.; Malcolm,
S.: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease: detection of mutations thr181-to-pro
and leu223-to-pro in the proteolipid protein gene, and prenatal diagnosis. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 51: 871-878, 1992.

55. Swanton, E.; Holland, A.; High, S.; Woodman, P.: Disease-associated
mutations cause premature oligomerization of myelin proteolipid protein
in the endoplasmic reticulum. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 4342-4347,
2005.

56. Trofatter, J. A.; Dlouhy, S. R.; DeMyer, W.; Conneally, P. M.;
Hodes, M. E.: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease: tight linkage to proteolipid
protein gene exon variant. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 9427-9430,
1989.

57. Trofatter, J. A.; Pratt, V. M.; Dlouhy, S. R.; Hodes, M. E.:
AhaII polymorphism in human X-linked proteolipid protein gene (PLP). Nucleic
Acids Res. 19: 6057, 1991.

58. Wilkins, P. J.; D'Souza, C. R.; Bridge, P. J.: Correction of
the published sequence for the human proteolipid protein gene. Hum.
Genet. 86: 617-618, 1991.

59. Willard, H. F.; Munroe, D. L. G.; Riordan, J. R.; McCloskey, D.
: Regional assignment of the proteolipid protein (PLP) gene to Xq21.2-q22
and gene analysis in X-linked Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. (Abstract) Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 46: 716, 1987.

60. Willard, H. F.; Riordan, J. R.: Assignment of the gene for myelin
proteolipid protein to the X chromosome: implications for X-linked
myelin disorders. Science 230: 940-942, 1985.

61. Woodward, K.; Cundall, M.; Palmer, R.; Surtees, R.; Winter, R.
M.; Malcolm, S.: Complex chromosomal rearrangement and associated
counseling issues in a family with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 118A: 15-24, 2003.

62. Woodward, K.; Kendall, E.; Vetrie, D.; Malcolm, S.: Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease: identification of Xq22 proteolipid-protein duplications and
characterization of breakpoints by interphase FISH. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 63:
207-217, 1998.

63. Woodward, K.; Kirtland, K.; Dlouhy, S.; Raskind, W.; Bird, T.;
Malcolm, S.; Abeliovich, D.: X inactivation phenotype in carriers
of Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease: skewed in carriers of a duplication
and random in carriers of point mutations. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 8:
449-454, 2000.

64. Woodward, K. J.; Cundall, M.; Sperle, K.; Sistermans, E. A.; Ross,
M.; Howell, G.; Gribble, S. M.; Burford, D. C.; Carter, N. P.; Hobson,
D. L.; Garbern, J. Y.; Kamholz, J.; Heng, H.; Hodes, M. E.; Malcolm,
S.; Hobson, G. M.: Heterogeneous duplications in patients with Pelizaeus-Merzbacher
disease suggest a mechanism of coupled homologous and nonhomologous
recombination. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 77: 966-987, 2005.

65. Yamamoto, T.; Nanba, E.; Zhang, H.; Sasaki, M.; Komaki, H.; Takeshita,
K.: Jimpy(msd) mouse mutation and connatal Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease.
(Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 75: 439-440, 1998.

66. Yool, D. A.; Edgar, J. M.; Montague, P.; Malcolm, S.: The proteolipid
protein gene and myelin disorders in man and animal models. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 9: 987-992, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/23/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/24/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/16/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/24/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/16/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/7/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/5/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/25/2007
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/4/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/13/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/12/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/25/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/18/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/16/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/16/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/4/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/30/2002

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 6/27/2002

EDITED carol: 10/02/2013
carol: 3/21/2013
alopez: 7/24/2012
terry: 7/23/2012
mgross: 6/28/2010
terry: 6/24/2010
wwang: 11/6/2009
ckniffin: 10/16/2009
mgross: 2/24/2009
terry: 2/24/2009
wwang: 6/12/2008
ckniffin: 5/16/2008
wwang: 3/10/2008
mgross: 2/19/2008
terry: 2/7/2008
wwang: 1/14/2008
ckniffin: 12/5/2007
alopez: 8/2/2007
terry: 7/25/2007
carol: 3/28/2007
alopez: 10/13/2006
terry: 9/29/2006
carol: 8/24/2006
carol: 5/10/2006
ckniffin: 5/4/2006
wwang: 4/19/2006
ckniffin: 4/13/2006
alopez: 12/16/2005
terry: 12/12/2005
wwang: 8/18/2005
wwang: 8/9/2005
ckniffin: 7/25/2005
wwang: 5/17/2005
wwang: 5/12/2005
ckniffin: 4/18/2005
terry: 3/3/2005
tkritzer: 1/4/2005
terry: 12/16/2004
carol: 11/10/2004
ckniffin: 11/9/2004
cwells: 11/10/2003
tkritzer: 4/25/2003
terry: 4/16/2003
cwells: 12/10/2002
ckniffin: 12/4/2002
ckniffin: 11/15/2002
carol: 11/4/2002
tkritzer: 11/1/2002
terry: 10/30/2002
carol: 8/28/2002
ckniffin: 8/28/2002
ckniffin: 7/16/2002

605602	TITLE *605602 MYOZENIN 2; MYOZ2
;;CALSARCIN 1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Calcineurin (see 114105) is a calcium/calmodulin-dependent
serine-threonine phosphatase that plays an important role in transducing
calcium-dependent signals in a variety of cell types. Calcineurin has
also been shown to have a profound influence on the properties of
striated muscle cells, including cardiac muscle. To identify potential
cardiac-specific regulators of calcineurin, Frey et al. (2000) conducted
a yeast 2-hybrid screen, using the catalytic A subunit of calcineurin as
bait. They identified a novel family of striated muscle-specific
calcineurin-interacting proteins called calsarcins. Calsarcins interact
and colocalize with the Z disc protein alpha-actinin (ACTN1; 102575) in
vitro and in vivo and thereby tether calcineurin to the sarcomere of
cardiac and skeletal muscle. These properties of calsarcins suggest an
important role for these proteins in modulating the function and
substrate specificity of calcineurin in striated muscle cells.

CLONING

Frey et al. (2000) cloned and characterized the cDNA of calsarcin-1 and
calsarcin-2 (MYOZ1; 605603). Calsarcin-1 encodes a 263-amino acid
protein, which shows the highest sequence homology with calsarcin-2 in
the N and C termini. Northern blot analysis of human tissues revealed a
highly striated muscle-specific expression pattern of both genes.
Calsarcins 1 and 2 are expressed in developing cardiac and skeletal
muscle during embryogenesis, but calsarcin-1 is expressed specifically
in adult cardiac and slow-twitch skeletal muscle as 1.6- and 2.6-kb
transcripts, whereas calsarcin-2 is expressed only in fast skeletal
muscle as a 1.6-kb transcript.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Frey and Olson (2002) showed that ZASP
(LDB3; 605906) interacted strongly with MYOZ1, MYOZ2, and MYOZ3
(610735). Coimmunoprecipitation studies in COS-7 cells showed that both
the longest and shortest ZASP splice variants bind all 3 members of the
myozenin family, suggesting that the interaction is not isoform
specific.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a 3-generation black family segregating autosomal dominant CMH
mapping to chromosome 4q26-q27 (CMH16; 613838), Osio et al. (2007)
identified a heterozygous missense mutation in the candidate gene MYOZ2
(605602.0001) that segregated with disease in the family. Analysis of
MYOZ2 in 516 additional CMH probands revealed another patient with a
different heterozygous missense mutation (605602.0002). Both mutations
occurred at highly conserved residues in MYOZ2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Frey et al. (2004) generated Myoz2 -/- mice and observed enhanced
calcineurin signaling in striated muscle and an excess of slow skeletal
muscle fibers. There was activation of a hypertrophic gene program
despite the absence of cardiac hypertrophy in the mutant mice. The
cardiac growth response to pressure overload was enhanced, but cardiac
adaptation to other hypertrophic stimuli such as chronic catecholamine
stimulation or exercise was not affected. Frey et al. (2004) concluded
that MYOZ2 modulates calcineurin signaling in striated muscles in vivo
and thereby influences the response of the heart to biomechanical
stress.

Frank et al. (2007) generated Myoz2-overexpressing transgenic mice,
which did not exhibit a pathologic phenotype when unchallenged.
Long-term infusion of angiotensin II (see 106150) resulted in a similar
degree of hypertension in both transgenic and wildtype mice; in contrast
to wildtype, however, the Myoz2-overexpressing mice did not develop
cardiac hypertrophy, yet had no impairment of contractile function by
cardiac catheterization and echocardiography. Induction of the
hypertrophic gene program was markedly blunted and expression of the
calcineurin-dependent gene MCIP1 (RCAN1; 602917) was significantly
reduced in transgenic mice. Frank et al. (2007) concluded that the
calsarcin-1 protein prevents angiotensin II-induced cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy at least in part via inhibition of calcineurin signaling.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 16
MYOZ2, SER48PRO

In 6 affected individuals from a 3-generation black family with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH16; 613838), Osio et al. (2007)
identified heterozygosity for a T-C transition at nucleotide position
15,072 in exon 3 of the MYOZ2 gene, resulting in a ser48-to-pro (S48P)
substitution at a highly conserved residue. The mutation was not found
in 4 clinically normal family members or in 658 controls who were
asymptomatic and had normal electrocardiograms and echocardiograms,
including 253 black individuals.

.0002
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC, 16
MYOZ2, ILE246MET

In a patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH16; 613838), Osio et
al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for an A-G transition at nucleotide
position 50,278 in exon 6 of the MYOZ2 gene, resulting in an
ile246-to-met (I246M) substitution at a highly conserved residue. The
patient had 2 deceased sibs with CMH. The mutation was not found in 2
unaffected offspring or in 517 unaffected controls, including 405 white
individuals.

REFERENCE 1. Frank, D.; Kuhn, C.; van Eickels, M.; Gehring, D.; Hanselmann,
C.; Lippl, S.; Will, R.; Katus, H. A.; Frey, N.: Calsarcin-1 protects
against angiotensin-II-induced cardiac hypertrophy. Circulation 116:
2587-2596, 2007. Note: Erratum: Circulation 117: e19 only, 2008.

2. Frey, N.; Barrientos, T.; Shelton, J. M.; Frank, D.; Rutten, H.;
Gehring, D.; Kuhn, C.; Lutz, M.; Rothermel, B.; Bassel-Duby, R.; Richardson,
J. A.; Katus, H. A.; Hill, J. A.; Olson, E. N.: Mice lacking calsarcin-1
are sensitized to calcineurin signaling and show accelerated cardiomyopathy
in response to pathological biomechanical stress. Nature Med. 10:
1336-1343, 2004.

3. Frey, N.; Olson, E.N.: Calsarcin-3, a novel skeletal muscle-specific
member of the calsarcin family, interacts with multiple Z-disc proteins. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 13998-14004, 2002.

4. Frey, N.; Richardson, J. A.; Olson, E. N.: Calsarcins, a novel
family of sarcomeric calcineurin-binding proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 97: 14632-14637, 2000.

5. Osio, A.; Tan, L.; Chen, S. N.; Lombardi, R.; Nagueh, S. F.; Shete,
S.; Roberts, R.; Willerson, J. T.; Marian, A. J.: Myozenin 2 is a
novel gene for human hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Circ. Res. 100:
766-768, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/25/2011
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/7/2008
Jennifer L. Goldstein - updated: 1/31/2007

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/29/2001

EDITED terry: 06/04/2012
carol: 3/25/2011
terry: 3/25/2011
carol: 9/24/2008
terry: 7/3/2008
carol: 3/7/2008
wwang: 1/31/2007
joanna: 1/14/2002
carol: 1/29/2001

606100	TITLE *606100 EGF-LIKE MODULE-CONTAINING, MUCIN-LIKE HORMONE RECEPTOR 2; EMR2
DESCRIPTION Epidermal growth factor (EGF; 131530)-7-transmembrane (TM7) proteins are
G-protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) found on monocytes and neutrophils.
They include mouse F4/80, mouse and human CD97 (601211), and EMR1
(600493), the likely human homolog of F4/80. EGF-TM7 glycoproteins have
variable numbers of N-terminal EGF-like repeats coupled to a family-B
GPCR-related moiety via a mucin-like stalk.

CLONING

By EST database searching, 5-prime and 3-prime RACE, and cDNA library
screening, Lin et al. (2000) obtained cDNAs encoding EMR2 and multiple
splice variants. Sequence analysis predicted that the 823-amino acid
EMR2 protein has an N-terminal signal peptide, 5 EGF-like domains, which
are nearly identical to those of CD97, and multiple N- and
O-glycosylation sites. EGF domains 2 through 5 have calcium-binding
sequences likely to play important roles in protein-protein
interactions. The spacer domain, which contains a cysteine-rich motif
involved in proteolytic cleavage, and the 248-residue 7-transmembrane
domain are each approximately 46% identical to those of CD97. The
41-amino acid cytoplasmic tail has 4 potential phosphorylation sites.
Northern blot analysis revealed expression of 3.3- and 6.1-kb EMR2
transcripts. Highest expression was found in peripheral blood
leukocytes, followed by spleen and lymph nodes, with intermediate to low
levels in thymus, bone marrow, fetal liver, placenta, and lung, and no
expression in heart, brain, skeletal muscle, kidney, or pancreas. RT-PCR
analysis detected EMR2 expression in monocyte/macrophage and Jurkat cell
lines but not in other cell lines tested, indicating expression of EMR2
is less broad than that observed for CD97. Flow cytometric analysis
demonstrated cross-reactivity with EGF domain-reactive anti-CD97
antibodies and specific reactivity with antibodies against spacer
sequences. Binding analysis, however, showed that EMR2 does not interact
with the CD97 ligand, CD55 (125240), suggesting that the association
between CD97 and CD55 is highly dependent on 3 or fewer amino acids
and/or the more diverse spacer region.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Lin et al. (2000) determined that the EMR2
gene contains 20 exons and spans 45 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Lin et al. (2000) localized the EMR2 gene
between the NOTCH3 (600276) and RFX1 (600006) genes on 19p13.1, close to
the other EGF-TM7 genes.

REFERENCE 1. Lin, H.-H.; Stacey, M.; Hamann, J.; Gordon, S.; McKnight, A. J.
: Human EMR2, a novel EGF-TM7 molecule on chromosome 19p13.1, is closely
related to CD97. Genomics 67: 188-200, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/11/2001

EDITED wwang: 07/25/2008
mgross: 7/11/2001

190010	TITLE *190010 TRANSFERRIN RECEPTOR; TFRC
;;TRANSFERRIN RECEPTOR 1; TFR1;;
TFR;;
TRFR;;
CD71
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

A monoclonal antibody, OKT-9, recognizes an antigen ubiquitously
distributed on the cell surface of actively growing human cells. It is a
glycoprotein composed of disulfide-linked polypeptide chains, each of
90,000 daltons molecular weight. Immunoprecipitation of the OKT-9
antigen in the presence of labeled transferrin results in specific
precipitation of transferrin (Sutherland et al., 1981); thus, the OKT-9
antigen is presumably transferrin receptor. Nikinmaa and Schroder (1987)
concluded that p90 and TFRC are the same protein: studies using
monoclonal antibodies indicated that exhaustive precipitation of
radioactively labeled lysates with one antibody removed all activity of
lysates with the other. Peptide maps of antigens recognized with both
antibodies showed great similarity and indicated that both antibodies
react with the same antigen, the human transferrin receptor, but with
different antigenic sites of the molecule.

GENE FUNCTION

Casey et al. (1988) analyzed the regulation by iron of the TFRC gene by
examining mouse cells transformed with chimeric constructs containing
the human transferrin receptor gene's promoter and either the structural
gene for bacterial chloramphenicol acetyltransferase or the human TFRC
cDNA. They concluded that at least 2 genetic elements, one 5-prime and
one 3-prime to the gene, are involved in the regulation of the TFRC gene
by iron.

Radoshitzky et al. (2007) demonstrated a specific high-affinity
association between TFR1 and the entry glycoprotein of Machupo virus (a
New World arenavirus). Expression of human TFR1, but not human TFR2
(604720), in hamster cell lines markedly enhanced the infection of
viruses pseudotyped with the glycoprotein of Machupo, Guanarito, and
Junin viruses, but not with those of Lassa or lymphocytic
choriomeningitis viruses. An anti-TFR1 antibody efficiently inhibited
the replication of Machupo, Guanarito, Junin, and Sabia viruses, but not
that of Lassa virus. Iron depletion of culture medium enhanced, and iron
supplementation decreased, the efficiency of infection by Junin and
Machupo but not Lassa pseudoviruses. Radoshitzky et al. (2007) concluded
that TFR1 is a cellular receptor for New World hemorrhagic fever
arenaviruses.

Ishii et al. (2009) found that knockdown of Ppargc1b (608886) in primary
mouse osteoclasts impaired their differentiation and mitochondrial
biogenesis. Transferrin receptor expression was induced in osteoclasts
via iron regulatory protein-2 (IREB2; 147582), and Tfrc-mediated iron
uptake promoted osteoclast differentiation and bone-resorbing activity,
which was associated with the induction of mitochondrial respiration,
production of reactive oxygen species, and accelerated Ppargc1b
transcription. Iron chelation inhibited osteoclastic bone resorption and
protected female mice against bone loss following estrogen deficiency
resulting from ovariectomy. Ishii et al. (2009) concluded that
mitochondrial biogenesis, which is induced by PPARGC1B and supported by
TFRC-mediated iron uptake for utilization by mitochondrial respiratory
proteins, is fundamental to osteoclast activation and bone metabolism.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid studies, Goodfellow et al. (1982) assigned the
TFR locus to chromosome 3. Miller et al. (1983) confirmed the assignment
to chromosome 3, specifically 3q22-qter. By in situ hybridization, Rabin
et al. (1985) narrowed the assignment to 3q26.2-qter. Adriaansen et al.
(1990) confirmed the assignment to chromosome 3 by study of somatic cell
hybrids. Using linkage analysis, somatic cell hybrid and radiation
hybrid mapping panels, and fluorescence in situ hybridization, Kashuba
et al. (1997) refined the localization of the TFRC gene to 3q29.

Valenzuela et al. (1991) found highly significant association between Rh
(111700) phenotypes and total iron binding capacity, i.e., transferrin.
Children with the C Rh specificity had higher values than non-C or c
individuals. Valenzuela et al. (1991) suggested that this finding may be
significant in relation to maintenance of the Rh polymorphism and
fetomaternal incompatibility.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Athletes such as racing cyclists sometimes use erythropoietin, which has
been officially included in the International Olympic Committee list of
banned substances since 1990, as a booster drug. Gareau et al. (1994)
presented evidence that the level of transferrin receptor in the blood
can be used as a means of detecting Epo misuse.

ANIMAL MODEL

Levy et al. (1999) disrupted the transferrin receptor gene, which they
termed Trfr, in mice. Homozygous mutant mice were not viable beyond
embryonic day 12.5 and had severe anemia with hydrops as well as diffuse
neurologic abnormalities. There was some variation of onset of severe
anemia, and in nonanemic embryos without tissue edema and necrosis
(E9.5), both stressed erythropoiesis and neurologic abnormalities were
apparent. The authors concluded that inadequate iron led to neuronal
apoptosis, but that tissues other than erythrocytes and neurons can
obtain sufficient iron for growth and development through mechanisms
independent of the transferrin cycle. Haploinsufficiency for the
transferrin receptor resulted in microcytic, hypochromic erythrocytes;
normal hemoglobin and hematocrit values were due to compensatory
increase in red cell numbers. Although iron saturation of serum
transferrin was indistinguishable from that of wildtype, heterozygotes
had significantly less tissue iron.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Enns et al. (1982); Larrick and Hyman (1984); Newman et al. (1982);
Omary and Trowbridge (1981); Schneider et al. (1983); Schneider et
al. (1984); Vodinelich et al. (1983)
REFERENCE 1. Adriaansen, H. J.; Geurts Van Kessel, A. H. M.; Wijdenes-De Bresser,
J. H. F. M.; Van Drunen-Schoenmaker, E.; Van Dongen, J. J. M.: Expression
of the myeloid differentiation antigen CD33 depends on the presence
of human chromosome 19 in human-mouse hybrids. Ann. Hum. Genet. 54:
115-119, 1990.

2. Casey, J. L.; Di Jeso, B.; Rao, K.; Klausner, R. D.; Harford, J.
B.: Two genetic loci participate in the regulation by iron of the
gene for the human transferrin receptor. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85:
1787-1791, 1988.

3. Enns, C. A.; Suomalainen, H. A.; Gebhardt, J. E.; Schroder, J.;
Sussman, H. H.: Human transferrin receptor: expression of the receptor
is assigned to chromosome 3. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 79: 3241-3245,
1982.

4. Gareau, R.; Gagnon, M. G.; Thellend, C.; Chenard, C.; Audran, M.;
Chanal, J.-L.; Ayotte, C.; Brisson, G. R.: Transferrin soluble receptor:
a possible probe for detection of erythropoietin abuse by athletes. Horm.
Metab. Res. 26: 311-312, 1994.

5. Goodfellow, P. N.; Banting, G.; Sutherland, R.; Greaves, M.; Solomon,
E.; Povey, S.: Expression of human transferrin receptor is controlled
by a gene on chromosome 3: assignment using species specificity of
a monoclonal antibody. Somat. Cell Genet. 8: 197-206, 1982.

6. Ishii, K.; Fumoto, T.; Iwai, K.; Takeshita, S.; Ito, M.; Shimohata,
N.; Aburatani, H.; Taketani, S.; Lelliott, C. J.; Vidal-Puig, A.;
Ikeda, K.: Coordination of PGC-1-beta and iron uptake in mitochondrial
biogenesis and osteoclast activation. Nature Med. 15: 259-266, 2009.

7. Kashuba, V. I.; Gizatullin, R. Z.; Protopopov, A. I.; Allikmets,
R.; Korolev, S.; Li, J.; Boldog, F.; Tory, K.; Zabarovska, V.; Marcsek,
Z.; Sumegi, J.; Klein, G.; Zabarovsky, E. R.; Kisselev, L.: NotI
linking/jumping clones of human chromosome 3: mapping of the TFRC,
RAB7 and HAUSP genes to regions rearranged in leukemia and deleted
in solid tumors. FEBS Lett. 419: 181-185, 1997.

8. Larrick, J. W.; Hyman, E. S.: Acquired iron-deficiency anemia
caused by an antibody against the transferrin receptor. New Eng.
J. Med. 311: 214-218, 1984.

9. Levy, J. E.; Jin, O.; Fujiwara, Y.; Kuo, F.; Andrews, N. C.: Transferrin
receptor is necessary for development of erythrocytes and the nervous
system. Nature Genet. 21: 396-399, 1999.

10. Miller, Y. E.; Jones, C.; Scoggin, C.; Morse, H.; Seligman, P.
: Chromosome 3q (22-ter) encodes the human transferrin receptor. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 35: 573-583, 1983.

11. Newman, R.; Schneider, C.; Sutherland, R.; Vodinelich, L.; Greaves,
M.: The transferrin receptor. Trends Biochem. Sci. 7: 397-400,
1982.

12. Nikinmaa, B.; Schroder, J.: Two antigens, the transferrin receptor
and p90 assigned to human chromosome 3, are probably the same protein. Hereditas 107:
55-58, 1987.

13. Omary, M. B.; Trowbridge, I. S.: Biosynthesis of the human transferrin
receptor in cultured cells. J. Biol. Chem. 256: 12888-12892, 1981.

14. Rabin, M.; McClelland, A.; Kuhn, L.; Ruddle, F. H.: Regional
localization of the human transferrin receptor gene to 3q26.2-qter. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 37: 1112-1116, 1985.

15. Radoshitzky, S. R.; Abraham, J.; Spiropoulou, C. F.; Kuhn, J.
H.; Nguyen, D.; Li, W.; Nagel, J.; Schmidt, P. J.; Nunberg, J. H.;
Andrews, N. C.; Farzan, M.; Choe, H.: Transferrin receptor 1 is a
cellular receptor for New World haemorrhagic fever arenaviruses. Nature 446:
92-96, 2007.

16. Schneider, C.; Kurkinen, M.; Greaves, M.: Isolation of cDNA clones
for the human transferrin receptor. EMBO J. 2: 2259-2263, 1983.

17. Schneider, C.; Owen, M. J.; Banville, D.; Williams, J. G.: Primary
structure of human transferrin receptor deduced from the mRNA sequence. Nature 311:
675-678, 1984.

18. Sutherland, R.; Delia, D.; Schneider, C.; Newman, R.; Kemshead,
J.; Greaves, M.: Ubiquitous cell-surface glycoprotein on tumor cells
is proliferation-associated receptor for transferrin. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 78: 4515-4519, 1981.

19. Valenzuela, C. Y.; Avendano, A.; Harb, Z.: Association between
Rh and plasma iron binding (transferrin). Hum. Genet. 87: 438-440,
1991.

20. Vodinelich, L.; Sutherland, R.; Schneider, C.; Newman, R.; Greaves,
M.: Receptor for transferrin may be a 'target' structure for natural
killer cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 835-839, 1983.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/8/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/20/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/30/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1986

EDITED wwang: 06/11/2009
terry: 6/8/2009
carol: 4/23/2008
alopez: 6/27/2007
terry: 6/20/2007
joanna: 3/14/2007
alopez: 3/30/1999
terry: 6/5/1998
dholmes: 4/14/1998
alopez: 2/26/1998
carol: 9/20/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/22/1992
carol: 10/18/1991
carol: 10/16/1991
carol: 10/5/1990

606940	TITLE *606940 ZINC FINGER HOMEOBOX 4; ZFHX4
;;ZFH4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Hemmi et al. (2006) cloned the human ZFHX4 gene. The deduced 3,599-amino
acid protein has 4 homeodomains and 22 zinc fingers. ZFHX4 is 90%
homologous to mouse Zfhx4, 52% to human ATBF1A (104155), and 24% to
Drosophila ZFH-2. RT-PCR analysis showed that ZFHX4 transcripts were
expressed in adult human brain, liver and muscle, as well as in
differentiating cells and myoblasts, suggesting it may be involved in
neural and muscle differentiation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Hemmi et al. (2006) determined that the ZFHX4 gene spans about 180 kb
and contains 12 exons.

MAPPING

Hemmi et al. (2006) mapped the ZFHX4 gene to chromosome 8q13.3-q21.11 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization.

CYTOGENETICS

McMullan et al. (2002) analyzed the chromosome breakpoints in a male
patient with congenital bilateral isolated ptosis and a de novo balanced
translocation t(1;8)(p34.3;q21.12). The 1p breakpoint was situated
approximately 13 Mb distal to the previously reported locus at
1p34.1-p32 identified by linkage as the site of a gene responsible for
congenital bilateral isolated ptosis (PTOS1; 178300), and did not
disrupt the coding sequence, whereas the chromosome 8 breakpoint
disrupted a gene homologous to the mouse zfh4 gene. McMullan et al.
(2002) identified 10 exons of the human ZFH4 gene covering approximately
161 kb of DNA; the translocation breakpoint occurred in intron 4. Murine
zfh4 codes for a zinc finger homeodomain protein that is a transcription
factor expressed in both muscle and nerve tissue. McMullan et al. (2002)
proposed that human ZFH4 is a candidate gene for congenital bilateral
isolated ptosis.

REFERENCE 1. Hemmi, K.; Ma, D.; Miura, Y.; Kawaguchi, M.; Sasahara, M.; Hashimoto-Tamaoki,
T.; Tamaoki, T.; Sakata, N.; Tsuchiya, K.: A homeodomain-zinc finger
protein, ZFHX4, is expressed in neuronal differentiation manner and
suppressed in muscle differentiation manner. Biol. Pharm. Bull. 29:-1830-1835,
2006.

2. McMullan, T. F. W.; Crolla, J. A.; Gregory, S. G.; Carter, N. P.;
Cooper, R. A.; Howell, G. R.; Robinson, D. O.: A candidate gene for
congenital bilateral isolated ptosis identified by molecular analysis
of a de novo balanced translocation. Hum. Genet. 110: 244-250, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/19/2011

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 5/14/2002

EDITED carol: 09/19/2011
ckniffin: 9/19/2011
wwang: 11/24/2008
alopez: 5/14/2002

606503	TITLE *606503 SUPPRESSOR OF VARIEGATION 3-9, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 2; SUV39H2
;;SU(VAR)3-9, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF, 2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

O'Carroll et al. (2000) isolated and characterized a murine gene,
Suv39h2, that encodes an H3 histone (see 602810) methyltransferase
(HMTase) with 59% identity to Suv39h1 (300254). Although both Suv39h
loci displayed overlapping expression profiles during mouse
embryogenesis, Suv39h2 transcripts remained specifically expressed in
adult testes. Immunolocalization of the Suv39h2 protein during
spermatogenesis indicated enriched distribution at the heterochromatin
from the leptotene to the round spermatid stage. Moreover, Suv39h2
specifically accumulated with chromatin of the sex chromosomes (XY
body), which undergo transcriptional silencing during the first meiotic
prophase. These data were consistent with redundant enzymatic roles for
Suv39h1 and Suv39h2 during mouse development and suggested an additional
function of the Suv39h2 HMTase in organizing meiotic heterochromatin
that may even impart an epigenetic imprint to the male germline.

GENE FUNCTION

In eukaryotes, Suv39h H3K9 trimethyltransferases are required for
pericentric heterochromatin formation and function. In early mouse
preimplantation embryos, however, paternal pericentric heterochromatin
lacks Suv39h-mediated H3K9me3 and downstream marks. Puschendorf et al.
(2008) demonstrated Ezh2 (601573)-independent targeting of maternally
provided polycomb repressive complex-1 (PRC1) components to paternal
heterochromatin. In Suv39h2 maternally deficient zygotes, PRC1 also
associated with maternal heterochromatin lacking H3K9me3, thereby
revealing hierarchy between repressive pathways. In Rnf2 (608985)
maternally deficient zygotes, the PRC1 complex was disrupted, and levels
of pericentric major satellite transcripts were increased at the
paternal but not the maternal genome. Puschendorf et al. (2008)
concluded that in early embryos, Suv39h-mediated H3K9me3 constitutes the
dominant maternal transgenerational signal for pericentric
heterochromatin formation. In the absence of this signal, PRC1 functions
as the default repressive backup mechanism. Paternal epigenetic
asymmetry, also observed along cleavage chromosomes, is resolved by the
end of the 8-cell stage--concurrent with blastomere
polarization--marking the end of the maternal-to-embryonic transition.

MAPPING

Using FISH and haplotype analysis, O'Carroll et al. (2000) mapped the
mouse Suv39h2 gene to the subcentromeric region of chromosome 2. The
International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the human
SUV39H2 gene to chromosome 10 (TMAP stSG30494).

ANIMAL MODEL

Peters et al. (2001) generated mice deficient for either Suv39h1 or
Suv39h2. These animals displayed normal viability and fertility and did
not exhibit apparent phenotypes. The authors subsequently intercrossed
Suv39h1 -/- and Suv39h2 -/- mice to generate compound Suv39h mutants
that were then used to derive Suv39h double-null mice (Suv39h1 -/- and
Suv39h2 -/-). These mice displayed severely impaired viability and
chromosomal instabilities that were associated with an increased tumor
risk and perturbed chromosome interactions during male meiosis. These
data suggested a crucial role for pericentric H3 histone-lys9 (H3-lys9)
methylation in protecting genome stability and defined the Suv39h
HMTases as important epigenetic regulators for mammalian development.

Garcia-Cao et al. (2004) reported on telomere length and function in
mice null with respect to both the histone methyltransferases Suv39h1
and Suv39h2. The 2 govern methylation of H3-lys9 in heterochromatic
regions (Peters et al., 2001). Garcia-Cao et al. (2004) showed that
primary cells derived from doubly-null mice had abnormally long
telomeres relative to wildtype controls. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis, they found that telomeres were enriched in
di- and trimethylated H3-lys9 but that telomeres of doubly-null cells
had less dimethylated and trimethylated H3-lys9 but more monomethylated
H3-lys9. Concomitant with the decrease in H3-lys9 methylation, telomeres
in doubly-null cells had reduced binding of the chromobox proteins Cbx1
(604511), Cbx3 (604477), and Cbx5 (604478), which are homologs of
heterochromatin protein-1 of Drosophila. The findings indicated
substantial changes in the state of telomeric heterochromatin in
doubly-null cells in association with abnormal telomere elongation. The
results indicated epigenetic regulation of telomere length in mammals by
Suv39h1 and Suv39h2.

REFERENCE 1. Garcia-Cao, M.; O'Sullivan, R.; Peters, A. H. F. M.; Jenuwein,
T.; Blasco, M. A.: Epigenetic regulation of telomere length in mammalian
cells by the Suv39h1 and Suv39h2 histone methyltransferases. Nature
Genet. 36: 94-99, 2004.

2. O'Carroll, D.; Scherthan, H.; Peters, A. H. F. M.; Opravil, S.;
Haynes, A. R.; Laible, G.; Rea, S.; Schmid, M.; Lebersorger, A.; Jerratsch,
M.; Sattler, L.; Mattei, M. G.; Denny, P.; Brown, S. D. M.; Schweizer,
D.; Jenuwein, T.: Isolation and characterization of Suv39h2, a second
histone H3 methyltransferase gene that displays testis-specific expression. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 20: 9423-9433, 2000.

3. Peters, A. H. F. M.; O'Carroll, D.; Scherthan, H.; Mechtler, K.;
Sauer, S.; Schofer, C.; Weipoltshammer, K.; Pagani, M.; Lachner, M.;
Kohlmaier, A.; Opravil, S.; Doyle, M.; Sibilia, M.; Jenuwein, T.:
Loss of the Suv39h histone methyltransferases impairs mammalian heterochromatin
and genome stability. Cell 107: 323-337, 2001.

4. Puschendorf, M.; Terranova, R.; Boutsma, E.; Mao, X.; Isono, K.;
Brykczynska, U.; Kolb, C.; Otte, A. P.; Koseki, H.; Orkin, S. H.;
van Lohuizen, M.; Peters, A. H. F. M.: PRC1 and Suv39h specify parental
asymmetry at constitutive heterochromatin in early mouse embryos. Nature
Genet. 40: 411-420, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/8/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/24/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/5/2004

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 11/27/2001

EDITED mgross: 02/05/2013
alopez: 5/8/2008
terry: 4/24/2008
terry: 4/6/2005
tkritzer: 1/5/2004
joanna: 12/27/2001
mgross: 11/27/2001

610469	TITLE *610469 ADAPTOR-RELATED PROTEIN COMPLEX 3, MU-2 SUBUNIT; AP3M2
;;CLATHRIN ADAPTOR COMPLEX AP3, MU-3B SUBUNIT;;
CLA20
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Pevsner et al. (1994) cloned rat Ap3m2, which encodes a 47-kD protein
with about 80% amino acid identity to rat Ap3m1 (610366) and about 30%
amino acid identity to mouse mu-1 (see AP1M1; 603535) and rat mu-2
(AP2M1; 601024). Ap3m2 was expressed exclusively in rat brain and spinal
cord.

By amplifying exons from cosmid clones mapped to chromosome 8, followed
by screening a human fetal brain cDNA library, Koyama et al. (1995)
cloned AP3M2, which they designated CLA20. AP3M2 encodes a deduced
protein of 418 amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous
expression of a major 3.5-kb transcript and low expression of a minor
1.7-kb transcript in liver, skeletal muscle, kidney, and pancreas.

MAPPING

Koyama et al. (1995) localized the AP3M2 gene to a cosmid clone that had
previously been mapped by FISH to chromosome 8p11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Koyama, K.; Sudo, K.; Nakamura, Y.: Isolation of 115 human chromosome
8-specific expressed sequence tags by exon amplification. Genomics 26:
245-253, 1995.

2. Pevsner, J.; Volknandt, W.; Wong, B. R.; Scheller, R. H.: Two
rat homologs of clathrin-associated adaptor proteins. Gene 146:
279-283, 1994.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/9/2006

EDITED wwang: 10/09/2006
wwang: 10/9/2006

611987	TITLE *611987 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S25; MRPS25
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPS25 is 1 of more
than 70 protein components of mitochondrial ribosomes that are encoded
by the nuclear genome (Kenmochi et al., 2001).

CLONING

By proteolytic digestion of whole bovine 28S subunits, followed by
peptide analysis and EST database analysis, Koc et al. (2001) identified
full-length human MRPS25. The deduced 151-amino acid MRPS25 protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 17.7 kD. Koc et al. (2001) identified
MRPS25 orthologs in mouse, Drosophila, C. elegans, and yeast, but not in
E. coli. Mouse and human MRPS25 share 89.5% amino acid identity.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis and analysis of an integrated BAC-STS map,
Kenmochi et al. (2001) mapped the MRPS25 gene to chromosome 3p25.

REFERENCE 1. Kenmochi, N.; Suzuki, T.; Uechi, T.; Magoori, M.; Kuniba, M.; Higa,
S.; Watanabe, K.; Tanaka, T.: The human mitochondrial ribosomal protein
genes: mapping of 54 genes to the chromosomes and implications for
human disorders. Genomics 77: 65-70, 2001.

2. Koc, E. C.; Burkhart, W.; Blackburn, K.; Moseley, A.; Spremulli,
L. L.: The small subunit of the mammalian mitochondrial ribosome:
identification of the full complement of ribosomal proteins present. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 19363-19374, 2001.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/21/2008

EDITED mgross: 04/23/2008

