605047	TITLE *605047 INTERFERON REGULATORY FACTOR 7; IRF7
;;IRF7A
IRF7B, INCLUDED;;
IRF7C, INCLUDED;;
IRF7H, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The expression of interferon genes (e.g., IFNB, 147640) in response to
viral infection (e.g., Epstein-Barr virus, EBV) or cytokines is
regulated at the transcriptional level by interferon regulatory factors
(IRFs).

CLONING

Using a yeast 1-hybrid system with an EBV protein-binding sequence as
bait, Zhang and Pagano (1997) obtained 2 cDNAs encoding variants of
IRF7. Sequence analysis showed that the cDNAs encode identical proteins
except that IRF7B lacks 29 amino acids that are present in the putative
503-amino acid IRF7A protein. The highest sequence identity with other
IRF family members is in the conserved N-terminal DNA-binding domain. By
EST database searching, Zhang and Pagano (1997) identified another
truncated splice variant, IRF7C, which encodes a 164-amino acid protein.
Northern blot analysis revealed expression of 2 major IRF7 transcripts
of 2.0 and 2.6 kb predominantly in spleen, thymus, and peripheral blood
leukocytes (PBLs). The smaller transcript is only weakly expressed in
PBLs. Western blot analysis demonstrated that the IRF7A, B, and C
isoforms are expressed as 69-, 67-, and 23-kD proteins. Expression of
IRF7A but not IRF7B or C was detected in normal PBLs. Electrophoretic
mobility shift analysis confirmed that the IRF7 N-terminal DNA-binding
domain interacts with the interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE;
see ISGF3G, 147574) in IFN promoters and also to an ISRE in the Q
promoter (Qp) of EBV nuclear antigen-1 (EBNA1). Western blot analysis
detected high levels of IRF7 in type III (positive for multiple EBV
antigens) EBV latently infected cells but not in type I (positive for
EBNA1 antigen only) latently infected cells, corresponding inversely
with endogenous Qp activity. Zhang and Pagano (1997) proposed that IRF7
is a repressor of Qp in type III latency.

Au et al. (1998) identified an IRF7 isoform, which they designated
IRF7H, that encodes a deduced 514-amino acid protein with highest
homology to IRF3 (603734). Unlike IRF3, expression of this isoform is
restricted to lymphoid cells. Northern blot analysis showed that IRF7 is
inducible by lipopolysaccharide, virus infection, and IFNA (147660) but
not by IFNG (147570). Functional analysis revealed a transactivation
domain located C terminal to the DNA-binding domain. Newcastle disease
virus infection facilitates transfer of overexpressed IRF7H from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus. The transfer is inhibited in the presence of
IRF3.

GENE FUNCTION

Wathelet et al. (1998) identified a virus-activated factor (VAF) that
binds to a regulatory element shared by different virus-inducible genes.
VAF contains 2 members of the IRF family of transcriptional activator
proteins, IRF3 and IRF7, and the transcriptional coactivator proteins
p300 (602700) and CBP (600140). Remarkably, VAF and recombinant IRF3 and
IRF7 proteins bind weakly to the IFNB gene promoter in vitro. However,
in virus-infected cells, both proteins are recruited to the endogenous
IFNB promoter as part of a protein complex that includes ATF2/c-jun and
NF-kappa-B. These observations demonstrated the coordinate activation of
multiple transcriptional activator proteins and their highly cooperative
assembly into a transcriptional enhancer complex in vivo.

Au et al. (2001) showed that IRF7 lacking its N-terminal 236 residues
exerted a dominant-negative (DN) effect on virus-induced expression of
endogenous type I IFN genes. IFNA expression in response to virus
infection required full-length IRF7, with the serines at positions 483
and 484 playing a crucial role. Amino acids 418 to 473 of IRF7
interacted with IRF3. Expression of the N-terminally truncated IRF7 DN
protein resulted in a significant reduction of IRF7 and IRF3 binding to
the IFNA1 promoter. Au et al. (2001) concluded that IRF3/IRF7 complexes
are biologically active and are involved in virus-activated
transcription of IFNA genes.

Sharma et al. (2003) demonstrated that IKKE (605048) and TANK-binding
kinase-1 (TBK1; 604834) are components of the virus-activated kinase
(VAK) that phosphorylate IRF3 (603734) and IRF7. They demonstrated an
essential role for an IKK-related kinase pathway in triggering the host
antiviral response to viral infection. Sharma et al. (2003) demonstrated
that expression of IKKE or TBK1 is sufficient to induce phosphorylation
of IRF3 and IRF7. This modification permits IRF3 dimerization and
translocation to the nucleus, where it induces transcription of
interferon and ISG56 genes.

Colina et al. (2008) showed that translational control of IRF7 is
critical for induction of type I interferon (see 147570) production. In
mouse embryonic fibroblasts lacking the translational repressors 4Ebp1
(602223) and 4Ebp2 (602224), the threshold for eliciting type I
interferon production is lowered. Consequently, replication of
encephalomyocarditis virus, vesicular stomatitis virus, influenza virus,
and Sindbis virus is markedly suppressed. Furthermore, Colina et al.
(2008) showed that mice with both 4Ebp1 and 4Ebp2 genes knocked out are
resistant to vesicular stomatitis virus infection, and this correlates
with an enhanced type I interferon production in plasmacytoid dendritic
cells and the expression of interferon-regulated genes in the lungs. The
enhanced type I interferon response of 4Ebp1 -/- 4Ebp2 -/- double
knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts is caused by upregulation of Irf7
mRNA translation. Colina et al. (2008) found that their findings
highlighted the role of 4EBPs as negative regulators of type I
interferon production, via translational repression of IRF7 mRNA.

Litvak et al. (2012) used an unbiased systems approach to predict that a
member of the forkhead family of transcription factors, FOXO3 (602681),
is a negative regulator of a subset of antiviral genes. This prediction
was validated using macrophages isolated from Foxo3-null mice.
Genomewide location analysis combined with gene deletion studies
identified the IRF7 gene as a critical target of FOXO3. FOXO3 was
identified as a negative regulator of IRF7 transcription. Litvak et al.
(2012) further demonstrated that FOXO3, IRF7, and type I interferon form
a coherent feed-forward regulatory circuit. Litvak et al. (2012)
concluded their data suggested that the FOXO3-IRF7 regulatory circuit
represents a novel mechanism for establishing the requisite set points
in the interferon pathway that balances the beneficial effects and
deleterious sequelae of the antiviral response.

Using single-cell RNA sequencing in mouse bone marrow-derived dendritic
cells (BMDCs) stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to investigate
expression variability on a genomic scale, Shalek et al. (2013) observed
extensive and theretofore unobserved bimodal variation in mRNA abundance
and splicing patterns. They found that hundreds of key immune genes are
bimodally expressed across cells, even genes that are very highly
expressed at the population average. Moreover, splicing patterns
demonstrated heterogeneity between cells. Shalek et al. (2013)
identified a module of 137 highly variable yet coregulated antiviral
response genes. Using cells from knockout mice, Shalek et al. (2013)
showed that variability in this module may be propagated through an
interferon feedback circuit, involving the transcriptional regulators
Stat2 (600556) and Irf7. This finding demonstrated that while some of
the observed bimodality could be attributed to closely related, yet
distinct, known maturity states of BMDCs, other portions reflected
differences in the usage of key regulatory circuits.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Associations Pending Confirmation

Heinig et al. (2010) reported the use of integrated genomewide
approaches across 7 rat tissues to identify gene networks and the loci
underlying their regulation. They defined an IRF7-driven inflammatory
network (IDIN) enriched for viral response genes, which represented a
molecular biomarker for macrophages and which was regulated in multiple
tissues by a locus on rat chromosome 15q25. Heinig et al. (2010) showed
that Epstein-Barr virus-induced gene-2 (Ebi2, also known as Gpr183,
605741), which lies at this locus and controls B lymphocyte migration,
is expressed in macrophages and regulates the IDIN. The human
orthologous locus on chromosome 13q32 controlled the human equivalent of
the IDIN, which was conserved in monocytes. IDIN genes were more likely
to associate with susceptibility to type 1 diabetes (see 222100), a
macrophage-associated autoimmune disease, than randomly selected immune
response genes (P = 8.85 x 10(-6)). The human locus controlling the IDIN
was associated with the risk of type 1 diabetes at dbSNP rs9585056 (P =
7.0 x 10(-10); odds ratio, 1.15), which was 1 of 5 SNPs in this region
associated with EBI2 expression. Heinig et al. (2010) concluded that
their data implicated IRF7 network genes and their regulatory locus in
the pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes.

ANIMAL MODEL

Honda et al. (2005) generated mice deficient in Irf7 by targeted
disruption. Using Irf7-null mice, they showed that the transcription
factor IRF7 is essential for the induction of IFN-alpha/beta genes via
the virus-activated, MYD88 (602170)-independent pathway and the
toll-like receptor (TLR)-activated, MYD88-dependent pathway. Viral
induction of Myd88-independent Ifn-alpha/beta genes is severely impaired
in Irf7-null fibroblasts. Irf7-null mice are consistently more
vulnerable than Myd88-null mice to viral infection, and this correlated
with marked decrease in serum interferon levels, indicating the
importance of the IRF7-dependent induction of systemic interferon
responses for innate antiviral immunity. Furthermore, robust induction
of interferon production by activation of the Tlr9 (605474) subfamily in
plasmacytoid dendritic cells was entirely dependent on Irf7, and this
Myd88-Irf7 pathway governed the induction of CD8(+) T-cell responses.
Honda et al. (2005) concluded that all elements of interferon responses,
whether the systemic production of interferon in innate immunity or the
local action of interferon from plasmacytoid dendritic cells in adaptive
immunity, are under the control of IRF7.

REFERENCE 1. Au, W.-C.; Moore, P. A.; LaFleur, D. W.; Tombal, B.; Pitha, P.
M.: Characterization of the interferon regulatory factor-7 and its
potential role in the transcription activation of interferon A genes. J.
Biol. Chem. 273: 29210-29217, 1998.

2. Au, W.-C.; Yeow, W.-S.; Pitha, P. M.: Analysis of functional domain
of interferon regulatory factor 7 and its association with IRF-3. Virology 280:
273-282, 2001.

3. Colina, R.; Costa-Mattioli, M.; Dowling, R. J. O.; Jaramillo, M.;
Tai, L.-H.; Breitbach, C. J.; Martineau, Y.; Larsson, O.; Rong, L.;
Svitkin, Y. V.; Makrigiannis, A. P.; Bell, J. C.; Sonenberg, N.:
Translational control of the innate immune response through IRF-7. Nature 452:
323-328, 2008.

4. Heinig, M.; Petretto, E.; Wallace, C.; Bottolo, L.; Rotival, M.;
Lu, H.; Li, Y.; Sarwar, R.; Langley, S. R.; Bauerfeind, A.; Hummel,
O.; Lee, Y.-A.; and 33 others: A trans-acting locus regulates an
anti-viral expression network and type 1 diabetes risk. Nature 467:
460-464, 2010.

5. Honda, K.; Yanai, H.; Negishi, H.; Asagiri, M.; Sato, M.; Mizutani,
T.; Shimada, N.; Ohba, Y.; Takaoka, A.; Yoshida, N.; Taniguchi, T.
: IRF-7 is the master regulator of type-I interferon-dependent immune
responses. Nature 434: 772-777, 2005.

6. Litvak, V.; Ratushny, A. V.; Lampano, A. E.; Schmitz, F.; Huang,
A. C.; Raman, A.; Rust, A. G.; Bergthaler, A.; Aitchison, J. D.; Aderen,
A.: A FOXO3-IRF7 gene regulatory circuit limits inflammatory sequelae
of antiviral responses. Nature 490: 421-425, 2012.

7. Shalek, A. K.; Satija, R.; Adiconis, X.; Gertner, R. S.; Gaublomme,
J. T.; Raychowdhury, R.; Schwartz, S.; Yosef, N.; Malboeuf, C.; Lu,
D.; Trombetta, J. J.; Gennert, D.; Gnirke, A.; Goren, A.; Hacohen,
N.; Levin, J. Z.; Park, H.; Regev, A.: Single-cell transcriptomics
reveals bimodality in expression and splicing in immune cells. Nature 498:
236-240, 2013.

8. Sharma, S.; tenOever, B. R.; Grandvaux, N.; Zhou, G.-P.; Lin, R.;
Hiscott, J.: Triggering the interferon antiviral response through
an IKK-related pathway. Science 300: 1148-1151, 2003.

9. Wathelet, M. G.; Lin, C. H.; Parekh, B. S.; Ronco, L. V.; Howley,
P. M.; Maniatis, T.: Virus infection induces the assembly of coordinately
activated transcription factors on the IFN-beta enhancer in vivo. Molec.
Cell 1: 507-518, 1998. Note: Erratum: Molec. Cell 3: 813 only, 1999.

10. Zhang, L.; Pagano, J. S.: IRF-7, a new interferon regulatory
factor associated with Epstein Barr virus latency. Molec. Cell. Biol. 17:
5748-5757, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 07/23/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/1/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/7/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/22/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/2/2005
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/10/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/13/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/13/2000

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 6/13/2000

EDITED alopez: 07/23/2013
carol: 4/12/2013
alopez: 11/1/2012
terry: 11/1/2012
alopez: 10/8/2010
terry: 10/7/2010
alopez: 5/28/2008
terry: 5/22/2008
mgross: 5/3/2006
terry: 3/24/2006
tkritzer: 6/6/2005
terry: 6/2/2005
alopez: 6/11/2003
terry: 6/10/2003
mgross: 9/13/2002
carol: 6/13/2000

611115	TITLE *611115 VON WILLEBRAND FACTOR C AND EGF DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN; VWCE
;;VWC1;;
URG11
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using PCR select cDNA subtraction, Lian et al. (2003) identified a gene,
which they designated URG11, that is upregulated in HepG2 cells
expressing the hepatitis B virus X antigen (HBxAg), a transactivating
protein that is associated with the development of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). The deduced 673-amino acid protein contains 5 von
Willebrand factor type C (VWFC) repeats and 1 C-type lectin domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Using in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry on liver sections,
Lian et al. (2003) showed that URG11 expression is upregulated at the
RNA and protein levels in the liver of HBV-infected individuals, but not
in hepatocellular carcinomas from the same patients, or in uninfected
individuals. In HepG2 cells, expression of HBxAg stimulated expression
of URG11 by transcriptional transactivation, consistent with the
hypothesis that URG11 is an effector of HBxAg. When expressed in HepG2
cells, both HBxAg and URG11 stimulated cell growth due to an increase in
cell cycle progression and a decrease in cell death, in comparison to
control cells. HBxAg and URG11 stimulated anchorage-independent growth
in soft agar by 5- and 3-fold above background, respectively, and
accelerated onset of tumor formation and size of tumors in Scid mice
injected with HepG2 cells. Lian et al. (2003) suggested that URG11 may
act as an oncogene that plays a role in the development of HCC in
individuals with chronic HBV infection.

Using PowerBlot analysis in HepG2 cells, Lian et al. (2006) demonstrated
elevated levels of beta-catenin and several beta-catenin effectors in
HBxAg-positive compared with HBxAg-negative HepG2 cells. Expression of
URG11 in Hep3B cells and Hep3B cells expressing HBxAg resulted in
increased levels of beta-catenin mRNA and protein. Lian et al. (2006)
found that beta-catenin, in addition to URG11, is a target for HBxAg
transactivation. In Hep3B cells, both HBxAg and URG11 stimulated
transcription from the beta-catenin promoter, and the former is
URG11-dependent. A URG11-specific siRNA inhibited growth of Hep3B cells
expressing HBxAg, and this correlated with decreased levels of
beta-catenin. Immunohistochemistry indicated that URG11 costains with
HBxAg and beta-catenin in HCC and HBV-infected livers, indicating a
close relationship in vivo. Lian et al. (2006) concluded that wildtype
beta-catenin is activated by HBxAg in part through URG11, as URG11 can
transcriptionally activate beta-catenin and promote
beta-catenin-dependent growth.

From immunohistochemistry analyses, Lian et al. (2003) found that the
expression of URG11 is upregulated in a variety of tumors other than
HCC, including those of colon, stomach, lung and breast, when compared
to peritumor and normal uninfected tissues.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the VWCE
gene to chromosome 11 (TMAP STS-AA017051). Lian et al. (2003) stated
that the gene maps to chromosome 11q11.

REFERENCE 1. Lian, Z.; Liu, J.; Li, L.; Li, X.; Clayton, M.; Wu, M. C.; Wang,
H. Y.; Arbuthnot, P.; Kew, M.; Fan, D.; Feitelson, M. A.: Enhanced
cell survival of Hep3B cells by the hepatitis B x effector, URG11,
is associated with upregulation of beta-catenin. Pathobiology 43:
415-424, 2006.

2. Lian, Z.; Liu, J.; Li, X.; Tufan, N. L. S.; Clayton, M.; Wu, M.
C.; Wang, H. Y.; Arbuthnot, P.; Kew, M.; Feitelson, M. A.: Upregulated
expression of a unique gene by hepatitis B x antigen promotes hepatocellular
growth and tumorigenesis. Neoplasia 5: 229-244, 2003.

CREATED Jennifer L. Goldstein: 6/13/2007

EDITED carol: 06/15/2007

602775	TITLE *602775 SUPPRESSOR OF CLEAR, C. ELEGANS, HOMOLOG OF; SHOC2
;;RAS-BINDING PROTEIN SUR8, C. ELEGANS, HOMOLOG OF; SUR8
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Activation of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) receptors elicits diverse
cellular responses, including growth, mitogenesis, migration, and
differentiation. Selfors et al. (1998) shed light on the intracellular
signaling pathways that mediate these processes by studies in
Caenorhabditis elegans. In this organism, they screened for genes that
suppress the activity of an activated form of the EGL-15 FGF receptor
consistent with the functioning of these genes downstream of EGL-15. Two
of these genes were soc1 and soc2, symbolized thus for 'suppressor of
clear (Clr)' phenotype; the third was sem5. Selfors et al. (1998) showed
that soc2 encodes a protein composed almost entirely of leucine-rich
repeats, a domain implicated in protein-protein interactions. They
identified a putative human homolog, SHOC2, which is 54% identical to
soc2. They showed that SHOC2 mRNA was expressed in all tissues assayed
and that the SHOC2 protein is localized to the cytoplasm.

Selfors et al. (1998) showed that within the leucine-rich repeats of
both soc2 and SHOC2 are 2 YXNX motifs that are potential
tyrosine-phosphorylated docking sites for the SEM5/GRB2 Src homology 2
domain. However, phosphorylation of these residues was not required for
soc2 function in vivo, and SHOC2 was not observed to be tyrosine
phosphorylated in response to FGF stimulation. Selfors et al. (1998)
concluded that this genetic system identified a conserved gene
implicated in mediating FGF receptor signaling in C. elegans.

MAPPING

By FISH analysis, Selfors et al. (1998) mapped the SHOC2 gene to
chromosome 10q25.

GENE FUNCTION

Sieburth et al. (1998) identified and characterized the sur8 gene in C.
elegans, which positively regulates Ras-mediated signal transduction
during vulval development. The authors found that reduction of sur8
function suppresses an activated Ras mutation and dramatically enhances
phenotypes of mpk1/sur1 MAP kinase (see 176948) and ksr1 (601132)
mutations, whereas increase of sur8 dosage enhances an activated Ras
mutation. Sur8 appears to act downstream of or in parallel to Ras but
upstream of Raf. Sur8 encodes a conserved protein that is composed
predominantly of leucine-rich repeats. The sur8 protein interacts
directly with Ras but not with the Ras(P34G) mutant protein, suggesting
that sur8 may mediate its effects through Ras binding. By use of EST
primers and 5-prime RACE, Sieburth et al. (1998) cloned a structural and
functional SUR8 homolog in humans that specifically binds K-Ras (190070)
and N-Ras (164790) but not H-Ras (190020) in vitro.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using a systems biology approach based on in silico protein network
analysis that identified SHOC2 as a candidate gene, Cordeddu et al.
(2009) sequenced SHOC2 coding exons in a Noonan syndrome (see 163950)
cohort that included 96 individuals who were negative for mutations in
known disease genes. The authors identified a heterozygous mutation
(S2G; 602775.0001) in the SHOC2 gene in 4 unrelated individuals. They
then analyzed the SHOC2 gene in a cohort of 410 mutation-negative
patients with Noonan syndrome or a related phenotype and identified 21
individuals with the same S2G mutation. All of the patients with the S2G
mutation had a relatively consistent Noonan syndrome-like disorder with
loose anagen hair (NSLH; 607721). Functional studies of S2G-mutant SHOC2
demonstrated introduction of an N-myristoylation site, resulting in
aberrant localization and signaling.

In a male infant with typical dysmorphic facial features and other signs
of Noonan syndrome, who died of congestive heart failure at 4 months of
age, Hoban et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for the S2G mutation
in SHOC2.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NOONAN SYNDROME-LIKE DISORDER WITH LOOSE ANAGEN HAIR
SHOC2, SER2GLY

In 21 patients with a Noonan syndrome-like disorder with loose anagen
hair (NSLH; 607721), Cordeddu et al. (2009) identified heterozygosity
for a 4A-G transition in exon 2 of the SHOC2 gene, resulting in a
ser2-to-gly (S2G) substitution. The mutation was shown to be de novo in
the 15 patients for whom parental DNA was available. Functional studies
demonstrated that the S2G mutation introduces an N-myristoylation site,
resulting in aberrant targeting of SHOC2 to the plasma membrane and
impaired translocation to the nucleus upon growth factor stimulation. In
vitro expression of mutant SHOC2 enhanced MAPK (176948) activation in a
cell type-specific fashion. Induction of mutant SHOC2 in C. elegans
engendered protruding vulva, a neomorphic phenotype previously
associated with aberrant signaling.

In a male infant with typical dysmorphic facial features and other signs
of Noonan syndrome, who died of congestive heart failure at 4 months of
age, Hoban et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for the S2G mutation
in SHOC2. The authors noted that the 'loose anagen hair' phenotype and
skin features previously reported in patients with the S2G mutation were
not present in this young infant, and stated that the cardiac anomaly
expanded the clinical phenotype associated with the SHOC2 mutation.

REFERENCE 1. Cordeddu, V.; Di Schiavi, E.; Pennacchio, L. A.; Ma'ayan, A.; Sarkozy,
A.; Fodale, V.; Cecchetti, S.; Cardinale, A.; Martin, J.; Schackwitz,
W.; Lipzen, A.; Zampino, G.; and 19 others: Mutation of SHOC2 promotes
aberrant protein N-myristoylation and causes Noonan-like syndrome
with loose anagen hair. Nature Genet. 41: 1022-1026, 2009.

2. Hoban, R.; Roberts, A. E.; Demmer, L.; Jethva, R.; Shephard, B.
: Noonan syndrome due to a SHOC2 mutation presenting with fetal distress
and fatal hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in a premature infant. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 158A: 1411-1413, 2012.

3. Selfors, L. M.; Schutzman, J. L.; Borland, C. Z.; Stern, M. J.
: Soc-2 encodes a leucine-rich repeat protein implicated in fibroblast
growth factor receptor signaling. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 6903-6908,
1998.

4. Sieburth, D. S.; Sun, Q.; Han, M.: SUR-8, a conserved Ras-binding
protein with leucine-rich repeats, positively regulates Ras-mediated
signaling in C. elegans. Cell 94: 119-130, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/26/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/9/2009
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/6/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/6/1998

EDITED carol: 07/27/2012
terry: 7/26/2012
wwang: 6/2/2011
wwang: 10/19/2010
wwang: 10/6/2010
wwang: 10/12/2009
terry: 10/9/2009
joanna: 9/10/2009
carol: 3/29/2001
carol: 8/6/1998
alopez: 7/7/1998
alopez: 7/6/1998

606817	TITLE *606817 PRE-T-CELL RECEPTOR, ALPHA-CHAIN PRECURSOR; PTCRA
;;PT-ALPHA
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

In immature T cells the T-cell receptor beta-chain (TCRB; see 186930) is
rearranged and expressed before the TCRA (see 186880) chain. At this
early stage, TCRB can associate with the pre-T-cell receptor alpha chain
(PTCRA). The PTCRA, together with TCRB and the CD3 complex (see 186740),
minimally make up the pre-T cell receptor (pre-TCR), which regulates
early T cell development.

CLONING

Using a cDNA corresponding to mouse Ptcra as a probe to screen a human
thymus cDNA library, followed by 5- and 3-prime RACE, Del Porto et al.
(1995) isolated a cDNA encoding a protein they named PTA for 'pre-T-cell
receptor alpha chain.' The deduced 282-amino acid type I transmembrane
protein, 63% identical to the mouse protein, contains a leader sequence,
an Ig constant domain-like extracellular region with a potential
N-glycosylation site, a transmembrane region, and a 114-amino acid
cytoplasmic tail with 3 potential phosphorylation sites. The tail is
much longer than that in the mouse protein. Southern blot analysis
suggested the presence of a similar sequence in all species examined,
but the cytoplasmic tail region appears to be restricted to primates.
RT-PCR analysis detected expression in immature, but not mature,
thymocyte subsets with strongest expression in CD4+/CD8-/CD3-low cells
on their way to differentiate into CD4/CD8 double-positive thymocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

By analysis of a chromosome 6 cosmid library, Saint-Ruf et al. (1998)
determined that the PTCRA gene contains 4 exons with a first intron rich
in repetitive Alu sequences and SINE and LINE elements. Analysis of the
region 1.5 kb upstream of the ATG start codon detected no CAAT or TATA
boxes or a potential promoter. However, the conserved 6.5-kb intron 1
contains binding sites for AP1 (165160) and for mu-EBP-C2. RT-PCR
analysis identified a smaller splice variant, PT-alpha-2, encoding a
231-amino acid protein lacking a major part of the Ig-like domain, due
to the elimination of exon 2. The variant lacks a potential
N-glycosylation site but retains a number of potential O-glycosylation
sites.

MAPPING

By radiolabeled in situ hybridization analysis, Del Porto et al. (1995)
mapped the PTCRA gene to chromosome 6p21.2-p12. The authors noted that
the mouse gene is localized to chromosome 17, also in the area of the
major histocompatibility complex. Saint-Ruf et al. (1998) refined the
localization to 6p21.3 by Southern blot and genomic sequence analysis.

ANIMAL MODEL

By expressing Ptcra mutants in transgenic mice and in cell lines,
Aifantis et al. (2002) showed that the conserved juxtamembrane cysteine
that could be a target for palmitoylation appears to be dispensable for
pre-TCR function. The nonconserved mouse cytoplasmic region,
particularly its somewhat conserved proline-rich domain, is required for
effective selection, proliferation, and survival of Tcrb-expressing
immature thymocytes.

REFERENCE 1. Aifantis, I.; Borowski, C.; Gounari, F.; Lacorazza, H. D.; Nikolich-Zugich,
J.; von Boehmer, H.: A critical role for the cytoplasmic tail of
pT-alpha in T lymphocyte development. Nature Immun. 3: 483-488,
2002. Note: Erratum: Nature Immun. 3: 591 only, 2002.

2. Del Porto, P.; Bruno, L.; Mattei, M.-G.; von Boehmer, H.; Saint-Ruf,
C.: Cloning and comparative analysis of the human pre-T-cell receptor
alpha-chain gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 12105-12109, 1995.

3. Saint-Ruf, C.; Lechner, O.; Feinberg, J.; von Boehmer, H.: Genomic
structure of the human pre-T cell receptor alpha chain and expression
of two mRNA isoforms. Europ. J. Immun. 28: 3824-3831, 1998.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 4/3/2002

EDITED mgross: 10/04/2013
terry: 9/14/2012
alopez: 1/13/2009
alopez: 3/11/2003
alopez: 4/30/2002
alopez: 4/3/2002

602700	TITLE *602700 E1A-BINDING PROTEIN, 300-KD; EP300
;;p300
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The EP300 gene encodes p300, a histone acetyltransferase that regulates
transcription via chromatin remodeling and is important in the processes
of cell proliferation and differentiation (Gayther et al., 2000).

CLONING

The growth-controlling functions of the adenovirus E1A oncoprotein
depend on its ability to interact with a set of cellular proteins. Among
these are the retinoblastoma protein, p107, p130, and p300. Eckner et
al. (1994) isolated a cDNA encoding full-length human p300. p300
contains 3 cysteine- and histidine-rich regions of which the most
carboxy-terminal region interacts specifically with E1A. In its center,
p300 contains a bromodomain, a hallmark of certain transcriptional
coactivators. p300 and CREB-binding protein (CREBBP, or CBP; 600140) are
highly related in primary structure (Arany et al., 1994). Several
protein motifs such as a bromodomain, a KIX domain, and 3 regions rich
in cys/his residues are well conserved between these 2 proteins.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Lin et al. (2001) identified a compactly folded 46-residue domain in CBP
and p300, the IRF3-binding domain (IBID), and determined its structure
by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. IBID has a helical framework
containing an apparently flexible polyglutamine loop that participates
in ligand binding. Spectroscopic data indicated that induced folding
accompanies association of IBID with its partners, which exhibit no
evident sequence similarities. IBID is an important contributor to
signal integration by CBP and p300.

- Crystal Structure

Liu et al. (2008) described a high resolution x-ray crystal structure of
a semisynthetic heterodimeric p300 HAT domain in complex with a
bisubstrate inhibitor, Lys-CoA. This structure showed that p300/CBP is a
distant cousin of other structurally characterized HATs, but revealed
several novel features that explain the broad substrate specificity and
preference for nearby basic residues. Based on this structure and
accompanying biochemical data, Liu et al. (2008) proposed that p300/CBP
uses an unusual hit-and-run (Theorell-Chance) catalytic mechanism that
is distinct from other characterized HATs. Several disease-associated
mutations could also be readily accounted for by the p300 HAT structure.

GENE FUNCTION

Eckner et al. (1994) examined the ability of p300 to overcome the
repressive effect of E1A on the SV40 enhancer. They showed that p300
molecules lacking an intact E1A-binding site can bypass E1A repression
and restore to a significant extent the activity of the SV40 enhancer,
even in the presence of high levels of E1A protein. These results imply
that p300 may function as a transcriptional adaptor protein for certain
complex transcriptional regulatory elements.

Weaver et al. (1998) identified EP300/CREBBP and IRF3 (603734) as
components of DRAF1 (double-stranded RNA-activated factor-1), a positive
regulator of interferon-stimulated gene transcription that functions as
a direct response to viral infection.

The cytokines LIF (159540) and BMP2 (112261) signal through different
receptors and transcription factors, namely STATs and SMADs,
respectively. Nakashima et al. (1999) found that LIF and BMP2 act in
synergy on primary fetal neural progenitor cells to induce astrocytes.
The transcriptional coactivator p300 interacted physically with STAT3
(102582) at its amino terminus in a cytokine stimulation-independent
manner, and with SMAD1 (601595) at its carboxyl terminus in a cytokine
stimulation-dependent manner. The formation of a complex between STAT3
and SMAD1, bridged by p300, is involved in the cooperative signaling of
LIF and BMP2 and the subsequent induction of astrocytes from neuronal
progenitors.

Hasan et al. (2001) demonstrated that p300 may have a role in DNA repair
synthesis through its interaction with proliferating cell nuclear
antigen (PCNA; 176740). Hasan et al. (2001) demonstrated that in vitro
and in vivo p300 forms a complex with PCNA that does not depend on the S
phase of the cell cycle. A large fraction of both p300 and PCNA
colocalized to speckled structures in the nucleus. Furthermore, the
endogenous p300-PCNA complex stimulates DNA synthesis in vitro.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments indicated that p300 is
associated with freshly synthesized DNA after ultraviolet irradiation.
Hasan et al. (2001) suggested the p300 may participate in chromatin
remodeling at DNA lesion sites to facilitate PCNA function in DNA repair
synthesis.

Hasan et al. (2001) found that p300 formed a complex with flap
endonuclease-1 (FEN1; 600393) and acetylated FEN1 in vitro. Furthermore,
FEN1 acetylation was observed in vivo and was enhanced upon ultraviolet
treatment of human cells. Acetylation of the FEN1 C terminus by p300
significantly reduced DNA binding and nuclease activity of FEN1. PCNA
was able to stimulate both acetylated and unacetylated FEN1 activity to
the same extent. These results identified acetylation as a novel
regulatory modification of FEN1 and suggested that p300 is not only a
component of the chromatin remodeling machinery but might also play a
critical role in regulating DNA metabolic events.

TDG (601423) initiates repair of G/T and G/U mismatches, commonly
associated with CpG islands, by removing thymine and uracil moieties.
Tini et al. (2002) reported that TDG associates with transcriptional
coactivators CBP (600140) and p300 and that the resulting complexes are
competent for both the excision step of repair and histone acetylation.
TDG stimulated CBP transcriptional activity in transfected cells and
reciprocally served as a substrate for CBP/p300 acetylation. This
acetylation triggered release of CBP from DNA ternary complexes and also
regulated recruitment of repair endonuclease APE (107748). These
observations revealed a potential regulatory role for protein
acetylation in base mismatch repair and a role for CBP/p300 in
maintaining genomic stability.

Etchegaray et al. (2003) demonstrated that transcriptional regulation of
the core clock mechanism in mouse liver is accompanied by rhythms in H3
histone (see 602810) acetylation, and that H3 acetylation is a potential
target of the inhibitory action of Cry. The promoter regions of the Per1
(602260), Per2 (603426), and Cry1 (601933) genes exhibited circadian
rhythms in H3 acetylation and RNA polymerase II (see 180660) binding
that were synchronous with the corresponding steady-state mRNA rhythms.
The histone acetyltransferase p300 precipitated with Clock (601851) in
vivo in a time-dependent manner. Moreover, the Cry proteins inhibited a
p300-induced increase in Clock/Bmal1 (602550)-mediated transcription.
Etchegaray et al. (2003) concluded that the delayed timing of the Cry1
mRNA rhythm, relative to the Per rhythms, was due to the coordinated
activities of Rev-Erb-alpha (602408) and Clock/Bmal1, and defined a
novel mechanism for circadian phase control.

Rapid turnover of the tumor suppressor protein p53 (191170) requires the
MDM2 (164785) ubiquitin ligase, and both interact with p300-CBP
transcriptional coactivators. p53 is stabilized by the binding of p300
to the oncoprotein E1A, suggesting that p300 regulates p53 degradation.
Grossman et al. (2003) observed that purified p300 exhibited intrinsic
ubiquitin ligase activity but was inhibited by E1A. In vitro, p300 with
MDM2 catalyzed p53 polyubiquitination, whereas MDM2 catalyzed p53
monoubiquitination. E1A expression caused a decrease in
polyubiquitinated but not monoubiquitinated p53 in cells. Thus, Grossman
et al. (2003) concluded that generation of the polyubiquitinated forms
of p53 that are targeted for proteasome degradation requires the
intrinsic ubiquitin ligase activities of MDM2 and p300.

Tsuda et al. (2003) found that SOX9 (608160) used CBP and p300 as
transcriptional coactivators. SOX9 bound CBP and p300 in vitro and in
vivo, and both coactivators enhanced SOX9-dependent COL2A1 (120140)
promoter activity. Disruption of the CBP-SOX9 complex inhibited COL2A1
mRNA expression and differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells into
chondrocytes.

Using systems reconstituted with recombinant chromatin templates and
coactivators, An et al. (2004) demonstrated the involvement of PRMT1
(602950) and CARM1 (603934) in p53 function; both independent and
ordered cooperative functions of p300, PRMT1, and CARM1; and mechanisms
involving direct interactions with p53 and obligatory modifications of
corresponding histone substrates. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses
confirmed the ordered accumulation of these (and other) coactivators and
cognate histone modifications on a p53-responsive gene, GADD45 (126335),
following ectopic p53 expression and/or ultraviolet irradiation.

Turnell et al. (2005) showed that 2 anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome
(APC/C) components, APC5 (606948) and APC7 (606949), interact directly
with the coactivators CBP and p300 through protein-protein interaction
domains that are evolutionarily conserved in adenovirus E1A. This
interaction stimulates intrinsic CBP/p300 acetyltransferase activity and
potentiates CBP/p300-dependent transcription. Turnell et al. (2005) also
showed that APC5 and APC7 suppress E1A-mediated transformation in a
CBP/p300-dependent manner, indicating that these components of the APC/C
may be targeted during cellular transformation. Furthermore, Turnell et
al. (2005) established that CBP is required for APC/C function;
specifically, gene ablation of CBP by RNA-mediated interference markedly
reduces the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity of the APC/C and the
progression of cells through mitosis. Taken together, Turnell et al.
(2005) concluded that their results define discrete roles for the
APC/C-CBP/p300 complexes in growth regulation.

In vivo transcription by RNA polymerase II takes place in the context of
chromatin. Guermah et al. (2006) found that a purified, reconstituted
RNA polymerase II system that sufficed for activator-dependent
transcription on DNA templates was incapable of transcribing chromatin
templates, even in the presence of factors that effected transcription
in less-purified assay systems. Using a complementation and HeLa cell
nuclear extract fractionation scheme, Guermah et al. (2006) identified
and purified an activity, designated CTEA (chromatin
transcription-enabling activity), that allowed for transcription through
chromatin templates in a manner that was both activator and
p300/acetyl-CoA dependent. CTEA acted primarily at the elongation step
and enabled RNA polymerase II machinery to transcribe efficiently
through several contiguously positioned nucleosomes. Guermah et al.
(2006) identified the major functional component of CTEA as
transcription elongation factor SII (TCEA1; 601425). SII was essential
for productive transcription elongation, and its function at this step
was dependent on p300-dependent acetylation. These synergistic
transcriptional elongation activities were potentiated by HMGB2
(163906).

Liu et al. (2008) demonstrated that a fasting-inducible switch,
consisting of the histone acetyltransferase p300 and the
nutrient-sensing deacetylase sirtuin-1 (SIRT1; 604479), maintains energy
balance in mice through the sequential induction of CRTC2 (608972) and
FOXO1 (136533). After glucagon induction, CRTC2 stimulated gluconeogenic
gene expression by an association with p300, which Liu et al. (2008)
showed is also activated by dephosphorylation at serine-89 during
fasting. In turn, p300 increased hepatic CRTC2 activity by acetylating
it at lysine-628, a site that also targets CRTC2 for degradation after
its ubiquitination by the E3 ligase constitutive photomorphogenic
protein (COP1; 608067). Glucagon effects were attenuated during late
fasting, when CRTC2 was downregulated owing to SIRT1-mediated
deacetylation and when FOXO1 supported expression of the gluconeogenic
program. Disrupting SIRT1 activity, by liver-specific knockout of the
SIRT1 gene or by administration of a SIRT1 antagonist, increased CRTC2
activity and glucose output, whereas exposure to SIRT1 agonists reduced
them. In view of the reciprocal activation of FOXO1 and its coactivator
Ppar-gamma coactivator 1-alpha (PGC1-alpha; 604517) by SIRT1 activators,
Liu et al. (2008) concluded that their results illustrate how the
exchange of 2 gluconeogenic regulators during fasting maintains energy
balance.

Visel et al. (2009) presented the results of chromatin
immunoprecipitation with the enhancer-associated protein p300 followed
by massively parallel sequencing, and mapped several thousand in vivo
binding sites of p300 in mouse embryonic forebrain, midbrain, and limb
tissue. They tested 86 of these sequences in a transgenic mouse assay,
which in nearly all cases demonstrated reproducible enhancer activity in
the tissues that were predicted by p300 binding. Visel et al. (2009)
concluded that in vivo mapping of p300 binding is a highly accurate
means for identifying enhancers and their associated activities, and
suggested that such datasets will be useful in the study of the role of
tissue-specific enhancers in human biology and disease on a genomewide
scale.

Das et al. (2009) demonstrated that the histone acetyltransferase CBP
(600140) in flies, and CBP and p300 in humans, acetylate histone H3 (see
601128) on lys56 (H3K56), whereas Drosophila sir2 and human SIRT1 and
SIRT2 (604480) deacetylate H3K56 acetylation. The histone chaperones
ASF1A (609189) in humans and Asf1 in Drosophila are required for
acetylation of H3K56 in vivo, whereas the histone chaperone CAF1 (see
601245) in humans and Caf1 in Drosophila are required for the
incorporation of histones bearing this mark into chromatin. Das et al.
(2009) showed that, in response to DNA damage, histones bearing
acetylated K56 are assembled into chromatin in Drosophila and human
cells, forming foci that colocalize with sites of DNA repair.
Furthermore, acetylation of H3K56 is increased in multiple types of
cancer, correlating with increased levels of ASF1A in these tumors. Das
et al. (2009) concluded that their identification of multiple proteins
regulating the levels of H3K56 acetylation in metazoans will allow
future studies of this critical and unique histone modification that
couples chromatin assembly to DNA synthesis, cell proliferation, and
cancer.

Vilhais-Neto et al. (2010) found that RERE (605226) forms a complex with
NR2F2 (107773), p300, and a retinoic acid receptor, which is recruited
to the retinoic acid regulatory element of retinoic acid targets, such
as the RARB (180220) promoter. Furthermore, the knockdown of NR2F2
and/or RERE decreases retinoic acid signaling, suggesting that this
complex is required to promote transcriptional activation of retinoic
acid targets. The symmetrical expression of NR2F2 in the presomitic
mesoderm overlaps with the symmetry of the retinoic acid signaling
response, supporting its implication in the control of somitic symmetry.
Vilhais-Neto et al. (2010) suggested that misregulation of this
mechanism could be involved in symmetry defects of the human spine, such
as those observed in patients with scoliosis.

Xu et al. (2011) isolated mouse embryonic endoderm cells and assessed
histone modifications at regulatory elements of silent genes that are
activated upon liver or pancreas fate choices, and found that the liver
and pancreas elements have distinct chromatin patterns. Furthermore, the
histone acetyltransferase P300, recruited via bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP; see 600799) signaling, and the histone methyltransferase Ezh2
(601573) have modulatory roles in the fate choice. Xu et al. (2011)
concluded that their studies revealed a functional 'prepattern' of
chromatin states within multipotent progenitors and potential targets to
modulate cell fate induction.

Wang et al. (2011) found that AML1-ETO (see 151385), a fusion protein
generated by the t(8;21) translocation found in acute myelogenous
leukemia, is acetylated by the transcriptional coactivator p300 in
leukemia cells isolated from t(8;21) AML patients, and that this
acetylation is essential for its self-renewal-promoting effects in human
cord blood CD34+ (142230) cells and its leukemogenicity in mouse models.
Inhibition of p300 abrogates the acetylation of AML1-ETO and impairs its
ability to promote leukemic transformation. Wang et al. (2011) concluded
that lysine acetyltransferases represent a potential therapeutic target
in AML.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Eckner et al. (1994) mapped the
p300 gene, symbolized EP300, to chromosome 22q13.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Role in Cancer

A role for EP300 in cancer had been implied by the fact that it is
targeted by viral oncoproteins (Arany et al., 1995), it is fused to MLL
(159555) in leukemia (Ida et al., 1997), and 2 missense sequence
alterations in EP300 were identified in epithelial malignancies (Muraoka
et al., 1996).

Gayther et al. (2000) described somatic EP300 mutations (see, e.g.,
602700.0001; 602700.0002) that predicted a truncated protein in 6 (3%)
of 193 epithelial cancers analyzed. Of these 6 mutations, 2 were in
primary tumors (a colorectal cancer and a breast cancer) and 4 were in
cancer cell lines (colorectal, breast, and pancreatic). In addition,
they identified a somatic in-frame insertion in a primary breast cancer
and missense alterations in a primary colorectal cancer and 2 cell lines
(breast and pancreatic). Inactivation of the second allele was
demonstrated in 5 of the 6 cases with truncating mutations and in 2
other cases. The data showed that EP300 is mutated in epithelial cancers
and provided the first evidence that it behaves as a classic tumor
suppressor gene.

Pasqualucci et al. (2011) reported that the 2 most common types of B
cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (605027), follicular lymphoma and diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma, harbor frequent structural alterations
inactivating CREBBP and, more rarely, EP300, 2 highly related histone
and nonhistone acetyltransferases (HATs) that act as transcriptional
coactivators in multiple signaling pathways. Overall, about 39% of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and 41% of follicular lymphoma cases
display genomic deletions and/or somatic mutations that remove or
inactivate the HAT coding domain of these 2 genes. These lesions usually
affect 1 allele, suggesting that reduction in HAT dosage is important
for lymphomagenesis. Pasqualucci et al. (2011) demonstrated specific
defects in acetylation-mediated inactivation of the BCL6 oncoprotein
(109565) and activation of the p53 tumor suppressor (191170).

Le Gallo et al. (2012) used whole-exome sequencing to comprehensively
search for somatic mutations in 13 primary serous endometrial tumors
(see 608089), and subsequently resequenced 18 genes that were mutated in
more than 1 tumor and/or were components of an enriched functional
grouping from 40 additional serous tumors. Le Gallo et al. (2012)
identified a high frequency of somatic mutation (8%) in the EP300 gene.

- Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome 2

In 3 unrelated patients with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-2 (RSTS2;
613684), Roelfsema et al. (2005) identified 3 different heterozygous
mutations in the EP300 gene (602700.0003-602700.0005). CREBBP and EP300
function as transcriptional coactivators in the regulation of gene
expression through various signal transduction pathways. Inactivation of
CREBBP also results in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-1 (RSTS1; 180849),
indicating that a certain level of the protein is essential for normal
development. There is a direct link between loss of acetyltransferase
activity and RSTS, which indicates the disorder is caused by aberrant
chromatin regulation. Roelfsema et al. (2005) stated that these were the
first mutations identified in EP300 underlying a congenital disorder.

In 1 (2.6%) of 38 patients with RSTS who did not have mutations in the
CREBBP gene, Zimmermann et al. (2007) identified a mutation in the EP300
gene (602700.0006) predicted to result in mild protein truncation. The
patient had a very mild form of the disorder. Zimmermann et al. (2007)
concluded that mutations in the EP300 gene play only a minor role in the
etiology of RSTS.

In a 7-year-old boy with suspected Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome in whom
sequencing and MLPA analysis of the CREBBP gene was normal, Foley et al.
(2009) identified a deletion involving exons 3 to 8 in the EP300 gene
(602700.0007).

ANIMAL MODEL

The transcriptional coactivator and integrator p300 and its closely
related family member CREBBP mediate multiple signal-dependent
transcriptional events. Yao et al. (1998) generated mice lacking a
functional p300 gene. Animals nullizygous for p300 died between days 9
and 11.5 of gestation, exhibiting defects in neurulation, cell
proliferation, and heart development. Cells derived from p300-deficient
embryos displayed specific transcriptional defects and proliferated
poorly. p300 heterozygotes also manifested considerable embryonic
lethality. Moreover, double heterozygosity for p300 and CREBBP was
invariably associated with embryonic death. Thus, mouse development is
exquisitely sensitive to the overall gene dosage of p300 and CREBBP.
These results provide evidence that a coactivator endowed with histone
acetyltransferase activity is essential for mammalian cell proliferation
and development.

Kasper et al. (2002) demonstrated that the protein-binding KIX domains
of CBP (600140) and p300 have nonredundant functions in mice. In mice
homozygous for point mutations in the KIX domain of p300 designed to
disrupt the binding surface for the transcription factors c-Myb (189990)
and Creb (123810), multilineage defects occur in hematopoiesis,
including anemia, B-cell deficiency, thymic hypoplasia,
megakaryocytosis, and thrombocytosis. By contrast, age-matched mice
homozygous for identical mutations in the KIX domain of CBP are
essentially normal. There is a synergistic genetic interaction between
mutations in c-MYB and mutations in the KIX domain of p300, which
suggests that the binding of c-MYB to this domain of p300 is crucial for
the development and function of megakaryocytes. Thus, Kasper et al.
(2002) concluded that conserved domains in 2 highly related coactivators
have contrasting roles in hematopoiesis.

Sandberg et al. (2005) created mice with a homozygous met303-to-val
(M303V) mutation in the Myb gene, which disrupted the interaction
between Myb and p300. The biologic consequences of the mutation included
thrombocytosis, megakaryocytosis, anemia, lymphopenia, and absence of
eosinophils. Detailed analysis of hematopoiesis in mutant mice revealed
distinct blocks in T-cell, B-cell, and red blood cell development, as
well as a 10-fold increase in the number of hematopoietic stem cells.
Cell cycle analysis showed that twice as many mutant hematopoietic stem
cells were actively cycling in mutant mice compared with wildtype mice.
Sandberg et al. (2005) concluded that MYB, through its interaction with
p300, controls the proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic
stem and progenitor cells.

HISTORY

Lin et al. (2012) reported that acetylation and deacetylation of the
catalytic subunit of the adenosine monophosphate-activated protein
kinase (AMPK), PRKAA1 (602739), a critical cellular energy-sensing
protein kinase complex, is controlled by the opposing catalytic
activities of HDAC1 (601241) and p300. Deacetylation of AMPK enhanced
physical interaction with the upstream kinase LKB1 (602216), leading to
AMPK phosphorylation and activation, and resulting in lipid breakdown in
human liver cells. The authors later found that the Methods section of
their article was inaccurate. Because they could not reproduce all of
their results, they retracted the article.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COLORECTAL CANCER, SOMATIC
EP300, ARG580TER

In 1 of 20 primary colorectal cancers (114500), Gayther et al. (2000)
found a somatic arg580-to-ter (R580X) nonsense mutation in the EP300
gene resulting from a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 2837. This was
associated with loss of heterozygosity (LOH).

.0002
COLORECTAL CANCER, SOMATIC
EP300, PRO2221GLN

In a primary colorectal cancer (114500), Gayther et al. (2000) found a
somatic 7861C-A transversion in exon 31 of the EP300 gene, resulting in
a pro2221-to-gln amino acid substitution. This was associated with loss
of heterozygosity of the other allele.

.0003
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 2
EP300, ARG648TER

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-2 (RSTS2; 613684), Roelfsema
et al. (2005) found a de novo 1942C-T transition in exon 10 of the EP300
gene, resulting in an arg648-to-ter (R648X) mutation.

.0004
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 2
EP300, 8-BP DEL, NT2877

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-2 (RSTS2; 613684), Roelfsema
et al. (2005) found a de novo 8-bp deletion that removed nucleotides
2877-2884 from exon 15 of the EP300 gene. The 8-bp deletion resulted in
a frameshift beginning at codon 959 and ending with a premature stop at
codon 966.

.0005
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 2
EP300, EX1 DEL

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-2 (613684), Roelfsema et al.
(2005) found a deletion of the first exon of the EP300 gene. It was
considered probable that this deletion would lead to no expression from
the affected allele.

.0006
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 2
EP300, 1-BP DEL, 7100C

In a patient with Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-2 (613684), Zimmermann et
al. (2007) identified a 1-bp deletion (7100delC) in exon 31 of the EP300
gene, The patient had a 'mild' form of the disorder with higher
intelligence than other reported patients (IQ estimated at 75) and mild
facial dysmorphism. The mutation is located close to the 3-prime end of
the protein, was predicted to be a mild truncation, and does not alter
the HAT domain.

.0007
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 2
EP300, EX3-8DEL

In a 7-year-old boy with global developmental delay, slightly broad
halluces but normal thumbs, and facial dysmorphism reminiscent of
Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome-2 (613684), especially while smiling, Foley et
al. (2009) identified heterozygosity for a de novo deletion of exon 4 of
the EP300 gene; RNA sequencing revealed that exon 2 was spliced to exon
9, indicating deletion of exons 3 through 8. Neither parent carried the
deletion.

.0008
RUBINSTEIN-TAYBI SYNDROME 2
EP300, 1-BP DEL, 638G

In a 3-year-old boy with RSTS2 (613684), Bartsch et al. (2010)
identified an apparently de novo heterozygous 1-bp deletion (638delG) in
exon 2 of the EP300 gene, predicted to result in a frameshift and
premature termination. The child had severe microcephaly, retrognathia,
broad thumbs and great toes, and delayed psychomotor development with
marked speech delay. He also had posterior helical pits but normal
palpebral fissures, nose, and mouth.

REFERENCE 1. An, W.; Kim, J.; Roeder, R. G.: Ordered cooperative functions
of PRMT1, p300, and CARM1 in transcriptional activation by p53. Cell 117:
735-748, 2004.

2. Arany, Z.; Newsome, D.; Oldread, E.; Livingston, D. M.; Eckner,
R.: A family of transcriptional adaptor proteins targeted by the
E1A oncoprotein. Nature 374: 81-84, 1995.

3. Arany, Z.; Sellers, W. R.; Livingston, D. M.; Eckner, R.: E1A-associated
p300 and CREB-associated CBP belong to a conserved family of coactivators.
(Letter) Cell 77: 799-800, 1994.

4. Bartsch, O.; Labonte, J.; Albrecht, B.; Wieczorek, D.; Lechno,
S.; Zechner, U.; Haaf, T.: Two patients with EP300 mutations and
facial dysmorphism different from the classic Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 152A: 181-184, 2010.

5. Das, C.; Lucia, M. S.; Hansen, K. C.; Tyler, J. K.: CBP/p300-mediated
acetylation of histone H3 on lysine56. Nature 459: 113-117, 2009.
Note: Erratum: Nature 460: 1164 only, 2009.

6. Eckner, R.; Ewen, M. E.; Newsome, D.; Gerdes, M.; DeCaprio, J.
A.; Lawrence, J. B.; Livingston, D. M.: Molecular cloning and functional
analysis of the adenovirus E1A-associated 300-kD protein (p300) reveals
a protein with properties of a transcriptional adaptor. Genes Dev. 15:
869-884, 1994.

7. Etchegaray, J.-P.; Lee, C.; Wade, P. A.; Reppert, S. M.: Rhythmic
histone acetylation underlies transcription in the mammalian circadian
clock. Nature 421: 177-182, 2003.

8. Foley, P.; Bunyan, D.; Stratton, J.; Dillon, M.; Lynch, S. A.:
Further case of Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome due to a deletion in EP300. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 149A: 997-1000, 2009.

9. Gayther, S. A.; Batley, S. J.; Linger, L.; Bannister, A.; Thorpe,
K.; Chin, S.-F.; Daigo, Y.; Russell, P.; Wilson, A.; Sowter, H. M.;
Delhanty, J. D. A.; Ponder, B. A. J.; Kouzarides, T.; Caldas, C.:
Mutations truncating the EP300 acetylase in human cancers. Nature
Genet. 24: 300-303, 2000.

10. Grossman, S. R.; Deato, M. E.; Brignone, C.; Chan, H. M.; Kung,
A. L.; Tagami, H.; Nakatani, Y.; Livingston, D. M.: Polyubiquitination
of p53 by a ubiquitin ligase activity of p300. Science 300: 342-344,
2003.

11. Guermah, M.; Palhan, V. B.; Tackett, A. J.; Chait, B. T.; Roeder,
R. G.: Synergistic functions of SII and p300 in productive activator-dependent
transcription of chromatin templates. Cell 125: 275-286, 2006.

12. Hasan, S.; Hassa, P. O.; Imhof, R.; Hottiger, M. O.: Transcription
coactivator p300 binds PCNA and may have a role in DNA repair synthesis. Nature 410:
387-391, 2001.

13. Hasan, S.; Stucki, M.; Hassa, P. O.; Imhof, R.; Gehrig, P.; Hunziker,
P.; Hubscher, U.; Hottiger, M. O.: Regulation of human flap endonuclease-1
activity by acetylation through the transcriptional coactivator p300. Molec.
Cell 7: 1221-1231, 2001.

14. Ida, K.; Kitabayashi, I.; Taki, T.; Taniwaki, M.; Noro, K.; Yamamoto,
M.; Ohki, M.; Hayashi, Y.: Adenoviral E1A-associated protein p300
is involved in acute myeloid leukemia with t(11;22)(q23;q13). Blood 90:
4699-4704, 1997.

15. Kasper, L. H.; Boussouar, F.; Ney, P. A.; Jackson, C. W.; Rehg,
J.; van Deursen, J. M.; Brindle, P. K.: A transcription-factor-binding
surface of coactivator p300 is required for haematopoiesis. Nature 419:
738-743, 2002.

16. Le Gallo, M.; O'Hara, A. J.; Rudd, M. L.; Urick, M. E.; Hansen,
N. F.; O'Neil, N. J.; Price, J. C.; Zhang, S.; England, B. M.; Godwin,
A. K.; Sgroi, D. C.; NIH Intramural Sequencing Center (NISC) Comparative
Sequencing Program; Hieter, P.; Mullikan, J. C.; Merino, M. J.; Bell,
D. W.: Exome sequencing of serous endometrial tumors identifies recurrent
somatic mutations in chromatin-remodeling and ubiquitin ligase complex
genes. Nature Genet. 44: 1310-1315, 2012.

17. Lin, C. H.; Hare, B. J.; Wagner, G.; Harrison, S. C.; Maniatis,
T.; Fraenkel, E.: A small domain of CBP/p300 binds diverse proteins:
solution structure and functional studies. Molec. Cell 8: 581-590,
2001.

18. Lin, Y.; Kiihl, S.; Suhail, Y.; Liu, S.-Y.; Chou, Y.; Kuang, Z.;
Lu, J.; Khor, C. N.; Lin, C.-L.; Bader, J. S.; Irizarry, R.; Boeke,
J. D.: Functional dissection of lysine deacetylases reveals that
HDAC1 and p300 regulate AMPK. Nature 482: 251-255, 2012. Note: Retraction:
Nature 503: 146 only, 2013.

19. Liu, X.; Wang, L.; Zhao, K.; Thompson, P. R.; Hwang, Y.; Marmorstein,
R.; Cole, P. A.: The structural basis of protein acetylation by the
p300/CBP transcriptional coactivator. Nature 451: 846-850, 2008.

20. Liu, Y.; Dentin, R.; Chen, D.; Hedrick, S.; Ravnskjaer, K.; Schenk,
S.; Milne, J.; Meyers, D. J.; Cole, P.; Yates, J., III; Olefsky, J.;
Guarente, L.; Montminy, M.: A fasting inducible switch modulates
gluconeogenesis via activator/coactivator exchange. Nature 456:
269-273, 2008.

21. Muraoka, M.; Konishi, M.; Kikuchi-Yanoshita, R.; Tanaka, K.; Shitara,
N.; Chong, J.-M.; Iwama, T.; Miyaki, M.: p300 gene alterations in
colorectal and gastric carcinomas. Oncogene 12: 1565-1569, 1996.

22. Nakashima, K.; Yanagisawa, M.; Arakawa, H.; Kimura, N.; Hisatsune,
T.; Kawabata, M.; Miyazono, K.; Taga, T.: Synergistic signaling in
fetal brain by STAT3-Smad1 complex bridged by p300. Science 284:
479-482, 1999.

23. Pasqualucci, L.; Dominguez-Sola, D.; Chiarenza, A.; Fabbri, G.;
Grunn, A.; Trifonov, V.; Kasper, L. H.; Lerach, S.; Tang, H.; Ma,
J.; Rossi, D.; Chadburn, A.; Murty, V. V.; Mullighan, C. G.; Gaidano,
G.; Rabadan, R.; Brindle, P. K.; Dalla-Favera, R.: Inactivating mutations
of acetyltransferase genes in B-cell lymphoma. Nature 471: 189-195,
2011.

24. Roelfsema, J. H.; White, S. J.; Ariyurek, Y.; Bartholdi, D.; Niedrist,
D.; Papadia, F.; Bacino, C. A.; den Dunnen, J. T.; van Ommen, G.-J.
B.; Breuning, M. H.; Hennekam, R. C.; Peters, D. J. M.: Genetic heterogeneity
in Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome: mutations in both the CBP and EP300
genes cause disease. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 76: 572-580, 2005.

25. Sandberg, M. L.; Sutton, S. E.; Pletcher, M. T.; Wiltshire, T.;
Tarantino, L. M.; Hogenesch, J. B.; Cooke, M. P.: c-Myb and p300
regulate hematopoietic stem cell proliferation and differentiation. Dev.
Cell 8: 153-166, 2005.

26. Tini, M.; Benecke, A.; Um, S.-J.; Torchia, J.; Evans, R. M.; Chambon,
P.: Association of CBP/p300 acetylase and thymine DNA glycosylase
links DNA repair and transcription. Molec. Cell 9: 265-277, 2002.

27. Tsuda, M.; Takahashi, S.; Takahashi, Y.; Asahara, H.: Transcriptional
co-activators CREB-binding protein and p300 regulate chondrocyte-specific
gene expression via association with Sox9. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 27224-27229,
2003.

28. Turnell, A. S.; Stewart, G. S.; Grand, R. J. A.; Rookes, S. M.;
Martin, A.; Yamano, H.; Elledge, S. J.; Gallimore, P. H.: The APC/C
and CBP/p300 cooperate to regulate transcription and cell-cycle progression. Nature 438:
690-695, 2005.

29. Vilhais-Neto, G. C.; Maruhashi, M.; Smith, K. T.; Vasseur-Cognet,
M.; Peterson, A. S.; Workman, J. L.; Pourquie, O.: Rere controls
retinoic acid signalling and somite bilateral symmetry. Nature 463:
953-957, 2010.

30. Visel, A.; Blow, M. J.; Li, Z.; Zhang, T.; Akiyama, J. A.; Holt,
A.; Plajzer-Frick, I.; Shoukry, M.; Wright, C.; Chen, F.; Afzal, V.;
Ren, B.; Rubin, E. M.; Pennacchio, L. A.: ChIP-seq accurately predicts
tissue-specific activity of enhancers. Nature 457: 854-858, 2009.

31. Wang, L.; Gural, A.; Sun, X.-J.; Zhao, X.; Perna, F.; Huang, G.;
Hatlen, M. A.; Vu, L.; Liu, F.; Xu, H.; Asai, T.; Xu, H.; and 9 others
: The leukemogenicity of AML1-ETO is dependent on site-specific lysine
acetylation. Science 333: 765-769, 2011.

32. Weaver, B. K.; Kumar, K. P.; Reich, N. C.: Interferon regulatory
factor 3 and CREB-binding protein/p300 are subunits of double-stranded
RNA-activated transcription factor DRAF1. Molec. Cell. Biol. 18:
1359-1368, 1998.

33. Xu, C.-R.; Cole, P. A.; Meyers, D. J.; Kormish, J.; Dent, S.;
Zaret, K. S.: Chromatin 'prepattern' and histone modifiers in a fate
choice for liver and pancreas. Science 332: 963-966, 2011.

34. Yao, T. P.; Oh, S. P.; Fuchs, M.; Zhou, N.-D.; Ch'ng, L.-E.; Newsome,
D.; Bronson, R. T.; Li, E.; Livingston, D. M.; Eckner, R.: Gene dosage-dependent
embryonic development and proliferation defects in mice lacking the
transcriptional integrator p300. Cell 93: 361-372, 1998.

35. Zimmermann, N.; Acosta, A. M. B. F.; Kohlhase, J.; Bartsch, O.
: Confirmation of EP300 gene mutations as a rare cause of Rubinstein-Taybi
syndrome. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 15: 837-842, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/7/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/7/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/30/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/14/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/6/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/6/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 3/8/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/8/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/30/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/9/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/19/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/9/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/26/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/20/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/13/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/30/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/11/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/23/2005
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/5/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/22/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/21/2003
Ada Hamosh -updated: 11/12/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/23/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 11/5/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/3/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/12/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/1/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 4/16/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/15/1999

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 6/9/1998

EDITED carol: 11/07/2013
carol: 9/16/2013
mgross: 2/7/2013
alopez: 2/7/2013
mgross: 2/5/2013
alopez: 3/12/2012
terry: 3/7/2012
alopez: 9/2/2011
terry: 8/30/2011
alopez: 6/16/2011
terry: 6/14/2011
alopez: 6/13/2011
terry: 6/6/2011
wwang: 1/25/2011
ckniffin: 1/6/2011
alopez: 4/23/2010
terry: 4/22/2010
wwang: 3/10/2010
mgross: 3/8/2010
mgross: 1/4/2010
terry: 12/8/2009
carol: 11/5/2009
terry: 10/30/2009
terry: 9/9/2009
alopez: 6/4/2009
terry: 5/19/2009
alopez: 3/10/2009
terry: 3/9/2009
alopez: 12/10/2008
terry: 11/26/2008
alopez: 3/20/2008
wwang: 8/23/2007
ckniffin: 8/13/2007
alopez: 2/1/2006
terry: 1/30/2006
wwang: 3/18/2005
wwang: 3/14/2005
terry: 3/11/2005
mgross: 2/23/2005
mgross: 8/5/2004
alopez: 4/22/2003
terry: 4/22/2003
alopez: 2/24/2003
terry: 2/21/2003
alopez: 11/13/2002
terry: 11/12/2002
mgross: 9/23/2002
mgross: 11/5/2001
mgross: 7/3/2001
alopez: 3/14/2001
terry: 3/12/2001
mcapotos: 8/1/2000
alopez: 3/1/2000
terry: 3/1/2000
psherman: 4/16/1999
alopez: 4/15/1999
carol: 8/27/1998
carol: 6/11/1998

153370	TITLE *153370 INTEGRIN, ALPHA-L; ITGAL
;;LYMPHOCYTE FUNCTION-ASSOCIATED ANTIGEN, TYPE 1, ALPHA SUBUNIT; LFA1A;;
CD11A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Larson et al. (1989) isolated clones corresponding to the LFA1-alpha
subunit from a size-selected lambda-gt10 cDNA library constructed from
PMA-stimulated myeloid cells. The protein contains a 25-amino acid
hydrophobic signal sequence, a 1,063-amino acid extracellular domain, a
29-amino acid transmembrane domain, and a 53-amino acid cytoplasmic
tail. The extracellular region contains 7 repeats. The LFA1-alpha
protein shares 36% identity with the alpha subunits of MAC1 (ITGAM;
120980) and p150,95 (ITGAX; 151510); all 3 of these proteins contain an
approximately 200-amino acid insert in the N terminus relative to other
integrin alpha subunits. Northern blot analysis detected expression of a
5.5-kb transcript in lymphoid and myeloid cells but not in bladder
carcinoma.

GENE FUNCTION

Lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA1) is a dimer consisting of
CD11A (ITGAL) and a beta subunit (ITGB2; 600065). ITGB2 also associates
with other alpha chains, e.g., with ITGAM (120980) to form MAC1 and with
ITGAX (151510) to form p150,95. LFA1 is expressed on lymphocytes and
phagocytic cells. The LFA1 molecule is involved in the adhesion of
cytotoxic T cells to their target cells. Patients with LFA1
immunodeficiency disease (116920) have recurrent life-threatening
infections, show deficiency of the beta chain of all 3 molecules, LFA1,
Mac1 (macrophage antigen-1), and p150,95, and display profound defects
in adhesion-dependent granulocyte, monocyte, and B- and T-lymphocyte
functions. The alpha subunits were designated by Marlin et al. (1986) as
alpha-L for LFA1, alpha-M for Mac1, and alpha-X for p150,95.

Marlin et al. (1986) showed that the genetic defect in LFA1
immunodeficiency disease resides in the common beta subunit of these 3
molecules. Furthermore, they were able to demonstrate that the beta
subunit is coded by chromosome 21, whereas the unique alpha subunit of
LFA1 is coded by chromosome 16. These results were obtained by
human-mouse T-cell fusion studies. Human LFA1 alpha and mouse beta
subunits joined in the interspecies hybrid cells to form alpha-beta
complexes. Surface expression of the alpha, but not of the beta, subunit
of patient cells was restored by the formation of interspecies
complexes. These findings showed that the LFA1 alpha subunit in
genetically deficient cells is competent for surface expression in the
presence of an appropriate beta subunit.

In the serum of a multiply transfused patient with systemic lupus
erythematosus (152700), Pischel et al. (1987) identified an antibody
directed at determinants of the LFA1 alpha-chain. Since the serum did
not immunoprecipitate LFA1 from autologous cells, even though LFA1
molecules were present, the serum identified 2 serologic phenotypes of
LFA1. The serum reacted with cells from 95% of normal individuals.

Lu and Cyster (2002) studied the mechanisms that control localization of
marginal zone B cells. They demonstrated that marginal zone B cells
express elevated levels of the integrins LFA1 and alpha-4-beta-1 (see
192975 and 135630) and that the marginal zone B cells bind to the
ligands ICAM1 (147840) and VCAM1 (192225). These ligands are expressed
within the marginal zone in a lymphotoxin-dependent manner. Combined
inhibition of LFA1 and alpha-4-beta-1 causes a rapid and selective
release of B cells from the marginal zone. Furthermore,
lipopolysaccharide-triggered marginal zone B cell relocalization
involves downregulation of integrin-mediated adhesion. Lu and Cyster
(2002) concluded that their studies identified key requirements for
marginal zone B cell localization and established a role for integrins
in peripheral lymphoid tissue compartmentalization.

Anikeeva et al. (2005) found that LFA1 engagement could be replaced by
other adhesion mechanisms, such as CD2 (186990)-CD58 (LFA3; 153420)
interaction, in antigen-induced cytotoxic T-lymphocyte granule
polarization and degranulation, but that LFA1 engagement was
indispensable for effective target cell lysis by the released granules.
LFA1-mediated adhesion to glass-supported bilayers resulted in a much
larger junction area and formation of a peripheral supramolecular
activation cluster compared with CD2-mediated adhesion. Anikeeva et al.
(2005) concluded that LFA1 delivers a distinct signal essential for
directing released granules to antigen-bearing target cells to mediate
their destruction.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Corbi et al. (1988) demonstrated that the
genes encoding the alpha subunits of LFA1, Mac1, and p150,95, all of
which play a part in leukocyte adhesion, constitute a cluster located on
16p13.1-p11. Callen et al. (1991) narrowed the localization to 16p11.2.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Kim et al. (2003) investigated cytoplasmic conformational changes in the
integrin LFA1 (alpha-L; beta-2, 600065) in living cells by measuring
fluorescence resonance energy transfer between cyan fluorescent
protein-fused and yellow fluorescent protein-fused alpha-L and beta-2
cytoplasmic domains. In the resting state these domains were close to
each other, but underwent significant spatial separation upon either
intracellular activation of integrin adhesiveness (inside-out signaling)
or ligand binding (outside-in signaling). Thus, bidirectional integrin
signaling is accomplished by coupling extracellular conformational
changes to an unclasping and separation of the alpha and beta
cytoplasmic domains, which Kim et al. (2003) noted as a distinctive
mechanism for transmitting information across the plasma membrane.

CLINICAL MANAGEMENT

Interactions between LFA1 and intercellular adhesion molecules are
important in the pathogenesis of psoriasis (see 177900). Lebwohl et al.
(2003) studied the therapeutic effects of efalizumab, a humanized
monoclonal antibody that binds to the alpha subunit of LFA1 and inhibits
the activation of T cells, in subjects with psoriasis. A significant
improvement in plaque psoriasis was observed in subjects with moderate
to severe disease. Extending treatment from 12 to 24 weeks resulted in
both maintenance and improvement of responses.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Fischer et al. (1986); Sanchez-Madrid et al. (1983)
REFERENCE 1. Anikeeva, N.; Somersalo, K.; Sims, T. N.; Thomas, V. K.; Dustin,
M. L.; Sykulev, Y.: Distinct role of lymphocyte function-associated
antigen-1 in mediating effective cytolytic activity by cytotoxic T
lymphocytes. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 6437-6442, 2005.

2. Callen, D. F.; Chen, L. Z.; Nancarrow, J.; Whitmore, S. A.; Apostolou,
S.; Thompson, A. D.; Lane, S. A.; Stallings, R. L.; Hildebrand, C.
E.; Harris, P. G.; Sutherland, G. R.: Current state of the physical
map of human chromosome 16. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 58:
1998 only, 1991.

3. Corbi, A. L.; Larson, R. S.; Kishimoto, T. K.; Springer, T. A.;
Morton, C. C.: Chromosomal location of the genes encoding the leukocyte
adhesion receptors LFA-1, Mac-1 and p150,95: identification of a gene
cluster involved in cell adhesion. J. Exp. Med. 167: 1597-1607,
1988.

4. Fischer, A.; Durandy, A.; Sterkers, G.; Griscelli, C.: Role of
the LFA-1 molecule in cellular interactions required for antibody
production in humans. J. Immun. 136: 3198-3203, 1986.

5. Kim, M.; Carman, C. V.; Springer, T. A.: Bidirectional transmembrane
signaling by cytoplasmic domain separation in integrins. Science 301:
1720-1725, 2003.

6. Larson, R. S.; Corbi, A. L.; Berman, L.; Springer, T.: Primary
structure of the leukocyte function-associated molecule-1 alpha subunit:
an integrin with an embedded domain defining a protein superfamily. J.
Cell Biol. 108: 703-712, 1989.

7. Lebwohl, M.; Tyring, S. K.; Hamilton, T. K.; Toth, D.; Glazer,
S.; Tawfik, N. H.; Walicke, P.; Dummer, W.; Wang, X.; Garovoy, M.
R.; Pariser, D.: A novel targeted T-cell modulator, efalizumab, for
plaque psoriasis. New Eng. J. Med. 349: 2004-2013, 2003.

8. Lu, T. T.; Cyster, J. G.: Integrin-mediated long-term B cell retention
in the splenic marginal zone. Science 297: 409-412, 2002.

9. Marlin, S. D.; Morton, C. C.; Anderson, D. C.; Springer, T. A.
: LFA-1 immunodeficiency disease: definition of the genetic defect
and chromosomal mapping of alpha and beta subunits of the lymphocyte
function-associated antigen 1 (LFA-1) by complementation in hybrid
cells. J. Exp. Med. 164: 855-867, 1986.

10. Pischel, K. D.; Marlin, S. D.; Springer, T. A.; Woods, V. L.,
Jr.; Bluestein, H. G.: Polymorphism of lymphocyte function-associated
antigen-1 demonstrated by a lupus patient's alloantiserum. J. Clin.
Invest. 79: 1607-1614, 1987.

11. Sanchez-Madrid, F.; Nagy, J.; Robbins, E.; Simon, P.; Springer,
T. A.: A human leukocyte differentiation antigen family with distinct
alpha subunits and a common beta subunit: the lymphocyte function-associated
antigen (LFA-1), the C3bi complement receptor (OKM1/Mac-1), and the
p150,95 molecule. J. Exp. Med. 158: 1785-1803, 1983.

CONTRIBUTORS Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 08/22/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/22/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/9/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/26/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/10/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/25/1986

EDITED alopez: 08/22/2008
mgross: 5/22/2007
carol: 5/16/2007
carol: 5/15/2007
tkritzer: 1/9/2004
terry: 1/9/2004
terry: 9/26/2003
alopez: 9/11/2002
tkritzer: 9/11/2002
tkritzer: 9/10/2002
mark: 6/12/1997
mimadm: 11/6/1994
carol: 5/4/1992
carol: 3/26/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989

611135	TITLE *611135 KLOTHO, BETA; KLB
;;BETA-KLOTHO; BKL
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases for homologs of Klotho (KL; 604824), Ito et al.
(2000) identified a partial human cDNA encoding KLB. They cloned
full-length mouse Klb and found that it encodes a 1,043-amino acid
protein that shares 41.2% identity with mouse Kl. Like Kl, Klb contains
an N-terminal signal sequence, followed by 2 tandemly repeated
glycosidase-like domains, a C-terminal transmembrane domain, and a short
cytoplasmic tail. Both Kl and Klb lack 2 key glutamates in the predicted
active centers of the glycosidase-like domains. Northern blot analysis
of adult mouse tissues showed that Klb was predominantly expressed in
liver and pancreas, with lower levels in skin and weak expression in
stomach, skeletal muscle, small intestine, and lung. In mouse embryos,
Klb expression became detectable at day 11 and increased in intensity as
development progressed. In situ hybridization of mouse embryos revealed
strong Klb expression in yolk sac, gut, brown and white adipose tissue,
liver, and pancreas.

GENE FUNCTION

Ogawa et al. (2007) noted that FGF23 (605380) requires KL to bind FGFRs
and activate FGF signaling in various cell types. Using immunoblot
analysis, they found that human embryonic kidney cells overexpressing
KLB, but not those overexpressing KL, responded to FGF21 (609436).
Coimmunoprecipitation analysis showed that FGF21 required KLB to bind
FGFR1c (136350) and FGFR4 (134935). FGF21 stimulated glucose uptake in
adipocytes, which Ogawa et al. (2007) found expressed KLB, but not in
preadipocytes, which did not express KLB. Small interfering RNA-mediated
knockdown of KLB in adipocytes abolished the effect of FGF21 on glucose
uptake. Mice injected with Fgf21 displayed Erk1 (MAPK3; 601795)/Erk2
(MAPK1; 176948) phosphorylation in white adipose tissue, which expressed
Klb, but not in kidney or skeletal muscle, which did not express Klb.
Phosphorylation in kidney, which expressed Kl, occurred only in response
to Fgf23. Ogawa et al. (2007) concluded that KLB is an essential
cofactor for FGF21 activity and suggested that the Klotho gene family
may have evolved to confer tissue-specific bioactivity on FGF19 (603891)
subfamily members.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Ito et al. (2000) mapped the KLB gene to
chromosome 4.

ANIMAL MODEL

Ito et al. (2005) found that Klb -/- mice were viable, fertile, and
appeared grossly normal, although they had slightly decreased body
weight compared with wildtype and heterozygous mice. Klb -/- mice showed
dramatically elevated synthesis and secretion of bile acids and strong
upregulation of 2 key bile acid synthase genes, Cyp7a1 (118455) and
Cyp8b1 (602172). Nuclear receptor pathways and enterohepatic
circulation, which regulates bile acid synthesis, were largely intact,
but bile acid-dependent induction of Nr0b2 (604630), a negative
regulator of Cyp7a1 and Cyp8b1, was significantly attenuated.
Suppression of Cyp7a1 expression by dietary bile acids was impaired in
Klb -/- mice, whereas that of Cyp8b1 expression was not significantly
altered. Ito et al. (2005) concluded that KLB may contribute to
CYP7A1-selective regulation. In addition, Klb -/- mice exhibited
resistance to gallstone formation, suggesting a potential clinical
relevance of the KLB system.

REFERENCE 1. Ito, S.; Fujimori, T.; Furuya, A.; Satoh, J.; Nabeshima, Y.; Nabeshima,
Y.: Impaired negative feedback suppression of bile acid synthesis
in mice lacking beta-Klotho. J. Clin. Invest. 115: 2202-2208, 2005.

2. Ito, S.; Kinoshita, S.; Shiraishi, N.; Nakagawa, S.; Sekine, S.;
Fujimori, T.; Nabeshima, Y.: Molecular cloning and expression analyses
of mouse beta-klotho, which encodes a novel Klotho family protein. Mech.
Dev. 98: 115-119, 2000.

3. Ogawa, Y.; Kurosu, H.; Yamamoto, M.; Nandi, A.; Rosenblatt, K.
P.; Goetz, R.; Eliseenkova, A. V.; Mohammadi, M.; Kuro-o, M.: Beta-Klotho
is required for metabolic activity of fibroblast growth factor 21. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 7432-7437, 2007.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 06/26/2007

CREATED Matthew B. Gross: 6/22/2007

EDITED mgross: 06/26/2007
wwang: 6/25/2007
mgross: 6/22/2007

604704	TITLE *604704 BREAST CANCER ANTIESTROGEN RESISTANCE 3; BCAR3
;;SH2 DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 3B; SH2D3B;;
NOVEL SH2-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; NSP2
DESCRIPTION In breast cancer, the antiestrogen tamoxifen has been prescribed for
both primary treatment and the treatment of advanced metastatic disease.
Although the drug induces remission in most patients with estrogen
receptor (see 133430)-positive disease, all patients eventually develop
resistance. To unravel the molecular mechanisms of antiestrogen
resistance, van Agthoven et al. (1998) applied an insertional
mutagenesis strategy to a breast cancer cell line. Infected cells were
subjected to tamoxifen selection, and the resistant clones were screened
for a common integration site linked with antiestrogen resistance. By
screening a human testis cDNA library with the integration site-specific
probe, van Agthoven et al. (1998) obtained a cDNA encoding BCAR3 (breast
cancer antiestrogen resistance-3). The deduced 825-amino acid BCAR3
protein contains a putative Src homology 2 (SH2) domain and sequences
homologous to yeast CDC48 (see 601023). Northern blot analysis detected
abundant expression of a 3.4-kb BCAR3 transcript in heart, placenta,
skeletal muscle, spleen, prostate, testis, ovary, small intestine,
colon, fetal kidney, and several cancer cell lines, but not in
nonmalignant breast tissue; a 6-kb BCAR3 transcript was also detected in
skeletal muscle and heart.

REFERENCE 1. van Agthoven, T.; van Agthoven, T. L. A.; Dekker, A.; van der Spek,
P. J.; Vreede, L.; Dorssers, L. C. J.: Identification of BCAR3 by
a random search for genes involved in antiestrogen resistance of human
breast cancer cells. EMBO J. 17: 2799-2808, 1998.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/20/2000

EDITED alopez: 09/14/2011
mgross: 3/23/2000
mgross: 3/21/2000
mgross: 3/20/2000

191720	TITLE *191720 5-PRIME,3-PRIME-@NUCLEOTIDASE, CYTOSOLIC; NT5C
;;PYRIMIDINE 5-PRIME NUCLEOTIDASE 2; P5N2;;
URIDINE 5-PRIME MONOPHOSPHATE HYDROLASE 2; UMPH2;;
DEOXYRIBONUCLEOTIDASE, CYTOSOLIC, 1; DNT1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Pyrimidine 5-prime nucleotidase (P5N; EC 3.1.3.5), also called uridine
5-prime monophosphate hydrolase (UMPH), catalyzes the dephosphorylation
of the pyrimidine 5-prime monophosphates UMP and CMP to the
corresponding nucleosides. There are 2 isozymes of pyrimidine 5-prime
nucleotidase in red blood cells, referred to as type I (UMPH1; 606224)
and type II (UMPH2).

CLONING

Electrophoretic analysis shows a single band of UMPH enzyme activity in
human cells but 2 distinct UMPH activities in rodent cells. Swallow et
al. (1983) and Paglia et al. (1984) showed that in fact humans also
possess 2 distinct UMPH isozymes that are not electrophoretically
separable. This result was based on observations in persons who lacked
UMPH1 but retained normal UMPH2 activity. Differences in substrate
specificity distinguish the 2 isozymes. Deficiency of UMPH1 causes
hemolytic anemia; see 266120.

5-prime(3-prime)-Deoxyribonucleotidase (DNT1) is a ubiquitous enzyme in
mammalian cells with particularly high activity in lymphoid cells.
Biochemically purified DNT1 has an apparent molecular mass of 45 kD and
hydrolyzes 5-prime deoxyribonucleotides (dNTP) and 2-prime(3-prime)-dNTP
and ribonucleotides but not 5-prime ribonucleotides (Hoglund and
Reichard, 1990; Tjernshaugen and Fritzson, 1976). By micropeptide
sequencing and database searching, Rampazzo et al. (2000) identified a
full-length cDNA encoding mouse Dnt1. They also cloned a partial human
DNT1 cDNA that lacked the 5-prime 181 bp present in the mouse sequence.
The amino acid sequence predicted from the partial human cDNA is 83%
identical to that of the mouse protein. Northern blot analysis revealed
ubiquitous expression of 1.5- and 1.0-kb DNT1 transcripts, with highest
expression in skeletal muscle, heart, and pancreas. SDS-PAGE and enzyme
analysis showed that recombinant murine Dnt1 is expressed as a 25-kD
enzyme that is active only when expressed from the first ATG and
catalyzes nucleotide dephosphorylation, but lacks phosphotransferase
activity. Recombinant human DNT1 was active only when fused with the
5-prime end of the mouse cDNA. Fluorescence microscopy indicated that
DNT is expressed in the cytoplasm and nucleus and is not targeted to any
specific organelle.

MAPPING

Wilson et al. (1986) demonstrated in somatic cell hybrids that UMPH2
cosegregated with 17q. Using mouse-Syrian hamster hybrids, Wilson et al.
(1987) demonstrated synteny of Umph2 and Glk in the mouse, indicating
that the Umph2 gene is on mouse chromosome 11. By means of
chromosome-mediated gene transfer, Xu et al. (1988) demonstrated that
UMPH2 is in a group of genes that are cotransfected along with the
selectable marker TK1 (188300), which lies in the region 17q23.2-q25.3.
UMPH2 cotransfected with the GHC genes (see 139250) with a high
frequency. The order was thought to be:
cen--GAA--UMPH2--GHC--TK1--GALK--qter.

By sequence analysis, Rampazzo et al. (2000) identified the DNT1 and
DNT2 (605292) genes within genomic clones located on chromosome 17. They
also found that the 2 genes have a similar genomic structure.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Anderson et al. (1975)
REFERENCE 1. Anderson, J. A.; Teng, Y.-S.; Giblett, E. R.: Stains for six enzymes
potentially applicable to chromosomal assignment by cell hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 14: 295-299, 1975.

2. Hoglund, L.; Reichard, P.: Cytoplasmic 5-prime(3-prime)-nucleotidase
from human placenta. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 6589-6595, 1990.

3. Paglia, D. E.; Valentine, W. N.; Brockway, R. A.: Identification
of thymidine nucleotidase and deoxyribonucleotidase activities among
normal isozymes of 5-prime-nucleotidase in human erythrocytes. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 81: 588-592, 1984.

4. Rampazzo, C.; Gallinaro, L.; Milanesi, E.; Frigimelica, E.; Reichard,
P.; Bianchi, V.: A deoxyribonucleotidase in mitochondria: involvement
in regulation of dNTP pools and possible link to genetic disease. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 97: 8239-8244, 2000.

5. Rampazzo, C.; Johansson, M.; Gallinaro, L.; Ferraro, P.; Hellman,
U.; Karlsson, A.; Reichard, P.; Bianchi, V.: Mammalian 5-prime(3-prime)-deoxyri
bonucleotidase, cDNA cloning, and overexpression of the enzyme in
Escherichia coli and mammalian cells. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 5409-5415,
2000.

6. Swallow, D. M.; Turner, V. S.; Hopkinson, D. A.: Isozymes of rodent
5-prime-nucleotidase: evidence for two independent structural loci
UMPH-1 and UMPH-2. Ann. Hum. Genet. 47: 9-17, 1983.

7. Tjernshaugen, H.; Fritzson, P.: Subcellular distribution and activity
in different rat tissues of a deoxyinosine-activated nucleotidase. Biochem.
J. 154: 77-80, 1976.

8. Wilson, D. E.; Swallow, D. M.; Povey, S.: Assignment of the human
gene for uridine 5-prime-monophosphate phosphohydrolase (UMPH2) to
the long arm of chromosome 17. Ann. Hum. Genet. 50: 223-227, 1986.

9. Wilson, D. E.; Woodard, D.; Sandler, A.; Erickson, J.; Gurney,
A.: Provisional assignment of the gene for uridine monophosphatase-2
(Umph-2) to mouse chromosome 11. Biochem. Genet. 25: 1-6, 1987.

10. Xu, W.; Gorman, P. A.; Rider, S. H.; Hedge, P. J.; Moore, G.;
Prichard, C.; Sheer, D.; Solomon, E.: Construction of a genetic map
of human chromosome 17 by use of chromosome-mediated gene transfer. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 8563-8567, 1988.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/16/1986

EDITED alopez: 06/02/2009
carol: 5/28/2003
carol: 7/8/2002
mgross: 5/2/2002
carol: 8/28/2001
psherman: 11/29/1999
mgross: 11/24/1999
supermim: 3/16/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 12/5/1988
marie: 3/25/1988
carol: 4/16/1987

614413	TITLE *614413 AMINOACYLASE 3; ACY3
;;ASPARTOACYLASE 3;;
HEPATITIS C VIRUS CORE-BINDING PROTEIN 1; HCBP1;;
HCV CORE-BINDING PROTEIN 1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Aminoacylase-3 is a hydrolase that removes the acyl group from several
acylated aromatic amino acids and from S-benzyl-N-acetylcysteine
(Pushkin et al., 2004).

CLONING

Pushkin et al. (2004) cloned mouse Acy3, which encodes a deduced
318-amino acid protein with a calculated molecular mass of about 35.2
kD. Acy3 has no membrane domain, but it contains consensus sites for
N-glycosylation, tyrosine sulfation, tyrosine and threonine
phosphorylation, and myristoylation. Northern blot analysis detected
high expression of an approximately 1.4-kb Acy3 transcript in kidney,
followed by liver. Weaker expression was detected in heart, small
intestine, brain, lung, testis, and stomach. Testis expressed an
additional transcript of about 2.2 kb. Immunocytochemical analysis of
mouse kidney revealed Acy3 localization to the apical membrane of S1
convoluted proximal tubule cells and in the cytoplasm of S2 and S3
proximal straight tubule cells. Gel-filtration and transmission electron
microscopy showed that Acy3 formed tetramers.

GENE FUNCTION

By assaying mouse Acy3 expressed in HEK293 cells, Pushkin et al. (2004)
found that it used all acetylated substrates examined, which included
N-acetyl-L-histidine, N-acetyl-L-tyrosine, N-acetyl-L-phenylalanine, and
S-benzyl-N-acetyl-L-cysteine. It showed highest affinity for
S-benzyl-N-acetyl-L-cysteine and had a pH optimum of 7.5 to 7.7.

MAPPING

Hartz (2011) mapped the ACY3 gene to chromosome 11q13.2 based on an
alignment of the ACY3 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AF359506) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Pushkin et al. (2004) stated that mouse Acy3 maps to chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  12/21/2011.

2. Pushkin, A.; Carpenito, G.; Abuladze, N.; Newman, D.; Tsuprun,
V.; Ryazantsev, S.; Motemoturu, S.; Sassani, P.; Solovieva, N.; Dukkipati,
R.; Kurtz, I.: Structural characterization, tissue distribution,
and functional expression of murine aminoacylase III. Am. J. Physiol.
Cell Physiol. 286: C848-C856, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/4/2012

EDITED mgross: 01/04/2012
mgross: 1/4/2012

260400	TITLE #260400 SHWACHMAN-DIAMOND SYNDROME; SDS
;;PANCREATIC INSUFFICIENCY AND BONE MARROW DYSFUNCTION;;
SHWACHMAN-BODIAN SYNDROME;;
LIPOMATOSIS OF PANCREAS, CONGENITAL
DESCRIPTION A number sign (#) is used with this entry because the Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome, also known as the Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome, is caused
by compound heterozygous or homozygous mutations in the SBDS gene
(607444).

Heterozygous mutations in the SBDS gene have been associated with
predisposition to aplastic anemia (609135).

DESCRIPTION

Shwachman-Diamond syndrome is characterized primarily by exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency, hematologic abnormalities, including increased
risk of malignant transformation, and skeletal abnormalities.

For a review of Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, see Dror and Freedman
(2002).

CLINICAL FEATURES

Shwachman et al. (1964) described a syndrome of pancreatic insufficiency
(suggesting cystic fibrosis of the pancreas but with normal sweat
electrolytes and no respiratory difficulties) and pancytopenia. One
sibship contained 2 affected brothers and an affected female. From the
early paper of Bartholomew et al. (1959) it appears that so-called
primary atrophy of the pancreas may be, in some instances, the same
disorder and that manifestations may develop first after the fifth
decade of life. The same syndrome was described by Nezelof and Watchi
(1961) and later by other authors such as Pringle et al. (1968).
Goldstein (1968) and others before him called this condition congenital
lipomatosis of the pancreas. He described one affected fraternal twin
girl. Affected sibs were referred to by Burke et al. (1967). Pringle et
al. (1968) observed associated skeletal changes of the metaphyseal
dysostosis type. These are of interest because of the digestive
abnormalities (not yet well characterized) and hematologic changes in
cartilage-hair hypoplasia (250250), a form of metaphyseal
chondrodysplasia. The exocrine pancreas is replaced by fat, whereas the
islets of Langerhans are normal.

Although dwarfing is usually moderate and becomes apparent only after 1
or 2 years of life, Danks et al. (1976) described 2 pairs of brothers
who showed neonatal respiratory distress, resembling that of Jeune
syndrome (208500), due to abnormally short ribs. The true nature of the
osseous disorder became clear in the second or third year of life.
Susceptibility to infection was marked in 1 family and led to death of 1
of the brothers.

Wulfeck et al. (1991), who referred to this disorder as
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome, evaluated 2 affected sisters, aged 8 and 13
years, in whom the most prominent neurologic abnormality was global
apraxia, which affected their motor skills. Generalized weakness and
hypotonia were also observed.

Mack et al. (1996) reviewed findings in 25 patients. Mean birth weight
was at the 25th percentile; however, by 6 months of age, mean heights
and weights were less than the 5th percentile. After 6 months of age,
growth velocity was normal. Neutropenia was the most common hematologic
abnormality (88%), but leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, and anemia were
also frequently encountered. Eleven patients with hypoplasia of all 3
bone marrow cellular lines had the worst prognosis; 5 patients died, 2
of sepsis and 3 of acute myelogeneous leukemia (AML; 602439).

Ginzberg et al. (1999) collected data from 116 families with Shwachman
syndrome. In 88 patients (33 female, 55 male; median age, 5.2 years),
their predetermined diagnostic criteria were fulfilled; 63 patients
represented isolated cases, and 25 affected sibs were from 12 multiplex
families. Steatorrhea was present in 86% (57 of 66), and 91% (78 of 86)
displayed a low serum trypsinogen concentration. Patients older than 4
years more often had pancreatic sufficiency. Neutropenia occurred in
98%, anemia in 42%, and thrombocytopenia in 34%. Myelodysplasia or
cytogenetic abnormalities were reported in 7 patients. Short stature
with normal nutritional status was a prominent feature. Similarities in
phenotype between isolated cases and affected sib sets supported the
hypothesis that Shwachman syndrome is a single disease entity.

Cipolli et al. (1999) provided long-term follow-up of 13 patients with
Shwachman syndrome diagnosed in infancy. At diagnosis, growth
retardation and pancreatic insufficiency were present in all.
Hematologic features, repeated respiratory infections during the first
years of life, and skeletal abnormalities were frequently observed.
Other associated features included hepatic involvement and occasional
renal dysfunction. One patient died in infancy of respiratory infection.
Six were under observation at other centers. Of the 6 patients followed
up by the authors (mean age of 10 years at the time of study), a
significant growth improvement was observed. In 5, the pancreatic
stimulation test showed values of lipase within reference range outputs,
whereas fat balance or fecal fat losses were normal in all but 1. Of 7
subjects assessed by psychologic evaluation, IQ test results were
markedly abnormal in one and bordered on abnormality in the others. This
study underlined the possibility of improvement or normalization of
exocrine pancreatic function, as well as decreasing the frequency of
infections, with age.

Ip et al. (2002) used a classification and regression tree analysis
(CART) to define a pancreatic phenotype based on serum trypsinogen and
isoamylase measurements in 90 patients confirmed to have SDS compared to
134 controls. They then studied the usefulness of the CART-defined
pancreatic phenotype in determining the diagnosis of SDS in 35 patients
with 'probable' and 39 patients with 'improbable' SDS. All confirmed
patients older than 3 years were classified correctly using the CART
analysis. The CART-defined pancreatic phenotype was found in 82% of
'probable' and 7% of 'improbable' SDS patients older than 3 years. Ip et
al. (2002) concluded that the pancreatic phenotype was diagnostically
useful.

Toiviainen-Salo et al. (2008) investigated brain structures by MRI in 9
patients (7 males, age range 7-37 years) with SDS and mutations in the
SBDS gene and in 18 age- and gender-matched controls. Eight of the 9
SBDS mutation-verified patients reported learning difficulties. Patients
with SDS had smaller occipitofrontal head circumferences than the
controls, and decreased global brain volume; both gray matter and white
matter volumes were reduced. Patients with SDS had no macroscopic brain
malformations, but they had significantly smaller age- and head
size-adjusted areas of posterior fossa, vermis, corpus callosum, and
pons, and significantly larger cerebrum-vermis ratio than the healthy
controls.

- Hematologic Abnormalities and Leukemic Transformation

Patients with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome are predisposed to hematologic
malignancies similar to those that occur with Fanconi anemia (227650)
(Woods et al., 1981).

Smith et al. (1996) reported hematologic abnormalities in 21 children
diagnosed with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome at their institution over 25
years. Anemia was found in 14 patients, thrombocytopenia in 5, and
pancytopenia in 2. Bone marrow cellularity was decreased in 5 and
increased in 3 of 13 patients studied. Cytogenetic examination of the
bone marrow showed clonal abnormalities in 4 of 12 children at the time
of diagnosis, and 1 boy developed a clonal abnormality later in the
course of his illness. Chromosome 7 was involved in rearrangements in 4
children. Myelodysplastic syndrome developed in 7 patients (including
all 5 with clonal bone marrow abnormalities); 5 of these persons
developed acute myeloid leukemia and died. Smith et al. (1996) showed
that the actual risk of leukemic transformation in the patients with
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome is much higher than 5% (as it was previously
considered), and that clonal cytogenetic abnormalities in the bone
marrow predispose to such transformation.

Dokal et al. (1997) described 3 men (2 of whom were brothers) with
Shwachman-Diamond syndrome who presented with acute myeloid leukemia in
adulthood. The brothers were 37 and 43 at time of presentation. The
third patient was 25 years old. Dokal et al. (1997) pointed out that of
the cases of acute myeloid leukemia in Shwachman-Diamond syndrome,
approximately one-quarter (5 in 18) have M6 morphology. They suggested
that the only therapy likely to be successful is allogeneic bone marrow
transplantation, which was reportedly successful in several cases.

In 8 SDS patients who did not have evidence of MDS or AML, Leung et al.
(2006) found increased bone marrow microvessel density compared to
controls. Vessels from SDS patients were more tortuous and showed
collapsed or constricted lumens, whereas control specimens showed more
open and organized vascular architecture. Stromal expression of VEGF
(192240), stromal VEGF secretion, and secretion and serum and marrow
levels of VEGF did not differ between the 2 groups. As increased marrow
angiogenesis and morphologic abnormalities are characteristically
observed in patients MDS and AML, even in the absence of SDS, Leung et
al. (2006) postulated that the marrow changes observed in this study may
be associated with the increased risk for MDS or AML in SDS patients.

DIAGNOSIS

Genieser et al. (1982) demonstrated the usefulness of computed
tomography (CT scan) in the diagnosis.

PATHOGENESIS

Rothbaum et al. (1982) postulated that abnormal polymorphonuclear
chemotaxis reflects defective cytoskeletal integrity in the Shwachman
syndrome. In support of this idea, they demonstrated abnormal
distribution of concanavalin-A receptors on polymorphonuclear
leukocytes.

Dror and Freedman (1999) showed that the bone marrow of patients with
SDS is characterized by a decreased frequency of CD34+ (142230) cells
and that marrow CD34+ cells have a reduced ability to form hematopoietic
colonies in vitro. For these reasons, and because apoptosis is central
in the pathogenesis of bone marrow dysfunction in myelodysplastic
syndrome, Dror and Freedman (2001) studied the role of apoptosis in the
pathogenesis of marrow failure in 11 children with SDS. Compared to
normal controls, the patients' marrow mononuclear cells plated in
clonogenic cultures showed a significantly higher tendency to undergo
apoptosis. The defect was found in patients with and without
myelodysplastic syndrome. They concluded that SDS hematopoietic
progenitors are intrinsically flawed and have faulty proliferative
properties and increased apoptosis. Bone marrow failure is linked to an
increased propensity for apoptosis, which in turn is linked to increased
expression of the Fas antigen (134637) and to hyperactivation of the Fas
signaling pathway.

Although immunologic abnormalities are not traditionally perceived as
part of SDS, patients with the disorder are prone to recurrent
infections even in the face of protective neutrophil counts. Dror et al.
(2001) studied immune function in 11 patients. Seven suffered from
recurrent bacterial infections and 6 from recurrent viral infections.
All patients had neutropenia; total lymphocyte counts, however, were
normal in all but 1 patient. Nine patients had B-cell defects comprising
one or more of the following abnormalities: low IgG or IgG subclasses,
low percentage of circulating B lymphocytes, decreased in vitro
B-lymphocyte proliferation, and a lack of specific antibody production.
Seven of 9 patients studied had at least one T-cell abnormality. Five of
6 patients studied had decreased percentages of circulating natural
killer cells. Moreover, neutrophil chemotaxis was significantly low in
all of the patients studied.

Bone marrow failure is believed to be the underlying condition that
drives the expansion of the paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH;
300818) clone. Circulating PNH blood cells have been identified in
patients with acquired aplastic anemia and with hypoplastic
myelodysplasia. To determine whether PNH blood cells are also present in
patients with inherited aplastic anemia, Keller et al. (2002) screened a
large group of patients with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. None of the
patients analyzed had detectable circulating PNH blood cells, indicating
that bone marrow failure in Shwachman-Diamond syndrome does not select
for PNH progenitor cells.

Thornley et al. (2002) found that telomere length in leukocytes derived
from SDS patients was significantly shortened compared to controls. The
mean telomere length was 1.4-kb shorter than controls and did not differ
according to disease severity. Thornley et al. (2002) suggested that
bone marrow stem cell hyperproliferation is a feature of SDS from the
outset.

Austin et al. (2008) found that primary bone marrow stromal cells and
lymphoblasts from SDS patients exhibited an increased incidence of
abnormal mitoses. Depletion of the SBDS gene using siRNA in normal skin
fibroblasts resulted in increased mitotic abnormalities and aneuploidy
that accumulated over time. Treatment of primary cells from SDS patients
with nocodazole, a microtubule destabilizing agent, led to increased
mitotic arrest and apoptosis compared to treated wildtype cells. In
addition, SDS patient cells were resistant to taxol, a microtubule
stabilizing agent. These findings suggested that spindle instability in
SDS contributes to bone marrow failure and leukemogenesis. In wildtype
human cells, Austin et al. (2008) found that SBDS colocalized with
mitotic spindles and bound to purified microtubules, preventing genomic
instability.

INHERITANCE

Ginzberg et al. (2000) determined estimates of segregation proportion in
a cohort of 84 patients with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome with complete
sibship data under the assumption of complete ascertainment, using the
Li and Mantel estimator (Li and Mantel, 1968), and of single
ascertainment with the Davie modification (Davie, 1979). A third
estimate was computed with the expectation-maximization algorithm. All 3
estimates supported an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance, but
complete ascertainment was found to be unlikely. No consistent
differences were found in levels of serum trypsinogen (to indicate
exocrine pancreatic dysfunction) between parents (presumed
heterozygotes) and a normal control population. Ginzberg et al. (2000)
suggested that although genetic heterogeneity could not be excluded, the
results indicated that a recessive model of inheritance for this
syndrome should be considered.

CYTOGENETICS

Tada et al. (1987) found increased frequencies of spontaneous chromosome
aberrations in a patient's PHA-stimulated circulating lymphocytes;
however, the lymphocytes did not show increased sensitivity to mitomycin
C. In 2 affected sisters, Fraccaro et al. (1988) were unable to confirm
the observation of Tada et al. (1987) of increased chromosome
aberrations.

Masuno et al. (1995) observed a de novo and apparently balanced
reciprocal translocation, t(6;12)(q16.2;q21.2), in an 18-month-old girl
with Shwachman syndrome, characterized by exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency in bone marrow dysfunction. They suggested that the
translocation breakpoints in this patient are candidate regions for a
gene responsible for Shwachman syndrome. Both 6q and 12q were excluded
by linkage studies reported by Goobie et al. (1999). The genetic
analysis was performed on members of 13 Shwachman-Diamond syndrome
families with 2 or 3 affected children.

Smith et al. (1995) described a 5-year-old boy with this disorder in
whom acute monoblastic leukemia developed following a period of
myelodysplasia associated with a clonal cytogenetic abnormality
involving chromosome 7.

Children with SDS are predisposed to myelodysplasia and AML, often with
chromosome 7 abnormalities. Cunningham et al. (2002) reported on 9
children with SDS, 8 of whom had clonal abnormalities of chromosome 7.
They presented evidence suggesting that isochromosome 7q may represent a
separate disease entity in SDS children, which is interesting given that
the SDS gene maps to the centromeric region of chromosome 7. Their
clinical observations suggested that isochromosome 7q is a relatively
benign rearrangement and that it is not advisable to offer allogeneic
transplants to SDS children with isochromosome 7q alone in the absence
of other clinical signs of disease progression.

From an investigation of 14 patients with Shwachman syndrome (SS), using
standard and molecular cytogenetic methods and molecular genetic
techniques, Maserati et al. (2006) made several observations. They
showed that the i(7)(q10) is not, or is not always, an isochromosome but
may arise from a more complex mechanism, retaining part of the short
arm; that the i(7)(q10) has no preferential parental origin; and that
clonal chromosome changes, such as chromosome 7 anomalies and
del(20)(q11), may be present in the bone marrow for a long time without
progressing to myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)/acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). The del(20)(q11) involves the minimal region of deletion typical
of MDS/AML. The rate of chromosome breaks is not significantly higher
than in controls, from which it can be concluded that SS should not be
considered a breakage syndrome. A specific kind of karyotype instability
is present in SS, with chromosome changes possibly found in single cells
or small clones, often affecting chromosome 7 and 20, in the bone
marrow. Maserati et al. (2006) considered these findings as confirming
their previous hypothesis that the SS mutation itself implies a mutator
effect that is responsible for MDS/AML through these specific chromosome
anomalies. The conclusion supports the practice of including cytogenetic
monitoring in the follow-up of SS patients.

MAPPING

In a genomewide scan of families with SDS, Goobie et al. (2001)
identified chromosome 7 markers that showed linkage with the disorder.
Finer mapping revealed significant linkage across a broad interval that
included the centromere. The maximum 2-point lod score was 8.7, with
D7S473, at a recombination fraction of 0.0. Evidence from all 15 of the
multiplex families analyzed provided support for the linkage, consistent
with a single locus for SDS. However, the presence of several different
mutations was suggested by the heterogeneity of disease-associated
haplotypes in the candidate region.

Popovic et al. (2002) constructed a physical map of the pericentromeric
region of chromosome 7 containing the locus for SDS, by using somatic
cell hybrid, radiation hybrid, and STS-content mapping of YAC and BAC
clones. A total of 34 SDS families of diverse ethnic origin were studied
by linkage disequilibrium analysis, which identified 6 extended
haplotypes to co-segregate with the disease in unrelated families of
common ethnic origin. These observations suggested existence of multiple
founder chromosomes (allelic heterogeneity) in SDS. Detection of
ancestral and intrafamilial recombination events refined the SDS locus
to a 1.9-cM critical interval (predicted size: 3.3 Mb) between markers
D7S2429 and D7S502 at chromosome 7q11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Dale et al. (2000) found no mutations in the neutrophil elastase gene
(130130) in 3 patients with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome.

By sequence analysis in 5 SDS patients, Popovic et al. (2002) found no
disease-causing mutations in the tyrosylprotein sulfotransferase 1 gene
(TPST1; 603125). Large-scale gene rearrangements were also excluded by
Southern blot analysis, and RT-PCR analysis failed to detect alterations
in gene expression, thereby excluding TPST1 as the causative gene for
SDS.

Boocock et al. (2003) identified 18 positional candidate genes in 7q11,
the region to which the Shwachman-Diamond syndrome maps. They discovered
mutations associated with a theretofore uncharacterized gene, which they
designated SBDS (607444).

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

Kuijpers et al. (2005) sequenced the SBDS gene in 20 unrelated patients
with clinical SDS and identified mutations in 15 (75%), with identical
compound heterozygosity in 11 patients (see 607444.0001 and
607444.0002). The authors examined hematologic parameters over 5 years
of follow-up and observed persistent neutropenia in 43% in the absence
of apoptosis and unrelated to chemotaxis defects or infection rate.
Irrespective of the absolute neutrophil count in vivo, abnormal
granulocyte-monocyte colony formation was observed in all patients with
SDS tested (14 of 14), whereas erythroid and myeloid colony formation
was less often affected (9 of 14). Cytogenetic aberrations occurred in 5
of 19 patients in the absence of myelodysplasia. Kuijpers et al. (2005)
concluded that in patients with genetically proven SDS, a
genotype/phenotype relationship does not exist in clinical and
hematologic terms.

HISTORY

Scott Hamilton, 1984 Olympic Gold Medalist figure skater, was ill as a
child with Shwachman syndrome.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bodian et al. (1964); McLennan and Steinbach (1974); Saint-Martin
et al. (1969); Saunders et al. (1979); Shmerling et al. (1969); Shwachman
and Holsclaw (1972); Taybi et al. (1969)
REFERENCE 1. Austin, K. M.; Gupta, M. L., Jr.; Coats, S. A.; Tulpule, A.; Mostoslavsky,
G.; Balazs, A. B.; Mulligan, R. C.; Daley, G.; Pellman, D.; Shimamura,
A.: Mitotic spindle destabilization and genomic instability in Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome. J. Clin. Invest. 118: 1511-1518, 2008.

2. Bartholomew, L. G.; Baggenstoss, A. H.; Morlock, C. G.; Comfort,
M. W.: Primary atrophy and lipomatosis of the pancreas. Gastroenterology 36:
563-572, 1959.

3. Bodian, M.; Sheldon, W.; Lightwood, R.: Congenital hypoplasia
of the exocrine pancreas. Acta Paediat. 53: 282-293, 1964.

4. Boocock, G. R. B.; Morrison, J. A.; Popovic, M.; Richards, N.;
Ellis, L.; Durie, P. R.; Rommens, J. M.: Mutations in SBDS are associated
with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Nature Genet. 33: 97-101, 2003.

5. Burke, V.; Colebatch, J. H.; Anderson, C. M.; Simons, M. J.: Association
of pancreatic insufficiency and chronic neutropenia in childhood. Arch.
Dis. Child. 42: 147-157, 1967.

6. Cipolli, M.; D'Orazio, C.; Delmarco, A.; Marchesini, C.; Miano,
A.; Mastella, G.: Shwachman's syndrome: pathomorphosis and long-term
outcome. J. Pediat. Gastroent. Nutr. 29: 265-272, 1999.

7. Cunningham, J.; Sales, M.; Pearce, A.; Howard, J.; Stallings, R.;
Telford, N.; Wilkie, R.; Huntly, B.; Thomas, A.; O'Marcaigh, A.; Will,
A.; Pratt, N.: Does isochromosome 7q mandate bone marrow transplant
in children with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome? Brit. J. Haemat. 119:
1062-1069, 2002.

8. Dale, D. C.; Person, R. E.; Bolyard, A. A.; Aprikyan, A. G.; Bos,
C.; Bonilla, M. A.; Boxer, L. A.; Kannourakis, G.; Zeidler, C.; Welte,
K.; Benson, K. F.; Horwitz, M.: Mutations in the gene encoding neutrophil
elastase in congenital and cyclic neutropenia. Blood 96: 2317-2322,
2000.

9. Danks, D. M.; Haslam, R. H. A.; Mayne, V.; Kaufmann, H. J.; Holtzapple,
P. G.: Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, neutropenia, and pancreatic
insufficiency presenting with respiratory distress in the neonatal
period. Arch. Dis. Child. 51: 697-701, 1976.

10. Davie, A. M.: The 'singles' method for segregation analysis under
incomplete ascertainment. Ann. Hum. Genet. 42: 507-512, 1979.

11. Dokal, I.; Rule, S.; Chen, F.; Potter, M.; Goldman, J.: Adult
onset of acute myeloid leukaemia (M6) in patients with Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome. Brit. J. Haemat. 99: 171-173, 1997.

12. Dror, Y.; Freedman, M. H.: Shwachman-Diamond syndrome: an inherited
preleukemic bone marrow failure disorder with aberrant hematopoietic
progenitors and faulty marrow microenvironment. Blood 94: 3048-3054,
1999.

13. Dror, Y.; Freedman, M. H.: Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Brit.
J. Haemat. 118: 701-713, 2002.

14. Dror, Y.; Freedman, M. H.: Shwachman-Diamond syndrome marrow
cells show abnormally increased apoptosis mediated through the Fas
pathway. Blood 97: 3011-3016, 2001.

15. Dror, Y.; Ginzberg, H.; Dalal, I.; Cherepanov, V.; Downey, G.;
Durie, P.; Roifman, C. M.; Freedman, M. H.: Immune function in patients
with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Brit. J. Haemat. 114: 712-717,
2001.

16. Fraccaro, M.; Scappaticci, S.; Arico, M.: Shwachman syndrome
and chromosome breakage. (Letter) Hum. Genet. 79: 194, 1988.

17. Genieser, N. B.; Halac, E. R.; Greco, M. A.; Selvarani Richards,
H. M.: Shwachman-Bodian syndrome. J. Comput. Assist. Tomogr. 6:
1191-1192, 1982.

18. Ginzberg, H.; Shin, J.; Ellis, L.; Goobie, S.; Morrison, J.; Corey,
M.; Durie, P. R.; Rommens, J. M.: Segregation analysis in Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome: evidence for recessive inheritance. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66:
1413-1416, 2000.

19. Ginzberg, H.; Shin, J.; Ellis, L.; Morrison, J.; Ip, W.; Dror,
Y.; Freedman, M.; Heitlinger, L. A.; Belt, M. A.; Corey, M.; Rommens,
J. M.; Durie, P. R.: Shwachman syndrome: phenotypic manifestations
of sibling sets and isolated cases in a large patient cohort are similar. J.
Pediat. 135: 81-88, 1999.

20. Goldstein, R.: Congenital lipomatosis of the pancreas. Malabsorption,
dwarfism, leukopenia with relative granulocytopenia and thrombocytopenia. Clin.
Pediat. 7: 419-422, 1968.

21. Goobie, S.; Morrison, J.; Ginzberg, H.; Ellis, L.; Corey, M.;
Masuno, M.; Imaizumi, K.; Kuroki, Y.; Fujiwara, T. M.; Morgan, K.;
Durie, P. R.; Rommens, J. M.: Exclusion of linkage of Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome to chromosome regions 6q and 12q implicated by a de novo
translocation. Am. J. Med. Genet. 85: 171-174, 1999.

22. Goobie, S.; Popovic, M.; Morrison, J.; Ellis, L.; Ginzberg, H.;
Boocock, G. R. B.; Ehtesham, N.; Betard, C.; Brewer, C. G.; Roslin,
N. M.; Hudson, T. J.; Morgan, K.; Fujiwara, T. M.; Durie, P. R.; Rommens,
J. M.: Shwachman-Diamond syndrome with exocrine pancreatic dysfunction
and bone marrow failure maps to the centromeric region of chromosome
7. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68: 1048-1054, 2001.

23. Ip, W. F.; Dupuis, A.; Ellis, L.; Beharry, S.; Morrison, J.; Stormon,
M. O.; Corey, M.; Rommens, J. M.; Durie, P. R.: Serum pancreatic
enzymes define the pancreatic phenotype in patients with Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome. J. Pediat. 141: 259-265, 2002.

24. Keller, P.; Debaun, M. R.; Rothbaum, R. J.; Bessler, M.: Bone
marrow failure in Shwachman-Diamond syndrome does not select for clonal
haematopoiesis of the paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria phenotype. Brit.
J. Haemat. 119: 830-832, 2002.

25. Kuijpers, T. W.; Alders, M.; Tool, A. T. J.; Mellink, C.; Roos,
D.; Hennekam, R. C. M.: Hematologic abnormalities in Shwachman Diamond
syndrome: lack of genotype-phenotype relationship. Blood 106: 356-361,
2005.

26. Leung, E. W.; Rujkijyanont, P.; Beyene, J.; Wei, K.; Abdelhaleem,
M.; Freedman, M. H.; Dior, Y.: Shwachman-Diamond syndrome: an inherited
model of aplastic anaemia with accelerated angiogenesis. Brit. J.
Haemat. 133: 558-561, 2006.

27. Li, C. C.; Mantel, N.: A simple method of estimating the segregation
ratio under complete ascertainment. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 20: 61-81,
1968.

28. Mack, D. R.; Forstner, G. G.; Wilschanski, M.; Freedman, M. H.;
Durie, P. R.: Shwachman syndrome: exocrine pancreatic dysfunction
and variable phenotypic expression. Gastroenterology 111: 1593-1602,
1996.

29. Maserati, E.; Minelli, A.; Pressato, B.; Valli, R.; Crescenzi,
B.; Stefanelli, M.; Menna, G.; Sainati, L.; Poli, F.; Panarello, C.;
Zecca, M.; Curto, F. L.; Mecucci, C.; Danesino, C.; Pasquali, F.:
Shwachman syndrome as mutator phenotype responsible for myeloid dysplasia/neoplasia
through karyotype instability and chromosomes 7 and 20 anomalies. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 45: 375-382, 2006.

30. Masuno, M.; Imaizumi, K.; Nishimura, G.; Nakamura, M.; Saito,
I.; Akagi, K.; Kuroki, Y.: Shwachman syndrome associated with de
novo reciprocal translocation t(6;12)(q16.2;q21.2). J. Med. Genet. 32:
894-895, 1995.

31. McLennan, T. W.; Steinbach, H. L.: Shwachman's syndrome: the
broad spectrum of bony abnormalities. Radiology 112: 167-173, 1974.

32. Nezelof, C.; Watchi, M.: L'hypoplasie congenitale lipomateuse
du pancreas exocrine chez l'enfant (Deux observations et revue de
la litterature). Arch. Franc. Pediat. 18: 1135-1172, 1961.

33. Popovic, M.; Goobie, S.; Morrison, J.; Ellis, L.; Ehtesham, N.;
Richards, N.; Boocock, G.; Durie, P. R.; Rommens, J. M.: Fine mapping
of the locus for Shwachman-Diamond syndrome at 7q11, identification
of shared disease haplotypes, and exclusion of TPST1 as a candidate
gene. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 10: 250-258, 2002.

34. Pringle, E. M.; Young, W. F.; Haworth, E. M.: Syndrome of pancreatic
insufficiency, blood dyscrasia and metaphyseal dysplasia. Proc. Roy.
Soc. Med. 61: 776-777, 1968.

35. Rothbaum, R. J.; Williams, D. A.; Daugherty, C. C.: Unusual surface
distribution of concanavalin A reflects a cytoskeletal defect in neutrophils
in Shwachman's syndrome. Lancet 320: 800-801, 1982. Note: Originally
Volume II.

36. Saint-Martin, J.; Fournet, J. P.; Charlas, J.; Schaison, G.; Nodot,
A.; Meyer, B.; Vialatte, J.: Insuffisance pancreatique externe avec
granulopenie chronique. Arch. Franc. Pediat. 26: 861-871, 1969.

37. Saunders, E. F.; Gall, G.; Freedman, M. H.: Granulopoiesis in
Shwachman's syndrome (pancreatic insufficiency and bone marrow dysfunction). Pediatrics 64:
515-519, 1979.

38. Shmerling, D. H.; Prader, A.; Hitzig, W. H.; Giedion, A.; Hadorn,
B.; Kuhni, M.: The syndrome of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency,
neutropenia, metaphyseal dysostosis and dwarfism. Helv. Paediat.
Acta 24: 547-575, 1969.

39. Shwachman, H.; Diamond, L. K.; Oski, F. A.; Khaw, K. T.: The
syndrome of pancreatic insufficiency and bone marrow dysfunction. J.
Pediat. 65: 645-663, 1964.

40. Shwachman, H.; Holsclaw, D.: Some clinical observations on the
Shwachman syndrome (pancreatic insufficiency and bone marrow hypoplasia). Birth
Defects Orig. Art. Ser. 8(3): 46-49, 1972.

41. Smith, O. P.; Chan, M. Y.; Evans, J.; Veys, P.: Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome and matched unrelated donor BMT. Bone Marrow Transplant. 16:
717-718, 1995.

42. Smith, O. P.; Hann, I. M.; Chessells, J. M.; Reeves, B. R.; Milla,
P.: Haematological abnormalities in Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Brit.
J. Haemat. 94: 279-284, 1996.

43. Tada, H.; Ri, T.; Yoshida, H.; Ishimoto, K.; Kaneko, M.; Yamashiro,
Y.; Shinohara, T.: A case of Shwachman syndrome with increased spontaneous
chromosome breakage. Hum. Genet. 77: 289-291, 1987.

44. Taybi, H.; Mitchell, A. D.; Friedman, G. D.: Metaphyseal dysostosis
and associated syndrome of pancreatic insufficiency and blood disorders. Radiology 93:
563-571, 1969.

45. Thornley, I.; Dror, Y.; Sung, L.; Wynn, R. F.; Freedman, M. H.
: Abnormal telomere shortening in leucocytes of children with Shwachman-Diamond
syndrome. Brit. J. Haemat. 117: 189-192, 2002.

46. Toiviainen-Salo, S.; Makitie, O.; Mannerkoski, M.; Hamalainen,
J.; Valanne, L.; Autti, T.: Shwachman-Diamond syndrome is associated
with structural brain alterations on MRI. Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A:
1558-1564, 2008.

47. Woods, W. G.; Roloff, J. S.; Lukens, J. N.; Krivit, W.: The occurrence
of leukemia in patients with the Shwachman syndrome. J. Pediat. 99:
425-428, 1981.

48. Wulfeck, B.; Trauner, D.; Marsden, D.; Nyhan, W.; Tallal, P.:
Neurobehavioral profiles in two sisters with Shwachman-Diamond syndrome. Dysmorph.
Clin. Genet. 5: 15-22, 1991.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS INHERITANCE:
Autosomal recessive

GROWTH:
[Height];
Short stature;
[Weight];
Low birth weight;
[Other];
Failure to thrive

CARDIOVASCULAR:
[Heart];
Myocardial necrosis

RESPIRATORY:
[Lung];
Respiratory distress in neonatal period

CHEST:
[External features];
Narrow thorax;
[Ribs, sternum, clavicles, and scapulae];
Costochondral thickening;
Irregular ossification at anterior rib ends

ABDOMEN:
[External features];
[Liver];
Hepatomegaly;
[Pancreas];
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency;
Pancreatic lipomatosis;
[Gastrointestinal];
Severe fat maldigestion;
Steatorrhea

GENITOURINARY:
[Kidneys];
Nephrocalcinosis

SKELETAL:
Delayed skeletal maturation;
[Spine];
Ovoid vertebral bodies;
[Pelvis];
Coxa vara;
Narrow sacroiliac notch;
[Limbs];
Slipped capital femoral epiphyses;
Metaphyseal chondrodysplasia of long bones

NEUROLOGIC:
[Central nervous system];
Learning disabilities;
Developmental delay;
Mild mental retardation

HEMATOLOGY:
Pancytopenia;
Persistent or intermittent neutropenia;
Anemia;
Thrombocytopenia;
Elevated fetal hemoglobin

NEOPLASIA:
Myelodysplasia;
Acute myelogenous leukemia

LABORATORY ABNORMALITIES:
Abnormal liver function tests;
Abnormal fecal fat;
Decreased serum trypsinogen

MISCELLANEOUS:
Increased susceptibility to infection;
Moderate age-related improvement of pancreatic function;
Broad range in severity of presentation in sibships

MOLECULAR BASIS:
Caused by mutation in the SBDS gene (SBDS, 607444.0001)

CONTRIBUTORS Kelly A. Przylepa - updated: 10/6/2004
Kelly A. Przylepa - revised: 9/10/2001

CREATED John F. Jackson: 6/15/1995

EDITED joanna: 03/14/2005
joanna: 10/6/2004
joanna: 9/10/2001

CONTRIBUTORS Nara Sobreira - updated: 11/20/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/18/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/14/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/25/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/9/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/12/2005
Natalie E. Krasikov - updated: 8/10/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/12/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/21/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/20/2002
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 11/4/2002
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 10/22/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/18/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/7/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/4/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/9/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/13/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 12/2/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/13/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/20/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/18/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/19/1997
Iosif W. Lurie - updated: 1/8/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED wwang: 07/22/2010
terry: 7/8/2010
mgross: 7/1/2010
carol: 11/24/2009
terry: 11/20/2009
wwang: 5/21/2009
ckniffin: 5/18/2009
terry: 3/13/2009
wwang: 7/16/2008
ckniffin: 7/14/2008
terry: 6/6/2008
wwang: 3/5/2008
ckniffin: 2/25/2008
alopez: 7/5/2006
terry: 6/9/2006
wwang: 12/12/2005
carol: 8/11/2004
terry: 8/10/2004
carol: 2/27/2003
tkritzer: 2/24/2003
terry: 2/12/2003
cwells: 1/24/2003
tkritzer: 1/21/2003
alopez: 12/23/2002
terry: 12/20/2002
cwells: 11/4/2002
carol: 10/22/2002
ckniffin: 10/22/2002
carol: 10/18/2002
terry: 3/8/2002
carol: 11/28/2001
mcapotos: 11/19/2001
terry: 11/7/2001
carol: 11/5/2001
mcapotos: 10/31/2001
terry: 10/11/2001
mcapotos: 5/17/2001
mcapotos: 5/10/2001
terry: 5/4/2001
mcapotos: 1/22/2001
terry: 1/9/2001
carol: 5/12/2000
terry: 4/13/2000
carol: 12/6/1999
terry: 12/2/1999
carol: 10/13/1999
jlewis: 8/2/1999
terry: 7/20/1999
dholmes: 1/23/1998
mark: 1/10/1998
terry: 12/18/1997
terry: 3/19/1997
terry: 3/12/1997
terry: 3/6/1997
jenny: 3/4/1997
jenny: 1/21/1997
jenny: 1/8/1997
jenny: 1/2/1997
mark: 1/30/1996
terry: 1/24/1996
terry: 1/23/1996
terry: 7/19/1994
davew: 6/6/1994
mimadm: 3/29/1994
carol: 2/9/1994
carol: 3/31/1992
supermim: 3/17/1992

605722	TITLE *605722 POTASSIUM CHANNEL, INWARDLY RECTIFYING, SUBFAMILY J, MEMBER 16; KCNJ16
;;KIR5.1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Inwardly rectifying potassium (Kir) channels are important for
regulation of the resting membrane potential and control of cellular
electrical activity. KCNJ16, or Kir5.1, belongs to the Kir family, but
it does not produce functional potassium channels when expressed by
itself. Instead, Kir5.1 appears to coassemble selectively with either
Kir4.1 (KCNJ10; 602208) or Kir4.2 (KCNJ15; 602106) to form novel
heteromeric channels (summary by D'Adamo et al., 2011).

CLONING

By EST database searching for sequences showing homology to mouse
Kir5.1, Liu et al. (2000) identified a human EST with 98% sequence
identity to a segment on chromosome 17. Using the full-length Kir5.1
mouse clone, they derived the human ortholog, designated KCNJ16, from
genomic sequence. The KCNJ16 gene encodes a deduced 418-amino acid
protein with a calculated molecular mass of 48 kD. The protein shares
over 95% sequence identity with both mouse and rat Kir5.1. RT-PCR
analysis detected ubiquitous expression of KCNJ16, whereas Northern blot
analysis detected significant expression of a 4.0-kb transcript in
kidney, pancreas, and thyroid gland. In situ hybridization demonstrated
expression of KCNJ16 in convoluted tubule cells of the kidney and in
acinar and ductal cells of the pancreas. Liu et al. (2000) noted that
Kir1.1 (KCNJ1; 600359), Kir4.1, and Kir4.2 are all expressed in kidney.
They suggested that heteromultimers of these potassium channel proteins
in kidney and pancreas may play a role in ion transport, fluid
regulation, and pH balance.

By database searching with sequences from rat Kir5.1, Derst et al.
(2001) independently assembled a human KCNJ16 cDNA, which they called
Kir5.1. They predicted that Kir5.1 encodes a protein of 418 amino acids
that shares 91% amino acid identity with rat and mouse Kir5.1. They
noted that Kir5.1 shares 40 to 43% amino acid identity with members of
the Kir2 gene family, including Kir2.1 (KCNJ2; 600681), Kir2.2 (KCNJ12;
602323), Kir2.3, and Kir2.4 (KCNJ14; 603953).

Using in situ hybridization, Derst et al. (2001) detected Kir5.1
expression restricted to the hindbrain, midbrain, and diencephalon in
rat brain. Using RT-PCR, they detected KCNJ16 expression in human kidney
in the proximal tubule, the thick ascending limb, and the cortical
collecting duct. They noted that KCNJ16 expression overlaps with Kir2.1
expression in some regions of the brain and kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

Derst et al. (2001) found that when Kir5.1 was expressed in Xenopus
oocytes, it was targeted to the cell surface and formed electrically
silent channels together with Kir2.1, thus negatively controlling Kir2.1
channel activity in native cells.

By electrophysiologic recording of HEK293T cells transfected with rat
cDNAs, Tanemoto et al. (2000) showed that Kir4.1, but not Kir5.1, formed
functional homomeric K+ channels sensitive to intracellular, but not
extracellular, pH. Heteromeric Kir4.1/Kir5 channels were functional and
showed channel properties different than those of homomeric Kir4.1
channels. For both Kir4.1 and Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels, response to pH
disappeared at pH 5.5 and increased in a pH-dependent manner between pH
6.5 and pH 8.0. Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels had larger conductance, altered
kinetics, and greater sensitivity to pH than Kir4.1 channels.
Kir4.1/Kir5.1 channels opened in bursts, and the closed period between
bursts was influenced by intracellular pH.

In cotransfection experiments, Tanemoto et al. (2002) showed that Kir5.1
assembles to form a functional homomeric potassium channel by
interacting with PSD95 (602887). Kir5.1 expressed alone was distributed
mostly in the cytoplasm, but Kir5.1 coexpressed with PSD95 was located
on the plasma membrane in a clustered manner. Using GST pull-down
studies, Tanemoto et al. (2002) identified domains responsible for
Kir5.1/PSD95 interaction. They found that protein kinase A
(PKA)-mediated phosphorylation of Kir5.1 disrupted the binding of Kir5.1
with PSD95. Tanemoto et al. (2002) hypothesized that Kir5.1/PSD95 forms
a functional brain potassium channel that may be a physiologic target of
PKA-mediated signaling.

GENE STRUCTURE

Derst et al. (2001) determined that the KCNJ16 gene is encoded by 5
exons spanning approximately 60 kb. They noted that KCNJ16 and KCNJ2 are
separated by only 34 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Liu et al. (2000) mapped the KCNJ16 gene
to chromosome 17q25. By the same method, Derst et al. (2001) assigned
KCNJ16 to chromosome 17q23.1-q24.2, near KCNJ2.

ANIMAL MODEL

D'Adamo et al. (2011) found that, despite widespread Kir5.1 expression,
Kir5.1 -/- mice were born at the expected mendelian ratio, were viable
and fertile, and showed no behavioral or physical abnormalities.
However, whole-cell patch clamp experiments showed that neurons cultured
from the locus ceruleus (LC) of Kir5.1 -/- mice exhibited reduced
response to intracellular pH compared with wildtype LC neurons. Both the
kinetics and amplitude of firing of Kir5.1 -/- LC neurons were altered
in response to NH4Cl application or elevated soluble CO2. D'Adamo et al.
(2011) concluded that Kir5.1/Kir4.1 channels of the LC respond to
hypercapnic acidosis.

REFERENCE 1. D'Adamo, M. C.; Shang, L.; Imbrici, P.; Brown, S. D. M.; Pessia,
M.; Tucker, S. J.: Genetic inactivation of Kcnj16 identifies Kir5.1
as an important determinant of neuronal PCO2/pH sensitivity. J. Biol.
Chem. 286: 192-198, 2011.

2. Derst, C.; Karschin, C.; Wischmeyer, E.; Hirsch, J. R.; Preisig-Muller,
R.; Rajan, S.; Engel, H.; Grzeschik, K.-H.; Daut, J.; Karschin, A.
: Genetic and functional linkage of Kir5.1 and Kir2.1 channel subunits. FEBS
Lett. 491: 305-311, 2001.

3. Liu, Y.; McKenna, E.; Figueroa, D. J.; Blevins, R.; Austin, C.
P.; Bennett, P. B.; Swanson, R.: The human inward rectifier K+ channel
subunit Kir5.1 (KCNJ16) maps to chromosome 17q25 and is expressed
in kidney and pancreas. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 90: 60-63, 2000.

4. Tanemoto, M.; Fujita, A.; Higashi, K.; Kurachi, Y.: PSD-95 mediates
formation of a functional homomeric Kir5.1 channel in the brain. Neuron 34:
387-397, 2002.

5. Tanemoto, M.; Kittaka, N.; Inanobe, A.; Kurachi, Y.: In vivo formation
of a proton-sensitive K+ channel by heteromeric subunit assembly of
Kir5.1 with Kir4.1. J. Physiol. 525: 587-592, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 6/9/2011
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/1/2011
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 12/18/2002

CREATED Yen-Pei C. Chang: 3/8/2001

EDITED terry: 11/29/2012
mgross: 6/9/2011
terry: 6/1/2011
carol: 2/4/2003
tkritzer: 12/18/2002
carol: 3/8/2001

606116	TITLE *606116 RIBONUCLEASE P/MRP, 38-KD SUBUNIT; RPP38
;;RIBONUCLEASE P, 38-KD SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ribonuclease P (RNase P) removes the 5-prime leader sequences from
precursor tRNA molecules. RNase P consists of an RNA species (H1 RNA),
the POP1 protein (602486), and at least 7 proteins called RPPs. The RPPs
have apparent molecular masses of 14 kD (RPP14; 606112), 20 kD (RPP20;
606113), 25 kD (RPP25), 29 kD (RPP29; 606114), 30 kD (RPP30; 606115), 38
kD (RPP38), and 40 kD (RPP40; 606117). Patients with scleroderma
(181750) have serum reactive with RNase P, the Th antigen, which is also
referred to as the To antigen, and RPP30 and RPP38 (summary by Jarrous
et al., 1998, 1999).

CLONING

By biochemical purification of RNase P, micropeptide sequence analysis,
PCR on a fetal liver cDNA library, and EST database searching, Eder et
al. (1997) obtained a cDNA encoding RPP38. The deduced 283-amino acid
protein has a leucine zipper RNA-binding motif and a predicted molecular
mass of nearly 32 kD, less than the 38 kD observed in SDS-PAGE analysis.

Jarrous et al. (1998) determined that RPP38 is a major target for
antisera from systemic sclerosis patients and that the antigen is likely
to be localized in both the nucleoplasm and nucleolus.
Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that polyclonal antibodies raised
against RPP20, RPP30, RPP38, or RPP40 interact with RNase P from HeLa
cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Following depletion of RNase P from HeLa cell extracts, Reiner et al.
(2006) found a severe deficiency in RNA polymerase (Pol) III (see
606007)-mediated transcription of tRNA and other small noncoding RNA
genes. Targeted cleavage of the H1RNA (RPPH1; 608513) moiety of RNase P
altered enzyme specificity and diminished Pol III transcription.
Similarly, inactivation of RNase P protein subunits, such as RPP38, by
small interfering RNA inhibited Pol III function and Pol III-directed
promoter activity in the cell. RNase P exerted its role in transcription
through association with Pol III and chromatin of active tRNA and 5S
rRNA (180420) genes. Reiner et al. (2006) concluded that RNase P has a
role in Pol III transcription and that transcription and early tRNA
processing may be coordinated.

MAPPING

Gross (2013) mapped the RPP38 gene to chromosome 10p13 based on an
alignment of the RPP38 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC029494) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Eder, P. S.; Kekuda, R.; Stolc, V.; Altman, S.: Characterization
of two scleroderma autoimmune antigens that copurify with human ribonuclease
P. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 1101-1106, 1997.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/9/2013.

3. Jarrous, N.; Eder, P. S.; Guerrier-Takada, C.; Hoog, C.; Altman,
S.: Autoantigenic properties of some protein subunits of catalytically
active complexes of human ribonuclease P. RNA 4: 407-417, 1998.

4. Jarrous, N.; Eder, P. S.; Wesolowski, D.; Altman, S.: Rpp14 and
Rpp29, two protein subunits of human ribonuclease P. RNA 5: 153-157,
1999.

5. Reiner, R.; Ben-Asouli, Y.; Krilovetzky, I.; Jarrous, N.: A role
for the catalytic ribonucleoprotein RNase P in RNA polymerase III
transcription. Genes Dev. 20: 1621-1635, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/9/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/19/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/16/2001

EDITED mgross: 09/09/2013
mgross: 9/9/2013
mgross: 7/19/2006
alopez: 11/8/2005
mgross: 7/16/2001

603584	TITLE *603584 MAP KINASE-ACTIVATING DEATH DOMAIN; MADD
;;DIFFERENTIALLY EXPRESSED IN NORMAL AND NEOPLASTIC CELLS; DENN;;
INSULINOMA-GLUCAGONOMA PROTEIN 20; IG20;;
RAB3 GDP/GTP EXCHANGE PROTEIN; RAB3GEP;;
KIAA0358
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Chow and Lee (1996) reported the cDNA sequence of DENN, a novel human
gene that is differentially expressed in normal and neoplastic cells
(hence, the symbol DENN). Northern blot analysis revealed differential
levels of expression of a 6.5-kb DENN transcript in malignant cell lines
compared to normal human tissues, where expression was highest in fetal
brain and kidney and in adult testis, ovary, brain, and heart. In fetal
liver and in several human cancer cell lines, the authors identified
cDNAs representing alternative transcripts of DENN that harbor a
deletion of 129 bp encoding 43 amino acids. Present within the serine-
and leucine-rich DENN gene product is an arginyl-glycyl-aspartic acid
(RGD) cellular adhesion motif and a leucine zipper-like motif.

Using the yeast interaction trap system to identify proteins that
interact with the death domain of the type-1 tumor necrosis factor
receptor (TNFR1; 191190), Schievella et al. (1997) isolated cDNAs
encoding 'MAP kinase-activating death domain' (MADD) protein.
Immunoblotting of immunoprecipitated proteins from various human cell
lines detected an approximately 200-kD MADD protein. The deduced
1,588-amino acid MADD protein contains a C-terminal death domain.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (1997) cloned KIAA0358. The deduced protein
contains 1,581 amino acids and is nearly identical to DENN.

Chow et al. (1998) stated that the DENN and MADD cDNAs and proteins are
virtually identical. From genomic studies, they traced the alternative
splicing of a 129-bp fragment to an alternative 5-prime donor site
involving exon 7. The deduced longer DENN isoform has 1,587 amino acids.
Western blot analysis of human MOLT-4 T-lymphoblastic leukemic cell
proteins detected a doublet consisting of 138- and 142-kD polypeptides.
The authors found the DENN protein concentrated predominantly in the
cytosolic compartment of MOLT-4 cells but was restricted to the nuclear
compartment of PLC/PRF/5 hepatoma cells.

Efimova et al. (2004) identified 7 putative splice variants of MADD:
IG20 full-length (IG20FL), IG20, KIAA0358, MADD (also referred to as
DENN), IG20 short variant-2 (IG20SV2), DENNSV (also referred to as
IG20SV3), and IG20SV4. These variants arise from alternative splicing of
exons 13L, 16, 21, 26, and 34. IG20FL, the longest variant, is encoded
by all 36 exons of the MADD gene. RT-PCR detected variable expression of
IG20, MADD, IG20SV, and DENNSV in all human tissues examined. Expression
of KIAA0358, IG20FL, and IG20SV4 was not observed.

GENE FUNCTION

Schievella et al. (1997) found that the MADD protein associated with
TNFR1 through a death domain-death domain interaction. Overexpression of
MADD activated the mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase ERK2 (176948),
and expression of the MADD death domain stimulated both the ERK2 and
JNK1 (601158) MAP kinases and induced the phosphorylation of cytosolic
phospholipase A2 (600522). The authors suggested that MADD links TNFR1
with MAP kinase activation and arachidonic acid release.

Al-Zoubi et al. (2001) showed that HeLa cells permanently transfected
with IG20 or DENNSV were more susceptible or resistant to TNF-alpha
(TNFA; 191160)-induced apoptosis, respectively. All MADD variants tested
could interact with TNFR1 and activate ERK and NF-kappa-B (see 164011).
However, relative to control cells, only those expressing IG20 showed
enhanced TNF-alpha-induced activation of caspase-8 (CASP8; 601763) and
CASP3 (600636). Cowpox virus CrmA, an inhibitor of caspase-induced
apoptosis, inhibited apoptosis when transfected in IG20-expressing HeLa
cells.

Using specific small hairpin RNAs targeted to splice variants of the
MADD gene, Mulherkar et al. (2006) found that knockdown of the MADD
variant resulted in spontaneous apoptosis in HeLa cells and in a human
ovarian carcinoma cell line, and they demonstrated that the MADD variant
alone was necessary and sufficient for cancer cell survival. Mulherkar
et al. (2006) hypothesized that since the MADD variant can bind to death
receptors, it may prevent apoptotic signaling by interfering with death
receptor oligomerization.

Efimova et al. (2004) found that overexpression of DENNSV enhanced cell
replication and resistance to treatment with proapoptotic stimuli. In
contrast, IG20 expression suppressed cell replication and increased
susceptibility to proapoptotic stimuli. Moreover, cells that were
resistant or susceptible to TNF-alpha-induced apoptosis exclusively
expressed endogenous DENNSV and IG20, respectively. Transfection of IG20
in a DENNSV-expressing cell line overrode endogenous DENNSV function and
increased susceptibility to apoptotic stimuli. Dominant-negative
I-kappa-B (see NFKBIA; 164008) reversed the effects of DENNSV, but not
IG20, indicating that DENNSV functions through NF-kappa-B activation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chow et al. (1998) determined that the MADD gene spans at least 28 kb
and contains 15 exons, ranging in size from 73 to 1,230 bp.

Efimova et al. (2004) determined that the MADD gene contains 36 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1997) mapped the MADD gene
to chromosome 11. Using FISH, Chow et al. (1998) mapped the MADD gene to
chromosome 11p11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Al-Zoubi, A. M.; Efimova, E. V.; Kaithamana, S.; Martinez, O.;
El-Azami El-Idrissi, M.; Dogan, R. E.; Prabhakar, B. S.: Contrasting
effects of IG20 and its splice isoforms, MADD and DENN-SV, on tumor-necrosis
factor alpha-induced apoptosis and activation of caspase-8 and -3. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 47202-47211, 2001.

2. Chow, V. T. K.; Lee, S. S.: DENN, a novel human gene differentially
expressed in normal and neoplastic cells. DNA Seq. 6: 263-273, 1996.

3. Chow, V. T. K.; Lim, K. M.; Lim, D.: The human DENN gene: genomic
organization, alternative splicing, and localization to chromosome
11p11.21-p11.22. Genome 41: 543-552, 1998.

4. Efimova, E. V.; Al-Zoubi, A. M.; Martinez, O.; Kaithamana, S.;
Lu, S.; Arima, T.; Prabhakar, B. S.: IG20, in contrast to DENN-SV,
(MADD splice variants) suppresses tumor cell survival, and enhances
their susceptibility to apoptosis and cancer drugs. Oncogene 23:
1076-1087, 2004.

5. Mulherkar, N.; Ramaswamy, M.; Mordi, D. C.; Prabhakar, B. S.:
MADD/DENN splice variant of the IG20 gene is necessary and sufficient
for cancer cell survival. Oncogene 25: 6252-6261, 2006.

6. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Nakajima, D.; Ohira, M.; Seki, N.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VII. The complete
sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which can code for large
proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4: 141-150, 1997.

7. Schievella, A. R.; Chen, J. H.; Graham, J. R.; Lin, L.-L.: MADD,
a novel death domain protein that interacts with the type 1 tumor
necrosis factor receptor and activates mitogen-activated protein kinase. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 12069-12075, 1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/5/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/3/2007
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 2/26/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/25/1999

EDITED mgross: 07/21/2008
mgross: 7/26/2007
terry: 6/5/2007
wwang: 4/6/2007
terry: 4/3/2007
carol: 2/14/2001
psherman: 12/17/1999
terry: 5/3/1999
carol: 3/2/1999
psherman: 2/26/1999
psherman: 2/25/1999

610889	TITLE *610889 IMPORTIN 11; IPO11
;;RAN-BINDING PROTEIN 11; RANBP11
SYNLEURIN, INCLUDED; SLRN, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Importins, including IPO11, are a members of the
karyopherin/importin-beta family of transport receptors (see KPNB1;
602738) that mediate nucleocytoplasmic transport of protein and RNA
cargoes (Plafker and Macara, 2000).

CLONING

By database analysis using S. cerevisiae Lph2 as probe, followed by
5-prime RACE of a human brain cDNA library, Plafker and Macara (2000)
cloned IPO11. The deduced 975-amino acid protein shares 24% amino acid
identity with S. cerevisiae Lph2 protein. Northern blot analysis
detected a 4.4-kb transcript in all human tissues examined.
Immunofluorescence studies localized IPO11 to the nucleus in baby
hamster kidney (BHK) cells.

Wang et al. (2003) isolated a splice variant of IPO11, which they called
synleurin, by screening for Toll-like receptor homologs in a human cDNA
database. The deduced 623-amino acid variant contains a transmembrane
domain and 12 leucine-rich repeats over the extracellular domain.
Northern blot analysis detected a 2.5-kb transcript in human spleen,
thymus, prostate, testis, small intestine, colon, and peripheral blood
leukocytes, with 2 additional 4.3- and 5.0-kb bands in testis.

GENE FUNCTION

Using yeast 2-hybrid and in vitro immunoprecipitation studies, Plafker
and Macara (2000) showed that IPO11 binds Ran GTPase (RAN; 601179) in
its GTP-bound form. Deletion analysis showed that N-terminal region of
IPO11 contains the RAN-binding domain. Using a heterokaryon shuttling
assay with BHK cells fused with a transformed HeLa cell line, they
demonstrated that IPO11 shuttles between the donor and acceptor nuclei
of the fused cells, suggesting that IPO11 shuttles constitutively
between the nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments. Yeast 2-hybrid and GST
pull-down analysis showed that IPO11 interacts specifically with mouse
E2-type ubiquitin conjugating enzyme UbcM2 (UBE2E3; 604151). The
IPO11-UbcM2 complex was disrupted by GTP-bound Ran, consistent with the
model that transport receptor-cargo complexes form in the cytoplasm and
are dissociated by Ran-GTP in the nucleus.

Using yeast 2-hybrid and GST pull-down studies, Plafker and Macara
(2002) showed that IPO11 binds RPL12 (180475). Competition assay and
microinjection studies in BHK cells showed that RPL12 and UbcM2 interact
with the same or overlapping sites on IPO11, competing with each other
for IPO11 binding. IPO11 increased nuclear accumulation of RPL12 in a
RAN-dependent manner, and overexpression of an IPO11 mutant lacking the
RAN-binding domain did not increase nuclear accumulation of RPL12. In
vitro binding assay showed that IPO11 did not bind RPL23A (602326), and
transient transfection assay showed that importin-beta and IPO5 (RANBP5;
602008) had no effect on nucleocytoplasmic distribution of RPL12,
indicating that IPO11 is a specific nuclear import receptor for RPL12.

Wang et al. (2003) found that synleurin plays a role in potentiation of
cytokine responses by amplifying signal transduction activation of FGF2
(134920), EGF (131530), PDGFB (190040), IGF1 (147440), IGF2 (147470),
and lipopolysaccharide when expressed in HEK293 cells.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Wang et al. (2003) mapped the IPO11 gene
to chromosome 5q12.1

REFERENCE 1. Plafker, S. M.; Macara, I. G.: Importin-11, a nuclear import receptor
for the ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, UbcM2. EMBO J. 19: 5502-5513,
2000.

2. Plafker, S. M.; Macara, I. G.: Ribosomal protein L12 uses a distinct
nuclear import pathway mediated by importin 11. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22:
1266-1275, 2002.

3. Wang, W.; Yang, Y.; Li, L.; Shi, Y.: Synleurin, a novel leucine-rich
repeat protein that increases the intensity of pleiotropic cytokine
responses. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 305: 981-988, 2003.

CREATED Dorothy S. Reilly: 3/26/2007

EDITED wwang: 03/27/2007
wwang: 3/27/2007

191340	TITLE *191340 UBIQUITIN C; UBC
;;POLYUBIQUITIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Studies of ubiquitin cDNAs and genes show 2 unusual gene structural
arrangements (Schlesinger and Bond, 1987). The first type of arrangement
is the polyubiquitin gene, consisting of tandem repeats of a ubiquitin
coding unit, with the number of repeats varying considerably even within
species. Presumably posttranslational cleavage produces ubiquitin
monomers from the primary translation product. The second structural
type is the ubiquitin fusion gene, which encodes a single ubiquitin
moiety fused to an unrelated tail protein. Three types of ubiquitin have
been identified: A, B (191339), and C. The ubiquitin C (UBC) mRNA
corresponds to a 9-coding-unit polyubiquitin gene.

MAPPING

During Northern blot analysis of ubiquitin mRNA, Baker and Board (1989)
observed a UBC mRNA length polymorphism. They characterized this 'mRLP',
showed that it correlated precisely with an HaeIII RFLP, and explained
the origin of the polymorphism on the basis of unequal crossover events.
Using a 5-prime flanking fragment to probe Southern blots of DNA
obtained from somatic cell hybrid cell lines, Board et al. (1992)
determined that the UBC gene is located on chromosome 12. In situ
hybridization with the same probe refined the assignment to 12q24.3.

REFERENCE 1. Baker, R. T.; Board, P. G.: Unequal crossover generates variation
in ubiquitin coding unit number at the human UbC polyubiquitin locus. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 44: 534-542, 1989.

2. Board, P. G.; Coggan, M.; Baker, R. T.; Vuust, J.; Webb, G. C.
: Localization of the human UBC polyubiquitin gene to chromosome band
12q24.3. Genomics 12: 639-642, 1992.

3. Schlesinger, M. J.; Bond, U.: Ubiquitin genes. Oxf. Surv. Euk.
Genes 4: 77-91, 1987.

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/7/1989

EDITED terry: 09/08/2010
carol: 5/12/2004
mark: 2/20/1997
carol: 3/30/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/21/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989
root: 5/8/1989

607030	TITLE *607030 GRANCALCIN; GCA
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By probing with antibody to the purified protein, Boyhan et al. (1992)
cloned GCA, which they called grancalcin, from a promyocytic cell line
expression library. The deduced 217-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 24 kD. The sequence contains an EF-hand
calcium-binding region, a potential phosphorylation site, and 2
potential N-glycosylation sites. GCA shares 58% identity over 192 amino
acids with sorcin (182520), and about 30% identity over the
calcium-binding domains of calpains (see 114220). Northern blot analysis
revealed abundant expression of a 1.65-kb transcript in bone marrow and
weaker expression in neutrophils, myeloid leukemic cells, and 2
Epstein-Barr virus-transformed B-cell lines. By Western blot analysis, a
28-kD protein was observed in B and T cells at low concentrations, and
at higher levels in neutrophils and macrophages. Subcellular
fractionation showed localization to be dependent upon Ca(2+) and
Mg(2+). In the absence of divalent cation, grancalcin localized to the
cytosolic fraction; with Mg(2+) alone, it partitioned with the granule
fraction; and in the presence of Mg(2+) and Ca(2+), it associated with
both the granule and membrane fractions.

Teahan et al. (1992) purified grancalcin from leukopheresis samples of
patients with chronic granulocytic leukemia. The purified protein
migrated as a 28-kD protein by SDS-PAGE and formed homodimers of 55 kD
upon gel filtration that was independent of reducing agents. No
biochemical evidence was found for phosphorylation or glycosylation.
Calcium binding was suggested by the difference in migration on SDS/PAGE
between calcium-loaded and calcium-depleted preparations, and was
confirmed by the binding of Ca(2+) to slot blots of the native protein.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the GCA
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP stSG15301).

REFERENCE 1. Boyhan, A.; Casimir, C. M.; French, J. K.; Teahan, C. G.; Segal,
A. W.: Molecular cloning and characterization of grancalcin, a novel
EF-hand calcium-binding protein abundant in neutrophils and monocytes. J.
Biol. Chem. 267: 2928-2933, 1992.

2. Teahan, C. G.; Totty, N. F.; Segal, A. W.: Isolation and characterization
of grancalcin, a novel 28 kDa EF-hand calcium-binding protein from
human neutrophils. Biochem. J. 286: 549-554, 1992.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/11/2002

EDITED carol: 06/13/2002

601330	TITLE *601330 GUANYLATE CYCLASE 2C; GUCY2C
;;GUANYLYL CYCLASE 2C; GUC2C;;
HEAT-STABLE ENTEROTOXIN RECEPTOR
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mann et al. (1996) described guanylyl cyclase C (called GC-C by them) as
a transmembrane receptor expressed primarily in the intestine that
regulates chloride secretion via the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (602421). Binding of GC-C to either the endogenous
peptide guanylin (139392) or the bacterially derived heat-stable
enterotoxin STa, results in increased levels of cGMP and the stimulation
of water and chloride secretion. In the case of exposure to STa, this
leads to debilitating secretory diarrhea.

From a human colonic cell line, Singh et al. (1991) isolated a cDNA
whose predicted amino acid sequence is 81% homologous to the GC-C
intestinal enterotoxin STa receptor in rat. After transient transfection
of COS-7 cells with the human cDNA, the investigators observed a
concentration-dependent response to STa in transfected cells as measured
by intracellular cGMP accumulation. They referred to this human STa
receptor as STaR. Similarly, de Sauvage et al. (1991) identified a human
cDNA encoding an STa receptor. The receptor has an extracellular
ligand-binding domain and a cytoplasmic guanylyl cyclase domain, as do
members of the natriuretic peptide receptor family. They showed that
stable mammalian cell lines overexpressing the STa receptor bind
radioiodinated STa (with a K(d) in the nanomolar range) and exhibit a
ligand-induced increase in the cellular cGMP level.

Mann et al. (1996) cloned and sequenced a cDNA for mouse Gucy2c.

MAPPING

Mann et al. (1996) mapped mouse Gucy2c by interspecific backcross to
chromosome 6. The placement of the mouse gene between Tpi (190450) and
Kras2 (190070), which map to human chromosome 12p13 and 12p12.1,
respectively, suggested to the authors that the human GUC2C gene resides
on 12p as well. This was confirmed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, which mapped the human GUC2C gene to 12p12.

GENE FUNCTION

Gong et al. (2011) reported that midbrain dopamine neurons in mice
selectively express guanylyl cyclase C (GC-C), a membrane receptor
theretofore thought to be expressed mainly in the intestine. GC-C
activation potentiates the excitatory responses mediated by glutamate
and acetylcholine receptors via the activity of guanosine
3-prime,5-prime-monophosphate-dependent protein kinase (PKG; 176894).
Mice in which GC-C had been knocked out exhibited hyperactivity and
attention deficits. Moreover, their behavioral phenotypes were reversed
by ADHD therapeutics and a PKG activator. Gong et al. (2011) concluded
that their results indicated important behavioral and physiologic
functions for the GC-C/PKG signaling pathway within the brain and
suggested new therapeutic targets for neuropsychiatric disorders related
to the malfunctions of midbrain dopamine neurons.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Diarrhea 6

In affected members of a large pedigree segregating autosomal dominant
early-onset chronic diarrhea mapping to chromosome 12p (DIAR6; 614616),
Fiskerstrand et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a missense
mutation in the GUCY2C gene (601330.0001) that was not found in
unaffected family members or controls. Functional analysis suggested
that the mutation has a gain-of-function effect, increasing
ligand-mediated activation of guanylate cyclase-C with subsequent
intracellular accumulation of cGMP. Based on associated features
observed in some affected family members, Fiskerstrand et al. (2012)
suggested that GUCY2C might be a susceptibility gene for Crohn disease
(see 266600), small bowel obstruction, and functional gastrointestinal
diseases such as irritable bowel syndrome.

- Meconium Ileus

In 11 affected individuals from a large Bedouin kindred with meconium
ileus mapping to chromosome 12p13 (614665), Romi et al. (2012)
identified homozygosity for a missense mutation in the candidate gene
GUCY2C (601330.0002). In a sporadic patient with meconium ileus from an
unrelated Bedouin family, they identified homozygosity for a 1-bp
duplication in the GUCY2C gene (601330.0003).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DIARRHEA 6
GUCY2C, SER840ILE

In affected members from 3 branches of a large pedigree segregating
autosomal dominant early-onset chronic diarrhea (DIAR6; 614616),
Fiskerstrand et al. (2012) identified heterozygosity for a 2519G-T
transversion in exon 22 of the GUCY2C gene, predicted to result in a
ser840-to-ile (S840I) substitution at a highly conserved residue in the
catalytic domain. Transfection studies demonstrated markedly increased
production of cGMP with the mutant receptor compared to wildtype,
suggesting a gain-of-function effect.

.0002
MECONIUM ILEUS
GUCY2C, ASP387GLY

In affected members of a large Bedouin kindred with meconium ileus
(614665), originally reported by Tal et al. (1985), Romi et al. (2012)
identified homozygosity for an 1160A-G transition in the GUCY2C gene,
resulting in an asp387-to-gly (D387G) substitution at a conserved
residue within 1 of the 2 essential regions of the extracellular
ligand-binding domain. The mutation was also found in homozygosity in 4
of 24 unaffected family members (1 of whom had meconium ileus detected
prenatally but passed stools unassisted after birth), and was found in
heterozygosity in 3 of 240 unrelated Bedouin controls, but was not
reported in the HapMap or 1000 Genomes databases. Transfection studies
in HEK293 cells demonstrated that activation of guanylate cyclase was
60% lower with the D387G mutant than with wildtype.

.0003
MECONIUM ILEUS
GUCY2C, 1-BP INS, 2270A

In a sporadic patient with severe meconium ileus, born of first-cousin
Bedouin parents, Romi et al. (2012) identified homozygosity for a 1-bp
insertion (2270dupA) in the GUCY2C gene, causing a frameshift resulting
in a premature termination codon (Asn757Lysfs*2) that fully abrogates
the guanylate cyclase catalytic domain. The mutation was not found in 2
healthy sibs or in 240 unrelated Bedouin controls, and was not reported
in the HapMap or the 1000 Genomes databases. The patient, who had a
normal sweat test, required surgery for her meconium ileus.

REFERENCE 1. de Sauvage, F. J.; Camerato, T. R.; Goeddel, D. V.: Primary structure
and functional expression of the human receptor for Escherichia coli
heat-stable enterotoxin. J. Biol. Chem. 266: 17912-17918, 1991.

2. Fiskerstrand, T.; Arshad, N.; Haukanes, B. I.; Tronstad, R. R.;
Pham, K. D.-C.; Johansson, S.; Havik, B.; Tonder, S. L.; Levy, S.
E.; Brackman, D.; Boman, H.; Biswas, K. H.; Apold, J.; Hovdenak, N.;
Visweswariah, S. S.; Knappskog, P. M.: Familial diarrhea syndrome
caused by an activating GUCY2C mutation. New Eng. J. Med. 366: 1586-1595,
2012.

3. Gong, R.; Ding, C.; Hu, J.; Lu, Y.; Liu, F.; Mann, E.; Xu, F.;
Cohen, M. B.; Luo, M.: Role for the membrane receptor guanylyl cyclase-C
in attention deficiency and hyperactive behavior. Science 333: 1642-1646,
2011.

4. Mann, E. A.; Swenson, E. S.; Copeland, N. G.; Gilbert, D. J.; Jenkins,
N. A.; Taguchi, T.; Testa, J. R.; Giannella, R. A.: Localization
of the guanylyl cyclase C gene to mouse chromosome 6 and human chromosome
12p12. Genomics 34: 265-267, 1996.

5. Romi, H.; Cohen, I.; Landau, D.; Alkrinawi, S.; Yerushalmi, B.;
Hershkovitz, R.; Newman-Heiman, N.; Cutting, G. R.; Ofir, R.; Sivan,
S.; Birk, O. S.: Meconium ileus caused by mutations in GUCY2C, encoding
the CFTR-activating guanylate cyclase 2C. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 90:
893-899, 2012.

6. Singh, S.; Singh, G.; Heim, J. M.; Gerzer, R.: Isolation and expression
if a guanylate cyclase-coupled heat stable enterotoxin receptor cDNA
from a human colonic cell line. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 179:
1455-1463, 1991.

7. Tal, A.; Carmi, R.; Chai-Am, E.; Zirkin, H.; Bar-Ziv, J.; Freud,
E.: Familial meconium ileus with normal sweat electrolytes. Clin.
Pediat. 24: 460-462, 1985.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/25/2012
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/1/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/7/2011
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 7/7/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/27/1996

EDITED carol: 05/25/2012
terry: 5/25/2012
carol: 5/2/2012
terry: 5/1/2012
alopez: 10/19/2011
terry: 10/7/2011
carol: 8/13/1998
carol: 3/28/1998
terry: 7/15/1996
mark: 7/7/1996
mark: 6/28/1996
terry: 6/28/1996
mark: 6/28/1996
mark: 6/27/1996

608040	TITLE *608040 INTRAFLAGELLAR TRANSPORT 74, CHLAMYDOMONAS, HOMOLOG OF; IFT74
;;COILED-COIL DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 2; CCDC2;;
CAPILLARY MORPHOGENESIS GENE 1; CMG1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using differential display and library screening to identify genes
upregulated during capillary morphogenesis, Bell et al. (2001) cloned
CMG1 from an umbilical vein endothelial cell cDNA library. The deduced
600-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 65 kD. CMG1
contains a coiled-coil domain and several putative phosphorylation
sites. The coiled-coil domain shares 24% identity with myosin heavy
chain (see 160730) sequences from various species. RT-PCR detected
highest expression in adult and fetal kidney and lower expression in
adult heart, placenta, lung, liver, and pancreas, and in fetal heart,
lung, and liver. Little to no expression was detected in adult brain and
skeletal muscle or in fetal brain, thymus, and spleen. Transfection into
epithelial tumor cells revealed targeting of fluorescent-tagged CMG1 to
an intracellular vesicular compartment.

GENE FUNCTION

Bell et al. (2001) determined that CMG1 was 1 of several transcripts
upregulated by umbilical vein endothelial cells during capillary
morphogenesis in 3-dimensional collagen matrices.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Bell et al. (2001) mapped the CMG1 gene to
chromosome 9q.

ANIMAL MODEL

Using short hairpin RNAs, Ezratty et al. (2011) found that knockdown of
Ift74 expression in embryonic day-9.5 mice enhanced proliferation and
expansion of basal keratinocyte-like cells, reduced Notch (see 190198)
reporter activity, and caused a loss of cilia in epidermal keratinocytes
in day-15.5 embryos. Cilia loss occurred in both undifferentiated basal
keratinocytes and differentiated suprabasal keratinocytes.

REFERENCE 1. Bell, S. E.; Mavila, A.; Salazar, R.; Bayless, K. J.; Kanagala,
S.; Maxwell, S. A.; Davis, G. E.: Differential gene expression during
capillary morphogenesis in 3D collagen matrices: regulated expression
of genes involved in basement membrane matrix assembly, cell cycle
progression, cellular differentiation and G-protein signaling. J.
Cell Sci. 114: 2755-2773, 2001.

2. Ezratty, E. J.; Stokes, N.; Chai, S.; Shah, A. S.; Williams, S.
E.; Fuchs, E.: A role for the primary cilium in Notch signaling and
epidermal differentiation during skin development. Cell 145: 1129-1141,
2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/5/2012

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/14/2003

EDITED mgross: 07/10/2012
terry: 7/5/2012
mgross: 7/1/2004
carol: 10/27/2003
mgross: 8/14/2003

613942	TITLE *613942 SAD1 AND UNC84 DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5; SUN5
;;SUN DOMAIN-CONTAINING PROTEIN 5;;
TESTIS- AND SPERMATOGENESIS-RELATED GENE 4; TSARG4;;
SPERM-ASSOCIATED ANTIGEN 4-LIKE PROTEIN; SPAG4L;;
SPAG4-LIKE PROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

SUN5 belongs to a family of proteins containing a Sad1/Unc84 (SUN)
domain (see SUN1; 607723). SUN domain-containing proteins interact with
Klarsicht/Anc1/SYNE1 homology (KASH) domain-containing proteins (see
SYNE1; 608441) and function at the nuclear envelope (review by Razafsky
and Hodzic, 2009).

CLONING

Xing et al. (2003) cloned human SUN5, which they designated TSARG4. The
deduced 379-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 43.1
kD. SUN5 shares 45% amino acid identity with SPAG4 (603038) and 74%
identity with mouse Sun5. Human SUN5 was expressed in a wide range of
adult tissues, including testis, whereas mouse Sun5 was expressed
specifically in testis.

MAPPING

Xing et al. (2003) mapped the SUN5 gene to chromosome 20q11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Razafsky, D.; Hodzic, D.: Bringing KASH under the SUN: the many
faces of nucleo-cytoskeletal connections. J. Cell Biol. 186: 461-472,
2009.

2. Xing, X.-W.; Li, L.-Y.; Fu, J.-J.; Zhu, W.-B.; Liu, G.; Liu, S.-F.;
Lu, G.-X.: Cloning of cDNA of TSARG4, a human spermatogensis (sic)
related gene. Acta Biochim. Biophys. Sinica 35: 283-288, 2003.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/27/2011

EDITED mgross: 04/27/2011

609094	TITLE *609094 F-BOX ONLY PROTEIN 17; FBXO17
;;FBX17;;
FBXO26; FBX26;;
FBG4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Members of the F-box protein family, such as FBXO17, are characterized
by an approximately 40-amino acid F-box motif. SCF complexes, formed by
SKP1 (601434), cullin (see CUL1; 603134), and F-box proteins, act as
protein-ubiquitin ligases. F-box proteins interact with SKP1 through the
F box, and they interact with ubiquitination targets through other
protein interaction domains (Jin et al., 2004).

CLONING

Using SKP1 as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen, and by searching EST
databases, Winston et al. (1999) identified several genes encoding F-box
proteins, including mouse Fbx17. The deduced protein contains an
N-terminal F box, followed by an F box-associated domain.

By searching EST databases using F box consensus sequences, followed by
PCR of a kidney cDNA library, Ilyin et al. (2002) obtained a full-length
cDNA encoding FBXO17, which they designated FBG4. The deduced protein
contains 278 amino acids. Northern blot analysis detected a 2.4-kb
transcript highly expressed in kidney. Lower expression was detected in
liver, and little to no expression was detected in all other tissues
examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Ilyin et al. (2002) determined that the FBXO17 gene contains 6 exons and
spans about 34.3 kb. Exon 1 is untranslated.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Ilyin et al. (2002) mapped the FBXO17 gene
to chromosome 19q13, near the FBXO27 gene (609099). Jin et al. (2004)
stated that the FBXO17 gene maps to chromosome 19q13.2 and the mouse
Fbxo17 gene maps to chromosome 7A3.

REFERENCE 1. Ilyin, G. P.; Serandour, A.-L.; Pigeon, C.; Rialland, M.; Glaise,
D.; Guguen-Guillouzo, C.: A new subfamily of structurally related
human F-box proteins. Gene 296: 11-20, 2002.

2. Jin, J.; Cardozo, T.; Lovering, R. C.; Elledge, S. J.; Pagano,
M.; Harper, J. W.: Systematic analysis and nomenclature of mammalian
F-box proteins. Genes Dev. 18: 2573-2580, 2004.

3. Winston, J. T.; Koepp, D. M.; Zhu, C.; Elledge, S. J.; Harper,
J. W.: A family of mammalian F-box proteins. Curr. Biol. 9: 1180-1182,
1999.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/14/2004

EDITED mgross: 12/15/2004

602015	TITLE *602015 OUTER DENSE FIBER OF SPERM TAILS 2; ODF2
;;OUTER DENSE FIBER OF SPERM TAILS, 84-KD; ODF84
CENEXIN 1, INCLUDED;;
CENEXIN 1 VARIANT 1, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ODF2 encodes multiple protein isoforms that have roles in the formation
of primary cilia and sperm flagella and in coordinating ciliary beating
(Kunimoto et al., 2012).

CLONING

See ODF1 (182878). Brohmann et al. (1997) used antibodies against Odf
proteins to screen a rat testis expression library and isolated the rat
Odf2 gene. Sequence analysis revealed that the protein has an overall
alpha-helical structure with 2 regions identical to the dimerization
region of a leucine zipper motif. Brohmann et al. (1997) documented Odf2
cDNAs with 3 different 5-prime end sequences, presumed to be the result
of alternative splicing. They found expression of the rat gene only in
testis.

The EST database contains several human cDNA sequences which are closely
related to rat Odf2, suggesting that a human homolog exists (Scott,
1997). These human cDNA sequences were derived from testis, epididymis,
and fetal brain libraries.

Shao et al. (1997) used a yeast 2-hybrid screening with the leucine
zipper region of ODF1 (ODF27; Shao and van der Hoorn, 1996) as bait to
isolate rat testis-specific proteins that could interact with ODF27.
They demonstrated that one of the novel genes isolated encoded the 84-kD
ODF protein ODF2.

Soung et al. (2006) stated that the deduced 638-amino acid ODF2 protein
has 2 leucine zipper motifs in its C-terminal half. Using an inactive
mutant of the mitotic kinase PLK1 (602098) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid
screen of a human testis cDNA library, followed by RT-PCR of HeLa cell
RNA, they identified 2 splice variants of ODF2 that they called
cenexin-1 and cenexin-1 variant-1. Cenexin-1 and cenexin-1 variant-1
encode proteins of 805 and 824 amino acids, respectively. Both isoforms
contain a C-terminal extension compared with ODF2, and cenexin-1
variant-1 also has a 19-amino acid insertion near its N-terminal end.
Northern blot analysis of synchronized HeLa cells detected a single
transcript of about 4.0 kb, representing cenexin-1. Cenexin-1 localized
at the microtubule-organizing center in interphase and at spindle poles
in mitosis, suggesting that cenexin-1 is a centrosomal protein.
Fluorescence-tagged cenexin-1 primarily localized to the mother
centrosome in interphase and to both mother and daughter centrosomes in
mitosis.

Using real-time RT-PCR with a probe for the 3-prime region of mouse
Odf2/cenexin, Kunimoto et al. (2012) detected highest expression in
mouse trachea and lung, with much lower expression in brain, and little
to no expression in heart, liver, and kidney. Western blot analysis
using an antibody against the N-terminal region of Odf2/cenexin detected
an apparent 75-kD protein in mouse testis and an apparent 90-kD protein
in mouse trachea, lung, kidney, brain, and oviduct.

GENE STRUCTURE

Soung et al. (2006) determined that the ODF2 gene contains 21 exons and
spans 44.8 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH, Shao et al. (1998) mapped the human ODF2 gene to chromosome
9q34. Soung et al. (2006) mapped the ODF2 gene to chromosome 9q34.11 by
genomic sequence analysis.

GENE FUNCTION

Using protein pull-down and coimmunoprecipitation analyses, Soung et al.
(2006) confirmed that cenexin-1 interacted directly with PLK1. Mutation
analysis revealed that the C-terminal domain of cenexin-1 interacted
with the polo-box domain of PLK1. The C-terminal domain of cenexin-1 was
also required to recruit PLK1 to centrosomes. Depletion of cenexin-1
from HeLa cells delocalized centrosomal PLK1, diminished gamma-tubulin
(see 191135) recruitment to centrosomes, and altered localization of a
subset of centrosomal proteins required for microtubule nucleation and
function. Depletion of cenexin-1 also resulted in severe mitotic
defects, including chromosome alignment and segregation defects. A
significant fraction of these cells also showed multipolar chromosomes
and apoptotic cell death.

ANIMAL MODEL

Kunimoto et al. (2012) developed a line of mice with deletion of exons 6
and 7 of Odf2, which they called Odf2(delta-ex6,7) mice. Homozygous
Odf2(delta-ex6,7) mice were born at the expected mendelian ratio, but
only 20% survived past weaning. Surviving mice were characterized by a
coughing/sneezing-like phenotype, sinusitis, otitis media, and a slight
tendency to hydrocephaly, suggesting primary ciliary dyskinesia. Unlike
Odf2 -/- F9 embryonic mouse carcinoma cells, homozygous
Odf2(delta-ex6,7) mice were born with primary cilia and expressed low
levels of N-terminally truncated Odf2/cenexin. Antibody raised against
the Odf2/cenexin C-terminal region detected slight immunofluorescence at
the base of cilia in homozygous Odf2(delta-ex6,7) tracheal cells, but
not in Odf2 -/- F9 cells. Cilium appeared to nucleate from the basal
body in Odf2(delta-ex6,7) cells, but the basal foot was completely lost,
and basal bodies failed to position apically in some cells. Basal feet
were also absent in oviduct epithelial cells and ependymal cells in
brains of homozygous Odf2(delta-ex6,7) mice. Live imaging of isolated
Odf2(delta-ex6,7) trachea preparations revealed uncoordinated ciliary
beating and inefficient fluid flow across the luminal surface.
Deficiency of full-length Odf2/cenexin also perturbed the polarized
distribution of planar cell polarity (PCP) proteins and PCP-dependent
apical organization of microtubules.

REFERENCE 1. Brohmann, H.; Pinnecke, S.; Hoyer-Fender, S.: Identification and
characterization of new cDNAs encoding outer dense fiber proteins
of rat sperm. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 10327-10332, 1997.

2. Kunimoto, K.; Yamazaki, Y.; Nishida, T.; Shinohrara, K.; Ishikawa,
H.; Hasegawa, T.; Okanoue, T.; Harnada, H.; Noda, T.; Tamura, A.;
Tsukita, S.; Tsukita, S.: Coordinated ciliary beating requires Odf2-mediated
polarization of basal bodies via basal feet. Cell 189-200, 2012.

3. Scott, A. F.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/10/1997.

4. Shao, X.; Murthy, S.; Demetrick, D. J.; van der Hoorn, F. A.:
Human outer dense fiber gene, ODF2, localizes to chromosome 9q34. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 83: 221-223, 1998.

5. Shao, X.; Tarnasky, H. A.; Schalles, U.; Oko, R.; van der Hoorn,
F. A.: Interactional cloning of the 84-kDa major outer dense fiber
protein Odf84: leucine zippers mediate associations of Odf84 and Odf27. J.
Biol. Chem. 272: 6105-6113, 1997.

6. Shao, X.; van der Hoorn, F. A.: Self-interaction of the major
27-kilodalton outer dense fiber protein is in part mediated by a leucine
zipper domain in the rat. Biol. Reprod. 55: 1343-1350, 1996.

7. Soung, N.-K.; Kang, Y. H.; Kim, K.; Kamijo, K.; Yoon, H.; Seong,
Y.-S.; Kuo, Y.-L.; Miki, T.; Kim, S. R.; Kuriyama, R.; Giam, C.-Z.;
Ahn, C. H.; Lee, K. S.: Requirement of hCenexin for proper mitotic
functions of polo-like kinase 1 at the centrosomes. Molec. Cell.
Biol. 26: 8316-8335, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 06/07/2013
Carol A. Bocchini - updated: 6/12/1999
Alan F. Scott - updated: 9/10/1997

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 9/10/1997

EDITED mgross: 06/07/2013
alopez: 3/15/2010
terry: 6/14/1999
carol: 6/12/1999
dkim: 9/22/1998
dkim: 9/21/1998
alopez: 9/17/1998
alopez: 9/15/1998
terry: 9/14/1998
carol: 5/26/1998
alopez: 10/15/1997
alopez: 10/13/1997
alopez: 10/7/1997

605267	TITLE *605267 JUNCTOPHILIN 2; JPH2
;;JP2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Junctional complexes between the plasma membrane (PM) and
endoplasmic/sarcoplasmic reticulum (ER/SR) are a common feature of all
excitable cell types and mediate cross talk between cell surface and
intracellular ion channels. Takeshima et al. (2000) identified the
junctophilins (JPs), a conserved family of proteins that are components
of the junctional complexes. JPs are composed of a C-terminal
hydrophobic segment spanning the ER/SR membrane and a remaining
cytoplasmic domain that shows specific affinity for the PM. In mouse,
there are at least 3 JP subtypes: Jp1, Jp2, and Jp3.

CLONING

By screening genomic DNA libraries, Nishi et al. (2000) isolated the
human JP1 (JPH1; 605266) and JP2 genes, and by screening a brain cDNA
library, they isolated a cDNA encoding human JP3 (JPH3; 605268). The JP2
gene encodes a deduced 696-amino acid protein. The human JPs share an
overall sequence identity of 39%, and they share characteristic
structural features with their rabbit and mouse counterparts. RNA blot
hybridization indicated that the tissue-specific expression patterns of
the JP genes in human are essentially the same as those in mouse; JP1
was expressed as a 4.5-kb transcript in skeletal muscle and at low
levels in heart, JP2 was expressed as a 4.1-kb transcript in heart and
skeletal muscle, and JP3 was expressed as a 4.6-kb transcript in brain.

Matsushita et al. (2007) noted that the JPH2 protein is composed of 6
predicted domains: MORN (membrane occupation and recognition nexus)
motif region I (MORN1), joining region, MORN2 motif, putative
alpha-helical region, divergent region, and membrane-spanning region.

GENE STRUCTURE

Nishi et al. (2000) determined that the JPH2 gene contains 5 exons,
similar to JPH1 and JPH3.

MAPPING

By FISH, Nishi et al. (2000) mapped the JPH2 gene to chromosome 20q12
and determined that the JPH genes do not cluster on the human genome.

GENE FUNCTION

Takeshima et al. (2000) showed that Jp2 is abundantly expressed in mouse
heart, and mutant mice lacking Jp2 exhibited embryonic lethality.
Cardiac myocytes from the mutant mice showed deficiency of the
junctional membrane complexes and abnormal calcium transients. These
results suggested that JPs are important components of junctional
membrane complexes.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 223 unrelated patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (see CMH17,
613873), who were negative for mutation in 8 myofilament-associated
genes and 5 Z disc-associated genes, Landstrom et al. (2007) analyzed
the candidate gene JPH2 and identified heterozygosity for 3 different
missense mutations in 3 probands (605267.0001-605267.0003,
respectively). Functional analysis demonstrated that the mutations
caused protein reorganization of JPH2, perturbations in intracellular
calcium signaling, and marked cardiomyocyte hyperplasia.

Matsushita et al. (2007) analyzed the candidate gene JPH2 in 148
Japanese probands with CMH and 48 affected family members, as well as 32
patients with dilated cardiomyopathy (CMD; see 115200) and 8 patients
with restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM; see 115210) and identified a
heterozygous missense mutation (605267.0004) in 4 CMH probands that was
not found in CMD or RCM patients or in 236 Japanese controls. Subsequent
analysis of 15 known CMH genes in the probands revealed that 1 patient
also carried 2 mutations in the MYH7 gene (see, e.g., 160760.0016).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC 17
JPH2, SER101ARG

In a 40-year-old man who was diagnosed at age 27 years with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (CMH17; 613873), Landstrom et al. (2007) identified
heterozygosity for a mutation in exon 1 of the JPH2 gene, resulting in a
ser101-to-arg (S101R) substitution in the conserved MORN motif. The
mutation was not identified in 1,000 Caucasian reference alleles.
Studies in transfected H9c2 cardiomyocytes showed an altered
localization pattern with respect to the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR).
Analysis of transfected HL-1 cardiomyocytes indicated decreased
spontaneous calcium release from the SR, suggesting that
excitation-contraction process was disrupted in cells expressing S101R.
The patient, who had dyspnea and had undergone placement of an
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator, had a family history of CMH,
with 3 first-degree affected relatives and 1 second-degree relative, all
of whom declined to participate in the study.

.0002
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC 17
JPH2, TYR141HIS

In a 33-year-old man who was diagnosed at age 24 years with hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (CMH17; 613873), Landstrom et al. (2007) identified
heterozygosity for a mutation in exon 2 of the JPH2 gene, resulting in a
tyr141-to-his (Y141H) substitution at a conserved residue. The mutation
was not identified in 1,000 Caucasian reference alleles. Studies in
transfected H9c2 cardiomyocytes showed an altered localization pattern
with respect to the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) and significant
hypertrophy (2- to 3-fold) compared to wildtype. Analysis of transfected
HL-1 cardiomyocytes indicated decreased spontaneous calcium release from
the SR, suggesting that excitation-contraction process was disrupted in
cells expressing Y141H. At presentation, the patient had dyspnea,
palpitations, angina, and a non-Q-wave myocardial infarction; he
underwent placement of a pacemaker and an implantable
cardioverter-defibrillator. There was no family history of CMH or sudden
cardiac death.

.0003
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC 17
JPH2, SER165PHE

In a 58-year-old female who was diagnosed at 30 years of age with
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH17; 613873), Landstrom et al. (2007)
identified heterozygosity for a mutation in exon 2 of the JPH2 gene,
resulting in a ser165-to-phe (S165F) substitution at a conserved
residue. The mutation was not identified in 1,000 Caucasian reference
alleles. Studies in transfected H9c2 cardiomyocytes showed an altered
localization pattern with respect to the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) and
significant hypertrophy (2- to 3-fold) compared to wildtype. Analysis of
transfected HL-1 cardiomyocytes indicated decreased spontaneous calcium
release from the SR, suggesting that excitation-contraction process was
disrupted in cells expressing S165F. At presentation, the patient had
dyspnea and subacute bacterial endocarditis; she underwent surgical
myectomy. There was no family history of CMH or sudden cardiac death.

.0004
CARDIOMYOPATHY, FAMILIAL HYPERTROPHIC 17
JPH2, GLY505SER

In 4 Japanese probands with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (CMH17; 613873),
Matsushita et al. (2007) identified heterozygosity for a 1306C-T
transition in exon 4 of the JPH2 gene, resulting in a gly505-to-ser
(G505S) substitution in the divergent region. One of the patients, who
was diagnosed with CMH at 14 years of age, had a mother who was
diagnosed at 40 years of age and also carried the G505S mutation. His
healthy father did not carry the mutation, and a younger sister who had
died suddenly at 3 years of age could not be examined. Another proband,
who was diagnosed with CMH at 33 years of age, had a family history of
CMH involving her grandfather, father, and the father's sibs, who were
not available for genetic analysis. Analysis of 15 known CMH-associated
genes in the 4 probands carrying the G505S mutation in JPH2 revealed
that the female proband also carried 2 missense mutations in the MYH7
gene (see, e.g., 160760.0016). Her newborn son, who had no signs of CMH
on echocardiography at 1 day of age, carried both the JPH2 G505S
mutation and 1 of the MYH7 mutations. Matsushita et al. (2007) suggested
that mutations in both JPH2 and MYH7 could be associated with the
pathogenesis of CMH in this proband.

REFERENCE 1. Landstrom, A. P.; Weisleder, N.; Batalden, K. B.; Bos, J. M.; Tester,
D. J.; Ommen, S. R.; Wehrens, X. H. T.; Claycomb, W. C.; Ko, J.-K.;
Hwang, M.; Pan, Z.; Ma, J.; Ackerman, M. J.: Mutations in JPH2-encoded
junctophilin-2 associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in humans. J.
Molec. Cell. Cardiol. 42: 1026-1035, 2007.

2. Matsushita, Y.; Furukawa, T.; Kasanuki, H.; Nishibatake, M.; Kurihara,
Y.; Ikeda, A.; Kamatani, N.; Takeshima, H.; Matsuoka, R.: Mutation
of junctophilin type 2 associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. J.
Hum. Genet. 52: 543-548, 2007.

3. Nishi, M.; Mizushima, A.; Nakagawara, K.; Takeshima, H.: Characterization
of human junctophilin subtype genes. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 273:
920-927, 2000.

4. Takeshima, H.; Komazaki, S.; Nishi, M.; Iino, M.; Kangawa, K.:
Junctophilins: a novel family of junctional membrane complex proteins. Molec.
Cell 6: 11-22, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/7/2011

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 9/14/2000

EDITED alopez: 02/03/2012
wwang: 4/8/2011
terry: 4/7/2011
joanna: 12/8/2000
mgross: 9/14/2000

601984	TITLE *601984 NUCLEAR RECEPTOR COACTIVATOR 4; NCOA4
;;RET-ACTIVATING GENE ELE1; ELE1;;
ANDROGEN RECEPTOR COACTIVATOR, 70-KD; ARA70
PTC3 CHIMERIC ONCOGENE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Androgen receptor (AR; 313700) is a transcriptional factor that belongs
to the steroid receptor superfamily. Using the C terminus of AR as bait
in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a human brain cDNA library, Yeh and Chang
(1996) cloned NCOA4, which they designated ARA70. The interaction
between the AR bait and NCOA4 occurred only in the presence of
dihydrotestosterone. The deduced 614-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 70 kD. It shares 99% homology with the protein encoded
by the RET-fused gene (RFG) cDNA isolated from human thyroid by Santoro
et al. (1994). Northern blot analysis of mouse tissues detected highest
expression of Ara70 in thymus, prostate, testis, and adrenal gland.
Intermediate expression was found in several other mouse tissues, and no
expression was detected in brain cortex, liver, spleen, and seminal
vesicle.

GENE FUNCTION

Yeh and Chang (1996) showed that ARA70 is a ligand-dependent
AR-associated protein that functions in human prostate cancer cells as
an activator to enhance AR transcriptional activity 10-fold in the
presence of dihydrotestosterone or testosterone, but not
hydroxyflutamide. ARA70 induced only slightly the transcriptional
activity of other steroid receptors such as estrogen receptor (133430)
in human prostate cancer cells.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, Minoletti et al. (1994) mapped
the ELE1 gene to chromosome 10q11.2. The ELE1 gene maps more than 500 kb
from the RET protooncogene (164761), which also maps to chromosome
10q11.2.

CYTOGENETICS

The PTC3 oncogene (RET/PTC3) is an activated form of the RET
protooncogene, which is frequently rearranged in papillary thyroid
carcinoma (PTC; 188550). RET/PTC3 results from a structural
rearrangement between the ELE1 and RET genes on chromosome 10
(Bongarzone et al., 1994) and has been observed in both sporadic and
radiation-associated post-Chernobyl PTC. Minoletti et al. (1994) found
that the karyotype of 2 PTC3-positive PTCs did not show evidence of
chromosome 10 abnormalities, indicating that a cytogenetically
undetectable paracentric inversion within chromosome 10q11.2 generates
PTC3. To understand the molecular basis that predisposes RET and ELE1
genes to be recurrent targets of 'illegitimate' recombination,
Bongarzone et al. (1997) examined the genomic regions containing the
ELE1/RET breakpoints in 6 Italian sporadic, RET/PTC3-positive tumors and
3 radiation-associated tumors from children living in areas contaminated
by the Chernobyl accident; the latter tumors also expressed RET/PTC3
oncogene. They found that the breakpoints in both genes clustered in
regions that they designated ELE1-bcr (1.8 kb) and RET-bcr (1.9 kb). In
all sporadic tumors and in 1 post-Chernobyl tumor, the ELE1/RET
recombination corresponded with short sequences of homology (3 to 7 bp)
between the 2 rearranging genes. In addition, Bongarzone et al. (1997)
observed an interesting distribution of the post-Chernobyl breakpoints
in ELE1-bcr located within an Alu element, or between 2 close Alu
elements, and always in AT-rich regions. In the case of the ELE1/RET
fusion gene, the 5-prime end of ELE1 is fused to the tyrosine kinase
portion of the RET gene. See 601985 for discussion of the PTC1 chimeric
oncogene.

Klugbauer et al. (2001) identified 22 reciprocal and 4 nonreciprocal
ELE1 and RET rearrangements in 26 post-Chernobyl PTC tumor samples.
Breakpoints were distributed in the affected introns of both genes
without significant clustering, and there was no accumulation of
breakpoints at the 2 Alu elements in the ELE1 sequence. However, at
least 1 topoisomerase I (126420) site was found at or near all
breakpoints, indicating a potential role for this enzyme in the
formation of DNA strand breaks and/or ELE1 and RET inversions. Due to
the presence of short regions of sequence homology and short direct and
inverted repeats at the majority of breakpoints, Klugbauer et al. (2001)
concluded that chimeric ELE1/RET and RET/ELE1 genes are formed by a
nonhomologous DNA end-joining mechanism.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Undermasculinization of the male genitalia is a common congenital
disorder, but in only a small proportion of cases is there an
identifiable abnormality of androgen production or of the androgen
receptor. Lim et al. (2001) studied 27 subjects in whom no abnormality
of the androgen receptor could be established as the cause of
undermasculinized genitalia. They found likewise no abnormality in the
NCOA4 gene.

REFERENCE 1. Bongarzone, I.; Butti, M. G.; Coronelli, S.; Borrello, M. G.; Santoro,
M.; Mondellini, P.; Pilotti, S.; Fusco, A.; Della Porta, G.; Pierotti,
M. A.: Frequent activation of ret protooncogene by fusion with a
new activating gene in papillary thyroid carcinomas. Cancer Res. 54:
2979-2985, 1994.

2. Bongarzone, I.; Butti, M. G.; Fugazzola, L.; Pacini, F.; Pinchera,
A.; Vorontsova, T. V.; Demidchik, E. P.; Pierotti, M. A.: Comparison
of the breakpoint regions of ELE1 and RET genes involved in the generation
of RET/PTC3 oncogene in sporadic and in radiation-associated papillary
thyroid carcinomas. Genomics 42: 252-259, 1997.

3. Klugbauer, S.; Pfeiffer, P.; Gassenhuber, H.; Beimfohr, C.; Rabes,
H. M.: RET rearrangements in radiation-induced papillary thyroid
carcinomas: high prevalence of topoisomerase I sites at breakpoints
and microhomology-mediated end joining in ELE1 and RET chimeric genes. Genomics 73:
149-160, 2001.

4. Lim, H. N.; Hawkins, J. R.; Hughes, I. A.: Genetic evidence to
exclude the androgen receptor co-factor, ARA70 (NCOA4) as a candidate
gene for the causation of undermasculinised genitalia. (Letter) Clin.
Genet. 59: 284-286, 2001.

5. Minoletti, F.; Butti, M. G.; Coronelli, S.; Miozzo, M.; Sozzi,
G.; Pilotti, S.; Tunnacliffe, A.; Pierotti, M. A.; Bongarzone, I.
: The two genes generating RET/PTC3 are localized in chromosomal band
10q11.2. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 11: 51-57, 1994.

6. Santoro, M.; Dathan, N. A.; Berlingieri, M. T.; Bongarzone, I.;
Paulin, C.; Grieco, M.; Pierotti, M. A.; Vecchio, G.; Fusco, A.:
Molecular characterization of RET/PTC3: a novel rearranged version
of the RET proto-oncogene in a human thyroid papillary carcinoma. Oncogene 9:
509-516, 1994.

7. Yeh, S.; Chang, C.: Cloning and characterization of a specific
coactivator, ARA-70, for the androgen receptor in human prostate cells. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 93: 5517-5521, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/18/2004
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/4/2004

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/10/1997

EDITED mgross: 10/18/2004
mgross: 10/4/2004
mgross: 10/18/2002
carol: 8/22/2001
mcapotos: 8/15/2001
carol: 7/2/2001
terry: 2/28/2000
carol: 12/22/1999
carol: 6/29/1999
mark: 9/11/1997
terry: 9/11/1997
mark: 9/10/1997

612112	TITLE *612112 TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR-ALPHA-INDUCED PROTEIN 8-LIKE 2; TNFAIP8L2
;;TNFAIP8-LIKE 2; TIPE2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Sun et al. (2008) cloned mouse Tnfaip8l2, which they called Tipe2, and
by database analysis, they identified human TNFAIP8L2. The deduced
184-amino acid human protein shares 94% identity with mouse Tnfaip8l2,
shares 53% identity with human TNFAIP8 (612111), and contains a death
effector domain (DED) and 6 putative alpha-helices characteristic of
DED-containing proteins. Northern blot analysis detected strong
expression in mouse thymus, spleen, lymph node, and small intestine,
with weak expression in lung, skin, and colon. Tnfaip8l2 was also
expressed in murine lymphoid cells and cell lines, in inflamed mouse
spinal cord, and in TNF-alpha (191160)-stimulated mouse fibroblasts,
suggesting that Tnfaip8l2 is preferentially expressed in lymphoid
tissue.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Sun et al. (2008) mapped the human
TNFAIP8L2 gene to chromosome 1q21.2-q21.3 and the mouse Tnfaip8l2 gene
to chromosome 3F1-F3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Sun et al. (2008) found that Tipe2 -/- mice were born at the expected
mendelian ratio. Starting at 2 months of age, many Tipe2 -/- mice became
chronically ill, with weight loss, splenomegaly, leukocytosis, and
multiorgan inflammation. About half of the Tipe2 -/- mice died within a
year. Tipe2 -/- mice were hypersensitive to septic shock, and
Tipe2-deficient cells were hyperresponsive to Toll-like receptor (see
TLR1; 601194) and T-cell receptor (see 186880) activation. Sun et al.
(2008) found that Tipe2 bound to caspase-8 (601763) and inhibited the
activation of activating protein-1 (see JUN; 165160) and NF-kappa-B (see
164011) while promoting Fas (TNFRSF6; 134637)-induced apoptosis.
Inhibiting caspase-8 significantly blocked the hyperresponsiveness of
Tipe2-deficient cells. Sun et al. (2008) concluded that TIPE2 is a
negative regulator of Toll-like and T-cell receptor function, prevents
hyperresponsiveness, and maintains immune homeostasis.

REFERENCE 1. Sun, H.; Gong, S.; Carmody, R. J.; Hilliard, A.; Li, L.; Sun, J.;
Kong, L.; Xu, L.; Hilliard, B.; Hu, S.; Shen, H.; Yang, X.; Chen,
Y. H.: TIPE2, a negative regulator of innate and adaptive immunity
that maintains immune homeostasis. Cell 133: 415-426, 2008.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/16/2008

EDITED mgross: 10/04/2013
wwang: 6/16/2008

611994	TITLE *611994 MITOCHONDRIAL RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN S34; MRPS34
;;MRPS12
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Mitochondria have their own translation system for production of 13
inner membrane proteins essential for oxidative phosphorylation. MRPS34
is a component of the small subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome that
is encoded by the nuclear genome (Koc et al., 2001).

CLONING

By proteolytic digestion of whole bovine 28S subunits, followed by
peptide analysis and EST database analysis, O'Brien et al. (2000) and
Koc et al. (2001) independently identified full-length human MRPS34,
which O'Brien et al. (2000) called MRPS12. The deduced protein contains
218 amino acids. Koc et al. (2001) determined that the MRPS34 protein
has a calculated molecular mass of 25.7 kD. Removal of a predicted
N-terminal 18-amino acid mitochondrial localization signal results in a
mature 23.6-kD protein. O'Brien et al. (2000) also identified a possible
splice variant of MRPS34. O'Brien et al. (2000) and Koc et al. (2001)
identified MRPS34 orthologs in mouse, rat, Drosophila, and C. elegans,
but not in yeast or E. coli. Koc et al. (2001) reported that mouse and
human MRPS34 share 86.5% amino acid identity.

GENE STRUCTURE

O'Brien et al. (2000) determined that the MRPS34 gene contains 4 exons
and spans approximately 1.5 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, O'Brien et al. (2000) mapped the MRPS34
gene to chromosome 16q13-q21.

REFERENCE 1. Koc, E. C.; Burkhart, W.; Blackburn, K.; Moseley, A.; Spremulli,
L. L.: The small subunit of the mammalian mitochondrial ribosome:
identification of the full complement of ribosomal proteins present. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 19363-19374, 2001.

2. O'Brien, T. W.; Liu, J.; Sylvester, J. E.; Mougey, E. B.; Fischel-Ghodsian,
N.; Thiede, B.; Wittmann-Liebold, B.; Graack, H.-R.: Mammalian mitochondrial
ribosomal proteins (4): amino acid sequencing, characterization, and
identification of corresponding gene sequences. J. Biol. Chem. 275:
18153-18159, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/21/2008

EDITED mgross: 04/23/2008

603975	TITLE *603975 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 93; ZNF93
DESCRIPTION Zinc finger proteins (ZNFs), which bind nucleic acids, perform many key
functions, the most important of which is regulating transcription. See
ZNF91 (603971) for general information on ZNFs.

By screening a cDNA library derived from a human undifferentiated
embryonal carcinoma cell line with the coding sequence of the ZNF85
(603899) N-terminal nonfinger region, which spans the KRAB domain,
Bellefroid et al. (1991) isolated cDNAs encoding 11 distinct KRAB zinc
finger proteins, including ZNF93, which they called HTF34.

Bellefroid et al. (1993) reported the characterization of a subgroup of
KRAB zinc finger proteins, named the ZNF91 family, of which ZNF93 is a
member. These proteins contain a conserved linker region, called the
ZNF91-related spacer region, between their N-terminal KRAB domain and
their first finger unit. The authors found that members of the ZNF91
family are widely expressed in human tissues, with the highest
expression in T-lymphoid cells.

By somatic cell hybrid analysis and FISH, Bellefroid et al. (1993)
mapped the ZNF93 gene to 19p13.1-p12.

REFERENCE 1. Bellefroid, E. J.; Marine, J. C.; Ried, T.; Lecocq, P. J.; Riviere,
M.; Amemiya, C.; Poncelet, D. A.; Coulie, P. G.; de Jong, P.; Szpirer,
C.; Ward, D. C.; Martial, J. A.: Clustered organization of homologous
KRAB zinc-finger genes with enhanced expression in human T lymphoid
cells. EMBO J. 12: 1363-1374, 1993.

2. Bellefroid, E. J.; Poncelet, D. A.; Lecocq, P. J.; Revelant, O.;
Martial, J. A.: The evolutionarily conserved Kruppel-associated box
domain defines a subfamily of eukaryotic multifingered proteins. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 3608-3612, 1991.

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 7/9/1999

EDITED mgross: 07/20/1999
mgross: 7/12/1999
psherman: 7/9/1999

164875	TITLE *164875 VAV1 ONCOGENE; VAV1
;;ONCOGENE VAV;;
ONCOGENE VAV1
DESCRIPTION The VAV oncogene was generated by genomic rearrangement that replaced
the 5-prime domain of the VAV protooncogene by sequences from a
bacterial gene present in the cotransfecting DNA used as a selectable
marker during gene transfer assay (Katzav et al., 1989). A high level of
expression of the VAV oncogene leads to morphologic transformation of
NIH 3T3 cells in culture and to the efficient induction of tumors in
immunocompromised mice. The VAV gene directs the synthesis of a 3.0-kb
transcript that is specifically expressed in cells of hematopoietic
origin, including those of erythroid, lymphoid, and myeloid lineages.
The predicted amino acid sequence of the gene product exhibits motifs
characteristic of transcriptional factors, including a highly acidic
amino-terminal region, separated from 2 putative nuclear localization
signals by a proline-rich sequence, and 2 zinc finger-like domains.

Bustelo and Barbacid (1992) presented results suggesting that the VAV
protooncogene participates in the signaling processes that mediate the
antigen-induced activation of B lymphocytes.

Fackler et al. (1999) identified the protooncogene and guanine
nucleotide exchange factor VAV as the specific binding partner of Nef
proteins from HIV-1. The interaction between Nef and VAV led to
increased activity of VAV and its downstream effectors. Both
cytoskeletal changes and the activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (see
602896) were observed. Fackler et al. (1999) concluded that the
interaction between Nef and VAV initiates a signaling cascade that
changes structural and physiologic parameters in the infected cell.

By analysis of a rodent-human hybrid DNA panel and by chromosomal in
situ hybridization, Martinerie et al. (1990) assigned the VAV locus to
19p13.2-p12. VAV and INSR, the insulin receptor gene (147670), appeared
to be closely linked; INSR and VAV migrated together in high molecular
weight DNA fragments created with rare cutting restriction enzymes that
were subjected to pulsed field gel electrophoresis. It may be worth
noting that transcription factor-3 (147141), which has been implicated
in acute lymphoblastic leukemia associated with translocations (p1;19),
is located at 19p13.3-p13.2. By fluorescence in situ hybridization,
Trask et al. (1993) assigned the VAV gene to 19p13.3-p13.2.

Studies by Tarakhovsky et al. (1995), Zhang et al. (1995), and Fischer
et al. (1995) demonstrated functional consequences of VAV gene deletion.
The investigators used homologous recombination to introduce a null
mutation into embryonic stem (ES) cells. Tarakhovsky et al. (1995)
reported that in the absence of VAV antigen, receptor mediated
proliferative responses of B and T cells are severely reduced. Fischer
et al. (1995) demonstrated that VAV-dependent signaling pathways
regulate the maturation of T cells. The studies reported by Zhang et al.
(1995) confirmed that VAV plays a role in T- and B-cell development and
activation.

Using genomic sequence analysis, Denkinger et al. (2000) determined that
the VAV1 gene contains 27 exons and spans 77 kb on chromosome 19. Its
overall exon organization is similar to that of VAV2 (600428). They also
identified several differences from the original VAV cDNA sequence,
notably, that there is an isoleucine at position 718 rather than a
threonine, which changes the classification of the VAV SH2 domain from
type 3 to type 2. Promoter analysis indicated that a 23-bp segment that
includes a potential CBF/AML1 (see 151385)-binding site is essential for
VAV expression in a monocytoid cell line.

Moores et al. (2000) expressed VAV1, VAV2, and VAV3 (605541) at
equivalent levels and found that each responds to similar surface
receptor tyrosine kinases. Integrin-induced phosphorylation required the
presence of SYK (600085). Only VAV1 could efficiently cooperate with
T-cell receptor (TCR; see 186880) signaling to enhance NFAT
(600489)-dependent transcription, while only VAV1 and VAV3 could enhance
nuclear factor kappa-B (NFKB; see 164011)-dependent transcription.

Bustelo (2000) presented a comprehensive review of the regulatory and
signaling properties of the VAV family.

REFERENCE 1. Bustelo, X. R.: Regulatory and signaling properties of the Vav
family. Molec. Cell. Biol. 20: 1461-1477, 2000.

2. Bustelo, X. R.; Barbacid, M.: Tyrosine phosphorylation of the
VAV proto-oncogene product in activated B cells. Science 256: 1196-1199,
1992.

3. Denkinger, D. J.; Borges, C. R.; Butler, C. L.; Cushman, A. M.;
Kawahara, R. S.: Genomic organization and regulation of the vav proto-oncogene. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1491: 253-262, 2000.

4. Fackler, O. T.; Luo, W.; Geyer, M.; Alberts, A. S.; Peterlin, B.
M.: Activation of Vav by Nef induces cytoskeletal rearrangements
and downstream effector functions. Molec. Cell 3: 729-739, 1999.

5. Fischer, K.-D.; Zmuidzinas, A.; Gardner, S.; Barbacid, M.; Bernstein,
A.; Guidos, C.: Defective T-cell receptor signalling and positive
selection of Vav-deficient CD4(+) CD8(+) thymocytes. Nature 374:
474-477, 1995.

6. Katzav, S.; Martin-Zanca, D.; Barbacid, M.: VAV, a novel human
oncogene derived from a locus ubiquitously expressed in hematopoietic
cells. EMBO J. 8: 2283-2290, 1989.

7. Martinerie, C.; Cannizzaro, L. A.; Croce, C. M.; Huebner, K.; Katzav,
S.; Barbacid, M.: The human VAV proto-oncogene maps to chromosome
region 19p12-19p13.2. Hum. Genet. 86: 65-68, 1990.

8. Moores, S. L.; Selfors, L. M.; Fredericks, J.; Breit, T.; Fujikawa,
K.; Alt, F. W.; Brugge, J. S.; Swat, W.: Vav family proteins couple
to diverse cell surface receptors. Molec. Cell. Biol. 20: 6364-6373,
2000.

9. Tarakhovsky, A.; Turner, M.; Schaal, S.; Mee, P. J.; Duddy, L.
P.; Rajewsky, K.; Tybulewicz, V. L. J.: Defective antigen receptor-mediated
proliferation of B and T cells in the absence of Vav. Nature 374:
467-470, 1995.

10. Trask, B.; Fertitta, A.; Christensen, M.; Youngblom, J.; Bergmann,
A.; Copeland, A.; de Jong, P.; Mohrenweiser, H.; Olsen, A.; Carrano,
A.; Tynan, K.: Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping of human
chromosome 19: cytogenetic band location of 540 cosmids and 70 genes
or DNA markers. Genomics 15: 133-145, 1993.

11. Zhang, R.; Alt, F. W.; Davidson, L.; Orkin, S. H.; Swat, W.:
Defective signalling through the T- and B-cell antigen receptors in
lymphoid cells lacking the vav proto-oncogene. Nature 374: 470-473,
1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 01/09/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/12/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 7/20/1999
Moyra Smith - updated: 3/7/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/3/1991

EDITED mgross: 01/09/2001
mcapotos: 10/19/2000
mcapotos: 10/17/2000
terry: 10/12/2000
mgross: 7/20/1999
kayiaros: 7/13/1999
alopez: 8/25/1998
mark: 6/10/1996
mark: 3/7/1996
terry: 3/7/1996
carol: 2/24/1995
carol: 2/11/1993
carol: 6/9/1992
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/4/1991
carol: 1/3/1991

603189	TITLE *603189 SYNTAXIN 5; STX5
;;STX5A
DESCRIPTION In eukaryotic cells, vesicle docking is thought to be regulated in part
by the specific interactions of a vesicle-associated membrane protein
(VAMP), or synaptobrevin (e.g., 185880), with the presynaptic plasma
membrane proteins syntaxin and SNAP25 (600322). By PCR using
oligonucleotides based on the sequence of rat syntaxin-5, Ravichandran
and Roche (1997) isolated a partial cDNA encoding human syntaxin-5. They
used the partial cDNA to clone a full-length human syntaxin-5 cDNA from
an EBV-transformed lymphocyte cell cDNA library. The predicted 301-amino
acid human protein is 96% identical to rat syntaxin-5. In vitro, human
syntaxin-5 bound efficiently to rat VAMP2 (see SYB2; 185881) but not to
human SNAP25.

To fuse transport vesicles with target membranes, proteins of the SNARE
complex must be located on both the vesicle and the target membrane. In
yeast, 4 integral membrane proteins, Sed5, Bos1, Sec22 (see 604029), and
Bet1 (605456) each are believed to contribute a single helix to form the
SNARE complex that is needed for transport from endoplasmic reticulum to
Golgi. This generates a 4-helix bundle, which ultimately mediates the
actual fusion event. Parlati et al. (2000) explored how the anchoring
arrangement of the 4 helices affects their ability to mediate fusion.
Parlati et al. (2000) reconstituted 2 populations of phospholipid
bilayer vesicles, with the individual SNARE proteins distributed in all
possible combinations between them. Of the 8 nonredundant permutations
of 4 subunits distributed over 2 vesicle populations, only 1 resulted in
membrane fusion. Fusion occurred only when the v-SNARE Bet1 is on 1
membrane and the syntaxin heavy chain Sed5 and its 2 light chains, Bos1
and Sec22, are on the other membrane, where they form a functional
t-SNARE. Thus, each SNARE protein is topologically restricted by design
to function either as a v-SNARE or as part of a t-SNARE complex.

Windpassinger et al. (2003) observed that Human Genome Project sequence
data indicated that the STX5A gene is located on 11q12-q14, the region
to which the locus for Silver spastic paraplegia syndrome (270685) had
been mapped. They excluded STX5A as the mutant gene, as no mutations
were found on sequence analysis of at least 2 affected individuals from
each of 4 different families and 1 healthy control.

REFERENCE 1. Parlati, F.; McNew, J. A.; Fukuda, R.; Miller, R.; Sollner, T.
H.; Rothman, J. E.: Topological restriction of SNARE-dependent membrane
fusion. Nature 407: 194-198, 2000.

2. Ravichandran, V.; Roche, P. A.: Cloning and identification of
human syntaxin 5 as a synaptobrevin/VAMP binding protein. J. Molec.
Neurosci. 8: 159-161, 1997.

3. Windpassinger, C.; Wagner, K.; Petek, E.; Fischer, R.; Auer-Grumbach,
M.: Refinement of the 'Silver syndrome locus' on chromosome 11q12-q14
in four families and exclusion of eight candidate genes. Hum. Genet. 114:
99-109, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/9/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/13/2000

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 10/22/1998

EDITED mgross: 01/03/2011
tkritzer: 12/16/2003
terry: 12/9/2003
mgross: 12/6/2000
alopez: 9/13/2000
psherman: 10/26/1998
psherman: 10/23/1998
psherman: 10/22/1998

606756	TITLE *606756 17-@BETA-HYDROXYSTEROID DEHYDROGENASE VII; HSD17B7
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

HSD17B7 encodes an enzyme that functions both as a
17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.62) in the biosynthesis
of sex steroids and as a 3-ketosteroid reductase (EC 1.1.1.270) in the
biosynthesis of cholesterol (Marijanovic et al., 2003).

CLONING

By EST database screening with mouse Hsd17b7 as the probe, followed by
PCR of an ovary cDNA library, Krazeisen et al. (1999) isolated a cDNA
encoding HSD17B7. The deduced 341-amino acid protein is approximately
75% identical to the rodent proteins. It contains a 28-residue insert
that forms a superficial loop close to the transmembrane domain. This
loop is a candidate prolactin receptor (PRLR; 176761)-binding domain.
RT-PCR detected wide and variable expression, with highest levels in
placenta and a hepatoma cell line and lowest levels in testis and
thymus. No expression was detected in leukocytes and spleen.

Marijanovic et al. (2003) showed that fluorescence-tagged HSD17B7
localized to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of transfected HeLa and
NIH3T3 cells, and that it required a C-terminal sequence for ER
localization. In situ hybridization showed that mouse Hsd17b7
colocalized with the rate-limiting enzyme in sterol biogenesis, HMG-CoA
reductase (HMGCR; 142910), in a wide range of tissues during embryonic
development. It did not colocalized with the estrogenic enzyme Hsd17b1
(109684). Orthologs of HSD17B7 were detected in all organisms capable of
de novo cholesterol biosynthesis.

By searching for orthologs of mouse 17Hsd7, followed by RT-PCR of
granulosa luteal cells, 3-prime RACE, and screening a placenta cDNA
library, Torn et al. (2003) cloned human HSD17B7, which they called
17HSD7. RNA dot blot analysis revealed abundant expression in adrenal
gland and in adult and fetal liver, lung, and thymus. Lower expression
was detected in adult pituitary gland, prostate, kidney, lymph node,
small intestine, and trachea, with very little expression in other
tissues. RT-PCR of eye ciliary epithelial cell and neuroendocrine cell
mRNA revealed a splice variant lacking exon 6. This transcript was
predicted to encode an HSD17B7 isoform lacking the putative
transmembrane region of the full-length protein. Following expression in
insect cells, full-length human HSD17B7 had an apparent molecular mass
of 35.5 kD by Western blot analysis.

By in situ hybridization, Shehu et al. (2008) found that Hsd17b7 was
expressed in embryonic mouse brain, heart, eye, and ear.
Immunohistochemical analysis of mouse placenta showed that Hsd17b7 was
expressed in ectoplacental cone, spongiotrophoblast, giant cells, and
maternal deciduas.

GENE FUNCTION

Endogenous squalene is converted to cholesterol via a multistep
multienzyme process. Based on its similarity to the yeast 3-ketosteroid
reductase Erg27, HSD17B7 was predicted to function in this pathway by
converting the cholesterol intermediate zymosterone into zymosterol.
Marijanovic et al. (2003) showed that recombinant mouse and human
HSD17B7 performed this reaction in vitro using NADPH as cofactor.
HSD17B7 also rescued yeast defective in Erg27 in complementation assays.

By assaying human HSD17B7 expressed by insect cells, Torn et al. (2003)
showed that the enzyme catalyzed only reductive reactions. It
efficiently catalyzed the conversion of estrone to estradiol and was
equally efficient in the conversion of dihydrotestosterone to the
estrogenic metabolite 5-alpha-androstane-3-beta,17-beta-diol, thus
showing the ability to reduce the keto group at both the 17 and 3
positions. HSD17B7 showed moderate inactivating 3-beta reductase
activity against progesterone and 20-hydroxyprogesterone. In contrast,
the mouse enzyme only efficiently catalyzed the conversion of estrone to
estradiol. The short isoform of human HSD17B7 was inactive in these
assays.

GENE STRUCTURE

Krazeisen et al. (1999) determined that the HSD17B7 gene contains 9
exons and spans approximately 22 kb. Promoter sequence analysis
identified lymphoid- and brain-specific transcription factor-binding
sites but no steroid-responsive elements, implying that an endocrine
regulatory effect observed on Hsd17b7 in mouse may be indirect.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Marijanovic et al. (2003) and Torn et al.
(2003) independently mapped the HSD17B7 gene to chromosome 1q23. They
identified HSD17B7 pseudogenes on chromosomes 1q44 and 10p11.2.

ANIMAL MODEL

Shehu et al. (2008) found that Hsd17b7 +/- mice appeared normal and
healthy and showed normal fertility. However, breeding of Hsd17b7 +/-
animals yielded no viable Hsd17b7 -/- offspring. Hsd17b7 -/- embryos
died by embryonic day 10.5 with severe brain malformation and heart
defects. At embryonic day 10.5, brain defects included marked
underdevelopment and reduced size and volume in the forebrain and
midbrain, and the boundaries between these regions were poorly defined
compared with wildtype. Heart defects in Hsd17b7 -/- embryos included
lack of heartbeat, lack of blood in the heart, and pericardial effusion.
Lack of vascularization was also seen in both the fetus and yolk sac.

Independently, Jokela et al. (2010) found that embryonic lethality in
Hsd17b7 -/- mice was associated with defects in the heart and central
nervous system. They reported reduced complexity of vasculature,
particularly in the head capillary plexus and branchial arches. Heart
development in Hsd17b7 -/- embryos initiated normally, but by embryonic
day 10.5 the heart was dilated, the thickness of the cardiac muscle and
pericardium was markedly reduced, the septum and atrium were abnormal,
and there was reduced number of myocardial cells.

REFERENCE 1. Jokela, H.; Rantakari, P.; Lamminen, T.; Strauss, L.; Ola, R.;
Mutka, A.-L.; Gylling, H.; Miettinen, T.; Pakarinen, P.; Sainio, K.;
Poutanen, M.: Hydroxysteroid (17-beta) dehydrogenase 7 activity is
essential for fetal de novo cholesterol synthesis and for neuroectodermal
survival and cardiovascular differentiation in early mouse embryos. Endocrinology 151:
1884-1892, 2010.

2. Krazeisen, A.; Breitling, R.; Imai, K.; Fritz, S.; Moller, G.;
Adamski, J.: Determination of cDNA, gene structure and chromosomal
localization of the novel human 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase
type 7. FEBS Lett. 460: 373-379, 1999.

3. Marijanovic, Z.; Laubner, D.; Moller, G.; Gege, C.; Husen, B.;
Adamski, J.; Breitling, R.: Closing the gap: identification of human
3-ketosteroid reductase, the last unknown enzyme of mammalian cholesterol
biosynthesis. Molec. Endocr. 17: 1715-1725, 2003.

4. Shehu, A.; Mao, J.; Gibori, G. B.; Halperin, J.; Le, J.; Devi,
S.; Merrill, B.; Kiyokawa, H.; Gibori, G.: Prolactin receptor-associated
protein/17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 7 gene (Hsd17b7)
plays a crucial role in embryonic development and fetal survival. Molec.
Endocr. 22: 2268-2277, 2008. Note: Erratum: Molec. Endocr. 22: 2766
only, 2008.

5. Torn, S.; Nokelainen, P.; Kurkela, R.; Pulkka, A.; Menjivar, M.;
Ghosh, S.; Coca-Prados, M.; Peltoketo, H.; Isomaa, V.; Vihko, P.:
Production, purification, and functional analysis of recombinant human
and mouse 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 7. Biochem. Biophys.
Res. Commun. 305: 37-45, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/4/2010

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 3/7/2002

EDITED terry: 07/27/2012
mgross: 5/5/2010
mgross: 5/4/2010
mgross: 3/7/2002

123812	TITLE *123812 cAMP RESPONSE ELEMENT MODULATOR; CREM
INDUCIBLE cAMP EARLY REPRESSOR, INCLUDED; ICER, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CREM is a multiexonic gene that encodes both activators and antagonists
of cAMP-inducible transcription by differential splicing. Splice
variants with antagonistic function lack 2 glutamine-rich domains and
block cAMP-induced transcription, whereas an isoform that includes these
glutamine-rich domains is a transcriptional activator (Molina et al.,
1993).

CLONING

From a mouse pituitary cDNA library, Foulkes et al. (1991) isolated a
protein highly homologous to nuclear factor CREB (123810), an activator
of cAMP-responsive promoter elements (CREs). Unlike CREB, which is
expressed uniformly in several cell types, the CREM gene showed
cell-specific expression. Downstream of the stop codon was a second
out-of-frame DNA-binding domain. Foulkes et al. (1991) identified 3 mRNA
isoforms that appeared to be formed through differential cell-specific
splicing. In contrast to CREB, CREM acts as a down-regulator of
cAMP-induced transcription.

Masquilier et al. (1993) showed conservation of CREM sequences in the
pig, chicken, lemur, and Xenopus. They cloned the full-length human CREM
cDNA sequence and demonstrated that it has a high degree of identity
with the mouse gene. They showed, furthermore, conservation of CREM
cyclic AMP transcriptional inducibility in humans.

Molina et al. (1993) identified a splice variant of CREM that is induced
by activation of the adenylyl cyclase signal transduction pathway. This
isoform, which they called 'inducible cAMP early repressor' (ICER), is
generated by induction of an internal promoter. Because ICER contains
the DNA-binding domain without the transactivation domain of other CREM
variants, it serves as a dominant-negative repressor of cAMP-induced
transcription.

GENE FUNCTION

Using EMSA analysis, Solomou et al. (2001) showed that while stimulated
T cells from normal individuals had increased binding of phosphorylated
CREB to the -180 site of the interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680) promoter,
nearly all stimulated T cells from systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE;
152700) patients had increased binding primarily of phosphorylated CREM
at this site and to the transcriptional coactivators CREBBP (600140) and
EP300 (602700). Increased expression of phosphorylated CREM correlated
with decreased production of IL2. Solomou et al. (2001) concluded that
transcriptional repression is responsible for the decreased production
of IL2 and anergy in SLE T cells.

ACT (FHL5; 605126) is expressed exclusively in round spermatids, where
it cooperates with transcriptional activator CREM in regulating various
postmeiotic genes. Targeted inactivation of CREM leads to a complete
block of mouse spermiogenesis. Macho et al. (2002) sought to identify
the regulatory steps controlling the functional interplay between CREM
and ACT. They found that ACT selectively associates with KIF17b (see
605037), a kinesin isoform highly expressed in male germ cells. The
ACT-KIF17b interaction is restricted to specific stages of
spermatogenesis and directly determines the intracellular localization
of ACT. Sensitivity to leptomycin B indicates that KIF17b can be
actively exported from the nucleus through the CRM1 receptor (602559).
Thus, Macho et al. (2002) concluded that a kinesin directly controls the
activity of a transcriptional coactivator by a tight regulation of its
intracellular localization.

Tomita et al. (2003) examined the expression and effects of ICER in
neonatal rat cardiac myocytes. They demonstrated that ICER is rapidly
upregulated by stimulation of the beta-adrenergic receptor in cardiac
myocytes and works as a negative regulator of hypertrophy as well as a
positive mediator of apoptosis.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, Masquilier et al. (1993) demonstrated that the
murine Crem gene is on chromosome 18; in the human, the gene was mapped
by in situ hybridization to 10p12.1-p11.1 with a peak of distribution in
the p11.2 band, and with a smaller secondary hybridization peak detected
on 2q34.

ANIMAL MODEL

Spermiogenesis is a complex process by which postmeiotic male germ cells
differentiate into mature spermatozoa. This process involves remarkable
structural and biochemical changes including nuclear DNA compaction and
acrosome formation. The transcriptional activator CREM is highly
expressed in postmeiotic cells and CREM may be responsible for the
activation of several haploid germ cell-specific genes involved in the
structuring of the spermatozoon. The specific role of CREM in
spermiogenesis was addressed by Nantel et al. (1996) using
CREM-deficient mice generated by homologous recombination. Analysis of
the seminiferous epithelium in mutant male mice revealed postmeiotic
arrest at the first step of spermiogenesis. Late spermatids were
completely absent, and there was a significant increase in apoptotic
germ cells. They showed that CREM deficiency results in the lack of
postmeiotic cell-specific gene expression. The complete lack of
spermatozoa in the mutant mice was reminiscent of cases of human
infertility. About one-third of infertile men fall into the category of
idiopathic infertility, i.e., they suffer from deficient spermatogenesis
even though gonadotropic and androgenic hormone secretion are not
subnormal.

Simultaneously and independently, Blendy et al. (1996) likewise observed
severe impairment of spermatogenesis in mice in whom the CREM gene had
been eliminated by gene targeting. Spermatids failed to differentiate
into sperm and postmeiotic gene expression in the testis declined
dramatically. The cessation of sperm development was not accompanied by
decreases in the levels of follicle-stimulating hormone or testosterone.

REFERENCE 1. Blendy, J. A.; Kaestner, K. H.; Weinbauer, G. F.; Nieschlag, E.;
Schutz, G.: Severe impairment of spermatogenesis in mice lacking
the CREM gene. Nature 380: 162-165, 1996.

2. Foulkes, N. S.; Borrelli, E.; Sassone-Corsi, P.: CREM gene: use
of alternative DNA-binding domains generates multiple antagonists
of cAMP-induced transcription. Cell 64: 739-749, 1991.

3. Macho, B.; Brancorsini, S.; Fimia, G. M.; Setou, M.; Hirokawa,
N.; Sassone-Corsi, P.: CREM-dependent transcription in male germ
cells controlled by a kinesin. Science 298: 2388-2390, 2002.

4. Masquilier, D.; Foulkes, N. S.; Mattei, M.-G.; Sassone-Corsi, P.
: Human CREM gene: evolutionary conservation, chromosomal localization,
and inducibility of the transcript. Cell Growth Differ. 4: 931-937,
1993.

5. Molina, C. A.; Foulkes, N. S.; Lalli, E.; Sassone-Corsi, P.: Inducibility
and negative autoregulation of CREM: an alternative promoter directs
the expression of ICER, an early response repressor. Cell 75: 875-886,
1993.

6. Nantel, F.; Monaco, L.; Foulkes, N. S.; Masquilier, D.; LeMeur,
M.; Henriksen, K.; Dierich, A.; Parvinen, M.; Sassone-Corsi, P.:
Spermiogenesis deficiency and germ-cell apoptosis in CREM-mutant mice. Nature 380:
159-162, 1996.

7. Solomou, E. E.; Juang, Y.-T.; Gourley, M. F.; Kammer, G. M.; Tsokos,
G. C.: Molecular basis of deficient IL-2 production in T cells from
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. J. Immun. 166: 4216-4222,
2001.

8. Tomita, H.; Nazmy, M.; Kajimoto, K.; Yehia, G.; Molina, C. A.;
Sadoshima, J.: Inducible cAMP early repressor (ICER) is a negative-feedback
regulator of cardiac hypertrophy and an important mediator of cardiac
myocyte apoptosis in response to beta-adrenergic receptor stimulation. Circ.
Res. 93: 12-22, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/15/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/1/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/2/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 4/27/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/12/1991

EDITED carol: 12/19/2012
mgross: 3/31/2004
joanna: 3/17/2004
terry: 3/15/2004
carol: 3/1/2004
alopez: 4/2/2003
terry: 4/2/2003
carol: 11/7/2001
mgross: 4/27/2001
psherman: 2/2/1999
dkim: 12/8/1998
dkim: 10/28/1998
terry: 5/2/1996
mark: 3/14/1996
terry: 3/13/1996
carol: 12/20/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 3/12/1991

138350	TITLE *138350 GLUTATHIONE S-TRANSFERASE, MU-1; GSTM1
;;GLUTATHIONE S-TRANSFERASE M1;;
GLUTATHIONE TRANSFERASE, CLASS MU, 1;;
GST1;;
LIVER AND FIBROBLAST GST1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The glutathione S-transferases (GST; EC 2.5.1.18) are a family of
enzymes responsible for the metabolism of a broad range of xenobiotics
and carcinogens (Mannervik, 1985). This enzyme catalyzes the reaction of
glutathione with a wide variety of organic compounds to form thioethers,
a reaction that is sometimes a first step in a detoxification process
leading to mercapturic acid formation.

Based on amino acid sequence similarities and antibody
cross-reactivities, the mammalian cytosolic GSTs are divided into
several classes, including alpha (e.g., 138359), mu, kappa (602321),
theta (e.g., 600436), pi (134660), omega (605482), and zeta (603758). In
addition, there is a class of microsomal GSTs (e.g., 138330). Each class
is encoded by a single gene or a gene family.

CLONING

Board (1981) showed that the most active GSTs of liver are the products
of 2 autosomal loci, GST1 (GSTM1) and GST2 (GSTA2; 138360), both of
which are polymorphic.

Strange et al. (1984) reported that GST1 is easily demonstrable in adult
liver, kidney, adrenal and stomach but is only weakly expressed in
skeletal and cardiac muscle and not at all in fetal liver, fibroblasts,
erythrocytes, lymphocytes and platelets. GST2 is not detectable in the
last 4 tissues but is found in many other tissues including fetal liver.
GST3 (GSTP1; 134660) is found in every tissue except adult liver.

DeJong et al. (1988) isolated a cDNA clone that encodes a human liver
GST H(b) subunit representing GST1.

MAPPING

By in situ hybridization, DeJong et al. (1988) mapped the GST1 gene to
chromosome 1p31. Zhong et al. (1992) used oligonucleotide primers
specific for intron 5 sequences in the GSTM1 gene to amplify a unique
718-bp fragment. They confirmed the assignment to 1p by analysis of DNA
from a panel of somatic cell hybrids and refined the localization to
1p13 by linkage analysis in 3-generation CEPH families.

Pearson et al. (1993) used locus-specific PCR primer pairs spanning exon
6, intron 6, and exon 7 as probes on DNA from human/hamster somatic cell
hybrids to map 5 glutathione transferase genes to chromosome 1: GSTM1,
GSTM2 (138380), GSTM3 (138390), GSTM4 (138333), and GSTM5 (138385). For
GSTM1, the assignment was confirmed by Southern blot hybridization. The
organization of the 5 genes was confirmed by the isolation of a YAC
clone that contained all 5. With this clone, the location of this
cluster on chromosome 1 was confirmed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization and regionalized to a point in or near 1p13.3. Xu et al.
(1998) reported that 4 mu GST genes are tightly clustered. These genes
are spaced approximately 20 kb apart and are arranged in the following
order: 5-prime--GSTM4--GSTM2--GSTM1--GSTM5--3-prime.

Islam et al. (1989) mapped a GST mu gene to human chromosome 3 (138385).

NOMENCLATURE

Mannervik et al. (1992) gave recommendations on nomenclature for human
glutathione transferases.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Data on gene frequencies of allelic variants were tabulated by
Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

A null allele at the GSTM1 locus has a high frequency of about 0.7
(Board et al., 1990). The GST1 null phenotype has a frequency of greater
than 50% among Caucasian, Chinese, and Indian populations (Board, 1981;
Board et al., 1990).

The GSTM1 null phenotype appears to be caused by the deletion of the
GSTM1 gene (Seidegard et al., 1988, 1990).

The close physical proximity of the GSTM1 and GSTM2 loci, which share
99% nucleotide sequence identity over 460 nucleotides of 3-prime
untranslated mRNA, suggested to Pearson et al. (1993) that the GSTM1
null allele may result from unequal crossing-over. Xu et al. (1998)
constructed a partial physical map of the GST gene cluster on 1p13.3 and
localized the end points of the GSTM1 deletion. The same deletion was
found in 13 unrelated individuals (20 null alleles) examined.

In a study of liver specimens from 168 autopsies in Japanese
individuals, Harada et al. (1987) found that the null allele of GST1 was
more frequent in livers with hepatitis and carcinoma than in control
livers. This supported the notion of Board (1981) that individuals with
the null allele are exposed to elevated levels of certain electrophilic
carcinogens.

GSTM1 deficiency may be a risk factor for cancer by providing increased
sensitivity to particular chemical carcinogens (Strange et al., 1991;
van Poppel et al., 1992). Seidegard et al. (1986, 1990) found an
association between the GSTM1 null phenotype and susceptibility to lung
cancer.

Zhong et al. (1993) found a significant excess of GSTM1 null individuals
among cases of colorectal cancer: 56.1% compared with the control group
value of 41.8%. More than 70% of individuals with a tumor in the
proximal colon were GSTM1 null.

Chen et al. (1996) described a method for simultaneous characterization
of GSTM1 and GSTT1 (600436) and studied the genotypes in whites and
blacks. The frequency of the null genotype for GSTM1 (GSTM1-) was higher
in whites and that for GSTT1- was higher in blacks. The observed
frequency of the 'double null' genotype was not significantly different
from that predicted, assuming that the 2 polymorphisms are independent
and did not differ by race or sex.

McLellan et al. (1997) found that 2 Saudi Arabian individuals with
ultrarapid GSTM1 enzyme activity were heterozygous for a tandem GSTM1
gene duplication. They suggested that the duplication was generated as
the reciprocal product of the homologous unequal crossing-over event
that produces the null allele.

The formation of DNA and protein adducts by environmental pollutants is
modulated by host polymorphisms in genes that encode metabolizing
enzymes. In a study of 67 smokers, Godschalk et al. (2001) studied
aromatic-DNA adduct levels in relation to polymorphisms in GSTM1, GSTT1,
and NAT1 (108345) and NAT2 (612182). Adjusted for the amount of
cigarettes smoked per day, DNA adduct levels were higher in GSTM1 null
individuals than in GSTM1+ subjects; higher in NAT1 slow acetylators
than in NAT1 fast acetylators; and associated with the NAT2 acetylator
status for slow or fast acetylators. Highest DNA adduct levels were
observed in slow acetylators for both NAT1 and NAT2 who also lacked the
GSTM1 gene, and lowest in GSTM1+ subjects with the fast acetylator
genotype for both NAT1 and NAT2. The results showed the combined effects
of genetic polymorphisms at these 4 loci and indicated that, due to the
complex carcinogen exposure, simultaneous assessment of multiple
genotypes may identify individuals at higher cancer risk.

Patients with reduced ability to metabolize environmental carcinogens or
toxins may be at risk of developing aplastic anemia. GST has been
implicated in detoxifying mutagenic electrophilic compounds. Lee et al.
(2001) investigated whether homozygous deletions of GSTM1 and GSTT1
affect the likelihood of developing aplastic anemia. They found that the
incidence of GSTM1 and GSTT1 gene deletions was significantly higher for
aplastic anemia patients than for healthy controls (odds ratio = 3.1, p
= 0.01, and odds ratio = 3.1, p = 0.004, respectively). Among the
aplastic anemia patients, 17.5% had chromosomal abnormalities at the
time of diagnosis, and all aplastic anemia patients with chromosomal
abnormalities showed GSTT1 gene deletions.

Carless et al. (2002) examined the role of GSTM1, GSTT1, GSTP1 (134660),
and GSTZ1 (603758) gene polymorphisms in susceptibility to solar
keratoses development. Using DNA samples from volunteers involved in the
Nambour Skin Cancer Prevention Trial, allele and genotype frequencies
were determined. No significant differences were detected in GSTP1 or
GSTZ1 allele or genotype frequencies; however, a significant association
between GSTM1 genotypes and solar keratoses development was detected,
with null individuals having an approximate 2-fold increase in risk for
solar keratoses development and a significantly higher increase in risk
in conjunction with high outdoor exposure. Also, a difference in GSTT1
genotype frequencies was detected, although considering that multiple
testing was undertaken, this was found not to be significant. Fair skin
and inability to tan were found to be highly significant risk factors
for solar keratoses development, with odds ratios of 18.5 (CI, 5.7-59.9)
and 7.4 (CI, 2.6-21.0), respectively. Overall, GSTM1 conferred a
significant increase in risk of solar keratoses development,
particularly in the presence of high outdoor exposure and
synergistically with phenotypic risk factors of fair skin and inability
to tan.

Lohmueller et al. (2003) performed a metaanalysis of 301 published
genetic association studies covering 25 different reported associations.
For 8 of the associations, pooled analysis of follow-up studies yielded
statistically significant replication of the first report, with modest
estimated genetic effects. One of these 8 associations was that between
GSTM1 and head/neck cancer (275355), as first reported by Trizna et al.
(1995). Head/neck cancer showed association with homozygosity for a null
allele of the GSTM1 gene.

Verlaan et al. (2003) investigated whether polymorphisms in the GSTM1,
GSTT1, and GSTP1 genes modified the risk for chronic pancreatitis
(167800). DNA was studied from 142 adult chronic pancreatitis patients
with alcoholic (79 patients), hereditary (21 patients), or idiopathic
(42 patients) origin. The rates of GSTT1 and GSTP1 genotypes did not
differ between chronic pancreatitis patients and healthy controls;
however, GSTM1 null alleles were significantly less common in alcoholic
chronic pancreatitis patients (odds ratio = 0.56) as compared to healthy
controls and to alcoholic controls. The frequency of the GSTM1 null
genotype was significantly lower in alcoholic chronic pancreatitis
patients, especially young female patients. Thus it appears that GSTM1
null alcohol users are less susceptible to chronic pancreatitis. The
molecular change leading to the GSTM1 null phenotype is a partial gene
deletion. It is associated with complete absence of GSTM1 enzyme
activity. The frequency of the GSTM1 null genotype ranges from 23 to 62%
in different populations around the world and is approximately 50% in
Caucasians, as reviewed by Cotton et al. (2000).

Gilliland et al. (2004) found that GSTM1 and GSTP1 modify the adjuvant
effect of diesel exhaust particles on allergic inflammation. They
challenged ragweed-sensitive patients intranasally with allergen alone
and with allergen plus diesel exhaust particles, and found that
individuals with GSTM1 null or GSTP1 ile105 wildtype genotypes showed
significant increases in IgE and histamine after challenge with diesel
exhaust particles and allergens; the increase was largest in patients
with both the GSTM1 null and GSTP1 ile/ile genotypes.

French et al. (2005) genotyped 126 children with newly diagnosed acute
lymphoblastic leukemia at 16 well-characterized functional
polymorphisms. The GSTM1 null polymorphism was a significant predictor
of global gene expression, dividing patients based on their germline
genotypes. Genes whose expression distinguished the null genotype from
the non-null genotype included NBS1 (602667) and PRKR (176871). Although
GSTM1 expression is concentrated in liver, it is involved in the
conjugation (and thus transport, excretion, and lipophilicity) of a
broad range of endobiotics and xenobiotics, which French et al. (2005)
suggested could plausibly have consequences for gene expression in
different tissues.

Observational studies have provided consistent evidence for a protective
role of vegetable consumption against lung cancer, with the evidence
being most apparent for green cruciferous vegetables such as broccoli
and cabbage. Such vegetables are rich is isothiocyanates, which have
been shown in animals to have strong chemopreventative properties
against lung cancer (Hecht, 1996). In studies of the effect of
cruciferous vegetables, a definite protective effect against any type of
cancer is hard to identify, in view of the small size of studies and
potential for confounding from other dietary sources. Brennan et al.
(2005) addressed the problem of confounding by adopting a mendelian
randomization approach. Isothiocyanates are thought to be eliminated by
glutathione-S-transferase enzymes, most notably GSTM1 and GSTT1
(600430). Both GSTM1 and GSTT1 genes have null alleles with homozygous
null phenotypes, resulting in no enzyme being produced. Individuals who
are homozygous for the inactive form of either or both genes probably
have higher isothiocyanate concentrations because of their reduced
elimination capacity. Furthermore, and implicit in the mendelian
randomization approach, the roles of GSTM1 and GSTT1 genes are likely to
be independent of other dietary or lifestyle factors. To investigate the
role of cruciferous vegetable consumption in the prevention of lung
cancer in interaction with GST genotypes, Brennan et al. (2005)
investigated this relation in a case-control study of 2,141 cases and
2,168 controls in 6 countries of central and eastern Europe, a region
that has traditionally high rates of cruciferous vegetable consumption.
Weekly consumption of cruciferous vegetables protected against lung
cancer in those who were GSTM1-null (odds ratio = 0.67), GSTT1-null
(odds ratio = 0.63), or both (odds ratio = 0.28). No protective effect
was seen in people who were both GSTM1- and GSTT1-positive. Similar
protective results were noted for consumption of cabbage and a
combination of broccoli and brussels sprouts.

Through a genomewide association study, Huang et al. (2009) identified a
significant association between dbSNP rs366631, a single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) approximately 11 kb downstream of the GSTM1 gene, and
GSTM1 expression. Utilizing lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from
International HapMap Consortium CEU and YRI populations, the authors
determined that the dbSNP rs366631 SNP is a nonpolymorphic site. The
false genotyping call arose from sequence homology, a common GSTM1
region deletion, and a non-specific genotyping platform used to identify
the SNP. However, the HapMap call for dbSNP rs366631 genotype is an
indicator of GSTM1 upstream region deletion. Furthermore, this upstream
deletion can be used as a marker of GSTM1 gene deletion. More than 75%
of the Caucasian (CEU) samples exhibited GSTM1 deletion, and none
contained 2 copies of GSTM1. In contrast, up to 25% of African (YRI)
samples were found to have 2 copies of GSTM1. The authors concluded that
dbSNP rs366631 is a pseudo-SNP that can be used as a GSTM1 deletion
marker.

HISTORY

Scott and Wright (1980) found that the amount of GST of red cells, while
homogeneous on electrophoresis, varies more than 6-fold among
individuals. Family studies showed no correlation of levels in husbands
and wives but a strong correlation between the level in children and the
mean level of their parents. They could devise no way to use this enzyme
as a genetic marker.

DeJong et al. (1991) stated that the H(a) or A genes encode the alpha
class proteins, and the H(b) or B genes encode the mu class proteins.
They concluded that the H(b) genes of GST are located on 3 separate
chromosomes: 1, 6, and 13. They suggested that a polymorphic mu GST gene
is probably located on chromosome 13. They suggested further that this
may be a presence/absence polymorphism of a gene created through
retrotransposition.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Strange et al. (1985); Suzuki et al. (1987)
REFERENCE 1. Board, P.; Coggan, M.; Johnston, P.; Ross, V.; Suzuki, T.; Webb,
G.: Genetic heterogeneity of the human glutathione transferases:
a complex of gene families. Pharm. Ther. 48: 357-369, 1990.

2. Board, P. G.: Biochemical genetics of glutathione-S-transferase
in man. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 33: 36-43, 1981.

3. Brennan, P.; Hsu, C. C.; Moullan, N.; Szeszenia-Dabrowska, N.;
Lissowska, J.; Zaridze, D.; Rudnai, P.; Fabianova, E.; Mates, D.;
Bencko, V.; Foretova, L.; Janout, V.; Gemignani, F.; Chabrier, A.;
Hall, J.; Hung, R. J.; Boffetta, P.; Canzian, F.: Effect of cruciferous
vegetables on lung cancer in patients stratified by genetic status:
a mendelian randomisation approach. Lancet 366: 1558-1560, 2005.

4. Carless, M. A.; Lea, R. A.; Curran, J. E.; Appleyard, B.; Gaffney,
P.; Green, A.; Griffiths, L. R.: The GSTM1 null genotype confers
an increased risk for solar keratosis development in an Australian
Caucasian population. J. Invest. Derm. 119: 1373-1378, 2002.

5. Chen, C.-L.; Liu, Q.; Relling, M. V.: Simultaneous characterization
of glutathione S-transferase M1 and T1 polymorphisms by polymerase
chain reaction in American whites and blacks. Pharmacogenetics 6:
187-191, 1996.

6. Cotton, S. C.; Sharp, L.; Little, J.; Brockton, N.: Glutathione
S-transferase polymorphisms and colorectal cancer: a HuGE review. Am.
J. Epidemiol. 151: 7-32, 2000.

7. DeJong, J. L.; Chang, C.-M.; Whang-Peng, J.; Knutsen, T.; Tu, C.-P.
D.: The human liver glutathione S-transferase gene superfamily: expression
and chromosome mapping of an H(b) subunit cDNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 16:
8541-8554, 1988.

8. DeJong, J. L.; Mohandas, T.; Tu, C.-P. D.: The human H(b) (mu)
class glutathione S-transferases are encoded by a dispersed gene family. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 180: 15-22, 1991.

9. French, D.; Wilkinson, M. R.; Yang, W.; de Chaisemartin, L.; Cook,
E. H.; Das, S.; Ratain, M. J.; Evans, W. E.; Downing, J. R.; Pui,
C.-H.; Relling, M. V.: Global gene expression as a function of germline
genetic variation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 1621-1629, 2005.

10. Gilliland, F. D.; Li, Y.-F.; Saxon, A.; Diaz-Sanchez, D.: Effect
of glutathione-S-transferase M1 and P1 genotypes on xenobiotic enhancement
of allergic responses: randomised, placebo-controlled crossover study. Lancet 363:
119-125, 2004.

11. Godschalk, R. W. L.; Dallinga, J. W.; Wikman, H.; Risch, A.; Kleinjans,
J. C. S.; Bartsch, H.; Van Schooten, F.-J.: Modulation of DNA and
protein adducts in smokers by genetic polymorphisms in GSTM1, GSTT1,
NAT1 and NAT2. Pharmacogenetics 11: 389-398, 2001.

12. Harada, S.; Abei, M.; Tanaka, N.; Agarwal, D. P.; Goedde, H. W.
: Liver glutathione S-transferase polymorphism in Japanese and its
pharmacogenetic importance. Hum. Genet. 75: 322-325, 1987.

13. Hecht, S. S.: Chemoprevention of lung cancer by isothiocyanates. Adv.
Exp. Med. Biol. 401: 1-11, 1996.

14. Huang, R. S.; Chen, P.; Wisel, S.; Duan, S.; Zhang, W.; Cook,
E. H.; Das, S.; Cox, N. J.; Dolan, M. E.: Population-specific GSTM1
copy number variation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 366-372, 2009.

15. Islam, M. Q.; Platz, A.; Szpirer, J.; Szpirer, C.; Levan, G.;
Mannervik, B.: Chromosomal localization of human glutathione transferase
genes of classes alpha, mu and pi. Hum. Genet. 82: 338-342, 1989.

16. Lee, K. A.; Kim, S. H.; Woo, H. Y.; Hong, Y. J.; Cho, H. C.:
Increased frequencies of glutathione S-transferase (GSTM1 and GSTT1)
gene deletions in Korean patients with acquired aplastic anemia. Blood 98:
3483-3485, 2001.

17. Lohmueller, K. E.; Pearce, C. L.; Pike, M.; Lander, E. S.; Hirschhorn,
J. N.: Meta-analysis of genetic association studies supports a contribution
of common variants to susceptibility to common disease. Nature Genet. 33:
177-182, 2003.

18. Mannervik, B.: The isozymes of glutathione transferase. Adv.
Enzym. Relat. Areas Molec. Biol. 57: 357-417, 1985.

19. Mannervik, B.; Awasthi, Y. C.; Board, P. G.; Hayes, J. D.; Di
Ilio, C.; Ketterer, B.; Listowsky, I.; Morgenstern, R.; Muramatsu,
M.; Pearson, W. R.; Pickett, C. B.; Sato, K.; Widersten, M.; Wolf,
R. C.: Nomenclature for human glutathione transferases. (Letter) Biochem.
J. 282: 305-306, 1992.

20. McLellan, R. A.; Oscarson, M.; Alexandrie, A.-K.; Seidegard, J.;
Evans, D. A. P.; Rannug, A.; Ingelman-Sundberg, M.: Characterization
of a human glutathione S-transferase mu cluster containing a duplicated
GSTM1 gene that causes ultrarapid enzyme activity. Molec. Pharm. 52:
958-965, 1997.

21. Pearson, W. R.; Vorachek, W. R.; Xu, S.; Berger, R.; Hart, I.;
Vannais, D.; Patterson, D.: Identification of class-mu glutathione
transferase genes GSTM1-GSTM5 on human chromosome 1p13. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 53: 220-233, 1993.

22. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World
Distribution.  New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

23. Scott, E. M.; Wright, R. C.: Variability of glutathione S-transferase
of human erythrocytes. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 32: 115-117, 1980.

24. Seidegard, J.; Pero, R. W.; Markowitz, M. M.; Roush, G.; Miller,
D. G.; Beattie, E. J.: Isoenzyme(s) of glutathione transferase (class
mu) as a marker for the susceptibility to lung cancer: a follow up
study. Carcinogenesis 11: 33-36, 1990.

25. Seidegard, J.; Pero, R. W.; Miller, D. G.; Beattie, E. J.: A
glutathione transferase in human leukocytes as a marker for the susceptibility
to lung cancer. Carcinogenesis 7: 751-753, 1986.

26. Seidegard, J.; Vorachek, W. R.; Pero, R. W.; Pearson, W. R.:
Hereditary differences in the expression of the human glutathione
transferase active on trans-stilbene oxide are due to a gene deletion. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 7293-7297, 1988.

27. Strange, R. C.; Davis, B. A.; Faulder, C. G.; Cotton, W.; Bain,
A. D.; Hopkinson, D. A.; Hume, R.: The human glutathione S-transferases:
developmental aspects of the GST1, GST2, and GST3 loci. Biochem.
Genet. 23: 1011-1028, 1985.

28. Strange, R. C.; Faulder, C. G.; Davis, B. A.; Hume, R.; Brown,
J. A. H.; Cotton, W.; Hopkinson, D. A.: The human glutathione S-transferases:
studies on the tissue distribution and genetic variation of the GST1,
GST2 and GST3 isozymes. Ann. Hum. Genet. 48: 11-20, 1984.

29. Strange, R. C.; Matharoo, B.; Faulder, G. C.; Jones, P.; Cotton,
W.; Elder, J. B.; Deakin, M.: The human glutathione S-transferases:
a case-control study of the incidence of the GST1 0 phenotype in patients
with adenocarcinoma. Carcinogenesis 12: 25-28, 1991.

30. Suzuki, T.; Coggan, M.; Shaw, D. C.; Board, P. G.: Electrophoretic
and immunological analysis of human glutathione S-transferase isozymes. Ann.
Hum. Genet. 51: 95-106, 1987.

31. Trizna, Z.; Clayman, G. L.; Spitz, M. R.; Briggs, K. L.; Goepfert,
H.: Glutathione S-transferase genotypes as risk factors for head
and neck cancer. Am. J. Surg. 170: 499-501, 1995.

32. van Poppel, G.; de Vogel, N.; van Bladeren, P. J.; Kok, F. J.
: Increased cytogenetic damage in smokers deficient in glutathione
S-transferase isozyme mu. Carcinogenesis 13: 303-305, 1992.

33. Verlaan, M.; te Morsche, R. H. M.; Roelofs, H. M. J.; Laheij,
R. J. F.; Jansen, J. B. M. J.; Peters, W. H. M.; Drenth, J. P. H.
: Glutathione S-transferase mu null genotype affords protection against
alcohol induced chronic pancreatitis. Am. J. Med. Genet. 120A: 34-39,
2003.

34. Xu, S.; Wang, Y.; Roe, B.; Pearson, W. R.: Characterization of
the human class mu glutathione S-transferase gene cluster and the
GSTM1 deletion. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 3517-3527, 1998.

35. Zhong, S.; Wolf, C. R.; Spurr, N. K.: Chromosomal assignment
and linkage analysis of the human glutathione S-transferase mu-gene
(GSTM1) using intron specific polymerase chain reaction. Hum. Genet. 90:
435-439, 1992.

36. Zhong, S.; Wyllie, A. H.; Barnes, D.; Wolf, C. R.; Spurr, N. K.
: Relationship between the GSTM1 genetic polymorphism and susceptibility
to bladder, breast and colon cancer. Carcinogenesis 14: 1821-1824,
1993.

CONTRIBUTORS George E. Tiller - updated: 4/16/2009
Carol A. Bocchini - reorganized: 9/18/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/16/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/8/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/7/2004
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/5/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/23/2003
Gary A. Bellus - updated: 5/1/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/30/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/10/2001
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 6/17/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED terry: 05/20/2010
alopez: 4/16/2009
terry: 9/24/2008
carol: 9/23/2008
carol: 9/18/2008
mgross: 7/17/2008
wwang: 6/19/2008
terry: 6/16/2008
alopez: 6/12/2006
terry: 6/8/2006
mgross: 1/21/2005
alopez: 12/10/2004
terry: 12/7/2004
carol: 2/5/2004
cwells: 6/26/2003
terry: 6/23/2003
alopez: 5/1/2003
alopez: 1/31/2003
terry: 1/30/2003
tkritzer: 8/16/2002
tkritzer: 8/15/2002
terry: 8/9/2002
alopez: 9/14/2001
terry: 9/10/2001
alopez: 4/21/1999
dkim: 12/16/1998
terry: 8/7/1998
psherman: 6/18/1998
psherman: 6/17/1998
psherman: 6/2/1998
psherman: 5/19/1998
alopez: 2/6/1998
jenny: 7/2/1997
jenny: 7/1/1997
mimadm: 5/17/1994
carol: 5/11/1994
pfoster: 2/18/1994
carol: 12/22/1993
carol: 10/20/1993
carol: 10/13/1993

110600	TITLE +110600 ADP-RIBOSYLTRANSFERASE 4; ART4
BLOOD GROUP--DOMBROCK SYSTEM, INCLUDED; DO, INCLUDED;;
DOMBROCK BLOOD GROUP, INCLUDED;;
DOK1, INCLUDED;;
DOMBROCK-NULL PHENOTYPE, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mono-ADP-ribosylation is a posttranslational protein modification that
involves the transfer of the ADP-ribose moiety from NAD+ to a specific
amino acid in the target protein. This modification helps regulate
cellular metabolism in prokaryotes and is the mechanism by which some
bacterial toxins function. The rodent T-cell alloantigen RT6 has
structural homology to prokaryotic ADP-ribosylation proteins and
possesses mono-ADP-ribosyltransferase enzyme activity. By searching an
EST database with the deduced protein sequences of ART1 (601625) and
ART2P (see ART1), both of which are homologous to RT6, Koch-Nolte et al.
(1997) identified human cDNAs encoding ART3 (603086) and ART4. They
isolated the corresponding genes from P1 and PAC1 genomic clones by PCR
using EST-derived primers. Southern blot analysis demonstrated that
human ART4 is a single-copy gene which has homologs in other primates
and in mouse. Northern blot analysis detected prominent ART4 transcripts
of 1.4 kb, 2.4 kb, and 5.5 kb only in spleen, or T-cell, RNA. The
predicted ART3 and ART4 proteins contain structural motifs similar to
those in ADP-ribosylating toxins, and hydrophobic N-terminal and
C-terminal signal peptides characteristic of
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI)-anchored cell membrane proteins;
unlike ART3, ART4 does not contain a repeated motif at the C terminus.
Koch-Nolte et al. (1997) reported that ART1 is the closest known family
member of ART4, with 39% amino acid sequence identity.

Gubin et al. (2000) provided the first molecular description of the
Dombrock blood group system. A candidate gene was identified by in
silico analyses of approximately 5,000 ESTs from terminally
differentiating human erythroid cells. Transfection experiments
demonstrated specific binding of anti-Dombrock and confirmed
glycosylphosphatidylinositol membrane attachment. Dombrock expression is
developmentally regulated during erythroid differentiation and occurs at
highest levels in fetal liver. Homology studies suggested that the
Dombrock molecule is a member of the adenosine 5-prime-diphosphate
(ADP)-ribosyltransferase ectoenzyme gene family. The ART4 gene encodes a
predicted 314-amino acid polypeptide containing an
arginine-glycine-aspartic acid (RGD) motif (DO*B allele product only),
commonly involved in cell-to-cell interactions involving integrin
binding and the GPI anchor motif. Gubin et al. (2000) stated that
although the identity of DO to ART4 had been established, enzymatic
activity has not been demonstrated in any cell type, including erythroid
cells.

POPULATION GENETICS

About 64% of northern Europeans are DO(a+) (Swanson et al., 1965).

GENE STRUCTURE

A comparison of the genomic and cDNA sequences of ART4 by Koch-Nolte et
al. (1997) revealed a conserved exon/intron structure, with an unusually
large exon encoding the mature protein.

The ART4 gene contains 3 exons spanning 14 kb (Gubin et al., 2000).

MAPPING

Lewis et al. (1983) reported evidence of linkage of DO and PGD (172200)
on chromosome 1, but data presented by Mohr et al. (1985) appeared to
negate this assignment of DO. In a linkage study of 832 families from
the Copenhagen region, Eiberg and Mohr (1996) found a strong indication
of tight linkage of DO with 2 flanking DNA polymorphisms, D12S358 and
D12S364. They thus assigned the DO locus to 12p13.2-p12.1.

By PCR screening of human/rodent somatic cell hybrids and by in situ
hybridization, Koch-Nolte et al. (1997) mapped the ART4 gene to
12p13.1-p12.2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Genotypic comparisons performed by Gubin et al. (2000) suggested that
Do(a) versus Do(b) antigenicity results from a single amino acid
substitution within an encoded RGD motif of the DO molecule; see
110600.0001.

The antithetical Dombrock antigens Do(a)/Do(b) also carry 3
high-incidence antigens: Gregory, Gy(a); Holley, Hy; and Joseph, Jo(a)
(Lucien et al., 2002). The Holley polymorphisms derive from a DO*B
background. The rare Dombrock-null phenotype, in which the RBCs lack all
5 antigens, may arise from a single nucleotide mutation in the acceptor
splice site of intron 1, causing the skipping of exon 2 (110600.0002)
(Rios et al., 2001) or from the absence of GPI-anchored proteins on RBCs
from patients with paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinemia (PNH; 300818). In
all cases, negative and null phenotypes can develop anti-Dombrock
antibodies that may cause severe hemolytic transfusion reactions
(Halverson et al., 1994; Strupp et al., 1998).

Rios et al. (2002) studied 2 probands in whom RBCs with the
Dombrock-null phenotype lacked all antigens in the Dombrock blood group
system. Sequence analysis of DNA from 1 proband with the Dombrock null
phenotype revealed a T-to-C mutation (110600.0004) with outsplicing of
exon 2. The second proband was homozygous for a 442C-T mutation
(110600.0005) in exon 2.

Lucien et al. (2002) identified an 8-bp deletion (110600.0003) in the
ART4 gene in a woman with the DO-null phenotype.

Data on gene frequencies of allelic variants were tabulated by
Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

Telen (1996) reviewed erythrocyte blood group antigens that represent
polymorphisms of functionally important molecules.

HISTORY

The Dombrock blood group was named for a transfused patient, Mrs.
Dombrock, in whom anti-Do(a) was detected.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
DOMBROCK BLOOD GROUP
ART4, ASN265ASP

Gubin et al. (2000) studied 8 blood donors of defined serology, i.e., 4
Do(a+b-) and 4 Do(a-b+), and determined the sequence of the coding
region of DO. Three SNP sites were identified. While 2 SNPs did not
alter the predicted amino acid primary structure, the third predicted a
mutation in the protein sequence, asn265 to asp (N265D). This SNP fell
within an RGD adhesion motif of the molecule.

.0002
DOMBROCK-NULL PHENOTYPE
ART4, IVS1AS, A-G, -2

Rios et al. (2001) identified an A-to-G mutation in the 3-prime splice
site of intron 1 of the ART4 gene in 3 probands with the Dombrock-null
phenotype.

.0003
DOMBROCK-NULL PHENOTYPE
ART4, 8-BP DEL, NT343

Lucien et al. (2002) identified a novel alteration of the blood group
DO*A allele in a female DO-null donor from Reunion Island with
allo-anti-DO3 in her serum; her parents were consanguineous. The only
deviation from the wildtype DO*A allele sequence was an 8-bp
(nucleotides 343-350) deletion within exon 2. This short deletion
generated a premature stop codon and encoded a truncated protein lacking
the predicted functional motif of the ADP-ribosyltransferase enzyme and
the glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor motif essential for RBC membrane
attachment. An allele-specific PCR to detect the DO(del8) deletion was
developed.

.0004
DOMBROCK-NULL PHENOTYPE
ART4, IVS1DS, T-C, +2

Rios et al. (2002) described the Dombrock null phenotype in a proband
with a T-to-C substitution in the donor splice site of the ART4 gene,
resulting in outsplicing of exon 2.

.0005
DOMBROCK-NULL PHENOTYPE
ART4, GLN148TER

In a proband with the Dombrock-null phenotype, Rios et al. (2002) found
homozygosity for a 442C-T mutation in exon 2 of the ART4 gene, resulting
in a premature stop codon, gln148 to ter (Q148X).

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Bailly et al. (2001); Lewis et al. (1978); Molthan et al. (1973);
Polesky and Swanson (1966); Williams and Crawford (1966)
REFERENCE 1. Bailly, P.; Lucien, N.; Celton, J. L.; Le Pennec, P. Y.; Cartron,
J. P.: A short deletion within the blood group Dombrock locus causing
a Do(null) phenotype. (Abstract) Transfusion Clinique et Biologique 8:
167s only, 2001.

2. Eiberg, H.; Mohr, J.: Dombrock blood group (DO): assignment to
chromosome 12p. Hum. Genet. 98: 518-521, 1996.

3. Gubin, A. N.; Njoroge, J. M.; Wojda, U.; Pack, S. D.; Rios, M.;
Reid, M. E.; Miller, J. L.: Identification of the Dombrock blood
group glycoprotein as a polymorphic member of the ADP-ribosyltransferase
gene family. Blood 96: 2621-2627, 2000.

4. Halverson, G.; Shanahan, E.; Santiago, I.; Mabile, R.; Thurrell,
T.; Strupp, A. M.; Wolf, C. F. W.; Spruell, P.; Moulds, M. K.: The
first reported case of anti-Dob causing an acute hemolytic transfusion
reaction. Vox Sang. 66: 206-209, 1994.

5. Koch-Nolte, F.; Haag, F.; Braren, R.; Kuhl, M.; Hoovers, J.; Balasubramanian,
S.; Bazan, F.; Thiele, H.-G.: Two novel human members of an emerging
mammalian gene family related to mono-ADP-ribosylating bacterial toxins. Genomics 39:
370-376, 1997. Note: Erratum: Genomics 55: 130 only, 1999.

6. Lewis, M.; Kaita, H.; Giblett, E. R.; Anderson, J. E.: Genetic
linkage analysis of the Dombrock (Do) blood group locus. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 22: 313-318, 1978.

7. Lewis, M.; Kaita, H.; Philipps, S.; Giblett, E. R.; Anderson, J.
E.: Genetic linkage data for the Dombrock blood group locus relative
to chromosome 1 and chromosome 4 loci. Ann. Hum. Genet. 47: 49-53,
1983.

8. Lucien, N.; Celton, J.-L.; Le Pennec, P.-Y.; Cartron, J.-P.; Bailly,
P.: Short deletion within the blood group Dombrock locus causing
a Do(null) phenotype. Blood 100: 1063-1064, 2002.

9. Mohr, J.; Eiberg, H.; Nielsen, L. S.: Various linkage relationships
of the Dombrock blood group system. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 40:
701 only, 1985.

10. Molthan, L.; Crawford, M. N.; Tippett, P.: Enlargement of the
Dombrock blood group system: the finding of anti-Do(b). Vox Sang. 24:
382-384, 1973.

11. Polesky, H. F.; Swanson, J. L.: Studies on distribution of the
blood group antigen Do(a) (Dombrock) and the characteristics of anti-Do(a). Transfusion 6:
268-270, 1966.

12. Rios, M.; Hue-Roye, K.; Lee, A. H.; Chiofolo, J. T.; Miller, J.
L.; Reid, M. E.: DNA analysis for the Dombrock polymorphism. Transfusion 41:
1143-1146, 2001.

13. Rios, M.; Hue-Roye, K.; Storry, J. R.; Lee, T.; Miller, J. L.;
Reid, M. E.: Molecular basis of the Dombrock null phenotype. Transfusion 41:
1405-1407, 2001.

14. Rios, M.; Storry, J. R.; Hue-Roye, K.; Chung, A.; Reid, M. E.
: Two new molecular bases for the Dombrock null phenotype. Brit.
J. Haemat. 117: 765-767, 2002.

15. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World
Distribution.  New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

16. Strupp, A.; Cash, K.; Uehlinger, J.: Difficulties in identifying
antibodies in the Dombrock blood group system in multiply alloimmunized
patients. Transfusion 38: 1022-1025, 1998.

17. Swanson, J. L.; Polesky, H. F.; Tippett, P.; Sanger, R.: A 'new'
blood group antigen, Do(a). Nature 206: 313 only, 1965.

18. Telen, M. J.: Erythrocyte blood group antigens: polymorphisms
of functionally important molecules. Semin. Hemat. 33: 302-314,
1996.

19. Williams, C. H.; Crawford, M. N.: The third example of anti-Do. Transfusion 6:
310 only, 1966.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/22/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/4/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/9/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/25/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 07/27/2012
mgross: 7/1/2010
carol: 12/23/2005
terry: 12/22/2005
carol: 3/17/2004
terry: 7/31/2003
carol: 4/11/2003
tkritzer: 4/11/2003
carol: 4/11/2003
carol: 4/10/2003
cwells: 3/7/2003
terry: 3/4/2003
carol: 5/25/2001
mcapotos: 1/22/2001
mcapotos: 1/16/2001
terry: 1/9/2001
carol: 5/1/1998
terry: 4/25/1998
jamie: 1/15/1997
terry: 1/10/1997
mimadm: 2/11/1994
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/28/1992
carol: 2/26/1992
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/26/1989

124095	TITLE *124095 CYTOPLASMIC TYROSINE KINASE; CSK
;;c-SRC TYROSINE KINASE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Partanen et al. (1991) cloned a novel cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase
designated CSK. The CSK gene was ubiquitously expressed in human tissues
as 2 mRNA species of 2.6 and 3.4 kb, although in some tissues and cell
lines, only the larger mRNA was detected.

GENE FUNCTION

CSK downregulates tyrosine kinase activity of the SRC oncoprotein
(190090) through tyrosine phosphorylation of the SRC carboxy terminus.
Since cell transformation by SRC oncoproteins is caused by various
mechanisms that interfere with this phosphorylation, the CSK gene might
function as an antioncogene (Armstrong et al., 1992).

Cloutier and Veillette (1996) used the yeast 2-hybrid system to identify
proteins associated with CSK. They found that the Src homology-3 (SH3)
domain of CSK associates with a proline-rich region of PEP (600716), a
protein-tyrosine phosphatase expressed in hemopoietic cells. Cloutier
and Veillette (1996) showed that this association is highly specific and
speculated that PEP may be an effector and/or regulator of CSK in T
cells and other hemopoietic cells.

MAPPING

Armstrong et al. (1992) used in situ hybridization to map the CSK gene
to 15q23-q25.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Associations Pending Confirmation

CSK physically interacts with the intracellular phosphatase LYP (PTPN22;
600716) and can modify the activation state of downstream Src kinases,
such as LYN (165120), in lymphocytes. Manjarrez-Orduno et al. (2012)
identified an association of CSK with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE;
152700) and refined its location to the intronic polymorphism dbSNP
rs34933034 (odds ratio = 1.32; p = 1.04 x 10(-9)). The risk allele at
this SNP is associated with increased CSK expression and augments
inhibitory phosphorylation of LYN. In carriers of the risk allele, there
is increased B-cell receptor-mediated activation of mature B cells, as
well as higher concentrations of plasma IgM, relative to individuals in
the nonrisk haplotype. Moreover, the fraction of transitional B cells is
doubled in the cord blood of carriers of the risk allele, due to an
expansion of late transitional cells in a stage targeted by selection
mechanisms. Manjarrez-Orduno et al. (2012) concluded that their results
suggested that the LYP-CSK complex increases susceptibility to lupus at
multiple maturation and activation points in B cells.

ANIMAL MODEL

Lowry et al. (2002) found that actin stress fiber formation induced by G
proteins and G protein receptors was completely blocked in Csk-deficient
mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Reintroduction of Csk into Csk-deficient
cells restored G protein-induced actin stress fiber formation. Rescue
experiments with catalytic mutants of Csk demonstrated that Csk
catalytic activity was required for stress fiber formation. Lowry et al.
(2002) found that G-beta (see GNB1; 139380)/G-gamma (see GNG2; 606981)
dimers translocated Csk to the plasma membrane and directly increased
Csk kinase activity. They concluded that CSK plays a critical role in
mediating G protein signals in the reorganization of the actin
cytoskeleton.

REFERENCE 1. Armstrong, E.; Cannizzaro, L.; Bergman, M.; Huebner, K.; Alitalo,
K.: The c-src tyrosine kinase (CSK) gene, a potential antioncogene,
localizes to human chromosome region 15q23-q25. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 60:
119-120, 1992.

2. Cloutier, J.-F.; Veillette, A.: Association of inhibitory tyrosine
protein kinase p50(csk) with protein tyrosine phosphatase PEP in T
cells and other hemopoietic cells. EMBO J. 15: 4909-4918, 1996.

3. Lowry, W. E.; Huang, J.; Ma, Y.-C.; Ali, S.; Wang, D.; Williams,
D. M.; Okada, M.; Cole, P. A.; Huang, X.-Y.: Csk, a critical link
of G protein signals to actin cytoskeletal reorganization. Dev. Cell 2:
733-744, 2002.

4. Manjarrez-Orduno, N.; Marasco, E.; Chung, S. A.; Katz, M. S.; Kiridly,
J. F.; Simpfendorfer, K. R.; Freudenberg, J.; Ballard, D. H.; Nashi,
E.; Hopkins, T. J.; Cunninghame Graham, D. S.; Lee, A. T.; and 11
others: CSK regulatory polymorphism is associated with systemic
lupus erythematosus and influences B-cell signaling and activation. Nature
Genet. 44: 1227-1230, 2012.

5. Partanen, J.; Armstrong, E.; Bergman, M.; Makela, T. P.; Hirvonen,
H.; Huebner, K.; Alitalo, K.: Cyl encodes a putative cytoplasmic
tyrosine kinase lacking the conserved tyrosine autophosphorylation
site (Y416-src). Oncogene 6: 2013-2018, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/11/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/8/2005
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 11/20/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/14/1992

EDITED alopez: 01/15/2013
terry: 1/11/2013
mgross: 9/8/2005
alopez: 2/1/1999
alopez: 12/17/1997
alopez: 12/11/1997
carol: 8/17/1992
carol: 8/14/1992

614911	TITLE *614911 C1q- AND TUMOR NECROSIS FACTOR-RELATED PROTEIN 4; C1QTNF4
;;CTRP4
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a high-throughput screen to identify genes encoding proteins that
stimulated NF-kappa-B (see 164011) activity, Li et al. (2011) identified
C1QTNF4, which they called CTRP4. The deduced 329-amino acid protein has
a calculated molecular mass of 35.3 kD. It has an N-terminal signal
sequence and 2 typical C1q domains, but it lacks a collagen-like region
found in other CTRPs. RT-PCR analysis revealed low CTRP4 expression in a
wide range of tissues and cell lines. Database analysis identified
orthologs of CTRP4 in several vertebrate species, with highest
conservation in the C1q domain.

GENE FUNCTION

Li et al. (2011) showed that CTRP4 was secreted from transfected HepG2
cells and that overexpression of CTRP4 increased the expression and
activity of NF-kappa-B, IL6 (147620), and TNF-alpha (191160), as well as
phosphorylation of STAT3 (102582), in a dose-dependent manner. Mutant
oncogenic RAS (HRAS; 190020) and IL6 also upregulated CTRP4 expression,
suggesting a positive regulatory loop between CTRP4 and IL6.
Overexpression of CTRP4 protected HepG2 cells from cyclohexamide-induced
apoptosis. Li et al. (2011) hypothesized that CTRP4 is a tumor-promoting
regulator of inflammation.

GENE STRUCTURE

Li et al. (2011) determined that the C1QTNF4 gene contains 2 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Li et al. (2011) mapped the C1QTNF4 gene
to chromosome 11p11.

REFERENCE 1. Li, Q.; Wang, L.; Tan, W.; Peng, Z.; Luo, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Zhang,
G.; Na, D.; Jin, P.; Shi, T.; Ma, D.; Wang, L.: Identification of
C1qTNF-related protein 4 as a potential cytokine that stimulates the
STAT3 and NK-kappa-B pathways and promotes cell survival in human
cancer cells. Cancer Lett. 308: 203-214, 2011.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/5/2012

EDITED mgross: 11/05/2012

604607	TITLE *604607 HOMEOBOX B13; HOXB13
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Vertebrate HOX genes are clustered in 4 unlinked complexes in the genome
(HOXA, HOXB, HOXC, and HOXD clusters). Each complex spans about 200 kb
and contains 9 to 11 genes, transcribed from the same strand of DNA. The
order of the HOX genes along the chromosome correlates with their
expression along the anterior/posterior axis of the embryo, suggesting
that their organization is integral to their proper regulation. Members
of the abdominal B (AbdB) subfamily of HOX genes exhibit posterior
domains of expression, including the developing urogenital system, in
vertebrates. It was thought that HOXB genes 10 through 13 had been lost
in evolution. Using Southwestern screening of a HeLa cell cDNA library,
Zeltser et al. (1996) identified HOXB13, a novel member of the AbdB
subfamily. Analysis of the cDNA revealed that the HOXB13 gene encodes a
284-amino acid protein, 2 residues shorter than the mouse protein, which
was also characterized by Zeltser et al. (1996). The 60-amino acid
homeodomain near the C terminus of HOXB13 shares 78 to 83% identity with
HOX proteins in paralog group-13 of the AbdB subfamily; 6 of the amino
acid differences from other members of this group represent conservative
changes. Moreover, HOXB13 shares less than 60% identity with other
AbdB-related genes. Using whole-mount in situ hybridization, Zeltser et
al. (1996) determined that Hoxb13 was expressed first in the tailbud of
embryonic mice and subsequently in the hindgut, urogenital tract, and
posterior extent of the spinal cord. It was not expressed in the
secondary axes.

During the first 2 trimesters of development, wound healing occurs
without scars. Using RT-PCR and sequencing of human fetal fibroblast
mRNA, Stelnicki et al. (1998) identified 2 homeobox genes, PRX2 and
HOXB13, as being differentially expressed during fetal versus adult
wound healing. Both genes were expressed in proliferating fibroblasts
and fetal dermis, but not in adult dermis. The protein sequence of
HOXB13 differed from that reported by Zeltser et al. (1996) by 1 amino
acid alteration, ser211 to cys.

GENE FUNCTION

When grown at the air-liquid interface, rat epidermal organotypic
cultures stratify and differentiate, producing the same morphologically
distinct epidermal layers that are observed in vivo. Mack et al. (2005)
found that overexpression of Hoxb13 in these 'lift' cultures increased
the overall thickness of the tissue and caused disorganized basal layer,
absence of granular layer, and abnormal accumulation of cornified tissue
in which numerous nuclei were retained. Overexpression of Hoxb13 also
resulted in decreased cell proliferation, increased apoptosis, and
reduced expression of epidermal differentiation markers. In both lift
and submerged cultures, overexpression of Hoxb13 induced corneocyte
formation and elevated transglutaminase (see TGM1; 190195) activity,
increasing crosslinking of the cornified envelope. Mack et al. (2005)
concluded that HOXB13 functions in epidermal differentiation and likely
has a role in skin regeneration and maintenance of normal barrier
function.

Miao et al. (2007) found that knockdown of HOXB13 by RNA interference in
human ovarian cancer cell lines was associated with reduced cell
proliferation. Conversely, ectopic expression of HOXB13 transformed p53
(TP53; 191170) -/- mouse embryonic fibroblasts and promoted cell
proliferation and anchorage-independent growth in mouse ovarian cancer
cell lines containing genetic alterations in p53, Myc (190080), and Ras
(HRAS; 190020). HOXB13 collaborated with activated Ras to markedly
promote tumor growth in vivo in nude mice and conferred resistance to
tamoxifen-mediated apoptosis in mouse ovarian cancer cells in culture.
Miao et al. (2007) concluded that HOXB13 has a proproliferative and
prosurvival role in ovarian cancer.

Norris et al. (2009) stated that HOXB13 interacts with androgen receptor
(AR; 313700) and plays an essential role in prostate development. They
found that HOXB13 played multiple roles in determining the response of
prostate cancer cells to androgens. HOXB13 interacted with the
DNA-binding domain of AR and inhibited transcription of genes containing
an androgen response element (ARE). In contrast, the AR-HOXB13 complex
conferred androgen responsiveness to promoters containing a specific
HOXB13 response element. HOXB13 and AR also synergized to enhance
transcription of genes containing a HOX element juxtaposed to an ARE.
Norris et al. (2009) concluded that HOXB13 functions as a licensing
factor for both AR and AR coregulator recruitment to chromatin.

GENE STRUCTURE

Zeltser et al. (1996) determined that the HOXB13 gene contains 2 exons.
It is separated from HOXB9 by 70 kb, but is transcribed in the same
orientation as the other HOXB genes.

MAPPING

By FISH, Stelnicki et al. (1998) mapped the HOXB13 gene to human
chromosome 17q21.2, where other HOXB genes are clustered. By somatic
cell hybrid analysis, Zeltser et al. (1996) mapped the mouse Hoxb13 gene
to chromosome 11.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the
HOXB13 gene and prostate cancer susceptibility, see HPC9 (610997).

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the
HOXB13 gene and breast cancer susceptibility, see 114480.

REFERENCE 1. Mack, J. A.; Li, L.; Sato, N.; Hascall, V. C.; Maytin, E. V.:
Hoxb13 up-regulates transglutaminase activity and drives terminal
differentiation in an epidermal organotypic model. J. Biol. Chem. 280:
29904-29911, 2005.

2. Miao, J.; Wang, Z.; Provencher, H.; Muir, B.; Dahiya, S.; Carney,
E.; Leong, C.-O.; Sgroi, D. C.; Orsulic, S.: HOXB13 promotes ovarian
cancer progression. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 104: 17093-17098, 2007.

3. Norris, J. D.; Chang, C.-Y.; Wittmann, B. M.; Kunder, R. S.; Cui,
H.; Fan, D.; Joseph, J. D.; McDonnell, D. P.: The homeodomain protein
HOXB13 regulates the cellular response to androgens. Molec. Cell 36:
405-416, 2009.

4. Stelnicki, E. J.; Arbeit, J.; Cass, D. L.; Saner, C.; Harrison,
M.; Largman, C.: Modulation of the human homeobox genes PRX-2 and
HOXB13 in scarless fetal wounds. J. Invest. Derm. 111: 57-63, 1998.

5. Zeltser, L.; Desplan, C.; Heintz, N.: Hoxb-13: a new Hox gene
in a distant region of the HOXB cluster maintains colinearity. Development 122:
2475-2484, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 9/28/2010
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/9/2008

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 2/24/2000

EDITED alopez: 08/29/2012
terry: 8/28/2012
alopez: 6/19/2012
terry: 6/19/2012
mgross: 9/28/2010
terry: 9/28/2010
joanna: 2/2/2009
mgross: 4/11/2008
terry: 4/9/2008
terry: 3/18/2004
carol: 2/28/2000

