130160	TITLE *130160 ELASTIN; ELN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Elastic fibers are comprised of 2 distinct components, a more abundant
amorphous component (elastin) and the microfibrillar component. Elastin
is composed largely of glycine, proline, and other hydrophobic residues
and contains multiple lysine-derived crosslinks, such as desmosines,
which link the individual polypeptide chains into a rubberlike network.
The hydrophobic regions of the chains between the crosslinks are highly
mobile. The hydrophobic and crosslinking domains are coded by separate,
small (27 to 114 bp) exons that are separated by large introns. The
initial translation product is a 72-kD polypeptide, designated
tropoelastin (Rosenbloom, 1984).

Indik et al. (1987) cloned human elastin cDNA and found that it encodes
a deduced 786-amino acid protein. They described alternative splicing of
elastin mRNA.

Uitto et al. (1991) reviewed the molecular biology of human elastin.
Elastin is initially synthesized as a soluble polypeptide of
approximately 72 kD. The individual elastin molecules are aligned on a
scaffolding of microfibrils composed of fibrillin (134797). This
alignment is stabilized by the formation of intermolecular crosslinks
known as desmosines, which contribute to the insolubility of elastin.
Formation of desmosines is initiated by oxidative deamination of certain
lysyl residues by lysyl oxidase, a copper-dependent enzyme. The elastin
polypeptides are encoded by an mRNA of approximately 3.5 kb which
comprises a 2.2-kb coding segment and a relatively large 1.3-kb, 3-prime
untranslated region.

MAPPING

Emanuel et al. (1985) provisionally assigned the elastin gene to
2q31-qter. Fazio et al. (1991) used human elastin cDNAs in both in situ
hybridization and Southern analysis of human-rodent cell hybrids to map
the elastin gene to 7q11.2. PCR analysis with elastin-specific primers
of DNA from a hybrid cell line containing only human chromosome 7
yielded a product of the expected size, while DNA containing human
chromosome 2, but not chromosome 7, did not result in a product. Foster
et al. (1993) described a dinucleotide repeat polymorphism in the ELN
gene and used it to confirm assignment to chromosome 7 as well as to
exclude the gene from chromosome 2 by linkage studies.

Wydner et al. (1994) used PCR primers complementary to regions of the
mouse tropoelastin mRNA to define a novel intron length polymorphism
(ILP) within intron 8 of the mouse elastin gene. Using this polymorphism
in an interspecific backcross, they mapped the mouse Eln gene to the
distal half of chromosome 5 in a region of homology of synteny of human
chromosome 7.

GENE STRUCTURE

Indik et al. (1987) found a dearth of coding sequences and a remarkable
abundance of Alu repetitive sequences in the 3-prime region of the human
elastin gene. This suggested to them that, mediated by recombination
between Alu sequences, considerable polymorphism may exist in the human
population and between species. Tromp et al. (1991) identified a RFLP in
the ELN gene.

The human ELN gene has 34 exons and spans a total of approximately 45 kb
of genomic DNA. The exon/intron ratio is unusually low, approximately
1:19 (Uitto et al., 1991).

GENE FUNCTION

Li et al. (1998) defined the role of elastin in arterial development and
disease by generating mice lacking elastin. These mice died of an
obstructive arterial disease that resulted from subendothelial cell
proliferation and reorganization of smooth muscle. These cellular
changes were similar to those seen in atherosclerosis; however, lack of
elastin was not associated with endothelial damage, thrombosis, or
inflammation, which occur in models of atherosclerosis. Hemodynamic
stress was not associated with arterial obstruction in these mice
either, as the disease still occurred in arteries that were isolated in
organ culture and therefore not subject to hemodynamic stress.
Disruption of elastin was enough to induce subendothelial proliferation
of smooth muscle and may contribute to obstructive arterial disease.

To investigate why a loss-of-function mutation in 1 elastin allele
causes an inherited obstructive arterial disease, supravalvular aortic
stenosis, Li et al. (1998) generated mice hemizygous for the elastin
gene (Eln +/-). Although ELN mRNA and protein were reduced by 50% in Eln
+/- mice, arterial compliance at physiologic pressures was nearly
normal. This discrepancy was explained by a paradoxical increase of 35%
in the number of elastic lamellae and smooth muscle in Eln +/- arteries.
Examination of humans with ELN hemizygosity revealed a 2.5-fold increase
in elastic lamellae and smooth muscle. Thus, ELN hemizygosity in mice
and humans induces a compensatory increase in the number of rings of
elastic lamellae and smooth muscle during arterial development. Humans
are exquisitely sensitive to reduced ELN expression, developing profound
arterial thickening and markedly increased risk of obstructive vascular
disease.

Lee et al. (2007) studied the immune responses of age-matched smokers
with and without emphysema (see COPD; 606963) and found that
differential responsiveness of T cells to elastin peptides, but not to
collagen (see COL6A1; 120220) or albumin (ALB; 103600), correlated with
emphysema severity. Compared with controls, COPD patients secreted
increased levels of IFNG (147570) and IL10 (124092) in response to
elastin peptides in an MHC II-dependent manner. Antibody to elastin, but
not to collagen, was also increased in emphysema patients, as were lung
B cells secreting antibody to the protein. Although regulatory T cell
(Treg) responses did not differ between subject and control peripheral
blood cells, emphysema patients showed a significant reduction of lung
Tregs compared with controls. Lee et al. (2007) concluded that
antielastin autoimmunity, possibly resulting from secretion of
proteolytic enzymes induced by cigarette smoke exposure, is associated
with an inflammatory response leading to emphysema and to
tobacco-related pathology in other organs.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Role in Williams-Beuren Syndrome

Curran et al. (1993) showed that the ELN gene was disrupted in a
translocation with a breakpoint at 7q11.23. Exon 28 of the gene was the
site of the breakpoint. Furthermore, Ewart et al. (1993) showed close
linkage of ELN and supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS; 185500) in 2
families. Ewart et al. (1993) found that deletion involving 7q11.23 and
resulting in hemizygosity of the elastin gene is responsible for the
Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS; 194050). Deletions limited to the elastin
gene appear to result in SVAS, whereas deletions spanning at least 114
kb lead to the Williams syndrome. Thus, the latter is a contiguous gene
syndrome with neurobehavioral features and mental retardation not easily
accounted for by the disruption of the elastin gene alone.

Perez Jurado et al. (1996) reported that 61 of 65 clinically defined
patients with Williams-Beuren syndrome had a deletion of the ELN locus.
They noted that no variability in the size of the deletion could be
detected between WBS patients by genotyping of polymorphic markers,
suggesting that the chromosomal breakpoints in these patients fell into
narrowly defined physical regions. Perez Jurado et al. (1996) also
compared clinical differences between maternally and paternally
inherited ELN deletions and postulated that an imprinted locus, silent
on the paternal chromosome and contributing to statural growth, may be
affected by the deletion.

Duba et al. (2002) investigated a family with a cytogenetically balanced
translocation t(7;16)(q11.23;q13) in which the 5 translocation carriers
manifested a wide variation in phenotype, ranging from a hoarse voice as
the only feature, partial WBS with or without SVAS, to the full WBS
phenotype. DNA sequence analysis showed that the breakpoint on
chromosome 7 was within intron 5 of the ELN gene and on chromosome 16
within intron 1 of the GPR56 gene (604110). In the course of the
rearrangement, no basepair was lost from either the chromosome 7 or
chromosome 16 sequences. Duba et al. (2002) speculated that the expected
phenotype in the reported family would be SVAS, not WBS, and proposed a
long-range position effect caused by the translocation event as the most
likely explanation.

- Supravalvular Aortic Stenosis

In a family with SVAS (185500), Ewart et al. (1994) found, by pulsed
field, PCR, and Southern analysis, a 100-kb deletion of the 3-prime end
of the elastin gene cosegregating with the disease (130160.0001). DNA
sequence analysis localized the breakpoint of the deletion between
elastin exons 27 and 28, the same region disrupted by the
SVAS-associated translocation. The family included an affected mother
and daughter. The daughter had right ventricular hypertrophy,
supravalvular pulmonic stenosis, bilateral narrowing of the pulmonary
arteries (left more severe than right), and a diffusely narrowed
ascending aorta with a discrete supravalvular narrowing diagnosed by
cardiac catheterization at 6 weeks of age. The patient also had
intermittent acrocyanosis and hypertension. At 16 months of age, the
supravalvular pulmonic stenosis had improved. The proband also had some
features common to Williams syndrome, including dolichocephaly,
bitemporal narrowness, outer canthal distance less than 2 SD below the
mean, periorbital fullness, broad mouth, full cheeks, hoarse voice, and
hypersensitivity to loud noises. The diagnosis of Williams syndrome was
not made because she had normal serum calcium levels, a normal urine
calcium/creatinine ratio, normal psychomotor development, and normal
growth parameters. The child was treated with phenobarbital for
seizures. The mother had had seizures in adolescence. Since childhood,
she had had a grade III (out of VI) early systolic murmur heard best at
the suprasternal notch and radiating to the left carotid. At least 2
other family members were affected by SVAS. The mother's brother had
narrowing of the entire pulmonary arterial tree documented by cardiac
catheterization and was treated for seizures. A maternal first cousin
had severe bilateral peripheral pulmonic stenosis, right ventricular
hypertrophy, and mild SVAS demonstrated by echocardiogram.

Gross rearrangements of the ELN gene have not been identified in most
cases of autosomal dominant SVAS. To define the spectrum of ELN
mutations responsible for SVAS, Li et al. (1997) refined the genomic
structure of the gene and used this information in mutation analyses.
ELN point mutations were found to cosegregate with the disease in 4
familial cases (e.g., 130160.0005) and to be associated with SVAS in 3
sporadic cases (130160.0004). Two of the mutations were nonsense, 1 was
a single bp deletion, and 4 were splice site mutations. In 1 sporadic
case, the mutation had arisen de novo.

Tassabehji et al. (1997) described the complete exon-intron structure of
the ELN gene. All exons are in-frame, allowing exon skipping without
disrupting the reading frame. Microsatellites were located in introns 17
and 18. They found that isolated SVAS was associated with point
mutations that predicted premature chain termination. They stated that
in their experience all patients with a classic Williams syndrome
phenotype had been found to be hemizygous at the elastin locus;
nevertheless, only 5% had severe clinical SVAS. In their 2 SVAS families
with point mutations, each mutation manifested as severe SVAS in the
proband, but as mild cardiac features or nonpenetrance in the mothers.
Tassabehji et al. (1997) considered such variability typical of
phenotypes produced by haploinsufficiency, where genetic background is
expected to have a major modifying effect. An alternative hypothesis is
that a dominant-negative elastin mutation results if truncated proteins
have some but not all domains critical for intermolecular interactions
and thus may disrupt posttranslational processing and development of
elastic fibers.

Koch et al. (2003) similarly found the complete spectrum of arterial
stenoses in 5 members of an extended pedigree with a confirmed nonsense
mutation haplotype.

Urban et al. (2000) used single-strand conformation and heteroduplex
analyses of genomic amplimers to identify point mutations within the ELN
gene in patients with nonsyndromic SVAS from a total of 8 unrelated
families. They identified 6 novel point mutations. Nonpenetrance was
demonstrated in some of the families. Together with the new mutations
they found, 14 point mutations had been reported in SVAS patients, and
10 of these resulted in premature stop codons (PTCs). They analyzed the
expression of ELN alleles in skin fibroblasts from 1 SVAS patient and
showed that PTC mutations resulted in selective elimination of mutant
transcripts. Inhibition of the nonsense-mediated decay mechanism by
cycloheximide resulted in the stabilization of mutant elastin mRNA.
Allelic inactivation by the ELN mutation in this patient led to an
overall decrease of the steady state levels of elastin mRNA. In the skin
fibroblasts from the same SVAS patient, they demonstrated reduced
synthesis and secretion of tropoelastin. Given the predominance of PTC
mutations in SVAS, Urban et al. (2000) suggested that functional
haploinsufficiency may be the pathomechanism underlying most cases of
nonsyndromic SVAS.

Metcalfe et al. (2000) used SSCP and heteroduplex analysis to screen 100
unrelated patients with SVAS and normal karyotypes without major
deletions of the ELN gene as determined by FISH. All 34 exons of the ELN
gene were screened and mutations were identified in 35 of the patients.
The mutations were 23 nonsense or frameshift mutations predicted to
cause premature termination, 6 splice site mutations, 4 missense
mutations, and 2 small deletions in exon 1 encompassing the ATG
initiation codon. The 35 patients represented 24 familial cases, 10
sporadic cases, and 1 of unknown status. Recurrent mutations were the
nonsense mutations Y150X in exon 9 (130160.0013), Q442X in exon 21
(130160.0003), and K176X in exon 10 (130160.0014), which appeared to be
mutation hotspots. A marked phenotypic intrafamilial variability was
illustrated by 2 large families with multiple affected members with
disease severity ranging from asymptomatic carriers to mild or severe
SVAS requiring surgery, or sudden infant death. No obvious
genotype-phenotype correlation was detected; cases with missense or
splicing mutations were as likely to have severe SVAS as cases with
truncating mutations.

Urban et al. (2002) compared both elastogenesis and proliferation rate
of cultured aortic smooth-muscle cells (SMCs) and skin fibroblasts from
5 healthy control subjects, 4 patients with isolated SVAS, and 5
patients with WBS. Three mutations found in patients with SVAS were
found to result in null alleles. RNA blood hybridization,
immunostaining, and metabolic labeling experiments demonstrated that
SVAS cells and WBS cells have reduced elastin mRNA levels and that they
consequently deposit low amounts of insoluble elastin. Abnormally low
levels of elastin deposition in SVAS cells and in WBS cells were found
to coincide with an increase in proliferation rate, which could be
reversed by addition of exogenous insoluble elastin. This led to the
conclusion that insoluble elastin is an important regulator of cellular
proliferation. The reduced net deposition of insoluble elastin in
arterial walls of patients with either SVAS or WBS leads to the
increased proliferation of arterial SMCs, which results in the formation
of multilayer thickening of the tunica media of large arteries and,
consequently, in the development of hyperplastic intimal lesions leading
to segmental arterial occlusion.

Micale et al. (2010) analyzed the ELN gene in 31 familial and sporadic
cases of SVAS and identified 7 novel mutations, including 5 frameshift
mutations and 2 splice site mutations (see, e.g., 130160.0020). In vitro
analysis of 3 of the frameshift mutations using minigene constructs and
transfection assays confirmed that functional haploinsufficiency of the
ELN gene is the main pathomechanism underlying SVAS. In addition,
molecular analysis of patient fibroblasts showed that the 2044+5G-C
(130160.0020) mutant allele encodes an aberrant shorter form of the
elastin polypeptide that may hamper the normal assembly of elastin
fibers in a dominant-negative manner.

- Cutis Laxa

In the cell line from a patient with cutis laxa (123700), Zhang et al.
(1997) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion in exon 30 of the
ELN gene (130160.0008). In a 30-year-old woman and her 2-year-old son,
both of whom had classic cutis laxa, Zhang et al. (1999) identified
heterozygosity for a different 1-bp deletion in the ELN gene
(130160.0010), also in exon 30.

In a 37-year-old Caucasian woman with cutis laxa, Tassabehji et al.
(1998) identified heterozygosity for a 1-bp deletion in the ELN gene
(130160.0009).

In a mother and daughter with cutis laxa and severe pulmonary disease,
originally described by Beighton (1972) and Corbett et al. (1994), Urban
et al. (2005) identified no mutations in the elastin gene by direct
sequencing, but detected an abnormal protein in cultured dermal
fibroblasts using metabolic labeling and immunoprecipitation. Mutation
and gene expression analyses established the presence of a complex
tandem duplication in the elastin gene (130160.0016).

In affected members of a 3-generation family of Japanese and German
ancestry and an unrelated Singaporean girl of Chinese descent with cutis
laxa and aortic aneurysmal disease, Szabo et al. (2006) identified
heterozygosity for a 25-bp deletion (130160.0017) and a 1-bp deletion
(130160.0018) in exon 30 of the ELN gene, respectively.

- Role in Other Disorders

For a discussion of a possible association between variation in the ELN
gene and susceptibility to intracranial berry aneurysm, see ANIB1
(105800).

ANIMAL MODEL

Faury et al. (2003) reported that Eln +/- mice were stably hypertensive
from birth, with a mean arterial pressure 25 to 30 mm Hg higher than
their wildtype counterparts. The animals had only moderate cardiac
hypertrophy and lived a normal life span with no overt signs of
degenerative vascular disease. Examination of arterial mechanical
properties showed that the inner diameters of Eln +/- arteries were
generally smaller than wildtype arteries at any given intravascular
pressure. Because the Eln +/- mice were hypertensive, however, the
effective arterial working diameter was comparable to that of the
normotensive wildtype animal. Physiologic studies indicated a role for
the renin (179820)-angiotensin (see 106150) system in maintaining the
hypertensive state. Faury et al. (2003) concluded that the association
of hypertension with elastin haploinsufficiency in humans and mice
strongly suggested that elastin and other proteins of the elastic fiber
should be considered as causal genes for essential hypertension.

Hirano et al. (2008) stated that the Eln gene in most mammalian species
contains 36 exons. The rat and mouse Eln genes have 37 exons, whereas
the human ELN gene has only 34 exons due to the sequential loss of 2
exons during primate evolution. In addition, although still contained
within the human gene, exon 22 is rarely included in the elastin
transcript. The mouse and human ELN proteins share only 64.1% amino acid
identity. Because of the structural differences between mouse and human
ELN, Hirano et al. (2008) developed a humanized elastin mouse in which
elastin production was controlled by a human ELN transgene. Expression
of the human transgene reversed the hypertension and cardiovascular
changes associated with Eln haploinsufficiency and rescued the perinatal
lethality of the Eln-null phenotype.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 100-KB DEL

In a family with SVAS (185500), Ewart et al. (1994) found a heterozygous
100-kb deletion in the 3-prime end of the elastin gene with a breakpoint
between elastin exons 27 and 28. The same region was disrupted in the
familial reciprocal translocation reported by Morris et al. (1993).
Ewart et al. (1994) pointed out that the protein product of the mutant
gene would lack a microfibril-associated glycoprotein (MAGP; 156790)
binding site that normally exists in the C terminus of elastin.

.0002
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 30-KB DEL

Olson et al. (1995) used Southern blot analysis to screen for mutations
in the ELN gene in 6 familial and 3 sporadic cases of SVAS (185500)
without features of Williams-Beuren syndrome (194050). The familial
cases included members of a previously reported large pedigree with
linkage to the elastin gene region (Olson et al., 1993). A 30-kb
deletion extending from breakpoints in intron 1 and intron 27 was found
in 2 members of a Middle Eastern family. The proband developed severe
SVAS and peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis and underwent aortic
operation in early childhood. He had no evidence of Williams syndrome or
clinically apparent abnormalities of other elastin-containing tissue.
The deletion was also demonstrated in his mother, an obligate carrier
with subtle disease (a heart murmur and a nondiagnostic echocardiogram).
Blood for DNA analysis was not available from a maternal uncle with SVAS
and a sister with isolated peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis.

.0003
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, GLN442TER

Li et al. (1997) found a heterozygous nonsense mutation in a sporadic
case of SVAS (185500): a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1324, resulting
in conversion of a glutamine to a premature stop codon (Q442X) in exon
21. DNA samples could not be obtained from the parents of the proband.

Tassabehji et al. (1997) found the same mutation in a patient with SVAS.
The patient had presented at the age of 8 weeks with a heart murmur and
episodes of cyanosis. Echocardiography at 4 months of age showed SVAS
and pulmonary arterial stenosis. These changes were progressive.
Corrective open heart surgery was performed at the age of 21 months, at
which time it was noted that the aorta and pulmonary arteries were very
thick and abnormal. His mother had had cardiac follow-up for a heart
murmur until the age of 6 years, but echocardiogram showed no evidence
of SVAS and no pulmonary artery stenosis.

Metcalfe et al. (2000) found the Q442X mutation in 3 unrelated patients
with SVAS among 100 patients screened. Haplotype analysis using ELN
flanking and intragenic markers showed no evidence of a founder effect;
therefore this appeared to be a mutation hotspot.

.0004
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, ARG570TER

In a sporadic case of SVAS (185500), Li et al. (1997) found a nonsense
mutation: a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1708, resulting in
conversion of arginine-570 to a premature stop codon in exon 25 (R570X).
DNA samples could not be obtained from the parents of the proband.

Metcalfe et al. (2000) detected the R570X mutation in a sporadic case of
SVAS with peripheral pulmonary artery stenosis and bilateral inguinal
hernias.

.0005
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 1821C

Using primers amplifying exon 26 of the ELN gene, Li et al. (1997)
identified an anomalous band that cosegregated with SVAS (185500) in 1
family. The aberrant conformer showed a single-nucleotide deletion at
position 1821 in exon 26 (1821delC). This deletion caused a frameshift
resulting in a premature stop codon in exon 28.

.0006
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, IVS15AS, A-G, -2

In 2 unrelated kindreds, Li et al. (1997) found that SVAS (185500)
segregated with an A-to-G transition at position -2 in the splice
acceptor site of intron 15 preceding exon 16.

.0007
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 1-BP INS, FS615TER

In a patient with SVAS (185500), Tassabehji et al. (1997) identified
insertion of a T in codon 606 of exon 26 of the ELN gene, producing a
frameshift predicted to cause premature termination 10 codons
downstream. The patient presented at birth with a heart murmur. At the
age of 3 years, echocardiography suggested SVAS on the basis of
'waisting' of the ascending aorta and poststenotic dilatation. A brother
had died suddenly in the first year of life and at autopsy was noted to
have spontaneously repaired SVAS, repaired central pulmonary artery
stenosis, and marked ventricular hypertrophy. The aortic valve and
proximal aorta were markedly dysplastic with extreme thickening beyond
the valve. The proband's mother had presented to cardiologists in
childhood with a murmur and a clinical diagnosis of aortic stenosis had
been made.

.0008
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 2012G

In a patient with cutis laxa (123700), Zhang et al. (1995) demonstrated
decreased elastin mRNA levels in skin fibroblasts due to transcript
instability. Zhang et al. (1997) cloned and sequenced both ELN cDNA
alleles in the cell line from this patient and identified a frameshift
mutation, deletion of 2012G, in the C-terminal coding region of 1
allele. The patient was heterozygous for the single base deletion, which
was not found in genomic DNA from either parent or from 65 unrelated
control samples. The mutant transcript was overrepresented compared to
the normal transcript.

.0009
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 748A

In a 37-year-old Caucasian patient with autosomal dominant cutis laxa
(123700), Tassabehji et al. (1998) identified heterozygosity for a
frameshift mutation in exon 32 of the elastin gene which was predicted
to replace 37 amino acids at the C terminus of elastin by a novel
sequence of 62 amino acids. Immunoprecipitation studies and mRNA showed
that the mutant allele was expressed. Electron microscopy of the skin
sections showed abnormal branching and fragmentation in the amorphous
elastin component, and immunocytochemistry showed reduced elastin
deposition in the elastic fibers and fewer microfibrils in the dermis.
These findings suggested that the mutant tropoelastin protein was
synthesized, secreted, and incorporated into the elastic matrix, where
it altered the architecture of elastic fibers. Interference with
crosslinking would reduce elastic recoil in affected tissues and explain
the cutis laxa phenotype.

.0010
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 2039C

In a 30-year-old woman and her 2-year-old son, both of whom had classic
cutis laxa (123700), Zhang et al. (1999) identified heterozygosity for a
deletion of 2039C from exon 30 of the ELN gene. The same exon was the
site of the mutation in the 2012delG deletion (130160.0008).

.0011
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, IVS15AS, C-G, -3

In 2 large, independently collected midwestern US pedigrees with
supravalvular aortic stenosis (185500), Urban et al. (1999) found a
C-to-G transversion in the acceptor splice site of intron 15 of the
elastin gene. The mutation segregated in both families with high
penetrance of SVAS, and all affected individuals carried the mutation.
Haplotype analysis indicated that the mutations in the 2 apparently
nonoverlapping kindreds were identical by descent. RT-PCR of elastin
from skin fibroblasts of an affected individual showed 2 abnormal
elastin species present as 0.9% and 0.3% of the total elastin message.
One transcript arose from activation of a cryptic splice site in intron
15 that added 44 bp of intronic sequence to the sequence encoded by exon
16 and led to a premature termination codon in exon 17 because of
frameshift; the other transcript arose from skipping of exon 16. The
miniscule amount of transcript associated with this mutation supported
haploinsufficiency of elastin as the etiology of SVAS.

.0012
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 1040C

In a large German family with SVAS (185500), Boeckel et al. (1999)
identified a 1-bp deletion (1040delC) in codon 347 of exon 18 of the ELN
gene, resulting in a stop codon in exon 22. The mutation was present in
heterozygous state. The family studied had affected individuals in 4
generations and by implication in a fifth earlier generation. The
severity of the phenotype appeared to increase in successive
generations, i.e., the phenomenon of anticipation. Tassabehji et al.
(1997) noted that the mothers of their severely affected SVAS patients
with ELN point mutations had only mild cardiac features or
nonpenetrance. Boeckel et al. (1999) observed nonpenetrance in at least
2 individuals, brothers, both of whom transmitted the disorder to
children.

.0013
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, TYR150TER

Metcalfe et al. (2000) identified a tyr150-to-ter (Y150X) mutation in
exon 9 of the ELN gene in 4 unrelated patients with SVAS (185500) among
100 patients screened. Haplotype analysis using ELN flanking and
intragenic markers showed no evidence of a founder effect; therefore
this appeared to be a mutation hotspot.

.0014
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, LYS176TER

Metcalfe et al. (2000) detected a lys176-to-ter (K176X; 526A-T) mutation
in exon 10 of the ELN gene in 2 apparently unrelated familial cases of
SVAS (185500) among 100 patients screened.

.0015
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, ARG610GLN AND 24-BP DUP, NT1034

In 2 related families with supravalvular aortic stenosis (185500), Urban
et al. (2001) identified 2 ELN mutations located on the same allele: an
in-frame duplication of nucleotides 1034-1057 in exon 18, and an 1829G-A
change in exon 26 predicted to result in an arg610-to-gln (R610Q)
substitution. In 1 family, an individual was identified with a
recombination between exons 18 and 26 of the ELN gene. This individual
was unaffected and carried the exon 18 insertion mutation but not
1829G-A. Skin fibroblasts were established from this recombinant normal
individual and from an affected individual carrying both of the
mutations. RT-PCR analysis indicated that the expression of the mutant
allele was reduced to 12 to 27% of that of the normal allele in the
affected but not in the unaffected individual. Further studies showed
reduced steady state elastin mRNA levels and tropoelastin synthesis in
the affected individual. RT-PCR analysis of the mRNA rescued by
cycloheximide treatment indicated that the 1829G-A mutation created a
cryptic donor splice site within exon 26, resulting in the deletion of 4
nucleotides at the 3-prime end of exon 26 and a frameshift in the mRNA.
This frameshift mutation generated a premature termination codon in the
domain encoded by exon 28, clearly resulting in nonsense-mediated decay
of this frameshift RNA product. Despite considerable variability in the
molecular nature of mutations responsible for SVAS, the unifying
mechanism appears to be the generation of null alleles by
nonsense-mediated decay leading to elastin haploinsufficiency.

.0016
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, EX9-33DUP

In a mother and daughter with cutis laxa (123700) and severe pulmonary
disease, originally described by Beighton (1972) and Corbett et al.
(1994), Urban et al. (2005) identified no mutations in the elastin gene
by direct sequencing, but detected an abnormal protein in cultured
dermal fibroblasts using metabolic labeling and immunoprecipitation.
Mutation and gene expression analyses established the presence of a
heterozygous complex rearrangement involving the duplication of exons 9
to 33, with a third copy of exons 9 and 10 and intron 10 added to the
end of the mRNA; nucleotides 3-65 of intron 10 encode a 21-amino acid
missense peptide sequence before ending in a stop codon.
Immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that the mutant tropoelastin is
partially secreted and partially retained intracellularly; a polyclonal
antibody raised against a unique peptide in the mutant molecule showed
both intracellular and matrix staining.

.0017
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 25-BP DEL, NT2114

In affected members of a 3-generation family of Japanese and German
ancestry with cutis laxa (123700) and aortic aneurysmal disease, Szabo
et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a 25-bp deletion beginning
at nucleotide 2114 in exon 30 of the ELN gene. There was variable
expression of cutis laxa, hernias, and aortic lesions in affected family
members. The mutation was not found in 121 controls.

.0018
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1-BP DEL, 2159C

In a Singaporean girl of Chinese descent with cutis laxa (123700) and
aortic aneurysmal disease, Szabo et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity
for a de novo 1-bp deletion (2159delC) in exon 30 of the ELN gene. The
mutation was not found in either of her parents or in 121 controls.

.0019
CUTIS LAXA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT 1
ELN, 1621C-T

In a boy with severe cutis laxa (123700), severe congenital pulmonary
disease (previously not reported in ADCL), and supravalvular pulmonary
artery stenosis, Graul-Neumann et al. (2008) identified a heterozygous
1621C-T transition in the ELN gene, resulting in an in-frame deletion of
exon 25 and predicting a protein lacking amino acids 527-540. The same
mutation was present in the clinically healthy father, but not in the
mother, the paternal grandparents, or 96 healthy controls. Analysis of
ELN expression in fibroblasts revealed the same amount of complete ELN
mRNA in the proband as in normal age-matched controls, whereas the
father had a more than 50% reduction of ELN mRNA expression as compared
to corresponding age-matched controls. In contrast, addition of the
translation inhibitor puromcin caused an increase in total ELN mRNA
expression in the father. Graul-Neumann et al. (2008) concluded that the
variable processing of an identically mutated gene (dominant negative in
the child and haploinsufficiency in the father) caused the highly
variable clinical appearance of ADCL in this family.

.0020
SUPRAVALVULAR AORTIC STENOSIS
ELN, IVS28, G-C, +5

In a 3-generation family with supravalvular aortic stenosis (SVAS;
185500), Micale et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 2044+5G-C
transversion in intron 28 of the ELN gene. The mutation was present in
all 3 family members who had been diagnosed with SVAS as well as in 1
asymptomatic family member; it was not found in 2 more unaffected family
members or in 100 unrelated control samples. RT-PCR analysis of elastin
mRNA from transfected HEK293 cells as well as patient fibroblasts
demonstrated 2 distinct transcripts, a 200-bp band corresponding to
wildtype mRNA product and a 300-bp mutant; sequencing confirmed that the
longer transcript resulted from splicing failure and inclusion of intron
28 in the mRNA, predicting a shorter elastin protein with a premature
termination codon within the same intron. Assessment of ELN mRNA
expression level after incubation of patient fibroblasts with an
inhibitor of nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) showed no significant
increase in ELN mRNA aberrant transcript, indicating that this mutation
is conceivably not a substrate of NMD.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Reidy  (1963); Sephel et al. (1989)
REFERENCE 1. Beighton, P. H.: The dominant and recessive forms of cutis laxa. J.
Med. Genet. 9: 216-221, 1972.

2. Boeckel, T.; Dierks, A.; Vergopoulos, A.; Bahring, S.; Knoblauch,
H.; Muller-Myhsok, B.; Baron, H.; Aydin, A.; Bein, G.; Luft, F. C.;
Schuster, H.: A new mutation in the elastin gene causing supravalvular
aortic stenosis. Am. J. Cardiol. 83: 1141-1143, 1999.

3. Corbett, E.; Glaisyer, H.; Chan, C.; Madden, B.; Khaghani, A.;
Yacoub, M.: Congenital cutis laxa with a dominant inheritance and
early onset emphysema. Thorax 49: 836-837, 1994.

4. Curran, M. E.; Atkinson, D. L.; Ewart, A. K.; Morris, C. A.; Leppert,
M. F.; Keating, M. T.: The elastin gene is disrupted by a translocation
associated with supravalvular aortic stenosis. Cell 73: 159-168,
1993.

5. Duba, H.-C.; Doll, A.; Neyer, M.; Erdel, M.; Mann, C.; Hammerer,
I.; Utermann, G.; Grzeschik, K.-H.: The elastin gene is disrupted
in a family with a balanced translocation t(7;16)(q11.23;q13) associated
with a variable expression of the Williams-Beuren syndrome. Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 10: 351-361, 2002.

6. Emanuel, B. S.; Cannizzaro, L.; Ornstein-Goldstein, N.; Indik,
Z. K.; Yoon, K.; May, M.; Oliver, L.; Boyd, C.; Rosenbloom, J.: Chromosomal
localization of the human elastin gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 37: 873-882,
1985.

7. Ewart, A. K.; Jin, W.; Atkinson, D.; Morris, C. A.; Keating, M.
T.: Supravalvular aortic stenosis associated with a deletion disrupting
the elastin gene. J. Clin. Invest. 93: 1071-1077, 1994.

8. Ewart, A. K.; Morris, C. A.; Atkinson, D.; Jin, W.; Sternes, K.;
Spallone, P.; Stock, A. D.; Leppert, M.; Keating, M. T.: Hemizygosity
at the elastin locus in a developmental disorder, Williams syndrome. Nature
Genet. 5: 11-16, 1993.

9. Ewart, A. K.; Morris, C. A.; Ensing, G. J.; Loker, J.; Moore, C.;
Leppert, M.; Keating, M.: A human vascular disorder, supravalvular
aortic stenosis, maps to chromosome 7. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90:
3226-3230, 1993.

10. Faury, G.; Pezet, M.; Knutsen, R. H.; Boyle, W. A.; Heximer, S.
P.; McLean, S. E.; Minkes, R. K.; Blumer, K. J.; Kovacs, A.; Kelly,
D. P.; Li, D. Y.; Starcher, B.; Mecham, R. P.: Developmental adaptation
of the mouse cardiovascular system to elastin haploinsufficiency. J.
Clin. Invest. 112: 1419-1428, 2003.

11. Fazio, M. J.; Mattei, M.-G.; Passage, E.; Chu, M.-L.; Black, D.;
Solomon, E.; Davidson, J. M.; Uitto, J.: Human elastin gene: new
evidence for localization to the long arm of chromosome 7. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 48: 696-703, 1991.

12. Foster, K.; Ferrell, R.; King-Underwood, L.; Povey, S.; Attwood,
J.; Rennick, R.; Humphries, S. E.; Henney, A. M.: Description of
a dinucleotide repeat polymorphism in the human elastin gene and its
use to confirm assignment of the gene to chromosome 7. Ann. Hum.
Genet. 57: 87-96, 1993.

13. Graul-Neumann, L. M.; Hausser, I.; Essayie, M.; Rauch, A.; Kraus,
C.: Highly variable cutis laxa resulting from a dominant splicing
mutation of the elastin gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 146A: 977-983,
2008.

14. Hirano, E.; Knutsen, R. H.; Sugitani, H.; Ciliberto, C. H.; Mecham,
R. P.: Functional rescue of elastin insufficiency in mice by the
human elastin gene. Circ. Res. 101: 523-531, 2008.

15. Indik, Z.; Yeh, H.; Ornstein-Goldstein, N.; Sheppard, P.; Anderson,
N.; Rosenbloom, J. C.; Peltonen, L.; Rosenbloom, J.: Alternative
splicing of human elastin mRNA indicated by sequence analysis of cloned
genomic and complementary DNA. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 5680-5684,
1987.

16. Indik, Z.; Yoon, K.; Morrow, S. D.; Cicila, G.; Rosenbloom, J.;
Rosenbloom, J.; Ornstein-Goldstein, N.: Structure of the 3-prime
region of the human elastin gene: great abundance of Alu repetitive
sequences and few coding sequences. Connect. Tissue Res. 16: 197-211,
1987.

17. Koch, A.; Buheitel, G.; Hofbeck, M.; Rauch, A.; Kraus, C.; Tassabehji,
M.; Singer, H.: Spectrum of arterial obstructions caused by one elastin
gene point mutation. Europ. J. Pediat. 162: 53-54, 2003.

18. Lee, S.-H.; Goswami, S.; Grudo, A.; Song, L.; Bandi, V.; Goodnight-White,
S.; Green, L.; Hacken-Bitar, J.; Huh, J.; Bakaeen, F.; Coxson, H.
O.; Cogswell, S.; Storness-Bliss, C.; Corry, D. B.; Kheradmand, F.
: Antielastin autoimmunity in tobacco smoking-induced emphysema. Nature
Med. 13: 567-569, 2007.

19. Li, D. Y.; Brooke, B.; Davis, E. C.; Mecham, R. P.; Sorensen,
L. K.; Boak, B. B.; Eichwald, E.; Keating, M. T.: Elastin is an essential
determinant of arterial morphogenesis. Nature 393: 276-280, 1998.

20. Li, D. Y.; Faury, G.; Taylor, D. G.; Davis, E. C.; Boyle, W. A.;
Mecham, R. P.; Stenzel, P.; Boak, B.; Keating, M. T.: Novel arterial
pathology in mice and humans hemizygous for elastin. J. Clin. Invest. 102:
1783-1787, 1998.

21. Li, D. Y.; Toland, A. E.; Boak, B. B.; Atkinson, D. L.; Ensing,
G. J.; Morris, C. A.; Keating, M. T.: Elastin point mutations cause
an obstructive vascular disease, supravalvular aortic stenosis. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 6: 1021-1028, 1997.

22. Metcalfe, K.; Rucka, A. K.; Smoot, L.; Hofstadler, G.; Tuzler,
G.; McKeown, P.; Siu, V.; Rauch, A.; Dean, J.; Dennis, N.; Ellis,
I.; Reardon, W.; Cytrynbaum, C.; Osborne, L.; Yates, J. R.; Read,
A. P.; Donnai, D.; Tassabehji, M.: Elastin: mutational spectrum in
supravalvular aortic stenosis. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 8: 955-963,
2000.

23. Micale, L.; Turturo, M. G.; Fusco, C.; Augello, B.; Jurado, L.
A. P.; Izzi, C.; Digilio, M. C.; Milani, D.; Lapi, E.; Zelante, L.;
Merla, G.: Identification and characterization of seven novel mutations
of elastin gene in a cohort of patients affected by supravalvular
aortic stenosis. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 18: 317-323, 2010.

24. Morris, C. A.; Loker, J.; Ensing, G.; Stock, A. D.: Supravalvular
aortic stenosis cosegregates with a familial 6;7 translocation which
disrupts the elastin gene. Am. J. Med. Genet. 46: 737-744, 1993.

25. Olson, T. M.; Michels, V. V.; Lindor, N. M.; Pastores, G. M.;
Weber, J. L.; Schaid, D. J.; Driscoll, D. J.; Feldt, R. H.; Thibodeau,
S. N.: Autosomal dominant supravalvular aortic stenosis: localization
to chromosome 7. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2: 869-873, 1993.

26. Olson, T. M.; Michels, V. V.; Urban, Z.; Csiszar, K.; Christiano,
A. M.; Driscoll, D. J.; Feldt, R. H.; Boyd, C. D.; Thibodeau, S. N.
: A 30 kb deletion within the elastin gene results in familial supravalvular
aortic stenosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1677-1679, 1995.

27. Perez Jurado, L. A.; Peoples, R.; Kaplan, P.; Hamel, B. C. J.;
Francke, U.: Molecular definition of the chromosome 7 deletion in
Williams syndrome and parent-of-origin effects on growth. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 59: 781-792, 1996.

28. Reidy, J. P.: Cutis hyperelastica (Ehlers-Danlos) and cutis laxa. Brit.
J. Plast. Surg. 16: 84-94, 1963.

29. Rosenbloom, J.: Elastin: relation of protein and gene structure
to disease. Lab. Invest. 51: 605-623, 1984.

30. Sephel, G. C.; Byers, P. H.; Holbrook, K. A.; Davidson, J. M.
: Heterogeneity of elastin expression in cutis laxa fibroblast strains. J.
Invest. Derm. 93: 147-153, 1989.

31. Szabo, Z.; Crepeau, M. W.; Mitchell, A. L.; Stephan, M. J.; Puntel,
R. A.; Loke, K. Y.; Kirk, R. C.; Urban, Z.: Aortic aneurysmal disease
and cutis laxa caused by defects in the elastin gene. (Letter) J.
Med. Genet. 43: 255-258, 2006.

32. Tassabehji, M.; Metcalfe, K.; Donnai, D.; Hurst, J.; Reardon,
W.; Burch, M.; Read, A. P.: Elastin: genomic structure and point
mutations in patients with supravalvular aortic stenosis. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 6: 1029-1036, 1997.

33. Tassabehji, M.; Metcalfe, K.; Hurst, J.; Ashcroft, G. S.; Kielty,
C.; Wilmot, C.; Donnai, D.; Read, A. P.; Jones, C. J. P.: An elastin
gene mutation producing abnormal tropoelastin and abnormal elastic
fibres in a patient with autosomal dominant cutis laxa. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 7: 1021-1028, 1998.

34. Tromp, G.; Christiano, A.; Goldstein, N.; Indik, Z.; Boyd, C.;
Rosenbloom, J.; Deak, S.; Prockop, D.; Kuivaniemi, H.: A to G polymorphism
in ELN gene. Nucleic Acids Res. 19: 4314 only, 1991.

35. Uitto, J.; Christiano, A. M.; Kahari, V.-M.; Bashir, M. M.; Rosenbloom,
J.: Molecular biology and pathology of human elastin. Biochem. Soc.
Trans. 19: 824-829, 1991.

36. Urban, Z.; Gao, J.; Pope, F. M.; Davis, E. C.: Autosomal dominant
cutis laxa with severe lung disease: synthesis and matrix deposition
of mutant tropoelastin. J. Invest. Derm. 124: 1193-1199, 2005.

37. Urban, Z.; Michels, V. V.; Thibodeau, S. N.; Davis, E. C.; Bonnefont,
J.-P.; Munnich, A.; Eyskens, B.; Gewillig, M.; Devriendt, K.; Boyd,
C. D.: Isolated supravalvular aortic stenosis: functional haploinsufficiency
of the elastin gene as a result of nonsense-mediated decay. Hum.
Genet. 106: 577-588, 2000.

38. Urban, Z.; Michels, V. V.; Thibodeau, S. N.; Donis-Keller, H.;
Csiszar, K.; Boyd, C. D.: Supravalvular aortic stenosis: a splice
site mutation within the elastin gene results in reduced expression
of two aberrantly spliced transcripts. Hum. Genet. 104: 135-142,
1999.

39. Urban, Z.; Riazi, S.; Seidl, T. L.; Katahira, J.; Smoot, L. B.;
Chitayat, D.; Boyd, C. D.; Hinek, A.: Connection between elastin
haploinsufficiency and increased cell proliferation in patients with
supravalvular aortic stenosis and Williams-Beuren syndrome. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 71: 30-44, 2002.

40. Urban, Z.; Zhang, J.; Davis, E. C.; Maeda, G. K.; Kumar, A.; Stalker,
H.; Belmont, J. W.; Boyd, C. D.; Wallace, M. R.: Supravalvular aortic
stenosis: genetic and molecular dissection of a complex mutation in
the elastin gene. Hum. Genet. 109: 512-520, 2001.

41. Wydner, K. S.; Sechler, J. L.; Boyd, C. D.; Passmore, H. C.:
Use of an intron length polymorphism to localize the tropoelastin
gene to mouse chromosome 5 in a region of linkage conservation with
human chromosome 7. Genomics 23: 125-131, 1994.

42. Zhang, M.-C.; Giro, M.; Quaglino, D., Jr.; Davidson, J. M.: Transforming
growth factor-beta reverses a posttranscriptional defect in elastin
synthesis in a cutis laxa skin fibroblast strain. J. Clin. Invest. 95:
986-994, 1995.

43. Zhang, M.-C.; He, L.; Giro, M.; Yong, S. L.; Tiller, G. E.; Davidson,
J. M.: Cutis laxa arising from frameshift mutations in exon 30 of
the elastin gene (ELN). J. Biol. Chem. 274: 981-986, 1999.

44. Zhang, M. C.; He, L.; Yong, S. L.; Tiller, G. E.; Davidson, J.
M.: Cutis laxa arising from a frame shift mutation in the elastin
gene (ELN). (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61 (suppl.): A353 only,
1997.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 3/14/2012
Kelly A. Przylepa - updated: 11/20/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/1/2008
Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/11/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 4/19/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/10/2004
Natalie E. Krasikov - updated: 2/19/2004
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 2/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/17/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/6/2001
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 4/17/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/16/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/14/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/18/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/5/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/1/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/19/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/15/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/24/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/15/1997
Moyra Smith - updated: 10/21/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 03/15/2012
terry: 3/14/2012
alopez: 1/26/2012
alopez: 1/24/2012
carol: 9/1/2010
wwang: 8/25/2010
ckniffin: 8/16/2010
carol: 8/9/2010
alopez: 1/6/2010
carol: 11/26/2008
terry: 11/20/2008
wwang: 10/14/2008
terry: 9/25/2008
mgross: 5/1/2008
mgross: 6/11/2007
carol: 4/20/2006
carol: 4/19/2006
terry: 4/19/2006
tkritzer: 5/26/2004
terry: 5/10/2004
carol: 2/19/2004
terry: 2/19/2004
cwells: 2/11/2003
tkritzer: 7/29/2002
tkritzer: 7/26/2002
terry: 7/17/2002
carol: 1/2/2002
mcapotos: 12/13/2001
terry: 12/6/2001
carol: 5/18/2001
mcapotos: 5/10/2001
mcapotos: 4/17/2001
carol: 8/29/2000
terry: 8/16/2000
carol: 3/15/2000
mgross: 5/25/1999
mgross: 5/18/1999
terry: 5/14/1999
alopez: 3/19/1999
alopez: 3/18/1999
mgross: 3/17/1999
carol: 1/6/1999
terry: 1/5/1999
carol: 12/2/1998
terry: 12/1/1998
terry: 8/11/1998
carol: 6/22/1998
terry: 6/19/1998
alopez: 6/18/1998
terry: 6/15/1998
terry: 5/29/1998
terry: 10/28/1997
alopez: 10/27/1997
terry: 10/24/1997
mark: 10/6/1997
mark: 9/9/1997
mark: 8/19/1997
jenny: 8/19/1997
terry: 8/15/1997
mark: 1/29/1997
mark: 10/21/1996
mark: 11/6/1995
terry: 11/7/1994
mimadm: 9/24/1994
jason: 6/8/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994
pfoster: 4/1/1994

608360	TITLE *608360 LEUCINE-RICH REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 8A; LRRC8A
;;LRRC8;;
KIAA1437
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned LRRC8, which they designated
KIAA1437. The deduced 811-amino acid protein shares 30% identity with
rat densin-180. RT-PCR ELISA detected expression within all tissues and
specific brain regions examined. Highest expression was found in adult
brain, followed by adult kidney, ovary, lung, liver, heart, and fetal
brain and liver. Within specific adult brain regions, highest expression
was detected in amygdala and caudate nucleus.

Kubota et al. (2004) noted that the human LRRC8A gene contains 810 amino
acids and shares 99% amino acid sequence identity with the mouse
ortholog. They identified 4 N-terminal transmembrane domains and 16
C-terminal extracellular leucine-rich repeats (LRRs).

GENE FUNCTION

Using semiquantitative PCR, Kubota et al. (2004) observed that mRNA
expression of LRRC8A in peripheral blood mononuclear cells was
eventually decreased by long-term stimulation by phytohemagglutinin,
contrary to the expression of other LRRC8 family members.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the LRRC8
gene to chromosome 9 (TMAP SGC34869).

Kubota et al. (2004) mapped the LRRC8A gene to chromosome 9q34.11 by
genomic sequence analysis. They localized the orthologous mouse gene to
chromosome 2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Sawada et al. (2003) studied a girl with a balanced translocation,
t(9;20)(q33.2;q12), who had congenital agammaglobulinemia (AGM5; 613506)
and minor facial anomalies; she lacked B cells in peripheral blood and
showed epicanthic folds, mild hypertelorism, high-arched palate, and
lowered ears. Sawada et al. (2003) isolated the LRRC8 gene at the
translocation site on chromosome 9. The LRRC8 gene has 4 transmembrane
helices with 1 isolated and 8 sequentially located leucine-rich repeats
(LRRs). It was expressed on T cells as well as on B-lineage cells. The
translocation truncated the LRRC8 gene, resulting in deletion of the
eighth, ninth, and half of the seventh LRR domains (608360.0001) located
close to the C terminus. Protein products derived from the truncated
gene were coexpressed on white blood cells with the intact LRRC8 protein
from the untranslocated allele. Transplantation experiments with murine
bone marrow cells that were forced to express the truncated LRRC8 showed
that expression of the truncated protein inhibited B cell development,
producing a dominant-negative effect. The results indicated that LRRC8
is required for B cell development.

Conley (2003) commented on the variety of genes in which mutations can
cause congenital agammaglobulinemia through failure of B-cell
development. The genes encode components of the pre-B cell receptor or
proteins that are activated by crosslinking of the pre-B cell receptor.
Defects in these genes result in a block in B-cell differentiation at
the pro-B to pre-B cell transition. The defect in the LRRC8 gene in the
patient described by Sawada et al. (2003) caused a block at exactly the
same point in B-cell differentiation.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
AGAMMAGLOBULINEMIA 5 (1 family)
LRRC8A, 1-BP INS, 2681T, TRANSLOCATION 20

In a patient with agammaglobulinemia-5 (613506), Sawada et al. (2003)
identified a reciprocal translocation, t(9;20)(q33.2;q12), and
demonstrated truncation of the LRRC8A gene, which was located at the
chromosome 9 breakpoint. The truncation resulted in deletion of the
eighth, ninth, and half of the seventh LRR domains located close to the
C terminus. The truncated gene encoded 754 amino acides, including 719
derived from exon 1 of the LRCC8A gene. In white cells, protein products
derived from the truncated gene were coexpressed with the intact LRRC8A
protein from the untranslocated allele. Experiments in mouse bone marrow
cells indicated that the truncated protein inhibited B-cell development.
A dominant-negative mechanism for expression of the defect in the
heterozygote was proposed.

REFERENCE 1. Conley, M. E.: Genes required for B cell development. (Commentary) J.
Clin. Invest. 112: 1636-1638, 2003.

2. Kubota, K.; Kim, J. Y.; Sawada, A.; Tokimasa, S.; Fujisaki, H.;
Matsuda-Hashii, Y.; Ozono, K.; Hara, J.: LRRC8 involved in B cell
development belongs to a novel family of leucine-rich repeat proteins. FEBS
Lett. 564: 147-152, 2004.

3. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVI.
The complete sequences of 150 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 65-73, 2000.

4. Sawada, A.; Takihara, Y.; Kim, J. Y.; Matsuda-Hashii, Y.; Tokimasa,
S.; Fujisaki, H.; Kubota, K.; Endo, H.; Onodera, T.; Ohta, H.; Ozono,
K.; Hara, J.: A congenital mutation of the novel gene LRRC8 causes
agammaglobulinemia in humans. J. Clin. Invest. 112: 1707-1713, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 6/30/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/7/2004

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/22/2003

EDITED carol: 05/01/2013
ckniffin: 5/1/2013
carol: 8/3/2010
ckniffin: 7/29/2010
alopez: 6/30/2009
tkritzer: 1/12/2004
tkritzer: 1/9/2004
terry: 1/7/2004
mgross: 12/22/2003

612167	TITLE *612167 WD REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 48; WDR48
;;p80;;
KIAA1449;;
USP1-ASSOCIATED FACTOR 1; UAF1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated fetal brain cDNA
library, Nagase et al. (2000) cloned WDR48, which they called KIAA1449.
The predicted 607-amino acid protein shares 43% identity with a 77-kD
worm protein containing trp-asp (WD) repeats. RT-PCR ELISA detected high
expression in testis and ovary and moderate expression in all other
adult and fetal tissues examined. Within brain, expression was high in
corpus callosum, caudate nucleus, and subthalamic nucleus and moderate
in all other regions examined.

By screening for T-lymphocyte proteins that could bind to the
herpesvirus saimiri Tip protein, followed by immunoblot analysis, mass
spectrometry, and PCR of a Jurkat T-cell cDNA library, Park et al.
(2002) cloned full-length WDR48, which they called p80. The deduced
677-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 76.2 kD. It
contains 8 potential N-terminal WD repeats and a C-terminal coiled-coil
structure. Northern blot analysis detected a major 4.2-kb transcript and
a minor 3.0-kb transcript in all tissues examined. Expression of the
major transcript was somewhat higher in skeletal muscle, kidney, and
placenta compared with other tissues. WDR48 had an apparent molecular
mass of 80 kD by SDS-PAGE. Immunofluorescence analysis localized to
WDR48 to late endosomes and lysosomes of Jurkat T cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using protein pull-down assays and immunoprecipitation analysis, Park et
al. (2002) showed that the N terminus of WDR48 interacted with the
N-terminal ser-rich portion of Tip, while the WDR48 C terminus mediated
lysosomal localization. Interaction of Tip with WDR48 induced lysosomal
vesicle formation and, via the C-terminal region of Tip, recruitment of
LCK (153390) to these lysosomal vesicles for degradation. Tip
interactions with WDR48 and LCK resulted in downregulation of T-cell
receptor (see 186830) and CD4 (186940) surface expression, respectively,
leading to inhibition of T-lymphocyte signal transduction.

Using tandem affinity protein purification coupled to mass spectrometry,
Cote-Martin et al. (2008) showed that anogenital, but not cutaneous,
strains of human papillomavirus E1 helicase interacted with WDR48.
Colocalization analysis revealed that E1 redistributed WDR48 from the
cytoplasm to the nucleus in a manner dependent on the E1 nuclear
localization signal. Cote-Martin et al. (2008) proposed that E1
interaction with WDR48 is required for efficient maintenance of the
viral episome in undifferentiated keratinocytes.

MAPPING

By database analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the KIAA1449 gene to
chromosome 3.

REFERENCE 1. Cote-Martin, A.; Moody, C.; Fradet-Turcotte, A.; D'Abramo, C. M.;
Lehoux, M.; Joubert, S.; Poirier, G. G.; Coulombe, B.; Laimins, L.
A.; Archambault, J.: Human papillomavirus E1 helicase interacts with
the WD repeat protein p80 to promote maintenance of the viral genome
in keratinocytes. J. Virology 82: 1271-1283, 2008.

2. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ishikawa, K.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 143-150, 2000.

3. Park, J.; Lee, B.-S.; Choi, J.-K.; Means, R. E.; Choe, J.; Jung,
J. U.: Herpesviral protein targets a cellular WD repeat endosomal
protein to downregulate T lymphocyte receptor expression. Immunity 17:
221-233, 2002.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/10/2008

EDITED mgross: 11/13/2012
carol: 10/9/2008
mgross: 7/10/2008

609383	TITLE *609383 NIPA-LIKE DOMAIN-CONTAINING 4; NIPAL4
;;ICHTHYIN; ICHYN
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By in silico analyses, Lefevre et al. (2004) cloned NIPAL4, which they
called ichthyin. The deduced 404-amino acid protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 44 kD. The protein has several putative transmembrane
domains and shares approximately 75% sequence identity with the mouse
and rat orthologs. It is predicted to localize in the plasma membrane,
but does not possess a signal sequence. RT-PCR detected expression of
ichthyin at high levels in brain, lung, stomach, skin, and leukocytes,
and in all other tissues tested except liver, thyroid, and fetal brain,
in which no expression was detectable. Strong expression was observed in
cultured keratinocytes from normal skin biopsies; expression was weaker
in cultured fibroblasts from the same skin biopsies, in placenta and in
lymphocytes.

GENE STRUCTURE

Lefevre et al. (2004) determined that the NIPAL4 gene contains 6 exons.

MAPPING

By in silico and sequence analyses, Lefevre et al. (2004) mapped the
NIPAL4 gene to chromosome 5q33.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 23 patients from 14 consanguineous families with nonsyndromic
autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI6; 612281), Lefevre et
al. (2004) identified 6 homozygous mutations in the NIPAL4 gene (see,
e.g., 609383.0001-609383.0002).

Dahlqvist et al. (2007) studied 27 patients from 18 ARCI families with
the specific ultrastructural features of the epidermis that characterize
electron microscopy-analyzed ichthyosis designated type III (EM type
III). Mutation screening of NIPAL4 revealed 4 different missense or
splice site mutations (see, e.g., 609383.0003-609383.0004) in affected
members from 16 of 18 (89%) families with these characteristics of ARCI
EM type III.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 6
NIPAL4, ARG83TER

In affected members of 3 consanguineous Algerian families with autosomal
recessive congenital ichthyosis-6 (ARCI6; 612281), Lefevre et al. (2004)
identified a homozygous 247C-T transition in exon 2 of the NIPAL4 gene,
resulting in an arg83-to-ter (R83X) substitution.

.0002
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 6
NIPAL4, ALA114ASN

In affected members of 7 consanguineous families with autosomal
recessive congenital ichthyosis-6 (612281), Lefevre et al. (2004)
identified a homozygous 341C-A transversion in exon 4 of the NIPAL4
gene, resulting in an ala114-to-asn (A114N) substitution. One of the
families was from Colombia, 3 were from Turkey, and 3 were from Algeria.

.0003
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 6
NIPAL4, ALA176ASP

In a study of 27 patients from 18 families with autosomal recessive
congenital ichthyosis-6 (612281) characterized by electron microscopy
(EM) as type III (ARCI EM type III), with abnormal lamellar bodies in
stratum granulosum and perinuclear, elongated membranes, Dahlqvist et
al. (2007) found a 527C-to-A transversion in exon 4 of the NIPAL4 cDNA
that led to an ala176-to-asp (A176D) amino acid substitution. The
mutation was found in 37 of the 54 alleles examined.

.0004
ICHTHYOSIS, CONGENITAL, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE 6
NIPAL4, IVS5, G-A, +1

In a patient with autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis-6 (612281),
Dahlqvist et al. (2007) identified compound heterozygosity for a G-to-A
transition at the splice donor site of exon 5 of the NIPAL4 gene, and an
A176D mutation (609383.0003). DNA sequencing showed that the mutant mRNA
retained 68 nucleotides of intronic sequence by the activation of a
cryptic splice site, which resulted in a premature stop codon.

REFERENCE 1. Dahlqvist, J.; Klar, J.; Hausser, I.; Anton-Lamprecht, I.; Pigg,
M. H.; Gedde-Dahl, T., Jr.; Ganemo, A.; Vahlquist, A.; Dahl, N.:
Congenital ichthyosis: mutations in ichthyin are associated with specific
structural abnormalities in the granular layer of epidermis. J. Med.
Genet. 44: 615-620, 2007.

2. Lefevre, C.; Bouadjar, B.; Karaduman, A.; Jobard, F.; Saker, S.;
Ozguc, M.; Lathrop, M.; Prud'homme, J.-F.; Fischer, J.: Mutations
in ichthyin a new gene on chromosome 5q33 in a new form of autosomal
recessive congenital ichthyosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13: 2473-2482,
2004.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 01/17/2013
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/28/2007
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 12/3/2007

CREATED George E. Tiller: 5/24/2005

EDITED carol: 01/17/2013
wwang: 4/28/2011
carol: 3/20/2009
alopez: 9/10/2008
alopez: 1/24/2008
terry: 12/28/2007
carol: 12/4/2007
carol: 12/3/2007
carol: 6/3/2005
carol: 5/27/2005
tkritzer: 5/26/2005

301040	TITLE #301040 ALPHA-THALASSEMIA/MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME, X-LINKED; ATRX
;;ALPHA-THALASSEMIA/MENTAL RETARDATION SYNDROME, NONDELETION TYPE;;
ATR-X SYNDROME;;
ATR, NONDELETION TYPE
DESCRIPTION A number sign (#) is used with this entry because the phenotype is
caused by mutation in the ATRX gene (300032).

The 'deletion' type of alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome
(141750) is a contiguous gene syndrome due to a deletion in chromosome
16p that involves the hemoglobin alpha-1 (HBA1; 141800) and alpha-2
(HBA2; 141850) genes.

The X-linked mental retardation-hypotonic facies syndrome (309580) is
also caused by mutation in the ATRX gene.

CLINICAL FEATURES

Weatherall et al. (1981) reported the association of hemoglobin H
disease (Hb H; see alpha-thalassemias, 141800) and mental retardation in
3 unrelated patients of northern European descent.

Wilkie et al. (1990) reported 5 unrelated patients, 2 of whom were
reported by Weatherall et al. (1981), with mental retardation and
alpha-thalassemia without molecular abnormalities of the alpha-globin
gene complex on chromosome 16p. The patients showed a strikingly uniform
phenotype comprising severe mental handicap, characteristic dysmorphic
facies, genital abnormalities, and an unusual, mild form of hemoglobin H
disease. Facial features included microcephaly, hypertelorism,
epicanthus, a small triangular upturned nose, and flat face. The degree
of red blood cell hypochromia and Hb H levels, which varied from 0.7 to
6.7%, were milder than usually found in alpha-thalassemia. Although
several approaches failed to find a defect in the alpha-globin genes, 3
patients tested had markedly reduced total mRNA levels of both HBA1 and
HBA2. The authors suggested that the responsible locus encoded a
trans-acting factor involved in the normal regulation of alpha-globin
expression.

Harvey et al. (1990) described the syndrome in a 21-year-old male and
his brother who had died earlier, suggesting X-linked inheritance. DNA
analysis showed no deletions within the alpha-globin gene cluster. Hb H
bodies were present at a low level (1.6%).

Porteous and Burn (1990) described a 6-year-old boy who had a maternal
uncle with an X-linked mental retardation syndrome, and suggested that
their case resembled 2 brothers previously thought to have an atypical
form of the Coffin-Lowry syndrome (303600) (illustrated in Smith's
Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation, Jones, 1988). However,
Wilkie et al. (1991) found that there were hematologic signs of the
nondeletion ATR syndrome in the patient reported by Porteous and Burn
(1990). In addition, Wilkie et al. (1991) reported that hematologic
evaluation of 1 of the brothers reported in Smith's book showed that he
had nondeletion ATR and that a male first-cousin through the maternal
line had the same condition. Wilkie et al. (1991) suggested that this
condition be called 'X-linked alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation'
(ATR-X) to distinguish it from the deletion form.

In a review, Gibbons et al. (1991) noted that some patients with ATR-X
syndrome have normal or only mildly abnormal hematologic indices; thus
normal hemoglobin levels and red cell indices do not necessarily exclude
the condition.

Cole et al. (1991) described an affected boy whose maternal uncle was
also affected. The boy had right-sided renal agenesis with left-sided
hydronephrosis and hydroureter. He had recurrent hypochromic, microcytic
anemia. His otherwise unaffected sister had had recurrent urinary tract
infections and persistent renal impairment in the absence of any
identifiable renal tract anomaly. Kurosawa et al. (1996) described a boy
with self-induced vomiting followed by rumination and noted that Cole et
al. (1991) made the same observation in a man and his nephew.

Donnai et al. (1991) described 4 brothers with this syndrome in whom the
diagnosis was first suspected because of their characteristic clinical
features and was confirmed in each case by the demonstration of Hb H
inclusions in a proportion of their red blood cells. Very rare Hb H
inclusions were found in the red blood cells of the mother and one
sister who both shared some facial features with the affected boys; they
were presumed to be carriers of the disorder.

Gorlin (1993) examined patients with typical features of the ATR-X
syndrome, but without hemoglobin H. The facies were identical and
mapping studies in several families suggested location of the mutation
in the site on the X chromosome involved in ATR-X. The facies of this
syndrome, which is often confused with that of Coffin-Lowry syndrome,
were marked by telecanthus, epicanthic folds, flat nasal bridge, midface
hypoplasia, a carp-shaped mouth with full lips, and small triangular
nose with anteverted nostrils. Gorlin (1993) noted that the alae of the
nose extended lower than the columella and septum. All developmental
milestones, especially walking, were delayed and speech was almost
absent. On further investigation, Gibbons (1994) found that the patients
of Gorlin (1993) did have alpha-thalassemia, as indicated by the
presence of hemoglobin H inclusions after use of 1% brilliant cresyl
blue staining overnight in buffered solution at room temperature. With
the staining, the Hb H inclusions give the erythrocytes the appearance
of golf balls.

Logie et al. (1994) reported a pedigree with 6 affected males in 4
sibships spanning 2 generations. Two affected cousins were described in
detail, one of whom had an unusually mild hematologic phenotype. Hb H
inclusions, the hallmark of the disorder, were detected in the
peripheral red blood cells only after repeated observations. The cousins
had strikingly similar facies with telecanthus, anteverted nares,
carp-shaped mouth, and large tongue. Gibbons et al. (1995) showed that
the hematologic findings in ATR-X may vary widely; indeed, in some
cases, the manifestation of alpha-thalassemia may be subtle and missed
without repeated examinations. McPherson et al. (1995) described a
kindred with 4 affected members. The hematologic abnormality was not
detected on routine hematologic studies, including hemoglobin
electrophoresis, but the patients were found to have hemoglobin H
inclusions on brilliant cresyl blue staining of peripheral smears.

Reardon et al. (1995) reported 2 phenotypic females with a 46,XY
karyotype who had abnormalities of the external genitalia resulting in
male pseudohermaphroditism. They pointed out that 1 of the 5 original
patients described in defining the ATR-X syndrome was a phenotypic
female with a 46,XY karyotype (Wilkie et al., 1990). McPherson et al.
(1995) described genital anomalies that led to a female sex of rearing
in 3 of 4 affected members of a family. Gibbons et al. (1995) emphasized
the progressive coarsening of the facial appearance. Kuno et al. (1997)
described a 5-year-old Japanese boy with this condition. He had an
abnormal hemoglobin which was found to consist exclusively of a beta
subunit. Severe mental retardation and hypoplastic penis and testes were
present. Anemia was only mild (hematocrit 35.8%). The family history was
unremarkable.

Martinez et al. (1998) reported 2 brothers and 1 maternal cousin with
severe mental retardation, microcephaly, short stature, cryptorchidism,
and spastic diplegia. Some facial dysmorphic features were present.
Martinez et al. (1998) pointed out the similarity in phenotype between
their family and that described by Sutherland et al. (1988) (see
309500). They suggested that the greater phenotypic severity in their
family was due to allelic heterogeneity. X-inactivation analysis of 1
potential and 3 obligate carriers showed nonrandom inactivation of the
disease-linked variant. On further analysis of this family, Lossi et al.
(1999) found that 3% of the patients' erythrocytes showed Hb H
inclusions, consistent with ATR-X. Lossi et al. (1999) also reported
dysmorphic facial features, including 'carp-like' triangular mouth,
hypertelorism, small triangular nose, and broad nasal root. The
hypertonia and spasticity were unusual findings in this family. A
mutation was found in the ATRX gene in affected individuals
(300032.0016).

Gibbons and Higgs (2000) provided a review of the clinical spectrum of
syndromes caused by mutation in the XH2 gene.

Martucciello et al. (2006) described male 3-year-old dizygotic twins
with ATRX who exhibited gastrointestinal problems including severe
regurgitation of food, vomiting, dysphagia, irritability, respiratory
disorders, meteorism, and chronic constipation. Barium studies in both
twins showed gastric pseudovolvulus, and 24-hour pH monitoring showed
severe gastroesophageal reflux. Enzymo-histochemical studies of
full-thickness colonic biopsies revealed a complex dysganglionosis:
ultrashort Hirschsprung disease (see 142623) associated with
hypoganglionosis. Martucciello et al. (2006) reviewed the
gastrointestinal phenotype of 128 confirmed cases of ATRX and found that
drooling was reported in 36% of cases, gastroesophageal reflux was
present in 72%, and constipation in 30%. Fundoplication was performed in
10% of cases, and 9% were fed by gastrostomy. Upper GI bleeding was
reported in 10% of cases. Fatal aspiration of vomitus occurred in 3
patients; volvulus was seen in 4 patients, 2 of whom died after
intestinal infarction; and 4 patients had recurrent hospitalizations for
ileus or pseudoobstruction. Martucciello et al. (2006) also noted that
there were numerous anecdotal reports from parents describing prolonged
episodes of patient distress with refusal to eat or drink.

Jezela-Stanek et al. (2009) reported a patient with ATRX confirmed by
genetic analysis. He had hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, strabismus,
short nose with flat bridge and triangular upturned tip, and tented
upper lip with everted lower lip. Other features included hypotonia,
psychomotor retardation, and hemoglobin H inclusions. The patient also
had undescended testes and ambiguous genitalia, which the authors
referred to as male pseudohermaphroditism. Laboratory studies showed
increased FSH and decreased testosterone. A deceased sib was believed to
have been affected and reportedly had ambiguous external genitalia.
Jezela-Stanek et al. (2009) postulated that the distinctive facial
features in ATRX result from facial hypotonia and can be confused with
Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS; 303600) or SLO syndromes (SLOS; 270400).

- Carrier Females

Studying 7 pedigrees that included individuals with the ATR-X syndrome,
Gibbons et al. (1992) concluded that intellectually normal female
carriers could be identified by the presence of rare cells containing Hb
H inclusions in their peripheral blood and by an extremely skewed
pattern of X inactivation in cells from a variety of tissues. McPherson
et al. (1995) used a combination of skewed X inactivation and haplotype
analysis at Xq12-q21.3 to establish carrier status.

Wada et al. (2005) found skewed X-inactivation patterns (greater than
90:10) in 6 of 7 unaffected Japanese female ATR-X carriers; the 1
carrier with non-skewed X inactivation (72:28) demonstrated moderate
mental retardation. The woman did not have dysmorphic features or
hemoglobin inclusions. Wada et al. (2005) concluded that mutations in
the ATRX gene may cause mental retardation in females if the chromosome
carrying the mutation is not properly inactivated.

Badens et al. (2006) reported a 4-year-old girl with typical features of
the ATR-X syndrome. Molecular studies showed a totally skewed
X-inactivation pattern, with the active chromosome carrying a
heterozygous mutation in the ATRX gene (300032.0018). Neither parent had
the mutation in peripheral blood leukocytes, but SNP analysis indicated
that the mutation occurred on the maternal chromosome. The child was
conceived with assisted reproduction technologies (ART) due to
micropolycystic ovaries and endometriosis in the mother. Badens et al.
(2006) suggested that some aspect of ART may have disturbed imprinting
in this patient.

MAPPING

By linkage analysis of 7 affected pedigrees, Gibbons et al. (1992)
mapped the ATR-X locus to an 11-cM interval on chromosome Xq12-q21.31
between markers DXS106 and DXYS1X (peak lod score of 5.4 at theta = 0 at
DXS72).

In a 3-generation ATR-X family with 3 affected males, Houdayer et al.
(1993) demonstrated a maximum lod score of 2.09 at a recombination
fraction of zero for linkage with DXS453 located at the boundary
Xq12-q13.1. The nearest flanking loci demonstrating recombination with
the disease locus were the androgen receptor (AR; 313700) at Xq11.2-q12
on the centromeric side and DXS72 at Xq21.1 on the telomeric side.
Houdayer et al. (1993) interpreted their results as compatible with a
distal boundary at Xq21.1 instead of Xq21.31 as previously held.

Gibbons et al. (1995) performed linkage analysis in 9 families with
ATR-X syndrome and identified key recombinants that reduced the area of
interest to 1.4 cM (estimated to be 15 Mb) between DXS454 and DXS72
within Xq13.1-q21.1 (Wang et al., 1994).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In patients with the ATR-X syndrome, Gibbons et al. (1995) identified
mutations in the ATRX gene (300032.0001-300032.0009).

In affected members of a family with ATR-X syndrome, Villard et al.
(1996) identified a splice site mutation in the ATRX gene (300032.0010).
In 2 first cousins presenting the classic ATR-X phenotype with
alpha-thalassemia and Hb H inclusions, only the abnormal transcript was
expressed. In a distant cousin presenting with a similar dysmorphic
mental retardation phenotype, but without thalassemia, they found that
approximately 30% of the ATRX transcripts were normal. These data
suggested that the mode of action of the ATRX gene product on globin
expression is distinct from its mode of action in brain development and
facial morphogenesis, and that the mutated splice site could be used
with varying efficiency in different individuals.

Hendrich and Bickmore (2001) reviewed human disorders that share in
common defects of chromatin structure or modification, including the
ATR-X spectrum of disorders, ICF syndrome (242860), Rett syndrome
(312750), Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (180849), and Coffin-Lowry syndrome.

- Partial Duplication of the ATRX Gene

Thienpont et al. (2007) reported 3 patients, including 2 sibs, with the
ATRX syndrome due to partial duplications of the ATRX gene. In 1 family,
the duplication included exons 2 to 35; in the other family, exons 2 to
29. Further analysis showed that both mothers carried the duplication
and both had skewed X inactivation. In 1 patient, ATRX mRNA levels were
about 3% of normal values. Thienpont et al. (2007) noted that the
duplications were not identified by sequence analysis and suggested that
quantitative analysis to detect copy numbers of the ATRX gene may be
required in some cases.

Cohn et al. (2009) reported a family in which 3 males had ATRX syndrome
due to a partial intragenic duplication of the ATRX gene that spanned
exons 2 to 31. Northern blot analysis failed to identify a full-length
transcript, but cDNA sequencing was consistent with some level of
expression. The authors noted that complete loss of ATRX is most likely
lethal, suggesting that the mutation was likely hypomorphic and
associated with some residual protein function. Unaffected obligate
carrier females in the family had highly skewed X inactivation. The
phenotype was typical for the disorder, although the facial features
were not as readily apparent in the 2 older affected individuals. The
proband was identified from 2 larger cohorts comprising 300 males with
mental retardation. Cohn et al. (2009) did not find ATRX duplications in
29 additional males with ATRX syndrome who were negative on sequence
analysis, suggesting that duplications are a rare cause of the disorder.

GENOTYPE/PHENOTYPE CORRELATIONS

In a review article, Gibbons and Higgs (2000) noted that mutations in
the ATRX gene resulting in the loss of the C terminal domain are
associated with the most severe urogenital abnormalities. However, at
other sites, there is no obvious link between genotype and phenotype,
and there is considerable variation in the degree of abnormalities seen
in individuals with the same mutation.

Among 22 ATRX patients from 16 families, Badens et al. (2006) found that
those with mutations in the PHD-like domain of the ATRX protein had
significantly more severe and permanent psychomotor retardation and
significantly more severe urogenital anomalies compared to those with
mutations in the helicase domain.

ANIMAL MODEL

Medina et al. (2009) surveyed ATR-X syndrome clinical findings and noted
that ocular defects were present in 47 (23%) of 202 patients. They
showed that Atrx was expressed in the neuroprogenitor pool in embryonic
mouse retina and in all cell types of adult mouse retina except rod
photoreceptors. Conditional inactivation of Atrx in mouse retina during
embryogenesis resulted in loss of only 2 types of neurons, amacrine and
horizontal cells. This defect did not arise from a failure to specify
these cells, but rather a defect in interneuron differentiation and
survival postnatally. The timing of cell loss was concomitant with
light-dependent changes in synaptic organization in mouse retina and
with a change in Atrx subnuclear localization within these interneurons.
The interneuron defects were associated with functional deficits as
demonstrated by reduced b-wave amplitudes upon electroretinogram
analysis. Medina et al. (2009) proposed a role for Atrx in interneuron
survival and differentiation.

REFERENCE 1. Badens, C.; Lacoste, C.; Philip, N.; Martini, N.; Courrier, S.;
Giuliano, F.; Verloes, A.; Munnich, A.; Leheup, B.; Burglen, L.; Odent,
S.; Van Esch, H.; Levy, N.: Mutations in PHD-like domain of the ATRX
gene correlate with severe psychomotor impairment and severe urogenital
abnormalities in patients with ATRX syndrome. Clin. Genet. 70: 57-62,
2006.

2. Badens, C.; Martini, N.; Courrier, S.; DesPortes, V.; Touraine,
R.; Levy, N.; Edery, P.: ATRX syndrome in a girl with a heterozygous
mutation in the ATRX Zn finger domain and a totally skewed X-inactivation
pattern. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A: 2212-2215, 2006.

3. Cohn, D. M.; Pagon, R. A.; Hudgins, L.; Schwartz, C. E.; Stevenson,
R. E.; Friez, M. J.: Partial ATRX gene duplication causes ATR-X syndrome.
(Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A: 2317-2320, 2009.

4. Cole, T. R. P.; May, A.; Hughes, H. E.: Alpha-thalassaemia/mental
retardation syndrome (non-deletional type): report of a family supporting
X linked inheritance. J. Med. Genet. 28: 734-737, 1991.

5. Donnai, D.; Clayton-Smith, J.; Gibbons, R. J.; Higgs, D. R.: The
non-deletion alpha-thalassaemia/mental retardation syndrome: further
support for X linkage. J. Med. Genet. 28: 742-745, 1991.

6. Gibbons, R.: Personal Communication. Oxford, England  11/7/1994.

7. Gibbons, R. J.; Brueton, L.; Buckle, V. J.; Burn, J.; Clayton-Smith,
J.; Davison, B. C. C.; Gardner, R. J. M.; Homfray, T.; Kearney, L.;
Kingston, H. M.; Newbury-Ecob, R.; Porteous, M. E. P.; Wilkie, A.
O. M.; Higgs, D. R.: Clinical and hematologic aspects of the X-linked
alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome (ATR-X). Am. J. Med.
Genet. 55: 288-299, 1995.

8. Gibbons, R. J.; Higgs, D. R.: Molecular-clinical spectrum of the
ATR-X syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 97: 204-212, 2000.

9. Gibbons, R. J.; Picketts, D. J.; Villard, L.; Higgs, D. R.: Mutations
in a putative global transcriptional regulator cause X-linked mental
retardation with alpha-thalassemia (ATR-X syndrome). Cell 80: 837-845,
1995.

10. Gibbons, R. J.; Suthers, G. K.; Wilkie, A. O. M.; Buckle, V. J.;
Higgs, D. R.: X-linked alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation (ATR-X)
syndrome: localization to Xq12-q21.31 by X inactivation and linkage
analysis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 51: 1136-1149, 1992.

11. Gibbons, R. J.; Wilkie, A. O. M.; Weatherall, D. J.; Higgs, D.
R.: A newly defined X linked mental retardation syndrome associated
with alpha-thalassaemia. J. Med. Genet. 28: 729-733, 1991.

12. Gorlin, R. J.: Personal Communication. Minneapolis, Minn.
5/29/1993.

13. Harvey, M. P.; Kearney, A.; Smith, A.; Trent, R. J.: Occurrence
of the alpha-thalassaemia-mental retardation syndrome (non-deletional
type) in an Australian male. J. Med. Genet. 27: 577-581, 1990.

14. Hendrich, B.; Bickmore, W.: Human diseases with underlying defects
in chromatin structure and modification. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10:
2233-2242, 2001.

15. Houdayer, C.; Toutain, A.; Ronce, N.; Lefort, G.; Sarda, P.; Taib,
J.; Briault, S.; Lambert, J. C.; Moraine, C.: X-linked alpha-thalassemia/mental
retardation syndrome: linkage analysis in a new family further supports
localization in proximal Xq. Ann. Genet. 36: 194-199, 1993.

16. Jezela-Stanek, A.; Fisher, C.; Szarras-Czapnik, M.; Olczak-Kowalczyk,
D.; Gibbons, R. J.; Slowikowska-Hilczer, J.; Krajewska-Walasek, M.
: X-linked alpha thalassaemia/mental retardation syndrome: a case
with gonadal dysgenesis, caused by a novel mutation in ATRX gene. Clin.
Dysmorph. 18: 168-171, 2009.

17. Jones, K. L.: Smith's Recognizable Patterns of Human Malformation.
Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders (pub.)  (4th ed.): 1988. P. 237.

18. Kuno, T.; Ideguchi, H.; Yoshida, N.; Masuyama, T.; Ohta, M.; Nishimura,
S.; Tasaki, H.; Miyazaki, S.; Hara, H.; Matsumoto, K.: A case of
X-linked alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome: analysis of
hemoglobin by an automated glycated hemoglobin analyzer. Acta Paediat.
Jpn. 39: 615-618, 1997.

19. Kurosawa, K.; Akatsuka, A.; Ochiai, Y.; Ikeda, J.; Maekawa, K.
: Self-induced vomiting in X-linked alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation
syndrome. (Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 63: 505-506, 1996.

20. Logie, L. J.; Gibbons, R. J.; Higgs, D. R.; Brown, J. K.; Porteous,
M. E. M.: Alpha thalassaemia mental retardation (ATR-X): an atypical
family. Arch. Dis. Child. 70: 439-440, 1994.

21. Lossi, A. M.; Millan, J. M.; Villard, L.; Orellana, C.; Cardoso,
C.; Prieto, F.; Fontes, M.; Martinez, F.: Mutation of the XNP/ATR-X
gene in a family with severe mental retardation, spastic paraplegia
and skewed pattern of X inactivation: demonstration that the mutation
is involved in the inactivation bias. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 65:
558-562, 1999.

22. Martinez, F.; Tomas, M.; Millan, J. M.; Fernandez, A.; Palau,
F.; Prieto, F.: Genetic localisation of mental retardation with spastic
diplegia to the pericentromeric region of the X chromosome: X inactivation
in female carriers. J. Med. Genet. 35: 284-287, 1998.

23. Martucciello, G.; Lombardi, L.; Savasta, S.; Gibbons, R. J.:
Gastrointestinal phenotype of ATR-X syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A:
1172-1176, 2006.

24. McPherson, E. W.; Clemens, M. M.; Gibbons, R. J.; Higgs, D. R.
: X-linked alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation (ATR-X) syndrome:
a new kindred with severe genital anomalies and mild hematologic expression. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 55: 302-306, 1995.

25. Medina, C. F.; Mazerolle, C.; Wang, Y.; Berube, N. G.; Coupland,
S.; Gibbons, R. J.; Wallace, V. A.; Picketts, D. J.: Altered visual
function and interneuron survival in Atrx knockout mice: inference
for the human syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 966-977, 2009.

26. Porteous, M. E. M.; Burn, J.: Unknown syndrome. A possible new
X linked retardation syndrome: dysmorphic facies, microcephaly, hypotonia,
and small genitalia. J. Med. Genet. 27: 339-340, 1990.

27. Reardon, W.; Gibbons, R. J.; Winter, R. M.; Baraitser, M.: Male
pseudohermaphroditism in sibs with the alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation
(ATR-X) syndrome. Am. J. Med. Genet. 55: 285-287, 1995.

28. Sutherland, G. R.; Gedeon, A. K.; Haan, E. A.; Woodroffe, P.;
Mulley, J. C.: Linkage studies with the gene for an X-linked syndrome
of mental retardation, microcephaly and spastic diplegia. Am. J.
Med. Genet. 30: 493-508, 1988.

29. Thienpont, B.; de Ravel, T.; Van Esch, H.; Van Schoubroeck, D.;
Moerman, P.; Vermeesch, J. R.; Fryns, J.-P.; Froyen, G.; Lacoste,
C.; Badens, C.; Devriendt, K.: Partial duplications of the ATRX gene
cause the ATR-X syndrome. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 15: 1094-1097, 2007.

30. Villard, L.; Toutain, A.; Lossi, A.-M.; Gecz, J.; Houdayer, C.;
Moraine, C.; Fontes, M.: Splicing mutation in the ATR-X gene can
lead to a dysmorphic mental retardation phenotype without alpha-thalassemia. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 58: 499-505, 1996.

31. Wada, T.; Sugie, H.; Fukushima, Y.; Saitoh, S.: Non-skewed X-inactivation
may cause mental retardation in a female carrier of X-linked alpha-thalassemia/mental
retardation syndrome (ATR-X): X-inactivation study of nine female
carriers of ATR-X. Am. J. Med. Genet. 138A: 18-20, 2005.

32. Wang, L. H.; Collins, A.; Lawrence, S.; Keats, B. J.; Morton,
N. E.: Integration of gene maps: chromosome X. Genomics 22: 590-604,
1994.

33. Weatherall, D. J.; Higgs, D. R.; Bunch, C.; Old, J. M.; Hunt,
D. M.; Pressley, L.; Clegg, J. B.; Bethlenfalvay, N. C.; Sjolin, S.;
Koler, R. D.; Magenis, E.; Francis, J. L.; Bebbington, D.: Hemoglobin
H disease and mental retardation: a new syndrome or a remarkable coincidence? New
Eng. J. Med. 305: 607-612, 1981.

34. Wilkie, A. O. M.; Pembrey, M. E.; Gibbons, R. J.; Higgs, D. R.;
Porteous, M. E. M.; Burn, J.; Winter, R. M.: The non-deletion type
of alpha thalassaemia/mental retardation: a recognisable dysmorphic
syndrome with X linked inheritance. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 28:
724 only, 1991.

35. Wilkie, A. O. M.; Zeitlin, H. C.; Lindenbaum, R. H.; Buckle, V.
J.; Fischel-Ghodsian, N.; Chui, D. H. K.; Gardner-Medwin, D.; MacGillivray,
M. H.; Weatherall, D. J.; Higgs, D. R.: Clinical features and molecular
analysis of the alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation syndromes. II.
Cases without detectable abnormality of the alpha-globin complex. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 46: 1127-1140, 1990.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS INHERITANCE:
X-linked dominant

GROWTH:
[Other];
Postnatal growth deficiency

HEAD AND NECK:
[Head];
Microcephaly;
Absent frontal sinuses;
[Face];
Mid-face hypoplasia;
[Ears];
Small ears;
Low-set ears;
Posteriorly rotated ears;
Sensorineural hearing loss (less common);
[Eyes];
Hypertelorism;
Epicanthal folds;
[Nose];
Low nasal bridge;
Small triangular nose;
Anteverted nares;
[Mouth];
'Carp-like' mouth;
Full lips;
Protruding tongue;
[Teeth];
Widely-spaced upper incisors

CARDIOVASCULAR:
[Heart];
Perimembranous ventricular septal defect

ABDOMEN:
[External features];
Umbilical hernia;
[Gastrointestinal];
Constipation;
Gastroesophageal reflux

GENITOURINARY:
[External genitalia, male];
Shawl scrotum;
Small penis;
Hypospadias;
[Internal genitalia, male];
Cryptorchidism;
[Kidneys];
Renal agenesis;
Hydronephrosis

SKELETAL:
[Spine];
Kyphoscoliosis;
Hemivertebra;
[Pelvis];
Coxa valga;
[Hands];
Tapering fingers;
Clinodactyly;
[Feet];
Talipes equinovarus

NEUROLOGIC:
[Central nervous system];
Mental retardation;
Delayed developmental milestones;
Expressive speech absent;
Hypotonia early;
Spasticity later;
Seizures (in 35%);
Cerebral atrophy

HEMATOLOGY:
Mild hypochromic microcytic anemia;
Mild form of hemoglobin H (Hb H) disease

LABORATORY ABNORMALITIES:
Hb H erythrocyte inclusions

MISCELLANEOUS:
Variable phenotype;
X-linked mental retardation-hypotonic facies syndrome (309580) is
an allelic disorder without alpha-thalassemia

MOLECULAR BASIS:
Caused by mutation in the ATR-X gene (ATRX, 300032.0001)

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/23/2005
Kelly A. Przylepa - revised: 8/22/2000

EDITED joanna: 12/09/2008
joanna: 12/12/2005
ckniffin: 6/23/2005
joanna: 3/15/2005
joanna: 3/14/2005
joanna: 9/4/2001
kayiaros: 8/22/2000

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/13/2010
George E. Tiller - updated: 8/24/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/31/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/18/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/11/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/24/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/19/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 7/14/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/23/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/22/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/12/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/3/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/7/1991

EDITED alopez: 07/25/2011
wwang: 10/20/2010
ckniffin: 10/13/2010
terry: 5/12/2010
wwang: 8/24/2009
wwang: 8/5/2009
ckniffin: 7/31/2009
wwang: 12/21/2006
ckniffin: 12/18/2006
wwang: 10/12/2006
terry: 10/11/2006
wwang: 9/1/2006
ckniffin: 8/24/2006
wwang: 11/23/2005
wwang: 10/3/2005
wwang: 9/30/2005
ckniffin: 9/19/2005
carol: 7/14/2005
ckniffin: 6/23/2005
ckniffin: 6/15/2005
ckniffin: 5/12/2005
terry: 1/22/2004
cwells: 2/18/2002
cwells: 2/12/2002
mcapotos: 10/6/2000
mcapotos: 10/5/2000
terry: 10/3/2000
carol: 8/4/1999
mark: 2/12/1998
mark: 3/27/1997
mark: 6/25/1996
terry: 6/14/1996
mark: 3/7/1996
terry: 3/4/1996
mark: 4/8/1995
terry: 1/20/1995
carol: 10/6/1994
davew: 8/22/1994
warfield: 4/19/1994

611150	TITLE *611150 ATAXIN 10; ATXN10
;;E46-LIKE; E46L
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By positional cloning in the spinocerebellar ataxia-10 (SCA10; 603516)
candidate region on chromosome 22q13-qter, Matsuura et al. (2000)
identified a gene, ataxin-10 (ATXN10), encoding a deduced 475-amino acid
protein with 82% identity with a presumed mouse ortholog (E46).

By Northern blot analysis, Wakamiya et al. (2006) identified a 2-kb mRNA
ATXN10 transcript.

GENE STRUCTURE

Matsuura et al. (2000) presented a schematic representation of the
structure of the ATXN10 gene, which consists of 12 exons and spans 172.8
kb of genomic DNA.

MAPPING

The ATXN10 gene maps to chromosome 22q13 (Matsuura et al., 2000).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In all affected patients from 5 Mexican families with spinocerebellar
ataxia-10, Matsuura et al. (2000) found an expansion of a
pentanucleotide (ATTCT) repeat in intron 9 of the ATXN10 gene
(601150.0001).

In affected members of 4 Mexican families with SCA10, Rasmussen et al.
(2001) identified expanded ATTCT repeats ranging from 920 to 4,140
repeats.

Fang et al. (2002) reported a 19-year-old Hispanic woman from the U.S.
with SCA10 who was found to have a 280-repeat expansion. Her
asymptomatic mother had the same expansion. This was the smallest SCA10
expansion mutation identified to date. Alonso et al. (2006) reported a
Brazilian family in which the proband had a 400-repeat expansion in the
ATXN10 gene. She was a 59-year-old woman with gait ataxia since age 50
years. She also had mild limb ataxia, dysarthria, extensor plantar
responses, and moderate axonal peripheral neuropathy. Two unaffected
sibs and her unaffected father, aged 65, 56, and 90, had alleles of 370
and 360. In another Brazilian family, the affected son inherited an
allele of 750 repeats from his affected mother who had 760 repeats.
Alonso et al. (2006) noted that the first family lowered the threshold
of repeat numbers for pathogenesis down to 400. Combined with the report
of Fang et al. (2002), the findings suggested that there may be reduced
penetrance for SCA10 alleles of 280 to 370 repeats.

Wakamiya et al. (2006) detected normal sizes and amounts of ATXN10 mRNA
transcripts in multiple cell lines derived from patients with SCA10.
SCA10 cell lines showed that the expanded repeat did not interfere with
transcription or processing of the ATXN10 gene and also did not affect
the transcription of neighboring genes. Wakamiya et al. (2006) concluded
that a simple haploinsufficiency, gain-of-function, or neighboring gene
effect are unlikely mechanisms contributing to SCA10 and suggested that
a transdominant mechanism may be at work.

ANIMAL MODEL

Wakamiya et al. (2006) found that Atxn10-null mice died at early
postimplantation stage, whereas heterozygous mutants were overtly normal
and showed no motor abnormalities. Histologic examination of brain
tissue from heterozygous mice also showed no abnormalities.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SPINOCEREBELLAR ATAXIA 10
ATXN10, (ATTCT)n EXPANSION

In all affected members of 5 Mexican families with SCA10 (603516),
Matsuura et al. (2000) detected expansion of a pentanucleotide (ATTCT)
repeat in intron 9 of the ATXN10 gene. There was an inverse correlation
between the expansion size, up to 22.5 kb larger than the normal allele,
and the age of onset. Analysis of 562 chromosomes from unaffected
individuals of various ethnic origins, including 242 chromosomes from
Mexicans, showed a range of 10 to 22 ATTCT repeats with no evidence of
expansions. The data indicated that the ATXN10 intronic ATTCT
pentanucleotide repeat in SCA10 patients is unstable and represented the
largest microsatellite expansion found to that time in the human genome.

In a multigenerational study, Matsuura et al. (2004) demonstrated that
(1) the expanded ATTCT repeats are highly unstable when paternally
transmitted, whereas maternal transmission results in significantly
smaller changes in repeat size; (2) blood leukocytes, lymphoblastoid
cells, buccal cells, and sperm have a variable degree of mosaicism in
ATTCT expansion; (3) the length of the expanded repeat was not observed
to change in individuals over a 5-year period; and (4) clinically
determined anticipation is sometimes associated with intergenerational
contraction rather than expansion of the ATTCT repeat.

REFERENCE 1. Alonso, I.; Jardim, L. B.; Artigalas, O.; Saraiva-Pereira, M. L.;
Matsuura, T.; Ashizawa, T.; Sequeiros, J.; Silveira, I.: Reduced
penetrance of intermediate size alleles in spinocerebellar ataxia
type 10. Neurology 66: 1602-1604, 2006.

2. Fang, P.; Matsuura, T.; Teive, H. A. G.; Raskin, S.; Jayakar, P.;
Schmitt, E.; Ashizawa, T.; Roa, B. B.: Spinocerebellar ataxia type
10 ATTCT repeat expansions in Brazilian patients and in a patient
with early onset ataxia. (Abstract) Am. J. Med. Genet. 71 (suppl.):
552 only, 2002.

3. Matsuura, T.; Fang, P.; Lin, X.; Khajavi, M.; Tsuji, K.; Rasmussen,
A.; Grewal, R. P.; Achari, M.; Alonso, M. E.; Pulst, S. M.; Zoghbi,
H. Y.; Nelson, D. L.; Roa, B. B.; Ashizawa, T.: Somatic and germline
instability of the ATTCT repeat in spinocerebellar ataxia type 10. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 74: 1216-1224, 2004.

4. Matsuura, T.; Yamagata, T.; Burgess, D. L.; Rasmussen, A.; Grewal,
R. P.; Watase, K.; Khajavi, M.; McCall, A. E.; Davis, C. F.; Zu, L.;
Achari, M.; Pulst, S. M.; Alonso, E.; Noebels, J. L.; Nelson, D. L.;
Zoghbi, H. Y.; Ashizawa, T.: Large expansion of the ATTCT pentanucleotide
repeat in spinocerebellar ataxia type 10. Nature Genet. 26: 191-194,
2000.

5. Rasmussen, A.; Matsuura, T.; Ruano, L.; Yescas, P.; Ochoa, A.;
Ashizawa, T.; Alonso, E.: Clinical and genetic analysis of four Mexican
families with spinocerebellar ataxia type 10. Ann. Neurol. 50: 234-239,
2001.

6. Wakamiya, M.; Matsuura, T.; Liu, Y.; Schuster, G. C.; Gao, R.;
Xu, W.; Sarkar, P. S.; Lin, X.; Ashizawa, T.: The role of ataxin
10 in the pathogenesis of spinocerebellar ataxia type 10. Neurology 67:
607-613, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/2/2007

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 6/28/2007

EDITED wwang: 08/20/2007
ckniffin: 8/2/2007
carol: 6/29/2007
ckniffin: 6/29/2007

300196	TITLE *300196 TRANSDUCIN-BETA-LIKE 1, X-LINKED; TBL1X
;;TRANSDUCIN-BETA-LIKE 1; TBL1;;
EBI, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; EBI
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

TBL1X is an intrinsic component of the nuclear corepressor (NCOR)
complex (see NCOR1; 600849). TBL1X also acts as a specific adaptor that
recruits the ubiquitin-conjugating (see 602961)/19S proteasome (see
154365) complex that mediates the exchange of corepressors for
coactivators (Perissi et al., 2008).

CLONING

In the course of constructing a deletion map of the distal portion of
the short arm of the X chromosome and the identification of GPR143
(300808), the gene mutant in OA1 (300500), Bassi et al. (1999) performed
cDNA selection experiments that resulted in the isolation of a novel
gene, TBL1, located outside the OA1 critical region on the telomeric
side. The TBL1 gene maps to the Xp22.3 region and shares significant
homology with members of the WD40 repeat-containing protein family. The
open reading frame encodes a 526-amino acid protein containing 6
beta-transducin repeats (WD40 motif) in the C-terminal domain. The
homology with known beta-subunits of G proteins and other WD40
repeat-containing proteins is restricted to the WD40 motif. Northern
blot analysis indicated that the TBL1 gene is ubiquitously expressed as
2 transcripts of approximately 2.1 and 6.0 kb.

Dong et al. (1999) reported that the Drosophila eb1 gene is conserved in
a number of species, including humans. Sequence analysis using the human
EB1 sequence reported by Dong et al. (1999) revealed identity with a
51-amino acid stretch in the N-terminal F box of TBL1 (Converse, 2001).

GENE FUNCTION

Matsuzawa and Reed (2001) elucidated a network of protein interactions
in which SIAH1 (602212), SIP (606186), SKP1 (601434), and EBI
collaborate in a pathway controlling beta-catenin (116806) levels,
affecting activity of beta-catenin-dependent TCF (e.g., TCF1; 142410)
and LEF (e.g., LEF1; 153245) transcription factors. This pathway is
inducible by p53 (191170), revealing a link between genotoxic injury
responses and beta-catenin degradation. SIAH1 is physically linked to
EBI by association with SIP, which binds SKP1.

Using database mining and protein structural prediction programs, Emes
and Ponting (2001) identified a sequence motif in the products of genes
mutated in Miller-Dieker lissencephaly (LIS1; 601545), Treacher Collins
(TCOF1, treacle; 606847), and oral-facial-digital type 1 (CXORF5;
300170) syndromes, as well as in TBL1, which is deleted in patients with
the contiguous syndrome ocular albinism with late onset sensorineural
deafness (OASD; 300650). Over 100 eukaryotic intracellular proteins were
found to possess a LIS1 homology motif, including several katanin p60
(606696) subunits, muskelin (605623), Nopp140 (602394), the plant
proteins tonneau and LEUNIG, slime mold protein aimless, and numerous WD
repeat-containing beta-propeller proteins. The authors suggested that
LIS1 homology motifs may contribute to the regulation of microtubule
dynamics, either by mediating dimerization, or else by binding
cytoplasmic dynein heavy chain (600112) or microtubules directly. The
predicted secondary structure of LIS1 homology motifs, and their
occurrence in homologs of G-beta beta-propeller subunits, suggests that
they are analogs of G-gamma subunits, and might associate with the
periphery of beta-propeller domains. The finding of LIS1 homology motifs
in both treacle and Nopp140 reinforces previous observations of
functional similarities between these nucleolar proteins.

Zhang et al. (2002) reported that GPS2 (601935), a protein involved in
intracellular signaling, is an integral subunit of the NCOR1-HDAC3
(605166) complex. They determined structural motifs that direct the
formation of a highly stable and active deacetylase complex. GPS2 and
TBL1, another component of the NCOR1-HDAC3 complex, interact
cooperatively with repression domain-1 of NCOR1 to form a heterotrimeric
structure and are indirectly linked to HDAC3 via an extended NCOR1 SANT
domain that also activates latent HDAC3 activity. Zhang et al. (2002)
also showed that the NCOR1-HDAC3 complex inhibits JNK (601158)
activation through the associated GPS2 subunit and thus could
potentially provide an alternative mechanism for hormone-mediated
antagonism of AP1 (165160) function.

Yoon et al. (2003) purified NCOR complexes, which contained 10 to 12
proteins, from HeLa cell nuclear extracts and characterized the
interactions of TBL1 and TBLR1 (608628) with NCOR. TBL1 and TBLR1
interacted with NCOR through 2 independent interactions. Their
N-terminal regions interacted with the RD1 region of NCOR, and their
C-terminal WD40 repeats interacted with the RD4 region of NCOR. In
vitro, TBL1 and TBLR1 also bound histones H2B (see 609904) and H4 (see
602822), and transcriptional repression by TBL1 and TBLR1 correlated
with their interactions with histones. Using small interfering RNAs,
Yoon et al. (2003) demonstrated that HDAC3 was essential for repression
by unliganded thyroid hormone receptor. TBL1 and TBLR1 were also
essential, but they were functionally redundant.

Perissi et al. (2004) reported that transcriptional activation mediated
by liganded nuclear receptors requires the actions of 2 highly related F
box/WD40-containing factors, TBL1 and TBLR1. TBL1 and TBLR1 serve as
specific adaptors for recruitment of the ubiquitin-conjugating/19S
proteasome complex, with TBLR1 selectively serving to mediate a required
exchange of the nuclear receptor corepressors, NCOR and SMRT (600848),
for coactivators upon ligand binding. Tbl1 gene deletion in murine
embryonic stem cells severely impaired PPARG (601487)-induced adipogenic
differentiation, indicating that TBL1 function is biologically
indispensable for specific nuclear receptor-mediated gene activation
events. The role of TBLR1 and TBL1 in cofactor exchange also appeared to
operate for JUN (165160) and NFKB (see 164011), suggesting it is likely
to be prototypic of similar mechanisms for other signal-dependent
transcription factors.

Perissi et al. (2008) found that a large number of regulated
transcription factors required both TBL1 and TBLR1 to simultaneously
overcome the repressive functions of CTBP1 (602618)/CTBP2 (602619) and
NCOR/SMRT corepressor complexes, respectively. TBL1 was specifically
required to mediate ubiquitination and degradation of CTBP. Although
TBL1 and TBLR1 share a high degree of amino acid identity, the
specificity of their activities was regulated by phosphorylation at
nonhomologous sites. This phosphorylation was induced by receptor
ligands and occurred on TBL1 and TBLR1 prebound to regulated promoters.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bassi et al. (1999) found that the TBL1 gene contains 18 exons spanning
approximately 150 kb adjacent to the OA1 gene. Unlike OA1, TBL1 is
transcribed from telomere to centromere.

MAPPING

By FISH and interspecific backcross analysis, Disteche et al. (1998)
mapped the Tbl1 gene to the mouse X chromosome. The findings indicated
the presence of a previously unrecognized rearrangement between human
and mouse X chromosomes that involves the distal end of the short arm of
human X. Indeed, in the human, TBL1, OA1, and APXL (300103) are located
very close to each other in Xp22.3, spanning a genomic region of
approximately 400 kb. Mapping of their mouse homologs revealed 2 novel
rearrangements, with Oa1 and Apx1 still close to each other in
chromosome band F2-3 but Tbl1 located much more proximally in chromosome
bands B-C.

CYTOGENETICS

By genomic analysis, Bassi et al. (1999) found that the TBL1 gene was
either partly or entirely deleted in patients carrying Xp22.3 terminal
deletions. The complexity of the contiguous gene syndrome phenotype
shared by these patients was dependent on the number of known disease
genes involved in the deletions. One patient carrying a
microinterstitial deletion involving the 3-prime portion of both the
TBL1 and OA1 genes showed the OA1 phenotype associated with X-linked
late-onset sensorineural deafness. Bassi et al. (1999) postulated an
involvement of TBL1 in the pathogenesis of ocular albinism with
late-onset sensorineural deafness phenotype.

REFERENCE 1. Bassi, M. T.; Ramesar, R. S.; Caciotti, B.; Winship, I. M.; De
Grandi, A.; Riboni, M.; Townes, P. L.; Beighton, P.; Ballabio, A.;
Borsani, G.: X-linked late-onset sensorineural deafness caused by
a deletion involving OA1 and a novel gene containing WD-40 repeats. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 64: 1604-1616, 1999.

2. Converse, P. J.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  8/24/2001.

3. Disteche, C. M.; Dinulos, M. B.; Bassi, M. T.; Elliott, R. W.;
Rugarli, E. I.: Mapping of the murine Tbl1 gene reveals a new rearrangement
between mouse and human X chromosomes. Mammalian Genome 9: 1062-1064,
1998.

4. Dong, X.; Tsuda, L.; Zavitz, K. H.; Lin, M.; Li, S.; Carthew, R.
W.; Zipursky, S. L.: ebi regulates epidermal growth factor receptor
signaling pathways in Drosophila. Genes Dev. 13: 954-965, 1999.

5. Emes, R. D.; Ponting, C. P.: A new sequence motif linking lissencephaly,
Treacher Collins and oral-facial-digital type 1 syndromes, microtubule
dynamics and cell migration. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 2813-2820, 2001.

6. Matsuzawa, S.; Reed, J. C.: Siah-1, SIP, and Ebi collaborate in
a novel pathway for beta-catenin degradation linked to p53 responses. Molec.
Cell 7: 915-926, 2001.

7. Perissi, V.; Aggarwal, A.; Glass, C. K.; Rose, D. W.; Rosenfeld,
M. G.: A corepressor/coactivator exchange complex required for transcriptional
activation by nuclear receptors and other regulated transcription
factors. Cell 116: 511-526, 2004.

8. Perissi, V.; Scafoglio, C.; Zhang, J.; Ohgi, K. A.; Rose, D. W.;
Glass, C. K.; Rosenfeld, M. G.: TBL1 and TBLR1 phosphorylation on
regulated gene promoters overcomes dual CtBP and NCoR/SMRT transcriptional
repression checkpoints. Molec. Cell 29: 755-766, 2008.

9. Yoon, H.-G.; Chan, D. W.; Huang, Z.-Q.; Li, J.; Fondell, J. D.;
Qin, J.; Wong, J.: Purification and functional characterization of
the human N-CoR complex: the roles of HDAC3, TBL1 and TBLR1. EMBO
J. 22: 1336-1346, 2003.

10. Zhang, J.; Kalkum, M.; Chait, B. T.; Roeder, R. G.: The N-CoR-HDAC3
nuclear receptor corepressor complex inhibits the JNK pathway through
the integral subunit GPS2. Molec. Cell 9: 611-623, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/30/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/1/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/30/2004
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 10/10/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 6/11/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/24/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 8/24/2001

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/7/1999

EDITED mgross: 02/08/2013
mgross: 1/29/2013
mgross: 11/9/2009
mgross: 6/4/2008
terry: 5/30/2008
mgross: 6/1/2004
mgross: 4/30/2004
mgross: 10/10/2002
cwells: 6/12/2002
cwells: 6/11/2002
carol: 5/24/2002
mgross: 8/24/2001
psherman: 3/24/2000
mgross: 6/7/1999

607001	TITLE *607001 EUCHROMATIC HISTONE METHYLTRANSFERASE 1; EHMT1
;;EUHMTASE1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Ogawa et al. (2002) identified the components of the E2F6 (602944)
complex, which represses transcription. Although histone acetylase and
deacetylase activities were not detected in the E2F6 complex,
methyltransferase activity was. Ogawa et al. (2002) identified
euchromatic histone methyltransferase-1 as a component of the E2F6
complex. The 1,267-amino acid EU-HMTase-1 protein contains ankyrin
repeats and a SET domain. EU-HMTase-1 shares 63% sequence similarity
with NG36/G9A (604599). EU-HMTase-1 exhibited histone methyltransferase
activity with a specificity for histone H3 in core histones, whereas it
hardly methylated nucleosomes, suggesting that other subunits in the
E2F6 complex are required for modification of nucleosomal substrates.
Ogawa et al. (2002) demonstrated that lysine-9 of histone H3 is the
target of euchromatic histone methyltransferase-1.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kleefstra et al. (2006) stated that the EHMT1 gene contains 28 exons.
The initiation ATG occurs in exon 2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The chromosome 9q subtelomeric deletion syndrome, or Kleefstra syndrome
(610253), is a mental retardation syndrome that was thought to be caused
by small interstitial deletions in the 9q subtelomeric region. Kleefstra
et al. (2005) characterized the breakpoints in a female with a balanced
translocation t(X;9)(p11.23;q34.3) and found that the chromosome
breakpoint disrupted the EHMT1 gene in intron 9. The patient presented
typical features of 9q subtelomeric deletion syndrome, which suggested
that the core phenotype of this entity is due to haploinsufficiency of
EHMT1. Kleefstra et al. (2006) performed a comprehensive mutation
analysis of the EHMT1 gene in 23 patients with clinical presentations
consistent with 9q subtelomeric deletion syndrome. Three patients had
microdeletions that comprised the EHMT1 gene; 1 interstitial deletion
reduced the critical region for this syndrome. Two patients had de novo
mutations, a nonsense mutation and a frameshift mutation, in the EHMT1
gene (607001.0001-607001.0002). These results appeared to establish that
haploinsufficiency of EHMT1 is causative for the 9q subtelomeric
deletion syndrome.

In 6 of 24 patients with a clinical phenotype consistent with 9q
deletion syndrome who had normal chromosome studies, Kleefstra et al.
(2009) identified 6 different intragenic mutations in the EHMT1 gene
(see, e.g., C1042Y, 607001.0003 and R260X, 607001.0004). There were 2
nonsense mutations, a deletion, 2 splice site mutations, and 1 missense
mutation in a highly conserved residue. A comparison of the phenotype
between these 6 patients and 16 additional patients with larger
deletions of 9q showed no genotype/phenotype correlations. Kleefstra et
al. (2009) concluded that haploinsufficiency for EHMT1 is the basis for
the phenotypic features in this disorder.

ANIMAL MODEL

Schaefer et al. (2009) found that conditional ablation of Ehmt2 (604599)
or Ehmt1 in postnatal mouse forebrain neurons caused a reduction in
euchromatic H3K9 methylation in the forebrain and
upregulation/derepression of neuronal and nonneuronal genes (e.g., AFP;
104150), including those involved in developmental stage-dependent gene
expression (e.g., Dach2; 300608). These changes were not associated with
alterations in neuronal architecture or electrophysiologic features.
Mice with postnatal knockout of Ehmt1 or Ehmt2 in the forebrain showed
decreased exploratory behavior in a novel environment and had a decrease
in the preference for sucrose solution compared to wildtype mice, the
latter of which may indicate an underlying dysfunction in
motivation/reward. Both Ehmt2-null and Ehmt1-null mice became obese.
Ehmt1-null mice also showed defects in contextual and cued fear
conditioning, indicating a problem with learning and memory. Mice
lacking Ehmt2 specifically in Drd1 (126449)- or Drd2 (126450)-expressing
neurons in the striatum showed altered locomotor and behavioral
responses to Drd-specific receptor agonist or antagonists, reflecting
reductions of cell type-specific activity. The changes in these mice
resembled the features of the human chromosome 9q34.3 deletion syndrome.
Schaefer et al. (2009) concluded that Ehmt1 and Ehmt2 are key regulators
of cognition and adaptive behavior in adult mice through regulation of
transcriptional homeostasis.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
KLEEFSTRA SYNDROME
EHMT1, ARG1137TER

In a patient with clinical features of the 9q subtelomeric deletion
syndrome (610253), Kleefstra et al. (2006) identified a heterozygous
3409C-T transition in exon 24 of the EHMT1 gene that caused an
arg1137-to-stop substitution (R1137X).

.0002
KLEEFSTRA SYNDROME
EHMT1, 13-BP DEL

In a patient with clinical features of the 9q subtelomeric deletion
syndrome (610253), Kleefstra et al. (2006) identified a heterozygous
13-bp deletion in exon 8 of the EHMT1 gene (1320_1332del13). The
deletion resulted in a frameshift (P442fs) and a premature stop that
predicted a mutant protein of 526 amino acids.

.0003
KLEEFSTRA SYNDROME
EHMT1, CYS1042TYR

In a 20-year-old woman with a phenotype consistent with chromosome 9q
subtelomeric deletion syndrome (610253), Kleefstra et al. (2009)
identified a de novo heterozygous 3125G-A transition in the EHMT1 gene,
resulting in a cys1042-to-tyr (C1042Y) substitution in a highly
conserved residue in the pre-SET domain of the protein. Protein modeling
predicted that the substitution would abolish a strong cysteine-zinc
interaction and interfere with the local conformation of the pre-SET
domain. The phenotype was fully compatible with the deletion syndrome,
and included severe psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, and
characteristic facial features of midface hypoplasia, synophrys, and
eversion of the lower lip. She also had pulmonary stenosis. Kleefstra et
al. (2009) postulated loss of protein function and haploinsufficiency
rather than a dominant-negative effect.

.0004
KLEEFSTRA SYNDROME
EHMT1, ARG260TER

In a 19-year-old man with a phenotype consistent with chromosome 9q
subtelomeric deletion syndrome (610253), Kleefstra et al. (2009)
identified a de novo heterozygous 778C-T transition in the EHMT1 gene,
resulting in an arg260-to-ter (R260X) substitution, predicted to result
in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. The man had mental retardation,
seizures, and characteristic facial abnormalities.

REFERENCE 1. Kleefstra, T.; Brunner, H. G.; Amiel, J.; Oudakker, A. R.; Nillesen,
W. M.; Magee, A.; Genevieve, D.; Cormier-Daire, V.; van Esch, H.;
Fryns, J.-P.; Hamel, B. C. J.; Sistermans, E. A.; de Vries, B. B.
A.; van Bokhoven, H.: Loss-of-function mutations in Euchromatin histone
methyl transferase 1 (EHMT1) cause the 9q34 subtelomeric deletion
syndrome. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 79: 370-377, 2006.

2. Kleefstra, T.; Smidt, M.; Banning, M. J. G.; Oudakker, A. R.; Van
Esch, H.; de Brouwer, A. P.; Nillesen, W.; Sistermans, E. A.; Hamel,
B. C.; de Bruijn, D.; Fryns, J.-P.; Yntema, H. G.; Brunner, H. G.;
de Vries, B. B. A.; van Bokhoven, H.: Disruption of the gene euchromatin
histone methyl transferase1 (Eu-HMTase1) is associated with the 9q34
subtelomeric deletion syndrome. J. Med. Genet. 42: 299-306, 2005.

3. Kleefstra, T.; van Zelst-Stams, W. A.; Nillesen, W. M.; Cormier-Daire,
V.; Houge, G.; Foulds, N.; van Dooren, M.; Willemsen, M. H.; Pfundt,
R.; Turner, A.; Wilson, M.; McGaughran, J.; and 16 others: Further
clinical and molecular delineation of the 9q subtelomeric deletion
syndrome supports a major contribution of EHMT1 haploinsufficiency
to the core phenotype. J. Med. Genet. 46: 598-606, 2009.

4. Ogawa, H.; Ishiguro, K.; Gaubatz, S.; Livingston, D. M.; Nakatani,
Y.: A complex with chromatin modifiers that occupies E2F- and Myc-responsive
genes in G0 cells. Science 296: 1132-1136, 2002.

5. Schaefer, A.; Sampath, S. C.; Intrator, A.; Min, A.; Gertler, T.
S.; Surmeier, D. J.; Tarakhovsky, A.; Greengard, P.: Control of cognition
and adaptive behavior by the GLP/G9a epigenetic suppressor complex. Neuron 64:
678-691, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/26/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/29/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/7/2006

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 5/30/2002

EDITED carol: 10/11/2013
tpirozzi: 10/11/2013
ckniffin: 9/26/2013
carol: 1/8/2010
ckniffin: 12/29/2009
terry: 8/24/2006
carol: 7/22/2006
alopez: 7/13/2006
terry: 7/7/2006
joanna: 6/30/2006
alopez: 5/30/2002

611908	TITLE *611908 RFT1, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; RFT1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

N-glycosylation of proteins follows a highly conserved pathway that
begins with the synthesis of a Man(5)GlcNAc(2)-dolichylpyrophosphate
(PP-Dol) intermediate on the cytoplasmic side of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) membrane followed by the translocation of Man(5)GlcNAc
(2)-PP-Dol to the luminal side of the ER membrane. RFT1 is the flippase
enzyme that catalyzes this translocation (Helenius et al., 2002).

CLONING

By database searching with the sequence of S. cerevisiae Rft1 as query,
followed by RT-PCR of human fibroblast total RNA, Haeuptle et al. (2008)
cloned RFT1. The deduced 541-amino acid protein contains 11
transmembrane domains and has a potential N-glycosylation site in a
hydrophilic loop within the ER lumen. RFT1 shares 22% sequence identity
with the yeast protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Helenius et al. (2002) showed that the expression of yeast Rft1
complemented a defect in N-glycosylation in the delta-alg11 (613666)
strain of yeast. Overexpression of Rft1 in delta-alg11 yeast suggested
that Rft1 is the limiting component for the flipping of
Man(5)GlcNAc(2)-PP-Dol from the cytoplasmic to luminal side of the ER
membrane in vivo and that no additional factors are required. Rft1
depletion in yeast led to underglycosylation of the vacuolar N-linked
glycoprotein carboxypeptidase Y. Haeuptle et al. (2008) found human RFT1
complemented Rft1-depletion in yeast and restored normal
carboxypeptidase Y glycosylation.

MAPPING

Hartz (2008) mapped the RFT1 gene to chromosome 3p21.1 based on an
alignment of the RFT1 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AJ318099) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

MOLECULAR GENETICS

A particular feature of N-glycans is that they are first assembled in
the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) as lipid-linked oligosaccharides (LLO).
This assembly proceeds through the sequential addition of
monosaccharides to the growing LLO. The assembly of LLOs requires
glycosyltransferases and their respective nucleotide- and
dolicho-activated monosaccharide substrates, but it also requires
several proteins that regulate the complex topology of the process. For
example, in yeast the Rft1 protein is essential for translocation of the
cytosolically oriented intermediate DolPP-GlcNAc(2)Man(5) into the ER
lumen, where LLO assembly is completed. The identification of N-linked
glycosylation disorders in humans, referred to as congenital disorders
of glycosylation (see CDG1A, 212065), demonstrated the conservation of
the LLO assembly pathway between yeast and humans. Haeuptle et al.
(2008) identified a novel glycosylation defect in a theretofore untyped
CDG case (CDG1N; 612015), thereby establishing the importance of the
RFT1 protein in human N-linked glycosylation. The patient, who had been
diagnosed with a disorder of N-linked glycosylation on the basis of
detection of abnormal isoelectric focusing of serum transferrin, carried
a homozygous point mutation in the RFT1 gene (R67C; 611908.0001).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE In
RFT1, ARG67CYS

In a patient with a congenital disorder of glycosylation (CDG1N;
612015), Haeuptle et al. (2008) identified a homozygous C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 199 of the RFT1 gene, resulting in a
substitution of cysteine for arginine at codon 67 (R67C). The R67C
substitution occurred in a 50-amino-acid hydrophilic stretch in the
overall hydrophobic RFT1 protein. Despite the low sequence identity
(22%) between yeast and human RFT1 protein, Haeuptle et al. (2008)
demonstrated both their functional orthology and the pathologic effect
of the human R67C mutation by complementation assay in Rft1-deficient
yeast cells. The causality of the RFT1 R67C mutation was further
established by restoration of normal glycosylation profiles in
patient-derived fibroblasts after lentiviral expression of the normal
RFT1 cDNA.

REFERENCE 1. Haeuptle, M. A.; Pujol, F. M.; Neupert, C.; Winchester, B.; Kastaniotis,
A. J.; Aebi, M.; Hennet, T.: Human RFT1 deficiency leads to a disorder
of N-linked glycosylation. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 82: 600-606, 2008.

2. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  3/19/2008.

3. Helenius, J.; Ng, D. T. W.; Marolda, C. L.; Walter, P.; Valvano,
M. A.; Aebi, M.: Translocation of lipid-linked oligosaccharides across
the ER membrane requires Rft1 protein. Nature 415: 447-450, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/14/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 3/19/2008

EDITED mgross: 12/14/2010
alopez: 4/29/2008
alopez: 4/28/2008
terry: 4/14/2008
carol: 3/19/2008

615051	TITLE *615051 ANKYRIN REPEAT- AND SOCS BOX-CONTAINING PROTEIN 6; ASB6
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Proteins of the ASB family, such as ASB6, contain central tandem ankyrin
(see 612641) repeats and a C-terminal suppressor of cytokine signaling
(SOCS) box. SOCS box proteins are predicted to be involved in protein
degradation by acting as a bridge between substrate proteins and E3
ubiquitin protein ligases (see 601623) (review by Kile et al., 2002).

CLONING

Kile et al. (2001) showed that the deduced 418-amino acid mouse Asb6
protein has 8 tandem ankyrin repeats and a C-terminal SOCS box.

GENE FUNCTION

Kohroki et al. (2005) found that epitope-tagged ASB6 and several other
ASB family members interacted with endogenous CUL5 (601741) and RBX2
(RNF7; 603863) in immunoprecipitated HEK293 cells. The ASB proteins did
not interact with CUL2 (603135) or RBX1 (603814).

MAPPING

Hartz (2013) mapped the ASB6 gene to chromosome 9q34.11 based on an
alignment of the ASB6 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK000555) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  1/29/2013.

2. Kile, B. T.; Metcalf, D.; Mifsud, S.; DiRago, L.; Nicola, N. A.;
Hilton, D. J.; Alexander, W. S.: Functional analysis of Asb-1 using
genetic modification in mice. Molec. Cell. Biol. 21: 6189-6197,
2001.

3. Kile, B. T.; Schulman, B. A.; Alexander, W. S.; Nicola, N. A.;
Martin, H. M. E.; Hilton, D. J.: The SOCS box: a tale of destruction
and degradation. Trends Biochem. Sci. 27: 235-241, 2002.

4. Kohroki, J.; Nishiyama, T.; Nakamura, T.; Masuho, Y.: ASB proteins
interact with cullin5 and Rbx2 to form E3 ubiquitin ligase complexes. FEBS
Lett. 579: 6796-6802, 2005.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/30/2013

EDITED mgross: 01/30/2013

139320	TITLE *139320 GNAS COMPLEX LOCUS; GNAS
;;GNAS1 GENE, FORMERLY; GNAS1, FORMERLY
GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE-BINDING PROTEIN, ALPHA-STIMULATING ACTIVITY POLYPEPTIDE
1, INCLUDED; GNAS1, INCLUDED;;
Gs, ALPHA SUBUNIT, INCLUDED;;
STIMULATORY G PROTEIN, INCLUDED;;
ADENYLATE CYCLASE STIMULATORY PROTEIN, ALPHA SUBUNIT, INCLUDED;;
SECRETOGRANIN VI, INCLUDED;;
NEUROENDOCRINE SECRETORY PROTEIN 55, INCLUDED; NESP55, INCLUDED;;
XL-ALPHA-S, INCLUDED; XLAS, INCLUDED;;
A/B TRANSCRIPT, INCLUDED;;
ALTERNATIVE GENE PRODUCT ENCODED BY THE XL EXON, INCLUDED; ALEX, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GNAS is a complex imprinted locus that produces multiple transcripts
through the use of alternative promoters and alternative splicing. The
most well-characterized transcript derived from GNAS, Gs-alpha, encodes
the alpha subunit of the stimulatory guanine nucleotide-binding protein
(G protein). Gs-alpha is expressed biallelically in nearly all tissues
and plays essential roles in a multitude of physiologic processes. Other
transcripts produced by GNAS are expressed exclusively from either the
paternal or the maternal GNAS allele (Bastepe and Juppner, 2005).

CLONING

- Overview of Transcripts Produced by GNAS

The GNAS locus is imprinted and encodes 4 main transcripts, Gs-alpha,
XLAS, NESP55, and the A/B transcript, as well as an antisense GNAS
transcript (GNASAS; 610540). The 4 main transcripts are produced through
the use of alternative promoters and splicing of 4 unique first exons
onto the shared exons 2 through 13. Gs-alpha is ubiquitously expressed
and encodes a protein that stimulates adenylyl cyclase when activated by
an agonist-occupied G protein-coupled receptor, thereby generating the
second messenger cAMP. Gs-alpha is biallelically expressed except in a
small number of tissues, including renal proximal tubules, thyroid,
gonads, and pituitary, where it is predominantly expressed from the
maternal GNAS allele. XLAS is a large variant of Gs-alpha that is
expressed exclusively from the paternal GNAS allele, primarily in
neuroendocrine tissues and the nervous system. The XLAS and Gs-alpha
proteins are identical over their C-terminal portions, but they have
distinct N termini. NESP55 is exclusively expressed from the maternal
GNAS allele and encodes a chromogranin (see 118910)-like neuroendocrine
secretory protein that, due to a stop codon in its unique first exon,
shares no amino acid sequence with Gs-alpha. The A/B transcript, which
uses the alternative first exon A/B (also referred to as exon 1A or
1-prime), and the antisense GNAS transcript, which consists of exons
that do not overlap with any other GNAS exons, are ubiquitously
expressed noncoding transcripts that are derived exclusively from the
paternal GNAS allele. Consistent with their parent-specific expression,
the promoters of the XLAS, NESP55, A/B, and antisense transcripts are
within differentially methylated regions (DMRs), and in each case the
nonmethylated promoter drives expression. In contrast, the promoter for
Gs-alpha lacks methylation and is biallelically active in most tissues
(Bastepe and Juppner, 2005).

- Gs-Alpha Transcript

Using oligonucleotide probes for recombinants that code for alpha
subunits of G signal transduction proteins, Bray et al. (1986) screened
human brain cDNA libraries and identified 11 clones corresponding to 4
species of Gs-alpha cDNA. One of the clones was predicted to encode a
384-amino acid protein with homology to the bovine and rat Gs-alpha
proteins. The 4 clones differed in nucleotide sequence in the region
that codes for amino acid residues 71 to 88. Two forms corresponded to
proteins with molecular masses of 52 and 45 kD. The authors suggested
alternative splicing of a single precursor mRNA.

- A/B Transcript

Ishikawa et al. (1990) reported a Gs-alpha mRNA that uses a different
promoter and exon, which they termed exon 1-prime (later termed exon 1A
or A/B) that is located 2.5 kb upstream of GNAS exon 1. Exon 1-prime
does not contribute an in-frame ATG, and thus its mRNA may encode a
truncated form of Gs-alpha.

- XLAS Transcript

By restriction landmark genomic scanning, Hayward et al. (1998)
identified a differentially methylated locus containing a previously
undescribed GNAS1 exon. This exon was included within transcripts
homologous to an mRNA encoding the large G protein XL-alpha (s) in the
rat (Kehlenbach et al., 1994). Two restriction sites flanking this exon
were methylated on a maternal allele and unmethylated on a paternal
allele. RT-PCR of human fetal tissues showed that in contrast to
Gs-encoding transcripts, which were biallelic, mRNAs encoding XLAS were
derived exclusively from the paternal allele. The paternally active
alternative promoter was located 35 kb upstream of exon 1.

In rat, the paternally expressed XLAS gene is a splice variant of GNAS,
consisting of exon 1 of XL and exons 2 to 13 of GNAS. A second open
reading frame in XL exon 1, which completely overlaps the XL domain ORF,
encodes ALEX (alternative gene product encoded by the XL exon), which is
translated from the XLAS mRNA and binds the XL domain of XLAS (Klemke et
al., 2001).

- NESP55 Transcript

Hayward et al. (1998) identified a second promoter upstream of the
Gs-alpha site in addition to that for XLAS. Both upstream promoters were
associated with a large coding exon and showed opposite patterns of
allele-specific methylation and monoallelic transcription. The more
5-prime of these exons encoded the neuroendocrine secretory protein-55
(NESP55), which was expressed exclusively from the maternal allele. The
NESP55 exon is 11 kb 5-prime to the paternally expressed XLAS exon. The
transcripts from these 2 promoters both splice onto GNAS1 exon 2, yet
share no coding sequences. Despite their structural unrelatedness, the
encoded proteins, of opposite allelic origin, have both been implicated
in regulated secretion in neuroendocrine tissues. Hayward et al. (1998)
concluded that maternally (NESP55), paternally (XLAS), and biallelically
(Gs-alpha)-derived proteins are produced by different patterns of
promoter use and alternative splicing of GNAS1, a gene showing
simultaneous imprinting in both the paternal and maternal directions.

By sequencing clones obtained from human pheochromocytoma and rat
pituitary cDNA libraries, Weiss et al. (2000) identified 2 main splice
variants that included NESP55 sequences. In the 2,400-bp variant, NESP55
exons were spliced onto GNAS exons 2 to 13, and in the shorter 1800-bp
variant, NESP55 exons were spliced onto GNAS exons 2, 3, and N1. Several
cDNA clones contained inverted repeats on either the 5-prime or 3-prime
terminus, and heterogeneity in the GNAS region, such as deletion of exon
3 or insertion of a CAG trinucleotide after exon 3, was also found. The
2,400-bp variant contains an open reading frame (ORF) encoding the
NESP55 protein and an ORF encoding a truncated form of GNAS lacking exon
1. The sequence TAATG encodes the stop codon (TAA) of the NESP55 ORF as
well as the initiating methionine (ATG) of the truncated GNAS. The human
NESP55 ORF encodes a protein of about 28 kD, which has high homology
with rat Nesp55, particularly in the first 70 amino acids. Northern blot
analysis and RT-PCR detected the longer transcript in rat adrenal
medulla, pituitary, and locus ceruleus, and the shorter transcript only
in pituitary. Biochemical analysis indicated that rat Nesp55 is a
keratan sulfate proteoglycan, and like other chromogranins, Nesp55 was
proteolytically processed into smaller peptides in several rat tissues,
including a predominant GPIPIRRH peptide that is also found in human
NESP55.

- GNAS Antisense Transcript

Hayward and Bonthron (2000) described a spliced polyadenylated antisense
transcript (GNASAS; 610540) arising from the maternally methylated
region upstream of the XL-alpha-s exon, which spans the upstream NESP55
region. The antisense transcript is imprinted, and expressed only from
the paternal allele, suggesting to the authors that it may have a
specific role in suppressing in cis the activity of the paternal NESP55
allele. For further information on the GNAS antisense transcript, see
610540,

GENE STRUCTURE

Rickard and Wilson (2003) provided a schematic representation of the
GNAS locus. Exons 1 through 13 of GNAS produce the Gs-alpha transcript.
Imprinted first exons specifically used for the NESP55, XLAS, and exon
1A transcripts are located approximately 35, 14, and 2.5 kb upstream of
GNAS exon 1, respectively. These exons are spliced to GNAS exons 2
through 13. The GNAS antisense transcript originates upstream of the
XLAS exon. An alternative 3-prime exon, located within GNAS intron 3,
includes an alternative stop codon and polyadenylation site.

Bastepe and Juppner (2005) noted that the promoter regions associated
with the imprinted NESP55, XLAS, exon A/B, and antisense transcripts are
located within differentially methylated regions. In each case, the
nonmethylated promoter drives expression of the transcript. In contrast,
the Gs-alpha promoter lacks methylation and is biallelically active in
most tissues.

MAPPING

Using a cDNA probe in connection with a mouse/human somatic cell hybrid
panel, Sparkes et al. (1987) mapped the gene encoding the
alpha-stimulating polypeptide of G protein to chromosome 20. (See also
Blatt et al. (1988).) Ashley et al. (1987) mapped the corresponding gene
in the mouse to chromosome 2 which, by the argument of homology of
synteny, supports the assignment of the human stimulatory G protein gene
to chromosome 20.

Gejman et al. (1991) mapped the GNAS1 gene to the distal long arm of
chromosome 20 by linkage studies using a polymorphism detected by
denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE). A maximum lod score of
9.31 was obtained at a theta of 0.042 with the locus D20S15, previously
reported to be on the long arm of chromosome 20 (Donis-Keller et al.,
1987).

By in situ hybridization, Gopal Rao et al. (1991) assigned the GNAS1
gene to chromosome 20q12-q13.2. Using the same method, Levine et al.
(1991) mapped the GNAS1 gene to chromosome 20q13.2-q13.3.

GENE FAMILY

- G Protein Family

G proteins transduce extracellular signals received by transmembrane
receptors to effector proteins. The activity of hormone-sensitive
adenylate cyclase is regulated by at least 2 G proteins, 1 stimulatory
(Gs) and 1 inhibitory (Gi; see 139310). A third G protein, Go (139311),
is abundant in brain. Each G protein is a heterotrimer composed of an
alpha, beta, and gamma subunit. The GNAS locus encodes Gs-alpha, the
alpha subunit of the G stimulatory protein. Each of the 3 G protein
subunits is encoded by a member of 1 of 3 corresponding gene families.
Hurowitz et al. (2000) counted 16 different members of the alpha subunit
family, 5 different members of the beta subunit family, and 11 different
members of the gamma subunit family, as described in mammals. Using
BACs, they determined the gene structure and chromosome location of each
gene. The G protein family includes transducin (189970).

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Rasmussen et al. (2011) presented the crystal structure of the active
state ternary complex composed of agonist-occupied monomeric
beta-2-adrenergic receptor (AR) (ADRB2; 109690) and nucleotide-free Gs
heterotrimer. The principal interactions between the beta-2-AR and Gs
involve the amino- and carboxy-terminal alpha-helices of Gs, with
conformational changes propagating to the nucleotide-binding pocket. The
largest conformational changes in the beta-2-AR include a 14-angstrom
outward movement at the cytoplasmic end of transmembrane segment 6 and
an alpha-helical extension of the cytoplasmic end of transmembrane
segment 5. The most surprising observation is a major displacement of
the alpha-helical domain of G-alpha-s relative to the Ras-like GTPase
domain.

Chung et al. (2011) applied peptide amide hydrogen-deuterium exchange
mass spectrometry to probe changes in the structure of the
heterotrimeric bovine G protein, Gs, on formation of a complex with
agonist-bound human beta-2-AR, and reported structural links between the
receptor-binding surface and the nucleotide-binding pocket of Gs that
undergo higher levels of hydrogen-deuterium exchange than would be
predicted from the crystal structure of the beta-2-AR-Gs complex.
Together with x-ray crystallographic and electron microscopic data of
the beta-2-AR-Gs complex, Chung et al. (2011) provided a rationale for a
mechanism of nucleotide exchange, whereby the receptor perturbs the
structure of the amino-terminal region of the alpha-subunit of Gs and
consequently alters the 'P-loop' that binds the beta-phosphate in GDP.

GENE FUNCTION

- Function of Gs-Alpha Protein

Mehlmann et al. (2002) demonstrated that meiotic arrest of the oocyte
can be released in mice by microinjecting the oocyte within the follicle
with an antibody that inhibits Gs. This indicates that Gs activity in
the oocyte is required to maintain meiotic arrest within the ovarian
follicle and suggests that the follicle may keep the cell cycle arrested
by activating Gs.

Harrison et al. (2003) demonstrated that signaling via the erythrocyte
ADRB2 and heterotrimeric G-alpha-s regulated the entry of the human
malaria parasite Plasmodium falciparum. Agonists that stimulate cAMP
production led to an increase in malarial infection that could be
blocked by specific receptor antagonists. Moreover, peptides designed to
inhibit G-alpha-s protein function reduced parasitemia in P. falciparum
cultures in vitro, and beta-antagonists reduced parasitemia of P.
berghei infections in an in vivo mouse model. Harrison et al. (2003)
suggested that signaling via erythrocyte ADRB2 and G-alpha-s may
regulate malarial infection across parasite species.

Adams et al. (2009) demonstrated that hematopoietic stem and progenitor
cell (HSPC) engraftment of bone marrow in fetal development is dependent
on G-alpha-S. The authors observed that HSPCs from adult mice deficient
in G-alpha-S differentiated and underwent chemotaxis, but did not home
to or engraft in the bone marrow in adult mice, and demonstrated a
marked inability to engage the marrow microvasculature. Deletion of
G-alpha-S after engraftment did not lead to lack of retention in the
marrow; rather, cytokine-induced mobilization into the blood was
impaired. In tests of the effect of G-alpha-S activation on HSPCs,
pharmacologic activators enhanced homing and engraftment in vivo. Adams
et al. (2009) concluded that G-alpha-S governs specific aspects of HSPC
localization under physiologic conditions in vivo and may be
pharmacologically targeted to improve transplantation efficiency.

- Imprinting of GNAS

Hall (1990) noted that the region of chromosome 20 occupied by the
Gs-alpha gene is homologous to an area of mouse chromosome 2 involved in
both maternal and paternal imprinting.

Campbell et al. (1994) presented evidence suggesting that GNAS1 is
biallelically expressed in a wide range of human fetal tissues. Of 75
fetuses genotyped, 13 heterozygous for a FokI polymorphism in GNAS1 were
identified whose mothers were homozygous for one or another allele.
Analysis of GNAS1 RNA from each fetus showed expression from both
parental alleles. No tissue-specific pattern of expression was
discerned. Campbell et al. (1994) concluded that if genomic imprinting
regulates the expression of the GNAS1 gene, the effect must either be
subtle and quantitative or be confined to a small subset of specialized
hormone-responsive cells within the target tissues.

Hayward et al. (2001) investigated GNAS1 imprinting in the normal adult
pituitary and found that Gs-alpha was monoallelically expressed from the
maternal allele in this tissue. They found that this monoallelic
expression of Gs-alpha was frequently relaxed in somatotroph tumors
regardless of GNAS1 mutation status. These findings implied a possible
role for loss of Gs-alpha imprinting during pituitary somatotroph
tumorigenesis and also suggested that Gs-alpha imprinting is regulated
separately from that of the other GNAS1 products, NESP55 and XL-alpha-s,
which retain maternal and paternal imprinting, respectively, in these
tumors.

To establish if the GNAS1 gene is imprinted in human endocrine tissues,
Mantovani et al. (2002) selected 14 thyroid, 10 granulosa cell, 13
pituitary (3 normal glands, 7 GH-secreting adenomas, and 3
nonfunctioning adenomas), 3 adrenal, and 11 lymphocyte samples shown to
be heterozygous for a known polymorphism in exon 5. RNA from these
tissues was analyzed by RT-PCR, and expression from both parental
alleles was evaluated by enzymatic digestion and subsequent
quantification of the resulting fragments. Most thyroid, ovarian, and
pituitary samples showed an almost exclusive or significantly
predominant expression of the maternal allele over the paternal one,
whereas in lymphocyte and adrenal samples both alleles were equally
expressed. The authors concluded that their results provided evidence
for a predominant maternal origin of GNAS1 transcripts in different
human adult endocrine tissues, particularly thyroid, ovary, and
pituitary.

Using hot-stop PCR analysis on total RNA from 6 normal human thyroid
specimens, Liu et al. (2003) showed that the majority of the Gs-alpha
mRNA (72 +/- 3%) was derived from the maternal allele. This was
considered consistent with the presence of TSH (see 188540) resistance
in patients with maternal Gs-alpha-null mutations (PHP 1a; 103580) and
the absence of TSH resistance in patients with paternal Gs-alpha
mutations (pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism). Patients with PTH (168450)
resistance in the absence of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (PHP1B;
603233) have an imprinting defect of the Gs-alpha gene resulting in both
alleles having a paternal epigenotype, which would lead to a more
moderate level of thyroid-specific Gs-alpha deficiency. The authors
found evidence of borderline TSH resistance in 10 of 22 PHP Ib patients.
The authors concluded that their study provided further evidence for
tissue-specific imprinting of Gs-alpha in humans and provided a
potential mechanism for mild to moderate TSH resistance in PHP Ia and
borderline resistance in some patients with PHP Ib.

Liu et al. (2000) showed that the human GNAS exon 1A promoter region
(2.5 kb upstream from exon 1) is imprinted in a manner similar to that
in the mouse: the region is normally methylated on the maternal allele
and unmethylated on the paternal allele. In 13 patients with
pseudohypoparathyroidism Ib, the exon 1A region was unmethylated on both
alleles, and was thus biallelically expressed. Liu et al. (2000)
proposed that the exon 1A differentially methylated region (DMR) is
important for establishing or maintaining tissue-specific GNAS
imprinting and that loss of exon 1A imprinting is the cause of PHP Ib.
(See also Bastepe et al. (2001, 2001).)

Freson et al. (2002) described a PHP Ib patient with lack of methylation
of the exon XL and 1A promoters, and biallelic methylation of the NESP55
promoter. Platelets of this patient showed a functional Gs defect,
decreased cAMP formation upon Gs-receptor stimulation, and normal
Gs-alpha sequence, but reduced Gs-alpha protein levels. The authors
hypothesized that transcriptional deregulation between the biallelically
active promoters of both exon 1A and exon 1 of Gs-alpha could explain
the decreased Gs-alpha expression in platelets and presumably in the
proximal renal tubules. Platelets demonstrated decreased NESP55 and
increased XL-alpha-s protein levels, in agreement with the methylation
status of their corresponding first exons. In a megakaryocytic cell line
MEG-01, exon 1A is methylated on both alleles, in contrast to the
normally maternally methylated exon 1A in leukocytes. Experimental
demethylation of exon 1A in MEG-01 cells led to reduced Gs-alpha
expression, in agreement with the observations in the patient. The
authors proposed that platelet studies may allow more facile evaluation
of disturbances of the GNAS1 cluster in PHP Ib patients.

Genomic imprinting, by which maternal and paternal alleles of some genes
have different levels of activity, has profound effects on growth and
development of the mammalian fetus. Plagge et al. (2004) disrupted a
paternally expressed transcript at the Gnas locus, Gnasxl, which encodes
the unusual Gs-alpha isoform XL-alpha-s. Mice with mutations in Gnasxl
had poor postnatal growth and survival and a spectrum of phenotypic
effects indicating that XL-alpha-s controls a number of key postnatal
physiologic adaptations, including suckling, blood glucose, and energy
homeostasis. Increased cAMP levels in brown adipose tissue of Gnasxl
mutants and phenotypic comparison with Gnas mutants suggested that
XL-alpha-s can antagonize Gs-alpha-dependent signaling pathways. The
opposing effects of maternally and paternally expressed products of the
Gnas locus provided tangible molecular support for the parental conflict
hypothesis of imprinting.

Two candidate imprinting control regions (ICRs) have been identified at
the compact imprinted Gnas cluster on distal mouse chromosome 2: one at
exon 1A upstream of Gnas itself and one covering the promoters of Gnasxl
and the antisense Gnas transcript, also called Nespas (Coombes et al.,
2003). Gnas itself is mainly biallelically expressed but is weakly
paternally repressed in specific tissues. Williamson et al. (2004)
showed that a paternally-derived targeted deletion of the germline
differentially methylated region at exon 1A abolished tissue-specific
imprinting of Gnas, which rescued the abnormal phenotype of mice with a
maternally-derived Gnas mutation. Imprinting of alternative transcripts,
Nesp, Gnasxl, and Nespas in the cluster was unaffected. The results
established that the differentially methylated region in exon 1A
contains an imprinting control element that specifically regulates Gnas
and comprises a characterized ICR for a gene that is only weakly
imprinted in a minority of tissues. Williamson et al. (2004) concluded
that there must be a second ICR regulating the alternative transcripts.

Williamson et al. (2006) identified a second ICR at the mouse Gnas
cluster. They showed that a paternally-derived targeted deletion of the
germline DMR associated with the antisense Nespas transcript
unexpectedly affected both the expression of all transcripts in the
cluster and methylation of 2 DMRs. The results established that the
Nespas DMR is the principal ICR at the Gnas cluster and functions
bidirectionally as a switch for modulating expression of the
antagonistically acting genes Gnasxl and Gnas. Uniquely, the Nespas DMR
acts on the downstream ICR at exon 1A to regulate tissue-specific
imprinting of the Gnas gene.

Mantovani et al. (2004) investigated the presence of a parent
specificity of Gs-alpha mutations in 10 patients affected with
McCune-Albright syndrome (MAS; 174800) and 12 isolated tumors (10
GH-secreting adenomas, 1 toxic thyroid adenoma, and 1 hyperfunctioning
adrenal adenoma). The parental origin of Gs-alpha mutations was assessed
by evaluating NESP55 and exon 1A transcripts, which are monoallelically
expressed from the maternal and paternal alleles, respectively. By this
approach, Mantovani et al. (2004) demonstrated that in isolated
GH-secreting adenomas, as well as in MAS patients with acromegaly,
Gs-alpha mutations were on the maternal allele. By contrast, the
involvement of other endocrine organs in MAS patients was not associated
with a particular parent specificity, as precocious puberty and
hyperthyroidism were present in patients with mutations on either the
maternal or the paternal allele. Moreover, isolated hyperfunctioning
thyroid and adrenal adenomas displayed the mutation on the maternal and
paternal alleles, respectively. Mantovani et al. (2004) concluded that
their data confirmed the importance of Gs-alpha imprinting in the
pituitary gland and demonstrated the high degree of tissue specificity
of this phenomenon.

To establish whether Gs-alpha is imprinted also in tissues that are site
of alteration both in PHP Ia and PPHP, Mantovani et al. (2004) selected
20 bone and 10 adipose tissue samples that were heterozygous for a known
polymorphism in exon 5. Expression from both parental alleles was
evaluated by RT-PCR and enzymatic digestion of the resulting fragments.
By this approach, the great majority of the samples analyzed showed an
equal expression of the 2 alleles. The authors concluded that their
results provided evidence for the absence of Gs-alpha imprinting in
human bone and fat and suggested that the clinical finding of
osteodystrophy and obesity in PHP Ia and PPHP patients despite the
presence of a normal Gs-alpha allele is likely due to Gs-alpha
haploinsufficiency in these tissues.

By analyzing 30 polymorphic sites across the Gnas1 gene region in
C57BL/6J x Mus spretus F1 mice, Li et al. (2004) identified 2 allelic
switch regions (ASRs) that marked boundaries of epigenetic information.
Activating signals consisting of histone acetylation and methylation of
H3 lys4 (see 602810) and silencing signals consisting of histone
methylation of H3 lys9 and DNA methylation segregated independently
across the ASRs. The authors suggested that these ASRs may allow the
transcriptional elongation to proceed through the silenced domain of
nearby imprinted promoters.

Sakamoto et al. (2004) examined the chromatin state of each parental
allele within the exon 1A-Gs-alpha promoter region by chromatin
immunoprecipitation of samples derived from mice with heterozygous
deletions within the region using antibodies to covalently modified
histones. The exon 1A DMR had allele-specific differences in histone
acetylation and methylation, with histone acetylation and H3 lysine-4
(H3K4) methylation of the paternal allele, and H3 lysine-9 (H3K9)
methylation of the maternal allele. Both parental alleles had similar
levels of histone acetylation and H3K4 methylation within the Gs-alpha
promoter and first exon, with no H3K9 methylation. In liver, where
Gs-alpha is biallelically expressed, both parental alleles had similar
levels of tri- and dimethylated H3K4 within the Gs-alpha first exon. In
contrast, in renal proximal tubules there was a greater ratio of tri- to
dimethylated H3K4 of Gs-alpha exon 1 in the more transcriptionally
active maternal as compared with the paternal allele. The authors
concluded that allele-specific differences in Gs-alpha expression
correlate in a tissue-specific manner with allele-specific differences
in the extent of H3K4 methylation, and chronic transcriptional
activation in mammals is correlated with trimethylation of H3K4.

Morison et al. (2005) reported a census of known imprinted genes in
humans and mice. They listed 83 transcriptional units, of which 29 are
imprinted in both species. They noted that there is a high level of
discordance of imprinting status between the mouse and human and that a
high proportion of imprinted genes are noncoding RNAs or genes derived
by retrotransposition.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Inactivating Mutations in the GNAS Gene

Inactivating loss-of-function mutations in the GNAS1 gene result in
pseudohypoparathyroidism Ia (PHP1A; 103580),
pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP; 612463), and progressive osseous
heteroplasia (POH; 166350) (Aldred and Trembath, 2000).

In a patient with PHP Ia and his affected mother, Patten et al. (1989,
1990) identified a heterozygous mutation in the GNAS gene (139320.0001).

Ahmed et al. (1998) performed mutation analysis in 13 unrelated
families, 8 with PHP Ia and PPHP patients, and 5 with PPHP patients
only. GNAS1 mutations were detected in 4 of the 8 families with PHP Ia:
2 novel de novo missense mutations and an identical frameshift deletion
in 2 unrelated families (139320.0011). GNAS1 mutations were not detected
in any of the families with PPHP only.

Aldred and Trembath (2000) found that a recurring 4-bp deletion in exon
7 of the GNAS1 gene (139320.0011) was common among patients with PHP1A.
The authors noted that inactivating mutations are scattered throughout
the GNAS gene with some evidence of clustering.

In 4 unrelated Italian families with PHP Ia, Mantovani et al. (2000)
identified heterozygous mutations in GNAS: 2 families had 2 previously
reported deletions in exons 5 and 7, whereas the other 2 families had 2
novel frameshift deletions (139320.0025 and 139320.0026). No mutations
were detected in the families in which PPHP was the only clinical
manifestation.

Ahrens et al. (2001) investigated 29 unrelated patients with Albright
hereditary osteodystrophy and PHP Ia or pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism
and their affected family members. All patients showed a reduced GNAS1
protein activity (mean 59% compared with healthy controls). In 21 of 29
patients (72%), 15 different mutations in GNAS1, including 11 novel
mutations, were detected. There were 8 instances in which a mother had
PPHP and her offspring had PHP Ia with AHO due to the same mutation
(see, e.g., 139320.0028). They also reported 5 unrelated patients with a
previously described 4-bp deletion in exon 7 (139320.0011), confirming
the presence of a hotspot for loss-of-function mutations in GNAS1. In 8
patients, no molecular abnormality was found in the GNAS1 gene despite a
functional defect of Gs-alpha.

Shore et al. (2002) identified heterozygous inactivating GNAS1 mutations
in 13 of 18 probands with progressive osseous heteroplasia. The
defective allele in POH was inherited exclusively from fathers, a result
consistent with a model of imprinting for GNAS1. Direct evidence that
the same mutation can cause either POH or PPHP was observed in a single
family; in this family 5 sisters had POH due to a frameshift deletion of
4 nucleotides (139320.0011) inherited from the father in whom the
mutation was nonpenetrant. Three offspring of these sisters had PPHP,
including traces of subcutaneous ossification. Shore et al. (2002)
described a second family in which the unaffected father was
heterozygous for the same GNAS1 mutation associated with POH in his 3
affected daughters. Shore et al. (2002) noted that hormone resistance,
such as that in PHP Ia, is strongly correlated with GNAS1 mutations in
the maternally derived allele, indicating that the maternal allele is
critical in some tissues for cellular functions required for signal
transduction. In contrast, severe, progressive heterotopic ossification,
such as that found in POH, correlates with paternal inheritance of the
GNAS1 mutation, suggesting that the paternal allele specifically
influences progressive osteoblastic differentiation, proliferation of
cells in soft connective tissues, or both.

Linglart et al. (2002) conducted clinical and biologic studies including
screening for mutations in the GNAS1 gene in 30 patients from 21
families with PHP: 19 with PHP associated with decreased erythrocyte Gs
activity (PHP Ia); 10 with AHO associated with decreased erythrocyte Gs
activity (isolated AHO); and 1 with PHP, hormonal resistance, and AHO
but normal erythrocyte Gs activity (PHP Ic). A heterozygous GNAS1 gene
lesion was found in 14 of 17 (82%) of the PHP Ia index cases, including
11 new mutations and a mutation hotspot involving codons 189-190 (21%).
These lesions led to a truncated protein in all but 3 cases with
missense mutations. In the patient diagnosed with PHP Ic, Gs-alpha
protein was shortened by just 4 amino acids, a finding consistent with
the conservation of Gs activity in erythrocytes and the loss of receptor
contact. No GNAS1 lesions were found in the 5 individuals with isolated
AHO who were not related to the PHP Ia patients. Intrafamilial
segregation analyses of the mutated GNAS1 allele in 9 PHP Ia patients
established that the mutation had occurred de novo on the maternal
allele in 4 and had been transmitted by a mother with a mild phenotype
in the other 5. They concluded that imprinting of GNAS1 plays a role in
the clinical phenotype of loss-of-function mutations and that a
functional maternal GNAS1 allele has a predominant role in preventing
the hormonal resistance of PHP Ia.

Aldred et al. (2002) reported 2 patients with Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy and deletions of chromosome 20q, including complete
deletion of the GNAS1 gene. One boy had a paternally inherited deletion
of chromosome 20q13.13-q13.32 and a normal biochemical evaluation
consistent with pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism. The other patient had a
maternally derived deletion of chromosome 20q13.31-q13.33 and
pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia. Neither patient showed evidence of
soft tissue ossification.

In patients with AHO, Rickard and Wilson (2003) searched the 3
overlapping upstream exons, NESP55, XL-alpha-s, and exon 1A. Analysis of
the NESP55 transcripts revealed the creation of a novel splice site in 1
patient and an unusual intronic mutation that caused retention of the
intron in another patient, neither of which could be detected by
analysis of the cDNA of GNAS1.

In a brother and sister with a PHP-Ia phenotype, who also had neonatal
diarrhea and pancreatic insufficiency, Aldred et al. (2000) identified
heterozygosity for a 12-bp in-frame insertion in the GNAS1 gene
(139320.0035). The mutation was inherited from the unaffected mother,
who was found to have germline mosaicism. Makita et al. (2007) performed
biochemical and intact cell studies of the 12-bp insertion (AVDT) and
suggested that the PHP-Ia phenotype results from the instability of the
Gs-alpha-AVDT mutant and that the accompanying neonatal diarrhea may
result from its enhanced constitutive activity in the intestine.

Adegbite et al. (2008) reviewed the charts of 111 individuals with
cutaneous and subcutaneous ossification. While most individuals with
superficial or progressive ossification had inactivating mutations in
GNAS, there were no specific genotype-phenotype correlations that
distinguished the more progressive forms such as POH from the
nonprogressive forms such as PPHP and PHP Ia/c.

- Pseudohypoparathyroidism Type Ib

In 3 brothers with a clinical diagnosis of PHP Ib (603233), Wu et al.
(2001) identified heterozygosity for a 3-bp deletion in the GNAS gene
(139320.0033). The boys had decreased cAMP response to PTH infusion, but
normal erythrocyte Gs activity. When expressed in vitro, the mutant
Gs-alpha was unable to interact with PTHR1 (168468) but showed normal
coupling to other coexpressed heptahelical receptors. Wu et al. (2001)
noted that the absence of PTH resistance in the mother and maternal
grandfather who carried the same mutation was consistent with models of
paternal imprinting of the GNAS gene.

In affected members and obligate carriers of 12 unrelated families with
PHP Ib, Bastepe et al. (2003) identified a 3-kb heterozygous
microdeletion located approximately 220 kb centromeric of exon 1A, which
they called exon A/B, of the GNAS gene. Four of 16 apparently sporadic
PHP Ib patients also had the deletion. Affected individuals with the
microdeletion showed loss of exon 1A methylation, but no other
epigenetic abnormalities. In all examined cases, the deletion was
inherited from the mother, consistent with the observation of PHP Ib
developing only in offspring of female obligate carriers. The deletion
also removed 3 of 8 exons encoding syntaxin-16 (STX16; 603666.0001), but
Bastepe et al. (2003) considered the involvement of STX16 in the
molecular pathogenesis of PHP Ib unlikely. They postulated that the
microdeletion disrupts a putative cis-acting element required for
methylation at exon 1A and that this epigenetic defect underlies the
pathogenesis of PHP Ib.

In all affected individuals and obligate carriers in a large kindred
with PHP Ib, Linglart et al. (2005) identified a 4.4-kb microdeletion
overlapping with a region of the 3-kb deletion identified by Bastepe et
al. (2003). Affected individuals exhibited loss of methylation only at
GNAS exon A/B. Linglart et al. (2005) concluded that PHP Ib comprises at
least 2 distinct conditions sharing the same clinical phenotype: one
associated with the loss of exon A/B methylation alone and, in most
cases, with a heterozygous microdeletion in the STX16 region, and the
other associated with methylation abnormalities at all GNAS DMRs,
including the DMR at exon A/B.

In affected members of 2 unrelated kindreds with PHP Ib, Bastepe et al.
(2005) identified a 4.7-kb deletion (139320.0031) removing the entire
NESP55 DMR and exons 3 and 4 of the antisense transcript of the GNAS
gene (GNASAS; 610540.0001) . Maternal inheritance of the deletion caused
loss of imprinting in cis at the entire GNAS locus.

Liu et al. (2005) found that all of 20 PHP Ib probands studied had loss
of GNAS exon 1A imprinting (a paternal epigenotype on both alleles). All
5 probands with familial disease had a deletion mutation within the
closely linked STX16 gene and a GNAS imprinting defect involving only
the exon 1A region. In contrast, the STX16 mutation was absent in all
sporadic cases. The majority of these patients had abnormal imprinting
of the more upstream regions in addition to the exon 1A imprinting
defect, with 8 of 15 having a paternal epigenotype on both alleles
throughout the GNAS locus. In virtually all cases, the imprinting status
of the paternally methylated NESP55 and maternally methylated
NESPAS/XL-alpha-s promoters was concordant, suggesting that their
imprinting may be coregulated, whereas the imprinting of the
NESPAS/XL-alpha-s promoter region and XL-alpha-s first exon was not
always concordant, even though they are closely linked and lie within
the same DMR. The authors concluded that familial and sporadic forms of
PHP Ib have distinct GNAS imprinting patterns that occur through
different defects in the imprinting mechanism.

- Activating Mutations in the GNAS Gene

Activating gain-of-function mutations in the GNAS1 gene result in the
McCune-Albright syndrome (MAS; 174800), polyostotic fibrous dysplasia
(POFD; see 174800), and various endocrine tumors. These activating
mutations are present in the mosaic state, resulting from a postzygotic
somatic mutation appearing early in the course of development which
yields a monoclonal population of mutated cells within variously
affected tissues. The nonmosaic state for activating mutations is
presumably lethal to the embryo (Aldred and Trembath, 2000; Lumbroso et
al., 2004).

Weinstein et al. (1991) analyzed DNA from tissues of 4 patients with the
McCune-Albright syndrome for the presence of activating mutations in the
GNAS1 gene and identified 1 of 2 activating mutations, R201C
(139320.0008) and R201H (139320.0009) in tissues from all 4 patients.

Among 113 patients with McCune-Albright syndrome, including 98 girls and
15 boys, Lumbroso et al. (2004) found that 43% had a GNAS1 mutation
involving arg201, with a net preponderance of the R201H (n = 34)
compared to R201C (n = 15). No difference in severity or manifestations
of the disease was noted between the two mutations. In patients who had
several tissue samples analyzed, the same mutation was always found,
supporting the hypothesis of an early postzygotic somatic mutation.

Bianco et al. (2000) analyzed a series of 8 consecutive cases of
polyostotic fibrous dysplasia without other features of McCune-Albright
syndrome and identified arg201 mutations (see, e.g., 139320.0013) in the
GNAS1 gene in all of them.

In a review, Aldred and Trembath (2000) noted that mutations leading to
constitutive activation of the GNAS1 gene occur in 2 specific codons,
201 and 227.

Fragoso et al. (2003) identified somatic heterozygous mutations in the
GNAS1 gene (139320.0009; 139320.0013) in adrenal tissue from 3 unrelated
patients with ACTH-independent macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (AIMAH;
219080). The mutations resulted in constitutive activation of the G
protein. The mutations were not present in peripheral blood, and none of
the patients had signs of McCune-Albright syndrome. Fragoso et al.
(2003) discussed whether the patients could be considered part of the
spectrum of McCune-Albright syndrome or whether they represent isolated
cases of AIMAH associated with somatic mutations.

- Somatic Mutations in Pituitary Adenomas

Growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH; 139190) uses cAMP as a second
messenger to stimulate growth hormone (GH; 139250) secretion and
proliferation of normal pituitary somatotrophs (Billestrup et al.,
1986). Vallar et al. (1987) identified constitutive activation of Gs in
tissue from a subset of GH-secreting pituitary tumors (102200).

In a series of 32 corticotroph adenomas of the pituitary (219090),
Williamson et al. (1995) found 2 with somatic mutations in the GNAS1
gene at codon 227 (139320.0010; 139320.0012).

Hayward et al. (2001) noted that approximately 40% of growth
hormone-secreting pituitary adenomas contain somatic mutations in the
GNAS1 gene. These mutations, which occur at arg201 or glu227 (see, e.g.,
139320.0008 and 139320.0010, respectively), constitutively activate the
alpha subunit of GNAS1. Although transcripts encoding Gs-alpha are
biallelically derived in most human tissues, Hayward et al. (2001)
showed that the mutation had occurred on the maternal allele in 21 of 22
GNAS1-positive somatotroph adenomas. They also showed that Gs-alpha is
monoallelically expressed from the maternal allele in normal adult
pituitary tissue. This monoallelic expression of Gs-alpha was frequently
relaxed in somatotroph tumors regardless of GNAS1 mutation status. These
findings implied a possible role for loss of Gs-alpha imprinting during
pituitary somatotroph tumorigenesis.

- Other Disease Associations

Jia et al. (1999) identified a common silent polymorphism in the GNAS1
gene involving a change of codon 131 from ATT (ile) to ATC (ile). The
authors found a significant difference in the frequency of the alleles
between 268 white patients with essential hypertension (145500) (51% +)
and a matched group of 231 control subjects (58% +) (P = 0.02).

Genevieve et al. (2005) reported 2 unrelated girls who presented with
severe pre- and postnatal growth retardation and had de novo
interstitial deletions of chromosome 20q13.2-q13.3. Molecular studies
showed that the deletions were of paternal origin in both girls and were
approximately 4.5 Mb in size, encompassing the GNAS imprinted locus,
including paternally imprinted Gnasxl, and the TFAP2C gene (601602).
Both patients had intractable feeding difficulties, microcephaly, facial
dysmorphism with high forehead, broad nasal bridge, small chin and
malformed ears, mild psychomotor retardation, and hypotonia. Genevieve
et al. (2005) noted that a mouse model with disruption of the Gnasxl
gene had poor postnatal growth and survival (Plagge et al., 2004), and
that a patient reported by Aldred et al. (2002) with a paternal deletion
of the GNAS complex also showed pre- and postnatal growth retardation
and feeding difficulties. Moreover, disruption of the Tfap2c gene in
mice had been shown to affect embryonic development (Werling and
Schorle, 2002).

Using metaanalysis combining data from case control and family studies
in Gambia, Kenya, and Malawi and a case control study from Ghana, Auburn
et al. (2008) detected associations between intronic or conservative
SNPs of GNAS and severe malaria. SNPs with significant associations
clustered in the 5-prime end of GNAS. Auburn et al. (2008) proposed that
the impact of GNAS on malaria parasite invasion efficacy may alter
susceptibility to disease.

ANIMAL MODEL

Yu et al. (1998) generated mice with a mutation in exon 2 of the Gnas
gene, resulting in a null allele. Homozygous Gs deficiency was
embryonically lethal. Heterozygotes with maternal (m-/+) and paternal
(+/p-) inheritance of the Gnas null allele had distinct phenotypes,
suggesting that Gnas is an imprinted gene. Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
resistance is present in m-/+ but not +/p- mice. Expression of the alpha
subunit in the renal cortex (the site of PTH action) was markedly
reduced in m-/+ but not in +/p- mice, demonstrating that the Gnas
paternal allele is imprinted in this tissue. Gnas was also imprinted in
brown and white adipose tissue. The maximal physiologic response to
vasopressin (urinary concentrating ability) was normal in both m-/+ and
+/p- mice and Gnas was not imprinted in the renal inner medulla, the
site of vasopressin action. Tissue-specific imprinting of Gnas was
likely the mechanism for variable and tissue-specific hormone resistance
in the knockout mice and a similar mechanism might explain the variable
phenotype in AHO.

Exon 2 m-/+ mice are obese and hypometabolic, whereas exon 2 +/p- mice
are lean and hypermetabolic. To study the effect of Gs-alpha deficiency
without disrupting other Gnas gene products, Chen et al. (2005)
disrupted exon 1 of the Gnas gene in mice. They found that exon 1 +/p-
mice lacked the exon 2 +/p- phenotype and developed obesity and insulin
resistance. Exon 2 and exon 1 m-/+ mice both had subcutaneous edema at
birth, presumably due to loss of maternal Gs-alpha expression; however,
they differed in other respects, raising the possibility for the
presence of other maternal-specific gene products. Exon 1 m-/+ mice had
more severe obesity and insulin resistance and a lower metabolic rate
relative to exon 1 +/p- mice. Chen et al. (2005) concluded that the
lean, hypermetabolic, and insulin-sensitive exon 2 +/p- phenotype
appeared to result from XL-alpha-s deficiency, whereas loss of
paternal-specific Gs-alpha expression in exon 1 +/p- mice led to an
opposite metabolic phenotype. Thus, alternative GNAS gene products have
opposing effects on glucose and lipid metabolism. The differences
between exon 1 m-/+ and +/p- mice presumably resulted from differential
effects on Gs-alpha expression in tissues where Gs-alpha is normally
imprinted.

A suspicion of the existence of one or more imprinted genes on distal
mouse chromosome 2 had been raised by Cattanach and Kirk (1985) and
Peters et al. (1994): paternal uniparental disomy (UPD)/maternal
deletion and maternal UPD/paternal deletion of a region between
breakpoints T2Wa and T28H on distal mouse chromosome 2 resulted in
distinct phenotypes and early lethality. Neuronatin (NNAT; 603106) is an
imprinted gene on distal mouse chromosome 2 that maps outside the
T2Wa-T28H imprinted region (Kikyo et al., 1997). Given the large
distance and the presence of multiple nonimprinted genes between Gnas
and Nnat, it is likely that they lie within distinct imprinting domains.
The tissue-specific imprinting of Gnas observed by Yu et al. (1998) had
been demonstrated for other imprinted genes; e.g., DeChiara et al.
(1991) had demonstrated tissue-specific parental imprinting in the case
of the insulin-like growth factor II gene (147280) by study of targeted
disruption of the gene in mice.

Bastepe et al. (2004) studied chimeric mice containing wildtype
chondrocytes and chondrocytes with either homozygous or heterozygous
disruption of Gnas exon 2. Haploinsufficiency of Gnas signaling resulted
in chondrocytes that differentiated prematurely. The phenotype was
similar to that observed in Pthr1 (168468)-deficient mice. Bastepe et
al. (2004) determined that expression of Gnas in chondrocytes occurs
from both parental alleles. They concluded that GNAS is the primary
mediator of PTHR1 in chondrocytes and that haploinsufficiency of GNAS
signaling contributes to the skeletal phenotypes of AHO.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, MET1VAL

In a mother and son with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580),
Patten et al. (1989, 1990) identified a heterozygous A-to-G transition
in exon 1 of the GNAS1 gene, resulting in a met1-to-val (M1V)
substitution at the initiator codon. Initiation at the next AUG was
in-frame and predicted to result in deletion of 59 N-terminal amino
acids. Laboratory studies showed that the GNAS protein was reactive with
a C-terminal Gs-alpha antiserum, but not with 2 Gs-alpha peptide
antisera to amino acid residues 28-42 or 47-61. This was the first
molecular delineation of a mutation in a human G protein and a
conclusive demonstration that mutation at the GNAS1 locus results in
AHO.

.0002
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, IVS10DS, G-C, +1

In 4 sisters with PHP Ia (103580), Weinstein et al. (1990) identified a
heterozygous G-to-C transversion in intron 10 of the GNAS1 gene,
resulting in a splice site mutation. The authors used PCR to amplify
genomic fragments with an attached high-melting G+C-rich region ('GC
clamp') and DGGE to analyze the fragments. All 4 daughters had decreased
Gs-alpha mRNA and functional Gs-alpha deficiency. The mother, who had
PPHP (612463), also carried the heterozygous mutation. She had minor
stigmata of Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, such as unilateral
brachyphalangy I, x-ray evidence of subcutaneous calcifications, and
short stature relative to other members of her family, but no hormonal
abnormalities. The kindred had previously been reported by Kinard et al.
(1979)l.

.0003
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED;;
OSSEOUS HETEROPLASIA, PROGRESSIVE, INCLUDED
GNAS, 1-BP DEL, 725C

In a mother with PPHP (612463) and her daughter with PHP1A (103580),
Weinstein et al. (1990) identified a heterozygous 1-bp deletion (G) in
exon 10 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a frameshift.

Adegbite et al. (2008) identified the same deletion (725delC) in an
unaffected carrier father and in 3 of his 5 children with progressive
osseous heteroplasia (POH; 166350). The 3 children exhibited varying
degrees of severity based on the extent of the heterotropic ossification
lesions and resultant functional impairment.

.0004
REMOVED FROM DATABASE
.0005
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, IVS3AS, A-G, -12

Levine and Deily (1990) identified a family in which members affected
with PHP1A (103580) had an A-to-G transition 12 bases from the 3-prime
terminus of intron 3 of the GNAS gene. The mutation was predicted to
result in a frameshift and a premature stop codon.

.0006
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, LEU99PRO

In affected members of a family with PHP Ia (103580), Levine and Deily
(1990) identified a heterozygous T-to-C transition in the GNAS gene,
resulting in a leu99-to-pro (L99P) substitution.

.0007
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, CYS165ARG

In affected members of a family with PHP1A (103580), Levine and Vechio
(1990) identified a heterozygous C-to-T transition in exon 6 of the GNAS
gene, resulting in a cys165-to-arg (C165R) substitution.

.0008
MCCUNE-ALBRIGHT SYNDROME, SOMATIC, MOSAIC
PITUITARY TUMOR, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
SEX CORD STROMAL TUMOR, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
GNAS, ARG201CYS

In various tissues from 4 patients with McCune-Albright syndrome
(174800), Weinstein et al. (1991) found 1 of 2 activating mutations
within codon 201 in exon 8 of the GNAS gene. Two patients carried an
arg201-to-cys substitution (R201C); the other 2 carried an R201H
substitution (139320.0009). Tissues analyzed included affected endocrine
organs, such as gonads, adrenal glands, thyroid, and pituitary, as well
as tissues not classically involved in the McCune-Albright syndrome. In
each patient the proportion of cells affected varied from tissue to
tissue. In 2 endocrine organs, the highest proportion of mutant alleles
was found in regions of abnormal cell proliferation. Weinstein et al.
(1991) concluded that somatic mutation of the GNAS gene early in
embryogenesis resulted in the mosaic population of normal and
mutant-bearing tissues that underlie the clinical manifestations of
McCune-Albright syndrome.

Candeliere et al. (1995) found the R201C mutation in a 14-year-old boy
who had previously been reported as a case of panostotic fibrous
dysplasia (see 174800).

Landis et al. (1989) identified somatic gain-of-function mutations in
the GNAS1 gene in 4 of 8 growth hormone (GH; 139250)-secreting pituitary
tumors (102200) surgically removed from patients with acromegaly. Two
tumors contained a C-to-T transition resulting in an R201C substitution.
The other 2 tumors had an R201H substitution (139320.0009) and a Q227R
substitution (139320.0010), respectively. All the mutations resulted in
constitutive activation of Gs by inhibiting its GTPase activity and
behaved like dominantly acting oncogenes.

Yang et al. (1996) identified somatic mutations at GNAS codon 201 in 9
of 21 pituitary adenomas derived from Korean patients with acromegaly.
Eight tumors had the R201C mutation and 1 had an R201S substitution
(139320.0013). Clinically, patients with the GNAS mutations were older
and responded better to octreotide-induced growth hormone suppression
than those without mutations.

Collins et al. (2003) identified an R201C mutation in thyroid carcinoma
derived from a patient with McCune-Albright syndrome.

Fragoso et al. (1998) identified a somatic R201C mutation in 4 (66.6%)
of 14 human sex cord stromal tumors, including ovarian and testicular
Leydig cell tumors. In contrast, no GIP2 (139360) mutations were found
in any of the sex cord stromal tumors studied.

Kalfa et al. (2006) detected the R201C mutation in 8 of 30 cases of
juvenile ovarian granulosa cell tumor, the most common sex cord stromal
tumor. Laser microdissection confirmed that the mutation was exclusively
localized in the tumoral granulosa cells and was absent in the ovarian
stroma. Patients with a hyperactivated G-alpha-s exhibited a
significantly more advanced tumor (p less than 0.05) because 7 of them
(77.7%) were staged as Ic or had had a recurrence.

.0009
MCCUNE-ALBRIGHT SYNDROME, SOMATIC, MOSAIC
PITUITARY TUMOR, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
ACTH-INDEPENDENT MACRONODULAR ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA, SOMATIC, INCLUDED;;
SEX CORD STROMAL TUMOR, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
GNAS, ARG201HIS

In 2 patients with McCune-Albright syndrome (174800), Weinstein et al.
(1991) identified an arg201-to-his (R201H) mutation in exon 8 of the
GNAS gene in endocrine organs affected in this disorder, such as gonads,
adrenal glands, thyroid, and pituitary, as well as tissues not
classically involved. In 2 endocrine organs, ovary and adrenal, the
highest proportion of mutant alleles was found in regions of abnormal
cell proliferation. Weinstein et al. (1991) concluded that somatic
mutation of the GNAS gene early in embryogenesis resulted in the mosaic
population of normal and mutant-bearing tissues that underlie the
clinical manifestations of McCune-Albright syndrome. It remained an open
question whether GNAS1 mutations were causally related to the
nonendocrine abnormalities in 3 of the patients: chronic liver disease
in 1, thymic hyperplasia in 2, gastrointestinal adenomatous polyps in 1,
cardiopulmonary disease in 1, and sudden death in 2.

Schwindinger et al. (1992) found a G-to-A transition resulting in the
R201H substitution in a patient with McCune-Albright syndrome who had
severe bony involvement, characteristic skin lesions, and a history of
hyperthyroidism. The mutation was found in a higher proportion of skin
cells from affected areas than from unaffected areas. The findings
confirmed the Happle (1986) hypothesis that this disorder is due to
mosaicism for a postzygotic GNAS1 mutation. The authors noted that
arg201 is also the site of ADP-ribosylation by the cholera toxin.

Collins et al. (2003) identified the R201H mutation in thyroid carcinoma
from a patient with McCune-Albright syndrome.

In 2 growth hormone (GH; 139250)-secreting pituitary tumors (102200)
surgically removed from patients with acromegaly, Landis et al. (1989)
identified a somatic mutation in the GNAS1 gene, resulting in an R201H
substitution. The mutation resulted in constitutive activation of Gs by
inhibiting its GTPase activity and behaved like a dominantly acting
oncogene.

Fragoso et al. (2003) identified a heterozygous R201H mutation in
adrenal tissue from 2 unrelated patients with ACTH-independent
macronodular adrenal hyperplasia (219080).

In 1 of 30 cases of juvenile ovarian granulosa cell tumor, the most
common sex cord stromal tumor, Kalfa et al. (2006) detected the R201H
mutation of the GNAS gene. Laser microdissection confirmed that the
mutation was exclusively localized in the tumoral granulosa cells and
was absent in the ovarian stroma.

.0010
PITUITARY TUMOR, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING, SOMATIC
PITUITARY ADENOMA, ACTH-SECRETING, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
GNAS, GLN227ARG

In a growth hormone (GH; 139250)-secreting pituitary tumor (102200)
surgically removed from a patient with acromegaly, Landis et al. (1989)
identified a somatic mutation in the GNAS1 gene, resulting in a
gln227-to-arg (Q227R) substitution. The mutation resulted in
constitutive activation of Gs by inhibiting its GTPase activity and
behaved like a dominantly acting oncogene.

In a series of 32 corticotroph adenomas of the pituitary (219090),
Williamson et al. (1995) found 2 with somatic mutations in the GNAS1
gene at codon 227. One had the Q227R mutation and the second had a Q227H
mutation (139320.0012).

.0011
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
OSSEOUS HETEROPLASIA, PROGRESSIVE, INCLUDED;;
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, 4-BP DEL, 565CTGA

In a patient with PHP1A (103580), Weinstein et al. (1992) identified a
heterozygous 4-bp deletion (565delCTGA) in exon 7 of the GNAS1 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature stop codon. Analysis of
lymphocyte RNA by reverse transcription-PCR and direct sequencing showed
that the GNAS1 allele bearing the mutation was not expressed as mRNA.
Consistent with this, Northern blot analysis revealed an approximately
50% deficiency in steady state levels of GNAS1 mRNA.

Ahmed et al. (1998) identified this deletion mutation in 2 unrelated
families with PHP Ia.

Shore et al. (2002) provided direct evidence that the 4-bp deletion can
cause either progressive osseous heteroplasia (POH; 166350) or Albright
hereditary osteodystrophy without hormone resistance (PPHP; 612463) in
the same family. Five sisters with POH had inherited this mutation from
the father in whom the mutation was nonpenetrant. Three offspring of
these sisters had AHO, including traces of subcutaneous ossification.
Shore et al. (2002) suggested that POH requires paternal inheritance of
a GNAS1 mutation, whereas hormone resistance is more likely to occur
when the genetic defect is maternally inherited.

Ahmed et al. (2002) cautioned against a premature conclusion that POH
may require paternal inheritance. In a family reported by Ahmed et al.
(1998), the 4-bp deletion was found in a brother and sister and in their
mother but not in their father. Aside from brachymetacarpia and short
stature, the mother did not have features of AHO. The daughter had
typical features of AHO and hormone resistant PHP1A; in contrast, her
brother presented in the first year of life with ossification of
subcutaneous tissue that was followed by progressive, generalized
heterotopic ossification of skeletal muscle, without any clear evidence
of hormone resistance. These cases exemplified the wide phenotypic
heterogeneity in persons with mutations in GNAS1, even within 1 family.

Bastepe and Juppner (2002) suggested that, like some patients who have
either PHP type Ia or PHP type Ib, the son described by Ahmed et al.
(1998) may have developed resistance to parathyroid hormone later in
life or not at all. Given that the patient's sister and mother had PHP
type Ia and PPHP, respectively, POH resulting from maternally inherited
GNAS1 mutations may actually represent an incomplete form of PHP type
Ia. Bastepe and Juppner (2002) suggested that the underlying mechanism
for this form of POH may be distinct from that described by Shore et al.
(2002), which appears to result only from paternally inherited GNAS1
mutations.

Adegbite et al. (2008) identified heterozygosity for the 565delCTGA
mutation in the GNAS gene in 13 POH cases (10 familial cases among 3
different families, and 3 individual spontaneous cases). The mutation
resulted in variable severity and pleiotropy, both in family members and
in unrelated sporadic cases.

.0012
PITUITARY ADENOMA, ACTH-SECRETING, SOMATIC
GNAS, GLN227HIS

In a series of 32 corticotroph adenomas of the pituitary (219090),
Williamson et al. (1995) found 2 with somatic mutations in the GNAS1
gene at codon 227. One had a Q227R (139320.0010) substitution, and the
other had a mutation resulting in a gln227-to-his (Q227H) substitution.
The latter patient was a 35-year-old male who presented with severe
Cushing syndrome complicated by psychosis.

.0013
PITUITARY TUMOR, GROWTH HORMONE-SECRETING, SOMATIC
POLYOSTOTIC FIBROUS DYSPLASIA, SOMATIC, MOSAIC, INCLUDED;;
ACTH-INDEPENDENT MACRONODULAR ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA, SOMATIC, INCLUDED
GNAS, ARG201SER

In a series of growth hormone-secreting pituitary tumors (102200)
derived from 21 Korean acromegalic patients, Yang et al. (1996) found
that 1 tumor had a somatic C-to-A transversion in the GNAS1 gene,
resulting in an arg201-to-ser (R201S) substitution.

Candeliere et al. (1997) reported a patient with polyostotic fibrous
dysplasia (see 174800) in whom the R201S mutation was identified in the
somatic mosaic state.

Fragoso et al. (2003) identified a heterozygous somatic R201S mutation
in adrenal tissue from a patient with ACTH-independent macronodular
adrenal hyperplasia (219080).

.0014
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, SER250ARG

In a patient with PHP Ia (103580), Warner et al. (1997) identified a
ser250-to-arg (S250R) mutation in the GNAS1 gene. Both GNAS1 activity
and expression were decreased by approximately 50% in erythrocyte
membranes from the affected patient. In vitro functional expression
studies suggested that substitution or deletion of residue 250 may alter
guanine nucleotide binding, which could lead to thermolability and
impaired function.

.0015
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA, INCLUDED
GNAS, 38-BP DEL, EX1/IVS1 BOUNDARY

In affected members of a large kindred in which 2 mothers had
pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP; 612463) and their 6 offspring had
PHP Ia (103580), Fischer et al. (1998) identified a 38-bp deletion at
the exon 1/intron 1 boundary of the GNAS gene. The deletion was
predicted to eliminate the splice donor site of exon 1. Some of the
patients had increased basal serum levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH; see 188540) and/or excessive TSH responses to
thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH; 613879). The pseudo-PHP patients had
decreased Gs activity, but normal urinary cAMP responses to PTH, normal
TSH levels and responses to TRH, and normal serum levels of calcium and
PTH.

.0016
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
GNAS, ARG258TRP

In a 24-year-old man with PPHP (612463), Warner et al. (1998) identified
a de novo arg258-to-trp (R258W) mutation in the GNAS1 gene. Arg258 is a
nonconserved residue adjacent to a highly conserved glutamic acid
residue, glu259, that is important for contact between switch 2 and 3 in
the activated state. Warner et al. (1998) presented evidence that
substitution of arg258 led to defective GDP binding, resulting in
increased thermolability and decreased activation. Developmental delay,
brachycephaly, and decreased muscle tone were noted by age 10 months.
Throughout childhood he was small for his age and stocky in appearance.
By 6 years, he developed learning disabilities as well as impulsive and
aggressive behavior. Brachydactyly involved the distal phalanx of the
thumb and the fourth metacarpals bilaterally. He also had intracranial
calcifications in the globus pallidus. There was no evidence of
resistance to parathyroid hormone or thyrotropin.

.0017
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
GNAS, ARG258ALA

Warner et al. (1998) identified a heterozygous arg258-to-ala (R258A)
substitution in the GNAS gene as a cause of PPHP (612463). The
substitution led to increased GDP release and impaired receptor-mediated
activation. Based on the crystal structure of GNAS1, arg258 interacts
with residue gln170 within the helical domain. Loss of this interaction
was predicted to open the cleft between the GTPase and helical domain,
resulting in more rapid GDP release, as observed in the arg258 variants.
Warner et al. (1998) suggested that interactions between arg258 and the
helical domain are important for receptor-mediated activation. This same
codon was affected in another patient with AHO (R258W; 139320.0016).

Warner and Weinstein (1999) showed that a gln170-to-ala substitution
(Q170A; 139320.0018) also leads to increased GDP release but does not
affect receptor-mediated activation. Therefore, interactions between
arg258 and gln170 are important for maintaining guanine nucleotide
binding but are not important for activation by receptor. Warner and
Weinstein (1999) also showed that the R258A mutation, but not Q170A, was
associated with a markedly elevated intrinsic GTPase rate, resulting in
more rapid inactivation. Arg258, through mutual interactions with glu50,
may constrain arg201, a residue critical for catalyzing GTP hydrolysis.
Disruption of the interaction between arg258 and glu50 may relieve this
constraint and allow arg201 to interact more efficiently with the
gamma-phosphate of GTP in the transition state. This is an example of a
mutation in a heterotrimeric G protein that increases the intrinsic
GTPase activity and provides another mechanism by which receptor
signaling can be impaired by G protein mutations.

.0018
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
GNAS, GLN170ALA

See 139320.0017 and Warner and Weinstein (1999).

.0019
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA, WITH TESTOTOXICOSIS
GNAS, ALA366SER

Iiri et al. (1994) studied 2 unrelated boys who had a paradoxical
combination of PHP Ia (103580) and testotoxicosis (176410). Both boys
were found to have an ala366-to-ser (A366S) mutation in the GNAS1 gene.
PHP Ia is marked by resistance to hormones acting through cyclic AMP
(parathyroid hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone) as well as a 50%
decrease in erythrocyte Gs activity in this heterozygous disorder. In
contrast, testotoxicosis is a form of precocious puberty in which the
Leydig cells secrete testosterone in the absence of luteinizing hormone,
often due to constitutive activation of the luteinizing hormone receptor
and (indirectly) of Gs. Iiri et al. (1994) demonstrated that this A366S
mutation constitutively activated adenylyl cyclase in vitro, causing
hormone-independent cAMP accumulation when expressed in cultured cells,
and accounting for the testotoxicosis phenotype. Although the mutant
form was quite stable at testis temperature, it was rapidly degraded at
37 degrees centigrade, explaining the PHP Ia phenotype caused by loss of
Gs activity. In vitro experiments indicated that accelerated release of
GDP caused both the constitutive activity and the thermolability of the
A366S mutant form.

.0020
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, ARG231HIS

In patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580), Farfel et
al. (1996) identified an arg231-to-his (R231H) mutation in the GNAS1
gene which impaired the ability of the mutant protein to mediate
hormonal stimulation of cAMP accumulation in transiently transfected
cells.

Iiri et al. (1997) reported biochemical analyses showing that an
activation defect caused by the R231H mutation was paradoxically
intensified by hormonal and other stimuli. By substituting histidine for
a conserved arginine residue, the mutation removed an internal salt
bridge (to a conserved glutamate) that normally acts as an
intramolecular hasp to maintain tight binding of the gamma-phosphate of
GTP. The activation defect became prominent only under conditions that
destabilized binding of guanine nucleotide (receptor stimulation) or
impaired the ability of alpha-s to bind the gamma-phosphate of GTP
(e.g., cholera toxin). Although GDP release is usually the rate-limiting
step in nucleotide exchange, the biochemical phenotype of this mutant
GNAS indicated that efficient G protein activation by receptors and
other stimuli depends on the ability of the protein to clasp tightly the
GTP molecule that enters the binding site. The 3 affected patients in
the family carrying the R231H mutation of the GNAS1 gene showed classic
clinical features of PHP Ia, including Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy, but Gs activities in their erythrocytes were nearly
normal (ranging between 60% and 90% of normal). Erythrocyte membranes of
most PHP I patients contain only 50% of the normal complement of Gs
activity and these patients are classified as PHP Ia, indicating that
the affected patients carry inactivating mutations in the GNAS1 gene. In
contrast, the PHP Ib phenotype is found in a smaller number of PHP I
patients whose erythrocytes contain normal (or nearly normal) Gs
activity. The R231H patients showed that results of the erythrocyte Gs
assay can lead to an incorrect inference with respect to the genetic
basis of the disease. PHP I patients with apparently normal or nearly
normal erythrocyte Gs activities merit careful investigation, especially
when they display the classic clinical phenotype, including Albright
hereditary osteodystrophy. Although such patients may inherit mutations
in genes other than GNAS1, their GNAS1 gene may encode mutant proteins
with instructive qualitative defects, including impairment of
conformational change, subcellular localization, or interaction with
other proteins, including receptors, effectors, and regulators of G
protein signaling proteins.

Ishikawa et al. (2001) found the R231H mutation in exon 9 of the GNAS1
gene in a Japanese patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia.

.0021
MCCUNE-ALBRIGHT SYNDROME, SOMATIC, MOSAIC
GNAS, ARG201GLY

Riminucci et al. (1999) studied a patient who had been diagnosed with
McCune-Albright syndrome (174800) at the age of 8 years. In an affected
parietal bone sample, the authors identified a heterozygous C-to-G
transversion in the GNAS1 gene, resulting in an arg201-to-gly (R201G)
amino acid substitution. The boy presented with precocious puberty,
facial deformities, and typical cafe-au-lait spots with a 'coast of
Maine' profile. Extensive involvement of the cranial vault was apparent
on x-ray. At the age of 13, acromegalic bone changes and growth hormone
oversecretion were detected. With the exception of a single case of
polyostotic fibrous dysplasia in which an R201S mutation was found
(139320.0013), R201C (139320.0008) and R201H (139320.0009) had been the
mutations consistently found in McCune-Albright syndrome patients and in
non-MAS cases of fibrous dysplasia of bone. Thus, of the predicted
missense mutations of codon 201, only R201P and R201L remained
undetected (although R201L had been observed by Gorelov et al. (1995) in
isolated, non-MAS endocrine tumors).

.0022
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, 2-BP DEL, GA, EXON 8

In affected members of a kindred with either PHP1A (103580) or PPHP
(612463), Yu et al. (1999) identified a 2-bp deletion in exon 8 of the
GNAS gene, resulting in premature termination of the protein. Serial
measurements of thyroid function in members of kindred 1 indicated that
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH; see 188540) resistance progressed with
age and became more evident after the first year of life in those with
PHP1A.

.0023
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, 2-BP DEL, CT, EXON 4

In affected members of a kindred with either PHP1A (103580) or PPHP
(612463), Yu et al. (1999) identified a heterozygous 2-bp deletion (CT)
in exon 4 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature
termination codon.

.0024
OSSEOUS HETEROPLASIA, PROGRESSIVE
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA, INCLUDED
GNAS, 1-BP DEL, 348C

In 2 patients with progressive osseous heteroplasia (166350) from
different families, Shore et al. (2002) identified a 1-bp deletion
(348delC) in exon 5 of the GNAS1 gene.

Shapira et al. (1995) had described the same mutation in a patient with
pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580).

.0025
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, INCLUDED
GNAS, 1-BP DEL, C, EXON 1

In an Italian patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580),
Mantovani et al. (2000) detected a heterozygous 1-bp deletion (C) within
codon 38 in exon 1 of the GNAS1 gene, resulting in a premature stop
codon at position 57. This mutation was also found in the patient's
mother, who had pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (612463).

.0026
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, 2-BP DEL, TG, EXON 11

In an Italian patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (103580),
Mantovani et al. (2000) detected a heterozygous 2-bp deletion (TG)
within codon 287 in exon 11 of the GNAS1 gene, resulting in a premature
stop codon at position 298. The mutation was also found in the patient's
mother, who presented the same clinical and biologic features.

.0027
OSSEOUS HETEROPLASIA, PROGRESSIVE
GNAS, 2-BP DEL, 860TG

In an unusual case of progressive osseous heteroplasia (166350)
involving the face in an 8-year-old Albanian girl, Faust et al. (2003)
identified a heterozygous 2-bp deletion in the GNAS1 gene, 860-861delTG,
resulting in a frameshift of 11 amino acids followed by a premature stop
codon.

.0029
PSEUDOPSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA, INCLUDED
GNAS1, PRO115LEU

In a woman with PPHP (612463), Ahrens et al. (2001) identified a C-to-T
transition in exon 5 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a pro115-to-leu
(P115L) substitution. Her son, who had the same mutation, had PHP Ia
(103580).

.0030
REMOVED FROM DATABASE
.0031
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IB
GNAS, 4.7-KB DEL

In 2 unrelated kindreds with pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ib (603233),
Bastepe et al. (2005) identified a 4.7-kb deletion in the GNAS locus
that removed the differentially methylated region (DMR) of the GNAS gene
encompassing the NESP55 region and exons 3 and 4 of the GNAS antisense
transcript (GNASAS; 610540.0001). When inherited from a female, the
deletion abolished all maternal GNAS imprints and derepressed maternally
silenced transcripts, suggesting that the deleted region contains a
cis-acting element that controls imprinting of the maternal GNAS allele.

.0032
RECLASSIFIED - VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
GNAS, 36-BP DUP, ALA138ASP, PRO161ARG

This variant, formerly titled PROLONGED BLEEDING TIME, BRACHYDACTYLY,
AND MENTAL RETARDATION, has been reclassified because delineation of the
phenotype and the contribution of the variant to the phenotype are
unclear.

In 3 patients from 2 families with markedly prolonged bleeding time
accompanied by neurologic problems, brachydactyly, and a variable degree
of mental retardation, Freson et al. (2001) identified a paternally
inherited functional polymorphism in XL exon 1, consisting of a 36-bp
duplication and 2 nucleotide substitutions, resulting in changes of
codon 138 from alanine to aspartic acid (A138D) and of codon 161 from
proline to arginine (P161R), that was associated with Gs hyperfunction
in platelets, leading to an increased trauma-related bleeding tendency.

Freson et al. (2003) described 8 additional patients who inherited the
same XLAS polymorphism paternally and who showed Gs hyperfunction in
their platelets and fibroblasts. The clinical features were variable: 3
patients resembled those reported by Freson et al. (2001) and had
psychomotor retardation, disturbed behavior, facial dysmorphism, feeding
or gastrointestinal motility problems, and abnormal bleeding following
trauma, whereas 5 patients had growth deficiency and no clinical
bleeding abnormalities. All carriers also had an elongated ALEX protein
as a consequence of the paternally inherited insertion. The paternally
inherited double XLAS/ALEX functional polymorphism was also associated
with elevated platelet membrane Gs-alpha protein levels. The in vitro
interaction between the 2 elongated XLAS and ALEX proteins was markedly
reduced. Freson et al. (2003) suggested that in contrast to the strong
interaction between the 2 wildtype proteins, the defective association
may result in unimpeded receptor-stimulated activation of XLAS.

.0033
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IB
GNAS, 3-BP DEL, CAT, EXON 13

In 3 brothers with a clinical diagnosis of pseudohypoparathyroidism type
Ib (603233) and their clinically unaffected mother and maternal
grandfather, Wu et al. (2001) identified heterozygosity for a 3-bp
deletion (CAT) in exon 13 of the GNAS gene, resulting in the deletion of
ile382. Biochemical studies showed normal erythrocyte Gs activity, but
decreased cAMP response to PTH infusion. When expressed in vitro, mutant
Gs-alpha was unable to interact with PTHR1 (168468) but showed normal
coupling to other coexpressed heptahelical receptors. The mutation was
not found in the unaffected father and sister or in 30 unrelated
controls. Wu et al. (2001) noted that the absence of PTH resistance in
the mother and maternal grandfather who carried the same mutation was
consistent with models of paternal imprinting of the GNAS gene.

.0034
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, 1-BP INS, A, EXON 3

In a 10-year-old girl with brachymetacarpia, mental retardation,
normocalcemic pseudohypoparathyroidism, and hypothyroidism (103580),
Thiele et al. (2007) identified a heterozygous insertion of an adenosine
in exon 3 of the GNAS gene, altering codon 85 and leading to a
frameshift and a stop at codon 87 in exon 4. Molecular studies of cDNA
from blood RNA demonstrated normal, biallelic expression of Gs-alpha-S
transcripts, whereas expression of Gs-alpha-L transcripts from the
maternal allele was reduced. Both the reduced activity and the mutation
were also found in the mother and the affected younger brother. Thiele
et al. (2007) noted that this was the first reported pathogenic mutation
in exon 3 of the GNAS gene. The mutation is associated with
pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia due to selective deficiency of
Gs-alpha-L and a partial reduction of Gs-alpha activity.

.0035
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IA
GNAS, 12-BP INS, NT1107

In a brother and sister with a PHP Ia phenotype (103580), who also had
neonatal diarrhea and pancreatic insufficiency, Aldred et al. (2000)
identified heterozygosity for a 12-bp insertion in exon 13 of the GNAS1
gene, resulting in an in-frame ala-val-asp-thr (AVDT) repeat at codon
366 within the beta-6/alpha-5 loop. The mutation was not found in 2
unaffected sibs and was also not detected in the lymphocyte DNA of
either of the clinically unaffected parents. Haplotype analysis
confirmed germline mosaicism and indicated that the mutation was
maternal in origin.

By biochemical and intact cell analysis of the mutant Gs-alpha
containing the AVDT repeat within its GDP/GTP binding site, Makita et
al. (2007) demonstrated that the mutant protein was unstable but
constitutively active as a result of rapid GDP release and reduced GTP
hydrolysis, suggesting that instability and paradoxical inactivation by
receptor stimulation results in a loss of function. Gs-alpha-AVDT was
located primarily in the cytosol except in rat and mouse small intestine
epithelial cells, where it was found predominantly in the membrane, with
adenylyl cyclase present and constitutive increases in cAMP accumulation
occurring in parallel. Makita et al. (2007) suggested that the PHP Ia
phenotype results from the instability of the Gs-alpha-AVDT mutant and
that the accompanying neonatal diarrhea may result from its enhanced
constitutive activity in the intestine.

.0036
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IC
GNAS, TYR391TER

In a girl with PHP type Ic (612462), Linglart et al. (2002) identified a
heterozygous mutation in exon 13 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a
tyr319-to-ter (Y391X) substitution only 4 amino acids before the
wildtype stop codon. She had hormone resistance with features of
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy and decreased cAMP response to PTH
infusion, but normal erythrocyte Gs activity. The findings suggested
that the mutation interfered somehow with receptor-mediated activation.
Linglart et al. (2002) noted that the C terminus is required for
receptor coupling, and postulated that the Y391X mutation in this
patient interrupted receptor coupling, leading to hormone resistance.
The findings showed the limits of the erythrocyte Gs bioassay used in
the study.

.0037
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IB
GNAS, METHYLATION CHANGES, PATERNAL EPIGENOTYPE

Mariot et al. (2008) studied a girl with obvious Albright osteodystrophy
features, PTH resistance, and normal G-alpha-s bioactivity in red blood
cells (PHP Ib, 603233), yet no loss-of-function mutation in the GNAS
coding sequence. Methylation analysis of the 4 GNAS differentially
methylated regions, i.e., NESP, AS, XL, and A/B, revealed broad
methylation changes at all of these regions, leading to a paternal
epigenotype on both alleles. There was a dramatic decrease of
methylation at exon A/B, XL, and AS promoter regions and therefore
likely biallelic expression of A/B, XL, and AS transcripts. The NESP
region appeared fully methylated in the patient, which was predicted to
result in a dramatic decrease in NESP-specific transcripts. The cause of
the imprinting defect was unknown. Mariot et al. (2008) concluded that:
(1) the decreased expression of G-alpha-s due to GNAS epimutations is
not restricted to the renal tubule but may affect nonimprinted tissues
like bone; and (2) PHP-1b is a heterogeneous disorder that should lead
to the study of GNAS epigenotype in patients with PHP and no mutation in
GNAS exons 1 through 13, regardless of their physical features. They
suggested that Albright osteodystrophy, or at least brachymetacarpia and
obesity, are not specific symptoms of PHP-1a (103580).

.0038
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IC
GNAS, LEU388ARG

In a 12-year-old boy with PHP IC (612462), Thiele et al. (2011)
identified a heterozygous 1163T-G transversion in exon 13 of the GNAS
gene, resulting in a leu388-to-arg (L388R) substitution in a conserved
residue in the alpha-5-helix in the C-terminal part of the protein
directly involved in the contact of Gs-alpha to the G protein-coupled
receptor. The patient had characteristic features of AHO, including
round face, brachymetacarpia, short stature, obesity, and mental
retardation. Serum PTH and TSH were increased and calcium was low. His
mother, who also carried the mutation, had short stature and
brachymetacarpia, but no evidence of hormone resistance. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that the L388R mutant protein
caused complete absence of receptor-mediated cAMP production, with
normal receptor-independent cAMP production. The findings indicated
normal Gs-alpha activity, but a selective defect in Gs-alpha-receptor
coupling functions.

.0039
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IC
GNAS, GLU392TER

In 13-year-old dizygotic twins and an unrelated 5-year-old girl with PHP
IC (612462), Thiele et al. (2011) identified a heterozygous 1174G-T
transversion in exon 13 of the GNAS gene, resulting in a glu392-to-ter
(E392X) substitution in the alpha-5-helix in the C terminus. The
patients had characteristic features of AHO, including round face,
brachymetacarpia, short stature, and obesity. Serum PTH and TSH were
increased and calcium was low. Both mothers, who also carried the
mutation, had short stature, round face, and/or brachymetacarpia, but no
evidence of hormone resistance. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that the mutant protein caused complete absence of
receptor-mediated cAMP production, with normal receptor-independent cAMP
production. The findings indicated normal Gs-alpha activity, but a
selective defect in Gs-alpha-receptor coupling functions.

.0040
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM, TYPE IC
GNAS, GLU392LYS

In an 11-month-old girl with PHP IC (612462), Thiele et al. (2011)
identified a heterozygous 1174G-A transition in exon 13 of the GNAS
gene, resulting in a glu392-to-lys (E392K) substitution in the
alpha-5-helix in the C terminus. The patient had characteristic features
of AHO, including round face, brachymetacarpia, and short stature. Serum
PTH and TSH were increased, but calcium was normal. Her mother, who also
carried the mutation, had short stature and brachymetacarpia, but no
evidence of hormone resistance. In vitro functional expression studies
showed that the mutant protein caused a decrease in receptor-mediated
cAMP production, with normal receptor-independent cAMP production. The
findings indicated normal Gs-alpha activity, but a selective defect in
Gs-alpha-receptor coupling functions.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Carter et al. (1987); Harris et al. (1985); Kozasa et al. (1988);
Lin et al. (1992); Mattera et al. (1989); Shenker et al. (1995); Shenker
et al. (1993)
REFERENCE 1. Adams, G. B.; Alley, I. R.; Chung, U.; Chabner, K. T.; Jeanson,
N. T.; Lo Celso, C.; Marsters, E. S.; Chen, M.; Weinstein, L. S.;
Lin, C. P.; Kronenberg, H. M.; Scadden, D. T.: Haematopoietic stem
cells depend on G-alphaS-mediated signalling to engraft bone marrow. Nature 459:
103-107, 2009.

2. Adegbite, N. S.; Xu, M.; Kaplan, F. S.; Shore, E. M.; Pignolo,
R. J.: Diagnostic and mutational spectrum of progressive osseous
heteroplasia (POH) and other forms of GNAS-based heterotopic ossification. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 146A: 1788-1796, 2008.

3. Ahmed, S. F.; Barr, D. G. D.; Bonthron, D. T.: GNAS1 mutations
and progressive osseous heteroplasia. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 346:
1669-1670, 2002.

4. Ahmed, S. F.; Dixon, P. H.; Bonthron, D. T.; Stirling, H. F.; Barr,
D. G. D.; Kelnar, C. J. H.; Thakker, R. V.: GNAS1 mutational analysis
in pseudohypoparathyroidism. Clin. Endocr. 49: 525-531, 1998.

5. Ahrens, W.; Hiort, O.; Staedt, P.; Kirschner, T.; Marschke, C.;
Kruse, K.: Analysis of the GNAS1 gene in Albright's hereditary osteodystrophy. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 86: 4630-4634, 2001.

6. Aldred, M. A.; Aftimos, S.; Hall, C.; Waters, K. S.; Thakker, R.
V.; Trembath, R. C.; Brueton, L.: Constitutional deletion of chromosome
20q in two patients affected with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 113: 167-172, 2002.

7. Aldred, M. A.; Bagshaw, R. J.; MacDermot, K.; Casson, D.; Murch,
S. H.; Walker-Smith, J. A.; Trembath, R. C.: Germline mosaicism for
a GNAS1 mutation and Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. (Letter) J.
Med. Genet. 37: e35, 2000. Note: Electronic Letter.

8. Aldred, M. A.; Trembath, R. C.: Activating and inactivating mutations
in the human GNAS1 gene. Hum. Mutat. 16: 183-189, 2000.

9. Ashley, P. L.; Ellison, J.; Sullivan, K. A.; Bourne, H. R.; Cox,
D. R.: Chromosomal assignment of the murine Gi and Gs genes. (Abstract) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 41: A155 only, 1987.

10. Auburn, S.; Diakite, M.; Fry, A. E.; Ghansah, A.; Campino, S.;
Richardson, A.; Jallow, M.; Sisay-Joof, F.; Pinder, M.; Griffiths,
M. J.; Peshu, N.; Williams, T. N.; and 9 others: Association of
the GNAS locus with severe malaria. Hum. Genet. 124: 499-506, 2008.

11. Bastepe, M; Pincus, J. E.; Sugimoto, T.; Tojo, K. Kanatani, M.;
Azuma, Y.; Kruse, K.; Rosenbloom, A. L.; Koshiyama, H.; Juppner, H.
: Positional dissociation between the genetic mutation responsible
for pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ib and the associated methylation
defect at exon A/B: evidence for a long-range regulatory element within
the imprinted GNAS1 locus. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1231-1241, 2001.

12. Bastepe, M.; Frohlich, L. F.; Hendy, G. N.; Indridason, O. S.;
Josse, R. G.; Koshiyama, H.; Korkko, J.; Nakamoto, J. M.; Rosenbloom,
A. L.; Slyper, A. H.; Sugimoto, T.; Tsatsoulis, A.; Crawford, J. D.;
Juppner, H.: Autosomal dominant pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ib
is associated with a heterozygous microdeletion that likely disrupts
a putative imprinting control element of GNAS. J. Clin. Invest. 112:
1255-1263, 2003.

13. Bastepe, M.; Frohlich, L. F.; Linglart, A.; Abu-Zahra, H. S.;
Tojo, K.; Ward, L. M.; Juppner, H.: Deletion of the NESP55 differentially
methylated region causes loss of maternal GNAS imprints and pseudohypoparathyroidism
type Ib. Nature Genet. 37: 25-27, 2005.

14. Bastepe, M.; Juppner, H.: GNAS locus and pseudohypoparathyroidism. Hormone
Res. 63: 65-74, 2005.

15. Bastepe, M.; Juppner, H.: GNAS1 mutations and progressive osseous
heteroplasia. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 346: 1671 only, 2002.

16. Bastepe, M.; Lane, A. H.; Juppner, H.: Parental uniparental isodisomy
of chromosome 20q--and the resulting changes in GNAS1 methylation--as
a plausible cause of pseudohypoparathyroidism. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68:
1283-1289, 2001.

17. Bastepe, M.; Weinstein, L. S.; Ogata, N.; Kawaguchi, H.; Juppner,
H.; Kronenberg, H. M.; Chung, U.: Stimulatory G protein directly
regulates hypertrophic differentiation of growth plate cartilage in
vivo. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 101: 14794-14799, 2004.

18. Bianco, P.; Riminucci, M.; Majolagbe, A.; Kuznetsov, S. A.; Collins,
M. T.; Mankani, M. H.; Corsi, A.; Bone, H. G.; Wientroub, S.; Spiegel,
A. M.; Fisher, L. W.; Robey, P. G.: Mutations of the GNAS1 gene,
stromal cell dysfunction, and osteomalacic changes in non-McCune-Albright
fibrous dysplasia of bone. J. Bone Miner. Res. 15: 120-128, 2000.

19. Billestrup, N.; Swanson, L. W.; Vale, W.: Growth hormone-releasing
factor stimulates proliferation of somatotrophs in vitro. Proc. Nat.
Acad. Sci. 83: 6854-6857, 1986.

20. Blatt, C.; Eversole-Cire, P.; Cohn, V. H.; Zollman, S.; Fournier,
R. E. K.; Mohandas, L. T.; Nesbitt, M.; Lugo, T.; Jones, D. T.; Reed,
R. R.; Weiner, L. P.; Sparkes, R. S.; Simon, M. I.: Chromosomal localization
of genes encoding guanine nucleotide-binding protein subunits in mouse
and human. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 7642-7646, 1988.

21. Bray, P.; Carter, A.; Simons, C.; Guo, V.; Puckett, C.; Kamholz,
J.; Spiegel, A.; Nirenberg, M.: Human cDNA clones for four species
of G-alpha-s signal transduction protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 83:
8893-8897, 1986.

22. Campbell, R.; Gosden, C. M.; Bonthron, D. T.: Parental origin
of transcription from the human GNAS1 gene. J. Med. Genet. 31: 607-614,
1994.

23. Candeliere, G. A.; Glorieux, F. H.; Prud'Homme, J.; St.-Arnaud,
R.: Increased expression of the c-fos proto-oncogene in bone from
patients with fibrous dysplasia. New Eng. J. Med. 332: 1546-1551,
1995.

24. Candeliere, G. A.; Roughley, P. J.; Glorieux, F. H.: Polymerase
chain reaction-based technique for the selective enrichment and analysis
of mosaic arg201 mutations in G alpha s from patients with fibrous
dysplasia of bone. Bone 21: 201-206, 1997.

25. Carter, A.; Bardin, C.; Collins, R.; Simons, C.; Bray, P.; Spiegel,
A.: Reduced expression of multiple forms of the alpha subunit of
the stimulatory GTP-binding protein in pseudohypoparathyroidism type
Ia. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 7266-7269, 1987.

26. Cattanach, B. M.; Kirk, M.: Differential activity of maternally
and paternally derived chromosome regions in mice. Nature 315: 496-498,
1985.

27. Chen, M.; Gavrilova, O.; Liu, J.; Xie, T.; Deng, C.; Nguyen, A.
T.; Nackers, L. M.; Lorenzo, J.; Shen, L.; Weinstein, L. S.: Alternative
Gnas gene products have opposite effects on glucose and lipid metabolism. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 7386-7391, 2005.

28. Chung, K. Y.; Rasmussen, S. G. F.; Liu, T.; Li, S.; DeVree, B.
T.; Chae, P. S.; Calinski, D.; Kobilka, B. K.; Woods, V. L., Jr.;
Sunahara, R. K.: Conformational changes in the G protein Gs induced
by the beta-2 adrenergic receptor. Nature 477: 611-615, 2011.

29. Collins, M. T.; Sarlis, N. J.; Merino, M. J.; Monroe, J.; Crawford,
S. E.; Krakoff, J. A.; Guthrie, L. C.; Bonat, S.; Robey, P. G.; Shenker,
A.: Thyroid carcinoma in the McCune-Albright syndrome: contributory
role of activating G(s)-alpha mutations. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88:
4413-4417, 2003.

30. Coombes, C.; Arnaud, P.; Gordon, E.; Dean, W.; Coar, E. A.; Williamson,
C. M.; Feil, R.; Peters, J.; Kelsey, G.: Epigenetic properties and
identification of an imprint mark in the Nesp-Gnasxl domain of the
mouse Gnas imprinted locus. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23: 5475-5488, 2003.

31. DeChiara, T.; Robertson, E. J.; Efstratiadis, A.: Parental imprinting
of the mouse insulin-like growth factor II gene. Cell 64: 849-859,
1991.

32. Donis-Keller, H.; Green, P.; Helms, C.; Cartinhour, S.; Weiffenbach,
B.; Stephens, K.; Keith, T. P.; Bowden, D. W.; Smith, D. R.; Lander,
E. S.; Botstein, D.; Akots, G.; and 21 others: A genetic linkage
map of the human genome. Cell 51: 319-337, 1987.

33. Farfel, Z.; Iiri, T.; Shapira, H.; Roitman, A.; Mouallem, M.;
Bourne, H. R.: Pseudohypoparathyroidism, a novel mutation in the
beta/gamma- contact region of Gs-alpha impairs receptor stimulation. J.
Biol. Chem. 271: 19653-19655, 1996.

34. Faust, R. A.; Shore, E. M.; Stevens, C. E.; Xu, M.; Shah, S.;
Phillips, C. D.; Kaplan, F. S.: Progressive osseous heteroplasia
in the face of a child. Am. J. Med. Genet. 118A: 71-75, 2003.

35. Fischer, J. A.; Egert, F.; Werder, E.; Born, W.: An inherited
mutation associated with functional deficiency of the alpha-subunit
of the guanine nucleotide-binding protein Gs in pseudo- and pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83: 935-938, 1998.

36. Fragoso, M. C. B. V.; Domenice, S.; Latronico, A. C.; Martin,
R. M.; Pereira, M. A. A.; Zerbini, M. C. N.; Lucon, A. M.; Mendonca,
B. B.: Cushing's syndrome secondary to adrenocorticotropin-independent
macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia due to activating mutations
of GNAS1 gene. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 2147-2151, 2003.

37. Fragoso, M. C. B. V.; Latronico, A. C.; Carvalho, F. M.; Zerbini,
M. C. N.; Marcondes, J. A. M.; Araujo, L. M. B.; Lando, V. S.; Frazzatto,
E. T.; Mendonca, B. B.; Villares, S. M. F.: Activating mutation of
the stimulatory G protein (gsp) as a putative cause of ovarian and
testicular human stromal Leydig cell tumors. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 83:
2074-2078, 1998.

38. Freson, K.; Hoylaerts, M. F.; Jaeken, J.; Eyssen, M.; Arnout,
J.; Vermylen, J.; Van Geet, C.: Genetic variation of the extra-large
stimulatory G protein alpha-subunit leads to Gs hyperfunction in platelets
and is a risk factor for bleeding. Thromb. Haemost. 86: 733-738,
2001.

39. Freson, K.; Jaeken, J.; Van Helvoirt, M.; de Zegher, F.; Wittevrongel,
C.; Thys, C.; Hoylaerts, M. F.; Vermylen, J.; Van Geet, C.: Functional
polymorphisms in the paternally expressed XL-alpha-s and its cofactor
ALEX decrease their mutual interaction and enhance receptor-mediated
cAMP formation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 12: 1121-1130, 2003.

40. Freson, K.; Thys, C.; Wittevrongel, C.; Proesmans, W.; Hoylaerts,
M. F.; Vermylen, J.; Van Geet, C.: Pseudohypoparathyroidism type
Ib with disturbed imprinting in the GNAS1 cluster and Gs-alpha deficiency
in platelets. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2741-2750, 2002.

41. Gejman, P. V.; Weinstein, L. S.; Martinez, M.; Spiegel, A. M.;
Cao, Q.; Hsieh, W.-T.; Hoehe, M. R.; Gershon, E. S.: Genetic mapping
of the Gs-alpha subunit gene (GNAS1) to the distal long arm of chromosome
20 using a polymorphism detected by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Genomics 9:
782-783, 1991.

42. Genevieve, D.; Sanlaville, D.; Faivre, L.; Kottler, M.-L.; Jambou,
M.; Gosset, P.; Boustani-Samara, D.; Pinto, G.; Ozilou, C.; Abeguile,
G.; Munnich, A.; Romana, S.; Raoul, O.; Cormier-Daire, V.; Vekemans,
M.: Paternal deletion of the GNAS imprinted locus (including Gnasxl)
in two girls presenting with severe pre- and post-natal growth retardation
and intractable feeding difficulties. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 13:
1033-1039, 2005.

43. Gopal Rao, V. V. N.; Schnittger, S.; Hansmann, I.: G protein
Gs-alpha (GNAS1), the probable candidate gene for Albright hereditary
osteodystrophy, is assigned to human chromosome 20q12-q13.2. Genomics 10:
257-261, 1991.

44. Gorelov, V. N.; Dumon, K.; Barteneva, N. S.; Palm, D.; Roher,
H.-D.; Goretzki, P. E.: Overexpression of Gs-alpha subunit in thyroid
tumors bearing a mutated Gs-alpha gene. J. Cancer Res. Clin. Oncol. 121:
219-224, 1995.

45. Hall, J. G.: Genomic imprinting: review and relevance to human
diseases. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 46: 857-873, 1990.

46. Happle, R.: The McCune-Albright syndrome: a lethal gene surviving
by mosaicism. Clin. Genet. 29: 321-324, 1986.

47. Harris, B. A.; Robishaw, J. D.; Mumby, S. M.; Gilman, A. G.:
Molecular cloning of complementary DNA for the alpha subunit of the
G protein that stimulates adenylate cyclase. Science 229: 1274-1277,
1985.

48. Harrison, T.; Samuel, B. U.; Akompong, T.; Hamm, H.; Mohandas,
N.; Lomasney, J. W.; Haldar, K.: Erythrocyte G protein-coupled receptor
signaling in malarial infection. Science 301: 1734-1736, 2003.

49. Hayward, B. E.; Barlier, A.; Korbonits, M.; Grossman, A. B.; Jacquet,
P.; Enjalbert, A.; Bonthron, D. T.: Imprinting of the G(s)-alpha
gene GNAS1 in the pathogenesis of acromegaly. J. Clin. Invest. 107:
R31-R36, 2001.

50. Hayward, B. E.; Bonthron, D. T.: An imprinted antisense transcript
at the human GNAS1 locus. Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 835-841, 2000.

51. Hayward, B. E.; Kamiya, M.; Strain, L.; Moran, V.; Campbell, R.;
Hayashizaki, Y.; Bonthron, D. T.: The human GNAS1 gene is imprinted
and encodes distinct paternally and biallelically expressed G proteins. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 10038-10043, 1998.

52. Hayward, B. E.; Moran, V.; Strain, L.; Bonthron, D. T.: Bidirectional
imprinting of a single gene: GNAS1 encodes maternally, paternally,
and biallelically derived proteins. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 15475-15480,
1998.

53. Hurowitz, E. H.; Melnyk, J. M.; Chen, Y.-J.; Kouros-Mehr, H.;
Simon, M. I.; Shizuya, H.: Genomic characterization of the human
heterotrimeric G protein alpha, beta, and gamma subunit genes. DNA
Res. 7: 111-120, 2000.

54. Iiri, T.; Farfel, Z.; Bourne, H. R.: Conditional activation defect
of a human Gs-alpha mutant. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 5656-5661,
1997.

55. Iiri, T.; Herzmark, P.; Nakamoto, J. M.; Van Dop, C.; Bourne,
H. R.: Rapid GDP release from Gs-alpha in patients with gain and
loss of endocrine function. Nature 371: 164-168, 1994.

56. Ishikawa, Y.; Bianchi, C.; Nadal-Ginard, B.; Homcy, C. J.: Alternative
promoter and 5-prime exon generate a novel Gs-alpha mRNA. J. Biol.
Chem. 265: 8458-8462, 1990.

57. Ishikawa, Y.; Tajima, T.; Nakae, J.; Nagashima, T.; Satoh, K.;
Okuhara, K.; Fujieda, K.: Two mutations of the Gs-alpha gene in two
Japanese patients with sporadic pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia. J.
Hum. Genet. 46: 426-430, 2001.

58. Jia, H.; Hingorani, A. D.; Sharma, P.; Hopper, R.; Dickerson,
C.; Trutwein, D.; Lloyd, D. D.; Brown, M. J.: Association of the
G(s)-alpha gene with essential hypertension and response to beta-blockade. Hypertension 34:
8-14, 1999.

59. Kalfa, N.; Ecochard, A.; Patte, C.; Duvillard, P.; Audran, F.;
Pienkowski, C.; Thibaud, E.; Brauner, R.; Lecointre, C.; Plantaz,
D.; Guedj, A.-M.; Paris, F.; Baldet, P.; Lumbroso, S.; Sultan, C.
: Activating mutations of the stimulatory G protein in juvenile ovarian
granulosa cell tumors: a new prognostic factor? J. Clin. Endocr.
Metab. 91: 1842-1847, 2006.

60. Kehlenbach, R. H.; Matthey, J.; Huttner, W. B.: XL alpha S is
a new type of G protein. Nature 372: 804-809, 1994. Note: Erratum:
Nature 375: 253 only, 1995.

61. Kikyo, N.; Williamson, C. M.; John, R. M.; Barton, S. C.; Beechey,
C. V.; Ball, S. T.; Cattanach, B. M.; Surani, M. A.; Peters, J.:
Genetic and functional analysis of neuronatin in mice with maternal
or paternal duplication of distal chr. 2. Dev. Biol. 190: 66-77,
1997.

62. Kinard, R. E.; Walton, J. E.; Buckwalter, J. A.: Pseudohypoparathyroidism. Arch.
Intern. Med. 139: 204-207, 1979.

63. Klemke, M.; Kehlenbach, R. H.; Huttner, W. B.: Two overlapping
reading frames in a single exon encode interacting proteins--a novel
way of gene usage. EMBO J. 20: 3849-3860, 2001.

64. Kozasa, T.; Itoh, H.; Tsukamoto, T.; Kaziro, Y.: Isolation and
characterization of the human Gs-alpha gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85:
2081-2085, 1988.

65. Landis, C. A.; Masters, S. B.; Spada, A.; Pace, A. M.; Bourne,
H. R.; Vallar, L.: GTPase inhibiting mutations activate the alpha
chain of Gs and stimulate adenylyl cyclase in human pituitary tumours. Nature 340:
692-696, 1989.

66. Levine, M. A.; Deily, J. R.: Identification of multiple mutations
in the gene encoding the alpha subunit of Gs in patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism
type IA. (Abstract) J. Bone Miner. Res. 5: S142 only, 1990.

67. Levine, M. A.; Modi, W. S.; O'Brien, S. J.: Mapping of the gene
encoding the alpha subunit of the stimulatory G protein of adenylyl
cyclase (GNAS1) to 20q13.2-q13.3 in human by in situ hybridization. Genomics 11:
478-479, 1991.

68. Levine, M. A.; Vechio, J. D.: Personal Communication. Baltimore,
Md.  8/1/1990.

69. Li, T.; Vu, T. H.; Ulaner, G. A.; Yang, Y.; Hu, J.-F.; Hoffman,
A. R.: Activating and silencing histone modifications form independent
allelic switch regions in the imprinted Gnas gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
741-750, 2004.

70. Lin, C. K.; Hakakha, M. J.; Nakamoto, J. M.; Englund, A. T.; Brickman,
A. S.; Scott, M. L.; Van Dop, C.: Prevalence of three mutations in
the Gs-alpha gene among 24 families with pseudohypoparathyroidism
type Ia. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 189: 343-349, 1992.

71. Linglart, A.; Carel, J. C.; Garabedian, M.; Le, T.; Mallet, E.;
Kottler, M. L.: GNAS1 lesions in pseudohypoparathyroidism Ia and
Ic: genotype phenotype relationship and evidence of the maternal transmission
of the hormonal resistance. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 189-197,
2002.

72. Linglart, A.; Gensure, R. C.; Olney, R. C.; Juppner, H.; Bastepe,
M.: A novel STX16 deletion in autosomal dominant pseudohypoparathyroidism
type Ib redefines the boundaries of a cis-acting imprinting control
element of GNAS. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 76: 804-814, 2005. Note: Erratum:
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81: 196 only, 2007.

73. Liu, J.; Erlichman, B.; Weinstein, L. S.: The stimulatory G protein
alpha-subunit Gs-alpha is imprinted in human thyroid glands: implications
for thyroid function in pseudohypoparathyroidism types 1A and 1B. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 88: 4336-4341, 2003.

74. Liu, J.; Litman, D.; Rosenberg, M. J.; Yu, S.; Biesecker, L. G.;
Weinstein, L. S.: A GNAS1 imprinting defect in pseudohypoparathyroidism
type IB. J. Clin. Invest. 106: 1167-1174, 2000.

75. Liu, J.; Nealon, J. G.; Weinstein, L. S.: Distinct patterns of
abnormal GNAS imprinting in familial and sporadic pseudohypoparathyroidism
type IB. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14: 95-102, 2005.

76. Lumbroso, S.; Paris, F.; Sultan, C.: Activating Gs-alpha mutations:
analysis of 113 patients with signs of McCune-Albright syndrome--a
European collaborative study. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 2107-2113,
2004.

77. Makita, N.; Sato, J.; Rondard, P.; Fukamachi, H.; Yuasa, Y.; Aldred,
M. A.; Hashimoto, M.; Fujita, T.; Iiri, T.: Human G(S-alpha) mutant
causes pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia/neonatal diarrhea, a potential
cell-specific role of the palmitoylation cycle. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 104: 17424-17429, 2007.

78. Mantovani, G.; Ballare, E.; Giammona, E.; Beck-Peccoz, P.; Spada,
A.: The Gs-alpha gene: predominant maternal origin of transcription
in human thyroid gland and gonads. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 87: 4736-4740,
2002.

79. Mantovani, G.; Bondioni, S.; Lania, A. G.; Corbetta, S.; de Sanctis,
L.; Cappa, M.; Di Battista, E.; Chanson, P.; Beck-Peccoz, P.; Spada,
A.: Parental origin of Gs-alpha mutations in the McCune-Albright
syndrome and in isolated endocrine tumors. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89:
3007-3009, 2004.

80. Mantovani, G.; Bondioni, S.; Locatelli, M.; Pedroni, C.; Lania,
A. G.; Ferrante, E.; Filopanti, M.; Beck-Peccoz, P.; Spada, A.: Biallelic
expression of the Gs-alpha gene in human bone and adipose tissue. J.
Clin. Endocr. Metab. 89: 6316-6319, 2004.

81. Mantovani, G.; Romoli, R.; Weber, G.; Brunelli, V.; De Menis,
E.; Beccio, S.; Beck-Peccoz, P.; Spada, A.: Mutational analysis of
GNAS1 in patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism: identification of
two novel mutations. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 85: 4243-4248, 2000.

82. Mariot, V.; Maupetit-Mehouas, S.; Sinding, C.; Kottler, M.-L.;
Linglart, A.: A maternal epimutation of GNAS leads to Albright osteodystrophy
and parathyroid hormone resistance. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 93:
661-665, 2008.

83. Mattera, R.; Graziano, M. P.; Yatani, A.; Zhou, Z.; Graf, R.;
Codina, J.; Birnbaumer, L.; Gilman, A. G.; Brown, A. M.: Splice variants
of the alpha subunit of the G protein G(8) activate both adenylyl
cyclase and calcium channels. Science 243: 804-807, 1989.

84. Mehlmann, L. M.; Jones, T. L. Z.; Jaffe, L. A.: Meiotic arrest
in the mouse follicle maintained by a GS protein in the oocyte. Science 297:
1343-1345, 2002.

85. Morison, I. M.; Ramsay, J. P.; Spencer, H. G.: A census of mammalian
imprinting. Trends Genet. 21: 457-465, 2005.

86. Patten, J. L.; Johns, D. R.; Valle, D.; Eil, C.; Gruppuso, P.
A.; Steele, G.; Smallwood, P. M.; Levine, M. A.: Mutation in the
gene encoding the stimulatory G protein of adenylate cyclase in Albright's
hereditary osteodystrophy. New Eng. J. Med. 322: 1412-1419, 1990.

87. Patten, J. L.; Smallwood, P. M.; Eil, C.; Johns, D. R.; Valle,
D.; Steel, G.; Levine, M. A.: An initiator codon mutation in the
gene encoding the alpha subunit of Gs in pseudohypoparathyroidism
type IA (PHP IA). (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 45 (suppl.): A212
only, 1989.

88. Peters, J.; Beechey, C. V.; Ball, S. T.; Evans, E. P.: Mapping
studies of the distal imprinting region of mouse chromosome 2. Genet.
Res. 63: 169-174, 1994.

89. Plagge, A.; Gordon, E.; Dean, W.; Boiani, R.; Cinti, S.; Peters,
J.; Kelsey, G.: The imprinted signaling protein XL-alpha-s is required
for postnatal adaptation to feeding. Nature Genet. 36: 818-826,
2004.

90. Rasmussen, S. G. F.; DeVree, B. T.; Zou, Y.; Kruse, A. C.; Chung,
K. Y.; Kobilka, T. S.; Thian, F. S.; Chae, P. S.; Pardon, E.; Calinski,
D.; Mathiesen, J. M.; Shah, S. T. A.; Lyons, J. A.; Caffrey, M.; Gellman,
S. H.; Steyaert, J.; Skiniotis, G.; Weis, W. I.; Sunahara, R. K.;
Kobilka, B. K.: Crystal structure of the beta-2 adrenergic receptor-Gs
protein complex. Nature 477: 549-555, 2011.

91. Rickard, S. J.; Wilson, L. C.: Analysis of GNAS1 and overlapping
transcripts identifies the parental origin of mutations in patients
with sporadic Albright hereditary osteodystrophy and reveals a model
system in which to observe the effects of splicing mutations on translated
and untranslated messenger RNA. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 72: 961-974,
2003.

92. Riminucci, M.; Fisher, L. W.; Majolagbe, A.; Corsi, A.; Lala,
R.; de Sanctis, C.; Robey, P. G.; Bianco, P.: A novel GNAS1 mutation,
R201G, in McCune-Albright syndrome. J. Bone Miner. Res. 14: 1987-1989,
1999.

93. Sakamoto, A.; Liu, J.; Greene, A.; Chen, M.; Weinstein, L. S.
: Tissue-specific imprinting of the G protein Gs is associated with
tissue-specific differences in histone methylation. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
819-828, 2004.

94. Schwindinger, W. F.; Francomano, C. A.; Levine, M. A.: Identification
of a mutation in the gene encoding the alpha subunit of the stimulatory
G-protein of adenylyl cyclase in McCune-Albright syndrome. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 89: 5152-5156, 1992.

95. Shapira, H.; Mouallem, M.; Shapiro, M. S.; Weisman, Y.; Farfel,
Z.: Pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia: two new heterozygous frameshift
mutations in exons 5 and 10 of the Gs alpha gene. Human Genet. 97:
73-75, 1995.

96. Shenker, A.; Chanson, P.; Weinstein, L. S.; Chi, P.; Spiegel,
A. M.; Lomri, A.; Marie, P. J.: Osteoblastic cells derived from isolated
lesions of fibrous dysplasia contain activating somatic mutations
of the G(s)-alpha gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 1675-1676, 1995.

97. Shenker, A.; Weinstein, L. S.; Moran, A.; Pescovitz, O. H.; Charest,
N. J.; Boney, C. M.; Van Wyk, J. J.; Merino, M. J.; Feuillan, P. P.;
Spiegel, A. M.: Severe endocrine and nonendocrine manifestations
of the McCune-Albright syndrome associated with activating mutations
of stimulatory G protein Gs. J. Pediat. 123: 509-518, 1993.

98. Shore, E. M.; Ahn, J.; Jan de Beur, S.; Li, M.; Xu, M.; Gardiner,
R. J. M.; Zasloff, M. A.; Whyte, M. P.; Levine, M. A.; Kaplan, F.
S.: Paternally inherited inactivating mutations of the GNAS1 gene
in progressive osseous heteroplasia. New Eng. J. Med. 346: 99-106,
2002. Note: Erratum: New Eng. J. Med. 346: 1678 only, 2002.

99. Shore, E. M.; Kaplan, F. S.; Levine, M. A.: GNAS1 mutations and
progressive osseous heteroplasia. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 346:
1670-1671, 2002.

100. Sparkes, R. S.; Cohn, V. H.; Mohandas, T.; Zollman, S.; Cire-Eversole,
P.; Amatruda, T. T.; Reed, R. R.; Lochrie, M. A.; Simon, M. I.: Mapping
of genes encoding the subunits of guanine nucleotide-binding protein
(G-proteins) in humans. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 46: 696
only, 1987.

101. Thiele, S.; de Sanctis, L.; Werner, R.; Grotzinger, J.; Aydin,
C.; Juppner, H.; Bastepe, M.; Hiort, O.: Functional characterization
of GNAS mutations found in patients with pseudohypoparathyroidism
type Ic defines a new subgroup of pseudohypoparathyroidism affecting
selectively Gs-alpha-receptor interaction. Hum. Mutat. 32: 653-660,
2011.

102. Thiele, S.; Werner, R.; Ahrens, W.; Hoppe, U.; Marschke, C.;
Staedt, P.; Hiort, O.: A disruptive mutation in exon 3 of the GNAS
gene with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, normocalcemic pseudohypoparathyroidism,
and selective long transcript variant Gs-alpha-L deficiency. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 92: 1764-1768, 2007.

103. Vallar, L.; Spada, A.; Giannattasio, G.: Altered Gs and adenylate
cyclase activity in human GH-secreting pituitary adenomas. Nature 330:
566-568, 1987.

104. Warner, D. R.; Gejman, P. V.; Collins, R. M.; Weinstein, L. S.
: A novel mutation adjacent to the switch III domain of Gs-alpha in
a patient with pseudohypoparathyroidism. Molec. Endocr. 11: 1718-1727,
1997.

105. Warner, D. R.; Weinstein, L. S.: A mutation in the heterotrimeric
stimulatory guanine nucleotide binding protein alpha-subunit with
impaired receptor-mediated activation because of elevated GTPase activity. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 4268-4272, 1999.

106. Warner, D. R.; Weng, G.; Yu, S.; Matalon, R.; Weinstein, L. S.
: A novel mutation in the switch 3 region of Gs-alpha in a patient
with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy impairs GDP binding and receptor
activation. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 23976-23983, 1998.

107. Weinstein, L. S.; Gejman, P. V.; de Mazancourt, P.; American,
N.; Spiegel, A. M.: A heterozygous 4-bp deletion mutation in the
Gs-alpha gene (GNAS1) in a patient with Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. Genomics 13:
1319-1321, 1992.

108. Weinstein, L. S.; Gejman, P. V.; Friedman, E.; Kadowaki, T.;
Collins, R. M.; Gershon, E. S.; Spiegel, A. M.: Mutations of the
Gs alpha-subunit gene in Albright hereditary osteodystrophy detected
by denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 87:
8287-8290, 1990.

109. Weinstein, L. S.; Shenker, A.; Gejman, P. V.; Merino, M. J.;
Friedman, E.; Spiegel, A. M.: Activating mutations of the stimulatory
G protein in the McCune-Albright syndrome. New Eng. J. Med. 325:
1688-1695, 1991.

110. Weiss, U.; Ischia, R.; Eder, S.; Lovisetti-Scamihorn, P.; Bauer,
R.; Fischer-Colbrie, R.: Neuroendocrine secretory protein 55 (NESP55):
alternative splicing onto transcripts of the GNAS gene and posttranslational
processing of a maternally expressed protein. Neuroendocrinology 71:
177-186, 2000.

111. Werling, U.; Schorle, H.: Transcription factor gene AP-2-gamma
essential for early murine development. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 3149-3156,
2002.

112. Williamson, C. M.; Ball, S. T.; Nottingham, W. T.; Skinner, J.
A.; Plagge, A.; Turner, M. D.; Powles, N.; Hough, T.; Papworth, D.;
Fraser, W. D.; Maconochie, M.; Peters, J.: A cis-acting control region
is required exclusively for the tissue-specific imprinting of Gnas. Nature
Genet. 36: 894-899, 2004.

113. Williamson, C. M.; Turner, M. D.; Ball, S. T.; Nottingham, W.
T.; Glenister, P.; Fray, M.; Tymowska-Lalanne, Z.; Plagge, A.; Powles-Glover,
N.; Kelsey, G.; Maconochie, M.; Peters, J.: Identification of an
imprinting control region affecting the expression of all transcripts
in the Gnas cluster. Nature Genet. 38: 350-355, 2006.

114. Williamson, E. A.; Ince, P. G.; Harrison, D.; Kendall-Taylor,
P.; Harris, P. E.: G-protein mutations in human pituitary adrenocorticotrophic
hormone-secreting adenomas. Europ. J. Clin. Invest. 25: 128-131,
1995.

115. Wu, W.-I.; Schwindinger, W. F.; Aparicio, L. F.; Levine, M. A.
: Selective resistance to parathyroid hormone caused by a novel uncoupling
mutation in the carboxyl terminus of G-alpha(s). J. Biol. Chem. 276:
165-171, 2001.

116. Yang, I.; Park, S.; Ryu, M.; Woo, J.; Kim, S.; Kim, J.; Kim,
Y.; Choi, Y.: Characteristics of gsp-positive growth hormone-secreting
pituitary tumors in Korean acromegalic patients. Europ. J. Endocr. 134:
720-726, 1996.

117. Yu, D.; Yu, S.; Schuster, V.; Kruse, K.; Clericuzio, C. L.; Weinstein,
L. S.: Identification of two novel deletion mutations within the
Gs-alpha gene (GNAS1) in Albright hereditary osteodystrophy. J. Clin.
Endocr. Metab. 84: 3254-3259, 1999.

118. Yu, S.; Yu, D.; Lee, E.; Eckhaus, M.; Lee, R.; Corria, Z.; Accili,
D.; Westphal, H.; Weinstein, L. S.: Variable and tissue-specific
hormone resistance in heterotrimeric Gs protein alpha-subunit (Gs-alpha)
knockout mice is due to tissue-specific imprinting of the Gs-alpha
gene. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8715-8720, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/25/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/7/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/30/2011
Nara Sobreira - updated: 6/17/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/19/2009
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/24/2009
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 1/13/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 1/6/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/15/2008
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/8/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 5/6/2008
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/26/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/19/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/31/2007
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/17/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/4/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/8/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 10/17/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/6/2006
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/5/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/21/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/6/2006
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/27/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/20/2005
Joanna S. Amberger - updated: 8/16/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/2/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/14/2005
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/8/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/16/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/23/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/22/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/20/2004
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/13/2004
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/10/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/26/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 8/27/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/11/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/9/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/16/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/10/2003
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 4/8/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/18/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/10/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/9/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/12/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/26/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/20/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/15/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/19/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/10/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/20/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/15/2001
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/8/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/22/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 8/9/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/7/2000
George E. Tiller - updated: 5/16/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/20/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/15/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/14/2000
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/29/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/11/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/15/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/16/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/4/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/26/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/1/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/3/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/19/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/13/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 10/1/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/30/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/8/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/11/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/17/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/13/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 6/24/1998
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 11/8/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 09/30/2013
ckniffin: 9/25/2013
carol: 9/5/2013
terry: 3/14/2013
mgross: 2/5/2013
terry: 11/29/2012
alopez: 3/9/2012
terry: 3/7/2012
carol: 12/1/2011
ckniffin: 11/30/2011
carol: 4/20/2011
joanna: 10/12/2009
carol: 6/18/2009
terry: 6/17/2009
alopez: 6/4/2009
terry: 5/19/2009
alopez: 4/24/2009
wwang: 3/24/2009
mgross: 1/13/2009
mgross: 1/8/2009
terry: 1/6/2009
carol: 12/19/2008
ckniffin: 12/15/2008
wwang: 10/15/2008
terry: 10/8/2008
carol: 5/6/2008
carol: 3/26/2008
carol: 2/28/2008
ckniffin: 2/28/2008
ckniffin: 2/19/2008
alopez: 11/5/2007
terry: 10/31/2007
alopez: 7/17/2007
carol: 6/29/2007
wwang: 12/4/2006
wwang: 11/8/2006
mgross: 11/1/2006
carol: 10/18/2006
ckniffin: 10/17/2006
alopez: 10/6/2006
alopez: 10/5/2006
alopez: 8/21/2006
alopez: 3/9/2006
terry: 3/6/2006
alopez: 10/27/2005
carol: 10/5/2005
wwang: 10/3/2005
terry: 9/27/2005
ckniffin: 9/20/2005
wwang: 9/2/2005
carol: 8/16/2005
joanna: 8/16/2005
wwang: 8/11/2005
wwang: 8/2/2005
alopez: 7/14/2005
alopez: 7/8/2005
carol: 6/24/2005
joanna: 5/10/2005
tkritzer: 3/22/2005
tkritzer: 3/18/2005
carol: 3/18/2005
carol: 3/16/2005
tkritzer: 3/8/2005
terry: 2/23/2005
mgross: 11/23/2004
mgross: 11/22/2004
tkritzer: 8/23/2004
terry: 8/20/2004
terry: 2/20/2004
cwells: 2/13/2004
carol: 11/24/2003
carol: 11/17/2003
tkritzer: 11/14/2003
terry: 11/11/2003
ckniffin: 11/10/2003
alopez: 9/29/2003
terry: 9/26/2003
carol: 8/27/2003
ckniffin: 8/25/2003
tkritzer: 8/15/2003
terry: 8/11/2003
carol: 7/11/2003
tkritzer: 7/9/2003
carol: 7/9/2003
terry: 6/11/2003
tkritzer: 5/13/2003
terry: 5/9/2003
tkritzer: 5/5/2003
tkritzer: 4/25/2003
terry: 4/16/2003
carol: 4/16/2003
tkritzer: 4/15/2003
terry: 4/10/2003
terry: 4/8/2003
alopez: 10/23/2002
terry: 10/18/2002
alopez: 10/10/2002
cwells: 8/9/2002
cwells: 6/25/2002
terry: 6/12/2002
terry: 4/4/2002
alopez: 3/26/2002
alopez: 3/20/2002
terry: 3/6/2002
carol: 1/31/2002
mcapotos: 1/18/2002
terry: 1/15/2002
carol: 12/19/2001
cwells: 11/20/2001
cwells: 11/19/2001
joanna: 10/3/2001
mcapotos: 8/10/2001
cwells: 8/10/2001
cwells: 7/20/2001
cwells: 6/27/2001
terry: 6/15/2001
alopez: 3/22/2001
terry: 11/8/2000
terry: 10/6/2000
mcapotos: 10/3/2000
mcapotos: 9/22/2000
mgross: 8/9/2000
carol: 7/19/2000
mcapotos: 6/28/2000
mcapotos: 6/23/2000
terry: 6/7/2000
alopez: 5/16/2000
mcapotos: 5/11/2000
mcapotos: 5/4/2000
terry: 4/20/2000
carol: 4/7/2000
mcapotos: 4/6/2000
mcapotos: 4/5/2000
terry: 3/15/2000
carol: 2/8/2000
carol: 2/2/2000
mcapotos: 2/2/2000
carol: 2/1/2000
mcapotos: 1/31/2000
terry: 1/14/2000
alopez: 11/30/1999
alopez: 11/29/1999
alopez: 11/23/1999
mgross: 10/11/1999
carol: 9/30/1999
jlewis: 9/28/1999
terry: 9/15/1999
terry: 8/16/1999
mgross: 5/11/1999
mgross: 5/7/1999
terry: 5/4/1999
alopez: 3/26/1999
carol: 3/22/1999
terry: 3/1/1999
carol: 2/12/1999
terry: 2/3/1999
carol: 10/29/1998
terry: 10/19/1998
carol: 10/18/1998
terry: 10/13/1998
dkim: 10/12/1998
carol: 10/9/1998
carol: 10/1/1998
terry: 9/30/1998
carol: 9/14/1998
terry: 9/8/1998
terry: 8/21/1998
carol: 8/14/1998
terry: 8/11/1998
terry: 7/20/1998
terry: 7/17/1998
terry: 7/14/1998
terry: 7/13/1998
carol: 7/2/1998
dholmes: 6/29/1998
dholmes: 6/24/1998
alopez: 12/22/1997
alopez: 12/10/1997
alopez: 12/3/1997
mark: 9/3/1997
mark: 7/8/1997
mark: 6/14/1997
terry: 5/30/1997
mark: 12/17/1996
jenny: 12/13/1996
terry: 11/19/1996
mark: 9/22/1995
pfoster: 9/7/1994
davew: 6/28/1994
carol: 6/2/1994
warfield: 4/8/1994
carol: 12/13/1993

602711	TITLE *602711 AMYLOID BETA A4 PRECURSOR PROTEIN-BINDING, FAMILY B, MEMBER 3; APBB3
;;FE65-LIKE 2; FE65L2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

To identify genes similar to Fe65 (602709), Duilio et al. (1998)
screened a rat brain cDNA library and isolated a Fe65L2 cDNA encoding a
deduced 504-amino acid polypeptide. Like Fe65 and Fe65L1 (602710), the
rat Fe65L2 protein contains 2 phosphotyrosine-binding (PTB) domains and
a WW domain. Northern blot analysis detected predominant expression of a
2-kb Fe65L2 mRNA in rat brain and testis.

Using the rat cDNA fragment as probe, Tanahashi and Tabira (1999) cloned
human Fe65L2 from a fetal brain cDNA library. Fe65L2 encodes a deduced
486-amino acid protein that shares 86% sequence identity with the rat
protein. Using RT-PCR of human fetal brain mRNA, Tanahashi and Tabira
(1999) also identified a variant, caused by the splicing of a
6-nucleotide mini-exon, that results results in a peptide lacking 2
amino acids in the first PTB domain. Northern blot analysis revealed
expression of a 2.2-kb transcript expressed mainly in the brain and in
all brain regions tested. A 2.9-kb transcript was found in other
tissues, with strongest expression in pancreas.

GENE FUNCTION

Duilio et al. (1998) showed that the Fe65L2 protein binds to the
intracellular domain of the Alzheimer disease amyloid precursor protein
(APP; 104760) both in vitro and in vivo. Using in vitro translation of
recombinant proteins, Tanahashi and Tabira (1999) confirmed interaction
between the second PTB domain of Fe65L2 with the intracellular domain of
APP and APP-like proteins.

GENE STRUCTURE

Tanahashi and Tabira (1999) determined that the FE65L2 gene contains 13
exons distributed over 6 kb, and that the genomic organization is
similar to that of the FE65 gene. By primer extension analysis, they
identified 2 transcription start sites in a CpG island.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Tanahashi and Tabira (1999) mapped the
FE65L2 gene to chromosome 5.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 556 Japanese patients with Alzheimer disease (AD; 104300), Tanahashi
et al. (2002) found a decreased risk for early-onset of the disease
(younger than 60 years) associated with a 954C-T polymorphism in exon 11
of the Fe65L2 gene (OR for TT genotype was 0.32).

REFERENCE 1. Duilio, A.; Faraonio, R.; Minopoli, G.; Zambrano, N.; Russo, T.
: Fe65L2: a new member of the Fe65 protein family interacting with
the intracellular domain of the Alzheimer's beta-amyloid precursor
protein. Biochem. J. 330: 513-519, 1998.

2. Tanahashi, H.; Asada, T.; Tabira, T.: c954C-T polymorphism in
the Fe65L2 gene is associated with early-onset Alzheimer's disease.
(Letter) Ann. Neurol. 52: 691-693, 2002. Note: Erratum: Ann. Neurol.
54: 137 only, 2003.

3. Tanahashi, H.; Tabira, T.: Genome structure and chromosomal mapping
of the gene for Fe65L2 interacting with Alzheimer's beta-amyloid precursor
protein. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 258: 385-389, 1999.

4. Tanahashi, H.; Tabira, T.: Molecular cloning of human Fe65L2 and
its interaction with the Alzheimer's beta-amyloid precursor protein. Neurosci.
Lett. 261: 143-146, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/20/2002
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 3/27/2002

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 6/10/1998

EDITED carol: 08/31/2009
tkritzer: 7/30/2003
ckniffin: 7/28/2003
carol: 1/6/2003
ckniffin: 12/20/2002
carol: 4/12/2002
terry: 3/27/2002
carol: 3/12/2002
carol: 6/18/1998
alopez: 6/10/1998

613208	TITLE *613208 XPC GENE; XPC
;;XPCC GENE;;
RAD4, YEAST, HOMOLOG OF; RAD4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The XPC gene encodes a protein that functions as a damage detector
involved in the first step of global genome nucleotide excision DNA
repair (Sugasawa et al. (1998); Volker et al., 2001).

CLONING

Teitz et al. (1987) were able to correct UV sensitivity in a xeroderma
pigmentosum group C (XPC; 278720) cell line by transfection with a human
cDNA library derived from fibroblasts. UV resistance appeared to be
closely linked to resistance to G418, an antibiotic. The authors
suggested the gene symbol XPCC (for xeroderma pigmentosum group
C-complementing).

Peterson and Legerski (1991) devised a simple, highly efficient cDNA
expression system for use in human cells. Legerski and Peterson (1992)
used this system to isolate a cDNA clone that restored the ultraviolet
sensitivity and unscheduled DNA synthesis of XPC cells to normal levels.
The cloned XPC gene was found to encode a highly hydrophilic protein
composed of a predicted 823 amino acids and sharing limited homology
with the product of the yeast DNA repair gene RAD4. The XPC transcript
was undetectable by Northern blotting in most XPC cell lines examined.

MAPPING

Legerski et al. (1994) mapped the XPC gene to chromosome 3p25 by somatic
cell hybridization. Although it is closely linked to the RAD23B gene
(600062) in the human, the mouse homolog of RAD23B maps to chromosome 4
and the mouse homolog of XPC maps to chromosome 6 (van der Spek et al.,
1996). The physical disconnection of the genes in the mouse argues
against a functional significance of the colocalization of these genes
in the human.

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, van der Spek et al. (1994) showed
that the XPC and HHR23B (600062) genes, the products of which form a
tight complex, colocalize to chromosome 3p25.1. Pulsed-field gel
electrophoresis revealed that the 2 genes may share a MluI restriction
fragment of about 625 kb.

GENE FUNCTION

Masutani et al. (1994) reported the purification to homogeneity and
subsequent cDNA cloning of a repair complex by in vitro complementation
of the XPC defect in a cell-free repair system containing UV-damaged
SV40 minichromosomes. The complex had a high affinity for
single-stranded DNA and consisted of 2 tightly associated proteins of
125 and 58 kD. The 125-kD subunit was an N-terminally extended version
of the XPC gene product, which is thought to represent the human homolog
of the RAD4 nucleotide excision repair (NER) gene of Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. The 58-kD species turned out to be a human homolog of yeast
RAD23. Unexpectedly, a second human counterpart of RAD23 was identified.
Masutani et al. (1994) referred to the 2 as HHR23A (600061) and HHR23B
(600062). The 2 RAD23 homologs were expressed in the same cells.
However, only the HHR23B protein was found in a complex with p125/XPC.
Masutani et al. (1994) pointed out that no human mutant defective in
HHR23A had been identified.

The XPC-HHR23B complex is specifically involved in global genome but not
transcription-coupled NER. Using a DNA damage recognition-competition
assay, Sugasawa et al. (1998) identified XPC-HHR23B as the earliest
damage detector to initiate NER; it acts before the known damage-binding
protein XPA (611153). Coimmunoprecipitation and DNase I footprinting
showed that XPC-HHR23B binds to a variety of NER lesions. This provides
a plausible explanation for the extreme damage specificity exhibited by
global genome repair.

Volker et al. (2001) described the assembly of the NER complex in normal
and repair-deficient (xeroderma pigmentosum) human cells by employing a
novel technique of local ultraviolet irradiation combined with
fluorescent antibody labeling. The damage-recognition complex XPC-HR23B
appeared to be essential for the recruitment of all subsequent NER
factors in the preincision complex, including transcription repair
factor TFIIH (see 189972). Volker et al. (2001) found that XPA
associates relatively late, is required for anchoring of ERCC1
(126380)-XPF (133520), and may be essential for activation of the
endonuclease activity of XPG (133530). These findings identified XPC as
the earliest known NER factor in the reaction mechanism, gave insight
into the order of subsequent NER components, provided evidence for a
dual role of XPA, and supported a concept of sequential assembly of
repair proteins at the site of damage rather than a preassembled
repairosome.

Shimizu et al. (2003) presented evidence that human and mouse XPC-HR23B
complexes interact with thymine DNA glycosylase (TDG; 601423), which
initiates base excision repair of G/T mismatches. XPC-HR23B stimulated
TDG activity by promoting the release of TDG following the excision of
mismatched T bases. In the presence of apurinic/apyrimidinic
endonuclease (APEX; 107748), XPC-HR23B had an additive effect on TDG
turnover without significantly inhibiting the subsequent action of APEX.
Shimizu et al. (2003) concluded that the XPC-HR23B complex contributes
to the suppression of spontaneous mutations and that compromised
function in XPC patients may promote carcinogenesis.

In studies of the contribution of the XPC gene to DNA repair, Emmert et
al. (2000) found that the gene leads to selective repair of cyclobutane
pyrimidine dimers (CPD) rather than 6-4 photoproducts (6-4PP).
Increasing XPC gene expression in vivo led to selective repair of CPD in
the global genome. Undetectable XPC protein was associated with no
repair of CPD or 6-4PP, detectable but subnormal XPC protein levels
reconstituted CPD but not 6-4PP repair, and normal XPC protein levels
fully reconstituted both CPD and 6-4PP repair.

Using sequence profile analysis, Anantharaman et al. (2001) showed that
RAD4/XPC proteins contain the ancient transglutaminase fold and are
specifically related to the peptide-N-glycanases (PNGases) which remove
glycans from glycoproteins during their degradation (Suzuki et al.,
2000). The PNGases retain the catalytic triad that is typical of this
fold and are predicted to have a reaction mechanism similar to that
involved in transglutamination. In contrast, the RAD4/XPC proteins are
predicted to be inactive and are likely to possess only the protein
interaction function in DNA repair. These proteins also contain a long,
low-complexity insert in the globular transglutaminase domain.
Anantharaman et al. (2001) hypothesized that the RAD4/XPC proteins,
along with other inactive transglutaminase-fold proteins, represent a
case of functional reassignment of an ancient domain following the loss
of the ancestral enzymatic activity.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

- Crystal Structure

Min and Pavletich (2007) presented the crystal structure of the yeast
XPC ortholog Rad4 bound to DNA containing a cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer
(CPD) lesion. The structure showed that Rad4 inserts a beta-hairpin
through the DNA duplex, causing the 2 damaged basepairs to flip out of
the double helix. The expelled nucleotides of the undamaged strand are
recognized by Rad4, whereas the 2 CPD-linked nucleotides become
disordered. Min and Pavletich (2007) concluded that the lesions
recognized by Rad4/XPC thermodynamically destablize the Watson-Crick
double helix in a manner that facilitates the flipping out of 2
basepairs.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Li et al. (1993) identified changes in the XPC gene (see, e.g.,
613208.0001-613208.0004) in 5 XPC cell lines. In 4 of them, Northern
blot analysis of RNAs demonstrated subnormal levels of the XPC
transcript, whereas the fifth exhibited a near normal level. Four of the
5 mutations resulted in a truncated protein, and there was a correlation
between the degree to which the protein was truncated and the repair
defect at the cellular level.

In affected members of 2 unrelated but consanguineous Turkish families
with XPC, Khan et al. (2004) identified 2 different splice site
mutations in the XPC gene (613208.0008 and 613208.0009), respectively.
RT-PCR of cells from the severely affected patients showed a short mRNA
band and no detectable wildtype band. In contrast, cells from the more
mildly affected patients had an mRNA band of shorter size and 1 of
normal size.

Cleaver et al. (1999) reviewed mutations in the XPC gene.

In affected members of 14 Tunisian families with XPC, Ben Rekaya et al.
(2009) identified the same homozygous 2-bp deletion (1744delTG;
613208.0010) in the XPC gene. Haplotype analysis indicated a founder
effect.

ANIMAL MODEL

Sands et al. (1995) generated XPC-deficient mice by 'knockout' of the
mouse homolog of the human XPC gene using embryonic stem cell
technology. Mice homozygous for mutant alleles were viable and did not
exhibit an increased susceptibility to spontaneous tumor generation at 1
year of age. However, they were found to be highly susceptible to
ultraviolet-induced carcinogenesis compared to mice heterozygous for the
mutant allele and to wildtype controls. Homozygous mutant mice also
displayed a spectrum of ultraviolet exposure-related pathologic skin and
eye changes consistent with those found in the human disease xeroderma
pigmentosum group C. The deficient mice showed marked hyperplasia of the
epidermis with focal areas of hyperkeratosis in varying degrees of
dysplasia, acantholysis, and/or dyskeratosis, similar to the human
lesions known as actinic or solar keratosis. Changes in the eye included
severe keratitis and corneal ulceration.

Cheo et al. (1999) studied the XPC -/- mouse to determine whether there
is a predisposition to cancers in noncutaneous tissues associated with
exposure to environmental carcinogens. They observed a significantly
higher incidence of chemically-induced liver and lung tumors in these
mice, compared with normal and heterozygous littermates, using
2-acetylaminofluorene and NOH-2-acetylaminofluorene. In addition, the
progression of liver tumors in the mice homozygous mutant for XPC and
heterozygous mutant for p53 was accelerated, compared with the
homozygous mutant XPC mice and homozygous wildtype p53 animals. They
also demonstrated a higher incidence of spontaneous testicular tumors in
XPC -/- p53 -/- double mutant mice, compared with mice homozygous for
mutation only at the p53 locus.

Hollander et al. (2005) found that 100% of Xpc -/- mice developed
multiple spontaneous lung tumors with a minority progressing to nonsmall
cell lung adenocarcinoma, occasionally with metastasis to adjacent lymph
nodes.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP C
XPC, PRO218HIS

In XPC (278720) cell line XP1MI, Li et al. (1993) identified a mutation
in the XPC gene, resulting in a pro218-to-his (P218H) substitution. The
finding suggested that the cell line was either homozygous or hemizygous
for this mutation. The XP1MI cell line was the most UV-sensitive of 5
cell lines analyzed by Li et al. (1993). Furthermore, the patient
demonstrated XP-associated neurologic abnormalities, a rarity in group
C.

.0002
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP C
XPC, 83-BP INS, NT462

In XPC (278720) cell line XP3BE-L3, Li et al. (1993) identified an 83-bp
insertion beginning at position 462 in the XPC cDNA, predicted to result
in premature termination.

.0003
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP C
XPC, 3-BP INS, GGT, CODON 580 AND LYS822GLN

In XPC (278720) cell line XP8BE-L1, Li et al. (1993) identified 2
mutations in the XPC gene: 1 was a 3-bp insertion (GGT) that resulted in
the insertion of a valine residue after val580, and the other was a
point mutation that created a nonconservative amino acid change near the
carboxyl terminus of the protein (lys822-to-gln; K822Q). The mutation
was either homo- or hemizygous. It could not be determined whether only
1 or both of these mutations was responsible for the observed repair
deficiency. Of the 5 cell lines examined, XP8BE-L1 was the least
sensitive to UV irradiation and exhibited a near-normal level of XPC
mRNA. Clinically, the patient XP8BE was diagnosed with XP at birth and
was rigorously protected from sunlight from that time; as of 13 years of
age, the patient had not exhibited any malignant neoplasms. However, an
older brother with XP began to develop tumors by age 13. Like the vast
majority of XPC patients, this patient did not exhibit neurologic
complications.

.0004
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP C
XPC, 2-BP DEL, 1132AA

In XPC (278720) cell line XP1BE-L1, Li et al. (1993) identified a 2-bp
deletion (1132delA) in the XPC gene, predicted to result in premature
termination of the protein by a new stop codon 15 nucleotides
downstream. The deletion appeared to be either homozygous or hemizygous.

.0005
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP C
XPC, IVS9DS, T-G, +2

In a 4-year-old boy of Korean ancestry who had xeroderma pigmentosum
type C (278720) characterized by sun sensitivity and multiple cutaneous
neoplasms, Khan et al. (1998) found a T-to-G transversion at the splice
donor site of exon 9 of the XPC gene. The patient had some unusual
neurologic features, including the inability to speak, hyperactivity,
and autistic features. There was a markedly decreased level of XPC mRNA,
and the splice site mutation was found to generate 3 different isoforms:
1 with loss of exon 9, resulting in premature termination; another with
an insertion of exons 9a and 9b; and a third with a deletion of exon 9
and insertion of exon 9a. The exon 9a insertion was located in intron 9
and was flanked by strong splice donor and acceptor sequences. Analysis
of the patient's blood showed persistently low levels of glycine (68
microM; normal = 125-318 microM). Normal glycine levels were maintained
with oral glycine supplements, and the patient's hyperactivity
diminished.

.0006
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP C
XPC, 2-BP DEL, 669AT

In 2 Israeli sibs with severe xeroderma pigmentosum type C (278720),
Slor et al. (2000) identified a homozygous 2-bp deletion (669delAT) in
exon 5 of the XPC gene predicted to result in a truncated protein.
Cultured skin fibroblasts from both patients showed reductions in
postultraviolet survival (11% of normal), unscheduled DNA synthesis (10%
of normal), global genome DNA repair (15% of normal), and plasmid host
cell reactivation (5% of normal). Transcription-coupled DNA repair was
normal, however. Northern blot analysis revealed greatly reduced
xeroderma pigmentosum complementation group C mRNA. Sun protection
delayed the onset of skin cancer and prolonged life in the second sib.

.0007
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP C
XPC, ARG579TER

In 2 severely affected Turkish sibs with XPC (278720), a boy with
multiple skin cancers who died at age 10 (XP67TMA) and an 8-year-old
girl who began developing skin cancer before 3 years of age (XP68TMA),
Gozukara et al. (2001) identified a 1840C-T transition in exon 8 of the
XPC gene, resulting in an arg579-to-ter (R579X) substitution. This
change would lead to a truncation of the XPC protein at amino acid 579
rather than at its full length of 940 amino acids. Restriction fragment
length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis of XPC exon 8 DNA showed that both
affected children were homozygous and both parents were heterozygous for
the mutation, consistent with a history of consanguinity in the family.
This mutation was reported by Chavanne et al. (2000) in an Italian
patient (XP10PV) from Bologna who developed skin cancers beginning at
age 4 years. She had ocular lesions including tumors and died at age 15
years. The parents were not known to be consanguineous. Gozukara et al.
(2001) studied 19 microsatellite markers flanking the XPC gene on
chromosome 3; their results suggested that the XPC allele passed between
Italy and Turkey approximately 300 to 500 years ago. The R579X XPC
allele is thus associated with severe clinical disease with multiple
skin cancers and early death.

.0008
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP C
XPC, IVS3AS, T-A, -9

In 2 sibs with xeroderma pigmentosum type C (278720) and multiple skin
cancers from a consanguineous Turkish family, Khan et al. (2004)
identified homozygosity for a -9T-A transversion in intron 3 of the XPC
gene. The mutation was located in a splice lariat branchpoint sequence.
PCR analysis of fibroblast cells detected an XPC mRNA isoform with
deletion of exon 4 that had no DNA repair activity in a post-UV host
cell reactivation assay. The 20-year-old male and his 16-year-old sister
were severely affected. They developed skin lesions at 3 years of age.
Both had cutaneous atrophy, telangiectasia, actinic keratoses, and
multiple skin cancers including squamous cell carcinomas, basal cell
carcinomas, and melanomas.

.0009
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP C
XPC, IVS3AS, A-G, -24

In 3 sibs with mild xeroderma pigmentosum C (278720) from a
consanguineous Turkish family, Khan et al. (2004) identified
homozygosity for a -24A-G transition in intron 3 of the XPC gene. Cells
from the affected sibs produced 3 to 5% normal XPC message and had a
higher level of post-UV host cell reactivation than cells from the
severely affected sibs harboring the -9T-A mutation (613208.0008). The
authors concluded that a small amount of normal XPC mRNA can provide
partial protection against skin cancers. The 3 sisters, aged 20, 18, and
11 years, were mildly affected. Skin lesions began at age 3 to 5 years.
They had freckling but no skin atrophy, telangiectasia, or actinic
keratoses. The oldest sister had a squamous cell carcinoma excised from
her face at age 12 years. The other sisters did not have skin cancer.

.0010
XERODERMA PIGMENTOSUM, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP C
XPC, 2-BP DEL, 1744TG

In affected members of 14 Tunisian families with severe XPC (278720),
Ben Rekaya et al. (2009) identified a homozygous 2-bp deletion
(1744delTG) in exon 9 of the XPC gene, resulting in a frameshift and
premature termination (fsTer572). Clinical features included photophobia
and skin tumors, including basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell
carcinoma, and malignant melanoma. None of the patients had neurologic
abnormalities. Haplotype analysis indicated a founder effect.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Cleaver  (1986)
REFERENCE 1. Anantharaman, V.; Koonin, E. V.; Aravind, L.: Peptide-N-glycanases
and DNA repair proteins, Xp-C/Rad4, are, respectively, active and
inactivated enzymes sharing a common transglutaminase fold. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 10: 1627-1630, 2001.

2. Ben Rekaya, M.; Messaoud, O.; Talmoudi, F.; Nouira, S.; Ouragini,
H.; Amouri, A.; Boussen, H.; Boubaker, S.; Mokni, M.; Mokthar, I.;
Abdelhak, S.; Zghal, M.: High frequency of the V548A fs X572 XPC
mutation in Tunisia: implication for molecular diagnosis. J. Hum.
Genet. 54: 426-429, 2009.

3. Chavanne, F.; Broughton, B. C.; Pietra, D.; Nardo, T.; Browitt,
A.; Lehmann, A. R.; Stefanini, M.: Mutations in the XPC gene in families
with xeroderma pigmentosum and consequences at the cell, protein,
and transcript levels. Cancer Res. 60: 1974-1982, 2000.

4. Cheo, D. L.; Burns, D. K.; Meira, L. B.; Houle, J. F.; Friedberg,
E. C.: Mutational inactivation of the xeroderma pigmentosum group
C gene confers predisposition to 2-acetylaminofluorene-induced liver
and lung cancer and to spontaneous testicular cancer in Trp53 -/-
mice. Cancer Res. 59: 771-775, 1999.

5. Cleaver, J. E.: DNA repair in human xeroderma pigmentosum group
C cells involves a different distribution of damaged sites in confluent
and growing cells. Nucleic Acids Res. 14: 8155-8165, 1986.

6. Cleaver, J. E.; Thompson, L. H.; Richardson, A. S.; States, J.
C.: A summary of mutations in the UV-sensitive disorders: xeroderma
pigmentosum, Cockayne syndrome, and trichothiodystrophy. Hum. Mutat. 14:
9-22, 1999.

7. Emmert, S.; Kobayashi, N.; Khan, S. G.; Kraemer, K. H.: The xeroderma
pigmentosum group C gene leads to selective repair of cyclobutane
pyrimidine dimers rather than 6-4 photoproducts. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 97: 2151-2156, 2000.

8. Gozukara, E. M.; Khan, S. G.; Metin, A.; Emmert, S.; Busch, D.
B.; Shahlavi, T.; Coleman, D. M.; Miller, M.; Chinsomboon, N.; Stefanini,
M.; Kraemer, K. H.: A stop codon in xeroderma pigmentosum group C
families in Turkey and Italy: molecular genetic evidence for a common
ancestor. J. Invest. Derm. 117: 197-204, 2001.

9. Hollander, M. C.; Philburn, R. T.; Patterson, A. D.; Velasco-Miguel,
S.; Friedberg, E. C.; Linnoila, R. I.; Fornace, A. J., Jr.: Deletion
of XPC leads to lung tumors in mice and is associated with early events
in human lung carcinogenesis. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 102: 13200-13205,
2005.

10. Khan, S. G.; Levy, H. L.; Legerski, R.; Quackenbush, E.; Reardon,
J. T.; Emmert, S.; Sancar, A.; Li, L.; Schneider, T. D.; Cleaver,
J. E.; Kraemer, K. H.: Xeroderma pigmentosum group C splice mutation
associated with autism and hypoglycinemia. J. Invest. Derm. 111:
791-796, 1998. Note: Erratum: J. Invest. Derm. 112: 402 only, 1999.

11. Khan, S. G.; Metin, A.; Gozukara, E.; Inui, H.; Shahlavi, T.;
Muniz-Medina, V.; Baker, C. C.; Ueda, T.; Aiken, J. R.; Schneider,
T. D.; Kraemer, K. H.: Two essential splice lariat branchpoint sequences
in one intron in a xeroderma pigmentosum DNA repair gene: mutations
result in reduced XPC mRNA levels that correlate with cancer risk. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 13: 343-352, 2004.

12. Legerski, R.; Peterson, C.: Expression cloning of a human DNA
repair gene involved in xeroderma pigmentosum group C. Nature 359:
70-73, 1992. Note: Erratum: Nature 360: 610 only, 1992.

13. Legerski, R. J.; Liu, P.; Li, L.; Peterson, C. A.; Zhao, Y.; Leach,
R. J.; Naylor, S. L.; Siciliano, M. J.: Assignment of xeroderma pigmentosum
group C (XPC) gene to chromosome 3p25. Genomics 21: 266-269, 1994.

14. Li, L.; Bales, E. S.; Peterson, C. A.; Legerski, R. J.: Characterization
of molecular defects in xeroderma pigmentosum group C. Nature Genet. 5:
413-417, 1993.

15. Masutani, C.; Sugasawa, K.; Yanagisawa, J.; Sonoyama, T.; Ui,
M.; Enomoto, T.; Takio, K.; Tanaka, K.; van der Spek, P.; Bootsma,
D.; Hoeijmakers, J. H. J.; Hanaoka, F.: Purification and cloning
of a nucleotide excision repair complex involving the xeroderma pigmentosum
group C protein and a human homologue of yeast RAD23. EMBO J. 13:
1831-1843, 1994.

16. Min, J.-H.; Pavletich, N. P.: Recognition of DNA damage by the
Rad4 nucleotide excision repair protein. Nature 449: 570-575, 2007.

17. Peterson, C.; Legerski, R.: High-frequency transformation of
human repair-deficient cell lines by an Epstein-Barr virus-based cDNA
expression vector. Gene 107: 279-284, 1991.

18. Sands, A. T.; Abuin, A.; Sanchez, A.; Conti, C. J.; Bradley, A.
: High susceptibility to ultraviolet-induced carcinogenesis in mice
lacking XPC. Nature 377: 162-165, 1995.

19. Shimizu, Y.; Iwai, S.; Hanaoka, F.; Sugasawa, K.: Xeroderma pigmentosum
group C protein interacts physically and functionally with thymine
DNA glycosylase. EMBO J. 22: 164-173, 2003.

20. Slor, H.; Batko, S.; Khan, S. G.; Sobe, T.; Emmert, S.; Khadavi,
A.; Frumkin, A.; Busch, D. B.; Albert, R. B.; Kraemer, K. H.: Clinical,
cellular, and molecular features of an Israeli xeroderma pigmentosum
family with a frameshift mutation in the XPC gene: sun protection
prolongs life. J. Invest. Derm. 115: 974-980, 2000.

21. Sugasawa, K.; Ng, J. M. Y.; Masutani, C.; Iwai, S.; van der Spek,
P. J.; Eker, A. P. M.; Hanaoka, F.; Bootsma, D.; Hoeijmakers, J. H.
J.: Xeroderma pigmentosum group C protein complex is the initiator
of global genome nucleotide excision repair. Molec. Cell 2: 223-232,
1998.

22. Suzuki, T.; Park, H.; Hollingsworth, N. M.; Sternglanz, R.; Lennarz,
W. L.: PNG1, a yeast gene encoding a highly conserved peptide:N-glycanase. J.
Cell Biol. 149: 1039-1052, 2000.

23. Teitz, T.; Naiman, T.; Avissar, S. S.; Bar, S.; Okayama, H.; Canaani,
D.: Complementation of the UV-sensitive phenotype of a xeroderma
pigmentosum human cell line by transfection with a cDNA clone library. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 84: 8801-8804, 1987.

24. van der Spek, P. J.; Smit, E. M. E.; Beverloo, H. B.; Sugasawa,
K.; Masutani, C.; Hanaoka, F.; Hoeijmakers, J. H. J.; Hagemeijer,
A.: Chromosomal localization of three repair genes: the xeroderma
pigmentosum group C gene and two human homologs of yeast RAD23. Genomics 23:
651-658, 1994.

25. van der Spek, P. J.; Visser, C. E.; Hanaoka, F.; Smit, B.; Hagemeijer,
A.; Bootsma, D.; Hoeijmakers, J. H. J.: Cloning, comparative mapping,
and RNA expression of the mouse homologues of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae
nucleotide excision repair gene RAD23. Genomics 31: 20-27, 1996.

26. Volker, M.; Mone, M. J.; Karmakar, P.; van Hoffen, A.; Schul,
W.; Vermeulen, W.; Hoeijmakers, J. H. J.; van Driel, R.; van Zeeland,
A. A.; Mullenders, L. H. F.: Sequential assembly of the nucleotide
excision repair factors in vivo. Molec. Cell 8: 213-224, 2001.

CREATED Cassandra L. Kniffin: 1/7/2010

EDITED carol: 09/12/2013
carol: 3/12/2013
terry: 8/9/2012
carol: 12/3/2010
terry: 11/5/2010
carol: 1/12/2010
ckniffin: 1/8/2010

607419	TITLE *607419 GEM-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 7; GEMIN7
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

GEMIN7 is part of the large macromolecular SMN complex (see 600354),
which is localized to both the cytoplasm and the nucleus and plays a
role in the cytoplasmic assembly of small nuclear ribonuculeoproteins
(snRNPs).

CLONING

Pellizzoni et al. (2002) identified a number of proteins that
coimmunoprecipitate with SMN or with GEMIN2 (602595) from lysates of
human kidney cells, including GEMIN6 (607006) and a 15-kD protein.
Baccon et al. (2002) sequenced the 15-kD protein, which they called
GEMIN7, identified corresponding ESTs, and cloned GEMIN7 by PCR
amplification of a cDNA library. The deduced 131-amino acid GEMIN7
protein contains several RG repeats. By EST database searching, Baccon
et al. (2002) also identified the putative mouse ortholog, which shares
82% amino acid sequence identity with the human protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Using coimmunoprecipitation and immunolocalization experiments, Baccon
et al. (2002) demonstrated that GEMIN7 is a component of the SMN complex
and colocalizes with SMN in the cytoplasm and in gems. Binding
experiments showed that GEMIN7 interacts directly with SMN and GEMIN6
and mediates the association of GEMIN6 with the SMN complex. The RG
repeats were necessary for its interaction with SMN. GEMIN7 also
interacted with several Sm proteins of snRNPs, particularly with SmE
(SNRPE; 128260).

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the GEMIN7
gene to chromosome 19 (TMAP SHGC-112).

REFERENCE 1. Baccon, J.; Pellizzoni, L.; Rappsilber, J.; Mann, M.; Dreyfuss,
G.: Identification and characterization of Gemin7, a novel component
of the survival of motor neuron complex. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 31957-31962,
2002.

2. Pellizzoni, L.; Baccon, J.; Rappsilber, J.; Mann, M.; Dreyfuss,
G.: Purification of native survival of motor neurons complexes and
identification of Gemin6 as a novel component. J. Biol. Chem. 277:
7540-7545, 2002.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 12/12/2002

EDITED carol: 03/31/2004
carol: 12/16/2002
mgross: 12/13/2002
carol: 12/12/2002

607065	TITLE *607065 GLUTAMINYL-PEPTIDE CYCLOTRANSFERASE; QPCT
;;GLUTAMINYL CYCLASE; QC
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Glutaminyl cyclase (EC 2.3.2.5) converts glutaminyl peptides to cyclic
pyroglutamyl peptides.

CLONING

Using primers derived from the bovine QPCT sequence, Song et al. (1994)
cloned QPCT by PCR from a human pituitary cDNA library. The deduced
361-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of about 41 kD.
It contains an N-terminal signal peptide region, several glycosylation
and phosphorylation sites, and 2 cysteine residues conserved between the
bovine and human enzymes. QPCT shares 86% overall sequence identity with
the bovine homolog.

GENE FUNCTION

Through assays of the recombinant QPCT protein against a series of
glutaminyl peptides, Song et al. (1994) confirmed glutaminyl cyclase
activity and showed that QPCT has a bias against acidic and tryptophan
residues adjacent to the N-terminal glutaminyl residue.

Schilling et al. (2008) found that the N-terminal pyroglutamate (pE)
formation of amyloid-beta is catalyzed by glutaminyl cyclase in vivo.
Glutaminyl cyclase expression was upregulated in the cortices of
individuals with Alzheimer disease (104300) and correlated with the
appearance of pE-modified amyloid beta (104760). Oral application of a
glutaminyl cyclase inhibitor resulted in reduced amyloid beta(3(pE)-42)
burden in 2 different transgenic mouse models of Alzheimer disease and
in a new Drosophila model. Treatment of mice was accompanied by
reductions in amyloid beta(X-40/42), diminished plaque formation and
gliosis, and improved performance in context memory and spatial learning
tests. Schilling et al. (2008) suggested that their observations were
consistent with the hypothesis that amyloid beta(3(pE)-42) acts as a
seed for amyloid beta aggregation by self-aggregation and coaggregation
with amyloid beta(1-40/42). Therefore, amyloid beta(3(pE)-40/42)
peptides seem to represent amyloid beta forms with exceptional potency
for disturbing neuronal function. The authors suggested that the
reduction of brain pE-modified amyloid beta by inhibition of glutaminyl
cyclase offers a new therapeutic option for the treatment of Alzheimer
disease and provides implications for other amyloidoses.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the QPCT
gene to chromosome 2 (TMAP TIGR-A002E27).

REFERENCE 1. Schilling, S.; Zeitschel, U.; Hoffmann, T.; Heiser, U.; Francke,
M.; Kehlen, A.; Holzer, M.; Hutter-Paier, B.; Prokesch, M.; Windisch,
M.; Jagla, W.; Schlenzig, D.; Lindner, C.; Rudolph, T.; Reuter, G.;
Cynis, H.; Montag, D.; Demuth, H.-U.; Rossner, S.: Glutaminyl cyclase
inhibition attenuates pyroglutamate A-beta and Alzheimer's disease-like
pathology. Nature Med. 14: 1106-1111, 2008.

2. Song, I.; Chuang, C. Z.; Bateman, R. C., Jr.: Molecular cloning,
sequence analysis and expression of human pituitary glutaminyl cyclase. J.
Molec. Endocr. 13: 77-86, 1994.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/12/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/24/2002

EDITED alopez: 11/19/2008
terry: 11/12/2008
carol: 6/26/2002

607287	TITLE *607287 LSM7 PROTEIN; LSM7
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Sm-like proteins were identified in a variety of organisms based on
sequence homology with the Sm protein family (see SNRPD2; 601061).
Sm-like proteins contain the Sm sequence motif, which consists of 2
regions separated by a linker of variable length that folds as a loop.
The Sm-like proteins are thought to form a stable heteromer present in
tri-snRNP particles, which are important for pre-mRNA splicing.

CLONING

In a search for human Sm-like proteins, Achsel et al. (1999)
fractionated proteins present in purified (U4/U6.U5) tri-snRNPs and
isolated 7 Sm-like proteins, which they named LSm2-LSm8. Using partial
peptide sequence for database searches, they identified and sequenced
EST clones. Using additional sequence obtained by PCR amplification of a
HeLa cDNA library, they assembled full-length cDNA sequences for
LSM2-LSM8.

Salgado-Garrido et al. (1999) searched database sequence for Sm proteins
and identified 16 potential Sm-related genes in yeast as well as some
Sm-related genes in human and archaebacteria. Using a multiple sequence
alignment of Sm domains, they built a phylogenetic tree of yeast, human,
and archaeal Sm and Sm-like proteins.

GENE FUNCTION

Using electron-microscopy, Achsel et al. (1999) observed that purified
LSm proteins form a heteromer that is stable even in the absence of RNA
and exhibits a doughnut-shaped structure similar to the Sm core RNP
structure. They demonstrated that the purified LSm heteromer binds
specifically to the U6 snRNA at its 3-prime-terminal U-tract. They also
showed that the LSm proteins facilitate the formation of U4/U6 RNA
duplexes in vitro and concluded that the LSm proteins may play a role in
U4/U6 snRNP formation.

Using immunoprecipitation experiments, Salgado-Garrido et al. (1999)
concluded that there is a complex of 7 Sm-like proteins bound to RNA in
yeast. Lsm2-Lsm8 coprecipitate the U4, U5 and U6 snRNAs and directly
associate with the U6 snRNA present in the free U6 snRNP. Additionally,
the yeast Lsm2-Lsm7 proteins were found to be associated with the
pre-RNase P RNA but not the mature RNase RNA. Using immunoprecipitation
experiments from human cell extracts, Salgado-Garrido et al. (1999)
showed that the LSM3 and LSM4 proteins are specifically associated with
snRNP complexes containing the U6 snRNA. Salgado-Garrido et al. (1999)
concluded that Sm and Sm-like proteins assemble in at least 2
functionally conserved complexes of deep evolutionary origin.

By disrupting the Sm and Sm-like genes in yeast, Salgado-Garrido et al.
(1999) concluded that disruption of genes encoding Sm-like proteins
directly associated with the U6 snRNA (Lsm2-8) generated variable
phenotypes. Lsm2, Lsm3, Lsm4, and Lsm8 are essential for vegetative
growth. Lsm5, Lsm6, and Lsm7 are not essential for growth; however,
their disruptions lead to slow growth especially at elevated
temperature. The levels of the U6 snRNA were strongly reduced in the
strains harboring the Lsm5, Lsm6, and Lsm7 disruptions. Lsm1 and Lsm9
are dispensable for vegetative growth, but Lsm1 is required for optimal
vegetative growth at 30 degrees and is temperature sensitive.

Ingelfinger et al. (2002) determined that human LSM1 to LSM7, but not
LSM8, were expressed in HeLa cells within cytoplasmic foci. The foci
also contained a decapping enzyme (DCP1/2) and the exonuclease XRN1
(607994). Coexpression of wildtype and mutant LSM proteins, as well as
fluorescence resonance energy transfer, indicated that the LSM proteins
form a complex similar to one found in yeast. Ingelfinger et al. (2002)
concluded that the foci contain a partially or fully assembled machinery
for the degradation of mRNA.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the LSM7
gene to chromosome 19 (TMAP stSG29317).

REFERENCE 1. Achsel, T.; Brahms, H.; Kastner, B.; Bachi, A.; Wilm, M.; Luhrmann,
R.: A doughnut-shaped heteromer of human Sm-like proteins binds to
the 3-prime end of U6 snRNA, thereby facilitating U4/U6 duplex formation
in vitro. EMBO J. 18: 5789-5802, 1999.

2. Ingelfinger, D.; Arndt-Jovin, D. J.; Luhrmann, R.; Achsel, T.:
The human LSm1-7 proteins colocalize with the mRNA-degrading enzymes
Dcp1/2 and Xrn1 in distinct cytoplasmic foci. RNA 8: 1489-1501,
2002.

3. Salgado-Garrido, J.; Bragado-Nilsson, E.; Kandels-Lewis, S.; Seraphin,
B.: Sm and Sm-like proteins assemble in two related complexes of
deep evolutionary origin. EMBO J. 18: 3451-3462, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 7/29/2003

CREATED Dawn Watkins-Chow: 10/9/2002

EDITED alopez: 03/08/2005
mgross: 7/29/2003
carol: 10/15/2002

600798	TITLE *600798 POLIOVIRUS RECEPTOR-LIKE 2; PVRL2
;;HERPESVIRUS ENTRY MEDIATOR B; HVEB;;
POLIOVIRUS RECEPTOR-RELATED 2; PVRR2; PRR2;;
CD112 ANTIGEN; CD112;;
NECTIN 2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Entry of the poliovirus into permissive cells is dependent on the
expression of a specific receptor, the poliovirus receptor (PVR;
173850), which is an integral membrane glycoprotein. Its extracellular
region exhibits 3 immunoglobulin-like domains. Two integral forms,
PVR-alpha and PVR-delta, and 2 soluble forms, PVR-beta and PVR-gamma,
are lacking a transmembrane region generated by alternative splicing of
mRNA. The normal cellular function of PVR is unknown. The identification
of human PVR prompted study of its counterpart in other species. In the
monkey, 2 genes located at 2 separate genetic loci, AGM1 and AGM2, have
been cloned. AGM1 encodes 2 membrane-bound splice variant forms
homologous to PVR-alpha and PVR-delta. AGM2 encodes a membrane-bound
form, PVR-alpha-2. Morrison and Racaniello (1992) described a murine
gene, Mph, as a structural homolog of human PVR. Two Mph molecules,
Mph-alpha and Mph-beta, are thought to be generated by alternative
splicing from a primary transcript.

Following the discovery of the human PVR-related gene (PVRR1; 600644),
other PVR-related molecules were sought. Using degenerate
oligonucleotides in a PCR-based methodology, Eberle et al. (1995)
identified a second PVR-related cDNA, which they called PRR2.
Furthermore, they presented evidence that PRR2, and not PVR, is the
homolog of Mph, and questioned the existence of a true murine homolog of
PVR. The PRR2 gene encodes 2 glycoproteins, PRR2-alpha (short form) and
PRR2-delta (long form), which have 69% and 73% identity within Mph-alpha
and Mph-beta, respectively. In contrast, the human PVR protein exhibits
only 51% identity which is, moreover, restricted to the 3 immunoglobulin
domains of the murine protein. Northern blot analysis showed that 2 mRNA
isoforms of 3.0 kb (PRR2-alpha) and 4.4 kb (PRR2-delta) are ubiquitously
found in various normal human tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Bottino et al. (2003) immunized mice with natural killer
(NK)-susceptible human target cells and obtained antibodies to PVR and
PVRL2. Binding analysis and flow cytometry demonstrated that both
molecules bound strongly with DNAM1 (CD226; 605397), but not with other
activating NK receptors, including NKp46 (NCR1; 604530) and NKp30 (NCR3;
611550). Expression of PVR or PVRL2 rendered cells susceptible to
enhanced lysis in a DNAM1-dependent manner that was nearly abrogated in
the presence of antibody to PVR, PVRL2, or DNAM1.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Liu et al. (2012) generated the crystal structure of the nectin-2
Ig-like V-set domain at 1.85-angstrom resolution. The structure bound to
both the soluble ectodomain of DNAM1 and cell surface-expressed
full-length DNAM1. Mutational analysis revealed that disruption of the
homodimeric interface of nectin-2 led to failure of homodimer formation
and loss of binding to DNAM1.

MAPPING

By isotopic hybridization, Eberle et al. (1995) mapped the PRR2 gene to
19q13.2-q13.4 in the same chromosomal region as PVR. By genomic sequence
analysis, Freitas et al. (1998) mapped the PRR2 gene to chromosome
19q13.2, where it lies centromeric to the TOMM40 gene (608061) and the
APOE (107741)-APOC2 (608083) gene cluster.

REFERENCE 1. Bottino, C.; Castriconi, R.; Pende, D.; Rivera, P.; Nanni, M.;
Carnemolla, B.; Cantoni, C.; Grassi, J.; Marcenaro, S.; Reymond, N.;
Vitale, M.; Moretta, L.; Lopez, M.; Moretta, A.: Identification of
PVR (CD155) and nectin-2 (CD112) as cell surface ligands for the human
DNAM-1 (CD226) activating molecule. J. Exp. Med. 198: 557-567, 2003.

2. Eberle, F.; Dubreuil, P.; Mattei, M.-G.; Devilard, E.; Lopez, M.
: The human PRR2 gene, related to the human poliovirus receptor gene
(PVR), is the true homolog of the murine Mph gene. Gene 159: 267-272,
1995.

3. Freitas, E. M.; Zhang, W. J.; Lalonde, J.-P.; Tay, G. K.; Gaudieri,
S.; Ashworth, L. K.; van Bockxmeer, F. M.; Dawkins, R. L.: Sequencing
of 42kb of the APO E-C2 gene cluster reveals a new gene: PEREC1. DNA
Seq. 9: 89-101, 1998.

4. Liu, J.; Qian, X.; Chen, Z.; Xu, X.; Gao, F.; Zhang, S.; Zhang,
R.; Qi, J.; Gao, G. F.; Yan, J.: Crystal structure of cell adhesion
molecule nectin-2/CD112 and its binding to immune receptor DNAM-1/CD226. J
Immun. 188: 5511-5520, 2012.

5. Morrison, M. E.; Racaniello, V. R.: Molecular cloning and expression
of a murine homolog of the human poliovirus receptor gene. J. Virol. 66:
2807-2813, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 05/03/2013
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/14/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/27/2003

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/27/1995

EDITED mgross: 05/03/2013
carol: 4/6/2011
mgross: 10/24/2007
mgross: 4/5/2006
terry: 4/3/2006
mgross: 11/14/2005
terry: 11/14/2005
wwang: 9/28/2005
ckniffin: 9/24/2003
mgross: 8/27/2003
carol: 11/10/1999
carol: 8/12/1998
alopez: 6/8/1998
mark: 9/27/1995

607860	TITLE *607860 YY1 ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 1; YY1AP1
;;YY1-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN; YAP;;
HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; HCCA2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By differential display PCR of normal hepatic tissue and hepatocellular
carcinomas, followed by screening a placenta cDNA library, Wang et al.
(2001) cloned YY1AP1, which they called HCCA2. The deduced 467-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 50.65 kD. HCCA2 contains
2 SH3-binding domains, 2 N-glycosylation sites, 6 N-myristoylation
sites, and numerous phosphorylation sites, but it does not have a
transmembrane domain, signal peptide, or targeting sequences. Northern
blot analysis detected 1.8- and 2.5-kb transcripts in all adult tissues
examined except liver. Expression was also detected in fetal liver,
lung, brain, and spleen. Western blot analysis of transfected embryonic
kidney fibroblasts detected HCCA2 at an apparent molecular mass of about
50 kD. Immunohistochemical staining showed that HCCA2 protein was
localized in the cytoplasm of liver cancer tissues, and it was not found
in surrounding nontumor hepatocytes.

Kuryshev et al. (2006) determined that YY1AP1 was formed by fusion of
the 5-prime region of the ASH1L gene (607999) and the 3-prime region of
the GON4L gene (610393) during a tandem segmental duplication on
chromosome 1. YY1AP1 contains the partial promoter and untranslated
first exon of ASH1L and coding exons 13 to 21 of GON4L. The 3-prime
region of YY1AP1 originated from a long terminal repeat of an endogenous
retrovirus, known as the MER51A repeat, that was inserted into exon 21
of GON4L after the duplication. The deduced YY1AP1 protein contains 750
amino acids, 748 of which correspond to amino acids 590 to 1,337 of the
GON4L protein. The last 2 C-terminal residues of YY1AP1 come from the
long terminal repeat of MER51A. RT-PCR detected ubiquitous expression of
YY1AP1, with highest levels in testis and skeletal muscle.

GENE FUNCTION

Wang et al. (2001) determined that HCCA2 was not expressed in normal
adult liver tissue, but it was expressed in 79% of hepatocellular
carcinomas tested. HCCA2 expression was associated with invasion of the
tumor capsule.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Kuryshev et al. (2006) mapped the YY1AP1
gene to chromosome 1q22.

REFERENCE 1. Kuryshev, V. Y.; Vorobyov, E.; Zink, D.; Schmitz, J.; Rozhdestvensky,
T. S.; Munstermann, E.; Ernst, U.; Wellenreuther, R.; Moosmayer, P.;
Bechtel, S.; Schupp, I.; Horst, J.; Korn, B.; Poustka, A.; Wiemann,
S.: An anthropoid-specific segmental duplication on human chromosome
1q22. Genomics 88: 143-151, 2006.

2. Wang, Z.-X.; Wang, H.-Y.; Wu, M.-C.: Identification and characterization
of a novel human hepatocellular carcinoma-associated gene. Brit.
J. Cancer 85: 1162-1167, 2001.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/29/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 6/6/2003

EDITED wwang: 04/18/2008
mgross: 9/11/2006
terry: 8/29/2006
mgross: 6/6/2003

603182	TITLE *603182 INTERLEUKIN ENHANCER-BINDING FACTOR 3; ILF3
;;NUCLEAR FACTOR OF ACTIVATED T CELLS, 90-KD; NF90;;
DOUBLE-STRANDED RNA-BINDING PROTEIN, 76-KD; DRBP76;;
M-PHASE PHOSPHOPROTEIN 4; MPP4; MPHOSPH4;;
NUCLEAR FACTOR ASSOCIATED WITH DOUBLE-STRANDED RNA; NFAR
DESCRIPTION For background information, see NF45 (ILF2; 603181).

CLONING

Kao et al. (1994) cloned cDNAs encoding NF45 and NF90. The NF90 gene
encodes a 671-amino acid polypeptide with limited similarity to several
RNA-binding proteins. The NF90 gene also appears to encode an
alternatively spliced 404-amino acid polypeptide, of which the first 394
amino acids are identical to the longer clone. Northern and Western blot
analysis demonstrated NF45 and NF90 expression in several cell types,
including both unstimulated and stimulated Jurkat T cells.

By immunoscreening a HeLa cell cDNA library for phosphoproteins,
Matsumoto-Taniura et al. (1996) isolated a partial cDNA encoding ILF3,
which they termed MPP4. Immunoprecipitation analysis indicated that MPP4
encodes 90- and 110-kD proteins. Immunofluorescence microscopy
demonstrated cytoplasmic expression during M phase and nuclear/nucleolar
expression during interphase.

Patel et al. (1999) purified double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-binding
proteins from HeLa cell extracts and microsequenced a 90-kD protein with
identity to MPP4 in its N terminus. Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen with a
mutant RNA-activated protein kinase (PRKR; 176871) as bait, followed by
RT-PCR, they isolated a full-length cDNA encoding ILF3, which they
called DRBP76. Sequence analysis predicted that the 702-amino acid
protein has a bipartite nuclear localization signal, 2 dsRNA-binding
domains, an RG2 domain, and multiple potential phosphorylation sites.
SDS-PAGE analysis showed expression of a 90-kD protein, larger than the
calculated 76 kD. EMSA analysis confirmed the dsRNA binding activity of
DRBP76. Autoradiographic analysis indicated that DRBP76 is
phosphorylated by PRKR.

Langland et al. (1999) noted that NF90 is primarily localized to
ribosomes.

Saunders et al. (2001) obtained a cDNA encoding DRBP76, which they
termed NFAR1, as well as a variant cDNA encoding a 110-kD, 894-amino
acid protein they designated NFAR2. Sequence analysis showed that the
NFAR proteins share homology with a known PRKR substrate, the
translation initiation factor EIF2S1 (603907). Northern blot analysis
revealed ubiquitous expression of multiple transcripts ranging from 4.0
to 8.0 kb. Immunoblot analysis indicated variable expression with lower
amounts particularly notable in liver and spleen, suggesting
differential regulation at the translational or posttranslational level.
Immunoblot analysis and confocal microscopy demonstrated that PRKR and
both NFAR variants reciprocally coimmunoprecipitate and colocalize in
the nucleus. Immunoprecipitation analysis indicated an association with
spliceosomes.

Viranaicken et al. (2006) identified splice variants of human and mouse
ILF3 that encode long and short isoforms of the ILF3 and NF90 proteins
via inclusion or exclusion of 13 N-terminal residues, respectively.

GENE FUNCTION

Kao et al. (1994) showed that the NF45 and NF90 proteins form an NFAT
DNA-binding activity that is enhanced by T-cell stimulation and
inhibited by cyclosporin A and FK506.

Functional analysis by Saunders et al. (2001) indicated that both NFAR
proteins regulate gene transcription, probably at the level of mRNA
elongation. NFAR2 exhibited potent, constitutive regulatory activity
through its unique C-terminal region, which specifically interacted with
FUS (137070) and SMN1 (600354). Saunders et al. (2001) concluded that
NFARs facilitate dsRNA-regulated gene expression at the level of
posttranscription.

Shim et al. (2002) showed that NF90 binds to a subregion of the 3-prime
untranslated region that contains several AU-rich elements (AREs) and
slows down the degradation of IL2 (147680) mRNA. In nonstimulated cells,
NF90 was mostly nuclear, but T-cell activation resulted in its
accumulation in the cytoplasm. The authors concluded that nuclear export
of NF90 is required for IL2 mRNA stabilization.

Pfeifer et al. (2008) found that NFAR1 and NFAR2 were involved in
retaining cellular transcripts in intranuclear foci and could regulate
mRNA export to the cytoplasm. They also remained associated with
exported ribonucleoprotein complexes. Treatment of HeLa cells with small
interfering RNA to NFAR1 and/or NFAR2 resulted in an increase in protein
synthesis rates, particularly in the presence the mRNA export factors
TAP (NXF1; 602647), p15 (NXT1; 605811), or RAE1 (603343). Depletion of
NFAR in mouse fibroblasts or HeLa cells dramatically increased their
susceptibility to vesicular stomatitis virus or influenza virus,
respectively. Pfeifer et al. (2008) concluded that NFAR1 and NFAR2 are
retained on polyribosomes and act to govern translation rates, and that
they also play a role in innate immune defense to virus infection.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Saunders et al. (2001) determined that the
NFAR gene contains 21 exons and spans 16.2 kb. The 90-kD NFAR1 variant
expresses exon 18, which contains several stop codons that lead to
termination at amino acid 702. The 110-kD NFAR2 variant lacks exon 18
but contains exons 19, 20, and 21.

Viranaicken et al. (2006) identified an additional alternatively spliced
exon within intron 2 of the mouse and human ILF3 genes, increasing the
total number of exons to 22.

MAPPING

Saunders et al. (2001) mapped the NFAR gene to chromosome 19p13 by FISH.

ANIMAL MODEL

Pfeifer et al. (2008) found that mice lacking Nfar died in utero.

REFERENCE 1. Kao, P. N.; Chen, L.; Brock, G.; Ng, J.; Kenny, J.; Smith, A. J.;
Corthesy, B.: Cloning and expression of cyclosporin A- and FK506-sensitive
nuclear factor of activated T-cells: NF45 and NF90. J. Biol. Chem. 269:
20691-20699, 1994.

2. Langland, J. O.; Kao, P. N.; Jacobs, B. L.: Nuclear factor-90
of activated T-cells: a double-stranded RNA-binding protein and substrate
for the double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase, PKR. Biochemistry 38:
6361-6368, 1999.

3. Matsumoto-Taniura, N.; Pirollet, F.; Monroe, R.; Gerace, L.; Westendorf,
J. M.: Identification of novel M phase phosphoproteins by expression
cloning. Molec. Biol. Cell 7: 1455-1469, 1996.

4. Patel, R. C.; Vestal, D. J.; Xu, Z.; Bandyopadhyay, S.; Guo, W.;
Erme, S. M.; Williams, B. R. G.; Sen, G. C.: DRBP76, a double-stranded
RNA-binding nuclear protein, is phosphorylated by the interferon-induced
protein kinase, PKR. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 20432-20437, 1999.

5. Pfeifer, I.; Elsby, R.; Fernandez, M.; Faria, P. A.; Nussenzveig,
D. R.; Lossos, I. S.; Fontoura, B. M. A.; Martin, W. D.; Barber, G.
N.: NFAR-1 and -2 modulate translation and are required for efficient
host defense. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 4173-4178, 2008.

6. Saunders, L. R.; Jurecic, V.; Barber, G. N.: The 90- and 110-kDa
human NFAR proteins are translated from two differentially spliced
mRNAs encoded on chromosome 19p13. Genomics 71: 256-259, 2001.

7. Saunders, L. R.; Perkins, D. J.; Balachandran, S.; Michaels, R.;
Ford, R.; Mayeda, A.; Barber, G. N.: Characterization of two evolutionarily
conserved, alternatively spliced nuclear phosphoproteins, NFAR-1 and
-2, that function in mRNA processing and interact with the double-stranded
RNA-dependent protein kinase, PKR. J. Biol. Chem. 276: 32300-32312,
2001.

8. Shim, J.; Lim, H.; Yates, J. R., III; Karin, M.: Nuclear export
of NF90 is required for interleukin-2 mRNA stabilization. Molec.
Cell 10: 1331-1344, 2002.

9. Viranaicken, W.; Gasmi, L.; Chauvin, C.; Denoulet, P.; Larcher,
J.-C.: Identification of a newly spliced exon in the mouse Ilf3 gene
generating two long and short isoforms of Ilf3 and NF90. Genomics 88:
622-632, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/2/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/8/2006
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 4/28/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 3/4/2002

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/22/1998

EDITED mgross: 07/11/2008
mgross: 7/11/2008
terry: 7/2/2008
mgross: 11/28/2006
terry: 11/8/2006
mgross: 4/28/2003
mgross: 3/4/2002
alopez: 10/22/1998

120436	TITLE *120436 MutL, E. COLI, HOMOLOG OF, 1; MLH1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

MLH is homologous to the E. coli MutL gene and is involved in DNA
mismatch repair. Heterozygous mutations in the MLH1 gene result in
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer-2 (HNPCC2; 609310)
(Papadopoulos et al., 1994).

CLONING

After human homologs of the mutS gene of bacteria and yeast were found
to have mutations responsible for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
cancer (HNPCC1; 120435), Papadopoulos et al. (1994) searched for other
human mismatch repair (MMR) genes. A survey of EST databases derived
from random cDNA clones revealed 3 additional human MMR genes, all
related to the bacterial mutL gene. One of these genes was MLH1. The
other 2 genes had a slightly greater similarity to the yeast mutL
homolog PMS1 and were therefore denoted PMS1 (600258) and PMS2 (600259),
respectively.

Genuardi et al. (1998) characterized the normal alternative splicing of
the MLH1 gene and reported a number of splice variants that exist in
various tissue types. They observed splice variants lacking exons 6/9,
9, 9/10, 9/10/11, 10/11, 12, 16, and 17. The level of expression varied
among different samples. All isoforms were found in 43 to 100% of the
mononuclear blood cell samples, as well as in other tissues. The authors
cautioned that knowledge of existence of multiple alternative splicing
events not caused by genomic DNA changes is important for the evaluation
of the results of molecular diagnostic tests based on RNA analysis.

GENE FUNCTION

Hypermutable H6 colorectal tumor cells are defective in strand-specific
mismatch repair and bear defects in both alleles of the human MLH1 gene.
Li and Modrich (1995) purified to near homogeneity an activity from HeLa
cells that complemented H6 nuclear extracts to restore repair
proficiency on a set of heteroduplex DNAs representing the 8 base-base
mismatches as well as a number of slipped-strand, insertion/deletion
mispairs. The activity behaved as a single species during fractionation
and copurified with proteins of 85 and 100 kD. Microsequence analysis
demonstrated both of these proteins to be homologs of bacterial MutL,
with the former corresponding to the human MLH1 product and the latter
to the product of human PMS2 or a closely related gene. The 1:1 molar
stoichiometry of the 2 polypeptides and their hydrodynamic behavior
indicated formation of a heterodimer. These observations indicated that
interactions between members of the family of the human MutL homologs
may be restricted.

Wang et al. (2000) used immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry
analyses to identify BRCA1 (113705)-associated proteins. They found that
BRCA1 is part of a large multisubunit protein complex of tumor
suppressors, DNA damage sensors, and signal transducers. They named this
complex BASC, for 'BRCA1-associated genome surveillance complex.' Among
the DNA repair proteins identified in the complex were ATM (607585), BLM
(604610), MSH2 (609309), MSH6 (600678), MLH1, the RAD50 (604040)-MRE11
(600814)-NBS1 (602667) complex, and the RFC1 (102579)-RFC2 (600404)-RFC4
(102577) complex. Wang et al. (2000) suggested that BASC may serve as a
sensor of abnormal DNA structures and/or as a regulator of the
postreplication repair process.

Meiotic recombination between homologous chromosomes generates crossover
and noncrossover products, which are derived from the formation of
double-strand breaks (DSBs) and result from distinct DSB repair
pathways. Guillon et al. (2005) analyzed crossovers and noncrossovers in
oogenesis and spermatogenesis in mice and determined that both crossover
and noncrossover pathways were Spo11 (605114) dependent. Mlh1 was
required for the formation of most crossovers, but not noncrossovers.
The remaining 5 to 10% of crossover products did not require Mlh1.
Guillon et al. (2005) concluded that the major crossover pathway
requires MLH1 for crossover formation and for mismatch repair of
heteroduplex DNA.

MutL-alpha is a heterodimer of MLH1 and PMS2 that is required for
mismatch repair. Kadyrov et al. (2006) identified human MutL-alpha as a
latent endonuclease activated in a DNA mismatch-, MutS-alpha (see
609309)-, RFC-, PCNA (176740)-, and ATP-dependent manner. Incision of a
nicked heteroduplex by this 4-protein system was strongly biased to the
nicked strand. A mismatch-containing DNA segment spanned by 2 strand
breaks was then removed by the 5-prime-to-3-prime activity of
MutS-alpha-activated exonuclease-1 (EXO1; 606063). By mutation analysis,
Kadyrov et al. (2006) mapped the endonuclease active site to a conserved
motif in PMS2.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

Ban and Yang (1998) determined the crystal structure of a 40-kD
N-terminal fragment of E. coli MutL that retains all of the conserved
residues in the MutL family. The structure of MutL is homologous to that
of an ATPase-containing fragment of DNA gyrase. The authors demonstrated
that MutL binds and hydrolyzes ATP to ADP and Pi. Mutations in the MutL
family that cause deficiencies in DNA mismatch repair and a
predisposition to cancer mainly occur in the putative ATP-binding site.
Ban and Yang (1998) also provided evidence that the flexible, yet
conserved loops surrounding this ATP-binding site undergo conformational
changes upon ATP hydrolysis, thereby modulating interactions between
MutL and other components of the repair machinery.

Ellison et al. (2001) performed quantitative in vivo DNA mismatch repair
(MMR) assays in the yeast S. cerevisiae to determine the functional
significance of amino acid replacements in MLH1 and MSH2 genes observed
in the human population. Missense codons previously observed in human
genes were introduced at the homologous residue in the yeast MLH1 or
MSH2 genes. Three classes of missense codons were found: (i) complete
loss of function, i.e., mutations; (ii) variants indistinguishable from
wildtype protein, i.e., silent polymorphisms; and (iii) functional
variants which supported MMR at reduced efficiency, i.e., efficiency
polymorphisms. There was a good correlation between the functional
results in yeast and available human clinical data regarding penetrance
of the missense codon. The authors suggested that differences in the
efficiency of DNA MMR may exist between individuals in the human
population due to common polymorphisms.

Using bioinformatic analysis, Kosinski et al. (2010) determined that the
dimerization of MLH1 and PMS2 occurs via their C-terminal domains and
involves residues 531 to 549 and 740 to 756 in MLH1 and residues 679 to
699 and 847 to 862 in PMS2.

GENE STRUCTURE

Han et al. (1995) reported that the human MLH1 gene consists of 19
coding exons spanning approximately 100 kb. Exons 1 to 7 contain a
region that is highly conserved in the MLH1 and PMS1 genes of yeast.

MAPPING

Papadopoulos et al. (1994) mapped the MLH1 gene to chromosome 3p21.3 by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Bronner et al. (1994) mapped the
MLH1 gene to the same region, 3p23-p21.3, by fluorescence in situ
hybridization.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

The mapping of MLH1 to 3p21 was of interest because markers in that area
had been linked to hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer in several
families (Lindblom et al., 1993). Searching for mutations in the MLH1
gene, Papadopoulos et al. (1994) performed RT-PCR analyses of
lymphoblastoid cell RNA and directly sequenced the coding region of the
gene in 10 HNPCC kindreds linked to 3p markers. All affected individuals
from 7 Finnish kindreds exhibited a heterozygous deletion of codons 578
to 632. The derivation of 5 of these 7 kindreds could be traced to a
common ancestor, and the presence of the same presumptive defect in 2
other kindreds supported a 'founder effect' for many cases of HNPCC in
the Finnish population. Codons 578 to 632 were found to constitute a
single exon that was deleted from 1 allele in the 7 kindreds. This exon
encodes several highly conserved amino acids found at identical
positions in yeast MLH1. In another 3p-linked family, Papadopoulos et
al. (1994) observed a 4-nucleotide deletion beginning at the first
position of codon 727 and producing a frameshift with a new stop codon
located 166 nucleotides downstream. As a result, the C-terminal 19 amino
acids of MLH1 were substituted with 53 different amino acids, some
encoded by nucleotides normally in the 3-prime untranslated region.
Another kindred displayed a 4-nucleotide insertion between codons 755
and 756. This insertion resulted in a frameshift and extension of the
open reading frame to include 99 nucleotides downstream of the normal
stop codon. One cell line showed a transversion from TCA to TAA in codon
252, resulting in conversion of a serine to a stop (120436.0001).

Simultaneously and independently, Bronner et al. (1994) likewise
implicated the human MutL homolog, MLH1, in the form of HNPCC that maps
to 3p. In 1 chromosome 3-linked HNPCC family, they demonstrated a
missense mutation in affected individuals (120436.0002).

Using PCR-SSCP analysis and DNA sequencing to examine the entire coding
region of the MLH1 gene in DNAs of 34 unrelated cancer patients from
HNPCC pedigrees, Han et al. (1995) found germline mutations in 8 (24%):
4 missense mutations, 1 intron mutation that would affect splicing, and
3 frameshift mutations resulting in truncation of the gene product
downstream of the mutation site.

Maliaka et al. (1996) identified 6 different novel mutations in the MLH1
and MSH2 genes in Russian and Moldavian HNPCC families. Three of these
mutations occurred in CpG dinucleotides and led to a premature stop
codon, splicing defect, or an amino acid substitution in evolutionarily
conserved residues. Analysis of a compilation of published mutations
including the new data suggested to the authors that CpG dinucleotides
within the coding regions of the MSH2 and MLH1 genes are hotspots for
single basepair substitutions.

From a study of unrelated HNPCC families, Wijnen et al. (1996) commented
that, whereas the spectrum of mutations at the MSH2 gene is
heterogeneous, a cluster of MLH1 mutations were found in the region
encompassing exons 15 and 16, which accounts for 50% of all the
independent MLH1 mutations described to date. They stated that their
finding has great practical value in the design of clinical genetic
services.

By screening members of Finnish families displaying HNPCC for
predisposing germline mutations in MSH2 and MLH1, Nystrom-Lahti et al.
(1995) showed that 2 mutations in MLH1 together account for 63% (19/30)
of kindreds meeting international diagnostic criteria. One mutation,
originally detected as a 165-bp deletion in MLH1 cDNA comprising exon
16, was shown to represent a 3.5-kb genomic deletion most likely
resulting from Alu-mediated recombination (120436.0004). The second
mutation destroyed the splice acceptor site of exon 6 (120436.0005).
They commented that this was the first report of Alu-mediated
recombination causing a prevalent, dominantly inherited predisposition
to cancer. Nystrom-Lahti et al. (1995) designed a simple diagnostic test
based on PCR for both mutations. Thus 2 ancestral founding mutations
account for most Finnish HNPCC kindreds.

Sasaki et al. (1996) studied 43 tumors and corresponding normal tissues
from 23 Japanese patients with multiple primary cancers. They found no
germline mutations of the MLH1 gene and detected only 2 somatic missense
mutations among the 43 tumors examined. These 2 tumors had each shown
increased replication error (RER+) at more than 1 of the 5
microsatellite loci examined. Only the second of these 2 mutations
occurred in an evolutionarily conserved domain of the protein.

Jager et al. (1997) reported studies based on the Danish HNPCC register
comprising 28 families that fulfilled the Amsterdam criteria. They found
an intron 14 founder mutation in the MLH1 gene (120436.0007) in
approximately 25% of the kindreds and showed that it was associated with
an attenuated HNPCC phenotype characterized by a highly reduced
frequency of extracolonic tumors. The mutation was a combined 7-bp
deletion and 4-bp insertion that 'silenced the mutated allele,' i.e., it
was not expressed. Tumors exhibited microsatellite instability (MSI),
and loss of the wildtype MLH1 allele was prevalent. Jager et al. (1997)
proposed that the mutation resulted in a milder phenotype because the
mutated MLH1 protein was prevented from exerting a dominant-negative
effect on the concerted action of the mismatch repair system.

Huang et al. (2001) studied a family with HNPCC in which the proband was
diagnosed with colorectal cancer at the age of 14 years; her mother,
grandmother, and aunt had been diagnosed with HNPCC in their twenties.
DNA sequencing revealed that the proband was heterozygous for the R226X
mutation (120436.0011).

Shimodaira et al. (1998) described a new method for detecting mutations
in MLH1 HNPCC using a dominant mutator effect of MLH1 cDNA expressed in
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Most MLH1 missense mutations identified in
HNPCC patients abolish the dominant mutator effect. Furthermore, PCR
amplification of MLH1 cDNA from mRNA of an HNPCC patient, followed by in
vivo recombination into a gap expression vector, allowed detection of a
heterozygous loss-of-function missense mutation in MLH1 using this
method. This functional assay offers a simple method for detecting and
evaluating pathogenic mutations in MLH1.

Liu et al. (1999) described 2 missense mutations in exon 16 of the MLH1
gene associated with colorectal cancer (see 120436.0012 and
120436.0013). The tumors did not show MSI, raising some potentially
important issues. First, even microsatellite-negative colorectal tumors
can be associated with germline mutations, and these will be missed if
an MSI test is used to select patients for mutation screening. Second,
the lack of MSI in these cases suggested that the mechanism involved in
the carcinogenesis could be different from that generally hypothesized.

In colorectal cancer arising in young Hong Kong Chinese, a high
incidence of microsatellite instability and germline mismatch repair
gene mutation has been found. Most of the germline mutations involve the
MSH2 gene, which is different from the mutation spectrum in the Western
population. In the MLH1 gene, alternative splicing is common, which
complicates RNA-based mutation detection methods. In contrast, large
deletions in MLH1, commonly observed in some ethnic groups, tend to
escape detection by exon-by-exon direct DNA sequencing. Chan et al.
(2001) reported the detection of a novel germline 1.8-kb deletion
involving exon 11 of the MLH1 gene in a Hong Kong hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer family. The mutation generated an mRNA
transcript with deletion of exons 10 and 11, which is indistinguishable
from one of the most common and predominant MLH1 splice variants. A
diagnostic test based on PCR of the breakpoint region led to the
identification of an additional young colorectal cancer patient with
this mutation. Haplotype analysis suggested that the 2 patients may
share a common ancestral mutation. The results represented a caveat to
investigators in the interpretation of alternative splicing and the
important implications for the design of MLH1 mutation detection
strategy in the Chinese population. The proband of one family developed
colorectal cancer at the age of 33 years. The second patient with no
family history of cancer developed colorectal cancer at the age of 38
years.

Viel et al. (2002) examined a series of 52 patients belonging to HNPCC
or HNPCC-related families, all of whom had previously tested negative
for point mutations in MMR genes. Southern blot mutation screening of
the MLH1 and MSH2 genes revealed abnormal restriction patterns in 3
patients who carried distinct MLH1 internal deletions. Although Alu
repeats are likely to be implicated in most cases of such deletions,
different molecular mechanisms may be involved. In particular, HNPCC
resulting from L1-mediated recombination was identified by Viel et al.
(2002) as another mechanism for MMR inactivating mutations.

Gorlov et al. (2003) evaluated colocalization of pathogenic missense
mutations (found in individuals with HNPCC) with high-score exonic
splicing enhancer (ESE) motifs in the MSH2 and MLH1 genes. They found
that pathogenic missense mutations in these genes are located in ESE
sites significantly more frequently than expected. Pathogenic missense
mutations also tended to decrease ESE scores, thus leading to a high
propensity for splicing defects. In contrast, nonpathogenic missense
mutations and nonsense mutations are distributed randomly in relation to
ESE sites. Comparison of the observed and expected frequencies of
missense mutations in ESE sites showed that pathogenic effects of 20% or
more of mutations in MSH2 result from disruption of ESE sites and
disturbed splicing. Similarly, pathogenic effects of 16% or more of
missense mutations in MLH1 genes are ESE related. Thus, the
colocalization of pathogenic missense mutations with ESE sites strongly
suggests that their pathogenic effects are splicing related.

Most susceptibility to colorectal cancer (CRC) is not accounted for by
known risk factors. Because MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6 mutations underlie high
penetrance CRC susceptibility in HNPCC, Lipkin et al. (2004)
hypothesized that attenuated alleles might also underlie susceptibility
to sporadic CRC. They looked for gene variants associated with HNPCC in
Israeli probands with familial CRC unstratified with respect to the
microsatellite instability phenotype. Association studies identified a
new MLH1 variant (415G-C; 120436.0019) in approximately 1.3% of Israeli
CRC individuals self-described as Jewish, Christian, or Muslim. MLH1
415C conferred clinically significant susceptibility to CRC. In contrast
to classic HNPCC, CRCs associated with MLH1 415C usually did not have
the microsatellite instability (MSI) defect, which is important for
clinical mutation screening. Structural and functional analyses showed
that the normal ATPase function of MLH1 is attenuated, but not
eliminated, by the MLH1 415G-C mutation. These studies suggested that
variants of mismatch repair proteins with attenuated function may
account for a higher proportion of susceptibility to sporadic
microsatellite-stable CRC than theretofore assumed.

Oliveira et al. (2004) investigated KRAS (190070) in 158 HNPCC tumors
from patients with germline MLH1, MSH2, or MSH6 mutations, 166
microsatellite-unstable (MSI-H), and 688 microsatellite-stable (MSS)
sporadic carcinomas. All tumors were characterized for MSI and 81 of 166
sporadic MSI-H CRCs were analyzed for MLH1 promoter hypermethylation.
KRAS mutations were observed in 40% of HNPCC tumors, and the mutation
frequency varied upon the mismatch repair gene affected: 48% (29/61) in
MSH2, 32% (29/91) in MLH1, and 83% (5/6) in MSH6 (P = 0.01). KRAS
mutation frequency was different between HNPCC, MSS, and MSI-H
colorectal cancers (P = 0.002), and MSI-H with MLH1 hypermethylation (P
= 0.005). Furthermore, HNPCC colorectal cancers had more G13D
(190070.0003) mutations than MSS (P less than 0.0001), MSI-H (P = 0.02),
or MSI-H tumors with MLH1 hypermethylation (P = 0.03). HNPCC colorectal
and sporadic MSI-H tumors without MLH1 hypermethylation shared similar
KRAS mutation frequency, in particular G13D. Oliveira et al. (2004)
concluded that, depending on the genetic/epigenetic mechanism leading to
MSI-H, the outcome in terms of oncogenic activation may be different,
reinforcing the idea that HNPCC, sporadic MSI-H (depending on the MLH1
status), and MSS colorectal cancers may target distinct kinases within
the RAS/RAF/MAPK pathway.

Mangold et al. (2004) screened for mutations in the MSH2 and MLH1 genes
in 41 unrelated index patients diagnosed with Muir-Torre syndrome
(MRTES; 158320), most of whom were preselected for mismatch repair
deficiency in their tumor tissue. Germline mutations were identified in
27 patients (mutation detection rate of 66%). Mangold et al. (2004)
noted that 25 (93%) of the mutations were located in MSH2, in contrast
to HNPCC patients without the MRTES phenotype, in whom the proportions
of MLH1 and MSH2 mutations are almost equal (p less than 0.001). Mangold
et al. (2004) further noted that 6 (22%) of the mutation carriers did
not meet the Bethesda criteria for HNPCC and suggested that sebaceous
neoplasm be added to the HNPCC-specific malignancies in the Bethesda
guidelines.

Alazzouzi et al. (2005) studied the allelic distribution of
microsatellite repeat bat26 in peripheral blood lymphocytes of 6
carriers and 4 noncarriers from 2 HNPCC families harboring germline MLH1
and MSH2 mutations, respectively. In noncarriers, there was a gaussian
distribution with no bat26 alleles shorter than 21 adenine residues. All
6 MLH1/MSH2 mutation carriers showed unstable bat26 alleles (20 adenine
residues or shorter) with an overall frequency of 5.6% (102 of 1814
clones detected). Alazzouzi et al. (2005) suggested that detection of
short unstable bat26 alleles may assist in identifying asymptomatic
carriers belonging to families with no detectable MMR gene mutations.

Quehenberger et al. (2005) obtained estimates of the risk of colorectal
cancer (CRC) and endometrial cancer (EC) for carriers of disease-causing
mutations of the MSH2 and MLH1 genes. Families with known germline
mutations of these genes were extracted from the Dutch HNPCC cancer
registry. Ascertainment-corrected maximum likelihood estimation was
carried out on a competing risks model for CRC and EC. The MSH2 and MHL1
loci were analyzed jointly as there was no significant difference in
risk (p = 0.08). At age 70, CRC risk for men was 26.7% (95% CI, 12.6 to
51.0%) and for women, 22.4% (10.6 to 43.8%); the risk for EC was 31.5%
(11.1 to 70.3%). These estimates of risk were considerably lower than
ones previously used which did not account for the selection of
families.

Changes in the coding sequence, which may or may not affect the encoded
protein sequence, may disrupt exon splicing enhancers (ESEs), leading to
exon skipping. ESEs are short, degenerate, frequently purine-rich
sequences that are important in both constitutive and alternative
splicing. ESEs have been identified in a large number of genes, and
their disruption has been linked to several genetic disorders, including
HNPCC (Stella et al., 2001), cystic fibrosis (219700), Marfan syndrome
(154700), and Becker muscular dystrophy (300376). McVety et al. (2006)
studied a 3-bp deletion at the 5-prime end of exon 3 of MLH1
(120436.0023), resulting in deletion of exon 3 from RNA. Splicing assays
suggested that the inclusion of exon 3 in mRNA was ESE-dependent. The
exon 3 ESE was not recognized by all available motif-scoring matrices,
highlighting the importance of RNA analysis in the detection of
ESE-disrupting mutations.

Pagenstecher et al. (2006) examined 19 variants in the MLH1 and MSH2
genes detected in patients with HNPCC for expression at the RNA level.
Ten of the 19 were found to affect splicing, including several variants
which were predicted to be missense mutations in exonic sequences (see,
e.g., 120436.0024). The findings suggested that mRNA examination of MLH1
and MSH2 mutations should precede functional tests at the protein
levels.

Without preselection and regardless of family history, Barnetson et al.
(2006) recruited 870 patients under the age of 55 years soon after they
received the diagnosis of colorectal cancer. They studied these patients
for germline mutations in DNA mismatch-repair genes MLH1, MSH2 (609309),
and MSH6 (600678) and developed a 2-stage model by multivariate logistic
regression for the prediction of the presence of mutations in these
genes. Stage 1 of the model incorporated only clinical variables; stage
2 comprised analysis of the tumor by immunohistochemical staining and
tests for microsatellite instability. The model was validated in an
independent population of patients. Furthermore, they analyzed 2,938
patient-years of follow-up to determine whether genotype influenced
survival. Among the 870 participants, 38 mutations were found: 15 in
MLH1, 16 in MSH2, and 7 in MSH6. Carrier frequencies in men (6%) and
women (3%) differed significantly (P less than 0.04). Survival among
carriers was not significantly different from that among noncarriers.

Tournier et al. (2008) examined potential splicing defects of 56
unclassified variants in the MLH1 gene and 31 in the MSH2 gene that were
identified in 82 French patients with Lynch syndrome. The variants
comprised 54 missense mutations, 10 synonymous changes, 20 intronic
variants, and 3 single-codon deletions. The authors developed an ex vivo
splicing assay by inserting PCR-amplified transcripts from patient
genomic DNA into a reporter minigene that was transfected into HeLa
cells. The ex vivo splicing assay showed that 22 of 85 variant alleles
affected splicing, including 4 exonic variants that affected putative
splicing regulatory elements. The study provided a tool for evaluating
putative pathogenic effects of unclassified variants found in these
genes.

Tang et al. (2009) identified pathogenic mutations or deletions in the
MLH1 or MSH2 gene in 61 (66%) of 93 Taiwanese families with HNPCC.
Forty-two families had MLH1 mutations, including 13 with the R265C
mutation (120436.0030) and 5 with a 3-bp deletion (1846delAAG;
120436.0018). Thirteen of the MLH1 mutations were novel, and 6 large
MLH1 deletions were also found. One family harbored MLH1 and MSH2
mutations.

Using structural modeling, Kosinski et al. (2010) identified 19
different MLH1 alterations located in the C-terminal domain involved in
dimerization with PMS2. Three changes, Q542L, L749P, and Y750X, caused
decreased coexpression of PMS2, which was unstable in the absence of
interaction with MLH1, suggesting that these 3 alterations interfered
with MLH1-PMS2 dimerization. In vitro studies showed that all 3 changes
compromised mismatch repair, suggesting that defects in dimerization can
abrogate proper MLH1 function. Additional biochemical studies showed
that 4 alterations with uncertain pathogenicity (A586P, L636P, T662P,
and R755W), could be considered deleterious because of poor expression
or poor MMR efficiency. Finally, some variants (e.g., K618A;
120436.0012), which were previously classified as deleterious, were
determined to have normal MMR activity.

- Constitutional Epigenetic Mutations, 'Germline Epimutation'

Herman et al. (1998) reported that hypermethylation of the 5-prime CpG
island of the MLH1 gene is found in most sporadic primary colorectal
cancers with MSI and that this methylation was often, but not
invariably, associated with loss of MLH1 protein expression. Such
methylation also occurred, but was less prominent, in MSI-negative
tumors, as well as in MSI-positive tumors with known mutations of a
mismatch repair gene. No hypermethylation of MSH2 was found.
Hypermethylation of colorectal cancer cell lines with MSI also was
frequently observed, and in such cases, reversal of the methylation with
5-aza-2-prime-deoxycytidine not only resulted in reexpression of MLH1
protein, but also in restoration of the mismatch repair capacity in
MMR-deficient cell lines. The results suggested that MSI in sporadic
colorectal cancer often results from epigenetic inactivation of MLH1 in
association with DNA methylation.

Germline defects in DNA mismatch repair genes account for the inherited
familial cancer syndrome of hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancers in
which affected individuals show accelerated development of cancers of
the proximal colon, endometrium (608089), and stomach. These cancers
typically demonstrate inactivation of the residual wildtype MMR allele
inherited opposite the germline mutant, absence of DNA MMR activity in
in vitro assays, and acquisition of an in vivo mutator phenotype showing
up to 1,000-fold increased gene mutation rates. Additionally, these
cancers display an associated instability of genomic MSI. MSI is
similarly found in approximately 15 to 20% of sporadic colon cancers
that arise in individuals without any family history of colon cancer.
Like HNPCC-associated colon cancers, sporadic MSI colon cancers arise
predominantly in the proximal colon and show a high rate of frameshift
mutations at a mutation hotspot in the transforming growth factor-beta
type II receptor tumor suppressor gene (TGFBR2; 190182). Familial and
sporadic MSI colon cancers thus appear to share a common carcinogenic
pathway. Liu et al. (1995) established that MMR gene inactivation via
somatic mutation was the cause of some cases of sporadic MSI colon
cancers. However, unexpectedly, in many sporadic MSI colon cancers, MMR
genes were found to remain wildtype. MMR coding sequences were similarly
reported to be wildtype in many sporadic MSI endometrial cancers
(Katabuchi et al., 1995). Kane et al. (1997) described methylation of
the MLH1 promoter region in some MSI tumors. Veigl et al. (1998)
investigated a group of MSI cancer cell lines, most of which were
documented as established from antecedent MSI-positive malignant tumors.
In 5 of 6 such cases, they found that MLH1 protein was absent, even
though MLH1-coding sequences were wildtype. In each case, absence of
MLH1 protein was associated with the methylation of the MLH1 gene
promoter. Furthermore, in each case, treatment with the demethylating
agent 5-azacytidine induced expression of the absent MLH1 protein.
Moreover, in single cell clones, MLH1 expression could be turned on,
off, and on again by 5-azacytidine exposure, washout, and reexposure.
This epigenetic inactivation of MLH1 additionally accounted for the
silencing of both maternal and paternal tumor MLH1 alleles, both of
which could be reactivated by 5-azacytidine. Thus, substantial numbers
of human MSI cancers appear to arise by MLH1 silencing via an epigenetic
mechanism that can inactivate both of the MLH1 alleles. Promoter
methylation is intimately associated with this epigenetic silencing
mechanism.

Approximately 20% of endometrial cancers, the fifth most common cancer
of women worldwide, exhibit MSI. Although the frequency of MSI is higher
in endometrial cancers than in any other common malignancy, the genetic
basis of MSI in these tumors had remained elusive. Simpkins et al.
(1999) investigated the role that methylation of the MLH1 DNA mismatch
repair gene plays in the genesis of MSI in a large series of sporadic
endometrial cancers. The MLH1 promoter was methylated in 41 of 53 (77%)
MSI-positive cancers investigated. In MSI-negative tumors, on the other
hand, there was evidence for limited methylation in only 1 of 11 tumors
studied. Immunohistochemical investigation of a subset of the tumors
revealed that methylation of the MLH1 promoter in MSI-positive tumors
was associated with loss of MLH1 expression. Immunohistochemistry proved
that 2 MSI-positive tumors lacking MLH1 methylation failed to express
the MSH2 mismatch repair gene. Both of these cancers came from women who
had family and medical histories suggestive of inherited cancer
susceptibility. These observations suggested that epigenetic changes in
the MLH1 locus account for MSI in most cases of sporadic endometrial
cancers and provide additional evidence that the MSH2 gene may
contribute substantially to inherited forms of endometrial cancer.

Wheeler et al. (2000) studied 10 MSI-positive sporadic colorectal
cancers and 10 colorectal cancers from individuals with HNPCC. The
promoter region of the MLH1 gene was hypermethylated in 7 of the 10
MSI-positive sporadic cancers but in none of the HNPCC cancers. LOH at
MLH1 was observed in 8 of the 10 HNPCC colorectal cancers. Wheeler et
al. (2000) concluded that while the mutations and allelic loss are
responsible for the MSI-positive phenotype in HNPCC cancers, the
majority of MSI-positive sporadic cancers are hypermethylated in the
promoter region of MLH1; therefore, tumors from HNPCC patients acquire a
raised mutation rate through a different pathway than MSI-positive
sporadic tumors.

Epigenetic silencing can mimic genetic mutation by abolishing expression
of a gene. Suter et al. (2004) hypothesized that an epimutation could
occur in any gene as a germline event that predisposes to disease and
looked for examples in tumor suppressor genes in individuals with
cancer. They reported 2 individuals with soma-wide, allele-specific and
mosaic hypermethylation of the DNA mismatch repair gene MLH1. Both
individuals lacked evidence of genetic mutation in any mismatch repair
gene but had had multiple primary tumors that showed mismatch repair
deficiency, and both met clinical criteria for hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer.

Suter et al. (2004) reported methylation of the MLH1 promoter in a small
proportion of FACS-sorted spermatozoa from an individual who harbored a
soma-wide MLH1 epimutation. In an addendum to the report of Suter et al.
(2004) and in a correspondence, Hitchins and Ward (2007) described
reassessment of spermatozoa from the original individual using 2
quantitative techniques. They included methylation analysis of the
imprinted control gene SNRPN (182279), which is unmethylated in
spermatozoa cells. Their new data indicated that the MLH1 methylation
previously reported in spermatozoa was most likely an artifact,
attributable to a low level of contamination of the sample with either
somatic cells or free DNA derived from somatic cells. These data altered
the original interpretation that incomplete resetting of the epigenetic
mark on MLH1 had occurred in a proportion of the individual's
spermatozoa and suggested instead that reversal is complete in the
actual gametes.

Persons who have hypermethylation of 1 allele of MLH1 in somatic cells
throughout the body (a germline epimutation) have a predisposition for
the development of cancer in a pattern typical of hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. By studying the families of 2 such
persons, Hitchins et al. (2007) found evidence that the epimutation was
transmitted from a mother to her son but was erased in his spermatozoa.
The affected maternal allele was inherited by 3 other sibs from these 2
families, but in those offspring the allele had reverted to the normal
active state. These findings demonstrated a novel pattern of inheritance
of cancer susceptibility and were consistent with transgenerational
epigenetic inheritance.

Gosden and Feinberg (2007) referred to genetics and epigenetics as
'nature's pen-and-pencil set.' They suggested that transmission of
epimutations in MLH1 may have more general relevance than appears at
first site. Perhaps it is rather common for disease to be caused by the
failure of both the pen and pencil to write correctly. Bjornsson et al.
(2004) suggested an integrated epigenetic and genetic approach to common
human disease. The genetic and epigenetic model of common
diseases--including neuropsychiatric and rheumatologic diseases and
cancer--suggest that the epigenotype modulates genetic effects. The
epigenotype, in turn, is affected by the environment, the epigenotype of
the parents, age, and the genotype at loci that regulate DNA methylation
and chromatin.

Hitchins and Ward (2009) reviewed the etiologic role of constitutional
MLH1 epimutations (see, e.g., 120436.0015) in the development of
HNPCC-related cancers.

Crepin et al. (2012) identified constitutional MLH1 epimutations in 2
(1.5%) of 134 patients suspected of having Lynch syndrome who did not
have germline mutations in the MMR genes. One patient was a man who
developed colorectal cancer at age 35 years. Tumor tissue showed MSI,
and analysis of lymphocyte DNA showed complete hypermethylation of the
promoter of 1 MLH1 allele. The second patient was a woman with
colorectal cancer, who had a son with colorectal cancer and 2 daughters
with dysplastic colonic polyps. Blood from the mother showed 20%
hypermethylation at the MLH1 promoter, suggesting mosaicism. The son and
1 affected daughter also showed partial hypermethylation in blood,
suggesting transmission of the epimutation through the germline. Tumor
tissue from the 3 patients in the second family also showed partial
hypermethylation at MLH1, and tumor tissue from the daughter also
carried a somatic BRAF mutation (164757.0001).

Ward et al. (2013) screened 416 individuals with colorectal cancer
showing loss of MLH1 expression but without deleterious germline
mutations in MLH1. Constitutive DNA samples were screened for MLH1
methylation in all subjects and for promoter sequence changes in 357
individuals. Constitutional MLH1 epimutations were identified in 16
subjects. Of these, 7 (1.7%) had mono- or hemi-allelic methylation and 8
had low-level methylation (2%). Ward et al. (2013) concluded that
although rare, sequence changes in the regulatory region of MLH1 and
aberrant methylation may alone or together predispose to the development
of cancer and suggested that screening for these changes is warranted in
individuals who have a negative germline sequence screen of MLH1 and
loss of MLH1 expression in their tumor.

- Mismatch Repair Cancer Syndrome

Mismatch repair cancer syndrome (276300), sometimes referred to as brain
tumor-polyposis syndrome-1 or Turcot syndrome, results from biallelic
mutations in the mismatch repair genes. The phenotype classically
includes colorectal adenomas and brain tumors, most often glioblastoma.
However, Trimbath et al. (2001) and Ostergaard et al. (2005) noted that
the original definition may be too restrictive, and suggested that the
full manifestation of biallelic mutations in MMR genes includes the
additional findings of early-onset hematologic malignancies and
cafe-au-lait spots suggestive of neurofibromatosis-1 (NF1; 162200).

Hamilton et al. (1995) identified a mutation in the MLH1 gene
(120436.0003) in a patient with brain tumor-polyposis syndrome-1. He had
hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, glioblastoma, and transitional
cell carcinoma of the ureter. Tumor tissue samples showed DNA
replication errors.

Ricciardone et al. (1999) reported 3 sibs in an HNPCC family who
developed hematologic malignancy at a very early age, 2 of whom
displayed signs of NF1. DNA sequence analysis and allele-specific
amplification in 2 of the sibs revealed a homozygous MLH1 mutation
(120436.0010). Wang et al. (1999) described a typical HNPCC family in
which MMR-deficient children who were homozygous for an MLH1 mutation
(120436.0011) exhibited clinical features of de novo NF1 and early onset
of extracolonic cancers. The observations demonstrated that MMR
deficiency is compatible with human development but may lead to
mutations during embryogenesis. Based on these observations, Wang et al.
(1999) speculated that the NF1 gene is a preferential target for such
alterations.

Wang et al. (2003) demonstrated that somatic mutations of the NF1 gene
occur more commonly in MMR-deficient cells. They observed NF1
alterations in 5 of 10 tumor cell lines with microsatellite instability
compared to none of 5 MMR-proficient tumor cell lines. Somatic NF1
mutations were also detected in 2 primary tumors exhibiting
microsatellite instability.

ANIMAL MODEL

Baker et al. (1996) generated mice with a null mutation of the Mlh1
gene. They reported that in addition to compromising replication
fidelity, Mlh1 deficiency appeared to cause both male and female
sterility associated with reduced levels of chiasmata. Mlh1-deficient
spermatocytes exhibited high levels of prematurely separated chromosomes
and cell cycle arrest occurred in the first division of meiosis. Baker
et al. (1996) also carried out analysis of the Mlh1 protein in
spermatocytes and oocytes using immunostaining. They demonstrated that
Mlh1 localizes at chiasma sites on meiotic chromosomes. They concluded
that Mlh1 in the mouse is involved in both DNA mismatch repair and
meiotic crossing over.

Linkage maps constructed from genetic analysis of gene order and
crossover frequency provide few clues to the basis of genomewide
distribution of meiotic recombination which might point to variation in
chromosome structure that influences meiotic recombination. To bridge
that gap, Froenicke et al. (2002) generated a cytologic recombination
map that identified individual autosomes in the male mouse. They
prepared synaptonemal complex (SC) meiotic chromosome spreads from mouse
spermatocytes, identified each autosome by multicolor FISH using
chromosome-specific DNA libraries, and mapped more than 2,000 sites of
recombination along individual autosomes, using immunolocalization of
Mlh1, which as a mismatch repair protein marks crossover sites. They
showed that SC length strongly correlated with crossover frequency and
distribution. Although the length of most of these SCs corresponded to
that predicted from their mitotic chromosome length rank, several SCs
were longer or shorter than expected, with corresponding increases and
decreases in Mlh1 frequency. Although all bivalents shared certain
recombination features, such as few crossovers near the centromeres and
a high rate of distal recombination, individual bivalents had unique
patterns of crossover distribution along their length. In addition to SC
length, other unidentified factors influenced crossover distribution,
leading to hot regions on individual chromosomes with recombination
frequencies as much as 6 times higher than average, as well as coldspots
with no recombination. By reprobing the SC spreads with genetically
mapped BACs, Froenicke et al. (2002) demonstrated a robust strategy for
integrating genetic linkage and physical contig maps with mitotic and
meiotic chromosome structure.

Avdievich et al. (2008) generated transgenic mice with a G67R mutation
in the Mlh1 gene located in 1 of the ATP-binding domains. Although cells
derived from homozygous mice showed defects in DNA repair, the mutation
did not affect the cellular response to DNA damage, including the
apoptotic response of epithelial cells in the intestinal mucosa. The
mice displayed a strong predisposition to cancer but developed
significantly fewer intestinal tumors compared to Mlh1-null mice.
Mlh1-null mice did show defects in the cellular response to DNA damage.
These findings suggested that missense mutations in the Mlh1 gene may
affect MMR tumor suppressor function in a tissue-specific manner. In
addition, homozygous G67R mice were sterile due to the inability of the
mutant protein to interact with meiotic chromosomes at pachynema,
demonstrating that the ATPase activity of Mlh1 is essential for
fertility in mammals.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, SER252TER

In a colorectal tumor cell line (H6) (609310) manifesting microsatellite
instability, Papadopoulos et al. (1994) used a technique that involves
the transcription and translation in vitro of PCR products to
demonstrate that only a truncated polypeptide was produced. Sequence
analysis of the cDNA revealed a C-to-A transversion at codon 252,
resulting in the substitution of a stop codon for serine. No band at the
normal C position was identified in the cDNA or genomic DNA from the H6
cells, indicating that these cells were devoid of a wildtype MLH1
allele.

.0002
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, SER44PHE

In a family with hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer (609310), Bronner
et al. (1994) found that 4 affected individuals were heterozygous for a
C-to-T substitution in an exon encoding amino acids 41 to 69, which
corresponds to a highly conserved region of the protein. The nucleotide
substitution resulted in a ser44-to-phe amino acid change.

.0003
MISMATCH REPAIR CANCER SYNDROME
MLH1, 3-BP DEL, LYS618DEL

In a man with mismatch repair cancer syndrome (276300), Hamilton et al.
(1995) identified a 3-bp deletion (AAG) in the MLH1 gene, resulting in
the loss of a lysine at codon 618. The patient had adenocarcinomas of
the ascending and transverse colon at the age of 30, adenomas of the
descending and sigmoid colon at the ages of 32 and 33, and an ileal
adenocarcinoma and a glioblastoma multiforme at the age of 33. There was
a family history of HNPCC. The patient was also reported to have a
transitional cell carcinoma of the ureter.

.0004
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, 3.5-KB DEL

Nystrom-Lahti et al. (1995) found that a 3.5-kb genomic deletion in the
MLH1 gene was responsible for 14 of 30 Finnish kindreds meeting
international diagnostic criteria for HNPCC (609310). The origins of the
families were clustered in the south-central region of Finland. The
mutation consisted of exon 15 and the proximal 2.4 kb of intron 15
joined to a distal half of intron 16 followed by intron 17. Introns 15
and 16 were found to be rich in Alu repetitive sequences. Sequence
analysis of the deletion breakpoint region in both mutant and normal
alleles suggested to Nystrom-Lahti et al. (1995) that the deletion may
have been due to recombination between 2 Alu repeat elements, 1 in
intron 15 and another in intron 16.

This large deletion mutation and the splice site mutation leading to
deletion of exon 6 (120436.0005), referred to by Moisio et al. (1996) as
mutations 1 and 2 respectively, are frequent among Finnish kindreds with
HNPCC. In order to assess the ages and origins of these mutations,
Moisio et al. (1996) constructed a map of 15 microsatellite markers
around MLH1 and used this information and haplotype analyses of 19
kindreds with mutation 1 and 6 kindreds with mutation 2. All kindreds
with mutation 1 showed a single allele for the intragenic marker D3S1611
that was not observed on any unaffected chromosome. They also shared
portions of a haplotype of markers encompassing 2.0 to 19.0 cM around
MLH1. All kindreds with mutation 2 shared another allele for D3S1611 and
a conserved haplotype of 5 to 14 markers spanning 2.0 to 15.0 cM around
MLH1. The degree of haplotype conservation was used to estimate the ages
of these 2 mutations. The analyses suggested to the authors that the
spread of mutation 1 started 16 to 43 generations (400 to 1,075 years)
ago and that of mutation 2 started 5 to 21 generations (125 to 525
years) ago. These datings were compatible with genealogic results
identifying a common ancestor born in the 16th and 18th century,
respectively. The results indicated to Moisio et al. (1996) that all
Finnish kindreds studied to date showing either mutation 1 or mutation 2
were the result of single ancestral founding mutations relatively recent
in origin in the population. Alternatively, it is possible that the
mutations arose elsewhere and were introduced into Finland more
recently.

.0005
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, IVS5, G-A, -1

In 5 Finnish families with HNPCC (609310), Nystrom-Lahti et al. (1995)
found that a splice site mutation in the MLH1 gene was responsible. The
mutation consisted of a G-to-A transition in the -1 position of the
splice acceptor site in intron 5. This resulted in deletion of the 92-bp
segment corresponding to exon 6 and caused a frameshift that led to a
premature stop codon 24-bp downstream.

See also Moisio et al. (1996) and 120436.0004.

.0006
MUIR-TORRE SYNDROME
MLH1, 370-BP DEL

Muir-Torre syndrome (MRTES; 158320) is an autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by development of sebaceous gland tumors and skin cancers,
including keratoacanthomas and basal cell carcinomas. Affected family
members may manifest a wide spectrum of internal malignancies, which
include colorectal, endometrial, urologic, and upper gastrointestinal
neoplasms. Sebaceous gland tumors, which are rare in the general
population, are considered to be the hallmark of MRTES, and may arise
prior to the development of other visceral cancers. Hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer shares many features in common with
MRTES, leading Lynch et al. (1985) to propose that these 2 syndromes
have a common genetic basis. Bapat et al. (1996) found a mutation in
MLH1 locus in a large, well-characterized kindred in which 17 affected
family members had colorectal and endometrial cancers, sebaceous gland
tumors, and hematopoietic malignancies. The family was originally
reported by Green et al. (1994) who excluded linkage to the MSH2 locus
(609309). Paraf et al. (1995) also described this family. Bapat et al.
(1996) studied 2 affected sibs and found by a protein-truncation test
(PTT) a truncated gene product of approximately 41 kD in addition to the
expected wildtype MLH1 protein of 53.9 kD. Further analysis discovered a
deletion of 370 bp (codons 346-467) corresponding to exon 12 of MLH1
cDNA. An examination of the MLH1 sequence indicated that deletion
generated a frameshift resulting in a stop codon at nucleotides
1472-1474 in exon 13 and a truncated protein of 40.8 kD. Linkage
analysis with an intragenic marker indicated that the affected parent
was heterozygous and the unaffected parent homozygous for the wildtype
allele.

.0007
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, IVS14DS, 7-BP DEL AND 4-BP INS

In 5 of 21 Danish families with HNPCC (609310) satisfying the Amsterdam
criteria, Jager et al. (1997) found a splice-donor mutation in intron 14
of MLH1: a combined 7-bp deletion and 4-bp insertion that led to the
exchange of the obligatory thymidine at position +2 and the exchange of
conserved purines at positions +3 to +5 in the splice donor site. Only 2
of 25 affected individuals suffered from extracolonic cancer. One
patient had endometrial cancer by the age of 33 years and 3 successive
colorectal cancers. The second patient had cancer of the ampulla of
vater by the age of 54 years and 4 colorectal cancers. The phenotype in
the families with the intron 14 mutation corresponded to Lynch syndrome
I. In 4 families with other types of intronic and splice site mutations,
almost 50% of affected individuals had extracolonic tumors corresponding
to Lynch syndrome II. Jager et al. (1997) suggested that clinical
surveillance could be restricted to colonic examinations in HNPCC gene
carriers with monoallelic MLH1 expression.

.0008
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, HIS329PRO

In a family that fulfilled the Amsterdam criteria of HNPCC (609310)
(Vasen et al., 1991), Wang et al. (1997) identified a his329-to-pro
germline mutation. That this mutation was of pathogenetic significance
was proved by finding the same missense mutation as a somatic event
('second hit') in colonic tumors of 2 other HNPCC patients who had
germline mutations at different sites of the MLH1 gene.

.0009
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, 1-BP DEL, 1784T

In a French-Canadian kindred, Yuan et al. (1998) found that a novel
truncating mutation, 1784delT, was associated with HNPCC (609310). The
I1307K APC polymorphism (175100.0029) was also segregating in the
family. This polymorphism, associated with an increased risk of
colorectal cancer, had previously been identified only in individuals of
self-reported Ashkenazi Jewish origin. In the French-Canadian family,
there appeared to be no relationship between the I1307K polymorphism and
the presence or absence of cancer.

.0010
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MISMATCH REPAIR CANCER SYNDROME, INCLUDED
MLH1, ARG226TER

In a hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (609310) family from
Turkey, Ricciardone et al. (1999) identified 3 sibs, born of
consanguineous parents, who developed hematologic malignancy at a very
early age, 2 of whom displayed signs of type I neurofibromatosis (NF1;
162200). Sequence analysis in the 3 sibs demonstrated homozygosity for a
676C-T mutation in the MLH1 gene, leading to an arg226-to-ter mutation
(R226X). Hematologic malignancy was diagnosed in all 3 by the age of 3
years. Both parents had colon cancer at an early age. The phenotype in
the sibs was consistent with the mismatch repair cancer syndrome
(276300), which manifests features of NF1 and hematologic malignancies.

Huang et al. (2001) studied a family with HNPCC in which the proband was
diagnosed with colorectal cancer at the age of 14 years; her mother,
grandmother, and aunt had been diagnosed with HNPCC in their twenties.
DNA sequencing revealed that she was heterozygous for the R226X
mutation. As this mutation is 2 bp from the 3-prime end of exon 8 and
might affect donor splicing, an in vitro transcription translation assay
was performed and confirmed the presence of the truncated peptide, which
lacked the critical PMS2-binding regions at its C terminus.

.0011
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MISMATCH REPAIR CANCER SYNDROME, INCLUDED
MLH1, GLY67TRP

In 2 affected members of a consanguineous North African family in which
11 members of multiple generations developed colorectal cancers
(609310), 8 of them before the age of 50 years, Wang et al. (1999)
identified a heterozygous G-to-T transversion in exon 2 of the MLH1
gene, resulting in a gly67-to-trp (G67W) substitution. Two female
children who were homozygous for the mutation had early onset of
hematologic neoplastic disorders, including undifferentiated non-Hodgkin
malignant lymphoma, acute myeloid leukemia, and a medulloblastoma,
consistent with mismatch repair cancer syndrome (276300). In addition,
both sisters had clinical features of type I neurofibromatosis (NF1;
162200): one had multiple but strictly hemicorporal cafe-au-lait macules
and a pseudarthrosis of the tibia, whereas the other had 9 cafe-au-lait
spots. No other family member had NF1.

.0012
RECLASSIFIED - VARIANT OF UNKNOWN SIGNIFICANCE
MLH1, LYS618ALA

This variant, formerly titled COLON CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS,
TYPE 2, has been reclassified based on the findings of Kosinski et al.
(2010).

Liu et al. (1999) described 2 germline missense mutations in exon 16 of
the MLH1 gene associated with colorectal cancer (609310): lys618 to ala
and glu578 to gly (120436.0013). The tumors did not show the usual DNA
microsatellite instability (MSI) and would have been missed if this
method was used for selection of patients for mutation screening.

Using in vitro functional expression studies, Kosinski et al. (2010)
demonstrated that the K618A variant was fully expressed and retained MMR
activity, and that PMS2 (600259) was stable. The authors classified
K618A as a variant of uncertain significance rather than as disease
causing.

.0013
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, GLU578GLY

See 120436.0012 and Liu et al. (1999).

.0014
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MISMATCH REPAIR CANCER SYNDROME, INCLUDED
MLH1, EX16DEL

Vilkki et al. (2001) identified a homozygous deletion of exon 16 of the
MLH1 gene in a 4-year-old girl who died unexpectedly of brain hemorrhage
caused by glioma. She also had cafe-au-lait spots, including multiple
axillary freckles characteristic of NF1 (see 162200) without other
features of NF1. The phenotype in this girl was consistent with the
spectrum of mismatch repair cancer syndrome (276300). Both parents, who
had family histories of HNPCC (609310), were heterozygous for the
deletion.

.0015
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, HYPERMETHYLATION

Gazzoli et al. (2002) examined 14 cases suspected to represent
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma (609310) with
microsatellite instability (MSI), but in which no germline MSH2
(609309), MSH6 (600678), or MLH1 mutations were detected, for
hypermethylation of CpG sites in the critical promoter region of MLH1.
The methylation patterns were determined using methylation-specific PCR
and by sequence analysis of sodium bisulfite-treated genomic DNA. In 1
case, DNA hypermethylation of 1 allele was detected in DNA isolated from
blood. In the tumor from this case, which showed high microsatellite
instability, the unmethylated MLH1 allele was eliminated by loss of
heterozygosity, and the methylated allele was retained. This biallelic
inactivation resulted in loss of expression of MLH1 in the tumor as
confirmed by immunohistochemistry. These results suggested a novel mode
of germline inactivation of a cancer susceptibility gene.

Morak et al. (2008) identified hypermethylation of the MLH1 proximal
promoter region in peripheral blood cells of 12 (13%) of 94 unrelated
patients with tumors and loss of MLH1 protein expression without
mutations in the MLH1 gene. Normal colonic tissue, buccal mucosa, and
tumor tissue available from 3 patients also showed abnormal methylation
at the MLH1 promoter. Seven patients who were heterozygous for
informative SNPs showed allele-specific methylation that was not
restricted to either allelic variant. Five patients had about 50%
methylation, consistent with complete methylation of 1 allele. One
patient showed 100% methylation, and the rest showed mosaicism or
incomplete methylation. Hypermethylation was found in 1 mother-son pair,
suggesting familial predisposition for an epimutation. However, there
was no evidence for epigenetic inheritance in the remaining families,
and 6 patients showed a mosaic or incomplete methylation pattern, which
argued against inheritance. Morak et al. (2008) concluded that MLH1
hypermethylation in normal body cells may constitute a pre-lesion, and
that patients with such defects should be under surveillance.

Crepin et al. (2012) identified constitutional MLH1 epimutations in 2
(1.5%) of 134 patients suspected of having Lynch syndrome who did not
have germline mutations in the MMR genes. One patient was a man who
developed colorectal cancer at age 35 years. Tumor tissue showed MSI,
and analysis of lymphocyte DNA showed complete hypermethylation of the
promoter of 1 MLH1 allele. The second patient was a woman with
colorectal cancer, who had a son with colorectal cancer and 2 daughters
with dysplastic colonic polyps. Blood from the mother showed 20%
hypermethylation at the MLH1 promoter, suggesting mosaicism. The son and
1 affected daughter also showed partial hypermethylation in blood,
suggesting transmission of the epimutation through the germline. Tumor
tissue from the 3 patients in the second family also showed partial
hypermethylation at MLH1, with loss of MLH1 expression in 2. Finally,
tumor tissue from the daughter also carried a somatic BRAF mutation
(164757.0001).

.0016
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, -42, C-T

Green et al. (2003) described, in a Newfoundland kindred, the first
report of a heritable MLH1 promoter mutation in HNPCC (609310). The
-42C-T mutation was within a putative Myb protooncogene (189990) binding
site. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, they demonstrated
that the mutated Myb binding sequence was less effective in binding
nuclear proteins than the wildtype promoter sequence. Using in vivo
transfection experiments in HeLa cells, they further demonstrated that
the mutated promoter had only 37% of the activity of the wildtype
promoter in driving the expression of a reporter gene. The average age
of onset in 6 family members affected with colorectal cancer was 62
years, which is substantially later than the typical age of onset in
HNPCC families. This finding was considered consistent with the
substantial decrease, but not total elimination, of mismatch repair
function in affected members of this kindred.

.0017
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, THR117MET

The majority of mutations associated with HNPCC occur in the MSH2
(609309) and MLH1 genes (see 120435 and 609310, respectively). Wei et
al. (2003) studied these 2 genes in 15 Taiwanese HNPCC kindreds meeting
the Amsterdam criteria, using both RNA- and DNA-based methods. In the 15
kindreds they found no MSH2 mutations and mutations in MLH1 in 3
kindreds (20%), which is lower than that reported in other countries.
Two novel deletions were found and 1 mutation had been reported several
times in western countries (Maliaka et al., 1996; Liu et al., 1996;
Trojan et al., 2002). A C-to-T transition in codon 117 in exon 4
resulted in an amino acid change from threonine to methionine.

.0018
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, LYS616DEL

In 4 cases of hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (609310), Taylor
et al. (2003) found deletion of 3 nucleotides: 1846-1848delAAG resulting
in deletion of lys616 (K616del) from the MLH1 protein. This mutation had
been previously observed by Miyaki et al. (1995). Taylor et al. (2003)
used the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLDA) assay
to demonstrate the deletion.

Tang et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 1846delAAG mutation in
affected members of 5 Taiwanese families with HNPCC2.

.0019
COLORECTAL CANCER, SPORADIC, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
MLH1, ASP132HIS

Using a novel high density oligonucleotide array (HNPCC Chip) to look
for variants in the MLH1, MSH2 (609309), and MSH6 (600678) genes in
Israeli probands with familial colorectal cancer (CRC; 114500)
unstratified with respect to the microsatellite instability phenotype,
Lipkin et al. (2004) identified a 415G-C translation in the MLH1 gene,
resulting in an asp132-to-his (D132H) amino acid substitution. MLH1 415C
conferred clinically significant susceptibility to CRC. In contrast to
classic HNPCC, CRCs associated with MLH1 415C usually did not have the
microsatellite instability (MSI) defect, which is important for clinical
mutation screening. Structural and functional analyses showed that the
normal ATPase function of MLH1 was attenuated, but not eliminated, by
the MLH1 415G-C mutation.

.0020
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MISMATCH REPAIR CANCER SYNDROME, INCLUDED
MLH1, PRO648SER

In 8 affected members of a Danish family with HNPCC (609310) reported by
Bisgaard et al. (2002), Raevaara et al. (2004) identified a
pro648-to-ser (P648S) mutation in the MLH1 gene. Only 1 member, a
6-year-old child with first-cousin parents, was homozygous for the
mutation. She had mild features of type I neurofibromatosis (162200) and
no hematologic cancers. She displayed cafe-au-lait spots and a skin
tumor clinically diagnosed as a neurofibroma, but no axillary freckles
or other abnormalities. The phenotype was consistent with the spectrum
of mismatch repair cancer syndrome (276300). Raevaara et al. (2004)
commented that the mutated protein was unstable but still functional in
mismatch repair, suggesting that the cancer susceptibility in the family
and possibly also the mild disease phenotype in the homozygous
individual were linked to shortage of the functional protein.

.0021
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, SER269TER

In a 30-year-old patient who had developed colon cancer (609310) at the
age of 22 years, Rey et al. (2004) identified a homozygous 806C-G
transversion in exon 10 of the MLH1 gene, resulting in a ser269-to-thr
(S269T) substitution. Many members of the paternal and maternal families
presented with colon cancer, gastric polyposis, or breast cancer. A
founder effect was proposed because both ancestral families originated
from the same small region in the south of France. A complete MLH1
inactivation was thought to have been responsible for the precocity of
colon cancer and the more aggressive phenotype in this patient.
Relatives could not be studied.

.0022
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, ALA681THR

In a screen of 226 patients from families matching the Amsterdam II
diagnostic criteria or suspected HNPCC criteria for MSH2 (609309) and
MLH1 germline mutations, Kurzawski et al. (2006) found the ala681-to-thr
(A681T) change of MLH1 in 8 Polish families, consistent with HNPCC2
(609310). They concluded that this, the most frequently occurring
mutation of MLH1 in Poland, was a founder mutation. The amino acid
substitution resulted from a 2041G-to-A transition in exon 18.

.0023
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, 3-BP DEL, 213AGA

McVety et al. (2006) demonstrated the presence of an exon splicing
enhancer (ESE) in exon 3 of MLH1 and showed that a 3-bp in-frame
deletion (213_215delAGA) in this ESE was the cause of HNPCC (609310) in
a Quebec family. The deletion resulted in loss of codon 71 and caused
skipping of exon 3 during mRNA splicing.

.0024
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, EX18DEL

In 4 unrelated patients with HNPCC (609310), Pagenstecher et al. (2006)
identified a heterozygous 2103G-C transversion in the MLH1 gene. The
change was predicted to result in a gln701-to-his (Q701H) substitution,
but RNA analysis showed that it resulted in a splicing defect and
complete loss of exon 18.

.0025
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, EPIGENETICALLY SILENCED

Some epigenetic changes can be transmitted unchanged through the
germline (termed 'epigenetic inheritance'). Evidence that this mechanism
occurs in humans was provided by Suter et al. (2004) by the
identification of individuals in whom 1 allele of the MLH1 gene was
epigenetically silenced throughout the soma (implying a germline event).
These individuals were affected by hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
cancer but did not have identifiable mutations in MLH1, even though it
was silenced, which demonstrated that an epimutation can phenocopy a
genetic disease.

.0026
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, EPIGENETICALLY SILENCED INHERITED

Hitchins et al. (2007) described a family in which a 66-year-old woman,
the mother of 3 sons by 2 different mates, had the clinical picture of
hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. She had metachronous
carcinomas that had microsatellite instability and lacked MLH1
expression. The diagnosis of cancer of the endometrium was made at the
age of 45; of the colon, at age 59; and of the rectum at 60 years. She
was heterozygous for a SNP within the MLH1 promoter (dbSNP rs1800734),
with methylation confined to the A allele. In this woman methylation of
the A allele on approximately 50% of chromosomes was confirmed by
sulfite sequencing. Hitchins et al. (2007) identified an expressible C-T
SNP within MLH1 exon 16 in her son, which was used to demonstrate that
he was transcribing RNA only from the MLH1 allele inherited from his
father. The data were consistent with transmission of the MLH1
epimutation from the proband to her son. In DNA from peripheral blood
leukocytes obtained from this son, approximately half of the MLH1
alleles were methylated. In contrast, his sperm had no trace of MLH1
methylation, despite containing equal proportions of alleles derived
from his father and mother. Furthermore, analysis of the RNA in his
sperm at the MLH1 exon 16 C-T SNP showed reactivation of the maternally
derived MLH1 allele. These results indicated reversion of the MLH1
epimutation to normality during spermatogenesis, suggesting a negligible
risk of transmission from that family member.

.0027
MISMATCH REPAIR CANCER SYNDROME
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2, INCLUDED
MLH1, 2-BP DEL, 593AG

In a 4-year-old boy with glioblastoma, nephroblastoma, and cafe-au-lait
spots consistent with mismatch repair cancer syndrome (276300), Poley et
al. (2007) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the
MLH1 gene: a 2-bp deletion (593delAG) and a met35-to-asn (M35N;
120436.0028) substitution. Both tumors and normal tissue were negative
for the MLH1 protein. The nephroblastoma showed microsatellite
instability, but the glioblastoma did not. Both parents, who were each
heterozygous for a respective mutation, came from families with HNPCC2
(609310).

.0028
MISMATCH REPAIR CANCER SYNDROME
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2, INCLUDED
MLH1, MET35ASN

See 120436.0027 and Poley et al. (2007).

.0029
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, GLY67GLU

In affected members of a family with HNPCC2 (609310), Clyne et al.
(2009) identified a heterozygous 200G-A transition in exon 2 of the MLH1
gene, resulting in a gly67-to-glu (G67E) substitution. The male proband
had breast cancer, leiomyosarcoma of the thigh, colon cancer, and
prostate cancer. Other relatively unusual tumors in other affected
family members included esophageal cancer, cervical adenosquamous
carcinoma, oligodendroglioma, and prostate cancer. In vitro functional
expression assays in yeast showed that the G67E-mutant protein
interfered with the ability to prevent the accumulation of mutations,
consistent with a loss of function.

.0030
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, ARG265CYS

In affected members of 13 Taiwanese families with HNPCC2 (609310), Tang
et al. (2009) identified a heterozygous 793C-T transition in exon 10 of
the MLH1 gene, resulting in an arg265-to-cys (R265C) substitution. The
mutation was not found in 300 controls. Cancers that occurred included
colon, rectal, gastric, endometrial, ovarian, breast, and others.
Haplotype analysis indicated 2 common haplotypes, 1 of which was shared
by 10 families, suggesting a common origin in China several centuries
ago.

.0031
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, 11.6-KB DEL

In 14 unrelated patients and 95 family members among a series of 84
Lynch syndrome (see 609310) families with germline mutations in MLH1,
MSH2 (609309), or MSH6 (600678), Pinheiro et al. (2011) identified an
identical exonic rearrangement affecting MLH1 and the contiguous LRRFIP2
gene (614043). All 14 probands harbored an 11,627-bp deletion comprising
exons 17 through 19 of the MLH1 gene and exons 26 through 29 of the
LRRFIP2 gene. The 5-prime and 3-prime breakpoints were located 280 bp
downstream of MLH1 exon 16 and 678 bp upstream of LRRFIP2 exon 25,
respectively (Chr3: 37.089-37.101 Mb, GRCh37). The mutation was
therefore designated 1896+280_oLRRFIP2:1750-678del. This mutation
represented 17% of all deleterious mismatch repair mutations in their
series. Haplotype analysis showed a conserved region of approximately 1
Mb, and the mutation age was estimated to be 283 +/- 78 years, or to the
beginning of the 18th century. All 14 families originated from the Porto
district countryside. Pinheiro et al. (2011) recommended using this
mutation as first line screening for Lynch syndrome among families of
Portuguese descent.

.0032
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, IVS3DS, G-A, +5

In 17 Spanish families originating from northern Spain with HNPCC2
(609310), Borras et al. (2010) identified a G-to-A transition in intron
3 of the MLH1 gene (306+5G-A). RT-PCR on patient lymphocytes showed an
aberrant mRNA transcript expected to generate a truncated protein. This
transcript was associated with an increased amount of a transcript
corresponding to the in-frame skipping of exon 3. Although the variant
is pathogenic at the RNA level, neither abnormal bands nor differences
in protein expression were observed in lymphocytes from carriers,
suggesting that the mutant protein was unstable. By age 70, the lifetime
risk of colorectal cancer in carriers was estimated at 20.1% in men and
14.1% in women. A common haplotype was identified, consistent with a
founder effect, and the age of the mutation was estimated to be from 53
to 122 generations.

.0033
COLORECTAL CANCER, HEREDITARY NONPOLYPOSIS, TYPE 2
MLH1, LEU622HIS

In 12 Spanish families originating from southern Spain with HNPCC2
(609310), Borras et al. (2010) identified a 1865T-A transversion in the
MLH1 gene, resulting in a leu622-to-his (L622H) substitution in a highly
conserved residue at the interaction domain for MutL. In vitro
functional expression studies showed that the substitution resulted in
decreased amounts of the MLH1 protein. Five of 6 tumors analyzed lost
the MLH1 wildtype allele, suggesting a growth advantage with loss of the
wildtype protein. By age 70, the lifetime risk of colorectal cancer in
carriers was estimated at 6.8% in men and 7.26% in women. A common
haplotype was identified, consistent with a founder effect, and the age
of the mutation was estimated to be from 12 to 22 generations.

.0034
MISMATCH REPAIR CANCER SYNDROME
MLH1, LEU73ARG

In a boy with mismatch repair cancer syndrome (276300), Baas et al.
(2013) identified a homozygous 218T-to-G transversion in exon 3 of the
MLH1 gene, resulting in a leu73-to-arg (L73R) substitution. His parents
were unrelated, but originated from the same Polynesian Pacific Island
population. In vitro functional expression studies showed that the
mutant protein had no DNA repair activity. The patient first presented
with a glioblastoma multiforme and later developed a T-cell
lymphoblastic lymphoma. He died of sepsis at the end of treatment. Brain
imaging showed near complete agenesis of the corpus callosum,
interhemispheric and intracerebral cysts, and right subcortical and
periventricular heterotopia. He was also noted to have multiple
cafe-au-lait spots. The maternal family history was positive for
colorectal cancer.

REFERENCE 1. Alazzouzi, H.; Domingo, E.; Gonzalez, S.; Blanco, I.; Armengol,
M.; Espin, E.; Plaja, A.; Schwartz, S.; Capella, G.; Schwartz, S.,
Jr.: Low levels of microsatellite instability characterize MLH1 and
MSH2 HNPCC carriers before tumor diagnosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 14:
235-239, 2005.

2. Avdievich, E.; Reiss, C.; Scherer, S. J.; Zhang, Y.; Maier, S.
M.; Jin, B.; Hou, H., Jr.; Rosenwald, A.; Riedmiller, H.; Kucherlapati,
R.; Cohen, P. E.; Edelmann, W.; Kneitz, B.: Distinct effects of the
recurrent Mlh1G67R mutation on MMR functions, cancer, and meiosis. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 105: 4247-4252, 2008.

3. Baas, A. F.; Gabbett, M.; Rimac, M.; Kansikas, M.; Raphael, M.;
Nievelstein, R. A. J.; Nicholls, W.; Offerhaus, J.; Bodmer, D.; Wernstedt,
A.; Krabichler, B.; Strasser, U.; Nystrom, M.; Zschocke, J.; Robertson,
S. P.; van Haelst, M. M.; Wimmer, K.: Agenesis of the corpus callosum
and gray matter heterotopia in three patients with constitutional
mismatch repair deficiency syndrome. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 21: 55-61,
2013.

4. Baker, S. M.; Plug, A. W.; Prolla, T. A.; Bronner, C. E.; Harris,
A. C.; Yao, X.; Christie, D.-M.; Monell, C.; Arnheim, N.; Bradley,
A.; Ashley, T.; Liskay, R. M.: Involvement of mouse Mlh1 in DNA mismatch
repair and meiotic crossing over. Nature Genet. 13: 336-342, 1996.

5. Ban, C.; Yang, W.: Crystal structure and ATPase activity of MutL:
implications for DNA repair and mutagenesis. Cell 95: 541-552, 1998.

6. Bapat, B.; Xia, L.; Madlensky, L.; Mitri, A.; Tonin, P.; Narod,
S. A.; Gallinger, S.: The genetic basis of Muir-Torre syndrome includes
the hMLH1 locus. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59: 736-739, 1996.

7. Barnetson, R. A.; Tenesa, A.; Farrington, S. M.; Nicholl, I. D.;
Cetnarskyj, R.; Porteous, M. E.; Campbell, H.; Dunlop, M. G.: Identification
and survival of carriers of mutations in DNA mismatch-repair genes
in colon cancer. New Eng. J. Med. 354: 2751-2763, 2006.

8. Bisgaard, M. L.; Jager, A. C.; Myrhoj, T.; Bernstein, I.; Nielsen,
F. C.: Hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC): phenotype-genotype
correlation between patients with and without identified mutation. Hum.
Mutat. 20: 20-27, 2002.

9. Bjornsson, H. T.; Fallin, M. D.; Feinberg, A. P.: An integrated
epigenetic and genetic approach to common human disease. Trends Genet. 20:
350-358, 2004.

10. Borras, A.; Pineda, M.; Blanco, I.; Jewett, E. M.; Wang, F.; Teule,
A.; Caldes, T.; Urioste, M.; Martinez-Bouzas, C.; Brunet, J.; Balmana,
J.; Torres, A.; and 13 others: MLH1 founder mutations with moderate
penetrance in Spanish Lynch syndrome families. Cancer Res. 70: 7379-7391,
2010.

11. Bronner, C. E.; Baker, S. M.; Morrison, P. T.; Warren, G.; Smith,
L. G.; Lescoe, M. K.; Kane, M.; Earabino, C.; Lipford, J.; Lindblom,
A.; Tannergard, P.; Bollag, R. J.; Godwin, A. R.; Ward, D. C.; Nordenskjold,
M.; Fishel, R.; Kolodner, R.; Liskay, R. M.: Mutation in the DNA
mismatch repair gene homologue hMLH1 is associated with hereditary
non-polyposis colon cancer. Nature 368: 258-261, 1994.

12. Chan, T. L.; Yuen, S. T.; Ho, J. W. C.; Chan, A. S. Y.; Kwan,
K.; Chung, L. P.; Lam, P. W. Y.; Tse, C. W.; Leung, S. Y.: A novel
germline 1.8-kb deletion of hMLH1 mimicking alternative splicing:
a founder mutation in the Chinese population. Oncogene 20: 2976-2981,
2001.

13. Clyne, M.; Offman, J.; Shanley, S.; Virgo, J. D.; Radulovic, M.;
Wang, Y.; Ardern-Jones, A.; Eeles, R.; Hoffmann, E.; Yu, V. P. C.
C.: The G67E mutation in hMLH1 is associated with an unusual presentation
of Lynch syndrome. Brit. J. Cancer 100: 376-380, 2009.

14. Crepin, M.; Dieu, M.-C.; Lejeune, S.; Escande, F.; Boidin, D.;
Porchet, N.; Morin, G.; Manouvrier, S.; Mathieu, M.; Buisine, M.-P.
: Evidence of constitutional MLH1 epimutation associated to transgenerational
inheritance of cancer susceptibility. Hum. Mutat. 33: 180-188, 2012.

15. Ellison, A. R.; Lofing, J.; Bitter, G. A.: Functional analysis
of human MLH1 and MSH2 missense variants and hybrid human-yeast MLH1
proteins in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Hum. Molec. Genet. 10: 1889-1900,
2001.

16. Froenicke, L.; Anderson, L. K.; Wienberg, J.; Ashley, T.: Male
mouse recombination maps for each autosome identified by chromosome
painting. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71: 1353-1368, 2002.

17. Gazzoli, I.; Loda, M.; Garber, J.; Syngal, S.; Kolodner, R. D.
: A hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal carcinoma case associated with
hypermethylation of the MLH1 gene in normal tissue and loss of heterozygosity
of the unmethylated allele in the resulting microsatellite instability-high
tumor. Cancer Res. 62: 3925-3928, 2002.

18. Genuardi, M.; Viel, A.; Bonora, D.; Capozzi, E.; Bellacosa, A.;
Leonardi, F.; Valle, R.; Ventura, A.; Pedroni, M.; Boiocchi, M.; Neri,
G.: Characterization of MLH1 and MSH2 alternative splicing and its
relevance to molecular testing of colorectal cancer susceptibility. Hum.
Genet. 102: 15-20, 1998.

19. Gorlov, I. P.; Gorlova, O. Y.; Frazier, M. L.; Amos, C. I.: Missense
mutations in hMLH1 and hMSH2 are associated with exonic splicing enhancers. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 73: 1157-1161, 2003.

20. Gosden, R. G.; Feinberg, A. P.: Genetics and epigenetics--nature's
pen and-pencil set. (Editorial) New Eng. J. Med. 356: 731-733, 2007.

21. Green, R. C.; Green, A. G.; Simms, M.; Pater, A.; Robb, J. D.;
Green, J. S.: Germline hMLH1 promoter mutation in a Newfoundland
HNPCC kindred. Clin. Genet. 64: 220-227, 2003.

22. Green, R. C.; Narod, S. A.; Morasse, J.; Young, T. L.; Cox, J.;
Fitzgerald, G. W. N.; Tonin, P.; Ginsburg, O.; Miller, S.; Poitras,
P.; Laframboise, R.; Routhier, G.; Plante, M.; Morissette, J.; Weissenbach,
J.: Khandjian, E. W.; Rousseau, F.: Hereditary nonpolyposis colon
cancer: analysis of linkage to 2p15-16 places the COCA1 locus telomeric
to D2S123 and reveals genetic heterogeneity in seven Canadian families. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 54: 1067-1077, 1994.

23. Guillon, H.; Baudat, F.; Grey, C.; Liskay, R. M.; de Massy, B.
: Crossover and noncrossover pathways in mouse meiosis. Molec. Cell 20:
563-573, 2005.

24. Hamilton, S. R.; Liu, B.; Parsons, R. E.; Papadopoulos, N.; Jen,
J.; Powell, S. M.; Krush, A. J.; Berk, T.; Cohen, Z.; Tetu, B.; Burger,
P. C.; Wood, P. A.; Taqi, F.; Booker, S. V.; Petersen, G. M.; Offerhaus,
G. J. A.; Tersmette, A. C.; Giardiello, F. M.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler,
K. W.: The molecular basis of Turcot's syndrome. New Eng. J. Med. 332:
839-847, 1995.

25. Han, H.-J.; Maruyama, M.; Baba, S.; Park, J.-G.; Nakamura, Y.
: Genomic structure of human mismatch repair gene, hMLH1, and its
mutation analysis in patients with hereditary non-polyposis colorectal
cancer (HNPCC). Hum. Molec. Genet. 4: 237-242, 1995. Note: Erratum:
Hum. Molec. Genet. 9: 321 only, 2000.

26. Herman, J. G.; Umar, A.; Polyak, K.; Graff, J. R.; Ahuja, N.;
Issa, J.-P. J.; Markowitz, S.; Willson, J. K. V.; Hamilton, S. R.;
Kinzler, K. W.; Kane, M. F.; Kolodner, R. D.; Vogelstein, B.; Kunkel,
T. A.; Baylin, S. B.: Incidence and functional consequences of hMLH1
promoter hypermethylation in colorectal carcinoma. Proc. Nat. Acad.
Sci. 95: 6870-6875, 1998.

27. Hitchins, M. P.; Ward, R. L.: Constitutional (germline) MLH1
epimutation as an aetiological mechanism for hereditary non-polyposis
colorectal cancer. J. Med. Genet. 46: 793-802, 2009.

28. Hitchins, M. P.; Ward, R. L.: Erasure of MLH1 methylation in
spermatozoa--implications for epigenetic inheritance. Nature Genet. 39:
1289 only, 2007.

29. Hitchins, M. P.; Wong, J. J. L.; Suthers, G.; Suter, C. M.; Martin,
D. I. K.; Hawkins, N. J.; Ward, R. L.: Inheritance of a cancer-associated
MLH1 germ-line epimutation. New Eng. J. Med. 356: 697-705, 2007.

30. Huang, S. C.; Lavine, J. E.; Boland, P. S.; Newbury, R. O.; Kolodner,
R.; Pham, T.-T. T.; Arnold, C. N.; Boland, C. R.; Carethers, J. M.
: Germline characterization of early-aged onset of hereditary non-polyposis
colorectal cancer. J. Pediat. 138: 629-635, 2001.

31. Jager, A. C.; Bisgaard, M. L.; Myrhoj, T.; Bernstein, I.; Rehfeld,
J. F.; Nielsen, F. C.: Reduced frequency of extracolonic cancers
in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer families with monoallelic
hMLH1 expression. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61: 129-138, 1997.

32. Kadyrov, F. A.; Dzantiev, L.; Constantin, N.; Modrich, P.: Endonucleolytic
function of MutL-alpha in human mismatch repair. Cell 126: 297-308,
2006.

33. Kane, M. F.; Loda, M.; Gaida, G. M.; Lipman, J.; Mishra, R.; Goldman,
H.; Jessup, J. M.; Kolodner, R.: Methylation of the hMLH1 promoter
correlates with lack of expression of hMLH1 in sporadic colon tumors
and mismatch repair-defective human tumor cell lines. Cancer Res. 57:
808-811, 1997.

34. Katabuchi, H.; van Rees, B.; Lambers, A. R.; Ronnett, B. M.; Blazes,
M. S.; Leach, F. S.; Cho, K. R.; Hedrick, L.: Mutations in DNA mismatch
repair genes are not responsible for microsatellite instability in
most sporadic endometrial carcinomas. Cancer Res. 55: 5556-5560,
1995.

35. Kosinski, J.; Hinrichsen, I.; Bujnicki, J. M.; Friedhoff, P.;
Plotz, G.: Identification of Lynch syndrome mutations in the MLH1-PMS2
interface that disturb dimerization and mismatch repair. Hum. Mutat. 31:
975-982, 2010.

36. Kurzawski, G.; Suchy, J.; Lener, M.; Klujszo-Grabowska, E.; Kladny,
J.; Safranow, K.; Jakubowska, K.; Jakubowska, A.; Huzarski, T.; Byrski,
T.; Debniak, T.; Cybulski, C.; and 30 others: Germline MSH2 and
MLH1 mutational spectrum including large rearrangements in HNPCC families
from Poland (update study). Clin. Genet. 69: 40-47, 2006.

37. Li, G.-M.; Modrich, P.: Restoration of mismatch repair to nuclear
extracts of H6 colorectal tumor cells by a heterodimer of human MutL
homologs. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 1950-1954, 1995.

38. Lindblom, A.; Tannergard, P.; Werelius, B.; Nordenskjold, M.:
Genetic mapping of a second locus predisposing to hereditary non-polyposis
colon cancer. Nature Genet. 5: 279-282, 1993.

39. Lipkin, S. M.; Rozek, L. S.; Rennert, G.; Yang, W.; Chen, P.-C.;
Hacia, J.; Hunt, N.; Shin, B.; Fodor, S.; Kokoris, M.; Greenson, J.
K.; Fearon, E.; Lynch, H.; Collins, F.; Gruber, S. B.: The MLH1 D132H
variant is associated with susceptibility to sporadic colorectal cancer. Nature
Genet. 36: 694-699, 2004.

40. Liu, B.; Nicolaides, N. C.; Markowitz, S.; Willson, J. K. V.;
Parsons, R. E.; Jen, J.; de la Chapelle, A.; Hamilton, S. R.; Kinzler,
K. W.; Vogelstein, B.: Mismatch repair gene defects in sporadic colorectal
cancers with microsatellite instability. Nature Genet. 9: 48-55,
1995.

41. Liu, B.; Parsons, R.; Papadopoulos, N.; Nicolaides, N. C.; Lynch,
H. T.; Watson, P.; Jass, J. R.; Dunlop, M.; Wyllie, A.; Peltomaki,
P.; de la Chapelle, A.; Hamilton, S. R.; Vogelstein, B.; Kinzler,
K. W.: Analysis of mismatch repair genes in hereditary non-polyposis
colorectal cancer patients. Nature Med. 2: 169-174, 1996.

42. Liu, T.; Tannergard, P.; Hackman, P.; Rubio, C.; Kressner, U.;
Lindmark, G.; Hellgren, D.; Lambert, B.; Lindblom, A.: Missense mutations
in hMLH1 associated with colorectal cancer. Hum. Genet. 105: 437-441,
1999.

43. Lynch, H. T.; Fusaro, R. M.; Roberts, L.; Voorhees, G. J.; Lynch,
J. F.: Muir-Torre syndrome in several members of a family with a
variant of the cancer family syndrome. Brit. J. Derm. 113: 295-301,
1985.

44. Maliaka, Y. K.; Chudina, A. P.; Belev, N. F.; Alday, P.; Bochkov,
N. P.; Buerstedde, J.-M.: CpG dinucleotides in the hMSH2 and hMLH1
genes are hotspots for HNPCC mutations. Hum. Genet. 97: 251-255,
1996.

45. Mangold, E.; Pagenstecher, C.; Leister, M.; Mathiak, M.; Rutten,
A.; Friedl, W.; Propping, P.; Ruzicka, T.; Kruse, R.: A genotype-phenotype
correlation in HNPCC: strong predominance of msh2 mutations in 41
patients with Muir-Torre syndrome. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 41: 567-572,
2004.

46. McVety, S.; Li, L.; Gordon, P. H.; Chong, G.; Foulkes, W. D.:
Disruption of an exon splicing enhancer in exon 3 of MLH1 is the cause
of HNPCC in a Quebec family. (Letter) J. Med. Genet. 43: 153-156,
2006.

47. Miyaki, M.; Konishi, M.; Muraoka, M.; Kikuchi-Yanoshita, R.; Tanaka,
K.; Iwama, T.; Mori, T.; Koike, M.; Ushio, K.; Chiba, M.; Nomizu,
S.; Utsunomiya, J.: Germline mutations of hMSH2 and hMLH1 genes in
Japanese families with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC):
usefulness of DNA analysis for screening and diagnosis of HNPCC patients. J.
Molec. Med. 73: 515-520, 1995.

48. Moisio, A.-L.; Sistonen, P.; Weissenbach, J.; de la Chapelle,
A.; Peltomaki, P.: Age and origin of two common MLH1 mutations predisposing
to hereditary colon cancer. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 59: 1243-1251, 1996.

49. Morak, M.; Schackert, H. K.; Rahner, N.; Betz, B.; Ebert, M.;
Walldorf, C.; Royer-Pokora, B.; Schulmann, K.; von Knebel-Doeberitz,
M.; Dietmaier, W.; Keller, G.; Kerker, B.; Leitner, G.; Holinski-Feder,
E.: Further evidence for heritability of an epimutation in one of
12 cases with MLH1 promoter methylation in blood cells clinically
displaying HNPCC. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 16: 804-811, 2008.

50. Nystrom-Lahti, M.; Kristo, P.; Nicolaides, N. C.; Chang, S.-Y.;
Aaltonen, L. A.; Moisio, A.-L.; Jarvinen, H. J.; Mecklin, J.-P.; Kinzler,
K. W.; Vogelstein, B.; de la Chapelle, A.; Peltomaki, P.: Founding
mutations and Alu-mediated recombination in hereditary colon cancer. Nature
Med. 1: 1203-1206, 1995.

51. Oliveira, C.; Westra, J. L.; Arango, D.; Ollikainen, M.; Domingo,
E.; Ferreira, A.; Velho, S.; Niessen, R.; Lagerstedt, K.; Alhopuro,
P.; Laiho, P.; Veiga, I.; and 16 others: Distinct patterns of KRAS
mutations in colorectal carcinomas according to germline mismatch
repair defects and hMLH1 methylation status. Hum. Molec. Genet. 13:
2303-2311, 2004.

52. Ostergaard, J. R.; Sunde, L.; Okkels, H.: Neurofibromatosis von
Recklinghausen type I phenotype and early onset of cancers in siblings
compound heterozygous for mutations in MSH6. Am. J. Med. Genet. 139A:
96-105, 2005.

53. Pagenstecher, C.; Wehner, M.; Friedl, W.; Rahner, N.; Aretz, S.;
Friedrichs, N.; Sengteller, M.; Henn, W.; Buettner, R.; Propping,
P.; Mangold, E.: Aberrant splicing in MLH1 and MSH2 due to exonic
and intronic variants. Hum. Genet. 119: 9-22, 2006.

54. Papadopoulos, N.; Nicolaides, N. C.; Wei, Y.-F.; Ruben, S. M.;
Carter, K. C.; Rosen, C. A.; Haseltine, W. A.; Fleischmann, R. D.;
Fraser, C. M.; Adams, M. D.; Venter, J. C.; Hamilton, S. R.; Petersen,
G. M.; Watson, P.; Lynch, H. T.; Peltomaki, P.; Mecklin, J.-P.; de
la Chapelle, A.; Kinzler, K. W.; Vogelstein, B.: Mutation of a mutL
homolog in hereditary colon cancer. Science 263: 1625-1629, 1994.

55. Paraf, F.; Sasseville, D.; Watters, A. K.; Narod, S.; Ginsburg,
O.; Shibata, H.; Jothy, S.: Clinicopathological relevance of the
association between gastrointestinal and sebaceous neoplasms: the
Muir-Torre syndrome. Hum. Path. 26: 422-427, 1995.

56. Pinheiro, M.; Pinto, C.; Peixoto, A.; Veiga, I.; Mesquita, B.;
Henrique, R.; Baptista, M.; Fragoso, M.; Sousa, O.; Pereira, H.; Marinho,
C.; Dias, L. M.; Teixeira, M. R.: A novel exonic rearrangement affecting
MLH1 and the contiguous LRRFIP2 is a founder mutation in Portuguese
Lynch syndrome families. Genet. Med. 13: 895-902, 2011.

57. Poley, J.-W.; Wagner, A.; Hoogmans, M. M. C. P.; Menko, F. H.;
Tops, C.; Kros, J. M.; Reddingius, R. E.; Meijers-Heijboer, H.; Kuipers,
E. J.; Dinjens, W. N. M.: Biallelic germline mutations of mismatch-repair
genes: a possible cause for multiple pediatric malignancies. Cancer 109:
2349-2356, 2007.

58. Quehenberger, F.; Vasen, H. F. A.; van Houwelingen, H. C.: Risk
of colorectal and endometrial cancer for carriers of mutations of
the hMLH1 and hMSH2 gene: correction for ascertainment. J. Med. Genet. 42:
491-496, 2005.

59. Raevaara, T. E.; Gerdes, A.-M.; Lonnqvist, K. E.; Tybjaerg-Hansen,
A.; Abdel-Rahman, W. M.; Kariola, R.; Peltomaki, P.; Nystrom-Lahti,
M.: HNPCC mutation MLHI P648S makes the functional protein unstable,
and homozygosity predisposes to mild neurofibromatosis type I. Genes
Chromosomes Cancer 40: 261-265, 2004.

60. Rey, J.-M.; Noruzinia, M.; Brouillet, J.-P.; Sarda, P.; Maudelonde,
T.; Pujol, P.: Six novel heterozygous MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6 and one
homozygous MLH1 germline mutations in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal
cancer. Cancer Genet. Cytogenet. 155: 149-151, 2004.

61. Ricciardone, M. D.; Ozcelik, T.; Cevher, B.; Ozdag, H.; Tuncer,
M.; Gurgey, A.; Uzunalimoglu, O.; Cetinkaya, H.; Tanyeli, A.; Erken,
E.; Ozturk, M.: Human MLH1 deficiency predisposes to hematological
malignancy and neurofibromatosis type 1. Cancer Res. 59: 290-293,
1999.

62. Sasaki, S.; Horii, A.; Shimada, M.; Han, H.-J.; Yanagisawa, A.;
Muto, T.; Nakamura, Y.: Somatic mutations of a human mismatch repair
gene, hMLH1, in tumors from patients with multiple primary cancers. Hum.
Mutat. 7: 275-278, 1996.

63. Shimodaira, H.; Filosi, N.; Shibata, H.; Suzuki, T.; Radice, P.;
Kanamaru, R.; Friend, S. H.; Kolodner, R. D.; Ishioka, C.: Functional
analysis of human MLH1 mutations in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Nature
Genet. 19: 384-389, 1998. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 21: 241 only,
1999.

64. Simpkins, S. B.; Bocker, T.; Swisher, E. M.; Mutch, D. G.; Gersell,
D. J.; Kovatich, A. J.; Palazzo, J. P.; Fishel, R.; Goodfellow, P.
J.: MLH1 promoter methylation and gene silencing is the primary cause
of microsatellite instability in sporadic endometrial cancers. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 8: 661-666, 1999.

65. Stella, A.; Wagner, A.; Shito, K.; Lipkin, S. M.; Watson, P.;
Guanti, G.; Lynch, H. T.; Fodde, R.; Liu, B.: A nonsense mutation
in MLH1 causes exon skipping in three unrelated HNPCC families. Cancer
Res. 61: 7020-7024, 2001.

66. Suter, C. M.; Martin, D. I. K.; Ward, R. L.: Germline epimutation
of MLH1 in individuals with multiple cancers. Nature Genet. 36:
497-501, 2004. Note: Erratum: Nature Genet. 39: 1414 only, 2007.

67. Tang, R.; Hsiung, C.; Wang, J.-Y.; Lai, C.-H.; Chien, H.-T.; Chiu,
L.-L.; Liu, C.-T.; Chen, H.-H.; Wang, H.-M.; Chen, S.-X.; Hsieh, L.-L.;
the TCOG HNPCC Consortium: Germ line MLH1 and MSH2 mutations in
Taiwanese Lynch syndrome families: characterization of a founder genomic
mutation in the MLH1 gene. Clin. Genet. 75: 334-345, 2009.

68. Taylor, C. F.; Charlton, R. S.; Burn, J.; Sheridan, E.; Taylor,
G. R.: Genomic deletions in MSH2 or MLH1 are a frequent cause of
hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer: identification of novel
and recurrent deletions by MLPA. Hum. Mutat. 22: 428-433, 2003.

69. Tournier, I.; Vezain, M.; Martins, A.; Charbonnier, F.; Baert-Desurmont,
S.; Olschwang, S.; Wang, Q.; Buisine, M. P.; Soret, J.; Tazi, J.;
Frebourg, T.; Tosi, M.: A large fraction of unclassified variants
of the mismatch repair genes MLH1 and MSH2 is associated with splicing
defects. Hum. Mutat. 29: 1412-1424, 2008.

70. Trimbath, J. D.; Petersen, G. M.; Erdman, S. H.; Ferre, M.; Luce,
M. C.; Giardiello, F. M.: Cafe-au-lait spots and early onset colorectal
neoplasia: a variant of HNPCC? Fam. Cancer 1: 101-105, 2001.

71. Trojan, J.; Zeuzem, S.; Randolph, A.; Hemmerle, C.; Brieger, A.;
Raedle, J.; Plotz, G.; Jiricny, J.; Marra, G.: Functional analysis
of hMLH1 variants and HNPCC-related mutations using a human expression
system. Gastroenterology 122: 211-219, 2002.

72. Vasen, H. F.; Mecklin, J. P.; Khan, P. M.; Lynch, H. T.: The
International Collaborative Group on Hereditary Non-Polyposis Colorectal
Cancer (ICG-HNPCC). Dis. Colon Rectum 34: 424-425, 1991.

73. Veigl, M. L.; Kasturi, L.; Olechnowicz, J.; Ma, A.; Lutterbaugh,
J. D.; Periyasamy, S.; Li, G.-M.; Drummond, J.; Modrich, P. L.; Sedwick,
W. D.; Markowitz, S. D.: Biallelic inactivation of hMLH1 by epigenetic
gene silencing, a novel mechanism causing human MSI cancers. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 8698-8702, 1998.

74. Viel, A.; Petronzelli, F.; Della Puppa, L.; Lucci-Cordisco, E.;
Fornasarig, M.; Pucciarelli, S.; Rovella, V.; Quaia, M.; Ponz de Leon,
M.; Boiocchi, M.; Genuardi, M.: Different molecular mechanisms underlie
genomic deletions in the MLH1 gene. Hum. Mutat. 20: 368-374, 2002.

75. Vilkki, S.; Tsao, J.-L.; Loukola, A.; Poyhonen, M.; Vierimaa,
O.; Herva, R.; Aaltonen, L. A.; Shibata, D.: Extensive somatic microsatellite
mutations in normal human tissue. Cancer Res. 61: 4541-4544, 2001.

76. Wang, Q.; Lasset, C.; Desseigne, F.; Frappaz, D.; Bergeron, C.;
Navarro, C.; Ruano, E.; Puisieux, A.: Neurofibromatosis and early
onset of cancers in hMLH1-deficient children. Cancer Res. 59: 294-297,
1999.

77. Wang, Q.; Montmain, G.; Ruano, E.; Upadhyaya, M.; Dudley, S.;
Liskay, R. M.; Thibodeau, S. N.; Puisieux, A.: Neurofibromatosis
type 1 gene as a mutational target in a mismatch repair-deficient
cell type. Hum. Genet. 112: 117-123, 2003.

78. Wang, Y.; Cortez, D.; Yazdi, P.; Neff, N.; Elledge, S. J.; Qin,
J.: BASC, a super complex of BRCA1-associated proteins involved in
the recognition and repair of aberrant DNA structures. Genes Dev. 14:
927-939, 2000.

79. Wang, Y.; Friedl, W.; Lamberti, C.; Ruelfs, C.; Kruse, R.; Propping,
P.: Hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer: causative role of
a germline missense mutation in the hMLH1 gene confirmed by the independent
occurrence of the same somatic mutation in tumour tissue. Hum. Genet. 100:
362-364, 1997.

80. Ward, R. L.; Dobbins, T.; Lindor, N. M.; Rapkins, R. W.; Hitchins,
M. P.: Identification of constitutional MLH1 epimutations and promoter
variants in colorectal cancer patients from the Colon Cancer Family
Registry. Genet. Med. 15: 25-35, 2013.

81. Wei, S.-C.; Yu, C.-Y.; Tsai-Wu, J.-J.; Su, Y.-N.; Sheu, J.-C.;
Wu, C.-H. H.; Wang, C.-Y.; Wong, J.-M.: Low mutation rate of hMSH2
and hMLH1 in Taiwanese hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. Clin.
Genet. 64: 243-251, 2003.

82. Wheeler, J. M. D.; Loukola, A.; Aaltonen, L. A.; McC Mortensen,
N. J.; Bodmer, W. F.: The role of hypermethylation of the hMLH1 promoter
region in HNPCC versus MSI+ sporadic colorectal cancers. J. Med.
Genet. 37: 588-592, 2000.

83. Wijnen, J.; Khan, P. M.; Vasen, H.; Menko, F.; van der Klift,
H.; van den Broek, M.; van Leeuwen-Cornelisse, I.; Nagengast, F.;
Meijers-Heijboer, E. J.; Lindhout, D.; Griffioen, G.; Cats, A.; Kleibeuker,
J.; Varesco, L.; Bertario, L.; Bisgaard, M.-L.; Mohr, J.; Kolodner,
R.; Fodde, R.: Majority of hMLH1 mutations responsible for hereditary
nonpolyposis colorectal cancer cluster at the exonic region 15-16. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 58: 300-307, 1996.

84. Yuan, Z. Q.; Kasprzak, L.; Gordon, P. H.; Pinsky, L.; Foulkes,
W. D.: I1307K APC and hMLH1 mutations in a non-Jewish family with
hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer. Clin. Genet. 54: 368-370,
1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 05/01/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/29/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/22/2013
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/3/2012
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 3/14/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/9/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/15/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 12/3/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/29/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/7/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/17/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/18/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/22/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/19/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/4/2008
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 1/7/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 11/8/2007
George E. Tiller - updated: 4/5/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/26/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/5/2007
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/27/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/9/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/17/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/15/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/7/2006
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/22/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/5/2005
Matthew B. Gross - reorganized: 4/15/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/3/2005
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 8/27/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/6/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/7/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/5/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/12/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/12/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/16/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/23/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/8/2003
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/21/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/24/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/19/2002
Paul Brennan - updated: 3/14/2002
George E. Tiller - updated: 1/30/2002
Deborah L. Stone - updated: 11/28/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/23/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/23/2001
Michael J. Wright - updated: 8/7/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/16/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/6/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/14/1999
Ada Hamosh - updated: 3/19/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/22/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/26/1999
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 12/3/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/11/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/29/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/30/1998
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/30/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/8/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/20/1997
Moyra Smith - updated: 7/1/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 12/9/1993

EDITED alopez: 05/01/2013
alopez: 4/29/2013
ckniffin: 4/22/2013
carol: 3/11/2013
terry: 8/17/2012
carol: 4/4/2012
terry: 4/4/2012
ckniffin: 4/3/2012
alopez: 3/14/2012
carol: 1/19/2012
ckniffin: 1/9/2012
alopez: 1/6/2012
terry: 12/15/2011
carol: 7/20/2011
wwang: 1/4/2011
ckniffin: 12/3/2010
wwang: 11/30/2010
ckniffin: 11/29/2010
wwang: 6/9/2010
ckniffin: 6/7/2010
ckniffin: 6/4/2010
wwang: 7/2/2009
ckniffin: 6/17/2009
wwang: 2/25/2009
ckniffin: 2/18/2009
wwang: 1/27/2009
ckniffin: 1/22/2009
wwang: 7/9/2008
ckniffin: 6/19/2008
wwang: 2/19/2008
ckniffin: 2/4/2008
carol: 1/15/2008
ckniffin: 1/7/2008
wwang: 11/28/2007
terry: 11/8/2007
carol: 9/6/2007
alopez: 4/13/2007
terry: 4/5/2007
alopez: 2/28/2007
terry: 2/26/2007
mgross: 2/5/2007
terry: 10/27/2006
alopez: 10/10/2006
carol: 10/9/2006
alopez: 6/23/2006
wwang: 5/17/2006
ckniffin: 5/17/2006
alopez: 3/15/2006
alopez: 3/13/2006
terry: 3/7/2006
wwang: 1/24/2006
wwang: 12/22/2005
terry: 12/21/2005
terry: 8/3/2005
alopez: 7/14/2005
wwang: 7/13/2005
wwang: 7/6/2005
terry: 7/5/2005
mgross: 4/15/2005
tkritzer: 3/11/2005
terry: 3/3/2005
carol: 9/30/2004
carol: 9/1/2004
terry: 8/27/2004
carol: 8/20/2004
ckniffin: 8/20/2004
tkritzer: 8/11/2004
terry: 8/6/2004
alopez: 7/12/2004
terry: 7/7/2004
alopez: 5/3/2004
alopez: 4/6/2004
terry: 4/5/2004
joanna: 3/17/2004
cwells: 1/14/2004
terry: 1/12/2004
cwells: 12/17/2003
terry: 12/12/2003
terry: 11/11/2003
cwells: 10/21/2003
terry: 10/16/2003
alopez: 9/30/2003
tkritzer: 9/15/2003
ckniffin: 3/11/2003
carol: 1/29/2003
tkritzer: 1/27/2003
terry: 1/23/2003
tkritzer: 1/9/2003
terry: 1/8/2003
tkritzer: 11/25/2002
terry: 11/21/2002
carol: 10/16/2002
tkritzer: 10/14/2002
terry: 10/8/2002
terry: 6/27/2002
alopez: 5/7/2002
terry: 4/24/2002
terry: 4/4/2002
cwells: 4/3/2002
terry: 3/19/2002
alopez: 3/14/2002
cwells: 2/5/2002
cwells: 1/30/2002
carol: 1/24/2002
mcapotos: 12/21/2001
carol: 11/28/2001
terry: 11/15/2001
carol: 11/5/2001
mcapotos: 10/29/2001
terry: 10/23/2001
mcapotos: 8/29/2001
mcapotos: 8/23/2001
cwells: 8/16/2001
cwells: 8/9/2001
terry: 8/7/2001
cwells: 6/20/2001
cwells: 6/19/2001
joanna: 1/17/2001
mgross: 11/16/2000
carol: 3/30/2000
yemi: 2/18/2000
mgross: 12/9/1999
terry: 12/6/1999
mgross: 5/27/1999
mgross: 5/20/1999
terry: 5/14/1999
alopez: 3/19/1999
mgross: 2/25/1999
carol: 2/25/1999
mgross: 2/23/1999
terry: 2/22/1999
carol: 1/26/1999
carol: 12/3/1998
carol: 10/14/1998
dkim: 9/11/1998
dkim: 9/10/1998
carol: 8/19/1998
terry: 8/11/1998
alopez: 7/31/1998
alopez: 7/30/1998
terry: 7/29/1998
terry: 7/24/1998
alopez: 7/6/1998
terry: 6/30/1998
alopez: 5/14/1998
alopez: 5/11/1998
dholmes: 5/11/1998
jenny: 10/28/1997
terry: 10/27/1997
mark: 9/22/1997
jenny: 9/18/1997
terry: 9/8/1997
dholmes: 8/29/1997
jenny: 8/22/1997
terry: 8/20/1997
alopez: 3/19/1997
terry: 1/16/1997
jamie: 1/15/1997
terry: 1/7/1997
jamie: 11/15/1996
terry: 11/14/1996
terry: 10/8/1996
terry: 8/19/1996
terry: 7/29/1996
terry: 7/2/1996
mark: 7/1/1996
terry: 7/1/1996
mark: 7/1/1996
terry: 6/27/1996
mark: 5/15/1996
terry: 5/13/1996
mark: 2/23/1996
terry: 2/19/1996
mark: 2/16/1996
mark: 2/13/1996
mark: 2/10/1996
terry: 2/5/1996
terry: 6/3/1995
mark: 5/14/1995
carol: 12/30/1994
jason: 7/13/1994
mimadm: 6/25/1994
carol: 12/9/1993

613583	TITLE *613583 WD REPEAT-CONTAINING PROTEIN 62; WDR62
;;C19ORF14
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The WDR62 gene encodes a protein that localizes to the centrosome and to
the nucleus, depending on the cell phase and on the cell type (summary
by Bhat et al., 2011).

CLONING

Bilguvar et al. (2010) identified the WDR62 gene in mutation analysis of
a patient with microcephaly and cortical abnormalities. The WDR62 gene
encodes a 1,523-amino acid protein. Immunohistochemical staining of
human fetal brain at 20 weeks' gestation demonstrated enriched WDR62
expression within the ventricular and subventricular zones. Stainings
suggested predominantly nuclear localization, which was confirmed by
immunofluorescence microscopy and Western blot analysis. WDR62 is
expressed by neural stem cells and intermediate progenitors, marked by
SOX2 (184429) and TBR2 (604615) expression. Expression of WDR62 in the
neocortex is transient, spanning the period of embryonic neurogenesis.
Unlike other microcephaly genes, WDR62 apparently does not associate
with centrosomes.

Nicholas et al. (2010) noted that WDR62 contains at least 15 WD repeats.
In HeLa, HEK293, and B lymphoblastoid cells, they found that WDR62 had
weak, diffuse cytoplasmic expression and was not found in the nucleus
during interphase. However, during mitosis, WDR62 accumulated strongly
at the spindle poles, although it was not present at the midbody in
cytokinesis. The expression pattern of WDR62 was identical to that of
ASPM (605481), which is mutant in primary microcephaly-5 (MCPH5;
608716). Immunohistochemistry and confocal microscopy of mouse embryonic
brain showed Wdr62 expression exclusively in apical precursors
undergoing mitosis at the apical-ventricular surface in the
neuroepithelium of the future cerebral cortex. Wdr62 expression was also
found exclusively in intermediate neural precursors found in the
subventricular zone during mitosis. Similar localization to mitotic
neural precursor cells was observed in human embryonic brain tissue.
WDR62 expression was also found in newborn neurons and in the outermost
layer of neurons that had just migrated to the cortical plate.

Yu et al. (2010) found widespread expression of Wdr62 in the developing
mouse brain, with highest expression in the forebrain. Expression was
seen in the ventricular zone and cortical plate, consistent with roles
in progenitor cells and postmitotic neurons.

GENE STRUCTURE

Bilguvar et al. (2010) determined that the WDR62 gene contains 32 exons.

There are alternative WDR62 transcripts in humans: exon 27 contains an
in-frame intraexonic alternative splice acceptor site, resulting in the
exclusion of the first 12 nucleotides (Nicholas et al., 2010).

MAPPING

The WDR62 gene maps to chromosome 19q13.12 (Bilguvar et al., 2010).

GENE FUNCTION

Yu et al. (2010) found notable cell-cycle dependent cellular
localization of WDR62 in HeLa and HEK cells. During interphase, there
was punctate, perinuclear expression, suggesting localization to the
Golgi apparatus, whereas during M phase, WDR62 was found at the spindle
poles. The subcellular localization resembled that of CEP170 (613023).
The findings suggested a major centrosomal role for WDR62.

In cellular studies, Bhat et al. (2011) found that WDR62 localized to
centrosomes throughout mitotic progression. No staining was observed at
the midbody during cytokinesis. During interphase, WDR62 localized to
nucleoli. The findings indicated that WDR62 is a centrosomal as well as
a nuclear protein and that localization is dependent both on the cell
phase and on the cell type.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Bilguvar et al. (2010) identified 2 missense, 2 nonsense, and 2
frameshift mutations (613583.0001-613583.0005) in the WDR62 gene in 10
patients with microcephaly-2 with cortical malformations (MCPH2;
604317). All patients were from consanguineous Turkish families and
manifested with microcephaly, moderate to severe mental retardation, and
cortical malformation including pachygyria with cortical thickening,
microgyria, lissencephaly, hypoplasia of the corpus callosum,
schizencephaly, and in 1 instance, cerebellar hypoplasia.

In affected members of 2 consanguineous Pakistani families with primary
microcephaly showing linkage to chromosome 19q13 (MCPH2) (Roberts et
al., 1999), Nicholas et al. (2010) identified 2 different homozygous
mutations in the WDR62 gene (613583.0006 and 613583.0007, respectively).
In 5 additional consanguineous families of Pakistani, Arab, and
Caucasian ancestry with primary microcephaly, they identified 4
different homozygous WDR62 mutations (see, e.g.,
613583.0008-613583.0009, 613583.0011). Overall, the findings indicated
that WDR62 is a key protein in enabling spindle poles to position the
cytokinetic furrow and prolong neural precursor generation, a process
that is uniquely vital to the proper growth of the human cerebral
cortex.

Yu et al. (2010) identified 6 different homozygous mutations in the
WDR62 gene (see, e.g., 613583.0009-613583.0011) in affected members of 6
consanguineous families with microcephaly-2 with cortical malformations,
including polymicrogyria, schizencephaly, and subcortical heterotopia.

Bhat et al. (2011) identified 2 different homozygous truncating WDR62
mutations in 2 unrelated consanguineous Indian families with MCPH2 with
cortical malformations, bringing the total number of pathogenic
mutations in the gene to 17. Six of the 17 mutations are missense, and
mutations occur throughout the gene sequence. Bhat et al. (2011)
emphasized the wide phenotypic spectrum of cortical malformations in
mutation carriers.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
MICROCEPHALY 2, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, WITH CORTICAL MALFORMATIONS
WDR62, 4-BP DEL, TGCC

In 2 sibs with autosomal recessive microcephaly-2 and cortical
malformations (604317) and in an affected child from another family, all
from consanguineous Turkish unions, Bilguvar et al. (2010) identified
homozygosity for a 4-basepair deletion (TGCC) in exon 31 of the WDR62
gene. This deletion occurred at amino acid 1,402 and resulted in
frameshift and premature termination (V1402GfsX12). The mutation was
heterozygous in all parents. It was not observed in 1,290 Turkish
control chromosomes. The index patient was a 4-year, 6-month-old female
who initially presented at 4 months of age with small head size. At 2
years, 3 months she showed micrognathia and a bulbous nose, and suffered
from severe mental retardation. She had had no seizures. MRI showed
diffuse cortical thickening and pachygyria. The patient from the second
family was a 2-year, 4 month-old male. He had microcephaly and
developmental delay but no seizures. Coronal images of this patient
showed findings of microlissencephaly including prominent microcephaly,
bilateral Sylvian clefts, hypoplastic corpus callosum, and thickened
cortex. The kinship coefficients between affected individuals from both
families were consistent with fourth-degree relatedness.

.0002
MICROCEPHALY 2, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, WITH CORTICAL MALFORMATIONS
WDR62, GLU526LYS

In a 15-year, 5-month old female with microcephaly-2 and cortical
malformations (604317), the child of consanguineous Turkish parents,
Bilguvar et al. (2010) identified homozygosity for a G-to-A substitution
in exon 12 of the WDR62 gene, resulting in a glutamic acid-to-lysine
substitution at codon 526 (E526K). The glutamic acid at codon 526 was
invariant in all species examined from human to zebrafish and lamprey.
This mutation was found in heterozygosity in 3 apparently unrelated
neurologically normal Turkish individuals, giving an allele frequency of
0.2%. The patient presented to medical attention at age 3.5 years with
poor verbal skills. She had microcephaly, severe mental retardation,
prognathism, dysconjugate gaze, and dysarthria, and was able to ambulate
independently. Although abnormal electroencephalograms were noted, the
patient never suffered an overt seizure.

.0003
MICROCEPHALY 2, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, WITH CORTICAL MALFORMATIONS
WDR62, TRP224SER

In 2 sibs and their cousin with microcephaly-2 and cortical
malformations (604317), Bilguvar et al. (2010) identified homozygosity
for a missense mutation in the WDR62 gene, a G-to-C transversion in exon
6 that converted tryptophan to serine at codon 224 (W224S). All parents
were heterozygous. The mutation was not identified in 1,290 Turkish and
1,500 Caucasian control chromosomes. Tryptophan-224 was invariant in all
species examined from human to zebrafish and lamprey. The proband was a
6-year, 5-month-old boy who presented at 2 years of age with
hyperactivity, seizures, and inability to sleep. He experienced 4 to 8
seizures per day and had microcephaly, micrognathia, and severe mental
retardation, and could ambulate only with assistance. The sibs were
cousins of the proband. One was an 8-year, 7-month-old female who
presented at age 3 with seizures. She was microcephalic, hyperactive,
and had dysconjugate gaze. She was able to walk independently and had no
obvious dysmorphic features but had moderate mental retardation. Her
brother was 12 years, 11 months old. He had seizures, self-mutilating
behavior, and severe mental retardation, but could ambulate
independently.

.0004
MICROCEPHALY 2, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, WITH CORTICAL MALFORMATIONS
WDR62, GLN470TER

In a 14-year, 6-month-old male with microcephaly-2 and cortical
malformations (604317), the product of a consanguineous Turkish union,
Bilguvar et al. (2010) identified homozygosity for a C-to-T transition
in exon 11 of the WDR62 gene, resulting in a glutamine-to-termination
substitution at codon 470 (Q470X). This mutation was not identified in
1,290 Turkish and 1,500 Caucasian control chromosomes. The patient was
severely mentally retarded but had never had seizures. He had required
surgery for hernia repair and cryptorchidism.

.0005
MICROCEPHALY 2, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, WITH CORTICAL MALFORMATIONS
WDR62, 17-BP DEL

In a 10-year, 10-month-old female with microcephaly-2 and cortical
malformations (604317), the product of a consanguineous Turkish union,
Bilguvar et al. (2010) identified homozygosity for a 17-bp deletion in
exon 30 of the WDR62 gene, leading to a frameshift at codon 1,280 with
premature termination following a novel peptide of 20 amino acids
(G1280AfsX21). She presented to medical attention at 3 months of age
with failure to thrive and small head size. On neurologic examination
she was noted to have good head control. She recognized her mother and
had a social smile. This mutation was not identified in 1,290 Turkish
and 1,500 Caucasian control chromosomes.

.0006
MICROCEPHALY 2, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
WDR62, ARG438HIS

In affected members of a consanguineous Pakistani family with primary
microcephaly-2 (MCPH2; 604317), originally reported by Roberts et al.
(1999), Nicholas et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 1313G-A
transition in exon 10 of the WDR62 gene, resulting in an arg438-to-his
(R438H) substitution in a highly conserved residue. In vitro functional
expression assays showed that the mutant protein did not localize
correctly to the spindle poles during mitosis. The mutation was not
found in 298 Pakistani control chromosomes. Brain scan from 1 patient
showed a simplified gyral pattern.

.0007
MICROCEPHALY 2, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
WDR62, 1-BP DUP, 4241T

In affected members of a consanguineous Pakistani family with MCPH2
(604317), originally reported by Roberts et al. (1999), Nicholas et al.
(2010) identified a homozygous 1-bp duplication (4241dupT) in exon 31 of
the WDR62 gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. The
mutation was predicted to result in a stable transcript with C-terminal
deletion of 109 amino acids in a region that contains neither predicted
protein domains nor posttranslational modification sites. The mutation
was not found in 298 Pakistani control chromosomes. In vitro functional
expression assays showed that the mutant protein did not localize
correctly to the spindle poles during mitosis. Brain scans of patients
were not available.

.0008
MICROCEPHALY 2, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE
WDR62, ASP511ASN

In affected individuals from 2 unrelated Pakistani families with MCPH2
(604317), Nicholas et al. (2010) identified a homozygous 1531G-A
transition in exon 11 of the WDR62 gene, resulting in an asp511-to-asn
(D511N) substitution in a highly conserved residue. The mutation was
found in 1 of 284 Pakistani control chromosomes. Brain scans of the
affected individuals were not available.

.0009
MICROCEPHALY 2, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, WITH CORTICAL MALFORMATIONS
WDR62, 1-BP INS, 3936C

In a Turkish boy, born of consanguineous parents, with microcephaly-2
with cortical malformations (604317), Yu et al. (2010) identified a
homozygous 1-bp insertion (3936insC) in exon 30 of the WDR62 gene,
resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. The mutation was
not identified in 508 control individuals. He had severely delayed
psychomotor development, and brain MRI showed polymicrogyria, simplified
gyral pattern, volume loss, and a corpus callosum with incomplete genu
and small splenium. A second pregnancy was terminated after the
ultrasound showed microcephaly and abnormal gyral pattern in the fetus.

In a Caucasian girl, born of consanguineous parents, with microcephaly,
thickened cerebral cortex, and severe developmental delay, Nicholas et
al. (2010) identified homozygosity for the 3936insC mutation, which they
termed 3936dupC. The mutation was not identified in 396 Caucasian
control chromosomes.

.0010
MICROCEPHALY 2, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, WITH CORTICAL MALFORMATIONS
WDR62, 1-BP DEL, 363T

In 3 affected Mexican sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with
microcephaly-2 with cortical malformations (604317), Yu et al. (2010)
identified a homozygous 1-bp deletion (363delT) in exon 4 of the WDR62
gene, resulting in a frameshift and premature termination. The mutation
was not identified in 508 control individuals. There was some phenotypic
variability: 2 sibs had small heads with a simplified gyral pattern on
brain MRI, 1 of whom had also had generalized tonic-clonic seizures and
severe psychomotor retardation. The third sib did not have seizures but
had more severe microcephaly (-5.4 SD), normal early psychomotor
development with later delay, and more complex MRI changes, including a
simplified gyral pattern, thin corpus callosum, and subcortical band
heterotopia.

.0011
MICROCEPHALY 2, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, WITH OR WITHOUT CORTICAL
MALFORMATIONS
WDR62, VAL65MET

In 3 affected Saudi Arabian sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with
microcephaly-2 with cortical malformations (604317), Yu et al. (2010)
identified homozygosity for a 193G-A transition in exon 2 of the WDR62
gene, resulting in a val65-to-met (V65M) substitution in a highly
conserved residue. The mutation was not identified in 508 control
individuals. Two sibs were more severely affected, with severe
microcephaly (-9.2 to -9.8 SD), profound psychomotor delay with spastic
quadriparesis, and polymicrogyria and open lip schizencephaly on brain
MRI. The third patient had microcephaly (-5.3 SD), developmental delay,
and simplified gyral pattern on brain MRI. All had relative preservation
of the cerebellum and brainstem.

In 3 Arab sibs, born of consanguineous parents, with primary
microcephaly (MCPH2; 604317), Nicholas et al. (2010) identified
homozygosity for the V65M mutation. The mutation was not identified in
184 Arab control chromosomes. Brain scans of these patients were not
available.

.0012
MICROCEPHALY 2, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, WITH CORTICAL MALFORMATIONS
WDR62, 1-BP DEL, 2083A

In 2 brothers with MCPH2 with polymicrogyria (604317), who were born of
unrelated parents of northern European descent, Murdock et al. (2011)
identified compound heterozygosity for 2 truncating mutations in the
WDR62 gene: a 1-bp deletion (2083delA) in exon 17 and a 2-bp deletion
(2472delAG; 613583.0013) in exon 23. Both mutations were predicted to
cause nonsense-mediated mRNA decay and loss of function. Each unaffected
parent was heterozygous for 1 of the mutations. The mutations were
identified by exome sequencing. The phenotype of the sibs varied. The
first sib, whose pregnancy was complicated by gestational diabetes, had
a more severe phenotype, with extensive bilateral polymicrogyria,
abnormal corpus callosum, global developmental delay, intractable
seizures, and spastic quadriparesis. The second sib had extensive
polymicrogyria and gray matter heterotopia, but did not have seizures;
he had age-appropriate cognition and only mild unilateral hemiparesis.
Both patients had head circumferences less than the fifth percentile.

.0013
MICROCEPHALY 2, PRIMARY, AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE, WITH CORTICAL MALFORMATIONS
WDR62, 2-BP DEL, 2472AG

See 613583.0012 and Murdock et al. (2011).

REFERENCE 1. Bhat, V.; Girimaji, S.; Mohan, G.; Arvinda, H.; Singhmar, P.; Duvvari,
M.; Kumar, A.: Mutations in WDR62, encoding a centrosomal and nuclear
protein, in Indian primary microcephaly families with cortical malformations. Clin.
Genet. 80: 532-540, 2011.

2. Bilguvar, K.; Ozturk, A. K.; Louvi, A.; Kwan, K. Y.; Choi, M.;
Tatli, B.; Yalnizoglu, D.; Tuysuz, B.; Caglayan, A. O.; Gokben, S.;
Kaymakcalan, H.; Barak, T.; and 21 others: Whole-exome sequencing
identifies recessive WDR62 mutations in severe brain malformations. Nature 467:
207-210, 2010.

3. Murdock, D. R.; Clark, G. D.; Bainbridge, M. N.; Newsham, I.; Wu,
Y.-Q.; Muzny, D. M.; Cheung, S. W.; Gibbs, R. A.; Ramocki, M. B.:
Whole-exome sequencing identifies compound heterozygous mutations
in WDR62 in siblings with recurrent polymicrogyria. Am. J. Med. Genet. 155:
2071-2077, 2011.

4. Nicholas, A. K.; Khurshid, M.; Desir, J.; Carvalho, O. P.; Cox,
J. J.; Thornton, G.; Kausar, R.; Ansar, M.; Ahmad, W.; Verloes, A.;
Passemard, S.; Misson, J.-P.; Lindsay, S.; Gergely, F.; Dobyns, W.
B.; Roberts, E.; Abramowicz, M.; Woods, C. G.: WDR62 is associated
with the spindle pole and is mutated in human microcephaly. Nature
Genet. 42: 1010-1014, 2010.

5. Roberts, E.; Jackson, A. P.; Carradice, A. C.; Deeble, V. J.; Mannan,
J.; Rashid, Y.; Jafri, H.; McHale, D. P.; Markham, A. F.; Lench, N.
J.; Woods, C. G.: The second locus for autosomal recessive primary
microcephaly (MCPH2) maps to chromosome 19q13.1-13.2. Europ. J. Hum.
Genet. 7: 815-820, 1999.

6. Yu, T. W.; Mochida, G. H.; Tischfield, D. J.; Sgaier, S. K.; Flores-Sarnat,
L.; Sergi, C. M.; Topcu, M.; McDonald, M. T.; Barry, B. J.; Felie,
J. M.; Sunu, C.; Dobyns, W. B.; Folkerth, R. D.; Barkovich, A. J.;
Walsh, C. A.: Mutations in WDR62, encoding a centrosome-associated
protein, cause microcephaly with simplified gyri and abnormal cortical
architecture. Nature Genet. 42: 1015-1020, 2010.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/6/2011
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/12/2011

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 10/7/2010

EDITED carol: 08/30/2013
alopez: 11/2/2011
alopez: 10/4/2011
carol: 9/7/2011
ckniffin: 9/6/2011
carol: 7/6/2011
wwang: 6/8/2011
ckniffin: 6/7/2011
wwang: 6/7/2011
ckniffin: 5/12/2011
alopez: 10/7/2010

138300	TITLE +138300 GLUTATHIONE REDUCTASE; GSR
GLUTATHIONE REDUCTASE, HEMOLYTIC ANEMIA DUE TO DEFICIENCY OF, IN RED
CELLS, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION Long (1967) found in a black American a variant red cell GSR (EC
1.6.4.2) characterized by greater electrophoretic mobility and enzyme
activity per unit of hemoglobin than the normal. Inheritance was
autosomal codominant. Three homozygotes were identified. The relation to
gout, suggested by Long (1967), is problematical. Long (1972) observed 2
variant forms of red cell GSR which appear to bind far more avidly than
the common form of the enzyme. In cases of mosaic trisomy for chromosome
8, de la Chapelle et al. (1976) found elevated glutathione reductase
activity, with other enzymes normal. George and Francke (1976) assigned
the gene to the region 8p21-p23 by the gene dosage method. In an infant
with terminal deletion of the short arm of chromosome 8, de la Chapelle
et al. (1976) found low GSR activity. They concluded that the GSR locus
is in the region 8pter-p21. Sinet et al. (1977) narrowed the assignment
to 8p21. The GSR locus has also been assigned by somatic cell
hybridization; it is one of the enzyme-markers for each chromosome
(table 1 in Shows and Sakaguchi, 1980), useful for synteny mapping.

Lohr and Waller (1962) observed a 'new' form of enzyme-deficiency
hemolytic anemia in which glutathione reductase was deficient and
glutathione (GSH) was low as a consequence. (This condition is
apparently distinct from that described by Oort et al. (1961) in which
GSH was also low, but glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase and glutathione
reductase were normal.) Lohr (1963) observed 10 homozygotes and 5
heterozygotes in a family distribution consistent with autosomal
recessive inheritance. Blume et al. (1968) studied a kindred with many
persons who were demonstrably heterozygous by chemical test. Hampel et
al. (1969) found a markedly increased frequency of chromosomal
aberrations in a patient with pancytopenia and absent GSR-II band in the
electropherogram. The mother was hematologically normal but had absent
GSR-II band and a moderate increase in the frequency of chromosomal
aberrations. Addition of chloramphenicol to the cultures increased the
number of damaged chromosomes in both the mother and the son. Staal et
al. (1969) described a variety of glutathione reductase anemia in which
the variant enzyme had diminished affinity for flavin adenine
dinucleotide (FAD). The patient's anemia was corrected by vitamin B2.
Administration of flavin compounds to normal individuals or addition to
hemolysates of most normal persons causes an increase in activity of GSR
(Beutler, 1969). In a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus,
Fajnholc et al. (1971) found red cell GSR deficiency which was
correctable in vivo with riboflavin and in vitro with FAD. The same
deficiency was found in the mother and some of her relatives (who were
asymptomatic) but not in the father and his relatives. Enzyme kinetics
were normal. These workers concluded that the defect was not in the
apoenzyme. Loos et al. (1976) found virtually complete absence of GSR
activity in the erythrocytes of 3 children of a consanguineous marriage
and intermediate levels in the parents. Activity was not restored by FAD
in vitro or riboflavin in vivo. Clinically the deficiency was manifested
by favism in 1 child and by cataracts in 2. Reduced GSR was found in
leukocytes, as well as evidence of impaired bactericidal capacity, but
there was no history of repeated infections. Furthermore, Roos et al.
(1979) found that chemotaxis, phagocytosis of opsonized S. aureus, and
degranulation proceeded normally. Intracellular killing appeared normal
at low ratios of bacteria to phagocytes, but higher ratios resulted in
defective bacterial killing. GSR deficiency is a frequent occurrence in
northern Thailand. Flatz (1971) found a high frequency of GSR deficiency
in northern Thailand but concluded that it was probably secondary to
dietary riboflavin deficiency because activity of the enzyme was raised
markedly in most deficient persons by administration of riboflavin.
Studies of the families of 6 persons with poor response to riboflavin
gave no evidence supporting 'simple dominant inheritance,' and the
proband with low GSR values had no hematologic evidence of a hemolytic
tendency. Nevin et al. (1990) found increased GSR activity in a child
with an inverted tandem duplication of 8p23.1-p12.

Data on gene frequencies of allelic variants were tabulated by
Roychoudhury and Nei (1988).

ANIMAL MODEL

Using a combination of behavioral analysis of 6 inbred mouse strains
with quantitative gene expression profiling of several brain regions,
Hovatta et al. (2005) identified 17 genes with expression patterns that
correlated with anxiety-like behavioral phenotypes. To determine if 2 of
the genes, glyoxalase-1 (138750) and glutathione reductase-1, have a
causal role in the genesis of anxiety, Hovatta et al. (2005) performed
genetic manipulation using lentivirus-mediated gene transfer. Local
overexpression of these genes in the mouse brain resulted in increased
anxiety-like behavior, while local inhibition of glyoxalase-1 expression
by RNA interference decreased the anxiety-like behavior. Hovatta et al.
(2005) concluded that both of these genes are involved in oxidative
stress metabolism, linking this pathway with anxiety-related behavior.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Carson et al. (1961); de la Chapelle et al. (1976); Flatz  (1971);
Gutensohn et al. (1978); Jensen et al. (1984); Jensen et al. (1982);
Kurz and Hohenwallner (1970); Lohr and Waller (1963); Magenis et al.
(1978); Nichols and Ruddle (1975)
REFERENCE 1. Beutler, E.: Effect of flavin compounds on glutathione reductase
activity: in vivo and in vitro studies. J. Clin. Invest. 48: 1957-1966,
1969.

2. Blume, K. G.; Gottwik, M.; Lohr, G. W.; Rudiger, H. W.: Familienuntersuchungen
zum Glutathionreduktasemangel menschlicher Erythrocyten. Humangenetik 6:
163-170, 1968.

3. Carson, P. E.; Brewer, G. J.; Ickes, C.: Decreased glutathione
reductase with susceptibility to hemolysis. (Abstract) J. Lab. Clin.
Med. 58: 804 only, 1961.

4. de la Chapelle, A.; Icen, A.; Aula, P.; Leisti, J.; Turleau, C.;
de Grouchy, J.: Mapping of the gene for glutathione reductase on
chromosome 8. Ann. Genet. 19: 253-256, 1976.

5. de la Chapelle, A.; Vuopio, P.; Icen, A.: Trisomy 8 in the bone
marrow associated with high red cell glutathione reductase activity. Blood 47:
815-826, 1976.

6. Fajnholc, N. E.; Kaminsky, E.; Machtey, I.; De Vries, A.: Hereditary
erythrocyte glutathione reductase deficiency. Rev. Europ. Clin. Biol. 16:
987-991, 1971.

7. Flatz, G.: Population study of erythrocyte glutathione reductase
activity. I. Stimulation of the enzyme by flavin adenine dinucleotide
and by riboflavin supplementation. Humangenetik 11: 269-277, 1971.

8. Flatz, G.: Population study of erythrocyte glutathione reductase
activity. II. Hematological data of subjects with low enzyme activity
and stimulation characteristics in their families. Humangenetik 11:
278-285, 1971.

9. George, D. L.; Francke, U.: Gene dose effect: regional mapping
of human glutathione reductase on chromosome 8. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 17:
282-286, 1976.

10. Gutensohn, W.; Rodewald, A.; Haas, B.; Schulz, P.; Cleve, H.:
Refined mapping of the gene for glutathione reductase on human chromosome
8. Hum. Genet. 43: 221-224, 1978.

11. Hampel, K. E.; Lohr, G. W.; Blume, K. G.; Rudiger, H. W.: Spontane
und chloramphenicolinduzierte Chromosomenmutationen und biochemische
Befunde bei zwei Faellen mit Glutathionreduktasemangel (NAD(P)H: glutathione
oxidoreductase, E.C. 1.6.4.2). Humangenetik 7: 305-313, 1969.

12. Hovatta, I.; Tennant, R. S.; Helton, R.; Marr, R. A.; Singer,
O.; Redwine, J. M.; Ellison, J. A.; Schadt, E. E.; Verma, I. M.; Lockhart,
D. J.; Barlow, C.: Glyoxalase 1 and glutathione reductase 1 regulate
anxiety in mice. Nature 438: 662-666, 2005.

13. Jensen, P. K. A.; Junien, C.; de la Chapelle, A.: Gene for glutathione
reductase localized to subband 8p21.1. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 37: 497 only, 1984.

14. Jensen, P. K. A.; Junien, C.; Despoisse, S.; Bernsen, A.; Thelle,
T.; Friedrich, U.; de la Chapelle, A.: Inverted tandem duplication
of the short arm of chromosome 8: a non-random de novo structural
aberration in man. Localization of the gene for glutathione reductase
in subband 8p21.1. Ann. Genet. 25: 207-211, 1982.

15. Kurz, R.; Hohenwallner, W.: Familiaerer Glutathionreduktasemangel
und Stoerung der Glutathionsynthese im Erythrozyten. Helv. Paediat.
Acta 25: 542-552, 1970.

16. Lohr, G. W.: Personal Communication. Marburg, Germany  1963.

17. Lohr, G. W.; Waller, H. D.: Eine neue enzymopenische haemolytische
Anaemie mit Glutathionreduktase-Mangel. Med. Klin. 57: 1521-1525,
1962.

18. Lohr, G. W.; Waller, H. D.: Zur Biochemie einiger angeborener
haemolytischer Anaemien. Folia Haemat. 8: 377-397, 1963.

19. Long, W. K.: Personal Communication. Austin, Texas  1972.

20. Long, W. K.: Glutathione reductase in red blood cells: variant
associated with gout. Science 155: 712-713, 1967.

21. Loos, J. A.; Roos, D.; Weening, R. S.; Hauwerzijl, J.: Familial
deficiency of glutathione reductase in human blood cells. Blood 48:
53-62, 1976.

22. Magenis, R. E.; Reiss, J.; Bigley, R.; Champerlin, J.; Lovrien,
E.: Exclusion of glutathione reductase from 8pter-8p22 and localization
to 8p21. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 22: 446-448, 1978.

23. Nevin, N. C.; Morrison, P. J.; Jones, J.; Reid, M. M.: Inverted
tandem duplication of 8p12-p23.1 in a child with increased activity
of glutathione reductase. J. Med. Genet. 27: 135-136, 1990.

24. Nichols, E. A.; Ruddle, F. H.: Polymorphism and linkage of glutathione
reductase in Mus musculus. Biochem. Genet. 13: 323-330, 1975.

25. Oort, M.; Loos, J. A.; Prins, H. K.: Hereditary absence of reduced
glutathione in the erythrocytes--a new clinical and biochemical entity. Vox
Sang. 6: 370-373, 1961.

26. Roos, D.; Weening, R. S.; Voetman, A. A.; van Schaik, M. L. J.;
Bot, A. A. M.; Meerhof, L. J.; Loos, J. A.: Protection of phagocytic
leukocytes by endogenous glutathione: studies in a family with glutathione
reductase deficiency. Blood 53: 851-866, 1979.

27. Roychoudhury, A. K.; Nei, M.: Human Polymorphic Genes: World
Distribution.  New York: Oxford Univ. Press (pub.)  1988.

28. Shows, T. B.; Sakaguchi, A. Y.: Gene transfer and gene mapping
in mammalian cells in culture. In Vitro 16: 55-76, 1980.

29. Sinet, P. M.; Bresson, J. L.; Couturier, J.; Prieur, M.; Rethore,
M.-O.; Taillemite, J. L.; Toudec, D.; Jerome, H.; Lejeune, J.: Localisation
probable du gene de la glutathion reductase (EC 1.6.4.2.) sur la bande
8p21. Ann. Genet. 20: 13-17, 1977.

30. Staal, G. E. J.; Helleman, P. W.; De Wael, J.; Veeger, C.: Purification
and properties of an abnormal glutathione reductase from human erythrocytes. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 185: 63-69, 1969.

CLINICAL SYMPTOMS 
Heme:
Hemolytic anemia

Lab:
Glutathione reductase deficiency

Inheritance:
Autosomal recessive

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/30/2006

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED alopez: 02/01/2006
terry: 1/30/2006
terry: 5/17/2005
mgross: 3/17/2004
joanna: 8/12/1997
mimadm: 9/24/1994
terry: 5/10/1994
pfoster: 2/18/1994
carol: 7/12/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 2/26/1991

600753	TITLE *600753 GOLGI APPARATUS PROTEIN 1; GLG1
;;GOLGI SIALOGLYCOPROTEIN MG-160;;
E-SELECTIN LIGAND 1, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; ESL1
DESCRIPTION MG-160, originally isolated from rat brain, is a conserved membrane
sialoglycoprotein residing in the medial cisternae of the Golgi
apparatus of most cells (Gonatas et al., 1989). MG-160 appears early in
the developing chick embryo and persists in most cells throughout
embryonic development and in the adult animal (Mourelatos et al., 1995).
The early appearance and ubiquitous presence of MG-160 suggests that the
protein plays an important role in the biogenesis and function of the
Golgi apparatus. MG-160 binds basic fibroblast growth factor (FGFB;
134920) and displays 90% identity of amino acids with CFR, a
cysteine-rich receptor for several fibroblast growth factors that was
isolated from chick embryos. Unlike the fibroblast growth factor
receptors involved in signal transduction, MG-160 and its chick homolog,
CFR, do not display the extracellular Ig-like repeats and the
intracytoplasmic tyrosine kinase domains. In addition to CFR, MG-160 is
highly homologous to ESL-1, a ligand for E-selectin (SELE; 131210).

Mourelatos et al. (1996) isolated and characterized human GLG1 cDNAs.
The full-length cDNA encodes a predicted 1,179-amino acid protein that
has a signal peptide, a proline- and glutamine-rich region, a
cysteine-rich domain containing 5 potential asparagine-linked
glycosylation sites, a hydrophobic transmembrane domain, and a short
carboxy-terminal tail. The proline- and glutamine-rich segment contains
a polyglutamine stretch which is encoded by an uninterrupted exonic
sequence of CAG-CAA repeats. Human GLG1 shows between 88% and 95%
overall amino acid identity with rat Glg1, mouse Esl1, and chicken CRF.
The authors detected 3 transcripts of 10, 5, and 3.8 kb in several human
fetal and adult tissues by Northern blot analysis.

Mourelatos et al. (1995) localized the human GLG1 gene for MG-160 to
16q22-q23 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. If MG-160, as has been
postulated, mediates the secretion of fibroblast growth factors, the
chromosomal localization of the gene may facilitate understanding of the
role of the gene in human disease.

By Southern blot analysis of an interspecific backcross panel, Willmroth
and Beaudet (1999) mapped Esl1, the mouse homolog of the GLG1 gene, to
chromosome 8, in a region showing homology of synteny to human 16q. The
mouse gene contains 27 exons and extends over 75 kb.

REFERENCE 1. Gonatas, J. O.; Mezitis, S. G. E.; Stieber, A.; Fleischer, B.;
Gonatas, N. K.: MG-160. A novel sialoglycoprotein of the medical
cisternae of the Golgi apparatus. J. Biol. Chem. 264: 646-653, 1989.

2. Mourelatos, Z.; Gonatas, J. O.; Cinato, E.; Gonatas, N. K.: Cloning
and sequence analysis of the human MG160, a fibroblast growth factor
and E-selectin binding membrane sialoglycoprotein of the Golgi apparatus. DNA
Cell Biol. 15: 1121-1128, 1996.

3. Mourelatos, Z.; Gonatas, J. O.; Nycum, L. M.; Gonatas, N. K.; Biegel,
J. A.: Assignment of the GLG1 gene for MG-160, a fibroblast growth
factor and E-selectin binding membrane sialoglycoprotein of the Golgi
apparatus, to chromosome 16q22-q23 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 28:
354-355, 1995.

4. Willmroth, F.; Beaudet, A. L.: Structure of the murine E-selectin
ligand 1 (ESL-1) gene and assignment to chromosome 8. Mammalian Genome 10:
1085-1088, 1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 07/06/2000
Sheryl A. Jankowski - updated: 6/8/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 8/28/1995

EDITED mgross: 07/06/2000
psherman: 6/8/1999
jamie: 5/8/1997
mark: 8/28/1995

150370	TITLE *150370 RIBOSOMAL PROTEIN SA; RPSA
;;LAMININ RECEPTOR 1; LAMR1;;
LAMBR;;
LAMININ RECEPTOR, 67-KD; 67LR
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Gehlsen et al. (1988) isolated a receptor for the adhesive basement
membrane protein laminin (150290, 150310, 150320) from human
glioblastoma cells by affinity chromatography on laminin. These RuGli
glioblastoma cells were later shown to be rat cells (Gehlsen et al.,
1988). This receptor has a heterodimeric structure similar to that of
receptors for other extracellular matrix proteins such as the
fibronectin (135620) and vitronectin (193210) receptors. Incorporation
of the laminin receptor into lysosomal membranes made it possible for
lysosomes to attach to surfaces coated with laminin.

Bignon et al. (1991) cloned 2 cDNAs for the human 67-kD laminin
receptor. They found that these clones hybridize to many restriction
fragments in Southern blot analyses in the human. The particular
patterns were accounted for by the presence of up to 16 and 21 copies of
the laminin receptor gene per haploid genome in human and mouse,
respectively. In contrast, a single gene copy was found in the chicken.

Yow et al. (1988) cloned a human colon carcinoma cDNA encoding a
laminin-binding protein. The cDNA hybridized to a 1.2-kb transcript, the
level of which was approximately 9-fold higher in colon carcinoma than
in adjacent normal colonic epithelium. The deduced 295-amino acid
protein has a highly negatively charged C-terminal segment and lacks
consensus sequences for an N-terminal signal sequence, amphipathic
alpha-helices, and N-glycosylation sites.

Satoh et al. (1992) cloned cDNAs encoding the 67-kD laminin receptor
from both a human lung cell line and a human lung cancer cell line. They
demonstrated that the level of the laminin receptor transcript was
higher in the lung cancer cell line than in the lung cell line.

Tohgo et al. (1994) found that the amino acid sequence of the rat 40S
ribosomal subunit is 99% identical to that of the human 68-kD
laminin-binding protein, indicating that the 40S ribosomal subunit is
identical to the 68-kD laminin-binding protein.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Jackers et al. (1996) localized
the LAMR1 gene to 3p21.3. Kenmochi et al. (1998) mapped the LAMR1 gene,
which they called RPSA, to 3p using somatic cell hybrid and radiation
hybrid mapping panels.

Bignon et al. (1991) identified laminin receptor pseudogenes on
chromosomes 3, 12, 14, and X. The features suggested that the laminin
receptor gene belongs to a retroposon family in mammals.

Lafreniere et al. (1993) demonstrated that a laminin receptor
pseudogene, which they symbolized LAMRP4, is located at Xq13 in a 2.6-Mb
segment that also contains the XIST gene (314670).

GENE STRUCTURE

The 37-kD precursor of the 67-kD laminin receptor (37LRP) is a
polypeptide whose expression is consistently upregulated in aggressive
carcinoma. It appears to be a multifunctional protein involved in the
translational machinery; it has also been identified as p40
ribosome-associated protein. Jackers et al. (1996) isolated the active
37LRP/p40 human gene. They found that it contains 7 exons and 6 introns.
Ribonuclease protection experiments suggested multiple transcription
start sites. The promoter area does not bear a TATA box but contains 4
Sp1 sites. The first intron is also GC-rich, containing 5 Sp1 sites.
Intron 4 contains a full sequence of the small nucleolar E2 RNA (RNE2;
180646) between nucleotides 4365 and 4516, and intron 3 contains 2 Alu
sequences.

GENE FUNCTION

Montuori et al. (1999) investigated the expression of integrin laminin
receptors in normal thyroid primary cultures; immortalized normal
thyroid cells (TAD-2); papillary (NPA), follicular (WRO), and anaplastic
(ARO) thyroid tumor cell lines; 7 thyroid tumors (4 papillary and 3
follicular carcinomas); and normal thyroid glands. Despite the presence
of several integrin laminin receptors, adhesion of TAD-2, NPA, and ARO
cells to immobilized laminin-1 was poor, whereas WRO cells and
follicular carcinoma-derived cells displayed a strong adhesion. Indeed,
WRO and follicular carcinoma-derived cells showed expression of a
nonintegrin laminin receptor, the 67-kD high-affinity laminin receptor
(67LR). TAD-2, NPA, and ARO cells as well as nodular goiter, toxic
adenoma, follicular adenoma, and papillary carcinoma-derived cells did
not express the 67LR. The expression in follicular carcinoma cells of a
functional, high-affinity 67LR, together with nonfunctional integrin
laminin receptors, could be responsible for the tendency of follicular
carcinoma cells to metastasize by mediating stable contacts with basal
membranes.

Chen et al. (2002) found that human normal and leukemic T cells produce
GNRH2 (602352) and GNRH1 (152760). Exposure of normal or cancerous human
or mouse T cells to GNRH2 or GNRH1 triggered de novo gene transcription
and cell-surface expression of the laminin receptor, which is involved
in cellular adhesion and migration and in tumor invasion and metastasis.
GNRH2 or GNRH1 also induced adhesion to laminin and chemotaxis toward
SDF1A (600835), and augmented entry in vivo of metastatic T-lymphoma
into the spleen and bone marrow. Homing of normal T cells into specific
organs was reduced in mice lacking GNRH1. A specific GNRH1 receptor
antagonist blocked GNRH1 but not GNRH2-induced effects, which was
suggestive of signaling through distinct receptors. Chen et al. (2002)
suggested that GNRH2 and GNRH1, secreted from nerves or autocrine or
paracrine sources, interact directly with T cells and trigger gene
transcription, adhesion, chemotaxis, and homing to specific organs.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Bolze et al. (2013) demonstrated that heterozygous mutations in the RPSA
gene cause autosomal dominant isolated congenital asplenia (271400) by
haploinsufficiency, revealing an essential role for RPSA in human spleen
development. Bolze et al. (2013) identified a nonsense mutation, a
frameshift duplication, and 5 different missense mutations. These 7
mutations were not identified in more than 10,000 alleles reported in
the 1,000 Genomes Project or the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project. The
missense mutations affected residues strictly conserved in mammals,
vertebrates, and yeast.

ANIMAL MODEL

Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (ARVD; 107970) is a
hereditary cardiomyopathy that causes sudden death in the young. Asano
et al. (2004) found a line of mice with inherited right ventricular
dysplasia (RVD) caused by mutation of the gene laminin receptor-1
(Lamr1). This locus contained an intron-processing retroposon that was
transcribed in the mice with RVD. Introduction of a mutated Lamr1 gene
into normal mice by breeding or by direct injection caused
susceptibility to RVD, which was similar to that seen in the RVD mice.
An in vitro study of cardiomyocytes expressing the product of mutated
Lamr1 showed early cell death accompanied by alteration of the chromatin
architecture. They found that heterochromatin protein-1 (HP1; 604478)
bound specifically to mutant Lamr1. HP1 is a dynamic regulator of
heterochromatin sites, suggesting that mutant LAMR1 impairs a crucial
process of transcriptional regulation. Indeed, mutant Lamr1 caused
specific changes to gene expression in cardiomyocytes, as detected by
gene chip analysis. Asano et al. (2004) concluded that products of the
Lamr1 transposon interact with HP1 to cause degeneration of
cardiomyocytes. This mechanism may also contribute to the etiology of
human ARVD. They noted that the human LAMR1 gene maps to 3p21 and that a
form of ARVD, ARVD5 (604400), maps to 3p23.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ASPLENIA, ISOLATED CONGENITAL
RPSA, GLN9TER

In affected members of a Caucasian family from the United States
(kindred E) with isolated congenital asplenia (271400), Bolze et al.
(2013) identified heterozygosity for a c.25C-T transition in the RPSA
gene that resulted in a nonsense mutation, gln9 to ter (Q9X). The
mutation segregated in the mother and son and was presumably present in
2 other sibs who had died of overwhelming infection.

.0002
ASPLENIA, ISOLATED CONGENITAL
RPSA, 5-BP DUP, 590TCATG

In a mother and 2 sons (kindred C) with isolated congenital asplenia
(271400), Bolze et al. (2013) identified heterozygosity for a 5-bp
duplication in exon 5 of the RPSA gene (c.590_594dup) that resulted in
frameshift and premature termination (Pro199SerfsTer25). Cloning and
analysis of protein generated from activated T cells from patients
showed that less than 10% of the transcripts carried the mutation, which
suggested that mutant mRNAs were subject to nonsense-mediated decay. The
mother was Caucasian and the father was of Tamil descent from Reunion
Island. This family had been reported by Mahlaoui et al. (2011) as
family D.

.0003
ASPLENIA, ISOLATED CONGENITAL
RPSA, ARG180GLY

In affected members of 2 families (kindreds D and A) with isolated
congenital asplenia (271400), Bolze et al. (2013) detected
heterozygosity for a c.538C-G transversion in the RPSA gene that
resulted in an arg180-to-gly substitution (R180G). Haplotype analysis
indicated that the mutation arose independently in each kindred. In
kindred A, affected individuals occurred in 3 generations.

.0004
ASPLENIA, ISOLATED CONGENITAL
RPSA, ARG180TRP

In a Caucasian individual from Sweden (kindred T) with isolated
congenital asplenia (271400), Bolze et al. (2013) identified
heterozygosity for a 538C-T transition in the RPSA gene that resulted in
an arg180-to-trp substitution (R180W). Since neither parent carried the
mutation and the patient had 3 unaffected sibs, the mutation was
presumed to have arisen de novo.

.0005
ASPLENIA, ISOLATED CONGENITAL
RPSA, ARG186CYS

In a family of Congolese origin (kindred B) with 3 affected members with
isolated congenital asplenia (271400), Bolze et al. (2013) identified a
heterozygous c.556C-T transition in the RPSA gene that resulted in an
arg186-to-cys substitution (R186C). This family had been reported by
Mahlaoui et al. (2011) as family E and had been reported by Koss et al.
(2012) as having a causative mutation in the NKX2-5 gene (600584.0024).
The RPSA mutation segregated with the disease in a father and 2 sons,
one deceased; 3 other deceased sibs were probably affected. Koss et al.
(2012) presented a case report of this family. Three children died of
fulminant infection within the first year of life; they were not further
studied. A fourth child died of sepsis at age 23 months. Postmortem
examination of this child showed asplenia with normal heart and visceral
placement, and mutation analysis identified the P236H mutation. The
fifth child and the father, who both carried the mutation, were found to
have ICAS; the child was placed on prophylaxis, whereas the father did
not have a history of infections, suggesting incomplete penetrance.
Studies in mouse embryos and cellular studies of splenic mesenchymal
cells demonstrated a pivotal role for the NKX2-5 gene in spleen
development.

.0006
ASPLENIA, ISOLATED CONGENITAL
RPSA, THR54ASN

In 2 affected children with isolated congenital asplenia (271400) from a
Caucasian French family (kindred F), Bolze et al. (2013) identified
heterozygosity for a c.161C-A transversion in the RPSA gene that
resulted in a thr54-to-asn substitution (T54N). Since neither parent was
found to carry the mutation, inheritance was attributed to germline
mosaicism. This family had been reported by Mahlaoui et al. (2011) as
family B, and by Ferlicot et al. (1997).

.0007
ASPLENIA, ISOLATED CONGENITAL
RPSA, LEU58PHE

In an individual of French descent (kindred O) with isolated congenital
asplenia (271400), Bolze et al. (2013) identified heterozygosity for a
c.172C-T transition in the RPSA gene that resulted in a leu58-to-phe
substitution (L58F). The mutation apparently arose de novo.

REFERENCE 1. Asano, Y.; Takashima, S.; Asakura, M.; Shintani, Y.; Liao, Y.;
Minamino, T.; Asanuma, H.; Sanada, S.; Kim, J.; Ogai, A.; Fukushima,
T.; Oikawa, Y.; Okazaki, Y.; Kaneda, Y.; Sato, M.; Miyazaki, J.; Kitamura,
S.; Tomoike, H.; Kitakaze, M.; Hori, M.: Lamr1 functional retroposon
causes right ventricular dysplasia in mice. Nature Genet. 36: 123-130,
2004.

2. Bignon, C.; Roux-Dosseto, M.; Zeigler, M. E.; Mattei, M.-G.; Lissitzky,
J.-C.; Wicha, M. S.; Martin, P.-M.: Genomic analysis of the 67-kDa
laminin receptor in normal and pathological tissues: circumstantial
evidence for retroposon features. Genomics 10: 481-485, 1991.

3. Bolze, A.; Mahlaoui, N.; Byun, M.; Turner, B.; Trede, N.; Ellis,
S. R.; Abhyankar, A.; Itan, Y.; Patin, E.; Brebner, S.; Sackstein,
P.; Puel, A.; and 20 others: Ribosomal protein SA haploinsufficiency
in humans with isolated congenital asplenia. Science 340: 976-978,
2013.

4. Chen, A.; Ganor, Y.; Rahimipour, S.; Ben-Aroya, N.; Koch, Y.; Levite,
M.: The neuropeptides GnRH-II and GnRH-I are produced by human T
cells and trigger laminin receptor gene expression, adhesion, chemotaxis
and homing to specific organs. Nature Med. 8: 1421-1426, 2002.

5. Ferlicot, S.; Emile, J.-F.; Le Bris, J.-L.; Cheron, G.; Brousse,
N.: L'asplenie congenitale: un deficit immunitaire de l'enfant de
decouverte souvent trop tardive. Ann. Path. 17: 44-46, 1997.

6. Gehlsen, K. R.; Dillner, L.; Engvall, E.; Ruoslahti, E.: The human
laminin receptor is a member of the integrin family of cell adhesion
receptors. Science 241: 1228-1229, 1988. Note: Erratum: Science
245:342-343, 1989.

7. Jackers, P.; Minoletti, F.; Belotti, D.; Clausse, N.; Sozzi, G.;
Sobel, M. E.; Castronovo, V.: Isolation from a multigene family of
the active human gene of the metastasis-associated multifunctional
protein 37LRP/p40 at chromosome 3p21.3. Oncogene 13: 495-503, 1996.
Note: Erratum: Oncogene 14: 627 only, 1997.

8. Kenmochi, N.; Kawaguchi, T.; Rozen, S.; Davis, E.; Goodman, N.;
Hudson, T. J.; Tanaka, T.; Page, D. C.: A map of 75 human ribosomal
protein genes. Genome Res. 8: 509-523, 1998.

9. Koss, M.; Bolze, A.; Brendolan, A.; Saggese, M.; Capellini, T.
D.; Bojilova, E.; Boisson, B.; Prall, O. W. J.; Elliott, D. A.; Solloway,
M.; Lenti, E.; Hidaka, C.; Chang, C.-P.; Mahlaoui, N.; Harvey, R.
P.; Casanova, J.-L.; Selleri, L.: Congenital asplenia in mice and
humans with mutations in a Pbx/Nkx2-5/p15 module. Dev. Cell 22:
913-926, 2012.

10. Lafreniere, R. G.; Brown, C. J.; Rider, S.; Chelly, J.; Taillon-Miller,
P.; Chinault, A. C.; Monaco, A. P.; Willard, H. F.: 2.6 Mb YAC contig
of the human X inactivation center region in Xq13: physical linkage
of the RPS4X, PHKA1, XIST and DXS128E genes. Hum. Molec. Genet. 2:
1105-1115, 1993.

11. Mahlaoui, N.; Minard-Colin, V.; Picard, C.; Bolze, A.; Ku, C.-L.;
Tournilhac, O.; Gilbert-Dussardier, B.; Pautard, B.; Durand, P.; Devictor,
D.; Lachassinne, E.; Guillois, B.; Morin, M.; Gouraud, F.; Valensi,
F.; Fischer, A.; Puel, A.; Abel, L.; Bonnet, D.; Casanova, J.-L.:
Isolated congenital asplenia: a French nationwide retrospective survey
of 20 cases. J. Pediat. 158: 142-148, 2011.

12. Montuori, N.; Muller, F.; De Riu, S.; Fenzi, G.; Sobel, M. E.;
Rossi, G.; Vitale, M.: Laminin receptors in differentiated thyroid
tumors: restricted expression of the 67-kilodalton laminin receptor
in follicular carcinoma cells. J. Clin. Endocr. Metab. 84: 2086-2092,
1999.

13. Satoh, K.; Narumi, K.; Sakai, T.; Abe, T.; Kikuchi, T.; Matsushima,
K.; Sindoh, S.; Motomiya, M.: Cloning of 67-kDa laminin receptor
cDNA and gene expression in normal and malignant cell lines of the
human lung. Cancer Lett. 62: 199-203, 1992.

14. Tohgo, A.; Takasawa, S.; Munakata, H.; Yonekura, H.; Hayashi,
N.; Okamoto, H.: Structural determination and characterization of
a 40 kDa protein isolated from rat 40 S ribosomal subunit. FEBS Lett. 340:
133-138, 1994.

15. Yow, H. K.; Wong, J. M.; Chen, H. S.; Lee, C. G.; Davis, S.; Steele,
G. D., Jr.; Chen, L. B.: Increased mRNA expression of a laminin-binding
protein in human colon carcinoma: complete sequence of a full-length
cDNA encoding the protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 85: 6394-6398,
1988. Note: Erratum: Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 86: 7032 only, 1989.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/11/2013
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/23/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 2/13/2003
Alan F. Scott - updated: 4/30/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 3/20/2000
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 3/10/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/27/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/14/1988

EDITED alopez: 10/08/2013
alopez: 9/11/2013
terry: 11/13/2012
wwang: 7/23/2008
alopez: 2/17/2004
alopez: 1/23/2004
terry: 1/23/2004
alopez: 2/19/2003
terry: 2/13/2003
joanna: 4/30/2002
mgross: 4/4/2000
terry: 3/20/2000
carol: 3/23/1999
psherman: 3/27/1998
dholmes: 3/6/1998
mark: 6/13/1995
carol: 9/20/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 6/24/1991
supermim: 3/20/1990
ddp: 10/27/1989

