614953	TITLE *614953 SCHLAFEN FAMILY, MEMBER 11; SLFN11
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The Schlafen (SFLN) family contains 9 mouse and 6 human genes that
encode proteins with a conserved N terminus containing a putative AAA
ATPase domain. Longer SLFN proteins, such as SLFN11, have C-terminal
motifs resembling DNA/RNA helicase domains. Studies in mouse have
implicated SLFN proteins in regulation of cell growth and T-cell
development (summary by Geserick et al. (2004) and Li et al. (2012)).

CLONING

Geserick et al. (2004) identified mouse Slfn5 (614952), Slfn8, Slfn9,
and Slfn10, which encode proteins that share significant homology with
mouse Slfn1 through Slfn4 in their N-terminal halves, but contain unique
C-terminal extensions with motifs homologous to DNA/RNA helicases.
Slfn8, Slfn9, and Slfn10 share 85 to 87% amino acid identity with one
another, whereas Slfn5 is more distantly related to the former group,
sharing 40% identity.

Van Zuylen et al. (2011) noted that human SLFN11 and SLFN13 (614957) are
orthologous to mouse Slfn8, Slfn9, and Slfn10.

Li et al. (2012) stated that the 901-amino acid human SLFN11 protein has
an AAA domain in its N-terminal half and a putative helicase sequence in
its C-terminal half. Quantitative RT-PCR showed that SLFN5 and SLFN11
were the most prominently expressed SLFN family members in several human
cell lines.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the SLFN11 gene to chromosome 17q12 based on an
alignment of the SLFN11 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC052586) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

Bustos et al. (2009) found that the SLFN genes are clustered within the
same orthologous region flanked by the UNC45 (UNC45B; 611220) and PEX12
(601758) genes in all mammalian genomes examined. The human and mouse
SLFN clusters are located on chromosomes 17 and 11, respectively.

GENE FUNCTION

Li et al. (2012) noted that levels of mouse SLFN proteins are elevated
after infection with Brucella or Listeria. Using quantitative RT-PCR,
they showed that lipopolysaccharide, poly-IC, or interferon (IFN)-alpha
(147660)/beta (147640) treatment of murine macrophages resulted in
induction of several SLFN genes. Treatment of human foreskin fibroblasts
with IFN-beta, poly-IC, or poly-dAdT revealed similar induction of SLFN
genes, including SLFN5 and SLFN11. Li et al. (2012) found that human
SLFN11, but not SLFN5, potently and specifically abrogated production of
retroviruses, such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 (see 609423),
and diminished the number of viral particles released from cells. The
inhibitory activity resided in the 579-residue N-terminal half of
SLFN11, which includes the AAA domain. Rather than affecting early steps
of the retroviral infection cycle, including reverse transcription,
integration, and transcription, SLFN11 selectively inhibited expression
of viral proteins in a codon-usage-dependent manner. SLFN11 bound tRNA
and counteracted changes in the tRNA pool elicited by HIV. Li et al.
(2012) concluded that SLFN11 is a potent, IFN-inducible restriction
factor against retroviruses that mediates its antiviral effects on the
basis of codon usage discrimination.

- Putative Mouse Orthologs of SLFN11

Using Northern blot analysis, Geserick et al. (2004) detected expression
of most mouse SLFN genes examined in Listeria monocytogenes-infected
mouse splenocytes, with little or no expression in uninfected mouse
cells. Ifngr (107470) was required for Slfn5, Slfn8, Slfn9, and Slfn10
upregulation. Further analysis showed that mouse SLFNs were
differentially regulated in developing thymocytes, in activated
peripheral T cells, in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)- or interferon-gamma
(IFNG; 147570)-activated macrophages, or during terminal myeloid
differentiation of M1 leukemia cells. Transgenic expression in mice
revealed that dysregulated expression of Slfn8 negatively influenced
thymocyte development and impaired the response of peripheral T cells to
T-cell receptor (see 186880)-mediated stimulation. Geserick et al.
(2004) concluded that SLFN genes are integrated into regulatory networks
that control T-cell development and activation.

EVOLUTION

Bustos et al. (2009) used genomic and phylogenetic studies to
investigate the evolution and role of the SLFN gene family. They found
that the SLFN family is widely distributed in mammals, with 4 major
clades that underwent lineage-specific expansions or contractions in
various orders, including primates and rodents. Bustos et al. (2009)
also identified SLFN family members in Chondrichthyes and Amphibia. They
found evidence that positive selection has acted on many SLFN genes. A
member of the SLFN family was horizontally transferred from mouse to
orthopoxviruses, where the authors hypothesized it plays a role in
allowing the virus to survive host defense mechanisms. The viral SLFN
sequences are evolving under purifying selection, indicating their
functional relevance.

Van Zuylen et al. (2011) noted that only 2 SLFN family members, SLFN5
and SLFN14 (614958), have direct orthologs in mouse and human,
consistent with rapid evolution of the SLFN family across mammalian
species. Human SLFN12 (614955) and SLFN12L (614956) have 4 orthologs in
mice (Slfn1, Slfn2, Slfn3, and Slfn4), and human SLFN11 and SLFN13 have
3 orthologs in mice (Slfn8, Slfn9, and Slfn10).

REFERENCE 1. Bustos, O.; Naik, S.; Ayers, G.; Casola, C.; Perez-Lamigueiro,
M. A.; Chippindale, P. T.; Pritham, E. J.; de la Casa-Esperon, E.
: Evolution of the Schlafen genes, a gene family associated with embryonic
lethality, meiotic drive, immune processes, and orthopoxvirus virulence. Gene 447:
1-11, 2009.

2. Geserick, P.; Kaiser, F.; Klemm, U.; Kaufmann, S. H. E.; Zerrahn,
J.: Modulation of T cell development and activation by novel members
of the Schlafen (slfn) gene family harbouring an RNA helicase-like
motif. Int. Immun. 16: 1535-1548, 2004.

3. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  11/29/2012.

4. Li, M.; Kao, E.; Gao, X.; Sandig, H.; Limmer, K.; Pavon-Eternod,
M.; Jones, T. E.; Landry, S.; Pan, T.; Weitzman, M. D.; David, M.
: Codon-usage-based inhibition of HIV protein synthesis by human Schlafen
11. Nature 491: 125-128, 2012.

5. van Zuylen, W. J.; Garceau, V.; Idris, A.; Schroder, K.; Irvine,
K. M.; Lattin, J. E.; Ovchinnikov, D. A.; Perkins, A. C.; Cook, A.
D.; Hamilton, J. A.; Hertzog, P. J.; Stacey, K. J.; Kellie, S.; Hume,
D. A.; Sweet, M. J.: Macrophage activation and differentiation signals
regulate Schlafen-4 gene expression: evidence for Schlafen-4 as a
modulator of myelopoiesis. PLoS One e15723, 2011. Note: Electronic
Article.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 11/29/2012

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 11/29/2012

EDITED mgross: 11/30/2012
mgross: 11/29/2012

602705	TITLE *602705 SYNAPSIN III; SYN3
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Synapsins are a family of neuron-specific synaptic vesicle-associated
phosphoproteins that have been implicated in synaptogenesis and in the
modulation of neurotransmitter release. In mammals, distinct genes for
synapsins I (SYN1; 313440) and II (SYN2; 600755) have been identified,
each of which encodes 2 alternatively spliced isoforms. Kao et al.
(1998) cloned and characterized a third member of the synapsin gene
family, synapsin III, from human DNA. Synapsin III gives rise to at
least 1 protein isoform, designated synapsin IIIa, in several mammalian
species. Synapsin IIIa is associated with synaptic vesicles, and its
expression appears to be neuron-specific. The primary structure of
synapsin IIIa conforms to the domain model previously described for the
synapsin family, with domains A, C, and E exhibiting the highest degree
of conservation. Synapsin IIIa contains a novel domain, termed domain J,
located between domains C and E. The similarities among synapsins I, II,
and III in domain organization, neuron-specific expression, and
subcellular localization suggested a possible role for synapsin III in
the regulation of neurotransmitter release and synaptogenesis.

Hosaka and Sudhof (1998) identified the human SYN3 gene. Among the rat
tissues tested, they found that Syn3 was expressed only in brain. As in
other synapsins, the C domain of Syn3 bound ATP with high affinity and
ADP with a lower affinity, consistent with a cycle of ATP binding and
hydrolysis. However, unlike with Syn1 and Syn2, calcium inhibited ATP
binding to Syn3. The authors concluded that calcium has distinct
regulatory effects on Syn1, Syn2, and Syn3.

MAPPING

Kao et al. (1998) found that an anonymous marker from 22q12-q13,
D22S280, was located within an intron between exons 2 and 4 of the SYN3
gene.

GENE FUNCTION

Kao et al. (1998) noted that the 22q12-q13 region had previously been
identified as a potential schizophrenia susceptibility locus (600850).
D22S278, which was shown by the Schizophrenia Collaborative Linkage
Group (Chromosome 22) (1996) to be significantly associated with
schizophrenia, was approximately 4.5 cM removed from D22S280, located
within an intron of the SYN3 gene.

From a study in Taiwan, Tsai et al. (2002) presented data that did not
support a large effect of the synapsin III gene in the pathogenesis of
schizophrenia. They performed systematic sequencing of the protein
coding and 5-prime promoter regions in 62 Han Chinese schizophrenic
patients with a positive family history. Further case-control
association studies were performed using genetic polymorphic markers.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Schizophrenia Collaborative Linkage Group (Chromosome 22)  (1996)
REFERENCE 1. Hosaka, M.; Sudhof, T. C.: Synapsin III, a novel synapsin with
an unusual regulation by Ca(2)+. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 13371-13374,
1998.

2. Kao, H.-T.; Porton, B.; Czernik, A. J.; Feng, J.; Yiu, G.; Haring,
M.; Benfenati, F.; Greengard, P.: A third member of the synapsin
gene family. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 4667-4672, 1998.

3. Schizophrenia Collaborative Linkage Group (Chromosome 22): A
combined analysis of D22S278 marker alleles in affected sib-pairs:
support for a susceptibility locus for schizophrenia at chromosome
22q12. Am. J. Med. Genet. 67: 40-45, 1996.

4. Tsai, M.-T.; Hung, C.-C.; Tsai, C.-Y.; Liu, M.-Y.; Su, Y.-C.; Chen,
Y.-H.; Hsaio, K.-J.; Chen, C.-H.: Mutation analysis of synapsin III
gene in schizophrenia. Am. J. Med. Genet. (Neuropsychiat. Genet.) 114B:
79-83, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/4/2002
Patti M. Sherman - updated: 5/30/2000

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/10/1998

EDITED terry: 10/02/2012
carol: 2/11/2002
terry: 2/4/2002
mcapotos: 6/20/2000
psherman: 5/30/2000
carol: 10/14/1998
dholmes: 7/9/1998
carol: 6/10/1998

611418	TITLE *611418 SMALL G PROTEIN SIGNALING MODULATOR 2; SGSM2
;;KIAA0397
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By database searching with the sequence of small G protein signaling
modulator-1 (SGSM1; 611417) as query, followed by RT-PCR and RACE of a
human brain cDNA library, Yang et al. (2007) cloned SGSM2, which had
previously been cloned and named KIAA0397 by Ishikawa et al. (1997). The
deduced 1,051-amino acid SGSM2 protein contains an N-terminal RUN domain
and a C-terminal TBC domain. Like SGSM1 and SGSM3 (611418), SGSM2
contains a RAP (see RAP1A, 179520)-interacting domain (RAPID) (amino
acids 301-350), containing 5 blocks of conserved sequence following the
RUN motif. Northern blot analysis detected variable expression of 6.0-
and 9.4-kb SGSM2 transcripts in several human tissues. Mouse tissues
showed a similar expression profile of Sgsm2, with evidence of splice
variants.

GENE FUNCTION

Using immunoprecipitation and Western blot analyses of proteins
expressed by transfected human embryonic kidney cells, Yang et al.
(2007) showed that SGSM1, SGSM2, and SGSM3 coimmunoprecipitated with all
RAP proteins examined, including RAP1A, RAP1B (179530), RAP2A (179540),
and RAP2B (179541). Yang et al. (2007) also found that endogenous Rab4
(179511) and Rab11 (see RAB11A, 605570) interacted with all of the SGSM
proteins in the mouse neuroblastoma cell line; however, Rab3 (see RAB3A,
179490), Rab5 (see RAB5A, 179512), and Rab8 (see RAB8A, 165040)
interacted only with SGSM1 and SGSM3.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yang et al. (2007) determined that the SGSM2 gene contains 23 exons.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Ishikawa et al. (1997) mapped the SGSM2
gene to chromosome 17. By genomic sequence analysis, Yang et al. (2007)
localized the gene to 17p13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Ishikawa, K.; Nagase, T.; Nakajima, D.; Seki, N.; Ohira, M.; Miyajima,
N.; Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of
the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. VIII. 78 new cDNA
clones from brain which code for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 4:
307-313, 1997.

2. Yang, H.; Sasaki, T.; Minoshima, S.; Shimizu, N.: Identification
of three novel proteins (SGSM1, 2, 3) which modulate small G protein
(RAP and RAB)-mediated signaling pathway. Genomics 90: 249-260,
2007.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 9/10/2007

EDITED carol: 09/10/2007
carol: 9/10/2007

605451	TITLE *605451 p21 PROTEIN-ACTIVATED KINASE 4; PAK4
;;p21 CDC42/RAC1-ACTIVATED KINASE 4;;
KIAA1142
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PAK4 is a serine/threonine kinase that is a target for the small GTPase
CDC42 (116952). PAK4 regulates cell morphology, cytoskeletal
organization, and cell proliferation and migration. It can also function
as an antiapoptotic protein (summary by Qu et al., 2003).

For additional background information on p21-activated kinases (PAKs),
see PAK1 (602590).

CLONING

By PCR using Jurkat cell cDNA with degenerate primers corresponding to
the homologous regions between the kinase domains of yeast STE20 and
human PAK2 (605022), followed by screening Jurkat cell and fetal brain
cDNA libraries, Abo et al. (1998) obtained a cDNA encoding PAK4. The
predicted 591-amino acid PAK4 protein, which is approximately 50%
identical and 71% similar in the C-terminal kinase domain to other PAKS,
contains the 11 subdomains characteristic of serine/threonine kinases.
The PAK4 N-terminal regulatory region, which is well conserved among
other PAKs, shares no homology with other proteins except for a 16-amino
acid CDC42 (116952)/RAC (602048) GTPase-binding domain. Northern blot
analysis detected a 3.0-kb PAK4 transcript in all tissues tested, with
highest expression in prostate, testis, and colon.

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human brain cDNA
library, Hirosawa et al. (1999) cloned a PAK4 variant, which they called
KIAA1142. The transcript contains several repetitive elements in its
3-prime end.

GENE FUNCTION

Binding analysis by Abo et al. (1998) indicated that PAK4 interacts
tightly with GTP-bound but not GDP-bound CDC42 and weakly with RAC.
Functional analyses showed that PAK4 phosphorylates and
autophosphorylates and also activates the JNK (601158) pathway.
Coexpression of PAK4 and activated CDC42 induced the sustained formation
of actin-enriched filopodia protrusions and caused PAK4 to colocalize
with polymerized actin clusters and with beta coat protein (COPB;
600959) in the Golgi.

Gnesutta et al. (2001) found that overexpression of wildtype or
constitutively active PAK4 in HeLa and mouse NIH3T3 cells delayed the
onset of apoptosis in response to TNF-alpha (191160) stimulation,
ultraviolet irradiation, or serum starvation. Consistent with an
antiapoptotic function, expression of PAK4 led to increased
phosphorylation of the proapoptotic protein BAD (603167) and inhibition
of caspase (see 600636) activation.

HGF (142409), the ligand for the receptor tyrosine kinase MET (164860),
induces GAB1 (604439)-dependent remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton,
leading to epithelial cell dispersal, invasion, and morphogenesis. Using
mass spectrometry, Paliouras et al. (2009) found that endogenous PAK4
bound GAB1, but not GAB2 (606203) or GAB3 (300482), in transfected
HEK293 cells. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis revealed weak binding
between GAB1 and PAK4 in the absence of MET activation. HGF-dependent
MET activation in HeLa cells resulted in PAK4 activation via ser474
phosphorylation, followed by PAK4 translocation to membrane ruffles.
Translocation of PAK4 to membrane ruffles required PAK4 phosphorylation
and binding to GAB1, but it did not require PAK4 kinase activity.
Mutation analysis revealed that a GEFH1 (ARHGEF2; 607560)-binding domain
in PAK4 was required for binding to GAB1. Knockdown of Pak4 in MDCK
canine kidney cells abrogated HGF-dependent actin cytoskeletal
remodeling, cell dispersal, invasion, and tube formation. Paliouras et
al. (2009) concluded that PAK4 is a specific GAB1 effector downstream of
HGF signaling through MET.

MAPPING

Gross (2011) mapped the PAK4 gene to chromosome 19q13.2 based on an
alignment of the PAK4 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC002921) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

ANIMAL MODEL

Qu et al. (2003) found that Pak4 +/- mice appeared normal and were
fertile, whereas Pak4 -/- embryos died prior to embryonic day 11.5 with
defects in heart, brain, and neural tube. Pak4 -/- embryos appeared to
die due to cardiac malformation, with thinning of the myocardial walls
of the bulbus cordis and ventricle. Pak4 -/- embryos also showed
improper folding of the caudal neural tube and defects in motor neuron
development. Motor neuron progenitors appeared to form normally, but
their differentiation was largely inhibited, axonal outgrowth was
impaired, and neurons failed to migrate to their proper locations.

REFERENCE 1. Abo, A.; Qu, J.; Cammarano, M. S.; Dan, C.; Fritsch, A.; Baud,
V.; Belisle, B.; Minden, A.: PAK4, a novel effector for Cdc42Hs,
is implicated in the reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton and
in the formation of filopodia. EMBO J. 17: 6527-6540, 1998.

2. Gnesutta, N.; Qu, J.; Minden, A.: The serine/threonine kinase
PAK4 prevents caspase activation and protects cells from apoptosis. J.
Biol. Chem. 276: 14414-14419, 2001.

3. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  5/10/2011.

4. Hirosawa, M.; Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Kikuno, R.; Nomura, N.;
Ohara, O.: Characterization of cDNA clones selected by the GeneMark
analysis from size-fractionated cDNA libraries from human brain. DNA
Res. 6: 329-336, 1999.

5. Paliouras, G. N.; Naujokas, M. A.; Park, M.: Pak4, a novel Gab1
binding partner, modulates cell migration and invasion by the Met
receptor. Molec. Cell. Biol. 29: 3018-3032, 2009.

6. Qu, J.; Li, X.; Novitch, B. G.; Zheng, Y.; Kohn, M.; Xie, J.-M.;
Kozinn, S.; Bronson, R.; Beg, A. A.; Minden, A.: PAK4 kinase is essential
for embryonic viability and for proper neuronal development. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 23: 7122-7133, 2003.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/8/2011
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 5/10/2011

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/4/2000

EDITED mgross: 02/14/2012
mgross: 2/10/2012
terry: 11/8/2011
mgross: 5/10/2011
mgross: 5/9/2011
alopez: 9/9/2005
mgross: 12/5/2000
mgross: 12/4/2000

603349	TITLE *603349 ENDOTHELIAL PAS DOMAIN PROTEIN 1; EPAS1
;;MEMBER OF PAS SUPERFAMILY 2; MOP2;;
HYPOXIA-INDUCIBLE FACTOR 2, ALPHA SUBUNIT;;
HIF2-ALPHA; HIF2A
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Members of the bHLH-PAS family are transcription factors that contain a
bHLH DNA-recognition motif and a PAS domain composed of 2 imperfect
repeats. See 602550. Tian et al. (1997) isolated cDNAs encoding a
bHLH-PAS protein that they designated EPAS1 (endothelial PAS domain
protein-1). The predicted protein shares 48% sequence identity with
HIF1-alpha (HIF1A; 603348), a bHLH-PAS transcription factor that induces
EPO (133170) gene expression in cultured cells in response to hypoxia.
Like HIF1A, EPAS1 binds to and activates transcription from the HIF1A
response element derived from the 3-prime flanking region of the EPO
gene. Activation by both HIF1A and EPAS1 is stimulated by hypoxic
conditions. EPAS1 heterodimerizes with ARNT (126110) and requires ARNT
for transcriptional activation of target genes. Northern blot and in
situ hybridization analysis revealed that EPAS1 and HIF1A mRNA display
different patterns of distribution. EPAS1 is predominantly expressed in
highly vascularized tissues of adult humans and in endothelial cells of
the mouse adult and embryo. Tian et al. (1997) suggested that EPAS1 may
represent an important regulator of vascularization, perhaps involving
the regulation of endothelial cell gene expression in response to
hypoxia.

Hogenesch et al. (1997) identified EPAS1 as MOP2 (member of the PAS
superfamily 2). Iyer et al. (1998) stated that EPAS1 is also designated
HIF2-alpha.

Tian et al. (1997) isolated cDNAs encoding mouse Epas1. The predicted
mouse protein is 88% identical to human EPAS1.

GENE FUNCTION

Using cell lines stably expressing the C-terminal 100 amino acids of
HIF2A, which include the C-terminal transactivation domain (CTAD), and
MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry analysis, Lando et al. (2002) determined
that asn851 (equivalent to asn803 in HIF1A) is hydroxylated under
normoxic but not hypoxic conditions, suggesting that an asparaginyl
hydroxylase mediates silencing of HIF1A and HIF2A CTADs. Mutational
analysis showed that replacement of asn with ala in these positions
resulted in full transcriptional activity in normoxia. In contrast,
replacement of pro853 in HIF2A or pro805 in HIF1A with ala resulted in
loss of this activity in both normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Western
blot analysis showed that asn hydroxylation silences the CTAD of HIF1A
and HIF2A by preventing their interaction with the CH1 domain of p300
(602700)/CBP (600140). Lando et al. (2002) concluded that the hypoxic
induction of HIF proteins involves 1) inhibition of oxygen-dependent
hydroxylation on pro residues in the oxygen-dependent degradation domain
to prevent interaction with the VHL ubiquitin ligase complex and
proteasomal destruction, and 2) inhibition of the oxygen-dependent
hydroxylation of asn in the CTAD regions to promote interaction with the
p300/CBP coactivator and induce transcription. They proposed that the
prolyl and asparaginyl hydroxylases are attractive targets for
therapeutic regulation of HIF1A and HIF2A.

Using DNA microarrays to compare gene expression patterns in normal
human placenta with those in other tissues, Sood et al. (2006) found
that HIF2A is expressed at relatively higher levels in villus sections
of placenta and in lung samples compared with other tissues examined.
Unlike other organs, both placenta and lung have primary roles in oxygen
exchange; Sood et al. (2006) suggested that the relatively high
expression of HIF2A in these organs may be associated with a common
response to hypoxia.

Endocytosis plays a major role in the deactivation of receptors
localized to the plasma membrane, and early endocytic events require the
small GTPase RAB5 (179512) and its effector rabaptin-5 (RABEP1; 603616).
Wang et al. (2009) found that hypoxia, via the VHL-HIF2A signaling
pathway, downregulated rabaptin-5 expression, leading to decelerated
endocytosis and prolonged activation of ligand-bound EGFR (131550).
Primary kidney and breast tumors with strong hypoxic signatures showed
significantly lower expression of rabaptin-5 RNA and protein. Wang et
al. (2009) identified a conserved hypoxia-responsive element (HRE) in
the rabaptin-5 promoter that bound in vitro-translated HIF1A and HIF2A,
leading to displacement of RNA polymerase II and attenuating rabaptin-5
transcription.

Using a COL10A1 promoter assay, Saito et al. (2010) identified HIF2A as
the most potent transactivator of COL10A1 (120110). HIF2A enhanced
promoter activities of COL10A1, MMP13 (600108), and VEGFA (192240)
through specific binding to the respective hypoxia-responsive elements.
HIF2A, independently of oxygen-dependent hydroxylation, was essential
for endochondral ossification of cultured chondrocytes and embryonic
skeletal growth in mice. HIF2A expression was higher in osteoarthritic
cartilage versus nondiseased cartilage of mice and humans, and Epas1 +/-
mice showed resistance to osteoarthritis development. In addition, an
EPAS1 promoter assay identified RELA (164014) as a potent inducer of
HIF2A expression.

Yang et al. (2010) screened a human osteoarthritis cartilage cDNA
library for upregulated genes under pathologic conditions and selected
HIF2A as a possible catabolic regulator. In studies in mouse, rabbit,
and human chondrocytes, Yang et al. (2010) demonstrated that HIF2A
directly induces the expression of genes encoding catabolic factors,
including the matrix metalloproteinases MMP1 (120353), MMP3 (185250),
MMP9 (120361), MMP12 (601046), and MMP13, as well as ADAMTS4 (603876),
NOS2 (163730), and PTGS2 (600262). HIF2A expression was markedly
increased in human and mouse osteoarthritic cartilage, and its ectopic
expression triggered articular cartilage destruction in mice and
rabbits. Transgenic mice overexpressing Epas1 in chondrocytes showed
spontaneous cartilage destruction, with loss of most cartilage tissue by
45 weeks of age compared to wildtype mice of the same age, whereas
heterozygous genetic deletion of Epas1 in mice suppressed cartilage
destruction caused by destabilization of the medial meniscus or
collagenase injection with concomitant modulation of catabolic factors.
Yang et al. (2010) concluded that HIF2A causes cartilage destruction by
regulating crucial catabolic genes.

Using an inducible promoter, Fatrai et al. (2011) showed that
overexpression of STAT5 (601511) provided a proliferative advantage for
neonatal human hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), but not stem cell
progenitors. Expression profiling identified HIF2A among 32 genes that
were upregulated by STAT5 overexpression, and HIF2A upregulation was
independent of hypoxia. Knockdown of HIF2A in HSCs abrogated the effects
of STAT5 on long-term proliferation and self-renewal. HIF2A had no
effect on HSC differentiation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
confirmed direct binding of STAT5 to the HIF2A promoter 344 bp upstream
of the HIF2A start site.

Uniacke et al. (2012) investigated how proteins are synthesized in
periods of oxygen scarcity and eIF4E (133440) inhibition. They described
an oxygen-regulated translational initiation complex that mediates
selective cap-dependent protein synthesis. Uniacke et al. (2012) showed
that hypoxia stimulates the formation of a complex that includes the
oxygen-regulated HIF2A, RNA-binding protein RBM4 (602571), and the
cap-binding EIF4E2 (605895), an eIF4E homolog. Photoactivatable
ribonucleoside-enhanced crosslinking and immunoprecipitation (PAR-CLIP)
analysis identified an RNA hypoxia response element (rHRE) that recruits
this complex to a wide array of mRNAs, including that encoding the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). Once assembled at the rHRE, the
HIF2A-RBM4-eIF4E2 complex captures the 5-prime cap and targets mRNAs to
polysomes for active translation, thereby evading hypoxia-induced
repression of protein synthesis. Uniacke et al. (2012) concluded that
cells have evolved a program by which oxygen tension switches the basic
translation initiation machinery.

GENE STRUCTURE

Tian et al. (1997) determined that the human EPAS1 gene contains 15
exons and spans at least 120 kb. The positions of the introns within the
genomic region encoding the N-terminal bHLH-PAS domains of EPAS1 and AHR
(600253) are similar, suggesting that the 5-prime ends of the 2 genes
may have arisen from a gene duplication event.

MAPPING

By analysis of radiation hybrids and by fluorescence in situ
hybridization, Tian et al. (1997) mapped the EPAS1 gene to 2p21-p16.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Using 4 SNPs across the EPAS1 gene, Henderson et al. (2005) defined 3
haplotypes that they designated F, G, and H. In a study of elite
athletes, they found that the presence of the G haplotype and the
absence of the F haplotype were associated with athletes involved in
high-intensity maximal exercise, whereas the presence of the H haplotype
was associated with athletes involved in a sustained steady-state
effort. Henderson et al. (2005) concluded that variation in EPAS1
influences the relative contribution of aerobic and anaerobic metabolism
and hence the maximum sustainable metabolic power for a given event
duration.

Yi et al. (2010) sequenced 50 exomes of ethnic Tibetans, encompassing
coding sequences of 92% of human genes, with an average coverage of 18x
per individual. Genes showing population-specific allele frequency
changes, which represent strong candidates for altitude adaptation, were
identified. The strongest signal of natural selection came from EPAS1.
One SNP at EPAS1 showed a 78% frequency difference between Tibetan and
Han samples, representing the fastest allele frequency change observed
at any human gene to that time. This SNP's association with erythrocyte
abundance supports the role of EPAS1 in adaptation to hypoxia.

- Erythrocytosis

Studies of the regulation of the erythropoietin gene (EPO; 133170) led
to the discovery of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF), which consists of a
labile alpha subunit and a constitutively expressed beta subunit (HIF1B;
126110). Under normoxic conditions, the alpha subunit, which consists of
3 isoforms--HIF1A, HIF2A, and HIF3A (609976)--is hydroxylated on 2
specific prolyl residues. This hydroxylation targets HIF-alpha for
degradation by the von Hippel-Lindau tumor-suppressor protein (PHL;
608537). Under hypoxic conditions, the hydroxylation is inhibited,
thereby maintaining a stable HIF-alpha protein, which activates not only
the EPO gene but also a broad range of other genes that orchestrates
adaptation to hypoxia. Familial erythrocytosis is a disorder that can be
caused by a mutation in one of the proteins that hydroxylates HIF-alpha,
namely, prolyl hydroxylase domain-containing protein-2 (PHD2; 606425),
also known as EGLN1. This form of familial erythrocytosis is here
designated type 3 (ECYT3; 609820). Mutation in the VHL protein can cause
type 2 familial erythrocytosis (ECYT2; 263400). (Type 1 familial
erythrocytosis (ECYT1; 133100) is caused by mutation in the
erythropoietin receptor (EPOR; 133171).)

Percy et al. (2008) investigated the HIF2A gene in a family with
erythrocytosis (ECYT4; 611783) and found a missense mutation (G537W;
603349.0001) that impaired hydroxylation of the HIF2-alpha protein,
thereby allowing both for maintenance of its stable conformation and its
induction of erythrocytosis.

Perrotta and Della Ragione (2008) stated that they analyzed the HIF1A
and HIF2A genes in 125 patients with familial erythrocytosis; none of
the patients had a mutation in HIF1A, but 1 patient had a mutation
(G537R; 603349.0002) involving the same residue of the HIF2A gene
(G537W; 603349.0001) previously identified by Percy et al. (2008).

Percy et al. (2008) identified heterozygous mutations in exon 12 of the
HIF2A gene (603349.0002-603349.0003) in 4 unrelated patients with
erythrocytosis. Three patients had the same mutation.

- Osteoarthritis

Saito et al. (2010) analyzed the EPAS1 gene in a Japanese
population-based cohort and identified only 1 common SNP (dbSNP
rs17039192; +18C-T). A comparison of allele frequencies between 397
individuals with knee osteoarthritis (see OS1, 165720) and 437 controls
showed significant association of dbSNP rs17039192 with knee
osteoarthritis (p = 0.013; odds ratio = 1.44). Studies in chondrogenic
and nonchondrogenic cells demonstrated that the susceptibility allele
(+18C) showed higher promoter activity in chondrogenic cells but not in
nonchondrogenic cells, confirming that enhanced transactivation of EPAS1
in chondrocytes is associated with osteoarthritis in humans.

- Somatic Mutation in Paraganglioma with Polycythemia

Zhuang et al. (2012) reported 2 novel somatic gain-of-function mutations
in the gene encoding HIF2A in 2 patients, 1 presenting with
paraganglioma and the other with paraganglioma and somatostatinoma, both
of whom had polycythemia. The 2 mutations were associated with increased
HIF2-alpha activity and increased protein half-life.

Favier et al. (2012) performed a transcriptome analysis of a large
number of pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas and identified 16
sporadic tumors with a transcription signature similar to that of
VHL-mutated tumors; 11 of these had mutations in VHL, but in 5 a
mutation could not be identified. In these 5 the HIF2A gene was
sequenced. In a pheochromocytoma resected from a 24-year-old woman,
Favier et al. (2012) identified a C-to-T transition at nucleotide 1591,
resulting in a missense mutation affecting the prolyl hydroxylase target
residue pro531. This mutation led to increased expression of
hypoxia-inducible genes, but the effect was mild compared to the effects
of SDHx-related tumors or VHL-related tumors. Zhuang et al. (2012)
commented that transcription studies showing weaker expression of
hypoxia-related genes in the HIF2A mutant may be biased owing to limited
sample size. Zhuang et al. (2012) recommended that additional cases and
functional studies would be helpful in further characterizing this novel
class of mutations.

By specific genotyping of exon 12 of the EPAS1 gene, Comino-Mendez et
al. (2013) identified 3 different somatic mutations in the EPAS1 gene
(A530T, P531S, and P531L) in 3 tumors from 3 unrelated patients with
multiple pheochromocytomas/paragangliomas and congenital erythrocytosis.
The patients developed congenital erythrocytosis at ages 1, 1, and 7
years and the other tumors as teens or young adults. All showed
secretion of EPO. Analysis of additional tumors in these patients showed
the same mutations, suggesting that they occurred in a chromaffin
precursor cell. Subsequent sequencing of exon 12 in 38 apparently
sporadic tumors identified 4 additional somatic EPAS1 mutations; all 4
patients had pheochromocytoma/paragangliomas but no erythrocytosis. All
7 mutations occurred in the region around the prolyl hydroxylation site
(residues 530-539) and likely affected prolyl hydroxylase recognition.
Gene expression analysis of EPAS1-mutated tumors showed a significant
upregulation of 2 hypoxia-induced genes (PCSK6, 167405 and GNA14,
604397). In addition, SNP array analysis found a gain of chromosome 2p
including the EPAS1 gene in 3 EPAS1-mutated tumors, and multiplex-PCR
screening detected a specific EPAS1 gain in another EPAS1-mutated tumor
and in 3 non-EPAS1-mutated cases, suggesting that somatic gain of EPAS1
may be a driving oncogenic event. The findings suggested that mutations
in EPAS1 are involved in the sporadic presentation of this disease.

ANIMAL MODEL

Tian et al. (1998) disrupted the mouse Epas1 gene and found that mice
lacking Epas1 died at midgestation. Epas1-deficient mice displayed
pronounced bradycardia despite normal morphologic development of the
circulatory system, and had substantially reduced catecholamine levels.
Midgestational lethality was rescued by administration of the
catecholamine precursor DOPS to pregnant females. Tian et al. (1998)
found that Epas1 was expressed strongly in the organ of Zuckerkandl
(OZ), the principal source of catecholamine production in mammalian
embryos. They hypothesized that the Epas1 protein expressed in the OZ
senses hypoxia during midgestational development and translates this
signal into an altered pattern of gene expression, leading to increases
in circulating catecholamine levels and proper cardiac function.

Scortegagna et al. (2003) found that mice homozygous for knockout of the
Epas1 gene have a syndrome of multiple-organ pathology, biochemical
abnormalities, and altered gene expression patterns. Histologic and
ultrastructural analyses showed retinopathy, hepatic steatosis, cardiac
hypertrophy, skeletal myopathy, hypocellular bone marrow, azoospermia,
and mitochondrial abnormalities in these mice. Serum and urine
metabolite studies showed hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis, altered Krebs
cycle function and dysregulated fatty acid oxidation. Biochemical assays
showed enhanced generation of reactive oxygen species, whereas molecular
analyses indicated reduced expression of genes encoding the primary
antioxidant enzymes: catalase (CAT; 115500), glutathione peroxidase
type-1 (GPX1; 138320), copper/zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1; 147450),
and magnesium superoxide dismutase (SOD2; 147460). Transfection analyses
showed that HIF2-alpha, encoded by Epas1, could efficiently
transactivate the promoters of the primary antioxidant enzymes. Prenatal
or postnatal treatment of the Epas1-null mice with a superoxide
dismutase (SOD) mimetic reversed several aspects of the null phenotype.
Scortegagna et al. (2003) suggested a rheostat role for HIF2-alpha that
allows for the maintenance of reactive oxygen species as well as
mitochondrial homeostasis.

Ding et al. (2005) observed that Epas1-knockout mice exhibited marked
retinopathy consistent with complete loss of vision by 1 month of age,
with marked thinning of the retina and abnormal retinal vasculature. The
pathologic changes in Epas1-knockout mice were associated with a virtual
absence of postreceptor function. The expression of a surrogate marker
for Epas1 mRNA localized to vascular endothelial, amacrine, and retinal
pigment epithelial (RPE) cells. Several Epas1 target genes involved in
angiogenesis, retinal protection, and stress responses had altered
expression patterns in Epas1 knockout retinas. Thus, impaired Epas1
signaling in these mice likely produced functional deficits in cell
types in which Epas1 was expressed, ultimately resulting in retinopathy.

Saito et al. (2010) investigated the skeletal phenotype of Epas1 +/-
mice, which were extraordinarily small and died at the early embryonic
stage. Although Epas1 +/- mice developed and grew without abnormalities
of major organs, they showed mild but proportional dwarfism compared to
wildtype littermates from embryonic stages up to 1 week after birth. In
Epas1 +/- limbs, the percentage of the hypertrophic zone was increased
and that of the bone area was considerably decreased compared to
wildtype, indicating that Hif2a insufficiency impaired not only
chondrocyte hypertrophy but also subsequent steps such as matrix
degradation and vascularization. Immunohistochemistry confirmed that
Mmp13 (600108) and Vegfa (192240), as well as Col10a1 (120110), were
suppressed by Hif2a insufficiency.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 4
EPAS1, GLY537TRP

In affected members in 3 generations of a family with erythrocytosis
(ECYT4; 611783), Percy et al. (2008) found that the disorder was
associated with a heterozygous 1609G-T transversion in exon 12 of the
HIF2A gene that caused a gly537-to-trp amino acid substitution (G537W).
In vitro functional assays showed that the hydroxylating protein PHD2
(606425) bound more weakly to the G537W peptide than to the wildtype
peptide. Mass spectrometry demonstrated less hydroxylation activity with
the mutant peptide. Competition experiments showed that VHL protein
(608537) bound to the prolyl-hydroxylated form of the mutant G537W
peptide weakly compared to its wildtype counterpart.

.0002
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 4
EPAS1, GLY537ARG

In 3 unrelated patients with erythrocytosis (ECYT4; 611783), Percy et
al. (2008) identified a heterozygous 1609G-A transition in exon 12 of
the EPAS1 gene, resulting in a gly537-to-arg (G537R) substitution in a
conserved residue. The patients presented between age 16 and 21 years
with increased hematocrit and elevated serum erythropoietin. One of the
patients had an affected daughter. A different mutation was reported in
this same codon (G537W; 603349.0001) in another family with
erythrocytosis. In vitro functional expression assays performed by
Furlow et al. (2009) showed that the G537R-mutant protein had decreased
PHD2 (606425) binding and decreased hydroxylation compared to wildtype
EPAS1. The G537R mutant was also less potent in competing for VHL
(608537) binding. The mutant protein showed increased stability and
decreased degradation associated with increased downstream
transcriptional activity, consistent with a gain-of-function effect.
Furlow et al. (2009) noted that the mutation occurs downstream of the
hydroxylacceptor pro531 residue, indicating that these residues play a
critical role in proper protein function.

.0003
ERYTHROCYTOSIS, FAMILIAL, 4
EPAS1, MET535VAL

In a Scottish woman with erythrocytosis (EYCT4; 611783), Percy et al.
(2008) identified a heterozygous 1603A-G transition in exon 12 of the
EPAS1 gene, resulting in a met535-to-val (M535V) substitution in a
highly conserved residue. She presented at age 23 with increased
hematocrit and erythropoietin levels. In vitro functional expression
assays performed by Furlow et al. (2009) showed that the M535V-mutant
protein had decreased PHD2 (606425) binding and decreased hydroxylation
compared to wildtype EPAS1. In contrast, the M535V mutant was similar to
wildtype in competing for VHL (608537) binding. The mutant protein
showed increased stability and decreased degradation associated with
increased downstream transcriptional activity, consistent with a gain of
function effect. Furlow et al. (2009) noted that the mutation occurs
downstream of the hydroxylacceptor pro531 residue, indicating that these
residues play a critical role in proper protein function.

REFERENCE 1. Comino-Mendez, I.; de Cubas, A. A.; Bernal, C.; Alvarez-Escola,
C.; Sanchez-Malo, C.; Ramirez-Tortosa, C. L.; Pedrinaci, S.; Rapizzi,
E.; Ercolino, T.; Bernini, G.; Bacca, A.; Leton, R.; and 10 others
: Tumoral EPAS1 (HIF2A) mutations explain sporadic pheochromocytoma
and paraganglioma in the absence of erythrocytosis. Hum. Molec. Genet. 22:
2169-2176, 2013.

2. Ding, K.; Scortegagna, M.; Seaman, R.; Birch, D. G.; Garcia, J.
A.: Retinal disease in mice lacking hypoxia-inducible transcription
factor-2-alpha. Invest. Ophthal. Vis. Sci. 46: 1010-1016, 2005.

3. Fatrai, S.; Wierenga, A. T. J.; Daenen, S. M. G. J.; Vellenga,
E.; Schuringa, J. J.: Identification of HIF2-alpha as an important
STAT5 target gene in human hematopoietic stem cells. Blood 24: 3320-3330,
2011.

4. Favier, J.; Buffet, A.; Gimenez-Roqueplo, A.-P.: HIF2A mutations
in paraganglioma with polycythemia. (Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 367:
2161 only, 2012.

5. Furlow, P. W.; Percy, M. J.; Sutherland, S.; Bierl, C.; McMullin,
M. F.; Master, S. R.; Lappin, T. R. J.; Lee, F. S.: Erythrocytosis-associated
HIF-2-alpha mutations demonstrate a critical role for residues C-terminal
to the hydroxylacceptor proline. J. Biol. Chem. 284: 9050-9058,
2009.

6. Henderson, J.; Withford-Cave, J. M.; Duffy, D. L.; Cole, S. J.;
Sawyer, N. A.; Gulbin, J. P.; Hahn, A.; Trent, R. J.; Yu, B.: The
EPAS1 gene influences the aerobic-anaerobic contribution in elite
endurance athletes. Hum. Genet. 118: 416-423, 2005.

7. Hogenesch, J. B.; Chan, W. K.; Jackiw, V. H.; Brown, R. C.; Gu,
Y.-Z.; Pray-Grant, M.; Perdew, G. H.; Bradfield, C. A.: Characterization
of a subset of the basic-helix-loop-helix-PAS superfamily that interacts
with components of the dioxin signaling pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 272:
8581-8593, 1997.

8. Iyer, N. V.; Leung, S. W.; Semenza, G. L.: The human hypoxia-inducible
factor 1-alpha gene: HIF1A structure and evolutionary conservation. Genomics 52:
159-165, 1998.

9. Lando, D.; Peet, D. J.; Whelan, D. A.; Gorman, J. J.; Whitelaw,
M. L.: Asparagine hydroxylation of the HIF transactivation domain:
a hypoxic switch. Science 295: 858-861, 2002.

10. Percy, M. J.; Beer, P. A.; Campbell, G.; Dekker, A. W.; Green,
A. R.; Oscier, D.; Rainey, M. G.; van Wijk, R.; Wood, M.; Lappin,
T. R. J.; McMullin, M. F.; Lee, F. S.: Novel exon 12 mutations in
the HIF2A gene associated with erythrocytosis. Blood 111: 5400-5402,
2008.

11. Percy, M. J.; Furlow, P. W.; Lucas, G. S.; Li, X.; Lappin, T.
R. J.; McMullin, M. F.; Lee, F. S.: A gain-of-function mutation in
the HIF2A gene in familial erythrocytosis. New Eng. J. Med. 358:
162-168, 2008.

12. Perrotta, S.; Della Ragione, F.: The HIF2A gene in familial erythrocytosis.
(Letter) New Eng. J. Med. 358: 1966 only, 2008.

13. Saito, T.; Fukai, A.; Mabuchi, A.; Ikeda, T.; Yano, F.; Ohba,
S.; Nishida, N.; Akune, T.; Yoshimura, N.; Nakagawa, T.; Nakamura,
K.; Tokunaga, K.; Chung, U.; Kawaguchi, H.: Transcriptional regulation
of endochondral ossification by HIF-2-alpha during skeletal growth
and osteoarthritis development. Nature Med. 16: 678-686, 2010.

14. Scortegagna, M.; Ding, K.; Oktay, Y.; Gaur, A.; Thurmond, F.;
Yan, L.-J.; Marck, B. T.; Matsumoto, A. M.; Shelton, J. M.; Richardson,
J. A.; Bennett, M. J.; Garcia, J. A.: Multiple organ pathology, metabolic
abnormalities and impaired homeostasis of reactive oxygen species
in Epas1 -/- mice. Nature Genet. 35: 331-340, 2003.

15. Sood, R.; Zehnder, J. L.; Druzin, M. L.; Brown, P. O.: Gene expression
patterns in human placenta. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 5478-5483,
2006.

16. Tian, H.; Hammer, R. E.; Matsumoto, A. M.; Russell, D. W.; McKnight,
S. L.: The hypoxia-responsive transcription factor EPAS1 is essential
for catecholamine homeostasis and protection against heart failure
during embryonic development. Genes Dev. 12: 3320-3324, 1998.

17. Tian, H.; McKnight, S. L.; Russell, D. W.: Endothelial PAS domain
protein 1 (EPAS1), a transcription factor selectively expressed in
endothelial cells. Genes Dev. 11: 72-82, 1997.

18. Uniacke, J.; Holterman, C. E.; Lachance, G.; Franovic, A.; Jacob,
M. D.; Fabian, M. R.; Payette, J.; Holcik, M.; Pause, A.; Lee, S.
: An oxygen-regulated switch in the protein synthesis machinery. Nature 486:
126-129, 2012.

19. Wang, Y.; Roche, O.; Yan, M. S.; Finak, G.; Evans, A. J.; Metcalf,
J. L.; Hast, B. E.; Hanna, S. C.; Wondergem, B.; Furge, K. A.; Irwin,
M. S.; Kim, W. Y.; Teh, B. T.; Grinstein, S.; Park, M.; Marsden, P.
A.; Ohh, M.: Regulation of endocytosis via the oxygen-sensing pathway. Nature
Med. 15: 319-324, 2009.

20. Yang, S.; Kim, J.; Ryu, J.-H.; Oh, H.; Chun, C.-H.; Kim, B. J.;
Min, B. H.; Chun, J.-S.: Hypoxia-inducible factor-2-alpha is a catabolic
regulator of osteoarthritic cartilage destruction. Nature Med. 16:
687-693, 2010.

21. Yi, X.; Liang, Y.; Huerta-Sanchez, E.; Jin, X.; Cuo, Z. X. P.;
Pool, J. E.; Xu, X.; Jiang, H.; Vinckenbosch, N.; Korneliussen, T.
S.; Zheng, H.; Liu, T.; and 58 others: Sequencing of 50 human exomes
reveals adaptation to high altitude. Science 329: 75-78, 2010.

22. Zhuang, Z.; Yang, C.; Lorenzo, F.; Merino, M.; Fojo, T.; Kebebew,
E.; Popovic, V.; Stratakis, C. A.; Prchal, J. T.; Pacak, K.: Somatic
HIF2A gain-of-function mutations in paraganglioma with polycythemia. New
Eng. J. Med. 367: 922-930, 2012.

23. Zhuang, Z.; Yang, C.; Pacak, K.: Reply to Favier et al. (Letter) New
Eng. J. Med. 367: 2161-2162, 2012.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 9/17/2013
Ada Hamosh - updated: 12/4/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 9/11/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/17/2012
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 11/1/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/30/2010
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 7/6/2010
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 7/7/2009
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 6/8/2009
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/13/2008
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/15/2008
Anne M. Stumpf - updated: 8/4/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/4/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 2/15/2006
Jane Kelly - updated: 7/7/2005
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 12/2/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/4/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 12/8/1998

EDITED carol: 09/19/2013
alopez: 9/19/2013
carol: 9/17/2013
ckniffin: 9/17/2013
alopez: 12/5/2012
terry: 12/4/2012
alopez: 9/11/2012
terry: 9/11/2012
alopez: 7/17/2012
terry: 7/17/2012
mgross: 11/10/2011
terry: 11/1/2011
alopez: 7/30/2010
terry: 7/30/2010
wwang: 7/7/2010
terry: 7/6/2010
wwang: 8/4/2009
ckniffin: 7/7/2009
wwang: 6/11/2009
terry: 6/8/2009
carol: 5/13/2008
alopez: 2/11/2008
terry: 1/15/2008
alopez: 8/4/2006
wwang: 2/22/2006
terry: 2/15/2006
alopez: 7/7/2005
alopez: 12/12/2003
terry: 12/2/2003
mgross: 2/4/2002
alopez: 12/15/1998
alopez: 12/9/1998
alopez: 12/8/1998

606214	TITLE *606214 SPECTRIN, BETA, NONERYTHROCYTIC, 4; SPTBN4
;;SPECTRIN, BETA-IV;;
QUIVERING, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; QV
DESCRIPTION Spectrins (e.g., SPTA1; 182860) are rod-shaped proteins that are part of
the lattice-like cytoskeleton under the erythrocyte membrane. This
meshwork is critical for the maintenance of plasma membrane shape and
lipid asymmetry, as revealed by mutant spectrins in diseases such as
elliptocytosis (see 182860) and spherocytosis (see 182870). Although
originally identified in erythrocytes, spectrins have also been found in
the membranes of intracellular organelles, such as the Golgi, lysosomes,
and secretory vesicles. The spectrin molecule is a tetramer consisting
of 2 alpha and 2 beta subunits, in which the N terminus of an alpha
subunit is tightly connected with the C terminus of a beta subunit to
form a heterodimer. Spectrin repeats contain approximately 106 amino
acids. Alpha subunits have 20 spectrin repeats, while beta subunits have
17.

CLONING

By screening a size-fractionated adult brain cDNA library for cDNAs with
the potential to encode large proteins, Nagase et al. (2000) isolated a
partial cDNA encoding SPTBN4, which they called KIAA1642. RT-PCR
analysis detected ubiquitous expression of SPTBN4, with relatively high
levels in adult and fetal brain, low levels in lung, liver, pancreas,
and spleen, and intermediate levels in the other tissues tested and in
specific brain regions.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a brain cDNA library with the
cytoplasmic domain of ICA512 (PTPRN; 601773) as bait, followed by
probing a brain cDNA library, PCR, and genomic sequence analysis, Berghs
et al. (2000) isolated cDNAs encoding SPTBN4 and several splice
variants. Sequence analysis predicted that the full-length 2,559-amino
acid SPTBN4 protein, designated sigma-1, contains 2 N-terminal calponin
homology domains, which mediate interactions with actin; 16 complete
spectrin repeats; 1 partial spectrin repeat; a unique proline-rich,
basic domain containing 4 ERQES repeats; numerous SH3 binding sites; and
a C-terminal pleckstrin homology domain. An insertion in exon 17 termed
exon 17b yields a 1,302-residue splice variant, sigma-2, which
terminates in spectrin repeat 9, and another variant, sigma-3, which
begins at exon 17b to generate a 1,307-amino acid protein. Variant
sigma-4 has an insertion in exon 30 termed exon 30b that introduces 42
amino acids and a stop codon, resulting in a 2,149-amino acid protein
that lacks the ERQES and pleckstrin homology domains. Binding analysis
indicated that the C terminus of SPTBN4 binds to PTPRN and only weakly
to an active tyrosine phosphatase mutant of PTPRN and to PHOGRIN
(601698). Northern blot analysis revealed expression of 9.0-, 5.1-, and
3.1-kb SPTBN4 transcripts that were predominantly expressed in brain.
Western blot analysis showed expression of 250- and 160-kD proteins in
rat brain and human pancreatic islets, as well as a 140-kD protein in
rat brain only. Phosphatase treatment indicated that the 160-kD protein
is phosphorylated, probably in the ERQES domain, which modifies its
interaction with cytoskeletal and membrane proteins. Immunocytochemistry
and confocal microscopy demonstrated coexpression of PTPRN and SPTBN4 in
both insulin-secreting beta cells and glucagon-secreting alpha cells. In
situ hybridization and immunocytochemistry suggested coexpression of
SPTBN4 and ankyrin-G (ANK3; 600465) in rat brain.

Tse et al. (2001) cloned SPTBN4, which they termed SPTBN3, as well as a
splice variant, sigma-5, encoding a 678-amino acid protein. Whole-mount
in situ hybridization analysis revealed Sptbn4 expression that was
restricted to forebrain, hindbrain, and developing eye in postcoital
day-9.5 mice. Western blot analysis with polyclonal antibodies detected
expression of a predominant 72-kD protein, close to the expected size of
the sigma-5 variant. Immunofluorescence microscopy demonstrated
colocalization of SPTBN4 with PML (102578) and with SUMO1 (UBL1; 601912)
in the cytoplasm and nucleus. The authors showed that both the N- and
C-terminal helical coils of sigma-5 are needed to form nuclear dots and
are associated with the nuclear matrix. Tse et al. (2001) proposed that
a spectrin-based skeleton may be important for the structure of the
nucleus.

GENE STRUCTURE

By genomic sequence analysis, Berghs et al. (2000) determined that the
SPTBN4 gene contains 36 exons. Tse et al. (2001) determined that the
SPTBN4 gene spans over 145 kb.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (2000) mapped the SPTBN4
gene to chromosome 19. Berghs et al. (2000) localized the gene to
19q13.13 by FISH. They identified a highly related gene that resides on
chromosome 16. Tse et al. (2001) mapped the SPTBN4 gene to
19q13.13-q13.2 by radiation hybrid analysis. Berghs et al. (2000) and
Tse et al. (2001) mapped the mouse Spnb4 gene to chromosome 7b2.

ANIMAL MODEL

The autosomal recessive mouse mutation 'quivering' (qv), described by
Yoon and Les (1957), produces progressive ataxia with hindlimb
paralysis, deafness, and tremor. Ear twitch responses (Preyer reflex) to
sound are absent in homozygous qv/qv mice, although cochlear morphology
seems normal and cochlear potentials recorded at the round window are no
different from those of control mice. However, responses from brainstem
auditory nuclei show abnormal transmission of auditory inflammation,
indicating that in contrast to the many mutations causing deafness
originating in the cochlea, deafness in qv is central in origin (Deol et
al., 1983; Bock et al., 1983). Parkinson et al. (2001) reported that qv
mice carry loss-of-function mutations in the Spnb4 gene that cause
alterations in ion channel localization in myelinated nerves. They
concluded that this finding provides a rationale for the auditory and
motor neuropathies of these mice.

REFERENCE 1. Berghs, S.; Aggujaro, D.; Dirkx, R., Jr.; Maksimova, E.; Stabach,
P.; Hermel, J.-M.; Zhang, J.-P.; Philbrick, W.; Slepnev, V.; Ort,
T.; Slimena, M.: Beta-IV spectrin, a new spectrin localized at axon
initial segments and nodes of Ranvier in the central and peripheral
nervous system. J. Cell Biol. 151: 985-1001, 2000.

2. Bock, G. R.; Frank, M. P.; Steel, K. P.; Deol, M. S.: The quivering
mutant mouse: hereditary deafness of central origin. Acta Otolaryng. 96:
371-377, 1983.

3. Deol, M. S.; Frank, M. P.; Steel, K. P.; Bock, G. R.: Genetic
deafness of central origin. Brain Res. 258: 177-179, 1983.

4. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Nakayama, M.; Hirosawa, M.; Ohara, O.:
Prediction of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XVIII.
The complete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code
for large proteins in vitro. DNA Res. 7: 273-281, 2000.

5. Parkinson, N. J.; Olsson, C. L.; Hallows, J. L.; McKee-Johnson,
J.; Keogh, B. P.; Noben-Trauth, K.; Kujawa, S. G.; Tempel, B. L.:
Mutant beta-spectrin 4 causes auditory and motor neuropathies in quivering
mice. Nature Genet. 29: 61-65, 2001.

6. Tse, W. T.; Tang, J.; Jin, O.; Korsgren, C.; John, K. M.; Kung,
A. L.; Gwynn, B.; Peters, L. L.; Lux, S. E.: A new spectrin, beta-IV,
has a major truncated isoform that associates with promyelocytic leukemia
protein nuclear bodies and the nuclear matrix. J. Biol. Chem. 276:
23974-23985, 2001.

7. Yoon, C. H.; Les, E. P.: Quivering, a new first chromosome mutation
in mice. J. Hered. 48: 176-180, 1957.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/23/2001

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 8/21/2001

EDITED terry: 03/03/2005
terry: 6/27/2002
mgross: 8/23/2001
terry: 8/23/2001
mgross: 8/22/2001
mgross: 8/21/2001

605145	TITLE *605145 ANK, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; ANKH
;;HANK
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Mutation at the mouse 'progressive ankylosis' (ank) locus causes a
generalized, progressive form of arthritis accompanied by mineral
deposition, formation of bony outgrowths, and joint destruction. Ho et
al. (2000) showed that the ank locus encodes a multipass transmembrane
protein that is expressed in joints and other tissues and controls
pyrophosphate levels in cultured cells. Using a positional cloning
approach, Ho et al. (2000) identified the mouse Ank gene. Using the
exon/intron structure of the mouse gene and partial sequence from human
EST clones, Ho et al. (2000) amplified and sequenced the complete coding
region of human ANK. Orthologs of mouse Ank were also found in
zebrafish, rat, and cow. The human ANK gene is virtually identical to
mouse ank, with only 9 amino acid differences over a 492-amino acid
protein. There are 3 potential N-linked glycosylation sites and multiple
putative phosphorylation sites. A hydropathy analysis revealed 9 to 12
hydrophobic stretches, most approximately 20 residues long, as would be
expected for membrane-spanning regions in an integral multipass
transmembrane protein. Western blot analysis suggested that the ank
protein is expressed at the cell surface. Northern blot analysis
revealed that ank mRNA is expressed in many tissues in adult mice,
including heart, brain, liver, spleen, lung, muscle, and kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

Although soft tissue phenotypes had not been reported in ank mice, Ho et
al. (2000) observed increased calcification in kidneys of adult mice,
consistent with an important role for the gene in nonskeletal tissues.
Fibroblasts from ank mutants displayed about a 2-fold increase in
intracellular inorganic pyrophosphate levels over wildtype cells and
there was a 3- to 5-fold decrease in extracellular pyrophosphate levels.
Additional studies demonstrated that ANK functions through a
probenecid-sensitive anion transport mechanism. Ho et al. (2000)
suggested that these results identified ANK-mediated control of
pyrophosphate levels as a possible mechanism regulating tissue
calcification and susceptibility to arthritis in higher animals.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid mapping, Ho et al. (2000) mapped the human ANK gene
to chromosome 5p, in a region showing homology of synteny with proximal
mouse chromosome 15.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

- Craniometaphyseal Dysplasia

Craniometaphyseal dysplasia is a bone dysplasia characterized by
overgrowth and sclerosis of the craniofacial bones and abnormal modeling
of the metaphyses of the tubular bones. Hyperostosis and sclerosis of
the skull may lead to cranial nerve compressions resulting in hearing
loss and facial palsy. An autosomal dominant form of the disorder (CMDD;
123000) was mapped to 5p15.2-p14.1 (Nurnberg et al., 1997) within a
region harboring the human homolog (ANKH) of the mouse progressive
ankylosis (ank) gene. The ANK protein spans the outer cell membrane and
shuttles inorganic pyrophosphate, a major inhibitor of physiologic and
pathologic calcification, bone mineralization, and bone resorption.
Nurnberg et al. (2001) identified 6 different heterozygous mutations in
the ANKH gene in 8 of 9 families with CMDD (see, e.g.,
605145.0001-605145.0005). The mutations predicted single amino acid
substitutions, deletions, or insertions. Using a helix prediction
program, they proposed for the ANK molecule 12 membrane-spanning helices
with an alternate inside/out orientation and a central channel
permitting the passage of inorganic pyrophosphate. The mutations
occurred at highly conserved amino acid residues presumed to be located
in the cytosolic portion of the protein. The results linked the
inorganic pyrophosphate channel ANK with bone formation and remodeling.

Reichenberger et al. (2001) demonstrated 3 different mutations in the
ANKH gene in 5 different families and in isolated cases of CMDD. All
mutations clustered within 7 amino acids in 1 of the 6 possible
cytosolic domains of the ANKH protein. These results suggested that the
mutated protein has a dominant-negative effect on its function, since
reduced levels of pyrophosphate in bone matrix increase mineralization.
Progressive thickening and increased mineral density of craniofacial
bones and abnormally developed metaphyses in the long bones characterize
CMD.

- Chondrocalcinosis-2

Chondrocalcinosis is a common cause of joint pain and arthritis that is
caused by the deposition of calcium-containing crystals within articular
cartilage. Pendleton et al. (2002) showed that affected members of 2
previously described families with chondrocalcinosis-2 (CCAL2; 118600),
which is also called calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate deposition disease
(CPPDD), had mutations in the ANKH gene. One of the mutations resulted
in the substitution of a highly conserved amino acid residue within a
predicted transmembrane segment (605145.0006); the other created a new
ATG start site that added 4 additional residues to the ANKH protein
(605145.0007). In addition, 1 of 95 patients with sporadic
chondrocalcinosis from the U.K. showed a deletion of a single codon in
the ANKH gene (605145.0008). The same change was found in the patient's
sister and son; the sister had bilateral knee replacement for
osteoarthritis. Each of the 3 mutations was reconstructed in a
full-length ANK expression construct previously shown to regulate
pyrophosphate levels in cultured cells in vitro. All 3 mutations showed
significantly more activity than a previously described nonsense
mutation that causes severe hydroxyapatite mineral deposition and
widespread joint ankylosis in mice. These results suggested that small
sequence changes in ANKH are 1 cause of chondrocalcinosis and joint
disease in humans. Increased ANK activity may explain the different
types of crystals commonly deposited in CCAL2 families and mutant mice,
and may provide a useful pharmacologic target for treating some forms of
human chondrocalcinosis.

In a family with calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate deposition disease,
Williams et al. (2002) identified a pro5-to-leu (605145.0009) mutation
in the ANKH gene. They postulated that loss of function of ANKH causes
elevated extracellular inorganic pyrophosphate levels, predisposing to
CCAL2 crystal deposition.

Williams et al. (2003) screened for mutations in the ANKH gene in 2 U.S.
families with autosomal dominant CPPDD and found that all affected
members were heterozygous for a pro5-to-thr mutation (605145.0010). The
2 families displayed distinct haplotypes. Williams et al. (2003) noted
that the family described by Williams et al. (2002) had a different
mutation at the same codon (see 605145.0009) and also displayed a
distinct haplotype. They concluded that the evolutionarily conserved
pro5 position of ANKH may represent a hotspot for mutation in families
with autosomal dominant CCAL2.

Mutations in the progressive ankylosis gene (Ank/ANKH) cause
surprisingly different skeletal phenotypes in mice and humans. Ank
encodes a multiple-pass transmembrane protein that regulates
pyrophosphate levels inside and outside tissue culture cells;
conflicting models have been proposed to explain the effects of the
human mutations. Gurley et al. (2006) tested wildtype and mutant forms
of ANK for radiolabeled pyrophosphate-transport activity in frog
oocytes. They also reconstructed 2 human mutations in a bacterial
artificial chromosome and tested them in transgenic mice for rescue of
the Ank-null phenotype and for induction of new skeletal phenotypes.
Wildtype ANK stimulates saturable transport of pyrophosphate ions across
the plasma membrane, with half maximal rates attained at physiologic
levels of pyrophosphate. Chondrocalcinosis mutations retain apparently
wildtype transport activity and can rescue the joint-fusion phenotype of
Ank-null mice. Craniometaphyseal dysplasia mutations do not transport
pyrophosphate and cannot rescue the defects of Ank-null mice.
Furthermore, microcomputed tomography revealed previously unappreciated
phenotypes in Ank-null mice that are reminiscent of craniometaphyseal
dysplasia. The combination of biochemical and genetic analyses provided
insight into how mutations in ANKH cause human skeletal disease.

In an Australian family with CMDD and a known mutation in the ANKH gene
(G389R; 605145.0002), Baynam et al. (2009) found evidence for
chondrocalcinosis segregating with CMDD in mutation-positive female
family members.

ANIMAL MODEL

Mice carrying the progressive ankylosis mutation have been studied as a
model of arthritis. The autosomal recessive Ank mutation causes an
abnormal flat-footed gait in young mice due to decreased mobility of
ankle and toe joints. Loss of joint mobility becomes more severe with
age and spreads to most joints throughout the limbs and vertebral column
leading to complete rigidity and death around 6 months of age.
Hydroxyapatite crystals develop in articular surfaces and synovial fluid
of Ank mice, accompanied by joint space narrowing, cartilage erosion,
and formation of bony outgrowths or osteophytes that cause fusion
(ankylosis) and joint immobility. Ho et al. (2000) identified a G-to-T
substitution in the mouse Ank gene, leading to a nonsense mutation in
exon 11, the penultimate exon of mouse Ank. This mutation truncates the
C-terminal region of the protein and greatly reduces its activity in
vitro. The mouse Ank gene is expressed in developing articular surfaces
and may help maintain the unmineralized state by providing a local
source of inorganic pyrophosphate to inhibit hydroxyapatite formation.
In the absence of normal Ank activity, mineralization extends unhindered
throughout articular cartilage, hydroxyapatite deposits form in synovial
fluid, and new bone is deposited in and around joints, showing that the
gene is essential for normal joint maintenance.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CRANIOMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ANKH, PHE377DEL

In 2 apparently unrelated German families with craniometaphyseal
dysplasia (123000), previously reported by Spranger et al. (1965) and
Schwahn et al. (1996), Nurnberg et al. (2001) found deletion of 3
basepairs leading to deletion of codon 377 (phenylalanine). Because of
different haplotype backgrounds, these were thought to be recurrent
mutations, an interpretation favored by a short tandem repeat structure
for F377del (1196delCTT).

Reichenberger et al. (2001) reported the same mutation in affected
members of 2 families with craniometaphyseal dysplasia. They designated
the mutation PHE376DEL (1127delTCT) based on a different numbering
system.

.0002
CRANIOMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
CHONDROCALCINOSIS 2, INCLUDED
ANKH, GLY389ARG

In a Swiss family and an Australian family with craniometaphyseal
dysplasia (CMDD; 123000), the latter family originally reported by
Taylor and Sprague (1989), Nurnberg et al. (2001) identified a
gly389-to-arg (G389R) missense mutation in the ANKH gene as the basis of
craniometaphyseal dysplasia. That these were recurrent mutations was
supported by the fact that they were on different haplotype backgrounds
and by the nature of the affected sequence, namely, a CpG dinucleotide
for G389R (1233G-A).

Baynam et al. (2009) restudied the Australian family with CMDD that was
originally reported by Taylor and Sprague (1989) and found evidence for
chondrocalcinosis segregating with CMDD in mutation-positive female
family members. Although a chance association of chondrocalcinosis with
CMDD could not be excluded, Baynam et al. (2009) suggested that the lack
of joint symptoms in affected male family members might be due to
involvement of sex-dependent mechanisms or to the fact that only
mutation-positive women in the pedigree had reached the age at which the
chondrocalcinosis phenotype typically expresses.

.0003
CRANIOMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ANKH, IVS9, A-G, -4

In a patient with craniometaphyseal dysplasia (123000), Nurnberg et al.
(2001) identified an insertion of a single alanine in the ANKH cDNA; the
mutation, however, was an A-to-G transition in the splice acceptor site
of intron 9 that ended with a split codon, which contributed to the
codon (GCA) for the extra alanine. A new splice acceptor site in the
disease allele was created by the heterozygous point mutation at
position -4 of the splice donor site of intron 9. Reichenberger et al.
(2001) identified the same mutation in affected members of a family with
craniometaphyseal dysplasia.

.0004
MOVED TO 605145.0001
.0005
CRANIOMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ANKH, SER375DEL

In 2 affected members of a family with craniometaphyseal dysplasia
(123000), Nurnberg et al. (2001) identified a 3-bp deletion (1192delCTT)
in exon 9 of the ANKH gene, resulting in the deletion of ser375. In 2
sporadic cases of craniometaphyseal dysplasia, Reichenberger et al.
(2001) found the same 3-bp deletion, which they designated 1122delCTC
based on a different numbering system.

.0006
CHONDROCALCINOSIS 2
ANKH, MET48THR

In a French family with chondrocalcinosis-2 (118600) reported by Andrew
et al. (1999), Pendleton et al. (2002) found that affected members were
heterozygous for a 143T-C transition in exon 2 of the ANKH gene,
resulting in a met48-to-thr (M48T) substitution. The mutation is in a
transmembrane domain at a position that is absolutely conserved in the
ANKH protein over 400 million years of evolution from fish to mammals.

.0007
CHONDROCALCINOSIS 2
ANKH, -11C-T

In a British family with chondrocalcinosis-2 (118600) reported by Hughes
et al. (1995), Pendleton et al. (2002) found that affected members were
heterozygous for a -11C-T change located 11-bp upstream of the normal
ATG initiation codon of the ANKH gene. This change generated an
alternative ATG initiation codon and added 4 amino acids to the highly
conserved N terminus of the ANKH protein.

.0008
CHONDROCALCINOSIS 2, SPORADIC
ANKH, GLU490DEL

In 1 of 95 British patients with sporadic chondrocalcinosis-2 (118600),
Pendleton et al. (2002) identified a 3-bp deletion in exon 12 of the
ANKH gene that deleted a glutamate residue (E490del) located 3 amino
acids from the highly conserved C terminus of the ANKH protein. The
79-year-old proband had a sister who had undergone bilateral knee
replacements for 'osteoarthritis.' The sister and son of the proband
were heterozygous for this ANKH mutation, but the son was not yet old
enough for a reliable diagnosis of chondrocalcinosis.

.0009
CHONDROCALCINOSIS 2
ANKH, PRO5LEU

In a family with autosomal dominant familial calcium pyrophosphate
dihydrate deposition disease (118600), Williams et al. (2002) identified
a C-to-T transition at 14 bp from the start codon of the ANKH gene,
resulting in a pro5-to-leu (P5L) change, which segregated with the
disease. Some members of the family with the disease haplotype were
considered too young to manifest the disorder; some other members of the
family did not have the disease haplotype but were apparently affected.

.0010
CHONDROCALCINOSIS 2
ANKH, PRO5THR

Williams et al. (2003) screened 2 US families with autosomal dominant
calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate deposition disease (118600) for
mutations in the ANKH gene and found that all affected members were
heterozygous for a pro5-to-thr (P5T) mutation. They noted that another
mutation at the same codon (P5L; 605145.0009) had previously been
reported to cause the same disorder and suggested that the
evolutionarily conserved P5 position of ANKH may represent a hotspot for
mutation in families with autosomal dominant CPPDD.

.0011
CRANIOMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ANKH, CYS339ARG

In a French boy with craniometaphyseal dysplasia (123000), Kornak et al.
(2010) identified a heterozygous 1015T-C transition in exon 9 of the
ANKH gene, resulting in a cys339-to-arg (C339R) substitution in a highly
conserved residue in transmembrane helix 9. The patient had a severe
form of the disorder, with hearing loss and bilateral facial palsy
developing soon after birth. He had severe sclerosis of the skull base,
orbits, maxilla, and mandible, with almost complete obstruction of the
sinuses. There was rapid worsening of the bone phenotype in the first
years of life.

.0012
CRANIOMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ANKH, LEU391PRO

In a 24-year-old man from the Netherlands with craniometaphyseal
dysplasia (123000), Kornak et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous
1172T-C transition in exon 10 of the ANKH gene, resulting in a
leu391-to-pro (L391P) substitution in a highly conserved residue in the
loop between transmembrane helices 10 and 11. The patient presented with
progressive conductive and sensorineural hearing loss and was found to
have typical features of the disorder, with unilateral facial palsy
apparent in infancy, macrocephaly, and teeth crowding.

.0013
CRANIOMETAPHYSEAL DYSPLASIA, AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT
ANKH, LEU334ARG

In a 43-year-old Italian man with craniometaphyseal dysplasia (123000),
Kornak et al. (2010) identified a heterozygous 1001T-G transversion in
exon 8 of the ANKH gene, resulting in a leu334-to-arg (L334R)
substitution in a highly conserved residue in transmembrane helix 9. The
patient had typical manifestations of CMD, with sclerosis of the skull
base and maxilla, hyperostotic but not sclerotic mandible, and partially
obstructed sinuses without cranial nerve compression. He also had
narrowing of the middle ear cavities with bilateral fixation of the body
of the incus to the lateral attic, resulting in conductive deafness and
tinnitus. These middle ear manifestations were similar to those observed
in postinflammatory ossicular fixation secondary to acute or chronic
otitis media.

REFERENCE 1. Andrew, L. J.; Brancolini, V.; Serrano de la Pena, L.; Devoto,
M.; Caeiro, F.; Marchegiani, R.; Reginato, A.; Gaucher, A.; Netter,
P.; Gillet, P.; Loeuille, D.; Prockop, D. J.; Carr, A.; Wordsworth,
B. F.; Lathrop, M.; Butcher, S.; Considine, E.; Everts, K.; Nicod,
A.; Walsh, S.; Williams, C. J.: Refinement of the chromosome 5p locus
for familial calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate deposition disease. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 64: 136-145, 1999.

2. Baynam, G.; Goldblatt, J.; Schofield, L.: Craniometaphyseal dysplasia
and chondrocalcinosis cosegregating in a family with an ANKH mutation.
(Letter) Am. J. Med. Genet. 149A: 1331-1333, 2009.

3. Gurley, K. A.; Reimer, R. J.; Kingsley, D. M.: Biochemical and
genetic analysis of ANK in arthritis and bone disease. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 79: 1017-1029, 2006.

4. Ho, A. M.; Johnson, M. D.; Kingsley, D. M.: Role of the mouse
ank gene in control of tissue calcification and arthritis. Science 289:
265-270, 2000.

5. Hughes, A. E.; McGibbon, D.; Woodward, E.; Dixey, J.; Doherty,
M.: Localisation of a gene for chondrocalcinosis to chromosome 5p. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 4: 1225-1228, 1995.

6. Kornak, U.; Brancati, F.; Le Merrer, M.; Lichtenbelt, K.; Hohne,
W.; Tinschert, S.; Garaci, F. G.; Dallapiccola, B.; Nurnberg, P.:
Three novel mutations in the ANK membrane protein cause craniometaphyseal
dysplasia with variable conductive hearing loss. Am. J. Med. Genet. 152A:
870-874, 2010.

7. Nurnberg, P.; Thiele, H.; Chandler, D.; Hohne, W.; Cunningham,
M. L.; Ritter, H.; Leschik, G.; Uhlmann, K.; Mischung, C.; Harrop,
K.; Goldblatt, J.; Borochowitz, Z. U.; Kotzot, D.; Westermann, F.;
Mundlos, S.; Braun, H.-S.; Laing, N.; Tinschert, S.: Heterozygous
mutations in ANKH, the human ortholog of the mouse progressive ankylosis
gene, result in craniometaphyseal dysplasia. Nature Genet. 28: 37-41,
2001.

8. Nurnberg, P.; Tinschert, S.; Mrug, M.; Hampe, J.; Muller, C. R.;
Fuhrmann, E.; Braun, H.-S.; Reis, A.: The gene for autosomal dominant
craniometaphyseal dysplasia maps to chromosome 5q and is distinct
from the growth hormone-receptor gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61: 918-923,
1997.

9. Pendleton, A.; Johnson, M. D.; Hughes, A.; Gurley, K. A.; Ho, A.
M.; Doherty, M.; Dixey, J.; Gillet, P.; Loeuille, D.; McGrath, R.;
Reginato, A.; Shiang, R.; Wright, G.; Netter, P.; Williams, C.; Kingsley,
D. M.: Mutations in ANKH cause chondrocalcinosis. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 71:
933-940, 2002.

10. Reichenberger, E.; Tiziani, V.; Watanabe, S.; Park, L.; Ueki,
Y.; Santanna, C.; Baur, S. T.; Shiang, R.; Grange, D. K.; Beighton,
P.; Gardner, J.; Hamersma, H.; Sellars, S.; Ramesar, R.; Lidral, A.
C.; Sommer, A.; Raposo do Amaral, C. M.; Gorlin, R. J.; Mulliken,
J. B.; Olsen, B. R.: Autosomal dominant craniometaphyseal dysplasia
is caused by mutations in the transmembrane protein ANK. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 68: 1321-1326, 2001.

11. Schwahn, B.; Schaper, J.; Herkenrath, P.; Michel, O.; Schonau,
E.: Chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis with MR correlation:
a case report. Monatsschr. Kinderheilkd. 144: 1073-1077, 1996.

12. Spranger, J. W.; Paulsen, K.; Lehmann, W.: Die kraniometaphysaere
Dysplasie (Pyle). Z. Kinderheilk. 93: 64-79, 1965.

13. Taylor, D. B.; Sprague, P.: Dominant craniometaphyseal dysplasia:
a family study over five generations. Australas. Radiol. 33: 84-89,
1989.

14. Williams, C. J.; Pendleton, A.; Bonavita, G.; Reginato, A. J.;
Hughes, A.  E.; Peariso, S.; Doherty, M.; McCarty, D. J.; Ryan, L.
M.: Mutations in the amino terminus of ANKH in two US families with
calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystal deposition disease. Arthritis
Rheum. 48: 2627-2631, 2003.

15. Williams, C. J.; Zhang, Y.; Timms, A.; Bonavita, G.; Caeiro, F.;
Broxholme, J.; Cuthbertson, J.; Jones, Y.; Marchegiani, R.; Reginato,
A.; Russell, R. G. G.; Wordsworth, B. P.; Carr, A. J.; Brown, M. A.
: Autosomal dominant familial calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate deposition
disease is caused by mutation in the transmembrane protein ANKH. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 71: 985-991, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 11/9/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/10/2010
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/28/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 5/26/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/3/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/29/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/14/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/20/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/18/2001

CREATED Ada Hamosh: 7/13/2000

EDITED carol: 11/12/2012
terry: 11/9/2012
wwang: 11/15/2010
ckniffin: 11/10/2010
alopez: 11/28/2006
terry: 11/28/2006
carol: 5/26/2004
terry: 5/26/2004
tkritzer: 5/10/2004
terry: 5/3/2004
carol: 11/1/2002
tkritzer: 10/30/2002
terry: 10/29/2002
carol: 11/14/2001
cwells: 7/2/2001
cwells: 6/25/2001
terry: 6/20/2001
alopez: 4/27/2001
terry: 4/18/2001
carol: 4/9/2001
joanna: 8/3/2000
alopez: 7/13/2000

609694	TITLE *609694 GEM-INTERACTING PROTEIN; GMIP
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using GEM (600164) as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a T-cell
leukemia cell line cDNA library, followed by screening a myeloid
leukemia cell line cDNA library, Aresta et al. (2002) cloned GMIP. The
deduced 970-amino acid protein contains an alpha-helical N-terminal
domain with a coiled-coil region, followed by a central cysteine-rich
domain and a Rho GTPase-activating protein (RhoGAP; see 602732) domain.
Northern blot analysis detected ubiquitous expression of a 4-kb GMIP
transcript and tissue-specific expression of other GMIP transcripts.

GENE FUNCTION

Aresta et al. (2002) found that the GAP domain of GMIP was specific for
RHOA (165390) in vitro and following transfection of human embryonic
kidney cells. Full-length GMIP inhibited RHOA-dependent stress fiber
formation in a rat fibroblast cell line.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Tadokoro et al. (2005) found that a -525G-A SNP in the GMIP gene can
influence transcriptional activity of the gene. A promoter-luciferase
reporter assay showed that the promoter activity for the -525A allele
was significantly decreased compared with the -525G allele.

GENE STRUCTURE

Aresta et al. (2002) determined that the GMIP gene contains 21 exons and
spans over 14 kb.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Aresta et al. (2002) mapped the GMIP gene
to chromosome 19. By in situ hybridization, they localized the gene to
19p12-p11.

REFERENCE 1. Aresta, S.; de Tand-Heim, M.-F.; Beranger, F.; de Gunzburg, J.
: A novel Rho GTPase-activating-protein interacts with Gem, a member
of the Ras superfamily of GTPases. Biochem. J. 367: 57-65, 2002.

2. Tadokoro, K.; Hashimoto, R.; Tatsumi, M.; Kosuga, A.; Kamijima,
K.; Kunugi, H.: The Gem interacting protein (GMIP) gene is associated
with major depressive disorder. Neurogenetics 6: 127-133, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS John Logan Black, III - updated: 8/4/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/1/2005

EDITED carol: 08/29/2006
terry: 8/4/2006
mgross: 11/1/2005

602380	TITLE *602380 UROPLAKIN 1B; UPK1B
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The asymmetric unit membrane (AUM) of mammalian bladder epithelium is
believed to be involved in strengthening and stabilizing the urothelial
apical surface, thus preventing the cells from rupturing during bladder
distention. The major protein components of the AUM are UPK1A (611557),
UPK1B, UPK2 (611558), and UPK3 (UPK3A; 611559) (Yu et al., 1994).

CLONING

Yu et al. (1994) cloned cDNAs encoding bovine Upk1a and Upk1b and found
that they are homologous to proteins in the 4 transmembrane (4TM), or
tetraspan, family. Members of this family, which include CD37 (151523),
CD53 (151525), CD63 (155740), and CD151 (602243), are integral membrane
proteins that contain 4 predicted transmembrane domains (TMDs). TMDs 3
and 4 of Upk1a and Upk1b are connected by a long hydrophilic loop that
contains 6 highly conserved cysteine residues and a potential
N-glycosylation site. Yu et al. (1994) stated that all UPKs have large
exoplasmic domains but very small cytoplasmic ones.

Finch et al. (1997) cloned a partial-length cDNA encoding human UPK1B by
PCR. This 693-bp cDNA shows 91% homology to bovine Upk1b.

Using RT-PCR, Lobban et al. (1998) found that UPK1B was expressed in all
normal human urothelial cell lines examined. In situ hybridization
showed UPK1B in both superficial and upper intermediate cells of normal
human urothelium. No expression was detected in the non-urothelial
tissues examined. In contrast to the expression of other uroplakins,
UPK1B was expressed in neoplastic urothelium and highly expressed in
moderately differentiated transitional cell carcinomas (TCCs).

Using primers based on bovine Upk3, Yuasa et al. (1998) cloned UPK1B
from normal human bladder total RNA. The deduced protein contains 287
amino acids. RT-PCR detected UPK1B and UPK3 in both normal and cancerous
urothelial tissues. Both genes were also detected in the peripheral
blood of 3 patients with metastatic TCC, but not in that from 9 patients
with nonmetastatic TCC or in 3 healthy volunteers.

GENE STRUCTURE

Olsburgh et al. (2002) determined that the UPK1B gene contains 8 exons
and spans 31 kb. Exon 1 is noncoding, and intron 1 spans 13 kb. The
promoter regions contains a CAATT box and binding sites for AP1 (see
JUN; 165160), AP4 (600743), and SP1 (189906), but it does not have a
TATA box. A canonical poly(A) signal and a noncanonical poly(A) signal
are about 17.5 and 18.4 kb downstream of the ATG, respectively.

MAPPING

By radioisotopic in situ hybridization, Finch et al. (1997) mapped the
UPK1B gene to 3q13.3-q21. Webb et al. (1999) mapped the mouse Upk1b gene
to chromosome 16.

REFERENCE 1. Finch, J. L.; Webb, G. C.; Evdokiou, A; Cowled, P. A.: Chromosomal
localization of the human urothelial tetraspan gene, UPK1B, to 3q13.3-q21
and detection of a Taq1 polymorphism. Genomics 40: 501-503, 1997.

2. Lobban, E. D.; Smith, B. A.; Hall, G. D.; Harnden, P.; Roberts,
P.; Selby, P. J.; Trejdosiewicz, L. K.; Southgate, J.: Uroplakin
gene expression by normal and neoplastic human urothelium. Am. J.
Path. 153: 1957-1967, 1998.

3. Olsburgh, J.; Weeks, R.; Selby, P.; Southgate, J.: Human uroplakin
1b gene structure and promoter analysis. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1576:
163-170, 2002.

4. Webb, G. C.; Finch, J. L.; Cowled, P. A.: Assignment of the uroplakin
1b (Upk1b) gene to mouse chromosome 16 bands B5-C2 by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet.
Cell Genet. 84: 37-38, 1999.

5. Yu, J.; Lin, J.-H.; Wu, X.-R.; Sun, T.-T.: Uroplakins Ia and Ib,
two major differentiation products of bladder epithelium, belong to
a family of four transmembrane domain (4TM) proteins. J. Cell Biol. 125:
171-182, 1994.

6. Yuasa, T.; Yoshiki, T.; Tanaka, T.; Kim, C. J.; Isono, T.; Okada,
Y.: Expression of uroplakin Ib and uroplakin III genes in tissues
and peripheral blood of patients with transitional cell carcinoma. Jpn.
J. Cancer Res. 89: 879-882, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/16/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/12/2005

CREATED Patti M. Sherman: 2/23/1998

EDITED wwang: 10/26/2007
terry: 10/16/2007
wwang: 5/19/2005
wwang: 5/17/2005
terry: 5/12/2005
joanna: 4/18/2005
joanna: 4/15/2005
dholmes: 2/23/1998

611575	TITLE *611575 STERILE ALPHA MOTIF DOMAIN-CONTAINING 8; SAMD8
;;SPHINGOMYELIN SYNTHASE-RELATED; SMSR
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By searching databases for sequences encoding motifs characteristic of
SM synthases (see 611573), Huitema et al. (2004) identified SAMD8, which
they called SMSR. The deduced 415-amino acid protein contains 5
membrane-spanning alpha helices connected by hydrophilic extramembrane
loops. SMSR also contains 4 highly conserved motifs, designated D1 to
D4.

MAPPING

Hartz (2007) mapped the SAMD8 gene to chromosome 10q22.2 based on an
alignment of the SAMD8 sequence (GenBank GENBANK AK057811) with the
genomic sequence (build 36.1).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/12/2007.

2. Huitema, K.; van den Dikkenberg, J.; Brouwers, J. F. H. M.; Holthuis,
J. C. M.: Identification of a family of animal sphingomyelin synthases. EMBO
J. 23: 33-44, 2004.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/31/2007

EDITED wwang: 11/05/2007

142994	TITLE *142994 MOTOR NEURON AND PANCREAS HOMEOBOX 1; MNX1
;;HOMEOBOX GENE HB9; HLXB9;;
HB9
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Deguchi and Kehrl (1991) found that 2 human homeobox genes, HB9 (MNX1)
and HB24 (HLX1; 142995), are highly expressed in CD34-positive (142230)
marrow cells but not in CD34-depleted marrow cells. Their expression was
readily downregulated during the differentiation of hematopoietic
progenitors to specific cell lineages.

Harrison et al. (1994) isolated a human HB9 cDNA encoding a deduced
403-amino acid protein with a predicted molecular mass of 41 kD. The
protein contains a homeodomain preceded by a highly conserved 82-amino
acid domain. The HB9 homeodomain was found to be most similar to that of
the Drosophila homeobox box gene proboscipedia. Northern blot analysis
detected a major 2.2-kb transcript in hematopoietic cell lines. The
transcript was most prevalent in several human B cell lines and K562
cells.

GENE STRUCTURE

Harrison et al. (1994) determined that the HB9 gene contains 3 exons
spread over 6 kb.

MAPPING

Ross et al. (1998) noted that an STS (sequence tagged site) from the
3-prime untranslated region (UTR) of the HLXB9 gene was on the
chromosome 7 map; after typing various YACs from the 7q36 region, Ross
et al. (1998) determined that the HLXB9 gene is located in the
D7S559-D7S2423 interval.

GENE FUNCTION

Based on the expression pattern of HLXB9, Harrison et al. (1994)
suggested its involvement in regulating gene transcription in lymphoid
and pancreatic tissues.

Ross et al. (1998) were prompted to investigate the sacral expression of
HLXB9 by a report of tailbud expression of the homolog in Xenopus
laevis. Ross et al. (1998) found that HLXB9 was detectable in the sacral
region during embryogenesis, albeit predominantly in the anterior horn
regions of the spinal cord.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In 2 dominantly inherited sacral agenesis families (see Currarino
syndrome, 176450), Lynch et al. (1995) found linkage to 7q36 markers.
Ross et al. (1998) refined the subchromosomal localization in several
additional hereditary sacral agenesis families and identified causative
mutations in the HLXB9 gene (142994.0001-142994.0006).

To define more precisely the involvement of HLXB9 in different
phenotypic subgroups of anorectal malformations (ARMs), Belloni et al.
(2000) did a mutation screen in 27 individuals showing different sacral
conditions. Of the subgroups studied, mutation in HLXB9 was found only
in the Currarino syndrome. In 7 of 10 patients with Currarino syndrome,
abnormality of the HLXB9 was found. Four patients harbored, within the
coding sequence, heterozygous point mutations that would be predicted to
cause deleterious changes in the protein; one of these patients had a
donor splice site mutation. The entire HLXB9 gene in 2 patients and
possibly a third was found to be deleted. The authors found no evidence
of HLXB9 involvement in caudal regression (categories III and V) or in
total sacral agenesis (categories I and II).

Hagan et al. (2000) reported an extensive mutation survey that
identified mutations in the HLXB9 gene in 20 of 21 patients with
familial Currarino syndrome. Mutations were also detected in 2 of 7
sporadic patients; the authors suggested that the remainder could be
explained by undetected mosaicism for an HLXB9 mutation or by genetic
heterogeneity in the sporadic patients. Of the mutations identified in
the 22 index patients, 19 were intragenic and included 11 mutations that
could lead to the introduction of a premature termination codon. The
other 8 mutations were missense mutations that were significantly
clustered in the homeodomain, resulting, in each patient, in
nonconservative substitution of a highly conserved amino acid. All of
the intragenic mutations were associated with comparable phenotypes. The
only genotype-phenotype correlation appeared to be the occurrence of
developmental delay in the case of 3 patients with microdeletions. HLXB9
expression was analyzed during early human development in a period
spanning Carnegie stages 12 to 21. A signal was detected in the basal
plate of the spinal cord and hindbrain and in the pharynx, esophagus,
stomach, and pancreas. Significant spatial and temporal expression
differences were evident when expression of the gene in human and mouse
were compared. This may partly explain the significant human-mouse
differences in the mutant phenotype.

Kochling et al. (2001) identified a total of 5 HLXB9 mutations (4 of
which were novel) in 4 of 4 families and 1 of 5 sporadic cases with
Currarino syndrome. A detailed clinical investigation failed to identify
any obvious genotype-phenotype correlation. In all familial cases an
autosomal dominant transmission was observed. Although 10 of 23 patients
with HLXB9 mutations were asymptomatic, radiologic investigation
revealed characteristic phenotypic features in all patients. The
complete triad, consisting of a presacral mass, anorectal malformation,
and sacral agenesis, was found in only 8 of the 23 patients. A highly
variable phenotype was seen within 3 of the families, whereas affected
members of 1 family showed almost identical phenotypes. The distribution
of these and previously described HLXB9 mutations indicated mutational
predilection sites within exon 1 and within the homeodomain (including
all missense mutations). All reported mutations directly or indirectly
affected the DNA-binding homeodomain, as all in-frame mutations were
located within the homeodomain and mutations N-terminal of the
homeodomain were frameshift mutations leading to HB9 haploinsufficiency.
Since mutations have been detected in most patients with familial
Currarino syndrome, Kochling et al. (2001) found somatic mosaicism to be
the best explanation for the low mutation detection in sporadic cases.

In affected members of a 3-generation family segregating Currarino
syndrome, Urioste et al. (2004) identified a frameshift mutation in the
HLXB9 gene (142994.0009). Malignant transformation of a presacral
teratoma was observed in the 22-year-old proband, and presacral
teratomas were found in 6 other family members, including the 3
asymptomatic individuals. Of 9 affected members, only 2 displayed the
complete triad.

In affected members of a 4-generation family with Currarino syndrome,
Wang et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a nonsense mutation in
the HLXB9 gene (142994.0010).

ANIMAL MODEL

In most mammals, the pancreas develops from the foregut endoderm as
ventral and dorsal buds. These buds fuse and develop into a complex
organ composed of endocrine, exocrine, and ductal components. This
developmental process depends upon an integrated network of
transcription factors. Gene targeting experiments in mice revealed
critical roles for PDX1 (600733), ISL1 (600366), PAX4 (167413), PAX6
(607108), and NKX2.2. The HLXB9 gene is prominently expressed in adult
human pancreas. To facilitate study of the role of HLXB9 in the
development and function of the pancreas, Harrison et al. (1999)
isolated the mouse HLXB9 ortholog, Hlxb9. They found that during mouse
development, the dorsal and ventral pancreatic ducts and mature beta
cells in the islets of Langerhans express Hlxb9. In gene targeting
experiments, mice homozygous for a null mutation of the Hlxb9 gene
failed to show development of the dorsal lobe of the pancreas. The
remnant Hlxb9 -/- pancreas had small islets of Langerhans with reduced
numbers of insulin-producing beta cells. Hlxb9 -/- beta cells expressed
low levels of the glucose transporter Glut2 (138160) and homeodomain
factor Nkx6.1 (602563). Thus, Harrison et al. (1999) concluded that
HLXB9 is key to normal pancreas development and function.

Catala (2002) reviewed caudal development, the evidence coming from
analyses of mutant mice, indicating the involvement of T-box
transcription factors and components of the Wnt signaling pathway in
cellular migration and mesoderm formation in the caudal embryo. The
basis of sacral agenesis in the human in mutations of the HLXB9
transcription factor provides further insight on the developmental
program of the caudal embryo.

HISTORY

Najfeld et al. (1992) used HB9 and HB24 cDNA probes to map the
corresponding genes to 1q41-q42.1 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.
The HB9 gene was later found to map to chromosome 7 (Ross et al., 1998).

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CURRARINO SYNDROME
MNX1, 1-BP DEL, 652A

In affected members of a previously reported sacral agenesis syndrome
(176450) family from northern England (Lynch et al., 1995), Ross et al.
(1998) found heterozygosity for deletion of an A from an AA dinucleotide
at positions 652-653 of the HLXB9 gene.

.0002
CURRARINO SYNDROME
MNX1, GLU261TER

In affected members of an Irish family with sacral agenesis syndrome
(176450) previously reported by Lynch et al. (1995), Ross et al. (1998)
found heterozygosity for a nonsense mutation at position 4213 in the
homeobox, replacing glutamate codon 261 (CAG) with the TAG termination
codon.

.0003
CURRARINO SYNDROME
MNX1, 1-BP DEL, 414C

In affected members of a Norwegian family with sacral agenesis syndrome
(176450), in which 5 members in 2 generations had severe anal stenosis
requiring colostomy and 1 patient had the typical Currarino triad, Ross
et al. (1998) found that affected members had a heterozygous deletion of
a single cytosine from a stretch of 4 cytosines at positions 414-417 in
the HLXB9 gene. Some members of this family were asymptomatic but showed
sacral abnormalities by x-ray. Several had chronic constipation.

.0004
CURRARINO SYNDROME
MNX1, TYR166TER

Ross et al. (1998) demonstrated heterozygosity for the HLXB9 gene in a
sporadic American case of sacral agenesis (176450). The woman presented
with presacral teratoma, severe anal stenosis, and spinal cord
tethering. A de novo nonsense mutation in exon 1, a C-to-A transversion
at nucleotide 575, resulted in replacement of tyrosine codon 166 (TAC)
with a stop codon (TAA).

.0005
CURRARINO SYNDROME
MNX1, 1-BP INS, 125C

In an American kindred with sacral agenesis (176450), Ross et al. (1998)
found that affected individuals had a heterozygous frameshift insertion
of a cytosine into a stretch of 6 cytosines at positions 125-130 in exon
1 of the HLXB9 gene. The first presumably affected member in this family
(with 3 affected children out of 4) had constipation but normal sacral
x-ray. One member of the family had undeveloped coccyx and urinary tract
bilateral ureteropelvic junction obstruction. Several were born with
imperforate anus and anterior meningocele, as well as typical
sickle-shaped hemisacrum revealed by x-ray. Rectovaginal fistula and
vesicoureteric reflux resulted in the need for renal transplantation in
one case.

In a 3-generation German family with autosomal dominant sacral agenesis,
Kochling et al. (2001) found the 125insC frameshift mutation in the
HLXB9 gene. Haplotype analysis in this and 2 previously reported
families with the same mutation (Ross et al., 1998; Hagan et al., 2000)
revealed different haplotypes in each of the 3 families, suggesting a
recurrent mutation.

.0006
CURRARINO SYNDROME
MNX1, IVS2, A-G, -2

In affected members of a British family with autosomal dominant sacral
agenesis (176450), Ross et al. (1998) found a heterozygous splice site
mutation in the HLXB9 gene, replacing the conserved AG at the 3-prime
end of intron 2 (positions 4889-4890) with GG. Clinical features in this
family included severe anal stenosis requiring anal dilatation,
presacral mass (anterior meningocele), imperforate anus, meningitis, and
anterior ectopic anus and anal cysts. Some members of the family were
asymptomatic, but x-rays revealed sacral abnormalities (the typical
scimitar sacrum).

.0007
CURRARINO SYNDROME
MNX1, IVS2, G-A, +1

In a female patient with rectoperineal fistula and decreased bladder
capacity in association with hemisacrum (176450), Belloni et al. (2000)
found a heterozygous splice site mutation in exon 2 (858+1G-A).

.0008
CURRARINO SYNDROME
MNX1, THR248SER

In a female patient with hemisacrum and rectoperineal fistula (176450),
Belloni et al. (2000) found a heterozygous thr248-to-ser amino acid
mutation due to a single nucleotide substitution in exon 2 of the HLXB9
gene.

.0009
CURRARINO SYNDROME
MNX1, 24-BP DEL/2-BP INS, NT577

In affected members of a 3-generation family segregating Currarino
syndrome (176450), Urioste et al. (2004) identified a heterozygous 24-bp
deletion followed by an insertion of 2 bp (AG) at nucleotide 577 in exon
1 of the HLXB9 gene. The mutation was identified in the proband, a
22-year-old male in whom malignant transformation of a presacral
teratoma was observed, as well as in 8 other family members, 3 of whom
were asymptomatic but were subsequently found to have presacral
teratomas. Of the 9 family members with the mutation, 7 had teratomas, 1
had a presacral 'tumor' removed 15 years previously, and 1 had a
presacral mass but refused removal. Only 2 affected members displayed
the complete triad.

.0010
CURRARINO SYNDROME
MNX1, GLU283TER

In affected members of a 4-generation family with Currarino syndrome
(176450), Wang et al. (2006) identified heterozygosity for a 4282G-T
transversion in the HLXB9 gene, resulting in a glu283-to-ter (E283X)
substitution in the DNA-binding domain. The mutation segregated with the
disease and was not found in 5 unaffected family members.

REFERENCE 1. Belloni, E.; Martucciello, G.; Verderio, D.; Ponti, E.; Seri, M.;
Jasonni, V.; Torre, M.; Ferrari, M.; Tsui, L.-C.; Scherer, S. W.:
Involvement of the HLXB9 homeobox gene in Currarino syndrome. (Letter) Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 66: 312-319, 2000.

2. Catala, M.: Genetic control of caudal development. Clin. Genet. 61:
89-96, 2002.

3. Deguchi, Y.; Kehrl, J. H.: Selective expression of two homeobox
genes in CD34-positive cells from human bone marrow. Blood 78: 323-328,
1991.

4. Hagan, D. M.; Ross, A. J.; Strachan, T.; Lynch, S. A.; Ruiz-Perez,
V.; Wang, Y. M.; Scambler, P.; Custard, E.; Reardon, W.; Hassan, S.;
Nixon, P.; Papapetrou, C.; and 13 others: Mutation analysis and
embryonic expression of the HLXB9 Currarino syndrome gene. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 66: 1504-1515, 2000. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet.
67: 769 only, 2000.

5. Harrison, K. A.; Druey, K. M.; Deguchi, Y.; Tuscano, J. M.; Kehrl,
J. H.: A novel human homeobox gene distantly related to proboscipedia
is expressed in lymphoid and pancreatic tissues. J. Biol. Chem. 269:
19968-19975, 1994.

6. Harrison, K. A.; Thaler, J.; Pfaff, S. L.; Gu, H.; Kehrl, J. H.
: Pancreas dorsal lobe agenesis and abnormal islets of Langerhans
in Hlxb9-deficient mice. Nature Genet. 23: 71-75, 1999.

7. Kochling, J.; Karbasiyan, M.; Reis, A.: Spectrum of mutations
and genotype-phenotype analysis in Currarino syndrome. Europ. J.
Hum. Genet. 9: 599-605, 2001.

8. Lynch, S. A.; Bond, P. M.; Copp, A. J.; Kirwan, W. O.; Nour, S.;
Balling, R.; Mariman, E.; Burn, J.; Strachan, T.: A gene for autosomal
dominant sacral agenesis maps to the holoprosencephaly region at 7q36. Nature
Genet. 11: 93-95, 1995.

9. Najfeld, V.; Menninger, J.; Ballard, S. G.; Deguchi, Y.; Ward,
D. C.; Kehrl, J. H.: Two diverged human homeobox genes involved in
the differentiation of human hematopoietic progenitors map to chromosome
1, bands q41-42.1. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 5: 343-347, 1992.

10. Ross, A. J.; Ruiz-Perez, V.; Wang, Y.; Hagan, D.-M.; Scherer,
S.; Lynch, S. A.; Lindsay, S.; Custard, E.; Belloni, E.; Wilson, D.
I.; Wadey, R.; Goodman, F.; Orstavik, K. H.; Monclair, T.; Robson,
S.; Reardon, W.; Burn, J.; Scambler, P.; Strachan, T.: A homeobox
gene, HLXB9, is the major locus for dominantly inherited sacral agenesis. Nature
Genet. 20: 358-361, 1998.

11. Urioste, M.; Garcia-Andrade, M. del C.; Valle, L.; Robledo, M.;
Gonzalez-Palacios, F.; Mendez, R.; Ferreiros, J.; Nuno, J.; Benitez,
J.: Malignant degeneration of presacral teratoma in the Currarino
anomaly. Am. J. Med. Genet. 128A: 299-304, 2004.

12. Wang, R. Y.; Jones, J. R.; Chen, S.; Rogers, R. C.; Friez, M.
J.; Schwartz, C. E.; Graham, J. M., Jr.: A previously unreported
mutation in a Currarino syndrome kindred. Am. J. Med. Genet. 140A:
1923-1930, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 10/25/2006
Marla J. F. O'Neill - updated: 9/27/2004
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/10/2002
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 2/8/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/18/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/4/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/26/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/24/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/21/1993

EDITED terry: 11/28/2012
terry: 8/9/2010
carol: 2/2/2010
wwang: 10/26/2006
terry: 10/25/2006
carol: 11/18/2004
carol: 9/28/2004
tkritzer: 9/27/2004
terry: 3/18/2004
ckniffin: 8/27/2002
terry: 5/10/2002
alopez: 2/8/2002
mcapotos: 6/7/2000
mcapotos: 5/30/2000
terry: 5/18/2000
carol: 3/9/2000
mcapotos: 2/29/2000
mcapotos: 2/10/2000
terry: 2/4/2000
alopez: 11/18/1999
mgross: 8/27/1999
terry: 8/26/1999
alopez: 11/30/1998
terry: 11/24/1998
carol: 1/13/1995
warfield: 3/15/1994
carol: 1/21/1993

300051	TITLE *300051 GLYCOPROTEIN M6B; GPM6B
;;NEURONAL MEMBRANE GLYCOPROTEIN M6B
DESCRIPTION Yan et al. (1993) used monoclonal antibodies raised against antigens in
mouse brain fractions to isolate 2 related cDNAs from an expression
library. The cDNAs, designated M6a (601275) and M6b, are highly similar
to the myelin proteolipid protein (300401) and are expressed during
early development of the mouse central nervous system. Partial human
genomic and cDNA clones for M6b (symbol = GPM6B) were obtained by
Olinsky et al. (1996). They found that M6b is expressed in both neurons
and glia and was detected in the cerebellar Bergmann glia, in glia
within white matter tracts of the cerebellum and cerebrum, and in
embryonic dorsal root ganglia Olinsky et al. (1996) mapped the gene to
Xp22.2 by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

Narayanan et al. (1998) described the structure of the M6b gene and
refined the physical mapping of the gene to a location between markers
DXS69E and DXS414. They presented data from a mutation analysis on 55
patients with Rett syndrome (RTT; 312750), from which they concluded
that it was very unlikely that M6b is involved in Rett syndrome. A
relationship had been suggested by the fact that the gene maps to the
same region of Xp as does RTT and by the fact that M6b is a member of
the proteolipid protein gene family.

REFERENCE 1. Narayanan, V.; Olinsky, S.; Dahle, E.; Naidu, S.; Zoghbi, H. Y.
: Mutation analysis of the M6b gene in patients with Rett syndrome. Am.
J. Med. Genet. 78: 165-168, 1998.

2. Olinsky, S.; Loop, B. T.; DeKosky, A.; Ripepi, B.; Weng, W.; Cummins,
J.; Wenger, S. L.; Yan, Y.; Lagenaur, C.; Narayanan, V.: Chromosomal
mapping of the human M6 genes. Genomics 33: 532-536, 1996.

3. Yan, Y.; Lagenaur, C.; Narayanan, V.: Molecular cloning of M6:
identification of a PLP/DM20 gene family. Neuron 11: 423-431, 1993.

CONTRIBUTORS Victor A. McKusick - updated: 9/3/1998

CREATED Alan F. Scott: 5/22/1996

EDITED ckniffin: 08/28/2002
alopez: 9/8/1998
terry: 9/3/1998
mark: 6/14/1996
terry: 5/22/1996
mark: 5/22/1996

601929	TITLE *601929 ATPase, Ca(2+)-TRANSPORTING, UBIQUITOUS; ATP2A3
;;SARCOPLASMIC RETICULUM Ca(2+)-ATPase 3; SERCA3
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPases (SERCAs), such as ATP2A3, are
membrane-spanning proteins that transport Ca(2+) across membranes
bordering Ca(2+)-sequestering stores, such as the sarcoplasmic or
endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Isoform diversity results by alternative
processing of the primary gene transcripts in a developmentally
modulated or tissue-specific manner.

CLONING

Dode et al. (1996) isolated cDNA and genomic clones of human SERCA3. The
deduced 109,237-Da protein contains 999 amino acids and is 94% similar
to rat SERCA3. Northern blot analysis provided evidence for alternative
processing of the SERCA3 transcript.

By RT-PCR, Santiago-Garcia et al. (1996) found variable expression of
the PMCA (see 108731) and SERCA genes during human fetal heart
development. SERCA3 was expressed at relatively constant levels at all
stages of fetal heart development examined and in adult heart and
placenta.

Poch et al. (1998) cloned 2 SERCA3 splice variants from a kidney cDNA
library and a Jurkat T-cell line cDNA library. The deduced proteins,
which contain 999 and 1,029 amino acids, both have 10 transmembrane
domains but differ at their C termini. They also cloned a third variant
encoding a 998-amino acid protein that differs from the 999-amino acid
protein at 3 amino acids; however, the origin of this variant was
unclear. Northern blot analysis detected a major transcript of about 5
kb expressed at highest levels in thymus, colon, pancreas, and spleen.
Intermediate to low expression was detected in all other tissues
examined. The SERCA3 proteins localized in the nuclear envelope and in
the ER throughout human embryonic kidney and Jurkat T-cell lines.

Dode et al. (1998) identified 3 SERCA3 splice variants that encode
proteins with 999, 1,043, and 1,024 amino acids. The proteins, which the
authors designated SERCA3a, SERCA3b, and SERCA3c, respectively, differ
only in their C termini. Mouse Serca3 is also expressed as 3 variants of
similar size.

By RT-PCR of human platelets, Martin et al. (2002) identified and cloned
2 additional SERCA3 splice variants, which they designated SERCA3d and
SERCA3e. The deduced proteins contain 1,044 and 1,052 amino acids,
respectively, and differ from each other and the previously identified
SERCA3 isoforms only in their C termini. RT-PCR detected all 5 SERCA3
splice variants in platelets, lung, and pancreas. Heart, brain,
placenta, and kidney expressed 3 or 4 splice variants, and skeletal
muscle expressed only 1 variant. Variation was also found in the
expression of SERCA3 variants in established cell lines.

Bobe et al. (2004) identified a sixth SERCA3 variant, which they
designated SERCA3f, that lacks exon 21 but retains exon 22. The deduced
SERCA3f protein contains 1,033-amino acids and differs from the other
SERCA3 isoforms at the C terminus. RT-PCR detected SERCA3f expression in
all tissues and cell lines examined.

GENE FUNCTION

Following isolation of the microsome fraction of transfected human
embryonic kidney cells, Poch et al. (1998) demonstrated that proteins
encoded by 2 SERCA3 splice variants supported Ca(2+) uptake and ATPase
activity.

Martin et al. (2002) found that all 5 SERCA3 isoforms pumped Ca(2+) with
similar affinities, and all pumped Ca(2+) toward the ER. However, the
isoforms modulated cytosolic Ca(2+) concentrations and ER Ca(2+)
concentrations differently. Martin et al. (2002) concluded that the
SERCA3 isoforms have widespread roles in cellular Ca(2+) signaling.

Gelebart et al. (2002) found that expression of SERCA3 was significantly
reduced or lost in colon carcinomas compared with normal colonic
epithelial cells. Treatment of tumor cells with butyrate or other
differentiation inducers resulted in increased SERCA3 expression,
whereas SERCA2 (ATP2A2; 108740) expression was unaltered or was reduced.
SERCA3 expression was increased along with other differentiation markers
during spontaneous post-confluence differentiation of a colon carcinoma
cell line.

Because the SERCA3b and SERCA3f isoforms diverge at the beginning of the
C-terminal domain but share the same last 21 amino acids, Bobe et al.
(2004) investigated the relationship between structure, function, and
location of these isoforms. Immunofluorescence and/or confocal
microscopy showed that SERCA3f and SERCA3b localized in overlapping but
distinct ER locations. By transfection in human embryonic kidney cells,
Bobe et al. (2004) found that SERCA3b and SERCA3f created distinct
resting cytosolic Ca(2+) concentrations and ER Ca(2+) content. SERCA3b
and SERCA3f showed similar sensitivity to a SERCA inhibitor and similar
kinetics of Ca(2+) release and reuptake. They both demonstrated low
apparent Ca(2+) affinity and enhanced rates of dephosphorylation of the
phosphoenzyme intermediate relative to other SERCA Ca(2+) channels.

GENE STRUCTURE

Dode et al. (1998) determined that the ATP2A3 gene contains 22 exons and
spans more than 50 kb. Exon 21 is subject to alternative splicing and
may be included, partially included, or excluded. The promoter region
has no TATA box, but it has 14 putative Sp1 (189906) sites, 11 CACCC
boxes, 5 AP2 (107580)-binding motifs, 3 GGCTGGGG motifs, 3 CANNTG boxes,
a GATA (see 305371) site, and single sites for ETS1 (164720), MYC
(190080), and TFIIIC (see 603246). The authors showed that the GC-rich
region was critical for SERCA3 transcription in Jurkat cells.

Martin et al. (2002) identified a novel exon within what was previously
reported as the last intron of ATP2A3, indicating that the ATP2A3 gene
contains 23 exons.

MAPPING

Dode et al. (1996) assigned the ATP2A3 gene to human chromosome 17p13.3
by fluorescence in situ hybridization.

ANIMAL MODEL

Liu et al. (1997) found that Serca3-null mice were viable, fertile, and
did not exhibit an overt disease phenotype. However, mutant aortic ring
preparations showed diminished acetylcholine-induced intracellular
Ca(2+) signaling and relaxation, with reduced Ca(2+) transient and
nitric oxide production. Their response to other modifiers of vascular
tone was unaltered. Liu et al. (1997) concluded that SERCA3 plays a role
in Ca(2+) signaling mechanisms that mediate endothelium-dependent
relaxation of vascular smooth muscle.

Serca3 expression is restricted to beta cells in mouse pancreas.
Arredouani et al. (2002) found the Serca3 ablation was insufficient in
itself to alter glucose homeostasis or impair insulin secretion in mice.
However, Serca3 ablation altered the reuptake of Ca(2+) into the ER and
increased the insulin response of islets to glucose.

REFERENCE 1. Arredouani, A.; Guiot, Y.; Jonas, J.-C.; Liu, L. H.; Nenquin, M.;
Pertusa, J. A.; Rahier, J.; Rolland, J.-F.; Shull, G. E.; Stevens,
M.; Wuytack, F.; Henquin, J.-C.; Gilon, P.: SERCA3 ablation does
not impair insulin secretion but suggests distinct roles for different
sarcoendoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) pumps for Ca(2+) homeostasis in
pancreatic beta-cells. Diabetes 51: 3245-3253, 2002.

2. Bobe, R.; Bredoux, R.; Corvazier, E.; Andersen, J. P.; Clausen,
J. D.; Dode, L.; Kovacs, T.; Enouf, J.: Identification, expression,
function, and localization of a novel (sixth) isoform of the human
sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+) ATPase 3 gene. J. Biol. Chem. 279:
24297-24306, 2004.

3. Dode, L.; De Greef, C.; Mountian, I.; Attard, M.; Town, M. M.;
Casteels, R.; Wuytack, F.: Structure of the human sarco/endoplasmic
reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase 3 gene: promoter analysis and alternative
splicing of the SERCA3 pre-mRNA. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 13982-13994,
1998.

4. Dode, L.; Wuytack, F.; Kools, P. F. J.; Baba-Aissa, F.; Raeymaekers,
L.; Brike, F.; Van de Ven, W. J. M.; Casteels, R.: cDNA cloning,
expression and chromosomal localization of the human sarco/endoplasmic
reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase 3 gene. Biochem. J. 318: 689-699, 1996.
Note: Erratum:  Biochem. J. 319: 1008 only, 1996.

5. Gelebart, P.; Kovacs, T.; Brouland, J.-P.; van Gorp, R.; Grossmann,
J.; Rivard, N.; Panis, Y.; Martin, V.; Bredoux, R.; Enouf, J.; Papp,
B.: Expression of endomembrane calcium pumps in colon and gastric
cancer cells: induction of SERCA3 expression during differentiation. J.
Biol. Chem. 277: 26310-26320, 2002.

6. Liu, L. H.; Paul, R. J.; Sutliff, R. L.; Miller, M. L.; Lorenz,
J. N.; Pun, R. Y. K.; Duffy, J. J.; Doetschman, T.; Kimura, Y.; MacLennan,
D. H.; Hoying, J. B.; Shull, G. E.: Defective endothelium-dependent
relaxation of vascular smooth muscle and endothelial cell Ca(2+) signaling
in mice lacking sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase isoform
3. J. Biol. Chem. 272: 30538-30545, 1997.

7. Martin, V.; Bredoux, R.; Corvazier, E.; van Gorp, R.; Kovacs, T.;
Gelebart, P.; Enouf, J.: Three novel sarco/endoplasmic reticulum
Ca(2+)-ATPase (SERCA) 3 isoforms: expression, regulation, and function
of the members of the SERCA3 family. J. Biol. Chem. 277: 24442-24452,
2002.

8. Poch, E.; Leach, S.; Snape, S.; Cacic, T.; MacLennan, D. H.; Lytton,
J.: Functional characterization of alternatively spliced human SERCA3
transcripts. Am. J. Physiol. 275: C1449-C1458, 1998.

9. Santiago-Garcia, J.; Mas-Oliva, J.; Saavedra, D.; Zarain-Herzberg,
A.: Analysis of mRNA expression and cloning of a novel plasma membrane
Ca(2+)-ATPase splice variant in human heart. Molec. Cell. Biol. 155:
173-182, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 2/7/2005

CREATED Lori M. Kelman: 8/6/1997

EDITED alopez: 03/08/2013
terry: 4/5/2005
carol: 2/16/2005
mgross: 2/8/2005
mgross: 2/7/2005
carol: 8/12/1998
dholmes: 10/21/1997
dholmes: 8/12/1997
dholmes: 8/11/1997
joanna: 8/6/1997
dholmes: 8/6/1997

608288	TITLE *608288 INSULIN-LIKE GROWTH FACTOR 2 mRNA-BINDING PROTEIN 1; IGF2BP1
;;IGF2 mRNA-BINDING PROTEIN 1; IMP1;;
CODING REGION DETERMINANT-BINDING PROTEIN, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF; CRDBP;;
ZIPCODE-BINDING PROTEIN 1; ZBP1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Nielsen et al. (1999) purified several IMP proteins from the
rhabdomyosarcoma (268210) cell line RD that bound to the leader 3 mRNA
in the 5-prime untranslated region of IGF2 (147470). Using degenerate
primers designed from tryptic fragments of IMP1 for RT-PCR of total RD
mRNA, followed by screening an EST database, they cloned IMP1. The
deduced 577-amino acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 63 kD.
IMP1 contains 6 characteristic RNA-binding modules, including 2
N-terminal RRM domains and 4 central and C-terminal KH domains. It
shares 59% amino acid identity with IMP2 (IGF2BP2; 608289) and IMP3
(IGF2BP3; 608259), 95% identity with chicken zipcode-binding protein,
and 99% identity with mouse Crdbp. Immunocytochemical analysis of
cultured cells showed a dynamic subcellular localization for IMP1 that
was dependent upon the cell type, the degree of cell differentiation,
and exposure of the cells to serum factors that differ between newborn
and fetal calf serum. Northern blot analysis detected no expression of
Imp1, Imp2, or Imp3 in adult mouse tissues. However, analysis of mouse
embryos showed that expression of all 3 Imp transcripts peaked at
embryonic day 12.5 and declined toward birth. RNA dot blot analysis
detected moderate IMP1 expression in placenta and in all human fetal
tissues of mixed first-trimester age examined. Immunohistochemical
staining of developing human skeletal muscle cells showed IMP1 beneath
the plasma membrane along the circumference of myoblasts and myotubes.
IMP1 was also detected in trophoblasts of human term placenta.
Immunostaining of frozen mouse embryos detected expression of Imp1 at
the basal plasma cell membrane of developing epidermis, in epithelia of
the lung and intestines, and in skeletal muscle throughout development.

GENE FUNCTION

By mobility shift analysis, Nielsen et al. (1999) determined that IGF2
leader 3 mRNA contains at least 6 binding sites for IMP1; no binding
sites were found on IGF2 leader 4 mRNA. IMP1 competed with PTB (600693)
for IGF2 leader 3 mRNA binding in a Mg(2+)-dependent manner, and binding
was mutually exclusive. PTB was the predominant species at low Mg(2+)
concentrations, while IMP1 was predominant at higher Mg(2+)
concentrations. IMP1 inhibited translation from a leader 3 reporter mRNA
in vivo.

By FISH, Doyle et al. (2000) determined that the CRDBP gene was
magnified in 14 of 40 breast cancer samples, and the amplification was
found only in the tumor cells in each sample. In 7 of these 14 cases,
the HER2 gene (164870) was coamplified.

By RT-PCR, Ioannidis et al. (2003) detected expression of CRDBP in 69 of
118 (58.5%) primary breast tumors, but not in any normal breast tissue
examined. There was no significant association between CRDBP expression
and patient age, histologic tumor type, tumor size, nodal status, or
invasion. However, there was a borderline association between CRDBP
expression and advanced tumor grade (grade I/II vs grade III, p of
0.054), and a highly significant inverse association between CRDBP
expression and estrogen receptor (see 133430) expression (p of 0.005).
Copy number gains in the region encompassing the CRDBP gene were found
in 11 of 60 (18.3%) tumor samples, but 3 of these samples were negative
for CRDBP expression.

Localization of beta-actin (102630) mRNA to sites of active actin
polymerization modulates cell migration during embryogenesis,
differentiation, and possibly carcinogenesis. This localization requires
the oncofetal protein ZBP1, which binds to a conserved 54-nucleotide
element in the 3-prime untranslated region of the beta-actin mRNA known
as the 'zipcode.' ZBP1 promotes translocation of the beta-actin
transcript to actin-rich protrusions in primary fibroblasts and neurons.
Huttelmaier et al. (2005) showed that chicken ZBP1 modulates the
translation of beta-actin mRNA. ZBP1 associates with the beta-actin
transcript in the nucleus and prevents premature translation in the
cytoplasm by blocking translation initiation. Translation occurs only
when the ZBP1-RNA complex reaches its destination at the periphery of
the cell. At the endpoint of mRNA transport, the protein kinase Src
(190090) promotes translation by phosphorylating a key tyrosine residue
in ZBP1 that is required for binding to RNA. These sequential events
provide both temporal and spatial control over beta-actin mRNA
translation, which is important for cell migration and neurite
outgrowth.

Noubissi et al. (2006) demonstrated that beta-catenin (see 116806)
stabilizes the mRNA encoding the F-box protein beta-TrCP1 (BTRCP1;
603482), and identified the RNA-binding protein CRDBP as a target of
beta catenin/Tcf transcription factor. CRDBP binds to the coding region
of BTRCP1 mRNA. Overexpression of CRDBP stabilized BTRCP1 mRNA and
elevated BTRCP1 levels both in cells and in vivo, resulting in the
activation of the Skp1-Cullin1-F-box protein (SCF)-BTRCP1 E3 ubiquitin
ligase and in accelerated turnover of its substrates including I-kappa-B
(see 164008) and beta-catenin. CRDBP is essential for the induction of
both BTRCP1 and c-Myc (190080) by beta-catenin signaling in colorectal
cancer cells. Noubissi et al. (2006) concluded that high levels of CRDBP
that are found in primary human colorectal tumors exhibiting active
beta-catenin/Tcf signaling implicates CRDBP induction in the
upregulation of BTRCP1, in the activation of dimeric transcription
factor NF-kappa-B (see 164011), and in the suppression of apoptosis in
these cancers.

GENE STRUCTURE

Doyle et al. (2000) determined that the mouse Crdbp gene contains 15
exons and spans about 40 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH, Doyle et al. (2000) mapped the CRDBP (IGF2BP1) gene to
chromosome 17q21.3. It lies distal to the HER2 and RARA (180240) genes
and proximal to the MPO gene (606989). Doyle et al. (2000) mapped the
mouse Crdbp gene to chromosome 11.

REFERENCE 1. Doyle, G. A.; Bourdeau-Heller, J. M.; Coulthard, S.; Meisner, L.
F.; Ross, J.: Amplification in human breast cancer of a gene encoding
a c-myc mRNA-binding protein. Cancer Res. 60: 2756-2759, 2000.

2. Huttelmaier, S.; Zenklusen, D.; Lederer, M.; Dictenberg, J.; Lorenz,
M.; Meng, X.; Bassell, G. J.; Condeelis, J.; Singer, R. H.: Spatial
regulation of beta-actin translation by Src-dependent phosphorylation
of ZBP1. Nature 438: 512-515, 2005.

3. Ioannidis, P.; Mahaira, L.; Papadopoulou, A.; Teixeira, M. R.;
Heim, S.; Andersen, J. A.; Evangelou, E.; Dafni, U.; Pandis, N.; Trangas,
T.: 8q24 copy number gains and expression of the c-myc mRNA stabilizing
protein CRD-BP in primary breast carcinomas. Int. J. Cancer 104:
54-59, 2003.

4. Nielsen, J.; Christiansen, J.; Lykke-Andersen, J.; Johnsen, A.
H.; Wewer, U. M.; Nielsen, F. C.: A family of insulin-like growth
factor II mRNA-binding proteins represses translation in late development. Molec.
Cell. Biol. 19: 1262-1270, 1999.

5. Noubissi, F. K.; Elcheva, I.; Bhatia, N.; Shakoori, A.; Ougolkov,
A.; Liu, J.; Minamoto, T.; Ross, J.; Fuchs, S. Y.; Spiegelman, V.
S.: CRD-BP mediates stabilization of beta-TrCP1 and c-myc mRNA in
response to beta-catenin signalling. Nature 441: 898-901, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/21/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/30/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/26/2003

EDITED wwang: 08/20/2010
alopez: 7/26/2006
terry: 7/21/2006
alopez: 3/21/2006
alopez: 1/31/2006
terry: 1/30/2006
mgross: 11/26/2003

606115	TITLE *606115 RIBONUCLEASE P/MRP, 30-KD SUBUNIT; RPP30
;;RIBONUCLEASE P, 30-KD SUBUNIT
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Ribonuclease P (RNase P) removes the 5-prime leader sequences from
precursor tRNA molecules. RNase P consists of an RNA species (H1 RNA),
the POP1 protein (602486), and at least 7 proteins called RPPs. The RPPs
have apparent molecular masses of 14 kD (RPP14; 606112), 20 kD (RPP20;
606113), 25 kD (RPP25), 29 kD (RPP29; 606114), 30 kD (RPP30), 38 kD
(RPP38; 606116), and 40 kD (RPP40; 606117). Patients with scleroderma
(181750) have serum reactive with RNase P, the Th antigen, which is also
referred to as the To antigen, and RPP30 and RPP38 (summary by Jarrous
et al., 1998, 1999).

CLONING

By biochemical purification of RNase P, micropeptide sequence analysis,
and EST database searching, Eder et al. (1997) obtained a cDNA encoding
RPP30. The deduced protein contains 268 amino acids with a predicted
molecular mass of nearly 30 kD.

Jarrous et al. (1998) determined that RPP30 is a target for antisera
from systemic sclerosis patients. Immunoprecipitation analysis showed
that polyclonal antibodies raised against RPP20, RPP30, RPP38, or RPP40
interact with RNase P from HeLa cells.

MAPPING

Gross (2013) mapped the RPP30 gene to chromosome 10q23.31 based on an
alignment of the RPP30 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BC006991) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Eder, P. S.; Kekuda, R.; Stolc, V.; Altman, S.: Characterization
of two scleroderma autoimmune antigens that copurify with human ribonuclease
P. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 1101-1106, 1997.

2. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  9/9/2013.

3. Jarrous, N.; Eder, P. S.; Guerrier-Takada, C.; Hoog, C.; Altman,
S.: Autoantigenic properties of some protein subunits of catalytically
active complexes of human ribonuclease P. RNA 4: 407-417, 1998.

4. Jarrous, N.; Eder, P. S.; Wesolowski, D.; Altman, S.: Rpp14 and
Rpp29, two protein subunits of human ribonuclease P. RNA 5: 153-157,
1999.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 9/9/2013

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/16/2001

EDITED mgross: 09/09/2013
mgross: 9/9/2013
alopez: 11/8/2005
mgross: 7/16/2001

601801	TITLE *601801 TRANSCRIPTION FACTOR Sp2; SP2
;;SPECIFICITY PROTEIN 2
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Kingsley and Winoto (1992) investigated transcription factors which bind
to the GT box, a T-cell transcriptional regulatory element which is
similar to the GC box, the classical binding site for SP1 (189906). Gel
shift assays showed that SP1 and 2 additional DNA-protein complexes
bound to the GT box. The authors then cloned 2 novel GT box-binding
cDNAs from a human cDNA expression library. They termed these new
transcription factors SP2 and SP3 (601804). These genes encode proteins
with several transactivation domains and a zinc finger DNA-binding
domain with homology to SP1. Kingsley and Winoto (1992) reported that
the SP2 cDNA encodes a 495-amino acid polypeptide which is 72% identical
to SP1 within the zinc finger domain. However, they noted that SP2,
unlike SP3, has limited homology to SP1. Northern blot analysis shows
that the SP2 gene produces a 3.2-kb message expressed in several cell
lines. When expressed in vitro, SP2 binds the GT box weakly but does not
bind the GC box.

MAPPING

Suske et al. (2005) stated that the human SP2 gene maps to chromosome
17q21.32, and the mouse Sp2 gene to chromosome 11D.

REFERENCE 1. Kingsley, C; Winoto, A.: Cloning of GT box-binding proteins: a
novel SP1 multigene family regulating T-cell receptor gene expression. Molec.
Cell Biol. 12: 4251-4261, 1992.

2. Suske, G.; Bruford, E.; Philipsen, S.: Mammalian SP/KLF transcription
factors: bring in the family. Genomics 85: 551-556, 2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 5/31/2005

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 5/15/1997

EDITED carol: 10/29/2008
wwang: 5/31/2005
alopez: 5/27/1997

603762	TITLE *603762 PHOSPHORIBOSYLPYROPHOSPHATE SYNTHETASE-ASSOCIATED PROTEIN 2; PRPSAP2
;;PAP41
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate (PRPP) is a primary substrate and a critical
control factor for de novo synthesis of purine and pyrimidine
nucleotides, histidine, tryptophan, and NAD. The enzyme PRPP synthetase
(PRPS), which catalyzes the formation of PRPP, exists in an aggregate
composed of 2 catalytic subunits, PRPS I (PRPS1; 311850) and PRPS II
(PRPS2; 311860), and 2 associated subunits, PAP39 (601249) and PAP41. By
searching an EST database for sequences related to PAP39, Katashima et
al. (1998) identified cDNAs encoding PAP41. The predicted 369-amino acid
protein exhibited 72%, 51%, and 50% sequence identity with PAP39, PRPS2,
and PRPS2, respectively. The rat and human PAP41 proteins are 99%
identical. Northern blot analysis revealed that PAP41 is expressed as a
2.1-kb mRNA in several human cell lines.

MAPPING

By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Katashima et al. (1998) mapped
the PRPSAP2 gene to 17p12-p11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Katashima, R.; Iwahana, H.; Fujimura, M.; Yamaoka, T.; Ishizuka,
T.; Tatibana, M.; Itakura, M.: Molecular cloning of a human cDNA
for the 41-kDa phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase-associated protein. Biochim.
Biophys. Acta 1396: 245-250, 1998.

2. Katashima, R.; Iwahana, H.; Fujimura, M.; Yamaoka, T.; Itakura,
M.: Assignment of the human phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase-associated
protein 41 gene (PRPSAP2) to 17p11.2-p12. Genomics 54: 180-181,
1998.

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 4/21/1999

EDITED carol: 08/17/2007
alopez: 4/21/1999

600488	TITLE *600488 PROPROTEIN CONVERTASE, SUBTILISIN/KEXIN-TYPE, 5; PCSK5
;;PROPROTEIN CONVERTASE PC5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

PCSK5 mediates posttranslational endoproteolytic processing for several
integrin alpha subunits (Cao et al., 2001). For background information
on proprotein convertases, see PC4 (PCSK4; 600487).

CLONING

De Bie et al. (1996) noted that 2 splice variants of mouse Pcsk5 encode
isoforms with different C termini. The 915-amino acid isoform, Pcsk5a,
which was cloned by Lusson et al. (1993) and Nakagawa et al. (1993),
contains an N-terminal signal peptide, followed by a prosegment, a
catalytic domain, 2 tandem P domains (also called homo B domains), a
cysteine-rich domain, and 38 C-terminal amino acids unique to Pcsk5a. In
comparison, the 1,877-amino acid isoform, Pcsk5b, which was cloned by
Nakagawa et al. (1993), contains an extended cysteine-rich domain,
followed by a C-terminal transmembrane region and a short cytoplasmic
tail. Pcsk5a is widely expressed, with highest abundance in intestine
and adrenal gland, but Pcsk5b is expressed only in intestine, adrenal
gland, and lung. De Bie et al. (1996) found that the soluble Pcsk5a
protein was sorted to secretory granules via its unique C-terminal
sequence, whereas the membrane-bound Pcsk5b protein was located in the
Golgi. Immunogold electron microscopy localized Pcsk5 in
glucagon-containing granules of mouse pancreatic cells.

GENE FUNCTION

Using pharmacologic inhibitors and PC5-specific antisense
oligonucleotides, Stawowy et al. (2004) found that PC5 was involved in
adhesion of rat vascular smooth muscle cells to vitronectin (VTN;
193190), an integrin alpha-V (ITGAV; 193210)/beta-3 (ITGB3;
173470)/beta-5 (ITGB5; 147561) ligand. Inhibition of PC5 also inhibited
migration of vascular smooth muscle cells on vitronectin-coated wells.
Stawowy et al. (2004) found that PC5 colocalized with alpha-V integrin
in human vascular smooth muscle cells in atherosclerotic plaques. They
concluded that vascular smooth muscle cell PC5 is necessary for
endoproteolytic activation of integrin alpha-V, which leads to
integrin-mediated cell adhesion, migration, and signaling.

GENE STRUCTURE

Cao et al. (2001) determined that the PCSK5 gene at least contains 12
exons.

MAPPING

Mbikay et al. (1995) mapped the Pcsk5 locus to mouse chromosome 19 close
to the lipocortin-1 (Lpc1) locus (LPC1; 151690) by RFLP analysis of a
DNA panel from an interspecific backcross. The human homolog was
localized to chromosome 9 by Southern blot analysis of a DNA panel from
human/rodent somatic cell hybrids, most of which contained a single
human chromosome.

Using analysis of somatic cell hybrids and YAC clones, as well as
fluorescence in situ hybridization, van de Loo et al. (1996) mapped the
PCSK5 gene to 9q21.3 near markers D9S175 and D9S276.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Cao et al. (2001) identified 2 silent SNPs in PCSK5 and found that they
varied in frequency among ethnic groups. They suggested that SNPs
provide tools to investigate PCSK5 for association with inflammatory or
vascular phenotypes.

ANIMAL MODEL

Szumska et al. (2008) identified an N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea (ENU)-induced
recessive mouse mutation that resulted in a pleiotropic phenotype
including cardiac, tracheoesophageal, anorectal, and anteroposterior
patterning defects, exomphalos, hindlimb hypoplasia, presacral mass,
renal and palatal agenesis, and pulmonary hypoplasia. They called the
mutation Vcc, because the phenotype resembled many aspects of human
VACTERL association (192350), caudal regression syndrome (600145), and
Currarino syndrome (176450). Szumska et al. (2008) identified the Vcc
mutation as a cys470-to-arg (C470R) substitution in Pcsk5 that ablated a
disulfide bond in the P domain, blocking export from the ER and
rendering the enzyme inactive. Wildtype Pcsk5a, but not Pcsk5a with the
Vcc mutation, cleaved and activated Gdf11 (603936), and Gdf11-deficient
embryos partially phenocopied Vcc mutants, including anteroposterior
patterning defects, renal and palatal agenesis, a presacral mass,
anorectal malformation, and exomphalos. The C470R Pcsk5 mutation
resulted in abnormal expression of several Hox genes (see HOXA1; 142955)
and Mnx1 (HLXB9; 142994), and these included Gdf11 targets and genes
necessary for caudal development. Szumska et al. (2008) proposed that
PCSK5, at least in part via GDF11, regulates caudal HOX genes to control
anteroposterior patterning, nephrogenesis, and skeletal and anorectal
development.

REFERENCE 1. Cao, H.; Mok, A.; Miskie, B.; Hegele, R. A.: Single-nucleotide
polymorphisms of the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 5
(PCSK5) gene. J. Hum. Genet. 46: 730-732, 2001.

2. De Bie, I.; Marcinkiewicz, M.; Malide, D.; Lazure, C.; Nakayama,
K.; Bendayan, M.; Seidah, N. G.: The isoforms of proprotein convertase
PC5 are sorted to different subcellular compartments. J. Cell Biol. 135:
1261-1275, 1996.

3. Lusson, J.; Vieau, D.; Hamelin, J.; Day, R.; Chretien, M.; Seidah,
N. G.: cDNA structure of the mouse and rat subtilisin/kexin-like
PC5: a candidate proprotein convertase expressed in endocrine and
nonendocrine cells. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 6691-6695, 1993.

4. Mbikay, M.; Seidah, N. G.; Chretien, M.; Simpson, E. M.: Chromosomal
assignment of the genes for proprotein convertases PC4, PC5, and PACE
4 in mouse and human. Genomics 26: 123-129, 1995.

5. Nakagawa, T.; Hosaka, M.; Torii, S.; Watanabe, T.; Murakami, K.;
Nakayama, K.: Identification and functional expression of a new member
of the mammalian Kex2-like processing endoprotease family: its striking
structural similarity to PACE4. J. Biochem. 113: 132-135, 1993.

6. Nakagawa, T.; Murakami, K.; Nakayama, K.: Identification of an
isoform with an extremely large Cys-rich region of PC6, a Kex2-like
processing endoprotease. FEBS Lett. 327: 165-171, 1993.

7. Stawowy, P.; Kallisch, H.; Veinot, J. P.; Kilimnik, A.; Prichett,
W.; Goetze, S.; Seidah, N. G.; Chretien, M.; Fleck, E.; Graf, K.:
Endoproteolytic activation of alpha(V) integrin by proprotein convertase
PC5 is required for vascular smooth muscle cell adhesion to vitronectin
and integrin-dependent signaling. Circulation 109: 770-776, 2004.

8. Szumska, D.; Pieles, G.; Essalmani, R.; Bilski, M.; Mesnard, D.;
Kaur, K.; Franklyn, A.; El Omari, K.; Jefferis, J.; Bentham, J.; Taylor,
J. M.; Schneider, J. E.; and 16 others: VACTERL/caudal regression/Currarino
syndrome-like malformations in mice with mutation in the proprotein
convertase Pcsk5. Genes Dev. 22: 1465-1477, 2008.

9. van de Loo, J.-W. H. P.; Creemers, J. W. M.; Kas, K.; Roebroek,
A. J. M.; Van de Ven, W. J. M.: Assignment of the human proprotein
convertase gene PCSK5 to chromosome 9q21.3 Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 75:
227-229, 1996.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/14/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 1/17/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/6/2002

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/14/1995

EDITED carol: 07/07/2009
terry: 5/7/2009
mgross: 8/14/2008
mgross: 1/17/2006
terry: 1/17/2006
cwells: 3/14/2002
cwells: 3/12/2002
terry: 3/6/2002
psherman: 4/24/2000
carol: 4/24/2000
terry: 4/25/1997
jamie: 2/18/1997
mark: 4/14/1995

130592	TITLE *130592 EUKARYOTIC TRANSLATION ELONGATION FACTOR 1, DELTA; EEF1D
;;ELONGATION FACTOR 1, DELTA; EF1D;;
GUANINE NUCLEOTIDE EXCHANGE PROTEIN
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Eukaryotic elongation factor-1 (EF1) consists of 4 subunits, EF1-alpha
(EEF1A1; 130590), EF1-beta (EEF1B2; 600655), EF1-gamma (EEF1G; 130593),
and EF1-delta. EIF-alpha-GTP transfers aminoacyl-tRNA to the ribosome,
and the release of animoacyl-tRNA from EIF-alpha-GTP is driven by GTP
hydrolysis. EF1-alpha-GDP is recycled to EF1-alpha-GTP by the EF1-beta,
-gamma, and -delta subunits (Sanders et al., 1996).

CLONING

Using Xenopus Ef1-delta to probe a human skin fibroblast cDNA library,
Sanders et al. (1993) cloned EF1-delta. The deduced 281-amino acid
protein has a calculated molecular mass of 31 kD. It has an N-terminal
leucine zipper domain and a C-terminal domain that is similar to that of
EF1-beta and is predicted to show GDP/GTP exchange activity. EF1-delta
also has a conserved serine phosphorylation site. SDS-PAGE detected
EF1-delta at an apparent molecular mass of 38 kD.

By Western blot analysis, Sanders et al. (1996) detected 1 major and 2
minor EF1-delta bands, which they attributed to variable degrees of
phosphorylation. Immunofluorescence analysis detected EF1-beta, -gamma,
and -delta in a perinuclear distribution in human foreskin fibroblasts,
and these subunits colocalized with an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
resident protein. In contrast, EF1-alpha showed strong nuclear staining
and diffuse cytoplasmic staining.

GENE FUNCTION

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 (HIV-1) Tat protein has an N-terminal
domain that is a potent activator of transcription from the viral long
terminal repeat promoter. Tat is also essential for viral replication
and can activate or repress transcription of host cell genes. Using Tat
as bait in a yeast 2-hybrid screen of a HeLa cell cDNA library, Xiao et
al. (1998) isolated EF1-delta. Protein pull-down and Western blot
analyses confirmed direct interaction between Tat and EF1-delta.
EF1-delta specifically interacted with the Tat C-terminal domain.
Titration of purified recombinant Tat into in vitro translation
reactions showed that Tat inhibited translation of cellular, but not
viral, proteins. Xiao et al. (1998) hypothesized that by binding
EF1-delta, Tat redirects the protein synthesis machinery toward
producing large amounts of viral proteins.

Using yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Ong et al. (2003) found that kinectin
(KTN1; 600381) interacted directly with EF1-delta. Using peptide
fragments, Ong et al. (2003) showed that a 60-amino acid domain near the
kinectin C terminus was required for EF1-delta binding. Endogenous
kinectin colocalized with EF1-delta in the ER. Expression of the
kinectin EF1-delta-binding domain disrupted EF1-delta localization,
suggesting that kinectin anchors EF1-delta to the ER membrane. Ong et
al. (2003) also showed that CDC2 (116940) phosphorylated HeLa cell
EF1-delta in vitro.

REFERENCE 1. Ong, L.-L.; Er, C. P. N.; Ho, A.; Aung, M. T.; Yu, H.: Kinectin
anchors the translation elongation factor-1-delta to the endoplasmic
reticulum. J. Biol. Chem. 278: 32115-32123, 2003.

2. Sanders, J.; Brandsma, M.; Janssen, G. M. C.; Dijk, J.; Moller,
W.: Immunofluorescence studies of human fibroblasts demonstrate the
presence of the complex of elongation factor-1-beta-gamma-delta in
the endoplasmic reticulum. J. Cell Sci. 109: 1113-1117, 1996.

3. Sanders, J.; Raggiaschi, R.; Morales, J.; Moller, W.: The human
leucine zipper-containing guanine-nucleotide exchange protein elongation
factor-1 delta. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1174: 87-90, 1993.

4. Xiao, H.; Neuveut, C.; Benkirane, M.; Jeang, K.-T.: Interaction
of the second coding exon of Tat with human EF-1-delta delineates
a mechanism for HIV-1-mediated shut-off of host mRNA translation. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 244: 384-389, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/3/2008

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 7/12/1991

EDITED mgross: 10/08/2008
terry: 10/3/2008
terry: 8/11/1998
dkim: 7/21/1998
dkim: 6/30/1998
mark: 4/1/1996
carol: 3/1/1995
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 7/12/1991

603535	TITLE *603535 ADAPTOR-RELATED PROTEIN COMPLEX 1, MU-1 SUBUNIT; AP1M1
;;CLATHRIN ASSEMBLY PROTEIN COMPLEX AP1, MU SUBUNIT;;
CLATHRIN ADAPTOR PROTEIN AP47; AP47;;
MU-1A
DESCRIPTION Heterotetrameric adaptor complexes promote the formation of
clathrin-coated pits and vesicles. The AP1 adaptor complex, localized at
the trans-Golgi network, is composed of 2 approximately 100-kD subunits,
beta-prime adaptin (600157) and gamma-adaptin (603533); a medium
subunit, AP47; and a small subunit, AP19 (603531). Nakayama et al.
(1991) isolated a mouse brain cDNA encoding AP47.

GENE FUNCTION

By Northern blot analysis, Peyrard et al. (1998) demonstrated that the
2.5-kb AP47 mRNA is expressed ubiquitously in human tissues.

Doray et al. (2002) demonstrated that the Golgi-localized,
gamma-ear-containing adenosine diphosphate ribosylation factor-binding
proteins (GGA1, 606004 and GGA3, 606006) and the AP1 complex colocalize
in clathrin-coated buds of the trans-Golgi networks of mouse L cells and
human HeLa cells. Binding studies revealed a direct interaction between
the hinge domains of the GGAs and the gamma-ear domain of AP1. Further,
AP1 contained bound casein kinase-2 (see CSNK2A1, 115440) that
phosphorylated GGA1 and GGA3, thereby causing autoinhibition. Doray et
al. (2002) demonstrated that this autoinhibition could induce the
directed transfer of mannose 6-phosphate receptors (see 154540) from the
GGAs to AP1. Mannose 6-phosphate receptors that were defective in
binding to GGAs were poorly incorporated into adaptor protein complex
containing clathrin coated vesicles. Thus, Doray et al. (2002) concluded
that GGAs and the AP1 complex interact to package mannose 6-phosphate
receptors into AP1-containing coated vesicles.

MAPPING

By analyzing a somatic cell hybrid panel with a mouse AP47 cDNA probe
(Peyrard, 1999), Peyrard et al. (1998) mapped the AP47 gene to human
chromosome 19.

REFERENCE 1. Doray, B.; Ghosh, P.; Griffith, J.; Geuze, H. J.; Kornfeld, S.
: Cooperation of GGAs and AP-1 in packaging MPRs at the trans-Golgi
network. Science 297: 1700-1703, 2002.

2. Nakayama, Y.; Goebl, M.; O'Brine Greco, B.; Lemmon, S.; Pingchang
Chow, E.; Kirchhausen, T.: The medium chains of the mammalian clathrin-associated
proteins have a homolog in yeast. Europ. J. Biochem. 202: 569-574,
1991.

3. Peyrard, M.: Personal Communication. Stockholm, Sweden  1/7/1999.

4. Peyrard, M.; Parveneh, S.; Lagercrantz, S.; Ekman, M.; Fransson,
I.; Sahlen, S.; Dumanski, J. P.: Cloning, expression pattern, and
chromosomal assignment to 16q23 of the human gamma-adaptin gene (ADTG). Genomics 50:
275-280, 1998.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/22/2002

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 2/15/1999

EDITED carol: 01/27/2012
alopez: 10/23/2002
alopez: 10/22/2002
mgross: 10/17/2002
carol: 10/2/2000
alopez: 2/15/1999

608370	TITLE *608370 STEAROYL-CoA DESATURASE 5; SCD5
;;ACYL-CoA DESATURASE 4; ACOD4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Stearoyl-CoA desaturase (SCD; EC 1.14.99.5) is an integral membrane
protein of the endoplasmic reticulum that catalyzes the formation of
monounsaturated fatty acids from saturated fatty acids. SCD may be a key
regulator of energy metabolism with a role in obesity and dislipidemia.
Four SCD isoforms, Scd1 through Scd4, have been identified in mouse. In
contrast, only 2 SCD isoforms, SCD1 (604031) and SCD5, have been
identified in human. SCD1 shares about 85% amino acid identity with all
4 mouse SCD isoforms, as well as with rat Scd1 and Scd2. In contrast,
SCD5 shares limited homology with the rodent SCDs and appears to be
unique to primates (Wang et al., 2005).

CLONING

By analyzing a region of chromosome 4 involved in a balanced pericentric
inversion associated with a familial case of cleft lip (see 608371),
Beiraghi et al. (2003) cloned SCD5, which they called ACOD4. The deduced
330-amino acid protein has a predicted molecular mass of 37.6 kD. Like
other SCDs, SCD5 contains a unique N terminus followed by a
5-transmembrane region and 3 catalytic histidine boxes that are thought
to bind nonheme iron required for enzymatic activity. Northern blot
analysis detected a 3.0-kb transcript expressed at a high level in fetal
brain and at a lower level in fetal kidney. No SCD5 expression was
detected in fetal lung or in any adult tissue examined.

GENE STRUCTURE

Beiraghi et al. (2003) determined that the SCD5 gene contains 5 exons
and spans approximately 169 kb.

MAPPING

By FISH and genomic sequence analysis, Beiraghi et al. (2003) mapped the
SCD5 gene to chromosome 4q21.1.

REFERENCE 1. Beiraghi, S.; Zhou, M.; Talmadge, C. B.; Went-Sumegi, N.; Davis,
J. R.; Huang, D.; Saal, H.; Seemayer, T. A.; Sumegi, J.: Identification
and characterization of a novel gene disrupted by a pericentric inversion
inv(4)(p13.1q21.1) in a family with cleft lip. Gene 309: 11-21,
2003.

2. Wang, J.; Yu, L.; Schmidt, R. E.; Su, C.; Huang, X.; Gould, K.;
Cao, G.: Characterization of HSCD5, a novel human stearoyl-CoA desaturase
unique to primates. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 332: 735-742,
2005.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 11/4/2005
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/20/2005

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 12/31/2003

EDITED mgross: 11/04/2005
mgross: 11/4/2005
terry: 10/20/2005
carol: 12/31/2003

607187	TITLE *607187 ST3 BETA-GALACTOSIDE ALPHA-2,3-SIALYLTRANSFERASE 1; ST3GAL1
;;SIALYLTRANSFERASE 4A; SIAT4A;;
ST3O
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Cell type-specific expression of unique carbohydrate structures on cell
surface glycoproteins and glycolipids provides information relevant to
cell-cell interactions in developing and adult organisms.
Sialyltransferases, such as ST3GAL1, contribute to the diversity of
carbohydrate structures through their attachment of sialic acid in
various terminal positions on glycolipid and on glycoprotein (N-linked
and O-linked) carbohydrate groups (Kitagawa and Paulson, 1994).

CLONING

By PCR using degenerate primers based on a conserved sialyl motif and
screening of a placenta cDNA library, Kitagawa and Paulson (1994)
isolated a full-length cDNA encoding SIAT4A (EC 2.4.99.4), which they
called ST3O. The deduced 340-amino acid protein shares 86% identity with
porcine St3O. Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous expression of a
major 6-kb transcript, with highest expression in lung, liver, skeletal
muscle, kidney, and pancreas. Several smaller transcripts were detected
in other tissues.

Using the porcine Siat4a sequence as probe, Chang et al. (1995) cloned
SIAT4A from a human submaxillary gland cDNA library. The deduced SIAT4A
protein contains a type II transmembrane region and 2 sialyl motifs,
designate SM1 and SM2. Northern blot analysis confirmed ubiquitous
expression of SIAT4A, with highest expression in skeletal muscle.

Shang et al. (1999) cloned SIAT4A, which they called SIATFL, from a
fetal liver cDNA library. The deduced SIAT4A protein has a calculated
molecular mass of 38 kD and contains an N-terminal cytoplasmic domain, a
single type II transmembrane domain, a stem region, and a C-terminal
catalytic domain. Northern blot and analysis revealed a single
transcript of about 8 kb in several cancer cell lines and fetal tissues.

GENE FUNCTION

Kitagawa and Paulson (1994) expressed soluble truncation mutants of
human and porcine ST3O in COS-1 cells. Biochemical analysis revealed
conservation of function. ST3O was found to synthesize
NeuAc-alpha-2,3-Gal-beta-1,3-GalNAc, a structure common to many O-linked
oligosaccharides. The authors noted that ST3O differs from other
sialyltransferases in its ability to utilize glycolipid acceptor
substrates in vitro.

Shang et al. (1999) analyzed the sialyltransferase activity of soluble
SAIT4A expressed in COS-1 cells, bacteria, and yeast. Recombinant
protein expressed in COS-1 cells catalyzed the transfer of
fluorescent-labeled NeuAc from CMP-9-fluoresceinyl-AcNeu to
asialofetuin. No activity was detected with recombinant protein
expressed in E. coli or P. pastoris, suggesting that correct
glycosylation of the enzyme is directly related to enzymatic activity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Chang et al. (1995) determined that the SIAT4A gene contains 7 exons.

MAPPING

By somatic cell hybrid analysis, Chang et al. (1995) mapped the SIAT4A
gene to chromosome 8.

OTHER FEATURES

Influenza viruses manifest species tropism, with avian viruses rarely
infecting and spreading between humans. Shinya et al. (2006) noted that
the distribution and prevalence of the influenza virus-binding
molecules, sialic acid linked to galactose by an alpha-2,3 linkage
(SA-alpha-2,3-Gal) or by an alpha-2,6 linkage (SA-alpha-2,6-Gal), in the
human airway were unknown. Using lectins specific for each molecule,
they showed that SA-alpha-2,6-Gal was dominant on epithelial cells of
the nasal mucosa, pharynx, trachea, and bronchi. In contrast,
SA-alpha-2,3-Gal was found on nonciliated cuboidal bronchiolar cells at
the junction of bronchioles and alveoli, as well as on alveolar cells,
including alveolar type II cells, and cells in the alveolar wall. Shinya
et al. (2006) found that human-derived viruses preferentially bound
epithelial cells expressing SA-alpha-2,6-Gal, whereas avian viruses
preferentially interacted with alveolar cells expressing
SA-alpha-2,3-Gal. They noted that an H5N1 influenza virus isolated from
a human patient bound to both bronchial and alveolar cells. The results
indicated that H5N1 virus strains preferentially recognizing
SA-alpha-2,3-Gal can be transmitted from birds to humans, but they can
replicate efficiently only in alveolar cells. Thus, transmission via
cells in the upper respiratory tract may be inefficient in the absence
of an ability to recognize SA-alpha-2,6-Gal. Shinya et al. (2006)
concluded that mutations in the viral hemagglutinin molecule would be
necessary to confer SA-alpha-2,6-Gal-binding ability on H5N1 avian
viruses, and that amino acid substitutions in other viral proteins,
including PB2, may also be required to confer potential for a human
pandemic.

Nicholls et al. (2007) found that ex vivo cultures of human
nasopharyngeal, adenoid, and tonsillar tissues could be infected with
influenza A H5N1 viruses in spite of the lack of viral receptors for
SA-alpha-2,3-Gal in the upper airway. They concluded that the increased
severity of H5N1 influenza cannot be explained purely on the basis of a
differential tropism of H5N1 to the lower respiratory tract.

REFERENCE 1. Chang, M.-L.; Eddy, R. L.; Shows, T. B.; Lau, J. T. Y.: Three
genes that encode human beta-galactoside alpha-2,3-sialyltransferases:
structural analysis and chromosomal mapping studies. Glycobiology 5:
319-325, 1995.

2. Kitagawa, H.; Paulson, J. C.: Differential expression of five
sialyltransferase genes in human tissues. J. Biol. Chem. 269: 17872-17878,
1994.

3. Nicholls, J. M.; Chan, M. C. W.; Chan, W. Y.; Wong, H. K.; Cheung,
C. Y.; Kwong, D. L. W.; Wong, M. P.; Chui, W. H.; Poon, L. L. M.;
Tsao, S. W.; Guan, Y.; Peiris, J. S. M.: Tropism of avian influenza
A (H5N1) in the upper and lower respiratory tract. Nature Med. 13:
147-149, 2007.

4. Shang, J.; Qiu, R.; Wang, J.; Liu, J.; Zhou, R.; Ding, H.; Yang,
S.; Zhang, S.; Cheng, J.: Molecular cloning and expression of Gal-beta-1,3-GalNAc
alpha-2,3-sialyltransferase from human fetal liver. Europ. J. Biochem. 265:
580-588, 1999.

5. Shinya, K.; Ebina, M.; Yamada, S.; Ono, M.; Kasai, N.; Kawaoka,
Y.: Influenza virus receptors in the human airway: avian and human
flu viruses seem to target different regions of a patient's respiratory
tract. Nature 440: 435-436, 2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 04/12/2007
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/23/2006

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 8/29/2002

EDITED mgross: 04/12/2007
mgross: 5/23/2006
mgross: 5/1/2006
mgross: 4/28/2006
mgross: 8/29/2002

613976	TITLE *613976 FANCE GENE; FANCE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By complementation cloning, de Winter et al. (2000) identified the FANCE
gene. The deduced 536-amino acid protein contains 2 potential nuclear
localization signals.

GENE STRUCTURE

The FANCE gene contains 10 exons (de Winter et al., 2000).

MAPPING

The FANCE gene maps to chromosome 6p22-p21 (Waisfisz et al., 1999; de
Winter et al., 2000).

GENE FUNCTION

The Fanconi anemia (FA) nuclear complex (composed of the FA proteins A,
C, G and F) is essential for protection against chromosome breakage. It
activates the downstream protein FANCD2 (see 227646) by
monoubiquitylation; this then forges an association with the BRCA1
(113705) protein at sites of DNA damage. Pace et al. (2002) showed that
the FANCE protein is part of this nuclear complex, binding both FANCC
(613899) and FANCD2. Indeed, FANCE is required for the nuclear
accumulation of FANCC and provides a critical bridge between the FA
complex and FANCD2. Disease-associated FANCC mutants do not bind to
FANCE, cannot accumulate in the nucleus, and are unable to prevent
chromosome breakage.

By coimmunoprecipitation of HeLa cell nuclear extracts, Meetei et al.
(2003) identified 3 distinct multiprotein complexes associated with BLM
(RECQL3; 604610). One of the complexes, designated BRAFT, contained the
Fanconi anemia core complementation group proteins FANCA (607139), FANCG
(602956), FANCC, FANCE, and FANCF (603467), as well as topoisomerase
III-alpha (TOP3A; 601243) and replication protein A (RPA; see 179835).
BLM complexes isolated from an FA cell line had a lower molecular mass,
likely due to loss of FANCA and other FA components. BLM- and
FANCA-associated complexes had DNA unwinding activity, and BLM was
required for this activity.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
FANCONI ANEMIA, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP E
FANCE, GLN119TER

In a Turkish patient with group E Fanconi anemia (600901) reported by
Joenje et al. (1997), de Winter et al. (2000) identified homozygosity
for a 355C-T transition in the FANCE gene, leading to a gln119-to-ter
(Q119X) nonsense change in the protein. The parents and an unaffected
brother were heterozygous for the mutation.

.0002
FANCONI ANEMIA, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP E
FANCE, ARG141TER

In a patient in Bangladesh with group E Fanconi anemia (600901), de
Winter et al. (2000) identified homozygosity for a 421C-T transition in
exon 2 of the FANCE gene, resulting in an arg141-to-ter (R141X) nonsense
change in the protein. The parents were heterozygous for the mutation.

.0003
FANCONI ANEMIA, COMPLEMENTATION GROUP E
FANCE, IVS5AS, G-A, -8

In a Turkish patient with group E Fanconi anemia (600901) reported by
Waisfisz et al. (1999), de Winter et al. (2000) identified homozygosity
for a G-to-A change at position -8 in intron 5 of the FANCE gene, an
alternative splice acceptor site. Sequence analysis indicated that this
mutation results in false splicing and incorporation of 6 nucleotides
from intron 5, including an in-frame stop codon.

REFERENCE 1. de Winter, J. P.; Leveille, F.; van Berkel, C. G. M.; Rooimans,
M. A.; van der Weel, L.; Steltenpool, J.; Demuth, I.; Morgan, N. V.;
Alon, N.; Bosnoyan-Collins, L.; Lightfoot, J.; Leegwater, P. A.; Waisfisz,
Q.; Komatsu, K.; Arwert, F.; Pronk, J. C.; Mathew, C. G.; Digweed,
M.; Buchwald, M.; Joenje, H.: Isolation of a cDNA representing the
Fanconi anemia complementation group E gene. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67:
1306-1308, 2000. Note: Erratum: Am. J. Hum. Genet. 67: 1365 only,
2000.

2. Joenje, H.; Oostra, A. B.; Wijker, M.; di Summa, F. M.; van Berkel,
C. G. M.; Rooimans, M. A.; Ebell, W.; van Weel, M.; Pronk, J. C.;
Buchwald, M.; Arwert, F.: Evidence for at least eight Fanconi anemia
genes. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 61: 940-944, 1997.

3. Meetei, A. R.; Sechi, S.; Wallisch, M.; Yang, D.; Young, M. K.;
Joenje, H.; Hoatlin, M. E.; Wang, W.: A multiprotein nuclear complex
connects Fanconi anemia and Bloom syndrome. Molec. Cell. Biol. 23:
3417-3426, 2003.

4. Pace, P.; Johnson, M.; Tan, W. M.; Mosedale, G.; Sng, C.; Hoatlin,
M.; de Winter, J.; Joenje, H.; Gergely, F.; Patel, K. J.: FANCE:
the link between Fanconi anaemia complex assembly and activity. EMBO
J. 21: 3414-3423, 2002.

5. Waisfisz, Q.; Saar, K.; Morgan, N. V.; Altay, C.; Leegwater, P.
A.; de Winter, J. P.; Komatsu, K.; Evans, G. R.; Wegner, R.-D.; Reis,
A.; Joenje, H.; Arwert, F.; Mathew, C. G.; Pronk, J. C.; Digweed,
M.: The Fanconi anemia group E gene, FANCE, maps to chromosome 6p. Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 64: 1400-1405, 1999.

CREATED Carol A. Bocchini: 5/16/2011

EDITED carol: 07/11/2011
carol: 7/8/2011
alopez: 5/19/2011
carol: 5/16/2011

305360	TITLE *305360 MEMBRANE PROTEIN, PALMITOYLATED 1; MPP1
;;ERYTHROCYTE MEMBRANE PROTEIN p55; EMP55;;
PALMITOYLATED ERYTHROCYTE MEMBRANE PROTEIN; PEMP
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

EMP55 is the prototype of a family of membrane-associated proteins
termed MAGUKs (membrane-associated guanylate kinase homologs). MAGUKs
interact with the cytoskeleton and regulate cell proliferation,
signaling pathways, and intracellular junctions (Kim et al., 1996).

CLONING

Ruff et al. (1991) deduced the complete amino acid sequence of a 55-kD
erythrocyte membrane protein from cDNA clones isolated from a human
reticulocyte library. This protein, p55, was copurified during the
isolation of dematin, an actin-bundling protein of the erythrocyte
membrane cytoskeleton. Its tight association with the plasma membrane
was reminiscent of an integral membrane protein. Protein p55 is the most
extensively palmitoylated protein of the erythrocyte membrane. Predicted
primary structure of p55 contained a conserved sequence, called the SH3
(src homology 3) motif, found in several other proteins that associate
with the cytoskeleton and are suspected to play important roles in
signal transduction.

Metzenberg and Gitschier (1992) found a gene located in a CpG island 30
kb 3-prime to the factor VIII gene (F8; 300841). The 2-kb transcript
encoded a previously described palmitoylated membrane protein, p55,
containing an src homology motif, SH3. Although originally described in
reticulocytes (Ruff et al., 1991), Metzenberg and Gitschier (1992) found
that the transcript was expressed in a wide variety of human tissues.
The gene was also found in the mouse where it was expressed in all
tissues examined. The EMP55 gene did not appear to be developmentally
regulated in erythrocytes; p55 is constitutively and abundantly
expressed in erythroid cells during their development from stem cells to
fully differentiated reticulocytes. In contrast, other red cell
membrane-associated proteins such as 4.1, ankyrin, and band 3 are
expressed late in erythropoiesis. These results suggested that the p55
protein may have a housekeeping function. Other work indicated that it
is a peripheral membrane protein. Bryant and Woods (1992) demonstrated
that p55 is homologous to the yeast guanylate kinase and to the product
of a Drosophila tumor suppressor gene.

Elder et al. (1996) cloned and sequenced the mouse MPP1 gene. The mouse
gene shares 89% sequence identity with the coding sequence of human
MPP1. The coding region size and intron/exon structures of the mouse and
human genes are identical. The human and mouse sequences and structures
are highly homologous to the MPP1 gene of fish (Fugu), suggesting that
the gene serves an essential function in development.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis of a mouse embryo cDNA library, Mburu et al.
(2006) found that whirlin (WHRN; 607928) interacted with p55. p55 was
expressed in mouse outer hair cells in long stereocilia that made up the
stereocilia bundle and in surrounding shorter stereocilia structures.
Since p55 and protein 4.1R (EPB41; 130500) form complexes critical for
actin cytoskeletal assembly in erythrocytes, Mburu et al. (2006)
proposed that p55 and whirlin may have a similar role in hair cell
stereocilia.

GENE STRUCTURE

Metzenberg and Gitschier (1992) estimated that the EMP55 gene spans 20
to 30 kb.

Kim et al. (1996) reported the complete intron/exon map of the human
erythroid p55 gene. The structure of the p55 gene was determined from
cosmid clones isolated from a cosmid library specific for the human X
chromosome. There is a single copy of the p55 gene, composed of 12 exons
and spanning approximately 28 kb in the Xq28 region. Several of the exon
boundaries corresponded to the boundaries of functional domains in the
p55 protein. These domains include an SH3 motif and a region that binds
to cytoskeletal protein 4.1.

MAPPING

Metzenberg and Gitschier (1992) identified the EMP55 gene in a CpG
island 30 kb 3-prime to the factor VIII gene (300841). They confirmed
the Xq28 localization of the EMP55 gene by study of hybrid cell lines
containing various parts of the human X chromosome in rodent
backgrounds. They proved that the gene is located between the F8 and
glucose-6 phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD; 305900) genes by hybridization
to a YAC clone that extends approximately 60 kb beyond the F8C gene. The
EMP55 gene appeared to be transcribed in the same direction as F8C. No
known factor VIII gene deletions extended into the EMP55 gene. Since the
function of the p55 protein was not known, the gene was formally a
candidate for any of the many disease genes that are closely linked
genetically to the F8C gene.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Metzenberg et al. (1994) failed to find evidence of mutation in the
EMP55 gene in either of 2 disorders that on the grounds of phenotype and
map location are candidate disorders: dyskeratosis congenita (305000)
and Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (310300).

Liu et al. (1997) reported a method of determination of clonality using
allele-specific PCR (ASPCR) to detect exonic polymorphisms in p55 and
G6PD (305900). They demonstrated a significant sex difference in allele
frequencies in African Americans but not in Caucasians, and linkage
disequilibrium for the p55 and G6PD alleles in Caucasians but not in
African Americans.

REFERENCE 1. Bryant, P. J.; Woods, D. F.: A major palmitoylated membrane protein
of human erythrocytes shows homology to yeast guanylate kinase and
to the product of a Drosophila tumor suppressor gene. Cell 68: 621-622,
1992.

2. Elder, B.; Kuo, K.; Gitschier, J.; Kim, A.; Chishti, A.; Metzenberg,
A.: cDNA sequence and genomic structure of the murine p55 (Mpp1)
gene. Genomics 38: 231-234, 1996.

3. Kim, A. C.; Metzenberg, A. B.; Sahr, K. E.; Marfatia, S. M.; Chisti,
A. H.: Complete genomic organization of the human erythroid p55 gene
(MPP1), a membrane-associated guanylate kinase homologue. Genomics 31:
223-229, 1996.

4. Liu, Y.; Phelan, J.; Go, R. C. P.; Prchal, J. F.; Prchal, J. T.
: Rapid determination of clonality by detection of two closely-linked
X chromosome exonic polymorphisms using allele-specific PCR. J. Clin.
Invest. 99: 1984-1990, 1997.

5. Mburu, P.; Kikkawa, Y.; Townsend, S.; Romero, R.; Yonekawa, H.;
Brown, S. D. M.: Whirlin complexes with p55 at the stereocilia tip
during hair cell development. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103;-10973-10978,
2006.

6. Metzenberg, A. B.; Gitschier, J.: The gene encoding the palmitoylated
erythrocyte membrane protein, p55, originates at the CpG island 3-prime
to the factor VIII gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 1: 97-101, 1992.

7. Metzenberg, A. B.; Pan, Y.; Das, S.; Pai, G. S.; Gitschier, J.
: Molecular evidence that the p55 gene is not responsible for either
of two Xq28-linked disorders: Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and
dyskeratosis congenita. (Letter) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 54: 920-922,
1994.

8. Ruff, P.; Speicher, D. W.; Husain-Chishti, A.: Molecular identification
of a major palmitoylated erythrocyte membrane protein containing the
src homology 3 motif. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 88: 6595-6599, 1991.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/5/2006
Michael J. Wright  - updated: 9/25/1997
Jennifer P. Macke - updated: 7/12/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 10/2/1992

EDITED carol: 04/07/2011
mgross: 10/5/2006
carol: 4/2/2002
alopez: 11/11/1997
jenny: 9/2/1997
jenny: 8/13/1997
mark: 3/18/1996
terry: 3/6/1996
jason: 7/26/1994
carol: 2/17/1993
carol: 1/8/1993
carol: 1/4/1993
carol: 10/21/1992
carol: 10/2/1992

605433	TITLE *605433 KINESIN FAMILY MEMBER 13A; KIF13A
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Intracellular transport mediated by kinesin superfamily proteins (KIFs;
see 604535) is a highly regulated process. KIF13A is a plus end-directed
microtubule-dependent motor protein that associates with beta-1 adaptin
(AP1B1; 600157), a subunit of the AP1 adaptor complex (Nakagawa et al.,
2000).

CLONING

Nakagawa et al. (2000) identified mouse Kif13a. The 1,749-amino acid
mouse Kif13a protein contains an N-terminal motor domain and an AF6/cno
domain.

MAPPING

Gross (2012) mapped the KIF13A gene to chromosome 6p22.3 based on an
alignment of the KIF13A sequence (GenBank GENBANK AJ291578) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

NOMENCLATURE

Lawrence et al. (2004) presented a standardized kinesin nomenclature
based on 14 family designations. Under this system, KIF13A belongs to
the kinesin-3 family.

GENE FUNCTION

Nakagawa et al. (2000) found that the cargo vesicles of mouse Kif13a
contained AP1 and mannose 6-phosphate receptor (M6PR; 154540).
Overexpression of Kif13a resulted in mislocalization of AP1 and M6pr,
and functional blockade of Kif13a reduced cell-surface expression of
M6pr. The authors concluded that KIF13A transports M6PR-containing
vesicles and targets M6PR from the trans-Golgi network to the plasma
membrane via direct interaction with the AP1 adaptor complex.

REFERENCE 1. Gross, M. B.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  6/21/2012.

2. Lawrence, C. J.; Dawe, R. K.; Christie, K. R.; Cleveland, D. W.;
Dawson, S. C.; Endow, S. A.; Goldstein, L. S. B.; Goodson, H. V.;
Hirokawa, N.; Howard, J.; Malmberg, R. L.; McIntosh, J. R.; and 10
others: A standardized kinesin nomenclature. J. Cell Biol. 167:
19-22, 2004.

3. Nakagawa, T.; Setou, M.; Seog, D.-H.; Ogasawara, K.; Dohmae, N.;
Takio, K.; Hirokawa, N.: A novel motor, KIF13A, transports mannose-6-phosphate
receptor to plasma membrane through direct interaction with AP-1 complex. Cell 103:
569-581, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Matthew B. Gross - updated: 06/21/2012

CREATED Stylianos E. Antonarakis: 11/29/2000

EDITED mgross: 06/21/2012
joanna: 9/10/2009
mgross: 2/8/2001
mgross: 11/29/2000

615475	TITLE *615475 DEAH BOX POLYPEPTIDE 34; DHX34
;;KIAA0134
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By sequencing clones obtained from a size-fractionated human KG-1 cell
line cDNA library, Nagase et al. (1995) obtained a partial clone for
DHX34, which they designated KIAA0134. The sequence contains an Alu
repeat at its 3-prime end. The deduced 576-residue coding region
includes an ATP/GTP-binding site motif (P-loop) and shares significant
similarity with the RNA helicase HRH1 (DHX8; 600396). Northern blot
analysis detected low to moderate DHX34 expression in all human tissues
and cell lines examined except heart, which lacked expression.

MAPPING

By PCR of a human-rodent hybrid panel, Nagase et al. (1995) mapped the
DHX34 gene to chromosome 19.

Hartz (2013) mapped the DHX34 gene to chromosome 19q13.32 based on an
alignment of the DHX34 sequence (GenBank GENBANK BE397677) with the
genomic sequence (GRCh37).

REFERENCE 1. Hartz, P. A.: Personal Communication. Baltimore, Md.  10/14/2013.

2. Nagase, T.; Seki, N.; Tanaka, A.; Ishikawa, K.; Nomura, N.: Prediction
of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes. IV. The coding
sequences of 40 new genes (KIAA0121-KIAA0160) deduced by analysis
of cDNA clones from human cell line KG-1. DNA Res. 2: 167-174, 1995.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 10/14/2013

EDITED mgross: 10/14/2013

608373	TITLE *608373 SYNAPTOGYRIN 4; SYNGR4
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

For a description of the synaptogyrin family, which includes SYNGR4, see
603926.

CLONING

By genomic sequence analysis, Smith et al. (2000) identified SYNGR4
within a 1.6-Mb glioma tumor suppressor region on chromosome 19q (see
137800). The SYNGR4 protein contains 234 amino acids.

GENE STRUCTURE

Smith et al. (2000) determined that the SYNGR4 gene contains 4 exons.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Smith et al. (2000) mapped the SYNGR4 gene
to chromosome 19q13.3.

REFERENCE 1. Smith, J. S.; Tachibana, I.; Pohl, U.; Lee, H. K.; Thanarajasingam,
U.; Portier, B. P.; Ueki, K.; Ramaswamy, S.; Billings, S. J.; Mohrenweiser,
H. W.; Louis, D. N.; Jenkins, R. B.: A transcript map of the chromosome
19q-arm glioma tumor suppressor region. Genomics 64: 44-50, 2000.

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 1/5/2004

EDITED mgross: 01/05/2004

600289	TITLE *600289 MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE 14; MAPK14
;;CYTOKINE-SUPPRESSIVE ANTIINFLAMMATORY DRUG-BINDING PROTEIN 1; CSBP1;;
CSAID-BINDING PROTEIN 1;;
STRESS-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE 2A; SAPK2A;;
p38 MAP KINASE; p38;;
p38-ALPHA;;
MXI2
CYTOKINE-SUPPRESSIVE ANTIINFLAMMATORY DRUG-BINDING PROTEIN 2, INCLUDED;
CSBP2, INCLUDED;;
CSAID-BINDING PROTEIN 2, INCLUDED
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Production of interleukin-1 (147720, 147760) and tumor necrosis factor
(TNF; see 191160) from stimulated human monocytes is inhibited by a
series of pyridinyl-imidazole compounds called CSAIDs
(cytokine-suppressive antiinflammatory drugs). These agents have shown
activity in a variety of animal models of acute and chronic
inflammation. Using radiolabeled chemical probes for radioligand binding
assays and photoaffinity labeling experiments, Lee et al. (1994)
identified, purified, cDNA-cloned, and biochemically characterized 2
CSBPs (CSAID-binding proteins) as molecular targets of
pyridinyl-imidazole cytokine inhibitors. They designated the 2 closely
related mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) CSBP1 and CSBP2.
Binding of pyridinyl-imidazole compounds inhibited CSBP kinase activity
and was directly correlated with their ability to inhibit cytokine
production, suggesting that the CSBPs are critical for cytokine
production. Lee et al. (1994) considered the 2 to be products of
alternative splicing. The 4.2-kb CSBP mRNA encodes a predicted 360-amino
acid protein and was expressed in all tissues tested. CSBP1 and CSBP2
are identical except for a 75-nucleotide stretch within the coding
region.

Han et al. (1994) cloned the mouse homolog as a protein that is tyrosine
phosphorylated as part of the protein kinase cascades induced by
endotoxic lipopolysaccharide. They named this 38-kD protein p38. As p38
is a member of the stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK) class of
MAPKs, Goedert et al. (1997) referred to this protein as SAPK2A.

Zervos et al. (1995) identified p38 as a human protein that interacts
with MAX protein (154950) and designated it MXI2. The MXI2 gene encodes
a 297-residue protein whose sequence indicates that it is related to the
extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK protein kinases; see
176948). MXI2 in yeast interacts with Max and with the C terminus of
c-Myc (190080). MXI2 phosphorylates MAX both in vitro and in vivo. The
authors speculated that phosphorylation by MXI2 may effect the ability
of MAX to oligomerize with itself and its partners, bind DNA, or
regulate gene expression.

GENE FUNCTION

Kumar et al. (1995) stated that CSBP1 and CSBP2 are human homologs of
the Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene Hog1, which is a MAPK required for
growth under high-osmolarity conditions. They studied the function of
both proteins in yeast. CSBP1 complemented a Hog1 deletion mutant, but
CSBP2 complemented only when it contained an ala-to-val mutation (A34V)
that reduced kinase activity 3-fold. The activity of CSBP1 and CSBP2 was
dependent on Pbs2, a yeast MKK (see 602315). Salt induced CSBP1
activity, but CSBP2 was constitutively active, and constitutive
expression of CSBP2 from a high copy number plasmid was toxic.

Using coimmunoprecipitation assays, Takekawa et al. (1998) demonstrated
that PPM1A (606108) directly interacts with p38.

New et al. (1998) and Ni et al. (1998) reported that p38 phosphorylated
and activated MAPKAPK5 (606723) in vitro.

Bulavin et al. (2001) reported that p38 kinase has a critical role in
the initiation of a G2 delay after ultraviolet radiation. Inhibition of
p38 blocks the rapid initiation of this checkpoint in both human and
murine cells after ultraviolet radiation. In vitro, p38 binds and
phosphorylates CDC25B (116949) at serines 309 and 361, and CDC25C
(157680) at serine-216; phosphorylation of these residues is required
for binding to 14-3-3 proteins (see 113508). In vivo, inhibition of p38
prevents both phosphorylation of CDC25B at serine-309 and 14-3-3 binding
after ultraviolet radiation, and mutation of this site is sufficient to
inhibit the checkpoint initiation. In contrast, in vivo CDC25C binding
to 14-3-3 is not affected by p38 inhibition after ultraviolet radiation.
Bulavin et al. (2001) proposed that regulation of CDC25B phosphorylation
by p38 is a critical event for initiating the G2/M checkpoint after
ultraviolet radiation.

Using a yeast 2-hybrid screen of gastrointestinal tract tissue with
p38-alpha as the bait, Ge et al. (2002) isolated multiple clones
encoding TAB1 (602615). Immunoprecipitation and GST pull-down analyses
indicated that TAB1 interacts with p38-alpha, but not with other MAPKs,
with or without treatment with TNF. Immunoblot analysis showed that
coexpression of TAB1 and p38-alpha enhanced autophosphorylation of
p38-alpha even in the presence of dominant-negative forms of MAP2Ks
(e.g., MAP2K3; 602315) and TAK1 (MAP3K7; 602614). The amino acids
between positions 373 and 418 of TAB1 were found to be required for
phosphorylation of p38-alpha. Expression of TLR2 (603028) caused
p38-alpha phosphorylation in the presence or absence of inhibitors,
whereas p38-alpha phosphorylation after stimulation of TLR4 (603030)
could be inhibited by mutant TAB1, suggesting that activation of
p38-alpha can be TAB1 dependent or independent. Immunoblot analysis
detected the formation of TRAF6 (602355)-TAB1-p38-alpha complexes.
Formation of these complexes could be enhanced by stimulation with
lipopolysaccharide. Ge et al. (2002) concluded that activation of
p38-alpha by a nonenzymatic adaptor protein such as TAB1 may be an
important alternative activation pathway operating in parallel with
kinase cascades in regulating intracellular signaling.

Maizels et al. (2001) investigated the activation in vivo and regulation
of the expression of components of p38 MAPK pathway during
gonadotropin-induced formation and development of the rat corpus luteum.
They postulated that the p38 MAPK pathway could serve to promote
phosphorylation of key substrates during luteal maturation, since
maturing luteal cells, thought to be cAMP-nonresponsive, nevertheless
maintain critical phosphoproteins. The p38 MAPK downstream protein
kinase target MAPK-activated protein kinase-3 (MAPKAPK3; 602130) was
newly induced at both mRNA and protein levels during luteal formation
and maturation, while mRNA and protein expression of the closely related
MAPKAPK2 (602006) diminished. MAPKAPK3-specific immune complex kinase
assays provided direct evidence that MAPKAPK3 was in an activated state
during luteal maturation in vivo. Transient transfection studies
provided direct evidence that MAPKAPK3 was capable of signaling to
activate CREB (123810) transcriptional activity, as assessed by means of
GAL4-CREB fusion protein construct coexpressed with GAL4-luciferase
reporter construct. Introduction of wildtype, but not kinase-dead
mutant, MAPKAPK3 cDNA, into a mouse ovarian cell line stimulated
GAL4-CREB-dependent transcriptional activity approximately 3-fold. The
authors concluded that MAPKAPK3 is uniquely poised to support luteal
maturation through the phosphorylation and activation of the nuclear
transcription factor CREB.

Raoul et al. (2002) showed that Fas (134637), a member of the death
receptor family, triggers cell death specifically in motor neurons by
transcriptional upregulation of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS;
163731) mediated by p38 kinase. ASK1 (602448) and Daxx (603186) act
upstream of p38 in the Fas signaling pathway. The authors also showed
that synergistic activation of the NO pathway and the classic FADD
(602457)/caspase-8 (601763) cell death pathway were needed for motor
neuron cell death. No evidence for involvement of the Fas/NO pathway was
found in other cell types. Motor neurons from transgenic mice expressing
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS; 105400)-linked SOD1 (147450)
mutations displayed increased susceptibility to activation of the Fas/NO
pathway. Raoul et al. (2002) emphasized that this signaling pathway was
unique to motor neurons and suggested that these cell death pathways may
contribute to motor neuron loss in ALS. Raoul et al. (2006) reported
that exogenous NO triggered expression of Fas ligand (FASL; 134638) in
cultured motoneurons. In motoneurons from ALS model mice with mutations
in the SOD1 gene, this upregulation resulted in activation of Fas,
leading through Daxx and p38 to further NO synthesis. The authors
suggested that chronic low-activation of this feedback loop may underlie
the slowly progressive motoneuron loss characteristic of ALS.

Using Western blot analysis, Waetzig et al. (2002) showed that
p38-alpha, JNKs (e.g., JNK1; 601158), and ERK1 (MAPK3; 601795)/ERK2
(MAPK1; 176948) were significantly activated in patients with
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD; see 266600), with p38 showing the most
pronounced increase in kinase activity. However, protein expression of
p38 and JNK was only moderately altered in IBD patients compared with
controls, and ERK1/ERK2 expression was significantly downregulated.
Immunohistochemical analysis indicated that p38 expression was localized
mainly to lamina propria macrophages and neutrophils. ELISA analysis of
Crohn disease mucosal biopsy cultures showed that a p38 inhibitor
significantly reduced TNF secretion. Treatment of IBD patients in vivo
or normal human monocytes in vitro with the anti-TNF monoclonal antibody
infliximab resulted in a significant but transient increase in p38
activity, but not JNK activity. Waetzig et al. (2002) concluded that p38
signaling is involved in the pathophysiology of IBD.

Anthrax lethal toxin (LT), a critical virulence factor of Bacillus
anthracis, is a complex of lethal factor (LF) and protective antigen
(PA). PA binds to the anthrax receptor (ATR; 606410) to facilitate the
entry of LF into the cell. LT disrupts the MAPK signaling pathway in
macrophages (Park et al., 2002). Agrawal et al. (2003) showed that, in
mice, LT impairs the function of dendritic cells (DCs), inhibiting the
upregulation of costimulatory molecules, such as CD40 (109535), CD80
(112203), and CD86 (601020), as well as cytokine secretion, in response
to lipopolysaccharide stimulation. LT-exposed DCs failed to stimulate
antigen-specific T and B cells in vivo, resulting in significant
reductions of circulating IgG antibody. Western blot analysis indicated
that LF severely impairs phosphorylation of p38, ERK1, and ERK2. A
cocktail of synthetic MAPK inhibitors inhibited cytokine production in a
manner similar to that of LF. Using a mutant form of LF lacking a
catalytic site necessary for cleavage of MEK1 (176872), MEK2 (601263),
and MEK3 (602314), the upstream activators of ERK1, ERK2, and p38,
respectively, Agrawal et al. (2003) found that cleavage of these MEKs is
essential for suppression of dendritic cell function. They proposed that
this mechanism might operate early in infection, when LT levels are low,
to impair immunity. Later in infection, Agrawal et al. (2003) noted, LT
might have quite different inflammatory effects.

During skeletal myogenesis, genomic reprogramming toward terminal
differentiation is achieved by recruiting chromatin-modifying enzymes to
muscle-specific loci. Simone et al. (2004) showed that the
differentiation-activated p38 pathway targets the SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complex to myogenic loci. Their results identified an
unexpected function of differentiation-activated p38 in converting
external cues into chromatin modifications at discrete loci, by
selectively targeting SWI/SNF to muscle regulatory elements.

Pokholok et al. (2006) presented evidence that most mitogen-activated
protein kinases and protein kinase A subunits become physically
associated with the genes that they regulate in the yeast (S.
cerevisiae) genome. The ability to detect this interaction of signaling
kinases with target genes can be used to more precisely and
comprehensively map the regulatory circuit that eukaryotic cells use to
respond to their environment.

Thornton et al. (2008) demonstrated that p38 MAPK inactivates GSK3-beta
(605004) by direct phosphorylation at its C terminus, and this
inactivation can lead to an accumulation of beta-catenin (116806). p38
MAPK-mediated phosphorylation of GSK3-beta occurs primarily in the brain
and thymocytes. Thornton et al. (2008) concluded that activation of
beta-catenin-mediated signaling through GSK3-beta inhibition provides a
potential mechanism for p38 MAPK-mediated survival in specific tissues.

Lauchle et al. (2009) showed that MEK inhibitors are ineffective in
myeloproliferative disorder, but induce objective regression of many Nf1
(613113)-deficient acute myeloid leukemias (AMLs; 601626) in mice. Drug
resistance developed because of outgrowth of AML clones that were
present before treatment. Lauchle et al. (2009) cloned clone-specific
retroviral integrations to identify candidate resistance genes including
Rasgrp1 (603962), Rasgrp4 (607320), and Mapk14, which encodes p38-alpha.
Functional analysis implicated increased RasGRP1 levels and reduced p38
kinase activity in resistance to MEK inhibitors. Lauchle et al. (2009)
concluded that their approach represented a robust strategy for
identifying genes and pathways that modulate how primary cancer cells
respond to targeted therapeutics and for probing mechanisms of de novo
and acquired resistance.

Spinal muscle atrophy (SMA1; 253300) is an autosomal recessive
neurodegenerative disease, which is characterized by progressive muscle
atrophy due to mutations or deletion of the SMN1 (600354) gene, which
encodes survival motor neuron (SMN) protein. Farooq et al. (2009)
reported a significant induction in SMN mRNA and protein following p38
activation by anisomycin. Anisomycin activation of p38 caused a rapid
cytoplasmic accumulation of HuR (ELAVL1; 603466), an RNA binding
protein, that bound to and stabilized the AU-rich element within the SMN
transcript. The stabilization of SMN mRNA, rather than transcriptional
induction, resulted in an increase in SMN protein. Farooq et al. (2009)
speculated that identification and characterization of p38 pathway
activators may be potential therapeutic compounds for the treatment of
SMA.

Lee et al. (2011) found that p38 phosphorylated the short isoform of
Xbp1 (194355) in obese and diabetic mice and enhanced Xbp1 nuclear
translocation and activity. Activation of Xbp1 resulted in relief of
endoplasmic reticulum stress and establishment of euglycemia.

MAPPING

Lee et al. (1994) stated that Southern blots suggested that CSBP1 and
CSBP2 are encoded by a single gene on human chromosome 6.

McDonnell et al. (1995) used PCR to screen genomic DNAs from a panel of
human/rodent somatic cell hybrids and map the MAPK14 gene to human
chromosome 6. They used a genomic clone in fluorescence in situ
hybridization to refine the assignment to a site at the boundary between
bands 6p21.2 and 6p21.3.

ANIMAL MODEL

Tamura et al. (2000) investigated a role for Mapk14 in mouse development
and physiology by targeted disruption of the Mapk14 gene. Whereas some
Mapk14 -/- embryos died between embryonic days 11.5 and 12.5, those that
developed past this stage had normal morphology but were anemic, owing
to failed definitive erythropoiesis caused by diminished expression of
the erythropoietin gene (EPO; 133170). Since Mapk14-deficient
hematopoietic stem cells reconstituted lethally irradiated hosts, Mapk14
function is not required downstream of the Epo receptor (EPOR; 133171).
Inhibition of MAPK14 activity also interfered with stabilization of EPO
mRNA in human hepatoma cells undergoing hypoxic stress. The authors
concluded that MAPK14 plays a critical role linking developmental and
stress-induced erythropoiesis through regulation of EPO expression.

MAPK14 is activated in response to many cellular stresses and also
regulates the differentiation and/or survival of various cell types in
vitro, including skeletal muscle cells and cardiomyocytes. Adams et al.
(2000) showed that targeted inactivation of the mouse Mapk14 gene
results in embryonic lethality at midgestation correlating with a
massive reduction of the myocardium and malformation of blood vessels in
the head region; however, this defect appeared to be secondary to
insufficient oxygen and nutrient transfer across the placenta. When the
placental defect was rescued, Mapk14 -/- embryos developed to term and
were normal in appearance. These results indicated that MAPK14 is
required for placental organogenesis but is not essential for other
aspects of mammalian embryonic development.

Liao et al. (2001) studied the effects of p38 MAP kinase on the intact
heart in transgenic mice. They achieved targeted activation of p38 MAP
kinase in ventricular myocytes in vivo by using a gene-switch transgenic
strategy with activated mutants of upstream kinases MKK3bE (602315) and
MKK6bE (601254). Transgene expression resulted in significant induction
of p38 MAP kinase activity and premature death at 7 to 9 weeks. Both
groups of transgenic hearts exhibited marked interstitial fibrosis and
expression of fetal marker genes characteristic of cardiac failure, but
no significant hypertrophy at the organ level. Echocardiographic and
pressure-volume analyses revealed a similar extent of systolic
contractile depression and restrictive diastolic abnormalities related
to markedly increased passive chamber stiffness. However,
MKK3bE-expressing hearts had increased end-systolic chamber volumes and
a thinned ventricular wall, associated with heterogeneous myocyte
atrophy, whereas MKK6bE hearts had reduced end-diastolic ventricular
cavity size, a modest increase in myocyte size, and no significant
myocyte atrophy. These data provided in vivo evidence for a negative
inotropic and restrictive diastolic effect from p38 MAP kinase
activation in ventricular myocytes and revealed specific roles of the
p38 pathway in the development of ventricular end-systolic remodeling.

Using a forward genetic screen of C. elegans mutants, Kim et al. (2002)
showed that viable worms lacking esp2 and esp8, homologs of the
mammalian MAP kinases SEK1 (MAP2K4; 601335) and ASK1 (MAP3K5; 602448),
were highly susceptible to and died more rapidly from both a
gram-negative bacterium, P. aeruginosa, and a gram-positive organism, E.
faecalis, than wildtype worms. RNA-interference and biochemical analyses
likewise implicated the p38 MAP kinase homolog, pmk1, in susceptibility
to these pathogens. Kim et al. (2002) concluded that MAP kinase
signaling, which is also involved in plant pathogen resistance, is a
conserved element in innate metazoan immunity to diverse pathogens.

By transferring purified IgG from patients with pemphigus vulgaris (PV;
169610), an autoimmune blistering skin disease characterized by
acantholysis, into neonatal mice, Anhalt et al. (1982) developed an
animal model of the disease. Berkowitz et al. (2006) found that
inhibition of p38 prevented the development of disease in mice with
IgG-induced PV. In human keratinocyte cultures, inhibitors of p38
prevented IgG-induced changes in the cytoskeleton associated with loss
of cell-cell adhesion.

Hui et al. (2007) found that mouse embryos lacking Mapk14 developed to
term but died shortly after birth with lung dysfunction and infiltration
of the lung with hematopoietic cells. Fetal hematopoietic cells and
embryonic fibroblasts deficient in Mapk14 showed increased proliferation
resulting from sustained activation of the Jnk (601158)-Jun (165160)
pathway. Mice with liver-specific deletion of Mapk14 showed enhanced
hepatocyte proliferation and enhanced chemical-induced liver cancer that
correlated with upregulation of the Jnk-Jun pathway. Furthermore,
inactivation of Jnk or Jun suppressed the increased proliferation of
Mapk14-deficient hepatocytes and tumor cells.

Ventura et al. (2007) showed that p38 deletion in adult mice resulted in
increased proliferation and defective differentiation of lung stem and
progenitor cells both in vivo and in vitro. p38 positively regulated
factors such as Cebp (116897) that are required for lung cell
differentiation and inhibited Egfr (131550), required for proliferation.
As a consequence, inactivation of p38 led to an immature and
hyperproliferative lung epithelium that was highly sensitized to
activated Ras (190020)-induced tumorigenesis.

REFERENCE 1. Adams, R. H.; Porras, A.; Alonso, G.; Jones, M.; Vintersten, K.;
Panelli, S.; Valladares, A.; Perez, L.; Klein, R.; Nebreda, A. R.
: Essential role of p38-alpha MAP kinase in placental but not embryonic
cardiovascular development. Molec. Cell 6: 109-116, 2000.

2. Agrawal, A.; Lingappa, J.; Leppla, S. H.; Agrawal, S.; Jabbar,
A.; Quinn, C.; Pulendran, B.: Impairment of dendritic cells and adaptive
immunity by anthrax lethal toxin. Nature 424: 329-334, 2003.

3. Anhalt, G. J.; Labib, R. S.; Voorhees, J. J.; Beals, T. F.; Diaz,
L. A.: Induction of pemphigus in neonatal mice by passive transfer
of IgG from patients with the disease. New Eng. J. Med. 306: 1189-1196,
1982.

4. Berkowitz, P.; Hu, P.; Warren, S.; Liu, Z.; Diaz, L. A.; Rubenstein,
D. S: p38MAPK inhibition prevents disease in pemphigus vulgaris mice. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 12855-12860, 2006.

5. Bulavin, D. V.; Higashimoto, Y.; Popoff, I. J.; Gaarde, W. A.;
Basrur, V.; Potapova, O.; Appella, E.; Fornace, A. J., Jr.: Initiation
of a G2/M checkpoint after ultraviolet radiation requires p38 kinase. Nature 411:
102-107, 2001.

6. Farooq, F.; Balabanian, S.; Liu, X.; Holcik, M.; MacKenzie, A.
: p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase stabilizes SMN mRNA through
RNA binding protein HuR. Hum. Molec. Genet. 18: 4035-4045, 2009.

7. Ge, B.; Gram, H.; Di Padova, F.; Huang, B.; New, L.; Ulevitch,
R. J.; Luo, Y.; Han, J.: MAPKK-independent activation of p38-alpha
mediated by TAB1-dependent autophosphorylation of p38-alpha. Science 295:
1291-1294, 2002.

8. Goedert, M.; Hasegawa, J.; Craxton, M.; Leversha, M. A.; Clegg,
S.: Assignment of the human stress-activated protein kinase-3 gene
(SAPK3) to chromosome 22q13.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 41:
501-502, 1997.

9. Han, J.; Lee, J.-D.; Bibbs, L.; Ulevitch, R. J.: A MAP kinase
targeted by endotoxin and hyperosmolarity in mammalian cells. Science 265:
808-811, 1994.

10. Hui, L.; Bakiri, L.; Mairhorfer, A.; Schweifer, N.; Haslinger,
C.; Kenner, L.; Komnenovic, V.; Scheuch, H.; Beug, H.; Wagner, E.
F.: p38-alpha suppresses normal and cancer cell proliferation by
antagonizing the JNK-c-Jun pathway. Nature Genet. 39: 741-749, 2007.

11. Kim, D. H.; Feinbaum, R.; Alloing, G.; Emerson, F. E.; Garsin,
D. A.; Inoue, H.; Tanaka-Hino, M.; Hisamoto, N.; Matsumoto, K.; Tan,
M.-W.; Ausubel, F. M.: A conserved p38 MAP kinase pathway in Caenorhabditis
elegans innate immunity. Science 297: 623-626, 2002.

12. Kumar, S.; McLaughlin, M. M.; McDonnell, P. C.; Lee, J. C.; Livi,
G. P.; Young, P. R.: Human mitogen-activated protein kinase CSBP1,
but not CSBP2, complements a hog1 deletion in yeast. J. Biol. Chem. 270:
29043-29046, 1995.

13. Lauchle, J. O.; Kim, D.; Le, D. T.; Akagi, K.; Crone, M.; Krisman,
K.; Warner, K.; Bonifas, J. M.; Li, Q.; Coakley, K. M.; Diaz-Flores,
E.; Gorman, M.; and 10 others: Response and resistance to MEK inhibition
in leukaemias initiated by hyperactive Ras. Nature 461: 411-414,
2009.

14. Lee, J.; Sun, C.; Zhou, Y.; Lee, J.; Gokalp, D.; Herrema, H.;
Park, S. W.; Davis, R. J.; Ozcan, U.: p38 MAPK-mediated regulation
of Xbp1s is crucial for glucose homeostasis. Nature Med. 17: 1251-1260,
2011.

15. Lee, J. C.; Laydon, J. T.; McDonnell, P. C.; Gallagher, T. F.;
Kumar, S.; Green, D.; McNulty, D.; Blumenthal, M. J.; Heys, J. R.;
Landvatter, S. W.; Stickler, J. E.; McLaughlin, M. M.; Siemens, I.
R.; Fisher, S. M.; Livi, G. P.; White, J. R.; Adams, J. L.; Young,
P. R.: A protein kinase involved in the regulation of inflammatory
cytokine biosynthesis. Nature 372: 739-746, 1994.

16. Liao, P.; Georgakopoulos, D.; Kovacs, A.; Zheng, M.; Lerner, D.;
Pu, H.; Saffitz, J.; Chien, K.; Xiao, R.-P.; Kass, D. A.; Wang, Y.
: The in vivo role of p38 MAP kinases in cardiac remodeling and restrictive
cardiomyopathy. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 98: 12283-12288, 2001.

17. Maizels, E. T.; Mukherjee, A.; Sithanandam, G.; Peters, C. A.;
Cottom, J.; Mayo, K. E.; Hunzicker-Dunn, M.: Developmental regulation
of mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated kinases-2 and -3 (MAPKAPK-2/-3)
in vivo during corpus luteum formation in the rat. Molec. Endocr. 15:
716-733, 2001.

18. McDonnell, P. C.; DiLella, A. G.; Lee, J. C.; Young, P. R.: Localization
of the human stress responsive MAP kinase-like CSAIDs binding protein
(CSBP) gene to chromosome 6p21.3/21.2. Genomics 29: 301-302, 1995.

19. New, L.; Jiang, Y.; Zhao, M.; Liu, K.; Zhu, W.; Flood, L. J.;
Kato, Y.; Parry, G. C. N.; Han, J.: PRAK, a novel protein kinase
regulated by the p38 MAP kinase. EMBO J. 17: 3372-3384, 1998.

20. Ni, H.; Wang, X. S.; Diener, K.; Yao, Z.: MAPKAPK5, a novel mitogen-activate
d protein kinase (MAPK)-activated protein kinase, is a substrate of
the extracellular-regulated kinase (ERK) and p38 kinase. Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun. 243: 492-496, 1998.

21. Park, J. M.; Greten, F. R.; Li, Z. W.; Karin, M.: Macrophage
apoptosis by anthrax lethal factor through p38 MAP kinase inhibition. Science 297:
2048-2051, 2002.

22. Pokholok, D. K.; Zeitlinger, J.; Hannett, N. M.; Reynolds, D.
B.; Young, R. A.: Activated signal transduction kinases frequently
occupy target genes. Science 313: 533-536, 2006.

23. Raoul, C.; Buhler, E.; Sadeghi, C.; Jacquier, A.; Aebischer, P.;
Pettmann, B.; Henderson, C. E.; Haase, G.: Chronic activation in
presymptomatic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) mice of a feedback
loop involving Fas, Daxx, and FasL. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 103: 6007-6012,
2006.

24. Raoul, C.; Estevez, A. G.; Nishimune, H.; Cleveland, D. W.; deLapeyriere,
O.; Henderson, C. E.; Hasse, G.; Pettmann, B.: Motoneuron death triggered
by a specific pathway downstream of Fas: potentiation by ALS-linked
SOD1 mutations. Neuron 35: 1067-1083, 2002.

25. Simone, C.; Forcales, S. V.; Hill, D. A.; Imbalzano, A. N.; Latella,
L.; Puri, P. L.: p38 pathway targets SWI-SNF chromatin-remodeling
complex to muscle-specific loci. Nature Genet. 36: 738-743, 2004.

26. Takekawa, M.; Maeda, T.; Saito, H.: Protein phosphatase 2C-alpha
inhibits the human stress-responsive p38 and JNK MAPK pathways. EMBO
J. 17: 4744-4752, 1998.

27. Tamura, K.; Sudo, T.; Senftleben, U.; Dadak, A. M.; Johnson, R.;
Karin, M.: Requirement for p38-alpha in erythropoietin expression:
a role for stress kinases in erythropoiesis. Cell 102: 221-231,
2000.

28. Thornton, T. M.; Pedraza-Alva, G.; Deng, B.; Wood, C. D.; Aronshtam,
A.; Clements, J. L.; Sabio, G.; Davis, R. J.; Matthews, D. E.; Doble,
B.; Rincon, M.: Phosphorylation by p38 MAPK as an alternative pathway
for GSK3-beta inactivation. Science 320: 667-670, 2008.

29. Ventura, J. J.; Tenbaum, S.; Perdiguero, E.; Huth, M.; Guerra,
C.; Barbacid, M.; Pasparakis, M.; Nebreda, A. R.: p38-alpha MAP kinase
is essential in lung stem and progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation. Nature
Genet. 39: 750-758, 2007.

30. Waetzig, G. H.; Seegert, D.; Rosenstiel, P.; Nikolaus, S.; Schreiber,
S.: p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase is activated and linked
to TNF-alpha signaling in inflammatory bowel disease. J. Immun. 168:
5342-5351, 2002.

31. Zervos, A. S.; Faccio, L.; Gatto, J. P.; Kyriakis, J. M.; Brent,
R.: Mxi2, a mitogen-activated protein kinase that recognizes and
phosphorylates Max protein. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 92: 10531-10534,
1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/26/2011
George E. Tiller - updated: 9/30/2010
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/19/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/17/2008
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 8/7/2007
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 10/6/2006
Ada Hamosh - updated: 8/11/2006
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/2/2006
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/13/2006
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 8/18/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 7/16/2003
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/9/2003
Paul J. Converse - updated: 9/4/2002
John A. Phillips, III - updated: 7/11/2002
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 2/26/2002
Paul J. Converse - updated: 2/18/2002
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/29/2001
Dawn Watkins-Chow - updated: 7/13/2001
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/2/2001
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 9/11/2000
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 8/8/2000
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 4/14/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 1/9/1995

EDITED mgross: 10/31/2011
terry: 10/26/2011
wwang: 10/13/2010
terry: 9/30/2010
mgross: 1/26/2010
terry: 1/20/2010
carol: 11/23/2009
alopez: 10/26/2009
terry: 10/19/2009
alopez: 6/19/2008
terry: 6/17/2008
alopez: 8/7/2007
wwang: 10/11/2006
terry: 10/6/2006
carol: 8/11/2006
terry: 8/11/2006
wwang: 6/2/2006
mgross: 2/13/2006
wwang: 10/27/2005
tkritzer: 8/18/2004
terry: 8/18/2004
alopez: 7/28/2003
mgross: 7/17/2003
mgross: 7/16/2003
carol: 6/12/2003
ckniffin: 6/9/2003
mgross: 9/4/2002
alopez: 7/11/2002
mgross: 2/26/2002
mgross: 2/18/2002
carol: 11/1/2001
mcapotos: 11/1/2001
terry: 10/29/2001
mgross: 7/13/2001
alopez: 5/2/2001
joanna: 2/27/2001
mgross: 9/11/2000
mgross: 8/8/2000
mgross: 9/9/1999
psherman: 4/21/1998
alopez: 4/14/1998
mark: 8/26/1996
mark: 10/3/1995
carol: 3/2/1995
carol: 3/1/1995
carol: 1/9/1995

602441	TITLE *602441 CYTOKINE-INDUCIBLE SH2-CONTAINING PROTEIN; CISH
;;CIS
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

CIS belongs to the suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) family (see
SOCS1; 603597) and is an important negative regulator for inflammatory
signaling (Hu et al., 2009).

CLONING

As part of the search for immediate-early cytokine-responsive genes,
Yoshimura et al. (1995) cloned murine Cish, which was shown to have a
growth inhibitory function. Cis, the protein product of Cish, has an Src
homology 2 (SH2) domain in the middle of its sole structural motif.

Uchida et al. (1997) isolated a human CISH cDNA. The CISH protein
consists of 258 amino acids. Northern blot analysis showed expression of
CISH as a 2-kb transcript in various epithelial tissues, including lung
and kidney.

GENE FUNCTION

Hu et al. (2009) noted that microRNAs (miRNAs) have been implicated in
the fine tuning of the Toll-like receptor (TLR; see 603030)-mediated
inflammatory response. Using Northern and Western blot analyses and PCR
with human cholangiocytes, which express multiple TLRs, Hu et al. (2009)
showed that the miRNAs MIR98 (300810) and LET7 (see MIRNLET7A1; 605386)
regulated CIS protein expression via translational suppression. CIS
expression was upregulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or
Cryptosporidium parvum exposure, and this upregulation involved
downregulation of MIR98 and LET7, which relieved MIR98- and
LET7-mediated translational repression of CIS. Gain- and
loss-of-function studies showed that CIS accelerated degradation of IKBA
(NFKBIA; 164008) and enhanced NFKB (see 164011) activation in
cholangiocytes in response to LPS stimulation or C. parvum exposure. Hu
et al. (2009) proposed that LET7 and MIR98 allow expression of CIS in
response to microbial challenge.

GENE STRUCTURE

Uchida et al. (1997) determined that the CISH gene contains 2 introns,
about 3 kb and 0.4 kb in size, and has 3 repeats of the pentameric mRNA
destabilization signal, ATTTA, in its 3-prime UTR.

MAPPING

Uchida et al. (1997) mapped the human CISH gene to chromosome 3p21.3 by
FISH. The mouse gene is tightly linked to the Gnai2 gene (139360) on
chromosome 9, a region syntenic to human chromosome 3p21.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Khor et al. (2010) used a case-control design to test for an association
between CISH polymorphisms and susceptibility to major infectious
diseases, including bacteremia, tuberculosis (607948), and severe
malaria (611162), in blood samples from 8,402 persons from Gambia, Hong
Kong, Kenya, Malawi, and Vietnam. The others had previously tested 20
other immune-related genes in 1 or more of these sample collections.
Khor et al. (2010) observed associations between variant alleles of
multiple CISH polymorphisms and increased susceptibility to each
infectious disease in each of the study populations. When all 5 SNPs, at
positions -639, -292 (dbSNP rs414171; 602441.0001), -163 (dbSNP
rs6768330), +1320 (dbSNP rs2239751), and +3415 (dbSNP rs622502), within
the CISH-associated locus were considered together in a multiple-SNP
score, Khor et al. (2010) found an association between CISH genetic
variants and susceptibility to bacteremia, malaria, and tuberculosis (P
= 3.8 x 10(-11) for all comparisons), and with -292 accounting for most
of the association signal (P = 4.58 x 10(-7)). Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) obtained from adult subjects carrying the -292
variant, as compared with wildtype cells, showed a muted response to the
stimulation of interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680) production, i.e., 25 to 40%
less CISH expression. Khor et al. (2010) found that the overall risk of
one of these infectious diseases was increased by at least 18% among
persons carrying the variant CISH alleles.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
TUBERCULOSIS, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO
MALARIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED;;
BACTEREMIA, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, 2, INCLUDED
CISH, -292, A-T (dbSNP rs414171)

In a case-control study testing for association between CISH
polymorphisms and susceptibility to major infectious diseases involving
8,402 individuals from Gambia, Hong Kong, Keyna, Malawi, and Vietnam,
Khor et al. (2010) found that dbSNP rs414171 at the -292 position
relative to the CISH gene results in increased susceptibility to
tuberculosis (607948), malaria (611162), and invasive bacterial disease
(BACTS2; 614383) (p = 4.58 x -10(-7)). In addition, peripheral blood
mononuclear cells obtained from adult subjects carrying the -292
variant, as compared with wildtype cells, showed a muted response to the
stimulation of interleukin-2 (IL2; 147680), i.e., 25 to 40% less CISH
expression.

REFERENCE 1. Hu, G.; Zhou, R.; Liu, J.; Gong, A.-Y.; Eischeid, A. N.; Dittman,
J. W.; Chen, X.-M.: MicroRNA-98 and let-7 confer cholangiocyte expression
of cytokine-inducible Src homology 2-containing protein in response
to microbial challenge. J. Immun. 183: 1617-1624, 2009.

2. Khor, C. C.; Vannberg, F. O.; Chapman, S. J.; Guo, H.; Wong, S.
H.; Walley, A. J.; Vukcevic, D.; Rautanen, A.; Mills, T. C.; Chang,
K.-C.; Kam, K.-M.; Crampin, A. C.; and 23 others: CISH and susceptibility
to infectious diseases. New Eng. J. Med. 362: 2092-2101, 2010.

3. Uchida, K.; Yoshimura, A.; Inazawa, J.; Yanagisawa, K.; Osada,
H.; Masuda, A.; Saito, T.; Takahashi, T.; Miyajima, A.; Takahashi,
T.: Molecular cloning of CISH, chromosome assignment to 3p21.3, and
analysis of expression in fetal and adult tissues. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 78: 209-212, 1997.

4. Yoshimura, A.; Ohkubo, T.; Kiguchi, T.; Jenkins, N. A.; Gilbert,
D. J.; Copeland, N. G.; Hara, T.; Miyajima, A.: A novel cytokine-inducible
gene CIS, encodes an SH2-containing protein that binds to tyrosine-phosphorylated
interleukin 3 and erythropoietin receptors. EMBO J. 14: 2816-2826,
1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/10/2010
Matthew B. Gross - updated: 12/11/2009
Paul J. Converse - updated: 12/10/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 3/13/1998

EDITED mgross: 12/08/2011
alopez: 9/8/2010
alopez: 6/10/2010
terry: 6/10/2010
mgross: 12/11/2009
terry: 12/10/2009
mcapotos: 12/9/1999
psherman: 3/17/1998
psherman: 3/13/1998

601273	TITLE *601273 CLATHRIN, HEAVY POLYPEPTIDE-LIKE 1; CLTCL1
;;CLATHRIN, HEAVY POLYPEPTIDE D; CLTD;;
CLH22;;
CHC22
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using a YAC clone containing the velocardiofacial syndrome (VCFS;
192430) critical region on chromosome 22q11 as a substrate for cDNA
selection, Sirotkin et al. (1996) derived a cDNA, which they designated
CLTD, that encodes a protein with a high degree of homology at the amino
acid level to human rat and Drosophila clathrin heavy chain. The CLTD
protein is 7% divergent at the amino acid level from that of the human
clathrin heavy chain gene (CLTC; 118955) located on chromosome
17q11-qter.

Kedra et al. (1996) cloned and characterized a clathrin heavy chain
gene, which they referred to as CLH22. The gene was cloned using a
software-based exon-trapping approach based on sequencing of genomic DNA
present in chromosome 22q11 contigs combined with the use of
exon-prediction computer programs. The 5,470-bp sequence covering the
entire open reading frame encodes a 1,640-amino acid polypeptide that is
identical to the polypeptide described by Sirotkin et al. (1996).
Although expression of the CLTD gene was ubiquitous, it was relatively
low in all tissues except skeletal muscle, testis, and heart. The main
transcript was 6 kb, and alternate transcripts were detected in several
tissues. Kedra et al. (1996) demonstrated loss of expression of the CLTD
gene in 37 out of 46 sporadic meningiomas examined. In genomic DNA from
82 sporadic meningiomas, they demonstrated aberrant restriction patterns
consistent with intragenic rearrangements in 4 tumors. Based on these
findings, the authors proposed that CLTD may be considered a candidate
meningioma tumor suppressor gene.

Long et al. (1996) cloned and characterized a gene they symbolized CLTCL
for 'CLTC-like.' The gene was expressed in all fetal tissues tested and
was selectively expressed in certain adult tissues, particularly
skeletal muscle. They observed alternative splicing of an exon near the
C terminus of the predicted polypeptide.

GENE FUNCTION

Intracellular trafficking of the glucose transporter GLUT4 (138190) from
storage compartments to the plasma membrane is triggered in muscle and
fat during the body's response to insulin. Clathrin is involved in
intracellular trafficking, and in humans, the clathrin heavy-chain
isoform CHC22 is highly expressed in skeletal muscle. Vassilopoulos et
al. (2009) found a role for CHC22 in the formation of insulin-responsive
GLUT4 compartments in human muscle and adipocytes. CHC22 also associated
with expanded GLUT4 compartments in muscle from patients with type 2
diabetes (125853). Tissue-specific introduction of CHC22 in mice, which
have only a pseudogene for this protein, caused aberrant localization of
GLUT4 transport pathway components in their muscle, as well as features
of diabetes. Thus, Vassilopoulos et al. (2009) concluded that
CHC22-dependent membrane trafficking constitutes a species-restricted
pathway in human muscle and fat with potential implications for type 2
diabetes.

MAPPING

Long et al. (1996) used fluorescence in situ hybridization to map CLTCL
to proximal 22q near the region commonly deleted in DiGeorge syndrome
(DGS; 188400) and VCFS.

In the course of comparative mapping of the human 22q11 region in mice,
Puech et al. (1997) found that CLTCL gene, which lies in the center of a
cluster of genes whose homologs reside on chromosome 16, is not located
there in the mouse. A gene they referred to as Cltd-rs-4 was located in
the central region of mouse chromosome 11 that shares a large region of
homology with human chromosome 17. A second human clathrin heavy chain
gene, CLTC, which is 84.7% identical to CLTD, maps to 17q11-qter. Puech
et al. (1997) interpreted their findings as suggesting that either Cltc
and Cltd are tandemly duplicated loci that map to the central region of
mouse chromosome 11 or that the mouse genome does not contain a gene
corresponding to human CLTD. They favored the latter hypothesis.

CYTOGENETICS

Holmes et al. (1997) reported characterization of a balanced
translocation t(21;22)(p12;q11) within the minimal DiGeorge syndrome
critical region in a patient with some features of DGS/VCFS, including
facial dysmorphia, mental retardation, long slender digits, and genital
anomalies (first-degree hypospadias and bilateral cryptorchidism).
Holmes et al. (1997) cloned the breakpoint of the translocation and
showed that it interrupted the CLTCL gene within the DGCR. The
breakpoint of the translocation partner was in a repeated region
telomeric to the rDNA cluster on chromosome 21p, making it unlikely that
the patient's findings were caused by interruption of sequences on 21p.
The chromosome 22 breakpoint, on the other hand, disrupted the 3-prime
coding region of the CLTCL gene and led to a truncated transcript.

REFERENCE 1. Holmes, S. E.; Riazi, M. A.; Gong, W.; McDermid, H. E.; Sellinger,
B. T.; Hua, A.; Chen, F.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, G.; Roe, B.; Gonzalez,
I.; McDonald-McGinn, D. M.; Zackai, E.; Emanuel, B. S.; Budarf, M.
L.: Disruption of the clathrin heavy chain-like gene (CLTCL) associated
with features of DGS/VCFS: a balanced (21;22)(p12;q11) translocation. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 6: 357-367, 1997.

2. Kedra, D.; Peyrard, M.; Fransson, I.; Collins, J. E.; Dunham, I.;
Roe, B. A.; Dumanski, J. P.: Characterization of a second human clathrin
heavy chain polypeptide gene (CLH-22) from chromosome 22q11. Hum.
Molec. Genet. 5: 625-631, 1996.

3. Long, K. R.; Trofatter, J. A.; Ramesh, V.; McCormick, M. K.; Buckler,
A. J.: Cloning and characterization of a novel human clathrin heavy
chain gene (CLTCL). Genomics 35: 466-472, 1996.

4. Puech, A.; Saint-Jore, B.; Funke, B.; Gilbert, D. J.; Sirotkin,
H.; Copeland, N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.; Kucherlapati, R.; Morrow, B.;
Skoultchi, A. I.: Comparative mapping of the human 22q11 chromosomal
region and the orthologous region in mice reveals complex changes
in gene organization. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 94: 14608-14613, 1997.

5. Sirotkin, H.; Morrow, B.; DasGupta, R.; Goldberg, R.; Patanjali,
S. R.; Shi, G.; Cannizzaro, L.; Shprintzen, R.; Weissman, S. M.; Kucherlapati,
R.: Isolation of a new clathrin heavy chain gene with muscle-specific
expression from the region commonly deleted in velo-cardio-facial
syndrome. Hum. Molec. Genet. 5: 617-624, 1996.

6. Vassilopoulos, S.; Esk, C.; Hoshino, S.; Funke, B. H.; Chen, C.-Y.;
Plocik, A. M.; Wright, W. E.; Kucherlapati, R.; Brodsky, F. M.: A
role for the CHC22 clathrin heavy-chain isoform in human glucose metabolism. Science 324:
1192-1196, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/16/2009
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/6/1998
Mark H. Paalman - updated: 6/3/1997
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 4/21/1997

CREATED Moyra Smith: 5/21/1996

EDITED alopez: 06/22/2009
terry: 6/16/2009
carol: 4/23/1999
mark: 2/15/1998
terry: 2/6/1998
alopez: 6/4/1997
mark: 6/3/1997
mark: 4/21/1997
terry: 4/8/1997
mark: 5/28/1996
carol: 5/22/1996

108728	TITLE *108728 ATP CITRATE LYASE; ACLY
;;CLATP;;
ATPCL;;
ACL
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

ATP citrate lyase is the primary enzyme responsible for the synthesis of
cytosolic acetyl-CoA in many tissues. The enzyme is a tetramer (relative
molecular weight approximately 440,000) of apparently identical
subunits. It catalyzes the formation of acetyl-CoA and oxaloacetate from
citrate and CoA with a concomitant hydrolysis of ATP to ADP and
phosphate. The product, acetyl-CoA, serves several important
biosynthetic pathways, including lipogenesis and cholesterogenesis. In
nervous tissue, ATP citrate-lyase may be involved in the biosynthesis of
acetylcholine.

CLONING

Cloning of cDNAs has been reported for murine (Sul et al., 1984), rat
(Elshourbagy et al., 1990), and human (Elshourbagy et al., 1992) ATP
citrate lyase. Elshourbagy et al. (1992) found that the subunits of the
enzyme have 1,105 amino acids and a calculated molecular mass of 121,419
Da. The human and rat ATPCL cDNAs showed 96.3% amino acid identity.

GENE FUNCTION

Wellen et al. (2009) showed that histone acetylation in mammalian cells
is dependent on ATP-citrate lyase (ACL), the enzyme that converts
glucose-derived citrate into acetyl-CoA. They found that ACL is required
for increases in histone acetylation in response to growth factor
stimulation and during differentiation, and that glucose availability
can affect histone acetylation in an ACL-dependent manner. Wellen et al.
(2009) concluded that ACL activity is required to link growth
factor-induced increases in nutrient metabolism to the regulation of
histone acetylation and gene expression.

MAPPING

Remmers et al. (1992) found that the genes for growth hormone (139250),
pancreatic polypeptide (167780), ERBB2 (164870), sex hormone binding
globulin (182205), embryonic skeletal myosin heavy chain (160720), and
asialoglycoprotein receptor (108360) map to human chromosome 17 and rat
chromosome 10. Many of the same genes are known to be located on mouse
chromosome 11. Furthermore, Remmers et al. (1992) showed that in the rat
the gene for ATP citrate lyase is closely linked to the gene for PPY,
which in turn is close to the GH gene, on chromosome 10. They predicted,
therefore, that the homologous gene in the human would be located on
chromosome 17, probably close to PPY which is situated at 17q22-q24.
Couch et al. (1994) mapped the ACLY gene to 17q12-q21 by PCR analysis of
a panel of human/rodent somatic cell hybrids and localized it to 17q21.1
by PCR on a panel of radiation hybrids. The radiation hybrid panel
indicated that the most likely position of ACLY on 17q21.1 is between
gastrin (137250) and D17S856 at a distance of 170 to 290 kb from the GAS
locus.

REFERENCE 1. Couch, F. J.; Abel, K. J.; Brody, L. C.; Boehnke, M.; Collins,
F. S.; Weber, B. L.: Localization of the gene for ATP citrate lyase
(ACLY) distal to gastrin (GAS) and proximal to D17S856 on chromosome
17q12-q21. Genomics 21: 444-446, 1994.

2. Elshourbagy, N. A.; Near, J. C.; Kmetz, P. J.; Sathe, G. M.; Southan,
C.; Strickler, J. E.; Gross, M.; Young, J. F.; Wells, T. N. C.; Groot,
P. H. E.: Rat ATP citrate-lyase: molecular cloning and sequence analysis
of a full-length cDNA and mRNA abundance as a function of diet, organ,
and age. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 1430-1435, 1990.

3. Elshourbagy, N. A.; Near, J. C.; Kmetz, P. J.; Wells, T. N. C.;
Groot, P. H. E.; Saxty, B. A.; Hughes, S. A.; Franklin, M.; Gloger,
I. S.: Cloning and expression of a human ATP-citrate lyase cDNA. Europ.
J. Biochem. 204: 491-499, 1992.

4. Remmers, E. F.; Goldmuntz, E. A.; Cash, J. M.; Crofford, L. J.;
Misiewicz-Poltorak, B.; Zha, H.; Wilder, R. L.: Genetic map of nine
polymorphic loci comprising a single linkage group on rat chromosome
10: evidence for linkage conservation with human chromosome 17 and
mouse chromosome 11. Genomics 14: 618-623, 1992.

5. Sul, H. S.; Wise, L. S.; Brown, M. L.; Rubin, C. S.: Cloning of
cDNA sequences for murine ATP-citrate lyase: construction of recombinant
plasmids using an immunopurified mRNA template and evidence for the
nutritional regulation of ATP-citrate lyase mRNA content in mouse
liver. J. Biol. Chem. 259: 1201-1205, 1984.

6. Wellen, K. E.; Hatzivassiliou, G.; Sachdeva, U. M.; Bui, T. V.;
Cross, J. R.; Thompson, C. B.: ATP-citrate lyase links cellular metabolism
to histone acetylation. Science 324: 1076-1080, 2009.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/17/2009

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 11/4/1992

EDITED alopez: 06/23/2009
alopez: 6/23/2009
terry: 6/17/2009
mark: 5/20/1996
jason: 6/9/1994
carol: 4/9/1994
carol: 12/31/1992
carol: 12/16/1992
carol: 11/12/1992
carol: 11/4/1992

604040	TITLE *604040 RAD50, S. CEREVISIAE, HOMOLOG OF; RAD50
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The S. cerevisiae Rad50 gene encodes a protein that is essential for
double-stranded DNA break repair by nonhomologous DNA end joining and
chromosomal integration. The yeast Rad50, Mre11 (600814), and Xrs2
proteins appear to act in a multiprotein complex, consistent with the
observation that mutations in these genes confer nearly identical
phenotypes of no meiotic recombination and elevated rates of homologous
mitotic recombination. By direct selection of cDNAs from the 5q23-q31
chromosomal interval, Dolganov et al. (1996) isolated a cDNA encoding a
human Rad50 homolog. The human RAD50 gene spans 100 to 130 kb. Northern
blot analysis revealed that the RAD50 gene was expressed as a 5.5-kb
mRNA predominantly in testis. A faint 7-kb transcript, which the authors
considered to be an mRNA with an alternatively processed 3-prime end,
was also detected. Yeast Rad50 and the predicted 1,312-amino acid human
RAD50 protein share more than 50% identity in their N- and C-termini.
The central heptad repeat domains of the proteins have relatively
divergent primary sequences but are predicted to adopt very similar
coiled-coil structures. Using immunoprecipitation, Dolganov et al.
(1996) demonstrated that the 153-kD RAD50 is stably associated with
MRE11 in a protein complex, which may also include proteins of 95 kD,
200 kD, and 350 kD.

MAPPING

By inclusion within mapped clones and by analysis of somatic cell
hybrids, Dolganov et al. (1996) mapped the RAD50 gene to 5q31. They
suggested that a recombinational DNA repair deficiency may be associated
with the development of myeloid leukemia, since this chromosomal region
is frequently altered in acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic
disease.

GENE FUNCTION

Trujillo et al. (1998) determined that the 95-kD protein in the
mammalian cell nuclear complex containing RAD50 and MRE11 is nibrin, or
p95 (602667), the protein encoded by the gene mutated in Nijmegen
breakage syndrome (NBS; 251260). The RAD50 complex possessed
manganese-dependent single-stranded DNA endonuclease and 3-prime to
5-prime exonuclease activities. The authors stated that these nuclease
activities are likely to be important for recombination, repair, and
genomic stability. Carney et al. (1998) demonstrated that p95 is an
integral member of the MRE11/RAD50 complex and that the function of this
complex is impaired in cells from NBS patients. They stated that
although p95 has little sequence homology to yeast Xrs2, the 2 proteins
can be considered functional analogs since they link the conserved
activities of MRE11/RAD50 to the cellular DNA damage response in their
respective organisms.

Zhong et al. (1999) showed that BRCA1 (113705) interacts in vitro and in
vivo with RAD50. Formation of irradiation-induced foci positive for
BRCA1, RAD50, MRE11, or p95 was dramatically reduced in HCC/1937 breast
cancer cells carrying a homozygous mutation in BRCA1 but was restored by
transfection of wildtype BRCA1. Ectopic expression of wildtype, but not
mutated, BRCA1 in these cells rendered them less sensitive to the DNA
damage agent methyl methanesulfonate. These data suggested to the
authors that BRCA1 is important for the cellular responses to DNA damage
that are mediated by the RAD50-MRE11-p95 complex.

Wang et al. (2000) used immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry
analyses to identify BRCA1-associated proteins. They found that BRCA1 is
part of a large multisubunit protein complex of tumor suppressors, DNA
damage sensors, and signal transducers. They named this complex BASC,
for 'BRCA1-associated genome surveillance complex.' Among the DNA repair
proteins identified in the complex were ATM (607585), BLM (604610), MSH2
(609309), MSH6 (600678), MLH1 (120436), the RAD50-MRE11-NBS1 complex,
and the RFC1 (102579)-RFC2 (600404)-RFC4 (102577) complex. Confocal
microscopy demonstrated that BRCA1, BLM, and the RAD50-MRE11-NBS1
complex colocalize to large nuclear foci. Wang et al. (2000) suggested
that BASC may serve as a sensor of abnormal DNA structures and/or as a
regulator of the postreplication repair process.

Telomeres allow cells to distinguish natural chromosome ends from
damaged DNA and protect the ends from degradation and fusion. In human
cells, telomere protection depends on the TTAGGG repeat-binding factor,
TRF2 (602027), which may remodel telomeres into large duplex loops
(t-loops). Zhu et al. (2000) showed by nanoelectrospray tandem mass
spectrometry that RAD50 protein is present in TRF2 immunocomplexes.
Coimmunoprecipitation studies showed that a small fraction of RAD50,
MRE11, and p95 is associated with TRF2. Indirect immunofluorescence
demonstrated the presence of RAD50 and MRE11 at interphase telomeres.
NBS1 was associated with TRF2 and telomeres in S phase, but not in G1 or
G2. Although the MRE11 complex accumulated in irradiation-induced foci
(IRIFs) in response to gamma-irradiation, TRF2 did not relocate to IRIFs
and irradiation did not affect the association of TRF2 with the MRE11
complex, arguing against a role for TRF2 in double-strand break repair.
Zhu et al. (2000) proposed that the MRE11 complex functions at
telomeres, possibly by modulating t-loop formation.

The MRE11/RAD50 protein complex functions in diverse aspects of the
cellular response to double strand breaks (DSBs), including the
detection of DNA damage, the activation of cell cycle checkpoints, and
DSB repair. Whereas genetic analyses in S. cerevisiae have provided
insight regarding DSB repair functions of this highly conserved complex,
the implication of the human complex in Nijmegen breakage syndrome
reveals its role in cell cycle checkpoint functions. Luo et al. (1999)
established mice with mutation in the mouse Rad50 gene and examined the
role of the Mre11/Rad50 protein complex in the DNA damage response.
Early embryonic cells deficient in Rad50 were hypersensitive to ionizing
radiation, consistent with a role for this complex in the repair of
ionizing radiation-induced DSBs. However, the null Rad50 mutation was
lethal in cultured embryonic stem cells and in early developing embryos,
indicating that the mammalian protein complex mediates functions in
normally growing cells that are essential for viability.

In mammalian cells, the conserved multiprotein MRN complex of MRE11,
RAD50, and NBS1 (602667) is important for double-strand break repair,
meiotic recombination, and telomere maintenance. In the absence of the
early region E4, the double-stranded genome of adenoviruses is joined
into concatamers too large to be packaged. Stracker et al. (2002)
investigated the cellular proteins involved in the concatamer formation
and how they are inactivated by E4 products during a wildtype infection.
They demonstrated that concatamerization requires functional MRE11 and
NBS1, and that these proteins are found at foci adjacent to viral
replication centers. Infection with wildtype virus results in both
reorganization and degradation of members of the MRN complex. These
activities are mediated by 3 viral oncoproteins that prevent
concatamerization. This targeting of cellular proteins involved in the
genomic stability suggested a mechanism for 'hit-and-run' transformation
observed for these viral oncoproteins.

Franchitto and Pichierri (2002) reviewed the roles of RECQL2 (604611)
and RECQL3 (604610) in resolution of a stall in DNA replication, as well
as their possible interaction with the MRN complex.

Zhong et al. (2005) tested whether the MRN complex has a global
controlling role over ATR (601215) through the study of MRN deficiencies
generated by RNA interference. The MRN complex was required for
ATR-dependent phosphorylation of SMC1A (300040), which acts within
chromatin to ensure sister chromatid cohesion and to effect several DNA
damage responses. Novel phenotypes caused by MRN deficiency that support
a functional link between this complex, ATR, and SMC1A, included
hypersensitivity to UV exposure, a defective UV responsive intra-S phase
checkpoint, and a specific pattern of genomic instability. Zhong et al.
(2005) concluded that there is a controlling role for the MRN complex
over the ATR kinase, and that downstream events under this control are
broad, including both chromatin-associated and diffuse signaling
factors.

Abuzeid et al. (2009) found that adenoviral-mediated transfection of a
mutant RAD50 gene into human squamous cell carcinoma cells disrupted the
MRN complex in a dominant-negative manner. The disruption significantly
downregulated MRN expression and enhanced the cytotoxicity of cisplatin
in vitro, with a corresponding increase in DNA damage and telomere
shortening. Treatment of nude mice with xenografts of
cisplatin-resistant human squamous cell cancer with this combination
therapy resulted in dramatic tumor regression with increased apoptosis
of tumor cells. The findings suggested that the use of targeted RAD50
disruption could be a chemosensitizing approach for cancer therapy in
the context of chemoresistance.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In a patient with chromosome instability, x-ray hypersensitivity,
microcephaly, and growth retardation (Nijmegen breakage syndrome-like
disorder; 613078), Waltes et al. (2009) identified compound
heterozygosity in the RAD50 gene, for a nonsense mutation (604040.0001)
and a mutation at the natural stop codon leading to a 66-amino acid
extension (604040.0002). There was no detectable RNA or protein from the
allele carrying the nonsense mutation, whereas from the allele carrying
the extension mutation a small amount of RNA and protein could be
detected. Unlike patients with Nijmegen breakage syndrome (604391) and
MRE11 deficiency resulting in an ataxia-telangiectasia-like disorder
(604391), this patient with RAD50 deficiency did not have
immunodeficiency or malignancies. Cells from this patient were
intermediate in their radiosensitivity between wildtype and
ataxia-telangiectasia (208900) cells.

BIOCHEMICAL FEATURES

To clarify functions of the MRE11/RAD50 complex in DNA double-strand
break repair, Hopfner et al. (2001) reported P. furiosus Mre11 crystal
structures, which revealed a protein phosphatase-like
dimanganese-binding domain capped by a unique domain that controls
active site access. These structures unify the multiple nuclease
activities of Mre11 in a single endo/exonuclease mechanism. Mapping
human and yeast MRE11 mutations revealed eukaryotic macromolecular
interaction sites. Furthermore, the structure of the P. furiosus Rad50
ABC-ATPase with its adjacent coiled-coil defines a compact
Mre11/Rad50-ATPase complex and suggests that RAD50-ATP-driven
conformational switching directly controls the MRE11 exonuclease.
Electron microscopy, small-angle x-ray scattering, and
ultracentrifugation data of human and P. furiosus MRE11/RAD50 complex
revealed a dual functional complex consisting of a (MRE11)2/(RAD50)2
heterotetrameric DNA-processing head and a double coiled-coil linker.

Hopfner et al. (2002) presented a 2.2-angstrom crystal structure of the
Rad50 coiled-coil region that revealed an unexpected dimer interface at
the apex of the coiled coils in which pairs of conserved cys-x-x-cys
motifs form interlocking hooks that bind one zinc ion. Biochemical,
x-ray, and electron microscopy data indicated that these hooks can join
oppositely protruding Rad50 coiled-coil domains to form a flexible
bridge of up to 1,200 angstroms. This suggested a function for the long
insertion in the Rad50 ABC-ATPase. The Rad50 hook is functional, since
mutations in this motif confer radiation sensitivity in yeast and
disrupt binding at the distant Mre11 (600814) nuclease interface.
Hopfner et al. (2002) concluded that their data support an architectural
role for the Rad50 coiled coils in forming metal-mediated bridging
complexes between 2 DNA-binding heads. The resulting assemblies have
appropriate lengths and conformational properties to link sister
chromatids in homologous recombination and DNA ends in nonhomologous
end-joining.

The human RAD50/MRE11/NBS1 complex (R/M/N) has a dynamic molecular
architecture consisting of a globular DNA binding domain from which two
50-nanometer coiled coils protrude. The coiled coils are flexible and
their apices can self-associate. The flexibility of the coiled coils
allows their apices to adopt an orientation favorable for interaction.
However, this also allows interaction between the tips of the 2 coiled
coils within the same complex, which competes with and frustrates the
intercomplex interaction required for DNA tethering. Moreno-Herrero et
al. (2005) showed that the dynamic architecture of the R/M/N complex is
markedly affected by DNA binding. DNA binding by the R/M/N globular
domain leads to parallel orientation of the coiled coils; this prevents
intracomplex interactions and favors intercomplex associations needed
for DNA tethering. The R/M/N complex thus is an example of a biologic
nanomachine in which binding to its ligand, in this case DNA, affects
the functional conformation of a domain located 50 nanometers distant.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
NIJMEGEN BREAKAGE SYNDROME-LIKE DISORDER
RAD50, ARG1093TER

In a patient with Nijmegen breakage syndrome-like disorder (NBSLD;
613078), Waltes et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity for
mutations in the RAD50 gene. The maternal allele carried a C-to-T
transition at nucleotide 3277 in exon 21 of the RAD50 gene, resulting in
an arg-to-stop substitution at codon 1093 (R1093X). The paternal allele
carried a point mutation resulting in a 66-amino acid extension of the
protein (604040.0002). This mutation was associated with undetectable
RNA and protein and was not identified in 350 German chromosomes.

.0002
NIJMEGEN BREAKAGE SYNDROME-LIKE DISORDER
RAD50, TER1313TYR

In a patient with Nijmegen breakage syndrome-like disorder (NBSLD;
613078), Waltes et al. (2009) identified compound heterozygosity for
mutations in the RAD50 gene, for a nonsense mutation (604040.0001) and
an A-to-T transversion at nucleotide 3939, resulting in substitution of
the termination codon occurring at position 1313 with tyrosine at that
position and an extension of the reading frame by 66 amino acids
(X1313YextX*66). The prediction of a larger polypeptide produced by the
aberrant paternal allele was consistent with detection of a protein band
of increased molecular weight. Very low amounts of a larger polypeptide
detected by immunoblot analysis were considered a consequence either of
protein instability or unstable nonstop mRNA. This mutation was not
detected in 350 chromosomes from a German random population sample.

REFERENCE 1. Abuzeid, W. M.; Jiang, X.; Shi, G.; Wang, H.; Paulson, D.; Araki,
K.; Jungreis, D.; Carney, J.; O'Malley, B. W., Jr.; Li, D.: Molecular
disruption of RAD50 sensitizes human tumor cells to cisplatin-based
chemotherapy. J. Clin. Invest. 119: 1974-1985, 2009. Note: Erratum:
J. Clin. Invest. 122: 4300 only, 2012.

2. Carney, J. P.; Maser, R. S.; Olivares, H.; Davis, E. M.; Le Beau,
M.; Yates, J. R., III; Hays, L.; Morgan, W. F.; Petrini, J. H. J.
: The hMre11/hRad50 protein complex and Nijmegen breakage syndrome:
linkage of double-strand break repair to the cellular DNA damage response. Cell 93:
477-486, 1998.

3. Dolganov, G. M.; Maser, R. S.; Novikov, A.; Tosto, L.; Chong, S.;
Bressan, D. A.; Petrini, J. H. J.: Human Rad50 is physically associated
with human Mre11: identification of a conserved multiprotein complex
implicated in recombinational DNA repair. Molec. Cell Biol. 16:
4832-4841, 1996.

4. Franchitto, A.; Pichierri, P.: Protecting genomic integrity during
DNA replication: correlation between Werner's and Bloom's syndrome
gene products and the MRE11 complex. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 2447-2453,
2002.

5. Hopfner, K.-P.; Craig, L.; Moncalian, G.; Zinkel, R. A.; Usui,
T.; Owen, B. A. L.; Karcher, A.; Henderson, B.; Bodmer, J.-L.; McMurray,
C. T.; Carney, J. P.; Petrini, J. H. J.; Tainer, J. A.: The Rad50
zinc-hook is a structure joining Mre11 complexes in DNA recombination
and repair. Nature 418: 562-566, 2002.

6. Hopfner, K.-P.; Karcher, A.; Craig, L.; Woo, T. T.; Carney, J.
P.; Tainer, J. A.: Structural biochemistry and interaction architecture
of the DNA double-strand break repair Mre11 nuclease and Rad50-ATPase. Cell 105:
473-485, 2001.

7. Luo, G.; Yao, M. S.; Bender, C. F.; Mills, M.; Bladl, A. R.; Bradley,
A.; Petrini, J. H. J.: Disruption of mRad50 causes embryonic stem
cell lethality, abnormal embryonic development, and sensitivity to
ionizing radiation. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 96: 7376-7381, 1999.

8. Moreno-Herrero, F.; de Jager, M.; Dekker, N. H.; Kanaar, R.; Wyman,
C.; Dekker, C.: Mesoscale conformational changes in the DNA-repair
complex Rad50/Mre11/Nbs1 upon binding DNA. Nature 437: 440-443,
2005.

9. Stracker, T. H.; Carson, C. T.; Weitzman, M. D.: Adenovirus oncoproteins
inactivate the Mre11-Rad50-NBS1 DNA repair complex. Nature 418:
348-352, 2002.

10. Trujillo, K. M.; Yuan, S.-S. F.; Lee, E. Y.-H. P.; Sung, P.:
Nuclease activities in a complex of human recombination and DNA repair
factors Rad50, Mre11, and p95. J. Biol. Chem. 273: 21447-21450,
1998.

11. Waltes, R.; Kalb, R.; Gatei, M.; Kijas, A. W.; Stumm, M.; Sobeck,
A.; Wieland, B.; Varon, R.; Lerenthal, Y.; Lavin, M. F.; Schindler,
D.; Dork, T.: Human RAD50 deficiency in a Nijmegen breakage syndrome-like
disorder. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 84: 605-616, 2009.

12. Wang, Y.; Cortez, D.; Yazdi, P.; Neff, N.; Elledge, S. J.; Qin,
J.: BASC, a super complex of BRCA1-associated proteins involved in
the recognition and repair of aberrant DNA structures. Genes Dev. 14:
927-939, 2000.

13. Zhong, H.; Bryson, A.; Eckersdorff, M.; Ferguson, D. O.: Rad50
depletion impacts upon ATR-dependent DNA damage responses. Hum. Molec.
Genet. 14: 2685-2693, 2005.

14. Zhong, Q.; Chen, C.-F.; Li, S.; Chen, Y.; Wang, C.-C.; Xiao, J.;
Chen, P.-L.; Sharp, Z. D.; Lee, W.-H.: Association of BRCA1 with
the hRad50-hMre11-p95 complex and the DNA damage response. Science 285:
747-750, 1999.

15. Zhu, X.-D.; Kuster, B.; Mann, M.; Petrini, J. H. J.; de Lange,
T.: Cell-cycle-regulated association of RAD50/MRE11/NBS1 with TRF2
and human telomeres. Nature Genet. 25: 347-352, 2000.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 11/20/2009
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/6/2009
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/10/2008
Ada Hamosh - updated: 11/3/2005
George E. Tiller - updated: 12/4/2003
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/1/2002
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/24/2002
Stylianos E. Antonarakis - updated: 6/4/2001
Paul J. Converse - updated: 11/16/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 6/27/2000
Ada Hamosh - updated: 7/30/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 7/28/1999

CREATED Rebekah S. Rasooly: 7/22/1999

EDITED tpirozzi: 10/01/2013
wwang: 12/10/2009
ckniffin: 11/20/2009
alopez: 10/12/2009
terry: 10/6/2009
wwang: 12/10/2008
alopez: 11/7/2005
terry: 11/3/2005
alopez: 10/11/2005
terry: 10/10/2005
mgross: 4/14/2005
mgross: 12/4/2003
ckniffin: 3/11/2003
alopez: 11/14/2002
alopez: 10/2/2002
cwells: 10/1/2002
cwells: 7/26/2002
terry: 7/24/2002
mgross: 6/4/2001
joanna: 1/17/2001
mgross: 11/16/2000
alopez: 6/27/2000
carol: 6/27/2000
alopez: 7/30/1999
alopez: 7/28/1999
mgross: 7/22/1999

176396	TITLE *176396 PREGNANCY-SPECIFIC BETA-1-GLYCOPROTEIN 7; PSG7
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The human pregnancy-specific glycoproteins (PSGs) are a group of
molecules that are mainly produced by the placental syncytiotrophoblasts
during pregnancy. PSGs comprise a subgroup of the carcinoembryonic
antigen (CEA) family, which belongs to the immunoglobulin superfamily.

For additional general information about the PSG gene family, see PSG1
(176390).

GENE STRUCTURE

Teglund et al. (1994) determined that the PSG7 gene contains 6 exons.

MAPPING

Studies by several groups resulted in the mapping of the CEA gene family
to 19q13.1-q13.2 (Thompson et al., 1990; Thompson et al., 1992; Tynan et
al., 1992; Trask et al., 1993). The PSG subgroup is located telomeric of
the CEA subgroup, and together they span approximately 1.1 to 1.2 Mb
(Brandriff et al., 1992; Tynan et al., 1992). Using a high-resolution
restriction fragment fingerprinting technique, Olsen et al. (1994)
assembled 256 cosmids spanning the PSG region on 19q13.2 into a single
700-kb contig. FISH to sperm pronuclei and cosmid walking experiments
indicated that this PSG contig is telomeric of CGM8 at the telomeric end
of the CEA subgroup gene cluster. Detailed restriction mapping and
hybridization with gene-specific probes indicated that the order of the
11 PSG genes in the contig is cen--PSG3--PSG8 (176397)--PSG12 (PSG10;
176399)--PSG1 (176390)--PSG6 (176395)--PSG7--PSG13 (PSG11; 176401)--PSG2
(176391)--PSG5 (176394)--PSG4 (176393)--PSG11 (PSG9; 176398)--tel. The
PSG genes are tandemly oriented in a 5-prime to 3-prime direction from
telomere to centromere. The CEA subgroup gene CGM11 is located at the
telomeric end of the PSG gene cluster, and 6 genes belonging to a third
CEA family subgroup, namely CGM13 through CGM18 (later found to be
pseudogenes; see 109770), are interspersed among the PSG genes.

NOMENCLATURE

Beauchemin et al. (1999) provided a revised nomenclature for the CEA
gene family. Based on this nomenclature, the CEA family is composed of
the PSG subfamily, the CEACAM subfamily (see 109770), and the CEACAM
pseudogene (CEACAMP) subfamily (see 109770). PSG11, PSG12, and PSG13
were renamed PSG9, PSG10, and PSG11, respectively.

REFERENCE 1. Beauchemin, N.; Draber, P.; Dveksler, G.; Gold, P.; Gray-Owen,
S.; Grunert, F.; Hammarstrom, S.; Holmes, K. V.; Karlsson, A.; Kuroki,
M.; Lin, S.-H.; Lucka, L.; and 13 others: Redefined nomenclature
for members of the carcinoembryonic antigen family. Exp. Cell Res. 252:
243-249, 1999.

2. Brandriff, B. F.; Gordon, L. A.; Tynan, K. T.; Olsen, A. S.; Mohrenweiser,
H. W.; Fertitta, A.; Carrano, A. V.; Trask, B. J.: Order and genomic
distances among members of the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) gene
family determined by fluorescence in situ hybridization. Genomics 12:
773-779, 1992.

3. Olsen, A.; Teglund, S.; Nelson, D.; Gordon, L.; Copeland, A.; Georgescu,
A.; Carrano, A.; Hammarstrom, S.: Gene organization of the pregnancy-specific
glycoprotein region on human chromosome 19: assembly and analysis
of a 700-kb cosmid contig spanning the region. Genomics 23: 659-668,
1994.

4. Teglund, S.; Olsen, A.; Khan, W. N.; Frangsmyr, L.; Hammarstrom,
S.: The pregnancy-specific glycoprotein (PSG) gene cluster on human
chromosome 19: fine structure of the 11 PSG genes and identification
of 6 new genes forming a third subgroup within the carcinoembryonic
antigen (CEA) family. Genomics 23: 669-684, 1994.

5. Thompson, J.; Koumari, R.; Wagner, K.; Barnert, S.; Schleussner,
C.; Schrewe, H.; Zimmermann, W.; Muller, G.; Schempp, W.; Zaninetta,
D.; Ammaturo, D.; Hardman, N.: The human pregnancy-specific glycoprotein
genes are tightly linked on the long arm of chromosome 19 and are
coordinately expressed. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 167: 848-859,
1990. Note: Erratum: Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 168: 1325 only,
1990.

6. Thompson, J.; Zimmermann, W.; Osthus-Bugat, P.; Schleussner, C.;
Eades-Perner, A.-M.; Barnert, S.; von Kleist, S.; Willcocks, T.; Craig,
I.; Tynan, K.; Olsen, A.; Mohrenweiser, H.: Long-range chromosomal
mapping of the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) gene family cluster. Genomics 12:
761-772, 1992.

7. Trask, B.; Fertitta, A.; Christensen, M.; Youngblom, J.; Bergmann,
A.; Copeland, A.; de Jong, P.; Mohrenweiser, H.; Olsen, A.; Carrano,
A.; Tynan, K.: Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping of human
chromosome 19: cytogenetic band location of 540 cosmids and 70 genes
or DNA markers. Genomics 15: 133-145, 1993.

8. Tynan, K.; Olsen, A.; Trask, B.; de Jong, P.; Thompson, J.; Zimmermann,
W.; Carrano, A.; Mohrenweiser, H.: Assembly and analysis of cosmid
contigs in the CEA-gene family region of human chromosome 19. Nucleic
Acids Res. 20: 1629-1636, 1992.

CONTRIBUTORS Patti M. Sherman - updated: 12/13/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/2/1992

EDITED terry: 12/21/2012
carol: 10/29/2009
mgross: 2/16/2001
mgross: 2/18/2000
mgross: 12/22/1999
mgross: 12/20/1999
psherman: 12/13/1999
carol: 6/2/1992

601785	TITLE *601785 PHOSPHOMANNOMUTASE 2; PMM2
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The PMM2 gene encodes phosphomannomutase (EC 5.4.2.8), an enzyme
necessary for the synthesis of GDP-mannose.

CLONING

Matthijs et al. (1997) identified phosphomannomutase-1 (PMM1; 601786) by
database searching for human cDNAs with similarity to Candida or yeast
phosphomannomutase. Biochemical studies of PMM1 and phosphomannomutases
from rat and human liver provided evidence for the existence in mammals
of a second phosphomannomutase with different kinetic and antigenic
properties. By database searching for sequences similar to that of PMM1,
Matthijs et al. (1997) identified identified and subsequently cloned a
PMM2 cDNA. The deduced 246-amino acid PMM2 protein shares 66% and 57%
sequence identity with PMM1 and yeast phosphomannomutase, respectively.

MAPPING

Matthijs et al. (1997) mapped the PMM2 gene to 16p13 by Southern blot
analysis of a genomic mapping panel and by hybridization to DNA from
YACs previously assigned to that chromosomal region (D16S406 to
D16S404). Bjursell et al. (1998) achieved refined mapping of the PMM2
gene by analysis of radiation hybrids.

GENE STRUCTURE

Schollen et al. (1998) determined the PMM2 intron/exon structure and
identified 8 exons.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Van Schaftingen and Jaeken (1995) identified a deficiency of
phosphomannomutase activity in patients with carbohydrate-deficient
glycoprotein syndrome type Ia (CDG1A; 212065).

In 16 patients with CDG1A from different geographic origins and with a
documented phosphomannomutase deficiency, Matthijs et al. (1997)
identified 11 different missense mutations in PMM2 (see, e.g.,
601785.0001-601785.0004).

Matthijs et al. (1998) described the results of an exhaustive mutation
analysis of the PMM2 gene in 56 patients with documented PMM deficiency
from different geographic origins. By SSCP analysis and by sequencing,
they identified 23 different missense mutations and a single-basepair
deletion in 99% of the disease chromosomes. The R141H mutation
(601785.0001) was found in 43 of 112 disease alleles. However, this
mutation was never observed in the homozygous state, suggesting that
homozygosity is incompatible with live birth. Homozygous mutations were
found in other patients (D65Y, 601785.0005 and F119L, 601785.0006). One
particular genotype, R141H/D188G (601785.0007), which was prevalent in
Belgium and the Netherlands, was associated with a severe phenotype and
a high mortality. Apart from this, there was only a limited relation
between the genotype and the clinical phenotype.

Kjaergaard et al. (1998) identified 34 mutations on 36 disease
chromosomes in 18 unrelated Danish patients with CDG1. All patients had
less than 15% residual activity of phosphomannomutase. Two mutations
accounted for 88% of all mutations: F119L (601785.0006) and R141H
(601785.0001) were each found in 16 of 36 CDG1 alleles. These 2 new
mutations were found to be in linkage disequilibrium with 2 different
alleles of the marker D16S3020, suggesting that there is 1 ancestral
origin for each mutation. Two new mutations, G117R and D223E, were
identified also. As reported by others, no patient was homozygous for
either of the 2 common mutations. This could be interpreted as
indicating that homozygosity for these mutations is lethal or, on the
other hand, so benign that such patients are not detected.

Kondo et al. (1999) identified 3 missense mutations in the PMM2 gene in
2 unrelated Japanese families with CDG1. The mutations occurred in exons
5 and 8, as have most of the mutations identified in the Caucasian
population.

Kjaergaard et al. (1999) determined the PMM2 genotypes of 22 unrelated
Danish patients with CDG Ia. The largest proportion (18) had the
genotype R141H/F119L. R141H was present in heterozygous state in 1
patient, while F119L was homozygous in 1 patient and heterozygous with
G117R in another. The lack of patients homozygous for R141H was
statistically highly significant. To investigate the effect of PMM2
mutations on phosphomannomutase activity, Kjaergaard et al. (1999)
cloned the cDNA into a vector. Following the introduction of mutations
into the PMM2 cDNA by site-specific mutagenesis, wildtype and mutant
PMM2 cDNAs were expressed in E. coli, and the activity of PMM2 was
determined by an enzymatic assay. Recombinant R141H, G117R, and T237R
(601785.0011) PMM2 had no detectable catalytic activity. F119L PMM2 had
25% of the activity of wildtype. Each of the 22 patients had at least 1
mutation that retained residual PMM2 activity. The results supported the
hypotheses that a genotype conveying residual PMM2 catalytic activity is
required for survival, and that homozygosity for R141H impairs PMM2 to a
degree incompatible with life.

Matthijs et al. (1999) reviewed the molecular basis of CDG Ia. Matthijs
et al. (2000) collated data from 6 research and diagnostic laboratories
involved in searching for PMM2 mutations. In total, they listed 58
different mutations found in 249 patients from 23 countries. Bjursell et
al. (2000) performed a mutation screen on 61 CDG Ia patients, 37 of whom
were from Scandinavian countries. They succeeded in detecting more than
95% of the mutations, all of them missense mutations. Seven were found
only in Scandinavian families. Of the 20 mutations found, 10 had not
previously been reported. The R141H (601785.0001) and F119L
(601785.0006) mutations accounted for 58% of the mutations detected. The
most common genotype was compound heterozygosity for these 2 mutations
(36%). Although 2 patients were homozygous for F119L, no patient was
homozygous for the most common mutation, R141H. Most mutations were
located in exon 5 or exon 8, while no mutation was detected in exon 2.
When the frequency of each mutation was considered, exon 5 comprised 61%
of the mutations. Thus, analysis of exon 5 in these patients enabled
reliable and time-saving first screening in prenatal diagnostic cases.

Grunewald et al. (2001) reported that 9 of 54 patients with CDG Ia had a
rather high residual PMM activity in fibroblasts included in the normal
range (means of controls +/- 2 SD), amounting to 35 to 70% of the mean
control value. The clinical diagnosis of CDG Ia was difficult because 6
of the 9 patients belonged to a subgroup characterized by a phenotype
that is milder than classic CDG Ia. These patients lacked some of the
symptoms that are suggestive for the diagnosis, such as inverted nipples
and abnormal fat deposition, and, as a mean, had higher residual PMM
activity in fibroblasts compared with patients with moderate or severe
manifestations. However, they all showed mild mental retardation,
hypotonia, cerebellar hypoplasia, and strabismus. All of them had an
abnormal serum transferrin pattern and a significantly reduced PMM
activity in leukocytes. Of the 9 patients with mild presentation, 6 were
compound heterozygotes for the C241S mutation (601785.0012), which is
known to reduce PMM activity by only approximately 2-fold. Grunewald et
al. (2001) suggested that intermediate PMM values in fibroblasts may
mask the diagnosis of CDG Ia, which is better accomplished by
measurement of PMM activity in leukocytes and mutation search in the
PMM2 gene.

Vuillaumier-Barrot et al. (2000) studied the activity of mutant proteins
encoded by arg141 to his (R141H; 601785.0001), cys241 to ser (C241S;
601785.0012), cys9 to tyr (C9Y; 601785.0015), leu32 to arg (L32R;
601785.0016), and thr226 to ser (T226S; 601785.0017). They found that
the protein encoded by R141H had no detectable activity, while the
others had increased specific activity (23 to 41% of normal levels). The
authors speculated that this is the reason R141H is not seen in
homozygous state since, in this form, it would most likely be lethal.

Among a total of 55 patients with CDG1A, Westphal et al. (2002) found
that a 911T-C (F304S) polymorphism in the ALG6 gene (604566) was almost
twice as frequent in severely affected patients (0.41) compared to
moderate or mildly affected patients (0.21). Functional expression
studies showed that the F304S allele had a reduced ability to rescue
defective glycosylation of an alg6-deficient strain of S. cerevisiae
during rapid growth. The authors concluded that the presence of the
F304S allele may act as a genetic modifier to exacerbate the clinical
outcome in severely affected CDG1A patients.

Briones et al. (2002) presented their experience with a diagnosis of 26
Spanish patients from 19 families with CDG Ia due to PMM deficiency.
Patients in all but 1 of the families were compound heterozygous for
PMM2 mutations. Eighteen different mutations were detected. In contrast
to other series in which the R141H mutation represents 43 to 53% of the
alleles, only 9 of 36 (25%) of the alleles had this mutation. The common
European F119L mutation was not identified in any of the Spanish
patients but the V44A (601785.0020) and D65Y (601785.0005) mutations
probably originated in the Iberian peninsula, as they have only been
reported in Portuguese and Latin-American patients. Probably because of
this genetic heterogeneity, Spanish patients showed very diverse
phenotypes that are, in general, milder than in other series.

Schollen et al. (2007) described 2 unusual truncating mutations in 2 CDG
Ia patients. One was a deep intronic point mutation (601785.0019), and
the other was an Alu retrotransposition-mediated complex deletion
(601785.0021). Schollen et al. (2007) cautioned that detection of these
mutations stresses the importance of combining PMM2 mutation screening
on genomic DNA with analysis of the transcripts and/or with the
enzymatic analysis of the phosphomannomutase activity, as these types of
mutations would not be easily identified by PCR-based mutation analysis
at the genomic level. Vega et al. (2009) found that the deep intronic
mutation identified by Schollen et al. (2007) activated a pseudoexon
sequence in intron 7. Antisense morpholino oligonucleotides targeted to
the 3- and 5-prime cryptic splice sites rescued the defect and allowed
correctly spliced mRNA to be translated into a functional protein.

Najmabadi et al. (2011) performed homozygosity mapping followed by exon
enrichment and next-generation sequencing in 136 consanguineous families
(over 90% Iranian and less than 10% Turkish or Arabic) segregating
syndromic or nonsyndromic forms of autosomal recessive intellectual
disability. In family 8307998, they identified a homozygous missense
mutation in the PMM2 gene (601785.0023) in 3 sibs with mild intellectual
disability, thin upper lip, flat nasal bridge, and strabismus, who were
diagnosed with glycosylation disorder CDG Ia (212065). The parents, who
were first cousins, were carriers, and they had 5 healthy children.

ANIMAL MODEL

Schneider et al. (2012) generated transgenic mice with homozygous or
compound heterozygous hypomorphic Pmm2 alleles: R137H, which is
analogous to human R141H (601785.0001), and F118L, which is predicted to
lead to mild loss of enzyme activity. Homozygous R137H and compound
heterozygous R137H/F118L mice were embryonic lethal. Homozygosity for
R137H was associated with no residual enzymatic activity, whereas
R137H/F118L mice had about 11% residual activity. Homozygous F118L mice
were clinically similar to wildtype, with 38 to 42% residual PMM2
activity, which was sufficient to prevent pathologic consequences.
Compound heterozygous R137H/F118L embryos showed very poor intrauterine
growth with extensive degradation of multiple organs and evidence of
hypoglycosylation of glycoproteins. Treatment of heterozygous F118L
females with oral mannose in water beginning 1 week prior to mating
resulted in a 2-fold increase of serum mannose concentrations and
rescued the embryonic lethality of compound heterozygous R137H/F118L
offspring, who survived beyond weaning. Compound heterozygous offspring
under treatment showed organ development and glycosylation comparable to
wildtype mice, indicating mannose-mediated normalization of
glycosylation. The phenotypic rescue remained apparent even after
4-month maintenance of the offspring on normal water. The results
revealed an essential role for proper glycosylation during embryogenesis
and suggested that mannose administration to at-risk mothers may reduce
the phenotype of offspring.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, ARG141HIS

In a family in Sicily in which linkage studies indicated mapping of CDG
Ia (212065) to 16p13, Matthijs et al. (1997) found that affected
individuals were compound heterozygous for a 425G-A transition (R141H)
and a 647A-T transversion (N216I; 601785.0002) in the PMM2 gene. Among
18 unrelated Danish patients with CDG Ia, Kjaergaard et al. (1998) found
that this and the F119L mutation (601785.0006) accounted for 88% of all
mutations. Each was found in 16 of 36 PMM2 alleles.

Matthijs et al. (1999) commented on the intriguing observation of the
total lack of patients homozygous for the common R141H mutation. The
residual activity of the in vitro expressed R141H recombinant protein is
almost zero, supporting the inference that homozygosity for this
mutation is lethal early in development. Patients homozygous for the
relatively frequent F119L mutation have been found, and 1 patient
homozygous for the D65Y mutation (601785.0005) has been identified. In
these patients, the residual activity of the deficient enzyme was, in
the words of Matthijs et al. (1999), 'relatively pronounced.'

Schollen et al. (2000) determined the frequency of the R141H mutation in
2 normal populations: in neonates of Dutch origin, 1 in 79 were
carriers, whereas in the Danish population, a carrier frequency of 1 in
60 was found. These figures were clearly in disequilibrium with the
frequency of CDG Ia that had been estimated at 1 in 80,000 and 1 in
40,000 in these populations. Haplotype analysis of 43 patients with the
R141H mutation of different geographic origins indicated that it is an
old mutation in the Caucasian population. Based on the new data, the
disease frequency was calculated at 1 in 20,000 in these populations.
The authors concluded that the disease was probably underdiagnosed.

Vuillaumier-Barrot et al. (2000) identified the R141H mutation in 9 of
22 (41%) chromosomes in French patients with CDG Ia.

In a male infant diagnosed with CDG Ia, Bohles et al. (2001) showed a
pro113-to-leu (P113L) mutation in compound heterozygosity with the
arg141-to-his mutation.

Quelhas et al. (2006) found that the R141H substitution was the most
common mutation among 15 Portuguese patients with CDG1A, accounting for
7 of 26 mutations (26%). The second most common mutation was D65Y
(601785.0005), which accounted for 6 of 26 mutations (23%). Haplotype
analysis indicated a founder effect for the R141H substitution.

.0002
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, ASN216ILE

See 601785.0001 and Matthijs et al. (1997).

Neumann et al. (2003) identified homozygosity for the N216I mutation in
a 16-month-old boy with CDG Ia. In contrast to previously reported
patients, he had postnatal macrosomia and did not have inverted nipples
or abnormal fat pads. His parents, who were consanguineous, were
heterozygous for the mutation. The authors suggested that homozygosity
for this mutation could have a specific phenotype correlation.

.0003
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, VAL129MET

In a family from Sicily in which CDG Ia (212065) showed linkage to
16p13, Matthijs et al. (1997) found that members with CDG Ia were
compound heterozygous for a 385G-A transition (V129M) and a 484C-T
transition (R162W; 601785.0004) in the PMM2 gene.

.0004
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, ARG162TRP

See 601785.0003 and Matthijs et al. (1997).

.0005
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, ASP65TYR

In a mutation screening of 56 patients with CDG Ia (see 212065),
Matthijs et al. (1998) identified 3 alleles (one homozygous and one
compound heterozygous patient) with a G-to-T transversion at nucleotide
193, resulting in an asp65-to-tyr (D65Y) mutation. The compound
heterozygous patient, who died at the age of 4 months due to hepatic
insufficiency, had the R141H mutation (601785.0001) on the other allele.

Quelhas et al. (2006) found that the R141H substitution was the most
common mutation among 15 Portuguese patients with CDG1A, accounting for
7 of 26 mutations (26%). The second most common mutation was D65Y, which
accounted for 6 of 26 mutations (23%). Haplotype analysis indicated a
founder effect of Iberian origin for the D65Y substitution.

.0006
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, PHE119LEU

In a mutation screening of 56 patients with CDG I (see 212065), Matthijs
et al. (1998) identified 18 occurrences of a phe119-to-leu (F119L)
mutation, which resulted from a C-to-A transversion at nucleotide 357.
Among 18 unrelated Danish patients with CDG1, Kjaergaard et al. (1998)
found that this and the R141H mutation (601785.0001) accounted for 88%
of all mutations. Each was found in 16 of 36 CDG1 alleles.

.0007
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, ASP188GLY

In a mutation screening of 56 patients with CDG I (see 212065), Matthijs
et al. (1998) identified 5 occurrences of an asp188-to-gly (D188G)
mutation, all of which were in compound heterozygous state with the
R141H mutation (601785.0001). An A-to-G transition at nucleotide 563
resulted in the D188G substitution.

.0008
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, GLY117ARG

In Danish cases of CDG Ia (212065), Kjaergaard et al. (1998) identified
a G-to-C transversion at nucleotide 349, resulting in a gly117-to-arg
(G117R) substitution. The mutation was present in compound heterozygous
state with the common F119L mutation (601785.0006).

.0009
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, ASP223GLU

In Danish cases of CDG Ia (212065), Kjaergaard et al. (1998) identified
a C-to-G transversion at nucleotide 669, resulting in an asp223-to-glu
(D223E) substitution. The patient was a compound heterozygote, but the
second mutation was not identified.

.0010
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, 357C-A

Bjursell et al. (1998) identified a 357C-A transversion in exon 5 of the
PMM2 gene as the change associated with the frequent 'haplotype A' found
in CDG Ia (212065) patients from western Scandinavia. The mutation
created a restriction site not present in the normal allele which could
be recognized by the restriction enzyme Tru9I.

.0011
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, THR237ARG

In a patient with CDG Ia (212065), Kjaergaard et al. (1999) identified a
thr237-to-arg substitution (T237R) in the PMM2 gene. The patient was a
compound heterozygote for the asp223-to-glu substitution (601785.0009).

.0012
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, CYS241SER

In a review of PMM2 mutations causing CDG Ia (212065), Matthijs et al.
(1999) noted that 4 patients had a 722G-C change in exon 8, resulting in
a cys241-to-ser (C241S) mutation in a nonconserved region in the
C-terminal part of the PMM2 protein. Vuillaumier-Barrot et al. (2000)
determined that this mutation decreases the activity of PMM2 by only
50%. Grunewald et al. (2001) found that the C241S mutation was present
in compound heterozygous state in 6 of 9 patients with a mild form of
CDG Ia.

Vuillaumier-Barrot et al. (2000) identified the C241S mutation in
compound heterozygosity with R141H (601785.0001) in a French patient
with CDG Ia.

.0013
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, ILE132THR

In 3 of 22 chromosomes in French patients with CDG Ia (212065),
Vuillaumier-Barrot et al. (2000) identified a 395T-C transition in exon
5 of the PMM2 gene, resulting in an ile132-to-thr (I132T) substitution.
Two of the patients were compound heterozygous for I132T and R141H
(601785.0001), and the other was compound heterozygous for I132T and
another pathogenic PMM2 mutation.

.0014
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, VAL231MET

In 3 of 22 chromosomes in French patients with CDG Ia (212065),
Vuillaumier-Barrot et al. (2000) identified a 691G-A transition in exon
8 in the PMM2 gene, resulting in a val231-to-met (V231M) substitution.
All patients were compound heterozygous for V231M and R141H
(601785.0001).

.0015
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, CYS9TYR

In a French patient with CDG1A (212065), Vuillaumier-Barrot et al.
(2000) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the PMM2
gene: a 26G-A transition in exon 1 resulting in a cys9-to-tyr (C9Y)
substitution and R141H (601785.0001).

.0016
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, LEU32ARG

In a French patient with CDG Ia (212065), Vuillaumier-Barrot et al.
(2000) identified a 95TA-GC change in exon 2 of the PMM2 gene, resulting
in a leu32-to-arg (L32R) substitution. The second mutant allele was not
identified.

.0017
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, THR226SER

In a French patient with CDG Ia (212065), Vuillaumier-Barrot et al.
(2000) identified compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the PMM2
gene: a 677C-G transversion in exon 8, resulting in a thr226-to-ser
(T226S) substitution, and R141H (601785.0001).

.0018
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, PRO113LEU

In a male infant diagnosed with CDG Ia (212065), Bohles et al. (2001)
identified compound heterozygosity for a pro113-to-leu (P113L) and an
arg141-to-his (R141H; 601785.0001) substitution.

.0019
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, IVS7, C-T

In a patient with CDG Ia (212065), Schollen et al. (2007) detected
compound heterozygosity for a V231M mutation in PMM2 (601785.0014) and a
deep intronic point mutation, notated as 639-15479C-T in the cDNA. The
latter variant activated a cryptic splice site which resulted in
in-frame insertion of a pseudoexon of 123 bp between exons 7 and 8.

Vega et al. (2009) referred to this mutation as 640-15479C-T or
IVS7-15479C-T. In vitro functional expression assays showed that the
mutation activated a pseudoexon sequence in intron 7. Antisense
morpholino oligonucleotides targeted to the 3- and 5-prime cryptic
splice sites rescued the defect and allowed correctly spliced mRNA to be
translated into a functional protein.

.0020
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, VAL44ALA

In a patient with CDG Ia (212065), Schollen et al. (2007) detected
compound heterozygosity for a val44-to-ala (V44A) mutation in PMM2
arising from a 131T-C transition in exon 2, and a large deletion
(601785.0021).

.0021
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, 28-KB DEL

In a patient with CDG Ia (212065), Schollen et al. (2007) found compound
heterozygosity for a missense mutation in the PMM2 gene (601785.0020)
and an Alu retrotransposition-mediated complex deletion of approximately
28 kb encompassing exon 8.

.0022
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, IVS3AS, G-C, -1

In a patient with CDG Ia (212065), Vega et al. (2009) identified
compound heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the PMM2 gene: a G-to-C
transversion in intron 3 (IVS3-1G-C), resulting in the skipping of exons
3 and 4, and the L32R (601785.0016) mutation. Western blot analysis
showed 28% residual protein.

.0023
CONGENITAL DISORDER OF GLYCOSYLATION, TYPE Ia
PMM2, TYR106PHE

In family 8307998, Najmabadi et al. (2011) identified a homozygous
A-to-T transversion in the PMM2 gene at genomic coordinate
Chr:16:8807735 (NCBI36), resulting in a tyr106-to-phe (Y106F)
substitution, in 3 sibs with mild intellectual disability, thin upper
lip, flat nasal bridge, and strabismus, who were diagnosed with
glycosylation disorder CDG Ia (212065). The parents, who were first
cousins, were carriers, and they had 5 healthy children.

REFERENCE 1. Bjursell, C.; Erlandson, A.; Nordling, M.; Nilsson, S.; Wahlstrom,
J.; Stibler, H.; Kristiansson, B.; Martinsson, T.: PMM2 mutation
spectrum, including 10 novel mutations, in a large CDG type 1A family
material with a focus on Scandinavian families. Hum. Mutat. 16:
395-400, 2000.

2. Bjursell, C.; Wahlstrom, J.; Berg, K.; Stibler, H.; Kristiansson,
B.; Matthijs, G.; Martinsson, T.: Detailed mapping of the phosphomannomutase
2 (PMM2) gene and mutation detection enable improved analysis for
Scandinavian CDG type I families. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 6: 603-611,
1998.

3. Bohles, H.; Sewell, A. C.; Gebhardt, B.; Reinecke-Luthge, A.; Kloppel,
G.; Marquardt, T.: Hyperinsulinaemic hypogycaemia: leading symptom
in a patient with congenital disorder of glycosylation Ia (phosphomannomutase
deficiency). J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 24: 858-862, 2001.

4. Briones, P.; Vilaseca, M. A.; Schollen, E.; Ferrer, I.; Maties,
M.; Busquets, C.; Artuch, R.; Gort, L.; Marco, M.; van Schaftingen,
E.; Matthijs, G.; Jaeken, J.; Chabas, A.: Biochemical and molecular
studies in 26 Spanish patients with congenital disorder of glycosylation
type Ia. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 25: 635-646, 2002.

5. Grunewald, S.; Schollen, E.; Van Schaftingen, E.; Jaeken, J.; Matthijs,
G.: High residual activity of PMM2 in patients' fibroblasts: possible
pitfall in the diagnosis of CDG-Ia (phosphomannomutase deficiency). Am.
J. Hum. Genet. 68: 347-354, 2001.

6. Kjaergaard, S.; Skovby, F.; Schwartz, M.: Absence of homozygosity
for predominant mutations in PMM2 in Danish patients with carbohydrate-deficient
glycoprotein syndrome type 1. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 6: 331-336,
1998.

7. Kjaergaard, S.; Skovby, F.; Schwartz, M.: Carbohydrate-deficient
glycoprotein syndrome type 1A: expression and characterisation of
wild type and mutant PMM2 in E. coli. Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 7: 884-888,
1999.

8. Kondo, I.; Mizugishi, K.; Yoneda, Y.; Hashimoto, T.; Kuwajima,
K.; Yuasa, L.; Shigemoto, K.; Kuroda, Y.: Missense mutations in phosphomannomutase
2 gene in two Japanese families with carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein
syndrome type 1. Clin. Genet. 55: 50-54, 1999.

9. Matthijs, G.; Schollen, E.; Bjursell, C.; Erlandson, A.; Freeze,
H.; Imtiaz, F.; Kjaergaard, S.; Martinsson, T.; Schwartz, M.; Seta,
N.; Vuillaumier-Barrot, S.; Westphal, V.; Winchester, B.: Mutations
in PMM2 that cause congenital disorders of glycosylation, type Ia
(CDG-Ia). Hum. Mutat. 16: 386-394, 2000.

10. Matthijs, G.; Schollen, E.; Heykants, L.; Grunewald, S.: Phosphomannomutase
deficiency: the molecular basis of the classical Jaeken syndrome (CDGS
type Ia). Molec. Genet. Metab. 68: 220-226, 1999.

11. Matthijs, G.; Schollen, E.; Pardon, E.; Veiga-Da-Cunha, M.; Jaeken,
J.; Cassiman, J.-J.; Van Schaftingen, E.: Mutations in PMM2, a phosphomannomutase
gene on chromosome 16p13, in carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein type
I syndrome (Jaeken syndrome). Nature Genet. 16: 88-92, 1997. Note:
Erratum: 16: 316 only, 1997.

12. Matthijs, G.; Schollen, E.; Pirard, M.; Budarf, M. L.; Van Schaftingen,
E.; Cassiman, J.-J.: PMM (PMM1), the human homologue of SEC53 or
yeast phosphomannomutase, is localized on chromosome 22q13. Genomics 40:
41-47, 1997.

13. Matthijs, G.; Schollen, E.; Van Schaftingen, E.; Cassiman, J.-J.;
Jaeken, J.: Lack of homozygotes for the most frequent disease allele
in carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type 1A. Am. J. Hum.
Genet. 62: 542-550, 1998.

14. Najmabadi, H.; Hu, H.; Garshasbi, M.; Zemojtel, T.; Abedini, S.
S.; Chen, W.; Hosseini, M.; Behjati, F.; Haas, S.; Jamali, P.; Zecha,
A.; Mohseni, M.; and 33 others: Deep sequencing reveals 50 novel
genes for recessive cognitive disorders. Nature 478: 57-63, 2011.

15. Neumann, L. M.; von Moers, A.; Kunze, J.; Blankenstein, O.; Marquardt,
T.: Congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1a in a macrosomic
16-month-old boy with an atypical phenotype and homozygosity of the
N216I mutation. Europ. J. Pediat. 162: 710-713, 2003.

16. Quelhas, D.; Quental, R.; Vilarinho, L.; Amorim, A.; Azevedo,
L.: Congenital disorder of glycosylation type Ia: searching for the
origin of common mutations in PMM2. Ann. Hum. Genet. 71: 348-353,
2006.

17. Schneider, A.; Thiel, C.; Rindermann, J.; DeRossi, C.; Popovici,
D.; Hoffmann, G. F.; Grone, H.-J.; Korner, C.: Successful prenatal
mannose treatment for congenital disorder of glycosylation-Ia in mice. Nature
Med. 18: 71-73, 2012.

18. Schollen, E.; Keldermans, L.; Foulquier, F.; Briones, P.; Chabas,
A.; Sanchez-Valverde, F.; Adamowicz, M.; Pronicka, E.; Wevers, R.;
Matthijs, G.: Characterization of two unusual truncating PMM2 mutations
in two CDG-Ia patients. Molec. Genet. Metab. 90: 408-413, 2007.

19. Schollen, E.; Kjaergaard, S.; Legius, E.; Schwartz, M.; Matthijs,
G.: Lack of Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for the most prevalent PMM2
mutation in CDG-Ia (congenital disorders of glycosylation type Ia). Europ.
J. Hum. Genet. 8: 367-371, 2000.

20. Schollen, E.; Pardon, E.; Heykants, L.; Renard, J.; Doggett, N.
A.; Callen, D. F.; Cassiman, J. J.; Matthijs, G.: Comparative analysis
of the phosphomannomutase genes PMM1, PMM2 and PMM2-psi: the sequence
variation in the processed pseudogene is a reflection of the mutations
found in the functional gene. Hum. Molec. Genet. 7: 157-164, 1998.

21. Van Schaftingen, E.; Jaeken, J.: Phosphomannomutase deficiency
is a cause of carbohydrate-deficient glycoprotein syndrome type I. FEBS
Lett. 377: 318-320, 1995.

22. Vega, A. I.; Perez-Cerda, C.; Desviat, L. R.; Matthijs, G.; Ugarte,
M.; Perez, B.: Functional analysis of three splicing mutations identified
in the PMM2 gene: toward a new therapy for congenital disorder of
glycosylation type IA. Hum. Mutat. 30: 795-803, 2009.

23. Vuillaumier-Barrot, S.; Hetet, G.; Barnier, A.; Dupre, T.; Cuer,
M.; de Lonlay, P.; Cormier-Daire, V.; Durand, G.; Grandchamp, B.;
Seta, N.: Identification of four novel PMM2 mutations in congenital
disorders of glycosylation (CDG) Ia French patients. J. Med. Genet. 37:
579-580, 2000.

24. Westphal, V.; Kjaergaard, S.; Schollen, E.; Martens, K.; Grunewald,
S.; Schwartz, M.; Matthijs, G.; Freeze, H. H.: A frequent mild mutation
in ALG6 may exacerbate the clinical severity of patients with congenital
disorder of glycosylation Ia (CDG-Ia) caused by phosphomannomutase
deficiency. Hum. Molec. Genet. 11: 599-604, 2002.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 2/15/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 1/6/2012
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 8/18/2009
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 6/22/2007
Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/14/2007
Natalie E. Krasikov - updated: 3/12/2004
Ada Hamosh - updated: 10/2/2003
George E. Tiller - updated: 10/9/2002
Michael J. Wright - updated: 8/7/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/8/2001
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/29/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 11/2/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 2/9/2000
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 1/7/2000
Wilson H. Y. Lo - updated: 8/19/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 3/17/1999
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 10/2/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/7/1998
Victor A. McKusick - updated: 5/30/1997

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 4/30/1997

EDITED carol: 02/23/2012
ckniffin: 2/15/2012
carol: 1/9/2012
terry: 1/6/2012
carol: 10/26/2010
wwang: 9/8/2009
ckniffin: 8/18/2009
carol: 6/26/2007
ckniffin: 6/26/2007
carol: 6/26/2007
ckniffin: 6/22/2007
alopez: 6/22/2007
terry: 6/14/2007
carol: 4/18/2007
carol: 3/23/2004
terry: 3/12/2004
cwells: 10/2/2003
cwells: 10/9/2002
cwells: 8/16/2001
cwells: 8/9/2001
terry: 8/7/2001
mcapotos: 3/20/2001
mcapotos: 3/14/2001
terry: 3/8/2001
mcapotos: 12/19/2000
mcapotos: 12/14/2000
terry: 11/29/2000
mcapotos: 11/16/2000
mcapotos: 11/10/2000
terry: 11/2/2000
mgross: 2/29/2000
carol: 2/17/2000
terry: 2/9/2000
carol: 1/24/2000
terry: 1/7/2000
carol: 8/19/1999
carol: 3/30/1999
terry: 3/17/1999
carol: 10/7/1998
terry: 10/2/1998
dholmes: 7/2/1998
alopez: 5/13/1998
carol: 5/8/1998
terry: 5/7/1998
dholmes: 1/16/1998
mark: 6/4/1997
mark: 6/3/1997
terry: 5/30/1997
mark: 5/16/1997
mark: 4/30/1997

610106	TITLE *610106 DREBRIN-LIKE; DBNL
;;HPK1-INTERACTING PROTEIN, 55-KD; HIP55
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

By yeast 2-hybrid screening of a HeLa cell cDNA library using GLK
(MAP4K3; 604921) as bait, followed by EST database analysis, Ensenat et
al. (1999) cloned DBNL, which they called HIP55. The predicted 430-amino
acid protein has a calculated molecular mass of 48 kD. The N terminus of
HIP55 contains a putative actin-binding domain found in drebrins (see
DBN1; 126660), which are involved in brain development, and the C
terminus contains an SH3 domain. Western blot analysis detected a 55-kD
protein. Northern blot analysis revealed ubiquitous expression of a
2.3-kb transcript, with highest levels in spleen and peripheral blood
leukocytes.

GENE FUNCTION

By yeast 2-hybrid analysis, Ensenat et al. (1999) found that HIP55
interacted with GLK and HPK1 (MAP4K1; 601983). They confirmed the
interaction with HPK1 both in vitro and in vivo. The interaction was
dependent on the SH3 domain of HIP55 and the second proline-rich domain
of HPK1. When cotransfected, HIP55 increased HPK1 kinase activity and
JNK1 (MAPK8; 601158) kinase activity. Ensenat et al. (1999) concluded
that HIP55 binds HPK1 and regulates the JNK1 signaling cascade.

Using confocal microscopy, RNA interference, and overexpression
experiments in mouse and human cell lines, Le Bras et al. (2004) found
that HIP55 did not contribute to early formation of T
cell-antigen-presenting cell (APC) conjugates. However, they identified
HIP55 as a key constituent of the immunologic synapse, regulating T-cell
activation by bridging T-cell receptors and the actin cytoskeleton to
gene activation and endocytic processes.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the DBNL
gene to chromosome 7 (TMAP D7S2634).

ANIMAL MODEL

Han et al. (2005) found that Hip55 -/- mice were viable and fertile, but
they showed decreased body weight and increased frequency of death
within the first 4 weeks after birth. Lymphoid organs of Hip55 -/- mice
showed normal cellularity and T-cell development. However, Hip55 -/- T
cells proliferated at a reduced level, with lower cytokine production
and lower expression of activation markers after T-cell receptor
stimulation.

REFERENCE 1. Ensenat, D.; Yao, Z.; Wang, X. S.; Kori, R.; Zhou, G.; Lee, S.
C.; Tan, T.-H.: A novel Src homology 3 domain-containing adaptor
protein, HIP-55, that interacts with hematopoietic progenitor kinase
1. J. Biol. Chem. 274: 33945-33950, 1999. Note: Erratum: J. Biol.
Chem. 275: 14004 only, 2000.

2. Han, J.; Shui, J.-W.; Zhang, X.; Zheng, B.; Han, S.; Tan, T.-H.
: HIP-55 is important for T-cell proliferation, cytokine production,
and immune responses. Molec. Cell. Biol. 25: 6869-6878, 2005.

3. Le Bras, S.; Foucault, I.; Foussat, A.; Brignone, C.; Acuto, O.;
Deckert, M.: Recruitment of the actin-binding protein HIP-55 to the
immunological synapse regulates T cell receptor signaling and endocytosis. J.
Biol. Chem. 279: 15550-15560, 2004.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 5/10/2006

EDITED terry: 07/03/2012
mgross: 5/10/2006

605146	TITLE *605146 SPHINGOSINE 1-PHOSPHATE RECEPTOR 5; S1PR5
;;ENDOTHELIAL DIFFERENTIATION GENE 8; EDG8;;
S1P RECEPTOR 5; S1P5
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

The lysosphingolipid sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) regulates cell
proliferation, apoptosis, motility, and neurite retraction. Its actions
may be both intracellular as a second messenger and extracellular as a
receptor ligand. S1P and the structurally related lysolipid mediator
lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) signal cells through a set of G
protein-coupled receptors known as EDG receptors. Some EDG receptors
(e.g., EDG1; 601974) are S1P receptors; others (e.g., EDG2; 602282) are
LPA receptors.

NOMENCLATURE

Chun et al. (2002) proposed a nomenclature scheme for the LPA and S1P
receptors that is consistent with the International Union of
Pharmacology (IUP) guidelines. According to these guidelines, a receptor
is to be named with the abbreviation of the natural agonist with the
highest potency, followed by a subscripted arabic number. Thus they
suggested that the designation EDG8 should be changed to S1P5.

CLONING

By searching an EST database for sequences similar to the S1P EDG
receptors, followed by screening a rat brain cDNA library, Im et al.
(2000) isolated a cDNA encoding Edg8. The authors identified a human
sequence (GenBank GENBANK AC011461) from chromosome 19 that is 87%
identical to rat Edg8. The conceptualized 400-amino acid rat Edg8
protein shares 42 to 49% amino acid identity with the human S1P
receptors EDG1, EDG3 (601965), and EDG5 (605111). Binding analysis
confirmed that expression of Edg8 leads to high-affinity binding for
labeled S1P. Northern blot and in situ hybridization analyses detected
widespread expression of a 2.2-kb Edg8 transcript in rat tissues, with
strongest expression in spleen and white matter tracts of the brain.

MAPPING

The International Radiation Hybrid Mapping Consortium mapped the S1PR5
gene to chromosome 19 (TMAP SHGC-53359).

REFERENCE 1. Chun, J.; Goetzl, E. J.; Hla, T.; Igarashi, Y.; Lynch, K. R.; Moolenaar,
W.; Pyne, S.; Tigyi, G.: International Union of Pharmacology. XXXIV.
Lysophospholipid receptor nomenclature. Pharm. Rev. 54: 265-269,
2002.

2. Im, D.-S.; Heise, C. E.; Ancellin, N.; O'Dowd, B. F.; Shei, G.;
Heavens, R. P.; Rigby, M. R.; Hla, T.; Mandala, S.; McAllister, G.;
George, S. R.; Lynch, K. R.: Characterization of a novel sphingosine
1-phosphate receptor, Edg-8. J. Biol. Chem. 275: 14281-14286, 2000.

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 7/14/2000

EDITED alopez: 05/04/2009
wwang: 9/25/2008
carol: 2/29/2008
alopez: 1/21/2004
mgross: 1/2/2001
mgross: 7/14/2000

602045	TITLE *602045 RING FINGER PROTEIN 1; RING1
;;RING1A;;
RNF1
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

The RING finger motif is a specialized zinc finger domain found in many
transcriptional regulatory proteins. This motif was defined by Lovering
et al. (1993) in their characterization of the human RING1 gene.
Lovering et al. (1993) identified and cloned the RING1 gene based on its
location within the human major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class
II region (syntenic to the mouse t complex) on chromosome 6p21.3. The
sequence of RING1 predicts a 377-amino acid polypeptide with a
glycine-rich region and an N-terminal cysteine-rich domain containing a
putative nuclear localization signal. Northern blot analysis showed that
the gene is expressed as a 1.6-kb transcript in a variety of cell lines.

While screening for proteins that interact with the polycomb group (PcG)
protein BMI1 (164831), Satijn et al. (1997) isolated the RING1 protein.

GENE FUNCTION

Lovering et al. (1993) showed that the RING finger domain of RING1 was
able to bind zinc with tetrahedral coordination, as well as DNA.

Satijn et al. (1997) showed that RING1 binds to and colocalizes with BMI
and that RING1 can act as a transcriptional repressor.

Wang et al. (2004) showed that an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, which
they designated Polycomb repressive complex-1-like (PRC1L), specifically
monoubiquitinates histone-2A (H2A; see 142711) at lys119. They found
that PRC1L is composed of several PcG proteins, including RING1, RNF2
(608985), BMI1, and HPH2 (EDR2; 602979). Reduction of RNF2 expression
resulted in a dramatic decrease in the level of ubiquitinated H2A in
HeLa cells. Wang et al. (2004) proposed that H2A ubiquitination is
linked to Polycomb silencing.

De Napoles et al. (2004) found that the PRC1 proteins Mel18 (600346) and
Ring1B (RNF2) were transiently enriched on inactive X chromosomes (Xi)
during early mouse development. Xi was also highly enriched in
ubiquitylated H2A (uH2A), and this occurred coincident with PRC1
recruitment. Analysis of cells lacking Ring1b and Ring1a proteins
demonstrated that Ring1b is required to maintain global uH2A levels in
embryonic stem cells and that Ring1a and Ring1b have an overlapping
function in maintaining uH2A on Xi in differentiated cells.

Yokobayashi et al. (2013) identified gene dosage-dependent roles in
primordial germ cell (PGC) development for Ring1 and Rnf2, 2 central
components of PRC1. Both paralogs are essential for PGC development
between days 10.5 and 11.5 of gestation. Rnf2 is subsequently required
in female PGCs to maintain high levels of Oct4 (164177) and Nanog
(607937) expression and to prevent premature induction of meiotic gene
expression and entry into meiotic prophase. Chemical inhibition of
retinoic acid signaling partially suppresses precocious Oct4
downregulation and Stra8 (609987) activation in Rnf2-deficient female
PGCs. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses showed that Stra8 is a
direct target of PRC1 and PRC2 in PGCs. Yokobayashi et al. (2013)
concluded that their data demonstrated the importance of PRC1 gene
dosage in PGC development and in coordinating the timing of sex
differentiation of female PGCs by antagonizing extrinsic retinoic acid
signaling.

GENE STRUCTURE

Kikuti et al. (1997) reported that the RING1 gene contains 5 exons
spanning 3 kb.

MAPPING

Lovering et al. (1993) mapped the RING1 gene within the MHC class II
region (syntenic to the mouse t complex) on chromosome 6p21.3.

Kikuti et al. (1997) examined YAC clone Y42, which contains the MHC
class II region. This region has a relatively high gene density. They
identified the following human genes (in order from centromere toward
telomere): HSET (603763)--HKE1.5--HKE2--HKE3--RING1--HKE6 (601417)--HKE4
(601416)--RXRB (180246)--COL11A2 (120290)--DPB2.

REFERENCE 1. de Napoles, M.; Mermoud, J. E.; Wakao, R.; Tang, Y. A.; Endoh,
M.; Appanah, R.; Nesterova, T. B.; Silva, J.; Otte, A. P.; Vidal,
M.; Koseki, H.; Brockdorff, N.: Polycomb group proteins Ring1A/B
link ubiquitylation of histone H2A to heritable gene silencing and
X inactivation. Dev. Cell 7: 663-676, 2004.

2. Kikuti, Y. Y.; Tamiya, G.; Ando, A.; Chen, L.; Kimura, M.; Ferreira,
E.; Tsuji, K.; Trowsdale, J.; Inoko, H.: Physical mapping 220 kb
centromeric of the human MHC and DNA sequence analysis of the 43-kb
segment including the RING1, HKE6, and HKE4 genes. Genomics 42:
422-435, 1997.

3. Lovering, R.; Hanson, I. M.; Borden, K. L. B.; Martin, S.; O'Reilly,
N. J.; Evan, G. I.; Rahman, D.; Pappin, D. J. C.; Trowsdale, J.; Freemont,
P. S.: Identification and preliminary characterization of a protein
motif related to the zinc finger. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 2112-2116,
1993.

4. Satijn, D. P. E.; Gunster, M. J.; van der Vlag, J.; Hamer, K. M.;
Schul, W.; Alkema, M. J.; Saurin, A. J.; Freemont, P. S.; van Driel,
R.; Otte, A. P.: RING1 is associated with the polycomb group protein
complex and acts as a transcriptional repressor. Molec. Cell. Biol. 17:
4105-4113, 1997.

5. Wang, H.; Wang, L.; Erdjument-Bromage, H.; Vidal, M.; Tempst, P.;
Jones, R. S.; Zhang, Y.: Role of histone H2A ubiquitination in Polycomb
silencing. Nature 431: 873-878, 2004.

6. Yokobayashi, S.; Liang, C.-Y.; Kohler, H.; Nestorov, P.; Liu, Z.;
Vidal M.; van Lohuizen, M.; Roloff, T. C.; Peters, A. H. F. M.: PRC1
coordinates timing of sexual differentiation of female primordial
germ cells. Nature 495: 236-240, 2013.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/1/2013
Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 12/21/2004
Paul J. Converse - updated: 10/21/2004

CREATED Jennifer P. Macke: 10/10/1997

EDITED alopez: 04/03/2013
terry: 4/1/2013
mgross: 12/21/2004
mgross: 10/21/2004
alopez: 4/22/1999
carol: 6/2/1998
alopez: 10/22/1997
alopez: 10/10/1997

123930	TITLE *123930 CYTOCHROME P450, SUBFAMILY IIB, POLYPEPTIDE 6; CYP2B6
;;CYTOCHROME P450, PHENOBARBITAL-INDUCIBLE
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Miles et al. (1988) reported the isolation of cDNA clones that seemed,
on the basis of their sequence homology to the rat P450IIB1 cDNA, to be
encoded by part of the human P450IIB subfamily. Evidence of alternative
splicing at the CYP2B locus was presented. Yamano et al. (1989)
demonstrated 2 anomalous cDNAs derived from the CYP2B locus on
chromosome 19.

GENE FUNCTION

Santisteban et al. (1988) were unable to demonstrate directly that
either P450IIA (CYP2A; see 122720) or IIB is inducible by phenobarbital
in man. However, they showed that members of both gene subfamilies are
inducible by phenobarbital in the marmoset monkey.

Thum and Borlak (2000) investigated the gene expression of major human
cytochrome P450 genes in various regions of explanted hearts from 6
patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and 1 with transposition of the
arterial trunk and 2 samples of normal heart. mRNA for cytochrome 2B6
was predominantly expressed in the right ventricle. A strong correlation
between tissue-specific gene expression and enzyme activity was found.
Thum and Borlak (2000) concluded that their findings showed that
expression of genes for cytochrome P450 monooxgenases and verapamil
metabolism are found predominantly in the right side of the heart, and
suggested that this observation may explain the lack of efficacy of
certain cardioselective drugs.

GENE STRUCTURE

Mizukami et al. (1983) determined the structure of a rat
phenobarbital-inducible P-450 gene. The gene spans about 14 kb and has 8
introns. The putative transcription start site is located 30 bp upstream
of the ATG initiation codon and a TATA-like sequence is present 27 bp
farther 5-prime-ward. The 3-prime end contains a putative
polyadenylation signal 25 to 26 bp upstream of the poly(A) attachment
site. Mizukami et al. (1983) concluded that the gene they sequenced is
P-450e (Cyp2b2) or a similar gene. Presumably, all P-450 genes have a
similar structure.

MAPPING

Using a cloned cDNA that codes for a human ortholog of the
phenobarbital-inducible cytochrome P450IIB subfamily in rodents,
Santisteban et al. (1988) localized the CYP2B gene(s) to 19cen-q13.3 by
Southern blot hybridization to DNA extracted from a panel of
human-rodent somatic cell hybrids. The CYP2A locus is also located on
chromosome 19. Other members of the P450II family are located on
chromosome 10 (2C) and chromosome 22 (2D).

By Southern blot analysis of human-rodent somatic cell hybrids, Miles et
al. (1988) established the chromosomal localization of the CYP2B gene
subfamily to be 19q12-19q13.2, close to the location of CYP2A. Rat
chromosome 1 shows homology to mouse chromosome 7 and human chromosome
19 and contains the rat P450IIB genes. Southern blot analysis indicated
the distinctness of the CYP2A and CYP2B clusters. Miles et al. (1988)
used RFLPs of these loci to establish the linkage relationships.

CYP2B is in the same NotI fragment as CYP2A (Spurr, 1988). Although
CYP2A and CYP2B map to the same 350-kb pulsed field gel electrophoresis
fragment, recombination between them was observed by Walsh et al.
(1989), suggesting that they are separated by a recombination hotspot.
Yamano et al. (1989) confirmed the assignment to chromosome 19 using the
somatic cell hybrid method. By fluorescence in situ hybridization, Trask
et al. (1993) assigned the CYP2B gene to 19q13.2.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

Efavirenz, an effective antiretroviral agent used in the treatment of
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV; see 609423) infection, is associated
with central nervous system side (CNS) effects (see 614546). Population
differences in pharmacokinetics and treatment response to the drug are
known. Haas et al. (2004) examined associations between CNS side effects
and efavirenz plasma concentration-time profiles and polymorphisms in
several genes, including CYP2B6, in 157 American HIV-infected patients.
They found that homozygosity for a nonsynonymous CYP2B6 SNP, 516G-T
(dbSNP rs3745274; 123930.0001), was present in 20% of African Americans
compared with only 3% of European Americans and was associated with
higher efavirenz exposure in plasma (P less than 0.0001). The median
24-hour area under the curve of efavirenz was about 3-fold higher in
516T homozygotes than in 516G homozygotes, and was intermediate in 516GT
heterozygotes, regardless of ethnicity, suggesting a gene dosage effect.
Among all patients, CNS side effects at week 1 were associated with 516T
(P = 0.036). There were no significant immunologic or virologic
differences for polymorphisms in any of the genes studied. Haas et al.
(2004) concluded that interindividual differences in drug metabolism
may, in part, explain susceptibility to efavirenz CNS side effects.

Blievernicht et al. (2007) used multiplex PCR and MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometry to genotype 15 SNPs of CYP2B6.

Watanabe et al. (2010) expressed wildtype CYP2B6 and 26 CYP2B6 variants
in COS-7 cells and assessed kinetic parameters against 2 substrates,
selegiline and 7-ethoxy-4-trifluoromethylcoumarin (7-EFC). They found
that 2 variants, CYP2B6.10 and CYP2B6.14, had significantly lower
Vmax/Km values for selegiline N-demethylation compared with wildtype
CYP2B6. The kinetic parameters for 9 other variants could not be
determined because they were inactive in the deethylation of 7-EFC and
the N-demethylation/N-depropaglyation of selegiline.

POPULATION GENETICS

By genotyping 100 healthy Mongolians, Davaalkham et al. (2009) found
that 7% of Mongolians were homozygous for the T allele of 516G-T,
whereas 64% were homozygous for the G allele. They noted that the
overall CYP2B6 allele distribution was comparable to that in Japanese,
Korean, and Han Chinese populations.

ANIMAL MODEL

Paolini et al. (1999) found significant increases in the
carcinogen-metabolizing enzymes CYP1A1 (108330), CYP1A2 (124060), CYP3A
(124010), CYP2B, and CYP2A in the lungs of rats supplemented with high
doses of beta-carotene. The authors suggested that correspondingly high
levels of CYPs in humans would predispose an individual to cancer risk
from the widely bioactivated tobacco-smoke procarcinogens, thus
explaining the cocarcinogenic effect of beta-carotene in smokers.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
EFAVIRENZ, POOR METABOLISM OF
EFAVIRENZ CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM TOXICITY, SUSCEPTIBILITY TO, INCLUDED
CYP2B6, GLN172HIS (dbSNP rs3745274)

Haas et al. (2004) studied 157 American HIV-infected patients and found
that homozygosity for a nonsynonymous SNP in CYP2B6, 516G-T (dbSNP
rs3745274), which results in a gln172-to-his (Q172H) substitution, was
present in 20% of African Americans compared with only 3% of European
Americans and was associated with higher efavirenz exposure in plasma (P
less than 0.0001). The median 24-hour area under the curve of efavirenz
was about 3-fold higher in 516T homozygotes than in 516G homozygotes,
and was intermediate in 516GT heterozygotes, regardless of ethnicity,
suggesting a gene dosage effect. Among all patients, CNS side effects at
week 1 were associated with 516T (P = 0.036). Higher efavirenz
concentrations had no effect on HIV viral load.

Carr et al. (2010) determined plasma efavirenz concentrations in 219
HIV-positive Chilean patients and identified 11 CYP2B6 SNPs that were
significantly associated with drug concentrations. Of these, only 516G-T
(P = 5.6 x 10(-20)) was exonic. However, a composite model in which
516G-T was combined 2 other SNPs was more strongly associated with
efavirenz plasma concentrations than 516G-T alone.

Elens et al. (2010) studied 50 HIV-infected patients from Belgium and
confirmed that minimum trough plasma level concentrations of efavirenz
were associated with CYP2B6 allelic status. They also found that
cell-associated concentrations of efavirenz were associated with CYP2B6
516G-T. Elens et al. (2010) concluded that knowledge of CYP2B6 genetic
status should be taken into account for efavirenz treatment.

ADDITIONAL REFERENCES Cressey and Lallemant (2007)
REFERENCE 1. Blievernicht, J. K.; Schaeffeler, E.; Klein, K.; Eichelbaum, M.;
Schwab, M.; Zanger, U. M.: MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry for multiplex
genotyping of CYP2B6 single-nucleotide polymorphisms. Clin. Chem. 53:
24-33, 2007.

2. Carr, D. F.; la Porte, C. J. L.; Pirmohamed, M.; Owen, A.; Cortes,
C. P.: Haplotype structure of CYP2B6 and association with plasma
efavirenz concentrations in a Chilean HIV cohort. J. Antimicrob.
Chemother. 65: 1889-1893, 2010.

3. Cressey, T. R.; Lallemant, M.: Pharmacogenetics of antiretroviral
drugs for the treatment of HIV-infected patients: an update. Infect.
Genet. Evol. 7: 333-342, 2007.

4. Davaalkham, J.; Hayashida, T.; Tsuchiya, K.; Gatanaga, H.; Nyamkhuu,
D.; Oka, S.: Allele and genotype frequencies of cytochrome P450 2B6
gene in a Mongolian population. Drug Metab. Dispos. 37: 1991-1993,
2009.

5. Elens, L.; Vandercam, B.; Yombi, J.-C.; Lison, D.; Wallemacq, P.;
Haufroid, V.: Influence of host genetic factors on efavirenz plasma
and intracellular pharmacokinetics in HIV-1-infected patients. Pharmacogenomics 11:
1223-1234, 2010.

6. Haas, D. W.; Ribaudo, H. J.; Kim, R. B.; Tierney, C.; Wilkinson,
G. R.; Gulick, R. M.; Clifford, D. B.; Hulgan, T.; Marzolini, C.;
Acosta, E. P.: Pharmacogenetics of efavirenz and central nervous
system side effects: an Adult AIDS Clinical Trials Group study. AIDS 18:
2391-2400, 2004.

7. Miles, J. S.; Spurr, N. K.; Gough, A. C.; Jowett, T.; McLaren,
A. W.; Brook, J. D.; Wolf, C. R.: A novel human cytochrome P450 gene
(P450IIB): chromosomal localization and evidence for alternative splicing. Nucleic
Acids Res. 16: 5783-5795, 1988.

8. Mizukami, Y.; Sogawa, K.; Suwa, Y.; Muramatsu, M.; Fujii-Kuriyama,
Y.: Gene structure of a phenobarbital-inducible cytochrome P-450
in rat liver. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 80: 3958-3962, 1983.

9. Paolini, M.; Cantelli-Forti, G.; Perocco, P.; Pedulli, G. F.; Abdel-Rahman,
S. Z.; Legator, M. S.: Co-carcinogenic effect of beta-carotene. (Letter) Nature 398:
760-761, 1999.

10. Santisteban, I.; Povey, S.; Shephard, E. A.; Phillips, I. R.:
The major phenobarbital-inducible cytochrome P-450 gene subfamily
(P450IIB) mapped to the long arm of human chromosome 19. Ann. Hum.
Genet. 52: 129-135, 1988.

11. Spurr, N.: Personal Communication. London, England  10/25/1988.

12. Thum, T.; Borlak, J.: Gene expression in distinct regions of
the heart. Lancet 355: 979-983, 2000.

13. Trask, B.; Fertitta, A.; Christensen, M.; Youngblom, J.; Bergmann,
A.; Copeland, A.; de Jong, P.; Mohrenweiser, H.; Olsen, A.; Carrano,
A.; Tynan, K.: Fluorescence in situ hybridization mapping of human
chromosome 19: cytogenetic band location of 540 cosmids and 70 genes
or DNA markers. Genomics 15: 133-145, 1993.

14. Walsh, K. V.; Harley, H. G.; Rundle, S. A.; Brook, J. D.; Miles,
J. S.; Wolf, C. R.; Shaw, D. J.; Harper, P. S.: The linkage relationship
of the loci CYP2A and CYP2B. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 51:
1102, 1989.

15. Watanabe, T.; Sakuyama, K.; Sasaki, T.; Ishii, Y.; Ishikawa, M.;
Hirasawa, N.; Hiratsuka, M.: Functional characterization of 26 CYP2B6
allelic variants (CYP2B6.2-CYP2B6.28, except CYP2B6.22). Pharmacogenet.
Genomics 20: 459-462, 2010.

16. Yamano, S.; Nhamburo, P. T.; Aoyama, T.; Meyer, U. A.; Inaba,
T.; Kalow, W.; Gelboin, H. V.; McBride, O. W.; Gonzalez, F. J.: cDNA
cloning and sequence and cDNA-directed expression of human P450 IIB1:
identification of a normal and two variant cDNAs derived from the
CYP2B locus on chromosome 19 and differential expression of the IIB
mRNAs in human liver. Biochemistry 28: 7340-7348, 1989.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 6/14/2012
Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/13/2011
Ada Hamosh - updated: 5/6/1999

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 9/15/1988

EDITED carol: 02/26/2013
mgross: 6/19/2012
terry: 6/14/2012
mgross: 3/23/2012
mgross: 3/22/2012
terry: 5/13/2011
mgross: 8/21/2003
mgross: 8/20/2003
alopez: 6/15/2000
alopez: 5/6/1999
terry: 5/24/1996
warfield: 4/8/1994
carol: 2/11/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992
carol: 1/31/1991
carol: 7/6/1990
supermim: 3/20/1990

607359	TITLE *607359 KIAA1967 GENE; KIAA1967
;;DELETED IN BREAST CANCER 1; DBC1
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

KIAA1967, or DBC1, regulates the deacetylase SIRT1 (604479) (Kim et al.,
2008; Zhao et al., 2008). It is also a subunit of a protein complex that
regulates alternative mRNA splicing (Close et al., 2012).

CLONING

By randomly sequencing clones obtained from a fetal brain cDNA library,
Nagase et al. (2001) cloned DBC1, which they called KIAA1967. The
deduced protein contains 818 amino acids. RT-PCR followed by ELISA
revealed moderate expression in all tissues and brain regions tested,
with highest expression in liver.

Hamaguchi et al. (2002) identified DBC1 near a region of chromosome 8p21
that is deleted in breast cancers (114480). RT-PCR revealed expression
of DBC1 in all normal breast, lung, placenta, and brain tissue samples
tested, and in 84 to 100% of neoplastic breast, lung, colon, and other
tissues tested.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Hamaguchi et al. (2002) mapped the DBC1
gene to chromosome 8p21.

GENE FUNCTION

Kim et al. (2008) demonstrated that DBC1, initially cloned from a region
on chromosome 8p21 homozygously deleted in breast cancers, forms a
stable complex with SIRT1 (604479). DBC1 directly interacted with SIRT1
and inhibited SIRT1 activity in vitro and in vivo. Downregulation of
DBC1 expression potentiated SIRT1-dependent inhibition of apoptosis
induced by genotoxic stress.

Zhao et al. (2008) independently showed that DBC1 acts as a native
inhibitor of SIRT1 in human cells. DCB1-mediated repression of SIRT1 led
to increasing levels of p53 (191170) acetylation and upregulation of
p53-mediated function. In contrast, depletion of endogenous DBC1 by RNA
interference (RNAi) stimulated SIRT1-mediated deacetylation of p53 and
inhibited p53-dependent apoptosis. Notably, these effects could be
reversed in cells by concomitant knockdown of endogenous SIRT1. Zhao et
al. (2008) concluded that DBC1 promotes p53-mediated apoptosis through
specific inhibition of SIRT1.

Close et al. (2012) identified ZIRD (ZNF326; 614601) and DBC1 as
subunits of an approximately 800-kD protein complex that they named the
ZIRD-DBC1 (DBIRD) complex. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis of transfected
HEK293 cells revealed that ZIRD and DBC1 interacted directly. The 2
proteins also interacted directly with RNA polymerase II (see POLR2A;
180660) and with mRNPs, although the interaction with mRNPs depended
upon the presence of RNA. Depletion of ZIRD via RNAi led to increased
exon inclusion in more than 2,800 cases, whereas exon exclusion was
observed in only 390 cases. Depletion of DBC1 led to exon inclusion in
796 cases, most of which were also observed following ZIRD depletion.
The effect of ZIRD or DBC1 depletion occurred at the level of
alternative splicing. RNA immunoprecipitation analysis confirmed that
the DBIRD complex bound to relevant exons in mRNAs from 7 tested genes.
The exons affected by DBIRD tended to be AT rich. Depletion of either
DBC1 or ZIRD slowed the rate of transcript elongation and RNA polymerase
II density. Close et al. (2012) concluded that the DBIRD complex affects
the efficiency of splicing, possibly by facilitating transcript
elongation across AT-rich regions and favoring exon inclusion.

REFERENCE 1. Close, P.; East, P.; Dirac-Svejstrup, A. B.; Hartmann, H.; Heron,
M.; Maslen, S.; Chariot, A.; Soding, J.; Skehel, M.; Svejstrup, J.
Q.: DBIRD complex integrates alternative mRNA splicing with RNA polymerase
II transcript elongation. Nature 484: 386-389, 2012.

2. Hamaguchi, M.; Meth, J. L.; von Klitzing, C.; Wei, W.; Esposito,
D.; Rodgers, L.; Walsh, T.; Welcsh, P.; King, M.-C.; Wigler, M. H.
: DBC2, a candidate for a tumor suppressor gene involved in breast
cancer. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 99: 13647-13652, 2002.

3. Kim, J.-E.; Chen, J.; Lou, Z.: DBC1 is a negative regulator of
SIRT1. Nature 451: 583-586, 2008.

4. Nagase, T.; Kikuno, R.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the coding sequences
of unidentified human genes. XXII. The complete sequences of 50 new
cDNA clones which code for large proteins. DNA Res. 8: 319-327,
2001.

5. Zhao, W.; Kruse, J.-P.; Tang, Y.; Jung, S. Y.; Qin, J.; Gu, W.
: Negative regulation of the deacetylase SIRT1 by DBC1. Nature 451:
587-590, 2008.

CONTRIBUTORS Patricia A. Hartz - updated: 4/26/2012
Ada Hamosh - updated: 4/4/2008
George E. Tiller - updated: 2/7/2008

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 11/18/2002

EDITED mgross: 11/30/2012
mgross: 4/27/2012
terry: 4/26/2012
alopez: 4/14/2008
terry: 4/4/2008
wwang: 2/14/2008
terry: 2/7/2008
mgross: 11/18/2002

600362	TITLE *600362 FLIGHTLESS I, DROSOPHILA, HOMOLOG OF; FLII
;;FLI
DESCRIPTION The Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS; 182290) is thought to be a contiguous
gene deletion syndrome related to deletion of 17p11.2. The spectrum of
clinical findings includes short stature, brachydactyly, developmental
delay, dysmorphic features, sleep disturbances, and behavioral problems.
Chen et al. (1995) demonstrated the first gene that mapped to the
deleted region. Campbell et al. (1993) cloned and characterized cDNAs
for the Drosophila melanogaster flightless I gene (FliI) and of
homologous cDNAs from Caenorhabditis elegans and from humans. The amino
acid sequence deduced from the FLI cDNA has 52% similarity to that of
the human gelsolin (137350) protein and also has an N-terminal
leucine-rich domain with 16 consecutive leucine-rich repeats. Campbell
et al. (1997) stated that the FLII gene encodes a predicted 1,269-amino
acid protein. Northern blot analysis revealed FLII expression as an
approximately 4.4-kb mRNA in all tissues tested, with strongest
expression in skeletal muscle.

GENE STRUCTURE

Campbell et al. (1997) stated that the FLII gene contains 30 exons and
spans 14 kb. In both mouse and human, the FLII gene is adjacent to LLGL1
(600966), and the 3-prime ends of the 2 transcripts overlap. The overlap
region contains poly(A) signals for both genes and is highly conserved
between human and mouse.

MAPPING

Chen et al. (1995) demonstrated that the human FLI homolog maps within
the SMS critical region on 17p11.2. Campbell et al. (2002) noted that
the mouse Flii gene maps to chromosome 11 with maintained synteny to a
portion of the SMS critical region.

CYTOGENETICS

By Southern blot analysis of somatic cell hybrids and/or fluorescence in
situ hybridization analysis of lymphoblastoid cell lines from 12
unrelated SMS patients, Chen et al. (1995) demonstrated the deletion of
1 copy of FLI in all.

ANIMAL MODEL

Campbell et al. (2002) constructed a transgenic mouse carrying the
complete human FLII gene. FLII rescued Flii -/- mice from early,
pregastrulation, embryonic death and restored normal development to
these mice.

REFERENCE 1. Campbell, H. D.; Fountain, S.; McLennan, I. S.; Berven, L. A.;
Crouch, M. F.; Davy, D. A.; Hooper, J. A.; Waterford, K.; Chen, K.-S.;
Lupski, J. R.; Ledermann, B.; Young, I. G.; Matthaei, K. I.: Fliih,
a gelsolin-related cytoskeletal regulator essential for early mammalian
embryonic development. Molec. Cell. Biol. 22: 3518-3526, 2002.

2. Campbell, H. D.; Fountain, S.; Young, I. G.; Claudianos, C.; Hoheisel,
J. D.; Chen, K.-S.; Lupski, J. R.: Genomic structure, evolution,
and expression of human FLII, a gelsolin and leucine-rich-repeat family
member: overlap with LLGL. Genomics 42: 46-54, 1997.

3. Campbell, H. D.; Schimansky, T.; Claudianos, C.; Ozsarac, N.; Kasprzak,
A. B.; Cotsell, J. N.; Young, I. G.; de Couet, H. G.; Gabor Miklos,
G. L.: The Drosophila melanogaster flightless-I gene involved in
gastrulation and muscle degeneration encodes gelsolin-like and leucine-rich
repeat domains and is conserved in Caenorhabditis elegans and humans. Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. 90: 11386-11390, 1993.

4. Chen, K.-S.; Gunaratne, P. H.; Hoheisel, J. D.; Young, I. G.; Gabor
Miklos, G. L.; Greenberg, F.; Shaffer, L. G.; Campbell, H. D.; Lupski,
J. R.: The human homologue of the Drosophila melanogaster flightless-I
gene (flil) maps within the Smith-Magenis microdeletion critical region
in 17p11.2. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 56: 175-182, 1995.

CONTRIBUTORS Paul J. Converse - updated: 5/24/2002
Rebekah S. Rasooly - updated: 9/30/1998

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 2/1/1995

EDITED mgross: 05/24/2002
mgross: 5/24/2002
carol: 2/11/1999
alopez: 9/30/1998
mark: 10/14/1997
carol: 2/1/1995

613879	TITLE *613879 THYROTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE; TRH
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) is a tripeptide (glu-his-pro-NH2)
hormone that is primarily produced in the paraventricular nucleus of the
hypothalamus and represents the most proximal member of the
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) axis. The major recognized function
of TRH is the maintenance of thyroid hormone homeostasis via regulation
of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH; 188540) secretion. TRH also
regulates the release of other hormones, such as prolactin (176760),
growth hormone (139250), vasopressin (192340), and insulin (176730). TRH
is also present in many brain loci outside of the hypothalamus and has
been found in several nonneuronal tissues such as gastrointestinal
tract, heart, and reproductive organs (summary by Gaspar et al., 2010).

CLONING

Yamada et al. (1990) reported that the predicted human prepro-TRH has
242 amino acids.

GENE STRUCTURE

Yamada et al. (1990) reported that the transcriptional unit of
prepro-TRH is 3.3 kb long, with 3 exons interrupted by 2 introns of
approximately 1,050 and 650 basepairs, respectively.

MAPPING

Using human/Chinese hamster ovary somatic cell hybrids analyzed by
Southern hybridization, Yamada et al. (1991) assigned the prepro-TRH
gene to chromosome 3. By fluorescence in situ hybridization to metaphase
chromosomes, Yamada et al. (1999) mapped the TRH gene to chromosome
3q13.3-q21.

Roller and Camper (1995) mapped the mouse homolog to chromosome 6.

GENE FUNCTION

Gaspar et al. (2010) reported that the epithelium of normal human scalp
hair follicles expresses not only TRH receptors (see 188545) but TRH
itself at the gene and protein levels. Stimulation of microdissected,
organ-cultured hair follicles with TRH promoted hair shaft elongation,
prolonged the hair cycle growth phase (anagen), and antagonized its
termination by TGFB2 (190220). It also increased proliferation and
inhibited apoptosis of hair matrix keratinocytes.

REFERENCE 1. Gaspar, E.; Hardenbicker, C.; Bodo, E.; Wenzel, B.; Ramot, Y.;
Funk, W.; Kromminga, A.; Paus, R.: Thyrotropin-releasing hormone
(TRH): a new player in human hair-growth control. FASEB J. 24: 393-403,
2010.

2. Roller, M. L.; Camper, S. A.: Localization of the thyrotropin-releasing
hormone gene, Trh, on mouse chromosome 6. Mammalian Genome 6: 443-444,
1995.

3. Yamada, M.; Radovick, S.; Wondisford, F. E.; Nakayama, Y.; Weintraub,
B. D.; Wilber, J. F.: Cloning and structure of human genomic DNA
and hypothalamic cDNA encoding human preprothyrotropin-releasing hormone. Molec.
Endocr. 4: 551-556, 1990.

4. Yamada, M.; Satoh, T.; Monden, T.; Mori, M.: Assignment of the
thyrotropin-releasing hormone gene (TRH) to human chromosome 3q13.3-q21
by in situ hybridization. Cytogenet. Cell Genet. 87: 275 only, 1999.

5. Yamada, M.; Wondisford, F. E.; Radovick, S.; Nakayama, Y.; Weintraub,
B. D.; Wilber, J. F.: Assignment of human preprothyrotropin-releasing
hormone (TRH) gene to chromosome 3. Somat. Cell Molec. Genet. 17:
97-100, 1991.

CREATED Anne M. Stumpf: 4/7/2011

EDITED alopez: 04/08/2011

610974	TITLE *610974 ZINC FINGER PROTEIN 521; ZNF521
;;EARLY HEMATOPOIETIC ZINC FINGER; EHZF;;
EVI3, MOUSE, HOMOLOG OF
DESCRIPTION 
CLONING

Using representational differential analysis to identify transcripts
expressed in CD34 (142230)-positive hematopoietic progenitors and not in
mature peripheral blood cells, Bond et al. (2004) cloned ZNF521, which
they called EHZF. The deduced 1311-amino acid protein contains a
negatively charged 6-amino acid motif in the N-terminal region followed
by 30 C2H2 Kruppel-type zinc fingers. ZNF521 shares 96% identity with
the mouse ortholog and 63.5% homology with OAZ (ZNF423; 604557).
Northern blot analysis of human tissues detected high expression in
brain and spleen, moderate expression in heart, placenta, lung, liver,
skeletal muscle, kidney, lymph, thymus, and fetal liver, and low
expression in pancreas and bone marrow with no expression in peripheral
blood cells. RT-PCR showed high expression in several hematopoietic cell
lines but not in normal human B or T cells. Significant levels were also
detected in about half of acute myelogenous leukemias examined.

GENE FUNCTION

By Northern blot analysis, Bond et al. (2004) showed that expression of
ZNF521 was high in CD34-positive hematopoietic progenitor cells, and its
expression decreased following cytokine-induced differentiation. In
response to BMP2 (112261) or BMP4 (112262), ZNF521 complexed SMAD1
(601595) and SMAD4 (600993) and bound to and enhanced transcriptional
activity of a BMP-responsive element. ZNF521 inhibited transcriptional
activity of early B-cell factor (EBF; 164343), a transcription actor
essential for specification of B-cell lineage.

Kamiya et al. (2011) showed that zinc finger nuclear protein Zfp521 is
essential and sufficient for driving the intrinsic neural
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. In the absence of
the neural differentiation inhibitor Bmp4, strong Zfp521 expression is
intrinsically induced in differentiating ES cells. Forced expression of
Zfp521 enables the neural conversion of ES cells even in the presence of
BMP4. Conversely, in differentiation culture, Zfp521-depleted ES cells
do not undergo neural conversion but tend to halt at the epiblast state.
Zfp521 directly activates early neural genes by working with the
coactivator p300 (602700). Thus, Kamiya et al. (2011) concluded that the
transition of ES cell differentiation from the epiblast state into
neuroectodermal progenitors specifically depends on the cell-intrinsic
expression and activator function of Zfp521.

MAPPING

By genomic sequence analysis, Bond et al. (2004) mapped the ZN521 gene
to chromosome 18q11.2.

REFERENCE 1. Bond, H. M.; Mesuraca, M.; Carbone, E.; Bonelli, P.; Agosti, V.;
Amodio, N.; De Rosa, G.; Di Nicola, M.; Gianni, A. M.; Moore, M. A.
S.; Hata, A.; Grieco, M.; Morrone, G.; Venuta, S.: Early hematopoietic
zinc finger protein (EHZF), the human homolog to mouse Evi3, is highly
expressed in primitive human hematopoietic cells. Blood 103: 2062-2070,
2004.

2. Kamiya, D.; Banno, S.; Sasai, N.; Ohgushi, M.; Inomata, H.; Watanabe,
K.; Kawada, M.; Yakura, R.; Kiyonari, H.; Nakao, K.; Jakt, L. M.;
Nishikawa, S.; Sasai, Y.: Intrinsic transition of embryonic stem-cell
differentiation into neural progenitors. Nature 470: 503-509, 2011.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/7/2011

CREATED Patricia A. Hartz: 4/25/2007

EDITED alopez: 06/08/2011
terry: 6/7/2011
wwang: 4/25/2007

104170	TITLE *104170 N-ACETYL-ALPHA-D-GALACTOSAMINIDASE; NAGA
;;ALPHA-GALACTOSIDASE B; GALB
DESCRIPTION 
DESCRIPTION

Alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase (EC 3.2.1.49) is a lysosomal
glycohydrolase that cleaves alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminyl moieties from
glycoconjugates.

CLONING

Wang et al. (1990) isolated a full-length 2.2-kb NAGA cDNA and a genomic
cosmid clone containing the entire NAGA gene from a human fibroblast
cDNA library. The cDNA encodes a 411-amino acid protein with a
17-residue signal peptide and 6 putative N-glycosylation sites. Northern
blot analysis detected 2 mRNA transcripts of 3.6 and 2.2 kb. Sequence
analysis revealed striking similarities between the NAGA gene and exons
1-6 of the alpha-galactosidase A gene (GLA; 300644), suggesting that the
2 genes evolved by duplication and divergence from a common ancestral
locus. Wang and Desnick (1991) also pointed to remarkable amino acid
identity between the NAGA and GLA genes.

Wang et al. (1998) isolated the mouse Naga cDNA from a fibroblast cDNA
library and found that the deduced human and mouse proteins share 81.9%
sequence identity.

GENE STRUCTURE

Wang and Desnick (1991) determined that the NAGA gene contains 9 exons.

MAPPING

De Groot et al. (1978) assigned the human
N-acetyl-alpha-D-galactosaminidase gene to chromosome 22 by human-rodent
somatic cell hybridization. The authors suggested that 'alpha-NAGA' was
a more appropriate designation for this enzyme than alpha-galactosidase
B.

In human-rodent cell hybrids, Geurts van Kessel et al. (1979, 1980)
studied chronic myeloid leukemia cells to determine the site of the
break on 22q relative to markers assigned to chromosomes 22 and 9.
Alpha-NAGA remained with the Ph-1 chromosome, whereas the aconitase gene
(ACO2; 100850) went with chromosome 9. Alpha-NAGA was located to band
22q11 and ACO2 was located between it and 22qter.

MOLECULAR GENETICS

In the first described cases of type I Schindler disease (609241) (van
Diggelen et al., 1987, 1988), Wang et al. (1990) identified a homozygous
mutation in the NAGA gene (104170.0001).

In a Japanese woman with Kanzaki disease (609242) reported by Kanzaki et
al. (1989), Wang et al. (1990, 1994) identified a homozygous mutation in
the NAGA gene (104170.0002).

ANIMAL MODEL

Wang et al. (1994) generated a mouse model of Schindler disease by
targeted disruption of the Naga gene. Naga-null mice appeared clinically
normal, survived into adulthood, and were fertile. Consistent with the
human disease, the mice had no Naga activity and showed lysosomal
pathology, including vacuolated peripheral lymphocytes.

Desnick and Schindler (2001) reported that Naga-null mice developed
widespread lysosomal storage of abnormal material in the central nervous
system and other organs, as well as focal axonal swellings or spheroids
in the brain and spinal cord.

ALLELIC VARIANT .0001
SCHINDLER DISEASE, TYPE I
NAGA, GLU325LYS

In the 2 German boys first described with Schindler disease (609241)
(van Diggelen et al., 1987, 1988), Wang et al. (1990) identified a
homozygous 973G-A transition in exon 8 of the NAGA gene, resulting in a
glu325-to-lys (E325K) substitution. Keulemans et al. (1996) identified a
distant affected relative of the 2 boys who had the E325K homozygous
mutation. The boys had approximately 1% residual NAGA activity.

Bakker et al. (2001) reported homozygosity for the E325K mutation in a
3-year-old Moroccan boy with alpha-NAGA deficiency. He was born of
consanguineous parents. The proband and his 7-year-old healthy brother
had undetectable alpha-NAGA activity in leukocytes and a profound
deficiency in fibroblasts. The parents had alpha-NAGA activity
consistent with heterozygosity. Mutation analysis revealed homozygosity
for the E325K mutation in the proband and his healthy brother, whereas a
third sib and both parents were heterozygous. The family demonstrated
the extreme clinical heterogeneity of alpha-NAGA deficiency, as the
homozygous brother at the age of 7 years showed no clinical or
neurologic symptoms.

.0002
KANZAKI DISEASE
NAGA, ARG329TRP

In a Japanese woman with disseminated angiokeratoma (609242) reported by
Kanzaki et al. (1989), Wang et al. (1990, 1994) identified a homozygous
985C-T transition in the NAGA gene, resulting in an arg329-to-trp
(R329W) substitution. The base substitution was confirmed by
hybridization of PCR-amplified genomic DNA from family members with
allele-specific oligonucleotides. Wang et al. (1994) showed that in
transiently expressed COS-1 cells, both the infantile-onset E325K
(104170.0001) and the adult-onset R329W precursors were processed to the
mature form; however, the E325K mutant polypeptide was more rapidly
degraded than the R329W subunit, thereby providing a basis for the
distinctly different infantile- and adult-onset phenotypes.

.0003
KANZAKI DISEASE
NAGA, GLU193TER

Keulemans et al. (1996) showed by PCR and sequence analysis that the
Spanish brother and sister with manifestations of Kanzaki disease
(609242) described by Chabas et al. (1994) were homozygous for a 5371G-T
transversion in exon 5 of the NAGA gene (numbering according to Yamauchi
et al., 1990), resulting in a glu193-to-ter (E193X) substitution,
premature termination, and complete loss of the NAGA protein.

.0004
SCHINDLER DISEASE, TYPE III
NAGA, SER160CYS

In a Dutch girl with type III NAGA deficiency (609241) reported by de
Jong et al. (1994), Keulemans et al. (1996) identified compound
heterozygosity for 2 mutations in the NAGA gene: E325K (104170.0001) and
a 4969C-G transversion in exon 4 (numbering according to Yamauchi et
al., 1990), resulting in a ser160-to-cys (S160C) substitution. The same
genotype was found in the clinically unaffected 3-year-old brother of
the proband, and the authors suggested that the brother might be a
preclinical case of NAGA deficiency; the brother's twin sister did not
have the genotype. Residual enzyme activity in the proband was
approximately 4% of controls. The S160C allele was not identified in 80
Dutch control alleles.

.0005
KANZAKI DISEASE
NAGA, ARG329GLN

In a Japanese woman with Kanzaki disease (609242), Kodama et al. (2001)
identified a homozygous 986G-A transition in the NAGA gene, resulting in
an arg329-to-gln (R329Q) substitution. The patient had angiokeratoma
corporis diffusum, Meniere syndrome, and no mental retardation. Her
parents were consanguineous.

REFERENCE 1. Bakker, H. D.; de Sonnaville, M.-L. C. S.; Vreken, P.; Abeling,
N. G. G. M.; Groener, J. E. M.; Keulemans, J. L. M.; van Diggelen,
O. P.: Human alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase (alpha-NAGA) deficiency:
no association with neuroaxonal dystrophy? Europ. J. Hum. Genet. 9:
91-96, 2001.

2. Chabas, A.; Coll, M. J.; Aparicio, M.; Rodriguez Diaz, E.: Mild
phenotypic expression of alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase deficiency
in two adult siblings. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 17: 724-731, 1994.

3. de Groot, P. G.; Westerveld, A.; Meera Khan, P.; Tager, J. M.:
Localization of a gene for human alpha-galactosidase B (=N-acetyl-alpha-D-galactosaminidase)
on chromosome 22. Hum. Genet. 44: 305-312, 1978.

4. de Jong, J.; van den Berg, C; Wijburg, H.; Willemsen, R.; van Diggelen,
O.; Schindler, D.; Hoevenaars, F.; Wevers, R.: Alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase
deficiency with mild clinical manifestations and difficult biochemical
diagnosis. J. Pediat. 125: 385-391, 1994.

5. Desnick, R. J.; Schindler, D.: Alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase
deficiency: Schindler disease.In: Scriver, C. R.; Beaudet, A. L.;
Sly, W. S.; Valle, D. (eds.): The Metabolic and Molecular Bases of
Inherited Disease. Vol. III.  New York: McGraw-Hill  (8th ed.)
: 2001. Pp. 3483-3505.

6. Geurts van Kessel, A. H. M.; ten Brinke, H.; de Groot, P. G.; Hagemeijer,
A.; Westerveld, A.; Meera Khan, P.; Pearson, P. L.: Regional localization
of NAGA and ACO2 on human chromosome 22. (Abstract) Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 25: 161 only, 1979.

7. Geurts van Kessel, A. H. M.; Westerveld, A.; de Groot, P. G.; Meera
Khan, P.; Hagemeijer, A.: Regional localization of the genes coding
for human ACO2, ARSA, and NAGA on chromosome 22. Cytogenet. Cell
Genet. 28: 169-172, 1980.

8. Kanzaki, T.; Yokota, M.; Mizuno, N.; Matsumoto, Y.; Hirabayashi,
Y.: Novel lysosomal glycoaminoacid storage disease with angiokeratoma
corporis diffusum. Lancet 333: 875-876, 1989. Note: Originally Volume
I.

9. Keulemans, J. L. M.; Reuser, A. J. J.; Kroos, M. A.; Willemsen,
R.; Hermans, M. M. P.; van den Ouweland, A. M. W.; de Jong, J. G.
N.; Wevers, R. A.; Renier, W. O.; Schindler, D.; Coll, M. J.; Chabas,
A.; Sakuraba, H.; Suzuki, Y.; van Diggelen, O. P.: Human alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase
(alpha-NAGA) deficiency: new mutations and the paradox between genotype
and phenotype. J. Med. Genet. 33: 458-464, 1996.

10. Kodama, K.; Kobayashi, H.; Abe, R.; Ohkawara, A.; Yoshii, N.;
Yotsumoto, S.; Fukushige, T.; Nagatsuka, Y.; Hirabayashi, Y.; Kanzaki,
T.: A new case of alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase deficiency with
angiokeratoma corporis diffusum, with Meniere's syndrome and without
mental retardation. Brit. J. Derm. 144: 363-368, 2001.

11. van Diggelen, O. P.; Schindler, D.; Kleijer, W. J.; Huijmans,
J. G. M.; Galjaard, H.; Linden, H. U.; Peter-Katalinic, J.; Egge,
H.; Dabrowski, U.; Cantz, M.: Lysosomal alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase
deficiency: a new inherited metabolic disease. (Letter) Lancet 330:
804 only, 1987. Note: Originally Volume II.

12. van Diggelen, O. P.; Schindler, D.; Willemsen, R.; Boer, M.; Kleijer,
W. J.; Huijmans, J. G. M.; Blom, W.; Galjaard, H.: Alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase
deficiency, a new lysosomal storage disorder. J. Inherit. Metab.
Dis. 11: 349-357, 1988.

13. Wang, A. M.; Bishop, D. F.; Desnick, R. J.: Human alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase-molecular
cloning, nucleotide sequence, and expression of a full-length cDNA:
homology with human alpha-galactosidase A suggests evolution from
a common ancestral gene. J. Biol. Chem. 265: 21859-21866, 1990.

14. Wang, A. M.; Desnick, R. J.: Structural organization and complete
sequence of the human alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase gene: homology
with the alpha-galactosidase A gene provides evidence for evolution
from a common ancestral gene. Genomics 10: 133-142, 1991.

15. Wang, A. M.; Ioannou, Y. A.; Zeidner, K. M.; Desnick, R. J.:
Murine alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase: isolation and expression of
a full-length cDNA and genomic organization: further evidence of an
alpha-galactosidase gene family. Molec. Genet. Metab. 65: 165-173,
1998.

16. Wang, A. M.; Kanzaki, T.; Desnick, R. J.: The molecular lesion
in the alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase gene that causes angiokeratoma
corporis diffusum with glycopeptiduria. J. Clin. Invest. 94: 839-845,
1994.

17. Wang, A. M.; Schindler, D.; Desnick, R. J.: Schindler disease:
the molecular lesion in the alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase gene that
causes an infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy. J. Clin. Invest. 86:
1752-1756, 1990.

18. Wang, A. M.; Schindler, D.; Kanzaki, T.; Desnick, R. J.: Alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase
gene: homology with human alpha-galactosidase A, and identification
and confirmation of the mutations causing type I and II Schindler
disease. (Abstract) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 47 (suppl.): A169 only, 1990.

19. Wang, A. M.; Stewart, C. L.; Desnick, R. J.: Schindler disease:
generation of a murine model by targeted disruption of the alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase
gene. Pediat. Res. 35: 115A only, 1994.

20. Yamauchi, T.; Hiraiwa, M.; Kobayashi, H.; Uda, Y.; Miyatake, T.;
Tsuji, S.: Molecular cloning of two species of cDNAs for human alpha-N-acetylgalactosaminidase
and expression in mammalian cells. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 170:
231-237, 1990.

CONTRIBUTORS Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 5/11/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 4/6/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - reorganized: 4/1/2005
Cassandra L. Kniffin - updated: 3/8/2005
Michael B. Petersen - updated: 8/21/2001
Iosif W. Lurie - updated: 7/10/1996

CREATED Victor A. McKusick: 6/4/1986

EDITED carol: 09/18/2013
terry: 2/3/2009
terry: 1/7/2009
carol: 3/28/2007
wwang: 5/18/2005
wwang: 5/13/2005
ckniffin: 5/11/2005
ckniffin: 4/6/2005
carol: 4/1/2005
ckniffin: 3/8/2005
carol: 3/17/2004
carol: 8/21/2001
mcapotos: 11/30/2000
carol: 6/20/1997
mark: 11/27/1996
carol: 7/22/1996
carol: 7/10/1996
carol: 10/10/1994
jason: 6/9/1994
warfield: 4/7/1994
mimadm: 3/11/1994
carol: 6/3/1993
supermim: 3/16/1992

606539	TITLE *606539 MYOSIN ID; MYO1D
;;KIAA0727
DESCRIPTION Myosins are molecular motors that, upon interaction with actin
filaments, utilize energy from ATP hydrolysis to generate mechanical
force. For further background information on myosins, see MYO1A
(601478).

CLONING

By screening for cDNAs with the potential to encode large proteins
expressed in brain, Nagase et al. (1998) identified a cDNA encoding
MYO1D, which they called KIAA0727. The deduced 674-amino acid protein is
98% identical to rat Myr4. RT-PCR analysis detected expression of
KIAA0727 in all tissues tested, with highest levels in brain, followed
by lung and ovary; expression was lowest in spleen.

MAPPING

By radiation hybrid analysis, Nagase et al. (1998) mapped the MYO1D gene
to chromosome 17. Hasson et al. (1996) mapped the mouse gene to
chromosome 11 by interspecific backcross analysis and predicted a
localization of 17q11-q12 in human.

ANIMAL MODEL

Hozumi et al. (2006) found that handedness of the embryonic gut and the
adult gut and testes is reversed (not randomized) in viable and fertile
homozygous Myo31DF Drosophila mutants. Myo31DF encodes an unconventional
myosin, Drosophila MyoIA (also referred to as MYO1D in mammals), and is
the first actin-based motor protein to be implicated in left-right
patterning. Hozumi et al. (2006) found that Myo31DF is required in the
hindgut epithelium for normal embryonic handedness. Disruption of actin
filaments in hindgut epithelium randomizes the handedness of the
embryonic gut, suggesting that Myo31DF function requires the actin
cytoskeleton. Consistent with this, Hozumi et al. (2006) found that
Myo31DF colocalizes with the cytoskeleton. Overexpression of Myo61F,
another myosin I, reversed the handedness of the embryonic gut, and its
knockdown also caused a left-right patterning defect. Hozumi et al.
(2006) suggested that these 2 unconventional myosin I proteins may have
antagonistic functions in left-right patterning. They suggested that the
actin cytoskeleton and myosin I proteins may be crucial for generating
left-right asymmetry in invertebrates.

Speder et al. (2006) identified the conserved Myo31DF gene in Drosophila
as a unique situs inversus locus. Myo31DF mutations reversed the dextral
looping of genitalia, a prominent left-right marker in adult flies.
Genetic mosaic analysis pinpointed the A8 segment of the genital disc as
a left-right organizer and revealed an anterior-posterior
compartmentalization of Myo31DF function that directs dextral
development and represses a sinistral default state. As expected of a
determinant, Myo31DF has a trigger-like function and is expressed
symmetrically in the organizer, and its symmetrical overexpression does
not impair left-right asymmetry. Thus, Speder et al. (2006) concluded
that Myo31DF is a dextral gene with actin-based motor activity
controlling situs choice. Like mouse inversin, Myo31DF interacts and
colocalizes with beta-catenin, suggesting that situs inversus genes can
direct left-right development through the adherens junction.

REFERENCE 1. Hasson, T.; Skowron, J. F.; Gilbert, D. J.; Avraham, K. B.; Perry,
W. L.; Bement, W. M.; Anderson, B. L.; Sherr, E. H.; Chen, Z.-Y.;
Greene, L. A.; Ward, D. C.; Corey, D. P.; Mooseker, M. S.; Copeland,
N. G.; Jenkins, N. A.: Mapping of unconventional myosins in mouse
and human. Genomics 36: 431-439, 1996.

2. Hozumi, S.; Maeda, R.; Taniguchi, K.; Kanai, M.; Shirakabe, S.;
Sasamura, T.; Speder, P.; Noselli, S.; Aigaki, T.; Murakami, R.; Matsuno,
K.: An unconventional myosin in Drosophila reverses the default handedness
in visceral organs. Nature 440: 798-802, 2006.

3. Nagase, T.; Ishikawa, K.; Suyama, M.; Kikuno, R.; Miyajima, N.;
Tanaka, A.; Kotani, H.; Nomura, N.; Ohara, O.: Prediction of the
coding sequences of unidentified human genes. XI. The complete sequences
of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code for large proteins in
vitro. DNA Res. 5: 277-286, 1998.

4. Speder, P.; Adam, G.; Noselli, S.: Type ID unconventional myosin
controls left-right asymmetry in Drosophila. Nature 440: 803-807,
2006.

CONTRIBUTORS Ada Hamosh - updated: 6/1/2006

CREATED Paul J. Converse: 12/7/2001

EDITED alopez: 06/05/2006
terry: 6/1/2006
mgross: 12/7/2001

